Memoirs of the Prince de Talleyrand, Vol. II (Charles Maurice de Talleyrand (Raphael Ledos de Beaufort, trans.), 1838)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1891 Putnam's edition, translated by Raphael Ledos de Beaufort (https://archive.org/details/memoirsofprinced02tall). Talleyrand's own account, Vol. II — the Empire at its height and the road to the Congress of Vienna.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a So 
As 
bees 
She 
ea 


Lyn 2s lg 


ty of California | is LR Perea la et 
ern Regional eee eee ea 


ary Facility 


a4 aA 2s ' kK hay Px \is £) =e 5 3 We ay ot x tens) 4 
: / we : = aa 2 rene BEN, wah 
— Ween ae 


patent 
Bah 


MEMOIRS 


OF THE 


PEINCE-DE TALLEYRAND 


The price of this book is 21/- net, and 
the terms on which it is supplied to the 
bookseller do not admit of his deducting 
any discount. 


VOL. II. 


MEMOIRS 


OF THE 


FRINCE. DE TALLEYRAND 


VOL. II. 


ee oO 


et 7 : mn) 
ty hes 
arte i a a 
7 8 
a 


THE PRINCE DE BENEVENT, VICE-GRAND ELECTEUR DE L’EMPIRE. 


Portrait reproduced from the original Oil Painting by P. PruDuHoNn, 
in the Collection of Monsieur EupoxrE MarciL_e. 


SvTnv A PRR «FP 


GRIFFITH FARRAN OKEDEN FWD W 


SH 


- 


NEWBERY HOUSE, CHASING CARRS KORY LON’ 


AND Ser ¥ 


18g: 


ad 2 3 4 
= at co rAd. 

Pane “ 

ar _ 

ae i 
es 
: nab de - a - 

i 

. 


MEMOIRS 


OF. THE 


meaNCHK DE TALLEYRAND 


EDITED, WITH A PREFACE. AND, NOTES, BY 


FHE DUC) DE BROGLIE 


Of the French Academy 


TRANSLATED BY 


RAPHAEL LEDOS DE BEAUFORT, F.R. Hist. S. 


VOLUME II 


WITH A PORTRAIT 


GRIFFITH FARRAN OKEDEN AND WELSH 
NEWBERY HOUSE, CHARING CROSS ROAD, LONDON 
AND SYDNEY 


18QI 


- j Li » 
4 


, The Rights of Translation and Reproduction are Reserved. — 

7 : ; . oe 
ei ‘ 
wy 7 ’ , 

rs \ . fi = * : M m6 


oo8 


QNIVERSITY OF CALIOR 
SANTA BARBAKA 


CONTENTS. 


PART V1: 
NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS—HIS STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 
1809—1813. 


Talleyrand marries his nephew with the daughter of the Duchess of 
Courland—Napoleon’s marriage with the Archduchess Marie-Louise— 
Napoleon’s dream of universal domination—His brothers and his 
sisters’ husbands—Why he gave them thrones—Joseph in Naples— 
Murat succeeds him—Murat endeavours to shake off the yoke of 
Napoleon —Murat’s ambition—Napoleon and his brother Louis— 
Westphalia—King Jérome and the Germans—Joseph in Spain—Lord 
Wellington—The French driven from Spain—Blunder of Napoleon in 
Spain—Differences between Napoleon and the Pope—Persecution of 
Pius VII.—Negotiations between the First Consul and Pius VII.—Some 
bishops decline to resign their sees—The Concordat—La petite Eglise— 
Home regulations concerning Public Worship—Cardinal Caprara— 
Coronation of Napoleon—Pius VII. at Paris—Napoleon crowned King 
of Italy at Milan—Refusal of the Pope to recognize Joseph as King of 
Naples—Occupation of Rome by General Miollis—Annexation of the 
legations of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata, and Camerino—Imprisonment 
of several cardinals—Disarming of the Papal guards—Annexation of 
the Papal States to France—Protest of Pius VII.—The bull of excom- 
munication—Arrest of the Pope—The King of Rome—Meeting of an 
ecclesiastical commission—Had the Pope any right to refuse the bull of 
confirmation to the French bishops ?—Did the French Government 
infringe the clauses of the Concordat by invading Rome ?—The Church 
in Germany and Italy—Measures to be taken to thwart the effect of the 
bull of excommunication—Considerations on the Commission—Cardinal 
Maury and the Pope’s brief—Inconsistency of Pius VII.—Arrest of 
Abbé d’Astros—Cardinal di Pietro—Severe measures against the Pope 
—Summoning of a secondecclesiastical commission—Can bishops accord 
dispensations ?—Are papal bulls indispensable to obtain the canonical 
confirmation ?—Intervention of the Bishop of Nantes—Napoleon agrees 
to summon a council and to negotiate with the Pope—Pius VII. with 


vill 


CONTENTS. 


draws his bull of excommunication—The liberties of the Church of 
France—Pius VII. adheres to a modification of the Concordat, with 
regard to the canonical confirmation of bishops—Misgivings of the Pope 
concerning the meeting of a council—Inutility of the latter—Napoleon 
insists on the meeting of the Council—Opening of the Council—The 
bishops at St. Cloud—Napoleon takes Cardinal Fesch to task—Dignified 
attitude of the latter—Napoleon flies into a passion—/e sas Charlemagne 
—The Emperor’s message to the Council—Address of the Council in reply 
—Napoleon declines to receive it—The Council declares its incompetence 
to decide the question pending between Napoleon and the Pope—Wrath 
of the Emperor on hearing this—Napoleon’s projects defeated by the 
Council—The Council dissolved by imperial decree—Imprisonment of 
three bishops—Re-assembling of the Council—The imperial decree 
adopted and sentto the Pope for his approval—Brief of Pius VII. approv- 
ing the decree—Inconsistency of Napoleon—Returns the Pope’s brief— 
Transfer of the Pope to Fontainebleau—Interview between Napoleon and 
Pius VII.—Signature of a new compact, which was not to be divulged— 
Breach of faith of Napoleon—Retractation of the Pope— Napoleon vainly 
tries to renew the negotiations-—Return of Pius VII. to Rome—Political 
blunders of the Emperor in the course of the negotiations with the Pope 

Pages 1—95 


PART VIL 
THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 


1813—1814. 


The political faults of Napoleon—What might have been a masterpiece of 


policy—No chance for the House of Bourbon—Why Louis XVIII. 
ascended the throne—Why Napoleon is the first and only man who 
could have given Europe her true equilibrium—The cause of his ruin— 
Talleyrand’s apology for having left Napoleon’s service—Rejects the 
imputation of having conspired against the Emperor—General Savary 
and Talleyrand—Napoleon wants Talleyrand to resume office—“Ah / 


st Talleyrand étatt la /”—La Besnardiére and Napoleon—Wrath of the 


latter against Murat—Napoleon alone plotted against himself—His 
obstinacy at the Congress of Chatillon—Lord Wellington—Abbé Juda 
—The Colossus has feet of clay—Lord Wellington’s plan—The Duc 
d’Angouléme and the Duke of Wellington—Sir Henry Bunbury—The 
Marquis de la Rochejacquelein— Wellington refuses to support a Bourbon 
rising—Battle of Orthez—Wellington yields—Viscount Beresford—M. 
Lynch and the Bourbons—Lord Bathurst’s letter to the Duke of Welling- 
ton—Battle of Toulouse—Correct attitude of Wellington—Colonels 
Frederick Ponsonby and H. Cook—The abdication of the Emperor— 
Charge brought against the Provisory Government—The English 
Government and Napoleon—Louis XVIII. and the Prince Regent of 


CONTENTS. ix 


England—Baron de Vitrolles at the headquarters of the allied sove- 
reigns—Talleyrand and the Baron de Vitrolles—Interview between the 
latter and Count von Stadion—Prince Metternich and Baron de Vitrolles 
—lInterview between the latter, the Czar Alexander, and the Emperor 
of Austria—Napoleon’s movements—Saint-Dizier—Marshal Macdonald’s 
error—General Wintzingerode—N apoleon’s suspicions—Hastens on the 
rear of the allies—Troyes, Fromenteau and Fontainebleau—The 
allies were bent on treating with Napoleon—Why they did not—The 
views of the allies on France—The position of the House of Bourbon 
—A constitutional Monarchy—Contrast between Spain and France— 
The security of France under Napoleon—The great need of Europe— 
The legitimacy of governments—Why Talleyrand supported the claims 
of the Bourbons—Napoleon’s opinion of the Bourbons—Capitulation of 
Paris—The Czar and the King of Prussia in Paris—March past of the 
allied troops in the Champs Elysées—Talleyrand and the Czar Alexander 
—Negotiations relative to the recall of the Bourbons—The Czar Alex- 
ander amazed—The return of Louis XVIII. voted by former regicides— 
M. de Caulaincourt and Talleyrand—Declaration of the allies to Napo- 
leon—The Provisory Government—Entrance of the Comte d’Artois into 
Paris—Interview between Talleyrand and Louis XVIII. at Compiégne— 
The Saint-Ouen proclamation—Return of Louis XVIII. to Paris—The 
Charter—Talleyrand appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs—The situa- 
tion of France compared with that of Europe on the morrow of Napo- 
leon’s fall—The conventions between the Comte d’Artois and the allies 
—Treaty of peace between Louis XVIII. and the allies—Additional 
Articles—Separate and secret Articles to the treaty of Paris—Decision 
relative to the assembling of a Congress at Vienna—Talleyrand’s letter 
to the Czar Alexander—Instructions of Louis XVIII. to the French 
plenipotentiaries to the Congress of Vienna—Various considerations 
on the condition of Europe and the respective situations imposed by 
Napoleon on its different States—How these are to be remedied by the 
Congress of Vienna ; 5 é : , : . Pages 96—197 


PART VIII. 
CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 
1814—1815. 


Talleyrand’s arrival at Vienna—Disposition of the Allies towards France— 
The position of the French plenipotentiaries at the Congress—Difficul- 
ties to be contended with—Opening of the Congress—The intentions of 
the first-class Powers—Talleyrand finds unhoped-for support in Spain 
and the second-class Powers—Want of courtesy towards Talleyrand— 
Defeats the aim of the Allies—The first meeting of the Congress 
attended by Talleyrand—Prince Metternich’s speech—Talleyrand’s 

VOL. II. b 


CONTENTS. 


reply—Puzssances Alliées—Count de Labrador’s motion in support of 
Talleyrand’s proposals—Embarrassment ‘of the plenipotentiaries of the 
Allied Powers—The Congress agrees to the annulling of the protocols of 
the preceding sittings— Distribution of the work of the Congress—Change 
of disposition towards France—The anniversary service of the death of 
Louis XVI.—The Congress at work—The fate of the kingdom of 
Saxony and of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw—Prussia’s designs—Talley- 
rand demurs to the recognition of her claims—The sacred principle of 
legitimacy—Suum cuigue—The laxity of the public law of Europe 
—Growing tendency to uphold usurpations—Indifference of the Allies as 
to the rights of the House of Bourbon—Obstacles encountered by, 
Talleyrand in enforcing the triumph of legitimacy—Hostile attitude of 
Russia towards France—Compromise offered—-“I am not here to 
strike a bargain !”—“ No compromise with principles !”—England 
backs up the views of Russia and Prussia on Saxony—Her delusion— 
Doubtful attitude of Austria—Talleyrand wins her support—He succeeds 
in dispelling the prejudices of England—A secret alliance between 
France, Austria, and England, against Russia and Prussia—The 
prestige of principles—Discord among the Allies—Prussia gives way— 
Napoleon’s return from Elba—Anxiety of the Congress—The Comtesse 
de Brionne—“ Politics must wait !”—Indecision of the King of Saxony— 
His interview with Metternich, Wellington, and Talleyrand—A plenipo- 
tentiary of Saxony at the Congress—Russia compelled to desist—The 
deliberations of the Congress concerning Poland—France disposed to 
admit the restoration of independent Poland—Russia’s ministers give 
in—Ferdinand IV. and Murat—The latter defeated by the Austrians— 
Talleyrand created Duc of Dino—Sardinia and the House of Carignan 
—Switzerland’s neutrality—The Netherlands—The German Confedera- 
tion—Louis XVIII. at Ghent—The Congress, at Talleyrand’s suggestion, 
denounces the wzsuvfer—The Powers rush to arms—Louis XVIII. ad- 
mitted into the Alliance of Europe against Napoleon—Correspondence 
exchanged between Louis XVIII. and Talleyrand at the Congress— 
Text of the Secret Treaty of Defensive Alliance, concluded January 3, 
1815, between Austria, France, and Great Britain—Napoleon acquaints 
the Czar Alexander with the text of the above-mentioned Treaty— 
Interview between Alexander and Prince Metternich—Napoleon’s aims 
defeated—Indulgence of the Czar for Prince Metternich—The Czar 
Alexander incensed at Talleyrand’s duplicity 5 . Pages 198—392 


MEMOIRS 


mi. &. _ OF THE ; 5 fay 
PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND 
ei ale: > ee 


‘ 


MEMOIRS 


OF THE 


PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND. 


PART, VI. 


NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS—HIS 
STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 


1809—1813, 


Talleyrand marries his nephew with the daughter of the Duchess of 
Courland—Napoleon’s marriage with the Archduchess Marie-Louise— 
Napoleon’s dream of universal domination—His brothers and his 
sisters’ husbands—Why he gave them thrones—Joseph in Naples— 
Murat succeeds him—Murat endeavours to shake off the yoke of 
Napoleon —Murat’s ambition—Napoleon and his brother Louis— 
Westphalia—King Jéré6me and the Germans—Joseph in Spain—Lord 
Wellington—The French driven from Spain—Blunder of Napoleon in 
Spain—Differences between Napoleon and the Pope—Persecution of 
Pius VII.—Negotiations between the First Consul and Pius VII.—Some 
bishops decline to resign their sees—The Concordat—La petite Eglise— 
Home regulations concerning Public Worship—Cardinal Caprara— 
Coronation of Napoleon—Pius VII. at Paris—Napoleon crowned King 
of Italy at Milan—Refusal of the Pope to recognize Joseph as King of 
Naples—Occupation of Rome by General Miollis—Annexation of the 
legations of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata, and Camerino—Imprisonment 
of several cardinals—Disarming of the Papal guards—Annexation of 
the Papal States to France—Protest of Pius VII.—The bull of excom- 
munication—Arrest of the Pope—The King of Rome—Meeting of an 
ecclesiastical commission—Had the Pope any right to refuse the bull of 
confirmation to the French bishops?—Did the French Government 
infringe the clauses of the Concordat by invading Rome ?—The Church 
in Germany and Italy—Measures to be taken to thwart the effect of the 
bull of excommunication—Considerations on the Commission—Cardinal 

VOL. Il. B 


iS) 


THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Maury and the Pope’s brief—Inconsistency of Pius VII.—Arrest of 
Abbé d’Astros—Cardinal di Pietro—Severe measures against the Pope 
—Summoning of a secondecclesiastical commission—Can bishops accord 
dispensations ?—Are papal bulls indispensable to obtain the canonical 
confirmation ?>—Intervention of the Bishop of Nantes—Napoleon agrees 
to summon a council and to negotiate with the Pope—Pius VII. with- 
draws his bull of excommunication—The liberties of the Church of 
France—Pius VII. adheres to a modification of the Concordat, with 
regard to the canonical confirmation of bishops—Misgivings of the Pope 
concerning the meeting of a council—Inutility of the latter—Napoleon 
insists on the meeting of the Council—Opening of the Council—The 
bishops at St. Cloud—Napoleon takes Cardinal Fesch to task—Dignified 
attitude of the latter—Napoleon flies into a passion—/e suzs Charlemagne 
—The Emperor’s message to the Council—Address of the Council in reply 
—Napoleon declines to receive it—The Council declares its incompetence 
to decide the question pending between Napoleon and the Pope—Wrath 
of the Emperor on hearing this—Napoleon’s projects defeated by the 
Council—The Council dissolved by imperial decree—Imprisonment of 
three bishops—Re-assembling of the Council—The imperial decree 
adopted and sentto the Pope for his approval—Brief of Pius VII. approv- 
ing the decree—Inconsistency of Napoleon—Returns the Pope’s brief— 
Transfer of the Pope to Fontainebleau—Interview between Napoleon and 
Pius VII.—Signature of a new compact, which was not to be divulged— 
Breach of faith of Napoleon—Retractation of the Pope— Napoleon vainly 
tries to renew the negotiations—Return of Pius VII. to Rome—Political 
blunders of the Emperor in the course of the negotiations with the Pope. 


ON leaving a position long stirred by the illusions and 
excitement of power, I had to think of creating one which, 
though affording me needed rest, might offer interesting and 
pleasant occupations. Home-life alone can replace all chimera ; 
but, at the time of which I speak, home-life, sweet and calm, 
existed for but very few people. Napoleon did not allow any 
one to grow fond of it; he believed that, to serve him, people 
should have no proper home. Carried away by the rapidity of 
events, by ambition, by the interest of each day ; placed in that 
mist of war and of political activity which hovered over all 
Europe, everybody was prevented from paying any attention to 
his own situation ; public life held too much room in his mind 
to allow of his giving a single thought to private life. People 
went home but accidentally, because it was necessary to take rest 
somewhere ; but no one was prepared to make his home an 
habitual abiding-place. 


NAPOLEON'S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 3 


I was, like anybody else placed in that position which 
explains the indifference everybody displayed in all the acts of 
his life, and that I regret having displayed in several of my own. 
It was then that I sought to marry my nephew, Edmond de 
Périgord It was important that the choice of the wife I should 
give him should not awaken the susceptibility of Napoleon, who 
did not wish to have the destiny of a young man, who bore 
one of the great names of France, escape his jealous influence. 
He believed that, a few years before, I had influenced the 
refusal of my niece, the Comtesse Just de Noailles,2 whom he 
had demanded from me for Eugene de Beauharnais, his adopted 
son. Whatever choice I might make for my nephew, I should 
still find the emperor dissatisfied. He would not have allowed me 
to choose in France, for he reserved for his devoted generals all 
the good matches to be found there. I bent my looks elsewhere. 
I had often, in Germany and Poland, heard much said of the 
Duchess of Courland.?. I knew that she was distinguished by the 
nobleness of her sentiments, by the elevation of her character 
and by the most amiable and brilliant qualities. The youngest 
of her daughters was then marriageable. This choice could 
but please Napoleon. It did not take away a match for his 
generals, who would have been refused, and it must even have 
flattered the vanity he displayed in trying to attract to France 
great foreign families. This vanity had, some time before, led 
him to have Marshal Berthier marry a princess of Bavaria. I 
resolved therefore to demand for my nephew the Princess 
Dorothée of Courland, and in order that the Emperor Napoleon 
should not, by reflection or by caprice, withdraw his approbation 
once given, I solicited from the Emperor Alexander, a particular 
friend of the Duchess of Courland, the favour of asking him- 
self the hand of her daughter for my nephew. I had the 


1 Alexandre-Edmond de Talleyrand-Périgord, born August 2, 1787, afterwards 
Duc de Dino, and later, Duc de Talleyrand-Périgord. 

? Frangoise de Talleyrand-Périgord, daughter of Archambauld Joseph, Comte, then 
Duc de Talleyrand-Périgord, brother of the author. Born in 1785, she married in 
1803 Just, Comte de Noailles, and later Duc de Poix, who was chamberlain of the 
emperor. She died in 1863. 

3 Charlotte-Dorothée, Countess of Medem, widow of Pierre, last Duke of Courland 
and of Semigalle, born February 3, 1761, married November 6, 1779. Widowed 
January 13, 1800, Died August 20, 1821. 

4 Dorothée, Princess of Courland, born August 20, 1793. Died in 1862. 


Br2 


4 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


happiness of obtaining it, and the marriage took place at Frank- 
fort-on-Main, April 22, 1809. 

~~ While determining no longer to take part in anything done 
by Napoleon, I remained sufficiently acquainted with current 
affairs to be able to judge well of the general situation, to 
calculate what must be the date and veritable nature of the 
catastrophe which appeared inevitable, and to seek means for 
warding off from France the evils this must produce. All my 
antecedents, all my former relations with the influential men of 
the different courts, assured to me facilities for being informed 
of all that took place. But I must at the same time give tomy 
manner of living an air of indifference and of inaction, which 
should not offer the least ground for the continual suspicions of 
Napoleon. I had the proof that one already ran risks by no 
longer serving him, for, on different occasions, he showed 
great animosity towards me, and several times publicly gave 
way to violent temper. This did not annoy me, for fear has 
never entered my nature ; and I might even say that the hatred 
he manifested against me was more harmful to him than to me. 
If it were not for anticipating the order of time, | would say 
that this hatred maintained me in my independence and decided 
me to refuse the portfolio of Foreign Affairs, which the emperor 
offered me later with much insistence. But at the time this offer 
was made to me, I already regarded his fine ré/e as finished, for 
he no longer seemed to apply himself to anything but destroying 
the good he had done. There was no longer any possible trans- 
action for him with the interests of Europe. He had outraged 
at one and the same time kings and nations. 

Whatever need people in France felt of deluding themselves, 
they were forced to recognize in the continental blockade, in the 
natural although dissimulated irritation of the deeply-wounded 
foreign cabinets, in the sufferings of industry bound by the pro- 
hibitive system, the impossibility for a state of things, which 
offered no guarantee of tranquillity for the future, to endure. 
Each victory, that of Wagram even, was only an obstacle the 
more to the strengthening of the emperor, and the hand of an 
archduchess which he obtained soon after, was only a sacrifice 
made by Austria to the necessities of the moment. Napoleon 


NAPOLEON'S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 5 


might well attempt to represent his divorce as a duty he fulfilled 
solely to assure the stability of the Empire ; no one was deceived, 
and it was plainly seen that, in marrying the archduchess, he 
only sought one more satisfaction for his vanity. 

The details of the council where the emperor put in delibera- 
tion the choice of his new empress are not without a certain 
historic interest ; I will give them a place here. Foralong time 
Napoleon had caused it to be circulated in his court and in 
public that the Empress Josephine could not have any more 
children, and that Joseph Bonaparte, his brother, who had neither 
glory nor intellect, was incapable of succeeding him. This was 
circulated abroad, and from there brought back to France. 
Fouché took care to spread these reports by his police; the Duc 
de Bassano instructed in the same manner the literary men: 
Berthier took the military in hand; as has been seen at the 
interview at Erfurt, the Emperor Napoleon unbosomed himself 
in that respect to the Emperor Alexander ; finally all was ready, 
when in the month of January, 1810, the emperor summoned an 
extraordinary council, composed of great dignitaries, ministers, 
the Grand Master of Public Instruction, and two or three other 
non-military eminent personages. The number and quality of 
the persons who composed this council, the silence observed as 
to the object of the meeting, the silence still lasting for some 
minutes even in the hall of assembly, all proclaimed the import- 
ance of what was going to take place. 

The emperor, with a certain embarrassment and an emotion 
which appeared to me’sincere, spoke mainly in these terms :— 

“T have not renounced without regret, assuredly, a union 
which shed so much sweetness over my domestic life. If, to satisfy 
the hopes that the Empire places in the new ties that I must 
contract, I consulted only my personal feeling, it is from the 
midst of the young pupils of the Legion of Honour, among the 
daughters of the brave soldiers of France, that I would choose 
a companion, and I would give to the French for empress 
the one whose qualities and virtues would render her most 
worthy of the throne. But it is necessary to make concessions 
to the customs of the times one lives in, to the usages of other 
States, and above all to the propriety which policy makes it a 


6 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


duty to observe. Some sovereigns have desired the alliance of 
my relations, and I believe there is now not one to whom I could 
not with confidence offer my personal alliance. Three reigning 
families could give an empress to France; those of Russia, 
Austria, and Saxony. I have summoned you in order to 
examine with you which of these three alliances is that i es 
in the interest of the Empire, preference should be given.” 

This discourse was followed by a long silence which the 
emperor broke by these words: “ Monsieur the Arch-Chancellor, 
what is your opinion?” 

Cambacéres, who appeared to me to have prepared what he 
was going to say, had raked up from his recollections as member 
of the committee of public safety, that Austria was and always 
would be our enemy. After having developed this idea at some 
length, supporting it by many facts and precedents, he finished 
by expressing the wish that the emperor should marry a grand- 
duchess of Russia. 

Lebrun,! putting aside policy, employed plainly all the 
motives drawn from habits, education, and simplicity, to give 
the preference to the court of Saxony, and voted for that 
alliance. Murat and Fouché thought the revolutionary interests 
more in safety by a Russian alliance ; it appears that both found 
themselves more at ease with the descendants of the Czars than 
with those of Rudolph of Hapsburg. 

My turn came; there I was in my element; I discharged 
my task tolerably well. I was able to sustain by excellent reasons 
that an Austrian alliance would be preferable for France. My 
secret motive was that the security of Austria depended on the 
resolution the emperor was going to take, but that was not the 
place to say it. After having briefly set forth the advantages 
and the inconveniences of a Russian match and of an Austrian 

1 Charles Lebrun, born in 1739, was in 1768 revenue officer, and inspector-general 
of the royal domain. He was the friend and devoted assistant of Chancellor Maupeou. 
He was dismissed in 1774. Deputy of the Third to the States-General, then adminis- 
trator of the department of Seine-et-Oise, he was arrested in 1794, and not released 
until after the 9th Thermidor. He was named deputy to the Council of the Elders in 
1796. After the 18th Brumaire, he became Third Consul, arch-treasurer in 1804, 
Prince and Duc de Plaisance (Piacenza) in 1808, lieutenant of the emperor in Holland 
in1I81o, In 1814, he was appointed Royal Commissioner at Caen and peer of France. 


During the Hundred Days, he accepted both the imperial peerage and the functions 
of Grand Master of the University. He died in 1824. 


NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 7 


marriage, I gave my voice for the latter. I addressed myself 
to the emperor, and as a Frenchman, begged of him that an 
Austrian princess might appear in our midst, in order to absolve 
France in the eyes of Europe and in her own eyes, of a crime 
that was not her own, and which belonged entirely to a faction. 
The term “European reconciliation” that I employed several 
times, pleased several members of the council, who had had 
enough of war. In spite of some objections the emperor made 
to me, I saw well that my advice suited him. 

M. Mollien! spoke after me, and sustained the same opinion 
with the shrewd and brilliant powers that distinguished him. 

The emperor, after having heard every one, thanked the 
council, declared the sitting closed, and retired. On the same 
evening, he sent a messenger to Vienna, and at the end of a few 
days, the French ambassador wrote that the Emperor Francis 
sranted the hand of his daughter, the Archduchess Marie-Louise 
to the Emperor Napoleon. 

To connect this union with the glory of a conquest made by 
his army, Napoleon sent the Prince de Wagram (Berthier) to 
wed the Archduchess by proxy, and gave to the Maréchale 
Lannes, Duchesse de Montebello (her husband had been killed 
at Wagram)? the place of lady of honour. As it would not do 
to omit the oddities of these times, I must call attention to the 
fact that, at the moment when the cannon announced to Paris 
the betrothal at Vienna, the letters from the French ambassador 
brought the news that the last treaty with Austria was faithfully 
executed, and that the cannon was blowing up the fortifica- 
tions of Vienna. This remark shows with what strictness 
Napoleon treated his new father-in-law, and proves well that 
peace was then for him only a truce employed in preparing new 
conquests. Thus all nations were fretting; all the sovereigns 
were uneasy and anxious. Everywhere Napoleon caused the 
srowth of hatred, and invented difficulties, which, in the long 


1 Comte Mollien, born at Rouen in 1758, was first clerk of the comptroller-general 
in 1789. He was arrested in 1794 as an accomplice of the fermiers-généraux, but was 
saved by the 9th Thermidor. On the 18th Brumaire, he became Director of the 
Sinking Fund, Counsellor of State in 1804, Minister of the Treasury in 1806: he 
remained at this post until 1814, and resumed it during the Hundred Days. He was 
created a peer of France in 1819. He died in 1850. 

* Marshal Lannes was killed at Esling, and not at Wagram. 


8 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


run, must become insurmountable. And, as if Europe did not 
furnish him enough, he created himself new ones, by authorizing 
the ambitions of his own family. The fatal words that he had 
uttered one day, that before his death his dynasty would be the 
most ancient in Europe, made him distribute to his brothers and 
to the husbands of his sisters the thrones and principalities that 
victory and perfidy put into his hands. It was thus he disposed 
of Naples, Westphalia, Holland, Spain, Lucca, even Sweden, 
seeing that it was the desire to please him that had caused 
Bernadotte to be elected Prince Royal of Sweden. 

A puerile vanity urged him on that path bristling with so 
many dangers. For, either these newly-created sovereigns re- 
mained in his great policy, and became its satellites, and then it 
was impossible for them to take root in the:country confided to 
them; or they must reject it more quickly than Philip V. 
had discarded that of Louis XIV. The inevitable divergence 
existing between nations soon alters the family ties of sovereigns. 
Thus each of these new creations became a principle of disso- 
lution in the fortune of Napoleon. It is found everywhere in 
the last years of his reign. When Napoleon gave a crown, 
he desired that the new king should remain bound to the system 
of this universal domination, of this grand Empire of which I 
have already spoken. The one, on the contrary, who mounted 
the throne, had no sooner seized the sceptre, than he wished for 
undivided power, and resisted with more or less audacity the 
hand which sought to subject him. Each of these improvised 
princes believed himself placed on a level with the most ancient 
sovereigns of Europe, by the sole fact of a decree and a solemn 
entry into his capital occupied by a corps of the French army. 
The vanity which led him to show independence made him a more 
dangerous obstacle to the projects of Napoleon than would have 
been a natural enemy. Let us follow them a moment in their 
royal career. 

The kingdom of Naples, with which I will begin, had been 
conferred, these were then the official terms, March 30, 1806, upon 
Joseph Bonaparte, the eldest brother of the emperor. It was 
desired to give his entry into this kingdom the appearance of a 
conquest, but the fact is, he must have read with some astonish- 


NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 9 


ment in the Jonzteur the recital of the so-called resistance with 
which he met. 

At the end of four months the new king was already in 
quarrel with his brother. Joseph resided but a short time at 
Naples ; circumstances led him soon to Spain. Power, during 
his sojourn at Naples, had been for him only a means of amuse- 
ment ; and, as if he had been the fifteenth of his race, he looked 
on to see how his ministers would extricate themselves, according 
to the expression of Louis XV., from the daily embarrassments 
of government. On the throne, he sought only the sweet- 
ness of private life and facile libertinage which great names 
rendered brilliant. 

To Joseph succeeded Murat, whose grand duchy of Berg no 
longer contented him. He had no sooner set foot beyond the 
Alps, than his imagination presented to him already the whole 
of Italy as destined to be his own one day. By the treaty which 
secured to him the crown of Naples, he was bound to maintain 
the constitution given by his predecessor, Joseph. But as this 
constitution was not yet executed except in its administrative 
part, he left to one side the changes in the civil and criminal laws 
that he had promised to make, and did not show himself in any 
haste to terminate the financial organization of the country. In 
order to facilitate the receipts and increase the revenues, he 
commenced to abolish all the feudal rights. Incited by his 
minister Lerlo,'! he desired that this operation, which he only 
considered from the fiscal point, should be immediately carried 
out. And the commission instituted to this effect pronounced 
on all the litigations existing between the lords and the parishes 
in a manner to favour the parish only; and this was being done 
at the very time when Napoleon was seeking to found again an 
aristocracy in France and to create entailed estates. The result 
of this operation was not only to despoil the Neapolitan barons 
of all the feudal rights and of all the payments in kind to which 


1 Giuseppe, Count Lerlo, born in 1759 at Naples, was Director of the Finances 
in 1798. In 1806, he accompanied King Ferdinand to Palermo, but joined Murat 
in 1809, became Counsellor of State, Minister of Justice and of Worship, and Minister 
of the Interior. In 1815, he took refuge in Rome, returned to Naples in 1820, was 
appointed Minister of the Interior, but was obliged to retire the same year. He died 
in 1828. 


10 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


they were entitled, but also to take from them, to the profit of 
the parishes, the greater part of their lands, which had been 
jointly held for several centuries. 

This measure was very detrimental to the fortunes of the 
nobles, but it rendered very much easier the assessment of the 
taxes, and made the latter more productive. Thus, in the space of 
five years the Neapolitan government raised its public revenues 
from forty-four millions of francs to more than eighty. Some 
real ameliorations in the administration, which were the result of 
the prosperity of the treasury, directed by the skilful hands of 
M. Agar, since created Comte de Mosbourg,! appeased the first 
discontent of the country, and prevented its reaching Napoleon, 
who besides, was disposed to indulgence for Murat. The latter 
was still so weak that the emperor felt flattered at being con- 
stantly reminded that Murat was also one of his creatures. He 
allowed a thousand improper, and sometimes even very grave 
things to pass unnoticed before making any reproaches to him. 
He was bound however to break forth, when Murat ordered that 
the French who, on the authority of Napoleon, were at Naples, 
should take the oath of fidelity to him, and be naturalized in the 
country. All were indignant at this demand; and Napoleon, 
driven to extremes, manifested his displeasure with his custom- 
ary violence. He gave orders for the French troops who were 
in that kingdom to be mustered in a camp a dozen leagues from 
Naples; and from this camp he had it declared that every 
French citizen was by right a citizen of the kingdom of Naples, 
because by the terms of the decree of its foundation, this king- 
dom formed a part of the Grand Empzire. 

Murat, who, in a moment of impetuosity, had allowed himself 
to take so imprudent a step, persuaded himself that the emperor 
would never pardon him, and that there was no other course 
for him to follow than to seek safety in an increase of power ; 
from that time his sole aim was to obtain means to invade all 


1 Michel Agar, Comte de Mosbourg, born in 1771 near Cahors, was at first a 
barrister, and then professor in that city. In 1801, he entered the Legislative 
Body, became in 1806 Minister of Finances of Murat, his fellow-countryman, who 
had just been created Grand Duc de Berg, and accompanied him in the same quality 
to Naples. He lived in retirement under the Restoration, was elected Deputy of 
Lot in 1830, and peer of France in 1837. He died in 1844. 


NAPOLEON'S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. II 


Italy. The annexation of Tuscany, Rome, Holland and the 
Hanseatic cities to the French Empire had already caused him 
much uneasiness. The employment, not defined, of this term 
Grand Empire, that he had just heard in the midst of his 
States, increased his perplexity, and he commenced to disclose 
his ulterior views. 

The queen, who partook to a certain extent of the fears of 
Murat, was not however of the same opinion as he as to the 
manner of escaping the projects which might be planned by her 
brother. She believed that it was a poor way of preserving a 
rule but feebly established, to seek to extend it. 

The arrival of Marshal Pérignon,! at Naples to take the 
government of the city, justified, in the eyes of Murat, the 
extremities to which he might be carried. And soon, the events 
of Europe, in reviving his hopes of ambition and of vengeance, 
gave more activity to his combinations. In his twofold idea 
of escaping French influence and extending his domination in 
Italy, he only thought of increasing his army and of seeking to 
open negotiations with Austria, which was more and more 
affrighted at the invading policy of the French government. 
The queen took it upon herself to write to Prince Metternich, 
over whom she believed she still retained some influence, and 
whose discretion she had tested. The king, on the other hand, 
conducted secretly a negotiation with the English authorities, and 
particularly with Lord William Bentinck,? who was in Sicily. 
The interests of commerce were the pretext of it. Murat, 
believing he had grounds for complaint against Napoleon, and 
for throwing upon him the odium of the prohibitions, indicated 


1 Dominique, Comte, then Marquis Pérignon, was an officer under the old régime, 
deputy to the Legislative Assembly, then commander of a legion of the army of 
the Pyrenees, he succeeded Dugommier as commander-in-chief. Member of the 
Council of the Five Hundred in 1795, ambassador at Madrid in 1796, he was after- 
wards placed at the head of a corps of the army of Italy, but was wounded and taken 
prisoner at Novi. He entered the senate in 1801, was appointed marshal of France 
in 1804, Governor of Parma and of Piacenza, and finally commander-in-chief of the 
ee of the kingdom of Naples. He was created peer of France in 1814, and died 
in 1818. 

2 Lord William Cavendish Bentinck (1774-1839), son of the Duke of Portland, 
entered the army, became Governor of Madras in 1803, and major-general in 1808. 
In this capacity, he made the campaigns of Portugal and Spain. In 1811, he was 
appointed commander-in-chief of the English troops in Sicily. In 1827, Bentinck 
was poe Governor of Bengal, then Governor-General of India. He was recalled 
in 1835. 


12 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


his disposition to separate from him; but time for rupture 
had not yet come. The Russian campaign had just opened, 
and Murat could not refuse to go there with his contingent, as 
to the number of which, he, as well as the other allies of the 
emperor, was not allowed to decide. The queen remained in 
charge of the government. A combination of reason, delicacy, 
and gallantry gave her more influence and power than her hus- 
band had ever had. While Murat was fighting for and serving 
in person, the French cause, all his policy was then directed on 
a contrary side. This double part rather pleased him ; on one 
hand he fulfilled his duty towards France and the emperor ; 
and, on the other, he believed he was acting as a king, as an 
independent prince called to the highest destiny. 

When Austria declared against France, and the battle of 
Leipzig had marked the limit of the fortune of Napoleon, 
Murat hurried to Naples, and from that moment he used all 
his endeavours to render his defection useful, for the support of 
his crown, and to enter the great European league. He found it 
very easy ; the desire of all the Allied Powers to isolate Napoleon, 
and the refusal of Eugene de Beauharnais to enter this combina- 
tion, rendered the defection of Murat very useful to the united 
powers. Napoleon, informed of all that was passing, was not 
enlightened in these circumstances either by his genius or by his 
- counsellors. He should, in his interest, have recalled Eugene 
de Beauharnais to Lyons, with all that remained of the 
French troops, and have abandoned Italy to the ambitious 
dreams of Murat. It was the only means left for preventing his 
junction with the Allied Powers, and to provoke, in Italy, 
a national rising, which, in this campaign, would have been 
of great importance to Napoleon. But his eyes were blinded, 
and the treason was consummated at the moment when he 
believed it useful to speak still of the fidelity of him who, for 
several months already, had signed his treaty with Austria. 
The intrigues of Murat for arriving at a general domination in 
Italy continued none the less ; one could follow the exact traces 
of them, until they became, at the Congress of Vienna, a motive 
of rupture with him on the part of the Powers. His ruin was 
the result of his intrigues. 


NAPOLEON'S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 13 


My object was to point out here as a fact that there was in 
the power of Napoleon, up to the point it had now reached, 
and in his political creations, a radical defect, which, it appeared 
to me, must injure his consolidation and even prepare his fall. 
Napoleon delighted in annoying, humiliating, and tormenting 
those whom he had elevated ; they, placed in a perpetual state 
of mistrust and irritation, worked secretly to injure the power 
which had created them, and that they already regarded as 
their principal enemy. 

Under one form or another, the same principle of destruction 
of which I have just given details to show the condition of 
affairs at Naples, is found in all the establishments of the same 
kind that Napoleon had made. 

In Holland, he had begun by placing the power, which was 
hitherto in the hands of a revocable directory, into those of a pre- 
sident. He had decided that Count Schimmelpenninck? should 
accept the sovereign power under the title of Grand Pensioner. 
Schimmelpenninck was a man of too much sense to believe 
that the part he was called upon to play could be anything 
but temporary. But the exactions of the French agents, 
and the dilapidations of all kinds which were the result, 
naturally irritated public opinion in Holland. Schimmel- 
penninck had hoped to be of real service to his country by the 
momentary credit which was to be the price of his deference 
for Napoleon, and to obtain by it better conditions for Holland. 
His illusion in this respect could not be of long duration. The 
emperor, who always wished to give the appearance of a 
national movement to the crises which he brought on for 
the purpose of annihilating the independence of conquered 
countries, encouraged secretly, from the beginning of the acces- 
sion of Schimmelpenninck, the complaints of the ancient privi- 
leged orders, of the magistracy of the cities, and of the nobility 


1 Roger Jean, Count Schimmelpenninck, born in 1761, a Dutch statesman, was 
associated with the revolutionary movements which disturbed Holland in 1795. He 
was appointed ambassador at Paris in 1798, then at London in 1802. In 1805, the 
Dutch Constitution having been transformed at the instigation of Napoleon, he had 
to accept the charge of Grand Pensioner. Under the reign of Louis Bonaparte, 
Schimmelpenninck lived inretirement. After the union of Holland with France, he 
was appointed senator. He resigned in 1814, and again become a Hollander ; he 
was a member of the first Chamber of the States-General. He died in 1825. 


14 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


of Holland against the Pensioner, who had sprung from the 
middle-class ; he sought, at the same time, to rouse the revo- 
lutionary spirit of the people, in order to incite them to rise 
against the authority that the new order of things accorded 
to a single man. But the moderation, the wisdom of the 
Grand Pensioner, the profound good sense of the Hollanders, 
and the conviction that any attempt at rising would lead imme- 
diately to the peremptory intervention of France, decided the 
nation to submit quietly to its new government. 

The emperor, who saw that his underhand dealings did 
not lead to the end he had in view, and that it had no effect 
upon the country, followed another plan. He got Admiral 
Verhuell! to inform Schimmelpenninck himself, and several 
prominent persons of the country, that this state of things could 
not last, and that it was indispensable for Holland to form with 
France a more intimate union, by demanding for sovereign a 
French prince. Some explanations made it clear to Napoleon that 
union with France was what the country dreaded most, and 
he skilfully made use of this disposition to make them almost 
desire one of his brothers. He not only promised to preserve 
the integrity of the territory, but he added to it Ost-Frise, and 
held out to the notable families hopes of all kinds. Schimmel- 
penninck was in a state of painful irresolution ; he neither 
dared to consult the nation nor to consent to what was exacted. 
The step of naming a deputation to go to Paris,and judge there 
upon the spot just how far resistance might go, appeared to him 
what was most prudent and wise to do. He composed this 
deputation of MM. Goldberg, Gogel,? Six and Van Styrum. 
Their instructions, like those of Admiral Verhuell, were to 


1 Charles-Henri Verhuell, Count of Sevenaar, born in 1764, entered the navy in 
1779. Rear-Admiral in 1803, he commanded the fleet destined to act against 
England, and was named Minister of Marine of Holland. In 1806, he presided over 
the commission charged to offer the crown of Holland to Louis Bonaparte. He 
became marshal and ambassador at Paris in 1807. In 1811, after the annexation of 
Holland to France, he entered the Legislative Body ; he commanded the armies of 
the Texel and of the Helder in 1813, and remained faithful to the emperor even to 
the last minute. Naturalized Frenchman in 1814, he was created peer of France 
in 1819, and died in 1855. 

2 Alexander Gogel, born in 1765, a Dutch manufacturer and statesman. He was 
Minister of Finances of the Batavian Republic. He was also minister of King 
Louis, and became member of the Council of State of France, after the union of 
Holland with the Empire. He died in 1821. 


NAPOLEON'S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 15 


demur, under any pretext, to the union, and to dismiss all pro- 
positions tending to establish a monarchy, by sustaining that 
the forms of it were opposed to the customs and habits of the 
country. 

The emperor knew all that as well as the Dutch deputies ; 
but his will was so positive, his vanity was so bound, that no 
consideration, of whatever kind it might be, could prevent these 
unhappy negotiators from being led to demand formally that 
Louis Bonaparte should accept the crown of Holland. Louis 
on his side was constrained to accept it; thus they erected a 
kingdom in Holland. From such an order of things difficulties 
could not fail to crop up for Napoleon. And so they did soon, 
in endless numbers. 

Prince Louis, on arriving at the Hague, received a very cold 
greeting. He remained there at first but a short time; called 
by the declaration of war against Prussia, to march at the head 
of the Dutch army into Westphalia, he commenced the siege 
of Hameln, when this fortress was included in the capitulation 
of Magdeburg ; his campaign finished there. Having returned 
to Amsterdam, he devoted himself to give Holland an inde- 
pendent existence ; hence arose interminable discussions between 
the two brothers. A treaty very hard for Holland was the result. 

The emperor had it drawn up in a manner to offend his 
brother enough to decide him to abdicate. But the irritation 
of Louis Bonaparte carried him to extremities of another kind. 
He submitted in appearance, signed what was desired, and 
immediately opened negotiations with the courts of St. Peters- 
burg and of London. His overtures to those two courts how- 
ever failed. Then, decided that he was not to carry out the 
treaty he had signed with his brother, he prepared for open 
resistance; he excited all Holland to war, had fortifications 
raised against France, and would not cede even to the force 
that Napoleon was obliged to employ against him. When he 
saw his kingdom invaded by the army commanded by Marshal 
Oudinot, he furtively left the country, and retired to I do 
not know what corner of Germany, bequeathing to Holland 
all the hatred he bore his brother. 


* Napoleon had only placed his brother on the throne of Holland to bind that 


16 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


The union of this country with France was the result of his 
departure. The emperor enlarged his empire by that, but 
diminished his forces ; for he had to employ constantly a portion 
of his army to assure himself of the fidelity of his new subjects. 
The latter were in much greater fear of the rigorous levies of the 
conscription, and of the guards of honour, than they were 
flattered to see the fort of Helder become one of the maritime 
bulwarks of the French Empire, and the Zuyder Zee furnish 
a great school of navigation where might be drilled the 
crews of the fleets that France was building at Antwerp. The 
different governments through which Napoleon made Holland 
pass completely destroyed the confidence of the people, and 
made them detest the name of Frenchman; but the greatest 
difficulties that he had to experience in that country arose, as 
has just been seen, there as elsewhere, from his own creatures, 
from his own family. 

The aggregation of twenty little states, erected by decree 
into the Kingdom of Westphalia, in favour of Joseph Bonaparte 
his brother, brought new embarrassments to his ambition- 
This kingdom, whose population was about two millions of 
inhabitants, comprised the whole of the states of the Elector 
of Hesse-Cassel. It must be remembered that in Hesse the 
will of the sovereign replaced very nearly all institutions, 
and that the people, who were not over-burdened with taxes, 
did not yet wish for any other form of government. 

Jéréme, a short time after his nomination (this was the term 


country to the continental system. His task was difficult, for the interests and 
sympathies of the Hollanders reconciled them more to England, while the policy of 
Napoleon ruined them. King Louis did not wish to, or could not, carry out the in- 
tentions of the emperor in his kingdom, and allowed English smuggling to organize on 
his sea-board. Napoleon complained bitterly, and neglected nothing to constrain 
his brother to enter into his views. By the treaty of November 11, 1807, he took 
away from him Flushing, one of the best ports of Holland, in exchange for some 
enlargements of no consequence. The situation remaining the same, he went 
still further, and announced to the Legislative Body that the exigencies of his policy 
might force him to annex Holland (Speech of December 3, 1809). Nevertheless, 
this extreme measure was repugnant to him: he attempted to avoid it by signing with 
King Louis a second treaty (March 16, 1810), by which the latter ceded to him Zealand 
and Dutch Brabant; at the same time, it was stipulated that the coasts of 
Holland should be guarded by French customs officers assisted by a body of troops. 
Louis came to Paris to sign this treaty, but, returning to his States, he avoided 
applying it. Napoleon soon sent twenty thousand men into Holland. ‘The king, 
for an instant, had the thought of resisting, but no one having wished to follow him, 
he abdicated and took refuge abroad. Holland was annexed to the Empire by a 
decree dated July 1, 1810. 


NAPOLEON'S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 17 


which the emperor desired to have used), went to Cassel, the 
capital of his States. His brother had given him a kind of 
council of regency, composed of M. Beugnot,! a man of much 
intelligence, and of MM. Simeon? and Jolivet,? whose directions 
he was to follow. . 

Their portfolios were full of organic decrees of all kinds. 
‘They at first had brought from Paris with them a constitution ; 
they were afterwards to adapt to it a judiciary, a military, and a 
financial system. Their first operation was to divide the terri- 
tory, and to change thus, in a moment, without the aid of 
revolutionary spirit, all the traditions, all the customs and all 
the relations that time had established. They then created pre- 
fectures and sub-prefectures, and appointed mayors everywhere. 
They thus transferred into Germany all the machinery of French 
administration, and pretended to have set it in motion. Their 
task being over, M. Beugnot and M. Jollivet returned to France. 
Jéréme Bonaparte hastened to facilitate their going. He 
retained M. Simeon as his Minister of Justice, and then he 


1 Jacques Claude, Comte Beugnot, born in 1761, advocate to the Parlement in 
1782, procureur-syndic for the department of the Aube in 1790, deputy to the Legis- 
lative Assembly in 1791. He was arrested in 1793, but was set free by the 9th 
Thermidor. After the 18th Brumaire, he was named Prefect of the Lower Seine, 
and Councillor of State in 1806. In 1807, he was one of the administrators of the 
Kingdom of Westphalia ; Imperial Commissioner and Minister of Finances of the 
Grand Duchy of Berg in 1800. In 1814, he was named by the government 
Provisory Commissioner of the Interior, and Director-General of the Police. He 
afterwards entered the navy. The second Restoration made him Director-General 
of Post Offices, Minister of State, and Member of the Privy Council. He was elected 
Deputy of the Marne. He died in 1835. 

2 Joseph Jéréme, Comte Simeon, born at Aix in 1749, was Professor of Law in 
that cityin 1789. In 1792, he was one of the leaders of the federalist movement pro- 
voked in the south by the Girondists. He was obliged to flee in 1793, returned to 
France in 1795, entered the Council of the Five Hundred, and became its president. 
Proscribed on the 18th Fructidor, he was confined in the island of Oleron until 
the 18th Brumaire. He was elected Member of the Tribunate of 1800, Coun- 
cillor of State in 1804, Minister of the Interior and of Justice, and President of the 
Council of State in Westphalia, Minister of Westphalia at Berlin, and to the Con- 
federation of the Rhine. In 1814, he became Prefect of the Nord. Under the 
Second Restoration, he was Councillor of State (1815), Under-Secretary of 
State of the Department of Justice, peer of France, Minister of State and Member 
of the Privy Council (1821). He was President of the Court of Accounts under the 
monarchy of July, and died in 1842. 

3 Jean-Baptiste, Comte Jolivet, born in 1754, was a barrister at Melun in 1789. 
Administrator of the department of Seine-et-Marne, then Deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly, he sided with the constitutional party, was arrested under the Terror, and 
only recovered his freedom after the 9th Thermidor. He became Curator-General 
of Mortgages in 1795, and Councillor of State after the 18th Brumaire. Liquidator- 
General of the debt of the Departments of the left bank of the Rhine, and Minister 
of Finances of Westphalia (1807). He retired in 1815, and died in 1818. 


VOL. II. C 


18 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


reigned alone, that is to say he had a court and a budget, or 
rather some women and some money. 

The court formed spontaneously; but the budget, raised 
to the point where Napoleon’s subsidies which were composed — 
of half the freehold wealth, forced them to swell it, was for 
the first years very difficult to establish. This dynasty com- 
menced as others finish. Jér6me was reduced to expedients 
from the second year of his reign. He did not seek those 
expedients in economies, that might have been made, but in the 
creation of new taxes. It became necessary, instead of thirty- 
seven millions of revenue, which would have been sufficient to 
furnish the necessary expenses of the state, to find more than 
fifty. For that, they had recourse to a means which displeases 
most people ; they issued a forced loan, which, according to the 
ordinary result of this kind of tax, caused many exactions and 

was not half covered. From thirty-seven millions the needs and 
expenses eventually rose to sixty. The court of Cassel had the 
pretension to rival the splendour of that of the Tuileries. The 
young sovereign so gave way to all his inclinations, that I have 
heard it said by the grave and truthful M. Reinhard,’ then 
minister of France at Cassel, that, with the exception of three 
or four women, respectable by their age, there was scarcely one 
at the palace over the fidelity of whom His Majesty had not 
acquired some rights, great though the vigilance was of the 
beautiful Frau von Truchsess and of Madame de la Fleche, 
who had also to watch over the doings of the young Prince of 
Wiirtemberg.? . 

The luxury of the court, its disorders, and the uneasy state 
of the country caused the detestation of France and of the 


1 Charles-Frederic, Comte Reinhard, born in 1761, entered diplomacy as First 
Secretary at London in 1791. It was there he made the acquaintance of M. de 
Talleyrand. He went to Naples in 1793 ; became, in 1794, head of a section of the 
department of Foreign Affairs. In 1795, he was appointed Minister Plenipotentiary 
in the Hanseatic cities and afterwards in Tuscany (1798). In July, 1799, he succeeded 
Talleyrand as Minister of Foreign Affairs, then was named successively minister to 
Helvetia (1800), at Milan (1801), to Saxony (1802), to Moldavia (1805), to Westphalia 
(1805-1814). In 1815, he entered the Council of State, and was afterwards minister 
to the German Confederation (1815-1829). The Government of July appointed him 
minister at Dresden (1830), and peer of France (1832). He died in 1837. M. de 
Talleyrand pronounced his eulogy at the Academy of Moral and Political Sciences. 

2 "The Prince Royal of Wiirtemberg, having quarrelled with the king, his father, 
had taken refuge at that time with his brother-in-law, Jérdme Bonaparte, married to 
the Princess Catherine of Wiirtemberg. 


NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 19 


emperor, to whom all was attributed, and if this uneasiness did 
not produce an immediate outbreak, it was because the natural 
submissiveness of the Germans was increased by the terror caused 
by the close alliance of the King of Westphalia with the colossus 
of French power. How must the grave universities of Gottingen 
and Halle, of which Jéréme was sovereign, have looked upon this 
unbridled luxury, this recklessness, so foreign to the simplicity, 
the decency and the good sense for which this part of Germany 
was noted? So, when in 1813, the Russian troops entered 
Westphalia, Jéréme’s subjects regarded that moment as that 
of their deliverance. And yet the country fell again under the 
domination of that Elector of Hesse, who, thirty years before, 
sold his soldiers to England. 

The luxury of these courts founded by Napoleon, we may 
remark here, was absurd. The luxury of Bonaparte was neither 
German nor French; it was a mixture, a species of learned 
luxury ; it was copied from everywhere. It had some of the 
gravity of that of Austria, with something European and Asiatic 
belonging to St. Petersburg. It paraded some of the mantles 
taken from the Czsars at Rome; but, in return, it showed very 
little of the ancient court of France where the magnificence of 
dress was so happily concealed under the spell of all the arts 
of taste. That which this kind of luxury set off above all, was 
the absolute lack of propriety ; and, in France, when propriety 
is too much lacking, mockery is near at hand. 

This Bonaparte family, which came from an obscure island, 
hardly French, where its members lived in a state of parsimony, 
having as head a man of genius, whose elevation was due to 
military glory acquired as leader of republican armies, them- 
selves the issue of a democracy in ebullition, ought indeed to 
have discarded former luxury, and have adopted, even for the 
frivolous side of life, an entirely new route. Would it not have 
been more imposing by displaying a noble simplicity which 
would have inspired confidence in its strength and in its 
duration? Instead of that, the Bonapartes were mistaken 
enough to believe that, to imitate in a puerile manner the 


* William IX., Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, Elector in 1803, despoiled of his states 
in 1806. He recovered his possessions in 1814. He died in 1821. 


CrZ 


20 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


kings whose thrones they had taken, was one way of succeeding 
them. 

I wish to avoid all that has a libellous appearance, and I have 
besides no need of citing proper names to prove that, by their 
morals also, these new dynasties have injured the moral power 
of the Emperor Napoleon. The morals of a people in times of 
trouble are often bad ; but even when the mob has all sorts of 
vices, its morality is severe. “ Men,’ said Montesquieu, “corrupt 
in detail, are very honest men in the main.” And these honest 
people are they who pronounce upon kings and queens. When 
their judgment is unfavourable, it is very difficult for a power, 
above all a new one, not to be shaken by it. 

Spanish pride did not allow that great and generous 
people to concentrate its hatred so long as that of Westphalia 
had done. The perfidy of Napoleon gave it birth, and Joseph 
from his arrival in Spain fed it each day. He was persuaded 
that to speak ill of his brother, was to separate from him; and 
that to separate from his brother was to take root in Spain. 
Hence he adopted a conduct and a language always in strict 
opposition to the will of the emperor. He never ceased saying 
that Napoleon despised the Spaniards. He spoke of the army 
that attacked Spain as being the refuse of the French army. He 
related all that could most injure his brother. He even went so 
far as to reveal the shameful secrets of his family, and that some- 
times in full council. ‘ My brother is acquainted with only one 
kind of government,” said he, “and that is a government of iron ; 
to accomplish that all means are good to him ;” and he stupidly 
added, “I am the only honest man in my family, and if the 
Spaniards were to rally around me, they would soon learn to 
fear nothing from France.” As for the emperor, he spoke 
with the same impropriety of Joseph ; he covered him with 
scorn, and that also before Spaniards, who, led away by their 
own exasperation, ended by believing them both, when they 
spoke of one another. The irritation of Napoleon against his 
brother made him act always on the first impulse in the affairs 
of Spain, and made him commit, incessantly, grave mistakes. 
The two brothers counteracted each other in all their opera- 
tions; it was never possible for them to agree together upon 


NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE—HIS BROTHERS. 21 


any plan of political action, any financial plan, or military 
arrangement. 

It was important to establish a supreme command, to have 
an invading army and an army of operations, to agree as to 
the means of nourishing, clothing, and paying the troops. All 
that could lead to this result failed successively, either through 
Napoleon’s consideration for his. generals, on whom he was 
known to rely, and who ever alleged, often in their personal 
interest, this trite pretext: the safety of the army I have the 
honour to command demands such or such a thing; or else, 
everything failed on account of the private policy of Joseph, 
which tended constantly, in opposition to his brother, to make 
all the expenses of the war fall upon France. The emperor, 
in order to avoid the obstacles that Joseph opposed constantly 
to the execution of his designs, ordered his generals to correspond 
directly with the Prince de Neufchatel, his major-general. They 
all did so, but without mutual agreement, solely guided by 
their interests ; in nearly all their correspondence, they desired 
the emperor to renounce his project of securing Spain, there 
to establish a prince of his family, but rather to parcel it 
out like Italy, and to distribute its principalities, duchies, and 
entailed estates, as rewards amongst zs brave lieutenants. I 
have been told that the Duc d’Albufera,1 who was rather a 
wit, added that this would be going back to the times of the 
Moorish princes, vassals of the Calif of the West. 

What was going on at the quarters of the French generals 
was known week by week at Cadiz, and from there all over the 
kingdom ; and one can judge of the intensity that the fear of 
such prospects gave to Spanish resistance. So, the French 
generals might conquer indeed, they always found new enemies 
before them, and there were no points really subdued, except 
those covered by French troops ; and even their communications 
were constantly cut off by guerillas. 


1 Louis-Gabriel Suchet, born at Lyons in 1772, enlisted in 1791, became general 
in 1796, and head of the staff of the army in Italy in 1799. He played a brilliant 
part in the wars of the Empire until 1808, when he was sent to Spain, where his 
gallant conduct won for him the staff of marshal of France, and subsequently the 
title of Duc d’Albufera (1812). He became peer of France in 1814, and died in 
1826, 


22 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


As for Joseph, he only accorded his favours to a few French- 
men discontented with the emperor, who had embraced his cause; 
these new Castilians slipped into all the offices of the court, civil 
and military; they had penetrated into the Council of State; 
treated the Spaniards with insupportable haughtiness ; flattered 
the vanity of the king in every way, and never failed to revile 
his brother. The hatred for the emperor was manifested as 
much in the palace of the king as in the hall of the Junta at 
Cadiz. 

What could be the fate of an undertaking the leaders of 
which were in open opposition to each other, and whose 
means were enfeebled by the successive recall of troops already 
acclimatized, but who were wanted, perhaps against Austria, 
or against Russia, and who were replaced by wretched 
recruits ? 

The emperor having again met at Wagram the good fortune 
which, for a time, had abandoned him at Lobau, had persuaded 
himself that the submission of Spain would follow the peace he 
had dictated at Vienna; but it was not so at all. This peace 
exercised no influence over the affairs of the Peninsula ; resist- 
ance had had time to organize, and it had done so everywhere. 
Napoleon then believed that he must make a great effort and he 
made it, but in the wrong direction. He started with a false idea; 
he believed he would make a good bargain with the Spaniards 
by driving Lord Wellington from Portugal. Marshal Massena 
displayed wondrous ability in, and brought enormous resources 
to bear on, this operation, which proved fruitless, and the success 
of which would, in any case, have been of insignificant influence 
on the point at issue. It was the whole Spanish people which 
had risen, which was armed, and which must be subdued. 
And supposing even the emperor to have succeeded in 
destroying armed resistance, would there not have remained 
for many years a secret opposition, the most difficult of all to 
destroy ? 

Joseph, whom the other enterprises of his brother left a little 
more to himself and to his own methods, recognized at last 
that it was the people who were his veritable enemy. He 
then did his best to win them; his ministers spread pamphlets 


NAPOLEON’S MARRIAGE--H1IS BROTHERS. 23 


filled with promises of all kinds; it was the liberty of the 
Spaniards that Joseph desired—it was a constitution adapted 
to the customs of the country, the project for which he was 
going to submit to the most enlightened men ; he announced 
great economies and a considerable reduction of the taxes. In 
his proclamations all the revolutionary methods were put in 
motion. The Cortes of Cadiz, in order to destroy the effect 
of it, immediately vied in liberalism with Joseph, and went 
on all points farther than he had done. It was nothing but 
decrees from Cadiz, suppressing the Inquisition ; suppressing 
feudal rights, privileges, fiscal obstacles between provinces, the 
censure of the press, &c..... And from the midst of these 
ruins they brought forth a constitution all democratic ; in which, 
however, in order not to frighten too much the friends of mon- 
archy, they had placed an hereditary king. But no king would 
have been able with dignity, nor even with safety, to occupy 
such a throne. The Cortes of Cadiz should have been more 
circumspect in re-establishing the fundamental laws of Spain, 
so skilfully undermined and finally destroyed by the house of 
Austria. 

Through all these intrigues, Lord Wellington penetrated 
into Spain; he captured Badajoz from the Duc de Dalmatie,’ 
and Ciudad Rodrigo from the Duc de Raguse.? Once master of 
these two keys of Spain at the northern and southern ex- 
tremities of the frontier of Portugal, the English general 
skilfully deceived the Duc de Dalmatie, in making him believe 
he wished to fall upon Andalusia, while he bore towards 
Valladolid on the Douro. As for the Duc de Raguse, without 
waiting for a reinforcement of 15,000 men which was within 
reach, he permitted the Battle of Arapiles* to be fought, at 
the beginning of which he received a serious wound. The. 
army, having lost its leader at the outset, was cruelly beaten. 
Lord Wellington who, following his successes, had advanced 
too far towards the north, did not hesitate, as a prudent man, 
to take retrograde steps; he re-entered Portugal, whence the 
famous disasters of the campaign of Russia, which obliged 


1 Marshal Soult. 2 Marshal Marmont. 
3 Village of Spain, near Salamanca. The battle was July 21, 1812. 


24 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


Napoleon to recall the best troops that remained in Spain, 
induced him to dart out again in 1812. 

The first news of those disasters had increased the disorder 
which too numerous and unsubmissive leaders fomented around 
Joseph ; it culminated in the loss of the fatal battle of Vittoria. 
The Duc de Dalmatie, sent with all speed to Spain, tried to re- 
organize the remnants of the army. He made well-planned and 
rapid marches, but they answered no other purpose than to 
dispute with his skilful adversary the possession of the southern 
provinces of France. Thus terminated this great conquest of 
Spain, as badly conducted as it was badly conceived ; and I say 
not only conducted by Napoleon’s generals, but by himself; for 
he, also, had committed grave military faults in Spain. If, at 
the end of 1808, after. the capitulation of Madrid, instead of 
rushing in pursuit of an English corps which was hastening to em- 
bark at Corunna, and to which he did little harm, he had marched 
on Andalusia and had there struck a great blow, he would have 
disorganized the resistance of the Spanish generals, who would 
have had no other resource than to retire into Portugal. 

The emperor, having once lost sight of the true interests of 
France, gave himself up, with the irreflection and ardour of 
passion, to the ambition of still placing a member of his family 
on one of the first thrones of Europe, and, to accomplish that, 
he attacked Spain without shame, and without the least pretext 
to justify himself; this is what the sense of justice in nations 
never allows them to forgive. When one studies all the actions 
or rather all the impulses of Napoleon at this all-important 
period of his life,one is inclined to believe that he was carried 
away by a sort of fatality which blinded his high intellect. 

If the emperor had only seen in Spain a ground on which he 
could force England to peace, where all the great political ques- 
tions then pending in Europe could have been decided, and each 
sovereign ensured the safe possession of his dominions, his ven- 
ture would not have been more justifiable ; but, at least, it would 
have been more consonant with the bold policy of conquerors. 
I have met a few persons who did not know him, and whose 


1 City of Spain, chief place of the province of Alava. The battle was fought 
June 21, 1813. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS Vil. 25 


minds, like those of our old diplomatists, being inclined to judge 
of events theoretically, supposed he had this intention. And, 
the fact is that the Bayonne transaction being revocable at will, 
might be regarded as a sacrifice good to make if need were 
for the general pacification of Europe ; but from the month of 
April, 1812, all makers of political combinations were obliged 
to dismiss this hypothesis; for, at that time, Napoleon refused 
the overtures of the British Cabinet, which declared it did not 
see any insurmountable difficulty to arrange with him, on all 
the points in litigation, if he himself admitted first of all the 
restoration of Ferdinand VII. on the throne of Spain, and 
that of Victor Amadeus on the throne of Sardinia. If he had 
accepted those propositions, he could easily have derived 
enormous moral advantages from his sacrifices, and all the 
cabinets could have believed that he had only invaded Spain 
in the hope of securing a lasting peace for France and of 
strengthening his dynasty. 

But, for a long time, Napoleon was but little concerned with 
the policy of France, hardly with his own. He did not think 
of maintaining, but only of extending. It seemed as if the 
idea of preserving never entered his mind, and as if it were 
opposed to his nature. , 

Nevertheless, that which he did not do in proper time, he 
was forced to do when it was too late, and without any profit 
to his power or to his glory. Sending back the Spanish princes 
to Madrid in the month of January, 1814, and the pope to 
Rome at the same time, were only expedients inspired by 
distress; and the sudden and even stealthy manner in which 
those measures were taken and executed, deprived them of every 
vestige of grandeur and generosity. But I notice that I am 
speaking of the return of the pope to his States, without our 
quarrels with the court of Rome having found room in this 
recital. It was, however, too remarkable an event of our times 
for me not to give here some of its details. 

The differences which arose between Napoleon and the court 
of Rome, shortly after the Concordat of 1801, grew still more 
acute after the coronation—though these two events ought to 
- have prevented that contest. Those differences were for a long 


26 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE. TALLEVRAND. 


time only known by the rumour of the violence of the emperor 
towards the pope, and by the noble complaints of the Holy 
Father, which only reached the public with great difficulty and 
great confusion. Their origin and their causes might have been 
better appreciated, for all that concerned the purely theological 
part of those discussions, when Napoleon summoned at Paris an 
ecclesiastical commission, of which I will speak soon. But the 
deliberations of that commission, composed of very enlightened 
men, had been kept secret. 

By what sequence of events did the pope find himself 
tormented and persecuted for nearly ten years, so odiously, 
with such want of policy and in so many ways? 

Let us run over the facts and their dates, looking at them 
from a distance. Several of these dates will explain the great 
misfortunes of Pius VII., supported with such heroic courage, 
that one hardly dares to note in the Holy Father some sigue 
wrongs of improvidence. 

Pius VI., his predecessor, removed from Rome by order of 
the Directory, February 10, 1798, died at Valence, August 9, 
1799.. Pius VII. was elected March 14, 1800, at Venice, which 
belonged then to the Emperor of Germany, according to one of 
the stipulations of the treaty of Campo-Formio ; and, on July 
13 of the same year, he made his entry into Rome which had 
been re-conquered with the Roman States by the allies, while 
Bonaparte was in Egypt. 

I have already said somewhere that Bonaparte, on his return 
from Egypt, had arrived suddenly in Paris, October 16, 
1799, and that as a result of the coup @’état of the 18th 
Brumaire (November 9, 1799), he had been placed at the 
head of the government as First Consul, December 13, 1799. 
The conclave was opened at Venice, on the first of this same 
month of December, and while Pius VII., elected in the month 
of March following, was going from Venice to Rome, Bonaparte 
had just marked his taking possession of power by two acts 
which had the greatest influence over Italy. On June 2, 1800, 
he entered Milan where he had re-established the Cisalpine 
Republic, and twelve days later, on June 14, he gained the 
famous battle of Marengo, which gave France so large a portion 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. ay 


of Italy, and reduced the States of the Church to what had been 
fixed upon by the treaty of Tolentino. 

Thus the pope, entering Rome after these two events, July 3, 
1800, must have felt how important it was for him to conciliate 
so powerful and so formidable a protector as Napoleon, and how 
important also it was for the religion of which he was the head, 
and which had experienced so many vicissitudes and persecu- 
tions in France, to bring to an end the schism which for so long 
a time obtained in that unhappy country. 

Bonaparte also experienced this same need, and, on his 
passage through Milan, he heard with the greatest interest the 
first overtures which were made to him very secretly and very 
skilfully on the part of the court of Rome. Is it not a 
remarkable thing, that, raised at the head of the government 
by his military exploits and by the philosophical and liberal 
ideas which prevailed then, Bonaparte should have felt im- 
mediately the necessity of being reconciled with the court 
of Rome? It is perhaps in this circumstance that he dis- 
played the greatest proof of the force of his character, for he 
braved then all the mockery of the army, and the opposition 
even of the two consuls, his colleagues. He remained firmly 
attached to the idea that, in order to sustain either the civil 
constitution of the clergy, or theo-philanthropy, which were 
equally discredited, he would have to play the part of per- 
secutor of the Catholic religion, and to arm, against her and 
against her ministers, the laws with severity, whereas in dis- 
carding the religious innovations of the Revolution, it would be 
easy for him to make a friend of our ancient religion and even 
to find support in all the Catholic consciences of France. 

He then resolved, and it was one of the strokes of his great 
genius, to come to an understanding with the head of the 
Church, who, alone, could reconcile, lead back, pronounce as 
judge or as arbiter, and re-establish finally by his authority, 
to which no other was comparable, unity of worship and of 
doctrine. . 

To this authority was added, in the person of the pope, 
the influence of a great and sincere piety, of an enlightened 
mind, and of an attractive meekness. 


28 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


The Concordat could not appear under better auspices ; it 
was greatly desired, above all in the provinces. It was con- 
verted into a law, April 8, 1801. It was composed of seventeen 
articles drawn up with remarkable wisdom and foresight. All 
was clear, without equivocation ; there was not a word which 
could offend or displease. Transferred ecclesiastical estates 
could no longer be claimed back, and it was declared that the 
acquirers of such property must be fully reassured in this 
respect. It was an immense point obtained from the con- 
descension of a pope full of piety. 

But one point presented prodigious difficulties. To re- 
establish religion in France there must be obtained the resig- 
nation of all the old bishops, or do without them. They had 
all offered and even sent it to Pius VI. in 1791, after the 
civil constitution of the clergy. Pius VI. thought he ought to 
refuse to accept it. Pope Pius VII. demanded it in 1801, by 
his brief of August 24, Zam multa, &c.... as an indispens- 
able preliminary to all negotiation, declaring, nevertheless, to 
the bishops, with sweet, confiding, but firm expressions, that if 
they refused, which he presumed they would. not, he should 
see himself with regret compelled to appoint new men to the 
government of the bishoprics of the new circumscription. 

Of the eighty-one bishops who were still alive and who had 
not renounced the episcopacy, forty-five sent in their resigna- 
tions, thirty-six refused to do so; the greater number, I think, 
less from theological conviction, although they were encouraged 
in their refusal by the learned theologian Asseline,t than from 
attachment to the House of Bourbon, and hatred for the present 
government. It has been pretended that the refusal of some of 
them was rather dilatory than absolute, but all persevered in it, 
and their resistance even seemed to increase from day to day; 
for, after their canonical claims of 1803, signed by all the 
bishops who had not resigned,’ there appeared in April, 1804, 


1 Jean-René Asseline, born in 1742, entered the Church and became grand-vicar 
of M. de Beaumont, Archbishop of Paris. In 1790, he was named Bishop of 
Boulogne, refused to swear allegiance to the civil constitution, and emigrated in 1791. 
He retired to Munster, whence he protested against the Concordat, in 1802. In 1807, 
he complied with the request of Louis XVIII. and lived on intimacy with the royal 
family until his death (1813). He has left numerous works on theology. 

2 It was in 1801 that the bishops, having refused to resign, assembled in London, 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI, 29 


with a list of still stronger claims, a declaration on the rights of 
the king,’ signed by the thirteen bishops residing in England. 

And, finally, anticipating events, I will say here that in 
1814, on the accession of Louis XVIII., these bishops pre- 
tended even with the pope, to derive credit for having re- 
sisted him, and, to this effect, wrote him a haughty letter 
in which each of them had taken the title of his old bishop- 
ric. The pope refused to receive it, and compelled them, 
by his perseverance in refusing, to address him a letter of 
apology, in which they abandoned their pretensions, and which 
they signed only as /ate bishops. In order that there should not 
remain the slightest doubt in this respect, the pope desired that 
not one of them should be replaced in the see he had previously 
occupied, not even the Archbishop of Reims,? in spite of all 
the propriety there would have been in making an exception 
in his favour. 

I revert to what took place in 1801 and the following years. 
The pope saw the Concordat in full working order, without any 
trouble resulting for France; in spite of the diversity of 


* M. de Talleyrand-Périgord, afterward Cardinal and Archbishop of Paris. 


30 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Opinions, the opposition was trifling, seldom offered, and without 
result. 

It must, however, be said here that Pius VII. had displayed 
in this circumstance an authority which transcended the ordinary 
rules, and which would not have been recognized in any other 
time, if a pope had tried to exercise it—that of deposing bishops 
without trial, as also that of suppressing more than half the 
bishoprics of France without formality. At another epoch, 
nothing would have appeared in France more opposed to the 
liberties of the Gallican Church. But the case was here out of 
-all comparison with ordinary times; it was impossible and 
almost ridiculous to invoke and to wish to apply here the 
exercise of those liberties. The pope had vainly exhausted 
the most powerful entreaties with this minority, composed of 
thirty-six bishops, and then, supporting himself on the majority 
of the French Episcopacy, he employed the oxy means possible 
of destroying the schism which it was so urgent to have cease. 
What other means, in effect, could the pope have employed ? 
Let any one search, he cannot even imagine one. Abbé 
Fleury,! ardent Gallican though he was, and certainly very 
little disposed to extend the authority of the pope, said none 
the less in his discourse on the liberties of the Gallican Church, 
that, “the authority of the pope is sovereign, and rises above 
all,’ when it is a question of maintaining the rules or causing 
the canons to be observed. Bossuet makes use of similar 
language: “It must be said, consequently and with much 
reason,” adds M. Emery,? in one of his works, “that the 
authority of the pope is sovereign, and takes precedence of all, 
even of the canons, when there is a question as to the preser- 


1 Abbé Claude Fleury, born in 1640, was at first preceptor of the sons of the 
Prince de Condé, then under-governor of the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou and 
Berry. In 1716, he came again to the court as confessor of Louis XV. He resigned 
this appointment soon after, and died in 1723. Abbé Fleury has left a large 
number of works on ecclesiastical history and religious controversies. 

2 Jacques-André Emery, born in 1732, took orders, in 1756, was Professor of 
Theology at Orleans, was named in 1776 Grand-Vicar of the Diocese of Angers, 
Superior of the Seminary of that city, and, shortly after, Superior-General of the 
Order of Saint Sulpice. Under the Terror, he was imprisoned for eighteen months. 
After the 9th Thermidor, he was charged with the functions of Grand-Vicar of the 
Diocese of Paris. Under the Consulate, he reorganized his congregation. He took 
part in the ecclesiastical commissions assembled by the emperor, and died in 
181I, 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 31 


vation of the Church, since it is only for the mazutenance of these 
great interests that these rules and these canons have been 
made.” Father Thomassin, in his great and celebrated work on 
the discipline of the Church, says also: “Nothing is more 
consonant with the canons than to violate these canons, when 
from this violation, there must result a much greater good than 
from even their observance.” 

Pius VII. then, in these difficult circumstances, showed him- 
self to be possessed both of a strong will and of a profound 
knowledge of true principles. In acting as he did, he destroyed 
the schism without irritating, without humiliating the constitu- 
tional bishops, and yet without yielding to them any point, and 
order was restored everywhere. 

There were, nevertheless, some people whose consciences 
felt uneasy in the dioceses where the former incumbents had 
not given in their resignation. Some among them, while reserv- 
ing their jurisdiction, had consented nevertheless, to the exercise 
of the powers of the bishop who replaced them, and supplied 
by that the insufficiency of his title. But the most active in 
their resistance, those who, from political opinions had shown 
themselves most inimical to the principle of the Revolution, and 
who were imperturbably ruled by this sentiment, were careful 
not to doit. This persistent opposition did not produce, how- 
ever, either the effect, or the results that they anticipated, and 
that might have been feared. Those of the parishioners of 
their dioceses whose consciences were more particularly timorous, 
though uneasy perhaps for a while, were not slow in compre- 
hending that their former bishop, not having wished either to 
come into their midst, or to give in his resignation at the 
demand of the pope, they were assuredly protected from all 
reproach in according, under such circumstances, their confidence 
to the new bishop sent to them by the Holy Father. 

The bishops remaining in London saw surely with grief that 
men imbued with their doctrines, such as Abbé Blanchard! and 


Abbé Pierre-Louis Blanchard, born in 1762, was Professor of Philosophy in 
1789. Having refused the oath, he emigrated to England, where he remained until 
1814. From his retreat, he published a great number of statements and of libels, in 
which he speaks with extreme violence of those who hurt the interests of religion. He 
attacks the Concordat, and does not spare even the pope, principally on the occasion 


32 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND, 


Abbé Gaschet, pushing to extremes the consequences (quite 
well deduced however) of these doctrines, published in England, 
and introduced as much as they could into France, a host of 
libels against the pope, in which, in a fanatical style which 
seemed copied from Luther’s, they declared him heretical, 
schismatic, fallen from papacy, even from priesthood; they 
said it was a blasphemy to pronounce his name at the canon 
of mass, that he was as much a stranger to the Church as if 
he were a Jew or a Pagan. They spoke of his outrages, of his 
scandals, &c. . . . I do not alter a syllable. Let us believe for 
the honour of those bishops who constituted what was then 
called da petite E-glise that, however contrary they were, they did 
not approve of these mad fits, although they appeared to have 
‘been instigated by them. They were, however, solemnly con- 
demned by twenty-nine Catholic bishops of Ireland, and by the 
apostolic vicars who resided in London. What must be added 
is, that in France, where they spread these libels, universal 
scorn treated them as they deserved. I believe that the police 
denounced them or wished to denounce them one day to the 
tribunals, but even that could not remove them from obscurity. 
Bonaparte had caused to be decreed, under form of law, at 
the same time as the Concordat, organic articles, concerning as 
much the Catholic as the Protestant clergy. Several of these 
articles displeased the pope, in as much as they appeared to put 
the Church of France in too great a dependence on the govern- 
ment, even in minor details. He complained with moderation, 
and demanded modification ; he obtained gradually, and even 
without much difficulty, essential alterations. Some of these 
articles were besides transitory ; their effects were to cease with 
the circumstances which had called them forth. There were others 
which proceeded naturally from old Gallican liberties ; modifica- 
tions could not be introduced in those, and the pope could not 
expect it. In order to draw up the Concordat, they had been 
obliged to renounce those liberties momentarily ; the Concordat 
once made, it was urgent to resume our privileges. All that 
was really necessary had been granted, if not at once, at least 


of the consecration of the emperor. His numerous writings have been published in 
London. 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 33 


in time. The pope was perfectly seconded in his desires by 
the Bishop of Nantes, as will be seen farther on, and by his 
legate, Cardinal’Caprara. The latter, knowing the passionate 
temper of the First Consul, put great wisdom and extreme cir- 
cumspection in all his conduct, knowing how to wait, fearing to 
irritate, and deeming himself too happy for what had been 
obtained, to seek to compromise it. 

Cardinal Caprara, appointed legate a /atere to Bonaparte, 
had been invested with the most extensive powers by the bull 
Dextera.... of the month of August, 1801, and by the bull 
Quoniam. ... of November 29, of the same year, to enable 
him to carry out the Concordat, to confirm the new bishops, 

. and to solve all the difficulties which might arise. But, 
although the Concordat had been concluded and signed at Paris, 
July 15, 1801, and ratified at Rome by Pius VII. in the month 
of August following, it had not been converted into a law (on 
account of the absence of the legislative body) until April 8, 
1802; and it was not until that day that the legate could 
exercise his functions and confirm the new bishops, after having 
taken oath the same day (April 8) at the hands of the First 
Consul. His oath, in the terms which he used, though only to 
trained eyes, is slightly different from that which had been 
settled by the decree of the consuls. The decree bore these 
few words, “He shall, according to the usual formula, take 
the oath and promise to conform to the laws of the State, 
and to the liberties of the Gallican Church.” But the cardinal 
took the oath and promised (in Latin) “to observe the constitu- 
tion, laws, statutes and usages of the French Republic,” and at 
the same time, “ not to derogate in any way from the authority 
and jurisdiction of the government of the Republic, nor from 
_ the rights, liberties and privileges of the Gallican Church.” 
The whole was preceded by a compliment to the First Consul, 
such as was never paid, perhaps, to any sovereign. It can be 
seen, on close examination, that instead of promising Zo conform 
to the liberties of the Gallican Church (which implies a sort of 
adherence to, or, at least, of recognition of these liberties), he 
promised only not to derogate from them, which is purely 
negative. The difference, at any rate, is very small or even 

VOL. II. D 


34 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


insignificant in its result, and very likely passed unnoticed. 
Besides, he promised, in the other part of the oath, more than 
had been demanded of him, for they wished him to swear to 
conform zo the laws of the state, and he took the positive 
oath Zo observe the Constitution, the laws, the statutes and the 
usages of the Republic, which expresses more. 

As to the liberties of the Gallican Church, which rouse the 
fears of the court of Rome, to engage by oath not to derogate 
from them is assuredly all that could be expected of a legate, 
above all if we consider that no pope has ever recognized 
them. Innocent XI." (Odescalchi) disturbed for eight years 
the Church of France on account of these same liberties con-: 
secrated in the Assembly of the Clergy of 1682, and repeatedly 
refused to grant bulls to the ecclesiastics of the second order, 
members of that assembly (where, however, they had no vote). 
His successor, Alexander VIII.? (Ottoboni) was more opinionate 
still in his refusals, since two days before his death, he published a 
bull against the four articles of 1682, which, for that matter, had 
no effect, because he was dying. Innocent XII. (Pignatelli), good 
man as he was, could not make up his mind to grant bulls to 
the bishops appointed between 1682 and 1693, until they had 
each written him a letter of apology and of regret for what had 
taken place inthat assembly. This letter was truly humiliating, 
and that which made it more so was that Louis XIV. added one 
in his own hand, in which he bound himself to give no sequel 
to his edict of March 22, 1682. The letter of the king must 
have seemed as a retractation, though, however, he withdrew it 
before his death, since finally the edict was not revoked, and 
after him it continued to be executed. 

It is almost useless to recall here that Bonaparte, proclaimed 
emperor by the senate, May 20, 1804, put a great price, and 
that is easily conceived, upon being consecrated by the pope. It 
is a wondrous feature of his destiny that he was able to obtain 
it, and at the time, I thought myself very happy in having con- 


1 Innocent XI. (Benedict Odescalchi), born at Como in 1611, Pope in 1671, died 
in 1689. 

? Alexander VIII., born at Venice in 1610, pope in 1689. He quashed the 
articles of the declaration of 1682 by the bull Inter multiplices, and died in 1691. 

3 Innocent XII. (Antoni Pignatelli), born in Naples in 1615, pope from 
1691 to 1700. 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 35 


tributed to it, because I thought that thereby the ties of France 
with the court of Rome would become closer. Pius VII. 
having already recognized the consular government, since it was 
with that government he had treated for the Concordat, could 
not be stayed by the consideration of rights which might some 
day be brought forth by the House of Bourbon, if the new 
government, being itself overthrown, the nation should recall 
the former. He had then nothing to object against the title of 
emperor that Bonaparte had given himself, or that had been 
awarded him in France, with more solemnity, although perhaps 
with less sincerity, than that of First Consul. Therefore the 
pope had only to consider a single point, viz., whether, in the 
sole interest of religion, to which the new emperor might do, 
by his immense power, so much good or so much harm, he 
ought to consent to come to consecrate him, as Saint Boniface, 
the legate of Pope Stephen III., had come to consecrate Pepin, 
during the life of the legitimate king, Childeric III. ; as Leo III. 
crowned Charlemagne emperor at Rome in 800, and as another 
pope, Stephen V., came afterwards to consecrate Louis le 
Debonnaire at Reims, after the death of Charlemagne. 

The pope decided to come to perform this consecration at 
Paris, and this memorable ceremony took place December 2, 
1804. Pius VII. was not influenced in this circumstance by 
temporal views, like Pope Stephen III, who had implored the 
assistance of Pepin against the Lombards, but very evidently 
and solely by purely religious motives, since he abstained from 
allowing even a glimpse to be seen of his desire, a very natural 
one, to recover his three legations of Bologna, Ferrara, and 
Ravenna, which the emperor besides was careful not to offer 
to return him, nor even to give him the hope of it. All the 
demands of the pope, without any exception, were in the 
interest of religion. None concerned himself personally, and 
he refused the presents that were offered him for his family. 

He quitted Paris April 4, 1805, leaving everywhere on his 
passage the profound impression of his virtues, and of his benev- 
olence. Napoleon had left Paris some days before him; he was 
bent on something else than on showing his gratitude to the 
Holy Father. On the 16th of May, the pope arrived in Rome, 

Dez 


36 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. . 


and on the 26th of May the emperor had himself crowned at 
Milan as King of Italy. A short time after his troops occu- 
pied Ancona, on Roman territory The pope complained ; 
Napoleon did not reply ; but, after the battle of Austerlitz, on 
Dec. 2, 1805, and the peace of Presburg, on the 26th, he wrote 
to the pope, Jan. 6, 1806, that he did not wish to appropriate 
Ancona, but simply to occupy it as protector of the Holy See, and 
in order that that city should not be defiled by the Mussulmans. 

Three months after, March 30,1806, Napoleon places his 
brother Joseph on the throne of Naples, and asks the pope to 
recognize him. He asks him at the same time to make with him 
an offensive and defensive league ; to embrace the continental 
system—to close consequently his ports to the English, that is 
to say, to declare war against them. Such propositions, at a 
time above all when the emperor was trampling under foot the 
Concordat that he had concluded with the pope in 1803, for 
Italy ; when he was despoiling the bishoprics and the mon-- 
asteries of their wealth, suppressing both at his will; when he 
was plaguing the bishops and the curés with new oaths, 
&c. . .., such propositions could not be accepted, and they 
were not. They gave rise to that correspondence with the 
French authorities in which there is displayed so much force, 
reason, and propriety on the side of the court of Rome. 

Such a refusal and so much wisdom could not fail to 
irritate the emperor. On February 2, 1808, he had Rome oc- 
cupied by his troops under the command of General Miollis.” 
They took possession of the Castello S. Angelo. The general 
tried to oblige the pope to subscribe to all the demands that 
were made to him, under the menace of losing his states; he 


1 Ancona had at that time great importance. Some Russian troops were con- 
centrated at Corfu, whence they were awaiting an occasion to pass into Italy and join 
the English. Ancona was then exposed to a coup de main, so much the more that 
its garrison was almost a cipher, and its fortifications falling to ruins. Napoleon 
begged the pontifical government to put the city into a state of defence. His request 
was unheeded. Soon General Gouvion Saint-Cyr, who was at that moment crossing 
the States of the Church to go to the kingdom of Naples, received the order to take 
possession of the city. He entered it by surprise and established himself there 
November 6, 1805. 

2 Francois, Comte Miollis, born in 1759, was captain of infantry in 1789. He 
served in the armies of the Republic, became general in 1794, and distinguished 
himself in the campaign of Italy. He was for a long time Governor of Mantua. In 
1807, he was appointed Governor of Rome and of the States of the Church. He 
retired in 1815, and died in 1828. 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITHA PIUS VII. 37 


multiplied vexations, seized the mail and the press ; had twenty 
cardinals, among whom were several ministers carried off, &c. 
..... The pope protested in vain against such violence: 
Napoleon paid no attention. On the 2nd of April following, 
he united the legations of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata and 
Camerino with the kingdom of Italy to make three departments 
of them. He confiscated the wealth of the cardinals who did not 
return to the place of their birth. He disarmed nearly all the 
guards of the Holy Father—the nobles of this guard were im- 
prisoned. Finally, Miollis had Cardinal Gabrielle,’ pro-Secretary 
of State, carried off, and put seals upon his papers. 

On May 17, 1809, a decree was issued by Napoleon, dated 
from Vienna, proclaiming the union (in his quality of successor 
to Charlemagne) of the States of the pope with the French 
Empire, ordaining that the city of Rome should be a free and 
imperial city; that the pope should continue to have his seat 
there, and that he should enjoy a revenue of two millions of 
francs. On June 10, he had this decree promulgated at Rome. 
On this same June 10, the pope protested against all these 
spoliations, refused all pensions, and recapitulating all the out- 
rages of which he had cause to complain, issued the famous 
and imprudent bull of excommunication against the authors, 
abettors, and executors of the acts of violence against him and 
the Holy See, but without naming any one. 

Napoleon was incensed at it, and on the first impulse he 
wrote to the bishops of France a letter in which he spoke in 
almost revolutionary terms “of him who wished,” said he, “to 
make dependent upon a perishable temporal power the eternal 
interest of consciences, and that of all spiritual affairs.” 

On the 6th of July, 1809, Pius VII., taken from Rome, after 
he had been asked if he would renounce the temporal sovereignty 
of Rome and of the States of the Church, was conducted by 
General Radet? as far as Savona, where he arrived alone» 


1 Jules Gabrielle, issue of an old Roman family, born in 1748, was Bishop of 
Sinigaglia, then cardinal in 1801. On March 27, 1808, he became pro-Secretary of 
State. He protested energetically against all the unlawful measures ordered by 
the emperor against the rights of the pope, and was arrested in June of the same 
year. He was sent to France, where he was confined, and in 1813 repaired to 
Fontainebleau to stay with the pope. He died in 1822. 

* Etienne, Baron Radet, born in 1762, had been non-commissioned officer under 


38 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


August 10, the cardinals having all been previously transported 
to Paris. And to complete the spoliation of the pope, Napoleon 
issued, on the 17th of February, 1810, a sexatus-consultum, which 
bestowed upon the eldest son of the emperor the title of King 
of Rome, and even ordained that the emperor should be conse- 
crated a second time at Rome, in the first ten years of his 
reign. 

It was while oppressed, captive and deprived of all counsel, 
that the pope refused the bulls to all the bishops nominated by 
the emperor, and then it was that all the discussions relative to 
the proper measures to put anend tothe viduity of the churches 
were commenced. 


ECCLESIASTICAL COMMISSION. 
Formed in 1809. 


This commission was composed of Cardinal Fesch, Cardinal 
Maury,! the Archbishop of Tours,? the Bishop of Nantes,® the 


the old régime. In 1792, he was sub-lieutenant in the National Guard at Varennes. 
Accused of having favoured the flight of Louis XVI., he was acquitted by the Revo- 
lutionary Tribunal. He became brigadier-general in 1799, and commander-in-chief 
of the gexdarmerie. It was in this capacity that he received the order, July 6, 1809, 
to arrest the pope. In 1813, he was appointed Grand Provost of the Grand Army 
and general of division. Sentenced in 1816 to nine years’ imprisonment, he was 
pardoned in 1818, and died in 1825. 

1 Jean Maury, born in 1746, at Valréas (Vaucluse), was the son of a shoemaker. 
He took orders in 1771, and soon made himself famous by his eloquence ; he 
entered the Academy in 1784. Deputy for the clergy of Peronne to the States- 
General, he became the leader of the Conservative side. He emigrated in 1791, went to 
Rome, was nominated archbishop zz partébus, cardinal and Bishop of Montefiascone. 
Shortly after, Louis XVIII. accredited him as ambassador to the Holy See. He 
rallied, however, to the side of the emperor in 1807, and became senator and 
chaplain to Prince Jérdme. In 1810, he was called to the archiepiscopal see of 
Paris, which caused his condemnation by the pope, and later his disgrace with 
Louis XVIII. In 1815, he had to leave his archbishopric and fled to Italy. He was 
momentarily confined at the Castello S. Angelo, but released soon after. He re- 
entered the good graces of Pius VII., and died in 1817. 

2 Louis, Comte de Barral, born in 1746, had been general agent of the clergy in 
1785, then coadjutor of the Bishop of Troyes and bishop zz fartibus. He refused 
the oath and emigrated. In r8o1, he sent his resignation to the pope, and was soon 
after named Bishop of Meaux, and, later, Archbishop of Tours. In 1805, he accepted 
the office of chaplain to the empress, and later the dignity of senator, Mgr. de Barral 
pronounced, in 1814, the funeral oration of the Empress Josephine. It was he also, 
who, on June I, 1815, officiated pontifically on the Champs-de- Mars. On the 
return of Louis XVIII. he was forced to resign. He died in 1818. 

3M. Duvoisin. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 39 


Bishop of Evreux,! the Bishop of Treves,? the Bishop of Verceil,* 
Abbé Emery, superior of Saint-Sulpice, and Father Fontana # 
General of the Barnabites. The government proposed to it three 
series of questions. The first on the interests of Christianity in 
general. The second on the interests of France especially. The 
third on the interests of the Churches of Germany, Italy, and 
the bull of excommunication. 

Each of these series is divided into several questions. I am 
going to give them all with the answers, which I have abridged 
without altering, taking care to underline the expressions of 
the commission as well as the citations they invoke. 

In the preamble heading the answers made by the commis- 
sion to the questions put by the government, the following 
passage may be noticed: “ We do not separate from the homage we 
render to your Mazjesty, the tribute of interest, zeal and love com- 
manded by the actual situation of the Sovereign Pontiff.... All 
the spiritual good we can expect as the result of our deliberations ts 
then solely in the hands of your Majesty .... and we dare to 
hope that you will enjoy soon this glory, if you deign to grant our 
wishes in accelerating so desirable a good harmony between your 
Majesty and the Sovereign Pontiff, by restoring entire freedom 
to the pope, surrounded by his natural counsellors, without whom he 
can neither communicate with the Churches confided to his soltct- 
tude, nor solve any question of importance, nor provide for the needs 
of Catholicism.” 


FIRST SERIES. 


Question 1.—Is the government of the Church arbitrary ? 
Answer.—No ; it belongs, it is true, especially to the suc- 
cessor of Saint Peter, who is the head of it, enjoying supre- 


1M. Bourlier. 2M. Mannay. 

- 3 Jean-Baptiste Canaveri, born in 1753, entered the order of the Oratorians in 
1771, became Bishop of Bielle in 1797, then of Verceil in 1808. He was soon after 
appointed first chaplain of Madame Letitia Bonaparte.* He died in 1818. 

4 Francois-Louis Fontana, born in 1750, entered the congregation of the Barna- 
bites in 1767, and was elected superior of his order in the province of Milan, In 
1804 he accompanied the pope to Paris, and became afterwards procurator-general of 
his order, Counsellor of Rites, and finally general of his congregation. After the 
removal of the pope, he was confined at Arcis-sur-Aube, was a member of the 
Ecclesiastical Commission of 1809, but only attended its first sittings. He was 
arrested and imprisoned in the following year. He only recovered his liberty in 1814, 


returned to Rome, was named cardinal in 1819, and died in 1822. 
* The Emperor’s mother—(7vans/ator). 


40 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


macy of honours and jurisdiction in all the Church; but it 
belongs also to the bishops, successors for the apostles ; and, 
however eminent may be the authority of the apostolic chair 
zt 7s regulated in its exercise by the canons, that ts to say by the 
laws common to the whole Church. Pope St. Martin wrote to a 
bishop: “ We are the defenders and the depositartes, but not the 
transgressors of the holy canons.” “It ts in observing them and 
causing them to be observed by others,’ said Bossuet, “that the 
Church of Rome raised itself prominently above all others.” 


The commission adds that the usages in the possession of 
particular Churches, and which take their source zu the ancient 
discipline, make the law for these Churches. They constitute in some 
way their common law and must be respected. It quotes Pope 
Saint Gregory, who says expressly, in speaking of the Church of 
Africa, “ The usages that do not injure the Catholic faith ought to 
remain intact.” 


Question 2.—Can the pope from motives of temporal welfare 
refuse his intervention in spiritual affairs ? 

Answer.—The supremacy, by which the pope enjoys divine 
right, being all for the spiritual advantage of the Church, we 
believe we here pay him homage in replying that when temporal 
affairs have no necessary connection with spiritual ones, when 
they do not prevent the head of the Church fulfilling freely the 
functions of apostolic nuncio, the pope cannot, from the sole 
motive of temporal affairs, refuse his intervention in spiritual 
affairs. 

Question 3.—It is beyond doubt that, since a certain time, the 
court of Rome is confined to a small number of families, that the 
affairs of the Church are there examined and treated by asmall 
number of prelates and theologians, taken from the small 
localities in the neighbourhood..... In this state of things, 
would it be proper to convene a council ? 

Answer.—lIf it is a question of a general council, it could 
not be held without the head of the Church, otherwise it would 
not represent the Universal Church... . . If itis of a national 
council, its authority would be insufficient to rule upon any 
matter which would interest all Catholicism. 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 4! 


Question 4.—Should not the Consistory or Privy Council of 
the pope be composed of prelates of all nations in order to 
enlighten his Holiness ? 

Answer—The Council of Basel had decided (with some 
limiting clauses) that the cardinals should be taken from all the 
Catholic states. The orators of the King of France at the 
Council of Trent renewed the propositions that the Council of 
Basel had adopted, and the former limited itself to deciding 
that the pope should take cardinals from all nations as much as 
could be convenzently done, and according as he should find them 
worthy of that dignity. 


The commission said it could only formulate wishes for the 
execution of the measure which meets the desire of his Majesty. 


Question 5.—Supposing that it should be recognized that 
there is no necessity for changes in the present organization of 
the Church, does not the emperor continue in his person the 
rights which were those of the Kings of France, the Dukes of 
Brabant, and other sovereigns of the Low Countries, the Kings 
of Sardinia, the Dukes of Tuscany, &c.—whether for the nomi- 
nation of cardinals or for all other prerogatives ? 

Answer.—The commission thinks that the emperor is war- 
ranted in claiming the prerogatives of the sovereignties comprised 
in the empire. 


SECOND SERIES. 
Questions which concern France especially. 


Question 1.—Have his Majesty or his ministers infringed 
the Concordat ? | 

Answer.—The commission thinks the pope has no cause to 
complain of any essential infringement of the Concordat. As to the 
organic articles added to the Concordat, the commission agrees that 
the pope, during his sojourn in Paris, laid before the emperor 
representations as to a certain number of these articles that he 
judged contrary to the free exercise of the Catholic religion. But 
several of the articles of which his Holiness complained are only 
applications or consequences of maxims and usages received in the 


42 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Gallican Church, from which neither the emperor nor the clergy 
of France can depart. 

Some others, in truth, it adds, comprise dispositions which 
would be very detrimental to the Church if they were strictly 
enforced. There is every reason to believe that they were added to 
the Concordat as regulations dictated by circumstances, as considera- 
tions necessary for paving the way for the restoration of the 
Catholic religion; and we expect from the justice and piety of 
his Majesty, that he will deign to revoke or modify them in such 
a manner as to dissipate the annoyance to which they have given 
rise. 

The commission indicates three of them: The first on the 
bulls, briefs, . . . . which were not to be received nor put into 
execution without the authorization of the government. It 
desires that the penztentiary’s briefs, which were formally excepted 
by the jarlements, be excepted. The twenty-sixth, on the 
fixation at three hundred francs of the title or revenue exacted 
from ecclesiastics in order to be ordained by the bishop, while 
it was only one hundred and fifty francs before the Revolution, 
when the candidates, belonging for the greater part to the higher 
classes, were very much richer. The thirty-sixth, on the vicars- 
general who were, according to this article, to continue their 
functions even after the death of the bishop; while it is a 
principle that the powers of the grand vicar expire with him 
who has given them, that the chapter is zpfso facto invested with 
episcopal jurisdiction, and that it is this chapter which appoints 
the vicars-general who govern during the vacancy in the see. 

It is but right to observe that these three demands were 
granted by decree, February 28, 1810. 


Question 2.—Is the state of the clergy in France ameliorated 
on the whole or made worse since the Concordat has been in 
force ? 

The answer is here most affirmative, most detailed, richest in 
facts. Besides the liberty of the Catholic religion, which is in 
itself alone the greatest of the benefits due to the Concordat, 
what new benefits did not accrue from it since that time? The 
endowment of chapters ; thirty thousand supplementary chapels 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 43 


pensioned ; four hundred scholarships and three hundred half- 
scholarships for the training-schools of the clergy ; exemption 
from conscription for students presented by the bishop; invitation 
to the general councils of departments to inerease the endow- 
ments of bishops and chapters, and to provide for the needs of 
religion ; re-establishment of religious congregations devoted to 
gratuitous teaching, to the relief of the poor, sick, &c..... All 
these facts are evident. 


Question 3.—If the French government has not violated 
the Concordat, can the pope arbitrarily refuse confirmation to 
appointed archbishops and bishops, and destroy religion in 
France as he has destroyed it in Germany, where, for the last 
ten years, no bishop has been appointed ? 

Answer—The Concordat is a synallagmatic compact between 
the Head of the State and the Head of the Church, by which each of 
them ts under obligation to the other. IT IS ALSO a public treaty 
by which each of the contracting parties acquires rights and takes 
obligations upon himself. The right reserved by the pope cannot be 
exercised arbitrarily. By the Compact between King Francis I. and 
Leo X.1 (1515), the pope was held to grant bulls of confirmation to 
subjects named by the sovereign, or to allege canonical motives for 
his refusal. Pius VII. zs equally bound towards the emperor and 
France by the Compact that he has solemnly ratified. 

The Holy Father having written from Savona, August 28, 
1809, a letter to Cardinal Caprara, to set forth the motives of 
his refusal, the commission does not think tt ts departing from the 
profound respect with which tt ts penetrated for the person and the 
supreme dignity of the Head of the Church, in putting under the 
eyes of the emperor the reflections that tt would dare to present to 
his Holiness himself, tf it were admitted to the honour of 
conferring with him. 


The pope gave three motives for refusal in his letter. 1. 
The religious innovations introduced into France since the 


1 This Compact, the preliminaries of which were agreed upon December 10, 1515, 
at an interview between the two sovereigns, was only signed August 18, 1516. It 
provided for the abolition of the ‘‘ Pragmatic sanction,” gave up to the pope the income 
derived from sees left vacant a year or more, and acknowledged the supremacy of the 
pope over the councils. As compensation, it gave the king the right of nomination 
to all the prelacies of France. 


44 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLE YRAND. 


Concordat, and yet he did not enumerate one which was an 
essential breach of this Compact. The known innovations had 
been in France of service to religion. The government had 
met the remonstrances relative to the organic articles, and 
besides, this complaint, already an old one concerning France, 
had not been followed, hitherto, by a refusal of bulls on the 
part of the pope. 2. The second motive was founded on political 
events and measures which it did not belong to him to judge. 
The principal event, said the commission, zs the decree of 1809, 
bearing upon the union of the Roman States with the French 
Empire. Is this motive canonical? Is it founded on the prin- 
ciples and on the spirit of religion? The commission replies : 
Religion teaches us not to confound the spiritual order and the 
temporal order; the jurisdiction that the pope exercises essen- 
tially by divine right is that which Saint Peter received from 
Christ, the only one he has been able to transmit to his successors ; 
and that ts purely spiritual. The temporal sovereignty is for 
the popes only an accessory foreign to thetr authority. The first 
will last as long as the Church, as long as the world; and the 
other, a human institution, not being comprised in the Divine 
promises that have been made to the Church, can be taken away, 
as it has been given, by men and events. In all suppositions 
in this respect,and whatever may be the political position of the 
pope, his authority in the universal Church and his relations with 
individual churches ought always to be the same, and as he has only 
received his powers for the advantage of the faithful and for the 
government of the Church, the commission is persuaded that the 
Holy Father would put an end to his refusals, of he were convinced, 
like those who see things closely, that this refusal can only be very 
detrimental to the Church. 

According to the commission, the zuvasion of Rome cannot 
then be a motive for the refusal of the canonical confirmation of the 
bishops nominated. This invasion ts not a breach of the Con- 
cordat. The Concordat stipulated nothing, guaranteed nothing 
temporal ; and so long as the jurisdiction of the pope over the Church 
of France ts recognized, the ties which attach this Church to the 
chair of St. Peter are not relaxed, and the Concordat subsests in 
ats integrity. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 45 


The pope recognizes this distinction in hts letter, but he could 
not, he said, sacrifice the defence of the patrimony of the Church. 
That ts not contested ; he might reclaim it with all the means at his 
disposal. But how could the refusal of the bulls be one of those 
means? If the emperor exacted and obtained from the nominated 
bishops some declaration contrary to the authority of the Holy 
Father, or relative to the invasion of the Roman States, the pope 
would be in the right in refusing them canonical confirmation ; 
but there ts nothing like it in the present circumstances. How then 
could he wish or could he believe he had the power to punish them 
Sor an event which could not be imputed to them? When Rome 
was stormed by the troops of Charles V., did Clement VII, 
to avenge himself on this prince, abandon all the churches to 
anarchy ? 3. The third motive of refusal in the letter from the 
Holy Father is taken from the actual situation. God knows, 
says the pope, if we desire ardently to give to the vacant 
churches of France their pastors, and if we desire to find an 
expedient for doing it in a proper manner; but ought we to 
act in so important a juncture without consulting our natural 
counsellors? Then, how could we consult them, when, sepa- 
rated from them by violence, we have been deprived of all free 
communication with them, and besides, from all the necessary 
means for the expedition of such affairs, not even having, up to 
the present, obtained permission to have near us one of our 
secretaries ? 

The objection was a strong one, and the commission saw 
itself compelled to make the following reply: To these last com- 
plaints, we have no other reply to make than to place them 
ourselves under the eyes of his Majesty, who will feel all the force 
and all the justice of them. 

This phrase was not perhaps lacking in courage, for it was 
to justify the refusal of the pope and to show clearly to the 
emperor his injustice and his inconsistency. 

Question 4.—The French government not having broken | 
the Concordat, if, on the other hand, the pope refuses to 
execute it, the intention of his Majesty is to regard the Con- 
cordat as abrogated ; but, in this case, what would it be proper 
to do for the good of religion ? 


46 THE MEMOIRS. OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


Answer.—ITIf the pope persisted in the refusal to execute the 
Concordat, it is certain, strictly speaking, that the emperor would 
no longer be held to observe tt, and that he could regard it as 
abrogated. ‘These are the first words of the reply ; they appear 
to decide everything, but, nevertheless, this was not the case, 
and the commission soon adds: But this compact ts not a purely 
personal transaction..... lt ts a treaty which forms a part of 
our public right. . . . and tt ts tmportant to demand its execution, 
even in the supposition that the Holy Father should persist in 
refusing it as far as he is concerned. 

This reasoning is subtle and even singular ; for the commis- 
sion seems to put forward with assurance a principle, only to 
recoil the more quickly before its consequence ; it seems even to 
have endeavoured to give rise again to the difficulty, at the 
moment when it appeared quite clearly solved. 

The commission says afterwards that the Concordat should 
be considered not as abrogated, but as suspended, and that it 
would be necessary to protest always against the refusal of the 
pope, and to appeal either to the pope himself, better informed, 
or to his successor. 

But whether the Concordat be regarded as abrogated, or remain 
suspended, adds the commission, what zs zt proper to do for the 
good of religion? (These are the last words of the question.) 
Here the commission establishes clearly the principles and does 
not spare any argument. <AJ// the powers of the ministers of 
the Church being of a spiritual order, wt 1s for the Church alone 
to confer them, The bishops have powers of order and powers of 
jurisdiction. In the three first centuries of persecutions, the 
Church was obliged alone to invest its pastors with these 
powers, and she did not lose this right when kings became her 
children. The Church has never recognized any bishops but those 
she has confirmed ; but the manner of proceeding with the election, 
and then of conferring the confirmation, have not always been the 
same. In the first centuries, the simple nomination, election, or 
presentation belonged to the co-provincial bishops, to the clergy and 
to the people of the church that was to be supplied ; and thts election 
was confirmed by the archbishop who consecrated the bishop ; or, of 
7t was the archbishop himself who was to be confirmed, by the 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 47 


council of the province that conferred the institution or the 
mission, for the particular church to which he had just been 
elected. Afterwards, the emperors and other Christian princes had 
a great share in the nomination, that ts to say, the election, and 
gradually the people and the clergy of the country ceased to be 
called upon. The election passed then to the chapter of the 
metropolitan church, but always with the requirement of the consent 
of the prince (representing the people) and of the confirmation or 
metropolitan institution or of that of the council of the province. 

The ecclesiastical commission forgot to add that, up to the 
thirteenth century, the popes had had no share either in the 
election or the confirmation. Since, by reservations and other 
principles inserted in the /ausses décrétales,) they assumed 
sometimes both the election and the confirmation. It was this 
state of things, so foreign to the ancient discipline, since there 
were no traces of it in the first twelve centuries of the Church, 
that the Council of Basel as well as the Pragmatic Sanction 
wished to remedy. After the Council of Basel and the 
Pragmatic Sanction published at Bourges in 1438” conformably 
to the decrees of that council, it was decided that the election 
by the people and by the chapter should be confirmed by the 
archbishop or by the provincial council. In 1516, this Prag- 
matic Sanction was replaced by the compact between Francois I. 
and Leo X., in virtue of which the right of election passed 
entirely to the king in the place of the people or of the 
chapter, and the confirmation or institution to the pope, 
instead of to the archbishops and provincial councils. 

The ecclesiastical commission says, with reference to these 
modifications : these two modifications to the right of election have 
been regarded as made with the expressed or tacit consent of the 
Church. We might even say that this approbation (of the Church) 
would still be indispensable, even if tt were proposed to return to 
one of the methods adopted in the preceding centuries ; for a law 

1 The name of fausses décrétales is applied to a collection of canonical rights 
of the sixth century, attributed to the monk Denys le Petit, which tended to con- 
siderably increase the power of the popes. 

2 The Pragmatic Sanctién of Bourges is the name given to the ordinance that 
King Charles VII. issued, in 1438, on the affairs of the Church of France. This 


article said in substance that God had given neither to St. Peter nor to his successors 
any direct power over temporal matters. 


48 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


once abrogated is no longer a law, and it can only resume that 
character by an act of the authority that abrogated it. This ts one 
of the capital vices of the civil constitution of the clergy, adopted by 
the Constituent Assembly. . . for, beyond the fact that the elections 
decreed by this Constitution resembled in no manner those of the 
first centuries, the Constituent Assembly which had only political 
powers was essentially incompetent to re-establish without the con- 
currence and consent of the Church these rules of discipline that the 
Church had abolished. 

Thus, in the supposition that by persevering in the refusal 
of the bulls the Concordat should be regarded as suspended or as 
abrogated, there would be no authority for reviving the Pragmatic 
Sanction, unless the ecclesiastical authority intervened for tts re- 
vival. Except in that case, it would become the source of troubles 
similar to those excited throughout all France by the civil constitu- 
tion of the clergy in 1791. 

What is it proper, then, to do for the good of religion? for 
this question recurs constantly. 

The commission has not the necessary authority to indicate 
measures suttable to replace the intervention of the pope in the con- 
firmation of the bishops. (Is this answer really accurate? Would 
the suggesting of these measures presuppose an authority ? ) 

The commission thinks that the emperor can do nothing wiser 
and more conformable to the rules than to convoke a national council 
which shall examine the question proposed and suggest the proper 
means for preventing the inconvenience of the refusal of the bulls. 
In 1688, on the occasion of a like refusal of bulls by Pope Innocent 
XI. to the bishops, as a sequel to the assembly of the clergy in 
1682, the Parlement of Paris, in the opinion of the attorney- 
general Du Harlay, rendered a decree to the effect that the king 
should be prayed to summon the provincial councils or even a 
national council. 

The emperor, in a note which he dictated to the Bishop of 
Nantes, M. Duvoisin, found that this answer was not sufficiently 
clear upon the question. He had thought, he said in this note, 
that, the Concordat failing, France was zpso facto in the situation 
which existed before. But the commission had caused him to 
alter his opinion, and he thought now that, the Concordat 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 49 


having abrogated the law which existed at the time of its con- 
clusion, the former could no longer be re-established except by 
the power that had abrogated it, but he differed from the 
opinion of the council in that he thought the Gallican Church 
was sufficient to pronounce the re-establishment of the ancient 
law, without which there would be a gap in the legislation of the 
Church. The emperor did not explain his thought further, 
having been interrupted by other business. 

The ecclesiastical commission, however, on the simple obser- 
vation contained in the note, discussed the question anew without 
entering too much into the idea of the emperor, for it commences 
by saying: that zt persists in believing that the convocation of a 
national council is the only canonical way that can lead to the 
desired end. It supposes that: the council will address at first to 
the pope respectful remonstrances on the results likely to be entailed 
by a refusal prolonged any further, on the necessity in which the 
emperor and the clergy would find themselves to provide by some other 
means for the preservation of religion and for the perpetuity of the 
episcopacy, and that they would propose afterwards all the means 
of conciliation, &c.... and uf the pope refused these prayers and 
these conciliations of the assembled clergy of France, the council 
would examine (which we did not believe we ought to do) zf z¢ 
be competent to re-establish a mode of canonical confirmation which 
could replace the mode established by the Concordat. If it judged 
ztself competent, 1t¢ would decree, under the good pleasure of his 
Majesty, a regulation of discipline on this matter, but declaring 
that this regulation ts only provisory, and that the Church of France 
would not cease to demand the observation of the Concordat, being 
at all times ready to return tozt.... And tf the national council 
aid not judge itself competent, rt would appeal to a general council, 
the only authority in the Church which is above the pope. 

And tf this resource became tmpossible because the pope would 
not recognize the council nor preside over it, or tf in the political 
circumstances its convocation should present too many difficulties to 
assemble it—what would it be proper to do for the good of 
religion ?—Seeing the tmpossibility of having recourse to the general 
council, and seeing the imminent danger with which the Church ts 
menaced, the national council could declare that the confirmation 

MOL. TT. E 


50 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


given by the archbishop to his suffragans, or by the oldest bishop 

of the province next to the archbishop, should take the place of the 

pontifical bulls until the pope or his successors consented to the full 
execution of the Concordat. This is a law of necessity, a law that 

the pope himself believed he had power to recognize, when, rising 

above all ordinary rules and by an act of authority without example,. 
he suppressed all the old bishoprics of France tn order to create new 

ones. 

Is it not astonishing that the ecclesiastical commission, having 
arrived at such a solution, did not repeat here that, in order 
to put an end to the principal motive of opposition of the pope 
(the motive enunciated by him in his letter to Cardinal Caprara, 
where he declares that his refusal to give bulls is founded par- 
ticularly on the fact that, in his prison at Savona, he is deprived 
of all liberty) the emperor was begged to render to the pope 
at least the liberty necessary for the expedition of the bulls in 
order to constitute him in the wrong if he then still persisted 
in his refusal ? In place of that, the commission was ever dwelling 
upon the supposition that the pope only refused the bulls from 
purely temporal motives, and above all on account of the in- 
vasion of Rome, whilst the pope had formally declared that it was 
because he had been deprived of his liberty, of his counsellors, 
and even of his secretary, that he refused to have the bulls 
expedited. 

The commission, which had felt all the force of this claim, 
which had already recognized the justice of it, should have 
renewed its instances in this respect. The liberty claimed here 
by the pope was not a purely temporal object ; it was an indis- 
pensable condition to validate the acts of any private citizen, 
and with much greater reason, those of the Head of the Church. 
The commission, in this long and conclusive part of the discus- 
sion, has too much the appearance of believing that all the 
wrongs are on the side of the pope. Is this complacency or 
pusillanimity ? That it did not counsel the emperor to return 
Rome may be conceived ; it was not called upon to treat this 
political question, which besides, was altogether independent of 
that of the delivery of the bulls, which had been submitted to 
it ; but not to repeat each day that, before thinking of a council 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VIZ. By 


or of any other extraordinary remedy, to which they could have 
recourse, in case, without any reason, the pope should persist in 
his refusal to execute the Concordat, it was necessary to allow 
him enough liberty in order that he could not complain that 
they did him violence by such a demand, was not only pusil- 
lanimity towards the emperor, but also inconsistence ; it was 
appearing to wish to prolong the rupture, when perhaps only 
a word could have remedied it. 


THIRD SERIES. 


Questions which concern the Churches of Germany, of Italy, 
and the Bull of Excommunication. 

Question 1.—His Majesty, who can justly consider himself 
as the most powerful Christian, would feel his conscience dis- 
turbed if he paid no attention to the complaints of the 
Churches of Germany as to the state of helplessness in which 
the pope had left them for ten years. He desires, as suzerazn 
of Germany, as heir of Charlemagne, as veritable Emperor of 
the West, as eldest son of the Churck,to know what course he 
ought to take to restore the benefits of religion to the people 
of Germany. 

Answer.—The one the commission gives to this question 
could not be more vague. The protractor believes he ought to re- 
call here the ancient compact of the Germanic nation of 1447, and 
the treaty of Munster of 1648; he then enters into long details 
on the Diet of Ratisbon of 1803, which overthrew by so many 
secularizations the political and religious state of Germany, and 
transferred the see of Mayence to Ratisbon ; on the preparatory 
conferences of 1804, between the nuncio of the pope, and the 
referendary of the Empire; on the act of the Confederation of 
the Rhine, July 12, 1806; on the abdication of the imperial 
crown of Germany by the Emperor Francis II. (August 6, 
1806), which effected the dissolution of the Germanic body ; on 
the divers pretensions of a multitude of princes in regard to 
the Catholic clergy, religious instruction, matrimonial dispen- 
sations .... on the subjection of the bishops, curates, and 
prebendaries to all these princes, and finally on the new diff- 

E 2 


52 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


culties caused in any arrangement whatever by the situation of 
the Holy Father. 

The commission does not see, since the abdication of the 
Emperor Francis II.,any one but the Protector of the Con- 
federation of the Rhine (Napoleon), who can, in conjunction with 
the Sovereign Pontiff, remedy these evils, and it limits itself to 
expressing wishes. 

It must be agreed that there had been much bad grace, and 
above all much bad faith on the part of the Emperor Napoleon, 
in imputing at this time the religious troubles of Germany to 
the state of abandonment in which the pope left for ten years 
the Church of Germany, and the argument of the commission 
on this point is very feeble and very insignificant. 

Question 2.—Is it indispensable to make a new circumscrip- 
tion of bishoprics in Tuscany, and in other parts of the Empire ? 
If the pope refuses to co-operate in these arrangements, what 
course ought his Majesty to follow in order to make them 
regular? 

Answer.—The commission thinks that the churches of Tus- 
cany are not suffering like those of Germany; that they are 
regularly organized and administered ; that thus a new circum- 
scription, although useful, is not urgent. Ad leads to the belief, 
it adds, that when the pope shall be surrounded by his counsellors, 
his Holiness will give them an active and sustained attention. 
Finally, the commission believes that his Majesty can suspend 
the ameliorations he is planning for the churches of Tuscany 
until the general affairs of the Church are terminated, since the 
case of necessity is not here applicable. 

Question 3.—The Bull of Excommunication of June Io, 1809, 
being contrary to Christian charity as well as to the independ- » 
ence and honour of the throne, what course must be taken so 
that, in times of trouble and calamity, the popes may not arrive 
at such an excess of power ?. 

Answer.—The commission cites at first the extract from this 
bull which declares that the authors, abettors, counsellors and 
perpetrators of the outrages (that ts to say the invasion of Rome 
and of the provinces of the Roman States, as well as the other perse- 
cutions) tn virtue of book xvit., chapter xt., which tt calls attention 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 53 


to, have incurred the excommunication pronounced by the Council 
of Trent, and the Holy Father excommunicates and anathematizes 
them anew, without, nevertheless, naming any special person. His 
Floliness forbids even the detracting from the rights and privileges 
of the persons comprised in this category. 

The commission says afterwards:—That the bulls of Boniface 
VIII. against Philippe the Fair, of Julius II. against Louis 
XII, of Sixtus V. against Henry IV. have never taken effect 
in France, because the bishops of France refused to admit or to pub- 
lish them. For the same reason, the bull In Coena Domini, so 
long published in Rome, was always regarded in France as 
null and void. 

Lf the bull of June 10, 1809, had been addressed to the bishops 
of France, the commission thinks that they would have declared 
them contrary to the discipline of the Gallican Church, to the 
authority of the sovereign, and capable, contrary to the intention of 
the pope, of troubling public tranquillity. 

It states that Gregory XIV., successor of Sixtus V., issued, 
mz 1591, IWONITORY letters against Henry IV., and that the 
bishops at Chartres declared that the censures and excommunica- 
tions conveyed by the aforesaid letters were void, as much in 
form as in matter, and that they could not bind nor constrain the 
conscience. 

The commission limits itself then to declaring: That it does 
not doubt that the National Council, cf it be assembled, remembering 
the true principles regarding this, and the spirit of the Church, in | 
the application of censures, will declare also its nullity, and will 
lodge an appeal as much against this bull as against all similar 
bulls to the General Council, or to the pope better informed, 
as has always taken place in the Church. . 

The commission might have added that the monitory letters 
against King Henry IV. were consigned to the fire by the 
parlements sitting at Tours and at Chalons. 

.As to Henry IV. himself, then King of Navarre, excom- 
municated by Sixtus V. in 1588, it is known that, following his 
natural bent, he had this act of appeal posted at the Vatican, 
and that the pope only esteemed him the more for that. 

The ecclesiastical commission concluded, in its general answer, 


54 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


by citing the first article of the declaration of the clergy, 
in 1682! 

It was by the delivery of these, January 11, 1810, that the 
commission ended its labours, begun on November 16, 1809. 

I forgot to say that the work of the commission on the first 
series of questions is attributed to the Bishop of Tréves; that 
on the second series to the Bishop of Nantes, and that on the 
third to the Archbishop of Tours. It is affirmed that Father 
Fontana only attended the first sitting, and that M. Emery was 
not very punctual at the meetings, and did not sign the answers 
of the commission, alleging that it was not proper for him to 
put his signature beside those of cardinals and of bishops. 


REFLECTIONS ON THIS ECCLESIASTICAL COMMISSION. 


I can quite conceive the consideration the members of this 
commission must have had for the emperor, for fear of irritating 
him and driving him to still more violent measures, that is to 
say, to a complete rupture with the pope, which would have 
revived the schism in the Church of France. But I cannot con- 
ceive why they did not try with more persistence to convince 
him, that, in order to be justified in imputing wrongs to the 
pope, he must, at least, accord him the kind of liberty that he 
himself judged necessary in order to give bulls, and to ask 
him, consequently, what liberty he deemed indispensable for 
that. The pope would not have dared to say that he needed 
above all Rome and the patrimony of St. Peter; that would 
have been too evidently false, natural though it might be that 
he should much desire this restitution, and that he should 
not cease to protest against the violence which had deprived ~ 
him of his States. He would have been satisfied, without 
doubt, to demand a certain number of cardinals, his secretary, 
and his papers. If he had demanded more, or having ob- 
tained the objects of his first demand, he had continued to 
refuse the bulls, then the answers of the commission, which we 
have just analyzed, would have offered to the public the 


1 This article said in substance that God had not given either to Saint Peter or 
to his successors any direct or indirect power over temporal matters. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 55 


expression of just and suitable opinions, but as long as this 
indispensable point was not accorded, to press the pope (in the 
situation in which he was placed) by arguments which would 
have no value except in case it had been shown that his refusal 
proceeded from ill-will, was greatly to enfeeble the reasoning, 
very good in other suppositions, but which, outside of that, 
must only appear sophistry mingled with a little bad faith and 
even with disloyalty. 

Before the meeting and deliberations of the ecclesiastical 
commission, the emperor had made several advances to the pope 
in order to conquer his repugnance to give the bulls. He had 
had Cardinal Caprara say, in a letter, that this cardinal (who 
was no longer a legate, but who was, however, at Paris) wrote 
to the pope then at Savona, July 20, 1809, that the emperor 
consented to his own name (the emperor’s), and even his right of 
nomination not being mentioned in the bulls which would then 
be delivered on the simple demand of the Council of State or of 
the Minister of Public Worship. To which the pope replied, 
August 26, that this Council of State, or this minister, being 
the organs of the emperor, it would be equivalent to recognizing 
in the emperor the right of nomination and the faculty of 
exercising it, which he did not wish to do. 

And why did he not wish to recognize this right? Was it 
then on account of the excommunication? If so, that was 
showing an unreasonable temper and beginning to place him- 
self in the wrong. Why, too, should the emperor have made 
this sacrifice ? Would it not have been better not to have made 
any, and to have tried upon the Holy Father the effect of 
what sufficient liberty he might grant him? 

The year 1810, far from bringing any alleviation to the 
situation of the pope and giving him, according to the wishes 
and prayers of the ecclesiastical commission, a little more liberty, 
aggravated, on the contrary, this situation, and rendered his 
captivity harder. 

In effect, on February 17, 1810, appeared the senatus- 
consultum pronouncing the union of the Roman States with 
the French Empire ; the independence of the imperial throne of 
all authority on earth, and annulling the temporal existence of 


. 


56 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


the popes. This senxatus-consultum assured a pension to the 
pope, but it ordained also that the pope should take oath to do 
nothing in opposition to the four articles of 1682. On the same 
day another senxatus-consultum, which awards to the eldest son 
of the emperor the title of King of Rome, and enacts that the 
emperor shall be consecrated a second time at Rome, was 
passed. 

All these dispositions were hostile and irritating. The pope 
was not accorded even the right and liberty of complaining. 
How could he consider he had enough liberty for the rest? 
To order by a senatus-consultum an oath from a captive pope, 
and an oath to do nothing against the four articles of 1682, were 
two points irritating in the highest degree, and very evidently 
inadmissible, above all when they were imposed with such 
imperiousness. 

The pope must have consoled himself, besides, even to 
rejoicing, that they made the insulting pension they offered 
him depend upon the taking of such an oath, and it is that 
which furnished him with a reply so nobly apostolic: that he 
had no need of this pension, and that he would live on the charity 
of the faithful. 

All must be told. In spite of his captivity at Savona, the 
Holy Father had, however, replied in 1809 to each of the 
letters of nineteen bishops who had demanded of him extra- 
ordinary powers for marriage dispensations, and had granted the 
latter. On November 5, 1810, he made public, at least as much 
as he could, his brief against Cardinal Maury, and addressed it 
to him in response to the communication the cardinal had made 
to him on his nomination to the archbishopric of Paris. The 


1 The sexatus-consultum of February 17, 1820, stipulated besides : 
That the papal States should form two departments: that of Rome and that of 
Trasmania ; 


That a prince of the blood or a high dignitary should keep the imperial court at 
Rome ; 


That all foreign sovereignty was incompatible with the exercise of any spiritual 
authority in France ; 

That palaces should be prepared for the Sovereign Pontiff in all the various 
portions of the Empire where he might be pleased to reside ; that at all events a 
palace should always be at his disposal in Paris, and another in Rome ; 

That his Holiness should enjoy an income of two millions of francs, derived 
from capital invested in country estates ; 


That the expenses of the Sacred College and those of the Propaganda should be 
provided for by the State. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 57 


cardinal, while waiting for the bulls of confirmation, had taken 
the administration of the diocese which had been conferred 
upon him by the metropolitan chapter. The pope, in his brief, 
reproaches him with having abandoned the holy cause, which he 
had so well defended hitherto ; with having violated his oath, 
with having left his see of Montefiascone, and taken the admin- 
istration of a see with which he could not be charged. He orders 
him to renounce it, and not force him to proceed against him 
conformably to the canons of the Church. This brief made a 
great noise,and caused, January 1, 1811, the public disgrace of 
Abbé d’Astros who had made it known, and soon after of his 
relation, M. Portalis the younger, who had learned it from him.! 

There was here, it cannot be denied, a little contradiction on 
the part of the pope. To be able to issue a brief against Cardinal 
Maury ; to be able to reply to nineteen letters from bishops who 
demanded powers, and accord them ;—and not to be able, for 
want of liberty, to deliver the bulls of confirmation and put 
a stop to the long viduity of the churches; was that very 
consistent ? 

Two other facts come in support of this reflection. 

Towards the end of the year 1810, the emperor had named 
for the archbishopric of Florence M. d’Osmond,? Bishop of 
Nancy. Pius VII., bya brief of December 2, 1810, declared that 
this bishop could not administer the diocese of Florence, sup- 
porting himself for that on the decisions of the second Council of 
Lyons, and on those of the Council of Trent, which were not 
really applicable to this circumstance. The chapter of Florence 
deferred to the order of the pope, which caused trouble in that 

1 This brief had been addressed by Pius VII. to Abbé d’Astros, vicar-general 
of the diocese of Paris. The latter communicated it to his cousin, Comte Portalis, 
then councillor of state and director of the section of the Ministry of the Interior, en- 
trusted with the supervision of all publications. Both kept the secret and the brief 
was published. Napoleon had knowledge of these facts ; his anger was very great. At 
the sitting of the Council of State of January 4, 1811, he vehemently reproached Comte 
Portalis for his conduct, deprived him of all his functions and exiled him to Provence. 
As to Abbé d’ Astros, he was arrested and confined at Vincennes, whence he was not 
released until 1814. 

2 Antoine, Baron d’Osmond, born in 1754, was at first vicar-general of M. de 
Brienne, Archbishop of Toulouse. On May 1, 1785, he was consecrated Bishop of 
Comminge to succeed his uncle. He emigrated at the Revolution, resigned his seat in 
1801, and was named Bishop of Nancy in 1802. In 1810, he was named Archbishop 


of Florence, but the pope refused to confirm him, and he was obliged, in 1814, to 
resume his see at Nancy. He died in 1823. 


58 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


city. Napoleon had also named for the bishopric of Asti a M. 
Dejean ;1 this brought forth another brief from the pope en- 
joining the chapter to abstain from confiding to him the power 
of administration. The emperor, who saw that the pope wished 
to put limits to his power, then gave way to great violence. 

On January 1, 1811, occurred the affair of Abbé d’Astros, 
who was arrested as he went out of the Tuileries. The chapter 
of Paris deprived him of his powers as grand vicar, and profited 
by this occasion to write, probably under the eyes of Cardinal 
Maury, a letter to the emperor, in which they established the 
right of the chapter to provide for the vacant see, and to confer 
upon a nominated bishop all the capitulary powers, that is to say, 
all the episcopal jurisdiction, basing this on what had been 
practised in the time of Louis -XIV., and even by the advice of 
Bossuet, they said, though without being able to proveit. This 
letter, sent to all the dioceses of France and Italy, drew to them 
the adhesion of a multitude of bishops and chapters, both in 
Italy and in France, who confirmed this doctrine. 

The publication of all the briefs of which I have just spoken, 
far from disposing the emperor to grant more liberty to the pope, 
persuaded him that he had too much, since he thus abused it. 
The order was given January 7, 1811, to make a strict perqui- 
sition in his apartment. Everything was ransacked, even his 
writing-desk ; and his papers and those of the members of his 
household were sent to Paris. There was found, it is said,a 
brief which conferred extraordinary powers on Cardinal di 
Pietro.2, The pope was then deprived of pens, ink, and paper. 
His master of the chamber and the prelate Doria, his confessor, 
were sent away. He was not allowed to communicate with the 
Bishop of Savona ;* the papers of the latter were seized and 


1 Francois André, Baron Dejean, born at Castelnaudary in 1745, nominated Bishop 
of Asti, February 9, 1809. 

2 Michel di Pietro, born in 1747, had been instituted apostolic delegate by Pius 
VI. in 1798, when that pope was carried away from Rome by order of the Directory. 
Pius VII. named him Patriarch of Jerusalem, cardinal and prefect of the Propaganda. 
He was compelled to come to Paris after the arrest of the pope, and was exiled to 
Semur for having refused to assist at the marriage of Napoleon and Marie-Louise. 
He returned to Rome in 1815, and became Grand Penitentiary and Bishop of Albano. 
He died in 1821. 

3 Here is the order signified to the Holy Father by the prefect of Montenotte, M. 
de Chabrol, according to the instructions sent him from Paris :—‘‘* The undersigned, 
according to the orders emanating from his sovereign, His Imperial and Royal 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 59 


himself even removed to Paris. There remained to the pope a 
few servants, to whom were assigned about forty sous per day 
for their expenses. It was at the moment when the emperor 
gave way to such unworthy violence, and when the pope con- 
tinued his noble and legitimate refusal, for that which concerned 
him personally, that Napoleon decided to appoint a second 
ecclesiastical commission. 


SECOND ECCLESIASTICAL COMMISSION. 


Formed in January, 1811, this Commission ended its labours 
at the end of March. It was composed of Cardinals Fesch, 
Maury, and Caselli ; of the Archbishop of Tours, the Bishops of 
Ghent,! Evreux, Nantes, and Tréves, and of the Abbé Emery. 

It had to reply only to these two questions: 

Question [—AIl communication between the pope and the 
subjects of the emperor, being interrupted for the present, to 
whom is it necessary to apply to obtain the dispensations that 
would be accorded by the Holy See? 

Question IJ—When the pope persistently refuses to accord 
the bulls to the bishops nominated by the emperor, to fill the 
vacant seats, what is the legitimate means of giving them 
canonical confirmation ? 

The Commission, before responding, expresses first zts pro- 

found grief that all communication between the pope and the 
subjects of the emperor has just been broken. It can only foresee 
days of mourning and afftiction for the Church, if these communt- 
cations remain long suspended. 
Majesty Napoleon, Emperor of the French, King of Italy, Protector of the Con- 
federation of the Rhine . . . . is charged to notify Pope Pius VII. that he is for- 
bidden to communicate with any church of the empire, and with any subject of the 
emperor under pain of disobedience on his part and on theirs, that he who preaches 
rebellion and whose soul is full of gall ceases to be the organ of the Church ; that since 
nothing can render him wise, he shall see that his Majesty is powerful enough to do 
what his predecessors have done and depose a pope.—SAVONA, January 14, 1811.”— 
(M. de Bacourt.) 

1 Maurice-Madeleine de Broglie (1766-1821), third son of Marshal de Broglie, 
Bishop of Acqui and chaplain of the emperor in 1805, promoted to the bishopric of 
Ghent in 1809 ; was imprisoned on account of his resistance to the wishes of the 
emperor at the council of 1811. On his return to his episcopal see in 1814, he pro- 


tested against various dispositions of the constitution of the Kingdom of the Low 
Countries, was exiled anew, and came to die in Paris. 


60 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


It was well to demand the liberty of the pope. But the 
Commission should not have limited itself to placing that in the 
preamble. It ought to have returned to it in its replies, other- 
wise it had the appearance of wishing to get rid, in a preliminary 
formula, not to return to it any more, of this objection which so 
strongly accused Napoleon. 

Answer to the first question—The Commission thinks that 
the power of reserving dispensations attributed to the pope in’ 
the Church of the West is very suitable in all that regards the 
general discipline of the clergy, and that, without examining 
whether it is of divine right or not, it has become, by this same 
suitability and by a very long exercise, a sort of common law, 
from which one ought not to seek exemption. But as to the 
reserve of the dispensations relative to the daily needs of the 
faithful, which is found also with many local diversities in his 
powers, the Commission affirms, without hesitation, that the 
bishops have, each in his diocese, entirely in their power to grant to 
the faithful the dispensations and absolutions belonging thereto ; that 
this power has never been withdrawn by any law, nor by any canon ; 
that it ts even untransferable, and that they recover this power very 
naturally, above all when, as in the present circumstances, recourse 
to the pope ts almost impossible. 

Answer to the second question.—This question had already 
been proposed to the Commission of 1809, and solved in some 
fashion by it. It had been reproduced here because the 
emperor presumed that he would have a more precise reply 
and more nearly like the note he had dictated, at the time, to 
M. Duvoisin ; in this he was not entirely deceived. The new 
Commission first laid stress on the fact that the pope had con- 
tinued to refuse the bulls, without alleging any canonical reason 
for his refusal, in spite of the supplications of the churches of 
France, and notwithstanding that the results of this refusal 
became every day more fatal. It recalled what passed in the 
time of Innocent XI., when the bishops nominated by the king 
could govern their dioceses in virtue of the powers given to them 
by the chapter. Fléchier, thus appointed successively at Lavaur 
and at Nimes, afforded a proof of this. It proceeded to say that 
the pope, in proscribing, by briefs addressed to the chapters of 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 61 


Paris, Florence, and Asti, this mode adopted in all times by the 
Church of France, openly attacked the ancient discipline of this 
Church, which was @ sad proof of the prejudices that had been 
inspired in him. 

But the emperor,adds the Commission, does not wish longer to 
make the existence of episcopacy in France depend on the canonical 
confirmation of the pope, who would thus be master of the 
episcopacy. What must be done? It agrees that the Concordat 
gives a very marked advantage to the pope over the sovereign of 
France. The prince loses the right to nominate if in a fixed time 
he does not present a suztable nominee. (The Commission is entirely 
mistaken here: he never loses it ; if so, to whom would it pass ?) 
In order that there should be equality, it would be necessary that 
the pope, on his side, should be obliged to give the confirmation, or 
to produce a canonical motive for refusing, in a determinate time, 
an default of which he would lose his right of confirmation, which 
would devolve upon whoever had the right. This clause ts lacking 
an the Concordat. It ought to be added to it; it ts the simplest 
measure and the most conformed to the principles. The emperor, 
said the Commission, zs right in exacting it, and the pope ought 
to consent to zt (these are the terms employed); and zf he did 
not consent, it would justify, tn the eyes of Europe, the entire 
abolition of the Concordat, and the recourse to another means of 
conferring canonical confirmation. (The Commission of 1809 
had not used such strong and decided language.) 

Flowever just might be, under the circumstances, the entire 
abolition of the Concordat, however legitimate might be the re- 
establishment of the Pragmatic Sanction or of any other method 
of canonical confirmation, the Commission thought, however, 
that zt would be necessary to prepare the minds, and to have the 
faithful convinced that there remained no other resource for 
giving bishops to the Church of France, without which the 
position of the bishops confirmed according to the new forms 
would be untenable. This change would be likened to the civil 
constitution of the clergy of 1791, and would produce the same 
troubles. Enlightened persons would clearly see that tt cannot be 
compared with an ecclesiastical constitution decreed by a purely 
political authority, against the sentiment of the Sovereign Pontiff 


62 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


and of nearly all the bishops of France. But others would 
probably not grasp the difference well, chiefly seeing the authority 
of the emperor displayed with so much ardour against the Holy 
Father. The one side in this struggle would take part for the 
pope against the French episcopacy ; the others would be separated 
too much from the Holy See, and the schism would thus revive 
with all its disorders. It was barely stamped out in 1801, by 
means of the perfect accord between the pope and the majority of 
the bishops. How much cause should we not have to fear tts 
revival, of the bishops should declare themselves separated from the 
pope by so grave a decision ? 

However, things cannot be left in thetr present state. The 
jurisdiction accorded by the chapters to the nominated bishops, 
besides tts having also the grave inconvenience of being dis- 
approved by the pope, does not really give to the dioceses the posses- 
sion of a complete episcopacy. If then the pope persists in his 
refusal without a canonical motive, we permit ourselves to express 
the destre that it be declared to His Holiness, either that the Con- 
cordat already broken by his own action shall be publicly abolished 
by the emperor, or that it will only be preserved by favour of a 
clause appropriate for insuring against arbitrary refusals, which 
render those rights wllusory which the Concordat assures to our 
sovereign. 

These are the exact words of the Commission. It recognized 
then that the emperor had, in the present case, the right to 
declare the Concordat abolished, under the condition of seeking 
afterwards some means of doing without it. Then what other 
means were there, if not-to recur to the ancient law, according 
to which bulls were not necessary (I make use of the expression 
of the Commission), or, if it was desired to retain the Concordat, 
to add to it a clause by which the right of the pope would pass 
to another authority, in default of being exercised by him within 
a determined time. 

Thus, either the Concordat will be declared abolished, or it 
will be modified by the aid of a clause accepted by both parties, 
and which will prevent all abuses. 

I remark that in the first case, they could do without the 
pope entirely, if he persisted in his refusal, and seek elsewhere 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 63 


some canonical authority different from his. This is said by the 
Commission without the least restriction. The emperor does not 
wish, it says, that the episcopacy in France should depend upon 
the confirmation by the pope, who would thus be master of the 
episcopacy, and it proves that it is right, that it is just, and entirely 
within the powers of the emperor, that the Concordat should be 
abolished by him, since it is no longer executed except by him. 
It expresses in this respect neither doubt nor regret; it is the 
fault of the pope. But, from that to say that the emperor 
could do the rest, or advise means by which the rest could be 
done, was hardly a step. For if the emperor had not in himself 
or at his disposition all that was necessary in order to secure 
the substitution of another confirmation than that by the pope, 
of what use would it be for him to abolish the Concordat? He 
might find himself as embarrassed then in abolishing it, as he 
was before. 

The Commission, however, did not wish to take this step. 
It thought, it declared, that, by principle as by prudence, it was 
necessary that a national council should determine or find this 
confirmation. But wasit sure that the council, influenced by 
party spirit and by intrigues of all kinds, would believe itself to 
possess such a right? Would it not raise new difficulties, instead 
of solving those it was called to settle? Would it consent to 
seek whence the confirmation of the bishops might proceed ? 
The solution might then remain incomplete. 

The Commission ought not to have dwelt so much upon the 
right of the emperor to abolish the Concordat, and to have pro- 
claimed it so loudly, since it could not acquaint him with a 
means of doing without it. It was a mistake, I believe, and 
an inconsistency on the part of the Commission. 

I have thought sometimes that if the emperor had made 
the Bishop of Nantes Minister of Public Worship, they might 
have been able to do without a council which could only involve 
matters. That bishop, so honest, so skilful, so versed in theo- 
logical knowledge, acting with the threefold authority of minister, 
bishop, and finished theologian, over each of the other bishops 
separately, would have much more easily obtained their con- 
sent to substitute another canonical confirmation for that of the 


64 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


pope, than he could in a council where each bishop feared to 
appear governed by one more skilful than himself, and where 
the united bishops had no longer the same fear of the emperor 
that each of them had in private. Perhaps even the pope 
himself would have released them all from embarrassment by. 
giving the confirmation this time for-fear of losing the right of 
conferring it in the future. 

Be it as it may with this idea which is purely conjectural, 
there was another supposition to be discussed besides that of 
the abolition of the Concordat ; it was that of its modification 
by a clause which would for ever prevent abuses, and this: was 
incontestably everything that was most desirable and the step 
most conformable to the principles, and the most suitable, even 
in the opinion of the Commission, to reassure all consciences. 

By that, in fact, both the contracting parties could be 
satisfied. The pope, in the drafting of it, could have reconciled 
this clause with even his most ultramontane views, by 
declaring that, after the expiration of the three or six months, 
he would authorize the archbishop to replace him; thus it 
was he who was still the source of power; he would be 
compromising nothing, even in the eyes of the most fas- 
tidious, and I think that this concession on the part of the 
pope might have been obtained, had the negotiation been well 
conducted. The emperor, in his turn, would have had all that 
he wished, more even than he wished up to that time; for, up 
to the existence of the Commission, he had only desired that the 
pope should give the bulls to the bishops nominated by him, 
consenting even that the pope should not insert the name of 
the emperor in these bulls; and in following the course I 
propose, Napoleon would have obtained, moreover, even with the 
consent of the pope, that they should no longer be refused by 
him in the future, without the confirmation he refused being 
at once replaced by an act none the less canonical. To obtain 
that from the pope, without returning to him Rome and his 
states, would have been a triumph worthy of the fabulous 
destiny of Napoleon, a triumph a thousand times more im- 
portant in its results than if he had secured it by means of a 
national council. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 65 


But the commission itself had, in the first place, put an 
obstacle in the way of obtaining such a clause. While agreeing 
that this clause in the Concordat was all that could most be 
desired, it had always insisted that to obtain it, or to do without 
it, it would be necessary to have recourse to a national council, 
which was not putting an end to the difficulty, for if the council 
eluded the question instead of solving it, what would become 
of it? It had been careful, however, not to do away with the 
idea of a negotiation: only it did not believe itself qualified to 
make the proposition, not having been assembled for that. 

What the commission did not believe it had the right to do, 
the Bishop of Nantes ventured to attempt directly with the 
emperor, out of fear, no doubt, of the scandal that would accrue 
from the sudden rupture of the Concordat, which in the 
preambles of the decree, would surely be accompanied by hard 
expressions, and consequently of injurious effect. M. Duvoisin 
was also perhaps uneasy as to the disposition in which the 
council might ,be, or as to that which might be suggested to it 
when it was once assembled. He therefore pressed the emperor 
not to send, if that did not suit him, the members of the 
commission to make a last effort with the pope, but merely to 
authorize them to go. 

The emperor resisted for a long time, and M. Duvoisin had 
much difficulty in inducing him to yield. In a moment of 
passion he had resolved to destroy the Concordat ; he had said 
it, and he did not wish to retract ; I believe, in truth, he rather 
gloried in it, although there was not much occasion to do so. 
He wished, he said, to have done with the pope. The Concordat 
once destroyed, he believed all would be finished. He had con- 
sented, it is true, to summon a council, but he thought he had 
nothing to fear from it. ‘‘The Concordat once abolished by a 
decree,” said he, ‘‘the council would of course be required, if it 
wished to preserve the episcopacy, to propose another mode of 
confirmation for the bishops, since they could not have recourse 
to a Compact which would exist no longer.” 

M. Duvoisin did not give himself up as conquered, but 
insisted still ; finally he decided the emperor, who, while yielding 
did it with such a bad grace, that he applied himself in the 

VOL. II. F 


66 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


instructions he gave more to increase the difficulties than to 
level them ; he seemed anxious to make the negotiation fail. 
It was known that the-instructions given by the Minister of 
Public Worship? to the bishops leaving for Savona had been 
dictated by the emperor. The minister, who did not wish to be 
held responsible for them, had told it to several influential 
members of the clergy. 

Instead of confining himself to the important point he would 
have been so happy to obtain, Napoleon desired the bishops to 
make the most inadmissible demands, as if it were a favour he 
was according to the pope to maintain the Concordat, even with 
the clause that he claimed. He wished them to inform him 
before all, that a national council was convened for June 9 
following, and to explain to him the measures that the Church 
of France would be likely to take after former precedents. 
He would consent to maintain the Concordat, he said, in these 
same instructions, only provided the pope would first con- 
firm all the nominated bishops, and agree that, in future, the 
confirmations should be made by the archbishop, in case he 
should not have confirmed them himself in the term of three 
months. He wished, and ¢hzs was a strict order, that the 
negotiators should declare to the pope that he should never re- 
enter Rome as a sovereign; but that he would be permitted 
to return there simply as head of the Catholic religion, if 
he consented to ratify the modifications to be introduced in 
the Concordat. In case it should no longer suit him to go 
to Rome, he could reside at Avignon, where he would enjoy 
sovereign honours, and where he would have the liberty of ad- 
ministering to the spiritual interests of the other countries of 
Christendom. Finally, they were to offer him two millions, all 
this on condition that he would promise to do nothing in the 
Empire contrary to the four articles of 1682. 


1 The Minister of Public Worship was then Jean Bigot de Preameneu. Born in 
1747, he had been an advocate in the Parlement. In 1791, he was elected deputy 
from Paris to the Legislative Assembly, and became its president in 1792. He 
lived in retirement during the Revolution. After the 18th Brumaire, he was named 
commissioner of the government at the Tribunal of Cassation, then councillor of 
state and president of the Legislative Section. He took part in the commission 
appointed with drawing up the civil code. In 1808, he became Minister of Public 
Worship. The first restoration retained him in his office, and created him peer of 
France. He lived in retirement under the second, and died in 1825. 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS V1. 67 


The three negotiating deputies were: the Archbishop of 
Tours, the Bishop of Nantes and the Bishop of Treves, to 
whom were added the Bishop of Faenza! nominated Patriarch 
of Venice, who was himself to repair to Savona. They 
were deputed by all the cardinals and bishops who were then 
in Paris, and who had given to them seventeen letters addressed 
to the Holy Father ; the longest and most pressing was that of 
Cardinal Fesch. 

Furnished with these letters, instructions and powers for 
concluding and signing an arrangement, the three deputies 
started at the end of April, 1811. They arrived at Savona 
on the 9th of May. It had been strongly recommended to them 
to return to Paris eight days before the opening of the council, 
that is before June 9; they left Savona, in fact, May 19. 

The contents of the letters, nine in number, they wrote from 
Savona to the Minister of Public Worship, and of the more 
detailed one they wrote to him afterwards from Paris, on their 
return, show with what wisdom and what propriety they con- 
ducted this negotiation, and how they led the pope, while 
disguising nothing from him, to show each day to them a 
sweeter and more conciliating disposition, and to cause him to 
consent at last, with a few slight modifications, to the principal 
demands they were charged to submit to him, or if one prefers, 
to impose upon him. 

It is. worthy of remark that on the day after their arrival, 
the pope, on seeing them, showed at first some uneasiness lest 
they came to announce to him that the future council was going 
to constitute itself a judge of his conduct. They dismissed most 
forcibly this idea, and made use of forms of the greatest respect 
in order to calm him. It was pretended at the time, that the 
fear he had allowed himself to manifest might well have had some 
influence on his benevolent dispositions. He resisted during the 
first days without bitterness, with an extreme moderation and 
even with some words of affection for the emperor; but what 
they demanded of him was so important, that it necessitated his 
conferring with his customary counsellors, and he complained of 


“a * Monsignor Buonsignori, appointed by Napoleon, Patriarch Archbishop of 
enice. 


F 2 


68 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


being deprived of them. The three negotiators could not return 
them to him, but they neglected nothing to persuade him that 
he would no longer be deprived of them, when he should have 
entered into the conciliatory and pacific ideas of which they 
were the agents with him ; they added that for that which 
concerned the bulls, there was no need of much deliberation nor 
of counsellors ; that in the main the demand was just and that 
he must see clearly how important it was for the good of the 
faithful, of the dioceses and of religion, that he should grant 
the bulls to the nominated bishops; and, in his own interest, as 
sovereign pontiff, that he should preserve, in adopting the new 
clause in the Concordat, this precious tie with the episcopacy of 
France, which would be broken if that Compact were once 
abolished. 

The pope made new objections, but each day less strong ; 
he expressed regret, never the appearance of ill-will. The 
bishops made no haste to speak to him of the sovereignty of 
Rome, for fear of injuring the principal negotiation. They 
believed, besides, that they could perceive that the Holy Father, 
no longer expecting to recover this sovereignty, would doubtless 
always protest upon this point, since he had not the right 
to make the sacrifice of it; but that he would engage not 
to return to Rome rather than consent to take the oath by 
which he would recognize the emperor as sovereign ; finally, 
that he felt that the deprivation of this sovereignty ought not 
to prevent him from governing the Church, as soon as his coun- 
sellors should have been returned to him. The pope was then 
resigned ; it was all that the negotiating deputies wanted. 

There was no real discussion on the subject of the Bull of 
Excommunication, on which, however, the bishops had had 
occasion to express their views. The Holy Father did not 
seem to them to hold to it, but rather to consent to regard it as 
not having been issued. 

The pope resisted gently but constantly, to make the promise 
to regard as a disciplinary regulation for the clergy of France 
the four articles of 1682. He showed himself well disposed in 
favour of the first of these articles, which recognized the inde- 
pendence of the temporal sovereignty, But why, he added, 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 69 


exact from him a declaration on the three other articles? He 
gave his word of honour to do nothing against them ; they could 
rely upon him. How could they demand of him what had 
never been demanded of any pope, a written promise to this 
effect ? There was a question here on one side and on the other 
as to free opinions. Bossuet himself did not ask anything else. 
He had taken care not to express his to the theologians of 
Italy and above all to the pope. The Holy Father referred 
often to the bull of Alexander VIII. (Ottoboni) successor to 
Innocent XI., who far from relaxing from the inflexibility of his 
predecessor, had issued a bull against the declaration of 1682, 
three days before his death. He agreed that this bull had had 
no results ; he did not seek to justify it, but was it for him to 
judge his predecessor and to condemn him? Would it not be 
said in Italy and in all Christendom, that he had con- 
sented to give this promise from weariness of his captivity? 
His memory would be tarnished by such suspicion. These 
questions were, besides, complicated and difficult; there were 
none on which he stood more in need of counsel. .... 

As to the bulls, we have not been able, wrote the three bishops, 
after seven or eight interviews, to obtain from the pope, the 
promise to accord them to the bishops already nominated ; he 
does not believe he can decide anything for the future without 
his council, and consequently, to consent to the new and im- 
portant clause, which would be inserted in the Concordat. We 
exhausted, on this point, all possible arguments and con- 
siderations, and we announced with regret that we would start 
on the morrow. This prompt departure appeared to affect him ; 
he expressed to us the desire to see us again ; we yielded to his 
desire, and it seemed to us that he no longer held to any point, 
except obtaining the substitution of the term of six months for 
that of three in which to exercise his right of confirmation. We 
presumed that that would not make any real difficulty; we 
therefore expressed all our confidence in regard tothis. Finally 
we led him, little by little, to agree to the following articles, 
drawn up, in a measure, under his dictation, and of which he 
wished to retain a copy as a witness to his own concessions, and 
of his ardent desire to restore peace in the Church. 


70 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


ARTICLES TO WHICH THE POPE CONSENTED. 


His Holiness, taking into consideration the needs and the 
wish of the Churches of France and of Italy, which have been 
presented to him by the Archbishop of Tours and by the 
Bishops of Nantes, Treves, and Faenza, and wishing to give to 
these Churches a new proof af his paternal affection, has 
declared to the above-named archbishop and bishops 


1. That he will accord canonical confirmation to the bishops 
and archbishops nominated by His Imperial and Royal Majesty, 
in the form agreed upon, at the time of the Concordats of 
France and Italy. 

2. His Holiness will hold himself ready to extend the same 
dispositions to the Churches of Tuscany, Parma, and Plaisance, 
by a new Concordat. 

3. His Holiness consents that there should be inserted in the 
Concordats a clause by which he agrees to expedite the bulls 
of confirmation to the bishops nominated by His Majesty, in a 
fixed time which His Holiness esteems should not be less than 
six months ; and, in case he should defer longer than six months 
for other reasons than the personal unworthiness of the candi- 
dates, he would invest with the power of giving the bulls in his 
name, after the expiration of the six months, the archbishop of 
the vacant see, and in default of him, the oldest bishop of the 
province. 

4. His Holiness only determines upon these concessions in 
the hope which has arisen from the interviews he has had with 
the deputy-bishops, that they would prepare the way for 
arrangements which would re-establish order and peace in the 
Church, and would restore to the Holy See the liberty, in- 
dependence and dignity which are befitting to it. 


SAVONA, May 19th, 1811. 


The declaration they obtained thus from the pope was a 
grand thing which closed so to say, for the future, all debate 
between the French government and the court of Rome. How 
could it in future trouble order in France? The canonical 
confirmation of the bishops was the only arm by which the 
refusal of a pope and his inaction could bring trouble ; his action 
could never bring it; for it could only be produced by 
briefs of bulls .... and France would always keep up the 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS V/1. at 


custom of not permitting their publication until she had had 
them examined and judged as containing nothing contrary to 
the laws of the country. All hostile will of a pope and even all 
dissidence which would displease, would be paralyzed by this. 
It mattered little what the pope thought of Gallican liberties, 
since it would not be in his power to arrest the effect of them. 
To wish to make him sign in advance some promise to this 
effect, was then entirely useless. The pope himself had said so ; 
and besides, it was only a petty tyranny they exercised over him. 
They had the word of honour of the Holy Father; that was 
indeed something ; it was even much more than any pope had 
ever done: and if he had not given it, there would have resulted 
no danger, not even the slightest inconvenience. 

I forgot to say that there was another point on which he had 
shown in his conversation that he would never yield: it was 
that by which the emperor had the pretension to reserve to 
himself the nomination to all the bishops of Italy, leaving to 
the pope only the confirmation. “What!” said he with emotion, 
“to recompense subjects, even cardinals who shall have served 
with zeal and talent the pontifical administration, the pope 
could not even nominate a single bishop in all Christendom, 
even in the churches which, from time immemorial, have formed 
part of the diocese of Rome, and whose titles would become 
annulled by a simple compact? That would indeed be 
| ” This was his expression, the only one of the 
kind which escaped him in his interviews with the French 
bishops. They had nothing to reply to him on this point, the 
wish of the Holy Father appearing to them so natural. 

They had occasion to speak to him of the two millions of 
income in rural property, fixed by the decree of February 17, 
1810, for the maintenance of the pope. Pius VII. began by an 
absolute refusal, being pleased to repeat what he had said from 
the outset, that he wished to live on very little and on the assist- 
ance that might be procured from the charity of the faithful. 
But the bishops combated this resolution, noble as it was, by 
showing him that he might deprive his successors of the temporal 
advantages accorded by the emperor, of the sovereign honours, 
and of means of communicating with Catholic princes; and 


72 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


also of the resources necessary for the maintenance of the Sacred 
College, which, by virtue of the decree of February 17, 1810, was 
charged to the imperial treasury. 

These considerations appeared to shake him; he did not 
insist ; but nothing was decided on this point. 

The bishops returned to France convinced that with more 
liberty and good advice the Holy Father, if his susceptibilities 
were not offended, might still make new concessions on several 
points of some importance. But they had obtained the prin- 
cipal one. 

Such a negotiation, so well commenced, ought to have 
removed all contest in the end. 

What was necessary for that? A single thing, it seems to 
me: not to allow the council to open, and to adjourn it for 
a month. During this time, Napoleon would have treated with 
the pope on the article of the bulls and on the new clause to be 
added to the Concordat, without interfering with anything else. 
He might have returned to him a few counsellors and sufficient 
liberty, and the pope would have held himself in honour bound 
to ratify what he had promised, as the result of an intimate 
conviction, at least in appearance. 

This treaty once signed, the emperor would no longer have 
need of the council, and he might be all the more inclined to 
adjourn it indefinitely, because its convocation had already 
thrown upon him some ridicule, which he could hardly 
ignore. Besides, would it not be better for him to agree to 
terminate with the pope himself, all of whose prejudices he had 
been able to conquer through his negotiators, than to have to 
do with an assembly which would surely be tumultuous, and 
probably, for him, ungovernable? With the promise of the 
pope, what was there to be done by a council which had only 
been convoked on the supposition that the pope would never 
consent to give confirmation to the nominated bishops, and still 
less to bind himself for the future in such a manner that he 
could no longer refuse this confirmation? Then all this had 
been granted and could be embodied in the treaty. Should 
the council wish anything different on this point? So much the 
worse! and if it wished only that, of what use would be its 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 73 


intervention? It was not at all agreeable to the pope; we 
have seen that. It could only be so to the emperor in a case 
which no longer existed. And more, it would have been preferable, 
in any case, to do without it. Was M. Duvoisin very sure of 
directing at his will those ninety-five bishops of France and of 
Italy, who, pliable enough individually, might easily become 
heated when in a body? And precisely because they would 
feel that there was nothing to be decided, they would be all the 
more disposed to create a host of difficulties, to raise incidental 
and annoying questions, in order that they should not be 
reproached with not having been able to say or do anything. 

The emperor counted without doubt on the influence in his 
favour Cardinal Fesch would obtain by presiding over the council, 
Here he was mistaken, as in all that he had done in raising 
every member of his family, with the thought of making use 
of him afterwards. His uncle, Cardinal Fesch, had to cause 
his origin to be forgotten ; and he wished, as did the brothers of 
Napoleon, to derive consideration from his opposition to the 
emperor’s will and rigour, and not from the credit of his nephew. 

Neither the emperor nor the Bishop of Nantes, whom his 
success at Savona ought to have better enlightened, felt all the 
gravity of the assembling of the council. Napoleon, who was 
not disarmed either by the cruel situation of the pope, or by the 
prodigious concessions which, in spite of this situation, had been 
obtained from him, had some injurious expressions in store 
against the pope, and did not wish to lose them. He prized the 
ridiculous honour of having them heard in the council, without 
thinking that the assembly, even the most cowardly, could not 
refuse to show an interest, at least for the sake of propriety, in 
the misfortunes of the Holy Father, and would not wish to 
dishonour itself openly. 

The Bishop of Nantes perhaps also flattered himself, and in 
that he was wrong, that he could exercise a paramount in- 
fluence in the council, by his great ability, and by his brilliant 
and fluent elocution. He believed he could interest at first, and 
acquire afterwards a right to, the confidence of the assembly, 
by relating his conferences with the pope. He only suc- 
ceeded in creating jealousy. They did not pardon him his 


74 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND, 


success ; they refused to believe in it; and as the four articles 
consented to by the pope were not signed by him, they pre- 
tended that no account should be taken of them. Besides, they 
knew that the emperor bore him special good will ; they soon 
spoke of him as being a favourite, and for this reason all his 
words were suspected. Thereupon the emperor, in his violence, 
spoke as severely of the council as of the pope; and it was 
supposed that M. Duvoisin was the instigator of this language. 
Finally, when the latter read one day in the council the project 
of an address to the empercr in reply to his message, and when, 
on some objections being offered as to its drafting, he had the 
inconceivable ill-taste to try to dismiss them, by saying that the 
project, as he had just read it, had already been submitted to 
the emperor, he was lost irretrievably. 

What remains clear for me, is that there cannot have been 
an instant when Napoleon must not have repented convoking 
this assembly, and having permitted it to meet, since he was 
able to ascertain to what extent, after the return of the deputa- 
tion from Savona, this council had become useless, and how it 
might become fatal for him. It is equally true that with the 
intention of the emperor to cause this assembly to turn to the 
profit of his power, it was impossible to follow a plan more in- 
considerate and more awkward than the one he followed. 

I wish only to pass rapidly in review the direction taken by 
this assembly and some incidents which relate to it. 

The council had been convoked for June 9, 1811, but, under 
the pretext of the baptism of the King of Rome, son of Napoleon, 
it did not hold its opening sitting until June 17, in the Church 
of Notre Dame. M. de Boulogne, Bishop of Troyes, preached 
the sermon. The assembly numbered ninety-five bishops (six 
were cardinals) and nine bishops nominated by the emperor, 
but who had not received their confirmation from the pope. 


 Etienne-Antoine de Boulogne, born in 1747, took orders in 1771, was in 
1782 grand-vicar of M. de Clermont-Tonnerre at Chalons-sur-Marne. He lived at 
Paris during all the Revolution, was imprisoned three times under the Terror, and 
proscribed at the 18th Fructidor ; but he then escaped all researches. Under 
the Empire, he became grand-vicar of the bishopric of Versailles, then Bishop of 
Troyes (1807). At the close of the council of 181 I, he was arrested and imprisoned 
at Vincennes. He gave in his resignation, and was exiled to Falaise ; but the pope 
did not accept his resignation, and M. de Boulogne returned to Troyes in 1814. He 
was created peer of France in 1822, and died in 1825. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 75 


Cardinal Fesch, as we have said, took, at the first onset, the 
presidency, which no one contested with him, and, in the enu- 
meration of his titles, that of Primate of Gaul, which came 
to him by right in his quality of Archbishop of Lyons. It will 
be seen further on, why I make mention of this particular. 
After the sermon, the president took the customary oath, which 
all the bishops repeated after him, and which is couched in the 
following terms: 

“T recognize the Holy Catholic Roman, Apostolic Church, 
Mother and Mistress of all the other Churches ; I swear a true 
obedience to the Roman Pontiff, successor to Saint Peter, Prince 
of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.” 

This oath produced much effect, in attracting attention to 
the unhappy victim to whom it was addressed. Thereupon the 
council separated for that day. 

On the 18th, the very day after the opening, Napoleon invited 
some of the bishops to Saint Cloud, to one of those evening 
receptions called entrées. The Empress Marie Louise and the 
ladies who were in attendance upon her were present, as well as 
a number of other persons, and among them the Prince Eugene, 
Viceroy of Italy. The emperor, taking some coffee that the 
empress poured out for him, had Cardinal Fesch, Duvoisin, 
Bishop of Nantes; Mannay, Bishop of Treves; de Barral, 
Archbishop of Tours ; and an Italian prelate introduced. At 
the moment they entered, Napoleon seized quickly and so that 
they could see him, the Monzteur, placed probably by order on 
a table. This paper in his hand, he went up to these gentlemen. 
The excited countenance he assumed, the violence and confusion 
of his expressions and the attitude of those whom he addressed, 
made of this singular-conference a scene such as he delighted in 
playing, and in which he displayed his brutal coarseness. 

The report of the first sitting of the council was re- 
produced in the JMonzteur the emperor was holding ; he creased 
it in his hands. He first attacked Cardinal Fesch, and, what is 
curious, he threw himself at the first onset, with singular volu- 
bility, into a discussion of ecclesiastical principles and usages, 
without the slightest previous knowledge, either historical or 
theological. 


76 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


“ By what right, Monsieur,” said he to the cardinal, “do you 
take the title of Primate of Gaul? What ridiculous preten- 
sion! And what is more, without having requested of me the 
authority! I see your subtlety; it is easy to unravel. Your 
object was to raise yourself, Monsieur, in order to call attention 
to "yourself and to prepare the public for a still higher rank 
in the future. Profiting by your relationship with my mother, 
you seek to make it believed that I wish one day to make you 
the Head of the Church; for it would not enter into any one’s 
mind that you would have the audacity to take, without my 
authorization, the title of Primate of Gaul. Europe would 
believe that I wish thus to prepare her to see in you the future 
pope... A fine pope, intruth!... With this new title you 
wish to frighten Pius VII. and render him more intractable still !” 

The cardinal, wounded, replied with firmness, and caused one 
to forget, by his honourable reply, the little dignity of his figure, 
tone, manners, and even the recollection of his former profession,} 
of which there were habitually seen too many traces in him, for 
the corsair re-appeared often under the coat of the archbishop. 
But there, before the emperor, he had all the advantage: he ex- 
plained that, from all time there had been in France, not only 
a Primate of Gaul, but a Primate of Aquitania, and a Primate 
of Neustria. Napoleon, a little astonished, turned towards the 
Bishop of Nantes and asked him if that was true. “The fact 
is incontestable,” said the bishop. Then the emperor left the 
cardinal whom alone, until then, he had taken to task. He 
generalized his anger, and on the word obédzence in the oath, 
which he confounded with obéssance,? he became so heated as even 
to call the fathers a council of traitors. ‘“ For one is a traitor,” 
he added, “ when he takes two oaths of fidelity at the same time, 
and to two sovereigns, enemies.” 

The Bishop of Nantes spoke a few words to which the 
emperor did not listen. He paid no attention either to the 


1 During the first years of the naval war, that is to say in 1793, 1794 and 1795, 
Cardinal Fesch commanded a privateer named 7’ Aventurier. He took several prizes 
that he brought to Genoa, which later were the occasion of a suit against him which 
he defended warmly before the tribunals of that city, and for which he had several 
times to my knowledge demanded the support of the government.—( 7a//eyrand.) 

* Obéissance means here allegiance, whereas obédience means the homage paid by 
Roman Catholics to the pope.—( 7vans/ator.) 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 77 


sad, discontented and reflective air of M. Duvoisin, to the 
dejected air of MM. de Barral and Mannay, to the submissive 
demeanour of the Italian, or to the angry liveliness of Cardinal 
Fesch, and he continued to talk for an hour with an incoherence, 
which would have left no recollection other than astonishment 
at his ignorance and his loquacity, if the phrase which follows, 
and which he repeated every three or four minutes, had not 
revealed the depth of his thought. “ Messieurs,” he exclaimed 
to them,“ you wish to treat me as if I were Louis le 
Débonnaire. Do not confound the son with the father. You 
See’ in me Charlemagne. .... Isam Charlemacne) Ts 2s *. 
yes, lam Charlemagne!” This “I am Charlemagne,” recurred 
at each instant. The bishops, after a few vain efforts to make 
him understand the difference which exists between the word 
obédience, which is only used in a spiritual sense, and that of 
obéissance, whose meaning is more extended, became tired at 
last of their unfruitful attempts. There was nothing for them to 
do but to wait, in the most profound silence, until fatigue put 
an end to this ill-regulated flow of words. The Bishop of 
Nantes, profiting then by a moment of rest, asked the emperor 
to speak to him in private. Napoleon went out, and he followed 
him into his cabinet. It was nearly midnight, and each one 
went his way, carrying from Saint-Cloud strange impressions. 

As a result of this scene the emperor exacted that the two 
Ministers of Public Worship, M. Bigot de Préameneu for France 
and M. Bovara for Italy, should attend all the sittings of the 
council. This was an impropriety added tg so many others, 
these two laymen in the midst of an assembly entirely ecclesiastic, 
where they had no right to take part in the deliberations, and 
could only occupy there a position as humiliating for the 
assembly as for themselves. 

The two ministers went, therefore, to the second sitting of 
the council, which was held on June 20. They produced an 
imperial decree which ordered that a committee should be formed 
of the president, three bishops, and of the two ministers, and that 
this committee should direct the operations of the council. There 
was some debate on this subject, but they took no notice of it 
and the committee was composed of Cardinal Fesch, president , 


78 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


the Archbishop of Bordeaux (M. d’Aviau),’ the Archbishop of 
Ravenna (Codronchi), the Archbishop of Nantes, and the two 
ministers. The latter read immediately a message from the 
emperor, which was nothing more than a long manifesto against 
Pius VII. and against all popes in general. It was the emperor 
who had done everything for religion ; it was the pope who did 
everything against it in France and in Italy ; such was, in short, 
the sense of this message, the drafting of which was attributed at 
the time to M. Daunou, a former Oratorian monk. It set 
forth that the pope had broken the Concordat, that, conse- 
quently, this was abolished, and the assembly was called 
upon to find a new mode of providing for the confirmation 
of the bishops. This diatribe produced just the contrary 
effect to that expected by the emperor ; that is to say, increased 
interest for the calumniated and persecuted Sovereign-pontiff. 
And at this same sitting, the majority decided to exclude from 
the deliberations the nine bishops nominated by the emperor and 
not confirmed by the pope, who, up to that time, had taken part 
in the proceedings of the council. This was already a grievous 
omen for the government. 

On June 25, the council nominated a commission which was 
called upon to propose an address to the emperor, in reply 
to his message. This commission was composed of twelve 
members, including the president, Cardinal Fesch; Cardinals 
Spina? and Caselli? who had concluded, in the name of 
Pius VIL., the Concordat of 1801; the Archbishops of Bor- 
deaux and of Tours; and the Bishops of Comacchio, Ivrea,* 


1 Charles-Francois, Comte d’Aviau de Sanzay, born in 1736, was at first grand- 
vicar of the diocese of Angers. In 1789, he was nominated Archbishop of Vienna, but 
refused the oath to the civil constitution and emigrated. In 1802, he became Arch- 
bishop of Bordeaux, and died in 1826. 

2 Cardinal Comte Joseph Spina, one of the negotiators of the Concordat of 180, 
archbishop iz partibus of Corinth, chaplain to Princess Pauline Bonaparte, was 
nominated Archbishop of Genoa, July 5, 1802. 

8 Charles-Francois Caselli, born in 1740, entered the order of the Servites, and 
became its procurator-general. After the signing of the Concordat of 1801, he became 
bishop iz partibus and cardinal (1802), then Bishop of Parma in 1804. This city 
having been annexed to the Empire, the cardinal came to Paris, where he lived until 
1814. He returned to Parma in 1814, became privy councillor of the Empress 
Marie Louise, who had become Duchess of Parma, and died in 1828. 

4 Joseph-Marie de Grimaldi, born in 1754, Bishop of Pignerol in 1797, then of 
Ivrea in 1805. In 1817, he became Archbishop of Verceil. He belonged to the old 
and powerful family of the Grimaldi, who have long possessed the principality of 
Monaco. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 79 


Tournai,! Troyes, Ghent, Nantes and Treves. On the 26th, they 
discussed the project of the address ; its drafting had been en- 
trusted to the Bishop of Nantes, and it was during this discussion 
that he had, as I have already said, the awkwardness to let it 
escape that the project had already been submitted to the em- 
peror, which did not prevent the majority voting against the 
passage which found fault with the Bull of Excommunication. 
On the morrow, the 27th, after the adoption of the amended 
plan of the address, a bishop, I believe it was the one from 
Chambéry,”? made the motion and in very touching terms, that 
the council should go to Saint-Cloud and ask the emperor for 
the release of the Holy Father. Cardinal Fesch hastened to 
close the sitting in order to cut this motion short, without 
which it would certainly have been carried by acclamation. 

Napoleon, greatly displeased, refused to receive the address. 

It was necessary, now, that, the commission of twelve should 
report upon the proposition presented by the government, and 
which consisted in finding a means of supplying the canonical 
confirmation of bishops refused by the pope. The Bishop 
of Nantes made a report on the work of the commission 
of 1810, on the subject of this question; and M. de Barral, 
Archbishop of Tours, gave an account of the journey of the three 
bishops to Savona, and ended by reading the note drawn up in 
the presence of the Holy Father and approved but not signed 
by him. 

This point was laid aside immediately and a member of the 
commission moved that, first of all, they should decide the 
question of the competency of the council. This proposition led 
to a lively discussion, in which the Bishop of Ghent (M. de Broglie) 
spoke with much heat against the competency of the council. The 
question put was: Js the council competent to ordain another mode 
of confirming bishops? Eight votes were for the negative, and 
the bishops who had been sent to Savona for the affirmative.‘ 
Cardinal Fesch did not vote. 


: Francois-Joseph de Hirn, born at Strasbourg in 1751, Bishop of Tournai in 1802. 

2 Trenée Yves, Baron de Solles, born at Auch in 1744, Bishop of Digne, April 
29, 1802; Bishop of Chambéry, May 30, 1805. 

3 The Cardinals Spina and Caselli, “MM. de Broglic, d’Aviau, Hirn, de Boulogne, 
de Grimaldi, and the Bishop of Comacchio. 

* MM. de Barral, Duvoisin and Mannay. 


80 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Napoleon became furious when he learned this result ; he 
exclaimed that he would dismiss the council, that he had no 
need of it, that he would himself make a decree which the whole 
world would obey, and which would contain the concessions 
made at Savona. The Bishop of Nantes succeeded again this 
time in calming him, and in bringing him to consent to a pro- 
ject of decree being sent to the council, containing, in effect, the 
Savona concessions, but to which should be added an article 
thanking the pope for his concessions, and that the assembly 
should be asked to sanction this project by its vote. 

The commission of twelve welcomed the project of decree, 
but with one restriction, that before having the force of law, it 
should be submitted to the pope for approbation, which was 
implicitly declaring the incompetency of the council. On July 
10, the plan of the amended decree was communicated, on the 
same evening, Napoleon sent to Vincennes three members of the 
commission, the Bishop of Ghent, M. de Broglie ; the Bishop 
of Troyes, M. de Boulogne; and the Bishop of Tournai, a German 
whose name I have forgotten,’ and an imperial decree announced 
that the council was dissolved. 

This dissolution of the council pronounced aé zrato, thisviolence 
exercised against three of its members, solved nothing and even 
created new embarrassments, for there was no longer any method 
of sending to the pope a projected decree in the name of a 
council which had been dissolved, and above all because it had 
been so on account of its having sustained that it was necessary 
that the project should be submitted to the Holy Father, That 
which could have been so well done before the council and 
consequently without it, could no longer be done now. 

Perplexed by the result of his passion, Napoleon was 
obliged to retrace his steps ; he had to fall back upon the pitiful 
means of reconstituting, so to speak, the council after having 
dissolved it. The bishops who had not left Paris were collected 
again, as well as those who had been retained there by force. 
They were each called separately to the residence of the Minister 
of Public Worship, and a written approbation obtained from 
them of the plan of decree with a new article nevertheless, which 


1M. Hirn 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITHA PIUS VI. 81 


stated that the decree should be submitted to the pope, and that 
the emperor should be begged to permit a deputation of six 
bishops to go to His Holiness to pray him to confirm a decree 
which alone could put an end to the misfortunes of the 
Churches of France and of Italy. 

This was a double inconsistency, since, on the one hand, they 
submitted to the pope propositions to which he had already con- 
sented, and on the other, they solicited his approbation when 
the council had been dissolved for having demanded this appro- 
bation. 

The bishops, more despondent than irritated, signed separately 
what was proposed to them, and, at a general sitting, August 15, 
1811, adopted by rising or remaining seated (a new mode of 
voting suggested by a ruse of Cardinal Maury) the following 
project : 


Art. 1.—Conformably to the spirit of the canons, the arch- 
bishoprics and bishoprics could not remain vacant more than a 
year at the longest. In this space of time the nomination, con- 
firmation, and consecration, must have taken place. 

Art. 2—The emperor will be begged to nominate for the 
vacant sees, conformably to the Concordats, and the nominees 
will address themselves to the Holy Father for canonical con- 
firmation. - 

Art. 3—In the six months which will follow the notifica- 
tion to the pope in the usual forms, of the aforesaid nomination, 
the pope shall give the canonical confirmation, conformably to 
the Concordats. 

Art. 4.— The six months expiring without the pope’s 
having accorded the confirmations, the archbishop, or, in default 
of him, the eldest bishop of the ecclesiastical province, shall 
proceed to the confirmation of the bishop nominated, and if it 
be to confirm an archbishop, the oldest bishop of the province 
shall confer the confirmation. 

Art. 5.—The present decree shall be submitted to the 
approbation of our Holy Father, the pope, and to this effect, his 
Majesty will be begged to permit a deputation of six bishops 
to go to His Holiness to pray him to confirm this decree which 
alone can put an end to the misfortunes of the Churches of 
France and of Italy. 


There was absolutely no difference in reality between what 
was proposed at first by the council and this which was 
VOL, TY, G 


82 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


adopted by the new assembly. Article 5 demanded the appro- 
bation of the Holy Father, while in the original draught it was 
the approbation of the emperor which was to be solicited. It is 
true that this was useless, since the draught was only the literal 
expression of the personal demand of the emperor. Of what 
use then to submit it to him? But to substitute so literally one 
expression for the other might have seemed offensive, if they 
had submitted this substitution to him; but I imagine the 
assembly would not have dared to ask him, and that it must 
have felt very happy when the decree arrived, invested with the 
imperial approbation, for it was Napoleon, that is to say his 
council, which proposed the wording. His approbation was 
included in the proposition made in his name to the council, in 
his sending the deputation to the pope, and in the instructions 
that he gave to this deputation. And as to the approbation to 
be conferred by the pope according to the fifth article, and upon 
which the council laid such stress, the Bishop of Nantes might 
easily persuade the emperor that the first draught which had 
been so violently rejected by him, was in reality only a form, 
by the aid of which they asked the pope if he recognized fully 
his own work. There was no harm, he added, in according this 
petty satisfaction to the council, which he engaged himself to 
convince that the imperial severity towards some of its members 
did not proceed from their having wished to insert this article 
in the decree, but rather from the hostile disposition they had 
manifested towards the government. 

A few days after, on August 19, eighty-five bishops, among 
whom, this time, were the nine unconfirmed ones, signed in com- 
mon a letter to the pope, in which they asked him to confirm the 
decree. Then they named nine deputies to carry it to him to 
Savona. These deputies were the Archbishops of Malines,! of 
Pavia and of Tours; the Bishops of Evreux,? Nantes, Tréves, 
Piacenza,? Faenza and Feltre ; and in order that the pope could 

1 M. de Pradt. 2 M. Bourlier. 

_” Etienne André Fallot de Beaumont, born in 1750, took orders and became 
Bishop of Vaison (Comtat Venaissin). He protested against the annexation of the 
comtat to France, was deprived of his see at that time, and took refuge in Rome. In 
1801 he was appointed Bishop of Ghent, then Bishop of Piacenza (1807), and Arch- 


bishop of Bourges (1813). But he did not receive a bull of confirmation for the latter 
see, and had to give it up in 1814. He lived in retirement ever after until his death. 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 83 


not complain that he was deprived of his council, they sent him 
also five cardinals: MM. Doria,! Dugnani,? Roverella, de Bay- 
anne,* and Ruffo,* the concurrence of whom I have every reason 
to believe was secretly assured. Finally, they sent, at the same 
time, the cameriere segreto of the pope, Bertazzoli, and his chaplain. 

They all arrived in Savona towards the end of the month of 
August. The pope did not receive them till the 5th of December. 
It was said that he did not welcome them as graciously as he had 
the first deputation. He was ignorant of what had passed in the 
council ; besides, he did not use that word, for which he continu- 
ally substituted that of assembly ; which proves how easy it would 
have been for the first deputation to have come to terms with the 
pope on the essential point, viz., that relative to the confirmation 
of the bishops, without having recourse to a council, for which the 
Holy Father cared nothing. But it was because Napoleon did not 
know what to do, and no one had the tact to persuade him. The 
evil became irreparable, because the approbation of the decree 
that they obtained from the pope, and which was to put an end 
to this great quarrel, ended in nothing, on account of the uncon- 
querable temper of Napoleon who, having almost concluded 
all, sought to embroil everything, and found only too many 
means of so doing. 


1 Giovanni Pamphili Doria, issue of an old Genoese family of that name. Born 
in 1751, he was archbishop at twenty, then nuncio at Paris, cardinal and Secretary of 
State (1797). He became afterward camerlingo of the pontifical court. 

2 Antoine Dugnani, born in 1748, took orders and became, in 1785, Archbishop zz 
partibus of Rhodes. He was nuncio at Paris in 1789. On his return from Rome in 
1792, he was created cardinal, and in 1800, contributed powerfully to the election of 
Pius VII. His attachment to this pontiff was the cause of his exile to Milan in 1808. 
He was taken to France in the following year. He returned to Rome in 1814, was 
appointed Bishop of Porto and of Santa Ruffina, and died in 1818. 

3 Alphonse-Hubert de Lallier, Duc de Bayanne, born at Valence in 1739, was at 
first auditor at rota at the Holy See. He was created cardinal in 1802. He returned 
to France under the Empire, played rather an active part in the negotiations between 
the pope and the emperor, and was appointed senator in 1813. He became peer of 
France under the Restoration, and died in 1818. 

* Fabrice-Denis Ruffo, born in 1744 at Naples. Destined for ecclesiastical 
life, he never rose to more than a deacon. Pius VI. nominated him assessor- 
general and treasurer of the pontifical chamber. On his return to Naples, he was 
appointed by King Ferdinand intendant of the palace, and became his most trusted 
counsellor. He was created cardinal in 1794. In 1798, he accompanied the king to 
Sicily, was named by him vicar-general with unlimited powers. He aroused the 
Calabrians and restored everywhere the royal authority.. In 1805, Ruffo returned 
to Rome, then went to France in 1809 ; he could not return to Italy until 1814. In 
1821, he was appointed member of the Royal Council by the King of the Two 
Sicilies, and died in 1827. 


G2 


84 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


After a few very gentle explanations between the deputations 
sent to Savona and the pope, explanations which did not bear 
upon any real difficulty opposed by him, the Holy Father agreed 
with a good grace to the five articles of the decree. He inserted 
them literally in a brief, dated September 20, 1811, which he 
addressed to the bishops with expressions full of paternal ten- 
derness, and without the least retractation. He recalls, in the 
preamble, with touching gratitude, that God has permitted that, 
with the consent of his very dear son Napoleon I., Emperor of 
the French and King of Italy (these two titles are mentioned 
there), four bishops should come to visit him and to pray him 
to provide for the Churches of France and Italy..... He speaks 
of the affection with which he received them, and with real joy 
of the manner in which they had reported his views and his 
intentions. He announced that after a new authorization from 
his very dear son Napoleon I..... five cardinals and the arch- 
bishop, his chaplain, had returned to him, and that eight deputies 
(for one died on the way) while informing him that a general 
assembly of the clergy had been held at Paris, August 5, had 
delivered to him a letter which related what had passed in this 
assembly, and which was signed by a large number of cardinals, 
archbishops, and bishops, and that finally they begged of him, 
in suitable terms, to approve anew the five articles he had 
previously approved. 

. The pope after having heard the five cardinals and his 
cameriere, the Archbishop of Edessa, confirmed all the acts they 
presented to him. He added only in the brief that the arch- 
bishop or the oldest bishop, when they should have to proceed 
with the confirmation, should give the customary information, 
exact the profession of faith, confirm in the name of the 
Sovereign Pontiff, and that they should transmit to him the 
authentic papers stating that these formalities had been faith- 
fully accomplished. This addition was a perfectly simple 
clause, it was even a consequence of the adoption of the articles, ” 
and it does not appear that the emperor himself was offended 
when he read it. 

But it was no longer so, when he had knowledge of the 

1 The Bishop of Feltre. 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 85 


portions which contained the congratulations and praises that the 
Holy Father addressed to the bishops for their conduct and 
sentiments. On reading a phrase which testified that the 
bishops had shown, as was proper, towards him and towards 
the Roman Church, which ts the mother and the mistress of all the 
other Churches, a true obedience—“aliarum omnium matri et 
magistri veram obedientiam,’ Napoleon could control himself 
no longer. The words mzstress and obedience excited first his 
laughter, then his fury, and he resolved to send back the brief 
with scorn, insisting on another wording. Divers rumours cir- 
culated in Paris concerning his changing disposition, growing 
each day more hostile to the Holy Father. Finally, without any 
public act, without even anything appearing in the JZonzteur (at 
least that I remember), it was spread about, after some little time, 
that the negotiations with the pope were broken off. The bishops 
were not called together to be informed of this, but the news 
was sent to them in their dioceses without telling them anything 
except that all was broken off with the pope, and by his fault. 
The brief, however, was returned. Napoleon, little accus- 
tomed to the language of the court of Rome, might find fault 
with a few expressions and even demand their modification ; but 
in spite of himself, of his violence and fury, the concessions de- 
manded from the pope and so much desired for three years, were 
accorded. The execution of the brief had even been commenced 
at Savona, for the pope had without difficulty confirmed the four 
bishops nominated by the emperor, and the name of the 
emperor was in the bulls as formerly, which was plainly a revo- 
cation of the Bull of Excommunication. Finally the pope 
accepted what they had been far from daring to hope, the 
additional clause of the Concordat ; this was his brief, and the 
emperor could then in future, when he wished, apply this clause, 
by a decree or by a senatus-consultum, without having need to 
refer to the pope. Why should he prefer to send back the 
brief, to reject all that was useful from his point of view, on 
account of a few expressions which were outside of the principal 
part of the brief, and against which, in accepting it, he could 
“make all the reservations he desired ? I do not know; he was 
capable of every inconsistency. 


86 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


The Bishop of Nantes, if he had been at Paris, might have 
been able, I think, to reconcile him to the words mother and 
mistress of all the Churches, and to that of obedience, by showing 
them to him repeated several times in the famous discourse of 
Bossuet, pronounced at the opening of the assembly of the 
clergy in 1682; he might have added that these expressions 
are reconcilable with the liberties of the Gallican Church, since 
they merely signify that the pope has the right to speak, as 
head, to all the Catholic Churches, as is admitted by the 
Church of France, as well as by the others. But the Bishop of 
Nantes was at Savona with the other deputies, where they were 
all to await new orders. 

The emperor sent back the brief ; the pope received it with 
grief, and was obliged to look upon it as not having been sent. 
However, with the sweet condescension which he is known to 
have possessed, he was surely ready, when it was desired, to 
maintain it, since he had given it unconditionally, and above all 
since he had demanded nothing for himself. 

In reading the instructions given by Napoleon to the bishop- 
deputies, before their departure for Savona, it is clearly seen 
that it is not on account of a few expressions scattered through 
the text of the brief, and which formed no part of its substance, 
that the emperor rejected the entire brief, but that it is above 
all because the pope spoke therein in his own name. (As if he 
could do otherwise !) 

These instructions, besides, were in themselves not concili- 
ating ; they were of a revolting offensiveness, and revealed at 
each word the evident desire to break off the negotiation. Thus 
the bishop-deputies were ordered to say to the pope that the 
emperor had instructed them to declare to him that the Con- 
cordats had ceased to be laws of the Empire and of the kingdom 
of Italy, and that the pope had warranted him in taking this 
measure by violating himself, for several years, some portions 
of these treaties ; that in consequence France and Italy were 
henceforth to be ruled by common law. The bishops were 
charged besides to demand of His Holiness his pure and 
simple approbation of the decree, and they were to exact that 
this should include not only France and Italy, but Holland, 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VI. 87 


Hamburg, Miinster, the Grand Duchy of Berg, Illyria, in fine, 
all the countries now annexed, or those which would hereafter 
be annexed to the French Empire. They were to refuse this 
approbation, if the pope made it depend upon any modification, 
restriction or reservation whatever, except respecting the see of 
Rome. They were to say to him, especially, that the emperor 
would accept no constitution or bull from which it should result 
that the pope had made over in his name what had been done by 
the council. Finally they were only to speak to him in menaces. 
It is probable that Napoleon, not finding in the brief the literal 
execution of his instructions, sent it back to the deputies, 
that the pope might have to conform to them; that they 
proposed, doubtless without menaces, but with respectful and 
supplicating forms, while acquainting him with the manner in 
which the brief had been received ; and that the Holy Father, 
seeing plainly that there was no possibility of satisfying the 
emperor by the only means at his disposal, refused in his turn 
that which was so harshly and arbitrarily exacted of him. 

I forgot to say that it was observed that, in the brief, the 
word council was not employed, but only that of assembly of 
bishops. That ought to have been a matter of indifference to 
Napoleon: the bishops alone might have felt wounded, and 
they were far from complaining. The emperor, who had treated 
this council so lightly, who had dissolved it with so much 
scorn, who had repented each time it was mentioned to him, 
that he had convened it, should have had very little jealousy 
as to its title, above all, when the pope gave it one so perfectly 
equivalent. His quarrelsome humour however impelled him to 
draw from this omission of the word counczl a new subject of 
attack upon the Holy Father, that he repeated often in his 
conversation, although this was not assuredly, the principal 
motive of his refusal and of his anger. 

The bishops who were at Savona remained there still a long 
time in spite of themselves. They did not return to Paris until 
the beginning of the spring of 1812. The emperor wished, he 
said, to punish them for their want of judgment. He did not 
even call the council together at Paris to inform them of what 
had taken place at Savona ; he had had them told on October 2, 


88 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


1811, by the A/znzster of Police, that they were to re-enter 
their dioceses, and they had done so. Nothing was published 
regarding the negotiation, the council, or the brief. Each one 
drew from this imbroglio his own conclusion ; and thought of 
other things. 

The rigorous treatment to which the Holy Father was sub- 
jected at Savona was continued during the winter of 1811— 
1812, and in the following spring. At this time, it seems there 
was some fear, on the appearance of an English squadron, that 
it might carry off the pope; and the emperor gave the order to 
transfer him to Fontainebleau. The unhappy old man left 
Savona, June 10, and was forced to travel day and night. He 
fell quite ill at the hospital of Mont Cenis; but they forced him 
none the less to continue his journey. They had compelled 
him to wear such clothes, so as not to betray who he was on 
the way they had to travel. They took great care also to 
conceal his journey from the public, and the secret was so 
profoundly kept, that on arriving at Fontainebleau, June 19, 
the concierge who had not been informed of his arrival, and who 
had made no preparation, was obliged to receive him in his own 
lodgings. The Holy Father was a long time before recovering 
from the fatigue of this painful journey, and from the needlessly 
rigorous treatment to which they had subjected him. 

The cardinals who were in favour with Napoleon, and were in 
Paris, as wellas the Archbishop of Tours, the Bishop of Nantes, 
the Bishop of Evreux, and the Bishop of Treves, were ordered to 
go and see the pope. It was said that the latter expressed the 
wish that Cardinal Maury should abstain from visiting him quite 
so often. The report was spread that the pope would be brought 
to Paris, and they made great preparations to receive him at 
the archiepiscopal palace, to which, nevertheless he never came. 

The Russian campaign, marked by so many disasters, was 
drawing toaclose. The emperor on his return to Paris, December 
18, 1812, still cherished chimerical hopes, and was meditating 
without doubt, more gigantic projects. Before carrying them out, 
he wished to take up again the affairs of the Church, either 
because he repented of not having finished them at Savona, 
or because he had the fancy to prove that he could do more 


NAPOLEON’S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 89 


in a two hours’ /ée-d-téte with the pope, than had been 
done by the council, its commissions, and its most able nego- 
tiators. He had beforehand, however, taken measures which 
were to facilitate his personal negotiation. The Holy Father 
had been surrounded for several months by cardinals and 
prelates, who, either from conviction or from submission to 
the emperor, depicted the Church as having arrived at a state 
of anarchy which put its existence in peril. They repeated 
incessantly to the pope, that if he did not conciliate the 
emperor and secure the aid of his power towards arresting the 
evil, schism would be inevitable. Finally, the Sovereign Pontiff 
overwhelmed by age, by infirmities, by the anxiety and cares 
with which his mind was worried, found himself well prepared 
for the scene Napoleon had planned to play, and which was to 
secure him what he believed would be a success. 

On January 19, 1813, the emperor accompanied by the 
Empress Marie Louise, entered the apartment of the Holy 
Father unexpectedly, rushed to him and embraced him with 
effusion. Pius VII., surprised and affected, allowed himself to 
be induced, after a few explanations, to give his approbation to 
the propositions that were imposed, rather than submitted to 
him. They were drawn up in eleven articles, which were not 
yet a compact, but which were to serve as the basis of a 
new act. On January 24, the emperor and the pope affixed 
their signatures to this strange document, which was lacking in 
the usual diplomatic forms, since they were two sovereigns who 
had treated directly together. 

It was said in these articles, that the pope would exercise the 
pontificate in France, and in Italy ;—that his ambassadors and 
those in authority near him, should enjoy all diplomatic 
privileges ;—that such of his domains as were not disposed of 
should be free from taxes, and that those which were transferred 
should be replaced by an income of two millions of francs ;— 
that the pope should nominate, whether in France or in Italy, 
to episcopal sees, which should be subsequently fixed ; that the 
suburban sees should be re-established, and depend on the nomina- 
tion of the pope, and that the unsold lands of these sees should 
be restored: that the pope should give bishoprics zz partibus to 


go THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


the Roman bishops absent from their dioceses by force of cir- 
cumstances, and that he should allow them a pension equal 
to their former revenue, until such time as they should be 
appointed to vacant sees ; that the emperor and the pope should 
agree in due time as to the reduction to be made, if it took 
place, in the bishoprics of Tuscany and of the country about 
Geneva, as well as to the institution of bishoprics in Holland, 
and in the Hanseatic departments ; that the propaganda, the 
confessional, and the archives should be established in the 
place of sojourn of the Holy Father ; finally, that His Imperial 
Majesty should bestow his good graces upon the cardinals, 
bishops, priests, and laymen, who had incurred his displeasure in 
_ connection with actual events. The principal article consented to 
by the Holy Father at Savona, naturally figured here also, and 
it was drawn up anew in the following terms: Jn the six months 
which shall follow the usual notification of the nomination by the 
emperor to the archbishoprics, and bishoprics of the Empire and of 
the kingdom of Italy, the pope shall give canonical confirmation 
conformably to the Concordats and in virtue of the present indult. 
The preliminary information shall be given by the archbishop. The 
six months having expired without the pope's having accorded the 
confirmation, the archbishop, and in default of him, or when 
concerning the confirmation of an archbishop, the oldest bishop 
of the province, shall proceed to confirm the nominated bishop, 
so that a see may never be vacant for more than a year—Such 
was Article IV. 

In a final article, the Holy Father declared that he had been 
induced to make the above dispositions by consideration for the 
actual state of the Church, and in the confident belief with 
which His Majesty had inspired him, that he would accord his 
powerful protection for facing the numerous needs of religion 
at the present time. 

The news of the signing of the treaty occasioned great joy 
among the people, but it appears that that of the pope was of 
short duration. The sacrifices he had been led to make were 
hardly consummated, when he experienced bitter grief; this 
could but be increased in proportion as the exiled and imprisoned 
cardinals, Consalvi, Pacca, di Pietro, on obtaining their liberty, 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. gl 


received also the authorization to repair to Fontainebleau. What 
passed then between the Holy Father and these cardinals I do 
not pretend to know ; but it must be that Napoleon’ had been 
warned by some symptoms of what was about to happen ; for, in 
spite of the agreement he had made with the pope to consider 
the eleven articles only as preliminaries which were not to be 
published," he decided nevertheless to make them the object of a 
message that the arch-chancellor was charged to submit to 
the senate. 

This premature publicity given to an act which the pope so 
strongly regretted having signed must have hastened his retrac- 
tation which he addressed to the emperor by a brief, on March 24, 
1814. I do not know upon what considerations the Holy Father 
founded this retractation ; but one can but deplore the weakness 
which directed his conduct in this circumstance, and which, after 
so short an interval, made him consent to retract. The best 
explanation that can be given of this conduct is, that by 
physical and moral enfeebling, his spirit bent before the exac- 
tions of Napoleon, and only regained its strength when he found 
himself surrounded by his faithful counsellors. One may regret, 
but can one believe oneself warranted in blaming? 

This time, the emperor, although greatly irritated by the 
retractation, believed it was to his interest not to make any noise 
about it, and decided to take outwardly no notice of it. Hehad 
two decrees published: one of February 13, and the other of 
March 25,1813. By the first, the new Concordat of January 25 
was declared state law ; by the second, he declared it obligatory 
upon archbishops, bishops, and chapters, and ordered, according 
to Article IV. of this Concordat that the archbishops should 
confirm the nominated bishops, and in case of refusal, ordained 
that they should be summoned before the tribunals. 

He restricted anew the liberty that had been given momen- 
tarily to the Holy Father, and Cardinal di Pietro returned to exile. 
Thereupon, Napoleon started, soon after, for that campaign 

1 Indeed, the preamble of this compact ran as follows: ‘‘H.M. the Emperor and 
King and His Holiness, wishing to terminate the differences which arose between 
them and remedy consequent difficulties touching the affairs of the Church, agreed 


upon the following articles, as being likely to furnish a basis for a definite arrange- 
ment, 


92 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


of 1813 in Germany, the prelude to that which was to lead to 
his downfall. 

The decrees issued ab zrato were not executed, and during 
the vicissitudes of the campaign of 1813, the imperial govern- 
ment several times attempted to renew with the pope negotiations 
which failed. Matters dragged along thus, and no one could 
foresee any issue when, on January 23, 1814, it was suddenly 
learned that the pope had left Fontainebleau that very day, 
and returned to Rome. 

Napoleon was then hotly pressed by the allied troops who 
had penetrated into France; but as he counted so confidently 
on success, it was difficult to comprehend so unexpected and 
precipitate a resolution. It can be explained, however. Murat, 
who had abandoned the cause of the emperor, and who, as we 
have already said, had treated with the coalition, was then 
occupying the States of the Church, and it is evident that 
Napoleon in his indignation against Murat, preferred to allow 
the pope to re-enter his States, to seeing them in the hands of 
his brother-in-law. 

While Pius VII. was ex route and the emperor was fighting 
in Champagne, a decree of March Io, 1814, announced that the 
pope was again taking possession of that part of his States 
which formed the departments of Rome and Trasimene. The 
lion, although vanquished, would not yet let go all the prey 
he so confidently hoped to retake. 

The journey of the Holy Father was not made without hind- 
rances and difficulties, so much so that the provisory govern- 
ment, over which I had the honour to preside, was obliged to give 
orders, April 2, 1814, to facilitate the progress of the Sovereign 
Pontiff, and render to him all the honours he was entitled to. 

It must be said that the viceroy of Italy, Eugene, greeted 
the pope with respect, and that Murat himself dared not oppose 
his taking possession of his States, although he was occupying 
them himself with his troops. 

The pope arrived on April 30, at Cesena, on May 12, at 
Ancona, and made his solemn entry into Rome on May 24, 
1814. 

In dwelling as long as I have done on the negotiations 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 63 


between the emperor and the pope, I had a double purpose; I 
desired to show how far Napoleon could be carried by passion, 
even when he encountered before him resistance on the side of 
right, and to prove that, in the question treated here, he was 
equally wrong in the main and in form; which it will be easy 
for me, I believe, to demonstrate. I have nothing more to add, it 
seems to me, to prove how odious was all his conduct towards 
the pope, from the year 1806; the facts that I have just exposed 
with impartiality and with as much coolness as it has been 
possible for me to employ in relating such unworthy persecu- 
tions, these facts speak for themselves ; I should risk enfeebling 
them by insisting. But I care still more, perhaps, to emphasise 
the enormous faults from a general political point of view, which 
were committed by the emperor in his relations with the court 
of Rome. 

When in 1801, Napoleon re-established religion in France, 
he performed not only an act of justice, but also an act of 
cleverness ; for he immediately secured, by this single deed, 
the sympathies of the Catholics of the entire world ; and by 
the compact with Pius VII. he had re-established on a solid 
foundation Catholic power which had been shaken for a 
moment by the French Revolution, and in the development of 
which every sensible government of France ought to aid, were 
it only for the annihilation of Protestantism and the Greek 
Church. For, what are the principal forces of Catholicism, as 
of all power, if they are not unity and independence? And 
these were precisely the two forces Napoleon wished to sap and 
to destroy,on the day when, urged by the most insensate 
ambition, he entered upon a struggle with the court of Rome. 
He attacked the unity of the Catholic Church in wishing to 
deprive the pope of the right of confirming the bishops ; its 
independence, in withdrawing from the Holy See its temporal 


power. 
The confirmation of the bishops by the pope is the only 


real tie which unites all the Catholic Churches of the world 
with that of Rome. It is that which maintains the uniformity 
of the doctrines and rules of the Church, in not allowing any to 
attain the episcopate who are not recognized as capable by the 


94. THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Sovereign Pontiff of sustaining and defending them. Suppose 
for a moment that this tie were broken, you fall into schism. 
Napoleon was so much the more guilty in this respect, that he 
had been enlightened by the errors of the constituent assembly: 
I do not hesitate to acknowledge here, whatever share I may 
have taken in this work, that the civil constitution of the clergy, 
decreed by the constituent assembly, was perhaps the greatest 
political error of that assembly, independent of the frightful 
crimes which were its consequences. It was inexcusable after 
such an example, to fall into the same error and to recommence 
against Pius VII., the persecutions of the Convention and of 
the Directory against Pius VI., which had been so severely 
and so justly blamed by Napoleon himself. There is no 
possible excuse, therefore, for his conduct in this matter. It 
would be vainly objected to me that there have existed 
turbulent popes, who abused the confirmation of the bishop and 
turned it into a weapon even against Catholic governments. 
I would reply to that, that it is exact, but that these govern- 
ments extricated themselves from these difficulties, and that 
the same could be done if a similar case happened again, 
and that it is a bad policy to prevent a possible abuse by 
creating a real danger. Let us add that Napoleon was less 
justified than any other in acting as he did, after having met 
in Pius VII. the most unhoped-for facilities for regulating the 
affairs of the Church, and a gentleness and meekness which 
never belied themselves for an instant, in spite of the most 
odious proceedings; for the Bull of Excommunication is an 
incident which had no bearing whatever. And how guilty 
must Napoleon have been on this occasion, in order that he, who 
so boasted of creating enemies everywhere for England, even as 
Mithridates formerly did for the Romans, should have come to 
make of the pope an ally of the English, and should have 
experienced some fear that they might carry off his victim from 
Savona ? 

The destruction of the temporal power of the pope by the 
absorption of the Roman States into the Grand Empire was, 
politically speaking, a fault no less serious. It is obvious to all 
that the head of a religion so universally spread over the globe 


NAPOLEON'S STRUGGLE WITH PIUS VII. 95 


as is the Catholic religion, has need of the most perfect in- 
dependence in order to exercise impartially, its power and 
influence. In the actual state of the world, in the midst of the 
territorial divisions created by time, and of political com- 
plications resulting from civilization, this independence can only 
exist ifguaranteed by a temporal sovereignty. It would be as 
absurd to wish to return to the times of the primitive Church, when 
the pope was only the Bishop of Rome, because Christianity was 
included within the Roman Empire, as it was insensate in Napo- | 
leon to pretend to make a French bishop of the Holy Father. 
What then would have become of Catholicism in all the countries 
which were not a part of the French Empire? What would 
France think if the pope were in the hands of Austria or of 
any other Catholic power? Would it believe it impartial, or 
independent ? However deluded Napoleon may have been as 
regards the extent and duration of his power, his person or 
that of his successors, he ought not to have created so dangerous 
a precedent, which might, some day, have been fatal to France. 
1814 has proved that nothing of this kind was impossible. 

I stop. I have said enough to show all the evil the insatiable 
ambition of the emperor prepared for France in the future. 
But, perhaps there will be said to me by the Revolutionists of 
the school of the year 1800, why, then, have re-established 
religion, and the papacy? It is Napoleon himself who replied 
to them beforehand by making the Concordat of 1801; but 
this is the truly great Napoleon, enlightened and guided by 
his splendid genius, and not ruled by the furious passions which 
eventually led to his ruin. 


END OF THE SIXTH PART. 


Pee ON 
THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 
1813—1814. 


The political faults of Napoleon—What might have been a masterpiece of 
policy—No chance for the House of Bourbon—Why Louis XVIII. 
ascended the throne—Why Napoleon is the first and only man who 
could have given Europe her true equilibrium—The cause of his ruin— 
Talleyrand’s apology for having left Napoleon’s service—Rejects the 
imputation of having conspired against the Emperor—General Savary 
and Talleyrand—Napoleon wants Talleyrand to resume office—“4h / 
st Talleyrand était ld /” —La Besnardiére and Napoleon—Wrath of the 
latter against Murat—Napoleon alone plotted against himself—His 
obstinacy at the Congress of Chatillon—Lord Wellington—Abbé Juda 
—The Colossus has feet of clay—Lord Wellington’s plan—The Duc 
d’Angouléme and the Duke of Wellington—Sir Henry Bunbury—The 
Marquis de la Rochejacquelein—Wellington refuses to support a Bourbon 
rising—Battle of Orthez—Wellington yields—Viscount Beresford—M. 
Lynch and the Bourbons—Lord Bathurst’s letter to the Duke of Welling- 
ton—Battle of Toulouse—Correct attitude of Wellington—Colonels 
Frederick Ponsonby and H. Cook—The abdication of the Emperor— 
Charge brought against the Provisory Government—The English 
Government and Napoleon—Louis XVIII. and the Prince Regent of 
England—Baron de Vitrolles at the headquarters of the allied sove- 
reigns—Talleyrand and the Baron de Vitrolles—Interview between the 
latter and Count von Stadion—Prince Metternich and Baron de Vitrolles 
—Interview between the latter, the Czar Alexander, and the Emperor 
of Austria—Napoleon’s movements—Saint-Dizier— Marshal Macdonald’s 
error—General Wintzingerode—Napoleon’s suspicions— Hastens on the 
rear of the allies—Troyes, Fromenteau and Fontainebleau—The 
allies were bent on treating with Napoleon—Why they did not—The 
views of the allies on France—The position of the House of Bourbon 
—A constitutional Monarchy—Contrast between Spain and France— 
The security of France under Napoleon—The great need of Europe— 
The legitimacy of governments—Why Talleyrand supported the claims 
of the Bourbons—Napoleon’s opinion of the Bourbons—Capitulation of 
Paris—The Czar and the King of Prussia in Paris—March past of the 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 97 


allied troops in the Champs Elysées—Talleyrand and the Czar Alexander 
—Negotiations relative to the recall of the Bourbons—The Czar Alex- 
ander amazed—The return of Louis XVIII. voted by former regicides— 
M. de Caulaincourt and Talleyrand—Declaration of the allies to Napo- 
leon—The Provisory Government—Entrance of the Comte d’Artois into 
Paris—Interview between Talleyrand and Louis XVIII. at Compi¢gne— 
The Saint-Ouen proclamation—Return of Louis XVIII. to Paris—The 
Charter—Talleyrand appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs—The situa- 
tion of France compared with Europe on the morrow of Napoleon’s fall— 
The conventions between the Comte d’Artois and the allies—Treaty of 
peace between Louis XVIII. and the allies—Additional Articles— 
Separate and secret Articles to the treaty of Paris—Decision relative to 
the assembling of a Congress at Vienna—Talleyrand’s letter to the 
Czar Alexander—Instructions of Louis XVIII. to the French plenipo- 
tentiaries to the Congress of Vienna—Various considerations on the 
condition of Europe and the respective situations imposed by Napoleon 
on its different States—How these are to be remedied by the Congress 
of Vienna. 


THE attention of my readers must now direct itself to the 
time of the reign of Napoleon, when I mentioned that by a 
clever move in Spain he would have been able to arrive at a 
general peace, and thus to firmly establish his own rule. 

Napoleon had been raised to supreme power by the 
concourse of united wills against anarchy. The fame of. his 
victories had caused him to be chosen ; it was his sole claim; 
defeat revoked it as much as a glorious peace would have 
justified and affirmed it. But, dupe to his imagination that 
overruled his judgment, he said emphatically, that he must 
raise about France a rampart of thrones occupied by mem- 
bers of his family to replace that line of fortresses created 
previously by Louis XIV. He found among his ministers 
and among his courtiers, men to approve that extravagance ; 
and the greater portion of these men were former members of 
the Convention and of the Council of elders. But the good sense 
of the masses of France, confined itself to desiring the conserv- 
ation of the real and useful results of the Revolution, that is to 
say, to the maintenance of those civil liberties, the forms of which 
the emperor had scarcely allowed to exist, by ever placing his 
despotic power above the law. 

His success had so blinded him that he did not see that 
by pushing to extremes the political system he had foolishly 

VOL. Il. Ul 


98 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


embraced, as much at home as abroad, he would tire the French 
as well as other nations, and compel them to seek with them 
cuarantees for a general peace, outside of himself, as well as for 
themselves, the enjoyment of their civil rights. 

In his enterprise against Spain, everything was unreasonable. 
Why ruin a country that was attached and devoted to him, 
in order to seize a portion of it, while he left its rich colonies 
to the mercy of England whom he intended to destroy or at 
least to weaken everywhere? Was it not evident that if all the 
provinces of the Peninsula were forced to bend under the yoke of 
France and to submit to the royalty of his brother, the Spanish 
colonies would rise in rebellion of their own accord, or at the 
hint of England? A master stroke of policy at that time would 
have been to isolate Great Britain, so as to leave her without a 
link of any description with the Continent, and without fresh 
intercourse with the colonies. Napoleon, on the contrary, by the 
war in Spain, threw open to England the Continent of Europe 
and the American colonies. 

_ When remembering what struck me most among my recol- 
lections of the twenty years of which I have just spoken, 
I often asked myself what would have happened if the emperor 
at such or sucha time in his career had paused, had changed 
his system, and had only aimed at strengthening his position. 
Thus, for example, after the peace of Lunéville, after having 
signed his first treaty with Russia, concluded the peace of 
Amiens with England, and had all the powers of Europe 
recognize the position of the empire, was not everything easy 
for him? France had then acquired limits to which Europe 
had been obliged to consent ; internal opposition had vanished, 
religion had resumed its proper place in the state. That situation 
evidently left no longer any prospect to the house of Bourbon. 

If that same idea sometimes occurs to Louis XVIII. 
what gratitude ought he not to feel towards Providence, and 
what attention should he not devote to the happiness and pros- 
perity of France. Let him think a moment of all that has been 
necessary since 1803, in order to prepare his return. 


1 It may be as well to note here that this portion of Prince Talleyrand’s A/emoirs 
was written during the Restoration, and previous to the death of Louis XVIII. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 99 


It was necessary that all sorts of delusions should take posses- 
sion of Napoleon’s mind at the same time ; that he should engage 
recklessly in the most hazardous expeditions ; that, by caprice, 
he should raise thrones, and, by other caprices, deprive those 
thrones of all chance of stability, and make enemies even of 
those he had placed on them. It was necessary that, in order 
to destroy the confidence of France and of foreign nations, he 
should impose upon them institutions, at first republican, then 
monarchical, and, that he should end by submitting them all 
to his despotic sway. It was necessary, finally, that he should 
furnish peoples who, as a rule, very soon understand each other, 
the sad consolation of successively despising the different forms 
of government that passed under their eyes, and that he should 
fail to see that that contempt was to generate a general disposi- 
tion for rebellion, and, soon after, for vengeance. 

But if passing from the date of 1803, we direct our attention 
to the year 1807, when the emperor had vanquished one after 
the other, Austria, Prussia and Russia, and held in his hands 
the destiny of Europe, what a grand and noble part might he 
not have played ? 

Napoleon is the first and only man, who could have given 
Europe the real equilibrium for which she has been searching 
in vain for several centuries, and from which she is to-day 
farther off than ever. 

It was necessary for that, Ist, to appeal to the unity of Italy 
in transferring to her the house of Bavaria ; 2nd, to divide Germany 
among the house of Austria, that would have extended to the 
mouth of the Danube, and the house of Brandenburg,! that 
would have been enlarged, and 3rd, to resuscitate Poland by 
giving her to the house of Saxony. 

With a real equilibrium, Napoleon would have been able 
to give to the peoples of Europe an organization consonant 
with true moral law. A real equilibrium would have rendered 
war well nigh impossible. A suitable organization would have 
carried to every household the highest degree of civilization 
which could possibly be attained. 


1 The house of MHohenzollern-Brandenburg, which occupies the throne of 
Prussia. 


Ee 2 


100 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


Napoleon was able to do all this, and he did not do it. If 
he had done so, gratitude would have raised statues to him 
everywhere, and his death would have been mourned in every 
heart. Instead of that, he has brought about the state of things 
which we see, and paved the way for the dangers that threaten 
Europe from the East. It is on these results that he should 
be, and will be judged. Posterity will say of him, “ That 
man was endowed with very great intellectual force; but he 
has not understood veritable glory. His moral force was very 
small or even null. He was not able to enjoy prosperity with 
moderation, nor to bear misfortune with dignity, and it is 
because he lacked moral force, that he caused the ruin of Europe 
and of himself.” 

Placed for so many years in the very midst of his pro- 
jects, and so to say in the very crater of his policy, a witness 
to all that he did or that was done against him, there was not 
much credit in foreseeing that all the countries recently placed 
under his rule, and all the kingdoms newly created for the benefit 
of his family, would be the first to deal a blow at his power. 
Not without bitter grief, [ confess, did I witness such a sight. 
I was fond of Napoleon; I was attached to his person, not- 
withstanding his faults—when he first appeared on the scene of 
the world, I felt attracted towards him by the irresistible spell 
peculiar to great genius. I was sincerely grateful to him for 
the favours he had bestowed on me. Besides, why should I fear 
to say it? I had shared in his glory, which reflected upon all 
those who assisted him in his noble work. Thus I can boast 
of having served him with devotion and, as far as I was able, 
with enlightened devotion. Inthe days when he still listened to 
the truth, I loyally told it to him; I told it to him even later, 
when it was necessary to be cautious in letting him know it ; 
and the disfavour that my candour caused me, justified me, in 
my conscience, in first leaving his policy, then his person, 
when he had reached the point of imperilling the destinies of 
my country. 

When Napoleon, casting aside every reasonable transaction, 
threw himself in 1812, into the fatal Russian expedition, any 
well-balanced mind could almost fix the date, when, followed 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. ot 


up by those powers he had humiliated, and forced to cross 
the Rhine again, he would lose the prestige with which fortune 
had hitherto surrounded him. Napoleon vanquished, was doomed 
to disappear from the world’s stage; that is the destiny of 
vanquished usurpers. But France once invaded, what odds 
there would be against her! What means could thwart the 
evils which threatened her? What form of government should 
she adopt, if she resisted such a catastrophe? Those were 
serious subjects of meditation for all good Frenchmen. To con- 
sider them was a duty for those whom circumstances, or, if 
one prefers, their ambition, had already called, at other times, 
to exercise an influence on the future of their country. It 
is what for several years I believed I had the right to do; 
and according as I saw the dreadful issue approaching, I ex- 
amined and combined with more care and attention, the 
resources that would remain to us. This was neither to betray 
nor to conspire against Napoleon, though he had more than 
once charged me with doing so. I have never conspired in my 
life, except at those times when I had the majority of France 
for an accomplice, and when I sought with her, the salvation of 
the country. Napoleon’s mistrust of and insults to me cannot 
change the truth of the facts, and I proclaim it loudly, he 
never had a dangerous conspirator against him, but himself. 
He, nevertheless, had the most rigid watch kept over me during 
the last years of his reign. Icould almost cite that constant 
watch as a witness to the inability I should have experienced 
to conspire, had I been so inclined. 

I shall perhaps be excused for recalling an incident of that 
supervision, that comes to my mind, and that will show how 
the emperor’s police construed the most insignificant events 
of private life. One evening in the month of February, 
1814, I had some guests in my drawing-room, among whom 
were the Baron Louis, the Archbishop of Malines, M. de Pradt, 
M. de Dalberg and many others. We were speaking of every 
subject, but particularly of the serious events of the time, 
which, naturally, engrossed all minds. The door opened with 
a great bustle, and without giving time to the footman to 
announce him, General Savary, minister of the general police, 


102 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


rushed into the middle of the drawing-room exclaiming : 
“Ah! I find you all in the very act of conspiring against the 
government!” Notwithstanding the serious tone of his ex- 
clamation, we saw at once that his intention was to joke, though 
trying at the same time to discover, if possible, indications 
likely to supply him with a police-report to Napoleon. He 
did not succeed, however, in disconcerting us, and the state of 
things justified only too well the anxiety which each one ex- 
pressed as to the perilous situation of the emperor and the 
consequences that might result from it. I am rather inclined to 
believe, that but for the fall of Napoleon, General Savary would 
not have failed to turn to account for his own advancement 
the boldness, and what he believed to be the cleverness, with 
which he acted on that occasion. It is decidedly a villanous 
calling, that of Minister of Police. 

What was most peculiar in the conduct of Napoleon to- 
wards me, even at the time when he suspected me most, was, 
that he was always seeking to reconcile me to him. Thus 
in the month of December, 1813, he asked me to again accept 
the portfolio of foreign affairs, which I plainly refused, under- 
standing thoroughly that we could never agree as to the sole 
manner of extricating himself from the maze into which his 
folly had driven him. Some weeks later, in the month of 
January, 1814, before his departure for the army, and when M. 
de Caulaincourt had already gone to the Congress of Chatillon,! 
the emperor worked nearly every evening with M. de la 
Besnardiére,2, who, in the absence of M. de Caulaincourt, held 
the portfolio of foreign affairs. In these conversations that were 
prolonged far into the night, he grew strangely confidential. 
For example, he repeated several times, after having read the 

1 As early as the month of November, 1813, the negotiations had begun. The 
allies then offered the frontiers of the Alps and of the Rhine. Napoleon consented 
to the assembling of a congress at Manheim. But events rushed on, and the con- 
gress only met on the 7th of February at Chatillon-sur-Seine. M. de Caulaincourt, 


Minister of Foreign Affairs, represented the emperor. This time, the allies offered 
only the limits of 1789. Congress separated March 19, without having accomplished 
anything. 

2 Jean-Baptiste de Gouey, Comte de la Besnardiére, born in 1765, entered in the 
congregation of Oratorians under the old végime. In 1796, he entered the ministry of 
Foreign Affairs as a simple clerk. He became in 1807, director of the first political 
section, and discharged those important functions until 1814. He became councillor 
of state in 1826, retired from public affairs in 1830, and died in 1843. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 103 


despatches in which the Duc de Vicence gave an account of the 
progress of the negotiations at Chatillon, “Ah! if Talleyrand 
were here, he would help me out of the difficulty.” He 
was mistaken, for I could only have helped him out of it, 
by taking upon myself, which I should probably have done, 
to accept the conditions of the enemy ; and if that day, he had 
had the slightest military success, he would have disowned my 
signature. M. de la Besnardiére related to me also another 
scene at which he was present, and which is too characteristic 
to be omitted. Murat, to remain faithful to his brother- 
in-law’s cause, demanded that Italy should be given up to 
him, as far as the right bank of the Po. He had written 
several letters to Napoleon, who did not reply, of which he 
bitterly complained, as being a proof of contempt. “ Why,” 
said Besnardiére to the emperor, “‘does your Majesty leave 
him this pretext, and what inconvenience would you find, in 
according him not exactly what he wishes, but in holding 
out some hope to him?” Napoleon then answered, “Can I 
reply to an insane man? Why does he not feel that my 
extreme preponderance alone prevented the pope from being in 
Rome? It is to the interest of all the powers that he should 
return there, and now that interest is also mine. Murat is a 
man who is ruining himself; I shall be obliged to do him a 
charity, but I shall shut him up in a good dungeon finally, in 
order that so black an ingratitude may not remain unpunished.” 
How could one so well realize the follies of others and fail to 
grasp one’s own ? 

I said above, that Napoleon alone had conspired against 
himself, and I can support the perfect exactitude of that 
fact, for it is true, that until the last minute which preceded 
his ruin, it depended only upon him to save himself. Not 
only could he, in 1812, as I have already said, consolidate his 
power for ever by a general peace, but in 1813 at Prague,' he 
could have obtained conditions if not as brilliant as in 1812, 

1 After the victories of Lutzen, of Bautzen, and of Wurtschen, Napoleon vic- 
torious had consented to an armistice that was signed at Pleiswitz on the 5th of June. 
Austria interposed as mediator, and a congress was opened at Prague on the 12th of 


July. Napoleon would cede nothing. The negotiations were broken off on the 
roth of August, and Austria joined in the coalition. 


104 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLE YRAND. 


at least still advantageous, and finally, even at the congress 
of Chatillon, in 1814, if he had ceded when necessary, he could — 
have arranged a peace beneficial to France thus driven to 
bay, which, even in the interest of his reckless ambition, 
would have offered him opportunities for recovering later 
some glory; the terror he had inspired in all the cabinets 
maintained them until the last moment in their resolution to 
treat with him. This claims certain developments, and I will 
state here some facts which are perfectly known to me, and 
which will prove the exactitude of what I advance. We must 
first transport ourselves to the frontier of the Pyrenees, where 
the French army had sustained so bravely an unequal struggle 
against the combined English, Spanish and Portuguese troops. 
We shall return afterwards to the plains of Champagne. 

San Sebastian had been taken at the end of August, 1813, 
and Pampeluna had just surrendered towards the end of 
October, when the Duke of Wellington, who saw Spain 
rid of her enemies on that side, and was informed of the 
battle of Leipzig and of the important results that followed it, 
decided to carry the war into French territory, in order to con- 
tribute as much as possible to the success of the general cause 
of Europe; that of Spain was only secondary. He crossed 
the Bidassoa towards the middle of November, notwithstanding 
the sharp resistance of the French army commanded by Marshal 
Soult, and established his head-quarters on the first day at 
Saint Pé, a little village on the frontier. 

The weather was fearful ; the rain fell in torrents, which forced 
the Anglo-Portuguese army to halt and its head-quarters to 
remain at St. Pé. It so happened that there was in the 
village a curé, full of intelligence and activity, who was in 
every way devoted to the Bourbons and to the royal cause, 
He had emigrated to Spain at the beginning of the Revolu- 
tion, and returned to France only after the Concordat. His 
name was Abbé Juda; he was very popular among the Basques, 
and much esteemed among the Spaniards, and as the bad 
weather did not permit the Duke of Wellington to go out, 
weariness and leisure caused him to seek the society of the 
curé, at whose house he was residing. 


THE (FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 105 


The conversation naturally turned on the state of France 
and on the spirit that reigned there. The curé did not hesitate 
to affirm that they were tired of the war to which they could 
see no termination, that they were especially very much annoyed 
at the conscription, and that people complained very much of the 
increasing burden of the taxes; finally, that they desired a change 
whatever it might be, just as an invalid desires to change his 
position in bed, with the hope of obtaining relief. “The colossus 
has feet of clay,” said the Abbé Juda. “ Attack it vigorously 
and with resolution and you will see it fall to pieces more easily 
than you think.” 

Those conversations convinced the Duke of Wellington of 
the necessity of attacking France simultaneously on all her 
frontiers, if it were wished to obtain from the head of the 
government a durable and honourable peace, and he suggested 
that plan to his own government. 

There was no question of the Bourbons, for it was easily 
seen that they were forgotten and entirely unknown to the new 
generation. However, it was thought advisable to make a trial 
of the effect that would be produced by the sudden appearance of 
one of those princes on any portion whatever of French territory, 
and to ascertain what would be the result. That was the pretext 
for the arrival of the Duc d’Angouléme at the head-quarters of 
Saint-Jean-de-Luz, about the beginning of January, 1814. 

The Duc d’Angouléme? was very well received by the 
general-in-chief, which was quite natural ; by the mayor of the 
village of Saint-Jean, and by the clergy ; but his presence had no 
other effect upon the people than to rouse their curiosity. They 
ran in his path when he went to church, without testifying any 
special sentiment, nor giving any proof of approbation or dis- 
approbation. If there were any offers of service, or protestations 
of fidelity they remained quite secret and had not the least 
outward effect. . 

Time was thus expected to bring the only solution to the 
situation, when towards the middle of January, Sir Henry 


1 Louis-Antoine de Bourbon, Duc d’Angouléme, eldest son of the Comte 
d’ Artois (1775-1844). He had married in 1799 the Princess Marie-Thérese, 
daughter of Louis XVI. 


106 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


Bunbury ! coming from London, landed at Saint-Jean-de-Luz. 
He was Under Secretary to the War Office and, besides other 
important messages, was instructed to inform the Duke of 
Wellington of the acceptance by England of the basis proposed 
at Frankfort by the allied sovereigns to settle the general 
peace, and of the necessity of taking every precaution to prevent 
that, under English protection, the people should be incited to 
rebellion against the government with which they were negotiat- 
ing. The English government, in accordance with very honour- 
able principles, did not wish to countenance an uprising of 
people, whom at the conclusion of the peace they would have 
been obliged to leave unprotected to the resentment of Napoleon’s 
government, and they insisted so much on this point that the 
situation of the Duc d’Angouléme at head-quarters became very 
unpleasant for him as well as embarrassing for the general-in- 
chief. In consequence, he was no longer invited to take part in 
the operations that were about to be undertaken, as was at first 
intended ; and when, in the beginning of February, it was con- 
templated to cross the Adour in order to attack the French 
army and lay siege to Bayonne, the Duc d’Angouléme was left 
at Saint-Jean-de-Luz, far from the scene of operations. 

Just at the moment of crossing, different persons from Bor- 
deaux presented themselves to the general-in-chief, among 
them being M. de la Rochejacquelein,? who greatly insisted on 
the necessity of making a movement in favour of the Bourbons, 
and laid special stress on the good disposition of the town of 
Bordeaux. They saw the prince at Saint-Jean-de-Luz, and 
the Duke of Wellington, who was then in the neighbourhood 
of Saint-Palais, several times. They tried to induce him to 
favour and foster this movement, but he was immovable in his 


* Sir Henry Edward Bunbury, born in 1778, lieutenant-general in the English 
army. In 1809 he became Under Secretary of State in the War department. In 1815, 
he was charged, with Admiral Keith, to notify to the Emperor Napoleon his exile at 
St. Helena. He entered the House of Commons in 1830, and refused a short time after, 
the post of Secretary of War. He died in 1860. 

* Louis du Vergier, Marquis de la Rochejacquelein, brother of the celebrated 
Vendean General, killed in 1794. He was born in 1777, followed his father in his 
emigration and returned to France in 1801. In 1814 he came to meet the Duc d’An- 
gouléme at Saint-Jean-de-Luz, and was, a short time after, appointed brigadier- 
general by Louis XVIII. During the Hundred Days, he sought to raise Vendée, 
but was killed on the 4th of June in the fight of Pont-de-Mathes. He had married 
the widow of the Marquis de Lescure. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 107 


refusal, according to the instructions he had just received from 
his government. 

On the 27th of February the French lost the battle of Orthez, 
which left open all the country of Landes as far as Bordeaux, 
and the Duke of Wellington, who desired to have a communi- 
cation more easy, open, and direct with his country, decided to 
occupy that town with troops, and sent thither the 7th division 
of his army, under the command of Lord Dalhousie. 

The entreaties and the motions in favour of a Bourbon rising 
became more pressing than ever, and many other people came 
from Bordeaux, to urge that movement on the occasion of the 
military occupation of the town. 

The Duke of Wellington did not believe it right to oppose it ; 
but wishing to enlighten the people of Bordeaux and to inform 
them of the state of affairs between his government and those of 
his allies, he appointed General Beresford,! general marshal of 
the Portuguese troops, and second in command of the army, 
to fulfil that task. He gave him the most positive instruc- 
tions to declare before entering the town, and after the occu- 
pation, “that they treated for peace with the Emperor Napoleon ; 
that it was now probably signed, and that as soon as it became 
known, the allied army would retire from the country without 
being able to lend assistance to any one. It was then for the 
inhabitants of Bordeaux to decide themselves if they wished to 
run the risk of their enterprise.” Letters couched in similar 
terms were sent to both governments of the Peninsula, and the 
night before entering Bordeaux, Marshal Beresford declared what 
has just been read to the mayor, M. Lynch,? who, with several 
other people, had come to meet the Duc d’Angouléme, the 
latter having followed the head-quarters of Lord Beresford. 

? William Carr, Viscount Beresford, descended from an Irish family, was born in 
1768. He entered the army and fought in the campaigns of 1793 and 1794, against 
France. In 1795 he went to the West Indies, and afterwards to India (1797); to 
Egypt (1800), to the Cape (1803). In 1806 he attacked Buenos Ayres, then a Spanish 
colony, but was beaten and made prisoner. On his return to England he com- 
manded an expedition against Madeira, landed in Portugal, in 1808, and was ap- 
pointed Governor of Lisbon. He then became major-general and general-in-chief 
of the Portuguese troops. In that capacity he made the campaign of Spain until 
1814. After the peace, he entered the House of Lords. He retired from public life 
in 1830, and died in 1854. 


2 Jean-Baptiste Comte Lynch was born at Bordeaux in 1749. His family, of Irish 
origin, had emigrated after the Revolution of 1688 and established itself in that town. 


108 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


That declaration spread discouragement among the greater 
portion of those who were in the plot, and to neutralize the bad 
effect that it might produce on the public, M. Lynch ventured 
to say in a proclamation that the rising was taking place with 
the agreement of the English army, which gave rise to a very 
energetic contradiction from the Duke of Wellington, who 
exacted a retractation and who obtained it finally, notwithstand- 
ing the steps taken by M, Ravez,! sent by the Duc d’Angouléme 
to the duke’s head-quarters to give explanations. These did not 
satisfy Wellington, for he insisted upon the retractation of M. 
Lynch’s expressions, and it was made. 

The rest of the month of March passed without any decisive 
event. The French still retreated before the English army, and, 
in the end, they were obliged to cross the Garonne in the begin- 
ning of April, in order to take up a stronger position before 
the city of Toulouse, on the Languedoc canal. 

On April 6, the English head-quarters were at Grenade, on 
the left bank of the Garonne, and the same day, the Duke of 
Wellington received an official letter from Lord Bathurst, 
Secretary of War, which announced, that “at the reception 
of his letter, peace would probably be made with the Em- 
peror Napoleon, but that he should still continue his military 
operations until he received the official notification of peace 
from the English plenipotentiaries who were at Chatillon.” 


Lynch was received in 1771 as counsellor at the par/ement of Bordeaux. He was a 
long time imprisoned under the Reign of Terror. Under the Empire, he became General 
Councillor of Gironde, and Mayor of Bordeaux in 1808. In 1814, he called for 
English aid and proclaimed the restoration of the Bourbons, as early as the 12th of 
March. In 1815, he endeavoured, with the Duchesse d’Angouléme to organize the 
resistance, but he failed and fled to England. At the second restoration, he was 
created peer of France. He died in 1835. 

1 Simon Ravez, born in 1770, was in 1791 barrister at Lyons. He took an active 
part in the revolt of that town against the Convention, and was afterwards able to 
take refuge at Bordeaux, after the defeat of Lyons. He declined every public function 
under the Empire, and in 1814 was one of the first to proclaim the restoration of the 
Bourbons. In 1816, he was elected deputy of Gironde, and became in 1819, president 
of the House. In 1817, he was appointed Under-Secretary of State to the Minister 
of Justice. He retired in 1840. In 1848, he was chosen as deputy to the legislative 
assembly, but died in 1849. 

* Lord Henry, third Earl Bathurst, born May 22, 1762; died July 26, 1834. 
Famous for his hatred towards Napoleon and France, and for his entire Liberal 
opinions. In 1815, he insisted in Parliament on the detention of Napoleon, and 
appointed Sir Hudson Lowe his gaoler at St. Helena. In 1812, he was appointed 
Colonial Secretary in Lord Liverpool’s Cabinet, and resigned his post, with Lord 


Wellington and Peel, on the accession of Canning’s Liberal Cabinet in 1827.— 
( Zranslator. ) 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 109 


In consequence, the Garonne was crossed on the 8th of 
April, and on the 1oth was fought the battle of Toulouse, without 
either party knowing what was going on in Paris, beyond the 
entrance of the allies into the capital, the news of which the 
Toulouse authorities had had posted at the crossings. 

After the battle, the French evacuated the town during the 
night from the 11th to the 12th, and so persuaded was the Duke 
of Wellington of the signing of the peace with Napoleon, that 
when about ten o’clock in the morning at the moment of 
mounting his horse to enter the city on the 12th, people came to 
communicate to him officially that there had been a proclama- 
tion in favour of the Bourbons, and that they had hoisted the 
white flag at the Capztole, after having thrown down the bust 
of Napoleon, he could not conceal his disapprobation, nor his 
desire to have been consulted by the town authorities before 
they had taken such a step. He then repeated what he 
had said to the Bordeaux people. He employed the same 
language before the municipality of Toulouse, when after 
having been received by the national guard with the Bourbon 
colours, he alighted from his horse at the Capztole. The 
duke’s expressions were clear and precise, and admitted of 
no misinterpretation. 

But, at about three o’clock in the afternoon, the English 
Colonel Frederick Ponsonby, arrived from Bordeaux, preceding 
M. de Saint-Simon and Colonel H. Cook, instructed by the 
provisory government to inform the two armies of the events 
of Paris: the emperor’s abdication, and the restoration of the 
Bourbons, 

The provisory government was then accused of having 
delayed acquainting the armies with those important events, and 
of having thus neglected to prevent the bloodshed resulting from 
the battle of Toulouse. But this accusation was groundless, for 
the government lost no time in despatching M. de Saint-Simon 
and Colonel H. Cook, with instructions to acquaint the two 
armies with the abdication of the Emperor and the restoration of 
the Bourbons, and, certainly on examining the dates of their 
instructions, it is obvious that they would have arrived in time 
to save the lives of many a poor wretch, if, after being arrested 


IIo THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLE VRAND. 


at Orleans, and taken to Blois, where was the Empress Marie 
Louise, they had been sent to their destination, instead of being 
directed to Bordeaux, where the Duc d’Angouléme was at that 
time. 

When one examines the dates of those past events, and 
sees that one whole month after the declaration of the town 
of Bordeaux, not only did Wellington continue to treat for 
peace with Napoleon, but that he believed that a treaty 
had been made and signed with the emperor, until after the 
letter from Lord Bathurst was received at Grenade, one 
may well appreciate the importance of that declaration, and 
the little influence it would have had upon the overthrow of 
the imperial government and on the restoration of the Bourbons, 
had not events at Paris decided the question otherwise. 

The result of all those incontestable facts is, that the 
English government remained convinced until the last moment 
that peace had been signed at Chatillon with Napoleon, which, it 
may be here said, diminishes somewhat the credit which, they 
say, Louis XVIII. ascribed to the Prince Regent of England, 
when he affirmed that it was to him, after God, that he was 
indebted for the recovery of his throne. 

Let us return now to the events that were taking place at 
Paris and in Champagne; and here it is as well to speak of 
M. de Vitrolles’ mission to the head-quarters of the allied 
sovereigns. The results of that mission will serve to elucidate 
the main point of the question of which I treat, and as to the 
mission itself, I will say what truth there is in the part that 
has been ascribed to me in it. 

Thus, as I have already said, no conspiracy was carried on 
at Paris against the emperor ; but there reigned there a general 
and very marked anxiety as to the consequences that his 
reckless conduct and his resolution not to conclude peace were 
likely to produce. It became of the highest importance to 
know the part which the united powers would take, when 
the day, clearly inevitable for those who watched the state of 
things, came, when they would overthrow the power of Napoleon. 
Would they continue to treat with him? Would another 
government be imposed on France, or, by leaving her at liberty 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 111. 


to choose herself, would they deliver her up to an anarchy of 
which it was impossible to calculate the results? 

I was informed of some conversations held by the Czar 
Alexander with the Grand Duchess Stephanie of Baden; as also 
of the insinuations made by that sovereign regarding Eugene 
de Beauharnais, and of the pretensions of Bernadotte; M. 
Fouché was intriguing with Queen Caroline, Murat’s wife. 
Finally, the English newspapers informed me that the Duc 
d’Angouléme was at the head-quarters of Lord Wellington, 
and that the Comte d’Artois had taken up a position in Switzer- 
land near the frontier of France. There existed there so many 
diverging elements that it was impossible to arrive at a reason- 
able notion, so long as the real intentions of the allied powers 
should not be known, seeing that those powers, definitely speak- 
ing, would be the masters of the situation if they triumphed over 
Napoleon. It was then their opinion that must be known. It 
was necessary for that that some reliable person should be 
sent to their head-quarters. The Baron de Vitrolles was chosen 
for that delicate and difficult mission. I did not know him, 
but he was acquainted with M. Mollien and M. d’Hauterive.' 
He was spoken of to me as a distinguished, energetic man, a 
royalist at heart, but having, however, recognized the necessity 
of establishing in France a constitutional monarchy. I even 
believe I remember that he wrote a pamphlet? to that effect, 
which he published after the restoration of the Bourbons. 

The instructions given to M. de Vitrolles bore only on these 
two points. Supposing (which is inevitable) that Napoleon suc- 
cumbed in the struggle, what course would the allied cabinets 
take? Would they still treat with the emperor? or would they 
leave France free to choose another government ? 

M. de Vitrolles must have employed a very long and indirect 

1 Alexander-Maurice Blanc, Comte d’Hauterive, was born in 1754, entered the 
diplomatic service as secretary to M. de Choiseul-Gouffier at Constantinople. In 1792, 
he was chosen consul to the United States, but was dismissed in the following year. 
He returned to France after Fructidor 18, and was appointed chef de division at the 
ministry of Foreign Affairs. After the 18th of Brumaire he entered the council of state. 
On several occasions, he was ad interim Minister of Foreign Affairs. He remained 
in office under the Restoration and died in 1830. 

2 Du Ministére dans le Gouvernement Représentatif. (The Part of Ministries in 


Representative Governments.) By a Member of the Chamber of Deputies (Paris, 
Dentu, 1815.)—M. de Vitrolles was then deputy of the Lower Alps. 


112 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


route to reach the head-quarters of the allies, where he arrived 
only on March 10, 1814. It was precisely the day fixed when 
Napoleon should have given a definite reply as to the acceptance 
or the non-acceptance of the wltzmatum of the allied powers. 
That reply having been found dilatory and unsatisfactory, the 
plenipotentiaries wished to break off, but M. de Caulaincourt, by 
his personal influence, obtained a new delay until March 15. 
I make this remark to show that M. de Vitrolles’ mission had 
no influence whatever on the decision of the allied governments,” 


1 The allies offered the frontiers of 1790. Napoleon, in his counter-project, sub- 
mitted March 15 by M. de Caulaincourt, insisted on the Alps and the Rhine as limits. 
Besides, he claimed some sovereignty in Italy for Prince Beauharnais, and one for 
the Princess Elisa. 

* We have thought it advisable to add further explanations at this important 
point of the memoirs of M. de Talleyrand, and we have asked Count von Nesselrode, 
to-day chancellor of the Russian Empire, to communicate to us such information as 
he could possibly give us regarding it. Here are those he has been good enough to 

ive us :— 

an During the campaign of 1814, and the second entrance that the troops were about 
to make into the town of Troyes, the sovereigns established their head-quarters in that 
town. I was there, when I saw a gentleman who was completely unknown to me, 
and who was announced under the name of M. de St. Georges, enter my house. 
Then this gentleman made himself very soon known as the Baron de Vitrolles, 
declaring that he had been sent from Paris by several personages to deliver certain 
important communications to the allied sovereigns: he mentioned among those 
personages MM. de Talleyrand and de Dalberg. To secure my confidence, as 
it was to me he had been particularly sent, he drew from his pocket a sheet of white 
paper, and asked for a light. By the aid of the light I was able to recognize the 
writing of one of my friends and relatives—M. de —— who wyote as follows: ‘ Receive 
the person whom I send to you, with every confidence, listen to him and be grateful 
tome. It is time to be more explicit. You are walking on crutches. Make use of 
your legs and be willing to do what you can.’ Then M. de Vitrolles entered into all 
the details on the situation of Napoleon, and on the lassitude the French nation felt 
under his yoke, and on the need that it had of guarantees against his despotism. The 
disposition of the allied sovereigns was not such that immediate action could be taken 
on these communications, and M. de Vitrolles was obliged to leave with only vague 
promises. 

‘* Another incident, more serious, followed a short time after. Towards the end 
of March, 1814, at the time of the battle of Arcis-sur-Aube (March 21 and 22), I 
attended a conference that was held at Bar-sur-Aube, between the ministers of the 
allied sovereigns. After the conference, the chancellor Von Hardenberg wished me 
to stay to dinner. I excused myself, being forced to join the Czar Alexander, and 
to report to him the deliberations that had just been held. I thus was fortunate enough 
to meet the Czar at Arcis, whilst the other ministers and the Emperor of Austria 
were severed from the army by Napoleon’s move on St. Dizier, and forced to direct 
themselves towards Dijon. The same evening, the Russian head-quarters were 
transferred to the chateau of Dampierre. It was reached very late. The head-quarters 
of the Czar Alexander were united with those of the Prince of Schwarzenberg. I 
lodged in an attic. I was scarcely asleep when an aide-de-camp to Prince Wolkonsky 
came to wake me and to invite me to go down to Prince Schwarzenberg’s rooms to 
aid him in unravelling a large quantity of letters from the authorities in Paris to the 
Emperor Napoleon, intercepted from a messenger who had been sent to him. 

“*T began at once, and I found letters and reports written by the Empress Marie 
Louise, by the ministers, and among others, by the minister of police, Savary, in 
which they informed Napoleon that there no Ionger remained any means of resistance 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 113 


who, until March 15, 1814, persevered in the determination to 
treat with the emperor, and it was the latter’s wilfulness alone 
that prevented the negotiations from being successful. On 
March 15, they again offered him the limits of France in 1789, 
and the treaty of Chaumont? of March 1, 1814, establishes in a 
most irrefragable manner, that, at that date, the allied powers 
did not think of any other sovereign for France than Napoleon. 

M. de Vitrolles first saw at Troyes Counts Nesselrode and 
Stadion.2, He explained to them the state of mind reigning at 
Paris and in those parts of France not yet invaded : he declared 
to them that several persons whom he named desired a change 
and legislative guarantees against the violence and the character 
of the emperor, and that it had become urgent to take a decision 
to prevent France from falling into anarchy. 

Count von Stadion introduced him to Prince Metternich, who, 
after listening, replied that he “ would with sincerity inform him 
of the full mind of the powers; that they recognized that 
Napoleon was a man with whom it was impossible to continue 
to treat ; that the day when he had reverses he appeared to 
yield everything; but that as soon as he obtained a slight 
success, he again assumed pretensions as exaggerated as inad- 
missible. They were then agreed to establish in France another 
sovereign, and so to regulate things, that Austria, Russia and 
and that public opinion was much roused against him, and that it would be very 
nearly impossible to defend Paris if the enemy approached. Finally, the success of 


the Duke of Wellington on the frontier of the Pyrenees was announced, and the 
arrival of the Duc d’Angouléme at Bordeaux. 

‘*T immediately reported this important news to the Czar Alexander. It brought 
about the project of uniting the grand army with that of Bliicher and to march to 
Paris ; whilst concealing this plan by a corps of six thousand horse that would follow 
Napoleon near St. Dizier. The Czar Alexander communicated this project to the 
King of Prussia, with whom he united on the heights before Vitry-le-Frangais, and it 
is there that it was decided to march straight on to Paris.” —(JZ. de Bacourt.) 

1 The treaty of Chaumont, signed by all the allied powers, prolonged their alliance 
for a period of twenty years, and declared that peace should not be signed with 
Napoleon, unless he accepted the ultimatum proposed at the Congress of Chatillon. 

2 Johan-Philip-Joseph-Karl, Count von Stadion, born in 1763, was an Austrian 
statesman. As early as 1787, he was ambassador at Stockholm, and at London in 
1790. He resigned in 1792, and resumed office only in 1804. He was then sent as 
ambassador to Saint-Petersburg, and greatly contributed to the third coalition. After 
the peace of .Presburg, he was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs, but was com- 
pelled to retire after the campaign of 1809. Since 1812, he played a leading part in 
the various diplomatic incidents that occurred until the downfall of Napoleon. He 
was present at the treaty of Toplitz, at the conferences of Frankfort, at the Congress 
of Chatillon, and signed the treaty of Paris in 1814. In 1815, he was appointed 
Minister of Finances, and died at Baden in 1824. 


VOL. II. I 


114 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


France should be, on the Continent, countries of equal power, 
and to let Prussia remain a power half as strong as any of 
the others. That regarding the new Sovereign to be established 
in France, it was not possible to think of the Bourbons, because 
of the personal character of the princes of that family.” 

Such was, according to M. de Vitrolles, the opinion expressed 
by Prince Metternich. 

M. de Vitrolles, who was devoted to the Bourbons, and whom 
that reply satisfied but little, requested Count Nesselrode to 
manage an interview for him with the Czar Alexander, and 
obtained it. 

The Czar Alexander repeated about the same things as the 
ministers, but he added, on the question of the choice of a 
Sovereign for France, that he had thought first to establish 
Bernadotte, and then Eugéne Beauharnais, but that different 
motives were opposed to it. That, inany way, the intention was 
especially to consult the wishes of the French themselves, and 
that, if they wished to constitute a republic, they would not be 
opposed. The Czar dwelt still more than the ministers on the 
impossibility of thinking of the Bourbons. 

M. de Vitrolles also saw the Emperor of Austria, who told 
him that he was going to Dijon, that the Czar of Russia and the 
King of Prussia would act as circumstances indicated at Paris, 
and that he would come there later. 

M. de Vitrolles, instead of returning to Paris, joined the 
Comte d’Artois, who had come to France from Switzerland, 
and who was now at Nancy. He saw the prince there, March 23, 
and did not write to Paris, where he did not arrive till after the 
entrance of the allies. Later, he returned to the Comte 
d’Artois at Nancy, with powers from the provisory government 
to invite the Prince to come to Paris. 

What was the Emperor Napoleon doing all this time ? 

After having been attacked by a considerable force in front 
of Arcis, March 20, and having acquired the certainty that it 
was the grand army of the allies, that the Czar Alexander com- 
manded in person, the Emperor Napoleon passed on the right 


: 1 See Appendix I., at the end of Part VII. It contains the account of M. de 
Witrolles’ mission by the Duc de Dalberg. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 115 


bank of the Aube, and set out, by way of Somme-Puis and 
Olconte, or St. Dizier, where he arrived March 23. From St. 
Dizier, he decided to march to the rear of the enemy, and went 
to spend the night at Doulevent. At the time of resuming 
this plan, he received news (I believe from Marshal Macdonald), 
that a numerous force, in fact, a whole army, was following his 
rear-guard. In consequence of that report, the emperor delayed 
his march, spent the 25th at Doulevent, and Marshal Macdonald, 
having insisted on the exactitude of the information that he had 
sent, and which the emperor had doubted, the latter decided to 
present himself with all his forces at St. Dizier, but instead of 
the army of which mention had been made to him, he found only 
acorps of cavalry commanded by General Wintzingerode,’ who, 
on arriving at St. Dizier, separated, and retired in three different 
directions, Bar, Joinville, and Vitry. The main body took the 
last route. 

The Emperor Napoleon held a kind of council to find out 
if they should follow them ; but as they feared to experience a 
strong resistance at Vitry, and to find perhaps the bridge on the 
Marne cut, it was decided that they should set off again to- 
wards Doulevent, where they arrived on the 28th, having spent 
a day at St. Dizier. It was at Doulevent that the Emperor 
Napoleon obtained the certainty of the enemy’s march to Paris, 
and that he decided to hasten there. He arrived on the 29th 
at Troyes; on the 30th at Fromenteau, and on the 3Ist at 
Fontainebleau. 

The emperor had informed the Empress Marie Louise of 
his project of coming up on the rear of the armies of the allies, 
in order to force them to retreat. This letter was written at 
Arcis, and the pomp with which the messenger who took it 


proceeded to his destination, was noticed by the enemy, and »_ 


roused their suspicion of the movement on foot, which 
determined them probably to march upon Paris. 


1 Ferdinand, Baron von Wintzingerode, born in 1770, at Bodenstein (Wurtem- 
berg), entered at first the service of the Landgrave of Hesse, and afterwards that of 
the Emperor of Germany. In 1797, he went to Russia, where he obtained the grade 
of major, became aide-de-camp to Alexander in 1802, and ambassador at Berlin in 
1805. He fought in the campaigns of 1805, 1806 and 1807. He was at Essling in 
1809, where he was seriously wounded. He was then appointed field-marshal. He 
took an active share in the campaigns of 1812, 1813, and 1814, and distinguished 
himself at the head of the Russian cavalry. He died in 1818. 


2 


116 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


All the facts I have just related without heeding the order 
in which I stated them, establish, it seems to me, by,the clearest 
and most complete evidence, the three following points :— 

(1) That until March 15, 1814, the united powers were 
firmly decided to treat with Napoleon, and, consequently, to 
conclude with him a treaty on the basis of the maintenance of 
his government. 

(2) That it is Napoleon alone, who, by his obstinacy, and be- 
cause of the vain hopes in which he indulged, brought upon 
himself his own ruin, and exposed France to the misfortune of 
having to treat, for her existence and safety, with an enemy 
everywhere victorious and triumphant. 

(3) Finally, that the allied sovereigns on entering Paris, had 
not yet taken any decision as to the choice of government that 
they should impose on France, or that they should allow her 
to adopt. 

Before continuing this rapid narrative of the facts that I 
relate briefly and only with the object I have in view, I wish 
to explain the reasons that decided me to adopt at the time of 
the Restoration the system which I then followed ; that will be 
the best explanation of the influence that I was able to 
exercise at that time, as it is, in my eyes, its best justification. 

I have already said that in these last days of the Empire, 
I had often asked myself the question, what form of government 
ought France to adopt after the catastrophe that would result 
from the fall of Napoleon ? 

To dream of preserving the family a had pushed him 
into the abyss, was to increase the depths of his misfortune, 
by adding humiliation to it. Besides, Austria, who alone 
could have seen without displeasure the regency of the 
Empress Marie Louise, had only a feeble voice in the council 
of the allies.- She had come the last among the great powers 
who had undertaken to avenge the rights of Europe, and 
Europe certainly had not made surprising efforts to place the 
throne of France at the disposition of the court of Vienna. 

Russia, in her plans, could think of Bernadotte, to rid herself 
of a troublesome neighbour in Sweden ; but, Bernadotte was only 
a new phase of the revolution. Eugéne de Beauharnais would 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 117 


perhaps have been elected by the army, but the army was 
beaten. 

The Duc d’Orléans had only a few individuals in his favour. 
His father had, for some, the wrong of having tarnished the 
word equality ; for others, the Duc d’Orléans was but an 
usurper, of a better family than Bonaparte. 

Nevertheless, it became more pressing every hour to prepare 
a government that could be rapidly substituted for the one 
that was falling to pieces. One day’s hesitation might cause 
the ideas of division, and of subjection, that secretly threatened 
our unhappy country, to break forth. No intrigue could now 
be carried on, all would have been insufficient. What was 
necessary, was to find just what France wanted, and what 
would be best for Europe? 

France, in the midst of the horror of an invasion, wished to 
be free and respected. This was equivalent to wishing for 
the return of the House of Bourbon in the order prescribed 
by legitimacy. Europe, still anxious, in the midst of France, 
wished her to disarm, and to resume her former limits, so that 
peace should no longer need to be constantly guarded. She re- 
quired for that guarantees: this was also to wish for the return 
of the House of Bourbon. 

Thus the requirements of France and of Europe once 
recognized, everything would concur to render the restoration of 
the Bourbons easy, for the reconciliation could thus be sincere. 

The House of Bourbon alone could veil, in the eyes of the 
French nation, so jealous of her military glory, the impression of 

‘the reverses which had just befallen her flag. 

The House of Bourbon, alone, could ina moment, and without 
danger to Europe, dismiss the foreign armies that covered her soil. 

The House of Bourbon alone could nobly aid France to again 
take possession of the secure frontiers indicated by policy and 
by nature. With the House of Bourbon, France would cease 
to be gigantic, but would become great. Relieved from the 
weight of her conquests, the House of Bourbon alone, could 
replace her in the lofty position that she should occupy in the 
social system. It alone could avert that vengeance that twenty 
years of violence had heaped up against her. 


118 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Every road was open to the Bourbons to reach a throne founded 
on a free constitution. After having tried all manner of organiz- 
ations, and submitted to the most arbitrary of them, France 
could find rest only in a constitutional monarchy. The monarchy 
with the Bourbons, offered complete legitimacy, for even the 
most innovating minds ; for it combined family legitimacy to 
that given by institutions, and it was that that France desired. 

Strange to say, when the dangers of the community began to 
vanish, it was not against the doctrines of usurpation, but only 
against him who had so happily and so long made use of them, 
that people inveighed, as if peril had come from him alone. 

Usurpation, triumphant in France, had not then made on 
Europe as great an impression as she should have produced. 
It was more the effect, than the cause, that struck people, as 
though the one were independent of the other ; France, especially, 
had fallen into no less serious errors. On seeing under Napoleon 
the country strong and peaceful, enjoying a sort of prosperity, 
people thought that it little mattered to a nation on what rights 
the government that ruled it was based. A little more judgment 
would have shown that that strength was but precarious, that 
that tranquillity did not rest on any solid basis, and that that 
prosperity being, after all, the fruit of the devastation of other 
countries, did not present any element of duration. 

What force, in fact, is that which succumbs to the first 
reverses! Spain, invaded by valiant and numerous armies, 
before even knowing that she would have a war to face; Spain, 
without troops, without money, languishing, weakened by the 
long and disastrous reign of an unworthy favourite under an 
incapable king; Spain, in short, deprived by treason of her 
government, struggled for six years, with a gigantic power, and 
came out victorious from the contest. France, on the contrary, 
having, under Napoleon, reached, in appearance, the highest 
degree of strength and power, broke down after three months’ 
invasion. And if her king, an exile for twenty-five years, for- 
gotten, almost unknown, had not come to endow her with a 
mysterious force and to impart cohesion to her aébris, ready to 
be dispersed, perhaps to-day she would be erased from the list 
of independent nations. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 119 


She was peaceful, it is true, under Napoleon, but her tran- 
quillity she owed to the firm hand which oppressed all, and 
threatened to crush all that would have stirred ; and that hand 
could not, without danger, have released its grasp even for 
an instant. Moreover, how is one to believe that this tran- 
quillity could have survived him, whose energy was not too 
much to maintain it? Master of France by the right of the 
strongest, could not his generals after him pretend to possess 
her by the same right ? The example given by him, taught that 
cleverness, or chance, were sufficient to secure power. How 
many would not have wished to tempt fortune, and run the 
chances of so brilliant a prospect? France would have had 
perhaps as many emperors as armies; and, destroyed by her 
own hands, she would have perished in the convulsions of 
civil wars. 

Had even her apparent and superficial prosperity taken the 
deepest root, it would have been, like her strength and tranquil- 
lity, limited to the term of a man’s life—a term short indeed, 
and one which might be reached any day. 

Thus, nothing is more fatal than usurpation, for nations 
which rebellion, or conquest, have caused to fall under the yoke 
of an usurper as well as for neighbouring nations. To the first, 
it only offers a future with no end of troubles, revolutions, and 
internal calamities; and it constantly threatens the others, to 
oppress and crush them in turn. It is for all an instrument 
of destruction and death. 

The first need of Europe, her greatest interest, was then to 
banish the doctrines of usurpation, and to revive the principle of 
legitimacy, the only remedy for all the evils which had over- 
whelmed her, and the only one which could prevent a relapse 
into them. 

This principle, as may be seen, is not, as thoughtless men 
suppose, or as the abettors of revolutions would have us 
believe, solely a means of preservation of the power of 
kings, and the safety of their persons; it is especially a 
necessary element of the tranquillity and happiness of nations, 
the most solid, or rather, the only guarantee of their strength 
and duration. The legitimacy of kings, or, to say better, 


a THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


of governments, is the safeguard of nations. That is the 
reason why it is sacred. 

I speak of the legitimacy of governments in general, whatso- 
ever be their form, and not only of those of kings, because 
it applies to all governments. A lawful government, be it 
monarchical or republican, hereditary or elective, aristocratic or 
democratic, is always one whose existence, form, and mode 
of action, have been consolidated and consecrated by a long 
succession of years, and I should say almost, by a secular pre- 
scription. The legitimacy of the sovereign power results from the 
ancient status of possession, just as, for private individuals, 
does the right of property. 

But according to the kind of government, the violation of ee 
principle of legitimacy may, in some respects, have various 
effects. In an hereditary monarchy, this right is indissolubly 
linked to the person of the members of the reigning family 
in the established order of succession. It can only die out by the 
death of allits members, who, themselves, or their descendants, 
could have been called to the crown by virtue of that order of 
succession. That is why Machiaveli says in his book of The 
Prince, that the usurper could not firmly establish his power, if 
he did not take the life of all the members of the family which 
reigned legitimately. Therefore, this is why the Revolution 
would have the blood of all the Bourbons. But, in a republic, 
where the sovereign power exists only in a collective and moral 
person, as soon as usurpation, by destroying the institutions that 
gave it existence, destroy, it also, the political body is dissolved, 
the state is struck to death. There no longer exists any legiti- 
mate right ; because there no longer exists any one to whom this 
right belongs. 

Thus, though the principle of legitimacy be not less vio- 
lated by the overthrow of a republican government than by 
the usurpation of a crown, it does not require that the former be 
restored, whereas it does require that the crown be returned to 
him to whom it belongs. Thus is manifested the excellency of 
the monarchical government, which, more than any other, 
guarantees the preservation and the perpetuity of states. 

Thosé were the ideas and the reflections which determined 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 121 


the resolution I adopted, to insist on the restoration of the House 
of Bourbon, if the Emperor Napoleon made himself impossible, 
and if I could exercise some influence on the final decision that 
would be taken. 

I do not pretend that I was alone in having these ideas, I can 
even cite an authority who shared them with me, it is Napoleon 
himself. In the interview held with M. de la Besnardiére, and 
of which I speak above, he told him the day he learned of the 
allies having entered Champagne, “ If they reach Paris, they will 
bring you the Bourbons, and you will not be able to help your- 
selves.” 

“ But,” replied Besnardiere, “ they are not there yet.” 

“ Ah,” replied he, “that is my business to prevent them, and 
I certainly hope to do so.” 

Another day, having talked a long time of the impossibility of 
making peace on the basis of the old limits of France, “a kind 
of peace,” he said, “that the Bourbons alone could make,” he said 
that he would sooner abdicate ; that he would readily re-enter 
private life, that he had very few needs, that five francs a day 
would be sufficient, that his only passion had been to make the 
French the greatest people on earth, that being obliged to re- 
nounce that, nothing remained for him, and he concluded with 
these words, “ If no one will fight, I cannot carry on a war alone ; 
if the nation wants peace on the basis of the former limits, I 
shall say to it, ‘Seek another ruler, I am too great for you!’” 

Being thus obliged to recognize the necessity of the return of 
the Bourbons, he reconciled his vanity with the misfortunes he 
had brought upon his country. rd 

But let us return to facts. 

I have not the intention of relating the history of the Restora- 
tion of 1814, which will be written some day by people more 
clever than myself. It will be sufficient to recall here a few 
of the principal events of that epoch. 

While Napoleon followed up the rear of the chief army of the 
allies, the latter had advanced near Paris, where it arrived the 30th 
of March. After a lively struggle which lasted all the day of 
the 30th, and that was bravely sustained by Marshals Marmont 
and Mortier, the latter were obliged to capitulate during the 


122 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


night of the 30th to the 31st, as they had been authorized to do 
by Joseph Bonaparte, who had retired to Blois with the empress 
and the King of Rome.' 

The Emperor Alexander, the King of Prussia, and Prince 
von Schwarzenberg entered Paris on the 31st of March at 
the head of their troops, and after having reviewed them in the 
Champs-Elysées, the Czar Alexander came directly to my hdtel, 
in the rue St. Florentin? where he had been preceded in the 
morning by Count Nesselrode. It had been arranged that the 
Czar Alexander should reside at the Elysée palace, but, on some 
one’s advice, I do not know whose, he preferred to stay at my 
house.® 


The first point touched upon between the Czar Alexander 
and myself could naturally only concern the choice of government 
to be adopted by France. I laid stress on the reasons that 


1 King Joseph, in the capacity of lieutenant-general of the empire had, March 30 
at noon, authorised the Duc de Trévise, and the Duc de Raguse to open negotiations 
with the enemy. In consequence, a convention was signed on the same evening at 
six o’clock, between the two marshals and Count Nesselrode, which regulated the 
evacuation of Paris by the French troops. 

2 M. de Talleyrand occupied in the rue St. Florentin a mansion built at the 
beginning of the eighteenth century by the architect Chalgrin for Louis Phelypeaux, 
Comte de St.-Florentin, Minister of State. That mansion belonged successively to 
the Duc de Fitz-James, and to the Duchess of Infantado (1787). In 1793, it was turned 
into a saltpetre manufactory. The Marquis d’Hervas purchased it afterwards, and sold 
it to Prince Talleyrand, who died there in 1838. 

3 We also thought it advisable to obtain on this point explanations from Count 
Nesselrode. This is what he said to us :— 

‘* The head-quarters of the Czar Alexander were situated March 30, under the walls 
of Paris, which capitulated on the night of the 30th to the 31st. On the 3Ist, in the 
morning, the emperor sent me to Paris, escorted by one Cossack. I was thus the first 
to enter the city by the barrier St. Martin, and followed all the boulevards that were 
thronged with people. I reported myself at once at rue St. Florentin at M. de Talley- 
rand’s hétel, who received me extremely well, and who, being in the act of combing his 
hair, covered me with powder from head to foot in embracing me. While I was at M. 
de Talleyrand’s, the Czar Alexander sent word that he had just been informed that the 
Elysée Palace, where he was about to reside was undermined, and that he must take 
care not to reside there. M. de Talleyrand said he did not believe that report, but 
that if the Czar found it more convenient to reside elsewhere, he would place his own 
hétel at his disposal, which he accepted, and it is thus that the emperor came to stay 
in the rue St. Florentin.” 

We must add what Count Nesselrode does not say, though history does, that he 
played a leading part in the great events which took place in that hétel. It was he, 
among others, who, conjointly with the Duc de Dalberg, drafted the proclamation 
addressed by the allied sovereigns to the French nation. However great the service 
rendered to Louis XVIII. by Count Nesselrode and Prince Metternich, it is absolutely 
false that they each received a million from that sovereign. It is a calumny invented 
by libellous writers, and repeated as true by one of the would-be historians of the 
Restoration, M. de Vaulabelle. These two statesmen received on the occasion of 


the treaty of Paris, the usual diplomatic present, a box of the value of 18,000 francs. 
—(M. de Bacourt.) 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 123 


I mentioned above, and I no longer hesitated to declare to him 
that the House of Bourbon was recalled by those who dreamed 
of the old monarchy with the principles and virtues of Louis 
XII., as well as by those who desired a new monarchy with a 
free constitution, and the latter fully proved it, since the wish 
expressed by the only body that could speak in the name of 
the nation, was proclaimed all over France, and found an echo 
in every heart. 

That was the peremptory reply that I made to one of the 
questions that the Czar of Russia addressed me: “ How can I 
find out that France desires the House of Bourbon ?” 

“By a decision, sire, that I shall take upon myself to have 
adopted by the senate, and of which your Majesty will 
immediately see the effect.” 

“You are sure of it?” 

“T will answer for it.” 

I convened the senate on April 2, and, in the evening at 
seven o'clock, I carried to the Czar the memorable decision that 
I had had signed individually by all those who composed the 
senate. It was that which pronounced the overthrow of 
Napoleon, and the restoration of the Bourbons with constitu- 
tional guarantees. 

The Czar Alexander was amazed, I must say, when he saw 
among the names of the senators who asked for the return of 
the house of Bourbon, the names of several of the very men 
who had voted for the death of Louis XVI. 

The decree of the senate being rendered, the house of 
Bourbon could consider itself as seated almost peacefully, not 
on the throne of Louis XIV., but on a solid throne resting 
on really monarchical and constitutional foundations, which 
should render it not only steady but even unassailable. 

I know that all I have just said may displease a great many, 
for I destroy, I believe, the importance of all those little efforts 
that a number of persons faithfully devoted to the Bourbons, 
boast of having made to lead to their restoration. But I speak 


1 See Appendix II. at the end of Part VII., containing a letter from Benjamin 
Constant to Prince Talleyrand, congratulating the latter on the part played by him on 
April 2. 


124 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


my mind, and my opinion is, that no one has caused the res- 
toration, nor I, nor others. Though I was able to say to the 
Czar Alexander, whose confidence I had had during many years 
“Neither you, sire, nor the allied powers, nor I, whom you 
believe to possess some influence, not one of us, could give a king 
to France. France is conquered—and by your arms, and yet 
even to-day, you have not that power. To force a king upon 
France, would require both intrigue and force; one or the 
other alone would not be sufficient. In order to establish a 
durable state of things, and one which could be accepted without 
protest, one must act upon a principle. With a principle we are 
strong. We shall experience no resistance; opposition will, at 
any rate, vanish soon; and there is only one principle. Louis 
XVIII. is a principle: he is the legitimate King of France.” 

By the political relations I had preserved, and by those 
which I had newly established, I had the advantage of being 
able to tell the foreign sovereigns what they could do, and by my 
long acquaintance with politics I had been enabled to fathom, 
and fully grasp, the needs and the wishes of my country. Theend 
of my political life would have been too glorious if I had had the 
happiness of being the principal instrument that served, by re- 
storing the throne of the Bourbons, to ensure for ever to France 
that wise liberty which a great nation should always enjoy. 

I omitted to say that, in its sitting of the 1st of April,. 
the senate, had, on my motion, decreed the formation of a 
provisory government. : 

The overthrow once pronounced by the senate in the sitting 
of the 2nd, Napoleon fully realized that there was nothing left 
for him to do but to treat with the allied sovereigns respecting 
the situation that was henceforth to be offered him. M. de 
Caulaincourt and two of his marshals? came to Paris to watch 
the negotiation. They nobly discharged that painful mission. 
A few days previously, on April 2, M. de Caulaincourt had 
already come from Fontainebleau to Paris, to uphold the rights 
of Napoleon. At the moment when I was leaving on that day 


1 It was composed of M. de Talleyrand, president ; of the Duc de Dalberg, the 
Comte de Jaucourt, Abbé de Montesquiou, and General Beurnonville. 
? Marshal, Prince de la Moskowa, and Marshal, Duc de Tarente. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 125 


to go to the senate, to have that assembly proclaim the emperor’s 
overthrow, M. de Caulaincourt, with whom I had just had a 
long discussion in the presence of the Czar Alexander, of Count 
Nesselrode, and of several others, and who had warmly and 
courageously defended the interests of Napoleon, said to me: 

“Very well, if you go to the senate to have the forfeiture of 
the emperor’s rights pronounced, I shall go there to defend 
them.” 

I replied in a jesting tone: “ You do well to inform me of 
this; I am going to give orders to have you detained at my 
hétel until my return.” 

“You may well think,’ he said, in the same tone, “that if I 
had had the intention of doing so, I should have been very 
careful not to inform you. I see only too well that there is no 
means of saving him, since you are all against me.” 

As a sequel to the negotiations between the allied powers 
and the provisory government on the one hand, and the pleni- 
potentiaries of Napoleon on the other, an arrangement inter- 
vened, by which the emperor and his family were treated 
generously, and which even respected their dignity by the very 
terms employed in the wording. The declaration of the allies 
ran thus :— 


Wishing to prove to the Emperor Napoleon that all 
animosity ceases on their part, from the moment when there 
is no longer any need to watch over the rest of Europe, and 
that they cannot, nor will not, forget the place which belongs to 
the Emperor Napoleon in the history of his time, the allied 
powers accord him in full ownership, for himself and family 
the Island of Elba ;! they settle on him an income of six millions 
a year, of which three millions shall be for himself and the 
Empress Marie Louise, and three millions for the rest of his 
family, to wit: his mother, his brothers Joseph, Louis and 
Jéréme, his sisters Eliza and Pauline, and the Queen Hortense, 
who shall be considered as a sister, while awaiting the fate of 
her husband. 


There was, a little later, a change made in this apportioning, 


1 See Appendix III. at the end of Part VII., concerning Foucheé’s opinion on 
this matter (letter of the Duc d’Otrante to Napoleon). 


126 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


the Empress Marie Louise not having followed the Emperor 
Napoleon ; it was made in the following manner :— 


The emperor, two millions; his mother, three hundred 
thousand francs ; Joseph and his wife, five hundred thousand 
francs ; Louis, two hundred thousand francs; Hortense and her 
children, four hundred thousand francs; Jér6me and his wife, 
five hundred thousand francs; Eliza, three hundred thousand 
francs ; and Pauline, three hundred thousand francs. 


The provisory government in its turn adhered to this act by 
the following declaration :— 


The allied powers having concluded a treaty with His 
Majesty the Emperor Napoleon, and this treaty containing 
dispositions in the execution of which the French government 
is in a position to take a part, and mutual explanations having 
been held on this point, the provisory government of France, 
with the intention of concurring in all the measures that are 
adopted to give to the events which have taken place a special 
character of moderation, grandeur, and generosity, considers it 
a duty to declare that it will adhere to them as much as 
possible, and guarantee in everything which concerns France, 
the execution of the stipulations contained in this treaty which 
have been signed to-day between the plenipotentiaries of 
the high allied powers and that of His Majesty the Emperor 
Napoleon. 


I had had the honour to be placed by the senate’s decree 
of the Ist of April at the head of the provisory government, 
which for a few days conducted the affairs of France. I 
shall not allow myself to speak here of all the acts of the 
government ; they are to be seen in print everywhere. The 
brilliant pen of M. de Fontanes may be seen in several of 
them, and since I have mentioned him, I am very happy to 
remember the services that the Duc de Dalberg, and the Marquis 
de Jaucourt! rendered France at that epoch. I think it almost 


1 Francois Marquis de Jaucourt, born in 1757, was colonel of dragoons in 1789. 
He was in 1791 elected deputy to the legislative assembly. Having emigrated the 
following year, he returned to France after Brumaire 18, was named member of the 
tribunal in 1802, senator in 1803, intendant of the house of Prince Joseph 1804. In 
1814 he took a part in the provisory government ; served as ad interim Minister 
of Foreign Affairs during the sojourn of M. de Talleyrand at Vienna, and was 
appointed peer of France. He became Minister of the Marine in 1815. In 1830 he 
re-allied himself with the monarchy of July, retained his seat in the House of Peers 
and died in 1852. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 127 


my duty, when I see the widespread disposition to forget 
those courageous men who so nobly devoted themselves to 
saving their country. 

In one hour the empire of Napoleon was destroyed ; the 
kingdom of France existed, and all was already easy to that 
weak provisory government. It encountered no obstacles 
anywhere ; the need of police, or of money, did not make itself 
felt, and everything worked satisfactorily. All the expenditure 
of the provisory government that lasted seventeen days, and 
of the entrance of the king into Paris, is entered in the budget 
of that year as two hundred thousand francs. It is true that 
every one aided us, and I am persuaded that the expense of the 
journeys I forced upon the officers of Napoleon’s army, from 
one end of France to the other, is still owing. 

On the 12th of April, 1814, the Comte d’Artois, to whom 
I had sent M. de Vitrolles at Nancy, entered Paris, and took 
the title of lieutenant-general of the kingdom. I found in him 
the same kindness as on the night of the 17th of July, 1780, 
when we separated, he to emigrate, I to fling myself into the 
exciting events which had finished by conducting me to the 
head of the provisory government. Strange destinies ! 

The duties of my position kept me at Paris, and made it 
‘impossible for me to go to meet Louis XVIII. I saw him for the 
first time at Compiegne. He was in his study. M. de Duras! 
conducted me there. The king, on seeing me, held out his 
hand, and, in the kindest and most affectionate manner, said, 
“T am exceedingly pleased to see you. Our houses date from 
the same epoch. My ancestors were the cleverest ; if yours had 
been more so than mine, you would have said to me to-day, 
‘Take a chair—draw near—let us speak of our affairs;’ to-day 
it is I who say it to you. Let us sit down and talk.” 

] had, soon after, the pleasure of repeating those words 
of the king’s to my uncle, the Archbishop of Reims, so com- 
plimentary to all our family. I repeated them the same evening 
to the Czar of Russia, who was at Compiégne, and who with 


1 Amédée, Duc de Durfort-Duras, was born in 1770, beecame brigadier-general 
and first gentleman of the king’s chamber. He followed Louis XVIII. into exile, 
was made a peer of France at the Restoration, and died in 1836. 


128 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


great interest asked me, “s77’avazs été content du rot.” 1 employ 
the terms that he used. I have not been so weak as to speak of 
the opening of this interview to other people. 

I gave the king an account of the state in which he would 
find things. That first conversation was a very long one. 

The king decided, before arriving at Paris, to issue a pro- 
clamation, in which his dispositions should be announced ; he 
drafted it himself. It was dated from Saint-Ouen. During the 
night which he passed at Saint-Ouen, the intriguers who 
surrounded the king, caused several changes to be added to 
that declaration—of which I did not approve. The address 
that I had read him in presenting the senate to him the 
evening before his entrance into Paris, will show more than 
all I could say, what was my opinion, and what was that which 
I sought to give him. Here is the address :-— 


SIRE,— 

The return of your Majesty restores to France her 
natural government, and all the necessary guarantees for her 
repose, and for the repose of Europe. All hearts feel that 
this benefit can be due only to yourself; and therefore rush to 
greet you. There are joys that cannot be controlled. That 
whose transports you now hear, is a joy truly national. The 
senate, profoundly touched by this affecting spectacle, happy 
to mingle its sentiments with those of the people, comes, as 
they, to place at the foot of the throne its testimony of respect 
and love. 

Sire, scourges without number have made desolate the 
kingdom of your fathers. Our glory has taken refuge in the 
camp; the armies have saved the honour of the French. In 
ascending the throne you succeed to twenty years’ of ruin and 
misfortunes ; such an inheritance would frighten an ordinary 
mind ; the reparation of so great a disorder requires the 
devotion of great courage; prodigies are necessary to heal the 
wounds of a country; but we are your children, and the 
prodigies are reserved for your paternal care. 

The more difficult the situation, the more need of power, 
and reverence towards the king. In speaking to the imagi- 
nation by the brilliant past it recalls, royal authority will know 
how to conciliate all the desires of modern reason, by borrowing 
from the wisest political theories. 

A constitutional charter will link all interests to those of 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 129 


the crown, and strengthen the prince’s will by backing it with 
the will of the whole nation. 

You know better than we, sire, how well such institutions— 
as has been proved lately by a neighbouring people—give sup- 
port, and not barriers, to the monarchs who are friends of the 
law, and fathers of their people. 

Yes, sire, the nation and the senate, full of confidence in 
the great enlightenment, and magnanimous sentiments of Your 
Majesty, desire with you, that France be free and the king 
powerful. 


I returned to Paris to occupy myself with the preparations 
for the brilliant entrance of Louis XVIII. He was shown 
on all sides, that France saw in him the guarantee of her 
peace, the pressrver of her glory, and the restorer of her 
liberty. 

There was gratitude on every face. Madame, the Duchesse 
d’Angouléme, falling upon her knees in the church of Notre- 
Dame, appeared to all sublime: every eye was filled with tears. 

The first two mornings, the king received nearly all the 
dignitaries of state ; the addresses were very good, and the king’s 
responses suitable and affectionate. The foreign sovereigns had 
the delicacy to show themselves but little. 

The courts of the Tuileries, the public squares, the theatres, 
were filled with people. There was a crowd everywhere, but an 
orderly crowd, for not a soldier was to be seen. 

Very soon, it was necessary to set about the drafting of the 
charter which had been announced, and then, intriguing and in- 
capable persons beset the king, and induced him to intrust to them 
the drawing up of this important document. I had no part in 
it; the king did not even designate me to be one of the mem- 
bers of the commission to whom it had been intrusted. I am 
forced to leave all the honour of it to Abbé de Montesquiou,} 

1 Francgois-Xavier-Marc-Antoine, Abbé de Montesquiou-Fezenzac, born in 1757. 
Having embraced the ecclesiastical profession, he was appointed in 1785, agent-general 
of the clergy. In 178g the clergy of Paris sent him to the States-General and he was 
twice president of the assembly in 1790. He escaped arrest under the Reign of 
Terror ; was after the 9th Thermidor one of the agents appointed by Louis XVIII. to 
defend his cause in France. He was also exiled to Mentone under the Consulate. 
In 1814 he took a part in the provisory government, and, on the 13th of May, was 
appointed Minister of the Interior. Under the second Restoration he remained 


minister of state, and was created peer of France. He resigned in 1832 and died 
the same year. 


VOL. II. K 


130 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


and M. Dambray,! M. Ferrand,? and M. de Sémonville. I 
only name the principal compilers. As for myself, I knew the 
charter only by the chancellor, M. Dambray, reading it in a 
council of the ministers on the evening before the opening of 
the House, and I was ignorant of the names of those persons 
who were to compose the House of Peers, until the royal sitting, 
when the Chancellor proclaimed them. 

The king had appointed me Minister of Foreign Affairs, and 
I was supposed, in that capacity, to occupy myself with the 
treaties of peace. Now is the time to speak of that difficult 
work, for which I have been so much attacked, and with 
regard to which it will be very pleasant to defend myself. 

From April 23, and before the king’s arrival, I had to 
negotiate, and sign a preliminary convention with the plenipo- 
tentiaries of the allied powers. 

In order to judge impartially of the transactions of that 
epoch, it is necessary to take into consideration the state to 
which the faults of Napoleon had reduced France, drained as 
she was of men, money, and resources; invaded on all her 
frontiers at the same time, on the Pyrenees, the Alps, the Rhine, 
and Belgium, by innumerable armies, composed, as a rule, not 
of mercenary soldiers, but of a people completely animated 
with the spirit of hate and vengeance. During twenty years 
these people had seen their territories occupied and ravaged 
by the French armies; they had been oppressed by every 
means, insulted, treated with the most profound contempt ; 
there had been no manner of outrage that one could mention 
that it was not their lot to avenge; and yet, if they resolved 
to wreak their vengeance, what had France to oppose to them ? 


1 Charles Henry, Vicomte Dambray, born in 1760 at Rouen, was first counsellor at 
law in parlement. In 1788 he was appointed general advocate at the Court of Aids. 
He was not disturbed under the Reign of Terror; was in 1795 elected deputy to the 
Council of Five Hundred, but refused to sit. Under the Consulate he became counsellor 
general to the Lower Seine. In 1814 M. Dambray was appointed chancellor, keeper 
of the seals, and peer of France. Under the second Restoration he retained only his 
functions of president of the House of Peers. He died in 1829. 

2 Antoine-Francois-Claude Comte Ferrand, born in 1751 of an old family of magis- 
trates. He was received as counsellor of par/ement at the age of eighteen. He emigrated 
about the month of September, 1789 ; presented himself to the army of the princes and 
took part in 1793 inthe regents’ council. He returned to France in 18o1, and lived 
in retreat, busying himself with historical works. In 1814, he was appointed 
minister ofstate and postmaster-general. In 1815 he again took up his functions, was 
elected peer of France, and member of the privy council. He died in 1825. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 131 


It was not the last scattered remnants of its armies, dis- 
persed as they were to all the parts of the country without 
union, and commanded by rival chiefs that had not always 
submitted, even under the iron hand of Napoleon. There existed 
still, it is true, a fine and numerous French army; but it was 
parcelled out among fifty fortresses, from the banks of the 
Vistula to those of the Seine; there also existed the masses 
of prisoners held by our enemies. But the fortresses were 
closely blockaded, the days of their resistance numbered, and 
their garrisons, like the prisoners, could only be given up to 
France by a treaty. 

It was under such circumstances that the French pleni- 
potentiaries had to negotiate with those of the united powers, 
and that too in the very capital of France. I think I am 
justified in here recalling with pride the conditions I obtained, 
no matter how painful and humiliating they were.1 

Here are the terms of the preliminary convention of 
April 23, 1814 (Moniteur of 1814, No. 114). 


CONVENTIONS 


BETWEEN H.R.H. MWonwsiEvUR, SON OF FRANCE, BROTHER 
OF THE KING, LIEUTENANT-GENERAL OF THE KINGDOM OF 
FRANCE, AND EACH OF THE HIGH ALLIED POWERS, 
NAMELY: GREAT BRITAIN, RUSSIA, AUSTRIA, AND PRUSSIA, 
SIGNED AT PARIS, APRIL 23, 1814, AND RATIFIED THE SAME 
DAY BY MONSIEUR. 


The allied powers are at one in their intention to put an 
end to the misfortunes of Europe, and to found its peace on a 
just division of the forces between the states that compose it, and 
wishing to give to France, now that she has once again a 
government whose principles guarantee them the maintenance 
of peace, the proofs of their desire to place themselves in 
amicable relations with her; desiring also that France enjoy 
as much as possible beforehand the benefits of the peace, 
even before all the provisions of it have been established, have 
resolved to proceed conjointly with H.R.H. Monsieur, son of 
France, brother of the king, lieutenant-general of the kingdom, 
towards a suspension of hostilities between the respective forces, 


' See Appendix IV. at the end of Part VIT. 


a 


132 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


and to the resumption of former friendly relations between 
them. 

H.R.H. Monsieur, son of France, &c. on the one hand, and 
H.M. &c. on the other, have appointed, in consequence, plenipo- 
tentiaries to agree upon an act, which, without prejudging the 
conditions of peace, shall stipulate for a suspension of hostilities, 
and which shall be followed, as soon as possible, by a treaty of 
peace, namely (designation of the high contracting parties and 
of their plenipotentiaries), who, after the exchange of their full 
powers, have agreed upon the following articles. 

Art. I.—All hostilities by land and sea are and shall remain 
suspended between the allied powers and France, namely : 
for the land forces as soon as the generals commanding 
French armies and fortresses, shall have informed the generals 
commanding the allied troops that are opposed to them, that 
they recognize the authority of the lieutenant-general of the 
realm of France ; and as regards naval forces either on the 
high seas, or in seaports, and naval stations, as soon as the war- 
vessels and the ports of the kingdom of France, or of other 
countries occupied by French troops, shall send in similar 
submissions. 

Art. II.—To acknowledge the resumption of friendly rela- 
tions between the allied powers and France, and to cause her to 
enjoy beforehand, as much as possible, the advantages of peace, 
the allied powers agree to have their armies evacuate French 
territory such as it was on Jan. 1, 1792, according as the places 
outside of these limits, still occupied by the French troops, 
shall be evacuated and handed over to the allies. (It will be 
noticed that, at the Chatillon Congress, it was the limits of 
France in 1789, that the enemies imposed upon Napoleon. 
Thus by virtue of that article 2, we retained the Comtat of 
Avignon, Landau, Savoy, the county of Montbéliard, and other 
territories annexed to France between 1789 and 1792.) 

Art. III.—The lieutenant-general of the realm shall, in con- 
sequence, give to the commanders of those fortresses, the order 
of handing them over in the following manner: those situated on 
the Rhine, not comprised within the limits of France, on janis: 
1792, and those between the Rhine and the same limits, within 
a delay of ten days, dating from the signing of the present 
act; the fortresses of Piedmont and of the other parts of 
Italy, which belong to France, within fifteen days, those 
situated in Spain within twenty days, and all other fortresses 

1 Montbéliard was formerly the chief town of an independent principality, which, 
after passing under many different masters, belonged to the Dukes of Wurtemberg, 


since 1723. France conquered it in 1792, and was allowed to keep it by the peace of 
Lunéville. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 133 


without exception, which are occupied by French troops, in 
such a manner that the final delivery shall be performed by 
June 1, next. The garrisons of those fortresses shall take with 
them, their arms and baggage, as well as the private property 
of the military men and civilian employés of all grades. They 
shall take away their field artillery, in the proportion of three 
pieces for every thousand men, sick and wounded included. 

The endowment for fortresses, and all that which is not 
private property, shall remain and shall be returned in its entirety 
to the allies, without excepting a single article. In the endow- 
ment, are included not only the depots of artillery and of 
ammunition, but also all other provisions of every kind, as also 
the archives, inventories, plans, maps, models, &c. 

First, after the signing of the present convention, commis- 
sioners for France and for the allied powers, shall be appointed 
and sent into the fortresses to verify the state in which they 
are, and to superintend together the execution of this article. 

The garrisons shall follow, by daily stages, different roads, 
previously agreed upon, for re-entering France. 

The siege and blockade of fortresses in France shall be at 
once raised by the allied armies. The French troops belonging 
to the army of Italy, or occupying the strongholds of that 
country, or fortresses in the Mediterranean, shall be at once 
recalled by H.R.H. the lieutenant-general of the kingdom. 
[It must not be forgotten that before the allied powers crossed 
the Rhine, Napoleon had offered to return to them the fortresses 
situated on the Vistula and on the Oder, on the conditions 
indicated in the first two paragraphs of this article.] 

Art. IV.—The stipulations of the preceding article shall be 
equally applied to naval stations ; the contracting powers how- 


1 We give the following letter for those who might feel inclined to doubt the 
assertion of Prince Talleyrand on this point :— 


THE MAjorR-GENERAL TO MARSHAL MARMONT. 


** Paris, November 18, 1813. 
** MONSIEUR LE MARECHAL Duc DE RAGUSE, 

“* The emperor requests me to write to you, to let you know that his intention is, that 
you send an intelligent officer to the Prince von Schwarzenberg to offer to negotiate 
for the surrender of Danzig, Moellin, Zamose, Custrin, Stettin, and Glogau. The 
conditions of the surrender of these places shall be that the garrisons return to France 
with arms and baggage, without being prisoners of war ; that all the field artillery 
bearing French arms, as also the storehouses of clothing that are found in those 
fortresses, shall be left tous ; that means of transportation shall be furnished us ; that 
the sick shall be nursed, and sent home, as soon as cured. You shall make it known 
that Danzig can still hold out a year ; that Glogau and Custrin can likewise hold out 
a year ; and that if the enemy would have those places by a siege, they would spoil 
the city ; that these conditions are therefore very advantageous to the allies ; moreover 
that the surrender of these places will pacify the Prussian States. If they talk of 
the surrender of Hamburg, Magdeburg, Erfurt, Torgau, or of Wittenberg, His 
Majesty desires you to reply that you will take his orders thereon, but that you have 


134 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


ever reserve to themselves the right of regulating in the treaty 
of definite peace, the disposal of the arsenals, and war vessels, 
armed and not armed, that are found in the said stations. 

Art. V.—The fleets and the men of war of France shall remain 
in their respective situations, except vessels charged with missions, 
which shall be allowed to pass ; but the immediate effect of the 
present act regarding the French ports, shall be the raising of 
all blockades by land or by sea, the right of fishing, of coasting, 
particularly of that necessary for the victualling of Paris, and 
the re-opening of commercial intercourse conformable to the 
internal rules of each country; and the immediate effect as 
regards the interior, will be the free supply of provisions to the 
towns, and the free transit of military or commercial transports. 

Art. VI.—To prevent all subjects of complaint, and dispute, 
that might arise on the occasion of captures by sea after the 
signing of the present convention, it is mutually agreed that the 
vessels and goods that may be captured in the Channel, and in 
the North Sea after the space of twelve days, beginning from 
the date of the ratification of the present act, shall be restored by 
each side ; that the limit shall be a month for anywhere between 
the Channel and the North Sea, and the Canary Isles; two 
months for the Equator; and finally of five months in all the 
other parts of the world, without exception or distinction of 
time or place. 

Art. VII.—The prisoners on both sides, officers and privates, 
army and navy, or whatever they may be, and especially hostages, 
shall be immediately sent back to their respective countries with- 
out ransom or exchange. Commissioners shall be appointed on 
both sides to proceed with this general liberation. 

Art. VIII.—Immediately after the signing of the present act, 
the administration of the departments or towns actually occupied 
by their forces, shall be handed over by the co-belligerents, to 
the magistrates appointed by H.R.H. the lieutenant-general of 
the realm of France. The royal credit will provide for the sub- 
sistence and needs of the troops until such time as they shall 


received no instructions ; that the only question is now to treat for the fortresses on the 
Oder and the Vistula. These communications, Monsieur le Maréchal, will also enable 
you to gauge the dispositions of the allies. 
‘THE PRINCE VICE-CONSTABLE, MAJOR-GENERAL.* 
“© ALEXANDER,”’ 


Let us add that the convention of April 23, 1814, benefited France by the return 
of two hundred and fifty thousand men, who had been shut up in fifty-four fortresses, and 
of a hundred and fifty thousand prisoners of war. Maréchal Davoust alone returned 
from Hamburg with twenty thousand armed men, a hundred pieces of artillery, and 
two hundred ammunition waggons ; it was, consequently, five pieces of. artillery 
instead of three per thousand men as stipulated by the convention.—(J/. de Bacourt.) 


* See Mémoires du Duc de Raguse, vol. 6, p. 75-76. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 135 


have evacuated French territory, the allied powers agreeing as a 
result of their friendship for France, to cease the military requi- 
sitions, as soon as the handing over of the administration to 
the legitimate powers shall have been established. 

All that bears upon the execution of this article shall be 
regulated by special agreement. [This Article VIII. was of 
great importance as putting an end to the requisitions of the 
hostile generals, which had so exhausted France. ] 

Art. IX.—It shall also be determined in accordance with the 
terms of Art. II., as to the routes that the troops of the allied 
powers shall follow in their march, in order to prepare them 
means of subsistence, and commissioners shall be appointed 
to regulate all arrangements of details, and to accompany the 
troops till the moment of their leaving French territory. 

fafaith of which ...... 

Given at Paris, the 23rd of April, 1814. 


ADDITIONAL ARTICLE.—The addition of ten days granted 
by virtue of the stipulations of Art. III., of the convention of 
that day for the evacuation of the fortresses on the Rhine, and 
of those between this river and the ancient frontiers of France, 
is extended to those places, forts, and military establishments, 
of whatever nature they may be, in the United Provinces of the 
Low Countries. 


By this convention, that which was thought to be most 
urgent, has been provided for, viz., the liberation of the territory, 
of prisoners, the return into France of the French garrisons on 
the Rhine, and the cessation of the ruinous requisitions. The 
definite treaty which was to regulate the new relations with France 
and Europe, remains to be negotiated, and it cannot be concluded 
and signed until the 30th of May.! I shall however insert 
this treaty here :— 


TREATY OF PEACE 
BETWEEN THE KING AND THE ALLIED POWERS, CONCLUDED 
AT PaRIs, MAy 30th 1814. 


In the Name of the most Holy and Indivisible Trinity 
His Majesty the King of France, and of Navarre, on the one 


1 The day after the signing of the treaty, M. de Talleyrand addressed the following 
letter to the Princess of Courland : 
‘¢ Paris, May 31, 1814. 
‘*T have concluded peace with the four great powers. The three accessions * are 
* The accessions of Spain, Portugal, and Sweden. 


136 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


side, and His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary 
and Bohemia, and his allies on the other, being animated by 
an equal desire to put an end to the long agitations of 
Europe, and to the misfortunes of the people, by a solid peace, 
founded on a just assessment of the forces of the powers, and 
bearing in its stipulations the guarantee of its duration; and 
His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and 
Bohemia, and his allies, wishing to exact no more from France, 
now that she is placed under the paternal government of her kings, 
and thus offers to Europe a pledge of security and stability, 
conditions and guarantees that they regretted having missed 
under the last government, their said Majesties have appointed! 
plenipotentiaries to discuss, conclude, and sign a treaty of peace 
and of amity—to wit: 

His Majesty the King of France and Navarre, M. Charles 
Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord, prince de Bénévent, Grand 
Eagle of the Legion of Honour. ... his minister and State 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs ; 

And His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary 
and Bohemia, MM. Prince Clément-Wenceslas-Lothaire von 
Metternich-Winneburg-Ochsenhausen, Knight of the Golden 
Fleece. . . . Chamberlain, Privy Counsellor, and State Minister 
of the Conferences.and Foreign Affairs of His Imperial and 
Royal Apostolic Majesty, and Count Johan-Philippe von Stadion 
Thannhausen and Warthausen, Knight of the Golden Fleece, 
Chamberlain, Privy Counsellor, Minister of State, and of the 
Conferences of His Imperial and Royal Apostolic Majesty ; 

These, after having exchanged their full powers, which were 
found to be in good and due form, have agreed upon the 
following articles : : 

Art I-—There shall be, from this day forth, between His 
Majesty the King of France and of Navarre on the one side, and 
His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and 
Bohemia and his allies, on the other, between their heirs and 
successors, and respective states and subjects, peace and friend- 
ship for ever. 

The high contracting powers shall bring every means to bear 
to maintain, not only among themselves, but, as much as 
possible, among all the states of Europe, a perfect harmony 
and understanding, so essential to her repose. 

Art. Il.—The kingdom of France preserves the integrity of 
its limits as they existed on January I, 1792. It will receive in 


only trivial. At four o’clock the peace was signed. It is very good, nay, even noble, 
being based on the standard of the greatest equality, although France is still covered 
with foreigners. My friends, and you at their head, ought to be content with me.” 


THE FAEL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 137 


all an increase of territory comprised by the line of limits fixed 
by the following article. 

Art. III.—On the side of Belgium, of Germany, and of Italy, 
the former frontier, just as it existed on the first of January 1792 
shall be re-established, commencing from the North Sea, between 
Dunkirk and Newport, to the Mediterranean, between Cannes 
and Nice, with the following corrections : 

1. In the department of Jemmapes, the cantons of Dour, 
Merbes-le-Chateau, Beaumont, and Chimay, shall continue to 
belong to France ; the line of demarkation shall pass there where 
it touches the canton of Dour, between that canton and those of 
Boussu and Paturage, as further on, between that of Merbes-le- 
Chateau and those of Binch and Thuin: 

2. In the department of Sambre-et-Meuse, the cantons of 
Valcourt, Florennes, Beauraing and Gédinne shall belong to 
France; the line of demarkation, when it reaches that department, 
shall follow the line which separates the above-mentioned districts 
from the department of Jemmapes, and the remainder of that of 
Sambre-et-Meuse. 

3. In the department of the Moselle, the new line of demar- 
kation, where it digresses from the old one, shall be formed by a 
line to extend from Perle to Fremesdorf, and by that which 
separates the canton of Tholey from the rest of the department 
of the Moselle. 

4. In the department of the Sarre, the cantons of Saarbruck 
and of Arneval shall remain to France, as well as that portion 
of Lebach which is situated in the middle of the line 
extending along the borders of the villages of Herchenbach, 
Ueberhofen, Hilsbach and Hall (leaving these different places 
outside the French frontier), to the point where, near Querselle 
(which belongs to France), the line which separates the districts 
of Arneval and of Ottweiler, touches that which separates those 
of Arneval and of Lebach; the frontier, on this side, shall be 
formed by the line above designated, and afterwards by that 
which separates the canton of Arneval from that of Bliecastel. 

5. The fortress of Landau having formed before the year 1792 
an isolated point in Germany, France preserves on that side of 
her frontiers a part of the departments of Mont Tonnerre and of 
the lower Rhine, in order to join the fortress of Landau and 
its radius to the rest of the kingdom. The new line of demar- 
kation in leaving the point where, near Obersteinbach, which 
remains out of the limits of France, the frontier between the 
department of the Moselle and that of Mont Tonnerre, reaches 
the department of the lower Rhine, shall follow the line which 
separates the cantons of Weissenbourg and of Bergzabern, on 


138 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


the side of France, from the cantons of Pirmasens, Dalm, and 
Anweiler, on the side of Germany, to the point where these 
limits, near the village of Wolmersheim, touch the old radius of 
the fortress of Landau. From that radius, which remains as it was 
in 1792, the new frontier shall follow the branch of the river 
Queich, which, on leaving the radius near Queichheim (which 
remains French) passes near the villages of Merlenheim, Knittels- 
heim and Belheim (remaining equally French) to the Rhine, 
which shall continue afterwards to form the boundary between 
France and Germany. 

As to the Rhine, the 7Za/weg shall constitute the limit, in such 
a manner however that the changes which this river shall undergo 
shall have no effect in the future on the ownership of the islands 
found there. The status of possession of these islands shall be 
re-established as it existed at the time of the signing of the 
treaty of Lunéville. 

6. In the department of the Doubs, the frontier shall be’recti- 
fied in such a manner that it begin above Ranconnieére near Locle, 
and follow the crest of the Jura, between Cerneux-Péquignot and 
the village of Fontenelles, to a peak in the Jura situated about 
seven or eight thousand feet to the north-west of the village of 
Brevine, where it shall again fall into the old French limits ; 

7. In the department of the Léman, the frontiers between the 
French territory, the country of Vaud, and the different portions 
of the territory of the republic of Geneva (which shall form a 
part of Switzerland) remain the same as they were before the 
incorporation of Geneva into France. But the canton of Frangy, 
that of Saint-Julien (with the exception of the part situated to 
the north of a line extending from the point where the bank of 
the river Laire enters near Chancy, the Genevan territory, along 
the confines of Sesequin, Lacouex, and Seseneuve, which shall 
remain outside the limits of France), the canton of Régnier (with 
the exception of the portion which is found to the east of a line 
which follows the confines of Muraz, Bussy, Pers and Cornier, 
which shall be outside the French limits), and the canton of 
Roche (with the exception of the places named Roche and 
Armanoy with their cantons), shall remain French. The frontier 
shall follow the limits of these different cantons and the lines 
dividing those portions which remain French, from those which 
she is not to preserve. 

In the department of Mont-Blanc, France acquires the sub- 
prefecture of Chambéry (except the cantons of IlHépital, of 
Saint-Pierre d’Albigny, of Rocette and of Montmélian), and the 
sub-prefecture of Annecy (except the portion of the canton of 
Faverge, situated to the east of a line which passes between 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 139 


Ourechaise and Marlens on the French side, and Marthod and 
Ugine from the opposite side, and which afterwards follows the 
mountain crests to the frontier of the canton of Thones) : this 
line with the boundary of the cantons mentioned shall, on that 
side, form the new frontier. 

On the Pyrenees side, the frontiers shall remain as they were 
between the two kingdoms of France and Spain on January 
I, 1792, and a joint commission shall at once be appointed by 
the sovereigns of the two realms, in order to fix the final 
line of demarkation. 

France renounces all rights of sovereignty, suzerainty 
and possession of all the countries and districts, villages and 
places of every description, situated outside the frontier desig- 
nated above, the principality of Monaco, nevertheless, re- 
assuming the position it occupied on the Ist of January, 1792.1 

The allied courts insure to France the possession of the 
principality of Avignon, of the Comtat Venaissin, of the 
county of Montbéliard, and of all the districts situated in French 
territory and formerly belonging to Germany, and comprised in 
the above-mentioned frontier, whether they were annexed to 
France before or after January I, 1792. 

The powers reserve to themselves reciprocally the entire 
right of fortifying such parts of their dominions as they shall 
deem fit for their security. 

In order to avoid all damage to private property, and to pro- 
tect, after the most liberal principles, the estates of individuals 
living on the frontiers, there shall be appointed by each of the 
states adjacent to France commissioners, to proceed conjointly 
with the French commissioners in the demarkations of the 
frontiers of the respective countries. 

As soon as the commissioners’ work shall be finished, maps 
shall be drawn and signed by the respective commissioners, and 
frontier posts put up to indicate the respective limits. 

Art. IV.—In order to insure the communications of the 
city of Geneva with the other parts of Switzerland situated on 
the lake, France consents to the Versoy road being used by the 
inhabitants of both countries. The respective governments 
shall come to some amicable agreement as to the means of 
preventing smuggling, and of regulating the postal service, and 
the keeping of the Versoy road in repair. 

Art. V.—Navigation on the Rhine from the point where it 

1 The principality of Monaco was, before the Revolution, under the protectorate of 
France (treaty of Péronne, 1641). In 1793, it had been annexed by France. The 


treaty of 1814 re-established her independence, whilst maintaining the French protect- 


orate ; but in 1815, France lost that right, which was attributed to Sardinia, who kept 
it until 1860. 


140 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


becomes navigable, to the sea, as well as from the sea to that 
point, shall be free, so that no one shall be forbidden to use 
it ; and, at the future congress, the principles by which the tolls 
to be raised by the bordering states may be arranged in a 
manner most equitable and favourable for the commerce of all 
nations shall be decided. 

It shall likewise be examined and decided at the future 
congress how, in order that communications may be facilitated 
between neighbouring nations, and they be rendered less foreign 
to one another, the above provision may be equally extended 
to all the other rivers which in their navigable course separate, 
or cross, different states. 

Art. VI.—Holland being placed under the sovereignty of 
the House of Orange, shall receive an increase of territory. The 
title and the exercise of sovereignty in that country can in no 
case belong to a prince wearing a foreign crown. 

The States of Germany shall be independent and united by 
a federal link. 

Switzerland, independent, shall continue to govern herself. 

Italy, outside the limits which shall become Austrian, shall 
be composed of sovereign states, 

Art. VII.—The island of Malta and its dependencies shall 
belong to His Britannic Majesty as sole sovereign and possessor. 

Art. VIII—His Britannic Majesty, stipulating for himself 
and his allies, agrees to restore to His Most Christian Majesty, in 
a term hereafter to be fixed, the colonies, fisheries, factories, 
and establishments of every kind that France possessed on 
January I, 1792, in the seas and on the continents of America, 
Africa, and Asia, with the exception of the islands of Tobago 
and of Saint Lucia, and of the island of France and its depend- 
encies, namely Rodriguez and the Seychelles, which His Most 
Christian Majesty yields to His Britannic Majesty as sole 
sovereign and owner, as also the portion of San-Domingo, ceded 
to France by the treaty of Basel, and which His Most Christian 
Majesty returns to His Catholic Majesty as sole sovereign and 
owner. 

Art. IX.—His Majesty the King of Sweden and Norway, in 
consequence of arrangements made with his allies, and to further 
the execution of the preceding article, agrees that the island of 
Guadaloupe be restored to His Most Christian Majesty, and 
foregoes all the rights he possesses to that island.! 

Art. X.—His Most Faithful Majesty, in consequence of 
arrangements made with his allies, and in view of facilitating 


1 The English had taken Guadaloupe and ceded it to Sweden (Art, IV. of the treaty 
of March 3, 1813). 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 141 


the execution of Art. VIII., binds himself to restore to His 
Most Christian Majesty, in the terms hereafter fixed, French 
Guiana, as it existed on Jan. 1, 1792.1 

The effect of the above stipulation being to revive the 
contest, existing at that time, as to the limits of the adjacent 
territories, it is agreed that this contest shall be settled by 
amicable arrangement between the two courts, under the 
mediation of His Britannic Majesty.? 

Art. XI.—The strongholds and forts existing in the colonies, 
and the establishments which are to be returned to His Most 
Christian Majesty by virtue of the Articles VIII., IX., and X., 
shall be handed over in the state in which they shall be at the 
time of the signing of the present treaty. 

Art. XI].—His Britannic Majesty binds himself to take all 
necessary measures that the subjects of His Most Christian 
Majesty may enjoy, as regards their commercial pursuits, and the 
safety of their persons and property within the limits of British 
sovereignty on the continent of India, the same facilities, 
privileges, and protection which exist at present, or which 
shall hereafter be accorded to the most favoured nations. On 
his part, His Most Christian Majesty, having nothing more at 
heart than to insure lasting peace between the two crowns of 
France and England, and wishing to contribute, as much as 
possible, henceforward, towards the removal from the intercourse 
of the inhabitants of the two kingdoms, of all that might 
some day alter the mutual good understanding now happily 
existing between them, binds himself to raise no fortifications 
in the settlements which shall be restored to him, and which 
are situated in the limits of British Sovereignty on the continent 
of India, and to place in those settlements only such troops 
as shall be necessary as police forces. 

Art. XIII.—As to the fishing rights of France on the great 
bank of Newfoundland, on the coasts of the island of that name, 
and of the adjacent islands, and in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, all 
shall be put again on the same footing as in 1792. 

Art. XIV.—The colonies, factories, and settlements which 
are to be restored to His Most Christian Majesty, by His 
Britannic Majesty, or his allies, shall be returned, viz.: those 
which are situated in the North Sea, or on the oceans, or on 
the continent of America and of Africa, within three months, 
and those that are beyond the Cape of Good Hope, within six 
months, from the ratification of the present treaty. 


1 The Portuguese had taken French Guiana at the beginning of hostilities, in 1809. 
2 It is well known that this question of boundaries has never been definitely 
settled ; to this day it is in suspense between France and Brazil. 


142 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TAELEYRAND. 


Art. XV.—The high contracting powers having reserved to 
themselves, by Art. IV. of the convention of last April 23rd, to 
settle, in the present definite treaty of peace, the ownership of 
the arsenals and vessels of war, armed or unarmed, which may 
be found in the seaports returned by France in execution of 
Art. II. of the said convention, it isagreed that the said men of 
war and ships, armed or unarmed, as also the naval artillery 
and naval ammunition, and all the shipbuilding materials and 
arms, shall be divided between France and the countries in which 
the above-mentioned seaports are situated, in the proportion of 
two-thirds for France, and of one-third for the powers to which 
the said seaports are to be ceded. 

Shall be considered, six weeks after the signing of the 
present treaty, as naval materials and divided as such, in the 
above-mentioned proportion, after having been previously de- 
molished, all unfinished war-vessels and ships in dock, which 
shall not be in a sufficiently forward state to be sent to sea. 

Commissioners shall be appointed on either side to proceed 
with the division, and to draw up a statement thereof; pass- 
ports, or safe conducts, shall also be given by the allied powers 
to enable to return to France all French workmen, sailors, and 
others employed in her service. 

Shall not be comprised in the above stipulations, the vessels 
and arsenals existing in the seaports which shall have been 
captured by the allies prior to the 23rd of April, nor the vessels 
and arsenals which belong to Holland, not excepting the fleet 
of the Texel: 

The government of France binds itself to remove, or to have 
sold, within the delay of three months after the division shall 
have taken place, everything which may be awarded to it, by 
reason of the aforesaid stipulations. 

Henceforth the port of Antwerp shall be solely a commercial 
port. 

Art. XVI.—The high contracting powers wishing to consign 
to oblivion and to destroy all records of the quarrels which have 
disturbed Europe, hereby declare and promise, that in the coun- 
tries restored and ceded by the present treaty, no individual of 
any class or condition shall be prosecuted, disturbed, or inter- 
fered with, in his person or his property, under any pretext, 
nor on account of any conduct or political opinion, nor of any 
attachment, either to any of the contracting powers, or to 
governments that have ceased to exist, nor for any other 
reason, except for debts to private individuals, or for deeds 
committed subsequently to the present treaty. 

Art. XVII.—In all countries which will now, or in the 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 143 


future, change masters, either in accordance with the present 
treaty, or by reason of the arrangements which are to be made 
in consequence of it, all foreign and native residents of whatever 
condition or nation, shall be allowed a delay of six years, to be 
reckoned from the exchange of ratifications, wherein to dispose, 
if they deem fit, of whatever property they may have acquired 
either before, or since, the breaking out of the present war, and 
wherein to go to whatever country they please. 

Art. XVIII —Theallied powers being anxious to give to His 
Most Christian Majesty a new testimony of their desire to 
obliterate as far as lies in their power, the consequences of the 
period of calamity so happily ended by the present peace, 
forego all claims to whatever sums their various governments 
may be entitled to by reason of contracts, supplies, or advances of 
any description, made to the French government in the course 
of the various wars which have taken place since 1792. 

In his turn, His Most Christian Majesty foregoes all claims 
France might bring forward for similar reasons against the 
allied powers. In execution of this article the high contracting 
powers promise to mutually return to each other all bonds, 
deeds, and documents relative to the debts and claims which 
they have each and all foregone. 

Art. XIX.—The French government undertakes to discharge, 
and pay, the sums which it may owe in addition in countries 
situated beyond French territory by reason of contracts or 
other agreements, passed expressly between individuals, or 
private establishments, and the French authorities, representing 
the price of supplies or any other legal claims. 

Art. XX.—The high contracting powers shall, immediately 
after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, 
appoint commissioners to regulate and assist in the execution of 
the whole of the provisions contained in Articles XVIII. and 
XIX. These commissioners shall examine the claims which 
have been mentioned in the preceding article, draw up the 
statements of the amounts claimed, and indicate the means by 
which the French government shall propose to settle its debts. 
They shall also be empowered to hand over all bonds, deeds, 
and documents relative to the claims mutually foregone by the 
high contracting powers, in such a way that the ratification of 
the results of their work shall complete the mutual renunciation. 

Art. XXI.—The debts originally mortgaged on countries 
which now cease to belong to France, or which were contracted 
by her for their internal administration, shall be chargeable to 
those countries. The French government therefore shall be 
indemnified from Dec. 22, 1813, for all such debts, if they have 


144 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


been registered in the grand ledger of the public debt of France. 
The deeds of all those which have been prepared for registra- 
tion, and have not yet been registered, shall be handed over to 
the governments of the respective countries to which they 
belong. The statements of all these debts shall be drawn up 
by a commission composed of plenipotentiaries appointed by all 
the states concerned. 

Art. XXII.—The French government shall, on the other hand, 
be called upon to refund all sums deposited by the subjects of the 
above-mentioned countries in the French treasury, whether as 
security, deposit, or guarantee. French subjects in the service 
of the said countries, who have deposited sums as security, 
deposits, or consignments in the respective treasuries of those 
countries, shall likewise be faithfully repaid. 

Art. XXIII.—Holders of official appointments subject to 
security, but who do not have the management of public 
moneys, shall be reimbursed with interest, until repaid in full 
at Paris, a fifth of the whole sum due to them being paid to 
them every year, the first of such payments to begin from the date 
of the present treaty. As regards officials entrusted with the 
management of public moneys, reimbursement shall begin at 
the latest, six months after the presentation of their accounts, 
the case of embezzlement being excepted. A copy of the last 
account shall be laid before the government of their country, 
to serve as information and as a point of departure. 

Art. XX1V.—The judiciary deposits and consignments, 
placed in the sinking funds, in execution of the law of the 28th 
of Nivése xiii. (18th of January, 1805), and which belong to 
the inhabitants of the countries which France has ceased to 
possess, shall be replaced, within the term of one year, counting 
from the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, 
in the hands of the authorities of the said countries, with the 
exception of those deposits and consignments that may interest 
French subjects ; in which case, they shall remain in the sinking 
fund, to be replaced only on authorizations, resulting from the 
decisions of competent authorities. 

Art. XXV.—The funds deposited by parishes and public 
establishments with the government cashiers, and in the sinking 
fund, or in any other bank of the government, shall be reim- 
bursed to them by a fifth, year by year, from the time of the 
present treaty, with the deduction of the advances that may 
have been made them, and with the exception of the legal 
attachments made on the funds by the said creditors, that is 
to say the parishes and the public establishments. 

Art. XXVI.—Dating from January 1, 1814, the French 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 145 


government ceases to be responsible for the payment of all 
civil pensions, whether military or ecclesiastical, for the balance 
of pensions, and for the half-pay of officers, to all individuals who 
are no longer French subjects. 

Art. XXVII.—National estates acquired by purchase by 
French subjects in the departments formerly belonging to 
Belgium, on the left bank of the Rhine, and in the Alps, out- 
side the old French limits, are, and shall, remain the property of 
the purchasers. 

Art. XX VIII.—The abolition of the rights of escheatage, of 
detraction, and others of the same nature, in the countries which 
have mutually stipulated for it with France, or which have been 
previously united to her, is expressly maintained.1 

Art. XXIX.—The French government promises to restore 
the bonds and other deeds that may have been seized in 
provinces occupied by French armies or French administrations, 
and, in the case in which this restitution cannot be effected, 
these bonds and deeds are, and shall remain null and void. 

Art. XXX.—The sums which may be due for all public works, 
not yet terminated, or that were terminated since December 31, 
1812, on the Rhine, and in the departments detached from 
France by the present treaty, shall pass to the charge of the 
future possessors of the territory, and shall be liquidated by 
the commission charged with the liquidation of the countries’ 
debts. 

Art. XXXI—The archives, maps, and documents of every 
description appertaining to the ceded countries, or referring to 
their administration, shall be faithfully restored at the same time 
as the countries, or, if this be impossible, within a delay that 
shall not exceed six months after the restitution of the 
countries themselves. 

This stipulation is applicable to the archives, maps, and 
plans, that may have been taken into countries temporarily 
occupied by the different armies. 

Art. XXXII.—Within the delay of two months, all the 
powers that have been engaged, on either side, in the present 
war, shall send plenipotentiaries to Vienna, to regulate, in 

1 The right of escheatage, as it existed under old French law constituted the 
sovereign the heir of all foreigners who died in France. But numerous treaties 
concluded with almost all the powers of Europe had, more especially during the 
eighteenth tentury, simply and solely abolished this right in all cases of re- 
ciprocity; or replaced it by one of simple detraction, which only left the king 
a part of the inheritance (from a quarter to a twentieth.) The National As- 
sembly entirely abolished both rights (by the decree of August 6, 1790, and 
April 15, and 28, 1791). A law of July 14, 1819, confirmed and completed 


this reform, which certain provisions of the Code Civil (Art. 726 and 912) seemed 
to modify. 


VOL, 1K. L 


146 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


a general congress the arrangements that are necessary to 
complete the dispositions of the present treaty. 

Art. XXXIII.—The present treaty shall be ratified, and the 
ratifications shall be exchanged, within the delay of fifteen days, 
or sooner if possible. 


In witness whereof... . 
THE PRINCE DE BENEVENT. 


THE PRINCE VON METTERNICH. 


THE COUNT VON STADION. 
PARIS, Way 30, 1814. 


ADDITIONAL ARTICLE.—The high contracting parties, 
wishing to eradicate all traces of the unhappy events which have 
weighed upon their peoples, have agreed to annul all effects of 
the treaties of 1805 and 1809, in so far as they are not already 
annulled by the present treaty ; in consequence of this determina- 
tion, His Most Christian Majesty, promises that the decrees 
existing against French subjects, or those reported to be so, who 
either are, or have been, in the service of His Imperial and Royal 
Apostolic Majesty, shall remain without effect, as well as the 
decisions that may have been put into execution in consequence 
of these decrees. 

The present additional article shall have the same force and 
value as though it were inserted word for word in the open 
treaty of this day... . 


The same day, in the same place, and at the same time, the 
same treaty of definite peace, was concluded 
Between France and Russia, 
Between France and Great Britain, 
Between France and Prussia, 
with the following additional articles :— 


ADDITIONAL ARTICLE TO THE TREATY WITH RUSSIA. 


The Duchy of Warsaw, being under the administration of 
a provisory council, established by Russia, since that country 
has been occupied by her armies, the two high contracting parties 
have agreed to name a special commission immediately, composed 
on both sides of an equal number of commissioners, who shall be 
employed with the examination, liquidation, and all other 
arrangements relative to the reciprocal claims. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 147 


ADDITIONAL ARTICLES TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT 
BRITAIN. 


Art. I—His Most Christian Majesty, sharing without 
reserve all the sentiments of His Britannic Majesty, relative to a 
class of commerce which is repugnant, both to the principles of 
justice, and the enlightenment of the times in which we live, 
promises to unite in a future congress all his efforts with those 
of His Britannic Majesty, to induce all the Christian powers to 
pronounce the abolition of the slave-trade, in such a manner 
that the said trade shall universally cease, as it shall cease, in 
any case, on the part of France, within five years; and that, 
moreover, during this interval, no trader shall import or sell 
slaves anywhere, except in the colonies of the state of which 
he is a subject. 

Art. II].—The French and British governments shall imme- 
diately appoint commissioners to ascertain their respective ex- 
penses for the maintenance of their prisoners, in order to agree 
as to the best means of settling the balance which may occur in 
favour of the one or other of the two powers. 

Art. I11—The respective prisoners of war shall be bound 
down to pay, before their departure from the place of their 
detention, any private debts they may have contracted there, or 
to give at least satisfactory security. 

Art. I1V.—Both sides shall, immediately after the ratification 
of the present treaty of peace, agree to the replevin of the 
escheatment which may have been applied since the year 1792, 
to the funds, revenues, credits, and other effects whatsoever, 
of the high contracting parties, or their subjects. The same 
commissioners, of whom mention is made in Article II., shall 
occupy themselves with the examination, and settlement of 
the claims of the subjects of His Britannic Majesty on the 
French government, for the value of goods, movable or not, that 
may have been unduly confiscated by the French authorities, 
as well as for the total or partial loss of their credits or other 
property unduly retained by the escheatment since the year 1792. 

France engages to treat, in this respect, all English subjects 
with the same justice that French subjects have experienced 
in England, and the English government, desirous to concur for 
its part in the fresh token that the allied powers have deter- 
mined to give His Most Christian Majesty of their desire to 
blot out the consequences of that troubled epoch, so happily 
terminated by the present peace, promises on its side to 
renounce, from the time complete justice shall have been rendered 
to its subjects, any excess which shall be found in its favour, 


Ee 


148 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


relative to the maintenance of the war prisoners, in such a manner 
that the ratification of the result of the work of the commissioners 
herein mentioned, and the acquittal of the sums, as well as 
the restitution of the effects which shall be pronounced be- 
iong to subjects of His Britannic Majesty, shall complete 
its renunciation. 

Art. V.—The two high contracting parties, desiring to 
establish the most amicable relations between their respective 
subjects, promise to agree as soon as possible upon an arrange- 
ment for their commercial interests, with the intention of 
encouraging and increasing the prosperity of their respective 
states. 

The present additional articles shall have the same force and 


ADDITIONAL ARTICLE TO THE TREATY WITH PRUSSIA. 


Though the treaty of peace concluded at Basel, April 5, 
1795, that of Tilsit, July 9, 1807, the Paris Convention, Septem- 
ber 20, 1808, as well as all conventions and acts whatsoever 
concluded ‘since the peace of Basel between Prussia and France, 
be already annulled according to the present treaty, the high 
contracting powers have nevertheless thought fit to expressly 
declare that the said treaties cease to be obligatory in all their 
articles, open as well as secret, and that they mutually renounce 
all rights, and hold themselves free from any obligation that can 
result from them. 

His Most Christian Majesty promises that the decrees aimed 
at French subjects, or those reported as such, who either 
are, or have been, in the service of His Prussian Majesty, shall 
remain without effect, as well as any decisions which may have 
been given in the execution of these decrees. 

The present additional article shall have the same force and 


The enumeration of all that relates to the open treaty of 
May 30, 1814, would not be complete, if I did not also insert 
here the separate and secret articles of that treaty, to which 
I was obliged to consent, and which formed perhaps the most 
unfortunate part of the negotiations that the French plenipo- 
tentiaries would have to follow at the future congress. Those 
articles were only communicated to me, and I did not put my 
signature to them. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 149 


SEPARATE AND SECRET ARTICLES OF THE TREATY OF PARIS 
OF May 30, 1814. 


The disposition of the territories which His Most Christian 
Majesty foregoes, by Art. III. of the open treaty of this day, 
and the future relations of the various states from which there 
is to result a system of real and durable equilibrium in Europe, 
shall be regulated at the congress on a basis agreed upon 
between the allied powers, and in compliance with the general 
provisions contained in the following article :-— 

Art. I—The establishment of a just equilibrium in Europe, 
demanding that Holland be strong enough to be able to maintain 
her independence by her own means, therefore the countries 
included between the sea, the frontiers of France, such as they 
are determined by the present treaty, and the Meuse, shall be 
united to Holland for ever. 

Art. I].—The frontiers of the right bank of the Meuse shall 
be determined according to the military convenience of Holland 
and her neighbours. 

Art. I1I.—The right of navigation on the Scheldt shall be 
established on the same principle as that of navigation on the 
Rhine, as stipulated for in Art. V. of the open treaty of to-day. 

Art. 1V.—The German countries on the left bank of the 
Rhine which have been united to France since 1792 shall 
serve for the aggrandisement of Holland and for the compen- 
sation of Prussia and other German states. 


When I think of the date of these treaties of 1814, of the 
difficulties of every kind that I experienced, and of the spirit 
of vengeance that I encountered in some of the negotiators with 
whom I treated, and whom I had to thwart, I await with 
confidence the judgment that posterity shall pass upon me. 
I shall simply call attention to the fact that, six weeks after the 
king’s entrance into Paris, France’s territory was secured, the 
foreign soldiers had quitted French soil, and, by the return of 
the garrisons of foreign fortresses and of the prisoners, she 
possessed a superb army, and finally that we had preserved all 
the admirable works of art carried off by our armies from nearly 
all the museums of Europe. 

If new disasters overwhelmed France in 1815, and caused 
her to lose the benefits of the treaties of 1814, it is again 
Napoleon alone who was guilty, and who deserved the 


150 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


execration of his country for drawing upon it irretrievable 
calamities. 

The treaty of Paris, by depriving France of those immense 
countries that conquest had previously placed in her hands, 
rendered ulterior arrangements for disposing of those territories, 
indispensable. Several sovereigns, for instance, the King of 
Sardinia,! the Elector of Hanover,? that of Hesse-Cassel,? had 
resumed possession of the states that had been taken from them 
in the war, as soon as those states were evacuated. But the 
fate of many of the countries released from France remained 
to be decided. That of the King of Saxony, towards whom the 
allied powers displayed implacable hatred because of his fidelity 
to the cause of Napoleon, had also to be pronounced upon, and 
that of the Duchy of Warsaw, taken, not by France, but by her 
ally, the King of Saxony, and finally, that of the realm of 
Naples, that the policy of France, as well as the will of Louis 
XVIII., unmovable on that point, could evidently not leave 
in the hands of Murat. 

It has been noticed, that by the treaty, it had been agreed 
that all the measures to be taken should be arranged at a congress, 
to meet at Vienna. One of the stipulations of the treaty was 
that Holland, placed under the sovereignty of the House of 
Orange, should receive an increase of territory that could be taken 
only from Belgium ; it was the result of a promise made by 
England, who wished to have the port of Antwerp under her 
control, and to prevent its becoming a military port. The King 
of Sardinia was also to receive an increase of territory taken 
from the former state of Genoa, for Napoleon, like the allied 
cabinets, no longer thought of re-establishing the old republics, 
shaken, or already destroyed, by the French Republic. 

The states of Germany which had survived the dissolution of 

? Victor-Emanuel I., second son of Victor Amadeus III., was born in 1759; he 
succeeded, 1802, his brother Charles-Emmanuel, who had abdicated. Until 1814, he 
reigned only on the island of Sardinia. Having then recovered his states, he reigned 
until 1821, was then obliged to abdicate in consequence of an insurrection, ceded the 
throne to his brother Charles-Felix, and died in 1824. 

2 George III. King of England, recovered, in 1814, his electorship of Hanover, 
which was formed into a kingdom and increased by various territories. 


3 William IX., Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel and Elector in 1801, was dispossesed in 


1806 ; in 1814 his estates and his title of elector were returned to him. He died in 
1821. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 151 


the German Empire, and those of Italy (with the exception of 
the countries which belonged to the Emperor of Austria), which 
had become independent, were to continue so. For the rest, the 
treaty determined nothing as to the other divisions and appor- 
tioning of territories. It simply stipulated that territorial and 
other arrangements should be made to secure a vea/ and durable 
equilibrium. ‘These words real and durable equilibrium were 
very vague, and could not fail to open up a vast field for discus- 
sion, the issue of which itavas impossible to foresee. For neither 
the direction that the negotiations were to take at the Congress, 
nor the spirit that would preside over its deliberations, had been 
determined beforehand in accordance with fixed principles. 
Whatever points had been decided, were so, by clauses relative 
to particular cases. 

In such a state of things, the part France had to play was sin- 
gularly difficult. It was very tempting and very easy for cabinets 
embittered for such a long time to refuse to admit her to a council 
discussing the great interests of Europe. By the treaty of Paris, 
France had escaped destruction ; but she had not resumed, in 
the system of general politics, the rank she is called upon to 
occupy. Experienced eyes could easily discover in several of 
the principal plenipotentiaries, the secret desire to reduce her to 
playing a secondary part ; and the secret articles of the treaty pro- 
vided that the territories re-taken from France should be divided 
between the powers, that is to say, to the exclusion of France. 
If then France did not herself point out, at the very opening of 
the congress, the place ascribed to her by the recollection of her 
power, and by the transitory generosity of some of the allied 
sovereigns, she would have to submit to remaining for a long 
time to come, a stranger to the transactions of Europe, and 
to being exposed to the effect of the alliances which her 
success, which she had so much abused, had brought about and 
which jealousy could renew. In a word, she would lose the hope 
of tracing, between the empire of Napoleon and the Restoration, 
that deep line of demarkation which would prevent the cabinets 
of Europe from requiring regenerated France to account for the 
violence and the excesses of revolutionary France. 

It required a negotiator well convinced of the importance 


152 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


of the circumstances, well penetrated with the means that had 
contributed to the changes brought about in France, and in 
a position to speak a firm and true language to the cabinets, 
whom it was difficult to induce to forget the fact of their being 
victorious. It required, above all, of the French plenipotentiary 
that he be impressed with, and impress the fact, that France de- 
sired only what she possessed ; that she had frankly repudiated 
the heritage of conquest ; that she thought herself strong enough 
in her old boundaries ; that she had no intention of extending 
them ; that, finally, she to-day placed her glory in her modera- 
tion ; but that, if she wished her voice to be heeded in Europe, 
it was in order to be able to defend the rights of others, against 
all kinds of trespass. 

I did not see among all the men who had held office any who 
seemed to me to possess the conditions necessary to suitably fill 
that mission. The émzgrés who had returned with the king had 
remained strangers to general politics; the men who were 
partisans of the fallen government could not yet understand 
the interests and position of the newly revived monarchy. 
I looked upon the post of French plenipotentiary at Vienna, 
as a very difficult one to fill. I have never known one more 
honourable. 

It was in fact, the duty of the plenipotentiary to complete the 
work of the restoration, by ensuring the solidity of the edifice that 
Providence had permitted to be reconstructed. I believed I pos- 
sessed the right, and I regarded it as a duty to claim that post. 
The king did not allow me to finish the request that I was about 
to put to him, and he interrupted me by saying, “ Draw me up a 
project for your instructions.” I thanked him, and begged him to 
appoint with me the Duc de Dalberg, whom I wished to distin- 
guish, and for whom I had a friendship, and whom moreover, by 
his birth, by his family relations in Germany, and by his ability, 
would be, for me a useful co-operator. 

At the end of a few days, I was able to place before the 
king, the project of instructions, that he had asked me for. He 
approved of it, and I believe that when the instructions, that 
I give farther on, are known, France will take a pride in the 
sovereign who signed them. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 153 


To accompany me, I chose from the Department of Foreign 
Affairs, the faithful and clever La Besnardiere, whom | regard 
as the most distinguished man who has appeared in the 
ministry of Foreign Affairs for a great many years. I gave 
him as assistants MM, Challaye, Formond! and Perrey, all 
three young, and possessing aptitudes that would enable them 
to profit by the lessons that could be learned in such great 
circumstances. 

I afterwards sought in society for two more persons whom I 
could attach to the French Legation at Vienna. In my choice, 
I studied Paris, that is to say, the Tuileries, more than Vienna, 
because, at Paris, I had to check all the would-be diplomats who 
surrounded the princes, and whom I wished to believe that they: 
were (without my being aware of it, though without any risk to: 
my mission) acquainted with my movements ; for, as to Vienna, 
and France, I depended upon myself. It is thus, that the Comte: 
Alexis de Noailles* and the Marquis de la Tour du Pin 
Gouvernet? were associated with the Duc de Dalberg and 
myself as plenipotentiaries at the congress at Vienna. 

It appeared to me also, that it was necessary to shake off 
the hostile prejudice with which imperial France had inspired 
the high and influential society of Vienna. For that it was 
necessary to make the French embassy attractive. I then 
asked my niece, the Comtesse de Perigord, to accompany me 

1M. de Formond was employed in the cipher department of the Seal office. He 
became consul afterwards and resided in that capacity at Bucharest (1815), at Cagliari 
(1817), at Livorna (1830). He retired on a pension in 1840. 

2 Alexis, Comte de Noailles, son of Louis-Marie, Viscomte de Noailles, was born 
in 1783. In 1809, he was arrested as guilty of having given publicity to the pope’s 
bull of excommunication against the emperor. Having been set at liberty a short time 
after, he emigrated in 1811, went to Switzerland, afterwards to Stockholm, and finally 
to England, where he joined Louis XVIII. He fought in the campaign of 1813 as Ber- 
nadotte’s aide-de-camp, and served likewise in the enemy’s ranks in 1814. He then 
became aide-de-camp to the Comte d’ Artois and followed Prince Talleyrand to Vienna, 
In 1815, he was elected deputy of the Oise and of the Rhéne, and appointed state 
minister and member of the privy council. He was always elected until 1830, when he 
retired into private life. He died in 1835. 

3 Frederic, Marquis de la Tour du Pin Gouvernet, born in 1758, was the son of 
the Comte de la Tour du Pin, who was a deputy at the States-General, Minister of 
War in 1789, and guillotined in 1794. The former was colonel at the outbreak of the 
Revolution, and was appointed Minister at the Hague. Having been recalled in 1792, 
he emigrated, returned to France under the Consulate, and became /réfet of Amiens 
and of Brussels. He accompanied M. de Talleyrand to Vienna, was afterwards 


appointed again Minister at the Hague, and sent later in that capacity to the King of 
Sardinia. He retired in 1830, and died in 1837. 


154 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


and do the honours of my house. By her superior intellect 
and tact, she knew how to attract and please, and proved very 
useful to me. 

At Vienna, it was necessary to have France use different 
language from that which people had been accustomed to 
hear from her for the last twenty years. Nor was it less 
necessary that the dignity that she should display should be 
expressed with nobleness, even with brilliancy. The part of 
self-resignation, so new to her, and that had been imposed upon 
her by Napoleon’s faults, could, in my opinion, scarcely be 
deprived of grandeur, and should even give weight to the 
observations that I might be called upon to make in the 
interest of right and justice. It was therefore, because of the 
aid which she could afford in supporting weak powers, that I 
endeavoured to place her, from the outset, in a worthy and 
honourable situation. 

It is thus easy to guess that difficulties sufficiently serious 
awaited me at Vienna, for no other answer to be needed to the 
reproach made me for having left Paris at the time when the 
government, being badly advised, might follow an imprudent 
course, delay thereby its consolidation, and damp the sentiments 
that had been displayed on the king’s arrival. And besides, 
one must first do that which one knows how to do, and in this 
I undertook a task, in which I felt confident of success. And, I 
would ask of all honest people, was it natural to believe that, 
instead of exerting every effort not to revive recollections which 
it was necessary to consign to oblivion, and of banishing all 
appearances ofan arbitrary will, the new government would apply 
itself only to do the reverse? The truth is, I confess, that I had 
not expected such blindness. I should never have believed that 
Abbé de Montesquiou, who had most influence, would have 
employed it so badly. 

The Czar Alexander very soon showed how astonished he 
was at the course being followed in the internal affairs of France. 
It was one more obstacle. He received his impressions from 
the most ardent Liberals, whom he was accustomed to see. 
After his departure for England, from whence he intended to 
return to Paris, I believed it my duty to write him the follow- 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 155 


ing letter. It probably caused him to make certain reflections, 
if he found it again in his pocket-book } in 1823 :— 


FROM THE PRINCE DE BENEVENT TO THE CZAR ALEXANDER. 


PARIS, June 13, 1814. 
SIRE, 


I did not see your Majesty before your departure, and I 
take the liberty of reproaching you for it with the sincere 
respect of my most affectionate attachment. 

Sire, important relations disclosed to you my most secret 
sentiments a long time ago. Your esteem was the result of 
such disclosure. It comforted me for many years, and enabled 
me to bear painful ordeals. I foresaw your destiny, and felt 
that I could, Frenchman though I am, associate myself some 
day with your projects, because they would never cease to be 
magnanimous. You have completely accomplished that grand 
destiny ; seeing that I followed you in your noble career, do not 
deprive me of my recompense. I ask it from the hero of my 
fancy, and, dare I add, of my heart. 

You have saved France. Your entrance into Paris has 
been the signal for the end of despotism; whatever be your 
secret observations, if you were again called there, what you 
have already done you would do again, for you could not fail 
in your glory, even if you were to believe the monarchy disposed 
to assume a little more authority than you think necessary, 
and the French people to neglect to look to their independence. 
After all, what are we yet? And who can flatter himself, after 
such a catastrophe, that he understands in a short time the cha- 
racter of the French? Do not doubt it, sire, the king whom you 
have brought back to us, shall be obliged, if he would give us 
useful institutions, to take certain precautions, and to seek in 
his faithful memory what we were formerly, in order to judge 
what will really suit us. Having swerved from our national 
customs owing to a gloomy oppression, we shall for long seem 
foreign to the government that shall be given us. 

The French in general, were, and will be, somewhat fickle in 
their impressions; they will always be ready to make them 
known because a secret instinct tells them that they are not 
to last long. This versatility will lead them very soon to place 
an unlimited confidence in their sovereign, and ours will not 
abuse that confidence. 

In France, the king has always come before the country. It 


_ 3 Lhave ascertained that the original of this letter is still (1857) to be found in the 
imperial archives at Saint Petersburg.—(JZ. de Bacourt.) 


156 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


seems to us that the country is represented by the one man. We 
have no national pride, but a vast amount of vanity, which, well 
regulated, produces a deep sentiment of individual honour. Our 
opinions, or rather our tastes, have often directed our kings 
(Bonaparte would have shed French blood with more impunity, 
if he had not tried to oppress us by his gloomy manners). 
The forms and manners of our sovereigns have in turn 
fascinated our own, and from that mutual action there shall 
result for us a method of governing and of obeying which, after 
all, might eventually deserve the name of constitution. The 
king has long studied our history. He knows us, he knows 
how to give a royal character to all that proceeds from him ; 
and when we shall have become ourselves again, we shall resume 
that truly French custom of adapting to ourselves the actions 
and qualities of our king. Besides, liberal principles are keep- 
ing pace with the spirit of the age. We cannot fail to reach 
that point; and if your Majesty will place confidence in my 
word, I will promise you that we shall have a monarchy blended 
with liberty; that you shall witness men of merit welcomed 
and honoured in France; and it will be your glory to have 
made the happiness of our country. 

Sire, I confess that you saw many discontented persons 
in Paris ; but if we put aside the quickness of the past revolu- 
tion, and the surprise of so many passions all stirred at the 
same time, what is Paris after all but a city of officials? The 
cessation of official appointments alone warned the Parisians of 
the despotism of Napoleon. If the government had continued 
paying people in places, it is in vain that the provinces would have 
groaned under tyranny. The provinces really constitute France ; 
there they really hail the return of the House of Bourbon, and 
proclaim your happy victory. 

Your Majesty will pardon the length of my letter. It was 
indispensable in order to reply to the greatest portion of your 
generous anxieties ; it will replace a verbal explanation that I 
should so much like to have given you. General Pozzo,! whom 

1 Charles-André, Comte Pozzo di Borgo, born near Ajaccio, in 1764. Was at 
first intimate with Napoleon in his youth ; but they fell out in the course of the civil 
outbreaks of Corsica, and this was the beginning of an enmity which continued during 
their lives. In 1791, Pozzo was elected deputy of Corsica at the legislative assembly. 
Having returned to Corsica in 1792, he was in the following year called to office with 
Paoli, by his fellow citizens. Corsica having momentarily submitted to England, 
Pozzo was president of the State Council and Secretary of State. He was obliged 
to emigrate in 1796, went to London, then to Vienna, and, in 1803, entered the 
Russian service as adiplomat. He returned to Austria after Tilsit, went from there 
to England (1809), and negotiated a reconciliation between London and St. 
Petersburg. He had a considerable influence over the events of 1812 and 1813. In 


1814, he accompanied the Czar Alexander to Paris, was appointed Russian am- 
bassador to France, entrusted with numerous diplomatic missions, and attended 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 157 


I see every day, and whom I cannot thank you enough, sire, for 
having left with us, shall look to our interests and warn us, 
for we sometimes need to be warned. I shall discuss with him 
our national interests ; and if, as I hope, your Majesty honours 
France with a short visit, upon his return, he will tell you, and 
you will yourself see, that I have not deceived you. 

Another confidant, one only, has received the secret of my 
grief, I mean the Duchess of Courland, whom you honour with 
your kindness and who so well understands my anxiety. When 
we shall have the happiness of seeing you again, I shall léave 
it to her to tell you how grieved I have been, and she will 
also tell you that I did not deserve to be so. 

May, sire, your generous soul have a little patience! A really 
good Frenchman as I am, permit me to ask of you, in the old 
French language, to allow us to resume the former accoutu- 
mance of love for our kings; it is certainly not yours to 
refuse to understand the influence of that sentiment on a great 
nation. 

Please deign to accept, sire, with your usual kindness, the 
homage of the profound respect with which I am, sire, your 
Majesty’s most humble, obedient servant, 

PRINCE DE BENEVENT. 


INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE KING’S AMBASSADORS AT THE 
CONGRESS. 


No assembly invested with powers can do anything legiti- 
mate unless it be legitimately constituted, and consequently, 
unless none of those who have a right to be there be excluded 
therefrom, and none of those who have not such right be ad- 
mitted. Let it confine itself scrupulously to its province, and 
proceed according to prescribed rules, or failing such rules, 
according to those which may be drawn from the purpose for 
which it was constituted, and from the nature of things. It is 
the nature of things to fix the order in which it is indispensable 
to regulate them, by the various degrees of connection of de- 
pendence that it places between different objects, seeing that a 
subordinate question cannot be treated and decided before 
that ‘upon which it depends. Finally the most legitimate and 
wisest acts would be useless and fail in their object if, for 
want of means of execution, they were not enforced. 


all the congresses of the Holy Alliance. In 1835 he became ambassador at London, 
resigned in 1839, and died in 1843. 

! An old French expression, now obsolete, meaning what one is wont to do.— 
( Translator.) 


158 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


It is then most necessary that the congress should determine 
first of all, 


1. Which are the states which may send plenipotentiaries. 

2. What subjects should or might be settled there. 

3. By what means they can be settled, if by decision or 
arbitration, or by means of negotiations, or again partly by both 
these means, and the cases in which each of those means should 
be employed. 

4. In cases in which the means of decision shall be em- 
ployed, in what manner the votes are to be taken. 

5. The order in which the subjects are to be treated. 

6. The form to be given to the decision. 

7. The modes and manners of execution in case obstacles 
of any description should be met with. 


According to Article XXXII. of the treaty of May 30th, 
the congress should be general, and all the powers engaged in the 
war that that treaty terminated should send their plenipoten- 
tiaries there. Although the term fowers carries with itself an 
indeterminate idea of greatness and of strength which seems 
to render it inapplicable to many states deprived of the one and 
the other, employed as it is in Article XXXII. in an abstract 
and general sense, restrained only by the expression of acon- 
nection entirely independent of the comparative strength of 
states and common to the smallest and the largest, it comprises 
incontestably all those between which that connection exists, 
that is to say, that have been in one way or another engaged 
in the war that the treaty of May 3cth terminated. If one 
excepts Turkey and Switzerland, for the republic of San- 
Marino cannot be reckoned, all the states of Europe, great 
and small, have been engaged in that war. The right. of 
the smallest to send a plenipotentiary to the congress results 
then from the provision of the treaty of May 30th. France 
has not thought of excluding them, and the other contracting 
powers have not been able to do so, since stipulating for them 
and in their name they were not able to stipulate against them. 
The smallest states, being those which would most readily be 
excluded because of their weakness, are all, or nearly all, in 
Germany. Now Germany intends to form a confederation of 
which they are members ; the organization of this consequently 
interests them in the highest degree. It could not be done 
without them without violating their natural independence, 
and Article VI. of the treaty of May 30, which by implication 
lays great stress upon it, by saying that the states of Germany 
should be independent and united by a federal link. That 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 159 


organization will be made at the congress, it would then be 
unjust to exclude them from it. 

To these motives of justice a more practical motive of utility 
to France must be added. All that is of interest to the small 
states is of interest to her also. All wish to preserve their 
existence, and she should wish that they preserve it. Some of 
them might desire to be enlarged, and that would suit her, 
inasmuch as it would diminish the growth of the large states. 
Her policy would be to protect and favour them, but without 
any one being able to take umbrage on that account, which 
would be less easy if they did not attend the congress, and, 
instead of having to support their requests, she should even be 
obliged to make their requests for them, while, from another 
point of view, the need they would have of her assistance would 
give her an influence over them. Thus the question of their 
votes being or not being counted, is not indifferent to her. 

In pursuance of which, if it should occur that, under the 
pretext of the smallness of any state engaged in the last war, 
the plenipotentiaries of the sovereign of that state be excluded 
from the congress, the king’s ambassadors shall oppose, and 
shall insist on their being admitted. 

The nations of Europe do not yet acknowledge in their 
mutual intercourse the moral law alone, nor yet that of nature 
alone, but are still under a law that they have made for them- 
selves, and which gives to the first a sanction which it other- 
wise lacks ; it is a law established by written conventions, or by 
usage constantly, universally, and reciprocally followed, which 
is always founded on mutual consent, whether tacit or expressed, 
and which is obligatory for all; this law is the law of public 
right. 

Now there are in this right two fundamental principles: the 
one that the sovereignty cannot be acquired by the simple fact 
of conquest, nor pass to the conqueror if the sovereign does not 
cede it; the other, that any title of sovereignty, and conse- 
quently the right that it supposes, are binding for the other 
states only in so far as they may recognize it. 

Whenever a conquered country has a sovereign, cession is 
possible, and it follows from the first of the principles cited, that 
it cannot be replaced, or supplied by anything. 

But a conquered country can be without a sovereign, either be- 
cause he who was sovereign has for himself and his heirs renounced 
his right simply, without ceding it to another; or because the 
reigning family has just died out without any one being legally 
called to reign after it. The moment a republic is conquered, 
the sovereign ceases to exist, because his nature is such that 


160 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


liberty is a necessary condition of his existence, and because 
it is an absolute impossibility for him to have one moment of 
liberty so long as the conquest lasts. 

The cession by the sovereign is then impossible. 

Does it therefore follow that in this case the right of conquest 
can prolong itself indefinitely, or convert itself into the right of 
sovereignty? By no means. 

Sovereignty is, in the general society of Europe, what 
private property is in civil society. A country or state under 
conquest and without a sovereign, and a property without 
a master, are unclaimed goods ; but forming both the one and 
the other a portion of a territory which is not unclaimed, and 
consequently subject to the law of that territory, and can be 
acquired only in conformity with that law ; for example, private 
property, in conformity with the public law of the special state 
in which it is situated, and the country or state only in con- 
formity with the European public law, which is the general law 
of the territory forming the common domain of Europe. Now it 
is one of the principles of this law that the sovereignty cannot 
be transferred by the mere act of conquest. Therefore, when 
the cession by the sovereign is impossible, it is of the fullest 
necessity that it be supplied. And this can only be done by the 
sanction of Europe. A sovereign whose states are under con- 
quest (if he be an hereditary sovereign) does not cease to be 
sovereign, unless he has ceded his right or has renounced it, 
nor does he lose by the conquest anything beyond actual pos- 
session, and consequently preserves the right to do all that 
does not presuppose this possession. The sending of plenipo- 
tentiaries to the congress presupposes it so little, that it could 
even have for object to demand it. 

Thus the King of Saxony and the prince-primate, as legiti- 
mate sovereign of Aschaffenburg! (at least if he has not 
abdicated in the meantime), could send theirs there, and not only 
could they do so, but it is even necessary that they should, for in 
case, which is more than probable, one wished to dispose 
entirely, or in part of their possessions, since it would be 
impossible to legitimately dispose of them, without a cession 
Or renunciation on their part, it is necessary that some one, 
invested with their power, cede or renounce them in their name ; 
and as it is a third principle of the public law of Europe, 
that a cession or renunciation is null, if it has not been freely 
made, that is, by a sovereign at liberty, the king’s ambassadors 


1 The prince-primate had been created sovereign Prince of Aschaffenburg, 


Frankfort and Wetzlar, by the emperor, at the time of the formation of the Rhine 
Confederation. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 161 


shall take the necessary steps that one of the plenipotentiaries 
claim, in conformity with this principle, for. the King of Saxony, 
the authorization to repair immediately wherever he may deem 
fit, and they shall personally second that request, and if needed, 
shall themselves make it. 

The Duke of Oldenburg,! the Duke of Arenberg,? and the 
Princes of Salm,? possessed in sovereignty countries that 
were seized in open peace by him who named himself, and who 
should have been, their protector, and they were annexed to 
France, but their sovereigns did not yield. The allies do not 
appear to have, up to the present, recognized the rights of the 
houses of Arenberg and Salm; but those rights exist, as well 
as those of the Prince of Isenburg, who, absent from home and 
in the service of France, was treated like an enemy, and whose 
estates are under conquest. 

The princes and counts of the old German empire who 
have become subjects of the members of the Rhine Confedera- 
tion by virtue of the act which constituted it, cannot be considered 
as dispossessed sovereigns, seeing that they were not sovereigns, 
but simply vassals and subjects of the emperor and of the 
Empire, whose sovereignty over them has been transferred to 
their new masters. The attempts that they might make to 
have themselves recognized as dispossessed sovereigns, and 
that certain powers might be willing to support, ought to be 
rejected as illegitimate and evendangerous. Mere hesitation on 
that point would suffice to agitate, and perhaps, to set on fire, 
the whole of Southern Germany. 

The order of St. John of Jerusalem might desire to send re- 
presentatives to the congress, but, considering that the island 
of Malta and its dependencies were the only territories that it 


i 1 The grand-duchy of Oldenburg had been annexed by Napoleon, December 13, 
15620. 

2 The states of the dukes of Arenberg had been partially annexed to France by 
the treaty of Lunéville. They had received in exchange, the county of Meppen and 
the Fort of Rechlinghausen. In 1803, the reigning duke, Louis-Angilbert, abdicated 
in favour of his son Prosper-Louis, born in 1785. The latter became in 1806, senator of 
the French Empire, entered the Rhine Confederation in 1807, raised, in 1808, a regi- 
ment of Chasseurs with which he was sent to Spain. He was made prisoner and taken 
to England. In 1810, Napoleon disposed of his states that were partially annexed to 
France and partially united to the Grand Duchy of Berg. In 1815, the states of the 
Duke d’ Arenberg were divided between Hanover and Prussia, and that prince him- 
self became a member of the Upper Chamber of Hanover. 

3 Constantine-Alexander, Prince of Salm-Salm, and Frederick IV., Prince of Salm- 
Kyrburg. The principality of Salm was united with France in 1802. In exchange, the 
Prince Salm-Kyrburg, who served in the French army as superior officer of cavalry, 
obtained the bishopric of Miinster and entered the Rhine Confederation. In 1812, 
Napoleon annexed that territory on condition of the payment of an income of 400,000 
ana which was made to the prince. In 1814, his ancient principality was united to 

russia. 


VOL.. II. M 


162 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


possessed ; that it yielded them, and that there can be no 
sovereign without territory, as there can be no property without 
an owner, it has ceased to be sovereign and can only become 
one by acquiring a territory. 

The deliverance of a conquered country, in whatever manner 
it be done, returns immediate possession to the sovereign who 
has only lost that, and to the republic its existence. They can 
only retake possession, the one and the other, of that which 
belonged to them, and not to any one else. 

The Electors of Hanover and of Hesse, the prince of Nas- 
sau-Orange as prince of Germany, the Dukes of Brunswick? and 
of Oldenburg, who all, in consequence of the dissolution. of the 
German Empire were independent when their countries were 
invaded, or disposed of, possess them to-day as legitimately as 
formerly. 

The cities of Liibeck, Bremen, and Hamburg, had become 
independent by reason of the dissolution of the German Empire: 
that of Danzig, by the peace of Tilsit.2 The republics of Valais, 
of Genoa, Lucca, and Ragusa, were independent for centuries. 
All have fallen under conquest, unless the documents by which 
Genoa and Lucca seemed to give up their own sovereignty, be 
regarded as valid. 

Countries that are not now occupied by any foreign force, 
nor governed by any foreign authority, have again become what 
they were, and can have ministers at the congress. The others 
cannot. 

Geneva has recovered her former independence ; but she has 
not been engaged, as a state, in the war that the treaty of 
May 30 has terminated; and she is to be included in the 
Helvetic confederation, which was not engaged therein either. 

The island of Elba forms an independent state only since the 
war has ceased.® 

Conquest being unable by itself to give sovereignty, cannot 
return it. The sovereign who enters by conquest into a 
country which he has ceded, cannot again become sovereign of 
that country, any more than a private owner can seize upon 
property he has already disposed of. 

That which conquest cannot give to one it cannot give to 


! Frederick- William, Duke of Brunswick-CEls, born in 1771, had succeeded his 
father in 1806. But he was deposed at the peace of Tilsit and his dukedom annexed 
to the kingdom of Westphalia. After vain efforts to reconquer his patrimony, he took 
refuge in England. He took up arms again in 1813, was reinstated in his states, 
December 22 of the same year, and was killed at Waterloo. 

2 Napoleon had then taken Danzig from Prussia, and declared it a free city, but 
it was to be occupied by a French garrison. 

5 Napoleon had been recognized as sovereign prince of the island of Elba. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 163 


several. If then several fellow-conquerors attribute to themselves, 
or give to themselves reciprocally, a sovereignty over the country 
which they have conquered, they commit an act which public law 
disapproves and annuls. 

The Prince of Orange! ceded all his rights to Holland, but 
the treaty of May 30, signed by eight of the principal powers of 
Europe, and agreed to in the names of all, returns him that 
country (Open Treaty, Art. 6). 

That treaty on laying down the bases of several dispositions 
to be made by the congress, says that the former states of the 
King of Sardinia, a portion only of which he had ceded, shall 
be returned him (Art. 2, Secret), and that Austria shall have as 
limits beyond the Alps, the Po, Lago Maggiore, and the Tessin, 
which will be returning to her countries that belonged to her, and 
that she had yielded on the Adriatic Gulf and in Italy (Art. 6, 
Open, and 2, Secret). 

The Prince of Orange possesses therefore a legitimate and 
actual right, and the King of Sardinia, and Austria an almost 
actual right of sovereignty over the countries which had ceased 
to belong to them because they had ceded them. 

But the treaty has not returned to Prussia any of the countries 
that she ceded at various times on this side of the Elbe. She 
has then no real right of sovereignty over those countries, if we 
except the principality of Neufchatel, for which the last and 
legitimate possessor has made with her an arrangement that may 
be considered as a cession. The treaty has not given Tuscany 
and Modena back to the Archdukes Ferdinand? and Francis,* 

1 William, Prince of Orange-Nassau, afterwards King of the Netherlands, was 
born in 1772 ; he was the son of the Stadtholder, William V. He was in command 
of the Dutch forces in 1794 and 1795. At the time of the French invasion his father 
abdicated and took refuge in England, and Prince William himself entered the service 
of Austria. In 1803, he obtained, in exchange for all his rights on Holland, the abbey 
of Fulda, which had just been secularized. But having, in 1806, embraced the cause 
of Prussia, he was despoiled of that principality as well as of his paternal estates. He 
then took up service again in Austria. He re-entered Holland in 1813, and took the 
title of sovereign prince of the United Provinces. The Congress of Vienna bestowed 
on him the title of King of the Netherlands, and united Belgium to Holland. In the 
following year King William I. again joined the coalition and was wounded at Water- 
loo. He reigned peacefully until 1830, when Belgium rose against him, and proclaimed 
her independence. He abdicated in 1840, and died three years later in Berlin. 

? Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, son of the Emperor Leopold and of Marie-Louise 
infanta of Spain. He became Grand-Duke of Tuscany in 1791. He retained his 
states until 1799, when he was deposed, and regained possession of his states in the 
same year. But the victory of Marengo again deprived him of his states, which were 
transformed in 1801 into the kingdom of Etruria, and given to the duke Louis of Parma. 
Ferdinand retired to Vienna, received in 1803 the archbishopric of Salzburg, with the 
title of elector, and in 1805, the bishopric of Wurtzburg, and in 1806 joined the Rhine 
Confederation with the title of grand-duke. Ferdinand re-entered Tuscany in 1814 
and reigned until 1824. 


3 Francis IV., son of the Archduke Ferdinand and of Marie-Beatrix d’Este, 
by his mother grandson of Hercules III. Duke of Modena. In 1797, Hercules was 


M 2 


164 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


who consequently have not, nor can have, any legitimate right as 
sovereigns over them. 

A prince who attributes to himself the sovereignty of a con- 
quered country that has not been ceded to him, usurps it. If 
the country previously belonged to him, and if it be vacant, the 
usurpation is less odious ; but it is still usurpation, which cannot 
confer legal right. 

The country about Modena having been yielded, and having 
become an integral portion of another state, before the war 
which the treaty of May 30 terminated, was not engaged in 
that war as a state. Thus, if it possessed now a legitimate 
sovereign, that sovereign could not have a minister at the 
congress. 

The country about Parma, which was likewise ceded, had 
likewise ceased before the war to form a separate state, and 
became one only after the war was over.} 

Tuscany is not a vacant country, though France, to whom 
it has been ceded and united, has renounced it, because it was 
ceded under a condition which has not been fulfilled, namely, 
that of furnishing a determinate equivalent, which has not been 
furnished, and which caused the Queen of Etruria to recover her 
right of sovereignty over that country. 

The most legitimate right can be contested, it then becomes, 
and remains, doubtful, as long as the dispute is not terminated ; 
and the effect of that right is suspended for all cases, and every- 
where when it is necessary for it to be unchallenged. A sovereign 
who is such only for the states which acknowledge him, cannot 
send an envoy where representatives of all states meet, a portion 
of which do not recognize his rights. 

Ferdinand IV. can therefore have representatives at the 
congress only as King of Sicily. It is not necessary to add 
that he who reigns at Naples cannot have any. 

From all that precedes, the following general rule can be 
drawn : 

That every prince possessing over states engaged in the last 


deposed by the French, and his states were incorporated in the Cisalpine republic, 
where they formed the departments of Crostolo, chief-town Reggio, and of Panaro, 
chief-town Modena, in 1814. He reigned until 1846. By his marriage with 
Marie-Beatrix, daughter of the King of Sardinia, Victor Emmanuel, he had several 
children, among whom was the princess Maria-Theresa, who married the Comte de 
Chambord. 

1 The duchy of Parma had been annexed to the Cisalpine republic in 1802. Under 
the Empire it was annexed to France, and formed the department of Taro, chief-town, 
Parma. 

2 It will be remembered that the secret treaty of Fontainebleau of October 27, 
1807, promised to the Queen Regent of Etruria, in exchange for her states in Italy, the 
kingdom of Lusitania that was to be formed ofa part of Portugal. That agreement 
had not been kept. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 165 


war, aright of sovereignty which has been universally recognized, 
which he has not ceded, and which is not recognized as belonging 
to any other person (be those states under conquest or not), can, 
as well as all states that the war found free, which have been 
engaged in it, and are now actually free, have a plenipotentiary 
at the congress ; all other princes or states cannot. 

The king’s ambassadors shall abide by this rule, and arrange 
that it be adopted and followed. 

The treaty of May 30 mentions as the points to be regulated 
at the congress only the following : 

1. The disposal of the territories which France had renounced 
fre. 1, Secret) ; 

2. The establishment of relations from which should result a 
real and durable system of equilibrium in Europe (Same Article); 

3. The organization of the confederation of the German 
States (Art. VI. Open) ; 

4. The guarantee of the organization that Switzerland has, 
or shall have, given herself since the treaty (Art. II. Secret) ; 

5. The duties to be levied on the navigation of the Rhine 
by the bordering states (Art. V. Open) ; 

6. The application, (if it be judged practicable,) to the rivers 
that separate or cross different states, of the clause which 
provides for the free navigation of the Rhine (Same Article) ; 

7. The universal abolition of the slave trade (Treaty with 
England, Ist additional Article). 

But the territories which France has renounced are not the 
only ones to be disposed of. There are yet those to dispose 
of which belonged to Napoleon, in another capacity than that 
of ruler of France, or to members of his family, and over 
which as well for the latter as for himself, he has renounced 
all pretensions. 

Besides these territories, there are many others which are 
under conquest. If the congress should not regulate their fate, 
how could it establish that equilibrium which ought to be the 
main and final object of its operations? Is not a determined 
ratio between the forces, and consequently between the posses- 
sions, of all the states, a necessary condition of it? Can certain 
proportions exist between the possessions of all, if the right 
of possession be uncertain for some? It is not a momentary 
equilibrium that should be established, but a durable one. It can 
endure only so long as the proportions upon which it is founded 
exist ; and these proportions can themselves endure only as 
long as the right of possession shall be transmitted in such a 
way that they shall not be changed. The order of succession in 
each state ought then to enter as a necessary element in the 


166 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


calculation of the equilibrium, not so as to be changed, if it 
is certain, but in such a manner as to be rendered certain, 
if itis not that. There is all the more reason for fixing it, if the 
state where it is doubtful is a state that is about to be aggran- 
dized ; for, by giving to its present possessor, one gives to his 
heir after him, and it is necessary to know to whom one 
gives. The ordinary, and almost inevitable, effect of a right 
of uncertain succession is to produce civil and foreign wars, and 
often the one and the other at the same time, which is not only a 
just motive for removing, but even makes it a necessity to remove 
all uncertainty on that point. 

The King of Sardinia added to his former titles that of 
prince and perpetual vicar of the Holy Roman Empire. Savoy, 
Montferrat,! and some districts of Piedmont were the feoffs of it. 
The right to succeed to them was regulated by the law of the 
Empire, and that law excluded women for ever. 

The King of Sardinia possessed his other states as independ- 
ent prince. The right to succeed to them could not then be regu- 
lated by the law of the Empire to which they were not subjected. 
Was the order of succession there established by an express law 
which might be applied to a circumstance which could not be re- 
placed by the tacit law of usage, because that circumstance never 
offered before ? namely that in which the house of Savoy being 
divided into two lines, there would only remain women in the 
reigning line, a circumstance which, to say the truth, still belongs 
to the future, but to a future so certain and so near that, in the 
eyes of Europe, and with respect to the points which the congress 
should settle, it ought to be considered as present. The reigning 
line counts only three princes, all three of an advanced age— 
the old king, who is a widower,” the present king,? who has only 
daughters, and the Duc de Genevois,t who has been married 
seven years and who has no children. 

In 1445, Piedmont being already for four centuries in 
the house of Savoy, Duke Louis, considering that the ruin 
of sovereign houses is the result of a division of their 


1 Montferrat was an ancient marquisate situated between Piedmont and the re- 
public of Genoa. Its capital was Casal. That state was conceded to the kingdom 
of Sardinia by the emperor in 1708, and the kings of Sardinia took the title of vicar 
of the emperor, a title which had been conferred upon the Marquis of Montferrat by the 
emperor Charles IV. 

2 Charles-Emmanuel II. who abdicated in 1802. He died at Rome in 1819, where 
he was a Jesuit. His wife was Marie-Adélaide-Xaviére-Clotilde, daughter of the 
Dauphin Louis, and thus sister of Louis X VIII. 

3 Victor-Emmanuel I. brother of the above. 

4 Charles-Felix, born in 1765, brother of the two above-mentioned, ascended the 
throne in 1804, and died without children in 1824. The Duke of Carignan (Charles- 
Albert) issue of the collateral line, succeeded him. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 167 


possessions, declared the domain of Savoy untransferable, 
that is to say, all that his house possessed then or was 
thereafter to possess. All the acquisitions made or to be 
made, were thus annexed to the ducal crown of Savoy. That 
is why we see that, in the course of several centuries, the 
heir of Savoy has always been heir to the possessions of his 
house, which certainly would not have occurred if there had 
been a different order of succession for the one and the other. 
To say that that which was common to them should exist only 
in the reigning line, and that the women of that line, if alone 
remaining, should be preferred to the males of another line for 
all that which was not imperial fief, would be to advance a 
proposition impossible to admit without proving it, and im- 
possible of proving otherwise than by a legal act, authentic 
and solemn, which should have established such a distinction 
between the two lines. An act of that nature if it existed 
would not have remained ignored, it would have been found, 
cited, or transcribed in more than one record, and no trace of 
it is found anywhere. It can then be looked upon as certain 
that it never existed, and that thus the totality of the inherit- 
ance of the house of Sardinia, and not only a portion of that 
inheritance which depended on the empire, ought, by virtue of 
the law of inheritance in force, to pass immediately from the last 
prince of the reigning branch to those of the second branch ; 
in other terms, that all the possessions of the house of Sardinia 
are hereditary from male to male by right of primogeniture, and 
to the exclusion of women. It is then, probable, that no doubt 
would arise in that respect, if Austria, who aspires to possess, by 
herself, or by the princes of her house, all the north of Italy 
had no interest in raising some, and if the marriage of the 
Archduke Francis with the princess, eldest daughter of the king, 
did not offer him a pretext, which it is to be feared that power 
will seize. It would suffice Austria to give to the pretensions, 
that of himself or incited by her, the archduke should form in his 
wife’s behalf, the qualification of rights, to assume that of up- 
holding them by the force of arms. It is these pretensions 
and the fatal results that they cannot fail to bring about, that 
it is not only wise but even necessary to obviate, by establishing 
the right of the house of Carignan by a recognition that would 
prevent all litigation. 

The same principle of public law which renders all claim to 


1 The house of Carignan descended from Charles-Emmanuel I., Duke of Savoy, 
who died in 1630. It was then represented by Charles-Amadeus-Albert, Prince of 
Carignan, born in 1798, cousin of king Victor-Emmanuel. He was called to the 
throne in 1831, at the death of king Charles-Felix. 


168 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


sovereignty null for the states which have not recognized it, 
applies,as a necessary consequence, to every means of acquiring 
sovereignty, and, therefore, to the laws of inheritance that trans- 
mit it. It is known what happened when the last prince of each 
of the two branches of the first house of Austria substituted 
(Charles II. by his testament, and Charles VI. by his pragmatic) 
a new order of succession to that which should have ended 
with his person. Recognized by some, rejected by others, the 
new law of inheritance became the cause of a bloody contest, 
that did not and could not terminate except when all the states 
were of one accord on the right that the disposition made by 
each prince tended to establish. To terminate a contest being 
only to acknowledge a right, those without whose recognition 
a right should be reputed not to exist, can proclaim it, and are 
indeed the only ones who can do so. And by the same means 
(and because it is not with Europe as with particular states, 
where disputes relative to the right of property cannot have very 
serious results, nor ones which may not easily and quickly be ter- 
minated, and where those who can terminate them are always 
present) to the power of terminating the present disputes relative 
to the right of sovereignty, is added for the congress, not only 
the right but even the power of preventing them, as much as 
the nature of things will permit, by removing that of all causes 
that could most infallibly produce them, namely: uncertainty 
regarding the right of succession. 

Switzerland enjoyed, during several centuries, amidst the 
wars of Europe, and though situated between two great rival 
powers, a neutrality constantly respected, and not less profitable 
to others than to herself. Notonly by that neutrality the arena 
of war was restrained, but again many causes of war were pre- 
vented, and France found herself dispensed withdevoting a portion 
of her means and forces to defend that portion of her frontiers, the 
most vulnerable, which Switzerland, always neutral, protected. 
If, in the future, Switzerland was no longer to be free to 
remain neutral, or, what amounts to the same thing, if her 
neutrality should not be respected, such a state of things, by the 
influence that it would necessarily have on the relative power 
of the neighbouring states, would disturb and perhaps even destroy 
that equilibrium which it is to establish. The treaty of May 30 
only speaks of guaranteeing the organization of Switzerland ; but 
it is necessary that her future neutrality be also guaranteed. 

The Ottoman Porte was not engaged in the last war, but it 
is an European power, whose preservation is important for the 
European equilibrium. It is then useful that its existence 
should also be assured. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 169 


Thus the Congress should decide :— 

1. The fate of the states under conquest and not vacant, of 
which there are two classes, including: the first, the states in 
litigation, that is to say, the states over which the same right 
of sovereignty is recognized to several persons, by different 
powers. 

To this class belong the realms of Naples and Tuscany. 

The second, the states or countries, the possession of which 
the sovereign has lost, without having ceded them and without 
another person claiming sovereignty over them. 

The kingdom of Saxony, the duchy of Warsaw, the provinces 
of the Holy See situated on the Adriatic, the principalities of 
Arenberg, Isenberg, and Salm, to which must be added that of 
Aschaffenburg (if the prince primate has not abdicated) compose 
the second class. 

2. Doubtful rights of succession. 

3. The disposal to be made of those states or vacant 
countries, that is to say, the states which the legitimate sovereign 
has renounced, without ceding them, or those over which no 
actual right of sovereignty has been conferred upon any one 
with the consent of Europe. 

They form also two classes ; in the first of which are included 
those which have not been actually assigned, but destined by 
the treaty of May 30, namely :— 

To the King of Sardinia, the portion of his old states ceded 
to France, that is to say, Savoy and the county of Nice, (his 
other possessions not having been ceded, he remained lawful 
sovereign of them), and an indeterminate portion of the state of 
Genoa. 

To Austria, the Illyrian provinces and the portion of the 
realm of Italy to the left of the Po, and to the east of Lago 
Maggiore and of Tessin. 

To Holland, Belgium, with a frontier to fix to the left side of 
the Meuse. 

Finally, to Prussia and other German states that have not 
been mentioned, the countries situated between the Meuse, the 
frontiers of France and the Rhine, to serve them as compensation 
and to be divided among them in a proportion that has not been 
indicated. 

To the other class belongs the rest of the vacant countries, 
namely :— 

The undetermined part of the state of Genoa which has not 
been destined to the King of Sardinia; the part of the former 
realm of Italy not destined to Austria; Lucca ; Piombino ; the 
Ionian Isles; the Grand Duchy of Berg, such as it existed 


170 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


before January 1, 1811; Ost-Frise ; all the provinces formerly 
Prussian, which formed a portion of the kingdom of Westphalia ; 
the principality of Erfurt and the town of Danzig. 

4. The future destiny of the Island of Elba, which, given to 
him who possesses it for life only, shall, at his death, become 
a vacant country. 

5. The organization of the German Confederation :— 

All those points should be so settled as to bring about a 
real equilibrium, into the composition of which shall enter as 
necessary elements the organization of Switzerland, its future 
neutrality, and the integrity of the recognized and guaranteed 
Ottoman possessions in Europe. 

6. The toll dues on the Rhine, the Scheldt, and the other 
rivers, the navigation of which is to be made free. 

7. The universal abolition of the slave-trade. 

An obligation can neither be created, nor a certain right of 
a state removed, without its consent. 

In every case where it is necessary to do the one or the other, 
all the powers together have no more power than one alone. 
The consent of the party interested being necessary, it must be 
obtained, or that which, without it, would not be just must 
be renounced. Means of negotiation is then the only one 
permitted. 

The means of decision is, on the contrary, the only one that 
can be taken when the competence, having been established 
(and that of the congress is an obvious consequence of the 
principles set forth above), the question at issue is either to 
proclaim a disputed right of sovereignty or to dispose of 
territories which belong to no one, or to regulate the exercise of 
a right common to several states, which, by explicit consent 
made it subordinate to the interest of all. For if it were necessary 
to secure, in the first case, the consent of him whose right is 
declared null, in the second, the consent of all those who pre- 
tend toa vacant territory, and, in the third, that of all concerned, 
never could a litigation be terminated, a vacant territory could 
never cease to be so, never could a right the exercise of which 
should have to be regulated according to the interest of all, 
be discharged. 

The fate of states in litigation. 

The doubtful rights of succession ; 

The disposal of vacant states ; 

And to establish the toll dues on the Rhine ; 

Should be settled by means of decision, with this difference, 
which arises from the disparity of objects, namely that, in the 
first case, the litigation cannot be terminated only inso far as the 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 171 


right of one of those between which it exists, is unanimously 
recognized ; that in the second case, the decision ought to be 
likewise unanimous ; and that it should be so again, in the third, 
with the exception of the votes of the co-claimants, which ought 
not to be counted ; finally that, in the fourth case, the majority 
should suffice. 

The other points can only be settled by means of negotiation. 

The fate of the countries that are neither vacant, nor in 
litigation, because for disposing of them otherwise than by 
returning them to their respective sovereigns, the consent of 
the latter is necessary. 

The organization of the German Confederation, because that 
organization shall become, for the German states, a law which 
cannot be imposed upon them without their consent. 

The abolition of the slave-trade, because it has been hitherto 
a matter foreign to the public law of Europe, under which the 
English wish to bring it now. 

Out of about one hundred and seventy millions of inhabit- 
ants that Christian Europe contains, more than two-thirds of 
them belong to France and to the seven states that signed with 
her the treaty of May 30, and the half of the other third to 
countries under conquest, which not having been engaged in the 
war, have no ministers at the congress; the surplus forms the 
population of more than forty states, of which some would be 
scarcely the hundredth part of the smallest of those which 
signed the treaty of May 30, and which all united would not 
constitute a power equal to one of the great powers of Europe. 
What part shall they play in the deliberations? What share 
in the right of voting? Shall each one have a share equal to 
that of the largest states? This indeed would be unwarrant- 
able. Shall they have but one vote in common? They would 
never succeed in coming to an agreement. Shall they have 
none? It would be better, then, not to admit them. But which 
shall be excluded? The ministers of the pope, of Sicily, of 
Sardinia? or that of Holland, or that of Saxony, or only those 
who are not ministers of crowned heads? But who would cede 
on behalf of those princes if they should have to cede? Who 
would, on their behalf, give to the obligation, that was about to 
be imposed upon them, the consent that they should give ? 
Shall their states be disposed of without their ceding them? 
Shall their consent be passed over when public law renders it 
necessary ? Shall Europe thus have met to violate the principles 
of the law which governs her? It is on the contrary most 
important to enforce them more strictly, now that they have 
been so long ignored and so ruthlessly violated. A simple 


172 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


means of conciliating at the same time, law and propriety would 
be to value the share that the states of the third or fourth order 
should take in the arrangements about to be made, not by the 
scale of power, but by that of their interest. 

The general equilibrium of Europe cannot be composed of 
simple elements. It can only be a system of partial equilibrium 
The small or medium states should be allowed a vote only in 
the questions concerning the particular system to which they 
belong—the states of Italy in the arrangements relative to Italy, 
and the German states in the arrangements relative to Germany. 
The great powers alone, being interested in the whole, should 
co-ordinate each part with regard to the whole. 

The order which appears the most natural and suitable for 
treating those points, is that in which they have been presented 
above. That which each one has, and that which he ought to 
keep, must first be determined so as to know if it is necessary 
and what is necessary to add to it ; not to dispose of vacant 
countries except when having good grounds for doing so; to 
divide afterwards that which is to be divided, and thus to fix the 
general state of possession which is the first principle of all 
equilibrium. The organization of Germany can only come 
afterwards, for it is necessary that it be relative to the reciprocal 
power of the German States, and consequently that that power 
be previously fixed. Finally, the guarantees should follow and 
not precede the arrangements on which they bear. 

A protocol should be kept of the deliberations, acts and 
decisions of the congress. These decisions ought not to be 
expressed in other language than that of ordinary treaties. To 
return the realm of Naples to Ferdinand IV., it will suffice that 
the treaty recognize that prince as King of Naples, or simply 
name him with that title in the following style, “ His Majesty 
Ferdinand IV., King of Naples and Sicily.” 

In like manner, to proclaim the right of the house of 
Carignan, the treaty has only to say, “Such part of the state 
of Genoa is for ever united to the states of his Majesty the 
King of Sardinia, to be, like them, possessed in full ownership 
and sovereignty, and to be inherited from male to male, by order 
of primogeniture, in both branches of his house.” 

For that which concerns the manner and means of execution 
a guarantee common to all the recognized rights, will be suff- 
cient, since it forces the guarantees to uphold those rights, and 
that it deprives from all external support the pretensions 
opposed to them. 

After having indicated what points the congress can and 
should decide, and pointed out that its competence results from 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 173 


the very principles of law that are to serve to decide those points, 
it remains to consider them in the light of the interest of France, 
and to show that fortunately for France she sees no reason why 
justice and utility should be antagonistic, and does not seek her 
own utility save in that justice which is the utility of all. 

An absolute equality of power between all the states, not 
only can never exist, but is not necessary to the political 
equilibrium, and would perhaps, in some respects, be hurtful to it. 
That equilibrium consists in a relation between the reciprocal 
power of resistance and forces of aggression of the various 
political bodies. If Europe were composed of states being so 
related to one another that the minimum of the resisting power 
of the smallest was equal to the maximum of the aggressive 
force of the largest, there would then be a real equilibrium, that 
is to say resulting from the very nature of things. But the 
situation of Europe is not and will never become such. Con- 
tiguous to large territories belonging to one single power there 
are territories of a greater or less size divided in a greater or 
less number of states, often of diverse natures. To unite 
these states by a federal link is often impossible, and it is 
always impossible to give those which are thus united the same 
unity of will and the same power of action as though they 
were a simple body. Therefore, they only contribute to the 
formation of the general equilibrium as imperfect elements ; in 
their capacity of composite bodies, they have their own equili- 
brium, subject to a thousand modifications, which necessarily 
affect that of which they form a part. 

Such a situation admits solely of an equilibrium quite 
artificial and precarious, that can endure only so long as certain 
large states are animated with a spirit of moderation and justice 
which will preserve that equilibrium. 

The policy of preservation was that of France, during the 
whole of the past century, until the outbreak of the events which 
produced the last war; and it is that policy which the king 
wishes constantly to follow. But before preserving, one must 
establish. 

If Austria were to ask for the possession of all Italy, there 
would be no one perhaps who would not denounce such a 
demand, think it monstrous, and regard the union of Italy to 
Austria as fatal to the independence and safety of Europe. 
Nevertheless, by giving all Italy to Austria, the independence of 
the former would simply be assured. Once united in one body, 
Italy, by whatever right she belonged to Austria, would escape 
her, not sooner or later, but in a very few years, perhaps in a 
few months, and Austria would have acquired her only to lose 


174 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


her. On the other hand, let Italy be divided into seven terri- 
tories, of which the two principal shall be at the extremities and 
the four smallest contiguous to the largest ; give the latter to 
Austria, and three of the smallest to the princes of her house, 
this would offer her a pretext by the aid of which she would 
cause the fourth one to fall to the share of one of those princes. 
Let the territory at the other extremity be occuped by a man, 
who because of his personal position towards a number of the 
sovereigns of Europe, can have no hope except in Austria nor 
any support but hers; let the seventh territory belong to a prince 
whose sole strength rests in the respect due to his character, is it 
not manifest that in appearing to give but a portion of Italy to 
Austria she will really have been given the whole? and that her 
apparent division into different states would be, in reality, but a 
means given to Austria to possess that country in the only 
manner in which she can possess it, without losing it. Such, 
indeed, would be the state of Italy, if Austria were to have the 
Po, Lago Maggiore, and Tessin as limits, if Modena, Parma and 
Piacenza, if the grand-duchy of Tuscany had princes of her 
house for sovereigns, if the right of succession in the house of 
Sardinia remained doubtful, if he who reigns at Naples continued 
to reign there. 

Italy, divided into non-confederate states, is not susceptible 
of a real but only of a relative independence, which consists in 
being submitted not to one influence only, but to several. The 
relation which causes those influences to balance each other is 
that which constitutes her equilibrium. ; 

That the existence of this equilibrium is of importance to 
Europe is a thing so obvious that it is unnecessary to question it ; 
and it is no less obvious that, were Italy situated as has just been 
surmised, all kind of equilibrium would cease for her. 

What is necessary, and what can be done to establish it ? 
Nothing except what justice requires or authorizes. 

Naples must be restored to her legitimate sovereign, Tuscany 
to the Queen of Etruria, not only the provinces on the Adriatic 
that have not yet been ceded, but also the legations of Ravenna 
and of Bologna, now vacant, must be returned to the Holy See. 
Piombino, as well as the mines of the Island of Elba, under the 
suzerainty of the crown of Naples, must go back to the prince of 
that name to whom it belonged, and who, having been deprived 
of both properties without indemnity, has been reduced to a 
state bordering upon indigence.t To remove all doubts con- 


1 The principality of Piombino included in Tuscany, was about ten miles long and 
contained an area of above fifty thousand acres. It belonged formerly to the family 
Buoncompagni, who had bought it in 1634. The prince of Piombino was deposed 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 175 


cerning the rights of the house of Carignan, and to aggrandize 
Sardinia. 

If it were proposed to assembled Europe to declare : 

That the sovereignty is acquired by the sole fact of con- 
quest ; and that the patrimony of a prince who only lost it 
through his unswerving fidelity to the cause of Europe, should 
with the consent of Europe, belong to him into whose hands the 
misfortunes of Europe have alone caused it to fall, it is impos- 
sible to suppose that such a proposition would not be at once 
received with an unanimous cry of reprobation. All would 
feel that it tended to nothing less than to the overthrowing 
of the only barrier that the natural independence of peoples 
has permitted reason to raise between the right of sovereignty, 
and force, in order to restrain the one and preserve the other, 
and to the undermining of the very foundations of morality 
itself. 

This is nevertheless what would be implied if it were possible 
for the congress to recognize as sovereign of the country him 
who reigns in Naples, and it is again what it will be reputed 
to have declared if it does not recognize Ferdinand IV. as king. 
For peoples would never understand that it should have con- 
secrated by its silence the violation of a principle so important 
to all sovereigns, and yet have held it for true. They will 
conclude from it that this principle does not exist, and that 
force alone constitutes right. 

Austria might object that she has given guarantees to him 
who reigns at Naples.!. But the act by which one guarantees the 
possession of a thing which does not belong to him, though neces- 
sity may excuse that act, is, to say the least, null and void. That 
guarantee moreover was not given against a judgment of Europe, 
but against the man with whom all Europe was then at war. 

It would undoubtedly be better that he who reigns at Naples 
should obtain no sovereignty. But the services he has rendered 
to the cause of Europe have been much talked of; if he has 
really rendered them, and if it be necessary to recompense him 
on that account, the king’s ambassadors will not oppose some- 
thing being given to him, but it must not belong to others ; it 


in 1801. Bonaparte took possession of the principality and gave it to his sister 
Princess Eliza Baciocchi. The treaty of Vienna restored it to the family Buoncompagni, 
and the latter ceded it to the Grand-Duke of Tuscany for a sum of four millions seven 
hundred and four thousand francs. 

1 Murat had signed two treaties of January 6 and 11, 1814, the one with Austria, 
the other with England, by which those two powers guaranteed him his states, and 
even promised him an increase of territory at the expense of the States of the Church, 
in regard to which he undertook to add to the allied armies, thirty thousand men from 
his own troops. 


176 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


may be anything which is unoccupied, such as a portion of the 
Ionian Isles. 

No right was ever more legitimate than that of the Queen 
of Etruria to Tuscany. That country had been ceded by the 
grand-duke, and Charles IV. had acquired it for his daughter, 
giving in exchange the duchies of Parma, Piacenza, Guastalla, 
and Louisiana, with a certain number of vessels and millions. 
If, however, the restitution of Tuscany offered too many difficul- 
ties, and if, in its place, the duchies of Parma, Piacenza, and 
Guastalla should be offered, the king’s ambassadors shall persuade 
those of Spain to content themselves with that offer, and accept it. 

Austria had not only guaranteed to him who reigns at 
Naples the possession of that kingdom ; she had even engaged 
to procure him an aggrandizement to the extent of a territory 
of from four to six hundred thousand souls. The provinces of 
the Holy See on the Adriatic, of which three departments of the © 
kingdom of Italy had been formed, have been intended to serve 
for the accomplishment of that promise, and continue for that 
reason to be occupied by the Neapolitan troops. If, as must be 
hoped, he who reigns at Naples, ceases to reign there, there will 
no longer be question of that promise, and the difficulty that 
Austria would have in keeping it might become a very good 
motive for her abandonment of him to whom she made it. But 
in any case, the king’s ambassadors will second, by all the means 
in their power, the opposition that His Holiness will undoubtedly 
offer to the provinces being separated from the pontifical domain. 
They willin like manner, as far as depends upon them, contribute 
to the legations of Ravenna and of Bologna being restored to 
the Holy See. That of Ferrara being comprised in the territory 
which, according to the treaty of May 30, is destined to Austria, 
its restitution might cause great, and even insurmountable, diffi- 
culties. But if any arrangement can facilitate it, provided it be 
not of a nature to increase Austrian influence in Italy, the king’s 
ambassadors shall give their support to it. 

The Prince of Piombino, though a simple feudatory of the 
crown of Naples, having been deposed as though he had been a 
sovereign prince, shall be re-established in all the rights of which 
he has been deprived by violence. 

The rights of the House of Carignan have been set forth with 
sufficient ‘details, so that it is not necessary to speak of them 
again. It is only on the supposition that these rights be placed 
beyond all doubt, that Sardinia can be aggrandized, but in that 
case it is to be hoped that she will be as much aggrandized as 
the quantity of vacant territories will allow, in order to increase 
thereby, and ensure her independence. 


THE FALL.OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 177 


In Italy, it is Austria who must be prevented from acquiring 
paramount power, by opposing other influences to hers. In 
Germany, it is Prussia. The exiguity of her monarchy makes 
ambition a sort of necessity to her. Any pretext seems good to. 
her. Noscruples stop her. Her convenience forms her right. It 
is thus that, in the course of sixty-three years, she has raised her 
population from less than four millions of subjects to ten millions, 
and that she has been able to form for herself, if I may so term it, 
the frame of an immense monarchy, by acquiring here and there 
scattered territories, which she aims at uniting by incorporating 
in herself those that separate them. The terrible fall that her 
ambition brought upon her has not yet cured her of it. At this 
very moment, her emissaries and partisans are agitating Ger- 
many, by representing France as bent on invading her again, 
and Prussia, as the only power in a condition to defend her, and 
are asking that Germany be delivered up to Prussia that the latter. 
may saveher. She would have liked to have had Belgium. She 
would like to have all that lies between the present frontiers of 
France,the Meuse,and the Rhine. She wants Luxembourg. All is 
lost if Mayence is not given her. She can have no security, if she 
does not possess Saxony. It is said that the allies have arranged 
to re-establish her in the same degree of power in which she 
was before her fall, that is to say, with ten million subjects. If 
that were permitted, she would very soon have twenty, and the 
whole of Germany would be subjected to her. It is necessary, then, 
to put a rein to her ambition, by first restraining as much as 
possible, her status of possession in Germany, and afterwards by 
cutting short her influence by a federal organization. 

Her status of possession shall be checked by the preser- 
vation of all the small states, and the aggrandisement of the 
medium ones. 

All the small states should be preserved for the sole reason 
that they exist, with the single exception of the ecclesiastical 
principality of Aschaffenburg, whose preservation seems in- 
compatible with the general plan of the distribution of terri- 
tories; but a sufficient income ought to be assured to the former 
possessor. 

If all the small states ought to be preserved, far more does 
this hold good of the kingdom of Saxony. The King of Saxony 
has governed his subjects for forty years like a father, giving an 
example of the virtues of both the man and the prince. Assailed 
for the first time by the tempest, at an advanced age, which should 
have brought him repose, and raised again forthwith by the 
hand that had vanquished him, and had crushed so many others, 
if he made mistakes, they should be imputed to an excusable 


VOE. II. N 


178 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. — 


fear, or to a sentiment that is always honourable to him who 
experiences it, whatever be its object. Those who reproach him 
for those mistakes have made far greater ones themselves, without 
having the same excuse. That which was given him, was given 
without his asking, or desiring it, or even knowing that he had 
it. He enjoyed prosperity with moderation, and now bears 
misfortune with dignity. To these motives, which are alone 
sufficient to guarantee him against being abandoned by the king, 
are joined the links of relationship,) and the necessity of 
preventing Saxony from falling a prey to Prussia, who, by such 
an acquisition, would take a long and decided step towards the 
absolute dominion of Germany. 

This necessity is so great, that if, on a supposition hereafter 
to be mentioned, the King of Saxony should find himself called 
upon to take possession of another kingdom, that of Saxony 
must all the same not cease to exist, and must be given to the 
ducal branch, which ought to be especially agreeable to the 
Emperor of Russia, since his brother-in-law, the hereditary 
Prince of Weimar, would then find himself presumptive heir. 

The king’s ambassadors shall, consequently, support, by 
every means in their power, the cause of the King of Saxony, 
and, in every case, do all that is possible in order that Saxony 
may not become a Prussian province. 

Important as it is that Prussia should not acquire Saxony, 
it is equally important that she be prevented from acquiring 
Mayence, or any portion whatever of the territory on the left 
bank of the Moselle ; that Holland be enabled to carry, as far as 
possible to the right bank of the river Meuse, the frontier that 
she is to have on that river; as it is important that the requests 
for increase of territory which Bavaria, Hesse, Brunswick, and 
particularly Hanover, shall make (with the understanding that 
these demands shall bear only upon vacant territories), should 
be seconded, in order to render as small as possible the portion 
of vacant countries that shall remain for Prussia. 

It is said that the allies have a plan, according to which 
Luxemburg and Mayence would belong to the confederation, 
and be occupied by federal troops. That plan would seem to 
suit the personal interests of France, and, for that reason, the 
king’s ambassadors should, when supporting it, avoid doing so in 
a manner likely to give rise to suspicion. 

Every confederation is a republic, and, to be well constituted, 
should have the spirit of one. Therefore, a confederation of 
princes could never be well constituted, for the spirit of the 


+ Louis XVIII. was by his mother, Marie-Josephe of Saxony, first cousin of the 
king Frederick- Augustus. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 179 


republic tends towards equality, and that of the monarch 
towards independence. But the question is not to give a perfect 
organization to the German confederation ; it suffices to give her 
such a one as will have the effect of preventing : 

1. The oppression of subjects in the small states; 

2. The oppression of the small states by the larger ones ; 

3. The influence of the latter from changing themselves into 
domination, in such a manner that one or several of them could, 
for the furtherance of their own views, dispose of the power 
of all. 

But these results can only be obtained by dividing power both 
in the small states, and in the confederation ; if it be concentrated 
in the latter, by having it change hands, and pass successively 
through as many hands as possible. 

This is all that can be said here on the future federal 
organization of Germany. The king’s ambassadors will not 
need to draw the plan of it. It will be sufficient for them to 
know in what spirit it should be made, and after what standard 
they are to judge the projects on which they shall be called upon 
to decide. 

The re-establishment of the realm of Poland would be 
a good and very great improvement, but only under the three 
following conditions: 

I. That it be independent ; 

2. That it have a strong constitution ; 

3. That it be not necessary to compensate Prussia and Austria 
for the portion that has respectively fallen to them. 

Those conditions are all impossible, and the second more so 
than the two others. 

In the first place, Russia does not wish for the re-establishment 
of Poland, in order to lose what she has acquired of it ; she wishes 
it so as to acquire what she does not possess of it. Thus, to re- 
establish Poland in order to give it entirely to Russia, and carry 
the population of the latter, in Europe, to forty-four millions of 
subjects, and extend her frontiers to the Oder, would mean 
creating so great and imminent a danger for Europe, that, 
although we must do everything to preserve peace, if the exe- 
cution of such a plan could only be stopped by force of arms, 
not a single moment should be lost in taking them up. It 
would be vainly hoped that Poland, thus united to Russia, would 
detach herself from her of her own accord. It is not certain that 
she would wish to do so, it is less certain still that she could, 
and it is certain that, if she could, and would do so at a given 
time, she would escape one yoke, only to carry a new one; for 
Poland, restored to independence, would infallibly be delivered up 


N 2 


180 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


toanarchy. The size of the country excludes the existence of an 
aristocracy properly speaking, and there can exist no monarchy 
where the people are without civil liberty, and where the nobles 
possess political liberty or are independent, and where anarchy 
does not reign. Reason alone tells it and the history of all Europe 
proves it. Thus, how, on re-establishing Poland can political 
liberty be taken from the nobles, or civil liberty be given to the 
people? That civil liberty could not be given by a declaration, 
or bya law. It is but a vain word, if the people, to whom it is 
given, have no independent means of existence, no property, no 
industry, and no arts, all of which no declaration nor law can 
give, and which can only be the work of time. Anarchy was 
a condition from which Poland could emerge only by the aid of 
an absolute power ; and as there did not exist in her the elements 
of that power, it was necessary that it come to her from outside, 
that is to say, that she fall under conquest. And she fell under 
it as soon as her neighbours wished, and the progress that has 
been made by those portions of her that have been allotted to 
nations more advanced in civilization, proves that it was fortunate 
for them to have fallen into their power. Let her be restored to 
independence and be given a king, no longer elective, but heredi- 
tary; let there be added all imaginable institutions; the less 
free the latter shall be, the more will they be opposed to the 
genius, customs, and recollections of the nobles, who will have to 
be subjected to them by force—and where is that force to come 
from? And, on the other hand, the more liberty is given to those 
institutions, the more inevitably will Poland be plunged anew into 
anarchy, to end anew by being conquered. All this is because 
there is in that country, as it were, two peoples, for whom there 
must be two institutions each of which excludes the other. Being 
neither able to arrange that these two peoples be as one, nor to 
create the one power that could conciliate all ; being, on the other 
hand, unable, without evident peril to Europe, to give all Poland 
to Russia (and the mere addition of the duchy of Warsaw to that 
which she already possesses would mean giving her all Poland), 
what better can be done than to replace things in the same state 
in which they were before the last division? That would be all 
the more advisable, that it would put an end to the pretensions 
of Prussia on the realm of Saxony ; for it is only as compensation, 
for what she should not recover, in the event of the re-establish- 
ment of Poland, that she dares to ask for Saxony. 

Austria would also surely demand compensation for the five 
millions of subjects that the two Gallicias contain, or if she did 
not ask for it, she would become all the more exacting in all 
questions relative to Italy. 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 181 


If nevertheless, contrary to all probability, the Czar of Russia 
consented to renounce that which he possesses of Poland (and it 
is clear that he could not do so without exposing himself to 
personal dangers on the part of the Russians), and if it were 
wished to make an experiment, the king, without expecting any 
favourable result from it, would not oppose it. In that case, it 
would be desirable that the King of Saxony, already sovereign of 
the duchy of Warsaw, whose father and ancestors have occupied 
the throne of Poland, and whose daughter was to bring the 
Polish crown as a dowry to her husband, should be made King 
of Poland. 

But, with the exception of the case in which Poland could be 
re-established in complete independence of each of the three 
co-possessing courts, the only admissible proposition, and the 
only one to which the king could consent, is (save several recti- 
fications of frontiers) to restore everything in Poland to the 
footing of the last division. 

By remaining divided, Poland will not be annihilated for 
ever: the Poles no longer forming a political society, will 
continue to form a family. They will no longer have the same 
country, but they will have the same language, they will thus 
remain united by the strongest and most durable of all links. 
They will arrive, under foreign dominations, at the virile age 
which they have not been able to reach during nine centuries of 
independence, and the moment when they attain it will not be 
far from that of their emancipation, when they will all converge 
to the same centre. 

Danzig must follow the destiny of Poland, of which she 
was only the emporium; she will have to be free, if Poland 
recover her independence, or to submit again to the domination 
of Prussia, if the old division be maintained. 

A disposition which could be made of the Ionian Islands, has 
already been indicated; it is important that those islands, and 
especially that of Corfu, should belong neither to England nor to 
Russia, who both covet them, nor to Austria. Corfu is the key 
of the Adriatic Gulf. If, to the possession of Gibraltar and Malta, 
England added that of Corfu, she would be absolute mistress of 
the Mediterranean. Those islands would furnish Russia with a 
point of aggression against the Ottoman Empire, and witha point 
of support for fomenting an uprising among the Greeks. In the 
hands of Austria, Corfu would serve to establish and consolidate 
her dominion over Italy. 

The order of Saint John of Jerusalem is without a capital, 
and it might be said, without asylum, since it lost Malta. The 
Catholic powers have an interest in its being restored and re- 


182 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


suscitated from its ruins. It is true that it ceded Malta, but it is 
equally true that it did so only in consequence of an invasion, that 
no motive of right, or even of utility, could justify or excuse. It 
would be to the honour of England, who, by the way, profits by 
that injustice, to contribute towards a reparation, by uniting with 
the Catholic powers in order to obtain a compensation for the 
order. Corfu could be given her without compromising the 
interests of any Christian state. It shall ask the possession of 
it, and the king’s ambassadors shall support this claim. 

The island of Elba, being a possession which, at the death of 
him who occupies it, will become vacant, and only at the time 
when it shall become so, could be restored to its former masters, 
Tuscany and Naples, or given to Tuscany alone. 

The future of all countries under conquest, of those which are 
not vacant, of those which are, and of those which will become 
so, shall thus be completely settled. 

In some of those countries, certain Frenchmen possessed, 
by right of endowment, estates which the treaty of May 30 
caused them to lose. That harsh measure, which might be con- 
sidered as unjust, concerning endowments situated in those 
countries that had been ceded, has been aggravated by the retro- 
active effect that was given it, by applying it to rents and revenues 
fallen due. The king’s ambassadors shall protest against such 
injustice, and shall do all in their power to get it repaired. The 
allied sovereigns having given occasion to hope that they will 
make, and several having already made, exceptions to the clause 
which deprived the donees of their endowments, the king’s 
ambassadors shall again do all in their power to effect that 
that favour be extended and accorded to as many donees as 
possible. 

As to the right of navigation on the Rhine and on the Scheldt, 
as they are to be the same for all, France has nothing to desire, 
except that they be very moderate. Owing to the free navigation 
of the Rhine and of the Scheldt, France will have the advantages 
that the possession of the countries crossed by those rivers would 
have given her, and which she has renounced, and she will not 
have the charges of their possession. She cannot thus reasonably 
regret it. 

The question of the abolition of the slave-trade is decided as 
regards France, who, on that point, has no more concessions to 
make ; for, if it were asked simply to remove, or merely shorten 
the agreed delay, she could not consent. But the king has 
promised to unite all his efforts to those of England so as to 
effect that the universal abolition of slavery be pronounced. 
That promise must be discharged, because it has been made, and 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 183 


because it is of importance to France to have England on her 
side in the questions that interest her the most. 

England, who has given herself up to conquest outside of 
Europe, brings a conservative spirit to the affairs of Europe. 
That proceeds, perhaps, simply from her insular position, that 
does not permit of any territory being added to her own, and from 
her relative weakness, that would not enable her to retain on the 
Continent any conquests she might already have made there. 
But, be it with her a necessity or a virtue, she has shown herself 
to be animated with a conservative spirit, even towards France, 
her rival, under the reign of Henry VIII., of Elizabeth, of Queen 
Anne, and perhaps also at a much more recent period. 

France, bringing before the congress only thoroughly conser- 
vative views, has then occasion to hope that England will second 
her, provided that she herself satisfy England on the points 
she has most at heart, and England has nothing more at heart 
than the abolition of slavery. That which was, in its origin, 
but a matter of interest and speculation, has become for the 
English people, a passion carried to fanaticism, and one which 
the ministry is no longer at liberty to check ; that is why the king’s 
ambassadors shall give every satisfaction to England on that point, 
by pronouncing themselves frankly and energetically for the 
abolition of slavery. But if Spain and Portugal, which are the 
only powers that have not yet bound themselves in that direction, 
consented only to give up the slave-trade after the expiration of a 
delay of more than five years, and if that delay were granted, the 
king’s ambassadors should arrange that France be admitted to 
take advantage of it. 

The present instructions are not given to the king’s ambas- 
sadors as an absolute rule from which they must not deviate in 
any degree. They can relinquish that which is of a less interest 
to obtain that which is of a greater one. The points that are 
most important to France are classified according to their 
relative importance as follows— 

1. That no opportunity be left to Austria to obtain possession 
for the princes of her house, or rather for herself, of the estates 
of the King of Sardinia ; 

2. That Naples be restored to Ferdinand IV. ; 

3. That the whole of Poland should not be placed in a 
position eventually to pass under the sovereignty of Russia. 

4. That Prussia neither acquire the realm of Saxony, at least 
in totality, nor Mayence. 

In making concessions on the other points, the king’s am- 
bassadors will make them bear only on matters of simple utility 
and not of obligation; in the first place, because, for nearly all 


184 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


the various points to be decided by the congress, the rights 
result from one and the same principle, and that to forego that 
principle with regard to one point, would be to forego it with 
regard to all; in the second place, because recent times have 
left impressions that it is of importance to efface. France is such 
a powerful state, that other nations can be tranquillized only 
by the idea of her moderation—an idea which they will accept 
all the more easily, that she will have given them a greater 
one of her justice. 

The king having decided on having at the congress several 
representatives of his will, which must be one, his intention 
is, that no overture, proposal, or concession be made except 
with the consent of his Minister of Foreign Affairs, who shall 
himself go to Vienna, and then only in so far as he shall have 
decided what overtures, proposals, and concessions should be 
made. 

PARIS, August, 1814. 
Approved : signed, LOUIS. 


And below: signed : PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND. 


SUPPLEMENTARY INSTRUCTIONS 


FROM THE KING TO HIS AMBASSADORS AND PLENIPOTEN- 
TIARY MINISTERS AT THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 


The king,conformably to the instructions given to his plenipo- 
tentiary ministers before their departure for the Vienna Congress, 
and informed by their correspondence of an agreement formed 
between Russia and Prussia to establish the semblance of Poland 
under Russian dependence,and to aggrandize Prussia by Saxony, 
has judged it advisable to address to his plenipotentiaries the 
following supplementary instructions :— 

It appearing that, the same reasons that induced his Majesty 
to think that the aggrandizement of Russia by Poland’s being 
subjected to her rule, and the union of Saxony to the Prussian 
monarchy, would be equally contrary to the principles of justice 
and of public law, and to the establishment of a system of solid 
and durable equilibrium in Europe, have been taken into con- 
sideration by other powers, and that it will be possible perhaps to 
cause, without disturbing the peace, Russia and Prussia to adopt 
views more moderate and more consonant with the general 
interest of Europe, by an agreement formed in opposition to 
that which now exists between them ; His Majesty authorizes his 
plenipotentiaries to declare to the Austrian and Bavarian plenipo- 
tentiaries that their courts can count on the most, active military 


THE FALL OF THE EMPIRE—THE RESTORATION. 185 


co-operation, on his part, in opposing the views of Russia and 
Prussia, as well on Poland, as on Saxony. The king’s pleni- 
potentiary ministers can confide the contents of the present 
instructions to the English plenipotentiaries, if they be of 
opinion that that might determine the cabinet of St. James’s 
to act in concert with France, Austria, and Bavaria, or at 
least, to remain neutral. It would especially be well to confide 
these instructions to Count von Miinster, the Hanoverian 
plenipotentiary. 
PARIS, October 25, 1814. 


(Signed) LOoUuISs. 
And underneath :— 


The State-minister, charged ad interim with the portfolio of 
Foreign Affairs. 
Signed, COMTE FRANCOIS DE JAUCOURT. 


1 Emest-Frederick, Count von Miinster, born at Osnabriick (Hanover) ; in 1766, 
he became intimate counsellor of the Elector of Hanover, King of England. He was 
appointed minister at St. Petersburg. When Hanover fell into Napoleon’s hands, 
Minster took refuge in London. King George entrusted him with various important 
diplomatic missions. In 1814, he represented the Elector of Hanover at the Con- 
gress of Vienna, and in the following year he was placed at the head of the 
Hanoverian government. He remained in charge of it until 1830, and died in 1841. 


END OF THE SEVENTH PART. 


APPENDICES, 


APPENDIX I.! 


We subjoin here an account of the mission of M. de Vitrolles 
zn 1814, drawn up by the Duc de Dalberg. This document, 
wretten throughout in the duke's own hand, was found among the 
papers of the Prince de Talleyrand. 


The mission of M. de Vitrolles to the Congress of Chatillon 
was only undertaken asa means of obtaining the information de- 
sired at Paris, as to the final intentions of the allies with regard 
to the Emperor. 

There existed in Paris neither plan nor conspiracy against 
the emperor ; but the conviction was unanimous that his power 
was undermined by his follies and extravagances, and that he 
would himself be the victim of his foolish resistance and policy 
of continual deception ! 

Anxiety as to the future was increasing. 

Baron Louis said to M. de Dalberg one day: “The man 
[meaning the emperor] is a corpse, but he does not stink yet: 
that’s the fact of the matter.” The enemy was then thirty 
leagues from Paris. 

Propositions offered by the Emperor Alexander to the 
Grand Duchess of Baden, and insinuations let fall by him 
to Bernadotte and Eugene de Beauharnais, were well known 
at Paris. ; 

The intrigues of Fouché with the family of Murat were 
suspected; in the south, the Duc d’Angouléme was ap- 
proaching ; the Duc de Berry was intriguing in Brittany ; the 
Comte d’Artois had drawn near to the German frontier, and 
was already at Basel! Risings had occurred at Vesoul and 
Troyes! People were so weary in France of the excessive 


1 See page 114. 


APPENDICES. 187 


military despotism of the emperor, and expected so little con- 
cession from him, that it began to be a serious question as to 
how far the crisis brought about by him would drag France and 
Europe. It was no longer an ordinary war; all the nations 
were involved in the struggle. This situation alarmed every 
one; and its solution was sought on all sides! 

The English newspapers were had by M. Martin, commis- 
sioner of the police at Boulogne, who sent them to Abbé de 
Pradt! Atthe Ministries of War and Foreign Affairs it had been 
forbidden to communicate them, especially to M. de Talleyrand. 

The latter desired to know what the allied powers would do 
as a last resource ; he spoke of it to M. de Dalberg ; the advice 
of the latter, was to ascertain this by sending some agent to 
Counts von Stadion and Nesselrode. 

The choice fell on M. de Vitrolles, a friend of M. Mollien 
and of M. de Hauterive, at this time a man who had very pro- 
nounced opinions on the progress of constitutional ideas, on 
which he had written a very good pamphlet, which he published 
later. 

M. de Vitrolles set out; his instructions were limited to 
this: he was to go to Chatillon to explain to Count von 
Stadion or Count Nesselrode, the danger incurred by every 
one by arriving at no definite decision ; after which he was to 
return to Paris bringing back the reply to the question as to 
whether or not the allies intended to maintain the emperor in 
power. 

M. de Vitrolles, believing that there were more facilities for 
reaching Chatidon by the north route, and by skirting the 
armies, only arrived at Chatillon on March 10, 1814. 

He introduced himself to Count von Stadion, and proved his 
identity to him by having him read two names written in his 
album by the Duc de Dalberg (they were the names of two 
sisters, whom the writer and reader had both known at Vienna). 

He declared to Count von Stadion that the state of opinion in 
France and the dispositions of several people demanded a 
change and legislative guarantees against the violence and 
character of the emperor, that it was important to enforce a 
speedy decision, in order that the war might not take a turn 
which should defer peace for a long time. 

Count von Stadion promised to return to Troyes, where the 
political cabinet of the allies was, and where the emperor and 
the King of Prussia were to be found. 

Baron de Vitrolles set out with a letter from Count von 
Stadion to Prince Metternich. The latter told him— “That he 
wished, without unnecessary circumlocution, to inform him of the 


188 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


unanimous opinion of the powers, viz., that they considered 
Bonaparte was a man with whom it was impossible to treat any 
longer ; that on the day that he experienced reverses, he appeared 
to cede everything ; that when he gained some slight success, 
he returned to pretensions as exaggerated as inadmissible ; that 
it was therefore desirable that another sovereign should be 
appointed in France, and that affairs should be regulated in 
such a manner as to give Russia, Austria, and France, an equal 
weight in Europe ; that Prussia should remain a power, half as 
strong as each of the three others ; that with regard to the new 
sovereign to be appointed for France, it was impossible to think 
of the Bourbons, because of the friends and supporters of these 
princes.” 

We must here mention that M. de Vitrolles’ policy was that 
peace could only be restored to France and Europe by the re- 
establishment of the House of Bourbon, with a charter guaran- 
teeing to France the enjoyment of public liberties. 

He was on intimate terms with Madame Etienne de Durfort, 
and from her he had received on setting out, a message for the 
Comte d’Artois, which would give him access to that prince, and 
win his confidence. 

M. de Vitrolles saw Count Nesselrode after an interview with 
Prince Metternich. He received almost the same information 
from him. He was at the same time told that nothing could 
dissuade the allies from acting unanimously, and in perfect 
agreement, till the general peace was established on a firm 
footing ; that no intrigue would gain a hearing. 

A few days after, M. de Vitrolles solicited from Count 
Nesselrode an audience with the Emperor of Russia. That 
minister told him that he had already thought of this himself, 
and that he was afraid it would prove rather difficult ; he never- 
theless secured this interview, by informing the emperor that 
M. de Vitrolles was in relation with Prince Talleyrand, Abbé 
de Pradt, and the Duc de Dalberg. The emperor repeated 
almost the same things as the ministers. He said that he had 
thought of placing at first Bernadotte and then Beauharnais on 
the throne of France; but that motives of a different nature 
forbade this plan: that, besides, his intention was above all to 
consult the wish of the French themselves, and that should they 
even wish to establish a republic, the allies would perhaps offer 
no objection. 

The emperor expatiated at even greater length than the 
plenipotentiaries on the impossibility of thinking of the Bourbons, 
and on the unfavourable opinion the sovereigns had of them. 

M. de Vitrolles, according to his own account, had a sudden 


APPENDICES. 189 


inspiration at this point,and invited the emperor, instead of follow- 
ing the ordinary operations of war to march at once on Paris ; 
for that he could there judge of the state of public opinion. 

On the other hand, General Pozzo di Borgo asserts that it was 
he who persuaded the emperor to take this step,and persons who 
were qualified to know, declare that the emperor refused to decide 
anything, without having first consulted Prince Talleyrand, and 
that it was his advice that would have to be followed as to the 
future of France. 

The last words of the emperor to M. de Vitrolles were : 
*“‘ Monsieur, our conversation of to-day will have ominous results 
for Europe ; I set out to-morrow in person for the general head- 
quarters.” 

As a matter of fact, he did start on the morrow, in order to 
confer with Prince von Schwarzenberg. 

After the capitulation of Paris, Count Nesselrode called, in 
the morning, on Prince Talleyrand, to whose residence M. de 
Dalberg had also been summoned. The emperor entered Paris 
at mid-day, and lodged at the house of Prince Talleyrand. 

M. de Vitrolles also saw the Emperor of Austria, who told 
him that he was about to return to Dijon, that the Emperor of 
Russia and the King of Prussia would take at Paris the course 
that circumstances indicated, and that he would go there himself 
afterwards. 

M. de Vitrolles, instead of returning to Paris, paid a visit to 
Monsieur. He heard, on the way, that Bonaparte had had some 
fresh successes; that the negotiations at Chatillon had been 
affected by that news, and that the Comte d’Artois was at 
Nancy. He arrived there on March 23. 

I give no account of his doings at Paris, where he only 
arrived several days after the allies, after having written to 
Prince Talleyrand a letter in the name of Monszeur, who found 
fault with his having allowed the Senate to express wishes for a 
constitutional regime. 


APPENDIX II. 


On the day after the sitting of the senate, Prince Talleyrand 
received the following letter from Benjamin Constant. Thts letter 
was found among the papers of Prince Talleyrand. 


“You have gloriously solved a long puzzle, and however 
strange, however inconvenient, this manner of congratulating you 
may be I cannot resist thanking you for having at once broken 


1 See page 123. 


190 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


the power of tyranny, and laid down some basis for liberty. 
Without the one, I should not have been able to thank you for » 
the other. 1789 and 1814 are glorious annals in your life. You 
resemble Maurice of Saxony in history, and you will not die at 
the moment of success. You will not accuse me of addressing 
this homage to your prosperity only. My past life ought to save 
me from being thus suspected. There is also no personal 
motive in what I do. I left France to escape a yoke I could 
not destroy, and although I have endeavoured to be reconciled 
to her, in order to serve her, bonds that are dear to me detain me 
elsewhere. But it is pleasant to me to express my admiration, 
when feeling it for one, who is at once the saviour, and the most 
courteous, of Frenchmen : I write this after having read the basis 
of the proposed constitution. 

“Pardon me if I add no title to those you already possess : 
Europe and history will readily award them you: but the finest 
will always be that of President of the Senate. 

“With homage and respect. 
“ BENJAMIN CONSTANT. 

“April 3, 1814.” 


APPENDIX III.! 


The following letter was addressed by Fouché to the emperor 
at the moment when he had just accepted the sovereignty of the 
Island of Elba, which the allied sovereigns had offered him. As the 
enclosed letter indicates, this note reached the emperor through the 
hands of Prince Talleyrand, amongst whose papers it was found. 


I have the honour to forward to your Highness two letters 
in place of the one I had promised. 

I thought fit to communicate to Monszeur the letter I have 
written to Bonaparte. 

I have added some reflections which I thought needful under 
the circumstances; your Highness knows that those whose 
anxieties I do not share suspect me of pusillanimous transactions. 

I shall call on your Highness at half-past five, and shall 
have the honour of dining with you ; your Highness may take 
it for granted that I shall seize every possible opportunity of 
seeing you and profiting by your conversation. 

(Signed) THE DUC D’OTRANTE. 
April 23, 1814. 

P.S.—I beg your Highness to be so good as to forward the 

letter to Bonaparte, when it has been communicated to 


Monsieur. 
1 See page 125. 


APPENDICES. I9I 


“SIRE, 

“When France and a part of Europe were at 
your feet, I ventured, even at the risk of displeasing you, to 
consistently tell you the truth, for your own interests. To-day 
you are in misfortune, and, though I fear to wound you yet 
more if I speak sincerely, it is both useful, and even necessary, 
to you, that I should do so. 

“You have accepted the isle of Elba, and its sovereignty. 
Iam lending an attentive ear to all that is said of this sovereignty 
and this island. I think I owe it to you, to assure you that its 
situation in Europe suits yours but little, and that the title of 
sovereign of some acres of land, still less befits him who possessed 
an immense empire. 

“]T beg you to weigh these two considerations, and you will 
feel how well founded they both are. 

“The island of Elba is not very far from Africa, Greece, and 
Spain. It nearly touches the coasts of. Italy and France ; from 
this island, the sea, the wind, and a felucca, can quickly transport 
you to all the countries that are most liable to outbreaks, 
revolts, and revolutions. To-day there is no stability anywhere. 
In the present uneasy state of Europe, a genius such as yours 
will always cause uneasiness and suspicion to the powers. 

“You will be accused without being guilty, but without being 
guilty, you will do wrong, for these alarms are bad both for 
sovernments and peoples. 

“ The king now about to reign over France, wishes to reign 
by justice alone ; but you know how clever hatred can be in 
giving to slander the colour of truth! 

“The titles which you preserve, and which cause you to 
remember what you have lost, only serve to embitter your 
recollections : they will seem not the relic, but so many empty 
badges of vanished grandeurs. I say more: without honouring 
you, they will bring you more prominently into notice. Men will 
say that you only retain these titles, because you refuse to let slip 
any of your pretensions. They will say that the rock of Elba 
is the fulcrum for placing the levers with which to lift the 
world. Permit me to tell you what I think about it, after 
mature reflection. It would be more glorious, and more con- 
soling for you, to live as a simple citizen ; and to-day, the 
surest, and the most comfortable, refuge for a man like you, 
would be the United States of America. 

“There you would begin your existence anew, among a new 
people ; they would admire your genius, without fearing it. You 
would be under the protection of laws that are just and in- 
violable towards all that breathes, in the land of the Franklins, 


192 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


the Washingtons, and the Jeffersons. You would prove to these 
people, that if you had been born amongst them, you would have 
had the same thoughts, feelings, and aspirations, as they; that 
you would have preferred their virtues and liberty, to ruling 
over all the countries of the earth. 

“T have the honour to be your Majesty’s most humble and 
respectful servant. 

“ (Signed) THE Duc D’OTRANTE. 


“PARIS, Aprz/ 23, 1814. 


“P.S.—I must inform your Majesty that I have asked no 
one’s advice as to writing this letter, nor have I received any 
instructions.” 


APPENDIX IV. 


At this point a long note in the manuscript ts inserted, written 
probably by M. de Bacourt, according to a chapter of M. de Cape- 
jigue's work, “V’Histoire des Traités de 1815.” The author 
states that the Emperor Napoleon had accepted the ultimatum of 
the allies at the Chatillon Congress, and that the conditions obtained 
by M. de Talleyrand on the 30th of May, after the fall of the 
Empire, were much better. 


On the 17th of February, 1814, the Chatillon Congress 
decided the formula of the treaty to be proposed to the Emperor 
Napoleon, and Prince Metternich sent it to M. de Caulaincourt. 
Here it is :— 

“In the name of the Most Holy and Indivisible Trinity. 

“Their Imperial Majesties of Austria and Russia, His 
Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Ireland, and His Majesty the King of Prussia, acting in the 
name of all their allies, on the one side, and of His Majesty the 
Emperor of the French on the other, wishing to cement the 
repose and future welfare of Europe by a solid and lasting peace, 
by land and sea; and having, with a view to this happy result, 
assembled their plenipotentiaries at Chatillon to discuss the 
conditions of this peace, the said plenipotentiaries have agreed 
on the following articles :-— 

“Article I—There shall be peace and amnesty between 
their Imperial Majesties of Austria and Russia, His Majesty the 
King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and 
His Majesty the King of Prussia, acting at the same time in the 


1 See page 131. 


APPENDICES. 193 


name of all their allies, and His Majesty the Emperor of the 
French, their heirs and successors for ever. 

“The high contracting parties bind themselves to employ 
all their influence in maintaining, for the future happiness of 
Europe, the good harmony, so happily established among them. 

“ Article II—His Majesty the Emperor of the French, 
renounces for himself and his successors, all acquisitions, 
alliances, or incorporations, made by France since the com- 
mencement of the war in 1792. 

“ His Majesty equally renounces all constitutional authority, 
direct or indirect, beyond the ancient limits of France as estab- 
lished before the war of 1792, as well as all titles derived from 
them, namely, those of King of Italy, King of Rome, Protector 
of the Rhine Confederation, and Mediator of the Swiss Con- 
federation. 

“Article II]—The high contracting parties formally and 
solemnly recognize the principle of the sovereignty and in- 
dependence of all the states of Europe, as they shall be definitely 
constituted in the final treaty of peace. 

“Article IV.—His Majesty the Emperor of the French 
recognizes expressly the following reconstitution of the countries 
bordering on France :— 


‘1. Germany, composed of independent states, united 
by a federal tie. 

“2. Italy, divided into independent states, situated be- 
tween the Austrian possessions and France. 

“3. Holland, under the sovereignty of the House of 
Orange, with an increase of territory. 

“4. Switzerland, a free and independent state, replaced 
in its former limits, and under the protection of all the 
Great Powers, France included. 

“5. Spain, under the dominion of Ferdinand VII,, in its 
former limits. 


“His Majesty the Emperor of the French further recognizes 
the right of all the allied powers to determine, according to the 
existing treaties between the powers, the limits and relations 
of the countries ceded by France, as of their own states among 
themselves, without France having the power to interfere in any 
way. 

“ Article V.—On his part, his Britannic Majesty consents to 
restore to France (with the exception of the Isles called Saintes) 
all the conquests which have been made by him during the war, 
and which are at present in the power of his Britannic Majesty, 
in the West Indies, in Africa, and in America. 


VOL. II. O 


194 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


“The island of Tobago, in accordance with Article II. of the 
present treaty, will continue to belong to Great Britain, and the 
allies promise to do their best to persuade their Majesties of 
Sweden and Portugal to put no obstacle in the way of the 
restoration of Guadaloupe and Cayenne to France. 

“All the settlements and factories taken by conquest from 
France to the east of the Cape of Good Hope, with the ex- 
ception of the isles of Mauritius (Ile de France), of Bourbon, 
and their dependencies, shall be restored to her. France shall 
not re-enter those of the above-mentioned settlements and 
factories which are situated in the continent of India, and 
within the boundaries of British possessions, unless she re- 
cognize them as commercial settlements only, and she promises 
in consequence to construct no fortifications, and never to settle 
any garrisons, or military forces of any kind whatever, beyond 
what may be necessary for maintaining order in the said settle- 
ments. 

“The restitutions above-mentioned, in Asia, Africa, and 
America, shall not include any possession which was not com- 
pletely under the dominion of France, before the commencement 
of the war of 1792. 

“The French government promises to forbid the importation 
of slaves into all the colonies and possessions restored by the 
present treaty, and to forbid her subjects, by the most efficacious 
means, to engage in the traffic of negroes at all. 

“The island of Malta, with its dependencies, will remain 
entirely under the dominion of his Britannic Majesty. 

“ Article VI—His Majesty the Emperor of the French will 
give up, immediately after the ratification of the present pre- 
liminary treaty, all fortresses and forts of the countries ceded, 
as well as those which his troops still occupy in Germany, without 
exception, Mayence being specially mentioned: those of Ham- 
burg, Antwerp, Bergen-op-Zoom, are to be ceded within a delay 
of six days; Mantua, Palma-Nuova, Venice, and Peschiera, and 
the fortified places of the Oder and the Elbe, in fifteen days ; 
all other forts and fortresses, with the shortest delay possible, 
which must not exceed fifteen days. These forts and fortresses 
are to be given up in the condition in which they now are, with 
all their artillery, ammunition of war, and various stores, archives 
IBS see V 5 aa es ; the French garrisons of these forts shall take away 
their arms, baggage, and all private property. 

“His Majesty the Emperor of the French will also give up 
to the allied armies within the space of four days the fortresses 
of Besangon, Belfort, and Huningen, which shall remain as 
pledges till the time of the ratification of the final peace, and 


APPENDICES. 195 


which are to be kept in the state in which they shall have been 
ceded, according as the allied armies evacuate French territory. 

“Article VII.—The generals in command shall, without 
delay, appoint commissioners charged with determining the line 
of demarcation between the various armies. 

“ Article VIII—As soon as the present preliminary treaty 
shall have been mutually accepted and ratified, hostilities shall 
cease both by land and sea. 

“ Article 1X.—The present preliminary treaty shall be 
followed, with the shortest delay possible, by a definite treaty of 
peace. 

“Article X.—The ratifications of the preliminary treaty 
shall be exchanged within four days, or sooner if possible.” 


M. de Caulaincourt, according to the orders of Napoleon 
tried to get better conditions than those enclosed in the projected 
treaty. His hesitation, which must be attributed to the vicissi- 
tudes of the strife which the Emperor Napoleon was undergoing, 
now victorious, now beaten, in his encounters with the allied 
armies, provoked from Prince Metternich the following letter, 
addressed to M. de Caulaincourt : 


“ March 18, 1814. 

“ Affairs are taking a very unfavourable turn, Monsieur le 
Duc. The day that a definite decision for peace shall have been 
arrived at, with its indispensable sacrifices, come and sign it, but 
not to be the interpreter of inadmissible projects. The points 
at issue are too important for it to be possible to add further 
romances to the Emperor’s life without his incurring great 
dangers. What do the alliesrisk ? At the very worst, after the 
greatest reverses, they can only be forced to quit the territory 
of old France. What will the Emperor Napoleon have gained ? 
The people of Belgium are making enormous efforts at the 
present time. All the left bank of the Rhine is to be put under 
arms. Savoy, spared hitherto, in order to leave it at the disposal 
of the first comer, will be forced to revolt, and there will be against 
the person of the Emperor Napoleon plots which can no longer 
be prevented. 

“You will see that I speak frankly, as to the man of peace. I 
shall always be of this mind. You,should know our views, prin- 
ciples,and wishes. The first are European, and therefore, French ; 
the second tend to interest Austria in the well-being of France ; 
the third are in favour of a dynasty so closely bound to that of 
Austria as is that of the emperor Napoleon. 

“T have shown you, my dear Duc, the most complete con- 
fidence, in order to put an end to the dangers which threaten 


O: 2 


196 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


France ; it still depends, on your master, as to whether peace is 
to be made; very shortly, perhaps, it will no longer be in 
his power. The throne of Louis XIV. with the additions of 
Louis XV. is a sufficiently fine one not to be staked on a 
single trump. I will do all I can to retain Lord Castlereagh a 


few days. If this minister is once allowed to depart, no chance 
of peace will be left. 


‘Be pleased t6 accept Ve 9. 
3 ‘ “ PRINCE VON METTERNICH.” 


This letter is important: it shows the position of Austria, 
who can no longer stand aloof, and must go with the allies: the 
latter are marching on Paris. It was then alone that Napoleon 
decided to accept the conditions of the allies. The fact of his 
having accepted them has been denied; it is said that the 
emperor refused the humiliating terms proposed by the allies. 
This is not true: he accepted them, late indeed, but he did 
accept them. 

The following is the letter of M. de Caulaincourt, addressed 
to Prince Metternich, which was despatched from Doulevent 


on the 25th of March by M. de Gallebois, orderly of Marshal 
Berthier :— 


** DOULEVENT, March 25, 1814. 
“T only reached the emperor to-night. His Majesty imme- 
diately gave me his final orders for the conclusion of the peace. 
He gave me, at the same time, all the powers necessary for 
negotiating and signing it with the ministers of the allied courts, 
this means being, in reality, better than any other for assuring 
its speedy accomplishment. I therefore hasten to inform you 
that I am ready to return to headquarters, and await the reply 
of your Excellency at the outposts. Our zeal will prove to the 
allied powers how strongly the emperor is bent on peace, and 
that, on the part of France, no delay will be opposed to the 

salutary work which is to ensure the peace of the world. 
“ CAULAINCOURT, DUC DE VICENCE.” 


This letter is dated the 25th of March, a month after the 
ultimatum of the allies: a second letter, also from M. de Cau- 
laincourt to Prince Metternich, was sent off on the same day; it 
agreed to everything:— # 


“Your HIGHNESS,— 


“TI have only just arrived, and hasten to execute 
the commands of the emperor, and to putin my letter all that I 
owe to the confidence displayed in yours. 


“The emperor authorizes me to renew the negotiations in 


APPENDICES. 197 


the frankest and most positive manner. I therefore ask for 
the facilities that you have led me to expect, that I may 
arrive as soon as possible. I beg of your Highness not to leave 
to others the care of restoring peace to the world. There is no 
reason why it should not be done in four days, if your kindly 
spirit presides, and if they are as frank as ourselves in their 
wishes for it. Let us seize the occasion, and many faults and 
misfortunes will be remedied. Your Highness’ task is glorious, 
mine will be very painful ; but since the tranquillity and welfare 
of so many peoples will result from it, I shall put no less zeal 
and devotion into it than yourself. 
“ CAULAINCOURT, DUC DE VICENCE.” 


This is what is certain, and is stated in authentic documents ; 
Napoleon accepted at the end of March the frontier of the old 
monarchy with all the harsh conditions laid down by the 
allies ; he gave up the fortresses, and the fleet of Antwerp (for 
which Prince Talleyrand has been so much blamed) ; as pledges 
he gave the fortresses of Besancon, Belfort, and Huningen, which 
the Bourbons did not do in 1814. That is the truth. To deny 
that Napoleon definitely accepted the ultimatum of the allies at 
Chatillon, is to ignore all the correspondence of M. de Caulain- 
court and his ulterior negotiations at Paris. 

Those who have with much simplicity written that, in the 
two restorations, there were disloyalties and treasons without 
number, have not sufficiently remarked that the first of all 
treasons is the suicide of power ; when it gives the blow to itself, 
is it astonishing that its supporters should desert it ? 

The following truths are shown by the clearest evidence :— 

I. At Prague, in 1813, Napoleon had it in his power to make 
peace by giving up Illyria, and the Hanseatic towns, and 
allowing the independence of Germany and Spain. 

2. At Frankfort, he could have made peace (December 181 3) 
by keeping the natural boundaries of the Rhine, the Alps, and 
the Pyrenees. 

3. At Chatillon (March, 1814), in the midst of our mis- 
fortunes, he had accepted this peace on most humiliating terms, 
demanding that the ancient boundaries be kept ; the surrender 
of almost all our colonies ; the occupation of Besancon, Belfort 
and Huningen. by the enemy ; ‘the surrender of the fleet of 
Antwerp, and of all the ammunition of the garrisons. 

4. By the treaties of April 24 and May 30, 1814, the 
Bourbons gained a larger frontier for France, and at the 
Congress of Vienna, Prince Talleyrand succeeded in regaining 
the preponderance of France in Europe. 


PART ViIL, 
CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 
1814— 1815. 


Talleyrand’s arrival at Vienna—Dispositions of the Allies towards France— 
The position of the French plenipotentiaries at the Congress—Difficul- 
ties to be contended with—Opening of the Congress—The intentions of 

‘the first-class Powers—Talleyrand finds unhoped-for support in Spain 
and the second-class Powers—Want of courtesy towards Talleyrand— . 
Defeats the aim of the Allies—The first meeting of the Congress 
attended by Talleyrand—Prince Metternich’s speech—Talleyrand’s 
reply—Pudssances Alliées—Count de Labrador’s motion in support of 
Talleyrand’s proposals—Embarrassment of the plenipotentiaries of the 
Allied Powers—The Congress agrees to the annulling of the protocols of 
the preceding sittings—Distribution of the work of the Congress—Change 
of disposition towards France—The anniversary service of the death of 
Louis XVI.—The Congress at work—The fate of the kingdom of 
Saxony and of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw—Prussia’s designs—Talley- 
rand demurs to the recognition of her claims—The sacred principle of 
legitimacy—Suum cuigue—The laxity of the public law of Europe 
—Growing tendency to uphold usurpations—Indifference of the Allies as 
to the rights of the House of Bourbon—Obstacles encountered by 
Talleyrand in enforcing the triumph of legitimacy—Hostile attitude of 
Russia towards France—Compromise offered—“I am not here to 
strike a bargain!”—“‘No compromise with principles !”—England 
backs up the views of Russia and Prussia on Saxony—Her delusion— 
Doubtful attitude of Austria—Talleyrand wins her support—He succeeds 
in dispelling the prejudices of England—A secret alliance between 
France, Austria, and England, against Russia and Prussia—The 
prestige of principles—Discord among the Allies—Prussia gives way— 
Napoleon’s return from Elba—Anxiety of the Congress—The Comtesse 
de Brionne—“ Politics must wait !”—Indecision of the King of Saxony— 
His interview with Metternich, Wellington, and Talleyrand—A plenipo- 
tentiary of Saxony at the Congress—Russia compelled to desist—The 
deliberations of the Congress concerning Poland—France disposed to 
admit the restoration of independent Poland—Russia’s ministers give 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 199 


in—Ferdinand IV. and Murat—The latter defeated by the Austrians— 
Talleyrand created Duc of Dino—Sardinia’ and the House of Carignan 
—Switzerland’s neutrality—The Netherlands—The German Confedera- 
tion—Louis XVIII. at Ghent—The Congress, at Talleyrand’s suggestion, 
denounces the wsurfer—The Powers rush to arms—Louis XVIII. ad- 
mitted into the Alliance of Europe against Napoleon—Correspondence 
exchanged between Louis XVIII. and Talleyrand at the Congress— 
Text of the Secret Treaty of Defensive Alliance, concluded January 3, 
1815, between Austria, France, and Great Britain—Napoleon acquaints 
the Czar Alexander with the text of the above-mentioned Treaty— 
Interview between Alexander and Prince Metternich—Napoleon’s aims 
defeated—Indulgence of the Czar for Prince Metternich—The Czar 
Alexander incensed at Talleyrand’s duplicity. 


I ARRIVED at Vienna September 23, 1814. I repaired to the 
“ H6tel Kaunitz,” which had been hired for the French legation. 
On entering, the porter handed me several letters addressed :— 
“To Prince Talleyrand, Hotel Kaunitz.” The two names thus 
side by side appeared to me a good omen. 

The day after my arrival, I presented myself at the houses of 
the members of the diplomatic corps. They all seemed to me 
rather surprised at the little advantage they had derived from 
the capitulation of Paris. They had just traversed countries that 
had been ravaged by war for many years, in which they had 
heard, they said, but words of hatred and vengeance against 
France, for having overwhelmed them with taxes, and treated 
them with the arrogance of a victor. My new colleagues assured 
me that they had been reproached everywhere for their weakness 
in signing the treaty of Paris. I therefore did not find them 
very enthusiastic over the satisfaction to be derived from 
generosity, but rather disposed toe excite each other about the 
pretensions they were to advance. Each was perusing the treaty 
of Chaumont, which had not only tightened the bonds of an 
alliance destined to last for the present war, but had also laid 
down conditions for an alliance which should survive it, 
and bind the allies together even in the remote future. 
And moreover, how could they make up their minds to admit 
to the council of Europe the very power against which Europe 
had been in arms during twenty years? The minister of a 
country so newly reconciled, they said, ought to think himself 


200 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


very fortunate in being allowed to give in his assent to the reso- 
lutions of the ambassadors of the other powers. 

Thus, at the opening of the negotiations, all the cabinets 
regarded themselves as being, notwithstanding the peace, in 
an attitude which, if not hostile, was at least very equivocal, 
with France! They all thought, more or less, that it would 
have been to their interest that she should have been more 
enfeebled still. Unable to do anything in that direction, they 
endeavoured to at least diminish her influence. I saw that they 
were all agreed on those various points. 

It remained for me to hope that there would be among 
the powers some divergence of opinion, when they came to 
distribute the numerous territories that the war had put at 
their disposal, each one desiring, either to obtain for itself, or 
to give to the states dependent upon it, a considerable portion 
of the conquered territories. It was specially desired, at the 
same time, to exclude from the division those countries which 
it was feared would prove too independent. That style of con- 
test, however, offered me but scant opportunity for interfering 
with matters ; for previous arrangements, by which the disposal 
of the most important territories had been regulated, existed 
between the powers. To succeed in modifying those arrange- 
ments, or in having them completely renounced, according to the 
dictates of justice, there was more than prejudices to remove, 
more than pretensions to check, more than ambition to defeat. 
It was necessary to annul all that had been done without 
France. For, if they consented to admit us to take a share in 
the acts of the congress, it was for the sake of form only, and in 
order to deprive us of the means of contesting their validity ; 
but it was intended that France should have nothing to say 
in the resolutions already settled, and that were looked upon as 
accomplished facts. 

Before giving here, that which, in my opinion, constitutes the 
most faithful picture of the Vienna Congress, that is to say, my 
official correspondence with the Department of Foreign Affairs 
of France, and my private correspondence with King Louis 
XVIII, as well as the letters from that sovereign during the 
congress, I believe I should furnish a rapid but general glance 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 201 


on the progress of the deliberations of that great assembly. The 
details of it will subsequently be better understood. 
The opening of the congress had been fixed for the Ist of 
October. I had been at Vienna since September 23, but I had 
been preceded there by several days, by the ministers who, having 
directed the war, and repented of peace, wished to take advan- 
tage of their position at the congress. It was not long before I 
was informed that they had already formed a commission, and 
were holding among themselves conferences, of which a protocol 
had been prepared. Their object was to decide alone what 
ought to be submitted to the deliberations of the congress, and 
that too, without the assistance of either France, Spain, or 
any power of the second order; to these however they would 
afterwards communicate, in the form of a proposition, what 
would in reality be a resolution, viz., the different articles they 
should have determined upon. I made no remonstrances. I 
continued to see them, without speaking of business. I limited 
myself to communicating to the ministers of the secondary 
powers, who had a common interest with me, the dissatisfaction 
I felt. Discovering also, in the past policy of their countries, 
traces of confidence in France, they very soon looked upon 
me as their support, and once assured of their assent in all 
that I was about to do, I officially pressed the opening of the 
congress. In my first requests, I acted as though I had no 
knowledge of the conferences that had been held. The opening 
of the congress was fixed for a certain day. That day passed ; 
I entreated that another should be fixed in the near future. I 
gave it to be understood that it was necessary that I should not 
remain too long absent from France. A few replies, evasive 
at first, caused me to repeat my entreaties. I even went so far 
as to complain a little, but was finally obliged to make use 
of the personal influence that I had fortunately acquired in 
the previous negotiations, over the principal personages of 
the congress. Prince Metternich and Count Nesselrode, not 
wishing to be disobliging to me, had both invited me to a 
conference which was to have been held at the office of the 
minister of foreign affairs. Count de Labrador, minister of 
Spain, with whom I had the honour to support a common 


202 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


cause in the deliberations of the congress, received the same 
invitation. 

I went to the office of the minister of state at the hour 
indicated, and found there, Lord Castlereagh,! Prince von 
Hardenberg,? Herr von Humboldt, and Herr von Gentz,’ a 
man of distinguished talents, who fulfilled the functions of 
secretary. The protocol of the preceding sittings was on the 
table. I mention all the details of that first sitting, because it 
decided the position of France at the congress. Prince Metter- 
nich opened it by a few sentences on the duty incumbent on the 
congress to give solidity to the peace which had just been restored 
to Europe. Prince von Hardenberg added, that in order to con- 
solidate the peace it was indispensable that the agreements the 
war had caused them to enter into should be religiously kept ; 
and that such was the intention of the al/zed powers. 

Placed by the side of Prince von Hardenberg, I was naturally 
forced to speak after him, and after having said a few words on 
the good fortune of France in finding herself in relations of confi- 
dence and friendship with all the cabinets of Europe, I remarked 
that Prince Metternich and Prince von Hardenberg had let fall an 


1 Robert Stewart, Marquis of Londonderry, Viscount Castlereagh, born in 1769, in 
Ireland, was elected at twenty-one to the House of Commons. In 1797, he be- 
came Lord of the Privy Seal of Ireland, then secretary of the Lord-Lieutenant 
Camden, and member of the Privy Council of Ireland. Strongly attached to Pitt he 
was appointed Minister of War, and of the Colonies in 1805. The death of Pitt 
brought about the dissolution of the ministry ; but Castlereagh took office again in 
1807. He retired in 1809. In 1812, he returned to power as Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, and was the moving spirit of the ministry of Lord Liverpool. He had con- 
siderable influence over the events of 1814 and 1815 ; he was present at the congresses 
of Chatillon and Vienna. He died in 1822. It is known that he committed suicide. 

* Charles-Augustus, Prince von Hardenberg, a Prussian Statesman, born in 1750, 
in Hanover. He was first in the service of the elector, passing afterwards to that 
of Brunswick, and became, a short time after, minister of the Margrave of Baireuth 
and Anspach. These principalities having been united to Prussia in 1791, Hardenberg 
became minister of the king of Prussia. In 1795, he signed the peace of Basel with 
France. In 1804, he replaced Count von Haugwitz as Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
but resigned after the battle of Austerlitz. He took office again after the battle of Jena, 
but was obliged to retire after the peace of Tilsit. In 1810, he was appointed 
Chancellor of State. After the campaign of Russia, he actively prosecuted the war 
against France, and was one of the signatories of the treaty of Paris. He was 
present at the Congress of Vienna. In 1817 he became president of the Council 
of State, and died in 1822. 

3 Frederick von Gentz, born in 1764, was first, secretary general of the Minister 
of Finance of Prussia, then counsellor at Vienna. A bitter enemy of France, he 
played an important part in European diplomacy. In 1813, he drafted the manifesto 
of the powers against France, was present at the Congress of Vienna as secretary, 
drafted the treaty of Paris in 1815, and attended the different congresses of the 
Holy Alliance. He died in 1832. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 203 


expression that appeared to me to belong to other times, for that 
they had both of them spoken of the intentions of the allzed 
powers. \ declared that allied powers, and a congress in which 
powers that were not allied were to be found, were in my eyes 
scarcely likely to arrange affairs loyally together. I repeated 
with some astonishment and even warmth, the word allied 


powers... “allied,’ 1 said, “and against whom? It is no 
longer against Napoleon—he is on the isle of Elba... it is no 
longer against France ; for peace has been made... it is surely 


not against the King of France ; he is a guarantee of the dura- 
tion of that peace. Gentlemen, let us speak frankly; if there are 
still alized powers, I am one too many here.”—-I perceived that 
I had produced some impression, and especially on Herr von 
Gentz. I continued: “And nevertheless if I were not here, I 
should decidedly be missed. Gentlemen, I am perhaps the only 
one who asks nothing. Great esteem is all I would have for 
France. She is sufficiently powerful by her resources, her extent 
of territory, by the number and intelligence of her inhabitants, 
by the contiguity of her provinces, by the unity of her adminis- 
tration, by the defences with which nature and art have guaran- 
teed her frontiers. I want nothing, I repeat it, but I bring you 
a great deal. The presence of a minister of Louis XVIII. 
consecrates here the principle upon which all social order rests. 
The first need of Europe is to banish for ever the opinion that 
right can be acquired by conquest alone, and to cause the 
revival of that sacred principle of legitimacy from which all order 
and stability spring. To show to-day that France troubles your 
deliberations, would be to say that true principles are no longer 
the only ones that guide you, and that you are unwilling to be 
just ; but that idea is far from me, for we all equally feel that 
a simple and straightforward path is alone worthy of the noble 
mission we have to fulfil. In the words of the treaty of Paris: 
‘ Toutes les purssances qui ont été engagées de part et d’autre dans 
la présente guerre, enverront des plénipotentiaires a Vienne, pour 
végler, dans un congres général, les arrangements qui doivent 
compléter les dispositions du traité de Paris’ When does the 


* “* All the powers who were on either side engaged in the present war, shall send 
plenipotentiaries to Vienna, there to settle, at a general congress, the arrangements 
which are to complete the provisions of the treaty of Paris.” 


204 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


general congress open? When do the conferences begin? 
These are questions asked by all those whose interests bring _ 
them here. If, as is already rumoured, some privileged powers 
would exercise a dictatorial authority over the congress, I 
must say that, confining myself to the terms of the treaty of 
Paris, I could not consent to recognize in this assembly any 
supreme power in questions that the congress is competent to 
treat, and that I should heed no proposal that proceeded from 
them.” 

After a few moments’ silence, Count de Labrador made, in his 
proud and piquant language, a declaration almost identical 
with my own. Embarrassment was depicted on every face. 
They denied and explained in the same breath all that had 
taken place before this meeting. I profited by this moment in 
order to make a few concessions to the pride that I saw thus 
hurt. I said that in so numerous an assembly as the congress, 
where one was obliged to occupy oneself with so many different 
matters, to regulate questions of the first importance, and to 
decide a host of secondary interests, it was very difficult, nay, 
even impossible, to reach any result by treating of all these 
subjects in general assemblies, but that some means of distri- 
buting and classifying all the business could be found without 
wounding either the interest or the dignity of any of the powers. 

This language, though vague, yet pointed out the possibility 
of a particular direction being given to general business, and 
thus permitted the assembled ministers to reconsider what they 
had done, and to regard it all as null; and Herr von Gentz 
destroyed the protocols of the previous sittings, and arranged 
one for that day. That protocol constituted the reports of the 
first sitting, and, in order to officially date our arrival at the 
congress, I signed it. From that time, there was no conference 
among the great powers in which France did not take a part. 
We met on the following days to distribute the work. All the 
members of the congress divided themselves into commissions that 
were charged to examine the questions submitted to them. The 
plenipotentiaries of those states who had a more direct interest 
in the objects to be examined, joined these commissions. The 
most important matters and questions of general interest 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 205 


were submitted to a committee formed of the representatives of 
the eight principal powers of Europe, and in order to form a 
nucleus, it was arranged that it should be those who had signed the 
treaty of May 30, 1814. This arrangement was not only useful 
because it wonderfully abridged and facilitated the work to be 
done, but it was also very just, since all the members of the 
congress consented to it, and no one raised objections. 

Thus, at the end of the month of October, 1814, I was able to 
write to Paris, that the house of Bourbon, which had only returned 
to France five months ago, and France herself, who had been 
conquered five months previously, found themselves already 
restored to their proper place in Europe, and had again regained 
that influence that belonged to them in the most important 
deliberations of the congress. And three months later, these 
same powers, who had done nothing to save the unfortunate 
Louis XVI., were called upon by me, to render a tardy, but 
solemn, homage to his memory. That homage was further a 
means of linking together the chain of events, and a new con- 
secration of the legitimate rights of the house of Bourbon. I 
should have said, that the Emperor and Empress of Austria 
powerfully seconded me in the pious and noble ceremony, cele- 
brated at Vienna, January 21, 1815, at which all the sovereigns, 
and notable personages then in the capital of the Austrian 
Empire were present. 

The first object with which the commission of the eight powers 
occupied itself, was the future lot of the king and realm of 
Saxony, and then that of the duchy of Warsaw. Prussia had, for 
some time, coveted the possession of the kingdom of Saxony. In 
acquiring it, she would not only have obtained possession of a 
rich and beautiful country, but one which would greatly 
strengthen her former territory. In the course of the war which 
had been terminated by the peace of Paris, the allies of Prussia 
had promised her, that, in the forthcoming arrangements, Saxony 
should be assured her. Prussia, consequently, counted with 
certainty upon that important acquisition, and already regarding 
herself as sovereign of that beautiful state which her troops occu- 
pied, held the King of Saxony prisoner in a Prussian fortress. 
But when the proposal was made in the committee of the eight 


206 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


powers to give it to her, I declared I could not consent to it 
I admitted that Prussia, deprived by Napoleon of vast and 
numberless possessions that she could not wholly recover, had 
a right to be indemnified, but, I asked, was that a reason that 
Prussia in her turn should plunder the King of Saxony ? Did not 
that mean substituting for a right founded upon justice, the right 
of the strongest, of which Prussia had so nearly become the 
victim? And, by making use of this right, renouncing as a 
matter of fact the interest her position inspired? Did not, more- 
over, the territories that the congress had to dispose of offer 
ample means of indemnity ? France wished to show herself 
complying in all the arrangements that concerned the King of 
Prussia, provided they were not contrary to justice; and I 
repeated that she could neither participate in, nor consent to, 
any that constituted an usurpation; while without mentioning 
the interest that was attached to the person of the King of 
Saxony, commanding, as he did, respect by his misfortunes, as 
well as by the virtues that had shed such lustre on his reign, I 
invoked in his favour the sacred principle of legitimacy alone. 

Prussia considered that all the requirements of this principle 
would be satisfied by assigning to the King of Saxony some 
indemnity in the way of unoccupied territory, and that, whether 
that prince thought so or not, the possession of Saxony would 
be sufficiently legitimate for her, if judged so by the allied 
sovereigns. Thereupon, I observed to Prince von Hardenberg 
that a recognition of that kind made by people who have no 
right to a thing themselves can scarcely confer it on another 
who has equally no right to it. 

This deplorable disregard for all principle must be attributed 
to the disorganization and agitation that Europe had experienced 
during twenty-five years. So many sovereigns had been de- 
spoiled, so many countries had changed masters, that public 
law, tainted by a sort of corruption, no longer reproved usurpa- 
tion. The sovereigns of Europe had been gradually forced by the 
sway of irresistible circumstances to recognize usurpers, to treat 
and even to ally themselves with them. They had thus, little by 
little, been led to sacrifice their scruples to their safety ; and, in 
order to satisfy their ambition, when they, in their turn, found 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 207 


the opportunity, they were ready to become usurpers themselves. 
Respect for legitimate rights had become so weak in them, 
that, after the first victory over Napoleon, it was not the sove- 
reigns who thought of the rights of the house of Bourbon ; they 
had even several other projects upon France. And if she 
recovered her kings, it was, that, as soon as she could express 
her wish, she threw herself into the arms of that august family, 
that brought her wisely restricted liberties and the remembrance 
of a glorious past. At first, the restoration had been, for the 
' powers who, I repeat, were present indeed, but whose work it was 
not, in any respect, far more a matter of fact than of right. 

When the ministers of France openly constituted themselves 
at the congress the defenders of the principle of legitimacy, 
no disposition was shown to admit the consequences of it, except 
in so far as they did not contradict in any way the respective 
conveniences before which it was intended that the principle 
should yield. Thus, to secure the triumph of that principle, I 
was obliged to surmount every obstacle that ambition, thus 
foiled at the very moment of satisaction, might raise. 

As for Prussia, she sustained her pretensions on Saxony 
with vehemence and tenacity. Russia, either on account of the 
attachment that her sovereign bore towards the King of Prussia, 
or because the price of that concession would be the possession 
of the duchy of Warsaw for the Czar Alexander, supported it 
with all her power. Her ministers spoke in this vein, without 
the least embarrassment. 

“ Arrangement is everything in politics,” said one of them to 
me. “Naples is your first interest ; give up Saxony, and Russia 
will support you for Naples.” 

“You speak to me now ofa bargain,” I replied. “I cannot do 
so. I am so fortunate as not to be quite so much at my ease 
as yourself; it is your will and your interest that decide you, 
while as to me, I am obliged to follow principles, and principles 
do not allow of compromise.” 

The principal object of England, in concurring in the 
views of Prussia and Russia on Saxony, appeared to be that of 
fortifying by a second line of defence on the Elbe, the one that 
Prussia already had on the Oder, so that this power might oppose 


208 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


a more solid barrier to enterprises which in the end Russia 
might form against Germany. But that idea, even from a 
strategic point of view, was a pure illusion. 

Austria had scarcely any other determinate motive in sup- 
porting the pretensions of Prussia, than that of maintaining 
arrangements which had previously been precipitately and lightly 
projected in the tumult of camps. She had not been debarred 
even by the danger to herself in allowing Prussia to establish 
herself on the mountains of Bohemia, a danger that she scarcely 
seemed to see until France informed her of it. I found a direct 
means of making the Emperor Francis understand, without it 
passing through one of his ministers, that he had a grave interest 
in Saxony being preserved. The reasons I developed to the 
intermediary! whom I employed made a great impression on 
his mind. 

England very soon understood that it would be imprudent 
to throw a new element of enmity and discord between the two 
powers which defended the borders of Germany against Russia. 
Moreover for Prussia, Saxony would have been for some time 
a precarious possession, and one not sufficiently submissive, but 
always ready to seize opportunities for escaping from her, and 
recovering her independence. It would therefore have been, for 
Prussia, an acquisition that was more likely to weaken than to 
strengthen her. 

The question of the disposal of Saxony was thus freed from 
the particular considerations which had been the motive for the 
first determination of England, and, being presented to Austria 
under the real point of view, under which her interest should 
bring her to consider it, France found these two powers at last 
disposed to listen without prejudice to the strong reasons that 
she had for winning consent to her principles. When these 
two powers saw that their own convenience lay in accordance 
with the principles of legitimacy they willingly recognized that 
the same principle applied to the convenience of others. They 
were thus led to become its defenders also, and things very soon 
reached such a point that a secret and contingent alliance was 


1 This intermediary was Count von Sickingen, of a noble German family which 
was descended from the famous Captain Franz von Sickingen (1481-1523). 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 209 


formed between France, Austria, and England, against Russia 
and Prussia.1 Thus France, by the sheer force of reason and 
the power of principles, broke an alliance which was only directed 
against herself. (Fortunate would she have been, if the fatal 
catastrophe of the 20th of March had not happened to renew its 
bonds ! !) 

The allies thus found themselves divided, whilst we had just 
formed a new alliance in which France was the principal party. 
The first alliance, viz.: that against Napoleon, which the allies 
desired to prolong beyond the object for which it had been 
contracted, could only bring them the means of satisfying their 
private ambitions and views, whilst the aim of the new alliance 
could be no other than that of maintaining the principles of 
order, of the preservation of kingdoms and of peace. In this 
way, France, who had but just ceased to be an object of dread 
to all Europe, became, in a measure, her arbitrator and 
moderator. 

After England and Austria had once come to a decision, 
Prussia was of course obliged to yield and ended by consenting 
to Saxony’s continued existence as a kingdom, and declaring 
herself satisfied with the promise of a portion of it, subject to 
the condition that it be voluntarily ceded by the sovereign of 
that country. This important point once obtained, it was neces- 
sary to induce the King of Saxony to make the sacrifice. I 
myself, the Duke of Wellington, and Prince Metternich, were 
bidden to present ourselves to the king, and endeavour to get 
his consent to it. The news of the arrival of Napoleon in 
France had just circulated through Vienna. It caused the 
utmost excitement at the congress. We were given twenty-four 
hours only in which to fulfil our painful mission. I started 
immediately for Petersburg, where the King of Saxony had 
finally been allowed to reside. 

The Comtesse de Brionne,? who dwelt in that town, whither 

1 January 3, 1815. By this treaty France, Austria and England promised to 
make common cause against the ambition of Prussia and Russia, and promised each 
other an army of one hundred and fifty thousand men. 


2 Louise-Julie-Constance de Rohan, the wife of Charles-Louis de Lorraine, 
Comte de Brionne. (See Voi. I., Part i.) 


VOL. II. P 


210 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


she had retired on emigrating ... Madame de Brionne!!.., 
-who had had for so many years as great an affection 
for me as though I had been her child, and who believed 
I had done her wrong . . . oh! politics must wait. On arriving 
at Presburg, I hurried to throw myself at her feet. She 
allowed me to stay there long enough to feel her tears falling — 
on my face. 

“Tt is you at last,” she said; “I always knew I should see 
you again. I may have been dissatisfied with you, but I have 
never for a moment ceased to love you. My heart has followed 
you everywhere. ...” 

I could not say a word, I wept. She sought to recompose 
me by asking all sorts of questions. 

“You have a fine position?” she said. 

“Oh yes, it is well enough,” I replied. But my tears choked 
me. The feeling I experienced was so profound, that I was 
obliged to leave her for a few minutes ; feeling faint, I went to 
breathe the air on the banks of the Danube. Having recovered — 
myself a little, I returned to Madame de Brionne. She recom- 
menced her questioning ; this time I was better able to answer 
her. She just mentioned the king, and spoke at some length 
of Monsieur. She named the King of Saxony to me, knowing 
that I had defended his cause ; she felt interest in him herself. 
A few days after this interyiew, death deprived me of the friend 
I had been so happy to find again. 

In the evening, I went to the palace, and acquitted myself 
of the commission with which I had been entrusted. The King 
of Saxony, whose ardent desire was to be able to confide in me, 
had asked me to see him alone. In this interview, in which he 
spoke of his gratitude to me without the slightest embarrassment, 
I showed him the necessity of making some sacrifice, and en- 
deavoured to convince him that, at the point which things had 
now reached, it was the only means of guaranteeing the inde- 
pendence of his country. The king detained me nearly two 
hours. He as yet engaged himself to nothing, simply saying 
that he was about to retire within with his family. A few 
hours after, Prince Metternich, the Duke of Wellington, and 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 211 


myself received an invitation to present ourselves at the palace. 
Prince Metternich, whom we had chosen to be our spokesman, 
explained to the king with considerable discretion, the wishes 
of the powers. The king, in noble and touching language, told us 
of his affection for his people, though letting us see in advance that 
he would place no obstacle in the way of whatever, be it only in: 
accordance with the honour of his crown, might contribute to 
the final settlement of the affairs of Europe ; he however reserved 
to himself the right to send to the congress a minister invested 
with full powers to treat of his interests. 

We set out for Vienna, without being the bearers of the 
king’s adhesion, but persuaded nevertheless, that he was decided, 
and that it was through Herr von Einsiedel, his plenipotentiary, 
that his consent would reach the congress. 

After several conferences to which Herr von Einsiedel had 
been admitted, the points at issue between Saxony and Prussia 
were settled, not to their mutual satisfaction but by common 
accord.! Thus the principle of legitimacy was not made to 
suffer in that important circumstance. 

From these arrangements it resulted that Russia, who had 
laid claim to the possession of the entire duchy of Warsaw, was 
obliged to desist, Prussia recovered a considerable portion of it, 
and Austria, who had not ceased to possess a portion of 
Galicia, took up again a few of the districts that she had ceded 
in 1809. 

This arrangement, which, at first glance, may seem to have 
had no importance except for those two powers, was of general 
interest. Poland almost entirely in the possession of Russia 
would probably have been a cause of continual anxiety to 
Europe. It was of importance for the security of the latter, 
that two powers rather than one if exposed to see themselves 
deprived of all they possessed, should be, by a sentiment of 
common danger, disposed to combine on every occasion 
against the ambitious enterprises of Prussia. Mutual in- 
terest became for them the strongest link, and it is for that 


1 Prussia acquired all the upper and lower Lusatia, nearly the whole of Misnia 
and Thuringia, with the towns of Torgau and Wittemberg (treaty of May 18, 1815). 


Ps 2 


212 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


reason that France sustained the pretensions of Prussia and 
Austria. 

The Russian minister sought to foil me with my own argu- 
ments. He pretended that if the principle of legitimacy required 
the preservation of the realm of Saxony, it ought to exact 
also the restoration of Poland. He added that the Czar 
Alexander wished to have the totality of the duchy of Warsaw 
to erect it into a kingdom, and that I could not thus, without 
being inconsistent, refuse to subscribe to its being placed in his 
possession. I replied with vivacity that one could really and 
honestly regard as a question of principle the re-establishment, 
as a national body and under an independent government, of a 
numerous people, formerly powerful, occupying a vast and con- 
tinuous tract of territory, and who, though it had allowed the 
bonds of its unity to be broken, had nevertheless remained 
homogeneous by a community of manners, language, and hopes ; 
that if that were what was desired, France would be the first not 
only to give her adhesion to the restoration of Poland, but 
even to wish for it sincerely, on the condition that Poland should 
be restored such as it was formerly, such as Europe wished 
that it should be. But, I added, there is nothing in common 
between the principle of legitimacy and the more or less 
great extent that would be given to the state Russia pretends 
to form with a small portion of Poland, and without even 
evincing the intention of uniting, later, with it the beautiful 
provinces which, since the last division, have been annexed to 
that vast empire. The ministers of Russia, after several con- 
ferences understood that they would not succeed to conceal, 
under the veil of the principle of legitimacy, the interested views 
that they had been instructed to enforce, and they confined them- 
selves to negotiating, in order to obtain a more or less great 
portion of the territory which, for some years, had composed 
the grand duchy of Warsaw. 

By rendering homage to the principle of legitimacy in the 
decision taken with regard to the kingdom of Saxony, the fate 
of Naples had been implicitly pronounced upon. The principle 
once adopted, no one could refuse to admit the consequences 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 213 


of it. Therefore France, after having rejected the pretensions 
founded upon the right of conquest, exacted the assurance that 
Ferdinand IV. should be recognized King of Naples. It was 
necessary to overcome the real difficulty of several cabinets who 
were bound to Murat, and especially of Austria, who had made 
a treaty with him. I was far from refusing to adopt, all that 
leading to the same end, could be reconciled with the dignity 
of the powers. Murat came to my aid. He was in a state of 
continual agitation; he wrote letters upon letters, making 
declarations, ordering his troops to make marches and counter- 
marches, and furnishing me with a thousand opportunities for 
exposing his bad faith. An unfortunate move of his army in 
Lombardy was regarded as an aggression, and that aggression 
became the signal of his ruin.1 The Austrians marched against 
him, beat him, followed him up, and a few days after, abandoned 
by his army, he left the kingdom of Naples as a fugitive, and 
that country soon returned to its allegiance to its legitimate 
king. The restitution of the realm of Naples to Ferdinand IV. 
consecrated anew, by a striking instance the principle of 
legitimacy, and besides, it was useful to France, because it 
gave her for ally in Italy, the most powerful state of that 
country.” 

1 They were agreed at Vienna to overthrow Murat, but no pretext could be found 
when he himself furnishedit. He had as agent at Vienna, the Duke de Campo-Chiaro, 
who had been refused admission to the congress. Though he had thus no official 
position, Murat sent him, towards the end of February, 1815, a note, with orders to 
communicate it to the powers; in it, the king demanded explanations from the 
sovereigns, concerning their intentions towards him, declaring that, if necessary, he 
was ready to fight, and warning them that he would then be forced to pass over the 
territories of several of the Italian states newly created. Austria seized that opportunity, 
and, under the pretext of protecting the Austrian princes in Italy, had one hundred 
and fifty thousand men marched against Murat. 

2 Were it not my duty to my family to mention here the honourable decree 
which King Ferdinand IV. rendered in my favour when bestowing on me the duke- 
dom of Dino, gratitude alone would induce me to do so.—( Prince Talleyrand.) 

The King and Queen of the Two Sicilies had entrusted to Prince de Talleyrand 
the defence of their interests at the Congress. The following are the letters they 


wrote to him on the subject. We shall here transcribe them from the originals, as 
they are to be found among the papers of the Prince. 


Letter from the King of the Two Sicilies. 
‘* MONSIEUR LE PRINCE, 
‘* My unsteady hand compels me to borrow the aid of another, whom I 
know however to be faithful, in order to express my feelings to you ; for having been 


214 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


The arrangements made with regard to several other parts of 
Italy had in view the establishment in that peninsula of a 
strong counter-poise, capable of checking Austrian power, if 
its ambitious views carried it some day in that direction. Thus 
the realm of Sardinia acquired all the state of Genoa. The 
branch of the house of Savoy, then reigning at Turin, being 
ready to die out, and Austria being enabled by her family 


informed by my proved and devoted minister, Commandatore Ruffo, of the favourable 
disposition you bear to my interests, and of the trouble you are taking to get my 
kingdom of Naples restored to me, I felt I could no longer defer expressing to you 
my recognition of your services, nor delay putting my just cause at once into the 
hands of a minister whose extraordinary abilities in conducting negotiations can alone 
assure me a fortunate issue ; and this it would be my greatest pleasure to owe to a 
Perigord. I charge Commandatore Ruffo to express to you, in my name, every 
acknowledgment that confidence in the interest you take in my cause, ty bu now 
furthered by you at the Congress, cannot fail to inspire; and it is in such a spirit 
that I ask you to receive the anticipated expression of the gratitude of 


** Yours very affectionately, 


‘* FERDINAND. 
** Palermo, Oct. 1, 1814.” 


Letter of the Queen of the Two Sicilies. 


‘* PRINCE DE BENEVENT, 

, ‘* The rights you have just acquired to the recognition of all the members 
of the House of Bourbon, compel me to make use of my old and constant friend, the 
Baronne de Tailerand, your relation, to assure you of the high regard and 
esteem that the signal services you have just rendered, in these latter most fortunate 
events, to a family to which I belong by all possible ties, have inspired me. I join 
my acknowledgments to those of the King my husband, and of all my family, and am 
proud to be the exponent of them. The astonishing and rapid events that have just 
restored to the oldest branch of the Bourbons and to Spain the rank and thrones of their 
ancestors, have not yet influenced in any way that of the two Sicilies, in spite of the 
fact that its misfortunes and, above all, its constancy, have won for it sacred rights to 
the esteem and equity of its allies: but the influence that France is with justice about 
to re-assume in Europe, is a sure guarantee, that owing to her interest in us, she will 
support our lawful rights with the noble-mindedness and energy that characterize the 
nation, the sovereign, and the minister who has had the wisdom and the talent to 
distinguish clearly, and to choose wisely. It is in these that I put my confidence to- 
day, as alsothe hope of the future good-fortune and glory of my family ; the mis- 
fortunes of the whole family of the Bourbons, and their cruel experience, teaches us 
that our different branches must be united for ever, to attain their own prosperity and 
glory, as well as that of the peoples they are called upon to govern, and that it is to 
the head of the whole family, to which they must all attach themselves. Such are 
the sentiments of the King, my husband ; such are the sentiments of my whole family : 
and they will doubtless form the basis for the future conduct of our government in its 
political relations. Accept, again, I pray your Highness, the tribute of admiration 
and acknowledgment, that I, with genuine satisfaction, offer to your talents and 
services, both in my own name, and that of all my family. 

“* Yours affectionately, 
‘* CHARLOTTE. 
“*Vienna, Sune 27, 1814.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 215 


alliances to raise pretensions to that fine inheritance, this effect 
was prevented by the recognition of the rights of the house 
of Carignan, to which was assured the inheritance of that 
crown. 

Switzerland, the central point of Europe, on which rest 
three great countries, France,Germany and Italy, was solemnly 
declared neutral for ever. By this decision, the means of defence 
for each one of these countries were increased, and the means 
of aggression diminished. That provision is especially favour- 
able to France, who, surrounded by fortresses on all other 
points of her frontiers, is deprived of any on those bordering 
on Switzerland. The neutrality of that country thus gives her, 
on the only point where she is weak and unarmed, an inex- 
pugnable position. 

To preserve the Helvetic people from internal dissensions, 
which, by disturbing their tranquillity, might have com- 
promised the maintenance of their neutrality, we applied 
ourselves to conciliate the respective pretensions of the cantons, 
and to arrange the differences which had existed fora long time 
between them. The union threatened by the conflict of former 
interests and of the interests resulting from the new organiz- 
ation made under the mediation of Napoleon, was strengthened 
by an act combining all the provisions, which appeared most 
likely to lead to their agreement. 

The erection of the new realm of the Netherlands, agreed 
upon before the peace, was evidently a hostile measure against 
France; and that project had been conceived with the view of 
creating about her a state which should be her enemy, and 
which the need of protection made the natural ally of England 
and of Prussia. The result of that combination however, 
appeared to me less dangerous for France than it was believed, 
for the new kingdom would have enough to do for some time, 
in consolidating itself In fact, formed from two countries 
opposed in interests and sentiments, it is doomed to remain 
weak and without stability for many years. That kind of pro- 


1 Tt had no time to do so. The Revolution of 1830-1832 divided Belgium 
from Holland. 


216 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


tective intimacy that England believes she will succeed in 
establishing between herself and the new state, seems to me 
destined to be, for a long time to come, a political dream. 
A. kingdom composed of a commercial and of a manu- 
facturing country, must undoubtedly become a rival to 
England, or be ruined by her, and consequently be dis- 
contented. 

The organization of the German confederation was to be 
one of the most important factors in the equilibrium of 
Europe. I cannot say whether the congress would have 
succeeded in founding that organization on bases which would 
have made it serve effectually as support to that equilibrium. 
The fatal events of 1815, which forced the congress to hurry 
its deliberations, were the cause that the final act had to be 
drafted in a somewhat embryonic state, that, until the present, it 
has not been able to take shape, and that it is still being 
worked upon, in order to be developed. 

The part played by France in that memorable circumstance 
I will leave to be appreciated. Notwithstanding the disadvantages 
of the position in which she found herself at the opening of 
the congress, she succeeded in taking in the deliberations such a 
leading part, that the most important questions were decided 
according to her views and after the principles that she had 
established and sustained, all opposed though they were to the 
intentions of the powers, to whom the fate of arms had given 
the power to dictate, without hindrance, the law to Europe. 
And although, in the midst of the discussions of the congress, the 
spirit of revolt and usurpation came again to subjugate France, 
the king, having returned to Ghent, exercised the same in- 
fluence at Vienna, as from the palace of the Tuileries. At my 
request, and I should say it, to the honour of the sovereigns, 
without insistance, Europe issued a crushing declaration 
against the wsurper I speak of him thus, for after his 


? On the 25th of March, 1815, at the news of the arrival of Napoleon at Paris, 
England, Austria, Russia and Prussia renewed-their alliance. All the other states 
of Europe adhered to that treaty. At the same time, the powers issued the follow- 
ing declaration :—‘‘In breaking thus the convention that sent him to Elba, 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 217 


return from Elba, Napoleon was but an usurper. Until 
then he had been a conqueror, his brothers alone had been 
usurpers. 

I again secured at that time the reward of my fidelity to 
upright principles. In the king’s name I had invoked them for 
the preservation of other people’s rights, and they had become 
the guarantee of his own. 

All the powers, seeing themselves again threatened by the 
revival of revolution in France, armed with all speed. The 
negotiations at Vienna were hastily concluded in order to apply 
all one’s energies to cares then becoming more pressing ; and 
the final act of the congress although only roughly sketched in 
some of its parts, was signed by the plenipotentiaries who 
parted afterwards. 

Affairs being thus terminated, the king, and consequently 
France, having been received in that alliance against Na- 
poleon and his supporters, I left Vienna, where nothing 
any longer detained me, and I started on my way to Ghent, 
far from imagining that, on arriving at Brussels, I should 
learn the result of the battle of Waterloo. His Highness 
the Prince de Condé was kind enough to furnish me all 
the details of it. He spoke, with a grace that I shall never 
forget, of the success France had had at the Congress of 
Vienna. 

After this succinct account of the deliberations of the 
Vienna Congress, the following correspondence will perhaps be 
read with more interest. 

All this correspondence—that is to say the minutes of the 
letters written by King Louis XVIII. in his own hand, and the 
originals of my letters—is deposited in the archives of the 
Department of Foreign Affairs. The copies which I give here 


Buonaparte destroys the only legal title to which his existence had been attached. 
In reappearing in France with schemes of disturbance and destruction, he has 
deprived himself of the protection of the law, and manifested to the face of all 
that there can be neither peace nor truce with him. . . . The powers declare in 
consequence that Napoleon Buonaparte has placed himself outside all civil and 
social bonds, and that, as enemy and disturber of the peace, he has delivered 
himself up to public vengeance.” 


218 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


are taken from the original letters of the king, and from my own 
minutes." 


No. 1. THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING Louis XVIII.’ 


VIENNA, September 25, 1814. 
SIRE, 
I left Paris on the 16th. I arrived here on the morning of 


1 The following correspondence was published a few years ago by M. 
Pallain (Correspondence inédite de Louis XVIII. et de M. de Talleyrand), with 
the exception however of the letters of the King’s Ambassadors to the Minister 
of Foreign Affairs which are included here. We have noticed between the official 
text found by M. Pallain in the archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the 
text which M. de Talleyrand wished to preserve in his memoirs certain differences, 
often insignificant, at times to the contrary, curious enough, which at any rate 
appeared to us interesting toreproduce. The additions and varieties will be found 
in notes and italics. Besides, there are in our text several passages that are not re- 
produced in the text of the archives, we have equally underlined and indicated them. 

2 We give here the whole text of this first letter, such as it is found in the work of 
M. Pallain. The differences are so numerous, that it would have been difficult to 
otherwise point them out. 

VIENNA, September 25, 1814. 

SIRE, 

I left Paris on the 16th. I arrived here on the 237d, in the evening. TI stopped 
only at Strasbourg and at Munich. 

The Princess of Wales had just left Strasbourg. She had accepted an invitation 
to a ball at the residence of Mme. Franck, widow of the banker of that name. She 
danced all night. At the inn where J put up, she gave a supper to Talma, Her 
manners while at Strasbourg explains perfectly why the Prince Regent prefers to know 
her in Italy instead of in England, At Munich the king spoke to me of his attach- 
ment for your Majesty and of the fears that Prussian ambition gave him ; he told me, 
in a most gracious manner: ‘I have served France twenty and one years, that cannot 
be forgotten.” Ziwo hours’ conversation that I was able to have with M. de Montgelas 
proved fully to me that it is only necessary to follow the principles adopted by your 
Majesty, as the basis of the political system of France, to secure the good-will of and 
to conciliate the confidence of powers of an inferior order. 

At Vienna the language of reason and moderation ts not yet spoken by the 
plenipotentiaries. 

One of the Russian ministers saéd to me yesterday, ‘‘ They wished to make us an 
Asiatic power, Poland will make Europeans of us.” 

As for Prussia, she asks nothing better than to exchange her old Polish provinces 
for those which she covets in Germany, and on the banks of the Rhine. Those two 
powers * should be regarded as intimately linked on that point. 

The Russian ministers insist, without having admitted up to the present the least 
discussion, on a territorial extension that would carry the power of Russia to the banks 
of the Vistula, by annexing even old Prussia to their empire. 

I hope that the Czar, who in different circumstances permitted me to explain to him 
frankly, what I judged most useful to A¢s znterests and to his glory, will enable me to 
combat before him the policy of his ministers. The philanthropist La Harpe revolts at 
the idea of the ancient division of Poland, and pleads her subjection to Russia ; he has 
been at Vienna for the last ten or twelve days. 

They still dispute the right of the King of Saxony to have a minister at the 

* Russia and Prussia.—(7vans/ator). 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 219 


the 24th. The Princess of Wales! had just left Strasbourg 
when I arrived there. She had accepted an invitation to a 
ball at Mme. Franck’s, widow of the banker of that name, 
where she had danced all night. She had given a supper to 
Talma the evening before her departure. All this explains to 
me the motives that led the Prince Regent to prefer to have 
her on the Continent rather than in England. She purposes 
setting off for Italy. At Munich, the king * spoke to me of his 
attachment for your Majesty. He said, “I have served France 
for twenty years. That cannot be forgotten. Jf Monsieur, or 
Monseigneur the Duc de Berry, had come to Strasbourg when I 
was at Baden, I should have hastened to pay them my respects.” * 
I foresaw that it would only be necessary to follow the 
principles laid down by your Majesty as the basis of the policy 


congress. JZ. de Schulenburg, whom I have known for a long time, told me yesterday 
that the king had declared that he would sign no act of cession, of abdication, nor 
exchange, that could destroy the existence of Saxony, or modify the rights of his house. 
That honourable resistance might make some impression upon those who still share 
the idea of the union of that kingdom to Prussia. 

Bavaria has offered to the King of Saxony to support his pretensions if necessary, 
by a large body of troops. Herr von Wrede says that he has orders to give as many as 
Sorty thousand men. 

The question of Naples is not resolved upon. Austria would like to place Naples 
and Saxony on the same footing, and Russia would make them serve as compensation. 

The Queen of Naples is xot much regretted. Her death appears to have put 
Prince Metternich more at his ease. 

Nothing is determined in regard to the conduct and the progress of affairs at the 
congress. The English even, whom I believed more methodical than others, have made 

_, no preparatory work on that subject. 

Lam inclined to believe that the idea of having two commissions will prevail: the 
one composed of the six great powers, and dealing with the general affairs of Europe ; 
the other to prepare the affairs of Germany, and being likewise composed of the six first 
German powers. I would have desired that there should have been seven. The idea 
of a commission for Italy displeases Austria prodigiously. 

The line of conduct which your Majesty has traced for his ministers is so noble, 
that it must of necessity, if all reason has not disappeared from the earth, end by giving 
them some influence. 

I am, with the most profound respect, Sire, 
Your Majesty’s most humble, obedient servant and subject, 
PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND. 


P.S.—The Czar of Russia and the King of Prussia have just arrived. Their 
entrance was most beautiful. They were on horseback ; the Emperor of Austria in the 
middle. Some disorder, occasioned by the horses, was the cause that for a considerable 
portion of the ride the King of Prussia was at the right of the Emperor Francis. He 
aid not resume his place until a little before the arrival at the palace. 

1 This is the princess who caused so much scandal by her conduct, and by her 
divorce case with King George IV. of England. 

? Omitted in the text of the archives. 

3 Maximilian I., King of Bavaria. He was colonel in the service of France 
before the Revolution of 1789. He was known at that time under the name of 
Max de Deux Ponts (A/ax von Zwei Briicken). 

4 Omitted in the text of the archives. 


220 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLE VRAND, 


of France, in order to assure to ourselves the return to, and 
to conciliate the confidence of, the powers of an inferior rank. 

Since my arrival here, I have been able to receive but a few 
persons. M. de Dalberg, who had preceded me by a day, had for 
his part picked up a few particulars) 

I see, Sire, that the language of reason, and moderation, 
will not be employed by all the plenipotentiaries. One of the 
ministers of Russia said a few days ago: “They wanted to 
make an Asiatic power of us. Poland will make us European.” 

Prussia, on her part, asks nothing better than to exchange 
her former Polish provinces for those she covets in Germany and 
on the banks of the Rhine. These two powers? should be con- 
sidered as intimately united on that point. 

The Russian ministers insist, without up to the present 
having allowed any discussion, on a territorial aggrandizement 
which shall carry that power to the banks of the Vistula, by 
uniting even old Prussia to its empire. They announce, how- 
ever, that this question still has to be treated by their sovereign, 
zvho, alone, can modify their instructions. 

I hope, that upon the arrival of the Czar of Russia, who, in 
different circumstances, accorded me the right to explain to him 
frankly what I judged most useful to his real interest and glory, 
I shall be able to inform him, how much it would be to the 
advantage of his general philanthropic policy, if he would allow 
moderation to temper might. Perhaps I may even find in this 
respect, the only point of contact with M. de la Harpe,? who 
is already here. The Emperor of Russia, and the King of 
Prussia, are expected to-day. 

They still contest the right of the King of Saxony to send a 
minister to the Congress. He has sent Count von Schulenburg,* 
a clever agent whom I know well. We can take advantage of this. 
The king has declared that he will sign no act of cession, abdica- 
tion, or exchange that can destroy the existence of Saxony. This 
honourable resistance would cause those who still cling to the idea 
of the union of this kingdom to Prussia to come to their senses. 


1 Omitted in the text of the archives. 

2 Russia and Prussia.—( Zans/ator). 

3 M. de La Harpe, a Swiss statesman, former tutor to the Czar Alexander, who 
has already been seen playing an important part in the affairs of his country at the 
time of the Directory. 

4 Frederick-Albert, Count von Schulenburg, born in 1772. He was appointed 
minister of Saxony at Vienna in 1798, then at Ratisbonne. Attended the congress 
of Rastadt (1799), and was, a short time after, sent to Copenhagen, then to St. Peters- 
burg (1804). He returned to Vienna in 1810, and attended at the congress of 1814 as 
Saxony’s plenipotentiary. He retired in 1830, and consecrated himself until his 
death (1853) exclusively to literature. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 221 


Bavaria has offered to support the King of Saxony by fifty 
thousand men if necessary. They do not seem to agree as 
to the non-admission of a plenipotentiary of Naples, but I 
regard this question as not being definitively decided. 

Austria wants Naples and Saxony to be treated on a par, 
and Russia to make them serve as compensation, The Queen 
of Naples is mourned by no one; and her death seems even 
to have put Prince Metternich more at his ease. 

Nothing, moreover, is yet determined with regard to the 
progress and conduct of the affairs of the congress, and even in 
the arguments of the English ministers, I thought I could detect 
that they had not yet matured their plans in this respect. 

Two commissions have been proposed, of which, the one is to 
be composed of the great powers, and the other of the inferior ones. 
They intend to have the affairs of Germany treated by a special 
commission. 

The part which your Majesty prescribes for your ambassadors 
is so noble, and so befitting your own dignity, that they will be 
enabled to aid in all that can bring order to Europe, and 
re-establish a real and durable equilibrium. 

I beg your Majesty to believe that we shall exert ourselves to 
meet your confidence, and to follow the line traced in the instruc- 
tions given by your Majesty toyour ambassadors at the congress." 

have the honour to<be . .°...'. 
PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND.? 


No. 1 A2 THE KING’S AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, September 27, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

The despatches of the king’s ambassadors at the congress 
have had as yet but little with which to acquaint the depart- 
ment. The king’s ministers keep to the line of conduct set 
forth in their instructions. In all their conversations, they revert 
to the article of the treaty of May 30, which gives to the 
congress the honourable mission of establishing a real and durable 
equilibrium. That disinterested stand leads them to appeal to the 


1 Omitted in.the text of the archives. 

2 Prince Talleyrand alone conducted the correspondence with the king.—(J/. de 
Bacourt.) 

3 Prince Talleyrand’s letters to the French Foreign Minister and to the King, 
simply bear a number ; those of the French Ambassadors bear the letter A besides ; 
and those of the King to Prince Talleyrand the letter B. 

4 The Comte de Jaucourt held the portfolio of Foreign Affairs at Paris during the 
absence of Prince de Talleyrand.—(A/. de Bacourt.) 


222 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


principle of public law which is recognized by all Europe, and 
from which springs, almost of necessity, the restoration of King 
Ferdinand IV. on the throne of Naples, as well as the succession 
of the Carignan branch to the house of Savoy. 

The non-abdication, and non-cession, of the King of Saxony, 
gives to the king’s ministers the right to defend his cause. You 
see, Monsieur le Comte, that we keep to generalities. Never- 
theless, we should tell you, that their application appears to be 
foreseen by the ministers of the courts which, before the peace, 
we called allies, and that that puts the king’s ministers in a 
position which is very suitable to the grand part he is called 
upon to play in these circumstances. 

Our information authorizes us to say that misfortune and 
ambition do not yet allow the Prussian ministers to use such 
language as so pacific an assembly as the congress sitting at 
Vienna would seem to warrant. 

Wehave-the-honout ac acy. 


THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND. 

THE DUC DE DALBERG. 

THE MARQUIS DE LA TOUR DU PIN GOUVERNET. 
THE COMTE ALEXIS DE NOAILLES. 


No. 2.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
' Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, September 29, 1814. 
SIRE, 

We have, at last, almost finished the round of our visits to 
the numerous members of the imperial family. It has been very 
soothing to me to meet everywhere with testimonies of the 
high regard felt for the person of your Majesty, of the interest 
shown in you, and of the wishes that are formed for you—all 
more or less happily expressed, but always with a sincerity that 
cannot be suspected of being feigned. The empress, who, since 
our arrival; has been obliged to occupy herself exclusively with 
the empress of Russia, had appointed us an hour for to-day. 
She was indisposed, but though she had had her mother, the 
archduchess, receive several persons for her, she expressed a wish 
to receive herself the embassy of your Majesty. She questioned 
me, with an interest that was not simply that of politeness, as 
to your Majesty’s health. “I remember,” she said,“ having seen 
the king at Milan, when I was very young. He was full of kindness 
towards me. I have never forgotten him,under any circumstances.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 223 


She spoke in like terms of the Duchesse d’Angou!éme, of her 
virtues, of the love borne her at Vienna, and of the memories that 
she left there. She also deigned to address some obliging 
remarks to the minister of Your Majesty. Twice in the conver- 
sation she mentioned the name of the Archduchess Marie 
Louise, the second time with a sort of affectation. She calls 
her ma fille Loutse1 Notwithstanding the cough which con- 
tinually* interrupted her, and notwithstanding her being so 
thin, this princess has the gift of pleasing, and possesses graces 
that I could almost term really French, if, to too fastidious eyes 
those graces did not seem somewhat affected. 

Prince Metternich is exceedingly polite to me. Count von 
Stadion shows me more confidence. It is true that the latter, 
dissatisfied with what the other does, intrenched himself in 
financial matters, the management of which he has, though I 
strongly doubt whether he understands them. He has left the 
direction of the cabinet, which perhaps renders him more 
communicative. 

I still have every reason to be satisfied with the frankness of 
Lord Castlereagh. He had a few days ago, with the Emperor 
Alexander, a conversation which lasted an hour and a half, and 
of which he came at once to inform me. He pretends that in 
that conversation the Czar Alexander displayed all the resources 
of a most subtle mind ; but that he, Lord Castlereagh, spoke 
in terms most positive and even sufficiently harsh to be impolite, 
had he not veiled them by means of zealous protestations for the 
glory of the Czar. Notwithstanding all that, I fear that Lord 
Castlereagh has not that spirit of decision that it would be so 
necessary for him to possess, and that the spectre of parliament 
that ever haunts him renders him timid. I shall do my very 
best to inspire him with firmness. 

Count Nesselrode told me that the Emperor Alexander 
desires to see me, and requested me to write to him to solicit an 
audience.2 I did so already, several days ago, and have not 
yet received his reply. Can it be that our principles, of which 
we make no mystery, are known to the Czar Alexander, and 
make him feel somewhat uneasy before me? If, as I am inclined 
to believe, after all that has been related to me, he does me the 

1 My daughter Louise (Napoleon’s wife).—( Z7azs/avor). 

2 Text: continuellement (continually). Var. souvent (often). 

3 Text: une audience (an audience). Var. une audience particulitre (a private 
audience). 

4 Text: “Je lat fait tl y a déja plusieurs, jours et n'ai pas encore sa réponse.” “1 
did so already several days ago and have not yet received his reply.” Var. ‘* Je fai 


fait il ya plusieurs jours, et n'ai pas encore de réponse.” ‘‘1 did so several days ago 
and haye not yet received a reply.” 


224 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


honour of talking to me about the affairs of Poland and Saxony, 
I shall be conciliating but positive, speaking only of principles, 
and never swerving from them. 

I imagine that Russia and Prussia make so much stir and 
speak with so much haughtiness, only in order to learn the in- 
tentions of the other powers. If they should find themselves 
alone in their opinion, they will think twice before bringing 
matters to a crisis. That Polish enthusiasm with which the 
Czar Alexander was filled at Paris has grown cold at St. Peters- 
burg. It has revived at Pulawi ;1 it may die out again, though 
we have here M. de la Harpe, and the Czartoryskis are ex- 
pected ;? I can scarcely believe that a simple but unanimous 
declaration of the great powers will not suffice to stay it. 

Unhappily, he who is at the head of affairs in Austria, and 
who claims to regulate those of Europe regards as the most 
obvious mark of the superiority of genius a carelessness which, 
in certain respects, he carries to the point of ridicule, and in 
others, to a point which, in a minister of a great state, and in 
circumstances such as these, becomes really calamitous. 

In this state of affairs; when so many passions are ram- 
pant, and when so many people are bestirring themselves in 
all directions, rashness and carelessness are two rocks which seem 
to me to be equally avoided. I therefore endeavour not to 
depart from that calm dignity which alone befits the ministers of 
your Majesty, who, thanks to the wise instructions given them, 
have only principles to defend, and no combination of personal 
interests to uphold. 

Whatever may be the issue of the congress, two opinions 
must be impressed and enforced, that relative to the justice of 
your Majesty, and that relative to the strength of his govern- 
ment; for these are the best, or rather the only guarantees of 
consideration abroad and of stability at home. Those two 
opinions having been once impressed, as I hope they may be, we 
shall, in any case, come out of the congress with honour, 
whether its results be or not be in conformity with our wishes 
and the good of Europe. 


1 Mansion of the Princes Czartoryski in Poland. That superb residence has been 
celebrated by the poet Delille in his poem entitled Les Jardins. 

? The Czartoryskis were one of the most powerful and wealthy families of Poland. 
Their family was then represented by Prince Adam-Casimir (1731-1823), starost- 
general of Podolia and fe/dzeugmezster in the Austrian army, as well as by his two 
sons: Adam-George, born in 1770, former ambassador of Russia and, later, senator of 
the kingdom of Poland: and Constantine-Adam, born in 1773, who was at the time 
a colonel of infantry in the Russian army. 


’ 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 225 


No. 2A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CONGRESS 
TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, September 29, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

During the last few days we have been introduced to the 
imperial family of Austria. It seemed to us that the emperor 
and the archdukes tried to be very obliging. The empress 
especially received us with much good grace. They expressed 
to us their attachment to the king, and asked many questions 
regarding the health of Madame la Duchesse d’Angouléme. 
The fétes have commenced. 

The affairs of the congress have made but little progress 
since the last letter that we had the honour of writing you. We 
continue to follow closely the instructions that have been 
given us. 

By proclaiming the principles they contain, France and the 
king will influence the affairs of Europe in a manner as noble as 
it is suitable. 

It appears that, hitherto, all that ought to have been agreed 
upon, with respect to the progress of affairs, has not been decided. 

The king’s ministers have not yet thought it advisable to 
interfere, and we are waiting, Monsieur le Comte, till some 
agreement be come to on those different subjects, before inform- 
ing you of the results. 

We have been informed in the most positive manner that 
Russia will abandon none of her pretensions on Poland. She 
declares that the duchy of Warsaw is occupied by her armies, 
and that they will have to be driven out. Such are the terms 
she employs. 

Prussia has ceded her what she calls her rights on that 
country, and seeks compensation in the kingdom of Saxony. 
This state of things leaves great uncertainty as to the issue of 
the congress. 

Information received as to the sentiments of Austria do 
not leave much hope that that power will employ her numerous 
armies to back up those principles without which nothing can be 
stable. 

The king’s ministers think they have reason to believe that 
the firm and energetic language that they have adhered to in 
divers circumstances has produced some effect ; that it has even 
led to hesitations in plans already almost decided. 

“Prince Talleyrand has expressed a wish to see the Emperor 
of Russia. His letter, sent three days ago, has remained 


VOL. II. Q 


226 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


unanswered. It is only after that interview that one can judge 
of the degree of moderation that that sovereign will bring to 
bear on the general affairs of Europe. His ministers do not 
appear to have complete instructions. They avoid us because 
they are afraid of entering into a discussion with us. 

The Austrian ministers show signs of suspicion. 

The Prussians serve the Russians. It does not appear that 
the English ministers take a very decided tone. 

The agents of the minor courts seek, to make overtures to 
France, and we encourage them to do so. . 

We can only send you those few observations ; but they will 
give you some idea of the state of affairs. 


No. 18B.—KING Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, October 3, 1814.1 
My Cousin, 

I received your despatch of September 25, and for the 
sake of your eyes and of my hand, I have this letter written 
by some one who is far from being ignorant of my affairs.” 

The Kings of Naples and Saxony are equally near relations 
to myself. The claims of each are equally just; but not so 
my interest in them. The fact of the kingdom of Naples 
being in the hands of a descendant of Louis XIV., increases the 
power of France. Remaining in those of a member of the 
Corsican’s family, flagitio addit damnum. I am scarcely less 
indignant at the idea that this kingdom and Saxony could 
serve aS compensations. I need not outline here my reflec- 
tions on such a neglect of all public morality ; but what I must 
hasten to tell you is, that if I cannot prevent this iniquity, I 
will, at least, not sanction it, but, on the contrary, reserve to 
myself and my successors, the liberty of redressing it, should 
an opportunity present itself. 

In saying this, I am, of course, supposing an extreme case, 
for I am far from despairing of the success of the cause, if 
England holds firmly to the principles Lord Castlereagh has 
manifested here, and if Austria persists in the same resolution 
as Bavaria. 

That which Herr von Schulenburg told you of the determina- 


1 This letter is dated October 13, in the text of the archives. 

2 The letters of Louis XVIII. to Prince Talleyrand were copied by the Comte, 
afterwards Duc de Blacas d’Aulps, but signed by the king. We have already said 
that the king’s minutes are now in the record office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
though no one knows how they came there. —(4Z. de Bacourt.) 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 227 


tion of the King of Saxony, is perfectly true ; that unhappy 
prince has himself informed me of it. 

You can easily judge with what impatience I await news 
from the congress, which must already have begun work. 
Thereupon, I pray God, my cousin, that He preserve you in His 
safe and holy keeping. 

LOUIS. 


No. 3A.—THE KING’S AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS. 


VIENNA, October 4, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

Since our last letter, we have made one more step. It 
has not yet, however, brought us within sight of the work of 
the congress. We will here briefly lay before you the various 
events that have taken place. 

Prince Metternich, in a note, dated the 29th of September, 
and addressed to Prince Talleyrand, has invited him to a private 
conference. [Subjoined to No. I, is a copy of that note.*] 

The word asszster, and the plenipotentiaries mentioned in the 
note, led to the supposition, that the fact of their presence 
there was to be simply an act of courtesy of the allies to- 
wards France. Prince Talleyrand replied to it in the note 
subjoined to No. 2. You will observe, Monsieur le Comte, 
that by putting Spain before Prussia, the intention of Prince 
Metternich was frustrated. 

Later on, it eked out, that Prince Metternich had addressed 
Count de Labrador an invitation couched in the following 
terms: “Prince Metternich and his colleagues, the ministers 
of Russia, England, and Prussia, invite... .” 

Count Labrador, who is on terms of intimate relations with 
the French embassy, and who seems to approve of the regu- 
larity of its conduct and principles, replied as Prince Talleyrand 
suggested to him. 

The conference was held at the residence of Prince Metter- 
nich himself. The latter had chosen Herr von Gentz, who is well 
known for his English and Prussian sympathies, to draw up the 
reports of the sitting. 

A protocol and the draft of a declaration were read. 

The protocol began by naming the a//zes at each paragraph, 


1 Mention is often made, either in Prince Talleyrand’s letters or in those of the 
ambassadors, of documents subjoined to the correspondence and forwarded to the 
Department of Foreign Affairs. Those documents were not found with the MS. of 
the Prince’s Memoirs. They could not, therefore, be reproduced here. 


G2 


228 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


and the declaration was made in their name. It will be found 
subjoined to No. 3. 

Prince Talleyrand, having twice noticed the word allies, 
and declared that it was an insult at a congress like that now 
assembled, pointed out that the conclusions of this document 
wounded the respect due to the other powers ; and that it was 
not for them alone to take an initiative which no right justified ; 
that it would be better to invite all the powers to unite in con- 
gress, to have commissions appointed, and thus proceed with that 
moderation, without which nothing can be legitimately done ; he 
finally declared that he could recognize no special arrangement 
that had been made since the signing of the treaty of Paris. 

That very evening, Prince Talleyrand addressed the result of 
his observations to the five ministers who had met that morning. 
His note is under No. 4. 

This note seems to have retarded the summoning of a 
second conference; and we have heard that the ministers 
seemed rather perplexed about it. On the other hand, we 
have been told that they seemed to think we wished to teach 
them a lesson, and that they did not appear to do justice to 
the care which was taken to bring them to principles which 
alone can re-establish Europe on a secure basis. 

Prince Talleyrand, seeing that these ministers had held 
preliminary conferences, that they had signed a protocol, and had 
decided upon publishing that document as being in conformity 
with the agreements they had made, to assume a kind of 
initiative in the matters that still remained to be settled, 
decided on also drawing up and sending an official note. Noticing 
that official measures had been resorted to on the one side, he 
believed it necessary that similar measures be taken by the 
other also. 

You will see, Monsieur le Comte, in perusing these different 
documents, that affairs in general are not yet treated with 
that frankness, and that sentiment of justice and equity, which 
would bring them to a speedy termination. You will also see 
that the position of the embassy of France is a very delicate 
one, inasmuch as its aim is to induce the other powers to be 
moderate and reasonable, and that those powers are still bound 
by previous engagements, and inspired by an_ intolerable 
ambition. The opinion that we express in this respect, is 
borne out by the conversation that Prince Talleyrand had 
with his Majesty the Emperor of Russia, with which it is 
necessary that you, Monsieur le Comte, should be acquainted. 

The emperor affectedly inquired of the prince, what was the 
present internal situation of France, the state of her armies, 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 229 


of her finances, of public opinion ; and emphatically announced 
his intention of preserving what he held, and laid down as 
a principle, namely, that, in the arrangements about to be 
made, he meant to suzt himself. Prince Talleyrand observed 
that he ought rather to seek what was right therein. The 
emperor then uttered these words: “ /t 7s war then! .... It ts 
war that you want ....?” Prince Talleyrand, without reply- 
ing, made a gesture which gave the Czar to understand, that 
if war broke out, it would be the latter’s own doing ; and 
that he would bear the responsibility of it. Thereupon, the 
Emperor of Russia explained that he had already made his 
arrangements with the great powers, which Prince Talleyrand 
took the liberty to question, seeing that France had not con- 
curred in those arrangements, and that all the powers proclaimed 
themselves free from any private engagements at variance with 
what had been agreed upon at Paris. 

Such is the situation of affairs. We hear on all hands 
that the intermediate and smaller powers are already looking 
towards France for support ; and we further flatter ourselves 
that the Russian nation and army, having no interest in the 
restoration of Poland, and not wishing for war merely to 
further certain ambitious views, the Emperor of Russia wili 
return to his senses, and consent to Europe regaining rest 
and tranquillity, by taking his stand on the principles that 
reason dictates. 

We have the honour, Monsieur le Comte, to forward to you 
a copy of a letter from the minister of Portugal to Lord 
Castlereagh, in which he protests against his exclusion from 
the preliminary conferences, as Portuguese minister. Prince 
Talleyrand thought fit to second his protest. 

Be pleased to accept . .. 


No. 3.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA Oct. 4, 1814. 
SIRE, 

On September the 30th, between nine and teno’clock A.M. 
I received from Prince Metternich a note of some five lines, 
bearing the date of the preceding evening, in which he proposed 
to me in his name alone, to call on him at two o'clock, to attend 
a preliminary conference, at which I should only find the 
ministers of Russia, England, and Prussia assembled. He 
added that he had made the same request to Count de Labrador, 
Spanish minister. 


230 LHE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


The words attend and assembled were manifestly in- 
tentionally employed. I replied that I should be very pleased to 
meet the ministers of Russia, England, Spain, and Prussia at 
his house. 

The invitation addressed to Count de Labrador, was couched in 
the same terms as the one I had received, with the difference 
only that it was in the form of a note in the third person, and 
was written in the name of Prince Metternich and zs colleagues. 

Count de Labrador having come to show it to me, and to 
consult me on the reply to be made, I showed him what I had 
written, and he wrote his in identical terms, naming France with, 
but before, the other powers. We thus purposely, Count de 
Labrador and myself, united what the others seemed anxious 
to divide, and we divided what they seemed especially anxious 
to unite. 

I was at Prince Metternich’s before two o’clock, and the 
ministers of the four courts were already sitting in conference 
round a long table: at one end Lord Castlereagh was ap- 
parently presiding: at the other, a gentleman whom Prince 
Metternich introduced to me as filling the office of secretary at 
their conferences. It was Herr von Gentz. I was shown to a 
vacant seat between Lord Castlereagh and Prince Metternich. 
I asked why I alone of your Majesty’s Embassy had been 
invited, which brought about the following dialogue : 

“It was wished to bring only the heads of cabinets together, 
at the preliminary conferences.” 

“Count de Labrador is not one of them, and yet has been 
invited.” 

“That is because the Secretary of State of Spain is not in 
Vienna.” 

“But, besides Prince von Hardenberg, I see here Herr von 
Humboldt, who is not a Secretary of State.” 

“ This is an exception, necessitated by the infirmity with which 
you are aware Prince Hardenberg is afflicted.” ! 

“Tf it be only a question of infirmities, each of us could have 
his own, and possesses an equal claim to have them considered 
as a valid excuse.” e 

There seemed then a disposition, to allow each Secretary of 
State to bring with him one of the plenipotentiaries attached to 
him, and for the present, I thought it useless to insist further. 

The Portuguese ambassador, Count de Palmella,? having 
been informed by Lord Castlereagh, that preliminary conferences 


? Prince von Hardenberg was afflicted with little short of complete deafness. 
* Senhor de Souza-Holstein, Count, then Duke of Palmella (1786-1850), was later 
Regent of Portugal (1830). 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 231 


were to be held, which Count de Labrador and myself were to 
attend, and of which no intimation had been sent to him, had 
thought fit to protest against an exclusion which he had con- 
sidered both unjust and humiliating to the Crown of Portugal. 
He had therefore written to Lord Castlereagh a letter, which the 
latter produced at the conference. His arguments were strong, 
and ably deduced. He asked that the eight powers that had 
signed the treaty of May 30th, and not six of those powers 
only, should form the preliminary commission, which was to 
start the congress for whose summoning they had stipulated. 
Count de Labrador and myself seconded that request. A certain 
disposition was shown to acquiesce in it, but a definite decision 
was deferred until the next sitting. Sweden has not yet any 
plenipotentiary here, and has consequently not yet been in a 
position to protest. 

“ The object of to-day’s conference,” said Lord Castlereagh to 
me, “is to acquaint you with what the four courts have done, 
since we have been here.” ‘Then addressing Prince Metternich, 
he added, “ You have the protocol.” 

Prince Metternich then handed me a document signed by 
himself, Count Nesselrode, Lord Castlereagh, and Prince von 
Hardenberg. In this document, the word allies occurred in each 
paragraph. 

I objected to that expression. I said it necessitated my 
asking where we were, whether still at Chaumont, or at Laon ?1 
if peace had not been made, whether war had been declared, and 
if so, against whom? They all replied that they did not attach 
to the word adlzes, any meaning at variance with our present 
relations, and that it had only been employed for the sake of 
brevity ; so I pointed out, that however important it might be 
to abridge work, that importance was not such as to warrant the 
neglect of accuracy. 

“As to the contents of the protocol, it was but a tissue of 
metaphysical deductions intended to justify pretensions based 
on treaties unknown to us. To discuss these arguments and 
pretensions would have opened up an area of endless dispute. 
I felt it necessary to meet all with one peremptory argument. I 
read several paragraphs and said, “I do not understand.” I read 
them again, posing with the air of a man who seeks to grasp the 
meaning of a thing, and I said, “I do not understand any 
better.” I added : “ There are but two dates, between which there 
isa gap, in my eyes, that of May 30th, when the formation of a 


1 On March 25, 1814, the allied sovereigns, after the rupture of the negotiations 
at Chatillon, had signed a declaration at Laon whereby they agreed anew to the 
provisions of the treaty of Chaumont. 


232 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


congress was stipulated for, and that of the 1st of October, when 
this congress was to meet. All that has been done in the mean- 
time I ignore, and it does not exist in my eyes.” 

To this, the plenipotentiaries replied that they cared little for 
that document, and that they asked no better than to withdraw 
it, upon which Count de Labrador’ remarked that they had 
nevertheless signedit. They withdrew it. Prince Metternich put 
it aside, and there was no longer any question of it. 

After having foregone that document, they produced another. 
It was a project of declaration which Count de Labrador and my- 
self were to sign with them, if we should adopt it. After a long 
preamble, on the necessity of simplifying and abridging the work 
of the congress, and after repeated assurances that there was no 
intention of encroaching on the rights of any one, the project 
stated, that the points to be settled by the congress, should be 
divided into two series, for each of which a commission should be 
appointed, to which application could be made by the states 
concerned, and that when those two commissions had completed 
their work, the congress should then assemble for the first time, 
and all questions be submitted for its sanction. 

This project was evidently intended to render the four 
powers who call themselves a//zed absolute masters of all the 
deliberations of the congress, seeing that on the supposition that 
the six chief powers should constitute themselves judges of the 
questions relative to the composition of the congress, to the 
points that it should settle, to the order in which these should 
be settled, and should, alone and without control, appoint the 
commission to prepare all the work, France and Spain, even 
supposing they always agreed on all questions, would still be 
but two against four. 

I declared that in order to form an opinion on a project of 
that nature, a first reading would not be sufficient; that it 
required to be meditated upon; that, above all, it was neces- 
sary to ascertain whether it was compatible with the rights 
that we were all bent on respecting; that we had come to 
consecrate and secure the rights of each of the powers, and 
that it would be most unfortunate if we should begin by 
violating them; that the idea of- arranging everything before 
assembling the congress was quite new to me; that they pro- 
posed to finish with what, as I believed, it was necessary to 
begin ; that, perhaps, the rights it was proposed to confer on the 
six powers could only be given them by the congress; that 
there were measures which irresponsible ministers could easily 
adopt, but that Lord Castlereagh and myself were very differ- 
ently situated. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 233 


Here Lord Castlereagh said that the remarks I had just 
made had all occurred to him, and that he fully appreciated 
their force. “ But,” he added, “ what other expedient can we find 
to avoid involving ourselves in inextricable and dilatory pro- 
ceedings?” 

I asked why the congress was not there and then assembled ? 
What difficulties were in the way? LEach plenipotentiary 
thereupon alleged what he regarded as an obstacle to the 
adoption of such a measure. A conversation ensued, in the 
course of which, it being a question of him who reigns at Naples, 
Count de Labrador expressed himself without reserve As for 
myself, I simply remarked: “Of what King of Naples do you 
speak? We do not know who heis.”? And Herr von Humboldt 
having observed that the powers had recognized him and 
guaranteed to him his states, I firmly replied:? “Those who 
gave him such a guarantee, had no right, and therefore no 
power, to do so.” And, in order not to lay stress on that 
language, I added: “ But there is no question of this at present.” 
Then reverting to the congress, I said that the difficulties 
which seemed to be apprehended would perhaps be less than 
was believed, that it was necessary to seek some means of 
obviating them, and that we should surely find it. Prince 
von Hardenberg declared that he did not hold to one ex- 
pedient more than to another, but that some was required in 
order that the princes of Leyen and of Lichtenstein* might not 
interfere in the general arrangements of Europe. Thereupon 
we adjourned until the next day, after the other plenipoten- 
tiaries had promised to send me, as well as Count de Labrador, 
copies of the draft of the declaration, and of the letter of 
Count de Palmella. 

(The different documents referred to in the letter I have the 
honour to write to your Majesty, are enclosed in the despatch 
I write to-day to the Department of Foreign Affairs.) 

After having received them, and thoroughly examined them 
I thought it best not to wait until the next conference to make 

1 Text: . . 5 “une Conversation s’er est suivie dans laquelle, 4 l’occasion de celui 
qui régne a Naples,” . . . (a conversation ensued, . . .). Var. ‘‘. . une conversa- 
tion générale s’en est suivie. Le nom du roi de Naples s’étant présenté a quelgu’un,”. . 
(a general conversation ensued. Zhe name of the King of Naples having occurred to 
pies Text “De quel roi de Naples parlez-vous ? nous ne savons qui c’est.”” (Of what 
king...) War.: ‘*De quel roi de Naples parle-t-on ? Nous ne connaissons point 
homme dont il est question.” (Of what king of Naples do you speak? We do not 
know the person you mention.) 

3 Text: . . , ‘‘j’aireparti d’un ton ferme” (I firmly replied). Var.:.. , ‘*j’ai 
dit d’un ton ferme e¢ froid” (I firmly and coolly said). 


4 Two of the smallest principalities of Germany. That of Lichtenstein, for instance, 
only contained 7,000 inhabitants. 


234 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


my opinion known. I drew up a reply, first in the form of a 
verbal note; then, remembering that the ministers of the four 
courts had held conferences among themselves in which they had 
drawn up and signed protocols, it struck me that it was im- 
portant that there should not be between them and the minister 
of your Majesty, merely conversations, of which no trace 
remained, and that an official note would be the most suitable 
means of opening the negotiations. Therefore, on the Ist of 
October I addressed to the ministers of the other five powers 
a note with my signature attached, bearing in substance :— 

“That the eight powers who signed the treaty of May 3oth, 
appeared. to me, for that simple reason! fully qualified to appoint 
a commission that should prepare, for the decision of the congress, 
the points that it was first of all to settle,and to propose to it the 
formation of the commission that it might have deemed 
expedient to appoint, as well as the names of the persons who 
were deemed most fit to sit on them; but that their competence 
extended no further; that, not being the congress, but only a 
fraction of it, the fact of conferring on themselves powers which 
can only belong to that assembly, would constitute an usurpation 
which, if called upon to concur in it, I should feel much 
exercised to conciliate with my responsibility ; that the difficulty 
found in summoning the congress was not of the nature of 
those which grow less with time, and that, since it was sometime 
or other to be overcome, nothing could be gained from delaying ; 
that minor states had undoubtedly no right to interfere in the 
general arrangements of Europe, but that such desire would not 
even occur to them, and that, therefore, they would cause no 
hindrance ; that all those considerations naturally led to wish 
that the eight powers should, without delay, examine the pre- 
liminary points to be decided by the congress, in order that 
it might soon be opened, and that those points might be 
submitted to it.” 

After having sent this note, I betook myself to the special 
audience that the Emperor Alexander had accorded me. Count 
Nesselrode came to tell me, on his Majesty’s behalf, that he 
desired to see me alone ; indeed, the Czar himself had reminded 
me of that wish on his part the evening before, at a court ball, 
where I had the honour of meeting his Majesty. On seeing me, 
the emperor took my hand, but his manner was not so affectionate 
as usual. His tone was curt, his demeanour serious, and perhaps 
a little solemn. I saw clearly that he was about to play a part. 


1 Text: . . , “me paraissaient par cette circonstance seule,” . . . (appeared to 
me...). Var.:... , ‘*me paraissaient par cette circonstance seule, e¢ 2 défaut 
) Gexmédiatet,””.. 2% (appeared... 02% = simple reason, and for want of a me- 


aigtor.) aus)» 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 235 


“First of all,” he said to me, “ what is the situation of your 
country ?” | 

“ As well as your Majesty has wished it to be, and better than 
one would have dared to hope.” 

“ Public opinion ?” 

“Tt is daily improving.” 

“ Liberal ideas ?” 

“ Nowhere is there more liberal ideas than in France.” 

“But what about the liberty of the press ?” 

“That exists with a few restrictions dictated by circum- 
stances.' Those restrictions will disappear in a couple of years, 
and will not prevent all that is good and useful being 
published in the meantime.” 

“And the army ?” 

“It is altogether devoted to the king. One hundred and 
thirty thousand men are now under the colours, and, at the first 
call, three hundred thousand more could join them.” 

“What about the marshals ? ” 

* Which, sire ?” 

“ Oudinot.” 

“ He is devoted to the king.” 

“Soult?” 

“He was at first in a bit of humour. He was given the 
governorship of Vendée ; he behaves there most satisfactorily. 
He makes himself beloved and respected.” 

“And Ney?” 

“He regrets a little the endowments of the past; your 
Majesty might soothe his regrets.” 

“The two Chambers? it seems to me they show signs of 
opposition ?” 

“As in all deliberative assemblies opinions may differ, but 
affection to the sovereign is unanimous ; and notwithstanding 
the difference of opinions, the government always secures a large 
majority.” 

‘But there is no accord.” 

“Who could have said such a thing to your Majesty ? When 
after twenty-five years of revolution, the king finds himself in a 
few months as firmly established on his throne as though he had 
never left France, what more certain proof could there be that 
everybody has the same end in view ?” 

“Your personal position ? ” 

“The confidence and kindness of the king are beyond all I 
could have hoped.” 


1 The charter had guaranteed the liberty of the press; but a law passed in 
September, 1814, had re-established the censorship for a period of two years. 


236 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


“ Now let us talk business affairs. We must finish them here.” 

“That depends upon your Majesty. They shall be concluded 
promptly and happily, if your Majesty displays the same noble- 
ness and magnanimity as when dealing with French affairs.” 

“But it is important that each of us should obtain what suits 
him.” | 

“And that each obtain his rights.” 

“JT shall keep what I have.” 

“Your Majesty would keep only what legitimately belongs 
to you.” 

“JT have made an agreement with the great powers.” 

“Tam not aware whether your Majesty reckons France as 
one of those powers.” 

“Yes, I certainly do. But if you will not admit that every 
one of us is to get what suits him best, what do you mean?” | 

“JT place right first and interest after.” 

“The interests of Europe constitute rights.” 

“This language, sire, is not yours ; it is foreign to your feel- 
ings and your heart disapproves it.” 

“No, I repeat it ; the interests of Europe constitute rights.” 

I then turned towards the wainscot close to me, I put my 
head against it, and striking it with my forehead, I exclaimed : 
“Europe, Europe, unfortunate Europe!” and turning round to 
the emperor—“ Shall it be said,” I asked of him, “that you have 
brought about her ruin?” 

He replied, “ Rather war than to renounce what I possess.” 

I let my arms fall in the attitude of a man afflicted, but 
decided, who had the air of saying to him, “the fault shall not 
be ours.” I kept silent. The Czar remained a few minutes with- 
out replying, he then repeated, “ Yes; rather war.” 

My attitude remained unchanged. Then raising his hands 
and moving them nervously as I had never seen him do before, 
and in a manner that recalled to my mind the passage that 
terminates the elegy of Marcus Aurelius, he cried out rather than 
he said, “It is time for the play, I must go: I promised the 
emperor that I would do so; I am expected”—and he moved 
away. Having opened the door, he came back to me, clasped 
me in his armsand said, with a voice that was no longer his 
own, “ Adieu, adieu! we shall meet again!” 

In all that conversation of which alone I can relate to your 
Majesty the striking features, Poland and Saxony were not 
once mentioned, but only indicated by periphrases. Thus that 
the Czar would designate Saxony in saying, “ Those who have 
betrayed the cause of Europe,’ to which I was in the case of 
replying, “ Sire, that is a question of dates,” and, after a slight 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 237 


pause, I might have added, “and the effect of the difficulties into 
which one may have been thrown by circumstances.” 

The emperor once spoke of the allies. I criticized that 
expression as I had done at the conference, and he accounted for 
it by having the habit of using it. 

Yesterday, which should have been that of the second con- 
ference, M. de Mercy was sent to me by Prince Metternich to 
inform me that it would not be held. 

A friend of Herr von Gentz having gone to see him in the 
afternoon found him engaged on a work which, he told him, 
was very pressing. I believe it was a reply to my note. 

In the evening at the house of the Prince von Trautmansdorf! 
the plenipotentiaries reproached me for having addressed it to 
them, and especially for having given it, by signing it, an 
official character. I told them that as they wrote and signed 
amongst themselves, I had believed that it was necessary that I 
should also write and sign. I infer from this that my note 
rather perplexed them. 

To-day Prince Metternich wrote to inform me that a con- 
ference would be held this evening at eight o'clock; later he 
sent me word that there would be none, because he was expected 
ge tne Czar's. 

Such is, sire, the present state of affairs. 

Your Majesty sees that our position here is intricate: it be- 
comes more so every day. The Czar Alexander gives full 
swing to his ambition ; in this he is incited by M. de la Harpe 
and by Prince Czartoryski. Prussia hopes for a large increase ; 
Austria, pusillanimous as usual, has only a bashful ambition ; 
but she displays complacency in order to be aided. And these 
are not the only difficulties : there are others still which proceed 
from agreements made by the courts, formerly allied, at a time 
when they did not hope to beat him whose overthrow they have 
witnessed, and by which they intended to make with him a 
peace which would enable them to imitate him. To-day, your 
Majesty replaced on the throne, has exalted justice ; the powers 
for the benefit of whom those agreements were made, will not 
renounce them, and those who perhaps regret being bound do 
not know how to release themselves. It is I believe the case 
with England.2 The ministers of your Majesty might thus 
meet with such obstacles that they would have to renounce all 
other hope than that of preserving honour. But we have not yet 
come to that. I have the honour to be, &c. 


? Councillor of State and High Chamberlain of the Emperor of Austria 
(1749-1817). Aas 
* Var: . . . dont le ministre est faible (whose minister is weak). 


238 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


No. 4A.—THE KING’S AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT -PARIS. 


VIENNA, October 8, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

In our despatch of the 4th inst. we had the honour to 
inform you that the close logic that we opposed to the four 
powers, who still represent themselves as bound together by 
secret clauses, embarrasses them very much. 

It is in fact natural that these powers, whose aim it is to get 
France to sanction the overthrow of all principles founded on 
public law, and, at the same time, to consent to the plunder of 
Saxony, be singularly inconvenienced when they find that same 
France willing to act only in accord with justice. 

However difficult be our part to play with persons who 
doubt our sincerity and will not allow principles of reason to 
modify their views, all we learn confirms us in the belief that 
we must strictly adhere to the line we have adopted. We feel 
that it is the only one that can form a bulwark to oppose the in- 
vading forces that threaten Europe, if serious attention is not 
paid to them. 

We have the honour of acquainting you with all that has 
been done since our last despatch. 

Lord Castlereagh has drawn up a project of declaration 
which Prince Metternich handed to Prince Talleyrand on the 
evening of the 3rd. (No. 1, subjoined documents.) 

It was communicated only under the form of a project, but 
the reading of it confirms us in our opinion that the four great 
allied powers will, conforming to their arrangements, continue 
to follow a system of convenience adopted on the supposition 
that Bonaparte remain on the throne of France, and that they 
do not take into consideration the restoration of the house 
of Bourbon, which changes all the state of Europe, and by 
means of which everything should be restored on its former 
basis. 

At first glance, it is plain that great danger must result 
from this system, that a real and durable equilibrium becomes 
impossible, and that considering the weakness of the cabinet of 
Vienna, France alone would no longer be mistress of the events 
that the future seems to have in store. 

Prince Talleyrand replied by private letter to Lord Castle- 
reagh. Therein he lays special stress on the importance of the 
idea that the congress should open, and that the powers could 
only prepare and propose—but not decide alone—matters of 
general interest. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 239 


Though that letter be in the form of a note, it is neverthe- 
less couched in such terms as will serve to enlighten Europe, 
some day, if necessary, concerning the attitude followed by 
France in the affairs of the congress. (See No. 2.) 

Since then, Prince Metternich has summoned a second con- 
ference. 

The Prince de Talleyrand and Count de Labrador were 
invited to it, but the ministers of Sweden and Portugal did not 
attend it. 

That conference has been barren of result. It was felt, how- 
ever, that it was necessary to acquaint the different powers with 
the motives that delayed the opening of the congress. 

Prince Talleyrand opposed the project of Lord Castlereagh 
as being contrary to the principle by which the congress is con- 
stituted and which Article XXXII. of the treaty of Paris distinctly 
sets forth." Thereupon the plenipotentiaries agreed to draw 
up new projects, and the next day Prince Talleyrand sent 
to Prince Metternich a draft which could serve for the purpose. 
(See note 3). 

This draft, Monsieur le Comte, as you will see on reading it, 
sets forth, at the same time, the principle by virtue of which the 
congress assembles, the reasons for delay, the consideration felt 
for the rights of the powers, and the principle upon which 
each plenipotentiary shall be admitted. 

According to the principle established by the declaration, the 
King of Saxony would find himself summoned and Murat 
excluded. Nevertheless the exclusion of the latter offers no 
less difficulties than the admission of the former, and we 
suppose that there exists between Russia, England, and Prussia 
an agreement on the points that our instructions enjoin us not 
to admit. 

Prince Metternich often pleads Murat’s cause, and seeks to in- 
timidate the congress with the obstacles that he might offer 
at the head of eighty thousand men, if, at the news of his 
exclusion, he marched into the interior of Italy. We point out 
how little justified is this fear, and that it would only require a 
landing of French and Spanish troops in Sicily to put an end 
for ever to that royal comedy in which no one can wish to take 
part, and which would be more dangerous to Austria than even 
to France. We see at each step we take that the principal 
difficulty which opposes our success is that arising from the 


? Art? XXXII.—In the delay of two months all the powers that have been 
engaged, on one side or the other, in the present war, shall send plenipotentiaries to 
Vienna to seitle at a general congress the arrangements which are to complete the 
provisions of the present treaty. 


240 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


timid character of the Austrian ministers, and from the peculiar 
apathy of the nation; that Russia and Prussia carrying that 
conviction in their calculations, shall insist upon their unjust 
pretensions, and that, perhaps nothing will remain for us but 
to declare that, protesting against such violence, France will take 
no part in it. We often repeat that it is singular that it should 
be the French embassy at the congress that takes it upon itself 
to transact the business of the Austrian cabinet. 

Lord Castlereagh equally lacks force and dignity in this 
circumstance, and we sometimes ask ourselves how he will 
justify one day before Parliament the heedlessness he displays 
for the great principles which constitute nations. 

The ministers of Bavaria, Denmark, and Sardinia begin 
to murmur, and we are told that they are concerting themselves 
for asking the great powers whether the congress is formed, and 
if so, when it will assemble. 

This idea was suggested by us, and we hope that this 
step shall, if the powers tarry too much, lead to an explana- 
tion. 

To-day, in the evening, Prince Metternich invited Prince 
Talleyrand to a new conference, and requested him to arrive at 
his house an hour before the general meeting in order to discuss 
some important points. 

The result of that conversation induces the hope that Prince 
Metternich will adopt some of our ideas, and that he will seek 
to conciliate the pretensions of the powers with the principles 
that we put forward. 

At the general conference, which was attended by the 
ministers of Portugal and Sweden, no agreement was arrived at 
concerning our projected declaration. It was decided not to 
prejudge anything by an inflexible principle too loudly pro- 
claimed, but to adjourn the opening of the congress until 
November Ist, and to endeavour, in the meantime, to promote 
business by means of confidential communications between the 
different powers. It is in this sense that a project of declara- 
tion was prepared and presented by the other ministers. After 
long debates, Prince Talleyrand succeeded in adding the fol- 
lowing phrase to it: “That the propositions to be made at the 
congress should conform to the public Jaw and to the just 
expectation of Europe.” The other ministers tried in vain to 
have that term pudlic daw omitted. The Prussian ministers 
demurred for a long time, and it was only after a debate which 
lasted two hours, that the insertion was carried, so to speak, at the 
point of the sword. It has been clearly seen that they wished 
to finish affairs rather by means of their own accord, than by 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 241 


conforming to the principles of reason and justice, upon which 
is properly founded the public law of Europe. 

We have the honour of addressing you a copy of that de- 
claration which, save several corrections, shall be published such 
as it is. (See No. 4.) 

We have not, as you see, Monsieur le Comte, obtained a 
complete victory, but things are intact, the principles of public 
law are maintained, and the declaration leaves us a great latitude 
for watching over all the interests it is our duty to do. 

We are told that the minister of Bavaria has sent in a 
formal protest with regard to his exclusion from the commission 
summoned to prepare work. 

Prince Metternich appeased him by holding out to him the 
hope that Bavaria will preside over the commission which is to 
deal with the affairs of Germany, and that, in that capacity, 
she would have a voice in all the general arrangements. 

Be pleased to accept. .... 


No. 4.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, October 9, 1814. 
SIRE, 

The ministers of the four courts, being embarrassed by 
my note of October Ist, and finding no argument with which to 
combat it, have hit upon no other plan than that of becoming 
angry. “That note,” Herr von Humboldt said, “is a firebrand 
thrown among us.” “They would like to sever us,” said Count 
Nesselrode, “ but they will not succeed in doing so.” Thus openly 
avowing what was easy to suspect, that they had formed a league 
among themselves to become masters of all and to constitute 
themselves the supreme arbiters of Europe. Lord Castlereagh, 
with more moderation and in a gentle tone, told me that their 
intention was that, the conference to which Count de Labrador 
and myself had been invited, should be quite confidential, and 
that I had deprived it of that character by addressing them 
a note, and especially an official one. I replied that it was their 
fault and not mine ; that they had asked me for my opinion, and 
that I was forced to give it, and that if I had reduced it to 
writing and signed it, it was because, having seen that in their 
conferences among themselves they wrote and signed, I was 
induced to suppose that it was necessary that I should do the 
same. 

However the contents of my letter having transpired, those 
gentlemen, in order to allay the effect of it, had recourse to the 


VOR. IL. R 


242 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


usual means of the cabinet of Berlin. They replied that the 
principles I put forth were but a decoy; that we wanted the 
left bank of the Rhine, had designs on Belgium, and wished for 
war. That intelligence came to me from all sides ; but I ordered 
all the members of the legation to explain themselves before all 
with so much simplicity and candour, and in so positive a manner, 
that the authors of those absurd rumours reaped only the shame 
of having spread them. 

On the evening of the 3rd of October, Prince Metternich, 
with whom I was at the house of the Duchess of Sagan,! handed 
me a draft of a declaration arranged by Lord Castlereagh; this 
second project differed from the first, only inasmuch as it tended 
to have what the four courts proposed, considered as being 
but a consequence of the first of the secret articles of the treaty 
of May 30th.? But neither was the principle on which he based 
his project just (for Lord Castlereagh evidently lent to one of the 
provisions of the article a sense that it did not have, and that 
we could not admit), nor, had the principle been just, would the 
consequence drawn from it have been legitimate ; the attempt 
was thus doubly unfortunate. 4 

I wrote to Lord Castlereagh. I gave a confidential tone to 
my letter. I endeavoured to point out all the reasons that 
militated against the proposed plan. (The copy of my letter is 
subjoined to the despatch I am writing to-day to the depart- 
ment.) Your Majesty will see that I have especially endeavoured 
to hint, with all possible deference, that the motive for which 
the plan had been proposed had not escaped me. I deemed it 
advisable to declare that it was impossible for me to consent to 
anything contrary to principles, seeing that- unless we remained 
invariably attached to them, we could not again resume, in the 
eyes of the nations of Europe, the rank and consideration to 
which we are entitled since the return of your Majesty, and 
because, discarding them would cause a revival of the Revolution 
which only resulted from a long forgetfulness of principles. 

I have learned that, when Lord Castlereagh received my 


1 Sagan, city of Silesia, chief town of a principality formerly possessed by the 
famous Wallenstein. It passed afterwards to the family of the Biren, Dukes of Cour- 
land. Catherine Wilhelmine, daughter of Pierre, Duke of Courland, succeeded 
him in 1800, as Duchess of Sagan. She died in 1839. Her sister Pauline succeeded 
her. In 1844, the duchy reverted to Dorothy, third daughter of Pierre, Duke of 
Courland, and wife of Edmond, Duke of Dino, and, later, of Talleyrand-Peérigord, 
nephew of Prince Talleyrand. 

2 This is that article: ‘‘ The disposal of the territories renounced by His Most 
Christian Majesty according to Article III. of the open treaty, and the relations from 
which a system of real and durable equilibrium is to result for Europe, shadd be settled 
at the Congress, on the bases arrived at by the allied powers, and in conformity to the 
general provisions contained in the following articles, &c...... 8 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 243 


letter, he gave it to read to the minister of Portugal, who was 
at his house, and who confessed to him that in law we were 
right, but added that it was nevertheless necessary to know if 
what we proposed was practicable, which was really asking, in 
other terms, whether the four courts could dispense with 
arrogating to themselves powers over Europe which the latter 
had not given them. 

On that day we had a conference, which at first was only 
attended by two or three plenipotentiaries, the other ministers 
arriving only at intervals of a quarter of an hour; Lord Castle- 
reagh had brought my letter in order to communicate it. It was 
passed from hand to hand. Prince Metternich and Count 
Nesselrode simply glanced at it, as men whose penetration 
was such that the single inspection of a document sufficed for 
grasping its entire contents. I had been forewarned that 
I should be asked to withdraw my note. Indeed, Prince 
Metternich made that request to me. I replied that I could 
not. Count de Labrador said it was too late; that it would 
do no good, for he had already sent a copy of it to his court. 

“It is then necessary that we reply?” said Prince Metter- 
nich. 

“If you wish to,” I said. 

“My opinion is,” he replied, “that we should settle our 
affairs all alone.” Meaning by “we” the four courts. 

I replied, without hesitation: “ If you consider the question 
from that point of view, I am quite your man; I am quite 
ready; I ask nothing better.” 

“ How do you mean it ?” he said. 

“It is very easy,” I replied. “I shall no longer attend your 
conferences. I shall be here only as a member of the congress, 
and I shall wait until it opens.” 

Instead of renewing his proposal, Prince Metternich returned, 
gradually and by the use of various periphrases, to general 
propositions concerning the inconvenience that the actual 
opening of the congress would cause. 

Count Nesselrode said, rather thoughtlessly, that the Czar 
Alexander intended to start on the 25th, to which I was obliged 
to reply ina rather indifferent tone : 

“T am sorry for that, for he will not witness the con- 
clusion of affairs.” 

“How can we summon the congress,” said Prince Metter- 
nich, “when none of the questions which are to be submitted 
to it are ready?” 

“Very well,” I replied, “to show you that it is not a spirit of 
contradiction that animates me and that I am disposed to 

R 2 


244 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


adopt all measures that are not in opposition to principles 
which I cannot desert, since nothing is yet ready for the opening 
of the congress, since you desire to adjourn it, let it be delayed 
a fortnight or three weeks, I consent to it, but on two con- 
ditions: the one that you convene it at once for a fixed day, 
the other, that you state, in the note of convocation, the rule 
according to which its members shall be admitted.” 

I wrote on a piece of paper that rule, couched in about the 
same terms as those contained in the instructions of your Majesty. 
The paper circulated from hand to hand. There were a few 
questions and some objections, which, however, did not settle 
anything, and the ministers, who had come in one after the 
other, having left in the same way, the conference died out, 
so to say, instead of running its natural course. 

Lord. Castlereagh, who had remained among the last, and 
with whom I went downstairs, tried to win me over to their 
opinion, by giving me to understand that certain matters, 
which most interested my court, might be arranged to my 
satisfaction. 

“Tt is not,” I said to him, “ of such and such private matters 
that it is now question, but of the principles which should serve 
to regulate all. If once the connection is broken, how are we 
to resume it ? We have to meet the wishes of Europe. What 
shall we have done for her, if we do not replace in honour 
the maxims to the disregard of which her misfortunes are due? 
The present epoch is one of those which scarcely presents 
itself once in the course of several centuries. A better occa- 
sion could never be offered us. Why not place ourselves in 
a position to take advantage of it ?” 

“ Ah,” he replied, with a sort of embarrassment, “because 
there are difficulties that you do not know of.” 

“No, Ido not know of them,” I replied, in the tone of a 
man who had no curiosity to know them. 

Thereupon we took leave of each other. 

I dined at Prince Windischgraetz.1 Herr von Gentz was there. 
We talked along time on the points discussed in the con- 
ferences which we had attended. He seemed to regret that I 
had not arrived sooner at Vienna ; for he was pleased to believe 
that the matters with which he seemed dissatisfied might have 

1 Alfred, Prince von Windischgraetz, of an old illustrious family of Styria. He 
was born at Brussels in 1787, entered the army and became general. His name 
became celebrated only in 1848 : he then commanded at Prague and had to suppress a 
terrible insurrection. He crushed it and was, in recompense, appointed field-marshal. 
He afterwards took Vienna, which had fallen in the power of the mob, and was sent 


to Hungary; but he failed in the latter task and was recalled. He died in 
1862, 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 245 


taken a different turn. He finished by confessing that they all 
felt that in the main I was right, but that pride was at stake, 
and that having made a step forward, the best disposed felt it 
difficult to retrace it. 

Two days passed without a conference being held. A féte 
one day, a hunt the other, were the causes of this. In the 
meantime I was introduced to the Duchess of Oldenburg! I 
expressed to her my regrets that she had not come to Paris with 
her brother. She replied that that journey was only postponed ; 
she then proceeded at once to put the same questions to me as 
the emperor concerning your Majesty, the state of public opinion, 
of our finances, and army; all questions that would have sur- 
prised me very much from a woman of twenty-two, had they 
not seemed to contrast still more with her bearing, her looks, 
and the sound of her voice. I replied to all in a sense con- 
forming to what we have to do here, and to the interests we 
have to defend. 

She further questioned me about the King of Spain, about 
his brother and his uncle, speaking of them in terms scarcely 
becoming, and I replied in a tone that I believed best cal- 
culated to give weight to my opinion on the personal merit of 
those princes. 

Herr von Gentz, who came to my house at the moment 
when I returned from visiting the Duchess of Oldenburg, told 
me that he had been charged to draw up a project for the 
convocation of the congress. The day before I had madea 
draft consonant with what I had proposed at the previous 
conference, and had sent it to Prince Metternich, begging him 
to communicate it to the other ministers. Herr von Gentz 
assured me that he had no knowledge of it. He told me that 
in his, there was no question of the rule of admission that I 
had proposed, because Prince Metternich feared that by publish- 
ing it they would drive to extremities him who reigns at Naples ; 
his plenipotentiary thus finding himself excluded. We discussed 
that point, Herr von Gentz and myself, and he seemed persuaded 
that what Prince Metternich feared would not happen. 

I expected a conference for the next day, but three-quarters 
of the day having slipped away without my having received 
any intimation, I no longer counted on it, when I received a 
note from Prince Metternich who informed me that there would 
be one at eight o’clock, and that if I would come to his 
house a little before, ke would find means of introducing some 


1 Catherine-Paulowna, sister to the Czar Alexander. Born in 1795; widow in 
1812, of Pierre-Frederick-George, Grand Duke of Oldenburg, married again, in 
1816, to the King of Wurtemberg. 


246 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


very important matters. (Such were the terms of his note.) 
I was at his house at seven o'clock. I was at once introduced. 
He first spoke of a project of declaration that he had had 
drawn up, which differed, he said, a little from mine but was on 
the whole, very similar,and with which he hoped that I would be 
satisfied. I asked him for it ; he did not have it. “ Probably,” 
I said to him, “it is being communicated to the allies?” 

“Speak no more of allies,” ‘replied he, “there areqiae 
longer any.” 

“There are here people,” I said to him, “who should be 
such in this way that even without concerting themselves, they 
should hold the same views and desire thesame end. How can 
you have the courage to place Russia as a belt around your 
principal and most important possessions, Hungary and 
Bohemia? How can you suffer that the patrimony of an old 
and good neighbour! in whose family an archduchess is married, 
be given to yournatural enemy? It isstrange that it should be 
us who object to this and you who do not! ... .” 

He said that I had no confidence in him. 

I replied, laughing, that he had not given me many 
motives for trusting him, and I reminded him of certain circum- 
stances in which he had not kept his word. “Besides,” I 
added, “how can I have confidence in a man whose affairs 
are all a mystery for those who are the most disposed to 
arrange matters? As for myself, I make no mystery, and I 
have no need to do so; that is the advantage of those who 
negotiate only with principles. There, I continued, are pens 
and paper. Will you write that France asks for nothing, and 
will accept nothing, and I will sign it?” 

“But there is,’ he said, “the Naples business, which is 
really your own.” 

I replied, “ No more mine than anybody else’s. It is for 
me only a question of principles. I ask that he who has a right 
to be at Naples, be at Naples, and nothing more ; and this is 
what everybody ought to wish as well as myself. Let prin- 
ciples be observed, and I shall be found most easy. _ I will tell 
you frankly what I ever can and what I never shall consent to ; 
I feel that the King of Saxony, in his present position, may be 
obliged to make a sacrifice. I believe that he will be disposed 
to make one, because he is wise; but if they mean to deprive 
him of all his states, and give the kingdom of Saxony to 
Russia, I shall never consent to that. I shall never consent 


1 Saxony. Prince Anthony, brother of the King Frederick-Augustus, married : 
(1) Princess Marie-Charlotte-Antoinette, daughter of the Emperor Leopold, who died 
in 1782; (2) in 1787, Marie-Therese-Josephe, another daughter of the Emperor 
Leopold, born in 1767. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA, 247 


either to Luxemburg or Mayence being given to Prussia. I 
shall never consent to Russia crossing the Vistula, and having 
forty-four millions of subjects in Europe, and her frontiers on 
the Oder. But if Luxemburg be given to Holland, Mayence 
to Bavaria; if the king and the kingdom of Saxony be pre- 
served, and if Russia pass not the Vistula, I shall have no 
objections to make for that part of Europe.” 

Prince Metternich thereupon took my hand saying, “ Our 
views are not so opposed as you think. I promise you that 
Prussia shall not have Luxemburg nor Mayence. We desire no 
more than yourself that Russia be increased beyond measure, 
and as to Saxony, we shall do our very best to preserve at 
least a portion of it.” 

It was only to know his own views regarding these 
different points that I spoke to him as I did. Reverting 
then to the convocation of the congress, he insisted upon 
the necessity of not publishing at present the rule of admis- 
sion that I had proposed, “ because,” he said, “it would scare 
every one; and, as to myself, it perplexes me at present ; for 
Murat, on seeing his plenipotentiary excluded, will know his 
case is hopeless; he will believe that no one knows what his 
passionate temper may lead him todo; that he is ready in Italy, 
and that we are not.” 

Having been informed that the ministers had assembled, we 
repaired to the conference. Prince Metternich opened it by 
announcing that he would read two projects, the one pre- 
pared by myself, the other by him. The Prussians declared 
themselves for that of Prince Metternich, saying that it pre- 
judged nothing, whereas mine prejudged a great deal. Count 
Nesselrode was of the same opinion. The minister of Sweden, 
Herr von Léwenhielm,? who was attending the congress for the 
first time, said that nothing must be prejudged. It was also the 
opinion of Lord Castlereagh, and I knew it was that of Prince 
Metternich. That project confined itself to adjourning the 
opening of the congress to November 1, and said nothing 
more, which gave rise to Count de Palmella, minister of Portugal, 
observing that a second declaration to convoke the congress 
would be necessary, and this was agreed upon. This was only 
delaying the difficulty but not resolving it. However, as the old 
pretensions had been abandoned, as it was no longer a question 
of everything being settled by the eight powers, and of 


1 Gustavus von Loéwenhielm, born in 1771, was an officer in the Swedish army. 
He was aide-de-camp to Gustavus III., and later to Bernadotte. In 1815, he left 
the army for the diplomacy, was sent to the congress at Vienna, and afterwards 
appointed ambassador at Paris. 


248 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


leaving to the congress only the faculty of approving; as the 
plenipotentiaries spoke only of preparing by free and confi- 
dential communications with the ministers of the other powers, 
the questions which the congress should decide, I thought that 
an act of complacency which would not infringe principles, 
could be useful to the progress of affairs, and I declared that I 
consented to the adoption of the project, but on the condition 
that in the place where it was said that the formal opening 
of the congress should be adjourned until November 1, they 
should add, and shall be made according to the principles of public 
law. These words provoked an uproar difficult to conceive. 
Prince von Hardenberg, standing, leaning his wrists on the table, 
almost menacing, and shouting as is the wont of those who 
are afflicted with the same infirmity as himself, uttered these 
words, interrupted now and again: 

‘No, Monsieur . .. , the term public law is useless, Why 
say that we shall act only according to public law? that goes 
without saying.” 

I replied, “ That if that went without saying, it would go 
better by saying it.” 

Herr von Humboldt exclaimed, “ What has public law to 
dochere 23 

To which I replied, “It has this to do here that it has brought 
you to this congress.” 

Lord Castlereagh drew me aside, and asked me if when 
they had yielded to my desires, I should be more easy. 

I inquired in turn whether if I showed myself easy to please, 
I could expect him to do the same in the Naples business. 

He promised to second me with all his influence: “I shall 
speak of it,” he said, “to Metternich; I have the right to give 
advice on this matter.” 

“You give me your word of honour,” I said. 

“T give you it,” he replied. : 

“ And,” I retorted, “I give you mine to be difficult only on 
those principles that I ought not to abandon.” 

Nevertheless Herr von Gentz having approached Prince 
Metternich represented to him that one could not refuse to 
speak of public law in an act of such a nature as that being 
mooted. Prince Metternich had previously proposed to put 
the point at issue to the vote, thus betraying the use they 
would have made of the powers they had assumed, had their 
first project been admitted. They concluded by consenting 
to the addition I demanded, but there was a no less lively 
discussion on the question of deciding where it should be placed, 
and they finally agreed to place it a sentence higher than that 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 249 


where I had proposed to insert it. Herr von Gentz could not 
help saying even at the conference: “ This evening, gentlemen, 
belongs to the history of the congress. It is not I who shall 
relate the incidents of it, because my duty forbids me to do so 
but they will be found there, certainly.” 

He has since told me that he never saw anything like it. 

That is why I look upon it as fortunate to have been able, 
without abandoning principles, to do something that could be 
regarded as conducive to the meeting of the congress. 

Herr von Lowenhielm is minister of Sweden and Russia, and 
a Russian at heart. That is probably why he was sent here, the 
Prince Royal ! of Sweden wishing for all that the Russians wish. 

The princes who were formerly members of the Confederation 
of the Rhine begin to assemble in order to urge the opening of 
the congress. They are already drafting projects between 
themselves for the organization of Germany. 

I have the honour to be... 


No. 5A—THE KING’s AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


: VIENNA, October 12, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

We have the honour of addressing you a printed copy of 
the declaration made in the name of the powers who signed the 
treaty of Paris. It is said that we have won a victory by 
having introduced the words pudlic daw. That opinion ought 
to enable you to gauge the spirit which animates the congress. 

It may so happen that the adjournment cause uneasiness 
in people’s minds. On the other hand, it is certain that 
sufficient justice is not yet being rendered to the principles 
which guide the king in his political relations. For the last 
twenty years, Europe has only been accustomed to appreciate 
force, and to fear its abuse. No one yet indulges the hope and 
shares the conviction that a great power can wish to be moderate. 

It has then appeared to us of importance that the publication 
of this document, the first result of the political work of the 
congress, be accompanied by a few observations that put the 
action of France and its actual influence in its true light. 

We have the honour, Monsieur le Comte, to address to you 
those that we believe may be used in the Monzteur, and the 
spirit of which can furnish the right direction to other news- 
paper articles. 


! Bernadotte, then Prince Royal, and later, King of Sweden, under the name of 
Charles XIV. 


250 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE FALLEYRAND. 


We have hopes that Austria will support the resistance that. 
we oppose in all circumstances to the cupidity which Russia 
and Prussia manifest, and the foree of our language shall be 
proportionate to the degree of confidence we shall be able to 
place in the energy of the cabinet of Vienna. 

We believe we may be certain that she will not sanction 
the destruction of Saxony, and though not everything, it will 
already be useful that the cabinet of Vienna concur with us to 
protest against such violence. We observe generally that Russia 
makes Germany uneasy, and that, without the support of Prussia, 
her federative system would lack basis. 

We have had occasion to speak of the endowments, and we 
seek to save as many private interests as is possible. But this 
matter is placed under the influence of the alliance contracted 
by the allies at Chaumont. A certain power appears to have 
given its word to another to accord nothing, and thence it is 
implied that principles can no longer be attacked. 

You feel, Monsieur le Comte, that so long as we shall have to 
negotiate with powers that assume the character of allies, not 
even the principle that the domains given in the countries which 
were ceded by the treaties, should be left to the donees, can be 
made to prevail. That does not, however, prevent us from 
seeking, on every occasion, to spare the private interests to which 
it is advisable to afford some support. 

The Czar of Russia spoke yesterday to the English 
ambassador, Lord Stewart,! of the restoration of Poland, 
indicating that he wished to have one of his brothers elected 
as king thereof. This question cannot fail to be mooted soon. 
We think that the Emperor of Russia has not yet any set ideas 
on the subject, and that he is feeling his way to becoming 
master of that country. 

Be pleased to accept... 


No. 5.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, October 13, 1814. 
SIRE, 
I have sent in the despatch addressed to the department, 
the declaration such as it was published yesterday morning. 


1 Charles William Stewart, Earl Vane, later Marquis of Londonderry, after the 
death of his brother, Lord Castlereagh, born in 1778 at Dublin. He entered the 
army and was colonel in 1803, when he was appointed Under-Secretary of State to the 
War Office. He served afterwards in Spain as brigadier-general. In 1815, he was 
appointed ambassador at Vienna, and plenipotentiary at the congress. He retired in 
1819, and did not thereafter discharge any public functions until his death in 1854. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 251 


It adjourns the opening of the congress to November 1. Some 
changes, bearing only on the wording, upon which the ministers 
have agreed without a meeting, and by the medium of Herr von 
Gentz, were introduced. We have not had a conference since 
the 8th, nor consequently any of those discussions with which I 
am afraid I have wearied your Majesty in my last two letters. 

The Prussian minister at London, old Count Jacobi Kloest,! 
has been summoned to the aid of Herr von Humboldt. He is 
one of the lights of Prussian diplomacy. He came to see me 
—he is an old acquaintance The conversation promptly led 
him to speak of the great difficulties that presented themselves 
and of which the greatest, according to him, proceeded from the 
Czar Alexander, who wished to have the duchy of Warsaw. I 
told him that if the Czar Alexander wished to have the duchy, 
he would probably provide himself with a cession from the King 
of Saxony, and that then we should see. 

“Why of the King of Saxony?” he replied, quite astonished. 

“ Because,” I replied, “the duchy belongs to him by virtue of 
the cessions that you and Austria have made him and of the 
treaties that you, Austria, and Russia have signed.” 

“ Then ”—with the air of a man who has just made a dis- 
covery, and to whom something quite unexpected has been 
revealed—‘it is true, Jove!” said he, “the duchy belongs to 
him.” At least, Count Jacobi Kloest is not one of those who 
believe that sovereignty can be lost and acquired by the single 
fact of conquest. 

I have reason to believe that we shall obtain for the King 
of Etruria—Parma, Piacenza, and Guastalla, but, in that case, 
we must no longer think of Tuscany, to which, however, he 
certainly has some claims. The Emperor of Austria has already 
hinted to the Archduchess Marie-Louise that he had little hope 
of preserving Parma. 

People within my hearing often wonder, and Lord Castlereagh 
plainly asked me, whether the treaty of April 117 is being put 
into execution. The silence of the budget in that respect has 
been remarked by the Czar of Russia. Prince Metternich says 
that Austria cannot be held to pay off the interest of the 
moneys invested in the Wont de Mzlan* bank, if France does not 

1 Baron Jacobi Kloest, a Prussian diplomatist, born in 1745, ambassador of Prussia 
at Vienna in 1790, then at London, 1792, where he remained until 1816. In 1799, he 
represented Prussia at the Congress of Rastadt and denounced loudly the assassination 
of the French plenipotentiaries by the Austrian hussars. He died in 1817. 

2 The treaty of April 11, 1814, signed between Prussia, Austria, and Russia, with 
the accession of England on the one part, and of Napoleon, on the other, was intended 
to determine the situation of the emperor and his family (see vol. ii. p. 126). It 


will be remembered that an endowment of 2,500,000 francs was promised him. 
3 A state-bank founded at Milan by Napoleon under the name of Mont Nafoléon. 


252 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


execute the clauses of the treaty which are incumbent on her. 
On every occasion, this matter always reappears under different 
forms, and almost always in an unpleasant manner. However 
painful it may be to dwell on such money matters, I can but 
say to your Majesty that it is desirable that something be 
done in this respect. A letter from M. de Jaucourt, who by 
command of your Majesty, should inform me of it, would 
certainly have a good effect. 

An almost unanimous intention is shown here of removing 
Bonaparte from the island of Elba. No one yet has any fixed 
notion as to the place where he can be sent. I proposed one 
of the Azores. It is fifteen hundred miles from any mainland. 
Lord Castlereagh seems to believe it possible that the Portuguese 
might be induced to lend themselves to that arrangement ; but, 
in this discussion the money question would re-appear. The son 
of Bonaparte is no longer treated as he was at the time of his 
arrival at Vienna. He is treated with less pomp and more sim- 
plicity. They have taken the grand ribbon of the Legion of 
Honour from him, and have substituted that of St. Stephen. 

The Czar Alexander, as is his wont, only speaks of liberal 
ideas. I do not know whether it is these that persuaded him, 
that in order to pay his court to his hosts, he should go to 
Wagram, there to visit the scene of their defeat. What is 
certain is, that he had M. de Czernicheff send for officers who, 
having been present in that battle, could inform him of the 
positions and movements of the two armies, which he was 
pleased to study on the field. It was replied to the Archduke 
Johan! the day before yesterday, who asked where the emperor 
was: “Your Highness, His Majesty is at Wagram.” 

It appears that he is to go in a few days to Pesth, where he 
has requested a ball for the 19th. His plan is to appear there ina 
Hungarian costume. Before, or after, the ball he will probably go 
to mourn over his sister’s tomb.?, At that ceremony, there will 


The emperor and the members of his family had funds deposited there, and Austria, 
in accordance with Article XIII. of the treaty of April 11, had agreed to pay the 
arrears of that institution. 

1 The Archduke Johan was the seventh son of the Emperor Leopold ; he was born 
in 1782. He commanded in chief the Austrian army at Hohenlinden. In 1801, he 
became director-general of the fortifications. He had equally important commands 
in 1805 and 1809, Fallen into disgrace, he played no military part in the last campaign 
of 1813 and 1814, and lived in retreat until 1848. The parliament united at Frankfort 
there named him vicar of the German Empire. At the same time the emperor had 
appointed him as lieutenant-general in Austria. He governed some time in quality 
of vicar of the empire, but the events which took place forced him to retire. He died 
in 1859. 

The grand-duchess Alexandra Polowna, born in 1783, married in 1799 to the 
Archduke Joseph-Anthony, brother of the Emperor Francis, palatine of the kingdom 
of Hungary. She died in 1801. 


¢ 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 253 


be a crowd of Greeks whom he has had informed of his intention, 
and who will hasten to come to see the only monarch who is 
of their creed. I do not know to what extent that pleases this 
court, but I fancy it does not please it very much. 

Lord Stewart, brother of Lord Castlereagh and ambassador 
at the court of Vienna, arrived several days ago. He has been 
presented to the Czar Alexander who said to him (according to 
his account), “ We are about to doa grand and noble thing— 
restore Poland by giving her one of my brothers, or my 
sister’s 1 (Duchess of Oldenburg) husband for king.” 

Lord Stewart said frankly to him, “I see in this no inde- 
pendence for Poland, and I don’t believe that England, though 
less interested than the other powers, can accommodate herself 
to that arrangement.” 

If I am not very much mistaken, either the union between the 
four courts is more apparent than real, and proceeds solely from 
the circumstance that some do not wish to suppose that we 
have the means of acting, and that the others fancy that we 
have not the wish to do so. Those who know us to be opposed 
to their pretensions, think we have only arguments to oppose 
them. The Czar Alexander said, a few days ago, “Talleyrand 
acts the minister of Louis XIV. here.” Herr von Humboldt, 
seeking to win, and at the same time to intimidate, Count von 
Schulenburg, minister of Saxony, said, ‘“ The minister of France 
comes here with words noble enough ; but they either conceal 
an afterthought, or they have nothing to back them up. Woe 
be to those who believe in them.” 

The means of putting an end to all these remarks and dis- 
pelling all irresolution would be for your Majesty to address 
a declaration to your people, and after having disclosed the 
principles that you have ordered us to follow, and your firm 
resolution not to deviate from them, simply leave others to 
gather from it that the just cause would not remain unsupported. 
Such a declaration, as I conceive it and as I intend submitting 
to your Majesty, would not lead to war—which no one wants— 
but would induce those who have pretensions to moderate them, 
and would give to the others the courage to defend their in- 
terests and those of Europe. But as that declaration would be 
at present premature, 1 ask your Majesty’s permission to speak 
to you about it later, if subsequent circumstances seemed to me 
to necessitate it. 

Our language is beginning to make an impression. I much 
regret that an accident met with by Count von Miinster pre- 


1 There is an error here. The prince Pierre-Frederick-George, Duke of Olden- 
burg, husband of the grand-duchess Catherine, sister of Alexander, died in 1812. 


254 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


vented him from coming to the aid of Lord Castlereagh who 
has really need of support. He will be, so we are told, in a 
couple of days in a condition to attend the sittings. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


No. 2B.—KinG Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 
PARIS, October 14, 1814. 
My COousIN, 

I have received your despatches of September 29th and 
October 4th. It will be well for the future to number them as I 
do this. Consequently those of which I acknowledge the receipt 
should bear the numbers 2 and 3. 

I will begin by telling you with genuine satisfaction that 
I am perfectly satisfied with the stand you have taken, and the 
language that you used as well with the plenipotentiaries as 
in your painful conference with the Czar Alexander. You un- 
doubtedly know that he has summoned General Pozzo di Borgo. 
God grant that that wise man bring back his sovereign to 
more sensible views ; but it is on the contrary hypothesis that 
we must reason. 

To prevent the success of the ambitious projects of Russia and 
Prussia is the end towards which we should tend. Buonaparte? 
unaided might perhaps have succeeded in this, but he employed 
means that are not and never shall be mine. I must then have 
aid. That which the small states could offer me would never be 
sufficient. I must then have that of at least one great power. 
We should have Austria and England, if they really understood . 
their interests; but I fear that they are already engaged. I 
particularly fear a system which prevails with many English, 
and with which the Duke of Wellington himself seems to be 
imbued, namely, to entirely separate the interests of Great Britain 
from those of Hanover. In that case, I cannot employ force to 
cause the triumph of right, but I can still refuse to be guarantee 
for iniquity ; we shall see if they will dare to attack me on that 
ground. What I say here applies only to Poland and Saxony 
—for, as to Naples, I shall always rely on the fine reply you 
made to Herr von Humboldt.” 

I suppose things at their worst, because I find that it is the 
best manner of reasoning—but I look for much better things— 
from your ability and firmness. Whereupon I pray God, my 
cousin, that He may have you in His safe and holy keeping. 

LoulIs. 


1 Var.: ‘‘ Pozzo di Borgo might perhaps...... 
2 See Prince Talleyrand’s letter dated October 4, p. 229. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 255 


No. 64.—THE KING’s AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, October 16, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

Since our last despatch of the 12th, no conference has been 
held, and all the work of the congress reduces itself to a few steps 
between the powers and to some insignificant intrigues, which 
serve nevertheless to disclose the real state of minds here, the 
excitement of some, the cupidity of others, the bewilderment 
of all. 

The great difficulties which oppose the progress of affairs 
result from the idea conceived by the Emperor of Russia, who 
will re-establish a sham Poland under Russian influence, and 
aggrandize Prussia by Saxony. That prince, if one may dare to 
say so, has not one sane idea in that respect, and confuses at 
the same time principles of justice and the wildest conceptions. 

Lord Castlereagh, on whom he called in order to insinuate his 
projects with regard to Poland, combated them. He even handed 
him a methodical memorandum, in which he presented the ques- 
tion such as we conceived it ; the situation requires either the 
restoration of ancient Poland, or that that source of trouble and 
contention be for ever withdrawn from the discussions of Europe. 

Lord Castlereagh had his memorandum read to Prince Talley- 
rand and to Prince Metternich, and he seconds in that respect the 
true interests of Europe. But, whilst combating exaggerated 
views, he concludes nothing and appears even to avoid con- 
cluding. With respect to the King of Saxony, whose fate is 
not discussed, Lord Castlereagh continues to indulge the falsest 
views, and being ruled by the thought that what he terms the 
treason of the King of Saxony, would serve as an example to 
Germany and to Europe, he interests himself very little in the 
preservation of his dynasty, or of the country itself, and he aban- 
dons all principle in that direction. The consequences that this 
measure would entail are too serious for France to permit of 
consent being given to them, and we hope that Austria will, in the 
end, become fully alive to what honour dictates, and to her own 
interest. We have several data on this subject which cause us to 
believe that our measures will be seconded by the cabinet of 
Vienna; but they will only be so, when the confidence of that 
cabinet in the disposition of France shall be complete. 

Austria is bound by the promise given to procure Prussia a 
population of ten million inhabitants ; but nothing is stipulated 
with regard to Saxony, and Austria desires to save her. 


256 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


Prince Metternich, though guided by a timid and uncertain 
policy, nevertheless judges the opinion of his country, and the 
interests of her monarchy well enough, to see that the dominions 
of Austria, encircled by Prussia, Russia, and a Poland entirely in 
the hands of the latter, would be constantly menaced, and that 
France alone could aid her in that difficult position. Bavaria 
having offered her aid, Prince Metternich sounded Marshal 
von Wrede! on the intention of his government to enter into a 
military league with Austria and France, in order to prevent the 
execution of the projects of Poland and Saxony. Marshal von 
Wrede replied that his governmeut intended to join them. 

On the other hand, Prince Metternich preserves a defiant 
attitude, not only with regard to the king’s wish to effectually 
second the policy of the preservation of Saxony, but also with 
regard to the means to be put at his disposal. This has been 
confirmed by the story of agentleman attached to Prince Metter- 
nich’s staff, who, explaining himself to the Duc de Dalberg, said 
to him: “You appear to us like the dogs which bark cleverly, 
but do not bite, and we shall not bite alone.” The same individual 
told him also, that if they could feel sure of the firmness of 
France, the language of Austria would become stronger, and 
Russia would not risk war. But she persists in her plans because 
she does not admit the possibility of Austria and France com- 
bining in an armed resistance against the projects sustained by 
both Russia and Prussia at once. The Duc de Dalberg replied, 
that the King of France would never sanction such a disregard 
of public morality as that involved in the destruction of Saxony, 
and that he had not been the last to order his plenipotentiaries, 
to pronounce themselves in favour of what honour and the great 
principles of public order dictated. 

The Emperor of Russia has given no decision for the last 
three days ; he is trying to gain over the English and Austrian 
ministers before pronouncing his last word in the matter. 

It may happen that he will insist on the restoration of 
Poland, after his own wishes, or, that by renouncing it, he will 
put a higher price on his sacrifice than the other powers would 
admit. Relations would then become strained, and we should 
have to be ready for any event that might result from it. 
Perhaps Austria would formulate the idea of a league, formed by 
the powers of the south against those of the north, and it would 
be as well to be prepared to reply to that proposal. 

1 Charles-Philippe, Prince von Wrede, born at Heidelberg in 1767; was from 
1805 to 1813 at the head of the Bavarian auxiliary troops of France, and was appointed 
by Napoleon Cointe of the Empire. He betrayed Napoleon in 1813, but was crushed 


at Hanau. After the campaign of France, he became field-marshal. He represented 
Bavaria at the congress of Vienna, He died in 1838. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 257 


We believe that the dignity of the king, the interests of 
France, and the force of opinion, require that the king do not 
refuse to concur in the defence of the grand principles which 
constitute order in Europe, and it would be well and useful that 
he should be willing to give the necessary authorization for 
forming, if matters became urgent, a military league with a view 
to checking the projects of Russia and Prussia. 

We think that even were Russia in a condition to take the 
field, Prussia would not compromise herself, and the firmness of 
France seconded by Austria really understanding her interest, 
would save Europe without disturbing the peace. 

There is another consideration that determines us to advise 
the king to refuse his sanction and to offer effectual aid to pre- 
vent the destruction of the House of Saxony, and the union of 
that country with Prussia. That consideration is derived from 
the revolutionary spirit that we observe in Germany, and that 
bears a character quite special. : 

It is not the struggle of the third estate with the privileged 
classes which gives rise to fermentation in that country. It is the 
pretensions and pride of a military, and formerly very inde- 
pendent nobility, which preparing the field and the elements for 
a revolution, would prefer to secure existence in a large state, 
and not to belong to parcelled out countries and to sovereigns 
whom she regards as her equals. . 

At the head of this party are found all the mediatised princes 
and nobles; their aim is to blend Germany into one single 
monarchy, in order to play in it the part of a great aristocratic 
element. Prussia, who has very cleverly flattered all that party, 
has attached it to herself by holding out to it the prospect of 
sharing the old privileges which it enjoyed. 

One can thus be persuaded that if Prussia succeeded in 
annexing Saxony, and appropriating for herself isolated territories 
on one side and another, she would form, in a very few years, a 
military monarchy very dangerous for her neighbours; and 
nothing, in this supposition, would serve her better than a great 
number of enthusiasts, who, under the pretext of sceking a 
mother-country, would create one by the most fatal upheavals. 

It is of the highest importance to prevent these projects and to 
second Austria in order to be able to cope with them successfully. 
This determination on the king’s part shall aid again to sever the 
bonds that link Austria and Bavaria to the coalition, and that 
consideration is very serious in the actual situation of France. 

On the occasion of the inquiry that Prince Metternich indirectly 
made from Marshal von Wrede, if Bavaria should be disposed to 
ally herself with France and Austria, the military situation of the 

VOL. II. 5 


258 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


two parties was mooted, and it was acknowledged that the mili- 
tary position of the powers of the south of Europe was greatly 
superior to those of the north, and that an offensive operation, 
made by the outlets of Franconia on the Elbe, would cut off the 
Prussian armies from their troops on the Rhine, and from a great 
portion of their resources. 

Austria displayed anxiety concerning the Neapolitan armies 
and the agitation of Italy, where she fears lest Bonaparte should 
prepare an uprising. 

Murat had proposed an alliance to Bavaria, who refused, but 
if events should lead to war, it would be necessary to carry an 
army corps into Sicily to engage the attention of Murat. Spain 
being entrusted with that operation, the French contingent need 
not be very large. 

Austria has at present nearly three hundred thousand men 
under arms, and, from sufficiently reliable data, these forces are 
distributed as follows :— 

80,000 men in Bohemia; 90,000 in Moravia and Hungary ; 
36,000 in Galicia ; 20,000 in Transylvania; 30,000 in Austria ; 
50,000 in Italy. 

Russia may have as many troops. Here is the list of them: 

50,000 men in Holstein; 80,000 in Saxony: 150,000 in Poland. 

Prussia 150,000, of which 50,000 on the lower Rhine, amongst 
whom 15,000 Saxons, whose chief, General Thielmann,! has 
taken the side opposed to his former sovereigns and would 
prove unfaithful—he is not to be relied on. 

What would seem to prove that the Czar of Russia does not 
believe in terminating affairs this year, is, that he has delayed 
the ratification of the treaty with Denmark and Sweden *—of 
which he is to be the voucher, and that he has not given orders 
to withdraw his army which occupies and ruins Holstein. The 
King of Denmark has failed to obtain anything in that respect. 

Be pleased, to accepts -yer 


No. 6.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 


Louis XVIII. 
VIENNA, Oct. 17, 1814. 


SIRE, 
I received the letter with which your Majesty has deigned 


1 Johan-Adolfus, Baron von Thielmann, born at Dresden in 1765, took, though a 
Saxon, service in the Prussian army, fought against France the campaigns of 1792- 
1795, and 1806. Appointed a general in 1809, he re-entered the service of Saxony, 
whose cavalry he commanded during the campaign of Russia. In 1813, he joined 
the allies and took the command of a body of partisans. In 1815, he again took 
service, and was in command of a Prussian division at Ligny. He died in 1824. 

2 The treaty of peace between Russia and Denmark, signed at Hanover, 
February 8, 1814. Article 6 of this treaty decided that the Russian troops could not 
levy any contribution on Holstein. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 259 


to honour me. I am happy to find that the line of conduct that 
I have followed tallies with the intentions that your Majesty 
is good enough to express to me. I shall exert every effort 
never to depart from them. 

I have to acquaint your Majesty with the state of affairs 
since my last letter. 

Lord Castlereagh, wishing to bring a new effort to bear upon 
the mind of the Czar Alexander, so as to induce him to relinquish 
his ideas on Poland, which disturb and lead to upset every- 
thing, had requested an audience from him. The Czar wished 
to make a sort of mystery of it, and paid him the honour of 
going to his house, and, knowing well what subject Lord Castle- 
reagh wished to discuss, he himself entered upon the matter by 
complaining of the opposition that he found to his views. He 
did not, nor could not, understand how France and England 
could be opposed to the restoration of a kingdom of Poland. 
Such restoration, he said, would be an atonement for the breach 
of public morality that the division had outraged—a sort of 
expiation. In truth, to entirely restore Poland was now out of 
question, but nothing would prevent that being done one day, if 
Europe desired it. For the present it would be premature: the 
country itself had need of being prepared for it ; it could not be 
so better than by the erection of a kingdom formed of a portion 
only of Poland, to which could be given institutions of a nature 
likely to promote the rise and progress of all the principles of 
civilization, that would spread through the entire nation when 
once it had been deemed advisable to restore unity to it. The 
execution of his plan was to involve sacrifices only for himself 
since the new kingdom would be formed only of portions of 
Poland over which conquest gave him incontestable rights, and 
to which he would moreover add those that he had acquired 
previous to the last war, and since the division (Byalistock and 
Tarnopol). No one could thus complain of his wishing to make 
those sacrifices ; he made them with pleasure, for conscience’ sake, 
to console an unhappy nation, to advance civilization ; he staked 
his honour and reputation on it. Lord Castlereagh, who had all his 
arguments ready, deduced them in a conversation that was very 
long, but without persuading or convincing the Czar Alexander, 
who retired, leaving Lord Castlereagh indeed very little satisfied 
with his intentions ; but as the Czar did not consider himself de- 
feated, he put his arguments into writing, and presented them the 
same evening to His Majesty, under the title of Memoranda. 

After giving me, in a very long conversation, the preceding de- 
tails, Lord Castlereagh gave me this document to read, at which, 
by the way, Prince Metternich, on hearing of it, testified a surprise 

S 2 


260 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


that he would not have shown, had there not been among the 
ministers of the four courts a general determination not to com- 
municate to the others what they were severally doing. 

The memorandum commences by reproducing the articles of 
the treaties concluded by the allies in 1813, which decided that: 
Poland should remain divided between the three powers in propor- 
tions that they shall amicably agree upon, without the interference 
of France. (Lord Castlereagh hastened to tell me that this 
referred to the France of 1813, and not to the France of to-day.) 
It then reports, word for word, the discourses held, promises 
made, and assurances given, by the Emperor Alexander at 
different epochs, in different places, especially at Paris 
which are all in direct opposition to the policy that he is now 
pursuing. This is succeeded by the enumeration of services 
rendered by England to the Emperor Alexander. 

To secure him the undisturbed possession of Finland, she 
agreed to bring Norway under the dominion of Sweden ;! by so 
doing, making a sacrifice of her own wishes, perhaps even of her 
interests as well. 

By her mediation she had obtained for him concessions from 
the Ottoman Porte and other advantages ;? and from Persia, 
the cession of a considerable portion of territory.* She believes 
herself therefore to have the right to speak to the Czar Alex- 
ander with more frankness than the other powers, who do not 
happen to have rendered him the same services. 

Passing thence to the examination of the actual policy 
of the emperor, Lord Castlereagh declared that the entire 
restoration of Poland as a completely independent state 
would obtain the assent of everybody; but that to create a 
kingdom out of a fourth of Poland, would be but to create 
regrets for the three other fourths, and just cause for anxiety 
for those who might be possessed of any portion of it whatever, 
and who, from the moment that there existed a kingdom of 
Poland, could no longer count for a single moment on the 
fidelity of their subjects ; that thus, instead of a focus of civiliza- 
tion, they would only have established one of insurrection and 
trouble, whereas peace and tranquillity are the"wish, as they are 
the need, of all. While admitting that conquest has given certain 


1 Norway, before 1814, belonged to Denmark. Now Denmark had, in 1813, an 
alliance concluded with Napoleon, by which the latter was to give her certain subsi- 
dies, whereas Sweden had taken the part of the allies, and had signed with England 
a treaty (March 3, 1813). Sweden thereupon invaded Norway. The treaty of August 
14, 1814, suspended hostilities, and on the 4th of the following November, the 
Norwegian Diet proclaimed the King of Sweden, King of Norway. 

2 Peace of Bucharest in 1812, by which Turkey ceded to Russia Bessarabia and a 
part of Moldavia, and recognized the Russian protectorate over Wallachia. 

3 Treaty of Peace between Russia and Persia (October 12, 1813). 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 261 


rights to the emperor, it maintains that the limits of those rights 
is that line that cannot be passed without trespassing on the 
security of his neighbours. It conjures him by all he holds 
dear, by his humanity, by his reputation, not to go beyond it, 
and concludes by saying that it entreats him to weigh, all the 
more carefully, all the reflections that are being submitted to 
him, that should he persist in his views, England would regret to 
find herself unable to assent to them. 

The Czar Alexander has not yet replied. 

Lord Castlereagh’s attitude is as good in the question of 
Poland as it is bad in that of Saxony. He speaks of nothing 
but treason ; of the necessity of an example. Principles do not 
appear to be his forte. Count von Miinster, whose health is 
improving, has tried to convince him that the equilibrium, 
perhaps even'the very existence, of Germany depended upon 
the preservation of Saxony ; but all he succeeded in effecting 
was to raise in him some doubts. However, he has promised me, 
not to pronounce himself of the same opinion as ourselves on 
this question (he seems indeed to have, with regard to that, 
engagements with the Prussians, that bind him), but at least to 
offer no objections. 

His attitude towards the Emperor Alexander has been 
assumed, not only by the advice, but even at the request of 
Prince Metternich. I should not have doubted it, had neither 
the one nor the other told me of it. Austria foresees all the 
consequences of Russia’s projects, but, not daring to come 
forward herself, she has made England do so. 

If the Czar Alexander persists, Austria, having too great an 
interest in not giving way, will not, I believe, give way, but her 
timidity will cause her to protract thingsindefinitely. This reso- 
lution, however, offers dangers that become daily greater, that 
might become very serious, and to which I must all the more 
call the attention of your Majesty, that their cause might pro- 
long itself far beyond the present time, in such a manner, as 
even to demand all your attention for the rest of your reign. 

The seeds of revolution are sown broadcast in Germany. 
Jacobinism predominates there, not, as in France twenty years 
ago in the middle and lower classes, but among the highest and 
wealthiest nobility ; a difference sufficiently great to make it 
impossible to estimate the progress of a revolution, should one 
break out there, by that of our own. The men whom the dis- 
solution of the German Empire, and the Act of the Confeder- 
ation of the Rhine have reduced from the rank of petty 
sovereigns to that of subjects, impatiently submitting to masters 
whose equals they were, or believed themselves to be, aim 


262 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


at changing an order of things, at which their pride revolts, 
and at replacing all the governments of that country by a 
single one. With these, university men and the youth imbued 
with their theories conspire, as well as those who attribute to the 
division of Germany into small states, the calamities rained 
upon her by so many wars of which she has been the continual 
scene. German unity—that is their cry, their doctrine, their 
religion, carried even to fanaticism, and this fanaticism is. shared 
even by princes actually reigning. Now this unity, from which 
France had nothing to fear when she possessed. the left bank 
of the Rhine and Belgium, would now be a serious question for 
her. Besides, who could predict the consequences. of the even- 
tual outbreak of a mass like Germany, when her heterogeneous 
parts bestir and blend themselves as a whole? Who knows. 
where the impulse thus given would stop? The present position 
of Germany, of which a great portion does not in the least know 
who is to be her master, the military pursuits, the vexations 
ordinarily attendant upon them, the fresh sacrifices demanded, 
after so many previous sacrifices, the present wrongs, the un- 
certainty of the future, all these favour a possible change in her 
political condition. It is but too evident that if the congress 
adjourns, if it decides nothing, it will aggravate this state of 
things, and it is greatly to be feared, that in aggravating it, 
the result will be an upheaval. It is therefore most urgent 
that it should accelerate and conclude its labours. But how 
conclude? By granting what Russia and Prussia demand? 
Neither the safety nor the honour of Europe permit it. By 
opposing force to force ? It would require for that, that Austria, 
who has, I believe, the desire, should also have the will. She 
has immense forces under arms; but fears an uprising in Italy, 
and dares not match herself alone against Russia and Prussia. 
She can rely upon Bavaria, who declares her intentions quite 
frankly, and has offered her fifty thousand men to defend 
Saxony: Wurtemberg would furnish her ten thousand: other 
German States would join her, but that does not sufficiently 
reassure her. She would like to be able to count upon our aid, 
and does not believe she can do so. The Prussians have spread 
the report that your Majesty’s ministers have received double 
instructions, which prescribe for them, the one the language 
that they are to adopt, the others, that they are to promise 
nothing. Prince Metternich heard Marshal von Wrede tell him 
that this was his own impression. One of his most intimate 
acquaintances said a few days ago to M. de Dalberg, “ Your 
legation speaks very cleverly, but you will not act, and we 
shall not act alone.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 263 


Your Majesty will easily believe that I like and desire war 
no more than yourself. But in my opinion, it would suffice to 
show our readiness for it, and there would be no need to wage 
it. It is my opinion again, that the fear of war should not 
prevail over that of a greater evil which war alone could 
prevent. 

I cannot believe that Russia and Prussia would run the risk 
of a war against Austria, France, Sardinia, Bavaria, and a large 
portion of Germany ; or if they had no fear of doing so, so much 
the more unlikely is it that they would recede before Austria 
alone, supposing, what is not the fact, that she would engage 
in the struggle alone. 

Thus Austria deprived of our support, would have no other 
resource than either to postpone the congress indefinitely, or to 
dissolve it, which would open up the way for revolutions ; or, to 
yield and consent to what your Majesty has resolved never to 
sanction. 

In that case, no other course would remain for your Majesty’s 
ministers but to retire from the congress, reconciling our- 
selves to getting nothing of what you most desire. Nevertheless 
the state of things which would thus be established in Europe 
would render inevitable in a very few years the war we now 
sought to avoid, and we might then find ourselves in a situation 
in which we should have less means of waging it. 

I believe it not only possible, but probable, that if the 
reply of the Czar Alexander should leave no hope of seeing 
him yield to persuasion, Prince Metternich will ask me if, and to 
what extent, Austria can count upon our co-operation. 

The instructions which your Majesty has given state, that 
the dominion of Russia over all Poland would threaten Europe 
with so great dangers, that, if it could not be removed, except 
by force of arms, resort must be had to them without hesitation, 
which, I think, may authorize me to promise in general terms, 
and for this cause alone, the help of your Majesty’s troops. 

But in order to reply positively to a definite demand, and 
and to promise determinate help, I need special authorization 
and instructions. I take the liberty of begging your Majesty to 
grant me them, and to be assured that I shall make use of them 
only in cases of manifest and extreme necessity. But I persist 
in believing that the case I am presupposing will not present 
itself. 

In order, however, to be ready for any emergency, I ask 
your Majesty to deign to honour me, as speedily as possible, 
with your orders. 

Since the declaration that I have had the honour of sending 


264 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


to your Majesty, the ministers of the eight powers have not 
met. 

A commission composed of Austrian, Prussian, Bavarian, 
Wiirtembergese, and Hanoverian ministers are working at the 
federal constitution of Germany. They have already held a 
conference. It is doubtful, considering the diversity of the 
interests of those whom they represent, and of their individual 
characters, whether they will arrive at an agreement. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


No. 7.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, Oct. 19, 1814. 

SIRE, 

Count de Labrador, for having expressed the same opinion 
as myself in the conferences to which we have both been sum- 
moned, and perhaps also for having come rather frequently to my 
house, where Lord Castlereagh found him once, was subjected 
to the keenest reproaches by the ministers of the four courts. 
They taunted him with having deserted them, with deserting 
the men to whom Spain is indebted for the recovery of her 
independence, and, what is most worthy of remark, it was Prince 
Metternich who displayed most violence in the matter. Not- 
withstanding this Count de Labrador has not altered his 
opinion, but has thought it advisable to call on me less 
frequently than he formerly did. From this, can be seen 
how far ministers, less independent by their position or per- 
sonal character are, or believe themselves, free to entertain 
close relations with your Majesty’s legation. 

The five ministers who met to examine the federal constitu- 
tion have been required to give their word of honour that they 
would abstain from communicating to any one whatsoever 
the proposals that might be laid before them. It is especially 
against the legation of France that this rather useless precaution 
has been taken. Having failed to induce her to play in the 
negotiations the part they had intended her to take, they now 
seek to isolate her. 

A ray of light has nevertheless pierced the darkness, with 
which it is sought to surround her, and which it is intended to 
thicken as time wears on. Perhaps we hold the thread that 
is to guide us through the maze of intrigue in which it was, at 
first, hoped we should lose our way. This is what we have 
learned from a man whose position enables him to be well 
informed. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 265 


The four courts have not ceased to be allied, in this sense 
that, the sentiments which animated them during the war have 
outlived hostilities, and that they display, in the arrangements of 
Europe, a spirit similar to that in which they fought. Their 
intention was to proceed alone with these arrangements. But 
they saw that the only means of imparting a certain character 
of legitimacy to them was to have them invested with some 
sanction or other. That is why the congress has been called 
together. They would have liked to exclude France from 
it, but could not do so after the fortunate change for the 
better that has taken place in our country, and from this point 
of view that change has displeased them. At all events, they 
had flattered themselves that France, being for a long time to 
come solely engaged with her internal difficulties, would attend 
the congress only for the sake of form. Seeing that she pre- 
sented herself with principles that they could not oppose, and 
were yet unwilling to follow, they have made up their mind 
to put her aside de facto, without excluding her, and to con- 
centrate all power in their own hands, in order to proceed 
without hindrance in the execution of their plan. This plan 
is, in the main, but that of England. It is she that is the 
soul of everything. Her want of regard for principles is not 
surprising: her interests constitute her principles. Her aim 
is simple. She is anxious to preserve her naval superiority, 
and, with that, the trade of the world. To effect this, she 
wants the French navy never to become strong enough to 
cause her any fear, either combined with others, or alone. She 
has already taken care to isolate France from the other naval 
powers, by the treaties she has imposed on them. The restoration 
of the house of Bourbon having caused her to fear the renewal of 
the “Family Compact,’! she hastened to conclude with Spain the 
treaty of July 5th, whereby that power bound herself never to 
renew that compact. She has stillso to situate France, as a conti- 
nental power, that she may be able to devote only a very small 
portion of her forces to naval service. With this object in view, 
she seeks to unite Austria and Prussia, rendering the latter as 
strong as possible,and setting them both up as the rivals of France. 
It is to carry out this plan that Lord Stewart was appointed 
ambassador to Vienna. His sympathies are entirely Prussian ; 
that is the reason why he was chosen. Care will likewise be 
taken to appoint in Berlin aman whose sympathies lean towards 
Austria. Nothing would strengthen Prussia more than to give 


1 The ‘‘ Family Compact,” a treaty concluded August, 1761, between France 
and Spain, and by which all the branchcs of the House of Bourbon mutually agreed 
to assist one another.—( 7rans/ator.) 


266 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


her Saxony; that is why England wishes that country to be 
sacrificed, and given to Prussia. Lord Castlereagh and Mr. 
Cook? are so determined on this point, that they are bold 
enough to say that the sacrifice of Saxony without any abdica- 
tion, without any cession on the part of her king, would not 
offend principles. Austria ought naturally to discard such a 
doctrine. Justice, propriety, her security even, everything urges 
her to do so, How has her resistance been overcome? Nothing 
was easier. She has been confronted with two difficulties, 
one of which she was helped to surmount, on the condition 
that she would give way on.the other. The Emperor of 
Russia very opportunely expresses the desire to have the whole 
duchy of Warsaw, and to form what can but be the shadow 
of the kingdom of Poland. Lord Castlereagh is opposed to 
this project, and is drawing up a memorandum that he will 
produce before his parliament, in order to make his country- 
men believe that he experienced so much trouble in arranging 
the affairs of Poland, that he cannot be blamed for not having 
saved Saxony, and, as the reward of his exertions, he urges 
Austria to consent to the partition of that kingdom. Who 
knows but that the desire of forming a sham kingdom of Poland 
was not suggested to the Emperor Alexander by the very men 
who are opposed to it, or who knows if this desire be sincere ? 
Whether the emperor, in order to make himself agreeable to 
the Poles, has not made them promises which he would be very 
sorry to keep? Whether the resistance offered him is not 
what he most wishes, and whether he would not be very much 
puzzled if people assented to what seems to be his wish? Be 
this as it may, Prince Metternich, who prides himself on 
giving the impulse to everything, himself receives the impulse 
in this case, and, without being aware of it, is the sport of 
the intrigues he thinks he is plotting, and is being deceived 
like a child. 

Although I cannot vouch for the exact truth of the fore- 
going particulars, I must say that they do not seem to me at all 
improbable. 

A few days ago, certain persons, whom Prince Metternich 
is in the habit of consulting, were summoned by him. They 
all were of the opinion that Saxony should not be abandoned. 
Nothing was concluded, and the evening before last I learned 


1 Edward Cook, or Cooke, an English statesman, was at first chief clerk of the 
Irish House of Commons, then secretary of the War Office in that country, and member 
of Parliament. He promoted, by his writings, the union of the English and Irish 
Parliaments, was afterwards appointed Home and Foreign Secretary of State by Lord 
Castlereagh, whom he accompanied to the Congress of Vienna as plenipotentiary. 
He retired from public life in 1817, and died in 1820. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 267 


from a reliable source that Prince Metternich, personally, had 
abandoned Saxony, but that the Austrian Emperor was still 
hesitating. 

One of the commissioners for the drawing up of the federal 
constitution said that the proposals made to them were made 
on the supposition that Saxony no longer existed. 

Yesterday was entirely devoted to two fétes: one of which 
was a military one, commemorative of the battle of Leipzig: 
the legation of your Majesty could not attend it; I was 
present at the other, which was given by Prince Metternich, in 
honour of the peace. I was anxious to find an opportunity of 
saying a word to the Emperor of Austria. I was not fortunate 
enough todo so. I had been more fortunate at the preceding 
ball, when I had been able to say to him, on the questions at 
issue, a few words calculated to produce some effect on his mind ; 
he seemed then to me to quite share the views I expressed. 
Lord Castlereagh talked with him for nearly twenty minutes, 
and I have been told that Saxony was the subject of the 
conversation. 

The arrangement that would give this country to Prussia, 
would be considered in Austria, even by the members of the 
cabinet, as a misfortune for the Austrian monarchy, and in 
Germany asacalamity. It would there be looked upon as an 
infallible indication that, sooner or later, Germany was doomed 
to be divided as Poland was. 

The King of Bavaria again yesterday, ordered his minister 
to take new steps in favour of Saxony, and said to him: “ That 
project is most unjust, and quite upsets me.” 

If Austria wishes to preserve Saxony for herself, it is probable 
that she will, at any rate, secure our co-operation, and, in order 
to be in a position to give an affirmative reply to any request of 
that nature, I have begged your Majesty to honour me with 
your orders. At the same time, as I have had the honour of 
informing your Majesty, I hold it for certain that Russia and 
Prussia will not open hostilities. 

Should Austria yield without having asked for our support, it 
would be because she had decided to dispense with it. She would 
thus take from your Majesty all hope of saving Saxony, but 
she could not deprive you of the glory of defending the principles 
that constitute the security of every throne. 

Besides, so long as Austria has not definitely yielded, I will 
not despair, and I even believe I have found a means which, 
though it may not prevent the sacrifice of Saxony, will, at least 
perplex those who wish for it: it is to inform the Emperor of 
Russia that we do not object to his possessing, under any 


268 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


denomination + whatever, the portion of Poland that may fall to 
his share, provided that does not extend his frontiers in such 
a way as to disturb his neighbours, and provided, at the same 
time, Saxony be preserved as an independent kingdom. 

If the emperor has no real wish to make a kingdom of 
Poland, and merely seeks for an excuse to give to the Poles, 
this declaration of ours will cross his projects. He will not be 
able to tell the Poles, nor will they believe, that France gg 
opposed to the accomplishment of their dearest wishes. In 
his turn, Lord Castlereagh will be puzzled to explain to parlia- 
ment how he could have objected to what is desired by many 
people in England, when France did not object to it. 

If,on the other hand, the Emperor Alexander really holds 
to the idea of this kingdom of Poland, the consent of France 
would be one more reason for him to persist in it; Austria, 
being thus again confronted by the difficulty from which she 
had thought to have extricated herself by abandoning Saxony, 
will be forced to reconsider her decision, and be brought over 
to us. 

In no case can this declaration do us harm. What is im- 

portant to us is, that Russia have as small a portion of Poland 
as possible, and that Saxony be saved. It is of less import- 
ance to us, or rather it is of no importance at all, whether 
Russia gain possession in one way or another of that which ought 
to be hers, and which she ought to possess. That is a matter that 
concerns Austria alone. Therefore when she sacrifices un- 
necessarily what she knows to be of interest to us, and that in 
which she ought to feel far more interest herself, why should we 
hesitate to replace her in the situation from which she sought to 
extricate herself, especially when it depends upon her to settle at 
once both her difficulties and our own; and when for that she 
needs only to march hand in hand with us. 
' I am informed that, within the last few days, the Emperor 
Alexander repeatedly expressed the intention of sending for 
me. If he does sd, I shall try the plan I have just had the 
honour of submitting to your Majesty. 

General Pozzo, who has been here for some days, speaks of 
France in a most becoming manner. 

The Elector of Hanover, who can no longer bear that title, 
since there is no longer a German Empire, or an emperor elect, 
and being unwilling to rank below the sovereign of Wurtem- 
berg, over whom he formerly took precedence, has just assumed 
the title of king. Count von Miinster (who has nearly recovered 


1 Text: ..., ‘‘sous quelque dénomination ” (under any denomination whatever.) 
Var. : ‘‘sous quelque domination” (under any v2#/e whatever). 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 269 


from the effects of his fall) has notified this decision of his 
sovereign. 

Before replying to him and recognizing the new title assumed 
by his master, I await the authorization which your Majesty will 
no doubt think advisable to give me. 

I have the honour to be... .. 


No. 7A—THE KING’S AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS 
TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, October 20, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

In one of our preceding despatches we had the honour 
of informing you that the four allied powers, conformably 
to their arrangements, continue to follow a system of con- 
venience, agreed upon for the case in which Bonaparte should 
have remained on the throne of France; that they ignore 
the restoration of the House of Bourbon, which changes 
the state of Europe, and which should have necessitated 
the restoration of the system existing in 1792. But as the 
might of France still alarms them, it is with a singular blind- 
ness that Prince Metternich continues to second the projects 
of the three powers; that he facilitates for Russia the means 
fo taking possession of the duchy of Warsaw, for Prussia, the 
occupation of Saxony, and for England, the exercise of the most 
absolute influence over what was and may still be called, 
the coalition. This state of things produces a very strange effect ; 
all the friends of the Austrian monarchy are favourably disposed. 
towards us; on the other hand, the friends of the ministry, 
assume a hostile attitude. 

There has been no other conference after that of which we 
have had the honour of informing you. The ministers of the 
four powers meet together, talk, project, change, and nothing is 
finished. Nevertheless the moment of decision approaches. 
We are strictly informed of all the minor political movements, 
though they have given their word of honour to each other to 
inform us of none of their intentions. 

The policy of the powers arises from the consternation in 
which they still are. They wish to execute the engagement 
made on the 13th of June, 1813, and to finish the affairs of 
Poland, without France interfering. Their aim is finally to isolate 
France, and they repent of the peace which they have signed. 

The effects of the English policy are to be seen everywhere. 
Again alarmed at the effect that the continental policy has 
produced on England, the English ministers wish, that in the 


. 


270 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


north, and on the Baltic, there should be powers strong enough 
to prevent France from being able at any time to fetter the com- 
merce of England with the interior of the Continent. For this 
reason, they lend themselves to all that Prussia demands, and 
support her pretensions with all their power. 

This combination resulted in the aggrandizement of Holland 
by the Low Countries, as well as in that of Hanover and of 
Prussia. It is in the same spirit that England has exacted that 
Spain should never renew the stipulations of the “Family 
Compact.” She fears lest the king should, by means of alliances 
add fresh power to that already possessed by France. This 
negotiation was the object of the hurried journey of Lord 
Wellington from Paris to Madrid. 

Lord Castlereagh further proves by this same policy that 
he knows how to judge, neither the situation of the Continent, 
nor that of France; and that he does not see that they have 
both been the victims of this policy, and would fear it more than 
England herself. 

In this state of things, situated between passions on the one 
side, and the ambition of the powers on the other, the king’s 
ministers have to sustain with the greatest firmness the conserva- 
tive principles of the law of nations, not to stoop to any com- 
placency which may overthrow these principles, to oppose to 
this act of violence all the dignity and calmness possible, and 
then await until reason and time enlighten the different powers 
as to their real interests. 

At a ball given yesterday by Prince Metternich, Count 
von Schulenburg went up to Marshal von Wrede, and asked 
him what he could tell him regarding Saxony. The marshal 
replied: “Go up to the master of this house, and see if he dares 
raise his eyes to you.” 

At that same ball, the King of Bavaria asked Count de 
Labrador if he ever saw Prince Talleyrand. 

The Spanish minister said “ Yes.” 

“T should like to see him, too,” said the King, “but I dare 
not. At any rate, I give you my word of honour that I am a 
devoted friend of the House of Bourbon.” 

We wait until these feelings shall be notified officially to us 
to explain ourselves; and we shall, while waiting, lose no 
opportunity of repeating, that this disregard of all moderation 
prolongs the revolution, and must necessarily lead to fresh 
agitations. Time will enlighten us as to the final decisions we 
shall have to take. 

The king must now be convinced, that the policy he has 
adopted, which he has outlined in his instructions, and from 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 271 


which we swerve in nothing, assures him the consideration and 
the gratitude of all those who are not blinded by passions and 
a most fatal delusion. 

Be pleased to accept .... 


No. 38B.—KING LouIsS XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 
PARIS, October 21, 1814. 

My CousIN, 

I have received your reports numbered 4 and 5. 

The most certain proof that that of October Ist was good 
is, that it displeased the plenipotentiaries of the formerly allied 
courts, and that it has, at the same time, compelled them in 
some measure to retrace their steps; but we shall not go to 
sleep on this success. The existence of the league you spoke 
of in your No. 4, has been unveiled to me, as well as the deter- 
mination to revenge on France the humiliations to which the 
Directory, and far more, Buonaparte,! have subjected Europe. I 
shall never allow myself to be reduced to such a point as that ; 
therefore I strongly favour the idea of the declaration, and wish 
you to send me a draft of it at your earliest convenience. But 
this is not all ; you must prove the existence of purposes behind 
those which they reveal, and, for this, it seems to me to be neces- 
sary to make preparations for putting the army, if need be, on a 
footing of greater efficiency than it is at present. 

I will certainly get M. de Jaucourt to write the letter you 
require ; but, between ourselves, I would go beyond the stipula- 
tions of April 11,? if the excellent idea of the Azores were put 
into execution. 

I shall be quite satisfied if they give Parma, Piacenza, 
and Guastalla to the young prince® It is his patrimony. 
Tuscany was a territory that was hardly acquired justly. 

The unfortunate Gustavus IV.4 has announced his intention 
of coming here in a few days. If it is spoken of in Vienna, you 
might boidly assert that this journey conceals no political 

1 Var. : ‘‘ Bonaparte.” 

2 The treaty of April 11, which determines the destination of Napoleon, and certain 
members of his family. 

3 The young King of Etruria, son of the late Duke of Parma, dispossessed of 
Parma in 1801, as he was of Tuscany, in 1807. 

* Gustavus IV., King of Sweden, son of Gustavus III., born in 1778, succeeded 
his father in 1792, under the tutelage of his uncle, the Duke de Sudermania. Conquered 
by Russia and France, having made his nobles and people discontented, he excited a 
revolution and abdicated in 1809. The Diet sent him into perpetual exile, and pro- 
claimed the Duke of Sudermania king, under the title of Charles XIII. As to 


King Gustavus, he lived henceforth in foreign lands under the title of Colonel Gus- 
tavson, and died in 1837. 


* 


pf THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


stipulation, but that my door shall never be closed to him who 
always opened his to me. ; 
I shall not close this letter without expressing to you my 
satisfaction at your conduct ; whereupon I pray God, my cousin, 
that He may always have you in His safe and holy keeping. 
LoulIs. 


No. 1.—ITHE COMTE DE BLACAS D’AULPS TO THE PRINCE 
DE TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, October 21, 1814. 


M. de Jaucourt doubtless informs your Highness of the 
arrival of Mina! at Paris, of his arrest, of the quite inconceiv- 
able conduct of the Spanish chargé @affaires,? or to express 
it better, of him who takes that title, and of the measure that 
has been adopted in consequence. 

For the rest, I have nothing new or special to acquaint Your 
Highness with to-day ; but I would not close this letter without 
remembering myself to you and expressing anew the most 
sincere assurances of my most szzcere attachment. 

BLACAS. 


No. 8A—THE KING’s AMBASSADORS AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, October 24, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 
Prospects have not improved. Since our last despatch all 
is intrigue, mystery, and incoherence, in the general policy. 
The Emperor of Russia persists in occupying the grand 
duchy of Warsaw. He will only give up a few portions of it, 
and pretends to be regenerating Poland in it. 
Prussia persists in retrieving her losses by the incorporation 
of Saxony. The Emperor of Russia announces that he has 
consented to it. He declares that he has entered into a 
personal engagement with the King of Prussia about it. 
Austria offers but a weak resistance ; she proceeds cautiously, 
seeking to gain time to strengthen herself against the bad im- 
pression that this act of injustice is producing on men’s minds. 
1 A celebrated partisan chief during the war of independence in Spain, who, 
after the ‘restoration of Ferdinand VII., had been obliged to flee from Spain and 
had taken refuge in Paris. 
2 The Marquis de Casa Florés, who on his own authority alone, had had Mina 
arrested and kept him imprisoned athis residence. The French government obliged 


the marquis to set his prisoner at liberty, and ordered Casa Flores to quit 
Paris immediately. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 273 


She does not yet make overtures to us, and believes the case 
lost, though still wishing to connect it to the discussion 
which is to take place on the delimitation of boundaries in 
Poland. 

The only good faith England has shown is in seeking to 
obtain for Prussia all that this power demands. Prussia is to 
become the guarantee for all English relations with Germany 
which tend towards an intimate union between Austria and 
Prussia ; England would add to these Hanover and Holland. 

The 1st of November is drawing near, and nothing will 
have been decided. No conference has taken place. People 
wonder whether the congress will be opened at all, or whether 
before it sits, Europe will know the causes which have delayed 
it. Several ministers are of opinion that it would be preferable 
to dissolve it for the time being, and then to summon it again 
when greater readiness shall be shown to shed light upon the 
true needs of Europe. 

Prince Metternich has replied to the note of the Prussian 
ministers demanding Saxony, to make up the ten millions of 
population which composed the Prussian monarchy of 1805. 
This reply decides nothing, and agrees to nothing. It rather 
discusses, and leads to the idea that the question of Saxony 
cannot be treated in an isolated fashion, and must be mooted 
with the arrangements to be made for the new limits of Poland. 

In this state of things, Prussia will temporarily occupy 
Saxony with her armies, and this concession on the part of the 
Court of Vienna, is already very unfortunate. It leaves Russia 
the opportunity of doing as she likes in the duchy of Warsaw, 
and furnishes Prussia with means for strengthening her position 
in Saxony. 

It will be seen that the calculations made as to the character 
of the Emperor of Russia, and the King of Prussia, are at fault; 
and we fear that false ideas of glory and camaradervze, if one may 
thus express oneself, will render them deaf to all remonstrances ; 
that England will applaud them, because she finds these projects 
in accordance with her own interests, and that Austria will be 
found unwilling to run the risks of another war. 

Prince Metternich, in order to cloak his shame a little, makes 
a great deal of the advantage gained in the Russian armies 
leaving Germany ; and does not see that they are concentrating 
themselves at a short distance from the Oder, and that sixty 
thousand men are still in Holstein. Lord Castlereagh, on his 
part, is only alarmed by the idea of not seeing his projects exe- 
cuted to such an extent as he had hoped. His only desire is to 
try and moderate the pretensions which the Emperor of Russia 


VOL. II. A 


274 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


has on the duchy of Warsaw ; but he protests that the good 
faith he is compelled to put into his communications with 
Prussia does not allow him to oppose her keeping Saxony for 
her own aggrandisement. 

We are therefore persuaded that the religion professed by the 
King of Saxony and his family+ influences the arrangements of 
England, and that she is only too glad to see this country fall 
back into the hands of Protestant princes. This observation is 
confirmed by the habitual language of the English embassy. 

Prince Talleyrand had an interview with the Emperor of 
Russia yesterday, which has produced no satisfactory result, 
and which has confirmed the fears that we had that this prince 
is running blindly into principles of expediency and ambition, 
such as must needs alarm Europe. Before his departure for 
Hungary, where he was to stay four days, he had a conversation 
with the Prince Metternich, in which he expressed his views 
in the most unbecoming manner. 

It may now be wondered what means are at our disposal for 
opposing the disorder which is threatening us anew, since Eng- 
land and Austria will not second our efforts? Lord Castlereagh 
admits now that he had presumed too much of his influence 
over the Emperor of Russia, that he regretted not having opposed 
all Europe to him, united, as had been proposed at Paris, and that 
this means might yet be tried. If it proved barren of result, as 
we ourselves think, it will still be easy for the king to sanction 
nothing; and this will be the last step to be taken, if no other 
means present itself of modifying this state of affairs. 

The conferences for the arrangement of German affairs con- 
tinue. There has been a contest between the King of Wurtem- 
berg, and the new King of Hanover, for precedence ; and the 
question as to who will be head of the new Germanic league, 
has not yet been decided. 

The court of Vienna might not be opposed to the idea of its 
sovereign reassuming the German imperial dignity, provided it 
were agreed that that dignity should be made hereditary to the 
throne of Austria. England would apparently second the idea, 
and Prince Metternich seeks here perhaps a means of gaining 
consideration for his policy, and. covering its weakness. In 
doing so, he follows the mistakes of Count von Cobenzl, who, 
when his sovereign abandoned the title of Emperor of Germany, 
consoled him and his country, by stipulating that it be replaced: 
by that of Emperor of Austria. 

In one of the conferences the Prussian ministers proposed 


1 The younger branch of the house of Saxony, that is the royal branch, was 
Catholic. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 275 
and carried that, for the security of the German league, the 
confederate states should forego the right of legation and of 
making war and peace. The Bavarian ministers are sternly 
opposed to this policy, which reduces the states to the position 
of simple vassals of Prussia. 

Be pleased to accept... . 


No. 8.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING LOUIS. 
ANIL. 


VIENNA, October 25, 1814. 
SIRE, 
I was much pleased to receive the letter dated October 
14, with which your Majesty deigned to honour me. It has 
strengthened and consoled me. Your Majesty will see by the 
account of an interview with the Emperor Alexander, held two 
hours before the arrival of the messenger, how much I stood in 
need of it. 

I had, as I have had the honour of informing your Majesty, 
already heard that he had on more than one occasion expressed 
an intention of seeing me; and this intimation, coming, as it did, 
from three members of his more confidential circle, was credited 
by me as being made by his own command ; while I understood 
at the same time that he desired me to prefer a request for an 
interview myself. He had not yet replied to Lord Castlereagh. 
Instead of that, he had expressed to Austria his intention of 
withdrawing his troops from Saxony, and handing over the 
administration of that country to Prussia. The rumour ran that 
Austria had consented to this, albeit with regret. (The Prussians 
themselves had given credit to the rumour.) Finally, the 
Emperor Alexander was on the point of setting out for 
Hungary. For all these reasons I had determined to ask an 
audience, and had received notice that the emperor would see 
me the day before yesterday at 6 P.M. 

Four days ago, Prince Adam Czartoryski, for whom Poland 
constitutes the whole world, came to visit me, and excusing 
himself for not having come sooner, declared that what had 
kept him away more than anything else, was that he had heard 
that I took such a very unfriendly attitude on the Polish 
question. 

“Why, we are more friendly than any one else,” I replied ; 
“we wish her united and independent.” 

“ That would be very fine,” he answered, “ but it is a chimera ; 
the great powers would never consent to it.” 

“Then again,” I said, “ Poland is no longer the subject of 

2 


276 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


greatest interest to us in the north. The preservation ot 
Saxony is of far more importance to us. We consider this 
question as being paramount to us, while we only hold as being 
subsidiary that of Poland, when it becomes a mere question of 
boundaries. It is for Austria and Prussia to fix their frontiers.1 
We wish them to be satisfied on that point ; but, once set at ease 
as to your neighbours, we shall put no obstacle in the way of the 
Emperor of Russia’s giving what form of government he pleases 
to the country handed over to him. For our compliance in 
this respect, I ask for the preservation of the kingdom of 
Saxony.” | 

This insinuation on my part, pleased Prince Adam sufficiently 
well, to make him seek, immediately on leaving me, an interview 
with the emperor, with whom he was closeted three hours. 
The result was that Count Nesselrode, whom I had not seen 
at my residence since the first moments of my arrival, called on 
me on the morrow evening for some explanations which I gave 
him, without at the same time going beyond what I had already 
told Prince Adam, but directing all my efforts to convincing him 
that the preservation of the kingdom of Saxony was a point 
which it was impossible for your Majesty to forego. 

The emperor, thus knowing beforehand in what he could, 
and in what he could not, expect me to meet him, I reaped this 
advantage, that on his first approach I could tell his intentions, 
and judge whether his end in the conversation granted 
me, was to propose means of conciliation, or to notify his 
wishes. 

He evinced some embarrassment at seeing me. I expressed 
my regret at having only seen him once since my arrival. 

“He was formerly good enough to spare me a privation of 
this nature,” I told him, “when I had the good fortune to be in 
the same part of the world as himself.” 

His reply was that he would always be pieased to see me, 
that it was my fault if I had not seen him since; why had I not 
come? adding this singular phrase: “I ama public character, 
and can always be seen ;” whereas I must tell you that his 
ministers and most intimate servants are sometimes compelled 
to wait several days before they can see him. Then “ Let us to 
business,” he said. 


1 Text: ‘‘nous ne sommes qu’en seconde sur celle de la Pologne, quand elle 
devient une question de limites. C’est a l’Autriche et a la Prusse 4 assurer 
leurs frontiéres”—(as translated in the text). Var.: ‘‘nous ne sommes qu’en 
seconde sur celle de la Pologne. Quand elle devient une question de limites, c’est 
a l Autriche et 4 la Prusse a assurer leurs frontiéres.” ‘* We consider that of Poland 
as being subsidiary. When it becomes a question of boundaries, it is for Austria and 
Prussia to fix their own frontiers,” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 277 


I will no longer weary your Majesty with the tedious 
details of a conversation which lasted an hour and a half; 
and what will still more deprive me of any fear in limiting 
myself to what is essential, is that, however careful I may be 
in abridging what I have to tell you, as having been uttered by 
the emperor’s own lips, your Majesty will yet perhaps find it 
beyond all credence. i 

“ At Paris,’ he said, “you were for a kingdom of Poland. 
How comes it that you have changed your opinion?” 

“My opinion, sire, is still the same. At Paris, it was a 
question of the restoration of the whole of Poland. I wished 
then, as I do to-day, her independence. But we have a 
different matter in hand now. The question is limited to the 
fixing of such boundaries as may put Austria and Prussia in 
security.” 

“They need not be anxious. Besides, I have two hundred 
thousand men in the duchy of Warsaw. Let them drive me 
out if they can! I have given Saxony to Prussia ; and Austria 
consents.” 

“JT do not know that,’ I replied. “I should find it difficult 
to believe, it is so decidedly against her own interests. But 
can the consent of Austria give to Prussia what belongs to 
the King of Saxony ?” . 

“Tf the King of Saxony refuses to abdicate, he shall be 
led to Russia; where he will die. One king has already died 
there.” 1 

“Your Majesty must permit me to disbelieve it. The 
congress has not assembled to witness such an outrage.” 

“How outrage? Why? Did not Stanislas go to Russia? 
Why should not the King of Saxony go? The case of both is 
the same. There is no difference in my opinion.” 

Words failed me. I declare to your Majesty that I knew 
not how to restrain my indignation. 

The emperor continued to speak very fast ; one of his 
sentences was: “I thought France considered herself indebted 
to me. You are always speaking to me of principles. Your 
public law is nothing to me: I don’t understand all that. What 
do you think are all your parchments and treaties to me?” (I 
had reminded him of the treaty by which the allies had agreed 
that the duchy of Warsaw should be shared by the three courts.) 
There is one thing which in my eyes outweighs everything else 
—my word of honour. I have given it, and I will keep it. I 


1 Stanislas II., Poniatowski, the last King of Poland. He abdicated in the year 
1795, retired to Grodno, where he lived ona pension served by the co-dividing powers, 
and died two years afterwards at St. Petersburg. 


278 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


promised Saxony to the King of Prussia when we joined each 
other.” 

“Your Majesty has promised tothe King of Prussia from 
nine to ten million souls ; and can give them without destroying 
Saxony.” (I had a list of the countries which could be given 
to Prussia, and which, without overthrowing Saxony, would 
give her the number of subjects that the treaties had guaranteed. 
The emperor took it and kept it.) 

“The King of Saxony is a traitor.” 

“ Sire, the term traitor can never be applied to a king; and 
it is of the greatest importance that it never should be.” 

I put perhaps a little heat into the last phrase. After a 
moment’s silence, 

“The King of Prussia,” he said, “shall be King of Prussia 
and Saxony, just as I shall be Emperor of Russia and King of 
Poland. The spirit in which I shall consider all questions that 
may interest France, will depend upon that which she now shows 
me on these two points.” 

In the course of this conversation, the emperor had not, as in 
the first that I had had with him, moments of generosity and 
nobler feelings ; he was imperious, and showed traces of great 
irritation. 

After having said that he would see me again, he repaired 
to the private court ball, whither I followed him, having had the 
honour to be invited. I found Lord Castlereagh there, and 
began to chat with him, when the Emperor Alexander perceived 
us in the recess of a window and beckoned to him. He led him 
to another room, and spoke with him for about twenty minutes. 
Lord Castlereagh then returned to me. He told me that he was 
very little satisfied with what he had just heard. 

Lord Castlereagh, I cannot doubt, either formed for himself, or 
received from his government, the order to follow the plan which 
I had the honour of laying before your Majesty in my letter of 
the 19th inst. It consists in isolating France, in reducing her to 
her own strength alone by depriving her of all alliance, and by 
hindering her from getting a powerful navy. Thus, while your 
Majesty only brings to the congress views of justice and 
friendliness, England brings nothing buta spirit of jealousy and 
entirely personal interest. But Lord Castlereagh finds in the 
execution of his plan difficulties that he had not foreseen. 
Wishing to avoid the reproach of having left Europe a prey to 
Russia, he would like to detach certain powers from the latter, 
and at the same time put them in opposition with France. 
While what he would like more than all, would be that Prussia 
should become, like Holland, a power, which, with subsidies, 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 279 


England could dispose of as she pleased. But as, to accomplish 
this, Prussia must be strong, he would wish to aggrandise her, 
and have, in her eyes the merit of doing so, all to himself. 
But the ardour that the Emperor Alexander brings to the 
interests of Prussia forbids this. Lord Castlereagh’s aim is to 
unite, if possible, Prussia to Austria, and the kind of aggrandise- 
ment that he wishes to procure for Prussia, is of itself an 
obstacle to this union. He would like to break the bonds which 
exist between the King of Prussia and the Emperor Alexander, 
and seeks to form others repellent to customs, tradition, and a 
rivalry, suspended indeed, but not yet extinct, and which a 
crowd of personal interests must infallibly re-ignite. Besides, 
before uniting Prussia and Austria, he would have to protect 
the interests of this latter monarchy and provide for its safety, 
a matter obstructed, as Lord Castlereagh finds, by the preten- 
sions of Russia. 

Thus the problem which he has set himself, and which I 
hope he may never succeed in solving to the damage of France, 
at least to such an extent as he seems to wish, presents 
difficulties sufficient to stay a mightier genius than his. He him- 
self sees no obstacles save those that arise from the Emperor 
Alexander, for he does not hesitate to sacrifice Saxony. 

I therefore told Lord Castlereagh that the dilemma in which 
he found himself was the direct consequence of his conduct, and 
of that of Prince Metternich; that they had only themselves to 
thank for making the Emperor of Russia what he was ; that if 
from the beginning, instead of rejecting my proposal to convene 
the congress, they had supported it, nothing of all this would 
have happened; that they had wished to match themselves 
alone against Russia and Prussia, and they had found them- 
selves too weak: whereas, if the Emperor of Russia had from the 
first day been brought face to face with the congress, that is to 
say, with the express wish of all Europe, he would never have 
dared to hold the language that he holds to-day. Lord Castle- 
reagh admitted the truth of what I said, regretted that the 
congress had not been called together sooner, and, expressing a 
wish that it should meet as soon as possible, proposed to me to 
draw up with him a formal summons, such as could not possibly 
give cause for any objection, and should defer any difficulties 
which might arise, to be settled by the great powers. 

Herr von Zeugwitz, a Saxon officer, who has just come from 
London, and who, before his departure, had an interview with 
the Prince Regent, reports that that prince spoke to him with 
expressions of the liveliest interest of the King of Saxony, 
and said that he had ordered his ministers at the congress to 


280 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


defend conservative principles, and not to depart from them at 
all. The Prince Regent had held the same language to the 
Duke Leopold of Saxe-Coburg,! who told it to me himself two 
days ago. This leads meto think that the attitude here assumed | 
by the English mission, is diametrically opposed to the wishes 
and personal views of the Prince Regent. 

Austria has not yet consented, as the Emperor of Russia 
affirmed, to Saxony being handed over to Prussia. She has 
said on the contrary that the question of Saxony was essentially 
subordinate to that of Poland, and that she could not reply to 
the former until the latter were settled. But although she has 
spoken in her report of the cession of Saxony as infinitely 
painful and odious in all respects, she has yet allowed to appear 
too prominently a disposition to yield on this point if she were 
first satisfied on the other. 

It is even asserted that the Emperor of Austria told his 
brother-in-law, Prince Anthony (of Saxony), that the cause of 
Saxony was lost. What is certain is, that Austria consents to 
Saxony being occupied by Prussian troops, and governed in the 
interests of the King of Prussia. 

Meanwhile public opinion declares itself more and more 
each day in favour of the cause of the King of Saxony, and 
of those who defend it. It is, I think, to this that I owe the 
flattering reception which the archdukes and the Empress of 
Austria herself were so good as to give me three days ago ata 
ball at Count Zichy’s,? and the day before yesterday at the 
court ball. 

The Emperor of Austria started yesterday morning for Ofen,? 
preceding the Emperor of Russia, who started in the evening. 
He is going to weep over the tomb of his sister, the grand- 
duchess, who had been married to the archduke palatine; 
after which the ball and fétes prepared for him will engross his 
whole attention. He expects to return to Vienna on the 29th. 

As, on his departure, he left neither authority nor instructions 
with any one, nothing can be discussed, and nothing of any 
importance can well take place in his absence. 

I saw Prince Metternich this evening, who is gradually re- 
gaining a little courage, and spoke to him in the strongest terms. 
The Austrian generals, many of whom I have seen, declare 
for the preservation of Saxony. They bring forward on the 

1 The future King of the Belgians. It is known that in 1816 he married the 
Princess Charlotte, granddaughter of King George III. 

2 Count Zichy of Vasonykio, issue of an old andeminent Hungarian family, Born 
in 1753, he was president of the Aulic Court of Hungary (1788) and became later 


Minister of War (1803). He died in 1826. 
3 German name of Buda-Pesth. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 281 


subject certain military arguments, which are beginning to make 
an impression. 
I have the honour to be, Sire, ... . 


No. 4B.—KiNnG Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, October 27, 1814. 
My Cousin, 
I have received your despatch (No. 6), and hastened as 
much as possible to forward you by the messenger who left here 
on Tuesday, the additional instructions you asked for. I hope 
your measures may prove sufficient, but, as I informed you 
(No. 3B), you must let them see ¢hat there is something else behind, 
and I am going to give orders for the army to be held in readi- 
ness to take the field. God is my witness that, far from wishing 
for war, my desire is to have some years quiet, in order to 
dress the wounds of the State; but I must, before everything, 
preserve intact the honour of France, and prevent principles, 
and an order of things as contrary to morality as prejudicial to 
tranquillity, from being established. Also (and this is not less 
necessary), I wish that my personal character be respected, and 
cannot allow it to be said, as was the case with the affair of the 
Spanish chargé @affaires, that I am firm only when pitted 
against the weak. My life, my crown itself, are nothing to me 
beside interests so great as these. 

It would nevertheless be very painful for me to be forced 
to ally myself for these reasons with Austria, and Austria only. 
I cannot understand how Lord Castlereagh, who expressed such 
correct opinions on Poland, can be of a different opinion with 
regard to Saxony. I should very much rely on the efforts 
of Count von Miinster to bring him back, had not the 
language of the Duke of Wellington on this same subject given 
me cause to fear that this was not the policy of the minister but 
of the ministry. There is certainly no lack of arguments with 
which to refute him, but examples sometimes carry more 
weight, and I can conceive a very striking one in the case of 
Charles XII. The execution of Patkul proves sufficiently how 
- vindictive this prince was, and how little he cared for the law 
of nations ; and yet master, as one may say, of all the states 

} Patkul (1660-1707) was a Livonian gentleman. Livonia was at that time subject 
to Sweden. Patkul tried on several occasions to unite his country to Russia, and 
excited several revolts against the Swedes. Peter the Great sent him as ambassador 
to Augustus III., King of Poland, who in order to get on good terms with Charles XII. 


handed him over to this prince. Patkul was immediately brought before a court- 
martial, which condemned him to be drawn and quartered. 


282 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


of King Augustus, he contented himself with robbing him of 
Poland, not feeling justified in touching Saxony. 

It seems to me that in comparing the two circumstances, 
viz., that of the duchy of Warsaw with that of the kingdom 
of Poland, and that of Saxony with herself on a former occasion, 
the analogy is sufficiently plain. Whereupon, my cousin, I pray 
God may have you in His safe and holy keeping. 

LOUIS. 


P.S.—Your No. 7 just received. It confirms me in my 
resolution to take up a warlike position to enforce respect. 

I approve of the declaration you are about to make to the 
Emperor of Russia, and could wish that your conference had 
already taken place. 

I authorize you to recognize in my name the King of Great 
Britain as King of Hanover. 


L. 


No. 9A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CONGRESS 

TO THE MINISTERS OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS, 
VIENNA, October 31, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

The date fixed for the opening of the congress was 
approaching, and yet it was only this evening that Prince 
Metternich has thought fit to call a conference to which all the 
plenipotentiaries of the eight powers that signed the treaty of 
Paris were invited. 

Prince Talleyrand came and presented the Duc de Dalberg 
and the Comte de la Tour du Pin as French plenipotentiaries. 

The Portuguese ambassador brought four plenipotentiaries, 
and Prince Metternich Baron von Wessemberg.! 

Prince Talleyrand had, in order to facilitate business, drawn 
up a rough draft, arranging the work of the congress. (See 
subjoined documents, I-5.) 

He had had an interview the evening before with Lord 
Castlereagh, who, while approving the arrangement, had in- 
sinuated that it would be necessary for him to talk it over 
with Prince Metternich, and that every proposition emanating 
from France would always inspire a feeling of distrust. 

Prince Talleyrand showed it before the sitting to Prince 
Metternich and some other plenipotentiaries. 

1 Johan-Philippe, Baron von Wessemberg-Ampfingen, born in the year 1773, was 
an Austrian diplomatist. He represented Austria at the Diet, at the time of the affair 
of the Secularizations (1802), was afterwards ambassador at Berlin, then at Munich, 


and London. He assisted Prince Metternich at the Congress of Vienna. In1848he 
was for a while Minister of Foreign Affairs, and died in 1858. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 283 


At the opening of the conference, Prince Metternich made 
a very diffuse speech, of which the object was to show that the 
confidential communications which had passed with regard to 
the affairs of Poland, had as yet been barren of result, but that 
_ they were on the eve of solution ; that the German Conferences 
were hastening forward the work of a plan of federation which 
would give to Europe a fresh guarantee of tranquillity ; that, 
such being the state of affairs, he would not advise that the 
congress be adjourned, but that they should seek a plan affording 
the time to discuss those questions foreign to the other powers. 
He insisted that the actual congress could not be so called, and 
that the form of resolutions could not be admitted there. 

Hereupon Prince Talleyrand remarked how very extra- 

ordinary it seemed, to change the intention, nay, the very 
meaning of the words themselves, from one conference to 
another. That at Paris a congress had been requested, that 
now, they said, this congress which they had requested, ought 
not to be held, and ought not to be a congress; that they ought 
to reassemble immediately on the first of November, but that the 
summons had not been made with the necessary formalities, that 
the opening ought not to be an opening... . . 
_ Prince Metternich finished by proposing a new delay of 
ten to twelve days for the verification of powers, which all 
the plenipotentiaries would be invited to send to an office 
appointed for the purpose. And speaking of the influence which 
could be brought to bear upon the congress, he said, with 
some show of malice, that it could be of two kinds: (1) that of 
the difficulties ; and (2) that of the facilities, which could be put 
in the way of the work. 

Prince Talleyrand took up this phrase, and said that when 
every one’s interests lay the same way, there was no other 
“influence” than that of cleverness and stupidity. 

Prince Metternich then communicated to us his own project 
of declaration, which is subjoined to No. 6. Discussions, insipid 
and without interest, occupied two hours, showing nothing but 
the levity and want of reflection which had been given to 
such important matters. 

At last it was agreed :— 

1. Not to adjourn the congress ; 

2. To appoint a commission for examining credentials ; 

3. To reassemble on the morrow to hear a new scheme of 
convocation read ; to determine whether the work could not 
be done by commissions appointed by the congress, to be re- 
examined by a general commission, and to determine the form of 
discussion to be admitted. 


284 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


It was also agreed that the drafts presented by the French 
commissioners should serve as the basis for the morrow’s 
discussion. 

The commission for examining credentials was appointed by 
lot. Russia, England, and Prussia were selected. A report will 
be drawn up by this commission after the credentials have been 
handed in. 

These conclusions would lead to the idea that one step more 
had been effected ; but on examining the state of affairs, it will 
be seen :— 

1. That the four powers have not renounced the idea of 
establishing that system of the balance of power which they 
have worked out to their own advantage. 

2. That they would allow France no voice in the matter. 

3. That their momentary embarrassment is the consequence of 
the unexpected and exaggerated claims of the Emperor of Russia. 

4. That, in order to free themselves from this dilemma, they 
are willing to sacrifice Saxony, and to present an appearance of 
unanimity on the question of Poland. 

5. That the principles set forth by the King of France have 
reminded Europe of her proper dignity, and that the voice which 
he has raised, if it has not yet rallied all the wiser minds, will 
yet finish by being listened to one day. 

In all this the weakness of the Austrian government, the 
ignoring of all principle on the part of the cabinets of Russia 
and Prussia, and the suspicions of the cabinet of London 
against France, are plainly to be seen. And it is impossible to 
stand firm against such powerful intrigues save by marching in 
the path pointed out by Reason alone, and by taking one’s stand 
on the wise teachings she gives with regard to the existence 
and mutual relations of separate bodies of society. 

If the powers directly interested in the settlement of Poland 
could, on the question of boundaries, come to some under- 
standing that did not disturb the balance of power in that part 
of Europe, we shall have the hope that things in general will 
arrange themselves, and we shall await with patience, news of the 
same. By a secret agreement Russia, Prussia, and Austria, have 
determined to effect the partition of the grand-duchy of Warsaw 
without France being allowed to interfere, and we believe we 
shall have no cause to regret this. 

If they can come to some such understanding, Europe will 
remain undisturbed. If they cannot, the coalition is ~pso facto 
dissolved, and France will find herself called upon to under- 
take the most honourable intervention that she has ever had the 
opportunity of doing in state matters. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA, 285 


It is not yet possible to foresee the last move of the 
Emperor of Russia, who alone, by his presumption and un- 
practical ideas, is on the eve of rekindling wars and disturbing 
Europe for some time to come. 

He returned the day before yesterday, in the evening, from his 
visit to Hungary, which he had made in company with the 
Emperor of Austria and the King of Prussia. 

This journey, which he had himself proposed, was further 
marked by intrigue. He wished to cajole the Hungarian people, 
and to surround his person with the head clergy of the Greek 
Church, a class very numerous in Hungary. We hear from Lord 
Castlereagh himself, that the Greeks are already fomenting war 
against Turkey ; that the Servians have just taken up arms, and 
that a Russian army is on its way to the frontier. And while 
giving himself to such disturbing projects on that side, the 
Emperor of Russia is telling the Swiss ministers here that he 
will not leave Vienna till he has finished their business. He has 
nominated, according to what we have heard, Baron von Stein to 
negotiate with them.? 

Before his departure for Hungary, he had given orders that a 
reply on the question of Poland should be prepared for Lord 
Castlereagh, and that memoranda on the restoration and 
organization of that country should be drafted. 

If he persists, this draft will infallibly have a decided influence 
over future events in Europe, and one perhaps, not altogether to 
the advantage of Russia. 

It is believed that the reply will be forwarded to Lord 
Castlereagh after the Emperor Alexander has corrected and 
approved it. It is thought to lay claims to creating a new 
Poland in the duchy of Warsaw, and giving Saxony to 
Prussia. 

The Grand-Duchess of Oldenburg declared, the day before 


1 Charles, Baron von Stein, born in 1757 at Nassau, of a noble and ancient family. 
He entered the Prussian service in 1779, and in 1784 was appointed minister at 
Aschaffenburg, and entered the cabinet in 1804. Immediately afterwards, he was 
made first president of all the Fiscal Chambers of Westphalia at Miinster, and 
Minister of Customs and Manufactories in 1804. He was one of the most inveterate 
enemies of France in the Prussian cabinet, and took an active part in the resistance 
in 1806. After the defeat he was obliged to retire. Recalled in 1807, his efforts at 
reorganizing the finances and the army roused the jealousy of Napoleon, who demanded 
his dismissal (1808). He fled to Austria. In 1812; he went to Russia, where he was 
eagerly welcomed by the emperor, who attached him to his person, and made him one 
of his most trusty councillors. During the years 1813 and 1814, he excited the 
passions of Germany against France by every means in his power, and followed the 
allied sovereigns to Paris. He then went to the Congress of Vienna, where he again 
met the Emperor Alexander, who made use of him on several occasions, but on this 
new scene of action he played but a secondary part. Plenipotentiary at the Congress 
of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, he was appointed state councillor in 1827, and died in 1831. 


286 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


yesterday, that it seemed to her that her brother had decided 
these two questions. 

We have often repeated our opinion, that in order to prevent 
this, there is no other means than that of opposing the public 
opinion of Europe against the abuse of her strength that 
Russia would make, and that it is for this reason that it was 
necessary to convene the congress and give it as much dignity 
as possible. If Russia grew too aggressive, France must all 
the more play the part of protectress. 

Were it not for the weakmindedness of Prince Metternich 
and the prejudice of Lord Castlereagh against any influence 
whatever on the part of France in the affairs of Europe, 
the matter would soon be settled. Meanwhile, this condition of 
affairs is protracted, and so long, one may almost say, as 
this fear of France exists, men will remain blind to all other 
dangers. 

In the midst of all these efforts to bring the Emperor of 
Russia back to more moderate ideas on the subject of Poland, 
the German conferences present some interest, on account of the 
conduct of Bavaria with respect to them. 

Prussia’s plan was to form a very close league, and share the 
leadership of it with Austria. Bavaria frustrated this, by 
demanding that each should take full powers of leadership 
in turn. She saw that Prussia’s object was to use this league 
as a support in her usurpation of Saxony. And as she will not 
consent to this, she will make known her intentions, when the 
occupation of Saxony has been officially notified to her ; and 
she must now declare her intentions of never consenting to this. 
In order to be able to sustain this independent attitude, Bavaria 
has just ordered a strong levy of recruits,and raised her army to 
the number of seventy thousand men. 

You therefore see, Monsieur le Comte, that if, in our last 
despatches, we induced the king to assume an attitude suitable 
both to his own dignity and to the exigencies of the moment, 
we so acted that he need have no fear of being compromised 
in a coalition aimed against France; but that, on the contrary, 
he should find himself at the head of those who will unite 
to defend the liberties of Europe whenever threatened. 

The article in the MZonzteur,! which so boldly gives utterance 


1 The following is the Article : 

‘The preceding declaration,” (that namely of the plenipotentiaries who would 
adjourn the opening of the congress till November I, see p. 248 and following)—‘‘ by 
exposing the motives which led to the prorogation of the Congress of Vienna, is the 
first guarantee of that spirit of wisdom which will direct the work of the assembled 
plenipotentiaries. It is in fact by maturity of views, in the absence ofall passion, that 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 287 


to the principles which direct the policy of the king, has caused 
a great sensation here, and has been almost universally ap- 
proved. We have observed that while spreading the rumour 
that, chagrined by the loss of conquests, the French army 
would drag the government into a fresh war, and that it was 
necessary to remain still under arms, this same government had 
sufficient force, and a sufficiently firm hold upon public opinion, 
to declare that France was content with her boundaries, because 
she possessed within herself all the elements of strength and 
prosperity which she needs for her happiness. 
: It is in this way that the hate and suspicion still surround- 
ing us on all sides will best be allayed, and confidence restored, 
which is the principal aim of our policy, and which will give the 
king that force and dignity which are his due in his relations 
with Europe. 
He pleased to accept .... 


No. 10A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CON- 
GRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS IN PARIS. 


VIENNA, October 31, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

The conference mentioned in our letter of to-day has been 
held this evening, before the departure of the messenger; we 
therefore have the honour of informing you of its result. 

After reading the protocol of the conference of the 30th, the 


the authority that is to protect the principles of public law, invoked and recognized 
in the last treaty of Paris, must rise again. 

‘¢ Thus the legitimate expectations of our contemporaries will be met, and in the 
following negotiations a result conformable to what the universal law of nations, 
and the universal law of justice, prescribe to nations in their mutual intercourse, will 
be obtained. 

“* At a time when the great powers are leagued together for the express purpose 
of introducing into the relations of states respect for property and safety for crowned 
heads, no other political transactions except those stamped with this equitable 
character ought to be expected. 

‘* Europe is already accepting this happy omen, and France, who envies no other 
states the advantages they may reasonably expect, only aspires to the adjustment of a 
fair equilibrium. Having in herself all the elements of strength and prosperity, she 
does not seek them beyond her own territories ; she lends an ear to no insinuation of 
simple expediency ; and assuming again the part which has hitherto won her the 
esteem and acknowledgment of peoples, she seeks no other fame than that which 
rests upon the alliance of force with moderation and justice ; she desires to become 
again the supporter of the weak and defender of the oppressed. 

‘Tt is in this spirit that France will concur in arrangements tending to consolidate 
the general peace ; and the sovereigns, who have so nobly proclaimed these same 
principles, will sanction this lasting treaty which is to assure the peace of the 
world.” —Moniteur, October 22, 1814. 


288 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


declaration, of which a copy is subjoined, was passed. It will be 
printed some time to-morrow. 

The projects proposed by Prince Talleyrand have been ap- 
proved, and have found their place in the documents bearing in 
the correspondence the Nos. 2 and 3. Prince Metternich intro- 
duced a proposal to discuss the questions Nos. 4 and 5. Count 
Nesselrode asked that this discussion might be put off till to- 
morrow, as he had not had time for receiving the orders of the 
emperor. This was also agreed to. Ina conversation between 
the two emperors in Hungary, when they discussed the question 
which would seem likely to put them at variance, the Emperor 
of Russia said, “ I have not yet said my last word.” 

At the meeting of to-day, Lord Castlereagh, was attended 
by Lords Stewart, Cathcart,! and Clancarty.? 

We are told that Counts Rasumoffski® and von Stackelberg 4 
would be present at the next conference to represent Russia. 

Be pleased to. accept <2. 4... 


No. 9.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis. AVE. 


VIENNA, October’ 31, 1814. 
SIRE, 

The state of things does not seem modified at first sight; 
but there are not wanting symptoms of a change, which have 
already begun to show themselves, and may gain in importance 
according to the conduct and language of the Emperor of Russia. 

On the morning of the day on which he set out for Hungary, 
he had an interview with Prince Metternich, in which it is agreed 
on all hands that he treated this minister with a pride and 
violence of language, which would have been thought extra- 


1 Lord William Cathcart, born in 1755, entered the army, served in the campaign in 
America, became brigadier-general in 1793, and served in this capacity in Holland. 
He was peer of Scotland in 1807, member of the Privy Council and vice-admiral. 
In 1809 he directed the expedition against Copenhagen. In 1812 he went to St. 
Petersburg as ambassador, followed the Emperor Alexander during the campaigns 
of 1813 and 1814, and signed the treaty of Paris, May 30. He was sent to Vienna 
as plenipotentiary at the congress, In 1815, he was created peer of England, and 
died 1843. 

2 Richard Power-Trench, Earl of Clancarty, Privy Councillor, Chairman of the 
Committee of the Privy Council for the Colonies and Commerce, Postmaster- 
General. In 1814 he was accredited to the Court of Vienna as plenipotentiary. 

3 André, Count, afterwards Prince, Rasumoffski, was born in the year 1752. 
Russian diplomatist ; was successively ambassador at Stockholm, Naples, and finally, 
at Vienna, where he took part in the congress. He diedin 1836. 

4 Gustavus, Count von Stackelberg, private counsellor and Chamberlain of the 
Czar. He was at the time we speak of, ambassador of Russia at Vienna, and, as 
such, attended the Congress. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 289 


ordinary, even towards one of his servants. The story runs} that 
Prince Metternich having said on the subject of Poland, that, if 
it were a question of making one, they also could do so, he had 
not only termed this expression gross and improper, but had 
allowed himself to be carried so far as to say that Prince Metter- 
nich was the only man in Austria who could have taken such a 
rebellious tone: and they add that matters reached such a pitch 
that Prince Metternich told him he would ask his master to 
appoint another minister to represent him at the congress. 
Prince Metternich came away from this interview in a state of 
mind such as his friends say they have never known him 
in before. He who, a few days ago, had told Count von 
Schulenburg that he would retrench himself in Time, and make 
an arm of Patience, has shown that he could very well lose it, if 
it had to undergo many such trials as that. 

This is not likely to dispose him to come to friendly 
terms with the Emperor of Russia, and the opinion of the 
Austrian generals and archdukes ought to render him equally 
disinclined to abandon Saxony. I have reasons: for believ- 
ing that the Emperor of Austria is now bent on offering some 
resistance. 

There is a certain Count von Sickingen here, who is admitted 
to the intimacy of this sovereign, and whose acquaintance I 
have formed. After the departure for Hungary, he went to 
Marshal von Wrede, and then came to me, to bid us on the 
part of the emperor to suspend all business until his 
return. 

There is a current report that during the journey to Buda- 
Pesth, whence the sovereigns returned at noon of the day 
before yesterday, the Emperor Alexander having complained of 
Prince Metternich, the Emperor Francis replied that he thought 
it better that the business should be transacted by ministers, that 
there was thus more liberty and more progress: that he never 
transacted his own affairs himself, but that, at the same time, his 
ministers did nothing without his orders ; that finally, in the course 
of the conversation he said, among other things, that when his 
people, who had never abandoned him, who had done everything 
for him, and given everything to him, were disturbed, as they were 
at the present time, his duty was to do all that he could to 
tranquillize them ; that on this, the Emperor Alexander, asking 
if his character and loyalty ought not to be sufficient to prevent 
and remove all uneasiness, the Emperor Francis replied that 
secure frontiers were the surest safeguard for peace. 

This conversation has come to my ears in almost precisely 
the same words from Count von Sickingen and Prince Metternich. 


1 Suppressed in the text of the archives. 
VOL. II. U 


290 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


It seems that the emperor, little accustomed to showing fight, 
returned very well pleased with himself. 

All the precautions taken to prevent our knowing what is 
passing in the commission of the political organization of 
Germany have failed. 

At the first sitting, it was proposed by Prussia, that all the 
princes whose states were completely included in the confedera- 
tion, should renounce the right of making war, peace, and of 
sending embassies. Marshal von Wrede having refused to agree 
to this, Herr von Humboldt exclaimed that it was easy to see that 
Bavaria had still at heart an alliance with France, and that this 
was a fresh reason for pressing the proposal still more urgently. 
But at the second sitting, the marshal, having received his 
orders from the king, peremptorily rejected the proposal, and 
it was withdrawn, with the substitution that half the military 
forces of the confederation should be under the control of Austria, 
and half under that of Prussia. Marshal von Wrede proposed 
that the number of controlling powers be increased and that their 
authority alternate among them. It was further proposed to 
establish between all the confederate states an intimate bond, 
for the purpose of keeping the possessions of each one in the 
state in which they will have been settled by the arrangements 
now about to be made. The King of Bavaria, who easily under- 
stood, that Prussia had in view by this to secure to herself the 
possession of Saxony as against the opposition of those powers 
whose wish is to preserve this kingdom intact ; who fully perceives 
that he would have everything to fear himself, if Saxony 
were once sacrificed, and who is ready to defend it, if only he be 
not abandoned to rely upon his own resources alone, has ordered 
in his dominions a fresh levy of twenty thousand men, which will 
raise the number of his forces to seventy thousand. Far from 
wishing to enter the proposed league, his intention, at least at 
present, is that, as soon as the Prussians have seized on Saxony, 
his minister retire from the commission, declaring that he refuses _ 
to be an accomplice, and far less a guarantee, for such an 
usurpation. 

The Prussians do not know of this intention of the king, but 
they are quite aware of his armaments, and probably suspect 
him of wishing to unite his forces with those of the powers who 
might wish to defend Saxony. They feel besides, that without 
the consent of France, Saxony will never be for them*a solid 
acquisition. It is also said that the ministry, which does not 
share the blind devotion of the king to the Emperor Alexander, 
is not without fears of trouble from Russia, and that it would 
willingly? renounce all claims to Saxony provided it found means 


1 Suppressed. ? Text: Volontiers (as translated) = Var. : peut-étre (perhaps.) 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 291 


elsewhere of completing the number of subjects which Prussia 
has a right to claim by the treaties. Whatever may be her 
sentiments and views, the Prussian ministers appear very anxious 
to meet us, and send us invitation after invitation. 

Lord Castlereagh, who has thought of the plan of fortifying 
Prussia on this side of the Elbe, under the pretext of making 
her serve as a barrier against the encroachments of Russia, has 
this project still greatly at heart. In a conversation that he had 
with me a few days ago, he reproached me for making the 
question of Saxony one of the first importance, whereas, accord- 
ing to him, this was as nothing, while that of Poland was every- 
thing. I replied that the question of Poland would be one of the 
first importance in my eyes if he himself had not reduced it to a 
simple question of boundaries. Did he wish to establish Poland 
in a position of complete independence? I should be entirely 
with him. But when the discussion was one of boundaries, it was 
for Austria and Prussia, who were the parties chiefly concerned, 
to step to the front. My part was then reduced to supporting 
them, and that I meant to do. As to his project of uniting 
Prussia and Austria, I made use of arguments to which he 
could not reply, and cited to him facts in the policy of 
Prussia throughout the last sixty years, which he was compelled 
to admit ; but while condemning the old wrongs done by this 
ministry, he retrenched himself in the hope of a better future. 

Meanwhile, I know that several people have brought forward 
objections which have struck him. For instance, it is asked, how 
he could consent to put one of the greatest commercial towns of 
Germany (Leipzig), where one of the greatest fairs of Europe is 
held, under the dominion of Prussia, with whom England had no 
guarantee of being always at peace, instead of leaving it in the 
hands of a prince with whom England could never have occasion 
to pick a quarrel? He was struck with a kind of astonishment 
and fear of his policy compromising in any way the mercantile 
interests of England. 

He had invited me to draw up with hima plan for summoning 
the congress. I had sent him one with which he had expressed 
himself satisfied. 

I also drew up some drafts for the first meeting of ministers, 
for the verifying of credentials, and for the commissions 
which were to be appointed at the first sitting of the congress. 
(These several projects are all subjoined to my despatch addressed 
to the department, and that M. de Jaucourt will submit to your 
Majesty.) As M.de Dalberg and myself both owed a visit to Lord 
Castlereagh, we went together to carry those drafts to him the day 
before yesterday in the evening. He found nothing to find 
fault with in them, but observed that the fear that the Prussians 


U 2 


292 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


had of us would surely cause them to suspect some veiled 
intention. The fears, real or pretended of the Prussians, led the 
conversation naturally back to the eternal question of Poland 
and Saxony. He had some maps on the table, by means of 
which I showed him that Saxony being once in the same hands 
as Silesia, Bohemia could be taken in a few weeks, and that 
Bohemia once taken, the heart of the Austrian monarchy was 
left open and defenceless. He appeared astounded. He had 
spoken to us as if he had rested his expectations on Prussia from 
its being impossible to rest them on Austria. He seemed 
surprised when we told him that the latter only needed money 
in order to assemble her troops, that she would, in that case, have 
very imposing forces, and that for this a million sterling would 
now be sufficient. This roused his spirit, and he seemed dis- 
posed to support Poland to the very end. He knew that in the 
Russian cabinet, they were at work at a reply to his report 
but no longer apparently expected it to be satisfactory. He 
had received information that Servia was under arms, and told 
us that a Russian contingent, commanded by one of the best 
generals of the country, was on its way to the frontiers of the 
Ottoman Empire. Nothing therefore was in his eyes more 
urgent or necessary than to put a barrier against the ambition of 
of Russia. But he wanted this to be done without war; if this 
were impossible, war at least without the aid of France. From 
his estimation of our strength, he almost gives the idea of its 
being France that he fears the most. “You have,” he told 
us, “twenty-five million inhabitants, really equivalent to forty 
millions.” Once he let escape him: “If only you no longer had 
any designs on the left bank of the Rhine!”...It was easy for 
me to prove to him, from the state of affairs, both in France, and 
in Europe generally, which was all under arms, that to give 
France credit for ambitious views now, was to give her credit for 
being mad. “That may be,” he replied, “but a French army 
traversing Germany now under any pretext, would make too 
great an impression, would awaken too many bitter memories.” 
I represented to him that war would not be necessary, that it 
would amply suffice to set Russia face to face with Europe 
united under a single purpose, and this brought us back to the 
opening of the congress, But he, speaking continually of diffi- 
culties, without ever saying in what these difficulties consisted, 
advised me to see Prince Metternich ; from which I came to 
the conclusion that they had concerted together some plan, 
which he would frankly have communicated to me, had he not 
feared some objection on my part. In conclusion, he naively 
admitted, in accusing us of having retarded matters, that, 
without us, everything would by this time have been arranged, 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 293 


as they had been of one mind at first, an admission which shows 
how much influence, in their opinion, your Majesty must have in 
the affairs of Europe. 

To sum up, Lord Castlereagh’s attitude, without being very 
favourable, seemed to me to be in a fair way to become so, and 
perhaps the reply which he is awaiting from the Emperor 
Alexander will contribute to this also. 

Yesterday morning, I received a note from Prince Metternich, 
inviting me to a conference at eight o’clock in the evening. 

I will not weary your Majesty with the details of this meeting, 
prolific indeed of words, but barren of result. They are to be 
found elsewhere! in my letter to the department. 

The end of it all has been, that a commission for verifying 
credentials has been formed, composed of three members, 
appointed by lot, that the credentials will be sent to them for 
_ verification, and that after this the congress will meet. 

This evening, we have had another meeting. The rough 
draft of the declaration relative to the verification of credentials 
has been read and passed, and will be printed to-morrow. Iam 
sending off? a copy of it this evening in my report to the de- 
partment. I thought that your Majesty would prefer that all 
documents should be adjoined to the letter addressed to M. de 
Jaucourt, in order that the department may have and preserve 
them in their proper sequence. 

For the last eight months the situation of France has been of 
such a character, that, no sooner has she obtained one end, than 
she has had a second before her, equally necessary to attain, 
without, in the majority of cases, being left the power to choose 
her means of reaching it. Scarcely has the tyrant been hurled 
down, scarcely has it been rendered possible to openly express 
the desires, which, in the depths of the heart, have, from all parts 
and for a long time, been demanding the recall of your Majesty 
to his kingdom, than it was necessary to provide for the disarma- 
ment of France, covered as she was, at the time of your return, 
with five hundred thousand foreigners, which could only be 
effected by bringing about a cessation of hostilities by means of 
an armistice obtained at any price. Therefore, to obtain the 
immediate release of the kingdom from the armies which 
were devouring its substance, it was necessary, to the exclusion 
of all other considerations, to aim at a prompt conclusion of 
peace. Your Majesty had then apparently nothing else to do but 
bask in the love of your people and the reward of your own 
wisdom, when a fresh demand was. made upon your constancy 

1 Suppressed in the text of the archives. 
2 Text: ‘‘J’en envoie ce soir la copie dans ma dépéche au département,” = as 


translated. War.: ‘‘et j’en envoie ce soir la copie dans we dépéche,” = ‘‘and I am 
sending off this evening the copy in a report.” 


294 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


and energy ; that of saving Europe if possible, from the perils 
with which the ambition and passions of some powers, and the 
blindness and pusillanimity of others were threatening her. The 
difficulties of the enterprise have never seemed to me sufficiently 
great to render hope of success impossible. 

The letter with which your Majesty deigned to honour me on 
the 21st October raises my hopes, at the same time that the 
expressions of satisfaction you were pleased to accord to my 
zeal, give me fresh courage to proceed. 

I have the honour to be...... 


No. 5B—KiINnG Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, Movember 4, 1814. 
My Cousin, 


I have received your letter No. 8. I have read it with 
great interest, and with great indignation. The tone and the 
principles for which Buonaparte! has so greatly and so justly 
been blamed, were different in no respect from those of the 
Emperor of Russia. 

I am pleased to flatter myself that the views of the 
army and of the imperial family will bring back Prince 
Metternich to more healthy opinions ; that Lord Castlereagh 
will share, more than he has done at present, those of the Prince 
Regent, and that you will then employ to advantage the arms I 
have placed in your hands. But, however that may be, continue 
to deserve the well-merited praises that I am pleased to repeat 
to-day, by holding firm to the course you have laid out, 
and be quite sure that my name? shall never be found at the 
bottom of an instrument sanctioning the most revolting im- 
morality. Whereupon, my cousin, I pray God that He may 
always have you in His safe and holy keeping. 

Louis. 


No. 11A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CONGRESS 
TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, Voveméber 6, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 
We have the honour of forwarding to you copies of the 
reports of the first two sittings which have taken place. 
The memoranda mentioned in it, are those which underwent 
1 Var.: Bonaparte. 


2 Text: ‘que mon nom ne se trouvera jamais.” Var.: ‘* que jamais mon nom,” | 
= ‘‘that never shall my name,” &c. (More emphatic.) 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. » 295 


discussion, and were presented by the embassy of France; 
they have been forwarded in the last despatch to the 
department. 

A third conference was held on the 1st of November, at 
which the Comte de Noailles, who arrived the same morning, 
was present. 

The result was unimportant; it has not yet even been 
decided, up to the present, to draft a report of it. 

Prince Metternich, in his quality of president, laid down in a 
remarkably diffuse and disjointed speech: “That before pro- 
ceeding to the formation of committees and commissions, it was 
necessary to understand each other; that it was necessary for 
each power to have settled with the others what interested it 
directly.” 

He told us further: 

“That every question treated had two sides; that this 
congress was not a congress ; that its opening was not, properly 
speaking, an opening at all; that the commissions were not 
commissions; that in the assembly of the powers at Vienna, 
the only advantage they had to note was that of aux Europe 
wzthout distances ; that they could agree, or they could not.” 

Prince Metternich has shown in this sitting the full extent of 
his mediocrity, of his taste for petty intrigues and an uncertain 
and tortuous course, as also of his marvellous command of 
words that are vague and void of meaning. 

To take one example out of a thousand ; he terms the com- 
missions “ chances of negotiation.” It would be useless to point 
out the irrelevance of such a way of talking. 

We had been told that the negotiations relative to the 
principal questions had taken a turn for the better, and while 
awaiting the confirmation of this, carefully avoided increasing 
difficulties which might trammel the course of affairs. 

The majority atthis meeting agreed in their wish to gain 
time, and to debate subsequently the possibility and the forms 
of a general convocation of the congress. 

The question of Poland, and, as a natural consequence, that 
of Saxony, are however now boldly attacked. 

The Emperor of Russia, we are informed, has sent his reply 
to the English ministers. The report, drafted by Baron von 
Anstedt,! has not been of a satisfactory nature, and must be 
understood to show but little conciliatory spirit. 

1 Johan, Baron Anstedt, a Russian diplomatist, was born at Strasbourg in the year 
1760. In 1789, he went to Russia and was given a post in the Foreign Department. 
He was several times appointed envoy at Vienna. In 1811, he was made director of 
the diplomatic cabinet of Prince Koutousoff. He represented Russia at the Congress 


of Prague (1813), went thence to Vienna (1814), and was till his death, Russian pleni- 
potentiary at the Diet of Frankfort. He died in 1835. 


296 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Lord Castlereagh replied yesterday. We are told that he 
insists, in the name of England, and for the safety of Europe, 
that Russia pass not the Vistula. 

Prince Metternich has been obliged to take up this 
question, as the emperor, his master, has submitted the subject 
for the consideration of a state council, and this, in its con- 
clusions, determined: “That Russia could not advance further 
without menacing the military positions of Austria, and that it 
was yet more important for Germany to prevent the defiles of 
the Saale’ falling into the hands of Prussia.” 

The supplementary instructions of the king, which had been 
brought by M. de Noailles, enabled the plenipotentiaries to 
throw out hints as to the active part which France would take in 
order to bring about a real and lasting balance of power and to 
hinder Russia from obtaining possession of the Grand Duchy of 
Warsaw, Prussia, and Saxony. 

The minister of Bavaria had been apprised of this, and 
notice of it had also been sent to the Emperor of Austria. 
We believe that this will sustain Prince Metternich in the 
resistance which he must offer to the claims of Russia and 
Prussia. Already the firm and decided tone taken by the 
embassy from the beginning has forced him to, second with 
more energy the great interests of Europe. We are generally 
assured that the two powers, Russia and Prussia, are getting 
enlightened as to the difficulties which they may expect to 
meet with before they can succeed in their various projects. 
The influence which the English ministers also exercise on 
these questions gives us grounds for hoping that they will be 
modified, and that the king will have the glory of having stopped 
the execution of schemes which would have been disastrous for 
Europe and her future tranquillity. 

Lord Castlereagh indeed always shows an inclination to 
procure Saxony for Prussia, but this latter power will reflect that 
she cannot hold it in peace without the concurrence of France, 
and will prefer perhaps to arrange matters by other combina- 
tions. 

Prince von Hardenberg has admitted to one of his friends 
that he believes that this incorporation of Saxony is very dis- 
tasteful to Germany, and that Prussia would perhaps consent 
to leave a nucleus of it. 

Austria appears to wish that this nucleus be composed of the 
three-fourths of Saxony, if the Russian boundary be definitely 
fixed at the Vistula. Saxony would then retain from fifteen 


1 The Saale takes its rise in Bavaria, traverses the whole of Saxony and empties 


itself in the Elbe. It was through the defiles of the Saale that Napoleon passed in 
the campaign of 1806. ; 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 207 


to sixteen hundred thousand inhabitants, and would still be 
larger than Wurtemberg or Hanover 

This outcome would indeed be beyond all that could 
possibly have been expected when the French plenipotentiaries 
arrived at the congress, and the king would have attained a 
really remarkable success, should things turn out in this way. 

The arrangements of the German Federation continue to be 
treated with much secrecy. Bavaria resists Prussia, and 
refuses to sacrifice any rights of sovereignty, save what may be 
absolutely necessary for the formation of the league. 

- It has hitherto been impossible to treat of the exchange of 
territory, because everything depends upon the fixation of 
the Prussian boundaries. 

There remain now two other political subjects of interest 
to settle, which will apparently soon be taken into consideration. 
They are the affairs of the Helvetian corporation, and those of 
Italy. 

Prince Metternich thought fit yesterday to invite Prince 
Talleyrand to a conference at which Lord Castlereagh and 
Count Nesselrode were present ; and these two subjects were 
there broached. 

These gentlemen informed Prince Talleyrand that a commis- 
sion had been appointed to arrange with the Swiss deputies 
present at Vienna the affairs of the Helvetian corporation. Prince 
Talleyrand said that he had appointed M. de Dalberg to debate 
as to the course that France had to pursue in this matter. 

With regard to Italian affairs, the embarrassment of Prince 
Metternich was very plain when we were on the subject of 
Naples. It must be attributed, I suppose, to the fear with which 
public spirit, as well as the little taste the Italians have for 
the Austrian government inspire him, and to the influence that 
Murat exercises over the Jacobins of Italy, particularly over 
those of the former kingdom of Italy, of which he was some time 
governor. 

In order to paralyse this influence, Prince Talleyrand pro- 
posed to abstain from touching on the fate of Murat till after 
the other Italian questions had been settled, and when provisory 
rule should have been brought to an end, and the country 
organized in a geographical order commencing with the northern 
states. 

Prince Metternich admitted that it was not possible in treating 
the affairs of Italy, to discard the claims of the kingdom of 
Etruria, but that he desired one or two legations! for the Arch- 
duchess Marie Louise and her son. The other ministers, holding 
that these possessions were a property left unappropriated by the 


1 Legation = the name of the six administrative divisions of the Papal States. 


298 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND., 


treaty of Tolentino, thought it equitable to compensate the loss 
of Parma by an equivalent. 

Seeing that, in the affairs of Italy, France seeks to get three 
points, namely, the succession of the house of Carignan to the 
throne of Sardinia, the establishing of the house of Parma and 
the expulsion of Murat, we must not raise too many difficulties. 
Prince Talleyrand has not yet turned his attention to this 
question. But it may be taken for granted that the Italian 
question will be arranged with these points as a basis. 

Prince Talleyrand has appointed M. de Noailles, to whom 
he has disclosed the purposes of the king, for the commission 
which will be formed for treating this subject in detail. 

With regard to the affairs of Switzerland, Lord Castlereagh 
would have liked to have been able to dispense with the 
interference of France, but the deputy from Bern?! declared 
that his instructions demanded it imperatively ; and that his 
government, as also that of Soleure and Fribourg, believed it 
impossible for Swiss interests to be satisfactorily settled with- 
out the intervention of France. The Russian minister, Count 
Capo d’Istria,2 and Sir Stratford Canning? appear to hold 


1 Louis Zerdeler (1772-1840), member of the upper council in the canton of Bern, 
was made, after the Decree of Mediation, minister at St. Petersburg and plenipo- 
tentiary at the Congress of Vienna. He resigned his functions in 1815. 

2 Jean, Comte Capo d'Istria, was born at Corfu in the year 1776. At twenty- 
seven years of age, he was chosen to be Secretary of State by the imperial commis- 
sioner of Russia in the Ionian Isles. When the peace of Tilsit brought these islands 
under the rule of France, Capo d’Istria laid down his functions and went to St. 
Petersburg, where he obtained a post in the cabinet of the Foreign Secretary. He 
followed the Emperor Alexander in the campaigns of 1813 and 1814, and was charged 
to Switzerland with a secret mission, the object of which was to get the neutrality of 
this country declared and respected. In 1814, Capo d’Istria was sent to the Congress 
of Vienna as plenipotentiary, and, the year following, was made Foreign Secretary of 
State. Greece was already beginning to rise, and the situation of Capo d’Istria, 
a Greek by birth and minister of the Czar, became full of difficulties. He was in fact 
dismissed in 1819, at the time of the insurrection of Ypsilanti. He then retired to 
Geneva, where he lived eight years, after which he was appointed President of 
Greece by his countrymen in 1827. Heaccepted these functions and held them for 
four years in the midst of war and civil strife, and was assassinated in the year 1831. 

3 Sir Stratford Canning, born in 1786, was an English diplomatist and a relation 
of the celebrated minister of that name. In 1814, he was plenipotentiary minister 
to Switzerland, and was sent in the same capacity to the Congress of Vienna. In 1824 
he was made ambassador at St. Petersburg, and afterwards (1827) at Constantinople. 
In 1832 he entered the House of Commons, returned to Constantinople in 1842, and, 
with some intervals, resided there until 1858. He then returned to England, where 
he lived until his death in the year 1880.* 

* This footnote is incomplete and inaccurate in some respects. It may therefore be as well to 
subjoin here the following abstract of the long and reliable notice devoted to the English diplomatist 
in the Dictionary of National Biography :— 

Stratford Canning, first Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe (this title being derived from the name 
of a seat of his family, near Bristol), was first cousin of George Canning, the famous statesman, and 
youngest son of Stratford Canning, who, having been disinherited for marrying beneath his rank, 
settled down as a merchant in Clement’s Lane, London, where the future diplomatist was born, 
November 4, 1786. He was still an infant when he lost his father, whose business had to be given up. 
His mother, Mehetabel, being left with scanty means, retired to Hackney, where young Canning 


was sent to school. In time, he went to Eton, and afterwards entered the Cambridge University. 
At Eton he had been the pupil of Sumner, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury. There, he 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 299 


the same opinion. The suspicion and jealousy of the other 
powers will then be overcome on this point, and we hope 
that the settlement of the Swiss question will not present many 
difficulties. 

The canton of Bern desires to recover that part of the 
canton of Aargau which belonged to it before. The canton 
of Zurich, urged on by former motives of jealousy, will only con- 
sent on condition of receiving itself a portion of it. Legitimate 
rights struggling against a system of expediency, such as is to be 
seen in Germany in the question of Saxony, may here also be 
observed. The authorities seem disposed to give the bishopric 
of Basel to the canton of Bern. On this point a question 
presents itself which ought to be immediately submitted to the 
decision of the king. 

The canton of Geneva asks for ten or twelve thousand souls of 


published, in conjunction with Richard Wellesley and others, a collection of essays. Fox, Sheridan, 
ars others, were great friends of his mother, and powerfully contributed to developing his natural 
gifts. 

In 1807, his cousin, who had been appointed Foreign Secretary, nominated him précis writer. 
In the same year, young Stratford was sent to Copenhagen as secretary to the special but fruitless 
mission sent to Danemarck to adjust pending difficulties. In June, 1808, he was appointed first 
secretary to the English embassy at Constantinople. In July, 1810, on the retirement of his chief, he 
was raised to the rank of minister plenipotentiory and chargé d'affaires to Turkey. In 1812, he 
succeeded in obtaining the signature of Turkey to the treaty of Bucharest with Russia, which 
enabled the latter to make use of the army she kept in the Danubian principalities, to check the 
progress of Napoleon. On his return to England, he received, as reward of his services, a yearly 
pension of £1,200. He stayed at home for about eighteen months, devoting his leisure to literature. : 
It was then that, with some friends, he founded the Quarterly Review, to which he contributed 
several political essays. In May, 1814, Lord Castlereagh having succeeded G. Canning at the 
Foreign Office, sent Stratford as minister plenipotentiary to Switzerland, where he was instrumental 
in effecting the federation of the cantons as a neutral state. After having arrived at a decision with 
Count Capo d’Istria, the Russian envoy to Switzerland, he went to submit it to the commission 
appointed by the Congress of Vienna to settle Swiss affairs. On his return home, in 1817, he was 
appointed member of the Privy Council. In 1820, he was sent to Washington to arrange certain 
difficulties pending between the government of the United States and the Cabinet of St. James. 
He succeeded in arranging a treaty which, however, was rejected by the American Senate. After 
some years spent in inactivity, he was sent to St. Petersburg, in November, 1824, on a short 
mission to induce the Czar to support the independence of Greece conjointly with England and 
France. In the following year, he returned to Constantinople in order to promote the independence 
of Greece, but the unexpected battle of Navarino momentarily put an end to his mission, and he had 
to leave Constantinople for Corfu with the other ambassadors. In 1829, the negotiations were renewed, 
and Turkey yielded partly. On his returnto England, Stratford was made G.C.B., and, owing to 
the enmity of Lord Aberdeen, failing to obtain the post he desired, he resigned and devoted himself 
to parliamentary debates. In 1828, he had been elected a member for Old Sarum (the rottenest 
borough on the list), and sat for various other constituencies until 1841, when he was again appointed 
ambassador to Turkey. In 1832, he went on a short mission to Portugal. In 1835, he had been 
appointed ambassador to the Court of St. Petersburg, but the Czar Nicholas refused positively to 
receive him. He retained his post at Constantinople during the whole of the Crimean War, and 
succeeded so fully in winning the confidence of and, so to say, in fascinating the Sultan, that what 
the late Mr. Kinglake says of him, in his admirable history of the Crimean war, hardly seems 
exaggerated. Stratford Canning fully deserved the title of “Great Elchi ” (full ambassador). At 
the conclusion of the war in 1858, he returned to London. In recognition of his services, he had, 
in 1852, been raised to the peerage with the title of Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe. 

Since then, he lived in retirement until his death, taking part in political debates only when the 
Eastern question again came to the front. He contributed several papers to the 7: zmes and to the 
Nineteenth Century. 1n-1813, he had written on Bonaparte a poem which won the praises of Byron, 
his former school-fellow at Eton. In 1866, he published Shadows of the Past. Amoug his other 
literary contributions, may be cited The Exile of Calauria and Alfred the Great in Athelney, an 
historical play of three thousand lines of blank verse, published in 1876. He was a profoundly 
devout Christian, and during the latter years of his life, he wrote several religious essays. He died, 
without surviving male issue, August 14, 1880. His political papers were collected and published in 
1881, under the title of 7ke Eastern Question, witha memorial preface by the late Dean Stanley. 
Mr. Gladstone created him Knight of the Garter. ms 

The fact that during all his career he was the bitterest enemy of the traditional enemy of 
England, and that to his energy and ability England was indebted for the paramount influence she, 
until recently, enjoyed, commercially and politically, in Turkey and the Levant generally, may 
justify this long rectifying note.—(7vanslator.) 


300 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


the country of Gex,! so as to be contiguous to the canton of Vaud. | 
In exchange, she would offer France twice the number of popu- 
lation taken on the bishopric of Basel, and the military frontier 
between Huningen, Vesoul and Besancon would be improved. 

France would lose nothing but the point situated on the 
lake of Geneva, and she could stipulate that the right of 
navigation and commerce be reserved to her. 

This exchange, which we consider advantageous, would 
necessitate however the restoration of a part of the canton of 
Aargau ? to the canton of Bern, the bishopric of Basel being then 
much reduced. But every advantage that can be gained for the 
canton of Bern is, so to speak, an advantage given to France, 
because of the strong sentiments of attachment and devotion 
which bind this canton to the House of Bourbon. 

We notice at the same time that the Emperor of Russia will, 
if this exchange does not take place, surround the canton of 
Geneva by a part of Savoy which hems the lake towards 
Valais. That exchange would consequently serve to dismiss 
this plan. 

Would you therefore have the goodness, Monsieur le Comte, 
to transmit to us the orders of the king as soon as possible, with 
any modifications it may please his Majesty to make. If his 
Majesty consents to the exchange, he will signify the desire on 
the part of France of doing all in her power for the advantage 
of the Helvetian corporation ; and, according to the words of the 
Swiss deputies, nay, of the deputy of Bern himself, she would 
thus gain for herself a preponderating influence. Prince Talley- 
rand thinks the exchange would be advantageous ; but we need 
an authorization to make it. ; 

Be pleased to accept, &c. 


No. 10.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING LoUvIs XVIII. 


VIENNA, WVovember 6, 1814. 
SIRE, 

The Comte de Noailles, who arrived here Wednesday 
morning (November 2nd), has brought me the additional in- 
structions, which your Majesty was so good as to address to me. 
Your Majesty’s resolutions are now known to the Austrian 
cabinet, to the Emperor of Austria himself, and to Bavaria. I 
thought it useless to speak of them to Lord Castlereagh, always 
so ready to take alarm at the intervention of France, and I 
could not speak of them to Count von Miinster, who, having 

1 France then possessed the portion of the Gex country situated on the lake of 
Geneva, with the town of Versoix. This was the territory coveted by the canton of 


Geneva. 
2 Aarau, Brugg, Lenzburg, and Zofingen with adjacent territory. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 301 


just left the hands of his doctors, is engaged in preparations for 
his marriage with the Countess von Lippe, sister of the Prince 
Regent of Buckeburg. 

The Comte de Noailles, the day after his arrival, was present 
at a conference that led to no result whatever. It was a question 
of deciding, whether the verification of credentials once termin- 
ated, commissions should be appointed for preparing the work, 
how many should be appointed, and with what formalities and 
by whom they should be appointed. Prince Metternich made a 
long speech, in order to prove that the name “ Commission” was 
unsuitable, because it supposed a delegation of authority, which 
in its turn supposed a deliberating assembly, and this the 
congress could not be. He proposed various expressions in 
place of that which displeased him, and, unable to satisfy 
himself with any of them, concluded that it would be necessary 
to seek others in the next conference, which has not yet been 
held. These scruples as to the name Commzssions, were without 
doubt strange, and out of place, when no difficulty had been 
made of applying it to the three ministers charged with the 
verification of credentials, and to the five who were drawing up 
the political organization of Germany. But, if I had supposed 
that Prince Metternich had any other object in view than that 
of gaining time, he would himself have undeceived me. 

After the meeting, he asked me to his study, and told 
me that he and Lord Castlereagh had determined not to 
allow Russia to pass the Vistula; that they were doing their 
utmost to get Prussia to make common cause with them on 
this question, and that they hoped to succeed. He conjured me 
to leave them time for this and not to press them. I wanted 
to know on what conditions they flattered themselves that they 
would receive the consent of Prussia ? He replied, by promising 
her a portion of Saxony, that is to say, from four to five hundred 
thousand souls of that country, with especially the town and 
district of Wittemberg, which may be considered as necessary 
to protect Berlin, all this arranged in such a manner as to leave 
Saxony still from fifteen to sixteen hundred: thousand souls, 
Torgau, Kcenigstein, and the course of the Elbe, from the district 
of Wittemberg to Bohemia. 

I have been informed that, in a Council of State, presided 
over by the emperor himself, and composed of Count von Stadion, 
Prince von Schwarzenberg and Prince Metternich, as well as 
of Count von Zichy and General Duka,! it was decided as a 
principle that the question of Saxony was of a greater interest 
for Austria even than that of Poland, and that the safety of the 


1 Peter, Count Duka, born in the year 1756, was made /é/dzeugmeister and Privy 
Councillor of the Empire of Austria, and died in 1822. 


302 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


monarchy demanded that the defiles of Thuringen and of the 
Saale should not fall into the hands of Prussia. (I enter into 
more minute details on this subject in my letter of to-day, 
addressed to the department.) 

This circumstance has caused me to put a little more confidence 
in what Prince Metternich has said to me on the subject, than I 
should have done otherwise. If we succeed in preserving the ~ 
kingdom of Saxony intact, with from four-fifths to three-fourths 
of its population, we shall have done a great deal for justice, 
for the general good, and a great deal also for the glory of 
your Majesty. 

The Emperor of Russia has answered the report of Lord 
Castlereagh. I shall see his reply, and shall have the honour 
of describing matters more pertinently, than by “earsay in 
my next despatch. At present, | only know with certainty, 
that the emperor complains of the injustice which he pretends 
has been done him, in supposing in him an ambition which he 
has not. He represents himself as in some way ill-treated, and 
then, without too marked a transition, declares that he will desist 
from none of his former pretensions. This reply roused Lord 
Castlereagh’s ire, and he sent an answer to the emperor, which is 
to be taken by Lord Stewart this evening. His brother has 
charged him with this commission, because throughout the war, 
he had and still retains, the confidence of the emperor. 

Herr von Gentz, who translated this answer for the benefit of 
the Austrian cabinet, to whom it has been forwarded, says it is 
very firm and very good. 

The affairs of Switzerland are now being considered. I have 
chosen M. de Dalberg to take part in the conferences in which 
they will be discussed. I will not repeat to your Majesty all 
that has passed on this question, for my report to the department 
gives a full account of it. 

Yesterday at four o’clock, I paid a visit to Prince Metternich, 
who had asked me to call on him. I found Count Nesselrode 
and Lord Castlereagh there. Prince Metternich began with fine 
protestations of his desire to be in my confidence, to be on good 
terms with France, and to do nothing without us.! 

“What they desired,” he said, “was that, putting aside all 
susceptibility, I should do all in my power to aid them in 
advancing matters, and in getting out of the dilemma, in which 
he affirmed they found themselves.” 

I replied that their situation with respect to me, was very 
different from mine with regard to them ; that I neither wished, 
did, nor knew anything with which they were unacquainted ; 


1 Text: ‘‘sans nous” = ‘‘without us.” Var.: ‘‘sans e//e” = ‘‘ without her,” 
(France). 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 303 


while they, on the contrary, had been doing, and were daily doing 
a mass of things of which I was ignorant, or, if I did get to hear 
of some of them, it was only by hearsay from the town, that 
it was only in this way, that I knew of the existence of a reply 
from the Emperor Alexander to Lord Castlereagh. (Here, I 
saw I embarrassed him, and understood that he was unwilling 
to be convicted of having been indiscreet in this respect, before 
Count Nesselrode.) I hastened to add that I was quite ignorant 
of the contents of that reply, nor did I in fact know definitely, if 
there had been one at all. Then, I remarked, that as to the 
difficulties of which they complained, I could only attribute 
them to one cause, and that was their refusal to assemble the 
congress. 

“You will,” I told them, “have to assemble it one day or 
other. The more you delay, the more grounds will you give 
for the suspicion that you have views which you dare not show 
in broad daylight. So much hesitation seems to indicate an 
uneasy conscience; why do you object to declare, without 
waiting for the verification of credentials, which may take 
a considerable time, that all those who have sent theirs to the 
seal-office, must meet at some specified place ? —The commissions 
will be reported there ; it will be declared that each can carry 
his demands thither, and they each will go his own way. The 
commissions will then do their work, and business will progress 
with a certain amount of regularity.” 

Lord Castlereagh approved of this plan, which had for him 
the merit of clearing out of the way the difficulty relative to 
the contested credentials. But he remarked that the word 
“ Congress” alone was sufficient to frighten the Prussians, and 
that Prince von Hardenberg had an especial horror of it. Prince 
Metternich repeated the greater number of the arguments he 
had laid before us at the last conference. He thought it prefer- 
able to summon the congress only when they had come to 
some agreement, at least on all the more important questions. 

“There is one,” he said, “that is demanding our attention 
now.” — 

He meant that of Poland, but refused to mention it by name, 
and passed swiftly to the affairs of Germany, properly so called. 

“There is,” he said, “great unanimity on these questions 
(ze. of Germany) amongst all who are directly concerned in 
them. The affairs of Switzerland are now coming to the front, 
and ought not,” he added, “to be settled without the intervention 
of France.” 

I told him, I had thought it impossible for them to have 
any other opinion, and had therefore selected M. de Dalberg to 


1 Suppressed in the text of the archives. 


304 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


take part in the conferences which would be held on the subject. 
Passing thence to the affairs of Italy, the word “ Complications,” 
which Prince Metternich is perpetually making use of, for the 
purpose of expressing himself vaguely—a resource of which his 
feeble policy is in constant need—was employed for the affairs 
of Genoa and Turin, and those of Naples and Sicily. He wanted 
to prove that the tranquillity of Italy, and therefore of Europe, 
depended on the Naples business, not being arranged at the 
congress, but on its being deferred to some subsequent date. 

“The force of things,’ he said, “will necessarily place the 
House of Bourbon on the throne of Naples.” 

“The force of things,” I replied, “is now to be seen in all its 
might. It is at the congress that this question ought to be 
settled. In the geographical order, this question is the last of 
those of Italy, and I am quite.content to follow the geographical 
order ; du¢ my compliance can go no further.” 

Prince Metternich then proceeded to speak of the supporters 
Murat had in Italy. 

“ Organize Italy, and there will be none left him. Put an end 
to an odious temporary arrangement ; strengthen the right of 
possession in upper and middle Italy ; from the Alps to the 
frontiers of Naples, let there be not a single spot of ground 
under military occupation ; let there be rightful sovereigns, and 
a regular government; fix the succession of Sardinia ; send an 
archduke to rule Milan ; recognize the rights of the Queen of 
Etruria; give back to the Pope what belongs to him, and 
which you detain ; Murat? will not have any hold left on the 
affections of the people and will be no more for Italy than a 
brigand.” 

This geographical line for treating Italian affairs seemed to 
answer, and it was decided to call the Marquis de Saint-Marsan ? 
to the next conference, in order to settle with him the affairs of 
Sardinia, in accordance with this plan. M. de Brignolles,* deputy 

1 Var.: ‘‘et alors Murat,” =‘* and then Murat.” 

2 Antony Asinari, Marquis of St. Marsan, was born at Turin in 1761 of an old 
family of Languedoc. He entered when still quite young into the diplomatic service, 
and was entrusted with various missions. In 1796, he was made Minister of War and 
of Marine. When Piedmont was incorporated with France, M. de St. Marsan was 
appointed state-councillor by Napoleon and French minister at Berlin. In 1813, he 
returned to Paris and was made a senator. In 1814, M. de St. Marsan was placed 
by the allied sovereigns at the head of the temporary government of Turin. King 
Victor Emmanuel, on his return, appointed him Minister of War and plenipotentiary 
at the Congress of Vienna. In 1816, he was Foreign Secretary, and President of the 
Council in 1818. He retired in 1821 and died in 1828. 

3 Antony, Marquis de Brignolles-Sales, descended from an ancient and illustrious 
Genoa family. Born in 1786, he was at first awdzteur at the imperial Council of State, 
and, later, prefect of Savona. In 1814, he was sent to the Congress as plenipotentiary 
bythe city of Genoa. He took allegiance to the House of Savoy, became head of 


the royal University (1816), ambassador at Rome (1839), and later at Paris. He was 
appointed Minister of State and Senator, and died in 1863. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 305 


of the town of Genoa, is also to be heard on all that concerns 
the commercial interests of this town. Lord Castlereagh insists 
on Genoa being a free port, and, on this occasion, spoke with 
disapprobation and bitterness, of the franchise of the port of 
Marseilles, 

We should have been justified in believing that our position 
was improving, were it not that I hardly dare to rely on appear- 
ances here, having too great reason to distrust the sincerity of 
Prince Metternich ; and further, I know not what may be the 
meaning of the unexpected departure of the Grand Duke Con- 
stantine, who leaves Vienna to-morrow direct for Warsaw. 

An expected journey of the Emperor Alexander to Gratz, zu 
Styria,| is much spoken of. It is said that he intends to go as 
far as Trieste. One of the archdukes must do him the honours 
of this part of the Austrian monarchy. The journey is announced 
for the 2oth instant. 

The court of Vienna continues to show its guests a hospitality, 
which, considering the state of its finances, must burden it 
considerably. Kings, emperors, empresses, queens, hereditary 
princes, prince-regents, are to be seen everywhere. The court 
defrays the expenses of all. It is estimated, that the expense 
for each day must amount to two hundred and twenty thousand 
florins in paper money. Royalty certainly loses some of the 
grandeur which befits it in such assemblies. It seems to me 
rather unbecoming to find three or four kings, and more princes, 
at the balls and teas of private citizens.? It is necessary to come 
to France to see in royalty that brilliancy and dignity which 
render it at once august and dear in the eyes of the people. 

I have the honour to be,.... 


No. 68.—KING LOUIS XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, Vovember 9, 1814. 
My COousIN, 
I have received your report, No. 9. 

I see with satisfaction, the approaching opening of the 
congress, but still foresee many difficulties. 

I have charged the Comte de Blacas to report to you : 

Ist. An interview which he has had with the Duke of 
Wellington.2 You will see that this latter speaks in far plainer 
terms than Lord Castlereagh, Which of the two gives the true 

1 Omitted in the text of the archives. é 
2 Var.: ‘‘de simples particuliers de Vienne,” = ‘‘ at the houses of private citizens 


of Vienna.” 
3 The Duke of Wellington was at that time ambassador at Paris. He was then 


appointed plenipotentiary at the congress from February 1 to March 26, 1815. 
VOL. II. : Xx 


306 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


intention of his court? I do not know; but what Lord 
Wellington says will, in any case, be a good weapon in your 
hands.! 

2nd. A document which this ambassador declares to be 
authentic ; nothing can astonish me that Prince Metternich 
does, but I should be surprised, if on October 31st, you had 
not yet been acquainted with such a fact. However that may 
be, it was in any case necessary for you to be informed of it. 

You will learn with pleasure that my brother arrived on | 
Sunday in very good health. And now, may God have you, my 
cousin, in His safe and holy keeping. 


LOuIS. 


No. II—THE COMTE DE BLACAS D’AULPS TO THE PRINCE 
DE TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, Movember 9, 1814. 

I AM but following out, your Highness, an order of 
the king, in hastening to transmit to you, from his Majesty, 
important information, and instructions which he considers no 
less essential. 

Your late interview with the Emperor of Russia, and yet more, 
your fears as to the compliance of Austria and England, have 
begotten in the king a lively desire to gather any information 
serving to enlighten him as to the real disposition of this latter 
power. That which has been reported to you of the language 
held by the Prince Regent, besides what his Majesty already 
knew in this respect, caused him to see the necessity of sounding 
the intentions of the British Cabinet. 

A conversation which I have just had with the Duke of 
Wellington, has accomplished this, or at least has furnished the 
king with the opportunity of claiming the co-operation of 
England, more strongly still, on all the more thorny points 
of the negotiation. Lord Wellington, after assuring me that 
the instructions given to Lord Castlereagh, and with which he 
was well acquainted, were absolutely opposed to the designs 
of the Emperor Alexander on Poland, and consequently on 
Saxony, since the fate of Saxony depends absolutely on the 
determination come to with regard to Poland, told me that it 
was by devoting attention solely to this great question, and by 
neglecting all secondary interests, that an understanding would 
be most easily arrived at. According to him, Austria will never 
lend support to a project rejected by France, and Prussia 
herself, who takes Saxony for want of something better, would 


1 Text: ‘‘mais le dire de Lord Wellington sera dans tous les cas,” as translated. 


Var.: ‘‘ mais le Duc de Wellington sera en tous cas,” = ‘‘ but the Duke of Wellington 
will be in any case.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 307 


be extremely pleased to find herself again oesses of the Duchy 
of Warsaw. Finding the Duke of Wellington! so explicit on this 
point, I thought that, according to the commands of the king, 
I ought to try and take steps which, although quite deprived 
of any official character, might yet more and more engage 
him in the admission of the only views likely to be avowed by 
the court of London. I represented to him, that if the views 
of his government were such as he told me, and if the only 
obstacle to a prompt and happy issue of the negotiations lay 
in the difficulty of reducing to one uniform resistance various 
oppositions of different natures, it seemed to me that a compact 
concluded between France, England, Spain, and Holland, and 
which should have no other aim than the public expression of 
the views held by them conjointly on this question, would soon 
obtain the assent of the other courts. This means, by presenting 
an imposing concurrence of opinion, would dissolve at once the 
charm which was beguiling so many states into a direction 
contrary to their interests, and the king, having no other am- 
bition than the enforcement of the principles of public law, 
and of a just balance of power in Europe, could flatter himself 
that there would be no cause which would drive from his side 
those who, animated by the same sentiments, would be invited 
to rally there. 

This proposal, whose advantages the Duke of Wellington 
was obliged to admit, was rejected by him, on the grounds 
of its being superfluous; but he protested to me with more 
emphasis than ever, the just intentions of his government 
on the question of Poland and Saxony, and even on that of 
Naples, and he reiterated that an exclusive attention given to 
these great interests would soon bring the plenipotentiaries to the 
end from which the court of St. Petersburg was swerving. 

Your Highness therefore sees that (whatever may be the 
reticence of her minister at the Congress) England is very 
sensible here of the instructions with which she has entrusted 
her envoy, instructions which in connecting,? as the Duke of 
Wellington has done, the question of Saxony with that of 
Poland,’ offer the king the most important support. In this 
state of affairs, his Majesty thinks that you could to some 
advantage make use of the information which I have the honour 


1 Text: ‘‘trouvant le Duc de Wellington tellement explicite,” = ‘‘ finding the 
Duke of Wellington so explicit.” Var.: ‘‘Ze trouvant tellement explicite,” = 
cf finding him so explicit.” 

2 Text : ‘en liant” = ‘in connecting.” Var. : ‘‘lorsgu’on lie” = ‘‘when one 
connects.” 

3 Text: ‘‘la question de la Saxe 4 celle de la Pologne,” = ‘‘the question of 
Saxony with that of Poland.” Var.: ‘‘la question de la Pologne a celle de la Saxe,” = 
**the question of Poland with that of Saxony.” (Mere inversion of words.) 


X 2 


308 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


to give you. By challenging the instructions of Lord Castle- 
reagh, you are thus empowered to put him to the necessity 
of giving you some reply, which it would be difficult for him 
to make entirely indefinite, since one day he will be compelled 
to prove that his policy has been consistent with that of his 
government, and with the best interests of his country. 

The independence of Poland, which would be very popular 
in England if carried out, would certainly not? be so if Russia 
is allowed to do as she proposes. 

Your Highness will therefore doubtless see, that in your 
intercourse with the English minister it will be very important 
to keep these two suppositions distinct. The king is of opinion 
that the stronger the views you express in favour of a real 
and complete independence of the Polish people, if that should 
be practicable, the more you will deprive Lord Castlereagh of 
all means of justifying in the eyes of England? the abandoning 
of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw to the Emperor Alexander. 

The king has informed you of the orders which his Majesty 
has given? to the Minister of War, and which are to place the 
army on a footing of peace.t 

The document which I here subjoin by order of the king, and 
which has been given to me as authentic, proves how necessary 
this measure was, in the midst of the breakers that surround us. 
Nothing can cause surprise that comes from Prince Metternich, 
yet it would all the same be very singular should such a fact not 
have been known to you on October 31st. Be so good, I beg of you, 
never to mention from whom I obtained the document which [am 
forwarding to you. 

lam glad you are satisfied with the services of the Chevalier de 
Vernégues. I have known for a long time the enlightened zeal he 
has for the cause we ourselves serve,\as well as his character, 
which deserves the highest esteem. 

I have given M. ad’ André a situation on the estates of the king ; 
zt was necessary at first to give him means of support; but I 
think that he will, in the end, be able to serve the king to far more 
advantage than in an administration of which the revenue ts of 
small importance. 


1 Text: ‘ne le serait,” = ‘‘ would not be so.” Var.: ‘‘ne le sera,” = ‘‘ well 
not be so.” 

2 Text: ‘‘aux yeux de l’Angleterre,” = ‘‘in the eyes of England.” Var.: ‘‘aux 
yeux de /a nation Anglaise,” = ‘‘in the eyes of the English nation.” 

3 Text: ‘vous a fait connaitre les ordres que sa Majesté a donnés,” = ‘‘has in- 
formed you of the orders which his Majesty has given.” Var.: ‘‘vous a zustrutt des 
ordres que S.JZ. avait donnés,” = ‘‘has acquainted you with the orders which 4. M/Z, 
had given.” 

«Add. : ‘Te me flatte que cette détermination, dictée par les considérations dont vous 
sentez toute la force, ne tardera pas a devenir superflue,” = ‘‘I flatter myself that this 


resolve, dictated by considerations of which you fully feel the force, will not be long 
in becoming superfluous.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 309 


Be pleased to accept the renewed assurance of my unalterable 
attachment and of my high regard. 
BLACAS D’AULPS. 


P.S.—This letter was partly written before the arrival of your 
No. 9, which only proves more and more the necessity of establishing 
good terms between ourselves and England on the questions which 
divide the negotiating parties. 


No. 12A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CONGRESS 
TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, JVovember 12, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

All the private information that reaches us causes us to 
fear that the questions of Poland and Saxony are still in an 
unsatisfactory stage, and that what hinders progress is the blind 
obstinacy of the Emperor of Russia and of the King of Prussia, 
as well as a fatal inertia on the part of Austria. 

A messenger from the King of Saxony, who left Berlin on 
the 5th instant, has brought with him an emphatic protest which 
he has communicated to us. This declaration says that the 
king will not consent to any exchange, and refuses absolutely to 
abdicate. His intention is that this expression of his opinions 
should be published. We think that it can only produce a 
very good effect, and shall probably forward it to you by the 
next messenger for insertion in the JMJonzteur The King of 
Saxony, since the temporary establishment of a Prussian ad- 
ministration, refuses all the proposals which have been offered 
him, and has told the Prussian government as much. 

Meanwhile, the Grand Duke Constantine has left for Warsaw. 
He carries, as we hear, instructions for organizing this new 
Poland, which, insignificant as it is in itself, will yet prove a 
source of trouble for its neighbours. Austria has taken alarm 
at this; her cabinet apparently is quite willing to exhaust 
all means for turning the Emperor of Russia from his designs, 
and severing him from the King of Prussia. Feeling, however, 
uncertain of success, she has chosen to march nearly twenty 
to twenty-five thousand men to Galicia. These troops are to 
reinforce the line which she already has on that frontier ; but 
Austria shows no desire to oppose the invasion of Saxony by 
means of arms. 

Prince Metternich has despatched a messenger to London. 
He probably carries an order to Count von Meerveldt to 
represent to the British cabinet the extreme importance of 


1 The latter part of this letter and the postscript are not found in the text of the 
record-office of the ministry of Foreign Affairs. 


310 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


stoutly seconding the advice given’ by Lord Castlereagh in his 
notes to the Emperor of Russia. This minister wishes the Grand 
Duchy of Warsaw to remain independent, or at least that the 
Vistula be the boundary line between Russia, Prussia, and Austria. 
It is on this point that the three powers are still negotiating. 
The Emperor Alexander, however, has determined to make one 
step further in pursuit of his aim, and is beguiling the King of 
Prussia, whom he has advised to commence the organization of 
Saxony, as he himself has that of Warsaw. 

This conduct sows in Europe the seeds of war, which, at the 
present moment, it would be impossible to remove. It will also 
furnish elements for long disturbances, and render very difficult 
the settling of German affairs. 

The result of the last private conference has been to resume 
the discussion of Italian affairs. 

The Austrian ministry is the more resolved to bring them 
to some conclusion, that the Jacobin agitation, making itself 
felt in that part of Europe, under the open protection of Murat, 
perplexes her. This agitation is backed by Russia and by the 
English. Lord William Bentinck! has sown, in those parts, the 
seeds of revolutionary ideas which were intended to thwart 
Bonaparte’s designs, but, as things now stand, they do more 
harm than good. 

The incorporation of Genoa with Piedmont will be made, we 
believe, by virtue of a capitulation. The Genoese had drawn up 
a proposal for a constitution, but of so democratic a character 
that it could not be allowed. But the capitulation is so much 
the more needed, that the Genoese have a strong repugnance 
to this act of submission, and that it is advisable to put down, 
as far as possible, the germs of bitterness and discord which 
crop up on all sides whenever the union of Belgians and Dutch, 
Saxons and Prussians, Italians and Austrians, is introduced. 

We have good hopes.of being able to restore Parma to the 
Spanish succession, and to get one of the legations given to the 
Archduchess Marie-Louise. If this exchange can be brought 
about, its return to the Holy See will be proposed in the case 
of the prince dying without male issue. The fate of Murat 
has not yet been broached ; but the embassy of the king will 
regard no arrangement as final if the retirement of Murat is 
not stipulated for. 

Swiss affairs also have not yet been touched upon. It is 
believed that the allies propose connecting Switzerland with the 
military system of Germany, in order to oppose stronger barriers 
to France. The nomination of Herr von Stein, on the part of 


1 It will be remembered that Lord William Bentinck had for several years com- 
manded a body of English troops in Sicily. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 311 


Russia, as commissioner appointed for this purpose, may perhaps 
lead one to suspect some concealed intentions. But this arrange- 
ment would be so strongly opposed to the interests of the 
Swiss, that it may be left to them to overthrow it, when it 
comes within the range of practical politics. 

You will therefore see, Monsieur le Comte, by this brief 
description of what is occupying the congress, that no very 
great results have as yet been attained, but that private intrigues 
have been sufficiently active. On the side of the great powers 
these intrigues proceed from two causes: the fear with which 
revolutionary France still inspires them, and the secret desire 
which they harbour of seeing France restrained within such 
limits, that she be rendered unable to regain that influence 
which she exerted at certain epochs of her history. 

The policy adopted by the king will restore to the country 
the confidence which the measures of her last government lost 
her, and with that the interference of France will be more 
sought after than dreaded. 

The Comte de Noailles, who was presented to the sovereigns 
on his arrival, has collected the observations and sayings which 
have come in his way, and which seemed to him worthy of 
interest. We have the honour to inclose herewith the report 
containing them. They present nothing but what can give 
satisfaction. 

Be pleased to accept, &c. 


No. 11.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING LOUIS XVIII. 


VIENNA, November 12, 1814. 
SIRE, 

Prince Metternich and Lord Castlereagh have persuaded 
the Prussian ministry to make common cause with them on the 
question of Poland. But the hopes built on the concurrence. of 
Prussia have not been of long duration. The Emperor of Russia, 
having engaged the King of Prussia to dine with him a few 
days ago, he had with him a long conversation, of which I have 
gleaned a few details from Prince Adam Czartoryski. He 
reminded him of the friendship which united them, of the high 
value he attached to it, of all that he had done to make it last- 
ing. Their age being almost the same, it was pleasant to think 
that they might, for a long time to come, witness the happiness 
which their people would enjoy from their close intimacy. He 
had always bound his hopes of fame to the restoration of 
a kingdom of Poland. When he was almost able to touch 
the goal of his wishes, was he to have the mortification of 
having to count among his opponents his dearest friend, and the 


312 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


only prince upon whose sentiments he had relied? The king 
made him a thousand protestations, and sworetosupport the Polish 
question. “It is not sufficient,” continued the emperor, “ for you 
alone to be of this disposition, your ministers must also conform to 
it.” And he made the king summon Prince von Hardenberg. He 
having arrived, the emperor repeated to him all that he had said, 
and the promise that the king had given. Prince von Hardenberg 
was about to make some objections, but pressed by the Emperor 
Alexander, who asked him if he refused to obey the orders of 
his king, and these orders being absolute, there was nothing left 
him but to promise to carry them out faithfully. This is all that 
I have been able to gather of the scene ; but there were probably 
many other particulars, of which I am in ignorance, if it is true 
as Herr von Gentz has assured me, that Prince von Hardenberg 
declared “he had never seen the like.” 

This change on the part of Prussia has disconcerted greatly 
Prince Metternich and Lord Castlereagh. They would have 
liked Prince von Hardenberg to have tendered his resignation, and 
certainly this could have gravely embarrassed! the king and the 
emperor, but he does not appear to have even thought of it 

As to myself, believing as I do that Prince Metternich 
obtained the concurrence of the Prussians by more concessions 
than he avowed, I am inclined to think this defection as good 
for us, and your Majesty will see that my presentiments were 
only too well founded. 

The Grand Duke Constantine, who left two days ago, went to 
organize the army of the Duchy of Warsaw. He was also 
charged with drawing up a civil organization for the country. 
The tenor of his instructions, according to Herr von Anstedt,® 
who prepared them, is that the Emperor Alexander will never 
withdraw any of his pretensions. The emperor has also 
probably engaged the King of Prussia to give likewise 
a military and civil organization to Saxony. He is reported to 
have said : “ From civil organization to ownership is not far.” In 
a letter which I received from M. de Caraman,‘ I find that the 
brother of the Minister of Finances and several generals have 
left Berlin in order to organize Saxony.’ M. de Caraman 


1 Text: ‘que cela aurait pu embarrasser,” = ‘‘ that this cow/d have embarrassed.” 
Var.: ‘‘ que cela awrait embarrasé,’’ = ‘‘this would have embarrassed.” 

2 Text: ‘‘ mais il ne parait pas y avoir méme pensé” = ‘‘ but he does not appear 
to have even thought of it.” Var.: ‘‘mais il ne parait pas méme y avoir pensé” = 
‘but he does not appear evex to have thought of it.” 

3 Var.: Herr von Anstetten. 

# Victor Ricquet, Marquis, afterwards Duc de Caraman, was born in 1762. In 
1814, Louis XVIII. appointed him ambassador at Berlin, and, inthe year following, 
at Vienna. He was present as plenipotentiary at the different congresses of the 
Holy Alliance, and created Duc in 1828. He died in 1829. 

5 Var.: add. ctvilement et militairement =civilly and militarily. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 313 


adds that, nevertheless, the occupation of Saxony is at present 
only represented as temporary, and not definite, at Berlin. 

There is yet a further tale, that the Emperor Alexander, after 
speaking of the opposition of Austria to his views, and bitterly 
complaining of Prince Metternich, said: “ Austria believes 
herself assured of Italy, but there is there a Napoleon, who 
might be found useful”—a saying which I could not guarantee, 
but which circulates, and which, if true, would enable one to 
form. an idea of him who uttered it. 

Lord Castlereagh has not yet received a reply to his last 
note: some even believe that the emperor will not deign to 
answer it. 

While the affairs of Poland and Saxony thus remain in sus- 
pense, the ideas, which, in the conference which I had the honour 
of describing to your Majesty, I had put forward on.the organi- 
zation of Italy, have borne fruit. The day before yesterday, I 
was with Lord Castlereagh, and found him full of it. Prince 
Metternich, who dined yesterday with us at the house of M. 
de Rasumowski, was no less so. To-day, he summoned Lord 
Castlereagh, Count Nesselrode, and myself in order to consider 
this question. On my coming he told me that it would 
only be question of this to-day ; that the day after to-morrow, 
to-morrow, perhaps in an hour, he would be in a position to 
speak to me of Poland and Saxony, but that for the moment 
he could not do so. I did not press the point. The discussion 
centred round the country of Genoa alone. It was proposed 
not to incorporate it with Piedmont, but to give it to the King 
of Sardinia by a capitulation which would insure! it certain privi- 
leges and private institutions. Lord Castlereagh had brought 
some memoranda and projects which had been addressed 
to him on the subject, and read them to us. He very strongly 
insisted on the establishment of a free port, of a bonded ware- 
house, and of a transit with defined rights across Piedmont. It 
was decided to meet again to-morrow, and summon MM. de 
Saint-Marsan and de Brignoles to the meeting. 

After the conference, being alone with Prince Metternich, and 
desiring to know how he stood with regard to Poland and Saxony, 
and what he proposed to do on this subject, in place of putting 
him direct questions which he would only have eluded, I spoke 
to him of himself, and, assuming the tone of an old friend, I told 
him that, while occupied in business affairs, it was yet necessary 
to think of oneself, and that it seemed to me he did not do so 
sufficiently : that there were matters to which one was forced by 
necessity, but that it was indispensable that this necessity be made 


1 Text: “qui lui assurat” = ‘“‘which would insure it.” Var.: ‘qui lui 
assurera”? = ‘which wi// insure it.” 


314 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


plain to every one ; that one might be actuated, as he probably 
was, by the most disinterested motives ; but that, if these motives 
were unknown to the public, one was yet calumniated, because 
in that case, the public could only judge by results; that he 
was exposed to reproaches of all kinds, as, for instance, of 
having sacrificed Saxony ; that I sincerely hoped he had not 
done so; but why give pretext for such rumours? Why not 
give his friends the means of defending or justifying him? A 
slight unbending on his part was the result of the frankness with 
which I spoke to him. He read me his letter to Prussia on the 
question of Saxony, and some affectionate thanks! on my part 
led him to confide it to me. I promised him it should remain 
secret. I enclose a copy of it with the letter that I have the 
honour to write to your Majesty. I beg of your Majesty to take 
great care of it,and to permit me to ask for it again on my return. 

Your Majesty will see in this letter that Prince Metternich 
had promised the Prussians not, as he had assured me a portion 
of Saxony, but the whole of it, a promise which he had for- 
tunately made dependent on a condition which rendered its 
accomplishment impossible.2 Your Majesty will see further by 
this note that Prince Metternich abandons Luxemburg to the 
Prussians, after having assured me on more than one occasion 
that he would not give it to them. This same note reveals 
further the project, formed now for some time, of putting 
Germany under what they are pleased to call the influence, 
and which would really be the absolute dominion, of Prussia 
and Austria. 

Prince Metternich protests now that he will never abandon 
Saxony. As to Poland, he has given me to understand that 
he would sacrifice much, which signifies that he would sacrifice 
everything, if the Emperor Alexander refused to yield an inch. 

I was still with him when a report of the state of the 
Austrian army was brought to him. He allowed me to see it. 
The actual forces of this army are 374,000 men, of whom 52,000 
are cavalry, and 800 pieces of cannon. It is while possessing 
such an army as this that he thinks the best thing for Austria 
to do is to submit to and suffer everything. Your Majesty 
will be pleased to remark that the number of the troops is 
the effective strength of the army. 


1 Text: ‘‘affectueux” = ‘“‘affectionate.” Var.: ‘‘assez affectueux” = “‘suffi- 
ciently affectionate.” 

2 “Prince Metternich gave Saxony to Prussia on two conditions: (1) that Prussia 
should abandon Russia on the Polish question ; (2) that on the side of the Rhine, 
the Mein on one side and the Moselle on the other should be the boundaries between 
the states of North and the states of South Germany, an arrangement which com- 
pelled Prussia to give up Mayence. Now it is well known that Frederick William 
and the Emperor Alexander were very closely united in their views on Poland, and 
that, on the other hand, Prussia eagerly coveted Mayence. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 315 


I shall not seal the letter which I have the honour to write 
to your Majesty till after my return from a conference, to which 
Iam going this morning. 

I have just left the conference. I found myself in company 
with Count Nesselrode, Prince Metternich, and Lord Castlereagh. 
M. de Saint-Marsan, to whom notice of the meeting had been 
sent, was also admitted. The only question under discussion was 
that of the incorporation of Genoa with Piedmont. A kind 
of authority, given by the provisory government formed 
some months ago by Lord William Bentinck, caused some 
difficulties to arise. They will be removed by trying to establish, 
that Genoa isavacant country. It was determined that the eight 
powers should reassemble to-morrow to make a declaration to 
this effect, and to give to M.de Brignoles, the envoy from 
Genoa, a copy of the protocol which shall contain this declar- 
ation. There will only remain to decide upon the method of 
the incorporation. I availed myself of the conference of to-day 
to speak of the succession of Sardinia. M. de Saint-Marsan, as 
I had suspected, had received from his court instructions agree- 
able to the rights of the house of Carignan. I proposed a word- 
ing which acknowledges these rights. M. de Saint-Marsan 
adopted and seconded it, and I have every reason for believing 
that it will be adopted. 

The discussion relative to the affairs of Switzerland will not 
be long now in commencing. 

I have the honour to be... . 


No. 7B.—KING Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, Movember 15, 1814. 

My COousIN, 

I have received’ your letter No. 10, and await with 
impatience the further details which you promise. 

I seize eagerly the hope that you hold out to me for 
Saxony, and I believe I can give myself up to it with some 
confidence, seeing that Prince Metternich speaks no longer his 
own opinion, but that of a council. I should certainly prefer 
that the kingdom should remain intact, but I think that its 
unhappy king may deem himself fortunate if two-thirds or 
three-fourths of it are left him. 

r« With regard to the proposed exchange, I do not like, asa 
general rule, giving up what belongs to me, still less do I like 


1 Text: ‘‘Une espéce de pouvoirs donnés” = ‘‘a kind of authority given. ” 
Var. : ‘‘une espéce de pouvoir donné” = ‘‘a kind of authority given” (singular 
instead of plural). 


316 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


robbing another ; and after all, the rights of the Bishop-Prince 
of Basel, less important doubtless though they be to the tran- 
quillity of Europe, are yet no less sacred than those of the King 
of Saxony. If, however, the spoliation of the former of these- 
princes is inevitable, moved by the twofold consideration of pre 
serving a portion of his estates to the King of Sardinia, and of 
rendering a great service to the canton of Bern, I will consent 
to the exchange and now send you an authority ad hoc 

Whereupon, my cousin, I pray God that He may have you 
in His safe and holy keeping. 

LOUIS. 


No. 13A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CON- 
GRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, JVovember 17, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

Since the sending off of our last despatch another confer- 
ence has been held. It has fixed the fate of Genoa agreeably 
to the secret article which incorporates that country in 
Piedmont. 

A commission has been appointed to settle the conditions 
under which this incorporation shall be effected. Austria, France, 
and England have been chosen as members of it. It will be com- 
posed of Count Wessemberg, the Comte de Noailles and Lord 
Clancarty. 

Lord Castlereagh has been put to some embarrassment by 
the conduct of Lord W. Bentinck at Genoa. This latter had 
flattered the Genoese with hopes of a complete independence. 
Lord Castlereagh has rather weakly maintained that this admiral 
went beyond his powers, and said that it was necessary by all 
means to soften to the Genoese the sacrifice which is imposed 
upon them. He assured the Deputy of Genoa that he would 
procure for his country, all the advantages enjoyed by his 
own country, Ireland, and we are curious to see how he will 
compensate the State of Genoa for the right of nominating 
members for the House of Commons and for the House of Lords, 
a prerogative which Ireland enjoys by its incorporation with 
Great Britain, and which cannot be given to the Genoese, since 
Piedmont possesses no parliament. This fact, and many others, 


1 Add.: ... of which you will make use in the five following cases, of which 
the first is only a rule of conduct for us :—(1) the impossibility of saving the princi- 
pality of Basel ; (2) the stags oes to the King of Sardinia of what remains to him 
of the nae of Savoy; (3) restitution of its share of Aargau to the canton of 
Bern ; (4) the free exercise of the Catholic religion in the portion of the Gex 
district given up to the canton of Geneva; (5) free navigation for France on the 
lake of Geneva. On these conditions you may agree to the exchange and sign. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. te 


prove that the noble lord has less studied the complications of 
European politics, than he has been struck with the danger to 
which a new system of continental blockade would expose his 
country. — 

In this conference, the plenipotentiary of Spain, Count de 
Labrador, maintained that it was necessary to leave to the Genoese 
the right of forming their own constitution, and that the secret 
article gave no right to the King of Sardinia, which had not 
signed the treaty of Paris. This minister wished doubtless to 
try, if the desire the Genoese had evinced to become subjects 
of the Queen of Etruria could not be realised. 

The desire not to change the provisions made by the treaty 
of Paris has caused the majority to decide that the zxcorporation 
of Genoa with Piedmont ought to be effected ; and that the act 
of submission on the part of this republic to France, and the 
cession which was made of it by the treaty of Paris, protected 
the principles of the law of nations. We supported this view. 

As soon as the report of this conference has been sent to us 
we shall have the honour, Monsieur le Comte, to transmit it to you. 

We address you meanwhile a document! which is far more 
curious, and which would severely denounce the principles of the 
coalition if we had not been witnesses of the embarrassment it 
causes, and of the desire which the ministers of the four powers 
have of declaring it either apocryphal, or published by a cul- 
pable precipitation on the part of Prince Repnin,? Governor 
of Saxony. 

This document deserves peculiar attention. It proves that in 
spite of all the trouble taken, since our arrival at the congress, 
to conceal from us the secret machinations of Russia and Prussia, 
in spite of the weakness of Prince Metternich and the incapacity 
of Lord Castlereagh, we have penetrated from the very first the 
deceitful combinations and tortuous path which the ministers of 
the four powers have followed, and which, without the intervention 
of France, would have destroyed even the possibility of coming 
to an agreement on some system of political equilibrium, a system 
which, badly conceived perhaps, will yet be under the egis of 
the general principles which ruled Europe before the Revolution. 


1 Prince Repnin, Governor of Saxony, had issued a proclamation, which declared 
that that country ought to be given up to Prussia. 

2 Nicolas, Prince Repnin-Wolkonski, a Russian general and diplomatist, was a 
grandson of the famous field-marshal of that name. Born in 1778, he was a colonel 
at Austerlitz, and was taken prisoner in that battle. In 1809, he was appointed 
ambassador at Cassel by King Jéréme Napoleon. Lieutenant-general in 1813, he 
was, after the battle of Leipzig, made Governor-general of Saxony for the allies, King 
Frederick Augustus being considered a prisoner of war. In 1814, he was accredited 
with plenipotentiary powers at the Congress of Vienna; after the peace he was 
appointed Governor of Little Russia (1816) and entered later (1835) into the Council 
of the Empire. He died in 1845. 


318 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


The publication of this circular in the German papers has 
caused a great deal of vexation to Herr von Stein, who, by his 
system of organization in Germany, has made himself the 
champion of the union of Saxony and Prussia. 

The English and Austrian ministers reproach him for having 
spoken of their consent, which they pretend they never gave, 
and which, as a matter of fact, they had subjected to very un- 
important conditions. Refutations therefore in several of the 
gazettes will soon appear. But it is well that this scandalous 
transaction, which lays bare the plots that have been woven 
here, should be disclosed. 

The minister of Saxony has not yet thought fit to publish 
the protest of the king, and will limit himself at present to 
announcing it only. 

We have the honour to address to you a copy of the circular, 
and you will be so kind, Monsieur le Comte, as to get it inserted 
in the MWonzteur, just as it is here subjoined, addressed to the 
ministry of Foreign Affairs. The occupation of Saxony by the 
Prussians is beyond all doubt a very grave fault on the part of 
the Austrian ministry, and an ignoring of all principles on the 
part of Lord Castlereagh ; but it does not yet decide the question, - 
and we see with satisfaction, that public opinion is very strong 
indeed against this measure. Bavaria has declared that she will 
never consent to the destruction of the House and people of 
Saxony, and that a German League could not be formed out of 
such elements. She has renewed her offers to Austria, if this 
power will resort to all her forces and adopt a more honest and 
candid policy. Wurtemberg seems to be moving in the same 
direction. 

Public opinion in Austria expresses without reserve, its 
disapproval of the execution of this measure, and Prince Metter- 
nich is greatly blamed, as neglecting the most important interests 
of the monarchy. 

Prince Talleyrand has had a third conversation with the 
Emperor of Russia, a full account of which he gives in his 
special report to the king. He has left no doubt in the emperor’s 
mind as to the part the king will take in the matter. The 
emperor himself was more affable and less autocratic than he 
had been at former interviews. 

Prussia, for her own part, cannot remain blind to the fact 
that this union, carried out in the face of so many difficulties, 
might become a source of embarrassment and danger for herself. 
The Prussian ministers are therefore trying the effect of nego- 
tiation. They appear to be willing to reserve to the King of 
Saxony an equivalent, or a part of Saxony enclosing one half 
of the population; but nothing has been agreed to in this 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 319 


respect on their part. They have even announced, that it would 
be sufficient if a Duke of Saxony only were retained. 

Prince Talleyrand has proved to the Emperor of Russia, 
that 1,600,000 inhabitants must be kept for Saxony, because 
Saxony comprises rather more than two million souls, that 
she ought to retain all that she has on the left bank of the 
Elbe, and that her territories on the right bank have a smaller 
number of inhabitants, not rising above 500,000 to 600,000 souls. 
A little less than 1,600,000 souls might perhaps be agreed to ; and 
as England and Austria have not yet abandoned their demand 
for fixed limits in Poland, all is still intact, and the final result 
of a negotiation which, without the firmness of the ambassadors of 
the king, would have been entirely abandoned, cannot yet be given. 

In any case, it will be less important for France to see a part 
of Poland sacrificed to Russia, than to see all Saxony destroyed, 
and some Austrian ministers are of opinion that if a sacrifice 
must be made on one point or another, Austria ought to be 
more compliant on the question of Poland’s boundaries, on 
condition that Prussia does not gain the advantage of uniting 
Saxony to her monarchy. 

It is by the combined action of these several interests, and by 
a course more conformable to true principle on the part of 
England, that we hope that this cause may be definitely settled. 

The news from Italy speaks of the intrigues of the King of 
Naples and of his armaments. We observe here, the fear with 
which this inspires Prince Metternich. We are informed also 
that the court of Russia has recalled the officer whom she had 
accredited at Murat’s court, and that the credentials, despatched 
to the minister of Russia at Palermo, expressly state that he 
is accredited to the King of the Two Sicelzes. 

A pamphlet, drafted by a certain Filangieri,! aide-de-camp 
of Murat, is circulating here; it is of a revolutionary and 
threatening character. The police have bought it up. Prince 
Metternich makes use of the alarm roused, in order to mislead 
public opinion with regard to the preservation of Murat on the 
throne of Naples. But he is the only one, even of the Emperor 
of Austria’s ministers, who supports a cause which Europe will 
soon treat as it deserves. 

The Emperor of Russia has signed the ratifications of the 
treaty made between himself and the King of Denmark, and 


1 Charles Filangieri, Prince of Satriano, Duke of Taormina, was born in 1785, was 
a Neapolitan general, and one of the most devoted officers of Murat. He was badly 
wounded in 1815, at the moment of the renewal of hostilities with Austria. He kept 
his rank after the restoration of the Bourbons. In 1848, King Ferdinand charged 
him with the subduing of Sicily. He succeeded after bloody battles, was appointed 
lieutenant-general and governor of the province, but retired shortly afterwards, and 
lived in retirement till his death. 


320 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


they were exchanged yesterday. The Russian troops are now 
to evacuate Holstein. 

No conclusion has yet been come to on Swiss affairs, and 
those of the German federation are not very far advanced. 
Prince Metternich and Prince von Hardenberg have commu- 
nicated the general line of policy to be followed to Count 
Nesselrode, that he may submit it to the emperor. In a reply 
dated November 11, Count Nesselrode announces to the cabinets 
of Austria and Prussia that Russia approves of the proposed 
basis of the federal compact. 

We have the honour to address to you this project, as it 
was communicated confidentially to us, and such as it is used at 
the deliberations of the German Commission. Many changes 
have been made in it, chiefly the division into districts, the right of 
War and peace: “x2. We hope to be shown the note of Count 
Nesselrode, and shall acquaint the ministry with its contents. 

Be pleased to accept, &c. 


No. 12,.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Lowurs: XViilL 


VIENNA, WVovember 17, 1814. 
SIRE, 

Before the Emperor of Russia secured the support of the 
King of Prussia, certain persons! who were in his confidence 
having advised him to turn to the side of France, to come to some 
understanding with her, and to see me, he had replied that hewould 
willingly see me, and that in future, in demanding an audience 
of him, I should have to apply, not to Count Nesselrode, but 
to Prince Wolkonski, his first aide-de-camp. I told the person 
by whom the message had been brought that if I demanded an 
audience of the emperor, Austria and England could not ignore 
it, that they would take umbrage at it and build besides all sorts 
of conjectures on it, and that, in demanding an audience by the 
unusual channel of an aide-de-camp, I should give an air of 
intrigue to any relations with the emperor, which would suit 
neither him nor me. Some days after, having asked why I had 
not been to see him, he was told my reasons, and approved of 
them, adding: “Then it is I who must attack him first.” 
Having often the occasion of finding myself with him at the same 
meetings, I made it a rule to come across him as little as possible, 
or even to abstain from going near him, shunning him, in fact, as 
much as was compatible with propriety. I was proceeding after 
this fashion on Saturday at the house of Count Zichy, where he 


1 Text: ‘‘des personnes” = ‘‘certain persons who were in his confidence.’ 
Var. : ‘‘ des personnes” = ‘‘¢hose persons who were in his confidence.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 321 


was. I had passed almost all the time in the gambling-room, 
and, profiting by the moment when every one was advancing to 
the tables, I prepared to retire, and had already reached the 
door of the antechamber, when, feeling a hand resting on my 
shoulder, I turned round, and saw it was that of the Emperor 
Alexander. He asked me why I had not gone to see him? 
when he should see me? what was I doing on Monday? He 
told me to go to him on that day at I1 am.; to go there in 
evening dress ; to resume the custom of wearing evening dress 
with him ; and, while saying this, he took my arms and pressed 
them ina friendly way. 

I was careful to inform Prince Metternich and Lord Castle- 
reagh of what had passed, in order to remove all idea of mystery, 
and to prevent all suspicion on their part. 

I went to the emperor at the hour indicated. 

“TI am very pleased to see you,” he said; “and you also 
wished to see me, did you not ?” 

I replied that it was with regret that I found myself in the 
same town as himself, and yet saw him so seldom. After which 
the conversation began. ; 

“ Flow are affairs now, and what is your position in,them ?” 

“ Always the same, sire. If your Majesty is willing to put 
Poland in a state of complete independence, we are ready to 
second you.” 

“T desired at Paris the restoration of Poland, and you 
approved of it. I desire it still, as a man, and as being 
always faithful to liberal ideas, which I will never abandon. But 
in my position, the desires I have as a man cannot guide me as 
a sovereign. Perhaps the day will come when Poland will be 
set again on a footing of complete independence. At present it 
cannot be thought of.” 

“If it is only a question of the partition of the Duchy of 
Warsaw, that concerns Austria and Prussia far more than our- 
selves. These two powers once satisfied on this point, we shall 
be satisfied too: so long as they are not satisfied, it is for us to 
support them, and it is our duty to do it, because Austria has 
allowed difficulties to spring up which could easily have been 
prevented.” 

“Tew: so?” 

“In demanding, at the time of her alliance with you, that 
the part of the Duchy of Warsaw which had belonged to her 
might! be occupied by her troops. You would certainly not 


1 Text: ‘‘ En demandant, lors de son alliance avec vous, 4 faire occuper” = as 
. . ” 
translated. Var.: ‘‘En demandant @ faire, lors de son alliance avec vous, occuper 
= order of words different ; no alteration in sense. 


VOL. II. Ys 


322 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


have refused it, and if she had occupied this district, you would 
never have thought of ousting her from it.” 

“ Austria.and I are in agreement now.” 

“That is not what is publicly believed.” 

“ We are agreed on the principal points: it is only a question 
of a few villages now.” 

“France takes only a second place in this question: in that 
of Saxony she takes the first.” 

“ Asa matter of fact, the question of Saxony is for the house 
of Bourbon—a family question.” 

“By no means, sire. In the affair of Saxony there is no 
question of any private individual, or of a private family: it is a 
question in which all the kings have an interest ; it is a question 
of the first interest for your Majesty as well; for your first 
interest is to take care of the personal glory which your Majesty 
has acquired, and whose brilliance flashes across your empire. 
Your Majesty owes it this consideration not only for yourself, 
but yet more for your country, whose patrimony it has now 
become. You will put a sanction on it by protecting it, and by 
making those principles respected which are the foundation of 
public order and of the security of all men. I speak to you, 
sire, not as minister for France, but as a man who is sincerely 
attached to your person.” 

“You speak of principles, and one of the first principles is that 
a man should keep his word of honour, and I have given mine.” 

“Obligations are of various kinds, and that which your 
Majesty took towards Europe in passing the Niemen ought to be 
of far more weight than any other. Permit me, sire, to add that 
the intervention of Russia in the affairs of Europe is generally 
looked upon with an eye of jealousy and suspicion, and that if 
this has lately in some degree been allowed, it is solely owing to 
the personal character of your Majesty. It is therefore necessary 
that this character should remain what it has always been.” 

“ That is an affair which concerns me alone, and of which I 
am the sole judge.” 

“Pardon, sire, but when one is a historic personage,’ one 
has the whole world for judge.” 

“ The King of Saxony is a man of unworthy character: he 
has broken his pledge more than once.” 

“He never gave any to your Majesty: he never gave any 
except to Austria. She alone therefore has the right to reproach 
him ; and, on the contrary, I know that the projects formed on 


1 Text: “quand on est homme de ’histoire” = ‘‘when one is a historic person- 
age.” Var. : ‘quand on est /homme de Vhistoire” = ‘‘ when one is the historic 
”? 
personage. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 323 


Saxony have caused the Emperor of Austria the most genuine 
grief—a thing which your Majesty ignores most certainly : other- 
wise, living, as your family and yourself do, with him and even 
in his palace for the last two months, you would never have 
caused him that grief. These very projects also grieve and alarm 
the people of Vienna: I have fresh proofs of this every day.” 

“But Austria is abandoning Saxony.” 

“Prince Metternich, whom I saw yesterday evening, showed 
me inclinations of a different nature from that which your 
Majesty does me the honour to mention.” 

“And you yourself? It is said that you would agree to 
yielding up a part?” 

“We shall only do it with the greatest regret. But if, in 
order that Prussia may have a population equal to that which 
she had in 1806, and which amounted to some 9,200,000 souls, 
it is necessary to give from 300 to 400 thousand Saxons, it is a 
sacrifice which we will make for the sake of peace.” 

“And that is just what the Saxons fear the most. They 
demand nothing better than to belong to the King of Prussia : 
all that they desire is not to be divided.” 

“We are within range for knowing? what is going on in 
Saxony, and we know that the Saxons are driven to despair at 
the idea of becoming Prussians.” 

“No; all that they fear is being divided, and that is, as a 
matter of fact, the most unfortunate thing that can befall a 
nation.” 

“Sire, suppose we apply this mode of reasoning to Poland!” 

“The division of Poland is not my doing. It is not 
my fault if the evil be not repaired: I have told you that 
perhaps it will be so one day.—The giving up of the two 
Lusatias would not, properly speaking, bea division of Saxony ; 
they were never incorporated with it ; they were till quite recent 
times a fief dependent on the crown of Bohemia; they had 
nothing in common with Saxony, save the bare fact of having been 
possessed by the same sovereign.” Tell me is it true that armies 
are being prepared in France?” (In putting this question the 
emperor came so close to me, that his face almost touched mine.) 


1 Text: ‘‘de savoir” = ‘‘for knowing.” Var.: ‘‘de connaitre” = ‘‘for being 
acquainted.” 

2 Lusatia is a province of Germany situated between the Elbe and the Oder, to 
the north of Bohemia and to the south of Brandenburg. It was divided into upper 
and lower Lusatia, each one governed by a margrave. The Lusatias formed originally 
part of the kingdom of Bohemia, from which they were detached in 1231 by King 
Ottokar, who gave them asa dowry to his daughter at her marriage with the Margrave 
of Brandenburg. They nevertheless reverted to the King of Bohemia in the following 
century. In 1635, the Emperor Ferdinand II. detached this province afresh from 
Bohemia, and gave it definitely to the Duke of Saxony, Johan-Georg. 


¥ 2 


324 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


“Yes, sire.” 

“ How many troops has the king ?” 

“One hundred and thirty thousand men under arms, and 
three hundred thousand, dismissed to their homes, but ready to 
be called out on the first necessity.” 

“How many of them are being mustered now ? 

‘“‘As many as are necessary to maintain peace. We have by 
turns felt the need of having no army at all and the need of 
having one. Of having no army at all when it was Bonaparte’s,! 
and of having one when it was the king’s. For this it was 
necessary to disband and recompose, to disarm at first, and then 
to arm again, and that is what at this moment we have just 
finished doing. Such is the aim of ouractual armaments. They 
menace no one, but when all Europe is under arms, it was 
thought fit that France should be so too in a fitting proportion,” 

“That is well. I hope that these matters may lead to a 
closer union between France and Russia. What are the desires 
of the king in this respect ?” 

“The king will never forget the services which your Majesty 
has rendered him, and will always be ready to acknowledge 
them, but he has his duties as sovereign of a great country, and 
as head of one of the most powerful and ancient houses of 
Europe. He could not abandon the House of Saxony. Incase 
of necessity he wishes us to protest; Spain, Bavaria, and other 
states as well, would protest also.” 

“Listen. Let us strike a bargain. Give way to me on the 
question of Saxony, and I will do the same for you on that of 
Naples. I have given no promise there.” 

“Your Majesty knows that such a bargain is not feas- 
ible. There is no similitude between the the two questions. 
It is impossible for your Majesty not to have the same wants 
with regard to Naples as ourselves.” 

“ Ah! well, then persuade the Prussians to give me back my 
word.” 

“TI see very few Prussians,2 and should certainly fail to 
persuadethem. Your Majesty can doso. You have every in- 
fluence over the mind of the king; besides you can give him 
satisfaction.” 

“Flow?” 

“ By leaving him a little more of Poland.” 

“It isa singular proposal you make me: you wish me to take 
something from my own property, in order to give it to them!” 


1 Text: ‘‘ Bonaparte.” Var.: ‘* Buonaparte.” 
2 Text: ‘‘fort peu de Prussiens” = ‘‘ very few Prussians.” Var.: ‘‘fort peu 
des Prussiens” = ‘‘I see ¢he Prussians but very little.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 325 


The interview was here interrupted by the Empress of 
Russia, who came to visit the emperor. She was pleased to 
make some polite remarks to me. She only remained a few 
minutes, and then the emperor said, “ Let us continue.” 

I recapitulated briefly the points on which I could, and 
those on which I could not, come to an agreement with him, and 
concluded by saying that I must insist on the kingdom of 
Saxony being preserved with sixteen hundred thousand 
inhabitants. 

“Yes,” said the emperor, “ you insist a good deal on a question 
which has been already decided.” But he did not pronounce this 
last word in a tone which showed an unalterable determination. 

His aim in summoning me before him had been to know: 

1. What the armaments were which he had heard were 
being prepared in France, and with what views they were being 
prepared. I believe I answered him in such a manneras to free 
him from all suspicion of being threatened by them himself, and 
yet! so as not to leave him too great a feeling of security. 

2. Whether your Majesty would be disposed to form an 
alliance with him one day. Unless he renounce his lust of 
conquest, which is most improbable, I do not see how it will be 
possible for your Majesty, animated by the conservative spirit 
to ally yourself with him, except in an extraordinary case, and 
for a temporary end. But it was not advisable, if he desired 
this, to deprive him of the hope of it, and I had to avoid doing so. 

3. What was our exact intention with regard to Saxony. 
In this respect I left him so few doubts, that he said to 
Count Nesselrode, from whom I learnt it: “The French have 
made up their minds on the question of Saxony; but let 
them arrange with Prussia if they can. They would like to take 
some of my possessions and give them to her; but that is what 
I will never agree to.” 

I have reported this interview with so many details in order 
to show your Majesty how his tone has changed since the 
last interview I had with him. Throughout the whole interview 
he did not give a single sign of irritation or bad humour, all was 
calm and pleasant. 

He has certainly the interests of Prussia less at heart, and is 
less tied by his friendship to the king, than embarrassed by 
the promises he has made; and I really believe that, in spite 
of the chivalrous character he affects, and slave as he wishes to 
be thought to his word, he would be delighted, at the bottom 
of his heart, could he find an honest pretext for releasing 


1 Text : ‘‘ cependant, 4 ne pas laisser” = ‘‘yet so as not to leave him.” Var. : 
“‘ de facon 4 ne pas laisser”’= “‘ in such a manner as not to leave him,” 


326 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


himself. I am the more led to this opinion by a conversation 
he had with Prince von Schwarzenberg, and which I believe 
contributed no little to the desire he had to see me. He asked 
him how their affairs! stood, whether they could come to an 
understanding, and pressed him to give him his opinion, not 
as Austrian minister, but as a friend. After defending himself 
from replying? for some time, Prince Schwarzenberg said bluntly 
that his conduct towards Austria had been neither frank nor 
even loyal, that his claims tended to putting the Austrian 
monarchy into considerable danger, and matters into a position 
which would render war inevitable. That if war should not break 
out now (either from respect for the recent® alliance, or from 
fear of showing themselves to Europe in the character of fools 
who could foresee nothing, and who had put themselves by a 
blind confidence at the mercy of events), it would infallibly 
come in a period varying from eighteen months to two years 
hence. Thereupon it escaped the emperor to say :— 

“Tf only I had not gone so far! But,” he added, “ how can 
I free myself? You see in what a position I am ; it is impossible 
for me to retract.” 

At the same time that Prince von Schwarzenberg was repre- 
senting war as inevitable sooner or later, a body of troops, 
despatched by Austria to Galicia, apparently seemed to indicate 
that it might soon be declared. The cabinet of Vienna means 
to rouse itself from its lethargy. Prince Metternich has spoken to 
Prince von Wrede of an alliance, asking if, from the present 
time, Bavaria would not join twenty-five thousand men to the 
Austrian forces, to which Prince von Wrede replied that Bavaria 
would willingly join seventy-five thousand men, but on the 
following conditions :— 

Ist. That the alliance be concluded with France; 

2nd. That Bavaria should furnish twenty-five thousand men 
and no more, for every hundred thousand that Austria should 
put into the field ; 

3rd. That if England granted subsidies to Austria, Bavaria 
should receive a part proportionate to their respective forces. 

I believe that at bottom these are only simple projects; but 
it is already much that England * should determine to make them, 
and must naturally have caused in the Emperor Alexander the 
desire to ascertain what he has to fear, or to hope for, from us. 


1 Text: ‘‘leurs affaires” = ‘‘ their affairs.” Var. : ‘‘des affaires” = ‘‘ affairs.” 

2 Text: ‘‘de répondre” = ‘‘from replying.” Var.: ‘‘de vompre” = ‘from 
breaking off.” 

3 Text: ‘‘alliance récente” = ‘‘recent alliance.” Var.: ‘‘ alliance naissante” 


= ‘‘ dawning alliance.” 
4 Text: ‘* Angleterre” = ‘‘England,.” Var.: ‘* Autriche” = ‘‘ Austria.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 327 


Knowing his custom, when speaking to those who are opposed 
to his wishes, of affirming that he has come to some agreement 
with others, and not wishing that my conversation with him 
should be made known under a false light, I profited by an 
interview paid me by Herr von Sickingen to inform the Emperor 
Alexander of my views through him. The emperor has revealed 
them to Prince Metternich, and by what he told him, I see that 
Herr von Sickingen has been a faithful mediator. This con- 
fidence has produced the best effect. The widespread sentiments 
of suspicion of which we have been the mark during the first 
days of our stay here, is weakening every day, and the contrary 
feeling increasing. 

On my return from the Emperor Alexander, I found the 
minister of Saxony in my rooms, who came to inform me of :— 

Ist. A protest of the King of Saxony, which this Prince had 
sent to him, with the command to lay it before the council ; but 
only after having consulted! Prince Metternich, to whose advice 
he was to conform ; 

2nd. A circular of Prince Repnin, who was governor-general 
of Saxony for the Russians. This paper, of which I inclose a 
copy in my despatch to the department, that it may be printed 
in the JZonzteur, was the cause of the king’s protest, which can 
only be printed after having been laid before congress. I shall 
then only have a copy of it” 

This circular, by which Prince Repnin announces to the 
Saxon authorities that in consequence of a convention concluded 
on September 27, the Emperor Alexander, according to the 
expressed wish of England and Austria, had ordered the adminis- 


1 Text: ‘‘aprés avoir consulté” = ‘‘after having consulted.” Var.: ‘‘apres 
avoir communiqué” = ‘‘after having communicated.” 

2 The following is the circular :—‘‘ A letter of the Minister, Baron von Stein, 
dated October 21, has informed me of a convention concluded September 28 at 
Vienna, by virtue of which his Majesty the Emperor of Russia, in concert with 
England and Austria will put the administration of the kingdom of Saxony into the 
hands of the King of Prussia. I am ordered to hand over the government of that 
country to the representatives of his Majesty the King of Prussia, and to replace the 
imperial Russian troops by those of Prussia, in order to effect the union of Saxony and 
Prussia, which will shortly take place in a more positive and solemn manner, and to 
establish a closer fraternity between the two nations. . . . After the preliminary de- 
liberations, of which the aim is the well-being of the two parties, their Majesties have 
declared the following: King Frederick William, in his quality of future sovereign of 
the country, has declared that he will not incorporate Saxony as a province of his 
states, but will unite it to Prussia under the title of kingdom of Saxony, will 
preserve it always in its integrity, will leave it the enjoyment of its rights, privileges, 
and advantages which the constitution of Germany will decree for those parts of 
Germany which form a portion of the Prussian monarchy, and so far will change nothing 
of its actual constitution. And his Majesty the Emperor Alexander has testified the 
special satisfaction he feels on account of this declaration.” (Aoniteur, November 
15, 1814. See also on the ceremony of the delegation of the powers of Prince Repnin 
to the Prussian authorities, the issue of the AZoniteur of November 24.) 


328 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


tration of Saxony to be handed over to the delegates of the 
King of Prussia, who must in the future be in possession of that 
country, not as a province of his kingdom, but as a separate 
kingdom which he has promised to maintain in its integrity, has 
put Prince Metternich and Lord Castlereagh in the greatest 
embarrassment, and roused the most lively complaints on their 
parts. 

It is quite true that their consent has been abused in the most 
odious manner, being misrepresented, and declared absolute, 
when it was purely conditional; and this justifies their com- 
plaints. But it is not less true, that they have given a consent 
which they bitterly repent having given. 

Your Majesty already has the note of Prince Metternich. 

I have to-day the honour of forwarding you that of Lord 
Castlereagh, which I only received two days ago, and then only 
on condition of my promising to keep it in the utmost secrecy. 
This is why I address it immediately to your Majesty. I am 
told that Lord Castlereagh is trying to get it back from the 
Prussians. 

This note confirms all with which I have had the honour of 
informing your Majesty for the past six weeks, and reveals more 
than I could possibly have believed, if it did not in itself represent 
incontestable proofs of its assertions. 

However strange the letter of Prince Metternich may have 
been, as soon as one compares it with that of Lord Castlereagh, 
the differences that exist between the two are all in favour of the 
former. 

Prince Metternich tries to persuade Prussia to give up her 
views on Saxony. He explains the moral and political reasons 
which make it repugnant to him to give his consent, and while 
giving it, declares it to be necessity which wrenches it from him. 

Lord Castlereagh, on the contrary, after expressing a lively 
and perfectly barren pity for the royal family of Saxony, declares 
that he has no moral or political repugnance to giving Saxony 
to Prussia. 

1 The following is what Lord Castlereagh, in a note addressed to Prince von 
Hardenberg, says of Saxony :—‘‘ As to the question of Saxony, I declare to you that 
if the incorporation of the whole of that country in the Prussian monarchy be 
necessary to secure sufficiently great advantages for Europe, whatever grief I might 
personally experience at seeing such an old family in such misfortunes, I could nourish 
no moral or political repugnance to the measure itself. If ever sovereign has placed 
himself in a position in which it was necessary for the future tranquillity of Europe that 
he should be sacrificed, I believe it is the King of Saxony, by his perpetual shuffling, 
and because he has been not only the most devoted, but also the most favoured vassal 
of Bonaparte, contributing with all his power, and with the greatest eagerness in his 
two-fold position, of head of the German and Polish states, to spreading general 


thraldom into the very heart of Russia.” [Lord Castlereagh to Prince von Hardenberg 
(October 11, 1814).] 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 329 


Prince Metternich only consents on the ground that Prussia 
will have suffered losses for which it will be impossible to 
compensate her in any other manner. 

Lord Castlereagh, on the contrary, only consents so long as 
Prussia preserves that, for the loss of which Prince Metternich 
would compensate her. He wishes Saxony to be so much 
increase of power for her, and not an equivalent for something 
she is to give up. 

Thus they both subordinate the question of Saxony to that 
of Poland, but in senses absolutely different, which shows how 
little agreement one with another these closely united allies have, 
and this after crying out so loudly that France wanted to divide 
them. 

Meanwhile they have agreed to disavow the circular of Prince 
Repnin, and I believe it will not be recognized even by the 
Prussians themselves, 

For the rest, it seems to me to be difficult for forgetfulness— 
if it is not contempt—of the most common principles and 
notions of healthy politics to be carried further than it has been 
in this note of Lord Castlereagh. 

He came yesterday to invite me to dinner, and to appoint an 
interview for to-day. I was expecting some confidence or im- 
portant disclosure ; he merely spoke of his dilemma. Deceived 
in the hopes he had built on Prussia, and seeing his policy for 
this reason overthrown from its basis, he has fallen into a kind 
of depression. He came to consult me as to the means of giving 
a spur to affairs, to make them advance more speedily. __ told 
him that the Emperor Alexander pretended to be at one with 
Austria on the Polish question, and that there only remained 
some details to settle ; that if this were so, the best thing to do 
'in my opinion, was to get Austria to terminate this arrangement 
as soon as possible; that they had wished to subordinate* the 
question of Poland to that of Saxony, and it had not succeeded ; 
that it was therefore necessary to separate them, and terminate 
that of Poland first; that Austria, tranquil on this side, and 
no longer obliged to trouble herself about the two questions, 
would devote her entire attention to that of Saxony, which all 
the Austrian generals considered to be by far the most important 
of the two; that Russia, once satisfied on the question which 
interested her directly, would probably trouble herself very little 
about the other, and that Prussia, finding herself alone face to 
face with England, Austria, France and Spain, the affair would 
be easily and quickly arranged. 


1 Text: ‘‘qu’ils avaient voulu subordonner” = “‘ that they had wished to subor- 
dinate.” War.: ‘‘qu’ils avaient subordonné” = “that they had subordinated.” 


330 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


The circular of Prince Repnin has been the signal awaited by 
Bavaria for declaring that she would consent to no arrangement, 
and would enter no German league, were the preservation of 
the kingdom of Saxony not first vouched for. This is what 
Prince von Wrede positively declared to Prince von Hardenberg, 
who, though saying that he could take no responsibility on 
himself and must refer to the king on the matter, has yet given 
it to be understood that the King of Saxony could be retained 
with a million subjects. 

Thus all is yet in suspense. But the chances of saving a 
great part of Saxony have increased. 

I had proceeded so far in my letter, when I received that with 
which your Majesty has deigned to honour me dated November 9, 
and that which you were so kind as to get the Comte de Blacas 
to write me. 

Your Majesty will judge by Lord Castlereagh’s letter which 
I have the honour to inclose, either, that this minister has 
instructions of which the Duke of Wellington is ignorant, or that 
he does not believe himself bound by those which have been 
given him, and that if he made the question of Saxony depend 
on that of Poland, it is in precisely the opposite sense to 
that which the Duke supposed. 

As to what concerns Naples, I have described to your Majesty 
the proposal which Prince Metternich brought forward, in one of 
those conferences at which only himself, Lord Castlereagh, Count 
Nesselrode and myself were present, viz., that of only discussing 
this affair after the congress, and my reply. (It is in No. 10 of 
my correspondence that you will find this detail.) The threats 
contained in the letter of which M. de Blacas has sent an extract, 
are found, it is said, in a pamphlet published by an aide-de-camp 
of Murat named Filangieri, who was quite recently still at Vienna. 
(This pamphlet has been suppressed by the police.) But I hope 
that if Italy is once organised from the Alps to the frontier of 
Naples, as I have proposed, these threats will cease to excite fear. 

I waited before closing my letter till I had returned from a 
conference which had been appointed for this evening at eight 
oclock. But nothing was done except to read and sign the 
protocol of the last sitting. 

The Emperor of Russia is sufficiently unwell to be obliged 
to keep his bed, but it is nothing more serious than an indis- 
position. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 331 


No. 8 B—KING LouIS XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, Vovember 22, 1814. 

My COousIN, 

I have received your despatch, No. 11. It would furnish 
me with ample matter for reflection, if I had not forbidden 
myself this indulgence when it can only serve my own satis- 
faction. 

The conversation which the Comte Alexis de Noailles has 
heard from the mouth of the princes with whom he has con- 
versed, has afforded me great pleasure. I was especially struck 
with that of the King of Bavaria: but what good would! these 
dispositions work, if they were not backed by Austria and 
England? Now, I am very much afraid that, in spite of the 
marvellously clever manner in which you have spoken to Prince 
Metternich, in spite of the conditions mentioned in the note of 
October 22 having been carried out, both Poland and Saxony 
will be abandoned. In this misfortune, there would always 
remain to my unlucky cousin, his constancy in adversity, and to 
me (for I am more resolved on it than ever) the comfort of 
never having participated by any consent whatever in such 
iniquitous spoliations. ; 

I put great faith in the proposal attributed to the Emperor 
Alexander on the subject of Italy; it is, in that case, of the 
highest importance that Austria and England be well convinced 
of the truth of the adage, trivial perhaps, but full of sense, and 
above all eminently applicable to the situation : 


“ Sublata causa, tollitur effectus,” 


I am more satisfied with the turn of affairs in Italy: the 
union of Genoa, and the male succession of the House of Savoy,’ 
are two important points, but what is more important than all, 
is, that in spite of the boasting, perhaps in reality too well 
founded, by Murat in his gazettes, the kingdom of Naples 
should return to its legitimate sovereign. 

Whereupon, my cousin, I pray God may have you in His 
safe and holy keeping. 


LOUIS. 
1 Text: ‘que serviraient” = ‘‘what good would they work.” Var.: ‘‘que 
° ? ms s ye 
serviront” = ‘* what good w7// they work. ; ’ 
2 Text: “‘de la maison” = “‘of the House.” Var.: ‘‘ dams la maison” = “‘ix 


the House.” 


332 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


No. 14 A-—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE 
CONGRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, November 23, 1814. 

MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

We have the honour to forward you a copy of the report of 
the last sitting. We have met since, to adjust and sign it, but 
have transacted no further business. 

Count de Labrador on this occasion further called attention 
to the rights of the Queen of Etruria, and asked that, when 
the arrangement of affairs in Italy should be treated, this should 
have some attention. Prince Metternich told him that he was 
prepared to discuss the matter, and waited for Count de Labrador 
to read him his memorandum. The ambassador of Spain will 
forward it one of these days. 

If the words of Prince Metternich could inspire the least 
confidence, one would be justified in believing that he found the 
Archduchess Marie-Louise sufficiently provided for by having 
obtained the State of Lucca, which brings in a revenue of 
from five to six hundred thousand francs,! and that, for the time 
being, the Legations could be restored to the Pope, and Parma 
to the Queen of Etruria. But we are informed that while he 
gives utterance to this opinion, the Archduchess Marie-Louise, 
following the invitation of the emperor, her father, has had the 
arms of her carriages and seals changed, and is effacing the 
imperial arms of Bonaparte, in order to substitute those of Parma. 

The Comte de Noailles, whose business it is to follow the 
Italian negotiations, has received an order from Prince Talleyrand 
not to admit any arrangements which may be determined on, 
except as provisory dispositions, which will only be sanctioned by 
a formal guarantee, when all present a general and satisfactory 
policy. This precaution was the more necessary, because we 
see Prince Metternich second with every day more and more 
heat and obstinacy, the cause of Murat. He does it under 
pretext of the danger that would accrue from provoking Murat 
to a revolutionary war. Prince Metternich, by himself proclaim- 
ing him head of the Jacobins in Italy, exaggerates his influence, 
and will not allow that in order to paralyse the danger which 
this agitation presents, it will be sufficient to get rid of the 
principal mover in it. The fact is, he is unwilling to do violence 
to his affections for Madame Murat, and believes that in preserving 
this family on the throne, he will be able to arrange as he likes all 
his designs on Italy. It is therefore necessary for the Comte de 
Noailles to use this reserve, when the signing of the articles for 


1 From £20,000 to £24,000. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 333 


the incorporation of Genoa and Piedmont, shall be introduced. 
For the rest, the succession of the House of Carignan has been 
stipulated for, and is no longer likely to give rise to any 
objection. 

Things are in this state, and the important questions con- 
cerning Poland and Saxony are hindering the progress of 
affairs, and we do not believe that their solution has made much 
progress during the last eight days. The circular of Prince 
Repnin has given rise to Lord Castlereagh and the cabinet of 
Vienna writing rather firm letters to the Prussian cabinet, in 
which they declared that the union of Saxony will only be 
admitted conditionally, as stated in the letters sent on the 
occasion of the temporary occupation of Saxony by Prussian 
troops, and that if Prussia would not co-operate in estab- 
lishing Poland’s limits in the interests of the three powers, the 
concession made with regard to Saxony would have to be 
regarded as null and void. 

Lord Castlereagh and Prince Metternich have gone further 
still. They are persuaded that if the Emperor of Russia and 
the King of Prussia refuse these overtures, it will be necessary 
to make preparations for enforcing more moderation on them. 

We are, in fact, assured that military measures have been 
concerted, and a plan of campaign discussed between the 
Austrian and Bavarian leaders. The co-operation of France is 
considered necessary for this. But neither Prince Metternich, 
nor Lord Castlereagh, have thought fit to speak of it, nor to 
have it mentioned to the plenipotentiaries of the king at the 
congress. 

One might well be astonished at this silence, could one once 
be convinced that all these military measures bore a character 
other than that of simple demonstrations, after the kind of 
measures by which Prince Metternich so often aids his policy. 
There are even some people, who have the reputation of being 
well informed, who believe that Lord Castlereagh and Prince 
Metternich have not yet decided upon any definite policy on 
this subject, and that they are afraid of being compelled to mix 
in such matters. 

Meanwhile Lord Castlereagh, whether it is that he feels it 
necessary to oppose some barrier to the Russian and Prussian 
intrigues, or that public opinion in England and throughout 
Germany has made him change his policy and system, appears 
to have decided on provoking war with Russia, if she does not 
moderate her pretensions, and he has spoken of it to some persons, 
affirming that England would furnish the necessary subsidies. 
This minister and Prince Metternich himself, owing to suspicions 


334 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


so gratuitously levelled at France, and the fears nourished that 
an alliance with this power would compromise the situation of 
Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, will not appeal to 
France save in the last extremity. We even think that, if it 
is possible for them to avoid it, they will do so, and you may be 
quite sure, Monsieur le Comte, that we shall not provoke them 
to it. 

Besides, experience has already taught these powers that 
they cannot dismiss the intervention of France, and that 
she does them more good than harm in settling the affairs of 
Europe. 

On our arrival here, the desire of ousting France from all share 
in the deliberations was manifest. She now takes a part in all 
that concerns Italy and Switzerland ; she will intervene to great 
advantage in the territorial divisions of Germany, and we should 
not be astonished if the arrangements relative to Poland were 
only made with her consent. To hinder her from so doing, 
and to contradict us, the enemies of France have for some days 
been spreading the most absurd reports as to her interior 
situation; and what has astonished us greatly is, that these 
rumours are repeated in the diplomatic correspondence of the 
English and Austrian legations at Paris. Amongst these asser- 
tions maintained with some cleverness, we mention one, to the 
effect that the king would not be in a position to make use of his 
army. We have been able to combat it by the communication of 
a letter from the Comte Dupont,! who speaks of the state of the 
army in most satisfactory and positive terms, and does so too 
without leaving the slightest opportunity for reply. The other 
assertions will all fall-into oblivion, when time shall have exposed 
the intrigue. 

The affairs of Germany suffer in the same way as all 
the others, from the delays caused by the decisions of the 
Emperor of Russia, and here, as elsewhere, he seeks to interfere, 
in order to further his main views. 

We have had the honour of informing you that the project of 
federation in twelve articles, which we have addressed to you in 
our last despatch of the 16th, has been modified in its principal 
provisions. The Austrian and Prussian cabinets had communi- 
cated it in its rough draft to the cabinet of Russia. This com- 
munication remained without reply. But in order to flatter the 
Czar, and mislead public opinion in Germany, which pronounced 
itself so strongly against the union of Prussia and Saxony, the 
Russian cabinet thought fit to take up the possibility of inter- 
vention in German affairs, and Count Nesselrode gave a reply 

1 General Dupon who was then Minister of War. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 


22¢ 
IIOP 


of which we here subjoin the copy. If the great alliance is 
broken in consequence of the affairs of Poland, this letter will 
of course be considered as null and void. 

It cannot, in general, escape us that the real embarrass- 
ment of the allied powers at the congress is owing to the 
illusion they entertain, in thinking that they can regulate the 
affairs of Europe on éases which they have declared settled, 
but which are not so as yet. 

Be pleased to accept, &c 


No. 15 A—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CON- 
GRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, lVovember 24, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 


We inclose with the despatch dated yesterday, a letter, 
which one of the principal heads of the Foreign Office of this 
country addressed to the Duc de Dalberg, pointing out to 
him an article in the Gazette de France which has caused a great 
sensation, and whose admission by the censorship is difficult to 
explain, if, as the author of the letter remarks, it was wished to 
reconcile public opinion with the persecutors and spoilers of 
Saxony.! : 


1 The following is the article :—‘‘ After long indecision, the fate of Saxony seems 
to be definitely fixed. King Frederick-Augustus descends from the throne ; his terri- 
tories are shared between Austria, Prussia, andthe Duke of Saxe-Weimar. Many a 
voice will be raised to deplore the instability of human affairs. Some reflective 
minds will meditate on the impenetrable decrees of that eternal Providence which, 
according to the expression borrowed from Scripture by one of our greatest poets 
(Racine, Athalie, acte iii.) : ‘ Frappe et guérit, perd ef ressuscite.’* Some will see 
in the fall of the reigning house nothing less than a revolution ; others will see in it 
a return to order. It is for the first of these that a glance on the origin and division 
of this illustrious family will not be without interest. 

“<The second elector, Frederick the Courteous, or the Peaceful, who died in 1464, 
left two sons, of whom the eldest, Ernest, was the head of the Ernestine branch, and 
the younger Albert, of the Albertine branch. By virtue of the recognized right of 
primogeniture, Johan-Frederick, sixth elector, reigned, without having his rights con- 
tested, when the troubles excited by the famous league of Smalcalde broke over the 
empire. Charles V., with a powerful army, commanded by the celebrated Duke 
of Alba, marched against the confederates. The battle of Muhlberg, fought in 1547, 
was decisive. Johan-Frederick, the soul of the league, fell into the power of the 
emperor, who used his victory cruelly. A court-martial, presided over by the inflex- 
ible Spanish general, dared to condemn to death the Elector of Saxony as a rebel to 
the imperial power. This introduced an entirely new legislation into the German 
empire. The illustrious prisoner, after having heard the reading of his arrest, con- 
tinued quietly his game of chess with Prince Ernest of Brunswick : ‘It is less my 
life, than my electorate, that they covet,’ he said. The event showed that he was not 
deceived: Charles V. gave him his life, but at the Diet of Augsburg in 1548, he 
deprived him of his electoral dignity, in order to confer it on the Duke Maurice of 
Saxony, head of the younger or Albertine branch. The unhappy Johan-Frederick was 


* Strikes and heals, blights and restores to life again. 


336 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


In a situation so ominous as that in which the fate of this 
sovereign is placed, in the midst of most difficult debates on 
such a question, how is it that the heads of journals were 


left only the little town of Gotha, where he was-kept in honourable captivity. More 
deserving of pity even than he, his son, accused of having tried to re-enter the palace 
of his fathers, at Dresden, was arrested and conveyed to Vienna as a common 
culprit. 

ze Although indebted for his renewed political existence to the protection of Charles 
V., the usurper Maurice greedily seized the occasion of showing in favour of 
Lutheranism that zeal which had served him as a pretext in the spoliation of the 
legitimate elector. He aided the Protestants, concluded a secret alliance with Henry 
III., King of France, fell upon the emperor, and was on the point of taking possession 
of his person by force in the defiles of Tyrol. He forced the treaty of Passau from 
him in 1552. 

‘¢ Since that time, the Albertine branch has preserved the electorate, whilst the 
eldest or Ernestine branch, reduced to very straitened circumstances, split up into a 
a great number of branches. As many as fourteen have been counted. There are 
only six extant now. ‘The first is that of Weimar; the duke of this name is therefore 
the direct and natural heir of the Elector Johan-Frederick, who was so violently and 
unjustly robbed by Charles V. 

“Tn spite of the lapse of time, the titles of his descendants have never sunk into 
oblivion. On the short appearance he put in at Rastadt, Buonaparte said one day to 
the minister of the Elector of Saxony, with that bluntness that was habitual to 
him: ‘When then does your master intend restoring the electorate to the Ernestine 
branch ?’* 

‘* Tt was however the same man who wished this prince later on to take the title 
of king. 

oe rn that day date all the misfortunes of Frederick-Augustus ; surrounded, 
enmeshed, he was obliged to forget that he was a German, and had to make common 
cause with the oppressor of Germany. The insensate expedition of Moscow permitted 
princes and people to foresee the moment of their deliverance. The King of Saxony 
retired to Bohemia, and there on neutral territory at length rejoiced in his liberty, and 
is said to have solemnly promised to unite his efforts with those of the liberators of 
Europe. Motives, which we will not here discuss, induced him to change his resolution. 

‘* Napoleon, a fugitive, abandoned him, without any resources to fall back upon, 
to the vengeance of the allies. Frederick-Augustus demanded to see them; if we 
are to believe the unanimous‘report of the public papers, his request was refused. 

‘* Public opinion, unanimous as it was on the subject of the private virtues of this 
prince, is singularly divided as to his public conduct. One party accuses him of 
having committed an indelible crime by being constant to his alliance with the enemy 
of the human race; others are tempted to see in him the instrument used by Provi- 
dence for prolonging the blindness of Napoleon. As a matter of fact, by putting his 
fortresses and troops at his disposal, the King of Saxony inspired him with the foolish 
hope of preserving the Elbe as a boundary. Whilst he was pleasing his fancy with the 
absurd possession of Dresden, whilst he was sacrificing armies, so long invincible, in 
keeping and protecting this useless city, everything was being prepared for the down- 
fall of this insensate conqueror. If he had not been master of places on the Elbe, he 
would have been constrained to take up a position behind the Rhine, and there, sup- 
ported by numerous fortresses, assured besides of communication with France, there 
would have remained to him means of still treating honourably with his conquerors. 

*“Thus the invisible and powerful Hand abases that which it has exalted, and 
exalts that which It has abased ; thus, after three centuries the Albertine branch fell 
from the throne which it had usurped, and the Ernestine branch recovers a part of 
what had been ravished from it. The French in lamenting the fate of Frederick- 
Augustus, will respect in him a prince issued from the same blood as the august princess 
who gave birth to our well-beloved sovereigns, Louis XVI. and Louis XVIII.” 

* Some say that it was to the elector himself after the battle of Jena that he addressed this 
singular compliment. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 337 


informed of the sense and spirit in which the government be- 
lieves it necessary to direct public opinion, as much for the glory, 
as for the true interests, of the king and of France? 

It is important that the origin and the author of this article, 
which was inserted in No. 315, November 11, of the Gazette de 
France be known. It is equally important that the Monzteur 
should publish a well-reasoned article, which without being 
official, would discuss the same question under the aspects of law 
and utility. The memorandum joined to the report of the 23rd will 
furnish M.de Rheinhard! with the materials for such an article. 

We have had it secretly circulated, and have observed that it 
has created some impression. It is necessary to change it so 
that the insertion in the MWonzteur may not seem to have been 
inspired by this memorandum, though its principles and argu- 
ments may be employed. 

We forward you at the same time an article from the Gazette 
Universelle, which has apparently issued from the Austrian 
cabinet, and is meant as a reply to the famous circular of Prince 
Repnin. 

It will be well when inserting it in the Wonzteur, to add that 
the editor is pleased to communicate it to the public as worthy 
of attention, and as representing the best possible principles. 
We think that the little rap given to France might be omitted. 

Our papers have, for outsiders, a far stronger authority than 
those of other countries, because they are known to be under the 
supervision and control of the government. 

We beg of you, Monsieur le Comte, to forward us the 
information we require. 

The importance of the question of Saxony cannot escape 
your notice. The principles we must sustain in it are identical 
with those that we must employ for putting a barrier to the 
march of revolution, and for consecrating anew the principles of 
the law of nations, without which the whole social edifice of 
Europe would be shaken. 

Be pleased to accept, &c. 


NO, 13.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, Vovember 24, 1814.7 
SIRE, 
No sooner had we uttered the word prznczples here, and 
asked for the immediate sitting of the congress, than the rumour 


1 M. de Rheinhard was at that time head of the Seal Office at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. 
2 Var.: November 25, 1814. 


VOL. II. Z 


338 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


spread abroad on all sides that France still regretted the left 
bank of the Rhine, and Belgium, and would never rest until she 
had recovered them, that the government of your Majesty most 
probably shared this wish of the army and the nation, or that + if 
it did not share it, it was not sufficiently strong to resist it ; that, 
on both hypotheses, the peril was the same, that one could not 
therefore keep too strict a guard against France; that it was 
necessary to oppose to her, barriers which she could not cross, 
to make the arrangements of Europe subordinate to this aim, 
and to be well on one’s guard against her negotiators who would 
leave nothing undone to hinder it. We found ourselves all at 
once treated with the very prejudices against which we have had 
to struggle for two months. We have succeeded in triumphing 
over the most painful of these suspicions, and it is no longer 
said of us that we have received double instructions (as Prince 
Metternich told Prince von Wrede) that we were bidden speak 
in one sense and act in another, and that we had been sent 
to sow discord. The public does your Majesty justice. It be- 
lieves no longer in any after-thoughts on your part. It applauds 
your disinterestedness ; it praises you for having embraced the 
defence of principles. It avows that no other power is playing 
a part so honourable as yours. But those whose interest it 
is that France should continue to be an object of suspicion 
and fear, when unable to excite them by one pretext, do so by 
another. They represent her internal condition under an alarm- 
ing light. Unfortunately they base their assertions on news sent 
from Paris, by those whose names, functions, and reputations 
enforce belief. The Duke of Wellington, who keeps up a very 
active correspondence with Lord Castlereagh, speaks only of 
conspiracies, secret discontent, and ominous murmurings, pre- 
cursors of storms ready to burst. The Emperor Alexander says 
that his letters from Paris foretell trouble. Herr von Vincent,? 
on the other hand, tells his court that he is expecting a change 
in the ministry,and that he is sure of it. Men pretend to regard 
a change of ministers as a certain index of a change of policy, 
both at home and abroad. The conclusion is, that France 
cannot be relied on, and that no agreement with her ought to 
be arranged. 

We may refute such news as much as we please, cite dates 
and facts which prove its inaccuracy, oppose to it the news that we 
receive ourselves, indicate the source whence I believe the Duke 
of Wellington gets his information, even show how suspicious a 
source this is, they none the less persist in asserting that, at a 


1 Text: ‘‘Ou que” = ‘‘or that.” ‘Var, : ** va que’’= ‘ seezng that.” 
2 Herr von Vincent was at that time Austrian ambassador at Paris. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 339 


distance from Paris, we cannot know what is going on there, or 
that we have some interest in concocting it, and that the Duke 
of Wellington and Herr von Vincent being on the spot, are 
better informed, or more sincere. 

I do not wish to accuse Lord Castlereagh of having propa- 
gated the prejudices which we have had to combat, but, whether 
he has imagined them himself, or whether they have been sug- 
gested to him, he is certainly imbued with them more than any- 
one else. The long war which England has had to sustain 
almost alone, and the peril she was in on account of it, have 
produced! so lively an impression on him, that it deprives him, 
so to speak, of the power of judging to what extent times 
are changed. Of all the fears, the least reasonable, nowadays, 
is certainly that of a return to the continental system. Mean- 
while, those who enjoy more intimate relations with him, assure 
me that he is always possessed by this fear, and that he thinks 
he cannot accumulate too many precautions against this 
imaginary danger. He thinks he is still at Chatillon, treating, 
and writing treaties of peace, with Bonaparte. It is easy to 
guess what effect the intelligence sent by the Duke of Wellington 
must have on a mind filled with these ideas, the Duke himself 
thus becoming an obstacle to that good understanding which he 
seems to think so easy to establish between Lord Castlereagh 
and ourselves. 

I have sought this mutual understanding by all the means in 
my power both before Lord Castlereagh left London, at the time 
of his passage to Paris, and since we have been at Vienna. If it has 
not yet been attained, it is not only owing to the prejudices of 
Lord Castlereagh, but because there has been a real and abso- 
lute opposition between his views and ours. Your Majesty 
ordered me to defend principles. The note of October 11,? 
which I have the honour of forwarding your Majesty, shows what 
respect he has for them. We must strain our utmost to preserve 
the King and kingdom of Saxony. Lord Castlereagh wishes 
with all his heart to treat the one as a condemned culprit, of 
whom he has constituted himself the judge, and to sacrifice the 
other. We wish Prussia to acquire and retain a great part of 
the Duchy of Warsaw, and Lord Castlereagh wishes it also ; 
but from such different motives, that he employs the same 
means for destroying Saxony, as we for saving her. He would 
thus turn against us the support which we would have given 


1 Text: ‘et le péril que cette guerre lui a fait courir, ont produit” = ‘‘and the 
peril that this war made her run, produced. ...” Var.: ‘‘et le péril dans lequel cette 
guerre Va mise, ont fact” = ‘‘and the peril 7x which this war placed her, made.” 

* See page 328. 


Z2 


340 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


him on the question of Poland. Purposes so different cannot 
possibly be reconciled. 

I have often spoken, even to the Emperor Alexander himself, 
of the restoration of Poland as a thing that France desired, 
and which she was prepared to support. But I have never de- 
manded this restoration without giving an alternative, because 
Lord Castlereagh has not asked it himself, because I should have 
been the only one to make the demand, and because in so doing, 
I should have irritated the Emperor Alexander without gaining 
any merit in the eyes of others, and also because I should have 
wounded Austria, who, up to the present time at least, has not 
wished for this restoration. 

It is hardly two days since Lord Castlereagh, whom I re- 
proached for the manner in which he had conducted affairs 
during the past two months, replied to me: “I have always 
thought that when one was a member of a league, one ought not 
to separate one’s self from it.” He then believes himself in a 
league. This league is certainly only a continuation of their 
alliance previous to the peace. Now, how can he be expected to 
come to an understanding with those against whom he declares 
himself in league ? 

The other members of the league or coalition against France 
are in a similar position. Russia and Prussia are only expecting 
for opposition from our part. Austria may desire our support on 
the question of Poland and Saxony ;! but her minister desires 
it far less for these two objects, than he fears our interference in 
others. He knows how much we have the affairs of Naples at 
heart, and he has it scarcely less at heart himself, but in a very 
different sense from that in which we have it. On Sunday last 
I went to see him, after dining with Prince Trautmansdorf. 
I had, the evening before, received a letter from Italy, stating 
that Murat had an army of seventy thousand men, most of 
them armed, thanks to the Austrians, who had sold him twenty- 
five thousand rifles. I wished to come to some explanation 
with Prince Metternich, or at least to show him that I knew 
of it. I drew him on to the Naples business, and, as we were 
ina drawing-room, with a great many people, I offered to follow 
him to his study and show him the letter I had received. He 
said there was no hurry, and that this question would come on 
later. I then asked, if therefore he was not decided? He re- 
plied that he was, but that he was unwilling to kindle fire every- 
where at once. And as he was alleging, as he always does, his 


1 Text: ‘dans les questions de la Pologne et de la Saxe” = ‘‘in the questions 
of Poland and Saxony.” Var.: ‘‘dans la question de la Pologne et dans celle de la 
Saxe” ‘in the guestion of Poland and ix that of Saxony.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 341 


fear lest Murat should bring about a rising in Italy, “ Why then,” 
I retorted, “did you furnish him with arms if you fear him? 
Why have you sold him twenty-five thousand rifles?” He 
denied the fact, as I had expected ; but I did not leave him the 
satisfaction of believing that I was the dupe of his denial. 
After I left him, he returned to the dancing-room, for it is at balls 
and fétes that he wastes three-quarters of his time, and his head 
was so full of the Naples business, that having come across a lady 
whom he knew, he told her, that people were worrying him with 
this Naples business, but that he would never consent to it, that 
he respected the situation of a man who made himself beloved in 
the country he governed ; that he besides passionately loved the 
queen, and was in continual communication with her. All this, 
and perhaps a little more on the same subject, was said masked. 
We must expect that he will put in motion every imaginable 
expedient for preventing the affair of Naples being treated at the 
congress, according to the insinuation he dropped some time ago at 
a meeting, and which I had the honour to report to your Majesty. 

The four allied courts, each having some reason for fearing 
the influence which France might have in the congress, have 
naturally united, and fear to become reconciled with us when 
divided, because every step made in that direction would draw 
from them concessions which they do not wish to make. 

Self-love, as is natural, is also mixed in this reluctance. 
Lord Castlereagh thought he was in a condition to bend the 
Emperor of Russia, and only succeeded in irritating him. 

Finally, all these motives are always enhanced by a feeling of 
jealousy against France. The allies thought they had crushed 
her more ; they did not expect to see her in possession of both 
the best finances and the best army in Europe. Now they believe 
it and admit it, and have even gone so far as to regret having 
made the treaty of Paris, to reproach each other with it, and to 
acknowledge their powerlessness to understand how they could 
have had the folly to make it, and to say all this, even at the 
conferences and in our presence. 

We can therefore reasonably expect England and Austria to 
make real and sincere overtures to us, only in a case of the most 
urgent necessity, such as in that of their discussions with Russia 
ending in an open rupture. 

All the same, in spite of these feelings, in spite of the diffi- 
culties they persist in causing us, and those which the letters 
from Paris also produce, the powers are here, with regard to us, 
in an attitude of respect and complacency, such as we could 
never have dared to expect six weeks ago, and which I may also 
say they are greatly astonished to see themselves, 


342 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVYRAND. 


Hitherto the Emperor Alexander has not budged an inch. 

Lord Castlereagh, personally piqued, although he has lately 
received a letter from Russia, couched in very conciliatory terms, 
says, though not to us, that if the emperor will not stop at the 
Vistula, he must be forced todo soby war ; that England could 
only furnish very few troops on account of her war with America;1 
but that she would furnish subsidies, and that Hanoverian and 
Dutch troops could be employed on the Lower Rhine. 

Prince von Schwarzenberg is for war, saying that it could be 
fought with greater advantage now than some years hence. 

A plan of campaign has even been drawn up at the War 
Office, and Prince von Wrede has drawn up one on his own 
account. 

Austria, Bavaria, and other German States, would put three 
hundred and twenty thousand men in the field. 

Two hundred thousand under Prince von Schwarzenberg 
would be led through Moravia and Galicia to the Vistula. 

One hundred and twenty thousand commanded by Prince 
von Wrede would be led from Bohemia to Saxony where they 
would raise a revolt ; and thence to the district lying between 
the Oder and the Elbe. Glatz and Neiss would at the same time 
be besieged. 

The campaign would not commence before the end of March. 

But this plan necessitates the co-operation of one hundred 
thousand Frenchmen, of whom one-half would be taken to 
Franconia to keep the Prussians from turning back the army of 
Bohemia, and the other half would engage them on the lower 
Rhine. 

It is therefore necessary to await till this co-operation, on 
the absolute necessity of which all the generals are agreed, be 
demanded of us, if war must take place. 

But at present neither Lord Castlereagh nor Prince Metter- 
nich speak to us of war, and we are even assured that it has 
not yet been broached between them. It is only to Bavaria that 
they have separately made overtures on this subject. 

Whether they still put some hope in negotiation or whether 
they wish to gain time, they are still negotiating. Lord Castle- 
reagh’s project having miscarried, they tried to reintroduce Prince 
von Hardenberg on the scene. But he was unable either the 


1 England had been at war with the United States for more than two years. The 
declaration of war by the government of Washington (June 19, 1812) had been pro- 
voked by England’s pretensions of getting American vessels to respect the pretended 
blockade of the frontiers of the French Empire from Hamburg to San Sebastian on 
the Atlantic, and from Port-Vendres to Cattaro on the shores of the Mediterranean ; 
and further by the rights which the English claimed of confiscating the wares of 
enemies found on neutral vessels. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 343 


day before yesterday or to-day, to see the Emperor Alexander, 
who, although much better, still keeps his room, and I do not 
think he has seen him to-day. 

The arrangements with respect to Genoa are agreed upon in 
the Italian Commission. They are being drafted now, and the 
commissions have charged the Comte de Noailles with this work. 
The rights of the House of Carignan have been acknowledged. 
The Comte de Noailles has been instructed by me to accept the 
arrangements made for Piedmont, only as an integrant part of 
the arrangements to be made with the concurrence of France for 
the whole of Italy. It is a reservation which I thought fit to 
make for the sake of Naples. 

The affairs of Switzerland are going to be treated by a com- 
mittee of which the Duc de Dalberg isa member, as I have had 
the honour of informing your Majesty. 

Those of Germany are suspended by the refusal of Bavaria 
and Wurtemberg to take part in the discussions, till the fate of 
Saxony be settled. 

There are a thousand reasons why I should like to be near 
your Majesty now. But I feel retained here by the notion that 
I can be of more service to you, and by the hope that in spite 
of all obstacles, we shall end by getting at least a good deal of 
what you wished. 

I have the honour to be,... . 


No.9 B—KING LOUIS XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, November 26, 1814. 
My Cousin, 

I have received your letter No. 12, and I can say with 
truth that it is the first which has satisfied me, not that I have 
not always been so, with your line of policy and manner of 
informing me of the condition of affairs, but, because for the 
first time, I see justice emerging. The Emperor of Russia has 
gone back a step, and in politics, as in everything else, the 
first step was never the last. This prince was deceived however 
if he thought to draw me into an alliance (political of course) 
with him. You know my plan is, general alliance, but no 
private ones. The latter are the causes of wars, the former 
the guarantee of peace; and without fearing war, peace is the 
aim of all my wishes. It is to get peace, that I have increased 
my army, and that I have authorised you to give my support 
to Austria and Bavaria. These measures are beginning to 


344 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


succeed. I believe I can expect otzwm cum dignitate, and that 
is quite sufficient to cause me satisfaction. 

You have said all that I could have said on Lord Castle- 
reagh’s letter. I explain the diversities of his language and 
that of the Duke of Wellington, by their respective positions : 
the one follows instructions, the other gives them. 

I should like to have seen the affairs of Italy from the Alps 
to Terracina already settled: for I anticipate great results from 
that settlement. Whereupon, my cousin, may God have you in 
His safe and holy keeping. 


LovulIs. 


No. 16 A—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE 
CONGRESS TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT 
PARIS: 


VIENNA, /Vovember 30, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

No general conference has been held since our last 
dispatch. Prince Metternich and Prince von Hardenberg have 
both been obliged to keep their beds from colds. 

The affair of Genoa meanwhile has been adjusted and ended. 
The acts are about to be signed, and the next messenger will 
carry copies of them to the department. Signor de Corsini has been 
charged with answering the memorandum of Count de Labrador, 
who claimed Tuscany for the Queen of Etruria. The debate on 
this question is about to take place, and we are afraid that it will 
be only with the greatest difficulty that the queen will recover 
this ancient patrimony of her family. Lord Castlereagh has 
expressed an opinion to this effect. A meeting to arrange 
the affairs of Switzerland has been held, and the French 
plenipotentiary invited to it. 

The demands of the canton of Bern have been heard, 
but nothing is concluded. There appears to be general goodwill 
towards Bern, but there is also no wish to overthrow the 
existence of the remaining nineteen cantons, which was guaran- 
teed by the act of Federal Union. The results of these 
conferences according as they emerge will be reported to the 
king. 

The authorisation that the king has given for the exchange 
of a portion of the district of Gex will be of great use. We 
observe however that in this matter, it is no longer a question of 
the spoliation of the Prince-Bishop of Basel, who had already in 
1803, at the time of the recess of the German Empire, lost 
his rights of sovereignty, and received a grant of a hundred 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 345 


and twenty thousand francs,! and has exercised spiritual powers 
ever since.” 

The German conferences have been suspended, Wurtemberg 
and Bavaria would not’ assist in riveting the fetters prepared 
for them. A reply made by the Austrian and Prussian 
cabinets to the Wurtemberg plenipotentiaries, increased their 
suspicion in this respect. We subjoin here a copy and a French 
translation. 

The minor and medium States of Germany, have meanwhile 
formed a second league, and the Grand Duke of Baden has joined 
it, owing to some advice given him to this effect by the Empress 
of Russia, his sister. 

As to Polish and Saxon affairs, they are in the same state, 
and at no period of the congress have the allied powers given 
to France a more complete proof of their disunion than they 
have done at this time, when England, Austria, Russia, and 
Prussia agree on no single point which ought to be a basis for 
the general arrangement of Europe. 

The attitude that France has assumed, places her in a 
position to await quietly the result of these intrigues, and only 
to appear on the scene for the purpose of getting the voice of 
reason heard. It is in this spirit that we think it would be 
useful to write some newspaper articles, against the teachings of 
the Correspondant of Nuremberg, and the Rhine Mercury, which 
both delight in falsifying facts and in fostering the animus 
which reigns in Germany against France. 

ibe pleased to-accepty ... . 


No. 14.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


; VIENNA, November 30, 1814. 
I have received the letter with which your Majesty has 
deigned to honour me, dated the 15th inst., and, by the same 


1 About £4,800. 

2 The bishopric of Basel was at one time a partly independent state. The Bishop, 
Prince of the Holy Empire since 1356, possessed, as vassal of the Empire, the towns 
of Porrentruy, Delemont, and Laufen with their territories, the whole being incor- 
porated within the district of the Upper Rhine. He was besides independent sove- 
reign of the towns of Bienne, Neuveville, the seigniories of Tessemberg, Erguel, and 
Illfingen. In 1792, the Revolution transformed the bishopric into the republic of 
Rauracia, which only lasted a few months; in 1793, the districts of Delemont and 
Porrentruy were annexed to France ; and in 1797, Erguel and Val-Moutiers underwent 
the same fate. The Bishop of Basel thus deprived of his states the remainder of 
which were secularized in 1803, received a grant of 10,000 florins. In 1815, the old 
bishopric of Basel was adjudged by the Congress of Vienna to the canton of Bern, 
with the exception of twelve parishes which were given to the canton of Basel, and 
of one district which was given to Neuchatel. 


346 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


messenger, the authorisation which your Majesty has been pleased 
to give me for the exchange of a small portion of the country 
of Gex for a portion of Porrentruy. 

The former Prince-Bishop of Basel has already resumed, 
as bishop, the spiritual administration of Porrentruy, but he 
cannot, as prince, recover the possession he lost, not by the 
simple fact of conquest, but by the general secularization of the 
ecclesiastical states of Germany in 1803. As prince, he enjoysa 
grant of sixty thousand florins, and does not lay claim to more. 
He can therefore be no obstacle to the project of exchange 
which we have had the honour to lay before your Majesty. But 
this exchange may be rendered difficult by one of the conditions 
upon which your Majesty has made it contingent: namely, the 
restitution of Bernese Aargau to the canton of Bern, for 
according to all appearances, this restitution will cause great, 
and, perhaps insurmountable difficulties. I suppose however 
that if one were limited to restoring some bailiwicks of Aargau 
to the canton of Bern, and to giving it as compensation the 
parts of the bishopric of Basel comprised in the ancient 
boundaries of Switzerland, that Bern would be content with 
this arrangement. Your Majesty would be content with it 
yourself. 

The commission charged with settling Swiss affairs has, up to 
the present, done nothing else but to convince itself that the 
multiplicity and divergence of the several claims render them 
very thorny to deal with. Those who, in the beginning, wished 
to regulate them alone, and who contested our rights to interfere, 
have been the first to demand our concurrence, one may almost 
say, our help and advice. It is true that the Swiss envoys who 
are here, and who, from the beginning of our sojourn at Vienna, 
have allied themselves with us, have declared that if the powers 
thought that they could establish a settled order of things in 
Switzerland, without the intervention, or even the assistance! of 
France, they have rocked themselves in the vainest of vain hopes. 

When the allies were treating of peace and were wishing to 
make it with Bonaparte,? they had addressed themselves to the 
cantons which had suffered most from the Swiss revolutions, 
rousing in them the recollection and feeling of their losses, and 
holding out to them the prospect of repairing them. Their aim 
was to detach Switzerland from France, and this seemed to them 
to bean infallible means. But it was found that these cantons 
were precisely those which were the most attached to the House 
of Bourbon. Then the allies troubled themselves no further 


1 Text: ‘‘Vassistance” = ‘‘the help.” Var. : ‘‘ 2assentiment” =‘‘ the assent.” 
2 Text: ‘* Bonaparte.” Var.: ‘‘ Buonaparte.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 347 


with a means which no longer suited their aim, and which was 
even contrary to their main purpose, and have gathered from 
their overtures nothing but embarrassment as to how to back out 
and quiet affairs. Some formed the idea of uniting Germany 
and Switzerland in one and the same league.) This is another 
idea which was abandoned.” There appears now to be a perfectly 
genuine wish to terminate matters, by satisfying the chief and 
most just claims, and by making besides as few changes as 
is possible. There is therefore some reason to hope that there 
will be an arrangement for Switzerland, which if not the best in 
itself, will yet be the best that circumstances allow; that the 
independence of the country and, what is not less important 
for us, its neutrality, will be declared. 

The commission for Italian affairs has, with regard to that of 
Genoa, drawn up a report and a proposal consisting of certain 
articles which will be signed to-morrow, and addressed to the 
eight powers. I shall have the honour of sending to your 
Majesty by the next messenger, a copy of this proposal. After 
the affairs of Genoa, come those of Parma which present more 
difficulties, if it is true, as is said, that the Emperor of Austria 
and Prince Metternich have recently given positive assurance to 
the Archduchess Marie-Louise, that she should preserve Parma. 
What is certain is, that the archduchess, who hitherto had the 
arms of her husband on her carriages, has had the arms of 
the Duchy of Parma painted on one of them. I hope never- 
theless that it may be restored to the Queen of Etruria. 

It is to Venice that the twenty-five thousand rifles sold to 
Murat have been taken. It appears that in spite of the pro- 
tection of Prince Metternich, he does not feel very sure, for he 
has just written a long letter to the Archduchess Marie-Louise, 
in which he tells her among other things that if Austria will lend 
him her support, so as to enable him to remain at Naples, “he 
will raise her again to the rank from which she ought never to 
have fallen.” (These were the very words of the letter.) Such 
an extravagance, even in a man of his country and character, 
can only be explained as an excessive fear which betrays itself. 

The conferences of the German commission are still sus- 
pended. Wurtemberg has declared that she could give no opinion 
whatever on the portions of a whole, which were only shown her 
one after the other, and isolated, and that she would deliberate on 


1 Text: ‘‘d’unir dans une méme ligue” = ‘‘ to unite in one and the same league,” 
Var. : ‘‘de réunir dans /a méme ligue” = ‘‘ to unite in ¢#e same league.” 

2 Text: ‘‘C’est excore une idée abandonnée” = ‘‘ This is another idea which 
was abandoned.” Var. : ‘‘ C’est une idée abandonnée = ‘‘ This is an idea which was 
abandoned.” 


348 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


none of them, before she had been informed of the whole. This 
has drawn forth, on the part of Austria and Prussia, a letter by 
the tenour of which these two powers show sufficiently plainly 
the kind of sway which, in sharing her between them, they 
would like to exercise over Germany. 

Persuaded that the influence thus exercised would soon 
develop into dominion and sovereignty, all the states of the 
former Rhenish confederation, with the exception of Bavaria and 
Wurtemberg, have assembled to express their wish for the 
re-establishment of the old German Empire, in the person of him 
who was the head of it. 

These states are on the point of forming a league, of which 
the object will be to oppose a resistance of non-consent and 
inertia to the policy which Austria and Prussia would like to 
see prevail. The Grand Duke of Baden, who at first held him- 
self aloof, has now joined the others, by the advice of the 
Empress of Russia, his sister, who has only been the instrument 
of the Emperor Alexander. 

The affairs of Poland and Saxony remain still in the same 
condition; the step which Prince Metternich had Prince von 
Hardenberg take, and which did not meet with the approval 
of Lord Castlereagh, having been without result, as well as 
the interview that Lord Castlereagh had with the Emperor 
Alexander. 

I have the honour to forward to your Majesty the draft of 
this discussion in six articles. It still lacks one letter, which I 
shall have later, and which I have already read. It is the last 
letter of the Emperor Alexander, in which he tells Lord 
Castlereagh, that it is sufficient, and invites him henceforth to 
proceed in his official capacity. 

Those who have read these papers do not understand how 
Lord Castlereagh, after having advanced as far as he has done, 
could draw back; he himself does not understand how, or in 
what direction, he could advance another step. 

Besides, your Majesty will see that Lord Castlereagh has 
only occupied himself with Poland, having made up his mind 
to sacrifice Saxony ; and all this in consequence of that policy 
which only views matters in the bulk, without troubling itself 
of the elements which go to form them. It is a policy of 
schoolboys and allies. 

I must make the same petition to your Majesty with regard 
to these papers that I have for those which I have already had 
the honour to forward you. I have received these in the same 
manner as the others and under the same conditions. 

The Emperor Alexander shows signs of making overtures to 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 349 


us. Hecomplains of those, who, since we have been here, and 
especially at first, have, as it were, interposed themselves 
between him and us, and names Prince Metternich and 
Count Nesselrode. The intermediary he employs with me is 
Prince Adam Czartoryski who enjoys most of his confidence 
at the present time, and whom he has admitted to his council, 
to which Prince Nesselrode is no longer invited, and which 
is composed of Prince Adam, Count Capo d'Istria and 
Herr von Stein. 

The emperor has quite recovered and goes out. Prince 
Metternich is ill; he went out neither yesterday nor to-day, 
which prevents him from holding a meeting with the ministers 
of the eight powers. 

Lord Castlereagh came this morning to propose to me to 
make use of this time of forced inaction for turning our attention 
to the question of the blacks. But while joking on his proposal 
and on the motives ? which led him to it, I told him so positively 
that this must be the last question of all, and that the affairs 
of Europe must be settled before those of Africa, that I hope 
he will not give me occasion to repeat it to him a second time. 

I have the honour to be, &c. 


NO. 106.—KING Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, December 4, 1814. 
My CousIN, 

I am inreceipt of your letter, No. 13. Always satisfied 
with your conduct, I am, as you may readily believe, very little 
satisfied with the state of affairs, which seems to me far removed 
from that in which they were when you sent off your letter No. 12. 
God alone is master of human wills ; men can do nothing, and 
however ? things may turn, by holding firmly on to principles, by 
perhaps deserving that the verse: /ustum et tenacem propositi 
virum, may be applied to me, honour will remain to me, which 
is what I am most ambitious of. 

I am not surprised at the rumours which are current, of the 
news that is handed on, and of the seeming consistency given 
to it by evil-minded people; were I to worry about these, 


1 Text: ‘il n’est sorti ni hier ni aujourd’hui” = ‘‘he went out neither yester- 


day nor to-day.” Var.; ‘‘et me s'est point levé ni hier ni aujourd’hui” = ‘‘and 
has not left his bed either yesterday or to-day.” 

2 Text ‘‘les motifs”? = ‘‘the motives.” Var.: ‘‘les motifs Jersonnels” = ‘‘ the 
personal motives.” 

3 Text: ‘‘et quoiqu’il en puisse étre” = ‘‘ and however things mayturn.” Var. : 


“* mais quoiqw il” = ‘‘ du¢ however things may turn.” 


350 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


I should not have a moment’s repose, whereas now, my sleep is 
as peaceful as it wasin my youth. The reason is simple: I 
have never for a moment thought that, after the first moments of 
the Restoration, the mixture of so many heterogeneous elements, 
would produce no agitation. I know well that there is some; 
but I am not disturbed by it. Resolved never to leave the path 
Equity prescribes me, within the constitution I have given my 
people, never to relax the exercise of my legitimate authority, 
I fear nothing, and sooner or later, I shall see these clouds 
disperse, clouds whose gathering I had foreseen. 

You have heard speak of a change in the ministry, and I now 
announce it to you. Iam ready to do all justice to the zeal 
and good qualities of the Comte Dupont: but I cannot equally 
praise his administration. Consequently, I have just deprived 
him of his office, which I entrust to Marshal Soult. I am 
giving that of the navy to the Comte Beugnot ;1 and the general 
superintendence of police to M. d’André?2 But these partial 
changes in confidential posts, and of which I could wish you had 
been first informed, change in no respect the policy, which is 
mine: you must take great care in clearly stating this to all the 
persons who speak to you of what is taking place to-day. 

I shall be very pleased to see you again when the time 
comes ; but the reasons which determined me to deprive myself 
of your services near my person, exist in increased measure by 
the very difficulties which you are experiencing. It is therefore 
necessary that you continue to represent me at the congress as 
well as you are now doing, to itsclose. Whereupon, my Cousin, 
may God have you in His safe and holy keeping. 

LoulIs. 


No. III.—THE COMTE DE BLACAS D’AULPS TO THE PRINCE 
DE TALLEYRAND, 


PARIS, December 4, 1814. 
YourR HIGHNESS, 


The letter which the King has received from you by the 
messenger, who had been unable to bring me the reply to that 
which I had the honour of writing to you, on the oth ultimo, 


1 The office of Minister of the Navy had been vacant since the death of its titular, 
M. de Malouet (September 7). 

* Antoine-Balthazar-Joseph d’André was born at Aix in 1759, member of the 
darlement of Provence in 1778, deputy of the nobility at the States-General, president 
of the Constituent Assembly (August, 1790) ; he took a seat in the ranks of the 
Constitutionals. In 1792, prosecuted asa monopolist, he took refuge in England, 


was appointed general director of police, and Jztendant of the king’s household. He 
died in 1825. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 351 


had already thrown important light upon the principal subjects 
treated in the letters, which you were so good as to forward me 
on the 23rd. His Majesty has had the goodness to com- 
municate your despatch to meas well as Lord Castlereagh’s letter, 
and it is impossible, as you observe, not to be struck with the 
difference existing between the style of this note, and the 
language of the Duke of Wellington. 

I cannot, however, I confess, yet decide what are the real 
causes of this difference. The king dislikes attributing it to a 
plot merely, of which the aim would be to discredit France. 
Lord Wellington, by official communications, such as that of 
which I have spoken to you on the subject of the relations of 
Naples to Paris, and by his late conduct on the occasion ofa 
correspondence seized on the person of Lord Oxford, has shown 
a disposition, whose motive could scarcely have been that? of 
the desire to spread chimerical fears alone. It might also be 
possible that, exaggerating in his own mind perils, rumours of 
which too generally welcomed, cease not to frighten timid minds, 
he often thwarted, without meaning it, the policy of the king, 
or perhaps favoured thereby intentions less loyal than his own. 
What is certain is, that several circumstances independent of the 
views of England, furnished only too many pretexts for suspicion 
likely to encourage vexatious opinions, such as those whose 
effect you fear. Your Highness knows, and has often deplored 
with me, the little credit obtained by his Majesty’s govern- 
ment, through want of vigour and of unity in the action * of the 
ministry. This weakness, which for some time was only known 
to the cabinet, could not fail in time to acquire an unfortunate 
publicity. Add to this, the discontent of the army, whose com- 
plaints constantly filled the ears of the princes, in their journeys 
to the departments ; the feeling of insecurity, to which all the 
protests against the inefficiency of the police gave rise; finally 
the informations of all kinds laid to the charge of men, marked 
out by their intentions or speeches, perhaps utterly without 


1 Edward Marley, Earl of Oxford, born in 1773, died in 1849, issue of the family 
of the English statesman of that name (1661-1724). The title is to-day extinct. 
Lord Oxford was, at the time, residing at Naples, without any official title. He was 
in constant communication with Murat and his court, and this aroused the suspicions 
of the French government. Thus, as the earl was passing through Paris, on his 
return to England, he was, on some pretext or other arrested. Several letters from 
the King of Naples were found among his papers : but, proofs of a conspiracy between 
Murat and Napoleon were looked for in vain. 


2 Text: ‘‘motiver le projet unique de répandre” = ‘‘the mere project of spread- 
ing . . . . could hardly be the motive.” Var. : ‘‘ motiver wxzguement le projet de 
répandre” = ‘‘the project of spreading . . . . could so/ely be the motive.” 

3 Text: ‘‘d’ensemble des opérations”’ = ‘‘ unity in the action.” Var.: ‘‘ d’en- 


semble dans Jes opérations’’ = ‘‘ unity zz ¢he action.” 


352 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


foundation, but not without probability, as the instigators of most 
dangerous plots; everything, to the very measures of safety 
which the zeal of the military commanders has rendered too 
plain, must produce an impression of which foreigners can profit 
without having contributed to it. 

This state of things will explain to your Highness the 
imperious necessity to which the king felt he must give way, by 
making some change in his ministry. It was only yesterday 
his Majesty signified his intention in this respect. Whilst fully 
admitting the great and good qualities of the Comte Dupont, the 
King recognized that the army, imputing to this minister mis- 
takes which perhaps the exigencies of the moment rendered 
inevitable! longed for quite a different policy, and therefore 
turned his attention to Marshal Soult,? whom he has entrusted 
with the direction of the War Office. This choice which has been 
dictated to his Majesty by the desire to quiet the troops, and to 
give them confidence and zeal, so necessary to the maintenance 
of national power, will without doubt be acknowledged by you, 
as being in conformity with the principles His Majesty has 
always followed. 

The office of the Ministry of Marine given to the Comte 
Beugnot and the direction*® of the police given to M. d’Andre, 
are other changes by which the king has sought to meet the 
wishes of the public. 

Your Highness will doubtless consider that this change, in- 
considerable as it is, when looked at in comparison with the 
formation of a cabinet, must none the less lead to important 
results. Asa matter of fact, the spirit of the army and the security 
of the police, have become so important factors in the loyalty of 
public opinion that, from this point of view, the resolution of the 
king possesses the greatest importance. It is to you that his 
Majesty looks for presenting this change in its true light at 
Vienna, and to get it looked upon, not as a change of ministry, 
but rather as affording additional power and enlightenment to 
the government. 

The king regrets keenly that instead of having to entrust this 
task to your care, he cannot see you near him, so as to offer one 
more proof of the favourable opinion he wishes to win for his 

1 Text: ‘‘imputant des torts que peut-étre, a ce ministre, les embarras du moment 
rendaient inévitables” = ‘‘imputing mistakes which perhaps the difficulties of the 
moment rendered inevitable to this minister.” WVar.: ‘‘imputant peut-étre a ce 
ministre des torts que les embarras du moment rendaient inévitable”” = ‘‘imputing 
perhaps to this minister mistakes which the difficulties of the moment rendered 
inevitable.” . . . (Same meaning ; order of words simply altered.) 

2 Var: ‘sur Monsieur le Duc de Dalmatie” = ‘‘to the Duc de Dalmatie.” 


3 Text: ‘‘direction” = ‘‘direction.” Var.: ‘‘direction générale” = ‘‘ general 
direction.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 353 


ministry.1 But his Majesty is too fully conscious of the advan- 
tageous effects produced by your unremitting efforts.? Besides, 
it is possible that, affairs taking a quicker turn, you may be 
retained less time than you give us occasion to fear, which I 
heartily desire.? 

The last news from Spain is not good. The Comte de 
Jaucourt will certainly inform you of the report which M. 
@ Agoult* has just addressed him. 

Nothing has yet been decided here as to the time of the adjourn- 
ment of the Chambers. 

I beg your Highness to kindly accept renewed assurances of 
my most sincere and invariable attachment. 

BLACAS D’AULPS. 


No. 17A.— THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE 
CONGRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT 
PARIS. 


VIENNA, December 7, 1814. 

MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

We have the honour to forward to you the report of the 
commission upon the formation of the kingdom of Sardinia ; it 
has been drafted by the Comte de Noailles. 

It is probable that in the next conference which will bring 
together the plenipotentiaries of the eight powers who signed 
the treaty of Paris, all that yet remains to be decided on this 
question will be definitely settled, to wit :— 

Ist. The formal recognition that the succession of the House 
of Sardinia lies in the family of Savoy-Carignan. 

2nd. The title of King of Sardinia on taking possession of 
the State of Genoa ; 

3rd. The award of the imperial fiefs. 

We have also the honour to forward to the department two 
German letters, one of which is that written by the court of 


1 Text: ‘‘ qu'il veut” = ‘‘ which he wants.” Var. : “‘quwil aéstve” = ‘‘ which 
he desires.” 

2 Text: ‘* Mais sa Majesté sent les effets avantageux qu’ont produits vos con- 
tinuels efforts” = as translated. Var.: ‘‘ Sa Mayjesté sent néanmoins toute la vérité 
des observations que vous lui faites sur Peffet avantageux gu’ ont produits vos continuels 
efforts” = ‘‘ His Majesty nevertheless ts too fully conscious of the truth of the observa- 
tions made by you to him as to the advantageous effects of your unremitting efforts.” 

3 Text: ‘‘et je le désire vivement” = ‘‘and I heartily desire it.” Var.: ‘‘e¢ 
pour moi je désire fort que votre retour soit plus prochain que vous ne semblez Vespérer” 
= ‘‘and for my part, I hope that your return may be nearer than you appear to 
expect.”’ 

+ Hector d’Agoult, secretary of the embassy at Madrid. 

5 The end of this letter is not found in the text of the archives. 


VOL. IF. aS AA 


354 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


Wurtemberg to the German commission. It provoked the 
reply of the cabinets of Prussia and Austria, of which our 
former despatch enclosed a copy. The second letter is that 
which the court of Wurtemberg drew up as an explanation of the 
former. Otherwise, German affairs are still suspended, and await 
the decision of the Saxony question which is still hovering in a 
state of uncertainty. There appear to be no overtures from 
either side. 

The Swiss conferences have commenced. M. de Dalberg 
defends to the best of his abilities the interests of the canton of 
Bern, and although the powers have decided on keeping the 
nineteen cantons intact, some advantages can yet be won for 
this canton, at least from the bishopric of Basel. M.de Dalberg 
will give a general report when some definite arrangement has 
been arrived at. 

Be pleased to accept... , 


No. 15.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, December 7, 1814. 

SIRE, 

The present: letter which I have the honour to write to 
your Majesty will be short. I have only this moment learnt the 
facts which I am going to report. I substitute them for others 
less important and more vague which I had gathered together. 

I am told, and I have every reason to believe it, that a 
messenger, who arrived this evening, has brought to Lord Castle- 
reagh and to Count von Miinster the order to back up Saxony. 
(I am ignorant as yet to what extent, and whether it is to be 
done in all cases, or only on certain conditions.) It is added 
that Lord Castlereagh addressed a letter to Prince Metternich 
this very morning, informing the Prince of this command, and 
also that Count von Miinster, who has always been of our 
opinion though rather timidly, is going to express himself on 
this question with considerable force. Prince von Wrede has in 
all probability read the letter of Lord Castlereagh at the house 
of Prince Metternich. 

On the morning of the day before yesterday, Prince Metternich 
had an interview with the Emperor Alexander in which the most 
ingenious subtleties and artifices were employed on both sides ; 
but it led to nothing. But as Prince Metternich declared that 
his master would never consent to Saxony being handed over 
to Prussia, the Emperor Alexander wishing to know if he had 
told him the truth,.attacked the Emperor Francis in the evening 
after the banquet, and said to him: 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 355 


“ At the present time, we sovereigns are obliged to conform 
to and obey the wish of the people. The wish of the Saxon 
people is not to be divided. They prefer to belong to Prussia, 
rather than be divided, or parcelled out.” 

To this the Emperor Francis replied : 

“T do not understand that doctrine at all. This is mine: a 
Prince can, if he wishes, surrender a portion of his dominions ; he 
cannot give up all his country or all his people. If he abdicates 
his right passes to his legitimate heirs. He cannot deprive them 
of it; Europe herself has not the right to do so.” 

“That is not consonant with modern ideas,’ said the 
Emperor Alexander. 

“Tt is my opinion,” replied the Emperor Francis, “that it 
ought to be that of all sovereigns, and consequently yours. As 
for me, I will never depart from it.” 

This conversation which was reported to me to the same 
tenour by two different people, may be relied upon, as a 
fact. One is therefore justified in saying that the Emperor of 
Austria’s opinion on the question of Saxony does not leave 
Prince Metternich the choice of defending or abandoning it, and 
it was not without good grounds that the Saxon minister flattered 
himself that it would never be abandoned. 

It is said that the Emperor Alexander declares that one 
conversation with the Emperor Francis is worth ten with Prince 
Metternich, because the former always expresses himself 
clearly and one knows what to expect from him. 

The princes of Germany, who have met for the purpose of 
considering some means for defending their rights against the 
projects which they know or guess the commission charged with 
German affairs has formed against them, are going, I hope, to 
publish a declaration in favour of the preservation of Saxony. 
Marshal von Wrede, to whom the majority have addressed them- 
selves, has advised them to press on, saying the moment was 
favourable. He has promised that Bavaria would join them. 

Wurtemberg, for the time being, is ranged on the side of 
Prussia. It is the Prince Royal, who is in love with the Arch- 
duchess Catherine who has influenced the cabinet in this. The 
court of Stuttgart has done a dirty trick in this, which will do 
her no good, and will scarcely harm any one else. This conduct 
so ignoble and disloyal, to say no more, of the King of Wurtem- 
berg, does not seem to me to be calculated to promote the desire 
of becoming his nephew.? I shall ask your Majesty to allow me 


1 If the Duc de Berry had married the Grand-Duchess Anne, he would thus have 
become the nephew of the King of Wurtemberg. The latter, in fact, was the brother 
of Sophie-Dorothea, Princess of Wurtemberg, who had married the Emperor Paul, 


AA 2 


356 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


to speak again one day at greater length of this subject which I 
only mention here. 

The Emperor of Russia had expressed a wish to see me; 
afterwards, he preferred first to clear up some confused ideas, 
with which, he informed me through Prince Adam Czartoryski, 
his mind was perplexed. In my intercourse with him, I have not 
been able to make use of General Pozzo, who is not now on the 
best of terms with him. His servants themselves only see him 
with difficulty. The Duc de Richelieu! had to wait a whole 
month to get an audience. Prince Adam, although an interested 
party in our discussions, is my most useful mediator. I have 
not yet seen the emperor. I am told that he is shaken but 
still undecided. I do not know when, or on what, he will 
determine. 

I have the honour to forward to your Majesty. copies of the 
two papers, which (to use his own expression) “ constitute the 
conclusion of his correspondence” with Lord Castlereagh. He 
has been generally blamed for having engaged, so to speak, ina 
hand-to-hand fight, little worthy of his rank, even had he proved 
victorious in it, whereas the contrary is the fact. Thus, instead 
of triumphing, which he doubtless contemplated, his vanity 
carries off nothing from the strife but wounds. 

Your Majesty will see from all this discussion, that Lord 
Castlereagh has only looked at the question of Poland from one 
point of view, and that he has isolated this subject from all others. 
Not only has he not demanded the independence of Poland, but 
he has not even expressed a wish for it: and he has even spoken 
of the Polish people in terms that rather dissuade than call for 
this arrangement. He has taken especial care to keep the 
Polish question perfectly separate from that of Saxony, a country 
which he had completely abandoned and which he is henceforth 
going to support. 

I have also the honour of forwarding to your Majesty a 


The Grand-Duchess Anne was the youngest daughter of Paul I. This princess, after 
having been on the point of becoming the wife of the Emperor Napoleon in 1810, 
and of the Duc de Berry in 1814, was married, in 1815, to the Prince of Orange, who 
became, later, King of the Netherlands, under the name of William II. 

1 Armand du Plessis, Duc de Richelieu, grandson of the marshal of this name. 
He was born in 1766, and was in 17809 first gentleman of the bedchamber. He emi- 
grated the same year, repaired first to Vienna, and then entered the Russian army, and 
received from the Empress Catherine the rank of lieutenant-general (1790). Hecame 
back to France for a brief period in 1802, but returned to Russia in 1803, and was 
appointed by the Emperor Alexander Governor of Odessa, and afterwards of all New 
Russia. Having gone back again to France, he re-assumed his office at the court, 
and became in September 1815 Minister of Foreign Affairs and President of the 
Council. He retired in 1818, but retained his dignity of state minister, to which was 
added that of master of the hounds. He returned to power in February 1820, but only 
retained office till December, 1821. He died in the following year. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 357 


letter of your consul at Leghorn I have made use here, and 
with some success, of the information it contains, which I have 
sent to the Emperor of Russia. M. de Saint-Marsan has received 
similar intelligence, and Prince Metternich confesses that he has 
received the same warnings from Paris. The conclusion which 
I draw from it is that it is necessary to rid one’s self as soon as 
possible of the man at Elba and of Murat. My opinion is 
bearing fruit. Count von Miinster warmly shares it. He has 
written about it to his court. He has spoken of it to Lord 
Castlereagh in such terms that the latter in his turn has gone to 
rouse Prince Metternich, who is employing all means to get the 
contrary opinion to prevail. 

His great stratagem is to make us lose time, in the belief that he 
thereby gains it. It is already eight days since the commission 
for Italian affairs settled those of Genoa. I have already had 
the honour of informing your Majesty that they were settled in 
accordance with your desires. I subjoin to my letter of to-day 
to the department, the work of the commission. Your Majesty - 
will find in it the clauses, nay even the very terms prescribed in 
our instructions. To-morrow the commission of the eight powers 
will take cognizance of the report and give its verdict.2 I doubt 
not that the conclusions of the report will be adopted. Tuscany 
and Parma will next engage attention. This work, which ought 
to be already finished, has been retarded by the slight illness of 
Prince Metternich, who, in order to finish nothing, terms his 
present state “convalescence.” 

The time lost to business is wasted in fétes. The Emperor 
Alexander demands and even commands them, as if he were at 
his own court. We are invited to those fétes, shown every regard, 
treated with distinction, in order to show the sentiments felt to- 
wards your Majesty, whose praises are on everybody’s lips ; but 
all this does not make me forget that it is now nearly three 
months that I have been absent from you. 

I have spoken to Lord Castlereagh of the arrest of Lord 
Oxford, of which M. de Jaucourt had informed me. Far from 
showing any displeasure, he told me he was delighted at it ; and 
has depicted Lord Oxford to me as a man who merited no 
esteem. I wish that among his papers, some had been found 
compromising Murat in the eyes of this court. 

The two messengers who have come to me from Paris have 
brought me the letters with which your Majesty has deigned to 
honour me, dated November 22 and 26. 

I have the honour to be... . 


1 The Chevalier Mariotti, who had been entrusted with watching the intrigues ot 
Napoleon at Elba. 2 Var.: Add, sur ce travail = on this work. 


358 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


No. It B—KING: Leuris, XV to. THE PRINGE 
DE TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, December 10, 1814. 

My COuSsIN, 

I am in receipt of your letter No. 14. 

You have very well interpreted my instructions with regard to 
the canton of Aargau. I should certainly prefer that Switzer- 
land might again become what she has been hitherto; but 
I will not wish what is impossible, and provided the canton of 
Bern be as satisfied as it can expect to be under the circum- 
stances, I shall be so too. With regard to the Prince-Bishop of 
Basel, I had not remembered the last recess of the Empire ; 
but I see that it solves the question with regard to him. And 
I have no further objection to make to the projected disposal 
of Porrentruy. 

I have read with interest, and am carefully preserving, 
the papers you have sent me. Lord Castlereagh speaks very 
well with regard to Poland, but his letter of October 11, belies 
his language considerably. If however he has succeeded 
in persuading the Emperor of Russia, it will be a great 
advantage for Saxony; but I scarcely see any appearance 
of it, and we must not swerve from our own line of conduct. 

You know Prince Czartoryski, and I know him also; the 
choice that his Imperial Majesty has made, taking him as 
mediator, leads me to think that he would rather I should 
make overtures to him, than he to me. Continue these con- 
ferences all the same, while equally continuing to follow 
out my intentions. No harm can result from them and they 
may produce some good. 

I am pleased to believe that it is from fear that Murat 
is playing the braggart; all the same, never lose sight for a 
moment of the fact, that if Buonaparte has any resource left, it 
is in Italy by means of Murat, and that also, delenda est 
Carthago. Wherefore, my cousin, I pray God may have you 
in His safe and holy keeping. LoUuIs. 


THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CONGRESS TO 
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 
VIENNA, December 14, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 
Our despatch of November 5, to the department pointed 
out the advantage which might accrue from an exchange 


1 Text: ‘qu'il tranche” = ‘‘ that it solves.” Var. : “‘quwil a ¢ranché” = ‘‘ that 
it has solved,” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 359 


of a part of the country of Gex for a part of the bishopric of 
Basel, an exchange which is desired by the Helvetian Con- 
federation, asked by the Genevese and proposed by the great 
powers. 

This sacrifice would have allowed hopes of a greater 
influence over the Helvetian Confederation, if the return of one 
of its cantons could have been procured for the canton of Bern. 

One would also have been justified in believing that the 
Genevese recognizing the value of this condescension would 
endeavour in their turn to get the Vaudois and Aargau people to 
satisfy the just pecuniary claims which the canton of Bern 
proffers. 

Pressed by the English plenipotentiary to reveal what were 
the conditions imposed by France for the exchange of a portion 
of the country of Gex, the French plenipotentiary remitted to 
him report No. 1, asking him to show it only to the ministers, 
in order to know if their instructions admitted destroying, in 
favour of Bern, the principle of the integrity of the nineteen 
cantons. The English minister, instead of keeping secret this 
confidential communication, showed it to the Genevese deputies, 
who drew up a counter project (No. 2). 

The conditions which it incloses are all in direct opposition 
to the orders of the king, who wished that the exchange should 
be made without depriving the King of Sardinia of any territory, 
and that Bern should recover the portion of Aargau which 
this canton (Bern) had possessed before. 

During this interval the powers, and especially England, were 
said to cherish the hope of increasing their influence in Switzer- 
land by this exchange. “They were very particular in letting the 
Helvetian league know what great obligations it was under to 
them for securing it. 

The Genevese, far from recognizing the sacrifice that France 
had made; pretended they had gained all their advantages from 
the congress, and maintained that, protected by the allies, 
nothing could be refused them. To prove this, they assured 
us, that although the exchange had been made contrary to the 
expressed wish of France, the king had yet acquiesced in it. 

These observations, which were well known, attracted some 
attention ; and in the conferences, the French plenipotentiary 
took occasion to maintain that England only seconded this 
exchange so vehemently, to get herself more highly valued ; and 
to be able to realise promises made to the Genevese at the time 
of the treaty of Chaumont. 

Several letters from Paris, addressed to Swiss deputies, 
announced at the same time that public opinion disapproved 


360 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


of this exchange, and that people were astonished that the 
French government had consented to it. 

It has therefore been thought more to the interests of the 
king and of France, to dismiss it, and with the more in- 
sistence, that the internal situation of Switzerland and the 
obstacles put in the way to all exchange of the new cantons 
by the Emperor of Russia, has rendered it impossible to obtain 
the conditions to which the king had attached his consent to the 
exchange. 

The French plenipotentiary sent in consequence a reply 
(No. 3) to the Genevese project, and declared that the exchange 
could not be allowed. The English plenipotentiary in express- 
ing his regrets at this modification of our attitude, announced 
that his government was intending to make a fresh attempt at 
Paris, to obtain the execution of the exchange, and proposed to 
reserve the part of the bishopric of Basel, which was to serve as 
the make-weight, by leaving it under a provisory government. 
The other plenipotentiaries refused their consent to this; but 
allowed this reservation to hold good till the end of the congress, 
and the projects proposed by England to be furthered. 

Although the Austrian and French plenipotentiaries observed 
that this only prolonged the uncertainty, and was harmful to 
the real interests of Switzerland, the proposal of England was 
maintained. 

We believe therefore that the Duke of Wellington will 
receive a fresh command to ask fora fresh decision from the 
king, in order to know, if, in spite of the recognition of the 
integrity of the nineteen cantons, the king would consent to 
this exchange ; we think that it is to the interest of the king to 
refuse it. 

1. Because it does not produce the advantages it was believed 
to give. 

2. Because the influence of France in Switzerland can only 
be increased by means of Bern and her allies. 

3. Because that so long as all that concerns the Helvetian 
Confederation is done under the auspices of the allied powers, 
France must reserve her means, and only act later, if she wishes 
to strengthen her influence. 

In thus informing you, Monsieur le Comte, of what has passed 
on this subject, you will be forewarned when the English 
ambassador presents himself to raise this question. It might 
also be as well for the French ambassador in London to know 
of this matter,and we ask you, Monsieur le Comte, to transmit 
to him the details of it, with which you will also be so good as to 
acquaint the king. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 361 


Prince Talleyrand, in order to thwart the importunities of 
the English ministers the more easily, has told them that the 
king has asked the chancellor of France under what form the 
cessions or exchanges of territory could be made, and that the 
chancellor had replied that this was not yet sufficiently decided, 
and that he must decline mixing himself up in such questions : 
after which the French plenipotentiaries could not furnish a 
further reply to this question. 

It will be well, Monsieur le Comte, to apprise the chancellor of 
this, that he may avoid giving an explanation on this subject, or, 
in case the ambassadors of England should speak to him of it, 
that he may give a reply similar to that which we have given here. 

ie pleased to accept. ... . | 


No. 19 AA—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE 
CONGRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, December 14, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

We have the honour to forward to you the protocol of 
the last conference. Another has since been held, but the pro- 
tocol has not yet been drafted. We shall wait to decide, 
with regard to the proposal of Count de Labrador on the Imperial 
fiefs, until the time when the fate of the King of Etruria, as well 
as that of the Archduchesse Marie-Louise . . . . shall be settled. 
The French plenipotentiaries have proposed, in accordance with 
the principle of the faithful execution of the dispositions of the 
treaty of Paris, the formation of three new commissions— 

The first to regulate, conformably to article 5, the navi- 
gation of rivers. 

The second to regulate the rank and precedence of crowns, 
and all that follows from this ; 

The third, to discuss the abolition of the slave-trade. 

This last point has caused some difficulties, because the 
Portuguese plenipotentiary observed that the commission could 
only be formed by powers interested in it. Count de Labrador 
has strongly backed the opposition of Portugal. The discussion 
has been so fierce that the Commission has adjourned its sitting, 
and the matter has resumed the form of simple negotiations. 

We observe again that Portugal has established as a 
principle that she will not renounce the slave trade for another 
eight years, and on condition that England regard the 
mercantile treaty existing between her and Portugal as 
null and void. 

The proposal made by France was in conformity with the 


362 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


engagement entered into with England to interpose her aid in 
getting the abolition of the slave-trade pronounced by all the 
powers, we shall therefore no longer have to occupy ourselves 
with this. 

The other two commissions have been formed. 

Prince Talleyrand has appointed as commissioners the Duc 
de Dalberg over the naval commission, and the Comte de la 
Tour du Pin over that for fixing the precedence and rank of 
crowned heads, 

Russia has asked to appoint a delegate for the commission of 
Italy, and has named Count Nesselrode. There has been no 
difficulty on this subject. 

The affairs of Poland and Saxony have been carried a step 
further without any positive result. Everything has, however, 
improved with regard to Saxony. Austria has decided to 
support her; England has changed her tone; all the Russian 
and Prussian intrigues have been unmasked. The explanations 
which have taken place have all tended to prove that Prussia 
can obtain her restoration on the basis of the population which 
she had in 1805, without depriving Saxony of more than three 
or four hundred thousand souls. 

We have, in this respect, obtained what we wanted, and the 
king and his policy have got the first advantages. It is possible 
that Prussia, seconded by Russia, may refuse to yield ; but in 
this case the forces would be very unequal, and Prussia would 
risk everything. We have some grounds for hoping that she 
will form a fair estimate of her position, and yield. 

Austria still seems determined not to remove Murat. More 
positive assurance has therefore been desired from England, 
Russia seeming to be sufficiently well disposed in this respect. 
Lord Castlereagh is about to ask his court for fresh instructions. 
He has communicated all the correspondence on the question of 
Naples to Prince Talleyrand, and has seemed to desire, rather 
to support what he has written, that our records be searched 
for all that may prove to the allies that Murat had a double 
intrigue with Bonaparte. We doubt not that several letters of 
his, and some despatches which have been preserved, can prove 
it. You will therefore, Monsieur le Comte, be so good as to 
transmit them to us in the originals. 

Prince Eugene has said that he has some material proofs of 
this, but he has refused to give them. 

Prince Talleyrand gives more details on the general state of 
affairs in his correspondence, but we can say with confidence 
that the king and France enjoy at the conference, the position | 
that is their due, and the consideration shown them affords the 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 363 


means of exercising some degree of influence that is honourable 
for the king, and which assures Europe a sound guarantee. 
Be pleased to accept... . 


_ No. 16—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING LOUIS 
XVIII. 


VIENNA, December 15, 1814. 
SIRE, 

The note in which the German princes of the second and 
third rank were to signify their wish for the preservation 
of Saxony, was on the point of being signed: it has not been 
signed, and it will not be. The Duke of Coburg’ was at the head 
of these princes. His conduct cannot be too highly praised. 

One of his sisters? is married to the Grand Duke Con- 
stantine. His youngest brother is aide-de-camp of the 
Grand Duke and major-general in the Russian _ service.’ 
He himself served in the Russian army. He enjoys the 
good graces of the Emperor Alexander, and is an intimate 
friend of the King of Prussia. Their resentment seemed likely 
to fear, if he crossed their purposes, and on the other hand, if 
Saxony were sacrificed there was every reason to hope that he 
might get some parcels of it. All these motives were insufficient 
to silence in him the claims of gratitude and of justice, or to 
make him forget what he owed to his house and country. When in 
1807, after the death of the duke his father, his possessions were 
confiscated, because he was in the Russian camp, and when 
Bonaparte wanted to proscribe him, he was protected by the 
intercession of the King of Saxony. Since then, the king had 
been in a position to extend his sovereignty over all the duchies 
of Saxony, and he had refused. In his turn, the duke has 
shown himself the zealous defender of the cause of the king. 
He had had it pleaded in London by the Duke Leopold his 
brother, who found the prince regent most favourably disposed 


1 Ernest-Anthony of Saxe-Coburg-Saafeld was born in 1784, He served first 
in the Russian army. After the peace of Tilsit he returned to his estates, 
which he preserved intact. The Congress of Vienna gave him the principality of 
Lichtenberg, but he sold it to Prussia in 1834. He promulgated a constitution in 
1821, and died in 1844. 

2 Julie-Henriette-Ulrica, Princess of Saxe-Coburg, was born in 1781. She 
married, in 1796, the Grand Duke Constantine, brother of the Emperor Alexander, 
who divorced her in 1810. 

3 Ferdinand-Charles-Augustus, Duke of Saxe-Coburg, was born in 1785, and 
married to the Princess de Kohary. He had by her three sons, one of whom married 
Dona Maria II., Queen of Portugal, and another the Princess Clementine, daughter 
of King Louis-Philippe. His daughter Victoria married in 1840 the Duc de Nemours. 
The Duke Ferdinand died in 1851. 


364 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYVRAND. 


towards him. He has pleaded his cause here among the 
sovereigns and their ministers. He has gone so far as to remit 
in his name to Lord Castlereagh a memorial in which he 
combated his arguments, and which he drew up with us. 

Informed by the Duke of Weimar! of the note which was 
being prepared, the Emperor Alexander sent for the Duke of 
Coburg, agd loaded him with reproaches, as much for the 
memorandum he had forwarded to Lord Castlereagh, as for his 
more recent doings, accusing him of intrigues, citing to him the 
conduct of the Duke of Weimar as a model for him to follow, 
telling him that if he had any representations to make, it was 
to Prince von Hardenberg that he ought to address them, and 
saying that he would now receive nothing of what had been 
promised him. 

The duke was noble and firm; he spoke of his rights, as 
prince of the House of Saxony, of his duties as a German 
prince, and, as a man of honour he thought he was not free to 
neglect them. If the Duke of Weimar thought otherwise he 
could only pity him. As for himself, he had, he said, twice 
compromised his position by his attachment to his Imperial 
Majesty. But if to-day it was necessary to sacrifice it for the 
sake of honour he was ready to do it. 

On the other hand, the Prussians, their emissaries, and, 
especially the Prince Royal of Wurtemberg have frightened a 
part of the German ministers by declaring that they would con- 
sider enemies all those who moved a finger in favour of Saxony. 

That is why the note has not been signed. But it is known 
that it was to be signed, as are also the reasons which pre- 
vented it from being so. The wishes it was to express have 
perhaps acquired more force from the violent attempt to 
stifle it. 

If I have expatiated on this circumstance at greater length 
than seemed to be necessary, I have done so from the double 
motive of rendering to the Duke of Coburg the justice that I 
believe to be his due, and to better acquaint your Majesty with 


? Charles-Augustus, Duke, and afterwards Grand-Duke of Saxe-Weimar, born in 
1757, lost his father at the age of eight months, and was proclaimed duke under the 
regency of his mother, Amelie of Brunswick, who was then only eighteen years of 
age. He entered the Prussian army, and received an important command in 
the campaign of 1806. After the battle of Jena, he became member of the Con- 
federation of the Rhine. In 1814, he went to the Congress at Vienna. It was 
then that the title of grand-duke was conferred on him. He died in 1828. His 
eldest son, Charles-Frederick, who succeeded him, had married the sister of the 
Emperor Alexander, the Grand-Duchess Marie Paulowna. 

2 Text: ‘‘De leur coté” = ‘‘on their part.” Var. : ‘‘De 7autre cété” = ‘on 
the other hand.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 365 


the style and variety of the obstacles against which we have to 
contend. 

Whilst these things were taking place, the Prussians received 
a letter from Prince Metternich, in which he declared to them 
that the kingdom of Saxony must be preserved intact, establish- 
ing by statistics subjoined to his letter, the fact that their 
population will be the same as in 1805, if in addition to that 
of the countries which they have retained, and that of the 
available countries destined for them, three hundred and thirty 
thousand Saxons only be added. 

I hasten to tell your Majesty that Count von Miinster 
has declared that he will renounce the increase promised to 
Hanover, if it be necessary for the preservation of the kingdom 
of Saxony. Your Majesty will surely learn this with pleasure, 
both for the sake of what it facilitates, and the esteem it brings 
to Count von Miinster. 

A passage in the letter of Prince Metternich, in which he 
availed himself of the opposition of France to the views 
of Prussia or Saxony, having probably caused the Emperor 
Alexander to fear that there was some agreement already 
settled, or ready to be settled, between Austria and ourselves, he 
immediately sent Prince Adam Czartoryski to me. 

The prince at once renewed to me the proposal which the 
Emperor Alexander had made me in the last interview I have 
had the honour of having with him, namely that we should 
comply with his desires as to Saxony, he promising us his support 
in the question of Naples. His proposal seemed the more 
acceptable that he no longer demanded the abandonment 
of all Saxony, and consented to the preservation of a portion 
of that kingdom. 

I replied that, as to the question of Naples, I held to the 
promise that the emperor had made us, that I relied on his word 
of honour ; that besides, in this question, his interests were the 
same as ours, and that he could not possibly be of a different 
opinion from ourselves; that if the question of Poland, which 
must be regarded as a personal one for the Emperor Alexander, 
since he had staked his satisfaction and fame on it, was decided 
according to his wishes, (it has not yet been entirely settled, but 
is in a fair way of being so now), he owed it to the persuasion 
of Austria and Prussia that this was only a question of second- 
rate importance to us; that in the question of Saxony, which 
was really foreign to the interests of the emperor, we had under- 
taken to persuade the King of Saxony to make some sacrifices, 
but that the spirit of conciliation could not be carried so far 
as the emperor seemed to desire. 


366 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


The prince spoke to me of alliance and marriage. I told him 
that so many serious matters could not be treated all at once; 
that there were, besides, some matters which could not be mixed 
up with others, because it would be to degrade them to the level 
of merchandise. 

He asked me if we had any engagements with Austria; I 
told him no; if we should come to any, in the case of no terms 
being settled between us as to Saxony: I replied, J should 
be very sorry. After a moment’s silence, we parted, politely, 
but coldly. 

The emperor, who was to have gone in the evening toa féte 
given by Prince Metternich, did not go. A sudden headache 
was the cause, or the excuse. He sent the empress and the 
grand-duchesses. 

He requested! Prince Metternich to call on him the next 
morning. 

During the ball, Prince Metternich came up to me, and after 
having thanked me for a little service I had rendered him, 
complained to me of the perplexity which Lord Castlereagh’s 
letters on Saxony had caused him. I thought that only one of 
them had been very compromising (that of October 11th); but 
he spoke to me of another, which I got to-day, and of which 
I inclose a copy to your Majesty. Although it is headed as 
being Lord Castlereagh’s, I know that it is the work of Mr. 
Cook, to whom, both in contents and style, it will not do much 
credit. It has been sent to the three powers who have called 
themselves allies so long. 

Prince Metternich promised me that, on leaving the emperor, 
he would call on me, were it not too late, to tell me what had 
passed. This time he kept his word. 

The emperor was cold, dry, and severe. He pretended that 
Prince Metternich told him, in the name of the Prussians, things 
which they disavowed, and that, on their side, the Prussians told 
him, as emanating from Prince Metternich, things opposed to 
what he wrote in his letters, and that he did not know which to 
believe. He reproached Prince Metternich with having inspired 
I know not what ideas in Prince von Hardenberg. Prince 
Metternich had with him,? and produced a letter which proved 
the contrary. The emperor took occasion of this letter to 
reproach Prince Metternich with having written some unbecom- 
ing letters. This reproach had some foundation. The emperor 


1 Text: ‘‘Il fit engager. . . . le lendemain matin” = as translated. Var. : 
“Le lendemain matin, il fit engager” = ‘‘ The next morning he requested.” 
Simple inversion in the text. 

Var. : ‘‘de M. de Hardenberg” = ‘‘ of Herr von Hardenberg.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 367 


had in his possession some private and confidential letters which 
he could only have obtained owing to some very gross indiscre- 
tion on the part of the Prussians. The emperor then seemed 
inclined to doubt that Prince Metternich’s note contained the 
real opinion of the Emperor of Austria, and added that he would 
like to have an explanation with the Emperor Francis himself. 
Prince Metternich immediately warned ! his master, who, should 
the Emperor Alexander put any questions on the subject, will 
reply that the letter was written by his orders, and contains 
nothing that he disavows. 

In a conference held between Prince Metternich and Prince 
Hardenberg, the only difficulties raised referred to the statistics, 
which were inclosed in the letter of Prince Metternich. They 
parted without coming to any agreement, a proposal having 
been made by Prince Metternich to appoint a commission for 
verifying them. 

That is, sire, the present state of affairs. 

Austria only calculates that Saxony loses four hundred 
thousand souls. She is? unwilling to give up Upper Lusatia 
because of the defiles of Gabel, which constitute an inlet into 
Bohemia. It was by this pass that the French entered in 1813. 

The Emperor of Russia consents to the existence of a 
kingdom of Saxony, which, according to Prince Adam Czar- 

toryski, would only be half the size of that of to-day. 
: Finally, Prussia seems now to reduce her claims to calcu- 
lations of population, and consequently to make them turn on 
the results and verification of the statistics. The question is 
doubtless not yet decided, but the chances are now more favour- 
able than they have ever been. 

Prince Metternich has offered to let me read his note. I 
thanked him, saying that I knew it, but desired that he should 
communicate it to me officially ; that it seemed to me he ought 
to do this, since he had mentioned us in it, for which I could 
reproach him, as it had been done without telling us; that it 
was necessary that we should be in a position to support it and 
that we could not do so very well except upon an official com- 
munication. He has given me his word to do what Iasked. My 
own motive for asking for an official participation, is that it will 
constitute the true date of the rupture of the coalition. 

I proposed some days ago the formation of a commission 
to treat.of the question of the slave-trade. This proposal was 


1 Text: ‘fit prévenir” = ‘“‘ warned.” Var.: ‘‘ad/a prévenir” = ‘‘ went to 
”» 
warn. 
2 Text: ‘‘ne veut point” = ‘‘is unwilling.” Var.: ‘‘ne voudrait point” = 


“* would be unwilling.” 


368 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


about to be made, and I wished to introduce it to the Congress, 
in order to do Lord Castlereagh a favour, and to dispose him by 
this means to meet us on the thorny Italian questions which we 
are beginning to discuss. I have gained something, for he has, 
of his own accord, asked me to indicate to him in what manner 
I proposed to arrange the affairs of Naples, promising to despatch 
a special messenger to receive the orders he might require. I 
wrote to him the letter subjoined here. After receiving it, he 
proposed to show me his correspondence with Lord Bentinck. 
I have read it, and my impression now is that the English are 
perfectly free in this question. But certain promises have been 
made to Murat, which as men, those who made them might feel 
obliged to keep, if he had himself (Murat) always faithfully kept 
his own. 

“T think I may say,” said Lord Castlereagh to me, “ that 
Murat has entered into correspondence with Bonaparte in the 
months of December 1813, and January and February 1814; 
but I should be very pleased to have the proof of it. That 
would wonderfully facilitate my action. If you have such 
proofs among your papers you would be affording me great 
pleasure if you could let me have them.” 

In the letter I write to-day to the department, I request that 
search be made for any that might be found in the archives of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is possible that there 
may be some traces of an understanding between Murat and 
Bonaparte at the Office of the Secretary of State.? 

The Comte de Jaucourt will lay before your Majesty the two 
letters which I address to-day to the department. I beg your 
Majesty to be so good as to refuse the proposals which may be 
made * to you concerning the country of Gex. None of the 
conditions imposed by your Majesty have been kept. We have 
also many reasons for being discontented with the Genevese who 
are here. The authority of the chancellor is more than sufficient 
to justify the abandoning of this question, which has been entered 
upon rather precipitately. 

I have the honour to be... . 


1 Var. : “‘ m’a-t-il dit”’ = ‘‘ said he to me.” 
Buia yeracn tz reste, Lord Castlereagh n'a fait aucune objection dla forme que je 
lui ai ~7 “oposé de sutvre” = ‘* At all events, Lord Castlereagh has made no objection to 


the id of policy I pr sad him to follow.” 
3 Text: ‘‘seraient” = ‘‘may be made.” Var. : ‘‘ seront” = ‘‘ wll be made.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 369 


No. 12B.—KING LouIs XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, December 18, 1814. 

My COousIN, 

I am in receipt of your letter, No. 15, which has caused 
me lively satisfaction. If England declares herself frankly in 
favour of Saxony, union with Austria and the greater part of 
Germany ought to triumph over modern zdeas. I like the 
firmness of the Emperor Francis, and the defection of the King 
of Wurtemberg affects me but very little. I await your explana- 
tion of the conduct of this prince, but, according to what I know 
of him I should advise no one to enter into a very close alliance 
with him. 

The letters found among the papers of Lord Oxford have 
thrown no light on the intrigues of Murat, but the facts found 
in the letter of Leghorn, the truth of which cannot be doubted, 
since Prince Metternich acknowledges his knowledge of them, 
speak for themselves, and it is time’ that all the powers should 
come to an understanding together, to pluck out the last 
root of the evil. On this subject, M.de Jaucourt must have 
informed you of the unjust, and, I daresay, ungrateful reproach 
levelled against the Comte Hector d’Agoult. It would be as 
well if you would speak of it to Count de Labrador, in order 
that his testimony may enlighten Sefior de Cevallos? if he is in 
error, or confound him if, as I more than suspect, he belies 
himself. 

I look upon the desire of the emperor to see you as a good 
omen. I have nothing to add to what I have told you on the 
main questions ; but there is one which I should like to see 
brought to a conclusion one way or another, vzz., the marriage. 
I have given my w/¢imatum. I shall not mind what will take 
place in foreign lands, but the Duchesse de Berry, whoever she 
may be, shall only cross the frontiers of France on making an 
open confession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman faith. 
On these conditions I am not only ready but eager to conclude 
it. If, however, these conditions do not suit the Emperor 
of Russia, let him say so; we will none the less remain good 
friends, and I will take measures for another marriage. 

I regret no less than yourself your absence, but in affairs of 


1 Text: ‘et il est temps” = ‘‘anditistime.” Var.: ‘‘et il est plus gue temps” 
= ‘and it is more than time.” 

2 Minister of Foreign Affairs for Spain. 

3 The marriage between the Duc de Berry and the Grand-Duchess Anne of 
Russia, sister of the Emperor Alexander. 


VOL. II. BB 


370 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


such importance it is necessary to endeavour to do what Lucan 
said of Czsar.1 Whereupon, my cousin, may God have you in 
His safe and holy keeping. 

LOUIS. 


No. 20A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE CON- 
GRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, December 20, 1814. 

MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

The questions of Poland and Saxony are not yet solved. 
Prince Talleyrand gives an account to the king of the com- 
munication made him by Prince Metternich of the letter which 
the latter wrote to the Prussians, and in which he declared that 
the cabinet of Vienna does not approve of the incorporation of 
Saxony with Prussia. 

Prince Talleyrand has replied by a letter laying special stress 
on the principles which ought to be followed in arranging the 
affairs of Europe. We are waiting for the Prussians to give 
their decision. It was said that they had drawn up a very 
strong letter, in which they lay as principles that the incorpora- 
tion of Saxony with Prussia admits of no contradiction. We are 
told that the Emperor of Russia himself did not wish this letter 
to be sent. 

Lord Castlereagh cannot conceal his embarrassment, but 
also refuses to explain himself on anything. His embarrassment 
arises from the fact that he has, on several occasions, abandoned 
Saxony, even in writing ; and more than that, whenever he has 
spoken of Poland, he has never spoken of her as great and 
independent, but solely as Poland. 

The affairs of Italy, Naples excepted, on which nothing — 
has yet been said, are progressing, and are being managed 
in the right direction. Nothing, however, is yet terminated. 

The conferences on Swiss affairs are advancing, and the 
report which is to be submitted to the consideration of the 
eight powers is being drafted. We shall have the honour of 
forwarding it to the department as soon as it is ready. 

Be pleased to accept)... 74 


1 Text: ‘£4 ce que Lucain dit de César = as translated. Var.: il faut s’appliquer 
ce que Lucain” = ‘‘one must apply to one’s self what Lucan.” ... . 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 371 


No. 17.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
2) LOUIS: 2 VEEL 


VIENNA, December 20, 1814. 

SIRE, 

I am in receipt of the letter with which your Majesty has 
deigned to honour me, dated December 1oth, and numbered I1. 

I have the honour of sending you copies of the letter of 
Prince Metternich to Prince von Hardenberg, on the subject of 
Saxony, of the tables which were subjoined? to it, and of the 
official letter which Prince Metternich has written me when com- 
municating these papers to me. He accompanies the whole with 
a note in his own handwriting, repeating to me, but less explicitly, 
what he had already told me vzvé voce, that this letter would be 
the last sent by the coalition, and adding that he congratulated 
himself for being of the same line of policy as the cabinet of 
your Majesty for the defence of so noble a cause. 

I was very eager for this communication for the reason I have 
had the honour of stating to your Majesty in my preceding 
letter. I desired it yet more, as probably offering me a quite 
natural opportunity for making known the decisions, principles, 
and views, of your Majesty. I have long sought for this 
opportunity ; I tried various ways for getting it, and now that 
it has offered itself, I hasten to make use of it, by addressing to 
Prince Metternich the reply, a copy of which I have the honour 
to address herewith to your Majesty. 

I have shown what the question of Poland might have been 
for us, if it had been wished: why it has lost its interest, and I 
added that the fault did not lie with us. 

In treating of the question of Saxony, I refuted the revolu- 
tionary arguments of the Prussians, and Mr. Cook in his “ Saxon 
point”; and I believe I have proved what hitherto Lord Castle- 
reagh has been unable or refused to understand, that as a 
question of the balance of power, that of Saxony is more im- 
portant than that of Poland, in the condition to which the latter 
now finds herself reduced. It is evident that Germany, after 
having lost her own equilibrium, could not help the general 
equilibrium, and that this would be destroyed were Saxony once 
sacrificed. 

In seeking to convince, I have aimed at not wounding 
susceptibilities. I have attributed the opinions which I have 
combated to a sort of fatality, and I have praised those 
monarchs who sustain them in order to induce them to abandon 
them. 

1 Text: ‘‘y joints” = ‘‘subjoined.” Var.: ‘‘ annexés” = ‘‘ annexed” 
BB 2 


372 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


As to your Majesty, I have not praised you. I have made 
public the orders you gave us; what could I say more? The 
facts speak for themselves. 

It is said that the Prussians had prepared a note in reply to 
that of Prince Metternich, and that it was couched in very violent 
terms; but that the Emperor of Russia to whom it was shown, 
did not wish it to be sent. 

Lord Castlereagh is like a traveller who has lost his way and 
cannot find it again. Ashamed of having belittled the Polish 
question, and of having exhausted all his efforts on it, of having 
been the dupe of Prussia, although we warned him of it, and of 
having abandoned Saxony to her, he does not know what part 
to take. Uneasy besides at the state of public opinion in 
England, he proposes, it is said, to return there, for the re- 
opening of Parliament and to leave Lord Clancarty here, to 
continue the negotiations. 

The affairs of Italy are proceeding nicely. I have good 
reasons for hoping that the Queen of Etruria will have the 
advantage over the Archduchesse Marie-Louise with regard to 
Parma, and I am trying to arrange matters in such a way that 
they may be settled without touching the legations. 

The commission of precedence, for which I nominated M. de 
la Tour de Pin, to whom I gave instructions in conformity with 
your Majesty’s resolutions on the subject, will in all probability 
be in a condition to give its report in from nine to ten days 
hence. 

Your Majesty will perhaps find the letter I have written to 
Prince Metternich rather long, but I could not make it shorter, 
It is intended to be one day published and read in England and 
France. All the words I employ have one special aim, which 
your Majesty will also find in my voluminous correspondence. 

I have the*horiour to be). 7". 


No. 13B.—KING Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE 
DE TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, December 23, 1814. 
My COousIN, 

I am in receipt of your No. 16, I have seen the noble 
and firm conduct of the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and of Count 
von Miinster with great satisfaction. You know my high 
esteem for the latter, and the duke, besides the bond of 
relationship between us, is the brother of a princess of whom 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 373 


I am very fond, the Duchess Alexander of Wurtemberg.! 
But this satisfaction does not prevent me from regretting that 
the note was not signed: Verba volant, scripta autem manent. I 
am pleased with your interview with Prince Adam Czartoryski ; 
you will have seen by my last letter that I should like a definite 
reply with regard to the marriage ; but that I am far from wishing 
to give it the character of a bargain. 

The slave-trade question appears to be in a fair way of being 
settled. As to that of Naples, which concerns me more closely, 
an exceedingly vexatious report was current in Vienna, at the 
time of the departure of the Duc de Richelieu, which was 
confirmed by private letters, but to which your silence on the 
point forbids me to give credence: that Austria had strongly 
declared herself in favour of Murat, and was seeking to entice 
England to the same opinion. The success of your letter to 
Lord Castlereagh, and that of the steps I have ordered to 
be made in consequence, will soon clearly reveal what I have 
to hope or fear. Nothing can be better than what you propose 
in this letter, but 1 am not quite easy on certain promises given 
to Murat. Should we—a thing of which I am not quite sure, 
for Bonaparte, after his defeat, destroyed many documents— 
should we find the most convincing proofs of this, it is yet too 
well known that an astute politician can deduce whatever he 
chooses from anything. However that may be, we will pursue 
our course ; I will never be found to go back one step in it. 

It was for the advantage of the canton of Bern that I 
consented to a portion of the district of Gex being exchanged ; 
but since the conditions I attached to it do not meet with 
approval, I will refuse all consent, and I will never more agree 
to an arrangement which would further rob the king, my 
brother-in-law,? of anything. 

Whereupon, my cousin, I pray God may have you in His safe 
and holy keeping. 

LOUIS. 


1 Antoinette-Ernestine-Amelie of Saxe-Coburg Saafeld, born in 1779, married in 
1798, Charles-Alexander-Frederick, Duke of Wurtemberg (1771-1833), general in 
the Russian service, Governor of Livonia and Courland. She had several children, 
among whom one son, Frederick-William-Alexander, born in 1804, who married 
the Princesse Marie d’Orléans, daughter of King Louis-Philippe. 

2 The King of Sardinia, Victor-Emanuel I. It is known that King Louis XVIII. 
had married his sister, the Princess Marie-Josephine-Louise of Savoy. At the same 
time, the Comte d’ Artois had married another daughter of the King Victor-Amadeus 
(father of the King of Sardinia), the Princess Marie-Therese. 


374 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


No. 214A.—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE 
CONGRESS TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT PARIS. 


VIENNA, December 27, 1814. 
MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

We believe that we can safely say that Austria has 
been brought back to the policy which the ministers of the king 
at the congress have been ordered to firmly support. 

The embassy of the king, following the line of principles 
traced in its instructions, has essentially contributed to raising 
the spirit of the cabinet of Vienna, and with inspiring it with the 
energy with which it was lacking. 

The Prussians, in a letter couched in rather strong terms, have 
pleaded the cause of the incorporation of Saxony; Prince Metter- 
nich has replied to it,and for the first time has dared to relinquish 
his character of ally, and show us his letter. Prince Talley- 
rand thought he ought to profit by this circumstance, for 
laying bare the true principles of the policy of the French 
Cabinet, and for spreading abroad the knowledge of those which 
guide it now, and which always will. This last letter has been 
laid before Lord Castlereagh and Prince von Wrede. 

Prince Talleyrand encloses in his letter to the king copies of 
these several documents. 

You will observe, Monsieur le Comte, that the letter to 
Lord Castlereagh consists of a plain and simple logic, which 
ought to make this minister see that truth and justice are one, 
and cannot triumph by means of the arguments he has hitherto 
made use of. 

We are informed that the Emperor Francis has _ been 
again attacked by the Emperor Alexander, who asked 
him if he had read the note of the Prussian cabinet, to which 
the Emperor Francis replied, that he had read it attentively : 
that he had already, before reading it, taken this position, 
but that he was more determined than ever not to consent 
to the incorporation of Saxony with Prussia. 

Since then the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia 
have nominated plenipotentiaries to treat the question of the 
limits of Poland and the affair of Saxony. We notice that the 
Emperor of Russia has chosen Count Rasumowski, as likely 
to be agreeable to the court of Vienna. Prince Metternich will 
treat for Austria, and Prince von Hardenberg for Prussia. Baron 
von Wessemberg will act as secretary. 

This affair is thus at last going to be treated officially ; it may 
encounter some opposition, but will, in all probability, terminate 
to the greatest advantage of Russia. 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 375 


In order to conciliate and reconcile the various statistics 
which the Prussian and the other cabinets submitted for the 
execution of the agreements entered into in the different 
treaties, Lord Castlereagh had proposed that a commission 
should be formed for this purpose. The Prussians consented, on 
condition that French commissioners be rigorously excluded. 
Lord Stewart was deputed to announce this insolent arrange- 
ment to Prince Talleyrand. The latter, keenly resenting the 
breach of propriety of this proceeding, declared that a French 
commissioner should be admitted, or that the French embassy 
should leave Vienna on the morrow. He added that he wished 
for a reply the sameevening. The reply was given affirmatively 
and in the most deferential terms. 

Prince Metternich, in his capacity of president, proposed for 
this commission the instructions enclosed under note No. 1. Prince 
Talleyrand replied by proposing note No. 2, and furnished the 
French commissioner with instructions conformable to his note. 

The commission is composed of: 

Lord Clancarty ; 

Count von Minster ; 

Baron von Wessemberg ; 

Herr von Jordan, Prussian Councillor of State ; 
Herr von Hoffmann ;! 

The Duc de Dalberg ; 

. The Baron de Martin, as secretary. 

The Prussian commissioners were at the same time accepted 
as Russian commissioners also; but, at the second sitting, it 
was announced that Baron von Anstett was to be adjoined to 
them on behalf of Russia. 

We forward to your department the protocol of the meetings. 

This general situation of affairs leads us to entertain the 
hope that Russia is about to bring the Polish question toa close, 
and that, after having obtained what she wanted, she will relax 
her efforts on behalf of Prussia. 

The King of Wurtemberg has grown weary of all this 
delay, and left Vienna yesterday for his own capital. 

There is a rumour abroad that he has signed a special agree- 
ment, in which he consents to the incorporation of Saxony with 
Prussia. Count von Winzingerode, his minister, has assured the 
Duc de Dalberg that the fact was not true, and that the conver- 
sations of the Prince Royal of Wurtemberg, who is on the eve 


1 Johan Godfried von Hoffmann, economist and German statesman. Born at Breslau 
in 1765, he was at first professor of political economy at Koenigsberg. He was appointed 
Councillor of State in 1808, attended the treaty of Paris and the Congress of Vienna, 
and accompanied Prince von Hardenberg on several diplomatic missions. He died in 


1847. 


VARA Y NH 


376 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND., 


of his wedding with the Grand Duchess of Oldenburg, could 
alone have given rise to this report. 

The Germans see this marriage with regret, because they 
- begin to detect in Russia intentions which alarm them. 

Indeed, the Prince Royal of Wurtemberg, is now on intimate 
terms with Baron von Stein, whose hero he has become, They 
are drawing up together constitutions, in which each of them is 
to play a part; and, it is probable that this intrigue will open 
the eyes of the other States of Germany, and induce them to 
prefer a kind of military league to a constitution of which they 
all might be the dupes. ; 

No decision has yet been taken as regards Italian affairs, 
and the question of navigation; but the commission appointed 
to arrange matters of rank and precedence, has sat twice. After 
a rather long debate on the subject submitted, most articles were 
eventually agreed on. That relative to salute at sea gave rise 
to objections on the part of the English commissioner ; but, as 
he only spoke of America, it will be easy, by offering to leave 
that matter undecided as regards the United States, to ascertain 
whether England’s objections really applied only to America. 
The principles set forth in the instructions given by his Majesty 
formed the basis of this decision, which may be regarded as their 
direct application. 

There only remains for us to call the attention of the 
ministry to various articles of Prussian newspapers, which should 
not be allowed to pass unnoticed. 

The Correspondant of Nuremberg, in its issue 355, publishes 
two such articles, reproduced from the Gazette of Aix-la-Chapelle ; 
these articles are most unwarrantable. 

It would be well to acquaint the German public with the 
conduct of Prussia for the last sixty years, and to quote simply 
facts, in order to explain the motives which should keep France 
from associating her policy with that of this power. 

It is necessary to call attention to the fact that, in her 
eyes, the end justifies the means, that she stops at no scruple, 
that the only law she recognizes is her own convenience ; that for 
the last sixty-five years she raised her population from less than 
four to more than ten million subjects, and that she has succeeded 
in cutting out for herself, as it were, an immense framework of 
dominion, by acquiring here and there territories which she in- 
tends to swallow by annexing the interlying territories ; that the 
terrible downfall brought upon her by her ambition has been no 
lesson to her ; that if, at this present time, Germany is still in a 
state of agitation, this is due to Prussia and her insinuations ; 
that she was the first to adopt in Franconia the system of 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 377 


incorporation, the first to withdraw, at Basel, from the policy of 
resistance to the Revolution, the only one to urge the loss to us 
of the left bank of the Rhine... 

It is necessary to give an energetic answer to the threats 
proffered by her plenipotentiaries regarding the consequences a 
new war might have on the tranquillity of France. (You will 
observe, Monsieur le Comte, that the articles to be written in 
refutation of the above allegations are only to appear in second- 
class newspapers). 

Be pleased to accept... . 


mo. £8.—LHE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND ‘TO. KING 
LOUIS 2. v LL. 


VIENNA, December 28, 1814. 
SIRE, 

Whilst I was writing to Prince Metternich the letter, a 
copy of which I[ have had the honour to forward to your Majesty, 
the Prussians were replying to his letter of December 12 and 
called his attention to the note addressed to them by him on 
October 22,and put him in contradiction with himself; they 
endeavoured to justify their pretensions on Saxony by reference to 
authorities and precedents, and contested chiefly the correctness 
of the calculations on which Prince Metternich based his views. 

Lord Castlereagh being authorized to communicate to me 
this reply of the Prussians, called on me, for the purpose of 
acquainting me with it. (It will be handed to me, and I 
shall have the honour of sending it to your Majesty by the next 
messenger.) He read it to me. I said that their arguments 
were but sophistry. I pointed out that the authorities and 
precedents to which they referred were devoid of weight and 
force, the cases and times being no longer the same. In my 
turn, I showed Lord Castlereagh my letter! to Prince Metternich. 
He read it very quietly, from beginning to end and returned it 
to me, without saying a word, either of approval or contradiction. 

The object of his visit was to acquaint me with his intention 
of proposing that a commission be appointed to verify the 
accounts furnished by Austria and Prussia respectively. I re- 
plied that I had no objection to such a course being adopted, but 
that, if in this case, as in many others, we proceeded at random, 
without rule or fixed principle, we should obtain no result ; that it 
was thus necessary to begin by adopting principles ; that, before 
verifying accounts, it was indispensable to acknowledge the rights 


1 Var. : note = note. 


378 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


of the King of Saxony, and that, on this subject, we might, he, 
Prince Metternich and myself, come to some agreement. 

“An agreement?” he said, “it is an alliance, then. you 
propose ?” : . 

“This agreement,” 1 replied, “may very well take place. 
without alliance, but, if you wish, it can be an alliance, I have no 
objection.” 

“ But an alliance presupposes war, or may lead to it, and we 
ought to do everything in our power to avoid it.” 

“That is also my opinion, every sacrifice should be made to 
prevent war, every sacrifice, that is, except that of honour, justice 
and the future of Europe.” 

“War,” he added, “ would not be readily accepted by our 
people.” 

“ A war would be popular with you, whose aim should be 
really noble, whose object should be for the good of Europe.” 

“And what might be that aim?” 

“The restoration of Poland.” 

He did not reject this suggestion and simply contented 
himself with replying : “ Not yet.” I had only given the con- 
versation this turn, to sound him, and to find out what he would 
be prepared to do in such and such a case. 

“ Whether it be,” I said, “ by an agreement, or by letter that 
we recognize the rights of the King of Saxony, or by a protocol 
signed by you, Prince Metternich and myself, the form is in- 
different, the recognition itself is all I care about. 

“ Austria,” he replied, “has officially recognized the rights of 
the King of Saxony; you have also recognized them officially ; 
as for myself, I recognize them absolutely. Is therefore the differ- 
ence between us such as to demand the act you suggest ?” 

We separated, after having agreed to his forming a commis- 
sion, for which each of us should appoint a plenipotentiary. 

The next morning he sent Lord Stewart to tell me that 
every one assented to the commission being formed, and that no 
objection was made to it except that a French plenipotentiary 
should sit in it. 

“Who objects to that ?” I indignantly asked Lord Stewart. 
He said, “It is not my brother.” ! . 
“Who then ?” said I. 

He hesitated in answering)“ But: .4../. this vise 

And finished by faltering out the word ad/ies. 

At this word all my patience forsook me, and without, in my 
expressions, going further than was fitting, I showed a spirit 
which was too strong to be merely termed heat or vehemence, 

1 Lord Castlereagh. 


”» 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 379 


I traced the only conduct, which, in such circumstances as these. 
Europe was to expect from the ambassadors of such a nation 
as England, and, speaking of what Lord Castlereagh had never 
ceased to do since we had been at Vienna,! I said that his conduct 
-would not be overlooked, that it would be judged in England, 
as it deserved, and I let him foresee the consequences of 
it. I treated Lord Stewart himself no less severely for his 
devotion to the Prussians, and concluded by declaring that if 
they wished always to be what they had shown themselves at 
Chaumont and to cling to the coalition for ever, France owed it 
to her dignity to retire from the congress, and that if the pro- 
posed commission were formed without a French plenipotentiary 
being invited to it, his Majesty's embassy would not remain 
another day at Vienna. Lord Stewart was abashed, and, with 
an alarmed look, ran to his brother. I followed him a few 
minutes afterwards, but Lord Castlereagh was not there. 

In the evening, I received from him a note in his own hand- 
writing, in which he told me that, having heard from his brother 
what I wanted, he had at once acquainted our colleagues with 
my wish, and that all had agreed with pleasure to do what was 
agreeable to me. 

The same evening, Prince Metternich, whom I had seen 
during the day, made to the powers who were to concur in the 
formation of the commission, the proposal that the decision 
arrived at by the said commission should have the force of law. 
He subjoined two riders to which I readily subscribed: one 
that the valuation of claims should comprise all the territories 
taken from France and her allies; the other that it should be 
brought to bear solely on population. But I stipulated in 
addition that the population should be estimated not according 
to number merely, but according to its wealth. For a Polish 
peasant without capital, without land, without means of liveli- 
hood, ought not to be put in the same rank as an inhabitant of 
the left bank of the Rhine or of the more fertile and richer 
districts of Germany. 

The commission, for which I chose? M. de Dalberg to 
represent your Majesty, met on the following day. It is working 
without interruption, and Lord Clancarty displays on this 
occasion the same zeal, uprightness, and energy as in the 
commission on Italian affairs, of which he is also a member. 

Justice compels me to say that Lord Castlereagh, displayed 
in this matter less ill will than weakness ; but his weakness was 


1 Text: ‘‘depuis que nous étions” = ‘‘since we had been.” Var.: ‘‘depuis 
Ly ee rf? CE as ” 

gui était” = “since he had been. 
2 Var. : ‘‘ appointed.” 


380 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


all the less excusable’ that the opposition which he expressed 
proceeded only from the Prussians. 

Two points in my note to Prince Metternich pleased the 
Austrian cabinet: the declaration by which France does not 
claim anything for herself, and that which concludes my note. 
After having read the latter, the Emperor of Austria said to 
Herr von Sickingen: “I share all the opinions expressed 
therein.” 

The Emperor of Russia, having asked him if he had read 
the answer of the Prussians to the note of Prince Metternich, 
dated December Io, he replied: “ Before reading it, I had made 
up my mind, and my opinion on the subject is still stronger 
since I read that answer.’ He is even said to have added: 
“Let us arrange” matters, if possible, but I beg your Majesty 
not to mention these statements any more.” 

He said to the King of Bavaria: “Iam an Austrian by 
birth, but I have a Bohemian head.* My mind is made up as 
regards the affairs of Saxony ; I shall not alter it.” 

Prince Czartoryski, to whom I communicated my note to 
Prince Metternich, had a copy of it made, which he placed under 
the eyes of the Emperor Alexander. The latter was pleased 
with the portion of it concerning himself and his interests. 

He admits that France is the only power whose language 
has not varied, and which has not deceived him. He, however, 
detected, as he thought, that he was indirectiy reproached with 
not remaining true to his principles, and sent Prince Czartoryski 
to tell me that his principles had for their object the happiness of 
nations, to which I replied that these were also at all times the 
principles of all the leaders of the French Revolution. Besides, a 
scruple arising from the fear lest the King of Saxony should feel 
very miserable with the portion of his dominions which your 
Majesty wishes to preserve to him has arisen in the mind of the 
Czar. He does not pity the present position of that sovereign, a 
prisoner and despoiled of his kingdom, but his future prospect 
when he will have regained possession of his throne, and re- 
entered the palace of his ancestors. But this scruple no longer 
bears any evidence of the former staunch resolution on the part 
of the Czar * of sparing the King of Saxony that misfortune. 

As for the Prussians, when consenting to the formation of 
the commission of statistics, and sending their plenipotentiaries 
to it, they evidently subordinated their claims and hopes on 


1 Var. : ‘‘all the more inexcusable,” 

> Var. “‘ Arrangez” (arrange). Second instead of first person of the plural of 
the imperative. 

3 A German idiomatic expression, meaning to be obstinate.—(Zyans/ator.) 

4 Text: ‘‘resolution.” Var. : ‘‘ réflexion” = “‘ reflection.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 381 


Saxony to the result of the discussions of the commission, 
and that result will, in all probability, be favourable to Saxony. 

Thus the affairs of Saxony are in a better situation than they 
ever were. 

Those of Poland are not yet concluded ; but their conclusion 
is being mooted. Counts Rasumowski and Capo d’Istria are to 
represent Russia. Prince Metternich is to be the Austrian 
plenipotentiary. He is bent on giving those deliberations a 
most official character. Baron von Wessemberg is to draw up the 
protocols. Prince von Hardenberg is to be the Prussian pleni- 
potentiary. Seeing that these negotiations will only deal with 
delimitation of territories, this matter will be settled in a few 
days. 

Although I have given my letter to Prince Metternich to 
Lord Castlereagh to read, I thought fit to send him a copy of 
it, that it may be found amongst his papers whenever they may 
be asked for by Parliament, and I have enclosed with it, not 
merely a letter to present it to him, but the one a copy of which 
I have the honour to subjoin here. The great problem for the 
congress to solve, is here put under a new form, and reduced to 
the most simple terms. The premises are so incontestable, and 
the consequences follow so necessarily from them, that no 
objection seems to be possible. I was therefore not much sur- 
prised when Prince Metternich told me that Lord Castlereagh, 
who showed ! him the letter, seemed rather embarrassed by it. 

There exists in Italy, as in Germany, a sect of Unionists, that 
isto say of people who aspire to making Italy one single state. 
Austria, warned of this, arrested a great number in one night, 
amongst whom three generals of division were compromised ? ; 
and the papers of the party have been seized at the house of a 
professor named Rosari.3 It is not known by whom Austria 
was informed of the plot. Some think it was by Murat, and 
that he delivered up some of his confederates in order to win 
favour with the court here. 

Your Majesty has seen by the papers I have sent, that I do 
not allow the affair of Naples to escape my attention. I do 
not either lose sight of the delenda Carthago, but it is not 
possible to begin with that. 


1 Text: ‘qui lui a montré” = ‘‘who showed him.” Var.: ‘“‘ qui Juz avait 
£99 “ce - ”? 
montré” = ‘who had shown him. 
2 Text : ‘* Compromis” = ‘‘compromised.” Var.: ‘‘ compris” = “‘ comprised.” 


3 Giovanni Rosari, born in 1766 at Parma, was a distinguished physician. In 
1796, he was one of the first to welcome the new state of things created in Italy by 
the French. He was Rector of the University of Pavia, and secretary-general to the 
Minister of the Interior. Compromised in a plot against Austria in 1814, he was 
arrested and imprisoned. He died in 1837. 


382 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


I have also the marriage question in my thoughts. Cir- 
cumstances have so changed that if, a year ago, it was your 
Majesty who desired this alliance, to-day it is for the Emperor 
of Russia to seek it. But this point requires developments 
which I beg your Majesty to allow me to reserve for a special 
letter which I shall have the honour of writing to your Majesty. 

When this letter reaches your Majesty, we shall be in a new 
year. I shall not have had the pleasure of being near you, sire, on 
its openirig day, and of presenting my respectful congratulations 
and sincere. wishes to your Majesty. I beg your Majesty to 
allow me now to offer them, and hope that your Majesty will 
deign to accept the homage. 

I have the honour to be... . 


No. 14B.—KING Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE DE 
TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, December 27, 1814. 
My Cousin, 

I have just been informed, that a treaty of peace and 
amity between England and the United States was signed on the 
24th inst. You will surely have been aware of it before this 
despatch reaches you, and I feel satisfied that you will’ have 
taken all the steps required by the circumstances. Nevertheless 
I hasten to charge you, while congratulating Lord Castlereagh 
on this fortunate event, to bring before his notice all the advan- 
tages that Great Britain can derive from it. Free, henceforth, in 
the disposal of all her means, what nobler employment could she 
make of them than to assure the tranquillity of Europe, on the 
basis of equity, the only really firm basis? And can she attain 
this end better than by allying herself closely to us? The Prince 
Regent and myself are the only parties disinterested? in the 
affair. Saxony never was the ally of France, Naples has never 
been in a position to assist her in war, and the same remark 
applies to England. Iam, it is true, the nearest relation of these 
two kings ; but, I am, before everything else, King of France, 
and father of my people. It is for the honour of my crown, for 
the welfare of my subjects, that I cannot allow the seeds of 
an European war to be sown in Germany; that I cannot 
tolerate in Italy the presence of an usurper whose existence 


ee 


1 Text: ‘‘ que vouz awrez faites” ... ‘‘ which you wz// have made.” Var. : ‘‘ que 
vous avez faites” . ‘‘ which you have made.” 

2 Text: ‘les seuls désintéressés dans cette affaire. La Saxe...” = ‘‘ the only dis- 

interested parties in this affair. Saxony...” War.: ‘‘les plus désintéressés dans cette 


affaire, car la Saxe” = ‘‘ the most disinterested parties in this affair, for Saxony.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 383 


constitutes a crying shame for all sovereigns, and threatens the 
internal tranquillity of all states. The same sentiments animate 
the Prince Regent, and it is with the liveliest satisfaction that I 
see him more and more attached to them. 

I have just spoken to you as your king, and I cannot refuse 
to speak to you alsoas man toman. There is a case which I 
ought not to foresee, and in which I should consider the ties of 
blood alone. If the two kings, my cousins, were deprived of 
their sceptres, as I was for a long time, then I should hasten 
to welcome them, to supply their wants, care for them in their 
misfortune, in a word, to imitate with regard to them what 
several sovereigns, and especially the Prince Regent, have 
done for me, and like them, in so doing, I should gratify at 
once, my feelings and my dignity. But that such a case 
will not happen, I have for warrant the generosity of some, 
and the true interest! of all. Whereupon, my cousin, I pray 
God that He may have you in His safe and holy keeping. 

LOUIS. 


No. 15B—KiING Louis XVIII. TO THE PRINCE 
DE TALLEYRAND. 


PARIS, December 28, 1814.” 
My Cousin, 

I am in receipt of your note under No. 17. Prince Metter- 
nich’s letter pleased me, because at last Austria has finally pledged 
herself, but your reply pleased me still more. I do not know 
if it can be abridged, but I know very well that I should not 
desire it, first because it says everything, and nothing that is 
unnecessary ; and secondly because I find there is more of this 
urbanity so useful, and often so indispensable in business, in 
developing one’s ideas, than in expressing? them in terms too 
laconic. 

That which you say of the embarrassment in which Lord 
Castlereagh finds himself placed, proves to me that I did right 
in sending you my last despatch. He perhaps does not perceive * 
that the peace with America offers to him a fine opportunity for 
retracing his steps. 

I am very glad that the affairs of the Queen of Etruria are 


-1 Text: ‘‘le veritable intérét ” = ‘the ¢rwe interest.” Var.: ‘‘?intérét = ‘‘the 
interest.” 

2 Text: ‘* Décembre 28, 1814” = ‘‘December 28, 1814.” Var.: ‘‘ Décembre 
30, 1814.” = ‘* December 30, 1814.” 

8 Text: ‘‘exprimer” = ‘‘to express.” Var.: “‘exposer” = ‘to expose.” ‘ 

4 Text: ‘Il est possible qu’il n’apercoive pas” = ‘‘he perhaps does not perceive.’ 


Var. : ‘Il est possible qu’il 2’afercit” = ‘* he perhaps ad not perceive.” 


384 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


taking a better turn, but I only consider this as another step 
achieved towards the attainment of another aim to which I 
attach a thousandfold more importance. 

M. de Jaucourt doubtless informs you of what M. de 
Butiakin! told him; you are in a better position than I am to 
know the truth concerning things at Vienna ; but, if it is true, 
as seems probable, that the Russian nation, which, in spite of 
its autocracy,? counts for something, feels some interest in 
the subject of the wedding, it must remember that he who 
wants the end, wants the means. As to me, I have given my 
ultimatum, and I shall not modify it. Whereupon, my cousin, 
I pray God that He may have you in His safe and holy keeping. 

LOoUuIs. 


No. 22 A—THE AMBASSADORS OF THE KING AT THE 
CONGRESS, TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AT 
PARIS. 


VIENNA, January 3, 1815. 

MONSIEUR LE COMTE, 

The situation of affairs is improved, and Austria and 
England are better disposed towards the policy that the king 
has defended and sustained hitherto. 

The Russian Cabinet at the second conference, which was 
held to divide the grand-duchy of Warsaw, submitted articles 
which contained all its own claims as well as those of Prussia. 

These are based on the principle that the grand-duchy of 
Warsaw is Russia’s, and that therefrom she detaches portions, 
which she hands over to Prussia and Austria. The incorporation 
of Saxony with Prussia is positively settled, and an equivalent of 
seven hundred thousand souls stipulated for in favour of the 
King of Saxony, on the left bank of the Rhine. We may hope 
that by means of mutual agreement these proposals will be 
rejected. The Prussian negotiators requested a counter project, 
which will soon be drafted. 

The discussion of Italian affairs are about to be resumed. 
After three weeks’ waiting, the commission has received the 
report of Austria on the questions of Tuscany and Parma..... 

The report on Swiss affairs will be discussed to-morrow by 
the commission summoned for the purpose. The proposal 
relative to the exchange of Gex will be discarded. 

The Emperor of Russia is embarrassed by the position he has 
taken up. He himself had told Prince Talleyrand that he 


1 An attaché to the Russian embassy at Paris. 
2 Var.: ‘‘ aristocratie” = ‘‘ aristocracy.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 385 


wished France to share in the discussions which were to take 
_place in the commission summoned on the affairs of Poland 
and Saxony. On the morrow, his minister, Count Rasumowski, 
refused permission to Prince Talleyrand to attend the conferences, 
Such is the inconsistency of this sovereign’s proceedings. 

There is still, however, some reason to hope that he will forego 
some of his pretensions. It is expected that the King of Saxony 
will have to submit to the loss of half his states; but that the 
principle of his existence as a sovereign will be secured, and that 
what can yet be obtained from the portion of the grand-duchy 
of Warsaw, which Russia wishes to incorporate, will necessarily 
have to be subtracted from the portion accruing to Prussia by 
virtue of the different treaties made between the allied Powers. 

He. pleased to accept. .... - 


No. 19.—THE PRINCE DE TALLEYRAND TO KING 
Louis XVIII. 


VIENNA, January 4, 1815. 

SIRE, 

I am in receipt of the letter with which your Majesty has 
deigned to honour me, dated the 23rd of last month, 

On the 21st of the present month, the anniversary of the day 
when was perpetrated that deed ! to be held up to the execration, 
and devoted to the tears and mourning of all future generations, 
a solemn service of expiation will be held in one of the principal 
churches of Vienna. I have ordered the preparations for it to 
be made. In ordering them, I have not only followed the 
impulse of my heart, but I also thought that it was necessary ? 
that the ambassadors of your Majesty, as interpreters of the 
grief of France, should show it in foreign lands and under the 
eyes of assembled Europe. Everything in this sad ceremony, 
must be in accordance with the grandeur of its object, the 
greatness of the crown of France, and the exalted rank of 
those who will in all probability witness it. 

All the members of the congress will be invited to it, and I 
am informed that they will all come. The Emperor of Austria 
has told me that he would be present. His example will certainly 
be followed by the other sovereigns. The most distinguished 
company of Vienna, of both sexes, will make it a duty to go 
there. I donot yet know what it will cost, but it is a necessary 
expense. 

1 ‘The execution of Louis XVI.—( Zransiator). 


2 Text: ‘‘qu’il fallait” = “‘that it was necessary.” Var.: “qu'il convenait” = 
‘that it was fitting.” 


VOL, II. cc 


386 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEVRAND. 


The news of the signing of the treaty of peace between England 
and America was announced to me on New Year's day by a letter 
from Lord Castlereagh. I hastened to send him my congra- 
tulations ; and I congratulated myself for it, knowing well the 
influence that this event might have both on the disposition of 
this minister, and on the resolutions of those whose pretensions we 
have hitherto had to combat. Lord Castlereagh showed me the 
treaty. It hurts the honour of neither party, and will conse- 
quently satisfy both of them. 

This good news was only the forerunner of some better still. 

The spirit of the coalition and the coalition itself, had 
survived the peace of Paris. My correspondence up to the present 
date offers numerous instances of it. If the projects that I found 
established here on my arrival, had been put into execution, 
France would have found herself, for some fifty years, isolated 
in Europe, without friendly intercourse with a single power. 
All my efforts were directed to preventing such a misfortune ; 
but my most sanguine hopes never went so far as to lead me to 
expect complete success. 

But now, sire, the coalition is destroyed, and destroyed for 
ever. Not only is France no longer isolated in Europe ; but 
your Majesty has already a federative system such as fifty years 
of negotiations held out no prospect of giving.! 

She is acting in concert with two of the greatest states, three 
second class powers, and soon will be joined by all the states that 
follow other principles or other maxims than the principles and 
maxims of revolution. She will in reality be the chief and soul 
of this union, formed for the defence of principles which she has 
been the first to inculcate. 

A change so great and so fortunate can be attributed to the 
protection of that Providence alone which was so visibly mani- 
fested in the return? of your Majesty. 

After God, the efficient causes of this change have been the 
following :— 

My letters to Prince Metternich and Lord Castlereagh and 
the impression they produced ; 

The hints dropped to Lord Castlereagh relative to an agree- 
ment with France, of which my last letter to your Majesty gave 
a full account ; 

The care I have taken to quiet his suspicions, by showing, in 
the name of France, the most perfect disinterestedness ; 


1 Text : ‘‘ne semblaient pas pouvoir parvenir a le lui donner = ‘‘ apparently held 
out no prospect of giving you.” Var.: ‘‘ne sembleraient” = ‘‘would apparently 
hold out no prospect... .” 

* Text: ‘‘dans le retour” = ‘‘in the return.” Var. : ‘‘ far le retour” = “‘ dy 


the return,” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 387 


The peace with America, which, by ridding him of his anxiety 
on that side, has left him more free to act, and has given him 
more courage ; 

Finally, the claims of Russia and Prussia, set forth in the 
Russian proposal, of which I here subjoin a copy ; and, above 
all, the tone in which the claims have been advanced and sus- 
tained in a conference between their plenipotentiaries and those 
of Austria. The arrogant tone taken in this shameful and pre- 
posterous document so wounded Lord Castlereagh that, forsaking 
his habitual calm, he exclaimed that the Russians were claiming 
to lay down the law, and that England would accept it from no 
one, 
All this had formed his opinion, and I profited by this to 
insist on the agreement of which I had long been speaking to 
him. He was sufficiently excited to propose to write me his 
views on the subject. The day after this conversation he called 
on me, and | was greatly surprised to find that he had drawn up 
his ideas in the form of articles. 

I had, till now, accustomed him to but little praise from me, 
which rendered him all the more sensible now to what I said of 
his project. He asked Prince Metternich and myself to read it 
attentively. In the evening, and after having made some 
alterations in the wording, we adopted it under the form of a 
convention. Insome articles the draft ought to have been more 
carefully made, but with people of weak characters the great 
thing is to press on to the end, and we signed it to-night. I 
hasten to forward it to your Majesty. 

Your Majesty had authorized me by letter, and especially 
by the special instructions of October 25, to promise Austria 
and Bavaria the most zealous co-operation, and, consequently, to 
stipulate in favour of these two powers, the aid which the forces, 
which would be brought against them in case of war, should 
render necessary. Your Majesty authorized me to do this, even 
on the supposition of England remaining neutral. Now England 
has to-day become an active party, and with her the united 
provinces of the Netherlands and Hanover, which makes the 
position of France superb. 

General Dupont having written to me on November g that 
your Majesty would have a hundred and eighty thousand men 
to dispose of on January I, and one hundred thousand more on 
March 1, without levying any fresh recruits, I thought that a 
help of one hundred and fifty thousand men might be stipulated 
without inconvenience. England engaging herself to furnish the 


1 Text: ‘‘ Dans la soirée” = ‘‘in the evening.” Var.: “‘ Fe pris heure dans la 
soirée et apres” = “I fixed an hour in the evening, and afterwards.” 


388 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


same number of troops, France could not remain behind her in 
this respect. 

The agreement being made only in case of protection being 
wanted, the aid would only be furnished in case of attack; and 
there is the greatest possible da that Russia and Prussia 
will not run this risk. 

At the same time, the case might happen, and render a 
military convention necessary, so I beg your Majesty to be so 
good as to order that General Ricard1 be sent to my aid. He 
enjoys the confidence of the marshal, Duc de Dalmatie : having 
been for some time in Poland, and especially at Warsaw, he 
possesses local knowledge which may prove very useful in 
arrangements of this character, and the opinion he has given 
me of his merits and ability causes me to prefer him to any 
other. But he must come zxzcoguito, and the Minister of War, 
after having given him the necessary documents, must enjoin 
on him the most profound secrecy. According to what I have 
heard of him, he has been well brought up, and your Majesty, 
if you thought fit, might give him his orders in person. 

I beg your Majesty to be so good as to order that the 
ratifications of the convention be drawn up, and sent to me 
as promptly as shall be possible? Your Majesty will surely 
see the necessity of commanding M. de Jaucourt to employ for 
this work only men of tried discretion. 

Austria being unwilling to send ? messengers to Paris to-day, 
so as to avoid arousing suspicions, and wishing her minister to 
be acquainted with the text of the convention desires that M. de 
Jaucourt may give it to read to Herr von Vincent, telling him + 
it must be kept secret. 

I hope your Majesty will likewise be so good as to include 
these two documents in the collection of all those that I have 
had the honour to send you up to the present. 

The agreement we have just come to is to get the dis- 
positions of the treaty of Paris completed, in a manner most 
consonant with the true spirit and best interests of Europe. 

But if war should break out, we could give it an aim which 
would render it almost infallible, and procure incalculable 
advantages for Europe. 


1 Etienne Ricard, born in 1771 at Castres, enlisted as a volunteer in 1792. He 
was afterwards Soult’s aide-de-camp, and was promoted to be general of brigade in 
1806. He rallied to the Bourbons in 1814, and was made a peer of France. He 
retired in 1821, and died in 1843. 


2 Text: ‘le plus promptement qu’il sera possible” = ‘‘as promply as shall be 
possible.” Var. : ‘‘le plus promptement possible” = ‘‘ as promptly as possible.” 
3 Var.: ‘‘envoyer aujoura’ hui (to send ¢o-day). 


4Var.: ‘‘ également” = ‘‘ at the same time.” 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 389 


France, in a war carried on with noble aims,! would succeed 
in winning back the esteem and confidence of all nations, and 
-such a conquest is worth more than that of one or several 
provinces, the possession of which is, fortunately necessary 
neither to her real force nor her prosperity.” 


I have the honour to be .... 


APPENDIX I. 


We subjoin here the text of the convention of January 3, 1815, although 
we have found no copy of it in M. de Talleyrand’s papers, no more than of the 
other papers which have been mentioned in his despatches. But this convention 
was published in the English State papers, whence we reproduce it, and we subjoin 
to it some details partly ignored, and possibly forgotten by M. de Talleyrand, as to 
the publicity it received at that time. 


SECRET TREATY OF DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE CONCLUDED AT VIENNA, JANUARY 
3RD, 1815. 
BETWEEN AUSTRIA, FRANCE, AND GREAT BRITAIN. 


In the name of the Most Holy and indivisible Trinity. 


His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 
His Majesty the King of France and Navarre, and His Majesty the Emperor of 
Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, being convinced that the Powers, to 
whose share it falls to complete the provisions of the Treaty of Paris, ought to be 
in a position of perfect security and independence, in order to be able to acquit 
themselves with the fidelity and dignity requisite to so important a duty, and con- 
sequently, considering it necessary, in face of pretensions recently put forth, to 
provide means of repulsing any aggression to which their own possessions, or those 
of one of their number might be exposed, from a spirit of opposition to the 
measures they might have thought it their duty to adopt and sustain by common 
consent, according to the principles of justice and equity ; and having no less at heart 
the completion of the dispositions of the Treaty of Paris, in a manner that may be 
most conformable to its true aim and spirit, have for these ends resolved to make a 
solemn convention and defensive alliance together. 

Wherefore, his Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Ireland, has nominated, as his plenipotentiary in this matter, the most honourable 
Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh. ..... 

His Majesty the King of France and Navarre, M. Charles-Maurice de Talley- 


rand-Périgord, Prince de Talleyrand..... 
And His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Herr 
Clement-Wenceslas-Lothaire, Prince of Metternich-Winneburg Ochsenhausen. ... . 


Who, after having exchanged their powers, which were found to be duly drawn 
up, agreed to the following articles :-— 

First ARTICLE.—The high contracting Powers mutually agree, individually and 
collectively, to act in concert, with the most perfect disinterestedness and complete 
good faith, in order to put into execution the arrangements of the treaty of 
Paris necessary to complete its dispositions, and to see that they be carried out in a 
manner that shall be most conformable to the true spirit of the treaty. 

If, consequent upon this, and from aversion to proposals that may have been made 
and sustained by common agreement, the possessions of any of them were attacked, 


1 Var.: ‘‘ aussi noblement faite” = ‘‘ so nobly carried on.” 
2 See Appendix I. and II. (Part VIII. Vol. II.), containing the text of the treaty 
of January 3, and a long note of the Marquis de Bacourt. 


390 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


at such time and in such circumstances, they promise and bind themselves to consider 
them all three as attacked, to make common cause with the one attacked, and to 
assist each other in repelling any such aggression with all the forces hereafter specified. 

Art. II.—If for the reasons above mentioned, which can only give rise to the 
present alliance, one of the high contracting powers were to be threatened by one 
or several powers, the two other signatories shall be bound to do their utmost, by 
means of a friendly intervention, to prevent hostilities. 

Art. III.—In case their efforts to attain that aim failed, the high contracting 
powers promise to come immediately to the help of the power attacked, each of 
them with an army of one hundred and fifty thousand men. 

Art. IV.—Each aforesaid army will be composed respectively of one hundred 
and twenty thousand men of infantry, and thirty thousand men of cavalry, with a 
train of artillery and ammunition proportionate to the number of troops. 

In order to contribute more efficiently to the defence of the power attacked or 
threatened, the auxiliary troops aforesaid will have to be ready to take the field 
within a delay of six weeks at the latest, after being called upon to do so. 

ART. V.—The situation of the countries which might become the seat of war, 
or other circumstances being likely to prevent England from providing, within the 
appointed delay, the stipulated contingent of English troops, and keeping it on a 
war-footing, His Britannic Majesty reserves to himself the right of providing foreign 
levies as his share of troops to the power requiring his help, the said foreign levies 
to be inthe pay of England, or to pay annually to the power in question a sum of 
money calculated at the rate of £20 for each infantry soldier, and of £30 for a 
horseman, until the stipulated help have been completed. 

The way in which Great Britain will have to provide her help will be arranged 
privately between His Britannic Majesty and the power threatened, as soon as the 
latter shall have claimed the said help. 

ArT. VI.—The high contracting powers agree, in case war should break out, to 
arrange privately the mode of co-operation best suited to the nature as well as to 
the object of the war, and to settle in like manner the plans of campaign, all matters 
relative to command, respecting which every facility shall be afforded, the lines 
of operation of the troops respectively employed, the marches of those troops and 
their provisions in food and forage. 

Art. VII.—If it should be found that the help stipulated be not proportionate 
to the requirements of circumstances, the high contracting powers reserve to them- 
selves the right of making together, within the shortest possible delay, a fresh 
arrangement fixing the additional heip which may be deemed necessary. 

Art. VIII.—The high contracting powers mutually agree that in case those who 
shall have provided the help stipulated above, should, for that reason, be involved in 
direct war with the power against which their help shall have been provided, the 
power that shall have claimed help and the powers from whom such help shall have 
been claimed, waging war as auxiliaries, shall make peace only by mutual consent. 

ArT. IX.—The stipulations agreed upon in the present treaty shall not alter or 
modify in any way any provision which the high contracting powers, or any of them, 
may have previously agreed upon or may subsequently consent to with other powers, 
inasmuch as those provisions are not or shall not be contrary to the object of the 
present alliance. 

ArT. X.—The high contracting powers, having no intention of aggrandizing 
themselves, and being solely animated by the desire of mutually protecting themselves 
in the exercise of their-rights and in the fulfilling of their duties as independent states, 
agree, in case, which God forbid, war were to break out, to consider the Treaty of 
Paris as the legal basis on which, at the time of signing the peace, the nature, extent, 
and frontiers of their respective dominions should be settled. 

ART. XI.—They moreover agree to settle all other matters by mutual consent, 
whilst adhering, as far as circumstances will permit, to the principles and provisions 
of the aforesaid Treaty of Paris. 

ArT. XII.—The high contracting powers reserve to themselves, by the present 
compact, the right of inviting all other powers to accede to this treaty in such delays 
and under such conditions as shall have been agreed between them. 

ArT. XIII.—His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 


THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA. 391 


Ireland, having on the Continent no possession which could be attacked in case of 
war alluded to in the present treaty, the high contracting powers agree that if such 
war should break out, and the possessions of his Majesty the King of Hanover or 
those of his Highness the Sovereign Prince of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, 
as well as those submitted to his rule, were attacked, the said contracting powers shall 
be obliged to act, in order to repulse that aggression, as though the latter were 
directed against their own territory. 
Art. XIV.—The present convention shall be ratified, and its ratifications ex- 
changed at Vienna, within six weeks, or sooner if possible. 
In witness whereof, the respective plenipotentiaries signed it and appended thereto 
the seals of their arms. 
Done at Vienna, on the third day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand 
eight hundred and fifteen. 
CASTLEREAGH. 
METTERNICH. 
TALLEYRAND. 


SEPARATE AND SECRET ARTICLE. 


The high contracting powers specially agree, in the present article, to call upon 
the King of Bavaria, the King of Hanover, and the Sovereign Prince of the United 
Provinces of the Netherlands, to assent to the treaty of to-day’s date, under reason- 
able conditions concerning the number of troops they may be called upon to furnish 
as their share ; in their turn, the high contracting powers bind themselves to enforce 
the full effect of the respective provisions of the treaties concerning Bavaria, Hanover, 
and Holland. 

It is, however, understood that in case one of the above mentioned powers should 
decline to assent to the present treaty, after having been called upon to do so, as 
said above, this power shall be considered as having forfeited its rights to the ad- 
vantages to which it might have been entitled, in accordance with the stipulations of 
to-day’s convention. 

The present separate and secret article shall be as valid and binding as though it 
were inserted word for word in to-day’s convention ; it will be ratified and its ratifica- 
tion will be exchanged at the same time. 

In witness whereof the plenipotentiaries signed it and appended thereunto the 
seals of their arms. Done at Vienna, the third day of January in the year of our 
Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifteen. 


(The signatures here follow.) 


APPENDIX II. 


King Louis XVIII., as seen in M. de Talleyrand’s despatch, had received a copy 
of the convention of January 3; the original of this convention, which latter re- 
mained secret, had been deposited at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in Paris. It 
is asserted that, on the return of the Emperor Napoleon from Elba, a high official 
of the French Foreign Office brought him the above convention, with the object of 
gaining his favour. According to another version, Napoleon himself found the con- 
vention in the very desk of Louis XVIII. Be as it may, it is a fact that Napoleon 
got acquainted with the convention, and lost no time in taking advantage of it. 

All the members of the diplomatic corps accredited to Louis XVIII. left Paris 
soon after the return of the Emperor Napoleon to the capital. M. Butiakin, a 
member of the Russian legation, whose name is mentioned in one of M. de Talleyrand’s 
despatches, prolonged his stay. The Duc de Vicence, having become Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, summoned M. Butiakin before him, told him he had an important 
communication to make to the Emperor of Russia, and asked whether he could rely 
on him to deliver it, without delay. M. Butiakin, having replied in the affirmative, 
the Duc de Vicence handed him, some hours afterwards, a parcel containing a copy 
of the convention, and a letter in which he tried to incense the Emperor Alexander 


. 


392 THE MEMOIRS OF PRINCE TALLEYRAND. 


against the treacherous allies who had deceived him. By this means, Napoleon 
thought he could break the coalition. 

M. Butiakin reached Vienna in the early part of April, 1815. Shortly after his 
arrival, the Emperor Alexander invited Prince Metternich to call on him, and, after 
showing him the copy of the convention, said: “ Do you know this?”—After en- 
joying a while the confusion of the Austrian Minister, the Czar said gently to him: 
**But let us forget all this; the point is now to overthrow our common enemy, and 
this document, which /e himself sent me, proves how dangerous and clever “e is.” 
—Thereupon, the Emperor Alexander threw the document in the fire, and required 
from Prince Metternich the promise that he would abstain from acquainting M. de 
Talleyrand with what had just taken place. Considering himself lucky to get so 
easily out of the trouble in which he had placed himself, Prince Metternich acquiesced 
in the Czar’s request, and never breathed a word of this adventure. 

The Emperor Alexander thought he still wanted Prince Metternich, which is why 
he spared him in this critical circumstance. But he did not display the same indul- 
gence towards M. de Talleyrand, to whom he made no allusion to the convention of 
January 3, doubtless reserving his vengeance for some other occasion. ‘The fact is 
that, after the battle of Waterloo and the return of King Louis XVIII. to Paris, the 
Russian plenipotentiaries, who had been so conciliatory the year before, and who had, 
on all occasions, endeavoured to lessen the claims their colleagues brought forward 
against France, became as exacting as they, and supported France, in a certain 
measure, against the exorbitant pretensions of the other powers, only after the retire- 
ment of M. de Talleyrand and the formation of the Duc de Richelieu’s Cabinet. 
—(M. de Bacourt.) 


END OF THE EIGHTH PART. 


RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED LONDON AND BUNGAY 


University of California 


SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 
Return this material to the library 
from which it was borrowed. 


16m-5,'65 (P4458s4) 40087 


s 


Be 


ON 


UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILI 


ee ae 


Pp te Cee S CC CCC CSCC UCC EU CUT CC TC CCC OCCT 


ee 


tN th tet De tet Sede oe ak tek a Re 
“ oo 5 


* 

eee ee 

SOOOOOIOR 
. 


ee eee 
Anes v* 
ve 
Ge i i 
ete a ee eae eee ee ee te ee ee 
Ce ee a _ 
A Acetate ehh del ek 
. rrywrt tres = wevseese 
Eten ewww eee eee eee 


a3 < 


weeuwvre 
wt rttrewe reer 


Te eee ew we 
S . 


ee 
Pree ee 


eg 
~ ed eee el dee 77 ads - ae Ce ee ee eS 
SOLES SLES LL, LLL ELE LE PEL EE et et Cttieds 


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee , ’ 
SSSohooS . : ; ; AIEEE LE LISS ESS ELLIE ELLE EEE EL 
AA KAA,