The Tao Teh King (Tao Te Ching) (Lao Tzu; James Legge (trans.), 1891)
==========================================================
The Tao Te Ching — all 81 chapters of Lao Tzu — in James Legge's complete 1891 translation with his introduction and notes, the full Tao Teh King text as published in The Texts of Taoism, Part I (Sacred Books of the East 39). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive scan wg939 (https://archive.org/details/wg939).

THE  TAO  TEH  KING,

OR

THE  TAO

AND  ITS  CHARACTERISTICS.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


PART  I.

Ch.  1.  i.  The  T&o  that  can  be  trodden  is  not  the
enduring  and  unchanging  T ao.  The  name  that  can
be  named  is  not  the  enduring  and  unchanging  name.

2.  (Conceived  of  as)  having  no  name,  it  is  the
Originator  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  (conceived  of  as)
having  a  name,  it  is  the  Mother  of  all  things.

3.  Always  without  desire  we  must  be  found,

If  its  deep  mystery  we  would  sound ;

But  if  desire  always  within  us  be,

Its  outer  fringe  is  all  that  we  shall  see.

4.  Under  these  two  aspects,  it  is  really  the  same ;
but  as  development  takes  place,  it  receives  the  dif¬
ferent  names.  Together  we  call  them  the  Mystery.
Where  the  Mystery  is  the  deepest  is  the  gate  of  all
that  is  subtle  and  wonderful.

§f  j||\  ‘Embodying  the  Tao.’  The  author  sets  forth,
as  well  as  the  difficulty  of  his  subject  would  allow  him,  the
nature  of  the  Tao  in  itself,  and  its  manifestation.  To
understand  the  Tao  one  must  be  partaker  of  its  nature.

Par.  3  suggests  the  words  of  the  apostle  John,  ‘  He  that
loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  is  love.’  Both  the
Tao,  L4o-jze’s  ideal  in  the  absolute,  and  its  Teh,  or  opera¬
tion,  are  comprehended  in  this  chapter,  the  latter  being  the
T tto  with  the  name,  the  Mother  of  all  things.  See  pages  1 2,
13  in  the  Introduction  on  the  translation  of  the  term  Tao.

2.  1.  All  in  the  world  know  the  beauty  of  the
beautiful,  and  in  doing  this  they  have  (the  idea  of)


48


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


what  ugliness  is  ;  they  all  know  the  skill  of  the  skil¬
ful,  and  in  doing  this  they  have  (the  idea  of)  what
the  want  of  skill  is.

2.  So  it  is  that  existence  and  non-existence  give
birth  the  one  to  (the  idea  of)  the  other ;  that  diffi¬
culty  and  ease  produce  the  one  (the  idea  of)  the
other ;  that  length  and  shortness  fashion  out  the  one
the  figure  of  the  other ;  that  (the  ideas  of)  height
and  lowness  arise  from  the  contrast  of  the  one  with
the  other ;  that  the  musical  notes  and  tones  become
harmonious  through  the  relation  of  one  with  another;
and  that  being  before  and  behind  give  the  idea  of
one  following  another.

3.  Therefore  the  sage  manages  affairs  without
doing  anything,  and  conveys  his  instructions  without
the  use  of  speech.

4.  All  things  spring  up,  and  there  is  not  one
which  declines  to  show  itself ;  they  grow,  and  there
is  no  claim  made  for  their  ownership ;  they  go
through  their  processes,  and  there  is  no  expecta¬
tion  (of  a  reward  for  the  results).  The  work  is
accomplished,  and  there  is  no  resting  in  it  (as  an
achievement).

The  work  is  done,  but  how  no  one  can  see ;

’Tis  this  that  makes  the  power  not  cease  to  be.

^  Jfp,  ‘  The  Nourishment  of  the  Person.’  But  many  of
Ho-shang  Kung’s  titles  are  more  appropriate  than  this.

The  chapter  starts  with  instances  of  the  antinomies,
which  suggest  to  the  mind  each  of  them  the  existence  of  its
corresponding  opposite  ;  and  the  author  finds  in  them  an
analogy  to  the  ‘  contraries  ’  which  characterize  the  operation
of  the  Tao,  as  stated  in  chapter  40.  He  then  proceeds  to
describe  the  action  of  the  sage  in  par.  3  as  in  accordance
with  this  law  of  contraries  ;  and,  in  par.  4,  that  of  heaven


CH.  IV.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


49


and  earth,  or  what  we  may  call  nature,  in  the  processes  of
the  vegetable  world.

Par.  2  should  be  rhymed,  but  I  could  not  succeed  to
my  satisfaction  in  the  endeavour  to  rhyme  it.  Every  one
who  can  read  Chinese  will  see  that  the  first  four  members
rhyme.  The  last  two  rhyme  also,  the  concluding
being  pronounced  so; — see  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary
in  voc.

3.  i.  Not  to  value  and  employ  men  of  superior
ability  is  the  way  to  keep  the  people  from  rivalry
among  themselves ;  not  to  prize  articles  which  are
difficult  to  procure  is  the  way  to  keep  them  from
becoming  thieves  ;  not  to  show  them  what  is  likely
to  excite  their  desires  is  the  way  to  keep  their  minds
from  disorder.

2.  Therefore  the  sage,  in  the  exercise  of  his
government,  empties  their  minds,  fills  their  bellies,
weakens  their  wills,  and  strengthens  their  bones.

3.  He  constantly  (tries  to)  keep  them  without
knowledge  and  without  desire,  and  where  there  are
those  who  have  knowledge,  to  keep  them  from  pre¬
suming  to  act  (on  it).  When  there  is  this  abstinence
from  action,  good  order  is  universal.

‘  Keeping  the  People  at  Rest.’  The  object  of
the  chapter  is  to  show  that  government  according  to  the
Tao  is  unfavourable  to  the  spread  of  knowledge  among  the
people,  and  would  keep  them  rather  in  the  state  of  primi¬
tive  simplicity  and  ignorance,  thereby  securing  their  rest¬
fulness  and  universal  good  order.  Such  is  the  uniform
teaching  of  Lao-jze  and  his  great  follower  iTwang-jze,  and
of  all  Taoist  writers.

4.  1.  The  T  ao  is  (like)  the  emptiness  of  a  vessel ;
and  in  our  employment  of  it  we  must  be  on  our
guard  against  all  fulness.  Howr  deep  and  unfa-

[39]  E


5°


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  i.


thomable  it  is,  as  if  it  were  the  Honoured  Ancestor
of  all  things !

2.  We  should  blunt  our  sharp  points,  and  unravel
the  complications  of  things ;  we  should  attemper
our  brightness,  and  bring  ourselves  into  agreement
with  the  obscurity  of  others.  How  pure  and  still
the  Tao  is,  as  if  it  would  ever  so  continue!

3.  I  do  not  know  whose  son  it  is.  It  might
appear  to  have  been  before  God.

1  The  Fountainless.’  There  is  nothing  before
the  Tdo;  it  might  seem  to  have  been  before  God.  And
yet  there  is  no  demonstration  by  it  of  its  presence  and
operation.  It  is  like  the  emptiness  of  a  vessel.  The  second
character  =  — see  Khang-hsi  on  the  latter.  The

practical  lesson  is,  that  in  following  the  Tao  we  must  try
to  be  like  it.

5.  1.  Heaven  and  earth  do  not  act  from  (the  im¬
pulse  of)  any  wish  to  be  benevolent ;  they  deal  with
all  things  as  the  dogs  of  grass  are  dealt  with.  The
sages  do  not  act  from  (any  wish  to  be)  benevolent ;
they  deal  with  the  people  as  the  dogs  of  grass  are
dealt  with.

2.  May  not  the  space  between  heaven  and  earth
be  compared  to  a  bellows  ?

’Tis  emptied,  yet  it  loses  not  its  power;

’Tis  moved  again,  and  sends  forth  air  the  more.

Much  speech  to  swift  exhaustion  lead  we  see ;

Your  inner  being  guard,  and  keep  it  free.

lit  J^J,  ‘  The  Use  of  Emptiness.’  Quiet  and  unceasing
is  the  operation  of  the  Tao,  and  effective  is  the  rule  of  the
sage  in  accordance  with  it.

The  grass-dogs  in  par.  1  were  made  of  straw  tied  up  in
the  shape  of  dogs,  and  used  in  praying  for  rain  ;  and  after-


CH.  VI.


THE  TAO  TEH  .STING.


51


wards,  when  the  sacrifice  was  over,  were  thrown  aside  and
left  uncared  for.  Heaven  and  earth  and  the  sages  dealt  so
with  all  things  and  with  the  people ;  but  the  illustration
does  not  seem  a  happy  one.  Both  A'wang-jze  and  Hwai-
nan  mention  the  grass-dogs.  See  especially  the  former,
XIV,  25  a,  b.  In  that  Book  there  is  fully  developed  the
meaning  of  this  chapter.  The  illustration  in  par.  2  is  better.
The  Chinese  bellows  is  different  to  look  at  from  ours,  but
the  principle  is  the  same  in  the  construction  of  both.  The
par.  concludes  in  a  way  that  lends  some  countenance  to  the
later  Taoism’s  dealing  with  the  breath.

6.  The  valley  spirit  dies  not,  aye  the  same ;

The  female  mystery  thus  do  we  name.

Its  gate,  from  which  at  first  they  issued  forth,

Is  called  the  root  from  which  grew  heaven  and
earth.

Long  and  unbroken  does  its  power  remain,

Used  gently,  and  without  the  touch  of  pain.

Jjjfc  ‘The  Completion  of  Material  Forms.’  This
title  rightly  expresses  the  import  of  this  enigmatical
chapter ;  but  there  is  a  foundation  laid  in  it  for  the  de¬
velopment  of  the  later  Taoism,  which  occupies  itself  with
the  prolongation  of  life  by  the  management  of  the  breath
or  vital  force.

‘  The  valley  ’  is  used  metaphorically  as  a  symbol  of
‘  emptiness  ’  or  ‘vacancy  and  ‘  the  spirit  of  the  valley’  is
the  something  invisible,  yet  almost  personal,  belonging  to
the  Tao,  which  constitutes  the  Teh  in  the  name  of
our  Kmg.  ‘The  spirit  of  the  valley’  has  come  to  be  a
name  for  the  activity  of  the  Tao  in  all  the  realm  of  its
operation.  ‘  The'  female  mystery  ’  is  the  T  4  o  with  a  name
of  chapter  1,  which  is  ‘  the  Mother  of  all  things.’  All  living
beings  have  a  father  and  mother.  The  processes  of  gene¬
ration  and  production  can  hardly  be  imaged  by  us  but
by  a  recognition  of  this  fact ;  and  so  Lao-jze  thought  of  the
existing  realm  of  nature — of  life — as  coming  through  an

E  2


52


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


evolution  (not  a  creation)  from  the  primal  air  or  breath,
dividing  into  two,  and  thence  appearing  in  the  forms  of
things,  material  and  immaterial.  The  chapter  is  found  in
Lieh-jze  (I,  i  b)  quoted  by  him  from  a  book  of  Hwang-Ti ;
and  here  Lao-jze  has  appropriated  it,  and  made  it  his  own.
See  the  Introduction,  p.  2.

7.  i.  Heaven  is  long-enduring  and  earth  continues
long.  The  reason  why  heaven  and  earth  are  able
to  endure  and  continue  thus  long  is  because  they  do
not  live  of,  or  for,  themselves.  This  is  how  they  are
able  to  continue  and  endure.

2.  Therefore  the  sage  puts  his  own  person  last,
and  yet  it  is  found  in  the  foremost  place ;  he  treats
his  person  as  if  it  were  foreign  to  him,  and  yet  that
person  is  preserved.  Is  it  not  because  he  has  no
personal  and  private  ends,  that  therefore  such  ends
are  realised  ?

‘  Sheathing  the  Light.’  The  chapter  teaches
that  one’s  best  good  is  realised  by  not  thinking  of  it,  or
seeking  for  it.  Heaven  and  earth  afford  a  pattern  to  the
sage,  and  the  sage  affords  a  pattern  to  all  men.

8.  i.  The  highest  excellence  is  like  (that  of)
water.  The  excellence  of  water  appears  in  its  bene¬
fiting  all  things,  and  in  its  occupying,  without  striving
(to  the  contrary),  the  low  place  which  all  men  dislike.
Hence  (its  way)  is  near  to  (that  of)  the  Tao.

2.  The  excellence  of  a  residence  is  in  (the  suita¬
bility  of)  the  place ;  that  of  the  mind  is  in  abysmal
stillness ;  that  of  associations  is  in  their  being  with
the  virtuous ;  that  of  government  is  in  its  securing
good  order ;  that  of  (the  conduct  of)  affairs  is  in  its
ability;  and  that  of  (the  initiation  of)  any  movement
is  in  its  timeliness.


CH.  X.


THE  TAO  TEH  SING.


53


3.  And  when  (one  with  the  highest  excellence)
does  not  wrangle  (about  his  low  position),  no  one
finds  fault  with  him.


}^j  ‘The  Placid  and  Contented  Nature.’  Water,  as
an  illustration  of  the  way  of  the  Tao,  is  repeatedly  em¬
ployed  by  Lao-jze.

The  various  forms  of  what  is  excellent  in  par.  a  are
brought  forward  to  set  forth  the  more,  by  contrast,  the
excellence  of  the  humility  indicated  in  the  acceptance  of
the  lower  place  without  striving  to  the  contrary.


9.  1.  It  is  better  to  leave  a  vessel  unfilled,  than
to  attempt  to  carry  it  when  it  is  full.  If  you  keep
feeling  a  point  that  has  been  sharpened,  the  point
cannot  long  preserve  its  sharpness.

2.  When  gold  and  jade  fill  the  hall,  their  possessor
cannot  keep  them  safe.  When  wealth  and  honours
lead  to  arrogancy,  this  brings  its  evil  on  itself.  When
the  work  is  done,  and  one’s  name  is  becoming  dis¬
tinguished,  to  withdraw  into  obscurity  is  the  way  of
Heaven.


|H| ;  but  I  cannot  give  a  satisfactory  rendering  of
this  title.  The  teaching  of  the  chapter  is,  that  fulness  and
complacency  in  success  are  contrary  to  the  Tao.

The  first  clauses  of  the  two  sentences  in  par.  x,  jfjj

StSffi#  W  W  Z.  #t  iffi  S  Z,

are  instances  of  the  ‘  inverted  ’  style  not  uncommon  in  the
oldest  composition.  ‘  The  way  of  Heaven  ’  =  ‘  the  Heavenly
Tao ’  exemplified  by  man.


10.  1.  When  the  intelligent  and  animal  souls
are  held  together  in  one  embrace,  they  can  be  kept
from  separating.  When  one  gives  undivided  at¬
tention  to  the  (vital)  breath,  and  brings  it  to  the
utmost  degree  of  pliancy,  he  can  become  as  a  (tender)


54


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISxM.


PT.  I.


babe.  When  he  has  cleansed  away  the  most  mys¬
terious  sights  (of  his  imagination),  he  can  become
without  a  flaw.

2.  In  loving  the  people  and  ruling  the  state,  can¬
not  he  proceed  without  any  (purpose  of)  action  ?  In
the  opening  and  shutting  of  his  gates  of  heaven,
cannot  he  do  so  as  a  female  bird  ?  While  his  intelli¬
gence  reaches  in  every  direction,  cannot  he  (appear
to)  be  without  knowledge  ?

3.  (The  Tao)  produces  (all  things)  and  nourishes
them ;  it  produces  them  and  does  not  claim  them  as
its  own ;  it  does  all,  and  yet  does  not  boast  of  it ;  it
presides  over  all,  and  yet  does  not  control  them.
This  is  what  is  called  ‘  The  mysterious  Quality’  (of
the  Tao).

‘  Possibilities.’  This  chapter  is  one  of  the  most
difficult  to  understand  and  translate  in  the  whole  work.
Even  K u  Hsi  was  not  able  to  explain  the  first  member
satisfactorily.  The  text  of  that  member  seems  well  sup¬
ported  ;  but  I  am  persuaded  the  first  clause  of  it  is  some¬
how  corrupt.

The  whole  seems  to  tell  what  can  be  accomplished  by
one  who  is  possessed  of  the  Tao.  In  par.  3  he  appears
free  from  all  self-consciousness  in  what  he  does,  and  of  all
self-satisfaction  in  the  results  of  his  doing.  The  other  two
paragraphs  seem  to  speak  of  what  he  can  do  under  the
guidance  of  the  T&o  for  himself  and  for  others.  He  can
by  his  management  of  his  vital  breath  bring  his  body  to
the  state  of  Tioistic  perfection,  and  keep  his  intelligent
and  animal  souls  from  being  separated,  and  he  can  rule
men  without  purpose  and  effort.  ‘  The  gates  of  heaven  ’
in  par.  2  is  a  Taoistic  phrase  for  the  nostrils  as  the  organ
of  the  breath  ; — see  the  commentary  of  Ho-shang  Kung.

11.  The  thirty  spokes  unite  in  the  one  nave;  but
it  is  on  the  empty  space  (for  the  axle),  that  the


CH.  XII.


THE  TAO  TEH  iTING.


55


use  of  the  wheel  depends.  Clay  is  fashioned  into
vessels ;  but  it  is  on  their  empty  hollowness,  that
their  use  depends.  The  door  and  windows  are  cut
out  (from  the  walls)  to  form  an  apartment ;  but  it  is
on  the  empty  space  (within),  that  its  use  depends.
Therefore,  what  has  a  (positive)  existence  serves
for  profitable  adaptation,  and  what  has  not  that  for
(actual)  usefulness.

itt  ‘  The  Use  of  what  has  no  Substantive  Existence.’
The  three  illustrations  serve  to  set  forth  the  freedom  of  the
Tao  from  all  pre-occupation  and  purpose,  and  the  use  of
what  seems  useless.

12.  i.  Colour’s  five  hues  from  th’  eyes  their  sight
will  take ;

Music’s  five  notes  the  ears  as  deaf  can  make  ;

The  flavours  five  deprive  the  mouth  of  taste ;

The  chariot  course,  and  the  wild  hunting  waste
Make  mad  the  mind  ;  and  objects  rare  and  strange,
Sought  for,  men’s  conduct  will  to  evil  change.

2.  Therefore  the  sage  seeks  to  satisfy  (the  craving
of)  the  belly,  and  not  the  (insatiable  longing  of  the)
eyes.  He  puts  from  him  the  latter,  and  prefers  to
seek  the  former.

‘  The  Repression  of  the  Desires.’  Government
in  accordance  with  the  Tao  seeks  to  withdraw  men  from
the  attractions  of  what  is  external  and  pleasant  to  the
senses  and  imagination,  and  to  maintain  the  primitive
simplicity  of  men’s  ways  and  manners.  Compare  chap.  2.
The  five  colours  are  Black,  Red,  Green  or  Blue,  White,
and  Yellow;  the  five  notes  are  those  of  the  imperfect
Chinese  musical  scale,  our  G,  A,  B,  D,  E  ;  the  five  tastes
are  Salt,  Bitter,  Sour,  Acrid,  and  Sweet.

I  am  not  sure  that  Wang  Pi  has  caught  exactly  the
author’s  idea  in  the  contrast  between  satisfying  the  belly


56


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM,


PT.  I.


and  satisfying  the  eyes ;  but  what  he  says  is  ingenious  :
1  In  satisfying  the  belly  one  nourishes  himself;  in  gratifying
the  eyes  he  makes  a  slave  of  himself.’

13.  i.  Favour  and  disgrace  would  seem  equally
to  be  feared  ;  honour  and  great  calamity,  to  be  re¬
garded  as  personal  conditions  (of  the  same  kind).

2.  What  is  meant  by  speaking  thus  of  favour  and
disgrace  ?  Disgrace  is  being  in  a  low  position
(after  the  enjoyment  of  favour).  The  getting  that
(favour)  leads  to  the  apprehension  (of  losing  it),  and
the  losing  it  leads  to  the  fear  of  (still  greater  cala¬
mity)  : — this  is  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  favour
and  disgrace  would  seem  equally  to  be  feared.

And  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  honour  and
great  calamity  are  to  be  (similarly)  regarded  as  per¬
sonal  conditions  ?  What  makes  me  liable  to  great
calamity  is  my  having  the  body  (which  I  call  myself) ;
if  I  had  not  the  body,  what  great  calamity  could
come  to  me  ?

3.  Therefore  he  who  would  administer  the  king¬
dom,  honouring  it  as  he  honours  his  own  person,
may  be  employed  to  govern  it,  and  he  who  would
administer  it  with  the  love  which  he  bears  to  his
own  person  may  be  entrusted  with  it.

‘Loathing  Shame.’  The  chapter  is  difficult  to
construe,  and  some  disciples  of  K\x  Hsi  had  to  ask  him  to
explain  it  as  in  the  case  of  ch.  10.  His  remarks  on  it  are
not  to  my  mind  satisfactory.  Its  object  seems  to  be  to
show  that  the  cultivation  of  the  person  according  to  the
Tao,  is  the  best  qualification  for  the  highest  offices,  even
for  the  government  of  the  world.  Par.  3  is  found  in
Afwangqze  (XI,  18  b)  in  a  connexion  which  suggests  this
view  of  the  chapter.  It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  in
him  the  position  of  the  verbal  characters  in  the  two  clauses


CII.  XIV.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


57


of  the  paragraph  is  the  reverse  of  that  in  the  text  of  Ho-
shang  Kung,  so  that  we  can  hardly  accept  the  distinction
of  meaning  of  the  two  characters  given  in  his  commentary,
but  must  take  them  as  synonyms.  Professor  Gabelentz
gives  the  following  version  of  K\v ang-jze:  ‘  Darum,  ge-
braucht  er  seine  Person  achtsam  in  der  Verwaltung  des
Reiches,  so  mag  man  ihm  die  Reichsgewalt  anvertrauen  ;
.  .  .  liebend  (schonend)  .  .  .  ubertragen.’

14.  i.  We  look  at  it,  and  we  do  not  see  it,  and
we  name  it  ‘  the  Equable.’  We  listen  to  it,  and  we
do  not  hear  it,  and  we  name  it  ‘  the  Inaudible.’  We
try  to  grasp  it,  and  do  not  get  hold  of  it,  and  we
name  it  1  the  Subtle.’  With  these  three  qualities,  it
cannot  be  made  the  subject  of  description  ;  and  hence
we  blend  them  together  and  obtain  The  One.

2.  Its  upper  part  is  not  bright,  and  its  lower  part
is  not  obscure.  Ceaseless  in  its  action,  it  yet  cannot
be  named,  and  then  it  again  returns  and  becomes
nothing.  This  is  called  the  Form  of  the  Formless,
and  the  Semblance  of  the  Invisible  ;  this  is  called
the  Fleeting  and  Indeterminable.

3.  We  meet  it  and  do  not  see  its  Front ;  we  follow
it,  and  do  not  see  its  Back.  When  we  can  lay  hold
of  the  T4o  of  old  to  direct  the  things  of  the  present
day,  and  are  able  to  know  it  as  it  was  of  old  in
the  beginning,  this  is  called  (unwinding)  the  clue
of  Tao.

‘The  Manifestation  of  the  Mystery.’  The  subject
of  par.  1  is  the  Tio,  but  the  Tao  in  its  operation,  and  not
the  primal  conception  of  it,  as  entirely  distinct  from  things,
which  rises  before  the  mind  in  the  second  paragraph.  The
Chinese  characters  which  I  have  translated  ‘the  Equable,’

‘  the  Inaudible,’  and  ‘  the  Subtle,’  are  now  pronounced  1,
Hi,  and  Wei,  and  in  1823  Remusat  fancied  that  they  were


58


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


intended  to  give  the  Hebrew  tetragrammaton  miT*  which
he  thought  had  come  to  Lao-jze  somehow  from  the  West,
or  been  found  by  him  there.  It  was  a  mere  fancy  or
dream ;  and  still  more  so  is  the  recent  attempt  to  revive
the  notion  by  Victor  von  Strauss  in  1870,  and  Dr.  Edkins
in  1884.  The  idea  of  the  latter  is  specially  strange,
maintaining,  as  he  does,  that  we  should  read  the  cha¬
racters  according  to  their  old  sounds.  Lao-jze  has  not
in  the  chapter  a  personal  Being  before  his  mind,  but  the
procedure  of  his  mysterious  Tao,  the  course  according  to
which  the  visible  phenomena  take  place,  incognisable  by
human  sense  and  capable  of  only  approximate  description
by  terms  appropriate  to  what  is  within  the  domain  of  sense.
See  the  Introduction,  pp.  14,  15.

15.  1.  The  skilful  masters  (of  the  Tao)  in  old
times,  with  a  subtle  and  exquisite  penetration,  com¬
prehended  its  mysteries,  and  were  deep  (also)  so  as
to  elude  men’s  knowledge.  As  they  were  thus  beyond
men’s  knowledge,  I  will  make  an  effort  to  describe
of  what  sort  they  appeared  to  be.

2.  Shrinking  looked  they  like  those  who  wade
through  a  stream  in  winter ;  irresolute  like  those
who  are  afraid  of  all  around  them  ;  grave  like  a
guest  (in  awe  of  his  host) ;  evanescent  like  ice  that
is  melting  away ;  unpretentious  like  wood  that  has
not  been  fashioned  into  anything ;  vacant  like  a
valley,  and  dull  like  muddy  water.

3.  Who  can  (make)  the  muddy  water  (clear)  ?
Let  it  be  still,  and  it  will  gradually  become  clear.
Who  can  secure  the  condition  of  rest  ?  Let  move¬
ment  go  on,  and  the  condition  of  rest  will  gradually
arise.

4.  They  who  preserve  this  method  of  the  Tao  do
not  wish  to  be  full  (of  themselves).  It  is  through
their  not  being  full  of  themselves  that  they  can


CH.  XVI.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


59


afford  to  seem  worn  and  not  appear  new  and
complete.

HI  |i|t,  ‘The  Exhibition  of  the  Quality,’  that  is,  of  the
Tao,  which  has  been  set  forth  in  the  preceding  chapter.
Its  practical  outcome  is  here  described  in  the  masters  of  it
of  old,  who  in  their  own  weakness  were  yet  strong  in  it,
and  in  their  humility  were  mighty  to  be  co-workers  with  it
for  the  good  of  the  world.

The  variety  of  the  readings  in  par.  4  is  considerable,  but
not  so  as  to  affect  the  meaning.  This  par.  is  found  in  Hwai-
nan  (XII,  23  a)  with  an  unimportant  variation.  From  the
illustration  to  which  it  is  subjoined  he  understood  the
fulness,  evidently  as  in  ch.  9,  as  being  that  of  a  vessel
filled  to  overflowing.  Both  here  and  there  such  fulness  is
used  metaphorically  of  a  man  overfull  of  himself ;  and
then  Lao-jze  slides  into  another  metaphor,  that  of  a  worn-
out  garment.  The  text  of  par.  3  has  been  variously
tampered  with.  I  omit  the  ^  of  the  current  copies,  after
the  example  of  the  editors  of  the  great  recension  of  the
Yung-lo  period  (a.d.  1403-1424)  of  the  Ming  dynasty.

16.  1.  The  (state  of)  vacancy  should  be  brought
to  the  utmost  degree,  and  that  of  stillness  guarded
with  unwearying  vigour.  All  things  alike  go  through
their  processes  of  activity,  and  (then)  we  see  them
return  (to  their  original  state).  When  things  (in
the  vegetable  world)  have  displayed  their  luxuriant
growth,  we  see  each  of  them  return  to  its  root.  This
returning  to  their  root  is  what  we  call  the  state  of
stillness ;  and  that  stillness  may  be  called  a  reporting
that  they  have  fulfilled  their  appointed  end.

2.  The  report  of  that  fulfilment  is  the  regular,  un¬
changing  rule.  To  know  that  unchanging  rule  is  to  be
intelligent ;  not  to  know  it  leads  to  wild  movements
and  evil  issues.  The  knowledge  of  that  unchanging
rule  produces  a  (grand)  capacity  and  forbearance,  and


6o


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM,


PT.  i.


that  capacity  and  forbearance  lead  to  a  community
(of  feeling  with  all  things).  From  this  community  of
feeling  comes  a  kingliness  of  character  ;  and  he  who
is  king-like  goes  on  to  be  heaven-like.  In  that  like¬
ness  to  heaven  he  possesses  the  Tao.  Possessed
of  the  Tao,  he  endures  long;  and  to  the  end  of  his
bodily  life,  is  exempt  from  all  danger  of  decay.

‘  Returning  to  the  Root.’  The  chapter  exhibits
the  operation  of  the  Tao  in  nature,  in  man,  and  in  govern¬
ment  ;  an  operation  silent,  but  all-powerful ;  unaccompanied
with  any  demonstration  of  its  presence,  but  great  in  its
results.

An  officer  receives  a  charge  or  commission  from  his
superior  (£■£  -jj^)  ;  when  he  reports  the  execution  of  it
he  is  said  ^  So  all  animate  things,  including  men,
receive  their  charge  from  the  Tiro  as  to  their  life,  and  when
they  have  fulfilled  it  they  are  represented  as  reporting  that
fulfilment ;  and  the  fulfilment  and  report  are  described  as
their  unchanging  rule,  so  that  they  are  the  Tao’s  impassive  in¬
struments,  having  no  will  or  purpose  of  their  own, — according
to  Lao-jze’s  formula  of  ‘doing  nothing  and  yet  doing  all
things  H ).’

The  getting  to  possess  the  Tao,  or  to  be  an  embodiment
of  it,  follows  the  becoming  Heaven  or  Heaven-like ;  and  this
is  in  accordance  with  the  saying  in  the  fourth  chapter  that
‘  the  Tao  might  seem  to  have  been  before  God.’  But,  in
/vwangyze  especially,  we  often  find  the  full  possessor  and
displayer  of  the  Tao  spoken  of  as  ‘  Heaven.’  The  last  sen¬
tence,  that  he  who  has  come  to  the  full  possession  of  the  Tao
is  exempt  from  all  danger  of  decay,  is  generally  illustrated  by
a  reference  to  the  utterances  in  ch.  50 ;  as  if  Laoqze  did  indeed
see  in  the  Tao  a  preservative  against  death.

17.  1.  In  the  highest  antiquity,  (the  people)  did
not  know  that  there  were  (their  rulers).  In  the
next  age  they  loved  them  and  praised  them.  In  the


CH.  XVIII.


THE  TAO  TEH  ffING.


6l


next  they  feared  them  ;  in  the  next  they  despised
them.  Thus  it  was  that  when  faith  (in  the  Tao)
was  deficient  (in  the  rulers)  a  want  of  faith  in  them
ensued  (in  the  people).

2.  How  irresolute  did  those  (earliest  rulers)
appear,  showing  (by  their  reticence)  the  importance
which  they  set  upon  their  words  !  Their  work  was
done  and  their  undertakings  were  successful,  while
the  people  all  said,  ‘We  are  as  we  are,  of  ourselves  !  ’

ML  ‘The  Unadulterated  Influence.’  The  influence
is  that  of  the  Tao,  as  seen  in  the  earliest  and  paradisiacal
times.  The  two  chapters  that  follow  are  closely  connected
with  this,  showing  how  the  silent,  passionless  influence  of
the  Tao  was  gradually  and  injuriously  superseded  by  ‘the
wisdom  of  the  world,’  in  the  conduct  of  government.  In
the  first  sentence  there  is  a  small  various  reading  of  Z  for
~Jv,  but  it  does  not  affect  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  The
first  clause  of  par.  3  gives  some  difficulty;  Tfc  jlf"  =5“,  ‘they
made  their  words  valuable  or  precious,’  i.  e.  ‘  they  seldom
spake ;  ’  cp.  i  Sam.  iii.  i .


18.  i.  When  the  Great  Tao  (Way  or  Method)
ceased  to  be  observed,  benevolence  and  righteous¬
ness  came  into  vogue.  (Then)  appeared  wisdom
and  shrewdness,  and  there  ensued  great  hypocrisy.

2.  When  harmony  no  longer  prevailed  throughout
the  six  kinships,  filial  sons  found  their  manifestation  ;
when  the  states  and  clans  fell  into  disorder,  loyal
ministers  appeared.


■jQ-  ‘  The  Decay  of  Manners.’  A  sequel  to  the
preceding  chapter,  and  showing  also  how  the  general  decay
of  manners  afforded  opportunity  for  the  display  of  certain
virtues  by  individuals.  Observe  ‘the  Great  Tdo,’  oc¬
curring  here  for  the  first  time  as  the  designation  of  ‘the
Tao.’


62


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


19.  i.  If  we  could  renounce  our  sageness  and
discard  our  wisdom,  it  would  be  better  for  the  people
a  hundredfold.  If  we  could  renounce  our  benevo¬
lence  and  discard  our  righteousness,  the  people
would  again  become  filial  and  kindly.  If  we  could
renounce  our  artful  contrivances  and  discard  our
(scheming  for)  gain,  there  would  be  no  thieves  nor
robbers.

2.  Those  three  methods  (of  government)

Thought  olden  ways  in  elegance  did  fail
And  made  these  names  their  want  of  worth  to  veil ;
But  simple  views,  and  courses  plain  and  true
Would  selfish  ends  and  many  lusts  eschew.

j||  yl|L,  ‘  Returning  to  the  Unadulterated  Influence.’
The  chapter  desires  a  return  to  the  simplicity  of  the  Tao,
and  shows  how  superior  the  result  would  be  to  that  of  the
more  developed  systems  of  morals  and  government  which
had  superseded  it.  It  is  closely  connected  with  the  two
chapters  that  precede.  Lio-jze’s  call  for  the  renunciation
of  the  methods  of  the  sages  and  rulers  in  lieu  of  his  fancied
paradisiacal  state  is  repeated  ad  nauseam  by  Ahvang-jze.

20.  i.  When  we  renounce  learning  we  have  no
troubles.

The  (ready)  ‘  yes,’  and  (flattering)  ‘  yea  ;  ’ —

Small  is  the  difference  they  display.

But  mark  their  issues,  good  and  ill ; —

What  space  the  gulf  between  shall  fill  ?

What  all  men  fear  is  indeed  to  be  feared  ;  but
how  wide  and  without  end  is  the  range  of  questions
(asking  to  be  discussed) !

2.  The  multitude  of  men  look  satisfied  and
pleased ;  as  if  enjoying  a  full  banquet,  as  if  mounted
on  a  tower  in  spring.  I  alone  seem  listless  and  still,
my  desires  having  as  yet  given  no  indication  of  their


CH.  XX.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


63


presence.  I  am  like  an  infant  which  has  not  yet
smiled.  I  look  dejected  and  forlorn,  as  if  I  had  no
home  to  go  to.  The  multitude  of  men  all  have
enough  and  to  spare.  I  alone  seem  to  have  lost
everything.  My  mind  is  that  of  a  stupid  man  ;  I
am  in  a  state  of  chaos.

Ordinary  men  look  bright  and  intelligent,  while  I
alone  seem  to  be  benighted.  They  look  full  of
discrimination,  while  I  alone  am  dull  and  confused.
I  seem  to  be  carried  about  as  on  the  sea,  drifting  as
if  I  had  nowhere  to  rest.  All  men  have  their  spheres
of  action,  while  I  alone  seem  dull  and  incapable,  like
a  rude  borderer.  (Thus)  I  alone  am  different  from
other  men,  but  I  value  the  nursing-mother  (the
T  ao).

‘  Being  Different  from  Ordinary  Men.’  The  chap¬
ter  sets  forth  the  difference  to  external  appearance  which  the
pursuit  and  observance  of  the  Tao  produces  between  its
votaries  and  others ;  and  Lao-jze  speaks  in  it  as  himself  an
example  of  the  former.  In  the  last  three  chapters  he  has
been  advocating  the  cause  of  the  Tao  against  the  learning
and  philosophy  of  the  other  school  of  thinkers  in  the  country.
Here  he  appears  as  having  renounced  learning,  and  found
an  end  to  the  troubles  and  anxieties  of  his  own  mind ;  but
at  the  expense  of  being  misconceived  and  misrepresented
by  others.  Hence  the  chapter  has  an  autobiographical
character.

Having  stated  the  fact  following  the  renunciation  of
learning,  he  proceeds  to  dwell  upon  the  troubles  of  learning
in  the  rest  of  par.  1.  Until  the  votary  of  learning  knows
everything,  he  has  no  rest.  But  the  instances  which  he
adduces  of  this  are  not  striking  nor  easily  understood.  I
cannot  throw  any  light  on  the  four  lines  about  the  ‘  yes  ’  and
the  ‘  yea.’

Confucius  (Ana.  XVI,  viii)  specifies  three  things  of  which
the  superior  man  stands  in  awe ;  and  these  and  others  of


64


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


a  similar  nature  may  have  been  the  things  which  Lao-jze
had  in  his  mind.  The  nursing-mother  at  the  end  is,  no
doubt,  the  Tao  in  operation,  ‘with  a  name,’  as  in  ch.  i  ;
‘  the  mysterious  virtue  ’  of  chapters  51  and  53.

21.  The  grandest  forms  of  active  force
From  Tao  come,  their  only  source.

Who  can  of  Tao  the  nature  tell  ?

Our  sight  it  flies,  our  touch  as  well.

Eluding  sight,  eluding  touch,

The  forms  of  things  all  in  it  crouch  ;

Eluding  touch,  eluding  sight,

There  are  their  semblances,  all  right.
Profound  it  is,  dark  and  obscure ;

Things’  essences  all  there  endure.

Those  essences  the  truth  enfold
Of  what,  when  seen,  shall  then  be  told.

Now  it  is  so  ;  ’twas  so  of  old.

Its  name — what  passes  not  away  ;

So,  in  their  beautiful  array,

Things  form  and  never  know  decay.

How  know  I  that  it  is  so  with  all  the  beauties  of
existing  things  ?  By  this  (nature  of  the  T  ao).

Jj§|  j\j),  ‘The  Empty  Heart.’  But  I  fail  to  see  the
applicability  of  the  title.  The  subject  of  the  chapter  is  the
Tao  in  its  operation.  This  is  the  significance  of  the
in  the  first  clause  or  line,  and  to  render  it  by  ‘virtue,’  as
Julien  and  Chalmers  do,  only  serves  to  hide  the  meaning.
Julien,  however,  says  that  ‘the  virtue  is  that  of  the  Tao;
and  he  is  right  in  taking  the  last  character  of  the
second  line,  as  having  the  sense  of  1  from,’  ‘  the  source
from,’  and  not,  as  Chalmers  does,  in  the  sense  of 1  following.’

Lao-jze’s  mind  is  occupied  with  a  very  difficult  subject —
to  describe  the  production  of  material  forms  by  the  Tao;
how  or  from  what,  he  does  not  say.  What  I  have  rendered
‘semblances,’  Julien  ‘les  images,’  and  Chalmers  ‘forms,’


CH.  XXIII.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


65


seems,  as  the  latter  says,  in  some  way  to  correspond  to
the  ‘Eternal  Ideas’  of  Plato  in  the  Divine  Mind.  But
Lao-jze  had  no  idea  of  ‘  personality  ’  in  the  Td  o.


22.  1.  The  partial  becomes  complete;  the  crooked,
straight;  the  empty,  full;  the  worn  out,  new.  He
whose  (desires)  are  few  gets  them  ;  he  whose  (desires)
are  many  goes  astray.

2.  Therefore  the  sage  holds  in  his  embrace  the
one  thing  (of  humility),  and  manifests  it  to  all  the
world.  He  is  free  from  self-display,  and  therefore
he  shines ;  from  self-assertion,  and  therefore  he  is
distinguished  ;  from  self-boasting,  and  therefore  his
merit  is  acknowledged ;  from  self-complacency,  and
therefore  he  acquires  superiority.  It  is  because  he
is  thus  free  from  striving  that  therefore  no  one  in  the
world  is  able  to  strive  with  him.

3.  That  saying  of  the  ancients  that  ‘  the  partial
becomes  complete  ’  was  not  vainly  spoken  : — all
real  completion  is  comprehended  under  it.


^  jg|,  1  The  Increase  granted  to  Humility.’  This  title
rightly  expresses  the  subject-matter  of  the  chapter.  I  cannot
translate  the  first  clause  otherwise  than  I  have  done.  It  was
an  old  saying,  which  L&o-jze  found  and  adopted.  Whether
it  was  intended  to  embrace  all  the  cases  which  are  men¬
tioned  may  be  questioned,  but  he  employs  it  so  as  to  make
it  do  so.

‘  The  emptiness  ’  which  becomes  full  is  literally  the
hollowness  of  a  cavity  in  the  ground  -which  is  sure  to  be
filled  by  overflowing  water  see  Mencius,  IV,  ii,  18.  ‘  The
worn  out’  is  explained  by  the  withered  foliage  of  a  tree,
which  comes  out  new  and  fresh  in  the  next  spring.  I  have
taken  the  first  sentence  of  par.  2  as  Wu  K/iang  does  ; — see
his  commentary  in  loc.


23.  1.  Abstaining  from  speech  marks  him  who  is
obeying  the  spontaneity  of  his  nature.  A  violent
[39]  F


66


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


wind  does  not  last  for  a  whole  morning ;  a  sudden
rain  does  not  last  for  the  whole  day.  To  whom  is
it  that  these  (two)  things  are  owing?  To  Heaven
and  Earth.  If  Heaven  and  Earth  cannot  make
such  (spasmodic)  actings  last  long,  how  much  less
can  man !

2.  Therefore  when  one  is  making  the  Tao  his
business,  those  who  are  also  pursuing  it,  agree  with
him  in  it,  and  those  who  are  making  the  manifestation
of  its  course  their  object  agree  with  him  in  that  ;
while  even  those  who  are  failing  in  both  these  things
agree  with  him  where  they  fail.

3.  Hence,  those  with  whom  he  agrees  as  to  the
Tao  have  the  happiness  of  attaining  to  it ;  those
with  whom  he  agrees  as  to  its  manifestation  have
the  happiness  of  attaining  to  it ;  and  those  with  whom
he  agrees  in  their  failure  have  also  the  happiness  of
attaining  (to  the  Tao).  (But)  when  there  is  not
faith  sufficient  (on  his  part),  a  want  of  faith  (in  him)
ensues  (on  the  part  of  the  others).

jte,  ‘Absolute  Vacancy.’  This,  I  think,  is  the  meaning
of  the  title,  ‘Emptiness  and  Nothingness,’ an  entire  con¬
formity  to  the  Tao  in  him  who  professes  to  be  directed  by
it.  Such  an  one  will  be  omnipotent  in  his  influence  in  all
others.  The  Tdo  in  him  will  restrain  all  (spasmodic)
loquacity.  Those  who  are  described  in  par.  2  as  ‘  failing  ’
are  not  to  be  thought  of  as  bad  men,  men  given  up,  as
Julien  has  it,  au  crime.  They  are  simply  ordinary  men,
who  have  failed  in  their  study  of  the  Tao  and  practice  of
it,  but  are  won  to  truth  and  virtue  by  the  man  whom  the
author  has  in  mind.  As  we  might  expect,  however,  the
mention  of  such  men  has  much  embarrassed  the  com¬
mentators.

Compare  the  concluding  sentence  with  the  one  at  the
end  of  par.  1  in  ch.  17.


CH.  XXV.


THE  TAO  TEH  AING.


67


24.  He  who  stands  on  his  tiptoes  does  not
stand  firm  ;  he  who  stretches  his  legs  does  not  walk
(easily).  (So),  he  who  displays  himself  does  not
shine ;  he  who  asserts  his  own  views  is  not  distin¬
guished  ;  he  who  vaunts  himself  does  not  find  his
merit  acknowledged ;  he  who  is  self-conceited  has  no
superiority  allowed  to  him.  Such  conditions,  viewed
from  the  standpoint  of  the  Tao,  are  like  remnants
of  food,  or  a  tumour  on  the  body,  which  all  dislike.
Hence  those  who  pursue  (the  course)  of  the  Tao  do
not  adopt  and  allow  them.

‘  Painful  Graciousness.’  The  chapter  should  be
so  designated.  This  concludes  the  subject  of  the  two  pre¬
vious  chapters,— pursuing  the  course,  the  course  of  the
unemotional  Tao  without  vain  effort  or  display.

The  remnants  of  food  were  not  used  as  sacrificial  offer¬
ings  ; — see  the  Li  K i  (vol.  xxvii,  p.  8a).  In  what  I  have
rendered  by  1  a  tumour  attached  to  the  body,’  the  is
probably,  by  a  mistake,  for  — see  a  quotation  by  Wu
Khang  from  Sze-ma  AT/nen.  ‘Which  all  dislike’  is,  liter¬
ally,  ‘  Things  are  likely  to  dislike  them,’  the  ‘  things  ’  being
‘  spirits  and  men,’  as  Wu  explains  the  term.

25.  1.  There  was  something  undefined  and  com¬
plete,  coming  into  existence  before  Heaven  and
Earth.  How  still  it  was  and  formless,  standing
alone,  and  undergoing  no  change,  reaching  every¬
where  and  in  no  danger  (of  being  exhausted)  !  It
may  be  regarded  as  the  Mother  of  all  things.

2.  I  do  not  know  its  name,  and  I  give  it  the
designation  of  the  Tao  (the  Way  or  Course).
Making  an  effort  (further)  to  give  it  a  name  I  call  it
The  Great.

3.  Great,  it  passes  on  (in  constant  flow).  Passing

F  2


68


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


on,  it  becomes  remote.  Having  become  remote,  it
returns.  Therefore  the  Tao  is  great;  Heaven  is
great ;  Earth  is  great ;  and  the  (sage)  king  is  also
great.  In  the  universe  there  are  four  that  are  great,
and  the  (sage)  king  is  one  of  them.

4.  Man  takes  his  law  from  the  Earth ;  the  Earth
takes  its  law  from  Heaven  ;  Heaven  takes  its  law
from  the  Tffo.  The  law  of  the  Tao  is  its  being
what  it  is.

,  1  Representations  of  the  Mystery.’  In  this
chapter  Lao  approaches  very  near  to  give  an  answer  to  the
question  as  to  what  the  TAo  is,  and  yet  leaves  the  reader
disappointed.  He  commences  by  calling  it  ‘a  thing  (#?);’
but  that  term  does  not  necessitate  our  regarding  it  as  ‘  mate¬
rial.’  We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  it  is
used  to  signify  ‘spirits  and  men.’  Nor  does  his  going  on
to  speak  of  it  as  ‘  chaotic  (yj^  J|j£)  ’  necessarily  lead  us  to
conceive  it  as  made  up  of  the  ‘  material  elements  of  things ;  ’
we  have  the  same  term  applied  in  ch.  14  to  the  three  im¬
material  constituents  there  said  to  be  blended  in  the  idea
of  it.

‘  He  does  not  know  its  name,’  and  he  designates  it  by  the
term  denoting  a  course  or  way  (Tao,  |||),  and  indicating
the  phenomenal  attribute,  the  method  in  which  all  pheno¬
mena  come  before  our  observation,  in  their  development  or
evolution.  And  to  distinguish  it  from  all  other  methods  of
evolution,  he  would  call  it  ‘  the  Great  Method,’  and  so  he
employs  that  combination  as  its  name  in  ch.  18  and  else¬
where  ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  name  has  fully
maintained  itself  in  the  writings  of  his  followers.  But
understood  thus,  he  here  says,  as  in  ch.  t,  that  it  is  ‘  the
Mother  of  all  things.’  And  yet,  when  he  says  that  ‘  it
was  before  Heaven  and  Earth  were  produced,’  he  comes
very  near  his  affirmations  in  chapters  1  and  4,  that  ‘  the
nameless  Tao  was  the  beginning  (or  originating  cause)  of
Heaven  and  Earth,’  and  ‘  might  seem  to  have  been  before


CH.  XXVI.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


69


God.’  Was  he  groping  after  God  if  haply  he  might  find
Him  ?  I  think  he  was,  and  he  gets  so  far  as  to  conceive  of
Him  as  ‘  the  Uncaused  Cause,’  but  comes  short  of  the  idea
of  His  personality.  The  other  subordinate  causes  which
he  mentions  all  get  their  force  or  power  from  the  Tao,  but
after  all  the  Tao  is  simply  a  spontaneity,  evolving  from
itself,  and  not  acting  from  a  personal  will,  consciously  in
the  direction  of  its  own  wisdom  and  love.  ‘  Who  can  by
searching  find  out  God  ?  Who  can  find  out  the  Almighty
to  perfection  ?  ’

The  predicate  of  the  Ta  o  in  the  chapter,  most  perplexing
to  myself,  is  1  It  returns,’  in  par.  3.  1  It  flows  away,  far

away,  and  comes  back are  not  the  three  statements
together  equal  to  ‘  It  is  everywhere  ?  ’

26.  1.  Gravity  is  the  root  of  lightness  ;  stillness,
the  ruler  of  movement.

2.  Therefore  a  wise  prince,  marching  the  whole
day,  does  not  go  far  from  his  baggage  waggons.
Although  he  may  have  brilliant  prospects  to  look  at,
he  quietly  remains  (in  his  proper  place),  indifferent
to  them.  How  should  the  lord  of  a  myriad  chariots
carry  himself  lightly  before  the  kingdom  ?  If  he
do  act  lightly,  he  has  lost  his  root  (of  gravity) ;  if
he  proceed  to  active  movement,  he  will  lose  his
throne.

Sf§’  *  The  Quality  of  Gravity.’  Gravity  and  stillness
are  both  attributes  of  the  T  d  o ;  and  he  who  cultivates  it
must  not  give  way  to  lightness  of  mind,  or  hasty  action.

The  rule  for  a  leader  not  to  separate  from  his  baggage
waggons  is  simply  the  necessity  of  adhering  to  gravity.
I  have  adopted  from  Han  Fei  the  reading  of  ‘the  wise
prince  ’  for  ‘  the  sage,’  which  is  found  in  Ho-shang  Kung  ;
and  later  on  the  reading  of  ‘  has  lost  his  root  ’  for  his
‘  loses  his  ministers,’  though  the  latter  is  found  also  in
Han  Fei.


7o


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


27.  i.  The  skilful  traveller  leaves  no  traces  of  his
wheels  or  footsteps  ;  the  skilful  speaker  says  nothing
that  can  be  found  fault  with  or  blamed ;  the  skilful
reckoner  uses  no  tallies ;  the  skilful  closer  needs  no
bolts  or  bars,  while  to  open  what  he  has  shut  will  be
impossible ;  the  skilful  binder  uses  no  strings  or
knots,  while  to  unloose  what  he  has  bound  will  be
impossible.  In  the  same  way  the  sage  is  always
skilful  at  saving  men,  and  so  he  does  not  cast  away
any  man ;  he  is  always  skilful  at  saving  things,  and
so  he  does  not  cast  away  anything.  This  is  called
‘  Hiding  the  light  of  his  procedure.’

2.  Therefore  the  man  of  skill  is  a  master  (to  be
looked  up  to)  by  him  who  has  not  the  skill ;  and  he
who  has  not  the  skill  is  the  helper  of  (the  reputation
of)  him  who  has  the  skill.  If  the  one  did  not
honour  his  master,  and  the  other  did  not  rejoice  in
his  helper,  an  (observer),  though  intelligent,  might
greatly  err  about  them.  This  is  called  ‘The  utmost
degree  of  mystery.’

*5JU.  ‘  Dexterity  in  Using,’  that  is,  in  the  application
of  the  Tao.  This  is  the  substance  of  the  chapter,  cele¬
brating  the  effective  but  invisible  operation  of  the  Tao,
and  the  impartial  exercise  of  it  for  the  benefit  of  all  men
and  all  things.

I  have  given  the  most  natural  construction  of  the  two
characters  at  the  end  of  par.  i ,  the  only  possible  construc¬
tion  of  them,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  suitable  to  the  context.
The  action  of  the  Tao  (non -acting  and  yet  all-efficient)  and
that  of  the  sage  in  accordance  with  it,  are  veiled  by  their
nature  from  the  sight  of  ordinary  men.

It  is  more  difficult  to  catch  the  scope  and  point  of  par.  2.
If  there  were  not  the  conditions  described  in  it,  it  would  be
hard  for  even  an  intelligent  onlooker  to  distinguish  between
the  man  who  had  the  skill  and  the  man  without  it,  between


CH.  XXIX.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


7r


him  who  possessed  the  Tao,  and  him  who  had  it  not,
which  would  be  strange  indeed.

28.  i.  Who  knows  his  manhood’s  strength,

Yet  still  his  female  feebleness  maintains  ;

As  to  one  channel  flow  the  many  drains,

All  come  to  him,  yea,  all  beneath  the  sky.

Thus  he  the  constant  excellence  retains  ; —

The  simple  child  again,  free  from  all  stains.
Who  knows  how  white  attracts,

Yet  always  keeps  himself  within  black’s  shade,
The  pattern  of  humility  displayed,

Displayed  in  view  of  all  beneath  the  sky  ;

He  in  the  unchanging  excellence  arrayed,
Endless  return  to  man’s  first  state  has  made.
Who  knows  how  glory  shines,

Yet  loves  disgrace,  nor  e'er  for  it  is  pale ;
Behold  his  presence  in  a  spacious  vale,

To  which  men  come  from  all  beneath  the  sky.
The  unchanging  excellence  completes  its  tale  ;
The  simple  infant  man  in  him  we  hail.

2.  The  unwrought  material,  when  divided  and
distributed,  forms  vessels.  The  sage,  when  em¬
ployed,  becomes  the  Head  of  all  the  Officers  (of
government) ;  and  in  his  greatest  regulations  he
employs  no  violent  measures.

1  Returning  to  Simplicity.’  The  chapter  sets
forth  humility  and  simplicity,  an  artless  freedom  from  all
purpose,  as  characteristic  of  the  man  of  Tdo,  such  as  he
was  in  the  primeval  time.  ‘  The  sage  ’  in  par.  2  may  be
‘  the  Son  of  Heaven,’ — the  Head  of  all  rule  in  the  kingdom,
or  the  feudal  lord  in  a  state.

29.  i.  If  any  one  should  wish  to  get  the  kingdom
for  himself,  and  to  effect  this  by  what  he  does,  I  see


72


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


that  he  will  not  succeed.  The  kingdom  is  a  spirit¬
like  thing,  and  cannot  be  got  by  active  doing.  He
who  would  so  win  it  destroys  it ;  he  who  would  hold
it  in  his  grasp  loses  it.

2.  The  course  and  nature  of  things  is  such  that
What  was  in  front  is  now  behind  ;

What  warmed  anon  we  freezing  find.

Strength  is  of  weakness  oft  the  spoil ;

The  store  in  ruins  mocks  our  toil.

Hence  the  sage  puts  away  excessive  effort,  extrava¬
gance,  and  easy  indulgence.

‘Taking  no  Action.’  All  efforts  made  with  a
purpose  are  sure  to  fail.  The  nature  of  the  T  a  o  necessi¬
tates  their  doing  so,  and  the  uncertainty  of  things  and
events  teaches  the  same  lesson.

That  the  kingdom  or  throne  is  a  ‘  spirit-like  vessel  ’  has
become  a  common  enough  saying  among  the  Chinese.
Julien  has,  ‘L’Empire  est  comme  un  vase  divin;’  but  I
always  shrink  from  translating  jjjjjj  by  ‘  divine.’  Its
English  analogue  is  ‘  spirit,’  and  the  idea  in  the  text  is
based  on  the  immunity  of  spirit  from  all  material  law,  and
the  uncertain  issue  of  attempts  to  deal  with  it  according  to
ordinary  methods.  Wu  Kh ang  takes  the  phrase  as  equiva¬
lent  to  ‘  superintended  by  spirits,’  which  is  as  inadmissible
as  Julien’s  ‘divin.’  The  Tao  forbids  action  with  a  personal
purpose,  and  all  such  action  is  sure  to  fail  in  the  greatest
things  as  well  as  in  the  least.

30.  i.  He  who  would  assist  a  lord  of  men  in
harmony  with  the  T  ao  will  not  assert  his  mastery  in
the  kingdom  by  force  of  arms.  Such  a  course  is
sure  to  meet  with  its  proper  return.

2.  Wherever  a  host  is  stationed,  briars  and  thorns
spring  up.  In  the  sequence  of  great  armies  there
are  sure  to  be  bad  years.


CH.  XXXI.


THE  tAo  TEH  .KING.


73


3.  A  skilful  (commander)  strikes  a  decisive  blow,
and  stops.  He  does  not  dare  (by  continuing  his
operations)  to  assert  and  complete  his  mastery.  He
will  strike  the  blow,  but  will  be  on  his  guard  against
being  vain  or  boastful  or  arrogant  in  consequence  of
it.  He  strikes  it  as  a  matter  of  necessity ;  he  strikes
it,  but  not  from  a  wish  for  mastery.

4.  When  things  have  attained  their  strong  matu¬
rity  they  become  old.  This  may  be  said  to  be  not
in  accordance  with  the  Tao  :  and  what  is  not  in
accordance  with  it  soon  comes  to  an  end.

j|(),  ‘  A  Caveat  against  War.’  War  is  contrary  to
the  spirit  of  the  Tao,  and,  as  being  so,  is  productive  of
misery,  and  leads  to  early  ruin.  It  is  only  permissible  in
a  case  of  necessity,  and  even  then  its  spirit  and  tendencies
must  be  guarded  against.

In  translating  by  ‘  striking  a  decisive  blow,’  I  have,
no  doubt,  followed  Julien’s  ‘  frapper  un  coup  decisif.’  The
same  occurs  six  times  in  par.  3,  followed  by  jfjj,  and
3iao  Hung  says  that  in  all  but  the  first  instance  the  jTfj
should  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  so  that  we  should
have  to  translate,  ‘  He  is  determined  against  being  vain,’  &c.
But  there  is  no  necessity  for  such  a  construction  of  fflj.

‘  Weakness  ’  and  not  ‘  strength  ’  is  the  character  of  the
T ao ;  hence  the  lesson  in  par.  4.

31.  1.  Now  arms,  however  beautiful,  are  instru¬
ments  of  evil  omen,  hateful,  it  may  be  said,  to  all
creatures.  Therefore  they  who  have  the  Tao  do
not  like  to  employ  them.

2.  The  superior  man  ordinarily  considers  the  left
hand  the  most  honourable  place,  but  in  time  of  war
the  right  hand.  Those  sharp  weapons  are  instru¬
ments  of  evil  omen,  and  not  the  instruments  of  the


74


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


superior  man  ; — he  uses  them  only  on  the  compul¬
sion  of  necessity.  Calm  and  repose  are  what  he
prizes  ;  victory  (by  force  of  arms)  is  to  him  undesir¬
able.  To  consider  this  desirable  would  be  to  delight
in  the  slaughter  of  men  ;  and  he  who  delights  in  the
slaughter  of  men  cannot  get  his  will  in  the  kingdom.

3.  On  occasions  of  festivity  to  be  on  the  left  hand
is  the  prized  position  ;  on  occasions  of  mourning,  the
right  hand.  The  second  in  command  of  the  army
has  his  place  on  the  left ;  the  general  commanding
in  chief  has  his  on  the  right ; — his  place,  that  is,  is
assigned  to  him  as  in  the  rites  of  mourning.  He
who  has  killed  multitudes  of  men  should  weep  for
them  with  the  bitterest  grief ;  and  the  victor  in  battle
has  his  place  (rightly)  according  to  those  rites.

fill  ‘  Stilling  War.’  The  chapter  continues  the  subject
of  the  preceding.  The  imperially-appointed  editors  of
Wang  Pi’s  Text  and  Commentary  (1765)  say  that  from
the  beginning  of  par.  3  to  the  end,  there  is  the  appearance
of  text  and  commentary  being  mixed  together ;  but  they
make  no  alteration  in  the  text  as  it  is  found  in  Ho-shang
Kung,  and  in  all  other  ancient  copies.

The  concluding  sentence  will  suggest  to  some  readers  the
words  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  that  to  gain  a  battle  was
the  saddest  thing  next  to  losing  it.

32.  1.  The  Tao,  considered  as  unchanging,  has
no  name.

2.  Though  in  its  primordial  simplicity  it  may  be
small,  the  whole  world  dares  not  deal  with  (one
embodying)  it  as  a  minister.  If  a  feudal  prince  or
the  king  could  guard  and  hold  it,  all  would  sponta¬
neously  submit  themselves  to  him.

3.  Heaven  and  Earth  (under  its  guidance)  unite
together  and  send  down  the  sweet  dew,  which,  with-


CH.  XXXIII.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


75


out  the  directions  of  men,  reaches  equally  everywhere
as  of  its  own  accord.

4.  As  soon  as  it  proceeds  to  action,  it  has  a  name.
When  it  once  has  that  name,  (men)  can  know  to
rest  in  it.  When  they  know  to  rest  in  it,  they  can
be  free  from  all  risk  of  failure  and  error.

5.  The  relation  of  the  Tao  to  all  the  world  is  like
that  of  the  great  rivers  and  seas  to  the  streams  from
the  valleys.

111-  Chalmers  translates  this  by  ‘sagely  virtue.’
But  I  cannot  adopt  that  rendering,  and  find  it  difficult  to
supply  a  better.  The  1  virtue  ’  is  evidently  the  Attribute  of
the  Tao  come  out  from  the  condition  of  the  Absolute,  and
capable  of  being  named.  In  the  former  state  it  has  no
name ;  in  the  latter,  it  has.  Par.  1  and  the  commencement
of  par.  4  must  both  be  explained  from  ch.  1.

The  ‘primordial  simplicity’  in  par.  2  is  the  Tao  in  its
simplest  conception,  alone,  and  by  itself,  and  the
in  par.  4  is  that  Tao  come  forth  into  operation  and  become
T eh,  the  Teh  which  affords  a  law  for  men.  From  this  to
the  end  of  the  paragraph  is  very  obscure.  I  have  trans¬
lated  from  the  text  of  Wang  Pi.  The  text  of  Ho-shang
Kung  is  different,  and  he  comments  upon  it  as  it  stands,
but  to  me  it  is  inexplicable.

33.  1.  He  who  knows  other  men  is  discerning;
he  who  knows  himself  is  intelligent.  He  who  over-
comes  others  is  strong ;  he  who  overcomes  himself
is  mighty.  He  who  is  satisfied  with  his  lot  is  rich  ;
he  who  goes  on  acting  with  energy  has  a  (firm)  will.

2.  He  who  does  not  fail  in  the  requirements  of
his  position,  continues  long ;  he  who  dies  and  yet
does  not  perish,  has  longevity.

^  ‘Discriminating  between  (different)  Attributes.’
The  teaching  of  the  chapter  is  that  the  possession  of  the


76


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


Tao  confers  the  various  attributes  which  are  here  most  dis¬
tinguished.  It  has  been  objected  to  it  that  elsewhere  the
Tao  is  represented  as  associated  with  dulness  and  not
intelligence,  and  with  weakness  and  not  with  strength.
But  these  seem  to  be  qualities  viewed  from  without,  and
acting  on  what  is  beyond  itself.  Inwardly,  its  qualities
are  the  very  opposite,  and  its  action  has  the  effect  of
enlightening  what  is  dark,  and  overcoming  what  is  strong.

More  interesting  are  the  predicates  in  par.  2.  3Ho  Hung
gives  the  comment  on  it  of  the  Indian  monk,  Kumara^iva,

‘  one  of  the  four  suns  of  Buddhism,’  and  who  went  to  China
in  A.D.  401:  ‘To  be  alive  and  yet  not  alive  may  well  be
called  long ;  to  die  and  yet  not  be  dead  may  well  be
called  longevity.’  He  also  gives  the  views  of  Lu  Nang-
shih  (a.d.  1042-1102)  that  the  freedom  from  change  of
Lieh-;zc,  from  death  of  Wwang-jze,  and  from  extinction  of
the  Buddhists,  have  all  the  same  meaning  as  the  concluding
saying  of  Lao-$ze  here;  that  the  human  body  is  like  the
covering  of  the  caterpillar  or  the  skin  of  the  snake ;  that
we  occupy  it  but  for  a  passing  sojourn.  No  doubt,  Lao-jze
believed  in  another  life  for  the  individual  after  the  present.
Many  passages  in  ATvang-jze  indicate  the  same  faith.

34.  1.  All-pervading  is  the  Great  Tao!  It  may
be  found  on  the  left  hand  and  on  the  right.

2.  All  things  depend  on  it  for  their  production,
which  it  gives  to  them,  not  one  refusing  obedience
to  it.  When  its  work  is  accomplished,  it  does  not
claim  the  name  of  having  done  it.  It  clothes  all
things  as  with  a  garment,  and  makes  no  assumption
of  being  their  lord  ; — it  may  be  named  in  the  smallest
things.  All  things  return  (to  their  root  and  disap¬
pear),  and  do  not  know  that  it  is  it  which  presides
over  their  doing  so ; — it  may  be  named  in  the
greatest  things.

3.  Hence  the  sage  is  able  (in  the  same  way)  to
accomplish  his  great  achievements.  It  is  through


CH.  XXXV.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


77


his  not  making  himself  great  that  he  can  accom¬
plish  them.

1  The  Task  of  Achievement.’  The  subject  is  the
greatness  of  what  the  Tao,  called  here  by  L&o’s  own  name
for  it  in  ch.  25,  does ;  and  the  unconscious  simplicity  with
which  it  does  it ;  and  then  the  achievements  of  the  sage
who  is  permeated  by  the  Tao.  Par.  2  is  descriptive  of
the  influence  of  the  Tao  in  the  vegetable  world.  The
statements  and  expressions  are  much  akin  to  those  in  parts
of  chapters  2, 10,  and  51,  and  for  Ho-shang  Kung’s  difficult
reading  of  ^  ^  ^  some  copies  give  fly)  Jjl,  as  in
chapter  2.

35.  1.  To  him  who  holds  in  his  hands  the  Great
Image  (of  the  invisible  Tao),  the  whole  world  re¬
pairs.  Men  resort  to  him,  and  receive  no  hurt,  but
(find)  rest,  peace,  and  the  feeling  of  ease.

2.  Music  and  dainties  will  make  the  passing  guest
stop  (for  a  time).  But  though  the  Tao  as  it  comes
from  the  mouth,  seems  insipid  and  has  no  flavour,
though  it  seems  not  worth  being  looked  at  or
listened  to,  the  use  of  it  is  inexhaustible.

‘The  Attribute  of  Benevolence.’  But  there
seems  little  appropriateness  in  this  title.  The  subject  of
the  chapter  is  the  inexhaustible  efficacy  of  the  T&o  for  the
good  of  the  world.

The  Great  Image  (of  the  invisible  T  a  o)  is  a  name  for
the  T&o  in  its  operation;  as  in  chapters  14  and  41.  He
who  embodies  this  in  his  government  will  be  a  centre  of
attraction  for  all  the  world.  Or  the  may  be

taken  as  a  predicate  of  the  holder  of  the  Great  Image :
— ‘If  he  go  all  under  heaven  teaching  the  Tao.’  Both
constructions  are  maintained  by  commentators  of  note.
In  par.  2  the  attraction  of  the  Tao  is  contrasted  with  that
of  ordinary  pleasures  and  gratifications.


78


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  I.


36.  i.  When  one  is  about  to  take  an  inspiration,
he  is  sure  to  make  a  (previous)  expiration  ;  when  he
is  going  to  weaken  another,  he  will  first  strengthen
him  ;  when  he  is  going  to  overthrow  another,  he  will
first  have  raised  him  up  ;  when  he  is  going  to  despoil
another,  he  will  first  have  made  gifts  to  him : — this
is  called  ‘Hiding  the  light  (of  his  procedure).’

2.  The  soft  overcomes  the  hard  ;  and  the  weak
the  strong.

3.  Fishes  should  not  be  taken  from  the  deep ;
instruments  for  the  profit  of  a  state  should  not  be
shown  to  the  people.

‘Minimising  the  Light;’  equivalent,  as  Wh
Khnng  has  pointed  out,  to  the  ||||  of  ch.  37.

The  gist  of  the  chapter  is  to  be  sought  in  the  second
paragraph,  where  we  have  two  instances  of  the  action  of
the  Tao  by  contraries,  supposed  always  to  be  for  good.

But  there  is  a  difficulty  in  seeing  the  applicability  to
this  of  the  cases  mentioned  in  par.  1.  The  first  case,
indeed,  is  merely  a  natural  phenomenon,  having  no  moral
character ;  but  the  others,  as  they  have  been  illustrated  from
historical  incidents,  by  Han  Fei  and  others  at  least,  belong  to
schemes  of  selfish  and  unprincipled  ambitious  strategy,  which
it  would  be  injurious  to  Lao-jze  to  suppose  that  he  intended.

Par.  3  is  the  most  frequently  quoted  of  all  the  passages
in  our  King,  unless  it  be  the  first  part  of  ch.  1.  Fishes
taken  from  the  deep,  and  brought  into  shallow  water,  can
be  easily  taken  or  killed  ;  that  is  plain  enough.  ‘  The  sharp
instruments  of  a  state’  are  not  its  ‘weapons  of  war,’  nor
its  ‘  treasures,’  nor  its  ‘  instruments  of  government,’  that  is,
its  rewards  and  punishments,  though  this  last  is  the  inter¬
pretation  often  put  on  them,  and  sustained  by  a  foolish
reference  to  an  incident,  real  or  coined,  in  the  history  of  the
dukedom  of  Sung.  The  11  kh\  are  ‘contrivances  for  gain,’
machines,  and  other  methods  to  increase  the  wealth  of
a  state,  but,  according  to  the  principles  of  Lao-jze,  really
injurious  to  it.  These  should  not  be  shown  to  the  people,


CH.  XXXVII.


THE  TAO  TEH  ZING.


79


whom  the  Taoistic  system  would  keep  in  a  state  of
primitive  simplicity  and  ignorance.  This  interpretation  is
in  accordance  with  the  meaning  of  the  characters,  and  with
the  general  teaching  of  Taoism.  In  no  other  way  can
I  explain  the  paragraph  so  as  to  justify  the  place  un¬
doubtedly  belonging  to  it  in  the  system.

37.  i .  The  Tao  in  its  regular  course  does  nothing
(for  the  sake  of  doing  it),  and  so  there  is  nothing
which  it  does  not  do.

2.  If  princes  and  kings  were  able  to  maintain  it,
all  things  would  of  themselves  be  transformed  by
them.

3.  If  this  transformation  became  to  me  an  object
of  desire,  I  would  express  the  desire  by  the  nameless
simplicity.

Simplicity  without  a  name
Is  free  from  all  external  aim.

With  no  desire,  at  rest  and  still,

All  things  go  right  as  of  their  will.

^  f  The  Exercise  of  Government.’  This  exercise
should  be  according  to  the  Tao,  doing  without  doing,
governing  without  government.

The  subject  of  the  third  paragraph  is  a  feudal  prince  or
the  king,  and  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  first  person,  to  give
more  vividness  to  the  style,  unless  the  ‘  I,’  may,  possibly,
be  understood  of  Lao-jze  himself  personating  one  of  them.


8o


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


PART  II.

38.  i.  (Those  who)  possessed  in  highest  degree
the  attributes  (of  the  Tao)  did  not  (seek)  to  show
them,  and  therefore  they  possessed  them  (in  fullest
measure).  (Those  who)  possessed  in  a  lower  de¬
gree  those  attributes  (sought  how)  not  to  lose  them,
and  therefore  they  did  not  possess  them  (in  fullest
measure).

2.  (Those  who)  possessed  in  the  highest  degree
those  attributes  did  nothing  (with  a  purpose),  and
had  no  need  to  do  anything.  (Those  who)  possessed
them  in  a  lower  degree  were  (always)  doing,  and  had
need  to  be  so  doing.

3.  (Those  who)  possessed  the  highest  benevolence
were  (always  seeking)  to  carry  it  out,  and  had  no
need  to  be  doing  so.  (Those  who)  possessed  the
highest  righteousness  were  (always  seeking)  to  carry
it  out,  and  had  need  to  be  so  doing.

4.  (Those  who)  possessed  the  highest  (sense  of)
propriety  were  (always  seeking)  to  show  it,  and  when
men  did  not  respond  to  it,  they  bared  the  arm  and
marched  up  to  them.

5.  Thus  it  was  that  when  the  Tao  was  lost,  its
attributes  appeared ;  when  its  attributes  were  lost,
benevolence  appeared ;  when  benevolence  was  lost,
righteousness  appeared ;  and  when  righteousness
was  lost,  the  proprieties  appeared.

6.  Now  propriety  is  the  attenuated  form  of  leal¬
heartedness  and  good  faith,  and  is  also  the  com¬
mencement  of  disorder ;  swift  apprehension  is


CH.  XXXVIII.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


81


(only)  a  flower  of  the  Tao,  and  is  the  beginning  of
stupidity.

7.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Great  man  abides  by  what
is  solid,  and  eschews  what  is  flimsy  ;  dwells  with  the
fruit  and  not  with  the  flower.  It  is  thus  that  he
puts  away  the  one  and  makes  choice  of  the  other.

||a,  ‘About  the  Attributes;’  of  Tao,  that  is.  It  is
not  easy  to  render  teh  here  by  any  other  English  term
than  ‘  virtue,’  and  yet  there  would  be  a  danger  of  its  thus
misleading  us  in  the  interpretation  of  the  chapter.

The  ‘virtue’  is  the  activity  or  operation  of  the  Tao,
which  is  supposed  to  have  come  out  of  its  absoluteness.
Even  Han  Fei  so  defines  it  here,— ‘Teh  is  the  meritorious
work  of  the  Tao.’

In  par.  5  we  evidently  have  a  resume  of  the  preceding
paragraphs,  and,  as  it  is  historical,  I  translate  them  in  the
past  tense ;  though  what  took  place  on  the  early  stage  of
the  world  may  also  be  said  to  go  on  taking  place  in  the
experience  of  every  individual.  With  some  considerable
hesitation  I  have  given  the  subjects  in  those  paragraphs  in
the  concrete,  in  deference  to  the  authority  of  Ho-shang
Kung  and  most  other  commentators.  The  former  says,
‘By  “the  highest  teh”  is  to  be  understood  the  rulers  of
the  greatest  antiquity,  without  name  or  designation,  whose
virtue  was  great,  and  could  not  be  surpassed.’  Most
ingenious,  and  in  accordance  with  the  Taoistic  system,
is  the  manner  in  which  Wu  AV/ang  construes  the  passage,
and  I  am  surprised  that  it  has  not  been  generally  accepted.
By  ‘the  higher  teh’  he  understands  ‘the  Tao,’  that  which
is  prior  to  and  above  the  Teh

ifi  ft);  by  ‘the  lower  teh,’  benevolence,  that  which  is
after  and  below  the  Teh;  by  ‘the  higher  benevolence,’
the  Teh  which  is  above  benevolence;  by  ‘the  higher
righteousness,’  the  benevolence  which  is  above  righteous¬
ness  ;  and  by  ‘  the  higher  propriety,’  the  righteousness
which  is  above  propriety.  Certainly  in  the  summation
of  these  four  paragraphs  which  we  have  in  the  fifth,  the
[39]  G


82


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


subjects  of  them  would  appear  to  have  been  in  the  mind
of  Lao-jze  as  thus  defined  by  Wu.

In  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  he  goes  on  to  speak
depreciatingly  of  ceremonies  and  knowledge,  so  that  the
whole  chapter  must  be  understood  as  descriptive  of  the
process  of  decay  and  deterioration  from  the  early  time  in
which  the  Tao  and  its  attributes  swayed  the  societies
of  men.

39.  i.  The  things  which  from  of  old  have  got
the  One  (the  Tao)  are —

Heaven  which  by  it  is  bright  and  pure  ;

Earth  rendered  thereby  firm  and  sure ;

Spirits  with  powers  by  it  supplied ;

Valleys  kept  full  throughout  their  void  ;

All  creatures  which  through  it  do  live  ;

Princes  and  kings  who  from  it  get
The  model  which  to  all  they  give.

All  these  are  the  results  of  the  One  (Tao).

2.  If  heaven  were  not  thus  pure,  it  soon  would
rend  ;

If  earth  were  not  thus  sure,  ’twould  break  and
bend ;

Without  these  powers,  the  spirits  soon  would  fail  ;

If  not  so  filled,  the  drought  would  parch  each  vale  ;

Without  that  life,  creatures  would  pass  away  ;

Princes  and  kings,  without  that  moral  sway,

However  grand  and  high,  would  all  decay.

3.  Thus  it  is  that  dignity  finds  its  (firm)  root  in
its  (previous)  meanness,  and  what  is  lofty  finds  its
stability  in  the  lowness  (from  which  it  rises).  Hence
princes  and  kings  call  themselves  ‘  Orphans,’  ‘  Men
of  small  virtue,’  and  as  ‘  Carriages  without  a  nave.’
Is  not  this  an  acknowledgment  that  in  their  con¬
sidering  themselves  mean  they  see  the  foundation  of


CH.  XL.


THE  TAO  TEH  .STING.


§3


their  dignity  ?  So  it  is  that  in  the  enumeration  of
the  different  parts  of  a  carriage  we  do  not  come  on
what  makes  it  answer  the  ends  of  a  carriage.  They
do  not  wish  to  show  themselves  elegant-looking  as
jade,  but  (prefer)  to  be  coarse-looking  as  an  (ordinary)
stone.

‘  The  Origin  of  the  Law.’  In  this  title  there  is
a  reference  to  the  Law  given  to  all  things  by  the  Tao,  as
described  in  the  conclusion  of  chapter  25.  And  the  Tao
affords  that  law  by  its  passionless,  undemonstrative  nature,
through  which  in  its  spontaneity,  doing  nothing  for  the  sake
of  doing,  it  yet  does  all  things.

The  difficulty  of  translation  is  in  the  third  paragraph.
The  way  in  which  princes  and  kings  speak  depreciatingly
of  themselves  is  adduced  as  illustrating  how  they  have  in¬
deed  got  the  spirit  of  the  T  ao  ;  and  I  accept  the  last
epithet  as  given  by  Ho-shang  Kung,  ‘  naveless  ’  (Jj^),
instead  of  ^  (  =  ‘the  unworthy’),  which  is  found  in  Wang
Pi,  and  has  been  adopted  by  nearly  all  subsequent  editors.
To  see  its  appropriateness  here,  we  have  only  to  refer  back
to  chapter  11,  where  the  thirty  spokes,  and  the  nave,  empty
to  receive  the  axle,  are  spoken  of,  and  it  is  shown  how  the
usefulness  of  the  carriage  is  derived  from  that  emptiness  of
the  nave.  This  also  enables  us  to  give  a  fair  and  consistent
explanation  of  the  difficult  clause  which  follows,  in  which
also  I  have  followed  the  text  of  Ho-shang  Kung.  For  his
fjj ,  Wang  Pi  has  |j|L,  which  also  is  found  in  a  quotation  of
it  by  Hwai-nan  $ze  ;  but  this  need  not  affect  the  meaning.
In  the  translation  of  the  clause  we  are  assisted  by  a  some¬
what  similar  illustration  about  a  horse  in  the  twenty-fifth
of  Wwang-jze’s  Books,  par.  10.

40.  1.  The  movement  of  the  Tao
By  contraries  proceeds ;

And  weakness  marks  the  course
Of  Tio’s  mighty  deeds.


84


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


2.  All  things  under  heaven  sprang  from  It  as
existing  (and  named) ;  that  existence  sprang  from  It
as  non-existent  (and  not  named).

‘  Dispensing  with  the  Use  (of  Means);’ — with  their
use,  that  is,  as  it  appears  to  us.  The  subject  of  the  brief
chapter  is  the  action  of  the  Tao  by  contraries,  leading  to  a
result  the  opposite  of  what  existed  previously,  and  by
means  which  might  seem  calculated  to  produce  a  contrary
result.

In  translating  par.  a  I  have  followed  3A°  Hung,  who
finds  the  key  to  it  in  ch.  i.  Having  a  name,  the  Tao  is
‘  the  Mother  of  all  things  ;  ’  having  no  name,  it  is  ‘  the  Ori¬
ginator  of  Heaven  and  Earth.’  But  here  is  the  teaching  of
Lio-jze : — ‘If  Tdo  seems  to  be  before  God,’  Tao  itself
sprang  from  nothing.

41.  i.  Scholars  of  the  highest  class,  when  they
hear  about  the  Tao,  earnestly  carry  it  into  practice.
Scholars  of  the  middle  class,  when  they  have  heard
about  it,  seem  now  to  keep  it  and  now  to  lose  it.
Scholars  of  the  lowest  class,  when  they  have  heard
about  it,  laugh  greatly  at  it.  If  it  were  not  (thus)
laughed  at,  it  would  not  be  fit  to  be  the  Tao.

2.  Therefore  the  sentence-makers  have  thus  ex¬
pressed  themselves  : —

‘  The  T ao,  when  brightest  seen,  seems  light  to  lack ;

Who  progress  in  it  makes,  seems  drawing  back  ;

Its  even  way  is  like  a  rugged  track.

Its  highest  virtue  from  the  vale  doth  rise  ;

Its  greatest  beauty  seems  to  offend  the  eyes  ;

And  he  has  most  whose  lot  the  least  supplies.

Its  firmest  virtue  seems  but  poor  and  low ;

Its  solid  truth  seems  change  to  undergo  ;

Its  largest  square  doth  yet  no  corner  show  ;

A  vessel  great,  it  is  the  slowest  made ;


CH.  XUI.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


85


Loud  is  its  sound,  but  never  word  it  said  ;

A  semblance  great,  the  shadow  of  a  shade.’

3.  The  Tho  is  hidden,  and  has  no  name  ;  but  it
is  the  T ao  which  is  skilful  at  imparting  (to  all  things
what  they  need)  and  making  them  complete.

[Sj  ‘  Sameness  and  Difference.’  The  chapter  is  a
sequel  of  the  preceding,  and  may  be  taken  as  an  illustra¬
tion  of  the  T ao’s  proceeding  by  contraries.

Who  the  sentence-makers  were  whose  sayings  are  quoted
we  cannot  tell,  but  it  would  have  been  strange  if  L&o-jze
had  not  had  a  large  store  of  such  sentences  at  his  command.
The  fifth  and  sixth  of  those  employed  by  him  here  are
found  in  Lieh-jze  (II,  15  a),  spoken  by  Lao  in  reproving
Yang  Kn,  and  in  VII,  3  a,  that  heretic  appears  quoting  an
utterance  of  the  same  kind,  with  the  words,  ‘  according  to  an
old  saying  ("£  gf  ^  £)•’

42.  1.  The  Tao  produced  One;  One  produced  Two;
Two  produced  Three  ;  Three  produced  All  things.
All  things  leave  behind  them  the  Obscurity  (out  of
which  they  have  come),  and  go  forward  to  embrace
the  Brightness  (into  which  they  have  emerged),
while  they  are  harmonised  by  the  Breath  of
Vacancy.

2.  What  men  dislike  is  to  be  orphans,  to  have
little  virtue,  to  be  as  carriages  without  naves  ;  and
yet  these  are  the  designations  which  kings  and
princes  use  for  themselves.  So  it  is  that  some
things  are  increased  by  being  diminished,  and  others
are  diminished  by  being  increased.

3.  What  other  men  (thus)  teach,  I  also  teach.
The  violent  and  strong  do  not  die  their  natural
death.  I  will  make  this  the  basis  of  my  teaching.

‘  The  Transformations  of  the  T io.’  In  par.  3  we


86


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


have  the  case  of  the  depreciating  epithets  given  to  them¬
selves  by  kings  and  princes,  which  we  found  before  in
ch.  39,  and  a  similar  lesson  is  drawn  from  it.  Such  depre¬
ciation  leads  to  exaltation,  and  the  contrary  course  of  self¬
exaltation  leads  to  abasement.  This  latter  case  is  stated
emphatically  in  par.  3,  and  L&o-sze  says  that  it  was  the
basis  of  his  teaching.  So  far  therefore  we  have  in  this
chapter  a  repetition  of  the  lesson  that  ‘  the  movement  of
the  T&o  is  by  contraries,’  and  that  its  weakness  is  the  sure
precursor  of  strength.  But  the  connexion  between  this
lesson  and  what  he  says  in  par.  1  it  is  difficult  to  trace.  Up
to  this  time  at  least  it  has  baffled  myself.  The  passage
seems  to  give  us  a  cosmogony.  ‘  The  Tdo  produced  One.’
We  have  already  seen  that  the  Tao  is  ‘  The  One.’  Are  we
to  understand  here  that  the  Tao  and  the  One  were  one  and
the  same?  In  this  case  what  would  be  the  significance  of
the  (‘produced’)? — that  the  Tao  which  had  been  pre¬
viously  ‘  non-existent  ’  now  became  ‘  existent,’  or  capable  of
being  named  ?  This  seems  to  be  the  view  of  Sze-ma
Kwang  (a.  d.  1009-1086).

The  most  singular  form  which  this  view  assumes  is  in
one  of  the  treatises  on  our  K ing,  attributed  to  the  Taoist
patriarch  Lii  (  g  f§.  f|l  ),  that  < the  One  is

Heaven,  which  was  formed  by  the  congealing  of  the  T a  o . ’
According  to  another  treatise,  also  assigned  to  the  same  Lii

the  One  was  ‘the  primordial  ether ;  ’
the  Two, ‘the  separation  of  that  into  its  Yin  and  Yang
constituents ;  ’  and  the  Three,  ‘  the  production  of  heaven,
earth,  and  man  by  these.’  In  quoting  the  paragraph  Hwai-
nan  3ze  omits  * ,  and  commences  with  — *

and  his  glossarist,  Kao  Yu,  makes  out  the  One  to  be  the
Tao,  the  Two  to  be  Spiritual  Intelligences  (J$  *Pj)>  and
the  Three  to  be  the  Harmonising  Breath.  From  the
mention  of  the  Yin  and  Yang  that  follows,  I  believe  that
Lao-jze  intended  by  the  Two  these  two  qualities  or  ele¬
ments  in  the  primordial  ether,  which  would  be  ‘  the  One.’
I  dare  not  hazard  a  guess  as  to  what  ‘  the  Three  ’  w'ere.


CH.  XLIV.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


87


43.  1.  The  softest  thing  in  the  world  dashes
against  and  overcomes  the  hardest ;  that  which  has
no  (substantial)  existence  enters  where  there  is  no
crevice.  I  know  hereby  what  advantage  belongs  to
doing  nothing  (with  a  purpose).

2.  There  are  few  in  the  world  who  attain  to  the
teaching  without  words,  and  the  advantage  arising
from  non-action.

‘The  Universal  Use  (of  the  action  in  weakness
of  the  T  a  o).’  The  chapter  takes  us  back  to  the  lines  of
ch.  40,  that

‘Weakness  marks  the  course
Of  Tao’s  mighty  deeds.’

By  ‘  the  softest  thing  in  the  world  ’  it  is  agreed  that  we  are
to  understand  ‘water,’  which  will  wear  away  the  hardest
rocks.  ‘  Dashing  against  and  overcoming  ’  is  a  metaphor
taken  from  hunting.  Ho-shang  Kung  says  that  ‘what  has
no  existence  ’  is  the  Tao  ;  it  is  better  to  understand  by  it
the  unsubstantial  air  (^)  which  penetrates  everywhere,
we  cannot  see  how.

Compare  par.  2  writh  ch.  2,  par.  3.

44.  1.  Or  fame  or  life,

Which  do  you  hold  more  dear  ?

Or  life  or  wealth,

To  which  would  you  adhere  ?

Keep  life  and  lose  those  other  things  ;

Keep  them  and  lose  your  life: — which
brings

Sorrow  and  pain  more  near  ?

2.  Thus  we  may  see,

Who  cleaves  to  fame
Rejects  what  is  more  great  ;

Who  loves  large  stores
Gives  up  the  richer  state.


88


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


3.  Who  is  content

Needs  fear  no  shame.

Who  knows  to  stop
Incurs  no  blame.

From  danger  free
Long  live  shall  he.

‘  Cautions.’  The  chapter  warns  men  to  let  nothing
come  into  competition  with  the  value  which  they  set  on  the
Tao.  The  Tao  is  not  named,  indeed,  but  the  idea  of  it
was  evidently  in  the  writer’s  mind.

The  whole  chapter  rhymes  after  a  somewhat  peculiar
fashion  ;  familiar  enough,  however,  to  one  who  is  acquainted
with  the  old  rhymes  of  the  Book  of  Poetry.

45.  1.  Who  thinks  his  great  achievements  poor
Shall  find  his  vigour  long  endure.

Of  greatest  fulness,  deemed  a  void,

Exhaustion  ne’er  shall  stem  the  tide.

Do  thou  what’s  straight  still  crooked  deem  ;
Thy  greatest  art  still  stupid  seem,

And  eloquence  a  stammering  scream.

2.  Constant  action  overcomes  cold;  being  still
overcomes  heat.  Purity  and  stillness  give  the
correct  law  to  all  under  heaven.

|i|I,  ‘Great  or  Overflowing  Virtue.’  The  chapter  is
another  illustration  of  the  working  of  the  Tao  by  contraries.

According  to  Wu  K/ia ng,  the  action  which  overcomes
cold  is  that  of  the  Yang  element  in  the  developing  primor¬
dial  ether ;  and  the  stillness  which  overcomes  heat  is  that
of  the  contrary  Yin  element.  These  may  have  been  in
Lao-jze’s  mind,  but  the  statements  are  so  simple  as  hardly
to  need  any  comment.  Wu  further  says  that  the  purity
and  stillness  are  descriptive  of  the  condition  of  non-action.

46.  1.  When  the  Tao  prevails  in  the  world,  they
send  back  their  swift  horses  to  (draw)  the  dung-carts.


CH.  XLVII.


89


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


When  the  Tao  is  disregarded  in  the  world,  the  war-
horses  breed  in  the  border  lands.

2.  There  is  no  guilt  greater  than  to  sanction
ambition ;  no  calamity  greater  than  to  be  discon¬
tented  with  one’s  lot ;  no  fault  greater  than  the
wish  to  be  getting.  Therefore  the  sufficiency  of
contentment  is  an  enduring  and  unchanging  suffi¬
ciency.

‘  The  Moderating  of  Desire  or  Ambition.’  The
chapter  shows  how  the  practice  of  the  Tao  must  conduce
to  contentment  and  happiness.

In  translating  par.  1  I  have,  after  Wu  /T/zang,  admitted  a
after  the  his  chief  authority  for  doing  so  being  that
it  is  so  found  in  a  poetical  piece  by  .Yang  Hang  (a.  D.  78-
139).  Ku  Hsi  also  adopted  this  reading  (^

XVIII,  7  a).  In  par.  3  Han  Ying  has  a  tempting  variation
of  ^  $  f«r  W  St.  but  I  have  not  adopted  it  because  the
same  phrase  occurs  elsewhere.


47.  1.  Without  going  outside  his  door,  one  under¬
stands  (all  that  takes  place)  under  the  sky ;  without
looking  out  from  his  window,  one  sees  the  Tao  of
Heaven.  The  farther  that  one  goes  out  (from
himself),  the  less  he  knows.

2.  Therefore  the  sages  got  their  knowledge  with¬
out  travelling;  gave  their  (right)  names  to  things
without  seeing  them  ;  and  accomplished  their  ends
without  any  purpose  of  doing  so.


Hi  j||,  ‘  Surveying  what  is  Far-off.’  The  chapter  is  a
lesson  to  men  to  judge  of  things  according  to  their  internal
conviction  of  similar  things  in  their  own  experience.  Short
as  the  chapter  is,  it  is  somewhat  mystical.  The  phrase,
‘The  Tao’  or  way  of  Heaven,  occurs  in  it  for  the  first  time  ;
and  it  is  difficult  to  lay  down  its  precise  meaning.  Lao-jze
would  seem  to  teach  that  man  is  a  microcosm  ;  and  that,  if


90


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


he  understand  the  movements  of  his  own  mind,  he  can
understand  the  movements  of  all  other  minds.  There  are
various  readings,  of  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak.

I  have  translated  par.  2  in  the  past  tense,  and  perhaps
the  first  should  also  be  translated  so.  Most  of  it  is  found
in  Han  Ying,  preceded  by  ‘  formerly  ’  or  ‘  anciently.’

48.  1.  He  who  devotes  himself  to  learning  (seeks)
from  day  to  day  to  increase  (his  knowledge) ;  he  who
devotes  himself  to  the  Tao  (seeks)  from  day  to  day
to  diminish  (his  doing).

2.  He  diminishes  it  and  again  diminishes  it,  till
he  arrives  at  doing  nothing  (on  purpose).  Having
arrived  at  this  point  of  non-action,  there  is  nothing
which  he  does  not  do.

3.  He  who  gets  as  his  own  all  under  heaven  does
so  by  giving  himself  no  trouble  (with  that  end).  If
one  take  trouble  (with  that  end),  he  is  not  equal  to
getting  as  his  own  all  under  heaven.

Forgetting  Knowledge ;  ’ — the  contrast  between
Learning  and  theTdo.  It  is  only  by  the  Tdo  that  the
world  can  be  won.

3iao  Hung  commences  his  quotations  of  commentary  on
this  chapter  with  the  following  from  Kumara^iva  on  the
second  par. : — ;  He  carries  on  the  process  of  diminishing
till  there  is  nothing  coarse  about  him  which  is  not  put
away.  He  puts  it  away  till  he  has  forgotten  all  that  was  bad
in  it.  He  then  puts  away  all  that  is  fine  about  him.  He
does  so  till  he  has  forgotten  all  that  was  good  in  it.  But
the  bad  was  wrong,  and  the  good  is  right.  Having  dimi¬
nished  the  wrong,  and  also  diminished  the  right,  the  process
is  carried  on  till  they  are  both  forgotten.  Passion  and
desire  are  both  cut  off;  and  his  virtue  and  the  Tao  are  in
such  union  that  he  does  nothing ;  but  though  he  does
nothing,  he  allows  all  things  to  do  their  own  doing,  and  all
things  are  done.’  Such  is  a  Buddhistic  view  of  the  passage,
not  very  intelligible,  and  which  I  do  not  endorse.


CH.  XLIX.


THE  TAO  TEH  S'ING.


91


In  a  passage  in  the  ‘Narratives  of  the  School’  (Bk.  IX,
Art.  2),  we  have  a  Confucian  view  of  the  passage  : — 1  Let
perspicacity,  intelligence,  shrewdness,  and  wisdom  be
guarded  by  stupidity,  and  the  service  of  the  possessor  will
affect  the  whole  world  ;  let  them  be  guarded  by  com¬
plaisance,  and  his  daring  and  strength  will  shake  the  age ;
let  them  be  guarded  by  timidity,  and  his  wealth  will  be  all
within  the  four  seas  ;  let  them  be  guarded  by  humility,  and
there  will  be  what  we  call  the  method  of  “  diminishing  it,
and  diminishing  it  again.”  ’  But  neither  do  I  endorse  this.

My  own  view  of  the  scope  of  the  chapter  has  been  given
above  in  a  few  words.  The  greater  part  of  it  is  found  in
AAvang-jze.

49.  1.  The  sage  has  no  invariable  mind  of  his
own ;  he  makes  the  mind  of  the  people  his  mind.

2.  To  those  who  are  good  (to  me),  I  am  good  ;
and  to  those  who  are  not  good  (to  me),  I  am  also
good  ; — and  thus  (all)  get  to  be  good.  To  those
who  are  sincere  (with  me),  I  am  sincere ;  and  to
those  who  are  not  sincere  (with  me),  I  am  also
sincere  and  thus  (all)  get  to  be  sincere.

3.  The  sage  has  in  the  world  an  appearance  of
indecision,  and  keeps  his  mind  in  a  state  of  indiffer¬
ence  to  all.  The  people  all  keep  their  eyes  and  ears
directed  to  him,  and  he  deals  with  them  ail  as  his
children.

fifl.  ‘  The  Quality  of  Indulgence.’  The  chapter  shows
how  that  quality  enters  largely  into  the  dealing  of  the  sage
with  other  men,  and  exercises  over  them  a  transforming
influence,  dominated  as  it  is  in  him  by  the  Tao.

My  version  of  par.  1  is  taken  from  Dr.  Chalmers.  A  good
commentary  on  it  was  given  by  the  last  emperor  but  one  of
the  earlier  of  the  two  great  Sung  dynasties,  in  the  period
A.  D.  UIJ-1X17  : — ‘  The  mind  of  the  sage  is  free  from  pre¬
occupation  and  able  to  receive ;  still  and  able  to  respond.’

In  par.  2  I  adopt  the  reading  of  (‘  to  get  ’)  instead  of


92


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


the  more  common  (‘  virtue’  or  ‘quality’).  There  is
a  passage  in  Han  Ying  (IX,  3  b,  4  a),  the  style  of  which,
most  readers  will  probably  agree  with  me  in  thinking,  was
moulded  on  the  text  before  us,  though  nothing  is  said  of
any  connexion  between  it  and  the  saying  of  L&o-Jze.
I  must  regard  it  as  a  sequel  to  the  conversation  between
Confucius  and  some  of  his  disciples  about  the  principle
(L&o’s  principle)  that  ‘  Injury  should  be  recompensed  with
Kindness,’  as  recorded  in  the  Con.  Ana.,  XIV,  36.  We
read  : — ‘  3ze-lu  said,  “  When  men  are  good  to  me,  I  will  also
be  good  to  them  ;  when  they  are  not  good  to  me,  I  will
also  be  not  good  to  them.”  3ze~kung  said,  “  When  men
are  good  to  me,  I  will  also  be  good  to  them  ;  when  they
are  not  good  to  me,  I  will  simply  lead  them  on,  forwards
it  may  be  or  backwards.”  Yen  Hui  said,  “  When  men  are
good  to  me,  I  will  also  be  good  to  them  ;  when  they  are
not  good  to  me,  I  will  still  be  good  to  them.”  The  views
of  the  three  disciples  being  thus  different,  they  referred  the
point  to  the  Master,  who  said,  “  The  words  of  3ze'lu  are
such  as  might  be  expected  among  the  (wild  tribes  of)  the
Man  and  the  Mo  ;  those  of  3ze~kung,  such  as  might  be
expected  among  friends  ;  those  of  Hui,  such  as  might  be
expected  among  relatives  and  near  connexions.”  ’  This  is
all.  The  Master  was  still  far  from  Lao-jze’s  standpoint,
and  that  of  his  own  favourite  disciple,  Yen  Hui.

50.  1.  Men  come  forth  and  live  ;  they  enter  (again)
and  die.

2.  Of  every  ten  three  are  ministers  of  life  (to  them¬
selves)  ;  and  three  are  ministers  of  death.

3.  There  are  also  three  in  every  ten  whose  aim  is
to  live,  but  whose  movements  tend  to  the  land  (or
place)  of  death.  And  for  what  reason  ?  Because
of  their  excessive  endeavours  to  perpetuate  life.

4.  But  I  have  heard  that  he  who  is  skilful  in
managing  the  life  entrusted  to  him  fora  time  travels
on  the  land  without  having  to  shun  rhinoceros  or


CH.  LI.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


93


tiger,  and  enters  a  host  without  having  to  avoid
buff  coat  or  sharp  weapon.  The  rhinoceros  finds  no
place  in  him  into  which  to  thrust  its  horn,  nor  the
tiger  a  place  in  which  to  fix  its  claws,  nor  the  weapon
a  place  to  admit  its  point.  And  for  what  reason  ?
Because  there  is  in  him  no  place  of  death.


14.  ‘  The  Value  set  on  Life.’  The  chapter  sets  forth
the  Tao  as  an  antidote  against  decay  and  death.

In  par.  i  life  is  presented  to  us  as  intermediate  between
two  non-existences.  The  words  will  suggest  to  many
readers  those  in  Job  i.  21.

In  pars.  2  and  3  I  translate  the  characters
by  ‘three  in  ten,’  instead  of  by  ‘thirteen,’  as  Julien  and
other  translators  have  done.  The  characters  are  suscep¬
tible  of  either  translation  according  to  the  tone  in  which
we  read  the  .  They  were  construed  as  I  have  done
by  Wang  Pi ;  and  many  of  the  best  commentators  have
followed  in  his  wake.  ‘  The  ministers  of  life  to  them¬
selves  ’  would  be  those  who  eschewed  all  things,  both  in¬
ternal  and  external,  tending  to  injure  health  ;  ‘  the  ministers
of  death,’  those  who  pursued  courses  likely  to  cause  disease
and  shorten  life ;  the  third  three  would  be  those  who
thought  that  by  mysterious  and  abnormal  courses  they
could  prolong  life,  but  only  injured  it.  Those  three  classes
being  thus  disposed  of,  there  remains  only  one  in  ten  rightly
using  the  T  ao,  and  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  next  paragraph.

This  par.  4  is  easy  of  translation,  and  the  various  read¬
ings  in  it  are  unimportant,  differing  in  this  respect  from
those  in  par.  3.  But  the  aim  of  the  author  in  it  is  not  clear.
In  ascribing  such  effects  to  the  possession  of  the  Tio,  is  he
‘  trifling,’  as  Dr.  Chalmers  thinks  ?  or  indulging  the  play  of
his  poetical  fancy?  or  simply  saying  that  the  Taoist  will
keep  himself  out  of  danger  ?


51.  1.  All  things  are  produced  by  the  T ao,  and
nourished  by  its  outflowing  operation.  They  receive
their  forms  according  to  the  nature  of  each,  and  are


94


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


completed  according  to  the  circumstances  of  their
condition.  Therefore  all  things  without  exception
honour  the  Tao,  and  exalt  its  outflowing  operation.

2.  This  honouring  of  the  T  do  and  exalting  of  its
operation  is  not  the  result  of  any  ordination,  but
always  a  spontaneous  tribute.

3.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Tao  produces  (all  things),
nourishes  them,  brings  them  to  their  full  growth,
nurses  them,  completes  them,  matures  them,  main¬
tains  them,  and  overspreads  them.

4.  It  produces  them  and  makes  no  claim  to  the
possession  of  them ;  it  carries  them  through  their
processes  and  does  not  vaunt  its  ability  in  doing  so  ;
it  brings  them  to  maturity  and  exercises  no  control
over  them ; — this  is  called  its  mysterious  operation.

|j|i,  ‘The  Operation  (of  the  Tao)  in  Nourishing
Things.’  The  subject  of  the  chapter  is  the  quiet  passionless
operation  of  the  T&o  in  nature,  in  the  production  and
nourishing  of  things  throughout  the  seasons  of  the  year  ; —
a  theme  dwelt  on  by  Lao-jze,  in  II,  4,  X,  3,  and  other
places.

The  T  ao  is  the  subject  of  all  the  predicates  in  par.  1,  and
what  seem  the  subjects  in  all  but  the  first  member  should
be  construed  adverbially.

On  par.  2  Wu  AT/kang  says  that  the  honour  of  the  Son  of
Heaven  is  derived  from  his  appointment  by  God,  and  that
then  the  nobility  of  the  feudal  princes  is  derived  from  him  ;
but  in  the  honour  given  to  the  Tao  and  the  nobility  ascribed
to  its  operation,  we  are  not  to  think  of  any  external  ordina¬
tion.  There  is  a  strange  reading  of  two  of  the  members  of
par.  3  in  Wang  Pi,  viz.  ifS  £  ^  £  for  $  £  fb
This  is  quoted  and  predicated  of  ‘  Heaven,’  in  the  Nes-
torian  Monument  of  Hsi-an  in  the  eighth  century.

52.  1.  (The  Tdo)  which  originated  all  under  the
sky  is  to  be  considered  as  the  mother  of  them  all.


CH.LII.


THE  TAO  TEH  ATING.


95


2.  When  the  mother  is  found,  we  know  what  her
children  should  be.  When  one  knows  that  he  is  his
mother’s  child,  and  proceeds  to  guard  (the  qualities
of)  the  mother  that  belong  to  him,  to  the  end  of  his
life  he  will  be  free  from  all  peril.

3.  Let  him  keep  his  mouth  closed,  and  shut  up
the  portals  (of  his  nostrils),  and  all  his  life  he  will  be
exempt  from  laborious  exertion.  Let  him  keep  his
mouth  open,  and  (spend  his  breath)  in  the  promotion
of  his  affairs,  and  all  his  life  there  will  be  no  safety
for  him.

4.  The  perception  of  what  is  small  is  (the  secret
of)  clear-sightedness  ;  the  guarding  of  what  is  soft
and  tender  is  (the  secret  of)  strength.

5.  Who  uses  well  his  light,

Reverting  to  its  (source  so)  bright,

Will  from  his  body  ward  all  blight,

And  hides  the  unchanging  from  men’s  sight.

7G>  ‘  Returning  to  the  Source.’  The  meaning  of  the
chapter  is  obscure,  and  the  commentators  give  little  help  in
determining  it.  As  in  the  preceding  chapter,  Lao-jze
treats  of  the  operation  of  the  TAo  on  material  things,  he
seems  in  this  to  go  on  to  the  operation  of  it  in  man,  or  how
he,  with  his  higher  nature,  should  ever  be  maintaining  it
in  himself.

For  the  understanding  of  paragraph  1  we  must  refer  to
the  first  chapter  of  the  treatise,  where  the  Ta  o,  ‘  having  no
name,’  appears  as  ‘  the  Beginning  ’  or  1  First  Cause  ’  of  the
world,  and  then,  ‘  having  a  name,’  as  its  !  Mother.’  It  is
the  same  thing  or  concept  in  both  of  its  phases,  the  ideal
or  absolute,  and  the  manifestation  of  it  in  its  passionless
doings.  The  old  Jesuit  translators  render  this  par.  by
‘  Mundus  principium  et  causam  suarn  habet  in  Divino
seu  actione  Divinae  sapientiae  quae  did  potest  ejus  mater.’
So  far  I  may  assume  that  they  agreed  with  me  in  under¬
standing  that  the  subject  of  the  par.  was  the  TAo.


96


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


Par.  2  lays  down  the  law  of  life  for  man  thus  derived
from  the  Tao.  The  last  clause  of  it  is  given  by  the  same
translators  as  equivalent  to  ‘  Unde  fit  ut  post  mortem  nihil
ei  timendum  sit,’ — a  meaning  which  the  characters  will  not
bear.  But  from  that  clause,  and  the  next  par.,  I  am  obliged
to  conclude  that  even  in  Lao-jze’s  mind  there  was  the  germ
of  the  sublimation  of  the  material  frame  which  issued  in  the
asceticism  and  life-preserving  arts  of  the  later  Taoism.

Par.  3  seems  to  indicate  the  method  of  ‘guarding  the
mother  in  man,’  by  watching  over  the  breath,  the  proto¬
plastic  ‘  one  ’  of  ch.  42,  the  ethereal  matter  out  of  which  all
material  things  were  formed.  The  organs  of  this  breath  in
man  are  the  mouth  and  nostrils  (nothing  else  should  be
understood  here  by  ft  and  ; — see  the  explanations  of
the  former  in  the  last  par.  of  the  fifth  of  the  appendixes  to
the  Yi  in  vol.  xvi,  p.  432);  and  the  management  of  the  breath
is  the  mystery  of  the  esoteric  Buddhism  and  Taoism.

In  par.  4  1  The  guarding  what  is  soft  ’  is  derived  from  the
use  of  ‘  the  soft  lips  ’  in  hiding  and  preserving  the  hard  and
strong  teeth.

Par.  5  gives  the  gist  of  the  chapter : — Man’s  always  keeping
before  him  the  ideal  of  the  Tao,  and,  without  purpose,
simply  doing  whatever  he  finds  to  do;  Tao-like  and
powerful  in  all  his  sphere  of  action.

I  have  followed  the  reading  of  the  last  character  but  one,
which  is  given  by  3Uo  Hung  instead  of  that  found  in  Ho-
shang  Kung  and  Wang  Pi.

53.  1.  If  I  were  suddenly  to  become  known,  and
(put  into  a  position  to)  conduct  (a  government)
according  to  the  Great  Tao,  what  I  should  be  most
afraid  of  would  be  a  boastful  display.

2.  The  great  T ao  (or  way)  is  very  level  and  easy  ;
but  people  love  the  by-ways.

3.  Their  court(-yards  and  buildings)  shall  be  well
kept,  but  their  fields  shall  be  ill-cultivated,  and  their
granaries  very  empty.  They  shall  wear  elegant  and


CH.  LI V.


THE  TAO  TEH  .KING.


97


ornamented  robes,  carry  a  sharp  sword  at  their  girdle,
pamper  themselves  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  have
a  superabundance  of  property  and  wealth  ; — such
(princes)  may  be  called  robbers  and  boasters.  This
is  contrary  to  the  Tfio  surely!

^  fiHb  ‘  Increase  of  Evidence.’  The  chapter  contrasts
government  by  the  T  &  o  with  that  conducted  in  a  spirit  of
ostentation  and  by  oppression.

In  the  ‘I’  of  paragraph  i  does  Lao-jze  speak  of  himself?
I  think  he  does.  Wu  W/zang  understands  it  of ‘any  man,’  i.e.
any  one  in  the  exercise  of  government ; — which  is  possible.
What  is  peculiar  to  my  version  is  the  pregnant  meaning
given  to  common  enough  in  the  mouth  of  Confu¬

cius.  I  have  adopted  it  here  because  of  a  passage  in  Liu
Hsiang’s  Shwo-wan  (XX,  13  b),  where  Lao-jze  is  made  to
say  ‘  Excessive  is  the  difficulty  of  practising  the  Tao  at  the
present  time,’  adding  that  the  princes  of  his  age  would  not
receive  it  from  him.  On  the  ‘  Great  Tao,’  see  chapters  25,
34,  et  al.  From  the  twentieth  book  of  Han  Fei  (12  b  and
13  a)  I  conclude  that  he  had  the  whole  of  this  chapter  in
his  copy  of  our  Wing,  but  he  broke  it  up,  after  his  fashion,
into  fragmentary  utterances,  confused  and  confounding.  He
gives  also  some  remarkable  various  readings,  one  of  which
instead  of  Ho-shang  Rung  and  Wang  Pi’s
character  48)  is  now  generally  adopted.  The  passage  is
quoted  in  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary  under  ^  with  this
reading.

54.  1.  What  (Tao’s)  skilful  planter  plants
Can  never  be  uptorn  ;

What  his  skilful  arms  enfold,

From  him  can  ne’er  be  borne.

Sons  shall  bring  in  lengthening  line,
Sacrifices  to  his  shrine.

2.  Tao  when  nursed  within  one’s  self,

His  vigour  will  make  true  ;


[39]


11


98


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


And  where  the  family  it  rules
What  riches  will  accrue  !

The  neighbourhood  where  it  prevails
In  thriving  will  abound  ;

And  when  ’tis  seen  throughout  the  state,

Good  fortune  will  be  found.

Employ  it  the  kingdom  o’er,

And  men  thrive  all  around.

3.  In  this  way  the  effect  will  be  seen  in  the  person,
by  the  observation  of  different  cases  ;  in  the  family  ;
in  the  neighbourhood ;  in  the  state  ;  and  in  the
kingdom.

4.  How  do  I  know  that  this  effect  is  sure  to
hold  thus  all  under  the  sky  ?  By  this  (method  of
observation).

HI?  UK,  ‘  The  Cultivation  (of  the  T  ao),  and  the  Observa¬
tion  (of  its  Effects).’  The  sentiment  of  the  first  paragraph
is  found  in  the  twenty-seventh  and  other  previous  chap¬
ters,- — that  the  noiseless  and  imperceptible  acting  of  the
Ta o  is  irresistible  in  its  influence ;  and  this  runs  through
to  the  end  of  the  chapter  with  the  additional  appeal  to  the
influence  of  its  effects.  The  introduction  of  the  subject  of
sacrifices,  a  religious  rite,  though  not  presented  to  the
Highest  Object,  will  strike  the  reader  as  peculiar  in  our
King.

The  T eh  mentioned  five  times  in  par.  2  is  the  ‘  virtue’
of  the  Tao  embodied  in  the  individual,  and  extending  from
him  in  all  the  spheres  of  his  occupation,  and  is  explained
differently  by  Han  Fei  according  to  its  application  ;  and
his  example  I  have  to  some  extent  followed.

The  force  of  pars.  3  and  4  is  well  given  by  Ho-shang
Kung.  On  the  first  clause  he  says,  ‘  Take  the  person  of
one  who  cultivates  the  Tao,  and  compare  it  with  that  of
one  who  does  not  cultivate  it which  is  in  a  state  of  decay  ?
and  which  is  in  a  state  of  preservation  ?  ’


CH.  LV.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


99


55.  i.  He  who  has  in  himself  abundantly  the
attributes  (of  the  Tao)  is  like  an  infant.  Poison¬
ous  insects  will  not  sting  him  ;  fierce  beasts  will  not
seize  him  ;  birds  of  prey  will  not  strike  him.

2.  (The  infant’s)  bones  are  weak  and  its  sinews
soft,  but  yet  its  grasp  is  firm.  It  knows  not  yet  the
union  of  male  and  female,  and  yet  its  virile  member
may  be  excited ; — showing  the  perfection  of  its
physical  essence.  All  day  long  it  will  cry  without
its  throat  becoming  hoarse  ; — showing  the  harmony
(in  its  constitution).

3.  To  him  by  whom  this  harmony  is  known,

(The  secret  of)  the  unchanging  (T ao)  is  shown,

And  in  the  knowledge  wisdom  finds  its  throne.

All  life-increasing  arts  to  evil  turn  ;

Where  the  mind  makes  the  vital  breath  to  burn,
(False)  is  the  strength,  (and  o’er  it  we  should
mourn.)

4.  When  things  have  become  strong,  they  (then)
become  old,  which  may  be  said  to  be  contrary  to
the  Tao.  Whatever  is  contrary  to  the  Tao  soon
ends.

‘  The  Mysterious  Charm  ;  ’  meaning,  apparently,
the  entire  passivity  of  the  Tao.

With  pars.  1  and  2,  compare  what  is  said  about  the  in¬
fant  in  chapters  10  and  20,  and  about  the  immunity  from
dangers  such  as  here  described  of  the  disciple  of  the  Tao
in  ch.  50.  My  '  evil’  in  the  second  triplet  of  par.  3  has  been
translated  by  ‘  felicity but  a  reference  to  the  Khang-hsi
dictionary  will  show  that  the  meaning  which  I  give  to  jjj^
is  well  authorised.  It  is  the  only  meaning  allowable  here.
The  third  and  fourth  Q  in  this  par.  appear  in  Ho-shang
Kung’s  text  as  ,  and  he  comments  on  the  clauses  accord-

H  2


IOO


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


pt.  ir.


ingly ;  but  (jjj  is  now  the  received  reading.  Some  light
is  thrown  on  this  paragraph  and  the  next  by  an  apocryphal
conversation  attributed  to  Lao-5  ze  ‘n  Liu  Hsiang’s  Shwo-
wan,  X,  4  a.

56.  1.  He  who  knows  (the  Tao)  does  not  (care
to)  speak  (about  it) ;  he  who  is  (ever  ready  to)  speak
about  it  does  not  know  it.

2.  He  (who  knows  it)  will  keep  his  mouth  shut
and  close  the  portals  (of  his  nostrils).  He  will
blunt  his  sharp  points  and  unravel  the  complications
of  things  ;  he  will  attemper  his  brightness,  and  bring
himself  into  agreement  with  the  obscurity  (of  others).
This  is  called  ‘  the  Mysterious  Agreement.’

3.  (Such  an  one)  cannot  be  treated  familiarly  or
distantly  ;  he  is  beyond  all  consideration  of  profit  or
injury;  of  nobility  or  meanness  : — he  is  the  noblest
man  under  heaven.

Ufa,  ‘  The  Mysterious  Excellence.’  The  chapter  gives
us  a  picture  of  the  man  of  Tao,  humble  and  retiring,  obli¬
vious  of  himself  and  of  other  men,  the  noblest  man  under
heaven.

Par.  1  is  found  in  Tdwang-^ze  (XIII,  20  b),  not  expressly
mentioned,  as  taken  from  Lao-jze,  but  at  the  end  of  a  string
of  sentiments,  ascribed  to  ‘  the  Master,’  some  of  them,  like
the  two  clauses  here,  no  doubt  belonging  to  him,  and  the
others,  probably  idwang-jze’s  own.

Par.  2  is  all  found  in  chapters  4  and  52,  excepting  the
short  clause  in  the  conclusion.

57.  1.  A  state  may  be  ruled  by  (measures  of)
correction  ;  weapons  of  war  may  be  used  with  crafty
dexterity ;  (but)  the  kingdom  is  made  one’s  own
(only)  by  freedom  from  action  and  purpose.

2.  How  do  I  know  that  it  is  so?  By  these


CH.  LVIII.  THE  TAO  TEH  SING.  IOI


facts  : — In  the  kingdom  the  multiplication  of  prohibi¬
tive  enactments  increases  the  poverty  of  the  people  ;
the  more  implements  to  add  to  their  profit  that  the
people  have,  the  greater  disorder  is  there  in  the
state  and  clan ;  the  more  acts  of  crafty  dexterity
that  men  possess,  the  more  do  strange  contrivances
appear;  the  more  display  there  is  of  legislation,
the  more  thieves  and  robbers  there  are.

3.  Therefore  a  sage  has  said,  ‘  I  will  do  nothing
(of  purpose),  and  the  people  will  be  transformed  of
themselves ;  I  will  be  fond  of  keeping  still,  and  the
people  will  of  themselves  become  correct.  I  will
take  no  trouble  about  it,  and  the  people  will  of
themselves  become  rich  ;  I  will  manifest  no  ambi¬
tion,  and  the  people  will  of  themselves  attain  to  the
primitive  simplicity.’

1  The  Genuine  Influence.’  The  chapter  shows
how  government  by  the  Tao  is  alone  effective,  and  of  uni¬
versal  application  ;  contrasting  it  with  the  failure  of  other
methods.

After  the  ‘weapons  of  war’  in  par.  1,  one  is  tempted  to
take  ‘  the  sharp  implements  ’  in  par.  2  as  such  weapons,  but
the  meaning  which  I  finally  adopted,  especially  after  studying
chapters  36  and  80,  seems  more  consonant  with  Lao-jze's
scheme  of  thought.  In  the  last  member  of  the  same  par.,
Ho-shang  Kung  has  the  strange  reading  of  {ffyj,  and  uses
it  in  his  commentary  ;  but  the  better  text  of  ^  ^  is  found
both  in  Hvvai-nan  and  Sze-ma  K/iie n,  and  in  Wang  Pi.

We  do  not  know  if  the  writer  were  quoting  any  par¬
ticular  sage  in  par.  3,  or  referring  generally  to  the  sages  of
the  past ; — men  like  the  ‘  sentence-makers  ’  of  ch.  41.

58.  1.  The  government  that  seems  the  most  un¬
wise,

Oft  goodness  to  the  people  best  supplies  ;


102


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


That  which  is  meddling,  touching  everything,
Will  work  but  ill,  and  disappointment  bring.
Misery ! — happiness  is  to  be  found  by  its  side !
Happiness  ! — misery  lurks  beneath  it !  Who  knows
what  either  will  come  to  in  the  end  ?

2.  Shall  we  then  dispense  with  correction  ?  The
(method  of)  correction  shall  by  a  turn  become  dis¬
tortion,  and  the  good  in  it  shall  by  a  turn  become
evil.  The  delusion  of  the  people  (on  this  point)  has
indeed  subsisted  for  a  long  time.

3.  Therefore  the  sage  is  (like)  a  square  which  cuts
no  one  (with  its  angles) ;  (like)  a  corner  which  injures
no  one  (with  its  sharpness).  He  is  straightforward,
but  allows  himself  no  license  ;  he  is  bright,  but  does
not  dazzle.

JPe  ‘Transformation  according  to  Circumstances;’
but  this  title  does  not  throw  light  on  the  meaning  of  the
chapter ;  nor  are  we  helped  to  an  understanding  of  it  by
Han  Fei,  with  his  additions  and  comments  (XI,  3  b,  4  b),
nor  by  Hwai-nan  with  his  illustrations  (XII,  21  a,  b).  The
difficulty  of  it  is  increased  by  its  being  separated  from  the
preceding  chapter  of  which  it  is  really  the  sequel.  It  con¬
trasts  still  further  government  by  the  Tao,  with  that  by
the  method  of  correction.  The  sage  is  the  same  in  both
chapters,  his  character  and  government  both  marked  by
the  opposites  or  contraries  which  distinguish  the  procedure
of  the  Tao,  as  stated  in  ch.  40.

59.  1.  For  regulating  the  human  (in  our  consti¬
tution)  and  rendering  the  (proper)  service  to  the
heavenly,  there  is  nothing  like  moderation.

2.  It  is  only  by  this  moderation  that  there  is
effected  an  early  return  (to  man’s  normal  state).
That  early  return  is  what  I  call  the  repeated  accumu¬
lation  of  the  attributes  (of  the  Teio).  With  that


CH.  LX.


THE  TAO  TEH  KING.


103


repeated  accumulation  of  those  attributes,  there
comes  the  subjugation  (of  every  obstacle  to  such
return).  Of  this  subjugation  we  know  not  what
shall  be  the  limit ;  and  when  one  knows  not  what
the  limit  shall  be,  he  may  be  the  ruler  of  a  state.

3.  He  who  possesses  the  mother  of  the  state  may
continue  long.  His  case  is  like  that  (of  the  plant)
of  which  we  say  that  its  roots  are  deep  and  its  flower
stalks  firm  : — this  is  the  way  to  secure  that  its  endur¬
ing  life  shall  long  be  seen.


,  ‘Guarding  the  Tdo.’  The  chapter  shows  how
it  is  the  guarding  of  the  T4o  that  ensures  a  continuance
of  long  life,  with  vigour  and  success.  The  abuse  of  it  and
other  passages  in  our  King  helped  on,  I  must  believe,  the
later  Tdoist  dreams  about  the  elixir  vitae  and  life-pre-
serving  pills.  The  whole  of  it,  with  one  or  two  various
readings,  is  found  in  Han  Fei  (VI,  4b-6a),  who  speaks
twice  in  his  comments  of  ‘  The  Book.’

Par.  1  has  been  translated,  ‘In  governing  men  and  in
serving  Heaven,  there  is  nothing  like  moderation.’  But  by
‘Heaven’  there  is  not  intended  ‘the  blue  sky’  above  us,
nor  any  personal  Power  above  it,  but  the  Tio  embodied
in  our  constitution,  the  Heavenly  element  in  our  nature.
The  ‘moderation’  is  the  opposite  of  what  we  call  ‘living
fast,’  ‘  burning  the  candle  at  both  ends.’

In  par.  a  I  must  read  instead  of  the  more  com¬
mon  JJJ£.  I  find  it  in  Lu  Teh-ming,  and  that  it  is  not  a
misprint  in  him  appears  from  his  subjoining  that  it  is  pro¬
nounced  like  Jjjfc.  Its  meaning  is  the  same  as  in  ^  ^
jij)J  in  ch.  5a,  par.  5.  Teh  is  not  ‘  virtue  ’  in  our  common
meaning  of  the  term,  but  ‘  the  attributes  of  the  T  a  o,’  as
almost  always  with  Lao-jze.

In  par.  3  ‘the  mother  of  the  state’  is  the  Tao  as  in
ch.  1,  and  especially  in  ch.  5a,  par.  1.

60.  1.  Governing  a  great  state  is  like  cooking
small  fish.


104


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


2.  Let  the  kingdom  be  governed  according  to  the
Tao,  and  the  manes  of  the  departed  will  not  mani¬
fest  their  spiritual  energy.  It  is  not  that  those
manes  have  not  that  spiritual  energy,  but  it  will  not
be  employed  to  hurt  men.  It  is  not  that  it  could  not
hurt  men,  but  neither  does  the  ruling  sage  hurt  them.

3.  When  these  two  do  not  injuriously  affect  each
other,  their  good  influences  converge  in  the  virtue
(of  the  Tao).

%%  ‘Occupying  the  Throne;’  occupying  it,  that  is,
according  to  the  Tao,  noiselessly  and  purposelessly,  so
that  the  people  enjoy  their  lives,  free  from  all  molestation
seen  and  unseen.

Par.  1 .  That  is,  in  the  most  quiet  and  easy  manner.  The
whole  of  the  chapter  is  given  and  commented  on  by  Han
Fei  (VI,  6a-7b);  but  very  unsatisfactorily.

The  more  one  thinks  and  reads  about  the  rest  of  the
chapter,  the  more  does  he  agree  with  the  words  of  Julien : —
‘  It  presents  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the  same  characters,
and  appears  as  insignificant  as  it  is  unintelligible,  if  we  give
to  the  Chinese  characters  their  ordinary  meaning.’ — The
reader  will  observe  that  we  have  here  the  second  mention
of  spirits  (the  manes;  Chalmers,  ‘the  ghosts;’  Julien,  les
demons).  See  ch.  39.

Whatever  Lao-sze  meant  to  teach  in  par.  a,  he  laid  in  it
a  foundation  for  the  superstition  of  the  later  and  present
Taoism  about  the  spirits  of  the  dead ; — such  as  appeared
a  few  years  ago  in  the  ‘  tail-cutting  ’  scare.

61.  1.  What  makes  a  great  state  is  its  being  (like)
a  low-lying,  down-flowing  (stream)  ; — it  becomes  the
centre  to  which  tend  (all  the  small  states)  under
heaven.

2.  (To  illustrate  from)  the  case  of  all  females  : — the
female  always  overcomes  the  male  by  her  stillness.
Stillness  may  be  considered  (a  sort  of)  abasement.


CH.  I.XII.


THE  TAO  TEH  AING.


T°5


3.  Thus  it  is  that  a  great  state,  by  condescending
to  small  states,  gains  them  for  itself;  and  that
small  states,  by  abasing  themselves  to  a  great
state,  win  it  over  to  them.  In  the  one  case  the
abasement  leads  to  gaining  adherents,  in  the  other
case  to  procuring  favour.

4.  The  great  state  only  wishes  to  unite  men  to¬
gether  and  nourish  them ;  a  small  state  only  wishes
to  be  received  by,  and  to  serve,  the  other.  Each
gets  what  it  desires,  but  the  great  state  must  learn
to  abase  itself.

‘ The  Attribute  of  Humility;’ — a  favourite  theme
with  Lao-jze ;  and  the  illustration  of  it  from  the  low-lying
stream  to  which  smaller  streams  flow  is  also  a  favourite
subject  with  him.  The  language  can  hardly  but  recall  the
words  of  a  greater  than  Laoqze: — ‘He  that  humbleth  him¬
self  shall  be  exalted.’

62.  1.  Tdo  has  of  all  things  the  most  honoured
place.

No  treasures  give  good  men  so  rich  a  grace;

Bad  men  it  guards,  and  doth  their  ill  efface.

2.  (Its)  admirable  words  can  purchase  honour;
(its)  admirable  deeds  can  raise  their  performer  above
others.  Even  men  who  are  not  good  are  not  aban¬
doned  by  it.

3.  Therefore  when  the  sovereign  occupies  his
place  as  the  Son  of  Heaven,  and  he  has  appointed
his  three  ducal  ministers,  though  (a  prince)  were  to
send  in  a  round  symbol-of-rank  large  enough  to  fill
both  the  hands,  and  that  as  the  precursor  of  the  team
of  horses  (in  the  court-yard),  such  an  offering  would
not  be  equal  to  (a  lesson  of)  this  Tao,  which  one
might  present  on  his  knees.

4.  Why  was  it  that  the  ancients  prized  this  Tao


io6


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


so  much  ?  Was  it  not  because  it  could  be  got  by
seeking  for  it,  and  the  guilty  could  escape  (from  the
stain  of  their  guilt)  by  it  ?  This  is  the  reason  why
all  under  heaven  consider  it  the  most  valuable  thing.

^  ‘ Practising  the  Tao.’  J||  ‘The  value  set

on  the  Tao,’  would  have  been  a  more  appropriate  title.
The  chapter  sets  forth  that  value  in  various  manifestations
of  it.


Par.  i.  For  the  meaning  of  JpfL,  see  Confucian  Analects,
III,  ch.  13.

Par.  2.  I  am  obliged  to  adopt  the  reading  of  the  first
sentence  of  this  paragraph  given  by  Hwai-nan,

m  #  M.  SI  ft  W  min  A:  — see  especially  his
quotation  of  it  in  XVIII,  10  a,  as  from  a  superior  man,
I  have  not  found  his  reading  anywhere  else.

Par.  3  is  not  easily  translated,  or  explained.  See  the
rules  on  presenting  offerings  at  the  court  of  a  ruler  or  the
king,  in  vol.  xxvii  of  the  1  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,’  p.  84,
note  3,  and  also  a  narrative  in  the  3°  ATwan  under  the
thirty-third  year  of  duke  Hsi.


63.  1.  (It  is  the  way  of  the  Tao)  to  act  without
(thinking  of)  acting  ;  to  conduct  affairs  without  (feel¬
ing  the)  trouble  of  them  ;  to  taste  without  discerning
any  flavour ;  to  consider  what  is  small  as  great,  and
a  few  as  many ;  and  to  recompense  injury  with
kindness.

2.  (The  master  of  it)  anticipates  things  that  are
difficult  while  they  are  easy,  and  does  things  that
would  become  great  while  they  are  small.  All  diffi¬
cult  things  in  the  world  are  sure  to  arise  from  a
previous  state  in  which  they  were  easy,  and  all
great  things  from  one  in  which  they  were  small.
Therefore  the  sage,  while  he  never  does  what  is
great,  is  able  on  that  account  to  accomplish  the
greatest  things.


CH.  LXIV.


THE  TAO  TEH  iTING.


107


3.  He  who  lightly  promises  is  sure  to  keep  but
little  faith;  he  who  is  continually  thinking  things
easy  is  sure  to  find  them  difficult.  Therefore  the
sage  sees  difficulty  even  in  what  seems  easy,  and  so
never  has  any  difficulties.

1  Thinking  in  the  Beginning.’  The  former  of
these  two  characters  is  commonly  misprinted  JB][,and  this
has  led  Chalmers  to  mistranslate  them  by  ‘  The  Beginning
of  Grace.’  The  chapter  sets  forth  the  passionless  method
of  the  Tao,  and  how  the  sage  accordingly  accomplishes  his
objects  easily  by  forestalling  in  his  measures  all  difficulties.
In  par.  1  the  clauses  are  indicative,  and  not  imperative,
and  therefore  we  have  to  supplement  the  text  in  translat¬
ing  in  some  such  way,  as  I  have  done.  They  give  us  a
cluster  of  aphorisms  illustrating  the  procedure  of  the  Tao
‘  by  contraries,’  and  conclude  with  one,  which  is  the  chief
glory  of  Ldo-sze’s  teaching,  though  I  must  think  that  its
value  is  somewhat  diminished  by  the  method  in  which  he
reaches  it.  It  has  not  the  prominence  in  the  later  teaching
of  Tdoist  writers  which  we  should  expect,  nor  is  it  found
(so  far  as  I  know)  in  iTwang-jze,  Han  Fei,  or  Hwai-nan.
It  is  quoted,  however,  twice  by  Liu  Hsiang; — see  my  note
on  par.  2  of  ch.  49.

It  follows  from  the  whole  chapter  that  the  Taoistic
‘  doing  nothing  ’  was  not  an  absolute  quiescence  and  inac¬
tion,  but  had  a  method  in  it.

64.  1.  That  which  is  at  rest  is  easily  kept  hold  of;
before  a  thing  has  given  indications  of  its  presence,
it  is  easy  to  take  measures  against  it ;  that  which  is
brittle  is  easily  broken  ;  that  which  is  very  small  is
easily  dispersed.  Action  should  be  taken  before  a
thing  has  made  its  appearance ;  order  should  be
secured  before  disorder  has  begun.

2.  The  tree  which  fills  the  arms  grew  from  the
tiniest  sprout ;  the  tower  of  nine  storeys  rose  from  a


108  THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.  pt.  ii.


(small)  heap  of  earth;  the  journey  of  a  thousand  li
commenced  with  a  single  step.

3.  He  who  acts  (with  an  ulterior  purpose)  does
harm ;  he  who  takes  hold  of  a  thing  (in  the  same
way)  loses  his  hold.  The  sage  does  not  act  (so),  and
therefore  does  no  harm  ;  he  does  not  lay  hold  (so),
and  therefore  does  not  lose  his  hold.  (But)  people
in  their  conduct  of  affairs  are  constantly  ruining  them
when  they  are  on  the  eve  of  success.  If  they  were
careful  at  the  end,  as  (they  should  be)  at  the  begin¬
ning,  they  would  not  so  ruin  them.

4.  Therefore  the  sage  desires  what  (other  men)
do  not  desire,  and  does  not  prize  things  difficult  to
get ;  he  learns  what  (other  men)  do  not  learn,  and
turns  back  to  what  the  multitude  of  men  have
passed  by.  Thus  he  helps  the  natural  development
of  all  things,  and  does  not  dare  to  act  (with  an
ulterior  purpose  of  his  own).

1  Guarding  the  Minute.’  The  chapter  is  a  con¬
tinuation  and  enlargement  of  the  last.  Wu  .ST/zang,  indeed,
unites  the  two,  blending  them  together  with  some  ingenious
transpositions  and  omissions,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to
discuss.  Compare  the  first  part  of  par.  3  with  the  last  part
of  par.  1,  ch.  29.

65.  1.  The  ancients  who  showed  their  skill  in  prac¬
tising  the  Tao  did  so,  not  to  enlighten  the  people,
but  rather  to  make  them  simple  and  ignorant.

2.  The  difficulty  in  governing  the  people  arises
from  their  having  much  knowledge.  He  who  (tries
to)  govern  a  state  by  his  wisdom  is  a  scourge  to  it ;
while  he  who  does  not  (try  to)  do  so  is  a  blessing.

3.  He  who  knows  these  two  things  finds  in  them
also  his  model  and  rule.  Ability  to  know  this


CH.  LX VI,


THE  TAO  TEH  STING.


109


model  and  rule  constitutes  what  we  call  the  myste¬
rious  excellence  (of  a  governor).  Deep  and  far-
reaching  is  such  mysterious  excellence,  showing
indeed  its  possessor  as  opposite  to  others,  but  lead¬
ing  them  to  a  great  conformity  to  him.

V?*  fjtb  *  -Pure,  unmixed  Excellence.’  The  chapter  shows
the  powerful  and  beneficent  influence  of  the  Ti o  in  govern¬
ment,  in  contrast  with  the  applications  and  contrivances  of
human  wisdom.  Compare  ch.  19.  My ‘simple  and  igno¬
rant’  is  taken  from  Julien.  More  literally  the  translation
would  be  ‘  to  make  them  stupid.’  My  ‘  scourge  ’  in  par.  2
is  also  after  Julien’s  ‘fleau.’

66.  1.  That  whereby  the  rivers  and  seas  are  able
to  receive  the  homage  and  tribute  of  all  the  valley
streams,  is  their  skill  in  being  lower  than  they  ; — it  is
thus  that  they  are  the  kings  of  them  all.  So  it  is
that  the  sage  (ruler),  wishing  to  be  above  men,  puts
himself  by  his  words  below  them,  and,  wishing  to  be
before  them,  places  his  person  behind  them.

2.  In  this  way  though  he  has  his  place  above
them,  men  do  not  feel  his  weight,  nor  though  he  has
his  place  before  them,  do  they  feel  it  an  injury  to
them.

3.  Therefore  all  in  the  world  delight  to  exalt  him
and  do  not  weary  of  him.  Because  he  does  not
strive,  no  one  finds  it  possible  to  strive  with  him.

2»,  ‘Putting  one’s  self  Last.’  The  subject  is  the
power  of  the  Tao,  by  its  display  of  humility  in  attracting
men.  The  subject  and  the  way  in  which  it  is  illustrated
are  frequent  themes  in  the  K ing.  See  chapters  8,  22,  39,
42,  61,  et  al.

The  last  sentence  of  par.  3  is  found  also  in  ch.  22.  There
seem  to  be  no  quotations  from  the  chapter  in  Han  Fei  or
Hwai-nan ;  but  Wu  K/ikng  quotes  passages  from  Tung


I  IO


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


Wung-shu  (of  the  second  century  B.  c.),  and  Yang  Hsiung
(b.  C.  53-A.  D.  1 8),  which  seem  to  show  that  the  phraseology
of  it  was  familiar  to  them.  The  former  says ‘  When  one
places  himself  in  his  qualities  below  others,  his  person  is
above  them  ;  when  he  places  them  behind  those  of  others,
his  person  is  before  them  the  other,  ‘  Men  exalt  him  who
humbles  himself  below  them  |  and  give  the  precedence  to
him  who  puts  himself  behind  them.’

67.  1.  All  the  world  says  that,  while  my  T&o  is
great,  it  yet  appears  to  be  inferior  (to  other  systems
of  teaching).  Now  it  is  just  its  greatness  that  makes
it  seem  to  be  inferior.  If  it  were  like  any  other
(system),  for  long  would  its  smallness  have  been
known !

2.  But  I  have  three  precious  things  which  I  prize
and  hold  fast.  The  first  is  gentleness  ;  the  second  is
economy ;  and  the  third  is  shrinking  from  taking
precedence  of  others.

3.  With  that  gentleness  I  can  be  bold ;  with  that
economy  I  can  be  liberal  ;  shrinking  from  taking
precedence  of  others,  I  can  become  a  vessel  of  the
highest  honour.  N ow-a-days  they  give  up  gentleness
and  are  all  for  being  bold ;  economy,  and  are  all  for
being  liberal ;  the  hindmost  place,  and  seek  only  to
be  foremost ; — (of  all  which  the  end  is)  death.

4.  Gentleness  is  sure  to  be  victorious  even  in
battle,  and  firmly  to  maintain  its  ground.  Heaven
will  save  its  possessor,  by  his  (very)  gentleness  pro¬
tecting  him.

—  =|§£,  ‘  The  Three  Precious  Things.’  This  title  is  taken
from  par.  2,  and  suggests  to  us  how  the  early  framer  of
these  titles  intended  to  express  by  them  the  subject-matter
of  their  several  chapters.  The  three  things  are  the  three
distinguishing  qualities  of  the  possessor  of  the  Tao,  the


CH.  LXVIII.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


I  1 1


three  great  moral  qualities  appearing  in  its  followers,  the
qualities,  we  may  venture  to  say,  of  the  Tdo  itself.  The
same  phrase  is  now  the  common  designation  of  Buddhism
in  China, — the  Tri-ratna  or  Ratna-traya,  ‘  the  Precious
Buddha,’  ‘  the  Precious  Law,’  and  ‘  the  Precious  Priesthood
(or  rather  Monkhood)  or  Church;’  appearing  also  in  the
‘  Tri-rarawa,’  or  ‘  formula  of  the  Three  Refuges,’  what  Dr.
Eitel  calls  ‘the  most  primitive  formula  fidei  of  the  early
Buddhists,  introduced  before  Southern  and  Northern  Bud¬
dhism  separated.’  I  will  not  introduce  the  question  of
whether  Buddhism  borrowed  this  designation  from  Taoism,
after  its  entrance  into  China.  It  is  in  Buddhism  the  formula
of  a  peculiar  Church  or  Religion  ;  in  Taoism  a  rule  for  the
character,  or  the  conduct  which  the  Tao  demands  from  all
men.  ‘  My  Tao  ’  in  par.  i  is  the  reading  of  Wang  Pi ;
Ho-shang  Kung’s  text  is  simply  Wang  Pi’s  reading
is  now  generally  adopted.

The  concluding  sentiment  of  the  chapter  is  equivalent  to
the  saying  of  Mencius  (VII,  ii,  IV,  2),  ‘  If  the  ruler  of  a
state  love  benevolence,  he  will  have  no  enemy  under  heaven.’
‘  Heaven  ’  is  equivalent  to  ‘  the  Tao,’  the  course  of  events, —
Providence,  as  we  should  say.

68.  He  who  in  (Tao’s)  wars  has  skill
Assumes  no  martial  port ;

He  who  fights  with  most  good  will
To  rage  makes  no  resort.

He  who  vanquishes  yet  still
Keeps  from  his  foes  apart ;

He  whose  hests  men  most  fulfil
Yet  humbly  plies  his  art.

Thus  we  say,  ‘  He  ne’er  contends,

And  therein  is  his  might.’

Thus  we  say,  ‘  Men’s  wills  he  bends,

That  they  with  him  unite.’

Thus  we  say,  ‘  Like  Heaven’s  his  ends.

No  sage  of  old  more  bright.’


I  12


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


@E^>  ‘  Matching  Heaven.’  The  chapter  describes  the
work  of  the  practiser  of  the  Tao  as  accomplished  like  that
of  Heaven,  without  striving  or  crying.  He  appears  under
the  figure  of  a  mailed  warrior  (^)  of  the  ancient  chariot.
The  chapter  is  a  sequel  of  the  preceding,  and  is  joined  on
to  it  by  Wu  jOang,  as  is  also  the  next.

69.  1.  A  master  of  the  art  of  war  has  said,  ‘  I  do
not  dare  to  be  the  host  (to  commence  the  war) ;  I
prefer  to  be  the  guest  (to  act  on  the  defensive).
I  do  not  dare  to  advance  an  inch ;  I  prefer  to  retire
a  foot.’  This  is  called  marshalling  the  ranks  where
there  are  no  ranks  ;  baring  the  arms  (to  fight)  where
there  are  no  arms  to  bare;  grasping  the  weapon
where  there  is  no  weapon  to  grasp ;  advancing  against
the  enemy  where  there  is  no  enemy.

2.  There  is  no  calamity  greater  than  lightly-
engaging  in  war.  To  do  that  is  near  losing  (the
gentleness)  which  is  so  precious.  Thus  it  is  that
when  opposing  weapons  are  (actually)  crossed,  he
who  deplores  (the  situation)  conquers.

tjfr  Jiff,  ‘The  Use  of  the  Mysterious  (Tdo).’  Such
seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  title.  The  chapter
teaches  that,  if  war  were  carried  on,  or  rather  avoided,
according  to  the  Tao,  the  result  would  be  success.  Lao-
jze’s  own  statements  appear  as  so  many  paradoxes.  They
are  examples  of  the  procedure  of  the  Tao  by  ‘contraries,’
or  opposites.

We  do  not  know  who  the  master  of  the  military  art
referred  to  was.  Perhaps  the  author  only  adopted  the
style  of  quotation  to  express  his  own  sentiments.

70.  1.  My  words  are  very  easy  to  know,  and  very
easy  to  practise ;  but  there  is  no  one  in  the  world
who  is  able  to  know  and  able  to  practise  them.

2.  There  is  an  originating  and  all-comprehending


CH.  LXXI.


THE  TAO  TEH  iTING.


I  13


(principle)  in  my  words,  and  an  authoritative  law  for
the  things  (which  I  enforce).  It  is  because  they  do
not  know  these,  that  men  do  not  know  me.

3.  They  who  know  me  are  few,  and  I  am  on  that
account  (the  more)  to  be  prized.  It  is  thus  that  the
sage  wears  (a  poor  garb  of)  hair  cloth,  while  he
carries  his  (signet  of)  jade  in  his  bosom.

Jfft>  ‘  The  Difficulty  of  being  (rightly)  Known.’  The
Tao  comprehends  and  rules  all  Lao-jze’s  teaching,  as  the
members  of  a  clan  were  all  in  the  loins  of  their  first  father
(tk)>  anc*  continue  to  look  up  to  him ;  and  the  people  of
a  state  are  all  under  the  direction  of  their  ruler ;  yet  the
philosopher  had  to  complain  of  not  being  known.  Lao-jze’s
principle  and  rule  or  ruler  was  the  Tao.  His  utterance
here  is  very  important.  Compare  the  words  of  Confucius
in  the  Analects,  XIV,  ch.  37,  et  al.

Par.  2  is  twice  quoted  by  Hwai-nan,  though  his  text  is
not  quite  the  same  in  both  cases.

71.  1.  To  know  and  yet  (think)  we  do  not  know
is  the  highest  (attainment) ;  not  to  know  (and  yet
think)  we  do  know  is  a  disease.

2.  It  is  simply  by  being  pained  at  (the  thought  of)
having  this  disease  that  we  are  preserved  from  it.
The  sage  has  not  the  disease.  He  knows  the  pain
that  would  be  inseparable  from  it,  and  therefore  he
does  not  have  it.

*»35s.  ‘The  Disease  of  Knowing.’  Here,  again,  we
have  the  Tao  working  ‘by  contraries,’ — in  the  matter  of
knowledge.  Compare  par.  x  with  Confucius’s  account  of
what  knowledge  is  in  the  Analects,  II,  ch.  17.  The  par.  1
is  found  in  one  place  in  Hwai-nan,  lengthened  out  by  the
addition  of  particles ;  but  the  variation  is  unimportant.
In  another  place,  however,  he  seems  to  have  had  the
correct  text  before  him.

Par.  2  is  in  Han  Fei  also  lengthened  out,  but  with  an

[39]  I


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


114


important  variation  for  ^  and  I  cannot

construe  his  text.  His  *  is  probably  a  transcriber’s
error.

72.  1.  When  the  people  do  not  fear  what  they
ought  to  fear,  that  which  is  their  great  dread  will
come  on  them.

2.  Let  them  not  thoughtlessly  indulge  themselves
in  their  ordinary  life  ;  let  them  not  act  as  if  weary
of  what  that  life  depends  on.

3.  It  is  by  avoiding  such  indulgence  that  such
weariness  does  not  arise.

4.  Therefore  the  sage  knows  (these  things)  of
himself,  but  does  not  parade  (his  knowledge) ;  loves,
but  does  not  (appear  to  set  a)  value  on,  himself.
And  thus  he  puts  the  latter  alternative  away  and
makes  choice  of  the  former.

^  ‘  Loving  one’s  Self.’  This  title  is  taken  from  the

expression  in  par.  4 ;  and  the  object  of  the  chapter  seems
to  be  to  show  how  such  loving  should  be  manifested,  and
to  enforce  the  lesson  by  the  example  of  the  ‘  sage,’  the  true
master  of  the  Tao.

In  par.  1  ‘the  great  dread’  is  death,  and  the  things
which  ought  to  be  feared  and  may  be  feared,  are  the
indulgences  of  the  appetites  and  passions,  which,  if  not
eschewed,  tend  to  shorten  life  and  accelerate  the  approach
of  death.

Pars.  2  and  3  are  supplementary  to  1.  For  the
second  character  of  Ho-shang  Kung’s  text  in  par.  2,  Wang
Pi  reads  Jfffl,  which  has  the  same  name  as  the  other ;  and
according  to  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary,  the  two  characters
are  interchangeable.  I  have  also  followed  Wu  Kh ang  in
adopting  for  the  former  of  the  two  in  par.  3.  Wu
adopted  this  reading  from  a  commentator  Lih  of  Lii-ling.
It  gives  a  good  meaning,  and  is  supported  by  the  structure
of  other  sentences  made  on  similar  lines.


CH.  LX XII.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


I  15


In  par.  4  ‘  the  sage  ’  must  be  ‘  the  ruler  who  is  a  sage,’
a  master  of  the  T  a  o,  ‘  the  king  ’  of  ch.  25-  He  ‘  loves
himself,’  i.  e.  his  life,  and  takes  the  right  measures  to
prolong  his  life,  but  without  any  demonstration  that  he
is  doing  so.

The  above  is,  I  conceive,  the  correct  explanation  of  the
chapter ;  but  as  to  the  Chinese  critics  and  foreign  trans¬
lators  of  it,  it  may  be  said,  ‘Quot  homines,  tot  sen-
tentiae.’  In  illustration  of  this  I  venture  to  subjoin  what
is  found  on  it  in  the  old  version  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries,
which  has  not  been  previously  printed : —

Prima  explicatio  juxta  interpretes.

1.  Populus,  ubi  jam  principis  iram  non  timet,  nihil  non
audet  ut  jugum  excutiat,  resque  communis  ad  extremum
discrimen  adducitur.

2.  Ambitio  principis  non  faciat  terram  angustiorem,  et
vectigalium  magnitudine  alendo  populo  insufficientem ;
numquam  populus  patriae  pertaesus  alias  terras  quaeret.

3.  Vitae  si  non  taedet,  neque  patrii  soli  taedebit.

4.  Quare  sanctus  sibi  semper  attentus  potentiam  suam
non  ostentat.

5.  Quia  vere  se  amat,  non  se  pretiosum  facit ;  vel  quia
sibi  recte  consulit  non  se  talem  aestimat  cujus  felicitati
et  honori  infelices  populi  unice  servire  debeant,  immo  potius
eum  se  reputat  qui  populorum  felicitati  totum  se  debeat
impendere.

6.  Ergo  illud  resecat,  istud  amplectitur.

Alia  explicatio.

1.  Populus  si  non  ita  timet  principis  majestatem,  sed
facile  ad  eum  accedit,  majestas  non  minuitur,  immo  ad
summum  pervenit.

2.  Vectigalibus  terra  si  non  opprimitur,  sua  quisque
contentus  alias  terras  non  quaeret,  si  se  non  vexari  populus
experitur.

3.  Vitae  si  non  taedet,  nec  patrii  soli  taedebit.

4.  Quare  sanctus  majestatis  fastum  non  affectat,  immo
similem  se  caeteris  ostendit.


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  XI.


1 16


5-  Sibi  recte  consulens,  populorum  amans,  non  se  pre-
tiosum  et  inaccessibilem  facit.

6.  Quidquid  ergo  timorem  incutere  potest,  hoc  evitat ;
quod  amorem  conciliat  et  benignitatem,  se  demonstrat
hoc  eligi  et  ultro  amplectitur.

73.  i.  He  whose  boldness  appears  in  his  daring
(to  do  wrong,  in  defiance  of  the  laws)  is  put  to  death  ;
he  whose  boldness  appears  in  his  not  daring  (to  do
so)  lives  on.  Of  these  two  cases  the  one  appears
to  be  advantageous,  and  the  other  to  be  injurious.
But

When  Heaven’s  anger  smites  a  man,

Who  the  cause  shall  truly  scan  ?

On  this  account  the  sage  feels  a  difficulty  (as  to
what  to  do  in  the  former  case).

2.  It  is  the  way  of  Heaven  not  to  strive,  and  yet
it  skilfully  overcomes ;  not  to  speak,  and  yet  it  is
skilful  in  (obtaining)  a  reply  ;  does  not  call,  and  yet
men  come  to  it  of  themselves.  Its  demonstrations
are  quiet,  and  yet  its  plans  are  skilful  and  effective.
The  meshes  of  the  net  of  Heaven  are  large  ;  far
apart,  but  letting  nothing  escape.

fi  ft,  ‘Allowing  Men  to  take  their  Course.’  The
chapter  teaches  that  rulers  should  not  be  hasty  to  punish,
especially  by  the  infliction  of  death.  Though  they  may
seem  to  err  in  leniency,  yet  Heaven  does  not  allow  offenders
to  escape.

While  Heaven  hates  the  ill-doer,  yet  we  must  not  always
conclude  from  Its  judgments  that  every  one  who  suffers  from
them  is  an  ill-doer;  and  the  two  lines  which  rhyme,  and
illustrate  this  point,  are  equivalent  to  the  sentiment  in  our
Old  Book,  ‘  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him.’
They  are  ascribed  to  Lao-jze  by  Lieh-jze  (VI,  7  a) ;  but,
it  has  been  said,  that  they  are  quoted  by  him  ‘in  an
entirely  different  connexion.’  But  the  same  text  in  two


CH. LXXV.


THE  TAO  TEH  iTING.


IX7


different  sermons  may  be  said  to  be  in  different  connexions.
In  Lieh-jze  and  our  K ing  the  lines  have  the  same  meaning,
and  substantially  the  same  application.  Indeed  Wang  Wan,
of  our  fourth  century,  the  commentator  of  Lieh-jze,  quotes
the  comment  of  Wang  Pi  on  this  passage,  condensing  it
into,  ‘Who  can  know  the  mind  of  Heaven?  Only  the  sage
can  do  so.’

74.  x.  The  people  do  not  fear  death;  to  what
purpose  is  it  to  (try  to)  frighten  them  with  death  ?
If  the  people  were  always  in  awe  of  death,  and  I
could  always  seize  those  who  do  wrong,  and  put
them  to  death,  who  would  dare  to  do  wrong  ?

2.  There  is  always  One  who  presides  over  the  in¬
fliction  of  death.  He  who  would  inflict  death  in  the
room  of  him  who  so  presides  over  it  may  be  de¬
scribed  as  hewing  wood  instead  of  a  great  carpenter.
Seldom  is  it  that  he  who  undertakes  the  hewing,
instead  of  the  great  carpenter,  does  not  cut  his  own
hands !

u  i  ,  ‘Restraining  Delusion.’  The  chapter  sets  forth
the  inefficiency  of  capital  punishment,  and  warns  rulers
against  the  infliction  of  it.  Who  is  it  that  superintends
the  infliction  of  death?  The  answer  of  Ho-shang  Rung
is  very  clear : — 1  It  is  Heaven,  which,  dwelling  on  high
and  ruling  all  beneath,  takes  note  of  the  transgressions
of  men.’  There  is  a  slight  variation  in  the  readings  of  the
second  sentence  of  par.  2  in  the  texts  of  Ho-shang  Rung
and  Wang  Pi,  and  the  reading  adopted  by  3^°  Hung
differs  a  little  from  them  both ;  but  the  meaning  is  the
same  in  them  all.

This  chapter  and  the  next  are  rightly  joined  on  to  the
preceding  by  Wu  Kh ang.

75.  i.  The  people  suffer  from  famine  because  of
the  multitude  of  taxes  consumed  by  their  superiors.
It  is  through  this  that  they  suffer  famine.


I  I  8  THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.  PT.  II.


2.  The  people  are  difficult  to  govern  because  of
the  (excessive)  agency  of  their  superiors  (in  govern¬
ing  them).  It  is  through  this  that  they  are  difficult
to  govern.

3.  The  people  make  light  of  dying  because  of  the
greatness  of  their  labours  in  seeking  for  the  means
of  living.  It  is  this  which  makes  them  think  light
of  dying.  Thus  it  is  that  to  leave  the  subject  of
living  altogether  out  of  view  is  better  than  to  set  a
high  value  on  it.

jtj-  ‘How  Greediness  Injures.’  The  want  of  the
nothing-doing  T  4  o  leads  to  the  multiplication  of  exactions
by  the  government,  and  to  the  misery  of  the  people,  so  as
to  make  them  think  lightly  of  death.  The  chapter  is
a  warning  for  both  rulers  and  people.

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether  rulers,  or  people,  or
both,  are  intended  in  the  concluding  sentence  of  par.  2.

76.  1.  Man  at  his  birth  is  supple  and  weak;  at
his  death,  firm  and  strong.  (So  it  is  with)  all  things.
Trees  and  plants,  in  their  early  growth,  are  soft  and
brittle  ;  at  their  death,  dry  and  withered.

2.  Thus  it  is  that  firmness  and  strength  are  the
concomitants  of  death  ;  softness  and  weakness,  the
concomitants  of  life.

3.  Hence  he  who  (relies  on)  the  strength  of  his
forces  does  not  conquer ;  and  a  tree  which  is  strong
will  fill  the  out-stretched  arms,  (and  thereby  invites
the  feller.)

4.  Therefore  the  place  of  what  is  firm  and  strong
is  below,  and  that  of  what  is  soft  and  weak  is  above.

}«3g.‘A  Warning  against  (trusting  in)  Strength.’  To
trust  in  one’s  force  is  contrary  to  the  Tao,  whose  strength
is  more  in  weakness  and  humility.

In  par.  x  the  two  characters  which  I  have  rendered  by


CH.  LX  XVII.


THE  TAo  TEH  .STING.


119


‘  (so  it  is  with)  all  things 5  are  found  in  the  texts  of  both
Ho-shang  Kung  and  Wang  Pi,  but  Wu  Kh ang  and  3'^o
Hung  both  reject  them.  I  should  also  have  neglected
them,  but  they  are  also  found  in  Liu  Hsiang’s  Shwo  Wan
(X,  4  a),  with  all  the  rest  of  pars.  1  and  2,  as  from  Lao-jze.
They  are  an  anakoluthon,  such  as  is  elsewhere  found  in
our  Wing;  e. g.  ~K  ^  ^  in  ch.  21,  par.  2.

The  ‘above’  and  ‘below’  in  par.  4  seem  to  be  merely
a  play  on  the  words,  as  capable  of  meaning  ‘  more  and  less
honourable.’

77.  1.  May  not  the  Way  (or  Tao)  of  Heaven  be
compared  to  the  (method  of)  bending  a  bow  ?  The
(part  of  the  bow)  which  was  high  is  brought  low,
and  what  was  low  is  raised  up.  (So  Heaven)  dimin¬
ishes  where  there  is  superabundance,  and  supple¬
ments  where  there  is  deficiency.

2.  It  is  the  Way  of  Heaven  to  diminish  super¬
abundance,  and  to  supplement  deficiency.  It  is  not
so  with  the  way  of  man.  He  takes  away  from  those
who  have  not  enough  to  add  to  his  own  super¬
abundance.

3.  Who  can  take  his  own  superabundance  and
therewith  serve  all  under  heaven  ?  Only  he  who  is
in  possession  of  the  Tao  !

4.  Therefore  the  (ruling)  sage  acts  without  claim¬
ing  the  results  as  his ;  he  achieves  his  merit  and
does  not  rest  (arrogantly)  in  it : — he  does  not  wish
to  display  his  superiority.

,  ‘  The  Way  of  Heaven but  the  chapter  contrasts
that  way,  unselfish  and  magnanimous,  with  the  way  of
man,  selfish  and  contracted,  and  illustrates  the  point  by  the
method  of  stringing  a  bow.  This  must  be  seen  as  it  is
done  in  China  fully  to  understand  the  illustration.  I  have
known  great  athletes  in  this  country  tasked  to  the  utmost


120


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


of  their  strength  to  adjust  and  bend  a  large  Chinese  bow
from  Peking.

The  ‘sage’  of  par.  4  is  the  ‘King’  of  ch.  25.  Compare
what  is  said  of  him  with  ch.  2,  par.  4,  et  al.

78.  1.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  more  soft
and  weak  than  water,  and  yet  for  attacking  things
that  are  firm  and  strong  there  is  nothing  that  can
take  precedence  of  it ; — for  there  is  nothing  (so
effectual)  for  which  it  can  be  changed.

2.  Every  one  in  the  world  knows  that  the  soft
overcomes  the  hard,  and  the  weak  the  strong,  but
no  one  is  able  to  carry  it  out  in  practice.

3.  Therefore  a  sage  has  said,

‘  He  who  accepts  his  state’s  reproach,

Is  hailed  therefore  its  altars’  lord  ;

To  him  who  bears  men’s  direful  woes
They  all  the  name  of  King  accord.’

4.  Words  that  are  strictly  true  seem  to  be  para¬
doxical.

‘  Things  to  be  Believed.’  It  is  difficult  to  give
a  short  and  appropriate  translation  of  this  title.  The
chapter  shows  how  the  most  unlikely  results  follow  from
action  according  to  the  Tao.

Par.  1.  Water  was  Lao-jze’s  favourite  emblem  of  the
Tao.  Compare  chapters  8,  66,  et  al.

Par.  2.  Compare  ch.  36,  par.  2.

Par.  3.  Of  course  we  do  not  know  who  the  sage  was
from  whom  Lao-^ze  got  the  lines  of  this  paragraph.  They
may  suggest  to  some  readers  the  lines  of  Burns,  as  they
have  done  to  me  : —

1  The  honest  man,  though  e’er  so  poor,

Is  king  o’  men  for  a’  that.’

But  the  Tdoist  of  Lao-jze  is  a  higher  ideal  than  Burns’s
honest  man.


CH.  LXXIX.


THE  TAO  TEH  JCING.


I  2  I


Par.  4  is  separated  from  this  chapter,  and  made  to  begin
the  next  by  Wu  Kh ang.

79.  i.  When  a  reconciliation  is  effected  (between
two  parties)  after  a  great  animosity,  there  is  sure  to
be  a  grudge  remaining  (in  the  mind  of  the  one  who
was  wrong).  And  how  can  this  be  beneficial  (to  the
other)  ?

2.  Therefore  (to  guard  against  this),  the  sage
keeps  the  left-hand  portion  of  the  record  of  the
engagement,  and  does  not  insist  on  the  (speedy)
fulfilment  of  it  by  the  other  party.  (So),  he  who
has  the  attributes  (of  the  Tao)  regards  (only)  the
conditions  of  the  engagement,  while  he  who  has  not
those  attributes  regards  only  the  conditions  favour¬
able  to  himself.

3.  In  the  Way  of  Heaven,  there  is  no  partiality  of
love  ;  it  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  good  man.

‘Adherence  to  Bond  or  Covenant.’  The  chapter
shows,  but  by  no  means  clearly,  how  he  who  holds  fast  to  the
Tao  will  be  better  off  in  the  end  than  he  who  will  rather
try  to  secure  his  own  interests.

Par.  1  presents  us  with  a  case  which  the  statements  of
the  chapter  are  intended  to  meet : — two  disputants,  one
good,  and  the  other  bad ;  the  latter,  though  apparently
reconciled,  still  retaining  a  grudge,  and  ready  to  wreak
his  dissatisfaction,  when  he  has  an  opportunity.  The  ^
=  ‘  for,’  ‘  for  the  good  of.’

Par.  1  is  intended  to  solve  the  question.  The  terms  of
a  contract  or  agreement  were  inscribed  on  a  slip  of  wood,
which  was  then  divided  into  two ;  each  party  having  one
half  of  it.  At  the  settlement,  if  the  halves  perfectly  fitted
to  each  other,  it  was  carried  through.  The  one  who  had
the  right  in  the  dispute  has  his  part  of  the  agreement,  but
does  not  insist  on  it,  and  is  forbearing ;  the  other  insists  on
the  conditions  being  even  now  altered  in  his  favour.  The


122


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


characters  by  which  this  last  case  is  expressed,  are  very
enigmatical,  having  reference  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
government  dues  of  Lao-jze’s  time, — a  subject  into  which
it  would  take  much  space  to  go.

Par.  3  decides  the  question  by  the  action  of  Heaven,
which  is  only  another  name  for  the  course  of  the  Tao.

80.  i.  In  a  little  state  with  a  small  population,  I
would  so  order  it,  that,  though  there  were  individuals
with  the  abilities  of  ten  or  a  hundred  men,  there
should  be  no  employment  of  them ;  I  would  make
the  people,  while  looking  on  death  as  a  grievous
thing,  yet  not  remove  elsewhere  (to  avoid  it).

2.  Though  they  had  boats  and  carriages,  they
should  have  no  occasion  to  ride  in  them ;  though
they  had  buff  coats  and  sharp  weapons,  they  should
have  no  occasion  to  don  or  use  them.

3.  I  would  make  the  people  return  to  the  use  of
knotted  cords  (instead  of  the  written  characters).

4.  They  should  think  their  (coarse)  food  sweet ;
their  (plain)  clothes  beautiful ;  their  (poor)  dwellings
places  of  rest ;  and  their  common  (simple)  ways
sources  of  enjoyment.

5.  There  should  be  a  neighbouring  state  within
sight,  and  the  voices  of  the  fowls  and  dogs  should  be
heard  all  the  way  from  it  to  us,  but  I  would  make
the  people  to  old  age,  even  to  death,  not  have  any
intercourse  with  it.

jll>  ‘  Standing  Alone.’  The  chapter  sets  forth  what
Lao-jze  conceived  the  ancient  government  of  simplicity
was,  and  what  he  would  have  government  in  all  time  to
be.  He  does  not  use  the  personal  pronoun  ‘  I  ’  as  the
subject  of  the  thrice-recurring  fj|l,  but  it  is  most  natural
to  suppose  that  he  is  himself  that  subject ;  and  he  modestly
supposes  himself  in  charge  of  a  little  state  and  a  small


CH.  LXXXI.


THE  TAO  TEH  XING.


123


population.  The  reader  can  judge  for  himself  of  the  con¬
summation  that  would  be  arrived  at ;  —  a  people  rude
and  uninstructed,  using  quippos,  abstaining  from  war  and
all  travelling,  kept  aloof  from  intercourse  even  with  their
neighbours,  and  without  the  appliances  of  what  we  call
civilisation.

The  text  is  nearly  all  found  in  Sze-ma  K/nt n  and
K wang-jze.  The  first  member  of  par.  1,  however,  is  very
puzzling.  The  old  Jesuit  translators,  Julien,  Chalmers,
and  V.  von  Strauss,  all  differ  in  their  views  of  it.  Wu
/Wang  and  3  Ho  Hung  take  what  I  have  now  rendered  by
‘  abilities,’  as  meaning  ‘  implements  of  agriculture,’  but  their
view  is  based  on  a  custom  of  the  Han  dynasty,  which  is  not
remote  enough  for  the  purpose,  and  on  the  suppression,
after  Wang  Pi,  of  a  ^  in  Ho-shang  Kung’s  text.

81.  1.  Sincere  words  are  not  fine  ;  fine  words  are
not  sincere.  Those  who  are  skilled  (in  the  Tao)
do  not  dispute  (about  it) ;  the  disputatious  are  not
skilled  in  it.  Those  who  know  (the  T4o)  are  not
extensively  learned  ;  the  extensively  learned  do  not
know  it.

2.  The  sage  does  not  accumulate  (for  himself).
The  more  that  he  expends  for  others,  the  more  does
he  possess  of  his  own  ;  the  more  that  he  gives  to
others,  the  more  does  he  have  himself.

3.  With  all  the  sharpness  of  the  Way  of  Heaven,
it  injures  not ;  with  all  the  doing  in  the  way  of  the
sage  he  does  not  strive.

HH  J=[ ,  ‘  The  Manifestation  of  Simplicity.’  The  chapter
shows  how  quietly  and  effectively  the  Tao  proceeds,  and
by  contraries  in  a  way  that  only  the  master  of  it  can
understand.  The  author,  says  Wu  /Wang,  ‘sums  up  in
this  the  subject-matter  of  the  two  Parts  of  his  Treatise,
showing  that  in  all  its  five  thousand  characters,  there  is
nothing  beyond  what  is  here  said.’


THE  TEXTS  OF  TAOISM.


PT.  II.


I  24


Par.  2  suggests  to  Dr.  Chalmers  the  well-known  lines  of
Bunyan  as  an  analogue  of  it : —

‘A  man  there  was,  though  some  did  count  him  mad,

The  more  he  gave  away,  the  more  he  had.’

Wu  W/zang  brings  together  two  sentences  from  K wang-jze
(XXXIII,  21  b,  22  a),  written  evidently  with  the  characters
of  this  text  in  mind,  which,  as  from  a  Tdoist  mint,  are
a  still  better  analogue,  and  I  venture  to  put  them  into
rhyme : —

‘  Amassing  but  to  him  a  sense  of  need  betrays  ;

He  hoards  not,  and  thereby  his  affluence  displays.’

I  have  paused  long  over  the  first  pair  of  contraries  in
par.  3  m  and  ^).  Those  two  characters  primarily
mean  !  sharpness  ’  and  ‘  wounding  by  cutting ;  ’  they  are
also  often  used  in  the  sense  of  1  being  beneficial,’  and
‘being  injurious;’ — -‘contraries,’  both  of  them.  Which
‘  contrary  ’  had  Lao-jze  in  mind  ?  I  must  think  the  former,
though  differing  in  this  from  all  previous  translators.  The
Jesuit  version  is,  ‘Celestis  Tao  natura  ditat  omnes,
nemini  nocet ;  ’  Julien’s,  ‘  II  est  utile  aux  etres,  et  ne
leur  nuit  point;’  Chalmers’s,  ‘Benefits  and  does  not
injure;’  and  V.  von  Strauss’s,  ‘Des  Himmels  Weise
1st  wolthun  und  nicht  beschadigen/


THE
