This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/

3  3433  08240813  3 ■

5i-^

OF  C

^^'mf^i

N.  EUAS  &  E.  D.  ROSS

%

^

\  \

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

THE TARIKH-I-RASHIDI

OP

MIRZA  MUHAMMAD HAIDAR, DUGHLAT

^G^"D'^

Digitized  by'

TO  LENOX.

Digitized  by

Google

THE

TARIKH-I-RASHIDI

OF

MIRZA MUHAMMAD HAIDAR, DUGHLAt

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  MOGHULS
OF  CENTRAL  ASIA

AN  ENGLISH VERSION

€biteb,  int^  <Kiratmtntais,  |[ot(0,  anb  Pap

BY

N. g.LIAS

HM.  CONSUL-GENERAL  FOR  KHORASAN  AND  SISTAN :

GOLD  MBDAXXIST  OP  THB  SOYAL  GBOGRAPHICAL  SOCIBTY  ; CORRBSPONDING  MBMBBS  OP
THB  GBOGRAPHICAL  SOCIBTY, BBRLIN

THE TRANSLATION
BY

E. DENISbN ROSS

DIPLOHi  DB  L'iCOLB  DBS  LANGUBS  ORIBNTALBS  VIVANTBS, PARIS  ;
OUSBLBY SCHOLAR

LONDON
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON AND COMPANY, L^

189s

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

THENEW  YORK

PUBLIC  LIBRARY-

A8T0R,  LENOX  AND

TILDEN  FOUNDATION&

1897.

We^ll  lead  you  to  the  stately  tent|of  war,
Where  yon  shall  hear  the  IScythian  TamhurLune
Threatening  the  world  with  high  astounding  terms.

— Marlowe,

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

PREFACE.

Although  this  is  the  first  time  that  a  translation  of  the
Tarikh'uBashidif  into  English,  has  been  presented  to  the  public,
it  is  necessary  to  explain  that  translators  and  historians  have
already  used  the  book,  to  some  extent,  as  a  source  from  which
to  draw  facts  for  their  writings.  Not  only  has  its  scope  and
its  general  purport,  as  a  history  of  the  Moghuls,  been  familiar
to  Orientalists  for  some  fifty  years,  but  much  of  its  contents
has  also  been  made  known,  in  a  more  or  less  scattered  way,
while  its  name  is  frequently  found  quoted  in  support  of  one
historical  passage  or  another.  And  if  this  is  the  case  in
English  writings,  it  is  the  same  when  we  refer  to  the  works  of
Continental  authors  who  have  occupied  themselyes  with  the
annals  of  Central  Asia.  Yet,  though  the  value  of  the  book  has
been  acknowledged  in  this  indirect  manner,  no  complete  trans-
lation into  any  European  language  has  hitherto  been  made.

The  nearest  approach  to  an  adequate  translation,  so  far  as  I
am  able  to  ascertain,  was  that  made  by  the  late  Mr.  W.  Erskine
of  the  E.  I.  Company's  service,  more  than  half  a  century  ago,  and
some  fourteen  years  after  the  publication  of  the  Memoirs  of
Saber.  Mr.  Erskine's  work,  however,  has  never  been  put  into
print,  and  seems,  indeed,  to  be  very  little  known  outside  the
MS.  department  of  the  British  Museum.  It  appears  to  have
been  taken  in  hand  in  1840,  after  his  retirement  from  the
Company's  service,  and  to  have  been  completed  at  the  beginning
of  the  next  year.^  It  consists  of  221  folio  pages  closely  written,
and,  in  one  form  or  another,  includes  the  greater  part  of  the
TariJch-i^Bcuhidi.  But  the  work  varies  greatly  in  character ;
in  some  places  the  author  has  set  himself  to  translate  fully  and
accurately  from  the  text,  and  has  been  at  pains  to  produce  a
rendering  that  would  seem  to  be  intended  for  publication ;  in
other  places  lengthy  passages — sometimes  whole  folios — are

^  From  a  note  in  the  mar<;in,  it  appears  that  he  finished  it  on  the  4th  of
January,  1841. The  MS.  is  numhered  at  the  British  Museum,  Add.  26,612.

Digitized  by

Google

vi  Preface,

summarised  more  or  less  briefly;  and  in  others,  again,  mere
memoranda,  or  headings,  are  given  to  show  the  drift  of  the
author's  narrative ;  while,  finally,  considerable  sections  of  the
book,  at  various  places,  are  omitted  altogether.

The  document,  therefore,  valuable  though  it  is,  can  scarcely
be  regarded  as  a  translation  of  the  TaHkh-i-Bashidu  Bather,
it  appears  to  me,  after  a  close  acquaintance  with  it,  to  have
been  prepared  less  with  a  view  to  producing  a  complete  English
version  of  Mirza  Haidar's  history,  than  for  some  other  and
more  special  purpose.  Whether  Mr.  Erskine  ever  contemplated
publishing  the  Twrikh-i-Bashidi  in  an  English  dress,  there  is
nothing  to  indicate,  but  there  are  several  circumstances  con-
nected with  the  MS.  at  the  British  Museum,  which  lead  me  to
conjecture  that  it  was  intended  rather  as  a  preparatory  study
for  the  compilation  of  his  second  important  work — The  History
of  India  wider  the  Moghuh — of  which  the  first  and  second
volumes  (the  only  ones  ever  completed)  appeared  in  1854.  In
the  first  place,  the  passages,  or  sections,  of  the  Tcmkh-i-Bashidi
devoted  to  the  dynastic  history  of  the  Moghul  Ehans  and
their  transactions,  are  usually  those  which  are  translated  in
full  in  the  manuscript.  Secondly,  the  Tarikhri-Bashidi  is  not
only  frequently  cited  in  the  two  volumes  of  the  history,  but,  in
many  parts  of  them,  passages  from  the  MS.  are  found  tran-
scribed word  for  word,  while  the  author  mentions,  in  his  preface,
that  he  has  based  his  knowledge  of  the  Moghuls  and  their
chronicles  chiefly  on  Mirza  Haidar's  evidence.  Indeed,  the
greater  part  of  Mr.  Erskine's  introduction  is  a  summary  of  the
Moghul  annals  as  put  forward  by  Mirza  Haidar,  and  by  Mirza
Haidar  alone,  for  no  other  Asiatic  author  deals  with  the  subject
in  any  but  a  merely  incidental  way.  A  third  circumstance
pointing  to  the  same  conclusion  is,  that  bound  up  in  the  same
volume  of  MSS.  with  the  fragmentary  translation  of  the
Tarikh'i-Bashidi,  we  find  a  second  document,  which  consists  of
a  similar  condensed  translation,  in  Mr.  Erskine's  handwriting,
of  the  third  volume  of  the  Ikbdl  Ndma  Jahdngiri  of  Mutamad
Ehan,  a  work  that  seems  to  have  been  studied  with  a  view  to
another — probably  the  fourth — volume  of  the  History  of  India.
Thus  it  seems  very  likely  that  the  prSds  (if  it  may  be  so  called)
of  the  Taaikhn-Bashidi,  was  drawn  up  as  a  preliminary  study
for  the  historical  works  the  author  was  at  that  time  planning ;
and  if  this  is  the  case,  no  better  proof  could  be  offered  of
the  care  and  thoroughness  he  devoted  to  the  task,  for  this

Digitized  by

Google

Preface,  v\v

doonmdnt  alone  seems  to  have  needed  nearly  a  year  of  labour,
while  the  Tarikh-t^BoAidi  is  only  one  among  many  Oriental
authorities  whom  Mr.  Erskine  studied,  in  the  original,  and
made  use  of — a  fact  to  which  the  footnotes  of  his  History
clearly  testify.

Besides  serving  the  purpose  of  its  own  author,  the  prSds
translation  has  also  been  made  to  contribute  much  that  is
valuable  to  the  works  of  Sir  H.  Howorth,  whom  little  escapes
that  is  authentic  and  original,  however  difficult  of  access.  In
his  History  of  the  Mongols  more  especially,  Sir  H.  Howorth
gathered  much  information  regarding  the  tribes  of  Central
Asia  and  the  genealogy  of  Moghul  Ehans,  and  was  able  to
throw  light  on  some  of  the  most  obscure  chapters  of  Asiatic
history,  from  Mirza  Haidar's  data,  as  found  in  this  document.
Had  it  only  been  more  complete,  and  had  the  geography  and
ethnography  of  Central  Asia  been  known  in  Mr.  Erskine's  day
as  well  as  they  are  known  now,  the  History  of  the  Mongols
would  no  doubt  have  contained  all  the  essential  parts  of  the
Tarikh-i-Bashidi^  and  little  would  have  been  left  to  occupy  the
editor  of  the  present  translation.  But  it  is  precisely  during
the  last  fifty  years  that  much  has  been  learned  on  these
subjects,  so  that  a  great  deal  of  what  was  unintelligible  to  Mr.
Erskine,  and  consequently  left  untranslated  or  in  obscurity,  is
now  easily  filled  in,  by  the  light  of  more  modern  knowledge.

The  only  English  writer  besides  Mr.  Erskine  who  has  made
any  extensive  use  of  the  Tarikh-i-Bashidi,  in  the  original
Persian,  is  the  late  Surg.-Gen.  W.  H.  Bellew.  In  1873  Dr.
Bellew  accompanied  Sir  D.  Forsyth's  mission  to  Eashgar,  and
compiled,  as  a  contribution  to  the  official  report  of  the  mission,
a  history  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  which  is  largely  drawn  from
Mirsa  Haidar's  data,  for  the  period  covered  by  the  latter's
narrative.  Dr.  Bellew  had  not  set  himself  the  task  of  trans-
lating the  Tarikh'i'Bashidi,  nor  was  he  concerned  with  any
part  of  it  that  did  not  bear  directly  on  the  country  to  which
the  mission  report  had  reference.  His  history,  therefore,  is  a
compilation,  oiUy,  from  certain  portions  of  Mirza  Haidar's  work,
and  though  in  some  places  it  contains  much  detail,  it  cannot
be  compared,  even  as  a  precis  of  the  book,  with  Mr.  Erskine's
MS.  at  the  British  Museum.  In  some  respects — as  for  instance,
the  names  of  places  and  geographical  notices — it  is,  perhaps,
more  valuable  than  that  document,  for  the  writer's  local  know-
ledge, and  opportunities  for  deriving  information  from  the

Digitized  by

Google

viit  Preface.

natives  of  the  country,  gave  him  a  distinct  advantage  over  the
earlier  translator.

In  the  same  way,  Mr.  B.  B.  Shaw,  while  on  duty  in  Yarkand
and  Eashgar,  took  up  a  section  of  the  book  and  translated  some
passages  from  it,  which  were  published  in  the  OeagrapMcdl
Society's  Journal  for  1876.  These  do  not  touch  on  the  history,
but  relate  exclusively  to  the  geography  of  Eastern  Turkistan
and  its  neighbouring  regions  on  tiie  south  and  south-west.
They  contain  translated  extracts  from  Mirza  Haidar's  opinions,
which  are  fully  and  accurately  elucidated  by  Mr.  Shaw,  accord-
ing to  modern  knowledge  of  the  subject  and  local  information.

Another  short  section  of  the  TaHTchri-BaMdi  is  found  in
Elliot's  History  of  India  told  by  its  Own  Authors— 9l  work
that  consists  of  extracts  (by  various  translators)  from  Asiatic
writers,  only  when  these  relate  to  the  history  of  India.  The
translation,  in  this  instance,  is  by  Professor  Dowson,  and  com-
prises the  one  episode  of  the  battle  of  Eanauj  in  1540,  when
the  Afghans,  under  Bhir  Shah,  won  for  a  time  the  so-called
Moghul  Empire  of  Hindustan.  But  even  this  has  not  been
given  in  full:  only  the  actual  account  of  the  battle  being
thought  necessary,  by  the  editor,  as  an  illustration  of  the
events  of  the  period,  while  some  rather  lengthy  passages,  con-
taining the  author's  views  of  the  policy  to  be  adopted  by  the
Moghuls  at  that  critical  moment,  have  been  omitted.

Whether  Moorcroft  used  the  book,  is  not  clear  from  the
posthumous  narrative  of  his  travels  which  has  come  down  to
us,  through  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson.  He  mentions  Mirza
Haidar's  name  on  one  occasion  only,  and  ascribes  a  statement
to  him  connected  with  Kashmir,  without  directly  citing  his
work.  If,  however,  Moorcroft  did  know  the  Tarikh-i-Baahidiy  he
would  be,  probably,  the  first  Englishman  to  become  acquainted
with  it,  for  his  reference  to  it  dates  from  1822.

In  BuBsia,  I  believe  Professor  Grigorieff  used  the  Tarikh-i-
Bashidi  in  editing  the  Bussian  version  of  Bitter's  Erdkunde,
and  it  may  be  that  other  Orientalists  in  that  country  have  also
reproduced  portions  of  it  in  their  own  language ;  but  in  French
and  German  Oriental  literature,  I  do  not  know  that  the  book
is  more  than  referred  to,  and  even  that  very  rarely.  I  make
this  statement,  however,  with  reserve,  for  it  is  quite  possible
that  extracts  may  have  been  published,  though  I  have  not
met  with  them.

As  regards  texts  in  the  original  Persian  (for  Mirza  Haidar

Digitized  by

Google

Preface.  ix

i^ote  in  Persian),  though  not  partionlarly  rare  in  Europe,  they
are  seldom  to  be  obtained,  as  far  as  my  experience  goes,  in  any
Asiatic  country.  In  England,  there  are  three  copies  at  the
British  Museum,  one  in  the  possession  of  Professor  Gowell,  at
Cambridge,  and  it  would  appear  that  three  or  four  more,  at
least,  are  in  the  hands  of  private  persons.  But  these  are  not
all  of  equal  Talue :  one,  at  any  rate,  of  those  in  the  British
Museum  being  a  modern  Indian  copy,  marred  by  many  oorrup-
tions,  while  another  is  not  quite  complete.  The  British  and
Foreign  Bible  Society  own  two  partial  translations  into  Turki,
which  they  were  good  enough  to  place  at  the  disposal  of  the
British  Museum,  to  be  used  for  purposes  of  collation  in  pre-
paring the  present  English  yersion.  Neither  of  these,  how-
ever, is  complete ;  one  of  them  consists  of  the  Second  Part  only,
and  the  other  of  merely  a  portion  of  that  Part.  In  the  pubUc
libraries  on  the  Continent,  I  am  informed  that  examples  are
often  to  be  met  with,  but  whether  in  the  original  or  in  Turki,
I  am  not  aware.

It  appears,  in  any  case,  that  European  collectors  have,  in  a
great  measure,  exhausted  the  supply  that  might  be  thought  to
be  available  in  one  part  of  Asia  or  another.  In  India,  I  believe
that  copies  exist  in  some  of  the  libraries  of  Calcutta  and
perhaps  elsewhere,  but  a  search  among  the  native  booksellers,
which  was  made  for  me  in  1891,  resulted  in  finding  nothing.
In  Persia  and  Afghan  Turkistan  I  have  never  been  able  to
hear  of  the  Tarikh-i-Baahidiy  while  in  the  country  to  which  it
chiefly  refers,  and  where  it  would  be  most  likely  to  be  in
request,  there  is  reason  to  think  that  scarcely  any  examples
are  now  left ;  at  any  rate,  all  the  inquiries  that  I  was  able  to
make  from  1880  to  1885,  at  Tarkand  and  Eashgar,  produced
only  the  Turki  fragment  alluded  to  above,  as  consisting  of  a
portion  of  the  Second  Part  of  the  book.  In  Kashmir,  no  copy
was  ever  procurable  by  native  inquirers,  who  endeavoured,  at
different  times,  to  obtain  one  for  me;  yet  it  seems  probable
that  the  more  perfect  Turki  copy  in  the  Bible  Society's  library,
may  have  been  acquired,  some  twenty  or  twenty-five  years  ago,
by  a  civil  officer  in  Kashmir.

For  the  present  translation,  Mr.  Boss  made  use,  chiefly,  of  the
Persian  text  numbered  Add.  24,090,  of  the  British  Museum
Catalogue,  and  with  this  he  collated  the  one  marked  Or.  157,
that  of  Professor  Cowell  (who  very  kindly  lent  it  for  the
purpose)  and,  in  the  Second  Part,  the  more  perfect  of  the  two

Digitized  by

Google

X  Preface.

Tnrki  versions  belonging  to  the  Bible  Society.  This  last
proved  a  valuable  aid  in  clearing  up  obscure  passages,  and  in
deciphering  ill-spelled  and  badly  written  names  of  places  and
tribes.  It  is  the  work  of  an  intelligent  man,  who  knew  the
countries  his  author  wrote  about,  and  who  read  what  he
translated  with  judgment  and  discrimination.  He  constantly
interpolates  a  word  or  two,  or  a  sentence,  in  order  to  make  the
meaning  clearer,  and  frequently  spells  the  names  of  places  in
Turki-speaking  countries,  with  vowel  points,  and  in  so  clear  a
way  that  they  can  be  recognised,  if  not  identified.  This  is  a
service  few  Asiatic  translators,  or  copyists,  are  able  to  render  to
the  modem  European  reader ;  and  the  only  pity  is  that  the
anonymous  scholar  was  unable  to  do  for  the  Tibetan  names,  what
he  accomplished  for  the  Turki  ones.  He  nowhere  gives  his
name,  but  the  end  of  his  work  is  subscribed  by  a  line  as  follows :
^'I  completed  this  translation  in  the  year  1263,  Jamad  II.
22nd,  in  the  town  of  Ehotan  " — e.6.,  in  the  year  1845  a.d.

A  few  words  may  be  necessary  to  explain  how  this  English
version  has  come  to  see  the  light,  and  how  it  is  that  it  should
have  been  undertaken  by  one  who  has  not  enough  Persian  to
be  his  own  translator.  My  attention  was  first  called  to  the
Tarikh'i-Bashidi  as  far  back  as  1877,  by  my  friend  the  late
Mr.  B.  B.  Shaw,  who  had  used  portions  of  it  when  he  himself
was  living  and  travelling  in  the  countries  it  describes.  He
was  enthusiastic  in  his  admiration  of  the  author's  intelligence,
and  of  the  value  of  the  work  as  a  "  guide  book "  to  Eastern
Turkistan  and  the  surrounding  regions.  He  had  intended,  as
I  always  understood,  to  take  up  the  translation  of  it  after
completing  his  Turki  vocabulary ;  but  in  June  1879  he  died,
while  on  service  in  Burma,  leaving  the  vocabulary  only  just
finished.^

For  some  years  after  this,  I  endeavoured  to  find  a  copy,

'  I  may  remark  here,  that  since  completing  the  present  version,  and
indeed,  within  the  last  few  weeks,  I  have  been  favoured  by  Gapt.  F.  £.  Young-
husband,  and  others  of  Mr.  Shaw's  friends,  with  an  opportunity  of  examining
some  of  the  papers  which  he  left.  Among  these  are  several  unpublished
extracts  from  the  Tarikli-i'Bctshidi,  as  well  as  some  more  complete  sections
of  a  rare  Turki  work  called  the  Tcutkirct-i-Khwdjagdn  ('  The  Memoirs  of  the
Khw&jas')  which  forms — from  a  chronological  point  of  view — a  continuation
of  Mirza  Haidar's  history.  The  translations  from  the  latter  work  were
evidently  intended,  by  Mr.  Shaw,  for  early  publication,  but  the  fragments
from  the  Tartkhr4-Bashidi  appear  only  to  nave  been  preliminary  studies
destined  to  serve,  at  some  future  time,  as  a  groundwork  for  a  more  complete
translation.

Digitized  by

Google

Preface.  xi

believing  that,  with  the  help  of  native  Mnnshis,  my  small
knowledge  of  Persian  might  be  sufficient  to  produce  a  practical,
working,  English  version,  though  by  no  means  a  scholarly
translation.  But  where,  and  when,  I  could  avail  myself  of
native  assistance,  no  text  was  forthcoming,  and  it  was  only  on
returning  to  England  in  1893,  that  I  became  acquainted  with
Mr.  Erskine's  partial  translation  among  the  MSS.  of  the
British  Museum.  My  first  impression  was  that  by  filling  up
the  gaps  in  this  document,  and  rectifying  the  names,  etc.,  a
version  might  be  obtained,  which  would  be  sufficiently  com-
plete to  publish  under  Mr.  Erskine's  name.  It  soon  became
apparent,  however,  that  the  bulk  of  the  MS.  was  only  a
summary  of  the  text,  and  in  some  places  was  so  brief,  that  the
word  '^  translation "  could  in  no  way  be  made  to  apply  to  it.
It  was  also  found  that  in  addition  to  many  other  omissions —
some  long,  some  short — the  whole  of  the  lengthy  extracts  from
the  Zafar-Ndma  of  Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali,  Yazdi,  which  the  author
embodies  in  the  First  Part  of  the  Tarikh-d-Baahidi,  to  tell  the
story  of  Timur's  times,  had  been  left  untouched ;  while  certain
marginal  notes  showed  that  Mr.  Erskine  had,  in  many  passages,
been  uncertain  of  the  author's  meaning.  In  these  circum-
stances, there  seemed  no  course  open  but  to  make  a  new
translation.  Accordingly  I  sought  advice  in  the  only  quarter
where  a  knowledge  of  Mirza  Haidar's  original  work  was  to  be
found.  Dr.  Charles  Bieu,  in  compiling  his  catalogue  of  the
Oriental  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  had  thoroughly  examined
the  Tarikh-i-Bdshidi,  and  had  described  its  contents ;  he  knew
its  difficulties  and  saw,  also,  how  imperfect  would  be  the
result  of  trying  to  expand  and  piece  together  Mr.  Erskine*s
document.  It  was  owing  to  his  advice  therefore,  and  through
his  good  offices,  that  I  obtained  the  assistance  of  his  former
pupil,  Mr.  Boss,  to  undertake  a  new  translation ;  and  I  believe
that  although  Mr.  Boss  holds  a  diploma  for  Persian  from  the
Ecole  des  I^gues  Orientales  Yivantes  of  Paris,  and  has  won
the  Ouseley  scholarship,  no  better  guarantee  for  his  proficiency
is  needed  than  Dr.  Bieu's  recommendation.  It  need  hardly  be
added  that  in  the  new  translation  Mr.  Erskine's  precis  was
extensively  used,  and  that  Mr.  Boss  derived  from  it  much  light
and  assistance.

The  work  of  translation  was  begun  with  the  year  1894  and
took  seven  months  to  finish.  The  method  followed  was  for
Mr.  Boss  to  put  sections  of  about  five  folios  at  a  time  into
English,  generally  leaving  out  obscure  or  uncertain  passages.

Digitized  by  VjCJOQIC

xii  Preface,

Each  of  these  sectionB  was  then  gone  through^  in  company  with
Mr.  Boss  and,  nsnally,  with  one  of  the  texts  at  hand.  The
uncertain  passages  were  then  discussed  and  filled  in,  or  marked
off  for  farther  investigation ;  but  the  revision  of  the  English,
and  the  addition  of  footnotes,  together  with  the  solution  of  the
puzzles  in  which  the  book  abounds,  were  subjects  left  for  me  to
take  up  at  a  later  opportunity.  In  editing  the  English  version,
my  object  has  been  to  render  the  language  fftirly  clear  and
readable,  without  so  changing  the  translation  as  to  alter  the
author's  meaning.  But  this  has  proved  to  be  not  always  an
easy  task,  for  numerous  passages  occur  where  the  translation
will  only  bear  slight  amendments,  without  impairing  its
accuracy.  As  a  rule,  indeed,  the  latitude  that  could  be  allowed
was  small,  so  that  it  has  been  necessary  to  leave  many  sentences
and  paragraphs  standing  in  rather  awkward  phraseology,  which
it  would  have  been  easy — and  was  even  tempting — to  improve,
had  the  author's  words  permitted  the  license.

As  regards  the  spelling  of  proper  names,  it  was  at  first
intended  that  all  should  be  reproduced  according  to  the  system
in  use  at  the  British  Museum — ».6.,an  exact  transliteration,  where
each  Persian  and  Arabic  letter  which  has  no  single  equivalent  in
English,  is  distinguished  by  some  accent  or  diacritical  sign.
This  design,  however,  could  not  be  followed  out  for  various
reasons.  Indeed,  the  work  of  translation  was  scarcely  finished,
when  Mr.  Boss  left  England  to  pursue  his  Oriental  studies  on
the  Continent,  and  the  task  of  attempting  to  harmonise  the
spelling  feU  to  me.  I  found  it  impossible,  with  the  time  at  my
disposal,  to  carry  out  the  original  intention,  seeing  that  many
of  the  names  would  have  had  to  be  searched  out,  afresh,  in  the
vernacular  texts — an  undertaking  that  would  have  involved
frequent  attendance  at  the  British  Museum.  I  decided,
therefore,  to  write  all  according  to  the  simple  method  of  Sir  W.
Jones,  or  that  adopted  by  the  Government  of  India  in  their
official  documents  and  publications.  This  system  may  be,  to  a
certain  extent,  imperfect,  for  it  does  not,  in  every  instance,
show  exactly  what  was  the  Persian  or  Arabic  spelling  of  the
word  represented,  and  therefore  is  not  a  complete  guide  to
re-conversion ;  but  it  gives,  as  nearly  as  possible,  the  correct
pronunciation,  while  it  secures  a  degree  of  accuracy  sufficient
for  practical  purposes.^ It  has  moreover  the  advantage  of

^  It  may  be  said  to  oonsist  of  accentuating  the  a,  in  order  to  give  the  sound
of  that  letter  in /a^Aer;  while  other  vowels  are  expressed  (as  Mr.  H.  G.  Keene
has  tersely  put  it)  **by  the  English  sounds  in  *  ruminant'  and  'obey'"

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Preface,  xiii

eimplicity,  and  avoids  that  air  of  pedantry  which  readers
who  do  not  occupy  themBelves  with  Oriental  languages,  usually
discern  in  the  more  perfect  system,  and  which  they  find
repellant.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  proficient  in  the
languages  concerned,  do  not  require  to  be  informed  how  the
great  majority  of  names  are  written  by  the  original  authors.
A  small  number  of  new  and  unfftmiliar  place-names  form  the
only  exception  to  this  proposition,  but  these  are  usually  so
carelessly  and  incompletely  written  in  the  original  texts,  that
a  critical  transliteration  can  have  no  great  value,  even  when  it
is  possible  to  give  one.

In  endeavouring  to  throw  light  on  the  narrative,  and  to
illustrate  the  author's  statements  on  subjects  connected  with  the
people  or  the  geography  of  the  countries  he  speaks  of,  I  have
used,  as  £Eur  as  possible,  the  authority  of  writers  whose  informa-
tion may  be  cited,  and  verified,  from  works  already  before
the  public.  Though  I  am  personally  acquainted,  more  or  less,
with  all  the  tribes  and  races  Mirza  Haidar  introduces,  and  with
most  of  the  localities,  the  reader  will  probably  find  it  more
satisfactory  to  be  referred  to  a  published  authority,  than  to  rely
on  the  editor's  own  reminiscences.  This  remark,  however,  only
applies  to  a  portion  of  the  footnotes  and  of  the  Introduction.
For  all  historical  matters,  reference  to  acknowledged  authorities
would,  in  any  case,  be  needed. -

It  may  be  observed  that  in  reproducing  Mirza  Haidar's
lengthy  extracts  from  the  Zafar^Ndma^  at  the  beginning  of  the
book,  his  transcription  was  not  relied  upon.  Mr.  Boss  trans-
lated these  sections  directly  from  the  texts  of  the  work  in  the
British  Museum,  and  only  added  the  Mirza's  interpolation
(which  is  repeated  in  several  places)  that  the  country  called
*^  Jatah/'  by  the  author  of  the  Sjafar-NAma^  was  one  and  the
same  with  ''  Moghulistan."  Neither  was  the  very  free  version
of  the  ZafaT'Ndma^  by  P^tis  de  la  Croix,  used  for  any  purpose
beyond  the  comparison  of  names,  and  Mr.  Boss's  translation  will
be  found,  I  believe,  to  be  much  more  perfect  than  the  French
one  of  two  hundred  years  ago. It  has  been  embodied  in  the

{Orient.  Biogr.  Dict.^  p.  Yii.).  It  may  be  added  that  ordinarily  used  and
well-known  names  have  been  spelled,  in  the  Introduction  and  footnotes,  as  they
aie  commonly  met  with  in  English  writings ;  though  in  the  text  they  stand
as  the  author  has  written  them.  Thus  in  the  text  will  be  foimd,  for  instance,
Baibar,  DMi^  Otmg^  etc. ;  while  elsewhere  these  names  occur  as  Baiber,  DeOU^
(Tofi^fetc.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

xiv  Preface.

text  without  any  break  in  the  numbering  of  the  chapters,  as
Mirza  Haidar  embodies  it  in  his  original  manuscript,  but  it  has
been  printed  in  somewhat  smaller  type  than  the  rest  of  the
text,  in  order  to  distinguish  the  difference  of  authorship.

A  few  words,  only,  are  needed  in  explanation  of  the  map.  In
the  first  place,  its  object  is  to  show  all  the  places  mentioned  in  the
Tarikh-i'Bashidi,  which  can  surely  be  identified,  and  the  posi-
tions of  which  can  be  established.  In  the  second  place,  it  was
obviously  necessary  to  lay  down  all  the  localities  alluded  to,
on  a  basis  of  the  best  data  available,  regarding  the  physical
geography  of  the  region  concerned.  But  a  map  containing
only  the  names  mentioned  by  Mirza  Haidar  would  have  had
little  significance.  As  a  guide  to  their  whereabouts,  easily
recognised  points  of  some  kind  were  needed,  and  for  this
purpose  a  number  of  the  most  ordinarily  known,  and  least
irrelevant,  names  in  modern  geography,  have  been  used.  They
are  marked  at  fairly  wide  intervals  all  over  the  included  region,
and  may  be  regarded,  for  the  most  part,  as  mere ''  signposts  "  for
pointing  to  the  places  spoken  of  by  the  author.

It  might  appear,  at  first  sight,  that  the  map  would  have  been
more  useful,  if  the  designations  of  the  tribes  had  been  inserted,
and  marked  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  the  regions  they  inhabited ;
also  that  the  boundaries,  or  approximate  limits,  of  the  various
countries  and  kingdoms  should  have  been  indicated.  But  in-
formation of  this  kind  it  is  impossible  to  give  on  a  single  sheet,
intended  to  serve  for  a  period  of  over  two  centuries  in  duration.
The  whole  burden  of  the  history  to  be  illustrated  is  *'  muta-
bility " ;  and  a  series  of  maps,  instead  of  one,  would  be  requisite
to  show  the  boundaries  that  existed  from  time  to  time,  or  the
moves  that  occurred  among  the  tribes.  It  has  been  found
expedient,  therefore,  to  omit  all  information  of  a  transitional
nature  from  the  face  of  the  map,  and  rather  to  make  it  exclusively
geographical.

For  the  rest,  everything  has  been  done  to  render  it  plain  and
easy  to  refer  to;  and  with  this  end  in  view, all  needless  details,
both  in  the  matter  of  names  and  of  physical  features,  have  been
avoided.  It  will  be  found,  I  believe,  to  be  the  only  map  which
contains  most  of  the  names  used  in  historical  works  relating  to
Central  Asia  during  the  Middle  Ages.  The  original  drawing
is  by  Mr.  H.  Scharbau,  and  is  clear  and  excellent  of  its  kind.

It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  take  this  opportunity  to  acknowledge
my  indebtedness  to  several  gentlemen  who  have|^been  so  good

Digitized  by

Google

Preface.  '  xv

as  to  lend  me  a  helping  hand,  at  varions  stages  of  my  task.  To
no  one  am  I  more  grateful  than  to  Sir  Henry  Howorth,  whose
interest  in  the  hook,  from  first  to  last,  has  been  manifested  in  so
many  practical  ways,  that  it  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether,  in  its
absence,  the  manuscript  would  ever  have  reached  the  printer.
Dr.  Bieu's  good  offices  I  have  already  alluded  to ;  but  I  here-
with offer  him  my  thanks  for  the  grace  and  patience  with
which  he  rendered  them,  in  part  to  myself,  and  in  part  to
Mr.  Boss  in  connection  with  the  technicalities  of  the  translation.
My  gratitude  is  also  due  to  Mr.  Stephen  Wheeler  for  the
valuable  advice  he  has  accorded  me,  and  for  many  references
to  books  and  other  documents  which  his  extensive  reading —
perhaps  unsurpassed  on  most  Asiatic  subjects — enabled  him,
with  great  generosity,  to  place  at  my  disposal.  In  tendering
my  acknowledgments  to  Dr.  L.  A.  Waddell  for  the  favour  he
has  done  the  reader  in  adding  some  notes  to  Mirza  Haidar's
chapters  on  Tibet,  I  have  only  to  refer  to  his  able  and
original  work  on  '  Lamaism  in  Tibet,'  to  guarantee  apprecia-
tion of  his  remarks.  I  gladly  avail  myself  of  this  occasion,  also,
to  express  my  sense  of  obligation  to  Her  Majesty's  Secretary
of  State  for  India,  for  the  material  assistance  so  liberally
accorded  by  him,  towards  securing  the  publication  of  the
volume.

Finally,  I  must  echo  the  author*s  words  when  he  tells  his
readers  that  he  knows  his  book  to  be  full  of  mistakes.  The
subject  on  which  I  have  chiefly  to  beg  the  indulgence  of  the
critical  is  that  of  the  spelling  of  Asiatic  names,  though  there
may  be  other  errors  and  omissions,  due  to  a  want  of  those
minute  and  repeated  revisions  of  the  proo£3,  that  a  book  of  this
kind  requires.  My  time  on  furlough,  however,  is  limited,
and  as  it  has  been  necessary  to  complete  the  revisions  before
leaving  England  to  return  to  Ehoras&Q,  some  hurry  has  been
inevitable.

Mirza  Haidar  also  tells  his  readers  that  no  one  but  a  Moghul
can  be  interested  in  this  history.  Let  us  hope  that  he  may
not  be  entirely  right  in  his  forecast.  Some  few  who  are  not
Moghuls  may  regard  the  preservation  of  his  work  as  an  advan-
tage, and  may  find  some  attraction  in  it,  even  in  an  English
dress ;  but  how  far  these  will  bear  with  an  editor  who  knows
but  little  of  his  author's  language,  is  another  question.  It  may
be  thought  that  a  scholarly  knowledge  of  the  language  of  a
book  is  essential  in  one  who  undertakes  to  elucidate  it,  in  order

Digitized  by

Google

XVI  Preface.

that  he  may  realise  the  true  significance  of  its  scope,  and

properly  understand  its  design. This  may  occasionally  be  the

case ;  but  if  there  be  any  virtne  in  the  words  of  the  German

poet—

Wer  den  Dichter  will  yersteheD,
Mu88  in  Dichter's  Lande  gehen,

I  would  plead  that  the  present  is  an  instance  in  which  some-
thing besides  language  may  help  lead  to  a  right  interpretation
of  the  author,  and  to  an  appreciation  of  his  theme.

N.  E.

Oriental  Club,

26fA  ilforc^  1895.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS,

Preface

iNTBODUCnON  : —

Suction I.  The  Author  and  his  Book
„ ir.  The  Line  of  Chaghafeli
„ III.  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls
„ IV.  The  People— Moghul,  Turk,  and  Uighur
„ Y.  The  Eastern  Khanate,  or  Uighurist&n
„ VL  The  Tarikh'i^Bashidi  and  after

PA6B

y

1
28
61
72
99
115

PART  I.
THE  TARIKH-I-RASHIDL

PbOLOGUE — CONTBHTS ..  1-4

CIIAPTRS

h  BeginniTig otihe  Tarikh'i'Bashidi 5

It  Tbe  Early  History  of  Tughluk  Timor 6

IIL  The  Conversion  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan  to  Inlam  10
lY.  Extracts  from  the  iZa/at^^clma— Expedition  of  Tughluk  Timur

Khdn  into  the  Kingdom  of  MiiYar&-un-Nahr 15

y.  Intrigues  of  Timur  with  Amir  H^ji  BarUs — ^His  return  from  the

banks  of  the  Jihun  and  his  meeting  with  the  three  Princes  ..  17

YL  Tughluk  Timur  Kh&n's  Second  Invasion  of  M£var6-un-Nahr  18

YIL  The  Return  of  Tughluk  Timur  Kh&n  to  his  own  Capital  . .  22

YIIL  IlyAs  Khwiija  Khdn 23

IX.  Return  of  Amir  Husain  and  Amir  Timur  to  Tuikh^n  and  Badukh-

sh^,  and  the  Treaties  between  them 23

X.  Timur's  passage  of  the  River  at  the  Stone  Bridge,  and  the  flight

of  the  Army  of  Jatah 25

XI.  The  Dream  of  Amir  Timur,  which  he  looks  upon  as  a  good  omen,

and  which  induces  him  to  make  War  on  Ily^  Khwaja  Khan  27
XIL  Battle  of  Amir  Husain  and  Amir  Timur  with  the  Army  of  Jatali.

Yictory  of  the  Amirs  over  the  Jatah 27

XIII.  Conference  [Kuril tai]  between  Amir  Husain  and  Amir  Timur;

and  the  raising  of  Kdbil  Sh&h  OghUn  to  the  rank  of  Kh^  ..  29  y

XIY.  The  Battle  of  the  Mire  SI'/'

XY.  Siege  of  Samarkand  by  the  Army  of  Jatah 37

XYX  The  last,  days  of  Ily^  Khw&ja  Khin,  and  events  that  took

place  after  his  Death— The  Domination  of  Kamar-ud-Din . .  38

XYIL  History  of  Kamar-nd-Din 39

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

xviii  Table  of  Contetits,

CHAPTKB  PAGE

XYIU.  The  Third  Invasion  of  Jatah  (that  is  to  say  Moghulist^n)  by

Amir  Timor 41

XIX.  Marriage  of  Amir  Timur  with  the  Princess  Dilsh^  Agh& . .  43
XX.  Amir  Timnr's  Third  Expedition  into  Khw&rizm,  and  his  return
owing  to  the  Revolt  of  S6r  Bughi,  Adilsh£h  and  Bahr^m

Jalto 44

XXI.  Amir Timor's Fourth Expedition into Jatah (that is,

Moghnlist6n) 46

XXn.  The  Death  of  Prince  Jah^gir 47

XXIII.  Amir  Timor  sends  an  Army  against  Kamar-od-Din .. ..  48

XXIV.  Amir  Timor's  Fifth  Expedition  into  Jatah  (that  is,  Mogholist^n)  50
XXV.  The  Last  Days  of  Amir  Kamar-ud-Dm 50

XXVL  The  Oommencement  of  the  Beign  of  Khizir  Ehw&ja  Khin,  son

of  Tughlok  Timur  Khin  51

XXVII.  Mohammad  Khan,  son  of  Khizir  Khw6ja  Kb^n  . . . .  57

XXVIII.  Shir  Mohammad  Kb^n,  son  of  Mohammad  Kh&n  . .  60

XXIX.  Early  Life  of  Vais  Khin 60

XXX.  Amir  Sayyd  Ali  and  Stories  relating  to  him 61

XXXI.  Epitomised  aoooont  of  what  passed  between  Shir  Muhammad

Kh^  and  Vais  Khdn 64

XXXU.  The  Khinship  of  Vais  Kh&n 65

XXXm.  Amir  Khud£id^  and  his  Journey  to  Mekka 68

XXXIV.  The  Martyrdom  of  Vais  Khin 71

XXXV.  Buin  of  [the  party  of]  Irdzin  after  the  Death  of  Vais  Khto  . .  78
XXXVI.  Reception  of  Tunus  Kh^n  and  Ir&zdn,  in  Samarkand,  by  Mirza

UlughBeg li

XXX VU.  Khtoship  of  ls4n  Bughi  Khan,  son  of  Vais  Khim,  after  the

Buin  of  Ir^zltn 74

XXXVIIL  Amir  Sayyid  All's  Expedition  to  and  Beduofcion  of  Kashghar  75

XXXIX.  The  Quarrels  of  Is&n  Bughd  Khin  with  his  Amirs  77

XL.  The  Commencement  of  the  Kh&nship  of  Tonus  Klian  83

XLI.  Detailed  account  of  the  Proceedings  of  Tunus  Kh&n . .  84

XLIL  Arrival  of  Tunus  Khan  in  Moghulistdn 86

XLIIL  Bule  of  Biirz6  Saniz  in  Kdshghar  after  the  Death  of  his  Father,

Mir  Sayyid  Ali 87

XLI V.  KlUinship  of  Dust  Muhammad  Khin 88

XLV.  Second  Betum  of  Tunus  Khin  from  [the  Oourt  of]  Sultan  Abu

Said  90

XLVL  Eyents  which  followed  on  the  Death  of  Dust  Muhammad
Khto ;  the  Supremacy  of  Tunus  Khan,  and  the  Murder  of

BungOghl&n 92

XLVII.  Shaikh  Jamil-ud-Din  and  his  capture  of  the  Kh&n .. ..  93
XL VIII.  Concerning  what  passed  between  Yunus  Kh&n  and  the  Kings  of

M^var6-un-Nahr,  after  tlie  murder  of  Shaikh  Jam^l  Khar  95

XLIX.  Bule  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzi  in  K^hghar  98

L.  Beginning  of  the  Beign  of  Abi  Bakr  Mirz& 99

LL  Account  of  the  Miiz^  of  Khotan  100

Ln.  Capture  of  Khotan  by  Mirz^  Abd  Bakr  and  the  Extirpation  of

the  Mirzds  of  Khotan 101

LTTT  The  Stratagem  of  Ab6  Bakr,  by  which  he  caused  Muhammad  y

Haidar  Mirz6  to  expel  his  own  Amirs  102"

LIV.  Yunus  Khan  goes  to  help  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd  against

Mirzi  Ab6  Bakr,  who  defeats  them  both Id^

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Table  of  Contents.  xix

OHAPTSB  PAOB

LY.  Tnntu  Kh6n'B  Second  Expedition  agftixkst  T&rkand,  and  Defeat

atthehaadflofMirz^AUBakr  105

LVI.  Early  daya  of  Sultin  Mahmnd  Eh^  son  of  Ynnns  Ehin ..  107
LVll.  The  War  that  aroee  out  of  a  difference  between  Yunns  Rhin

and  Mohammad  Haidar  Minsllin  Aksn  109

LVliL  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz^  attacks  Mirz&  Ab6  Bakr  in  E^hghar,

and  is  taken  Prifloner  by  him ..  ..  ..  Ill

LIX.  Yunns  and  the  Moghul  Ulus  enter  Tashkand. Peace  is  esta-
blished between  the  Timuri  Snltdns 112

LX.  End  of  Yunns  Khin's  Life 114

LXI.  War  between  Sultan  Ahmad  Mirz£  and  Sultdn  Mahmud  Kh&n  115
LXII.  Arrangement  for  the  marriage  of  my  Father  into  the  Khan's

FamUy : 117

LXIII.  Events  in  Tlishkand  during  the  Rule  of  Sult&n  Mahmud  Kh&n.

The  Last  Years  and  Death  of  the  Khin  118

LXIY.  Snlt^  Ahmad  Kh&n 120

LXV.  Mansur  Kh&n  (may  his  sins  be  pardoned  I)  128

LX  VL  Bh&h  Khin,  son  of  Mansur  Khin 129

LXVn.  Sultin  Said  Khdn,  son  of  Sultin  Ahmad  Khin 130

LXVIDL  Concerning  the  laudable  virtues  and  rare  attainments  of  Sultin

Said  Khin 137

LXIX.  Abdur  Bashid  Khin,  son  of  Sultin  Said  Khan 139

LXX.  End  of  First  Part  of  the  TariyhA-noahidi  147

PART  II.
Prolooue 150

CHAPTKS

I.  Beginning  of  Part  II.,  which  contains  what  took  place  among  the

Moghul  Ulus,  the  Uzbeg  and  the  Ghaghatai 152

IL  Reign  of  Yunns  Khin; account  of  his  Life  and  list  of  his

Offspring 155

UI.  End  of  the  Reign  of  Yunns  Khin. List  of  his  sons. The  Reign

of  Sultin  Mahmnd  Khin  and  the  reason  of  his  ruin  . . . . 156
IV.  Epitomised  account  of  the  Martyrdom  of  Sultin  Mahmud  Khin

and  his  children 162

V.  The  rest  of  the  History  of  Mirzi  Muhammad  Husain  Kurkin  . . 163 >^

VL  History  of  Shihi  Beg  Khin \m^

VIL  Birth  and  Parentage  of  Babar  Pidishih : his  connection  with

the  Moghuls ;  and  his  Early  History 172

VIII.  Beginning  of  the  Story  of  Sultin  Said  Khin,  and  the  sufferings

he  endured  at  the  outset  of  his  career 177

IX.  Flight  of  Muhammad  Husain  Kurkin  from  before  Shihi  Beg

Khin  into  Khorisin ;  with  Incidental  Biographical  Notices 191
X.  Babar Pidishih's Expedition  into  Khorisin. Troubles and

contentions  in  Kibul 197

XI.  Bibar  Pidifhih's  journey  into  Khorisin,  and  his  return  from

Khorisin  to  Kibul  199

XII«  Brief  account  of  Bibar  Pidishih's  sojourn  in  Kibul,  and  a  few

Stories  connected  therewith 201

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

XX  Table  of  Contents,

CHAFTBR  PAOB

XIII.  Expedition  of  Sh^hi  Beg  into  Elhw&rizm. His  Conquest  of  that

country. His  return  to  M^vard-un-Nahr,  and  march  into
KhorAsAn  204

XIV.  Tlie  reason  why  Muhammad  Hasain  Kurkdn  snrrendeied  him-

self to  Shihi  Beg  Khfin. His  Martyrdom  and  that  of

Sult&n  Mahmud  Kh£n 205

XV .  Some  of  the  Author's  own  Adventures 210

XYI.  Hazrat  MauUni  Muhmmad  Kdzi  212

XVII.  Return  to  the  History 215

XVIII.  Advent  of  Sult&n  Said  Khin  in  Andijin. His  capture  and

escape  to  Biher  P&dishdh  in  E&bul 221

XIX.  Mirz6  Khdn*s  Life  in  Badakhsh&n. The  Author  goes  from

Badakhsh&n  to  Kdbul  .. 227

XX.  Expedition  of  Shdhi  Beg  Kh&n  against  the  Kazik,  and  the

beginning  of  his  decline  . . . .  . . 230

XXI.  The  beginning  of  hostilities  between  Shdhi  Beg  Kh6n  and  Shdh

Ismail. Death  of  the  former  at  the  hands  of  the  latter . . 232
XXII.  Arrival  of  the  news  of  the  defeat  of  Shdhi  Beg  Eh^n  by  Shih

Ismail. March  of  the  Emperor  from  E^bul  to  Kunduz . . 237

XXIII.  Brief  account  of  the  proceedings  of  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzi,

and  details  of  tlie  Conquest  of  the  country  uf  Farghdna . . 239

XXIV.  Biibar  Pddishah  learns  the  success  of  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirz&,

and  sends  Sultdn  Said  Khin  to  his  aid  in  Andijan ..  241
XXV.  Accession  of  Bdbar  P^ishih  to  the  Throne  of  Mdvar&-un-

Nahr 243

XXVI.  The  Kh&n's  Journey  to  Andijdn  and  events  that  occurred  there  247

XXVII.  Short  account  of  MirzA  Aba  Bakr 251

XXVIII.  The  evil  deeds  and  wicked  ways  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr . . . .  254
XXIX.  Ubaid  Ullah  Kh6n  marches  against  Bokhdr&. Is  met  by

B&bar  Pddishih. A  Battle  and  the  events  that  ensued . .  259

XXX.  Account  of  my  Uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirz& .. ..  264

XXXI.  Personal  Adventures  of  the  Author 267

XXXII.  Account  of  Bultdn  Said  Eh&n  after  his  defeat  by  Suyunjuk

Eh6n 270

XXXIII.  Account  of  the  Eazak  and  their  Sultans :  the  Origin  of  tlieir

Name  and  their  End 272

XXXIV.  Events  that  followed  the  Battle  with  Suyunjutc  Eh^n;  also

Sultdn  Said  Ehdn's  Journey  to  the  Eazak  and  to  E^m

Ehdn 274

XXXV.  Account  of  the  Miracles  of  Mauldnd  Muhammad  Eazi . .  277

XXXVI.  Some  further  Details  in  the  same  Connection 280

XXXVII.  Short  account  of  Shdh  Ismail's  End 281

XXXVIII.  Account  of  the  Shaibdni  who  have  reigned  in  succession  in

Mavard-UD-Nahr,  down  to  the  present  day 282

XXXIX.  Beasons  for  Sultin  Said  Ehdu  quitting  Farghdna  and  repairing

toEashghar 284

XL.  Description  of  Edshghar 286

XLI.  Extract  from  the  Ja/idn-KtM^dt 288

XLII.  The  Martyrdom  of  Imdm  Ald-ud-Din  Muhammad  of  Ehotan,

at  the  hands  of  Eushluk 293

XLIII.  Return  to  the  General  Narrative ,. ..304

XLIV.  Battles  of  Sultdn  Said  K^hdn  with  the  Array  of  Mirzd  Abd

Bakr  at  Easlighar 310

Digitized  by  VjOOQIc

Table  of  Contents,  xxi

CHAFTXB  PAGB

XLY.  Maioh  of  Saltan  Said  Khiii  against  Y&rkaod,  and  Beveral

matters  in  the  same  connection  812

XLYI.  Taking  of  Ydngi-His6r :  the  key  to  the  Gonqnest  of  the  King^

domofKlUthghar  315

XLyn.  Decline  of  Mirz&  Ab&  Bakr;  facts  connected  therewith,  and

the  End  of  his  Dominion 319

XLYIIL  The  Conquest  of  Kishghar  825

XLIX.  Story  of  the  Amirs  who  went  in  pursuit  of  Mirz&  Ab6  Bakr . . 327
L.  Conclusion  of  the  Story  of  liirz^  Ab&  Bakr's  Offspring  . . 828

LI.  History  of  the  Kh&n  after  the  Conquest  of  Kishgfaar .. . . 881
LIL  Arrival  of  Aiman  Khw6ja  SultiLn  ftnom  Turfin  to  wait  on  the

Khto 832

LIU.  The  Kh£n  (in  spite  of  past  ill-treatment)  craves  an  interview

with  Mansur  Khin  and  submits  to  him 334

LIY.  Transactions  of  Mansur  Ehdn 886

LV.  Birth  of  Iskandar 340

LYL  Rebuilding  of  Aksu  and  negotiations  of  the  Ambassadors  of

Mansur  Kh&n  and  the  Khin 341

LYIL  Death  of  Hazrat  Mauldni  Muhammad  K^zi 841

LYIIL  Meeting  of  Mansur  Kh&n  and  Sultdn  Said  Kh&n,  and  conclusion

of  Peace  between  them  848

LIX.  Tbe  Khan's  return  after  the  Peace — Subsequent  events  and

visit  of  B&b6jik  Sult&n  845

LX.  The  Khin's  Holy  War  against  Sirigh  Uighur  and  the  reason

for  his  turning  back 848

LXI.  The  Kirghiz  Campaign  and  the  capture  of  Muhammad  Kirghiz 349
LXII.  Daulat Sultan Kh&nim,  daughter  of  Yunus  Khiin,  comes

from  Badakhshan  to  K&ahghar  351

LXIII.  Celebration  of  the  Marriages  of  Aiman  Khwija  Sulb&n  and

Shdh  Muhammad  Sultan 352

LXIY.  Beginning  of  the  quarrels  between  the  Khin  and  Mirz£  Khan.

The  Khin's  First  Invasion  of  Badakhah&n 358

LXY.  The  Kh&n's  second  interview  with  Mansur  Khiln . . . . 356
LXYI.  Conclusion  of  the  affairs  of  Bibar  Pddishih. Death  of  his

brother. Cause  of  the  insubordination  of  his  Amirs  . . 356

LXYII.  Settlement  of  Moghulistan  and  the  Kirghiz. Beginning  of

Bashid  Sultan's  career 858

LXYIII.  Extracts  from  the  Jahdn-Kushdi  of  Ala-ud-Din  Muhammad

Juvaini 860

LXIX.  Return  to  the  tliread  of  the  History 367

LXX.  The  Kh&n's  Repentance 369

LXXL  How  the  Khan,  wishing  to  become  a  Darvish,  intended  to

abdicate  the  Throne,  and  how  he  was  dissuaded .. .. 870

LXXIL  Khw^ja  T^-ud-Din 872

LXXin.  Khw6ja  Tij-ud-Din  is  allowed  to  return  to  Turfan. The  Khin
mak^s  peace  with  the  Kazik-Uzbeg. Other  contemporary

events 373

LXXIY.  Birth  of  Sultan  Ibrahim,  son  of  Sultan  Said  Khin . . . . 375

liXXY.  The  Kh&n's  Second  Invasion  of  Andijin  875

LXXYL  Last  Yisit  of  the  Khdn  to  Moghulisttln. The  Moghuls  are
brought  to  K^hghar  from  Moghulist6n.  Other  contemporary

events 877

LXXYII.  Reasons  for  Bdb6  Sultan's  Flight Thecanclusion  of  his  Story 379

Digitized  by

Google

xxii  Table  of  Contents.

CIIAPTKX  PA6B

LXXYIII.  Shilh  Muhammad  Snltdn,  and  ooDclnaion  of  his  Stoiy  . .  881

LZXIX.  Bashid  SultUn  and  the  Author  lead  a  Holy  War  into  Balnr  884
LXXX.  Second  Expedition  of  the  Khdn  into  Badakhsh&n,  and  the

cansea  of  certain  contemporary  events 887

LZXXL  Causes  of  the  Rupture  between  the  Kh^  and  Aiman  Khw^'a

Sultdn 391

T.X.XXTT.  The  Khin  becomes  a  disciple  of  Khwdja  Khivand  Mahmud  395

LXXXTTT.  Genealogy  and  Life  of  Hazrilt  Ehw&ja  Ehivand  Mahmud  .

Shahdb-ud-Din  395

LXXXiy.  Journey  of  Hazrat  Makhdumi  into  India  and  certain  matters

connected  therewith 898

LXXXY.  Miracles  of  EhwdjaNuri  « 399

T.XXXVI.  The  End  of  Khwdja  Null's  Biography  401

LXXXyU..Gonolusion  of  B^barP&dish&h's  History  402

LXXXVm.  InyasionofTibetbytheKhlLn 403

LXXXIX,  Description  of  the  position,  mountains,  and  plains  of  Tibet

An  account  of  the  Customs  and  Beligion  of  the  Inhabitants  404

XC.  Account  of  the  curiosities  of  Tibet 411

XCI.  Tibet  and  the  Customs  of  its  People 414

XCII.  The  Khan  makes  a  Holy  War  on  Tibet  417

XCIII.  Arrival  of  the  Author  in  Tibet  and  subsequent  events  . .  417

XCIV.  Arrival  of  the  Kh^n  in  Tibet,  following  the  Author. His

entrance  into  B&lti. Journey  of  the  Author  to  Kashmir  420

XCY .  The  Kb&n's  experiences  in  B&lti  422

XCVI.  The  Author's arrival in Kashmir  and  events  connected

therewith  428

XCYIL  Description  of  Kashmir 424

XCVni.  Further  Wonders 426

XCIX.  Extract  from  the  ^/ar-^<fina 480

C.  The  Conversion  of  Kashmir  to  Islim,  and  a  short  account  of

the  MusulmiLn  Sultans  of  Kashmir :  432

CI.  Account  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  Kashmir  . .  434

OIL  Betum  to  the  main  Narrative 437

CIII.  Betreat  from  Kashmir  and  subsequent  events  .. ..  441

CIV.  Betum  of  the  Khdn  from  Maryul  to  his  capital,  Y&rkand ;

and  the  Author's  Mission  to  Ursang  443

CY.  The  Death  of  the  Khin  and  an  Epitome  of  his  Life  . . . .  445

C YI.  Events  in  Kdshghar  after  the  Khan's  death 449

CYII.  Account  of  Muhanmiadi  Barlas  who  was  Amir-ul-Umard  to

BashidKhiln 452

CYIII.  March  of  the  Author  towards  Ursang. The  slaying  of  his

brother  Abdullah  Mirzi. Details  of  the  Expedition ..  454
CIX.  Sufferings  in  Tibet,  and  the  Death  of  the  Author's  cousin,

Mahmud  Mirzii  459

ex.  The  Author  crosses  from  Tibet  to  Badakhshin  . .  464

CXI.  Hum&yun  P&dishUh,  son  of  Bdbar  Padish&h,  and  his  downfall  469

CXII.  The  Battle  of  the  Ganges  . . , 471-

CXIII.  Flight  of  the  Cbaghat6i  from  Hindustan  to  L6hur . . . .  477

CXIY.  Origin  of  the  Author's  Expedition  to  Kashmir  . .  481

CKY.  The  Author  conquers  Kashmir. Adventures  of  the  Chaghatdi

after  their  departure  from  HindusUln 483

CXYI Parting  of  the  Author  from  Humayun  P^ishah. Conquest

of  Kashmir. Contemporaneous  events  and  Conclusion ..  484

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Table  of  Contents.  xxiii

PAOB

APPENDICES.

Appendix  A. Extract  Irom  a  paper  entitled :  The  Square  Silver  Coins

of  the  SuUdfU  of  Kashmir^  by  Mr.  0.  J.  Bodgers,  M.B.  A.S.,  &c.  487

Appendix  B. TheKariLwinlis 491

Appendix  G. Chronological  Tabic  of  Events 492

INDEX 495

GENEALOGICAL  TABLES.

The  House  of  Cliaghatai to  face 49

The  House  of  Timur „ 60

The  DughUt  Amirs 60

Digitized  by

Google

NOTE.

The  First  Part  of  the  Tarikh-i-Rasliidi  is  calledy  by  the  Author,
the  Tarikh-i-Asl,  or  '  Beal  History.*  The  Second  Part  he  styles
Mnkhtasar,  or  *  Epitome.'

The  First  Part  was  written  after  the  Second  Part  had  been
completed.  This  accowats  for  the  Author  remurkingy  in  several
places  in  Part  I.,  that  he  has  written  certain  passages  in
Part  11. ;  while  in  Part  IL  he  promises  to  make  certain
statements  in  Part  L

Tlie  system  adopted  in  spelling  proper  names  has  been  explained
in  the  Preface,  pp.  x.  and  xi.,  which  see.

It  has  also  been  noticed  in  the  Preface  (p.  xii.)  that  the  extracts
from  the  Zafar-Nama  are  printed  in  smaller  type  than  the  rest
of  the  text.  No  difference  in  type,  however,  has  been  made  for  the
extracts  from  the  Tarikh-i-Jahan  Kushai.  Those  from  the  former
work  {with  the  exception  of  the  very  brief  one  in  Chapter  XOIX.
of  Part  IL)  were  translated  from  original  texts ;  while  those
from  the  latter  {though  collated  with  a  copy  of  the  Jahan  Enshai)
were  translated  from  the  Tarikli-i-Eashidi,  a«  Mirza  Haidar
gives  them.

The  ordinary,  or  curved,  parentheses  in  the  text,  are  the
Author's.  The  light  angular  brackets  enclose  words  inserted  by
the  translator  or  the  editor,  in  order  to  render  a  passage  complete
in  English,  or  to  make  sense.  The  heavy  angular  brackets
contain  words,  or  sentences,  interpolated  by  the  Turki  translator,
or  substituted  from  his  version,  and  are  the  outcome  of  the  colla-
tioti  of  the  Turki  text  with  the  Persian.  Tliey  appear  first  at
page  177  and  continue,  at  intervals,  to  the  end  of  the  book.

The  foot-notes  to  the  text,  referring  to  the  translation,  a/nd
signed  R.,  are  those  of  Mr.  Boss.  Those  in  Section  IV.  of  the
Introduction,  when  signed  H.  H.,  are  by  Sir  Henry  Howorth.
Those  in  Chapters  LXXXIX.  to  XCI.  added  by  Dr.  L.  A.
Waddell  on  certain  Tibetan  subjects,  are  signed  with  his  initials.
The  rest  of  the  notes  are  editorial.

Digitized  by

Google

TAEIKH-I-EASHIDL

INTRODUCTION.

SECTION  I.

THE  AUTHOR  AKD  HIS  BOOK.

The  Poet  wandering  on,  through  Arable
And  Persia,  and  the  wild  Carmanian  waste,
And  o'er  the  aerial  mountains  which  pour  down
Indus  and  Oxus  from  their  icy  caves,
In  joy  and  exultation  held  his  way;
Till  in  the  vale  of  Cashmire,  ....

he  stretched

His  languid  limbs.

— Alastor,

The  object  of  the  Tarikh-i-Badiidi,  as  the  author  tells  his
readers,  is  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the  Moghuls  and  their
Khans,  which,  at  the  time  he  wrote,  stood  in  danger  of  being
altogether  lost  through  the  want  of  a  chronicler.  It  was  a  race
that  he  knew  to  be  not  only  declining,  but  speedily  approaching
an  end :  its  power  was  a  dream  of  the  past ;  its  numbers  were
dwindling  at  a  rapid  rate,  chiefly  through  absorption  into  the
neighbouring  tribes  then  rising  to  influence ;  while  he  himself
had  been  a  witness  of  the  events  and  an  actor  in  the  scenes,
which  had  resulted  in  the  remnant  of  his  people  being  ousted
from  their  own  country,  to  find  an  asylum  in  a  strange  land.
In  short,  the  Moghuls  of  Moghulistan — the  eastern  branch  of
the  Chaghatai — had  been  nearly  blotted  from  existence,  while
their  Ehans,  through  a  long  course  of  intermarriage  with
other  races,  had  ceased  to  be  Moghuls  in  anything  but  the
name.  Mirza  Haidar  foresaw,  therefore,  that  there  might  soon
be  nobody  left  to  tell  the  story  of  a  people  who,  only  a  few
generations  earlier,  had  regarded  themselves  with  pride  as  the

Digitized  by

Google

2  The  Aiitftor  and  his  Book.

descendants  of  Chingiz's  conqnering  hordes,  who  made  them-
selves feared  if  not  respected,  by  their  neighbours,  and  who
gloried  in  the  independence  of  the  wide  steppe-land  which  was
their  home.  All  this  had  been  changed  when  our  author —
himself  an  exile  and  serving  a  foreign  monarch — had  to  consti-
tute himself  the  historian  of  their  fall.  Whether  he  was  able
to  appreciate  the  changes  that  were  taking  place  around  him,
where  they  did  more  than  affect  his  own  people,  is  perhaps
doubtful.  It  may  be  supposed  that  he  was  regarding  events
from  too  close  a  standpoint  to  be  able  tq  judge  of  their  true
proportions ;  but  it  has  become  evident  to  later  observers  that
he  had,  for  the  period  of  his  history,  a  time  of  gradual  but
extensive  change,  which  brought  results  of  the  greatest  im-
portance to  the  future  of  a  large  section  of  Asia.  Mr.  Erskine,
the  historian  of  the  rise  of  the  Moghul  dynasty  in  India,  has
pointed  to  this  period,  as  that  which  gave  Transoxiana  to  the
Uzbegs,  Moghulistan  to  the  Earghiz,  and  India  to  the  Moghuls
— ^but  to  the  descendants  of  a  branch  of  the  Moghuls  quite
separate  from  that  of  Moghulistan.^

In  Central  Asia  it  was  a  period  full  of  incident :  wars  were
on  foot  on  every  side:  states  were  being  overrun  and  cities
besieged,  while  rulers  arose  or  went  down,  almost  from  day  to
day,  according  to  their  fortune  in  war  or  intrigue.  The
princes  and  the  descendants  of  exiled  ruling  families,  together
with  most  of  the  Ehans  and  Begs  of  the  various  tribes,  found
themselves  forced  to  take  a  side,  either  in  support  of  their
house  or  their  relations,  or  in  self-defence ;  and  in  many  cases
they  seem  to  have  changed  sides  with  as  little  consideration  for
the  rights  and  wrongs  of  the  cause,  as  when  they  first  took  a
part  in  the  quarreL  When  they  were  strong  they  attacked  a
neighbour  with  or  without  reason ;  if  successful,  they  enjoyed^
usually,  a  short  period  of  bloody  revenge  and  debauchery,  but
soon  had  again  to  ''mount" — as  the  phrase  was— for  a  new
campaign ;  if  beaten,  they  fled  to  some  other  neighbour,  and  if
not  put  to  death  by  him,  waited,  in  exile,  till  a  turn  of  fortune's
wheel  should  afford  a  fresh  chance  of  aggrandizement  or  plunder.
''In  the  space  of  about  120  years,"  writes  Sir  H.  Yule,  "  no  less
than  thirty  descendants  or  kinsmen,  of  Ghaghatai  are  counted

^  It  will  be  seen,  lower  down,  that  Mirza  Haidar  invariably  speaks  of  the  rulin<;
house  which  we  know  as  *'  the  MoghulB  of  India^"  by  the  name  of  Chaghataij
which  is,  of  course,  strictly  correct.  He  reserves  the  name  of  Moghul  to
denote  his  own  race — i.e.,  the  descendants  of  the  Moghuls  (or  Mongols)  of
Moghulistan. The  subject  will  be  explained  farther  on  in  this  Introduction.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Author  and  his  Book.  3

to  hare  oconpied  his  throne;  and  indeed  revolutions,  deposit
tions,  murders,  and  usurpations  seem  to  have  succeeded  each
other  with  a  frequency  unusual  even  in  Asiatic  governments."  *

Here,  then,  were  times  that  could  hardly  fail  to  make  a
historian  of  any  soldier  of  fortune,  who  happened  to  have  a
taste  for  recording  the  events  of  his  own  life.  Baber,  the  first
of  the  Moghuls  of  India,  and  our  author's  cousin,  especially
answered  to  this  description,  and  left  behind  him  a  picture  of
his  age  which  is  almost,  if  not  quite,  unique  among  the  works
of  Asiatic  authors.  He  has  been  represented  as  at  once  a
soldier,  a  historian,  and  an  autobiographer ;  and  his  kinsman,
Mirza  Haidar,  may  justly  be  described  in  the  same  way.  Baber,
however,  was  a  better  autobiographer  than  Mirza  Haidar,  and
he  was  incomparably  a  greater  soldier,  as  history  proves.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  his  cousin  may  be  fairly  acknowledged  the
better  historian.  While  Baber  made  history  incidental  to  his
own  memoirs,  the  reverse  was  the  case  with  Mirza  Haidar.  The
Mirza  wrote  the  history  of  his  race  and  family  with  a  definite
purpose ;  and  when  he  came  to  his  own  days,  he  wove  in  his
personal  adventures  as  those  of  an  actor  and  participator  in
the  events  he  was  recording — making  the  one  illustrate  the
other ;  so  that  it  may,  with  truth,  be  said  that  his  life  belongs
to  his  history.

Though  they  differed  in  remote  origin,  Mirza  Haidar  was,  to
all  intents  and,  purposes,  of  the  same  nation  and  country  as
Baber ;  yet  he  wrote  in  Persian,  while  the  latter  wrote  in  the
Chaghatai  Turki  (as  the  modern  name  is),  current  then,  as  now,
all  over  Central  Asia.  Baber  was  a  descendant  of  Amir  Timur
(or  Tamerlane),  and  was,  consequently,  on  one  side  of  his  family,
more  a  Turk  than  a  Moghul,  for  Timur  belonged  to  the  Barlas,
a  Turki  tribe  of  distinguished  lineage.  Following  the  common
usage  of  the  day,  however,  Mirza  Haidar  would  have  called
Baber  a  '^  Chaghatai,"  while  the  latter  would  have  spoken  of
his  cousin  as  a  '^  Moghul."  Mirza  Haidar  came  of  the  Dughlat
tribe — a  sub-division,  or  sept,  of  the  true  Moghuls  of  Chagha-
tai's  line — and  one  that  was  accounted  about  equal,  in  point  of
nobility,  to  the  Barlas.  By  the  end  of  the  fif  fceenth  century  the
members  of  all  the  Moghul  and  Chaghatai  ruling  families  had
become  much  scattered,  and  mixed  in  blood,  through  frequent
intermarriages  with  aliens.  Many  of  them  had,  for  several
generations,  lived  in  Turki  countries,  where  they  had  become
*  CaihaAj  and  the  Way  Thither ,  p.  523.

o2

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

4  The  Author  and  his  Book,

Turks  in  manners  and  language.  So  much  was  this  the  case
with  Baber  and  his  kindred,  that  he  had  come  to  look  upon
himself  as  more  of  a  Turk  than  a  Moghul,  and  in  his  Memoirs
mentions,  more  than  once,  his  aversion  and  contempt  for  the
Moghul  race.^  The  Dughlat  had  remained  more  distinctively
Moghul,  though  among  its  members,  also,  much  intermixture
with  Turki  tribes  appears  to  have  taken  place.  Thus  the  Turki
in  which  Baber  wrote  his  Memoirs,  must  Have  been  the  natural
language  of  Mirza  Haidar  also,  who  probably  knew  little  or
nothing  of  the  Moghul  tongue,  and  in  his  capacity  of  Musulman,
would  have  despised  it  as  something  appertaining  to  infidels
and  barbarians.  But  however  this  may  be,  when  he  wrote  in
Persian,  he  was  certainly  using  a  foreign  language,  and  it  is  for
this  reason,  perhaps,  that  his  style  is  wanting  in  the  simplicity
which  (it  is  said)  characterises  that  of  Turki  writers— a  sim-
plicity that  Baber  loved,  and  impressed  upon  his  son,  Humayun,
as  an  accomplishment  to  be  cultivated.^

That  the  TarikJ^Bashidi  was  not  written  for  effect,  or  for
the  indulgence  of  a  taste  for  literature,  need  hardly  be  remarked
after  what  has  been  said  above.  The  work  is  an  earnest  one,
and  the  author,  no  doubt  intended  that  it  should  be,  before
everything  else,  a  clear  and  complete  exposition  of  the  times  he
had  set  himself  to  chronicle.  On  the  whole  he  has  been  suc-
cessful, and  has  produced  a  record  that,  in  point  of  usefulness,
will  bear  comparison  (as  far  as  can  be  judged  from  translations)
with  most  of  those  of  Asiatic  authors  who  have  occupied  them-
selves in  the  same  field,  from  the  thirteenth  century  to  the  seven-
teenth.^ His  task  was  not  an  easy  one,  for  much  of  the  history  of
the  times  is  complicated  and  obscure,  and  would  require  infinite
care  and  method  to  present  it  to  the  reader  with  perfect  clear-
ness. All  was  change  and  disorder. Princes  and  members  of

'  He  sums  up  his  sentiments  regarding  tliem  in  some  verses,  which  arc
translated,  as  fullows : —

If  the  Moghul  race  were  a  race  of  Angels,  it  is  a  bad  race ;
And  were  the  name  Moghul  written  in  gold,  it  would  be  odious.
Take  care  not  to  pluck  one  ear  of  corn  from  a  Moghul's  harvest.
The  Moghul  seed  is  such  that  whatever  is  sowed  with  it  is  execrable.

— (Memoirs,  p.  93.)

"  "  You  certainly  do  not  excel  in  letter  writing,  and  fail  chiefly  because  you

have  a  great  desire  to  show  your  acquirements. For  the  future  you  should

write  unaffectedly,  with  clearness,  using  plain  words,  which  would  cost  less

trouble  both  to  the  writer  and  the  reader." — (/6.,  p.  392.)

'Mr.  Erskine  has  remarked  that  it  forms  a  *'  valuable  accompaniment  to
the  Commentaries  of  Baber,  which  it  illustrates  in  every  i^age."— (&i«^  of
Jndia,  i.,  p.  193.)

Digitized  by

Google

The  Author  and  his  Book.  5

reigning  families  wandered  and  married  in  every  direction,  and
their  honses  dovetailed  into  one  another  in  a  manner  almost
calculated  to  set  at  defiance  any  method  of  narration,  however
systematic :  the  limits  of  countries  were  nowhere  fixed,  while,
unlike  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,  many  of  the  nations
dealt  with  were  nomads,  who  sometimes  migrated  6n  max»e  from
one  region  to  another,  or  sometimes  were  found  divided  in  their
political  subordination,  as  well  as  in  their  abodes.  Even  the
names  of  the  countries  were  not  defined ;  and  in  some  cases  the
tribe  and  the  region  it  occupied,  were  confused  under  one  name.
In  others,  the  country  and  the  chief  town  were  not  distinguished ;
while  in  some,  again,  a  place  or  a  people  might  be  known  by
different  names  to  different  neighbouring  nations.  The  author
who  could  construct  from  these  confused  materials  an  intelli-
gible and  fairly  consecutive  narrative,  can  scarcely  be  blamed
if  his  reader  should  occasionally  be  perplexed  in  linking  the
various  incidents  together,  or  in  distinguishing  between  some
of  the  actors  who  took  part  in  them.  More  especially  should
he  be  treated  with  leniency,  when  it  is  considered  that  what
was  clear  to  him  at  the  time,  and  on  the  spot,  must  necessarily
bear  an  entirely  different  complexion  when  viewed  by  the
Western  reader,  after  a  lapse  of  more  than  three  hundred  years,
and  after  all  the  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  interval.
It  may  be  said  that  the  art  of  the  historian  consists  in  over-
coming these  difficulties,  and  in  leaving  behind  him  a  narrative
that  will  be  clear  for  all  time ;  but  this  would  be  too  much  to
expect  from  an  Asiatic  author,  even  though  he  might  be  an
experienced  writer,  and  not,  as  in  Mirza  Haidar's  case,  a  roving
adventurer  or  soldier  of  fortune,  exposed  to  all  the  vicissitudes
of  the  times.  To  the  most  practised  among  them,  systematic
arrangement  and  clearness  of  statement,  as  we  understand  the
terms,  are  unknown,  and  even  if  they  thought  it  worth  while
to  consider  the  convenience  of  the  readers  they  knew  of,  they
could  hardly  have  contemplated  their  works  being  studied  by
foreigners,  from  countries  of  which  they  had  scarcely  heard
even  the  names.

Still,  after  making  every  allowance,  it  must  be  admitted  that
Mirza  Haidar^s  book  has  its  shortcomings,  when  viewed  as  a
practical  history.  His  flights  of  unmeaning  rhetoric  are,
imfortunately,  frequent,  if  scarcely  so  extravagant  as  those  of
most  Persian  writers.  He  constantly  breaks  out  into  verse,
also, though  he  usually indulges in this  form  of  ornament

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

6  The  Author  and  his  Book,

parenthetically — ^by  way  of  declamation — and  thus  only  in-
terrupts the  course  of  the  narrative,  while  not  marring  its
sense.  His  sentences,  again,  are  often  involved  and  his  mean^
ing  not  always  apparent.  This  is  more  especially  the  case
where  he  uses  the  ratio  olliqua,  and  where  he  puts  speeches
into  the  mouths  of  his  characters ;  but  when  he  confines  him-
self to  the  direct  relation  of  an  event,  such  as  the  siege  of
Yangi-Hisar  or  the  battle  of  Eanauj,  his  descriptive  power  is
excellent,  and  the  picture  he  presents  is  all  that  can  be  desired.
On  the  whole,  it  may  be  said  that  for  an  author  who  takes
credit  to  himself  (as  the  Mirza  does  in  his  prologue)  for  being
a  past  master  in  the  art  of  making  verses  and  in  the  ^'  episto-
lary style,"  his  writing  is  not  obscure  as  Asiatic  writings  go ;
and  though  rather  tedious  repetitions  are  found  in  some  of  the
historical  sections,  this  is  a  fault  on  the  right  side,  and  causes
less  embarrassment  than  when  gaps  occur  in  the  narrative.

These  points  relate  more  particularly  to  the  author's  style,  but
the  chief  imperfections  in  the  work  lie  deeper.  Perhaps  those
most  to  be  deplored,  are  the  weakness  of  the  chronology  and
the  looseness  with  which  numbers  and  measurements  are  used.
The  former  is  a  serious  blemish,  but  as  it  is  most  marked  in
the  early  parts  of  the  history,  where  the  faults  can  be,  to  some
extent  rectified,  by  references  to  Chinese  and  other  annals,  it
is  not  of  vital  consequence.  A  great  part  of  his  information
having  reached  him  by  means  of  verbal  tradition,  passed  down
through  three  or  four  generations,  the  dates,  above  all,  would
tend  to  suffer ;  while,  generally,  it  may  be  supposed  that  Mirza
Haidar  had  scarcely  realised,  as  did  Sir  Walter  Scott,  that
*^  tradition  is  as  frequently  an  inventor  of  fiction,  as  a  preserver
of  truth."  The  eecond  defect  is  greatly  to  be  regretted,  as
many  interesting  passages  relating  to  military  operations,  the
tribes,  cities,  ruins  and  curiosities  are  greatly  diminished  in
value,  from  the  want  of  accuracy  in  the  figures  recorded.  The
tendency,  generally,  it  to  exaggerate  freely.  A  third,  but  less
important  deficiency,  is  the  one  partially  alluded  to  above
— i.e.,  the  want  of  systematic  arrangement  into  divisions,  or
sections,  the  absence  of  which  is  the  cause  of  the  frequent
repetitions  that  occur,  and  the  involution  of  one  subject  with
another.

The  scope  and  character  of  the  Tarikh-i-Rashidi  may  be
briefly  summarised  in  much  the  same  way  as  Dr.  Charles  Kieu,
the  learned  Keeper  of  the  Oriental  Manuscripts  at  the  British

Digitized  by

Google

The  Author  and  his  Book.  7

Museum,  has  described  it  in  his  official  catalogue.^  It  may  be
regarded  as  the  history  of  that  branch  of  the  Moghul  Ehans
who  separated  themselves,  about  the  year  1321,  from  the  main
stem  of  the  Chaghatai,  which  was  then  the  ruling  dynasty  in
Transoxiana ;  and  it  is  the  only  history  known  to  exist  of  this
branch  of  the  Moghuls.  The  original,  or  western  line — that  of
Transoxiana — was  at  that  time  declining  in  power,  and  through
internal  dissensions  and  administratiye  decay,  was  rapidly
approaching  a  final  dissolution.  The  princes  of  the  branch
then  thrown  off,  became  masters  of  Moghulistan  (or  Jatah,  as
it  was  called  at  that  period)  and  of  all  Eastern  Turkistan,  and
continued  as  a  ruling  dynasty  for  more  than  two  and  a  half
centuries.  The  book  is  divided  into  two  parts,  called  Da/^or,
the  first  of  which  is  entirely  historical,  while  the  second  con-
tains reminiscences  of  the  author's  life  and  notices  of  Ghaghatai,
Uzbeg  and  other  princes,  with  whom  he  was  acquainted.

The  first  Part,  or  history  proper,  was  written  in  Kashmir  in
1544  and  1545,  and  was  completed  about  February,  1546,  or
five  years  after  his  installation  as  regent  of  that  country.  It
includes,  however,  a  later  addition,  in  which  953  of  the  Hajra
(4th  March,  1546,  to  21st  February,  1547)  is  mentioned  as  the
current  year.  For  the  earlier  periods  it  deals  with,  it  is  based
on  the  traditions  handed  down  to  the  author  chiefly  by  his
older  relatives,  combined  with  the  statements  of  Sharaf-ud-Din,
Yazdi  in  the  prolegomena  of  the  Zafcvr-Nama ;  and,  for  the
later  periods,  on  his  personal  recollections.  It  contains  a
record  of  two  distinct  and  parallel  dynasties :  (1)  that  of  the
Ehans  of  Moghulistan,  beginning  with  Tughluk  Timur,  who
reigned  from  1347  to  1362,  and  whose  father,  Isan  Bugha,  was
the  first  to  separate  from  the  main  Ghaghatai  stem ;  and  (2)  of
their  vassals,  the  Dughlat  Amirs  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  one  of
the  earliest  of  whom,  Amir  Bulaji,  the  author's  ancestor,  had
raised  Tughluk  Timur  to  the  Khanship.  In  the  second  period,
the  family  of  the  Ehans  divided  into  two  branches,  one  of
which,  superseding  the  Amirs  of  Eashghar  (or  Eastern  Turkis-
tan), continued  to  rule  over  Moghulistan  proper  and  Eastern
Turkistan,  with  their  capital  at  Eashghar,  while  the  other
became  rulers  of  the  provinces  eastward  of  Aksu  (known  as
XJighuristan),  and  had  their  seat  of  government  usually  at

*  Catalogue  of  the  Persian  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum,  by  Cb.  Kieu,
Ph.D.,  1879,  vol.  i.,  p.  167.  But  1  have  only  partially  followed  Dr.  Rieu's
analysis  of  tiie  Tarikh-i-Bashidi,

Digitized  by

Google

a  The  Author  aud  his  Book.

Tnrfan.  The  author  conclndes  his  accotint  of  each  with  a
short  sketch  of  their  reigning  representatives,  at  the  time  of
writing.

The  second  Part,  which  has  more  than  twice  the  extent  of
the  first,  and  contains  Mirza  Haidar's  record  of  his  life  and
times,  was  the  first  in  point  of  date.  The  author  wrote  it  in
1541-42,  and,  as  he  states  in  the  Prologue^  with  a  view  to
preparing  himself  for  the  more  arduous  task  of  historical  compo-
sition.^ It  begins  with  his  birth  and  concludes  with  an  account
of  his  second  invasion  of  Kashmir,  when,  by  a  battle  fought  on
the  2nd  August,  1541,  he  became  master  of  the  country.  This
Part  includes  also  some  rules  of  conduct  for  kings,  drawn  up
at  the  request  of  the  author,  by  his  spiritual  guide,  Manlana
Muhammad  Eazi,  whose  death,  in  1515,  is  recorded  in  the
preceding  passage;  while  another  moral  treatise  by  a  holy
Shaikh,  Shahab-ud-Din  Mahmud,  styled  Ehwaja  Nura,  is
inserted  in  fulL^

The  author  is  usually  known  as  Mirza  Haidar,  and  in  this
way  he  styles  himself,  though  his  full  name  and  designation
would  be  Mirza  Muhammad  Haidar,  Dughlat,  Eurkan.  By
some  European  writers,  his  usual  appellation  has  been  reversed,
and  he  has  become  Haidar  Mirza.  In  some  parts  of  Asia  the
distinction  would  be  a  wide  one ;  for  when  "  Mirza  "  is  placed
before  a  name,  it  means  merely  **  Mr. "  or  "  Esq.,"  and  has
about  the  same  signification  as  the  word  *'  Ehan,"  when  used
by  Persians  of  the  better  class,  and  by  Hindustani  Musulmans
of  all  classes,  at  the  present  day.  When  placed  after  a  name,
it  is  equivalent  to  "  Prince,"  and  is  so  used  only  by  persons
belonging  to  a  reigning  family.  In  the  case  of  our  author
either  would  be  suitable,  seeing  that  he  was  a  prince  of  the
branch  of  Moghul  Ehans  who  were,  at  that  time,  rulers  of  the
Eashghar  province.  But  his  grandfather,  who  had  been  one  of
these  rulers,  had  borne  the  same  names,  and  seems  always  to
have  been  styled  with  the  word  Mirza  at  the  end — Muhammad
Haidar  Mirza.  It  may  be  as  well,  therefore,  to  draw  as  clear
a  distinction  as  possible  between  him  and  his  grandson.  The
latter  tells  us,  too,  that  he  was  known  to  his  associates  by  the

*  This  should  be  home  in  mind  in  reading  the  text,  for  in  Part  I.  the  author
frequently  aUudes  to  what  he  has  written  in  Part  II. ;  while  in  Part  II.  he
proTnisea  to  make  mention  of  certain  events  in  Part  I.

'  As  these  two  documents  do  not  properly  belong  to  the  history,  they  hav©
not  been  included  in  the  translation.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Author  and  his  Book.  9

style  of  Mirza  Haidar^  and  as  he  himself  uses  it,  the  words  may
safely  be  placed  in  that  order.

In  recording  his  own  descent,  Mirza  Haidar  describes  him-
self as  the  son  of  Muhammad  Husain  Enrkan,  son  of  Muham-
mad Haidar  Kurkan,  son  of  Amir-i-Kabir  Said  Ali,  son  of  Amir
Ahmad,  son  of  Khudaidad,  son  of  Amir  Bulaji.  He  was  bom
in  the  year  of  the  Hajra  905  (1499-1500  a.d.)^  at  Tashkand,
the  capital  of  the  province  then  known  as  Shash,  where  his
father,  Husain,  had  been  made  governor  some  six  years  before,
by  Mahmud,  the  titalar  Khan  of  Moghulistan  and  Eashghar.
The  others  named  in  the  pedigree  were  all  Amirs  of  Eashghar,
while  the  earliest  of  them,  Bulaji  of  the  Dughlat  tribe,  is
remembered  as  being  the  first  of  the  line  to  become  a  Musul-
man.  It  was  on  the  side  of  his  mother,  EJbub  Nigar  Ehanim,
that  our  author  was  related  to  the  Emperor  Baber.  She  was  a
daughter  of  Yunus,  Ehan  of  the  Moghuls,  and  a  younger  sister
of  Eutlugh  Nigar  Ehanim,  the  mother  of  Baber.^

Mirza  Haidar  began  his  life  in  the  midst  of  strife  and
adventures.  His  father — a  treacherous  and  intriguing  man —
had  been  convicted  of  a  mischievous  plot  against  Baber  at
Eabul,  but  had  been  pardoned  on  account  of  his  blood  relation-
ship. Shortly  afterwards  he  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Shahi
Beg  Ehan  (otherwise  Shaibani  Ehan),  the  Uzbeg  leader,  and
had  incurred  that  chiefs  suspicion  also ;  but  once  more  he  was
permitted  to  escape,  and  repaired  to  Herat,  then  the  capital  of
Ehorasan.  His  intriguing  nature,  however,  being  thought  by
Shahi  Beg  to  be  dangerous  even  at  a  distance,  he  caused  him
to  be  put  to  death  there,  after  a  short  time,  by  emissaries  whom
he  sent  for  the  purpose  from  Transoxiana.  Muhammad  Husain
had  taken  with  him  into  exile  some  members  of  his  family,
among  whom  was  our  author,  then  quite  a  child ;  and  it  appears
that  after  his  father's  murder,  some  of  the  retainers  of  the
family,  believing  the  son  to  be  doomed  to  a  similar  fate,  had
carried  him  off  to  Bokhara,  and  had  placed  him  in  concealment
there.  In  1508,  when  about  nine  years  of  age,  he  was  taken
in  charge  by  one  of  these  faithful  friends,  called  Maulana
Muhammad  (formerly  his  father's  hMlifa,  or  religious  guide)
who  determined  to  save  the  child  from  the  death  that  awaited
him  at  the  hands  of  the  relentless  Uzbegs,  and  contrived  to
escape  with  him  from  the  city. After  a  difficult  and  exciting

*  The  ye«r  905  h.  began  8th  August,  1499.

*  See  the  genealogical  table  of  the  house  of  Chaghatai  facing  p.  49.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

10  The  Author  and  his  Book.

flight  across  the  hill  tracts  of  Ehatlan  and  Enlab,  in  the  course
of  which  they  several  times  narrowly  escaped  falling  into  the
hands  of  hostile  Uzbegs,  they  succeeded  in  crossing  the  Oxus
into  Badakhshan.  Here  one  Ehan  Mirza,  a  cousin  and  depen-
dent of  Baber,  was  at  the  time  the  reigning  chief,  with  his
capital  at  Eila  Zafar  on  the  Eokcha.  He  received  the  fugitives
with  kindness,  and  they  remained  a  year  with  him,  when  Baber
sent  to  summon  them  to  Kabul.  On  their  arrival,  Mirza  Haidar
was  made  a  member  of  the  Emperor's  household,  and  seems  to
have  been  treated  with  much  consideration.  Within  a  few
months,  however,  Baber  had  to  march  northwards  against  the
Uzbegs,  whose  main  force  was  then  at  Hisar,  and  his  young
cousin  accompanied  the  army.  The  next  two  years  were  stirring
times,  and  Mirza  Haidar,  if  not  too  young,  must  have  learned
much  of  warfare,  as  it  was  conducted  in  those  days  in  Central
Asia.

Baber's  first  two  attempts  on  Hisar  failed,  but,  on  being  joined
by  a  large  body  of  Persians  from  Ehorasan,  his  third  advance
resulted  in  a  victory  which  gained  him  the  possession  of
Eunduz,  Ehatlan,  and  Ehuzar.  Taking  advantage  of  the
reputation  they  had  established,  and  of  the  defeat  and  death  of
8hahi  Beg,  which  had  just  then  (1510)  taken  place  in  a  battle
with  the  Persians  near  Merv,  the  allies  lost  little  time  in
making  an  attempt  on  Samarkand,  the  capital  of  Transoxiana.
They  marched  first  on  Bokhara,  where  the  inhabitants  opened
their  gates  to  them,  and  afterwards  to  Samarkand,  which  they
found  undefended,  the  Uzbeg  leaders  having  fled  on  their
approach.  Here  Baber  was  received  with  enthusiasm  by  the
people,  and  was  virtually  master,  for  a  time,  of  the  greater  part
of  Central  Asia.  With  his  young  guest  in  his  following,  he
remained  in  Samarkand  for  some  months,  when  a  strong  com-
bination of  Uzbeg  tribes,  compelled  him  and  his  Persian  allies
once  more  to  take  the  field — though  this  time  with  very
different  results.  They  advanced  against  Bokhara,  which  had
in  the  meantime  been  seized  by  the  Uzbegs,  but  were  repulsed,
and  shortly  afterwards  were  disastrously  defeated  at  the  battle
of  Ghajdiwan,  some  distance  to  the  north  of  the  city.  The
alliance  with  the  Persians  came  to  an  end  and  Baber  retreated
to  Hisar,  where  he  was  surprised  by  an  attack  made  by  a  body
of  Moghuls  in  the  service  of  the  Uzbegs,  and  again  experienced
a  crushing  defeat.  He  then  retired  to  Eabul,  but  Mirza  Haidar
had  now  left  him. After  the  retreat  from  Samarkand,  his  uncle.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Tke  Author  and  his  Book.  11

Sultan  Ahmad,  the  Khan  of  Moghulistan,  having  written  several
times  to  ask  Saber's  permission  for  the  boy  to  be  sent  to  him.,
at  last  obtained  it,  and  Mirza  Haidar,  '^  led  away  by  youthful
impatience,"  as  he  himself  writes,  availed  himself  of  the
Emperor's  consent,  unwillingly  given,  and  followed  his  uncle  to
Andijan,  then  the  capital  of  Farghana.

It  was  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1514  that  Mirza
Haidar  arrived  at  Andijan,  and  almost  immediately  afterwards
entered  the  service  of  his  kinsman  Sultan  Said  Khan  (the  son  of
Sultan  Ahmad),  who  had  just  then  been  conducting  an  expedi-
tion against  the  XJzbegs  in  Tashkand,  but  had  returned  to
Andijan  on  the  enemy  evacuating  their  positions. During  the
following  summer,  however,  the  XJzbegs  recovered  themselves
and  marched  with  a  large  force  to  lay  siege  to  the  Farghana
capital Sultan  Said  convened  a  council  of  his  chiefs,  who  were
unanimously  of  opinion  that  they  were  unable,  without  allies,  to
contend  against  the  power  of  the  Uzbegs ;  they  believed  them-
selves to  have  a  fairer  chance  of  success  by  undertaking  an
invasion  of  Eashghar,  and  wresting  that  province  from  Mirza
Aba  Bakr,  who  then  held  it. This  resolution  was  accordingly
adopted,  and  before  the  Uzbegs  had  time  to  enter  the  country,
the  Khan  with  all  his  Amirs,  their  families  and  baggage,  set
out  from  Andijan  and  advanced  towards  Kashghar,  by  a  route
leading  through  Moghulistan. This  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  was  of  the
line  of  Dughlat  Amirs,  and  was  regarded  by  the  Khans  of
Moghulistan  as  a  usurper. He  was  an  active  and  able  soldier,
though  a  cruel  tyrant,  and  during  his  long  rule,  had  made  him-
self master  of  nearly  the  whole  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  besides
several  of  the  neighbouring  countries. In  1511  he  had  invaded
Farghana,  but  had  there  received  a  check  by  coming  into  con-
flict with  Sultan  Said,  from  whose  forces  he  experienced  a
severe  defeat  at  the  battle  of  Tutluk,  near  Andijan. It  was  this
victory  over  the  usurper,  that  emboldened  Sultan  Said  and  his
Amirs  to  attack  him  again  in  his  own  stronghold. Their  enter-
prise resulted  in  a  complete  success :  Kashghar  was  taken  in
1514,  while  Yangi-Hisar,  Yarkand,  and  the  remainder  of  the
cities  of  Eastern  Turkistan  fell  shortly  afterwards. Aba  Bakr,
driven  an  exile  to  Ladak,  was  murdered  on  the  road,  and  the
.line  of  Moghul  Khans  was  re-established  in  Moghulistan  and
Eastern  Turkistan.

Mirza  Haidar,  though  now  only  fifteen  years  of  age,  was  raised
by  his  cousin  the  Khan  to  a  high  position,  and  his  life  of  activity

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

12  The  Author  and  his  Book.

may  be  Baid  to  have  begun  about  this  time.  For  the  ensuing
nineteen  years,  during  which  Sultan  Said's  reign  lasted,  the
Mirza  served  him  in  various  capacities^  but  chiefly  as  a  soldier ;
and  it  was  only  after  the  Khan's  death,  which  occurred  while
returning  from  an  expedition  against  Ladak  in  1533,  that
he  abandoned  Eashghar  and  transferred  his  services  to  the
Ghaghatais  in  India.  He  not  only  took  part  in  Sultan  Said's
wars  against  the  Kirghiz  and  Uzbegs  in  Moghulistan,  and  against
other  tribal  enemies,  but  was  entrusted  with  important  com-
mands on  distant  expeditions.  The  first  of  these  was  an
invasion  of  the  hill  country,  then  known  as  Bilur,  or  Bolor,  in
1527.  The  expedition  was  nominally  under  the  command  of
the  Khan's  eldest  son,  Bashid  Sultan,  but  seeing  that  our
author  acted  as  a  sort  of  tutor,  or  governor,  to  this  young
prince,  it  seems  that  he  had  much  to  do  with  the  conduct  of
the  campaign.  Bolor  may  be  described,  roughly,  as  all  the
small  hill  states  lying  south  of  the  Hindu  Kush,  between
Baltistan  on  the  east  and  Afghanistan  on  the  west — as  the
limits  of  these  countries  are  now  accepted.  Thus  it  included
Hunza,  Gilgit,  Chitral,  and  probably  most  of  the  petty  states
sometimes  known  as  '^  Yaghistan."  There  appears  to  have  been
no  cause  for  the  invasion,  other  than  that  the  inhabitants  were
not  Musulmans ;  but  considerations  of  this  kind  did  not  weigh
with  the  Central  Asian  Khans,  and  Sultan  Said,  as  the  author
tells  us,  had  always  been  ambitious  of  gaining  glory  by  waging
wars  against  "  infidels."  The  Bolor  states  were  accordingly
overrun  and  plundered  during  a  whole  winter,  and  the  expe-
dition returned  to  Kashghar  in  the  following  spring.

In  1529-30  tho  Khan  undertook,  in  per8on,a  campaign  against
Badakhshan,  but  sent  Mirza  Haidar  in  advance  to  begin  opera-
tions. The  Mirza  records  that  he  laid  waste  the  environs  of
the  chief  town,  Kila  Zafar,  and  when  the  Khan  arrived,  his  men
had  only  to  carry  oflf  what  little  had  been  left.  The  object  of
this  expedition  was  to  gain  possession  of  the  districts  on  the
Upper  Oxus — Wakhan,  Shighnan,  etc. — which  had  been  con-
quered by  the  late  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  and  which  Sultan  Said,  in
consequence,  considered  himself  the  heir  to.  But  the  chief  of
Badakhshan  was  a  relation  and  nominee  of  Baber,  who  took  a
view  of  the  matter  entirely  opposed  to  that  of  Sultan  Said,  and
threatened  to  support  the  chief.  As  Baber  had  now  recovered,
in  India,  the  influence  he  had  lost  in  Transoxiana,  a  letter  from
him  to  the  aggressive  Sultan  Said,  8eems  to  have  been  sufficient

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Author  and  his  Book.  13

to  cause  the  Eashghar  forces  to  be  withdrawn  across  the
Pamirs.

But  it  was  in  1531  that  Mirza  Haidar  undertook  his  most
important  service  for  Sultan  Said  Khan.  This  was  the  inyasion,
first  of  Ladak,  then  of  Kashmir  and  Baltistan,  and  afterwards
of  Tibet  proper,  or  the  country  known  to  Europeans  under  that
name  ^ — an  invasion  as  culpably  aggressive  as  the  raid  into  the
Bolor  states.  There  was  much  paganism,  he  tells  us,  in  Tibet^
and  the  Khan,  always  animated  by  a  love  of  Islam  and  a  desire
to  carry  on  holy  wars,  was  led  by  his  pious  aspirations  to
conquer  that  infidel  country.  It  was  not  the  first  time  that
Ladak  had  been  wantonly  overrun  from  the  side  of  Turkistan.
Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  during  his  long  reign,  had  once  at  least,
carried  his  arms  into  Ladak,  while  it  would  appear,  from  what
Mirza  Haidar  records,  that  several  parties  had  been  sent  to
plunder  the  country  since  the  accession  of  his  patron,  Sultan
Said,  to  the  Ehanate.  Very  little  is  known  of  these  earlier
invasions,  beyond  the  mere  mention  of  them  by  Mirza  Haidar,
and  by  the  author  of  the  Raft  Tklim^  who,  however,  obviously
derived  his  information  from  the  Tarikh-i-Bashidu  That  all
were  unprovoked  and  prompted  by  a  mere  craving  for  plunder,
however  disguised  under  the  mask  of  religious  zeal,  may  be
assumed  with  moderate  confidence.  None  of  them,  including
that  of  Sultan  Said  and  Mirza  Haidar,  appear  to  have  prospered,
or  to  have  made  much  impression  on  the  inhabitants,  who  have
preserved  their  old  religion  and  manners  to  the  present  day ;
and  though  they  have,  in  modern  times,  fallen  politically  under
the  Hindu  yoke  of  the  Dogras,  they  still  keep  up  their  ancient
connection  with  Lassa,  in  all  matters  concerning  their  Buddhism
and  social  customs.  As  Mirza  Haidar  says  little  about  the
fighting  in  Ladak,  it  is  probable  that  the  inhabitants  offered
only  a  feeble  military  opposition  to  the  invaders,  but  trusted
rather  to  the  rugged  nature  of  their  country,  the  severity  of
the  climate,  and  to  the  weapon  common  to  most  of  the  yellow
races — passive  resistance — to  free  them  eventually  from  their
enemy.  And  they  were  indeed  successful.  After  subduing
Ladak,  a  rapid  march  was  made  into  Kashmir,  where,  to  begin

'  Mirza  Haidar,  like  all  natives  of  Central  Asia,  used  the  name  Tibet  to
signify  Ladak,  but  he  applies  it  siUo,  on  some  occasions,  to  the  territory  ruled
from  Lassa,  or  Tibet  proper,  as  understood  in  modern  times.  (See  notes,
pp.  135  and  136.)

'  See  Quatremdre*d  extracts  from  this  work,  in  the  Notices  et  Extraits  des
ManwcritB  de  la  Biblioth  du  Boi,  xiv.,  p.  484.

Digitized  by

Google

14  The  Author  and  his  Booh,

with,  some  easy  yictories  were  won,  but  treachery  and  discon-^
tent  haying  appeared  in  the  Moghul  camp,  Mirza  Haidar  had,
after  a  few  months'  occupation,  to  fall  back  on  Ladak,  leaving
Kashmir,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  independent.

Sultan  Said  Khan,  hoping  to  share  in  the  glories  of  the
"  holy  war,"  had  followed  his  lieutenant  into  Ladak,  but  his
constitution,  undermined  by  excessive  drinking,  proved  less
vigorous  than  his  religious  zeal,  and  the  attenuated  air  of  the
Ladak  passes  had  nearly  proved  fatal  to  him  on  the  journey
across.  He  recovered,  however,  sufficiently  to  lead  a  portion  (rf
his  force  into  Baltistan,  while  Mirza  Haidar  was  engaged  in
Kashmir,  but  after  passing  a  winter  there,  distracted  by  cold
and  hunger,  he  too  had  to  retreat  into  Ladak,  and  very  shortly
afterwards,  set  out  on  his  return  to  Kashghar  with  a  portion  of
the  army.  This  second  journey  across  the  heights,  achieved  for
him  what  the  first  had  so  nearly  accomplished.  He  died  on
the  Suget  Pass,  from  the  malady  known  as  "damgiri,"  or
mountain  sickness,  and  was  at  once  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,
Abdur  Bashid.

The  death  of  the  Khan  in  no  way  checked  the  course  of  the
"  holy  war,"  for  his  second  son,  Iskandar  Sultan,  and  many  other
Amirs,  remained  with  Mirza  Haidar,  who  now  (July,  1533)
started  on  an  expedition  to  ''earn  merit"  by  destroying  the
great  temple  at  Lassa — an  exploit,  he  tells  his  readers,  th^t
had  never  been  achieved  by  any  King  of  Islam.  He  appears  tQ
have  marched  for  about  a  month's  journey  towards  the  south-
east, over  some  of  the  highest  table-lands  in  Asia,  to  the  region
which  gives  rise  to  most  of  the  great  rivers  of  India,  and  to
within  a  few  days'  journey  of  the  Tibetan  border  of  Nipal.  His
total  force  is  nowhere  stated  in  figures,  and  apparently  it  was
divided  into  at  least  two,  or  perhaps  three,  columns.  One  of
these  was  attacked  by  a  force  of  "  men  armed  with  short
swords,"  sent  by  '*  a  Bai  of  Hind  "  to  the  assistance  of  the
Tibetans — a  statement  that  appears  to  point  to  a  body  of
Nipali  tribesmen,  armed  with  their  national  weapon,  the  kukri.
The  inference  is  that  the  Moghuls  were  beaten  in  at  least  one
fight  with  these  people.  Yet  Mirza  Haidar  continued  h^is
march  towards  the  capital,  until  he  arrived  at,  and  plundered,
a  place  he  calls  Astabrak  (or  Astakbark),  which  was  repre-
sented as  being  within  eight  days'  journey  of  Lassa.  No  map
or  book  of  any  date,  now  available,  seems  to  contain  this  name
or  any  variant  of  it,  but  if  the  estimate  of  eight  marches  from

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

i^

Tlie  Author  arid  his  Book,  15

Lassa  be  correct,  and  these  marches  are  intended  for  the  long
Tibetan  post-stages,  the  invaders  would  still  have  been  some  800
miles,  or  more,  distant  from  their  goal.  However  this  may  be,
the  mortality  among  his  horses,  want  of  supplies,  and  the  general
distress  caused  by  cold  and  the  high  elevation,  obliged  the
Mirza  to  abandon  his  enterprise  at  this  point,  and  to  set  out  in
retreat  towards  Ladak.  His  experience,  indeed,  was  almost
exactly  that  of  the  Dogra  general  Zorawar  Sing  who,  in  1841;^
made  an  attempt  to  conquer  the  western  provinces  of  Tibet  for
his  master,  Bajah  (rulab  Sing  of  Kashmir.  Of  fighting  there  was
little  in  either  case,  except  against  the  climate  and  conditions
of  the  country,  and  in  both  instances  these  adversaries  proved
victorious.

In  the  early  months  of  1534  Mirza  Haidar  returned  defeated,
and  with  a  mere  remnant  of  his  force,  to  a  position  of  safety  in
Ladak.  Of  those  who  were  left  even,  many  deserted  him  here
to  find  their  way  back  to  their  homes  across  the  mountains.
Yet,  broken  and  almost  helpless  as  he  was,  the  chiefs  of  Upper
Ladak  received  him  and  his  men  with  hospitality,  and  even
assisted  him  in  getting  together  a  force  with  which,  the  next
year,  he  proceeded  to  attack  and  plunder  the  western  districts
of  the  country,  known  as  Purik,  Suru,  and  Zangskar.  His
success  in  all  these  forays  was  very  doubtful.  He  seems  to
have  been  able  to  do  little  more,  during  the  first  year,  than
keep  his  men  and  animals  from  starving,  while  in  the  second
year  (1535)  he  had  again,  from  sheer  distress,  to  fall  back  on
the  neighbourhood  of  Leh  and  throw  himself  on  the  mercy  of
the  strangely  tolerant  Ladak  chiefs.  His  followers,  under
these  conditions,  became  discontented  if  not  mutinous,  and
began  to  desert  him ;  while  he  received  such  evil  tidings  from
Eashghar,  that  the  "  holy  w»: "  against  the  Tibetans  at  length
came  to  an  end.

Bashid  Sultan  (otherwise  Abdur  Bashid  Khan)  had  begun
his  reign  at  Eashghar,  by  putting  to  death  many  of  his  own
relations,  and  among  them  the  author's  uncle,  Sayyid  Muham-
mad Mirza,  whom  he  suspected  of  plotting  against  him  in
favour  of  the  late  Khan's  younger  son,  Iskandar.  These  events
seem  to  have  made  a  deep  impression  on  Mirza  Haidar's  mind,
for  he  alludes  to  them  with  bitterness,  more  than  once  in  the
course  of  his  narrative.  His  uncle  had  served  Sultan  Said  faith-
fully for  many  years,  and  had  done  much  arduous  work  for  him,
while  Mirza  Haidar  himself  had  been  the  chief  agent  in  extending

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

16  The  Author  and  his  Book.

the  Ehan's  kingdom  and  power.  But  besides  this,  he  had  been
companion  and  instructor  to  two  of  the  Ehan's  sons,  and  when
the  elder  of  these  marked  the  commencement  of  his  reign  by
acts  of  ingratitude  and  bloodshed,  it  is  scarcely  surprising  that
he  should  be  deeply  hurt,  and  should  record  his  feelings,  years
afterwards,  in  his  history.

Hence,  fearing  that  he  might  meet  with  the  same  treatment
as  his  uncle  and  others  of  his  family,  if  he  returned  to  Eash-
ghar,  he  had  to  seek  for  a  refuge.  It  was  impossible  to  stay
longer  in  Ladak,  while  all  the  direct  roads  to  India  and  Eabul
were  in  the  hands  of  those  whom  he  had  lately  been  chastising
and  plundering,  in  the  name  of  religion.  With  the  daring  of
despair,  he  determined  to  try  and  reach  Badakhshan  with  the
handful  of  adherents  that  remained  in  his  service,  by  turning  off
from  the  usual  track  between  Ladak  and  Yarkand,  at  a  point
called  Ak-Tagh,  to  the  north  of  the  Earakorum  Pass;  and
after  following  the  course  of  the  Yarkand  river  for  some
distance,  to  gain  Baskam,  the  southern  Pamirs,  and  Wakhan.
This  adventure — apparently  almost  hopeless  under  the  conditions
in  which  he  attempted  it — he  accomplished  successfully,  accom-
panied by  about  twenty  followers,  though  not  without  much
hardship  and  suffering.  The  winter  of  1536-7  he  spent  in
Badakhshan,  the  following  summer  he  repaired  to  Eabul,  and
shortly  after  to  Lahore,  where  he  was  received  by  Baber's  son,
Eamran  Mirza,  and  found  himself,  as  he  tells  us,  raised  from
the  depths  of  distress  to  honour  and  dignity.

Eamran  was  at  that  time  engaged  in  a  struggle  for  territory
with  the  Persians,  and  had,  soon  after  our  author's  arrival,  to
proceed  to  the  relief  of  Eandahar,  which  was  being  besieged  by
Sam  Mirza  and  by  Shah  Tahmasp,  the  sons  of  Shah  Ismail,  the
Safavi ;  but  before  setting  out  he  appointed  his  guest  to  the
governorship  of  those  parts  of  India  (the  whole  of  the  Punjab)
which  belonged  to  him,  and  in  this  capacity  Mirza  Haidar
resided  for  over  a  year  at  Lahore,  *'  collecting  taxes,  suppress-
ing revolt,  protecting  the  frontiers,  and  establishing  Islam."
It  was  shortly  after  Eamran's  return  to  the  Punjab,  (1538)  that
Humayun  had  sustained  a  severe  defeat  in  Bengal  at  the  hands
of  Shir  Shah  Sur,  the  Afghan  leader,  who  was  now  advancing
towards  Agra  by  the  left  bank  of  the  Ganges.  A  large  part  of
Humayun's  army  having  accompanied  him  to  Bengal,  he  made
an  appeal  to  Eamran  and  his  other  brothers  to  send  assistance
to  Agra^  while  he  himself  hurried  northward. Edmran,  after

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Author  and  his  Book,  17

some  hesitation,  consented,  and  moved  first  to  Delhi  and  then
to  Agra,  with  an  army  of  20,000  men,  and  in  company  with
onr  author.  Here  dissensions  took  place  among  the  brothers ;
Eamran  repented  of  his  decision  to  support  the  Emperor,  and
putting  forward  bad  health  as  a  reason,  determined  to  return
to  Lahore,  while  Shir  Shah  was  yet  on  the  far  side  of  the
Ganges.  He  endeavoured  to  persuade  Mirza  Haidar  to  return
with  him,  but  the  Mirza  declined  on  patriotic  grounds,  and
from  that  time  forward  (1539)  became  an  adherent  of  Huma-
yun,  who  treated  him  with  great  honour  and  called  him
^^  hroQier^  after  the  Moghul  fashion."

The  disastrous  battle  of  Kanauj  soon  followed.^  Humayun's
force  numbered  some  40,000,  but  was  less  an  army  than  a  huge
undisciplined  mass,  commanded  by  Amirs  who  had  no  intention
of  fighting  the  Afghans.  Mirza  Haidar  appears  to  have  acted
as  a  kind  of  general  adviser  or  chief  of  the  Emperor's  stafi^,  but
he  mentions  incidentally  that  he  also  led  the  centre  division.'
The  confusion  and  corruption  that  prevailed  on  the  side  of  the
Ghaghatais  he  describes  with  much  candour,  and  clearly  shows
that  the  battle  was  lost  before  it  had  been  fought.  Whatever
his  position  in  the  army  may  have  been,  he  seems  to  have  done
his  best  to  advise  and  support  his  master,  and  finally  joined
him  in  his  flight  to  Agra,^  and  thence  to  Lahore.  His  narrative
gives,  in  a  few  words,  a  vivid  picture  of  the  crowd  of  refugees
that  were  assembled  at  the  Punjab  capital,  their  state  of  panic,
and  the  divided  and  interested  counsels  with  which  the  Em-
peror was  perplexed.  Mirza  Haidar  advised  that  the  Ghaghatai
Amirs  should  occupy  separate  positions  along  the  lower  hills,
from  Sirhind  to  the  Salt  Bange,  where  the  army  might  be  re-
organised in  safety  and,  on  a  favourable  opportunity  presenting
itself,  might  be  used  with  effect  to  regain  possession  of  India.
He  himself  would  undertake  the  reduction  of  Kashmir,  a  task
he  hoped  to  accomplish  in  so  short  a  time  that  the  Emperor

^  17th  May,  1540,  or  10  Muharam,  947  h.

"  Abul  Fazl  (accordiDg  to  Price)  implies  that  Humayun,  in  person,  com-
manded the  centre,  while  the  right  and  left  wings  were  led  by  a  brother  and
a  nephew,  respectively. {Mvhamd.  Hist,  iii.,  p.  781.)

'  The  historian  Jauhar  mentions  that  during  a  brief  halt  made  at  Fattehpar
Sikri,  Humayon,  while  sitting  in  a  garden,  was  shot  at  by  some  unseen
person,  and  that  **  two  attendants  "  having  been  sent  in  pursuit  of  the  would-
be  sasassiD,  both  returned  wounded.  Mr.  Erskine  (following  apparently  the
AIAar-Ndma  of  Abul  Fazl)  mentions  that  one  of  the  wounded  **  attendants"
was  Mirza  Haidar.  (See  Jauhar's  IbzkirdU  ul  Wdkidt,  trans,  by  Stewart,
p.  24;  and  Erskine^s  Hist,  of  India,  11.,  p.  194.)

d

Digitized  by

Google

18  The  Author  and  his  Book.

and  his  brothers  might  send  their  families  thither,  and  secnre,
for  them  at  least,  a  refuge  from  all  enemies.  But  the  Mirza's
advice  was  of  no  avail ;  for  though  Hnmaynn  seems  to  have
been  inclined  to  listen,  he  was  overborne  by  other  councillors.

While  acting  at  Lahore  as  Eamran's  delegate,  Mirza  Haidar
had  been  approached  by  certain  chiefs  of  Kashmir  who  were  at
variance  with  the  native  prince  then  reigning  in  their  country,
and  who,  on  being  worsted  by  him,  had  found  a  refuge  in  the
Punjab.  They  endeavoured  to  procure,  through  Mirza  Haidar's
influence,  the  assistance  of  a  body  of  Eamran's  troops,  to  invade
their  own  country  and  expel  the  obnoxious  ruler.  The  scheme
seems  to  have  commended  itself  to  the  Mirza's  judgment,  and
after  some  delay  he  was  able  to  gather  a  respectable  force,  which
he  placed  under  the  command  of  one  Baba  Chuchak,  one  of  the
most  experienced  officers  in  the  service  of  Kamran,  with  in-
structions to  accompany  the  Kashmiri  chiefs  and  restore  them
to  the  possession  of  their  State.  The  Baba,  however,  found
pretexts  for  evading  the  execution  of  these  orders,  and  the
expedition  proved  a  failure.  After  the  retreat  of  the  Chaghatais
from  Kanauj  to  Lahore,  these  chiefs  renewed  their  appeals  for
assistance,  and  it  was  during  the  discussions  that  took  place
there  as  to  the  general  line  of  action  to  be  adopted,  that  Mirza
Haidar  impressed  on  Humayun  the  advantage  of  seizing  the
opportunity  to  gain  a  footing  in  Kashmir.  He  had  learned
from  his  previous  incursion  into  that  country,  while  in  the
service  of  the  Khan  of  Kashghar,  the  value  of  its  position  and
resources,  and  calculated  that,  with  a  reasonable  force,  he  would
require  only  two  months  to  subjugate  it  and  make  it  a  suitable
asylum  for  the  Emperor  and  his  family,  together,  if  necessary,
with  the  remains  of  the  Chaghatai  army.  Shir  Shah,  on  the
other  hand,  with  the  wheeled  carriages  and  the  artillery,  on
which  his  strength  mainly  depended,  would  not,  the  Mirza
reckoned,  be  able  to  reach  the  outer  hills  in  less  than  four
months,  and  his*  troops  would  be  exhausted  by  the  effort.

Though  these  plans  were  not  taken  advantage  of  by  Humayun
(who  continued  his  retreat  to  the  Indus),  he  permitted  them
to  be  put  into  practice  by  Mirza  Haidar.  The  Mirza  was  given
a  small  body  of  troops,  and  was  sent  forward  from  Lahore  to
join  the  Kashmiri  chiefs,  in  whose  company  he  was  to  enter
the  hills  of  their  country,  and  to  be  followed,  at  intervals,  by
two  of  Humayun's  officers,  called  respectively  Iskandar  Tupchi
and  Khwaja  Kalan. When  all  had  assembled  above  Jhilam,  and

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Author  and  his  Book.  19

the  force  had  begun  to  ascend  the  passes  leading  to  the  valley
of  Kashmir,  dissensions  arose  among  the  commanders.  Ehwaja
Ealan,  with  his  men,  first  separated  himself  from  the  expedition,
and  the  Tnpchi  shortly  afterwards  followed  him,  leaving  Mirza
Haidar  to  prosecute  the  undertaking  with  no  more  than  a
handful  of  retainers  in  his  own  pay,  and  a  few  more  who  had
joined  him  on  the  personal  authority  of  the  Emperor.  With
this  following  he  determined  to  advance,  and  on  the  21st
November,  1540,  crossed  the  Punch  pass  and  descended  into
the  valley.  His  calculations  proved  correct :  he  met  with  no
resistance  from  the  chiefs  or  people,  but  obtained  possession  of
the  country  without  striking  a  blow.

It  is  curious  how  little  our  author  relates  about  his  invasion
and  administration  of  Kashmir,  or  of  the  affairs  of  that  country
during  the  eleven  years  that  his  regency  lasted.  He  was  to  all
intents  and  purposes  king  of  the  State ;  while  the  value  of  the
territory  and  the  importance  of  its  position,  from  a  military
point  of  view,  at  the  juncture  when  he  found  himself  its  ruler,
were  well  known  to  him,  for  he  had  impressed  them  urgently
on  Humayun  only  a  short  time  before.  Yet  all  he  has  to  say  of
the  period  is  summed  up  in  two  short  chapters  at  the  end  of
his  history ;  though  he  devotes  much  more  space  to  the  events
that  were  happening  at  the  time  across  the  passes.  It  was  in
Kashghar  and  Yarkand  that  his  nearest  relatives  and  his  friends
were  living — most  of  them  in  sufiTering  and  danger— and  that
his  political  enemies  were  ruling,  on  lines  that  he  regarded  as
dangerous,  and  subversive  of  the  power  and  prosperity  that  he
had  himself  helped  to  build  up.  It  seems  evident,  indeed,  that
to  the  end  of  his  life,  his  mind  was  chiefly  occupied  with  the
affairs  of  what  may  be  called  his  own  country,  and  communica-
tions between  his  friends  and  himself  seem  to  have  been  kept
up  to  the  last,  while  he  felt  himself  to  be  more  or  less  an
exile  in  Kashmir.  So  meagre  is  his  story  of  this  period  of  his
life,  and  so  abruptly  broken  off,  that  from  the  year  1540  on-
wards, I  have  had  to  follow  chiefly  the  accounts  of  Abul  Fazl,
the  historian  of  Akbar,  and  of  Firishta.  Both  of  these  authors
wrote  within  an  interval  not  very  remote  from  that  which  they
chronicle,  so  that  the  events  they  deal  with  must  have  been
fresh  in  the  memories  of  their  informants.^

^  See  for  Abul  Fazl,  Price's  Uuham,  Eisi.  iii.,  pp.  787-862;  Jarrett's
AinFi-Akhariy  p.  390 ;  Erskine'a  Hist,  ii.,  pp.  364-68.  For  Firishta,  Brigg«,  iv.,
pp.  497  aej.,  and  Mr.  C.  J.  Rodgers'  Extracts,  in  J.A,8,B,,  1885,  pp.  98  9eq.

d  2

Digitized  by

Google

20  The  Author  and  his  Book,

Kashmir  had,  for  some  time  previously,  acknowledged  no  one
supreme  ruler,  except  those  set  up  as  mere  nominal  represen-
tatiyes  of  the  old  line  of  kings.  Several  native  chiefs  exercised
the  real  authority,  in  various  parts,  and  at  that  particular  time
were  supporting,  as  a  pageant,  a  prince  whose  title  was  Nazuk
Shah.^  Whether  Mirza  Haidar  began  by  joining  issue  with
this  personage  we  are  not  informed,  but  it  appears  rather,  that
he  took  him  under  his  protection.  It  is  related,  however,  that
one  Eachi  Chak,  the  principal  of  those  chiefs  through  whose
representations  Mirza  Haidar  had  been  originally  induced  to
undertake  the  reduction  of  the  State,  very  shortly  deserted  his
benefactor.  He  perceived,  says  Abul  Pazl,  that  his  own
schemes  would  be  defeated  by  the  establishment  of  Mirza  Hai-
dar's  power,  and  "with  the  natural  perfidy  inherent  in  the
character  of  the  Eashmirians,  suddenly  withdrew  from  the
country  to  seek  the  protection  of  Shir  Ehan  "^  [e.e.  Shir  Shah]  ;
with  the  result  that  a  force  of  2,000  Afghans  was  immediately
despatched  by  the  Shah,  to  conduct  the  petitioner  back  to  his
country.  A  threat  of  invasion  by  Shir  Shah  and  his  Afghans
was  sufficient  to  deprive  Mirza  Haidar  of  all  hisEashmiri  allies,
and  he  had  to  retire  to  an  inaccessible  part  of  the  country,  with
a  few  of  his  own  followers,  where  he  led  a  precarious  and
unsettled  life  for  about  three  months.  At  last,  on  the  2nd
August,  1541  (8  Eabi  H.  948  h.)  he  gave  battle  to  his  enemies,
who  were  computed  at  5,000  combatants  (including  natives  and
auxiliary  Afghans),  and  defeated  them  with  great  loss,  the
Afghans  retiring  to  Delhi,  while  the  Eashmiri  malcontents  fled
to  the  outer  hills.  By  this  victory,  our  author  rendered  himself
undisputed  master  of  the  whole  of  Eashmir.

A  period  of  tranquillity  followed,  but  was  destined  to  last
only  till  the  year  1543,  when  the  fugitives  beyond  the  borders,
having  combined  their  forces  with  those  of  some  of  their  rela-
tives, marched  on  Srinagar  for  the  purpose  of  subverting  Mirza
Haidar's  government.  They  were  completely  routed,  however,
and  again  took  refuge  in  the  outer  hills.  Not  long  afterwards,
the  Mirza  himself  took  the  offensive  against  Ladak,  and  is  said
to  have  reduced  several  of  its  districts  to  subjection.  Only  one
of  these  is  named  by  Firishta,  who  writes  it "  Looshoo  " — a  name
impossible  to  identify,  unless  it  can  be  regarded  as  a  corruption

^  The  name  appears  in  this  form  in  the  histories  of  both  Abul  Fazl  and
Firishta,  but  Mr.  Kodgers  infonue  us  that  all  the  coins  bear  Nadir  in  place  of
Ndzuk  (p.  114}.

«  Price,  iii.,  p.  825.

Digitized  by

Google

H*-^

The  Author  and  his  Book,  21

of ''  Bora."  During  his  absence  on  this  expedition,  an  epidemic
disease  broke  out,  which  carried  off  the  three  discontented
chiefis  who  had,  up  to  that  time,  been  his  most  persistent
opponents.  Their  removal  afforded  him  again  a  period  of  peace,
wluch  lasted  for  abont  two  years,  when  he  proceeded  to  attack
the  province  of  Eashtaw&r.  One  Bandagan  Eoka  was  sent
forward  in  command  of  a  portion  of  the  force,  while  Mirza
Haidar  followed  at  a  distance.  Bandagdn  Eoka  *came  np  with
the  enemy  on  the  banks  of  the  Eishtawar  river,  and  after  two
engagements,  was  defeated  and  killed,  together  with  a  number
of  his  men.  The  remainder  of  his  force  fell  back  on  the  divi-
sion of  the  Mirza,  who,  however,  does  not  appear  to  have
followed  up  his  intention  of  subduing  the  province.  The  next
year,  1548,  he  is  reported  to  have  turned  his  attention  first
towards  Little  Tibet  (or  Baltistan),  then  to  Tibet  (or  Ladak)
again,  and  subsequently  to  Bajaori  and  Pakhli.  In  all  these
provinces  he  is  said  to  have  succeeded  in  his  objects,  and  to
have  added  them,  finally,  to  his  Eashmir  dominions.

In  1549  an  occurrence  is  recorded,  which  nearly  brought  our
author  once  more  into  conflict  with  the  Afghans  of  Hindustan.
In  1545  Shir  Shah  had  been  succeeded  by  his  son,  Islam  Shah
(otherwise  known  as  Salim  Ehan),  against  whose  rule  the  Niazi
tribe  of  Afghans,  then  settled  in  the  Punjab,  rose  in  rebellion.
After  being  worsted  by  Salim  in  the  plains,  they  fled  towards
the  hills  and  took  refuge  in  the  Eashmir  province  of  Bajaori.
Here  they  were  received  by  the  descendants  of  those  Eashmiri
chiefs,  who  had  so  persistently  opposed  Mirza  Haidar's  rule,  up
to  a  few  years  previously.  Intrigues  were  entered  into  between
these  and  the  Niazi,  but  in  the  meantime  Salim,  pursuing  the
latter,  arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  near  Nau  Shahra  in
Bajaori,  while  Mirza  Haidar  advanced  to  block  the  road  from
the  side  of  Eashmir.  According  to  Firishta,  a  peaceful  arrange-
ment was  come  to  between  the  various  parties;  Salim  was
appeased  on  certain  hostages  being  made  over  to  him,  and
returned  to  Delhi,  while  the  Eashmiri  partisans,  abandoning
their  plans,  some  joined  Mirza  Haidar,  and  others  accompanied
Salim  to  his  capital.  A  different  version  of  this  affair  (it  may  be
noted)  is  given  by  Abdulla,  the  author  of  the  Tarikh-i-Daudi,
who  records  that  a  fight  took  place  between  the  Niazi  and  a  force
sent  by  Mirza  Haidar  to  prevent  them  from  entering  Eashmir,
and  the  writer  locates  this  encounter,  not  in  Bajaori,  but  in
the  district  of  Banihal. The  Eashmiri  force  is  represented  as

Digitized  by

Google

22  The  Author  and  his  Book,

gaining  a  complete  yictory,  while  Mirza  Haidar  is  said  to  have
propitiated  Salim  Ehan,  by  sending  him  the  heads  of  the  slain
Niazi  as  a  peace-offering.  Which  of  these  two  accounts  is  the
more  correct,  it  is  not  easy  to  judge^  but  it  seems  that  Mirza
Haidar  had,  about  this  time,  some  transactions  with  the  Afghan
Shah  of  Hindustan,  and  may  possibly  have  felt  it  necessary  to
propitiate  him.  At  any  rate,  Firishta  relates  that  he  sent
ambassadors  with  presents  to  Delhi  in  1550,  and  that  Salim,  in
return,  deputed  an  envoy  with  horses,  muslins,  etc.,  to  Srinagar.
What  brought  about  this  exchange  of  courtesies,  or  what  came
of  it,  the  historian  does  not  state.

In  the  same  way,  the  events  of  the  ensuing  year,  1551,
relating  to  Mirza  Ebidar's  death,  are  to  some  extent  at  variance.
The  only  two  historians  (as  far  as  I  am  aware)  who  record  them
in  any  detail  are  Abul  Fazl  and  Firishta ;  but,  as  the  former
seems  somewhat  uncertain  of  his  facts,  the  account  of  the  latter
may  perhaps  be  more  advantageously  followed.

General  Briggs'  version  of  Firishta  records,  quite  briefly,  that
Mirza  Haidar  had  appointed  one  Eiran  Bahadur,  a  commander
of  Moghul  horse,  to  the  government  of  the  district  of  Bhirbal.^
The  measure  gave  great  offence  to  the  inhabitants,  who  resisted
Eiran's  authority,  and  eventually  proceeded  to  attack  him.
Mirza  Haidar,  in  order  to  support  his  officer,  put  himself  at  the
head  of  his  Moghuls,  and  marched  towards  the  scene  of  the
disturbance.  On  the  road,  a  night  attack  was  made  upon  his
camp,  the  Moghuls  were  defeated,  and  he  himself  was  killed  by
an  arrow  in  the  course  of  the  fight.  The  exact  date  of  the
event  in  1551  is  nowhere  recorded,  but  it  would  appear  to  have
taken  place  on  one  of  the  last  days  of  Bamzan,  or  about  the
beginning  of  October.*  In  Mr.  Eodgers'  version,  the  circum-
stances are  related  in  much  greater  detail,  but  some  of  the
particulars  are  not  quite  intelligible.  The  substance,  however,
is  the  same,  and  the  account  makes  it  appear  that  the  locality
where  Mirza  Haidar  fell,  must  have  been  somewhere  near
Baramula  on  the  Jhilam.  It  points  also  to  his  death  having
been  caused  through  being  accidentally  struck  by  an  arrow,
discharged  by  one  of  his  own  men,  in  the  darkness.

During  the  ten  years  (counting  from  the  battle  of  2nd  August,
1541)  over  which  Mirza  Haidar's  regency  extended,  he  is  said,

>  These  Dames  are  given  elsewhere  in  Firishta  as  Kari  Bahidur  and
Bhirpul. The  latter  stands  probably  for  Ehirrher  below  Nau  Shahra.
'  The  Hajra  year  is  958,  which  began  9th  January,  1651.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Author  and  his  Book.  28

in  the  Akbar-Ndma,  to  have  devoted  himself,  when  not  actively
engaged  with  his  enemies,  to  the  restoration  of  the  province  and
the  improvement  of  its  resources.  He  found  it  in  a  state  of
rain  and  desolation,  and  raised  it  to  a  land  abounding  in  culti-
vation and  flourishing  towns ;  he  extended  the  frontiers  also,
and  ruled  with  moderation  and  justice.  Yet  the  austere  Abul
Fazl  takes  him  to  task  for  devoting  too  much  of  his  time  and
attention  to  music,  and  thereby  becoming  forgetful  of  the
dangers  that  surrounded  him.  Still  more  he  bkmes  him  for
continuing  the  government  of  the  State  in  the  name  of  the
puppet  I^nce,  Nazuk  Shah.  After  his  military  successes,  it
was  his  duty,  the  historian  considers,  to  read  the  prayers  and
strike  the  coins  in  the  name  of  '^  his  imperial  benefactor  then
struggling  with  adversity ; "  while  there  was  no  necessity  to
cultivate  the  attachment  of  the  native  rulers.  Yet  he  is  obliged
to  admit  that  when  Humayun  had  returned  &om  exile  in  Persia,
and  had  repossessed  himself  of  Kabul,  Mirza  Haidar  at  once
conceded  to  him  the  honours  due  to  a  sovereign.

How  far  Abul  Fazl's  estimate  of  Mirza  Haidar's  character  is
a  just  one,  may  be  open  to  question.  ^  In  the  first  place,  it  was  not
entirely  to  music  that  he  devoted  the  interval  of  well-earned
repose  that  he  enjoyed  in  Kashmir.  It  was  during  these  years
that  he  wrote  the  Tarikh-i-Bashidi — a  work  which,  strange  to
say,  Abul  Fazl  makes  no  mention  of.  Yet  it  is  evident,  from
incidental  allusions  to  dates  in  the  body  of  the  book,  that  this
task  occupied  no  little  of  the  Mirza's  time.  To  judge  by  the
number  of  authors  he  cites,  or  speaks  of,  in  the  course  of  his
history,  he  must  have  collected  a  good  number  of  books  about
him,  and  the  study  of  these  may  perhaps  have  occupied  more  of
his  leisure  than  the  lute  or  the  zitdra.  Among  them,  it  may
be  noted,  was  a  copy  of  the  "  Memoirs "  of  his  cousin  Baber,
which,  in  all  probability,  he  had  obtained  while  in  India  at  the
court  either  of  Humayun  or  of  E^amrdn ;  and,  no  doubt,  it  was
the  first  copy  ever  utilised  for  historical  purposes.  Secondly,
as  regards  the  imputed  infidelity  towards  the  Ghaghatai  Em-
peror, it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  historian  of  Akbar
was  writing  after  events  had  seemed  to  justify  his  view.  At
the  time  when  Mirza  Haidar  administered  Kashmir  in  the  name
of  Nazuk  Shah,  Humayun  was  a  refugee  in  Persia,  dependent
on  the  uncertain  friendship  of  Shah  Tahmdsp,  and  it  must
have  been  quite  a  matter  for  speculation  whether  he  would
ever  returUj  or  if,  indeed,  any  member  of  the  house  of  Baber

Digitized  by

Google

24  The  Author  and  his  Book.

would  again  occupy  the  throne  of  Hindustan.  After  completely
subjugating  Kashmir,  and  defeating  the  troops  that  Shir  Shah
had  sent  against  him,  there  seems  to  have  been  no  reason,  but
loyalty  to  the  Gbaghatais,  why  the  Mirza  should  not  have  set
himself  up  as  king  of  the  State.

His  action  in  recognising  the  native  puppet  may  fairly  be
regarded  as  one  of  self-denial— a  temporary  measure,  under-
taken while  waiting  to  see  whether  his  patron  might  not  return,
and  claim  his  own  kingdom  in  India.  As  events  fell  out,  he
did  return,  though  not  till  January  1555,  or  nearly  four  years
after  our  author's  death.  Step  by  step,  he  made  himself  master
of  the  principal  districts  of  Afghanistan,  regained  Kunduz  and
Badakhshan,  and  disposed  of  Eamrdn  Mirza,  together  with  other
enemies  of  his  house.  But  as  early  as  1545,  when,  with  the  aid
of  Shah  Tahmasp,  he  had  wrested  only  Kandahar  and  Kabul
from  his  rebellious  brother,  and  while  still  far  beyond  the
limits  of  India,  Mirza  Haidar  transferred  to  Humayun  the
nominal  sovereignty  with  which  he  had  invested  Nazuk  Shah.
He  sent  an  envoy  to  Kabul,  to  inform  his  patron  of  these  pro-
ceedings and  to  invite  him  to  Kashmir.  His  letters  were  full  of
expressions  of  loyalty  and  attachment,  and,  in  pressing  his
invitation,  he  pointed  out  that  the  country  he  had  subdued
would  serve  as  an  impregnable  position,  from  which  the  Emperor
might  pour  down  his  troops  for  the  conquest  of  Hindustan —
an  enterprise  which  he  urged  him  to  attempt  without  delay.^
He  is  recorded,  moreover,  by  Abul  Fazl  himself,  to  have  read
the  prayers  and  to  have  struck  the  coins  in  Humayun's  name  at
about  this  period ;  while  unanswerable  evidence  as  regards  the
coinage  is  to  be  found,  to  this  day,  among  the  specimens  of  the
money  of  Kashmir,  which  have  come  down  to  us.  In  the  British
Museum  there  is  a  silver  coin  of  Kashmir,  bearing  the  name  of
Humayun  and  dated  952  or  953  *  of  the  Hajra  (1545  or  1546).
Mr.  Bodgers  also  describes  two  coins  of  Humayun  which  were
struck,  in  Kashmir,  in  the  year  953,  and  another  bearing  a  date
subsequent  to  950,  but  on  which  the  third  figure  is  illegible.
This  last  one,  however,  contains  in  the  field  a  letter  &a,  which
Mr.  Bodgers  believes  may  stand  for  the  initial  letter  of  the
name  Haidar. In  any  case,  the  dates  that  are  decipherable  not

*  Erskine,  ii.,  pp.  366-7  ;  on  the  authority  of  the  Akbar-Ndma.

*  Probably  the  former  date,  but  perhaps  the  latter;  for  there  is  some
uncertainty  about  the  third  figure.  8ee  S.  L.  Poole,  Cfat,  Coins  qf  Muham.
States  of  India,  p.  xlviii.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Author  and  his  Book.  26

only  &11  within  the  period  of  Mirza  Haidar's  regency,  but  they
are  good  evidence  that  he  regarded  Hnmaynn  as  his  sovereigny
while  at  the  height  of  his  own  power  in  Eashmir,  although  no
coins  are  known  which  show  that  he  so  regarded  him  previons
to  his  recovery  of  Kabul.^  Neither  the  coins  nor  the  docn-
mentary  history  of  the  period^  however,  are  completely  worked
out,  and  until  the  tales  that  both  have  to  tell  are  exhausted,  it
would  perhaps  be  premature  to  conclude  that,  even  prior  to  the .
subjugation  of  Afghanistan  in  1545,  Mirza  Haidar  may  not  have
afforded  testimony,  in  one  form  or  another,  that  he  regarded  him-
self and  his  puppet  king  as,  alike,  dependants  of  the  Ghaghatai
Emperor.

Thus,  whatever  faults  the  Mirza  may  have  had,  disloyalty  to
his  chiefs  can  hardly  be  accounted  one  of  them.  He  served  his
first  master,  Sultan  Said  Khan,  with  devotion  till  the  end  of
the  Ehan's  reign,  and  when  forced  by  the  barbarities  of  his
successor,  Bashid  Sultan,  to  seek  safety  for  his  life  with  the
Ghaghatais  in  India,  he  served  them  likewise  with  good  faith,
as  long  as  he  lived.

Besides  Abtil  Fazl's  and  Firishta's,  the  notices  of  Mirza
Haidar's  life,  among  the  writings  of  Asiatic  authors,  appear  to
be  few.  Several  quote  his  history,  and  even  copy  from  it
extensively,  but  only  two,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascer-
tain from  translations,  make  any  mention  of  his  personality.
Jauhar,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Bumayun^  does  no  more  than  briefly
allude  to  his  master's  faithful  lieutenant.  The  author  of  the
Tar%kJhi-D(mdi,  cited  above,  calls  him  '^  a  youth  of  a  magna-
nimous disposition,"  but  vouchsafes  no  more.*  Amin  Ahmad
Bazi,  however,  has  devoted  a  iv^  sentences  to  him  in  his
geographical  work,  the  Haft  Iklimy  ax.  important  extract  from
which  was  translated  into  French  by  Quatrem^re,  and  pub-
lished in  1843.^  Ahmad  Bdzi  tells  us  that  Mirza  Haidar  "  was
endowed  with  an  excellent  character  and  a  rare  talent  for
elegant  composition  in  verse,  as  well  as  in  prose. To  these

^  The  date  of  HumayuD's  reoovery  of  Kabul  yaries  somewhat  in  the
accounts  of  different  native  authors,  but  Mr.  Erskine  adopted  that  of  10
Ramzdn  952,  or  15th  November,  1545  (JEKst,  ii.,  p.  325),  so  that  it  is  possible
that  these  coins  may  have  been  struck,  as  Mr.  S.  L.  Poole  suggests,  to  com-
memorate that  event. (Loc.  eit)

^  The  Tazkirdt  vi  WakicU,  trans,  by  Major  Gh.  Stewart,  1832,  mentioned
on  p.  17.

^  See  Elliot's  Hiit.  India,  iv.,  p.  497.

*  Notiees  ei  Extr^  etc.,  xiv.,  pp.  474-89.

Digitized  by  Google

26  The  Author  and  his  Book.

gifts  of  nature,  he  added  those  of  extreme  yalotir,  and  all  the
qualities  that  constitute  a  great  general.  Having  been  sent
into  Kashmir  by  Sultan  Abu  Said  Ehan,^  he  penetrated  into
this  province  by  the  road  of  Eashghar  and  Tibet  [Ladak]  and
entirely  subdued  it.  He  entered  it  also  a  second  time  from  the
side  of  India,  and  establishing  his  residence  in  Kashmir,  formed
it  into  an  independent  principality  ....  He  was  author  of
.the  historical  work  entitled  the  TarikM-Batihidif  which  was
named  in  this  way  after  Bashid  Khan>  sovereign  of  Kashghar.
This  book  enjoys  universal  esteem."  Ahmad  B&zi  then  appends
some  verses  of  the  Mirza's,  as  a  specimen  of  his  poetic  genius.

Among  Europeans,  Mr.  W.  Erskine  is  perhaps  the  only
original  author  who  has  touched  on  Mirza  Haidar's  personal
characteristics  or  attainments;  even  he  does  so  only  very
briefly,  though  in  several  passages  he  praises  his  work  in  the
highest  terms.  He  sums  him  up  as  "  a  man  of  worth,  of  talent,
and  of  learning."^  For  his  own  part,  he  naively  tells  us
that  he  had  many  accomplishments,  and  though  most  of  those
he  names  were  of  a  more  or  less  mechanical  order,  others,  at
least,  show  a  taste  for  authorship,  and  make  us  picture  him  as  a
man  of  some  imagination.  Taking  into  consideration  the  life  he
led — his  adventures,  sufferings,  discomfitures,  and  escapes —
and  the  age  and  countries  he  lived  in,  he  may  be  accounted
also  a  man  of  learning.  At  any  rate,  he  was  a  patron  of  the
learned  whom  he  came  in  contact  with,  and  seems  to  have
taken  an  interest  in  their  teachings,  as  well  as  in  the  books  he
knew  of ;  though  it  may  be  open  to  question,  perhaps  (from  a
European  point  of  view),  how  far  he  used  them  to  the  best
advantage  for  historical  purposes.  Yet,  withal,  he  was  a
bigoted  Musulman  and  a  fanatical  Sunni,  as  his  remarks  about
the  transactions  of  Baber  with  the  Persian  Shias,  after  the
capture  of  Samarkand  in  1511,  clearly  indicate.  And  his
bigotry  took  many  curious  forms,  as,  for  instance,  his  approval
of  the  hypocritical  proceedings  of  Sultan  Said  Khan,  his
refraining  to  trace  his  pedigree  beyond  the  date  of  Amir
Bulaji,  because  Bulaji's  ancestors  were  not  Musulmans,  and  his
pious  invocations  on  the  Moghul  Khan,  whose  religious  zeal  and
enlightenment  led  him  to  drive  horseshoe  nails  into  the  heads
of  his  subjects,  to  induce  them  to  become  Musulmans. In  short

*  The  Khan's  nam©  is  oocasionally  written  in  this  way,  but  it  is  incorrect.
The  word  Abu  is  redundant.
«  Hist,  ii.,  p.  368.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Author  and  his  Book.  27

he  belonged  to  his  times^  and  herein  lies  the  chief  value  of  all
that  he  has  left  on  record.

The  reader,  howeyer,  will  form  his  own  judgment  of  the
author's  character  and  worth.  What  may  safely  be  said  is  that
his  history  carries  with  it  a  conviction  of  honesty ;  while  he
himself,  though  a  soldier  of  fortune,  was,  as  shown  by  the
advice  he  tendered  to  Humayun,  and  by  his  administration  of
Kashmir,  no  mere  Dugald  Dalgetty  of  the  East.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

28  The  Line  of  Chaghatai,

SECTION  IL

THB  UKB  OF  OHAaHATAI.

Think,  in  this  batter'd  Caravanserai

Whose  Doorways  are  alternate  Night  and  Bay,

How  Sult^  after  Sultdn  with  his  Pomp
Abode  his  Hour  or  two,  and  went  his  way.

— Omar  Khayyam,

The  story  of  the  conquests  of  Ghingiz  Ehan,  and  the  partition
of  nearly  the  whole  of  Northern  Asia  among  his  descendants,
has  been  so  often  told,  that  no  useful  purpose  would  be  served
by  recounting  it  again  in  this  Introduction.  Only  those  phases
need  be  briefly  sketched,  which  form  the  basis  of  Mirza  Eaidar's
history,  or  which  help  to  elucidate  the  course  of  events  imme-
diately preceding  it.  Though  the  Tarikh-i-Bashidi  embraces
many  wide  regions  and  deals  with  many  tribes  and  nations,
its  chief  scenes  are  laid  within  the  appanage  of  Chingiz's
second  son  Chaghatai,  and  it  is,  before  all  things,  a  history  of
part  of  the  Chaghatai  branch  of  the  Mongol  dynasty.  This  is
the  branch,  moreover,  which  hitherto  has  remained  the  most
obscure  of  all  those  of  the  family  of  Chingiz  Khan.  The  other
divisions  of  the  empire  founded  by  the  great  conqueror,  have
all  found  abundant  historians,  not  only  in  China  and  Mongolia,
but  among  the  Musulman  writers  of  Western  Asia  and  among
Europeans.  The  great  works  of  Deguignes,  D*Ohs8on,  and
Howorth,  though  designed  to  tell  the  story  of  all  the  Chingizi
branches,  have  failed,  as  yet,  to  complete  that  of  the  house  of
Chaghatai.  The  two  older  authors  frankly  avow  the  want  of
materials,  as  their  reason  for  leaving  this  section  of  their  field
almost  untouched,  while  Sir  H.  Howorth,  though  he  is  under-
stood to  have  completed  his  researches  in  it,  has  been  prevented
by  other  circumstances,  from  giving  to  the  world  his  much
desired  volume  on  the  Chaghatais.

Perhaps  the  nearest  approaches  to  histories  of  the  Chaghatais
are  to  be  found,  (1)  in  an  excellent  paper  entitled  The  Ohagha-
tai  MughaJs^  by  Mr.  E.  E.  Oliver,  in  the  Journal  of  the  Boyal

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Line  of  Chagkatai,  29

Afliatio  Society/  where  the  writer  has  siuumarisedy  in  a  consecn-
tiye  mannery  most  of  that  which  can  be  gathered  on  the  subjeot,
from  European  sources  and  from  translations  of  Asiatic  authors ;
and  (2)  in  Erskine's  History  of  India  under  Baher  and  HumO'
ffun.  The  learned  translator  of  Saber's  Memoirs  had  read
widely  among  the  Musulman  authors,  and  compiled,  in  his  last
work,  a  more  complete  epitome  of  Ghaghatai  history,  from
original  sources,  than  is  to  be  found  in  any  other  European
writings — unless  possibly  in  those  of  Bussian  Orientalists^
whose  books,  indeed,  are  sealed  to  most  European  readers.
The  source  from  which  Mr.  Erskine  chiefly  drew  his  informa-
tion was  the  TariJeh-i-Bashidi,  which  he  not  only  studied,  but,
as  we  have  seen  in  the  Preface,  partially  translated  in  a
summarised  form.  The  Tarikh^-Bashidi^  howeyer,  does  not
begin  at  the  be^nning  of  the  Ghaghatai  history,  but  at  an
arbitrary  point,  dating  nearly  a  hundred  years  after  the  allot-
ment of  his  empire  by  Ghingiz  Ehan,  and  at  the  period  when  -
the  Ehans  of  Moghulistan,  haying  separated  themselyes  from
those  of  Mayara-un-Nahr,  a  distinct  history  of  their  branch
became  possible.  In  order,  then,  to  furnish  a  foundation  for
Mirza  Haidar's  chronicle,  it  is  necessary  to  fill  in,  howeyer
briefly,  this  gap  of  a  hundred  years,  and,  in  doing  so,  to  take  a
rapid  glance  at  the  two  allotments  which  bordered  on  that  of
Ghaghatai  Ehan — the  one  on  the  west  and  the  other  on  the
east — for  the  affairs  of  all  three  are,  to  some  extent,  interworen
at  certain  periods.

In  assigning  his  dominions  to  his  four  sons,  Ghingiz  Ehan
appears  to  haye  followed  an  ancient  Mongol  custom.  The  sons
of  a  chief  usually  ruled,  as  their  father's  deputies,  oyer  certain
nations  or  clans,  and  at  his  death  each  receiyed,  as  an  appanage,
the  section  of  the  population  which  had  been  under  lus  cara
Thus  the  distribution  was  rather  tribal  than  territorial,  and  the
tribes,  which  were  in  most  cases  nomadic,  sometimes  shifted
their  abode,  or  were  driyen,  by  enemies,  to  migrate  from  one
district  to  another.  These  moyements,  as  a  fact,  do  not  seem  to
haye  occurred  yery  frequently,  nor  to  haye  altered  the  position
of  the  main  body  of  the  people  to  any  great  extent.  It  will  be
more  conyenient,  therefore,  and  far  more  intelligible,  to  state
the  distribution  of  Ghingiz's  dominions,  as  far  as  possible,  in
territorial  terms.

Juji,  or  Tushi,  the  eldest  son  of  Ghingiz,  died  some  months
^  YoL  zz.,  New  Series,  pp.  72,  acq.

Digitized  by

Google

30  The  Line  of  Chaghatai,

before  his  father,  and  therefore,  never  became  supreme  Ehakan^
in  the  regions  he  goyemed ;  but  the j  descended  intact  to  his
own  son  and  successor,  Batu,  as  an  appanage  direct  from
Ghingiz.  The  centre  of  this  dominion  may  be  taken  to  be  the
plains  of  Eipchak,  but  it  comprised  all  the  country  lying  north
of  the  lower  course  of  the  Sir  Daria  (the  Sihun  or  Jaxartes)  and
of  the  Aral  and  Caspian  seas — "  wherever  the  hoofe  of  Mongol
horses  had  tramped  " ;  it  included  also  the  valleys  of  the  Volga
and  the  Don,  and  some  wide-spread  regions  on  the  north  shore
of  the  Black  Sea ;  while  towards  the  north  it  extended  beyond
the  Upper  Taik  (or  Ural  Eiver)  into  Western  Siberia.  On  its
southern  and  south-eastern  confines,  this  appanage  of  the  Juji
line  marched  with  that  of  Chingiz's  second  son,  Chaghatai,
whose  central  kingdom,  Mavara-un-Nahr,  or  Transoxiana,  was
situated  chiefly  between  the  rivers  Sir  and  Amu  (the  Jihun  or
Oxus),  but  included,  in  its  extension  towards  the  north-east,
the  hill  ranges  and  steppes  lying  beyond  the  right  bank  of  the
Sir,  east  of  the  Eipchak  plains,  and  west  of  lakes  Issigh-Eul  and
Ala-Nor.  Towards  the  east,  the  Chaghatai  domain  took  in  the
greater  part  of  the  region  now  known  as  Chinese  (or  Eastern)
Turkistan,  Farghana  (or  Elhokand)  and  Badakhshan;  while
towards  the  south  it  embraced  Eunduz,  Balkh,  and,  at  the
outset,  Ehorasan — a  country  which,  at  that  time,  spread  east-
ward to  beyond  Herat  and  Ghazni,  and  southward  to  Mekran.
This  was,  perhaps,  the  most  extensive  appanage  of  all,  and
within  its  limits  were  to  be  found  the  greatest  variety  of  races
and  tribes,  and  the  greatest  diversity  of  modes  of  life.  It
comprised,  on  the  one  hand,  some  of  the  richest  agricultural
districts,  peopled  by  settled  inhabitants,  far  advanced  in  Asiatic
civilisation,  and  some  of  the  most  flourishing  cities  in  Asia;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  rudest  hill  tribes,  or
Haziras  as  they  were  called  then,  had  their  homes  in  the

^  As  the  word  KhaMn  will  often  be  met  with  in  the  Tarilchr-i'^a£hiAi^  it
may  be  explained,  here,  that  the  difference  between  it  and  the  simple  form  of
Khan  was  one  of  d^ee.  Khakwn  was  a  form  of  Kadn  which  was,
originally,  the  peculiar  title  of  the  supreme  severely  of  the  Mongols,  while
the  subordinate  princes  of  the  Chaghatai,  and  other  Chinsizi  lines,  were
styled  only  Khan.  After  a  time  the  higher  title  degenerated,  and  was  used
by  many  besides  the  sovereign,  as  will  be  obsenr^  in  the  course  of  the
Tarihh'i'Rashidi.  Marco  Polo  always  wrote  Kawn^  and  applied  the  title
to  Eublai,  the  Mongol  Emperor  of  China.  The  meaning  of  Khaka/n^  Sir
H.  Tule  considered  to  be  "  Khan  of  Kha/nsP  or  the  equivalent  of  the  modem
Khdn-KhdncM,  (See  Marco  Polo,  Intro,  pp.  9,  10;  also  I^.  Terrien
de  Lacouperie  in  Babylonian  and  Oriental  Bec<»xl  for  December,  1888.)

Digitized  by

Google

The  Line  of  Chaghatau  31

sonthern  highlands,  and  large  tracts  of  barren  steppe-land  were
occupied  by  almost  equally  primitive  nomads,  who  droye  their
flocks  from  hill  to  valley  and  valley  to  hill,  in  search  of  pasture,
according  to  season.

Eastward,  again,  of  this  '^  middle  dominion,"  as  it  was  often
termed,  came  that  of  Oktai  (or  Ogodai),  the  third  son  of  Chingiz
Khan.  His  allotment  was  the  country  of  the  original  Mongols
with  that  of  the  tribes  immediately  around  it,  while  he  was  also
heir  to  his  father's  capital,  Earakorum,  and  to  the  supreme  *
authority  over  the  Mongol  people.  On  its  western  confines  his
dominion  bordered,  at  first,  on  that  of  Ghaghatai,  in  the  country
since  known  as  Jungar  or  Zungaria  ^ — a  region  that,  for  want  of
more  exact  boundaries,  may  be  roughly  described  as  lying  north
of  the  Tian-Shan,  from  about  IJrumtsi  on  the  east,  to  the  river
Ghu  on  the  west,  and  having  for  its  middle  line  the  upper
course  of  the  Hi  river.  This  region  became  the  subject  of  much
contention  among  the  descendants  of  Oktai  and  Ghaghatai,  in
the  latter  half  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  as  the  house  of  the
former  declined,  the  greater  part  of  it,  if  not  the  whole,  appears
to  have  gradually  merged  into  the  territories  of  the  Ghaghatai
Ehans ;  while  the  clans  that  inhabited  it,  were  dispersed  among
the  tribes  of  Transoxiana  and  Eipchak,  and  their  chiefe  lived
in  obscurity  under  the  Ehans,  or  conquerors,  for  the  time
being.

Ghaghatai  himself  appears  to  have  been  a  just  and  energetic
governor,  though  perhaps  rough  and  uncouth,  and  addicted  to
the  vice,  common  among  the  Mongols,  of  hard  drinking.  At
any  rate,  he  was  animated  by  the  soldier-like  spirit  of  his
father,  and  succeeded  in  keeping  order  among  as  heterogeneous
a  population,  as  a  kingdom  was  ever  composed  of.  In  1232,  for
instance,  when  sedition  showed  itself  at  Bokhara,  he  acted  with
promptitude,  if  with  severity,  and  saved  his  country  from  a  far^
reaching  calamity.  He  was,  in  all  probability,  an  old-fashioned
Mongol,  for  we  read  that  he  stood  by  the  Yasak,  or  code  of  laws
instituted  by  Ghingiz  Ehan,  and  that  he  showed  little  favour
to  what  was,  at  that  time  in  his  dominions,  the  comparatively
new  and  rising  religion  of  Islam.  He  must,  however,  have  been
fairly  tolerant,  for  it  is  recorded  that  his  minister  for  Trans-
oxiana was  a  Musulman,  called  the  Jumilat-ul-Mulk,  and  that
mosques  and  colleges  were  founded  during  his  reign.  But  if
Ghaghatai  did  not  lean  towards  Islam,  neither  does  it  appear

^  X0.,  the  country  of  the  Jungar,  or  Zungar— the  2e^^>Aan<i— E^lm&ks.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

32  The  Line  of  Chaghaiau

that  he  ever  inolined  towards  Christianity,  though  that  religion,
as  practised  by  the  Nestorians,  must  haye  been  familiar  to  him.
It  existed  in  his  own  dominions  and  in  those  of  his  brother
Oktai,  who  seems  to  have  been  thoroughly  tolerant,  and  to  haye
encouraged  at  his  capital,  Karakorum,  every  form  of  worship,
besides  the  enlistment  in  his  service  of  men  of  all  religions — a
circumstance  which  had,  as  will  be  seen  later,  an  important
bearing  on  subsequent  history.

Chaghatai's  own  capital  was  at  Almdligh,  in  the  valley  of  the
Upper  Ili,  near  the  site  of  the  present  Eulja,  and  consequently
in  the  extreme  east  of  his  dominion*  His  reason  for  filing  it  in
that  remote  position,  instead  of  at  Bokhara  or  Samarkand,  was
probably  one  of  necessity.  His  Mongol  tribesmen  and  followers
— the  mainstay  of  his  power — were  passionately  fond  of  the  life
of  the  steppes:  the  only  existence  worthy  of  men  and  con-
querors, was  that  passed  in  the  felt  tents  of  their  ancestors,
among  the  flocks  and  herds  that  they  tended  in  time  of  peace,
and  led  with  them  on  their  distant  campaigns.  The  dwellers
in  houses  and  towns  were,  in  their  eyes,  a  degenerate  and
effeminate  race ; — the  tillers  of  the  soil,  slaves  who  toiled  like
cattle,  in  order  that  their  betters  might  pass  their  time  in
luxury.  They  would  serve  no  Ehan  who  did  not  pass  a  life
worthy  of  free-born  men  and  "  gentlemen  rovers " ;  and  Cha-
ghatai  and  his  immediate  successors  probably  saw,  as  his  later
descendants  are  described  by  Mirza  Haidar  to  have  seen,  that
the  one  way  of  retaining  the  allegiance  of  his  own  people,  was
to  humour  their  desires  in  this  respect,  and  live,  with  them,  a
nomad's  life.

Ghaghatai  died  in  1241,  after  a  reign  of  about  fourteen  years,
and  within  the  same  year  the  death  of  Oktai  occurred  at  Kara-
korum. Thus  two  out  of  four  of  the  chief  divisions  of  the
Mongol  empire  were  suddenly  deprived  of  their  sovereigns,  with
the  result  that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  successors  of  Ghingiz
were  set  disputing  for  the  succession.  ''Among  the  most
violent  as  regards  party  spirit  and  warlike  temper,"  writes
Mr.  Oliver  in  his  summary  of  this  period,  "  were  some  of  the
representatives  of  Ghaghatai.  For  the  time  being,  it  ended  in
Turakina,  Oktai's  widow,  being  appointed  regent;  but  there
were  set  up  lasting  disputes  among  the  rival  ckimants,  and  the
seeds  of  much  future  mischief  were  sown.  For  long  after,  the
disputes  regarding  the  succession  to  the  throne  of  the  great
Eaan  became  inextricably  mixed  up  with  the  affairs,  more

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Line  of  Chaghatai,  33

especially  of  the  eastern  part,  of  Chaghatai's  Khanate,  and  it  is
impossible  to  give  an  intelligible  acoonnt  of  the  latter  without
occasional  references  to  the  former."  ^

Little  is  known  of  the  way  in  which  Chaghatai  disposed  of
his  kingdom  at  his  death,  and  there  appears  to  be  no  mention,
anywhere,  of  his  having  followed  the  ancestral  custom  of  his
house  in  distributing  it  among  his  descendants.  He  is  recorded
to  have  left  a  numerous  family,  but  to  have  been  succeeded  by
a  grandson,  and  a  minor,  named  Kara  Hulaku,  while  his  widow,
Ebuskun,  assumed  the  regency.  This  statement,  howeyer,  seems
to  apply  to  Turkistan,  Transoxiana,  and  the  adjacent  regions :
at  all  eyents  not  to  Eashghar,  Yarkand,  Ehotan,  Aksu,  and  the
southern  slopes  of  the  Tian  Shan  mountains — or,  in  other  words,
to  the  province  south  of  the  line  of  the  Tian  Shan,  which  is
called,  in  our  times.  Eastern  Turkistan^  As  regards  this
province,  Mirza  Haidar  tells  us  that  it  was  given  by  Chaghatai,
presumably  at  his  death,  to  the  clan  or  house  of  Dughlat,  whose
members  were  reckoned  to  be  of  the  purest  Mongol  descent,
and  one  of  the  noblest  divisions  of  that  people.  We  shall  hear
more  of  this  clan  and  the  province  they  ruled,  farther  on ;  but
the  important  point  to  notice  here,  with  reference  to  subsequent
events,  is  that  the  Dughlats  were  made  hereditary  chiefs,  or
Amirs,  of  the  various  districts  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  as  far  back
as  the  time  of  Chaghatai,  for  it  is  chiefly  on  this  incident  that
hinges  the  permanent  division  of  the  Chaghatai  realm  into  two
branches,  at  a  later  date.

Ebuskun's  sway  was  a  short  one,  for  as  early  as  1247  Almaligh
was  attacked  by  Euyuk,  the  son  and  successor  of  Oktai,  and  she
was  deprived  of  her  power.  For  a  time,  disorder  prevailed
throughout  the  Ehanate ;  but  Euyuk  seems  to  have  had  suffi-
cient power  to  set  up  one  Tasu  (or  Isu)  Mangu,  who,  being  him-
self a  worthless  debauchee,  governed  the  country  through  the
agency  of  a  Musulman  Wazir,  called  Ehw&ja  Bahd-ud-Din.
Euyuk  died  within  three  years  of  his  accession,  and  was  followed,
as  supreme  Ehakan,  by  Mangu,  who,  in  1252,  restored  Eara
Hulaku  and  Ebuskun  to  their  former  dignities.  Baha-ud-Din
and  Yasu  Mangu  were  now,  in  their  turn,  removed,  the  former
being  put  to  death  at  once.  Eara  Hulaku  died  within  a  few
months  of  his  restoration,  and  after  his  death  we  hear  no  more
of  Ebuskun.  Hulaku's  throne  passed  over  to  his  own  widow — one
Organah  Ehatun — whose  first  act  was  to  execute  Tasu  Mangu,
1  Oliver,  pp.  90,  91.

e

Digitized  by

QjOo^^z

34  The  Line  of  Chaghatai,

ander  some  compact,  which  appears  to  have  been  made  for  his
riddance,  between  her  predecessor  and  the  Ehakdn  Mangn.

Organah  is  described  as  possessing  mnch  beauty,  wisdom,
and  influence,  and  as  long  as  Mangu  lived  she  was  allowed  to
reign  in  peace.  But  he  died  in  1259,  when  a  war  of  succession
to  the  supreme  Ehak&nate  broke  out  between  his  brothers
Irtukbuka  and  Eublai.  In  this  strife,  the  Ghaghatai  princess
appears  to  have  taken  no  part,  but  she  suffered  nevertheless,
for  in  1261  she  was  driven  from  Almaligh  by  Algu  (a  great-
grandson  of  Ghingiz),  who  had  been  nominated  by  Irtukbuka  to
rule  in  her  place,  and  to  bring  over  the  Ghaghatai  forces  to  assist
him  in  his  war  with  Kublai.  Algu,  however,  betrayed  his
patron,  who,  abandoning  Earakorum  to  his  rival  Eublai,  marched
against  Almaligh,  whence  Algu  had  to  fly  for  safety,  first  to
Eashghar  and  Ehotan,  and  finally  to  Samarkand.  Irtukbuka
spent  the  winter  of  1263  in  Almaligh,  devastating  the  district
and  putting  to  death  many  of  Algu's  followers.  By  these
excesses  he  weakened  his  own  army  and  resources  to  so  great  a
degree,  that  he  had  to  submit  to  Eublai  and  make  peace  with
Algu,  stipulating  to  retain  for  himself  a  portion  only,  of  the
eastern  part  of  the  Ghaghatai  Ehanate.  These  transactions
brought  about  not  only  a  reconciliation  between  Algu  and
Organah,  but  a  marriage.  Both,  however,  died  within  a  few
months,  and  Irtukbuka,  having  done  homage  to  Eublai,  by
prostrating  himself  at  the  door  of  Eublai's  tent,  the  latter
remained  supreme  from  Peking  to  Transoziana,  and  acquired  the
title  of  Ehakan. He  was  the  ''  Great  Eaan  "  of  Marco  Polo.

But  a  rival  was  beginning  to  show  himself  in  the  person  of
Eaidu,  a  grandson  of  Oktai.  This  prince  was  plotting,  in
western  Eipchak,  for  the  assistance  of  his  uncle  Batu,  in
asserting  his  claim  to  the  province  of  Turkistan — the  north-
western division  of  the  Ghaghatai  Ehanate— and  probably  also
for  the  region  then  becoming  known  as  Moghulistan,  which  lay
immediately  to  the  eastward  of  Turkistan,  and  comprised  the
Zungar  country,  already  alluded  to.  At  the  death  of  Algu,
Eublai  nominated  Mubarak  Shah,  a  son  of  Algu  and  Organah,
to  the  Ghaghatai  succession,  but  immediately  afterwards  is
said  to  have  appointed,  as  his  vice-regent,  another  great-
grandson  of  Ghaghatai,  named  Borak  (or  Bar^k),  to  support
Mubarak  Shah  in  resisting  Eaidu.  So  far  from  assisting  the
young  Ehan,  Bordk  drove  him  from  the  throne,  made  common
cause  with  EaidUi  and  for  a  time  exercised  joint  sovereignty

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Line  of  Chaghatau  35

with  the  latter  over  Transoxiana.  But  jealousies  were  not
long  in  showing  themselves  between  the  allies,  and  quarrels
ensued  which  were  only  partially  composed  at  a  kvriltai,  or
conference  of  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes,  held  in  Turkistan  in  1269,
when  certain  points  were  agreed  on,  the  most  important  being
''the  implied  recognition  of  Kaidu  as  the  rightful  Ehakan
of  the  Moghuls,  which  from  this  time  was  extended  by  the
Ohaghatai  Khans  both  to  him  and  his  son  Ghapar."  ^

Borak  now  proceeded  to  indemnify  himself  by  invading
Ehorasan,  but  his  campaigns  resulted  in  nothing  but  defeat,
and  eventually  he  retired  to  Bokhara,  where  he  died,  or  was
perhaps  poisoned,  in  1270.  "  His  reign,"  says  Mr.  Oliver,  "  had
extended  only  to  some  four  years,  but  they  were  years  of  misery
and  destruction  to  some  of  the  fairest  lands  and  most  prosperous
cities  on  the  Zarafshan.  His  death  delivered  them  from  at
least  one  cowardly  tyrant  and  persecutor,  though  they  still
continued  to  suffer  from  the  fratricidal  wars  that  constantly
raged  between  the  rival  chiefs  of  the  lines  of  Oktai  and  Ghag-
hatai,  and  the  unhappy  citizens  had  even  more  reason  than
Venice  of  old  for  invoking  '  a  plague  on  both  their  houses.'

''  Borak's  death  left  Eaidu  sole  master  of  the  western  portion  of
the  Khanate.  The  dispossessed  Mubarak  Shah  and  other  chiefs
took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  him,  thus  rendering  him  a  still
more  dangerous  rival  of  Kublai.  In  1270  (668  h.),  much  to  the
indignation  of  the  sons  of  Borak,  he  nominated  Nikpai,  a
grandson  of  Ghaghatai,  chief  of  the  tribe,  but  in  less  than  two
years  Nikpai  seems  to  have  revolted,  been  killed,  and  succeeded
by  Tuka  Timur,  another  scion  of  the  house  (circa  1271,  or  670  h.),
who,  in  less  than  two  years  more,  was  ousted  by  Dava,  the  son
of  Borak  {circa  1273,  or  672  h.).  Dava  had  made  up  his  quarrel
with  Kaidu,  his  claims  having  been  constantly  urged  by  the
latter's  son  Ghapar.  His  reign  was  the  longest  ever  enjoyed
by  a  descendant  of  Ghaghatai,  and  the  Khanate  might  have
hoped  for  some  peace  from  an  alliance  between  the  rival  houses,
but  unfortunately  a  third  firebrand  appeared  on  the  scene.
Abaka,  the  Il-Khan  of  Persia,  who  had  always  acknowledged
Kublai  as  the  rightful  Khakan  in  opposition  to  Kaidu,  and  who
had  never  forgiven  Borak's  invasion  of  Khorasan,  was  only
watching  his  opportunity,  and  his  Wazir,  Shams-ud-Din  Juvaini,^

*  Oliver,  p.  96.

*  This  Wazir  was  brother  of  Ala-ud-Din  Ata-Mulk,  Javaini,  the  historian
and  author  of  the  Tarikl^-i^cUidn  Kmhai — a  work  that  will  be  often  alluded
to  ilEtfther  on.

e  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

36  The  Line  of  Chagkatai.

had  only  to  draw  his  attention  to  a  favourable  omen,  to  start
him  for  Bokhara,  which  he  entered  abont  1274  (672  h.),  plunder-
ing, burning,  and  murdering  right  and  left."  ^

Dava  reigned  for  some  thirty-two  years  and  was  almost  con-
stantly at  war.  He  possessed  himself  of  Ghazni,  and  from  that
stronghold,  as  a  base,  made  seyeral  expeditions  into  India,
ravaging  the  Punjab  and  Sind,  and  sacking  at  different  times
between  1296  and  1301  Peshawar,  Multan,  Lahore,  and  Delhi.
In  the  meantime,  Eaidu  had  involved  himself  in  wars  of  long
duration  with  the  Ehakan  Eublai,  and  as  these  took  place
shortly  before  the  time  of  Marco  Polo's  travels  through  Central
Asia  and  China,  detailed  accounts  of  some  of  them  have  been
handed  down  to  us  in  his  narrative.  These  wars  extended,  from
first  to  last,  over  a  period  of  some  thirty  years,  and  were  not
even  concluded  in  1294,  when  Eublai  died  and  was  succeeded
as  Ehakan  by  his  grandson  Uljaitu.^  The  credit  indeed  of
finally  overthrowing  Eaidu  is  due  rather  to  this  prince,  and
moreover  it  was  not  Eaidu  alone  whom  he  subdued,  but  Dava
also,  for  this  last,  on  his  return  from  a  campaign  in  India  in
1301,  seems  to  have  allied  himself  with  Eaidu  and  to  have
assisted  in  the  wars  against  the  Ehakan.  Eaidu's  death  followed
quickly  on  his  final  reverse,  and  must  have  occurred  in  1302,
about.  His  son  Chapar,  backed  by  the  influence  of  Dava,
obtained  the  recognition  of  his  succession  to  the  Ehanate  of
the  eastern  division  of  the  country,  and  both  having  sent  envoys
to  nijaitu  bearing  professions  of  submission,  a  period  of  peace
should,  it  might  appear,  have  been  established.  But  this  was
not  the  case.  Within  a  year  of  Eaidu's  death,  Dav&  and  Chapar
fell  out,  and  the  latter  was  defeated  in  a  battle  fought  between
Samarkand  and  Ehojand.  This  engagement  was  followed  by
several  others,  victory  falling  sometimes  to  one  side  and  some-
times to  the  other,  until  at  length  the  Ehakan  Uljaitu  routed
Chapar  and  obliged  him  to  submit  to  Dava.

The  death  of  Dav&  occurred  in  1306,  and  he  was  succeeded
by  his  son  Euyuk,  who  lived  only  two  years,  and  was  in  his
turn  followed  by  a  descendant  of  Chaghatai  named  Taliku.
This  prince  is  said  to  have  adopted  the  Musulman  religion,  and
in  consequence  to  have  been  put  to  death  by  his  own  officers,
who  raised  in  his  place,  one  Eabak,  a  son  of  Dav&. Eabak  was

^  Oliver,  pp.  97,  98.

'  Properly  **  Tlmur  Uljaitu ;"  the  Tie-mu-urh,  or  Ching  Tsung,  of  the
Chinese.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Line  of  Chaghatai,  37

installed  in  1309,  and  was  at  once  attacked  by  Ghapdr,  in  alliance
with  several  members  of  the  house  of  Oktai.  The  allies  were
beaten  in  a  number  of  fights,  and  eventually  fled  for  refuge  to
the  territory  of  the  Khakdn  (now  Kuluk,^  a  nephew  of  Uljaitu),
while  their  dominions  were  appropriated  by  the  house  of
Chaghatai,  the  clans  who  inhabited  them  becoming  in  part  its
subjects  and  in  part  those  of  the  Kipchaks.  "  With  Chapir,"
says  Mr.  Oliver,  "  the  house  of  Oktai  disappears,  though  repre-
sentatives came  to  the  front  for  a  brief  period  again  in  the
persons  of  Ali  and  of  Danishmanjah,  while  Timur  (Tamerlane),
after  displacing  the  family  of  Chaghatai,  selected  his  puppet
khans  from  the  Oktai  stock.*'  ^  Within  a  year  of  his  installation,
Eabak  made  way  for  an  elder  brother,  who  ascended  the  throne
of  the  Chaghatai  under  the  name  of  Isan  Bugha,  though  his
historical  identity  (in  connection  with  this  name  at  least)  is
somewhat  uncertain.  He  provoked  the  Ehakan  into  war,  and
was  beaten  almost  at  the  outset  of  his  rule;  afterwards  he
invaded  Khorasan  with  a  like  result,  and  was  finally  forced  to
fly  from  the  country,  before  the  combined  forces  of  one  of  his
brothers  and  of  the  seventh  Il-Khdn,  or  King  of  Persia.  This
occurred  in  1321,  when  Eabak  seems  to  have  resumed  the  throne
which  he  had  abdicated  twelve  years  previously.

It  was  about  this  time  that  a  permanent  division  occurred  in
the  realm  of  Chaghatai,  the  two  parts  being  known  by  the  general
names  of  Mavara-un-Nahr  (or  Transoxiana)  and  Moghulistan
(or  Jatah),  though  there  were  other  provinces  attached  to  each
section.  The  story  of  the  Ehans  of  the  former  branch,  roughly
sketched  above  need  not  be  followed  further,  as  the  history  of
Mirza  Haidar,  which  chiefly  concerns  us,  belongs  to  the  other  or
eastern  division,  and  is  told  by  him,  a  descendant  of  its  princes,
in  fuU.  It  is  only  necessary  to  remark  with  regard  to  Mavara-
un-Nahr,  that  from  the  time  of  this  division  forward,  the  fifty
years  that  remained  till  the  great  Amir,  Timur,  made  himself
master  of  the  land,  confusion  and  discord  prevailed.  During
those  few  years  the  names  of  fifteen  Ehans  appear  in  the  lists —
some  of  them  not  even  of  the  Chaghatai  line — together  with
some  periods  of  anarchy  when  no  name  occurs. '  The  rise  of
Timur  was  the  turning-point  from  decadence  to  power  in
Mavahi-un-Nahr,  but  at  the  same  time,  the  death-blow  to  the
original  line  of  Chaghatai. He  reduced  the  country  to  order,

^  Hai  Shan,  or  Wu  Tsung,  in  the  Chinese  annaU.
"  Oliver,  p.  106.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

38  The  Line  of  CJtagkatau

and  ruled  with  uncontrolled  power,  though  he  left  to  the  Khans,
whom  he  set  up  or  pulled  down  at  pleasure,  certain  dignities
and  privileges  which  were  nothing  more  than  nominal.

We  have  seen  already,  how  near  the  empire  of  Chaghatai  came
to  being  divided  during  the  wars  of  Kaidu.  This  Prince  was,
as  far  as  can  be  gleaned,  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  Oktai  line,  and
an  active  and  determined  soldier.  During  his  struggles  for
supremacy,  he  held  a  large  tract  of  country  carved  chiefly  out
of  the  Chaghatai  appanage,  though  taken  partly  from  that  of
Oktai.  It  is  not  clear  what  were  the  limits  of  the  territory  he
held  thus  temporarily,  and  indeed  it  is  probable  that  no  actual
limits  were  ever  acknowledged.  In  aU  likelihood  his  power
extended  chiefly  over  certain  tribes  who  were  nomads,  or
dwellers  in  tents,  and  thus  in  the  habit  of  moving  their  abodes
when  expedient;  such  movements,  too,  may  have  been  more
frequent  than  usual  about  Eaidu's  period,  for  the  tribesmen
must  have  been  constantly  entangled  in  the  prevailing  wars,
and  subject  therefore,  to  the  changes  of  fortune  of  those  with  or
against  whom  they  had  to  serve.  His  dominion,  consequently,
would  have  been  more  tribal  than  territorial  in  its  extent.  At
any  rate  it  would  seem  that  during  Eaidu's  last  days — the
period  when  he  was  allied  with  Borak — his  power  reached  from
the  Talas  Biver  and  Lake  Balkash  on  the  west,  to  Eara-Ehoja
(between  Turfan  and  Hami)  on  the  east,  and  that  it  thus
included  nearly  the  whole  length  of  the  Tian  Shan  mountains,
together  with  the  Zungar  country  on  the  north,  and  Eashghar,
Yarkand,  Aksu,  etc.,  on  the  south  of  them.  Although  this  wide
tract  never  fell  permanently  to  him  or  his  race,  his  temporary
hold  over  it  seems  to  have  assisted  in  marking  it  out  as  a  self-
contained  eastern  division  of  the  Chaghatai  realm,  and  the
greater  portion  of  it — all  that  lay  to  the  north  of  the  Tian
Shan — ^acquired,  about  this  time,  the  name  of  Moghulistan,  or
vulgarly  ^'  Jatah."  It  was,  above  all  parts  of  that  realm,  the  land
of  the  purely  nomad  Moghul  (or  Mongol)  tribes,  as  distinguished
from  the  settled  populations  of  Turkistan,  Farghana,  and  Ma-
vara-un-Nahr  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  mountaineers  of  Hisar,
Earatigin,  Badakhshan,  etc.,  on  the  other.  It  was  the  land  to
or  from  which  the  tent-dwelling  population  could  migrate,  and
carry  with  them  their  only  wealth — their  flocks  and  herds —
when  safety  or  other  interests  demanded  a  move ;  and  it  became,
moreover,  as  Mirza  Haidar's  history  will  show,  a  sort  of  refuge
for  the  defeated  and  discontented  among  those  tribes  and  the

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Line  of  Chaghatau  89

neighbouring  nations,  and  the  ootmtry  that  the  true  Moghnl
loved  to  call  his  own.

Thus,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  centnry,  when  the
Ehans  of  Chaghatai  were  rapidly  declining  in  power,  and  conld
scarcely  maintain  themselyes  in  their  central  kingdom  of
M^yara-un-Nahr,  this  eastern  division,  or  Moghnlistan,  appears
scarcely  to  have  felt  their  sway.  The  hereditary  Dughlat  Amirs
who,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  set  np  by  Chaghatai,  governed
in  detail,  with  more  or  less  power,  in  the  different  cities  and  dis-
tricts of  the  region  sonth  of  the  Tian  Shan  (or  Eastern  Tnrkistan),
and  left  scarcely  a  trace  behind  them  in  any  history  bat  that
of  one  of  their  own  clan — Mirza  Haidar.  They  acted  in  the
name  of  the  Chaghatai  Ehan  of  the  time,  and  though  nominally
hereditary,  they  seem  in  practice  to  have  held  office  very  much
at  the  pleasure  of  the  tribesmen  whose  affairs  they  administered;
while  the  popularity  of  each  one  probably  depended  more  on  the
degree  of  independence  he  was  able  to  secure  for  the  small
section  that  regarded  him  as  its  chief,  than  on  his  hereditary
rights.  Still  in  the  early  days,  the  power  of  some  of  them  must
have  been  considerable,  and  it  seems  to  have  risen  in  degree,  as
that  of  the  Chaghatai  Khans  declined.  They  fought  among
themselves  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  the  people  suffered,  no
doubt,  from  the  consequent  disorder.  It  would  be  quite  natural
therefore  that  Is&n  Bugha,  a  Moghul  by  descent,  when  forced
to  retire  from  Mavard-un-Nahr,  should  turn  his  steps  towards
Moghulistan,  and  its  companion  province  south  of  the  moun-
tains.

Just  at  this  point  the  histories  of  the  period  are  discordant.
As  remarked  above,  the  identity  of  Isan  Bugha  is  to  some
extent  uncertain.  He  is  known  to  have  been  a  son  of  Dava
Ehan,  and  is  believed  to  have  had  some  brothers.  Abul  Ghdzi
Ehan,  the  historian  King  of  Ehwarizm  of  the  seventeenth
century,  speaks  of  him  as  "  II  Ehwaja,  sumamed  Isan  Bugha."
On  the  other  hand,  Khwandamir  makes  Isan  Bugha  continue  to
reign  over  the  western  branch  of  the  Chaghatai  until  his  death,
and  alludes  to  one  Imil  Ehwaja  (apparently  another  son  of
Dava)  as  having  established  himself  in  Moghulistan.^  It  is
possible  that  Imil,  or  II,  may  denote  one  and  the  same  person ;  ^

^  See  Abul  Gh&zi's  ExiU  des  MongoU^  transl.  by  Desmaisons,  pp.  164-6,
and  Khwdndamir's  Habib  w  Siydr^  transl.  by  Defir^mery  in  Journal  AaicU.
4"*  S^rie,  torn  xix.,  pp.  270  and  280.

*  Enkine  notes  (kigt.  i.,  p.  37)  that  in  the  Tb/rikhri-Rashidi  he  is  called
Aia  or  Mai  Bugha ;  in  the  Shajrat^  p.  378,  and  by  Price  (Jfuftam.  Hitit.^

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

46  The  Line  of  Chaghatai.

but  however  this  may  be,  if  the  nsually  accurate  AbtQ  Gh&zi
be  followed^  we  learn  that :  "  As  there  remained  no  longer  in
Eashghar^  Tarkand,  Alah-Tagh  or  Uighuristan,  any  prince  de-
scended from  Chaghatai  Khan,  whose  authority  was  acknow-
ledged,  the  Moghul  Amirs  held  a  councily  at  which  it  was
decided  to  summon  Isan  Bugha  from  Bokhara;  and  they
proclaimed  him  Khan  of  Kashghar,  Tarkand,  Alah-Tagh,  and  of
Moghulistan."^  This  would  make  it  appear  that  Isan  Bugha
was  still  reigning  in  Mayara-un-Nahr  when  summoned  by  the
Dughlat  Amirs;  but  the  point  is  doubtful,  for  we  have  just
been  told  that  he  had  fled  to  Moghulistan.  In  any  case,  the
dates  of  the  two  events  agree,  for  the  disappearance  of  Isan
Bugha  from  Mavara-un-Nahr  is  recorded  by  one  author  to  have
taken  place  in  721  h.  (1321  a.d.),  and  this  is  just  the  year
when  he  is  said,  by  the  other,  to  have  been  summoned  to
Eashghar  and  made  Ehan  of  Moghulistan,  with  (it  may  be
assumed)  its  dependencies.

Thus,  although  the  chronology  and  even  some  of  the  events
of  the  times  are  uncertain,  the  final  division  of  the  Chaghatai
Khanate  appears  to  have  taken  place  in  or  about  the  year  1321,
and  it  resulted  in  two  separate  lines  of  Ehans  being  established
which  were  never  afterwards  united.  The  western  branch  was,
a  little  later,  superseded  by  Timur,  whose  descendants,  through
Baber,  gave  the  ruling  house  to  India,  which  has  gone,  for
three  centuries,  by  the  name  of  "Moghul";  though,  as  we
shall  see  from  Mirza  Haidar's  narrative,  it  was,  in  its  early
days,  known — and  perhaps  more  correctly — as  the  "  Chaghatai."
The  history  of  the  eastern  branch — that  of  the  true  "  Moghuls  "
of  Central  Asia — we  may  now  leave  to  be  told,  in  detail,  by  our
author;  but  as  this  line  was  several  times  broken,  or  sub-
divided, and  as  the  subject  is  a  complicated  one,  it  may  aid  the
reader  to  give  (immediately  below),  in  the  form  of  an  epitomised
statement,  a  general  view  of  the  succession  of  the  Moghul
Ehans  from  the  time  of  Isan  Bugha  onwards.  It  is  extracted
almost  entirely  from  Erskine's  History  of  India,^  and  was  com-

vol.  iii.,  p.  7),  following  the  Khuldsat-ul-Akbart  11,  or  -4i7,  KhwAja ;  by
Sharaf-ud-Din  (P6tis'  transl.  torn,  i.,  p.  26),  Airnal ;  and  by  Abul  Ghizi,
**  Aimal  Khwdja,  who  reigned  in  Mavara-un-Nahr  under  the  title  of  Isdn
Bugha  Khan."  As  regards  the  name  Ais,  howeyer,  there  is  some  mistake  due
to  a  misreading  of  the  text  by  Erskine.  The  name  nowhere  occurs  in  this
form.

^  Desmaisons,  p.  165.

'  Vol  L,  Appendix  B.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

'The  Line  of  Chagkdtai,  41

piled  by  him  from  the  Tarikh-i-Bcuhidi ;  bnt  it  contains  some
emendations  from  the  Chinese  history  of  the  Ming  dynasty,  as
translated  by  Dr.  Bretschneider,  for  the  period  immediately
succeeding  the  reign  of  Ehizir  Ehwaja,  and  a  few  other  altera-
tions besides.

It  is  abont  this  period  that  Mirza  Haidar*s  chronicle  is  at  its
weakest ;  and  it  is  also  a  period  where  some  of  the  best  of  the
Musnlman  authors  fail  us.  The  Bavaat  us  8afd  of  Mir  Ehwand
and  the  Zafar-Ndma  of  Sharaf-ud-Din,  both  diflfer  from  the
Ta/rikh-i'-Baskidiy  and  the  Ming  history  is  at  variance  with  all
three.  Thus  between  Ehizir  Ehwaja  and  Yais  Ehan,  the
Bavaat  us  8afd  and  the  Zafar-Ndma  show  two  reigning  Ehans
of  Moghulistan,  and  the  Tarikh-i-Bashidi  also  gives  accounts
of  two  only,  though  the  names  in  the  last-mentioned  work  are
not  the  same  as  in  the  other  two  histories.^  But  the  Tarikh-i-
Bashidi,  in  another  place,  relates  that  six  Ehans,  including
Ehizir  Ehwaja  and  Yais,  were  raised  to  the  throne  by  the
Dughlat  Amir,  Ehudaidad,  thus  placing  four  between  them.
These  Ehans  are —

Shama-i-Jah^,

Nakhsh-i-Jahan,

Muhammad,

Shir  Muhammad,

and  the  author  states  them  in  this  order;  so  that  the  three
which  correspond  with  the  names  of  those  given  in  the  Chinese
histories,  do  not  fall  in  the  same  succession.  Again  none  of  the
Musulman  authors  supply  the  date  of  succession  for  any  of  the
intermediate  Ehans  whom  they  mention.  The  Chinese  annals
show  three  Ehans  for  the  period  between  Ehizir  Ehwdja  and
Yais,  and  furnish  the  year  of  succession  for  each  of  them,  besides
giving  dates  of  other  contemporary  occurrences,  which  indicate
that  a  particular  Ehan  was  reigning  at  a  particular  time.
The  annals  chiefly  refer  to  tributary  missions  and  appeals  for
assistance  addressed  to  the  Chinese  Emperor,  but  it  is  precisely
such  occurrences  as  these  that  the  Clunese  chroniclers  record
with  care  and  exactness.  Their  dynastic  histories  are  believed
to  be  not  always  trustworthy,  but  they  are,  at  any  rate,  com-
pilations, more  or  less  methodical,  from  State  documents  and
are  not  based  merely  on  tradition,  as  are  most  of  the  Musulman

^  As  the  Haft  IkHim  copies  from  the  Tarikh-i-Bcuhidi,  and  does  not  copy
completely,  it  need  not  be  referred  to  as  an  authority.  (See  Not,  et  Extraita,
ziv.,  pp.  474  teq.)

Digitized  by

Google

42

The  Line  of  CkaghatcS.

historieB.  As  mere  records  of  eyents  and  dates,  therefore,  the
Chinese  accounts  are  likely  to  be  the  best  guides ;  and  I  should
be  inclined  to  snbstitnte  their  data,  regarding  this  period,  for
those  of  Mirza  Haidar.  I  haye,  howeyer,  shown  both  in  amend-
ing Mr.  Erskine's  epitome,  as  will  be  seen  (at  p.  46).  A  full
extract  from  Dr.  Bretschneider's  translation  of  the  Chinese
history  is  also  appended  immediately  below.

The  three  lists  just  spoken  of,  stand  as  follows : —

{k.)—The  Bamca  us  Safd"^  and  the  Zafwr-Ndma?

(1.)  Khizir  Khwdja .  .died  1399

(2.)  Muhammad  Eh£n  .... No  date
(3.)  Nakhsh-i-Jahan ....  „

(4.)  Vais  Khan  . . .  .  „

(B.) — The  Chinese  Annals  of  the  Ming  dynasty.^

(1.)  Khizir  Khwaja ....  died  1399

(2.)  Shama-i-Jahan . . . .  „ 1408

(3.)  Muhammad  Khan . .  „ 1416

(4.)  Nakhsh-i-Jahan . . . .  „ 1418

(5.)  Vais  Khan „ 1428

(G.)—The  Tarikh^-Bashidi.

(1.)  Khizir  Khwaja
(2.)  Shama-i-Jahan
(3.)  Nakhsh-i-Jahdn
(4.)  Muhammad  Khan
(5.)  Shir  Muhammad
(6.)  Vais  Khan .

died  1420
No  date

died  1428-9

Of  the  two  dates  furnished  by  the  Tarikh-i-BaAidi^  the  one
indicating  the  year  of  Khizir  Khwaja's  death  is  certainly  in-
correct, for  there  is  evidence  to  show,  in  addition  to  the  con-
currence of  the  authorities  named  above,  that  this  Khan  did
not  reign  up  to  the  year  1420.  The  portion  of  the  MaUa*
Asaadin,  of  Abdur  Bazzak,  translated  by  Quatremere,^  though
it  contains  no  list  of  these  Khans,  makes  mention  of  ambas-
sadors having  been  sent  to  Shah  Bukh,  of  Mavara-un-Nahr,  in

*  Price's  Muham.  Hist.,  iii.,  p.  300.
'  P^tis  de  la  Croix,  Hist,  de  TVmtir  Bee,  ill.,  p.  213.
'  Bretschneider,  Med.  Be$.,  ii.,  pp.  231,  239.
^  Notices  et  ExtraitSf  voL  xiv.,  p.  296.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Line  of  Chaghatau  43

819  H.  (1416),  by  Nakhsli-i-Jahan,  who  is  described  as  a  son  of
Shama-i-Jahan  of  Moghnlistan ;  thereby  implying,  it  wonld
seem,  that  Nakhsh-i- Jahdn  was  reigning  in  that  year  in  Moghnl-
istan. This  date  accords  with  the  Chinese  indication  for  the
accession  of  Nakhsh-i- Jahdn — or  the  year  when  he  wonld  most
probably  have  despatched  envoys  to  his  neighbours.  The  same
work^  mentions  also  that  in  823  h.  (1420)  Shah  Enkh's
ambassadors,  then  on  their  way  to  China,  learned  that  disorder
prevailed  in  Moghnlistan  in  consequence  of  Vais  Ehan,  who
was  then  reigning,  having  attacked  Shir  Muhammad  Oghlan.
This  statement  stands  by  itself ;  but  it  has  some  resemblance
to  that  of  Mirza  Haidar,  who  relates  that  between  Yais  Ehan
and  '^  Shir  Muhammad  Ehan  there  arose  great  disputes."  It
also  appears,  from  the  MaJtlci  Asaadiny  that  in  1425  Shir
Muhammad  held  powers  of  some  kind  in  Moghnlistan,  though
he  may  not  have  been  the  reigning  Ehan.  It  is  stated,  at  any
rate,  that  in  that  year  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg,  who  was  ruling  in
MAvard-un-Nahr,  undertook  an  expedition  into  Moghnlistan
and  defeated  Shir  Muhammad.  Yet,  according  to  the  Chinese,
Vais  Ehan  was  then  reigning,  he  having  slain  Nakhsh-i- Jahan
in  1418.  On  the  subject  of  Shir  Muhammad,  therefore,  the
Matla'  Asaadin  and  the  Tarikh-i-RoBhidi  would  seem  to  be
at  one,  in  so  far  that  they  both  name  him  as  living  at  a
period  immediately  previous  to  the  accession  of  Yais,  though
neither  states  precisely  that  he  was  a  reigning  Ehan  of  the
dynasty.

As  I  have  placed  in  juxtaposition  above,  the  lists  of  reigning
Ehans,  according  to  the  various  authorities,  it  may  be  useful
also  to  show  how  they  vary  in  their  statements  regarding  the
sons  of  Ehizir  Ehwaja,  some  of  whom  reigned,  though  some
did  not.

Thus  the  BauzcU  us  Sofa  has—

(1.)  Shama-i-Jahan,

(2.)  Shir  Ali,

(3.)  Shah  Jahan  Oghlan.

The  Zafar-Ndma  gives : —

(1.)  Shama-i- Jahan,
(2.)  Muhammad  Oghldn,
(3.)  Shir  Ali,
(4.)  Shah  Jah&n,

....  ^  NcHcu  €t  EastnUti,  p.  388.

Digitized  by

Google

44  The  Line  of  Chaghaiau

while  the  TankJhi-Bashidi  mentions  : —
(1.)  Muhammad  Ehan,
(2.)  Shama-i-Jahan,
(3.)  Nakhsh-i-Jahin,

'  and  others."

}..,

The  passage  taken  from  Dr.  Bretschneider's  version  of  the
Ming  history  rnns  thus  ^ : —

"After  Ynng-lo  acceded  to  the  throne  he  sent  an  envoy
with  a  letter  and  presents  to  the  King  of  Bie-shi-ba-lL^  But
at  that  time  Hei-di-rh-ho-djo  had  died,^  and  had  been  succeeded
by  his  son  Sha-mi-cha-gcm.  The  latter  sent  in  the  next  year
an  embassy  to  the  emperor,  offering  as  tribute  a  block  of  rude
jade  and  fine  horses.  The  envoy  was  well  treated  and  rewarded.
At  that  time  it  had  happened  that  An-ho  Tie-mu-rh^  Prince  of
Hami,  had  been  poisoned  by  Om-U-chiy  Ehan  of  the  Mongols,
and  Sha-mi-cha-gan  made  war  on  the  latter.  The  emperor
was  thankful,  and  sent  an  envoy  with  presents  to  him,  exhorting
the  King  to  be  on  good  terms  with  To-to,  the  Prince  of  Hami.

"In  1406  Sha-mi-cha-gan  sent  tribute,  and  the  emperor
accordingly  despatched  Liu  Tie-mu-rh,  a  high  officer,  with
presents  to  Bie-shi-ba-li.  In  the  year  1407  Sha-mi-cha-gan
presented  three  times  tribute.  His  envoys  had  been  ordered  to
solicit  the  assistance  of  Chinese  troops  for  reconquering  Sa-ma-
rh-han,  which  country,  as  they  stated,  had  formerly  belonged
to  Bie-shi-ba-li.  The  emperor  sent  his  eunuchs.  Pa  Tai  and
Li  Ta,  together  with  Liu  Tie-mu-rh,  to  Bie-shi-ba-li  to  inquire
cautiously  into  the  matter.  The  envoys  presented  silk  stuffs
to  the  Eng,  and  were  well  received.  They  returned  home  in
the  next  year,  and  brought  the  intelligence  that  Sha-mi-cha-
gan  was  deceased,  and  his  younger  brother,  Ma-ha-ma^  had
succeeded  him.  The  emperor  then  sent  the  same  envoys  once
more  to  Bie-shi-ba-li,  to  offer  a  sacrifice  in  memory  of  the  late
King  and  bestow  presents  on  Ma-ha-ma.  When,  in  1410,
imperial  envoys  on  their  way  to  Sa-ma-rh-han  passed  through
Bie-shi-ba-li,  they  were  well  treated  by  Ma-ha-ma,  who  in  the
next  year  despatched  an  embassy  to  the  Chinese  court,  offering
fine  horses  and  a  tffen  poo  (leopard).

*  Med.  Eesearches,  ii.,  pp.  239-42.

'  Bishbdlik:  the  Chinese  name  for  Moghulifltan,  as  will  be  seen  lower
down.— [Ed.]
'  According  to  the  Zfj^er-namehy  Ehizir  Ehodja  died  in  1890.  •  •  •

Digitized  by

Google

The  Line  of  ChaghataL  45

"When  this  embassy  retnmed,  they  were  accompanied  by
Any  who  carried  gold  embroidered  silk  stuffs  for  the  King.  At
that  time  an  envoy  of  the  WaAa  (Oirats)  complained  that
Ma-ha-ma  was  arming  for  making  war  on  the  Wa-la.  The
emperor  sent  to  warn  him.  In  1413  Ma-ha-ma  sent  one  of
his  generals  with  tribute  to  China.  He  reached  Ean  Su.
Orders  had  been  given  to  the  civil  and  military  authorities  to
receive  him  honourably.

"  In  the  next  year  (1414)  people  returning  from  the  Biryu
brought  the  intelligence  that  Ma-ha-ma's  brother  and  another
had  both  died  in  a  short  interval.  The  emperor  sent  again  An
to  Bie-shi-ba-li,  with  a  letter  of  condolence.  When  Ma-ha-ma
died  he  left  no  son.  His  nephew,  Na-hei-shi-dji-han,  succeeded
him,  and  in  the  spring  of  1416  despatched  an  envoy  to  inform
the  emperor  of  his  uncle's  death.  The  emperor  sent  the
eunuch  Li  Ta  to  offer  a  sacrifice  in  memory  of  the  late  King
and  confer  the  title  of  wang  (King)  on  his  successor.  In  1417
Na-hei-shi-dji-han  sent  an  embassy  to  inform  the  emperor  that
he  was  about  to  marry  a  princess  from  Sa-ma-rh-hany^  and
solicited  in  exchange  for  horses,  a  bride's  trousseau.  Then  500
pieces  of  variegated  and  500  of  plain  white  silk  stuff  were
bestowed  on  the  King  of  Bie-shi-ba-li  as  wedding  presents.

"  In  1418  an  envoy,  by  name  Su-ko,  arrived  from  Bie-shi-ba-
li,  reporting  that  his  sovereign  (Na-hei-shi-dji-han)  had  been
slain  by  his  cousin,  Wai-sz,  who  then  had  declared  himself  King.
At  the  same  time  Wai-sz  with  his  people  had  transferred  their
abode  to  the  west,  changing  the  former  name  of  the  empire
(Bie-shi-ba-li)  into  I'li-horli.  The  emperor  said  that  it  was
not  his  custom  to  meddle  with  the  internal  affairs  of  foreign
countries.  He  bestowed  upon  Su-ko  the  rank  of  tu  tu  ts'ien  shi,
and  at  the  same  time  sent  the  eunuch  Yang  Chung  with  a
mission  to  Wai-sz,  conferring  on  the  King,  as  presents,  an
arrow,  a  sword,  a  suit  of  armour,  and  silk  stuffs.  The  chieftain
Hu-dai-da^  and  more  than  seventy  other  people  of  I-li-ba-li
all  received  presents.  Subsequently  Wai-sz  sent  frequently
tribute  to  the  Chinese  court,^  as  did  also  his  mother,  So-lu-tan
Ha-tun  (Sultan  Khatun).

^  The  Mohammedan  authors  do  not  record  this  marriage.

'  This  seems  to  be  the  Amir  Khodaidad  of  Eashgar,  a  man  of  great
influence  in  Mogbulistan.  .  .  .  The  embassy  of  Shah  E^k  to  China  in  1420
met  the  Amir  Khodaidad,  who  then  enjoyed  great  authority  in  the  country
of  Mogbulistan.

'  The  embassy  of  Shah  Bok  saw  an  envoy  of  Awis  Khan,  by  name  Batu
Timwr  Anha,  in  Peking,  in  1421.

Digitized  by

Google

46  The  Line  of  Chaghatau

''In  1428  Wai-sz  died,  and  was  sncceeded  by  his  son,  Ye^-^im,
hu-hiia,^  who  also  sent  repeatedly  tribute  to  China.  Tribute
was  also  offered  by  Bu-sai-iiif  the  son-in-law  of  the  late  King.

^*  Ye-rien  hvr-hua  died  in  1445,  and  was  succeeded  by  Ye-muli^
hvrdjo,^  The  latter  sent  camels  as  tribute,  and  also  a  block  of
rude  jade  weighing  3800  hin,  but  not  of  the  best  quality.  The
Chinese  goyemment  returned  for  every  two  kin  of  jade  one
piece  of  white  silk.

"  In  1457  a  Chinese  envoy  was  sent  to  I-lirla-li  with  presents
for  the  King,  and  in  1456  again.'  It  was  then  settled  that  I-li-
ba-li  was  to  send  tribute  every  three  or  five  years,  and  the
number  of  the  people  in  the  suite  of  the  envoy  should  not
surpass  ten  men.  Subsequently  embassies  from  that  country
were  seldom  seen  at  the  Chinese  court."

Epitomised  Aooount  of  the  Khans  of  MooHuusrAN.

{Chiefly  from  Erskine,)

Isan  Bugha  Khan  seems  to  have  been  called  into  Moghulistan

about  A.H.  721  (1321),  and  to  have  reigned  till  730  (1330).

An  Interregnum.

Tughluk  Timur  Khan,  son  of  Isan  Bugha,  bom  about  730,

began  to  reign  748  (1347),  died  764  (1363).

Usurpation  of  Amir  Kamar-ud-Din. It  was  against  him

that  the  expeditions  of  Timur  into  Moghulistan  were  directed

— A.H.  768-94  (1367-1392).

Khizir  Khwaja  Khdn,  son  of  Tughluk  Timur,  raised  to  the

throne  in  791,  before  Kamar-ud-Din's  death. He  reigned

till  801  (1399),  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son,

Shama-i-Jahan,  who  was  succeeded  by  his  brother,

Nakhsh-i- Jahan,  who  was  succeeded  by  his  brother,

Muhammad  Khan,  who  was  succeeded  by  his  son.

Shir  Muhammad  Khan,  who  was  succeeded  by  his  nephew.

Sultan  Vais  Khan,  the  son  of  Shir  Ali  Oghlan,  the  brother

of  Shir  Muhammad. Sultan  Vais  was  killed  832  (1428-9)  .*

^  laan  Buka  II.  of  the  Mohammedan  authors.  .  .  .
^  Imil  Khodja, This  Ehan  is  not  mentioned  by  the  Mohammedan  authors.
^ The  two  dates  should  probably  be  reversed. — fEo.]
*  According  to  Chinese  annals,  the  portion  of  the  list  bracketed  above,
should  stand : —

Khizir  Khwdja died  1399

Shama-i-Jahdn „ 1408

Muhammad  Khdn ....... 1416

Nakhsh-i-Jah&n „ 1418

VaisKhdn , 1428

Each  of  these  appears  to  have  succeeded  immediately  on  the  death  of  his
predecessor.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Line  of  Chaghatai,

47

On  the  death  of  Yais  there  was  a  diyision  among  the  Moghnls,
some  adhering  to  Yunos  Ehan,  the  eldest  son  of  YaiS|  others
to  Isan  Bngha  11.,  the  younger  son.

Tunus  Khan,  who  was  expelled
832  (1429),  returned  860  (1466),
and  r^ained  the  western  part  of
Moghnlistan.  Hostilities  were  main-
tained between  the  eastern  and
western  Moghuls  till  the  death  of  his
grand-nephew,  Eabak  Sultan,  when
he  reigned  without  a  rivaL

In  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  the
remoter  tribes  of  the  steppes,  dis-
pleased with  his  fondness  for  towns,
separated  from  him,  and  acknowledged
his  second  son,  Sultan  Ahmad,  or
Alicha  Kh&n,  as  their  Ehin — so  that
the  kingdom  was  again  divided  into
two  during  his  lifetime.  He  died
892  H.  (1487).

Sultan  Mahmnd  Khan,  Yunus*
eldest  son,  succeeded  his  father  in
Tashkand  and  as  chief  of  the  western
tribes.  He  was  defeated  by  Shaib&ni
Kh4n  in  908  (1502-^),  lost  Tash-
kand and  Sair&m,  and  was  finally
put  to  death  by  Shaib^  in  914  h.
(1508-9).

EaxA.

Isin  Bugha  II.,  raised  to  the  throne
in  832  H,  (1429),  and  through  life
supported  by  the  eastern  Moghuls,
died  866  (1462),*  was  succeeded  by
his  son

Dust  Muhammad  Kh&n,  who  ruled
in  the  eastern  districts  (UighuristdQ,
etc.),  died  873  (1468-9).

Kabak  Sultan  Oghldn,  his  son,
ruled  for  a  time  about  Turfdn,  or
Uighunstin,  where  he  was  murdered.

Sultan  Ahmad  Kh&n,  second  son
of  Yunus,  governed  the  eastern
Moghuls  in  Aksu  and  Uighurist&n.
He  was  generally  known  as  Aldchi^
Khin— *'  the  slaughtering  Kh^."  He
was  bent  on  making  himself  absolute
ruler  of  the  steppes,  destroyed  the
chiefs,  and  curtailed  the  power  of
many  of  the  tribes.  Defeated  by
Shaibini  Khin  in  908  (1502-3),  be
died  of  grief  in  909  (1503-4).

The  death  of  Sultan  Ahmad  was  followed  by  many  civil
wars  and  mnch  anarchy  in  Moghnlistan.  His  elder  brother,
Snltan  Mahmnd,  invaded  his  dominions  from  the  west.  Saltan
Ahmad's  nnmerons  sons  contended  with  one  another.  Several
sections  of  the  people,  and  among  others  the  Kirghiz,  separated
from  the  main  body.  The  anarchy  and  civil  wars  lasted  some
years.  The  country  was  overrun  by  Aba  Bakr  (a  DughUt)  of
Eashghar,  by  the  Ealmaks  and  the  Eazaks.  The  whole  of  the
tribes  of  Moghnlistan  never  again  united  under  one  head.
Two  Khanates  and  the  confederation  of  the  Eirghiz-Eazaks
seem  to  have  arisen  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Ehanate  of  the
Moghuls. Sultan  Mansur,  the  eldest  son  of  Sultan  Ahmad,

^  According  to  the  Chinese  accounts  Isin  Bugha  11.  died  in  1445,  and  was
succeeded  by  one  Te-mi-li-hu-jo  (Im-il  Khwdja),  a  personage  who  does  not
appear  to  be  mentioned  by  any  of  the  Musulmsm  historians.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

48

The  Line  of  Chaghatau

Mansur  Ehan,  Sultan  Ahmad's
eldest  SOD,  was  acknowledged  and
ruled  in  Turfdn  and  the  eastern
provinces  —  ».c.,  UighuristAn.  He
died  in  950  (1543-4),  having  reigned
two  years  along  with  his  father,  and
forty  more  hy  himself;  he  was
succeeded  by  Ms  son,  Sb&h  EhAn.

esiablislied  himself  in  Aksu,  Turfan,  etc.^  and  a  new  Khanate
arose  in  Eashghar  and  the  western  provinces.

Sidtan  Said  Khan,  third  son  of
Sultan  Ahmad,  in  Hajab  920  (Sept.
1514),  or  eleven  years  after  his
father's  death,  seized  Kashghar,  and
expelled  Abd  Bakr  Mirza.  He
died  16  Zilhajah  939  (9  July,  1633);
and  was  succeeded  by  his  son,
Abdur  Rashid  Ehan,  who  died  973
(1565-6)  ;  and  was  succeeded  by  his
son,  Abdul  Karim.

Meanwhile  in  the  steppes  of  Moghnlistan,  the  Kirghiz
established  themselves  under  Khans  of  their  own,  and  in
process  of  time,  formed  a  kind  of  federative  union  with  the
Kazak  Uzbegs,  which  has,  in  some  degree,  lasted  to  the  present
day,  and  has  been  called  ^^  the  three  hordes  of  Kirghiz."

Amirs  of  Kashohab,  ob  Alti  Shahb,  who  webe  oontempobabt
WITH  THE  Khans  of  Moghxtlistan.

Amir  Tulik,  Ulusbegi  (or  chief  of  the  tribe)  of  the  Moghul
Khans,  contemporary  with  Isan  Bugha  I.,  succeeded  by

Amir  Bulaji,  his  brother ;  raised  Tughluk  Timur  to  the  throne ;
succeeded  by  his  son,

Amir  Khudaidad,  who  is  said  to  have  reigned  about  ninety
years  in  Kashghar.  He  succeeded  his  father,  probably  soon
after  the  year  748  h.  (1347).  In  his  time  Amir  Kamar-ud-
Din,  his  uncle,  usurped  the  Khanship  of  the  Moghuls,  and
for  a  time  also  (it  would  appear)  that  of  the  greater  part  of
Alti  Shahr.  The  chronology  of  Amir  Khudaiddd's  life  is  very
uncertain. He  was  succeeded  by

Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  grandson  of  E^iudaidad  (by  his  son  Amir
Sayyid  Ahmad).  Sayyid  Ali  reigned  about  twenty-four
years — 838  to  861  h.  (1435  to  1457) — ^and  was  succeeded  by
his  sons.

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  in  Eash-
ghar, whence  he  was  expelled  by  his
brother.

Sdniz  Mirza,  in  Tarkand,  who  ex-
pelled hia  brother  from  Eashghar,
and  reigned  seven  years.  He  died
868  H.  (1463-4).

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  on  his  brother's  death,  succeeded.
He  is  said  to  have  reigned  twenty- four  years  in  all,  or  eight
years  with  imperfect  authority  and  sixteen  years  with  full

Digitized  by

Google

The  Line  of  Chaghatau

49

authority.  In  885  h.  (1480)  he  was  expelled  by  his  nephew
and  stepson,  Aba  Bakr.
Aba  Bakr  Mirza,  son  of  Saniz,  reigned  in  all  forty-eight  years.
The  years  of  his  reign  are  probably  reckoned  from  the  date
of  his  taking  possession  of  Tarkand,  abont  873  h.  (1468-9).
He  was  finally  defeated  and  expelled  by  Saltan  Said  Ehan,
the  third  son  of  Saltan  Ahmad  Ehan  (Alacha  Ehan),  who
changed  the  dynasty.  See  Khans  of  MoghtUigian,  aiove.  Aba
Bakr  was  mardered  920  h.

It  may  perhaps  help  to  make  matters  clear  as  regards  the
dates,  if  I  append  here,  a  list  of  the  western  branch  of  the
line  of  Ghaghatai  Ehans  (those  of  Mavara-un-Nahr  or  Trans-
oxiana),  extracted  from  Mr.  Stanley  Lane  Poole's  Miihammadan
Dynasties  (p.  242).

A.H.

A.D.

1.  Ghaghatai . . .i Began

to

reign  624

z=

1227

2.  Kara  HuUku

>9

639

=

1242

3.  Isu  Manga .

>»

645

=

1247

.  Kara  Huldku  (rcs^orerf)  .

»  '

650

=

1252

4.  Orgdnah  EhdtuQ .

»»

650

=

1252

5.  Algu ....

>»

659

=  ■

1261

6.  Mubdrak  Shah^ .

))

664

=

1266

7.  Bartt  Khan  .

>»

664

"=

1266

8.  Nikpai

»'  ,

6fi8

=

1270

9.  Tnka  Timur  .

»l

670

=

1272

10.  Davd  Khan  .

>».

c672

rr

ci274

11.  Kunjuk  Khan

>»

706

=

1306

12.  Taliku

n

708

=

1308

13.  Kabak  Khan

»•

709

=

1309

14.  Isdn  Bugba ....

f>

709

=

1309

.  Kabik  Khan  (restored) .

n

c718

=

1318

15.  Ilchikadi .

»»

721

=

1321

16.  Dnvd  Timur  ...

»»

721

=

1321

17.  lannashirin  .

»>

722

=

1322

.  Sanjar?

»t

730-4?  =

1330-4?

18.  Jinkishai

»»

734

=

1334

19.  Buznn  ....

»»

c735

=

c  1335

20.  Isun  Timnr .

»>

c739

=

C1339

.  Ali  (of  Oktai  stock)

>»

c741

=

c  1340

21.  Miihamnjad  .

>»

c743

=

c  1342

22.  Kazdn

>»

744

=

1343

.  Danishmanja  (of  Oktai  stock)

»»!

747

=

1346

23.  Buyan  Kuli  .

»

749

=

1348

—

760

—1358

Anarchy  and  rival  chiefs  until  the  supremacy  of  Timur  in
771A.H. = 1370  A.D.

Digitized  by

Google

50

The  Line  of  Chaghatai.

J

<

I

v^ - - - -

I-]

4

1 1

'5 i

OQ  . —

J

-  I

11

I

I

5

if

•^ ^o

J

<2

OQ

I

ha
I

3

•a

, a

Digitized  by

Google

SarW
?.  Nikpai

^Ox

17.  Tarmasbiriu Burgu  Ogliul
Sanjar  28.  Bayiin  Kuli

Abukau

I

18.  Jininshai  20.  Isuu  Timur

Timur  Shall

Ktitluk  Nigdr  Klmnim

uan (8)  fchin (9)  Yubuu (10)  Tukhta Eight  OiJierf
ja  Timur  Timur  Bugha

Chin

ITIUB Arif AW.  Rahim? ?  ?

""H

ished
.?d  in

list  at

Omar

Siiaikh,

I
Baber

Humayun

Thnuri  (of  Farjj:hdna)

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC
To  face  i^.  49

Digitized  by

Google

Digitized  by

Google

ge:

I

1.  Jantogir

[Khoramti]

2,  Umar  Shaikh  Uimx

1.  Muhamd.  Sultan

Jahaugir  ,

I
M.  Sultan  Khalil,

M.  Muhniil.  Umar

2.  Pir  Muhamd.
1  fcona

Baikara

J.  Pir  Muhamd.

2.  KuBtam

3.  Sikaudar 4.  Mamtur

I

o.  Mah<l.

in  Babar
ftiud

Haikaiu

Sultan  Vain ,

r '

Muhd.  Saltan  M.

Saltan  H;

1.  Badi-u{

2.  Muzaf4

I"

n-

1.  IJliigh  M. M  2.  Sliah  M. 3.  Muhd. 4.  Ibrahim 5.  Masud  I

I  Husain  M.  . Husain  M. Huisain  M.  ;

1.  Muhd.  Sultan  M,  ■ | M  :

2.  Sikaudar  Sultan  MuzaiTar  Huaain  M  i

[Baddkhn^uLn']

1 .  Baisanghar 2.  Sultan  Masud  M. 3.  Khan  Mirza ?  4.!

(Vais)  \

Mirza  Suhumau

M.  Ibrahim
M.  Shah  Rukh

Note.— This  Tabh

hot-  p.  50.

Digitized  by

Goo^^

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  61

SECTION  m.

THE  LAKD  OF  THB  HOGHULS.

His  eye  might  there  command  wherever  stood

City  of  old  or  modem  fieune,  the  seat

Of  mightiest  Empire,  from  the  destined  walls

Of  Gamhalu,  seat  of  Gathaian  Can,

And  Samarcband  by  Oxus,  Temur  s  throne,

To  Paquin  of  Sinsean  Kings;  and  thence

To  Agra  and  Labor  of  great  Mogul

^Faradue  Lost,  Bk.  XL

The  area  over  which  Mirza  Haidar's  history  extends  is  a  wide
one.  Expressed  in  the  geographical  terms  of  onr  times,  it  may
be  said  to  deal  with  Western  Turkistan,  Bokhara,  Farghdna,  the
Bnssian  province  of  Semirechensk  (or  the  seven  rivers),  the
Chinese  province  of  Ili  (or  Znngaria),  Eastern  Turkistan,  Tibet,
Ladak,  Baltistan,  Gilgit  and  the  neighbouring  states,  Ohitral,
Wikhin,  Badakhshan,  Afghanistan,  Kashmir,  and  Northern
India ;  while  references  are  frequently  made  to  countries  lying
even  beyond  these  regions.  But  it  is  a  history,  especially,  of
the  eastern  branch  of  the  Ohaghatais — i.0.,  the  Moghuls  proper
— and,  therefore,  the  chief  scene  of  action  lies  in  and  immediately
around  their  home-land.  The  situation  and  extent  of  this
region  are  not  difficult  to  describe,  but  it  is  far  from  easy  to
give  a  name  to  it  as  a  whole.

Its  limits  were  not  very  clearly  defined  at  any  period,  and
were  seldom  the  same  for  twenty  years  at  a  time,  while  even
the  names  of  ''  Jatah  "  and ''  Moghulistan,"  by  which  a  portion
of  it  was  known,  are  now  not  only  obsolete,  but  have
hitherto  been  subject  to  some  doubt  regarding  the  exact  locality
to  which  they  were  applied.  Moreover,  there  was  at  no  time
any  one  name  in  use,  which  served  to  designate  the  entire
Khanate.  Mirza  Haidar  usually  speaks  of  ^  Moghulistan '  and
'Kashghar,'  but  it  is  not  always  clear  whether,  by  'Kashghar,'  he
means  only  the  city  and  district  of  that  name,  or  the  entire
province  oiAUi-Shakr — the  Six  Cities^  of  Eastern  Turkistan — a

*  The  six  cities  were  Kashghar,  Yangi  Hisar,  Yarkand,  Khotan,  Ush-Tuifiin,
and  Aksu.  Dr.  Bellew  informs  us  that  Mar^Ibashi  was  sometimes  added  to
the  list,  when  Alti  Shdhr  hecame  Tati  Shahr,  or  seven  cities.  {Tarkand
Bepcri,  p.  186.)  The  name  is  prohably  of  Ehokandi  origin,  and  belongs  to
the  present  century.

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

52  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls,

region  which,  he  tells  ns  more  than  once,  was,  when  combined
with  Farghana,  termed  Mangalai  Suyah  or  "  Facing  the  Sun."^
This  territory  would  almost  exactly  correspond  to  the  provinces
of  Farghana  and  the  Chinese  Turkistan  of  modern  times,  less
the  districts  of  Earashahr,  Turfan  and  Hami  in  the  extreme
east;  or,  in  other  words,  to  Farghana  and  Alti-Shahr.  But
even  if  we  were  to  give  the  entire  country  the  double  name  of
*^  Moghulistan  and  Mangalai  Suyah,"  there  would  still  remain
some  difficulties  of  definition.  At  first  sight  it  would  appear
that  the  author  describes  the  limits  very  exactly ;  but  this  is
not  quite  the  case,  and  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  he
sets  forth  the  provinces  that  composed  it  on  several  occasions,
but  does  not  always  make  them  the  same :  the  other  is  that,  in
common  with  all  Asiatics  who  attempt  to  describe  an  area,  he
names  a  district  or  a  geographical  feature  as  a  boundary,  but
does  not  mention  whether  it  should  be  included  or  excluded —
whether  the  limiting  district,  range  or  lake  lay  beyond  or
within  the  area  he  is  describing.  In  addition  to  these  uncer-
tainties there  is  also  the  inconsistency  that  Farghana,  as  a
whole,  was  seldom  included  within  the  actual  possessions  of  the
Ehans  of  Moghulistan.  They  always  regarded  it  as  theirs  by
right,  but  they  rarely  held  more  than  a  few  positions,  or
districts,  within  its  limits,  and  even  these  they  were  usually
unable  to  keep  for  any  length  of  time.  Practically,  therefore,
Farghana  can  scarcely  be  held  to  have  formed  a  part  of  their
dominions,  although  it  may  have  been  comprised  in  the  geo-
graphical term  '^  Mangalai  Suyah."  With  this  reservation,
however,  and  in  order  to  show  what  the  author  describes,  it
would  seem  as  well  that  Farghana  should  be  included  nominally
with  Moghulistan  and  Alti-Shahr ;  so  that,  after  making  due
allowance  for  the  fluctuations  that  occurred  at  different  periods,
the  following  may  be  regarded  (as  nearly  as  possible)  as  a
statement  of  the  extent  of  the  dominions  of  the  Moghul  Ehans,
from  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century  to  the  middle
of  the  sixteenth.

There  was  no  central  division,  but  the  province  of  Moghulis-
tan proper — or  Jatah,  as  it  was  also  called  during  the  early  part
of  that  period— being  a  '^  steppe  "  or  pastoral  country,  and  the
homeland  of  the  dominant  tribe,  was  therefore  the  principal
division.  Its  western  boundary  marched  with  the  province  of
Shash,  the  modern  Tashkand,  which  seems  to  have  contained
1  For  some  remarks  on  this  name,  see  note,  jp.  7.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  B3

the  whole  of  the  lowlands  of  the  yalley  of  the  Sir,  from  a  little
above  Khqjand  to  about  the  Arys  tributary,  and  included  such
towns  as  Shahrukhia,  Tashkand  and  Sairam.  Immediately  to
the  east  of  this  level  agricultural  stretch,  rise  the  hills  which
separate  it  from  the  valley  of  the  Upper  Talas,  and  it  was  this
line  of  hills,  or  uplands,  which  seems  to  have  stood  usually,  and
in  a  general  way,  for  the  boundary  of  the  Moghuls.  To  the
north  of  Bhash  lay  the  province  of  Turkistan,  with  the  Earatau
hills  between  it  and  the  Lower  Talas,  and  here  again  the  hills
appear  to  have  been  the  western  limit  of  the  nomad  tribes.
Turning  towards  the  north-west,  a  line  drawn  from  the  Earatau
to  the  southern  extremity  of  Lake  Balkash,  and  continued  again
from  its  other  extremity  to  the  Tarbdgatai  mountains,  may  be
taken  roughly  to  have  been  the  frontier  in  that  direction.  We
hear,  at  any  rate,  of  no  transactions  of  the  Moghuls,  as  a  tribe,
anywhere  to  the  north-west  of  the  Balkash ;  nor  do  we  trace
them  anywhere  to  the  north  of  the  Imil  river,  which  is  fed
from  the  Tarbagatai  mountains,  except  when  flying  before
Timur's  avenging  army  in  1389  and  1390,  they  crossed  the
range  into  the  valley  of  the  Irtish.  But  this  was  an  occasion
when  danger  led  them  to  seek  refuge  beyond  the  bounds  of  their
own  country.  From  the  Tarbagatai  range,  the  limiting  line
would  probably  bend  south-eastward  to  some  point  at  the
northern  foot  of  the  Tian  Shan,  near  the  present  Urumtsi ;  but
this  is  somewhat  uncertain.  All  that  is  clear  is  that  the  tract
now  known  as  '*  Zungaria  "  (or  the  land  of  the  Zungar,  or  Jungdr,
Ealmaks)  formed  a  part  of  the  Moghul  dominion,  but  how  far
precisely,  '' Zungaria"  extended  towards  the  east,  there  is
nothing  to  show.  Probably  it  included  Lakes  Ebi  Nor  and
Ayar  Nor,  and  had  for  its  central  feature  the  upper  course  of
the  Ili  river.  On  the  south,  the  main  range  of  the  Tian  Shan,
as  far  west  as  about  the  head  of  the  Narin  river,  divided
Moghulistan  from  Euchar,  Aksu,  etc.,  while  westward,  again,
the  water-parting  ranges  between  the  Narin  and  Lake  Issigh-
Eul,  continued  up  to  the  heads  of  the  Talas,  would  seem,
approximately,  to  have  been  the  line  of  separation  from  Eash-
ghar  and  Farghana.

The  boundaries  of  Alti-Shahr  were  better  defined  by  natural
features  than  Moghulistan.  It  may  be  said,  generally,  to  have
embraced  the  whole  of  the  system  of  the  Tarim,  together  with
some  of  the  upper  waters  of  the  Sir.  On  the  north  it  marched
with  the  southern  limit  of  Moghxdistan,  as  described  above. On

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

64  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

the  east  it  included  the  town  and  district  of  Enchar  (which  was
nsnally  a  dependency  of  Aksn),  and  probably  the  region  of  Lake
Lob ;  while  it  exclnded  Earashahr — then  known  as  Chalish —
and  all  to  the  east  of  it,  which  constituted,  as  we  shall  see,  a
province  that  bore  the  ancient  name  of  *  Uighuristan.'  On  the
sonth,  along  the  whole  length  of  the  country,  the  mountains
forming  the  scarp  of  the  Tibetan  highlands — the  Euen-lnn  and
the  Altyn  T&gh — shnt  it  off  from  aU  beyond.  Towards  the
west  the  Pamirs,  generally  speaking,  constituted  its  extreme
limit,  till  these  abut  northward  on  the  southern  confines  of
the  valley  of  the  river  Sir;  for  these  uplands,  then  as  now,
seem  to  have  divided  the  Eashghar  district  from  Farghana.
What  the  precise  limits  in  the  Pamir  region  were,  there  is
nothing  to  indicate,  but  in  speaking  of  Sarigh-Eul,  Mirza
Haidar  implies  that  that  district,  at  least,  lay  within  the  pro-
vince of  Alti-Shahr,  and  for  a  time  also,  we  find  Wakhan  and
Shighnan  described  as  territory  dependent  on  Eashghar,  though
this  was  not  usually  the  case.

But  if  these  were  approximately  and  usually  the  limits,  it
does  not  follow  that  they  were,  on  the  one  hand,  never  over-
stepped, or  on  the  other,  that  the  area  they  included  was  always
held  intact.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  varied  considerably  from
time  to  time.  Before  the  rise  of  Timuf ,  for  instance,  invasions,
by  the  Moghuls,  of  Shash,  Turkistan  and  even  Mavara-un-Nahr
were  of  common  occurrence,  while  at  times  in  their  later
history,  they  extended  their  sway  over  districts  in  the  east
which  did  not  properly  belong  to  Alti-Shahr.  In  the  same
way,  when  the  affairs  of  their  neighbours  were  in  the  hands  of
strong  rulers,  portions  of  Moghulistan  were  cut  off  for  a  time,
and  numbers  of  the  inhabitants  seem  to  have  had  no  scruple  in
joining  the  service  of  the  successful  conqueror  of  the  time
being.

The  section  known  as  Moghulistan  differed  widely,  in  ^ost
respects,  from  its  companion  province  on  the  south.  It  was  a
land  of  mountains,  streams  and  lakes,  of  upland  pastures  and
steppes,  of  wooded  valleys  and  even  forests ;  for  while  it  laj
north  of  the  regions  which  can  only  become  productive  it
reached  by  the  monsoon  from  the  southern  seas,  or  if  irrigated
by  the  art  of  its  inhabitants,  it  was  yet  far  enough  from  the
blighting  snows  and  sunless  days  of  Siberia,  to  be  in  most  parts
clothed  with  natural  verdure  of  some  kind.  Its  altitudes  were
moderate,  and  its  climate,  therefore,  as  Mirza  Haidar  describee

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  68

it,  cool  and  inyigorating,  thongli  to  Europeans,  accustomed
to  live  within  the  modifying  influence  of  the  sea,  it  would
appear  to  be  subject  to  extremes  of  temperature.  Deserts  in
the  proper  sense  of  the  word — sandy  or  stony  wastes,  with  little
or  no  vegetation  or  water — ^nowhere  existed,  except  on  the  ex-
treme north-western  confines,  and  wherever  the  word  '  desert '
occurs  in  the  text,  when  referring  to  Moghulistan,  it  is  because
the  author  has  used  the  Persian  or  Turki  equivalent,  though
the  real  meaning  would  be  *  the  open  country,'  or  the  *  country
devoid  of  towns  and  cultivation' — the  'steppe' — a  feature
which  no  English  word  will  describe.

However  this  may  be,  it  was  a  land  in  every  way  suited  to
the  habits  and  customs  of  a  sparse  population  of  nomadic
graziers  and  shepherds,  and  it  accordingly  evolved,  or  at  least
attracted,  a  race  whose  requirements  it  fulfilled.  But  the
peaceable  pursuits  of  raising  flocks  and  attending  herds  were
not  the  only  avocations  of  a  people  with  the  traditions  of  the
Moghuls.  Perhaps  their  chief  requirement  was  a  land  whence
they  might  raid  on  their  settled  and  more  wealthy  neighbours,
and  whither,  if  beaten,  they  could  retire  and  find  a  refuge — a
land,  in  short,  so  inaccessible  and  unproductive  to  all  but  them-
selves, that  it  formed,  at  once,  a  base  for  their  own  description
of  warfare,  a  secure  retreat,  and  an  inhospitable  waste  for  the
pursuing  enemy ;  for  where  they  moved,  the  whole  resources  of
the  country — the  food  supplies,  the  transport,  the  shelter —
moved  with  them,  and  were  used  to  meet  their  wants  alone.
There  could  have  been  no  forts  or  towns  or  immovable  pro-
perty, worthy  of  the  name,  for  an  invader  to  destroy,  and  no
stationary  population,  left  undefended,  upon  whom  he  might
wreak  his  vengeance ;  for  the  women  and  children  and  the  aged
all  formed  part  of  the  expedition,  and  were  doubtless  employed
or  disposed  of,  in  much  the  same  way  while  the  tribe  was  on  the
march,  as  while  at  home  in  their  own  encampment  In  times
of  peace — or  rather  of  inactivity — they  probably  bred,  besides
the  camels  and  sheep,  which  were  their  principal  food-pro-
ducers, large  numbers  of  ponies,  for  it  was  on  these  that  all
depended,  when  wars  or  forays  were  on  hand.  Mobility  must
have  been  the  quality  they  relied  on  more  than  any  other,  both
in  attack  and  retreat,  and  we  find  them  baffling  their  enemies
more  by  their  movements  than  by  their  fighting  power.
Indeed,  fighting  in  its  proper  sense  must  have  been  with  them,
as  with  most  of  their  neighbours,  a  pursuit  very  sparingly

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

66  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

indulged  in.  We  read,  it  is  true,  of  armies  counted  by  hundreds
of  thousands,  and  of  pitched  battles  when  thousands  were  killed
on  either  side,  but  apart  from  the  facts  that  populations  such
as  those  in  question  could  not  have  put  such  masses  of  fighting
men  in  the  field,  and  that  numbers  among  Orientals  are  at  all
times  used  as  mere  figures  of  speech,  it  is  remarkable  that
where  a  particular  battle  or  other  special  incident  is  described
in  detail,  there  are  usually  indications  that  the  numbers  engaged
were  very  small  indeed.

This  must  have  been  more  especially  the  case  with  the
tribe  of  Moghuls  and  the  other  nomads  who  allied  themselyes
with  them,  after  the  first  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century.
During  Amir  Timur's  reign,  the  Moghuls  under  Kamar-ud-Din,
one  of  their  best  leaders,  seem  to  have  been  always  beaten  when
met  by  the  Amir's  troops,  yet  they  were  never  thoroughly
repressed .  until  the  great  conqueror  had  put  forth  all  his
strength  and  resources  in  following  them  up,  in  separate  bodies,
to  the  farthest  confines  of  their  territory.  His  problem  was
not  how  to  beat  the  Moghuls  in  battle  or  to  invade  their
country,  but  how  to  catch  their  mobile  forces  in  sufficient
numbers,  to  make  an  impression  on  the  nation  at  large ;  while,
on  their  part,  the  Moghuls  never  seem  to  have  attempted  an
incursion  into  Timur's  dominions,  except  when  he  and  his
troops  were  engaged  in  prosecuting  a  war  elsewhere.  Later,
the  same  difficulty  occurred  to  Ulugh  Beg  Mirza,  who  only
succeeded  in  dealing  them  a  heavy  blow,  through  the  accident
of  a  piece  of  treachery  on  the  part  of  one  of  their  own  people,
by  which  he  was  afforded  an  unlooked-for  opportunity.  And
later  again — within  the  sixteenth  century — when  the  Kirghiz
and  Eazaks  had  to  a  great  extent  supplanted  the  Moghuls  in  what
had  been  the  latter's  own  land,  and  the  nominal  Ehans  of  the
country  (Sultan  Said  and  his  successor)  had  their  headquarters
at  Kashghar,  it  seems  evident,  though  Mirza  Haidar  says  little
about  it,  that  the  tactics  of  the  nomads  left  them  practically
masters  of  the  situation.  Tet  even  in  those  days,  when  brought
to  battle,  they  are  said  usually  to  have  been  beaten.  Perhaps
the  only  power  which  the  Moghuls  stood  in  fear  of,  after  the
days  of  Timur,  was  that  of  the  Uzbegs,  when  these  were  first
rising  to  power.  Under  Shaibani  Ehan  the  confederated  tribes
of  Uzbegs  still  possessed  the  characteristics  and  qualities  of
nomadic  nations,  and  it  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  the
Moghuls,  so  far  from  dtaling  with  them  as  they  were  accustomed

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  5?

to  do  with  others  in  the  low  conntries,  enlisted  under  Shaib£ni
in  large  numbers,  and  assisted  him  against  the  more  civilised
forces  of  Baber  and  the  Khorasani  Mirzas.  They  seem  to  have
feared  to  measure  themselves  with  those  who  could  use  their
own  tactics  against  them^  or  fight  them,  indeed,  with  their  own
weapons.

In  many  places  in  Mirza  Haidar's  history,  as  well  as  in  the
Zafar-Ndma  and  other  books,  mention  is  made  of  the  '  cities '
or  ^towns'  of  Moghulistan;  but  as  the  same  words  must
necessarily  be  used  when  speaking  of  the  settled  countries  of
Mavara-un-Nahr,  Turkistan,  and  Alti-Shahr,  they  are  somewhat
misleading  terms  to  apply  to  the  avhy  or  encampments,  of  a
nomadic  people.  One  native  writer,  whose  book  dates  from  the
first  half  of  the  fourteenth  century,  presents,  in  a  few  words,  a
telling  picture  of  Moghulistan  in  his  day — or  part  of  Turkistan  as
it  was  then  still  called.  ''  Since  the  region  has  been  devastated
by  the  arms  of  the  Tatars,"  he  writes,  "  it  is  inhabited  only  by
a  scanty  population.  According  to  what  I  have  been  assured
by  a  man  who  has  travelled  through  the  country,  there  is
nothing  to  be  seen  in  Turkistan  but  ruins,  and  more  or  less
obliterated  remains.  From  a  distance  one  sees  a  well-built
village,  the  environs  of  which  are  covered  with  beautiful
verdure;  but  on  approaching,  in  the  hope  of  meeting  with
some  inhabitants,  there  are  found  only  houses  completely  de-
serted. The  population  is  composed  entirely  of  nomads — that
is,  of  shepherds  and  graziers  who  never  occupy  themselves  with
cultivating  the  land  or  sowing  crops.  There  is  no  other  verdure
but  that  of  the  steppes,  which  grows  naturally."  ^  That  towns,
in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  had  existed  in  the  land  is  thus
correct,  but  they  had  been  built  when  others  possessed  and
governed  it,  and  before  it  had  become  the  home  of  the  Mon-
golian nomads.  The  TJighurs,  a  Turki  tribe  of  considerable
cultivation  by  comparison,  had  owned  the  greater  part,  if  not
the  whole,  of  the  country  up  to  less  than  a  century  prior  to  the
rise  of  the  Mongols,  and  were  probably  the  founders  of  several
towns  of  more  or  less  importance ;  while  the  whole  of  Moghul-
istan had,  during  the  interval,  been  occupied  by  the  Kara
Ehitai,  whose  people,  although  perhaps  much  mixed  with
nomad  tribesmen,  seem  also  to  have  been  capable  of  building
cities  and  carrying  on  cultivation. The  advent  of  the  Mon-

^  See  the  MasdUikrdl'Ahsar  of  Shah4b-ud-DiD,  transl.  by  Quatremdre  in
Not.  el  Extr.  ziiL,  p.  257.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

68  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

golian  hordes,  however,  under  Chingiz  and  his  snccessors,  put
an  end  to  all  such  practices,  and  from  that  time  till  the  date
when  Mirza  Haidar's  history  closes  (and  probably  for  long
after  also),  the  country  reverted  to  a  purely  pastoral  condition.
When,  therefore,  we  read  of  the  cities  of  Taraz,  Balasaghun,
Aimal,  Bishbalik,  Almaligh,  etc.,  within  the  Moghul  period,  it
can  hardly  be  that  Moghul  cities  are  intended,  but  rather
encampments — some  of  them,  perhaps,  central  in  situation  and
well  inhabited — standing  on  or  near  the  sites  of  the  remains  of
these  places.

In  the  more  advanced  of  the  countries  conquered  by  the
Mongolian  armies — in  Persia,  Mavara-un-I^ahr,  Turkistan,  etc.
— no  obliteration  or  even  systematic  destruction  of  tovms
(except  in  the  course  of  the  wars),  and  no  reversion  to  a
nomadic  level,  seems  to  have  taken  place;  but  the  difference
in  the  case  of  Moghulistan  was  that,  in  that  country,  the
nomadic  tribesmen  of  the  steppes  immediately  to  the  eastward
— the  true  Mongolia — ^pressed  in,  and  appropriating  the  land
for  their  own  habitation,  took  root,  while  in  the  lower  countries
they  settled  as  rulers  only.  Those  of  the  Mongols  who,  after
the  first  invasion,  stayed  in  the  conquered  countries  with  their
governing  Khans  or  chiefs,  probably  intermarried,  after  a  time,
with  the  settled  popxdation,  and  were  soon  absorbed ;  while  in
what  became  known — and  partly  for  this  very  reason — as
*  Moghulistan,*  or  the  '  land  of  the  Mongols,'  the  invaders  found
a  suitable  home,  and  establishing  themselves  as  one  of  the
nations  of  the  soil,  became,  for  a  time  at  least,  the  dominant
one.  As  generations  passed,  they  tended,  no  doubt,  to  lose
their  identity  by  intermarrying  with  other  races  already
sparsely  inhabiting  the  region,  but  in  this  instance  their
absorption  would  be  a  slow  process,  as  compared  with  the  few
left  among  the  overwhelming  populations  of  the  lower  countries
in  the  west.  The  aul  was  probably  a  tribal  community,  and
the  number  of  the  Moghuls  was  perhaps  greater  than  that  of
their  neighbours,  while  the  life  of  the  steppes  rendered  a
certain  degree  of  isolation  inevitable.  All  these  circum-
stances would  combine  to  retard  a  fusion  of  races,  though  it
may  not,  as  far  as  the  evidence  goes,  have  obviated  it  in  the
end.

Here,  then,  no  cities  sprang  up,  while  those  already  in
existence  soon  fell  to  ruin.  But  the  Musulman  writers,  who
constantly  confuse  the  words  for  *city'  and  'country,*  and

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  B9

even  'nation,^  would  be  unlikely  to  draw  any  distinction
between  a  built  and  permanent  town,  and  an  encampment  of
felt  tents — an  wriu  or  an  ouZ,  as  the  Tarki  words  are.  In
several  cases  Mirza  Haidar  mentions  towns  of  Moghnlistan  as
existing  in  the  form  of  mins  only,  and  he  is  explicit  on  this
point.  Bnt  he  nowhere  describes  one  as  an  inhabited  centre  at
his  own  time,  though  it  is  only  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he
would,  at  least,  haye  made  some  mention  of  them  had  they
existed,  in  the  same  way  that  he  speaks  of,  and  even  describes,
those  of  Alti-Shahr.  The  aiiZ,  or  collection  of  felt  tents,
pitched  without  order  or  any  yiew  to  permanency,  near  the
banks  of  a  stream,  and  in  the  centre  of  some  district  where
pasture  was  near  at  hand,  was  probably  the  nearest  approach
to  a  town  at  the  period  our  history  belongs  to.  Here,  possibly,
a  square  or  oblong  shed  of  brown  mud  bricks,  ornamented  with
yaks'  tails,  antelopes'  heads,  and  rows  of  small,  coloured  flags,
may  have  stood  to  represent  the  wriv,  proper,  or  reception-
room  and  court-house  of  the  chief;  while  round  it  were
scattered  the  dome-shaped  tents  of  willow  laths,  covered  with
sheets  of  felt — all  grimy  and  greasy — and  ready  at  any  moment
to  be  taken  down  by  the  women  of  the  tribe,  and  packed,  with
the  rest  of  their  domestic  belongings,  on  the  backs  of  the  camels.
Of  forts,  walls,  or  streets  there  could  have  been  no  sign.  In  the
daytime,  the  ground  on  which  the  encampment  stood  would
have  been  black  with  the  dried  droppings  of  sheep,  a  foot  in
depth,  which,  whirled  into  the  air  by  the  west  wind,  would
{)ervade,  with  its  pungent  smell,  the  valley  for  a  mile  round,
and  cover  everything,  even  the  surface  of  the  river,  with  a.film
of  black.  By  the  evening,  this  unsavoury  carpet  would  be
overlaid  by  thousands  of  sheep,  driven  in  from  the  neighbour-
ing glens  and  packed  close,  in  scarcely  separated  flocks,  for  the
night,  while  outside  these,  long  rows  of  camels  would  kneel  at
their  tethering-ropes,  and  groups  of  shaggy  ponies  stand  fastened
to  the  doors  of  their  masters'  tents.  Near  at  hand,  it  may  be,
some  ruined  walls  or  weather-worn  mounds  pointed  to  the
remains  of  an  Uighur  town,  or  fort,  destroyed  hundreds  of
years  ago,  and  having  no  more  connection  with  the  life  of  the
people  of  the  avi  than  have  the  ruins  of  an  Elizabethan  castle,
or  a  Norman  keep,  with  the  inhabitants  of  a  neighbouring  county
town  in  England  at  the  present  day.

Encampments  such  as  these  would  not  only  leave  no  trace  of
where  they  stood,  but  even  their  names  would  be  unlikely  to
endure  in  history. Such  were,  no  doubt,  At-Bashi,  Euchkar,

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

60  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

Jumgdl,  Jnd  Euzi,  and  others,  so  often  spoken  of  in  the  Second
Part  of  the  Tarihh'i'Bashidiy  and  several  more  that  are
mentioned  in  the  Zafar-Ndma  and  the  Tcmkhri-Jdhdn  Eushai,
now  impossible  to  identify.  They  were  typical  of  the  Moghuls
as  a  race — of  a  nation  devoid  of  constructiye  instincts,  destined
only  to  fallow  the  land  and  then  make  place  for  others.

The  period  subsequent  to  the  conquest  of  Ghingiz*s  successors
was  one  when  disorder  and  intolerance  prevented  European
travellers,  who  might  have  left  a  description  behind  them,  from
traversing  the  country  of  the  Moghuls ;  but  a  side-light  is  shed
on  the  subject  by  a  brief  mention  in  Eubruk's  narrative  of  his
visit  to  Mangu  Eaan  (Ghingiz's  grandson)  at  Earakorum  in  the
year  1253,  and  consequently  only  just  at  the  outset  of  the
establishment  of  the  Mongols  in  the  region  in  question.  Eara-
korum was  then  the  Mongol  capital :  it  numbered  among  its
inhabitants  many  Chinese,  Uighurs,  and  other  comparatively
cultivated  people,  and  was,  presumably,  if  not  the  only  per-
manent Mongolian  town,  at  any  rate  by  far  the  best  of  them.
Yet  the  walls  only  measured  about  a  mile  in  circumference,  and
Bubruk  relates  of  it :  "  You  must  understand  that  if  you  set
aside  the  Eaan's  own  palace,  it  is  not  as  good  as  the  borough  of
St.  Dennis ;  and  as  for  the  palace,  the  abbey  of  St.  Dennis  is
worth  ten  of  it  I  There  are  two  streets  in  the  town,  one  of
which  is  occupied  by  the  Saracens,  and  in  that  is  the  market-
place. The  other  street  is  occupied  by  the  Cathayans,  who  are
all  craftsmen  ....  There  are  also  twelve  idol  temples  belong-
ing to  different  nations,  two  Mahummeries,  in  which  the  law  of
Mahomet  is  preached,  and  one  Church  of  the  Christians  at  the
extremity  of  the  town.  The  town  is  enclosed  by  a  mud  wall
and  has  four  gates."*  The  Chinese  travellers  of  the  thirteenth
century  give  no  description  of  the  inhabited  centres  of  Moghul-
istan  which  they  passed  through,  though  one  of  them,  Chang
Te  (who  seems  to  have  had  an  eye  for  irrigation)  mentions
briefly  that  at  Almaligh  there  were  reservoirs  in  the  market-
places, "connected  by  running  water."  Farther  westward
also,  in  the  valley  of  the  Chu,  he  remarks  that  the  country
was  intersected  in  all  directions  by  canals  which  irrigated  the
fields,  while  numerous  ancient  walls  and  other  ruins  were  seen
which  he  attributed  to  the  days  of  the  Eitan  or  the  Eara  Ehitai.'
But  all  these  marks  of  civilisation  had  been  swept  away  in
Mirza  Haidar's  time,  as  he  himself  implies  in  his  description  of

*  See  Yule's  Marco  PcHo^  L,  p.  228.
^  See  Bretflcbneider,  1.,  pp.  127, 129.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls,  61

the  antiqiiities  of  that  part  of  the  Ehanate  which/ he  says/ was
formerly  known  as  '  Eotra  Ehitai.'

In  attempting  to  make  clear  the  condition  of  Mogholistan
and  the  neighbonring  regions  of  Central  Asia,  perhaps  the
chief  perplexity  is  experienced  in  nnravelling  the  nomenclature
of  places  and  people.  The  names  of  countries  and  towns  not
only  changed  with  time,  but  different  nations  applied,  frequently,
a  different  designation  to  one  and  the  same  place.  Thus,
names  often  arose  at  a  certain  period,  were  employed  by  writers
for  a  time,  and  again  fell  out  of  use.  The  Mongols,  for  instance,
during  their  ascendency,  gave  names  of  their  own  to  many
places  which,  after  the  decline  of  their  power,  became  obsolete.
In  the  same  way,  the  conquests  of  Timur  seem  to  have  giyen
birth  to  names  that  are  peculiar  to  that  period  alone,  and  were
perhaps  only  in  vogue  among  those  connected  with  the  con-
queror's court  or  his  armies.  This  circumstance,  in  addition  to
the  habit  of  applying  nicknames  to  tribes  and  nations,  may
account  for  many  of  the  difficulties  that  surround  the  identifica-
tion of  names  mentioned  by  yarious  authors,  and  should  act  as
a  warning,  in  the  case  of  the  tribes,  not  to  attach  too  readily  a
racial  significance  to  every  name  that  is  met  with.

To  the  Ghaghatais  of  M^vara-un-Nahr  and  the  west,  Moghul-
istan  was  known,  in  the  13th  and  14th  centuries,  by  the  name
of  JcUdhf  and  though  this  was  only  a  term  of  depreciation,  or  a
nickname  (as  will  be  explained  below),  it  is  employed  in  the
gravest  way  by  several  Persian  authors  of  the  Timuri  period,
whose  works  have  become  standards  of  historical  reference.
What  is  perhaps  more  curious  to  remark  is,  that  the  name  of
Bishbdlik,  which  so  often  occurs  in  medisdval  histories  and  travels,
and  in  the  Chinese  historical  annals,  is  that  by  which  the
Chinese  knew  the  Ehanate  of  Moghulistan,  during  the  earlier
part  of  the  period  over  which  Mirza  Haidar*s  history  extends.
This  name  had  originally  no  connection  with  the  Moghuls  or
their  dominion,  but  was  a  survival  from  the  days  when  the
region  had  belonged  to  the  Uighurs.  Properly  it  was  the  name
of  a  city  only,  which  had  been  built  by  the  Uighurs,  and,
having  become  their  capital,  had  lent  its  name  to  the  whole
kingdom.  The  meaning,  in  Turki,  is  *  Five  Cities,'  and  seems,
possibly,  to  have  indicated  the  capital  of  the  five  divisions,  or
provinces,  into  which  the  country  of  the  Uighurs,  at  that  time,
(about  the  middle  of  the  ninth  century)  was  divided ;  or  other-
wise, it  may  have  meant  that  the  tribe  was  divided  into  five

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

62  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls,

Beetions,  or  the  town  (as  one  anthority  has  it)  into  five  qnarters.^
However  this  may  be,  the  Chinese  knew  the  country  by  its
Tnrki  name  (which  they  sometimes  translated  into  its  Chinese
eqniyalent— Wu-chfeng),  while  they  gave  the  city  itself  the
Chinese  style  of  Pei-ting,  or  '  Northern  Court ' ;  and  snbse-
qnently  (early  in  the  fifteenth  century)  changed  that  of  the
whole  country  from  '  Bishbdlik  '  into  '  Hi-balik.'

The  town  of  Bishbalik  was  situated  on,  or  near,  the  site  of
the  modem  Urumtsi,  and  the  country  of  which  it  was  the  chief
place,  extended  to  the  westward  and  north-westward,  as  well  as
beyond  the  southern  slopes  of  the  Tian  Shan.  Like  the  rest  of
this  part  of  Asia,  it  fell  into  the  empire  of  Chingiz  Ehan,  and,
after  his  death,  passed  to  his  son  Chaghatai.  Later  again,  in
the  time  of  the  Chinese  Mings,  the  official  historians  of  that
dynasty  described  the  limits  of  the  region  in  such  a  way,  as  to
leave  no  doubt  that  the  country  they  termed  Bishbalik  was,
indeed,  Moghulistan.  "  Bie-shi-ba-li,"  says  the  Ming  Shi^  "  is
a  great  empire  in  the  8i  Yu  [countries  of  the  west].  It  is
bordered  on  the  south  by  Yu-tien  [Ehotan],  on  the  north  by
the  country  of  the  Wa-la  [the  Girat  Ealmaks],  on  the  west  by
Sa-ma-rh-han  [Samarkand],  and  to  the  east  it  is  contiguous
with  Huo-chou  [Kara  Ehoja].  It  is  distant  [probably  the
m'iu  of  the  Ehan  is  meant]  from  Eia-Yu-Euan  in  the  south-
east, 3700  IL  It  is  believed  that  Bie-shi-ba-li  occupies  the
same  tracts  as,  in  ancient  times,  Yenki  or  Eui-tsz."^  As  a
description  of  the  land  and  people,  the  Ming  history  adds : —
"  The  country  of  Ili-ba-li  is  surrounded  by  deserts.  It  extends
8000  li  from  east  to  west  and  2000  li  from  north  to  south.
There  are  no  cities  or  palace  buildings.  The  people  are  nomads
living  in  felt  tents,  and  exchanging  their  abode,  together  with
their  herds,  in  accordance  with  the  existence  of  water  and
pasture  land.  They  are  of  a  fierce  appearance.  Their  common
food  is  flesh  and  ii^mM.  They  are  dressed  in  the  same  fetshion
as  the  Wa-la."

Many  embassies  are  recorded  in  the  Ming  Shi  as  having

1  See  Bret  Schneider,  L,  p.  258.  But  Mr.  Waiters  derivmg  his  iDformation»
it  seems,  from  Chinese  soiu-ces,  coimts  Bishhdlik,  or  Urumtsi,  as  one  of  the
*'  Five  Qties,"  and  mentions  Tenki  Tnow  Karashahr)  and  Kuitze  (the  present
Kuchar)  as  two  of  the  others.  The  remaining  two  he  does  not  specify.
{China  Ri^oitw,  xix..  No.  2,  pp.  108,  112.)

«  Bretschneider,  ii.,  pp.  225  wj.

'  These  were  two  ancient  kingdoms,  explained  by  Dr.  Bretschneider  to  have
existed  before  the  Christian  ora^  and  to  be  generally  identified,  by  the  Qiinese,
with  the  modem  Karashahr  and  Kuohar.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

mn

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  63

passed  between  Bishbalik,  or  Ili-b&lik^  and  the  Gbinese  capital,
which  make  it  appear  that  the  Ehans  of  Moghulistan  and  the
Dnghlat  Amirs  paid  tribute  to  China.  Whether  the  position  of
tributaries  was  imposed  upon  them  by  superior  force,  or  whether,
as  is  far  more  probable,  the  missions  were  sent  to  cultivate  the
friendship  of  a  powerful  neighbour,  and  to  profit  by  an  exchange
of  presents,  is  nowhere  intimated ;  but  the  result  remains,  that
from  the  time  of  Khizir  Khwaja,  about  the  year  1391,  down  to
the  reign  of  Isan  Bugha  II.  in  1456,  each  successive  Khan  (as
we  have  seen  in  Section  11.)  sent  one  or  more  tribute-bearing
missions  to  the  Ming  court.  After  the  latter  date,  it  appears  to
have  been  settled  that  *Ili-bali'  was  to  send  tribute  every
three  years,  but  no  further  mention  is  made  of  any  special
mission,  and  it  is  possible  that  not  long  afterwards,  the  growing
weakness  of  the  Mings  caused  the  custom  to  fall  into  disuse.

It  may  be  thought  strange,  perhaps,  that  Mirza  Haidar's  his-
tory nowhere  speaks  of  intercourse  with  China,  or  mentions  that
the  Moghul  Ehans  performed  these  acts  of  homage  to  her  Em-
perors. Whether  he  omitted  any  allusion  to  them,  from  a  feeling
that  the  payment  of  tribute  was  derogatory  to  his  ancestors,  or
whether  he  thought  the  subject  not  worth  recording,  must
remain  a  matter  of  conjecture.  In  all  likelihood  the  latter  was
the  reason,  as  we  shall  see,  further  on,  when  referring  to  similar
missions  from  Uighuristan.  The  proceeding  was,  presumably,
looked  upon  as  a  mere  form,  or  indeed  a  farce,  and  therefore
attracted  no  attention  on  the  part  of  the  historian.  Still,  his
silence  on  the  point  cannot  be  taken  to  disprove  the  statements
of  the  Chinese,  for  these  are  explicit  and  persistent,  and  can
hardly  be  otherwise  than  correct  as  records  of  bare  facts.  What
is  remarkable,  however,  is  that  the  same  Khans  and  Amirs  who
were  bowing  the  knee  to  China,  whether  in  good  faith  or  other-
wise, had  no  hesitation  in  measuring  their  strength  with  so
great  a  soldier  as  Timur.  The  fact  that  his  power  was  near  and
visible  did  not  inspire  them  with  respect,  or  deter  them  from
raiding  into  his  territory  and  otherwise  provoking  his  vengeance.
But  the  Chinese,  then  as  now,  seem  to  have  possessed  the  art  of
attracting  the  outward  forms  of  submission  from  distant  States,
though  they  had  no  power  to  exact  the  reality.

Passing  now  across  the  mountains  to  the  south-east,  an
entirely  different  land  and  people  present  themselves,  in  the
province  that  may  be  most  appropriately  and  correctly  called
AUi'Shahrj  or  the  '  Six  Cities '  of  Eastern  Turkistan. Here  the

Digitized  by

Google

64  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

low  ranges  and  open  yalleya  of  the  steppes,  are  changed  for
gigantic  mountains  on  the  one  hand,  and  sandy  deserts  on  the
other;  the  avl  of  felt  tents  for  the  town  of  brown  mud-bricks
and  close-packed  bazars;  the  grazing  grounds  and  hill-side
torrents  for  cultivated  fields  and  irrigation  canals ;  while,  aboye
all,  the  thriftless,  irresponsible  nomad  is  replaced  by  the  culti-
vator and  artisan,  with  all  the  elements  of  stability  that  their
industry  confers  upon  a  people.  Though  the  area  is  large,  the
culturable  and  habitable  spots  in  it  are,  out  of  all  proportion,
small.  One  modern  traveller  describes  it  as  a  huge  desert
fringed  by  a  few  small  patches  of  cultivation.  Another  tells  us
that  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  country  would  show  a  huge  bare
desert,  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  barren  mountains,  along
the  bases  of  which  would  be  seen  some  vivid  green  spots,  show-
ing out  sharp  and  distinct  like  streaks  of  green  paint  on  a  sepia
picture.  At  the  western  end,  the  cultivation  is  of  greater  extent
and  more  continuous  than  in  the  eastern  half,  where  the  oas^s
are  small  and  separated  from  each  other  by  stretches  of  desert,
which  increase  in  length  as  the  traveller  passes  eastward;  while
the  eastern  extremity  is  desert  pure  and  simple.  The  oases,
however,  are  fertile  enough  in  themselves,  for  every  drop  of
the  water  brought  down  by  the  streams  from  the  mountains,  is
drawn  off  into  irrigating  canals,  and  made  to  reach  as  far  as
possible  toward  the  desert,  for  agricultural  purposes.

All  except  the  shifting  sands  of  the  central  waste,  appears  to
require  only  water  to  render  the  ground  fertile;  but  water  is
precisely  the  boon  that  is  withheld.  Though  the  monsoon
clouds  roU  in  every  summer  across  the  mountain  masses  on  the
south,  they  seldom  do  more  than  tantalise  the  cultivator,  who
watches  them  in  the  hope  of  rain.  Indeed,  rain  but  rarely
falls  and  a  Chinese  traveller  of  ancient  days  ^  has  recorded  the
incredulity  of  the  people,  when  told  that  water  for  cultivation
fell  from  heaven,  onto  the  favoured  soil  of  his  country,  and
rendered  it  independent  of  melted  snow  from  the  mountains.
They  laughed,  and  cried :  "  How  can  heaven  provide  enough  for
aU?"  ^  Snow  may  be  less  of  a  rarity,  but  so  dry  is  the  atmo-
sphere, that  when  a  fall  occurs,  it  evaporates  after  a  few  hours,
and  leaves  the  surface  of  the  ground  scarcely  moistened.

That  a  land  of  this  nature  should  support  only  a  small
population,  and  be  too  poor,  as  Mirza  Haidar  tells  us,  to  main-
tain an  army  on  its  own  produce,  is  not  surprising. Whether
*  Sung  Yun,  in  518  a.d. See  Beals  Si-YvrKi^  i.,  p.  xc.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Land  of  the  Mogkuls.  66

its  weakness  as  a  State  is  owing  to  this  or  to  whatever  other
cause,  it  has  always  been  an  easy  prey  to  invaders,  and  has
seldom  had  a  native  ruler  within  historic  times.  Its  population
has  been  a  Turki  one  for  ages  past,  and  the  Uighur  branch  of
that  race  may  be  regarded  (as  far  as  historic  times  are  concerned)
as  the  original  owners  of  the  soil,  and  the  parent  stock  of  the
bulk  of  the  present  inhabitants.^  That  in  later  times,  at  least,,
they  were  not  an  aggressive  race  appears  evident  from  the  little
we  hear  of  them,  and  that  they  had  some  capacity  for  crafts  and
literature  seems  also  to  be  established.  No  doubt  the  tendency
of  such  a  people  would  be  to  live  peaceably  under  any  govern-
ment strong  enough  to  repel  external  enemies ;  so  that  when
Mirza  Haidar  tells  us  that  Alti-Shahr  was  ''  free  from  the  dis-
cord of  men  and  the  trampling  of  hoofs,  and  became  an  asylum
for  the  contented  and  the  prosperous,"  he  is  probably  drawing
a  picture  of  the  country  not  only  true  of  his  own  time,  but  one
that  serves  for  several  centuries  both  before  and  after  it.

During  the  periods  that  the  Dughlat  Amirs  and  Moghul
Ehans  held  sway,  we  hear  of  expeditions  being  sent  to  overrun
Badakhshdn,  Ladak,  and  other  weak  States,  but  these  were
evidently  undertaken  by  foreign  rulers  with  their  foreign
troops,  and  not  by  the  people  of  the  country ;  indeed,  we  come
much  more  frequently  upon  records  of  invasions  which  they
themselves  underwent  at  the  hands  of  various  enemies,  such  as
the  Arabs,  the  Mongols,  the  Kara  Ehitai,  and  even  the  Kalmaks.
In  the  raids  of  the  Moghuls  into  Western  Turkistan  and
Ifavara-un-Nahr^  in  their  wars  with  Timur  and  Ulugh  Beg,
and  their  long  campaigns  with  the  Uzbegs,  it  is  probable  that
the  natives  of  Alti-Shahr  took  little  part,  for  they  are  never
mentioned  as  combatants.  They  had,  in  short  (and  have  still),
all  the  attributes  of  a  lowland  and  unwarlike  people,  whose
wealth  excites  the  cupidity  of  aggressive  neighbours,  but  the
nature  of  whose  country  and  customs  prevent  them  from
becoming  themselves  aggressive.

It  would  be  interesting  to  learn  what  the  armies  were  com-
posed of,  that  invaded,  in  the  reigns  of  Aba  Bakr  and  Sultan
Said,  BadakhshAn,  Ghitral,  etc.,  Ladak,  Tibet  and  Kashmir.  In
all  likelihood  the  numbers  were  very  small — to  be  counted  in
some  instances  by  hundreds  rather  than  by  thousands — while
most  of  the  men  were  probably  mercenaries  from  countries

^  Cknnp.  Elaproth,  in  Timkowski's  Voy.  h  Peking,  i.,  p.  392,  and  Hadloff  in
Petermaon's  MUtheilungeny  1866,  Heft,  iii.,  p.  97.

9

Digitized  by

Google

66  TJie  Land  of  the  Mogkuls.

other  than  Alti-Shahr.  Mirza  Haidar  nowhere  Bpecifies  the
races  which  famished  the  rank  and  file  of  these  forces.  When
entering  on  the  conquest  of  E^ashghar,  in  1514,  he  gives  an
analysis  of  the  chiefs  of  Saltan  Said's  army,  nearly  all  of  whom
were  Moghuls  of  yarioas  clans,  or  members  of  tribes  who  had
long  previously  thrown  in  their  lot  with  the  Moghuls,  and  the
number  of  tribal  followers  that  each  chief  brought  with  him  is
specified  in  each  case.  If  the  figures  given  are  correct — and  as
they  are  not  mere  round  numbers,  they  appear  as  if  intended  to
be  exact — ^it  is  evident  that  the  tribal  following  which  each
chief  could  muster  was  a  mere  handful,  for  the  total  of  the
tribesmen  mentioned  does  not  approach  that  of  the  entire  army
of  4700  men,  as  he  states  it.^  The  remainder  must  have  been
mercenaries  and  adventurers  who  were,  no  doubt,  to  be  found
in  abundance  all  over  Central  Asia  in  those  times,  in  the
persons  of  Eipchaks,  Turkomans,  Afghans,  Shrinks  and  what
not.  On  this  occasion,  too,  a  great  efibrt  was  being  made  and
a  prize  worth  winning  was  at  stake;  the  army  was  raised,
moreover,  in  Farghina  and  Moghulistan,  and  not  in  peaceful
Alti-Shahr.  Thus  it  was  probably  a  much  more  numerous  one
than  those  afterwards  employed  on  distant  expeditions  beyond
the  mountains,  though  it  may  be  fairly  conjectured  that  the
composition  was  very  similar  in  all  cases.  In  the  expedition  of
Sultan  Said  against  Ladak,  Kashmir  and  Tibet  in  1532,  the
author  puts  the  total  of  the  army  at  the  round  figxure  of  5000
men,  but  in  this  instance  he  gives  none  of  the  minute  parti-
culars that  he  records  with  regard  to  the  4700  and  their
supports,  who  invaded  Eashghar.  The  round  number  is  likely,
therefore,  to  be  one  of  the  many  similar  exaggerations  in  whidi
his  book  abounds ;  for  it  is  improbable  that  as  large  a  force
would  have  been  thought  necessary  for  this  enterprise  as  for
the  wresting  of  Eashghar  and  the  whole  of  Alti-Shahr  from
so  formidable  an  enemy  as  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.  He  tells  us,  it  is
true,  that  Ladak  was  incapable  of  supporting  the  Khan's  army,
but  this  might  have  been  the  case  with  even  half  5000  men
and  their  complement  of  horses.

Perhaps  the  most  noteworthy  feature  of  this  land  of  the  Six
Cities,  and  the  one  that  has  chiefly  struck  the  imagination  of

^  This  force  was,  however,  only  the  army  actually  operating  against
Eashghar,  Yan^i  Hisar,  etc.,  lor  the  author  mentions  other  troops  that  were
guarding  the  road  from  Moghulistan,  and  the  baggage ;  though  as  regards
the  number  of  these,  he  gives  no  indication.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  67

both  ancient  and  modern  writers,  is  the  central  desert  with  its
moving  sands  and  bnried  towns.  It  is  referred  to  in  Chinese
writings  of  more  than  2000  years  old,  by  travellers  who  gave
the  region  the  name  of  Liu  8ha,  or  *  Moving  Sands,*  from  its
chief  characteristic  and  most  obvious  peculiarity ;  ^  and  it  was
made  known  to  Europeans  through  the  graphic  accounts  of  it
which  Marco  Polo  left  on  record.  The  phenomenon  of  the
shifting  sands  could  hardly  have  escaped  Mirza  Haidar,  and  the
story  he  tells  of  the  overwhelming  of  Katak,  with  its  mosque
and  minaret,  is  one  of  the  best  pieces  of  description  in  his  book.
It  ia  almost  an  exact  counterpart  of  that  told  by  Hiuen  Tsang
in  the  eighth  century,  of  a  town  between  E^otan  and  Pima
(Pain  ?)  which  was  said  to  have  been  overwhelmed  by  the  same
agency,  some  hundreds  of  years  previously.  In  this  case,  neglect
in  the  proper  worship  of  a  Buddhist  idol  was  the  cause,  while
in  the  later  one  the  Musulmans  detected  the  wrath  of  God.
The  earlier  calamity  too,  is  said  to  have  been  predicted  by  a
pious  Arhat  seven  days  before  it  occurred.  At  first  a  great
storm  of  wind  arose,  which  carried  sand  and  soil  before  it,  while
"  on  the  seventh  day,"  continues  the  narrative, "  in  the  evening,
just  after  the  division  of  the  night,  it  rained  sand  and  earth
and  filled  the  city  ....  The  town  of  Ho-lo-lo  Kia  is  now  a
great  sand  mound.  The  kings  of  neighbouring  countries,  and
persons  in  power  from  distant  spots,  have,  many  times,  wished
to  excavate  the  mound  and  take  away  the  precious  things
buried  there ;  but  as  soon  as  they  have  arrived  at  the  borders
of  the  place,  a  furious  wind  has  sprung  up,  dark  clouds  have
gathered  together  from  the  four  quarters  of  heaven,  and  they
have  become  lost."  *

Similar  stories  are  in  the  mouth  of  nearly  every  native  of  the
country  down  to  the  present  time,  and  several  have  been
recorded  by  Dr.  Bellew  and  Sir  Douglas  Forsyth.  These
travellers  themselves  visited  some  of  the  sand-buried  ruins  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Yangi  Hisar.  One  of  them  was  the  fort  of
a  Uighur  chief  called  Tokhta  Bashid,  which  had  been  destroyed
about  the  eleventh  century  by  Arsalan  Ehan,  and  afterwards
overwhelmed  by  the  sand.  Another  was  the  Maaar,  or  shrine,
of  one  Hazrat  Begum,  which  had  been  first  swallowed  up,  and
again,  at  a  later  date,  left  free  by  the  receding  dunes.  The
neighbourhood  of  the  latter  ruin  is  described  as  ''  a  perfect  sea

^  See  Bretschneider,  ii.,  pp.  18,  144.
'-»  Beal'fl  Si-yHrKi,  ii.,  pp.  323-4.

Digitized  by

Google

68  Tlie  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

of  loose  sand,  adyancing  in  regular  wave  lines  from  north-west
to  south-east. The  sand  dunes  are  mostly  from  ten  to  twenty
feet  high,  but  some  are  seen,  like  little  hills,  full  a  hundred  feet
high,  and  in  some  spots  higher. They  oover  the  plain,  of  which
the  hard clay  is  seen  between  their  rows,  with  numberless
chains  of  two  or  three  or  more  together  in  a  line,  and  follow  in
successive  rows  one  behind  the  other,  just  like  the  marks  left
by  wave  ripples  on  a  sandy  beach,  only  on  a  large  scale.
Towards  the  south-east  these  sand  dunes  all  present  a  steep
bank  in  the  shape  of  a  crescent,  the  horns  of  which  slope
forwards  and  downwards,  in  points,  to  the  ground  .  .  .  . " The
process  of  submergence.  Dr.  Bellew  found  to  be  usually  a  very
gradual  one,  until  the  symmetry  of  the  dune,  becoming  broken
by  an  obstructing  object,  its  loose  materials  subside,  and  thus
overwhelm  the  obstruction. In  the  instance  of  one  of  the
buildings  inspected,  it  was  found that  '^a  chain  of  three
crescentic  dunes,  side  by  side,  had  advanced  in  line  across  the
plain,  till  one  of  the  outer  crescents  had  struck  the  walls  of  the
court  of  the  tenement,  and  growing  up,  had,  in  time,  over-
topped, and  thus  overflowed  and  filled  its  area  by  its  downfall ;
whilst  the  other  two  crescents  at  its  side,  continuing  their
unobstructed  course,  maintained  their  proper  form  uninjured."  ^
The  rate  of  progression  the  writer  was  unable  to  determine,  as
it  depends  on  the  varying  force  of  the  propelling  power,  the
slope  of  the  land,  and  the  obstructions  on  its  surface. The
operation,  however,  is  the  same  as  in  the  well-known  instance
of  Eccles  church,  on  the  coast  of  Norfolk,  only  on  a  larger  scale.
By  1839  the  whole  of  the  church,  except  a  portion  of  the  tower,
had  been  buried ;  by  1862  the  tower  had  nearly  emerged  again,
while  in  1892  the  whole  building  rose  free  from  the  level  of
the  strand,  the  dunes  having  passed  to  its  landward  side.

The  phenomenon  thus  seen  in  operation,  explains  how  the
town  of  Eatak,  and  others  mentioned  by  Mirza  Haidar,  became
engulfed,  and  confirms  the  stories  still  current  in  Eastern
Turkistan  of  ruined  towns,  or  buildings,  now  and  then  appear-
ing for  a  while  and  being  again  submerged.^  In  the  extreme
east  of  the  countiy,  the  sandy  desert  is  found  at  its  worst,  and
it  is  in  connection  with  this  quarter  that  most  of  the  tales  of
weird  horrors  have  their  origin. How  deeply  the  superstitious

»  See  Jbfim.  Rh  Geo,  Socy,,  1877,  pp.  9-11.

'  Mirza  Haidar  and  ttie  Chinese  traveller,  referred  to  above,  attribute  these
calamities  to  the  showers  of  fine  sand  that  frequently  fall  after  violent  storms

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.  69

mind  of  the  Asiatic  may  be  impressed  by  these  wastes  of
moying  sands,  and  how  little  reason  there  is  to  wonder  at  the
stories  of  ghosts,  demons,  and  visions  with  which  he  has  in-
vested the  region,  may  be  judged  by  General  Prejevalski's  vivid
description  of  it.  "  The  eflfect  of  these  bare  yellow  hillocks,"
he  writes, ''  is  most  dreary  and  depressing  when  yon  are  among
them,  and  can  see  nothing  bat  the  sky  and  the  sand;  not  a
plant,  not  an  animal  is  visible,  with  the  single  exception  of  the
yellowish-grey  lizards  (PhrynocepTialvs  8p.)  which  trail  their
bodies  over  the  loose  soil  and  mark  it  with  the  patterns  of  their
tracks.  A  dnll  heaviness  oppresses  the  senses  in  this  inani-
mate sea  of  sand.  No  sonnds  are  heard,  not  even  the  chirping
of  the  grasshopper ;  the  silence  of  the  tomb  surrounds  you."  ^

Hiuen  Tsang's  description  scarcely  varies  from  that  of  the
Bussian  traveller.  *' These  sands,"  he  says,  '' extend  like  a
drifting  flood  for  a  great  distance,  piled  up  or  scattered  before
the  wind.  There  is  no  trace  left  behind  by  travellers,  and
oftentimes  the  way  is  lost,  and  so  they  wander  hither  and
thither  quite  bewildered,  without  any  guide  or  direction.  80
travellers  pile  up  the  bones  of  animals  as  beacons.  There  is
neither  water  nor  herbage  to  be  found,  and  hot  winds  frequently
blow.  When  these  winds  rise,  both  man  and  beast  become
confused  and  forgetful,  and  then  they  remain  perfectly  dis-
abled. At  times,  sad  and  plaintive  notes  are  heard  and  piteous
cries,  so  that  between  the  sights  and  sounds  of  this  desert,  men
get  confused  and  know  not  whither  they  go.  Hence  there  are
so  many  who  perish  on  the  journey.  But  it  is  all  the  work  of
demons  and  evil  spirits."  ^

And  if  the  superstition  of  the  Asiatic  is  moved  by  the  mystic
scenes  of  the  desert,  his  cupidity  is  also  stirred  by  the  legends
of  buried  riches  which  the  submerged  cities  are  supposed  to

of  wind.  It  is,  no  doubt,  a  fact  that  a  high  wind  carries  quantities  of
impalpable  dust  into  the  air,  and  that  much  of  this  gradually  fedls  to  the
ground  again  when  the  storm  subsides.  In  this  way  the  dust  showers  are
formed  which  have  been  described  by  the  Georgian  traveller  Danibeo;,  in
1795,  and  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Johnson,  who  visited  Eliotan  in  1865.  But  these
showers  cannot  be  held  to  account  for  the  disappearance  of  towns,  or  even
buildings,  in  the  sudden  and  calamitous  manner  describe  1  by  Asiatic  authors.
Their  action  would  be  extremely  gradual,  and  could  only  submerge  a  building
after  operating  for  centuries,  while  that  of  the  sand-dunes  can  accomplish  it
in  a  few  years.  (See,  for  Danib^,  Oeogr.  Mag.  1876,  p.  150.  Johnson  in
J,  B.  0.  JS,  1867,j).  5. Also  note,  p.  11.)

'  Prejevalski,  KtUjd  to  Lake  Loh,  pp.  163-4.

«  Beal'9  Si-ru-Ki  ii.,  pp.  324-5,

Digitized  by

Google

70  The  Land  of  the  Moghuls.

contain.  Traditions  lose  nothing  from  age  or  from  being  often
repeated,  and  no  doubt,  the  stories  of  hidden  treasures  are  now
— and,  indeed,  were  in  Mirza  Haidar's  time — ancient  enough  to
acquire  a  very  strong  influence  on  numbers  of  the  population.
From  time  to  time  ornaments,  vessels,  images,  and  coins  of
great  curiosity  are  unearthed,  but  their  value  to  the  finders,
whose  only  interest  lies  in  the  worth  of  the  metal  they  are
made  of,  can  scarcely  be  great.  Perhaps  the  only  systematic
exploitation  of  the  ancient  sites,  ever  undertaken,  is  that  of
Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  Amir  of  Eashghar,  so  fully  described  by  our
author.  It  may  be  dated  about  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  and
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  we  may  infer  that  nearly
everything  of  intrinsic  value  was  brought  to  light,  while  much
that  was  of  antiquarian  interest  was  destroyed,  so  that  when,
at  some  future  time,  civilised  explorers  come  to  investigate  the
ruins,  and  find  little  to  reward  their  labours,  they  may  feel
themselves  indebted  to  the  cupidity  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  for
their  disappointment.  The  tales  which  the  author  tells  of  the
riches  accumulated  by  the  Mirza,  may  safely  be  regarded  as,  in
a  great  measure,  fabulous ;  but  it  is  precisely  tales  such  as  these
that  have  given  rise  to  the  inflated  estimates  of  buried  wealth
so  common  in  the  country,  even  at  the  present  day.

Here  and  there  valuable  records  of  the  past  may  still  be
forthcoming  from  the  submerged  towns,  like  those  obtained  in
1874,  by  Sir  D.  Forsyth,  who  enumerates  a  figure  of  Buddha
of  the  tenth  century,  a  clay  figure  of  the  Hindu  monkey-god
Hanuman,  and  Hindu  women's  ornaments,  all  pointing  to  that
close  intercourse  with  India  which  we  know,  from  other  sources,
to  have  existed  in  times  before  Muhammadanism  prevailed  and
crushed  it.  He  also  obtained  several  Greek  coins  of  great
antiquity  and  interest.  Among  these  is  mentioned  especially
one  of  Antimachus,  dating  about  140  B.C.,  and  another,  of
Menander,  from  about  the  year  126  b.o.,  while  a  third,  an  iron
one  of  HermaBus,  might,  it  was  thought,  prove  even  older  than
either  of  these.  But  it  is  not  necessarily  among  the  ruins
buried  by  the  shifting  sands,  that  relics  of  remote  ages  will  be
found.  Very  ancient  remains  are  known  already  to  exist  at
various  points  along  the  southern  spurs  of  the  Tian  Shan,
though  nothing  has  yet  been  ascertained  as  to  the  age  they
belong  to.  It  was  near  the  town  of  Kuchar — the  ancient
Euitze  of  the  Chinese — that  Captain  Bower  found  the  famous
birch-bark  manuscript,  written  in  Sanskrit  and  dating  from

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Land  of  the  Moghuls,  71

the  fifth  century,  while  he  also  points  to  ruins  of  cities  which,
though  buried  beneath  the  present  level  of  the  country,  have
no  connection  with  the  shifting  sands.^

But  it  is  time  to  turn  from  the  land  of  the  man  to  the  man
of  the  land.

^  See  ¥ro%,  R.  A.  8.  R,  Nov.  1890.

Digitized  by

Google

72  The  People—

SECTION  IV.

TUB  PEOPLE— MOGHUL, TUBE, AND  maHUB.^

Men  from  the  regions  near  the  Volga's  mouth,
Mixed  with  the  rude,  black  archers  of  the  South ;

Chiefs  of  the  Uzbek  race,

Waving  their  heron  crests  with  martial  grace;
Turkomans,  countless  as  their  flocks,  led  forth
From  th'  aromatic  pastures  of  the  North;
Wild  warriors  of  the  turquoise  hills, — and  those
Who  dwell  beyond  the  everlasting  snows
Of  Hindoo  Kosh,  in  stormy  freedom  bred,  ....

— VtOtd  Pr<^h0t  of  Khanuan.

In  the  foregoing  Section,  it  has  been  found  convenient  to  nae
the  word  MoghvUstan  for  the  region  occupied  by  th^  descend-
ants of  the  Mongols,  subsequent  to  the  time  of  Chaghatai  Ehan,
though  it  has  been  necessary,  when  speaking  of  the  people  or
their  language  from  a  racial  point  of  view,  to  employ,  occasion-
ally, the  terms  Mongol  and  Mongolian  rather  than  Moghvl.
The  distinction  may  not  be  a  yery  satisfactory  one,  and  need
not  be  carried  farther  than  is  absolutely  needed  to  differentiate
between  the  earlier  racial  attributes,  and  the  later  national,  or
political,  aspects  of  the  land  and  people.  It  is  not  easy,  how-
ever, to  distinguish,  nominally,  between  the  Mongols  of  Mon-
golia proper,  before  they  spread  to  the  westward  under  Ghingiz
Ehan,  and  the  same  people  when,  at  a  later  date,  having
separated  from  the  land  of  their  ancestors,  they  had  come  to
close  quarters  with  the  Musulman  inhabitants  of  the  western
states  of  Central  Asia.  These  neighbours  mispronounced  the
name  of  the  new-comers'  original  nation  and,  afterwards
becoming  their  historians,  handed  it  down  to  posterity  under
what  appears  to  be  an  altered  form.  Fortunately  it  was  not
greatly  changed  by  either  Persian  or  Turki  writers,  yet  the
slight  modification  they  made  has  led,  in  modern  times,  to
doubts  whether  the  terms  Mongol  and  Moghvl  were  intended

^  This  section  was  read,  in  MS.,  by  Sir  H.  Howorth,  who  had  the  kindneaa
to  add  some  marginal  notes.  These  I  have  distinguished  by  subscribing  hia
initials.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Moghuly  Turk,  and  Uighur.  73

for  the  same  word,  and  whether  they  denoted  one  people  or
two.  We  may  be  satisfied  that  the  two  forms,  as  also  the
Ifo-oZ  of  some  of  the  earlier  transliterators  from  the  Chinese,
are  intended  for  one  and  the  same.^

With  the  name  of  the  land  it  was  somewhat  different.  The
Mongols  themselves  haye  perhaps  never  had  a  general  name
for  the  whole  of  the  countries  inhabited  by  their  tribes — that
is,  for  the  region  known  to  Europeans  as  '  Mongolia '  in  its  most
extended  sense.  At  the  time  of  Ghingiz  Ehan,  probably  what-
ever country  was  vaguely  regarded  by  Turki  and  Persian
writers  as  being  in  the  original  occupation  of  the  Mongols,  or
Moghuls,  was  called  simply  Moghidistan ;  but  later,  when  a
specific  region,  bordering  on  some  of  the  most  advanced  and
thickly  peopled  countries  of  the  Turks  and  Tajiks,  became  the
home  of  Mongol  tribesmen,  who  made  their  presence  felt  in
a  manner  none  too  agreeable,  they  absorbed  the  attention  of
their  neighbours  and  came  to  be  spoken  of  as  the  Moghuls  in  a
special  sense,  and  their  land  as  MoghvUstan.  The  rest  of  the
race  fell  out  of  sight :  their  territory  was  far  away  and  probably
seldom  heard  of,  while  taking  into  consideration  the  loose  ideas
prevalent  among  Asiatics  on  such  subjects,  it  is  not  in  the
least  unlikely  that  the  smaller,  but  better  known,  region,  should
have  acquired  for  itself  the  name  which,  by  strict  right,  should
have  been  applied  to  the  whole.

That  the  original  population  of  this  smaller  region  was
composed  of  various  nations,  previous  to  its  becoming  the  home
of  Mongol  tribesmen,  we  have  seen  already.  Abul  Ghazi  tells
us  that  it  was  inhabited  by  many  tribes— some  that  were  of
Mongol  race  and  others  that  were  not — and  D'Ohsson  and
Howorth  amply  demonstrate  the  same  thing.  It  contained
Uighurs,  who  were  a  tribe  of  Turki  descent ;  Kara  Ehitai,  whose
origin  was  chiefly  Manchu  (and  therefore  of  a  Tungusic  root),
though  probably  much  mixed  with  Mongol  blood ;  also  Naimans
and  Eotrluks,  and  perhaps  some  original  Kirghiz,  all  of  Turki
ancestry;  and,  moreover,  there  were  Kalmaks,  who  must  be
regarded  as  a  branch  of  the  Mongol  race.' But  when,  during

1  At  the  present  day,  it  takes  a  sharp  ear  to  distinguish  the  exact  pro-
nunciation, when  the  word  is  spoken  hy  a  true  Mongol — as,  for  instance,  a
Khalka  or  a  Chakhar.  It  sounds  as  often  M(hghol  or  Mo-cl  as  Mongol ;  and
sometimes  even  Monghci.  But  always  with  the  vowel  sound  of  o,  and  never
that  of  «. The  latter  vowel  is,  no  douht,  a  foreign  introduction.

'  The  name  Kalmyk  is  a  difiSculty.  It  is  unknown  among  the  so-called
Kalmyks,  who  treat  it  as  a  term  of  opprobrium,  and  it  has  been  suspected  to

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

74  The  People--

the  time  of  the  Mongol  ascendency,  large  numbers  of  that
people  settled  in  the  country  and  became,  from  a  military  point
of  view,  the  dominant  race,  it  is  scarcely  surprising  that  the
western  foreigners  should  have  given  the  whole  of  the  region
the  name  of  Moghvlistan^^  just  as  they  had  previously,  when
the  Kara  EJiitai  were  supreme  there,  called  the  same  territory
Kara  KhUai.  It  was  the  name  that  the  Mongols  themselves
affected  and  were  (at  that  time,  at  any  rate)  proud  of,  while  it
was  also  that  with  which  their  fame  and  their  most  cherished
traditions  were  associated.  Their  mode  of  procedure,  and  the
result  they  unconsciously  attained,  are  paralleled  in  European
history  by  the  instance  of  the  Franks  in  Gaul.  During  the
third  century,  the  Franks  were  still  a  loose  confederacy  of
Germanic  tribes  living  beyond  the  right  bank  of  the  Bhine.
By  degrees,  onder  the  Merovingians,  they  began  to  invade  the
country  on  the  left  bank.  As  the  Boman  power  declined,  their
own  increased  till,  in  the  fifth  century,  tiiey  had  extended  it
over  the  whole  of  northern  Gaul.  Here  they  adapted  them-
selves to  the  conditions  of  their  new  territory,  and  gradually
spread  over  the  entire  surface  of  what  is  now  France.  Their
numbers  were  so  small  that  they  were  overlaid  by  the  large
Gtkllic  population,  yet  the  new-comers  succeeded  eventually  in
imposing  their  name  on  the  larger  nation,  and  originated  the
names  of  France  and  French^  which  entirely  displaced  those  of
the  ancient  inhabitants.

But  Moghulistan  was  not  the  only  name  the  new  land  of  the
Mongols  acquired,  for  in  many  books  of  the  fourteenth  and

be  a  corruption  of  Kalp&k.  Eara-kalp&ks — black  hats — will  be  remembered
as  an  appellation.  I  am  quite  conviDced  that  the  Naimins  and  Karlughs
were  a  branch  of  the  Uighurs.  Nnim^n  means  "eight,**  and,  by  itself,  is  an
im|x>8sible  appellation.  They  were  really  called  "  NaimAn- Uighurs,"  or  the
"  Eight  Uighurs.'*  When  the  Mongol  Empire  broke  up,  the  Naimi&ns  joined
the  Eaz^k  and  Uzbeg  confederacies,  and  the  chief  tribe  of  the  Middle  Horde
is  still  called  NaimAn. — H.  H.

*  The  late  Professor  Grigorief  has  explained  that:  "from  the  time  of
Timur  the  name  Mongol,  or  Mogol,  was  given,  by  Musulman  historians,
not  to  the  Mongols,  but  to  the  Turkish  subjects  of  the  Jaghatis  who  ruled  in
Zungaria  and  the  western  parts  of  what  are  now  called  the  Kirghiz  steppes.**
(See  Schuyler's  Tu,rkifian^  L,  p.  375.)  The  word  "  western  *'  is  probably  a
misprint  for  "  eastern  ;'*  but  Professor  Grisorief  can  hardly  mean  that  ihe
name  of  Mongol,  or  Moghtd,  was  applied  omy  to  those  who  were  Turks,  and
consequently  not  Mongols,  by  race.  My  impression  is  that  the  confusion  he
has  fallen  into,  will  Im  sufficiently  cleiu^d  up  by  observing  Uie  non-ethnic
way  in  which  Asiatic  writers  use  the  word  Turk,  but  which  the  Professor
seems  to  have  takoii  in  a  strictly  ethnical  seuse.  This  subject  will  be  explained
farther  on  in  the  present  Section.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Mogkul,  Turk,  and  Uighur.  76

fifteenth  centaries,  we  find  both  country  and  people  alluded  to
under  the  name  of  /atoA — a  name  that,  in  translating,  has  been
made  to  assnme  several  nnnecessary  forms.  Thns  P^tis  de  la
Groix,  who  put  the  Zafar-Ndma  into  French,  as  far  back  as  the
end  of  the  seventeenth  centnry,  transliterated  the  word  Oeta^
and  many  subsequent  authors  followed  his  example.  From  the
name  mis-spelled  in  this  way,  much  speculation  arose  among
European  writers,  some  of  whom  were  able  to  derive  from  it  the
designation  of  the  Jots  of  India,  and  others  to  recognise  the  QeUe^
or  MasagetaB,  of  classical  authors.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  most
modem  Orientalists  have  hesitated  to  accept  these  speculative
conjectures,  though  the  meaning  and  origin  of  the  name,  have
been  hidden  from  them.  Mirza  Haidar  now  (and  he  is  the  first  to
do  so)  clears  the  matter  up  by  informing  his  readers,  parenthe-
tically, in  a  number  of  places,  that  Moghidtstan  and  Jatdh  were
one  and  the  same  country.  In  the  passages  from  the  Zafar-
Ndma^  which  he  cites  in  the  First  Part  of  his  history,  he  inter-
polates this  definition  repeatedly,  while  in  the  closing  chapter
of  that  Part,  he  adds  the  further  explanation  that  the  Chaghatais
called  the  Moghuls  Jatah,  on  account  of  their  enmity  towards
them,  and  by  way  of  depreciation.  Thus  it  was  merely  a  nick-
name— a  term  of  contempt  or  reproach — and  when,  with  this
clue,  the  word  is  sought  in  a  Mongol  dictionary,  it  is  found
to  mean  a  *  worthless  person,'  a  *  ne'er-do-well,'  or  *  rascal.'  ^
It  has  therefore  no  racial  significance,  but  like  such  names  as
Eazak,  Ealmak,  etc.,  was  probably  applied  to  the  Moghuls  by
their  more  cultivated  neighbours,  on  account  of  their  barbarous
manners,  lawless  character,  and  unsettled  habits  generally.^
This  being  the  sense,  it  need  not  be  used  except  in  translating
from  the  texts ;  explained  once  for  all,  the  Jatahs  who  have
haunted  the  works  of  historians  and  commentators  for  two

^  My  attention  has  been  called  to  a  Mongol  word  j^te,  chete,  or  chata,  having
the  meanings  of  '  margin,'  '  border,'  or  '  a  march ; '  but  these  are  significa-
tions which  could  scarcely  have  been  applied  as  a  term,  of  reproach  or
depreciation.

'  Quatremdre,  though  unaware  of  the  meaning  of  the  word,  sagaciously
inferred,  from  the  numerous  authors  he  had  read,  that  it  was  employed  to
designate  a  nation  composed  of  Mongol  tribes  and  others,  and  was  not  in
reality  a  race  name.  He  tells  us  also  that  the  term  Jatah  is  of  very  recent
origin.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  authors  previous  to  the  nfteenth
century,  and  is  about  contemporaneous  with  the  birth  of  such  denominations
as  Kcusdkf  Sort,  Sirr,  KcUmak^  and  others.  On  the  other  hand,  the  word
could  not  be  traced  by  Quatremdro  in  any  book  subsequent  to  that  of  Abdur
Razzdk  (the  Matla  i  8aadain\  who  died  1482.  (See  Not,  et  Extraiis,  xiii.,
p.  231.)

Digitized  by

Google

76  The  People—

hundred  years,  fall  into  their  right  place  and  need  be  heard  of
no  more.

Bat  the  anomalies  of  nomenclature  did  not  stop  here,  for  our
author  farther  implies  that  the  Moghals  retorted  on  the  Ghag-
hatais  with  the  reproachful  name  oiKar&w&noA.  Unfortunately
he  does  not,  in  this  instance,  give  any  clue  to  the  meaning  of
the  word,  and  neither  Turki  dictionaries  nor  the  transliterated
Mongol  dictionaries  (as  far  as  I  am  able  to  use  them)  throw
any  light  upon  it.  Indeed,  I  know  of  nothing  to  point  to  the
word  being  a  term  of  depreciation,  except  the  inference  to  be
drawn  from  this  one  statement  of  Mirza  Haidar's ;  but,  taking
into  consideration  the  connection  in  which  he  introduces  it,
and  the  common  practice  over  the  greater  part  of  Asia,  of  one
nation  calling  another  by  a  reproachful  nickname,  this  single
instance  is  probably  sufficient.  The  name,  under  one  variant
or  another,  has  been  found  by  translators  in  seyeral  Oriental
works,  and  appears  in  many  cases  to  be  applied  to  a  tribe  or
community:  thus  Quatremere  cites  the  TariJ^^-WoAZ&f  \^  the
effect  that  the  army  of  the  ''  Earavenas  "  resembled  monkeys
rather  than  men,  but  that  they  were  the  brayest  ^'  among  the
Mongols '';  also  Mirkhwand,  who  is  represented  as  describing
them  in  precisely  the  same  way ;  Bashid-ud-Din,  who  also  speaks
of  their  bravery ;  and  several  others  who,  however,  only  make
mention  of  the  name.  Not  one  of  these  authors  assists  us  in
assigning  a  meaning  to  the  word,  or  in  tracing  the  origin  of  its
application  to  the  Chaghatais  as  a  people.  None  of  them  do
more  than  represent  the  Earawanas  to  have  been  a  sub- tribe  of
Mongols  who  entered  Ehorasdn  and  Persia  under  Hulaku,  or
very  shortly  after  him.

It  appears  from  Wassaf  that  there  was,  indeed,  a  tribe  among
the  Mongols  named  Kuranoj^  ^  towards  the  end  of  the  twelfth
century,  though  the  name  is  not  traceable  in  Bashid-ud-Din's
lists,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  recognise  it  in  that  which  Dr.
Erdmann  transliterates  ''  GhiYanvJt "  (where  the  final  i  is  only
the  Mongol  plural)  or  ^' OhuTvlds'' ^  In  any  case,  the  form
KwrdnoB  is  said  to  have  afterwards  become  modified  in  Persia,
into  KcwdwcmoB,  which,  but  for  the  absence  of  an  accent  on  the
third  a,  is  the  same  spelling  as  Mirza  Haidar's. But  the  fact

^  It  occurs  in  a  list,  of  ihirty-niue  tribes  furnished  by  Wassdf,  who  compiled
his  list  from  a  book  called  the  TaHkh-^-Mogul,  This  information  reaches  me
from  Khan  Bah&dur  Maula  Bakhsh,  H.M.'s  Attach^  at  the  Consulate  General
in  Ehorasdn. (See  also  App.  B.)

•  In  Erdmann's  Temudwkin  de UnerschuUerliche^  p.  168.

Digitized  by

Google

Moghuly  Turk,  and  Uighur.  77

that  a  tribe,  or  sub-tribe,  bearing  this  name  existed  in  the
twelfth  or  thirteenth  centuries,  in  no  way  accounts  for  its  having
been  applied,  as  a  general  term  of  contempt,  to  the  Ghaghatais
as  a  people :  there  must  have  been  some  other  reason  and
origin. The  name  itself  was  found,  by  Quatrem^re,  never  to
appear  previous  to  the  Mongol  invasions  of  the  west,  or  subse-
quent to  the  date  of  the  Zafar-Nama — viz.,  1424.^ Marco  Polo
was  one  of  the  earliest  to  mention  it,  and  he  gives  it  the  form
Caraonas. He  relates  that  he  met  with  the  Caraonas  at  Eirman
and,  apparently  also,  at  other  places  in  Persia  farther  north,  and
describes  them  as  a  robber  tribe  who  were  ^^  the  sons  of  Indian
mothers  by  Tartar  fathers." Probably  the  word  "  Indian  "  may
have  been  employed  by  him  in  a  very  broad  sense,  or  it  may,  as
Sir  H.  Yule  has  suggested,  perhaps  stand  for  Biluchi ;  but  in
any  case,  Marco  Polo  refers  to  them  as  a  race  of  half-breeds,
and  states  that  the  name  of  Caraonas  had  been  given  them  on
account  of  their  mixed  parentage.' Dr.  Erdmann,  again,  alludes
to  the  Karawinahy  or  Karawinas,  stationed  in  Ehorasan  about
the  same  period,  and  explains,  on  the  authority  of  Wassaf,  that
they  were  the  artillerists  (Feuerwerker)  of  the  Ghaghatai  army."
These  are  the  only  two  instances  known  to  me,  where  meanings
for  the  term  are  suggested  by  original  contemporary  authors ;
but  there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  name  was
specially  given  to  any  such  classes  as  half-caste  robbers  or
artillerymen. It  was  imposed,  Mirza  Haidar  tells  us,  on  the
Ghaghatais  generally,  and  therefore  is  far  more  likely  to  have
had  its  origin  in  something  quite  unconnected  with  either  the
banditti  of  Eirman  or  the  gunners  of  the  army  in  Ehorasan,
for  both  these  classes  may  have  inherited  a  right  to  the  distinc-
tion vrith  their  Ghaghatai  relationship :  ^  the  lesser  would  be
contained  in  the  greater.

But  under  whatever  name  the  Moghuls  were  known  to  their
neighbours,  one  of  the  most  noteworthy  circumstances  connected
with  them,  during  the  period  to  which  Mirza  Haidar's  history
refers,  was  that  they  were  rapidly  declining  in  power  and  in
numbers. With  the  introduction  among  them  of  the  Musulman

1  Not.  et  Exir.  xiv.  p.  282.

'  Marco  Polo,  i.,  p.  99,  and  note.

'  Temudschin,  Introd.  p.  183.

*  It  is  not  clear  in  what  sense  Marco  Polo  uses  the  word  "  Tartar,"  hut  it
may,  I  think,  he  assumed  that  with  him,  as  with  most  Western  writers,  the
Ghaghatais  would  have  come  under  that  denomination.

For  some  further  remarks  hy  Mr.  Maula  Bakhsh  on  the  Kar^wdnds  in
Persia,  see  App.  B.

Digitized  by

Google

78  The  People—

religion,  they  seem  to  have  tended  gradually  to  lose  their
national  characteristics  and  to  merge  more  and  more  into  the
trihes  or  nations — ^for  the  most  part  of  Turki  descent — hy  whom
they  were  surrounded.  From  the  time  of  the  Mongol  conquests
down  to  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  nearly  three
hundred  years  had  elapsed.  In  so  long  a  period,  it  is  only  reason-
able to  conclude  that  some  changes  may  have  taken  place  in  a
politically  weak  and  unstable  people  like  the  Mongols,  and  who,
in  addition,  were  pressed  upon  from  the  west  and  south  by  alien
nations  much  superior  to  themselves  in  numbers.  It  is  not,
however,  necessary  to  assume,  as  some  writers  have  done,  that
the  mass  of  the  Moghuls,  even  in  the  latest  years  of  this  period,
were  of  Turki  blood,  or  that  they  used  the  Turki  language  as
their  own.^  The  circumstances  that  appear  rather  to  have
given  rise  to  this  view  are  :  (1)  the  glimpses  that  are  occasion-
ally obtained  in  history  of  the  Moghul  Ehans  and  chiefs  (almost
the  only  persons  ever  noticed  individually  by  historians)  who
had  become  to  all  intents  and  purposes  Turks,  at  a  period
following  pretty  closely  on  that  of  the  Mongol  ascendency — a
matter  that  affects  only  the  Moghuls  of  Moghulistan ;  and  (2j
the  use  made  by  Musulman  authors  of  the  word  Twk^  when
designating,  sometimes  all  nomad  and  steppe-dwelling,  or
pastoral,  tribes,  and  sometimes  a  specific  race.  This  dual  use
of  the  word  Turk  underlies  the  whole  of  the  ethnography  of
Central  Asia,  as  it  has  come  down  to  us  through  the  writings
of  Oriental  authors.  It  has  been  my  object  to  avoid,  if  possible,
all  discussion  of  this  much-debated  question,  but  in  order  that
some  of  our  author's  statements  may  not  be  wrongly  interpreted,
it  is  necessary  to  make  some  brief  remarks  upon  it.

One  instance  which  touches  phase  (1)  is  that  of  the  racial
characteristics  of  the  family  of  Baber,  which  gave  to  India  the

^  In  making  this  remark  I  am  not  alluding  to  the  origin  of  the  Mongol
tribes.  How  Mongol,  Turk,  and  Tatar  arose  in  remote  ages,  is  a  subject  with
which  Mirza  Haidar's  book  has  no  concern,  and  which,  therefore,  need  not
occupy  us  here.  Dr.  Erdmann,  in  his  learned  work  just  cited,  has  thoroughly
sifted  the  matter,  and  has  shown  how  the  Mongol  was  originally  connected
with  the  Turk.  Sir  H.  Howorth  has  come  to  similar  conclusions  with  regard
to  the  common  origin  of  the  two  people.  I  am  dealing,  here,  with  only  the
long  subsequent  period  when  Mongols  and  Turks  had  come  to  differ  from  one
another,  in  feature  and  in  language,  to  as  great  an  extent  as  the  Scandinavian
and  Latin  races  in  Europe.  What  docs  concern  this  history  is  that  that  section
of  the  Mongols,  best  known  to  their  Western  neighbours  as  the  inhabitants
of  Moghulistan,  were  at  the  period  in  question  still  Mongol,  in  fact,  thougji
perhaps  gradually  tending  to  become  Turkish  by  fusion  of  language  and
blood.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Moghuly  Turky  and  Uighur.  79

so-called '  Moghul '  line  of  kings.  It  will  hardly  be  disputed  that
not  alone  Baber  himself,  but  some  of  his  more  immediate  ances-
tors, were  to  all  intents  and  purposes  Turks;  and  this  was  the  case
not  only  in  the  acquisition  of  language  and  manners,  but  by  inter-
mixture of  blood;  while  his  successors,  whose  portraits,  painted
in  India,  are  extant  at  the  present  day,  show  no  trace  in  their
features  of  descent  from  a  Mongoloid  race.  It  is  said  that
Baber's  grandfather  (Sultan  Abu  Said  of  Khorasan,  1452-67)
was  described  by  a  Khivan  contemporary,  who  visited  him,  as  a
very  handsome  man  with  a  full  beard  and  unlike  a  Moghul.
Another,  and  perhaps  more  perfect,  instance  of  the  same  thing
is  the  description  giyen  in  the  Tdrikh-i-Baahidi  of  the  personal
appearance  of  Yunus,  Ehan  of  Moghulistan,  in  1456,  or  some
two  centuries  only  after  the  death  of  Chaghatai  Khan — who  was
certainly  a  pure  Mongol.  Tunus  is  reported,  by  one  who  says
that  he  expected  to  see  a  beardless  man,  ''  like  any  other  Turk
of  the  desert,"  to  have  had  a  full  beard  and  Tajik  (e.6.,  Aryan)
features  ;^  and  brief  though  this  description  is,  it  tells  so  signifi-
cant a  tale  of  a  changed  race,  that  it  is  probably  as  trustworthy
a  record,  as  a  portrait  painted  by  even  a  superior  artist  to  those
of  Hindustan.  In  the  case  of  the  few  families  of  the  chiefs,
there  would  be  a  tendency  to  change  much  more  rapidly  than
in  that  of  the  bulk  of  the  people.  Their  custom  was  to  give  their
relations  in  marriage  to  the  friendly  rulers  of  foreign  countries,
and,  in  exchange,  to  take  to  wife  a  member  of  those  rulers'
families ;  if  one  Ehan  subjugated  another,  he  usually  demanded
a  daughter  or  a  sister  in  marriage;  while  it  was  no  doubt
possible,  and  perhaps  fashionable,  for  the  governing  classes  to
add  foreign  wives  to  their  harems,  in  the  same  way  that  Musul-
mans  of  means  and  position  have  loved  to  do  at  all  periods  and
in  most  countries.

In  these  circumstances,  the  physical  characteristics  of  the
original  race  would  soon  pass  away  among  the  families  of  the
chiefs,  and  with  them  would  go  the  language  and  the  customs.
But  with  the  mass  of  the  tribes-people  it  would  be  otherwise.
There  appears  to  be  no  description  of  them  indicating  a  resem-
blance to  the  Turks ;  on  the  contrary,  the  description  of  Yudus
implies  a  difference  between  him  and  the  mass  of  his  people.
Moreover,  we  may  assume  that  the  rank  and  file  of  the  Moghuls
would  not  have  the  same  opportunities  for  rapidly  connecting
themselves  in  blood  relationship  with  their  neighbours ;  conse-

1  See  p.  97.

Digitized  by

Google

80  Ttie  People—

quently  the  distinctive  features  of  their  race  wonld  take  longer
to  nndermine.  As  already  observed,  the  life  of  the  steppes  and
the  comparative  isolation  of  the  atiZ,  wonld  tend  rather  to  pre-
serve the  purity  of  the  race.  It  may  not  he  possible  to  form
an  estimate  of  the  length  of  time  that  would  be  needed  to  bring
about  a  change  of  type  by  gradual  intermarriage,  but  we  know,
at  any  rate,  of  one  instance  where  this  same  Mongol  people,  from
living  in  more  or  less  isolated  positions,  and  mixing  with  neigh-
bouring races  only  to  a  very  slight  extent,  have  preserved  all
the  physical  characteristics  of  their  original  type,  as  well  as  the
language,  down  to  our  own  day — or  some  six  and  a  half  centuries
from  the  date  of  their  transplantation,  during  the  era  of  the
Mongol  conquests.  I  refer  to  the  Hazaras  of  Afghanistan,  most
of  whom  are  still  as  unmistakably  Mongol  in  feature  and  build
as  the  inhabitants  of  Mongolia  itself.  According  to  the  most
trustworthy  accounts  of  them,  they  descend  from  the  remnants
of  the  army  of  Nikudar  Oghlan,  a  son  of  Hulaku,^  who  invaded
the  region  in  which  they  dwell  now,  about  the  latter  half  of  the
thirteenth  century;  while  Professor  von  der  Gabelentz  has
shown  that,  in  spite  of  a  slight  mixture  of  Persian  words,  their
language  is  still  strictly  Mongolian,  or  more  particularly,  West
Mongolian — t.e.,  EalmaL^

On  the  general  question  of  the  rise  and  decay  of  languages,
enough  is  known  of  the  process  which  a  nation  has  to  go
through  before  it  can  completely  change  its  tongue,  to  justify
the  belief  that  a  very  long  period  is  needed  for  the  transfer  to
become  finally  accomplished.  The  first  step  is  that  the  people
should  become  bi-lingual — that  the  mass  of  them  (not  a  few  of
the  chiefs)  should  come  to  use  both  the  old  and  the  new
language  with  equal  facility — and  this  alone  is  a  process  re-
quiring many  generations.  The  next  step  is  that  the  old
language  should  fall  into  disuse  and  be  forgotten. The  second

^  More  exactly,  seventh  son  of  Hulaku,  who,  becoming  converted  to  Islam,
towards  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  took  the  name  of  Ahmad,  and
reigned  as  Sultan  Ahmad,  in  succession  to  his  brother  Abdkd.  The  name,
however,  instead  of  Nikudar,  should  perhaps  read  Takudar.  (See  Howorth,
iti.,  pp.  310  and  680.

'  See  H.  G.  von  der  Gabelentz,  ^  Uber  die  Sprache  der  Hazaras  und
Aimaks,"  in  Zeitschrift  DeuUch,  Morgenland.  Qesell  xx.,  pp.  326-35  (1866).
According  to  Khanikoff,  the  Hazaras  are  the  posterity  of  an  army,  or  tribe,
led  into  the  hills  they  now  inhabit,  by  Shah  Kukh.  (Ibidy  p.  335.)  If  so,
they  must  have  been  pure  Mongols  in  type,  while  dwelling  in  the  low
countries,  as  late  as  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century ;  but  the  view  given  in
the  text  above  is  the  more  probable.  (See  also  Col.  Jarrett's  note  in  Ain-i-^
Akbari,  ii.,  pp.  401-2,  Calcutta,  1891.)

Digitized  by

Google

Moghuly  Turk,  and  Uigkur.  81

stage  may,  perhaps,  take  less  time  to  work  itself  out  than  the
first ;  but  it  must,  nevertheless,  require  a  period  measured  in
generations.  Thus,  when  we  consider  that  a  century  (accord-
ing to  the  usual  computation)  embraces  only  about  three
generations,  it  must  be  regarded  as  improbable  that  the  tribes
which  were  pure  Mongols  at  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century
should  haye  become  the  pure  Turks  they  are  sometimes  repre-
sented, at  the  period  dealt  with  by  our  author.  The  Bussian
savant  Gmelin,  who  travelled  in  Central  Asia  in  the  last  cen-
tury, is  emphatic  in  stating  his  belief  in  the  permanency  of  the
Mongol  race  in  general,  as  far  as  physical  attributes  are  con-
cerned. He  affirms  that,  in  spite  of  all  mixtures  of  blood  by
their  wars  in  distant  countries,  the  Mongol  tribes  have  not
only  preserved  their  characteristic  type  of  features,  but  have
even  impressed  it  on  other  races  with  whom  they  have  come  in
contact^such  as  the  Kirghiz  and  others.^  This  statement
perhaps  hardly  affords  a  proof  on  the  subject  in  question,  but
it  goes  towards  showing  that  the  eradication  of  the  Mongol
type  is  not  a  simple  matter,  or  one  that  is  likely  to  have  been
accomplished  in  a  space  of  barely  two  hundred  years.

Amir  Khusru,  the  poet  of  medisBval  India,  draws-r-or  perhaps
overdraws — a  picture  of  the  Moghuls  who  invaded  Northern
India  towards  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  in  a  manner  which
leaves  no  doubt  that  he  is  attempting  to  describe  a  Mongoloid
race.  He  had  previously  fallen  into  their  hands  as  a  prisoner,
and,  according  to  his  own  account,  had  been  badly  treated  by
them  ;  as  he  was  no  doubt  burning  with  dread  and  resentment,
his  description  must  be  taken  to  be  somewhat  tinged  by  his
feelings.  However,  omitting  some  offensive  details,  he  writes
thus :  ''  There  were  more  than  a  thousand  Tatar  infidels  and
warriors  of  other  tribes,  riding  on  camels,  great  commanders  in
battle,  all  with  steel-like  bodies  clothed  in  cotton ;  with  faces
like  fire,  with  caps  of  sheepskin,  with  heads  shorn.  Their  eyes
were  so  narrow  and  piercing  that  they  might  have  bored  a  hole
in  a  brazen  vessel  .  .  .  Their  faces  were  set  on  their  bodies
as  if  they  had  no  neck.  Their  cheeks  resembled  soft  leathern
bottles,  full  of  wrinkles  and  knots.  Their  noses  extended  from
cheek  to  cheek,  and  their  mouths  from  cheek  bone  to  cheek
bone.  .  .  •  Their  moustaches  were  of  extravagant  length.
They  had  but  scanty  beards  about  their  chins.  .  •  .  They
looked  like  so  many  white  demons,  and  the  people  fled  from
•  P^uvert^  Busses,  vol.  iii.,  p.  209,

h

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

S2  The  People—

them  everywhere  in  affright."  ^  Is  it  possible  that  a  race  which
would  call  forth  such  a  description  as  this,  from  even  a  terrified
poet,  could  have  become,  in  the  mass,  men  like  Yunus  or  Baber
between  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  and  the  latter  half  of
the  fifteenth?

Thus,  although  it  might  appear  at  first  sight  that,  vvith  the
change  taking  place  in  the  families  of  the  Ehans,  with  the
advance  of  the  Musulman  religion  and  the  growing  use  of  the
Turki  language,  it  would  be  impossible  to  distinguish  a  true  Mo-
ghul  people,  still  evidence  is  not  wanting  to  show  that  even  up
to  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  Moghuls  of  Moghul-
istan — the  Moghul  [7Zua  of  Mirza  Haidar — were  in  fact  a  separate
people  from  the  Turks. During  the  period  1514  to  1533,  the
Mirza  constantly  alludes  to  a  distinct  tribe  or  community  of
Moghuls — however  reduced  in  numbers — in  exactly  the  same
terms  as  he  refers  to  them  at  a  period  dating  two  hundred  years
before.  They  were  neither  Kirghiz,  nor  Uzbegs,  nor  Kalmaks,  but
were  the  natural  enemies  of  all  three ;  they  were  of  the  XRmia  (or
clan)  of  the  Ehans  descended  from  Ghaghatai ;  they  preserved
Mongol  customs  and,  from  occasional  incidental references
which  he  makes  to  Mongol  terms  and  phrases,  must  have  re-
tained something,  at  least,  of  the  original  language  of  their
nation,  though  they  had  no  literature  in  which  it  could  become
fixed. This  being  the  case,  the  bulk  of  them  must  have  pre-
served their  Mongol  type  to  the  last,  and  it  may  perhaps  be
fairly  conjectured  that  whatever  change  they  had  undergone,
was  due  less  to  the  fusion  of  blood  than  to  the  conversion  of
the  people  to  Islam. The  spread  of  the  Musulman  religion
tends  always  to  the  modification  of  manners  and  customs,  and
to  the  use  of  the  Arabic,  Turki  or  Persian  language ;  but  in
spite  of  all,  racial  characteristics  remain,  until  very  gradually
expunged  by  a  course  of  inter-breeding,  that  must  extend  over
many  centuries. Several  parallel  cases  (besides  that  of  the
Hazdras)  might  be  cited  among  Asiatic  nations;  but  one,
haviog  no  relation  to the  Mongol  tribes,  will  suffice. The
Balfcis  of  Baltistan,  or  Little  Tibet,  formed  originally  a  section
of  the  ordinary  population  of  Tibet,  were  of  the  same  religion,
and  used  the  same  language. Some  three  centuries  or  more
ago,  they  were  converted  to  the  Musulman  faith,  and  began
gradually  to  change  their  manners. At  present  the  written
language  of  Tibet  is  unknown  among  them,  Persian  having
^  Elliot's  Eist.  f^flndioy  iii.,  pp.  528-9.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Moghuly  Turk,  and  Uighur,  83

replaced  it;  their  cliiefs,  through  intermarriage  with  neigh-
bouring Musnlman  peoples,  have  changed  so  greatly,  even  in
type,  that  nsnally  no  trace  of  the  Tibetan  is  left ;  but  the  mass
of  the  nation,  though  practising  Musulman  social  customs  and
wearing  a  Musulman  costume,  have  not  lost  the  Tibetan  spoken
language,  and  are,  in  feature  and  other  personal  attributes,  as
thoroughly  Tibetan  as  ever  they  were.  Had  the  Baltis  occu-
pied an  open  country,  and  been  constantly  engaged  in  wars
and  invasions,  there  might  have  been  a  greater  and  more
rapid  change.  Their  secluded  mountainous  home  (like  that
of  the  Hazaras)  has  mitigated  this,  and  has  helped  to  pre-
serve them  as  a  race :  but  the  principle  is  the  same  as  with  the
Dfoghuls.

With  regard  to  the  misleading  employment  of  the  word  Turk^
alluded  to  above,  it  must  be  explained  that,  among  Asiatic
authors,  it  is  constantly  met  with  as  the  definition  of  a  race  or
people  distinguished  from  the  Tartars  and  the  Moghuls,  on  the
one  hand,  and  from  Tajiks,  or  Taziks,  on  the  other.  But  in
the  same  writings,  and  often  on  the  same  page,  it  is  used  to
denote  all  nomads  and  inhabitants  of  the  steppes,  irrespective
of  race  or  origin,  and  merely  to  distinguish  such  people  from
those  who  dwelt  in  towns,  and  who  cultivated  the  settled  districts
— or  from  the  Tajiks  generally.  The  first  may  be  regarded  as
its  ethnological  sense :  the  second  as  sociological  only,  and  as
about  synonymous  with  the  adopted  English  word  nomad.  In
this  second  sense  it  included,  as  we  shall  see,  all  Mongoloid  and
Tartar  races.  In  dictionaries  we  find  among  its  many  mean-
ings those  of  howiarian,  robber,  vagahond^  wanderer^  etc.  It  is
also,  in  poetry,  applied  to  the  planet  Mars  as  "  a  Wanderer  of
the  sky,"  and  to  the  sun  as  "  the  Turk  of  China,"  that  is  of  the
East;  or  "the  Turk  of  midday  "—viz.,  the  South;  or  "the
Turk  of  the  Spheres."  All  who  lived  in  the  steppes  and  ranges,
outside  the  pale  of  what  was  regarded  as  civilisation,  and
led  a  pastoral  or  unsettled  life,  but  who  were  not  distinctively
mountaineers,  were  deemed  a  separate  class  (irrespective  of
race)  and  required  a  separate  name  to  denote  them.  To  this
class  the  name  of  Turk  attached  itself  throughout  Central
Asia.  In  Europe  and  in  India  the  word  Tvrh  was  not  used
in  this  sense.  By  Europeans,  and  perhaps  Western  Asiatics
also,  the  word  Tatar^  or  Tartar^  was  usually  in  vogue,
down  to  quite  modern  times,  to  indicate  the  nomadic  nations
of  the  interior  of  Asia,  without  reference  to  any  racial  con-

h  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

84  The  People—

siderations ;  ^  while  in  India  the  name  Moghvi  came  to  be
applied  (in  times  subsequent  to  the  rise  of  the  Mongols,  at  any
rate)  in  a  yery  similar  way,  to  these  same  races.

Abnl  Ghazi,  the  historian  Ehan  of  Ehiva,  himself  a  Turk  by
nationality,  though  of  remote  Mongol  descent,  constantly  uses
the  word  Twh  in  its  sociological  sense,  and  applies  it  indis-
criminately to  all  the  nomad  and  steppe-dwelling  tribes,  when
he  requires  a  name  for  the  whole  of  them ;  but,  when  referring
to  their  descent  or  language,  or  when  in  any  way  particularising
between  them,  I  do  not  know  of  a  single  instance  of  his  alluding
to  the  Moghuls  as  connected  by  blood  with  theTurki  tribes. In
other  words,  although  he  employs  the  name  Turk  to  describe
certain  nations—among  them  the  Moghuls — for  whom  he  knows
no  other  general  designation,  he  never  applies  it  in  the  par-
ticular instances  where  a  racial  consideration  is  involved,  except
to  those  among  them  whom  he  regards  as,  in  reality,  Turks  by
race. He  writes,  for  instance:  "Of  all  the  Turk  tribes  who
inhabited  those  countries  at  that  period,  the  Tatars  were  the
most  numerous  ....";  and  again :  "  We  have  ....  recounted
what  we  know  of  the  other  branches  of  the  race  of  Turks.
Now,  we  will  speak  of  the  branches  of  Mongol  race."* It  is  in
the  same  non-racial  sense  that  Mirza  Haidar  uses  the  word
Turh^  when  putting  the  remark  (alluded  to  above)  about  Yunus
Ehan,  into  the  mouth  of  Maulana  Muhammad  Eazi :  "  I  had
heard  that  Yunus  Ehan  was  a  Moghul/'  says  the  Maulana,
"  and  I  concluded  that  he  was  a  beardless  man,  with  the  ways
and  manners  of  any  other  Turk  of  the  desert ;  but  when  I  saw
him,  I  found  that  he  was  a  person  of  elegant  deportment,  with

*  The  name  of  Tatar,  we  are  told  by  D'Ohsson,  was  applied  to  the  Mongols
by  their  Western  neighbours,  and  became  propagated,  from  nation  to  nation,
to  the  extremities  of  Euroiie ;  although  the  Mongols  themselves  rejected  it
with  disdain,  as  belonging  to  a  hostile  people  whom  they  had  exterminated.
{Hist,  des  Mongols^  1.,  p.  94.)

'  Hist,  des  MongolSy  etCy  Desmaisons'  transl.,  pp.  34  and  52-^.  Abnl
Ghdzi's  evidence  on  this  point  is  not  particularly  satisfactory,  but  it  has
some  value,  because  he  was  one  of  the  latest  of  the  Musulman  historians.  His
book  was  only  completed  about  1664 ;  and  he  was  therefore  aware  of  all  the
changes  that  had  taken  place  among  the  Moghuls  down  to  that  time.  If  they
had  become  the  pure  Turks  they  are  sometimes  represented,  we  should
probably  find  the  fact  noticed  by  him,  though  not  by  earlier  authors.  The
history  of  Rashid-ud-Din  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  best  and  fullest,  and  no
doubt  this  is  the  case,  but  it  is  some  350  years  earlier  in  date  than  that  of
Abul  Ghizi,  and  consequently  previous  to  tho  decadence  of  the  Moghuls.
Moreover,  the  latter  knew  the  contents  of  Rashid-ud-Din's  book,  for  he  tells
his  readers  that  he  had  it  before  him  when  compiling  his  own,  together  with
^venteen  other  historical  works.

Digitized  by

Google

Moghut,  Turk,  and  Uighur.  86

a  full  beard  and  a  Tajik  face."^  That  is,  the  speaker  knew
that  Tunns  was  a  Moghnl  by  descent,  and  expected  to  see  a
man  with  Mongolian  featores,  but  he  classed  him  with  other
Turks  of  the  steppes.

D'Ohsson  became  conscious,  from  the  extensive  use  he  had
made  of  Asiatic  historians,  that  these  writers  constantly  em-
ployed the  word  Turl^  to  signify  the  nomad  and  pastoral  tribes,
known  in  Europe  as  'Tatars/  In  one  passage  he  writes:
'^  The  Mongols  gave  the  name  of  Tajik,  or  Tazik,  to  the  Muham-
madans,  and  in  the  historical  works  of  this  period  it  will  be
found  that  they  employed  this  word  in  opposition  to  that  of
'Turk.'  The  first  served  to  designate  the  Muhammadan
inhabitants  of  towns  and  cultivated  lands,  whether  they  were  of
Turki,  Persian,  or  Arab  origin  mattered  not ;  while  under  the
name  of  '  Turk '  were  comprised  the  nomad  nations  of  Turki
and  Tatar  race.  It  was  in  this  general  acceptation  that  Chingiz
Ehan  and  the  Mongols  styled  themselves  'Turks';  they  re-
jected, on  the  other  hand,  the  name  of  '  Tatar.' "  ^  In  another
passage,  when  speaking  of  the  Tatars  proper,  previous  to  the
rise  of  the  Mongols,  D'Ohsson  quotes  Bashid-ud-Din  as  follows :
''  They  made  themselves  so  powerful  and  formidable,  that  other
nations  of  Turks  passed  themselves  ofif  as  Tatars,  and  regarded
the  name  as  an  honour."^

Again,  Major  Baverty,  in  his  translation  of  the  TcUbakaUi'^
Nddriy  notes  the  headings  of  the  first  four  sections  of  Bashid^
ud-Din's  history,  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  of  which  contain
the  following: — "2»i  Section,  Account  of  the  Turk  tribes
whom  they  designate  by  the  name  of  Mughals,  but  every  one
of  which,  in  ancient  times,  bore  distinct  and  particular  sur-
names. .  .  .  3re2  Section.  Account  of  the  Turk  tribes,  every
one  of  which  have  had  Badshahs  and  chiefs,  but  who  bore  no
relationship  to  the  tribes  mentioned  in  the  preceding  sections.
^ih  Section.  Account  of  the  tribes  of  Turks,  whose  surname,
from  time  immemorial,  was  Mughal.  .  •  ."^  These  brief
extracts  are  sufficient  to  show  the  sense  in  which  Bashid-ud-
Din,  one  of  the  best  of  the  Musulman  authors  of  the  Mongol
period,  used  the  work  TwrTc,  and  how,  though  he  was  able  to
distinguish  specifically  between  real  Tiurks  and  other  tribes^

^  Seep.  97  of  the  text

*  D'Ohsson's  Hist.  de$  MangoU,  i,  p.  217.

»  Ibid.,  p.  248.

«  Bayerty'B  TabdkdU-Ndnri,  note,  p.  891.

Digitized  by

Google

86  The  People—

when  ethnological  considerations  were  in  question,  still  used
the  word  in  a  non^ethnic  sense,  to  denote  a  group  of  tribes  who
had  to  be  distingnished  from  the  Tajiks.

Other  Asiatic  authors  wrote  on  these  subjects  in  the  same
way.  Thus,  Minhaj-ud-Din,  the  author  of  the  TcMkat-i-Ndsirtf
frequently  uses  the  word  Turk  to  designate  the  nomadic
group  generally,  and,  like  Bashid-ud-Din,  even  brings  the  name
Tatar  into  the  same  category.  The  following  is  an  instance
taken  from  three  consecutiye  paragraphs : — "  In  this  same  year
the  Ghingiz  Khan,  the  Mughal,  rose  up  in  the  Kingdom  of
Chin  and  Tamghaj,  and  commenced  to  rebel;  in  all  books  it  is
written  that  the  first  signs  of  the  end  of  time  are  the  outbreak
of  the  Turks.  .  .  .  The  name  of  the  father  of  this  Ghingiz
Khan,  the  accursed,  was  the  Tatar,  Timurchi,  and  he  was  the
mihtar  [chief]  of  the  Mughal  tribes,  and  ruler  oyer  his  people
....  Among  the  tribes  of  the  Mughal  was  another  Turk  of
importance,  a  ruler  and  leader,  and  greatly  yenerated;  and
the  whole  of  the  tribes  of  the  Mugbals  were  under  the  rule
of  these  two  persons.  .  .  .  All  the  tracts  of  the  Turk  tribes,
at  the  hand  of  their  iniquity  and  sedition  were  reduced  to
misery.  .  .  ."  ^

Juyaini,  the  author  of  the  Jahdn  Kushai,  applies  to  the
Mongols  the  passage  from  the  Koran :  "  Beware  of  proyoking
the  Turks,  for  they  are  formidable."^  Abul-feda  quotes  an
Aiab  author  to  the  effect  that  the  Bussians  are  a  people  of
Turkish  race,^  when  pointing  to  them  as  belonging  to  the  group
of  non-Musulman  and  non-Tajik  inhabitants  of  what  were
regarded  as  ciyilised  countries.  Ibn  Haukal,  touching  on  the
question  from  a  geographical  point  of  yiew,  writes :  ''  Tiraz
[Taraz]  is  on  the  extreme  frontier  between  the  country  of  the
Torks  and  that  of  the  Musulmans  "  ^ ;  yet  the  Musulmans,  in
this  case,  were,  to  a  great  degree,  of  Turki  race.  And,  again,
Minhaj-ud-Din  mentions  an  inyasion  of  Tibet  (from  Upper
Bengal  apparently)  and  says  :  "  All  the  people  [of  Tibet]  were
Turks,  archers,  and  [furnished  with]  long  bows."  ^  Idrisi,  also,
in  speaking  of  Tibet,  says  :  *'  This  is  the  country  of  the  Tibetan
Turks  " ;  and  afterwards :  ''  This  interyening  space  is  ooyered
with  pastures,  forests,  and  strong  castles  belonging  to  the

^  Tabakdtri'Ndsiri^  pp.  935-6.

*  D'OhBaon,  Introd,  p.  xxiiL

■  Reitiaud'a  Alnd-feda,  ii.,  pt.  1,  p.  296.

*  Thonnelier,  Did.  Geogr.,  p.  48.
»  TdbakcUH-Ndsiri,  p.  566.

Digitized  by

Google

Mogkuty  Turk,  and  Uighur.  87

Tibetan  Turks."  Further  on  again,  he  tells  us :  ''  There  are
Turks  of  yery  diverse  races "  {de  races  ires  diveraes) ;  and  he
proceeds  to  detail,  among  others,  the  Tibetans  and  the  Ealmaks.
The  names  of  the  remaining  tribes  he  mentions  in  this  passage,
are  spelled  in  so  unintelligible  a  manner,  that  I  can  recognise
none  but  the  Kirghiz  and  Eipchaks,  with  whom  he  thus  classes
the  Tibetans  and  the  Ealmaks  as,  all  alike,  Turks !  ^

The  poet  Ehusru,  in  the  passage  cited  above,  calls  the  people
he  describes,  by  the  name  of  Tatar,  though  a  little  lower  do?m
(on  the  same  page)  he  says  they  were  "  Turks  of  Kai ; "  while
elsewhere,  he  frequently  speaks  of  the  same  people  as  Moghuls.'
Further,  the  late  Mr.  B.  B.  Shaw  has  explained,  with  regard
to  the  word  Tajik,  that  it  stands  in  opposition  to  Turk,  just
as  Arab  stands  to  Ajam,^  and  thus  is  not  necessarily  a  race
name.

Many  other  instances  might  be  given  of  this  non-ethnic  use
of  the  word  Turk,  and  with  them  might  be  included  also
some  relating  to  a  similar  employment  of  the  term  Tatar.^
But  the  above  will  suffice  to  make  it  clear  that,  though  the
Moghuls  of  Moghulistan  were  often  called  Turks,  during  the
period  including  the  thirteenth  to  sixteenth  centuries,  it  need

1  Jaubert's  J(imt,  pp.  494  and  498.

*  His  editor,  Professor  Dowson,  in  a  foot-note,  marvels  that  his  author
should  **  sometimes  confound  Turks  and  Mughals,"  while  '*  in  some  passages
he  discriminates  very  accurately  between  them."  Herein  lies  precisely  Sie
difficulty  that  has  occurred  to  other  translators  and  commentators.  The
solution,  I  venture  to  think,  is  as  now  pointed  out.

'  According  to  some  authorities  it  might  be  said  that  Turk  was  used  in
opposition  to  Sart ;  but  the  application  of  the  word  8art  is  subject  to  some
variations.  Mr.  Shaw  gives  as  a  definition  of  Sart : — **  A  term  applied  by  the
nomads  (Kirghiz,  Kazz&ks,  etcl  to  dwellers  in  settled  habitations,  whether
Turks  or  Tdjiks,  i,e^  whether  Turanians  or  Iranians."  But,  in  some  cases,
the  name  Sart  is  used  to  denote  only  the  settled  Turk^  and  to  differentiate
them  from  the  Tijiks.  Moreover,  in  the  works  of  Mustdman  authors
referring  to  the  period  of  the  Tarikh-i'Bashidi,  it  is  seldom  found  as  an
ordinary  appellation,  though  Baber,  it  is  true,  employs  it  in  describing
MarghiniLn.  In  our  own  times  it  is  not  often  heard  in  the  eastern  parts  of
Central  Asia ;  though,  to  judge  by  Russian  writings,  it  is  perhaps  more
frequently  used  in  Khiva  and  the  adjoining  regions  of  Aussian  Turkbtan,  etc.
It  is,  however,  an  imperfect  term  to  make  comparisons  with.  (See  Shaw,
Sketch  qf  Twrki  Language,  Asiat.  Socy.,  Bengal,  pt.  ii.,  1880,  pp.  61  and  116 ;
Baber,  p.  3 ;  and  Lerch  in  Bumsche  ^einie,  lb72,  Heft,  i.,  p.  33.  Also  Shaw's
JBigh  Tartary,  p.  26,  where  he  defines  the  Sarts  as  '*  a  settled  people,  who
include  the  Aryan  Tajiks  as  well  as  the  Tartar  Oosbeks  and  others.")

*  The  ELiung  Nu  of  Chinese  historians  have  often  been  described  as  a  Turki
race,  yet  it  is  significant  that  Professor  de  Laoouperie,  on  investigating  the
point,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Hiung  Nu  ''seem  to  have  been  a
politicid,  not  a  raoialy  unity."  (See  Western  Origin  qf  Chinese  OivUieation,
p.  223.)

Digitized  by

Google

88  The  Peoph--

not  be  assumed  that  they  were  actually  of  Turkish  race,  either
by  origin  or  by  subsequent  fusion  of  blood.  There  was,  however,
another  and  very  important  circumstance  that  complicated  this
question  of  nomenclature  still  further.  It  was,  it  seems,  the
desire  of  all  the  tribes  and  nations  of  Central  Asia,  to  identify
themselves  with  the  race  which  happened  to  be  in  the  ascendant
at  any  particular  time.  They  endeavoured  to  adopt  its  name,  and
to  pass  themselves  off  as  members  of  the  nation  in  supremacy,
regardless  of  racial  affinities.  Bashid-ud-Din  has  laid  special
stress  on  this  point  in  his  great  work  on  the  Mongols,  and  has
explained  the  matter  in  one  place  as  follows:  ''They  [the
Tatars]  made  themselves  so  powerful  and  formidable,  that  the
other  nations  of  Turks  passed  themselves  off  as  Tatars,  and  re-
garded as  an  honour  this  name,  under  which  they  had  become
famous;  just  as  at  the  present  day^  the  Jalair,  Tatar,  Uirat,
XJngut,  Karait,  Naiman,  Tangut,  and  others,  find  glory  in  the
name  of  Mongol,  made  illustrious  by  that  of  Ghingiz  Ehan
and  his  descendants — a  name  which,  at  an  earlier  date,  they
would  have  disdained.  The  young  people  of  all  these  nations
believe,  even  now,  that  their  ancestors  have  always  borne  the
style  of  Mongol ;  but  it  was  not  so,  for  formerly  the  Mongols
were  only  one  of  the  nations  of  Turks.  .  .  .  This  name  has
been  extended  to  such  a  degree,  that  nowadays  the  people  of
ELitai  (Northern  China)  and  of  Nan-gyass  (Southern  China),  as
well  as  the  Ghurchi,  the  XJighur,  the  Eapchak,  the  Turkoman,
and  the  Karluk;  also  the  Captives  and  the  Taziks  (Muham-
madans),  ^ho  have  been  brought  up  among  the  Mongols  are
[all  of  them]  called  Mongols ;  and  they  are  all  interested  in
passing  for  Mongols,  in  order  that  they  may  gain  consideration.
Previous  to  this  period  it  was  the  same  with  the  Tatars,  on
account  of  their  power,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  Mongols
are  still  called  Tatars  in  China  and  in  India,  by  the  Kirghiz,
the  Bashgirds,  in  the  Eapchak  country,  in  the  north  of  Asia,  in
Arabia,  in  Syria,  in  Egypt,  and  in  Africa."  ^

It  has  been  observed  above,  that  in  India  the  word  Moghttl
was  employed,  subsequent  to  the  days  of  Chingiz,  in  the  same
way  as  the  word  Turk  in  Central  Asia,  and  Tatar  in  Europe,
and  on  this  subject  Mr.  H.  O.  Keene  has  come  to  conclusions
which  coincide  with  the  teachings  of  Bashid-ud-Din.  It
denoted,  in  the  first  place,  the  group  of  tribes  or  nations  who

*  J.e.,  the  early  years  of  the  fourteenth  century.
«  D'Ohaaon,  i.,  pp.  428-9.

Digitized  by

Google

Moghul,  Turk,  and  Uighut.  89

composed  the  armies  of  the  northern  invaders,  with  little  or  no
reference  to  their  racial  origin;  and  secondly^  at  the  time  of
Baber,  it  was  regarded  as  something  scarcely  better  than  a  term
of  contempt.  Bnt  later,  when  the  so-called  Moghnl  dynasty
came  to  be  looked  np  to  as  the  supreme  power,  the  name
assumed  a  different  and  more  respectful  significance.  Mr.
Keene  writes :  "  Under  Akbar,  when  the  empire  had  become  a
firm  result  of  successful  war,  the  word  [Moghul]  recovered  its
prestige  and— like  the  name  of  *  Goth '  in  *pain— came  to
indicate  '  a  noble  conqueror,'  or  the  descendant  of  one  " ;  ^  and
in  support  of  this  view  he  cites  a  valuable  passage  from  Ehafi
Ehan  (for  which  he  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  to  the  late
Professor  Blochmann,  who  may  be  inferred  to  have  translated
it),  which  runs  as  follows:  ''The  flourishing  condition  of
Mugholistan  commenced  with  Mughol  Ehan,  who  was  a  great
king.  Although  from  the  time  of  Akbar  the  word  Mughol  has
been  applied  to  the  Turks  and  Tajiks  of  Irdn  (Persia)  to  such
an  extent  that  even  the  Sayyids  of  Ehorasan  were  called
Mughols,  yet  in  reality  the  word  is  the  proper  term  for  those
Turks  who  belong  to  the  descendants  and  house  of  Mughol
Ehan ;  and  it  was  used  in  this  sense  in  the  time  of  the  earlier
(Moslem)  kings  of  Delhi  .  .  .  ."  Here  Ehafi  Ehan  uses  Turk
in  the  same  sociological  sense  as  Bashid-ud-Din,  Minhaj-ud-
Din,  Mirza  Haidar,  and  the  rest.^

Mr.  Dentil  Ibbetson,  too,  furnishes  some  instructive  remarks,
in  his  Beport  on  the  Punjab  census,  on  the  way  the  words  Turk
and  Moghul  have  come  to  be  used  in  modern  times  in  the  north
of  India.  A  Turk  is  there  regarded  as  a  native  of  Turkistan
and  a  man  of  Mongolian  race.  ''In  the  Delhi  territory,
indeed,"  writes  Mr.  Ibbetson,  "the  villagers,  accustomed  to
describe  the  Mughals  of  the  Empire  as  Turks,  use  the  word  as

'  Turks  in  India,  ^.24.

*  I  may  take  this  opportunity  of  remarking  that  Mr.  Keene  must  have
referred  to  the  old  translation  of  the  Swedish  officers  of  Charles  XII.,  when
he  states  (p.  50)  that  Ahul  Ghdzi ''  is  represented  as  saying  that  he  wrote  his
book  '  in  ttie  Moghul  or  Turki  language.'  "  I  cannot  find  such  a  passage  in
Desmaisons'  version.  At  p.  36  the  author  is  made  to  write : — ^Afin  de  mettre
oette  histoire  ^  la  port^  de  toutes  les  cUsses,  je  Tai  ^crite  en  Turc  ;*'  and  I
believe  this  to  be  the  only  allusion  he  makes  to  the  subject.  It  is  an
additional  instance  of  the  dual  mode  of  using  the  word  Turk,  for  here  Abul
Giidzi  employs  it  to  denote  the  language  of  the  Turks  proper,  in  an  ethnic
sense.  He  in  no  way  classes  the  two  tongues  as  one.  He  was,  himself,  a
Turk  of  Khiva,  and  Mr.  Erskine,  who  remarked  the  inconsistency  in  the  old
▼endon  of  Abul  Ghdzi's  history,  has  well  said :  — "  No  Moghul  or  Turk  would
have  confounded  thede  two  languages." (^if^.,  L,  p.  536,  App.)

Digitized  by

Google

90  The  People—

synonymous  with  '  official ' ;  and  I  hare  heard  my  Hindu  clerks^
of  Eayath  caste,  described  as  Tnrks  merely  because  they  were
in  G-oyemment  employ.  On  the  Biloch  frontier,  also,  the  word
Turk  is  commonly  used  as  synonymous  with  Mughal."  ^

But  though  Oriental  writers  make  use  of  the  tribal  name  of
Twk  to  denote  a  nomadic  people,  similar  inconsistencies  are
not  wanting  in  European  languages.  The  way  in  which  the
French  apply  the  word  BohSmien  to  the  gipsies  is  a  parallel
instance.  The^psies,  though  in  no  way  belonging  to  the
same  race  as  the  natives  of  Bohemia,  acquired  their  name  in
France,  on  account  of  certain  social  habits  and  customs  which
they  were  belieyed  to  have  brought  with  them  from  Bohemia,
and  because  they  were  known  to  wander  into  France  from  that
country.'  An  almost  similar  instance,  though  not  precisely
parallel,  was  the  use  in  English  of  the  word  Indian,  during  the
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  to  define  the  aborigines  of
North  America,  the  Caribbean,  and  many  other  islands.  In  this
case  it  was  not  the  social  condition  and  proclivities  of  the  inhabi-
tants that  caused  the  misapplication  of  name,  but  their  colour,
the  climate  and  products  of  their  countries,  and  other  circum-
stances, which  reminded  those  who  came  into  contact  with
them,  of  the  India  of  the  East.  The  process  and  result,  how-
ever, are  much  the  same.  But  if  we  leave  out  of  consideration
the  fact  that  Turk  happened  also  to  be  a  race-name,  its
employment  to  designate  the  pastoral  tribes  of  unsettled  abodes
becomes  no  more  anomalous  than  such  appellations  as  Kohi*
stani,  Badmny  etc.,  in  Asia,  or  the  familiar  Moimtaineer,
Idander,  etc.,  in  Europe.

Misapplication,  or  change  in  the  application,  of  race-names
is  a  practice  so  commonly  met  with,  that  it  is  almost  super-
fluous to  mention  it  here.  It  may,  however,  be  briefly  pointed
out,  in  regard  to  the  names  we  are  dealing  with,  that  the  term
Tajik  has  been  made,  in  one  instance,  to  take  exactly  the
opposite  meaning  to  that  which  it  usually  bears.  Mr.  A.  G.
Ellis,  of  the  British  Museum,  informs  me  that  while  early
Armenian  writers  applied  it  to  the  Arabs,^  modern  Armenians

1  Beport  on  the  Punjab  Censtu/ar  1881. Calcutta,  1883,  vol.  L,  p.  276.

*  It  is  curious  that  the  name  Gypwy  is  a  corruption  of  Egwiian,  lliey
are  always  called  Egyptians  in  our  early  Acts  of  Parliament,  and  it  is  probable
that  they  came  to  England  first  from  Egypt,  whither  they  had  gone  from  the
country  of  the  Golden  Horde,  where  we  first  meet  with  them. — H.  H.

<  Whence  it  came  about  that  the  Arabs  are  referred  to  as  Tdrhi  in  early
Ghinese  aoooonto  of  the  West. — ^H.  EL

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Mogkut,  Turk,  and  Uighur.  VI

have  imposed  it  on  the  Turks  and  the  Torkish  Empire,  and
even  on  Musulmans  in  general.  In  this  case  it  seems  that  the
word  is  used  to  imply  a  *  stranger/  or  *  barbarian ' ;  *  but  it
is  a  carious  example  of  the  length  to  which  misapplication  can
go,  for  it  constitutes  an  absolute  reversal  of  the  usual  and
original  sense  of  the  word.  In  the  Twrikh-i-RaiMdi^  among
other  books,  we  find  "Hamra  used  for  'hill-men,'  or  *  moun-
taineers/ without  reference  to  its  original  meaning  or  to  any
racial  consideration,  while  in  modern  times  the  term  has  become
the  name  of  a  specific  race  or  people.  "Haaara  meant  simply
*'  a  thousand,"  and  was  the  name,  it  appears,  which  was  given
to  a  particular  section  of  cavalry  or  other  troops,  who  were
perhaps  the  original  settlers  in  the  hill  districts  in  question.^
What  Mr.  Ibbetson  has  told  us  above,  of  the  employment  of
the  words  Twk  and  MoghtU  in  the  Panjab,  is  another
instance  of  mere  misapplication  or  irrelevent  nomenclature;
but  we  need  hardly  go  far  from  home  to  find  a  telling  example
of  the  same  thing.  From  Earle's  Philology  of  the  English
Tongue^  we  learn,  with  regard  to  the  Cymraeg,  or  British
language  now  spoken  in  Wales,  that  '*  the  Anglo-Saxons  called
it  JVylsey  and  the  people  who  spoke  it  they  called  Wcdas^  which
we  have  modernised  into  Wales  and  Welsh.  So  the  Germans
of  the  Continent  called  the  Italians  and  their  language  Wfisch.
The  word  simply  means  foreign  or  strange.  At  various  points
on  the  frontiers  of  our  race  we  find  them  affixing  the  name  on
the  conterminous  Bomance- speaking  people  ....  The  French
....  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  are  called,  by  the
contemporary  [Anglo-Saxon]  annalist,  tha  Welisee  men,  by
which  was  meant '  the  foreigners.'  "  ^

Thus,  the  evidence  on  this  subject  (apart  from  that  of  nick-
names or  terms  of  contempt)  points  to  three  distinct  con*
elusions.  The  first  is  that,  in  reading  the  histories  of  Musul-
man  authors,  the  tribal  names  they  use  must  not  always  be

^  Professor  Noldeke  has  been  good  enough  to  inform  Mr.  Boss  that  Tajik
(better  Tdchik)  and  Tom  are  the  same  word,  the  former  being  merely  the
older  form.  Chik  means  "  belonging  to,"  and  in  this  case  **  belonging  to  the
tribe  of  Tat." In  modem  Persian  Chik  becomes  Zi,

'  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  name  of  the  famous  Turkish  tribe  of  the
Khazars  is  connected  with  the  same  word. — H.  H.

*  Page  23.  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Stephen  Wheeler  for  this  appropriate
extract.

^  In  another  way,  the  name  of  the  specific  tribe  Alemannif  who  lived
nearest  to  Qaul  of  all  the  Qermans,  became  the  generic  name  of  all  Qexmanj

Digitized  by

Google

92  The  People-^

taken  to  haye  a  racial  significance;  or^  in  other  words,  it  is
necessary  in  every  case  where  either  the  term  Twk  or  Takar
occurs,  to  see  whether  the  writer  is  applying  it  in  its  general
and  sociological  acceptation,  or  in  a  specific  and  discriminating
ethnic  sense.  The  second  conclusion  is  that  the  word  Moghid,
even  where  it  is  used  in  an  ethnic  sense,  is  frequently  mis-
applied, and  so  extended,  at  certain  periods  in  history,  as  to
comprise  many  tribes  of  real  Turki  race  (among  others),  until
large  numbers  of  people  who  were  not  of  Moghul  race  came  to
be  called  Moghuls.  This  habit  appears  to  have  been  prevalent
first  in  the  time  of  Cbingiz  and  his  immediate  successors,  and
subsequently  during  the  ascendency  of  the  Chaghatai  (or
so-called  Moghul)  dynasty  in  India.  The  third  conclusion  is
that  the  application  and  significance  of  all  three  names — Turk,
Tatar,  and  Moghul — varied  at  different  times  and  in  different
countries.  It  appears  to  me  that  a  due  appreciation  of  these
three  points  will  help  to  clear  up  much  that  has  been  regarded
hitherto  as  inconsistent,  and  even  contradictory,  in  the  Musul-
man  histories,  and  has  occasioned  no  little  controversy  among
European  writers.  That  the  ethnographic  nomenclature  of
Persian,  Turki,  and  Arabic  writers  is  anomalous,  cannot  but
be  granted ;  but  in  Asiatic  nomenclature  what  is  there  that  is
not  anomalous?  They  had  no  knowledge  of  the  scientific
ethnology  that  guides  the  modern  European  commentator  on
their  works,  but  merely  followed  the  common  speech  of  the
time,  and  employed  the  terms  that  had  grown  into  use  among
the  people  around  them.  In  reading  their  books,  therefore,  it
is  futile  to  look  for  systematic  nomenclature ;  but  if  they  are
read  with  a  due  regard  to  date,  locality,  and  other  circum-
stances, they  will  seldom  be  found,  I  think,  to  contain  actual
contradictions ;  for  loose  and  inaccurate  though  Asiatics  are  in
some  respects — such  as  in  figures,  measurements,  geographical
details,  etc. — they  are  usually  remarkably  clear  on  such  subjects
as  blood  relationship,  family  lineage,  and  racial  descent.

But  here  we  must  leave  the  Moghuls,  and  glance  briefly  at
those  original  Turks,  or  Uighurs,  who  may  be  regarded  as
the  immediate  ancestors  of  the  population  of  Alti-Shahr  (and
indeed  all  Eastern  Turkistan)  and  the  main  stock  of  their  race.
Who  the  Uighurs  were  in  remote  times,  and  what  was  their
origin,  are  speculative  questions  which  need  not  be  investigated
here.  The  best  notices  of  them  during  early  historic  times
point  to  their  home-land  as  lying  in  north-western  Mongolia ;

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Moghul,  Turk,  and  Uighur.  93

but  in  the  ninth  century  they  are  recorded,  in  the  Chinese  annals/
to  haye  been  displaced  from  that  region  and  to  have  been
driven  southward  by  the  Kirghiz,'  who  were  themselves,  at  that
time,  beginning  to  rise  to  power,  and  tending,  like  other  Tnrki
tribes,  to  press  towards  the  sonth  and  west.  In  early  times
there  seem  to  have  been  at  least  two  confederacies  of  Uighars
in  the  further  east:  one  living  in  the  region  now  known  as
Zungaria,  and  called  the  Naimdn  Uighur,  or  ''  Eight  Uighurs,"
while  the  other  inhabited  the  country  watered  by  the  Orkhon
and  the  Tula,  and  were  known  as  the  Toghuz  Uighur,  or  ^'  Nine
Uighurs."  •  When  the  latter  were  driven  to  the  south  and  west,
the  former  remained  in  their  old  country,  where  they  are  found
at  the  time  of  Ghingiz  Ehan.  The  Toghuz  Uighur  settled  in  the
eastern  ranges  of  the  Tian  Shan,  and  gradually  built  up  a  new
kingdom,  extending  over  all  the  eastern  portion  of  that  chain.
Here  one  of  their  states  seems  to  have  been  established  on  the
south  of  the  mountains,  and  subsequently  another  on  the  north.
The  first  had  for  its  chief  town  the  representative  of  the  modem
Eara-Ehoja  (called  at  different  periods  Si-Chao,  Ho-Chao,  and
Eao-Chang),  and  embraced,  at  some  periods  at  least,  the
modem  district  of  Euchar,  then  known  as  Eui-tze ;  while  the
capital  of  the  second  was  Bishbalik  (the  Five  Towns),  which
stood  on,  or  near,  the  site  of  the  present  Urumtsi.  Very  little
is  known  of  even  these  later  Uighur  kingdoms,  although  the
date  when  they  flourished  is  not  a  very  remote  one.  It  is
chiefly  from  the  Chinese  chronicles  that  any  knowledge  of  their
history  is  to  be  gathered,  but  even  these  do  not  appear  to  have
been  compiled  with  completeness,  nor  to  have  embraced  the
entire  Uighur  nation,  which  must  have  been  a  large  and
influential  one  for  a  long  period.

In  addition  to  these  Uighurs,  always  so  named,  and  living  in
the  Eastem  Tian  Shan,  there  was  a  third  section  of  the  race
dwelling  farther  west.  They  are  called  sometimes  the  'Ear-
lughi,'  and  their  seat  of  power  was  originally  at  Ili-bdlik  and
on  the  head  waters  of  the  Chu.  During  the  eleventh  and
twelfth  centuries,  they  appear  to  have  dominated  Western
Tnrkistan  and  perhaps  the  whole  of  Alti-Shahr,  while  one  of

^  See  Bretschneider,  I,  p.  236  ieq. Also  Elaproth,  Tableaux  Hiat,,  p.  129.

•  Or  more  properly,  as  Sir  U.  Howorth  notes — ^**the  people  whom  the
Chinese  call  Hakas,  and  who  are  identified,  in  my  paper  on  the  Kerais,  with
the  ancestors  of  that  famous  people — the  subjects  of  Prester  John — who,  in
the  time  of  Chiogiz,  are  found  doniioating  the  old  Uighur  country."

*  I  owe  this  definition  to  Sir  H,  Howorth,

Digitized  by

Google

94  The  People—

their  chief  towns  was  Kashghar,  then  known  as  Urdu-Eand*
Their  mlers  were  the  so-called  ^Ilak-Ehans/  or  'Eara-
Ehans/  whose  history  is  more  or  less  known  throngh  the  works
of  Arab  and  Persian  authors,  since  the  conyersion  of  one  of  the
line — a  certain  Satnk  Eara  Ehan — ^to  Islam,  in  the  first  half  of
the  tenth  centnry.  That  the  state  and  dynasty  of  the  Ilak
Ehans  were  in  reality  Uighur,  there  seems  to  be  sufficient
evidence  to  proye,  although  the  name  of  Uighur  was  not  used
by  Mnsnlman  authors  till  a  much  later  date.  They  seem  to
haye  been  known  by  the  name  of  Ta-gaa-gaz'^  nntil  the
thirteenth  centnry,  when  they  begin  to  appear  under  that  of
Uighur  in  Western  annals,  though  the  Ilak  Ehans  were  then  no
more.  From  these  same  Musulman  historians  we  learn  that,
during  parts  of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries,  the  kingdom
of  the  Ilak  Ehans  extended  from  Ehorasan  to  China,  which  is
perhaps  scarcely  to  be  taken  literally,  but  is  only  another  way
of  saying  that  it  extended  a  long  way  to  the  east;  for  the
Chinese,  in  their  chronicles  of  the  same  period,  speak  of  trans-
actions between  their  Emperors  and  the  Ehans  of  Eao-Chang
and  Bishbalik,  as  if  these  were  independent  chiefs.^

We  come  to  surer  ground  about  the  year  1124,  when  Teliu
Taishi,  the  Gurkhan  of  the  Eara  Ehitai,  overran  the  whole  of
Eastern  Turkistan  and  captured  Balasaghun,  together  with
much  of  the  country  to  the  northward,  which  was  then  under
the  sway  of  the  Ilak  Ehans.  This  invasion  put  an  end  to  the
kingdom  of  the  Western  Uighurs — the  Earluks,  or  Earakhani —
while  the  Eastern  Uighurs  became  tributary  to  the  conquerors.
But  it  was  a  conquest  that  probably  had  little  inflaence  on  the
people  by  whom  the  land  was  inhabited.  It  is  uncertain  what
tribes  the  army  of  the  Gurkhan  was  composed  of;  in  all  proba-
bility it  was  much  mixed  in  race,  while  in  any  case,  it  was  a
mere  army  of  invasion  and  by  no  means  constituted  the  migra-
tion of  a  people. The  dominion  of  the  Eara  Ehitai,  moreover,

^  This  word  ia,  no  doubt,  an  Arab  corruption  of  some  Turki  term,  or  a
mis-reading  due  to  copyists.  Targar^aVf  Ba-gaz^az,  etc.,  are  other  variiints
of  the  same  word  ;  and  all  lock  as  if  they  coutaincd  a  corruption  of  U*yhur,
or  possibly  even  of  Toyhvz'Uighur,  In  the  geouniphical  uoiices  of  the  Arab,
Yakut!  (fifteenth  century)  the  name  occui-s  as  7 a^Aa«-^^a— without  any
tUif, He  calls  them  a  race  of  Turks. (Not  et  Extr.^  ii.,  p.  531.)

'  I  have  purposely  omitted  to  mention  the  separate  Ui;^hur  state  which  is
said  to  have  beeu  established  near  Ean-chou  aud  Su-chou,  od  tlie  bc>rders  of
China,  as  that  lay  beyond  the  range  of  the  )irovinces  in  question  in  the
Tarihh'i'Batihidi,  and  was  probably  a  mere  isolated  state  or  community  of
yery  small  importance.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Moghul,  Turky  and  Uighur.  9B

lasted  for  less  than  a  hnndred  years,  so  that  the  UightLrs,  as  a
nation,  must  have  formed  too  solid  a  mass  to  have  been  in  any
degree  changed  in  race  by  this  conqnest.

Thus,  it  may  be  said  generally,  that  for  several  centuries
previous  to  the  rise  of  the  Mongols,  certain  Tnrki-Uighnr
peoples  (they  may,  in  fature,  be  called  simply  Uighnrs),  under
whatever  line  of  kings,  had  overspread  the  whole  of  the  pro-
vince of  Alti-Shahr  and  the  districts  to  the  east  of  it,  while  at
some  periods  they  held  sway  in  Znngaria  and  extended  their
dominion  westward  into  Transoxiana.  While  exercising  inde-
pendent mle,  and  even  subsequently,  when  allied  with  CHiingiz
Ehan  against  the  Kara  Ehitai  and  other  enemies,^  they  appear  to
have  shown  warlike  qualities,  but  at  later  dates  the  impression
we  receive  of  them  is  that  of  a  peace-loving,  cultivated  race,
of  settled  habits,  and  forming  as  great  a  contrast  as  possible  to
their  Moghul  neighbours.  Their  taste  for  literature  must  have
been  a  strong  one ;  in  fact,  they  were  the  only  literate  people  at
that  time  in  existence  between  China  in  the  east,  and  Trans-
oxiana in  the  west.  They  are  credited  with  having  been  the
first  to  reduce  the  Turki  language  to  writing,  by  borrowing  the
Syriac  written  character  from  the  Nestorian  missions  which,  in
the  Middle  Ages,  were  spread  over  Central  Asia;  while  the
writing,  thus  founded  by  the  Uighurs,  became,  at  a  later  period,
the  origin  of  the  systems  still  in  use  among  the  Mongols
and  the  Manchus.'  Many  books  were  written  by  them,  and
both  Bashid-ud-Din  and  Abul  Ghazi  point  to  their  services
being  in  request  as  administrators,  accountants  and  writers  of
the  Turki  language.  The  latter  author  especially  bears  witness
to  their  capabilities  in  these  pursuits.  He  says :  '^  During  the
reign  of  the  grandsons  of  Chingiz  Ehan  the  accountants  and  chief
officers  of  government  in  Mavard-un-Nahr,  in  Ehoraean  and  in
Irak,  were  all  Uighurs.  Similarly,  it  was  the  Uighurs  who  filled
these  posts  in  Ehitai  during  the  reign  of  the  sons  of  Chingiz
Ehan.  Oktai  Eaan,  son  and  successor  of  Chingiz  Ehan,
entrusted  Elhoras&n,  Mazandaran  and  Gilan  to  a  Uighur  named
Eurguz,  who  was  well  versed  in  keeping  accounts  and  knew
thoroughly  how  to  levy,  in  these  provinces,  the  taxes,  which  he
remitted  regularly,  each  year,  to  Oktai  Eaan."  *  They  occupied,
indeed,  a  very  similar  position  to  that  of  the  Bengali  and

*  They  submitted  voluntarily  to  Chingiz  in  1209.

*  Yule'ri  Cathay,  pp.  205  and  264-5. Also  Bretsohneider,  i.,  p.  262.
>  Pages  41-2.

Digitized  by

Google

96  The  People—

Harathi  Hindus in tbe  administrations  of the Chagbatai
Emperors  of  India.

Though  the  Arabs,  during  their  inyasions  of  Eastern  Tor-
kistan  in  the  eighth  oentnry,  had  done  their  best  to  impose  the
Mosnlman  religion  on  the  old  Uighur  population,  it  seems  that
they  met  only  with  yery  partial  success,  as  far  as  the  bulk  of
tbe  people  was  concerned.  They  no  doubt  converted  the  Kara-
Khani,  as  is  shown  by  the  coinage,  and  it  is  probable  that  from
the  eleventh  century  onwards,  the  population  in  the  western
districts  was  largely  Muhammadan.  In  the  central  and  eastern
parts,  however,  the  Uighurs  continued  to  be  Buddhists  and
belonged  to  the  red  sect  of  that  religion ;  but  Nestorian  Christi-
anity must  also  have  been  fairly  prevalent  among  them.  They
are  spoken  of  very  generally  as  T<w9i^  and  according  to  some
authorities,  this  should  be  taken  to  indicate  that  they  were
Christians ;  but  as  regards  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  Tarti^
there  are  differences  of  opinion.  In  many  cases  it  was,  no
doubt,  applied  to  the  Nestorians  in  various  parts  of  Asia,  but  it
was  also  applied  to  the  Buddhists,  the  Zoroastrians,  and  was
even  used  to  denote  idolaters.^

Strangely  enough,  the  only  two  European  accounts  we  have
of  the  Uighurs  in  the  Middle  Ages  (the  thirteenth  century)
differ  on  this  subject:  Piano  Carpini  stating  positively  that
they  were  Nestorian  Christians,  while  William  Bubruk,  only
eight  years  later,  pronounces  them,  with  equal  certainty,  to  have
been  idolaters,  and  he  adds  that  they  dwelt  in  towns  together  with
Nestorians  and  others.  It  is  possible  that  Bubruk  may  have
regarded  most  of  those  he  saw  as  Buddhists,  and  that  he  classed
all  Buddhists  with  idolators;  if  so,  he  would  only  have  been
following  the  practice  of  many  of  the  Musulman  writers,  who
drew  no  very  clear  distinction  between  religions  that  were  foreign
to  their  own.  But  however  uncertain  this  may  be,  the  name
of  Tar^i  frequently  included  the  Nestorians,  though  it  was
ordinarily  used,  during  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,
to  indicate  the  Uighurs  as  a  nation — or  more  particuLurly  the
Uighurs  of  the  eastern  Tian  Shan.  It  is  in  this  latter  sense  that
Friar  John  of  Montecorvino,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth
century,  speaks  of  the  Tarzi  tongue,  for  he  could  not  have
meant  a  Buddhist  tongue.  About  the  same  period,  too,  the
Armenian  author  Hayton,  Prince  of  Gorigos,  in  his  account  of
the  kingdoms  of  Asia»  expressly  applies  the  name  of  IVtm  tg
^  See  not9,  p,  290,

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Moghul,  Turk,  and  Uighur.  97

the  country  of  the  "Togurs"  or  Uighurs.*  Mirza  Haidar,
writing  in  the  sixteenth  century,  makes  no  mention  of  Tar^^  or
even  of  Uighurs  generally,  as  being  the  inhabitants  of  Eastern
Turkistan,^  and  it  may  be  inferred  that,  by  his  time,  the  bnlk
of  the  people  haying  become  Musulmans,  had  ceased  to  be
distingnished  by  their  race-name  of  TJighv/r,  He  speaks  only
of  the  '  Sarigh,*  or  *  Yellow,'  Uighnrs,  who  appear  to  have
been  a  small  community  occupying  a  territory  to  the  east,  or
north-east,  of  Ehotan,  and  to  have  been,  according  to  his  view,
idolaters.^  These  may  quite  possibly  have  been  merely  a
section  of  the  original'  inhabitants  who  had  retained  their  old
religion — Christianity  or  Buddhism — and  had  found  a  refuge
from  the  converting  Musulmans  in  the  secluded  region  border-
ing on  the  eastern  desert.  In  this  case  they  would  have  been
Turks,  like  the  rest  of  the  population,  in  race  and  language.

Besides  the  ITighurs,  the  only  people  that  are  heard  of  in
Alti-Shahr,  at  the  period  of  the  Tdrikhri-Baahidi,  are  the  Eal-
maks,  as  they  had  begun  then  to  be  called  by  Musulman
vmters.*  To  the  Mongols  and  the  Chinese  they  were  known
as  Oirai,  and  this  was  probably  their  real  name.*  They
must  have  been  few  in  number,  and  were,  of  course,  Mongolian,
and  not  Turki,  in  race.  Their  home  was  among  the  eastern
ranges  of  the  Tian  Shan,  and  therefore  only  partially  within
the  limits  of  Alti-Shahr:  thus  they  were  more  properly
borderers  of  the  '^  Eastern  Khanate,"  or  Uighuristan,  and
indeed  occupied  very  much  the  same  localities  in  which  they
are  found  at  the  present  day.  In  this  region,  like  in  Moghul-
istan,  there  were  no  towns  or  cultivated  districts :  the  people
were  tent-dwellers,  and  owners  of  flocks,  and  their  religion  was,
no  doubt.  Buddhism  then,  as  it  is  now.  During  the  period  of
the  Moghul  Ehans,  they  appear  to  have  played  but  a  small  part
in  the  history  of  the  country,  and  to  have  exercised  little
influence  over  the  course  of  its  affairs ;  though  after  the  dis-

1  See  Yule's  Caihay,  p.  206.

'  He  notices  only  certain  persons  as  Uighurs,  and  in  the  one  passage  where
he  mentions  tiie  word  Thrsa,  he  is  citing  toe  Tarikh-i-Jcthdn  Kushdi,  In  his
dav  the  name  was  prohahly  extinct.

"  See  p.  348,  and  note,  p.  349.

^  Professor  Grigorief  states  that  the  name  of  KalrmSk  (or  Kal'-im&k)  only
appears  for  the  fiist  time  in  the  fifteenth  century. (Schuyler,  i.,  p.  369.)

'  The  Chinese  corruption  was  Wa4a,  They  are  the  same  people  who
became  subsequently  known  as  Eleuth  or  Olot^  and  Zungar  fBretschneider,  ii.,
p.  169);  though  it  would  perhaps  be  more  correct  to  follow  the  Chinese
traveller  Chuan  Yuan,  of  the  last  century,  and  say  that  the  Zungars  were  a
branch  of  the  Eieuths.  (See  Gueluy,  Chine  Occid,  in  Le  MusSon,  1887,  p.  100.)

%

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

98  The  People.

appearance  of  the  Moghnls,  and  with  the  opening  of  the
eighteenth  century,  they  began  to  rise  to  very  considerable  power,
and,  in  connection  with  the  Tibetans  of  Lassa,  entered  into
intrigues  and  wars  that  resulted  in  their  own  country,  together
with  all  Eastern  Tnrkistan  and  the  Hi  region,  falling  into  the
possession  of  China.

In  Alti-Shahr  there  conld  not  have  been  many  Moghols,  for
with  the  exception  of  some  few  valleys  among  the  sonthern
slopes  of  the  western  Tian  Shan,  the  country  could,  in  no  way,
have  been  suited  to  their  mode  of  life.  When  Sultan  Said
Ehan  conquered  E^shghar  in  1514,  perhaps  a  certain  propor-
tion of  them  may  have  followed  him,  but  at  that  date  their
numbers,  even  in  Moghulistan,  must  have  become  much  reduced
from  what  they  had  previously  been.  Therefore,  when  a  few
years  later  (1525-6),  he  withdrew  the  remnant  of  them  from
their  own  country  to  the  hills  near  Eashghar,  in  order  to
rescue  them  from  the  hostility  of  the  Kirghiz,  they  would  have
formed  too  small  a  body  to  have  been  accounted  part  of  the
population  of  Alti-Shahr.  By  that  date  the  Moghul  l7Zti«  had
become  a  mere  band  of  refugees ;  and  though  afterwards,  for  a
short  time,  at  fitful  intervals,  their  Ehans  sallied  forth  &om
Eashghar  and  gained  some  successes  over  the  Eirghiz,  the
middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  may  be  said,  approximately,  to
have  seen  their  practical  extinction  as  a  nation.^

^  See  for  some  further  remarks  on  this  subject  Sec  VI.  of  this  Introduction.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Eastern  Khanate.  9d

SECTION  V.
The  Eastern  Khanate,  or  Uighuristan.

Their  inward  thought  U  that  their  houses  shall  contiDue  for  ever,  and  their
dwelling  places  to  all  generations ;  they  call  their  lands  after  their  own  names.
Nevertheless  man  being  in  honour  abideth  not;  .  .  . — P«.  xlix.,  11-12.

The  province  called  by  Mirza  Haidar,  *  Mangalai  Suyah/  ex-
tended, as  we  have  seen,  from  the  western  limit  of  Fargh&na  as
far  east  as  the  modern  E^ra  Shahr,  a  town  and  district  that,  in
his  day,  bore  the  name  of  Obalish,  and  more  anciently  that  of
*  Tanld '  or  *  Ten-Ki.*  This  district,  and  the  larger  one  of  Turfdn,
that  lay  beyond  it  to  the  eastward,  formed,  daring  the  two
centuries  (or  the  greater  part  of  them)  that  the  Tdrikhri-BaJiidi
embraces,  a  Moghnl  principality  which  had  an  entirely  separate
goyemment  horn  that  of  the  chief  Moghnl  Khanate.  During
the  latter  half  of  the  fourteenth  century  and  the  first  quarter  of
the  fifteenth,  while  the  Dughlat  Amirs  were  in  power  in  the
provinces  of  Eashghar,  A^ksu,  Ehotan,  etc. — ^that  is,  in  the  whole
of  Alti-Shahr — there  is  nothing  in  the  Tdrikh-i-Bashidi,  or  in
the  work  of  any  Musulman  author  that  I  am  acquainted  with,
to  indicate  who  were  the  rulers  of  these  eastern  districts,  except
Mirza  Haidar's  mention  of  their  temporary  conquest  by  Ehizir
Ehw&ja.  It  seems  probable,  from  what  may  be  learned  from
the  side  of  China,  that  the  region  was  regarded  as  more  or  less
under  the  power  of  the  Moghul  Khans,  and  the  author  of  the
ZafarNdma,  in  narrating  the  wars  between  Timur  and  the
Moghuls,  seems  also  to  imply  that  this  was  the  case,  as  has
been  seen  above.  Later,  again,  towards  the  middle  of  the
fifteenth  century,  when  a  division  in  the  Moghul  Ulm  had  taken
place,  Isdn  Bugha  11.,  with  the  support  of  one  section,  set  him-
self up  in  Gh&lish  and  Turfan,  and  there  established  a  separate
principality,  or  Khanate,  which  lasted  down  to,  and  even  beyond,
the  date  when  Mirza  Haidar's  history  closes.

Our  author  is  fond,  as  will  be  found  in  the  course  of  his
narrative,  of  using  copulate  names,  and  therefore  generally
applies  to  this  eastern  Khanate,  the  form  Chdliah-Tv/rfdn,  or

i  2

Digitized  Sy,

sy.Goagle

100  :T]ie  Eastern  Khanate,

*  Chdliah  cmd  Tvrfdn,*  from  its  two  central  and  principal  dis-
tricts. There  were  times,  however,  as  he  relates,  when  the
province  of  Aksu  also  fell  under  the  rule  of  the  eastern  Khan,
though  it  belonged  properly  to  Alti-Shahr.  But  on  two  occa-
sions he  mentions  a  country  or  province  of  Vighufistdn,  and  in
one  passage,  when  describing  the  boundaries  of  'Mangalai
Suyah,'  sajs  that  it  marched,  on  the  east,  with  the  province  of
Uighuristan.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  the  small  eastern
Khanate  really  bore  that  name  down  to  the  sixteenth  century ;
and  if  this  is  the  case,  the  survival  is  an  interesting  one.

Within  the  district  of  Turfan,  and  only  some  twentynaeven
miles  to  the  south-east  of  it,  stands  the  little  known,  but  ancient,
town  of  Kara-Khoja,  which  has  borne  also,  in  the  course  of  its
history,  several  other  names,  the  chief  of  tliem  having  come
to  us,  through  the  Chinese,  in  the  forms  of  Kao-Chang  and
Ho'Chao.  The  Chinese  annals  of  the  Suug  and  Yuan  dynasties  ^
mention  this  place  frequently,  and  make  it  clear  that  from
the  ninth  century  to  within  the  twelfth,  Kao-Chang  was  the
capital  of  a  Uighur  kingdom  which  bordered  on  the  north  with
another  Uighur  state,  called  Bishbalik  (the  modem  Urumtsi),
and  on  the  west  with  a  third  known,  anciently,  as  Kui-tze,  Kus,
etc.,  and  now  as  Kuchar.^  These  States,  collectively,  appear  to
have  been  the  home  and  centre  of  the  Uighur  race,  until  a
much  later  date  than  when,  in  the  twelfth  century,  they  lost  their
-  political  independence  and  became  subject  to  the  Kara-Khitai.
It  would  not  be  improbable,  therefore,  that  the  region  having
become  known  to  neighbouring  nations  on  the  west  as  Uighur-
istdn,  when  independent,  should  have  retained  that  name  long
afterwards,  though  subject  to  foreign  rulers.

On  the  partition  of  the  empire  of  Chingiz  Khan  among  his
sons,  we  read  of  Uighuristan  falling  to  the  appanage  of  Chag-
hatai  Khan,  and  we  also  learn,  from  Mirza  Haidar,  of  Ohaghatai
having  entrusted  the  province  called  *  Miingalai  Suyah,'  as  far
east  as  Chalish,  to  the  care  of  the  Dughlats,  but  not  a  word  is
said  regarding  the  disposal  of  the  districts  to  the  eastward  of
Chalish.  Beferring  to  a  later  date — about  1320 — Abul  G-hazi
mentions  Uighuristan  as  one  of  the  countries,  the  inhabitants  of

'  As  translated  by  Dr.  Bretschneider,  i.,  pp.  238-60 ;  and  ii.,  pp.  198-202.

^  This  is  the  Chinese  acceptation,  but  it  is  perhaps  more  probable  that
Euitze  or  Kuchar  did  not  form  a  third  state ;  it  may  have  been  included  in
Eao-Cbang.  At  an  earlier  period  (seventh  century)  Kuitze  or  Ku-tze  is
believed  by  Mr.  Watters  to  have  been  one  of  the  five  divisions,  or  five  cities,
of  Bishbdlik. (See  note,  p.  62  of  Introduction).

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

or  Uighuristdn,  101

which,  heing  without  a  Khan  at  that  time,  summoned  Isan
Bagha  I.  from  Mayara-nn-Nahr  to  reign  oyer  them.  Bnt  although
a  region  is  often  mentioned  hy  this  name  snhsequent  to  the  time
of  Chingiz,  no  indication,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  is  given  of  its
situation,  until  we  come  to  Mirza  Haidar's  incidental  statement
that  it  constituted  the  eastern  neighbour  of  '  Mangalai  Suyah/
and  was,  consequently,  identical  with  the  Khanate  of  ^  Ghalish
and  Turfan/  On  the  other  hand,  though  the  Khanate  is  men-
tioned by  Erskine,  he  does  not  connect  it  with  the  Uighuristan
of  Asiatic  authors,  but  speaks  of  it  always  as  '^  the  Eastern
districts  " — presumably  of  the  Moghul  Khanate  in  general.

Mirza  Haidar,  unfortunately,  omits  to  apprise  his  readers  of
the  extent  of  the  Khanate  of  Uighuristan.  At  periods  when
Aksu  was  not  comprised  within  its  limits,  it  could  not  have
been  large.  On  the  east  it  did  not  include  Kumul  (Hami)  till
as  late  as  1513,  when  Mansur  Khan  annexed  that  State  and
joined  it  on  to  Turf&n,^  as  we  learn  from  Chinese  sources  of
information.  On  the  south  it  may  have  stretched  to  a  con-
siderable distance,  but  if  so  it  could  have  enclosed,  in  that
direction,  only  the  sands  of  the  desert.  Northward,  among  the
ranges  of  the  Tian  Shan,  and  along  the  valley  of  the  Yulduz
river,  the  inhabitants  in  the  sixteenth  century,  at  all  events,
and  probably  long  before,  appear  to  have  been  the  Oirat  or
Kalmaks,  but  whether  the  Khans  of  Uighuristan  counted  these
people  among  their  subjects  is,  from  the  Tdrikh't-Rashidi,  not
clear.  It  is  possible  that  they  may  have  done  so  at  some
periods,  if  not  always,  and  in  this  case  their  State  may  have
extended  to  the  upper  waters  of  the  Tulduz  and  to  the  northern
slopes  of  the  Tian  Shan.  In  the  days  of  Khizir  Khwaja  of
Moghulistan  (about  1383  to  1399),  the  country  of  the  Kalmaks
would  appear  to  have  formed  part  of  that  Khan's  possessions,
and,  for  this  reason  evidently,  was  invaded  by  Timur  in  his
expedition  of  1388.*  According  to  Klaproth  (who  does  not
name  his  authorities  in  this  instance)  the  region,  thus  limited,
is  almost  exactly  that  which  was  occupied  by  the  Uighurs  at
the  latest  period  of  their  existence  as  a  people,  though  this  was
long  past  the  time  when  they  had  ceased  to  constitute  self-
contained  or  independent  states. Indeed,  he  assigns  to  them

^  Kumul  remained  dependent  on  Turfin  till  the  year  1669,  when  it  became
Chinese.

«  See  P^tis  de  la  Croix,  Hist,  de  Timur  Bec^  ii.,  p.  46.

Digitized  by

Google

102  The  Eastern  Khanate,

this  position  until  beyond  the  date  of  Timor,  or  within  the
fifteenth  centary,  and  speaks  of  them  as  a  gronp  of  small  but
not  independent  principalities.^  In  all  probability  the  inde-
pendence, or  otherwise,  of  these  Tlighur  communities,  had  no
influence  on  the  name  which  their  country  went  by  among
neighbouring  nations ;  it  seems  merely  to  have  acquired  the
race-name  of  the  inhabitants,  as  is  often  the  case  elsewhere,
and  (what  chiefly  concerns  us  here)  to  have  preseryed  that  name
for  some  two  hundred  years,  after  a  new  and  foreign  principality
had  sprung  up  on  its  soil.

The  only  consecutive  account  of  the  history  of  Turf&n,  from
the  days  of  Chingiz  and  the  Uighur  chiefs  onwards,  would  seem
to  be  that  contained  in  the  Chinese  chronicles  of  the  Ming
dynasty,  and  we  are  indebted  to  Dr.  Bretschneider  for  an
epitomised  translation  of  them.^  The  companion  province  of
Ghalish  is  not  mentioned  in  the  epitome,  and  for  this  reason,
we  may  assume  that  no  notice  of  it  is  contained  in  the  Ming-
Shi.  Possibly  the  Chinese  annalists  may  have  regarded  it  as
part  of  Turfan,  and  if  this  was  the  case,  their  account  of  that
province  may  be  taken  to  embrace  the  whole  of  the  eastern
Khanate  of  IFighuristan.  The  Ming  record  begins  very  shortly
after  the  opening  dates  of  the  Tdrikh-i-Rashidi,  by  relating
how  the  prince  of  Tu-lu-fan  (or  Turfdn),  having  repeatedly
plundered  foreign  embassies  proceeding  through  his  dominion
towards  China,  the  Emperor,  in  1377,  despatched  an  army  to
punish  him  and  ravage  his  territory—  a  task  that  seems  to  have
been  accomplished  with  success.  No  name  is  mentioned  for
this  prince.  The  date  would  correspond  with  the  reign,  in
Moghulistan,  of  Eamar-ud-Din,  but  I  know  of  nothing  that
points  to  Uighuristan  forming  a  part  of  Eamar-ud- Din's  terri-
tory, unless  perhaps  the  fact  that  Timur,  shortly  after  the  date
in  question,  when  overruning  Moghulistan  in  the  course  of  a
punitive  expedition,  sent  one  of  his  columns  as  far  east  as
Kara-Ehoja,  which  lay  well  within  Uighurist&n.  On  the  other
hand,  a  few  years  later,  on  the  death  of  Ehizir  Ehwaja,  Timur's
army,  under  Mirza  Iskandar,  laid  waste  the  country  only  as
far  east  as  Euchar,  and  then  (for  what  reason  is  not  stated)

^ Tableaux  Hittoriques^  pp.  121-5.

*  Most,  but  apparent Iv  not  all,  of  what  Dr.  Bretschneider  has  translated  is
contained  in  De  Mail  las  Hist,  de  la  Chine  (vol.  xX  but  it  is  there  much
scattered  and  in  vol  ved  with  the  history  of  Hami.  Dr.  Bretschneider's  version  is
therefore  the  more  useful  of  the  two. (See  his  Med.  Renearches,  ii.,  pp.  193  $eq,)

Digitized  by

Google

or  Uighuristdn.  103

drew  off  towards  Ehotan.^  Tet  Khizir  Ehwaja  is  known,  from
Mirza  Haidar's  narratiye,  to  have  made  at  least  a  temporary
conquest  of  Tnrfan  and  Eara-Ehoja.

These  eyents  occurred  during  the  best  days  of  the  Moghul
power,  when  raiding  and  general  lawlessness  flourished,  and  it
is  to  be  inferred  from  what  little  we  tnow  of  the  history  of
those  times,  that  even  if  Eamar-ud-Din  sometimes  held  sway  in
Uigburistan,  he  was  not  necessarily  the  recognised  chief  of  the
State.  But,  whoever  was  the  chief,  he  seems  to  have  been  sub-
dued by  the  Ming  army,  for  we  read  of  Turfan,  in  1406,  sending
a  mission  of  homage  to  Peking,  while  two  years  after  that  date
another  is  recorded  to  have  been  despatched  by  the  ruling
Ehan,  this  time  under  the  leadership  of  a  Buddhist  priest.  In
1422  a  chief  of  Turfan,  whose  name  is  given  as  In-ghir-rh-eha^
is  reported  to  have  been  expelled  from  his  government  by  Vais
Ehan  of  Bishbalik  {i.e.y  Moghulistan),  and  to  have  personally
carried  his  appeal  for  redress  before  the  Emperor,  who  caused
Vais  Ehan  to  restore  In-ghi-rh-cha  to  his  possessions.  What
means  the  Chinese  Emperor  took  to  compel  the  Moghul  to
perform  this  act  of  restitution  is  not  stated,  but  the  Ming-Shi
goes  on  to  relate  that  in  1425  and  1426  In-ghi-rh-cha  appeared
a  second  and  third  time  at  Peking,  *'  at  the  head  of  his  tribe,"
to  present  tribute.  In  1428,  shortly  after  his  return  home,  he
died.

The  next  reigning  chief  mentioned  is  one  Ba-la-ma-rhy  on
whom  the  Ming  Emperor  bestowed  presents  in  1441.  on  the
occasion  of  the  Egyptian  envoy  passing  through  Turfan  on  his
way  homeward  from  Peking.  It  was  about  this  time — the
middle  of  the  fifteenth  century — that  the  Turfan  chief,  one
Ye-mi^i  Hiuhjo  (Imil  Ehwaja?)  took  possession  of  Eara-Ehoja
and  Lu-kotsin  and  assumed  the  title  of  Wangy  or  'Prince.'
Previous  to  this,  says  the  Ming  historian,  Turfan  was  of  little
account,  but  it  now  became  powerful,  and  appears  to  have
extended  its  territory,  for  he  incidentally  mentions  that  it  was
bordered  on  one  side  by  Moghulistan,  and  on  another  by  Ehotan.
The  rise  in  power  of  the  Turfan  chiefs  did  not  prevent  them
from  continuing  to  send  tribute  to  China,  and  it  was  shortly
afterwards  (in  1465)  settled  that  a  mission  should  be  despatched
regularly  once  every  five  years.

The  particulars  of  these  missions,  the  demands  they  made  at

>  Pdtis  de  la  Croix,  iil,  pp.  216-17.

Digitized  by

Google

104  The  Eastern  KlianatCy

the  Ming  court,  and  the  concesBions  granted  from  time  to  time
by  the  Emperor,  need  not  be  followed  here.  One  of  them
which  appeared  at  Peking  in  1469  reported  that  the  Torfan
chief  had  taken  the  title  of  ^Saltan/  and  the  name  of  this
personage  is  recorded  to  have  been  Mi}  In  the  Tdrikh-i^Raahidi
no  mention  is  made  of  the  name  of  Ali,  in  connection  with
Uighnristan.  The  date  points  to  Eabak  Saltan,  as  well  as  the
title;  bat  as  Ali  is  represented  farther  on  in  the  Chinese
history  to  have  been  the  father  of  Ahmad,  we  can  hardly  assume
Eabak  to  be  the  Saltan  indicated.  The  father  of  Ahmad  was
Tanas,  who  nowhere  appears  under  the  name  of  Ali,  while
Eabak  was  grand-nephew  of  Yunus.  That  Sultan  Ahmad  (or
Alacha  Ehan) — and  no  other  Ahmad — is  the  personage  pointed
to  by  the  Chinese  annals,  seems  more  than  probable,  seeing  that
the  dates  of  his  succession  and  death  agree  very  nearly  with
those  given  in  the  Tdrikh^-Bashidi,  and  that  he  is  said  to  be
the  father  of  Mansur.  But  this  is  not  the  only  reason  to  suspect
inaccuracy  in  this  matter,  on  the  part  of  the  Chinese  chroniclers.
Even  if  Ahmad  were  to  be  regarded  as  chief  of  Turfan,  in  the
sense  of  being  suzerain  over  the  local  prince,  he  could  scarcely
have  played  the  part  they  attribute  to  him,  without  Mirza
Haidar  making  some  mention  of  his  deeds.  They  represent
him,  for  example,  as  having  proceeded  in  person  against  Hami
in  1488,  as  having  captured  the  town,  and  put  to  death  the  local
chief  *— a  series  of  important  events  about  which  the  Tdrikh-i'
Bashidi  is  silent.  We  find  there  only  a  brief  statement  that  his
son,  Mansur,  carried  on  several  wars  against  Ehitai,  or  China.

To  proceed,  however.  In  1473  this  Sultan  Ali  is  said  to  have
attacked  and  captured  Hami,  together  with  some  tracts  to  the
eastward,  proceedings  which  called  forth  an  expedition  from  China
to  recover  these  places  from  him.  The  Chinese  had  to  retire
unsuccessful ;  the  Sultan  retained  Hami,  but  the  tribute  missions
went  on  as  before.  About  the  same  year  that  he  annexed  Hami,
it  appears  that  Sultan  Ali  also  captured  more  than  10,000  of
the  tribe  of  Oirat,  or  Ealmaks,  and  in  general  he  seems  to  have
been  a  chief  of  warlike  tendencies.  He  had  in  his  hands
the  road  by  which  all  the  tribute  missions  from  the  western

*  Klaproth  aays  that  in  1490  a  rebel  arose  in  TurfAn,  who  took  the  title  of
Sultan ;  and  he  appears  to  be  using  some  Chinese  history  as  his  authority.
(Spraeke  u.  Schri/t  d.  Uiguren,  p.  47.)

*  Bretschneider,  ii.,  p.  196 ;  De  Mailla,  x.,  pp.  256,  257.

Digitized  by

Google

or  Uighuristdn.  105

conntries  were  in  the  habit  of  coming  and  going,  and  he  made
the  Emperor  feel  that  it  was  well  to  be  on  good  terms  with
him.

In  1478  Ali  died,  and  his  son  A-hei-ma  (Ahmad)  succeeded
him  as  Saltan  of  Tnrfan.  He  also  wa^  generally  successful  in
holding  Hami  against  the  Chinese ;  if  he  lost  it  at  one  time,  he
regained  it  shortly  afterwards,  and  he  made  the  governor  nomi-
nated by  the  Chinese,  a  prisoner.  During  the  period  1478  to
1493  he  was  nearly  always  at  war  with  the  Chinese,  yet  he
seems  to  have  been  ever  ready  with  his  tribute,  and  several
missions,  carrying  lions  and  other  presents,  are  recorded  to  have
been  despatched  during  these  years.  At  length,  however  (in
1493)  his  mission,  consisting  of  172  men,  was  stopped  and  im-
prisoned near  the  Chinese  border.  This  event,  occurring  at  a
time  when  the  Ealmdks  on  his  northern  frontier  were  assuming
a  threatening  attitude  towards  him,^  decided  Ahmad  to  abandon
Hami,  and  finally  peace  was  established  with  the  Chinese  in
1499.  Five  years  later  (1504)  Ahmad  died,  and  a  struggle
for  the  succession  to  the  Ehanate  took  place  among  his  sons.
The  eldest,  by  name  Man-su-rh  (Mansur),  got  the  upper  hand,
declared  himself  Sultan,  and  began  at  once  to  despatch  tribute
to  Peking.  In  1513  the  subordinate  Prince  of  Hami,  Bat-yadsi
by  name,  made  over  his  province  to  Mansur,  who  soon  after-
wards began  to  make  incursions  on  Chinese  territory  proper,  by
invading  Su-chou  and  Ean-chou.  Whether  he  obtained  any
but  a  mere  temporary  hold  on  these  districts  is  not  apparent,
but  he  is  related  to  have  had  dissensions  with  the  Chinese,  on
subjects  connected  with  Hami,  till  his  death  in  1545.  He  was
succeeded  by  his  son,  Sha^-i.e.,  Shah  Khan.

This  is  a  brief  outline  of  Dr.  Bretschneider's  epitome  of  the
chapters  in  the  Ming  history  which  relate  to  Turfan,  or  Uighur-
istan.  It  shows,  briefly,  the  course  of  the  history  of  the  province
according  to  the  Chinese  view ;  but  when  we  come  to  compare
the  names  and  dates  with  the  same  story  as  gathered  from  the
Tdrikh'i'Bcuhidi,  the  two  accounts  are  found  not  to  agree.  In
the  summary,  or  discursive  taMe,  gi^en  in  Section  II.  of  this
Introduction,  some  of  the  Ehans  of  Uighuristan  have  been
mentioned;  with  the  dates  of  their  reigns  (as  far  as  obtainable),
from  Mirza  Haidar's  statements. They  may  be  placed  here  in

^  De  Mailla  savs  the  Oir&t  were  perpetual  enemies  of  the  MnsulmaDS  of
Turfdn,  and  conld  put  60,000  men  into  the  field. (Hist,  x.,  p.  302.)

Digitized  by

Google

106

The  Eastern  Khanatey

juxtaposition  with those  of  the  Ming-Shi,  for  purposes  of
comparison,  as  follows : —

Ming-ahi.

Tdnkhri'Raahidi.

1.  In-ghi-rh-cha  •

died

1428

1.

Yais  Khan .

. died 1428

2.  Manku  'JHmur.

,

?

2.

Iain  Bngha  II.

. „ 1462

3.  Ba-la-ma-rh was  reigning

1442

3.

Dust  Muhamd.

. ,. 1468

4.  Ye-mi-li  Huo-jo ,

t

1450

4.

Eabak  Sultan

. ?

6.  Sultan  AH •  .

died

1478

5.

Ahmad  .

. died 1504

6.  Ahmad  .

w

1504

6.

Mansur  .

. „ 1543

7.  Mansur

8.  Shah  Khan .

99

1545
1570

7.

Shah  Khan .  |

was  reigning  at
close  of  history.

From  this,  it  appears  that  none  of  the  rulers  mentioned  by
the  Chinese  are  the  same  as  those  given  in  the  Tdrikh-i-BaJUdi^
till  the  name  of  Ahmad  Ehan  is  reached,  while  the  date  of  the
death  of  his  successor,  Mansur  EJian,  differs  by  two  years  in
the  two  accounts.  The  allusion  to  Yais  Ehan  accords  fairly
satisfactorily  as  to  date;  but  here  all  accordance  ends.  The
first  and  third  names  on  the  Chinese  list  would  appear  to  be
of  Mongol  origin ;  the  second  is  certainly  Mongol,  while  the
fourth  and  fifth,  though  Musulman,  are  in  no  way  to  be  traced
among  the  Moghul  Ehans  whom  we  know  of.  It  is,  perhaps,
possible  that  the  earlier  Moghul  chiefs,  while  Islam  had  only
partially  spread  among  them,  bore  Mongol  as  well  as  Musulman
names,  and  that  the  Chinese  found  it  more  convenient  to  use
the  former,  in  reducing  them  to  their  own  phonetics;  but
against  this  conjecture  for  solving  the  difficulty,  it  must  be
considered  that  the  number  of  Khans,  previous  to  Ahmad,  is
too  great,  and  that  the  dates  do  not  correspond  sufficiently  to
admit  of  the  assumption  that  the  Mongol  names  point  to  Ehans
of  Moghulistan.  A  more  probable  explanation,  perhaps,  may
be  that  during  the  reigns  of  Isan  Bugha  II.  and  Dast  Mu-
hammad, there  were  also  Moghul  Amirs  who  (like  the  Dughlat
Amirs  in  Alti  Shahr),  if  they  did  not  reign,  at  all  events  held
some  kind  of  hereditary  position  as  local  chiefs,  and  that  it  was
they  who  sent  the  tribute  missions,  and  carried  on  intercourse,
with  the  Chinese  court.  Thus,  though  not  supreme  in  the
Ehanate,  they  might  have  been  the  chiefs  best  known  to  the
Chinese.  The  possibility  of  this  suggestion  derives  some  sup*
port,  I  think,  from  the  accounts  the  Chinese  furnish  of  the
towns  of  Eara-EJioja  and  Lu-ko-tsin  (more  anciently  Liu-
ChSng).  During  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  century,  both
these  towns,  though  situated  close  to  Turfan,  were  reckoned

Digitized  by

Google

or  Uighuristdn,  107

independent,  and  sent  their  own  tribute,  separately,  to  Peking ;
and  it  was  only  when  Tnrfan  became  powerful,  after  the  middle
of  the  centnry,  that  they  were  annexed  to  their  more  important
neighbonr.^  This  wonld  have  been  only  very  shortly  before
the  commencement  of  the  reign  of  Saltan  Ahmad,  or  when  we
come  to  corresponding  names  and  dates  in  the  two  lists.  At  this
time^  it  may  be,  the  custom  was  changed,  and  the  reigning  Ehan
may  have  begun  to  send  the  tribute  missions  in  bis  own  name ;
while  the  names — especially  the  non-Musulman  ones— of  the
subordinate  chiefs,  would  have  tended  soon  to  fall  into  oblivion
and  remain  unnoticed  by  Muhammadan  writers.  This,  however,
is  only  a  suggestion — ^a  possible  explanation  of  the  discrepancies.
Unfortunately,  it  is  not  the  only  puzzle  connected  with  this
eastern  Kbanate.  In  his  MSmoires  concemant  les  .  ,  .  .  Chi-
noiSy^  Pere  Amyot  has  published  several  Chinese  documents
relating  to  Turfan,  one  of  which  is  a  repcript  by  the  Emperor
Shun-Chi  (the  first  of  the  present  dynasty),  dated  1647,  where
notice  is  taken  of  the  fact  that  Turfan  had  not  sent  to  tender
homage  to  China  for  more  than  280  years — 1.6.,  since  some  date
previous  to  the  year  1867,  or  the  commencement  of  the  Ming
epoch  I  So  direct  a  contradiction  is  this  of  all  that  the  Ming
history  has  recorded,  that  it  would  appear  almost  hopeless  to
attempt  to  reconcile  the  two  statements.  It  would  be  tempting
to  put  the  Tsing  Emperor's  direct  assertion  into  the  same  side
of  the  scales  with  Mirza  Haidar's  silence  on  the  subject,  and  to
suspect  the  veracity  of  the  Ming  chronicles ;  but  my  impression
is  that  these  records  contain  too  much  internal  evidence  of
truth,  and  are  too  circumstantial  in  their  facts,  to  admit  of  the
matter  being  disposed  of  in  so  summary  a  manner.  The  Em-
peror Shun-Chi,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  only  come  to  the
throne  in  1644.  He  was  a  mere  child  of  nine  years  of  age  in
1647,  while  his  elder  relations,  who  were  presumably  his
advisers,  were  Manchus,  who  had  been  deeply  engaged  in  the
wars  which  had  won  for  him  the  Empire  of  China.  They  pro-
bably knew  little  of  the  affairs  of  the  country,  or  of  the  history
of  the  dynasty  that  had  just  been  crushed  by  them  and  their
people.  The  dynastic  history  of  the  Mings,  moreover,  was  not
written  till  many  years  later,^  while  events  connected  with  an

*  Bretschneider,  ii.,  pp.  186, 187.

*  VoL  xiv.,  p.  16.

'  The  order  for  the  compilation  of  the  Ming  8hiy  Dr.  Terrien  de  Lacouperie
informed  me,  was  passed  in  1679.  Fifty-eight  scholars  were  appointed  to
engage  in  the  work,  which  was  not  finished  till  1724.

Digitized  by

Google

108  Tlie  Eastern  Khanate^

insignificant  Khanate  in  Central  Asia  would  scarcely  have  been
in  the  minds  of  the  courtiers  and  secretaries,  when  the  Emperor
was  made  to  pen,  or  to  approve,  the  rescript  in  question ;  or  if
it  was  known  to  them  that  Turfan  had  sent  tribute  regularly —
rather  effusively — they  probably  sought  to  please  him  by  conceal-
ing the  fact  from  his  knowledge.  The  rescript  is  obviously
intended  to  convey  the  idea  that  Shun-Ohi  is  flattered  by  the
homage  paid  him  by  the  Sultan  of  Turfan,  whose  predecessors
had  never  rendered  so  great  an  honour  to  the  Emperors  of  the
late  dynasty ;  indeed,  the  whole  document  appears  to  be,  more
than  anything  else,  a  display  of  exultation  on  the  part  of  the
Emperor,  intended  to  reflect  on  his  Chinese  predecessors.  The
occasion  which  brought  about  its  promulgation,  was  the  arrival
of  an  envoy  from  the  Turfan  Sultan  of  the  time,  who  is  therein
called  "  Ablun-Mouhan  " — a  corruption  not  easy  to  identify
with  any  Musulman  name.  ^'Le  Sultan,"  runs  the  French
translation,  "  qui  regno  aujourd'hui  sur  le  Tourfan,  descend  en
droit  ligne  de  Tchahatai,  un  des  fils  de  Tsinkiskan,  fondateur  de
la  dynastie  des  Yuen  ou  Mongoux.  Ces  prM^cesseurs,  depuis
plus  de  deux  cens  quatre-vingts  ans  n'avaient  point  envoy6
d'ambassade  solemnelle  pour  rendre  hommage  a  la  Chine,  et  lui
apporter  le  tribut.  Le  Sultan  Ablun-Mouhan,  ayant  appris
que  j'6tais  sur  le  trone  de  TEmpire  Chinois,  m'envoie  des
ambassadeurs.  .  .  .  Une  telle  conduite  m^rite  quelque  atten-
tion de  ma  part.  .  .  .*'  And  the  venerable  Amyot  adds  signifi-
cantly:— "Ten  years  afterwards,  that  is  to  say  in  the  year
1657,  the  King  of  Tourfan  again  despatched  ambassadors  carry-
ing tribute,  which  means  in  plain  French,  that  he  sent  people
to  trade  and  to  receive  presents  from  the  Emperor.  Yet  His
Imperial  Majesty  was  greatly  flattered  by  this  new  mission."

A  still  more  inexplicable  statement  is  contained  in  a  letter
written  by  Amyot  from  Peking  some  time  subsequently.^  Re-
ferring to  Turfan,  he  says  the  country  was  so  broken  up  in  the
early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  that  in  the  year  1533  there
were  seventy-five  small  independent  States,  all  the  chiefs  of
which  called  themselves  king.  Here,  all  that  can  be  said  is  that
Amyot  must  have  fallen  into  some  error.  He  was  living  at
Peking  as  far  back  as  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and
may  be  assumed  to  have  had  good  sources  of  information  on
historical  as  well  as  other  subjects,  but  on  this  occasion  he  does
not  mention  the  authority  for  the  statement  he  makes.  The
^  M6m,  Con.  1m  Chin,  xiv.,  p.  19. No  date  is  traceable  for  this  letter.

Digitized  by

Google

or  Uighuristdn.  109

Ming-Shi,  as  we  have  just  seen,  refers  to  the  two  towns  of
Eara-Khoja  and  Ln-ko-tsin,  as  haying  been  thought,  by  the
Chinese,  to  be  independent  of  Tnrfan,  about  a  century  before  the
date  spoken  of  by  Amyot,  but  during  this  interval  the  tendency
of  events  in  Uighuristan  was  towards  consolidation  of  the  king-
dom, and  centralisation  of  the  power  of  the  Ehan.  The  date
1533  falls  within  the  reign  of  Mansur  Ehan,  who,  we  see  from
the  histories  of  Mirza  Haidar  and  that  of  the  Ming  dynasty,
was  the  most  powerful  and  prosperous  ruler  that  the  Khanate
had  had,  and  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  likely  that,  during  his
reign,  the  country  should  have  been  split  up  into  more  indepen-
dent divisions  than  there  were  towns  in  it,  or  perhaps  into
almost  as  many  as  there  were  villages.  Had  any  disintegration
been  going  on,  Mirza  Haidar  could  hardly  have  failed  to  notice
it,  and  moreover.  Sultan  Said,  then  Ehan  of  Moghulistan  and
Alti-Shahr  (Mansur's  brother)  would  scarcely  have  submitted  (as
Mirza  Haidar  reports  him  to  have  done  in  1516)  to  a  ruler  whose
kingdom  had  broken  up  into  small  States.  In  this  instance  it
is  far  more  likely  that  Pere  Amyot  made  use  of  some  imperfect
information,  than  that  both  the  official  history  of  the  Ming
dynasty  and  the  independent  one  of  our  author,  should  be  wrong.
What  we  find  from  the  latter  to  have  been  the  case  is,  that  after
the  death  of  Ahmad,  and  with  the  succession  of  Mansur,  Uighur-
istan obtained  a  great  increase  of  strength.  Mansur  had  been
chief  of  Aksu,  which  province  had  been  invaded  and  conquered
by  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  of  Eashghar,  and  the  chief  had  migrated  to
Turfan  with  the  whole  of  his  tribe  and  family.  The  number
of  the  tribe  is  not  stated,  but  the  advent  of  a  large  body  of
Moghuls,  together  with  the  Ehan,  can  hardly  have  failed  to
prove  a  source  of  increased  strength  to  the  Ebanate,  and  would
point  rather  to  unification  than  the  reverse.

Perhaps  if  any  explanation  of  so  curious  a  discrepancy  may
be  hazarded,  it  might  be  found  in  the  abuse  of  the  tribute
missions.  As  the  Ming  dynasty  declined  and  approached  its  fall,
the  practice  of  encouraging  counterfeit  missions  seems  to  have
become  common ;  and  towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth,  they  came  much  into
vogue  among  the  States  bordering  on  the  west  of  China.  This
fact  stands  out  with  special  clearness  in  the  narrative  of  Bene-
dict Goes,  who  travelled  from  Lahore  to  China  in  the  years
1603-1604,  and  who  died  at  the  frontier  town  of  Suchou,  in
Etmsu, after  passing through ¥arkand,  Aksu, Turfan and

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

110  The  Eastern  Khanate,

Enmnl.  The  account  of  his  journey  is,  indeed,  a  meagre  one,
for  the  greater  part  of  his  journal  was  lost  at  the  time  of  his
death.  Some  fragments,  however,  were  recovered  and  passed
into  the  hands  of  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  Jesnit  missionaries
then  at  Peking — Father  Matthew  Bicci — who  compiled  from
them  the  story  of  Goes'  adventures.  In  this  way  much  of  the
narrative  that  has  come  down  to  us,  is  from  the  pen  of  a  man
specially  well  informed  and  qualified  to  expose  the  real  state  of
afikirs,  OD  such  a  subject  as  the  missions  of  homage  from  the
west.  He  tell  us  that  the  tribute  brought  to  the  capital  was
merely  nominal  in  value,  but  that  the  Emperor,  considering  it
beneath  his  dignity  to  receive  presents  from  foreigners  without
making  a  return,  not  only  entertained  the  tribute-bearers  on  a
handsome  scale,  but  paid  highly  for  the  objects  presented  to
him  in  the  shape  of  return  gifts,  so  that  every  man  pocketed
''  a  piece  of  gold  daily,  over  and  above  his  necessary  expenses."
For  this  reason,  the  privilege  of  carrying  offerings  to  China  was
keenly  competed  for  among  merchants  and  others,  who  paid
highly  for  a  nomination  to  the  post  of  tribute-bearer.  When
the  time  came  for  setting  out,  these  so-called  ambassadors,  says
Bicci,  forged  letters  in  the  name  of  the  kings  they  professed  to
represent,  in  which  the  Emperor  of  China  was  addressed  in
obsequious  terms.  ''  The  Chinese,"  he  continues,  '^  receive  em-
bassies of  a  similar  character  from  varions  other  kingdoms,
such  as  Cochin-China,  Siam,  Leu-Chieu,  Corea,  and  some  of  the
petty  Tatar  kings,  the  whole  causing  incredible  charges  on  the
public  treasury.  The  Chinese  themselves  are  quite  aware  of
the  imposture,  but  they  allow  their  Emperor  to  be  befooled  in
this  manner,  as  if  to  persuade  him  that  the  whole  world  is
tributary  to  the  Chinese ;  the  fact  being,  rather,  that  China
pays  tribute  to  those  Jkingdoms."  ^

This  account  may  be  somewhat  overdrawn  in  respect  of  the
comparisons  made  with  such  States  as  Cocbin-China,  Siam,
Korea,  etc.,  for  in  these  cases  it  is  well  known  that  there  was
no  question  of  the  Chinese  winking  at  an  imposture,  and  allow-
ing themselves  to  be  befooled.  Tribute  from  these  States
meant  political  subjection;  the  exaction  of  it  at  regular
periods  was  a  serious  affair,  and  one  of  the  cardinal  points  of
Chinese  foreign  policy.  But  where  the  small  States  of  Central
Asia  were  concerned,  it  was  apparently  not  regarded  as  so  im-
portant a  matter,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fact  that,
»  Yule's  CbMoy,  pp.  582-3.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

or  Uighuristdn.  Ill

at  tbe  period  in  question,  the  custom  of  sending  tribute-bearing
missions  to  China  had  degenerated,  in  the  Khanates  of  Eastern
Turkistan,  to  mere  trading  adventures,  and  that  the  Chinese
must  have  been  aware  of  the  abuse  the  custom  had  undergone.^
Even  one  of  the  circumstances  that  gave  rise  to  Goes'  mission,
hinged  upon  a  fraudulent  embassy  of  this  kind.  A  Musulman
merchant,  on  his  return  to  Lahore  from  China,  gave  the  Jesuits
there,  information  regarding  the  road  to  '  Cathay,'  which
appears  to  have  had  much  influence  in  deciding  them  to  send
forward  Benedict  Goes.  The  man,  on  appearing  at  Akbar's
court,  and  on  being  asked  by  the  Emperor  how  he  obtained
admission  to  the  Chinese  capital,  replied  with  frankness,  that
he  had  gone  in  the  character  of  an  ambassador  from  the  King
of  Kashgbar.

It  may,  therefore,  be  possible  that  spurious  tribute-missions
arrived  at  Peking  from  so  many  petty  chiefs,  or  governors  of
towns,  that  the  Chinese  had  actually  recorded  as  large  a
number  as  seventy-five  for  the  Turfan  region,  at  the  time  Pere
Amyot  speaks  of ;  though  this  would  in  no  way  demonstrate
that  the  State  of  Turfan,  or  Uighuristan,  had,  in  reality,  been
split  up  into  small  divisions.

Though  a  separate  and  self-contained  State,  the  Khanate  of
Uighuristan  was  in  no  way  disconnected,  physically,  from  the
rest  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  or  Alti-Shahr.  No  range  of  moun-
tains or  great  river  divided  the  two  States,  and  even  their
people,  in  race  and  language,  must  have  been  practically  one.
No  doubt  there  were  slight  variations  in  type  and  dialect,  as  is
the  case  at  the  present  day,  between  the  natives  of  Turfan  and
those  of  Kashgbar  and  Khotan;  but  all  were  of  the  Uighur
stock,  and  those  of  the  eastern  Khanate,  occupying,  as  they  did,
one  of  the  ancient  seats  of  the  nation,  perhaps  retained  the
characteristics  of  the  race  in  greater  purity  than  the  commu-
nities of  the  more  western  provinces.  They  lived,  as  it  were,  on
the  ruins  of  ancient  Uighuria,  and  were  less  accessible  than  the
communities  further  west  to  foreign  influences,  except  perhaps,
to  those  emanating  from  China — which  must,  however,  have
been  slight.  Their  land,  placed  as  it  is,  in  the  very  centre  of
Asia,  is  less  known,  even  nowadays,  than  almost  any  other  part
of  the  continent ;  the  few  modern  travellers  who  have  visited

^  Sir  H.  Yule  cites  Abel  R^musat  to  show  that  the  same  thing  had  happened
in  the  days  of  the  Sung  Emperors — ».«.  the  last  native  Chinese  dynasty  prior
to  the  Mings. (CcUhay,  p.  583.)

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

112  The  Eastern  Khanate,

it  haviDg  famished  only  a  meagre  description  of  it.  A  Chinese
author  of  the  last  century  says  that  the  whole  population  of
the  province,  in  his  time,  could  be  estimated  at  no  more  than
3000  families,  and  these  were,  for  the  greater  part,  so  poor
that  they  were  scarcely  able  to  provide  for  themselves.  In
the  summer  the  heat  was  excessive,  and  the  blaze  of  the  sun
on  the  barren  ridges  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  town,  in-
supportable— wherefore  the  people  had  named  them  "  the  fire
mountains/*  ^

One  of  its  distinctive  features  is  the  depression,  to  some  150
or  200  feet  below  the  level  of  the  sea,  of  the  central  districts
of  Turfan  and  Eara-Ehoja.  This  is  one  of  the  driest  as  well  as
one  of  the  hottest  portions  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  and  the
one  where  the  greatest  ingenuity  of  the  inhabitants,  both
ancient  and  modern,  has  been  displayed  in  irrigating  the  land
so  as  to  render  it  habitable.  Mirza  Haidar  relates  the  personal
exertions  of  Yais  Ehan  (though  these  were  not  particularly
ingenious)  to  provide  water  for  the  cultivation  of  the  land ;  but
possibly  the  tradition  regarding  Yais  Ehan's  manual  labour  is
not  intended  to  be  taken  literally.  The  attention  of  modern
travellers  has  been  attracted  by  the  remains  of  aqueducts  and
systems  of  wells,  showing  how  dependent  the  population  was,
and  is,  on  artificial  irrigation.  Thus  Dr.  Begel  mentions  the
reservoirs  where  water  from  the  mountains  is  stored,  and  the
underground  canals  that  lead  it  to  the  town,  and  serve  also  as
dwelling-places  for  the  inhabitants,  during  the  fierce  heat  of
summer.^  Captain  F.  E.  Younghusband  found  the  modem  city
of  Turfan  surrounded  by  lines  of  pits  upwards  of  a  hundred
feet  in  depth— the  lines  extending  for  several  miles  into  the
desert.^

In  contrast  to  the  low-lying  group  of  oases  in  the  burning
desert,  and  among  the  '^  fiie  hills,"  there  rise  immediately  to
the  north,  the  eastern  ranges  of  the  Tian  Shan,  with  summits
reaching  to  12,000  or  14,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and  capped
with  eternal  snow.  One  of  these  is  the  famous  Bogdo-Uh  of
the  Mongols  and  Ealmaks,  or  the  Tengri-Tagh  of  the  Eirghiz ;
a  mountain  that,  for  ages  past,  has  been  held  sacred  by  the
pastoral  tribes  that  have  inhabited  the  regions  around,  and
whose  people  have  venerated  it,  no  doubt,  because  it  is  the

^  Bretschneider  ii.,  p.  202.

'  Petermann's  MiUheUwngm,  1880,  p.  205.

»  P.  R.  G,  S.,  1888,  p.  498.

Digitized  by

Google

or  Uigkuristdn.  113

central  and  most  commanding  feature  of  their  landscape^  and
the  parent  of  many  of  the  streams  that  bring  them  life.

Tety  in  spite  of  its  natural  drawbacks  of  heat  and  drought,
the  country  appears  to  have  supported,  at  times  during  its
history,  a  fairly  large  population,  and  to  have  been  one  of  the
chief  centres  of  the  Buddhists  in  the  earlier  centuries  of  the
Middle  Ages;  for  these  communities  have  left  many  relics
behind  them,  not  only  in  the  shape  of  buildings,  but  also  of
inscriptions  and  objecte  of  art.  The  Bu89ian  traveller  Qrijmailo
speaks  of  a  place  called  Singim,  lying  to  the  south  of  Lu-ko-tsin
(the  old  Liu-Cheng),^  where  '*  leaflets  enclosed  in  horn  and
wooden  boxes,"  and  bearing  ancient  writings  in  a  language
now  unknown,  are  still,  from  time  to  time,  unearthed ;  ^  while
Dr.  Begel,  again,  tells  us  of  vast  ruins  at  a  short  distance  to  the
south-east  of  modem  Eara-Ehoja  (the  Ho-Chao  of  the  Chinese),
to  which  he  gives  the  name  of  ^  Old  Turfan,'  but  which  are
more  likely  to  be  those  of  ancient  Eara-EJioja.  These  re-
mains  are  described  as  covering  a  large  tract  of  ground,  with
massive  walls,  gates  and  bastions,  besides  underground  passages,
vaulted  and  arched;  the  whole  bearing  witness  to  a  high
development  of  architectural  knowledge.  He  mentions  also
other  ruins  of  a  similar  kind,  lying  to  the  south  of  the  town  of
Turfan.^  From  the  Ming  history  too,  we  learn  that  to  the  east
of  Ho-Chao  there  stand  the  ruins  of  a  city  of  the  past,  which
are  regarded  as  remains  of  the  ancient  Uighur  capital,  Eao-
Chang,  and  with  regard  to  the  aspect  of  the  place  in  the  days
of  the  Mings,  the  author  adds  that  there  were  in  Ho-Chao
more  Buddhist  temples  than  dwelling-houses  of  the  people.^

With  the  gradual  break  up  of  the  power  of  the  Moghuls
towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  the  rise  of  the
Manchu  dynasty  in  China  in  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth,
the  Khanate  of  Uighuristan  fell  more  and  more  under  the
influence  of  China.  For  a  time,  during  the  eighteenth  century,
the  Ealmaks,  with  the  help  of  the  Tibetans,  obtained  a  hold
over  it,  but  this  was  of  short  duration,  and  on  their  final  sub-
jugation by  the  Manchus,  about  1755,  the  whole  country

^  In  Dr.  Regel'8  map  this  place  is  mar]ced  some  thirty-six  miles  to  the
Dorth-west  of  La-ko-tsiu  (Luktuchin),  an  instance  of  how  uncertain  our
information  is  regarding  this  region.  (See  map  in  Petermann,  1881,  Band  27,
No.  X.)

•  P.  B.  G.  8.,  1891,  p.  223.

«  Zoc  «•<.,  p.  207.

^  Bretschneider,  ii.,  p.  187.

h

Digitized  by

Google

114  The  Eastern  Khanate.

became  Chinese  territory.  In  the  interyaLs,  however,  several
petty  principalities  arose  within  its  limits,  and  some  of  these
appear  to  have  had  for  their  chiefs,  Mnsnlman  Ehans  who
claimed  descent  from  the  Moghnls.  It  was  probably  to  one  of
these  that  the  Manchn  emperor  Shnn-Chi  allnded,  when  in
his  rescript  of  1644  (mentioned  above)  he  spoke  of  his  tributary
as  a  descendant  of '  Cha-ha-tai.'

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Tdrikh-URashidi  and  after.  116

SECTION  VI.

THB  <' tIbIKH-I-RASHIDI  "  AND  ATTEB.

ElngdomB  are  shrunk  to  provinces,  and  ohaina
Clank  over  sceptred  cities;  nations  melt
From  power's  high  pinnacle,  when  they  have  felt
The  sunshine  for  a  while,  and  downward  go,
Like  lauwine  loosened  from  the  mountain's  helt.

--Cfhilde  Harold  iv.,  12.

What  is  chiefly  wanting  to  throw  light  on  Mirza  Haidar's
history,  is  the  narratire  of  some  judicious  European  trayeller—
a  contemporary,  or  nearly  so — who  might  hare  afforded  an
outside  view  of  the  state  of  Central  Asia  at  the  period  in
question,  and  thus  have  brought  some  of  our  author's  state-
ments into  touch  with  Western  aspects  of  history.  The  Tdrikhri^
Baskidi  refers,  for  the  most  part,  to  the  darkest  times  in  the
annals  of  the  inner  Asiatic  States :  when  strife  and  disorder
prerailedy  and  no  commanding  personality  or  stable  dynasty
existed  in  any  quarter,  to  check  confusion  and  form  a  centre  of
security.  In  the  days  of  Chingiz  and  his  immediate  successors,
Mongol  rule  was  supreme  over  the  greater  part  of  Central  Asia
and  China.  The  Khans  were  in  most  respects  uncouth  and
uncivilised,  but  their  govemment  was  a  yigorous  and  consistent
one  while  it  lasted.  They  had  confidence  in  their  strength,
and  were,  for  that  reason  probably,  liberal  and  tolerant  in  their
general  policy,  when  dealing  with  the  many  foreign  nations
with  whom  iLey  came  in  contact.  They  knew,  also,  how  to
ensure  order  in  their  own  possessions,  and  thus  attracted
envoys,  merchants,  and  missionaries,  who  have  been  the  means
(whatever  it  may  be  worth)  of  handing  them  down  in  history
with  perhaps  their  best  side  foremost.

The  decay  of  Mongol  authority  and  the  rise  of  Musulman
influence,  changed  all  this  in  the  more  westerly  regions,  while,
on  the  side  of  China,  the  accession  of  an  unwarlike  dynasty
tended  to  weakness  at  the  extremities  of  the  empire,  and  laid
open  large  tracts  of  the  interior  of  the  continent  to  the  misrule
of  unstable  and  lawless  tribes,  whose  chiefsi  while  unable  to

Tc  2

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

116  cThe  Tdrikh'i'Rashidi  and  dfter.

gain  permanency  for  themselyes,  repelled  all  interoonrse  with
civilised  Dations,  and  were  the  means  only  of  intensifying  the
barbarism  of  their  people. For  a  time,  towards  the  end  of  the
fourteenth  century  and  the  early  part  of  the  fifteenth,  the
ascendency  of  Timur  and  hi&  immediate  descendants  proved,  to
some  extent,  an  agency  for the  preservation  of  order,  and
perhaps  prevented  the  tide  of  nomad  misrule  from  overwhelm-
ing the  whole  of  the  best  parts  of  Central  Asia. Except  for  this
check,  it  is  probable  that  the  relapse  into  barbarism  would  have
been  even  more  lasting  than  it  was,  and  would  have  had  more  far-
reaching  results. But  the  times  of  Timur  and  Ulugh  Beg  were
stormy  ones,  and  had  little  of  the  steadying  influences  of  those
of  the  Mongols. Being  Musulman  rulers,  the  advance  of
Islam,  and  the  intolerance  that  always  goes  hand  in  hand  with
that  system  of  religion  and  government,  was  encouraged,  so
that  as  soon  as  the  secular  authority  of  the  Timuri  began  to
weaken,  the  religious  element  grew  stronger  and  came  to  the
front. Saints  and  religious  pretenders  increased  in  numbers,
and  nothing  is  more  clear  in  Mirza  Haidar's  history  than  the
influence  they  gained  in  all  political  affairs. Each  Eban  and
Chief,  besides  many  of  the  leading  Amits,  he  tells  us,  retained
at  their  headquarters  one  or  more  of  these  advisers ;  and  he
shows  how  in  his  own  case,  and  in  that  of  his  master,  Said
Khan,  they  gained  an  altogether  inordinate  degree  of  control
over  their  patrons. Even  such  barbarous  tyrants  as  Aba  Bakr
of  Eashghar,  and  the  most  blood-thirsty  of  the  Uzbeg  chiefs,
seem  to  have  honoured  them  with  superstitious  reverence,  and
to  have  accepted  their  guidance. It  was  in  deference,  appa-
rently, to  the  teachings  of  this  class,  and  under  the  pretence  of
religious  zeal,  that  all  the  worst  deeds  of  these  potentates  were
done — that  plundering  expeditions  assumed  the  name  of  holy
wars,  that  murders,  prompted  in  reality  by  fear  or  revenge,  were
committed  under  priestly  sanction,  and  that  wholesale  slavery
was  carried  on  as  a  meritorious  measure  of  conversion  from
infidelity.

Under  such  conditions  as  these  Central  Asia  must  have  been
impenetrable  to  European  travellers,  whether  missionaries  or
merchants,  while  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  that  any  European
monarch  would  depute  envoys  to  such  rulers  as  Shaibani  Ehan
or  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  as  they  had  done  to  the  Mongol  Khakans
and  to  Timur.  Even  when  these  personages  had  disappeared,
Uzbegs,  Uzbeg-Eazaks,  and  Eirghiz^  acting  under  chiefs  whose

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Tdrikk-i'Rashidi.  and  after:  117.

names  are  searcely  known  in  history  (but  who  were  to  the  full
as  mde  and  lawless),  were  always  at  war  with  each  other  or
with  their  neighbonrs.  They  kept  the  whole  of  the  country
north  of  the  Sir  and  the  Tian  Shan  in  a  state  of  tnmnlt,  and
consequently  closed  to  all  foreign  intercourse;  whilst  they
were,  besides,  the  means  of  weakening  the  governments — such
as  they  were — of  Ehorasan,  Transoxiana,  and  Alti-Sbahr,  and
assisted  in  cutting  them  off  from  the  West.  In  the  days  of  the
grandsons  and  early  successors  of  Chingiz  Ehan,  we  find  enyoys
like  Piano  Garpini  and  Bubruk  traversing  Asia  with  safety  from
the  Ural  to  the  northern  confines  of  Mongolia,  and  there  finding
Europeans  in  the  service  of  the  Ehakans ;  the  Polos  could  march
backwards  and  forwards  from  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Persian
Gulf,  to  China,  and  carry  with  them  their  wares  in  security ;
while  preaching  friars  and  missionaries,  such  as  Odoric  of
Pordenone,  John  of  Marignolli,  William  of  Modena,  and  their
companions,  were  tolerated  not  only  as  travellers,  but  as  pro-
pagandists.

These  are  only  a  few  among  those  whose  names  happen  to
have  been  preserved  in  documents  which  they,  or  their  friends,
left  behind  them,  and  which  have  survived  till  moderti  times.
But  for  one  who  committed  his  experiences  to  writing,  there
must  have  been  many  of  the  same  class  who  attempted  nothing
in  the  shape  of  a  record,  and  as  many  more  whose  journals,
letters,  or  what  not,  have  been  lost  during  the  intervening
ages,  or  which  have  not  yet  come  to  light.  In  short,  all  that
we  know  of  the  early  part  of  the  Mongol  period,  or  from  the
middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  to  nearly  the  middle  of  the
fourteenth,  points  to  order  and  security,  and  thus  to  a  constant
intercourse  with  the  West  and  Europe.  But  for  the  whole  of
what  may  be  called  the  authentic  period  of  Mirza  Haidar's
history— ^.6.,  from  the  second  half  of  the  fourteenth  century
.  until  it  closes  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth — not  a  single
instance  can  be  mentioned  of  a  European  having  visited  any
of  the  regions  of  Central  Asia,  east  of  Samarkand.

If  any  there  were,  no  vestige  of  them  has  survived ;  indeed,
.  the  party  of  missionaries,  twenty  in  number,  with  six  lay
companions,  who  had  been  sent  forth  from  Avignon  in  1333
under  Friar  INicholas,  as  Bishop  of  Gambulu  (^an  Baligh),
can  only  be  traced  as  far  as  Almaligh,  and  seems  never  to  have
been  heard  of  later  than  1338.^  The  latter  date  would  fall
»  See  Cathay,  pp.  172  and  188-9.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

118  The  Tdrikh^i-Rashidi  and  after.

within  the  reign  of  the  Ohaghatai  Ehan,  Bnzun,  and  at  a  time
when  no  Ehan  was  reigning  in  Mogholistan. As  far  as  can  be
gathered  from  the  imperfect  chronology  of  those  times,  as
furnished  by  Mirza  Haidar^s  history,  Isan  Bngha,  the  first
Moghnl  Ehan,  was  already  dead,  and  the  second,  Tughlnk
Timur,  had  not  yet  succeeded  him. Probably  Amir  Bulaji,
the  Dnghldt,  was  the  UluAegi,  or  chief  of  the  tribe,  and  he,  as
we  are  told,  was  a  Mnsulman  of  very  recent  date. Whether
the  disappearance  of  the  friars  had  any  connection  with  the
rise  of  Islam  in  the  country  at  that  time,  or  with  the  general
disorder  that  prevailed,  can  only  be  a  matter  of  conjecture.
All  that  is  certain  is  that  no  other  European  is  heard  of  in
Central  Asia  till  the  embassy  of  Buy  Gonzalez  Clayijo  from
Henry  III.  of  Spain  to  the  Court  of  Timur,  which  reached
Samarkand  in  1404,  or  about  a  year  before  Timur's  death. The
narrative  of  this  embassy,  however,  does  not  relate  to  the  part
of  Central  Asia  now  alluded  to,  but  to  the  centre  of  the  king-
doms, mentioned  above,  as  forming  a  barrier  against  the  mis-
rule of the  barbarous nomads farther east. Don Buy*s
narrative  therefore  cannot  be  utilised  to  throw  light  on  tiie
obscurities  of  Mirza  Haidar's  history,  for  all  that  the  Tdrikh-i-
Bashidi  relates  concerning  Transoxiana  is  amply  elucidated  by
other  Musulman  chronicles,  and  among  them  some  of  the
best. More  properly  it  should  be  said  that  from  the  middle
of  the  fourteenth  century  no  European  is  heard  of  in  eastern
Central  Asia  till  some  fifty  and  odd  years  after  the  death  of
Mirza  Haidar,  and  when  the  kingdom  of  the  Moghul  Ehans,
having  split  up  into  a  number  of  small  States,  was,  to  all
intents  and  purposes,  at  the  end  of  its  existence.

And  if  there  were  no  European  spectators  to  review  what
was  passing  in  eastern  Central  Asia,  neither  does  there  appear
to  have  been  any  Musulman  annalist  contemporary,  or  even
nearly  so,  with  our  author,  who  devoted  attention  to  the
Moghul  Khanates  during  this  dark  period.  At  any  rate,  I
have  met  with  no  writer  who  has  done  more  than  allude  to
them  casually.  Perhaps  the  book  which  casts  the  most  light
on  the  country  and  the  times,  is  the  Zafar-Ndma  of  Sharaf-ud-
Din  Ali,  Yazdi.  As  one  of  the  historians  of  Timur's  reign,  and
the  chronicler  of  his  campaigns  in  Moghulistan,  Sharaf-ud-Din
has  necessarily  become  an  authority  on  the  period  ending  with
the  date  of  Timur's  death,  although  he  had  never  set  himself
the  special  task  of  writing  a  history  of  Moghulistan  and  its

Digitized  by

Google

The  Tdrikh-i-Rashidi  and  after.  llfl

Khans.  He  merely  apeaks  of  those  against  whom  his  hero,
Timnr,  carried  on  campaigns  or  had  other  direct  dealings  with,
but  he  in  no  way  professes  to  write  the  story  of  the  Moghnls
for  any  period.  Thus,  his  narrative  ends  abont  a  hundred  and
twenty  years  before  Mirza  Haidar  was  of  an  age  to  begin
collecting  the  traditions,  which  constitute  the  groundwork  of
much  of  the  early  part  of  his  own  book ;  and  for  this  interval,
as  well  as  for  the  subsequent  quarter  of  a  century  (about)  over
which  his  life  extended,  it  may  be  said,  I  think,  that  he  is  the
sole  Mnsulman  authority  for  the  history  of  the  Moghals.
What  the  Chinese  have  recorded  is  brief  and  incidental  only,
as  we  have  seen.  Where,  however,  Sharaf-ud-Din  occupied
himself  with  Moghulistan  and  events  connected  with  it  in  the
neighbouring  regions,  Mirza  Haidar  has  given  no  account  of
his  own — he  trusted  entirely  to  the  Tazdi  author,  and  has
simply  copied  his  worL  The  brief  period  that  falls  between
the  opening  date  of  the  Tdrtih-i-Raahidi,  and  the  point  where
the  Zafar-Ndma  takes  up  the  narrative,  is  dealt  with  to  some
slight  extent  by  other  Musulman  authors,  though  Mirza  Haidar
gives  his  own  version  of  it  as  founded  on  the  traditions  of  his
ancestors.

It  may  be  regarded,  therefore,  that  his  history  is  the  only
work  we  have,  which  deals  with  the  period  subsequent  to  the
accounts  furnished  by  the  Zafar-Ndma^OT  from  the  early
years  of  the  fifteenth  century  to  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth ;
while  for  this  epoch  Mirza  Haidar's  evidence  is  unsupported  by
any  European  witness,  and  only  very  partially  attested  to  by
the  Chinese  annalists.  This  solitary,  individual  character  of
the  book  may  perhaps  enhance  its  value  as  a  history,  and
render  it  indispensable  as  a  reference,  for  the  interval  where  it
stands  alone ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  would  have  had
a  still  higher  value  had  it  been  illustrated  by  outside  commen-
tary, and  had  it  been  connected  with  Western  countries  and
events  by  a  link  of  foreign  testimony.  If,  in  other  words,  some
European  spectator,  regarding  matters  from  a  different  point
of  view  from  that  of  Mirza  Haidar,  had  done  for  him  what
Piano  Carpini  and  Bubruk  chanced  to  do  for  the  JaMi%  Kwhai
of  Juvaini,  or  Marco  Polo  for  the  field  covered  by  authors  who
treat  of  the  various  countries  of  Asia  in  the  thirteenth  and
fourteenth  centuries,  the  history  of  the  times  might  have  been
worked  out  to  better  purpose  than  is  the  case  now,  and  fewer
doubtful  points  left  unelucidated.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

120  The  Tdrikhri'Rashidi  and  after.

The  sequel  to  the  T&riJAri-'Ba^hiSi  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  a
snbject  which  should  enenmber  this  Introduction,  yet  it  may
be  worth  while  to  sketch  very  briefly  an  outline  of  what  took
place  in  Moghnlistan  and  Eastern  Tnrkistan  after  the  last
pages  of  the  book  were  written.  At  that  time  the  author  had
been  some  six  years  regent  of  Kashmir,  and  had  already  been
absent  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Moghuls  for  about  fourteen
years,  but  he  continued,  it  would  seem,  to  keep  up  communica-
tion with  his  friends  in  Eashghar  till  the  end,  and  evidently
took  a  deep  interest  in  all  that  was  happening  there.  So  much
was  this  the  case,  that  in  the  last  recorded  chapters  of  his  book/
though  he  omits  much  that  might  have  been  worthy  of  notice
regarding  the  events  that  were  passing  around  him  in  Kashmir,
he  gives  some  particulars  of  the  course  of  affairs  in  what  may
be  called  his  own  country.

At  the  time  when  he  left  it,  to  conduct  Said  Khan's  expedition
into  Ladak,  Tibet  and  Kashmir,  the  Kirghiz  and  the  Shaiban
Uzbegs,  who  were  the  most  inveterate  enemies  of  his  people,
had  been  so  far  checked  as  to  admit  of  the  Khan  turning  his
attention  to  other  quarters.  Still  they  were  only  checked  and
by  no  means  subdued :  in  fact,  their  power  was  increasing  as
that  of  the  Moghuls  declined,  and  very  shortly  after  Said
Khan's  eldest  son,  Bashid  Sultan,  came  into  possession  of  his
father's  kingdom,  wars  broke  out  afresh  with  the  Kirghiz,  and
this  time  also  with  the  Kazak  Uzbegs.  Again  the  Khan  is
said  to  have  been  victorious,  and  is  described  as  defeating  the
Uzbegs  in  more  than  one  great  battle ;  but  these  victories,  like
the  earlier  ones,  were  mere  checks  to  the  enemy,  and  it  seems
evident  that  during  Bashid's  reign  they  gained  in  strength  aild
became  practically  masters  of  the  greater  part,  if  not  the
whole,  of  Moghulistan ;  while  the  territory  of  the  Khanate
became  almost  entirely  confined  to  the  districts  of  Alti^Shahr.

This  Bashid  Sultan  (otherwise  Abdur  Bashid  Khan)  succeeded
Lis  father  in  1533,  and  long  outlasted  our  author,  for  the
length  of  his  reign  is  given  by  Amin  Ahmad  Bazi,  in  the  'Raft
Iklim^  as  thirty-three  liajra  years,  which  would  bring  the  date
of  his  death  to  973  h,,  or  1665-6  a.d.  As  Ahmad  Bazi's  account
of  the  dynasty,  though  exceedingly  brief,  is  the  only  one
that  approaches  a  consecutive  story,  it  may  be  followed  here.

• »  Viz..  in  Part  I.

*  For  fragments  of  the  Eafi  Iklim  see  Quatremere  in  Not.  et  FxtraiU^  xiv.,
pp.  474,  8eq,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

The  Tdrikh'i'Rashidi  and  after.  121

He  tells  ns  that  Bashid  had  thirteen  sons,  the  eldest  of  whom

was  named  Abdul  Latif. This  prince  is  extolled  for  his  bravery,

and  is  said  to  have  been  sent  several  times,  by  his  father,  into

Moghulistan,  to  oppose  the  Kirghiz  and  the  Eazaks,  and  that,

though  he  was  always  victorious  over  his  enemies,  he  lost  his

life  during  the  wars.* His  brother  Abdul  Earim,  who  was

reigning  in  1593,  when  Ahmad  Bazi  wrote,  is  also  praised  for

his  courage  and  accomplishments,  after  the  manner  of  Asiatic

writers. Abdul  Bahim,  the  third  son,  is  stated  to  have  left

the  country  without  his  father's  consent  and  to  have  led  an

expedition  into  Tibet,  where  he  was  killed ;  while  the  fourth^

named  Abdul  Aziz,  died  a  natural  death  at  the  age  of  sixteen.

The  fifth  son's  name  was  Adham  Sultan,  but  he  was  known  as

Sufi  Sultan. He  had  been  made  governor  of  Eashghar,  by  his

father,  and  retained  the  post  for  sixteen  years^  but  he  survived

the  latter  only  for  a  short  time. He  appears  to  have  been

succeeded  at  Eashghar  by  his  brother,  Muhammad  Sultan,  the

sixth  son  of  Bashid,  who  was  governor  of  that  place  at  the

date  of  the  completion  of  the  Eaft  Iklim^ The  seventh  was

called  Muhammad  Baki,  but  nothing  is  recorded  of  him. The

eighth  was Eoraish  Sultan, who  had dissensions  with  his

brother  Abdul  Earim,  and  retired to  India, where  he  was

received  with  every  honour,  presumably  by  the  Chaghatais.

He  left  two  children,  who  were  still  alive  when  Ahmad  Bazi

wrote  his  history. Of  the  five  remaining  sons  of  Bashid

Sultan nothing  is  related ; the names  of three  only are

^  Haidar  Kizi,  the  author  of  the  2Mdat-ut-Tacdrikhy  says  that  Alxiul
Latif  was  killed  at  the  age  of  twenty-uine  in  a  fight  with  '*  Tou  Nazar  Khan,
soyereigQ  of  the  Eaz&ks  and  Kirghiz."  The  date  is  quite  uncertain ;  hut  for
some  years  ending  in  1580  the  KazAk-Kirghiz  (or  White  Horde)  were  ruled
hy  one  Ak  Nazar,  who  is  perhaps  the  personage  intended  by  "  Tou  Nazar."
(See  Not  et  ExtraUs,  xiv.,  p.  511,  and  Howorth,  ii.,  pp.  632-34.)

'  Since  completing  this  Introduction  I  have  been  favoured,  through  the
good  ofiices  of  Capt.  F.  £•  Younghusband,  with  the  loan  of  some  valuable
papers  by  the  late  Mr.  R.  B.  Shaw,  among  which  I  find  the  followiog  note
referring  evidently  to  this  sixth  son  of  Abdur  Kasbid,  although  called  "  Khau  "
and  not  "  Sultan."  It  runs :  **  A  Yarligh^  or  title-deed,  is  still  in  existence
granted  by  Muhammad  Khan,  son  of  Abdul  Bashid,  as  reigning  sovereign,
which  confers  the  dignity  of  Tarkhan  or  '  franklin '  on  a  certain  Mhd.  Fazl  of
« Puski.*  It  is  dated  from  Kashghar  in  h.  996  =  a.d.  1587."  The  year  996,
however,  fell  chiefly  in  1588— ♦.«.,  from  Dec.  2, 1587,  to  Nov.  20, 1588.

Again,  with  reference  to  Abdiil  Rahim,  the  third  son,  Mr.  Shaw  has  noted
certain  title-deeds  which  indicate  that  he  was  governor  of  Tarkand  in  1011  H.
(1602-3  A.D.),  and  of  Kuchar  in  1017  (160»-9).  It  also  appears  from  these
notes,  that  several  grandsons  of  Abdur  Rashid  inherited  power  of  some  kind
in  the  various  districts  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  down  to  near  the  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century.  . -

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

122  The  Tdrikh-i-Raskidi  and  after.

mentioned,  as  XTlns  Sultan,  Arif  Sultan,  and  Adul  Bahim
Sultan,

From  this  meagre  account,  little  can  be  gathered  regarding
the  course  of  events  during  the  forty-four  years  that  followed
on  the  close  of  Mirza  Haidar's  work.^  The  only  two  points
that  seem  clear  are,  that  there  was  much  contention  with  the
Kirghiz  and  a  tendency  towards  subdiyision  of  the  Ehanate.
At  length,  however,  we  come  to  a  ray  of  light  (though,  alas,
too  late  to  be  of  great  value)  shed  by  a  European  traveller ;  for
the  next  glimpse  we  get  of  the  Moghuls  and  their  State  is  from
the  narrative  of  the  Portuguese  missionary  Benedict  Goes,
which  was  mentioned,  in  the  last  chapter,  as  having  been
partially  rescued  from  oblivion  by  Father  Matthew  Bicci  of  the
Jesuit  mission  at  Peking.

Gk)es,  in  seeking  a  road  to  China,  from  Agra  and  Lahore,
passed  through  Afghanistan  and  over  the  Pamirs,  and  reached
larkand  towards  the  end  of  1603.  Here  he  remained  for  about
a  year,  paying,  during  that  interval,  a  brief  visit  to  Ehotan.
After  this  he  proceeded,  with  many  delays,  eastward,  through
Aksu,  Ghalish  (the  modern  Karashahr)  Turfan  and  Eamul,  to
Suchou  on  the  western  frontier  of  China,  where  he  died  in
April  1607.  He  speaks  of  Yarkand  as  the  capital  of  the
kingdom  of  Eashghar,  and  it  was  there  that  resided  ^'the
king"  whose  name  was  Muhammad  Ehan.  How  far  this
Ehan's  authority  extended  is  nowhere  stated,  but  the  pass  with
which  he  furnished  Goes'  party,  for  their  journey  eastward,
seems  to  have  been  respected,  at  any  rate,  as  far  as  Euchar.
Aksu  is  particularly  mentioned  as  ^^  a  town  of  the  kingdom  of
Cascar"  (Eashghar),  and  the  chief  there  is  described  as  a
nephew  of  the  king's,  and  only  twelve  years  of  age ;  but  he  is
not  named.  The  territory  of  "  Cialis  "  (Chalish)  was  governed
by  an  illegitimate  son  of  the  king  of  Eashghar ;  but  here  again
the  traveller  furnishes  no  name,  and  gives  no  indication  of
whether  the  territory  was  a  dependency,  or  not,  of  Muhammad
Ehan's.  Similarly,  when  mentioning  Ehotan,  he  merely  alludes
to  ^'  the  prince  of  Quotan,"  but  gives  no  name  or  other  informa-
tion regarding  him.  Thus  the  only  personage  whose  name  can
be  identified  from  Goes*  narrative,  is  Muhammad  Ehan,  who

^  Dr.  Bellew'B  memoranda  derived  from  the  Tarikk-i-KhamjOLn  Chdghatdya
(a  book,  however,  which  he  says  he  had  not  seen),  and  from  personal  inquiries,
ai-e  contradictory  inter  te,  and  altogether  at  variance,  as  to  names,  with  tho
slight  information  afforded  by  Ahmad  Bazi  in  the  Baft  Iklim. —  Yarkand
Meportf  pp.  174-^.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Tdrtkhri'Rashidi  and  after.  XV&

appears  to  be  the  '  Muhammad  Sultan '  of  Ahmad  Bazi's  list,
and  the  sixth  son  of  Bashid  Sultan.  This,  at  any  rate,  seems
possible  as  fiir  as  dates  are  concerned,  though  Ahmad  Bazi
states  that  Abdul  Earim  (the  second  son  of  Bashid)  was  the
reigning  Khan  in  1593,  and  Muhammad  Sultan  only  governor
of  Eashghar — meaning,  presumably,  the  town  and  district  of
that  name,  but  not  the  entire  Elhanate.  Ten  years,  however,
had  passed  between  the  date  when  Ahmad  Bazi  wrote  and  that
of  Goes'  visit  to  the  country.  It  is  just  possible,  therefore,
that  Muhammad  Sultan  may  have  succeeded  his  elder  brother
during  the  interval,  and  in  that  case  he  would,  according  to
the  ordinary  custom,  have  added  the  title  of  "  Ehan "  to  his
name.

The  only  other  name  that  occurs  in  the  history  of  Eastern
Turkistan  as  that  of  a  ruler  of  Eashghar,  is  one  Ismail  Ehan,
who  was  apparently  the  last  of  all  the  Moghuls  to  fill  that
position,  if  indeed,  he  was  a  ruler,  or  '  Ehan,'  in  the  proper
sense  of  the  word.  It  would  seem  from  Mr.  Shaw's  fragmentary
papers,  mentioned  in  note  2,  p.  121,  above,  that  he  was  a  great-
grandson  of  Bashid  Sultan,  and  he  is  shown  in  this  degree,  in
the  genealogical  table  at  the  end  of  Section  11.  of  this  Introduc-
tion. He  must  have  lived  in  the  third  quarter  of  the  seventeenth
century  when  the  Ehwajas  held  the  real  and  practical  authority
in  the  State ;  while  at  a  somewhat  earlier  date  we  hear  of  one
Muhammad  Ehan  as  governor  at  Tarkand,  AbduUa  at  Ehotan,
Ehudabanda  at  Aksu,  and  a  certain  Abdur  Bashid  in  the  dis-
tricts of  Euchar  and  Turfan.^  But  how  these  personages
were  descended  we  are  not  told.  It  is  probable  that  all  were
grandsons  or  great-grandsons  of  Bashid  Saltan,  but  it  cannot
be  so  said  for  certain.

Of  the  Eastern  Elhanate,  or  Uighuristan,  nothing  is  to  be
gleaned  from  any  Musulman  author  accessible  to  me,  subse-
quent to  the  date  of  Mirza  Haidar's  history.  A  short  frag-
ment regarding  the  succession  of  the  Ehans,  however,  is  to
be  found  in  Dr.  Bretschneider's  extracts  from  the  Chinese
history  of  the  Mings.  It  is  related  there  that  on  Mansur
Ehan's  death,  in  1545,  he  designated  his  eldest  son,  Sha  (Shah
Ehan),  to  be  his  successor ;  but  Sha's  brother  Ma-hei-ma
(Muhammad)  laid  claim  to  the  throne,  and  though  he  did  not

^  See  Bellew,  Ywhmi  Bepori^  p.  176,  and  Yali-Khanoff  in  ButaianB  in  G,
Arna^  p.  169.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

124  The  Tdrikh'i'Rashidi  and  after.

Buoceed  in  obtaining  it,  took  possession  of  a  part  of  Hami — a.
province  which  was  included  in  his  brother's  dominions.^
Afterwards  he  allied  himself  with  the  "  Wa-la "  (the  Oirat
or  Kidmaks),  and  with  their  assistance  attacked  Shah  Ehan.

No  date  for  this  last  event  is  given,  nor  is  the  result  of  the
attack  mentioned ;  it  is  not  clear,  therefore,  whether  he  gained
the  throne  by  force,  or  by  what  means.  All  that  is  vouchsafed
is  that  Shah  Ehan  died  in  1570,  and  was  succeeded  on  '*  the
throne  of  Tulufan  "  (Turfan)  by  Ma-hei-ma,  when  three  other
brothers  revolted  against  him.  One  of  these  was  named  So-fei
(Sufi),  of  whom  it  is  recorded  that  he  "  aspired  to  the  crown,"
called  himself  Su-tan  (Sultan),  and  that  he  sent  an  embassy  to
China.'

As  the  Khans  and  their  descendants  tottered  to  their  fall,  the
Kirghiz  began  to  descend  into  the  lowlands  of  Alti-Shahr  and  in-
terfere, directly,  in  the  affairs  of  their  old  opponents.  They  were,
in  some  cases,  the  supporters  of  influential  priests,  or  Khwajas,
who  were  rapidly  acquiring  an  influence  that  was  to  gain  for
them  the  sovereign  power  in  the  country ;  but  without  attempt-
ing here  to  follow  all  the  gradual  changes  that  brought  about
the  establishment  of  these  new  rulers,  it  maybe  said  generally,
that  before  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  priests
and  saintly  teachers,  spoken  of  above,  had  acquired  so  great  an
authority,  that  the  governing  power  of  the  country  was  rapidly
^passing  into  their  hands.  Their  ascendency  was  the  direct
result  of  the  encouragement  they  had  received,  for  some  genera-
tions past,  from  the  superstitious  Khans  and  Amirs  of  all  the
surrounding  countries,  and  it  is  hardly  a  matter  for  surprise
that  their  power,  as  a  class,  should  develop,  or  if,  when  the
authority  of  the  dynastic  chiefs  in  Eastern  Tarkistan  was
decaying,  they  should  take  advantage  of  the  situation  to  build
up  a  government  of  their  own.  As  Khwajas,  or  reputed  descen-
dants of  the  Prophet,  their  lineage  was  undeniable,  and  ranked,
in  the  estimation  of  Musulman  zealots,  far  in  advance  of  that
of  any  of  the  Khans  or  Sultans  who  held  t^he  secular  power.

*  Hanii  remained  dependent  on  Turfan  till  the  year  1696,  when,  according
to  the  Chinese  annals  of  the  present  dynasty,  the  chief  of  tlie  province,  named
Beg  Abdullah,  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  the  Emperor  Kang-hi  {Mtd,
BeaearcheSf  iL,  p.  182).

^  Ih,  ii.,  p.  198.  If  the  dates  are  correct,  thia  Sufi  cannot  be  the  persona^
of  that  name  mentioned  in  the  list  of  Ahmad  Bdzi,  as  fifth  son  of  Kashid ;  for
the  Sufi  of  the  list  is  reported  to  have  died  only  a  short  time  after  his  father
— <.c.,  shortly  after  1566.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Tdrikh'i'Rashidi  and  after.  126

fGThey  had  no  special  nationality,  bnt  formed  a  class  or  brother-
hood of  devotees,  banded  together  in  aim  and  design,  though
wandering  or  dwelling,  separately,  in  all  the  conntries  of  Central
Asia. They  became  expounders  of  the  Musulman  law,  and  the
executive  authority  (such  as  it  was).dare  not  oppose  them ;  they
were  also  workers  of  miracles  and  healers  of  the  sick,  and  in
these  capacities  obtained  a  hold  over  the  minds  of  the  mass  of
the  people. "  Their  tombs,"  Dr.  Bellew  tells  us,  "  were  con-
'  verted  into  sacred  shrines  endowed  with  all  sorts  of  munificent
virtues.  .  Bich  grants  of  land  were  apportioned  by  Successive
>  Ehans  for  the  support  of  their  establishments,  whose  presiding
elders  in  return  dispensed,  in  the  name  of  their  patron  saint,
.endless  favours  and  bounties  to  an  illiterate  and  superstitious
peasantry/'^

The  Ehwajas,  in  short,  were  a  class  that  had  been  evolved  by
all  that  had  gone  before,  during  the  rule  of  the  Moghul  Ehans
— a  rule  that  had  begun  with  the  raiding  and  lawlessness  of
irresponsible  nomads,  and  had  ended  with  the .  hypocrisy  and
fanaticism  that  usually  mark  a  people  incapable  of  attaining  to
any  degree  of  civilipation.  In  the  Ehwdjas  they  unconsciously
raised  up  rivals  who  were  to  displace  their  house,  while  these,
within  little  over  a  century,  had,  for  much  the  same  reasons  as
their  predecessors,  to  quit  the  stage  and  make  room  for  others.
They  had  scarcely  begun  to  wield  the  power  that  had  fallen
into  their  hands  when,  as  is  the  case  with  most  governments
and  dynasties  of  Asia,  discord  began  to  spring  up  among  them,
and  their  brotherhood  was  divided  into  two  opposing  camps.
One  of  these  was  known  as  the  party  of  the  ''  White  Moun-
tain," and  the  other  as  that  of  the  '*  Black  Mountain  " — the
'  Ak-tdghlik  and  the  Ka/rortdgKlik.  Their  feuds  were  at  first
based  on  religious  dissensions,  but  this  rendered  them  none  the
less  bitter:  they  soon  developed  into  political  strife,  which
woald  speedily  have  brought  about  the  end  of  their  rule,  but
for  the  support  that  both  parties  obtained  from  the  Kirghiz.
The  White  mountaineers  summoned  the  nomad  clans  from
Moghulistan,  while  the  Black  mountaineers  called  in  those
from  the  Pamir  region ;  and  though  the  White  party,  under  the
leadership  of  the  celebrated  saint,  Ehwdja  Hid&yat  XJllah  (better
known  as  Hazrat  Afak)  obtained  the  upper,  hand  for  a  time
towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  their  perpetual
contentions  resulted  in  the  entire  country  falling  first  into  the
»  YarhcMd  Biport,  p.  174.

Digitized  by

Google

126  The  Tdrikh'uRashidi  and  after.

hands  of  the  Ealm&ks,  and  finally  passing  to  the  nile  of  the
Manchn  Emperors  of  China.

Thus  the  Kirghiz  were  amply  avenged  on  their  ancient
enemies,  and  began  to  form  the  great  confederacies  that  have
endnred  to  the  present  day.

They  and  their  kinsmen,  the  Eaz&ks,  not  only  prospered  in
their  own  way,  bnt  mnltiplied,  so  that  at  the  present  time  they
represent  a  large  section  of  the  population  in  the  Bnssian
Asiatic  dominions.  Both  families  are  found  spread  oyer  the
whole  of  the  provinces  of  Central  Asia,  north  of  the  Sir  and
the  western  Tian  Shan,  in  large,  if  somewhat  scattered,  com-
munities. Thus,  of  the  Kirghiz  proper  (the  ^  Black,'  or  '  Hill,*
Kirghiz  of  the  Bussians),  the  estimates  compiled  by  Mr.  P.
Lerch  in  1873,  from  various  sources,  show  a  total  of  about
176,000  persons,^  while  a  good  many  more,  for  whom  no
numerical  estimate  is  forthcoming,  are  known  to  exist  in  the
Chinese  provinces  to  the  east  of  the  Bussian  possessions,  and
in  the  hill  tracts  of  Southern  Fargh&na  and  the  Pamirs.
The  Kaz^ks — the  XJzbeg-Kazak  of  Mirza  Haidar — are  even  more
numerous.  For  those  who  are  still  nomadic  in  their  mode  of
life,  sufiBiciently  ample  statistics  were  available,  about  twenty
years  ago,  to  enable  Mr.  Lerch  to  sum  up  their  total  numbers,
in  Bussian  territory,  as  some  867,000  souls.  But  to  this
section  also,  some  addition  would  have  to  be  made  for  com-
munities living  in  Chinese  territory.  Moreover,  the  figures
furnished  refer  only  to  the  nomads  among  both  the  Kazak  and
the  so-called  Kirghiz  proper.  There  are,  however,  sections  of
settled  Kazaks  who  are  fairly  numerous  in  the  Zard&han  valley,
Kurama,  etc.,  but  they  are  so  much  intermingled  with  the
Uzbegs  and  Tajiks  of  those  regions,  that  their  strength  was  not
(at  the  time  Mr.  Lerch  wrote)  to  be  ascertained  with  any  degree
of  certainty.*

At  the  same  time  the  other  tribal  enemies  of  the  Moghuls —
the  Uzbegs  proper — ^who  had  become  established  in  Trans-
oxiana  since  the  early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  continued
their  sway  under  the  dynasty  then  founded,  down  to  a  date
about  coeval  with  the  break  up  of  the  Moghul  kingdom ;  while,
indirectly  and  after  many  vicissitudes,  they  gave  rise  to  the
line  of  Bokhara  Khans  now  reigning. Mirza  Haidar's  own

^  This  figure  does  not  include  those  dwelling  in  the  Yemoye  circle. For
these  no  estimates  were  obtainable.
*  8ee  Bwsw^  Bevtie^  1872,  Hoft  i.,  pp.  26-9  and  39,

Digitized  by

Google

The  Tdrikh-i'Raskidi  and  after.  127

snccessors  in  Eashmir  are,  for  some  thirty-fiye  years  subsequent
to  his  time,  to  be  found  among  the  members  of  the  families,  to
whose  weakness  and  incapacity  he  owed  his  own  successful
regency  of  nearly  eleven  years — a  term  not  often  reached,  about
that  period,  by  any  of  the  native  chiefs.  After  his  death,  the
same  internal  strUe  and  disorder  prevailed,  that  had  been
habitual  for  many  years  before  his  government  began,  so  that
no  less  than  eight  kings  are  recorded  to  have  reigned  between
the  years  1551  and  1587,  when  Akbar  stepped  in  and  finally
annexed  the  country  to  the  dominions  of  tiie  Ohaghatais  in
India.

A  small  residue  of  the  Moghuls  still  exists  among  the  Turki
inhabitants  of  Eastern  Turkistan.  The  number  is  trifling
indeed,  and  they  are  scattered  chiefly  among  the  northern
towns,  where,  however,  they  form  no  separate  communities ;  on
the  contrary,  they  are  so  much  mixed  in  blood  that  no  one  but
their  immediate  neighbours  and  associates  are  aware  of  any
difference  in  their  origin  to  that  of  the  people  around  them.
Still,  a  difference  is  so  far  acknowledged  that  they  are  called,
and  call  themselves,  Moghuls.  In  this  capacity  it  must  be
said,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Bellew,  that  they  enjoy
very  little  respect :  rather  they  are  given  over  to  the  meanest
modes  of  life,  and  are  looked  down  upon  as  an  inferior  people.^
It  is  possible  that  some  may  also  exist  in  Western  Turkistan,
Fargh&na  or  Transoxiana,  but  I  know  of  no  mention  of  them
in  these  countries.  In  the  northern  Hazara  country,  and  on
the  Indian  frontier  of  Afghanistan  (among  the  divisions  of  the
Afridis)  we  find  sub-tribes  still  fiourishing  under  the  name  of
Mongol  or  Mongol,  who.  Sir  H.  Howorth  believes,  may  very
possibly  be  remnants  of  the  Mongols,  and  may  thus  represent
the  Moghuls  of  a  later  date.^  Just  as  the  Hazaras  still  form  a
people  apart,  having  descended  from  Mongol  invaders  of  the
country  they  now  inhabit,  it  may  also  be  that  the  Mangals  are
a  relic  of  some  other  Mongolian  army  which  overran  Afghani-
stan in  the  days  of  Ghingiz  or  one  of  his  successors.  But
whether  the  features  and  language  of  the  Mangals  show  any
trace  of  such  an  origin,  I  have  no  information.

^  Tarkand  Bepari,  pn.  81, 174.

*  Dr.  Bellew  was  of  the  eame  opinion.  He  mentions  an  early  conqnest  of
the  Afridi  country  by  **  Turkish  tribes ;"  and  speaks  of  the  Mangals  as  a
"Mougol  or  Cbaghatai-Turk  clan,"  who  became  ^  settled  about  the  P^ivar,
and  the  head  waters  of  the  Kurram  river."  (See  Baoes  of  J/ghanUUm,
pp.  78-9,  and  102.

Digitized  by

Google

128  The  Tdrikh-i-Rashidi  and  after.

Perhaps  it  may  be  in  India  that  Moghtds,  of  one  yariety  or
another,  are  more  nnmerously  represented  than  elsewhere  lit
the  present  day.  In  the  coarse  of  the  operations  connected
with  the  compilation  of  the  censns  of  the  Punjab,  in  1881,  Mr.
Denzil  Ibbetson  found  large  numbers  of  people  claiming  the
name  of  Moghul,  many  of  whom,  though  perhaps  descended
from  the  tribesmen  who  entered  India  at  the  time  of  Baber  or
Humayun,  can  scarcely  owe  their  origin  to  the  Moghuls  of
Moghulistan^-the  true  Moghul  TRva  of  Mirza  Haidar.  Such  as
they  are,  however,  they  are  chiefly  to  be  found  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Delhi,  in  the  Bawal  Pindi  diyision,  and  ^qu  the
routes  that  cross  the  northern  frontiers  of  the  province..  In
these  localities  they  are  divided  into  numerous  sub-tribes,  but
of  real  Moghuls  among  them,  only  those  calling  themselves
Ghaghatai  and  Barlas  seem  to  be  numerously  represented.  For
the  former,  Mr.  Ibbetson  gives  23,593  as  the  total  number,  and
of  the  latter  12,137.^  But  how  far  they  have  retained  the
characteristics  of  their  race,  or  whether,  in  their  changed  con-
dition, they  would  be  recognised  as  the  blood  relations  of
the  present  Mongols  of  Mongolia,  or  even  of  the  Hazaras  of
Afghanistan,  there  is  nothing  to  show.  Bill,  something  of  the
Mongoloid  type  must  remain,  it  would  seem,  to  support  their
individuality  as  a  tribe.

On  the  frontiers  of  India,  apparently,  as  in  Eastern  Turkistan,
the  descendants  of  the  Moghuls  do  not  bear  a  good  name ;  but
with  the  people  of  a  tribe  that  has  fallen  from  a  position  of
supremacy,  and  one  that  at  no  time  has  had  any  very  high  qualities
to  recommend  it,  this  is  perhaps  not  surprising.  The  national
character  of  a  community  would  naturally  degenerate  with  the
loss  of  political  and  military  power,  and  in  the  absence  of  a
consciousness  among  its  members,  that  they  belonged  to  a  ruling
caste.  The  more  remarkable  circumstance  is  that  the  race,
when  transplanted  to  a  foreign  country  as  populous  as  India,
should  have  endured  at  all,  and  that  it  should  still  show  any
signs  of  individuality.  The  fact  that  Moghuls  of  any  variety
should  yet  remain  as  a  people,  is  one  more  piece  of  evidence
which  miiy  be  added  to  those  mentioned  in  Section  lY.  abovB,
that  many  hundreds  of  years  are  needed  to  eradicate  the  Mongol
type,  or  to  blot  out  its  racial  affinities,  even  when  overlaid  by
the  superior  numbers  of  an  alien  nation.

1  TMfnjah  Census  Report,  1881, !.,  p.  277.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

PROLOGUE.

IN  THE  NAME  OF  GOD,  THE  MERCIFUL,  THE  CLEMENT!

It  is  fitting  that  the  opening  of  a  royal  history,  and  the  beginning
of  a  book  of  victory  and  good  fortune,  should  be  the  praise  and
glory  of  that  Monarch,  the  length  and  breadth  of  whose  kingdom,
(according  to  the  words :  **  Say — ^verily  God  is  the  holder  of  the
Empire,")  is  defended  and  preserved  from  change  and  decay,  and
whose  palace  is  securely  guarded  from  the  evil  of  destruction
and  ruin.

^'He  setteth  upon  the  throne  whomsoever  He  will,"  is  a
testimony  to  His  glorious  unity;  "He  deposes  whomsoever  He
will,"  is  a  proof  of  the  permanence  of  His  kingdom.

[Verses];  And  all  that  is  'twixt  earth  and  sky,

The  sun  and  moon,  the  east  and  west ;
From  India  to  far  Turkistan,
The  mighty  conquerors  of  the  earth
Have  girt  the  belt  of  service  on,
Prepared  to  do  their  Lord's  behest.

The  splendour  of  His  greatness  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the
contentions  of  friends  or  adversaries,  and  the  glory  of  His
omnipotence  is  exempt  from  the  pretentious  claims  of  passionate
and  dissentient  men.

The  kings  of  the  earth  place  the  forehead  of  helplessness  and
impotence  upon  the  dust  of  submission  and  humility,  at  the  palace
of  His  glory ;  and  the  Ehakans,  powerful  as  the  heavens,  standing
upon  the  threshold  of  the  portal  of  His  divinity,  stretch  forth  the
hand  of  humility,  supplication  and  devotion.

'*  Amma  had"  Let  it  not  be  concealed  from  the  minds  of  the
wise  that  the  Koran,  which  is  the  greatest  of  the  miracles  of
Muhammad,  is  divided  into  three  sections.  The  first  contains  the
declaration  of  the  Unity  of  Qod ;  the  second  the  statutes  of  the
Holy  Law  of  Muhammad,  and  the  third  historical  matter,  such  as
the  lives  of  the  Prophets.  Thus,  we  see,  one-third  of  this  book
(none  but  the  clean  shall  touch  it)  is  intended  to  teach  the  histoiy

Digitized  by

Google

2  Prologue.

of  past  generations;  and  therein  lies  the  clearest  proof  of  the
excellence  of  the  science  of  history.  Moreover,  all  are  agreed
concerning  the  utility  of  this  science ;  and  most  nations,  nay,  all
the  peoples  of  the  world,  have  studied  it,  and  have  collected  and
handed  down  traditions  of  their  forefathers,  of  which  they  give
ample  proofs  and  upon  which  they  rely.

For  instance,  the  Turks,  in  their  literary  compositions  and  in
their  transaction  of  business,  as  well  as  in  their  ordinary  intercourse,
employ  a  speech  based  upon  the  traditions  and  chronicles  of  their
ancestors.

Consequently  I,  the  least  of  God's  servants,  Muhammad  Haidar,
son  of  Muhammad  Husain  Eurk4n — known  familiarly  as  Mirza
Haidar — notwithstanding  my  ignorance  and  want  of  skill,  felt  it
my  duty  to  undertake  this  difficiQt  task.  For  much  time  has
already  passed  since  the  Ehdkins  of  the  Moghuls  were  driven
from  the  towns  of  the  civilised  world,  and  have  had  to  content
themselves  with  dwellings  in  the  desei-t.  On  this  account  they
have  written  no  history  of  themselves,  but  base  their  ancestral
records  upon  oral  tradition.

At  this  present  date— 951  [1544  A.D.] — there  remains  not  one
among  them  who  knows  these  traditions,  and  my  boldness  in
attempting  this  difficult  work  is  due  to  the  consideration  that,
did  I  not  make  the  venture,  the  story  of  the  Moghul  Khdkans
would  be  obliterated  from  the  pages  of  the  world's  history.  The
more  I  considered  the  matter,  the  more  conscious  I  became  of  my
inability  to  write  an  elegant  and  ornate  preface.  [Verses.]  .  .  .
For  this  reason,  and  in  order  to  give  my  book  an  auspicious
opening,  I  transcribed  the  Prolegomena  to  the  Zafar-Ndma  of
Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Yazdi,  as  far  as  the  '' Amma  had:'  This  Zafar-
Ndma  contains  a  history  of  the  Moghuls  and  their  Eh&kdns,  from
Chingiz  Eh4n  to  Tughluk  Timur  Kh4n,  but  of  the  successors  of
this  latter  no  mention  is  made,  except  where  the  context  required  it.

I  began  my  history  with  the  reign  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khdn  for
three  reasons.  (1.)  That  which  had  happened  before  the  time  of
Tughluk  Timur  Khdn  had  been  already  recorded,  but  no  account
had  been  written  of  events  which  took  place  after  his  time,  and
which,  not  being  contained  in  any  history,  ought  to  be  written.
But  to  write  of  the  times  preceding  Tughluk  Timur  Khdn,  when
we  have  already  that  other  excellent  history,  the  Zafar-Ndma^
would  be  like  digging  a  well  on  the  margin  of  the  Euphrates.
(2.)  None  of  his  successors  have  attained  to  so  great  a  degree  of
pre-eminence,  or  acquired  so  extensive  a  dominion,  as  Tughluk
Timur  Khan.  (3.)  He  was  one  of  the  Moghul  Khakdns  who  were
converted  to  Islam,  and  during  his  reign  the  Moghuls,  having
withdrawn  their  necks  from  the  yoke  of  Unbelief,  entered  into  that
state  of  freedom  in  Islam  enjoyed  by  all  Musulmans. For  these

Digitized  by

Google

Contents  of  tlie  Book.  3

reasons,  this  history  is  dedicated  to  his  illustiious  name  and  his
most  noble  memory.

And  for  three  chief  reasons,  out  of  many,  I  have  called  this  book
the  rartifcA-t-fiflwWdt  /

1.  It  was  ManUnd  Arshad-ud-Din  who  converted  Tughluk  Timtir
to  Isldm,  as  will  be  recounted  hereafter.

2.  Although  before  the  time  of  Tughluk  Timur,  Barak  Ehdn,
and  after  Barak  Ehdn,  Eabak  Ehdn,  had  become  Musulmdns,
neither  these  Ehdkdns  nor  the  Moghul  people  had  had  a  knowledge
of  the  12u«At2,  or  *'  True  Road  to  Salvation,"  but  their  natures  had
remained  base,  and  they  had  continued  in  the  road  that  leads  to
Hell.  But  a  full  knowledge  of  the  BrnM  fell  to  the  lot  of  the
enlightened  Tughluk  Timur  and  his  happy  people.  And  inasmuch
as  the  beginning  of  this  history  will  deal  with  this  matter,  the
suitability  of  the  title  Bashidi  is  evident.

3.  Since  at  the  present  date,  Abdur  Eashid,  the  last  of  the
Moghul  Ehdkdns,  is  reigning,  and  since  this  book  has  been
dedicated  to,  and  written  for,  him,  the  reason  for  the  title,  Tdrikh-
i'Bashidi  is  [still  more]  apparent.

CONTENTS  OF  THIS  BOOE.

It  is  divided  into  two  Parts  [Daftar].

Part  I. — From  the  beginning  of  tl^e  reign  of  Tughluk  Timur
Ehdn  to  the  time  of  Abdur  Rashid,  who  is  still  reigning.

Part  IL — Concerning  myself  and  what  I  have  seen  and  known
of  the  Sultdns  and  Ehdkdns  of  the  Uzbeg,  the  Chaghatdi  and
others ;  and,  in  fact,  everything  that  happened  during  my  lifetime.

I  thank  God  that  He  has,  in  His  graoiousness,  made  me  absolutely
independent  of  the  Moghuls.  For  though  the  Ehdkdns  of  that
tribe  are  of  my  own  race,  nay,  are  my  own  cousins,  I  received  very
bad  treatment  at  their  hands — a  matter  of  which  I  shall  speak  in
the  Second  Part.
[Verses.]  ....

The  ancestors  of  my  mother  and  of  my  father's  mother  have,  for
several  generations  back,  been  related,  on  the  paternal  side,  to  the
Ehdkdns.  At  the  age  of  sixteen,^  having  just  been  left  an  orphan,
I  went  to  the  court  of  Sultan  Said  Ehdn,  who  by  his  fatherly
kindness,  greatly  alleviated  my  giief;  he  showed  me  so  much
attention  and  favour,  that  I  became  an  object  of  envy  to  his
brothers  and  sons.  I  passed  twenty-four  years  at  his  court,  living
a  life  of  luxury  and  splendour,  and  acquiring,  under  his  instruction
and  guidance,  many  accomplishments  and  much  learning. In  the

*  It  was  in  920  h.,  or  1514  a.d.,  that  the  author  firat  joined  Sultftn  Said  Ehan,
of  K&shghar.

11  2

Digitized  by

Google

4  Contents  of  the  Book.

arts  of  calligraphy,  reading,  making  verses,  epistolary  style  [tiwM]
painting  and  illuminating  I  became  not  only  distinguished,  but  a
past-master.  Likewise  in  such  crafts  as  seal-engraving,  jeweller's
and  goldsmith's  work,  saddlery  and  armour  making ;  also  in  the
construction  of  arrows,  spear-heads  and  knives,  gilding  and  many
other  things  which  it  would  take  too  long  to  enumerate :  in  all  of
these,  the  masters  of  each  could  teach  me  no  more.  And  this  was
the  outcome  of  the  care  and  attention  of  the  Ehan.  Then  again  in
the  affairs  of  the  State,  in  important  transactions,  in  planning
campaigns  and  forays  \Kazak%\^  in  archery,  in  hunting,  in  the
training  of  falcons  and  in  everything  that  is  useful  in  the  government
of  a  kingdom,  the  Khan  was  my  instructor  and  patron.  Indeed,  in
most  of  the  above-mentioned  pursuits  and  studies  ho  was  my
only  instructor.

Although  I  have  received  from  his  sons  the  worst  possible  treat-
ment, I  will  return  them  good  for  evil ;  and  whether  the  £h4n's
son  accept  this  small  work  or  reject  it,  I  will,  all  the  same,  dedicate
it  to  him,  in  order  that  he  may  have  a  remembrance  of  me  and  that
the  world  may  have  a  remembrance  of  him.  And  the  title  of  this
book  is  derived  from  his  illustrious  name,  which  is:  Khakdn
bin  ulkh&kdn  ussultan  bin  ussult4n  almutawakkil  ala  Ullah  al
Malik  Almumin  abul  muzaffar  Abd-ur-Bashid  Kh&n  bin  Sultan
almabrur,  wa  Kh4kan  almaghfur  assaid  ash-shahid  abul  Fath
SultAn  Said  Khan. [Verses.]  .  .  .

«  «  «  «  «

Here  are  omitted  one  or  two  Muhammadan  legends  such  as  are  usually  found
in  Masulman  histories,  and  a  quotation  from  the  Kash/'nl-HuJub.  They  liave  no
liearing  on  the  author*8  history.

Digitized  by

Google

TAEIKH-I-EASHIDI.

PART  L

CHAPTER  I.

BEGINNING OF  THE  TABlKH-1-RASHlDl.

One  day  when  Tughluk  Timur  Ehan  was  feeding  hin  dogs  witk
Mwine*8  flesh,  Shaikh  Jamdl-nd-Din  was  brought  into  his  presence.
The  Khan  said  to  the  Shaikh :  "  Are  you  better  than  this  dog  or
is  the  dog  better  than  you?"  The  Shaikh  replied :  "If  I  have
faith  I  am  the  better  of  the  two,  but  if  I  have  no  faith  this  dog  is
better  than  I  am."  The  Khan  was  much  impressed  by  these
words,  and  a  great  love  for  IsUm  took  possession  of  his  heart.

Tughluk  Timur  Khan  was  the  son  of  Isan  Bugha  Khan,  son  of
Dava,  son  of  Barak  Kh£n,  son  of  Kara  Isud,  son  of  Mutukau,  son
of  Chaghatdi  Khan,  son  of  Chingiz  Kh4n,  son  of  Yusukai,  son  of
Birtdn,  son  of  Kabal,  son  of  Tumana,  son  of  Baisanghar,  son  of
Kaidu,  son  of  Dutumanin,  son  of  Buka,  son  of  Burunjar  Khan,  son
of  Alankua  Kurkluk  (which  means  an  immaculate  woman).  Of
her  the  Prolegomena  of  the  Zafar-Ndma  tells  the  following  story  :
One  day  a  brilliant  light  shone  into  her  mouth,  and  thereupon  she
felt  within  her  a  kind  of  pregnancy — just  in  the  way  that  Miriam,
the  daughter  of  Omran,  became  pregnant  by  means  of  the  breath  of
Gabriel.  And  neither  of  these  things  is  beyond  the  power  of  God.
[Verses.]  .  .  .

The  object  of  this  book  is  not  to  tell  such  tales  as  these,  but
simply  to  point  out  that  Burunjar  Kh4n  was  bom  of  his  mother,
without  a  father.  All  histories  trace  the  genealogy  of  his  mother,
Al^nkud  Kurkluk,  back  to  Japhet  son  of  Noah  (upon  them  be
peace),  and  detailed  accounts  of  all  her  ancestors  are  given  in  these
histories.  But  I  have  not  accorded  them  a  place  in  this  one,  for  it
would  take  too  long;  moreover,  I  have,  in  this  work,  limited  my
subject  to  events  that  took  place  after  the  conversion  to  Islam  of
the  Moghuls,  and  have  said  nothing  of  their  history  previous
to  that  time.

Digitized  by

Google

History  of  Tughluk  Timur.

CHAFPEE  11.

THE EARLY HISTORY  OF TUGHLUK  TIMUR.

I  HAVE  heard  from  trustworthy  Moghul  sources  (and  my  father
and  my  uncle  used  also  to  relate)  that  Isdn  Bugh&  Khdn,^  the
father  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan,  had  for  his  favourite  wife  a  certain
Satilmish  Khatun ;  while  he  had  also  another  wife  whose  name
was  Manlik.  Now  the  Khan  had  no  children,  and  Satilmish
Khatun  was  barren.  The  Khan,  on  a  certain  occasion,  went  on
an  expedition  with  his  army.  According  to  an  old  Moghul
custom,  the  favourite  wife  has  the  allotment  and  disposal  of  a
man's  wives,  keeping  back  or  giving  him  whichever  of  them  she
pleases.  Satilmish  Khdtun  learnt  that  Manlik  was  with  child  by
the  Khan,  and,  being  envious,  gave  her  in  marriage  to  Dukhtui
Sharawal,  who  was  one  of  the  gi-eat  Amirs. .  When  the  Khan
returned  from  his  expedition  he  asked  after  Manlik.  Satilmish
Khatun  replied :  "  I  have  given  her  away  to  some  one."  The  Khan
then  said :  "  But  she  was  with  child  by  me,"  and  he  was  very
wroth ;  but  as  this  was  a  usual  practice  among  the  Moghul  s,  he
said  nothing.

Soon  after  this,  Isan  Bugha  Kh^n  died,  and  there  was  no  Khan
left  of  the  tribe  of  Moghul.  Every  man  acted  for  himself,  and  ruin
and  disorder  began  to  creep  in  among  the  people.  Amir  Bulaji
Dughldt,^  an  ancestor  of  the  humble  narrator,  determined  on
discovering  a  Khan,  and  restoring  order  to  the  State ;  so  he  sent
a  certain  Tdsh  Timur  to  find  Dukhtui  Sharawal,  and  to  obtain
what  information  he  could,  concerning  Manlik  and  her  child;
telling  Tash  Timur  that  if  it  were  a  boy,  he  was  to  steal  the  child
away  and  bring  it  back  with  him.  Tash  Timur  replied  :  "  It  is  a
very  long  and  tedious  expedition,  and  fitting  preparations  for
the  journey  must  be  made.  I  beg  of  you  to  supply  me  with
six  hundred  goats,  that  we  may  first  drink  their  milk  and  then
kill  and  eat  them,  one  by  one."

Amir  Bulaji  complied  with  his  wishes  and  supplied  him  with
all  that  was  necessary. Tash  Timur  then  set  out. He  journeyed

^  The  reign  of  Is^n  Bughi  and  the  ciTOumstanoes  under  which  he  became  Khan
of  Moghulistan,  have  been  discussed  in  Sec.  II.  of  the  Introduction.  As  far  as
the  uncertain  chronology  of  the  times  admits  of  its  being  stated,  his  reign
lasted  from  about  721  to  730  a.h.,  or  from  1321  to  1330  a.d.

'  The  name  of  this  Dughlat  Amir  has  been  transliterated  by  some  writers
Tidaji  and  PvXaji,  but  though  the  initial  letter  is  always  found  unpointed,  and
therefore  capable  of  being  read  B,  F,  or  P,  I  have,  throughout,  adopted  Bulaji  as
the  more  probable  form.  If  (as  is  most  likely)  it  is  of  Mongol  origin,  it  may  be
the  name  met  with  in  the  narrative  of  the  Chinese  traveller,  Chan^  Chun,  where
it  has  been  transliterated  (from  the  phonetics)  by  Dr.  Bretschneider — Bo4u'dji.
(See  Med.  Rewarch^St  i.,  p.  82.)

Digitized  by

Google

History  of  Tughluk  Timur,  7

for  a  long  while  in  Moghulistan,  and  by  the  time  he  came  upon  the
party  of  Dukhtui  Sharawal,  there  was  but  one  goat  remaining,  and
that  was  a  brown  one  \lcahud\  On  his  inquiring  after  Manlik  ^
and  her  child^  they  replied  that  she  had  borne  a  son^  and  that  she
had  a  second  son  by  Dukhtui  Shard wal ;  ^  the  name  of  the  Khan's
son  was  Tughluk  Timur,  and  the  name  of  the  son  of  Sharawal  was
Inchumalik.^  Finally  Tash  Timur  succeeded  in  carrying  off
Tughluk  Timur,  and  returned  to  the  Amir  with  him.

Bulaji  belonged  to  Aksu.  When  ChaghatAi  Kh4n  apportioned
his  kingdom,  he  gave  Mangalai  Suyah  to  Urtubu,  who  was
the  grandfather  of  Amir  Bulaji.  Mangalai  Suyah  is  the  equivalent
of  Aftdh  Bm,  or  "  sun-faced."  It  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  Kusan
and  Tarbugur ;  on  the  west  by  Sam,  Gaz  and  Jakishman,  which  are
situated  on  the  confines  of  Farghana ;  on  the  north  by  Issigh  Eul,
and  on  the  south  by  Jorjan  and  Sarigh-Uighur.  This  territory  is
called  Mangaldi  Suyah,  and  it  was  subject  to  Amir  Bulaji.  In  his
time  it  contained  many  large  towns,  the  most  important  of  which
were  Eashgbar,  Ehotan,  Yarkand,  Kas&n,  Akhsiket,  Andij&n,
Aksu,  At-Bashi  and  Kusan.* From  all  these  towns,  Amir  BuUji

^  This  name  has  beon  veiy  yariously  read  by  different  tmnslators.  Baron
Desmaisons  took  it  for  Mingli  in  Abul  Gh^zi's  history.  Mr.  Erskine  read  his
copy  of  the  Tarikh-i-Bathidt,  Mdnselik;  while  Dr.  Bellew,  using  the  same
work,  made  it  Minilik,  One  of  the  texts  used  for  this  translation  bas  Miling,
Like  many  of  the  earlier  names  that  occur  in  the  Tarikh-i-Iieuihidi,  it  is
probably  Mongol,  and  therefore,  being  an  unfamiliar  one  to  Musulman  writers,
they  would  l^  very  likely  to  distort  it  (See  Desmaisons'  AbtU  Ghdzi,  p.  165  ;
Erddne^  History  of  India,  i.  p.  89;  Bellew,  Report  on  Mission  to  Yarkand^
p.  147.)

'  Desmaisons  has  Schiri-OghuL  for  this  name. (Ahtd  Ghdzi,  loc.  cit.)

'  Here  Desmaisons  reads  Timur  Mdik. (Ihid.)

*  The  name  the  author  makes  use  of  here  is  to  be  found  in  no  other  book  or
document  that  I  have  any  knowledge  of.  His  description  of  the  region  to  which
he  applies  it,  is  fairly  distinct,  and  his  translation  of  the  tei-m  into  Persian  leaves
no  uncertainty  as  to  its  mere  verbal  meaning.  But  he  does  not  tell  us  what
language  the  term  belongs  to,  what  country  it  originated  in,  or  who  were  the
people  that  he  borrowed  it  from.  The  first  word  of  the  term,  Mangalai,  is  per-
fectly good  Turki,  and  means  **  forward,  in  advance,  fronting,  the  forehead,"  etc.,
as  for  instance,  the  "  advance  "  guBxd  of  an  army,  etc.  It  Is  written  with  some
variants,  such  as  Mankalai^  Mankali,  but  the  meaning  is  in  every  case  the  same.
It  may  therefore  well  he  facing  or  fronting,  as  he  translates  it  into  Persian.

The  second  word  should  thus  have  the  sigpaification  of  Sun.  It  may  perhaps
be  subject  to  some  uncertainty  iu  the  reading,  for  when  unpointed,  it  may  be
taken  tot  Bvbah — an  Arabic  word,  very  commonly  employed  in  India  and  some
other  countries,  in  the  sense  of  a  province  or  administrative  division.  Indeed,  the
two  words  differ  by  only  a  dot  in  the  Persian  spelling.  But  there  are  two
reasons  for  rejecting  the  reading  of  subah.  The  first  is  that  Mirza  Haidar  trans-
lates the  whole  term  Aftiib  Bui,  so  that  if  Mangalai  represents  Bui,  or  fronting,
there  would  be  no  word  left  as  an  equivalent  for  Aftdh.  Secondly,  in  one  of  the
texts  used  by  Mr.  Ross,  the  word  is  clearly  pointed  for  Suyah,  The  Haft  IftZtm,
whose  author  copied  from  Mirza  Haidar,  also  makes  the  word  Suyah.

But  Suyah  is  neither  Persian  nor  Turki :  no  such  word  seems  to  exist  in
either  language,  and  no  such  proper  name,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  ascertain.  If
one  word  of  the  term  is  Turki,  it  is  likely  that  the  other  would  belong  also  to
that  language.  But  this  is  not  quite  certain,  for  a  combination  would  not  be
impossible.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  Suyah  should  be  sought  in  the  language
of  some  neighbouring  nation,  and  for  preference  in  that  of  the  Mongols,  though

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

8  History  of  Tughluk  Timur,

selected  Aksu  as  a  residence,  and  it  was  in  Aksu  that  Tash  Timur
found  him. As  he  still  had  with  him  the  one  brown  \kdhujSi\  goat,

the  Kara-Khitais,  the  Arabs,  the  Chinese,  or  even  the  Buddhists  of  India  may
have  had  a  hand  in  inventing  a  name  for  the  countiy  in  ancient  times — ^if  ancienfc
the  name  is;  but  this  last  point  is  also  one  on  which  Mirza  Haidar  £eu1s  to
enlighten  ns.

The  late  Dr.  Terrien  de  Lacouperie,  who  did  me  the  kindness  to  look  into
the  term,  with  a  view  to  finding  a  solution,  suggested  the  similarity  of  a  name
variously  written  iu  the  historical  records  of  Szema  Tsien — Bu  Hiai,  Sui  Yeh,
and  Su  Yep,  which  was  that  of  a  state  that  has  been  identified  with  Yirkand.
It  lay,  at  any  rate,  to  the  east  of  Farghdna,  was  not  Kashghar,  and  was  con-
nected with  Ku  She,  which  was  perhaps  the  modem  Kucbar.  My  attention  has
also  been  directed  towards  the  ancient  Indian  word  Suriya,  for  the  tun,  but  this
could  hardly  have  been  combined  with  the  common  Turki  word  Mangdlai,
while  it  is  unlikely  that  it  could  have  been  corrupted  by  losing  its  most
distinctive  letter.  My  impression  is  that  Mirza  Haidar's  name  is  something
comparatively  modem,  and  is  rather  a  laudatory  term  for  the  region  in  question,
tlian  a  leviWl  applying  to  any  particular  district  or  town.

In  the  seventh  century  the  name  of  Su-Yeh  (unconnected  with  Mangalai  or
any  other  word)  was  used  by  tbe  Chinese  pilgrim,  Hiuen  Ti^ang,  according  to
Julien,  BeiJ,  and  other  commentators,  for  a  town  on  the  upper  waters  of  the
Chu,  then  the  capital  of  certain  Turki  Khans ;  though  Mr.  Watters  affirms
that  the  name  in  Hiuen  Tsang  should  be  read,  not  Su-Yeh,  but  Su-Sa  or  Su^She,
This  place,  as  will  be  shown  later  (see  note,  pp.  361-3),  was  roost  probably
the  same  as  Bdld-Sdahun.  If  so  it  was  situated  some  di&tance  to  the  north  of
Farghiina,  and  would  therefore  not  fiill  within  the  region  described  by  Mirza
Haidar  as  Mangalai  Suyah.  There  is,  moreover,  a  difference  in  date  between
Hiuen  Tsang  and  Mirza  Haidar  of  some  nine  hundred  years,  and  the  latter
nowhere  implies  that  he  is  employing  an  ancient  term.  Su-Yeh  or  Sti-Sa  was,  in  fact,
applied  by  tbe  Chinese  writers  to  a  different  locality,  though,  strangely  enough,
in  tbe  syllable  Su  it  has  a  certain  degree  of  connection  with  a  part  of  our
author's  province — that  is,  with  Kashghar.  Su-li  was  an  ancient  name  for
Kashghar,^  and  Hiuen  Tsang  tells  us:  ^  From  the  town  of  the  Su-Yeh  river  as
far  [west]  as  the  Ki  Shwang  Na  country,  tbe  land  is  called  Su-li,  and  the
people  are  called  by  the  same  name  "  (BeoVs  Si  Yu  Ki).  Ki  Shwang  Na  is
usually  identified  with  Kesh,  in  M&vara-un-Nahr,  and  if  that  be  correct  it  would
mean  that  most  of  Western  Turkistan  and  a  great  part  of  Mivara-un-Nahr  went,
in  the  seventh  century,  by  the  same  name  as  the  dty  (and  perhaps  district)  of
Kashghar,  though  the  latter  place  stood  altogether  apart  from  the  tract  of  country
between  the  Chu  and  Kesh.  Thus,  whether  it  is  in  any  way  possible,  that
Hiuen  Tsang's  SurYeh,  Su-Sa,  or  Su-li  can  be  connected  with  Mirza  Haidar's
Suifah  must  remain  extremely  doubtful.  If  Mr.  Watters'  reading  of  Su-Sa
instead  of  Su-Yeh  is  the  right  one,  such  a  suggestion  could  not  hold  good.  (See
China  Rev.,  as  below.)

A  curious  passage,  it  may  be  noted  here,  occurs  in  the  Geographical  Dictionary
of  the  Arab  author  Yakut,  as  translated  by  Thonnelier.  He  writes :  **  Farghanah
....  confinant  aveo  le  Turkestan  du  cote  du  district  de  Haital,  lequel  fait  face
au  soleil  levant,  k  droite  du  voyageiur  qui  se  rend  au  pays  des  Turks."  This
passage  would  be  too  obscure,  in  any  case,  to  throw  light  on  the  Question  at
issue.  It  is  remarkable  only  as  an  instance,  in  this  particuhur  region,  of  regarding
a  certain  tract,  or  province,  as  **  facing  the  sun."

With  regard  to  the  limits  given  for  Mangalai  SuyaJi,  the  only  boundarv  that
the  author  defines  by  names  that  appear  to  be  unknown  at  the  present  day,  is
the  western  one.  Sdm,  Gaz  (or  the  two  may  be  read  together  as  iS<ifiit(jfas)  and
Jdkithmdn  are  indeed  subject  to  some  variants,  but  however  read,  I  can  find  no
place  to  answer  to  anv  of  them  on  the  westem  confines  of  Farghina,  unless  it  be
a  small  town,  or  village,  marked  on  Bitter  and  Oetzel's  map  of  I8il,  as  Sam
Seirak,  and  placed  on  the  Angren,  tributary  of  the  Syr,  about  midway  between

>  The  Chinese,  quite  recently,  have  revived  the  ancient  Su-li,  and  have  applied
it  as  the  official  iianic  for  Kashghar.

Digitized  by

Google

History  of  TuglUtik  Timur.  9

he  received  the  Enimame  \la'kab'\  of  Kuk  Uchgu,  which  is  now  borne
by  all  his  descendants.

As  they  neared  Aksu,  they  fell  in  with  a  party  of  merchants,
and  while  they  were  crossing  a  pass,  the  Khan  [Tughlnk  Timur]
fell  down  a  fissure  in  the  *ice.  T4sh  Timur,  at  this,  raised  a  loud
cry  for  help,  but  he  oonld  make  no  one  hear  him,  for  the  caravan
had  crossed  the  pass  and  had  arrived  at  a  halting  ground.  T&sh
Timur  went  to  one  of  the  merchants,  whose  name  was  Begjik,  and
told  him  what  had  befallen  the  Khan;  the  merchant  communi-
cated this  to  some  of  his  companions,  and  several  of  them  set  out  with
Tdsh  Timur  to  the  place  where  the  Khan  had  disappeared.  Begjik
descended  into  the  chasm  and  found  the  Khdn  uninjured,  and
then  and  there  formed  a  friendly  agreement  with  him.  After
that,  by  way  of  precaution,  he  said  apologetically  to  the  Khan :  "  If
you  go  up  first  they  will  not  pull  me  up  at  all ;  let  me  go  first  and
they  must  perforce  pull  you  up  after."  Again,  proffering  many
apologies,  he  called  out  to  them  to  throw  down  the  rope,  which
they  did,  and  he  went  up  first,  and  afterwards  they  pulled
up  the  Khan.  All  then  went  on  to  Aksu.  Amir  Bulaji  raised
Tughluk  Timur  to  the  rank  of  Khakan,  and  in  course  of  time  he
ruled  not  only  the  whole  of  Moghulistan,  but  also  much  of  the
country  of  Ghaghatai,  as  shall  be  related  hereafter.

Khojand  and  Tashkend.  The  exact  situation  of  these  places  is  of  little  impor-
tance, as  the  author  sufficiently  indicates  that  all  Farghdna  was  included,  when
he  mentions  the  names  of  Akhsiket  and  Kdtdn.  The  first  of  these  two  does  not
exist  nowadays,  but  it  is  known  to  have  stood  near  the  site  of  the  present
Ndmangdn,  while  Kdsdn  is  again  somewhat  farther  westward,  and  consequently
not  far  from  the  western  confines  of  the  province.  Among  the  other  limits,  none
leave  any  doubt  except  in  detail.  Kasan  and  Tdrbuaur  on  the  east,  are  both
well-known  towns  on  the  main  road  leading  from  Kasnghar  towards  Karashahr
and  China,  though  called  nowadays  Kuchar  and  Buaur  respectively.  The
position  of  Joijdn  is  also  readily  recognised,  imder  the  modem  spelling  of
CJuirehdn,  or  Chdrchand ;  while  the  country  of  the  Sdrigh  Vighur  (or  Yellow
Uighur),  though  long  forgotten,  may  be  nlaced  with  moderate  certainty  to  the
eastward  of  Cfidrdidn,  or  south  and  somewhat  west  of  Lake  Lob,  Farther  on  in
his  history  (pp.  348-9),  Mirza  Haidar  alludes  to  this  country  again,  as  lying
very  much  in  this  position.  Dr.  Bretschneider  has  some  interesting  notes  on  the
subject  of  the  Siirigh  Uighur  taken  ftrom  Chinese  sources,  and  places  their  country
**  somewhere  north  of  Zaidam,  on  the  southern  verge  of  the  stony  desert."  They
would  in  any  case  have  dwelt  on,  or  beyond,  the  south-eastern  confines  of
Eastern  Turkistan.  (For  Hiuen  Tsang,  see  Beal's  Si  Yu  Ki,  i.,  p.  26 ;  Thon-
nelier.  Did.  de  G6ogr.  de  VAsie  Cent,.,  p.  29 ;  Bretschneider,  Medimval  Researches,
L,p.  263;  Mr.  T.  IVatters  in  China  Beview,  xix..  No.  2, 1890,  p.  117.)

/

Digitized  by

Google

10  Conversion  of  Tughluk  Timur.

CHAPTER  m,

THE  CONVERSION OP  TUGHLUK TIMUR  KhAn  TO ISLAM.

MaulInI  Khwaja  Ahmad  (may  God  sanctify  his  soul)  was
descended  from  Maul&nd  Arshad-ud-Din.  He  was  exceedingly
pious  and  much  esteemed  and  revered.  He  belonged  to  the  sect
of  Khwdjds  (may  God  sanctify  their  spirits).  For  twenty  years  I
was  in  his  service,  and  worshipped  at  no  other  mosque  than  his.
He  led  a  retired  life,  devoting  his  time  to  religious  contemplation,
and  he  used  to  recite  the  traditions  of  his  sect  in  a  beautiful
manner ;  so  much  so,  that  any  stranger  hearing  him  was  sure  to
be  much  impressed.

From  him  I  heard  that  it  was  written  in  the  annals  of  his  fore-
fathers concerning  Mauldna  Shuja-ud-Din  Mahmud,  the  brother  of
H&fiz-ud-Din,  an  elder  of  Bokh&r&  (who  was  the  last  of  the
Muj  tabids,  for  after  the  death  of  Hdfiz-ud-Din  there  was  never
another  Mujtahid),  that  during  his  interregnum,  Chingiz  Khan
assembled  the  Im&ms  of  Bokhara,  according  to  his  custom,  put
Hdfiz-ud-Din  to  death,  and  banished  Mauldna  Shuja'ud-Din  Mahmud
to  Eardkorum.  [The  ancestors  of]  Mauldnd  Khwdja  Ahmad  also
ivere  sent  there.  At  the  time  of  a  disaster  in  Eardkorum,^  their
sons  went  to  Lob  Eatak,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  towns
between  Turfdn  and  Ehotan,  and  there  they  were  held  in  much

*  In  this  story  (beginning  after  the  word  **  forefathers  ")  I  have  had,  slightly,
to  alter  the  translation  in  order  to  make  sense ;  the  meaning  intended,  however,
is,  I  believe,  preserved.  In  the  text  there  is  some  confusion,  which  renders  the
passage  unintelligible.

The  word  Mujtahid,  it  may  be  remarked,  means  properly,  a  jurist  who  can
deliver  judgment  without  reference  to  past  or  present  authorities;  but  it  is
usually  employed,  throughout  Central  Asia,  to  denote  a  high-priest  or  Musulmdn
Doctor  of  Divinity.  It  is  in  more  common  use  among  the  Shiahs  than  among
the  Sunnis.

It  is  perhaps  curious  to  read  of  Chingiz  Ehdn  deporting  rebellious  priests  from
Bokhara  to  his  capital  in  Northern  Mongolia,  but  it  is  quite  a  likely  thing  to
have  happened.  The  disaster  in  Kaiikorum  here  referred  to  by  the  author,  is
impossible  to  trace,  for  want  of  some  indioition  of  a  date.  The  place  underwent
many  vicissitudes  in  the  Middle  Ages.  From  the  time  of  Chingiz,  it  remained
the  capital  of  the  Mongol  Khdk&ns  only  till  the  year  1256,  when  Mangu  trans-
ferred the  seat  of  government  to  Kai-ping  fu,  in  Southern  Mongolia,  and  some
distance  north  of  Peking:.  Traces  of  Kar&orum  are  still  in  existence ;  they  were
found  in  1889  by  Mr.  N'.  Yadrintzeff,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Orkhon,  about  thirty
miles  south-east  of  Lake  Ugei  Nor ;  and  in  this  position  the  site  is  marked  on  the
map  attached  to  this  volume.  The  ancient  city  appears  to  have  covered  an  area  of
six  miles  in  circumference,  and  some  portion  of  it  may  have  existed  contempor-
aneously with  Lob,  or  Lob-Katak— a  town,  or  towns,  which  have  long  since  passed
out  of  existence,  and  even  the  sites  of  which  are  only  to  be  traced  conjecturally.
(See  next  note;  also  Introduction,  Sec.  III.;  Tule's  Marco  Polo,  i.,  pp.  228
8pq. ;  Howorth's  Hist,  of  the  MongoU,  i.,  pp.  182-6 ;  Pro.  R  G.  8„  1890,  p.  424.)

Digitized  by

Google

Conversion  of  Tughluk  Timur^  H

honour  and  esteem.  I  was  told  many  particulars  oonoeming  all  of
them,  but  I  have  forgotten  them  for  the  most  part.  The  last  of
the  sons  was  called  Shaikh  Jamal-ud-Din,  an  austere  man  who
dwelt  in  Katak.

On  a  certain  Friday,  after  the  prayers,  he  preaohed  to  the  people
and  said :  *'  I  have  already,  on  many  occasions,  preached  to  you
and  given  you  good  counsel,  but  no  one  of  you  has  listened  to  me.
It  has  now  been  revealed  to  me  that  God  has  sent  down  a  great
calamity  on  this  town.  A  Divine  ordinance  permits  me  to  escape
and  save  myself  from  this  disaster.  This  is  the  last  sermon  I
shall  preach  to  you.  I  take  my  leave  of  you,  and  remind  you  that
our  next  meeting  will  be  on  the  day  of  resurrection."

Having  said  this,  the  Shaikh  came  down  from  the  pulpit*
The  Muazzin  [crier  to  prayer]  followed  him  and  begged  that  he
might  be  allowed  to  accompany  him.  The  Shaikh  said  he  might
do  so.  When  they  had  journeyed  three  farsdhhs  they  halted,  and
the  Muazzin  asked  permission  to  return  to  the  town  to  attend  to
some  business,  saying  he  would  come  back  again  immediately.  As
he  was  passing  the  mosque,  he  said  to  himself :  '*  For  a  last  time,  I
will  just  go  and  call  out  the  evening  prayer."  So  he  ascended  the
minaret  and  called  the  evening  prayer.  As  he  was  doing  so,  he
noticed  that  something  was  raining  down  from  the  sky ;  it  was  like
snow,  but  dry.  He  finished  his  "  call,"  and  then  stood  praying
for  a  while.  Then  he  descended,  but  found  that  the  door  of  the
minaret  was  blocked,  and  he  could  not  get  out  So  he  again
ascended  and,  looking  round,  discovered  that  it  was  raining  sand,
and  to  such  a  degree  that  the  whole  town  was  covered ;  after  a
little  while  he  noticed  that  the  ground  was  rising,  and  at  last
only  a  part  of  the  minaret  was  left  free.  So,  with  fear  and
trembling,  he  threw  himself  from  the  tower  on  to  the  sand ;  and
at  midnight  he  rejoined  the  Shaikh,  and  told  him  his  story.  The
Shaikh  immediately  set  out  on  his  road,  saying :  '*  It  is  better  to
keep  at  a  distance  from  the  wrath  of  God."  They  fled  in  great
haste ;  and  that  city  is,  to  this  day,  buried  in  sand.  Sometimes  a
wind  comes,  and  lays  bare  the  minaret  or  the  top  of  the  dome.  It
often  happens  also,  that  a  strong  wind  uncovers  a  house,  and  when
any  one  enters  it  he  finds  ever>'thing  in  perfect  order,  though  the
master  has  become  white  bones.  But  no  harm  has  come  to  the
inanimate  things.^

'  Throughout  this  story,  Katah  is  spoken  of  as  a  single  town,  and  when,  just
above,  the  author  brackets  Lob  and  Katak  together,  he  probably  means  to  denote
the  district  generally,  in  which  the  two  places  were  situated.  During  the  mission
of  Sir  D.  Forsyth  to  Eastern  Turkistan  in  1873-4,  the  question  of  these  sand-
buried  cities  was  inquired  into  by  himself  and  Dir.  Bellew.  As  regards  their
positions,  the  opinion  arrived  at  was  that  Xo6  must  have  stood  a  short  distance
to  tbo  aouth-west  of  the  lake  of  that  name,  while  Katak  lay  probably  about  three
days  farther  towards  the  south,  on  the  road  leading  to  Ghlrchan  and  Khotan.
Three  yearf  later  General  Prejevalski  Tisited  Lake  Lob|  an4  in4eed  spent  the

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

12  Conversion  of  Tughlnk  Timur,

In  short,  the  Shaikh  finally  came  to  BAi  Gul,*  which  is  in  the
vicinity  of  Aksu.  At  that  time  Tughluk  Timur  Khan  was  in
Aksu.  When  he  had  first  been  brought  there  he  was  sixteen
years  of  age.  He  was  eighteen  when  he  first  met  the  Shaikh,
and  he  met  him  in  the  following  way.  The  Khan  had  organised
a  hunting-party,  and  had  promulgated  an  order  that  no  one  should
absent  himself  from  the  hunt. It  was,  however,  remarked  that

winter  of  1876-7  in  its  vicinity,  with  the  modem  village  of  Clmrgalik  (about  one
day's  march  to  the  south-west  of  the  lake)  for  his  headquarters.  In  this  place
there  were  the  remains,  in  the  shape  of  earthen  walls  and  watch-towers,  of  an
ancient  town,  which  the  natives  called  Ottog^sh-Shahr,  or  city  of  Ottogush,
after  a  khan  who  was  said  to  have  ruled  there.  Two  days  journey  from
Ohargalik,  in  the  direction  of  Ghirchan,  the  ruins  of  another  town  were  reported
to  exist ;  and  lastly,  General  Prejevalski  disoovered  traces  of  a  third,  and  very
large  city,  near  the  south  shore  of  the  lake.  This  place  was  known  locally  by  the
name  of  Kunah-Shahr,  or  "  old  town,"  and  was  thought,  by  Sir  H.  Yule,  to  bo
the  remains  of  the  Lch  of  Marco  Polo  and  Miiza  Haidar.  Marco  Polo,  whoso
narrative  dates  from  more  than  two  hundred  years  before  that  of  the  Mirza,
speaks  of  the  town  as  still  in  existence  in  his  day — he  makes  no  mention  of
ruins — and  there  is  nothing  on  record  to  point  to  its  having  been  buried  by  the
sand,  like  Katak.  The  latter  place  is  not  mentioned  by  Marco  Polo,  nor  does
General  Prejevalski  seem  to  have  heard  of  it,  by  that  name  at  least,  though  it
may  possibly  be  represented  by  the  ruins  he  was  told  of,  called  Gds-Shahr,  which
seem  to  lie  more  in  the  direction  of  the  shifting  sands  than  the  other  two,  that
he  tells  us  of.

Mirza  Haidar*s  account  of  the  overwhelming  of  Katdk  by  the  sand,  is  interesting
and  graphic,  though,  no  doubt,  overdrawn.  The  process  has  been  well  described  by
Dr.  Bellew,  who  with  Sir  D.  Forsyth  saw  it  in  operation  at  a  place  called  Urdum
Padshah,  some  forty  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Yangi  Hisar.  The  sand  waves
were  found  to  advance  very  gradually,  but  no  estimate  could  be  formed  of  the
yearly  rate.  When  the  hillocks  of  sand  become  piled  against  walls  or  buildings,
they  grow  in  height,  till  at  length  they  fall  over  and  engulf  the  object  that
obstructs  them.  This  last  phase  of  the  process  would  be  assisted  by  a  violent
wind  or  storm,  and  it  appears  to  have  been  a  storm  that  brought  about  the
catastrophe  narrated  by  our  author.  The  sand  in  no  case  falls  from  the  skv  like
snow,  as  described  by  Shaikh  Jamdl-ud-Din  in  the  text,  though,  no  doubt,  the  air
would  be  full  of  sand  during  a  storm  of  wind ;  indeed,  the  Shaikh  himself  says
enough  to  show  that  the  disaster  at  Eatak  was  known  to  be  impending  long
before  it  occurred,  and  that  the  storm  was  only  the  final  incident.  The  subse-
quent action  of  the  sand  in  laying  bare,  but  little  injured,  villages  or  buildings
and  their  contents,  in  the  course  of  its  advance,  was  found  by  Dr.  Bellew  to  tako
place  much  as  Mirza  Haidar  relates.  It  may  be  remarked  here,  that  the  air  in
Eastern  Turkistan  is  at  all  times,  except  lust  after  a  fall  of  rain  (which  seldom
occurs)  filled  with  a  thick  haze,  and  the  sky  is  dark  from  the  mist  of  impalpable
dust  or  sand  held  in  suspension.  Bain  clears  the  mist  away,  but  immediately
the  fall  has  ceased,  the  sand  begins  to  rise  once  more,  in  whirling  columns,  and
forms  small  clouds,  which  at  length  grow  and  coalesce  till,  in  a  few  hours,  the
dry  haze  has  formed  again  in  every  direction.

As  regards  the  name  of  KataJc^  the  texts  in  the  British  Museum  all  have  it
spelled  in  this  way,  and  Sir  D.  Forsyth  specially  mentions  that  in  his  copy  of
the  Tarikh-i'Ra»hidi  the  spelling  was  the  same.  In  some  copies,  however,  it
appears  to  read  Kanak — a  question  only  of  a  dot — and  some  discussion  was  at
one  time  raised  as  to  the  real  name.  This  need  not  now  be  followed  up.
Dr.  Bretsohneider  gives,  as  Chinese  names  for  Lake  Lob,  Yen49e  (salt  marsh),
Fo-^-haiy  and  Pu-^ihang-kai,  the  last  meaning  **  reedy  sea,  or  lake."  Shin-Shen
was  also  a  Chinese  name  for  the  Lob  region.  (Bellew  in  Yarkand  Beport^
pp.  27  9 ;  Forsyth  in  /.  J2.  (?.  S.,  1877,  pp.  1  seq. ;  Prejevalski,  Kulja  io  Lob  JSor,
pp.  76-7 ;  Bretsehneider,  Med.  EeBearckes,  ii.,  pp.  191  and  344.)

*  Perhaps  Oikul,  as  marked  on  modem  mape  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aksu.

Digitized  by

Google

Conversion  of  Tughluk  Tunur.  13

some  persons  were  seated  in  a  retired  spot.  The  Ehdn  sent  to
fetch  these  people,  and  they  were  seized,  bound  and  brought
before  him,  inasmuch  as  they  had  transgressed  the  commands  of
the  Eh&n,  and  had  not  presented  themselves  at  the  hunt.  The
Khan  asked  them :  "  Why  have  you  disobeyed  my  commands  ?  "
The  Shaikh  replied  :  **  We  are  strangers,  who  have  fled  from  the
ruined  town  of  Katak.  We  know  nothing  about  the  hunt  nor  the
ordinances  of  the  hunt,  and  therefore  we  have  not  transgressed
your  orders."  So  the  Khan  ordered  his  men  to  set  the  Tajik  free.
He  was,  at  that  time,  feeding  some  dogs  with  swine's  flesh,  and  he
asked  the  Shaikh  angrily :  **  Are  you  better  than  this  dog,  or  is
the  dog  better  than  you  ?  "  The  Shaikh  replied :  **  If  I  have  faith
I  am  better  than  this  dog ;  but  if  I  have  no  faith,  this  dog  is
better  than  I  am."  On  hearing  these  words,  the  Kh&n  retired  and
sent  one  of  his  men,  saying :  *'  Gk)  and  place  that  T4jik  upon  your
own  horse,  with  all  due  respect,  and  bring  him  here  to  me."

The  Moghul  went  and  led  his  horse  before  the  Shaikh.  The
Shaikh  noticing  that  the  saddle  was  stained  with  blood  (of  pig)
said;  ''I  will  go  on  foot."  But  the  Moghul  insisted  that  the
order  was  that  he  should  mount  the  horse.  The  Shaikh  then
spread  a  clean  handkerchief  over  the  saddle  and  mounted.  When
he  arrived  before  the  Khan,  he  noticed  that  this  latter  was
standing  alone  in  a  retired  spot,  and  there  were  traces  of  sorrow
on  his  countenance.  The  Kh4n  asked  the  Shaikh :  *'  What  is  this
thing  that  renders  man,  if  he  possess  it,  better  than  a  dog?"
The  Shaikh  replied :  *^  Faith,"  and  he  explained  to  him  what
Faith  was,  and  the  duties  of  a  Musulmdn.  The  Khan  wept
thereat,  and  said :  '*  If  I  ever  become  Khdn,  and  obtain  absolute
authority,  you  must,  without  fail,  come  to  me,  and  I  promise  you  I
will  become  a  Musulman."  He  then  sent  the  Shaikh  away  with
the  utmost  respect  and  reverence.  Soon  after  this  the  Shaikh
died.  He  left  a  son  of  the  name  of  Arshad-ud-I3in,  who  was
exceedingly  pious.  His  father  once  dreamed  that  ho  carried  a
lamp  up  to  the  top  of  a  hill,  and  that  its  light  illumined  the  whole
of  the  east.  After  that,  he  met  Tughluk  Timur  Khan  in  Aksu,
and  said  what  has  been  mentioned  above.  Having  related  this  to
his  son,  he  charged  him,  saying :  "  Since  I  may  die  at  any  moment,
let  it  be  your  care,  when  the  young  man  becomes  Khan,  to  remind
him  of  his  promise  to  become  a  Musulmdn ;  thus  this  blessing  may
come  about  through  your  mediation  and,  through  you,  the  world
may  be  illumined."

Having  completed  his  injunctions  to  his  son,  the  Shaikh  died.
Soon  afterwards  Tughluk  Timur  became  Khan.  When  news  of
this  reached  MauUn4  Arshad-ud-Din,  he  left  Aksu  and  proceeded
to  Moghulistdn,  where  the  Khan  was  ruling  in  great  pomp  and
splendour. But  all  his  efforts  to  obtain  an  interview  with  him.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

14  Coftversion  of  Ttighluk  Timur.

that  he  might  execute  his  charge,  were  in  vain.  Every  morning,
however,  he  used  to  call  out  the  prayers  near  to  the  Khdn's  tent.
One  morning  the  Ehdn  said  to  one  of  his  followers :  "  Somebody
has  been  calling  out  like  this  for  several  mornings  now ;  go  and
bring  him  here."  The  Mauland  was  in  the  middle  of  his  call  to
prayer  when  the  Moghul  arrived,  who,  seizing  him  by  the  neck,
dragged  him  before  the  Khan.  The  latter  said  to  him  :  *'  Who
are  you  that  thus  disturb  my  sleep  every  morning  at  an  early
hour  ? "  He  replied :  "I  am  the  son  of  the  man  to  whom,  on  a
certain  occasion,  you  made  the  promise  to  become  a  Musulman.'*
And  he  proceeded  to  recount  the  above  related  story.  The  Khan
then  said :  "  You  are  welcome,  and  where  is  your  father  ?  "  He
replied:  **My  father  is  dead,  but  he  entrusted  this  mission  to
me."  The  Khan  rejoined  :  "  Ever  since  I  ascended  the  throne  I
have  had  it  on  my  mind  that  I  made  that  promise,  but  the  person
to  whom  I  gave  the  pledge  never  came.  Now  you  are  welcome.
What  must  I  do?"  On  that  morn  the  sun  of  bounty  rose  out  of
the  east  of  divine  favour,  and  effaced  the  dark  night  of  Unbelief.
Khidmat  Maulan4  ordained  ablution  for  the  Khdn,  who,  having
declared  his  faith,  became  a  Musulmdn.  They  then  decided  that
for  the  propagation  of  Islam,  they  should  interview  the  princes  one
by  one,  and  it  should  be  well  for  those  who  accepted  the  faith,  but
those  who  refused  should  be  slain  as  heathens  and  idolaters.

On  the  following  morning,  the  first  to  come  up  to  be  examined
alone  was  Amir  Tulik,  who  was  my  great  grand-uncle.  When
he  entered  the  Khan*s  presence,  he  found  him  sitting  with
the  Tdjik,  and  he  advanced  and  sat  down  with  them  also.  Then
the  Khan  began  by  asking,  "Will  you  embrace  Islam?"  Amir
Tulik  burst  into  tears  and  said:  "Three  years  ago  I  was  con-
verted by  some  holy  men  at  Kashghar,  and  became  a  Musulmdn,
but,  from  fear  of  you,  I  did  not  openly  declare  it."  Thereupon
the  Khan  rose  up  and  embraced  him ;  then  the  three  sat  down
again  together.  In  this  manner  they  examined  the  princes  one  by
one.  All  accepted  Islam,  tillit  came  to  the  turn  of  Jards,  who
refused,  but  suggested  two  conditions,  one  of  which  was  :  "I  have
a  man  named  Sataghni  Buka,^  if  this  Tajik  can  overthrow  him
I  will  become  a  Believer."  The  Khan  and  the  Amirs  cried  out,
"  What  absurd  condition  is  this  I "  Khidmat  Maulanti,  however,
said :  "  It  is  well,  let  it  be  so.  If  I  do  not  throw  him,  I  will  not
require  you  to  become  a  Musulman."  Jaras  then  said  to  the  Mau-
lana:  "  I  have  seen  this  man  lift  up  a  two  year  old  camel.  He  is  an
Infidel,  and  above  the  ordinary  stature  of  men."  Khidmat  Mauldna
replied,  **  If  it  is  God's  wish  that  the  Moghuls  become  honoured
with  the  blessed  state  of  Isldm,  He  will  doubtless  give  me  sufficient

*  Dr.  Bellew  reads  tliis  name  as  Sanghoy  Boca, {Tarhaiid  Ifrport,  p.  148.)

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

Tughluk  Invades  Mdvard-un-Nakr.  15

power  to  overcome  this  man."  The  Khdn  and  those  who  had
become  Musnlmans  were  not  pleased  with  these  plans.  However,  a
large  crowd  assembled,  the  Kafir  was  brought  in,  and  he  and
Ehidmat  Maulan4  advanced  towards  one  another.  The  Infidel,
proud  of  his  own  strength,  advanced  with  a  conceited  air.  The
Maulana  looked  very  small  and  weak  beside  him.  When  they
came  to  blows,  the  Maulan4  struck  the  Infidel  full  in  the  chest,  and
he  fell  senseless.  After  a  little,  he  came  to  again,  and  having
raised  himself,  fell  again  at  the  feet  of  the  Maulana,  crying  out
and  uttering  words  of  Belief.^  The  people  raised  loud  shouts  of
applause,  and  on  that  day  160,000  persons  cut  off  the  hair  of  their
heads  and  became  Musulmans.  The  Khan  was  circumcised,  and
the  lights  of  Islam  dispelled  the  shades  of  Unbelief.  Isl4m  was
disseminated  all  through  the  country  of  Chaghat4i  Khdn,  and
(thanks  be  to  Qod)  has  continued  fixed  in  it  to  the  present
time.

EXTRACTS  FROM  TEE  ZAFAR-NAMA.

CHAPTER  IV-

expedrrion  of  tughluk  timur  khan  into  the  kingdom  op
mIvarI-un-nahr.^

Since  the  country  of  M&vard-un-Nahr,  owing  to  the  events  above  related,
was  in  a  state  of  disruption  and  confusion,  Tughluk-Timnr  Khan  (son^  of
Davd  Kbin,  a  descendant  of  Ghaghatdi  Kbin),  King  of  Jatah,  to  whom
by  right  of  descent  this  country  belonged,  having  called  together  his  officers
and  courtiers,  and  having  made  ready  an  army,  set  out,  in  a  manner
becoming  a  great  conqueror,  towards  Mdvard-un-Nahr.  This  was  in  the  month
of  Rabi  Assani,  761  of  the  Hajra,  [March  a.d.  1360]  corresponding  to  the  year
of  the  Mouse  [SichkAn]  of  the  Tartar  cycle.  Thirty  years  had  elapsed
between  the  death  of  T&rmashirin  *  and  this  event— and  during  this  period
there  had  reigned  eight  khans  of  the  race  of  Chaghaftdi.  When  Tughluk
Timur  Khan  arrived  at  Chandk  BuUk,  which  is  near  the  river  of  Khojand,  in
the  plains  of  T&sbkand,  he  consulted  with  his  princes  and  generals,  and  they
decided  that  the  wisest  plan  would  be  for  Ulugh  Taktimur,  of  the  tribe  of

^  Bellew  (who,  however,  is  not  translating  but  summarising  from  the  TariJch-i'
Rathidi)  tells  this  story  somewhat  differently,  and  ends  by  sajring:  '*Toghluk
Timur  was  at  this  time  twentv  years  of  age,  and  he  died  ten  years  later,  in
764  A.H,  (1362  A.D.y' (Yark,  Report,  p.  148.)

3  Transoxiana.

'  Should  be  grandson.

*  He  died  738  a.h.,  which  would  make  twenty^hree  years;  while  all  th
texts  of  the  Zafar-Ndma  in  the  British  Museum  say  thirty-three  years.

Digitized  by

Google

1 6  Tughluk  Invades  Mdvard-un^Nahr.

Kardit,^  Hdji  Beg  of  the  tribe  of  Arkenut,^  and  Begjik  of  the  tribe  of  Ednghali,'
to  go  forward  and  reconnoitre.  The  three  princes  hastened  to  carry  out  these
orders,  and  when  they  had  crossed  the  river  of  Ehojand,  Amir  Bdy&zid
JaUir,  together  with  bis  people,  joined  them,  and  they  all  proceeded  together
in  the  direction  of  Shahr-i-Sabz.

Amir  Hdji  Barlds  having  collected  troops  from  Eesh,  Earshi,  and  that
neighbourhood,  set  out  to  oppose  these  combined  forces.  But  on  reconsidera-
tion, judging  the  plan  to  be  unwise,  he  turned  with  his  own  force  towards
Ehor&sdn,  before  the  two  armies  had  come  into  conflict.

*  The  Karat,  or  Karait  (the  final  t  is  only  the  Mongol  plural),  are  usually
described  as  a  Mongol  tribe,  and  Bashid-ud-Din,  according  to  Dr.  Erdmann,
includes  them  in  his  list  of  Mongol  tribes.  Sir  H.  Howorth,  however,  gives
reasons  for  believing  them  to  be  Turks,  and  also  for  regarding  them  as  one  and
the  same  people  with  the  Eirghiz,  or  the  **  Hakas'*  of  the  Chinese.  Before  the
rise  of  Cningiz  Ehan,  they  occupied  large  tracts  of  Southern  and  Central
Mongolia,  and  were,  in  fact,  the  nation  ruled  over  by  Wang  Ehan,  or  Prester
John,  so  famous  in  mediaeval  history.  They  were  subdued  by  Chingiz  about
the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  afterwards  became  so  much
scattered,  that  fragments  of  their  tribes  have  been  found  in  various  localities  all
over  Mongolia,  and  as  far  west  as  the  country  now  known  as  'the  Eirghiz
Steppes.'  In  the  latter  part  of  the  twelfth  century  they  were  ^rhaps  the  most
powerful  of  all  the  nomiul  nations  of  northern  Asia,  and  are  douotless  the  people
who  displaced  that  other  important  nation,  the  Uighurs,  from  north-western
Mongolia,  and  drove  them  southward.  (See  Howorth,  /.  R.  A,  8,,  1889,  pp.  361
8eq ;  and  Erdmann,  TJbemeht  der  ....  TurMichen,  etc,  VdUcerdamme,  Easan,
1841.)

'  Some  of  the  texts  may  read  Azkenut  instead  of  Arkentd,  but  the  tribe
intended  can  scarcely  be  other  than  the  AldkntU  of  Deg^ignes'  list,  or  the
OUchonod  of  Howorth.  The  latter  author  speaks  of  six  tribes— the  Kunkurat^
Inkirass,  OUchonod,  KaramU,  Kuridat  or  KurltU,  and  JXkijin — who  formed  a  con-
federacy under  the  name  of  Kunhurai.  They  were  of  Turki  origin,  and  inhabited
the  north  of  Mongolia.  In  the  Irutitutet  of  Timur  the  name  is  written  Arhenut ;
and  in  Rashid-ud-Din's  list,  Alkunut.  The  last  writer  classes  them  as  Tartars.
(See  Howorth,  Hist,  of  Mongols,  i,  p.  703 ;  Deguignes,  Hist,  des  Huns,  iii.,
p.  3 ;  Dave^'s  Inst,  of  Timur,  p.  19 ;  and  Erdmann  as  above.)

*  The  Kdngali,  or  Kdnkali,  were,  at  the  time  of  the  rise  of  the  Mongols,  an
important  Turki  tribe  whose  country  lay  norUi  of  Transoxiana,  between  that  of
the  Kipchdks  on  the  west,  and  Moghulistan  on  the  east.  They  appear  to  have
))een  much  intermixed  with  the  Kipchdks,  and  are  thought  by  Howorth  to  have
)jeen  the  ancestors  of  the  modem  Nogais  and  some  of  the  Turkoman  tribes.
Abul  Ghazi  mentions  the  Kanhali  as  living  on  the  Chu  and  Talas  rivers  in
times  previous  to  the  Mongol  ascendency.  Dr.  Brctschneider  tells  us  that  they
are  frequently  spoken  of  in  Chinese  historical  works  of  the  Mongol  period,  the
name  Ming  generally  represented  as  Kang-li,  or  sometimes  Hang-li.  The  tribe
was  known  to  the  Ein  dynasty  of  China  as  early  as  the  eleventh  century,  when
one  of  their  chiefs  is  said  to  have  offered  to  become  a  vassal  of  the  Chinese
Emperor.  They  were  a  warlike  people,  and  at  a  later  period  the  Mongol  Ehans
utilised  their  services  as  soldiers,  and  even  as  genenJs.  Rashid-ud-Din  also
classes  the  Karikcdi  as  Turks.  (Howorth,  Hist,  of  Mong.,  i.,  p.  18;  Brct-
schneider, i.,  p.  301 ;  Abul  Gh^zi,  p.  38 ;  Erdmann  as  above.)

Digitized  by

Google

Proceedings  of  Amir  Timnr.  17

CHAPTER  V.

mXRIGUES  OF  TIMUB  WITH AMIR  hAjI BARLAS— IIIS  RETURK FROM  THE
BANKS  OP THE  JIHUN AND HIS MEETING WITH THE  THREE PRINCES.

[Arabic  verses] :

Judgment  is  preferable  to  tbe  valour  of  heroes;

The  former  is  the  first  of  virtues,  the  latter  stands  second ;

But  when  these  two  are  united  in  one  person,

That  person  can  attain  the  highest  summits  of  fame.

[Persian  verses] :

With  judgment  thou  canst  put  a  whole  army  to  rout.

One  man  with  a  sword  can  kill  as  many  as  a  hundred  men.^

The  events  about  to  be  related,  all  testify  to  the  truth  of  these  statements.
For  when  Amir  Hdji  Barl^  heard  of  the  advance  of  the  army  of  Jatah,  he
abandoned  his  own  country  and  set  out  for  Khor^n.  He  crossed  tbe  desert
and  arrived  at  the  River  Jihun.  Amir  Timur'  saw  well  that  if  he  continued
in  this  policy  of*  self-preservation,  his  native  country  would  go  to  ruin,  and
his  inherited  duminions  would  fall  into  confusion,  for  in  that  same  year  his
father  Amir  Trdgii  had  died.

[Verses] :  His  father  was  dead  and  his  uncle  had  flown :

The  people  were  exposed  to  the  ravages  of  a  stranger.

Its  enemies  had  placed  the  tribe  in  danger:

It  was  become  as  an  eagle  without  wings  or  feathers.

tinder  these  circumstances,  although  he  had  not  passed  the  age  of  twenty
five,  and  his  intelligence  had  not  yet  received  the  enlightenment  of  great
experience,  Amir  Timur  determined  upon  setting  these  affairs  in  order,  and
with  this  intent  took  counsel  with  Amir  Hdji,  saying :  "  If  the  kingdom
remains  without  a  head,  great  evils  will  most  surely  come  upon  it,  and  the
people  will  be  entirely  annihilated  by  the  violence  and  perfidy  of  enemies."

[Verses]:  A  kingdom  without  a  head  is  like  a  body  without  soul;
Certainly  a  body  without  a  head  is  as  good  as  destroyed.

''  Since  you  wish  to  proceed  into  Khor^^,  I  think  I  had  better  return  to
Kesh,  and  when  I  have  comforted  and  encouraged  the  inhabitants  of  that
place,  I  will  go  thence  to  the  court  of  the  Khdn. I  will  confer  with  the

*  Here  follow  some  rhetorical  phrases  and  more  verses,  which  are  omitted  in
the  translation. Their  burden  is  the  superiority  of  intelligence  over  the  sword.

'  Known  as  Tamerlane,  Timnrlang,  etc.  He  is  always  spoken  of  in  the  texts
of  the  Zafar-Nama  as '' SaJitb-d-Kirdn,**  or  "Lord  of  the  Conjunction";  but  I
propose  to  caU  him  throughout  **  Amir  Timur,**  which  is  not  only  correct,  but  is
snmcient  to  distinguish  him  from  other  Timurs.  Major  C.  Stewart,  in  the
Preface  to  the  Muffuidt  Timuri,  translates  *' Safiib-i-Kirdn "  as  ''Lord  of  the
Auspicious  Conjunction.**

c

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

LI

1 8  Tughluk  Timur's  Second

priuces  and  nobles  of  the  State,  so  that  this  country  and  the  people,  who  have
been  entrusted  to  our  care  by  God,  may  come  to  no  harm."  *

Having  thus  spoken  he  departed.  Amir  Hdji  was  fully  convinced  that  the
words  of  Amir  Timur  were  divinely  inspired,  and  therefore  accepted  all  his
decisions  and  approved  all  his  plans.  When  Amir  Timur  arrived  at  Ehuz&r,
he  met  Hdji  Mahmud  Shdh  Yasuri,  who  was  acting  as  guide  to  the  advance
body  of  the  army  of  Jatah.  The  troops  were  advancing  with  all  possible
haste,  whetting  the  teeth  of  their  lust  for  plunder  and  desire  for  booty,  and
sewing  themselves  purses  in  expectation  of  the  treasure  and  wealth  to  be
found  in  that  country.  Amir  Timur  succeeded  in  arranging  an  amnesty  with
the  generals  of  this  force,  saying:  ''Wait  here  while  I  go  and  see  the
princes  and,  with  them,  determine  upon  some  reasonable  and  advisable  plan."
The  wise  words  of  that  prince  were  as  heavenly  utterances,  and  had  such  an
effect  on  the  soldiers,  that,  in  spite  of  their  eagerness  to  advance,  they
remained  where  they  were.  Amir  Timur  passed  safely  on,  and  -  when  he
reached  Kesh  he  met  the  three  Amirs  of  Jatah,  who  had  themselves  just
arrived  there.  After  friendly  greetings  had  been  exchanged,  they  expressed
to  him  their  satisfaction  at  hearing  that  he  was  going  to  submit  himself  to
the  Khin;  and  they  appointed  him  governor  of  the  district,  which  had
formerly  belonged  to  Amir  Karich&r — ^that  is  to  say,  the  district  round  about
Kesh,  together  with  its  dependencies;  with  the  result  that,  by  his  wise
conduct,  the  torrent  of  distress  and  calamity  which  threatened  to  overwhelm
this  country  was  turned  aside,  and  the  people  again  enjoyed  that  repose
which  they  had  lost  all  hopes  of  recovering. [Verses]  .  •  •  •

In  the  opinion  of  the  most  ignorant  people,  it  seemed  that  a  great  piece  of
good  fortune  had  befallen  Amir  Timur,  but  Fate  had  still  a  thousand  successes
in  store  for  him.

After  this.  Amir  Timur  took  leave  of  the  princes  and  threw  the  shadow  of
his  protection  and  care  upon  the  tribe.  He  commanded  troops  to  be  collected
between  Shahr-i-Sabz  and  the  Biver  Jihun,  and  in  a  short  time,  having
mustered  a  very  large  army,  set  out,  together  with  Amir  Yasuri.  At  this
time  a  dispute  arose  among  the  princes  of  Jatah,  who  having  withdrawn  all
their  troops  from  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  returned  to  the  headquarters  of  Tughluk
Timur  Kh^n.  After  that,  Bdy^id  Jal^ir,  with  the  whole  of  his  following,
joined  the  side  of  Amir  Timur  and  Amir  Ehizar  Yasuri.

CHAPTBE  VI.

TUGHLUK  TIMUR  KHAH*8  SECOND  INVASION  OP  MAVARA-UK-NAHR-

When  desire  for  the  government  of  Mdvar^un-Nahr  a  second  time  seized
the  skirt  of  Tughluk  Timur  Kh&n*s  enthusiasm,  he  prepared  an  innumerable
army  and,  in  the  month  of  Jamdd-aldvla  of  the  year  762  (a.d.  1361),  con%-
spending  to  the  year  of  the  Ox  in  the  Tartar  cycle,  he  again  marched  for  that

*  He  probably  means  that  he  will  make  friends  with  the  chiefs,  and  persuade
them  not  to  do  the  country  any  injury.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

hivasion  of  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  19

country.  When  he  arrived  at  Khojand,  Amir  Biyizid  Jaldir  came  to  oflfer
him  his  services.  Amir  Bdyin  Saldnz  also,  as  a  sign  of  his  obedience,  went
forward  as  far  as  Samarkand  to  meet  the  Khdn,  and  Hdji  Barlds,  although  at
the  time  of  the  Khin's  first  invasion  he  had  opposed  him,  trusting  to  Provi-
dence, now  presented  himself  before  him.  In  the  meanwhile  the  Ehdn  had
given  orders  to  his  men  to  capture  Amir  Bdy^id  and  put  him  to  death.
Amir  Haji  Barlds,  feariug  a  similar  fate,  fled  towards  Kesh.  He  got  together
some  of  his  own  tribe  and  led  them  across  the  Jihun,  but  they  were  attacked
by  the  Kashmir  ^  regiment  of  the  Jatah  army,  who  were  pursuing  them,  and
a  battle  took  place,  in  which  Jugh^m  Barl^  was  killed,  and  Amir  H&ji
retired  to  Ehordsdn.  On  his  arrival  at  Khorasha,  which  is  a  village  ot
Buluk-i- Juvin,*  a  dependency  of  SebzvAr,  he  was  seized  by  a  band  of  brigands
and,  together  with  his  brother  Idegu,  was  killed.  After  the  conquest  of
Khor^sdn  (which  event  made  Amir  Timur  feel  himself  in  some  way  avenged)
and  after  some  of  them^  had  been  put  to  death,  that  village  became  a  fief  of
the  heirs  of  Amir  Hiji,  and  up  to  the  present  time  the  inhabitants  thereof  are
their  subjects  and  agents.

Among  the  Amirs  at  the  court  of  Jatah  was  a  certain  Amir  Hamid,  of  the
tribe  of  Kurlukut,*  who  was  distinguished  above  his  peers  at  the  court  by  his
wisdom  and  common  sense.  He  had  free  access  to  the  Khdn,  and  whatever
he  proposed  in  the  way  of  advice  or  approval,  was  acceptable.  At  this  time
he  be^  to  praise  and  extol  the  virtues  of  Amir  Timur  to  the  Khdn,  and  he
begged  the  Khdn  to  restore  to  the  prince,  the  territory  that  was  his  by  right
of  inheritance.  The  Khdn  lent  a  favourable  ear  to  his  entreaties,  and  a
messenger  was  immediately  despatched  to  fetch  Amir  Timur.  The  prince
accordingly  came  to  the  Kh&n,  received  from  him  the  warmest  welcome,

'  All  the  texts  have  the  word  *'  Kashmir,"  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the
reading.  The  question  is  as  to  the  fact  mentioned.  It  seems  almost  impossible
to  imagine  that  there  was  a  regiment  of  Kashmiris  in  the  service  of  the  Moghul
Khans.  No  doubt  the  Buddhists  of  Kashmir  had  intercourse  with  those  of
Eastern  Turkistan,  and  more  especially  with  Khotan ;  and  a  certain  number
may  have  found  their  way  into  the  service  of  the  Khans,  but  they  must  have
been  differently  constituted  to  the  Kashmiris  of  the  present  day,  if  they  became
soldiers.  Possibly  all  strangers  who  came  into  the  country  from  the  side  of
Kashmir  were  called  Kashmiris,  and  if  so  there  may  have  been,  among  them,
Hindus  and  others  with  sufficiently  warlike  qualities  to  enlist  as  fighting-men.
But  perhaps  the  most  likely  explanation  is  that  they  were  slaves,  or  descendants
of  slaves,  and  of  prisoners,  carried  off  during  the  earlier  Mongol  invasions  of
countries  in  the  direction  of  Kashmir.  In  this  case,  little  but  the  name  of
Kashmiri  would  have  remained  to  such  people,  a  century  and  a  half  later.

'  Probably  the  plain  of  Juvain  (or  Jagatai  Juvain),  which  lies  to  the  north
and  north-west  of  Sabzawdr  in  Khorasan.  B\ibik  means  **  a  district.''  Kharcuiha
most  likely  stands  for  Kud&shah,  the  name  of  a  village  in  the  Juvain  plain,
marked  on  modem  maps.

'  By  the  word  *'  them,"  the  brigands  seem  to  be  intended.

*  Probably  the  Karluh,  in  the  Mongol  plural,  is  the  tribe  meant  The  Karluk
were  certainly  Turks  by  origin,  and  in  Sir  H.  Howorth's  opinion  were  of  the
XJighur  race.  Bashid-ud-Din  enters  them  under  the  Turki  tribes,  pure  and
simple.  At  the  time  of  Ghingiz,  they  appear  to  have  inhabited  the  country  north
of  the  Tian  Shan,  but  later  they  probably  pushed  farther  towards  tiie  west.  From
Br.  Bretschneider  we  learn  that  the  Karluk  are  repeatedly  noticed  in  the
Chinese  histories  under  such  names  as  Ko-erh-lu^  Ha-la-lut  etc.  (See  for  Howorth,
Sect  IV.  of  Introduction ;  Bashid-ud-Din  in  Erdmann's  Uberg.  d.  T&rk,  Volker'
gtanme;  Bretschneider,  ii.,  pp.  89-41).  Communities  of  Karlaks  are  found
at  the  present  day  in  and  around  Badakhshiin,  where  they  are  regarded  as  Turks
and  speak  the  Turk!  language.

C  2

Digitized  by

Google

20  Tughluk  Ttimir's  Second

and  was  appointed  Governor  of  Kesh  and  Tumdn,^  together  with  their
dependencies.

In  the  winter  of  that  year,  the  Khin  determined  to  make  war  upon  Amir
Husain,^  and  set  out  against  him.  Amir  Husain,  for  his  part,  also  raised  an
army  and  led  it  as  far  as  the  River  Vakhsh.  Here  he  pitched  his  camp.
When  the  Khan  hjid  i^asscd  the  Iron  Gate'  and  arrived  near  to  where  Amir

'  For  Tumdii^  prohably  Kdrman  (sometimes  written  Kennine)  should  be  read.
The  town  stands  on  the  Zurafshdn,  to  the  north-cast  of  Bokhara.

*  Husain  was  grandson  of  the  Amir  Kazagiin,  a  prince  of  the  tribe  of  Tahit
(according  to  Pctis  de  la  Croix)  who  had  revolted  against  Sultan  Kazan,  the
*'  Grand  Can  " — that  is,  the  Khuk^n  of  the  Chaghatai.  {Uiti.  de  Timur  Be^.,  i.,
p.  2.)  The  word  Tahit  is  probably  a  corruption ;  it  should  perhaps  read  Tait,  a
difference  only  of  a  dot  under  one  letter.

'  The  texts,  in  this  place,  have  Darhand-i-Ahanitij  or  "  Iron  Gate,"  but  in  all
other  places  KulugJui,  the  name  by  which  the  pass  was  usually  known.  It  is
often  mentioned  by  ancient  travellers,  but  has  very  rarely  been  visited  in  modem
times,  at  any  rate  up  to  within  the  last  few  years,  or  before  the  Russians  became
possessors  of  Samarkand  and  Khokand.  The  gates,  in  ancient  times,  were  a
reality,  for  the  Chinese  traveller  Hiuen  Tsane,  who  passed  the  Darband  in
630  A.D.,  describes  the  defile  as  **  closed  by  folding  gates  clamped  with  iron."
(See  Sir  H.  Yule  in  Wood's  Oxtu,  1872,  p.  Ixix.)  At  the  time  of  Ghingiz  Khan,
when  Chinese  travellers  frequently  went  backwards  and  forwards  between  China
and  the  conqueror's  camp  in  various  parts  of  Central  Asia,  the  pass  of  the  Iron
Gates  is  frequently  mentioned  under  the  name  of  Tie-men-Kuan  (literally.  Iron
Gate  barrier) ;  and  one  of  them,  the  Taoist  monk  Chang  Chun,  describes  his
passage  through  the  defile  in  1222,  with  carts  and  an  escort  of  a  hundred  Mongol
and  Muhammadan  soldiers :  "  We  crossed  the  mountains  in  a  south-east  direction
and  found  them  very  high.  Masses  of  rock  were  lying  scattered  about  The  escort
themselves  pulled  the  carts,  and  took  two  days  to  pass  to  the  other  side  of  the
mountains."  (Chinese  Mediaval  TraveUere  to  the  West,  by  Dr.  E.  Bretechneider,
1875,  pp.  41,  42.)  The  gates  themselves  seem,  thus,  to  have  disappeared  by  the
thirteenth  century,  and  they  had  certainly  done  so  at  the  begmning  of  the
fifteenth,  when  Ruy  Gk>nzalez  Clavijo  visited  the  spot,  in  the  course  of  his  em-
bassy (1403-n5)  from  Henry  III.  of  Spain  to  Amir  Timur.  He  wrote :  *'  These
mountains  of  the  Gates  of  Iron  are  without  woods,  and  in  former  times  they  say
that  there  were  great  gates  covered  with  iron  placed  across  the  pass,  so  that  no
one  could  pass  without  an  order."  (See  Embassy  of  Ruy  G.  Clavijo  to  Court  of
Timur,  by  C.  R.  Markham,  Hakluyt  Series,  1859,  p.  122.)  From  the  time  of
Don  Roy  down  to  1875,  when  the  Russian  Hiaar  Expedition  passed  the  Darband,
no  European  appears  to  have  seen  (or,  at  any  rate,  to  have  described)  the  defile.
Mr.  N.  A.  Mayef,  who  accompanied  Uie  Russian  Expedition,  described  the  spot
thus :  "  The  famous  ravine  of  the  Iron  Gate  winds  through  a  high  mountain
chain,  about  twelve  versts  to  the  west  of  Derbent  It  is  a  narrow  cleft,  5  to
35  paces  wide  and  about  two  versts  long.  It  is  known  now  as  Buz-ghala  Khiina
(t.e.,  the  House  of  Goats).  Its  eastern  termination  is  3540  feet  above  the  sea ;  its
western  termination  8740  feet.  A  torrent,  Buz-ghala  Khdna  buliik,  flows  through
it  .  .  ." (Geogr.  Magazine,  Dec.,  1876,  p.  328.)

The  term  *'  Iron  Ghite,"  or  at  any  rate  **  Kulugha,"  seems  often  to  have  been
applied  to  narrow  defiles  in  mediaeval  times;  thus  there  is  the  gate  in  tho
"Wall  of  Alexander,"  near  Darband,  on  tho  west  shore  of  the  Caspian,  which
is  still,  according  to  Sir  H.  Yule,  called  in  Turkish  JDeniir-Kdpi,  or  Iron
Grate.  Another  is  the  defile  of  Talki  leading  from  the  Sairam  (Nor)  or  Sut
(Kul)  lake  southward,  to  the  Hi  river.  This  was  called  Kulugha  by  Turki-
speaking  people,  and  Timur-Khalaga  by  tho  Mongols ;  and  Dr.  Bretschneider
explains  that  the  word  Kludaga,  or  Khalga,  means,  in  Mongol,  a  pass  or  gate,
while  Timur  signifies  iron.  The  Chinese  traveller  Chang-Te,  in  1259,  passed
through  the  Talki  defile,  and  described  it  as  "  very  rugged,  with  overhanging
rocks."  He  speaks  of  it  by  a  transliterated  Mongol  name  which  stands  for
'*  iron  roadway."  Possibly — though  I  think  not— it  may  be  this  Talki  Kuiualm
which  the  historians  of  Timur  refer  to  when,  in  recording  his  last  expedition  but
one  against  the  Jatah  Moghuls,  tliey  describe  the  route  taken  by  the  division  of
the  army  commanded  by  Timur's  son,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza,  from  Yulduz  towards

Digitized  by

Google

Invasion  of  Mdvard-nn-Nahr,  21

Ilusain  was  encamped,  the  two  armies  came  in  sight  of  one  anuthtr  and  were
preparing  to  engage,  when  Kaikhosru  of  Khatldn,  together  with  his  men,  left
the  side  of  Amir  Husain  and  joined  the  army  of  the  Khdn,  thus  breaking  the
order  of  battle  of  the  former.*  When  Amir  Husain  perceived  this,  he  turned
and  fled.  The  victorious  Kh&n  went  in  pursuit  of  him,  and  crossing  the
Jihun,  penetrated  as  far  as  Kunduz.  His  troops  pillaged  all  the  country
round  about,'as  far  as  the  mountains  of  Hindu  Kush,  and  spent  the  following
spring  and  summer  in  that  region.

Kashghur.  At  any  rate  the  Iron  Gate  near  Kesh,  in  Transoxiana,  cannot  have
been  meant,  as  P^tis  de  la  Croix,  in  reading  the  ^/ar-^ama,  and  Price,  reljing
upon  the  Bauzai-ua-sa/d^  seem  to  have  assumed.  From  the  Yulduz  valley,  Omar
Snaikh  is  made  to  return  to  Andijan  by  way  of  Kuchar,  Uch-Tnrrtin,  and
Kashghar,  and  to  fight  a  battle  with  an  Amir  of  Jatah  in  tlie  pass  of  Kuhtgha^  on
the  way.  While  it  is  scarcely  conceivable  that  he  should  have  marched  first
into  the  heart  of  Transoxiana,  there  have  met  with  a  Jatah  Amir  far  in  the  rear
of  Tlmur'a  army,  and  then  have  returned  to  Andijan,  it  is  just  possible,  though
improbable,  that  he  may  have  first  made  an  expedition  north-westward  to  the
Talki  defile  and  thence  back  to  Kuchar.  I  suspect  that  in  the  hills  between  the
Ynlduz  and  Kuchar,  there  was  yet  another  defile  known  by  the  name  of  Kulmha,
or  *  Pass,'  and  tiiat  it  may  be  represented  on  modem  maps  by  the  pass  of  Kui-Kulo.
This  view  is  supported  by  the  circumstance  that  the  victory  over  the  Jatah  Amir
is  mentioned,  in  the  Zafar-Nama^  as  having  been  won  before  Omar  Shaikh's
arrival  at  Kuchar,  and  without  any  allusion  to  a  return  march  northward,  for
after  the  battle,  he  U  said  to  have  continued  his  march  by  way  of  Kuchar,  etc.,
to  Kashghar.  In  this  case,  the  translators  have  probably  been  led  into  calling
the  pass  **  lion  Gate,"  on  aooount  of  the  name  Kulugha  being  identical  with  one
of  those  used  for  the  Darband-i-Ahanin  near  Kesh.  In  all  likelihood,  there  were
many  passes  in  various  parts  of  Turki  and  Mongol-speaking  Asia,  which  were
known  simply  by  the  name  Kulugha^  though  they  may  have  had  more  specific
local  names  besides,  such  as  Ttmur,  or  Demir,  Kiduglia.  The  error  £eillen  into,  in
this  case,  was  to  apply  the  Persian  translation  of  one  of  these  specific  names,  to
all  Kulugha,  or  passes.  (See  for  Tcdki,  etc.,  Bretschneider's  Researches^  i.,  p.  127,
and  ii.,  pp.  34-5  and  230.)

^  Amir  Husain  had  put  to  death  Kaikobad,  the  brother  of  Kaikhusru  {Hut.
de  Timur  Bee,  i.,  p.  191.)  These  Zoroastrian  names,  occurring  in  KliatUn  at
this  period,  are  remarkable.  As  regards  the  state  or  province  of  Khatldn,  KhutUn,
or  Khotl,  Sir  H.  Yule  located  it  (m  1872)  somewhat  north  of  the  present  KoUb
and  west  of  Darwdz ;  but  Mr.  Mayef,  who  travelled  in  this  region  three  years
liter,  believes  Kurgdn-Tube  {i.e.j  Kurghun  Tipa)  on  the  lower  Surkhdb  (or
Yiiklish)  and  a  short  distance  west  of  Kolab,  to  have  been  the  centre  of  the
ancient  Kbatldn.  He  quotes  Ibn  Dast,  an  author  of  tho  tenth  century,  to  the
effect  that  the  kingdom  of  Khotl,  or  Khatlan,  included  the  lower  valley  of  tho
Yakhsh  and  that  of  the  Kafir-nahdn,  with  the  town  of  Kabtidian,  and  reached
also  to  Faizabad  on  the  upper  waters  of  that  river.  Khatlan  existed  at  least
down  to  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  for  in  1498  we  find  Khusru  Shah,  of
Kunduz,  bestowing  the  governorship  of  it  on  his  brother  Wall.  Both  the  Stato
and  the  name  have  since  disappeared.  (See  Yule  /.  R.  A.  Socy.,  vi.,  pt.  1, 1872,
p.  97,  and  his  map  in  Wood's  Oxi«,  1872 ;  Mayef  in  (reograph.  Mag,,  Dec,  1876,
p.  328 ;  Erskine  Hi$t  of  India,  I,  p.  200;  and  Memoirs  of  Jiaher,  pp.  xxxii.  acq.)
Tho  Chinese  of  the  Ming  period  know  the  country  by  tlio  unmcs  Ko-ie-lamj  and
Uu-Ulan. (Bretschncider,  ii.,  pp.  277  and  315.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

22  Return  of  Tughluk  to  his  Capital,

CHAPTER  VII.

THE  BbTURN  OP  TUGHLUK  TIMUB  KHAN  TO HIS  OWN  CAPITAL.

On  tho  approach  of  autumn,  the  Ehdn  set  out  for  Samarkand,  and  on  the
journey  gave  orders  for  Amir  Bayin  Salduz  to  be  killed,  according  to  the  code
of  the  Moghuls.^  When  he  reached  Samarkand,  he  had  the  whole  of  Mdvard-
un-Nahr  under  his  command  and  rule,  and  all  the  nobles  and  princes  of  the
country  were  compelled  to  swear  allegiance  to  him.  Some,  however,  whom
he  suspected  of  treachery,  he  treated  as  he  had  treated  Amir  Bay&n  Salduz.
Others,  whom  he  found  he  could  rely  on,  he  bestowed  favours  and  distinctions
upon.  He  entrusted  the  government  of  the  conquered  districts  to  his  son
Ilyds  Ehwdja  Oghl&n,  and  he  assigned  to  him  a  number  of  the  amirs  and
soldiers  of  the  army  of  Jatah,  over  whom  he  appointed  Begjik.  Amir  Timur
was  charged  with  the  most  important  duties  in  the  administration  of  the  State,
under  the  orders  of  the  young  prince ;  and  when  the  Khan  had  assured  him-
self of  the  sagacity  of  Amir  Timur,  he  handed  over  the  whole  direction  of  the
State  to  him,  and  returned  to  his  own  seat  of  government.  Tughluk  Timur,
in  short,  again  left  the  country  of  M&vard-un-Nahr.  He  had  given  supreme
authority  over  all  the  princes  and  people  of  Jatah,  to  Amir  Begjik,  and  had
deputed  Amir  Timur  to  look  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  But  Amir  Begjik
did  not  obey  the  instructions  of  the  Khsin,  for  not  only  did  he  exercise
tyranny  and  violence,  but  even  attempted  open  revolt  [against  the  Kb^].
When  Amir  Timur  saw  that  the  orders  of  the  Kbdn  were  not  being  complied
with,  and  that,  in  consequence,  the  State  would  fall  into  disorder,  he  did  not
think  fit  to  stay  any  longer  in  the  country,  but  fled,  with  the  intention  of
discovering  Amir  Husain.  Since  he  could  learn  no  news  of  the  whereabouts  of
Amir  Husain,  he  turned  towards  the  deserts.^

'  The  term  is  Ba  Ydsdk  rasdnidan.  It  may  be  taken  to  mean,  to  try  a  man
and  punish  him  (in  this  case  with  death)  acoording  to  the  system  of  the  Ydtdk.

The  Ydzdk,  or  Yd88d,  Ydza,  etc.  (sometimes  called  the  Turah)^  was  the  legal
code  of  the  Mongols,  said  to  have  been  instituted  by  Ghingiz  Khan.  P^tis  de  la
Croix  hsoids  it  down  in  twenty-two  sections,  but  says  that  there  were  other
sections  which  have  not  been  specified  by  the  authorities  he  used.  Deguignes
summarises  from  P^tis,  but  omits  the  22nd  section.  Section  8  of  the  Yas^k,
forbids  any  prince,  under  pain  of  death,  to  cause  himself  to  be  proclaimed  Khan,
without  having  first  been  elected  by  a  general  assembly,  or  Diet  (oidled  Kuriltai\
formed  of  the  chiefs  of  the  nation.  (Fetis  de  la  Croix,  HiiL  de  Oenghiz  Can,
p.  98 :  Deguignes,  Hist,  dea  Hun$,  iii.,  pp.  72-3.)  Renaudot,  on  the  authority  of
Mirkhund  and  Khundamir,  calls  the  Ydza  the  religion  of  the  Mongols,  but  this
can  hardly  be  correct  {Ancient  Accounts  of  India  and  CJiina,  1783,  p.  139.)
Baber  often  alludes  to  the  Turah,  and  expressly  says  that  they  were  not  "  of
diTine  appointment,"  though  they  had  been  neld  m  respect  by  all  his  forefathen.
Erskine  translates  the  word  *'  Institutions  "  (of  Chinnz  Khan),  and  says,  *'  they
seem  to  have  been  a  collection  of  the  old  usages  of  tne  Moghul  tribes  .  .  .  pro-
bably merely  traditionary,  and  never  reduced  into  writioK."  In  Baber^s  days
they  were  still  respected  among  the  wandering  tribes,  but  did  not  form  the  law
of  his  kingdom,  **  since  they  had  been  introduced  before  the  Musulman  religion,
and  were,  in  many  respects,  inconsistent  with  the  Koran."  {Baber,  xlviii.,  uq.)
Sir  H.  Howorth  has  fully  discussed  the  Ynza  or  Tnrah  in  the  Indian  Antiquary
for  July,  1882.  In  Amyot's  Diet.  Tatare-Mantcltou-Franfaia  (1789,  i.,  p.  xviii.)
Toura  or  Ta>ourdt  is  said  to  be  the  Arabic  equivalent  of  Ydssd.

'  Mirza  Haidar  breaks  off  here  at  an  interesting  port  of  the  adventures  of
Tlmiur  and  Husain. The  Za/ar-Nama  goes  on  to  relate  how  Timur  wandered

Digitized  by  VjL^OS!  LC

Ilyds  Khwdja  Khdn,  23

In  short,  the  subBtance  of  what  we  find  in  the  Moghul
traditions  is,  that  Tughluk  Timur  Khdn's  dominions  extended  as
far  as  Samarkand,  and  even  further,  but  no  precise  facts  have
come  down  to  us.  Amir  Bulaji,  who  has  been  already  mentioned
as  having  raised  Tughluk  Timur  Ehdn  to  the  Khdnate,  sought
nine  privileges  for  himself  from  the  Eh4n,  which  privileges  had
been  granted  to  his  ancestors  by  Chingiz  Eh&n,  and  which  my
family  have  inherited.  I  have  seen  them  myself.  They  were
written  in  Kunduz,  in  the  Moghul  language,  and  I  mention  this
circumstance  because,  by  it,  the  Moghuls  prove  that  the  Kh&n*s
rule  extended  as  far  as  Eunduz.  It  is  stated,  in  the  Zafar-Nama^
that  the  Kh&n  died  in  the  year  764.  The  Moghul  traditions  say
that  Tughluk  Timur,  at  the  age  of  16,  was  brought  from  [the]
Ealmak  [country]  by  Amir  Bulaji,  as  has  been  related;  at  the
age  of  18  he  became  Khan,  at  the  age  of  24  he  became  a  Musul-
man,  and  died  at  the  age  of  34. He  was  bom  in  the  year  730.

CHAPTER VIII.

ILYAS KHWAJA  KUAN.

The  Moghuls  have  preserved  no  traditions  concerning  this  Ilyas
Khwaja  Khan,  but  I  have  heard  my  father  mention  his  name,
and  the  Zafar-Ndma  makes  occasional  mention  of  him,  in  con-
nection with  other  events.  These  passages  I  have  transcribed  in
substance.

CHAPTER  IX.

BETURM OF  AMIR  HUSAIK AND  AMIR  TIMUR  TO  TAlKlf  AN  AND  BADAKH
SHAn, and  THE  TREATIES  BETWEEN  THEM.

The  two  princes  then  proceeded  to  Kunduz,  and  there  collected  some  troops
from  the  tribe  of  Bolddi.^ Thence  they  marched  towards  Badakbsbdn,  and

CD  tbrongh  the  deserts  of  Khiva,  till  at  length  he  found  Hosain  near  the  wells  of
Saghej;  how  they  went  on  together  to  Khiva,  where  Takil,  or  Jakil,  the
governor,  tried  to  seize  them  by  treachery— a  design  which  they  frustrated  by
again  taJcing  to  the  desert,  where  they  met  with  a  series  of  adventures,  until  ai
last  they  fell  in  with  friends,  and  collected  a  small  force  willing  to  follow  them,
(ifirt.  de  Timur  Bec,^  i.,  pp.  45-54.)  These  were  the  adventures  of  Timur  which
attracted  the  attention  of  Gibbon.
>  Or  Buruldai — the  reading  is  uncertain.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

24 Return  of  Timur  and  Husain  to  Badakhshdn,

when  they  arrived  at  Taikbdn/  they  concluded  a  peace  with  the  Kings  of
Badakhshdn  and  e£Eiaced  every  trace  of  bitterness  of  feeling.  From  there
again  they  went  to  Arhang,*  where  they  crossed  the  river  onto  the  side  of
S^-Sar£i,'and  advanced  towards  Ehatl^n ;  then,  having  traversed  the  desert,
they  arrived  at  a  p'luse  called  GulaV,*  where  they  encamped.  In  accordance
with  the  words  "  and  we  have  ordained  the  night  as  a  time  for  repose,"  they
retired  to  rest  After  Amir  Timur  had  taken  off  his  clothep,  with  the  inten-
tion of  going  to  bed,  and  had  withdrawn  his  blessed  feet  from  the  fatiguing
companionship  of  his  bootF,  Amir  Husain  sent  a. person  to  beg  him  to  come
to  him,  and  when  he  arrived,  he  found,  among  those  present  in  the  assembly,
Pul^  Bughd  and  Shir  Bahr^m.  Amir  Husain  began  to  make  complaints  of
Shir  Bahrdm  to  Amir  Timur,  saying :  **  We  are  now  close  upon  the  enemy ;
this  is  not  the  time  for  hhn  to  abandon  us ;  it  is  not  acting  in  an  honourable
way.**  Amir  Timur  did  his  best  to  induce  Shir  Bahr&m  not  to  desert  them,
but  without  success,  and  this  latter  set  out  for  Biljav^n.^

In  the  meanwhile,  the  news  was  confirmed  that  Tughluk  Salduz  and
Kaikhusru  were  advancing  with  the  army  and  many  of  the  Amirs  of  Jatah,
and  besides  these  there  were  assembled,  between  ZHXk^  and  the  *'  Bridge  of
Stone  "  \F%d  i  Sanginy  Timur  son  of  Bubakan,  Sdrik,  Shengum,  Tughluk
Khwdja  brother  of  Haji  Beg,  Kuj  Timur  son  of  Begjik,  and  other  com--
manders  of  thousands  [tuman]  and  regiments  [ktuhun]  with  fifty  thousand

*  Taikhdn  is  often  found  written  for  Talikan.  There  were  several  places  of
this  name  in  Khoras^n  and  Persia,  but  the  town  alluded  to  here  is  the  one  which
lies  about  forty-four  miles  east  of  Eunduz.  Abul-feda  tells  us  that  it  was  distant
from  the  border  of  "  Khotal  *'— t.c,  KhatUn—seven  farasangs,  or  some  twenty*
eight  miles. (Beinaud's  tronsL,  il.,  pt.  2,  p.  207.)

'  ArJiang  (or  Arheug,  or  Arhenk)  has  been  shown,  by  Sir  H.  Yale,  to  have
been  a  small  state  lying  *'  astride  upon  the  Oxus,"  to  the  north-west  of  Tallk^o,
and  near  the  present  Hazrat  Imtoi.  Petis  de  la  Croix  mentions  its  being  on  the
south  of  the  Oxus,  near  S&li-Sahii,  but  his  geography  is  not  always  quite
accurate.  In  the  IfutittUes  of  Timur,  Arhang  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with
Kbatldn,  and  as  if  adjoining  that  province  (p.  90).

*  Sdli'Sardi  is  marked  by  P^tis  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Oxus,  and  may
perhaps  be  represented  by  the  present  village  of  Sarai,  shown  on  some  modern
maps  about  twelve  miles  below  the  month  of  the  Kokcha.  Sdli-Sarai  is  often
mentioned  in  the  Zafar-Nama,  and  was  no  doubt  the  site  of  a  ford  across  the
Oxus. {Higt,  de  Timur  Bee,  1.)

*  A  village  called  ChUi-zindan  is  marked  on  Mayefs  map,  about  halfway  between
the  Bridge  and  Baljudn,  which  may  perhaps  represent  Gnlak.  {Geo.  Mag.,  Dec.,
1876.)  It  is  obviously  the  same  place  as  that  mentioned  lower  down,  under  the
name  of  Kulak  or  Dasht-i-Kulak  (p.  238).

*  Baljudn— of  modem  maps.

*  Or  8ar  Jala — ^probably  a  spot  lying  northvrard  of  the  Bridge.

'  This  bridge  is  often  mentioned  by  medi«Bval  and  even  ancient  authors.  (See
Yule  in  Wood's  Oxus,  p.  Ixxxii.)  It  spans  the  Upper  Vakhsh  (or  Surkhdb),  where
the  river  is  crossed  by  the  road  leading  from  Baljudn,  north-westward  to  Faizabad
and  Kafimahdn.  The  first  modem  description  of  the  locality  was  that  of  Mr.  Mayef,
after  his  iouruey  of  1875.  Ho  wrote :  '*  Where  the  Vakhsh  approaches  the  boundary
of  the  Khanate  of  Bukhara,  it  rashes  through  a  narrow  valley,  hemmed  in  by  tho
steep  slopes  of  the  Nur-t&gh  and  Khoja-Yukur  [ranges].  This  defile,  at  one  of
its  narrowest  parts,  where  the  rooks  approach  each  other  within  twenty  paoes,  is
spanned  by  the  well-known  stone  hndge  of  Pul-i-Sengi.  An  exceedingly  diffi-
cult path  leads  up  to  this  bridge  from  the  bank  of  tho  Vakhsh  ....  At  many
parts  of  it  steps  are  cut  into  the  rock.  .  .  ."  {Geographical  Mag.,  Dec,  1876,
p.  328.)  Kostenko's  Gazetteer  says  the  length  of  the  bridge  is  ten  paces,  and
that  it  is  supported  on  two  projecting  rocks,  rising  high  above  the  level  of  the  river,
which  is  not  more  than  twenty  paces  in  width.  The  steps  cut  in  the  rocks  arc
also  mentioned  hero. (ffw««an-T«rW»/an  Gazetteer,  Calcutta,  1882,  ii.,  p.  182.)

Digitized  by

Google

Timur  passes  tlu  Sione  Bridge.  25

men,  tliou<;h  more  than  six  thousand  had  deserted  the  royal  camp.  But
Amir  Timur  placed  firm  trust  in  the  assistance  of  (rod,  and  comforted  his  men
with  the  verse^  *'  How  many  armies  small  in  number,  have  overcome  infinite
hosts,  by  the  permission  of  God,"  which  he  seemed  to  hear  repeated  in  his  car
by  a  voice  from  the  unseen  world.

[Verses] : Though  the  ocean  of  the  world  bo  full  of  alligators,
And  desert  and  mountain  full  of  tigers,
If  a  man  have  good  fortune  for  a  friend,
Not  a  hair  of  his  head  will  be  touched.

With  two'thousand  brave  men,  he  marched  out  to  meet  the  enemy,  and  the
opposing  forces  met  on  the  Stone  Bridge.  A  battle  ensued  which  lasted  from
early  morning  till  nightfall;  and  during  all  that  day  these  brave  and
experienced  warriors  fought,  until  they  had  no  strength  left  to  continue.
Moreover  the  inequality  of  the  forces  was  great.

Amir  Timur,  considering  the  situation,  saw  that  victory  could  not  be  with
his  side,  if  the  sword  of  valour  were  not  brightened  with  the  polish  of  good
counsel,  and  he  understood  that  if  the  arrow  of  courage  were  not  let  fiy  from
the  thumb-stall  of  deliberation,  its  whistling  would  not  sound  to  them  as
news  of  triumph.  These  things  he  pondered  in  his  mind,  until  the  reed  of
absurance  and  conviction,  painted  a  picture  of  welfare  and  safety  upon  the
tablet  of  his  enlightened  intelligence.

CHAPTER  X.

txmuk's  passage  of  the  kiver  at  the  stone  bridge,  aud  the  flight
of  the  army  op  jatah.

Amir  Ttmur  ordered  Amir  Musa,  Amir  Mnvayid  ArUt  aud  Uchkar&  Bahadur,
with  a  force  of  500  picked  men,  to  wait  for  the  enemy  near  the  Stone  Bridge,
while  he  himself,  with  1500  men,  swam  the  river  at  midnight  and  took  up
his  position  on  the  mountains.  On  the  following  day,  the  sentinels  of  the
enemy  saw,  by  their  footprints,  that  they  had  crossed  the  river  during  the
night;  and  they  were  very  much  perturbed  in  consequence.  When  night
set  in.  Amir  Timur  commanded  his  soldiers  to  light  a  great  number  of  fires
on  the  summits  of  the  highest  of  the  mountains ;  and  at  the  sight  of  these
fires  the  enemy  were  seized  with  fear  and  terror,  so  that  they  lost  heart  and
fied.  Thus  did  Grod,  without  the  trouble  of  a  battle,  scatter  this  numerous
army,  which  was  in  the  proportion  of  ten  warriors  to  one  of  their  opponents.
"  Verily  God  giveth  the  victory  to  whomsoever  He  will."

The  enemy  being  thrown  into  flight  and  confusion.  Amir  Timur  rushed
down  the  mountain  with  his  army,  like  a  raging  lion  or  a  mighty  boiling
torrent,  and  pursued  them  as  for  as  Gujarat ' — falling  upon  them  with  his
)ife-taking  sword  and  his  soul-biting  lance,  till  the  road  was  covered  with

'  This  pame  may  read  Gujardh. I  cannot  identify  the  place.

Digitized  by

Google

26  Flight  of  the  Army  of  Jatah.

the  heaps  of  their  slain.  In  this  place  he  halted,  victorious  and  happy,  while
Amir  Hnsain  with  the  rest  of  the  army  continaed  the  pursoit.  This
victory  helped  to  spread  the  fame  of  Amir  Timur  and  much  encouraged  his
troops.  Feeling  the  reality  and  importance  of  the  advantages  he  had  just
secured,  Amir  Timur  again  set  out  with  two  thousand  men ;  and  when  he
arrived  at  Euhlagha,^  the  people  of  Eesh  and  the  districts  round  about,
fleeing  from  the  army  of  Jatah,  kept  coming  to  him  in  detachments,  with
offers  to  serve  him  if  he  would  protect  them.  Out  of  the  two  thousand  men
Amir  Timur  had  brought  with  him,  he  selected  three  hundred  as  his  own
special  bodyguard.  With  these  he  advanced,  commanding  the  rest  to  stay
behind.  He  then  sent  on  two  hundred  of  these  men,  under  the  Amirs
Sulaim&n  Barlds,  Ghakui  Barlds,  Bahrdm  Jaliir,  Jaldluddin  Barlds,  Saifuddin
and  Yultimur,  to  Eesh,  telling  them  to  divide  into  four  squadrons,  and
ordering  every  man  to  suspend  from  either  side  of  his  horse,  a  large  leafy
branch,  in  order  that  much  dust  might  be  raised  and  so  cause  the  governor  of
Eesh,  if  he  saw  them,  to  beat  a  retreat'  They  carried  out  his  orders  exactly,
so  that  when  they  entered  the  plains  of  Eesh,  the  governor,  frightened  at
the  sight  of  so  much  dust,  took  to  flight,  and  they  entered  the  town,  where
they  occupied  themselves  with  the  appointment  of  officers  and  the  like.

Thus  the  boundless  favour  of  God  descended  in  such  a  manner  upon  this
king,  that  by  means  of  sparks  of  Are  he  was  able  to  put  an  army  to  flight,
and  with  dust  to  conquer  a  town.

[Verse] :  The  evil  eye  was  distant  from  him,  for  greater  successes  than  these
it  is  impossible  to  conceive.

At  that  time  Ily&s  Ehw&ja  Ehdn  was  encamped  at  Tash  Arighi,  which  is
ioMX  fardsangB  distant  from  Eesh ;  he  had  round  him  his  nobles  and  princes
and  an  innumerable  army.  About  this  time  Tughluk  Timur  EhAn  died.
Ulugh  Timur  and  Amir  Hamid  came  to  announce  the  news  to  Ily&s  Ehwaja
Eh&n  and  to  bring  him  bock  to  his  tribe,  that  he  might  rule  in  his
father's  stead.

Meanwhile,  Amir  Timur,  with  one  hundred  chosen  men,  having  marched
all  the  night,  came  to  Ehuzdr,  and  when  day  broke,  the  people  of  that  town
learnt  the  arrival  of  that  royal  prince  and  hastened  out  to  kiss  the  ground
in  obeisance  to  him.  He  then  combined  the  troops  of  Ehuzdr  and  Eesh,  and
put  Ehwdja  Silibari  in  command  of  the  rearguard.  With  this  mighty  army
he  set  out  for  Chekad&lik,  and  on  arrival  there,  pitched  his  camp.  At  that
place  too,  he  was  joined  by  Muhammad,  son  of  Salduz,  with  seven  regiments,
and  he  remained  there  seven  days.  In  the  meanwhile,  Amir  Husain  arrived
with  his  own  forces,  and  with  those  that  Amir  Timur  had  left  behind  at
Euhlagha.  Shir  Bahram  also,  who  had  separated  from  them  in  the  desert
[or  plain]  of  Gulak,  in  order  to  visit  his  own  people,  now  rejoined  them,
after  an  absence  of  forty-three  days.  They  then  all  set  forth  together,  under
the  command  of  Amir  Timur  and  Amir  Husain,  in  the  direction  of  Ehuzir,
and  on  their  arrival  there,  visited  the  tomb  of  Ehwdja  llesmes,'  in  the  name
of  whose  blessed  spirit  they  made  a  solemn  alliance  and  swore  eternal
friendship.

1  The  Iron  Gates.

•  Lit.  "and  if  a  darugjia  [superintendent]  were  there  he  would  flee."— R.
'  There  appears  to  be  something  wrong  about  this  name. It  should  be,
probably,  the  tomb  of  Shams-ud-Din.

Digitized  by

Google

Dream  of  Timur.  27

CHAPTER  XI.

THE  DRlvAM OF  AMIR  TIMUR, WHICH HE LOOKS  U1X)N AS  A  GOOD  OMKN,
AND  WHICH  INDUCKS  HIM  TO  MAKE  WAR  ON  ILYAS  KHWAJA KHAN.

The  Prophet  (upon  whom  be  the  peace  of  God)  said :  '*  True  dreams  are  one
of  the  forty-six  gifts  of  prophecy,'*  jEuid  the  explanation  of  this  tradition  is
that  when  the  all-knowing,  all-powerful  God  (may  He  he  exalted  and
magnified),  places  upon  the  forehead  of  some  great  person  the  distinctive
mark  of  His  favour,  He  so  enlightens  him  that  He  causes  him  to  understand
the  secrets  of  the  invisible  world,  reveals  unto  his  human  spirit  the  things
that  are  to  come  to  pass,  and  makes  him  aware  of  occurrences  that  have
not  yet  taken  place.  Joseph  was  informed,  by  revelation,  of  the  coming
of  his  father  and  brothers  several  years  before  that  event  took  place.  And
Muhammad,  Prince  of  the  Prophets,  had  revealed  to  him  the  conquest
ofMekka.

In  the  same  way,  as  Amir  Timur  was  one  day  reflecting  upon  the  straits
he  was  in,  and  the  smallness  of  his  army  in  comparison  with  that  of  the
enemy,  and  considering  what  would  be  the  best  line  of  action,  he  fell  asleep,
and  heard  a  voice  say  to  him,  in  eloquent  language :  '*  Be  of  good  cheer  and
grfove  not,  for  God  has  given  you  victory."  When  he  awoke  from  his
slumber,  he  asked,  "  Did  anyone  speak  ?  "  All  present  replied, "  Indeed  not  1 "
So  he  was  convinced  that  the  words  were  spoken  by  a  voice  from  heaven,  and
that  the  sweet-scented  breeze  of  good  news  had  blown  from  the  rose-garden
of  God's  graciousness  and  favour.  His  confidence  in  the  assistance  of  God
was  absolute,  and  he  went  to  Amir  Husain  with  fresh  enthusiasm  and
renewed  vigour,  telling  him  what  had  happened.  The  good  tidings  were
spread  about  among  all  the  troops,  and  they  were  much  encouraged ;  their
obedient  hearts  blossomed  out,  as  do  the  rosebuds  with  the  zephyr  of
the  morn.

CHAPTER  XII.

BATl'LE  OP  AMIR HUSAIN AND  AMIR  TIMUR WITH THE  XKSiY OF
JATAH. VICTORY  OF  THE AMIRS OVER  THE  JATAH.

Amik  Husain  and  Amir  Timur,  having  offered  up  praise  and  thanksgiving
tu  the  Padishah  of  Padishahs  (may  His  name  bo  exalted),  mounted  their
horses  and  began  to  make  preparations  for  battle.  They  divided  the  army
into  two  parts ;  Amir  Husain  commanded  the  right  wing,  and  raised  the
victorious  standard,  while  Amir  Timur  led  the  left  win^  of  his  troops,  who
were  so  accustomed  to  victory.  Having  arranged  all  this,  and  having  put
the  army  into  order  of  battle,  they  went  forward.

The  enemy  meanwhile  were  at  Tdsh  Arigbi,  and  they,  in  the  same  manner,
divided  their  forces  into  two  parts;  Ilyds  Khw&ja  Kh^n  and  Amir  Hamid

Digitized  by  VjUUV  iC

28  Victory  of  Timur  and  Husaiu

conmiaudiug  the  left  wing,  and  Amir  Tuk  Timur  and  Amir  Bo^ik  the  right.
The  opposing  armies,  having  drawn  themselves  up  in  order  of  battle,^  attacked
one  another  with  vigorous  onslaught.

[Verses]: The  world  and  time  ranged  themselves  on  his  side,

You would  have thought  he was  about  to overcome the

universe.
Nor the  shining  sun  nor  the  moon  looked  more  brilliant

than  did  his  army.
His  troops  on  a  sudden  raised  a  loud  cry
And  their  spear  points  made  the  clouds  bright.

The  fighting  began  at  a  place  called  Kaba  Matan,  and  clamour  aud
shouting  filled  the  vault  of  the  heavens.  The  first  attack  was  made  upon  the
soldiers  of  Amir  Timur,  by  the  scouts  of  the  enemy,  who  were  boasting  of
the  superiority  of  their  army  in  numbers,  and  were  burning  for  the  fray.

But  Timur,  keeping  his  foot  as  firmly  fixed  upon  the  spot  where  he  was
standing,  as  was  his  kingdom  upon  its  foundations,  seized  his  bow  and  arrow
and  made  his  left  arm  like  an  Alif  and  his  right  arm  like  a  Ddl,^
[Verses]  ....

And  his  soldiers,  in  imitation  of  their  king,  discharged  their  miseiles  into
the  souls  of  the  enemy,  just  as  the  starry  army  of  the  moon  let  fly  their
shooting  stars ;  and  the  reed  of  the  arrow — according  to  the  words  '*  we  have
ordained  them  as  missiles  against  the  evil  spirits  " — ^made  such  writing  with
the  blood  of  the  scouts,  that  not  one  of  them  remained  alive.  .  .  .'

Among  those  slain  were  Tuk  Timur,  a  Beg,  brother  of  Begjik,  Daiilat  Shah,
and  two  princes  besides,  who  were  both  of  them  leaders  of  the  other  army.

[Verses] :  Of  all  these  daring  men  not  one  was  left.

But  all  fell  wretchedly,  of  life  bereft.

The  two  armies  then  rushed  upon  one  another,  and  blood  flowed  from  tbc
enemy  as  if  it  were  tears  from  a  thousand  eyes.

[Verses]: They  charged  one  another  like  great  mountains;
The  desert  became  a  sea  of  blood;
You  would  have  said  that  tulips  had
Sprung  up  on  the  &ce  of  the  earth.^

The  attacks  and  chaiges  of  the  veteran  warriors  grew  more  frequent,  and
the  waves  of  the  ocean  of  combat  increased.  Amir  Timur,  in  accordance
with  the  blessed  promise  (thanks  be  to  God,  who  has  aided  and  blessed  us),
was  able  to  overcome  and  put  to  rout  this  enormous  army,  in  comparison
with  which  his  own  was  but  as  a  drop  of  rain.  "  And  there  is  no  victory  but
from  God."

Amir  Ilyds  Khwdja,  Amir  Begjik,  Iskandar  0«;hl&D,  Amir  Hamid  and
Amir  Yusuf  were  taken  prisoners.  But  the  generosity,  common  to  all  Turks,
was  favourable  to  the  Kbdn,  for  the  soldiers  who  had  captured  him,  when
they  recognised  him,  without  saying  anything  to  their  leaders,  mounted  him

*  Ya»dl, Pe'tis  de  la  Croix  says  •*  formed  a  crescent"— R.

'  That  is,  he  drew  his  bow  to  the  ear,  straightening  his  left  arm  like  the
straight  Arabic  letter  aZ?/,  and  bending  his  right  like  the  crooked  ddL ,

•  The  rhetoric,  which  continues  for  some  lines,  is  omitted. — R.

^  This  is  in  allusion  to  the  bloo<l-red  tulips  which  cover  the  p:round  in  spring,
in  some  parts  of  the  Central  Asian  steppes.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(^

over  tlie  Amirs  of  Jatak  29

and  Begjik  on  horseback  and  set  them  at  libei-ty.  But  the  other  captives
they  kept  bound.  On  the  same  night,  Amir  Timur  continued  his  march
until  he  reached  the  River  Tdm,  in  order  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  enemy,
of  whom  many  had  been  killed.

[Verse] : From  their  blood,  the  water  of  the  stream  became  like  wine.

Amir  Chagu  and  Amir  Salfuddin,  at  his  command,  marched  against
Samarkand.  Tliey  conquered  this  town  in  the  beginuing  of  the  year  765  of
the  Hajra  [a.d.  1363],  corresponding  to  the  year  of  the  Crocodile  [Lui]  of  the
Tartar  cycle.

Amir  Timnr,  who  was  attended  by  success  in  all  his  endeavours  and
desires,  hastened  to  hold  counsel  with  Amir  Husain  and  Shir  Bahrdm,  and
then  set  out  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  Having  crossed  the  river  at  Kbojand,
he  fixed  his  royal  camp  at  Tashkand,  and  there,  in  order  that  his  good
fortune  might  not  be  quite  perfect,  he  was  afflicted  with  a  few  days'  sickness.
[Verses]  ....

Both  Amir  Timur  and  Amir  Husain  were  for  a  short  time  a  prey  to
a  malady  in  that  place.  But  they  were  soon  released  from  the  house  of
sickness;  and  the  illustrious  Princess  Uljdi  Turkdn  arrived  in  safety
from  Kar.*

[Verse] :  Bilkis  again  returned  to  Sulaim&n.

Amir  Timur  then  resolved  to  return,  and  therefore  recrossed  the  river  at
Khojand.  Being  seized  with  a  desire  to  hunt,  he  threw  out  a  ring  of  beaters
round  a  large  extent  of  country,  and  Amir  Husain  did  the  same  thing  in  a
place  called  Dazdk  Bulbul.  They  set  out  from  opposite  directions  towards
Akdr  Kam&r.  Several  days  were  spent  in  pleasure  and  amusement,  accordinc[
to  the  words,  "Seize  the  opportunity  while  you  may,"  and  then  they  returned
in  safety  to  Samarkand.

At  the  joyful  advent  of  this  augmenter  of  happiness  and  decorator  of
kingdoms,  the  people  of  that  district  were  illumined  by  the  protecting  dust  of
the  royal  prince,  so  that  the  evils  of  the  bufifetings  of  events,  which  had  crept
in  among  high  and  low,  were  cured  by  the  healing  properties  of  his  humanity
and  encouragement.

CHAPTER  XIII.

CONFERENCE [kUKILTAI] BETWEEN AMIR HUSAlN AND AMIR TIMUR;
AND  TFIE  RAISING OF  KABIL SHAH OGHLAN TO THE RANK OP KHAN.

When  the  countries  of  Mdvard-un-Nahr  and  Turkist&n,  together  with  all
their  dependencies,  had  been  delivered  from  the  domination  and  oppression  of
the  people  of  Jatab,  no  one  of  the  chief  princes  or  more  important  generals

*  There  is  nothing  to  show  where  the  first  part  of  this  campaign  took  place,
and  I  cannot  trace  the  names.  It  seems  that  the  Jatah  army  invited  the  vaUey
of  the  Zarifshdn,  and  if  so  Yam  may  stand  for  Jdm,  to  the  south-west  of
Samarkand,  and  Koba  Matan  for  Mitan,  to  the  north-west  of  it.  Kar  may  also
be  read  Kaz  or  Gax.

Digitized  by

Google

30  Victory  of  Timur  and  Husain,

would  submit  to  the  orders  and  commands  of  another  ;^  for  all  the  chiefs  of
tribes,  making  boast  of  the  large  number  of  their  subjects  and  followers,
wished  to  retain  independence  and  would  suffer  no  control.  For  it  has  been
said:  A  number  of  people  without  a  central  imity  to  direct  them,  will
perish,  and  a  kingdom  without  a  ruler  to  give  laws  to  the  inhabitants,  and
prevent  them  transgressing  the  same,  will  most  certainly  fietU  into  a  state  of
disorder.

[Verses] :  A  world  without  a  leader  is  like  a  body  without  a  head.
A  headless  body  is  worth  less  than  the  dust  of  the  road.

Under  these  conditions.  Amir  Husain  and  Amir  Timur  took  counsel
together,  and  determined  that  it  would  be  advisable  to  set  up,  as  Eh^  one  of
the  descendants  of  Chaghatai  Elh&n,  while  for  the  execution  of  this  plan  they
convoked  an  assembly  of  all  the  chiefs  and  princes,  in  the  year  765  of  the
Uajra  [a.d.  1363-4],  to  discuss  the  settlement  of  the  affairs  of  the  State.
They  finally  determined  to  appoint  Edbil  Sh&h  Oghldn  as  Eh^.  He  was  the
son  of  Durji,  son  of  Ilchikidl,  son  of  Dav&  Eb&n.  In  order  to  avoid  the  trials
and  troubles  of  public  life,  be  had  taken  to  ways  of  poverty  and  solitude,
and  had  clothed  himself  like  a  darvish.  They  resolved  to  divest  him  of  hb
poor  garments,  and  to  array  his  noble  figure  in  the  richly-embroidered  robes
of  the  Ehdnship. To  this  end :

[Verses]:  They  prepared  a  splendid  banquet,

That  what  was  small  might  became  great
They  sought  the  whole  world  over
For  gold  and  silver  and  gifts.

They  succeeded  in  placing  Edbil  Sh£h  Oghldn  upon  the  throne ;  and,  as  was
customary  among  the  Turkish  Sultans,  he  was  presented  with  a  goblet.'

[Verses] :

All  the  mighty  rulers  and  proud  princes,  at  one  time
Bent  the  knee  nine  times  in  obeisance  to  him.

Amir  Haidar  Andarkhudi '  was  given  over  to  Zinda  H&sham,  who  executed
him  on  that  same  night. [Verses]  ....

When  the  coimtry  had  once  again  been  brought  under  the  rule  of  Amir
Timur,  he  made  a  great  display  of  his  liberality  and  hospitality,  and  gave  a
great  feast  in  honour  of  Amir  Husain.  His  own  stewards  prepared  the
banquet.

Amir  Timur  showed  much  favour  to  his  own  special  subjects,  and  bestowed
suitable  presents  on  Amir  Husain.

[Verses] :  He  gave  him  the  most  magnificent  gifts,

Such  as  horses,  swords,  helmets  and  belts.

Since  the  father  of  Amir  Haidar  was  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with
Amir  Timur,  he  was  invited  to  the  feast ;  for  his  intelligence  had  received
brightness  from  the  polish  of  experience  of  long  years. With  him  and  Amir

>  The  meaning  is  perhaps :  they  would  not  submit  to  Timur  and  Husain.— R.
*  That  is:  They  presented  him  with  the  royal  goblet  of  tlie  Sultans  of
Tnrkistan.— R.
'  Of  Andarkhud,  or  Andlchui,

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Battle  of  the  Mire,  3 1

nusain,  he  discussed  the  advisability  of  setting  Amir  Hamid  and  Iskandar
Oghldn  at  liberty ;  and  Amir  Hosain  (in  spite  of  the  words

[Verses] :  When  your  enemy  falls  into  your  hands

Keep  him  at  a  distance,  lest  he  hurt  you  again  and  you  will  repent)

out  of  consideration  for  the  noble-mindedness  of  Amir  Timur,  did  not  refuse
his  entreaty,  but  gave  sanction  for  the  two  prisoners  to  be  released.

As  soon  as  Amir  Husain  had  set  out  for  S&li-Sardi,  his  residence  in  his  own
province.  Amir  Timur  sent  Amir  Ddud  and  Amir  Saifuddin  to  release  the
two  prisoners,  and  to  bring  them  back  with  all  respect  and  honour;  but
Bdydzid  and  Aiman,  who  had  the  custody  of  Amir  Hamid  and  Iskandar
Oghlan,  on  seeing  the  two  messengers,  thought  they  had  come  to  kill  Amir
Hamid,  and  therefore  hastened  to  put  him  to  death,  one  giving  him  a  blow
with  a  mace  and  the  other  striking  him  with  a  sword.  Such  was  the  end  of
Amir  Hamid.  When  Amir  Husain  heard  of  this,  he  said :  **  The  work  of  the
servant  was  better  than  the  work  of  the  master,"  and  at  once  sent  a  messenger
in  search  of  Iskandar  OghUn,  to  kill  him.

[Verse] :  Against  the  arrow  of  destiny  there  is  no  shield.

During  the  winter  of  that  year.  Amir  Husain  and  Amir  Timur  devoted  their
attention  to  the  internal  affairs  of  the  State,  so  that  the  countr}"^  attained  a
condition  of  perfect  peace  and  prosperity.

CHATTEE  XIV.

THE  BATTLE  OP  THE  MIRE.^

Fboh  the  garden  abounding  in  thorns  and  adorned  with  flowers,  the  sweet
zephyr  reached  to  nostrils  of  those  whose  souls  had  been  sent  upon  the
battle-field  of  misfortune  and  grief.  They  heard  the  good  tidings  that  God
often  crowns  our  best  endeavours  and  most  fervent  wishes  with  calamities
and  hardships. [Verses]  ....

Happmess  often  results  from  the  traces  left  by  misfortune,  and  a  state  of
equanimity  and  success  often  has  its  origin  in  distress  and  failure,

[Verses.]  .  •  •  •

The  course  of  events  in  the  time  of  Amir  Timur  is  a  proof  and  example  of
the  above  truths.

For  when  the  winter  (during  which  he  had  devoted  his  time  to  the  peaceful
administration  of  the  affairs  of  his  State)  had  passed,  and  spring  at  length
arrived ;  (When  the  warrior  spring  had  raised  the  standards  of  the  tulips  and

'  Known  as  the  battle  of  hai — ^'.e.,  mud  or  mire.  It  appears  to  have  been
foueht  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Sibun  (Jaxartes)  between  Chintz  and  (old)
Tashkend. P^tis  translates :  **  Bataille  des  Bourbiers."

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

32  The  Battle  of  tite  Mire,

had  led  out  bis  army  of  green  plants  into  the  plains  of  gardens  and  meadows,

[Verses] :  The  morning  breeze  led  out  his  army  towards  the  fertile  plains
And  made  ready  the  weapons  and  arms  of  war.
He  made  spears  of  the  buds  and  shields  of  the  roses,
The  spcarpoints  he  made  from  shai'pened  thorns)

[When  spring  set  in]  news  came  that  the  hosts  of  Jatali  were  again  on  their
way  towards  this  country  [t.c.,  Mdvard-un-Nahr].  Amir  Timur  began  at  once
to  collect  his  army  together,  and  sent  to  inform  Amir  Husain  of  the  report.
The  latter  ordered  Puldd  Bughi  and  Zinda  Hdsham,  son  of  Muhammad
Aperdi,  and  Malik  Bahddur  to  collect  their  forces  and  set  out  with  all  possible
8 peed  to  join  Amir  Timur.  They  met,  and  at  once  marched  together  against
the  enemy.  On  their  arrival  at  Ak&r,'  tbey  inspected  the  cavalry  and  beasts
of  burden,  and  remained  there  several  days  to  take  advantage  of  the  excellence
of  the  pasturage.  Departing  thence,  they  crossed  the  Biver  Sihun^  and
encamped  [on  the  opposite  side].  Amir  Husain  hastened  on  in  the  direction
of  the  enemy,  with  a  large  body  of  men,  till  he  came  to  the  banks  of  the
river,  where  he  caught  sight  of  some  of  their  outposts.

Amir  Timur  now  removed  his  camp  to  the  river-side,  between  Ghiniz  and
Tashkend,  and  commanded  his  men  to  fortify  their  tents,  which  tbey  did
with  great  care.  Meanwhile  Amir  Husain  crossed  the  Sihun  with  his  whole
army,  and  halted  in  the  entrenchments  \jnurchdC\  destined  for  his  troops.
The  enemy  had  also  encamped  on  the  same  side  of  the  river,  having  reached
it  at  early  mom.  Amir  Timur  and  Amir  Hus^n  once  more  advanced,  and  as
soon  as  the  scouts  of  the  two  forces  came  in  sight,  preparations  were  made
for  battle  and  each  army  was  arrayed  in  fighting  older.  Amir  Husain
commanded  the  right  wing,  and  Tirl&nji  IrUt  led  the  rearguard;  his  van-
guard was  under  the  command  of  Uj£  Betu  Irdi,'  Shir  Bahrdm,  Pul^  Bughd,
Farhdd  Aberdi,  Malik  Bahidur,  and  many  other  valiant  soldiers.  Amir
Timur,  who  was  the  soul  of  the  whole  army,  led  the  left  wing,  and  he
appointed  Amir  Sdr  Bughd,  with  the  tribe  of  Kipchdk,  to  the  rearguard,  and
Timur  Khwdja  Oghldn  to  the  vanguard.  Close  at  his  side  he  kept  Amir
Chdgu,  Amir  Saifuddin,  Amir  Murdd  Barlds,  Abbds  Bahddur,  and  many  other
brave  men  of  the  sword.

In  this  order  they  attacked  the  enemy,  but  in  pursuance  with  the  words :
''  It  is  an  evil  day  for  you  when  you  boast  of  your  own  strength  or  numbers,"
they  were  not  spared  from  an  unexpected  punishment,  for  the  army  of  Jatah,
which,  in  spite  of  its  superiority  in  numbers,  had  been  defeated  at  Kaba
Matan,  now  that  tbey  found  their  opponents  exceeded  them  in  numbers,  had
recourse  to  magic,  and  sought  aid  from  the  Jadah  stone,  which  possessed
supernatural  properties.*

*  This  spot  must  have  been  near  the  left  bank  of  the  Sihun,  not  far  below
Khojand,  and  is  probably  the  place  called  Akdr  Kamdr  above  (p.  29).

'  Some  MSS.  of  the  Za/afNama  say  they  crossed  the  Slhnn  at  Khojand.
'  This  name  might  read  Ulja  Yetu  Aberdi. — B.

*  The  superstition  of  the  Jadah  stone  is  often  alluded  to  by  Baber.  Erskine
says  the  stone  was  called  by  the  Arabs  Hajar-fd-MaUar,  or  the  rain  stone,  by
the  Turks  Tedek-tdth,  and  by  the  Persians  Sang-i-deh.  The  author,  a  little
lower  down,  speaks  of  Jadah  as  the  name  of  a  magician.  The  stone  had  the
virtue  of  causine  the  rain  to  fall  or  to  oease;  but  in  the  course  of  time  the
original  stone,  which  was  given  by  Noah  to  Japhe^  was  either  lost,  or  the  name

Digitized  by

Google

Ttie  Battle  of  t/ie  Mire.  33

[Verses] : The  army  of  Jatah  had  not  strength  for  the  fight,
So  they  sought  help  from  the  magic  stone.
With  the  stone  of  Jadah,  who  was  a  magician,
They  filled  the  world  with  wind  and  rain,
The  clouds  roared  with  thunder  and  the  winds  howled.
A  thunderbolt  fell  upon  the  earth.

Although  the  sun  was  in  Orion,  a  host  of  dark  clouds  suddenly  filled  the
sky.  The  thunder  resounded  and  the  lightning  flashed.  The  elements
rushed  out  from  the  ambush  of  destiny  into  the  open  plain  of  the  ether,  and
the  thunderclaps  re-echoed  round  the  azure  vault  of  heaven.  The  arrows  of
lightning  were  shot  out,  in  all  directions,  from  the  bow  of  the  thunder-clouds,
and  the  rain  shot  down  its  whistling  darts.  It  seemed  as  if  the  Fates  had
again  become  a  prey  to  the  love  of  rebellion  and  confusion.  Such  a  quantity
of  water  descended  from  the  eyes  of  the  stars,  that  the  Deluge  seemed  to  occur
a  second  time.  And  the  voice  of  Noah  was  again  heard  to  pray  for  the
cessation  of  the  waters  of  heaven.

The  beasts  of  the  field  began  to  swim  about  in  the  water  like  fishes ;  and
the  feet  of  the  horses  stuck  so  fast  in  the  mire,  that  the  skin  of  their  bellies
adhered  to  the  crust  of  the  earth,  while  the  damp  caused  their  bones  to
become  bare.  They  were  afflicted  with  Asterkhai  and  began  to  lose  their
fiesh  and  become  pariodytic,  their  bones  being  loosened.  The  feathers  of  the
arrows  fell  out:  the  notches  canra  off;  while  clothes  and  accoutrements
became  so  heavy  with  the  damp,  that  neither  cavalry  nor  in&ntry  were  able
to  advance.  In  consequence  of  all  this,  our  host^  lost  their  confidence  and
courage.  But  the  army  of  the  enemy,  remaining  where  they  were,  covered
themselves  over  with  felt,  and  as  far  as  they  were  able,  preserved  their
clothes  and  arms  from  the  violeoce  of  the  rain. When  our  army  came  up  to

of  God,  which  had  been  engraved  upon  it,  was  worn  away.  "  It  is  pretended,
however,  that  others,  with  a  similar  virtue,  and  bearing  the  same  name,  are  still
found  among  the  Turks;  and  the  more  superstitious  affirm  that  they  were
originally  produced  and  multiplied  by  some  mysterious  sort  of  generation  from
the  original  stone  given  by  Noah  to  his  son."  Mir  Izzat  Ullab,  who  was  sent
into  Central  Asia  by  Moorcroft,  mentions  the  Jadah  stone  as  one  of  the  wonders
of  Yarkand.  ^  He  says,"  writes  Erskine,  '*  that  it  is  taken  from  the  head  of  a
horse  or  a  cow ;  and  that  if  certain  ceremonies  be  previously  used,  it  inevitably
produces  rain  or  snow.  He  who  performs  the  ceremonies  is  called  Yedehchi.
Izzat  Ullah,  though,  like  Baber,  professes  his  belief  in  the  virtues  of  the  stone^
yet  acknowledges  that  he  was  never  an  eye-witness  of  its  effects."  (Memoirs  of
Baber,  Intr.,  p.  zlvU. ;  ako  Klaproth's  translation  of  Izzat  Ullah  in  ilfo^.  Ana*
Wgttc,ii.,  p.33.)

In  the  Habib-iu-Siyar  an  instance  is  given  of  Tului,  son  of  Ghingiz  KMn,
having  recourse  to  the  Jadah  stone  (here  Sang-i-yaddd)  to  produce  a  fall  of  snow
as  a  means  of  concealment,  when  hard  pressed  by  the  enemy  during  his  invasion
of  China  in  1230.  (See  Price's  Mah.  Hist.,  ii.,  p.  542,  who  translates  the  word
•*  lapis  imbrifer.")

The  word  Jadah^  it  may  be  remarked  here,  has  no  connection  with  Jade.  It
was  in  reality,  as  Sir  H.  Yule  teUs  us,  a  bezoar,  or  antidote,  much  used  in  the
Middle  Ages  by  the  Arabs  and  others.  The  bezoar  was  usually  a  hard  concretion
found  in  the  bodies  of  animals,  to  which  antidotal  virtues  were  ascribed.  *'  The
bezoar,"  he  adds,  **  was  sometimes  called  wnahe  atone^  and  erroneously  supposed
to  be  found  in  the  head  of  a  snake." (Glossary,  ^.  68.)

A  complete  note  on  the  Jadah  stone,  containing  numerous  extracts  from
Oriental-  authors,  wiU  be  found  in  Quatrem^re's  Hist,  dee  MongdU  e»  Pertet
p.  428.

'  Viz.,  the  army  of  Timur  and  Husain.  ;

D

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

34  Tlu  Battle  of  the  Mire,

tbem,  they  threw  asido  their  felt  ooverings  ^nd  offered  battle  with  fresh
horses  and  uninjured  arms ;  then  the  combat  began  in  good  earnest.

[Verses] :  The  cries  and  shoutings  of  the  two  armies

Fill  the  whole  world,  right  and  left.

The  spheres  ring  again  with  the  cries  of  the  heroes  and  the  sound  of  the
hemu%di}

Amir  Timur,  by  the  aid  of  God,  made  a  chaige  with  ths  left  wing,  and
overcame  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy,  which  was  led  by  Shenkummuy&n,
brother  of  Amir  Hamid ;  and  when  Uy^  Khwija  Ehdn  saw  this,  he  fled  in
confusion.  But  meanwhile  fortune  had  deserted  the  right  wing  of  our  army,
for  the  enemy's  left,  led  by  SharAwal  and  H^i  Beg,  attacked  and  o?eicame
our  right;  they  drove  Tildnji'  and  Zinda  H^isham  back  to  where  Amir
Husain  was  posted,  and  the  body-guard  of  the  latter  being  terrified,  turned
and  fled.  But  PuMd  Bughi  and  Shir  BahriLm  stood  their  ground  and
displayed  the  utmost  courage.  Hiji  Beg  continued  the  attack  and  out*
flanked  our  right.  Farh&d  and  Orong  Iimur'  were  astounded  at  the  sight  of
this.  But  Amir  Shams-ud-Din,  on  the  other  hand,  having  withdrawn  the  hand
of  bravery  from  the  sleeve  of  temerity,  made,  with  his  men,  a  great  display  of
courage.

And  now  the  fuel  of  the  ardour  of  Amir  Timur  took  fire ;  ho  seized  his
sword

[Verses] :  And  made  such  sparks  fly  from  it  that

llie  sun  in  comparison  seemed  dark.
He  charged  down  like  a  roaring  lion.
[He  wore]  hia  iron  helmet,  bearing  the  crest  of  a  dragon.

He  chaiged  the  enemy  with  seventeen  regiments  [^*u«Attn] ;  the  wind  of
his  onslaught  threw  fire  and  fear  upon  the  harvest  of  their  stability,  ao  that
Amir  Shams-ud-Pin,  terrified  at  the  fierceness  of  TimuPs  attack,  was  obliged
to  turn  the  reins  of  power  from  the  field  of  battle,  and  to  set  the  face  of
helplessness  and  defeat  in  the  direction  of  flight.  This  success  of  Amir
Timur  gave  Amir  Husain  an  opportunity  to  re-assemble  his  troopa,  and
having  done  so,  he  stood  his  ground.

[Verses] : From  the  victory  of  this  host-crushing  Shdh
The  army  received  new  life  into  its  body.

Amir  Tunur  scut  his  servant  Tib&n  BahAdur  to  Amir  Husain,  saying :  ^  It
is  time  for  the  Amirs  to  advance.  Let  us,  together,  make  such  a  charge  that
we  may  cause  an  earthquake  among  the  proud  princes  of  the  enemy :  so  that
they  may  lose  all  power  to  resist  us  and  all  strength  to  oppose  us."

But  in  proportion  as  the  power  of  Amir  Timur  rose,  so  did  the  star  of
felicity  of  Amir  Husain  begiu  to  decline,  and  his  happiness  to  approach  the
evening  of  distress,  according  io  the  texi,  '*God  doth  not  work  any  clutnge
in  the  people,  until  they  liav6  altered  their  own  individual  selves."  During
this  period,  his  nature  underwent  a  gr^t  change;  he  lost  his  former  stability

'  1  A  Idxid  of  horn  or  trumpet.  P^tis  de  la  Groiz  says  it  was  a  trampet  eight
feet  Icmg,  used  in  the  array. (fliM.  de  Timw  Bee,  i.,  p.  87.)

'  May  read :  Petlanji.— R.

•  Or  perhaps :  Erek  Timur.— R.

Digitized  by

Google

Tlu  Battle  of  the  Mire.  35

of  character,  and  began  to  adopt  evil  habits  and  practise  evil  deeds.  [Thus]
when  Tdbdn  Bahddur  came  before  him,  Amir  Husain  abused  him  much  in
words,  and  then  struck  him  so  violently  that  he  fell  to  the  ground.

Ainir  l^mtir  then  sent  Malik  and  Hamdami,  who  were  two  of  Amir
Httsain's  adherents,  to  tell  their  master  that  he  must  most  certainly  come,  in
order  that  no  time  should  be  lost;  but  Anur  Husain,  having  heard  the
message,  began  to  abuse  the  messengers  and  let  loose  upon  them  the  tongue
of  violence  and  menace ;  then  he  added :  ^  Did  I  run  away  that  you  should
thus  press  me  to  advance?  Whether  you  are  victorious  or  whether  the
enemy  carry  the  day,  there  is  not  one  of  you  shall  save  his  soul  from  my
avengiug  hand."

Thereupon  Malik  and  Hamdami,  much  enraged,  left  his  presence  and
hastened  to  Amir  Timor,  to  whom,  on  their  arrival,  they  said,  *'  It  is  no  use
your  persisting  in  the  fight."  Amir  Timur  was  persuaded  by  them  and  did
not  oppose  tlieir  advice,  but  withdrew  the  hand  of  intention.  Since  the
ranks  of  both  armies  had  been  so  much  broken  that  the  left  wings  of  the
opposing  forces  were  facing  one  another,  each  soldier  encamped  [lay  down  to
rest]  where  he  happened  to  find  himself.

[Verses]: The  soldiers  of  both  armies  lay  down  to  rest

And  did  not  stir  from  their  i^aces  till  day  had  broken.

During  that  night  Amir  Husain  sent  several  times  to  request  that  Amir
Timor  should  come  to  him,  but  the  prince  would  not  give  ear  to  his  entreaties.
[Verses.]  .  •  ,  .

WheD)  on  the  following  morning,  the  two  hosts  again  joined  in  battle,
the  army  of  Jatah  was  routed  and  fled.  Our  troops  were  pursuing,  when
they  suddenly  caught  sight  of  the  standard  \Tugh  or  Tulc\  of  Amir  Shams-
ud-Dio,  who  had  separated  himself  with  a  large  body  of  soldiers  from  the  rest
of  the  army.  Thereupon  the  pursuers  abandoned  their  object  and  turned  to
attack  Shams -ud-Din,  while  the  defeated  army  again  rallied  and  made  a
violent  onslaught  upon  our  men.  Thus  our  side,  after  it  had  gained  a
victory,  was  in  its  turn  defeated,  and  in  their  haste  to  get  away,  many  of  our
men  perished  in  the  mud  and  swamps.  The  enemy  pursued  them  and  put
numbers  of  them  to  the  sword,  so  that  there  remained  nearly  ten  thousand
slain  of  our  forces  on  the  field  of  battle.

This  battle  took  place  on  the  Ist  day  of  Hamaz&u  of  the  year  766  of  the
Hajra  [a.d.  1365],  corresponding  to  the  year  of  the  Serpent  (Yihdn)  of  the
Moghul  cycle ;  and  astrologers  have  shown  that  this  event  coincided  with  the
tenth  conjunction  of  the  triple  aerial  conjunctions  in  the  Scorpion.  This  I
only  mention,  that  my  history  may  be  complete,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  infer
that  events  are  caused  by  celestial  influences,  for  "  Qod  alone  has  influence
over  creation."

After  this  defeat,  the  princes  retired  to  Ecsh.  All  the  chiefs  of  tribes
began  to  cross  the  Jihun  with  their  people.  Amir  Husain  said  to  Amir
Timur:  "It  would  be  expedient  for  you  to  cross  the  river  with  your
household  and  troops  " ;  but  Timur  replied,  "  Others  may  cross  if  they  like,
but  as  for  me,  my  patriotism  will  not  permit  me  to  leave  my  country  to  the
molestation  of  foreigners.  I  will  again  collect  an  army  and  attack  the
enemy."

Amir  Husain  then  left  him  and  retired  to  S&li-Sarii ;  then  he  made  all  his
people  cross  the  Jihun,  and  taking  an  out-of-the-way  route,  he  reached  a  place

DigitizidbyVaUOglC

36  The  Battle  of  the  Mire.

called  Shibartu^  where  be  halted.  From  that  place  he  despatched  bides,
intending,  if  these  brought  news  of  the  approach  of  the  army  of  Jatah,  to
take  flight  at  once  towards  Hindustdn.^

As  soon  as  Amir  Hnsain  had  departed  from  Eesh,  Amir  Timur  turned  his
mind  to  preparations  for  meeting  the  enemy.  He  mustered  twelve  regiments
and  sent  forward  eight  of  them,- under  the  command  of  Timur  Ehwija  Oghlin,
Charuchi/  and  Abbds  Bahidur,  to  reconnoitre  the  country  round  Samarkand.
But  on  the  way  Gharuchi  took  to  drinking  much  wine,  and  the  liquor  made
a  strong  impression  on  him :  as  has  been  said  [Arabic] :

Wine  is like the  wind: When it  passes  over  a  perfume,  it b. comes
fragrant:  but  becomes  tainted  when  it  passes  over  a  corpse.

He  became  intoxicated  and  began  to  talk  wildly,  and  veiy  much  frightened
Daud  Ehwdja  and  Hindush&h  by  saying :  Such  a  one  (meaning  Amir  Timur)
purposes  to  send  somebody  to  seize  you,  to  take  3'ou  before  Amir  Husain,
and  to  have  you  kiUed  without  delay.  [His  companions]  consequently  were
much  alarmed,  and  running  away*  gave  themselves  up  to  the  enemy.  When
they  reached  Kukung,  they  met  the  reconnoitring  party  of  the  army  of  Jatah,
under  the  command  of  Eapak  Timur,  son  of  Ulugh  Tukatmur  Shardwal,  and
Angirch^  son  of  H&ji  Beg.  They  offered  to  act  as  guides  to  them  and
brought  them  to  the  place  where  Timur  Khwdja  OghUn,  Gharuchi  and
Abb&s  were  stationed ;  these  they  put  tonight,  together  with  all  their  forces.
When  Amir  Timur  heard  all  this,  he  knew  that  he  must  be  patient  yet  a
little  longer,  and  that  impetuosity  was  of  no  avail.

He  crossed  the  river  at  Amuyah'  and  went  and  encamped  at  Balkh,  where
he  again  assembled  his  scattered  tribe.  He  called  to  his  side  Tumin  Kapak
Eh&n  and  Tum&n  Biighdi  Salduz ;  he  also  appointed  a  certain  number  of  men  to
defend  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  get  what  news  they  could  of  what  was
passing  on  the  other  side.

Timur  Khwija  Oghl^u  was  punisheil  for  Lis  misconduct,  and  from  this
point  Fortune  continued  to  favour  Amir  Timur. [Verses.]  ....

>  That  is,  Husain  fled  to  the  Hindu  Kush,  whence  he  might,  if  necessary,
take  refuge  in  India.  Shibartu  is  no  doubt  the  pass  often  mentioned  by  Baber.
which  seems  to  have  been  much  used  in  tiiose  days.  It  is  usually  called  Shibr
or  Shabar  nowadays,  and  will  be  found  on  modem  maps  a  little  to  the  east  of
BdmUn.  For  a  refugee  crossing  the  Oxus  at  Sali-Sarai,  tiie  Shibr  Pass  would
be  one  of  the  most  convenient,  if  not  the  nearest  route,  to  take  towards  India.
(See  BaJber*$  Memoir$,  p.  139,  and  other  places.)

*  OrOha-uichi.

'  Amuyah,  or  Arnold  ^aaa  a  ford  over  the  Amu  or  Oxus,  in  frequent  use  during
the  Middle  Ages,  and  in  the  time  of  Timur.  There  was  also  a  town  of  the  same
name,  which  stood  near  the  bank  of  the  river,  in  a  direction  about  sonth-west
from  Bokhara,  and  either  on,  or  very  near,  the  site  of  the  present  Ofaaijni.  (See
ncte,p.  170.)

Digitized  by

Google

Siege  of  Samarkand.  37

CHAPTER  XV.

SIEGE  OF  SAMARKAND  B7  THE  ARMT  OF  JATAH.

In  the  meanwhile,  the  army  of  Jatah  reached  Samarkand.  Now  at  that
time,  this  town  bad  no  citadel,  but  Mauldni-Zada  Samarkand!,  Maulini
Khardak  Bukh&ri  and  Abu  Nasr  Kului  Nadd&f  influenced  the  people  of
Samarkand  to  defend  and  fortify  the  town ;  and,  despite  their  want  of  a
princely  leader,  they  offered  stout  resistance  to  the  besiegers.  They  wore
bent  on  saving  their  city  from  the  domination  and  tyranny  of  the  people  of
Jatah.  But  when  the  inhabitants  were  beginning  to  tire  of  their  efforts  and
to  lose  perseverance,  God  came  to  their  aid  and  caused  a  pestilence  to  appear
among  the  horses  of  the  cavalry  of  Jatah,  so  that  three-fourths  of  them  died.
Consequently,  the  besiegera  were  obliged  to  retire,  and  the  great  majority  of
them  returned  on  foot,  with  their  quivera  strapped  to  their  backs.  Since  the
people  of  Samarkand  had  so  well  defended  their  State,  and  had  offered  such
determined  opposition  to  their  enemies,  those  among  them  who  had  most
power  became  inflated  with  pride,  and  tried  to  obtain  precedence  over  their
equals  by  stirring  up  sedition  and  rebellion  in  the  town.

At  the  time  of  the  retreat  of  the  Jatah  army,  Amir  Timur  had  sent
Abbds  Bahidur  to  Euhlagha^  to  spy  out  the  land  of  Jatah,  and  when  he  was
informed  of  the  events  above  related — of  the  state  of  the  people  of  Jatah  and
of  the  retreat  of  their  army — ^Iie  sent  to  Amir  Husain  to  inform  him  also  of
the  state  of  affairs,  and  to  advise  him  to  proceed  in  the  direction  of  that
country.  When  Amir  Husain  heard  the  news  which  the  messenger  brought,
he  was  beyond  measure  pleased,  and  immediately  set  out  from  Shibartu
towards  S&li-Sardi.  Amir  Timur,  having  caused  his  household  and  people  to
cross  the  river,  had  sent  them  to  their  native  land,  and  had  started  himself
on  horseback  to  meet  Amir  Husain.  They  met  in  the  plain  of  Bakl&n,'  and
having  embraced  one  another  in  the  most  respectful  manner,  they  held  a  long
discussion  about  what  had  already  happened,  as  well  as  about  the  future.  It
was  finally  decided  that  they  should  proceed  together  towards  Samarkand  early
in  the  following  spring.  Then  Amir  Timur  returned,  crossed  the  Jihun,  and
encamped  at  Karshi.  Karshi  is  so-called  because  Kapak  Ehin  built  a
palace  at  [that  spot  which  is]  2i/ara«an^s  distance  from  Nakhsheb,  and  in
the  Moghul  language  a  palace  is  called  Karzhi.

There  Amir  Timur  remained  during  that  winter;  and  he  caused  to  be
erected  on  the  spot  a  citadel  [Hisdr],  which  was  completed  by  the  end  of
the  winter.

>  The  Iron  Gate.

*  Or  BaghUn,  which  would  bo  on  the  direct  road  from  tho  Shibr  Pass  to
Sali-Saiii.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

38  Last  Days  of  Ilyds  Kkwdja,

CHAPTER  XVI.

THE  LAST  BAYS  OF  ILYIs  KHWIjA KhAN,  AKD  EVENTS THAT  TOOK
PLAGE  AFTER  HIS  DEATH. — THE  DOMINATION  OF  KAMARUDDIN.

TuEKE  are  no  traditions  or  stories  extant  among  the  Moghuls
relating  to  Ily^s  Ehwaja  Eh&n.  We  learn,  however,  from  the
Zafar-NAma^  that  it  was  upon  him  that  the  Ehanship  devolved
after  the  death  of  Tughluk  Timur  Ehdn.  Daring  his  reign,  there
took  place  his  victory  of  the  battle  of  the  Mire,  the  siege  of
Samarkand  and  the  abandonment  thereof,  on  account  of  the
epidemic  which  fell  among  his  horses.  He  only  survived  these
events  a  very  short  time.  But  an  account  of  the  events  im-
mediately following  the  death  of  Tughluk  Timur  Eh4n,  as  recorded
in  Moghul  tradition,  will  he  given  below.  For,  although  knowledge
of  what  happened  after  the  death  of  Iljas  Ehw4ja  Ehan  is  with
Grod  onl}*^,  we  know,  from  Moghul  traditiouB,  what  occurred  after
the  death  of  Tughluk  Timur  Ehan.  From  these  sources  we  learn
that  thei-e  were  five  brothers:  (1)  Amir  Tulik,  who  has  been
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  conversion  of  the  Eh4n  to  IsUm ;
(2)  Amir  Buldji ;  (3)  Amir  Shams-ud-Din,  who  is  mentioned  in
the  Zafar-Ndma  as  having  taken  part  in  the  battle  of  the  Mire
(which  passage  I  have  copied  into  this  book) ;  (4)  Amir  Eamar-
uddin,  of  whom  I  shall  speak  later ;  (5)  Amir  Shaikh-i-Daulat,  of
whom  no  traces  remain.

After  Amir  Tulik's  death,  the  office  of  Uluahegi  was  given  to
Amir  Bulaji,  and  when  this  latter  followed  his  brother  to  the
dwellings  of  eternity,  the  ofSce  of  Uluabegi  devolved  upon  his  son
Amir  Ehuddidad.  But  Amir  Eamaruddin,  going  down  on  his
knees  before  the  Ehdn,  said  to  him :  "  The  ofiBce  of  my  brother
should  first  come  to  me,  for  his  son  is  only  seven  years  of  age  and
is  not  fit  for  the  duties  attached  to  the  position."  Tughluk  Timur
Ehdn  would  not  pay  any  attention  to  him,  but  appointed  the  then
seven-year-old  Amir  Ehudaidad  to  the  office.  Eamaruddin  was  a
violent  man,  and  was  angry  at  being  superseded  by  a  child  of  seven ;
but  he  could  do  nothing.  When,  subsequently,  the  Ehan  died  he
revolted.  The  Zafar-Ndma,  on  the  other  hand,  says  that  he  raised
a  rebellion  after  the  death  of  Ilyis  Ehwdja  Ehan.  However  this
may  be,  it  appears  that  on  the  death  of  the  Ehdn,  Eamaruddin
gave  vent  to  that  rancour  which  he  had  so  long  cherished  in  his
breast,  and  (according  to  Moghul  traditions)  put  to  death  in  one
d^yt  eighteen  sons  of  the  Ehan,  and  assumed  the  style  of  Ehdn  for
himself. The  country  of  Moghnlistdn  fell  into  a  state  of  disorder.

Digitized  by

Google

History  of  Kamaruddin.  39

Oue  of.  Tnghluk  Ttmiir  Khan's  sons^  who  was  still  at  the  breast^
being  concealed  by  Amir-Ehnddidad,  and  his  mother,  Mir  Agb&,
was  spitred.  E^m&rtrddin  sent  everywhere  in  search  of  him, '  but
they  were  sncoessful  in  hiding  the  child  from  his  spies.

Kamamddin  devoted  his  attention  to  the  affairs  of  the  State,  but
in  consequence  of  the  hostility  of  the  Amirs,  there  was  disorder
and  strife  in  the  country^  Mioreover,  the  invasion  of  Moghulistan,
which  Amir  Timnr  and  his  army  undertook  at  that  time,  was  a
serious  obstacle  to  internal  progress.  Meanwhile  Amir  Ehud4idad
sent  Ehizir  Ehw4ja  Eh4n  from  Eashghar  to  the  hills  that  are
between  E&shghar  and  Badakhsh&n,  that  he  might  be  safe  from
the  machinations  of  Eamaruddin ;  which  matter  shall  be  presently
related,  but  first  of  all  it  will  be  well  to  give  an  account  of
Eamaruddin  and  his  times.

CHAPTEB  XVIL

HISTORY  OF  KAMARUDDIN.

It  has  already  been  said  that  Eamaruddin  tried  to  assume  supreme
authority,  but  that  he  met  with  determined  opposition  from  the
Amirs*  llius  it  was  that  Eumzah,  together  with  Uzbeg  Timur
(who  was  of  the  tribe  of  Eardit),  went  over  to  the  side  of  Amir
Timur.  Then  Amir  Timur  raised  an  army,  and  himself  remaining
within  his  own  dominions,  sent  Amir  Bahrdm  Jal&ir,  Ehit4i
Bahidur,  and  Shaikh  All  Bahadur  to  the  territory  of  Almatu.^
On  reaching  the  banks  of  the  river  Aishah  Eh4tun  they  attacked
the  men  of  the  Eardit.^  After  this  battle,  having  concluded  a  peace,
they  returned.  Bat  Amir  Timur  not  approving  the  peace,  invaded
the  country  in  person.  This  expedition  is  related  in  the  Zafar-
Ndma  as  follows : —

The  successful  Amir  1'imur,  who  when  he  had  once  undertaken  any
business  w&s  never  content  till  he  had  carried  it  through  to  the  end,  was  dis-
satisfied with  the  gentle  way  in  which  his  generals  bad  treated  the  enemy,  in
watering  the  plains  of  enmity  and  warfare  with  peace.  For  this  reason  he
sent  royal  mandates  in  all  directions  for  troops  to  be  collected  [verses]  ....
A  victorious  and  veteran  army  assembled  before  the  palace  of  the  Shih-^an

»  The  nodem  Vierny. (See  note,  p.  182.)

'  Fkoperly  Karaif  or  Kirai,  is  the  name  of  the  tribe,  though  it  is  sometimes
written  GiraL  The  final  i  is  merely  the  Mongol  plural.  (See  note,  p.  16,
above ;  also,  for  some  remarks  on  this  passage  and  the  word  ^'Karait,"  Qowor^
ii.,pp.l3,X4.)

Digitized  by

Google

40  History  of  Kamaruddin.

army  couDtless  as  the  sand  of  the  desert.  When  he  had  passed  Sairim  and
Yangi^  in  safety,  with  his  victorious  standard,  the  enemy  fled  hefore  him,
and  he  reached  a  place  called  Sangarighdj,^  when  many  prisoners  and  much
booty  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  conquering  host.

At  Adun  Kuri,'  Amir  Musd  and  Zinda  H^lsham,  in  spite  of  all  the  former
benefits  they  had  received  from  Amir  Timur,  again  began  to  devise  plans  of
treason  and  deceit,  and  with  treacherous  designs  conspired  together,  [taking
into  their  confidence]  the  son  of  Ehizir  Yasuri,  named  Abu  Ishik.  They  took
a  solemn  oath  that  when  they  reached  Kard  Sam&n  they  would  by  some
stratagem  seize  the  'Lord  of  the  Conjunction'  while  hunting,  and  they
laughed  over  the  thought  of  their  foolish  plan.  The  Khinzida  Abu  Ma&li
Turmadl  and  Shaikh  Abu  Lais  of  Samarkand,  who  were  already  sworn
enemies  of  Amir  Timnr,  now  joined  in  this  conspiracy.

But  some  one  happening  to  get  knowledge  of  the  affair,  informed  Amir
Timur  thereof.  Thereupon  his  majesty  summoned  the  offenders  to  appear
before  him.  They  were  brought  in  [and  thrust]  upon  their  knees,  and  on
being  interrogated,  were  found  guilty  of  high  treason  and  rebellion.

But  as  the  Queen  Sarii  Mulk  Kbdnim*  was  the  niece  of  Amir  Musd,  and
because  the  chaste  Princess  Akka  Begi  had  been  promised  in  marriage  to  him.
Amir  Timur  said  to  him :  ''  Although  the  crime  you  have  committed  is  a
grave  one,  nevertheless  as  we  are  relations,  I  will  forgive  you  and  take  no
vengeance  upon  you.  [Verses]  ....  Your  connection  with  me  and  your  white
beard  have  given  you  hope  of  life.  Were  it  not  for  these,  I  should  give  the
command  for  your  evil-intentioned  head  to  be  severed  from  your  body."  And
to  the  Eh&nzdda  he  paid :  '*  As  your  family  is  connected  with  the  household
of  the  Prophet  (upon  all  of  whose  descendants  be  peace)  I  shall  not  consent
to  your  receiving  any  ill-treatment ;  you  must  however  quit  this  country."
He  commanded  Abu  Lnis  to  make  the  pilgrimage  to  the  Hij^.  The  son  of
Khizir  Yasuri,  being  the  brother  of  the  wife  of  Amir  SaifiiddiD,  appealed  to
the  clemency  .of  the  •  Lord  of  the  Conjunction,'  and  so  escaped  from  the
abyss ;  thus  the  tablet  of  his  soul  was  cleansed  of  its  sins  with  the  pure  water
of  royal  beneficence  and  mercy.  A  royal  mandate  was  issued,  ordering
Zinda  H^ham  to  be  conveyed,  bound,  to  Samarkand,  and  there  closely
confined.  When  Amir  Timui*  returned  to  his  seat  of  government  [Samarkand]
he  gave  the  governorship  of  Shibargh&n,  and  the  position  which  had  been
held  by  Zinda  Hdsham,  to  Baydn  Timur,  son  of  Ak  Bughd.

>  May  be  read  Tank!  or  Panki,  but  no  doubt  Yanqi  is  intended,  i.e.,  Tahiz.
(See  notes,  pp.  63  and  79-81.)

'  Or  Sangamifdj.— R.

'  This  may  be  read  as  P^tis  has  read  it :  Adun  Eunzi.  I  cannot  identify  the
spot.

*  Sardi  Mulk  Khdnim  was,  according  to  Pdtis  de  la  Cioix,  Timur's  chief
wife,  and  mother  of  Shah  Rnkh  Mirza. (J'imuT  Bee,  i.,  p.  225.)

Digitized  by

Google

Third  Invasion  of  Moghnlistdiu  41

CHAPTER  XVIIL

THE  THIRD  INVASION  OF  JATAH (tHAT  IS  TO  SAY MOGHULISTAN) BY

AMIR  TDfUR*

On  Thursday,  the  first  day  of  the  month  of  Shabdn  of  the  year  776  of  the
Hajra  [a.d.  1375],  Amir  Timur,  having  collected  an  army,  marched  out  towards
Jatah — ^which  is  equivalent  to  Moghulist^n.  On  the  route  he  encamped  at
the  Bab&t-i-Kata&n,  when  the  coldness  of  the  weather  caused  the  sun  suddenly
to  withdraw  behind  the  veil  of  the  clouds,  and  much  rain  and  snow  began
to  fall.

[Verses]: No  one  ever  yet  saw  so  much  snow.

The  world  looked  like  a  morsel  in  the  snow's  mouth.

The  violence  of  the  storm  deprived  the  soldiers  of  their  strength,  and  they
were  soon  no  longer  able  to  look  after  their  horses,  because  of  the  risk  they
ran  of  losing  their  own  lives ;  in  this  way  many  of  the  men  died  and  a
quantity  of  horses  perished.  Amir  Timur,  being  moved  to  pity  at  this  sad
state  of  affairs,  commanded  them  to  break  up  the  camp  and  return  to
Samarkand,  where  they  remained  about  two  months,  until  the  rigour  of  the
season  had  in  some  measure  abated.  On  Monday,  the  1st  of  the  month
ShawAl,  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  of  the  Hare  (Tushkin\  he  again  led
out  his  army  against  the  country  of  Jatah— which  is  equivalent  to
Moghulistdn.

He  sent  Amir  Zdda  Jahdugir  forward  to  reconfloitre ;  and  to  accompany  him
he  sent  Shaikh  Muhammad  Baydn  Salduz  and  Adilsbdh,  to  whom  he  had  en-
trusted the  tribe  of  JaUir,  on  the  death  of  the  latter's  father,  Bahrdm  JaUir*
Having  passed  Sair&m,  they  came  to  a  place  called  Jarnn,  where  they  seized
one  of  the  soldiers  of  the  army  of  Jatah  and  sent  him  on  to  Amir  Timur.
When  he  was  asked  for  news  of  Eamaruddin,  who  was  of  the  tribe  \TJmaic\  of
Dughlit,  he  related  that  Eamaruddin  had  collected  an  army  and  was  then
stationed  at  Eeuk  Tubeh,*  waiting  for  Hiji  Beg,  but  that  no  news  of  the
advance  of  Amir  Timur  had  reached  Eamaruddin.  Timur  then  ordered  the
reconnoitring  party  to  hasten  forward,  while  he  himself  soon  after  followed
them.

When  Eamaruddin  heard  of  these  doings,  he  withdrew  his  army  to  an
inaccessible  spot  called  Birkah-i-Ghnri4n^  [the  Pond  of  the  Ghuris].  In  that
place  there  are  three  very  deep  ravines,  through  which  flow  three  great  riveni.
Eamaruddin  having  crossed  two  of  these  valleys  with  his  army,  ])itched  his
camp  in  the  third,  protecting  the  approaches  thereto  with  barricades  and
entrenchments.

But  Prince  Jahdngir  marched  forward  at  the  head  of  his  experienoeil
soldiers,  to  the  sound  of  the  drums  and  war-trumpets. After  they  had

»  Or  Euk  Tito  :  the  *•  blue  hillock."

'  The  Turki  MS6.  says  ArtSiidl  Aidr,  I  cannot  find  either  name  on  any  map ;
but,  taking  the  probable  position  of  the  Jatah  army  into  consideration,  it  is
.possible  that  OUr^  some  forty  miles  west-north-west  of  Kastek,  may  represent
ArAAl  Aidr,

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

42  Third  Invasion  ofMoghtdistAu.

wounded  and  killed  many  of  the  enemy  with  their  arrowSy  they  came  to  close
quarters  with  them,  and  when  night  fell,  all  the  enemy  took  to  flight ;  so  that
on  the  morrow  not  a  single  man  of  the  army  of  Jatah — ^that  is  to  say,
Moghulist^n^was  found  in  the  camp.  But  our  victorious  soldiers  followed
in  their  pursuit,  and  put  to  death  many  of  those  heretics.  When  the  sun  had
risoD,  Amir  Timur  arrived  on  the  spot  with  the  rest  of  the  army.  He  there-
upon sent  Amir  Sayyid  D&ud,  Husain  and  Uch  Kar&  Bahidur  in  pursuit  of
the  enemy.  In  accordance  with  his  orders,  they  followed  the  course  of  the  river,
and  Husain  was  drowned  in  the  river.  On  reaching  the  enemy's  country
they  began  to  ravage  and  pillage,  and  seized  many  of  their  horses.  But  they
spared  those  Haz^ras  who  submitted,  and  having  disarmed  them  sent  theiii
on  to  Samarlkand.  Amir  Timur  advanced  as  far  as  B&it&k^  with  the  purpose
of  meeting  the  enemy,  while  he  sent  Amir  Zdda  Jahtogir  with  one  regiment
to  look  for  Kamaruddin,  that  he  might  defeat  him  and  take  him  prisoner.
The  prince  accordingly  set  out  with  a  body  of  men,  and  laid  waste  the  country
of  Uch  and  Firm&n.'  He  came  upon  Kamaruddin  in  the,  mountains^  and
pursued  him  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  country;  he  (dsooeptured  much
booty  and  took  many  prisoners.  Among  the  latter  were  Tumdn  Aghi,  the
wife  of  Kamaruddin  and  her  daughter,  Dilshid  Agh&.  The  prince  sent  news
of  his  success  to  Amir  Timur,  who  durin«;  fifty-throe -days  had  not  moved
from  B&it^k.  When,  however,  this  Joyful  intelligence  reached  his  ears  he
immediately  set  out  for  Kara  Kasmak,  which  hill  he  ascended 'and  awaited
the  happy  return  of  his  son  Jah&ngir.  On  his  arrival,  the  latter,  haviirg
respectfully  kissed  Amir  Tiniur's  feet,  presented  him  with  a  quantity  of
booty,  horses  and  sheep,  after  which  he  obtained  for  Dilshid  Aghd  the  honour
of  saluting  the  Emperor. [Verses.]  ...

Amir  Timur,  on  leaving  this  encampment,  descended  to  Atb^i  and  tbebde
pix)ceeded  to  Arpa  Ydzi,*  where  he  spent  a  few  days  in  festivity  and  rejoicing.
There,  too,  Mubiraksh&h  M^krit,  who  was  a  commander  of  9000,  and  one  of
Timur^s  oldest  friends,  showed  his  respect  for  the  Amir  by  causing  a  grand
festival  (^<ft)  to  be  organised  in  his  honour.  And  he  so  gained  Amir  Timur^s
good  graces  that  he  obtained  for  his  son,  Khudi&id^,  the  succession  to  the
honours  and  titles  of  Saldr  OghlAn  and  of  Husain,  who  had  both  perished  fn
the  late  war.

*  Mr.  y.  P.  Nalivkine  mentions  '<Baitok^  as  a  village  in  the  Andijan  district
of  Farghana,  and  says  that  its  ancient  name  was  ^  Paitoug.**  (flt^.  du  Khanat
de  Khokand,  p.  14.)

'  Possibly  the  first  of  these  two  places  may  stand  for  Dsh,  near  the  eastern
borders  of  Farghana,  but  I  know  of  no  place  with  a  name  like  Firmdn  in  ihi^
direction.  Dr.  Bellew  has  **  Uch  Borhiln  or  ]Jch  Turfan ; "  the  latter  place,
l:owever,  would  seem  to  lie  too  far  east  to  suit  the  narrative,  while  the  K>rmcr
was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  Kashghar.  Dr.  Bellew  himself  tells  us  (KoAmir
and  Kathuar^  p.  809)  that  the  Vck  Burhan  ridge  is  on  the  left  bank  of 'th«
Tumin  Biver,  while  the  modem  Kishghar  stands  on  the  right  bank,  having
been  built  there  after  the  destruction,  early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  of  the.olq
town,  which  was  on  the  left  bank.  Had  Firmdn  been  so  near  K&shghar  as  to  form
almost  a  part  of  the  town,  the  name  of  Kishgbar  would  certainly  have  appeared  in
connection  with  that  of  Ftrintfn.  like  KaraiKwmc^  which  occurs  immediately
below^  it  was  probably  the  name  .of  an  uninhabited  spot,  or  camping  ground,  and
should  be  looked  for  in  the  hills  to  the  north-west  of  Eishghar.  SevertsofTs  map,
though  loaded  with  detail,  does  not  oontain  these  tfames.  :  (See  also  p.  90i,
for  Vek  BeLrKhd%t  whioh  lliiza  Haidor  puta.at  tl^r^  faridkh^  or  tveli^  miles,
from  Eishghar.)

-  *>  Arpa  and  YM:  two  riven  wringing  from  the  same  range  of  bills  near  tha
eastern  confines  of  Farghana. (See  map  for  the  position  of  the  pass.) ^ «

Digitized  by

Google

Marriage  of-  Amir-TimuK  43

CHAPTER  XIX.

MIBEIAGE  OF  AMIB  TIHUB  WITH  THE  PRINCESS DILSHAd  AGhA.

hmsL  TlMQBiin  ac<)ordaBoe  with  the  text  of  the  Korin :  "  Thou  ehalt  marry
whatever  woman  thou  pleasest,  even  unto  the  numher  of  four  women,"  set
the  eye  of  his  favour  upon  Dilsh&d  Agh&,  and  resolved  to  marry  her.  The
officers  of  &8  Court,  made  preparations  for  grand  festivities^  Wine  and  song
and  instramental  mnme  were  not  wanting,  and  the  whole  ceremony  was
oonducted  imth  the  greatest  pomp  and  magnificence.  The  revels  having  h^en
brought  to  a  close.  Amir  Timur  broke  up  his  camp,  and  crossing  the  Tisi
Dabdu/  went  and:  pitched  his  royal  tents  at  Uzkaod.  Here  he  received  his  -
eldest  sister  Kutlugh  Taikto  Agb&,  who,  aooompanied  by  several  princes  and
nobles,  had  arrived  from  Samarkand ;  she  had  the  honour  of  kissing  Uie
Emperor's  feet,  and  took  part  in  the  festivities  which  were  now  again  renewed
at  the  Court.  From  Uzkand  they  proceeded  to  Ehojand,  when  Adilshdh,
being  obliged  to  show  his  submission,  organised  feasts  and  merry-making  in
honour  of  Amir  Timur,  and  made  him  presents  of  horses  in  order  that  his
homage  might  gain  the  Amir's  approval.  His  heart,  however,  was  of  another
colour,  for  he  had  really  the  design  of  taking  him  by  surprise  in  the  midst  of
the  rejoicings.  But  Amir  Timur  (whom  Qod  used  to  watch  over  contmnally)
by  his  happy  intuition,  observed  signs  of  ibis  hidden  treason,  and  detected
the  evil  intentions  of  the  conspirators  by  their  movements.  He  thereupon
rose  from  the  banquet,  mounted  his  horso  and  relumed  to  his  camp*

At  the  tune  when  he  was  advancing  to  attack  Eamaruddip,  Shaikh
Muhammad  Bayin  Salduz,  Adilshdh  Jalair  and  Turkdn  Arlit  had  resolved
to  seize  Amir  Timur  whenever  an  occasion  should  prtaent  itself.  But  their
schemings  were  of  no  avail  against  one  who  was  so  carefully  watched  over  by
the  Eternal:  and  thus  he  reached  his  capital  without  accident.  He  then
disbanded  his  soldiers,  while  he  himself  went  to  take  up  his  winter  quarters
at  Zaujir  Sar&i,  which  is  two  marches  to  the  west  of  Karshi.  During  the
winter  Adilshdh  arrived,  and  having  paid  his  respects  at  the  palace,  confessed
to  the  Amir  the  evil  designs  he  and  the  cither  cotspirators  had  had  against
him.  When  Timur  heanl  this,  he  was  wise  enough  to  pretend  not  to  have
heard,  and  ahowed  Adilsh&h  great  favour.  When  the  winter  had  passed,  he
issued  an  order  for  his  soldiers  to  muster,  With  the  object  of  making  another
war  upon  Khwdrizm.  All  the  generals,  princes,  and  soldiei-s  having
assembled  round  his  palace,  he  ordered  them  to  seize  Sh^h  Muhammad
Bay &n  Salduz  and  to  put  him  on  trial."  Aftef  his  case  liad  been  heard; *his
guilt  being  clear,  he  was  handed  over  to  the  brother  of  Harimnlk  Salduz,  a
relation  of.  his  own,  whom  he  had  unjustly  killed  with  his  sword.  The
brother  avenged  Harimulk  by  killing  Shaikh- Muhammad  in  a  like  manner.
All  Darvish,  son  of  Bdydzid  Jaldir,  was  also  put  to  death  after  being  found
guilty;  while  the  government  of  the  Tum4n  of  Salduz,  together  with  the
administration  of  justice  and  police  [Sahtly  was  entrusted  to  the  brave
Ak  Timur  Bah^ur.

*  Evidently  the  pass  (D&h^n)  between  the  Y^zi  and  Arpa  rivers^  alluded  to
in  the  lost  note,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

44  Third  Expedition  of  Timur

CHAPTER  XX.

THIRD EXPEDITION OF AMIR  TIMUR  INTO  KHWARIZM, AND HIS RETURN
ON ACCOUNT OF THE REVOLT OF sIR BUGHI, ADILBHIh AND

bahrAm  jalIir.

In  the  beginning  of  the  spring  of  the  year  of  the  Hajra  777  [a.d.  1375],  or
the  year  of  the  Crocodile  (Lui)  of  the  Tartar  cycle.  Amir  Timur,  being
encouraged  by  his  former  good  fortune,  determined  to  make  an  expedition
into  Khwdrizm,  preferring  war  to  feasting. [Verses]  ....

Having,  therefore,  appointed  Amir  Ak  Bugbd  (xOTemor  of  Samarkand,  and
having  sent  Amir  8ir  Bugh&,  Adilsb^  Jal&ir,  Khit&i  BahMur,  Ilchi  Bugbi
and  other  commanders  of  thousands,  with  30,000  horsemen,  to  Jatah  (which  is
oquivalent  to  Moghulistan),  he  gave  them  express  orders  to  seek  diligently  for
Eamaruddin,  and  to  kill  him  wherever  they  might  find  bim  ;  he  tben  raised
bis  own  victorious  standard  and  set  out  for  Elhw&rizm  with  a  numerous  army.
On  reaching  a  place  on  the  banks  of  the  Jibun,  called  Sihpdyab,  he  saw
Turkan*  Arl4t  approacbing  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  The  latter,  how-
ever, feeling  tbat  the  end  of  his  life  bad  come,  did  not  deem  it  advisable  to
advance,  but  fled  back  with  his  men  to  Kuzruin.^  Amir  Timur  thereupon
sent  Pulid  after  him  with  a  few  men.  They  marched  day  and  night,  and
having  passed  Andkhud  they  came  up  to  the  fugitives  at  Fdry&b,^  which  is
on  a  river,  where  Turkan,  with  his  brother  Turmlsh  and  their  men,  taking
up  their  position  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  offered  them  fight.  The  enemy
stood  like  lions  at  first,  but  they  were  at  length  defeated  and  compelled  to
take  to  flight,  the  victorious  army  following  close  upon  their  heels.  Pul&d
alone  came  up  to  Turkan.  His  horse  being  fatigued,  Turkan  dismounted  and
ran  forward  on  foot;  he  then  struck  Puliid's  horse  with  the  shaft  of  an  arrow,
and  before  the  latter  could  rise  from  the  ground,  aimed  at  him  another  arrow,
which  only  passed  through  PulAd's  helmet. Then  Pulid,  becoming  more

*  A  corruption,  probably,  of  Khordsdn,  a  province  which  extended,  at  tbe  end
of  the  fifteenth  century,  eastward  to  Balkh  and  north-eastward  to  the  Amu.

*  These  movements  are  not  intelligible.  Fardhf  or  Fdrvdb,  was  an  ancient
name  of  Otiar  on  the  Sir  or  Jaxartes,  but  there  is  also  a  Far&b  near  tbe  right
bank  of  the  Amu  or  Oxus,  to  the  south-west  of  Bokhara,  and  though  P^tis  de  la
Croix  (Hid.  de  Timur  Bee,  vol.  i.,  pp.  260-1)  specially  explains  that  the
Fdrydb  of  the  text  means  Otrar,  this  is  obviously  impossible.  It  seems,
however,  that  there  was  a  third  Fdrydhj  for  Abul-feda,  on  the  authority  of  the
Lcldbt  speaks  of  a  '*  small  locality ''  of  tbat  name  in  the  environs  of  B^lkh.  He
also  quotes  Azizi  to  the  effect  tbat  Fdrydb  was  situated  twenty-two  parasangs,
or  about  eighty-eight  miles,  from  Balkb,  but  in  which  direction  he  does  not
mention.  Again,  he  tells  us  Ibn  Haukal  states  that  the  water  of  this  Fdrydb
comes  from  Talkdn-Hi  place  not  far  from  Marv-al-Rud— this  latter  being  some
forty  parasangs,  or  four  days'  journey,  east  of  Marv-i-Shah-Jah&n,  and  situated
probably  not  far  east  of  the  Murghab.  It  is  this  last  Fdrydb  (now  no  more)  that
seems  to  be  indicated  in  the  text  But,  in  any  case,  the  movements  of  PaUd's
pursuing  force  are  inexplicable,  as  it  could  not  have  passed  Andkhui  (or  And-
khud) to  reach  a  spot  near  the  Murgh&b,  or  160  miles  east  of  Marv-i-Bhah-Jah&n.
(See  Abul-feda,  ii.  (2).  pp.  195-6  and  198.)  The  only  map  I  know  of  that  shows
this  Farydb  is  that  of  James  Fraser,  who  marks  the  place  about  halfway
between  Balkh  and  Marv-al-Rud. (See  Hitt.  of  Nadir  Shah,  1742.)

Digitized  by

Google

into  Khwdrizm,  45

furious,^  made  a  bold  msli  at  him,  and  they  wrestled  together  for  some  time,
till  at  last  Pulid  got  the  upper  hand,  and  crying  out,  **  Long  live  Amir
Timur  1 "  struck  Turkan  to  the  ground.  He  then  cut  ofif  his  head  and
returned  in  triumph.

Am^n  Sarbaddl,  who  had  gone  in  pursuit  of  Turkan's  brother,  Turmish,
came  up  with  him,  overcame  him,  and  severed  his  head  from  his  body.  His
corpse  became  meat  for  the  wild  beasts,  while  the  heads  of  the  two  were
taken  before  Amir  Timur.

Of  those  Amirs  whom  'i'imur  had  sent  into  Jatah  (that  is  to  say,  Moghuli-
ist&n),'  Sir  Bughi  and  Adilsfa&h,  when  they  found  the  country  empty,'
prepared  another  plan  of  revolt;  they  seized  Khitdi  Bahddur,  and  Ilchi
Bughd,  while  Hamadi,  whom  Amir  Timur  had  made  Governor  of  Andakan
[Andijin],  allied  himself  with  them.  Having  collected  their  tribes,  namely,
the  Jaliir  and  the  Kipchik,  they  set  out  against  Samarkand,  and  began  to
lay  si^  to  it.  But  the  iDhabitants  defended  themselves  so  successfully  with
arrows  and  darts,  that  they  could  not  surround  the  town.  Amir  Ak  Bughi,
who  was  governor  of  the  town,  wrote  of  this  matter  to  Timur,  who  having
passed  K4t^  had  just  attained  Khds,  when  this  news  reached  him.  Ha
immediately  made  preparations  to  return,  and,  having  sent  forward  his  son
Jahdngir,  in  command  of  the  vanguard,  he  himself  followed  with  a  large
army.  When  he  reached  Bokhdrd  he  put  his  men  into  fighting  order,  and
went  and  encamped  at  Rabdt-i-Malik.

Prince  Jahingir  came  up  with  the  enemy  at  a  place  called  Karmiaa,  where
a  battle  took  place.  The  air  was  filled  with  the  sound  of  cymbals,  and  much
blood  was  shed.  But  the  Prince  Jahiugir,  relying  on  the  aid  of  the  eternal
God,  at  length  overcame  the  enemy,  who  fiod  into  the  deserts  of  Kipchdk,
where  they  put  themselves  under  the  protection  of  Urus  Kh&n.^  Timur
B<g,  finding  himself  victorious,  returned  in  peace  to  his  capital.  He  then
divided  the  tribe  of  Jaldir  between  his  Amirs,  and  appointed  his  son  Omar
Shaikh  Grovernor  of  Andakdn  [Andijdn].

Adiishih  and  Sdr  Bughi  remained  in  the  service  of  Urus  Ehdn.  But  at
leugth  their  thirst  for  rebellion  again  got  the  better  of  them,  and  once,  while
Urus  Kh&n  was  absent  nt  his  summer  quarters,  they  ran  away,  and  drawing
the  sword  of  treachery  from  the  sheath  of  infidelity,  made  war  on  Uchibi,  a
lieutenant  of  the  Kb&n,  and  killed  him.  They  then  fied  to  the  court  of
Kamaruddin  in  Jatah  (that  is,  Moghulistdn)  and  tried  to  stir  up  in  him  a
spirit  of  revolt.

>  Puldditar :  more  steely ;  a  play  on  the  word  Ptddd,  which  means  steeL — B.

'  It  may  be  observed  here  that  it  is  Mirza  Haidar,  and  not  the  author  of  the
Zafar-Ndma,  who  interpolates  on  each  oooaslon  the  remark :  "  Jatah  hi  *ibdrat  %
MoghuUstan  ast^* — that  Jatah  is  equivalent  to  MbghtUidan,

*  I.e.,  offered  no  resistance. — R.

*  Marked  on  P^tis  de  la  Croix's  map  (vol.  i.)  near  the  bank  of  the  Oxus,  a
little  above  Khiva.  Erskine  mentions  K&t  as  the  ancient  capital  of  Ehwarizm,
and  says  it  lay  twenty-four  miles  from  HazariUp  down  the  Amu.  (Baber,
p.  xxiz. ;  see  also  Sprenger's  map  No.  3  in  Poat^nd-BeUeroiUen  des  OrieTds.)

^  Ruler  of  the  White  Horde  of  Kipchak,  and  a  descendant  of  Juji  Khan.

Digitized  by

Google

46  Fourth  Invasion  of  MoghulistAn.

CHAPTER  XXL

AMIR  tlMUR*S  FOURTH  fiXPKDmON  INTO  JATAH  (tHAT  IS,
MOGHULISTAN).

Afteb  Sdr  Bugbd  and  Adilshdh  bad  attaolied  themselyeB  to  KamaraddiQ,
they  used  every  posssible  means  to  rekindle  in  him  th6  old  fire  of  emnlty
ivhich  he  naturally  cherished  against  Amir  Timur.  Eamaruddin  finally  led
an  army  into  the  country  of  Andakdn,  where  the  Hazira  of  Eudak,  deserting
Omar  Shaikh,  joined  the  side  of  the  enemy.  But  Omar  Shaikh,  having  taken
up  a  fortified  position  in  the  mountains,  sent  a  messenger  whose  namiei  was
Ddshmand,  to  Amir  Timur  to  tell  him  that  the  enemy  had  arrived  with  a
large  army,  and  that  they  had  overrun  the  whole  of  Andak^n.  Amir  Timur
was  much  enraged  when  he  heard  this,  and  immediately  set  out  with  all
haste  for  that  country.  When  Eamaruddin  beard  of  the  advance  of  Amir
Timur  he  retired  from  the  place  where  he  was  encamped,  and  having  caused
his  household  and  tribe  to  leave  Atb&shi,  he  hid  himself,  with  4000  cavalry,
in  a  place  of  ambush.  When  Amir  Timur  reached  that  spot,  being  quite
unaware  of  the  trap  [which  Eamaruddin  had]  laid  for  him,  he  sent  forward
the  whole  of  his  force  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.

There  stayed  behind,  however,  of  the  army,  5000  cavalry  and  several  brave
generals,  such  as  Amir  Muayad,  Ehit&i  Bah^ur,  Shaikh  All  Bah^ur  and
Ak  Timur.  Ehitdi  Bahddur  and  Shaikh  Ali  Bahidur  discussed  how  the
enemy  oould  best  be  destroyed.  They  determined  to  display  the  utmost
bravery  and  audacity,  and  thereupon  set  out  in  pursuit  of  the  foe,  so  that
finally  there  did  not  remain  more  than  200  men  with  Amir  Timur.

Eamaruddin,  now  seizing  his  opportunity,  rushed  out  of  his  ambuscade
with  his  4000  cavalry,  sword  in  hand,  bent  on  avenging  himself  on  Amir
Timur.  Bnt  Timur  recalling  to  mind  the  words  of  the  Eorin :  *'  How  many
small  armies  have  overcome  great  hosts  by  the  help  of  God !  **  Was  in  no
way  disturbed  or  alarmed,  but  ^licouraged  his  men  and  opened  his  heart  to
them,  saying :  '*  Victory  is  from  the  Giver  of  all  good  gifts':  libt  from'  the
multitude  of  soldiers  is  it  to  be  obtained.  Your  sole  duty  is  to  acquit  your-
selves like  men ;  for  should  you  show  even  the  smallest  sign  of  cowardice  or
hontati^Hi  we  are  lost**

No  sooner  bad  Mt  said  these  words  than  he  tiuned  his  charger  against  the
enemy,  and  full  of  trust  in  God,  entered  the  fray. [Verses.]  ....

After  the  fight  was  over,  Timur  avowed  that  it  was  only  by  the  aid  of  HeUVen
that  snch  a  more  baodfol  of  men.oould  have  overcome  a  forcQ  of  (bus  thousand
cavalry,  bent  on  vengeanoe.  •  .  •  [V^ves  and  rhetorie.]  .  .  •  .

One  day  after  this  event,  he  fell  asleep,  and  there  appeared  to  him,  in  a
dream,  Shiukh  Burhdn-ud-Din  Eilij  (upon  whom  be  the  mercy  of  God).  Atnir
Timur  advanced  towards  him  with  great  reverence,  and  asked  him  to  pray
to  God  for  the  recovery  of  his  son  Jah^ir,  whom  he  had  left  on  the  bed  of
sickness  at  Samarkand.  The  Shaikh  answered,  "  God  be  with  you  " ;  but  of
his  son  he  said  nothing.  When  Timur  awoke  from  his  dream,  he  felt  convinced
that  his  wishes  concerning  his  son  were  not  fulfilled,  and  was  so  distressed
about  Jah&ogir's  safety  that  he  despatched  Bu  Eutlugh,  his  private  secretary;

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Death  of  Prince  Jahdngir,  47

with  a  letter  (from  Sang),  that  he  might  obtain  correct  news  of  his  son.  As
soon  as  his  secretary  had  started,  he  had  another  disturbing  dream  about
Jahin^r,  and  became  more  anxious  than  ever,  saying  to  his  courtiers:  ''I
sadly  ftfar  I  am  for  ever  separated  from  my  son ;  do  not  hide  the  tnith  from
me  any  longer.**  But  they,  going  down  on  their  knees,  took  a  solemn  oath,
saying:  ^^Thy  servants  have  absolutely  no  news  of  this  matter,  and  have
heard  nothing  of  your  son's  condition."

I)e)mrtiDg  thence,  they  again  met  with  Eamaruddin  at  Sang  Zighaj ;  a  fight
took  place,  and  they  again  put  him  to  flight.  Amir  Uch  Eard  followed  close
after  him,  and  when  [the  pursuers]  had  gone  a  little  way,  Eamaruddin,  being
surrounded  by  the  Amir*s  soldiers,  turned  round  with  eight  of  his  followers.
His  horse  was  killed  under  him  by  an  arrow,  and  he  himself  only  just
managed,  to  escape  on  foot,  covered  with  wounds.  In  the  same  fight  Pulid
received  an  arrow  wound  in  the  hand;  by  chance,  also,  a  fire  broke  out,  and
the  efibrts  which  PuUd  made  to  extinguish  it,  so  increased  the  inflammation  of
his  wound  that  he  died.

OHAPTEB  XXn.

TOE  DEATH  OF  FRINGE  JAHAnGIB...

Amib  TiMUtt  having  left  Atdkum,  croesed  the  Bihun  and  arrived  at  his
capital,  Samarkand,  where  he  found

[Verses] : The  people  wearing  clothes  of  bUick  and  grey
And  tears  of  sorrow  streaming  from  their  eyes.
And  all  had.^prinkled. dust  iipoii.thei]:  .heads -  >
And  as  a  sign  of  mourning  beat  their  breasts.
They  came  in  haata  to  greet  their  lord  the  king,
•  Their  heads  they  bared,  and  on  their  neck»  they  hung
Kack  felt  and  sackcloth,  thiis  th^ylieft  the  town
Filling  the  ur  with  moans  and  lainentations.
'^What  pity  that  Jah&ngir,  just  and  good,
Should  thus  be  carried  off  in  early  youth,
As  is  a  flower  by  the  cruel  wind."

When  Amir  Timur  heard  these  wailings  he  could  no  longer  doubt  but
that  his  forebodings  bad  been  correct  The  death  of  his  son,  which  he  now
learned,  caused  the  whole  world  for  him  to  become  black ;  his  cheeks  were
continually  wet  with  tears,  and  life  became  almost  unbearable  to  him.  The
kingdom,  which  should  have  been  overjoyed  at  the  ifietum  of ..  itft  mighty
monarch,  was  become,  instead,  a  place  of  desolatioii  and  mourning*  The
whole  army,  clothed  in  black  and  grey,  sat  down  m  mourning.  The  generals
put  dust  upon  their  heads,  and  their  eyes  were  filled  with 'the  blood  of
tiieir  hearts.

Though  the  Emperor  was  greatly  overcome  by  ^ef  at  the  loss  of  his  8ob>

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

48  Timur  sends  an  Army

his  noble  intelligence  fully  realised  that  this  world  is  but  transitory,  and  that
every  beiog  must  inevitably  perish  at  some  time — ^that  we  must  "  Verily  all
return  unto  God."  These  considerations  brought  healing  to  the  wounds  of
his  sorrow.  He,  moreover,  instituted  many  pious  works,  and  ordered  alms
to  be  distributed  in  the  form  of  food  to  the 'poor  and  indigent.  His  son's
body  was  carried  to  Kesh,  where  it  was  buried,  and  over  the  grave  a  beautiful
building  was  raised.^  The  prince  was  twenty  years  of  age  when  he  died.
He  left  behind  him  two  sons,  one  called  Mirza  Muhammad  Sult&u,  by  his
wife  Khdnz&dah,  and  the  other,  Mirza  Pir  Muhammad,  by  his  wife
Bakhtimulk  Aghd,  daughter  of  Ilyds  Yasuri.  This  second  son  was  born
forty  days  after  his  father's  death,  which  happened  in  the  year  777  of  the
Hajra  [a.d.  1375-6],  the  year  of  the  Crocodile  (Lui)  of  the  Tartar  cycle.
■  When  Prince  Saifuddin  '  heard  of  this  sad  event,  he  became  weary  of  life,
and  begged  Amir  Timur  to  allow  him  to  retire  to  the  Hij^.

CHAPTER  XXIII.

AMIR  TIMUR  SENDS  AN  ARMY  AGAINST  KAMARUDDIN.^

Amir  Timur  was  so  much  afflicted  by  the  death  of  his  son,  that  he  neglected
almost  entirely  the  affairs  of  the  State.

[Verses]: What  value  has  this  world  compared  with  heaveki?
U|M)n  the  other  world  my  mind  is  set.
Why  should  I,  for  a  meagre  clod  of  earth,
Bo  forced  to  keep  my  spirit  bound  in  chains?
Why  for  the  sake  of  living  our  short  life.
Should  I  be  made  to  run  the  whole  world  o'er?

But  the  chief  men  among  his  nobles  and  princes  came  to  him,  and  having
done  him  obeisance,  said :  "  The  Almighty  Creator  and  wise  disposer  of  the
affairs  of  the  universe  has  appointed  kings  on  the  earth  to  protect  the  sous
of  men,  and  administer  justice  to  them.'*

[V.  rses]: But  if  the  mighty  King  do  fall  asleep,

His  State  will  surely  sink  into  corruption;

And  if  the  Sultan's  sword  be  not  kept  bright.

The  mirror  of  religion  will  grow  dim.

The  Sultan  is  the  Shadow  of  the  Giver  of  Ail  Light,

And  from  his  Shadow  should  the  world  become  both  fair  and  bright.
«■  *  *  *  •  «

'  Or  mausoleum. — B.

■  Uncle  of  Amir  Timur.

'  This  incursion  appears  not  to  have  been  counted  as  a  fifth  expedition  into
Moghulistao,  as  will  be  observed  from  the  heading  of  the  next  chapter.  Also,
from  Mirza  Haidar's  statement  in  the  ensuing  one,  it  appears  that  he  regarded
Timur's  expeditions  against  the  Moghuls  to  have  numbered  five  in  all,  while
Petis  do  la  Croix  reckons  six.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Against  Kamamddin.  49

If  the  desire  of  their  nohle  sovereign  was  to  please  God,  nothing  could  be
more  acceptable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Preserver  of  Mankind,  than  the  adminis-
tration of  jnstice  and  care  for  his  subjects,  for  the  most  perfect  and  wisest
of  all  men  (upon  whom  be  the  most  excellent  prayers)  said  that  he  preferred
one  hour  of  his  life,  which  should  be  spent  in  the  administration  of  justice,
to  sixty  or  seventy  years  spent  in  worship.

Amir  Timur  accepted  favourably  the  counsels  of  his  servants,  feeling  that
it  was  purely  out  of  affection  for  himself,  that  they  had  addressed  these  words
to  him,  and  he  thereupon  began  again  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  affairs  of
the  State.  He  also  reassembled  his  troops  and  prepared  them  for  an
expedition.

At  this  time,  news  arrived  that  Adilshah  Jaldir  was  wandering  about  the
hills  of  Kardjik,  with  a  few  other  persons ;  whereupon  Amir  Timur  despatched
Bardt  Khwdja  Kukilddsh  and  Ilchi  Bugha,  together  with  fifteen  horsemen,
in  search  of  Adilshdh  and  his  party.  Tbey  set  out  from  Samarkand  in  the
night,  and  when  they  reached  Otrdr  a  few  chosen  men  were  despatched  to
the  mountains  to  look  for  Adilshdh.  They  eventually  found  him  in  a  place
called  Aksumd,  when  they  seized  him  and  put  him  to  death,  in  accordance
with  the  Ydsdk.  Aksumd  is  a  column  [mif],  built  on  the  summit  of  the
mountains  of  Kardjik,  to  serve  as  a  watchtower  (didah  hdni)  whence  one  may
look  out  over  the  plains  of  Kipchdk.^

Sdr  Bughd  also,  who  having  deviated  from  the  high  road  of  reason,  had
become  rebellious  and  fled,  now,  after  two  years'  absence,  being  led  by  the
true  guide  of  the  intelligence,  returned  again  to  court.  He  was  pardoned  by
the  merciful  monarch,  and  received  the  government  of  his  own  tribe  and
country.

Soon  after  this,  Amir  Timur  saw  fit  to  send  his  son  Omar  Shaikh  against
Kamaruddin,  and  with  him  he  also  sent  Amir  Ak  Bughd,  Kbitdi  Bahddur  and
other  Amirs,  commanding  them  to  do  their  utmost  to  sweep  the  enemy  from
the  face  of  the  earth.  Thus  intent  on  making  a  great  effort,  they  sot  out
with  all  possible  speed.  In  the  desert  of  Eurdtu  they  came  upon  Kamar-
uddin, and  by  the  aid  of  the  Almighty,  their  swords  of  emerald  hue  became
ruby-coloured  like  pomegranates,  with  fighting,  and  the  faces  of  their
opponents  grew  amber-coloured  with  fear.  Their  charges  were  so  fierce  that
at  length  the  enemy  had  to  fly,  scattered  in  all  directions.  When  Kamar-
uddin had  fled,  the  victorious  army  pillaged  all  his  country  and  returned
home  laden  with  booty.

^  This  tower,  it  seems  likely,  may  have  stood  at  the  spot  marked  on  some  maps
of  Turkistan,  **  Ak  sumbe  ruins."  The  site  appears  to  be  on  a  spur  of  the  range
now  called  Kdra-tdgh,  and  would  overlook  the  plains  of  Kipchdk  from  a  distance.
Dr.  Bellew  calls  the  tower  *'a  red-brick  pillar  built  on  the  Kara  Chdo  hill '
(  Yarhand  Mission  Report,  p.  152.)

Digitized  by

Google

so  Fifth  Invasion  of  Moghulistdn.

CHAPTER  XXIV.

AMIR  TIMim'S  FIFTH EXPEDITION  INTO  JATAH (tHAT IS, MOGHUUSTIn).

No  sooner  bad  these  victorious  troops  returned  from  their  attack  on  Jatah
(or  Moghulist^n),  than  Amir  Timur  resolved  to  make  yet  another  expedition
into  that  country,  that  same  year.  He  sent  forward,  as  an  advance  party,
Muhammad  Beg,  son  of  Musa  (who,  on  account  of  his  connection  by  marriage
with  Amir  Timur,  had  a  high  opinion  of  himself).  Amir  Abbdsand  Ak  Timur
Bab^ur.  Marching,  in  obedience  to  orders,  day  and  night,  they  came  up
with  Kamaruddin  at  Bughdm  Issigh-Kul,  and  after  a  fierce  fight,  put  him  to
flight  They  then  ravaged  his  country,  and  took  his  men  prisoners.  Amir
Timur  himself  pursued  Kamaruddin  as  far  as  Euchkdr.^

At  this  place  news  reached  the  Emperor's  ears  that  ToktAmish  OghlAn,^
having  lost  his  faith  in  Urns  Khdn,  had  come  in  hopes  [of  good  treatment]  to
pay  his  respects  at  court.  The  Emperor  at  once  commanded  the  Amir
TumAn,  Timur  Uzbeg,  to  go  and  meet  Toktdmish  with  all  possible  honour
and  ceremony,  and  accompany  him  back.  Amir  Timur  returned  from  the
direction  of  Inaghu  and  ahght«d  at  Uzkand."  Thence  he  reached  Samarkand
in  safety.

On  his  arrival  at  the  capital,  Toktdmish  Oghldn  was  brought  before  him
by  Timur  Uzbeg  and  others  of  the  nobles.  Amir  Timur  received  him  with
affection,  and  with  all  the  honour  due  to  a  prince,  none  of  the  prescribed
ceremonies  being  neglected ;  for  after  he  had  given  a  great  feast  in  Tokt&mish
OghUn's  honour,  he  loaded  him  and  his  retinue  with  magnificent  presents,
such  as  gold  and  jewels,  robes  of  honour  and  girdles;  arms,  armour,  horses,
camels,  tents,  cymbals  {kus\  chargers,  slaves,  standards,  and  such  like
things ;  and  as  a  proof  of  the  extent  of  the  love  he  bore  him,  the  Emperor
paid  him  the  honour  of  calling  him  his  son.

El^D  OF  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  ZAFAll-NAMA,

CHAPTER  XXV.

THE LAST  DAYS  OF  AMIR  KAMARUDDIN.

I  HAVE  heard  from  certain  Moghuls  that,  towards  the  end  of  his
life,  Kamaruddin  was  afliicted  with  dropsy,*  While  he  was  in  this
state  news  came,  one  day,  that  Amir  Timnr  was  approaching  with

'  Euchk&r,  or  Eoshkar,  is  one  of  the  head  streams  of  the  Ghu,  to  the  south-west
of  Issigh  Eul. (See  the  map.)

-  ToktAmish  was  nephew  of  Urns,  and  subsequently  became  Ehan  of  the
White  Horde. (See  note  5,  p.  46).

'  This  sentence  may  also  be  read — "  turned  aside  from  the  road  to  Inaghu.**
Instead  of  the  form  Inaghu,  Dr.  Bellew  has  read  Jumghdl,  and  this  is  likely  to
be  correct,  or  nearly  so ;  for  another  of  the  head  streams  of  the  Chu,  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  Euchkar,  is  called  Jumgdn  or  JumgdL  I  can  find
nothing  to  answer  to  Inaghu.

*  Some  details,  descriptive  of  the  foul  symptoms  of  the  disease,  are  omitted.

Digitized  by

Google

End  of  Kamaruddin, Khizir  Khivdja.  ^\

his  army ;  but  Kamaruddin  was  too  weak  to  mount  his  horse  or  to
hold  the  bridle.  So  his  people  carried  him  into  the  depths  of  the
jungle,  and  left  him  there  with  two  of  his  concubines,  and  pro-
visions for  a  few  days.  The  rest  then  fled.  After  the  invading
army  had  withdrawn,  and  the  scattered  inhabitants  had  returned,
they  sought  for  Kamaruddin  in  the  jungle,  but  not  a  trace  of  him
or  of  his  attendants,  either  dead  or  alive,  could  be  found.  Thus
were  the  people  released  from  his  oppression.^  After  his  dis-
appearance Amir  Timur's  mind  was  set  at  rest  with  regard  to
Moghulistan,  and  he  made  no  sixth  invasion  of  that  country.  In
fine,  the  Moghuls  eujoyed  peace  and  rest.

CHAPTER  XXVI.

THE  COMMENCEMENT  QJ-'  THE  REIGN OF  KHIZIR KHWAJA  KHAN,  SON
OF  TUQHLUK  TIMUR KHAN.

It  has  been  mentioned  above,  that  Tughluk  Timur  Khtin's  youngest
son  was  Khizir  Khw4ja  Khdn,  and  that  while  he  was  yet  at  his
mother's  breast,  he  had  been  saved  from  the  cruelty  and  enmity  of
Kamaruddin  by  Mir  Aghd,  the  mother  of  Amir  Khud4idad.  When
Khizir  Khwaja  Khan  attained  the  age  of  twelve  years,  [his  friends]
still  fearing  Amir  Kamaruddin,  removed  him  from  Kashghar.  Amir
Khudaidad  wished  him  to  be  accompanied  by  a  few  trustworthy
men,  but  Mir  Agha  opposed  this  plan,  saying :  *'  Do  not  send  any
of  your  own  servants,  for  when  the  boy  becomes  E^h&n,  base  bom
people  [such  as  they]  will  become  influential,  and  then  they  will
prove  enemies  to  yourself  and  your  children.  They  will  imagine
that  the  people  do  not  pay  them  sufficient  respect,  but  say  among
themselves,  *  These  are  only  servants.'  For  this  reason  raider  send
others  than  your  own  retainers — send  strangers."  So  twelve  men
were  sent  with  him,  of  whom  every  one  eventually  became  an
Amir,  and  many  of  their  descendants  are  alive  now.  Among  their
number  was  Arjir4k,  from  whom  are  descended  the  Amirs  of  Itdrji ;
Tdjri  of  Khwarizm,  from  whom  are  sprung  the  Amirs  of  Kunji ;
while  another  was  of  the  tribe  of  Chdlish  Siadi  [or  Sayyddi] ;  and

^  Amir  Kamaruddin  was  one  of  five  brothers  who  were  governors  of  districts
in  Moghulistan,  and  were  heirs  of  former  Dughlat  Amirs  (t.e.,  provincial
govemoni),  originally  appointed  by  Ch^gliatai  Khdn.  The  brothers  were  Tulik
at  Kashghar,  Bulaji  at  Aksu,  Kamaruddin  at  Atbdshi,  Shamsuddin,  who  is
mentioned  as  having  taken  part  in  the  battle  of  Lai  (or  the  mire),  and  Shaikh
Daulat.  of  whom  nothing  bat  the  name  can  be  traced.  Tulik,  the  eldest,  was
succeeded  as  Ulusbegi  by  Bulaji,  and  he  by  his  son  Khud^iddd,  who  was  seven
years  old  when  his  ffttber  died. (See  Bellew,  Yark.  Beportj  p.  151.)

E  2

Digitized  by

Google

52  Reign  of  Khizir  Khwdja.

his  sons  also  became  Amirs,  with  the  style  \lalcah']  of  Kushji,  but
they  are  also  called  Kukilddsh.^  These  persons  all  attained  the
rank  of  Amir,  as  did  also  the  remainder  of  the  twelve.

In  short,  they  conducted  Khizir  E^waja  Khan  up  to  the  hills,
which  lie  between  Badakhsh^n  and  Kashghar.  But  as  the  spies  of
Kamaruddin  got  news  of  his  hiding-place,  he  was  obliged  to
abandon  it  and  take  flight  to  the  hills  of  Khotan.  Then  again
fearing  discovery,  he  passed  on  from  this  place  to  Sarigh  Uighur,*
JurjAn,^  and  Lob  Katak,^  in  which  regions  he  remained  twelve
years.  On  the  death  of  Kamaruddin,  search  was  made  for
Khizir  Khwdja  Kh&n,  and  Amir  E^udaidad  sent  some  people
to  fetch  him  from  where  he  was  in  hiding.  As  soon  as  he  was
brought  in,  Khudaid4d  called  the  people  together  and  raised  him
to  the  Khanship.  Thus  did  the  splendour  of  the  Khan  come  to
illumine  the  sovereignty  of  the  Moghuls,  so  that  the  affairs  of
Moghulistdn  prospered.

The  Khan  then  concluded  a  peace  with  Amir  Timur,  who  formed
an  alliance  with  him  by  marrying  Tavakkul  Kh&nim,^  a  maiden
from  the  royal  haram.  During  his  reign  the  Khan  undertook  a
holy  war  [jghazdt]  against  Khitdi.  He,  in  person,  attacked  and
conquered  Karakhoja  and  Turfan,  two  very  important  towns,
situated  at  the  border  of  Khitai,  and  forced  their  inhabitants  to
become  Musulmans,  so  that  at  the  present  time  it  is  called  "  Dar  al
Islam  "^  As  a  seat  of  the  Moghul  Khakans  this  country  stands
next  in  importance  to  Kashghar.  It  is  moreover  related  that,  in
that  campaign,  this  country  was  divided  up  in  the  manner  ordained
by  the  Holy  Shariat.  And  there  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  Khan,  one
piece  of  satin  and  one  grey  cow.''  The  Khan*s  object  in  doing  this,
was  the  glorification  of  the  realm  of  Islam.

>  The  Turki  MS.  has  Bukvlddsh\  the  Persian  ones  have  KuUUdtik  (or
Gukildat^i),  meaning  sworn  friend  or  foster  brother,  which  is  no  doubt  the  right
reading.

'  The  country  of  the  Sdrigh  or  Yellow  Ulghurs  lay  to  the  east  of  Ehotan  and
Chdrchan. (See  notes,  pp.  9  and  349.)

*  Clidrchduy  or  Chdrchand^  between  Khotan  and  the  Lob  Nor  country.

♦  Or  Lob  Kanah,  the  district  about  Lake  Lob.  (For  Katak  or  Kanak,  see
note,  p.  12).

^  Sho  was  the  Khan's  daughter.

•  Which  of  the  two  towns — Turfan  or  Kardkhoja— was  called  Ddr  al  Isldm,  or
'  the  Seat  of  Islam,'  Mirza  Haidar  leaves  his  readers  to  coDJeoture.  They  are
in  reality  some  twenty-six  or  twenty-seven  miles  apart.  In  our  author's  time
Turfdn  was  the  more  important,  and  was  usually  the  residence  of  the  Khan  of
the  State.  But  in  earlier  time 5  Karakhoja  was  a  place  of  consequence,  so  that
it  is  very  uncertain  which  may  have  been  regarded  as  the  capital,  aud  the  Seat  of
Islam,  at  the  date  ho  is  speaking  of.  It  U  possible  also,  that  he  may  mean  to
indicate  the  whole  state,  or  province,  of  Uighuristan,  as  he  afterwards  calls  the
Khanate  which  lay  cast  of  the  modem  Kuchar,  and  had  for  its  capital  Turfi&n.
He  is  much  given,  as  will  be  seen,  to  using  copulate,  or  dual,  names  for  countries
or  districts,  and  sometimes  speaks  of  this  same  province  of  Uighuristan  as
"  Chdlish-Turfan."  (For  the  identity  of  Kardkhoja  (the  Chinese  Ho-Chou)  witli
the  ancient  Kao-Chan^,  etc.,  see  Sec.  v.  of  the  Introduction.)

'  The  *  piece  of  satm '  and  the  'grey  cow '  may  have  been  some  emblems  of

Digitized  by

Google

Reign  of  Khizir  Khwdja.  53

It  IB  related  in  the  Zafar-Ndmay  that  as  soon  as  Amir  Timur  had
satisfied  his  lust  for  conquest  in  the  north,  south  and  west,  he
prepared  an  expedition  against  the  countiies  lying  to  the  east,
especially  against  Khitai,  which  is  the  most  important  of  them ;
and  a  long  description  is  given  of  the  [projected]  expedition,  the
substance  of  which  is  that  he  mustered  an  army  of  eight  hundred
thousand  men,  supplying  them  with  provender  sufficient  for
seven  years — as  was  the  custom  in  the  armies  of  Irak  and  Kum.^
As  the  country  lying  between  Khitai  3  and  Mavara-un-Nahr  was
but  little  cultivated  and  thinly  populated,  he  ordered  each  man  to
take,  in  addition  to  other  supplies,  two  milch-kine  and  ten  milch
goats,  telling  them  that  when  their  supplies  should  be  exhausted,
they  were  to  milk  these  animals ;  and  when,  in  turn,  the  milk
should  come  to  an  end,  they  were  to  convert  the  animi^ls  themselves
into  provisions.

Having  completed  these  preparations,  Amir  Timur  set  out  from
Samarkand,  and  for  that  winter  took  up  his  quarters  {kishWc]  in
Turkistan.  While  there,  he  sent  to  ask  Khizir  Khwaja  Kh4n  if
it  would  be  possible  to  cultivate  the  ground  [in  Moghulistan],  in
order  to  furnish  supplies  for  the  army.

I  have  frequently  heard  my  father  (upon  whom  rest  the  mercy
of  God)  relate  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  spring  the  new  kimiz^
had  come  in,  and  on  that  day,  according  to  an  ancient  Moghul
custom,  a  great  feast  had  been  prepared.  As  Amir  Khud&idad
was  on  the  point  of  offering  a  cup  of  kimiz  to  the  Khan,  one  of  the
chief  nobles  announced  the  arrival  of  an  ambassador  from  Amir
Timur,  and  stated  the  purport  of  his  mission.  [The  noble]  added :
"  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  not  power  to  resist  him,
and  that  we  shotdd  be  compelled  to  pay  him  tribute."  At  these
reflections,  the  cup  of  kimiz  fell  from  the  hands  of  the  Khdn,
whereupon  Amir  Khudaidad  said :  **  You  must  now  drink  of  the
cup  of  tranquillily  {r&hat)y  in  conformity  with  this  couplet :

To  gricvo  ovor  wkit  has  not  yet  come  to  pass  is  taking  son*ow  in  antici-
pation.
*Tis  bett^-r  that  I  should  defer  to  the  morrow  the  things  of  to-morrow."

Then  he  added :  "  It  has  been  said  that  if  an  apple  be  thrown  up
to  the  sky,  God  has  had  time  to  bestow  a  hundred  blessings  before
it  descends  again.  Ere  another  year  be  passed,  how  many  thousand
favours  may  He  not  confer !  This  consideration  ought  to  bring  you
comfort."

power,  or  both  may  be  corruptions  of  place-name^,  duo  to  bad  copying.  There  is,
liowcver,  no  doubt  as  to  the  reading  of  the  texts ;  the  words  are  Yah  Atlas  wa
Yak  Gdw  Kahud — words  in  which  I  can  trace  no  names  of  provinces  or  districts.

*  Persia  and  Turkey.

'  Kumiz  or  Kimiz  is  a  bitter  beverage  made  from  fermented  mare's  milk. — B.

Digitized  by  VjCJOQIC

54  Reign  of  Khizir  Khwdja,

Scarcely  had  he  done  speaking,  when  they  saw  advancing  rapidly
from  the  shore  of  Lake  Karids,  a  man  mounted  on  a  black  horse,
and  clothed  in  white  robes.  He  rode  on  as  far  as  the  executioner's
tent,  where  it  is  customary  to  dismount.  This  man,  however,  rode
on  without  stopping,  right  past  the  station  of  the  guards  who  were
sitting  in  a  line.  The  chamberlains  \^aM&v\iir^  ran  up  from  every
side  to  try  and  stop  him  in  his  course,  but  he  did  not  slacken  his
speed  till  he  came  up  to  where  the  Khan  was  standing.  Then  he
called  out  in  a  loud  voice :  "  Amir  Timur  is  no  more,  he  has  died
at  Otrdr  I "  Having  uttered  these  words  he  again  rode  off  at  full
speed.  Many  horsemen  were  sent  after  him,  but  none  could  over-
take him ;  and  no  other  intimation  of  the  news  was  received.
However,  after  an  interval  of  forty-five  days,  information  came  that
Amir  Timur  had  died  at  Otrar ;  so  there  no  longer  remained  any
doubt  about  the  matter,  and  the  Kh&n  was  relieved  of  all  anxiety
and  distress.

The  Khdn  was  bom  before  the  year  770  of  the  Hajra,  and  the
above  recorded  events  took  place  in  807^  of  the  Hajra.  But  it  is  not
known  how  long  the  Khan  survived  Amir  Timur — God  knows
best.

When  the  Khan  ascended  the  throne  of  the  Khanate,  the  founda-
tions of  the  State,  which,  under  the  usurpation  of  Kamaruddin  and
the  ascendency  of  Amir  Timur,  had  been  much  shaken,  were  once
more  strengthened  and  consolidated.  Old  customs  and  rights,
which  had  fallen  into  disuse  or  oblivion,  were  revived,  while  the
affairs  of  the  kingdom  and  the  business  of  the  nobles  were  restored
to  order.  Among  other  matters  that  received  attention  was  the
restoration  to  his  rights  of  Amir  Khudaidad.

For  in  the  reign  of  Chingiz  Khan  there  had  been  granted  to  the
ancestora  of  Amir  Khudaidad  the  following  seven  privileges
SjiiatiBdh^^  ^ :  1.  Tdbl  (or  the  drum).  2.  Alam  (or  the  Standard),
the  former  being  called  in  Turki  "tiaA^dra,"  the  latter  *'*'tumdn
ttighJ"  3.  Two  of  his  servants  might  wear  the  ^^  Kmlmn-iughy
Kushun-tugh  is  synonymous  with  *'  chdpdr  tugh"  4.  He  might  wear
the  Kur*  in  the  councils  of  the  Khan,  though  it  is  a  custom  among

*  Yasdvid  may  be  translated  chamberlain,  or  sometimes  mace-bearer.

*  Timur's  death  took  place  in  Febrnaiy,  1405,  or  about  the  middle  of  the
Hajra  year  807,  which  began  on  10th  July,  1404,  and  ended  28th  June,  1405.

'  In  the  text  used  by  Mr.  Erskine,  twelve  mansab — privileges  or  prerogatives—
appear  to  be  mentioned.  (See  Hist  of  India,  U  P-  43,  where,  however,  no  detail
LB  given.)  From  his  abridged  MS.  translation  at  the  British  Museum,  it  is  evident
that  Mr.  Erskine  found  only  eleven  detailed,  as  is  the  case  in  the  three  texts
used  by  Mr.  Boss.  Dr.  Bollew  {Yarkand  Report,  p.  153)  has  ten,  and  his  list
differs  in  many  respects  from  the  one  given  above.  The  word  manaaJb  means,
properly,  office  or  dignity,  but  her©  prerogative  or  privilege  best  answers  the
meaning.  A  good  account  of  these  prerogatives  is  given  by  Professor  Blochmann
in  his  Ain^'Ahbari  Cpp.  364-5X  as  derived  from  the  Akhamamah  of  Abul  Fazl.

*  Perhaps  girdle  or  garter,  though  the  text  would  appear  to  imply  the  mean-
ing (j[uiver. pjr.  BeUew  translates :  qur,  **  armour  "  (p.  153),  and  Mr.  Blochmann,

Digitized  by  VjL^OV  LC

,2

Reign  of  Khizir  Khwdja.  55

the  Moghuls  that  no  one  but  the  Khan  may  carry  his  quiver  in  his
hand. 5.  Certain  privileges  in  connection  with  the  Khan's  hunt.^

6.  He  was  to  be  an  Amir  over  all  the  Moghuls,  and  in  the  jirwafw-
his  name  was  to  be  entered  as  "  Sirdar  of  the  TJlus  of  Moghuls."

7.  In  the  presence  of  the  Khan,  the  other  Amirs  were  to  sit  a  bow's
length  further  than  he  from  the  Khdn.

Such  were  the  seven  privileges  bestowed  upon  Urtubu  by
Chingiz  Khan.  When  Amir  Bulaji  had  brought  Tughluk  Timur
Kh&n  from  the  land  of  Kipchak,  and  had  set  him  on  the  throne  of
the  Khanate,  he,  in  return  for  his  services,  received  in  addition  to
the  seven  privileges  above  enumerated,  two  others,  so  that  he
enjoyed  nine  in  all.  The  first  of  the  new  privileges  was,  that  he
should  have  the  power  of  dismissing  or  appointing  Amirs  of
Kushuns  (that  is.  Amirs  who  had  one  thousand  followers)  without
applying  to,  or  consulting  with,  the  Khan  ;  and  the  second  was  as
follows  :  Bulaji  and  his  descendants  should  be  permitted  to  commit
nine  crimes  without  being  tried.  On  committing  the  tenth  offence,
trial  should  be  conducted  under  the  following  conditions: — The
accused  should  be  set  upon  a  white  two-year-old  horse ;  under  the
hoofs  of  the  horse,  nine  folds  of  white  felt  should  be  placed — as  a
token  of  respect — and  he  should  in  that  position  address  the  Khtin,
while  the  Khan  should  speak  to  him  from  an  elevation.  When
the  interrogatory  and  investigation  had  been  conducted  in  this
fashion,  if  the  offence  should  be  a  mortal  one,  and  the  other  nine
crimes  should  also  be  proved  against  him,  two  Amirs  should  stand
by  and  watch  him  while  his  veins  were  opened  and  all  his  blood
drawn  from  his  body.  Thus  he  should  perish.  Then  the  two
Amirs,  wailing  and  lamenting,  should  carry  his  body  out.^

These  nine  privileges  were  contained  in  a  firmdn  issued  under

*^  a  collection  of  flags,  arms,  or  other  insignia,  which  follow  the  king  wherever  ho
goes  "(p.  50).

*  These  are  given  in  the  texts,  but  are  unintelligible  to  some  of  the  best
translators  to  whom  Mr.  Eoss  has  shown  the  passage.  Erskine  also  failed  to
translate  it  in  his  abridged  MS.  at  the  British  Mnsenm.  Dr.  Bellew  has  **jirga
— hunting  circle — ^with  power  to  punish,  according  to  rale,  those  who  infringed
its  regulations.'*  Mr.  Blochmann  writes :  ^  Ho  could  enclose  (qurq)  a  forest  as
his  private  hunting-ground,  and  if  any  one  entered  the  enclosure,  he  forfeited
his  personal  liberty'*  (p.  364).

«  Written  orders.— R.

*  The  nine  original  prerogatives  carried  with  them  the  title  of  Tarkhdn^o,
very  ancient  rank,  or  order  of  nobility,  among  the  Mongols.  (See  Tule,  Caihay
and  the  Way  Thither^  pp.  287  and  436).  The  Tarkhdns  are  constantly  spoken
of  b^  Asiatic  authors  as  a  tribe,  but  this  need  not  imply  that  they  were  of  any
particular  racial  descent.  Distinctions  between  tribes  and  orders,  or  families,  are
not  always  accurately  drawn.  Thus  Amir  Timur,  in  his  InstituteSy  enumerates
twelve  of  the  forty  tribes  (Aimdics)  which  had  submitted  to  his  government :
Barl^s,  Tarkhiin,  Arghun,  Jalair,  Tulkchi,  Duldi,  Moghul,  Sulduzi  [Salduzi],
Tughai,  Eipch&k,  Arlat,  and  Tatar.  Some  of  these  names  imply  race  distinc-
tions :  others  only  orders  or  families.  (Davy's  Imtitutei  of  Timur ^  p.  91.)  The
word  Barlas  means  ^  hero,"  and  some  of  the  others  may  nave  special  meanings
also. Mr.  R.  B.  Shaw  translated  Tarkhdn  by  •*  Franklin."

Digitized  by

Google

56  Reign  of  Khizir  Khwdja.

the  seal  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan,  which  I  once  saw  myself.  For  it
was  handed  down  in  onr  family,  and  ultimately  came  into  the  hands
of  my  father  (upon  whom  be  the  peace  of  Grod).  It  was  however
destroyed  or  lost,  in  the  disturbed  times  of  Shahi  Beg  Eii4n.^  It
was  written  in  the  Moghul  language  and  character,  and  bore  the
date  and  place  of  the  year  of  the  Hog,  at  K^nduz ;  which  goes  to
prove  that  Tughluk  Timur  Khdn's  rule  extended  as  far  as  Eunduz.
No  one  alive  now  knows  anything  about  the  reign  of  that  Khan,
but  I  have  copied  into  this  history  the  account  of  it  given  in  the
Zafar^mma.

Since  Khizir  Khwaja  Kh&n  had  been  saved  from  the  yawning
abyss  of  Kamaruddin's  violence,  and  had  been  placed  upon  the
throne  of  the  Khdns,  by  the  aid  of  Amir  BuUji's  son.  Amir
Khudaidad,  he  rewarded  the  latter  Amir  by  superadding  tliree
privileges  to  the  nine  existing  ones ;  making  the  prerogatives  of
Amir  ELhud&iddd  twelve  in  number. Thus :

10.  That  on  the  occasion  of  festivals,  when  the  Khan's
chamberlains  [yo^dinil]  arranged  the  ranks,  one  of  the  chamber-
lains of  Amir  Khuddidad,  taking  part  in  the  proceedings,  should
stand  on  the  right  hand  side,  holding  the  Khdn's  cup :  another  on
the  left  side,  should  hold  the  cup  of  Amir  Khudaiddd,  and  those
two  cups  were  to  be  exclusively  reserved  for  the  Khan  and  Amir
Khudaidad.

11.  That  he  should  set  his  seal  on  all  firmdna  that  might  be
issued,  but  that  the  Khdn's  seal  should  be  set  above  his.

12.  [No  12th  mansab  is  mentioned  in  any  of  the  texts].

Such  were  the  twelve  prerogatives  [mansab']  for  which  2l  firman
was  granted  to  Amir  Khud4id4d,  after  whose  death  they  descended
to  his  son  Amir  Muhammad  Shah  Kurkan.  When  this  latter  died,
they  devolved  on  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  Kurkan,  the  son  of  Muhammad
Shab's  brother,  and  after  Sayyid  Ali  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza
Kurkan  his  son,  and  after  him  to  his  son  Muhammad  Husain
Mirza  Kurkan,  father  of  the  present  writer  Muhammad  Haidar,
known  familiarly  as  Mirza  Haidar.

After  the  martyrdom  of  my  father,  my  uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza,  attached  himself  to  Sultan  Ash-Shahid-Sult4n  Said  Kh&n ;
the  Khan  Said  Shahid  confirmed  all  these  privileges  to  my  uncle.
The  particulars  of  the  matter  are  recorded  in  the  Second  Part  of
this  Tarikh-i-Bashidi.  These  privileges  (that  is  to  say,  the  first
[seven]  of  them)  were  in  force  from  before  the  year  625  of  the
Hajra,  which  is  the  date  of  Chingiz  Khdn,^  down  to  the  death  of
the  Khan  and  the  murder  of  my  uncle,  the  date  of  which  was  the

'  Shaib&ni  Khan,  the  Uzbeg  leader.

'  ThiB  date  is  intended,  evidently,  for  that  of  Chingiz  Khan's  death,  which  is
usually  taken  to  be  1227.  The  Hajra  year  625  began  12th  December,  1227,  so  that
nearly  the  whole  of  it  fell  within  1228.  But  the  date  of  the  death  of  Chingiz  is
very  variously  stated  in  different  chronicles.

Digitized  by

Google

Reign  of  Muhammad  Kkdn.  57

1 8t  of  Moharram,  940  of  the  Hajra.^  When  this  calamity  took  place
and  the  Ehanship  came  to  Snltan  Kashid,  the  customs  of  our  fore-
fathers were  exchanged  for  other,  and  very  different,  practices.

Praise  be  to  the  gracious  Creator,  in  that  when  my  turn  arrived
to  be  created,  he  made  me  a  free  man  and  independent  of  the
Khans,  for  the  great  *'  mansah  "  He  has  granted  me,  is  but  an  atom
of  those  boundless  favoars  which  are  the  salvation  of  this  world
and  the  next.  In  the  same  way  that  thou  hast  made  me  materially
free,  make  me  also  spiritually  independent  and  prosperous !

[Vcrscp] : Oh !  God,  make  all  the  world  my  ill-wishers.
And  keep  me  apart  from  them  all.
Keep  my  heart  from  worldly  matters,
And  cause  me  to  have  but  one  purpose  and  aim  in  life.

CHAPTER  XXVn.

MUHAMMAD  KHAN, SON  OF  KHIZIR  KHWAJA KUAN.

This  Muhammad  Kbdn  was  the  son  of  Khizir  Khwdja  Khan,  who
had,  besides  Muhammad  Khan,  other  sons;  among  these  were
Sham-i-Jah4n  Khan  and  Nakhsh-i- Jahan  Kh&n.^  After  Isdn  Bughd
Khan,  excepting  Tughluk  Timur  Khan,  there  was  no  one  left  in
the  country  of  the  Moghuls  who  was  of  the  first  rank  of  Khakans.
This  fact  I  have  already  mentioned.  After  the  death  of  Tughluk
Timur  Khan,  Amir  Kamaruddin  murdered  all  Tughluk's  sons,  so
that  there  was  do  one  loft  but  Khizir  Khwdja  Khan.  (This  I  have
also  already  stated.)  This  labt  Khdn  left  many  sons  and  grandsons ;
the  details  of  the  lives  of  all  of  them  have  nut,  however,  been
preserved  in  the  Moghul  traditions.  In  fine,  1  have  recounted  what
I  considered  worthy  of  belief  regarding  the  history  of  the  ancestors
of  the  Kbnkans.  But  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  any  details
concerning  their  uncles  and  cousins.  Consequently  I  have  only
mentioned  the  sons  of  Khizir  Khwdja  Khdn,  as  for  example,
Muhammad  Khdn :  fur  in  him  the  race  of  Moghul  Khdkdns  came
to  an  end.

Muhammad  Kbdn  was  a  wealthy  prince  and  a  good  Musulman.
He  persisted  in  following  the  road  of  justice  and  equity,  and  was

*  Said  Khan  died  on  this  date.  The  author's  uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza,
was  murdered  by  the  Khan's  son  and  successor,  Rashid,  a  week  or  two  afterwards.
The  Ist  Moharram,  940,  fell  on  23rd  July,  1533.

'  The  discrepancies  of  various  authors  regarding  the  sons  and  successors  of
Khizir  Khwaja  have  been  remarked  upon  in  the  Introduction.  See  Sec.  ii.,
pp.  40  8eq,

Digitized  by

Google

58  Reign  of  Muhammad  KMn,

so  unremitting  in  his  exertions,  that  during  his  blessed  reign  most
of  the  tribes  of  the  Moghuls  became  Musulmans.

It  is  well  known  what  severe  measures  he  had  recourse  to,  in
bringing  the  Moghuls  to  be  believers  in  Islam.  If,  for  instance,
a  Moghul  did  not  wear  a  turban  \pa%tar\  a  horseshoe  nail  was
driven  into  his  head:  and  treatment  of  this  kind  was  common.
(May  God  recompense  him  with  good.)

In  the  Moghul  records  it  is  stated  that  Amir  Khudaidad  himself
raised  six  Khans  to  the  Khunate,  and  this  Muhammad  Ehdn  was
one  of  the  number.

Muhammad  Khan  built  a  ^,6166.1  on  the  northern  side  of  the
defile  of  Chadir  Kul.  In  the  construction  of  this  building  he
employed  stones  of  great  size,  the  like  of  which  are  only  to  be  seen
in  the  temples  [J?ndid/]  of  Kashmir.  The  'Rabat  contains  an
entrance  hall  20  gaz^  in  height.  When  you  enter  by  the  main  door,
you  turn  to  the  right  hand  along  a  passage  which  measures  30  gaz.
You  then  come  to  a  dome  which  is  about  20  gaz^  and  beautifully
proportioned.  There  is  a  passage  round  the  dome,  and  in  the  sides
of  it;  and  in  the  passage  itself  are  beautiful  cells.  On  the
western  side  there  is  also  a  mosque  15  gaz  in  height,  which  has
more  than  twenty  doors.  The  whole  building  is  of  stone,  and  over
the  dooi-s  there  are  huge  solid  blocks  of  stone,  which  I  thought
very  wonderful,  before  I  had  seen  the  temples  in  Kashmir.^

*  Whether  the  diameter  or  tlie  height  of  the  dome  is  not  stated.  A  great  variety
of  (jaz  are  in  use  in  India,  Bokhara,  and  other  places.  Babcr  made  his  gat  about
thirty  inches,  but  it  was  popularly  taken  at  a  little  less,  perhaps  about  twenty-
seven  inches.  Mirza  Haidar's  gaz  may  be  assumed  as  aoout  equal  to  Baber's.
(See  Memoirsy  p.  4  ;  also  note,  p.  256.)

-  The  ancient  temples  in  Kashmir  are  noticed  again  towards  the  end  of  the
history.  The  RahdU  or  traveller's  rest-bouse  (caravan-sarai)  here  recorded  to
have  been  built  by  Muhammad  Khan  at  a  short  distance  north  of  the  Chadir
Kul,  would  seem  to  be  in  existence  still.  Its  ruins  stand  on  the  main  road  from
Almati  (i.e.,  Viemy)  to  Kashghar,  by  way  of  the  Narin  fort,  and  they  have  been
seen,  of  late,  by  several  European  travellers.  One  of  these  is  Dr.  N.  Seeland,  whose
account  of  the  building  is  quoted,  in  English,  by  Dr.  Lansdell,  in  his  recently-
published  book  of  travels  in  Chinese  Turkistan,  and  is  so  confirmatory  of  Mirza
llaidar's  description,  that  it  may  usefully  be  transcribed  :  *•  The  traveller,*'  says
Dr.  Seeland,  "  is  not  a  little  astonished  to  see  a  stone  construction,  hoary  with
age,  about  48  paces  long  by  36  wide,  with  a  flat  roof,  from  the  middle  of  which
riacs  a  rough,  half-ruined  cupola  about  25  feet  high.  Tlie  entrance,  fairly  lofty
and  vaulted,  conducts  to  an  interior  without  windows.  Under  the  cupola  is  a
sort  of  chamber  or  hall,  with  vaulted  wings,  9  feet  high,  of  rooms  or  cells
running  oflf  in  four  directions  in  the  form  of  a  Latin  cross.  The  entrance  wing
has  lateral  corridors  on  one  side  only,  and  in  these,  as  in  those  of  the  other
wings,  openings  from  30  to  36  inches  are  contrived  in  the  wall.  They  lead  to
separate  cells,  which  are  square  at  bottom,  circular  at  top,  and  perfectly  dark,
except  where  the  coiling  has,  in  some  cases,  fallen  in.  The  entrances  are  so  low
as  sometimes  to  necessitate  crawling,  and  the  interiors  have  no  trace  of  chimneys,
niches,  or  places  to  sit  or  sleep.  No  trace  exists  of  refectory,  kitchen,  or  even  fire-
place, throughout  the  building,  which  is  constructed  with  mortar  of  fragments  of
local  blueish  and  reddish  schist.  In  the  central  hall  are  a  few  remains  of
plaster,  but  none  of  ornamentation."  On  the  whole.  Dr.  Seeland  considers  that
the  building  has  no  resemblance  to  other  rest-houses  or  caravan-sarais  in  (Central
Asia,  but  I  am  not  aware  that  he  connects  it  with  any  ruin  dating  from  the  time

Digitized  by  VaL^OSI  IC

Reign  of  Muhammad  Khan.  59

In  the  time  of  Muhammad  Khan,  the  learned  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg
was  reigning  in  Mavara-un-Nahr  by  the  appointment  of  his
father,  Mirz4  Shah  Bukh;  he  was  the  founder  of  the  famous
observatory  and  the  author  of  the  astronomical  tables  called  Zij
Kurhdn,  Mirzd  Shah  Bukh  was  king  of  Khorasan  and  Irak.  The
dates  of  his  birth  and  death  are  not  known,  but  if  we  refer  to  other
dates,. we  find  that  he  must  have  died  before  860  of  the  Hajra.
(But  Qod.  knows  best.)^

of  the  Keatorians.  Dr.  Lanadell  does  so,  oonjecturally.  He  infeis  that  the
Rabat,  being  on  the  "direct  route  between  the  Christian  see  of  Kashghar  and
the  Christian  settlements  on  the  Chn,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  the  rain  may
represent  the  monastery  indicated  on  the  Catalan  map."  A  reference  to  this
ancient  ma^ — it  was  constructed  in  1375 — ^will,  however,  scarcely  aid  us  in
falling  in  with  Dr.  Lansdell's  conjecture.  In  the  first  place,  the  **  monastery  of
Armenian  Friars  and  Body  of  St.  Matthew  "  is  marked  on  the  reduced  fac-similo
published  in  Yule's  Cathay,  as  standing  on  the  margin  of  Lake  Issigh-Kul,  that  is,
just  at  a  spot  where  "^e  know,  from  the  narratives  of  modern  travellers,  many
remarkable  remains  are  to  be  seen — some  on  the  shore,  but  mostly  at  the  bottom
of  the  lake,  near  the  shore.  The  site  of  Muhammad  Khan's  Kabdt  would  be
some  180  miles  to  the  south  of  the  lake,  by  the  Narin  road,  or  120  miles  in  direct
distance.  In  the  second  place.  Dr.  Lansdell  cites,  from  Dr.  Bcllew,  a  passage
purporting  to  be  from  the  Tarikh-i-IUiBhidij  to  the  effect  that  Muhammad  Khan
*' converted  the  ancient  Hindu  temple  (resembling,  in  the  massive  blocks  of  its
stone,  the  temples  of  Kashmir)  called  Tash-Babdt,  on  the  pass  to  the  Chadir
Kul,  into  a  fortified  post  to  protect  his  capital  (Kashghar)  from  the  incursions  of
the  Kirghiz.''  The  strange  circumstances  about  this  quotation  are :  (1)  that  I
liave  been  unable  to  find  the  passage  in  either  of  Dr.  Bellew's  works  (Tlie
Yarhand  Mission  Report  or  his  Kashmir  and  Kashghar) ;  and  (2)  that  no  one  of
the  texts  of  the  Tanhh-i-Haahidi  in  the  British  Museum,  contains  any  thing  about
the  origin  of  the  stones  used  in  building  the  Rabat.  Tiieso  texts  state,  simply
and  clearly,  that  which  has  been  translated  above,  and  nothing  more.  Thus,  all
that  can  be  said  is :  (1)  almost  contemporary  evidence  proves  that  Muhammad
Khan  built  a  Rabdt  of  huge  stones ;  (2)  that  this  building  stood  in  a  region
where  Nestorian  Christianity  flourished  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  and  (3)  in  a  land
where  many  ruins,  whose  origin  is  not  yet  determined,  are  known  to  exist.  I
have  not  been  able  to  obtain  Dr.  Seeland's  full  description,  but  may  remark  that
no  mere  conjectures  to  the  effect  that  the  Tdsh-Rabdt  is  unlike  ordinary  rabuts,
or  that  it  is  like  a  monastery  or  what  not,  would  shake  the  very  clear  evideuce
of  Mirza  Haidar.  What  he  states,  when  coupled  with  Dr.  Seeland's  discovery,
is  interesting  enough.  The  descriptions  of  the  building  and  its  geographical
])oBition  agree,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  in  identifying  Dr.  Seeland's  ruin  with
Muhammad  Khan's  Babdt.

*  Strange  as  it  may  appear  in  the  cose  of  so  eminent  a  personage  as  Ulugh
Beg,  Mirza  Haidar's  statement  that  the  date  of  his  birth  is  not  known,  is  correct.
It  is  known,  however,  that  he  began  to  reign  at  Samarkand  in  a.h.  812  (or
A.W.  1409),  Eome  thirty-eight  years  before  the  death  of  his  father  Shah  Itukh,
who  was  the  fourth  son  of  ijnir  Timur.  At  Shah  Bukh's  death  in  a.h.  850
(  =  1446-47  A.D.)  ho  was  succeeded  by  Ulugh  Beg,  who,  however,  only  con-
tinued to  reign  for  a  further  period  of  two-and-a-half  years.  In  the  dissensions
and  wars  which  took  place  after  Shah  Bukh's  death,  Ulugh  Beg  was  taken
prisoner  and  put  to  death  by  his  own  son,  Abdul  Latif  (Ramzan,  858,  or
27th  October,  1449).  Thus  Mirza  Haidar's  calculation  of  the  approximate  date
of  Ulugh  Bog's  death  is  not  greatly  in  error,  though  the  circumstance  that  he
should  be  able  to  give  only  an  estimate,  shows  that  the  chronology  of  his  historv
is  not  always  to  be  relied  on.  As  the  author  of  the  astronomical  tables,  Ulugh
Beg  has  a  world-wide  reputation.  It  is  said  that  not  onlv  was  the  design  his,
but  that  he  assisted  in  the  computation  of  tables.  The  chief  computers  wen*,
according  to  Erskine,  first,  Maulana  Balah-nd-Din  Musa,  better  known  by  the
name  of  Kdzi-Zddah  Bum! ;  then  (after  the  Kdzi-Zidah's  death)  Maulana

Digitized  by  VjL^OQIC

6o  Skir  Muhammad  and  Vats  Khdn.

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

SUIR  MUHAMMAD  KHAN, SON OF  MUHAMMAD KHAN.

Muhammad  Khan,  also,  had  several  sons,  two  of  whom  were  Shir
Muhammad  lE^an  and  Shir  Ali  Oghlan.  Shir  Muhammad  Khan
succeeded  his  father,  and  as  long  as  he  governed,  the  people  were
peaceful  and  prosperous.  During  his  reign,  his  brother  Shir  Ali
Oghlan  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  thus  never  attained  to  the
rank  of  Kh&n.  He,  however,  left  one  son,  Yais  Ehdn  by  name,
between  whom  and  Shir  Muhammad  Khan  there  arose  groat
disputes,  as  will  be  related  below.  Shir  Muhammad  Khan,  who
was  also  a  contemporary  of  Mirzd  Sh&h  Bukh,  enjoyed  a  longer
reign  than  Muhammad  Kh4n.

CHAPTER  XXIX.

EABLT  LIFE  OF VAIS  KHAN.

SultAn  Yais  KhIn  was  the  son  of  Shir  Ali  Kh&n ;  ^  after  the  death
of  his  father,  he  was  in  the  service  of  his  uncle.  Shir  Muhammad
Khan.  After  a  time  he  began  to  find  this  condition  ii'ksome,  and
therefore  fled  from  the  court,  and  took  to  the  life  of  a  robber
\Kazak%\,  Many  distinguished  Moghul  youths  volunteered  to  follow
him.  Among  this  number  was  my  grand&ther  Mir  Sayyid  Ali.
I  am  the  grandson  of  Yais  Khan,  on  my  mother's  bide. Amir

Ghias-ud-Din  Jamshidi ;  and,  lastly,  Ibn  Ali  Muhammad  Kc^hji.  Tho  geo-
graphical tables  irero  first  publishcMi  in  England  by  Graves  in  1711,  and  the
tables  of  fixed  stars,  by  Hyde,  of  Oxford,  in  1768.  In  France,  Lalandc
published  the  astronomical  tables  in  1792.  Baber,  in  his  description  of  8amar-
Kand,  notices  the  college,  observatory,  and  other  buildings  erected  by  Ulngh
Beg.  Tho  observatory,  ho  says,  stood  on  the  skirts  of  the  hill  of  Kohik,  and
was  three  stories  in  height : — "  By  means  of  this  observatory,  and  its  astronomical
apparatus,  Ulugh  Beg  Mirza  composed  the  Zich-Kurk^ni,  vrhich  are  followed
at  the  present  time,  scarcely  any  other  being  used."  Mr.  Schuyler  was  shown
a  hill  called  Chup^n  Atd,  near  the  city  of  Samarkand,  on  which  the  observatory
ia  said  to  have  stood.  There  is  now,  however,  no  trace  of  it.  (See  Stanley
Lane  Poole's  Muhamwadan  DynasiieB,  p.  268 ;  Erskine's  Hut,  of  Indict^  i.,  p.  105 ;
lb.,  Mem,  of  Baber,  p.  61;  E.  Schuyler's  Turkuiany  i.,  p.  233;  also  Bealc's
Oriental  Biogravh.  Did.,  1881,  p.  276 ;  and  d*Herbelot's  Bitiioiheoue  OrientaU).
*  Profierly,  Shir  Ali  Oghlan,  not  Khan.  Ho  is  called  by  Erskine  and  somo
other  writers  Shir  Kuli,  But  Ali  and  Kuli  may  easily  be  taken  one  for  tho
other  by  Persian  copyists.  (See  the  Genealogical  Table  attached  to  this  volume.)

Digitized  by  VjL^OSI  LC

Amir  Sayyid  AIL  6 1

Sayyid  Ali  is  my  paternal  grandfather,^  and  this  Amir  Sayyid  Ali
was  the  son  of  Sayyid  Ahmad  Mirza,  son  of  Amir  Khuddiddd.  I
think  it  is  fitting  in  this  place  to  give  the  history  of  Amir
Sayyid  Ali.

CHAPTER  XXX.

AMIR  SAYYID  ALI  AND  STORIES  RELATING  TO  HIM.

As  has  been  already  mentioned,  Amir  Khudaid&d  lived  in  Moghul-
istan  in  the  service  of  the  Kh&ns.  His  native  country  was
Kdshghar,  which  had  been  given  as  a  fief  \akta^a\  to  his  anoestoi-s,
by  Chingiz  Eh4n.  This  matter  however  will  be  referred  to  in  the
Second  Fart,  when  I  speak  of  the  conntry  of  Kashghar.

Amir  Sa3ryid  Ahmad  ^  had  an  impediment  in  his  speech,  and
only  those  who  were  accustomed  to  hear  him  speak,  could  under-
stand him.  He  was  also  hard  of  hearing,  so  that  it  was  necessary
to  speak  very  loudly  to  him  in  order  to  make  him  understand.
His  father  sent  him  to  K&shghar  as  governor,  which  position  he
retained  for  a  considerable  time,  till  at  length  Ehwdja  Sharif,  one
of  the. nobles  of  Kdshghar,  became  very  powerful  and  all  looked  to
him  for  help  and  advice.  Khw&ja  Sharif  was  a  noble-minded  man,
but  he  was  displeased  with  Sayyid  Ahmad  Mirzd,  so  he  handed
over  the  government  to  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg,  while  Amir  Sayyid
Ahmad  fled  from  Kdshghar  to  his  father,  and  soon  afterwards  died.

Amir  Ali,  the  son  of  Sayyid  Ahmad  Mirzd,  lived  with  his  grand-
father. Amir  Khuddiddd,  who  loved  him  better  than  all  his  other
children ;  for  he  was  without  rival  in  stature  and  strength  as  well
as  in  courage,  talent  and  understanding.  He  used  to  be  called
Sayyid  AH  AUp

When  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  took  the  daughter  of  Isdn  Bughd  ELhdn
for  his  son  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd  (as  will  be  related  below),  he
marked  his  joy  by  striking  a  nail  into  a  wall,  which  I  have  myself
seen.  If  one  man  stand  upright,  and  a  second,  placing  his  feet  on
the  first,  also  stand  upright  and  stretch  out  his  hand,  he  will  not
reach  the  nail  by  about  an  ell  [^az].

On  this  account  *  Amir  Khuddiddd  loved  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  better
than  all  his  children.

^  Sayyid  Ali  was  the  author's  g^eat-grandfather,  as  he  shows  elsewhere.  (Sco
Genealogical  Table  of  the  Dughlats  in  Sec.  ii.  of  Introduction.)

'  It  is  curious  that  this  Khan's  name  should  be  written  sometimes  Avaxr
Sayyid  Ahmcidy  and  at  others  Sayyid  Ahmad  Mirza,  withu  a  few  lines.  The
texts,  howeyer.  have'  been  followed  as  they  stand.

'  In  allusion  to  his  upright  figure — ^like  the  letter  oZi/.

*  On  account  of  his  stature,  etc.

Digitized  by

Google

62  Amir  Sayyid  Alt,

At  this  time  a  cei*tain  Ahmad  Mirza,  one  of  the  Timuri  MIrzds
of  the  line  of  Mirz4  Shah  Bukh,  having  fled  [from  his  own  country]
had  come  [to  Mogholistdn].  He  had  [with  him]  a  sister,  for  whom
Amir  Sayyid  Ali  conceived  a  great  afifection;  so  mnch  so  that
Amir  KhnddidAd  and  others  begged  her  to  become  Amir  Sayyid
Ali's  wife.  She,  however,  refused,  saying :  "  I  cannot  stay  in
Moghulistdn,  but  if  he  will  accompany  me  to  my  own  country,  it
can  be  arranged."  She  then  immediately  set  out  for  her  own
country,  accompanied  by  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  When  she  arrived  at
Andij&n,'Mirz&  Ulugh  Beg  despatched  a  man  to  kill  Ahmad  Mirza,
and  himself  married  his  sister,  at  the  same  time  throwing  Amir
Sayyid  Ali  into  prison  at  Samarkand,  where  he  remained  one  year.
Here  he  fell  sick  of  dysentery,  and  when  on  the  point  of  dying,
Amir  Ulugh  Beg  sent  for  the  doctors,  whose  remedies,  however,
were  all  without  effect.  One  day  somebody  brought  some  kumiz.
The  Mirza  implored  tho  doctors,  saying :  '*  As  the  medicines  have
done  me  no  good,  I  should  much  like  to  try  a  little  kumiz,  for
which  I  have  a  great  craving."  They  at  last  agreed  [to  grant  his
request]  as  a  desperate  experiment,  saying :  "  It  will  very  likely
give  him  strength."  They  then  gave  him  as  much  kumiz  as  he
wanted,  and  from  that  moment  he  began  to  show  signs  of  recovery.
On  the  following  day  they  gave  him  some  more,  and  he  became
perfectly  well.

About  this  time,  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  was  going  to  wait  on  his
noble  father  Mirz£  Sh4h  Rukh.  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  being  quite
recovered,  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  ordered  a  horse  and  arms  to  bo  given
him,  that  he  might  accompany  him  to  Ehortlsan.  His  object
was  to  show  off  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  to  the  people  of  Khorasdn,  as
if  he  would  say :  "  This  is  the  sort  of  booty  we  take  in  Moghul-
istdn."  One  night  when  the  Mirza  was  in  his  tent,  the  torch-
bearers  were  passing  by,  and  he  saw  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  with  his
bow,  which  was  fourteen  spans  long — longer  than  that  of  anybody
else.  Tho  Mirza  thought  to  himself :  "  If  this  man  wishes  to  aim
his  arrow  at  me,  who  will  be  able  to  prevent  him  ?  "  He  became
very  nervous,  and  immediately  sent  for  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  and  said
to  him :  **  This  journey  into  Khordsdn  must  be  very  irksome  and
unpleasant  to  you.  You  can  return  to  Samarkand :  when  I  get
back  1  will  give  you  leave  to  go  to  Moghulistan ;  and  you  shall  bo
the  intermediary  between  myself  and  Shir  Muhammad  Khan,  so
that  matters  may  be  settled  in  a  peaceable  way."

So  he  gave  him  leave  to  return,  and  sent  a  man  to  accompany
him.  He  also  wrote  to  the  Governor  of  Samarkand,  telling  him
to  treat  him  with  every  mark  of  respect.  But  he  sent  a  secret
message  to  the  governor  telling  him  to  keep  Amir  Saj^yid  Ali  in
prison.

When  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  arrived  at  Samarkand  with  his  companion,

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

.Amir  Sayyid  AIL  63

he  gathered  from  the  behaviour  of  the  latter  that  he  was  not
going  to  be  well  treated.  When  they  had  entered  the  town,  his
companion  placed  him  in  a  house,  and  himself  went  before  the
governor.  No  sooner  was  he  gone  than  the  Amir  left  the  house,  on
foot,  and  proceeded  to  Tashkand.  When  the  man  returned  to  the
house  from  visiting  the  governor,  he  found  the  Amir's  horse,  and
arms,  and  servants,  but  the  Amir  himself  had  disappeared.  They
inquired  after  him  from  his  servants,  who  replied  that  he  had
iust  departed  on  foot.  They  then  searched  carefully  for  the  Amir,
but  could  not  find  him.

Meanwhile  the  Amir  had  fallen  in  with  some  Kalandars  on  the
road,  and  having  dressed  himself  as  one  of  them,  arrived  in  safety
at  Tdshkand.  TThe  Kalandars  gave  the  Amir  the  name  of  Ashtar
Abddl,  and  bestowed  on  him  some  of  the  provisions  out  of  their
wallets.  Thus,  in  the  guise  of  a  Kalandar,  he  reached  Tardz,
which  is  another  name  for  Yangi,^  where  he  was  recognised  by  the
Shaikh  of  the  "  Shrine  of  the  Companions  of  the  Cave,"  which  is
called  in  Moghulistan  "Mamlakat  Ata."^  The  Shaikh  sent  his
son  Shadika  with  the  Amir,  and  caused  him  to  be  conducted
into  Moghulistin  and  brought  before  Amir  Khud4iddd.  This
Shaikh  Shddika  became  one  of  the  Amir's  intimates,  and  gained
the  title  \ldkQb'\  of  Vafdd4r  [the  Faithful].  There  are  descendants
of  his  still  alive,  but  they  have  not  attained  to  any  celebrity.

At  the  time  when  the  Amir  re-entered  the  service  of  his  dis-
tinguished relation,  Amir  Khudaiddd,  Yais  Khan  had  separated
from  his  uncle  Shir  Muhammad  Kh&n,  and  had  taken  to  highway
robbery.  Amir  Khudaiddd  said  to  Amir  Sayyid  Ali :  "  I  think  you
had  better  go  and  join  Vais  Khdn,  for  if  you  stay  here  you  may
come  to  some  harm."  He  then  selected  sixty  young  men  and
despatched  them  with  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  to  Vais  Khan. The  Amir

^  This  name  is  written  in  the  Persian  texts  in  such  a  way  that  it  may  read
Tngt,  Ytnfc*,  Nild^  or  even  McLski,  In  all  prohability  Ydngi  is  intended,  though
the  word  is  spelled  without  an  alif.  Further  on,  the  author  tells  us  that  Ydngi
is  another  name  for  Tardz,  and  as  other  writers  state  the  same  thing  (sec  note,
pp.  79-80)  I  think  it  is  fair  to  assume  that  the  name  here  written  Yngi  is  merely
an  oyereight — that  an  alif  has  been  omitted  by  mistake.  The  position  of  ancient
Tdr^z  or  Tdlds  has  given  rise  to  some  discussion,  while  several  writers  have  been
led  to  the  opinion  that  Tdntz  stood  on  the  Sir,  and  was  merely  another  name  for
the  town  of  TurMstan,  or  for  Otrar.  Modem  investigation,  however,  has  shown
these  views  to  be  untenable.  That  Taraz  was  situated  on,  or  close  to,  the  banks
of  the  Talas  river,  there  can  no  longer  be  any  reasonable  doubt.  The  names  of
town  and  river  are  practically  one ;  and  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  question
the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Schuyler,  that  the  ancient  Tarfiz  stood,  probably,
very  near  the  site  of  the  modem  town  of  Aulia-Ata.  He  speaks  of  some  ruins
on  the  Talas,  ten  miles  below  Aulia-Ata,  which  were  called  by  the  natives
Tiurae-Kent  (Timiii  Kand  ?),  and  thinks  that,  on  investigation,  they  may  perhaps
prove  to  be  the  remains  of  Taraz.  Sir  H.  Howorth,  Dr.  Bretschneider,  and
Captain  Valikhanof  are  of  the  same  opinion  as  Mr.  Schuyler. (See  Howorth,  ii.,

L286 ;  Schuyler,  ii.,  pp.  120-1 ;  Bretschneider,  i.i  pp.  18-19  and  228 ;  Valik-
nof  in  Rusnans  in  V.  Atia,  p.  104.)
*  Or,  perhaps,  Malihdt  Atd, — B«

Digitized  by

Google

64  Transactions  of  Shir  Muhammad  and  Vais,

served  the  Ehan  well,  and  obtained  in  return  the  Eh&n's  sister,
Uzun  Sultdn  Ehanim,  in  marriage.

Countless  were  the  laudable  actions  which  Amir  Sayyid  Ali
performed  whilst  in  the  service  of  the  Khan.  They  would,
however,  take  too  long  to  relate.  I  have  mentioned  a  few  of  them
in  my  account  of  Vais  Khan.

CHAPTER  XXXI.

EPITOMISED  ACCOUNT  OF WHAT  PASSED  BETWEEN  SHIR  MUHAMMAD
KHAN  AND  VAIS  KHAN.

When  Vais  Khan,  as  has  been  related  above,  fled  from  his  uncle
Shir  Muhammad  Khan,  a  number  of  people  attached  themselves  to
him,  and  they  took  to  plundering  in,  and  on  the  confines  of,  the
territory  of  Shir  Muhammad  Kh&n ;  especially  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Lob  Katak  and  S&righ  Uighur.

It  is  related  that  when  Uzun  Sultan  Kh&nim  was  given  in  marriage
to  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  this  latter,  in  order  to  procure  food  for  the
feast,  went  out  hunting,  and  returned,  having  killed  two  stags
\Ga\iazan\y  which  were  eaten  at  the  banquet.  From  this,  one  can
form  some  idea  of  the  splendour  of  the  marriage  festivities.

But  [Vais  Kh4n]  finding  little  scope  for  activity  in  that  country,
[left  it  and]  wont  to  Turkistan.  At  that  Amir  Shaikh  Nuruddin,
son  of  Sdr  Bnghd  Kipch&k,  one  of  Amir  Timur's  greatest  generals,
was  Governor  of  Turkistdn.  With  him  [the  Khdn]  had  some
intercourse,  and  since  he  was  at  enmity  with  Shir  Muhammad
Khdn,  he  gave  his  daughter  Daulat  Sultdn  Sakanj/  in  marriage  to
Vais  Khdn.  He  also  gave  the  Khdn  much  assistance  in  his  attacks
on  Shir  Muhammad  Khdn,  and  for  a  loug  time  there  was  continual
confiict  between  Vais  Khdn  and  his  uncle,  the  latter  being  as  a
rule,  victorious.  One  of  these  encounters  took  place  at  a  spot  in
Moghulistdn  called  Karang  Kdingligh.  Vais  Khan,  after  a  long
and  rapid  march,  surprised  Shir  Muhammad  Khdn  in  his  camp  at
midnight.  [The  assailants]  were  four  hundred  strong.  When
the  alarm  was  raised,  Shir  Muhammad  Khdn  threw  himself  into  a
ditch,  while  Vais  Khdn,  surrounding  the  camp,  searched  till  dawn
for  Shir  Muhammad  Khdn,  slaying  all  whom  he  met.  Yet,
notwithstanding  their  search  and  the  violence  they  used  towards
the  people  in  the  camp,  no  trace  of  Shir  Muhammad  Khdn  was  to
be  found. When  day  broke  they  fled. Then  Shir  Muhammad

>  The  Turk!  MS.  has  Daulat  Bultan  Begum.— B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Reign  of  Vats  Kkdn.  65

Khan  came  out  of  the  ditch,  and  his  men  having  again  collected
round  him,  he  set  out  in  pursuit  of  Vais  Kh4n,  who  only  saved
himself  after  a  hundred  narrow  escapes.  In  fine,  this  hostility
continued  between  them  until  the  natural  death  of  Shir  Muhammad
Khan,  whereupon  Vais  Khan  succeeded  to  the  Khanate.

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE KHAnSHIP  of VAIS KHAn.

When  his  turn  came,  Vais  Kh4n  showed  himself  to  be  religiously
inclined ;  he  was  moreover  distinguished  among  his  race  for  his
bravery.  Since  he  had  forbidden  the  Moghuls  to  attack  Musul-
mans,  he  made  war  against  the  infidel  Kdlmaks ;  and  though  he
was  frequently  defeated  by  them,  he  persisted  in  hostilities  against
them,  not  wishing  to  relinquish  the  holy  war  [jahdd\  He  was
twice  taken  prisoner  by  them.  The  first  occasion  was  in  a  battle
at  a  place  called  Ming  L&k,  where  the  Kh4n,  having  been  seized,
Mas  led  before  Isdn  Taishi.  This  latter  thought  to  himself :  "  If
he  is  really  a  descendant  of  Chingiz  Khan,  he  will  not  do  me
obeisance,  but  will  look  upon  me  as  an  inferior."  When  the
Khan  was  brought  in,  he  dismounted  (for  he  was  on  horseback)  and
[Isan  Taishi]  advanced  towards  him  with  great  respect  [Sar-Zadah\^
But  the  Kh&n  turned  away  his  face  and  did  not  raise  his  hands.
Isan  Taishi  was  then  convinced,  and  treating  the  Kh4n  with  much
honour,  set  him  at  liberty.  The  Kh&n,  on  being  asked  afterwards
why  he  had  not  done  obeisance  [to  Isan  Taishi]  replied :  "  If  Isan
Taishi  had  treated  me  in  a  lordly  manner,  I  should,  out  of
fear  for  my  life,  have  approached  him  with  reverence.  But  since
he  came  towards  me  with  bowed  head,  it  occuiTed  to  me  that  the
hour  of  my  martyi'dom  had  arrived;  and  it  is  not  fitting  for
a  Musulman  to  do  homage  to  an  infidel,  or  to  countenance  his
actions,  therefore  I  did  not  salute  him."  It  was  the  Khan's
faithful  observance  of  his  religion  that  saved  him  from  the
abyss.

On  another  occasion,  he  fought  a  battle  with  this  s^mo  Isan
Tdishi  at  a  spot  called  Kabaka,  on  the  confines  of  Moghulistan.
Here,  too,  he  suffered  defeat.  His  horse  being  shot  under  him  by
an  arrow,  the  Khan  was  obliged  to  continue  on  foot.  He  was  on
the  point  of  being  captured,  when  Amir  Sayyid  AH,  dismounting

*  Sar-Zadah  usually  means  •* ill-mannered,"  but  here  it  is  obviously  ijitciidc  d,
literally,  "  with  bowed  head."— R.

F

Digitized  by

Google

66  Reign  of  Vais  Kfidn.

from  his  horse,  gave  it  to  the  Kh&n,  while  he  threw  himself  on
his  face  on  the  ground.  The  infidels,  thinking  him  dead,  shot  an
arrow  at  his  head.  When  they  came  near  enough,  the  Amir  contrived
to  lay  hold  of  one  of  them  (who  happened  to  be  a  man  of  some
distinction),  and  lifting  him  up  by  his  coat,  turned  him  from  side
to  side  as  a  shield  against  the  arrows,  running  all  the  while  by  the
side  of  the  Khan's  bridle,  so  that  it  was  impossible  to  shoot  an
arrow  at  the  Amir.  In  this  way  he  continued  fighting  and
carrying  the  man  by  his  clothes  for  a  whole  farsdkh^  till  they
came  to  the  River  Ailah.  He  then  threw  the  Kalmak  into  the
water,  and  seizing  the  bridle  of  the  Khan's  horse,  entered  the
stream,  which  came  up  to  his  chest.  Several  men  were  drowned.
The  Khtin's  horse  began  to  swim,  while  the  Amir  held  up  it*s
head,  and  thus  safely  conducted  the  Khan,  mounted  and  armed,
across  the  river. Many  men  were  drowned  on  that  day.

It  is  related  that  the  Khan  had  with  him,  on  that  occasion,
two  cousins,  Hasan  Sult4n,  who  wore  red  armour,  and  Lukmdn
SultAn,  who  wore  blue  \lcabud'\.  They  were  both  drowned  on
entering  the  stream.  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  keeping  hold  of  the  Khan's
bridle  with  one  hand,  did  his  best  to  save  these  two  men  vnth  the
other,  but  could  not  reach  them.  The  Khdn  declared  he  could
distinguish  their  red  and  blue  jackets  deep  down  in  the  water.
Vais  Khan  gave  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  five  presents  ^ —  one  for  each  [of
the  following]  acts.  (I.)  He  had  given  his  horse  to  the  Khan  and
had  himself  remained  on  foot.  (II.)  He  had  seized  the  Kalmak.
(III.)  He  had  used  him  aa  a  shield  for  a  whole  farsdkh.^  (IV.)
He  had  brought  the  Khan  fully  armed  and  mounted  across  the
Eiver  Ailah.^  (V.)  Although  he  had  hold  of  the  Khan,  he  twice
stretched  out  his  hand  to  save  the  drowning  men.  The  Khan
then  added  :  **  I  know  that  the  Amir  has  such  strength  that  if  one
of  my  cousins  had  been  able  to  seize  him  by  the  hand,  the  Amir
would  have  saved  him  too,  and  brought  him  across  the  water."
In consideration  of  these  five  actions,  he gave  the Amir five

*  The  word  isjuldUy  wliich  signifies  in  Turki  "royal  gift,"  a  "prize,"  or  a
**  trophy,"  for  valour.

*  The  farfoJihy  or  faramng,  is  usually  reckoned  at  four  statute  miles

'  There  is  nothing  to  show  in  what  locality  this  fight  took  place.  There  were
Kalmuks  on  both  the  nortliern  and  eastern  "  confines  "  of  Moghulistan,  and  I
can  find  no  trace  of  Kalxika.  In  all  probability,  however,  it  was  on  the  upper
Ailah,  which  may  also  be  read  Hah,  and  is  the  river  nowadays  called  the
**  Hi,"  which  losses  by  Kulja  and  flows  into  the  Balkash  lake.  **Ili"i8  the
Ohinese  pronunciation,  while  the  Turki-bpcaking  jieople  of  the  present  day
call  it  "  Ha."  As  re^rds  its  being  on  the  "  confines  of  Mogliulistan,"  as  the
author  luis  it,  Brettichneidcr  quotes  Quatrem^re's  translation  of  the  Masalek-
Alahsdr  to  the  effect  that  the  Hi  river,  in  the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth  century,
formed  the  eastern  boundary  of  Mavara-un-Nahr.  (Med.  Besearchet,  i.,  p.  18.)  But
the  limit  was  soon  afterwards  pushed  much  farther  westward,  and  at  tiic  time  of
Vais  Khan  could  hardly  have  been  formed  by  the  river.  The  extreme  upper
and  lower  waters  of  the  III,  however,  were  near  two  of  *' the  confines."

Digitized  by

Google

Reign  of  Vats  Khdn.  67

Aimdks  as  a  reward.  1.  Tnrkat.  2.  Hibat  Shira  Sut.  3.  Uzbog,
a  tribe  of  Khotan.  4.  Darugha,  also  a  tribe  of  Khotan.  5.
Kukanit,  also  a  tribe  of  Khotan.^

Sultan  Vais  Ehan  had  another  combat  with  Isan  Taishi,  in  the
vicinity  of  Turf  An,  and  was  again  defeated  and  taken  prisoner.
Isan  Taishi  said  [to  Vais  Khan,  on  his  being  brought  before  him]  :
**  This  time  I  will  only  set  you  free,  on  your  giving  me  your  sister
Makhtum  KhAnim,  as  a  ransom."  There  being  no  help  for  it,
Makhtum  Khanim  was  given  to  him,  and  the  Khan  was  set  at
liberty.  It  is  commonly  reported  that  the  Khan  had  sixty-one
engagements  with  the  Kalmdks :  once  only  was  he  victorious ;  on
every  other  occasion  ho  was  put  to  rout.  (But  God  alone  knows
the  truth.)  I  have  frequently  heard  from  Maulana  Khw4ja
Ahmad  that  the  Khdn  was  a  very  powerful  man,  and  that  he
used,  every  year,  to  go  hunting  wild  camels  in  the  country  round
Turfan,  Tiirim,  Lob  and  Katak,  which  places  I  have  spoken  of  in
the  Second  Part.  When  he  killed  a  camel  he  would  skin  it  with
his  own  hands,  and  take  the  wool  to  his  mother  Sultan  Khdtun ;
the  Khatun  would  spin  it  and  make  it  into  shirts  and  breeches  for
him,  which  he  wore  with  sumptuous  robes  outside.  In  Turfan
water  is  very  scarce,  and  it  was  the  Khan  himself  who  irrigated
the  land.  He  did  not  get  his  water  from  any  stream,  but  having
dug  a  deep  well,  drew  from  it  a  supply  of  water  for  irrigation.
Khidmat  MauUna  told  me  the  following  story  of  his  uncles,  who
used  to  say:  "We  have  often  seen  the  Khan,  during  the  hot
season,  with  the  help  of  his  slaves,  drawing  water  from  the  well
in  pitchers  [Jcuzak],  and  pouring  it  himself  over  the  land."  His
agriculture  was  carried  out  on  such  a  small  scale,  that  the  produce
of  it  never  attained  the  value  of  an  ass's  load ;  but  this  served
him  for  a  yearly  supply  of  food.

He  was  a  disciple  of  Maulana  Muhammad  Kashani,  who  was
a  disciple  of  Hazrat  Khwaja  Hasan  (may  God  perfume  his  tomb),
and  Khwaja  Hasan  was  a  disciple  of  Hazrat  Kutb-i-Masnad
Arshad  Khwaja  Bahduddin  Nakhshband*^  (may  God  bless  his
spirit).  Being  a  king  did  not  prevent  Vais  Khdn  from  passing
his  time  in  such  studies  [as  theology].  During  the  reign  of  this
prosperous  Khan,  Amir  Khudaidad  went  on  a  pilgrimage  to
Mekka. Moghul  records  state  that  Amir  Khudaidad  raised  six

^  All  five  Aimaks  are  probably  only  small  local  clans.  No.  2  may  also  read
Hahit-skard-mU.

*  This  Khwjija  Babuuddin  (sometimes,  thougb  probably  wrongly,  called
Shaikh  Bahauddin)  was  the  founder  of  a  sect,  or  an  order,  of  Sufis  known  as  tlio
"Nakhshbandi.*'  He  is  said  by  Mr.  Beale  {Orienial  Biogr.  Didy.)  to  have  died
in  Persia  in  the  year  857  a.h.  (1463),  and  to  have  been  the  author  of  a  work  on
Sufi-ism  called  the  "  Dalil'id-Ashilcin.*'  As  late  as  1886  there  lived  at  Bokliara
a  noted  Fir,  or  religious  leader,  called  Ir  Nazar  Khwaja,  Samarkand!.  Ir  Nazar
claimed  to  be  a  descendant  of  Khwaja  Bahduddin,  and  was  (perhaps  is  still)
regarded  as  the  chief  of  the  Nakhshbandi  Order  in  Central  Asia.

F 2

Digitized  by

Google

68  Amir  Khuddiddd  and

KhanB  to  the  Khanship,  "  with  his  own  hand."  Thoy  were  as
follows: — Khizir  Khwaja  Khan  (whom  we.  have  mentioned),
Sham-i-Jahan  Khdn,  Nakhsh-i-Jahan  Khdn,  Muhammad  Khan,
Shir  Muhammad  Khan,  and  lastly  Yais  Khan.

C^IIAPTER  XXXIII.

AMiR KHUDAIDAI) AND HIS  JOURNEY TO MEKKA.

I  HAVE  already  told  the  history  of  Amir  Khudaidad  in  pai-t;  but
in  this  chapter  I  have  to  relate  the  rest  of  his  deeds  and  his  death.
All  the  Moghul  traditions  are  agreed  as  to  the  country  ^ver  which
he  was  Amir.  I  remember  hearing  from  my  father  (upon  whom
be  the  grace  of  God)  and  from  my  uncles  (may  the  pardon  of  God
be  on  them)  that  their  father  had  24,000  families  under  him. .  He
was  Amir  before  the  year  765  of  the  Hajra  [a.d.  1363-4]  and  he
made  his  journey  to  Mekka  before  the  year  850  of  the  Hajra
[a.d.  1446-7].  He  was  Amir  for  ninety  years.^  He  exercised
absolute  power  over  the  whole  of  Kdshghar,  Yarkand,  Khotan,
Aksu,  Bai,  and  Kuchdr.  In  spite,  however,  of  all  this,  he  was
never  a  wealthy  man,  and  during  most  of  his  life  had  not  even  a
horse  to  ride.  When  travelling  from  place  to  place,  the  people
of  the  country  used  to  furnish  him  with  a  horse.  And  in  the  army
it  was  just  the  same.  He  spent  much  of  the  revenue  of  his  State
in  releasing  and  ransoming  Musulm&n  prisoners.  In  those  days  the
Moghuls  wore  constantly  attacking  Turkist&n,  Shash  and  Andijan,
and  carrying  off  Musulm&ns  as  prisoners.  The  Amir  would  buy
these  prisoners  from  the  Moghuls,  and  supply  them  with  provisions
and  transport  to  enable  them  to  return  home.  He  used  also  to
provide  them  with  tents,  in  which  they  had  room  to  kneel  down
and  say  their  prayers.  In  the  performance  of  good  actions  such
as  these,  and  pious  works,  did  the  Amir  pass  his  life.

»  A  little  lower  down,  the  author  tells  us  that  Mir  Khudaidad  was  ninely-sex  en
years  of  age  when  he  went  on  pilgrimage  to  Mekka.  Both  ninety  years  for  tlic
length  of  Khuddid^d's  reign  and  ninety-seven  years  for  his  age,  are  probably
mere  figures  of  speech,  intended  to  indicate  a  great  number.  A  man  of  ninety-
seven  could  not  accomplish  a  pilgrimage  from  Kashghar  to  Mekka  and  Medina,
as  Khud&idad  is  said  to  have  done,  and  in  all  probability  liis  reign  was  much  len^
than  ninety  years.  The  chronology  througliout  this  part  of  Mirza  Haidnr's
history  is  very  loose  and  cannot  be  relied  on.  He  probably  had  only  rough
estimates — little  more  than  guesses  on  the  part  of  his  informants— to  go  upon,
and  if  in  the  case  of  so  prominent  a  person  as  Ulugh  Beg,  he  could  be  several
years  in  error,  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  bo  more  accurate  in  that  of  the
Beg's  contemporaries.  As  Mirza  Haidar's  is  the  only  book  (so  far  as  we  know
at  present)  that  gives  the  history  of  this  branch  of  the  Moghuls,  as  a  whole,  thcro
is  no  other  chronology  by  which  his  dates  can  bo  tested.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

his  yourney  to  Mekka,'  69

There  are  also  many  miracles  attributed  to  him.  One  of  them,
that  was  related  to  me  by  Khidmat  MauldnA  Khwdja  Ahmad,  I
will  quote  here.  Khwdja  Zdhid  of  Kdshghar  was  a  great  and
pious  man.^  Amir  Khud4id&d  sent  a  person  from  Moghulistiin  to
beg  for  one  of  Khwaja  Zahid's  handkerchiefs.  The  Khwaja's  wife,
however,  thought  that  it  was  not  fitting  to  send  the  Khwaja's
handkerchief  to  a  Moghul  in  Moghulistdn,  and  that  it  would  be  a
sin  to  do  so.  Therefore  she  sent  one  that  was  not  the  Khwaj  a's.
When  it  was  brought  to  the  Amir,  he,  with  much  praise-giving,
wiped  his  face  therewith.  But  the  next  moment  he  returned  it
to  the  messenger,  saying :  '*  If  this  is,  in  truth,  the  handkerchief
of  the  Khwdja,  I  have  no  need  of  it."  So  the  messenger  returned
and  gave  it  back  to  the  wife  of  the  Khwdja.  At  this  she  was  much
astounded  and  told  the  Ehwdja  what  had  passed,  Ehwdja
Zahid  reproved  his  wife,  saying  :  "  The  Amir  is  one  of  •  this  sect  -P
why  did  you  act  thus?"  Thereupon  the  Khw&ja  sent  his  own
handkerchief.  When  the  messenger  delivered  it  over  to  the  Amir,
he,  having  wiped  his  face  with  it,  said:  "Verily  this  is  the
kerchief  of  the  Khwaja — and  I  have  faith  in  the  Khwaja."  Many
miracles,  such  as  this,  are  recorded  of  the  Amir.

At  last  when  the  Amir  reached  the  age  of  ninety-seven,  he  was
possessed  of  a  very  strong  desire  to  make  the  pilgrimage  to  Mekka.
But  in  spite  of  much  entreaty,  Yais  Khdn  refused  his  consent  to
this  step.  The  Amir  secretly  sent  to  Mirzd  Ulugh  Beg,  saying :
'*  If  you  will  come,  I  will  disable  the  Moghuls  and  deliver  them
into  your  hands."  Now,  as  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  had  suffered  much
annoyance  from  the  Moghuls,  and  was  continually  engaged  in
repressing  them,  he  immediately  mounted  his  horse  and  set  out
[for  Moghnlistdn].  When  he  reached  a  famous  town  in  Moghul-
istan  called  Chu,^  the  Amir  having  deserted  his  own  troops,  joined
Mirza  Ulugh  Beg;  and,  in  consequence,  the  Moghuls  were
scattered  in  eveiy  direction.  When  the  Amir  met  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg,
he  said  to  him  :  "  I  committed  this  act  because  I  could  not  obtain
leave  to  go  to  Mekka :  this  was  my  excuse  for  coming  over  to  yon,
but  now  I  don't  see  fit  to  go."  They  then  left  that  place,  the
Mirza  treating  the  Amir  with  all  possible  honour  and  respect.
When  they  reached  Samarkand,  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  said to  Amir

»  The  Turki  MS.  says  "  zealot."— R.

-  Probably  the  "  sect  of  sorcerers/'  or  somethiog  equivalent,  is  meant.  Secret
sects  or  bodies,  as  the  Babis  in  Persia  for  instance,  are,  in  fact,  spoken  of  as
"  that  sect,"  **  this  tribe,"  etc.

*  In  some  MSS.  this  name  may  be  read  /it,  but  three  dots  instead  of  one  under
the  first  letter  would  convert  it  into  the  name  of  the  river  CAu,  which  flows
tlirough  the  western  part  of  Moghulistan,  and  it  is  possible  that  tiiero  may  liave
been  at  this  period  a  town,  or  auL^  of  the  same  name  on  the  banks  of  the  river.
There  ii  every  reason  to  believe  that  about  the  time  here  spoken  of,  there  were
large  atdi  and  ruins  of  ancient  towns  on  and  near  the  banks  of  the  ChUy  though
perhaps  not  actual  towns,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.  The  word  for  *'  town  "  or
"  city,"  however,  is  one  that  is  much  misused  by  Oriental  writers.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

70  '  Amir  Khuddiddd  and

KhTidaidiwl :  "  There  is  no  one  who  knows  so  much  abont  the
Turalik^  of  Chingiz  Eh4n  as  you  do ;  I  beg  you  to  tell  me  all  its
regulations,  as  I  have  a  great  desire  to  know  all  about  it."  The
Amir  replied  :  "  We  have  completely  discarded  the  infamous  Tttra/*
of  Chingiz  Khan,  and  have  adopted  the  Skariat  [or  Muhammadan
Law].  If,  however,  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg,  in  spite  of  his  common
sense  and  good  judgment,  approves  the  Turah  of  Chingiz  Khan,
I  will  teach  it  him,  that  he  may  adopt  it  and  forsake  the  Skariat'*
The  Mirza  was  much  perturbed  at  these  words,  and  did  not  learn
the  Turah.

In  short,  the  Amir  went  to  Mekka.  When  my  father  (God  have
mercy  on  him)  went  to  Khor4s4n,  as  I  have  mentioned  in  the
Second  Part,  he  found  there  one  of  the  generals  of  Sultan  Husain
Mirzd,  named  Sultan  Ali  Barl&s,  who  was  a  very  old  man,  being
nearly  one  hundred  years  of  age.  He  had  been  held  in  great
honour  by  the  Mirz4.  My  father  questioned  him  concerning  his
ancestors  and  their  times.  He  replied :  "  My  father's  name  was
Shah  Husain  Barlas.  He  was  one  of  the  Moghul  Barl&s,  and  a
distinguished  Mir.  Amir  Khud&idad  travelled  with  him  from
Moghulistan."  When  my  father  heard  this  story,  he  became
greatly  interested  and  begged  [the  Barlas]  to  narrate  the  whole
history.  The  latter  began  :  "  I  was  quite  a  boy  when  Mir  Khud&i-
ddd  undertook  his  pilgrimage  to  Mekka,  and  my  father  accom-
panied him,  for  he  was  in  the  service  of  the  Amir.  Wo  fled  from
Moghulistdn  and  wandered  from  town  to  town,  till  we  tet  out
upon  the  journey  to  visit  the  holy  town  of  Mekka  ;  when  wo  had
been  a  few  days  on  our  return  journey,  the  Amir  asked  where
Medina  was ;  they  told  him  that  Medina  lay  in  a  different  direc-
tion. At  this  the  Amir  was  much  distressed,  and  said :  '  I  have
come  a  great  distance  and  suffered  many  privations ;  yet  I  have
not  made  the  tawdf  [circuit]  of  the  garden  of  the  Prophet  (may
the  peace  and  prayers  of  God  be  upon  him);  and  it  is  a  long
journey  home  again.'

**  He  then  gave  all  his  servants  and  porters  leave  to  return  home
with  the  caravan,  sending  with  them  many  letters  and  messages
for  his  children  in  Moghulistan.  One  of  these  letters  has  passed
down  from  father  to  son  into  my  possession,  for  it  had  always
been  carefully  preserved  in  our  family.  In  short,  the  Amir  and
his  wife  started  for  Medina,  unencumbered,  making  an  Arab
go  in  front  to  guide  them.  My  father  sent  me  with  him  too,
so  I  was  of  the  Amir's  party.  After  a  long  journey  wo  arrived
at  Medina.  The  Amir  made  the  tawdf  of  the  garden  of  the
Prophet  (upon  whom  be  the  most  excellent  of  prayers),  and  we
passed  the  night  in  the  house  of  a  darvish. As  night  came  on  a

'  Turah,  ns  we  have  Been,  was  another  name  for  the  Ydsdh  or  Ydzd  of  Chingiz
Khan.

Digitized  by

Google

his  Journey  to  Mekka.  71

great  chango  manifested  itself  in  the  Amir.  He  called  my  father
(t.e.,  Shah  Husain  Barlas)  and  said  to  him :  *  Bead  me  the  chapter
called  Ya-sin;^  when  my  father  came  to  the  verse  ^ Mislahum
BM,'  the  Amir  expired.  We  .were  all  astonnded  at  this  occur-
rence. With  the  break  of  day,  many  of  the  nobles  and  people  of
Medina  came  to  the  house,  asking :  '  Did  not  some  one  die  here
last  night  ? '  and  when  .we  told  them,  they  began  to  condole  with
us,  and  said  :  *  We  have  this  night  seen  the  Prophet  in  onr  sleep,
and  he  said  to  ns  :  a  guest  has  come  to  me  to-night ;  he  had  made
a  very  long  journey  to  visit  me,  and  he  has  died  here  during  the
night ;  bury  him  at  the  foot  of  the  tomb  of  the  Commander  of  the
Faithful,  Osmdn.'"  Then  the  Prophet  drew  a  line  with  the  end  of
his  stick.  As  soon  as  we  awoke,  we  went  and  found  that  a  line
had  been  drawn  there.  Happy  the  man  who  has  been  honoured
with  such  a  favour !  The  nobles  of  Medina  buried  the  Amir  at  the
feet  of  Osm4n,  with  great  honour.  On  the  following  night  the
wife  of  the  Amir  died  also,  and  she  was  buried  near  where  her
husband  had  been  laid."

When  Sult4n  Ali  Barlas  reached  this  point  in  his  narrative,  my
father  showed  signs  of  great  happiness ;  whereupon  they  questioned
him  as  to  the  cause  of  his  delight.  My  father  replied:  "This
Amir  Khudaiddd  was  my  grandfather."  Sultan  Ali  Barlas  im-
mediately got  up  and  having  embraced  my  father,  said  :  "  What  I
have  told  you  is  true.  But  no  news  of  the  death  of  the  Amir  ever
reached  Moghulistdn,  for  on  our  return  journey  we  settled  down
for  some  time  in  Ir4k,  and  then  in  Khor4s4n,  and  no  one  brought
the  news  into  Moghulistan.  Thanks  be  to  God  that  I  have  been
able  to  give  this  news  to  you,  and  tell  you  what  a  noble  death
Amir  Khuddidad  died."

Moghul  tradition  says  that  when  Amir  Khuddidad  wont  to
Mekka,  his  rank  and  titles  were  given,  by  Yais  Ehdn,  to  the  Amir's
eldest  son  Mir  Muhammad  Shah.

CHAPTER  XXXIV.

THE  MARTYRDOM  OF VAIS  KHAN.

A  SHORT  time  after  the  departure  of  Amir  Khuddidad  for  Mekka,  and
the  accession  of  Mir  Muhammed  Shdh  to  his  father's  rank  and  titles,
Vais  Khdn's  destiny  was  achieved.  It  came  about  in  the  follow-
ing way.  Sdtuk  Khdn — one  of  those  men  upon  whom  Amir
Timur  had  conferred  the  title  of  Khdn — had  been  placed  within
four  strong  walls  in  the  centre  of  the  towTi. The  place  is  called

Digitized  by  VjL^OQIC

72  Martyrdom  of  Vat's  Klidn,

nowadays,  in  Samarkand,  Hiydt-i-Khdn  [the  walls  of  the  KhAu].^
It  is  a  large  place  and  each  division  of  it  has  a  separate  name.
One  of  them  is  ihe  Hauz-i-Bostan-i-KMn  [the  reservoir  of  the
Khan's  garden],  which  is  one  of  the  loveliest  spots  in  Samarkand.
In  the  days  of  Amir  Tiranr,  Yusurghdtmish  Khan  ^  occupied  this
j)lace ;  he,  however,  went  away  to  Irak,  and  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan
was  appointed  to  the  Hiyat-i-Khdn  in  his  stead.  All  the  mandates
[manshur]  of  Amir  Timur  bear  the  name  of  these  two  Khans.  So
also  the  mandates  of  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  bear  the  name  of  Satuk
Khan.  Mirzd  Ulugh  Beg  removed  this  Satuk  Khan  from  the
Uiyat-i-Kh4n,  and  put  some  one  else  in  his  place,  whom  he  also
made  Khan. He  then  sent  Satuk  Khan  into  Moghulistan.

Vais  Khan  was  in  Issigh  Kul,  at  Bakabulung.^  I  have  heard
MauUna  Khwdja  Ahmad  say  :  '*  Khwaja  Abdul-Karim,  my  cousin,
who  was  on  very  intimate  terms  with  Vais  Khdn,  used  to  relate
that  one  Friday,  just  before  the  service,  Vais  Khan,  who  had
performed  his  ablutions  and  had  been  shaved,  came  to  me  and
asked  :  *  Of  what  is  my  head,  in  its  present  state  of  cleanliness,
worthy?'  I  replied:  *  A.  jewelled  crown.'  He  said:  'No,  it  is
worthy  of  martyrdom.'  He  had  scarce  uttered  those  words  when
a  messenger  came  running  up,  to  say  that  Satuk  Kh&n  had  arrived.
Vais  Khdn  immediately  ordered  them  to  sound  the  drums,  while
he  himself  began  to  put  on  his  armour.  The  men  who  were  near
at  hand  quickly  gathered  round  him,  and  they  set  out  to  meet  the
enemy.  There  was  a  stream  running  between  them.  When  the
two  forces  came  in  contact,  the  Khan  himself  charged  forward,  and
wished  to  make  his  horse  jump  the  stream,  but  the  horse  sank  up
to  his  head  [in  the  mud]  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  One  of  the
servants  of  Mir  Muhammad  Shah  (Jakir  by  name)  was  such  a
good  archer  that  he  had  not  a  single  rival  in  the  whole  tribe,  and
for  this  reason  the  Khan  had  begged  him  of  Mir  Muhammad  Shah,
for  his  own  service.  At  the  moment  when  the  Khan  fell  from  his
horse,  Jakir  arrived  on  the  spot,  and  mistaking  the  Klian  for  one
of  the  enemy,  aimed  an  arrow  at  the  waist  of  the  Khan,  who  on
being  struck  rolled  over  on  his  back.  Then  Jakir  recognised  the
Khdn,  and  threw  himself  upon  him.* When  the  news  reached

*  Perhaps,  better,  the  Endoture,  or  Garden  of  Qie  Khdn.

'  This  name  usually  stands  SuyurghdtmUh.  His  nominal  reign  dates  from
1369  to  1388,  and  that  of  Mahmud  from  1388  to  1398.  (See  8.  L.  Poole's
Muham.  Dynasty  p.  268.)  Thoy  were  both  puppets  set  up  by  Timur,  and  what
ISIirza  Haidar  briefly  relates  of  them  here,  shows  how  they  were  treated  by  the
great  Amir.

'  Or  Yakdbulung ;  but  the  Turki  MS.  does  not  mention  the  place.  There  are
two  rivers  called  Bakhvlan  in  Moghulistan,  on  Kitter  and  Oetzers  map.  but
neither  is  near  Issigh  Kul.  One  is  some  distance  to  the  north-webt  of  the  lake,
and  the  otlier  a  tributary  of  the  lower  Chu.  Tlic  name  of  KarabiUun  occurs  on
tlie  east  shore  of  tlie  lake,  and  though  less  like  the  word  in  the  text  than  is
Bakbulany  it  may  represent  the  spot  mentioned  by  the  author.

*  Probably  *•  ran  to  his  aid  "  is  intended

Digitized  by

Google

Ruin  of  Irdzdn.  73

Stttuk  Khan,  he  set  out  for  the  spot  and,  on  his  arrival,  lay  tho
Khan's  head  npon  his  breast,  but  the  last  breath  of  life  had  fled."

The  Moghul  tribe  were  in  the  greatest  disorder  and,  moreover,
refused  to  obey  Satuk  Khan ;  so  that  this  latter  could  no  longer
remain  in  Moghulistan,  but  retired  to  Kashghar.  Here  he  was  over-
powered by  Karakul  Ahmad  Mirza,  who  was  a  grandson  of  Amir
Khudaidtid.  Soon  after  this,  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  sent  an  army  to
Kashghar.  They  seized  Karakul  Ahmad  Mirza  and  carried  him  off
to  Samarkand,  where  they  cut  him  in  half.

CHAPTER  XXXV.

IIUIN  OF  [the  party  OP]  IRAzIn  after  the  death  of  VAIS KHAN.^

After  the  death  of  Yais  Khan,  the  tribe  of  the  Moghuls  fell  into
great  disorder.  But  they  became  more  tranquil  when  they  learnt
the  news  of  the  death  of  Satuk  Khan.  Vais  Khan  left  two  sons,
Yunus  Khan  and  Isan  Bugha  Khan.  Yunus  Khan  was  the  elder,
and  [at  his  father's  death]  was  thirteen  years  of  ago.  There  arose
a  dispute  among  the  princes  [as  to  who  should  succeed].  There
were  two  men  named  Irazan  B4rin  and  Mirak  Turkoman,  who
had  first  of  all  been  in  the  service  of  Amir  Khudaidad,  and  after-
wards in  that  of  his  son  Mir  Muhammad  Shah ;  but  at  the  death  of
Yais  Khan,  these  two  men  had  separated  themselves  from  Mir
Muhammad  Khan  [Shah  ?],  by  force  of  arms,  and  having  attached
themselves  to  Yunus  Khan,  began  to  stir  up  rebellion  in  his
favour;  while  the  rest  of  the  people  were  on  the  side  of  Isan
Bugha.  But  as  most  of  the  generals  wore  on  tho  side  of  Isan
Bugha  Khan,  it  became  impossible  for  the  party  of  Yunus  to  remain
in  Moghulistan.  So  Irazan  and  Mirak  Turkoman,  together  with
thirty  thousand  households  and  Yunus  Khan,  set  out  for  Samarkand,
while  Isan  Bugha  Khan  and  the  rest  of  the  Moghuls  remained  in
Moghulistan.

*  The  Virdni  of  Irdzan  seems  to  have  been  a  long-remembered  event  among
tljo  Moghuls.  The  word  may  mean  rutn,  devcistation^  or  calamity^  also  expnlsion^
dhpertnon,  etc.  In  reality  it  was  the  party  of  Irtizdn  Barin  that  was  ruined  and
expelled,  though  the  calamity  full  on  the  Moghul  tribe  generally,  and  more
especially,  perhaps,  on  their  chiefs,  a  number  of  whom  were  massacred.  Baber
mentions  the  matter  in  his  Memoirs,  He  says  three  or  four  thousand  families
accompanied  Irdzan  and  Mirak,  when  these  two  carried  the  young  Khan  off  to
Samarkand.  Ulugh  Beg  gave  them  a  bad  reception,  imprisoning  some  and  dis-
persing tho  rest  in  all  directions :  "  so  that  *  tho  Dispersion  of  the  Ir&zan '  has
become  an  era  among  the  Moghuls." (Memoin^  p.  1 1.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

74  Ynnus  Khdn  and  Isdn  Bug/id  IL

CHAPTEE  XXXVI.

RECEPTION  OF  YUNUS KHAn AND IRAzAn, IN  SAMARKAND, BY  MIRZA

ULUGH BEG.

When  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  heard  of  the  approach  of  Irazan  Barin
and  Mirak  Turkoman,  he  set  out  from  Samarkand  to  meet  them.
On  their  arrival,  he  promised  to  supply  them  with  provisions,  and
said :  "  Every  household  must  come  into  the  fort  separately,  where
the  members  will  have  their  names  written  down;  each  Moghul  will
receive  an  ass's  load  of  provisions  and  then  pass  on."  Thus,  hopeful
of  supplies,  the  people  entered,  but  when  they  arrived  at  another
door  they  were  obliged  to  wait.  Then  their  chiefs  were  killed
and  the  rest  of  them  were  taken  prisoners.  Of  all  that  entered
the  fort  no  one  came  out  again  to  tell  his  story.  Mirz&  Ulugh  Beg
finished  this  business  in  a  few  days,  and  then  despatched  Yunus
Khan,  with  a  fifth  of  the  spoil,  to  his  father  Mirza  Shah  Bukh.
The  Khan  was  kindly  treated — ^more  like  a  son  than  a  prisoner.
He  was  sent  to  Mauldn4  Sharaf-ud-Din  Yazdi,  that  under  him  he
might  continue  his  studies.  Many  of  the  Maulana's  verses  and
Kdssidas  are  dedicated  to  the  Khdn.

He  spent  altogether  twelve  years  with  the  Maulana,  in  the
acquirement  of  science  and  letters.  In  fact,  as  long  as  the  Maulana
lived  he  remained  with  him,  but  on  the  death  of  the  latter,  ho
quitted  Yazd  and  made  a  journey  through  Irak,  Arabia  and  Ears.
He  was  twenty-four  when  the  Maulana  died,  and  ho  returned  to
Moghulistan,  as  pddishdh^  at  the  age  of  forty-one,  as  will  bo
mentioned  below  (if  God  will).

CHAPTER  XXXVII.

KlIANSHIP  OF ISAN BUGHA  KHAN, SON  OF  VAIS KHAN, AFTER
THE  RUIN  OF IRAzIn.

After  Mirdk  Turkoman  and  Irazdn  had  carried  off  Yunus  Kh&n
1o  Samarkand,  the  whole  of  Moghulistdn  became  subject  to  Isdn
Bugh4  Khan :  all  the  Amirs  offered  to  serve  him,  and  thus  the
affairs  of  the  Khan  made  great  progress.  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  was
untiring  in  his  efforts  to  help  the  Khdn,  and  as  soon  as  the  latter
was  firmly  established  on  the  throne,  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  bogged  him

Digitized  by  VjUUV  iC

Sayyid  A  lis  Expedition  to  Kdsltghar.  75

for  permission  to  go  to  Kasbghar.  For,  as  I  have  already  related,
Khwaja  Sharif  of  Kashghar  bad  given  that  place  to  Uiugh  Beg
Mirza,  and  had  expelled  Mir  Sayyid  Ahmad,  the  father  of  Amir
Sayyid  Ali.  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  had,  in  the  first  place,  appointed
Amir  Sultan  Malik  Duladai  to  be  Governor  of  Eashghar,  and  after
him  Haji  Muhammad  Sh4yistah,  and  after  him  Pir  Muhammad
Barlas.

Amir  Sayyid  Ali  pointed  out  that  it  was  a  very  fitting  oppor-
tunity for  him  to  go  to  Kashghar,  and  added :  "  I  will  see  if  I
cannot  restore  to  our  family  its  old  possession,  of  which  for  forty
years  it  has  been  deprived.  If  I  fail  I  shall  merit  your  scorn."
The  Khan  thereupon  gave  his  consent.

CHAPTEB  XXXVIII.

AMlll  SAYYID AU'S EXPEDITION  TO, AND REDUCTION OF, KASHGHAR.

At  this  time,  the  greater  part  of  Mangalai  Suyah  was  under  the
administration  of  the  Dughlats.  But  Andijdn  and  K4sbghar  had
fallen  to  the  government  of  Samarkand ;  while  Issigh  Kul,  from
the  numerous  vicissitudes  to  which  it  had  been  exposed,  was
sinking  into  disruption  ;  the  rest  of  the  country,  however,  was  still
in  the  hands  of  the  Dughl&t  Amirs.  Just  at  this  period  the
brothers  and  cousins  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  were  [governing]  in  Aksu,
Kus  and  Bai.  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  came  to  Aksu,  and  leaving  his
family  there,  proceeded  to  Kdshghar.  When  the  Amir  arrived  in
Aksu,  a  great  conflict  arose  between  himself  and  his  two  brothers,
Mumin  Mirza  and  Sayyid  Mahmud  Mirza.  The  Amir  came  off"
victor,  in  the  end,  after  having  killed  many  of  his  relations.  About
this  matter  there  are  many  conflicting  traditions.  It  appears,
at  all  events,  that  he  first  got  the  upper  hand  of  his  relatives
and  then  set  out  for  Kashghar.  He  had  7000  men  in  his  following.
When  he  arrived  within  the  territory  of  Kashghar,  Haji  Muhammad
Shayistah  repaired  to  a  place  called  Uch  BarkhAn,  which  is  about
three  fars&kha  distant  from  Kdshghar,  to  oppose  him,  with  30,000
cavalry  and  infantry.  But  at  the  first  attack  of  the  Amir,  IJaji
Muhammad  Shayistah  took  flight.  The  Moghuls  started,  in  hot
haste,  after  the  Chaghatai,  who  in  order  to  gain  greater  freedom
in  their  flight,  threw  aside  their  armour  before  the  enemy  were
able  to  overtake  them,  and  uttered  cries  of  distress.  For  this
reason  the  battle  was  called  "Salai  Begum,"  that  is  to  say,
*•  Mir-i-man  hianddzam,*'  or  "  I  throw  down  my  Mir." This  was  one

Digitized  by

Google

y6  Sayyid  Alis  Expedition  to  Kdshg/iar.

of  tho  most  famous  battles  ever  fought  in  that  country,  and  formed
an  epoch  in  its  history.  The  people  of  Kashghar  enabled  the
fugitives  to  creep  into  the  citadel,  while  the  Amir  laid  waste  and
pillaged  all  without,  and  then  departed  with  the  spoil.

The  following  year,  when  the  corn  was  ripe,  the  Amir  returned,
and  no  one  dared  to  leave  th  e  city.  Haji  Muhammad  Shayistah
fortified  himself  in  the  citadel,  while  the  Amir  ravaged  the  whole
country  round.  He  laid  siege  to,  and  captured,  one  of  the
neighbouring  fortresses,  called  Alaku,  and  again  retired.

Then  Khw4ja  Sharif  went  to  Samarkand  to  implore  tho
assistance  of  Mirzd  XJlugh  Beg.  While  he  was  there,  the  Mirza  one
day  asked  him :  **  Are  there  any  donkeys  in  Kashghar  ?  "  Khwaja
Sharif  replied :  "  Since  the  Chaghatai  have  come,  there  are  a  great
number  of  donkeys."  Khwdja  Sharif  took  Pir  Muhammad  Barl^s
with  him  to  Kashghar,  while  Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  withdrew  H4ji
Muhammad  Shayistah  to  Samarkand.  When  Pir  Muhammad
Barlas  arrived  in  Kashghar,  the  people  gave  him  the  surname
\ldkah]  of  Bangi,  but  they  derived  no  benefits  from  him,^  and
Khwdja  Sharif  began  to  despair  of  the  Chaghatai.

When  the  Amir  advanced  against  Kashghar  for  the  third  year  in
succession,  the  people  of  that  country  addressed  a  complaint  to
Khwaja  Sharif,  saying:  "We  have  lost  tho  crops  of  two  successive
years ;  if  we  lose  this  year's  crop  too,  there  will  be  a  famine  in  our
country."

On  the  Amir's  arrival  in  K&shghar,  the  people  of  that  town,
having  bound  Pir  Muhammad  Barlas,  gave  him  up  to  the  Amir.^
The  Amir  thereupon  divested  Pir  Muhammad  Barlas  of  his
mantle  of  life,  and  entered  the  town  of  Kashghar,  where  he
administered  justice  to  the  people.  Ho  governed  the  country
during  twenty- four  years;  and  under  him  tlie  State  was  so
l>rosperous  and  happy,  that  he  is  talked  of  to  this  day.  During  all
this  time,  the  Amir  paid  so  much  attention  to  agriculture  and  Ihe
breeding  of  cattle  and  sheep,  that  when  he  died,  leaving  three  sons
and  two  daughters,  one  of  his  sons,  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  my
grandfather,  received  as  his  share  180,000  sheep.

I  once  heard  from  KhwAja  Fakhruddin,  a  merchant  of  noble
birth  and  .pleasant  of  speech,  that  tho  Amir  occupied  himself  with
hunting  during  three  months  every  winter.  No  one  but  soldiers
were  allowed  to  take  part  in  the  royal  Inint.  But  as  many  soldiers
as  the  Amir  was  able  to  provide  for,  used  to  join  in  the  party,  and
during  those  three  months,  each  one  was  supplied  with  meat  and
flour,  which  was  distributed  to  them  at  the  diiferent  halting-places
[wan2i7]. On  some  days  as  many  as  5000  sheep  were  given  out,

*  That  is :  this  change  of  governor  did  not  improve  tlie  slate  of  aflfaird.

•  Lit.,  as  an  istikbdl — i.e.,  the  ]>reseut  oftered  to  u  perj»n  of  con>equen(H',  l»y
ttiose  who  go  out  to  meet  and  weloome  him  on  his  arrival. — K.

Digitized  by

Google

Quarrels  of  Isdn  Bughd  with  his  A  mirs,  77

together  with  a  proportionate  amount  of  flour  and  barley  and  hay.
Some  years,  3000  persons  were  in  attendance  on  the  Amir,  and
each  one  was  given  his  provisions.  The  inhabitants  of  the  different
villages  were  always  anxious  for  the  Amir  to  come  to  stay  in  their
village,  and  the  huntine  party,  on  its  arrival,  would  make  them
participate  in  their  own  store  of  good  things.  Fakhruddin  used  to
relate  that  on  one  occasion,  when  they  had  alighted  in  our  village,
which  is  Artuch,^  the  Amir's  master  of  the  hunt  [Mir-Mhdr]
having  brought  some  flour,  gave  it  to  a  poor  woman  to  bake,
promising  her,  as  a  wage  for  her  work,  one  of  the  six  loaves,
which  were  to  be  made  from  the  flour  he  had  supplied  her
with  ;  but  when  the  woman  brought  the  loaves,  he  refused  to
give  her  one  of  them,  saying :  "  I  supplied  the  flour  and  the
wood  and  the  salt;  what  have  you  deserved  of  me?"  At  that
moment  the  Amir  happened  to  be  passing  by  on  horseback.
He  stopped  and  asked  the  woman  what  her  trouble  was :  the  woman
laid  her  complaint  before  the  Amir,  who  then  questioned  the
master  of  the  hunt.  As  this  latter  acknowledged  the  truth  of  the
poor  woman's  story,  the  Amir  said  to  him :  "  Why  did  you  not  bake
your  own  bread,  instead  of  troubling  this  woman  ? "  The  Amir
then  sent  to  a  blacksmith's-shop  for  some  pincers,  and  caused  all
the  wretched  man's  teeth  to  be  drawn  from  his  head.  I  have
repeated  this  tale  as  a  proof  of  the  Amir's  justice.  There  are  still
existing  in  Kashghar,  many  sacred  ediflces  and  charitable  institu-
tions, which  were  founded  by  the  Amir.  During  the  twenty-four
years  of  his  government,  many  important  events  occurred,  which
shnll  hereafter  be  related  in  detail.

CHAWER  XXXIX.

Thb  quarret^  of  isan  buqha  khJln  witfi  his  amius.

WilKN  Yuntts  Khan  left  the  country,  the  whole  tribe  submitted  to
Isan  Bugha  Khan,  and  for  a  few  3'ears  the  country  enjoyed  repose.
The  Khan,  however,  by  reason  of  his  youth,  was  but  lightly
esteemed  by  his  Amirs.  One  of  the  Amirs,  a  certain  Timur  of  the
Uighur  tribe  of  Turfan,  had  enjoyed  the  special  favour  of  the
young  Khan;  the  other  Amirs  being  annoyed  at  his  elevation,
and  at  the  small  degree  of  attention  they  themselves  received,
could no  longer contain their  wrath, and one day,  in the

*  No  doubt  Artush^  or  AUun  Arttisfi,  on  the  sporB  of  the  hills,  one  short  march
north  of  Kashghar — a  favourite  summer  resort  of  the  townspeople.

Digitized  by

Google

78  Quarrels  of  Isdn  Biighd

presence  of  the  KHdn,  seized  the  unfortunate  man  and  cut  him  in
pieces.  After  this  there  was  a  division  among  the  Amirs,  and  the
Khan,  much  alarmed  at  what  had  taken  place,  fled.

When  this  news  reached  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  in  Kdshghar,  he  at
once  set  out  for  Moghulistan.  He  found  the  Khdn  at  Ak  Kabas,
and,  accompanied  by  a  few  men,  carried  h'im  off  to  Aksu,  of  which
town  he  made  him  governor.

Meanwhile  the  Moghul  Amirs  were  acting  each  in  his  own  way.
Mir  Muhammad  Shah  had  taken  up  his  abode  in  AtbAshi,  but
after  some  correspondence  and  promises  of  friendship,  between
himself  and  his  nephew  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  he  joined  the  Eh&n  in
Aksu ;  he  was  beloved  and  esteemed  to  the  end  of  his  life.

Another  was  Mir  Karim  Bardi,  who  was  also  a  DughUt.  He
built  a  fort  on  the  frontier  of  Moghulist&n,  on  the  side  of  Andijan
and  Farghdna.  It  stood  on  the  summit  of  a  hillock  at  a  place
called  Alabughd,  and  its  ruins  are  still  to  be  seen.  He  spent  his
time  in  ravaging  and  plundering  Andij&n  and  the  Musulm&ns.

Mir  Hakk  Bardi  Begjik  went  to  dwell  in  a  place  called  Eui
Sui,  which  is  in  Issigh  Kul.  Hei-e  he  built  a  fort,  and  put  his
wives  and  family  on  the  island  in  Issigh  Kul,^  that  they  might  be

'  This  appears  to  mean  that  Kui  Sui  was  the  name  of  the  island.  There  are
now  no  islands  in  Issigh  Kul,  but  the  name  of  Koi-8u  is  found,  on  some  maps,
among  those  of  some  small  rivers  discharging  into  the  eastern  end  of  the  lake.
Kostenko  tells  us  that  although  no  islands  exist,  there  are  numerous  shoals  iu  its
waters,  and  since  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  level  of  the  lake  has
altered  within  liistoric  times,  it  is  possible  that  some  of  these  shoals  may  have
been  above  the  surface  four  hundred  years  ago.  He  points  to  some  evidences  of
the  lake  having  fallen  rather  than  ridcn,  but  he  is  speaking  of  geological  periods
in  one  instance,  and  of  a  statement  of  the  local  Kirghiz,  that  the  water  has
subsided  "  during  the  last  ten  years,"  in  another.  Mr.  Schuyler  gives  a  good
account  of  the  lake  and  comes  to  a  different  conclusion.  He  writes :  **  Lake
Issik-KiQ,  which  is  a  large  body  of  water,  120  miles  long  by  33  wide,  has  at
present  no  outlet  Its  shores,  however,  afford  indubitable  evidence  of  numerous
elevations  and  depressions."  He  admits  that  **  at  one  time "  the  water  may
have  reached  the  bases  of  the  mountains  100  feet  above  its  present  level,  but
adds  (in  another  place) :  **  the  fact  that  ruins  are  visible  under  the  water  would
seem  to  show  either  a  subsidence  of  the  soil,  or  that  the  lake  is  higher  than  it
once  was."  He  relates  that  "diamond-shaped  tiles,  some  plain  red,  others
covered  with  a  blue  glaze,  have  been  obtained  partly  from  the  lake  and  partly
from  ruins,  ploughed  up  by  the  peasants.  At  a  place  on  the  northern  side  of  the
lake  called  Koroi-Saroi,  and  in  two  places  at  the  eastern  end,  remains  of  sub-
merged cities  are  still  to  be  seen  a  few  feet  under  water.  Many  objects  have
been  found  hei-e,  some  thrown  up  by  the  waves  and  others  fished  out  of  the
water,  chiefly  broken  pottery  and  pieces  of  metallic  ve8>els.''  He  mentions  the
discovery  of  two  ornamented  copper  kettles,  a  lamp  bearing  an  inscription  in  an
unknown  alphabet,  etc.,  and  continues  :  "  These  ruins  have  never  been  carefully
investigated,  but  in  1869  General  Kolpakofsky  examined  some  of  them,  and  say's
that  between  the  mouths  of  the  streams  2nd  and  3rd  Koi-Suf  at  seven  feet  from
the  shore  and  at  a  depth  of  three  feet,  tliere  are  visible  traces  of  brick  walls
which  go  parallel  to  each  other  at  a  distance  of  a  few  feet  until  the  depth  of  the
lake  prevents  their  being  seen.  He  also  saw  a  large  stone,  on  which  was  carved
the  representation  of  a  human  face,  and  which  he  succeeded  in  getting  out  of  the
water.  Subsequent  observers,  who  had  succeeded  in  rigging  out  a  boat,  assured
me  that  especially  near  the  river  Tub,  on  a  clear  day,  they  could  see  the  remains
of  buildings."

Digitized  by

Google

with  his  Amirs,  79

safe  from  the  attacks  of^the  E&lm&ks.  Having  done  this,  he  went
forth  to  lay  waste  Turkistan  and  Sairam.  The  Amirs  of  Jards
and  of  the  tribe  of  Bdrin  went  to  join  Amasanji  Taishi,  son  of
Isan  Taishi,  who  was  [chief]  in  the  land  of  the  Kalmaks,^  while
Kaluji  and  Balghdji  and  several  families  joined  Abulkhair  Khan^
in  Turkistan.  The  Amirs  of  Kunji  and  several  others  wandered,
in  confusion  and  disorder,  over  the  desert  plains  of  Moghulistan.

But  when  Is&n  Bugh4  Kh4n  had  become  firmly  established  in
Aksu,  first  of  all  Mir  Muhammad  Shah  came  to  him  [and  sub-
mitted], and  after  that,  others  returned  to  him  in  numbers.  The
Kh4n,  too,  repenting  of  his  former  deeds,  began  to  treat  his  people
with  great  kindness.  As  soon  as  he  had  regained  complete
authority,  he  made  a  simultaneous  attack  upon  Sairam,  Turkistan
and  Tashkand,  and  having  devastated  these  countries,  returned
home.  This  expedition  took  place  before  the  year  855  of  the
Hajra  [1451].  A  second  time  also,  he  made  a  similar  foray  into
this  country.  At  that  time  Sultan  Abu  Sdid  Mirzd  was  pddiahdh
of  Mavard-un-Nahr.  He  pursued  the  Khan  and  overtook  him  in
Yiingi,^  which  in  books  of  history  is  called  Tar&z. The  Moghuls

Issigh'KtU  means  warm  lake,  and  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Chinese  Jhe-hai.
Other  Chinese  names  are  Yen-hai,  salt  lake  (for  the  water  is  brackish),  and
Teing-haiy  or  dear  lake,  By  the  Kirghiz  it  is  sometimes  called  Tuz-Kul,
meaning  *■  salt  lake/  and  by  the  K^lm^ks  Timurtu  Nor,  or '  iron  lake,'  on  account  of
the  ferruginous  sand  found  on  its  shores.  Schuyler  remarks  tliat  old  Chinese
maps  place  the  city  of  Ghi-gu  on  the  shores  of  Issigh-Kul,  while  the  Catalan
map  of  1375  (as  noted  already)  marks  on  the  southern  shore,  a  Nestorian
monastery  containing  the  bones  of  St.  Matthew.  Bretscimeider  mentions  a  curious
statement  found  in  the  work  of  Arab  Shah,  who  reporrs  that  Amir  Timur,  in
1403,  b  inished  a  Tartar  tribe  (the  Kara  Tatar)  from  Asia  Minor  **  to  the  fortress
Dowairct,  which  was  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  lake  called  Imcoul.  This
lake,  he  says,  was  at  the  boundary  between  the  dominions  of  Timur  and
Moghulistan/'  The  passaRC  is  apparently  taken  from  Pitts'  translation  of  the
Zafar-Ndma^  or  Hist,  de  Timur  Bee.  Thus  two  native  authors,  writing  in  the
fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  respectively,  mention  islands  in  Lake  Issigh-
Kul.  (See  Kostenko,  Turkistan,  English  tr.,  i.,  pp.  155-6 ;  Schuyler,  i.,  p.  54 ;  ii.,
pp.  129-81 ;  Bretschueider,  ii.,  pp.  244-5.)

^  Taishi  was  the  title  by  which  K&lmdk  chiefs  were  designated,  and  from  the
combination  Khdn-Taishi,  the  word  Contaish,  used  by  early  European  writers
for  a  K^lmak  king,  is  said  to  be  derived.  The  statement  made  by  the  author
that  "Amasanji  Taishi  was  in  the  land  of  the  Kdlm^ks,*'  contains,  probably,  an
omission  of  the  word  chief  or  some  equivalent  of  it.  It  should  probably  read :
"  Amasanji  Taishi  was  chief  in  the  land.  .  .  ."

*  Abulkhair  was  the  chief  of  the  Uzbegs  in  and  about  the  plains  of  Kipchak,
Mdvani-un-Nahr,  and  Turkistan,  and  grandfather  of  the  famous  Shaibdni,  or
Shahi  Beg,  Khan. He  died  1469.

^  This  is  the  second  time  that  Mirza  Haidar  gives  nn  equivalent  for  Tiirdz,
which  may  be  read  in  several  different  ways,  as  for  instance  Yang^i,  Manila,
Masih',  JBaiki,  etc.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  Yangt  is  intended,  but
Erskine,  when  preparing  his  Hist  of  India,  seems  to  have  read,  in  this  place,
Masiki.  He  notes  that  Baber  refers  to  the  event  mentioned  in  the  text,  thus :
*^  Baber  says  that  Abu  Said  advanced  beyond  Yangi,  and  gave  Isanbugha  a
severe  defeat  at  a  town  in  Moghulistan  called  Aspera.  (Mem,,  pp.  11, 12.)  Mirza
Haidar  makes  him  overtake  the  Khdn  at  Masiki,  in  oooks  called  Tdrdz.  .  .  .
Otrar  is  known  by  the  names  of  Taraz,  Yangi  (or  Yangi  Kent),  and,  it  would
appear,  of  Masiki" Baber  does  say,  on  the  nrst  page  of  his  Memoirs,  that  "  in

Digitized  by

Google

So  Qfiarre/s  of  Isdn  Bnghd

fled  without  offering  battle,  and  Saltan  Abn  Said  Mirza  returned
to  his  own  country  [Mavara-un-Nahr] ;  but  when  he  had  taken

former  tiuies  "  there  was  a  city  called  latt^i,  *•  known  in  books  of  history  by  the
name  of  Olrdr,**  but  he  adds  that  in  his  own  time  it  was  in  ruins  and  depopu-
lated. Quatrembre  also  took  Tdrdz  to  be  another  name  for  Oirdr^  because  the
latter  had  at  one  time  borne  the  name  of  Yangi.  But  there  are,  and  haye  been
at  aU  times,  many  towns  of  the  name  of  Yangi,  or  New^  either  used  alone  or  com-
bined with  Kand,  Hiear,  Shafirt  etc.,  just  as  we  have  everywhere  in  England,
Newton,  Newport,  Newcastle,  etc.  Indeed,  in  most  countries  the  adjective
^*  new  "  is  one  of  the  commonest  parts  of  place-names.

Tdrdz,  as  we  have  seen  in  note  1,  p.  63,  was  without  doubt  situated  on  tlie
Tdlda  river,  probably  at  or  near  the  modem  Aulia-Ata,  and  would  therefore  have
stood  about  one  hundred  and  sixty  miles,  in  direct  distance,  to  the  eastward  of
Otrdt.  Thus  the  only  inference  is,  that  two  places  of  the  same  name  are  spoken  of
by  some  of  the  Oriental  writers.  There  was  indeed  a  third  in  this  particular
region,  for  Mr.  Lerch,  in  1867,  explored  and  made  us  acquainted  with  the
ruins  of  an  ancient  Ydngi,  or  Ydngi-Kand  on  the  Sihun,  some  distance  below
Otrdr.

As  regards  Baber^s  Yangi,  mentioDed  in  reference  to  the  pursuit  of  the
Moghuls  by  Abu  Said,  it  is  obvious  that  neither  of  those  on  the  Sihun  can  be
indicated,  for  we  are  clearly  told  (1)  that  the  Moghuls  were  flying  towards  their
own  country,  and  (2)  that  they  were  defeated  at  Aspardh.  If  they  had  passed
by  Otrdr,  they  would  not  have  been  gouig  in  the  direction  of  Moghulistan,  and
there  is  no  Aspardh  in  that  direction.  In  order  to  retreat  to  Moghulistan,  on
the  other  hand,  they  must  necessarily  have  passed  by,  or  near,  Tar^z,  while
beyond  that  place  the^  would  have  come  to  Aspardh.  Thus  there  is,  I  think,
sufficient  evidence  to  identify  the  Ydngi,  or  Yangi-Kand,  of  Mirza  Haidar  with
Tdrdz,  and  to  regard  the  Matiki  of  Erskine  as  a  mere  misreading  of  the  text  he
used.  Moreover,  it  seems  possible  that  he  may  have  been  misled  into  this
reading  through  the  frequent  mentions  by  Baber,  in  his  Memoirs,  of  a  place  which
he  writes  Masikha,  Athough,  as  Erskine  himself  has  shown  in  his  map,  it  is  an
entirely  difi'erent  place,  and  should  never  be  confused  with  his  Manki  or  Yangi,
still  the  writing  in  the  orig^al  text  may  have  misled  him.

But  if  Erskine  read  Matiki  as  an  equivalent  for  Tdrdz  he  is  not  singular,  for
Quatremere  thought  that  the  original  of  Haidar  Rdzi  might  possibly  be  read  in
the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  way.  Thus  he  translates  the  **  meadows  of  Talas
and  Kentchek  which  are  vulgarly  called  Meski  and  Taraz  "  ;  though  he  notes
that  perhaps  the  word  Meski  may  stand  for  Yangi.  This,  however,  is  only  a
question  of  reading  the  texts — not  of  the  identification  of  the  places — and  an
inspection  of  the  text  of  Haidar  Rdzi,  would  probably  show  that  the  word  was
written  in  ihe  same  way  as  Mirza  Haidar  has  written  it.

Farther  on,  in  this  history,  we  shall  see  that  Mirza  Haidar  again  refers  to
Tdrdz  as  a  city  mentioned  in  books,  where  **  it  is  written  that  the  Moghuls  call
Tdrdz,  Yangi.*'  Here  there  is  no  question  of  any  other  reading  of  the  text.  He
adds  that  traces  of  several  other  ancient  towns  are  found  in  the  same  neighbour-
hood, but  that  *Ht  is  not  known  which  of  these  old  cities  was  Yangi,  or  what
were  the  names  of  the  others."  This  point  may  be  cleared  up  by  a  reference  to
Quatrem^re's  translation  of  the  Masdlak  Al  Absdr  (a  work  of  the  first  half  of  the
fourteenth  century),  where  we  are  told  that  from  Samarkand  to  Yangi  twenty
days'  journey  was  reckoned,  and  that  the  latter  city  consisted  of  four  towns,
separated  one  from  the  other  by  a  distance  of  one  *'  parasang."  Each  town  had
its  own  particular  name,  one  being  called  Yengi,  the  second  Yengi-bdlik,  the
third  Kenchak,  and  the  fourth  Talds  (or  Taraz).  Again,  in  the  Haft  Iklim
(Quatrem^)  it  is  said  that  **  Tdr&z  .  .  .  bore  abio  the  name  of  Yangi  ** ;  while
in  the  geography  of  S&dik  Ispah^ni  (Ouseley)  we  find  the  two  names  coupled
together  thus  :  "  Yangi-Tiriz,  a  city  of  Turkistan."  The  Arab  writer,  Mukadasi
(according  to  Spreuger)  included  Tdrdz  in  a  list  of  towns  belonging  to  the  pro-
vince of  Itfi^dh,  which  is  the  ancient  name  for  Sairam,  near  Ghimkent.  Ist^khri
and  Idrisi  (according  to  the  same  authority)  make  the  distance  from  Samarkand
to  Tdrdz  twenty-two  and  twenty-three  days  respectively.  Ibn  Khordadbah
nckons  it  about  five  days  (twenty-six  fars^khs)  from  Isfijdh ;  while  Arab  Shah
(on  Bretschneider's  authority)  places  it  about  four  days  from  SairTim  (which

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

with  his  Amirs.  8 1

Khorasan,  he  repaired  to  that  country.^  Isdn  Bugha  Khdn  went
to  Andijan,  where  Mirza  All  Euchuk,  having  been  put  in  command
by  Mirza  Sultan  Abu  Said,  had  fortified  the  citadel.  The  Khan
had  troops  enough  to  enable  him  to  surround  the  citadel  with  a
triple  line  of  men.  He  ran  mines  in  every  direction.  The  outer
fort  was  taken.  .  .  .*  Finally  peace  was  concluded,  and  many
complimentary  presents  given  \jpi8hka8h\  The  Eh&n  having
taken  possession  of  the  whole  district  of  Andij4n,  departed.
There  are  to  this  day  in  Edshghar,  descendants  of  the  men  who
were  made  prisoners  in  this  war,  and  they  are  Moghuls.^

When  Sult4n  Abu  Said  Mirz4  heard  this  news,  he  was  at  a  loss
to  know  how  he  could  put  a  check  on  Is4n  Bugh4  Eh&n.  For  if
he  advanced  into  Moghulistdn,  the  Kh&n  would  withdraw  to  the
farthest  extremities  of  the  country,  whither  it  would  be  impossible
for  the  army  of  Samarkand  to  follow  him,  and  when  the  army  should
retreat  the  Eh4n  would  follow  after  it.*  Again  it  was  out  of  the
question  to  be  always  sending  people  to  oppose  him ;  for  Isan
Bugh&'s  strength  and  numbers  generally  proved  obstacles  to  the
Amirs  who  were  sent.

All  this  time  Mirz4  Sultan  Abu  Said  was  intent  upon  an
expedition  against  Ir4k,  but  on  account  of  the  trouble  and
annoyance  caused  him  by  Isdn  Bugh4  Khdn,  he  was  not  able  to
carry  out  his  plan  of  marching  into  Irdk.  So  he  sent  to  summon
Yunus  Eh4n,  the  elder  brother  of  Isan  Bughd  Ehdn,  from  Irdk,

asnrees  fairly  with  Khordddbah),  thongh  he  makes  it  fifteen  only  from  Samarkand,
These  distances,  except  perhaps  the  last  mentioned,  would  suit  well  for  a  position
on  the  Tdlds  river.

On  the  wholes  no  further  evidence  is,  I  think,  needed  to  demonstrate  (1)  that
MoBhi,  or  MctsQci,  is  only  a  misreading  of  Ydngi ;  and  (2)  that  Yangi  and  Tdrdz
were  one  and  the  same  place  and  stood  on,  or  about,  the  same  site  as  the  modern
Aulia-Ata — though  there  were  several  other  YanqU  in  Central  Asia.  It  may  be
added  here  that  D'Avezac  gives  some  curious  variants  of  the  name  Yangi  Kand
or  Yangi-Eent,  culled  from  old  authors — mz.<^  larikine,  lanekiuy  Idkynty  Sakine,
Sarguit,  etc

(Bee  Baber,  pp.  1, 11, 12, 101, 102;  Erskine's  Hist,  i.,  p.  47;  Yule's  Cathay,

S.ccxiii;  Schuyler,  i.,  pp.  404,  and  ii.,  pp.  120-1;  Bretschneider,  ii.,  p.  252;
prenger,  pp.  19,  22,  23 ;  Quatrembre,  Not.  et  Eztr,,  xiii.,  pp.  224-26 ;  D'Avezac,
BeoeuU  de  Voyages,  iv.,  pp.  505  and  513;  Sadik  Xspahdni,  p.  56 ;  Howorth,  ii.,
pp.  286  seq. ;  Thonnelier,  Dio.  G^r.,  pp.  45  seq.)

*  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza  was  great-grandson  of  Amir  Timur,  and  grand-
father of  Baber.  He  was  ruler  of  M&vartl-un-Nahr  from  1451  to  1468,  and  at
the  time  spoken  of  in  the  text  (863  h.,  or  1459)  had  also  conquered  Khorasdn
and  Balkb.  He  was  perhaps  the  most  powerful  chief  then  ruling  in  CJential
Asia,  and  his  capital,  Herat^  was  famed  for  its  institutions,  its  architecture  and
its  men  of  leammg.

'  An  unintelligible  passage  of  six  words  occurs  here— B.

'  This  is  the  literal  translation  of  the  sentence.  The  meaning  probably  is,  as
Erskine  has  inserted  it  in  the  Introduction  to  his  HisL  (p.  48)--**  and  they  are
become  perfect  Moghuls."

*  This  is  exactly  the  difficulty  that  Timur  experienced  in  dealing  with  the
Moghuls  under  the  leadership  of  Eamaruddin.  Their  traditional  tactics,  as
described  here,  seem  alone  to  have  rendered  them  formidable  to  their  western
neighbours.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

82  Quarrels  of  Isdn  Bughd,

where,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  Yanus  was  living  at  tliat
time ;  he  then  despatched  Ynnus  Ehan  against  Isdn  Bughd  Ehdn,
in  order  that  while  the  two  brothers  were  engaged  in  fighting  one
another,  his  own  country  might  enjoy  a  little  peace.  The  Moghul
Amirs  who  had  separated  from  [Isan  Bugha]  Khdn  and  all  those
who,  having  built  castles,  would  not  yield  obedienoe  to  him,  the
Khan  did  not  oppose  in  their  proceedings,  in  the  hope  that  they
would  again  return  to  [their  allegiance  to]  him.

At  that  time  Abulkhair  Eh&n  exercised  full  power  in  the
Dasht-i-Kipchdk.  He  had  been  at  war  with  the  Sultans  of  the
race  of  Juji ;  while  Jdni  Beg  Kh4n  and  Earai  Eh&n  fled  before
him  into  Moghulistan.  Isan  Bughd  Ehdn  received  them  with
great  honour,  and  delivered  over  to  them  Euzi  Bdshi,^  which  is
near  Chu,  on  the  western  limit  of  Moghulistdn,  where  they  dwelt
in  peace  and  content.  On  the  death  of  Abulkhair  Ehdn  the  Ulua
of  the  Uzbegs  fell  into  confusion,  and  constant  strife  arose  among
them.  Most  of  them  joined  the  party  of  Ear&i  Ehan  and  Jani
Beg  Ehdn.  They  numbered  about  200,000  persons,  and  received
the  name  of  Uzbeg-Eazak.^  The  Eazdk  Sult&ns  began  to  reign  in
the  year  870  [1465-66]  (but  Gtod  knows  best),  and  they  continued
to  enjoy  absolute  power  in  the  greater  part  of  Uzbegistan,  till  the
year  940  [1533-34  a.d.].  Eardi  Ehdn  was  succeeded  by  Baranduk
Ehdn,  who  was  in  turn  succeeded  by  Edsim  Ehdn,  the  son  of  Jdni
Beg  Ehdn.  Edsim  Ehdn  subdued  the  whole  of  the  Dasht-i?
Eipchdk.  His  army  numbered  more  than  a  million  [a  thousand
thousand]  men.  Excepting  Juji  Ehdn,  there  had  never  reigned  a
greater  Ehdn  than  he  in  that  country.  He  was  succeeded  by  his
son  Mimdsh  Ehdn,  who  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Tdhir  Ehdn.
During  the  rule  of  this  Tdhir  Ehdn,  the  Eazdks  began  to
diminish;  after  him  his  brother  Birildsh  reigned.  During  his
rule  there  were  only  20,000  Eazdks  left.  In  940  he  died,  and  the
Eazdks  disappeared  entirely.  From  the  days  of  Isdn  Bugbd
Ehan  to  the  time  of  Bashid  Ehan,^  friendly  relations  generally
existed  between  the  Moghuls  and  the  Kazdks.  But  Eashid  Sultdn
upset  this  state  of  affairs,  as  will  be  related  (God  willing)  in  the
account  I  shall  give  of  Kashid  Ehdn.

*  Another  reading  of  this  name  is  Jud  Kuzi  Bd%hu  It  is  not  traceable  on
modem  maps.

'  This  brief  statement  is  valuable,  as  showing  not  only  how  this  particular
tribe  came  into  existence,  but,  generally,  bow  a  new  tribe  with  a  new  name  may
arise  from  mere  local  circumstances  and  passing  events.  For  some  remarks  on
this  particular  event  and  on  the  passages  whidi  follow,  see  note  1,  p.  272,  and
Howorth,  ii.,  p.  6.

■  Isan  Bugha  reigned  from  832  to  866  h.  (or  1429-62  A.D.).  Rashid's  reign
dates  from  the  end  of  939  h.,  or  1533,  and  lasted  tiU  973  H.,  or  1565-6 ;  but  the
alienation  of  the  Eazaks  took  place  in  the  early  years  of  his  rule.  Thus  the
alliance  continued  for  about  a  hundred  years.  Regarding  the  author's  statoment
that  the  Kozaks  "  disappeared  entirely  "  from  about  the  year  940  h.  (1533),  see
note  1,  p.  272,  and  Sec.  vL  of  the  Introduction.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Reign  of  Yumis  Khdn.  83

CHAPTEE XL.

THE  COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  KHANSHIP  OF  TUNUS  EHIn.

SultIn  Abu  Said  MirzA,  son  of  Sult&n  Muhammad  Mirz&,  son  of

Mir4nflhdh  Mirza,  son  of  Amir  Timur,  got  the  tipper  hand  of  his

cousins  and  took  Samarkand  from  Abdullah  Mirz4  of  Shir&z.

After  the  death  of  Mirzd  Bdbar  Ealandar,^  son  of  Mirzd  B4isanghar,

son  of  Mirz4  Sh&h  Eukh,  son  of  Amir  Timnr,  there  was  no  pddishdh

in  Khordsan. So [Sultan  Abu Said Mirz4]  took possession  of

Khor&sdn ;  his  heart  was  set  upon  appropriating  for  himself  Irak

also,  but,  as  has  been  mentioned,  the  opposition  of  Isdn  Bugh4

Kh4n  prevented  him  from  absenting  himself  upon  so  long  an

expedition. He  therefore  sent  to  fetch  Yunus  Khan,  the  elder

brother  of  Is4n  Bugbd  Kh4n,  from  Ir4k  (the  reason  of  whose  going

to  Ir4k  has  been  explained  above),  and  having  established  his  court

at  Kushk-i-B4gh-i-Zdgh4n,^  he  instituted  princely  feasts  in  honour

of  the  Khdn. They  made  many  compacts  and  agreements,  and

among  other  things,  Sultdn  Abu  Said  Mirzd  said  to  the  Eh4n :  '*  In

Amir  Timur's  first  expedition,  his  generals  would  not  obey  him  as

they  should  have  done. Now,  if  he  had  ordered  them  all  to  be

put  to  death,  he  would  but  have  weakened  his  own  power. The

generals  said  to  him : *  You  should  appoint  a  Ehdn,  whom  we

must  obey.' So  Amir  Timur  appointed  Suyurghdtmish  Eh4n  over

them,  and  the  generals  submitted  to  the  Eh4n. All  firmdna  were

issued  in  this  Ehdn's  name,  but  Amir  Timur  kept  careful  watch

over  him. After  his  death,  his  son  Sultan  Mahmud  Eh4n  was

appointed  in  his  stead. But  from  the  reign  of  Amir  Timur  down

to  the  time  of  Mirz4  Ulugh  Beg,  the  power  of  these  Kh4ns  was

only  nominal ;  and  in  my  own  time  the  Khans  have  generally  been

prisoners  in  Samarkand. Since  I  have  ascended  the  throne,  my

power  is  so  absolute  that  I  have  no  need  of  a  Khan ;  so  now  I  have

divested  you  of  the  garments  of  poverty  and,  having  clothed  you  in

princely  robes,  am  sending  you  back  to  your  native  country  on  the

following  conditions:— For  the  future  you  must  not  follow  the

example  of  your  ancestors  and  say,  ^  Amir  Timur  and  the  race  of

Amir  Timur  are  our  vassals,  and  have  been  for  generations.' For

although  it  was  formerly  so,  things  have  changed  now,  and  I  am

'  His  real  name  was  Abdul  Edaim  Baber.  (See  Genealogical  Table  of
Timnri,  attached.)

'  The  Bdgh4-Zdghdn  is  a  celebrated  garden  sitaated  ontside  the  north-western
angle  of  the  walls  of  Herat.  Its  foundation  is  attributed  to  Shah  Rukh  and  his
wife  Gauhar  Sbdd  Aghd,  and  thus  dates  from  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth
century.  (See  Kh^nikoff  in  Journ.  Anal.,  5  s^rie  I.,  xt.,  June,  1860,  pp.  537-43,
and  plan.)

a  2

Digitized  by

Google

84  Proceedings  of  Yunus  Kkdn.

pddishdh  in  my  own  right ;  thus,  now  if  you  are  going  to  be  my
vassal,  you  must  bear  the  name  of  *  servitor '  [Khddim-i'Makhdum]
and  do  away  with  the  name  of  *  friend/  You  need  not,  however,
write  to  me  in  the  way  the  Khdns  used  to  write  to  the  Timuri
Mirzas,  but  in  a  friendly  way ;  ^  and  these  conditions  are  to  apply
to  your  sons  and  your  sons'  sons."  Yunus  Khan  agreed  to  all  these
conditions,  and  swore  a  solemn  oath  to  abide  by  them.  He  was
then  allowed  to  depart,  accompanied  by  all  the  Moghuls  who  were
in  that  district.

CHAPTER  XLI.

DETAILED  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  PROCEEDINGS  OF  YUNUS  KHAN.

I  HAVE  only  given  a  summarised  account  of  Yunus  Khan  in  the
above  Chapter ;  I  will  now  enter  more  into  detail.

Yunus  Khdn  was  the  son  of  Vais  Khdn,  son  of  Shir  All  Oghlan,
son  of  Muhammad  Ehdn,  son  of  Ehizir  Khwaja  Khan,  son  of
Tughluk  Timur  Kh4n.  I  have  never  heard  the  date  of  his  birth,
but  from  the  date  of  his  death  and  the  length  of  his  days,  it  may
be  inferred  that  he  was  born  in  the  year  819  of  the  Hajra  [1416],
but  God  alone  knows.  He  succeeded  to  the  Khanate  upon  the
death  of  his  father,  Yais  Khan.  There  was  much  dissension
between  himself  and  his  brother  Isdn  Bughd  Khdn,  and  the  Amirs ;
Irazan  and  Mirak  Turkoman  had  seized  the  Khdn  and  several  of
the  chiefs  of  families,  and  had  taken  them  to  Ulugh  Beg  in
Samarkand.  This  was  when  the  Kh&n  was  sixteen  years  of  age.
This  disaster  [mVant],  which  took  place  in  the  year  832  of  the
Hajra,  forms,  down  to  the  present  day,  an  epoch  among  the
Moghuls.^

Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  sent  the  Khan  to  his  father,  in  the  manner
related,  and  the  Khdn  was  received  with  all  honour  and  respect  by
Mirz4  Shah  Kukh,  who  put  him  under  the  guidance  and  care  of
MauUna  Sharaf-ud-Din  Yazdi.  The  Maulana  was  a  man  of  profound
learning,  and  had  not  an  equal  in  all  Samarkand,  Khorasdn  or  Ir&k.
In  former  times  enigmas  [muammd]  were  of  a  different  sort  to
what  one  commonly  meets  with  nowadays.  This  new  kind  was
introduced  by  the  MauUnd,  and  he  has  written  a  book  concerning
the  solution  of  these  enigmas. He  is  the  author,  too,  of  the  Zafar-

*  The  meaninpf  probably  is — ^"Befoie  tlie  world,  and  officially,  you  are  only  my
vassal  or  subordinate,  but  you  may  write  to  me  privately  as  a  friend,  and  not
with  the  humility  that  the  Khans  Iiad  to  use  to  the  Timun  Mirzas/'

'  Or,  more  literally,  one  of  the  principal  dates  in  Moghul  history. — B.

Digitized  by

Google

Proceedings  of  Yunus  Khdn.  85

Ndma,  He  ako  wrote  some  mystical  commentaries  on  poetry,^
and  he  has  never  been  excelled,  at  any  time,  in  this  style  of  com-
mentary. Many  other  works  were  written  by  him,  which  it  would
take  too  long  to  enumerate  here.  I  only  wish  to  demonstrate  how
very  talented  he  was.  The  Eh&n  studied  twelve  years  under  him,
with  the  result  that  there  never  was,  either  before  or  after,  so  wise
a  Ehdn  as  he,  among  the  Moghuls.

When  Khidmat  Mauland  died,  the  Khan  left  Yazd  and  made  a
journey  in  Fdrs  and  Azarbaijan.  He  profited  much  by  his  travelling,
and  gained  great  experience  of  life.  He  finally  selected  Shiraz  as
a  residence ;  there  he  mixed  with  the  learned  men  of  the  place,  and
acquired  many  useful  sciences  and  crafts,  so  that  he  became  known
as  Ustad  Yunus.

In  the  meanwhile,  Mirza  Sultan  Abu  Said  had  seized  Khorasan,
and  was  meditating  the  conquest  of  Irak,  but  was  prevented  from
carrying  out  this  project,  by  the  frequent  incursions  of  Isdn  Bugha
Khan  into  Farghana,  Sh4sh  and  Turkistan,  which  caused  all  ideas
of  an  expedition  into  Irak  to  be  temporarily  abandoned.  In  the
year  860  of  the  Hajra,  Mirza  Sultan  Abu  Said  sent  people  to
summon  the  Khan  from  Shirdz,  under  the  conditions  above  men-
tioned, and  to  conduct  him  to  Moghulistan.  The  EMn  was  then
forty-one  years  of  age.^

>  Or  commentaries  in  verso ;  the  text  is  uncertaiD. — B.

'  Among  the  works  of  Sharaf-nd-Din,  the  best  known  to  Europeans  is  the
Zafar-Ndma  (called  sometimes  the  Tdrikh-i-Sdhib  Kirdni),  so  copiously  cited  by
Mirza  Haidar  at  the  beginning  of  this  history.  Besides  being  an  author,  Sharaf-
nd-Pin  is  said  to  have  ^n  an  astronomer,  and  to  have  assisted  Ulugh  Beg  in  the
observations  used  for  the  astronomical  tables.  The  Zafar-Ndma  may  be  de-
scribed as  a  panegyric,  as  well  as  a  history,  of  Amir  Timur,  and  was  dedicated  to
Shah  Rukh  Mirza  in  1425.  A  French  translation  by  M.  Pe'tis  de  la  Croix  was
published  in  1722  and  1723,  though  it  had  been  completed  some  years  before  the
translator's  death,  which  occurred  in  1695.  Sharaf-ud-Din  died  in  the  year  858  h.
(1454  A.D.)  according  to  Dr.  Bieu,  so  that  we  ought  here  to  have  a  date  for
fixing  the  life  and  reign  of  Yunus  Khdn.  If  Yunus  was  twenty-four  years
old  in  858  (as  Mirza  Haidar  says  at  p.  74),  and  returned  to  Moghulistan  as
Khin  when  he  was  forty-one,  he  must  have  remained  in  exile  for  seventeen  years
after  the  Manila's  death,  and  thus  began  to  reign  only  in  875  h.,  or  1470-1.
If,  however,  his  capture  took  place  in  832,  and  he  was  then  sixteen  years  of  age,
he  must  have  been  forty-two  when  the  MauUni  died  in  858,  and  forty-four  at
bis  restoration,  if  that  event  occurred,  as  the  author  states,  in  860.  There  is
thus  an  irreconcilable  difference  of  fifteen  years  in  the  date  of  the  beginning  of
his  reign.  Baber  gives  an  account  of  these  transactions,  but,  unfortunately,
mentions  no  dates.  He  says  that  five  or  six  months  after  the  arrivol  of  Yunus  at
Shirdz,  Sultan  Ibrahim  (second  son  of  Shah  Bukh  and  Governor  of  Fars)  died,
and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  AbduUa  Mirza,  under  whom  Yunus  took  service,
and  remained  seventeen  or  eighteen  years — ^unlil  he  was  summoned  to  Herat,
and  made  Khan  of  Moghulistan  by  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza.  Farther  on  it  will
be  seen  that  our  author  says  Yunus  was  bom  in  818,  and  died,  at  the  age  of
seventy-four,  in  892.  If  this  is  correct,  and  if  his  capture  should  date  from  832,
he  would  at  that  time  have  been  fourteen  years  old. This  leaves  only  a  diflference

P

pp.  45  and  49.)

Digitized  by

Google

86  Arrival  of  Yunus  in  Moghulistdn.

CHAPTEE  XLII.

ABRIVAL  OF  YUNUS  KhIn  IN  MOGUULISTAN.

I  HAVE  already  shown  that  in  Moghnlistdn,  each  Amir  had  fortified
himself  where  ne  happened  to  be.  After  this  demonstration  of
contumaoy,  and  the  murder  of  Timur  Uighnr,  Is&n  Bugh4  had
withdrawn  to  AJasu.  When  Tunus  Eh4n  arrived  in  Moghulist4n»
the  first  of  the  Amirs  to  join  him  was  Mir  Earim  Bardi ;  and  after
him,  Etinji,  together  with  several  of  the  dispersed  Moghuls,  entered
the  Ehan's  service.  The  Ehdn  then  married  the  daughter  of  Mir
Fir  Haji  Eunji,  who  was  at  that  time  an  Amir  Tnman  of  the  Eunji
[clan]  and  enjoyed  absolute  authority.  Her  name  was  Is&n  Daulat
Begum.  By  her  the  Eh4n  had  three  sons,  each  of  whom  will  be
spoken  of  in  his  proper  place.  Of  the  Begjik  Amirs' in  Issigh  Eul,
Mir  Pir  Hakk  Bardi  had  died,  and  had  been  succeeded  by  his
nephew  Mir  Ibr&him,  who  also  came  and  attached  himself  to  the
Eh4n.

All  these  Amirs  offered  their  services  to  the  Ehan,  but  as  they
had  for  so  long  a  time  been  acting  independently,  and  each  one
for  himself,  they  did  not  fulfil  their  duties,  or  offer  the  Ehan  fitting
allegiance.  Nevertheless,  he  humoured  them  in  every  way
possible.

When  some  years  had  passed  in  this  manner,  the  Ehdn  set  out
against  Edshghar.  Amir  Sayyid  Aliwasnow  grown  very  old,
so  that  he  could  no  longer  sit  on  horseback.  He  sent  a  messenger
[to  ask  help]  of  Isan  Bugha  Ehan,  and  meanwhile  fortified  himself
in  the  citadel  of  Eashghar.  Isan  Bugha  Eh4n  happened,  at  the
time,  to  be  in  Yulduz  of  Moghulistan,  which  is  on  the  eastern  side
of  his  dominions.  When  the  message  reached  him,  he  immediately
collected  a  large  army,  which  numbered  60,000  men;  with  this
force  he  marched  from  Yulduz,  and  arrived  at  Eashghar  eleven  days
later.  Only  6,000  men  were  with  him,  the  others  were  still  on
the  road  [so  great  had  been  the  rapidity  of  his  march].  He  was
then  joined  by  the  Amir  with  30,000  men.  A  battle  was  fought
at  Ehwiln-i-Saldr,  which  is  about  three /ar«d^^^  from  Eashghar  in
the  direction  of  Aksu.  The  fight  was  fiercely  maintained,  but
finally  Isan  Bugha  Eh4n  and  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  were  victorious.
[Yunus]  Ehan  was  compelled  to  take  flight,  while  his  wives  and
family  fell  into  the  hands  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali.  At  that  time
Mihr-i-Nigar  Ehanim,  the  eldest  child  of  Yunus  Ehan,  by  Isiin
Daulat  Begum,  was  still  at  the  breast.  They  were  supplied  with
necessaries  and  sent  after  the  Khan.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Rule  of  Mirzd  Sdnis.  87

When  Yumis  Khan  reached  Moghulistan,  he  was  deserted  by
his  followers,  and  finding  it  was  impossible  to  remain  in  that
country,  he  left  it  and  proceeded  to  Khor&san,  where  he  presented
himself  before  Mirz4  Sultdn  Abn  Said.  But  the  £^4n  was  in  such
a  state  of  destitution,  that  he  could  find  nothing  to  offer  as  a  present
[jpishhulh']  to  the  Mirza.  So  the  Kh4n  said  to  Buy&n  Kuli,  who
was  one  of  his  most  devoted  servants :  "  I  am  going  to  give  you  as
a  slave  to  the  Mirz4,  by  way  of  a  '  pishkash.'  "  And  as  the  man
offered  no  objection,  the  Eb4n  presented  him  to  the  Mirz4,  and
entreated  the  Mirz&,  saying :  '*  You  must  give  me  some  country
\ml&ya£]  as  a  possession,  so  that  I  may  inspire  the  Moghuls  with
confidence."  The  Mirza  gave  him  Yatikand,^  which  is  on  the
confines  of  Andijdn.  When  the  hour  of  the  Khdn's  departure
arrived^  Buy4n  Kuli  began  to  weep.  The  Mirz^  questioned  him  as
to  the  cause  of  his  tears.  Having  told  his  story,  the  Mirzd  took
pity  on  him,  and  supplying  him  with  a  horse  and  provisions,  sent
him  along  with  the  Khdn.

On  re-entering  Moghulistan,  the  Kh&n  was  once  more  joined  by
his  scattered  adherents.  At  this  time  Amir  Sayyid  AH  died  in
Kdshgbar.  On  the  dome  of  the  mausoleum  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,
which  is  in  Kashghar,  is  written  the  date  U62.  Yunus  Khan  was
relieved  of  much  anxiety  by  the  death  of  the  Amir.

CHAPTER  XLin.

BULG  OF  HIRZA  slUIZ  IN  RASHQHAR  AFTER  THE  DEATH  OF  HIS  FATHER,
MIR  SAYYID  ALI.

The  Amir  died  leaving  two  sons.  The  elder  was  Mirz4  Saniz,
whose  mother  was  of  the  family  [hahilaK]  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Jaras; and  the  younger  was  Muhammad Haidar  Mirza,  whose

*  ThiB  name  is  sabject  to  many  different  readings,  not  only  in  the  Tarildi-t
Bashidi,  but  in  other  Asiatic  histories,  and  has  been  frequently  transliterated
BaniJcandj  Yantkand,  Batxkand,  Itikand,  etc.  Mirza  Haidar,  however,  gives,
lower  down  (p.  180),  the  Persian  equivalent  for  it  as  Haft  Deh ;  and  this  settles
the  question,  for  Haft  Deh,  or  Seven  viUages^  translated  into  Turki,  would  beoomo
Yati-kand.  This  last  form  has  been  adopted,  therefore,  whenever  tho  name
ocours.  He  tells  us  that  the  district  was  situated  on  the  confines  of  Andijdn,  but
in  this  instance,  it  is  possible  that  he  may  be  using  the  word  Andijdn  to  denote
the  whole  province  of  Farghdna — ^in  fact,  as  an  equivalent  for  FargMna.  In
some  modern  maps  a  district  called  Itikand  or  Itikemi  is  marked  to  the  north  of
the  Sir,  and  between  the  modem  town  of  Khokand  and  Tashkand ;  but  it  seems
hardly  possible  that  this  district  can  represent  the  Yatikand  of  the  fifteenth
century.  It  must  have  stood  on  the  north-western  confines  of  Farghana,  and
would  have  constituted  tho  extreme  western  limit  of  Moghulistan.  (See  note
1,  pp.  180-1.)

Digitized  by

Google

88  Reign  of  Dust  MuJtammad.

mother  was  Urun  Sultan  Khanim,  the  aunt  of  Yunus  Khan.
Aoooiding  to  Moghul  custom,  Saniz,  being  the  elder,  succeeded  to
the  gOYemment.  He  was  a  violent,  but  generous  man.  Out  of
respect  and  reverence  for  his  mother,  and  his  love  and  a£fection  for
his  brother,  he  gave  Edshghar  and  Ydngi  His4r  to  the  Eh&nim,
and  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  [respectively],  while  he  chose  Y4r-
kand  for  his  seat  of  government.

Although  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  was  cousin  to  both  Yunus
Khdn  and  Isdn  Bugha  Kh4n,  yet  he  naturally  sided  with  the  latter,
because  Amir  Sa^yid  Ali  had  chosen  Daulat  Nigdr  Ehdnim,  the
daughter  of  Isdn  Bugha  Khan,  as  a  wife  for  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirzd.

Soon  after  the  death  of  Mir  Sayyid  Ali,  Isan  Bugha  Khan  died
also ;  this  was  in  the  year  866.  His  son  Dust  Muhammad  Khan
succeeded  to  the  Khdnate.  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  allied  him-
self with  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn,  while  Sdniz  Mirzd,  on  the  other
hand,  became  a  partisan  of  Yunus  Khan.  Under  these  circumstances
it  became  impossible  for  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  to  remain  in
Kashghar,  so  he  left,  and  joined  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn  in  Aksu.

After  this,  Saniz  Mirzd  governed  Kashghar  so  well,  and  adminis-
tered justice  so  evenly,  that  his  time  was  looked  back  on  with
envy  by  those  who  came  after  him.  He  ruled  during  seven  years,
and  died  in  the  year  869  [1464-5].  He  fell  from  his  horse  while
out  hunting,  and  i-an  five  arrow-heads  into  his  loins,  causing  wounds
which  proved  fatal.  After  his  death,  the  inhabitants  of  Kdsbghar
brought  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  to  their  town,  while  Dust
Muhammad  Khan  advanced  on  Yarkand,  where  he  married  the
widow  of  Saniz  Mirzd,  Jamdl  Aghd  by  name,  who  had  given  Sdniz
Mirza  two  sons,  viz. :  Mirza  Abd  Bakr  and  Omar  Mirza,  and  one
daughter,  called  Khan  Sultdn  Khanim,  all  of  whom  the  Khdn  took
back  with  him  to  Aksu, (I  will  speak  about  them  below.)

CHAPTER  XLIV.

KHANSHIP  OF  DUST  MUHAMMAD  KHAN.

When  Isdn  Bugha  Khdn  died  (a  natural  death)  he  was  succeeded
by  his  son  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn,  who  was  then  seventeen  years
of  age.  He  was  an  eccentric  youth,  and  his  actions  were  unrea-
sonable. He  was  never  for  a  moment  in  his  senses.  He  much
affected  the  ways  of  Kalandars,  and  gave  himself  and  all  his
Amirs  such  names  as  are  usually  borne  by  Kalandars.  His  own
namo  was  Shams  Abdal,  and  in  the  same  way,  all  hi^  co\irtiors

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Reign  of  Dust  Muhammad.  89

and  publio  officers  were  called  Abd4l  this  and  Abd4l  that,  and  had
to  transact  their  basiness  under  these  names.  He  was,  moreover,
excessively  generous.

He  reigned  seven  years.  During  this  time  he  made  expeditions
against  Yarkand  cmd  Kishghar.  First  of  all  he  attacked  Y&rkand,
where,  after  the  death  of  Sdniz  Mirz4,  the  Amirs  had  shut  them-
selves up  in  the  citadel.  The  Eh4n  asked  them  to  surrender  the
widow  of  Saniz  Mirz4 :  when  she  had  been  given  up  to  him,  he
asked  for  the  children,  of  whom  they  sent  the  eldest  son  Mirza
Ab4  Bakr.  He  then  ceased  hostilities,  and  went  on  to  Kdshghar.
At  the  time  when  he  had  set  out  against  Yarkand,  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirz4,  upon  the  entreaty  of  the  people  of  Eashghar,  pro-
ceeded to  their  town.  When  the  Khan  neared  Kashghar,  Muham-
mad Haidar  Mirzd  set  out  to  meet  him;  the  Khan  sent  him  to
Yangi  Hisdr,  while  he  himself  entered  Kashghar,  and  when  he
had  plundered  it,  he  returned  to  Aksu.  In  consequence  of  this,
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  was  much  enraged,  and  went  over  to
the  side  of  Yunus  Kh4n  (as  will  be  mentioned  below).  Soon  after
Dust  Muhammad  Khan'd  return  to  Aksu,  he  gave  his  sister,  Husn
Nig&r  Khanim,  to  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr  in  marriage.  But  Mirza  Aba  Bakr
was  much  alarmed  at  the  unbalanced  state  of  the  Kh4n's  mind,
and  finally  fled  to  his  noble  uncle  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  in
Kashghar,  whither  his  wife  was,  soon  after,  permitted  to  follow
him.

Not  long  after  this,  the  Khan  fell  in  love  with  one  of  his  father's
wives,  and  in  consequence  tried  to  obtain  permission  from  the
Ulama  for  an  alliance  with  her.  He  put  to  death  seven  of  the
Ulam4  in  succession,  who  decided  against  the  union.  At  length  the
Khan  came  to  Maulana  Muhammad  Attar,  reeling  with  drunken-
ness and  with  a  sword  in  his  hand,  and  said  to  him :  '*  I  want  to
marry  my  own  mother ;  is  it  lawful  or  not  ?  "  The  Maulana,  who
was  one  of  the  most  learned  of  the  darvishes  and  a  most  pious
man,  said  to  the  Khan :  "  For  such  a  one  as  you  it  is  lawful."
So  the  Khan  immediately  ordered  preparations  for  the  marriage
to  be  made.  But  on  the  night  of  the  nuptials  he  saw  his  father,
in  a  dream,  mounted  on  a  black  horse,  who,  coming  up  to  him,
said :  "  Oh !  wretched  one,  in  that  after  we  have  for  one  hundred
years  been  Musulmans,  thou  shouldst  apostasise  and  become  an
infidel."  [His  father]  shot  him  below  the  ribs  with  an  arrow,
then  dismounting,  he  rubbed  his  hand  on  the  bottom  of  a  kettle,
and  blackened  the  Kh4n's  face,  who  thereupon  awoke,  in  alarm.
Breathless  and  penitent,  he  rushed  out  of  the  house  of  his  mother
and  washed  himself.  He  was  seized  with  an  acute  pain  in  the
side,  which,  in  the  morning,  developed  into  fever.

The  people  sent  for  Maul4na  Muhammad  Attar,  and  said  to  him :
**Jt  was  you  who  granted the  faiv6, [decree legalising this

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

go  Return  of  Yunus  from  the

marriage]."  The  Khan  said :  *'  Do  not  blame  the  Maulana ;  for  I
had  already  killed  seven  persons  when  I  asked  his  opiniou,  so
what  cotild  the  poor  Mull4  do  ?  "  But  the  Manl4n4  said :  "  I  gave
you  no  fadnay  I  simply  said  that  [the  marriage]  was  lawful  for
an  infidel  such  as  you  are."  Dust  Muhammad  Eh4n  was  next
seized  with  pleurisy  [ZatoZ/amb]  and  died  after  six  days'  illness  at
the  age  of  forty,  in  the  year  873  [1468-9].  Khwdja  Sharif  of
E&shghar  devised  the  following  chronogram  on  his  death:  **  TJ
Ehuk  murd  " :  that  pig  died.  He  had  reigned  seven  years.  On
his  death  great  disorder  ensued.  He  left  one  son,  Eabak  Sult4n
Oghl&n,  who  was  seized  by  some  of  the  people  and  carried  away
to  Turf&n  and  Chdlish,^  while  Yunus  Ehan  came  down  and
captured  Aksu.

CHAPTER  XLV.

SECOND  RETURN  OP  YUNUS  KHIn  FROM [tHE  COURT  OF] SULTAN
ABU SAID.

When  Yunus  Khan  was  sent  back  by  Sultan  Abu  Said  into
Moghulist4n,  he  was,  on  his  arrival  in  that  country,  again  joined
by  all  the  Amirs ;  he  remained  there  some  time,  his  headquarters
being  generally  Yatikand.  He  was  not,  however,  able  to  enter  the
territory  of  Is4n  Bughd  Khan.  When  the  latter  and  Amir  Sayyid
Ali  died.  Dust  Muhammad  Khan  became  pddiahdhj  and  was  joined
in  Aksu  by  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4,  while  Sdniz  Mirz4,  who  had
been  at  enmity  with  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz&,  attached  himself
to  Yunus  Khdn,  to  whom  he  was  of  great  service.  Yunus  Kban
entered  Kashghar  several  times,  but  the  Amirs  of  Moghulistan
refused  to  stay  there,  so  the  Kh4n  was  always  compelled  to  with-
draw. This  happened  several  times,  but  I  will  not  give  any
details,  as  it  would  take  too  long,  and  the  accounts  I  have  heard
differ  considerably.  The  substance  of  the  whole  matter  is  that
the  Khdn  was  very  fond  of  cities  and  houses,  but  the  Amirs  and
soldiers  of  Moghulistdn  always  avoided  the  towns,  and  for  this
reason  the  Kh4n  spent  most  of  his  time  in  Moghulistan.  When
S^niz  Mirza  died,  the  Khdn  was  joined  by  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirza.  A  short  time  after  this.  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn  also  died,
whereupon  Yunus  Kh&n  entered  Aksu  and  subdued  the  subjects  of
Dust  Muhammad  Khan,  while  the  son  of  this  latter,  Kabak  Sultan
Oghlan,  was  seized  by  some  of  his  well-wishers,  who  fled  with
him  to  Turfan.

*  Jalish  or  Clialish — ^the  modern  Kani-shahr.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

Court  of  Sultdn  Abti  Sdid.  91

Yimus  Khan  wished  to  dwell  in  Aksu.  In  comparison  with
Moghnlistan,  Aksn  is  like  a  town ;  ^  but  he  concluded,  from  the
manner  of  the  Moghxils,  that  if  he  stayed  there  much  longer,  they
would  all  go  over  to  the  side  of  Eabak  Sultan  Oghlan,  so  he  was
compelled  to  call  together  all  his  tribesmen  and  return  with  them
to  Moghulistan.  At  this  time  Amdsdnji  Tdishi,  son  of  Jsan  Taishi
(whom  I  have  mentioned  in  connection  with  Vais  Khan)  came  to
Mc^hulistan.  For  Isan  Taishi  had  given  him  [in  marriage]
Makhtum  Khanim,  sister  of  Yais  Khan,  as  a  ransom  for  theKhdn's
life,  and  by  her  he  [Amds&nji  Tdishi]  had  two  sons  and  one
daughter.  When  Yais  Khdn  had  bestowed  his  sister,  he  had
obliged  his  brother-in-law  to  become  a  Musulmdn,  and  they  were
married  with  Muhammadan  rites.  The  Khdnim  caused  all  her
following  to  become  Musulmans,  and  named  her  two  sons  Ibrahim
and  Ilyas,  and  her  daughter  Kddir  Bardi  Mirzd,  after  Mir  Karim
Bardi.  This  conversion  to  Isldm  was  the  cause  of  a  conflict
between  Ibrdhim  Ung  and  Ilyds  Ung,  on  the  one  hand,  and
Amdsdnji  Tdishi  on  the  other.  (In  the  language  of  the  Kdlmdks  the
son  of  a  Khdn  is  called  "  Ung.")  Amdsdnji  fled  before  them  into
Moghulistdn  with  thirty  times  100,000  men,  while  it  is  stated,
that  eighteen  times  100,000  stayed  behind  with  Ibrdhim  Ung  and
Ilyds  Ung.  These  two,  however,  quarrelled  with  the  Khdn  of  the
Kdlmdks,  and  therefore  fled  from  that  country  into  Khitdi  with
10,000  men.  The  rupture  [mr&n%\  between  the  brothers  [and
Amdsdnji]  took  place  before  the  death  of  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn,
which  occurred  in  873.  The- flight  of  Ibrdhim  Ung  and  Ilyds  Ung
into  Khitdi  took  place,  probably,  in  910  [1604-6].^  These  two
both  died  in  Khitdi.  Ibrdhim  left  one  son,  Bdbuldi  by  name,
whose  descendants  are  still  to  be  met  with  in  that  country,  and
who  still  bear  the  same  name  of  Bdbuldi.  Mansur  Khdn  made  a
holy  war  \jghaz&f\  against  Khitdi  and  came  in  contact  with  that
very  tribe  (as  will  be  mentioned  shortly).

But  Amdsdnji  Tdishi,  having  separated  himself  from  Ibrdhim
Ung  and  Ilyds  Ung,  came  to  Moghulistdn.  Near  the  Kiver  Ailah
he  came  upon  and  defeated  Yunus  Khdn.  In  that  flght  many
Moghul  Amirs  were  killed  .  .  .  .^  and  all  the  MoghxJ  TJlua  moved

*  Meaning  that  although  Aksn  is  only  a  small  place,  life  there  would  bo  town
life,  while  in  Moghulistan  it  would  bo  tiie  life  of  the  steppes.

'  This  passage  is  somewhat  obscure.  The  word  virdni  should  mean  r«t»,
devagtation,  or  expulsion,  rather  than  rupture,  and  it  appears  to  refer  to  the  flight
of  the  brothers  into  Ehitai,  or  Chinese  territory.  But  the  dates  which  the  author
mentions  show,  I  think,  that  the  conflict  between  them  and  Amdsinji,  and  tho
latter's  flight  into  Moghulistan,  are  the  events  he  speaks  of  when  using  the  word
virdni.  If  this  is  correct,  a  period  of  thirty-six  years,  or  more,  elapsed  between
those  events  and  the  retreat  of  tho  brothers  into  Chinese  territory,  t.e.,  from
some  date  prior  to  873  (1468-9)  to  the  year  910  (1504-5).  These  occurrences
are  not  traceable  in  the  translations  from  the  Chinese  history  of  tho  Ming
dynasty,  published  by  Dr.  Bretschnoidcr  in  his  Medi/p.ml  Jic^archeti.

'  A  passage  of  five  words  here  is  unintelligible. — li.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

92  Supremacy  of  Yunus  Khan.

towards  Turkistan,  spending  the  winter  at  a  plaoe  in  Turkistan,
on  the  banks  of  the  Sihnn,  called  Kara  Tnk4i.^  Buruj  Oghl&n
made  a  raid  upon  them,  as  will  be  hereafter  related.

CHAPTER  XLVI.

EVENTS  WHICH  FOLLOWED  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DUST  MUHAMMAD  KHAN  ;
THE  SUPREMACY  OF  YUNUS  KHIn,  AND  THE  MURDER  OF  BURUJ
OGHLAN,  SON  OF  ABULKHA.IR KHAN  UZBEG.

In  the  year  855  Abulkhair,  a  descendant  of  Juji,  was  pddishdh  in
the  kingdom  [yurt]  of  Juji  Kb4n,  son  of  Chingiz  Kh4n — that  is  in
the  Dasht-i-Eipchak ;  and  he  was  the  greatest  king  [pddiahdh]  of
his  time.  After  his  death^  his  people  became  very  demoralised,
and  a  number  of  them  joined  the  Kazdks,  Karai  Kb4n  and  Jani
Beg  Eh4n  (whom  I  have  had  occasion  to  mention).  There  was  a
standing  quarrel  between  these  two  Eazdks,  and  the  sons  of
Abulkhair  Ehdn.  For  this  reason  the  sons  of  Abulkhair  were  also
at  enmity  with  the  Moghul  Ehdns.  For  these  last  had  always
been  the  supporters  of  Earai  Eh&n  and  J4ni  Beg  Eh4n.  At  the
death  of  Abulkhair  Ehdn,  his  subjects  gathered  round  his  eldest
son  Buruj  Oghlan.^  Seeing  that  Earai  Ehan  and  Jani  Beg  Ehan
had  become  very  powerful,  Buruj  Ehdn  thought  he  had  better
keep  at  a  distance  from  them,  and  so  retired  to  Turkistdn.

When  [the  inhabitants  of]  Turkistdn  learnt  the  news  of  the
advance  of  the  Moghuls  on  their  territory,  and  having  ascertained
that  Yunus  Ehdn  was  at  Eard  Tukdi,  [they  sent]  Buruj  out  vdth
all  speed  [to  attack  him].  On  that  day  the  Ehdn  happened  to  be
out  hunting  with  all  his  men  near  the  banks  of  the  Sihun.  Buruj,
crossing  the  river  on  the  ice  at  mid-day,  found  the  camp  of  the
Ehdn  undefended ;  he  had  20,000  soldiers  with  him,  and  there  were
at  that  time  60,000  families  of  Moghuls. They  entered  the  camp

*  Possibly  tho  Kara  Sengir  Tukai  of  modern  maps. (See  map  attached.)

*  Abulkhair  died  in  874  a.h.,  or  1469-70  a.d.  (See  Howorth,  ii.,  p.  690,
where,  however,  the  a.d.  year  is,  by  an  oversight,  printed  1489).

'  The  name  of  Buruj  Oghldn  does  not  appear,  as  Sir  H.  Howorth  has  pointed
out,  in  the  list  of  Abulkhair's  sons.  His  eldest  son  was  Shah  Baddgh  Sultan,
the  father  of  the  renowned  Shahi  Beg,  or  Shaibdni,  Khan ;  and  Sir  H.  Howorth
is  disposed  to  think  that  Buruj  was  only  another  name  for  Shdh  Badigh.  This
is  probable,  for  several  of  the  Abulkhairi  Uzbeg  chiefs  had  second  names,  or
nicknames.  Br.  Bellew  calls  Buruj  OghMn  the  son  of  J&ni  Beg,  who  was  a
grandson  of  Abulkhair ;  but  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  name  does  not  occur
among  Jini  Bog's  sons,  as  they  are  known  to  us,  a  man  of  that  generation  would
have  been  too  young  to  take  the  part  ascribed  to  him,  at  the  time  mentioned  by
Mirza  Haidar. (Howorth,  ii.,  p.  691 ;  Bellew,  Yarhand  Report,  p.  159.)

Digitized  by

Google

Sfiaikh  Jamdl-ud'Din  Ktiar,  93

and  each  soldier  made  himself  master  of  an  untenanted  house.
They  settled  down  in  the  Khan's  camp,  occupying  themselves  with
the  appropriation  of  all  the  wealth  and  spoil  they  found  there.

When  news  of  this  matter  reached  the  Khdn  he  immediately
abandoned  the  hunt,  and  set  out  in  the  direction  of  his  camp
without  waiting  to  collect  his  men ;  when  he  reached  the  river  he
found  it  was  frozen  over.  Now  the  Khan's  camp  was  pitched  on  the
[opposite]  bank  of  the  river.  The  Khan  could  blow  the  horn
[nq/Kr]  better  than  any  one  of  his  day,  and  all  his  men  knew  the
sound  of  his  blast.  He  now  gave  a  loud  blast  on  the  horn,  and
then  rushed  across  the  ice,  accompanied  by  six  men,  one  of  whom
was  bearer  of  the  great  standard  {Shauih  Tughj\\  The  women
[hearing  the  approach  of  the  Khan]  seized  all  the  Uzbegs  who
were  in  their  houses.  When  Buruj  Oghlan  heard  the  sound  of  the
horn  and  saw  the  six  men  and  the  standard,  he  rose  up  with  the
intent  of  mounting  his  horse,  but  the  female  servants  had  seized
both  his  groom  \oikhiaj%\  and  his  horse.  Some  women  [at  that
moment]  came  out  of  their  houses  and  seized  Buruj  OghUn,  when
the  Kh4n,  arriving  upon  the  scene,  ordered  them  to  behead  him ;
this  order  was  carried  out  immediately,  and  of  the  20,000  Uzbegs
a  few  only  escaped.  The  Kh4n  then  again  settled  down,  victorious,
in  his  camp.  On  the  morrow,  when  the  army  had  reassembled,  the
pursuit  of  the  enemy  was  continued,  and  all  the  Sult4ns  of  Abulkhair
Kh4n  who  survived,  were  scattered  in  different  directions.  They
will  be  mentioned,  separately  and  individually,  in  different  parts  [of
this  book].

CHAPTER  XLVIL

SHAIKH  JAMAL-UD-DIN  Al^D  HIS CAPTURE  OP THE KUAN.

Having  passed  the  winter  at  Kar&  Tukai,  the  Kh&n  proceeded  in
the  spring  to  Tdshkand.  At  that  time  there  was,  in  Tasbkand,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Mirzd  Sultdn  Abu  Said,  Shaikh  Jamdl-nd-Din  Khar
by  name.  Sultdn  Abu  Said  Mirza  had  just  died  in  Irdk,^  and  had
been  succeeded  in  the  rule  of  Khordsdn  by  Saltan  Husain  Mirzd  ;
while  his  son,  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirzd,  succeeded  him  in  Samarkand.
The  government  of  Hisdr,  Kunduz  and  Badakhshdn  had  devolved
upon  his  son,  Mirzd  Sultdn  Mahmud,  and  Mirzd  Omar  Shaikh
became  p&dishdh  of  Andijdn,  and  vali  of  Farghdna.  Yunus  Khdn
made  all  three  of  these  Mirzds  his  sons-in-law. (I  will  mention

>  Abu  Said  died  873  a.h. =1468-9  a.d. Beale  (Orient  Diogr.  Diet.)  gives
the  exact  date  as  25  Rajab,  878,  or  8th  February,  1469.

Digitized  by

Google

94  Shaikh  Jamdl-ud-Dift  Khar.

each  of  them  in  his  proper  place.)  In  short,  this  Shaikh  Jamil
Khar  was  one  of  Snlt&n  Abu  S4id's  Amirs,  and  had  been  appointed
Govemor  of  Tdshkand,  subject  to  Mirz4  Sult4n  Ahmad  of  Samar-
kand ;  bnt  his  allegiance  to  the  Mirz4  was  very  imperfect  The
Khan,  on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  barley  in  Moghulistdn,  came
to  Tashkand,  where  he  mixed  freely  and  unsuspectingly  with  the
above-mentioned  Mirzds.  For  the  Ehdn  had  come  without  any
apprehensions;  but  his  Moghul  followers  had  sent  secretly  to
Shaikh  Jamil  Khar,  inviting  him  to  come  and  oppose  the  Khin,  to
which  the  Shaikh,  after  much  persuasion,  agreed.  He  approached
the  ELhan  as  if  to  do  him  homage,  but  when  he  drew  near,  all  the
men  who  were  with  the  latter,  went  forward  to  meet  the  Shaikh,
leaving  the  Khdn  alone.  The  Khin  asked  where  his  men  were
going,  to  which  they  answered  that  they  were  going  to  meet  Mir
Shaikh  Jamil.  When  Shaikh  Jamal  Khar  came  up  to  the  standard
and  drum  of  the  Khin,  he  remained  on  horseback ;  there  was  no
one  with  the  Khin,  so  the  Shaikh  sent  one  of  the  Khin's  own
servants  to  seize  him,  which  was  easily  managed.  The  Khan  was
bound  and  kept  in  prison  one  year.  The  whole  Moghul  Vlus
submitted  to  Shaikh  Jamil.

Isin  Daulat  Begum,  the  wife  of  Yunus  Khin  and  mother  of  his
children,  has  been  mentioned  above  as  the  mother  of  Mihr-i-Nigir
Ehinim,  who  was  given  in  marriage  to  Sultin  Ahmad  Mirzi,  and
of  Kutluk  Nigir  Khinim,  who  was  wedded  to  Mirzi  Omar  Shaikh.
This  same  Isin  Daulat  Begum  was  given,  as  a  present,  by  Shaikh
Jamil  Khar,  to  one  of  his  most  distinguished  officers.  When  the
Begum  heard  of  this,  she  made  no  objections,  but  appeared  pleased.
They  then  informed  Khwija  Kalin  (as  this  officer  was  named)  of
the  Begum's  pleasure :  he  too  was  much  pleased,  and  in  the  evening
went  to  her  house.  He  found  her  servants  standing  outside.  He
himself  entered  her  room.  Now,  before  his  arrival,  the  Begum  had
arranged  with  her  female  attendants  [d&h&n]  that  on  a  given  sign
from  herself,  they  should  make  fast  all  the  doors  of  the  house.  So
when  Khwija  Kalin  had  entered  the  room,  having  fastened  the
doors,  the  female  attendants  laid  hold  of  him  and  put  him  to  death,
by  stabbing  him  with  knives  {kizlik].  When  day  broke  they  ihi-ew
his  body  outside.  Some  persons  seeing  the  Khwija's  dead  body,
went  and  reported  the  matter  to  Shaikh  Jamil,  who  sent  to  ask  the
Begum  the  meaning  of  it  all.  The  Begum  replied :  '*  I  am  the
wife  of  Sultin  Yunus  Khin ;  Shaikh  Jamil  gave  me  to  some  one
else ;  this  is  not  allowed  by  Muhammadan  law,  so  I  killed  the  man,
and  Shaikh  Jamil  Khar  may  kill  me  also  if  he  likes."  Shaikh
Jamil  commended  her  words,  and,  taking  pity  on  her,  sent  her
back  with  all  honour  to  the  Kbin  [her  husband].

When  the  Khin  had  been  one  year  in  prison.  Amir  Abdul  Kudus,
the  nephew  of  Amir  Karim  Bardi  Dughlit,  with  the  assistance  of

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Transactions  of  Yunus  KMn.  95

a  body  of  men,  fell  on  the  Shaikh  and  slew  him.  He  then  brought
the  head  of  the  Shaikh  to  the  Ehdn,  and  set  him  at  liberty.  The
Amirs,  who  had  gone  over  to  the  Shaikh,  now  returned  to  their
allegiance  under  the  Ehan.  They  explained  that  the  reason
for  the  hostility  they  had  shown  him  was,  that  he  had  always
tried  to  make  them  settle  in  towns  and  cultivated  countries,  but
that  these  places  were  hateful  to  them.  So  the  Kh4n  repented
and  said :  *'  Henceforward  I  will  give  up  all  idea  of  living  in
towns  and  cultivated  countries  "  [shaJhr  u  vildyat].  To  record  this
event  they  invented  the  chronogram:  aar-p-hhar  giriftah  Abdul
Kudus,  which  is  enigmatical ;  for  "  sar-i-khar  "  is  equivalent  to  the
letter  *^khd"  and  has  to  be  added  to  [the  numerical  value  of]
Abdul  Kudus  in  order  to  produce  the  date  877  [1472-3].

At  this  time  [in  the  same  year]  the  Kdlm&ks  returned  to  their
own  homes  [j^r^],  and  Moghulistan  being  left  unoccupied,  the
Eh&n  led  his  Moghuls  back  to  their  country.

CHAPTEB  XLVIIL

CONCERNma  WHAT  PASSED BETWEEN  YUNUS  KHAn AND  THE KINGS  OP
m1vAR1-UN-NAHR, AFTER  THE  MURDER  OF  SHAIKH  JAMAL KHAR.

As  soon  as  the  Ehdn  had  again  established  himself  on  the  throne
of  the  Ehdnate,  the  Moghuls  and  the  Amirs  made  him  promise
never,  for  the  future,  to  attempt  to  make  them  dwell  in  cities  or
cultivated  countries  [shahr  u  vildycU],  which  had  been  the  cause
of  all  their  sedition  and  revolts.  The  Eh4n  was  obliged  to
comply,  and  they  then  re-entered  Moghulistdn,  which  had  been  ,
vacated  by  the  E&lmaks.  During  several  years  the  Eh&n  never
even  made  mention  [Aatrd]  of  towns  or  houses,  so  that  at  length
the  Moghuls  became  much  attached  to  him.

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  who  was  in  Edshghar,  yielded  fitting
obedience  to  the  Eh4n,  from  whom  he,  in  return,  received  demon-
strations of  paternal  affection ;  and  complete  tranquillity  prevailed
in  Moghulistdn  and  Edshghar.

Soon  after  the  Ehdn's  return,  the  followers  of  Eabak  Sult4n
Oghlan  (son  of  Dust  Muhammad  ELhdn),  who  had  fled  in  the
direction  of  Turfdn,  having  killed  their  master,  brought  his  head
to  the  £[hdn.  But  the  Eh4n,  in  spite  of  EabiJc  having  been  his
enemy,  was  (for  Eabak's  brother's  sake)  very  angry,  and  ordered
the  murderers  [to  be  put  to  death]  by  way  of  retaliation.

The  Ehdn  had  now  no  enemies  remaining  on  any  side. After

Digitized  by

Google

g6  Transaction^  between Yunus  and

he  had  killed  Buruj  Oghlan,  he  sent  his  eldest  daughter,  Mihr
Nigdr  Ehanim,  to  Saltan  Ahmad  Mirza,  son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said
Mirza,  saying :  "  Sultdn  Abu  Said  Mirza  turned  the  enmity  that
existed  between  Moghul  and  Ohaghatai  into  friendship.  I  wish
now  to  cement  this  friendship  with  a  family  alliance,  and  therefore
offer  my  daughter,  as  a  wife,  to  the  son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza."
Mihr  Nigdr  Khdnim  remained  in  the  haram  of  Mirzd  Sultan
Ahmad  as  long  as  he  lived.  (I  shall  have  more  to  say  of  the
Ehdnim  in  the  second  part  of  this  work.)

After  the  Khan's  return  to  Moghulistan,  when  Shaikh  Jamal
Khar  had  been  put  to  death,  he  gave  his  daughter,  Eutluk  I^ig4r
EJidnim,  who  was  younger  than  Mihr  Nigar  Khdnim,  in  marriage
to  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz4,  son  of  Sultdn  Abu  Said  Mirz4.  This  was
in  the  year  880.  There  existed  between  the  Eh4n  and  Omar
Shaikh  such  an  affection  as  is  seldom  even  found  between  father
and  son.  Omar  Shaikh  used  to  go  and  spend  a  month,  or  two
months,  at  a  time  in  Moghulistan,  and  sometimes  he  would  bring
back  his  father  with  him  to  Andijan,  and  the  ELhdn  would  be  his
guest  for  a  month  or  more.  About  this  time  Omar  Shaikh  tried
to  induce  the  Eb4n  to  march  on  Samarkand,  and  after  depriving
his  brother  Mirza  Sult4n  Ahmad  (the  eldest  son-in-law  of  Yunus
Kh4n)  of  the  throne,  to  set  him  (Omar  Shaikh)  upon  it,  in  his
brother's  stead.  But  the  Ehan  would  not  hear  of  such  a  measure.
When  Sultan  Ahmad  heard  of  his  brother's  scheme,  he  set  out  to
oppose  him  with  an  army.  But  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza  appealed  to
the  Ehdn  for  succour,  giving  him,  at  the  same  time,  some  of  his  own
territories.  Thus  Sultan  Ahmad  was  hindered  from  making  an
invasion.  This  state  of  affairs  was  constantly  recurring.  It  was,
however,  at  length  agreed  that  the  Kh&n  should  come  every
winter  to  Andij&n,  attended  only  by  his  own  personal  servants ;
leaving  the  TJlua  of  the  Moghul  in  Moghulistan.  Omar  Shaikh
Mirza  was  to  give  to  the  Ehdn  whichever  of  his  territories  the
latter  might  select.  In  the  spring,  the  Eh4n  was  to  return  to
Moghulistan,  and  the  Mirza  again  take  possession  of  his  own
territories.

On  one  occasion,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza,  being  in  great  fear  of  his
brother,  sent  to  Yunus  Ehan  for  support,  while  he  gave  over  to
him  Akhsi.  The  Khdn  took  up  his  winter  quarters  in  Akhsi,
hearing  of  which,  Sult4n  Ahmad  Mirza  abandoned  his  hostile
intentions.  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz4,  though  his  mind  was  set  at  rest
with  regard  to  his  brother,  nevertheless  did  not  like  the  Ehdn's
residing  in  Akhsi.  For  Akhsi  was  the  largest  town  in  Fargh&na,
and  its  capital.  On  this  account  he  rose  in  arms  against  the  Eh&n,
and  fought  a  battle  against  him  at  the  Bridge  of  Tik&  Sagrutku.^

^  This  name  has  been  transliterated  aoouratel j,  as  it  stands  in  the  Persian
text— the  Tarki  texts  are  wanting  here. The  meaning  wonld  be  **the  camel's

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

ttie  Kings  of  Mdvard-nn-Nahr.  97

The  Khan  at  first  remonstratecl  with  the  Mirzu,  but  in  vain ;  and
a  battle  ensued  in  which  the  Mirz4  was  defeated  and  taken
prisoner.  He  was  brought  bound  before  the  Ehdn,  who  rose  up  to
meet  him  and  ordered  his  hands  to  be  set  free.  He  then  made  him
presents  and  sent  him  away,  saying :  "  Betum  home  at  once,  that
your  men  be  thrown  into  confusion.  I  too  will  follow  you  to  your
house."  When  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza  returned  to  Andij4n,  the
Eh4n  allowed  his  TJIim  to  go  back  to  Moghulist&n,  while  he
himself  proceeded  to  Andijdn  with  his  family  \kuf[  and  a  few
followers.  He  remained  in  the  house  of  the  Mirzi  for  two  months,
and  nothing  disturbed  their  friendship.^

On  another  occasion  when  the  Mirz4  called  on  the  Kh4n  for
assistance,  he  gave  him  Marghildn.  While  the  Kh4n  was  in
Marghilin,  his  Holiness,  the  Axis  of  pious  works,  the  Cynosure  of
the  pious,  the  Beloved  of  Ood,  EJiw4ja  N4siruddin  Ubaidullah
(may  God  sanctify  his  spirit)  came  there  in  order  to  bring  about
a  reconciliation  between  the  Ehdn  and  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza,  on  the
one  hand,  and  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirza  on  the  other.  I  have  often
heard  from  trustworthy  narrators,  that  when  his  Holiness  arrived
near  Marghil4n,  all  the  Moghuls  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  town
came  out  to  meet  him  [in  w^tA^biZ],  but  none  of  the  Moghuls
had  the  presumption  to  approach  him  [to  salute  him],  such  was
their  great  regard  [for  this  holy  man].  Men  and  women  halted  at
a  distance  and,  dismounting,  fastened  their  horses  to  the  ground,
while  they  themselves  kept  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  dust  of  the
road.  His  Holiness  then  approached  them.  There  was  one  among
his  retinue  who  recognised  the  Eh4n,  and  he  said  to  his  Holiness,
•*  This  is  Yunus  Khdn."  His  Holiness  immediately  dismounted,
and  having  raised  the  Khan's  head  from  the  ground,  embraced
him.

I  once  heard  from  his  Holiness,  the  Eefuge  of  Piety,  Mauldn4
Muhammad  Kazi  (upon  whom  be  mercy),  who  on  a  certain
occasion  went  to  Marghildn,  the  following :  '*  I  had  heard  that
Tunus  Khdn  was  a  Moghul,  and  I  concluded  that  he  was  a  beardless
man,  with  the  ways  and  manners  of  any  other  Turk  of  the  desert.
But  when  I  saw  him,  I  found  he  was  a  person  of  elegant  deport-
ment,  with a  full  b^ard and  a  Tdjik  face,*  and  such  refined

leap."  Most  likely,  however,  the  name  should  read  Telika  Sagrutku  iustead  of
Tikd,  and  should  mean  '*  the  goat's  leap."  Baber  records  this  battle  as  hanng
taken  place  '*  to  the  north  of  Andij^n,  on  the  banks  of  the  Sihun,  at  a  place
called  Tikcb-SakanUku,  which  derives  its  name  from  this  curcumstancc,  that  the
river,  in  flowing  past  the  skirt  of  a  hill<,  becomes  so  much  contracted  in  breadth,
that  it  is  said  that  on  one  occasion  a  mountain  goat  leaped  from  the  one  biink  to
tlie  other." (Memoirs,  p.  9.)

»  Lit. :  No  vexation  came  between  them. — R.

*  Or  Tajik  **  features."  Tliat  is,  the  Maulana  found  Yunus  to  be  of  an  Aryan,
and  not  of  a  Mongoloid  cast  of  countenance,  a  ciroumstance  that  shows  how  little
of  the  Moghul  was  left,  even  in  the  fifteenth  century,  in  a  Klian  of  Moghuliatan.

n

Digitized  by

Google

98  R7ile  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd.

speecli  and  manner,  as  is  seldom  to  be  found  even  in  a  Tajik."  .  ^i^
short,  when  his  Holiness  had  Keen  the  Khan,  he  addressed  letters
to  all  the  Sultans  round  about,  saying :  ''  I  have  seen  Yunus  Khan
and  the  Moghuls.  The  subjects  of  such  a  pddishdh  are  not  to  be
carried  off  oaptives.  They  are  people  of  Islam."  Fit)m  this  time
forth,  no  more  Moghuls  were  bought  or  sold  as  slaves  in  Mavar4-un-
Nahr  and  Khorasan — for  before  this,  the  Mc^huls  had  been
purchased  as  other  K4firs  are  purchased.

CHAPTER  XLTX.

RULE  OF  MUHAMMAD  HAIDAR  MIRZA IN kIsHGHAR.

Ai^TER  the  death  of  Saniz  Mirza,  son  of  Amir  Sayyid  AH,  the
government  of  Edshghar  was  given  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,
son  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  (as  was  related  above).  When  he  had
become  firmly  established  in  that  place.  Dust  Muhammad  Kh4n
died.

Yunus  Ehan,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  Moghul  Ulus,  gave  up  all
intention  of  inhabiting  cities  and  cultivated  lands.  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirza,  in  Kashghar,  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  the
Kh4n,  who  in  return  treated  him  in  a  fatherly  way.  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirza  reigned  in  peace  and  prosperity  for  twenty-four  years
in  all :  that  is  from  the  year  869  to  885  (or  sixteen  years)  he  had
absolute  authority;  and  for  the  remainder,  partial  authority
only.^

The  family  of  Yunus,  as  we  have  seen,  had  for  some  generations  past,  inter-
married in  several  directions.  His  origin,  therefore,  combined  with  Siis  Pereian
training,  would  account  for  his  appearance  being  unlike  that  of  ordinary
Moghuls.

The  word  Turk,  in  this  passage,  taken  in  connection  with  Moghtdj  is  obviously
used  in  a  general,  sociological,  sense,  and  is  intended  more  as  a  distinction  to
Tdjik  than  ns  a  race-name.  But  this  subiect  has  been  treated  of  already  in
Sec.  iv.  of  the  Introduction,  and  need  not  be  further  discussed  here.  It  may
bo  remarked,  however,  that  the  word  Tdjik,  though  in  this  instance  employed  in
its  racial  sense — ior  the  speaker  is  pointing  to  the  Khan*s  Aryan  features —
meant  also,  in  many  cases,  merely  a  **  foreigner,"  and  more  especially  a  "  western
foreigner."  It  was  in  tliis  sense  that  the  word  was  used  at  p.  14,  above,  in  the
story  of  the  wrestling  match  between  the  priest  and  the  Moghul.  Some  remarks
on  this  subject  also,  will  be  found  in  Sec.  iv.  of  the  Introduction.

*  Thus  the  remainder  would  bo  the  eight  years  from  861  to  869.  Erskino
makes  these  periods  "six  years  with  imperfect,  and  eighteen  years  with  full,
authority."  But  the  MSS.  used  for  this  translation  read  as  in  the  text  above.
(Erskine's  Hist,  i.,  p.  539).

Digitized  by

Google

Beginning  of  Reign  of  Abd  Bakr,  99

CHAPTER  L.

BEGINNING  OF THE REIGN  OF ABA BAKR  MIRZA.

On  the  death  of  S&niz  Mirz4,  Dust  Muhammad  Eh&n  went  to
Yarkand,  and  took  the  widow  of  Saniz  Mirz4  to  wife.  He  then
proceeded  to  Aksu,  taking  with  him  Aba  Bakr  Mirza,  the  eldest  son
of  S4niz  Mirza.  Not  long  after  this,  he  gave  his  sister  Husn  Nigar
Khanim,  in  marriage  to  the  young  Mirza.  But  Abd  Bakr,  fearing
the  unsoundness  of  Dust  Mubammad  Khan's  mind,  fled  to  his  uncle
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4 ;  and  Dust  Muhammad  Khan  sent  Husn
Nigdr  Ehdnim  after  bim  to  Kdsbghar  (all  of  which  I  have  already
related).

Dust  Muhammad  was  a  very  brave  and  generous  man,  and  of  so
great  a  belght,  that  if  he  stood  on  foot  in  the  midst  of  a  bundred
people,  any  one  seeing  bim  would  bave  said  he  was  on  borseback.
But  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd  having  inherited  bis  power,  did  not
know  the  value  and  importance  of  an  army.  The  distinguished
generals  and  captains  whicb  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  bad  collected  round
bis  person  during  a  life  of  eighty  years,  were  in  the  time  of
Mubammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  for  the  most  part  dead,  and  tbose  wbo
yet  remained  alive,  were  worn  with  age;  wbile  their  sons  and
grandsons  bad  no  relations  witb  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza.  AH
tbe  young  men  and  the  princes  [mirzdzddah]  were  in  favour  of
Mirzd  Aba  Bakr.  It  would  be  a  long  story,  to  recount  all  the  details
concerning  tbose  wbo  were  parties  to  these  intrigues ;  moreover,
tbougb  it  is  only  twenty  years  ago,^  not  one  of  them  is  alive  now,
and  the  various  and  conflicting  reports  which  were  at  tbat  time
spread  about,  are  now  entirely  forgotten.  It  is,  however,  certain
that  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  fled  from  Mubammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  and
presented  bimself  before  the  Governor  of  Ydrkand.  Showing  bim
a  forged  order,  be,  by  cunning  and  deceit,  made  himself  master  of
Ydrkand.  He  tben  sent  certain  persons  to  bis  uncle  Mubammad
Haidar  Mirzd,  oflering  complete  submission  to  him,  wbich  tbe
Kbdn  accepted,  and  sent  him,  for  bis  own  service,  3000  young
princes  from  Edsbgbar.  His  brother,  Omar  Mirzd,  wbo  was  in
Edsbghar  at  the  time,  now  came  to  join  bim  in  tbe  government  of
Ydrkand.  They  united  tbeir  efforts  in  an  attempt  to  subdue
Ebotan,  Having  mentioned  this  town  here,  I  think  it  necessary
to  say  something  about  Ebotan  and  its  governors.

*  It  was,  in  fact,  much  moro  than  20  years— rather  about  60  or  70  years.

H  2

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

lOO  The  Mirzds  of  Khotan.

CHAPTER  LI.

ACCOUNT OF  THE  MIRZAS  OP KHOTAN.

Khotan  is  one  of  the  most  famous  towns  in  the  East.  In  the
Second  Part,  I  have  given  all  that  I  have  been  able  to  learn  from
histories,  and  other  books,  concerning  Eiiotan.  When  the  Amirship
{Imarail  of  the  Dnghlats  descended  to  Amir  Ehnddiddd  (npon
whom  be  mercy),  he  divided  all  the  dependencies  of  the  Dughldts
among  his  children  and  his  brothers.  Thus  to  his  youngest  son,
Sayyid  Ahmad  Mirza,  he  entrusted  Eashghar  and  Yarkand.  Amir
Khuddidad  had  two  maternal  brothers  {umm-wdad^  Ilyas  Shah
and  Khizir  Shdh  by  name.  To  the  former  he  gave  Aksu,  and  to
the  latter  Khotan,  making  them  both  subordinate  to  Sayyid  Ahmad
Mirzd,  to  whom  he  granted  the  power  of  their  dismissal  or  appoint-
ment. These  two,  like  all  his  other  officers,  used  to  come  and  wait
on  the  Mirza  yearly,  and  then,  when  they  were  granted  leave,  they
returned  to  their  respective  provinces.  This  practice  was  observed
until  the  time  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali.

When  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  gave  Aksu  to  Is4n  Bugha  Ehdn,  there
was,  in  the  service  of  the  latter,  one  of  the  grandsons  of  11yds  Shah
Mirza,  who  was  also  named  Ilyas  Shdh,  and  who,  till  the  time  of
Dust  Muhammad  Ehdn,  had  the  command  of  the  fortress  of  Aksu.
But  after  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  there  were  in  Ehotan  two  brothers,
descendants  of  Ehizir  Shdh  Mirztl ;  the  name  of  one  was  Ehdn
Nazar  Mirza,  and  of  the  other  Eul  Nazar  Mirzd.  The  former
reckoned  himself  equal  in  strength  and  power  of  the  arm,  to  Mirzd
Aba  Bakr,  nay  even  to  Amir  Sayyid  Ali.  He  showed  a  spirit  of
independence,  and  threw  off  the  old  allegiance  to  Edshghar.  Mirzd
Aba  Bakr  begged  permission  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd  to  go  and
conquer  Ehotan,  on  the  ground  that  Ehdn  Nazar  and  Eul  Nazar
had  sought  to  deviate  from  that  high-road  of  obedience,  which  was
one  of  the  conditions  of  their  inheritance.  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirzd,  being  himself  displeased  with  these  two  [governors]  granted
the  demand,  and  encouraged  him  [in  the  undertaking].  Thus
Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  acted  freely  in  the  matter  of  Ehotan.

Ehdn  Nazar  Mirzd  had  made  himself  an  iron  club,  which  no  one
but  he  could  lift  with  two  hands ;  he,  however,  could  wield  it  with
one  hand,  and  whatever  he  struck  with  it,  were  it  a  horse  or  a  cow,
inevitably  fell.  But  his  younger  brother,  Eul  Nazar  Mirzd,  was
a  young  man  of  great  modesty.  These  two  brothers  aimed  at
becoming  kings.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Capture  of  K ho  tan  by  Aba  Bakr,  lOl

CHAPTEB  LII.

CAITURE  OF  KUOTAN  BY  MIRZi  AbA  BAKB  AND  THE  EXTIRPATION  OF
THE  MIRZAS  OF KHOTAN.

In  thoBo  days,  when  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  was  intent  on  the  conquest  of
Khotan,  ho  had  with  him  Omar  Mirza.  His  elder  brother  did  not
approve  of  his  proceedings,  and  wished  to  join  issue  with  him.
Upon  Mirza  Abd  Bakr  ascertaining  this,  he  contrived  to  lay  hands
on  him,  and  having  blinded  him,  sent  him  to  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirza.  After  the  destruction  [yirant]  of  Kashghar,  Omar  Mirza
went  to  Samarkand,  where  he  was  treated  with  kindness,  till,  in
the  year  921,  he  returned  to  Kashghar.  Here  he  died,  and  was
buried  in  the  mausoleum  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali.

In  short,  Abd  Bakr  being  released  from  the  molestations  of  his
brother,  continued  his  march  upon  Khotan.  On  the  first  occasion
he  made  peace ;  on  the  second,  matters  were  again  concluded  with
a  treaty.  The  two  governors  mounted,  and  having  met  and  con-
ferred together,  they  arranged  the  conditions  of  the  peace,  and  took
a  solemn  oath  upon  the  Word  of  God,  in  confirmation  of  the  agree-
ment. Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  having  given  the  bond  to  his  own  servants,
handed  the  Kordn  [the  Kaldm  Ullahy  to  one  of  bis  nobles,  telling
him  to  take  it  to  Khan  Nazar  Mirzd.  When  Khdn  Nazar  Mirza
stretched  out  his  hand  to  take  the  '*  Kaldm  Ullah,"  the  noble  seized
his  hand  with  both  his  own,  while  others  attacked  him  from  every
side  with  swords :  for  the  followers  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  having
previously  agreed  upon  this,  had  been  standing  ready.  He  was
taken  quite  by  surprise.  None  of  the  retainers  of  Khan  Nazar
Mirzd  being  able  to  use  their  arms  [to  help  him],  they  fled,  while
some  others  who  had  been  appointed  for  the  business,  seized  Kul
Nazar  Mirzd.  The  two  brothers  were  put  to  death  with  the  sword,
and  by  this  ruse  their  seed  was  eradicated  from  Khotan ;  thus  did
Abd  Bakr  conquer  Khotan  and  gain  absolute  power.  Having
finished  this  affair,  Abd  Bakr  started  on  an  expedition  against  his
uncle,  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd.

>  That  is,  he  handed  the  copy  of  the  Koiin  containing  the  treaty :  for  treaties
and  Bolemn  engagements  are  nsoally  written  and  sealed,  by  Musulmdns,  in  copies
of  the  Kordn.

Digitized  by

Google

102  Stratagem  of  Abd  Bakr.

CHAPTEE  LIII.

TUl!.  STilATAQEM  OF  ABA  BAKR,  BT  WHICH  HE  CAUSED  MUHAMMAD  HAIDAR
MIRZA  TO  EXPEL  HIS  OWN AMIRS.

After  the  death  of  Saniz  Mirzd,  Dust  Muhammad  Khan  (as  has
been  mentioned)  took  to  wife  the  widow  of  Saniz  Mirza,  whose
name  was  Jamak  Aghd.  He,  moreover,  gave  Kashghar  to  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirzd. These  events  took  place  in  the  year  869.

On  the  death  of  Dust  Muhammad  Ehdn,  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirza  married  Jamak  Agh4,  who  was  the  mother  of  Mirza  Aba
Bakr  and  of  Omar  Mirza.  By  her,  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4  had
two  sons :  my  father  Muhammad  Husain  Kurkan,  and  my  uncle
Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza.  After  the  conquest  of  Khotan,  Mirz4
Ab4  Bakr  became  still  more  powerful.  In  vain  were  the  reflections
and  protestations  of  his  Amirs,  who  represented  that  his  whole
career,  from  beginning  to  end,  had  been  one  of  tyranny :  that
he  spared  no  one :  that  he  had'  seized  Tarkand  by  stealth  and
by  the  employment  of  unheard-of  perfidy :  that  after  he  had  put
out  the  eyes  of  Omar  Mirzd,  he  had  put  to  death  Kh4n  Nazar  and
Kul  Nazar.  How  could  the  world  look  with  the  eye  of  trust  upon
such  a  man  ?  He  still  longed  for  E&shghar,  and  his  sole  object  in
life  was  to  make  his  kingdom  into  a  sausage  [ikuZma^].^  In  spite
of  their  laying  these  matters  before  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  the
latter,  on  account  of  his  affection  for  his  nephew,  made  light  of  it
all;  and  his  wife,  who  was  the  mother  of  his  children,  and  the
mother  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  said  to  him,  in  opposing  the  remon-
strances of  the  Amirs :  "  He  is  your  son  :  Yarkand  belonged  to  one
of  your  Amirs.  Since  Tdrkand  was  the  capital  of  his  fisbther,  it  is
his  by  right,  but  you  did  not  give  it  him.  If  he  has  been  pre-
sumptuous, he  at  least  counted  on  your  forgiveness.  What  matter
if  they  make  him  out  a  bad  man  to  you  ?  Khotan,  too,  was  in  the
possession  of  another.  What  harm  was  there  in  his  superseding
[the  usurper]  ?  "

In  this  manner  she  excused  all  the  actions  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  ;
80  that  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  was  appeased  and  comforted  ;  but
when  she  touched  on  the  hostility  which  Aba  Bakr  had  displayed
towards  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  she  declared  that  it  was  all
owing  to  the  Amirs  who  had  spoken  badly  of  the  Mirzd.  She
then  secretly  wrote  to  Mirza  Abd  Bakr,  asking  him  how  she  was
to  excuse  his  hostility  [to  her  husband],  and  stating  the  reason  she
had  already  given. Then  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr,  in  conformity  with

>  Meaning,  apparently,  to  stutf  it  fuller  and  fuller.

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

Defeat  of  Yumis  and  Muhammad  Haidar.  103

this,  replied  :  '*  As  long  as  the  Amirs  are  in  power,  I  cannot  offer
fitting  service, ,  for  they  seek  to  do  mo  harm  by  vilif3ring  my
character  to  yon :  if  you  will  dismiss  these  Amirs,  I  will  be  not
only  a  son  to  you,  but  a  slave  also."  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,
in  the  simplicity  of  his  heart,  credited  these  lies  and  discharged
his  Amirs.  Since  the  most  influential  of  the  generals  were  thus
removed,  the  power  of  his  kingdom  was  broken ;  and  Mirza  Aba
Bakr  began  to  ravage  all  the  country  round  about  Kashghar  and
Yangi  Hisar ;  but  as  all  the  greatest  generals  had  been  dismissed,
there  was  no  one  to  watch  over  and  protect  the  country.

CHAPTEE  LIT.

YUMUS KHAN GOES  TO  HELP  MUHAMMAD HAIDAR  MIRZA AGAINST
MIBZi ABJL  bakr, WHO  DEFEATS  THEM BOTH.

Amir  Abdul  Kudus,  who  was  mentioned  above  as  having  slain
Shaikh  Jam41  Khar  and  released  the  Khan  frpm  prison,  was
treated  with  great  kindness  by  the  Khan,  and  had  been  given  the
title  of  Kurkani;  all  the  privileges  [mansali]  of  the  clan  [2\tm(in]
of  Dughldt  had  been  bestowed  upon  him.  In  consequence  of  this
he  grew  proud  and  presumptuous,  and  treated  the  Kh4n  in  such  a
way  as  to  make  him  frightened  at  his  own  acts ;  but  it  would  take
too  long  to  explain  all  this.  Abdul  Kudus,  however,  finally  fled
to  Kashghar,  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  who  had  just  dismissed
his  generals,  on  which  account  his  affairs  had  fallen  into  confusion,
and  he  was  repenting  his  deed.  When  Abdul  Kudus  arrived,  he
treated  him  with  every  respect,  gave  him  his  own  daughter  Agha
Sultan  Sultdnim  in  marriage,  showed  him  marked  favour,  and
having  raised  an  army,  sent  him  against  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.  He  fell
upon  the  Mirza,  who  was  on  a  plundering  foray  in  Yangi  Hisar.
Mir  Abdul  Kudus  was,  however,  defeated,  in  spite  of  his  force  being
greater  than  that  of  his  enemy.  He  was  so  ashamed  of  himself  that
he  did  not  go  back  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  but  moved  first  to
Shahndz,  and  then  set  out  on  the  road  to  Badakhshan.  He  went
with  300  men  to  Mirza  Sultan  Mahmud,  who  showed  him  every
kindness  and  attention,  and  bestowed  on  him  the  government  of
Khust,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  districts  in  Badakhshdn
and  Kunduz.  He  was  [afterwards]  slain  in  that  country  by  some
infidels  of  Katur.^

>  Khiiflt,  or  KhoBi,  is  a  district  on  the  northern  alopea  of  the  Hindu  Knsh,
between  south  and  south-east  of  Kunduz,  and  lies  very  near  the  hiU  tracts  known
in  our  times  as  K^firist^,  or  the  ooontry  of  the  Siaposh  and  other  Kafirs. Sir

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

104  Defeat  of  Ytimis  and  Muhammad  Haidar.

In  shorfc,  after  the  departure  of  Mir  Abdul  Kudus,  the  power  of
Mirz4  Aba  Bakr  increased.  With  his  deceit  and  cunning,  he  had
caused  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  to  send  away  his  greatest  generals
and  commanders,  and  he  had  defeated  Mir  Abdul  Kudus ;  so  that
dark  days  had  come  upon  the  transactions  of  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirz4.  Jam4k  Agha  repented  of  what  she  had  done,  but  it  was  of
no  avail.  Finally  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  inade  ready  an  army
of  nearly  30,000  cavalry  and  infantry,  and  took  the  field  against
Mirzi  Aba  Bakr,  who  opposed  him  with  3000  men.  A  fierce  battle
was  fought,  and  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  suffered  defeat.  Having
come  to  Kdshghar,  he  told  his  noble  uncle  Yunus  Khan  all  that  had
happened,  and  begged  his  assistance.  The  Khan  selected  50,000
men  from  his  own  army,  and  out  of  the  aflfection  he  bore  his
nephew,  marched  in  person  against  Aba  Bakr.  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirza  having  again  collected  an  army,  joined  the  Khan,  and  thoy
all  proceeded  together  against  Yarkand.  Mirz4  Aba  Bakr  fortified
the  citadel  of  Ydrkand.  The  Khan  halted  on  the  eastern  side  of  the
citadel.  On  the  next  day  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  drew  out  his  cavalry
and  infantry  from  the  citadel  into  the  suburbs:  they  were  3000
in  number,  all  the  sons  of  the  generals  and  chiefs  [miTzSidak  and
heMdurzddaK]  of  Mir  Sayyid  Ali,  whom  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza
had  slighted.  But  Mirzd  Aha  Bakr  had  collected  them  in  a  body.
The  Kh4n  arrived  from  one  side  with  a  large  army  and  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirza  from  another.  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  did  not  direct  his
force  to  any  extent  against  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  but  brought
all  his  strength  to  bear  upon  the  Kban,  and  after  many  attacks
and  retreats,  finally  put  him  to  flight.  When  the  Khan  fled,
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  also  took  flight,  and  thus  this  great
army  was  defeated.

When  the  Khan  and  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  arrived  at
Kashghar,  the  Khan  said  to  the  latter :  "  Thinking  it  would  be
an  easy  matter,  I  only  brought  a  small  force.  Stop  in  your  own
country  this  year ;  next  year  I  will  come  with  a  complete  army

H.  Yule  quotes  several  authorities  who  show  that  among  the  Kafir  tribes  which
inhabited  this  region,  between  the  thirteenth  and  the  present  centuries^  was  one
called  Kaiur^  or  Kitaur.  Baber,  in  his  Memoirs,  also  sp^Jos  of  a  division  of
Kaflristan,  to  the  north-east  of  Kabul,  called  Kattor ; -while  Col.  J.  Biddnlph
tells  us  that  the  family  name  of  the  rulers  of  Chitral  is  Kature,  and  he  adds  that
"  the  name  of  Kator  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  the  country  in  early  times,
before  the  present  Kature  family  was  founded."  The  name  Shah  Katur  occurs
more  than  once  in  the  line  of  Ghitral  rulers.  Thus  the  Katur  of  the  text  would
point  to  Kaflristan  and  probably  also  to  Ghitral,  for  it  is  quite  possible  that,
though  divided  now,  the  two  states  may  have  been  one  in  the  fifteenth  century.
According  to  Ritter,  the  Kafirs  were  a  people  much  feared  by  the  Musulmins  of
BadakhsMn  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and  used  to  exact  tribute
from  them.  There  is  nothing  improbable,  therefore,  in  the  story  of  the  Kafirs
raiding  into  the  neighbouring  district  of  Khust  and  killing  the  Musulmdn
governor.  (See  Yule,  Cathay,  p.  564 ;  Biddulph,  Tribes  of  the  Hindu  Kwhy  p.  148  ;
Baber,  p.  140 ;  Ritter,  Erdkuixde,  vii.,  pp.  206-7).

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Yunus Second  Expedition  against  Ydrkand. 105

and  will  settle  [Aba  Bakr's]  aflfairs."  The  Khan  then  returned
to  Moghnlistan,  while  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  remained  in
Kdshghar.

CHAPTER  LV.

YUKUS  khan's  second  EXPEDITION  AOAINSF  YARKAND,  AND  HIS  DEFEAT
AT  THE  HANDS  OF  MIRZl  ABA  BAKR.

In  the  following  year,  885,  the  Khan  came  to  Eashghar  with  the
whole  of  the  Moghul  troops,  who  numbered  60,000  men.  Here
he  was  joined  by  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  who  had  a  better
ordered  army  than  he  had  had  the  year  before,  and  they  advanced
together  on  Tarkand.  The  two  forces  together  amounted  to  90,000
men,  cavalry  and  infantry.  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr  again  fortified  him-
self in  the  citadel,  as  he  had  done  the  year  before.  He  had
mustered  an  army  of  cavalry  and  infantry  to  the  number  of  about
5000.  The  cavalry  consisted  of  3000  of  those  princes  of  whom  I
have  spoken — chosen  young  men,  whom  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4,
in  his  ignorance,  had  let  slip  out  of  his  power.  The  2000  infantry
were  chosen  archers,  all  of  whom  the  Mirza  had  brought  together
by  promises  and  hopes  [of  gain].  The  Khan*s  army  encamped  in  a
circle  round  [the  town].^  The  Kh4n  himself  took  up  his  quartera
in  Kalu  Aj  Bari,  a  well-known  place  to  the  north-east  of  Yarkand.
After  the  afternoon  prayer,  distinguished  men  from  the  battalions
and  divisions  [huhun  u  tdhin]  of  the  Khan's  army  advanced,  of
their  own  accord,  before  the  citadel  and  opened  the  battle.  Mirza
Aba  Bakr*s  force  issued  from  the  citadel  in  the  following  order :
between  every  two  horsemen  there  was  an  archer  on  foot,  and  in
front  of  each  archer  there  was  another  foot-soldier  bearing  a  shield.
A  hard  fight  took  place;  but  the  Kh4n  remained  in  his  own  quarters.
Some  persons  came  and  gave  him  such  a  vivid  description  of  the
battle  that  he  longed  to  go  and  see  it  himself.  So,  without  putting
on  his  armour,  he  started  for  the  scene  of  action  with  a  small
number  of  followers.  On  reaching  the  edge  of  a  ravine  they  saw
that  the  infantry  of  both  sides  were  engaged  in  close  fight.  From
this  position  they  could  not  see  very  distinctly,  so  the  Kh4n
descended  into  the  ravine,  and  came  on  to  the  road  in  order  to  get
a  better  view — for  the  ravine  was  a  road-way.  When  the  Khan
came  down,  the  infantry  became  more  daring,  and  fought  most
fiercely. At  that  moment  Alim  Shaikh  Bah4dur,  who  was  one  of

'  Lit. :  the  army  formed  a  riog  and  encamped.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

106 Yuntis'  Second  Expedition  against  Ydrkand,

the  Khan's  most  distinguished  warriors,  was  in  his  tent ;  he  heard
that  the  Khan  had  gone  to  watoh  [the  battle],  and  it  occurred  to
him  that  he  would  go  and  display  his  valour,  that  ho  might
become  distinguished  above  his  equals.  Having  fastened  on  his
armour,  he  passed  before  the  Kh4n,  and  then  went  in  among  the
infantry  who  were  engaged  in  the  battle.

There  was  some  ground  between  the  infantry  of  the  two  armies,
and  on  either  side  was  an  enclosure  for  herding  cattle  [cjavbandi] ;
between  these  two  enclosures  was  a  level  passage.  Alim  Shaikh
Bah4dur  rode  up  this  passage  and  charged  the  infantry  of  Mirza
Aba  Bakr,  until  he  came  upon  a  foot-soldier  with  a  shield,  who,
seeing  him  come  on  unchecked,  did  not  attempt  to  withstand  him,
but  having  thrown  down  his  shield  in  front  of  the  horse  of  Alim
Shaikh  Bah4dur,  ran  away.  The  horse,  being  terri6ed  at  the  fall
of  the  shield,  reared  so  badly  that  Alim  Shaikh  Bahddur,  not  able
to  keep  his  seat,  was  thrown.  The  infantry  who  were  on  the
other  side  of  the  enclosure,  now  jumped  over  it  and  seized  Alim
Shaikh  Bahadur.  Meantime,  the  cavalry  of  Mirza  Abd  Bakr
charged  the  EJidn's  infantry,  but  these,  not  deeming  it  advisable
to  stand  their  ground,  turned  and  fled,  being  followed  by  those
who  had  come  to  watch  the  battle.

The  Kh4n  had  descended  from  the  [edge  of  the]  ravine,  but  those
who  were  with  him  now  counselled  him  to  re-ascend.  The  Khan
set  out  in  all  haste  along  the  road  in  the  ravine,  but  when  his  men,
who  were  on  the  top,  saw  him  approaching  in  haste,  they  fled  [in  a
panic].  So  that  when  the  Khan  emerged  from  the  ravine,  he  found
all  his  men  had  taken  flight,  and  that  his  army  was  in  confusion.
He  thereupon  returned  to  his  camp  in  order  to  reassure  his  men ;
he  tried  beating  and  striking  them,  but  not  one  of  them  would
move  from  his  place.  In  the  meanwhile  Mirza  Ab&  Bakr  engaged
the  infantry,  who  had  oome  down  by  way  of  the  ravine ;  he  attacked
with  his  cavalry  those  who  had  been  watching  the  battle,  charging
up  the  ravine  unresisted,  then  pursuing  [the  fugitives]  until  his
cavalry  threw  them  into  confusion.  When  the  Khan's  army —
already  disordered — saw  this  state  of  affaira,  they  suddenly  turned
and  fled :  all  the  Khan's  efforts  to  rally  them  wore  ineffectual.
When  the  cavalry  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  came  on,  the  Khan  himself
took  to  flight.  Thus  was  this  enormous  army  defeated  in  the
space  of  one  hour.

The  Kh4n  retreated  to  Kashghar,  while  most  of  the  army  deserted
him  and  escaped  to  Moghulistdn.  [The  Khan]  advised  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirza  not  to  remain  in  Kdejighar,  so  the  Mirzd  accompanied
the  Khdn  to  Aksu,  taking  with  him  5000  families.  Many  of  the
Kashghari  went  to  Andijan,  so  that  Kashghar  was  left  clear  for
Mirzd  Aba  Bakr.  These  events  occurred  in  the  year  885.  At  that
time  my  father,  Muhammad  Husain  Mirza  Kurkan,  was  twelve

Digitized  by  VjL^UV  IC

Early  Days  of  Sultan  Mahntud.  \oj

years  of  age.  When  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  went  to  Aksu  with
Yunus  Khan,  the  son  of  the  latter,  Saltan  Mahmud  Khan,  took
my  father  with  him  into  Moghnlistan,  where  they  became  great
friends ;  and  to  the  end  of  his  life  he  called  my  father  *'  D&sh^
which  in  the  Moghul  language  means  **  friend."

CHAPTEE  LVI.

EARLY DAYS  OF  SULTIn  MAHMUD  KHAN, SOX  OF  YUNUS  KHIn.

As  an  account  will  be  given  of  Sult&n  Mahmud  Khdn,  it  is  neces-
sary to  say  a  few  words  about  his  early  life.

When  Sultan  Yunus  Khan  returned  a  second  time  from  Kho-
rds&n,  Amir  Sayyid  AH  had  died,  and  Saniz  Mirzd  had  sought
the  assistance  of  Yunus  Khdn,  as  has  been  mentioned.  Yunus
EJian,  in  those  days,  often  went  backwards  and  forwards  to
Kdshghar.  At  that  time,  the  Kh4n  sent  Amir  Zid-ud-Din  (who
was  one  of  the  most  eminent  Sayyids  of  Kdshghar)  to  Shah  Sultan
Muhammad  Badakhshi,  in  Badakhshan,  to  ask  one  of  his  most
immaculate  daughters  in  marriage.  Sb&h  Sult4n  Badakhshi  was
of  the  race  of  Sikandar  Zulkarnain,  Filikus  BumL^  Sikandar,
after  he  had  conquered  the  regions  of  the  world,  consulted  with
his  wise  men,  saying :  "  Find  me  a  place  which  shall  be  out
of  the  reach  of  the  princes  of  the  earth  [Sultans  of  the  time],  in
which  I  may  place  my  descendants."  The  councillors  chose
Badakhshan,  and  they  wrote  a  Book  of  Regulations  \J)a»iuT
vX  a7?iaZ];  so  that  as  long  as  the  regulations  were  observed,  no
one  prince  could  prevail  in  this  country.

From  the  time  of  Sikandar  down  to  the  time  of  Shah  Sultan
Muhammad,  nobody  had  attacked  Badakhshan.  Thus  they  had
ruled  from  generation  to  generation.  When  the  kingdom  passed
into  the  hands  of  Sh4h  Sultan  Muhammad  Badakhshi,  he  dis-
carded the  '*  Dastur  ul  amal "  of  Sikandar.^  He  was  a  prince  of
great  natural  gifts  and  refined  taste,  and  he  left  a  '^  Divdn"  which
is  exceedingly  beautiful.  His  "  takhallus^**  or  poetical  name,  was
Lali.  His  elegance  and  clearness  of  style  were  so  great  that  he
altered  [the  wording  of]  the  '*  Daatur  ul  amal "  to  suit  his  own  taste.

^  Alexander  the  Great  and  Philip  of  Maoedon.  Fdihu  appears  to  be  the
usual  Oriental  cormption  of  Philip.

'  The  fanciful  nature  of  this  account  of  Badakhshan  need  hardly  be  pointed
ont.  It  is  based,  probably,  on  the  claim  made  by  the  princes  of  Badakhshi  to
be  descended  from  Alexander  the  Great,  rather  than  on  any  history  of  the
country  knovn  to  Mirza  Haidar.

Digitized  by

Google

io8  Early  Days  of  Sultan  Mahmtid,

He  had  six  daughters.  He  gave  one  of  them  to  Sultan  Masud
Kabuli,  who  was  a  descendant  of  Amir  Timur.  Another  he  gave
to  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza,  who  had,  by  her,  a  son  named  Mirza
Aba  Bakr.  The  Mirza,  after  the  death  of  his  father,  engaged  in
war  with  Sultdn  Husain  Mirza,  and  caused  much  disturbance  in
his  kingdom  (all  of  which  is  related  in  the  Histories  of  Mir
Khwand  and  of  Khwand  Mir,  of  Herat).  A  third  daughter  he
gave  to  IbrAhim  Barlas,  who,  by  her,  had  Jah&ngir  Barlas,  who  at
the  end  of  the  Chaghatai  mle  \dLaulai\  became  chief  minister.
His  fourth  daughter,  whose  name  was  Shah  Begum,  he  sent  to
Yunus  Khan,  at  the  request  of  Sayyid  Zi4-ud-Din  Kashghari.  He
gave  his  fifth  daughter  to  Sayyid  Shah  Buzurg  Arhangi  (who
will  be  mentioned  below) ;  and  the  sixth  to  Shaikh  Abdullah
Barlas,  who,  by  her,  had  Sultan  Vais  BarlAs,  Mizrab  Barlas,
and  Sultdn  Sanjar  (all  of  whom  will  be  spoken  of  in  their  proper
places);  they  are  moreover  mentioned  in  the  Histories  of  Mir
Khwdnd  and  Khwand  Mir,  of  Herat.^

In  short,  Sayyid  Zia-ud-Din  brought  Shah  Begum  back  with  him
to  Eashghar,  and  delivered  her  over  to  the  Khan.  Yunus  Khan
had  two  sons  and  two  daughters  by  Shdh  Begum.  The  eldest  of
all  was  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan.  He  was  bom  in  868.  Next  to  him
came  Sultdn  Ahmad  Khdn  (whom  I  shall  mention  separately).
The  two  daughters  were  Sultan  Nigar  Khanim  and  Daulat  Sultdn
Kh4nim  (of  these  also  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  hereinafter).
Before  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan  arrived  at  years  of  discretion,  the
Amirs  of  Mogbulistan  (as  I  have  recorded)  had  behaved  rudely
and  disrespectfuUy  to  Yunus  Khan.  By  the  time  Sultan  Mahmud
Khan  was  grown  up,  most  of  these  Moghul  Amirs  were  dead.
Yunus  Khan,  with  the  help  of  his  son  Sult4n  Mahmud  Khan,
obtained  complete  ascendency  and  control  over  the  Moghuls,  and
over  those  of  their  Amirs  who  were  still  alive.

On  the  occasion  of  Yunus  IQian  being  defeated  before  Ydrkand
and  retiring  to  Kashghar,  he  was  not  accoompanied  by  Sultan
Mahmud  Kh4n ;  for  Mahmud  remained  behind  in  Moghulistan,  to
keep  the  people  in  order.

Yunus  Kh4n,  both  to  quiet  the  apprehensions  of  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirza,  and  for  his  own  pleasure,  spent  that  winter  in
Aksu.'  They  sent  the  son  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4,  Muham-
mad Husain  Mirza,  who  was  then  twelve  years  of  age,  to  Sultan
Mahmud  Khdn,  with  whom  he  became  very  friendly  ;  the  two
remained  on  good  terms,  and  used  to  call  each  other  '^DdsA"
[friend].  Muhammad  Husain  Mirza  stayed  in  Moghulistan  with
Sult4n  Mahmud  Khdn,  and  was  treated  with  great  honour  and
respect.

'  Most  of  the  names  mentioned  in  this  paragraph  will  be  found  in  the  table  of
the  house  of  Timor  appended  to  Beet.  ii.  of  the  Introduction.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

War  between  Yuntis  and  Muhammad  Haidar. 109

CHAPTER  LVII.

THE  WAR  THAT AROSE  OUT  OF A  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN TUNUS  KHaN
AND  MUHAMMAD  HAIDAR  MIBZA  IN  AK8U.

That  winter  the  Rh&n  went  to  Aksu.  Aksu  is  situated  on  the
edge  of  a  ravine.  It  has  two  forts,  one  of  which  the  Khan  gave
to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  while  he  established  himself  in  the
other.  That  winter  passed  peacefully.  On  the  setting  in  of
spring,  Yunus  Khan  wished  to  move  into  Moghulistan.  He
therefore  said  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd  :  **  Now  that  the  first
spring  has  come  I  am  going  into  Moghulistan.  You  stay  here
and  make  your  men  cultivate  the  land.  I  bestow  the  country  of
Aksu  on  you.  When  harvest^time  comes  round,  it  will  also  be  the
end  of  the  season  for  summer  quarters  in  Moghulistan.  The
horses  will  be  in  good  condition,  and  we  will  then  go  to  Edshghar
and  settle  scores  with  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr.  I  shall  march  from
Moghulistan  and  you  from  here.  We  will  meet  in  Kashghar,  and
there  make  all  final  arrangements."

Having  agreed  upon  this  plan  of  action,  the  Eh&n  appointed;
people  to  go  to  Moghulistan  with  the  flocks.  He  [also]  sent  to
collect  the  flocks  destined  for  Moghulist&n.  But  some  rebellious
men  tried  to  instil  into  the  mind  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  that
when  the  EJian  arrived  in  Moghulistdn  he  would  plunder  the
Mirza's  people ;  and  many  like  impossibilities  did  they  suggest,
such  as  could  only  proceed  from  Satan;  but  the  Mii^,  in  his
simplicity,  gave  ear  to  all  they  said,  and  began  to  consider  how
he  might  avert  these  evils.  Those  devils  [Shidtin]  said  to  him  :
"  When  the  flocks  reach  the  Khan,  and  he  is  able  to  make  a
start,  we  will  influence  his  younger  son,  Ahmad  Ehan,  who  is
accompanying  his  father,  to  separate  himself  from  him.  We  will
then  fortify  ourselves  in  this  citadel  and  defy  the  Ehan.  When
the  hour  of  the  Ehan's  departure  comes  he  will  suspect  nothing,
and  will  march  into  Moghulistan,  while  we  shall  remain  esta-
blished in  Aksa."

This  base  and  senseless  plan  was  acceptable  in  the  sight  of
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza.  Just  as  the  Ehan  was  about  to  start,
they  suddenly  closed  the  gates  of  Aksu.  Sultan  Ahmad  Ehan
fled  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd ;  and  they  all  rose  in  rebellion.
Yunus  Ehan  sent  a  messenger  to  the  Mirz4,  to  treat  with  him,
but  to  no  purpose.  So  the  Ehan  finally  abandoned  his  march,
and  entering  the  other  fort,  put  it  into  a  state  of  defence.  He
then  despatched  a  messenger  to  Sultdn  Mahmud  Ehdn,  who  affcer
seventeen  days  arrived  with  a  force  of  30,000  men. Conflicts

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

no War  between Yunus  and  Muhammad  Haidar,

took  place  daily,  till  at  the  end  of  forty  days  a  famine  broke  out
in  the  fort  of  the  Mirza.  The  promoters  of  the  rebellion  began  to
desert  nightly.  Sult&n  Ahmad  Kh4n,  alarmed  at  his  own  want
of  filial  piety,  came  to  his  parents  with  apologies  and  prayers  for
forgiveness,  bnt  the  Mirza  stood  out.  Suddenly  the  fort  was
taken  by  a  general  assault.  The  Ehdn  immediately  sent  some
Amirs  to  prevent  it  from  being  plundered.  The  Amirs  went,
but  their  eflforts  were  of  no  avail,  for  the  men  who  had  made  the
assault  were  not  of  the  sort  that  could  be  withheld.  After  a
hundred  struggles  they  seized  the  Mirzd  and  brought  him  before
the  Khan.  As  they  approached,  they  were  beginning  to  bind  the
Mirzd's  hands,  but  Yunus  Khan  cried  out  to  prevent  them.  So
they  brought  the  Mirza  forward  just  as  he  was.  The  Ebdn  called
him  to  him,  and  having  upbraided  and  rebuked  him  severely,
said :  '*  Why  did  you  do  this?  Abandon  your  rebellious  intentions,
so  that  I  may  depart.  Eemain  here.  [But  if]  again  you  rebel
[think]  what  will  happen."  ^

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  was  ashamed,  and  stood  with  bowed
head,  at  the  thought  of  his  ill-advised  actions.  The  Khan  then
said :  "  All  is  well  now,  I  have  given  you  Aksu,  and  you  should
stay  there."  The  Mirza  replied:  "How  can  I  remain  now  in
Aksu,  since  so  many  of  my  men  have  gone  away?"  The  Khan,
thereupon,  gave  the  Mirza  3000  horses,  and  said :  "  Accompany
me  into  Moghulistan;  I  think,  too,  the  wisest  plan  will  be  for
me  to  go  to  Kashghar,  as  soon  as  the  com  is  high,  and  try  and
take  that  town  for  you  ...."*

In  short,  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  accompanied  Yunus  Khdn

into  Moghulist&n. When  the  spring  came  to  an  end,  the  Khan

turned  his  thoughts  to  Kashghar. At  the  same  time  Sultan

Ahmad  Mirza  was  planning  an  expedition  from  Samarkand,  against

Farghana,  from  which  country  he  wished  to  expel  his  brother

Omar  Shaikh  Mirza. As  soon  as  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz4  heard  of

his  brother's  intention,  he  sent  in  great  haste  to  Yunus  Kh4n,

begging  assistance ;  for  by  this  means  he  had  frequently  (as  has

been  mentioned above)  been delivered from  the  cruelty  and

violence  of  his  brother  Sult&n  Ahmad  Mirz4. On  the  arrival  of

the  news,  the  Khdn  set  out  for  Andijdn. Now  the  Khdn  did  not

wish  that  there  should  bo  any  strife  between  his  two  sons-in-law,

and  had  always  tried  to  keep  them  at  peace  with  each  other. On

the  Khan's  entry  into  Andijan,  he  was  received  by  Omar  Shaikh

Mirza ;  he  was  shown  great  honour,  and  the  province  of  Ush  was

given  to  him. The  Kh4n  spent  that  winter  in  Ush. Entrusting

the  rest  of  the  Moghuls  to  the  care  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  ho

*  This  passage  is  most  obscnre. It  reads:  ^ An  gdh  ydghi-gari  hekun. In
chi'tur  mibdsliad  f  "— B.
'  Some  high-flown  passages  treating  of  the  meroy  of  kings  are  omitted  here.

Digitized  by

Google

Attack  on  Add  Bakr  in  Kdshgliar.  Ill

sent  them  back  to  Moghulistan,  while  he  himself  made  his  winter
quarters  in  Ush,  and  appointed  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  as
administrator  [raZtJ.  When  Sultan  Ahmad  Mirza  heard  of  the
arrival  of  the  Khan,  he  abandoned  his  project.  And  thuB  Omar
Shaikh  was  rendered  safe  from  his  brother.  When  winter  had
passed,  the  Khan  came  again  to  Moghulistan.  [On  the  eve  of  his
departure]  the  Khan  said  to  the  Mirza  :  "  You  have  always  suffered
great  annoyance  in  Moghulistan.  I  have  now  given  you  this
country  of  Ush.  Stay  here  till  next  winter,  when  I  will  return.
[In  the  meanwhile]  govern  the  country,  as  my  deputy,"

He  then  left  for  Moghulistan,  while  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4
remained  in  Ush.  The  Mirz&  begged  his  own  son,  Muhammad
Husain  Mirz4,  of  the  Khdn,  and  kept  him  at  his  side.

CHAPTER  LVIII.

'  MUHAMMAD  HAIDAR  MIRZi.  ATTACKS  MIRZA  ABA BAKR  IN  kAsHQHAR,
AND  IS  TAKEN  PRISONER  BY  HIM.

When  Sult4n  Yunus  Khan  reached  Moghulistdn,  Omar  Shaikh
Mirza  sent  an  official  {darvLghal  to  Ush  to  replace  Muhammad
Haidar.  The  [last-named]  Mirza  and  his  men  were  not  capable
of  marching  into  Moghulistdn,  and  it  was  also  impossible  for  them
to  remain  in  Ush.  He  placed  his  two  sons,  Muhammad  Husain
Mirzd  and  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd,  under  the  care  of  Omar
Shaikh  Mirzd,  and  himself  set  out  for  Kdshghar,  thinking  that
as  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  was  his  brother's  son  and  his  own  wife's  son,
he  would  go  to  him  and  would  offer  him  terms  of  peace.  Under
such  illusions  he  approached  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  who  immediately
seized  him  and  threw  him  into  prison,  where  he  remained  one  year.
At  the  end  of  a  year  he  was  sent  to  Badakhsbdn,  which  was  at
that  time  ruled  by  Mirzd  Sultdn  Mahmud,  son  of  Mirzd  Sultdn
Abu  Said.  Abdul  Kudus,  who  was  the  son-in-law  of  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirzd  (and  who  has  been  spoken  of  already),  was  at  this
time  with  Mirs^  Sultdn  Mahmud.  He  [Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd]
was  entertained  for  a  short  time  as  the  guest  of  the  Sultdn;  ho
then  came  to  Samarkand  and  paid  his  respects  to  his  Holiness
Ndsiruddin  Ubaidullah  (may  God  bless  his  spirit)  and  waited  on
Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad,  who  received  him  in  a  friendly  way,  and
arranged  to  come  to  the  Mirzd  yearly,  on  the  occasion  of  two
festivals  [at<i].

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

112  Yumis  Enters  Tdshkand.

Mirzd  Sulttln  Ahmad  bad  three  brothers :  Osmdn  Mirza,  Sultan
Yalad  Mirza,  and  Talak  Muhammad  •  .  .  .^

In  the  meanwhile  a  person  came  from  Ynnus  Khdn  to  fetch
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza.  Not  feeling  in  the  least  fettered  by
the  kindness  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirz4  had  shown  him,  he  went  to  the
Khdn.  This  matter  will  be  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  life
of  the  Ehdn  and  his  entrance  into  Tdshkand.

CHAPTER  LIX.

TUNUS  AND  THE  HOGHUL  ULUS  ENTER  TASHKAND  ;  PEACE  IS
ESTABLISHED  BETWEEN  SULTIn  AHMAD  MIBZJL  AND  OMAB  SHAIKH
MIRZA  AND  SULTIn MAHMUD  KHIn.

The  story  of  the  quarrels  and  contests  that  arose  between  the  two
brothers,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz4  and  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirz&,  is  a  long
one,  and  has  no  place  in  this  history ;  it  has  however  been  given .
in  detail  in  the  history  of  Mir  Ehwdnd.  But  it  is,  nevertheless,
necessary  to  mention  in  this  book,  that  on  the  death  of  Shaikh
Jam41  Khar,  Tdshkand  passed  into  the  [power  and]  jurisdiction  of
Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  as  did  also  Shdhrukhia,  which  has  a  fortified
castle  \kalaK\,  Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad  became  an  enemy  to  Omar
Shaikh  Mirzd  on  the  subject  of  these  two  places,  and  a  fierce
dispute  arose  between  them.  When  the  hostility  of  Mirzd  Sultdn
Ahmad  was  directed  against  Tdshkand,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd
desired  the  Khdn  [to  come  and  help  him]  in  Tdshkand.

The  same  year  that  the  ELhdn  had  left  Ush  and  had  given  it
over  to  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  after  the
arrival  of  the  Khdn,  dismissed  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  who
went  to  Kdshghar,  where  he  was  thrown  into  prison.  The  Khdn
wafl  then  in  Moghulistdn.  When  autumn  [ttVmaA]  ^  set  in
and  the  hostility  of  Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad  was  directed  against
Tdshkand,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd  invited  the  Khdn  to  [come  and
help  him  in]  Tdshkand.  He  gave  Sairdm  to  the  Khdn.  In  the
same  way  that  he  had  given  him  Ush  out  of  Andijdn,  so  he  gave
him  Sairdm  out  of  Tdshkand.  When  the  Khdn  turned  towards
Sairdm,  the  Moghuls,  who  could  not  on  any  terms  put  up  with

*  Here  follows  an  obeoure  passage  regarding  the  precedence  of  the  three
brothers,  which  baffles  translation. — R.

*  The  word  Tirmah  is  nsnally,  if  not  always,  found  in  dictionaries  to  signify
*<tho  first  month  of  summer."  Thionghont  Central  Asia,  however,  it  means
axAwBMiy  and  seeing  that  in  some  passages  of  this  history,  the  context  shows  that
Mirza  Haidar  uses  it  for  aiUtimn,  1  have  applied  it  everywhere  for  that  season.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

Peace  with  the  Timuri  Sultdns.  113

towns  and  cultiyated  lands,  having  led  astray  the  Khan's  younger
son,  Sult4n  Ahmad  Ehan,  fled  back  to  Moghulistan.  The  Eh4n
did  not  follow  them,  for  in  the  family  of  the  Moghul  Khakans
there  remained  no  rivals  [of  the  Ehan]  who  were  worth  con-
sidering. So  he  let  the  people  go  back  to  Moghulistan,  while  he
himself  went  on  to  Sairam  and  there  passed  the  winter.

The  Eh&n  also  sent  his  elder  son,  Sultan  Mahmud  Ehan,  against
Sult&n  Ahmad  Mirz4,  with  30,000  men.  From  the  side  of
Farghdna  came  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  with  an  army  15,000  strong.
These  three  armies  neared  each  other,  and  a  desperate  conflict  was
about  to  ensue,  when  the  news  of  what  was  passing  reached  his
Holiness  Nasiruddin  Ubaidullah  (may  God  bless  his  hidden  soul).
He  at  once  set  out,  sending  a  person  in  advance  to  announce  that
he  was  coming.  When  the  tidings  reached  the  three  Sultdns,
they  all  halted  where  they  were.  When  his  Holiness  arrived,
he  alighted  in  the  camp  of  Sult&n  Ahmad  Mirza,  and  sent
messengers  to  the  Khan  and  to  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza,  begging
them  to  make  peace.  No  one  could  resist  the  entreaties  of  the
blessed  mind  of  his  Holiness.  Such  was  his  spiritual  and  moral
influence,  that  he  calmed  these  three  F4dish4hs,  who  had  each
come  for  some  object  of  his  own,  with  an  army  in  fighting  order,
and  caused  them  to  sit  together  on  one  carpet  \zalicha\^  while  he
sat  in  their  midst  and  dictated  to  them  conditions  of  peace,  to
which  they  assented.  T&shkand  was  to  be  made  over  to  Yunus
Eh4n.  The  two  brothers  who  disputed  with  each  other  the
possession  of  T4shkand,  were  to  give  up  their  dispute  and  concede
the  place  to  the  Eh4n.

His  Holiness  Maul4na  and  Sayyid  N4  Mahdumi  Maul4n4
Muhammad  E4zi  (upon  whom  be  mercy  and  forgiveness)  has
written  in  the  appendix  [zaiV]  to  his  '*  Salsalat  td  Arifin^'*  that  this
occurrence  is  among  the  miracles  of  his  Holiness  [i.e.  of  N4siruddin
Ubaidullah].  It  is  related  there:  'Hhe  meeting  was  so  solemn
that,  in  the  intensity  of  my  emotion  [ddhaaht]  I  overturned  the
table-cloth  [daaidr  khiodn];  when  the  meeting  was  terminated
his  Holiness  said :  *  It  is  well,  I  must  now  retire,  for  I  am  an  old
man  and  can  only  bear  a  certain  amount  of  fatigue.'

**  The  three  kings  returned,  each  one,  to  his  own  army.  His
Holiness  departed  in  the  direction  of  the  river  of  Ehojand  and
performed  his  ablutions  [vazu]  at  the  waterside.  Turning  to  me
he  said :  *Maul4n4  Muhammad  can  write  an  account  of  my  deed.'
His  Holiness  the  Maul4n4  says  that  this  was  his  reason  for  under-
taking the  composition  of  his  book — ^the  Salsalai  ul  Arifin.

"  In  short,  Sult4n  Ahmad  Mirz4  repaired  to  Samarkand,  Omar
Shaikh Mirz4 to Fargh4na, and Sult4n Mahmud Eh4n to

^  TliiB  is  probably  a  coimption  of  the  Tarki  word  zUcha  or  xUuchOy  a  long  pile
carpet  made  of  wool. — E.

I

Digitized  by

Google

114  End  of  Yunus  Khan's  Life,

Tashkand.  TunuB  Khan  also  went  to  Tdshkand,  and  his  Holiness,
following  him,  met  him  again  there.  I  [Muhammad  E4zi]  have
heard  from  my  uncle,  that  one  day  in  the  assembly  of  his  Holiness
[Nasiruddin  UbaiduUah]  the  oonversation  turned  upon  Sultdn
Mahmud  Eh&n,  and  one  of  those  present  said  :  '  It  is  strange  how
proud  this  prince  is  of  his  own  grandeur.'  His  Holiness  replied :
'  Proud  as  the  F4dishah  may  be,  I  will  make  him  fill  his  skirt
with  earth  [A;A<iA;];  glory  and  grandeur  belong  to  God  alone.
Hence  how  can  even  Sultan  Mahmud  Kh4n  be  proud.'  It  chanced
that  at  that  very  moment  the  Eh&n  came  to  pay  his  respects  to
his  Holiness.  It  was  prayer  time,  and  his  Holiness  had  risen  for
prayer.  When  prayers  were  about  to  begin,  a  censer  was  noticed
in  which  were  some  embers.  His  Holiness  said:  *  Embers  and
censers,  while  prayer  is  proceeding,  are  abhorrent.  Therefore  the
fire  must  be  extinguished  with  some  earth.'  In  spite  of  the
number  of  people  present,  the  Eh4n  sprang  up  and,  going  outside,
fiUed  his  skirt  with  earth,  which  having  brought  in,  he  sprinkled
on  the  fire;  this  he  repeated  several  times,  until  the  fire  was
extinguished.  And  he  begged  of  those  present  that  they  would
allow  him  to  perform,  quite  alone,  this  service  of  fetching  the
earth.  After  the  Ehdn's  departure  all  the  companions  of  his
Holiness  expi-essed  great  wonder.'*

This  peace  and  meeting  of  the  Ehans  in  Tashkand  took  place  in
890.  His  Holiness  remained  for  a  while  in  Tashkand  and  then
returned  to  Samarkand,  it  was  the  practice  of  all  the  princes  of
that  time,  to  employ  one  of  the  disciples  of  his  Holiness  as  a
medium  of  communication  with  him.  Sultan  Mahmud  Ehan
employed  for  this  purpose  Maulana  Kazi.  About  this  matter  I
have  heard  many  anecdotes,  which,  please  God,  1  will  give  in
their  proper  place.

CHAPTER  LX.

END  OF YUNUS  KHIn'S UFE.

Tu£  Ehan,  being  firmly  established  in  Tdshkand,  begged  the
daughter  of  Sultan  Ahmad  Mirz4 — Ear4guz  Begum — ^in  marriage
for  his  son  Sult4n  Mahmud  Ehan.  The  arrival  of  Eardguz  Begum
will  be  mentioned  hereafter.  But  in  the  in  terim  Sultan  Yunus  Ehan
was  seized  with  paralysis,  was  bedridden  for  nearly  two  years*
and  died,  suffering,  at  the  age  of  seventy- four.  No  other  Ghaghat4i
Ehakan  ever  reached  such  an  advanced  age  :  most  of  them,  indeed,
died  before  they  reached  the  age  of  forty. The  Ehan  was  born  in

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

War  between  Ahmad  Mirzd  and  Sultdn  Mahmud. 1 1 5

818  and  died  in  892.  He  was  buried  neAr  the  tomb  of  Pur4nv4r
Shaikh,  Kh4wand-i-Tuhur  [Master  of  Purification],  in  T4shkand ;
and  a  large  mausoleum  was  built  over  the  spot,  which  stands  to
this  day  and  is  very  renowned.

During  his  illness,  the  Ehdn  heard  that  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirzd  bad  gone  from  Badakhshdn  to  Samarkand,  so  he  sent  to
Hummoii  the  Mirza  to  him.  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz4  left  Samar-
kand, came  to  the  Khan,  and  waited  on  him  throughout  his  illness.
He  was  a  skilled  surgeon  and  physician.  The  Eh4n,  during  this
period,  would  not  allow  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  out  of  his  presence
for  one  hour ;  and  he  treated  the  Mirzd's  children  with  hospitality.
The  Mirza's  son,  Muhammad  Husain  Mirz&,  who  had  remained
with  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza,  had  gone  to  Sultdn  Mahmud  Ehdn  in
Andijan,  before  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  had  come  [to  attend
on  the  Khan].  He  lived  always  in  the  same  house  and  room  as
the  Khan,  as  shall  be  related  below.

CHAPTER  LXl.

WAR BETWEBN  SULtIn AHMAD MIRZi AND  SULTAn MAHMUD KHAN.

SultAn  Yunus  KhIn  died  in  the  year  892,  and  in  the  course  of  the
same  year,  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn  v^as  raised  to  the  Khanate  with
Moghul  rites.  When  the  news  of  the  death  of  Tunus  Khan  got
abroad,  Mirzd  Omar  Shaikh  and  Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad  became
intent  on  renewing  hostilities  with  one  another.  Omar  Shaikh
Mirzd  sent  a  large  number  of  his  staunchest  and  most  trustworthy
followers  to  occupy  the  fort  of  TJshtur  in  Tdshkand,  which  was
an  impregnable  stronghold.  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn  led  his  forces,
in  person,  against  that  fort.  A  fierce  battle  took  place ;  so  fierce,
indeed,  that  it  is  still  talked  of  among  the  Moghuls.  The  castle
was  taken  by  assault,  and  all  the  faithful  adherents  of  Mirzd  Omar
Shaikh  were  put  to  death ;  no  one  escaped  :  they  all  died  fighting.
From  this  victory  great  strength  accrued  to  the  Khdn,  while  the
Mirzd  lost  all  power  of  opposition.

The  year  following,  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirzd's  Amirs  impressed  upon
him  that  he  had  given  up  Tdshkand  to  the  Khdn  without  proper
cause,  and  that  the  longer  the  Khdn's  people  remained  there,  the
more  annoying  it  was  to  them.  His  Holiness  sent  word  to  say
that  he  was  mistaken,  and  that  he  ought  to  make  peace  with  the
Khdn,  who  would  do  him  no  injury  :  why  hhould  he  annoy  him  ?
Finally,  however,  the  Mirzd  collected  an  army  150,000  strong,  and

1  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

1 16 War  between  Ahmad  Mirzd  and  Sultdn  Mahmud.

led  it  against  Tatdikaiid.  The  Khan  passed  through  the  suburbs
of  Tdshkand  and  stood  facing  [the  advancing  enemy].  Between
them  flowed  a  stream  which  it  was  impossible  to  cross.  The
armies  remained  there  during  three  days.  In  the  army  of  the
Sultdn  was  a  certain  Shdhi  Beg  Khan,  the  son  of  Shah  Badagh
Oghldn,  the  son  of  Abulkhair  Khan.  After  the  death  of  Buruj
Oghlan  (which  has  been  described  above)  ^  Shahi  Beg  Khan
underwent  many  hardships  (as  we  are  told  in  histories).  Finally,
as  he  was  not  able  to  hold  his  own  in  the  steppes,  he  betook
himself  to  Mavar4-un-Nahr,  and  became  a  follower  of  Sultdn
Ahmad  Mirzd,  or  rather  he  became  a  retainer  of  one  of  the  Sultdn's
Amirs.  He  was  in  this  army,  and  had  3000  followers.  When
Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad  had  remained  three  days  [on  the  bank  of
the  river],  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  sent  to  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn  to  ask
if  he  would  meet  and  confer  with  him.  That  same  night  they
met:  he  from  the  one  side  and  the  Khdn  from  the  other;  and
they  agreed  that  on  the  morrow  the  Khdn  should  attack  Mir
Abdul  Ali,  the  master  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  who,  on  his  part,  under-
took to  throw  the  army  into  disorder,  and  then  to  take  flight.

On  the  next  day  the  Moghul  army  was  drawn  up  in  battle  array,
and  the  infantry  x>assed  the  Chir;  the  cavalry  aUo  entered  the
stream,  when  the  infantry  of  the  other  side  began  the  battle.  The
Moghul  army  directed  its  force  against  Mir  Abdul  Ali.  At  this
moment  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  turned  and  fled  with  his  3000  men,  and
throwing  himself  on  the  baggage  \j^TiaX\  of  the  army,  began  to
plunder  the  Moghuls.  In  fact,  wherever  this  disordered  rabble
found  themselves,  their  device  was  to  fall  upon  the  baggage,  so
that  the  army  of  Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad  was  put  to  flight.  But  the
river  Chir,  which  the  people  of  Tdshkand  call  Farak,  was  in  front
of  them,  and  most  of  his  soldiers  were  drowned  in  it.  The  troops
of  the  Mirzd  suffered  a  severe  defeat,  while  he,  disoomfltod  and
beaten,  fled  to  Samarkand.  He  proffered  many  excuses  and  apolo-
gies to  his  Holiness,  who  again  arranged  a  peace  between  the
Khdn  and  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirzd.  The  discussion  about  Kardguz
Begum  was  resumed,  and  after  various  formalities  had  been  gone
through,  they  brought  Kardguz  Begum  to  the  Khdn.  This  victory
did  much  to  raise  the  Khdn  in  the  estimation  of  the  surrounding
Sultdns,  who  henceforward  stood  in  great  fear  of  him,  and  thus  his
position  became  secure.

*  See  note,  p.  92.  The  mention  of  Bnng  here  appears  soaroely  to  bear  out
Sir  H.  Howorth'8  sapposition,  though  it  does  not  disprove  it.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Marriage  of  the  Author^ s  Fat  Iter,  117

CHAPTER  LXIL

ARRANOEMBNT  FOR  THB  MABRIAQB  OF MY FATHER  INTO  THB  KHIn^S

FAMILY.

My  father  Muhammad  Hai9ain  Eurk&n,  (may  Gh)d  illtimine  his
proof)  from  the  time  of  his  quitting  Edi^ghar  to  this  date,  had
always  been  in  the  service  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Kh&n,  except  for  the
two  years  that  he  spent  with  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz&  (all  of  which  has
been  related  above).  The  Khin  was  on  such  close  and  friendly
terms  with  my  father,  that  they  always  lived  in  the  same  room ;
their  houses  adjoined,  and  they  confided  household  matters  to  each
other.

When  anything  was  brought  for  the  ELhdn,  something  like  it
was  also  broaght  for  my  father.  When  the  Khdn  went  out  riding,
two  horses  would  be  brought,  one  of  which  my  father  would
mount  and  the  Eh4n  the  other.  Whenever  the  Eh4n  put  on  a
new  robe,  another  like  it  used  to  be  found  for  my  father.  Thus,  in
no  matter  was  any  distinction  made  between  them.  Till  the  time
when  the  Ehdn  married  Eardguz  Begum,  he  spent  most  of  the
day  in  the  common  apartment  \hijra-%-m&hvd\  and  in  the  evening
would  go  into  his  haram,  whilst  my  father  remained  in  the  outer
chamber.  When  the  Ehan  was  seated  on  his  throne,  they  used
to  place  a  carpet  in  front  of  it,  so  that  ray  father  might  sit  down
and  lean  against  the  throne ;  thus  the  two  used  always  to  arrange
[the  affairs  of  the  State]  together.  Sometimes  the  Ehan  used  to
say  to  my  father,  apologising  the  while :  "  I  am  obliged  by  family
affairs  to  retire  to  the  haram,  while  you  remain  in  the  outer  apart-
ment ;  this  makes  you  appear  like  a  palace  guard  [^&ti8h\  and  is
inconsistent  with  terms  of  friendship  and  concord."

A  year  passed  in  this  way,  when  the  Eh&n  contracted  an  alliance
with  the  Eurk4ni,  in  the  person  of  Ehub  Nigar  Ehanim,  who  was
his  senior  by  one  year.  She  was  the  third  daughter  of  Yunus
Eh&n,  by  Isan  Daulat  Begum ;  and  her  eldest  daughter  was  Mihr
Nig&r  Ehdnim,  who  had  been  given  in  marriage  to  Sult&n  Ahmad
Mirz4  (of  whom  I  have  spoken  at  greater  length  in  the  Second
Part).  The  second  daughter  was  Eutluk  Nigdr  Eh4nim,  whom
Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd  took  to  wife ;  and  their  children  were  Zahir-
ud-Din  Muhammad  Bdbar  Padish4h,  and  Eh4nz4da  Begum,  of
whom  I  shall  speak  below.  The  third  daughter  was  this  Ehub
Nigar  Ehdnim,  who  was  given  in  marriage  to  my  &ther,  and  is
my  mother.  I  will  give  a  record  of  them  in  their  proper  place,  in
Part  II.  Sult4n  Yunus  Eh4n  had  two  other  daughters  by  Shah
Begum  Badakhshi :  the  elder,  Sultan  Nigar  Ehanim,  was  sent  to

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

Ii8  Rule  of  Sultdn  Mahmud

Sult&n  Mahmud  Mirzd  in  Hisdr,  who  had  children  by  her,  as  is
mentioned  in  the  Second  Part.  The  younger  was  Daulat  Sultdn
Eh&nim,  also  mentioned  in  the  Second  Fart.

In  short,  the  Eh4n  apologised,  saying :  **  It  is  not  reasonable
that  I  should  always  go  into  the  haram  at  nights,  and  leave  you
here  in  the  palace,  as  if  on  guard.  It  is  not  worthy  of  our  friend-
ship." On  this  account  he  gave  orders  for  the  preparation  of
festivities,  and  showed  [his  friend]  every  mark  of  sympathy  and
regard.  During  two  years  the  preparations  continued.  Then  he
gave  Khub  Nigdr  Ehdnim  in  marriage  to  my  father.  In  the
meanwhile  Mirz4  Sultdn  Ahmad,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  and  Sultdn
Mahmud  Mirzd  died,  as  shall  be  presently  related.

Urdtupa  ^  was  included  in  the  administration  of  the  Khdn,  who
granted  that  country  to  my  father ;  he  established  himself  there,
and  extended  its  limits  over  some  of  the  bordering  districts^  all  of
which  is  related  in  Part  11.

CHAPTER  LXIII.

EVENTS  IN  tIsHKAND  DURING  THE  RULE  OF  SULTAN  MAHMUD  KHIn.
THE  LAST  TEARS  AND  DEATH  OF  THE  KhIn.

Before  the  Ehdn  made  peace  with  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirzd  and
married  Eardguz  Begum,  he  captured  Tdshkand.  He  seized  and
threw  into  prison  Muhammad  Mazid  Tarkhdn,  who  had  been
appointed  Governor  of  Turkistdn  by  Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad ;  and
this  Muhammad  Mazid  Tarkhdn  was  one  of  the  principal  causes  of
the  peace,  for  he  was  a  relation,  on  the  mother's  side  \t&gMk\^  of
Mirzd  Sultdn  Ahmad.  When  the  Khdn  conquered  Turkistdn,  he
had  in  his  service  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn.  As  a  reward  for  the  services
he  rendered  in  the  battle  of  the  Chir  (which  has  been  described
above),  the  Khdn  made  over  Turkistdn  to  him  ;  and  on  this  account
disagreement  arose  between  the  sons  of  Kardi  Khdn  and  Jdni  Beg
Khdn  (of  the  Kazdk)  and  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  who  had  previously
been  on  terms  of  friendship.  [They  complained,  saying :]  "  Shdhi
Beg  Khdn  is  our  enemy ;  why  did  you  send  him  to  oppress  us  in
Turkistdn  ?  " In  a  word,  in  consequence  of  this  quarrel,  between

>  Uratippa  or  Uratupa  is  the  Penian  form ;  UratvM^  the  Tarki — ^ffenerally
oomipted  by  the  Ruasians  into  Urativhe — and  meaning  *'  high  monnd."  Ola
names  for  tMs  place  are  Oahrwene^  Vsruskna^  Satrtuhna^  etc,  while  MirzaHaidar,
farther  on  (p.  154)  writes  it  TJshiwr  U$hna.  (See  Schuyler,  i.,  p.  812;  Sprenger,
p.  19,  andjErskine  in  Baber^p.  zli.)

Digitized  by

Google

I

and  his  Death.  119

Snlt4n  Mahmttd  Kh4n  and  the  Uzbeg  Kazak,^  two  battles  took
place,  the  Khdn  Bnffering  defeat  on  both  oooasions.  The  canBe  of
these  defeats  was  that  the  most  distinguished  of  his  generals  had
left  Yunns  Eh4n.  For  the  Eh4n  had,  in  common  with  all  who
succeed  to  power,  the  defect  of  not  knowing  the  value  of  men  of
worth,  and  [of  imagining]  that  whomsoever  they  favour  becomes,
for  that  reason,  a  valuable  man,  which  is,  of  course,  impossible.

However,  in  conformity  with  these  pernicious  principles,  the
Khan  patronised  some  of  the  lowest  of  his  people,  who  were  con-
tinually engaged  in  trying  to  deciy  the  old  and  influential  Amirs.
This  they  carried  so  far  as  to  induce  the  Eh&n  to  put  to  death  five
of  the  great  Amirs,  each  of  whom  was  the  head  of  a  department
\9ar  da,fiaT\  and  to  extirpate  their  families ;  while  in  their  places,
five  of  those  base-bom  men  were  set  up.  At  the  time  when  the
difierence  arose  between  Sult&n  Mahmud  Ehan  and  the  Uzbeg
Eaz4k,  on  account  of  8h4hi  Beg  Eh4n,  and  a  war  ensued,  these  five
base-bom  men  were  generals :  hence  the  defeat.  That  dread  and
esteem  of  the  Eh4n,  which  by  the  successful  efforts  of  the  five
Amirs,  had  taken  possession  of  the  hearts  of  the  neighbouring
Sultans,  had  now  disappeared.  In  the  meantime  Omar  Shaikh
Mirz4  was  killed  by  a  house  falling  on  him :  this  was  in  the  year
899.  When  this  news  reached  Sultan  Ahmad  Mir2s4,  he  set  out
with  an  army  against  Andij4n,  to  prevent  it  falling  into  the  hands
of  the  Moghuls.  The  Amirs  of  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza  behaved
bravely,  and  raised  his  son,  Zahir-ud-Din  Muhammad  B4bar Padish4h,
who  was  then  twelve  years  of  age,  to  the  throne :  they  also  applied
to  Sult4n  Mahmud  Ehan  for  assistance.  When  Sult4n  Ahmad
Mirz4  reached  Marghil4n  he  fell  ill,  and  so  made  terms  of  peace
and  turned  back  ;  but  he  died  on  the  road,  just  forty  days  after  the
death  of  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz4.  Sult4n  Mahmud  Mirz4  came  from
His4r,  and  set  himself  up  on  the  throne  of  Samarkand  in  his
brother's  stead.  He  reigned  six  months;  he  then  died  a  natural
death,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Mirz4  Baisanghar.

Sult4n  Mahmud  Khan  coveted  the  throne  of  Samarkand.  He
marched  towards  that  town  and  met  Baisanghar  in  battle,  at  a
place  called  E4myai.  As  the  generals  were  the  [above  mentioned]
base-born  persons,  the  enterprise  failed  and  the  Eh4n  was  defeated.
This  was  a  very  famous  battle,  and  its  date  is  as  celebrated  with
the  Moghuls  as  among  the  people  of  Samarkand.  The  Eh4n  then
returned  to  T48hkand,  when  these  same  low-born  men  persuaded
him  that  it  was  fitting  for  them  to  support  Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n,  in
order  that  he  might  take  Samarkand  and  Bokh4r4,  and  bear  all
the  duties  of  the  State,  while  they  themselves  remained  at  their
ease  in  T4shkand. This  appeared  reasonable  to  the  Eh4n. Much

*  One  MS.  reads :  '*....  between  Bnltan  Mahmud  Khan  and  the  Uzbeg
Khan  and  the  Kazik  Amin."— R.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

I20  Sultdn  Ahmad  Khdn.

as  my  father  condemned  this  advice  and  need  his  inflnenoe  over  the
Eh4n,  he  was  in  no  way  able  to  prevent  the  latter  helping  and
supporting  Sh&hi  Beg  Eh4n,  till  he  had  taken  Samarkand  and
Bokh4rd.  This  needs  a  detailed  account,  which  will  be  given  in
Fart  IL  along  with  incidents  in  the  life  of  Bdbar  F4dish4h.

In  a  word,  with  this  assistance,  Sh4hi  Beg  Kh&n  took  Samarkand,
and  obtained  complete  control  over  it.  His  army  increased  to
50,000  men  ;  and  Uzbegs  from  on  all  sides  flocked  round  him.  His
first  attack  was  directed  against  the  Kh4n,  who  began  to  despair ;
but  much  as  he  and  his  ignoble  advisers  might  gnaw  the  hand  of
vexation  with  the  teeth  of  regret,  they  could  not  help  themselves.
In  the  meanwhile  Sult&n  Ahmad  Khdn,  who  (as  I  have  mentioned)
had  remained  in  Moghulist4n,  hearing  of  the  Khan's  distress,  came
to  his  brother's  aid,  and  these  two  Kh&ns  together,  gave  battle  to
Sh&hi  Beg  Eh&n,  but  they  were  defeated.  Shahi  Beg  Khan,
having  treated  them  both  with  courtesy  and  respect,  sent  the  Kh4n
into  Moghulist4n ;  he,  however,  kept  the  Moghul  soldiers  with  him,
as  will  be  related  in  Part  11.

The  two  brothers,  Sult&n  Mahmud  Eh4n  and  Sult4n  Ahmad
Ehan,  went  to  Moghulist4n,  where  Sult&n  Ahmad  Ehan  died,  as
shall  be  presently  related.  Sultan  Mahmud  Eh4n  reached  Moghul-
istan  and  for  some  time  imderwent  many  hardships  there.  Finally
he  presented  himself  before  Shahi  Beg  Ehan,  counting  on  the
favour  he  had  once  shown  him.  But  Shahi  Beg  Ehan  said  to
Sult4n  Mahmud  Ehdn :  '*  Once  I  was  kind  to  you,  but  a  second
act  of  mercy  would  be  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  my  kingdom."  He
then  put  to  death  the  Eh4n  and  his  children,  both  great  and  small,
on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  Ehojand.  The  chronogram  **  Lah-i-
daryd-i-Khojand  "  gives  the  date  of  the  event— 914  [1508-9].  The
particulars  will  be  given  in  Part  II.  of  this  History.  The  matter
is  mentioned  briefly  here  to  save  repetition.

CHAPTER  LXIV.

SULTAN AHMAD KHAN.

SultIn  Ahmad  EhIn  was  the  son  of  Ynnus  Ehdn,  who  has  been
mentioned  above.  When  his  father  used  to  go  and  take  up  quarters
in  Tdshkand,  Ahmad,  with  a  number  of  Moghnls  who  objected  to
towns  and  settlements,  parted  from  his  father,  and  stayed  behind
in  Moghnlist4n.  It  would  take  too  long  to  relate  all  that  he  did
and  [to  describe]  his  administration  in  Moghulistdn ;  but  the  sub-
stance of  the  matter  is  that  it  required  ten  years  of  residence  in

Digitized  by

Google

Sultdn  Ahmad  Khdn.  I2i

the  country,  before  he  could  bring  the  people  fally  under  his
control.  He  was  obliged  to  suppress  some  of  the  Amirs :  among
others  the  IrUt,  who  were  powerful  chiefs,  and  had  offered  him
much  opposition.  A  battle  ensued  in  which  he  overthrew  their
race ;  he  also  put  to  death  Amir  Sult4n  Ali  Jar&s,  who,  since  the
time  when  the  Amirs  rose  in  opposition  to  Is4n  Bughd  Eh4n,  had
never  become  reconciled  to  any  of  the  Khdns.

The  Edluji  were  the  most  numerous  of  all  the  tribes  in  Moghul-
istin.  At  this  time,  a  number  of  their  chiefs  joined  together,  and
one  night  attacked  the  Eh4n's  camp,  killed  all  whom  they  found
there,  and  poured  a  shower  of  arrows  upon  the  tent  of  the  Eh4n,
who  sustained  several  wounds.  At  last  one  of  the  attacking  party
entered  the  tent  intending  to  kill  him,  but  he  rose  up  with  drawn
sword  to  meet  the  man ;  they  dealt  each  other  severe  blows,  and
the  intruder  fled  wounded.  After  this,  several  persons,  having
dismounted,  tried,  together,  to  force  an  entry.  Sut  Im  Bahadur,
who  was  one  of  the  most  important  men  in  the  Eh4n's  court,  at
this  moment  arrived  on  the  scene,  and  when  the  assailants  saw
that  somebody  was  coming,  they  remounted  and  attacked  him.
He  was  quite  alone,  but  nevertheless,  offered  them  fight,  and  a
considerable  time  elapsed  before  they  were  able  to  kill  Sut  Im
Bahddur.  They  then  again  turned  to  attack  the  Ehan.  Hearing
the  noise,  men  came  riding  up  from  all  directions  to  the  tent  of
the  Ehan.  At  last  the  Ealuji,  having  no  longer  power  to  resist,
turned  and  fled.  All  these  were  the  intimates  of  the  Ehan,  and
no  one  suspected  them  of  such  [treacherous]  intentions.  They  fled
to  the  E&lmak.  As  soon  as  the  Ehan  had  recovered  from  his
wounds,  he  pursued  them  whither  they  had  gone,  but  it  took  him
two  years  to  root  them  out.

After  this,  the  affairs  of  the  Ehdn  became  more  prosperous,  and
no  one  in  Moghulistan  dared  to  oppose  him.  He  made  several
successful  inroads  on  the  Kdlm4k,  and  put  a  number  of  them  to
death.  He  fought  two  battles  with  T4ishi  Is4n,  and  was  victorious
in  both.  The  Edlmak  stood  in  great  awe  of  him,  and  used  to  call
him  Alacha  Eh4n ;  Aldcha,  in  Moghul,  means  husMnda  [the  slayer],
that  is  to  say,  "  the  slaying  Eh4n."  lliis  title  adhered  to  him.
His  own  people  used  to  call  him  Aldcha  Eh4n.  He  is  now  spoken
of  by  the  Moghuls  as  Sult4n  Ahmad  Ehan,  but  all  the  neighbouring
peoples  call  him  *  Alacha.'  Also  one  finds  •  Alacha '  written  in  the
Histories  of  Mir  Ehwand  and  of  Ehw4nd  Mir,  of  Herat,  and  others.*

^  lldcha  is  the  Penian  oorniption  of  Aldeha,  and  in  the  Persian  texts  of  the
Tdrikh-i'IUuhidi ;  it  is  found  written  in  this  way ;  but  Aluyd^  Mr.  Boss  informs
me,  would  be  preferable  to  either.  In  Mr.  Shaw's  dictionary  of  the  language  of
Eastern  Turkistan  (p.  12)  the  word  Aldch  is  shown  as  a  proper  name,  but  the
author  adds  that  it  is  also  "  a  comprehensiye  name  given  to  the  tribes  of  Euzz^ks
and  Kirghiz,  from  some  eponymous  ancestor."  Can  this  ancestor  be  Sultan
Ahmad  Khan — ^a  Moghul  ?

Digitized  by

Google

122  Snltdn  Ahmad  Khdn,

After  these  events,  he  carried  on  hostilities  with  the  Uzbeg
Kazak,  for  the  reason  already  stated  in  the  story  of  Sultan
Mahmud  Khdn.  For  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khan  had,  on  two  occasions,
gone  to  war  with  the  Uzbeg  Kazdk,  and  had  been  defeated  on  both
occasions;  on  which  account  Snlt4n  Ahmad  Eh4n  attacked  the
Uzbeg  Kazdk  and  utterly  routed  them  three  times.

Whatever  they  had  done  to  his  elder  brother,  Sult4n  Mahmud
Khdn,  he,  in  turn,  did  to  them.  He,  moreover,  kept  Moghulist&n
under  such  strict  supervision,  that  during  seven  or  eight  months
the  Kalmyk  and  Uzbeg  were  unable  to  approach  the  country.
When  he  h«td  satisfactorily  disposed  of  the  affairs  of  Moghulistdn,
he  turned  his  attention  to  the  question  of  Ab4  Bakr  and  Kdshghar.
In  the  year  905  (which  is  also  the  year  of  my  birth),  when  he  came
to  Kishghar,  he  found  that  Ab4  Bakr  had  gone  to  Tdrkand,  leaving
Kdshghar  and  Ydngi  Hisdr  fortified,  garrisoned  and  stored.
The  officers  of  Mirz4  Abd  Bakr  attacked  the  Khdn  several  times,
both  in  the  citadel  of  Kdshghar  and  at  Ydngi  Hisdr,  all  of  which
would  take  too  long  to  relate.  At  length,  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirzd  ^
took  the  citadel  of  Tdngi  Hisdr  by  storm,  and  after  that,  Kdsh-
ghar being  deserted  by  its  garrison,  who  fled,  he  captured  that
place  also.

He  spent  that  winter  in  Kdshghar,  and  removed  his  family
thither  from  Moghulistdn.  At  the  end  of  the  winter  he  marched
against  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  in  Yarkand.  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  would  not
come  out  of  the  citadel,  and  when  they  [the  attacking  force]  saw
that  an  entry  was  impracticable,  they  went  up  into  the  lulls  near
Ydrkand,  to  carry  off  the  flocks  and  plunder  [the  country].  Then,
having  taken  quantities  of  cattle  and  booty,  they  returned  towards
Kdshghar.  But  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  leading  a  powerful  army  out  of
Ydrkand,  went  and  blocked  the  Khdn's  road  in  the  mountains.  A
fierce  battle  was  fought,  in  which,  at  length,  the  Khdn's  army  was
put  to  flight.  The  defeated  Khdn  then  descended  to  Kdshghar,
but  being  unable  to  remain  there,  he  fled  into  Moghulistdn.

One  year  after  this  event,  news  of  the  victory  gained  by  Shdhi
Beg  Khdn  over  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn  reached  him.  Prompted
by  brotherly  love,  he  set  out  to  offer  his  services  .to  his  distin-
guished brother.  Leaving  his  eldest  son,  Mansur  Khdn,  in  his  own
place,  and  giving  him  the  style  of  JTMn,  he  took  his  two  other
sons,  Sultdn  Said  Khdn  and  Bdbdjdk  Khdn,  with  him  to  Tdshkand.
The  two  Khdns  met  in  Tdshkand,  and  exchanged  the  salutations
and  formalities  usual  on  such  occasions.  (An  account  of  this
matter  is  to  be  found  in  Part  II.)  In  short,  they  discussed  how
they  might  frustrate  the  plans  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  and  finally  a
battle  took  place  between  the  latter  and  the  two  Khdns,  at  Akhsi,
in  which  the  two  Khdns  were  defeated,  and  both  of  them  made
'  Should  be  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Mansur  Khdn,  123

prisoners.  Sh&hi  Beg  Eh&n,  observing  the  duties  of  the  situation,
permitted  them  both  to  retnm  to  Moghulistan ;  but  the  greater
part  of  the  Moghul  Vhu  he  would  not  allow  to  depart.  These
two  Ehdns  went  to  Moghulist&n,  passing  that  winter  in  Aksu.
[There]  Sult4n  Ahmad  Ehan  was  attacked  with  so  violent  a
paralytic  seizure,  that  the  doctors  were  unable  to  relieve  him,
and  he  died  in  the  winter  of  the  year  909  [1503-4].  (May  Paradise
be  his  dwelling.}

Sultan  Ahmad  Ehdn  was  a  very  religious  prince  and  a  devoted
Musulm4n.  He  was  versed  in  the  Holy  Law  [5Aar']  ^  and  most
of  his  affairs  were  governed  by  it.  He  was  a  high-minded,  though
violent,  man  and  was  distinguished  for  his  daring.  He  was
intelligent,  of  sound  judgment  and  modest.  He  was  especially
affable  towards  darvishes,  and  towards  learned  and  pious  men.
During  most  of  his  life  he  granted  pensions  to  the  poor,  and  gave
away  one-fifth  of  his  income  in  charity.  In  his  beneficence  and
virtuous  habits  he  had,  in  his  time,  no  rival.  He  died  at  the  age
of  thirty-nine.

More  will  be  said  of  him  in  the  Second  Part.

CHAPTER  LXV.

MANSUR  KHIn  (may HIS  SINS BE PABDONED !)

He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,  who,  when  he
went  to  join  his  brother  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn  in  Tashkand,  set
up  Mansur,  as  Eh4n,  in  his  own  stead.  This  was  in  the  year  909,
when  Mansur  Ehan  was  nineteen  years  of  age.  At  his  father's
death,  his  uncle,  Sult4n  Mahmud  Eh4n,  left  Aksu  and  came  into
Moghulistdn.  Mansur  Ehdn  then  established  his  court  in  Aksu,
where  a  dispute  arose  between  himself  and  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi,  such
as  is  wont  to  arise  between  rival  heirs;  and  Mir  Jab&r  Birdi's
life  became  imperilled.  The  only  means  he  could  devise  for  saving
himself,  was  to  send  off  a  messenger  to  Mirz4  Ab&  Bakr  [to  aak
him  to  come  to  his  aid].  This  was  exactly  what  the  Mirz4  would
have  prayed  God  for;  so  he  set  out  for  Aksu  with  an  army  of
30,000  men.  Mir  Jabar  Birdi  hastened  out  to  receive  Mirz4  Ab&
Bakr.  The  advance-guard  and  scouts  of  the  Mirz4's  army  were
in  readiness.

When  news  of  this  reached  Mansur  Eh4n,  he  fortified  Aksn,

^  Lit. :  from  the  Shar*  he  derived  no  yezation.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

1-24  Mansur  Khdti.

and,  leaTing  a  garrison  in  its  fort,  repaired  to  64i  and  Kusan.^
Mir  Jabar  Birdi,  as  a  mark  of  confidence,  delivered  over  to  Mirza
Aba  Bakr  the  fort  of  Uoh,  which  was  his  own  residence  and
domain.  They  entered  Aksn  together,  took  the  fort  by  storm,
and  laid  hands  on  all  the  treasure  and  hidden  wealth  which
Snlt&n  Ahmad  and  his  people  had  amassed  during  twenty-five
years.  This,  together  with  the  people  of  Aksn,  both  Moghnl  and
peasant  [rdyat\^  they  despatched  to  E&shghar,  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi
sending  his  own  family  in  front  of  all  the  rest,  to  prove  his  entire
tnist  in  Mirz4  Ab&  Bakr :  for  he  looked  upon  a  show  of  confidence  as
his  source  of  safety.  Mirz4  Abd  Bakr  asked  him  if  that  were  his
family.  He  replied :  "  There  might  be  difficulties  in  the  way  of
taking  them  in  the  rear  of  the  party,  so  they  can  go  now.  I
will  stay  here  a  few  days  to  pillage  and  plunder  the  surrounding
neighbourhood ;  then  I  will  load  your  army  with  booty,  and  will
bring  back  both  the  booty  and  the  army  to  you,  in  E&shghar.^

The  Mirza  was  pleased  with  this  boast  of  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi,  whose
family  he  took,  with  the  rest  of  the  people  of  Aksu,  to  Edshghar ;
while  he  left,  with  the  Mir,  an  army  of  10,000  men,  who  were
to  bring  on  whatever  had  been  left  behind.

Mir  Jabar  Birdi  led  the  Mirzi's  cu-my  against  Bai  and  Eusan,
making  several  raids  into  those  territories,  and  carrying  off  the
horses.  When  he  calculated  that  the  Mirz4  had  arrived  in
Eashghar,  he  abandoned  the  army  of  the  Mirza,  which,  frustrated
and  disappointed,  returned  to  Eashghar,  while  Mir  Jabar  Birdi
remained  in  the  province  of  Aksu.

These  events  were  disastrous  to  Mansur  Eh4n,  and  his  position
became  very  weak.  He  repented  of  having  persecuted  [attempted
to  take  the  life  of]  Mir  Jabar  Birdi,  who  was  his  maternal  uncle,

*  One  MS.  reads  Kw  and  others  Kusan,  Both  names  were  used  for  the  same
place,  as  also  Kot^  Kueha^  Kujar^  etc.,  and  all  appear  to  stand  for  the  modem
Kuchar  of  the  Turki-speaking  inhabitants,  and  KucHiS  of  the  Chinese.  An
earlier  Chinese  name,  however,  was  Ku-Hen.

The  neighbourhood  of  Kuchar  shows  traces  of  very  ancient  civilisation ;  it
must  liave  heen  one  of  the  chief  seats  of  Buddhism  in  Eastern  Turkistan,  and  it
abounds  still  in  remains  of  Buddhistic  buildings,  sculptures,  cave  dwellings,  etc.
It  was  in  this  district  that  Capt.  H.  Bower  obtained,  in  1888,  the  famous  birch-
bark  Sanscrit  MS.  described  by  Dr.  Hoernle  in  J.  A.  8.  B.,  vol.  Iz.,  pt.  1.,  no.  8.
The  book  was  dug  out  of  the  foot  of  what  appears  to  be  an  ancient  *'  chorten,**  of
which  several  are  to  be  found  in  the  Kuchar  district.  Capt.  Bower  also  notices
that  one  of  these  **cliortens"  is  to  be  seen  on  the  north  bank  of  the  river  at
Kasbghar.  The  one  out  of  which  the  MS.  was  obtained,  stood  just  outside  the
subterranean  rains  of  a  city  called  Manaai,  which  are  situated  about  16  miles
from  Kuchar,  on  the  banks  of  the  Shah-yar  river.  ^  The  town,"  writes  Capt.
Bower,  '*  must  have  been  of  considerable  extent,  but  has  been  greatly  reduced
owing  to  the  action  of  the  river.  On  the  cliffs  on  the  left  bank,  nigh  up  in  mid
air,  may  be  seen  the  remains  of  houses,  still  hane:ing  on  to  the  face  of  the  cliffs.
....  1  was  told  that  other  similar  towns  may  bo  seen  in  the  district."  (See
Proceedings  B.  A.  S.  B.,  Nov.  1890).  The  book  was  found  by  Dr.  Hoernle  to  be
written  in  tiie  Gupta  alphabet,  and  to  date  from  the  sixth  century  a.d.

'  Rdpat,  in  this  sentence,  appcnrs  to  mean  the  natives  of  the  soil,  as  distin-
guished from  the  foreign  Moghuls.

Digitized  by

Google

Manstir  Khdn.  125

the  brother  of  his  mother  Sahib  Daulat  Begum.  In  the  mean-
time, news  of  Mir  Jab&r  Birdi  reached  him.  He  thereupon  sent
messengers  to  him,  offering  apologies.  Having  made  a  covenant
with  him,  he  brought  him  back  and  bestowed  upon  him  even  greater
favours  than  his  father,  Sult4n  Ahmad  Ehdn,  had  done  before  him.

After  the  return  of  Mir  Jab&r  Birdi  to  the  court  of  Mansur
Eh&n,  the  affairs  of  the  latter  assumed  a  more  favourable  aspect.
At  that  time  the  people  of  the  different  tribes  were  engaged  in
hostilities  with  one  another,  and  these,  as  far  as  was  possible,  he
pacified.  This  is  a  long  st^ry,  and  I  do  not  recall  further  details.
In  short,  while  these  things  were  passing,  news  arrived  of  the
discord,  in  Moghulistdn,  between  Sult4n  Mahmud  Eh&n  and  Sultan
Said  Khdn  and  Sult&n  Ehalil  Sultdn.  Thereupon  Mansur  Khan
entered  Moghulistan,  and  again  met  his  paternal  uncle  Sultdn
Mahmud  Eh4n.  At  this  audience  he  also  met  Sult&n  Said  Eh4n
and  Sultan  Ehalil  Sultdn,  who  were  his  younger  brothers.

After  this  division  had  occurred.  Sultan  Mahmud  Kh4n  was  no
longer  able  to  remain  in  Moghulist&n,  being  incapable  of  directing
his  affairs  there  :  so  he  repaired  to  Mavard-un-Nahr  (as  has  been
told)  and  was  there  slain.

When  Mansur  Eh4n  heard  of  Sult4n  Mahmud  Khdn's  expedition
into  the  [wZdyaf]  country  [of  M4vdra-un-Nahr],  he  marched  against
his  brothers,  who  were  in  Moghulistdn  with  the  Kirghiz  and  the
rest  of  the  Moghuls,  who  had  stayed  behind.  On  his  arrival,  a
battle  took  place  in  Chdrun  Ch41&k.  The  fight  was  a  fierce  one,
and  ultimately  Mansur  Ehan  came  off  victor.  The  two  brothers
fled  to  *'  ihe  vildyaL^*  ^  On  reaching  Andij4n,  the  governor  of  that
place  put  Sultan  Ehalil  Sultan  to  death :  but  his  brother,  Sultdn
Said  Eh&n,  escaped  to  E&bul ;  all  of  which  is  related  in  Fart  II.

Mansur  Ehdn  carried  off  to  Chalish  ^  and  Turfan,  all  those  of
the  Eirghiz,  and  other  Moghul  tribes,  whom  he  found  in  Moghul-
istan. As  the  Eirghiz  were  the  originators  of  all  the  revolts  in
Moghulistdn,  he  put  most  of  them  to  death  by  stratagem.  A  few
of  them,  however,  fled  to  Moghulistdn.  After  this  he  made  in-
roads on  the  Edlmdk  and  was,  as  a  rule,  victorious.  Thus  the
affairs  of  the  Eh4n  prospered ;  though  from  time  to  time,  he
met  with  opposition  from  the  side  of  his  brothers.  One  of  them,
Aiman  Ehwaja  Sultdn,  twice  rose  against  him  and  was  twice
subdued,  without  more  being  said ;  however,  on  the  occasion  of
his  revolting  a  third  time,  he  was  seized  and  handed  over  to
Y&r4ka  At&ka,  who  received  orders  to  put  him  to  death.  But  in-
stead of  obeying,  he  hid  Aiman  Ehw4ja  Sultan,  telling  the  Eh4n  that

*  Into  which  vUdyat^ix,  ooontry  or  proyince— is  not  mentioned,  either  here
or  where  it  oocuib  imsi  ahove.  In  both  iDstances  it  is  probably  Mdvar^-nn-Nahr
that  is  intended,  though  the  word  appears  to  be  used,  in  this  and  other  Persian
books,  to  denote  any  foreign  country — as  is  the  case  in  modem  Hindustani.

*  The  modem  Kara-shahr.

Digitized  by

Google

126  Mansur  Khan.

he  had  carried  out  bin  oommission.  A  year  after  this,  Babajak
Snlt&n,  another  brother  of  the  Kh4n,  fled  from  him,  and  betook
himself  to  B4i  and  Kusan.

These  two  places,  since  their  destruction  [virdn]  by  Mirza  Ab4
Bakr  and  Jabar  Birdi,  had  fallen  into  desolation  and  ruin.  But
Babajak  came  and  cultivated  the  ground,  and  restored  the  fort
which  had  been  destroyed.  Then  Mansur  Kh4n  came  against
B4b4jak  Sult4n,  and  in  the  first  place,  tried  to  bring  him  to  terms
of  peace,  but  B4b4j&k  said :  *'  How  can  I  put  any  trust  in  you  ?
Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan  was  al^o  your  brother,  and  you  slew  him
like  an  enemy :  I  have  no  longer  any  faith  in  you."  Then  Mansur
Khan  repented  of  having  killed  Aiman  Khw&ja  Sultdu,  and  could
make  no  reply.  But  Y4r4ka  Atdka  interposed  :  "  I  had  the  pre-
sumption to  act  in  opposition  to  your  orders,  and  kept  your
brother  alive."  Mansur  Khan  was  very  grateful,  and  on  account
of  thiti  action,  raised  Y4r4ka  At4ka  to  a  very  high  rank.  He  then
sent  Aiman  Khw4ja  Sult4n  to  B4baj4k  Sult4n,  who  thereupon  came
and  offered  submission  to  the  ELhan,  and  made  terms  of  peace.

In  the  meanwhile,  news  arrived  of  the  victory  Sult4n  Said
Khan  had  obtained  over  Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr,  and  of  his  conquest  of
K4shghar.  B4b4j4k  Sult4n  sent  Aiman  Khw4ja  Sult4n  to  Said
Khan,  who  was  rejoiced  at  his  coming.  (B4b4j4k  Sult4n  and
Mansur  Kh4n  were  bom  of  the  same  mother ;  as  were  also  Sult4n
Said  Kh4n  and  Aiman  KJiw4ja  Kh4n.)  This  is  related  more  fully
in  Part  U.

Mansur  Kh4n  stood  in  great  fear  of  Sultau  Said  Khan,  because
he  had  been  the  cause  of  the  death  of  Sult4n  Said  £lh4n's  own
brother,  Sult4n  Khalil,  and  many  violent  disputes  arose  be-
tween them.  Mansur  ELhan  was  convinced  that  this  would
cause  an  eternal  enmity  between  them,  but  contrary  to  his  expec-
tations, Sult4n  Said  Kh4n  sent  an  ambassador,  with  an  escort,  to
his  elder  brother  Mansur  Kh4n,  and  begged  for  an  interview.  The
meeting  took  place  between  Aksu  and  Kusan  in  the  year  912,^
in  which  Sult4n  Said  Kh4n  declared  his  submission  and  obedience
to  Mansur  Kh4n,  and  ordered  the  Khutha  to  be  read  in  the  latter's
name ;  thus  a  complete  reconciliation  was  brought  about  between
the  two  brothers,  as  a  result  of  which  their  countries,  during  a
period  of  twenty  years,  enjoyed  the  most  perfect  peace  and  security.
Any  one,  for  example,  could  travel  alone  from  K4mul,^  in  Khitai,

*  The  date  912  is  wrongly  tranacribed  in  all  the  texts.  It  should  be  922,  as
is  shown  in  the  next  chapter  but  one,  where  a  chronogram  for  the  event  in
question  is  given,  which  works  out  922~obvious1y  the  correct  date — 1516.

*  Nowadays  usually  called  Kumvl — sometimes  KdmiL  The  modem  Chinese
name  is  Hdmiy  as  it  was  also  at  the  time  of  the  Mings,  who  were  coeval  with  the
events  here  related.  More  ancient  names  were  I-gu  and  I-ehou.  Sir  H.  Yule
mentioUH  a  Bishop  of  KwmuL^  about  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  Rnd
believes  the  place  tn  have  been  a  Nestorian  See.  (Klaproth's  TahUaux  UUtciiriquts^
map ;  Tule's  Marco  Polo,  i.,  p.  213).

Digitized  by

Google

Mansur  Khdn.  127

to  Andijan,  without  having  any  duties  levied  upon  him;  and
would  be  taken  every  night,  as  a  guest,  into  some  house  [on  the
road].  May  God  place  these  two  just  and  righteous  brothers  in
the  Garden  of  Paradise  I

During  these  twenty  years,  Mansur  Khan  made  several  holy  wars
against  Khit^i,  and  always  returned  mansur  [victorious].^  In  one
of  these  holy  wars,  Mir  Jab4r  Birdi  met  his  death,  as  did  also
Bandagi  Khwdja  Tajuddin  Muhammad.  This  latter  was  one  of  the
Ehwajas  of  Kusan,  and  was  descended  from  Maulan4  Arshad-
ud-Din,  who  converted  the  Moghuls  to  Islam,  as  has  been  already
related.  He  made  his  studies  under  Maul4n4  Ali  Gharrdn  of  Tus
(upon  whom  be  mercy),  and  also  spent  much  time  in  the  company
of  that  Axis  of  Axes,  Khwaja  Nasiruddin  UbaiduUah,  and  partici-
pated in  the  benevolent  glance  of  his  Holiness

I  once  heard  from  the  lips  of  Ehwaja  Tajuddin  the  following :
'*  I  was  one  day  visiting  his  Holiness,  and  was  seated  near  him,
when  he  remarked  that  it  was  necessary  to  abstain  from  *  doubtful
morsels.'  I  looked  round  the  company,  and  saw  they  were  all
men  of  piety ;  I  was  the  only  one  present  who  was  not  an  abstainer
[an  ascetic],  and  I  took  an  oath  that,  from  that  time  forward,  I
would  eat  no  food  that  was  not  pronounced  absolutely  lawful  by
him.  So  have  me  excused  if  I  touch  not  any  food  at  your  table.'*
I  have  mentioned  this  to  show  what  a  pious  and  abstinent  man
Khwaja  Tajuddin  was.  He  was  in  attendance  on  Sultan  Ahmad
Khan  and  Mansur  Kh4n  for  fifty  years,  or  rather  these  Khans
were  his  disciples.  And  he  accepted,  during  all  this  period,  neither
offering  nor  gift,  whether  it  were  from  the  Kh4ns  or  the  Sultdns
or  the  generals  of  the  army,  or  from  peasants  or  merchants.  The
Khw&ja  occupied  himself,  also,  with  commerce  and  agriculture.
And  from  these  occupations  there  accrued  to  him,  by  the  blessing
of  the  Most  High  God,  great  wealth.  And  what  urbanity  did  he
not  show,  every  year,  towards  the  Khans  and  the  Amirs !  The  poor
and  indigent — nay,  more,  the  peasant,  the  villager,  the  artisan,  and
the  merchant,  all  profited  [by  his  wealth].  For  this  reason  no  one
denied  him  anything,  and  all  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  were  laid
before  him  in  detail.  He  was,  in  very  truth,  a  great  and  loving —
a  generous  and  zealous  man.

In  one  of  the  holy  wars  against  Khitdi,  he  was  slain  before
Mansur  Kh4n's  eyes.  (May  God's  mercy  be  upon  him.)  When
Mansur  Kh4n  had  disposed  of  these  holy  wars  in  Khitai,  he  fought
a  pitched  battle  with  the  Uzbeg  Kaz4k  at  a  place  in  Moghulist4n
called  Arish,^  where  he  was  defeated ;  and  Sufi  Mirza,  who  was  a

*  For  some  remarks  on  these  wars,  see  Introduction,  Sec.  Y.

'  This  ArUh  in  Moghulistan  can  hardly  be  traced  for  certain,  though  names
such  as  Arys^  Arystyriy  etc.,  often  occur  on  the  detailed  Bussian  maps  of  ue  region
which  represents  Moghulistan.  In  all  probability  it  was  situated  towards  the
eastern  coniines  of  the  Moghul  territory,  and  can  scarcely  be  the  same  as  the

Digitized  by

Google

128  Manstir  Kkdn.

Begjik  and  the  chief  minister  of  the  Elhdn,  was  killed*  Affcer  this
event  [Mansur]  made  fewer  expeditions  from  Chdlish  and  Turf4n.

Subsequent  to  the  death  of  Sultan  Said  Kh4n,  he  marched  against
Aksu.  Twice  he  failed  and  was  obliged  to  retire,  and  in  the  year
950  he  died  (may  God  illumine  his  proof !)  at  the  age  of  about
sixty  years.  Except  Ynnus  Eh&n,  no  other  Kh4n  of  the  Chaghatdi
line  attained  such  an  age.  He  ascended  the  throne,^  in  the  year
907,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  reigned  forty-three  years.  No  other
Chaghatai  Kh4n  ever  reigned  as  long  as  this.  Nor  did  any  of
the  Moghul  Kh4ns  enjoy  so  long  a  life  and  reign.  He  adorned  his
days  from  the  first  to  the  last  with  blessings  and  charitable  gifts.
He  passed  the  whole  of  his  time  in  the  study  of  the  holy  law,  or  the
reading  of  the  Kor4n.  I  have  heard  from  his  intimates  that  he
used  to  spend  about  one-fifth  of  his  time  in  directing  the  affairs
of  the  State,  and  all  the  rest  in  perusal  of  the  Kor4n  {t%lami\^
prayer  [davat\  the  prescribed  prayers  [nanuiz],  and  in  reciting  the
names  of  God  \Izkdr\  It  would  be  hard  to  find  any  one  among
the  P4dish4hs,  or  even  among  the  most  pious  men  \alil^9ukJc],  who
disposed  of  their  time  better  than  he  did.  And  in  consequence  of
this  he  was  blessed  with  a  long  life  and  earthly  happiness,  such  as
no  one  but  he,  of  his  line,  has  ever  enjoyed.  May  God  bless  his
heavenly  life  as  he  did  his  days  upon  earth  I  Amen.  Oh  God  of
both  worlds  I

He  excelled  in  the  conduct  of  life,  in  intelligence  and  prudence,
and  was  skilled  in  state  management  and  the  control  and  organisa-
tion of  armies.  By  his  nature  he  was  not  at  all  addicted  to  the
customs  and  ceremonies  of  kings,  or  to  the  grandeur  and  magnifi-
cence of  Kh4ns,  but  rather  tried  to  do  without  ceremony,  and  to
live  as  simply  as  possible.  In  no  way  whatever  did  he  make  any
distinction  between  himself  and  the  rest  of  his  people.  He  knew
the  Kor4n  by  heart,  and  had  a  very  accurate  Beadery  who  was  better
versed  in  the  Kor4n  than  any  one  else  in  the  country.  His  name  was
"  H4fiz  Magas-i-sag."  ^  But  in  his  innermost  nature,  this  man  was
so  unbalanced  and  his  acts  were  so  revolting,  that  to  mention  them
would  be  a  reason  for  withdrawing  behind  a  curtain!  It  was
under  this  man  that  Mansur  Khan  learnt  by  heart  the  Kaldm-  UUah,
Some  of  his  officers  one  day  suggested,  in  private,  to  the  Kh4n  that
H4fiz  Magas  was  not  worthy  to  be  his  teacher,  seeing  that  his  mind

Arish  mentioned  in  Part  II.  (p.  378)  in  connection  with  Ak-kum,  as  that  place
appears  to  have  lain  beyond  the  north-western  limits  of  Moghulistan.  (See  note
4,  p.  378.)

1  That  is  to  say,  the  throne  of  Aksn  and  Tur&n.

*  TUdvat — treading  and  meditating  on  the  Kordn.  The  Namdz  means  the  five
prescribed  prayers  or  litanies  of  the  day — ^the  Arabic  saUU,  Ddvat  literally
means  "  supplication,"  and  is  used  for  private,  or  spontaneous,  prayer. — ^B.

'  The  name  would  mean  "  the  Hafiz  of  the  fly  of  the  dog. '  A  Hafiz  is  one
who  has  committed  to  memory  the  whole  of  the  Kor6n.

Digitized  by

Google

Shdh  Khan.  129

was  totally  unsound.  .  .  }  Thus  it  is  evident  that  Mansnr  Khan
was  a  religiously  inclined  monarch.  He  spent  the  whole  of  his
life  in  the  practice  of  Islam.

He  left  behind  him  two  sons,  Sh4h  Khan  and  Muhammad  Sultan,
and  one  daughter,  whom  Sultan  Said  Khan  took  for  his  son  Eashid
Sultan,  as  is  mentioned  in  Part  11.

CHAPTER  LXVI.

sHiH  khIn,  son  of  mansur  khan.

At  the  end  of  his  life,  Mansur  Kh4n  had  raised  his  eldest  son  Shah
Khan  to  the  throne,  while  he  himself  withdrew  to  the  cell  of  retire-
ment. His  son  succeeded  to  all  his  authority,  and  is  at  this  day —
952  [1545]— the  reigning  Khan  in  Tnrf4n  and  Ch41ish.  l3ut  in  his
treatment  of  his  father's  adherents,  in  his  direction  of  the  Khanate,
and  in  his  regal  proceedings,  he  has  adopted  displeasing  ways,  and
has  become  notoiious  for  his  bad  manners,  of  which  it  is  unneces-
sary for  me  to  speak.  Even  while  his  father  was  yet  alive,  he  had
stained  the  garments  of  good  reputation  with  the  pollution  of
disobedience,  and  he  does  not  now  regard  the  memory  of  his  dis-
tinguished father  in  the  way  that  is  becoming  and  fit ;  nor  has  he
shown  such  signs  of  piety  and  prosperity  as  would  be  worthy  of
his  good  father.

It  is  the  practice  of  historians  to  recount  everything  as  they  find
it,  whether  worthy  or  unworthy  of  mention.  For  it  is  not  their
object  to  write  down  the  good  qualities  of  princes,  and  to  omit  all
their  bad  actions,  but  rather  to  reproduce  all  facts  without  dis-
crimination, in  order  that  they  may  leave  behind  them  a  record  of
the  people  of  this  world.  Thus  all  men  in  power,  as  well  as  others,
reading  their  histories,  may  profit  by  their  advice,  and  may  see
what  have  been  the  various  fruits  and  results  of  praiseworthy
habits,  on  the  one  hand,  or  blameable  actions  on  the  other :  also
that  they  may  accept  the  lesson  I0  be  learnt  from  observing  the
way  in  which  the  memory  of  different  princes  has  been  preserved,
and  may,  in  short,  incline  to  good  deeds  and  avoid  evil  ways.

>  The  remainder  of  this  passage  is  unfit  for  translation.  In  Persian  it  stands
as  foUoWd :  **  In  H^fiz  Magas  IdiK  nsUdi  nist  chi  dar  ghr&yat  bi  iHiddlf  ast.  Az
jumki  ^nki  lira  darin  rilzhi  ba  mdda  gavi  girifta-and.  SMgirdiyi  Kh&n  ura  chi
mun^ib  bdshad."  Kbdn  gnft :  ^*  Mao  azii  KaUm-Ullah  yad  mikaxdam,  mdda-
g&y  ii  Taz*-i-badan  ydd  nakhwdham  girift.*'

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

130  Sultdn  Said  Khdn,

CHAPTER  LXVII.

SULTAN SAID KHAN, SON OF SULTAN AHMAD  KHAN.

Sultan  Ahmad  Khan  had  eighteen  sons.  The  eldest  was  Mansur
Khan,  of  whom  I  have  just  spoken.  Next  to  him  came  Iskandar
Sultan,  who  died  a  natural  death,  after  his  father.  Then  came
Sultan  Said  Khan,  who  was  fourteen  years  of  age  when  Sultan
Ahmad  Kh4n  went  to  [the;  assistance  of)  his  elder  brother.  Sultan
Mahmud  Khan.  He  had  taken  with  him,  on  this  occasion,  two  of
his  sons ;  namely  Sultan  Said  Khan  and  Babdjak  Sultdn.

While  the  two  Kh4ns  were  together,  Sultdn  Said  Khan  passed
his  days  in  the  cell  of  instruction  of  my  father,  and  under  the
kindly  protection  of  my  uncle.  [This  lasted]  up  to  the  time  of  the
battle  at  Akhsi,  between  the  two  Khans  and  Shahi  Beg  Khan  (which
has  been  mentioned).  In  the  flight  which  ensued,  Sultdn  Said
Khdn  was  struck  by  an  arrow  in  the  thigh,  and  the  bone  was
broken :  so  he  threw  himself  onto  a  side  path.^  After  the  flight
and  rout  had  subsided,  some  of  the  people  of  that  district  found
him,  but  as  his  leg  was  broken,  they  did  not  remove  him  from
where  he  lay.  After  a  few  days  had  passed,  and  he  was  almost
recovered,  they  took  him  before  Shaikh  Bdyazid,  Governor  of
Akhsi.  An  account  of  Shaikh  Bdyazid  and  of  his  brother,  Sultdn
Ahmad  Tambal,  Avill  be  found  in  Part  II.  Shaikh  Bdyazid  kept
Sultdn  Said  Khdn  in  prison.

In  the  year  following,  when  the  com  was  high,  Shdhi  Beg
Khan  again  came  against  Farghdna  and  Sultdn  Ahmad  Tambal.
Sultdn  Ahmad  Tambal  and  Shaikh  Bdyazid,  together  with  all  their
brothers,  were  put  to  death  by  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  who  then  pos-
sessed himself  of  Farghdna.  Sultdn  Said  Khdn,  who  was  in  prison,
by  the  order  of  Shaikh  Bdyazid,  was  now  released  and  conducted
before  Shdhi  Beg  Khan,  who  treated  him  as  his  own  son,  and  being
moved  to  pity  at  his  sad  condition,  took  him  to  Samarkand.  From
there  he  took  him  on  his  campaign  against  Hisdr  and  Knndnz,  at
the  time  when  Khusrau  Shdh  had  just  subjugated  the  provinces  of
Hisdr,  Kunduz,  and  Badakhshdn.  When  he  had  brought  this  enter-
prise to  a  close,  he  again  returned  to  Samarkand.  He  next  invaded
Khwdrizm.  But  on  the  occasion  of  this  expedition,  the  Khdn  fled
from  him  and  came  into  Moghulistdn.  He  journeyed  by  way  of
Uzun  Ahmad  as  far  as  Yatikand.*  His  uncle,  Sultdn  Mahmud
Khdn,  was  at  that  time  in  Yatikand ;  with  him  he  passed  a  few

>  PaightUa — side  path  or  sheltered  nook. — R.
'  See  for  this  name  note,  p.  180.

Digitized  by

Google

Stdtdn  Said  Khan,  13 1

days,  but  finally,  being  wearied  with  the  careless  way  in  which
his  uncle  conducted  the  affairs  of  the  State,  he  departed  and  went
into  Moghnlistaii  to  visit  his  brother,  Sultan  Khalil  Sultan,  who
was  governor  of  the  Kirghiz.

He  remained  four  years  with  his  brother,  among  the  Kirghiz  in
Moghulistdn.  During  this  period  many  transactions  took  place
between  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  Mansur  Khan,  and  these  two
brothers.  The  result  of  these  proceedings  was  that  Sultan  Mahmud
Khan  found,  on  account  [of  the  opposition]  of  his  nephews,  that
he  could  no  longer  remain  in  Moghulistdn.  So  he  went  to  seek
Shahi  Beg  Khdn,  in  hopes  of  kind  treatment.  But  Shahi  Beg
Khan,  ^s  has  been  related,  put  him  to  death  on  the  river  of
Khojand.  When  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan  went  abroad  [to  vildyat]
to  visit  Shahi  Beg  Khdn,  these  two  brothers  remained  in  Moghul-
istan  and  the  Kirghiz  country.  In  the  meanwhile,  news  of  the
approach  of  Mansur  Khdn's  army  reached  them.  For  Mansur
Khan  had  led  out  an  army  from  Ghalish  and  Turfan  against  his
brothers,  in  order  to  seize  the  land  of  the  Khirghiz  and  Moghulistdn.
So  Sultdn  Said  Khdn  and  Sultan  Khalil,  having  collected  all  the
[fighting]  men  of  the  Kirghiz  and  the  Moghuls,  took  up  a  strong
position  at  a  place  called  Charun  Chdk,^  ready  to  receive  the  enemy.
On  the  arrival  of  Mansur  with  his  army,  the  signal  for  battle  was
given,  and  finally  Sultdn  Said  Khdn  and  Sultdn  Khalil  Sultdn  were
defeated.  Mansur  Khan  made  the  Kirghiz  march  into  Chdlish,
as  has  been  mentioned  in  the  account  of  Mansur  Khdn.  Sultdn
Khalil  Sultdn  escaped  from  the  fight  with  a  considerable  number
of  men,  and  came  to  Farghdna,  [hoping]  to  fall  in  with  his
uncle  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  and  to  be  kindly  treated  by  Shdhi
Beg  Khdn.  But  when  he  reached  Akhsi  he  was  put  to  death  by
Jdni  Beg  Khdn,  a  cousin  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  and  governor  of  the
country  of  Farghdna.

Sultdn  Said  Khdn,  for  some  time  after  the  battle,  took  to
robbery,  but  events  soon  came  about  which  rendered  impossible
for  him  further  sojourn  in  Moghidistdn.  (These  events  are
described  in  Part  II.  To  avoid  repetition  they  have  only  been
given  in  epitome  here.)  In  this  state  of  hopelessness  Sultan  Said
Khdn  went  to  Andijan,  and  thence  to  Kdbul,  to  visit  his  (p;»ternal)
cousin  Babar  Padishdh,  the  son  of  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  who
received  him  with  honour  and  kindness,  and  with  whom  he
stayed  for  three  years  at  Kdbul.

When  Shdh  Ismdil  [defeated  and]  slew  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  in
Marv,  Bdbar  Pddishdh  moved  from  Kdbul  to  Kunduz,  taking
Sultdn  Said  Khdn  with  him.  At  this  same  time  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirzd,  son  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  and  uncle  of  the  author

'  Or  Jdrun  Jdk — prohably  the  same  name  that  at  page  125  was  written  Chdrun
ChdJdk,

K  2

Digitized  by

Google

132  Snltdn  Said  Khdiu

of  this  history,  invaded  Andijan  and,  driving  Jani  Beg  Sultan  otif,
became  himself  master  of  the  country.  He  then  sent  messengers
to  inform  Babar  Padishah  of  what  he  had  achieved.  Bdbar
Padishah  thereupon  sent  Sultan  Said  Khan  and  what  Moghiil
Amirs  he  had  in  his  service,  to  Andijan.  On  his  ariival  there,
Sultan  Said  Khdn  W€i8  received  with  ceremony  by  his  undo
Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza,  who  also  delivered  over  to  him  the
whole  of  the  territory  which  he  had  just  subjugated.  The  Khan
showed  my  undo  every  mark  of  honour,  and  according  to
the  ancient  Moghul  custom,  conferred  upon  him  the  title  of
Ulushegiy^  which  became  his  hereditary  office.

Meanwhile  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  having  set  his  heart  upon  the
kingdom  of  Farghana,  had  collected  an  army  in  Kdshghar,  and
was  on  the  road  to  Andijan.  The  Khan  marched  out  to  meet  him
with  an  army  of  1500  men.  The  two  forces  came  into  contact  at
a  place  called  Tnt-lugh,*  about  two  farsdkhs  from  Andijan.  By
the  help  of  God  [that  small  body]  of  1500  men  overcame  an  army
20,000  strong,  after  a  very  fierce  struggle,  and  in  consequence
of  this  victory  the  fame  of  Sultan  Said  Khan  was  established
among  the  surrounding  Sultdns.  The  Uzbeg  Sultans  from
Farghana  then  began  to  assemble  on  the  borders  of  Samarkand
and  T4shkand.  Afterwards,  Babar  Padishah  engaged  these
Sultans  in  a  battle  at  His4r  Shadman,  and  was  victorious.  By
this  victory  he  was  enabled  to  rid  Mavard-un-Nahr  of  all  the
Uzbeg,  and  he  himself  mounted  the  throne  of  Samarkand.  In  the
month  of  Bajab  of  the  year  917,^  the  Khan  was  again  firmly
established  in  Andijdn.  In  the  early  spring  [awal  hahdr]  of  the
same  year,  the  Uzbeg  again  entered  Tashkand.  Ubaid  UUah  Khan
advanced  in  the  direction  of  Bokhdra,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
which  place  he  fought  a  battle  with  Babar  Padishah,  who  had
come  out  to  oppose  him.  Ubaid  Ullali  Khan  was  victorious,  and
Babar  Padishah  retired  defeated  to  Samarkand,  whence,  with-
drawing his  family  and  all  his  belongings,  ho  fied  to  Hisar.  Thus
the  Uzbeg  recovered  their  ascendency.  The  Khan  remained  in
Andijan.

Babar  Padishah,  meanwhile,  appealed  to  Shdh  Ismail  for  assist-
ance. The  latter  sent  Mir  Najm,  one  of  his  Amirs,  with  60,000
men,  to  the  Padishdh,  who  having  joined  his  own  troops  to  these,
marched  on  Samarkand. The  Kh&n,  in the  meantime,  having

*  That  is,  **  chief  of  the  tribe."  This  title  seems  to  have  been  a  very  old  one
among  the  Moghuls,  though  strangely  enough  the  words  ulus  hegi  are  both
Turkish.  At  the  time  in  question  here— within  the  sixteenth  century — it  could
have  carried  with  it  little  more  than  a  nominal  office,  though  at  an  earlier  period
the  Uluabegi  appears  really  to  have  been  ruler  of  his  tribe,  and  the  title  then
was  perhaps  equivalent  to  **  King."

*  Previously  written  Tut-Luh,

*  June  or  July,  1511.

Digitized  by

Google

Sultdn  Said  Khan.  133

harassed  the  Uzbeg  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Andijan,  also  marched
towards  Samarkand,  and  encountered  Suyunj  Khwaja  Khan  near
Tashkand.  All  the  other  Khans  and  Sultdns  had  assembled  in
Samarkand  and  Bokhara  to  oppose  Babar  Pddishdh.  But  in  the
battle  near  Tashkand,  between  the  Kh4n  and  Suyunj  Khwdja
Khan,  the  former  had  5000  men  and  the  latter  7000 ;  after  a  hard
fight,  the  Khan  was  defeated  and  fled  to  Andijdn.^

Your  servant,  the  author  of  the  present  history,  having  taken
leave  of  Babar  Padishah,  at  the  time  when  he  went  to  join  Mir
Najm,  entered  the  service  of  the  Khdn,  who  was  in  Andij4n,  and
had  just  sustained  a  defeat  at  the  hands  of  Suyunj  Khw4ja  Khan.
In  the  spring,  the  Khan  went  to  the  court  of  Kasim  Kh4n,  who
was  luler  of  the  Dasht-i-Kipch&k.  At  that  time  his  army
numbered  300,000  men.  Kasim  Khan  received  him  with  so  much
respect  and  honour  that  the  Khan  remembered  it  for  years  after.
On  his  return  from  that  visit,  he  distinguished  me  from  among
my  equals  with  the  connection  [mtMaAara^]  of  Kurkdni.  All  this
is  related  in  Fart  II.

In  the  early  spring  of  the  year  920  all  the  great  Uzbeg  Sultans,
with  a  very  numerous  army  of  warriors,  advanced  against  Andijan.
The  Khan,  not  deeming  it  wise  to  offer  fight,  retired  into
Moghulistan  before  the  foreign  army  reached  Farghana.  When
he  arrived  at  Yatikand  they  held  a  council  of  war,  and  acting  on
the  timely  advice  and  persuasion  of  my  uncle  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza  (who  was  brother  to  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr),  they  marched  towards
Kashghar,  where  a  terrible  battle  was  fought,  in  which  the  army
of  that  place  was  routed  and  obliged  to  retire  within  the  fort  of
Kashghar.  The  Kh4n  then  marched  on  Yangi  HisAr,  which  he
besieged  fur  three  months.  At  length  the  inhabitants  entered
into  a  capitulation  with  my  uncle,  and  delivered  up  the  fort.

On  this  news  reaching  Kdshghar,  the  army  that  was  in  that
town  abandoned  it.  When  the  fugitives  joined  Mirza  Aba  Bakr
in  Yarkand,  he  too  resolved  on  flight,  and  took  the  road  to  Khotan.
The  Khan  pursued  him  to  Yarkand,  and  then  sent  on  troops  after
him,  as  far  as  the  mountains  of  Tibet.  Much  booty  in  the  shape
of  cloths,  goods,  cattle  and  horses  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Moghul
army  (as  is  described  in  the  Second  Part).

The  accession  of  the  Khan  to  the  kingdom  of  Kashghar  was  in
Rajab  of  the  year  920.^  At  the  end  of  that  winter  Aiman  Khwaja
Sultan,  who  was  brother  to  the  Khan,  by  the  same  father  and
mother,  came  from  Turfan,  as  has  been  stated  above.  He
instigated  and  encourged  his  Amirs  in  the  matter  of  the  exter-
mination of  Mansur  Kh&n,  explaining  to  them  the  decline  of  the

^  One  MS.  has  '*  fled  to  Hissar,*'  but  Andijan  is  obviouflly  right. Dr.  Bellew'd
MS.  appears  to  have  had  Andijan.
'  May  and  June,  1514.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

134  Sultdn  Said  Klidn,

Khan's  power,  and  dwelling  on  the  enmity  that  had  existed  in
Moghulistan,  in  times  past,  towards  the  Khan.  But  the  Khan
said  :  "  He  is  the  elder  brother ;  in  former  times  I  did  not  pay  him
due  respect,  and  consequently  he  punished  me.  I  ought  on  this
account  to  hear  him  no  enmity.  The  most  fitting  thing  for  me  to
do,  is  to  apologise  to  him  for  my  shortcomings,  and  ofifer  him
reparation  for  the  past."  He  then  sent  ambassadors  bearing
words  of  peace  and  submission.  At  this  message,  Mansur  Khan,
whose  soul  had  come  to  his  lips,  from  fear  and  foreboding,  now
received  new  life  and  joy  without  bounds.  He  came  in  fear  and
trembling  to  the  conference  \mMkat\  which  was  held  between
Aksu  and  Kusan.  The  Khan  showed  him  great  honour,  and
agreed  to  read  the  Khu^a  and  strike  coins  in  his  name.  And  all
ihe  ill-feeling  that  he  had  formerly  borne  Mansur  Khan,  he  now
changed  to  brotherly  affection  and  obedience.  From  this  peace
and  reconciliation  between  the  two  brothers,  resulted  such  security
and  prosperity  for  the  people,  that  any  one  might  travel  alone
between  K4mul  or  Khitdi  and  the  country  of  Farghana,  without
provision  for  the  journey  and  without  fear  of  molestation.  Some
ingenious  person,  to  commemorate  this  peace,  invented  the  following
chronogram,  "  Jhk  Icuhkar  ha  niakdt " — that  is,  922.  ["  Two  armies
in  happiness."]

The  next  year,  when  Muhammad  Kirghiz  had  made  raids  into
Turkistan  and  Farghana,  and  had  plundered  the  Musulmdns,  the
Khdn,  in  his  desire  to  protect  Islam,  looked  upon  this  action  us  an
insult.  He  therefore  set  forth  to  attack  Muhammad  Kirghiz,
whom  he  seized  and  threw  into  prison,  where  he  remained  for
fifteen  years.

In  928  [1522]  the  Kh&n  took  his  sonBashid  Sultan  intoMoghul-
istan.  He  subdued  the  whole  of  Moghulistan  and  the  Kirghiz,  and
a  number  of  the  people  of  Moghulistan  supported  Eashid  Sultan.
Finally,  on  account  of  the  [^superiority  of  the  Mangit,^  the  Uzbeg

*  The  uame  here  reudei  ed  Mangit  is  subject  to  several  difTereut  readings,  such  as
ManfakiU  MarCakit,  etc. ;  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  author  is  pointing
to  tlie  tribe  of  Mangit  or  MangtU,  The  word  occurs  again  in  connection  wiih
tlie  same  events  lower  down,  ttjough  it  is  there  spelled  differently,  (see  p.  374).
t:*till  it  would  seem  permissible,  un  historical  grounds,  to  assume  that  the  tribal
name  of  ManaU  is  intended.  There  is  little  to  be  found  on  the  subject  of  these
))eop1e. Abut  Ghazi  tells  us,  quite  shortly,  that  they  descended  from  Chiugiz/s

name  of  ManaU  is  intended.  There  is  little  to  be  found  on  the  subject  of  these
))eop1e.  Abut  Ghazi  tells  us,  quite  shortly,  that  they  descended  from  Chiugiz^s
grandfather  Bartau  Khan,  while  Kashid-ud-Din,  according  to  Erdmann,  includes

4li£im in Ilia liaf f\f *  Ttloolr 'PofaiKi'  fv^ f^iKoa  iK.rVir\  xuar^tt rki>i trin o  1 W* \frknrm1o  • Vvufr

them  in  liis  list  of  *  Black  Tatars,'  or  tribes  who  were  originally  Mongols;  but
beyond  these  brief  references  to  them,  in  the  later  Middle  Ages,  they  do  not
appear  to  have  attracted  much  attention.  They  are  said  to  have  been  a  people
akin  to  the  Nogai,  and  at  about  the  period  alluded  to  in  the  text  (1522)  were
inhabitants  of  the  Kipchak  steppes.  They  are  known  also  to  have  become
adherents  of  Sh^hi  Beg  Khan  shortly  before  this  date,  and  it  seems  quite  possible
that  they  may  have  had  sufficient  power  to  expel  the  Uzbeg  Kazak  from  the
K.ii)chak  steppes,  if  these  were  their  enemies.  At  a  long  subsequent  date — ^iu
lliM  eighteenth  century — the  descendants  of  these  Mangit  rose  in  influence,  till  their
chiefb  became  a  rulin  ^  dynasty  in  Bokhara.  (See  Abul  Ghazi.  p.  76;  Erdmann's
Ttmud»chin,\)\h  ICiS  and  tclO;  and  S.  L.  Poole's  Muham.  Dynast,  p.  277.)

Digitized  by

Google

Sultdn  Said  Khdn.  13S

Eazak,  being  no  longer  able  to  remain  in  the  Dasht-i-Kipchak,
came  over  into  Moghulistan,  to  the  number  of  200,000  persons.  It
was  impossible  to  resist  them,  so  Bashid  Sultan  retired  with  his
men  to  Kashghar.

Meanwhile  the  Khan  invaded  Badakhshdn,  and  conquered  half
of  it,  whioh  is,  to  this  day,  subject  to  the  government  of  Kashghar.
This  is  a  long  story.  The  disputes  that  arose  out  of  the  claims  to
its  inheritance  made  by  Sh4h  Begum  (who  has  been  mentioned)
are  related  in  Fart.  IT.  of  this  History.

The  Khdn  twice  invaded  Badakhshan,  once  in  the  year  925  and
again  in  936  [1519  and  1529-30].  In  the  year  934  the  Khan
sent  me,  with  Bashid  Sultdn,  to  Balur,  which  is  a  country  of
infidels  \KafiriitAn\  between  Badakhshan  and  Kashmir,^  whore  we
conducted  successfully  a  holy  war  \€jhaa&i\  and  returned  victo-
rious, loaded  with  booty  and  covered  with  glory.

A  short  time  after  this,  it  came  about  that  some  malicious  and
impure  devils  set  up  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultdn  in  Aksu.  This  town,
which  from  the  date  of  the  conquest  of  Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr  (909),
to  the  year  913,  had  been  in  a  state  of  ruin,  was  now  rebuilt  by
Aiman  Khwaja  Sultdn.

The  Khdn  sent  me,  together  with  Bashid  Sultdn,  to  Aksu,  whence
we  drove  out  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultdn,  and  sent  him  to  Kdshghar.
Then,  having  set  in  order  his  military  and  civil  affairs,  I  left
Bashid  Sultdn  in  Aksu  and  re-entered  the  service  of  the  Khan.
Aiman  Sultdn  was  despatched  to  Hindustdn,  where  he  died  a  natural
death.  At  the  end  of  the  year  938  [1532]  the  Khdn  made  a  holy
war  on  the  infidel  country  \KafiT%9ian\  of  Tibet,^  sending  me
forward  in  advance  of  himself.  I  had  taken  several  of  the  forts
and  subdued  most  of  the  country  of  Tibet,  by  the  time  the  ELhdn

*  Balur  or  B(^  included  Honza,  Nagar,  Gilgit,  Yasin,  Chitial,  &c.,  as  will  bo
seon  farther  on,  note,  p.  885.

'  It  may  be  noted  hore,  that  the  only  name  for  the  province  of  Ixtddk  ever  used
by  Mirza  Haidar  is  Tibet.  In  this  he  is  at  one  with  all  the  Tarki-speaking
inliabitauts  of  Central  Asia,  down  to  the  present  day.  The  word  Ijodak,  or  more
properly  Lortags^  is  a  purely  local  one.  The  inconvenient  circumstance,  however,
is  that  throughout  the  Tarikh4-Ba$h%di  the  name  of  Tibet  is  applied  not  only  to
LaddJt^  but  to  the  whole  of  the  provinces  under  the  rule  of  the  priestly  govern-
ment of  Lassa — that  is,  to  the  region  generally  known  in  Europe  as  Tibet.  In
^reading  the  Tarikh-i'Iiashidi,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  discriminate  betweou
Ladak  and  Tiitet  proper,  on  every  occasion  that  the  word  occurs.  In  the  pre:*ent
instance  the  author  is  speaking  of  Ladak  only.  The  province  of  Balti»tau
(called  always  by  our  author  Balti)^  which  is  situated  to  the  north  of  Kashmir
and  west  of  Ladak,  is  known  as  LitUe  Tibet  in  all  the  neighbourinsr  regions,  and
to  niost  Oriental  writers ;  while  Ladak  is  sometimes  termed  Great  Tibet  by  way  nf
distinction.  The  Jesuit  missionary  Desideri,  in  the  MS.  narrative  of  his  travels
during  the  early  part  of  the  last  century  (in  possession  of  the  Hakluyt  Society)
nearly  always  refers  to  BaUiskm  as  "  the  first  Tibet,"  to  Ladak  as  **  the  second
Tibet,"  and  to  Tibet  proper,  or  Lassa  territory,  as  "  the  third  Tibet." The  word

Ttbe/,  it  may  be  added,  though  seldom  or  never  used  by  the  natives  of  any  of  th«
Tibetan  provinces,  is  of  purely  Tibetan  origin,  as  explained  by  Mr.  W.  W.  Rock-

Google

hill  in  the  Joum.  Ml.  As.  Socy.  for  Jan.  1891,  p.  5. It  has  come  to  Europe,
however,  through  Central  Asia.

Digitized  by'

136  Sultdn  Said  Khdtt,

came  up  with  me.  The  two  armies  together  formed  a  body  of
5000  men,  which  was  a  larger  number  of  people  than  all  Tibet
could  support  in  winter  time.  So  the  Khan  saw  fit  to  send  me,  in
company  with  Iskandar  Sultdn,  to  Kashmir,  with  4000  men,  while
he  himself  proceeded  to  Balti,  which  is  a  province  between  Tibet
and  Balur.  He  spent  the  winter  there,  engaged  in  a  holy  war,
and  in  the  spring  returned  to  Tibet.

I  entered  Kashmir  that  winter,  and  at  the  end  of  the  season  ^
fought  a  pitched  battle  with  the  kings  [maZi'A;]  of  the  country.
Thanks  to  the  Most  High  God,  I  came  off  victorious,  and  exter-
minated the  whole  army  of  Kiashmir  and  the  kings.  I  might  also
have  subdued  the  whole  of  the  country,  had  it  not  been  for  some
of  those  malignant  persons  who,  by  their  words  and  actions,
throw  things  into  disorder,  and  who  rendered  the  further  reduction
of  the  country  impossible.^  Peace  was  made  with  the  kings  of
Kashmir,  and  the  daughter  of  Muhammad  Shah,  the  Padishah  of
Kashmir,  was  given  in  marriage  to  Iskandar  Sultan,  while  the
Khu&)a  was  read  and  the  coins  struck  in  the  Khan's  name.  All  the
wealth  of  Kashmir,  that  it  was  possible  to  collect,  was  brought,  in
the  spring  following  that  winter,  to  the  Khd.n  in  Tibet.  The
Khan,  on  my  return,  honoured  me  with  every  mark  of  royal  bene-
volence and  favour,  and  sent  me  to  Ursang,  which  is  the  Kibla
of  Khitai  and  Tibet,^  while  he  himself  set  out  for  Kashghar.

>  The  winter  of  1532-3.

'  The  author  is  referring  to  ''malignant  persons **  in  his  own  oamp — i.e.  to  one
Ali  Taghai  and  others  of  the  Moghuls,  as  will  be  seen  in  Chap.  cii.  of  the
Second  Part.

'  Ursang  can  be  no  other  than  Lassa,  under  a  corruption  of  the  Chinese  names
of  the  two  chief  or  central  provinces  of  Tibet — ^viz.,  Wu  and  Ttang.  These  two
names  are  nearly  always  coupled,  and  used  together  to  denote  Tibet  proper  as  a
whole,  BO  that  Mirza  Haidar,  hearing  them  paired  in  this  way — Wu-Taang —
applied  them  to  the  capital  city  instead  of  to  the  country.  Nothing  is  more
common  among  Asiatics  than  to  give  the  name  of  the  country  to  its  chief  town,
or  to  employ  the  name  of  the  capital  for  the  country  at  large.  In  this  cabo,
Mirza  Haidar  is  only  using  what  may  be  termed  the  official  Chinese  designation
for  the  country,  at  the  time  he  wrote,  for  during  the  Ming  period,  as  well  as
during  that  of  the  Monjjjols  (which  preceded  it),  Wu-Tsang  or  Wu-K^-tgang  waa
the  name  for  Tibet  which  had  been  adopted  in  the  official  histories  and  geo-
graphies. Later,  the  name  became  changed  into  Si'Tsang,  or  Western  T«atw/,
and  Tibet  is  known  to  the  Chinese  of  the  present  day  by  this  combination.  Tho
two  <iuter  provincori  of  Ijissa-governed  TilH-t  are  Kdmf  lying  to  the  east  of  Wu^
and  Ngari  to  the  north-west  of  Tsang,  AH  the  country  to  the  north  of  Wu-Tmng
and  Ngari  is  usually  known  as  Chdng-tdn^  or  the  Northern  Plain — an  elevated
desolate  region  with  which  the  Lassa  government  seems  scarcely  to  concern  itself.

When  Mirza  Haidar  speaks  of  Ursang^,  as  the  "  Kibla " — the  cynosure,  tho
}X)int  of  adoration— of  the  Chinese  and  Tibetans,  he  could  not  have  indicated
Lassa  more  distinctly,  although  further  on,  in  the  Second  Part,  he  g^ves  some
additional  particulars  concerning  Ursang^  which  could  apply  to  no  other  place
than  Lassa.  His  spelling  of  the  name  has  arisen  from  the  difficulty,  which  every
Persian  or  Turki  speaking  Asiatic  finds,  in  pronouncing  the  combination  ts — a
difficulty  just  as  formidable  as  the  pronunciation  of  the  st.  The  insertion  of  the
letter  r,  too,  in  foreign  names,  is  not  an  uncommon  practice  with  Persian  writers,
as  Amur  for  AiQU,  manchur  for  Manchu,  etc.  (Comp.  Bretschneider,  11.,  pp.  23-4,
221,  etc.)

Digitized  by

Google

Sultan  Said  Khan.  137

At  the  time  of  hiB  arrival  [in  Tibet]  he  had  become  very  weak
and  much  reduced,  from  dam-giriy^  and  during  the  whole  peiiod
of  his  sojourn  in  Tibet  he  never  quite  recovered.  Nevertheless,
he  was  obliged,  under  any  circumstances,  to  make  the  [return]
journey.  When  he  reached  a  spot  where  damrgiri  was  prevalent,
his  pious  soul  took  flight  to  the  regions  of  the  blessed.  This  was
at  the  close  of  the  year  939.^  All  this  is  fully  related  in  Part  II.
of  this  History.

CHAPTER  LXVni.

CONCERNING THE LAUDABLE  VIRTUES AND RARE ATTAINMENTS OF

sultIn  SAID  khJLk.

Sultan  Said  KhIn  was  a  noble,  happy,  and  prosperous  prince,
and  was  adorned  with  acquirements  and  good  qualities.  He  was
nearly  forty-eight  years  of  age  when  he  went  to  take  up  his  abode
in  the  dwellings  of  God's  mercy.  His  conduct  of  life  was  irre-
proachable. His  conversation  was  both  graceful  and  eloquent,
whether  in  Turki  or  in  Persian,  and  when  he  showed  favour  to
any  one,  he  used  to  blush  before  speaking.  He  was  always
gay,  open-hearted,  generous  and  afiectionate.  For  example,  a
certain  Maksud  All  had  struck  the  Khto  in  the  left  shoulder
with  an  arrow,  in  some  battle ;  [so  severe  was  the  wound]  that
the  Khan  suffered  from  it  for  two  years  and  nearly  died  of  it.
During  the  time  of  his  suffering,  some  men  captured  Maksud  Ali,
so  that  the  Kh4n  might  wreak  his  vengeance  upon  him.  But
when  he  was  brought  before  the  Khan,  he  treated  him  kindly,  and
though  he  had  only  one  garment  by  him,  gave  it  him.  He  aho
took  him  into  his  own  society,  and  made  him  his  companion,
saying :  "  1  was  vexed,  but  thou  art  welcome  [ntfc  &mad%\y^^  and
they  continued  good  friends  the  rest  of  their  lives.  He  performed
many  similar  acts  of  generosity,  Bcveral  of  which  will  be  found
recorded  in  Part  II.  His  liberality  reached  a  high  degree  (»f  per-
fection. I  was  twenty-four  years  in  his  service.  Such  was  his
munificence  that  his  household  supplies  were  sometimes  quite
exhausted,  and  the  royal  larder  was  some  days  so  empty,  that  he
would  go  and  take  his  meals  in  the  haram.  For  the  same  reason
his  expenditure  exceeded  the  revenue  of  the  State.

*  The  word  here  is  damgir — lit.  breath-seizing  or  choking ;  but  the  malady
the  writer  points  to  is  that  of  shortness  of  breath,  and  other  dietressing  symptoms,
produced  by  the  rarefied  air  at  great  altitudes. (See  note,  p.  418).

•  The  year  939  ended  23  July,  1533.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

138  Sultdn  Said  KMiu

He  was  also  greatly  distinguished  for  his  bravery.  I  was  present
at  an  attack  which  was  led  by  him  in  person,  and  have  described
it  in  Part  11.  Moreover,  I  never  saw  his  equal  as  an  archer,
among  all  the  Moghul,  Uzbeg,  or  Ghaghat4i  IRva^  either  before
or  since.  I  have  myself  seen  him  shoot  seven  or  eight  arrows  in
succession,  without  missing  his  mark.  When  hunting  deer,  hares,
or  game  birds,  he  would  never  fail  to  hit  them  with  his  arrow.
And  in  the  battles  he  fought  against  the  Kirghiz  and  others  iu
Moghulistan,  he  became  celebrated  for  the  way  he  discharged  his
shafts  into  their  midst.  Generosity  such  as  his  I  have  seldom  seen.
On  one  occasion,  an  assassin  came  and  sought  to  take  his  life,  but
not  finding  an  opportunity,  stole  a  horse  from  the  Eh^n's  stable
and  rode  off.  He  was  captured  on  the  road,  with  the  horse,  and
brought  back.  The  prisoner  said  to  the  Ehan :  **  I  came  on  a
mission  \dava\^  but  could  find  no  opportunity  of  carrying  it  out,
so  I  said  :  I  will  take  a  horse  from  the  £J[ian*s  stables,  then  I  shall
at  any  rate  have  done  something."  The  Kh4n's  men  all  wished  to
kill  him,  but  the  Khan  said  to  me:  "Hand  him  over  to  your
servants  that  they  may  take  care  of  him,  and  do  with  him  whatever
you  tell  them."  When  the  people  had  dispersed  the  Khan  said
to  me :  "  As  a  thankoffering  to  Grod  for  having  preserved  me
from  that  man,  give  him  the  horse  he  stole  from  me.  Then  tell
your  men  to  let  him  secretly  out  of  the  camp,  so  that  when  he
returns  to  his  fellows  they  may  not  look  upon  him  with  con-
tempt. Thus  the  poor  man  will,  in  a  measure,  have  executed  his
mission."

Further,  I  never  saw  a  more  accurate  reader  than  the  Khan.
However  faulty  the  orthography  might  be,  he  would  read  off  ver6e
or  prose  without  hesitating,  in  such  a  way  that  listeners  might
buppobe  he  knew  it  by  heart.  He  wrote  Naskh  Tdlik  excellently,
and  his  spelling  in  Turki  and  Persian  was  faultless.  He  also
composed  letters  [  inshd]  well  in  Turki :  other  people  could  only
have  composed  them  with  great  difficulty  and  application.  I  have
rarely  met  with  such  power  and  capability  in  writing  verse  [shtrX
He  never  said  poems  by  heart,  but  in  assemblies  and  social
gatherings,  if  any  collectiun  of  odes  [divdn]  that  was  at  hand  was
opened,  and  he  was  given  any  metre  and  rhyme,  he  would  extem-
porise a  poem.  If  he  repeated  a  poem  once  or  twice,  everybody
could  remember  it ;  but  he  was  not  pleased  if  any  one  made  a  copy
of  it.

I  have  remembered,  and  here  reproduce,  some  of  the  extempore
poems  which  the  Khan  recited  in  the  assemblies. [Turki  verses

I  only  once  knew  him  make  versos  in  Persian.^

»  The  author  cites  one  "  Bait"  of  the  Khan'g  Persian  verses,  which,  however,
is  omitted  in  the  translation.

Digitized  by

Google

Abdur  Rashid  Khdn.  139

He  performed  on  the  *tM2,  and  the  sihtara,  and  the  chdrtdra^  and
the  ghachah,  but  best  of  all  on  the  chdrtdra,^  He  had  a  sound
knowledge  of  bone-outting,  and  was  skilled  in  making  arrows.

CHAPTER  LXIX.

ABDUn UASIIID KHAN,  SON  OF  SULTAN SAID KUAN.

At  this  date  of  953,^  Abdur  Eashid,  the  most  excellent  son  of
Sultan  Said  Khan,  is  on  the  throne  of  the  Khans,  and  I  (your  most
despicable  slave),  Muhammad  Haidar,  have  inscribed  and  adorned
my  history  with  his  glorious  name.  This  book,  beginning  with
an  account  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khdn  (who  was  the  first  among  the
Moghul  Khakdns  to  be  converted  to  IsUm),  down  to  Sultan
Yunus  Khan,  is  compiled  from  oral  tradition  and  contemporary
accounts,  when  they  have  not  been  found  contradictory.  Conflict-
ing tradiuons  have  been  omitted,  on  account  of  their  probable
inaccuracy.  The  history,  from  Yunus  ELhan  down  to  the  end
of  the  reign  of  Sultan  Said  Khan,  has  been  fully  treated  of  in
Part  II.  But  in  Part  I.  I  have  only  given  this  portion  of  the
history  in  epitome,  as  it  is  long,  and  much  repetition  would  not
embellish  my  work.

As,  however,  there  is  no  account  of  Abdur  Bashid  Khdn  in
Part  II.,  it  is  fitting  to  give  it  in  this  place.

At  the  time  when  the  Khan  [Sultan  Said]  was  in  Moghulistan
with  his  brother  Sultan  Khalil  Sultan,  Mansur  Khan  also  entered
that  country,  and  a  battle  was  fought  between  them  at  Cbdrun
Chalak,  in  which  the  two  brothers  were  put  to  flight.  After  being
routed,  they  found  that  they  could  no  longer  remain  in  Moghulistan,
so  they  retired  in  distress  to  Andijan,  where  the  EJidn  was  put  into
confinement.  But  he  managed  to  escape,  and  went  to  Kabul,
where  his  cousin  Bdbar  Padishah  was. (All  of  this  is  related  in

*  El  *Vd,  the  Arabio  name,  whence  our  word  LiUe,  Either  the  Sik-ldra,  a
three-Btringed  instrument,  or  the  Ghdridra^  one  of  four  strings  (the  tetracord),
may  be  the  original  of  the  European  guitar  or  cithar ;  but  it  is  not  clear  from
which  name  the  word  guitar  has  descended.  Either  one  could  be  the  parent.
Badger's  dictionary  gives  the  word  kitdrah  for  guitar,  but  it  is  possible  that  the
Aral^  adopted  the  guitar  (as  they  are  known  to  have  adopted  the  lute)  from
Persia,  and  with  the  instrument,  probably,  the  name.  The  GJiachah,  according
to  the  dictionaries,  should  be  a  kind  of  violin — or,  at  any  rate,  a  stringed
instrument.

'  That  is,  1546  a.d.,  when  the  author  was  composing  his  history.

Digitized  by

Google

I40  Abdur  Rashid  Khdn,

Part  II.)  The  mother  of  Abdur  Hashid  Khan  was  one  of  those
tribes-people  whom  his  father  had  married,  while  they  were  in  his
service.  She  was  with  the  Khan  when  he  was  thrown  into  prison
in  Andijan,  but  the  malignant  Uzbeg  had  separated  her  from  the
Khan,  by  whom  she  was  seven  months  with  child,  of  this  same
Abdur  Rashid  Khan.  When  the  Khan  joined  Babar  Padishah  at
Kabul,  news  reached  him  that  his  servant  was  delivered  of  a  son.
The  Khan  told  this  news  to  the  Padishah,  who  said  to  him  :  **  Call
this  boy  Abdur  Rashid,  because  it  rhymes  with  Sult4n  Said
Khan."  And  this  is  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Abdur  Rashid,  who
was  his  father's  successor.

When  my  uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd,  went  to  Farghana
and  attacked  the  Uzbeg  under  Jani  Beg  Sultan,  he  cleared  the
country  entirely  of  Uzbeg  impurities,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  the
Pddishdh  in  Kunduz,  who  brought  him  back  Sultan  Said  Khdn.
Abdur  Rashid  Khdn  had  fallen  into  the  unclean  hands  of  the
Uzbeg,  but  in  consequence  of  these  successes,  he  recovered  his
liberty  and  joined  his  noble  father.  When  my  sister,  Habiba
Sultdn  Khanish,  came  from  Samarkand,  the  Khan  married  her,  and
entrusted  Abdur  Rashid  Sultan  to  her  care.  She  reared  him  with
motherly  attention  and  love,  and  Amir  Ghuri  Barlas  was  appointed
his  governor  [Atdbeg].  He  was  at  that  time  three  years  of  age.
Two  years  later  Amir  Ghuri  Burlas  died,  and  according  to  the
Moghul  usage,  his  office  was  given  to  his  uncle,  Ali  Mirak  Barlas
Khan.  Thus  Ali  Mirak  Barlds  was  appointed  Atdbeg  to  Abdur
Rashid  Sultan,  and  the  charge  of  his  education  was  given  to
Maulana  Mohammad  Shirazi,  a  learned  and  noble-minded  man,
who  passed  all  his  valuable  life  in  the  service  of  the  Moghul
Khdkans.  He  was  chief  judge  \Sadr-\-Sud,vi.r\  at  the  court  of  Sultan
Said  Khan,  where  he  exercised  groat  influence.

This  Maulana  was  in  truth  the  Atabeg  of  Rashid  Sultan,  while
Ali  Mirak  Barl&s  held  the  office  only  nominally.

Rashid  Sultan  was  bom  in  the  year  915  [1509-10].  In  928,
when  he  was  thirteen  years  of  age,  the  Khan  brought  him  into
Moghulistan.

When  Khalil  Sultan  was  killed  by  Jani  Beg  Sultan  at  Akhsi,
his  son  Baba  Sultan  was  still  at  the  breast,  and  like  Rashid  Sultan,
was  kept  a  prisoner  by  Jani  Beg  Sultan.  At  the  time  when
Farghana  was  subdued,  he  was  brought  to  the  Khan,  who  came  to
love  this  nephew  more  dearly  than  he  loved  his  own  children.  lie
gave  the  child  in  charge  to  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur,  who  had  formerly
rendered  great  services  to  Sultan  Said  Khan,  and  appointed  the
Khwaja,  Atabeg  to  Baba  Sultan.  The  Khwaja  was  a  Moghul,  and
had  spent  most  of  his  life  in  Moghulistan  ;  he  was  very  devoted  to
that  country,  and  was  always  longing  to  be  there.  For  this  reason
he  begged  the  Khan  to  give  Moghulistan  and  the  Kirghiz  country

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Abdnr  Rashid  Khdiu  141

to  Babd  Sultan,  saying  that  he  himself  would  take  [the  boy]  to
Moghulistan,  and  would  arrange  the  aflFairs  of  the  Kirghiz  and  of
Moghnlistdn.  The  Ehan  consented  to  this,  and  wished  to  send
[them]  off.  My  uncle,  since  he  was  father-in-law  to  Baba  Sultan,
did  not  overstep  the  bounds  of  loyalty,  but  as  he  disapproved  of
the  plan,  he  represented  [to  the  Khdn]  that  the  Moghuls  had  an
unbounded  love  for  Moghulistan.  If  Baba  Sult4n  were  once
established  in  that  country,  all  the  Moghuls  would  want  to  live  in
Moghulistan ;  if  the  Khan  forbade  the  undertaking,  BAba  Sultan
would  be  ofifended ;  while  if  he  did  .not  forbid  it,  the  departure  of
the  people  for  Moghulistan  would  be  a  source  of  injury  to  the
Khan;  much  anxiety  would  be  caused,  and  the  situation  would
give  rise  to  many  difficulties.  "But  if,  [he  went  on  to  say]  Bashid
Sultan  takes  him  there,  he  is  your  son,  and  it  can  do  you  no  harm
for  the  people  to  follow  him.  Even  if  evil  should  result,  you  have
only  to  control  him — a  course  which  cannot  injure  him.  Although
Bashid  Sultan  is  very  young,  it  is  advisable  that  he  should  go  into
Moghulistan."

No  one  supported  my  uncle's  opinion.  Mirza  Ali  Taghdi  in
particular  sapported  the  side  of  Bdba  Sult&n.

In  the  meanwhile,  Khwaja  Ali  Bahddur  died  (a  natural  death),
so  that  the  proposal  was  entirely  abandoned,  and  the  Kh4n's
attention  was  turned  to  Bashid  Sultdn,  but  heated  discus^sions
constantly  arose  concerning  that  matter.  My  uncle  did  his  utmost
to  settle  the  affairs  of  Bashid  Sultdn  quietly,  and  represented  [to
the  Khdn]  that  the  right  course  to  take  was  to  release  Muhammad
Kirghiz  from  prison,  where  he  had  now  been  for  a  long  time.  He
should  [my  uncle  said]  be  brought  out;  a  selection  should  be
made  from  among  the  Moghuls  who  had  flocks  and  herds  and  were
desirous  of  returning  to  Moghulistdn,  and  these,  accompanied  by
some  of  the  great  Amirs,  should  all  be  sent  off  [to  Moghulistan]
together.

Finally  the  Khdn  approved  my  uncle's  plan,  and  carried  it  out  as
had  been  suggested.

Having  created  Mirza  Ali  Taghdi  commander-in-chief,  and
appointed  Muhammad  Kirghiz,  Amir  of  the  Kirghiz,  he  sent  them
away.  Just  at  this  time  Ali  Mirak  Barlas  died,  and  was  succeeded
in  the  service  of  Bashid  Sultan,  by  his  son  Muhammadi  bin  Ali
Mirak  Barlas ;  he  also  accompanied  the  expedition.

Finally,  at  the  insistence  of  my  uncle,  the  Khan  gave  to  Bashid
Sultan  one-third  of  all  his  regal  possessions,  whether  in  men,
soldiers,  money,  tents,  or  felt  dwellings  {khirgali\  and  despatched
him  into  Moghulistan.  On  the  day  of  the  departure  of  Bashid
Sultdn,  [the  Khdn]  sent  to  the  haram  for  all  his  accoutrements,  and
said  to  me :  **  Fasten  on  his  sword  and  quiver  for  him,  and  help
him  to  mount  his  horse ;  it  may  be  a  good  omen,  and  in  the  art  of

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

142  Abdur  Rashid  Kkdn.

war  ho  shall  be  your  pupil."  I  performed  this  service,  and  the
Khan  himself,  having  stood  up,  repeated  several  times  the  Fatiha^^
and  then  said:  "Do  not  forget  that  it  was  Mirza  Haidar  who
first  fastened  on  your  sword  for  you,  and  that  you  are  his  pupil;
should  any  one  ask  you,  whose  pupil  are  you  in  the  art  of  war,
what  answer  will  you  make  ?  "  Eashid  Sultan  replied  :  "  [I  shall
say]  that  I  am  the  pupil  of  such  a  one."  The  Kh4n  said  :  "  He  is
my  pupil."  Having  repeated  this  several  times,  and  having  once
more  recited  the  Fdtiha^  the  Khan  sent  the  party  off.

On  the  arrival  of  Rashid  Sult&n  in  Moghulistan,  Muhammad
Kirghiz  brought  together  all  the  Kirghiz  and  entirely  subdued
Moghulistdn,  where  at  that  time  there  was  a  large  army.  It
would  take  too  long  to  recount  the  details.  However,  in  conse-
quence of  the  opposition  which  Bashid  Sultan  and  his  followers
and  allies  met  with  from  the  Uzbeg  Kazak,  and  also  because  of  the
hostility  of  the  Kirghiz,  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  Kashghar.
Then  followed  those  incidents  in  connection  with  Bab4  Sultan  and
Shah  Muhammad  Sult&n  which  I  have  given  in  Part  II.  Muham-
madi  BarUs  was  also  concerned  in  these  matters,  for  it  was  to  him
they  entreated  the  Kh&n  to  give  the  heritage  of  Sbah  Muhammad
Sultan,  by  way  of  retaliation.  My  uncle  and  I,  however,  opposed
this  plan.

In  short,  in  the  winter  of  that  year,  934  [1628],  the  Kh&n  sent
me  with  Hasbid  Sultdn  to  Balur,  and  in  Balur  I  managed  all  the
affairs  of  the  army.  Eashid  Sult4n  was  then  eighteen  years  of
age.  He  had  no  cultured  men  in  his  service,  and  had  never  had
practice  in  conversation  [kash-i-muhdvara].  Those  about  him
were  all  a  sect  of  Muhammadans,  who,  though  men  in  form,  were
but  brutes  in  their  manners,  and  what  could  he  learn  from  the
brutal  ways  of  those  people  ?  In  spite  of  my  own  want  of  power
and  capacity  [istitdat']^  I  was  superior  to  these  people,  and  I  passed
my  time  with  Eashid  Sultan.  So  that  when  we  returned,  some
little  time  after,  the  Khan  found  his  son  quite  another  person,
and  he  said  several  times,  both  before  me  and  in  my  absence,  to
Eashid  Sult&n,  that  he  was  delighted  [mastwar'l  with  me.  I  had
made  Eashid  Sultan  a  son  to  him,  in  that  he  had  won  many
victories  with  this  army;  and  [he  added]  "thanks  be  to  God,
my  son  has  come  so  near  to  being  what  my  heart  would  desire
him  to  be."

Meanwhile  news  came  of  the  revolt  of  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan  who
was  at  Aksu,  and  in  spite  of  my  own  and  my  uncle's  efforts,  we
were  unable  to  quell  it.  The  account  of  this,  and  of  the  execrable
proceedings  of  Mirzd  Ali  Taghdi,  will  be  found  in  Fart  II.

Finally,  I  was  sent,  together  with  Eashid  Sultan,  to  Aksu . When

^  Fdliha — the  ^  opener  "  or  *'  beginner,*'  i.e.  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Kor&n.
— R.

Digitized  by

Google

Abdur  Rashid  Khdn,  143

we  reached  that  town  the  whole  population  came  out  to  receive
us.  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultdn  presented  himself  before  the  Khan.  I
remained  six  months  in  Aksu,  where  I  conducted  satisfactorily  all
military  and  civil  affctirs.  Before  this,  one  day  in  Moghulistan,
the  Khan  was  eating  ahnonds ;  he  broke  one  with  his  (blessed)
teeth,  and  found  that  it  had  two  kernels.  He  thereupon  sent  for
Eashid  Sultan  and  myself,  and  gave  one  kernel  to  each  of  us,
saying :  "  It  is  an  excellent  and  significant  custom  that  when  two
men  wish  to  become  friends,  each  should  eat  one  of  the  kernels
from  a  double  almond,  and  then  become  friends  to  one  another.
Thus,  like  the  two  kernels  in  one  shell,  nothing  will  separate
them,  and  though  two  in  appearance,  they  will  really  be  one.  I
have  told  you  to  do  this  that  you  may  be  friends."  Both  of  us
then  respectfully  kissed  the  ground,  and  drew  our  horses  close
together.  The  outcome  of  which  was  that,  while  we  were  in  Aksu,
we  lived  in  great  concord.  Our  affection,  our  unity,  our  mutual
regard  and  confidence  were  beyond  description,  and  our  friendship
was  confibrmed  by  sworn  covenants.  If  I  were  to  write  down  a
description  of  our  friendship  and  concord,  the  reader  would  cer-
tainly doubt  whether  such  a  state  of  things  really  existed,  and
would  attribute  it  to  mere  rhetoric.  In  a  word,  after  six  months
we  parted  with  a  hundred  regrets  at  separation,  but  in  hope  of
meeting  again,  and  I  returned  to  wait  on  the  Khdn.  At  the  hour
of  bidding  farewell  I  extemporised  an  ode  {€ihazal\  of  which  I
here  give  four  verses. [Verses]  .  .  .  •

The  year  after  my  returning  to  his  service,  the  Khdn  entered  on
a  holy  war  in  Tibet,  sending  me  on  in  advance,  so  that  before  the
Khan  joined  me,  I  had  achieved  a  great  deal  in  that  country.  An
army  of  6000  men  was  now  in  Tibet — a  number  that  the  country
was  unable  to  support.  So  I  was  obliged  to  retire  to  Kashmir,
with  Iskandar  Sult4n,  younger  brother  of  Eashid  Sultan.  Having
passed  the  winter  in  Kashmir,  I  returned  to  the  Khdn  the  follow-
ing spring.  This  I  have  related  [elsewhere],  so  there  is  no  object
in  stating  [details]  here.  While  with  the  Khan  in  Tibet,  he  sent
me  to  destroy  the  Idol-Temple  of  Urs4ng,  while  he  himself
returned  to  Ydrkand.  I  made  a  journey  of  fotir  months ;  but  the
Khan  died  on  his  way  home.  The  Amirs  who  were  with  him  at
the  time,  sent  express  messengers  to  Eashid  Sult&n  to  acquaint
him  with  the  event.  They  also  sent  the  news  to  my  uncle,  who
came  to  be  present  at  the  Khdn's  funeral,  and  to  take  part  in  the
lamentations  \aza\  On  the  10th  of  Mohan  am,  940  [2nd  August,
1533],  Eashid  Sultan  arrived,  when  my  uncle,  having  raised  lamen-
tations [by  way  of  condolence],  entered  the  presence  of  Eashid
Sult4n  and  was  immediately  put  to  death,  together  with  Ali
Sayyid,  who  was  the  sworn  £riend  of  my  uncle.  To  commemorate
the  date  of  the  martyrdom  of  these  two  men,  the  chronogram

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

144  Abdur  Rashid  KJidn,

•*  KutUd  Ji(d)l'moharram "  [940]  was  invented  [meaning :  the  two
men  were  killed  in  the  month  of  Moharram.]

It  is  the  practice  of  the  humane  and  the  nsage  of  the  generous
(and  of  these  two  qualities  kings  make  boast)  that  when  a  person
at  any  time  renders  them  some  particular  service,  they  reward
that  person  with  various  presents  and  favours.  My  uncle  was  the
son  of  the  daughter  of  Yunus  Khan,  and  for  generations  [his
family]  had  been  at  the  head  of  the  affairs  of  the  Moghul  Sultans
and  Ehakans.  I  have  explained  the  prerogatives  of  the  office  of
Uhuhegi^  in  Fart  II.  My  uncle  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished
men  in  the  service  of  Bashid  Sultan's  father,  so  much  so  that  no
one  was  more  valued  or  prized  than  he ;  for  he  had  rendered  some
most  important  services  to  Sultan  Said  KhAn.  The  first  was  the
conquest  of  Andijan,  which  became  the  keystone  of  the  Khan's
'dominions.

'  His  second  service  was  on  the  expedition  against  Eashghar,
where  he  made  such  exertions,  that  had  he  not  been  of  the  party,
all  hope  of  taking  Eashghar  would  have  been  relinquished.  The
Ehan  was  in  consequence  grateful  for  his  services,  and  rewarded
him  with  favours  in  proportion.  If  my  uncle  had  never  been  of
service  to  Bashid  Eh4n — nay,  had  he  even  committed  offences
against  him,  his  faults  ought  to  have  been  overlooked.  But  in
addition  to  this,  his  invasion  of  Andij&n  delivered  Bashid  Ehan
out  of  the  hands  of  the  Uzbeg.  It  was,  moreover,  owing  to  the
efforts  of  my  uncle  that  Bashid  Ehan  subdued  Moghulistan — an
event  which  was  the  cause  of  enhancing  his  dignity,  and  the
commencement  of  his  prosperity.  For  had  the  advice  of  Mirza
All  Taghdi  and  Ehw4ja  All  Bahadur  been  followed,  Bab4  Sult4n
would  have  been  sent  to  Moghulist&n  instead  of  Bashid  Ehan.
He  had  always  endeavoured  to  represent  Bashid  Sidt4n  in  a  good
light  to  the  Ehan.  Aiman  Ehwdja  Sultdn  had  married  his  daughter,
and  by  her  had  five  sons,  who  were  my  uncle's  grandsons ;  yet,
notwithstanding  this,  when  it  was  suggested  that  Bashid  Sult4n
should  be  set  up  in  the  place  of  Aiman  Ehwaja  Sultan,  and  that
this  latter  should  be  driven  away,  he  made  no  objection,  but  rather
exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to  further  the  plan.  It  is  not  worth
while  here  to  detail  his  services.

It  was  most  astounding  that  all  this  should  have  been  ignored,
and  that  he  should,  though  innocent,  have  been  put  to  death.  It  is
therefore  all  the  more  fitting  that  his  story  should  not  be  told
more  fully ;  what  God  willed  came  to  pass.  Moreover,  the  retri-
bution for  this  act  is  in  His  power;  and  we  should  read  and
remember  the  verse,  "Verily  we  belong  to  God,  and  unto  God  we
return."  It  is  the  more  strange  that  those  very  mischief-makers
who  had  caused  a  rupture  in  the  affairs  of  Bashid  Sult4n,  were
those  whom he  raised  to  high  dignities. In short,  Mirza Ali

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Abdur  Rashid  Klidfu  145

Taghai  was  appointed  successor  to  my  uncle,  and  was  sent  to
Kdshghar,  where,  on  his  arrival,  he  omitted  no  act  of  cruelty,  such
as  putting  to  death  my  uncle^s  children  and  relatives.  •  .  .  .^

In  a  word,  the  accession  of  Eashid  Khan  was  characterised  by
the  shedding  of  innocent  blood,  and  by  .an  absence  of  humanity.
[Verses.  .  .  .]  In  the  sight  of  the  wise  and  pious,  it  is  not  right
to  shed  blood,  even  for  the  kingdom  of  the  whole  world.  After
the  murder  of  these  faithful  men,  Eashid  Khan  established  himself
upon  the  throne  of  the  Khdnate.  When  the  news  of  the  death  of
the  Khdn  reached  Mansur  Khdn,  he  marched  against  Aksu,  and
Eashid  Khan  went  out  to  meet  him.  Mansur  Khan  returned
without  achieving  his  object,  and  Eashid  Sultdn  likewise  returned
to  his  seat  of  government.  The  attempt  was  afterwards  repeated
by  Mansur  Khan;  Eashid  Khan  also  marched  out  again,  and
returned  with  success  and  spoil.  The  Amirs  in  the  service  of  the
E^an  became  apprehensive,  on  account  of  my  uncle  having  been
put  to  death  without  cause.  On  this  account  they  lost  all  con-
fidence, and  Mirza  Ali  Taghdi  fled  towards  Karatigin. [Verses. . .]

When  Mirzd  Ali  Tagh&i  fled  from  that  execrable  devil, ^  he  was
joined  by  the  rest  of  the  Amirs ;  and  having  seized  some  of  the
Khdn's  children,  they  all  made  off  to  Khotan  and  rose  in  open
rebellion.  Eashid  Khan  then  went  after  them ;  all  the  people
[of  Khotan]  came  out  to  receive  him,  except  a  few  of  the  Amirs
who  remained  in  the  fort.  These  [Amirs]  were  all  bound  and
brought  before  Eashid  Khan,  who  spared  their  lives,  but  ordered
them  all  to  be  banished.  Thus  he  did  not  kill  these  men  who  had
committed  a  crime  and  were  deserving  of  death,  and  whose  neglect
of  duty  had  been  proved,  though,  on  the  other  hand,  he  had  publicly
murdered  my  uncle,  in  spite  of  his  near  relationship,  his  countless
services,  his  innocence  of  all  offence,  and  his  strong  protestations  of
loyalty.

[Verses.] No  one  can  comprehend  the  ways  of  this  lower  world,
The  Grodhead  seems  always  to  be  upside-down.
All  faithful  men  come  to  a  bad  end,  and  the  wicked  triumph
over  them.

After  he  had  finished  this  affair  of  the  Amirs,  he  banished  all  his

^  Hero  follows  a  tradition  concerning  Muhammad  and  his  son-in-law  Abul  As,
which,  having  no  bearing  on  our  history,  is  omitted  in  the  translation.  The
story  is  taken,  says  Mirza  Haidar,  from  the  work  of  Shaikh  Said  Kazaruni,
entitled  Siyar-unnabi — "The  Virtues  of  the  Propliet."  (See  Rieu*s  Catalogue
Brit.  Mus.  ii.,  p.  621  a.)

*  It  appears,  at  first  sight,  that  the  author  is  here  alluding  to  the  Khan,  Abdur
Bashid ;  but  my  impression  is  that  Muhammadi  Barl^s  is  meant.  In  spite  of  the
bitterness  of  feeling  which  Mirza  Haidar  evinces  against  Abdur  Bashid,  lie  is
careful  not  to  abuse  him ;  but  with  the  Barlds  it  is  otherwise,  and  seeing  that  a
little  lower  down  we  are  told  that  the  Khan  was  led  and  ruled  by  Muhammadi
BsltUb,  who  is  called  by  various  abusive  names,  it  seems  likely  that  he  is  the
person  here  referred  to  as  an  **  execrable  devil."

L

Digitized  by

Google

146  Abdur  Rashid  Khan,

paternal  aunts  and  sisters  and  mothers;  among  the  rest  Zainab
Sultan  Khauim,  who  had  been  the  favourite  wife  of  Sultan  Said
Ehan.  '  HO  next  contracted  an  intimacy  and  friendship  with  the
Uzbeg-Shaiban,  who  had  been  old  enemies  (as  has  been  already
related),  and  did  his  best  to  exterminate  the  Uzbeg-Kazak,  who
were  old  friends ;  and  to  the  Uzbeg  of  both  sides  [tribes]  Eashid
Khan  gave  his  own  sisters  in  marriage.  As  the  Uzbeg-Shaiban
were  old  enemies,  Eashid  Khan  put  an  end  to  this  [enmity]  by
giving  his  sister  [in  u.arriage],  which  was  a  base  action.  In  short,
having  allied  himself  with  the  Shaiban,  he  entirely  crushed  the
Uzbeg-Kazak.  Still  if  we  leave  aside  all  consideration  of  the
ancient  covenant,  the  overthrowing  of  the  Uzbeg-Kazak  was,  in
truth,  a  mighty  achievement.  Since  the  time  when  Sultan  Yunus
Khan  defeated  Buruj  Oghlan  at  KarA  Tukai  (in  the  year  877)  up  to
this  date,  there  have  been  many  battles  between  the  Uzbeg  and  tho
Moghuls,  and  the  Uzbeg  have  always  been  victorious ;  for  during
all  this  time  the  Moghuls  had  never  gained  a  single  success  over
the  Uzbeg.  But  Eashid  Khan  did  gain  a  victory  over  them,  and
this  exploit  of  his  was  a  really  great  one.  For  although  his
grandfather,  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,  overcame  the  Uzbeg  (as  has
been  related),  yet  it  was  only  in  plundeiing  forays;  he  never  won
a  victory  over  them  in  a  real  pitched  battle.  Eashid  Sultan
defeated  their  troops  in  order  of  battle.

Up  to  this  point  I  have  heard  the  story  of  Eashid  Sultan  from
reliable  sources  in  Hindustan  and  Kashmir,  and  have  committed  it
to  writing.  After  his  victory  over  the  Uzbeg  he  marched  on
Andijan  and  Turfdn.  But  the  sources  from  which  I  derived  the
details  of  this  matter  not  being  trustworthy,  I  have  not  thought
fit  to  enter  them,  and  have  therefore  drawn  in  the  reins  of  my  pen
from  [writing]  of  these  things.

All  those  unworthy  acts  with  which  people  have  reproached
Eashid  Khan,  were  committed  either  for  the  sake,  or  through  the
efforts,  of  Muhammadi  BarhiS.  The  origin  of  this  man's  influence
is  not  evident,  for  neither  had  he  rendered  such  service  as  to
merit  elevation  in  rank,  nor  had  he  ever  displayed  such  great
bravery  or  good  qualities,  as  to  gain  for  himself  distinction.

Eashid  Khan  was  led,  mounted,  \muTiaki^^  by  him  in  all  his
affairs.  If  I  were  to  relate  all,  the  reader,  who  has  not  himself
witnessed  these  things,  would  regard  them  as  incredible.  Tho
epithet  of  "  Himar  "  [Ass]  which  is  applied  to  the  tribe  of  Barlas,
was,  indeed,  fully  applicable  to  that  particular  BarUs.  It  would
be  quite  out  of  place  for  me  to  relate  how  he  urged  Eashid  Khan
on  to  kill,  or  banish,  his  uncles  and  mothers  and  Amirs,  and  to
change  his  haram ;  therefore  I  have  thought  it  better  to  avoid  this
matter  altogether.

At  the  present  time  the  Most  High  God  has  delivered  Abdur

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

End  of  Part  L  147

Bashid  Khan  from  that  calamity,  and  has  carried  off  the  ass
[Atmar]  with  the  dninkenness  \Vhimar\  of  death.  It  is  to  be
hoped  that,  this  time,  the  reins  of  power  may  become  nnited  in  the
hands  of  intelligence,  and  that  trouble  may  be  kept  at  a  distance.
Also  that  the  Khan  may  follow  in  the  approved  ways  of  his
honoured  father  and  distinguished  ancestors ;  that  his  mind  may
be  enlightened,  and  that  he  may  not,  for  the  sake  of  an  ass,  engage
in  the  extirpation  of  meritorious  persons.

May  the  Most  High  God,  of  His  gracious  favour,  cause  justice  to
issue  from  the  throne  of  the  Kh4nate  for  many  years  to  come !
May  the  Khdn  avoid  all  that  is  displeasing  in  the  sight  of  God
and  His  Prophet,  and  may  he  repent  him  of  his  former  deeds  I
Amen  I  Oh  Lord  of  the  worlds  I

Though  Abdur  Bashid  Khan's  powers  of  discrimination  were
faulty,  he  was  strong  of  body,  sound  of  limb,  and  without  an  equal
in  the  art  of  conversation.  Excepting  his  father,  I  have  rarely
seen  an  archer  like  him.  He  was  brave  even  to  rashness.  In
elegant  convei-sation  he  was  as  a  peerless  pearl ;  and  he  had  also
written  several  letters  to  a  great  personage.  He  played  several
instruments  to  perfection,  and  had  great  aptitude  for  all  arts  and
crafts.  Once,  for  example,  he  cut  a  tree  out  of  paper,  and  painted
all  the  branches,  the  leaves,  and  the  trunk  in  their  proper  colours ;
he  did  it  so  skilfully  that  even  the  masters  of  that  craft  were
astounded.  Since  the  time  of  my  absence  has  been  protracted,  I
cannot  answer  for  all  his  acquirements.  But  in  those  arts  which
I  was  myself  cognisant  of,  I  know  him  to  have  excelled.  Not
being  a  musician,  I  cannot  praise  his  performance  on  instruments
with  justice,^  nor  can  I  say  anything  of  what  he  acquired  during
my  absence.  He  was,  besides,  a  good  Musulmdn  and  inclined  to
justice  and  equity.  But,  by  allowing  himself  to  be  influenced  by
the  violent  Muhammadi,  he  performed  many  unjust  acts.  Please
God  that  he  may  now  persist  in  the  path  of  justice  I

CHAPTEE  LXX.

EKD  OP  PART  I.  OF  THE  tIbIKH-I-RASHIW.

What  right  have  I,  with  my  poor  learning  and  my  want  of
capacity,  to  attempt  to  make  my  btyleless  reed  flow  upon  the
white  [sheet]  of  literature  ?

>  This  muat  have  been  bitten  about  the  time  when,  according  to  Abul  Fazl
(the  historian  of  Akbar),  Mirza  Haidar  was  giving  so  much  attention  to  miwic
that  he  neglected  the  aflfaira  of  the  Kashmir  State,  of  which  he  was  regent.  (Seo
Erskine,  flf«<.,  u.  p.  368,  and  Sec.  i.  of  the  Introduction  to  this  volume.)

L  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

148  End  of  Part  /.

My  justification  lies  in  the  fact  that  I  have,  during  my  life,
collected  many  authentic  facts  concerning  those  Moghul  Khakans
who  were  Musulmans,  and  have  also  myself  played  a  part  in  their
history.  At  the  present  time  there  is  no  one  but  myself  who
knows  these  traditions.  Thus,  if  I  did  not  make  Ihe  attempt,  it  is
probable  that  the  memory  of  the  Moghuls  and  their  Khakans
would  be  altogether  lost.

The  history  of  the  Moghuls  and  their  Khans  can  be  of  little
interest  to  any  but  the  Moghuls  themselves,  for  they  have  now
become  the  most  remote  and  insignificant  of  tribes,  whereas
formerly  they  were,  through  the  power  and  resolution  of  Chingiz
Kh4n,  the  lords  of  the  world.  Chingiz  Khan  bad  four  sons  to
whom  he  left  the  world,  dividing  the  cultivated  countnes  and
deserts  into  four  parts,  and  giving  one  quarter  of  the  earth  to  each
of  these  sons.  Every  mention  in  histories  of  the  TJlus  Arhaa,  or
"  the  four  hordes,"  refers  to  these  four  divisions.  The  learned  Mirza
Ulugh  Beg  has  written  a  history  which  he  has  called  Ulvs  Arbaa.
One  of  the  "  four  hordes  "  is  that  of  the  Moghul,  who  are  divided
into  two  branches,  the  Moghul  and  the  Chaghatai.  But  these  two
branches,  on  account  of  their  mutual  enmity,  used  to  call  each
other  by  a  special  name,  by  way  of  depreciation.  Thus  the
Chaghatai  called  the  Moghul  Jatah,  while  the  Moghul  called
the  Chaghatai  Kardwdnds,^  At  the  present  date  there  are  no
Chaghatai  left  excepting  the  kings,  who  are  the  sons  of  Baber
Padishah;  and  the  place  of  the  Chaghatai  is  now  occupied  by
some  [other]  civilised  people.  But  of  the  Moghuls  there  are
still  about  30,000  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Turfan  and  Kashghar.
Moghulistan  has  been  seized  by  the  Uzbeg  and  the  Kirghiz.
Although  the  Kirghiz  belong  to  the  tribe  of  M(^hul  ^  they  have,
on  account  of  their  repeated  rebellions  against  the  Khakans,
become  separated  from  them.  All  the  Moghuls  have  become
Musulmans,  but  the  Kirghiz  are  still  infidels,  and  hence  their  hos-
tility to  the  Moghuls.  The  Moghuls  have  become  a  most  isolated
and  paltry  people.  No  one  but  a  Moghul  could  be  interested  in
this  history;  but  though  fully  recognising  my  lack  of  literary
capacity,  I  have  not  shrunk  from  doing  the  best  in  my  power.

*  Some  remarks  on  these  interesting  points  will  be  found  in  the  Introduction,
Sec.  iv.

^  This  is  a  somewhat  embarrassing  statement.  It  would  seem,  at  first  sight,
that  the  author  means  to  class  the  Kirghiz  and  Moghuls  ns  one  people,  or  race  ;
but  the  word  Jiaum  in  tlio  text,  moaning  *•  tribe  "  or  "  nation,"  is  not,  I  think,
used  in  a  racial  sense.  The  sentence  runs,  Agarchi  Kirghiz  ham  Kaumi  az
Moghul  ast  .  ,  .  ,  and  my  impression  is  that  the  author  means  the  connection
between  tlie  two  people  to  be  regarded  as  a  political,  rather  than  a  racial  one  :
that  is,  that  the  Kirghiz  were  undei stood  to  belong  to  the  Moghul  kingdom,  or
were  one  of  the  tribes  subject  to  the  Moghul  Khans,  while  the  Uzbegs  had  no
connection  with  the  Moghuls.  The  word  Kaum  is  often  used  in  a  very  broad
sense  in  Persian.  It  is  unfortunate  that  neither  of  the  Turki  MSS,  used  for
this  translation  contains  this  part  of  the  history.

Digitized  by

Google

End  of  Part  I.  149

It  is  the  practice  of  authors  to  excuse  themselves,  and  bog  for
pardon  if  they  have  made  any  mistakes  or  blunders  in  their  work.
But  I  will  not  make  such  apology  as  those  who  say : — "  If  there
bo  any  mistakes  or  blunders  " — for  I  know  that  my  book  is  full  of
mistakes  from  beginning  to  end.  My  object  is  not  to  extol  my
own  merit,  but  simply  to  write  a  memoir,  that  the  history  of  the
Moghuls  may  not  be  entirely  forgotten ;  and  that  if,  by  chance,
any  of  the  Moghul  Khakans  should  wish  to  know  his  genealogy,
he  shall  be  able  to  find  it  in  this  book.

Of  those  Moghuls  who  were  not  Musulmdns,  I  have  not  mentioned
more  than  the  names;  for  an  infidel,  though  he  attain  to  the
splendour  of  Jamshid  and  Zohhdk,  is  not  worthy  of  having  his  life
commemorated.  This  Tdrikli-i/Rashidi  was  completed  at  the  end
of  the  month  Zulhijja  of  the  year  963,^  in  the  town  of  Kashmir
(may  God  defend  her  from  ruin  and  destruction)  five  years  after  I,
Haidar  Mirza  son  of  Muhammad  Kurkan,  had  ascended  the
throne.

» February,  1547.

END  OF  PART  I.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

TAEIKH-I-EASHIDI.

PART IL

PEOLOGUE.

I  WOULD  lay  before  tlie  wise  and  critical  that  I,  the  least  of  Grod's
servants,  Muhammad  Haidar,  known  among  my  intimates  as  Mirz4
Haidar,  son  of  Muhammad  Husain  Kurkan,  have  been  continually
possessed  of  the  thought  that  the  rank  and  dignity  which  historians
attain  to,  is  not  so  high  that  one  should  have  a  craving  for  it.
StDl,  thei-e  can  bo  little  doubt  that  this  poor  histoiy  (which  has
been  driven  by  the  whirlwind  of  pride  and  the  waves  of  ignorance
and  intoxication,  from  the  sea  of  incapacity  upon  the  shores  of
small  literary  attainment)  may  be  regarided  as  of  some  value  by  the
divers  in  the  ocean  of  excellence,  who  have  concealed  in  the  shells
of  perfection,  the  pearls  of  poetry  and  the  precious  stones  of  prose.
According  to  the  saying :  "  Necessity  makes  lawful  that  which  is  for*
bidden,"  and  because  certain  important  events  in  the  annals  of
the  Moghul  Ehakans  have  been  entirely  forgotten,  I  was  induced,
as  far  as  time  should  permit,  to  narrate  some  of  the  most  trust-
worthy facts  in  their  history.

"When  the  Moghul  power  was  high,  many  eminent  men  flourished,
and  some  wrote  their  people's  history.  Now,  for  more  than  a
hundred  years  nothing  of  the  sort  has  been  done — no  trace  of  these
men  remains,  nor  of  tjieir  writings.  Nor  does  any  sign  remain  of
their  prosperity  and  civilisation,  except  here  and  there  a  ruined
tower  or  fortification;  and  in  some  towns  the  relics  of  a
monastery,  a  college,  a  mosque,  a  portico,  or  a  minaret,  still  exist,
because  their  foundations  being  of  stone,  or  for  some  other  reason,
God  willed  that  they  should  endure.  No  vestige  of  these  men
survives  and  no  one  knows  anything  concerning  them.  For
during  this  long  lapse  of  time,  all  have  become  strangers  to  the
old  customs  and  ways  of  learning.  Since  the  conversion  of  the
Moghuls  to  Isldm,  more  especially,  no  history  of  them  has  been
written. But  the  learned  men  of  Mavara-un-Nahr  and  Ehor4s4n

Digitized  by

Google

Prologue  to  Part  II,  151

and  Irak,  who  have  written  the  annals  for  their  own  kings,  have
made  mention  of  the  Moghuls,  just  where  it  has  suited  the  context,
while  they  have  paid  no  attention  to  them  when  not  connected
with  their  own  country.  Among  these  histories  may  be  mentioned
the  Mujma  ut  Tavdrikh  ^  of  Khwaja  Bashid-ud-Din ;  the  Tdrikh-i-
Guzida^  of  Khwaja  Hamid  UUdh  Mustaufi ;  the  Zafar-Ndma^  of
Mauldn4  Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Yazdi;  the  Tdrikh-i-Manzum^  of
MauUna  Abdur  Eazzdk ;  and  the  Vlus  Arhaa  ^  of  Mirza  TJlugh  Beg.
Among  these  I  have  sought  carefully  for  any  mention  of  the
Moghul  Khdkans,  but  have  found  nothing  very  connected  [ha
tartib].  In  my  early  years,  I  was  much  drawn  to  the  study  of  the
history  of  my  forefathers,  and  in  those  days  there  were  still  alive
some  of  the  Moghul  Amii-s  and  nobles  (some  over  one  hundred
years  of  age,  some  under).  But  it  never  occurred  to  my  father  or
my  uncles  to  commit  to  writing  what  they  had  heard  concerning
the  Khdkdns,  from  their  parents,  and  other  trustworthy  sources.
And  now  they  have  all  been  dead  for  some  time.  [On  this
account]  I  intend,  God  willing,  to  write  an  account  of  the  Moghuls
after  their  conversion  to  Islam,  basing  my  facts  upon  histories  and
reliable  traditions,  in  addition  to  what  I  have  myself  witnessed  in
my  own  times.  But  not  finding  that  I  had  capacity  or  talent
sufficient  to  justify  my  setting  out  on  this  bold  venture,  I  have
resolved  to  begin  by  making  a  trial  on  those  events  of  which  I
have  been  an  eye-witness,  and  then,  should  I  by  the  grace  of  God
succeed,  I  will  proceed  with  my  original  plan  of  writing  the
history  of  the  Moghul  Khdkans.

^  The  oorrect  title  of  this  work  is  Jdmi  ^uttavdrikh.  It  is  a  general  history  of
the  world  from  the  earliest  times  to  a.h.  700,  and  gives  a  special  account  of  the
Moghuls. (See  Dr.  Bieu's  Catalogue,  i.,  p.  74.)

'  A  general  history  from  the  earliest  tmies  to  a.h.  730,  by  Hamid  Ullah  Mus-
taufi, Kazvini. (Bieu,  i.,  p.  80.)

»  A  history  of  Timur.

*  The  proper  title  is  MaUaH  Sa*adain  vaMaJmu-i-Bdhrain^  by  'Abdur  Bazz&k
bin  Ish&k  us  Samarkandi — (*'  Manzum  *'  here,  may  mean  *'  well  arranged.'*)
(Bieu,  i.,  p.  181  b.)

*  A  hlstoiT  of  Ghingiz  Khan,  his  ancestors  and  descendants,  down  to  the  time
of  Timur. (Bieu,  1.,  p.  164.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

152  Beginning  of  Part  II,,  containing

CHAPTEB  I.

BEGINNING  OF  PART  11.  OF  THE  TARIKH-I-RASHIDI,  WHICH  CONTAINS,  IN
DIFFERENT  PARTS,  WHAT  TOOK  PLACE  AMONG  THE  MOGHUL  ULDS
AND  THE UZBEG AND  THE  CHAGHATAI.

At  the  time  of  my  birth,  which  was  in  905,  and  for  which  the
chronogram  Nur  Chashm  Shah  has  been  found,  the  power  of  the
Moghnl  Khakans  was,  compared  with  former  times,  on  the  increase ;
but  at  this  period,  the  towns  of  Moghulist^n  (which  is  another
name  for  Kar4  Ehitai)  ^  fell  into  ruin,  till  in  the  beginning  of  the

*  This  mention  of  Eara^Khitai  lb  curious,  and  the  geographical  indication
accords  with  what  we  know,  from  other  sources,  to  have  been  the  centre  of  the
Kara-Khitai  dominion  about  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,  when  the
power  of  that  dynasty  was  at  its  best.  What  Mirza  Haidar  means  to  explain,
in  this  passage,  probably  is  that  Moghullstan  stands  on  the  ground  which  the
Kara-Khitai  country  occupied  before  the  time  of  Cbingiz,  when  all  previous
sub-divisions  were  swept  away.  In  other  words,  he  seems  to  have  found  it  more
convenient  to  go  back  to  ancient  times  for  a  single  name  to  denote  the  region,
than  to  explain  its  whereabouts  geographically,  or  to  describe  its  limits  accord-
ing to  the  ever-shifting  divisions  of  the  period  subsequent  to  Gbingiz*B  conquests.
But  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  him  to  mean  that  Moghulistan  was,  at  his
time,  known  as  Kara-Khiiai^  or  that  it  was  a  land  inhabited  by  a  race  of  that
name.  The  Kara-Khitai  must  have  disappeared,  as  a  nation,  some  two  centuries
before  Mirza  Haidar's  day.  Indeed,  they  could  hardly  at  any  time  have  been
regarded  as  a  nation  in  the  western  parts  of  Central  Asia,  but  only  as  a  ruling
dynasty,  supported  by  a  fighting  force,  composed  of  their  own  and  other  foreign
races,  sufficient  to  subdue  certain  weaker  nations,  and  to  rule  them  for  a  time,
until  some  stronger  power  should  arise  and  displace  them.  In  this  way  thev
resembled  most  other  Asiatic  dynasties  that  have  appeared  in  history,  and  their
period  of  power  was  perhaps  even  shorter  than  most  others,  for  it  lasted  for  lees
than  a  century.

In  race  the  Kara-Khitai  (or  Kara-Kitan)  appear  to  have  been  Manchu,  though
perhaps  a  good  deal  mixed  with  Mongol  tribes,  for  their  home  was  in  southern
Manchuria — the  Idao-tung  of  modem  times — and  bordered  on  south-eastern
Mongolia.  To  the  Chinese  tliey  were  known  as  Kitan  or  liao.  In  the  tenth
century,  they  conquered  the  small  section  of  northern  China  which  was  then
known  to  western  nations  as  Khitai  or  Cathay,  where  they  set  up  the  dynasty
called  by  the  Chinese  **  the  Liao.*'  As  a  Chinese  dynasty,  their  kings  ruled  for
about  two  centuries,  and  it  was  only  just  before  their  overthrow,  in  the  early  part
of  the  twelfth  century,  that  they  first  appear  in  Central  Asia  as  a  conquering
horde.  At  this  time  a  certain  Liao  prince,  one  Yelui  Taishi,  escaped  westward
from  "Cathay,*'  gathered  an  army  (composed  of  what  races  is  not  clear),  and
overran,  firstly  Eastern  and  Western  Turkistan,  and  subsequently  Khwarizm.  In
these  regions,  and  at  about  this  period,  he  and  his  people  seem  to  havo
acquired  the  name  of  Kara-KhUaiy  or  **  Black  Cathayans,*'  while  the  Chinese
spoke  of  them  as  Si  Liao  or  Wettem  Liao.  In  a  short  time,  the  whole  country
between  Hami  (or  Kumul)  in  the  east,  and  the  Aral  in  the  west,  became  subject
to  them,  while  tlieir  capital  seems,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  to  have  been
situated  near  the  banks  of  the  river  Chu — in  the  heart  of  the  Moghulittan  of  our
author's  time.  The  identity,  as  well  as  the  position,  of  the  Kara-Khitai  capital
has  been  made  a  subject  of  much  discussion,  for  it  is  mentioned  by  several

Digitized  by

Google

General  Sketch  of  History.  153

year  889,  when  Yunua  Khan,  [who  affected]  towns  and  cultivation,
came  into  power.  Most  of  the  Moghuls  had  never  possessed  or
even  lived  in  a  village — nay,  had  never  even  seen  cultivation.
They  were  as  wild  as  the  beasts  of  the  mountains.  The  explana-
tion of  this  is  that  the  country  of  Shash,  together  with  its  depen-
dencies, was  under  the  rule  of  the  Moghuls,  as  were  also  all  the
deserts  of  Moghulist&n.  It  would  be  tedious  to  relate  this  here,
but,  God  willing,  it  will  be  mentioned  in  the  First  Part  of  this
history.

My  father  was  Muhammad  Husain  Eurkdn,  son  of  Muhammad
Haidar  Kurkdn,  son  of  the  Amir,  Lord  of  the  Sword  and  the  Throne,
Sayyid  Ali  Kurkan,  son  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ahmad,  son  of  Amir
Khuddiddd,  son  of  Amir  Bulaji.  It  was  this  Amir  BuUji  that
introduced  Isldm,  and  changed  the  darkness  of  unbelief  into  the
light  of  faith.

After  my  father  entered  the  service  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,
son  of  Sultan  Yunus  Khan,  sun  of  Vais  Khan,  son  of  Shir  Ali
Oghlan,  son  of  Muhammad  Khan,  son  of  Khizir  Khwaja  Khdn,  son
of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan  (who  also  lightened  the  dark  night  of
heathendom  with  the  rising  sun  of  the  dawn  of  Islam),  he  was
treated  by  the  Khdn  with  the  utmost  favour  and  honour  (as
is  mentioned  at  greater  length  in  the  First  Part  of  this  history
[TarHch-i'Afir^)  and  had  the  title  of  Kurkan  conferred  upon  him,  as
well  as  the  honour  of  marriage  with  Khub  Nigdr  Khanim. This

different  names  in  the  records  of  different  nations.  Thus  the  Chinese  knew  it
by  the  name  of  Hu-Bze-wa-erh-du,  Gu-ste-o-hk-dUy  etc.,  the  Tnrki  writers  by  that
of  BaJUxadhan^  while  the  Mongols  (as  is  stated  in  the  Tarikk-i-Jahdn-Kushax)
conyerted  Balasakun  into  GharhdWc,  No  doubt  the  Chinese  forms  **  wa-erh-du/'
**o-lu-du,"  etc.,  stand  for  the  Turki  word  **Urdu*' — city  or  capital;  while
**b&lik"  in  Mongol  means  the  same  thing.  Dr.  Bretschneider  is  therefore
probably  right  in  identifying  the  '*  Ga  "  (it  should  be  Ghar)  of  the  Chinese  and
Mongols  with  the  Balasakun,  which,  according  to  all  probability,  stood  in  the
valley  of  the  Upper  Chu,  and  in  deeming  it  the  site  of  the  Kara-Ehitai  capital.
It  was,  at  any  rate,  in  and  about  the  region  of  the  Chu  valley,  that  they  seem  to
have  flourished  most,  during  their  short  period  of  power ;  and  it  was  in  this
region,  after  being  partially  subjected  by  the  Naiman,  that  Chingiz  Khan
finally  broke  them  up.

As  regards  the  name  of  Kara-Ehitai^  it  appears  to  me  that  these  people  were
regarded  by  the  Turki-speaking  nations  of  the  west  as  northern  Chinese,  or
Cathayans,  though  differing  from  them  to  some  extent.  The  word  **Kara,'*
Uiough  meaning  **■  black,"  is  constantly  used  in  Central  Asia  to  denote  a  differ-
ence, a  variety,  and  especially  a  lower  variety.  It  is  difficult  to  find  an  Enelish
equivalent ;  but  the  Urdu  word  **  Kacha  "  (raw),  as  used  in  India,  would  perhaps
more  nearly  translate  '*  Kara  "  than  any  English  term.  In  this  way  **Eara  "  is
sometimes  applied,  at  the  present  day,  in  Mongolia  and  Turkistan,  to  Chinese
from  certain  parts  of  China,  though  they  may  be  Chinese  of  the  lightest  com-
plexion ;  also  to  some  tribes  of  Kirghiz  who  differ,  in  colour,  in  no  way  from
other  Kirghiz,  and  so  on.  In  naming  wild  animals  too,  the  word  is  made  ueo
of  in  this  manner— to  denote  a  variety.  Thus  the  Kara-Khitai  were,  to  the
western  foreigner,  not  the  real,  the  true-bred  (the  '*pakk^")  Khatai,  but  a
variety,  or  ofiiBboot,  of  them,  and  therefore  denominated  by  an  adjective.

(See  Bretschneider,  i.,  pp.  208,  tef^q. ;  Howorth,  ii«,  pp.  16*20.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

154  Beginning  of  Part  11.

alliance  was  oontracted  in  Sh^sh  in  the  year  899.  After  this  ho
received  the  country  of  Ushtur  Ushna  (which  is  known  now  as
tJrdtippa),  together  with  as  much  of  the  surrounding  country  as  he
could  bring  within  his  power.  He  then  had  leave  to  depart,  and
spent  nine  years  in  the  administration  of  the  government  of  that
district.  During  this  time  many  important  events  occurred.  I
was  bom  after  my  father  had  governed  for  six  years.^

I  think  it  proper  here  to  mention  who  were  the  princes  who  at
this  time  ruled  in  the  surrounding  countries.

In  the  country  of  Fargh4na,  whose  capital  is  Andijan,  after  the
death  of  Mirz4  Omar  Shaikh  Eurkdn,  son  of  Sultdn  Abu  Said
Kurkan,  serious  quarrels  and  disputes  arose  between  his  two
sons,  Zahir-ud-Din  Muhammad  B4bar  Pddishah  Oh4zi  and  Mirza
Jahangir,^  in  spite  of  their  youth  ;  and  these  quarrels  were  chiefly
owing  to  ^'b  enmity  of  their  respective  Amirs.  There  ensued
many  victories  and  defeats,  some  of  which  shall  be  mentioned  in
this  Epitome.

In  the  country  of  Samarkand  and  Bokhara,  endless  wars  and
contests  arose  between  the  three  princes,  Baisanghar  Mirza  and
Sultdn  All  Mirza  (the  sons  of  Mahmud  Eurkan,  son  of  Sultan  Abu
Said  Kurkan)  and  Shahi  Beg  Ehan,  son  of  Sbdh  Badagh  Sultan,
son  of  Abulkhair  Khdn,  than  whom,  in  his  lifetime,  there  was  no
more  exalted  chief  on  the  throne  of  the  Juji.^  Of  these  wars  and
disputes  I  will  speak  hereafter.

In  Ehorasan,  Sultan  Husain  Mirza^  was  at  the  height  of  his
power  and  magnificence.  From  time  to  time  the  dust  of  dissension
rose  up  between  the  father  and  his  sons,  but  this  the  MirzA,  with
his  wisdom  and  sagacity,  soon  caused  to  subside.

In  Ir4k,  after  the  death  of  Sultan  Takub,  son  of  Uzun  Hasan,'
the  Sultans  (his  sons)  by  reason  of  their  youth,  were  unable  to
direct  the  affairs  of  the  State,  and  Shah  Ismail  (who  had  mado  his
violence  felt  in  the  world)  taking  advantage  of  the  situation,
invaded  the  country,  entirely  exterminated  the  rest  of  those
Sultans,  and  upset  all  the  afEairs  of  the  state  and  of  religion.

In  the  Dasht-i-Eipch4k  and  the  TJlw  of  Juji  Ehdn,  Baranduk
Ehan*  was  in  power,  and  all  the  Juji  Sult4ns  were  subservient  to
him. They  have  sought  to  rival  the  rain-drops  in  their  numbers.

>  That  is  in  905  h.  =  1499-1500  a.d.

'  See,  for  these  names,  the  Genealogical  Table  of  the  house  of  Timur  attached
to  this  Yolume.

*  Compare  the  genealogical  table  of  Uzbeg  Khans  in  Biolms,  i,  p.  158.

*  Otherwise  known  as  Abul  Ghizi  Hussain,  or  Snltan  Hussain  Baikac&.  He
was  great-grandson  of  Timur*s  son,  Umar  Shaikh.  (S.  L.  Poole,  p.  268;  or
Btokvis,  i.,  p.  156.)

*  Of  the  line  of  Ak-Koinla,  or  White  Sheep  Turkomans.  (See  S.  L.  Poole,
pp.  254-5 ;  or  Stokvis,  i.,  p.  119.)

'  Son  of  Karat  Khan,  son  of  Bar&k,  etc.,  of  the  White  Horde.  (Gomp.
Howorth,  ii.,  p.  685;  and  Stokvis,  i.,  pp.  158  and  163.)

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Reign  of  Yumis  KJidn,  155

What  took  place  between  them  and  the  Moghals  will  be  herein-
after related.

In  Shdsh,  which  is  better  known  as  Tashkand,  Sultan  Mahmud
£h4n  held  sway.

I  mnst  now  tnm  to  the  story  of  Yunns  Khan,  without  which
the  threcKl  of  my  history  would  not  be  connected.

CHAPTER  II.

KEIGN  OF  YUNUS  KHXn  ; ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  LIFE  AND  LIST  OF  HIS
OFFSPUING.

YuNUs  EhAn  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  Chaghatai  Khans,  and
before  him  there  was,  in  many  respects,  no  one  like  him  in  his
family.  None  of  the  Chaghatai  Khdus  who  preceded  him  had
passed  the  age  of  forty ;  nay,  most  of  them  never  reached  that  age.
But  this  prosperous  Khan  attained  to  the  age  of  seventy-four.
Towards  the  end  of  his  life,  growing  repentant  and  devout,  he
became  a  disciple  of  that  Befuge  of  the  Pious,  Nasiruddin  Khw4ja
Ubaidullah  (in  this  history,  wherever  the  term  "  His  Holiness "
is  used,  it  refers  to  the  Khwdja),  and  him  the  Khdn  followed
with  piety.  He  was  also  acquainted  with  many  other  Shaikhs,
and  used  to  associate  with  them.  His  nature  was  adorned  with
many  high  qualities  and  virtues ;  he  possessed  also  many  acquire-
ments, among  which  may  be  mentioned  the  reading  of  the  Kor4n.
He  was  of  an  even  temper,  his  conversation  was  charming,  and  he
had  a  quick  perception.  He  excelled  in  penmanship,  painting,
and  other  accomplishments  conformable  with  a  healthy  nature,
and  was  well-trained  in  singing  and  instrumental  music.  He
studied  under  Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Yazdi,  with  whom  he  spent  twelve
years,  and  travelled  much  in  foreign  countries.  Of  all  these
acquirements  and  travels,  a  more  full  account  will  (God  willing)
be  given  in  the  First  Part  of  this  history.  He  was  graced  with
good  qualities  and  perfect  manners,  was  unequalled  in  bravery
and  heroism,  and  excelled  especially  in  archery.  In  a  word,  no
one  of  all  his  family  can  be  compared  to  him.  The  Kh4n  had
seven  children.

1.  Mihr  Nig4r  Kh&nim,  whom  he  gave  to  Sult&n  Ahmad  Miiz&«
She  died  childless.

2.  Kutluk  Nigdr  Kh&nim,  whom  he  gave  to  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd*
She  had  two  children :  Eh&nzdda  Begum,  who  still  honours  the
throne  of  chastity,  and  Babar  F4dish4h,  who  has  illumined  the

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

1 56  End  of  Reign  of  YunuSy

world  with  the  radiance  of  his  power  and  his  exploits,  as  I  have
recounted  in  the  First  Part,  and  will  relate  again  in  this  Epitome
whenever  it  suits  the  context.

3.  Ehub  Nigar  Ehanim,  who  was  given  to  my  father,  as  has
been  mentioned  above.

4.  Sultan  Mahmud  Rh4n,  a  short  notice  of  whose  history  will
be  given.

5.  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,  known  as  Alacha  Khan,  of  whom,  also,
I  shall  speak  briefl}'.

6.  Sultan  Nigar  Ehanim,  who  was  given  to  Mirza  Sultan
Mahmud,  son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said.  She  had  one  son,  who  is
known  as  Mirza  Ehan ;  and  his  son  Sulaiman  is,  at  the  present
time,  king  of  Badakhshan.

7.  Daulat  Sultan  Ehanim,  who  fell  into  the  hands  of  Timur
Sultan,  son  of  Sh4hi  Beg  Ehan,  at  the  sacking  of  Tashkand.  She
too  will  be  mentioned  farther  on.

CHAPTER  III.

END  OF  TUB  REIQN  OF  YUNUS  KHAN. LIST  OF  HIS  SONS. THB  REIGN
OF  SULTJLn  mahmud  KHIn  and  the  reason  OF  HIS  RUIN.

At  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Yunus  Ehan,  all  the  Moghuls
dwelt,  according  to  their  old  custom,  in  Moghulist4n ;  they  avoided
all  towns  and  cultivated  countries  [and  regarded  them]  with  great
repugnance.  They  were  Musulm4ns  in  nothing  but  the  name ;  in
fact,  not  even  in  name,  for  they  were  carried  off  into  tne  countries
round  about,  and  sold  as  slaves  like  other  infidels.  After  the
Ehdn  had  had  the  happiness  to  kiss  the  feet  of  his  Holiness,  the
latter  wrote  letters  to  all  the  surrounding  Musulman  rulers,
saying :  "  We  have  seen  Sultan  Yunus  Ehan,  and  it  is  not  lawful
to  molest  a  tribe  whose  chief  is  so  good  a  Musulman."

From  that  date,  no  more  Moghuls  who  had  been  carried  off,  were
ever  bought  or  sold  as  slaves,  in  a  Muhammadan  country.  The
Moghuls  had  always  been  this  kind  of  [nomadic]  people.  The
Ehan  felt  that  until  they  settled  down  in  cultivated  countries  and
towns,  they  could  never  become  true  Musulmans.  He  therefore
exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to  bring  their  settlement  about.
When  the  Ehan  was  leading  away  the  Moghuls  to  Tishkand,
a  number  of  them  who  were  loth  to  go,  having  seized  the  Eh&n*8
younger  son,  Sultan  Ahmad  Ehan,  abandoned  the  party  and
stayed  behind  in  Moghulistan. The  Ehan  meanwhile  arrived  in

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

and  Reign  of  Mahmud  K/uin.  157

Tashkand  with  his  elder  son.  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  and  the  rest
of  the  Moghuls.  It  would  be  tedious  to  relate  their  proceedings  in
this  Epitome,  but  they  will  (God  willing)  be  given  in  the  First  Part.
When  Yunus  Khan  went  to«the  palace  of  eternity,  he  left  the
kingdom  to  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  and  the  Moghuls,  according  to
their  custom,  placed  him  on  his  father's  throne.  It  is  a  common
occurrence  that  those  who  inherit  what  their  father  has  left  them,
do  not  appreciate  its  worth ;  thus  the  new  Kh4n,  undervaluing
the  great  Amirs  who  had  served  his  father,  expelled  them  and
set  up,  in  their  stead,  weak-minded  and  base  men :  while  his  old
friends  being  defeated,  old  enemies,  who  styled  themselves  new
friends,  now  gained  the  supremacy.  But  in  this  new  order  of
things,  the  Ehdn  found  it  dif&cult  to  withstand  these  [new
advisers] ;  nay,  was  incapable  of  keeping  together  his  kingdom.
When  Aldcha  Khan  heard  of  this,  although  he  was  occupied  with
rebellions  and  seditions  on  the  confines  of  Moghulistan  (which
was  under  his  rule),  he  did  his  best  to  punish  those  [who  opposed
him],  and  then,  setting  up  his  eldest  son,  Mansur  Khan,  in  his
own  place,  hastened  to  the  court  of  his  brother.  This  was  in  the
year  907  [1501-2].

A  year  and  a  half  previous  to  this  meeting  of  the  two  Eh&ns,  my
mother  journeyed  from  this  transitory  abode  to  the  dwellings  of
eternity.  She  had  six  sons :  two  of  them  had  died  at  the  breast,
four  survived  her,  and  of  each  of  these  I  will  speak  hereafter.

One  of  the  most  curious  facts  in  my  own  history  is  the
following.  While  I  was  yet  at  my  mother's  breast,  I  was  subject
to  such  severe  hasmorrhoids  that  the  doctors  gave  up  all  hope  of
my  recovery.  My  mother,  before  bearing  me,  had  been  four  times
disappointed  in  child-birth  [ajiza].  She  had  prayed  very  earnestly
to  God  to  grant  her  a  son,  and  after  much  prayer  and  supplication
on  her  part,  I  came  into  existence;  hence  the  unbounded  love
which  my  mother  had  for  me.  When  my  malady  became
alarming,  she  turned  in  every  direction  in  search  of  help,  till  at
length  she  went  to  Mauldn4  Muhammad  Kazi,  who  was  one  of  the
most  distinguished  of  the  companions  of  his  Holiness :  so  much  so
that  even  at  this  time  his  family  have  many  disciples.  When  he
had  looked  on  me  with  his  Christ-like  glance,^  ho  became  very
thoughtful,  and  after  he  had  gone  out  said :  "  If  I  had  known
that  the  Mirzii's  son  was  in  such  a  grave  condition,  I  should  not
have  come."  He  ordered  no  remedy,  except  frugality,  and  then
went  on  his  way.

One  morning  he  sent  one  of  his  servants  to  my  parents,  to  tell
them  that  the  Most  High  God  had  sent  to  their  child  the  wine  of
recovery  and  the  meat  of  life,  from  His  heavenly  abode. When

>  Christ  is  always  connected  with  healing  in  the  Mnhammadan  mind. — B.

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC

1 58  End  of  Reign  of  YumiSy

my  parents  heard  this  good  news,  they  set  out  that  same  morning
to  the  place  of  worship  of  this  holy  man,  and  laid  their  prayers
before  him.  From  that  same  day,  marked  signs  of  improvement
showed  themselves  in  me ;  and  up  to  the  present  time  I  have  never
had  a  return  of  the  haemorrhoids.  I  would  point  out  that  in  this
matter  two  miracles  were  performed — one  being  my  recovery
without  the  aid.  of  medicine,  the  other  the  fact  that  the  malady
never  returned.  And  this  is  the  more  wonderful  miracle  of  the
two,  for  haemorrhoids  generally  last  all  one's  life.  From  that  date
I0  the  end  of  bis  life,  the  Maul&nd  helped  and  instr acted  me,  both
publicly  and  privately.

The  story  of  each  [of  the  children]  will  be  told  in  tho  proper  place.

After  these  events  my  mother  departed  this  life.

Shortly  afterwards  Shdhi  Beg  Khan,  with  the  inopportune  aid
of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn,  conquered  Samarkand  and  Bokhara,
and  defeated  the  Timnri  Sultans :  in  particular  Bdbar  Pddishah,
who  was  Sultan  Mahmud*s  nephew,  and  almost  like  a  son  to  him.
After  [these  successes]  having  changed  his  assurances  of  obedience
and  friendship,  into  boasts  of  pride  and  insubordination,  he  began
to  sound  the  drum  of  revolt.

In  the  meanwhile  Sultdn  Ahmad  Tambal,  who  had  been  in  tho
service  of  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  although  he  belonged  to  the  race
of  the  Moghul  Amirs,  revolted  in  Andijan,  on  account  of  the
improvidence  of  the  Khan,  and  having  got  possession  of  that  place,
began  to  shoot  the  arrows  of  insurrection  at  the  target  of
sovereignly.  The  two  Khans  consequently  went  to  crush  him —
Sult4n  Medimud  Khan,  leaving  his  son  Sultan  Muhammad  Sultdn
in  Tashkand  with  a  strong  army,  wherewith  to  oppose  his
perfidious  enemies.  My  father,  too,  had  been  left  in  Urdtippa  to
oppose  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.  And  they  imagined  that  the  latter
could  not  pass  between  these  two  armies.  But  in  reality  ho
looked  upon  it  as  an  opportunity  to  be  seized,  thinking  that  he
would  never  again  find  the  two  Khans  with  so  small  a  force.
Therefore  he  hastened  from  Samarkand  to  Farghdna,  passing  by
Urdtippa  on  his  road.  [My  father]  thinking  he  had  come  to  lay
siege  to  the  town,  began  to  busy  himself  with  its  defence.  At  the
hour  of  afternoon  prayer,  [Shdhi  Beg]  came  and  encamped  close
to  the  town.  After  the  sun  had  deprived  the  world  of  its  light,
and  hud  thrown  the  shadows  of  night  upon  the  eyes  of  all  creation,
he  broke  up  his  camp  and  marched  away  with  all  possible  speed,
so  that  before  the  men  in  the  fort  had  begun  to  inquii-e  in  which
direction  he  had  gone,  he  was  many  farsdkha  away.  When  it  was
discovered  that  he  had  marched  towards  Farghdna,  several
messengers  in  succession  were  despatched,  to  give  notice  to  the
Khdns  of  his  approach.  The  messengers  and  the  enemy  arrived
at  the  same  moment. Neither  the  army  of  Tdshkand  nor  that  of

Digitized  by

Google

and  Reign  of  Mahmud  KMn.  159

Urdtippa,  had  time  to  come  to  the  aid  of  the  Khans.  The  two
Khans  had  with  them  16,000  men,  because  in  the  beginning  of  the
year  they  had  [collected  a  largo  force]  to  attack  Tambal,  whom
they  had  soverely  handled,  and  whose  power  they  had  entirely
subdued.  For  this  reason,  they  felt  sure  that  he  would  now
resolve  on  flight  as  a  last  resource.  They  had  taken  Babar
Padishah  with  them,  in  order  that  after  things  were  settled,  they
might  set  him  up  on  his  father's  throne  and  then  return  home.

The  Khans  had  not  yet  reached  Andijan.  Akhsi,  which  is  one
of  the  strongest  forts  in  that  country,  was  occupied  by  Shaikh
Bayazid,  brother  of  Tambal ;  ho  was  treating  about  submission,
and  for  that  reason  they  had  tarried  near  the  fort.  At  this
juncture,  Shahi  Beg  Khan  came  up  with  30,000  men,  and  all  his
Sultdns,  such  as  Kuchum  Sultdn,  Suyunjuk  Sultdn,  Jani  Beg
Sultan  and  others.  They  had  hardly  time  to  draw  up  in  line,  when,
after  a  short  conflict,  the  Khans  were  put  to  rout  by  the  over-
powering numbers  of  the  enemy.  Their  horses  being  rendered
useless  with  fatigue,  the  two  Khans  were  taken  prisoners.  Babar
Fddishdh  fled  to  the  hills  on  the  south  of  Furghana.  ShAhi  Beg
Kh4n  behaved  with  magnanimity,  and  having  taken  possession  of
Tdshkand,  dismissed  the  Kh4ns  with  every  mark  of  favour,  saying :
"  With  your  help  and  assistance  I  have  won  my  power :  I  took  you
captive,  but  do  not  kill  you  :  I  let  you  go."

In  this  place,  I  call  to  mind  the  story  of  the  tax-gatherer
\omaldiAT\  A  certain  governor  had  imposed  a  fine  upon  a  tax-
gatherer,  and  went  so  far  as  to  torture  him  [in  order  to  make  him
pay  it].  But  a  generous  Khwdja  took  pity  on  him,  and  bought
him  out  of  the  hands  of  his  creditors  [by  paying]  the  price  of  the
fine,  and  taking  him  home  with  him,  showed  him  every  kindness
and  attention.  One  day  the  tax-collector  was  sitting  with  his  son,
and  they  were  talking  confidentially,  while  the  Khwaja  was
listening  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall.  The  son  said  to  his  father  :
**  How  can  we  ever  worthily  repay  the  Khwaja  for  his  kindness?"
The  tax-collector  answered :  *<  As  soon  as  I  am  again  in  ofSce,  the
matter  will  be  simple."  The  son  then  asked :  "  How  will  it  be
easy  to  repay  his  generosity  ?  "  His  father  replied :  "  When  they
have  again  entrusted  me  with  an  office,  I  will  press  the  Khwdja
very  hard,  and  will  give  him  over  to  the  creditors,  who  will  fine
him  heavily,  and  when  it  has  come  to  a  matter  of  life  and  death
for  him,  I  will  take  all  his  money,  and  with  a  part  of  it  will  buy
him  ofif  again."

When  the  news  of  the  capture  of  the  Khans  reached  Tashkand,
Sultdn  Muhammad  Sultdn  earned  off  into  Moghulistdn,  all  that  he
was  able  of  his  people  and  family,  and  of  the  Moghul  TJVm^  causing
my  father  and  my  uncle  to  follow  him  with  all  the  money  they
could  collect.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

i6q  End  of  Reign  of  Yunus.

When  the  Khdns  were  captured,  Shahi  Beg  Khan  said :  "  I  have
always  wished  to  arrange  a  marriage^  but  it  has  never  been  granted
me ;  to  make  up  for  this  [disappointment]  I  must  now  form  three
marriage  alliances."  The  youngest  sister  of  the  Khan,  Daulat
Sultan  Khanim,  who  has  been  mentioned  above  in  the  list  of
the  children  of  Yunus  Khan,  was  married  to  [Shiihi  Beg's]  son
Timur  Sultan.^  He  took  for  himself  Aisha  Sultdn  Khdnim,  better
known  as  Moghul  Ehanim,  and  gave  to  J4ni  Beg  Khan,  Kutuk
Khdhim ;  both  of  these  princesses  were,  in  their  chastity,  bright
as  the  sun  and  pure  as  the  moon.  Some  of  their  children  are  living
now,  and  are  ruling  in  MdvarA-un-Nahr.

On  the  return  of  the  Khdns  to  their  old  residence,  in  Moghulistan,
the  younger  fell  ill,  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  909,  wandered  from
the  garden  of  earthly  dominion  to  the  fields  of  Paradise.

From  Khwaja  Tajuddin  Muhammad,  who  inherited  from  his
ancestors  the  office  of  Shaikh-ul-Islam  of  that  country  (and  who
was,  in  truth,  a  most  admirable,  austere  man,  and  endowed  with
many  good  qualities)  I  have  heard  the  following :  "  When  the  Kh&n
was  extremely  ill,  I  said  to  him,  '  It  is  commonly  reported  that
Shahi  Beg  Khdn  has  caused  poison  to  be  put  in  your  food ;  if  your
Highness  is  also  of  this  opinion,  I  will  bring  some  of  that  powerful
antidote,  which  comes  from  Khitai,  and  administer  it.'  The  Khan
replied,  '  Yes,  indeed,  Shahi  Beg  Khdn  has  poisoned  me,  and  the
poison  is  this :  having  risen  from  the  most  degraded  station  to  the
highest  elevation,  he  has  taken  us  two  brothers  prisoners  and  then
set  us  at  liberty.  This  disgrace  is  the  cause  of  my  succumbing  to
illness.  If  yours  is  an  antidote  against  this  kind  of  poison,  it  may
prove  efficient.' "

Sultdn  Ahmad  Khdn  had  eighteen  sons.

(1.)  The  eldest,  Mansur  Khdn,  from  909  to  the  present  date  of
948,^  has  ruled  over  his  father's  dominions  with  absolute  power.
An  account  of  him  will  be  given  in  this  Epitome.

(2.)  Iskandar  Sultdn,  who  died  a  natural  death,  soon  after  his
father's  demise.

(3.)  Sultdn  Said  Kbdn,  whose  history  will  be  related.  Where-
ever  "  the  Khdn  "  is  spoken  of  in  an  absolute  way,  in  this  Epitome,
it  is  this  Khdn  that  is  meant.

(4.)  Bdbdjdk  Sultdn,  who  is  still  in  the  service  of  Mansur
Khdn.

(5.)  Sbdh  Shaikh  Muhammad  Sultdn,  who,  together  with  his
haram  and  some  of  his  children,  was  killed  by  the  fall  of  his  palace
during  an  earthquake.

*  In  Stokvis'  table  of  the  line  of  Juji,  the  son  of  Shabi  Beg  ia  thovn  as  *  Yar
Muhammad/ I  do  Dot  know  the  authority  for  this  name. ( Manuel  d*UUt.y  p.  158.)

^  A.U.  918  (1541  A.D.)  will  then  be  the  date  of  compiling  Part  ii.  of  the
Tdrihh-i'Ranliidi — or  the  Epitome.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

List  of  Ahmad  KMtis  Offspring,  l6l

(6.)  Sultdn  Ehalil  Snltdn,  of  whom  I  shall  have  occaBion  to
speak  in  connection  with  Sultan  Said  Khan.

(7.)  Aiman  Ehwdja  Sultan,  who  will  also  be  mentioned  in  the
same  connection.

(8.)  Chin  Timur  Snltdn,  who  for  some  time  was  in  the  service
of  Mansur  Khdn,  whom  he  afterwards  abandoned,  and  entered  the
service  of  '*  the  Ehdn."  Mansur  Ehan  had  him  brought  back,  but
he  again  fled  ;  this  time  going  to  the  court  of  Babar  Padishah  in
Hindustan.  Here  he  rendered  good  service,  and  was  in  return
treated  with  the  utmost  honour  and  respect  by  the  Emperor.  He
died  of  a  violent  dysentery  at  Agra,  where  he  was  buried.

(9.)  Tusun  Timur  Sultan,  who  like  his  brother,  being  tired  of
always  going  backwards  and  forwards  between  the  two  Khdns,  fled
to  the  Eazdk  and  thence  to  Turdn ;  thence  again  to  the  court  of
Ubaid  UUah  Eh&n  in  Bokhara.  From  there  he  wont  to  the  court  of
Babar  F4diahah ;  him  also  the  Emperor  treated  most  kindly,  and
he  is  now  in  Hindustan.

(10.)  Tukhta  Bugha  Sultan,  who  also  went  to  Hindustan,  where
he  died  a  natural  death.

The  other  sons  died  natural  deaths,  at  different  times.

Sultdn  Ahmad  Ehan  had  four  daughters.

(1.)  L41  Sh&d  Ehanim,  whose  mother  was  a  slave  whom  the
Ehdn  had  married  \ym.m'r)aladL\.  Although  she  was  outside  the
circle  of  distinction,  she  was  finally  married  to  Muhammad  Amir
Mirza,  son  of  Amir  Jabar  Birdi,  who  was  a  Dughldt,  and  to  their
family  alone  belonged  the  office  of  Ulmhegi  in  the  time  of  Alacha
Eh4n.

(2.)  M&him  Ehdnim,  who  was  given  to  Builash  Ehan,  son  of
Uyuk  Sultan.

(3.)  The  third  was  married  to  me,  as  will  be  related  below.

(4.)  Ehadija  Sultan  Ehdnim.  After  the  death  of  Sultan  Ahmad
Ehan,  Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr,  whose  story  will  be  told  in  connection
with  the  Ehan,  took  possession  of  Aksu,  the  capital  of  Alacha
Ehin's  dominions.  In  those  days  Ehadija  Sultan  Ehdnim  fell  into
the  hands  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr.  He,  however,  treated  her  kindly
and  gave  her  to  his  son  Jah4ngir  Mirza.  When  the  latter  was
slain,  she  was  given  to  Shah  Muhammad  Sult4n,  son  of  Sult4n
Muhammad  Sultan,  son  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Eh4n,  as  will  be
related.

Digitized  by

Google

i62  Murder  of  Mahnud  Khdn,

CHAPTEE  IV.

EPITOMISED  ACCOUNT  OF THE  MARTYRDOM  OF  SULtAn  MAHMUD  KHAN
AND  HIS  CHILDREN.

On  the  death  of  Sultdn  Ahmad  Ehdn,  Stdt^n  Mahmud  Ehdn
resigned  to  his  brother's  children  all  the  country  and  people  that
had  belonged  to  their  father,  from  the  frontier  of  Khit&i  to  the
confines  of  Edshghar,  viz. :  Turfdn,  Ch4lish,  Enchah  [Euchar],
Aksu  and  Uch  [Ush-Tarf4n],  while  he  himself  withdrew,  with
those  few  of  his  own  people  who  yet  remained,  to  the  deserts  of
Moghulistdn.  There  he  spent  five  years,  during  which  time
nothing  of  importance  happened  to  him.  At  length  those  same
base  men  who  had  caused  the  night  shadows  of  ruin  to  overcloud
the  dawn  of  the  Ehdn's  reign,  filled  his  mind  with  evil  suggestions,
saying :  "  Shahi  Beg  Ehan  will  treat  you  kindly,  but  even  if  he
does  not,  he  will  at  least  allow  us  to  return  to  this  comer  of
comers."  My  uncle  used  to  relate  that  one  day  after  the  death  of
Aldcha  Ehan,  he  was  at  the  court  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Ehdn  in
Aksu,  where  the  Ehdn,  being  friendly  and  talkative,  asked  him :
'*  Is  the  position  of  scullion  ^  in  Tashkand  better  than  that  of  king
in  Aksu  ? "  My  uncle  replied :  "  Verily  it  is,  if  the  scullion  is
allowed  to  perform  his  office."  At  these  words  the  Ehdn  was  very
wroth.

In  short,  these  base  men  succeeded  in  bringing  the  Ehdn  to
Farghdna.  When  news  of  this  reached  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn,  he  was
in  TJldng-zddagdn.  He  at  once  despatched  a  party  of  men  to  find
him.  These  men  were  coming  in  exactly  the  opposite  direction  to
the  Ehdn,  whom  they  met  and  slew,  together  with  his  five  young
sons,  at  Ehojand.  To  commemorate  the  date  of  their  martyrdom
the  chronogram  "  Ldb-i-^aryd-i-Khofand  "  =  914,  was  devised.  (This
matter  I  will  also  speak  of  elsewhere.)

Sultdn  Mahmud  Ehdn  had  six  sons,  five  of  whom  suffered  death
with  their  father.  His  eldest  son  was  Sultdn  Muhammad  Sultdn.
When  the  Ehdn  was  setting  out  from  Moghulistdn,  in  the  hope  of
being  well  treated  by  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn,  Sultdn  Muhammad  Sultdn
had  done  his  utmost  to  dissuade  his  father  from  going,  but  his
words  being  of  no  avail,  he  separated  from  his  father  and  stayed
behind  in  Moghulistdn.  From  circumstances  which,  God  willbig,
will  be  related  in  the  First  I'art  [Tdrikh-i-Asl],  he  was  not  able  to
remain  in  Moghulistdn,  but  went  in  dire  distress  to  Baranduk

*  Tho  word  in  the  origiDal  is  DaBimdl-shui,  meaning,  literally,  <<  towel-washer.''

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

History  of  t/ie  Autfwr's  Fat/ier.  163

Ehin  and  Easim  Kh&n  ^  in  the  Dasht-i-Eipchak.  His  followers,
hoping  that  Sh4hi  Beg  Ehdn  had  received  Saltan  Mahmud  Ehan
well,  led  him  by  a  wrong  road  and  brought  him  to  T&shkand,
where  the  Uzb^  sent  him  to  join  his  father.  He  left  one  son,
whose  name  was  Sh4h  Muhammad  Sult4n.  His  history  will  be
given  in  my  notioe  of  the  Ehdn.

CHAPTEB  V.

THE  REST  OF  THB  HISTORY  OF  MY  FATHER,  MIRZi  MUHAMICAD
HUSAIK  KURKIn.

When  the  Ehans  fell  into  the  hands  of  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn  at  Aksn ,
my  father  was  at  Urdtippa.  When  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn  passed  between
[the  two  armies]  it  was  not  possible  for  my  father  to  form  a
junction  with  the  Ehdns,  and  he  found  it  necessary  to  go  to
Eardtigin.  At  that  time  Ehusrau  Shdh,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Mirzd
Sultdn  Mahmud,  son  of  Sultdn  Abu  Said,  was  in  possession  of
Hisdr,  Eunduz  and  Badakhshdn.  After  the  death  of  Mirzd
Sultdn  Mahmud,  he  had  blinded  his  son  Sultdn  Masud  Mirzd,  and
when  Bdisanghar  Mirzd,  son  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Mirzd,  fled  from
Samarkand,  Ehusrau  Shdh  sent  messengers  to  him  to  express  his
repentance,  saying :  "  What  I  did,  was  from  fear  for  my  life,  for
Sultdn  Masud  Mirzd  had  the  intention  of  killing  me ;  but  now,  in
compensation  for  that  act,  I  will  serve  you  so  faithfully  that,
however  much  my  infftmous  act  may  have  brought  down  upon  me
the  execrations  and  curses  of  mankind,  my  conduct  for  the  future
will  procure  for  me  their  favour  and  applause."  In  this  manner
did  he  make  abundant  promises  and  protest  so  much,  that  he
deceived  Bdisanghar  Mirzd  also,  and  sent  that  worthy  prince  into
the  next  world,  as  if  he  were  an  arrow  from  a  bow.

Thus  he  brought  the  whole  of  the  dominion  of  Sultdn  Mahmud
Mirzd  under  his  own  power.  But  these  successes  filled  his  mind
with  pride  and  vainglory.  When  he  was  thus  at  the  height  of  his
power,  my  father  arrived  in  Eardtigin,  and  Ehusrau  Shdh  desired
an  interview  with  him.  My  father  accordingly  went  to  Hisdr;
and  Ehusrau  Shdh,  having  received  him  in  the  Bdgh-i-chindr,
with  the  utmost  distinction  and  friendliness,  said  to  him :  "  I  look
upon  your  gracious  visit  as  a  blessing  from  Grod ;  for  it  is  the
season  of  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn*s  supremacy.  My  fear  is  that  though
this  year  his  mind  is  set  upon  the  conquest  of  other  territories,  he

*  The  Turki  MS.  only  has  Kdsim  Ehan's  name  here;  bnt  it  is  probably
correct. (See  Erskine,  UisU,  i.,  p.  192.)

U  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

1 64  History  of  the  Author's  Father.

may  next  year  turn  towards  this  quarter.  I  have  never  been  to
war  with  the  Uzbeg,  and  do  not  know  their  mode  of  warfare.  For
every  tribe  has  its  own  special  methods,  whether  in  war  or  in
negotiation.  The  arrangement  of  these  matters  diOrera  with  each
people  according  to  time  and  place,  and  until  their  methods  are
known,  it  is  difficult  to  contend  with  them.  Now,  as  you  have
many  times  had  to  do  with  the  Uzbeg,  both  in  peace  and  in  war,  and
have  experienced,  when  at  war  with  them,  both  victory  and
defeat,  make  known  to  me  all  that  you  have  learned,  that  I  may
be  guided  by  what  you  tell  me.  As  my  reliance  is  on  you,  and
my  hope,  I  beg  you  to  accept,  in  confirmation  of  my  confidence,
Sultanim  Begum,  daughter  of 'Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirzd,  and  one  of
the  princesses,  [of  my  family]  that  she  may  be  a  bond  of  union
between  us."

Such  idle  words  and  many  more  did  he  utter,  and  set  on  foot
grand  preparations  for  the  marriage.

The  destruction  \mram\  of  Tashkand  and  Uratippa  was  in
the  season  of  Cancer,^  and  this  affair  took  place  in  the  end  of  the
season  of  the  Balance.^

Meanwhile,  news  arrived  of  the  invasion  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan,
and  all  the  adherents  of  Ehusrau  Shah  fled  in  different  directions.
Those  who  possessed  castles,  fortified  themselves  in  them,  and
those  who  had  none,  fled  to  the  hills  and  the  remote  valleys  and
glens.  No  one  troubled  himself  about  his  neighbour.  As  all
Khusrau  Shah's  people  were  scattered  in  confusion,  my  father
also  took  refuge  in  Kardtigin,  which  is  a  country  of  mountain
fastnesses.  Among  these  mountains  they  encountered  a  very
severe  winter.  It  began  to  snow  as  soon  as  they  arrived,  and  for
one  whole  month  the  weather  did  not  clear,  so  that  the  snow
reached  to  a  depth  of  twelve  spans,  and  for  those  who  had  settled
in  the  valleys,  or  lived  in  houses,  there  was  no  possibility  of
changing  their  abode.

Now  Shahi  Beg's  purpose  in  coming  [to  Hisar]  was  not  to  seize
Khusrau  Shah,  but  just  to  try  whether  Khusrau  Shah  had  power
to  withstand  him  or  not.  In  that  inroad  he  did  not  commit  much
violence.  Whatever  plunder  did  fall  into  his  hands,  he  seized
upon.  He  then  returned,  with  the  conviction  that  when  he  came
a  second  time  he  would  frighten  away  [Khusrau  Shah]  as  a  fly
from  a  dish,  with  a  mere  wave  of  his  hand.  That  winter  he  also
wished  to  test  the  people  of  Khorasan.  Using  the  same  means,  he
marched  on  Balkh,  where  the  governor  at  that  time  was  Sultan
Kulunjdk,  acting  under  Badi-uz-Zamdn  Mirz4,  son  of  Sultan  Husain
Mirzd.  He  commanded  his  men  to  invest  the  town,  and  spent  the
whole  of  that  winter  in  besieging  it. The  Khordsani  were,  in

'  About  Jane~1503.  *  The  end  of  autumn.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

History  of  the  Author^ s  Father,  165

spite  of  their  nnmerous  attacks  on  the  enemy,  unable  to  relieve
Balkh.  Thus,  during  that  winter,  he  weighed  Khusrau  Shdh  and
Ihe  Ehordsani  in  Ihe  scales  of  experiment,  and  found  that  neither
of  them  equalled  himself  in  weight.

But  while  Shahi  Beg  Eh&n  was  engaged  in  besieging  Balkh,
Khusrau  Sh4h  was  left  free  from  molestation,  and  his  men  again
assembled.  In  short,  his  affairs  began  to  prosper,  and  he  sent
messengers  without  intermission  to  Shdhi  Beg  Eh4n,  with  suitable
expressions  of  friendship,  which  Shdhi  Beg  Khan  returned  in  kind.
That  winter,  when  Khusrau  Shdh  was  recovering  his  peace  of
mind,  news  arrived  from  Kardtigin  that  there  had  been  a  great
fall  of  snow,  so  that  no  one  was  able  to  get  away.  Khusrau  Shdh
immediately  despatched  20,000  men,  under  his  brother  Mir  Vali.^

Those  in  Kardtigin  were  under  no  apprehensions  from  anything
on  his  side,  but  remained  where  they  were,  far  and  near.  When
they  learned  the  approach  of  the  army,  they  immediately  mustered
all  the  men  they  could,  to  the  number  of  about  500,  and  occupied
the  pass.  The  snow  was  so  deep  that  no  one  dared  leave  the  road.
Both  sides  dismounted  and  the  fight  commenced.  It  lasted  from
morning  till  night.  Finally  our  i)eople  had  no  arrows  left,  for  on
both  sides  every  arrow  that  was  shot  was  lost  in  the  snow.  The
enemy  were  veiy  numerous,  and  advanced  to  the  fight  in  detach-
ments ;  while  as  soon  as  the  aiTows  of  one  detachment  were  expended,
another  came  up  to  take  its  place  and  continued  the  fight.  But  we
had  on  our  side  only  one  body,  and  towards  evening,  our  arrows
being  entirely  expended,  our  people  turned  and  fled.  Among  the
Amirs  of  my  father,  who  died  of  arrow- wounds  in  that  fight,  were
Bdgh  Yasdr  Oghldn,  Khush  Edi  Kukilddsh,  and  several  more.  My
father  escaped,  with  six  others,  towards  the  hills  of  the  country  of
Farghdna,  which  lie  on  the  eastern  side  of  that  country,  between
Kdshghar  and  Andijdn.  In  those  mountains  are  people  whom
they  call  Jagirdk,  and  who,  at  that  time,  were  great  cattle-
stealers.  Not  long  after  this,  however,  they  were  exterminated  by
Mirzd  Abd  Bakr.2 g^t  Khusrau  Shdh  had  carried  away  all  our

^  Only  one  text  gives  the  name  of  Mir  Yali.  He  was  also  brother  of  Baki
ChaghaniAni,  so  often  mentioned  by  Baber.  He  played  a  considerable  part,  but
eventually  fell  into  the  hands  of  Shabi  Beg,  who  beheaded  him  at  Samarkand  in
1504. (Erskine,  Hut,  i.,  pp.  95  and  212.)

•  The  country  of  the  Jagirdk  must  have  been  in  the  mountains  which  bound
the  upper  part  of  the  Alai  valley  on  the  north,  and  separate  it  from  the  lower
country  of  Farghiina.  Seeing  that  the  tribe  is  said  to  have  been  exterminated
about  tlio  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  it  is  scarcely  surprising  that  no
trace  of  them,  or  of  the  name  of  their  country,  should  remain.  Baber  mentions
the  tribe,  calls  it  a  very  numerous  one,  and  says  that  they  inhabited  "tho
mountains  that  lie  between  Farghdna  and  Kdshghar.*'  Secure  in  these  moun-
tains, they  refused  to  pay  tribute,  and  accumulated  great  numbers  of  sheep,
horses,  and  yaks.  Baber  describes  how,  in  a.h.  900,  he  sent  a  force  to  pluiider
them,  takiug  20,000  sheep  and  1600  horses,  which  he  divided  among  the  soldiers
pf  his  army,  then  ip  a  stftlo  of  destitution. (Jtfemotr*,  p.  85,)

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

1 66  History  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khan.

Bervants  and  retinue  to  Eunduz,  where  they  spent  one  year  as
best  they  conld.

Having  reached  this  point  in  my  narrative,  if  I  omitted  to  give
a  short  account  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  the  chain  of  my  history  would
not  be  continuous.

CHAPTER  VI.

HISTORY  OP  SHIhI  BEG  KHIn.

When  the  great  judge  and  disposer  of  all  things  determines  to
exalt  some  mortal  with  the  crown  of  sovereignty  and  make  him
illustrious,  he  so  arranges  that  great  warriors  and  intelligent
councillors  assemble  round  his  person,  who  may  defend  him  from
his  enemies  and  ill-wishers,  and  make  all  far-sighted  men  blind
and  all  attentive  men  deaf,  so  that  father  and  son,  brother  and
brother,  are  at  enmity  with  one  another.  These  words  may  serve
as  a  preface  to  the  story  of  Shahi  Beg  Khdu.

He  was  the  son  of  Shah  Bad4gh  Sult4n,  the  Qon  of  Abulkhair
Khan.  After  the  death  of  Abulkhair  Khan,  disputes  arose  among
those  whom  he  had  left  behind.  To  such  a  length  were  these
quarrels  carried,  that  each  one  went  in  a  different  direction,  and
thus  all  the  men  of  noble  lineage — the  Sultdns  and  the  Mirzadas —
who  were  held  in  esteem  by  the  people,  were  scattered.  In  this
confusion,  Shdhi  Beg  Kh&n,  after  much  suffering  and  wandering,
being  driven  to  extremity  by  want,  went  to  Mavard-un-Nahr,  where
Sultan  Ahmad  Mii-za,  son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mii-za,  was  reigning.
Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirza  was  a  powerful  king,  and  had  round  him  Amirs
of  such  dignity  and  pretensions  that  they  aimed  at  having  kings
in  their  service.  One  of  these  Amirs  was  Amir  Abdul- Ali  Tarkhan,
Governor  of  Bokhard.  Shahi  Beg  Kh4n  became  his  vassal,  and
was  entered  as  one  of  his  retainers.  In  like  manner  several  other
Sultans  entered  his  service.  From  this  circumstance,  on  estimate
may  be  formed  of  the  splendour  and  dignity  of  Sultan  Ahmad
Mirza.  As  long  as  Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirza  remained  in  the  bonds  of
this  life,  Shahi  Beg  Khdn  stayed  in  the  service  of  Abdul-Ali  Tar-
khan. The  Mirza  and  Abdul-Ali  Tarkhan  died  at  about  the  same
time,  after  which  Shahi  Beg  Khan  went  to  Turkistdn  and  sought
the  protection  and  favour  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  who  did  not
deny  him  what  support  and  assistance  lay  in  his  power  to  give,
till  finally,  by  means  of  the  aid  afforded  him  by  the  Khdn,  Shahi
Beg  Khdn  took  possession  of  Samarkand  and  Bokhdrd.  Then  the
number  of  his  troops  rose  from  two  or  three  hundred  to  50,000  ;

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

History  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  167

or  rather  to  60,000.  From  the  time  of  his  going  to  Tnrkistdn,  by
the  help  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khan,  his  power  had  increased  daily.
All  the  Sultans  and  Amirs,  and  other  adherents  of  Abulkhair
Khan,  who  had  been  wandenng  aimlessly  in  the  wastes  of  the
Dashtr-i-Kipch4k,  now  joined  him ;  and  thus  he  arrived  at  power.

After  the  reduction  of  Samarkand  and  Bokh&rd,  he  turned
against  his  own  benefactor.  Thus  was  the  protector  undone  by
the  dependant.  When  news  of  this  reached  the  ears  of  Alacha
Kh4n,  he  set  out  from  Moghulistdn  to  his  brother's  aid.  The
result,  as  has  been  briefly  related  above,  was  that  he  captured  and
set  at  liberty  the  Khdn  [Mahmud],  and  took  from  him  as  many  of
the  Moghuls  as  was  possible.  Thus  to  his  Uzbeg  army  there  were
added  30,000  Moghuls. [Verses]  ....

Leaving  Tashkand,  he  did  not  tarry  long  in  Samarkand,  but  pro-
ceeded to  ravage  His4r  and  to  besiege  Balkh  (as  has  been  mentioned).
Having  passed  the  winter  of  901)  [1503-4]  in  the  siege  of  Balkh,
he  went,  in  the  beginning  of  spring,  to  Samarkand,  and  remained  a
month  or  two  in  the  open  country  \SoM,rx\  round  that  town.  He
then  turned  his  victorious  arms  against  Andijan.  The  flrst  year,
when  he  captured  the  Kh4n,  he  did  not  trouble  himself  with
Tambal  or  ^dij&n,  being  fully  occupied  in  settling  the  affairs  of
T&shkand.  Moreover,  before  the  conquest  of  that  place,  Shaikh
Bayazid  had  hastened  fearlessly  out  to  receive  him,  and  had  shown
him  signs  of  loyalty.  Tambal  also  had  proffered  him  timely
assurances  of  devotion,  with  all  of  which  he  showed  himself  con-
tented, and  returned  that  same  year.  Having  thus  set  his  mind
at  rest  with  regard  to  the  Moghuls  and  Tdshkand,  and  having  had
an  opportunity  of  forming  an  estimate  of  the  Hisdri  and  the
Khorasdni,  he  wished  first  of  all  to  settle  the  question  of  Andijan
and  Tambal,  that  he  might,  with  a  calm  mind,  proceed  with  the
reduction  of  His4r  and  the  extermination  of  Khusrau  Sh4h,  which
was  the  first  step  towards  the  conquest  of  Khordsan.

When  he  reached  Marghin4n,  which  is  one  of  the  chief  towns  of
Farghdna,  Tambal  abandoned  all  the  forts  in  Farghdna,  and  col-
lected a  force  within  the  fort  of  Andijan.  On  this  news  being
brought  to  Sh&hi  Beg  Khdn,  he  and  all  his  wisest  advisers  wore
agreed  that  this  bringing  together,  into  one  place,  of  the  troops  [of
Tambal]  only  made  the  conquest  eisier  for  them.  With  all  speed,
therefore,  they  hastened  to  Andijan,  and  being  sure  that  they
should  find  him,  prepared  for  a  siege ;  it  was  resolved  that  Shahi
Beg  Khan  should  conduct  the  siege  in  person,  while  the  rest  of  the
Sultans  should  ravage  and  spoil  the  country  round,  seizing  the
forts  and  men,  and  laying  waste  the  whole  region.  The  next
year  they  would  return  to  complete  the  work  of  devastation.
But  the  hand  of  fate  seized  Tambal  by  the  collar  and  hastened
him  to  his  end. He  came  out  of  the  fort  saying :  "  Let  us  meet

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

1 68  History  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,

them  in  the  open  field  " ;  and  he  led  10,000  men  out  of  the  walls.
When  Shdhi  Beg  Eh&n  arrived,  Tambal,  judging  of  their  nnmbers
from  the  dnst  they  raised,  retired.  Bat  before  he  oould  reach  the
fort,  many  of  his  men  had  fallen  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and
Tambal  and  his  brothers,  broken  and  terrified,  crept  into  the
citadel.  It  had  been  decided  that  that  year  they  should  lay  waste
his  territories  ^  and  then  return  home,  so  that  the  enterprise  should
be  easy  the  next  year.  He  himself,  however,  went  to  meet  his
fate :  and  thus  the  undertaking  which  was  to  have  been  accom-
plished the  year  following,  was  achieved  in  forty  days.  When
Shahi  Beg  Kh4n  saw  that  the  fugitives,  in  terror  of  their  lives,
had  taken  refage  in  the  fort,  he  resolved  to  shut  them  up  and  to
push  the  siege  vigorously  forward.

After  the  defeat  in  Eardtigin,  my  father  crossed  to  the  country
of  the  Jagirdk.

The  most  surprising  thing  of  all  was  that,  although  news  had
reached  [Tambal]  of  the  movements  of  Sbahi  Beg  Khdn,  instead  of
making  preparatioos  to  withstand  the  advance  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,
he  went  to  attack  my  father^  in  Jagirdk.  The  Jagirdk,  allying
themselves  with  my  father,  took  up  a  strong  position  in  the  valley
of  Turuk  Shdrdn.^  On  the  arrival  of  Tambal,  fighting  began  and
lasted  continuously  for  three  days.  I  have  heard  my  father  say :
**  On  the  third  day  we  had  used  every  means  in  our  power  to  hold
our  ground.  When  night  fell  we  became  very  thoughtful  and
distressed,  wondering  what  would  become  of  us  if  the  enemy
renewed  the  attack,  for  most  of  our  active  men  had  been  killed  or
wounded,  and  there  was  no  one  left.  How  will  it  be  with  us  to-
morrow ?  But  when  day  broke  we  were  filled  with  astonishment
and  wonder,  for  on  going  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  we  saw  the
army  hurrying  away  with  all  possible  speed,  in  divisions  and
detachments.  Our  joy  and  gratification  knew  no  bounds,  and  we
immediately  sent  off  some  of  those  who  were  not  wounded,  or
whose  wounds  were  not  mortal,  to  obtain  information.  One  man
was  brought  in.  He  said  that  at  midnight  some  one  had  brought
news  [to  Tambal]  that  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  had  reached  Kand  Bdddm,
and  on  learning  this,  he  had  set  out  without  delay.  This  news
caused  fresh  life  and  immeasurable  joy  to  spring  up  in  us.  We
forthwith  sent  a  messenger  to  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  to  say  that  we  had
come  to  that  country  in  great  distress,  owing  to  the  confusion  of
times ;  that  when  news  of  the  arrival  of  the  Khdn  reached  us  it
was  as  if  life  \jdn]  had  come  to  us ;  whatever  the  royal  mandate
should  lay  upon  us  we  were  ready  to  perform. Our  messenger

»  That  is,  the  Uzbegs  should  lay  waste  Tambars  territories.

'  See  note  2,  p.  165.  From  the  position  of  JagiMk  and  from  what  follows,  it
would  appear  that  Turuk  Shdrdn  was  in  one  of  the  valleys  of  the  north  slope  of
the  Alai  mountains.  It  could  not  have  been  far  to  the  south  and  east  of  Kand-^
liaddm^

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

History  of  Shdlli  Beg  Khdn,  169

reached  Andij4n  on  the  second  day  of  the  siege.  He  was  imme-
diately sent  back  to  tell  us  that  we  were  desired  to  hasten  on
without  delay,  and  that  everything  we  could  hope  for  or  desire
would  be  done  for  us.  We  were  very  apprehensive,  but  having
no  other  place  to  go  to,  and  deeming  it  the  most  advantageous
plan  for  ourselves,  we  set  out  with  light  hearts.

**When  I  came  into  the  Ehdn's  presence,  he  showed  me  all
honour  and  respect,  and  received  me  in  the  most  friendly  way,
saying  to  all  his  Sultans  and  Amirs :  '  Muhammad  Husain  Kurkdn
is  our  guest ;  I  expect  you  all  to  entertain  him  as  a  guest.'  And
every  day,  while  the  siege  was  in  progress,  all  -the  Sultdns  and
Amirs  entertained  us  with  feasts  and  banquets  and  showed  us
marked  attention.

"  On  the  morning  of  the  forty-first  day,  Tambal  mounted  to  the
top  of  one  of  the  towers  and  called  out  with  a  loud  voice :  *  I  am
a  Mirz4,  remember  my  services  and  the  time  of  our  infancy.  Tell
me  what  I  should  do — [and  I  will  do  it].* "  (Now  Tambal  was
my  father's  foster  brother.)  My  father  continued:  "Although
I  had  been  very  badly  treated  by  him,  it  made  my  heart  sad  to  see
him  in  this  evil  plight,  and  I  asked :  '  Why  do  you  not  strengthen
the  fortress?'  Tambal  replied:  *I  cannot  continue  hostilities;
what  is  to  be  done  ? '  I  answered :  *  The  only  hope  for  the  helpless
is  surrender.'  Timur  Sultan  was  present.  Tambal  at  once  came
out  of  the  fort  with  his  brothers.  He  came  in  confosion  and
alarm,  and  threw  his  arms  round  my  neck.  They  [the  Uzbeg]
granted  him  no  respite,  but  that  same  hour  put  them  all  to  the
sword.  They  then  closed  the  gates  of  the  fort,  and  would  not
allow  any  kind  of  plunder  or  rapine  to  be  carried  on."

That  country  was  then  given  to  J&ni  Beg  Sult&n,  and  Shahi
Beg,  accompanied  by  my  father,  retraced  his  steps  and  arrived  in
Samarkand.  [There]  they  spent  a  few  days  in  military  prepara-
tions, after  which  they  set  out  to  attack  Khusrau  Shah.  On
reaching  Hisar,  they  found  the  fort  defended  by  Shiram  Ohahra,
a  dependant  of  Ehusrau  Sh4h.  Shahi  Beg  Ehan  conducted  the
siege  in  person,  but  after  a  few  days  Shiram  Chahra  begged  for
quai-ter,  and  coming  out,  surrendered  the  fort.  The  Khan,
observing  his  promise,^  let  Shiram  go.  Shiram  stayed  for  a  time
among  the  followers  of  the  Khan,  and  many  who  had  formerly
been  attached  to  him,  now  rejoined  him.

It  is  not  known  how  it  came  about,  but  the  same  day  that  the
Khan  began,  personally,  to  lay  siege  to  His&r,  he  also  sent  a
mandate  to  Mahmud  Sult&n,  ordering  him  to  take  as  many  men
from  the  army  as  he  wanted,  and  to  advance  on  Kunduz.

Khtisrau  Sh4h  for  a  long  time  past  had  been  filling  Kunduz
with  stores,  provisions  and  treasure,  and  had  proclaimed  that  he
>  A  promise  to  give  quarter  seems  to  be  implied.

Digitized  by

QjOo^^z

I/O  History  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.

had  Bupplies  enougli  to  last  him  for  twenty  years.  If  all  else
should  fail  [he  said]  we  shall,  at  least,  be  able  to  remain  inside  the
fort  for  twenty  years,  dead  or  alive.

While  he  was  busy  with  this  vain  boasting,  news  came  that
Shdhi  Beg  Eh4n  was  laying  siege  to  Hisdr,  and  that  Mahmnd
Snltdn  was  crossing  the  Biver  Amuya.^  That  same  honr,  abandon-
ing all  his  stores,  he  packed  up  whatever  he  could,  and  in  the
utmost  confusion  and  disorder,  set  out  for  the  hills,  hoping  there
to  find  a  refage.  A  few  days  later,  Mahmud  Sultdn  entered
Eunduz,  where  I  myself  happened  to  be,  with  my  sisters  and
my  younger  brother.  It  has  been  stated  already,  that  a  marriage
connection  had  been  formed  between  my  father  and  Sult4nim
Begum,  and  after  the  above  related  circumstances,  we  were
carried  off  to  Eunduz.  During  our  sojourn  there,  Sultdnim  Begum
gave  birth  to  a  son,  named  Abdullah,  whose  history  will  be  told
in  various  connections.  My  father  had  accompanied  Mahmud
Sultdn,  for  the  greatest  intimacy  existed  between  them.  The
reason  for  this  was  as  follows.  In  his  earlier  days,  Sh&hi  Beg
Eh4n  had  made  eveiy  possible  effort  to  obtain  supreme  power,
and  was  bound  by  no  promises  or  agreements.  Whenever  an
occasion  offered  he  pushed  his  ambitious  projects:  if  he  was
successful  he  would  say :  "  It  was  God's  will " ;  if  he  failed  he
was  always  ready  with  a  thousand  excuses  and  pretexts.  In  this
way,  frequent  misunderstandings  arose  between  him  and  Sultan
Mahmud  Ehan.  The  wonder  is  that  in  every  instance,  his  pretext,
such  as  it  was,  should  have  been  accepted.  It  would  be  tedious  to
enter  here  into  the  details  of  this  matter,  which  will  be  given  in
the  First  Part  {rMkh-i-AzXl.  I  will,  however,  give  one  instance
in  this  place.  Shdhi  Beg  was  then  in  Turkistan  at  the  height  of
favour  and  prosperity,  when  Sultdn  Mahmud  Eh4n  led  an  army
against  Tambal.  After  three  days'  march,  in  consequence  of  some
untoward  events  (mentioned  in  the  Thri^h-x-AsV)  his  projects
were  frustrated  and  he  marched  back  again.  All  the  Amirs  who
had  come  from  [beyond]  the  frontiers  to  join  the  army,  now
letumed  and  settled  down  again  within  their  own  territories.

*  The  ancient  town  of  iimuya  or  Avaol  stood  some  three  or  four  miles  from  tho
left  bank  of  the  Ozns,  on  the  road  from  Merv  to  Bokham.  According  to  the
Arah  geographers  followed  bv  Sprenger,  the  distance  from  Merv  ¥ras  calculated
ot  36 /arsa/rA<,  and  from  Bokhara  at  19  f.  by  one  antbority  and  22  f.  by  another.
The  ferry  crossed  to  Fer^  (Farab)  on  the  right  hank,  a  name  still  extant  on
modem  mnns,  near  Ghariui,  which  latter  place,  indeed,  represents  the  ancient
Amuyd.  The  name  of  the  river— iimti— is  said  by  some  of  the  Arab  writers  to
have  been  derived  from  that  of  the  town,  but  possibly  this  statement  should  bo
reversed.  The  Chinese  travellers  of  the  Mongol  period  called  the  river,  Amu  and
AnAm,  In  the  Turki  MSS.  used  for  this  translation,  by  Mr.  Boss,  Amur  is  written
where  Amux^a  stands  in  the  Persian.  The  addition  of  the  letter  r  is  not,  however,
unfrequent  m  Turki  rendering?  of  foreign  nnmcs,  as  remarked  in  note  3,  p  136
above,  on  Ursang.  (See  Sprenger,  pp.  IG  and  17,  and  map  I.  Brotschneider  ii.,
p.  62.)

Digitized  by

Google

History  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.  171

When  news  of  the  Khdn's  expedition  reached  Shdhi  Beg  Khan
in  Tarkistan,  he  at  once  placed  the  foot  of  ambition  in  the  stirrup
of  enterprise,  and  marched  to  attack  Tdshkand.  He  sent  Mahmnd
Snlt&n  against  Sair&m,  which  in  old  books  is  called  Isbijdb,^  but
while  on  his  road  he  learnt  that  the  Eh4n  had  returned.  He
instantly  sent  a  messenger  to  say  that  his  Highness  had  set  out
to  punish  his  rebellious  vassal  Tambal,  while  he  had  come  to
protect  Tdshkand,  and  [the  E^4n*s]  family  and  household.  (Though
except  himself  there  was  no  one  to  hurt  them.)  Hearing  of  his
Highness's  return  to  his  capital,  he  had  also  returned,  and,  in
effect,  he  did  go  back  to  Turkist4n.  He  moreover  despatched  swift
messengers  to  Mahmud  Sultdn,  enjoining  him,  likewise,  to  molest
no  place,  but  to  return.  But  before  the  messengers  could  arrive,
Msihmud  Sult4n,  supposing  Sairdm  to  be  unprotected,  had  begun
to  plunder.  The  Governor  of  Sairdm  was  Amir  Ahmad,  one  of
the  It4r4ji  Amirs,  and  uncle  of  Tambal,  but  unlike  bis  nephew,
he  was  a  worthy  man  and  a  devoted  sei-vant  to  Sultan  Mahmud
Khan.  He  went  out  to  check  Mahmud  Sultan,  and  the  two
forces  met,  when  Mahmud  Sult4n  was  seized  and  brought  bound
before  the  Kban.  The  Khan  sent  for  my  father,  who,  on  his
arrival,  begged  that  the  prisoner's  life  might  be  spared ;  therefore
he  [Mahmud]  was  treated  with  great  kindness  and  then  allowed
to  depart.  On  this  account  a  very  close  intimacy  and  warm  friend-
ship sprang  up  between  my  father  and  Mahmud  Sultan.  He
accompanied  Mahmud  Sultan  to  Kunduz,  and  there  caused  us  to
rejoin  his  own  party;  thus  our  families  and  households  arrived
at  Shahr-i-Sabz,  a  town  which  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan  had  given  to  my
father  as  a  fief.  From  the  time  of  the  return  from  Balkh  to  that
now  mentioned,  only  one  spring  had  elapsed.  At  the  beginning
of  the  winter,  Shdhi  Beg  Khan  set  out  against  Khwarizm,  while
my  father  fled  into  Khords&n.

In  this  place,  for  the  proper  understanding  of  what  followed,  it

'  Jibijafr,  or  Afbijab,  is  a  name  frequently  employed  by  the  early  Arabian
geographers.  It  has  been  thought  by  some  modem  writers  to  be  the  old  name
for  Chimkendt  but  here  is  a  distmct  statement  that  Sairdm  is  its  modem  repre-
sentative. The  present  Saitdm  lies  only  some  seven  or  eight  miles  distant  from
Chirnkend;  bnt  Sir  H.  Yule  gives  reasons  for  believing  that  the  town  of  that
name  mentioned  by  anthers  in  the  fifteenth  oentury,  stood  some  distance  farther
east  He  notices  that  Hnlagu,  on  his  march  to  Persia  in  the  thirteenth  century,
reached  Sairdm  the  seoond  day  after  passing  Tcdas — i.e,  Tdraz;  also  that
Bashid-ud-Din  speaks  of  an  ancient  city  of  vast  size  called  Kari'Sairam^  uear
ToUm,  Sir  H.  x  ule  does  not  mention  the  date  to  which  Rashid-nd-Din  refers,
and  the  book  he  quotes  is,  I  regret,  not  accessible  to  me.  If,  however,  the  city
was  ancient  in  Rashid-ud-Din's  time  (end  of  thirteenth  century),  it  is  just  possible
that  the  modem  Sairam  may  have  been  in  existence  at  the  time  of  Mirza  Uaidar's
history.  The  distance  between  the  modern  Sairam  and  AnliarAta  (which,  as  we
have  seen,  was  about  on  the  site  of  Tdrdz)  is  as  nearly  as  possible  110  miles,  or
about  five  ordinary  marches  in  that  country.  Thus,  if  the  older  Sairam  lay  two
marches  westward  of  Tiriz,  the  distance  between  it  and  the  modem  town  would
not  be  great. (See  Tule*s  CaHuiy,  p.  cc. Kostenko*s  TurlMarif  ii.,  p.  28).

Digitized  by

Google

1/2  Birth  of  Bdbar  Pddishdh,

will  be  necessary  to  give  some  aooonnt  of  Babar  Fadishdh  and
Sultdn  Said  Eh^n.  Some  further  details  will,  God  willing,  be
given  in  the  First  Part.

CHAPTER  VII.

BIRTH  AND PARENTAGE  OF  BABAR  PADISHAH: HIS CONNECTION WITH
THE  MOGHULS; AND HIS  EARLY HISTORY.

There  existed  anciently,  between  the  Chaghatdi  and  the  Moghuls,
a  bitter  enmity.  Moreover,  from  the  time  of  Amir  Timur  till  that
of  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza,  some  one  of  the  race  of  Chaghatai  Eh4n,
son  of  Chingiz  Eh4n,  had  always  been  placed  on  the  royal  throne,
and  was  honoured  with  the  title  of  Eing,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that
he  was  [in  reality]  a  prisoner,  as  one  may  gather  from  the  roj'al
mandates.  "When  it  came  to  the  turn  of  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza  to
reign,  this  king  discarded  the  old  custom ;  Yunus  Ehau  was  sum-
moned from  Shiraz,  and  was  sent  into  Moghulistan  to  oppose  his
brother  Isan  Bugh4  Eban.  But  in  this  Epitome  there  is  no  space
for  an  account  of  the  removal  of  the  Ehan  to  Shiraz,  of  the
Ehdnship  of  Isan  Bugh4  Eh4n,  or  of  the  reign  of  Sultan  Abu  Said
Mirza.i

To  be  brief,  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza  said  to  Yunus  Ehan  :  "  The
old  order  of  things  has  been  changed;  you  must  now  lay  aside  all
your  [former]  pretensions :  that  is  to  say,  the  royal  mandates  will
be  issued  in  the  name  of  this  dynasty  [to5aA:a],  and  henceforth
there  mu8t  be  friendship  between  us,  and  a  bond  of  union.'*

When  Yunus  Eh4n  came  to  Moghulistdn,  he,  after  thirty  years
of  hardship  and  suffering,  got  the  upper  hand  of  Is&n  Bugh4
Ehan,  as  will  be  briefly  related  in  connection  with  the  history  of
Sultan  Said  Ehan  and  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.

The  noble  mind  of  Yunus  Eh4n  was  thus  set  at  rest ;  Sult4n
Abu  Said  Mirza  changed  an  old  enemy  into  a  new  friend.  Yunus
Ehdn  wa^  desirous  of  making  a  return  for  his  kindness,  and  [said
to  himself] :  '*  Perhaps  in  the  same  way  that  he  has  changed  an  old
enem^"  into  a  new  friend,  I  will  change  a  friend  into  a  relation."
To  this  end,  he  gave  to  the  three  sons  of  Mirza  Sultdn  Abu  Said
(namely.  Sultan  Ahmad  Mirzd,  Sultan  Mahmud  Mirza,  and  Omar
Shaikh  Mirza)  three  of  his  daughters  in  maniage ;  the  names  of

>  The  main  facts  regarding  Tuntu^  exile  in  Persia  have  been  noticed  at
pp.  74  and  84-5 ;  while  some  remarks  concerning  the  Khanship  of  Is&n  Bugba  IL
will  be  found  in  the  Introduction,  Sec.  ii.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

and  his  Early  History.  173

these  three  daughters  being  Mihr  Nigar  Ehdnim,  Sultan  Nigar
Ehanim,  and  Eutluk  Nigar  Rhanim.  (These  have  all  been
already  mentioned.)

As  Farghana,  the  country  of  Omar  Sbaikh,  was  situated  on  the
borders  of  Moghulistan,  [Yunus  Khan]  became  more  intimate  and
friendly  with  him  than  with  either  of  his  brothers :  indeed,  the
Kh4n  made  no  distinction  between  him  and  his  own  children,  and
whenever  they  pleased  they  used  to  come  and  go  between  each
other's  countries  and  residences,  demanding  no  ceremony,  but
being  satisfied  with  whatever  was  at  hand.

On  the  occasion  of  the  birth  of  B4bar  Padish4h,  a  messenger  was
sent  to  bear  the  good  tidings  to  Yunus  Ehin,  who  came  from
Moghulistdn  and  spent  some  time  with  [Omar  Shaikh].  When  the
child's  head  was  shaved,  everyone  gave  feasts  and  entertainments.
Never  were  two  kings  known  to  be  on  such  terms  of  intimacy  as
were  Yunus  Khan  and  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza.  In  short,  the  Pddishah
was  bom  on  the  6th  of  Moharram  of  the  year  888.  MauUnd
Munir  Marghindni,  one  of  the  Ulam4s  of  Ulugh  Beg  Mirza,
discovered  the  date  in  the  [numerical  value  of  the  letters]  of
Shash  Moharram.  They  begged  his  Holiness  to  choose  a  name  for
the  child,  and  he  blessed  him  with  the  name  of  Zahir-ud-Din
Muhammad.

At  that  time  the  Chaghatdi  were  very  rude  and  uncultured
[bwsurg\  and  not  refined  [hdzdri]  as  they  are  now;  thus  they
found  Zahir-ud-Din  Muhammad  difficult  to  pronounce,  and  for
this  reason  gave  him  the  name  of  B4bar.  In  the  public  prayers
[khuiha'\  and  in  royal  mandates  he  is  always  styled  '  Zahir-ud-Din
Babar  Muhammad,'  but  he  is  best  known  by  the  name  of  B4bar
Pddishdh.  His  genealogy  [is  as  follows].  Omar  Shaikh  Kurkdn^
son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said  Kurkan,  son  of  Sult4n  Muhammad  Mirz4,
son  of  Miran  Sh&h  Mirza,  son  of  Amir  Timur  Kurkan.  And  on
the  mother's  side:  Kutluk  Nigar  Kb&nim,  daughter  of  Yunus
Kh4n,  son  of  Yais  Kh4n,  son  of  Shir  Ali  Khan,  son  of  Muhammad
Khan,  son  of  Khizir  Khwdja  Khan,  son  of  Tughluk  Timur  Kh4n.
This  prince  was  adorned  with  various  virtues,  and  clad  with
numberless  good  qualities,  above  all  of  which  bravery  and  humanity
had  the  ascendant.  In  the  composition  of  Turki  poetry  he  was
second  only  to  Amir  Ali  Shir.  He  has  written  a  Divan,  in  the
purest  and  most  lucid  Turki.  He  invented  a  style  of  verse  called
"  Mubaiyan,"  and  was  the  author  of  a  most  useful  treatise  on
Jurisprudence,  which  has  been  adopted  generally.  He  also  wrote
a  tract  on  Turki  Prosody,  superior  in  elegance  to  any  other,  and
put  into  verse  the  Basala'i-Vdlidiyyah  of  his  Holiness.  Then
there  is  his  Vakdi  ^  or  Turki  History,  which  is  written  in  a  simple,

*  The  *< Memoirs"  of  Baber.  It  U  interesting  to  notice  that  about  ten  years
after  Baber's  death,  his  Memoirs  were  in  the  haxids  of  Mirza  Haidar. Baber  died

Digitized  by

Google

174  Birth  of  Bdbar  Pddishdh,

unaffected,  and  yet  very  pure  Biyle.  (Some  of  tbe  stories  from
that  work  will  be  reproduced  here.)  He  excelled  in  music  and
other  arts.  In  fact,  no  one  in  his  family  before  him  ever  possessed
snch  talents  as  his.  Nor  did  any  of  his  race  ever  perform  snch
wonderful  exploits,  or  experience  such  strange  adventures,  as  did
he.  He  was  twelve  years  of  age  when  his  father,  Omar  Shaikh
Mirza,  died.  In  his  Vakdi,  which,  though  in  Turki,  is  written
in  very  elegant  and  florid  slyle,  he  says :  *'  On  Monday,  the  4th  of
Bamazan,  Omar  Shaikh  Mirz4  having  flown  from  the  top  of  the
precipice  with  his  pigeon  and  his  pigeon-house,  became  a  falcon,  at
the  age  of  thirty-nine."  ^  This  occurred  in  the  year  899,  and  after
his  fjEkther's  death  B&bar  Pddish4h  was  raised  to  the  throne,  being,
at  that  time,  twelve  years  of  age.  There  was  so  much  dissension
between  Baisanghar  Mirz4  and  Sult&n  Ali  Mirz4  (the  sons  of
Sult&n  Mahmud,  son  of  Sult4n  Abu  Said),^  that  neither  of  them
had  strength  enough  to  protect  Samarkand.  When  information  of
this  [state  of  affairs]  reached  Andijdn,  the  Emperor  set  out  to
attack  Samarkand.  Although  the  Mirzds  had  become  very  weak,
they  offered  him  stout  resistance ;  but  Anally,  B4isanghar  having
no  power  left,  abandoned  the  town  and  fled  towards  Hisdr,  where
he  was  put  to  death  by  Khusrau  Shah  (as  already  mentioned).
The  Emperor  took  Samarkand,  and  quartered  in  it  as  many  of  the
troops  of  Andijan  as  was  possible,  while  the  rest  returned  to
Andij4n,  some  with  his  permission,  some  without.

On  the  arrival  of  Tambal,  of  whom  we  have  spoken,  he,  in  con-
junction with  some  other  Amirs,  set  Jahdngir  Mirz4,  younger
brother  of  the  Emperor,  upon  the  throne.

The  Chief  Judge  [Kdzi]  of  Andijdn,  a  very  pious  and  religious
man,  who  had  done  everything  in  his  power  to  forward  the

in  937  A.H.  (26  Doc.  1530]),  and  Mizza  Haidar  was  in  India  from  about  9i3  to  947.
It  was  probably  at  this  time,  therefore,  that  he  ac^nued  a  copy  of  his  cousin's
Memoirs.  The  pity  is  that  he  says  nothing  to  enlighten  ns  regarding  the  gaps
or  lost  chapters,  in  the  Memoirs.

>  Baber,  in  his  Memoirs,  describes  his  father's  death.  After  mentioning  that
Akhsi,  where  Omar  Shaikh  liyed,  **  is  situated  on  a  steep  precipice,  on  the
very  edge  of  which  some  of  its  buildings  are  raised,"  he  continues,  aoooiding  to
Erskine's  trauBlation  (p.  7) :  "  Omar  Shaikh  Mirza  wns  precipitated  from  the
top  of  the  steep,  with  his  pigeons  and  pigeon-house,  and  took  his  flight  to  the
otJicr  world."  In  Pavet  de  Gourteille's  trwislation  from  the  Turki,  the  passage
stands :  **  So  changea  en  faucon  "  (i.  p.  11).  The  allusion  to  a  •*  falcon  "  in  this
connection,  I  cannot  explain.

*  In  the  very  detailed  table  of  the  descendants  of  Timur,  given  by  Prof.  Bloch-
mann,  in  Vol.  I.  of  the  Ain-i-Akhari,  the  name  of  Sultan  Ali  does  not  appear

among  the  sons  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Mirza. Only  three  sons  are  entered  there

viz.,  Baisanghar  Mirza,  Masud  Mirza,  and  Khan  Mirza ;  but  wo  know  that  the
Isst  of  these  had  also  another  name — ^that  of  Sultan  Yais  Mirza,  which  does  not
appear  in  Prof.  Blochmann's  table.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  Ali  may  have
been  a  second  name  of  one  of  the  two  other  brothers,  but  as  this  is  merely  a
conjecture,  I  have  added  the  name  of  Ali  to  the  abbreviated  table  of  Timnri
attached  to  this  volume. (See  note,  p.  203).

Digitized  by

Google

and  his  Early  History,  175

Emperor's  interests,  was  wantonly  put  to  death.  A  short  time
before  the  murder  of  the  E4zi,  the  adherents  of  the  Emperor  had
strengthened  and  defended  the  fort  of  Andijan,  and  had  sent
letters  of  entreaty  [to  the  Emperor],  representing  that  if  he  did
not  come  quiokly,  Andijan  would  fall,  and  that  after  it  Samarkand
would  also  sucoumb.  On  receiving  those  letters,  the  Emperor  left
Samarkand,  and  set  out  for  Andijan.  On  reaching  Ehojand,  how-
ever, news  was  brought  him  that  the  enemy  had  won  the  day.
The  Emperor,  having  left  one  place,  and  lost  the  other,  was
greatly  perplexed,  and  betook  himself  to  his  uncle,  Sult&n  Mahmud
Eh&n.

The  Emperor's  mother,  and  her  mother,  Is4n  Daulat  Begum,
went  to  their  son  and  sister.  This  sister  was  my  mother.  On
this  account  the  Emperor,  also,  stayed  in  our  country.  His  hosts
exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost  on  his  behalf,  and  after  many
severe  hardships,  after  many  victories  and  defeats,  the  Emperor
once  more  became  ruler  of  Samarkand.  He  fought  many  battles
with  rival  claimants  for  Samarkand,  and  experienced  both  victory
and  defeat.  At  length  he  was  besieged,  and  when  all  his  power  of
resistance  had  gone,  he  gave  his  sister,  £Ji4nz4da  Begum,  to  Sh4hi
Beg  Khan,  and  making  some  kind  of  treaty,  left  Samarkand,
which  thus  fell  again  into  the  hands  of  Sh^hi  Beg  Eh4n.  It
would  be  very  tedious  were  I  to  relate  all  the  details ;  however,  to
be  brief,  the  Emperor  [again]  repaired  to  his  uncle.  Having
given  up  all  idea  of  [regaining]  Samarkand,  he  determined  to
secure  Andij&n.  The  Eh4ns  also,  having  bound  the  girdle  of
endeavour  round  the  waist  of  fatherly  love,  exerted  themselves  to
the  utmost  to  take  Andijdn,  that  they  might  give  it  to  the
Emperor,  with  the  result  which  has  been  mentioned  above.  After
the  last  battle,  in  which  the  Khans  fell  into  the  hands  of  Shdhi
Beg  £Ji4n,  the  Emperor  fled  to  the  hills  on  the  south  of  the  country
of  Fargh&na,  where  he  underwent  many  hardships  and  innumerable
misfortunes.  Moreover,  his  mother  was  with  him,  as  were  also
most  of  his  servants,  together  with  the  family  and  children.  In
that  journey  (and  verily,  as  the  Prophet  himself  said,  "Travelling
is  a  foretaste  of  Hell ")  they  all  suffered  great  hardships,  and  ^nth
difficulty  reached,  at  length,  the  territory  of  Hisdr,  which  is  the
capital  of  Khusrau  Sh&h,  hoping  that  they  might  participate  in
the  humanity  for  which  he  was  renowned.  But  he,  like  the
heavens,  changed,  and  averting  the  face  of  compassion,  turned
the  back  of  unkindness  towards  that  master  of  benevolence.  But
beyond  this  he  did  not  do  them  any  iujury.  And  thus,  in  the
same  state  of  dejection,  afSiction,  apprehension,  and  evasion,  they
passed  on  towards  Ghuri  and  Bakldn.  When  they  reached  this
quarter,  the  back  of  their  strength  being  broken,  and  the  foot  of
vigour  being  bound,  they  tarried  for  a  few  days.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

176  Bdbar  PddishdKs  Early  History.

How  often  in  misfortune  is  there  a  hidden  blessing !  Although
waiting  in  that  place  was  a  cause  of  great  affliction  to  them,  it
turned  out  most  providentially,  and  in  a  way  which  the  most  far-
sighted  person  could  not  have  foreseen.  For  at  this  very  crisis,  the
advance  of  the  standards  of  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan  on  Hisar,  and  the
approach  towards  Kunduz  of  the  drums  of  Mahmud  Sultdn,  caused
the  boasting  Khusrau  Shah  to  desert  his  kingdom,  as  has  been
related  above.  He,  too,  fled  to  the  hills  of  Ghuri;  and  on  his
arrival  there,  learnt  that  the  Emperor  was  still  among  the  moun-
tains. That  samb  night  his  servants  and  retinue,  both  great
and  small,  from  the  Mir  to  the  groom,  all  flocked  to  the  court  of
the  Emperor.  Khusrau  Shdh  saw  nothing  left  for  it  but  to  hasten
also  to  offer  his  services.  Yet  this  man  had  put  out  the  eyes  of
one  of  the  Emperor's  cousins.  Sultan  Masud  Mirzd,  and  had  bronght
Masud's  brother,  Baisanghar  Mirza,  to  the  bier,  after  having  raised
him  to  the  throne ;  also,  at  the  time  when  the  Emperor  had  arrived
on  his  frontier,  he  had,  with  extreme  harshness,  ordered  him  to
quit  the  country.

Moreover,  Mirza  Kh&n,  a  younger  brother  of  the  cruelly-treated
Mirzds,  whose  father  and  mother  were  both  closely  connected  with
the  Emperor's  father  and  mother,  had  shared  in  all  the  Emperor's
sufferings  and  trials  in  the  mountains,  and  was  at  this  time  with
him.  When  Khusrau  Shah  arrived  in  the  Emperor's  presence,
Mirzd  Khan  petitioned  that  he  might  be  put  to  death,  by  way  of
retaliation  for  his  treatment  of  his  [Mirz4  Khan's]  two  brothers.
The  Emperor,  whose  natural  disposition  was  a  humane  one,  said
to  Mirz4  Kh4n :  **  It  would  be  a  pity,  a  thousand  pities,  to  compare
two  good  angels  with  this  devil  of  a  king,  and  to  such  purpose
did  he  pierce  the  pearls  of  love  with  the  diamond  of  mercy,  that  at
last  he  caused  Mirzd  Khdn  to  desist  from  his  demand  and  be  satis-
fied. When  Khusrau  Shdh  looked  upon  the  Emperor  and  Mirza
Khan,  the  forehead  of  his  folly  became  moist  with  the  perspiration
of  shame,  but  the  Emperor  wiped  it  clean  with  the  sleeve  of  forgive-
ness and  the  skirt  of  pardon.  When  the  audience  was  terminated,
the  Emperor  commanded  the  treasurers  to  take  back  all  the  pro-
perty, treasure,  horses,  etc.,  which  they  had  brought  to  him,  just
as  they  were,  although  he  had  only  one  horse  suitable  to  his  rank,
and  that  was  used  also  by  his  mother.  From  this  an  idea  may  be
formed  of  what  necessaries  [he  had  at  his  command].  He  ordered
that  none  of  [Khusrau's]  effects  should  be  confiscated.  Although
the  Emperor  was  very  needy,  he  would  not  take  any  of  the  presents,
but  gave  him  back  all  his  arms  and  treasures  untouched,  and
declined  all  that  was  offered.  This  is  one  trait  out  of  a  thousand,
in  the  Emperor's  character.  Khusrau  Shdh,  having  obtained  per-
mission to  go  to  Khorasan,  separated  from  the  Emperor,  and  pro-
ceeded to  his  destination. It  is  astonishing  that,  with  such  a  force  as

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn.  177

he  had,  he  did  not  attempt  to  defend  his  own  State.  Having  got
some  help  from  Khoras&n,  he  went  and  attacked  Knnduz,  where
he  was  put  to  death  without  much  ado.  Yerily  the  murder  of  a
master,  or  a  master's  son,  is  a  portentous  deed !

The  Emperor,  in  one  night,  became  master  of  20,000  men,
together  with  great  Amirs,  such  as  Baki  Ghaghdnidni,^  Sultan
Ahmad  Kar&ul,  B4ki  Nila  Furush  and  others,  who  took  office  under
him.

[Having  made  the  necessary  preparations]  they  set  out  against
Eabnl.  After  the  death  of  the  Emperor's  uncle,  XJlugh  Beg
Mirza  of  Edbul,  Mukim,  son  of  Zunnun'  Arghun,  one  of  the
Mirzds  of  Sultin  Husain,  had  taken  possesion  of  Kabul.  Imme-
diately on  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor,  he  went  out  to  oppose  him,
but  seeing  the  enemy's  superior  numbers,  be  fled  back  and  prepared
to  defend  himself  in  the  fort  of  E&buL  At  length,  beiug  unable
to  hold  out,  he  begged  for  quarter  and  surrendered  the  fort.
Faithful  to  his  agreement,  the  Emperor  allowed  him  to  proceed  to
Eandahdr,  with  all  his  effects  and  followers.  From  that  date,
909,  to  the  present  date,  948,  E4bul  has  remained  in  the  hands  of
the  Emperor  and  his  descendants.

Having  brought  down  my  history  to  this  point,  it  is  time  to
turn  to  the  proceedings  of  Sultdn  Said  Kh&n ;  also  to  those  of  my
father,  of  his  journey  to  Ehordsdn,  and  of  his  relations  with  the
Emperor.  The  first  part  will  be  given  briefly,  and  the  latter  part
in  detail.

CHAPTEE  VIII.

BEGINNING  OF  THE  STORY  OF  SULTAN  SAID  KHAn,  SON  OF  SULTAN
AHMAD  KHix,  SON  OF  SULTIn  YUNUS  KHAn,  AND  THE  SUFFERINGS
AND HARDSHIPS  HE  ENDURED AT  THE  OUTSET  OP  HIS  CAREER.

[Here  follows  a  somewhat  lengthy  dissertation  on  the  advantages
of  misfortune,  into  which  is  introduced  an  anecdote  in  verse
concerning  Moses,  taken  from  the  '*  SaUalat-^nz-Zahah  "  or  *'  Golden

>  The  texts  differ  here.  The  Turki  MS.  has  Kdlghdn  Chdghdtai  in  the  place
of  Baki  Chaghdnidni.  The  latter  name,  however,  is  certainly  correct,  as  is
evident  from  a  reference  to  Baher's  memoirs  (pp.  128,  seqq.),  -where  these  transac-
tions are  set  forth.  Bdki  of  Ghaghdnidn  was  a  younger  brother  of  Khusrau  Shah,
and  is  described  by  Baber  as  "  a  man  of  much  weight"  The  country  of  Chag-
hdnian,  it  may  be  remarked,  was  situated  on  the  middle  and  upper  courses  of  the
Surkhan  and  Edfimah&n  rivers. The  name  is  now  obsolete.

'  Usually  written  ZtUnun,  For  an  aooonnt  of  liis  life  and  lineage,  see  Erskine's
Hittary,  U  PP-  262  ieqq.

N

Digitized  by

Google

178  Story  of  Sultdn  Said  KMn.

Chain  "  of  Abd^nrrahman  Jami,  and  also  an  account,  in  prose,  of
the  Education  of  Nushiriv&n  the  Just.]  Wherever  in  this  Epitome
ike  Khdfhj  in  an  absolute  sense,  is  mentioned.  Saltan  Said  Kh4n  is
meant.^  This  Khan  had  many  wonderful  adventures.  As  one  of
the  chief  objects  of  this  Epitome  is  to  set  forth  the  virtue  and
ability  of  the  Ehdn,  I  shall  enter  into  detail

His  most  noble  lineage  has  already  been  given.  From  the  time
of  his  birth  to  the  age  of  fourteen,  he  spent  his  days  under  the  fond
care  and  kind  protection  of  his  father.  When  he  reached  the  age
of  fourteen,  his  father.  Sultan  Ahmad  Kh4n,  better  known  as
Alicha,  wished  to  go  to  the  assistance  of  his  elder  brother,  Sultdn
Mahmud  Elian.  He  therefore  appointed  his  eldest  son,  Mansur
Ehan,  to  fill  his  place  on  the  throne,  and  took  with  him  to
T&shkand,  two  sons  who  were  younger  than  Mansur  Kh4n,  namely,
Sultdn  Said  Kh4n  and  B4bajak  Sult&n.  The  Eh4n  was  with
his  father  at  the  battle  of  Akhsi,  in  which  the  Khdns  were  captured,
as  has  been  mentioned.  When  the  army  was  thrown  into  disorder
and  every  man  was  trying  to  save  his  own  life,  the  Kh4n  also  took
flight,  but  at  that  moment  he  was  struck  in  the  thigh  by  an  arrow,
which,  piercing  his  armour,  struck  the  bone.  As  his  father's  army
was  routed  he  had  no  means  of  escape.  Some  men  of  the  district
captured  him,  and  as  he  was,  at  the  time,  unable  to  walk,  they
refrained  from  carrying  him  as  a  present  to  anybody,  but  took  care
of  him  for  a  few  days.

Shahi  Beg  Kh&n  returned  in  haste  to  settle  his  aflisdrs  in  Tishkand.
By  the  time  the  EJian  had  recovered  his  strength.  Shaikh  Bayazid
had  taken  upon  himself  the  government  of  Akhsi.  The  EJidn,  as
soon  as  he  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  be  moved,  was  brought
before  him,  and  by  his  orders  was  thrown  into  prison,  where  he
remained  a  whole  year.

When  Shahi  Beg  Khan  arrived  [in  Tashkand]  he  seized  and  put
to  death  Tambal,  and  gave  the  government  of  Andij&n  to  Jani  Beg
Sultdn.  When  this  latter  came  to  Akhsi,  the  Khdn  was  brought
before  him.  Jani  Beg  Sultdn  recommended  him  to  the  favour  of
Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  who  received  him  with  compassion,  kept  him  in
his  fatherly  care,  and  denied  him  nothing.  He,  moreover,  took  tho
Khdn  with  him  on  the  expedition  in  which  he  conquered  Hisdr  and
Kunduz.

I  have  heard  the  Ehdn  relate,  in  terms  of  wonder  and  admira-
tion, that  when  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  had  conquered  Hisdr,  news  was
brought  of  the  taking  of  Kunduz  by  Mahmud  Sultan.  Shdhi  Beg
Ehan,  having  entrusted  Hisdr  to  Hamza  Sultdn  and  Chaghdnidn  to

>  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  author  does  not  carry  ont  his  intention  in  this
matter.  In  many  places  he  forgets  himself,  and  calls  other  Khans  **  the  Khan^'*
thereby  causing  some  confusion.  To  make  matters  clear,  I  have  usually  had  to
insert  the  fall  name  on  these  occasions.

Digitized  by

Google

Story  of  Stiltdn  Said  Khdn,  I79

Mahdi  Sultan,^  set  out  quietly  on  his  return.  *'As  the  pass  of
Darband-i-Ahanin  [The  Iron  Gate]  was  very  difficult  [continued
the  £Ji4n],  and  as  the  army  was  much  burdened  with  booty,  they
made  the  journey,  farsdhh  after  fars&kh^  by  way  of  Buya  and
Tirmiz.  While  the  victorious  army  was  encamped  at  Buya,  I  was
sitting  once,  at  midday,  in  the  royal  tent  [majlis].  The  hour  for
the  assembly  had  not  yet  arrived,  and  only  a  few  of  the  king's
intimates  were  present,  when  somebody  with  a  terrified  coun-
tenance and  wild  appearance  came  in  great  haste,  and  laid  a  letter
at  the  foot  of  the  royal  throne.  As  [Shahi  Beg]  perused  the  contents
of  this  letter  a  great  change  came  over  him,  and  before  he  had
finished  reading  it,  he  rose  up  and  went  in  to  his  haram,  giving
orders  for  his  horse  to  be  brought.  He  remained  for  some  time  in
the  haram ;  but  after  midday  prayers  came  out  again  and  mounted
his  horse.  He  was  attended  by  a  great  number  of  people.  Then
it  was  made  known  that  Mahmud  Sultan  had  died  a  natural  death
in  Kunduz,  and  that  his  body  was  on  the  way  [to  the  camp].
When  Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n  had  got  some  distance  away,  we  saw  a
great  crowd  in  pitch-black  clothes,  such  as  captives  wear.  Having
placed  the  bier  upon  the  ground,  they  drew  up  in  two  lines  behind
it.  When  [Shahi  Beg  Khan]  saw  this,  he  made  a  sign  for  all  the
Sultans  and  others  to  dismount  and  follow  in  his  train.  These,
having  obeyed,  began  to  raise  cries  of  grief  and  lamentation,  and
we,  in  the  camp,  also  commenced  to  utter  moans  and  wailings.
When  those  attending  the  bier  approached,  he  ordered  aU  who
were  with  him  to  draw  up  in  a  line;  while  he  himself  rode  forward
until  his  horse's  head  was  just  above  the  bier ;  he  then  gave  a  sign
for  everyone  to  keep  silence,  and  thereupon  those  who  were  with
him  ceased  from  rending  their  garments  and  tearing  their  beards.
He  then  called  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Mahmud  Sult&n,  and  said  to
him  such  things  as  are  usual  on  occasions  of  condolence.  After
this  he  remained  silent  for  a  while,  never  showing  the  slightest
change  in  his  countenance,  nor  shedding  a  tear.  At  the  end  of  an
hour  ho  raised  his  head  and  said :  ^  The  death  of  Mahmud  is  a  good
thing :  men  have  been  wont  to  say  that  the  power  of  Shahi  Beg
Ebdn  was  upheld  by  Mahmud :  let  it  now  be  known  that  Sh4hi
Beg  Khdn  was  in  no  way  whatever  dependent  upon  Mahmud.  Carry
him  away  now,  and  bury  him.'  Having  said  this,  he  turned  away,
and  all  present  were  astounded  at  his  boldness  and  composure."

The  death  of  Mahmud  Sultan  was  a  great  loss  to  the  MoghiUs,
for  he  was,  in  every  respect,  a  thorough  Moghul  [and  they  recalled
all  he  had  done  for  them].

^  These  two  Uzbeg  chiefa  had  formerly  been  in  Saber's  service,  but  had
deserted  him  to  join  his  enemy  Shdhi  Beg.  Afterwards,  at  the  battle  of  the  Iron
Gate  (916  a.h.=1510  a.d.— after  Sh&hi  Bog's  death)  they  fell  into  Baher*8  hands
and  were  put  to  death. (Erskine,  Eitt.,  i.,  pp.  145, 309  and  315).

N  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

1 8b  Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn.

When  Sh&hi  Beg  Eh&n  reached  Samarkand,  Sh4h  Begum
arrived  from  Moghnlistdn.  The  details  are  briefly  these:  Shah
Begnm  was  the  mother  of  the  Khans,  was  daughter  of  Shah
Sultdn  Mahmud,  King  of  Badakhshdn,  and  of  the  race  of  Iskandar
Zulkamain.  She  had  accompanied  her  son,  Sultan  Mahmud
Khan,  into  Moghulistdn.  But  those  base  advisers,  of  whom  I
have  already  spoken,  provoked  a  quarrel  between  the  mother  and
her  son — a  son  who  had  been  so  obedient  to  her,  that  he  had  never
even  mounted  for  a  ride  without  her  permission.  Between  these
two,  they  contrived  to  raise  the  dust  of  vexation  and  wrath.  For
they — cunning  advisers  that  they  were — decided  to  send  Sh4h
Begum  to  Sh4hi  Beg  Kh4n  to  solicit  a  country  for  herself,  because
she  found  living  in  Moghulistan  distasteful.  Such  was  the
impracticable  mission  upon  which  they  sent  Sh&h  Begum.  Now,
as  the  Begum  was  a  very  sensible  woman,  she  went  under  this
pretext,  and  thus  left  her  son,  before  those  base  advisers  could
bring  about  an  open  rupture,  which  would  cause  endless  scandal
and  reproach  to  herself.  The  rumour  was  that  she  had  gone  to
entreat  [Shahi  Beg  Kh4n],  while  she  was  [in  reality]  in  Samarkand
enjoying  the  company  of  her  children.

At  this  same  time  [Shdhi  Beg  Khan]  led  an  army  into
Khw&rizm,  and  my  father  fled  to  Khordsan,  as  shall  be  presently
related.

The  Khan  told  me:  "After  the  Mirzd's  flight  we  were  so
overcome  with  apprehension,  that  sixteen  of  us  haviog  banded
together,  we  fled  from  Samarkand,  and  journeyed  by  way  of  Khutuk
and  Kara  Tukai  to  Sairam.  Thence  we  went  on  to  Moghulistan
by  way  of  Uzun  Ahmad,  and  arrived  at  Haft  Deh,  which  is  better
known  as  Yatikand,^  where  Sultau  Mahmud  Khan  was  living  at

>  This  name  has  ocooirod  several  times  already  (see  pp.  87  and  note,  130,  etc.X
but  has  been  snbjeot,  in  the  texts,  to  many  different  readings,  such  as  BottAamJ,
jBant%a7u2,  YoMkaind^  etc.,  etc.  Here,  at  last,  we  have  in  the  Persian  translation
of  it,  whioli  the  author  himself  gives  as  Haft-Deh,  a  distinct  guide  to  YatikandL,
the  Turki  (ae  Haft  Deh  is  the  Persian)  equivalent  for  "  seven  villages,"  or  •'  seven
towns."  But  though  he  has  thus  fixed  the  name  for  his  readers,  he  still  leaves
them  in  the  dark  as  to  the  situation  of  Yaiikand.  In  the  passage  under  note,  he
appears  to  regard  it  as  lying  within  Moghulistan — and  probably  at  some  distance
within  it — for  Sairam  (either  old  or  new,  see  note,  p.  171)  must  have  been  near
the  frontier,  and  he  meutioDs  Uzun  Ahmad  (a  place  I  cannot  trace  though,  see
below)  as  situated  on  the  road  between  the  two.  As  the  party  had  come  from
Samarkand — i.e.  from  the  south-west — ^they  were  journeying  probably  towiuds  no
point  south  of  Sairam.  Wo  have,  therefore,  to  look  for  Yaiikaitdy  according  to
the  indication  in  this  passage,  somewhere  to  the  east  or  north-east  of  Sairam.
Bat  at  p.  87  the  author  says  Yatikand  was  on  the  confines,  or  in  the  terri-
tory, or  evon  suburbs,  of  Andijdn  (az  nahiyat  i  Andijdn);  and  he  appears
always  to  mean  the  toim  or  district  of  Andijdn  alone,  when  he  uses  that  name,
and  not  the  province  to  which  the  town  belonged.  The  latter  he  always  speaks
of  ad  Farghdna.  Thus,  according  to  this  indication,  Yaiikand  would  have  to  be
sought  to  the  south  or  south-east  of  Sairam.  In  modem  times  the  province  of
FargMna  came  to  be  called  Andijdn^  nnd  the  only  solution  of  the  discrepanoy
which  I  can  suggest  is  that  perhaps  Mirza  Haidar,  in  one  instance,  has  also  use^

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn»  i8i

the  time."  It  has  been  already  related  that  after  the  death  of
Saltan  Ahmad  Khan,  Sultan  Mahmud  Ehdn  came  into  Moghnl-
istan.  The  latter  was  a  weakly  prince  and  very  lax  and  careless
in  the  affairs  of  State.

Now  Moghulistan  is  a  country  which  does  not  admit  of  any
such  negligence  and  callousness  in  its  administration,  and  for  this
reason  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khan  was  not  able  to  remain  there  long,
but  came,  with  a  desire  to  live  a  civilised  life,  to  Yatikand,  where
there  is  [indeed]  some  cultivation.  When  he  had  been  there  a
short  time,  the  Kh&n  went  and  attached  himself  to  his  uncle,
Sultan  Mahmud  Khan.  The  Khdn  passed  some  time  in  the
service  of  his  uncle;  but  he  was  an  energetic  and  enterprising
man,  and  being  unable  to  endure  the  negligence  and  indolence  of
his  uncle,  he  fled  from  his  court.  Sultdu  Mahmud  Kh4n  sent  a
party  after  him  to  bring  him  back.  After  three  days'  march  he
was  overtaken,  when  a  fight  ensued.  In  the  heat  of  the  action,  a
certain  Maksud  Ali,  one  of  the  courtiers  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan
(and  a  man  skilled  in  instrumental  music  and  singing),  displayed
great  valour,  and  the  Kh4n  seeing  that  the  brunt  of  the  battle
was  supported  by  him,  rode  up  to  attack  him.  Thereupon  Maksud
Ali  turned  and  fled,  but  while  retreating  faced  round  and  shot  an

Andijdn  to  denote  the  entire  provinoe.  For  this  reason  I  have  made  the  transla-
tion of  **az  nihiyat"  read  **on  the  confines" — a  reading  which,  at  any  rate,
points  to  a  position  within  Moghulistan.  If  this  suggestion  be  accepted,  Yatikand^
or  JSaft'Dehj  would  have  stood  probably  in  the  south-western  extremity  of
Moghulistan,  and  on  the  northern  slopes  of  the  range  which  forms  the  limit
of  the  valley  of  the  Sir;  or  possibly  near  the  more  westerly  of  the  head  streams
of  the  Talas  river,  and  thus  not  very  far  distant  from  Tardz.  When  (on  p.  131)
the  author  speaks  of  the  Khan  passing  on  from  Yatikand  to  Moghulistan  to  visit
his  brother  Khalil,  it  should  be  remembered  that  Khalil  was  at  that  time  chief
of  the  Kirghiz  only,  and  that  the  Kirghiz  tribe  did  not  occupy  the  whole  of
Mozhulistan.  In  all  probability,  therefore,  that  passage  may  read:  ^*went
farther  on  into  Moghulistan."

It  is  somewhat  strange  that  we  should  have  no  better  cue  for  fixing  the  position
of  YalilMndf  for  it  was  evidently,  about  the  period  in  question,  a  place  of  some
importance.  It  may  be  worth  while  to  remark  that  its  identification  has  been
somewhat  embarrassed  by  the  application,  on  Arrowsmith's  map  of  1878,  of  the
word  Itikent  to  a  district  of  Kurima,  in  the  angle  formed  by  the  Sir  near  Khojand.
1  do  not  know  on  what  authority  the  name,  so  located,  rests.  The  district  in  q  uestion
is  practically  that  of  the  modem  Kurdma  itself— -between  the  river  and  the  hlllp,
and  almost  exactly  opposite  Ehojand,  In  this  locality,  however,  the  Yatikand  of
our  history  cannot  be  sought :  it  is,  in  the  first  place,  a  quarter  which  lay  altoo^ether
outside  of  Moghulistan,  while  secondly,  no  traveller  making  for  it  from  Samar-
kand could  have  taken  Sairam  on  his  road.  Itikent,  as  placed  by  Arrowsmith,
must  have  belonged  either  to  the  province  of  Shdxh  (t.e.  Tashkand^  or  to  Farghdna ;
and  was  in  one  of  the  most  thickly-populated  and  highly-cultivated  parts  of
Central  Asia,  while  this  could  not  have  been  the  case  with  Yaiikand^  as  is
evident  from  the  narrative.  As  regards  Uzun  Ahmad,  Kostenko  in  his  itineraries,
mentions  a  stream  of  that  name  in  the  mountains  between  the  Bish-Tdsh  pass  and
KcUmdn-tipa,  more  than  100  miles  in  a  direct  line  to  the  south-east  of  Aulia-Ata
(Tar&zX  and  consequently  too  far  in  the  same  direction  to  suit  the  narrative,  or  to
point  in  any  way  towards  Sairam,  old  or  new. (See  Turkitian,  ii.,  pp.  58-9.)

Kara  Tugai  is  very  possibly  to  be  identified  with  the  Kara  Sengir  Tugai  of  the
accompanying  map— one  of  the  numerous  **  Tugai "  on  the  Sir.

Digitized  by

Google

1 82  ^Story  of  Sultan  Said  Khdn,

arrow,  which  struck  the  KhAn  in  the  left  shoulder.  The  collar-
bone was  broken,  and  passing  under  his  left  shoulder  blade  the
arrow  reached  his  right  shoulder  blade.  [In  this  state  the  Ehan
tried  to  overtake  Maksud  All],  but  in  spite  of  his  efforts,  his  hand
would  not  wield  the  sword,  and  his  enemy  got  away  in  safety.
The  Khdn  then  turned  back  [from  the  pursuit].  His  wound
proved  very  serious,  and  during  two  years  he  was  deprived  of  the
use  of  his  right  eye  and  his  right  arm.

Later  in  the  day  Maksud  Ali  fell  into  the  hands  of  one  of  the
KhAn's  men,  who  thought  to  himself:  if  I  bring  him  alive  to  the
Khdn,  that  he  may  put  him  to  death  with  his  own  hands,  he  will
be  more  grateful  to  me  [than  if  I  bring  him  dead].  So  he  took
him  alive  before  the  Khdn.  But  the  Khdn,  assuming  a  cheerful
air,  called  to  him  and  said  :  ''  I  am  glad  you  have  fallen  into  my
hands.  I  was  sony  [for  what  had  happened]."  And  although  he
had  only  one  garment  by  him,  he  gave  it  him,  together  with  a
present  of  some  horses,  and  kept  him  in  Moghulistdn  to  the  end
of  his  days,  always  looking  on  him  with  the  eye  of  favour.

The  Khdn's  generosity  was  quite  unbounded.  Other  examples
will  be  given  in  their  proper  places.  In  short,  after  being
wounded  and  enduring  great  hardships,  he  joined  his  brother
Sultdn  Khalil  Sultdn.  This  latter,  after  the  death  of  his  father,
had  fled  from  Mansur  Khdn  into  Moghulistdn,  and  had  joined  tho
Kirghiz,  who  are  the  "  wild  lions "  of  that  country.  They  made
him  their  chief.  He  remained  some  time  with  his  brother,  but
finally  war  broke  out  between  them  on  the  one  hand,  and  Sultdu
Mahmud  Khdn,  in  alliance  with  Mansur  Khdn,  on  the  other,  which
led  to  victories  and  defeats,  struggles  and  conflicts,  and  great  and
wonderful  battles.  In  those  fights  such  wounds  were  inflicted,
that  no  reasonable  person  would  consider  them  capable  of  being
cured.  But  the  details  are  not  worth  describing.  These  hostilities
continued  from  910  to  914,  when  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  being
hard  pressed  by  his  nephews  and  the  people  of  Moghulistdn,  went
over  to  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  (as  has  been  related).  Mansur  Khdn
then  attacked  his  two  brothers,  Sultdn  Said  Khan  and  Sultdn
Khalil  Sultdn,  who  had  remained  in  Moghulistdn.  They,  for  their
part,  met  him  in  the  open  field  at  Almdtu,^  one  of  the  most
celebrated  places  in  Moghulistdn,  when  after  a  hard  fought  battle
the  Sultdns  were  worsted.

Sultdn  Khalil  Sultdn,  all  his  prospects  of  success  in  Moghulistdn
being  shattered,  followed  his  uncle  [Mahmud],  in  the  hope  that

*  This  place  stood  on  a  sonthern  tribatary  of  the  river  Hi.  The  name,  though
usually  written  Almaty,  is  still  in  use  for  the  modem  Bussian  fort  and  town  of
Vienty,  which  was  built  in  1854,  on  the  banks  of  a  small  river,  oaUed  by  the
Kirghiz  Ahnatu,  The  name  is  derived,  Mr.  Schuyler  says,  from  the  abundance
of  apples  (in  Tnrki,  cdmd)  which  grow  in  the  neighbourhood.  (Bretschnelder,  ii.,
p.  33 ;  Schuyler,  ii.,  p.  145.)

Digitized  by

Google

Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn.  183

Shahi  Beg  Eh&n  had  received  the  latter  kindly;  and  when  he
reached  Akhsi,  J4ni  Beg  Khan  having  seized  [him]  delivered  him
to  my  uncle  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirz4,  Sultdn  All  Mirz4  Begjik
and  Tubra  Tidghuth,  [with  the  order]  that  he  should  be  drowned
in  the  river.  They,  being  obliged  to  obey  this  order,  drowned  tho
unfortunate  Sultdn  in  the  river  of  Akhsi.  It  will  be  mentioned
later,  how  the  Khdn,  a  short  time  after  this  event,  heaped  favours
and  patronage  upon  those  men  whose  brother  he  had  murdered.

When  the  Ehdn  escaped  from  the  field  of  battle,  he  was  accom-
panied by  about  fifty  men  with  their  cattle  and  followers,  all  in
great  want.  Broken  and  discomfited,  they  came  from  Almdtu  to
Dulan  (about  fifteen  days*  march  at  a  medium  pace).  On  arriving
there,  liiey  began  to  grow  less  afraid  of  the  enemy.  That  same
day,  they  came  across  a  man  whom  they  seized  and  interrogated.
He  informed  them  that  at  Uruk,  which  was  distant  about  three
days*  march,  at  an  even  pace,  there  was  encamped  a  body  of  the
tribe  of  Bahrin,  who  intended  to  go  to  Edshghar  and  seek  the
protection  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr.  *'  And  I,"  he  added,  *'  have  fled,  and
am  on  my  way  to  join  the  Kirghiz."  They  then  all  sat  down  [and
held  a  consultation].  Some  suggested  that  the  ELhan  should  him-
self go  and  mix  with  that  tribe :  haply  by  that  means  he  would
obtain  a  little  help  fi*om  them.  And  Khwdja  Ali  Bahadur,  in
particular,  urged  this  plan  (for  he  was  himself  of  the  tribe  of
Bahrin),  and  he  was,  moreover,  a  bold  and  daring  man,  and  an
unrivalled  archer.  When  the  Khdn  fled  from  Samarkand  and
entered  the  service  of  his  noble  uncle  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khan,
Khwdja  Ali  Bahadur  was  in  Yatikand,  in  the  service  of  one  of
the  officers  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn.  When  the  Khdn  arrived,  he
entered  [his  uncle's]  service  with  tho  greatest  eagerness.  On  the
occasion  of  the  Khdn's  flight,  when  he  received  the  arrow-wound
from  Maksud  Ali,  the  musician,  Khwdja  Ali  Bahddur,  had  displayed
great  valour  in  the  contest,  and  had  shown  proofs  of  singular
daring,  which  did  not  escape  the  notice  of  the  KhdD,  who,  from
that  day  forward,  bestowed  on  him  his  special  protection  and
favour.  In  the  battles  that  took  place  in  Moghulistdn,  he  usually
distinguished  himself  by  his  heroic  acts.  But  besides  his  bravery
and  prowess,  he  was  also  noted  for  his  sagacity,  intelligence,  and
perception;  wherefore  at  that  time  most  [of  the  Khan's]  affairs
were  submitted  to  him  for  decision.

Now  as  he  was  strongly  in  favour  of  the  proposed  plan,  [while
all  the  rest  objected  to  it],  Khwdja  Ali  represented  that  if  the  Khdn
went  with  a  body  of  men,  [the  Bahrin]  would  be  frightened,  and
think  he  had  come  to  attack  them.  It  was  impossible  to  drive
these  ridiculous  ideas  out  of  their  minds,  which  had  become  a  prey
to  the  whispering  of  devils ;  and  it  seemed  that  a  new  cause  of
dissension  and  violence  would  arise. [The  Khwdja]  thought  the

Digitized  by

QjOo<^z

1 84  Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Kkdn.

wisest  plan  was  tliat  he,  in  preference  to  any  of  the  other  followers,
should  be  selected  to  accompany  the  Kh4n.  He  snggested  that
they  should  remain  where  they  were  for  five  days,  to  see  if  they
would  approve  of  his  going.  If,  thus,  their  minds  could  be  pacified
and  their  vain  fears  and  foolish  ideas  be  changed  to  good  faith  and
confidence — ^well  and  good.  "  If  not,"  said  he,  "  let  us  all  go,  as
quickly  as  possible,  and  make  common  cause  with  [the  Bahrin]."  ^

This  suggestion  was  approved,  and  the  EJian  and  Khw4ja  Ali  set
out  together.  They  made  a  three  days'  journey,  passing  only  ono
night  on  the  road,  and  arrived  at  their  destination  at  breakfast
time.

When  these  dastardly  men  heard  of  their  arrival,  they  came  with
unbounded  impudence  before  him,  not  observing  any  of  those
marks  of  respect  which  are  customary  among  the  Moghuls.  Then
Kbw&ja  Ali  addressing  them  said :  **  All  adventurous  persons  who
have  obtained  their  desires,  have  watched  for  a  favourable  oppor-
tunity to  seize  with  both  hands  the  skirts  of  men  of  power."
While  his  words  were  yet  unfinished,  they  cried  out :  *'  Down  with
this  babbler  of  idle  words !  What  use  has  a  Khdn  for  a  hundred
households?  We  have  nothing  to  offer  him!  "  So  saying  they
drove  the  Kh&n  back  to  his  friends,  and  seized  Khwaja  Ali ;  they
took  away  the  led  horse  of  the  Kh4n,  which  he  was  holding,  and
threw  its  bridle  towards  the  Khan.  On  seizing  Khwaja  Ali,  they
carried  him  off  to  their  tents.

The  Khan,  in  alarm  for  his  life,  fled  back  with  all  speed,  fearing
lest  they  might  take  him  and  deliver  him  into  the  hands  of  Aba
Bakr.  Being  terrified  at  this  idea,  he  hastened  to  rejoin  his  men,
looking  round  him  on  all  sides  as  he  went  [to  see  whether  he  was
being  pursued].

Once,  when  the  Kh4n  was  relating  this  story,  I  asked  him :
"  Did  you  not  dread  [the  thought  of]  solitude  and  desolation  ? "
He  replied  :  "  Not  so  very  much,  for  I  had  once  before  been  left
alone  in  Moghulistan,  and  had  spent  some  days  in  solitude,  in  the
same  way,  but  afterwards  joined  my  people  again."

When  he  had  gone  a  short  way,  he  perceived  something  black
in  the  distance ;  whereupon  he  withdrew  to  a  secluded  spot  and,
fastening  his  led  horse  there,  stood  waiting  in  ambush.  He  soon
discovered  that  it  was  a  man,  and  waited  till  he  came  near;  then,
placing  an  arrow  [in  readiness]  in  his  bow,  he  leapt  out  of  his
ambush  upon  the  new-comer,  who  had  no  time  to  get  away,  but
threw  himself  in  terror  from  his  horse.  The  Khdn  then  reoognised
that  this  man  was  the  slave  who  had  fled  to  the  Kirghiz  from  his
own  party,  who  had  been  captured  at  DuUn,  and  had  given  in-

^  The  texts  here  are  very  confused,  and  the  meaning  of  the  whole  paragraph
(begiiming  with  the  words :  "  Now  as  he  was  strongly  .  •  . "}  is  in  some  degree
uncertain. Some  passages  of  it  are  not  contained  in  the  Torkl  MS.— B.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn.  185

formation  of  [the  presence  of]  those  dastardly  people  [the  Bahrin].
He,  on  his  part,  recognised  the  Ehan,  and  kissed  his  stirrup.

The  Kh4n  asked  him  for  news  of  his  men,  and  where  they  were
now  encamped.  The  man  replied  :  "  When  you  went  away  with
Khw4ja  Ali  Bahddur,  a  dispute  arose  among  your  men.  It  came
about  in  this  way.  Somebody  said :  *  Last  night  I  happened  to  be
near  the  Kh&n's  tent,  when  I  heard  Khwdja  Ali  Bahddur  say  to  the
Khdn :  Our  people  are  in  a  very  broken  condition  [and  there  is
nothing  to  be  done  with  them] ;  they  have  hardly  anything  left ;
but  our  opponents  have  cattle  and  property  in  abundance,  because
every  one  of  [the  Khan's]  dependants  is  either  a  Mir  or  a  Mirzada,
and  wishes  to  have  power  and  precedence  over  others,  which  they
cannot  possibly  obtain.  Moreover,  we  cannot  attain  any  object  or
carry  out  any  scheme  by  means  of  such  people.  It  will  be  best
for  us,  therefore,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given,  to  separate  from
these  men  and  to  go  and  join  the  other  side.  Let  these  people  go
wherever  they  choose,  while  we  avail  ourselves  in  every  possible
way  of  the  services  of  our  opponents.  And  with  this  plan  the
Khan  will  be  greatly  pleased.  [I  tell  you]  the  Khau  does  not
intend  to  return.'

"  At  these  words  the  people  became  very  despondent  and  grieved ;
and  each  one,  forming  whatever  plan  seemed  best  to  himself,  they
split  up  into  factions.  One  party  under  the  leadership  of  Uchku
Muhammad  Mirza,  Sh4h  Mirak  and  Zikul  Bahadur,  set  out  for
Turfan,  the  capital  of  Mansur  Khan.  Another  division  under
Kura  Kuldk,  took  the  road  to  Andij4n,  in  the  hope  that  the  Khans
who  had  preceeded  them  had  been  well  received  by  Shdhi  Beg
Kh4n.  And  a  third  division,  under  the  direction  of  Khush  Gildi
Kukildash  and  Aziz  Birdi  Aghd,  resolved  to  go  to  the  court  of
Mirzd  Aba  Bakr  in  Kdshghar.  Thus  did  they  form  themselves
into  different  parties."

The  Khan  used  always  to  say :  "  When  I  learnt  these  facts,  I  was
filled  with  amazement  and  alarm.  Dismay  took  possession  of  my
mind.  I  asked  him  how  many  days  ago  this  had  happened ;  he
replied  that  on  the  particular  day  ho  had  left  them,  the  discussion
had  taken  place,  and  they  had  separated.

*'  I  then  dismounted,  and  for  a  while  remained  buried  in  thought.
At  length  I  resolved  to  leave  my  horse  in  the  impenetrable  jungles
of  K4rin,  and  myself  to  lie  in  ambush  for  antelopes ;  and  when  I
had  killed  them,  to  eat  their  flesh  and  to  clothe  myself  with  their
skins ;  thus  I  would  spend  several  years,  until  I  should  see  how
events  might  fall  out.

"  With  this  intention,  having  withdrawn  my  led  horse  to  one
side,  I  set  out  on  my  road."

[It  must  be  understood  that]  it  is  a  custom  among  the  Moghuls,
for  the  bravest  of  their  youth  to  spend  a  long  time  alone,  either

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

1 86  Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Kkdn.

in  the  deserts,  the  mountains  or  the  forests,  at  a  distance  of  one
or  two  months'  journey  from  any  of  their  fellow  creatures,  and  to
feed  and  clothe  themselves  with  the  flesh  and  skins  of  antelopes.
Such  persons  they  esteem  as  brave  and  manly ;  and  it  is,  in  fact,
a  very  difficult  and  dangerous  mode  of  life.

[The  Kh4n]  having  resolved  upon  this  strange  and  perilous
adventure,  gave  the  slave  his  liberty,  and  set  out  on  his  own
design.  He  spent  the  night  in  what  he  considered  a  suitable
spot,  and  on  the  morrow  again  started  on  his  road.  But  first  of
all  he  surveyed  the  country,  in  accordance  with  the  Moghul
practice  of  circumspection  and  caution.  For  it  is  their  custom,
in  the  morning,  to  examine  carefully  the  road  by  which  they
have  just  come,  and  also  to  reconnoitre  that  by  which  they
intend  to  travel  the  same  day ;  the  travellers  having  ascended  a
piece  of  rising  ground,  and  having  carefully  inspected  both  the
roads,  then  give  some  fodder  to  their  horses,  which  have  been
tethered  all  night.  The  purpose  of  this  vigilance  which  they
practise  is,  that  if  anybody  should  happen  to  be  following  them,
and  should  have  come  on  during  the  night,  he  would  be  seen,  and
could  be  guarded  against.  When  the  horses  have  grazed  long
enough,  and  no  one  is  visible  in  either  direction,  the  road  is  again
taken  at  midday,  and  the  journey  continued  till  midnight,  so
that  no  one  may  discover  the  traveller  or  his  nightly  resting-
place. Such  is  the  cautious  practice  of  the  Moj^huls.

The  Khan,  looking  round  carefully  on  all  sides,  after  a  short
time  descried  something  black  on  the  road  by  which  he  had
come  the  day  before,  and  began  to  fear  lest  those  tribesmen,
regretting  that  they  had  let  him  go,  were  come  in  pursuit  of  him.
But  ho  presently  saw  that  it  was  only  one  person,  and  that  there
was  no  one  behind  him,  as  far  as  he  could  see.  Then,  as  was
his  practice,  he  placed  himself  in  ambush.  He  noticed  that  this
man  was  ever  and  again  uttering  cries,  as  if  calling  for  somebody.
And  as  he  came  nearer  [the  Khan]  recognised  his  voice  as  that
of  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur.  He  rushed  out  to  meet  hiiu,  and  the
Khwaja,  also  recognising  the  Khan,  dismounted,  and  they  both
began  to  weep  as  they  met  in  affectionate  embrace.

One  can  imagine  the  extent  of  the  Kh&n's  joy  at  this  meeting.
Having  made  an  end  of  weeping,  [the  Khan]  asked  the  Khwaja
where  he  had  been  and  what  had  befallen  him.  The  Khwaja
replied :  *•  They  carried  me  off  and  kept  my  horse,  and  placed
me  in  the  house  of  one  of  my  acquaintances.  After  a  while  a
decrepit  and  frail  old  woman,  who  claimed  a  blood  relationship
with  me,  came  to  me  secretly  and  began  to  heap  reproaches  on
my  head,  saying :  '  Some  have  been  known  to  serve  a  Khan  yet
unborn,  or  an  Amir  still  in  his  cradle,  and  to  have  reaped  their
reward ;  yet  you,  with  your  lack  of  zeal,  have  deserted  a  great

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn,  187

Ehan,  who  is  worthy  of  a  throne  and  a  crown,  and  in  your  slug-
gishness have  debased  yourself.  Else  up:  if  you  have  not  a
horse,  I  have  left  mine  tied  up  in  such  and  such  a  plaoe :  take  it
and  go ! '  Then  my  old  enthusiasm,  which  seemed  to  have  died
within  me,  revived :  I  hastened  out  and  went  to  the  spot  she  had
indicated,  found  the  horse,  and  here  I  am."

The  Khan,  having  bestowed  thanks  and  praises  on  him,  said :
"  When  I  found  myself  alone,  I  resolved  upon  the  following  plan  "
(and  the  Khan  proceeded  to  relate  to  him,  from  beginning  to  end,
what  has  been  told  above).  Khwdja  AliBahddur  replied :  "Peace
on  you !  It  was  a  most  excellent  resolve  for  a  brave  man  like
yourself,  under  existing  circumstances.  And  it  is  all  the  better
that  it  should  have  been  so.  But  now  it  is  possible  to  proceed
with  greater  comfort  and  ease.  However,  even  if  we  do  spend  a
few  years  in  this  way,  we  must  get  news  of  the  world  whenever
we  can ;  for  the  wheel  of  the  spheres  does  not  always  turn  in  the
same  groove,  and  we  must  be  on  the  look  out  for  any  opportunity
that  may  arise  to  again  obtain  the  control  of  affairs.  We  must
also  be  bold."

The  two  then  set  out  with  strong  hearts  and  cheerful  spirits,
riding  bridle  to  bridle.  On  the  following  day  they  noticed  in
front  of  them  some  black  objects :  and  the  same  care  and  pre-
cautions were  observed  as  on  the  other  occasion.  As  the  objects
approached,  they  recognised  the  two  brothers  of  Khwiija  Ali
Bahadur,  Tika  and  Ali  Mirak,  and  two  of  his  sons-in-law,  Asil
ruliid  and  Buzana  [each  one  accompanied  by  his  servant].

After  this  meeting,  the  Khan*s  position  was  as  sovereignty  com-
pared with  that  of  the  day  before.  The  new-comers  were  then
asked  their  story.  They  related  what  has  been  mentioned  above,
and  added  :  '*  Khush  Gildi  and  Aziz  Birdi,  who  had  determined  to
go  to  Kashghar,  separated  from  us  yesterday."  With  these  two
came  SukAr  and  some  of  the  Kdluchi  (who  were  relatives  of  a
certain  woman  of  the  namo  of  Makhtum,  with  whom,  during  the
time  of  the  great  disturbances  in  Moghulist&n,  the  Kh4n  had
contracted  a  marriage),  and  they  brought  with  them  several  horses
from  the  royal  stables.

Having  announced  this  news,  the  whole  party  set  out  in  pursuit
without  delay,  and  came  upon  the  fugitives  towards  the  end  of  the
night ;  when  these  heard  the  sound  of  the  hoofs  of  the  approaching
horses,  they  were  filled  with  dismay  and  alarm.  The  Khan  and
his  companions  called  out  to  each  one  by  name,  and  they,  recog-
nising his  voice  and  that  of  the  others,  were  filled  with  joy.
They  came,  running,  to  the  stirrup  of  his  Excellency  the  Khan
and,  kissing  his  feet,  gave  vent  to  expressions  of  thankfulness.

The  Kh4n,  being  rejoined  by  Khwdja  Ali,  was  relieved  of  the
distress  of  solitude,  but  now,  on  falling  in  with  Tika  and  his

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

i88  Story  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn.

party,  he  had  become  a  veritable  king,  compared  T^ith  his  former
position.  When,  under  the  guidance  of  these  men,  they  had
rejoined  the  party  who  had  separated  from  them,  the  Eh4n  was
overjoyed  at  the  prospect  of  a  meeting  with  a  slave,  who  was  his
wife.  All  were  delighted  at  coming  together  again,  and  hoped
that  that  night  they  would  enjoy  a  refreshing  sleep.  The  E^han,
in  the  same  hope,  had  already  taken  off  his  boots  and  coat,  when
Aziz  Birdi  Agh4  came  and  persuaded  him  to  put  them  on  again.
Although  it  was  apparently  a  trouble  to  do  so,  it  was  at  least
a  fitting  precaution,  so  he  consented,  in  order  to  quiet  Aziz  Birdi,
and  with  one  boot  off  [and  one  boot  on]  he  slumbered  peacefully
on  the  breast  of  his  wife.  For  he  had  taken  no  rest  for  seversd
nights  and  days,  and  was  exceedingly  fatigued  from  rough
travelling  and  watchful  nights.  The  full  enjoyment  of  sleep  had
not  yet  come  to  him,  when  he  heard  a  war  cry  [«ttra»]  and  the
sound  of  giving  and  taking  of  blows.  Before  the  £Mn  could
jump  out  of  bed,  he  saw  by  the  light  of  the  burning  camp  that
the  enemy  were  upon  them,  and  were  dealing  out  blows  to  right
and  left.  He  had  just  time  to  gird  on  his  quiver,  when  Khwaja
All  arrived.  They  rushed  together,  from  the  blazing  camp  into
the  darkness,  and  began  to  shower  down  arrows  upon  the  enemy
who  were  doing  their  work  in  the  light,  and  in  the  same  way,
the  men  from  the  camp  came  out  on  all  sides  into  the  darkness,
and  began  to  discharge  their  arrows.  The  enemy,  who  were  all
mounted,  then  withdrew  from  the  light,  and  the  Kh4n's  men,  who
were  on  foot,  shot  at  them  from  different  ambuscades.  On  account
of  the  darkness  it  was  not  possible  to  judge  of  the  great  numbers  of
the  one  side  or  the  small  numbers  of  the  other.  Some  of  the  men,
in  imitation  of  the  Eh4n,  were  engaged  in  discharging  arrows,
while  the  rest  had  gone  back  to  secure  the  horses.

As  a  fact,  this  hostile  band  was  part  of  an  army  which  Mirza
Abd  Bakr  had  sent  to  Moghulistan,  witli  orders  to  seize  and
treat,  in  the  worst  possible  way,  any  one  who  might  be  found  in
the  deserts  of  MoghuJistdn,  The  continual  raids  of  these  followers
of  Mirzd  Abti  Bakr  caused  great  distress  in  Moghulistan,  and
threw  the  Moghuls  and  Kirghiz  into  disorder.  [The  assailants]
who  were  a  division  of  the  force  spoken  of,  had  come  on  at  the
time  of  afternoon  prayer,  and  when  they  had  seen  the  Ehdn's  party
arrive  and  halt,  they  had  crept  into  concealment  till  late  in  the
night.  They  then  seized  all  the  horses,  which  had  been  turned
out  to  graze,  and  when  darkness  was  nearly  over  they  made  their
night  attack.  There  were  no  horses  left  in  the  camp  ^  except  a
few  fat  animals,  which  had  been  retained  for  purposes  of  war.
These  were  saddled,  and  mounted  by  the  men,  and  some  of  the

^  The  Tarki  text  has,  in  place  of  **  in  the  oamp"—*' among  the  Khan's  suite.'*

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Story  of  Stdtdn  Said  Khdn,  189

women  of  the  KMn's  haram ;  wUle  two  or  three  other  women  were
Bent  ofif  by  their  husbands,  who  found  horses  for  them.  The
Khdn's  horse  was  saddled  and  brought  to  him.  When  day  dawned
all  were  in  the  greatest  straits.  Moreover,  except  for  the  two
or  three  women  already  mentioned,  all  the  wives  and  children  of
our  party  had  fallen  into  the  enemy's  hands,  and  there  was  no
time  to  take  leave  or  bid  farewell.  The  soar  of  disappointment
was  marked  upon  their  foreheads,  and  they  never  saw  each  other
more.  But  those  who  fled,  drove  their  wives  and  men  and  horses
before  them.  The  Kh4n  and  all  those  who  had  any  courage  and
strength,  followed  after  them.  The  cursed  enemy  came  close  on
their  heels,  and  pursued  them  with  the  greatest  ardour,  being,
moreover,  supplied  with  changes  of  horses.

Whenever  the  enemy  approached,  the  Khan  with  a  few  men,
turned  round  and  plied  them  with  arrows,  and  kept  them  at  bay
until  his  own  party  had  got  well  on,  when  he  again  let  loose  the
reins  of  flight  till  he  overtook  them.  Thus  did  they  fly  fighting ;
and  shot  their  arrows  with  their  faces  towards  their  friends  and
their  backs  to  their  enemies.  This  state  of  affairs  continued  till
the  hour  of  the  "  prayer  of  sleep."  The  night  attack  took  place  in
the  desert  plains  \<^vXg&i'\  of  XTtluk,  which  are  called  Ankghun
Archa,  and  by  the  time  of  the  "  prayer  of  sleep  "  they  had  reached
Kumala  Kdchur,^  which  represents  a  distance  of  five  days*  journey
at  a  medium  pace.  The  feeble  ones,  both  women  and  men,  at  the
time  of  flight  and  distress,  were  concealed  in  the  glens  and  forests,
while  the  rest  hid  themselves  wherever  they  thought  most  safe.

With  the  exception  of  the  EJidn's  wife  and  two  or  three  other
women,  and  a  few  men  who  had  remained,  most  of  these  people
were  captured ;  only  a  few  escaped.  When  evening-prayer  time
came,  fear  of  the  enemy  left  them  but  little  peace  of  mind.  They
were  all  scattered,  every  one  hiding  in  the  jungle  of  Eumala
Edchur ;  and  from  the  excess  of  their  terror,  some  of  those  whose
horses  were  tired  out,  left  them  and  crept  into  the  forest  on  foot.

When  day  dawned,  they  all  came  out  onto  an  elevation,  and
still  concealing  themselves,  looked  carefully  round.  They  could
see  no  trace  of  the  enemy.  They  waited  patiently  till  midday,
when  wherever  they  happened  to  be,  they  called  out,  and  by  means
of  their  cries  were  able  to  find  one  another ;  [they  also  found]
those  whom  they  had  sent  into  the  glens,  and  of  whose  fate  they

*  The  spelling  of  these  names  is  very  uncertain ;  hut  in  whatever  fonu,  I  can
find  no  trace  of  them,  even  on  Seyertsoff's  detailed  map  of  Zungario,  &o.  They
were  probably  mere  local  names  of  uninhabited  and  unimportant  spots ;  though
it  is  possible  that  *♦  Avkgiiuti  Archa  "  may  have  some  connection  with  tho  "  On
Archa  marked  on  modem  maps,  seeing  that  this  place  stands  on  a  river  (a  right
tributary  of  the  upper  Narin— just  east  of  the  Son  Kul)  called  the  Ottuk—
of  which  perhaps  Vuuk  may  be  a  mis-rendering.  The  author,  however,  gives  no
indication  of  the  quarter  of  Moghulistan  where  these  adventures  took  place.

Digitized  by

Google

igo  Story  of  Siiltdn  Said  Khdn.

were  till  then  ignorant,  not  knowing  whether  they  had  been
captured  or  not.

Eetnming,  they  looked  to  &ee  what  had  become  of  these  people.
They  found  that,  excepting  the  Khan's  wife  [haram]  and  one  or
two  other  persons,  all  had  been  discovered  and  carried  off  captive.
They  remained  where  they  were  during  that  day,  for  they  had  not
sufficient  strength  left  to  proceed.  Moreover,  they  did  not  know
whither  they  could  go.  They  discussed  the  matter  in  all  its
aspects :  every  one  made  suggestions,  and  held  his  own  views  upon
the  matter;  but  all  their  plans  were  quite  impracticable.  One
proposition  was  that  they  should  live  in  the  forests,  and  banish
from  their  thoughts  all  desire  for  civilisation.  This,  however,  was
not  considered  to  be  feasible,  as  it  was  impossible  to  exist  in  the
forests  without  the  [necessary]  weapons,  etc.  After  seeking
everywhere,  they  found  that  all  their  quivers  were  empty.  At  last
they  found  one  arrow  in  the  Khan's  quiver:  in  the  rest  there
were  none  left  but  iir-i-gaz}  [And  with  only  one  arrow  there  was
certainly  nothing  to  be  achieved,  so  perforce  this  idea  must  be
banished  from  their  minds.  Another  proposal  was  that]  they
should  enter  the  Dasht-i-Kipchdk,  which  at  that  time  was  an
asylum  and  refuge  of  the  Moghul  Khans.  But  this  again  was
impossible,  on  account  of  their  want  of  arrows  [and  other  weapons.
A  third  suggestion  was  that  they  should  go  to  Kashghar.  But  they
came  to  the  conclusion  that]  to  go  to  Kashghar  was  as  good  as  to
walk,  living,  into  a  grave.

With  Mansur  Khan  it  was  but  yesterday  that  they  had  fought
a  battle,  and  all  their  sufferings  and  calamities  were  due  to  him.
At  length  they  decided  upon  going  to  Andijdn ;  for  it  was  possible
that  Sh4hi  Beg  Khdn  had  given  Sult4n  Mahmud  Kh^n  a  favourable
reception.

The  Khan  repeatedly  related  these  details  to  me,  and  he  used  to
add ;  "  Those  who  advised  our  going  to  the  country  of  Shahi  Beg
Khan,  did  so  out  of  their  ignorance  of  his  true  character.  However
strongly  those  who  knew  him  protested,  and  pointed  out  the
absurdity  and  danger  of  the  scheme,  which  the  others  had  made
appear  so  plausible,  they  would  not  be  dissuaded.  I,  for  my  part,
showed  my  objections  and  disapproval  in  a  hundred  ways;  for
had  I  not  been  a  whole  year  with  Shahi  Beg  Khan  ?  I  well  knew
and  understood  his  temperament,  the  ways  of  his  Sultans,  and  the
intentions  of  his  Amirs.  I  knew  very  well  that  he  would  ill-treat
us,  which  he  did,  but  when  I  said  this  to  these  ignorant  men,  they
replied :  '  Then  what  is  to  be  done  ?  All  our  proposals  are  con-
sidered impracticable  or  impossible!  [But  in  going  to  Shahi
Beg  Kh4n]  there  is  some  hope  of  safety.  If  anything  else  suggests
itself  to  your  enlightened  mind,  tell  us  of  it :  for  in  every  matter
^  Probably  arrows  of  one  gox  in  length.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Flight  of  tlie  Author's  Father.  191

we  are  willing  to  follow  and  obey  you,  mind  and  body.'  Much  as
I  thought  the  matter  over,  I  was  unable  to  find  a  solution  of  the
difficulty,  or  offer  any  other  suggestion ;  and  finaUy  I,  with  my
eyes  open,  and  in  spite  of  what  I  knew,  became  myself  a  promoter
of  that  very  plan  for  which  I  had  so  severely  reproved  my  men.
For,  in  truth,  there  was  no  choice  left  Knowingly  and  deliberately
I  rushed  upon  calamity !

"  On  the  morrow,  having  prepared  myself  for  death  and  my  heart
for  martyrdom,  I  set  out  to  pay  homage  to  Jdni  Beg  Sultan,  which
was  the  first  step  to  entering  the  service  of  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan.  And
there  was  no  great  difference  between  that  stage  ^  and  the  bottom
of  the  tomb,"

These  events  took  place  in  the  year  914,^  just  two  months  after
the  murder  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  and  one  month  before  Sultan
Khalil  Sultan  was  drowned  in  the  ocean  of  mercy,  all  of  which
has  been  mentioned  above.  Sultdn  Khalil  Sultdn  was  the  full
brother  of  the  Khdn.

At  this  date  Babar  Pddishah  was  established  on  the  throne  of
Kabul,  and  his  power  was  nearly  absolute.

Having  reached  this  point  in  the  Khan's  story,  it  is  necessary
for  the  better  understandiiig  of  the  history,  that  I  should  now
revert  to  the  stories  of  my  father  and  Babar  Padishdh.

CHAPTEE  IX.

FLIGHT  07  MT  FATHER  MUHAMMAD  HUSAIN  KURKAN  FROM BEFORE  SHAHI

BEG  khAn  into  khorAsan;  wfth  some  incidental  biographical

NOTICES.

It  has  been  related  above,  how  Kunduz  submitted  without  resist-
ance, on  the  advent  of  the  victorious  army  of  Mahmud  Sultan ;  also
how  I,  after  being  confined  in  prison  by  Khusrau  Shdh  for  a  year,
obtained  my  release,  went  and  joined  my  father,  and  together  with
all  the  members  of  my  family,  proceeded  to  Shahr-i-Sabz,  which
Shtthi  Beg  Khan  had  given  to  my  father  [together  with  its
dependencies].

In  the  beginning  of  Sagittarius,  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan  marched  on
Khwarizm.

All  the  heads  of the  Moghuls, whether  Sultdns  or  Amirs,

'  Instead  of  the  words  *"  that  stage,"  the  Turki  MS.  has  :^<'  the  seryice  of
Jam  Be^  Siilt6ii."'-B.
«  1508-9  A.D.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

192  Flight  of  the  Author^ s  Father

together  with  their  train,  were  dweUing  among  the  Uzbegs,  and
fear  and  apprehension  continually  occupied  their  hearts.

In  the  meanwhile,  Mahmud  Sultdn,  who  had  always  been  a
defender  of  the  Moghnls,  died  in  Eundnz,  whereat  all  the  Moghnls,
and  especially  my  father,  were  mnch  afflicted  and  saddened.  For
Mahmud  Sultan  had  borne  him  such  love,  and  had  bestowed  so
much  kindness  on  him,  that  if  ever  one  of  Shdhi  Beg  Kh4n's
nobles  wrote  a  letter  of  cruelty  or  violence  upon  the  tablet  of  the
imagination  concerning  my  father,  ho  would  draw  a  line  through
it  with  the  pen  of  his  protection ;  or  else  would  erase  this  writing
from  the  tablet  of  the  rancorous  heart  of  the  evil-minded  man,
with  the  penknife  of  punishment.  In  fact,  he  recognised  it  as  his
duty  to  side  with  my  father  in  all  things.  His  death  was  a  source
of  great  uneasiness  to  the  Moghnls  in  general,  and  to  my  father  in
particular.  But  Sh&hi  Beg  Khdn  said  privately  to  Amir  J4n  Yafa,
who  was  an  intimate  friend  of  my  fiekther,  tlubt  he  would  on  no
account  whatever  leave  Ehwarizm  until  he  had  reduced  it,  and  it
was  clear  that  the  siege  ^  would  be  a  very  protracted  one : — "  There
are,  at  the  present  moment,  about  30,000  Moghnls  among  our
Uzbegs.  So  long  as  any  of  the  Moghul  chiefs  remain,  these  men
will  continue  to  serve  them,  and  ueVer  enter  our  service.  If  a
favourable  occasion  presents  itself,  they  will  do  to  us  that  which
we  did  to  them.  The  first  among  them  is  Muhammad  Husain
Kurk&n  ;  I  think  of  him  all  day,  but  feel  that  to  kill  him  would
be  like  killing  one  of  the  Ehdns — an  act  that  would  obliterate  all
the  kindnesses  I  have  ever  shown  the  Ehdns.  Hence,  it  will  be  best
for  you  to  announce  to  him  my  intention,  so  that  he  may  rise  up
with  all  speed  and  escape  while  he  has  yet  a  foot  [to  walk  upon],
and  no  longer  tempt  his  fate.  For  after  his  departure,  I  must
make  all  the  other  Moghul  Amirs  feel  the  blood-drinking  scimitar."

Amir  Jan  Yaf4  immediately  sent  a  messenger,  who  reached  my
father  at  the  hour  of  midday  prayer,  and  by  the  time  of  afternoon
prayer  my  father,  having  chosen  me  from  among  his  children  to
accompany  him,  together  with  sixteen  of  his  servants,  fled  towards
Khoras4n.  This  event  remains  fixed  in  my  mind  like  a  dream  or
a  fantasy.

In  those  days  Sultdn  Said  Kh&n  was  also  in  Samarkand.  Three
days  after  [our  flight]  he  fled  to  Moghulistdn ;  but  this  story  has
been  told  above.

Of  those  children  whom  my  father  left  behind  him  in  Shahr-i-
Sabz,  the  eldest  was  Habiba  Sult&n  Ehdnish ;  Shdhi  Beg  Eh4n
kept  her  in  his  haram  at  Tdshkand,  where  he  also  kept  Aisha
Sultdn  Ehdnim,  the  daughter  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Ehun,  and  who

^  Tho  author  appears  to  mean  the  siege  of  Khwarizm,  or  Eliiva ;  but  Erskine
mentions  that  Sham  Beg  was  besieging  Kelat  (I  presume  Kelat-i-Qhilzai)  at
the  time. (See  Hut,  i.,  p.  257.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

into  Khordsdn,  193

is  nowadays  better  known  as  Moghnl  Ehdnim.  After  a  while  he
married  her,  with  varions  ceremonies,  to  Abdullah  Ehdn,  son  of
Mahmud  Sult&n.

[2.]  Next  in  age  was  Ganhar  Shah  Begum,  whom  Amir  Jan  Vafa
obtained,  in  marriage,  for  his  own  son  Amir  Y4r,  in  return  for
haying  carried  the  message  to  my  father.

[3.]  I  come  next. I  accompanied  my  father.

[4.]  Another  was  Muhammad  Shdh,  whom  one  of  my  father's
relations  had  taken  after  my  father  into  Ehordsan.

[5.]  The  youngest  of  all  was  Abdull4h  Mirza,  who  has  been
mentioned  above,  as  having  accompanied  his  mother,  Sultdnim
Begum. I  shall  tell  his  life  in  these  pages.

In  short,  we  left  Shahr-i-Sabz,  and,  passing  one  night  on  the  road,
reached,  at  the  close  of  [the  second]  day,  the  banks  of  the  Eiver
Amuya ;  the  cold  was  very  severe  and  we  only  succeeded  in  cross*
ing  with  great  difficulty ;  without  entering  Balkh,  we  went  on  to
Ehordsan.

Those  were  the  last  days  of  the  life  and  reign  of  Mirz4  Sultan
Husain,  who  was  a  grandson  of  Mirzd  Jahdngir,^  son  of  Amir
Timur.  None  of  his  ancestors,  as  far  back  as  Amir  Timur,  had
attained  to  sovereignty.  Mirzd  Sultan  Husain,  however,  had,  after
many  years  of  struggles  and  hardships,  won  Ehords&n  at  the  point
of  the  sword,  and  during  forty-eighfc  years,  while  firmly  established
on  the  throne  of  Herat,  he  governed  the  four  quarters  of  Ehorasdn.
He  encouraged  all  the  arts  and  crafts  of  the  world  to  such  a
degree  that  in  every  separate  profession  he  produced  an  unsurpassed
master.

Having  reached  this  point,  I  meditated  and  felt  that  I  ought  to
write  something  concerning  these  lords  of  revelation  and  masters
of  manifestation,  who  lived  at  this  time.  And  though  I  did  not,
with  my  lack  of  capacity,  seem  fit  for  the  task,  yet  strange  to  say,
I  could  not  see  my  way  to  omit  recording  one  or  two  circumstcmces
in  relation  to  these  men.  In  any  case  I  will  make  a  beginning,  in
the  hope  that,  with  the  aid  of  existing  memoirs  \tazlcira\  which

*  Our  anthor  should  have  said  that  Sultan  Husain  Miiza  (Baikara)  was  great-
grandson  of  Omar  Shaikh,  son  of  Amir  Timur— not  the  grandson  of  Jahaiiglr.
Sultan  Husain's  father  was  Mansur  Mirza,  his  grandfather  Baikara  Mirza,  son  of
Omar  Shaikh.  He  succeeded  Sultan  Abu  Said  on  the  throne  of  Ehorisdn  in
A.H.  878,  and  reigned  tUl  his  death  in  912  (1474  to  1507) ;  but  previous  to  878  he
had  been  ruler  in  M&zandarin  and  Gurgdn.  He  is  said,  hj  ErsMne,  to  have  been  a
man  of  great  power  and  reputation,  and  beyond  comparison  the  most  distinguished
of  the  Princes  of  the  house  of  Timur,  at  that  time  living.  The  capital  of
Khoris&n  was  then  at  Heri,  or  Herat,  which,  for  about  half  a  century,  was  cele-
brated, **  not  merely  for  the  splendour  and  ddgnity  of  its  Court,  the  architectural
beauty  of  its  mosques,  tombs,  colleges,  and  palaces,  but  as  being  the  resort  of
the  greatest  divines,  philosophers,  poets,  and  historians  of  the  age."  Sultan
Husain,  besides  being  eminent  as  a  nder,  was  also  well  known  as  a  poet  and  a
writer  of  fiction— under  the  name  of  Husaini.  (See  S.  Lane  Poole,  Muhamd.
Dyfuuties^  table  facing  p.  268.  Erskine,  Baber,  pp.  Ivi.  and  125;  History  i.,
p.  77;  BeAle,  Orient,  BiographMB.)

0

Digitized  by

Google

194  Flight  of  the  Author's  Father

shall  supplement  the  deficienoies  of  my  humble  reed,  it  may  prove
worthy  of  the  perusal  of  the  clear-sighted.

•  ••••••

As  it  does  not  lie  in  my  power  to  write  a  separate  book  in
memory  of  these  men,  I  have  in  this  Epitome  only  devoted  a
few  lines  to  some  of  them,  in  order  to  satisfy  my  mind  and  to  oalm
my  inner  man. [Quatrain].  .  .  .  ^

Shaikli  VI  Isldmy  ihe  Light  of  Beligion,
Mavldnd  Abdur  Bahmdn  Jdmi,

He  was  far  the  greatest  and  most  excellent  and  learned  of  all
the  8aints  and  spiritual  guides  of  the  time  of  Mirzd  Sult&n  Husain.

He  is  much  too  great  to  stand  in  need  of  any  mention  from  my
humble  pen ;  so  I  will  simply  trace  his  disdpleship.  He  was  a
disciple  of  Maulan&  Sad-ud-Din  Edshghari,  disoiple  of  Mauland
Nizam-ud-Din  Ehdmushi,  disciple  of  Ehw4ja  A14-ud-Din  Attar,
disciple  of  His  Holiness  the  Eibla  of  the  Pious,  Ehw&j4  Bahd  'ul
Hakk  va  ud-Din,  generally  known  as  Ehwdjd  Kakshband.

Mauldnd  Sadrud-Din  Kdshghari.

He  belonged  to  one  of  the  most  noble  families  in  the  country  of
Eashghar,  and  his  race  had  produced  IJlamas,  and  many  pious  and
devout  men  and  saints.  Among  whom  was  Shaikh  Habib,  the
disciple  of  Shaikh  Sayyid  E&rdgar,  disciple  of  Shaikh  Mohibb
Mujarrad.^

Amir  Sayyid  Ahmad,  my  great-great-grandfather,  placed  his
son  Mir  Sayyid  Ali  in  the  service  of  Shaikh  Habib,  when  he  was
very  young.

Mauldnd  Nizdm-itd-Din  Khdmush.

I  have  heard  from  a  certain  distinguished  person  that  [even]
before  Maulaua  Nizam-ud-Din  became  a  disciple  of  Ehw4jd  Ala-
ud-Din  he  was  an  exceedingly  pious  and  chaste  man.  He  used  to
sit  in  the  mosque  of  the  Lawyers,  aud  was  an  admirer  of  the

spirituality  of  the  Shaikh.

^♦»  ♦  «  ♦  ♦  «

>  Here  follow  some  notices  of  saints,  learned  men,  poets,  singers  and  others,
the  bnlk  of  which  are  omitted,  as  the  persons  they  treat  of  have  no  connection
with  the  history.  They  are  all.  Dr.  Bieu  informs  me,  to  be  found  in  other  books ;
indeed,  the  author  acknowledges  that  he  has  taken  them  chiefly  from  **  existing
memoirs,"  and  has  written  them  for  his  own  satisfaction.  As,  however,  three  of
the  saints  mentioned  are  persons  of  importance,  and  appear  to  have  played  some
part  in  the  history  of  the  times,  the  brief  notices  of  their  lives  have  been  trans-
lated, though  the  anecdotes  regarding  them  have  been  left  out ;  these  last  are
not  only  irrelevant,  but  childish.

*  The  name  Kdrdgar  stands  in  the  Turk!  MS.  Kdsargar ;  while  for  Mti^arrad
may  perhaps  be  read  Mt^jtdbi — ^B.

Digitized  by

Google

into  Khordsdn.  195

He  performed  many  miracles,  as  is  related  in  the  Nafahdt  ul

fins.

Betumfram  the  Digression*

My  father  arrived  in  Ehorasan  at  the  time  when  iU  pomp  and
splendour  and  learning  were  at  their  highest,  and  the  fame  of
Herat  and  its  people  was  spread  over  the  world.

At  that  time  the  sons  of  Mirz4  Sult&n  Husain,  who  had  revolted
against  their  illustrious  father,  had  repented  and  had  been  allowed
to  kiss  his  feet,  and  they  now  surrounded  the  Mirzd's  throne  with
honour  and  respect.

When  my  father  arrived  in  Herat,  the  people  came  out  to  receive
him,  and  attended  his  passage  with  honour.  They  then  conducted
him  to  a  magnificent  residence — worthy  of  his  rank — which  they
had  made  ready  for  him.

[When  my  father  went  to  pay  his  respects  to  Mirza  Sultan
Husain],  Mir  Muhammad  Baranduk  Barl&s,  who  had  been  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Shdh  Bukh  and  who,  at  that  time,  in  respect  of  age,
rank,  understanding,  intelligence,  and  knowledge  of  the  laws  and
customs,  had  not  his  equal  among  the  whole  of  the  Chaghatdi  ZTZtw,
came  and  spoke  to  my  father  about  kneeling  at  the  audience.  My
father  agreed  to  his  proposals.  The  Mirzd  also  showed  my  father
great  honour,  and  placed  him  above  all  his  children,  even  above
his  son  B4di-uz-Zam&n,  who  was  the  eldest  and  most  respected  of
the  Mirza's  sons.  In  this  city,  which  might  have  been  compared
to  Paradise,  my  father  commanded  the  utmost  respect  and  dis-
tinction, and  enjoyed  every  possible  luxury.

The  Mirz4,  for  his  personal  satisfaction,  had  determined  on  an
alliance  between  one  of  his  granddaughters  and  my  father.  The
latter  did  not  approve  of  this  connection,  because  the  Mirza  was
very  old  and  afflicted  with  paralysis  and  gout,  and  the  power  of
his  children  would  not  be  such  that,  when  they  succeeded  their
father,  they  would  be  able  to  cope  with  Shahi  Beg  Kh4n.  Never-
theless, as  it  had  been  arranged,  he  contracted  the  marriage.

In  the  meanwhile.  Shah  Begum,  as  has  been  mentioned  above,
went  from  Moghulistdn  to  Samarkand  with  a  petition  for  Shahi
Beg  Khan.  The  latter  was  intent  on  the  conquest  of  Ehwdrizm,
which  was  a  dependency  of  Mirza  Sult4n  Husain.  It  was  on
Shahi  Beg  Khdn's  warning  that  my  father  had  fled  to  Khor&s4n,
and  Sultan  Said  £^4n  had  taken  refuge  in  Moghulistdn.  Most  of
the  Moghul  chiefs  had  gone  to  the-  kingdom  of  the  next  world,
while  some  had  been  thrown  into  confinement.  Shah  Begum  was
banished  and  sent  to  Ehor&sdn.  The  rest  of  the  Moghuls  accom-
panied the  expedition  into  Ehwarizm.

In  enumerating  the  names  of  the  children  of  Yunus  Khan,  I

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

196  Flight  of  the  Author's  Father.

mentioned  that  the  eldest  was  Mihr  Nigar  Khdnim,  who  married
Sult&n  Ahmad  Mirza,  king  of  Samarkand.  When  Shahi  Beg  Khdn
seized  and  put  tx)  death  Sult4n  Ali  Mirzd  and  subdued  Samarkand,
he  married  Mihr  Nigar  Kh4nim.  When  he  besieged  Bdbar
Pidishdh  in  that  city,  for  the  last  time,  and  compelled  him  to
capitulate,  he  demanded  Eh&nz4da  Begum.  B&bar  Pddishah  gave
up  Eh&nzdda  Begum  in  exchange  for  his  own  life,  and  escaped,  as
has  been  mentioned.  Now  as  Mihr  Nigdr  Ehanim  was  maternal
aunt  to  Eh4nzada  Begum,  and  as  it  was  unlawful  for  both  to  be
wedded  to  the  same  man,  he  divorced  Mihr  Nigdr  Ehdnim,  and
married  Ebanz4da  Begum.  The  Eh4nim  had  dwelt  in  Samarkand.
When  Shith  Begum  was  sent  to  Eborasan,  the  Eh4nim  accompanied
her  mother-in-law.  My  father  had  a  maternal  aunt,  who  had
remained  in  Shahr-i-Sabz,  whither  many  of  her  connections  had
fled:  she,  having  taken  my  brother  Muhammad  Shah  with  her,
came  with  the  Begum  and  the  Ehanim  to  Ehorasan.

Before  the  arrival  of  this  party,  my  father  resolved  to  make  the
Pilgrimage  of  tlie  Hijaz,  but  when  they  joined  him  he  gave  up  this
intention,  thinking  that  they  would  be  in  danger  if  left  alone  in  a
strange  land.  He  then  decided  to  remove  them  to  Eabul,  where
B4bar  P4dishah  was,  as  has  been  related.  Shdh  Begum  was  the
stepmother  of  the  Emperor's  mother ;  Mihr  Nigar  Eh4nim  was  his
maternal  aunt.

tn  short,  having,  with  this  intention,  obtained  leave  to  depart
from  Mirz4  Sult4n  Husain,  they  set  out  for  E&bul.  A  few  days
before  they  reached  Eabul  the  mother  of  Babar  Pddishah,  Eutluk
Nig4r  Ehdnim,  died,  and  her  death  was  a  great  misfortune  to  all.
In  spite  of  his  mourning,  B4bar  P4dish4h  came  out  to  receive  them,
and  gave  the  party  a  warm  welcome,  accompanied  by  every  honour
that  he  was  able  to  show  them.  Here  they  spent  some  time  in  the
greatest  ease  and  comfort.

Soon  after  this,  came  news  of  the  death  of  Mirz4  Sult4n  Husain.
In  the  natural  order  of  things,  and  in  conformity  with  recognised
custom  and  practice,  Mirz&  Bddi-uz-Zam&n  should  have  succeeded
his  father  on  the  throne.  But  Ehadija  Begum,  one  of  the  late
Sult&n's  wives,  who  was  at  the  head  of  a  factious  party,  succeeded
in  getting  Muzafifar  Husain  Mirza,  who  was  her  own  son,  to  share
the  government  with  Mirz4  B4di-uz-Zamdn.  This  she  did,  in  spite
of  the  objections  of  the  wise  men  of  the  time  [who  were  at  last
compelled  to  consent  to  the  unstable  arrangement]  which  was  in
consequence  carried  out.

In  the  meantime,  Jah&ngir  Mirza,  who  was  in  Ghazni,  being
discontented  with  the  narrow  limits  of  his  territories,  marched  for
EJiords&n.  [At  the  same  time]  he  sent  a  petition  to  the  Emperor,
saying  :  *'  Sultan  Husain  Mirzd  has  lately  departed  this  life.  It
has  occurred  to  me  that,  at  this  orisiB,  I  should  go  and  offer  my

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Bdbar's  Expedition  into  Kkordsdn,  197

help  and  allianoe  to  his  sons.  Probably  I  may  be  able  to  help
them  in  some  way."  When  this  petition  reached  B4bar  Pddish4h,
he  at  once  set  out,  with  the  intention  that  if  he  fell  in  with
Jahingir  Mirz&  on  the  road,  he  would  turn  him  back,  or  if  not,  would
pursue  his  brother  into  Ehor&san.  [In  either  case]  he  would  not
be  long  in  ascertaining  what  schemes  Mirza  Jahdngir  had  in  his
mind.  As  soon  as  the  Emperor  had  resolved  on  this  plan,  he  came
to  my  father's  house,  and  asked  him  to  undertake  the  management
of  Kabul  and  its  dependencies.  My  father  would  not  accept  the
invitation,  but  said,  in  excuse :  "  When  in  Khordsan,  I  resolved  to
undertake  the  Pilgrimage ;  if  I  were  to  bind  myself  to  the  measure
you  propose,  my  resolution  would  be  to  no  purpose.  Let  this
business  be  entrusted  to  one  of  your  great  Amirs,  and  I  will  render
him  assistance  to  the  utmost  extent  of  my  ability."  The  Emperor
then  sent  for  Nizam-ud-Din  Ali  Khalifa  Mauland  Baba  Bishaghari,
Amir  Ahmad  K4sim  Kuhbur,^  and  one  or  two  other  of  his  [trust-
worthy] chiefis,  and  after  complimenting  [my  father],  said  to  him  :
**I  am  about  to  start  for  Khor4s4n,  having  the  most  perfect
reliance  on  you.  These  Amirs  will  conduct  the  different  affairs  of
the  State  under  your  general  supervision."  Having  thus  spoken,
and  after  farther  compliments,  he  set  out  for  Khoras4n.

CHAPTEE  X.

bAbab  pIdishAh's  expedition  into  khobJLbAn. troubles  and  con-
tentions IN  kIbul.

After  the  Emperor's  departure  for  Khorasan,  up  till  the  middle
of  the  winter,  all  was  order  and  quiet  in  K4bul.  He,  however,
stayed  away  a  long  while,  and  various  reports  began  to  circulate ;
the  main  roads  were  also  blocked  by  the  Hazdra  highwaymen.

In  the  list,  given  above,  of  the  children  of  Yunus  Kh4n,  it  was
stated  that  he  had  five  daughters  and  two  sons.

By  his  wife,  Isdn  Daulat  Begum,  he  had  three  daughters:
[1.]  Mihr  Nigar  Kh4nim,  who  has  been  already  mentioned  as
being  at  this  time  in  Kdbul;  having  accompanied  Sh4h  Begum
from  Samarkand.  [2.]  Kutluk  Nigdr  Kh4nim,  the  mother  of  the
Emperor,  who  died  just  before  the  arrival  of  Shdh  Begum,  the
Khdnim  and  my  father,  in  K&bul.  [3.]  My  mother,  who  died
during  the  interval  of  peace  [amdnx]  in  Tdshkand,  which  has  been
mentioned.

>  The  Turki  MS.  has  KuM  in  place  of  ^tiftbur— B.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

198  Bdbars  Expedition  into  Khordsdn,

By  Sli&h  Begum  he  had  four  children :  [1}  Sultdn  Mahmnd  Eh4n ;
[2]  Sult4n  Ahmad  Khan ;  [8]  Sult4n  Nig4r  Eh4nim,  who  was  the
wifeof  Mirza  Sult&n  Mahmud  (son  of  Mirz4  Snlt4n  Abu  Said)  and  the
mother  of  Mirz4  Khan ;  and  [4]  Danlat  Sult&n  Eh4nim,  who  was  wife
of  Timur  Sultdn,  son  of  Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n.  All  of  these  have  been
mentioned  before.  From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  Sh4h  Begum
was  step-grandmother^  to  both  the  Emperor  and  myself;  and
[actual]  grandmother  to  Mirz4  Khan.  After  the  defeat  of  the
Khans,  when  the  Emperor  went  to  the  hill  country  of  Hisdr,  he
was  there  joined  by  Mirzd  Kh4n,  who  accompanied  him  wherever
he  went.  And  the  Emperor  looked  upon  him  as  his  own  son ;  for,
as  has  been  explained,  Mirza  Kh&n*s  father  and  mother  were  of  the
same  family  as  the  Emperor's  father  and  mother.

On  account  of  straitened  circumstances  [Mirz4  Khdn]  did  not
accompany  the  Emperor  on  that  expedition,  but  stayed  behind  in
the  service  of  his  grandmother  Shah  Begum.  As  various  reports
came  in  concerning  the  Emperor  and  the  Mirz&s  of  Khor4s4n,  the
motherly  love  of  Shdh  Begum  began  to  bum  in  her  heart,  and  she
persuaded  herself  that  the  Emperor  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of
the  Mirz&s  of  Khor&s4n.  Also,  on  account  of  the  enmity  that
existed  between  Sultdn  Husain  Mirz4  and  Abu  Said  Mirz4,  and
the  bloodshed  which  had  resulted  therefrom,  [she  thought]  that  the
Emperor  would  never  escape  from  their  power.  Moreover,  reports
which  seemed  to  confirm  this  view  were  constantly  arriving ;  and
it  was  considered  time  to  put  Mirzd  Khdn  upon  iJlie  throne  in  the
Emperor's  place.

When  this  plan  was  suggested  to  my  father,  he  would  not  hear
of  it.  An  altercation  followed  which  led  to  much  sorrow ;  and  the
distress  of  Sh4h  Begum  gave  ofience  to  the  Khdns.  All  this
brought  much  trouble  upon  my  father,  who  at  last,  being  exas-
perated, said  :  *'  As  you  will  not  be  warned  by  me,  I  will  no  longer
be  your  adviser."  Nevertheless,  the  Emperor's  Amirs,  who  used
to  come  daily  out  of  the  castle  to  wait  on  my  father,  continued  to
come,  as  was  their  wont.  After  one  month's  bickering  and
quarrelling,  Sh&b  Begum  had  quite  resolved  to  set  Mirzd  Khan  up
in  the  Emperor's  place.^  My  father  [then]  said  privately  to  the
Amirs,  that  it  was  not  necessary  for  them  to  come  to  him  any  more.
When  the  Amirs  re-entered  the  castle,  my  father  went  away  to  a
place  called  Ab-Baran,  which  is  a  day's  march  from  Kdbul,  and
withdrew  himself  fiom  public  affairs.  Shah  Begum  and  some
Moghuls  [then]  read  the  Khutba  in  the  name  of  Mirza  Khdn,  and
did  their  utmost  to  seize  the  fort  of  K4bul ;  whereupon  numerous

^  The  term  used  Ib  Mddar-i-Kaldn-i-Sahahi—Ii.

'  The  whole  of  this  paragraph  is  more  or  less  obsoure,  and  very  badly  arranged ;
but  the  sense  is,  I  think,  preseryed  in  the  translation.  Erskine  has  made  it
nearly  the  same. (See  Hiilory  i.,  pp.  24^-50.)

Digitized  by

Google

Bdbars  Expedition  into  Kltordsdn.  199

fights  ensoed.  Shdh  Begum  sent  a  letter  of  entreaty  to  my  father
to  return,  and  as  entreaties  and  remonstrances  were  unlimited,  my
father  could  not  choose  but  come.  During  twenty-four  days  they
laid  siege  to  the  castle  of  E4bul;  and  in  the  course  of  these
operations  the  Emperor  himself  arrived.^

CHAPTER  XL

BABAR pAdISHAh'S JOURNET INTO KHORAsAn, AND HIS  RBTURN FROM

khorAsAn  TO  kAbul.

When  B4bar  Padishdh  went  in  pursuit  of  Jahangir,  he  came
upon  him  in  the  mountains  of  Haz4ra.  After  holding  a  consultation,
it  was  determined  that  the  wisest  plan  would  be  to  proceed  into
Ehor4s4n,  as  with  some  aid,  the  sons  of  Sultan  Husain  Mirzd  might
be  enabled  to  withstand  Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n.  So  with  this  object  in
view,  they  turned  towards  Khorasan,  and,  on  their  arrival,  these
two  brothers  were  warmly  welcomed  by  the  people  of  Khorasan,
while  the  two  Mirzas,  for  their  part,  were  ovei  joyed  at  their  advent.
But  there  existed  no  accord  between  these  two  Mirz&s.  In  the  first
place,  Bdbar  Fadishih  knew  that  they  were  not  at  one ;  he  also
knew  that  without  unity  they  could  eflfect  nothing.  Moreover,
Jah4ngir  Mirzd,  from  having  indulged  too  freely  in  wine  drinking,
was  suffering  so  severely  from  dysentery,  [from  a  disease  called]
VMki^  and  a  burning  fever,  that  it  was  generally  reported  that  Ehadija

^  This  episode  has  no  doubt  been  Blurred  over  by  the  author,  in  order  to  excul-
pate hill  fa&ier  as  &r  as  possible,  but  there  can  be  no  question  that  the  latter  was
guilty  of  a  serious  act  of  treachery  towards  Baber,  and  that  he  gave  his  counten-
ance to  the  schemes  of  Shah  Begum.  Baber  himself  seems  to  have  regarded
Muhammad  Husain  Mirza  as  one  of  the  chief  movera  in  the  plot,  and  evidently
felt  his  ingratitude  acutely,  though,  with  characteristic  generosity,  he  spared  the
Mirza*s  life,  when  the  latter  fell  into  his  hands.  In  recording  the  event  in  his
"*-  Memoirs,"  Baber  concludes  the  account  of  it  thus :  **  Muhammad  Husain
Mirza  had  conducted  himself  in  such  a  criminal  and  guilty  way,  and  had  been
Actively  engaged  in  such  mutinous  and  rebellious  proceedings  that,  had  he  been
cut  in  pieces  or  put  to  a  painful  death,  he  would  only  have  met  with  his  deserts.
As  we  were  in  some  degree  of  relationship  to  each  other,  he  having  sons  and
daughters  by  my  moth^s  sister  Ehub  Nigar  Khdnim,  I  took  that  circumstance
into  consideration  and  gave  him  his  liberty,  allowing  him  to  set  out  for  Khor&s&n.
Tet  this  ungrateful  thankless  man,  this  ooward,  who  htid  been  treated  by  me  with
such  lenity  and  whose  life  I  had  spared,  entirely  forgetful  of  this  benefit,  abused
and  scandalised  my  conduct  to  Shaibdk  Khan  rSh&hi  Beg  Khan].  It  was  but  a
riiort  time,  however,  before  Shaibdk  Khan  put  him  to  death  and  thus  sufficiently
avenged  me : —
[  Venet] :  **  Deliver  over  him  who  injures  vou  to  Fate,

For  Fate  is  a  servant  that  will  avenge  your  quarrel.**

(See  Memoirs,  p.  218.)

Digitized  by

Google

200  Bdbar's  Expedition  into  Khordsdn.

Begum  (^ter  her  old  fashion)  had  put  poison  in  his  wine. For
these  and  other  reasons,  he  took  his  leave  and  returned  to  E&bul.

On  reaching  the  Haz4ra  mountains,  he  learnt  that  Mirz&
Kh4n  and  Muhammad  Husain  Ifirzd  were  besieging  E4bul.
Leaving  the  heavy  baggage  with  Mirzd  Jah4ngir  (who,  being  sick,
was  travelling  in  a  litter)  he  advanced  with  all  possible  speed
towards  the  passes  of  Hindu  Rush,,  accompanied  by  a  small  body
of  men.  [The  passes]  were  covered  with  snow.  They,  however,
crossed  them  with  much  difficulty,  and  advanced,  by  forced
marches,  upon  E4bul.  At  dawn  one  day  they  made  a  rapid
descent  upon  the  town.  Those  who  were  outside  the  fort  of  Edbul,
and  had  been  attacking  those  within,  crept  into  concealment  on
every  side,  while  those  who  were  within,  rushed  out  and  carried
off,  as  plunder,  all  that  feU  in  their  way,  both  within  and  without
[the  walls].  The  Emperor,  in  conformity  with  his  affectionate
nature,  without  ceremony,  and  without  a  sign  of  bitterness — nay,
with  the  utmost  cheerfulness  and  good-humour — came  into  the
presence  of  his  step-grandmother,  who  had  withdrawn  her  affection
from  him,  and  set  up  her  grandson  as  king  in  his  stead.  Sh4h
Begum  was  confounded  and  abashed  [at  his  generous  behaviour]
and  knew  not  what  to  say.

The  Emperor,  going  down  on  his  knees,  embraced  her  with  great
affection,  and  said :  "  What  right  has  one  child  to  be  vexed  because
the  motherly  bounty  descends  upon  another?  The  mother's
authority  over  her  children  is  in  all  respects  absolute."  He
added:  *'I  have  not  slept  all  night,  and  have  made  a  long
journey."  So  saying,  he  laid  his  head  on  Sh&h  Begum's  breast  and
tried  to  sleep ;  he  acted  thus  in  order  to  reassure  the  Begum.  He
had  scarcely  fallen  asleep,  when  his  maternal  aunt,  Mihr  Nig&r
Eh&nim,  entered.  The  Emperor  leapt  up  and  embraced  his
beloved  aunt  with  every  manifestation  of  affection.  The  Eh4nim
said  to  him :  "  Your  children,  wives  and  household  are  longing  to
see  you.  I  give  thanks  that  I  have  been  permitted  to  behold  you
once  again.  Else  up  and  go  to  your  family  in  the  castle.  I  too
am  going  thither."

So  he  went  to  the  castle,  and  on  his  arrival  all  the  Amirs  and
people  began  to  thank  God  for  His  mercy.  They  made  the  dust
of  the  feet  of  that  loving  king,  powder  [hM]  for  their  eyes.
Then  the  Eh&nim  conducted  Mirzd  Ehdn  and  my  father  before
the  Emperor.  As  they  approached,  the  Emperor  came  out  to
receive  them.  The  Ehdnim  then  said  :  "  Oh,  soul  of  your  mother  I
I  have  also  brought  my  guilty  grandson  and  your  unfortunate
brother  to  you.  What  have  you  to  say  to  them?"  and  she
pointed  to  my  father.  When  the  Emperor  saw  my  father,  he
instantly  came  forward,  with  his  wonted  courtesy,  and  smiling,
openly  embraced  him,  made  many  kind  inquiries  and  showed  him

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Bdbat^s  Sojoiirn  in  Kdbiil  20 1

marked  affection.  He  then  embraced  Mirzd  Khan  in  like  manner,
and  displayed  a  hundred  proofs  of  love  and  good  feeling.  He
conducted  the  whole  ceremony  with  the  utmost  gentleness  of
manner,  bearing  himself,  in  all  his  actions  and  words,  in  such
a  way  that  not  a  trace  of  constraint  or  artifice  was  to  be  seen  in
them.  But  however  much  the  Emperor  might  try  to  wear  away
the  rust  of  shame  with  the  polish  of  mildness  and  humanity,  he
was  unable  to  wipe  out  the  dimness  of  ignominy  which  had
covered  the  mirror  of  their  hopes.

My  father  and  Mirza  Kh4n  obtained  permission  to  go  to
Kandahar.  The  Emperor,  by  entreaty  and  unremitting  attentions,
detained  Sh4h  Begum  and  the  Kh&nim.  When  they  reached
Eandahdr,  Mirza  Khan  remained  there,  while  my  father  proceeded
in  the  direction  of  Fardh  and  Sistan,  with  the  intention  of  carrying
out  that  holy  resolve  which  he  had  made  while  in  Khor&sdn.  On
his  arrival  in  the  territory  of  Far&h,  he  heard  of  the  conquest
of  Ehorasdn,  by  Sh&hi  Beg  Kh4n,  and  the  overthrow  of  the
Chaghat4i.  The  high  roads  and  passes  were  in  a  dangerous  state,
being  obstructed  and  even  closed.  Thus  my  father  was  prevented
from  executing  his  purpose. This  happened  in  the  year  912.^

OHAPTEE  Xn.

BBIEP  ACCOUNT  OF  bIbAB  pJLdIShIh'S 80JOI7BN  IN  kJLbUL, AND  A FEW
STORIBS  CONNECTED  THEREWITH.

It  has  been  already  related  that  the  Emperor,  in  the  year  909,
conquered  Kabul  from  Mukim,  son  of  Zunnun  Arghun.  [On  this
expedition]  he  was  accompanied  by  nearly  20,000  men  of  the  army
of  Khusrau  Sh4h.  Now  as  Edbul  was  unable  to  support  so  great
a  host,  the  Emperor  resolved  to  invade  Hindust&n.  But  on  that
expedition,  from  ignorance  of  the  roads,  they  frequently  came  to
places  where  provisions  were  scarce,  and  most  of  their  cattle
perished.  Although  there  was  not  a  single  battle  in  that  campaign,
yet  the  army  suffered  a  severe  reverse.  On  their  return  to  Kabul,
many  of  Khusrau  Sh4h's  men  deserted  him.  At  this  crisis  8h4h
Begum  and  my  father  arrived  in  K4bul,  and  the  Emperor  proceeded
to  Khor&sdn  (as  has  been  related  above).

After  we  went  to  Kandah&r,  in  consequence  of  all  that  had
passed,  the  people  were  reduced  to  the  most  afflicting  want  and
distress. In  addition  to  this,  Jah&ngir  Mirz4,  who  was  at  that

»  1606-7  A.D.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

202  Bdbar's  Sojourn  in  KdbuL

time  the  stay  and  support  of  the  Emperor's  government,  died.
After  the  occurrence  of  these  events,  he  [the  Emperor]  wished  to
strengthen  his  power  by  whatever  means  were  available,  in  order
that  he  might  be  firmly  and  securely  established  in  K4bul.  To
this  end,  he  sent  an  envoy  to  Sh4h  Beg  in  EandahiLr.  Sh4h  Beg
was  the  son  of  Zunnun  Arghun,  who  was  one  of  the  greatest
Amirs  of  Mirz4  Sult4n  Husain,  under  whom  he  had,  during
thirty  years,  conducted  the  affairs  of  Eandah&r  and  Zamind4war.
Although  he  was  a  brave  and  intelligent  man,  yet  by  denying
himself  everything,  he  amassed  great  wealth.  He  had  gone  in
person  to  Ehor4s4n  to  assist  the  Mirz&s.  When  Sh4hi  Beg  Ehin
attacked  Herat,  he  alone  went  out  to  oppose  the  advance  of  the
Uzbeg  army,  and  in  the  engagement  which  ensued,  he  was  slain.
He  was  succeeded,  in  Kandahar,  by  his  son  Sh4h  Beg.  [As  has
been  stated]  the  Emperor  sent  an  envoy  to  Sh4h  Beg,  saying:
*'  Since  the  children  of  Mirz4  Sult4n  Husain  have  been  extirpated,
it  is  fitting  that  the  gates  of  obedience  and  service  should  be
opened,  and  at  this  time  there  is  no  one  in  the  palace  of  our
sovereignty,  who  is  more  worthy  than  yourself  of  occupying  the
highest  post."  But  in  spite  of  all  the  Emperor's  assurances  and
promises,  Shdh  Beg  refused ;  for  he  had  higher  views  of  dignity
than  that  of  entering  into  a  state  of  dependence.  To  be  brief,
this  refusal  led  to  an  outbreak  of  hostilities.  The  Emperor
marched  to  Kandahar,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  town  a
battle  was  fought,  and  that  a  very  bloody  one.  Finally  victory
declared  for  the  Emperor;  the  dust  of  flight  filled  the  eyes  of
Shah  Beg  8  men,  and  they  were  thrown  into  such  confusion  that
they  were  unable  to  enter  the  fort  of  Eandah&r.  Thus,  without
haggage,  they  crept  on  towards  Sui,*  and  his  good  fortune  was
changed  to  desolation.  So  much  treasure  fell  into  the  Emperor's
hands,  that  [the  gold  and  jewels]  and  Shdhrukhi  ^  were  divided
among  the  army  by  the  shieldful.

Mirz4  KhAn,  who  had  stayed  in  KandahAr,  now  joined  the
Emperor,  who  returned  to  Kabul  laden  with  much  spoil  and
treasure,  having  left  SultAn  Nasir  Mirz4,  younger  brother  of
Jahangir  Mirz4,  in  charge  of  Kandahdr.

On  his  retuni  to  K4bul  [important]  news  came  from  Badakhsh4n.

*  From  the  abridged  MS.  translation  at  the  Britiah  Miisenm,  Erskine  appears
to  have  read  this  name  Svoit  in  the  text  used  by  him.  If  that  is  the  correot
reaiHng,  probably  SUA  in  the  place  indicated.  In  our  texts,  it  roRy  read  Bvhi  as
well  as  ^ttt. For  Baber's  account  of  these  transactions,  see  itftftnoiri,  pp.  224  mq,

*  The  Shdhrukhi  was  a  coin  reckoned  by  Erskine  to  be  of  the  probable  value
of  9|  or  9f  pence,  when  the  rupee  was  worth  two  shillings.  (Hutory^  i.  Append.
E.)  I  infer  tbat  it  derived  its  name  from  Sliah-Rukh  Mirza,  fourth  son  of
Timur,  who  rei|?ned  in  Kliorasnn,  etc.,  from  1405-1447,  and  that  it  was  a  silver
Cdin,  thonffh  Col.  Mallcson,  in  liis  Lffp  of  Akbar^  oills  it  '*a  gold  coin  of
Khora^an  **^  (p.  53).  The  Shdhrukhi  docs  not  uppenr  in  Mr.  S.  Lane  Poole's
tables.

Digitized  by

Google

Bdbar's  Sojourn  in  Kdbul,  203

When  the  oonntry  of  EhTisran  Shah  ^  was  annexed  by  the  Uzbeg,
some  of  the  people  of  Badakhshan  refused  to  submit,  and  on
several  ocoasions  put  the  Uzbeg  army  to  flight,  wherefore  every
commander  of  1000  men  [mtV  'haz&r\\  attained  the  rank  of  Sardar,
and  plaoed  the  heads  of  the  Uzbeg  on  their  pikes.'  Their  leader
was  Zobir  B4ghi.^  ^

Sh4h  Begum  laid  claim  to  Badakhshin,  saying :  "  It  has  been
our  hereditary  kingdom  for  3000  years.*  Though  I,  being  a
woman,  cannot  myself  attain  to  the  sovereignty,  yet  my  grandson
Mirz4  Eh&n  can  hold  it.  Males  descended  from  me  and  my
children  will  certainly  not  be  rejected."  The  Emperor  assented,
and  Sh&h  Begum  and  Mirzd  Kh&n  departed  for  Badakhsh&n.^  My
brother  Muhammad  Sh4h,  who  was  in  the  service  of  the  Begum,
accompanied  them.  As  they  approached  Badakhshdn,  Mirza
E[h4n  was  sent  forward  to  announce  to  Zobir  Baghi  the  arrival  of
the  Begum,  and  to  explain  her  intentions.

No  sooner  had  Mirza  Eh4n  left  them,  than  the  army  of  Abd  Bakr
marching  from  Eashghar  came  upon  them.  All  the  men  and  the
Begum,  and  all  who  were  of  the  party,  were  seized  and  carried
off  [to  Eashghar]. An  account  of  Ab4  Bakr  ®  will  shortly  follow.

Mirzd  Eh4n  [hearing  of  this  event]  hastened  to  2i0bir  Eaghi.
At  first  iZobir  treated  him  with  respect  and  honour,  but  afterwards
paid  so  little  attention  to  him,  that  he  allowed  only  one  or  two
servants  to  wait  on  him.  When  things  had  gone  on  a  short  time
in  this  way,  Yusuf  Ali  Eukild4sh  Divdna,  one  of  Mirz4  Eh4u*s
old  retainers,  conspired  with  eighteen  other  persons,  and  one  night
fell  on  iZobir,  slew  him,  and  set  Mirzd  Ehan  upon  the  throne.
From  that  date,  913,  till  the  end  of  his  life,  Mirz&  Eh4n  reigned
over  Badakhsh4n.

>  Ehusran's  country  was  the  province  of  Kwadva^  or  more  properly  the  territory
of  KaUaghdnj  of  which  Kundiu  was  the  capital.

*  The  words  are  Bir-ddri^  but  the  passage  makes  no  sense  when  translated
literally.  Erskine  (in  a  note  to  his  MS.  in  the  British  Museum)  suggests  a
pun  on  the  words  Sarddr  and  Sir-ddri,  by  adopting  which,  the  translation
may  stand  as  given  here.

'  That  is,  a  native  of  Bagh — a  hill  district  in  north-western  Badakhsbdn,  on
the  left  bank  of  the  Panjah,  and  opposite  KuULb.

*  Shah  Begum  (Khau  Mirza's  grandmother)  was,  as  we  have  been  told  above,
the  daughter  of  Shah  Sultan  Muhammad,  King  of  Badakhshan,  and  the  widow
of  Yunus  Khan,  Baber*s  maternal  grandfather. (See  also  Baber,  p.  281.)

'  This  Mirta  Khan  (or  properly,  perhaps.  Khan  Mirta)  was  the  eon  of  Sultan
Mahmud  Mirza,  who  was  third  son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said  and  an  uncle  of  Baber.
Mirza  Ehan  was  ruler  of  Hisar,  Ehatldn  and  Badakhsbdn.  His  mother  was
Nigar  Klianim,  a  sister  of  Baber's  mother.  Consequently  he  was  Baber's  cousin,
both  by  the  father's  and  the  mother's  side.  His  proper  name  was  SuUan  Vais
Mirza,  and  it  is  not  clear  how  he  acquired  that  of  Khin  Mirta  or  Mirta  KJian,
One  of  his  brothers,  Baisaughar  Mirza,  had  been  murdered,  and  another,  called
Sultan  Mdsud  Mirza,  had  been  blinded  by  Khusrau  Shah.  (See  Baber,  pp.  128
and  287).

*  Abd  Bakr  was  a  Dughl&t,  and  brother  of  the  author's  uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza.

Digitized  by

Google

204  Shdhi  Be^s  Conquest  of  Kkwdrizm.

After  the  conquest  of  Kandah4r,  Bdbar  remained  in  E4btil.
Those  Moghnls  of  Khusrau  Sh&h's  army  who  had  stayed  behind,
to  the  number  of  about  3000,  now  raised  Abdur  Bazzdk  ^  to  the
throne,  and  declared  against  the  Emperor,  who  had  only  500  men
left  with  him.  However,  with  these  500  men,  he  met  them  in  a
pitched  battle.  This  was  on^of  the  Emperor's  greatest  battles.
After  much  giving  and  taking  of  blows  and  countless  hand-to-hand
figbts,  the  Emperor  broke  and  routed  the  foe.  In  that  action  he
personally,  and  alone,  engaged  five  different  champions  of  the
enemy:  Ali  Sayyid  Gur,  Ali  Sinar,  and  three  others,  and  with
brave  strokes  and  sword  cuts,  put  them  all  to  flight.

In  this  same  battle,  Abdur  Bazzdk  Mirzd  fell  into  the  Emperor's
hands,  but  was  treated  with  generosity  and  set  at  liberty.

After  these  events,  the  affairs  of  the  Emperor  began  to  march
favourably  in  E4bul,  where  he  remained  until  the  year  916  [1510],
when  Shdhi  Beg  Eh4n  was  slain,  as  will  be  mentioned  below.

CHAPTEB  Xm.

EXPSDinON  OF  SHIhI  BEQ  EHiN  INTO  KHWIRIZM.  HIS  OOHQUEST  OF
THAT  COUNTRY.  HIS  RETURN  TO  mIvArI-UN-NAHR,  AND  HIS  MARCH
INTO  EHORIsIn.

When  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan  had  disposed  of  the  Moghuls,  Sultan  Said
Khan  fled  to  Moghulistan,  and  my  father  to  Khor&s4n.  Some  [of
the  Moghuls]  were  put  to  death  and  others  imprisoned.  Shih
Begum  was  sent  into  Ehor&sdn,  while  the  rest  of  the  Moghuls,  [Sh4hi
Beg]  carried  with  him  into  Khwdrizm.  He  besieged  [Khw4rizm]
for  eleven  months.  Chin  Sufl  was  then  acting  as  governor  for
Mirz4  Sultdn  Husain.  During  all  that  time  no  one  came  in
answer  to  his  appeal  for  help;  and  he  fought  some  marvellous
battles,  which  even  now  are  celebrated  among  the  Uzbeg.  At
length,  in  consequence  of  the  dearth  of  provisions,  most  of  his  men
died  of  hunger,  and  resistance  became  no  longer  possible ;  then
Shdhi  Beg  Kh4n  took  the  citadel,  put  Chin  Sufi  to  death,  and
returned  to  Samarkand.

As,  before  the  conquest  of  Ehw4rizm,  he  had  laid  siege  to  Balkh
for  six  months,  and  had  left  that  enterprise  only  half  completed

*  Abdur  Bazz&k  was  another  of  Baber's  nnmerouB  courinB.  He  waa  a  son  of
Saltan  Ulngh  Beg  Mirza  of  Kabul  (son  of  Abu  Said),  and  had  reigned  in  Kabul
until  expelled  by  Muhim,  eon  of  Zunnun  Arghun,  late  in  1503  or  early  in  1504.
(firakine,  But,  i.,  pp.  211,  215,  216,  277,  etc.)

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Murder  of  the  Author's  Father.  205

(as  has  been  related  above),  he  now  went  and  conqnered  Balkh,
and  then  returned  to  Samarkand,  where  he  passed  the  winter.  In
the  spring  he  set  out  against  Khorasan.  Mirz4  Sultan  Husain
had  died  the  year  before,  and  his  sons,  in  their  indolence  and
indifferenoe,  could  not  come  to  any  mutual  agreement.  When  the
news  arrived  of  Shahi  Beg  Ehdn's  approach,  everything  was
thrown  into  dire  confusiou  and  disorder.  Every  one  had  some
suggestion  to  offer,  but  no  conclusion  could  be  arrived  at,  [and
while  they  were  still  engaged  in  these  arguments]  news  came  that
Shahi  Beg  Ehdn  had  reached  Herat.  Mirza  Zunnun  led  out  an
army  [to  oppose  him],  but  [saw]  that  it  was  too  late  to  dam  the
torrent  with  earth,  or  to  smother  the  blazing  fire  with  dust,  and
he  was  himself  slain  at  the  first  onset  of  the  Uzbeg,  who  forthwith
entered  and  plundered  Herat.  The  Mirzas  all  fled  in  different
directions,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  army  did  not  even  know
how  Herat  had  been  taken.  Thus  easily  fell  that  important  city
with  its  vast  population.

Mir  Muhammad  Salih,  one  of  the  Amii-s  of  Sult&n  Abu  Said,
whose  name  is  to  be  found  in  the  "  Lives  of  the  Poets "  \iaz\dra\
discovered  the  date  of  this  event,  namely,  912,  in  the  words  FaXk-
i'Khordadn^*'  Conquest  of  Khorasan."

CHAPTEE  XIV.

THB  REISON  WHT  MT  FATHER,  MUHAMMAD  HUSAIN  KURKJLn,  SUR-
RENDERIED  HIMSELF  TO  ShIhI  BBG  KHIn.  MARTYRDOM  OF  MY
KOBLE  UNCLE,  SULTIn  MAHMUD  KHIn, AND  OF  MY  FATHER.

My  father  and  Mirza  Ehan  left  Kabul  and  went  to  Kandahar,
whence  the  former  proceeded,  with  the  intention  of  making  the
Holy  Pilgrimage,  while  Mirz4  Kh4n  remained  at  Kandah&r.
[My  father]  had  resolved  to  go  to  Sistan,  and  taking  the  road  by
Neh  and  Band&n,  to  reach  Kirman ;  since  if  he  travelled  by  way
of  Khordsan,  he  would  be  hindered  by  the  importunities  of  the
Mirz4s.^  On  nearing  Far4h  he  was  met  by  a  body  of  fugitives,  in
the  most  pitiable  state  imaginable,  who  told  him  that  Sh4hi  Beg
Kh4n  had  seized  Khords4n  in  the  manner  above  related.^

When  they  reached  Farah  they  found  that  the  roads  on  every
side  were  unsafe,  and  there  was  nothing  left  for  my  father  but  to
remain  where  he  was.  Thus  he  stayed  three  months  in  Far&h.
On  Shdhi  Beg  Kh&n  hearing  of  his  whereabouts,  he  sent  him  a.

>  The  Ttirki  MS.  has:  **  the  Mirzas  would  press  him  to  stop." — ^B.
*  The  Torki  adds :  **  And  we  have  fled  from  him ;  having  said  this  they  gave
him  an  aooonnt  of  the  victory,  as  we  have  given  it  above." — ^B.

Digitized  by

Google

2o6  Murder  of  the  Author's  Father

moBt  oonrteous  invitation  [which  he  aooepted],  and,  accompanied
by  the  magnates  of  Fardh,  he  went  to  visit  Shdhi  Beg  Khan,  who
was  then  encamped  at  TTl&ng  Kahdastan,^  in  great  magnificence ;
but  the  limits  of  this  Epitome  prevent  me  from  giving  fall  par-
ticulars. No  one  wonld  ever  have  imagined  that  change  and
destruction  were  coming  over  his  affairs  within  a  few  years ;  it  is
wonderful  how,  in  a  short  space  of  time,  all  went  to  ruin,  in  a  way
that  will  be  briefly  described.

In  short,  he  received  my  father  with  every  mark  of  attention
and  honour,  and  showered  down  innumerable  presents  upon  him.

After  this  [Sh4hi  Beg  Khan]  went  against  Kandahar,  where
Sultan  N&sir  Miiz4  ^  was  [ruling],  as  has  been  mentioned  above.
He  laid  siege  to  the  town  for  forty  days,  and  then,  having  made
peace,  he  returned,  carrying  away  much  booty.  During  the  same
year  there  were  battles  between  the  sons  of  Mirza  Sultdn  Husain
and  Shahi  Beg  Kh4n's  Sult4ns  at  Mashhad,  Nishdpur,  Astardb4d,
and  Turshiz.  In  all  these  encounters  the  Uzbeg  were  victorious,
and  the  Chaghat4i  defeated.  A  great  number  of  the  Chaghat4i
were  slain,  and  those  who  escaped  became  so  scattered  that  they
were  never  again  united.

At  this  time,  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan,^  who  was  Sultan  (and  many

>  KahdaalAn  appears  to  have  been  a  spot  in  the  near  vicinity  of  Herat  It  lay
probably  to  the  north  or  north-east  of  the  city,  bat  is  not  marked  on  maps  now  in
use. (See  Barbierde  Meynard  in  Jowm,  Awai,.,  5  S^rie,  xvii,  p.  509.)

'  Nisir  Mirza  was  Baber*8  vonngest  brother,  and  had  been  appointed  Governor
of  Kandahar,  when  Baber  took  that  place  in  1507.  (Erskine,  Mid.^  L,  pp.  89  and
279.)

*  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan  Tor  Ubaid  Ullah  Sultan)  was  son  of  Mahmnd  Sultan
(Shahi  Beg^s  brother),  and  afterwards  (in  1538)  became  Khik^n,  or  over-lord,  of
the  Uzbegs.  It  may  be  remarked  here,  that  the  Uzbeg  government  was  not  an
absolute  sovereigntv,  but  was  committed,  bvan  electorate  of  chiefs,  into  the  hands
of  one  of  their  number.  Sir  H.  Howorth  likens  it  to  that  of  Russia  in  mediiBval
times,  and  says  :  '*  It  was  broken  up  into  a  number  of  appanages,  each  under  its
own  Khan,  and  all  subservient  to  an  over-chief  who  was  styled  Khikdn,  and
answered  to  the  Grand  Prince  in  Russia,  who  hnd  a  similar  feudal  authority  over
the  appanaged  princes.  On  the  death  of  a  Khak&n  the  apnanaged  princes  met
together  to  choose  a  successor;  and  their  choice, as  is  usual  in  the  East,  generally
fell  upon  the  senior  representative  of  the  house,  not  necessarily  the  heir  by  right
of  primogeniture,  but  the  oldest  living  representative  of  the  senior  line.  It  has
followed,  in  consequence,  that  in  many  notices  of  Bokhara  there  has  not  been  a
sufficient  discrimination  between  the  line  of  Khik^inB,  or  chief  Khana,  and  those
of  the  appanaged  princes,  and  the  two  lists  have  been  oonfuaed  together."
(Vol.  II.,  p.  718.)  Ubaid  Ullah's  private  appanage  was  Bokhara,  as  mentioned
in  the  text ;  but  he  was  practically  Sultan  of  the  Uzbegs  at  the  time  in  question,
though  Kuch-Kunji  (otherwise  Kuchum  Khan)  was  nominally  in  that  position.
It  appears  that  Ubaid  Ullah  ruled  the  whole  of  Transoxiana,  including  Bokhara,
during  two  reigns  before  he  was  himself  proclaimed  K^^lf^n  in  940  h.,  or
1588  A.D.  .  These  reigns  were  Kuch-Kunji,  1510-80,

Abu-Said,  1580-.S8,  and  they  were  followed  by
Ubaid  Ullah  as  Khdk^n,  1588-39.

Mr.  Stanley  Lane  Poole  points  out  the  **dual  character  of  Shaibani's  dynasty,**
and  remarks  that,  though  Samarkand  was  the  capital,  '*  there  was  generally  a
powerful  and  sometimes  an  independent  government  at  Bokhara."  (See
8.  L.  Poole's  Cat.  OrietU.  Coina  in  Brit.  ifiM.,  VII.,  p.  xiv ;  also  Stokvis,  Manuel
(fHi0t.,e(o.,p.  157.)

Digitized  by

Google

and  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn.  207

▼iotories  were  in  his  name),  was  going  to  Bokh&rd,  which  was  his
hereditary  seat  of  govemment.  He  begged  my  father  to  allow  me
to  accompany  him.  The  reason  for  this  was  that  Habiba  Snltan
Ehanish  (who  has  been  mentioned,  in  the  detailed  list  of  my
father's  children,  given  above)  had  been  married  by  Shdhi  Beg
Khan  to  XJbaid  Ullah  Sultdn,  after  [my  father's]  flight  from
Shahr-i-Sabz.  So,  with  my  father's  permission,  I  was  taken  to  my
sister  in  Bokhi.r4.

In  the  winter  of  the  same  year,  Shdhi  Beg  £Lh&n  went  to  attack
the  Kazak  in  M4yar4-an-Nahr,  that  is  to  say,  the  Dashi-i-Eipchak.^
Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n  [first]  took  my  father  to  Bokhard,  but  when  he
went  to  attack  the  Eaz4k,  he  left  him  in  Samarkand.  He  returned
in  the  spring,  and  then  set  out  for  Khor4s&n,  entrusting  my  father
to  the  care  of  Timur  Sult4n,  his  son,  to  whom  he  had  given
Samarkand.  So  my  father  spent  that  spring  in  Samarkand,  while
I  was  living  with  my  sister  in  Bokhar4.

At  this  time  news  came  that  Sultdn  Mahmud  Ehdn  had  left
Moghulist4n  and  was  advancing  on  Andijdn,  with  complaints  and
demands.  Sh4hi  Beg  Ehan  sent  to  beg  my  £Ather  to  come  into
Ehordsan.  My  father  accepted  the  invitation  and  went.  He  felt
his  end  was  drawing  near,  and  on  the  tablet  of  his  fate  he  recog-
nised the  hue  of  martyrdom.  His  hope  of  safety  being  more
slender  than  a  spider's  web,  he  devoted  all  his  attention  and
energy  to  providing  for  my  safety,  so  that  should  his  precious  soul
be  drowned  in  the  whirlpool  of  martyrdom,  I  at  least,  on  the
shores  of  safety,  should  be  protected  from  risks  and  dangers.

On  his  first  visit  to  Herat,  my  father  had  sought  out  a  pious  and
talented  man  to  be  my  teacher,  whose  name  was  H4fiz  Miram.  He
was,  indeed,  a  pious  and  ascetic  man  \Jakir\  possessed  of  numerous
talents.  He  could  recite  the  Eor4n  [with  special  attention  to  the]
modulations  of  the  voice,  and  wrote  the  Ncukh  T&cdih  hand  and  others
beautifully.  My  father  was  much  pleased  with  him ;  and  during
[his  stay  in  Herat]  this  man  was  his  constant  companion,  whether
in  the  time  of  contentment  and  pleasure,  or  in  the  days  of  trial
and  sorrow. He  instructed  me  in  the  Eor4n  and  in  calligraphy.

When  the  time  came  for  starting  for  Ehorisan,  my  father
showed  me,  in  private,  much  kindness,  and  did  his  utmost  to
console  and  comfort  me,  saying:  "Your  uncle  Sultan  Mahmud
Ehdn  has  arrived  [from  Moghulistan]  in  spite  of  my  having
warned  him  both  by  word  and  in  writing.  I  said  to  him,  *  After
the  conquests  of  Amir  Timur,  and  the  devastation  [takhnb]  of
Moghulistan,  your  forefathers,  though  dispersed,  remained  in  that

>  This  is  the  literal  translation  of  the  passage,  hut  it  seems  to  imply  the  fallacy
of  regarding  the  Dasht-i-Kipcbdk  and  Mdvard-an-Nahr  as  one  and  the  same
region.  The  meaning  most  likely  is  that  Shahi  Beg  returned  to  Mdvard-un-Nahr
to  attack,  or  check,  the  Koz^ks  of,  or  firom,  the  Dasht-i-Kipchik.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

2o8  Murder  of  the  Authot^s  Father

country,  and  were  awaiting  their  opportunity.  Contenting  them-
selves with  scanty  clothing  and  simple  food,  they  took  care  of
their  people  and  their  army.  Thus  passed  150  years,  until  the
sun  of  your  noble  nature  rose  in  Moghulistan,  which  is  an  eastern
clime  and  the  quarter  where  rise  the  lights  of  the  Ehakans.  At
the  middle  season  of  your  youth,  in  the  manner  of  your  noble
ancestors,  you  restored  the  fallen  Moghulistan  to  its  former  glory,
and  together  with  Yunus  Ehdn,  you  seized  that  opportunity,
which  had  been  long  sought  by  your  forefathers,  and  brought
under  your  control  those  states  which  they  so  earnestly  coveted.
Thus  you  spent  nineteen  years  in  complete  success.  It  is  now
clearer  than  the  day,  that  the  power  of  your  victorious  forces  can-
not be  compared  with  the  numbers  of  Shahi  Beg  Eh4n's  army.
Hence  it  is  your  obvious  duty  to  remain  in  Moghulistan,  both  for
your  own  personal  safety  and  for  the  welfare  of  your  people.  For
though  you  may  there  be  exposed  to  many  hardships,  that  is
better  than  extinction.  It  is,  moreover,  quite  evident  to  me  that
should  you  ever  fall  into  the  hands  of  Sh4hi  Beg  Kh4n,  he  will
subject  you  to  the  most  painful  of  tortures,  and  will  deem  your
death  his  own  life :  on  no  acootmt  whatever  will  he  spare  you.'

*<  Thus  did  I  use  all  the  arguments  in  my  power  to  dissuade  the
Khan,  but  as  often  as  my  remonstrances  reached  him,  certain  base
advisers,  in  their  short-sighted  ignorance,  represented  to  him  that
*  Muhammad  Husain  Mirz4  does  not  wish  you  to  go,  because  lately
Shdhi  Beg  Eh&n  has  shown  him  great  favour,  and  he  knows  that
your  going  would  put  an  end  to  this.'  To  absurd  representations
of  this  kind  they  would  add :  *  It  is  our  firm  conviction  that  if
[Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n  has  treated  Muhammad  Husain  Mirz4  well,  in
return  for  his  services,  he  will  treat  a  hundred,  nay,  a  thousand,
times  better,  you  who  have  done  so  much  more  for  him  '].^  After  the
expression  of  all  these  impossible  and  absurd  ideas,  the  following
answer  was  sent  back :  *  Oh  I  Dd^A '  (that  is,  oh !  Friend,  for  these
two  had  become  'friends'  according  to  the  Moghul  custom,  in
their  youth,  and  called  each  other  by  this  name  up  to  the  end  of
their  days) :  '  how  strange  it  is  that  you  should  be  leading  such
a  happy  life  in  Khorasdn  and  Samarkand,  in  spite  of  your  know-
ledge of  the  pitiable  state  of  affairs  in  Moghulistdn  I  How  can
you  allow  me  to  be  exposed  to  so  much  suffering  ? '  But  taking
my  words  and  advice  as  mixed  with  evil  intentions,  he  failed  to
recognise  their  truth,  and  came.  This  instance  is  not  the  same  as
the  former  one.^  Gei*tainly  Sh4hi  Beg  Khdn  will  fill  the  cup  of
the  Eh&n's  hopes  with  tbe  fatal  wine  of  martyrdom,  and  whatever
dregs  remain  he  will  cause  me  to  drink. I  now  commit  you  to

>  ThuB  in  the  Turki;  in  tho  Persian  texta  the  sense  appears  to  be  the  same,
bnt  is  obscure. — ^B.
*  That  is,  the  times  have  changed  now.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

and  of  Sultan  Mahmnd  Khan,  209

the  care  of  God.  Though  your  company  would  be  dearer  to  me
than  my  own  life,  I  fear  Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn  would  not  allow  it,  and
I  prefer  the  idea  of  your  life  being  prolonged,  even  though  it
involve  the  bitterness  of  separation ;  you  must  therefore  bear  my
absence  patiently.  Patience  is  bitter,  but  it  has  a  sweet  fruit.
Bemember  that  when  the  father  dies,  the  children  are  his  heirs.
You  also  have  become  an  heir.  If  the  bird  of  my  life  escape  from
the  net  of  Shahi  Beg  Khdn's  intentions  against  me,  we  shall  have
the  joy  of  meeting  again.

*'  ]Now  as  your  teacher,  Hdfiz  Miram,  is  a  devout  man,  and  is  not
on  friendly  terms  with  any  of  our  people,  if  anything  happens  to
me,  he  will,  with  the  advice  of  my  partisans,  be  able  to  look  to
your  interests.  Moreover,  his  family  is  also  in  Khorusan.  It  is
just  a  year  since  he  left  them  to  follow  me ;  therefore  he  is  going
along  with  me.

''  I  entrust  you  to  the  care  of  Maulana  Muhammad.  Be  careful
to  pay  attention  to  all  he  may  say  to  you,  for  he  is  my  vicar
\]thalifa\y  His  father  was  my  instructor  and  guide.  From  the
day  of  his  birth  up  to  the  present  time,  he  has  been  my  confidant
and  companion.  I  trust  that  he  will  always  bo  your  support  in
times  of  trouble,  and  that  he  will  protect  you  through  thick  and
thin."

Having  thus  threaded  many  pearls  of  good  counsel  upon  the
string  of  wisdom,  and  hung  them  on  the  attentive  ear  of  my
understanding,  my  father  departed  to  go  and  wait  on  Shahi  Beg
Khdn,  who  was  at  that  time  besieging  Kalat.^  To  all  outward
appearance  he  received  my  father  with  friendship,  and  then
allowed  him  to  proceed  to  Herat.  When  he  reached  Herat,  a
person  was  sent  after  him  [to  put  him  to  death].  Sultan  Mahmud
Kh4n  and  his  children  were  killed  on  the  river  of  Khojand.^  My
father  was  buried  in  the  mausoleum  of  Amir  Sayyid  Husaini,
while  Sultan  Mahmud  was  placed  in  the  mausoleum  of  Shaikh
Muslih-ud-Din,  Khojandi.

This  happened  in  the  year  914.  For  the  Khan,  the  chronogram
Lah'idaryd'i'KJiojand  [the  banks  of  the  river  of  Kliojand]  was
discovered. [Here  follow  some  blessings  upon  the  martyrs  .  .  .  .]

*  Or  successor. That  is— he  is  to  take  my  place  as  your  father.

^  Kelat-i-N6diri — as  the  modem  name  is — in  Khorasiu.

'  The  texts  are  very  corrupt  here. I  have  followed  the  Turki.— R.

f

Digitized  by

Google

210  Adventures  of  the  Author,

CHAPTER  XV.

SOME  OF  THE  ATJTHOR's  OWN  ADVENTURES.

After  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn  had  put  my  father  to  death,  he  despatched
an  emissary  to  Bokhara  with  instructions  to  throw  me  intx)  the
river,  and  thus  send  me  to  join  those  who  had  been  drowned  in
the  river  of  Khqjand.  Although  the  order  was  an  obnoxious  one
to  Ubaid  Sultan,  who  received  it  (for  he  was  married  to  my
sister),  still  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  refuse.

But  how  excellent  a  thing  it  is  that  the  Almighty  has  power
to  check  the  violent  and,  if  He  so  wills  it,  to  restrain  the  hand  of
the  cruel :  so  that,  without  His  consent,  the  tyrant  cannot  touch
a  single  hair  of  any  man's  head.  And  this  is  confirmed  by  the
events  of  this  disturbed  timo.^  For,  in  his  glory,  vanity  and
magnificence,  see  how  many  royal  families  Shahi  Beg  Khan
destroyed,  and  the  number  of  princely  houses  he  annihilated!
For  example.  Sultan  Husaini  ^  and  his  followers,  to  the  number
of  nearly  200,000  persons ;  Sultan  Mahmud  and  the  Mirzas  with
nearly  50,000  men — these  all  suffered  at  the  hands  of  Shdhi  Beg
Kh4n.  Again  the  royal  houses  of  Samarkand  and  of  Mirza  Sultan
Ahmad:  to  what  extremities  were  they  not  all  driven  by  this
tyrant  ?  In  a  short  space  of  time,  he  scattered  to  the  winds  of
annihilation  many  governors  and  officials,  so  that  the  dust  of  their
existence  formed  towers  on  the  plains  of  non-existence,  which
reached  up  to  the  heavens,  and  from  the  mists  of  their  sighs  a
frightful  whirlwind  arose  in  the  deserts.

This  king,  who  could  commit  such  atrocities  and  practise  such
violence,  was  resolved  on  my  death,  at  a  time  when  I  had  only
just  passed  the  half  of  my  childhood,  and  did  not  know  my  right
hand  from  my  left,  nor  good  from  evil ;  nor  had  I  the  ability  to
use  my  strength — nay,  I  had  not  enough  intelligence  to  execute
my  own  wishes.  I  had  become  an  orphan,  without  father  or
mother,  my  paternal  uncles  were  scattered  and  my  maternal
uncles  slain.  I  had  not  [even]  an  elder  brother  who  could  share
in  my  grief;  no  friend  or  relation  to  comfort  me.

That  year,  914,^  proved  one  of  disaster  for  the  Sultans- of  the
day  in  general,  and  of  massacre  for  the  Moghul  Khakans  in
particular.  When  God  willed  that  all  my  uncles,  aunts,  and
cousins  should  be  carried  off  in  different  directions  and  murdered,

>  Tho  Tnrki  MS.  says :  This  is  explained  by  what  liappoticd  to  myself. — ^R.
'  That  is :  Sultan  Husain  Mirza,  Baikara,  whoso  poetical  name  was  Hnsaini,
as  we  have  seen.
»  1508-9  A.D.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Adventures  of  the  Author,  2ii

I  was  the  weakest  and  youngest  of  the  family.  The  strangest
part  of  it  all  is  that  they  wore,  everyone,  at  a  great  distance
[from  Sh4hi  Beg  Khdn],  as  has  been  mentioned  above,  but  being
helpless,  nay,  having  no  alternative,  they  came  and  threw  them-
selves into  calamity  and  were  murdered ;  while  I  escaped,  though
in  the  town  of  Bokhara,  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean  of  Sh4hi  Beg
Khan's  dominions.  Since  the  decree  of  the  will  of  the  Almighty
had  not  been  issued  for  my  destruction,  but  for  my  preservation,
Shdhi  Beg  Khan,  with  all  his  boasting  and  power,  was  not  able
to  touch  one  hair  of  the  head'  of  that  helpless  little  child  whom  ho
wished  to  kill.  (Thanks  be  to  God,  the  Lord  of  Heaven  and
Earth,  the  Possessor  of  Might,  Majesty,  and  Power.)

The  details  [of  my  escape]  are  briefly  as  follows :  at  the  above
date,  my  father  went  to  Khordsan  and  was  put  to  death  by  Shdhi
Beg  Khan,  who  also  sent  an  emissary  to  Bokhdrd  to  kill  me.  And
although  this  was  an  act  that  would  have  been  distasteful  to
XJbaid  Ullah  Khan,  it  was  quite  impossible  for  him  to  disobey
the  orders  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.  He  handed  me  over  to  the
emissary,  with  instructions  to  throw  me  into  the  river  Amu,  that
I  might  join  those  others  who  had  been  drowned  in  the  ocean  of
divine  mercy.  He  was  engaged  in  investigating  some  of  the
property  whioh  my  father  had  left  [in  Bokhdrd],  alleging  that  the
Mirzd  had  said  to  him :  "  Bring  my  property  along  with  my  son."
This  occasioned  a  delay  of  a  few  days.  During  this  interval
Mauldnd  Muhammad,  who  was  my  master  and  my  father's
Khalifa,  went  to  see  Hazrat  Mauldnd  Muhammad  Kdzi,  who
asked  him  :  ^'  When  are  you  starting  for  Khordsdn  ?  "  Mauldna
Muhammad  replied :  "  We  have  decided  to  depart  in  a  few  days."
Hazrat  Mauldnd  then  said :  "  Come  back  in  a  little  while,  I  have
something  I  wish  to  say  to  you."  After  a  time,  when  the  assembly
of  faithful  men  had  dispersed,  Mauldnd  Muhammad  came  in  again,
and  Hazrat  Mauldnd  asked  him :  **  How  could  I  consent  to
Muhammad  Husain  Mirzd  going  to  ELhordsdn,  and  now  to  the
Mirza's  son  going  there  too  ? "  Mauldnd  Muhammad  replied  :
"  Verily,  we  are  taking  him,  fully  trusting  in  God's  protection."
Then,  said  Hazrat  Mauldnd :  *'  The  Holy  Prophet,  when  his  life
was  threatened  by  the  infidels  of  Mekka,  did  not  put  his  trust
in  standing  still  and  being  captured,  but  took  to  flight.  There-
fore, what  you  should  now  do  is,  trusting  in  God,  to  take  the
Mirzd  and  flee ;  and  if  danger  or  cause  of  fear  presents  itself,  I
am  your  security. You  ought  certainly  to  set  out  without  delay."

Mauldna  Muhammad  used  to  say :  "  I  never  had  any  such
thought  in  my  mind,  but  those  words  of  Hazrat  Mauldnd  had  a
wonderful  effect  on  me,  and  the  determination  to  go  and  seize  you
and  carry  you  away,  took  so  strong  a  hold  of  me  that  as  soon  as  I
had  left  him,  I  turned  my  whole  attention  to  our  flight."

p  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

212  Mauldnd  Muhammad  Kdzi,

Having  reached  this  point  in  my  narrative,  I  think  fit  to  give
some  details  of  the  life  of  Hazrat  Maulana,  who  has  been  mentioned
above,  in  connection  with  my  illness.

CHAPTER  XVL

HAZRAT  MAULANA MUHAMMAD  eXzI.

His  name  was  Muhammad  bin  Bnrhdn-nd-Din.  His  father  was
one  of  the  intimate  friends  of  Kazi  Im4d-ud-Din  Maskin,  Samar-
kandi,  and  for  this  reason  Hazrat  Maulana  was  known  as  Mauldna
Muhammad  Eazi.  After  he  had  acquired  a  certain  proficiency  in
the  sciences,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  theology — walking
in  the  way  of  God — and  to  this  end  he  repaired  to  Khor&sAn.  On
leaving  Samarkand,  he  went  to  pay  his  respects  to  that  much
beloved  and  respected  example  of  piety,  Khw&ja  N4sir-ud-Din
Ubaidullah,  who  lived  there.  He  asked  Hazrat  Mauland  where
he  was  going.  The  latter  replied  that  he  was  going  to  Ehor&sAn.
Again  he  asked  :  **  Are  you  going  for  the  sake  of  study,  or  for  some
other  object?'*  A  certain  student,  who  was  in  the  company  of
Hazrat  Mauland,  said :  ''His  greatest  desire  is  to  become  a  darvish."
His  Holiness  [the  Khw&ja]  telling  them  to  wait  a  little,  went  into
his  garden,  and  after  a  prolonged  absence  returned,  bringing  two
letters  for  Hazrat  Maulana  :  one  was  a  letter  of  recommendation
to  Khwaja  Kilan,  the  son  of  Maulana  Sad-ud-Din  Kashghari  ;  the
other  contained  an  account  of  the  rules  and  practices  of  devotees,
which he had written, and which he now gave to Hazrat

Maulana.

♦  ♦  ♦  ♦  ♦

[flere  follows  an  epitome  or  summary  of  the  contents  of  the
**  Tract,"  which  contained  commendations  to  the  study  of  divine
truths,  through  following  Muhammad,  and  warnings  against
associating  with  dancing  and  singing  (or  howling)  darvishes,  and
against  listening  to  heretical  doctrines.]

In  the  Salsalat  ul  Arijin^  one  of  Hazrat  Maulana's  works,  it  is
written  :  "  It  was  most  strange  that  in  spite  of  the  Khwaja's
admonition,  my  desire  to  visit  Khorasan  was  in  no  way  lessened ;  I
at  length  obtained  Khwaja  Nasir-ud-Din's  sanction  to  depart,  and
set  out  for  Khorasan.  But  as,  on  the  road,  incidents  occurred
which  prevented  me  from  proceeding  further,  I  returned  and
entered  the  Khwaja's  service."  The  writer  remained  some  time
with  him,  and  managed  his  private  kitchen ;  and  so  great  t\'as  his

Digitized  by

Google

Matildnd  Mukamtnad  KdzL  Z13

devotion  that  he  used  himself  to  come,  on  foot,  and  lay  the  meals
before  Hazrat  Ishdn.  He,  by  degrees,  won  his  entire  confidence,
and  Ilazrat  Ishdn  used  to  address  Hazrat  Mauland  in  the  presence
of  all  his  most  distinguished  guests.^

In  all  matters,  the  most  perfect  intimacy  and  trust  existed
between  them — so  much  so,  that  Mauldnd  Muhammad  became  an
object  of  jealousy  to  the  other  companions  of  Hazrat  Ishdn  and  his
children.  And  as  this  gave  rise  to  much  unpleasantness,  Hazrat
Maulana set out for Rhorasan in company with Maulaua

Muhammad  Amin,  who  was  also  a  disciple  of  Hazrat  Ishan.  •  .  .

♦  *  ♦  ♦  ♦

And  there  they  spent  six  months  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  society
of  Maulana  Abdur  Bahman  Tami.  Hazrat  Maulana  then  entered
the  service  of  Hazrat  Ishan  in  Tashkand,  who  encouraged  him
and  honoured  him  with  the  respectful  style  of  "  Ishdn."  .  .  •  .

«  »  *  *  *2

It  was  the  fashion,  at  that  time,  for  every  Sultan  to  have  one  of
Hazrat  Mauland's  disciples  for  a  spiritual  guide.  Thus  Sultan
Abu  Said  Mirzd  entertained  Mauland  Kdsim ;  Sultan  Ahmad  Mirza,
Mauldnd  Khwaja  Ali ;  and  all  the  Sultans  observed  this  practice.
Sultan  Mahmud  Khan  was  guided  by  Hazrat  Maulana.  I  have
heard  this  last  say :  "  I  was  once  praising  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan
to  Hazrat  Ibhan,  when  ho  remarked  that  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn
was  indeed  a  very  capable  young  man,  but  he  had  one  fault,  which
was  a  hinderance  to  his  advancement.  A  pupil,  with  such  an
instructor,  ought  to  do  all  that  his  instructor  told  him,  and  not
rely  on  his  own  judgment ;  but,  like  a  hawk,  he  should  pounce  down
upon  whatever  prey  he  is  sent  against,  whether  or  no  he  has  strength
sufficient,  and  should  not  hesitate  and  doubt,  as  the  Khdn  did.  It
was  this  that  prevented  him  rising 'to  that  elevation  which  his
people  had  expected  of  him."

In  a  word,  after  the  death  of  Hazrat  Ishdn,  Hazrat  Maulana
went  to  Tdshkand,  where  he  was  welcomed  with  honour  and
devotion,  and  where  he  remained  until  the  destruction  of  Tdshkand,
when  he  migrated  to  Bokhdrd.  At  that  time  Mahmud  Sultdn,
brother  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,  and  father  of  Ubaid  UUah  Khdn,  was
ruler  of  Bokhdrd,  as  representative  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.  He
cultivated  the  society  of  Hazrat  Mauldnd  and  was  his  disciple  for
one  winter,  which  greatly  pleased  Hazrat  Mauldnd,  who  for  this
reason  stayed  on  in  Bokhdrd  from  that  date  to  the  year  916,  when
my  father  went  to  Khordsdn^  and  was  martyred. It  has  been

*  This  paTagraph  is  very  obscure. — R.

'  The  omissions  here  consist  of  some  irrelevant  anecdotes  concerning  these
holy  men.  They  are  obscure  in  style,  Mr.  Ross  informs  me,  and  not  worth
translating:.

»  The  Turki  text  adds  here  :— "  I,  also,  was  at  Bokhara."  The  date  should
bo  914.

Digitized  by

Google

214  Mauldnd  MiiJtammad  Kdzu

mentioned  in  my  own  story,  and  will  be  related  again,  how  kind
Hazrat  Maulana  was  to  me.

When  the  Eazilbash  *  overran  the  land  (as  will  be  described),
Hazrat  Mauldna  left  Bokhara  and  went  to  Andijan  and  Akhsi,
where  he  resolved  to  stay.^  There,  many  people  became  Nakhsh-
bandi  under  his  guidance,  thus  attaining  high  rank,  and  are,  to
this  day,  a  blessing  in  the  land,  where  they  propagate  the  doctrines
of  their  sect.  An  account  of  these  men  will  be  given  below,  in
connection  with  the  biographical  notice  of  Hazrat  Makhdumi.
Wherever  in  this  history  Hazrat  Maulana,  absolutely,  is  mentioned,
Hazrat  Maulana  Muhammad  Kazi  is  indicated.  Further  details  of
his  life  will  be  given  in  their  proper  place.

*  It  frequently  liappens  at  the  present  time,  in  Central  Asia,  that  the  word
Kizil-hdsh  is  used  to  denote  almost  any  Shiab,  but  more  especially  a  Persian,  or
Khorasani,  Shiah,  or  the  descendant  of  one.  In  the  sixteenth  century,  i  t  is  evident
from  many  passages  in  Erskine's  History ^  that  the  native  authors  utilised  by  him
meant  the  Persians  in  general,  when  they  spoke  of  the  KizU-bdsh ;  and  it  appears
to  be  in  this  sense  that  Mirza  Haidar  makes  use  of  the  name.  The  Turki  words
mean  literally  Red  Head,  but  more  properly  Red  Cap.  The  people  who  originally
bore  the  name  of  Kizil-bdsh  were,  according  to  Sir  J.  Malcolm,  the  seven  Turki
tribes  who  had  been  the  chief  supporters  of  Shah  Ismail  during  his  early,  suc-
cessful, campaigns  in  the  west  of  Persia,  and  whom  he  (Hstinguished  by  a
particular  dress,  which  included  a  red  cap.  The  names  of  these  tribes  are  given
by  the  historian  as :— <1)  the  Ustajlu,  (2)  the  Shamlu,  (3)  the  Nikallu,  (4)  the
Baharlu,  (5)  the  Zulkadar,  (6)  the  Kuiar,  and  (7)  tlie  Afshar.  He  adds :— "  Tho
swords  of  these  tribes  were  consecrated  ....  to  the  defence  of  the  Shiah  religion ;
and  a  sense  of  that  obligation  has  survived  the  existence  of  tho  family  by  whom
it  was  first  created  " — i.e.,  the  Sufavi.  The  Kizil-bash  would  thus  date  from  tho
first  decade  of  the  sixteenth  century ;  but  James  Fi-nscr,  writinti^iu  the  first  half  of
tho  eighteenth  century,  attributes  their  institution  to  Shaikh  Uaidar,  tho  father  of
Shall  Ismail,  which  would  make  tho  date  a  little  earlier.  SirH.  Yule  defines  tho
name  as  that  *'  applied  to  certain  tribes  of  Turks  who  have  become  naturalised,
as  it  were,  in  Persia,  and  have  adopted  the  Persian  language ;  they  are  in  fact
Persianised  Turks,  like  the  present  royal  race  and  dominant  class  in  Persia."
The  name  is  now  chiefly  heard  in  Afghanistan  and  the  adjoining  regions  of  India,
Peraia  snd  Turkistan.  In  the  two  first  of  these  localities  they  appear,  from  what
Mr.  Denzil  Ibbetson  tells  us,  to  bo  rcgnrded  as  the  residue  of  the  army  with
which  Nddir  Shah  invaded  India.  However  this  may  be,  it  appears  that  they
aro  fairly  numerous  in  Afghanistan,  and  that  there  are  some  1200  families  of  them
ill  the  city  of  Kabul  alone,  where  they  form  not  only  an  important  military
colony,  but  also  a  political  party,  in  possession  of  much  influence.  (Malcolm,
Hist,  of  Persia,  i.,  pp.  502-3 ;  Yule,  Glossary,  p.  814  ;  Ibbetson,  Punjab  Census,
1881,  i.,  p.  278 ;  Fraser,  Hist,  of  Nadir  ShaJi,  1742,  p.  135.)

3  This  is  a  looselv  expressed  sentence,  but  has  been  translated  as  it  stands
in  the  original.  It  docs  not  determine  whether  the  Maulana  stayed  at  Andijan
or  at  Akhsl.

Digitized  by

Google

Flight  of  the  Autlior  from  BokMrd.  215

CHAPTEE  XVir.

RErURN TO THE  HISTORY.

Before  entering  upon  the  life  of  Hazrat  M&ulan4, 1  had  reached
that  point  in  my  narrative  where  Hazrat  Mauldna  Muhammad,
who  was  my  tutor  \yM6id\  had  resolved  that  he  would  escape  with
me.  Though  he  had  previously  had  no  intentions  of  this  sort,
the  idea  gained  complete  ascendency  over  his  Christ-like  mind.
With  this  intent  he  came  to  me,  in  private,  and  asked  me  :  *'  Do
you  propose  to  go  to  Khordsan  now  ?  "  I  replied :  **  Yes,  I  must
go,  for  I  have  been  sent  for."  He  then  said  :  "  It  is  quite  certain
that  Shahi  Beg  Khdn  will  put  you  in  chains,  but  what  he  will  do
with  you  after  that  I  can90t  say."  Then  he  added:  "I  have
something  to  tell  you,  but  will  only  do  so  on  the  condition  that
you  will  reveal  the  secret  to  no  one."  I  then  took  a  very  solemn
oath  and  swore  I  would  not  repeat  what  he  told  me,  after  which
he  said :  "  They  have  murdered  the  Mirzd  in  Khorasan,  and  have
now  sent  for  you.  They  have  given  orders  that  you  are  to  bo
bunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  Eivor  Amu,  and  thus  to  be  despatched
to  the  next  world.  If  you  know  of  any  one  who  will  carry  you
off,  then  fly  at  once.

For  death  attacks  alike  both  old  and  young,
And  fills  with  fear  the  minds  of  all  it  strikes :"

Fear  and  dismay  overcame  me,  and  I  began  to  weep ;  I  longed
to  flee,  in  the  hope  of  saving  my  life.

The  Mauland  said :  **  You  must  keep  this  secret  well  hid ;  be
on  the  watch :  for  the  moment  I  give  the  sign  you  must  hasten
away."

He  had  a  friend  who  lived  outside  the  town  of  Bokhara,  and
arranged  that  I  should  pass  a  few  days  in  perfect  concealment
in  this  man's  house.  He  informed  certain  of  my  father's  servants
of  this  plan,  and  aiTanged  that  on  the  night  of  our  flight,  these
servants  should  take  some  saddle  horses  and  start  in  a  certain
direction,  in  order  to  make  the  spies  think  that  we  had  fled  on
horseback,  and  [thus  cause  them]  to  scour  distant  roads,  searching
only  the  outside  of  the  town  while  not  suspecting  the  inside.

Accordingly,  the  same  night  that  we  took  refuge  in  the  house  of
this  friend,  the  servants  took  the  horses  and  carried  out  the  orders
which  had  been  given  them.  All  turned  out  as  we  had  expected.
The  spies  imagined  that  we  had  escaped  on  horseback,  and  no  one
made  search  for  us  in  the  town. We  remained  fourteen  days  in

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

2i6  Flight  of  tlie  Author  from

the  house  of  that  excellent  man.  After  this  lapse  of  time,  we
joined  a  party  of  donkey-drivers  and  accompanied  them  to  the
town  of  Hisar  Sh&dmdn.  In  the  bazar  of  that  town  one  of  my
father's  seiTants  recognised  Maulan4  Muhammad.  Fearing  lest
he  might  trace  us  out,  we  at  once  fled  from  Hisar.  On  the  road
I  fell  from  my  donkey,  and  dislocated  my  left  elbow.  We  dared
not  re-enter  the  town,  or  the  bazar,  and  in  the  villages  we  could
not  find  a  bone-setter ;  thus  I  endured  the  greatest  agony  for  two
months.

At  Fushang,  one  of  the  villages  in  Ehatlan,  we  spent  some  days
in  the  house  of  one  of  its  holy  men,  who  was  known  as  Khwaja
Habib  TJUah.  He  was  a  benevolent  person,  and  after  d  iligent  search
found  a  bone-setter,  whom  he  brought.  The  bone-setter  broke  the
joint  again,  and  set  it.  I  had  not  been  able  to  use  my  arm  for
two  months,  and  from  the  intensity  of  the  pain,  had,  during  all
that  time,  never  slept  at  night.  That  night,  however,  I  fell
asleep.

One  day,  while  we  were  there,  a  soldier  came  in  and,  placing  his
quiver  in  a  comer,  sat  down.  Having  scrutinised  the  company,
he  came  quickly  forward,  and  said  with  great  respect  and  courtesy :
"Does  not  Khwaja  MauUna  Muhammad  know  me  again?  I  was
Mirza  Muhammad  Husain's  cook  at  such  and  such  a  time;  in
those  days  I  rendered  you  good  service."  And  as  he  gave  such
clear  proofs  of  recognition,  it  was  vain  to  disclaim  his  acquaintance.
Moreover,  MauMna  Muhammad  seemed'  much  pleased,  gave
expression  to  his  joy,  and  began  to  enumerate  the  good  qualities  [of
that  man].  That  day  and  night  they  spent  in  friendly  inter-
course. When  day  broke  and  he  was  about  to  depart,  he  stood  in
the  doorway  of  the  house,  in  a  respectful  attitude,  and  said :  "  Oh,
Khwaja  Maulana  Muhammad,  blessings  be  upon  your  zeal  and
fidelity.  It  was  a  noble  and  a  suitable  act  of  yours  to  take  Mirza
Husain's  son  and  escape  with  him.  If  I  had  had  any  power  or
means,  I  would  have  given  my  assistance;  but  I  have  not.  However,
if  I  can,  in  any  way,  further  your  plans,  I  will  hasten  to  bear  my
part." So  saying  ho  departed.

A  little  while  after,  there  came  an  intimate  friend  of  Khwaja
Habib  UUah,  who  whispered  something  in  the  Khwdja's  ear;
whereat  the  Khwaja's  colour  fled  from  his  face.  He  immediately
took  the  man  apart,  and  said :  *'  Now  repeat  what  Shaikham  ^
said."  The  man  replied :  "  Shaikham  told  me  to  go  and  tell
Khwaja  Habib  XJllah  that  'this  man'  has  fled  with  the  son  of
Mirza  Muhammad  Husain  ;  the  child  is  the  cousin  of  Mirza  Khan

^  The  only  word  in  the  texts  is  Shaikham,  but  no  doubt  refereuce  is  made  to
Shaikham  Mirza,  who,  our  author  informs  us  lower  down,  was  an  unde  of  Ubaid
TJUah  Khan.  He  was  ^yemor  of  Karshi,  and  was  killed,  in  1512,  at  the  taking  of
that  place  by  the  Persians,  under  Mir  Najm.

Digitized  by

Google

Bokhdrd  to  Badak/ts/idn.  217

and  of  Btibar  Pddi^bah.  Ferliaps  the  Khwaja  is  keeping  him  in
his  house,  and  in  this  case  he  will  incur  the  enmity  of  Hamza
Sultan.  ^  Behold,  I  am  going  to  inform  the  Navab  Matlab  Sulttin
[of  the  matter],  so  that  the  house  and  home  of  Khwdja  Habib
UUah  may  be  swept  away  with  the  broom  of  plunder,  its  dust
mount  to  the  skies,  and  its  vapour  be  diffused  over  the  earth."
With  these  words  he  went  away.

This  Matlab  Sultdn  was  the  son  of  Hamza  Sultan,  a  one-eyed
wretch,  whose  inward  vision  was  rendered  blinder  than  his  out-
ward sight  by  the  darkness  of  tyranny.  All  the  oppressed  of  those
countries  united,  at  his  court,  in  a  common  protest  against  his
tjranny.  The  leaves  of  the  trees  of  these  people's  lives  were
constantly  trembling  from  the  violence  of  his  blasts.

Khwaja  Habib  UUah  remained  for  a  while  buried  in  thought,
then  raising  his  head,  he  said :  "  No  one  has  delivered  you  over  to
me  as  hostages.  I  will  not,  from  fear  of  being  hold  responsible  *
for  a  charge  I  have  not  taken  upon  myself,  deliver  this  little  child
into  the  hands  of  death.  To  do  so,  would  be  conformable  neither
with  the  teachings  of  Islam  nor  the  dictates  of  humanity.  Rise
up  and  flee  whithersoever  you  may  be  safe.  And  whatever
chastisement  may  fall  upon  me,  on  your  account,  I  will  consider  as
treasure  laid  up  for  mo  in  the  next  world."  "Wo  then,  having
returned  him  thanks,  bade  him  farewell,  and  sot  out  at  once.

At  this  time  Shah  Ruzi-ud-Din,  who  was  a  Chiragh  Kush,  appeared
in  Badakhshan.  His  followers  used  to  put  to  death  every  one  they
met,  deeming  it  a  means  of  salvation,  and  reward  in  the  next  world.
He  had  caused  all  the  roads  to  be  stopped,  so  that  it  was  impossible
for  us  to  journey  into  Badakhshan.  Shah  Razi-ud-Din  was  one  of
the  cursed  Mulahida  of  Kohistan,  whose  story  is  to  be  found  in  all
histories.  Most  of  the  people  of  Badakhshan  are  adherents  of  that
sect.  They  hold  the  world  to  be  without  beginning  or  end
\kadim\  and  do  not  believe  in  resurrection  or  a  future  state.
They  say  that  dining  the  lifetime  of  the  Prophet,  it  was  incumbent
on  all  to  abide  by  the  statutes  of  the  Holy  Law ;  but  at  the
pn  sent  time,  the  sole  duty  of  man  is  to  Bjicak  fitting  words  and
to  be  faithful  to  their  meaning.  All  other  ordinances  are  futile.
Sexual  intercourse  [vaii]  with  their  own  kindred  is  lawful,  and
the  enjoyment  of  it  is,  in  no  respect,  dependent  on  marriage ;  thus,
should  one  have  a  passion  for  somebqdy  with  whom  its  indulgence
is  practicable,  it  is  lawful  to  gratify  it — be  it  with  daughter  or
son  or  mother.

*  An  Uzbeg  chief  who  bad  at  ono  time  been  inBaber'g  Bcrvice,and  afterwards,
joining  Shahi  Beg,  turned  against  him.  Finally,  in  1611,  he  fell  into  Baber's
hands  and  was  executed  as  a  traitor,  together  with  two  other  Uzbeg  leaders.  At
the  time  in  question  here,  Hamza  was  master  of  Uis^r.  (Erskine,  flt«^,  i.,
pp.  145,  315,  etc.)

*  The  Turki  has :— no  one  has  made  me  responsible  for  you.— R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

2i8  Flight  of  the  Author  from

It  is  also  lawful  for  them  to  take  one  another's  lives  or  property.
[In  fact]  the  sect  of  Muldhida  is  the  worst  form  of  heathenism  in
the  world.  ^ At  the  time  of  the  conquests  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khan,

*  It  is  noticeable  that  Mirza  Haidar  uees  the  word  Chirdgh-Kush  or  ''lamp
oxtinguisheis,'*  as  a  synonym  of  Muldhiday  or  **  the  impious,"  for  the  sect  he  is
alluding  to.  Properly,  the  designation  of  this  sect  of  Shiahs  is  Ismaili,  and  they
take  their  name  from  Ismail,  the  eldest  son  and  nominated  succeasor  of  Im^
Jdfar  Sddik.  They  consider  Ismail  as  the  trae  heir  to  the  Im&mat,  and  do  not
acknowledge,  as  lawful,  the  succession  of  his  brother  Musa,  and  of  the  five  last
Imams.  One  branch  of  the  sect  flourished  in  Africa  under  the  Egyptian  dynasty
of  the  Khalifd,  while  another  became  established  in  Northern  Persia,  where  it
was  known  by  the  name  of  Ali-Ildhi,  as  well  as  by  that  of  lamaili.  It  is  not  clear,
however,  that  all  the  eastern,  or  Asiatic,  Ismaili  hold  the  doctrines  of  the  Ali-
Ildhi,  Mr.  Golebrooke  quotes  the  book  called  Ddhittdn,  by  Mullah  Mohsin
Fani,  from  which  I  transcribe  the  following  extract,  as  it  brings  to  light  the
meaning  and  origin  of  the  name.  *'  The  Ali-Ilahijah  hold  that  celestial  spirits
which  cannot  otherwise  be  known  to  mankind,  have  frequently  appeared  in
palpable  shapes.  God  himself  has  been  manifested  In  human  form,  but  especially
in  the  person  of  Ali  Murteza,  whose  image  being  that  of  Ali-Uliab,  or  Ali-God,
these  sectaries  deem  it  lawful  to  worship.  .  .  .  They  imagine  that  Ali  Murteza
when  he  quitted  this  earth,  returned  to  the  sun,  which  is  the  same  with  himself;
and  hence  they  call  the  sun  Ali  Ullah.  This  sect  does  not  admit  tlie  authority  of
the  Koran  as  it  is  now  extant  ....  they  believe  in  tlie  transmigration  of  God
into  the  persons  of  the  Imams.  Some  of  them  affirm  that  the  manifestation  of
the  divine  being  in  this  age  of  the  world  yras  Ali- Ullahj  and  after  him  his  glorious
posterity  ;  and  they  consider  Muhammad  as  a  prophet  sent  by  AU-Ulluh*  When
God,  say  they,  perceived  Muhammad's  insufficiency.  Ho  Iiimself  assumed  the
human  form  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  the  prophet.'  The  names  of  Muldhida
and  Chirdgh-Kush  are  of  course  terms  of  reproach  only,  while  that  of  AssasHns,  by
which  the  Ismaili  were  known  to  Europeans  in  the  Middle  Ages,  was  derived  from
their  practice  of  drugging  their  victims  with  J/asAwfe,  a  j:reparation  of  hemp,
and  thus  acquiring  the  designation  of  Hdshishin.  Fiddici,  another  name  under
which  they  are  found  mentioned,  means  ''  the  devote.l,"  and  was  applied  to  them
as  devotees,  or  instruments,  of  the  Chief  of  the  Assasfins—iho  Sliaikh  ul  Jabal —
or,  as  the  literal  translation  ran  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain.
Full  and  interesting  accounts  of  the  IsmaUi,  the  Ali-Hdhi^  and  of  the  dynasty  of
Uio  Hiishishin  or  Assassins^  who  ruled  for  about  170  years  from  their  strongholds
in  the  Kuhistan  of  Northern  Persia,  will  be  found  in  the  works  mentioned  below.
There  is  no  space  here  to  go  further  into  the  general  subject ;  but  it  must  bo
remarked  that  when  Mirza  Haidar  speaks  of  the  **  cursed  3fuldhida  of  Kuhislan,"
it  is  to  the  Assassins  of  the  Kuhistan  of  North- Wcs'ern  Persia  thut  he  alludes.
The  chief  stronghold  of  the  **  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain  "  was  at  Aldmat  (the
"  Eagle's  Nest"),  about  thirty-two  miles  N.E.  of  Kazvin,  until  the  joower  of  the
dynasty  was  broken,  by  the  Mongol  army  under  Hulaku,  in  1256,  when  the  sect,
as  11  political  body,  came  to  an  end.  In  Mirza  Haidar's  time  (as  indeed  down  to
the  present  day)  they  seem  to  have  flourished  in  the  remote  hill  districts  of
Badakhshan  and  tho'  region  of  the  Upper  Oxus;  and  from  time  to  time,  no
doubt,  some  of  their  chiefs*,  liko  Shah  Kazi-ud-Din  of  the  text,  obtained  a  certain
degree  of  power  in  those  localities.  Here,  in  our  times,  they  are  known  as
Isnmili  antl  albo  as  Agha-Khdniy  from  the  name  of  one  of  their  *'  Pirs,"  or
religious  leaders,  who  took  up  his  residence  in  Bomljay  in  18-10,  and  whose
successors  still  live  there.  The  inhabitants  of  Bhighnau,  lioshiin,  etc.,  still  carry
tribute  to  him  at  Bombay,  and  reverence  him  as  the  chief  of  their  religion.

As  regards  the  name  of  Chirdgh-Kush^  it  may  be  added  that  it  is  a  term  which
has  been  applied  to  many  religious  sects,  besides  those  of  the  Shialis :  indeed,  it
was  applied  to  the  early  Christians,  and  is  meant  to  stigmatise  their  proceedings
as  immoral  or  olwcene,  by  conveying  the  charge  that,  after  their  gatherings  for
worship,  the  lamps  are  extinguished  and  obscene  orgies  indulged  in.  Thus  it
is  merely  an  abusive  term,  invented  by  intolerant  religious  opponents.  In  our
times,  at  any  rate,  (as  far  as  tlie  European  traveller  among  them  has  opportunities
of  judging)  their  morality  is  no  worse  than  that  of  their  neighbours.

The  best  notices  of  these  sects  and  their  hiatory,  will  be  found  in  Yule  s  Marco

Digitized  by  VjL^UV  IC

Bokkdrd  to  Badakks/tdn.  219

the  people  of  Badakhsban  (as  Las  been  mentioned)  were  acting
independently ;  still,  tbey  bad  never  neglected  to  pay  tribute  to
Bazi-nd-Din,  who  was  a  Fir-zdda,  or  to  bis  ancestors.  At  tbat
time  Shah  Bazi-ud-Din  was  brought  from  Sistan  into  Badakhsban.
But  before  his  arrival  Mirza  Khan,  as  already  stated,  had  come,
and  having  killed  Zobir,  set  himself  up  as  king.  As  the  people
of  B4gh,  as  well  as  most  of  the  Hazdra  of  Badakhsbdn,  attached
themselves  to  him,  his  supremacy  was  absolute.  All  the  inhabi-
tants of  Badakhsban,  both  far  and  near,  openly  and  privately,
adhered  to  him.

When  we  reached  Dili  Bazar,  one  of  the  chief  villages  of  Khat-
lan,  we  heard  of  these  events.  Whereupon  we  debated  together
as  to  what  should  bo  done ;  some  of  the  people  of  that  place  coun-
selled us,  saying :  "  Nik  Pai  Shah,  although  ho  professes  obedience
to  Hamza  Sultan,  is  nevertheless  a  well-wisher  of  Mirza  Kbdn,
and  has  also  pretty  constant  intercourse  with  Shah  Bazi-ud-Din.
If  you  throw  yourselves  upon  him  for  support  and  protection,  he
will  be  able  to  convey  you  to  Mirza  Khan."  The  Maulana,  having
left  me  in  the  house  of  some  person,  went  to  sec  Nik  Fai  Khdn,  to
whom  he  explained  that  he  was  the  preceptor  of  Mirza  Khan,^
and  that,  having  escaped  the  tyranny  of  the  Uzbeg,  he  was  desirous
of  repairing  to  the  foot  of  the  throne  of  Mirzd  Khan.  "  If,"  he
continued,  **  you  will  help  mo  in  this  matter,  your  reward  shall  bo
great;  ^  I  shall,  moreover,  be  able  to  represent  your  loyalty  in  tho
most  favourable  light  to  Mirza  Khan."  Nik  Pai  Shah  received  tho
Maulana  with  great  respect  and  honour,  and  instructed  five  of  his
most  trusted  men  to  escort  him  across  the  river  to  Bustak,  which,
though  in  ruins,  was  at  least  a  place  of  security  from  the  violence
of  the  Chiragh  Kush.  At  about  the  hour  of  midday  prayer,  those
five  men  came  and  conveyed  us  across  the  river  Amu,  whence  we
advanced  towards  Bustak.  When  the  blazing  torch  of  the  sun
descended  into  the  oven  of  the  West,  and  the  sparks  of  the  stars
were  scattered  over  the  smoke-streaked  vault  of  heaven,  fire  fell
upon  the  souls  of  those  five  men,  and  they  began  to  brawl  and
wrangle.  Three  other  poor  men,  who  carried  a  little  merchandise,
were  of  our  party,  being  bound  for  Kala-i-Zafar,  where  they  hoped
to  realise  a  small  profit.  These  [five  men]  said  to  us :  "  You  must
pay  duty  [6a/]  "  ;  and  what  was  demanded  was  accordingly  handed
over.  Again  they  said :  "  To  each  of  us,  separate  payment  is
due  " ;  and  this  also  they  took. Finally  they  said :  "  [You  have

Fdoy  i.,pp.  146-8, 152-5;  Cathay^  i.,pp.  153-4 ;  Colebrooke  inAiiaiic  Seiearchea,
vii.,  p.  339;  Sir  H.  Rawlinson,  J.  M.  G.  8^  vol.  ix.  (1839),  pp.  3e-7;  Bret-
Bchneider,  i.,  pp.  112  8eqq. ;  and  D'Herbelot,  £t&L  Orient,  under  Ismailouth  AfoKe-

»  The  Torki  MS.  aays :  one  of  Minta  Khan's  oldest  attendants.— R.
*  Literally :  [Yoursj  shall  be  the  rewaid  of  Gfabriel.— B.

Digitized  by

Google

220  Flight  of  tlie  Autlior  to  Badakhsttdn.

no  need  of  money],"  and  they  threatened  to  plunder  us.  How  could
five  poor  artless  men  withstand  five  stalwart  ru£Sans  \(jhah^M\,  ^
Besides,  they  gave  us  no  time,  but  began  to  bind  us  all,  as  a  firet
step  towards  putting  us  to  death.  When  tliey  laid  hold  of  Man-
luna  Muhammad,  he  called  out  in  an  authoritative  and  severe  tone
of  voice :  "  You  dare  not  do  us  any  injury.  Do  you  know  who
til  is  is?  "  (pointing  to  me).  "  This  is  the  brother  of  Mirza  Khan,
who,  flying  from  Bokhara,  is  on  his  way  to  visit  his  brother.  A
great  number  of  his  servants  are  following  after  him,  as  fast  as
they  can,  while  others  have  stayed  behind  with  Nik  Pai  Shah.  If
wo  do  not  reach  Kala-i-Zafar  in  safety,  you  can  imagine  what  will
be  done  to  you."  When  Maulana  Muhammad  had  said  this,  the
ruffians  \(jhalcha'\  became  mild  [«tM<],  and  replied  in  their  own
dialect :  "  Take  back  your  possessions,  oh !  Khwdja."  So  saying
they  restored  what  we  had  given  them,  and  turned  to  depart.  In
Bpito  of  our  insistance,  they  would  not  help  us  any  further,  but
returned.  We,  however,  had  no  intention  of  reluming;  but
putting  our  whole  trust  in  God's  protection,  continued  our  road
until  dawn.  During  the  day  we  crept  into  hiding,  and  on  the
following  night  again  set  out.  At  daybreak  we  reached  Rustak,
where  we  were  safe  from  the  hostility  of  the  accursed  Mulahida.

On  the  following  day  we  arrived  at  Kala-i-Zafar.  During  the
time  of  the  Uzbeg  domination,  of  which  I  have  spoken,  when  the
people  of  Badakhshan  raised  their  heads  in  every  comer,  and  the
Uzbeg  made  several  unsuccessful  invasions,  one  of  the  chiefs 'of
Badakbshan  was  Mubarak  Shah.  lie  had  chosen  out  a  strong  place
for  himself,  but  before  he  was  able  to  complete  the  fortifications,
the  Uzbeg  came  upon  him.  He  gave  them  battle  in  that  place,
and  defeated  them,  and  for  that  reason  he  called  the  fort  Kula-i-
Zafar  [the  Fort  of  Victory],  which  name  is  the  more  appropriate
seeing  that  Mubarak  Shah  was  of  a  tribe  called  •*  Muzafi'ari."  It
is  the  capital  of  Badakhshan.  ^ This  Mubarak  Shah  was  put  to

*  The  dictionary  meanings  of  the  word  gluddia  are — ^villogt-r,  viigaboml,  rustic.
Tho  late  Mr.  B.  B.  8baw  defined  it  as  tlio  name  applied  ti>  tlio  Tajik  or  Arvan
inhabitants  of  the  mouDtain  districts  of  Badakhshan,  Shignan,  Wdkh^n,  Sarikol,
Kuhib,  Kardtigin,  etc.  In  Eastern  Turkistan  be  found  it  used  generally  for
a  bluve  bought  witli  money.  Vambery  translates  it :  "  Der  kuirps,  der  kleiiie
Wuchs" ;  and  Pavet  de  CouitolUe :  "  CJourt,  has,  petit  homme."  In  any  case  it
was  a  reproachful  name,  applied  by  neighbouring  tribes,  and  not  used  by  the
people  themselves.  In  modt  parts  of  Badakhshan,  in  Shigndn,  Roshan,  and  I
tliink  I  may  say  Wakhan,  the  name  is  unknown  to  the  inhabitants.  TJiey  not
unly  do  not  call  themselves  by  it,  but  appear  unconscious  of  its  being  applied  to
tliem  by  others.  It  is  one  among  the  many  instances,  in  Central  Asia,  of  one
people  being  known  to  another  by  a  contemptuous  appellation,  instead  of  by  their
own  name.  (For  a  full  account  of  the  so-called  Ghalehah,  see  Shaw's  Ohalchah
Languages,  Calcutta,  1876.)

^  The  ruins  of  Kala  Zafar  are  stiU  to  be  found.  They  stand  on  the  loft  bank
of  the  Kokcha,  a  little  below  the  mouth  of  the  Argu  river  and  above  that  of  the
Teshkan  stream.  The  Kokcha  valley  contains  several  traces  of  medissval  times ;
for  instance,  the  ruins  of  a  fort  called  Ai-Khdnim  (on  an  isolated  hill  near  the
mouth  of  the  river,  and  on  its  right  bank),  which  is  said  to  have  been  destroyed  by

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Adventures  of  Sultan  Said  Khan,  221

death  by  Zobir  EdgHi,  who  had  defeated  him,  but  who  was,  in
turn,  killed  by  Mirza  Khan,  as  already  mentioned.  [Mirza  Khan
then  ruled  Badakhshan]  and  resided  in  Kala-i-Zafar.

Mirza  Aba  Bakr  had  taken  many  of  the  upper  \haladLaii'\  ^
Hazdra  of  Badakhshan,  and  the  lower  \j^yan\  side,  which  is  flat
country,  he  had  joined  on  to  the  TJzbeg  states,  which  lie  on  the
borders  of  this  territory.  But  the  best  of  the  country  that  was
left  between  these  [two  territories]  was  under  the  sway  of  Shah
Bazi-ud-Din,  the  Chirdgh  Kush,  and  his  Mulahida.  Mirza  Khan
encountered  many  difficulties  and  hardships  in  Badakhshan.
When  I  came  to  him,  he  gave  me  a  warm  and  affectionate  wel-
come. Eighteen  days  before  my  arrival,  SultAn  Said  Khan  had
come  to  visit  him,  [had  stayed  a  short  time]  and  then  left  [for
K4bul],  as  will  be  presently  related.  I  remained  one  year  in  the
service  of  Mirza  Khan.  The  rest  of  my  adventures  will  be  told
after  the  account  of  the  Khan's  journey  to  Kabul.

CHAPTER  XVIII.

ADVENT  OF  SULTAN SAID  KHAN  IS ANDIJAN. HIS CAPTDRK  AND  ESCAPE
TO  BABAR  PADISHAH IN kAbUL.

It  has  already  been  stated  that  Sultan  Said  Khdn  had  passed  some
time  in  the  service  of  Shahi  Beg  Khdn,  and  was  consequently  well
acquainted  with  his  disposition  and  that  of  his  nobles.  He  felt
assured  that  Sh4bi  Beg  would  not  spare  the  Moghul  SuMns,
merely  in  recognition  of  having  once  been  released  by  them,  after

ChiDgiz  Eban.  Above  Kala  Zafar  also,  and  nearer  to  the  present  capital,
Faizs^ad,  there  are  the  remaiDs  of  a  stone  bridge,  among  the  scattered  blocks  of
A¥hidi,one  of  my  party  in  1885,  found  an  Arabic  inscription  to  the  effect  that  the
bridge  had  been  built  by  Shah  Sultan  Muhammad,  in  toe  year  881  h.  How  long
Kala  Zafar  remained  the  capital  of  Badakhshdn  I  am  not  aware,  but  it  appears
from  the  narrative  of  Mirza  Haidar  that  it  could  only  have  been  foundtd  towards
the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  It  was  still  the  capital  of  Badakhshan  in
1516  when  Humayun  took  refuge  there,  but  beyond  that  date  I  huvc  met  with
no  mention  of  it.

*  The  word  hdlddust  eeema  to  be  used  throughout  the  Tdrihh-i-BaHhidi^  with  the
meaning  of  a  **  hill,"  or  "  highland,  district " ;  while  the  word  Hazdra  denotes  the
inhabitants  of  such  districts,  and  becomes  therefore  the  equivalent  of  *'high]ander,"
without  reference  to  any  racial  consideration  or  to  the  meaning  of  the  word.  I
have  never  heard  it  used  in  this  way,  but  to  iudge  from  tiie  report  of  Munshi
Vaiz  Beikhsh  (1870)  it  must  still  be  commonly  met  with,  for  he  speaks  of  the
inhabitants  of  Wakhan,  Hunza,  etc.,  as  Hazdra^  and  the  former  of  these  places
must  have  been  one  of  the  '*  b&lddast  Hazara  of  Badakhshan  "  mentioned  m  the
text. (See  Faiz  Bakhsh  in  /.  i?.  G.  8.,  1872,  p.  472.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

222  Adventures  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn.

having  fallen  into  their  hands.^  So,  whenever  he  had  heard
praises  bestowed  on  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  he  had  protested.  Ulti-
mately, things  came  to  such  a  pass  in  Moghulistdn,  that  he  had  no
resource  left  but  to  surrender  himself  to  the  TJzbeg.

Under  these  conditions,  he  entered  Andijan.  The  government
of  the  province  of  Farghdna  was,  at  that  time,  in  the  hands  of  Jdni
Beg  Sultan.  He  had  given  Andijan  to  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur,  who
was  one  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan's  most  trusty  men,  and  whom  he  now
promoted  to  the  rank  of  Aidlik  ^  [guardian].  He  was  partially
mad,  but,  in  military  and  state  affairs,  exceedingly  capable.

The  Khan  reached  Sulat-Kand,^  which  is  one  of  the  dependencies
of  Andijan,  but,  before  he  told  his  name  and  descent,  asked  the
inhabitants  what  had  happened  to  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  and
whither  Sultan  Khalil  Sultdn  had  been  sent.  They  answered  him  :
*'  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan  and  all  the  Khdkans  of  the  Moghuls,  who
have  come  here,  have  been  sent  to  the  City  of  Non-Existence,  by
the  Gate  of  Martyrdom."

At  this  announcement,  the  thread  of  the  Khdn's  hope,  which
was  slender  as  a  spider's  web,  snapped  in  two.  But  he  did  not
regret  that  he  had  come,  for  he  had  done  so  as  a  last  resource,  with
his  eyes  open  and  knowing  the  risk  he  was  running.  Khwaja  Ali
Bahddur  sent  people  to  seize  whatever  they  had  brought  with
them,  and  imprisoned  the  Khan  in  an  apartment  which  was  above
the  gateway  of  the  citadel  of  Andijan.

On  the  morrow,  when  the  glorious  sword-bearer  of  the  East
drew  his  sword  from  the  sheath  of  the  horizon,  and  caused  its
dazzling  brightness  to  illumine  the  earth,  the  resplendent  world
was  utter  darkness  in  the  eyes  of  the  Khdn,  who  was  sent,  with
his  hands  tied  to  his  neck,  to  Jdni  Beg  Khdn  in  Akhsi.  But
Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur  was  depressed  and  sorrowful ;  he  felt  deeply
for  the  Khdn,  but  as  he  did  not  dare  to  disobey  Shahi  Beg  Khdn's
orders,  he  could  not  so  much  as  think  of  releasing  the  Khan.

*  This  passage  is  obscure  and  the  traDslation  somewhat  uncertain.

-  The  proper  meaning  of  AtdWc  is  ** guardian"  or  "tutor."  lu  speaking  of
Bokhara  and  the  Kipcbdk  country,  Sir  H.  Howorth  (on  the  authority  of  Sen-
kofski)  tells  us  that :  "Originally  the  duties  of  the  AtdWc  consisted  in  superin-
tending the  education  of  the  heir  to  the  throne  and  looking  after  his  household.
Afterwards  the  Atdlih  became  one  of  the  chief  dignities  of  tlie  Court,  almost
equal  to  those  of  Divan-begi  and  Grand  Vizier,  and  eventually,  haying  become
hereditary  and  fallen  into  yigorous  hands,  the  holders  of  the  post  b^me  the
yirtual  rulers  of  the  country,  like  the  Merovingian  mayors  of  the  palace,  and
succeeded  like  them  .  ...  in  usurping  the  chief  authority  of  the  state."
(Vol.  II.,  p.  869).  A  modem  instance  of  what  Sir  H.  Howorth  states  here,  was
the  career  of  the  late  Amir  Yakub  Beg,  who,  when  he  first  began  to  exeroiso
power  in  Eastern  Turkistan,  and  while  nominally  in  the  service  of  Buzurg  Khoja
of  Khokand,  assumed  the  title  of  Atdlih  Ghdzi^  but  soon  afterwards  abolished  his
chief,  styled  himself  Amir-vl'Mumnin,  and  reigned  independently.

3  On  Hitter  and  Oetzel's  map  of  1841,  a  smsJl  place  near  Ush,  to  the  f  outh-eaat
of  Andijan,  is  marked  as  Ldt  Kend,  which  may  possibly  represent  8ulat-Kand  of
the  text. Neither  name  appears  on  modem  maps.

Digitized  by

Google

Adventures  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn^  223

Before[[sending  him  off  ho  had  despatched  a  special  messenger  [to
announce  the  Khan's  approach].  At  about  that  time,  Jani  Beg
Sultan  had  fallen  from  his  horse  onto  his  head,  and  his  brain  had
become  severely  deranged,  so  that  now,  most  of  his  actions  and
words  were  inconsistent  with  a  healthy  understanding,  and  the
reins  of  memory  fell  from  the  hands  of  his  intellect.  On  the  day
that  this  news  was  brought  to  him,  it  chanced  that  his  brain  was
influenced  by  the  spirit  of  Islam  and  the  Holy  Law  (the  Most
High  God  had  ordained  this,  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  the
Khan),  and  he  said :  "  I  am  not  an  executioner  that  I  should
endeavour  to  take  any  man's  blood."  He  then  ordered  a  letter
\n%»han\  to  be  written  to  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur,  saying:  "The
Moghul  Sultan  who  has  come  [to  you]  has  not  been  delivered  into
our  custody.  It  would  not  be  acting  in  conformity  with  the
statutes  of  the  Holy  Law  were  I  to  take  his  life.  [It  behoves  me]
to  open  to  him  the  meadows  of  mercy  and  safety,  that  he  may
wander  whither  he  will." [Such  was  the  purport  of  his  letter.]

When  the  Khan  related  these  incidents  to  me,  as  he  frequently
did,  ho  used  to  say :  "  I  had,  for  a  long  time,  felt  quite  assured  that
the  Uzbeg  would  spare  none  of  the  Moghul  Sultans,  and  had
become  so  convinced  of  this,  at  the  time  of  my  first  visit  to  Andijan,
that  when  I  arrived  there  [on  this  occasion],  and  ^  certain  pious
men  had  written  to  me  and  sent  prayers  [for  me  to  repeat],  I  said
in  reply  to  them :  *  One  of  the  conditions  [of  prayer]  is  that
nothing  impossible  should  be  prayed  for;  now  my  deliverance
must  be  reckoned  among  impossibilities,  and  therefore  these
prayers  for  my  safety  would  be  ill-advised.'  To  which  they
answered:  'Though  these  prayers  may  not  have  the  power  to
bring  about  deliverance  from  the  imminent  peril  in  which  you
stand,  yet  on  account  of  them,  God  will  give  you  a  greater  reward
in  the  next  world.'  On  this  assurance  I  repeated  the  prayers  which
they  had  sent  me.  I  began  also  to  turn  over  in  my  mind  my
chances  of  safety,  and  how  my  escape  might  be  achieved,  but  not
one  of  the  ideas  that  occurred  to  me  seemed  feasible.  If,  for
example,  Shdhi  Beg  Khan  were  now  to  die,  how  could  his  dying
in  Khorasdn,  at  the  time  when  they  were  going  to  put  me  to
death  in  Akhsi,  in  any  way  further  my  escape?  If,  again,  Jdni
Beg  Sultdn  were  to  die,  his  death  would  not  throw  the  affairs  of
the  Uzbeg  into  such  confusion  that,  during  the  disturbance,  my
escape  could  be  effected.  In  short,  I  could  not  conceive  any
possibility  or  probability  of  deliverance.  As  we  diew  near  to
Akhsi,  we  saw  a  horseman  riding  towards  us;  I  was  persuaded
that  he  was  coming  to  put  me  to  death,  and  wondered  how  he
would  do  it.  But  when  he  approached,  we  found  that  it  was
Mauland  Haidar  Kharsuz,  one  of  the  notables  of  Andijdn. Throw-

*  The  Tiurki  MS.  interpolates  here :  I  was  quite  prepared  for  martyidom.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

224  Adventures  of  Sultan  Said  Khdn,

ing  himself  from  the  saddle,  he  came  and  kissed  my  stirrup,  with
joy  and  delight  that  knew  no  bounds,  and  said :  *  Good  news  for
you  !  J4ni  Beg  Sultan  has  issued  an  order  for  your  release.  The
joyful  mandate  is  now  being  brought  by  Dust  Ali  Chulak.'  It
then  occurred  to  me  that  he  was  saying  this  just  to  set  my  fears
at  rest,  so  I  said :  *  May  God  reward  you  with  good  things !  As
for  me,  I  have  withdrawn  my  mind  from  life,  and  therefore  do  not
stand  in  need  of  such  comfort."  But  Mauldnd  Haidar  reiterated
his  assertions,  and  was  confirming  them  with  the  strongest  assevera-
tions and  the  most  solemn  oaths,  when  Dust  Ali  Chul4k  arrived,
and  commanded  my  guard  \mwiakkal\  to  return,  to  escort  me  back
to  Khwaja  Ali  Bah&dur  and  perform  all  the  details  of  the  man-
date concerning  me.  Thus,  from  within  one  farsAkh  of  Akhsi  I
was  conveyed  back  to  Andijan.

"  When  the  mandate  was  delivered  to  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur,  he
[having  read  it]  handed  it  to  me.  On  perusing  it,  I  found  it  to
contain  exactly  what  Maulana  Haidar  had  told  me.  Khwaja  Ali
Bahadur  then  said :  *  Though  he  should  not  abide  by  this  decision
but,  changing  his  humour,  should  issue  a  second  mandate  reversing
this  one,  still  this  is  sufficient  pretext  for  me ;  you  must  be  cheer-
ful, and  enjoy  now  the  soul-stirring  wine-cups  of  the  spirit  of
youth.  Be  at  your  ease.'  However  much  I  insisted  that  it  was
but  base  deceit  and  a  mean  device  to  pollute  the  cup  of  martyrdom
with  [earthly]  wine,  [my  protestations]  were  of  no  avail.^  More-
over, in  conformity  with  the  rules  of  good  breeding  [ilm-%-mamli\
I  was  obliged  to  give  in  to  his  mode  of  thinking  [and  with  an
unwilling  heart  I  accepted  his  invitation].  As  the  wine-cup  was
passed  round,  the  rose-coloured  liquor  diffused  itself  over  our  cheeks,
which  had  become  yellow  as  saffron,  from  the  jaundice-tainted
order  of  the  livid-souled  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  but  now  opened  out  like
the  rod  rose  or  the  new-blown  tulip.  All  that  day  was  spent  in
wine  drinking,  [and  when  night  came  on]  the  feast  adorning
torches  made  the  banquet  hall  bright  as  the  day.  [The  festivities
had  scarce  recommenced]  when  one  of  Jdni  Beg  Sultan's  chamber-
lains named  All4h  Birdi  came  in  and  placed  a  sorrow-bearing
mandate  in  the  hands  of  Khwdja  Ali  Bahadur,  who  passed  it  on
to  me,  saying :  *  Read  thy  letter.'  In  it  was  written :  *  The
question  of  the  release  of  Sultan  Said  Khdn  has  been  reconsidered,
and  found  to  be  contrary  to  the  orders  of  the  Khan.  He  must  be
sent  to  join  those  who  have  gone  before  him  and  who  will  never
return  :  or,  otherwise,  according  to  the  old  Moghul  custom,  he
must  be  sent  to  the  capital,  where  he  should,  by  means  of  the
gallows,  be  sent  to  his  lasting  home.'  On  reading  this  ill-favoured
mandate,  the  rosy  tints  of  joy  were  exchanged  for  the  saffron  hues

*  The  Turk!  puts  it :  Now  that  I  have  mixed  the  wine  of  martyi-dom,  to  defile
my  mouth  with  the  pure  wino  [of  enjoyment]  were  of  no  avail.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Adventures  of  Sultan  Said  K/idn,  225

of  apprehension.  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadnr  grasped  the  sitnation,  and
asked :  "  What  is  the  cause  of  your  dejection  ?  Bead  out  the
mandate.'  So  I  read  it  aloud.  Then  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur  became
enraged,  and  said:  'His  brain  is  disordered  with  mischief:  what-
ever emanates  from  such  a  mind,  if  it  be  originally  a  good  thought,
becomes  a  sin,  and  if  it  be  a  premeditated  sin — then  God  pre-
serves us !  When  a  man  has  escaped  from  the  edge  of  the  sword,
or  from  the  foot  of  the  gallows,  he  is  as  difficult  to  lay  hold  of  as
quicksilver — he  disappears  like  camphor  unmixed  with  pepper.
Where  can  I  find  him  ?  *  The  chamberlain,  kissing  the  ground  of
respect,  said:  'It  is  not  reasonable  that  you,  Bahadur,  should
deviate  from  the  straight-road  of  loyalty  and  adopt  that  of  false-
hood, which  is  the  worst  of  qualities.  You  say  that  the  Sultdn,
like  quicksilver,  is  not  to  be  caught ;  but  he  is  now  at  your  side,
and  of  this  I  am  a  witness.'  [At  these  words]  Khwaja  Ali
Bahadur  blazed  up,  like  a  fire,  with  rage,  and  cried :  '  Have  all  the
woithy  services  and  deeds  of  valour  I  have  performed  in  the
employment  of  Jani  Beg  Sultan,  resulted  in  so  little,  that  a
Chaghatai  like  yourself  (whose  skirt  of  service  is  still  so  defiled
with  the  pollution  of  hostility  that  no  water  of  forgiveness  could
cleanse  it)  should  come  and  give  me  the  lie  direct,  and  point  out
to  me  the  straight  road  of  loyalty  to  this  family  ?  I  will  report
your  answer  in  full  to  the  Sultan.'  He  then  ordered  a  hole  to  be
cut  out  of  a  beam,  and  that  the  beam  should  be  placed  upon  the
man's  neck  [and  he  be  made  to  sit  before  the  gate]."

After  the  Khdn  [Sultdn  Said]  had  been  invested  with  the  robe
of  sovereignty  of  Andijan,  this  same  Allah  Bardi  was  taken  before
him,  and  he  was  thus  reminded  of  the  man's  former  base  conduct.
Bat  he  said  :  '*  Khwdja  Ali  Bahadur  avenged  me  that  same  night,
and  the  rancour  I  bore  him  was  washed  from  my  heart.  Let  him
now  be  restored  to  his  former  post  of  chamberlain ;  "  and  he  gave
him  the  middle  rank  of  chamberlain,  which  was  a  high  office  for
him.i

"  That  night  was  spent  in  companionship,  until  day  dawned ;  on
the  morrow,  attended  by  a  few  men,  we  set  out  for  Karatigin.
After  travelling  for  one  day,  the  men  sent  to  accompany  us,  having
lost  the  right  road,  turned  back.  When  Khwajd  Ali  Bah&dur  was
informed  of  this,  he  vented  his  wrath  upon  these  men  and  punished
them  severely."  He  kept  the  Khdn  with  him  some  days,  while  he
selected  for  him  some  distinguished  and  trusty  persons.  The  first
among  them  was  Maulana  Khaliki,  a  talented,  good,  and  studious
man;  he  wrote  the  Naskh-Tdalik  perfectly,  and  composed  good
poetry ;  he  was  also  a  proficient  musician.  Another  of  them  was
Khwdja  Salih,  who  was  the  leading  merchant  in  the  province  of
Andijan,  and  was  known  by  every  one  he  met  on  the  road,  while
*  Hero  follows  a  prayer,  "which  is  omitted.

Q

Digitized  by

Google

226  Adventures  of  Sultdn  Said  Khdn,

people  often  appealed  to  him  for  advice  in  their  affairs.  A  third
was  Maulana  Yusuf  Kashghari,  who  waa  an  accountant  [mu^toMb],
much  esteemed  in  Andijan  for  his  judgment.  Another  was  Gadai
Piri,  a  professional  courtier  \nadAm\  and  a  skilled  musician.  An-
other was  Mir  Ahmad,  one  of  the  Andijan  Turks ;  he  had  travelled
much  and  knew  all  the  best  routes.  Another  was  Jalal,  a  very
serviceable  man.  Having  given  him  these  few  men  as  an  escort,
he  started  the  Khan  off  a  second  time.

Khwaja  Salih  and  Maulana  Yusuf  were  dressed  like  merchants,
Maulan4  Khaliki,  Darvish  Firi  and  the  Khan  were  in  the  guise  of
students,  and  looked  very  like  kalandars.  Mir  Ahmad  and  Jalal
passed  as  servants  of  the  merchants.  Thus  attired,  they  set  forth
and  reached  Kala-i-Zafar  in  perfect  peace  and  safety.  Here  they
found  Mirza  Khan,  who  received  and  entertained  them  as  well  as
his  straitened  circumstances  would  allow.  They  remained  there
eighteen  days.  Now,  since  Mirza  Khan  was  a  very  feeble  man,
some  of  his  retainers,  on  account  of  his  weakness,  thought  fit  to
offer  the  Khan  the  government  of  Kala-i-Zafar  (which  was  not
worth  half  a  loaf  of  bread).  But  the  Khan  declined,  saying :
"  Mirz4  Khan,  who  is  my  cousin,  has  been  exposed  to  a  thousand
hardships,  by  crooked  fortune.  It  would  be  contrary  to  all  rules
of  good  feeling  and  justice  to  oppose  him,  or  to  deprive  him  of  this
[possession].''  The  Khan  accordingly  hastened  to  depart,  and  went
on  to  Kabul.  Eighteen  days  after  his  departure,  I  arrived  at
Mirza  Kh&n's  [capital],  as  has  been  mentioned  above.

On  reaching  Kabul,  the  Khan  was  welcomed  with  the  utmost
respect  and  honour  by  the  Emperor.  The  Khan  used  to  say  [when
telling  his  story]  :  "  Those  days  that  I  spent  in  Kabul  were  the
freest  from  care  or  sorrow  of  any  I  have  ever  experienced,  or  ever
shall  experience.  I  spent  two  years  and  a  half  at  the  court  of  this
excellent  Prince,  in  a  continual  succession  of  enjoyments,  and  in
the  most  complete  abandonment  to  pleasure  and  absence  of  pre-
occupation. I  was  on  friendly  teims  with  all,  and  made  welcome
by  all.  I  never  suffered  even  a  headache,  unless  from  the  effects
of  wine ;  and  never  felt  distressed  or  sad,  except  on  account  of  the
ringlets  of  some  beloved  one."

In  short,  the  Khan  remained  in  Kabul  as  the  companion  and
confidant  of  the  Emperor.  There  existed  between  these  two  great
princes  perfect  accord  and  love  and  trust.  The  Khdn's  visit  lasted
from  Shaban  914  to  Eamazdn  916,^  at  which  latter  date  Shiihi  Beg
Khun  fell  into  the  hands  of  Shah  Ismail,  and  was  killed  by  him,  as
will  be  related.

»  From  Nov.,  1508,  to  Dec.,  1510.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Mirza  Khdn  in  Badakhskdn,  227

CHAPTER  XIX.

MIRZA KhAn's  life  IN  BADAKHShIn. THE AUTHOR  GOES  FROM

badakhshIn  to  kIbul.

I  HAVE  mentioned  that  I  arrived  at  Kala-i-Zafar  just  eighteen
days  after  the  Khan's  departure  for  Kabul.  Mirzd  Kh4n  was
living  there  in  exceedingly  straitened  circumstances,  being  without
provisions  and  surrounded  by  the  scheming  natives  of  Badakhshdn.
The  Tangi  Bala,^  in  which  are  situated  the  strongest  places  of  the
Hazdra,  had  been  annexed  to  Kdshghar,  as  will  be  mentioned
below.  The  flat  country  of  Badakhsh&n,  the  most  fertile  and
prosperous  part  of  that  state,  was  under  the  control  of  the  Uzbeg ;
while  the  rest  [of  the  land]  from  fear  of  the  Uzbeg  had  [been
abandoned  and  had]  become  a  waste.  What  yet  remained  over
from  the  panther  of  the  mountains  of  enmity,  on  the  one  hand,
and  from  the  crocodile  of  the  river  of  tyranny,  on  the  other,  (that
is  to  say,  the  Uzbeg  and  the  Kdshghari)  had  passed  to  Sh4h  Bazi-
ud-Din,  the  Chirdgh  Kush,  who,  having  been  brought  from  Sist4n
to  Badakhshdn,  had  been  appointed  king  [of  this  portion].  He
had  introduced  the  religion  of  the  Mul&hidas,  and  outdid  the
oppression  of  his  two  tyrannical  predecessors.  Mirz4  Kh&n,  as  a
Musulman,  was  much  harassed  [by  these  infidels]  and  had  scarcely
the  necessaries  of  life. That  winter  was  passed  in  sufifering.

In  the  early  spring,  a  dissension  arose  among  the  supporters  of
Sh4h  Bazi-ud-Din,  which  ended  in  their  cutting  off  his  head  and
laying  it  at  the  feet  of  Mirzd  Khdn.  By  this  defeat  of  the  Muld-
hida  [Mirza  Khdn]  gained  a  little  power.  Thus  passed  the  spring ;
and  at  the  end  of  autumn  [tirmaK]  a  compulsory  order  came  from
the  Emperor  of  the  following  purport :  "  The  son  of  Muhammad
Husain  Mirzd  has  been  with  you ;  your  country  is  always  exposed
to  the  forays  of  the  Uzbeg,  and  my  mind  can  never  be  at  rest  as
long  as  he  remains  there ;  you  must  send  him  to  me."

When  Mirzd  Khdn  gave  me  leave  to  go  to  Kdbul,  he  tried  his
best  to  procure  a  coloured  garment  for  me,  but  was  unable  to  find
one  [and  was  obliged  to  excuse  himself].  On  that  day  a  most
curious  incident  occurred.  I  have  already  mentioned  ^at  I  fell
from  my  horse  and  dislocated  my  elbow  at  Langar  Mir  Amdd
(which  is  a  dependency  of  Hisdr),  and  that  it  had  been  broken
again  and  set  at  Pushang.  Altiiough  the  pain  had  subsided,  I
was  not  able  to  bend  and  straighten  my  arm. I  could  not  bend  it

»  The  Tangi  Bdld  may  be  tranfllated— *•  the  higher  defiles"  or  "the  upper
ravines."

q2

Digitized  by

Google

228  Tlie  Author  Repairs  to  Kabul,

enough  to  touch  my  face  with  my  hand,  nor  straighten  it  suffi-
ciently to  draw  a  bow.  During  the  spring  I  spent  with  Mirza
Khan,  a  man  of  Badakhshan,  having  stolen  a  two  year  old  horse
from  the  Uzbeg,  had  brought  it  as  a  present  \^isKka9h'\  to  Mirz4
Khdn  who,  in  turn,  gave  it  to  me.  One  day  the  Mirza  was  taking
a  ride  for  pleasure,  and  I  accompanied  him  on  that  particular
horse.  While  we  were  riding  along,  a  thorn  ran  into  [the  A:Adrt«/i-
gah  ^  of]  my  horse.  He  gave  two  or  three  bounds  into  the  air,  and
as  I  had  not  strength  enough  to  keep  hold  of  the  bridle,  it  fell
from  my  hand,  and  I  was  thrown  on  to  the  ground  upon  my
injured  arm.  As  I  struck  the  ground,  I  heard  a  sound  in  my  bad
elbow.  The  shock  was  so  violent  that  I  fainted.  After  a  time  I
came  to,  and  found  that  Mirza  Kh4n  was  holding  my  head  upon
his  knees.  He  asked  me  how  I  felt.  When  I  had  quite  recovered
my  senses,  having  bound  up  my  arm,  they  conveyed  me  to  Kala-i-
Zafar.  There  they  sent  for  the  bone-setters  ^kataAngm^?  On
examination,  they  ibund  that  my  arm  had  gone  back  to  its  proper
place,  so  that  after  a  short  time  I  recovered  the  entire  use  of  it,
and  no  injury  was  traceable.  This  was  certainly  a  very  strange
occurrence.

In  a  word,  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  Eajab  I  left  Kala-i-
Zafar  and  the  service  of  Mirzii  Khdn,  and  turned  towards  Kabul,
accompanied  by  a  party  of  sixteen.  We  only  had  two  horses
with  us,  and  so  limited  was  our  baggage  that  I  had  nothing  to  lie
on  at  night.  Mauldna  Muhammad,  who  was  a  sort  of  father  to
the  party,  had  nothing  but  one  meagre  shawl,  such  as  is  worn  by
the  poorest  men  in  Badakhshan.  What  the  condition  of  the  others
was,  may  be  surmised.

When  we  reached  Kabul,  we  were  received  by  Shirun  ^  Taghai,
*  who  was  maternal  uncle  to  the  Emperor  and  myself,  and  one  of
the  pillars  of  state.  With  a  hundred  marks  of  respect,  he  invited
me  to  his  own  house,  where  I  was  entertained  with  distinction  and
kindness.  Later,  the  Emperor  sent  a  messenger  to  say  that,  after
three  days,  the  happy  hour  would  arrive  when  he  would  send  for
me.  After  that,  the  moon  of  my  ascendency  and  [the  star  of
my  good-luck]  emerged  from  their  eclipse,  and  my  misfortune
changed  to  prosperity.  An  order  came  that  I  should  have  the
honour  of  waiting  [upon  the  Emperor].  When  I  came  into  his
presence,  the  joy-diffusing  glance  of  the  Emperor  fell  upon  me,
and  from  the  excess  of  his  love  and  the  intensity  of  his  kindness,
strung  pearls  and  set  rubies  began  to  rain  down  upon  me  from  his

>  I  can  find  no  maaaing  for  khdruih-gdh.  The  dictionaries  only  give  "  part  of
a  horse." — B.

*  The  "word  only  means  ** bow-maker"  in  Persian,  but' is,  I  belieye,  used
in  India  for  **  bone-setter."— R.

«  In  Baber*8  Memoirs  this  man's  name  is  written  Shiriny  but  in  the  Tdrikh'i'
Rauhidi,  everywhere  Shirun.

Digitized  by

Google

Tlie  Autlwr  Repairs  to  KdbuL  229

benign,  jewel-scattering  eye.  He  extended  towards  me  the  hand
of  favour  and  bade  me  welcome.  Having  first  knelt  down,  I
[raised  myself  and]  advanced  towards  him.  He  then  clasped  me
to  the  bosom  of  affection— drew  me  to  the  breast  of  fatherly  love,
and  held  me  thns  for  a  while.  When  he  let  me  go,  he  would  no
longer  allow  me  to  observe  the  formalities  of  respect,  but  made  me
sit  down  at  his  side.  While  we  were  thus  seated,  he  said  to  me
with  great  benevolence ;  "  Your  father  and  brother  and  all  your
relations  have  been  made  to  drink  the  wine  of  martyrdom ;  but
thank  God,  you  have  come  back  to  me  again  in  safety.  Do  not
grieve  too  much  at  their  loss.  For  I  will  take  their  place,  and
whatever  favour  of  affection  you  could  have  expected  from  them,
that,  and  more,  will  I  show  you."  With  such  promises  and  tender-
ness did  he  comfort  me,  so  that  the  bitterness  of  orphanage  and
the  poison  of  banishment  were  driven  from  my  mind.  He  then
asked  me :  "  Who  was  it  that  carried  you  off  in  flight?  "  I  replied :
*'  My  master,  Maulana  Muhammad  Sadr."  He  then  sent  for  the
Mauland.  When  he  arrived  [the  Emperor]  honoured  him  with
many  kind  speeches,  and  kept  asking  him  the  particulars  of  his
story,  while  the  Mauldna  several  times  recounted  the  details  of  our
escape.  [The  Emperor]  praised  him  highly  and  rejoiced  his  soul
with  promises  of  favour.  [When  the  Mauldna  had  taken  his
leave]  the  Emperor  said  to  me :  "  You  have  not  yet  paid  your
respects  to  Sultan  Said  Khau,"  and  thereupon  he  ordered  one  of
his  private  officers  to  take  me  to  the  Sultan.  I  accompanied  this
officer,  and  at  once  waiting  on  the  Khan,  benefited  likewise  by
his  joy-scattering  glances.  I  then  returned  to  the  presence  of  the
Emperor.  After  sitting  with  him  for  a  short  time,  I  took  my
leave,  amid  assurances  of  royal  favour.

When  I  came  out,  a  man  advanced  to  meet  me  with  great  respect,
and  said :  "  I  am  the  steward  \ha}AwjLz\  of  the  abode  which  the
Emperor  has  appointed  for  you."  So  saying,  he  led  the  way  to
an  elegant  mansion ;  its  rooms  were  spread  with  many-coloured
carpets  and  beautifol  thrones  [mo^nod].  Everything  in  the  way
of  furniture,  food,  clothing,  servants,  and  slaves,  had  been  so  fully
prepared  as  to  leave  nothing  to  be  desired  in  the  whole  building.
It  may  be  imagined  how  I  enjoyed  so  sudden  a  transition  to
comfort,  ease,  and  abundance  from  a  state  of  poverty,  misfortune,
suffering,  and  hardship,  which  had  rendered  the  soul  weary  of  its
confinement  within  the  cage  of  the  body.  How  can  I  ever  show
sufficient  thankfulness  ? May  God  reward  him  with  good  things !

Thus  I  passed  a  long  time  in  the  service  of  the  Emperor,  in
perfect  happiness  and  freedom  from  care ;  and  he  was  for  ever,
either  by  promises  of  kindness  or  by  threats  of  severity,  encouraging
me  to  study.  If  he  ever  notioed  any  little  virtue  or  new  acqui-
sition, he  would  praise  it  in  the  highest  terms,  commend  it  to

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

230  Expeditions  of  Slidhi  Beg

everybody,  and  invite  their  approbation.  All  that  time,  the
Emperor  showed  me  such  affection  and  kindness  as  a  fond  father
shows  his  son  and  heir.  It  was  a  hard  day  for  me  when  I  lost  my
father,  but  the  bitterness  of  my  desolation  became  scarcely  percep-
tible, owing  to  the  blessed  favours  of  the  Emperor.

From  this  time,  to  the  year  018  [1512  A.D.]  I  remained  in  his
service.  Whenever  he  rode  out,  I  had  the  honour  of  riding  at  his
side,  and  when  he  received  friends,  I  was  sure  to  be  among  the
invited.  In  fact,  ho  never  let  me  be  separated  from  him.  When
I  was  studying,  for  example,  directly  my  lesson  was  over  he  would
send  someone  to  fetch  me.  And  in  this  fatherly  manner  did  he
continue  to  treat  me  till  the  end  of  my  stay  [(a  akhar-i-MX^

CHAPTER  XX.

EXPEDITION  OF SHAHI  BEG KHAN AGAINST  THE KAZAK, AND  THE
BEGINNING  OF  HIS  DECLINE.

As  Shahi  Beg  Khan  had  filled  the  cups  of  the  Khans  and  my
father  with  the  wine  of  martyrdom,  and  had  made  them  drink  it
to  the  last  dreg,  so  also  was  his  own  cup  of  life  full,  and  his
fortune  departed ;  for  has  it  not  been  said :  '*  llie  wine  which
thou  hast  made  others  drink,  that  must  thou  also  drink  of  in  the
end  "  ?  The  goblet  of  his  prosperity  was  upset,  and  that  which  he
had  caused  others  to  taste,  he  was  himself,  in  turn,  obliged  to
drink  to  the  dregs.  To  be  brief,  as  soon  as  he  had  set  his  mind  at
rest  concerning  the  Khans  and  my  father,  Shahi  Beg  Kh&n  carried
devastation  in  all  directions.  In  the  year  915  [1509  A.D.]  he
proceeded  against  the  Kaz&ks.  At  that  time,  although  Baranduk
was  Khan,  yet  all  the  business  of  government  was  conducted  by
Kasim  Khan.  In  spite  of  his  great  power,  Shdhi  Beg  Kh&n  had
not  force  enough  to  withstand  Kasim  Beg.  At  that  period,  the
numbers  of  his  army  exceeded  20,000.  In  winter  time  every  one
stayed  in  some  place  ^  where  there  was  fodder  for  the  cattle.  In
the  middle  of  the  winter,  Shahi  Beg  Kh&n  was  engaged  in  plun-
dering on  every  side,  but  he  soon  returned,  his  object  being  not
to  remain  too  far  from  his  own  country.^  About  the  time  above
mentioned,  he  made  his  last  expedition,  but  the  strength  of  his
horses  and  soldiers  was  quite  exhausted ;  he  himself  remained  in

*  In  the  Ttirki  M8. :  Were  scattered  in  all  directions.— R.
-  This  passage  is  obscure. It  may  mean  that  he  never  stayed  away  long
at  one  time.— R.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

against  the  Kazdk  and  the  Hazdra.  231

tli(j  district  of  Kuk  KiiBbana,  and  Laving  detachod  a  force,  whoBO
hor808  had  some  strengtli  left,  sent  thctn  forward.  This  party  fell
in  with  a  few  men,  whom  they  despoiled  and  made  prisoners.

One  day  tbey  had  halted  for  the  sake  of  feeding  their  hoi-ses,
when  news  came  that  Kasim  Khan  was  close  at  hand.  This  news
alarmed  them.  Buyun  Pir  Hasan,  one  of  Kasim  Khan*8  Amirs,
having  heard  of  the  invasion  of  the  Shaiban,  advanced  against
them  with  his  own  followers ;  he  spread  the  report  that  Kasim
Khan  was  approaching,  and  had  let  himself  be  seen  in  the  distance.
Shabi  Beg  Khan's  men,  being  fully  persuaded  that  Kasim  Khan
was  really  upon  them,  abandoned  all  they  had  seized — nay,  even  all
they  had  brought  with  them — and  retreated,  in  the  utmost  disorder
and  confasion,  to  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  bearing  the  news  of  Kasim
Khan's  approach.  Shahi  Beg  Khan  at  once  ordered  them  to  sound
the  drum  of  departure,  without  paying  attention  to  anything  [but
getting  away].  Those  who  liked  stayed,  those  who  wished  to  go
went.  Broken  and  in  disorder,  they  reached  Samarkand  at  the  end
of  the  winter.  [Shahi  Beg  Khan]  himself  went  on  to  Khorasan,
where  he  spent  the  spring.

In  the  beginning  of  autumn  [aVi/iaA]  he  led  an  army  against
the  Uazara ;  but  search  a«  he  might,  he  could  not  find  a  trace  of
them  in  the  Hazara  mountains.  For  they  had  crept  into  hiding,
so  that  it  was  impossible  to  find  them.  He  returned  by  way  of  the
passes,  and  along  the  bottom  of  a  i*avine  where  flows  the  River
Halman  [Helmand].  There  were  but  few  roads  by  which  it  was
possible  to  descend  the  ravine,  and  these  were  extremely  difficult.
It  was  well  nigh  impossible  for  an  army  of  that  magnitude  to  pass
by  one  or  two  paths,  or  to  carry  away  [sufficient]  water  [or  to
water  the  horses  and  beasts  of  burden].  They  marched  as  they
could  for  several  days,  but  from  want  of  water  they  lost  their
courage.  Numbers  of  the  cattle  perished ;  and  this  army,  too,
having  received  the  decree  of  defeat,  returned  to  Khorasdn.  As  it
was  winter,  and  as  two  armies  in  succession  had  fared  thus  badly,
he  gave  his  soldiers  a  general  leave  of  absence  [allowing  every
man]  to  return  to  his  own  home  and  country,  whether  he  came
from  the  confines  of  Turkistdn  or  the  farthest  extremity  of  Ir&k
and  Kirm&n.  At  this  juncture,  news  came  that  Shah  Ismail  was
advancing  on  Khor4san.  Now,  as  the  army  was  dispersed,  Shahi
Beg  Khdn  did  not  think  it  advisable  to  remain  in  Herat.  He  sent
messengers  to  the  surrounding  districts,  to  summon  the  Sultdns
and  Amirs  to  assemble  in  Merv,  whilst  he  himself  proceeded
thither ;  and  when  he  reached  Merv  he  found  Sh4h  Ismail  was
already  dose  upon  him,  as  shall  be  presently  related.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

232  ' War  between  Shdhi  Beg  and  IstnaiL

CHAPTER  XXI.

THE  BEGINNING  OF HOSTILITIES  BETWEEN SHAhI BEG KHAN AND  SHAH
ISMAIL. DEATH  OF  THE  FORMER  AT  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  LATTER.

It  is  written  at  the  beginning  of  this  Part,  and  is  mentioned  in
the  list  of  the  kings  who  were  reigning  in  the  different  countries
in  the  year  905,  that  Sh&h  Ismail  had  gained  complete  dominion
over  Irak.  His  dynasty  had  driven  the  Perfect  Law  l^Shariaf]  out
of  that  country,  and  had  brought  about  general  massacres.  How-
ever, there  is  no  room  in  this  Epitome  for  an  exposition  of  his
misdeeds.  When  the  frontiers  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan's  states  came
to  border  on  Irak,  the  Uzbeg  used  to  make  forays  into  those  parts
of  Irdk  which  immediately  adjoined  Khorasan.  On  this  account
6hah  Ismail  sent  an  envoy  to  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan,  bearing  suitable
gifts,  together  with  a  letter,  which  ran  as  follows :  *'  Hitherto  the
dust  of  dissension  has  never  settled  upon  the  skirts  of  our  thoughts
to  such  an  extent  as  to  raise  a  cloud  of  enmity.  Let  the  path  of
fatherly  conduct  be  observed  on  your  side,  and  on  this  side  the
bonds  of  filial  relationship  shall  be  established. [Verses]

Plant  the  tree  of  friendship :  for  its  fruit  will  be  the  desire  of  your  heart ;
Iloot  up  the  sapling  of  eomity,  which  produces  countless  griefs."

When  the  bearer  of  this  missive  arrived  ^  at  the  court  of  the
Khdn,  the  [following]  answer  was  returned :  *'  It  is  fitting  that
every  man  follow  the  profession  of  his  father.  If  he  follows  his
mother  he  is  going  backwards.  For  Uzun  Hasan  withdrew  himself
from  the  circle  of  kings,  on  the  day  that  he  gave  his  daughter  in
marriage  to  your  father,  a«  did  also  Sultdn  Yakub,  son  of  Hasan,
in  giving  him  his  sister.  You  had  a  right  to  make  claims  on  your
mother's  side,  so  long  as  there  was  no  son  in  the  world  like  me —
Sultan,  son  of  a  Sultan.  As  the  proverb  says :  '  Let  the  son  do
the  father's  work,  and  the  daughter  the  mother's.' [Yeises]

Kings  know  the  secrets  of  the  business  of  the  realm.

Oh ! Hdfiz,  thou  beggar,  sitting  in  the  comer,  do  not  complain.*'

Having  exhauste.d  his  eloquence,  Sh4hi  Beg  Khdn  sent  back  by
the  envoy  a  staff  [d^a]  and  a  beggar's  bowl  \kachhd\  adding:

^  The  Tnrki  MS.  is  fuller  here;  it  says:  Having  performed  the  requisite
ohseryanoes,  they  laid  the  presents  before  the  Khan  ana  submitted  the  letter  for
his  perusaL  When  Shahi  Beg  Khan  had  acquainted  himself  with  the  oontents
of  this  excellent  epistle,  he  mode  answer  .  .  .  . — B.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Death  of  Shdhi  Beg,  233

"  In  case  yon  have  forgotten  your  father's  trade,  I  remind  you
of  it. [Verses.]

Oh !  my  friend,  if  you  value  your  life  give  ear  to  good  counsel ;
Ye  happy  youths,  listen  to  the  wisdom  of  the  sage  old  man.

If  you  place  your  foot  on  the  step  of  sovereignty  think  of  your
own  danger. [Verses.]

He  may  clasp  the  hride  of  sovereignty  firmly  to  his  breast,
Who  dares  to  kiss  her  amid  the  clashing  of  keen  swords."

So  saying,  he  dismissed  the  envoy  from  Irdk,  while  he  himself
led  an  army  against  the  Hazara.  The  envoy,  on  his  return,
delivered  the  reply  to  Sh&h  Ismail,  who,  on  hearing  it,  said :  *'  If
it  is  incumbent  on  every  son  to  follow  his  father*s  trade,  we,
being  sons  of  Adam,  ought  all  of  us  to  practise  prophecy !  If
sovereignty  had  been  confined  to  the  hereditary  descendants  of
kings,  there  would  have  been  more  Pishdadi,  and  never  any
Kaiani.  How  would  Chingis  himself  have  beoome  king?  and
where  did  yovk  come  from  ?

[Verses.] Oh  I  youth,  do  not  boast  of  your  dead  father ;
Do  not,  like  a  dog,  take  delight  in  hones!"

Then,  in  return  for  his  presents,  he  sent  Sh^hi  Beg  Khan. a
spinning-wheel  and  spindle,  saying :  "  You  wrote  in  your  letter
to  me,  *  Whosoever  would  clasp  the  bride  of  sovereignty  close
to  his  breast  •  .  •  .'  I,  too,  say  the  same  thing,  and  behold,
I  have  bound  on  the  girdle  to  offer  you  fight,  and  have  placed
the  foot  of  contest  in  the  stirrup  of  fierce  warfare.  If  you
come  out  to  meet  me  face  to  face  in  battle,  our  claims  shall  be
thereby  decided.  And  if  you  will  not  fight,  go  and  sit  in  a
comer  and  busy  yourself  with  the  little  present  I  am  sending
you. [Verses.]

We  have  had  many  experiences  in  this  monastery  of  Becompenscs.
Whosoever  quarrelled  with  the  Family  of  the  Prophet  was  defeated."

Shahi  Beg  Khan  had  disbanded  his  army,  and  was  in  Merv  when
this  letter  arrived.  He  despatched  expresses  to  every  quarter  to
collect  his  forces,  but  before  even  the  troops  of  the  neighbouring
districts  could  assemble.  Shah  Ismail  arrived  and  pitched  his
camp  in  the  vicinity  of  Merv.  During  three  days  there  were
continual  skirmishes,  and  the  army  of  Shahi  Beg  Eh4n  began  to
muster  from  all  directions.  Shdh  Ismail  then  came  out  from  the
broken  ground  [where  he  was  camped],  and  when  the  pickets  of
the  Uzbeg  army  saw  this  movement  they  reported  it.  The  Uzbeg
[at  once]  imagined  that  the  enemy  had  repented  having  come^and
were  about  to  turn  back. At  the  hour of  afternoon  prayers.

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

234  War  between  Shdhi  Beg  and  IsniaiL

on  tho  ruz-i'SliaJc  of  Kamazan  in  the  year  916  [1510  A.u.],  they
marched  out,  with  a  force  of  about  20,000  men.  Some  of  his
advisers,  such  as  Amir  Eambar  and  Amir  Eai,  represented  that:
"  To-day  we  had  better  suspend  hostilities  [and  not  pursue  Shah
Ismail]  ;  for  Ubaid  Ullah  Sultan  and  Timur  Sultan  are  encamped
with  20,000  men  at  a  distance  of  one  farsdkh  ;  [to-morrow  they  will
come  and  join  their  force  to  ours].  Moreover,  it  has  been  positively
ascertained  that  the  enemy,  in  thus  returning,  either  means  to
retreat  or  [to  draw  us  on  to]  battle.  If  they  wish  to  fight,  we
had  better  [wait  until  more  of  our  troops  have  assembled  from  tho
surrounding  districts]  and  engage  them  with  as  large  a  force  as
possible.  And  if  they  are  really  in  flight,  there  is  no  necessity
for  the  chief  to  pursue  them '  in  person.  Ubaid  Ullah  Sultan,
Timur  Sultan,  and  a  few  other  Amirs  can  follow  them,  while  His
Majesty  the  Ehdn  can  travel  quietly  and  leisurely,  stage  by  stage,
right  into  Irdk.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  case  of  his  retreating
from  this  place,  our  men  can  drive  him  forward  and  rout  him,  so
that  he  will  not  have  strength  to  establish  himself  even  in  Ir4k."
To  this  the  Khan  replied :  "  [You  have  said  well]  nevertheless,  to
make  war  on  Shah  Ismail  is  a  holy  war,  and  one  of  importance :
moreover  there  will  be  much  plunder,  and  it  would  be  a  sacrifice
of  gain  in  this  world  and  advantage  in  the  next,  were  I  to  share
[this  undertaking]  with  the  Sultdns.  We  must  be  bold."  So
saying,  he  [mounted  his  horse  and  that  same  hour]  set  out  [in
pursuit  of  Shah  Ismail].  When  they  had  crossed  the  broken
ground  and  entered  the  open  plain,  they  saw  that  the  enemy  had
halted,  and  they  calculated  them  to  be  40,000  strong.  Before  the
Uzbeg  army  had  time  to  get  properly  into  fighting  order,  the
Turkoman  contingent  charged  them.  When  ShAhi  Beg  Khan's
men  saw  themselves  outflanked  by  the  enemy,  they  lost  their
steadiness  and  turned  in  flight.  But  the  leaders  of  the  army
stood  their  ground,  till  at  length  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan  and  all  his
officers  were  killed.  No  history  has  recorded,  nor  has  any  one  read
or  heard  of  [another]  battle  in  which  all  the  commanders  of  the
army  were  slain.

When  the  fugitives  reached  the  fort  of  Merv,  every  man  of  them
who  was  able  to  do  so,  took  his  family  and  fled,  while  such  as  were
unable,  repeated  the  verse  [from  the  Koran]  about  separation  from
wife  and  children,  and  then  departed.

Now,  most  of  the  Moghuls  had  been  sent  to  Khorasan  by  Shahi
Beg  Khan,  so  that  they  might  be  further  from  the  Khans  and
from  Moghulistdn.  When  the  Uzbeg  reached  the  River  Amu,  they
fell  into  the  hands  of  these  Moghuls,  who  did  not  fail  to  plunder
them.  20,000  Moghuls  then  separated  themselves  and  went  to
Kunduz.  Ubaid  Ullah  Sultan  and  Timur  Sultdn  were  still
encamped  near  Merv,  when  news  of .  the  defeat  reached  them.

Digitized  by  VjL^OSI  IC

Death  of  Shdhi  Beg.  235

They  iiumodiatcly  repaired  to  the  fort  of  Merv,  when  tbey  seized
the  haram  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  and  of  several  of  the  Sultans  and
nobles,  together  with  anything  that  caught  their  eye,  and  went
off  again  the  same  night.  Of  those  who  stayed  behind,  all  the
men  were  compelled,  by  the  flashing  swords  of  the  Turkomans,  to
taste  the  wine  of  martyrdom,  while  the  women  were  carried  off
into  bondage.  There  followed,  also,  a  general  massacre  of  the
people  of  Merv.

Meanwhile  Shah  Ismail  returned  to  Herat,  where  he  commanded
all  the  chief  men  \ak6ib%r\  of  the  town  to  assemble  in  the  Mulkdn
mosque,  and  read  the  Yhiiha ;  also,  while  the  Khui3ba  was  being
read,  to  pour  out  curses  upon  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  and
the  faithful  Aisha.  When  the  chief  men  were  met  together  in  the
mosque  of  Mulkan,  they  carried  out  that  unseemly  order,  and  then
remained  silent,  until  Hdflz-ud-Din,  who  was  the  preacher  \khit%h\
was  conducted  to  the  pulpit.  Hafiz  ascended  the  pulpit  and  gave
out  praise  and  thanksgiving  to  the  Bestower  of  all  good  gifts,  and
praises  to  the  Lord  of  all  living  things  [the  Prophet].  When  the
turn  came  for  the  blessed  names  of  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet,
the  hand  of  honour  and  piety  seized  the  collar  of  [faithfulness  to]
Isl4m  and  gave  him  the  courage  of  Haflz,  so  that  he,  preferring
the  good  things  of  the  next  world,  and  eternal  felicity,  to  this
transitory  life,  said :  "  For  many  years  I  have  read  the  Kkuiha
in  accordance  with  the  Sunna.  To-day,  the  sun  of  my  life  has
reached  the  west  of  old  age.  If  it  were  the  dawn  of  my  days,  I
might  not  have  hesitated  to  perform  this  act  of  infidelity  to  preserve
my  young  life ;  but  now  that  my  days  are  just  drawing  to  a  close,
what  benefit  could  I  derive  from  such  an  act  of  blasphemy  [Jcufr]  ?  "
So  saying,  he  proceeded  to  read  out  the  names  of  the  Companions,
with  the  customary  honour  and  respect.  The  accursed  Kizilbash
(may  God  curse  them)  rose  up  to  a  man,  and  pulled  the  hoary-
headed  Hafiz  down  from  the  pulpit,  by  his  collar,  trampled  him
under  their  feet,  and  then  cut  him  in  pieces;  while  the  great
men  of  the  city  all  fled.

On  the  following  day,  the  Shaikh-ul-Islam  (who  has  been
mentioned  among  the  great  men  of  KhordsAn)  was  sent  for  by
Sh4h  Ismail.  When  the  Shaikh  came  into  the  king's  presence,
the  king  turned  to  him  and  said  ;  "  Oh,  Shaikh !  you  are  a  learned
man.  It  is  a  pity  you  should  commit  an  error.  '  Come  and  curse
the  Companions  and  adopt  the  Shia  faith."  The  Shaikh  then
opened  his  lips  and  said :  "  Oh,  my  son !  what  do  you  know  of
religion,  that  you  should  point  out  the  way  thereof  to  me  ?  Bring
before  me  those  cowardly  men  who  are  nothing  more  or  less
than  infidels  and  worthy  of  death,  and  who  have  brought  you
to  this  sad  plight.  If  their  words  convince  me,  I  will  renounce
my  own  faith  and  enter  their  sect. But  if  the  superiority  of  my

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

236  Proceedings  of  Shah  Ismail.

religion  is  proved  against  them,  tlien  you  will  renounce  your
corrupt  belief  and  adopt  my  pure  faith."

Then  Shah  Ismail  turned  to  his  Ulama  and  asked  them  what
they  had  to  say  to  this.  They  i-eplied:  "With  people  such  as
these  words  are  of  no  avail."

That  hundred  times  a  wretch  twice  turned  towards  the  Shaikh
ul-IsUm  and  said :  "  Come,  Shaikh,  renounce  your  sect."  But  the
Shaikh  retorted  insultingly  :  "  Oh,  cursed  infidel,  may  your  mouth
he  filled  with  the  earth  of  malediction,  and  your  head  struck
with  the  stones  of  execration !  You,  who  are  deceived  by  false
and  wicked  guides,  and  cannot  distinguish  between  the  path  of
life  and  the  road  to  perdition :  what  do  you  know  of  religion,
or  of  sects  ?  How  do  you  know  Satan  from  God  the  all-merciful  ?
By  what  science,  learning,  intelligence,  or  perception  can  you
distinguish  the  true  from  the  false,  that  you  should  lecture  me
on  the  True  Faith?"  On  hearing  these  scornful  remarks,  the
king  laid  hold  of  his  bow  and  let  fly  an  arrow  at  the  Shaikh,
which  struck  him.  The  Shaikh  pidled  the  arrow  out,  rubbed
some  of  the  blood  that  issued  from  the  wound,  over  his  blessed
face  and  white  beard,  saying :  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  that  after  a
life  of  eighty  years  spent  in  the  confirmation  of  the  True  Faith,
and  the  recitation  of  false  doctrine,  I  have  seen  my  white  beard
stained  with  the  blood  of  martyrdom."  That  black-faced  heretic
\hadr}cuHi\  then  drew  another  arrow  from  his  quiver  [A;mA],  and
shot  it  at  the  Shaikh.  He  then  gave  orders  for  him  to  be
carried  out  and  hanged  on  a  tree,  and  for  the  tree  to  be
afterwards  cut  down  from  the  root.  The  Shaikh  fell  with  the
tree,  and  they  carried  him  away  and  burned  him  in  the  Malik
bazaar.  Try  as  they  might,  they  could  not  make  the  blessed
breast  of  the  Shaikh  to  bum,  and  he  lay  for  some  time  in  the
bazaar  exposed  to  the  kicks  of  infidels.  .  .  .  ^  In  short,  the  per-
secution was  continued  as  long  as  Shah  Ismail  remained  in
Khor4san.

A  summarised  account  of  the  rest  of  his  reign  will  follow.

*  Here  follows  a  rhetorical  passage,  explaining  why  God  allows  His  faithful
servants  to  be  exposed  to  calamity,  in  the  defence  of  the  truth. — B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

March  of  Bdbar  to  Kuftdus.  237

CHAPTER  XXII.

ARRIVAL OF  THE  UKWS  OF  THE DEFEAT OF SH^Hr BEG KHAn BY SHAH
ISMAIL. MARCH  OF  THE EMPEROR FROM KABUL  TO KUNDUZ.

In  the  early  part  of  Ramazan  of  the  year  916  [1510  a.d.]  a  person
came  to  Kdbul  with  a  letter. from  Mirzd  Kh4n  to  the  Emperor.
The  passes  were  blocked  with  snow,  for  it  was  the  season  of  the
beginning  of  Capricorn.  The  letter  contained  the  news  that  Shah
Ismail,  having  oome  from  Irdk,  had  engaged  and  defeated  Sh4hi
Beg  Khan  at  Merv.  It  had  not  been  fully  ascertained  whether
Sh4hi  Beg  Khan  had  been  killed  or  not.  ^  All  the  Uzbeg  had
recrossed  the  river  Amn,  and  fled  to  Knnduz,  where  Amir  Urus
Dnrman  then  was.  ^

Nearly  20,000  Moghuls,  having  separated  from  the  Uzbeg,  had
also  gone  to  Eundnz  from  Merv.  "  I,  myself,"  he  added,  "  have
gone  over  to  Ennduz.  If  you  will  quickly  turn  the  reins  of  your
power  in  the  direction  of  Kunduz,  I  will  attach  myself  to  you,
and  I  have  the  firmest  hope  that  you  may  soon  recover  your
hereditary  kingdom."

[As  soon  as  the  Emperor  had  read  the  contents  of  this  letter]  ho
set  out  with  all  possible  speed  [although  it  was]  in  the  depth  of
winter.  [He  took  the  route]  of  Ab  Dara  *  [since  by  that  route]
there  were  no  high  passes  to  cross.  He  kept  the  Feast  of
Ramazan^  in  the  Bamian  district,  and  at the beginning of

'  It  IB  Boxnewhat  singular  that  Mirza  Haidar  nowhere  reoords  the  death  of
Sbdhi  Beff  Khan,  or  giveB  any  aoconnt  of  how  it  took  place.  It  is  fully  reoorded,
however,  by  other  authors.  His  army  was  completely  routed  by  Shah  Ismail  at
Huhammadabad,  near  Mery,  in  1510,  when  Shahi  ueg,  attended  by  about  500
men,  chiefly  heads  of  tribes  and  persons  of  distinction,  had  to  fly  for  his  life.
They  were  pursued  and  took  refuge  in  a  walled  enclosure,  ereotea  for  herding
cattla  This  enclosure  had  but  one  entrance,  and  as  the  pursuers  pressed  towards
it,  those  inside  attempted  to  escape,  by  jumping  their  horses  oyer  the  wall  on  the
far  side,  at  the  foot  of  which  ran  a  riyer.  They  fell  in  heaps,  one  upon  another,
and  Shahi  Beg  was  crushed  and  smothered  by  those  who  followed  him.  After-
wards, his  body  was  disentangled  from  the  heap  of  men  and  horses,  and  his  head
was  cut  off  and  presented  to  Ismail,  who  ordered  a  number  of  barbarities  to  be
committed  with  the  Khan's  remains.  (See  Erskine's  HiU,^  i.,  p.  808 ;  Howorth
ii.,  p.  708,  etcs.)

'  This  Amir  Urus  I  cannot  trace.  He  appears  to  have  belonged  to  the  Durman
sub-tribe  of  Uzbegs,  who  nowadays  occupy,  according  to  Mayef,  the  yalley  of  the
lower  Yakhsh  or  Surkh^b. {Qeo^.  Mag.,  Dec,  1876,  p.  829).

'  The  Ah-dara  pass,  or  deflle,  is  frequently  mentioned  by  Baber,  thougb  wo
never  hear  of  it  nowadays.  It  appears  to  l>e  the  name  not  of  an  actual  pass
(or  kotaX)  across  the  main  range,  but  rather  that  of  a  deflle  leading  up  to  the
Shtbr^  or  Skibertu^  pass  from  the  northern  side,  and  was  used  only  in  winter  when
the  water  was  low.  The  name  does  not  occur  in  our  most  recent  maps.  (Seo
note  p.  86.)

*  The  2nd  January,  1511.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

238  March  of  Bdbar  to  Kunduz.

Shawal  reached  Kunduz,  where  he  was  reoeivedi  by  Mirza  Khan,
and  by  the  Moghuls  who  had  been  with  the  Uzbeg.  Having
reposed  for  a  few  days  in  Kundnz,  after  the  fatigues  of  die  journey,
it  was  proposed  that  they  should  prooeed  against  Hisar,  where
Hamza  Sultan  and  Mahdi  Sultdn,  two  of  the  most  eminent  of  the
Uzbeg  Sultans,  were  ruling.  The  winter  was  nearly  over  when
they  passed  the  River  Amu,  at  the  ford  of  Tukuz  Taram.  When
Hamza  Sultdn  heard  of  their  approach,  he  rode  out  of  Hisar  and
repaired  to  Yakhsh,  while  the  Emperor  advanced  to  the  plain
\da»M\  of  Kulak,  ^  which  is  one  of  the  most  noted  localities  in
Khatlan.  There  he  learnt  that  Hamza  Sultin  was  in  Yakhsh.
That  same  night  he  set  out  by  the  higher  road  to  surprise  Sultan
Hamza,  and  at  sunrise  reached  his  camp.  Nobody  was  there.
They  searched  on  every  side,  and  found  a  few  peasants,  who
gave  them  the  following  information  concerning  Hamza  Sultdn :
"  Yesterday,  at  the  hour  of  midday  prayers,  news  came  that  the
Emperor  had  pitched  his  camp  in  the  plain  of  Kulak,  whereupon
[Hamza  Sultdn]  immediately  set  out  for  that  place,  by  the  lower
road."  The  Emperor  at  once  started  in  pursuit,  along  the  road
which  Hamza  Sultan  had  taken,  and  at  noontide  prayers  again
found  himself  at  his  quarters  of  the  night  before.  Hamza  Saltdn,
for  his  part,  had  reached  the  camp  at  dawn,  and  found  a  precisely
similar  state  of  affairs ;  he,  too,  set  out  in  the  track  of  our  army,
and  at  midday  prayer  time  re-entered  his  own  camp.

The  Emperor  and  his  men  believed  that  Hamza  Sultan  would
not  be  able  to  resist  them ;  while  Hamza  Sultan,  on  the  other
hand,  thought  that  [the  Emperor]  had  only  brought  a  few  men
with  him  from  K4bul,  and  that  the  Moghul  army,  having  only
just  arrived,  would  not  yet  have  made  sufficient  preparations  to  be
able  to  fight.  As  both  sides  entertained  such  ideas  as  these,  they
became  afraid  of  one  another.^  That  same  night  the  Emperor
pressed  on  to  Kunduz,  while  Hamza  Sultan  fled  to  His&r.  After  a
few  days,  they  each  received  the  news  of  the  other's  flight,  and
both  of  them  repeated,  in  thankfulness  for  their  escape,  the  verse
"  Praise  be  to  God  who  has  averted  from  us  an  affliction."  The
Emperor,  on  reaching  Kunduz,  found  that  an  ambassador  had
arrived  from  Shah  Ismail,  bearing  tenders  of  friendship. In  the

*  Tuhiiz  Tardm  meang,  in  Turki/the  nine  **  branchings  "  or  **  forks  "  of  a  river.
The  ford  is  not  marked  on  any  map  that  I  am  acquainted  with,  nor  can  any  par-
ticular town  or  village  of  Vahhdt  be  located,  nor  the  Dasht-i-Kulak.  But  the
rente  tnken  from  Kunduz  to  Hisar  is  made  evident  by  a  rtference  to  the  map  in
this  volume.  In  all  probability,  whatever  town  or  fort  may  have  been  known  as
VaJ:Ji$ht  at  the  period  in  question,  would  have  been  situated  not  far  from  the
modem  Kurghdn  Ttpa,  or  the  Kurgan  Tube  of  Ruesian  maps. (See  pp.  21  and  24.)

*  The  outhor  seems  to  have  fallen  into  an  inconsistency  here.  As  all  the  texts,
both  Persian  and  Turki,  read  alike,  the  translation  is  allowed  to  stttnd.  If  each
side  thought  the  other  weak,  it  is  not  clear  why  they  should  have  dreaded  one
another  and  avoided  a  battle.

Digitized  by

Google

Account  of  the  Aiithor's  Uncle.  239

meantime  Kbanzada  Begum,  the  Emperor's  sister,  had  oome  from
Khor^sin  [having  been  sent  by  Shah  Ismail].  It  has  been  already
related  how  the  Emperor,  at  the  siege  of  Samarkand,  had  given
his  sister,  Kh4nz4da  Begum,  to  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  as  a  ransom  for
his  own  life,  and  had  thus  escaped.  The  Begum  was  taken  into
Shdhi  Beg  Khan's  haram,  and  by  him,  had  a  son  named  Khurram
Sbah  Sultan.  After  this,  the  Khan  [Sh4hi  Beg]  began  to  fear  that
she  might,  in  concert  with  her  brother,  plot  against  his  life ;  he
therefore  divorced  her,  and  gave  her  to  Sayyid  H&di,  one  of  the
most  eminent  Sayyids  of  the  Sayyiddtdi  ^ — a  man  who  was  held
in  the  greatest  respect  and  honour  by  himself  and  the  Sultans  and
all  the  Uzbeg.  Sayyid  Hadi  had  been  killed  in  the  battle  of
Merv,  and  the  Begum  and  her  son  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the
Turkomans.  When  Sh4h  Ismail  discovered  that  she  was  Babar
Padishah's  sister,  he  treated  her  with  great  attention,  and  sent  her
back,  with  an  ambassador  bearing  costly  gifts,  to  the  Emperor.
When  Khdnzada  Begum  arrived  [the  Emperor  was  overjoyed]  and
despatched  Mirza  Khdn  to  Sh4h  Ismail  laden  with  presents,  and
charged  with  protestations  of  submission,  good  faith,  and  entreaties
for  support  and  assistance.  Shdh  Ismail  received  him  well,  and
having  acceded  to  his  requests,  speedily  gave  him  leave  to  return.
During  this  interval,  a  messenger  came  from  my  uncle  to
announce  that  he  had  entirely  cleared  Farghana  of  the  Uzbeg,  and
that  he  had  brought  that  country  under  his  complete  control,  so
that  the  extermination  of  the  Uzbeg  and  the  conquest  of  Mavar4-
un-Nahr  would  now  become  an  easy  matter.  This  brings  me  to
the  next  chapter.

CHAPTER  XXIII.

BRIEF ACCOUNT  OF  THE PROCEEDINGS  OF  MY  UNCLE  SAYYID  MUHAMMAD
MIRZA,  AND  DETAILS  OF  THE  CONQUEST  OF  THE  COUNTRY  OP  FARGHANA.

At  the  time  of  the  devastation  of  Tishkand,  my  father's  brother,
Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza  (who  is  everywhere  spoken  of  in  this
book  as  ''  my  uncle  "  in  an  absolute  sense),  was  in  Tushkand,  in

^  In  order  to  explain  wbo  were  the  Sajyids  and  the  Sayyidutd,  I  cannot  do
better  than  cite  Sir  H.  Howorth.  He  informs  ns  (on  the  authority  of  M.  Schefer)
that  the  former  ^*  were  all  who  claimed  descent  from  tiie  Khalifs  Uaman  and  Ali,
throug^h  the  daughters  of  the  Prophet.  The  Khojas  claimed  descent  from  the
Khalifs  Abn-bakr  and  Omar,  hy  other  women  than  daughters  of  the  Prophet.
The  Sayyidfi  had  precedence  of  the  Khojas.  The  latter  were  divided  into  two
categories,  the  Khojas  Sayyid-ata,  who  possessed  deeds  proving  their  descent,
and  the  Khojas  Juibari,  whose  title-deeds  were  lost,  and  who  could  only  appeal  to
tradition  and  repute.' (Vol.  ii.,  p. 870.)

Digitized  by

Google

240  Account  of  tlie  Aut/ior's  Uncle.

the  service  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan.  When  the  Khans  went  to
attack  Andijdn,  thej  first  of  all  easily  subdued  K4san,  and  gave  it
to  my  uncle ;  they  next  proceeded  to  Akhsi,  whither  Sh4hi  Beg
Khan  had  also  gone,  and  there  a  fight  ensued,  which  has  been
already  mentioned.  On  the  news  of  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn's  victory
reaching  my  uncle,  he  left  Kasan  [immediately],  and  though  he
himself  had  not  been  defeated,  he  joined  those  who  were  flying  into
Moghulistan.  When  Sult&n  Mahmud  Khdn  went  into  Moghul-
istan  (as  has  been  mentioned)  my  uncle  remained  with  him  until
the  death  of  Sultdn  Ahmad  Kh4n.  After  this  event  (as  has  also
been  related)  the  Khan  said  to  my  uncle,  in  disparagement  of  Aksu
and  Moghulist&n :  *'  The  position  of  towel-washer  in  Tashkand  is
better  than  that  of  king  in  Moghulistan."  To  which  my  uncle
responded :  **  Verily,  it  is  better  if  one  is  allowed  to  wash  towels."
The  Khan  was  offended  at  these  words,  and  some  of  those  base  men
[ardzU\  whose  manner  it  always  is  to  slander  good  people  behind
their  backs,  strove  to  aggravate  the  Kh&n's  anger  to  such  a  degree
as  to  cause  him  to  put  my  uncle  to  death,  and  succeeded  in  pre-
venting any  reconciliation  ever  being  effected  between  the  two.
However,  the  Khan  said :  "  He  is  too  near  a  relation  for  me  to  take
extreme  measures  with.  As  he  has  no  evil  intentions  against  me,
let  him  take  himself  off;  let  him  go  to  Mansur  Khdn  at  Turfan."
My  uncle,  therefore,  was  sent  to  Turfan,  while  the  Khdn  himself
went  to  Moghulifitdn.  In  journeying  towards  Turfan,  my  uncle
allied  himself,  at  Aksu,  with  the  survivors  of  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan's
people,  who  had  remained  in  that  province.

When  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn  came  to  his  brother  in  Aksu,  his
son,  Sultdn  Muhammad  Sultan,  and  Amir  Ahmad  Itarji  were  left
in  Moghulistdn,  with  some  other  peraons,  and  on  the  whole  ruled
with  success.  They  sent  out  some  men  who  brought  my  uncle ;
and  he  and  Sultdn  Muhammad  Sultdn  lived  on  the  most  friendly
and  intimate  terms,  until  one  night  some  assassins  [fid&i\  disguised
as  servants,  came  and  murdered  Amir  Ahmad.  It  was  never
discovered  by  whose  order  this  deed  had  been  done.

After  this,  the  entire  government  of  Moghulistan,  and  the  autho-
rity of  Sultan  Muhammad  Sultdn,  devolved  upon  my  uncle.  But
for  want  of  the  old  army  and  of  able  councillors  [«aAi6-t-r(if]  my
uncle*s  affairs  did  not  prosper.  All  the  old  stock  and  the  chief
councillors  were  with  my  father,  and  had  aecompanied  him  to
Hisar,  so  that  nothing  could  be  accomplished  with  the  hundred
men  or  so,  that  my  uncle  had  with  him.

During  that  time,  Sultan  Said  Khdn  and  Sultdn  Khalil  Sultdn,
together  with  the  Kirghiz,  made  repeated  forays  into  Moghul-
istdn, so  that  my  uncle  [at  length]  fled  from  that  country  to  Yati-
kand,  which  was  the  residence  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn.  Those
same  base  men [arazil]  again  commenced  their  intrigues,  and

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Sultdn  Said  K/tdn  is  sent  to  Andijdn.  24 1

caused  my  uncle  to  be  seized  and  sent  to  the  TJzbeg.  Jani  Beg
Sult4n  was  at  the  time  in  Andijdn,  and  to  him  my  unde  was  taken.
Jdni  Beg  Sultdn  did  nothing  [to  injure  him],  but  rather  treated
him  with  his  wonted  kindness  and  consideration.  With  him  my
uncle  remained  until  the  time  of  Shdh  Ismail's  conquest,  and  the
Emperor's  expedition  from  Kdbul.  ^

In  the  spring  following  the  winter  when  Shahi  Beg  Khan  was
killed,  all  the  Sultdns  of  the  Uzbeg  assembled  in  Samarkand  ;  Jdni
Beg  Sultdn  also  went  thither,  taking  my  uncle  with  him.  At  that
meeting,  the  Sultans  came  to  the  conclusion  that  not  one  of  the
Moghuls  who  yet  remained  in  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  should  be  left  alive.
But  to  this  Jani  Beg  Sultdn  would  not  consent.  He  dismissed  my
uncle,  and  all  the  Moghnls  who  were  in  attendance  upon  him,  [per-
mitting them]  to  go  to  Andijdn  and  join  their  families.  My
uncle,  however,  placed  no  trust  in  the  permanence  of  Jani  Beg
Sultdn's  decision,  and  fearing  a  change  in  his  humour,  got  away
with  all  speed.  Soon  after  this,  Jdni  Beg  Sultan  regretted  the
action  he  had  taken,  and  sent  some  men  in  pursuit  of  these
Moghuls,  with  orders  to  put  to  death  any  they  should  find  of  them.
My  nncle  had  only  just  escaped  in  time.  On  his  arrival  at  Andijdn
he  joined  the  remainder  of  the  Moghuls  and  the  people  of  Andijdn ;
witii  these  he  raised  a  revolt,  and  drove  all  the  Uzbeg  out  of  the
country  of  Farghdna.  He  then  sent  a  messenger  to  the  Emperor,
by  way  of  Eardtigin,  *  to  inform  him  of  these  events,  and  to  beg
him  for  help,  as  has  been  mentioned  above.  The  news  filled  the
Emperor  with  joy.

CHAPTER  XXIV.

BABAR  PADIShIh  LEABNS  THE  SUCCESS  OF  MY  UNCLE  SAYTID  MUHAMMAD
MIRZA,  AND  SENDS  SULtIn  SAID KhAn  TO HIS  AID  IN ANDUiN.

Before  this  news  reached  Eunduz,  a  deputation  of  the  leading  men
[sdhih'i-r&i]  of  the  Moghuls,  such  as  Mir  Sharim,  Mir  Mazid,  Kul
Nazar  Mirzd,  Amir  Ayub,  Mir  Muhammad,  Mir  Ibrdhim,  Yadgdr
Mirzd,  Kard  Sultdn  Ali  Mirzd,  Mir  Ghuri  Barlds,  Amir  Ddim  Ali,
Mirzd  Muhammad,  Mir  Beg  Muhammad,  Mir  Kambar,  Shdh  Nazar
Mirzd,  Kutluk  Mirdk  Mirzd,  and  others,  came  and  represented  to
the  Khdn,  at  a  private  interview,  that  if  he  desired  it  they  would

*  Viz.,  in  917  a.h.,  or  1511  a.d.

*  The  word  often  reads  jBTatV  Tagin^  and  in  the  present  instance  all  the  texts
spell  it  in  that  way.  I  have,  however,  adhered  to  Kardiigin  throughout,  as  that
is  known  to  be  the  real  name  of  the  country.

R

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

242  Sultdn  Said  Khan  is  sent  to  Andijdn,

make  away  with  the  Emperor,  and  set  Hm  [Sultdn  Said  £Mn]
in  his  place.  [For  at  that  time  there  were  20,000  Moghnls
armed  and  fully  prepared,  while  there  were  not  more  than  5,000
Chaghatais.]  But  the  Khan  replied :  "  During  the  period  of  the
hurricane  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan*8  conquests,  when  the  buffetings  of
the  waves  of  calamity  and  contention  dashed  in  pieces  the  ships  of
the  life  and  prosperity  of  the  Moghul  Khakans,  [and  they  had  all
been  drowned  in  the  ocean  of  annihilation]  I  saved  myself  upon
the  plank  of  concealment,  and  arrived  at  length  at  the  island  of
K&bul,  which  B4bar  Padishdh  had  contrived  to  save  from  the
violent  shocks  of  the  billows  of  events,  and  where  he  then  was.
On  this  island,  the  Emperor  protected  me  with  the  utmost  benevo-
lence. Now  that  I  have  attained  the  shore  of  prosperity,  how
malicious,  how  ungrateful  it  would  be  for  me  to  perform  so  ignoble
an  act.  [The  Holy  Law  and  the  dictates  of  humanity  prevent  my
entertaining  any  such  base  thoughts.]  "  By  the  hand  of  Amir
Kdsim  Kuchin,  who  stood  in  the  place  of  guardian  to  the  Emperor,
he  sent  the  following  message :  "  Praise  be  to  Gk)d,  the  affairs  of
[your]  State  are  to-day  prosperous,  and  the  various  peoples  are
turning  their  fEtces  towards  the  palace  of  that  Befuge  of  the
Nations  [your  Majesty].  The  Moghuls,  more  especially,  who  are
distinguished  above  all  other  tribes  by  their  numbers  and  their
strength,  and  whose  Amirs  have  been  the  most  eminent  of  Amirs,
have  always  devoted  their  energies  to  the  advancement  of  the
work  of  their  colleagues  [iZmd-iViiw] ;  they  now  turn  to  your
Majesty.  It  is  no  longer  expedient  for  me  to  remain  near  you ;  it
is  fitting  that  our  ancient  union  should  be  changed  to  separation.
If  your  Majesty  send  me  to  some  quarter,  where  it  will  be  possible
for  the  bonds  of  our  old  affection  to  remain  fastened,  it  will  con-
tribute to  the  welfare  of  both."

Just  at  this  time  news  came  from  Andijdn,  together  with  my
uncle's  petition  for  help.  The  Ehan  was  immediately  sent  off  to
Andij4n,  together  with  every  one  that  thought  fit  to  go.  These
events  will  be  presently  related,  if  it  please  God.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Accession  of  Bdbar  in  Mdvard-un-Nahr.  243

CHAPTER  XXV,

AOGE8SION  OF  bIbAR  PADISHAH  TO  THE  THBONE  OF  mAyARI-UN-NAHB.

After  the  Khan  had  been  despatched  to  Andijan,  Mirz4  Khdn
arrived  with  the  auxiliary  force  which  had  been  sent  by  Sh4h
Ismail,  and  thus  the  power  of  the  Emperor  became  complete.
Then,  without  delay,  his  Majesty  marched  for  the  country  of
His&r;  on  learning  which  the  XJzbeg,  on  their  part,  collected
their  forces,  and  under  the  leadership  of  Hamza  Sultdu,  Mahdi
Sultan,  Timur  Sultdn,  and  several  others  of  their  great  Sultans,  set
out  to  oppose  the  Emperor.  Euchum  Kh&n — who  had  been  set  up
in  the  place  of  Sh4hi  Beg  Kh4n — Suyunjuk  Sult4n,  J4ni  Beg
Sultan,  Ubaid  Ullah  Sultdn,  and  all  the  other  [Uzbeg]  Sultdns,
had  assembled  and  encamped  at  Earshi,  which  was  originally
called  Nakhshab.  When  the  Emperor  approached  the  Pul-i-
Sangin,  Hamza  Sultdn  advanced  and  occupied  it.  Both  sides
remained  encamped  for  nearly  one  month.  Finally  it  became
apparent  that  the  Uzbeg  force  was  numerous,  their  Sultdns
renowned,  and  that  it  would  be  a  difficult  matter  to  resist  them.
The  Uzbeg,  on  their  part,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Emperor
was  unable  to  withstand  them,  and  crossed  the  river  by  swimming
it  below  the  Pul-i-Sangin.  Intelligence  of  this  reached  [Bdbar]  at
about  afternoon  prayer-time,  and  he  immediately  broke  up  his
camp  and  advanced  towards  Abdara,  a  locality  where  there  are
mountain  fastnesses.  They  continued  to  march  at  their  best  speed
all  through  that  night,  until  the  midday  prayers  of  the  following
day,  when  they  reached  a  spot  which  the  most  experienced  leaders
considered  strongly  enough  protected  to  justify  a  halt.  At  mid-
night news  came  that  the  Uzbeg  were  advancing  in  full  force ;
the  commanders  announced  this  simultaneously  to  the  whole
army,  and  up  to  daybreak  every  man  was  busy  getting  his  arms
ready  [for  action].  About  sunrise  .  .  .  .^  our  pickets  came  in  and
reported  that  the  Uzbeg  army  was  approaching,  Thereupon  the
Emperor  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  to  the  top  of  some  rising
ground.  He  saw  that  there  was  only  one  road  by  which  the
enemy  could  advance ;  on  the  left  hand  of  the  elevation  [on  which
he  stood]  there  was  another  hill,  and  between  the  two  there  was  a
deep  ravine,  through  which,  also,  only  one  road  led.  When  the
enemy  had  deployed  on  the  level  plain,  they  saw  that  it  would  be
no  easy  task  to  ascend  [the  first  mentioned]  hilL Timur  Sultdn

*  A  rhetorical  interpolation  of  three  lines,  deacriptive  of  the  victory  of  the  day
over  the  night,  ia  omitted  here. — ^B.

R  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

244  Accession  of  Bdbar  to  the

and  some  of  the  other  Sultana,  with  about  10,000  men,  detached
themselves  from  the  rest  of  the  army  and  began  to  mount  the
other  hill.  Against  these  the  Emperor  sent  Mirza  Khan  with  a
detachment  of  brave  warriors.  At  this  moment  his  eye  fell  upon
a  body  of  men,  and  he  asked  who  they  were.^  When  [my  father]
had  left  Kabul,  there  were  nearly  3000  of  his  hereditary  retainers,
[who  had  come  from  Khorawin  to  Kunduz  with  the  Moghuls].
The  chiefs  and  leaders  of  these  men,  the  Emperor  had  taken  into
his  own  service,  and  some  of  the  remainder  became  attached  to
myself.  It  was  upon  this  latter  body  that  the  Emperor's  eye  now
fell.  They  replied:  "We  are  MirzA  Haidar's  followers."  The
Emperor  then  [addressing  me]  said :  "  You  are  still  too  young  to
take  part  in  such  serious  affairs  as  these.  Stay  by  me ;  [keep  by
you]  Mauldnd  Muhammad  and  a  few  others,  and  send  the  rest  to
the  aid  of  Mirzd  Khan."

When  my  retainers  came  up  with  Mirz4  Khan,  the  Uzbeg  made
a  charge,  bearing  down  \baT  d(uMand'\  every  one  who  was  in  front
of  Mirza  Khan,  till  they  came  close  upon  Ihe  Mirza  himself.  At  that
crisis  my  retainers  arrived  on  the  scene.  Their  leader  was  Ataka
Fakir,  whose  name  was  Jan  Ahmad  Ataka ;  '^  hereafter,  wherever
his  name  occurs,  he  will  be  called  by  the  latter  stj'le.  He  attacked
the  Uzbeg  with  the  men  under  him,  and  put  them  to  flight.  Then
those  who  had  fled  from  before  Mirza  Khan  rallied,  and  returning
to  the  fight,  drove  the  enemy  back.  In  the  midst  of  this  confusion
and  scuffle,  one  of  my  men  took  one  of  the  enemy  prisoner,  and  led
him  before  the  Emperor,  who  viewed  it  as  a  good  omen  [/ar|,  and
said  :  "  Inscribe  the  name  of  Mirza  Haidar  upon  the  first  trophy
\j\Mu\r  Thus,  fighting  continued  on  the  left  of  the  army  till
evening.  But  on  the  Emperor's  side  [of  the  army]  there  were  no
engagements,  for  the  road  was  very  narrow,  and  his  position  was
not  easy  of  approach  from  either  side.  At  the  hour  of  afternoon
prayers  the  brave  warriors,  having  left  the  Emperor's  presence,
dismounted  and  encamped.  At  nightfdU  [6i</(iA]  the  enemy  found
it  impossible  to  encamp  where  they  were,  on  account  of  the  absence
of  water — for  none  was  to  be  had  except  at  a  distance  of  one
fars&kh — so,  with  the  object  of  being  near  water  when  night  came
on,  they  retreated.  The  infantry,  who  had  descended  [the  hill],
ran  after  them,  shouting  Hai !  Hai !  [and  making  a  great  noise].
That  portion  of  the  enemy's  army  which  was  opposite  to  Mirza
Kh4n,  also  became  anxious  to  retire,  as  soon  as  they  saw  that
Hamza  Sultdn,  who  was  in  their  centre  [^liul\^  was  in  retreat.
As  long  as  the  two  armies  remained  facing  each  other,  neither  side

>  For  this  passage  the  Turki  MS.  substitutes :  The  Emperor  asked  them  who
they  were. They  replied,  "  We  are  Mirza  Haidnr's  followers."— R.

*  The  Turki  MS.  says:  Their  leader  was  a  poor  man  [fakir]  named  Jan
Ahmad. — R.

»  Ghul  is  a  Mongolian  viorOi,  also  written  iTuL— R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Throne  of  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  245

prevailed  over  the  other.  But  when  the  enemy  turned  to  retire,
those  of  Mirzd  Khdn's  men  who  had  been  facing  them,  [suddenly]
made  a  charge,  and  the  enemy  at  once  fled.  When  the  centre  saw
this  division  put  to  rout,  they  too  let  the  reins  of  self-possession
fall  from  the  band  of  stability,  and  likewise  turned  and  fled.  It
was  at  the  hour  of  evening  prayers  that  Hamza  Sultdn,  Mahdi
Sult4n,  and  Mamak  Sultdn,  who  had  been  captured,  were  led
before  the  Emperor,  who  did  to  them  that  which  Shaibdni  had
done  to  the  Moghul  Khdkans  and  the  Chaghatai  Sultans.^

From  night  to  morning  and  from  morning  to  the  next  night,
did  our  men  pursue  the  Uzbeg — as  far  as  the  frontier  [of  the
State]  of  Darband-i-Ahanin.  The  whole  of  the  victorious  army
now  assembled  in  Hisar,  when  further  help  arrived  from  Shah
Ismail,  besides  bodies  of  men  from  all  the  surrounding  tribes,
so  that  the  entire  force  amounted  to  60,000  men.  They  next
marched  out  of  Hisar  and  proceeded  to  Karshi.  Most  of  the
Uzbeg  Sultans  were  in  Samarkand,  while  Ubaid  XJllah  Khan  had
fortified  himself  in  the  castle  of  Karshi.  All  [the  Emperor's]
councillors  (and  they  were  those  who  solved  the  difficult  questions
of  State)  were  against  laying  siege  to  Karshi.  "  It  would,"  they
argued,  "  be  far  wiser  to  push  on  to  Bokhara.  For  if  Ubaid  Ullah
keeps  himself  strongly  fortified  and  garrisoned  in  the  castle  of
Karshi,  Bokhara,  which  is  devoid  of  troops  and  full  of  fools,  will
fall  easily  enough  into  our  power.  He  has  nothing  to  gain  by
staying  in  Karshi.  [God  forbid  that,  fearing  to  remain  there,]  he
should  abandon  the  fort  and  come  out."  ^  I'he  Emperor  agreed
with  these  opinions,  and  passing  Karshi,  went  and  encamped  [at  a
distance  of  one  stage  beyond  it].  Scouts  came,  in  rapid  succession,
to  report  that  Ubaid  Ullah  had  come  out  of  the  fort  of  Karshi  and
was  on  the  road  to  Bokhai'd.  At  that  same  hour  the  Emperor
mounted  his  horse,  and  set  out  with  all  speed  in  pursuit  of  the
Uzbeg.  He  marched  night  and  day  until  he  reached  the  city.
The  pursuers  drove  the  Uzbeg  out  of  Bokhara  into  the  deserts
[chul]  of  Turkistan,  plundering  as  they  went.

When  the  Uzbeg  Sultans  who  were  assembled  in  Samarkand
heard  this  news,  they  were  suddenly  filled  with  terror  and  fled,
scattered  and  dismayed,  to  different  parts  of  Turkistan.

Now  when  the  Emperor  arrived  in  Bokhara,  he  sent  back  the

*  Baber's  account  of  theae  traDsactioDB  is  wanting  in  his  Memoirs.  The  battle
here  described  took  place  early  in  1511,  while  the  period  1508  to  tlie  beginning
of  1519  is  one  where  a  break  occurs  in  his  Memoirs.  It  is  known,  however,  that
he  put  the  two  first-named  Sultans  to  death  as  traitors,  for  they  had,  at  one  time,
been  in  his  service,  and  had  deserted  him  to  join  the  cause  of  Shaibaui.  (See
Erskine,  Hisi,y  i.,  p.  145.)  Tlie  antecedents  of  Mam&k  do  not  appear  to  be
recorded  anywhere.

*  The  meaning  of  these  obscure  passages  appears  to  be,  that  Ubaid  Ullah  alone
was  formidable ;  that  he  was  too  strong  to  admit  of  an  attack  on  Karshi,  and
plight  also  prove  dangerous  if  he  came  out  to  attack  Baber.

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

246  Accession  of  Bdbar  in  Mdvard-un-Nahr,

auxiliaries  of  Shah  Ismail,^  after  praising  them  for  their  services
and  bestowing  upon  them  adequate  rewards,  while  he  himself,
victorious  and  covered  with  glory,  proceeded  to  Samarkand.  All
the  inhabitants  of  the  towns  of  M&vara-un-Nahr,  high  and  low,
nobles  and  poor  men,  grandees  and  artizans,  princes  and  peasants
— alike  testified  their  joy  at  the  advent  of  the  Emperor.  He  was
received  by  the  nobles,  while  the  other  classes  were  busy  with  the
decoration  of  the  town.  The  streets  and  the  bazaars  were  draped
with  cloth  and  gold  brocades,  and  drawings  and  pictures  were
hung  up  on  every  side.  The  Emperor  entered  the  city  in  the
middle  of  the  month  of  Eajab  in  the  year  917,  in  the  midst  of
such  pomp  and  splendour  as  no  one  has  ever  seen  or  heard  of,
before  or  since.  The  angels  cried  aloud :  "  Enter  with  peace,"  and
the  people  exclaimed :  "  Praise  be  to  God,  Lord  of  the  Universe.*'
The  people  of  M4vara-un-Nahr,  especially  the  inhabitants  of
Samarkand,  had  for  years  been  longing  for  him  to  come,  that  the
shadow  of  his  protection  might  be  cast  upon  them.  Although,  in
the  hour  of  necessity,  the  Emperor  had  clothed  himself  in  the
garments  of  the  Kizilbash  (which  was  pure  heresy,  nay  almost
unbelief),  they  sincerely  hoped,  when  he  mounted  the  throne  of
Samarkand,  (tiie  throne  of  the  Law  of  the  Prophet)  and  placed  on  his
head  the  diadem  of  the  holy  Sunna  of  Muhammad,  that  he  would
remove  from  it  the  crown  of  royalty  \Sh6M\  whose  nature  was
heresy  and  whose  form  was  as  the  tail  of  an  ass.

But  the  hopes  of  the  people  of  Samsirkand  were  not  realised.  For,
as  yet,  the  Emperor  did  not  feel  able  to  dispense  with  the  aid  and
support  of  Shdh  Ismail ;  nor  did  he  consider  himself  sufficiently
strong  to  cope  single-handed  with  the  Uzbeg ;  hence  he  appeared
to  overlook  [muddrd]  the  gross  errors  of  the  Kizilbash.  On  this
account,  the  people  of  M4vara-un-Nahr  ceased  to  feel  that  intense
longing  for  the  Emperor  which  they  had  entertained  while  he
was  absent — their  regard  for  him  was  at  an  end.  It  was  thus
that  the  Emperor  began  [already]  to  flatter  the  Turkomans,  and
associate  himself  with  them.^

*  Erakine,  in  hia  History  of  India,  notes  that  the  historian  Khafi  Khan  (follow-
ing the  Tarikh-i-Alam  Aral  Abasi  of  Mirza  Sikandnr)  makes  Baber  dismiss  the
Persian  auxiliaries  after  the  march  to  Samarkand ;  while  Mirza  Haidar  states
here  that  they  were  sent  away  from  Bokhira.  Erskine  prefers  the  statement  of
Khdfi  Khan,  and  thinks  that  dismissal  from  Bokdra  would  have  been  premature
under  the  circumstances  and,  therefore,  improbable. (Vol.  i.,  p.  316,  footnote.)

'  It  appears,  from  what  Erskine  remarks,  that  much  difference  of  opinion  exists
among  Asiatic  historians  as  to  some  uf  the  events  of  this  period — viz.,  9Ui  to
about  921  A.H. — an  interval  which  falls  just  within  one  of  those  gaps  which  unfor-
tunately occur,  in  several; places,  in  the  course  of  Saber's  Memoirs.  In  this
instance,  the  gap  extends  from  the  beginning  of  914  to  the  beginning  of  925  (May,
1508,  to  January,  15 19),  so  that  his  own  explanation  of  his  transactions  with
Stiah  Ismail  is  wanting,  and  dijfficulty  lias  been  found  in  fixing  their  exact  dates.
It  would  appear  that  Indian  historians,  such  as  Firishta,  Khdfi  Khan,  and
Abul  FazI,  differ  entirely  in  their  views  from  the  Persian  writers,  Iskaudar  Beg
and  Khundamir. The  foimcr  group  stute  that  the  coin  was  struck  and  the

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

The  Khdfis  Journey  to  Andijdn.  247

CHAPTER  XXVL

THJs  khIn's  journet  TO  andijIn  and  events  that  occurred  there.

It  has  been  recounted  above,  that  tbe  Emperor  sent  the  Kh&n  to
Andijan.  Along  with  him  he  sent,  of  the  Moghnl  Amirs,  Mir
Ghuri  Barlas,  Mir  Daim  Ali  and  his  brother  Ahmad  Ali,  Mahmnd
Kuli,  Mirza  Muhammad  Begjik  and  his  brother  Beg  Muhammad ;
of  the  tribe  of  Dnghldt,  Shah  Nazar,  Mirzd  Ali,  Eutluk  Mirdk ;  of

Khuiha  (prayer  for  the  soyereign)  waa  read  in  Baber's  name,  while  the  Persian
authors  ajffirm  that  Ismairs  name  was  employed  as  that  of  sovereign  in  917  (1511).
Affain,  when  referilDg  to  the  subsequent  battle  with  the  Uzbeg  under  Ubaid
Uilah  at  Kul  Malik,  the  Indian  writers  make  Baber's  army  very  small  and  that
of  Ubaid  Ullah  very  numerous,  while  one  of  them  (Abul  Fazl)  goes  so  far  as  to
give  Baber  the  victory,  though  he  acknowledges  that  the  Emperor  had  to  beat  a
retreat.  Mr.  B.  S.  Poole,  who  has  gone  thoroughly  into  the  subject  (taking  the
coinage  of  the  period  as  his  principu  guide),  cites  Khundamii  to  show  that  there
was  an  agreement  between  Baber  and  Ismail,  to  the  effect  that  if  Tiansoxiana
were  to  be  conquered  by  the  Allies,  the  prayer  and  ooiuage  should  be  in  the  name
of  the  Shah.  He  then,  in  support  of  Kiiundamir,  points  to  a  recently-discovered
coin  of  Babel's  reign  in  Tzvnsoxiana,  which  bears  the  Shia  formula  and  tho
names  of  the  twelve  Imdms ;  and  concludes  from  this,  and  some  other  numis-
matic evidence,  that  **  Baber  caused  the  Ehutba  to  be  said  and  the  coinage  to  be
struck  in  the  names  of  Shah  Ismail,  as  over-lord  and  himself  as  vassal."  This
indeed  is  evidence  that  cannot  easily  be  gainsaid,  and  it  derives  something  very
like  confirmation,  when  the  religious  bias  of  the  various  authors  who  have  com-
mented on  these  transactions  is  considered.  Their  historical  opinions  appear  to
be  governed,  to  a  great  extent,  by  their  sectarian  feelines,  and  in  no  case  is  this
more  evident  than  in  that  of  Mirza  Haidar.  There  can  be  no  question  that,  what-
ever may  be  the  true  facts  regarding  the  Khutba  and  the  coinage,  Baber  gave
great  offence  to  the  Sunnis  by  acting  in  subordinate  alliance  with  the  fanatical
Shia,  Ismail,  and  by  adopting  the  national  costume  of  the  Kizil-b&sh,  for  himself
and  his  men.  This  was  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  subordination  to  Shia
interests,  which  all  would  feel  and  understand.  Shah  Ismail  had  lost  no  oppor-
tunity of  insulting  the  Sunni  religion,  and  as  Mirza  Haidar  relates,  had  treated
some  of  their  most  revered  divines  with  barbaric  cruelty.  It  is  scarcely  sur-
prising, therefore,  that  Mirza  Haidar  should  speak  with  bitterness  of  the  trans-
actions of  his  couJain  and  protector,  with  the  Persian  Shias  and  their  Turkoman
allies  at  this  period,  or  that  oven  his  historical  statements  should,  to  some  degree,
be  underlaid  with  rancour.  It  should  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  in  accord-
ance with  one  of  the  curious  anomalies  of  the  times,  Mirza  Haidar  had  a  family
connection  with  Baber's  opponent,  and  the  enemy  of  his  own  race.  Ubaid  Ullah
was  his  brother-in-law,  and  it  is  remarkable,  throughout  the  Tdrtkhri-Rashidi,
that  the  tie  of  relationship  often  counted  for  a  great  deal.  On  the  other  hand,
Baber  owed  Shah  Ismail  a  debt  of  gratitude  for  rescuing  his  sister,  Kh^nzada
Begum,  as  related  at  p.  239.

With  regard  to  the  missing  pages  in  Baber's  Memoirs,  Mr.  B.  S.  Poole  believes
that  their  absence  may  be  accounted  for  by  a  desire,  on  the  part  of  the  autobio-
grapher,  to  hide  the  traces  of  proceedings  which  he  could  only  look  back  upon  with
shame.  This  view,  I  cannot  help  thinking,  requires  some  substantiation.  In  the
first  place,  the  objectionable  connection  with  the  Shias  extended  only  over  the
period  916  to  921 — some  five  years — while  the  gap  in  the  Memoirs  embraces  the
eleven  years,  from  914  to  925.  If  the  object  of  the  writer  had  been  to  hide  the  traces
of  events  of  the  shorter  period,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  reason  for  also  destroy-
ing the  record  of  an  aaditional  period  of  six  years.  Secondly,  this  |;ap  in  the
Memoirs  is  not  the  only  one ;  there  is  another,  which  extends  from  late  m  the  year

Digitized  by

Google

248  The  Khdfis  Journey  to  Andijdn,

the  Kunji  Amirs,  Kul  Nazar  Mirzd,  Ehananki^  Mirza,  Amir
Kambar,  son  of  Haidar  Kukildash  Barki,  and  others.  All  these
departed  in  the  train  of  the  Khan.  This  party,  on  their  arrival  at
Andijan,  were  received  by  my  uncle  and  the  Amirs  who  had
assisted  him  in  the  conquest  [istikhUs]  of  Farghana,  sudh  as
Sultdn  Ali  Mirza  Begjik,  Pishka  Mirza  Itdrji,  Tubra  Nuydghut
and  others,  who  all  came  and  kissed  the  Ehdn's  stirrup.

After  the  Khan  had  come  to  Andijan,  the  Uzbeg  Sultdns  in
Samarkand  heard  of  his  arrival  and  of  the  support  he  brought  the
Moghuls  of  Andijan.  [Moreover]  as  was  mentioned  above,  Hamza
Sult4n,  Mahdi  Sultdn  and  Timur  Sultdn,  together  with  a  few
other  Sultans,  had  assembled  in  Hisar  with  the  intent  of  opposing
the  Emperor.  Although  Ubaid  Ullah  Sult4n  knew  that  Sh&h
Ismail  had  given  over  [the  kingdom  of]  Mdvara-un-Nahr  to  the
Emperor,  and  was  not  going  there  in  person,  he  [Ubaid  Ullah
Sultan]  nevertheless,  by  way  of  precaution,  stayed  and  occupied
Earshi.  What  happened  to  him  has  just  been  mentioned.  Jani
Beg  Sultan,  Euchum  Eh4n  and  Suyunjuk  Sultdn  advanced  towards
Akhsi  and  Andijan,  in  order  to  check  the  downfall  of  Farghdna.
The  Ehan  had  made  no  preparations  in  Andijan,  when  news  of
their  approach  arrived,  but  he  then  despatched  Sultan  Ali  Mirza
and  Tubra  Nuyaghut  Mirza  to  Easan.  As  the  castle  of  Easan
was  not  well  fortified,  these  men  went  and  made  it  strong.  It
was  the  first  place  which  the  Uzbeg  Sultans  attacked,  and  they
reduced  it  to  straits.  On  learning  this  news,  the  Ehan  sent  all  the
captains  of  his  army  to  the  hills  of  Easan,  [hoping  that]  although
they  were  not  strong  enough  to  cause  the  Uzbeg  to  fear  them,*  yet
they  might,  at  least,  be  able  to  harass  their  fianks,  and  inflict  some
discomfort  and  annoyance  on  them ;  also  that  the  force  in  Edsdn
would  thereby  be  somewhat  encouraged.

When  this  body  was  sent  to  [help]  the  E4s4ni,  news  of  the  event
reached  the  ears  of  Aba  Bakr  Mirza,  who  had  just  come  from
Eashghar,  with  the  project  of  seizing  the  kingdom  of  Farghana.
He  had  taken  possession  of  all  the  country  above  Andijan,  such  as

908  U)  the  end  of  909,  and  a  third,  whore  nearly  six  years  are  wanting,  viz.,  from  926
to  932.  Yet  in  these  periods,  it  is  nowhere  suffgestod  that  Baber  was  oonoerned  in
proceedings  of  which  he  had  reason  to  be  ashamed,  or  the  evidenoe  of  which  he
desired  to  obliterate.  In  the  third  place,  it  is  noticeable  that  in  each  oafle  where
a  gap  occurs,  the  narrative  breaks  off  suddenly  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence — a
circumstance  that  points  rather  to  the  accidental  loss  of  certain  sheets  of  the
manuscript,  than  to  premeditated  destruction,  or  a  design  to  omit  any  particular
events.  The  matter,  however,  need  hardly  be  pursued  in  detail  here.  (See
Erskine,  Hist,,  i.,  p.  321 ;  B.  S.  Poole,  Cat  of  Coins  of  Shahs  of  Persia  in  BriL
Mus.,  1887,  pp.  xxiv.,  seqq.  Also,  on  the  general  question  of  Baber  and  Ismail^
Howorth,  ii.,  pp.  712-13.)

^  This  name  is  very  uncertain.  It  may  be  read  Jan^t,  and  perhaps  in  othe^
ways.  .

*  TbQ  Turki  MS.  has :  to  m^t  the  Uzbeg  face  to  face.— R.

Digitized  by

Google

and  Events  that  Occurred  There,  249

Uzcband  ^  (better  known  as  Uzkand),  Mddn  ^  and  Usb,  wbicb
comprise  tbe  best  parts  of  Fargbana;  and  be  now  [on  bearing
tbat  tbese  troops  bad  left  Andijan]  marcbed  towards  tbat  place
intending  to  lay  siege  to  it.  [He  imagined  tbat  tbe  fort  of
Andijan  was  a  very  strong  and  large  one,  and  tbat,  witbont  ibe
necessary  siege  appliances,  it  could  not  be  taken  by  a  party  of  two
or  tbree  thousand  assailants.  Therefore,  be  first  got  ready  some
engines  [manjanik\  ladders,  etc.,  and  then  set  out  for  Andij&n].
Wben  news  of  this  was  brought  to  tbe  Kbdn,  be  and  all  bis  people
were  filled  with  tbe  utmost  alarm.

In  the  meanwbile  tbe  Uzbeg  Sultdns  bad  delivered  a  simul-
taneous attack  on  tbe  fort  of  Kdsan,  bad  made  breacbes  on  all
sides  and  applied  tbe  scaling  ladders.  Sucb  was  tbe  violence  of
tbeir  assault  tbat  those  witbin  tbe  fort,  giving  up  all  hope  of
being  able  to  defend  it,  made  tbeir  escape  by  the  gateway  on  tbe
side  removed  from  tbe  river.  All  tbe  Uzbeg  army  bad  dismounted
and  were  on  foot ;  they  bad  not  thought  of  tbe  garrison  taking
fiigbt,  and  before  they  bad  time  to  get  back  to  their  horses  and
mount,  the  fugitives  bad  gone  a  great  distance.  But  those  who
lagged  behind  they  put  to  death,  together  with  tbe  people  of  tbe
fort.3

Tbe  garrison  tbat  bad  escaped  from  tbe  fort,  fell  in  witb  those
captains  who  had  been  sent  to  tbe  bills  of  Kasan  to  succour  them.
They  now  all  went  straight  on,  until  they  arrived  at  a  spot  witbin
half  a  fars&kh  of  Andijan,  where  tbey  found  Aba  Bakr  Mirz4
encamped,  witb  all  bis  siege  appliances  made  ready ;  for  be  bad
determined  to  deliver  an  assault  from  all  sides,  early  tbe  next
morning.  Tbis  same  night  tbe  army  arrived  from  Eas&n.  [On
tbe  morrow  tbe  enemy]  advanced  witb  tbe  intention  of  storming
tbe  fort,  quite  ignorant  of  the  fitct  tbat  tbe  Khan's  troops  bad
arrived.  At  early  dawn,  tbe  Kban  in  person  issued  from  tbe  castle,
and  drew  up  bis  troops  in  order  of  battle.  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr,  on
bis  side,  brought  forward  bis  force  ready  to  lay  siege  to  tbe  castle.
Tbe  opposing  armies  met  at  a  place  on  the  road  called  Tutluk ;  botb
sides  at  one  drew  up,  and  raising  their  battle-cries,  began  tbe
struggle.  It  would  take  too  long  to  detail  all  tbe  particulars  of
tbis  battle.  In  sbort,  the  standard  of  the  Kb4n  was  filled  by  tbe
winds  of  victory  and  success,  while  the  faces  of  bis  enemies  were
covered  witb  tbe  dust  of  deatb  and  destruction. The  victorious

>  Or  it  may  be  read  Urckand,

'  Known  nowadays  as  M&di  or  Mdd,

*  The  Tnrki  translator  reverses  tbe  order  of  the  two  paragraphs  wbioh  end  at
this  point,  and  which  begin  with  the  words :  When  tbis  body  was  sent.  .  .  .
He  introduces  bis  second  paragraph  with  the  following  interpolation :  **  When
Aba  Bakr  Mirza  heard  the  news  of  the  Khan's  arrival  in  Andijin,  and  the  storm-
ing of  Kisdn  by  tbe  Uzbeg  Sultans,  he  desired  to  bring  witbin  his  power  the
country  of  Fargh^na,  and  left  K&shsbar.  .  .  ."*

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

2SO  The  Khdns  Journey  to  Andijdn,

breezes  of  the  Khan  scattered  the  enemy  (who  in  strength  and
numbers  might  be  compared  to  mountains)  like  chaff  before  the
wind.  Thus  the  army  of  Mirza  Ab&  Bakr  suffered  an  overwhelm-
ing defeat.  All  of  the  enemy  who  were  taken  captive  by  the
conquering  army,  were  brought  together,  and  the  order  was  issued
for  them  to  be  put  to  death  in  the  park  \hkru}i\  of  Andijan.
Having,  accordingly,  made  them  sit  down  in  lines  [the  victors]
began  to  kill  them.  At  that  moment  my  uncle  [Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza]  placing  the  knee  of  intercession  upon  the  ground  of  en-
treaty, said  to  the  Khan :  "  Praise  and  gratitude  we  owe  to  God
for  this  victory,  for  it  is  the  key  by  which  may  be  opened  the
whole  kingdom  of  Kashghar.  I  sincerely  hope  that  Kashghar
may  fall  into  our  hands  with  the  same  ease.  But  these  prisoners
whose  execution  is  permitted  by,  and  is  in  accordance  with,
the  laws  of  retaliation  [ma2%a5-t-m<»Hm],  are  all  natives  of  the
country  [of  Kashghar].  If  you  do  not  spare  them  here,  it  will  be
as  if  you  had  committed  a  general  massacre  in  that  place  itself —
an  act  that  would,  in  the  end,  be  a  cause  of  repentance  and  regiet
[to  yourself).  If  his  Highness  the  Kh4n  will  forgive  these  men,
who  yet  remain,  and  hand  them  over  to  me  as  my  share  of  the
spoil,  his  reward  in  this  world  and  the  next  will  be  enhanced  by
such  an  act  of  mercy."  When  the  entreaty  of  my  uncle  reached  the
blessed  ears  of  the  Kh4n,  he  drew  the  line  of  forgiveness  with
the  pen  of  pardon,  upon  the  tablet  of  the  existences  of  those
prisoners.  Thus  about  3000  persons  were  rescued  from  death.
Then,  raising  up  their  hands  in  prayer,  they  filled  the  air  with
acclamations  of  thanksgiving.

This  important  victory  caused  the  Uzbeg  to  keep  the  foot  of  re-
flection yet  longer  within  the  skirt  of  hesitation.  Following  this
event,  news  arrived  of  the  defeat  which  Hamza  Sultan  had  suffered
from  B4bar  P4dishah,  and  of  his  death,  by  the  Emperor's  order,  after
the  battle  [which  has  been  mentioned].  A  short  time  afterwards,
intelligence  was  received  of  the  Emperor's  march  on  Samarkand
and  his  reception  by  its  inhabitants ;  also  that  the  Uzbeg,  who
were  in  the  city,  had  taken  flight  and  therefore  were  unable  to
surround  him.  After  these  occurrences,  the  Emperor  and  the  Khan
reigned  absolute  in  Samarkand  and  Andijan,  respectively.  Shdh
Ismail  returned  to  Irak.  The  Emperor  gave  Kabul  and  Ghaznin
to  his  younger  brother,  Sultdn  Nasir  Mirza.  The  [Jzbeg  all
collected  together  in  Turkistan.  The  rest  of  the  events  that
ensued  will,  please  God,  be  recounted  below  ^ — how,  for  example,
the  Khan  and  Sult&n  Khalil  Sultdn  came,  one  after  the  other,  to
Andijan.  Sultan  Khalil  Sultan  left  one  son,  who  was  still  at  the
breast,  named  Baba  Sultan ;  and  the  wife  of  the  Khan,  who  has

'  The  Turki  MS.  interpolates  hero :  It  has  been  mentioned  above  that  Sultan
Khalil  Sultan  was  put  to  death,  at  Akhsi,  by  ZkoX  Beg  Sultan. — ^R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Account  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr.  251

been  mentioiied  above,  was  with  child,  at  the  time  when  the  Khdn
was  put  to  flight  by  Khwdja  AH  Bahadur  the  Uzbeg  :^  she  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  Uzbeg,  and  after  a  short  time  was  delivered  of  a
son.  The  Kh&n  arrived  in  E4bal  at  the  same  moment  as  this
news.^  The  Emperor  said  to  the  Kh4n:  "As  your  illustrious
name  is  Said,  it  would  be  very  suitable  to  call  him  [the  child]
Abdur  Sashid,"  and  the  Khan  decided  upon  that  name.  Both
[these  Eh&nzdda],  B4bd  Sult4n,  son  of  Sultdn  Khalil  Sultan,  and
Abdur  Rashid  Khdn,  son  of  Sultan  Said  Ehdn,  were  taken  in
charge  by  Tutuk  Ehdnim,  daughter  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Eban,
who,  at  the  destruction  of  Tashkand,  had  been  captured  by  Jdni
Beg  Sultan,  as  has  been  mentioned.  When  the  Ehan  gained  his
victory  at  the  battle  of  Tutluk,  and  drove  the  Uzbeg  out  of  the
country  of  Farghana,  these  two  Sultans  were  brought  to  him.  I
shall  speak  of  them  hereafter.

Having  reached  the  story  of  what  passed  between  the  Ehan  and
Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  my  history  would  not  be  complete  without  a
brief  account  of  the  Mirza's  career.

CHAPTEB  XXVn. '

SHOBT  ACCOUNT  OF  MIRZl  AbI  BAKR.

Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  ray  great-grandfather  [wotmh  jadd\  whose
history  will,  God  willing,  be  told  in  the  First  Part,  had  two  sons :
Sdniz  Mirza,  whose  mother  was  of  the  line  of  the  Jaras  Amirs,
and  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  my  grandfather,  whose  fortunate
and  blessed  name  has  devolved  upon  me.  His  mother  was  an
aunt  [ammo]  of  Sultdn  Yunus  Ehdn.  On  the  death  of  the  great
Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  his  elder  son,  Saniz  Mirzd,  according  to  the
ancient  Moghul  custom,  succeeded  to  his  father's  throne.  After
seven  years,  he  went  to  join  his  father  in  the  next  world,  leaving
two  sons,  the  first  Aba  Bakr  Mirza  and  the  second  Omsir  Mirza.
The  mother  of  these  children  was  married  [afterwards]  to
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  in  conformity  with  the  Moghul  custom
of  Tangalik.^ By  her,  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd  also  had  two

>  There  appears  to  be  aome  mistake  here,  as  Khwdja  Ali  Bahadur  can  hardly
have  been  an  Uzbeg.  The  Turki  MS.  seems  to  read :  **  At  the  time  when
Ehwdja  Ali  Bahadur  was  taking  the  Khan  from  the  Uzbeg.''

*  The  Turki  version  is :  The  Khan  was  in  Kabul  when  this  news  reached
him.— B.

'  Yan^  means  '*annt  by  marriage,"  or  *<wife  of  an  elder  brother;**  the
custom  being,  apparently,  that  a  younger  brother  should  take  to  wife  the  widow
of  his  elder  brother.

Digitized  by

Google

252  Account  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr.

sons :  the  first  was  my  father  Muhammad  Husain  Mirza,  and  the
second  my  nncle  Say y id  Muhammad  Mirzd.  After  the  death  of
Sdniz  Mirza,  the  government  of  all  the  districts  of  Kashghar
devolved  upon  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  who  for  a  period  of
twenty-four  years  ruled  with  perfect  justice  and  impartiality.
He  was  a  prosperous  man,  for  he  had  inherited  great  riches ;  ho
always  realised  his  desires,  and  examined  into  details;  [he  ex-
perienced no  trials  or  troubles].  But  those  young  men  in  whose
conduct,  indications  of  braverj'  and  intelligence  were  traceable,  he
failed  to  encourage.  Most  of  those  experienced  and  wise  men  whom
Amir  Sayyid  Ali  had  gathered  round  him,  during  a  space  of
eighty  years,  had  died  by  the  end  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza's
life,  or  if  they  were  not  actually  dead,  they  were  only  decrepit
old  men  \shaikliri'fani\  whose  hands  and  intellects  were  no  longer
capable  of  guiding  or  controlling.  Their  sons  [had  developed
into  incapable  young  men]  quite  unworthj'  of  their  parents.  At
this  time,  Mirza  Abd  Bakr  was  about  twenty  years  of  age,  and
was  in  the  service  of  his  guardian  [a&u7t-mdd6]  uncle  [Sayyid
Muhammad  Mirzd].  He  mixed  and  associated,  in  the  most  friendly
way,  with  the  princes  and  youths  [of  the  court],  while  they,  for
their  part,  from  equality  of  age  and  from  fellow  service,  became
very  devoted  to  him.  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  was  so  open  handed  and
generous,  that  in  a  few  days  he  distributed  all  his  property  and
household  possessions,  as  if  they  were  plunder  \bataraj  'middd\
One  day,  one  of  his  followers,  hearing  of  some  spoil,  came  in  great
haste,  but  found  everything  gone,  and  that  others  had  already
exhausted  the  booty.  So  he  came  and  laid  hold  of  the  skirt
of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  who  was  standing  at  the  door  of  his  own
house,  saying:  ** Although  I  have  come  the  last  [and  am  dis-
appointed of  booty],  nevertheless  I  have  found  a  good  pledge
[which  I  will  not  give  up  until  a  ransom  is  paid]."  At  these
words  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  laughed,  and  bought  himself  free  from
the  man  with  a  large  sum.  In  a  word,  his  liberality  was  so
unbounded,  that  all  men  flocked  to  him.

At  this  period  he  went  to  Aksu  and  Moghulistdn,  and  paid  his
respects  to  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn,  son  of  Isdn  Bughd  Ehdn.
Dust  Muhammad  Khdn  treated  him  with  honour,  and  after  giving
him  his  own  sister  in  niarriage,  allowed  him  to  depart.  It  would
take  too  long  to  tell  this  story,  and  the  details  would  carry  us  too
far  afield.  In  short,  he  managed,  by  one  means  or  another,  to
reduce  Yarkand,  which  is  one  of  the  most  renowned  cities  of  the
province  of  Kdshghar,  and  is  distant  four  days'  jouniey  from  the
town  of  that  name. To-day  Yarkand  is  the  capital  of  Kdshghar.

He  had  collected  3000  men  in  his  following,  who  had  to  oppose
30,000.  "When  his  troops  reached  that  district,  he  openly  sounded
the  dium  of  ascendency,  and rang  the  bells  of  independence.

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Account  of  Mirzd  Add  Bakr.  253

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  wont  out  to  meet  him  with  an  army  of
30,000  infantry  and  cavalry,  but  he  was  defeated  and  fled.  He
sought  refuge  with  Yunus  Khan,  who  was  his  cousin.  The  Khan
also  undervalued  the  strength  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  and  did  not
take  his  whole  army.  lie  came  against  him  with  30,000  armed
men.  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  again  made  ready  his  forces,  as
best  he  could,  and  set  out  [with  Yunus  Khan].  This  time,  also,
[Mirza  Aba  Bakr]  sallied  forth  from  the  gates  of  the  citadel  of
Yarkand  with  3000  chosen  men,  and  defeated  and  scattered  these
two  armies ;  and  Yunus  Khdn  and  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  both
retired,  crestfallen,  to  Kdshghar.  The  Khan  passed  into  Mogbul-
istan,  and  in  the  following  year  returned  with  the  whole  of  his
troops.  On  this  occasion,  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr  had  made  fuller  and
better  preparations.  He  strengthened  his  cavalry  by  embodying
with  it  lightly-armed  archers  on  foot,  as  he  had  done  on  two  former
occasions,  and  engaged  in  such  a  battle  [as  the  tongue  of  the  reed
is  incapable  of  describing].  His  men  then  again  became  bold,  and
showed  more  steadiness  [and  courage]  than  ever,  so  that  they
easily  put  to  rout  that  numerous  army;  and  the  Kh4n,  with
Mnhammad  Haidar  Mirza,  returned  once  more,  defeated,  to  Kash-
ghar.  But  this  time  it  became  impossible  for  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirza  to  remain  in  Kashghar,  so  taking  his  household  with  him,
and  accompanied  by  Yunus  KJIian,  he  went  to  Aksu.  Meanwhile
Mirza  Aba  Bakr  gained  complete  domination  over  the  whole  of
the  kingdom  of  Kdshghar.  After  this,  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  his
full  Sjialc  zdda]  brother  Omar  Mirza,  and  then  banished  him  from
his  territories.  Omar  Mirza  went  and  lived  in  Samarkand.  [Sub-
sequently] when  [Sultan  Said]  Khan  took  Yarkand  and  Kashghar,
Omar  Mirza  returned  to  Kashghar,  where  the  KhAn  paid  him
unbounded  honour  and  attention,  until  his  death.

The  affairs  of  Muhammad  Haida  Mirza  and  of  Yunus  Khan  will
be  related  in  the  First  Part ;  the  object  of  this  chapter  is  to  give  a
brief  account  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.

For  forty-eight  years  ho  remained  firmly  established  and  suc-
cessful in  Kashghar,  exercising  always  absolute  authority  [istila].
During  this  period  [he  was  attacked]  on  one  other  ^  occasion,  when
Sultdn  Ahmad  Khdn,  son  of  Sultan  Yunus  Khan  (and  known
as  Alacha  Khan),  in  the  course  of  the  3'ear  905,  came  against
Kdshghar.  But  his  army  likewise  was  put  to  rout,  as  will  be
mentioned  in  the  First  Part.

After  the  above  mentioned  victory  over  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,
Mirza  Abd  Bakr  began  to  extend  his  conquests  on  all  side.^.  In
the  first  place,  he  sent  an  army  into  Tibet.  It  gained  glorious
victories,  subdued  most  of  the  districts  of  Tibet  as  far  as  the

In  the  Turki  is  inserted :  enoouraged  by  their  two  former  successes. — R.
The  Turki  MS.  has :  a  third  time.— B.

Digitized  by

Google

254  Account  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr^

frontieTS  of  Eaahmir,  and  carried  such  desolation  [^o&icii]  into
those  countries,  that  nobody  was  left  to  withstand  him.  He  next
sent  armies  in  the  direction  of  Balnr,  which  gained  decisive
victories  and  carried  o£f  untold  booty.  After  this,  he  sent  a  force
into  Badakhshdn,  where  he  subdued  most  of  the  Hazara  of  Badakh-
shan.  At  the  time  when  Sh4hi  Beg  Eh4n  was  making  the  whole
world  tremble,  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  despatched  an  army  to  Andijan
and  reduced  J4ni  Beg  Kh4n  to  great  straits.  He  took  Ush,  M&dn
and  Uzkand  from  the  Uzbeg,  and  reduced  the  whole  of  Moghul--
ist4n  to  such  a  condition,  that  not  a  single  Moghul  was  able  to
remain  in  the  country,^  as  already  mentioned  in  the  history  of  the
Eh4n.  The  reason  of  their  [the  Moghuls]  passing  into  Andij4n
has  been  explained.  All  the  Moghuls  who  were  in  Moghulist&n
fled  in  different  directions  before  the  prowess  of  his  army.  Even
the  Kirghiz,  who  are  the  ravening  lions  ^  of  Moghulistdn,  were
no  longer  able  to  stay  there,  but  had  to  join  Mansur  Khan  in
Ghilish.  After  the  death  of  Ahmad  Kh4n,  and  the  arrival  of
Sult4n  Mahmud  Khan  in  Moghulist4n,  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr  went  to
Aksu,  which  he  seized,  together  with  Uch,^  and  carried  off  all  the
people  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  latter  place.  He  also  left  a
garrison  in  the  fort  of  Uch.  My  object  in  relating  the  prowess
and  valour  of  Mirz4  Ab&  Bakr,  and  the  extent  of  his  conquests,
is  to  show  what  a  great  warrior  Sult4n  Said  Kh&n  was,  to  have
defeated  such  a  man,  as  he  did,  at  the  battle  of  Tutluk.

CHAPTER  XXVIIL

THE  EVIL  DEEDS  AND  WICKED  WATS  OF  MIRZi  AbL  BAKR.

One  of  the  obligations  I  have  imposed  on  myself  in  writing  this
Epitome  [makhtaaar]  is,  that  what  I  have  heard  from  other  people
and  on  good  authority,  I  would  briefly  rehearse,  when  it  was  of
importance ;  but  what  I  have  not  witnessed  myself,  I  would  not
dwell  on  too  long,  for.fear  of  exaggeration,  which  I  desire  to  avoid.
But  what  I  have  witnessed  or  taken  part  in,  that  I  have  written
as  personal  experience.  I  have  divided  the  strange  life,  the  evil
de«as,  and  the  depraved  conduct  of  Mirzd  AbA  Bakr  into  three
sections. Firstly,  what  I  have  heard  from  others  and  from  trust-

1  The  Tnrki  adds :  thero  was  nothing  left  for  them  but  to  go  to  Andijin,
prepaied  to  die. — B.
«  Shir^'hUha, Lit :  lions  of  the  forest.— B.
»  The  place  now  known  as  Ush  Turf  an.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

and  His  Evil  Deeds.  255

worthy  reports  :  this  I  have  stated  briefly ;  secondly,  what  I  have
myself  seen  or  heard  [directly],  but  which  I  could  not  bring
myself  to  relate ;  and  thirdly,  what  I  have  myself  witnessed,  and
have  written  down  in  this  Epitome.  But  this  is  only  as  one  in  a
thousand  incidents — ^a  little  out  of  many — a  long  story  cut  short.

Heaven  forbid  that  any  reader  of  these  pages  should  accuse  me
of  exaggeration  or  of  slander.  If  I  had  deemed  it  permissible  to
depass  the  limits  [of  truth]  in  any  way,  I  should  not  have  said
anything  about  Mirz&  Aba  Bakr,  for  he  was  my  undo.  But  if  I
were  to  omit  his  history,  all  other  facts  connected  with  him  would
be  obscure  and  incomprehensible.  It  is  my  duty  both  to  shun
6x&gg^i*fttion  and  to  avoid  omissions..  The  truth  is  that  for
more  than  forty  years  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr  ruled  supreme.  Towards
the  end  of  his  life,  the  spirit  of  tyranny  so  mastered  his  nature,
that  if  an  offence  was  committed  against  him,  though  the  offender
might  not  be  liable  to  any  sentence  according  to  the  law,  yet  his
evil  heart  was  not  satisfied  with  killing  him  once,  but  desired  the
death  of  the  sinless  sinner,  a  thousand  times  over.

If  any  one  had,  in  the  slightest  degree,  opposed  him,  and  he
only  heard  of  it  ten  years  after,  he  was  sure  to  punish,  not  only
the  offender,  but  likewise  his  children,  relations,  connections,  and
dependants.  On  this  account,  his  subjects  grew  so  submissive  to
his  government,  that  nobody  dared  dream  of  acting  contrary  to
his  orders.  When  he  had  brought  his  authority  to  the  point  of
complete  supremacy  in  all  things,  he  made  such  a  collection  of
wealth,  in  treasure,  property,  mules  and  cattle,  as  surpasses  all
reckoning.

He  used  to  set  culprits  to  work,  involving  di£Sculty  which  was
proportionate  to  the  gravity  of  their  offence ;  he  arranged  for  the
separate  employment  of  men  and  women,  but  he  got  some  work
out  of  everybody.  [For  instance]  he  ordered  the  old  cities  [known
as]  Eazik^  to  be  excavated  by  these  [prisoners],  and  the  earth  dug
from  them  to  be  washed.  If  there  were  anything  big,  they  would
come  upon  it  in  digging,  while  anything  small  [such  as  gems]
they  would  find  when  they  washed  [the  earth].  In  this  way,
innumerable  treasures  in  precious  stones,  gold  and  silver,  were
discovered. I have heard  some  of  his  confidants  say  that  a

>  The  ward  K6sih  has  proved  somewhat  of  a  pnzzle,  and  I  am  not  quite
satisfied  that  the  author's  meaning  is  correctly  rendered,  either  in  this  passage  or
in  those  immediately  bebw,  where  the  word  is  used.  In  all  it  occurs  five  times :
but  the  texts  are  so  obscure  that,  in  some  places,  it  may  be  read  as  the  name  of
a  person,  rather  than  that  of  ruined  towns,  generally.  Mr.  Boss  informs  me  that
there  is  a  verb  Kdsmaky  in  Tnrld,  meaning  **  to  make  excavations,  or  excavating,"
while  fdctfc  signifies,  literally,  *<  a  spade."  But  fix>m  the  context  it  appears
.  rather  that  KiS^  stands  for  easoaootions,  and  has  been  applied,  in  a  general  way,
to  the  sites  of  ruined  towns,  or  those  buried  in  the  sands,  where  probably  the
Inhabitants  were  in  the  habit  of  digging  for  treasures.  In  tliat  case  it  would  be
used  like  *'  the  mines,"  '*  the  roads,"  etc.  Still,  it  is  a  word  that  does  not  appear
in  any  book  relating  to  Eastern  Turkistan  and  the  buried  cities,  so  far  as  I  am
aware;  and  I  am  not  acquainted  with  it  from  local  experience.

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

256  Account  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr^

treasure  was  found  in  the  citadel  of  Khotan.^  There  were  twenty-
seven  jars  [fc^ttm]  of  such  a  size  that  a  man,  with  a  quiver  on,  could
get  inside  them,  without  stooping  or  bending  [and  without  touching
it  on  any  side].  Inside  each  of  these  jars  was  a  copper  ewer
\aficiha-%-mi%\.  One  of  these  ewers  fell  into  my  possession.  It  is
a  sort  of  flask  \9:wrahi'\  with  a  long  narrow  neck,  to  which  is  fixed
a  rough  iron  handle.  In  the  centre  of  the  ewer  is  a  copper  spout,
the  nose  of  which  is  on  a  level  with  \harabaT\  the  mouth  of  the
ewer.  The  height  of  it  is,  at  a  guess,  over  one  and  a  half  gaz.^
When  filled  with  water,  two  persons  had  great  diflSculty  in  lifting
it,  and  they  could  not  carry  it  from  one  place  to  another.  Inside
each  of  the  jars  was  placed  one  of  these  ewers,  filled  with  gold
dust,  and  outside  [the  ewers]  the  space  was  filled  with  hal\%k  of
silver.  In  historical  works,  such  as  the  cTa^n-JTu^Mt,  the  Jami-
ut-Tavdrikhf  and  others,  a  hdlish  is  thus  described :  *'  A  hdlish  is
500  mithkdl  [of  silver],  made  into  a  long  brick  with  a  depression
in  the  middle."  ^ I  had  [at  that  time]  only  heard  the  name  [and

^  The  Tnrki  translator  chants  Khotan  into  '*  the  old  city  of  Yarkand,"  and
Tery  poesibly  he  may  have  made  the  alteration  with  some  reason — perhaps  in
aocomanoe  with  local  traditions,  with  which  he  may  have  been  aoauainted.
Many  stories,  it  may  be  remarked,  are  current  in  the  country,  to  this  day,  con-
cerning Ab&  Bakr  and  his  treasures.

'  S^  note,  p.  58.  The  gaz  as  used  by  Baber,  was  estimated  by  Erskine,  from
a  variety  of  considerations,  to  be  a  little  over  two  English  feet.  He  con-
cludes his  remarks  on  the  subject  as  follows :  *'  A  fair  allowance  for  the  pace,  or
gazj  of  Baber  would  thus  be  thirty  inches,  which  applies  to  his  regular  tandb  or
surveying  cord.  But  as  the  regulated  measures  were  larger  than  the  ordinary
ones,  we  may  perhaps  assume  two  feet,  or  little  more,  as  an  average  popular  gaz**
A  great  variety  of  gaz  are  in  use  in  India  and  Central  Asia,  ana  just  as  the
measure  varies  in  different  localities,  it  has  probably  also  changed  in  value  at
different  periods.  In  estimating  Mirza  Haidar's  gcu,  it  will  perhaps  be  best
always  to  assume  that  of  Baber,  seeing  that  it  belonged  to  the  same  regions  and
the  same  period.  Baber,  however,  was  fairly  accurate  in  such  matters  as
measurements,  etc.,  but  tlids  cannot  always  be  said  of  Mirza  Haidar.

'  The  author  is  obviously  alluding  to  the  Chinese  ingots  of  silver,  called
Tuan-pao,  which  appear  to  have  been  very  generally  known,  down  to  the  seven-
teenth century,  as  hdlish^  halishtf  ete.,  among  European,  as  well  as  Asiatic,  writers.
Sir  H.  Yule  has  an  interesting  dissertation  on  the  subject  in  his  **  Cathay  **
(i.,  pp.  115  8eqq.)f  from  which  it  may  be  gathered  that  the  true  meaning  and  origin
of  the  word  is  uncertain.  The  value  of  the  hdlish^  as  a  measure  of  money,  is  also
very  uncertain,  and  appears  to  have  varied  at  different  periods ;  while  there  were
hdlish  of  gold  and  of  paper,  as  well  as  of  silver.  The  Turk!  dictionary  states  the
weight  of  the  bdlish  at  8  miskdl  and  2  ddnak.  But  it  is  to  the  silver  bdlWi  of
500  mUikdU  weight  that  our  author  alludes.  The  actual  weight  of  the  miskdU
like  that  of  most  Asiatic  measures,  may  be  variable,  but  Mr.  B.  8.  Poole  (Coins
of  the  Shahs  of  Persia,  1887)  states  it,  for  numismatic  purposes,  at  71 '18  grains.
At  this  rate  the  hdlish  would  have  weighed  74*1  oz.  troy.  As  a  rule,  the  modem
Chinese  Yuan-pao  is  made  to  weigh  about  50  to  55  Hang  (or  kreb),  and  the
standard  liang  is  equal  to  579*84  grains.  Thus,  if  taken  at  500  miskdls,  the
hdlish  would  have  weighed  about  61^  Ztang,  which  is  perhaps  nearly  correct,  for
nt  the  period  in  question  it  may  have  been  heavier  than  in  modern  times.  The
Yuan-pao  (or  "  shoe  of  sycee  "  as  it  is  usually  called  in  the  ports  of  China)  is  made
Rome  what  in  the  shape  of  a  shoe,  or  a  shallow  boat,  and  this  is  what  Mirza
Haidar  means  by  describiug  a  depression  in  the  middle.  In  Eastern  Turkistan
it  is  called  nowadays  Kurus — a  Turki  word,  the  derivation  of  which  I  am  ignorant
of — and  Ydmbuy  which  is,  of  course,  only  a  corruption  of  the  Chinese  Tuan-pao.
Ite  value,  in  exchange  with  India,  is  usually  about  165  or  170  rupees.  (See  also
Yule's  Glossary,  under  "Shoe"  and  " Tael.")

Digitized  by

Google

and  His  Evil  Deeds.  257

had  never  seen  one  myself*  but  had  read  the  description  in  these
books].  These  MUsh  had  been  placed  outside  the  ewers,  but  inside
the  jars.  Many  of  them  were  brought,  just  as  they  were,  to  the
treasury,  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Eh&n's  army  [when
Sult&n  Said  Eh4n  conquered  Yarkand].  I  myself  possessed  some
of  them.  Thus  [subsequently]  I  saw  the  h&li»h  [and  found  them
correspond  to  the  description  I  had  seen  in  books].

One  of  the  most  singular  things  that  I  heard  from  those  who
had  worked  at  the  K&zik  was  this :  In  every  one  of  the  ewers  was
a  letter  written  in  Turki,  which  read  :  ["  ITiis  treasure  was  pre-
pared for  the  expenses  of  the  ceremony  of  circumcision  of  the  son
of  the  Eh&tun  called  Ehamar."]  But  no  one  could  discover  who
this  Ehamar  Eh4tun  was,  nor  when  she  had  lived,  nor  how.  How
strange  that  in  spite  of  witnessing  such  examples,  man  is  not
restrained  in  his  lusts,  desires,  and  vain  fancies  I

After  the  discovery  of  this  treasure,  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr  urged
forward  the  men  employed  at  the  K4zik,  to  work  with  greater
diligence  and  care  than  before,  and  several  other  treasures  were
brought  to  light  in  the  old  cities  of  E&shghar,  Yarkand,  and
Elhotan.  The  mode  of  operations  at  the  E4zik  was  as  follows:
eighteen  or  twenty  prisoners,  more  or  less,  were  secured  together
by  a  chain  running  from  one  to  the  other,  at  their  backs,  through
a  collar  fastened  round  the  neck  of  each.  In  their  hands  they
carried  spades  [ikalafui].^  They  laboured  both  summer  and  winter.
[During  the  day  they  worked]  and  at  night  they  were  put  into  a
prison.  If  the  prisoner's  offence  was  very  grave,  neither  friends,
relations,  nor  strangers  were  allowed  to  speak  to  him  or  give  him
anything.  So  that  not  even  one  of  the  same  gang  [chain]  as  him-
self was  able  to  tell  him  a  story.  There  was  an  overseer  to  every
gang,  and  over  every  eighteen  of  the  overseers  was  another  person,
and  there  was  one  man  at  the  head  of  the  whole  of  the  Eazik.  If  any
one  of  these  overseers,  whether  superior  or  inferior,  in  the  slightest
degree  neglected  his  duty  with  regard  to  the  convicts,  as  in
fleeing,  commanding,  urging  them  on,  or  throwing  them  into
prison,  and  the  like,  he  was  himself  consigned  to  a  gang  of  con-
victs. Moreover,  such  was  the  strictness  of  discipline,  that  the
overseers  never  dared  to  show  any  leniency.  In  fact,  they  could
never  speak  a  word,  except  ofBcially.

Those  who  were  confined  for  lesser  offences,  were  allowed  to  see
a  relation  or  friend  once  a  week ;  and  in  like  manner,  there  were
many  different  gradations  for  individual  cases,  from  which  [favours],
however,  not  the  slightest  deviation,  in  the  way  of  enhancement,
could  be  made,  without  authorisation.  [Separate]  work  was  found
for  the  men  and  the  women. The  above  is  only  one  example,  out

*  KcHand  may  mean  a  shoyel  or  spade  or  pick-axe.  The  Tiirki  MS.  gfve.i
Kaimdn  which  BignifleB  a  spade. Yamb^ry  has :  pelle,  btebe. — B.

8

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

25 8  Account  of  Mirzd  Add  Bakr.

of  many,  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr's  cruelties.  Many  more  instanoes
might  be  mentioned,  but  they  would  disgust  the  reader,  and  the
mind  shrinks  from  narrating  them.

It  has  been  related  above,  that  Shah  Begum,  Mihr  Nigar
Khdnim,  my  brother  Muhammad  Shah,  and  the  maternal  sister  of
my  father  (who  was  the  full  sister  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr),  when  they
were  coming  from  K4bu],  on  their  way  to  Badakhshan,  were
captured  by  the  army  of  Mirz4  Aba  Bakr.  The  Mirza  brought
them  to  Edshghsir.  His  sister,  Kh&n  Sult4n  Sultdnim,  was  a
very  pious  woman,  and  had  spent  all  her  life  in  acts  of  religious
devotion.  For  a  long  time  he  allowed  her  no  food  but  wine,  and
when  she  was  brought  to  the  point  of  death  by  hunger  and  thirst,
she  was  made  by  force  to  drink  some  of  that  [wine],  so  that  she
died  in  torture  and  suffering,  all  the  same.^

He  kept  my  brother,  Muhammad  Shdh,  up  till  the  age  of  fifteen
years  among  his  eunuchs  [ghtddm-i-akhta].  When  [my  brother]
reached  this  age  [the  Mirza]  ordered  a  roasting-spit  to  be  thrust
into  his  stomach,  then  to  be  driven  through  with  a  hammer,  bo  as
to  come  out  at  his  back,  and  impale  him  against  a  wall;  thus
nailed  to  the  wall,  he  was  left  [to  die  in  agony].  From  these
examples,  one  may  judge  of  his  treatment  of  his  nephews  and  nieces,
and  of  those  two  noble  women,  the  Begum  and  the  Kh&nim.  On
consideration,  I  have  decided  to  withhold  my  pen  from  further
details,  for  I  do  not  wish  the  honourable  mind  of  the  reader  of
this  Epitome  to  be  clouded  by  the  darkness  of  that  black  nature ;
I  will  therefore  not  detain  him  longer  on  this  subject.

In  spite  of  all  these  [barbarities]  Mirza  Ab4  Bsikr  afifected  gi-eat
piety,  and  was  given  over  to  good  works,  charity,  and  almsgiving
to  such  an  extent,  that  he  never  rested  from  these  matters ;  while
MuUas  and  doctors  of  the  law  were  continually  in  his  assemblies.
In  all  his  affairs  and  actions  he  relied  upon  afaUod;  he  even  pro-
cured fattod  for  the  most  atrocious  of  his  deeds.^  If  the  Ulama
granted  the  fatwdy  well  and  good ;  if  they  refused  it,  he  would
accuse  the  Mufti,  find  him  guilty  and  sentence  him  to  death,  but
would  pretend  to  show  him  mercy,  saying :  **  He  ought,  according
to  the  law,  to  die,  but  owing  to  my  regard  for  him,  I  will  remit
the  sentence  of  death,  and  will  give  him  some  work  to  do  instead."
But  the  work  he  gave  him  was  far  worse  than  death.  Among  the
faiwd  he  demanded  were  the  two  following.

*  In  the  Torki  we  find :  Mirza  Ah&  Bakr  practised  such  cruelty  towards  his  sister,
that  for  Bome  time  he  refused  her  all  food,  and  gave  her  nothing  hut  wine  in  place
of  water;  and  that  wretched  woman  was,  at  length,  driven  to  drink  one  or  two
drops  of  the  wine  to  qnench  her  thirst. — B.

*  In  place  of  this  passage  the  Tmrki  MS.  reads  :  Until  the  Ulama  had  granted
Afatwdf  he  had  no  right  to  do  anything ;  and  in  order  to  legalise  and  justify  his
most  hideous  and  abominable  unaertakmgs,  he  would  ask  for  Afatwd,  and  would
thus  show  that  his  action  was  in  accordance  with  the  Holy  Law.— B.

Digitized  by

Google

Ubaid  UUah  defeats  Bdbar.  259

If  Amr  attack  Zaid  with  the  intention  of  killing  him,  Zaid  does
all  he  can  against  Amr  in  self-defence,  and  according  to  the  law  is
justified.^

Again,  if  Eh4lid  ^  be  one  who  excites  sedition  and  carries  his
evil  intentions  to  another  kingdom,  in  order  to  stir  np  rebellion  in
his  own,  the  govemor  of  his  own  country  does  all  he  can  to
prevent  Ehdlid  from  going  to  another  country,  lest  he  may  become
a  source  of  distress  to  his  own  people ;  and  in  so  doing  is  justified
by  the  law.

On  the  strength  of  these  two  fatwi^  Mirza  Ab&  Bakr  put  to
death  3000  of  the  men  of  Jdgir&k,  Uzkand,  and  M&du,  who  had
designs  upon  his  life.  And  he  cut  off  the  feet  of  several  thousands
of  others,  with  the  excuse  that :  '*  if  these  men  run  away  to  another
country,  they  will  stir  up  revolt  [against  me] ;  in  this  manner  I
will  keep  them  within  my  own  kingdom,  that  they  may  not
escape."  Such  were  his  acts  of  cruelty.  [In  this  book]  there  is
no  place  for  a  further  record  of  them.  Haply  they  are  contained
in  the  book  of  the  Most  Merciful  of  Scribes.  On  this  account,  I
will  now  close  the  description  of  these  repulsive  matters.

The  rest  of  Mirzd  Ab&  Bakr's  reign  will  be  related  presently.

CHAPTER  XXIX.

UBAID  ULLAH  KHAN  MARCHES  FROM  TURKISTIk  AGAINST  BOKHARA.  IS
MET  AT  KUL  MALIK  BY  bIbAR  pIdISHJLh.  A  BATTLE  TAKES  PLAGE,
IN  WHICH  THE  LATTER  IS  DEFEATED. EVENTS  THAT  ENSUED.

When  the  Emperor,  in  Bajab  of  the  year  917,^  mounted  the  throne
of  Samarkand,  as  has  been  stated  above,  the  learned  men  and
nobles  of  M4vara-un-Nahr  were  indignant  at  his  attachment  to
Sh4h  Ismail  and  at  his  adoption  of  the  Turkomdn  style  of  dress.
When  that  winter  had  passed  and  spring  had  set  in  (the  plentiful
drops  of  her  rain  having  clothed  the  earth  in  green  raiment)  the
Uzbeg  advanced  out  of  Turkistdn.  Their  main  body  marched
against  Tdshkand,  while  Ubaid  Ullah  went  to  Bokb4r4  by  way  of
Yati  Euduk.  As  the  citadel  of  Tashkand  had  been  fortified  by
Amir  Ahmad  K4sim  Euhbur,  [the  Emperor]  sent  him  some  rein-

'  In  Arabic  gramman  Amr  and  Zaid  are  generally  taken  in  examples  of  rules
of  syntax,  and  correspond,  in  sort,  to  A  and  d.  in  JSnglish,  or  Gains  and  Balbns
in  Latin.— R.

*  EMlid  is,  I  suppose,  the  tmical  name  for  a  general,  after  the  famous  early
Muhammadan  conqueror. — R.

»  October,  1611.

S  2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

26o  Ubaid  Ullah  defeats  Bdbar

foroements,  nnder  the  command  of  such  men  as  Amir  Dust  Nasir,
Sultan  Muhammad  Duiadi,^  and  othera,  while  he  himself  [the
Emperor]  advanced  on  Bokhara.  When  he  neared  the  town,  news
of  his  approach  reached  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan,  who  [becoming
alarmed]  immediately  drew  his  bridle  and  returned  along  the  road
by  which  he  had  just  come.  The  Emperor  pursued  him,  overtook
him  at  Kul  Malik,  and  compelled  him  to  retreat.  Ubaid  Ullah
Eh4n  had  3000  men  with  him,  while  the  Emperor  had  40,000.^
Ubaid  Ullah  Khan  having  repeated  to  the  end  of  the  verse :  •*  And
how  often  has  not  a  small  force  defeated  a  large  one,  by  the  per-
mission of  God  ?  "  [faced  the  Emperor],  and  a  fierce  battle  began
to  rage.  God,  the  most  high,  has  shown  to  the  peoples  of  the
earth,  and  especially  to  kings  and  rulers,  that  no  boast  is  to  be
made  of,  no  reliance  to  be  placed  in,  the  numbers  of  an  army  nor
their  equipment ;  for  He  in  His  might  gives  victory  to  whomsoever
He  will.

Thus  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan,  with  3000  shattered  \Txkhia\  men,  who
eight  months  previously  had  retreated  before  this  same  force,  now
entirely  defeated  an  army  of  40,000,  perfectly  equipped  and
mounted  on  fine  horses  \tw^Miik\?  This  event  occurred  in  Safar
of  the  year  918.*  The  Emperor  had  reigned  eight  months  in
Samarkand.

When  the  Emperor  returned  to  Samarkand,  he  was  unable
to  get  a  firm  footing  upon  the  steps  of  the  throne,  and  so  bidding
farewell  to  the  sovereignty  of  Samarkand,  he  hastened  to  His4r.
Ho  sent  one  ambassador  after  another  to  Sh4h  Ismail,  to  inform
him  of  what  had  passed,  and  to  beg  for  succour.  Shdh  Ismail
granted  his  request,  and  sent  Mir  Najm,  his  commander-in-chief,*
with  60,000  men,  to  his  aid.  Thus  at  the  beginning  of  the  winter
succeeding  that  spring,  [the  allies]  once  more  marched  against  the
Uzbeg.  On  reaching  Karshi,  they  found  that  Shaikham  Mirza,
the  uncle  of  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan,  had  strengthened  the  fort  of
Karshi.  They,  therefore,  began  by  laying  siege  to  the  fort,  which
they  quickly  reduced.  Then  they  put  to  death  Shaikham  Mirza,
and  massacred  the  whole  of  the  people  of  the  fort,  killing  both
high  and  low— the  sucklings  and  the  decrepit.

Of  the  Uzbeg  Sultans,  each  one  had  fortified  himself  in  his  own

1  For  JhUMi  the  Torki  has  Kuidtlik.^^,

*  The  Torki  version  of  this  passage  is :  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan  saw  that  no  escape
was  possible,  and  that  he  must  perforce  remain  and  fdve  battle  to  Baber  Padishah,
although  he  had  only  8,000  men  to  the  Emperor's  40,000.— R.

'  Tupehdk  is  an  Eastern  Turki  word  meaning  **  a  fine  horse,"  though  Dr.  Bellew
says  it  signifies  "roadster,"  and  that  it  is  used  in  distinction  to  drghumdk  or
**  thorough-bred."  {Yarkand  Be^MMrt,  p.  70.)  Baber  constantly  uses  tlie  word  in
his  Memoirs,  and  implies  a  superior  animal  and  a  riding  horse.

*  April— May,  1512  a.d.

'  Mir  Najm,  sometimes  called  Najm  Sani,  or  the  **  Second  Star,"  was,  according
to  Howorth,  minister  of  finance  to  Shah  Ismail.  His  real  name  was  Yar
Muhammad. (iU  p.  712.)

Digitized  by

Google

at  the  Battle  of  Knl  Malik.  261

castle.  Thus  Jani  Beg  Sultan  had  stood  on  the  defensivo  in  tho
fort  of  Ghajdavan.  When  the  Turkomdns  had  finished  with
Earshi,  they  asked  the  Emperor  about  the  condition  of  all  the
fortified  cities  of  Mayard-un-Nahr,  and  he  described  them  one  by
one.  It  appeared  that  the  easiest  of  all  to  take  was  that  of  Ghaj-
davan ;  towards  it,  therefore,  they  marched.  The  Uzbeg  Sultdns
heard  of  their  coming,  and  entered  the  fort  on  the  same  night  that
the  Turkomans  and  the  Emperor,  who  were  encamped  before  the
place,  were  busy  preparing  their  siege  implements.  At  dawn  they
arranged  their  forces  in  the  midst  of  the  suburbs,  and  stood  facing
[the  enemy].  On  the  other  side,  too,  preparations  were  made  for  a
fight.^  Since  the  Uzbeg  were  in  the  midst  of  the  suburbs,  the  field
of  battle  was  narrow.  The  Uzbeg  infantry  began  to  pour  forth
their  arrows  from  every  comer,  so  that  very  soon  the  claws  of
Isldm  twisted  the  hands  of  heresy  and  unbelief^  and  victory
declared  for  the  true  faith.  The  victorious  breezes  of  Isl4m  over-
turned the  banners  of  the  schismatics.  [The  Turkomans]  were  so
completely  routed,  that  most  of  them  perished  on  the  field ;  all  the
rents  that  had  been  made  by  the  swords  at  Karshi,  were  now  sewn
up  with  the  arrow  stitches  of  vengeance.  They  sent  Mir  Najm
and  all  the  Turkoman  Amirs  to  hell.  The  Emperor  retired,
broken  and  crestfallen,  to  His4r.

And  now  a  difference  arose  between  the  Emperor  and  those
Moghul  Amirs  who,  when  the  Kh&n  went  [to  Andijan],  had  stayed
behind  and  entered  the  Emperor's  service.  To  make  a  long  story
short,  one  night,  Ayub  Begjik,  Mir  Muhammad,  Y4dgar  Mirza  and
Nazar  Mirza,  in  company  with  the  rest  of  the  Moghuls,  fell  upon
the  Emperor  so  unexpectedly  that  he  was  with  difificulty  able  to
escape,  naked,  into  the  catitle  of  Hisdr ;  while  [the  conspirators]
having  plundered  all  they  could  find  outside  [the  fort],  marched
away  towards  the  mountains  of  Kardtigin.  The  Emperor  was
powerless  to  oppose  them :  having  left  several  of  his  trusted  Amirs
to  defend  the  castle  of  Hisar,  he  himself  proceeded  to  Kunduz.
The  whole  province  of  His4r,  except  the  fort,  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  Moghuls.  The  Moghuls  have  a  proverb  which  runs  ;  when
a  place  is  left  unoccupied,  the  pigs  will  mount  to  the  top  of  the
hillock.^  .  .  .  They  withdrew  the  hand  of  tyranny  and  oppression
from  the  sleeve  of  violence  and  enmity,  and  seized  upon  the
households,  families,  possessions  and  cattle  of  all  the  people.  One
of  the  most  distinguished  of  those  Moghuls,  who  was  in  my
service  [at  one  time],  used  to  relate:  "They  once  [by  way  of
paying  my  allowance]  gave  me  an  assignment  [&ard<]  for  obtaining
provisions, which  was  addressed  to  one  of  the  inferior  ofiicials

■  The  Tarki  says :  The  Emperor  and  the  Tarkomans  advanced.— B.
'  This  saying  is  followed  by  a  line  containing  a  coarse  pun,  which  is  nntrans-
latable.— B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

262  Ubaid  Ullah  defeats  Bdbar

at  Yaklish.  I  alighted  at  his  house  and  showed  him  my  assign-
ment. He  pondered  for  a  while ;  then  he  came  out  and  displayed
before  my  view  about  200  horses,  and  a  proportionate  nnmber  of
sheep,  oamels,  slaves,  household  furniture,  olothes  and  [various]
materials,  saying :  '  I  entreat  you  to  let  me  and  my  children  and
wives  go  with  the  clothes  we  have  on,  while  you  take  possession  of
all  that  is  here,  and  release  me  from  the  balance  of  the  sum  that  is
mentioned  in  the  order.'  When  I  had  reckoned  up  the  value  of
the  cattle  and  property,  though  it  came  to  a  considerable  sum,  it
was  only  half  of  that  entered  in  the  assignment."  This  story
shows  what  degree  of  tyranny,  violence  and  oppression  they  had
begun  to  practise.  Whatever  property  or  flocks  they  found  among
the  people  of  Hisar,  they  extorted  from  the  owners,  whom  they
ruined  with  waste  and  extravagance.  There  ensued  a  terrible
famine  among  the  Musulmans,^  and  in  the  whole  town  of  Hisar
[only]  sixly  persons  survived.  The  living  eat  the  dead,  and  when
these  had  died  in  such  a  condition  that  no  nourishment  was  left
in  their  flesh,  the  living  fell  upon  one  another.  The  end  of  these
odious  and  revolting  scenes  was,  that  out  of  those  thirty  or  forty
thousand  people,  only  about  two  thousand  escaped,  leaving  their
property  behind;  the  rest  were  all  engulfed  in  the  ocean  of
violence,  or  annihilated  with  the  sword  of  vengeance.  The  women
and  children  were  led  away  captive  by  the  Uzbeg,  and  bear  the
burden  of  the  ignominy  to  this  day.

To  add  to  all  this  distress  and  suffering,  that  winter  there  was
such  a  prolonged  and  incessant  snowfall,  that  the  plains  became
like  hills  and  the  hills  like  plains.  But  as  for  that  abominable
race  [the  Uzbeg],  as  their  tyranny  and  cruelty  increased,  so  did
their  prosperity  decrease.  They,  also,  began  to  suffer  from  want  of
grain ;  and  as  the  fodder  all  lay  buiied  under  the  snow  in  the
plains,  they  had  nothing  to  give  their  hordes ;  nor  could  they  find
any  com  fur  themselves.  Thus  were  these  cursed  people  likewise
reduced  to  great  distress,  and  became  impotent.

When  news  of  their  helpless  condition  reached  Ubaid  CJllah
Khan,  most  of  whose  efforts  were  guided  [at  least]  by  good  inten-
tions, he  felt  it  his  bounden  duty,  both  from  a  desire  to  restore
order  in  the  country,  and  also  from  a  sense  of  right  and  justice,  to
go  and  expel  these  evil  doers.  At  the  end  of  the  winter,  therefore,
he  set  out  for  Hisar.  When  [the  Moghuls]  heard  of  the  approach
of  the  Uzbeg,  they  knew  not  which  way  to  turn,  for  they  had
themselves  darkened  their  road  to  the  Emperor ;  nor  did  they  think
fit  to  go  to  the  Eh4n  in  Andij4n,  because  whenever  they  might
enter  the  Kh4n's  service,  they  would  be  obliged  to  do  some  work
which  they  considered  beneath  their  dignity :  the  hands  of  their

^  By  MnBulmina  the  Snnni  appear  to  be  meant — i.e.,  the  Uzbegs  and  their
partisanB.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

at  tlie  Battle  of  Kul  Malik.  263

tyranny  would  be  cut  off  and  the  feet  of  their  insubordination
crtuahed.  On  this  account  they  abhorred  the  idea  of  going  to  the
court  of  the  Khin.  Moreover,  the  roads  were  rendered  impassable
by  the  snow.  For  these  several  reasons,  they  took  up  a  strong
position  in  the  mountains  of  the  Surkh&b  and  of  Yakhsh.  On  one
side  it  was  protected  by  the  Eiver  Surkhdb,  on  two  others  by  the
mountains,  whDe  on  the  remaining  side  was  deep  snow,  on  which
they  placed  much  reliance.

When  the  Uzbeg  drew  near,  they  reconnoitred  on  all  sides  and
found  the  enemy  well  fortified.  As  the  Ustid  says :  '*  Life  is  like
snow  under  the  summer  sun."  The  snow  on  the  one  flank,  on
which  they  had  put  reliance,  thawed  a  few  days  later,  and  left  a
very  broad  way  through  the  defile.  This  wide  passage  caused  joy
to  [the  Uzbeg]  and  depression  to  those  wicked  [Moghuls].  One
morning  the  Uzbeg  charged  down  upon  [the  Moghuls],  who,  when
they  saw  them  coming,  threw  themselves  into  the  water ....
(Couplet).  •  .  •  Most  of  those  wretches  passed  through  the  water
to  the  flames  of  hell,  some  few  escaped ;  and  all  those  who  had  not
reached  the  river,  went  to  hell  by  way  of  the  flashing  scimitar.
Those  that  survived  were  taken  prisoners,  and  all  the  suffering
that  they  had  inflicted  on  the  people  in  Hisar  during  a  year,  Gk)d
Almighty  now  caused,  by  the  hand  of  Ubaid  UUah  Kh&n,  to
descend  upon  them  in  one  hour  .  .  .  (Couplets)  ....  All  those
that  escaped  the  His^r  river  and  the  glittering  sword,  went  to  the
Kh4n  in  Andijan,  in  the  condition  that  has  been  described,  or
rather,  their  condition  would  not  be  possible  to  describe.

I  have  heard  Mir  Ayub  relate :  *'  Often,  when  I  experienced
ill-treatment  from  the  Moghuls,  and  witnessed  their  dealings  with
the  people  [in  Hisir],  I  have  prayed  to  God  to  hasten  to  send
down  calamity  upon  them,  that  true  Musulmdns  might  thereby
be  delivered."  The  moral  to  be  drawn  from  this  story  is  that  one
should  shun  cruelty,  which  embitters  life  and  destroys  happiness  :
one  should  practise  justice,  which  strengthens  prosperity  and
sweetens  life.  *'  Divine  aid  is  a  precious  thing,  and  is  only  given
to  the  faithful  servant."^  In  short,  through  the  villany  of  tSat
tribe  [the  Moghuls],  Hisar  fell  from  the  hands  of  the  Emperor,
and  came  under  the  domination  of  the  Uzbeg.  So  long  as  the
Emperor  entertained  any  hopes  [of  recovering  Hisar],  he  remained
in  Kunduz,  though  exposed  to  the  greatest  distress  and  want.
Mirz4  Eh4n  possessed  that  country,  but  in  spite  of  his  entire
subordination  [to  the  Emperor],  he  was  not  able  to  give  up  his
own  country  to  oblige  him.  The  Emperor,  with  his  accustomed
courtesy,  bore  the  situation  patiently,  and  made  no  attempt  to
deprive  Mirz4  Kh4n  of  his  dominions.  At  last,  despairing
altogether  of  recovering  His4r,  he  returned  to  K4bul.
■  An  Aiabio  qnotation  from  the  KoWln.^B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

264  Account  of  the  Authors  Uncles

'When  he  conquered  Mavara-un-Nahr,  he  lef^.  Sultan  Naslr  Mirza
upon  the  throne  of  E4bul.  On  learning  the  Emperors  approach,
Sultan  Ndsir  Mirz&  came  out  to  receive  him,  with  protestations  of
devotion  and  respect,  saying :  "  When  you  withdrew  your  foot  fixMn
the  throne  of  the  glorious  kingdom  of  E4bul,  you  entrusted  the
high  honour  of  government  to  me.  And  I  have  guarded  this
imperial  treasure  for  you  until,  through  the  changes  of  fortune
and  the  revolving  of  the  spheres,  you  have  again  come  to  place
your  noble  foot  upon  the  steps  of  the  throne.  I  would  now  crave
your  permission  to  be  allowed  to  return  to  my  former  government
of  Ohazna,  and  would  be  most  grateful  if  a  few  Amirs,  of  whom  I
stand  in  need,  were  appointed  to  my  service."  This  devotion  on
the  part  of  Sultdn  N4sir  Mirzd  made  a  deep  impression  on  the
mind  of  the  Emperor,  who  showed  his  gratitude  by  many  favours,
and  allowed  him  to  return  to  Ghazna,  where  Sult&n  Nasir  Mirza
died  soon  after  \dar  hamkn  ayy6m\.  Whereupon  grave  disputes
arose  among  the  Amirs  in  Ghazna,  which  shall  be  spoken  of  in
their  proper  place.  The  Emperor  remained  in  Kabul  until  the
conquest  of  Kandahar ;  after  that  he  conquered  Hindustan,  which
s  hall  likewise  be  mentioned  in  its  right  place.

CHAPTEE  XXX.

ACOOUKT  OF  MY  UNCLE, SAYTID  MUHAMMAD  MIRZJL.

It  has  already  been  briefly  related  how  the  Khdn,  on  the  14th  of
Safar,  in  the  year  917,^  separated  from  the  Emperor,  and  went  to
Andijan ;  also  how  he  defeated  [Mirza  Aba  Bakr]  and  the  K4sh-
ghari  [at  the  battle  of  Tutluk].  At  the  same  time  the  Emperor
seized  Samarkand:  while  the  Khan  became  absolute  master  of
Andijan.  In  speaking  of  the  children  of  Sultan  Ahmad  Kh4n,  it
was  mentioned  that  Sultdn  Khalil  Sultau,  being  in  great  distress,
had  come  to  Andij&n,  and  that  J4ni  Beg  Sultdn  had  been  afifected
in  the  brain,  by  falling  from  his  horse  onto  his  head.

At  the  time  when  Sult4n  Ehalil  Sultdn  came  [to  Andij4n],  J4ni
Beg  Sultdn  ordered  my  uncle,  Say3dd  Muhammad  Mirza,  Sult4n
Ali  Mirza  Begjik,  and  Tubra  Nuy&ghut,^  to  kill  Sultan  Khalil
Sultdn,  in  order  that  he  might  be  assured  that  they  were  cut  off
from  the  Moghuls,  otherwise  [he  feared  that],  on  the  first  oppor-
tunity, they  would  stir  up  a  rebellion  and  attach  themselves  to
the  Moghul  Khakdns. These  three,  fearing  for  their  own  liveS|

>  The  14  Safar,  917  =  1.S  May,  1511.
<  The  Turk!  MS.  Ya^ :  TuhdghtUh.^^,

Digitized  by

Google

Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirsd.  265

drowned  Saltan  Ehalil  Snlt4n  in  the  river  of  Akhsi.  The  Sultan
was  3'oanger  brother  to  the  Khan.^

So  long  as  the  XJzbeg  had  the  upper  hand  and  were  suocessful,
these  three  men  lived  in  peace ;  but  when  the  Uzbeg  were  over-
thrown, they  grew  appi-ehensive  lest  the  Eh4n  should  take
vengeanoe  upon  them  for  that  crime  [and  this  thought  wus  never
out  of  their  minds].  One  day  the  Ehin,  in  a  state  of  intozioation,
killed  Tubra.  It  came  about  in  this  wisa  Tubra  was  a  rude,
unpolished  man,  who  had  never  been  in  personal  attendance  on  the
Khakans,  but  had  always  lived  in  the  deserts  of  Moghulistan  and
Uzbegistan,  engaged  in  forays  \kazdk%]  and  skirmishes  \kar&vuU'],^
Uc  was  ignorant  of  the  manners  of  an  Amir.  He  now  looked
upon  himself  as  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  State,  and  thought  that
for  him  to  speak  gently  or  courteously  to  a  prince  was  but  flattery,
while  flattery  was  the  vilest  of  qualities ;  that  coarse  speech  was  a
sign  of  power,  and  that  a  rough  manner  and  the  non-observance
of  the  rules  of  politeness  due  to  a  king,  should  be  regarded  as  a
mark  of  dignity  in  himself.  The  people  thought  he  was  insane,
and  that  pride  had  thickened  the  fibres  of  his  brain.  In  spite  of
fear  and  apprehension,  he  had  certainly  made  roughness  of  speech
and  rude  manners  his  second  nature.  One  day,  at  a  feast  given  by
the  Kh4n,  the  wine  was  passing  freely,  and  Tubra's  head  became
hot  with  intoxication ;  reason  left  his  brain,  and  in  its  place  came
pride  and  wickedness.  All  those  thoughts  which,  when  sober,  he
kept  to  himself,  he  now  let  free  with  full  force,  and  began  to  talk
wildly.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  Eh4n  expostulated  and  pointed
out  to  him  that  his  railleries  were  out  of  place :  that  be  should  not
let  loose  the  reins  of  coarse  speech  and  vulgarity.  Tubra  retorted
in  a  speech  reflecting  on  the  Khan's  family.^  At  this  answer,  the
Khan  quite  lost  control  over  his  t^nper,  and  the  harvest  of  his
patience  was  consumed ;  he  then  and  there  gave  orders  for  Tubra's
head  to  be  struck  off  and  hung  over  the  gate,  as  an  example  to  all
not  to  forget  the  respect  due  to  authority.

When  Sult4n  Ali  Mirz4,  who  was  one  of  the  three,  heard  of  this
event,  he  fled  to  the  Emperor  in  Samarkand,  and  joined  his
brothers,  Mir  Ayub,  Mir  Muhammad,  and  Mir  Ibr&him.  My
uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirz4,  who  was  their  leader,  was
plunged  into  the  greatest  alarm.  This  event  had  occurred  at
Akhsi,  while  my  uncle  was  in  Andij4n.  The  Kh4n  immediately
sent  off  Mir  Eambar,  in  great  haste,  from  Akhsi  [to  explain  the
matter  to  my  uncle],  saying :  '*  Tubra  was  an  ass ;  but  no  ass
would  endure  him,  even  to  buckle  on  his  nose-bag.^ Moreover,

*  The  ezpreflBkm  is :  Urddar^-padar'i^mddaH, — ^R.
'  The  Tnrki  aays :  Like  a  Kaz&k.~B.

'  The  Bpeecb,  which  is  about  one  line  in  length,  is  obscure  and  impossible  to
put  into  English. — ^B.

*  A  play  on  the  word  Tubra,  meaning  a  *'  nose-bog  "  for  feeding  bones.

Digitized  by

Google

266  Account  of  the  Author's  Uncle.

he  had  entirely  given  himself  up  to  the  paths  of  rudeness.''  Mir
Eambar  succeeded  in  quieting  the  Eh4n  with  this  message.  Soon
after  this,  the  Ehan  himself  came  to  Andij&n.  Here  he  treated
my  uncle  with  such  friendliness  and  affection,  as  to  blot  out  all
fears  irom  \hf^  latter's  mind,  and  such  a  firm  friendship  was  estab-
lished between  them,  that  it  lasted  all  their  lives.  In  later  times
the  Ehdn  never  mentioned  my  uncle's  name  without  shedding
tears  of  affection.

[Verse] Behold  the  kindness  and  mercy  of  the  Lord;

The  servant  has  nnned,  and  the  master  is  ashamed.'

After  settling  this  matter,  the  Kh4n  became  firmly  established
upon  the  throne  of  the  Khanate,  until  the  time  when  the  Emperor
abandoned  Samarkand,  and  the  Uzbeg  again  obtained  the  ascend-
ency in  M4var4-un-Nahr.  The  Emperor  appealed  to  Shah  Ismail
for  assistance,  which  came  in  the  person  of  Mir  Najm,  with  whom
he  again  marched  against  Samarkand,  as  has  been  already  recorded.
On  learning  this  news,  the  Kh4n  set  out  for  Andij4n ;  and  with
the  desire  to  anticipate  [pMAi2a«<t]  the  Emperor  and  Mir  Najm,
before  they  had  crossed  the  Darband-i-Ahanin,  he  attacked  Suyunjuk
Ehan,^  who  was  one  of  the  chief  Uzbeg  Sultans.  With  him  a
pitched  battle  was  fought  at  a  place  called  Bishkand.^  But  the
Ehan  was  defeated,  after  displaying  great  personal  valour  and
receiving  many  wounds,  and  he  arrived  discomfited  at  Andijan,
where  he  awaited  news  of  the  Emperor  and  Mir  Najm.  The
Uzbeg,  for  their  part,  were  unable  to  pursue  or  harass  his  troops
to  any  great  extidnt,  for  the  Emperor  and  Mir  Najm  had  turned
towards  Samarkand,  thereby  causing  them  great  alarm.  On  this
account,  the  Kh4n  remained^in  Andijin,  to  repair  the  effects  of  his
defeat  and  wait  for  news  of  the  Emperor.

'  From  Sddi's  Q\jXitidn.  Then  follow  four  lines  of  rhetoric,  which  are  omitted
— E.

'  He  was  son  of  Ahnlkhair  Khan,  and  brother  of  Knch  Ennji  and  Shall
BacUigb — consequently,  uncle  of  Shaibini  Khan.

'  m«A-Aand  is  no  doubt  intended  for  Panja-kand,  a  town  in  the  Zarilfshin
▼alley,  some  forty  miles  east  of  Samarkand.  BiA  Kandy  or  **  five  towns,'*  is
merely  the  Turki  form  of  Panja  Kand^  which  has  the  same  significatiim  in
Persian.  The  caae,  indt  ed,  is  similar  to  that  of  Yatikand  and  Haft  Deb,  alluded
to  at  p.  180.  The  movements  of  the  three  parties  referred  to  in  the  text
are  not  very  clear,  but  they  are  sufficiently  plain  to  show  that  Bitkand  or
Pukandy  beyond  the  ri^ht  bank  of  the  Sir,  and  south  of  Tashkand,  cannot  be
the  place  indicated  by  Bish-kand.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Adventures  of  the  Author.  267

CHAPTER  XXXI.

PERSONAL ADVENTURES  OF  THE  AUTHOR.

It  has  been  already  related  that  in  Bajab  of  the  year  915,^  I  left
Mirza  Khan  and  proceeded  to  E4bal,  to  be  honoured  by  the  blessed
glance  of  the  Emperor,  who  welcomed  and  entertained  me  with
the  wannest  affection.  In  pnblic  he  ranked  me  with  his  brothers
and  nephews ;  bat  in  private  he  regarded  me  with  a  tmly  paternal
eye,  as  one  of  his  own  children,  and  I  was  the  special  object  of  his
fatherly  sympathy.  So  much  did  he  comfort  me,  that  he  entirely
banished  from  my  mind  the  bitterness  of  orphanage,  and  grief  at
separation  from  my  friends.  Thus  did  I  pass  my  time  in  perfect
ease  and  contentment.  In  the  meanwhile  the  Emperor  resolved  to
lead  an  army  against  Knndnz,  as  has  been  already  mentioned.  It
was  the  season  of  the  polar  star,  and  in  the  rigonr  of  Dat,^  when  he
said  to  me,  with  great  affection :  **  The  difficulty  of  the  road  and
the  coldness  of  the  air  are  extreme.  [Tou  had  better]  stop  in
E&bul  this  winter.  When  spring  comes,  and  the  air  is  cleared  of
the  bitter  cold,  you  can  come  to  me."  But  I  remonstrated  with
him,  saying :  **  In  this  country,  it  is  the  consideration  and  kindness
of  the  Emperor  which  have  enabled  me  to  endure  the  bitterness  of
my  desolation.  If  the  Emperor  leaves  me  behind,  to  whom  shall
I  turn  for  comfort?"  When  he  saw  that  to  insist  upon  my  re-
maining behind,  in  K4bul,  would  prey  upon  my  mind  and  break
my  heart,  he  ordered  such  preparations  for  my  journey  to  be  made
as  the  limited  time  allowed,  and  permitted  me  to  accompany  him
to  Eunduz.

As  many  of  my  father's  old  followers  were  among  the  Moghuls,
they  all  hastened,  at  this  crisis,  to  enter  my  service,  bringing  with
them  such  presents  and  offerings  as  their  circumBtances  admitted.
In  short,  I  was  well  equipped  with  arms  and  men.  More  especially
[I  must  mention]  my  foster-father,  J4n  Ahmad  Ataka,  whose  name
will  frequently  occur  hereafter,  in  its  proper  place ;  he,  together
with  the  rest  of  my  father's  old  retainerc*,  attached  himself  to  me.
This  Ataka  was  a  trustworthy  man,  and  had  distinguished  himself
by  his  personal  exploits  at  the  time  of  the  XJzbeg  ascendency.  He
had  made  a  goodly  collection  of  horses  and  arms,  which  he  put  at
my  service.  It  was  thus  that  he  was  employed  until  the  winter,
when  [the  Emperor]  led  his  army  into  the  Dasht-i-Eulak,  as  has
been  mentioned. I  personally  accompanied  that  expedition. On

»  Oct— Nov.,  1509.

'  Box  wonld  be  the  tenth  month  of  the  andent  Perrian  year,  or  December.
— E.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

268  Adventures  of  tfie  Aut/wr.

our  return  from  the  Dasht-i-Kulak,  in  the  spring,  the  Emperor
sent  the  Khan  to  Andijan.  The  Khan  was  very  anxious  to  take
me  with  him  in  his  seryice,  and,  I  for  my  part,  had  a  strong
desire  to  go.  But  when  I  asked  leave  of  the  Emperor,  his  blessed
heart  became  heavy,  and  he  put  all  such  ideas  on  one  side.  Thus
the  Khan  went  to  Andijan,  while  I  remained  in  the  service  of
the  Emperor.

Soon  after  this,  followed  the  campaign  of  Hisar,  in  which  the
battle  with  Hamza  Sultan  and  the  defeat  of  the  ITzbeg  occurred.
In  the  former  engagement,  the  aforesaid  Jin  Ahmad  Atska  led  my
men  into  battle,  and  having  captured  one  of  the  IJzbeg  chiefs  alive,
brought  him  to  the  Emperor,  who  promised  him  a  reward  for  his
bravery  \^juldu\^  saying :  **  This  is  Mirz&  Haidar's  first  exploit,
and  IB  a  good  omen."  He  then  ordered  them  to  record  the  pddu
in  the  book,  under  Mirza  Haidar's  name.  This  story  has  been
already  related.

I  was  with  the  Emperor  when  he  captured  Samarkand.  In
mentioning  my  father's  children,  I  said  that  the  eldest  of  all  was
Habiba  Sultan  Ehanish ;  [she  was  my  full  sister]  and  had  fallen
to  Ubaid  Ullah  Khan.  When  Ubaid  Ullah  fled  from  Kaishi  to
Bokh4r&  and  entered  Turkistan,  he  was  not  able  to  look  after  his
own  family  properly.  Every  one  who  could  find  means  to  make
that  difiicult  journey  went ;  those  who  could  not,  stayed  behind.
Among  these  last  was  my  sister,  Habiba  Sultdn  Eh4nish,  whom  I
joined  in  Bokhara.  We  then  came  to  Samarkand,  where  we  found
my  uncle,  who  had  come,  that  winter,  from  the  Eh4n  in  Andijan,  on
business  of  the  State.  Having  settled  his  affiftirs  to  the  best  of  his
powers,  he  returned  to  Andij4n,  taking  with  him  my  sister,  whom
on  his  arrival  he  gave  in  marriage  to  the  Khan.

In  the  spring  of  that  year,  when  the  Emperor  went  to  encounter
Ubaid  Ullah  Khan  at  the  battle  of  Eul  Malik,  I  was  detained  in
Samarkand  by  an  access  of  fever.  When  the  Emperor  retired  to
Samarkand  discomfited,  and  then  again  departed  [being  unable  to
remain  there],  I  was  in  a  state  of  convalescence ;  nevertheless,  I
continued  to  follow  him  to  Hisar.  The  Kh4n  sent  messengers
several  times  to  the  Emperor  to  fetch  me,  and  at  last,  displeased
and  irritated,  he  gave  me  leave  to  go.  In  my  childish  folly  I  did
not  (as  it  was  my  duty  to  do)  pay  attention  to  the  Emperor's
consent  [but  determined  to  go  to  Andijan].  Thus,  on  the  arrival
of  Mir  Najm,  the  Emperor  mounted  his  horse  and  joined  the
expedition,  while  I  set  out  for  Andijan.  I  have  already  mentioned
how  the  Emperor  joined  Mir  Najm.  I  [as  I  say]  went  to  Andij4n ;
but  before  reaching  my  destination,  the  Khan  ^  had  been  put  to
rout  by  Suyunjuk  Khan,  and  returned  to  Andijan  just  as  I  arrived

■  A  Tnrki  word  meaning — a  present  made  to  heroes,  or  a  reward  for  bravery.
*  Sultan  Said  Khan.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Adventures  of  the  Author,  269

there.  This  oocurred  in  Eajab  of  the  year  918.  From  that  date
to  the  day  of  the  Khin's  death,  in  Zulhijja  939,^  I  remained  oon-
stantly  in  his  servioe,  and  was  all  the  while  distinguished  by  his
regard  and  liberality.  In  short,  until  he  conferred  upon  me  the
rank  of  Knrkani,  I  was  never  absent  from  him.  At  night,  where-
ever  his  bed  was  spread,  one  was  also  spread  for  my  convenienoe,
at  his  side.  At  royal  banquets,  the  right  hand  of  my  fortune  was
joined  to  the  left  hand  of  the  Kbin's  favour.  Whenever  a  con-
sultation was  held,  my  uncle  was  sure  to  be  at  the  head  of  the
meeting  [«ar-t-da/tor],  but  he  gave  me  precedence  over  ray  uncle;
nay  more,  he  did  so  at  the  request  of  my  uncle,  who  used  frequently
to  point  out  to  the  Eh&n  that  [although]  I  was  only  the  son  of  his
brother,  still  he  recognised  that  my  precedence  over  him  was  not
only  proper,  but  necessary.  When  he  rode  out,  I  always  rode  at
his  side ;  and  when  he  went  hunting,  he  used  to  instruct  me  in  the
sport  [and  initiate  me  into  its  secrets  and  subtleties].  He  used  to
lead  tiie  hunt  himself,  for  he  was  a  keen  sportsman.  He  never
allowed  me  out  of  his  sight,  but  used  to  persuade  me  to  go  hunting
with  him,  and  if  ever  I  showed  any  reluctance,  he  would  compel
me  to  enjoy  it.  He  used  to  set  me  various  tasks  to  do,  at  the  same
time  pointing  out  what  benefit  I  should  derive  [from  doing  them],
and  would  say :  **  Until  young  men  begin  to  perform  duties,  they
can  never  gain  experience.  [Otherwise]  in  important  affairs  and
in  large  assemblies,  in  mosques  and  in  the  battlefield,  where  the
leaders  of  the  people,  whether  Kh4kans  or  Sult&ns  or  Amirs,  take
part,  they  become  confused,  and  meet  with  opposition  from  their
people.  But  when  young  men  practise  themselves  in  the  business
of  their  elders,  they  gain  insight  into  the  particulars  of  their
various  duties,  and  in  all  such  matters  as  wars  and  the  like,  they
acquire  a  certain  confidence.  This  self-reliance  gains  for  them  the
esteem  of  the  people,  which  strengthens  their  authority.  In  the
performance  of  these  duties  they  learn  to  recognise  their  own
merits  and  demerits,  and  to  judge  of  the  best  modes  of  action.

^  While  in  the  service  of  my  father  and  my  uncle,  I  had  these
principles  indelibly  engraved  upon  my  heart,  and  they  used  to
make  me  perform  namerous  duties,  that  I  might  turn  the  advan-
tages derived  from  them  to  the  best  possible  account.  What  I
learnt  from  my  elders  I  now  am  teaching  jou,  that  you,  in  turn,
may  also  profit  by  it."

Till  the  age  of  twenty-four,  I  was  employed  in  every  kind  of
service,  and  all  that  the  Khan  gave  me  to  do,  both  great  things
and  small,  I  carried  out  single-handed.  But  if,  even  in  the  councils
of  the  Amirs,  in  which  I  had  my  special  place,  an  opportunity  of
some  service  presented  itself  to  me,  the  Eh4n  would  forbid  my
performing  it,  saying:  ''In  the  battlefield  you  must  remember
1  Bajab,  918,  began  12  8ept.,  1512. Zulbijja,  939,  began  24  June,  1533.

Digitized  by

Google

2/0  Defeat  of  Said  Khdn

your  rank,  so  that  you  may  not  fall  in  the  estimation  of  the
people."  When  I  was  between  twenty-four  and  twenty-five  years
of  age,  he  bade  me  desist  from  all  these  servioes,  and  said :  **  All
that  I  have  given  you  to  do,  you  have  done  well.  Now  you  can
return  to  your  favourite  pursuits."  Thereafter,  till  the  age  of  thirty,
he  entrusted  to  me  the  affairs  of  the  army.  But  he  caused  me  to
be  attended  by  men  of  judgment  and  experienced  Amirs,  and
instructed  me  never  to  deviate  from  what  they  considered  right,
but  to  follow  them  in  all  matters.  When  several  campaigns
[ZflwAJkar]  had  been  carried  through  in  this  way,  he  gave  me  leave
to  speak  my  mind  in  debates  and  plans  of  action.  ITp  to  the  age
of  thirty  I  had  never  received  this  permission,  nor  had  I  ever
spoken  in  an  assembly,  but  had  always  remained  silent.  After
sanction  was  accorded  me,  however,  I  spoke  much,  and  whenever
I  used  to  speak  in  the  assemblies,  the  Kh&n  would  say  to  me :
••  Explain  this  matter  more  fully,  give  us  your  proofs  and  your
reasonings."  If  I  explained  myself  well  and  said  what  was  fitting,
he  would  praise  me,  and  desire  the  people  to  applaud ;  and  when
I  did  not  say  exactly  what  was  right,  he  would  add  :  "  What  he
means  to  say  is  so-and-so  " ;  and  thus  would  improve  my  words
and  satisfy  the  Amirs.

When  some  time  had  passed  in  this  way,  he  said  to  me :  '*  I  have
now  learnt  to  rely  on  you  thoroughly ;  "  he  then  entrusted  to  me  the
entire  management  of  the  army  and  the  direction  of  the  govern-
ment, giving  me,  in  these  matters,  absolute  freedom  of  action,
together  with  sanction  to  issue  mandates  and  firm&fM.  When  I
returned  from  my  expedition  into  Kashmir,  and  came  to  kiss  the
Khan's  feet  in  Tibet,^  he  called  me  by  no  other  name  than
•*  brother,"  both  in  private  and  in  public.  The  details  connected
with  [these  events]  will  be  given  in  the  account  of  the  Kh4n.
I  shall  not  record  the  rest  of  my  own  life  until  I  have  related  the
end  of  his.

CHAPTER  XXXII.

ACCOUNT OF  SULTAN  SAID KHIn  AFTER HIS  DEFEAT BY
SUYUNJUK  KHAn.

[Soon]  after  I  entered  the  Kh&n's  service,  news  arrived  of  the
defeat  of  the  Emperor  and  Mir  Najm  at  Ohajdav&n.  This  was  at
the  beginning  of  the  same  winter  in  which  the  Moghuls  revolted

■  By  TUbdy  Ladak  is  meaDt  here,  as  in  nearly  every  case  where  the  word  IShti
18  used.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

by  Suyunjuk  Khdn.  271

against  the  Emperor,  when  the  severe  famine  broke  out  iu  Ilisar,
[and  much  snow  fell].  During  that  winter  the  whole  of  the
province  endured  great  misery  and  want.

At  this  crisis,  news  came  of  Suyunjuk  Khan's  march  [on
Andij4n].  Three  months  previously  [the  Khan]  had  been
defeated  [by  ISuyunjuk],  and  his  power  of  resistance  had  been
broken.  After  much  deliberation,  it  was  resolved  that  my  uncle
should  fortify  himself  in  the  citadel  of  Andij&n ;  that  Mir  Ghuri
Barlas  should  defend  Akhsi  and  Mir  D&im  Ali  should  hold  the
dtadel  of  Marghindn,  while  the  Kh&n  should  retire  to  the  hills  on
the  north  of  the  province  of  Andij&n,  with  his  family  and  the  rest
of  the  army ;  for  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  Uzbeg  to  come  into
the  hills  [to  fight],  and  the  fact  that  the  Kh4n  was  still  in  the
field  [btrun]  would  make  them  fear  to  besiege  the  citadels.
Having  decided  upon  these  plans,  they  were  at  once  put  into
execution.  When  Suyunjuk  Kh4n  learnt  this,  he  did  not  see  fit
to  advance,  but  abandoning  his  purpose,  remained  quietly  where
he  was  for  tbat  winter.

In  the  spring,  news  came  of  Kasim  Khan.  The  incidents  were
as  follows.  When  the  Emperor  conquered  M4vara-un-Nahr,  he
gave  T4shkand  [in  charge]  to  Mir  Ahmad  Kdsim  Kuhbur,  and
Sair4m  to  the  latter's  brother,  Kitta  Beg.  When  the  Emperor  left
Samarkand  and  went  to  His&r,  the  Uzbeg,  having  regained  their
composure,  laid  siege  to  T4shkand,  and  at  length  reduced  the
defenders  to  great  straits.  One  night,  however,  [the  garrison]
rushed  out  of  the  citadel,  and  attacking  one  comer  of  the  Uzbeg
army,  got  away.  The  Uzbeg  looked  upon  their  departure  as  a
great  blessing,  and  did  not  follow  them,  but  were  satisfied  with  the
reduction  of  T4shkand.  Afterwards,  Mir  Ahmad  Kasim  went  to  the
Kb&n  in  Andij&n,  and  on  leaving  that  town,  proceeded  to  join  the
Emperor  in  His4r.  But  his  brother,  Kitta  Beg,  had  put  the
citadel  of  Sair4m  into  a  state  of  defence,  [lest  the  Uzbeg  should
come  and  besiege  him],  and  could  find  no  road  for  escape.  All
that  winter  he  remained  within  his  fortifications.  Early  in  the
spring  he  sent  to  Kdsim  Kh4n  for  help,  saying:  "If  you  will
come  to  me,  I  will  deliver  the  citadel  of  Sair4m  over  to  you."
With  such  words  did  he  entice  his  brother  and  arouse  his
ambition,  thus  bringing  him  against  T4shkand.

But  at  this  point,  in  order  to  understand  what  follows,  it  is
necessary  to  say  something  about  K&sim  Khdn.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

272  The  Kazdk  and  their  Sultdns,

CHAPTER  XXXni.

ACOOUNT  OF  THE  KAZAK  AND  THEIR  SULTAkS  : THE  0BI6IK  OF
THEIR  NAME  AND  THEIR  END.^

When  Abulkhair  had  made  himself  master  of  the  whole  of  the
Dasht-i-Kipch^k,  he  desired  to  remove  several  of  the  Snlt4ns  of
tJie  race  of  Jnji,  in  whom  he  detected  symptoms  of  seditious  designs.
Ear&i^  Eh&n  and  Jani  Beg  Kb&n,  perceiving  the  intentions  of
Abulkhair  Eh4n,  fled,  together  with  a  few  other  Juji  Sultdns,  to
Moghulistan.  This  country  was  at  the  time  under  the  Ebdnship
of  Is4n  Bugh4  Eh4n,  who  received  them  favourably  and  assigned
a  comer  of  Moghulistdn  for  them  to  live  in.  Here  they  dwelt
in  peace.

On  the  death  of  Abulkhair,  dififerences  arose  between  the  IJzbeg
TJluB.  As  many  as  were  able,  repaired  to  Ear4i  Eh4n  and  J4ni  Beg
Eh4n,  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  security ;  and  in  this  way  [the
two  Eh&ns]  became  very  powerful.  Since  they  had  first  of  aU
separated  from  the  mass  of  their  people,  and  for  some  time  had

>  The  whole  of  this  Taluable  seotion  was  translated  by  Erskine,  and  will  be
foond  in  his  MS.  at  the  British  Museum.  As  Sir  H.  Howorth  has  reproduoed  it
in  his  ohapter  on  the  WhUe  Horde  and  the  Kirghiu  Kaxaks,  and  has  collated  it
with  other  accounts  of  the  same  events,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  offer  any
oomment  on  the  subject  here.  I  would  only  remark  that,  when  Mirza  Haidsir
says  that  *<  in  the  year  944  not  a  vestige  "  of  the  Kaz^  of  Moghulistan  remained
*<  on  the  face  of  the  earth,"  he  must  have  been  unacquainted  with  what  was
going  on  in  that  country.  He  wrote  the  passage,  apparently,  in  the  year  948  h.
(1541-2)  in  Kashmir,  or  about  nine  years  after  he  had  severed  his  connection
with  Moghulistan,  and  was  possibly  wrongly,  or  imperfectly,  informed.  Sir  H.
Howorth  observes:  **ThiB  is  probablv  an  exaggeration,  but  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  at  this  time  the  Kazdk  confederacy  was  much  disintegrated."  Their
line  of  Khans  continued,  however,  and  Sir  Henry  traces  their  history,  and  that  of
their  people,  down  to  the  early  years  of  the  eighteenth  century.

For  convenience  of  reference,  the  Khans  of  the  Kaz^  of  the  White  Horde
may  be  detsiled  here^  for  the  period  of  Mirza  Haldar's  history,  as  follows: —

Karai |

and KsonsofBor&k) ....  1427-1488  a.d.
Jim  Beg)

Baranduk(sonofKar&i) 1488-1509  „

Kdsim(8onof  J&niBeg) 1509-1518  „

Mum&Bh(8onofKdsim) 1518-1523  „ (?)

Tdhir  (grandson  of  KartU) 1528-1580  „

Bulish  (iWd.) 1530-15..  „ (?)

There  is  some  doubt  about  the  last  name.  Sir  H.  Howorth,  citing  a  Russian
author,  shows  that  it  may  have  been  Uziak  Ahmad.  The  date  1523, 1  have
taken  item  Stokvii,  but  do  not  know  his  authority  for  it  It  is  wanting  in  the
Tdrikh-i-Baihidi,  and  in  Howorth.  rSee  HiU,  of  Mongoh,  ii.,  pp.  627,  seg. ;  and
Stokvis,  1.,  p.  168 ;  but  the  hitter's  table  does  not  agree  with  the  above.)

*  This  is  the  ezaiot  transliteration  of  the  name  as  It  occurs  in  the  texts,  though
roost  European  authors  have  written  it  Oirai.

Digitized  by

Google

Tlie  Kazdk  and  their  Sultdns,  273

been  in  an  indigent  and  wandering  state,  they  got  the  name  of
Kazakh  which  has  clung  to  them  [ever  since].

On  the  death  of  Kardi  Khan,  his  son  Baranduk  Khan  succeeded
to  the  Khanship,  while  Easim  Khan,  son  of  Jani  Beg  Khan,  like
his  father,  became  obedient  and  submissive  to  Baranduk  Khan.
In  addition  to  Baranduk  Khan,  Karai  Khan  had  many  sons,  and
Jani  Beg  Khan  had  others  besides  Kasim  KhaD.  Among  [Jani
Beg^s  sons]  was  Adik  Sultan,  who  married  Sultan  Nigar
Khanim,  the  fourth  daughter  of  Sultan  Tunus  Khan,  on  the
death  of  Mirza  Sultan  Mahmud,  son  of  Sultan  Abu  Said  Mirza.
After  the  devastation  of  Tashkand,  Adik  Sultan  abandoned  Shahi
Beg  Khan  to  join  the  Kazak,  and  was  followed  by  Sultan  Nigar
Khdnim.  But  Adik  Sultdn  dying  soon  after  this,  Kasim  Khan
took  Sultan  Nigar  Kh4nim  to  wife.  At  the  death  of  Adik  Sultan,
Kasim  Khan  obtained  complete  ascendency,  and  Bai-anduk  was
Khan  in  name  only.  Finally  he  banished  Baranduk  Kh&n,  who
repaired  to  Samarkand  and  died  in  exile.

Kasim  Khan  now  brought  the  Dasht-i-Kipohak  under  his
absolute  control,  in  a  manner  that  no  one,  with  the  exception  of
Juji  Khan,  had  ever  done  before.  His  army  exceeded  a  thousand
thousand.  In  the  year  924  he  died,  whereupon  contests  ensued
among  the  Kazak  Sultans.  He  was  succeeded  in  the  Khanate  by
his  son  Mumash  Khan,  who,  in  one  of  the  wars,  died  of  shortness
of  breath,^  and  was  succeeded  by  T4hir  Khan,  son  of  Adik  Sultan.
Being  a  harsh  man,  he  practised  much  cruelty,  so  that  his  people,
who  numbered  about  400,000  persons,  suddenly  deserted  him  and
dispersed,  while  he  was  left  alone  among  the  Kirghiz,  and  died,
at  last,  in  misery.

Nearly  30,000  men  being  now  collected  together  in  Moghulistan,
they  appointed  as  their  Kh4n,  Baldsh^  Khan,  brother  of  Tahir
Khiin.  But  the  wheel  of  Fate  has  made  such  strange  revolutions,
that  for  the  last  four  years,  not  a  trace  has  been  visible  of  these
people.  In  the  year  '30,  the  Kaz4k  numbered  a  thousand
thousand ;  in  the  year  '44,  not  a  vestige  of  all  this  host  remains
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  They  will  be  frequently  mentioned  [in
this  history]  in  connection  with  the  Khdn.  Such  is  the  story  of
the  Kaz&k.

Even  previous  to  the  time  of  Kasim  Khan's  assumption  of  the
title  of  Khan,  his  power  was  so  great  that  no  one  considered
Baranduk  Kh4n ;  nevertheless  he  did  not  wish  to  live  side  by  side
with  Baranduk  Khan,  because,  if  near  him,  he  would  not  be  able

>  The  Persian  texts  have  dam-giri,  the  Turki  tang-nafU,  Both  terms  mean
practically  the  same  thing,  but  dam-gin  is  generally  used  for  shortness  of  breath
produced  by  the  rarefied  air  at  high  altitudes,  while  tang-nafsi  usually  stands
for  ordinary  asthma  or  other  affections  of  the  breathing  organs.  In  the  Dasht-i-
Kipchak  there  ore  no  high  altitudes  to  produce  dam-girt  in  its  usual  sense.

'  This  name  may  perhaps  read  TiddA.

T

Digitized  by

Google

274  Sultdn  Said  Khdiis Visit  to

to  pay  him  due  respect,  but  would  offer  him  opposition  ;  and  [he
felt  that]  if  he  did  treat  him  with  honour,  he  could  not  reconcile
passive  submission  with  his  own  private  convictions.  He  there-
fore kept  at  a  distance.  Baranduk  Khan  lived  at  Sarai  Chuk,^
and  Easim  Khan,  in  order  to  be  far  away  from  him,  wont  to  the
confines  of  Moghulistan.  He  made  KarataP  his  winter  quarters,
intending,  early  in  the  spring,  to  return  to  bis  original  capital ;
when  one  of  Kitta  Beg's  men,  with  some  of  the  chief  inhabitants
of  Sairam,  arrived,  bringing  the  keys  of  Sairam  and  beseeching  him
to  accept  the  town,  which  he  did.  He  then  marched  on  Taraz,
which  the  Moghuls  call  T4ngi.  In  advance  of  himself,  he  des-
patched one  of  his  own  Amirs,  into  whose  hands  Kitta  Beg
delivered  the  town  of  Sair4m.  [Kitta  Beg  waited  on  Kasim  Khan
in  person,  and  induced  him  to  attack  T4shkand.]  Kasim  Kh4n
then  set  out  with  a  countless  army  for  Tashkand,  where  Suyunjuk
Khan  had  fortified  himself  within  the  citadel.  Kasim  Khan
arrived,  spent  one  night  outside,  and  then  turned  back  again,
plundering  all  the  environs  of  Tashkand  as  he  went.  The  rest
of  the  events  of  K4sim  Khan's  life  will  be  related  in  their  proper
place.

CHAPTEE  XXXIV.

EVENTS  THAT  FOLLOWED  THE BATTLE  WITH SUYUNJUK  KHIn  ; ALSO
SULTAn said  khan's  JOURNEY  TO  THE KAzIk  AND  TO  KASIM KHAN.

In  the  spring  of  the  year  918,  the  Shaiban  Uzbeg  (by  which  name
is  meant  the  followers  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan)  had  become  absolute
masters  of  Mavar&-un-Nahr.  The  fear  of  them  had  sunk  into  every
heart.  That  winter  had  been  spent  in  the  above-mentioned  plot  ;^
in  the  spring  they  were  busy  devising  further  schemes,  and
thinking  what  they  should  next  attempt,  when  suddenly  news

^  If  this  is  intended  for  the  name  of  a  town,  some  possible  varianta  are  Sarai-
Jiik,  Sarai'Chik,  etc.  There  is  a  town  of  the  last  name  on  the  Yaik  or  Ural
river,  near  the  northern  end  of  the  Caspian,  and  it  is  auite  possible  that  this  is
the  place  indicated.  But  the  text  may  be  read  '*  the  palace  of  Ghuk,  Jnk,*'  etc.,
and  in  that  case  I  am  unable  to  suggest  any  location  for  it.

'  The  Kdrdtdl  River,  which  flows  into  Lake  B^lkdsh  from  the  south,  was,  as
Mirza  Haidar  states  in  a  later  chapter,  on  the  northern  confines  of  Moghulistan.
There  was  a  place  called  Kdrdtdl  on  the  upper  course  of  the  river,  but  it  is  less
likely  to  have  been  the  name  of  a  town  than  that  of  a  camping-ground.  Both  the
river  and  the  modem  camping-ground,  or  village,  are  marked  on  the  accompany-
ing map. There  are,  however,  other  insignificant  spots  called  Kdratdl.

'  The  Turki  ti^uslator  here  interpolates  the  following  explanation:  The
Khan  in  Andij&n  had  taken  counsel  with  the  Amirs ;  and  Suyunjuk  Khan,
hearing  of  this,  had  desisted  from  his  intended  march  against  Andij^n.

Digitized  by

Google

Kdsivi  K/idn,  Chief  of  the  Kazdk,  275

of  Kasim  Ehdn's  advance  [on  T&shkand]  was  brought  to  them.
Before  Kasim  Khan's  arrival,  however,  the  Khan  went  and
plundered  Ahangaran,  one  of  the  most  important  towns  in
Tashkand,  and  I  accompanied  him  on  this  foray.  When,  at  early
mom,  we  came  upon  the  people  of  Ahangar4n,  they  retired  with
their  wives  and  children  and  effects  into  a  wood,  and  there  took  up
a  strong  position.  On  one  side  of  the  wood  was  a  large  river,  and
on  the  other  a  deep  ravine,  which  could  only  be  approached  by
one  road.  They  would  not  allow  the  pillagers  to  approach,  and
when  the  Khan  heard  of  this  he  put  me  under  the  care  of  Khwaja
Ali,  saying :  "  Hold  the  bridle  of  Mirz4  Haidar's  horse,  lest  he  get
into  some  dangerous  place."  For  I  was  still  too  young  to
distinguish  good  from  evil  or  to  keep  myself  out  of  danger.
[Having  entrusted  me  to  Khwija  Ali,  the  Khan  placed  himself  at  the
head  of  his  men  and  advanced  on  the  enemy.]  When  he  drew  near
them,  he  saw  that  their  foot  bowmen  had  made  ambushes  in
every  corner,  and  were  ready  to  shoot.  They  had  stretched  their
bows,  washed  their  hearts  of  life— made  straight,  crooked,  and  the
left,  right.  As  our  men  advanced,  the  Khan  stimulated  and
encouraged  the  champions  of  his  right  and  the  warriors  of  his  left,
warning  them  not  to  ride  impetuously,  but  to  make  a  charge  in
one  body.  The  heroes  drew  their  horses  up  in  line  ready  to
charge,  and  so  busy  were  they  getting  into  order,  that  they  did
not  notice  the  Khan,  who  had  made  a  charge  all  alone.  It  had
been  the  Khan's  intention  to  conceal  his  design  from  them  by  his
words.  Thus  he  threw  himself  upon  the  enemy  before  any  of  the
others.  Three  men  who  were  lying  in  ambush  let  fly  their  arrows
simultaneously  at  him;  but  by  the  mediation  of  tiie  Almighty,
they  all  three  missed  the  mark.  Then  the  Kh4n  made  his  bright
sword  to  flash  upon  one  of  those  three  men  who,  bleeding,  and  in
fear  for  his  life,  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  i^hdn's  horse.  The  Kh4n
turned  against  another  of  them ;  but  the  first  had  just  put  out  his
head  from  behind  the  horse,  when  Abdul  Ydhid,  who  was  the
Bustem  of  the  Khan's  warriors,  having  followed  close  behind  [his
master]  came  up  and  struck  a  blow  with  his  sword  at  the  wounded
man's  head,  which  sent  it  flying  a  bow's  length  off,  while  theKhdn
fell  upon  the  second.  Then  commenced  a  conflict,  in  which  all  the
enemy  were  annihilated,  and  where  the  Khdn  exceeded  all  the
other  warriors  in  valour.^

On  his  return,  in  safety,  from  this  expedition,  laden  with  booty,
the  Khan  learnt  that  Kasim  Kh&n  had  attacked  Suyunjuk  Kh4n
in  Tashkand.  Whereupon  he  immediately  set  out  for  that  town,
but  on  reaching  the  pass  of  Kandarlik,  which  is  situated  between
the  provinces  of  Farghdna  and  Tdshkand,  news  came  of  K&sim

^  Tills  sentence  is  an  abridgment  of  four  lines  fall  of  high-flown  phrases-^B.

T  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^^z

276  Said  KkdfCs  Visit  to  Kdsim  Klidn.

Khan's  retreat.  Eetuming,  [the  Khan]  proceeded  to  Akhsi,  and
having  put  the  various  forts  of  the  province  of  Farghana  into  a
state  of  defence,  he  turned  towards  the  Kazak,  his  object  being  to
make  them  attack  Tashkand  a  second  time.  I  did  not  accompany
that  expedition  ;  being  indisposed,  I  stayed  behind.

The  Khan  advanced  [in  the  direction  of  the  Kazak]  till  he  came
to  a  iivell-known  town  in  Moghulistati  called  Jud.^  At  that  date
Kasim  Khan  was  nearer  seventy  than  sixty  years  of  age ;  while
the  Khan,  being  still  under  thirty,  was  in  the  full  vigour  of  youth.
Kasim  Khan  begged,  on  the  plea  of  old  age,  to  be  excused  from
coming  out  [in  ui%}^aX\  to  receive  the  Khan.  He  commanded
all  his  Sultans  to  go  and  kneel  before  the  Khan,  and  receive  him.
Some  of  these  Sultans  were  fifty  and  sixty  jears  old ;  such  as
Janish  Kh4n,  Sabash  Khdn,  Mumdsh  Khan,  Jan  Haidar  Sultan,
Karish  Khan,  and  others  to  the  number  of  thirty  or  forty — all
Sultans  of  the  race  of  Juji.  When  Sabdsh  Khan^  and  Janish
Khan  (who  were  very  old)^  bowed,  the  Khan  rose  up,  but  when
the  others  bowed  he  remained  seated.  Then  Kasim  Khan  advanced
with  a  courtesy  which  the  Khan,  to  the  end  of  his  life,  never
forgot.  Whenever  he  was  spoken  of,  the  Khan  used  to  say  that
Kasim  Khan  was  a  most  upright  and  worthy  man,  and  would
then  relate  the  circumstances  of  their  friendship.

On  meeting,  Kasim  Khan  approached  and  said :  *'  We  are  men  of
the  desert,  and  here  there  is  nothing  in  the  way  of  riches  or  for-
malities. Our  most  costly  possessions  are  our  horses,  our  favourite
food  their  flesh,  our  most  enjoyable  drink  their  milk  and  the
products  of  it.  In  our  country  are  no  gardens  or  buildings.  Our
chief  recreation  is  inspecting  our  herds.  Therefore  let  us  go  and
amuse  ourselves  with  looking  at  the  droves  of  horses,  and  thus
spend  a  short  time  together."  When  they  came  to  where  these
were,  he  examined  them  all,  and  said :  *'  I  have  two  horses  which
are  worth  the  whole  herd."  These  two  were  then  brought
forward ;  (and  the  Khan  used  to  say  that  never  in  his  life  had
he  seen  6uch  beautiful  animals  as  these  two).  Then  Kasim  Khan
resumed :  "  We  men  of  the  desert  depend  for  our-  lives  upon  our
horses ;  and  [personally]  I  put  my  trust  in  no  others  than  these
two.  [I  could  not  bear  to  part  with  either  of  them.]  But  you
are  my  esteemed  guest,  so  I  beg  you  to  accept  whichever  of
them  appears  to  you  the  better,  and  to  leave  the  other  for  me."
Having  examined  the  points  of  each,  the  Khan  chose  one  which
was  called  Ughlan  Turuk ;  and  truly  buch  another  horse  was
never  seen.  Kasim  Khan  then  selected  several  others  from  his
droves,  and  gave  them  to  the  Khan. He  next  offered  the  Kh&n  a

^  For  the  author's  remarks  on  this  place,  see  pp.  361-5.

*  This  name  reads  Sh&th  Khan  in  some  texts. — B.

*  The  Torki  text  says :  Much  older  than  the  Khan.— B.

Digitized  by

Google

Miracles  of  Mauldnd  Muhammad,  277

cup  of  the  spirit  Tdmiz^  saying :  "  This  is  one  of  our  forms  of
hospitality,  and  I  shall  esteem  it  a  great  favour  if  you  will  drink
it."  Now  the  Eh4n,  a  short  time  before  this,  had  renounced  all
intoxicating  liquors;  so  he  excused  himself,  saying:  "I  have
foresworn  such  things  as  this:  how  can  I  break  my  vow?"  To
which  K4sim  Khan  replied :  "  I  have  already  told  you  that  our
favourite  beverage  is  mare's  milk  and  its  products,  and  of  these
this  [kimiz]  is  the  pleasantest.  If  you  do  not  accept  what  I  now
offer  you,  I  am  totally  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  give  you  in  its
place,  in  performance  of  the  duties  of  hospitality.  Years  must
elapse  before  such  an  honourable  guest  as  yourself  again  enters  the
house  of  your  humble  host ;  and  now  I  am  incapable  of  entertaining
you.  How  can  I  make  reparation  for  this  ?  "  So  saying  he  hung
down  his  head  with  shame,  and  marks  of  sorrow  appeared  upon  his
face.  Thereupon,  for  his  host's  sake,  the  Khan  drank  the  spirit
to  the  dregs,  to  the  great  joy  of  Easim  Ehdn.  Festivities  [mhhat]
then  began,  and  during  twenty  days  they  continued  to  indulge
together  in  quaffing  cups  of  the  spirit  kimiz.  The  summer  was
just  drawing  to  a  close,  and  the  Eazak  set  out,  by  Eazim  Ehan's
orders,  for  winter  quarters.  Easim  Ebdn  said :  "  To  go  and
attack  the  Shaibani,  at  this  time,  would  involve  great  difficulties.
Men  of  the  desert  do  not  think  of  winter  at  this  season  [without
orders].  It  is  impossible.  An  expedition  is  not  to  be  thought  of  at
this  time."  He  then  dismissed  his  army  ;^  and  with  the  utmost
courtesy  and  regard,  he  bade  the  Khan  farewell.  He  himself
returned  to  his  capital,  while  the  Ehan,  much  pleased  with  Easim
Ehan,  returned  to  Andijan.  It  was  then  autumn  \tirmah].  A
learned  man,  to  commemorate  these  events,  discovered  the
chronogram ;  Ashti-i-Kazdh,  or  «*  Peace  with  the  Eazak  "  [919  a.h.]

CHAPTER  XXXV.

ACCOUNT  OF  THE  MIRACLES  OF  MAULInA  MUHAMMAD  KAZf.'

At  the  time  of  Shah  Ismail's  victory  over  Shahi  Beg  Ehan,  and
the  anival  of  the  Emperor  in  Samarkand,  to  lend  his  aid  to  the
former,  Hazrat  Maulana  had  left  Samarkand  and  come  to  Andijan,
as  has  been  mentioned  above.  At  the  period  of  which  I  am  now
speaking,  Hazrat  Maulana  was  living  in  the  province  of  Farghana,

*  The  Tiirki  text  says,  literally :  He  excused  his  army  from  going  against
Tashkand.  From  the  words,  **Tho  summer  was  then  drawing.  ..."  cuwards
to  tliis  point,  the  pa&snge  is  obsciuro  and  involved,  in  all  the  texts.

Digitized  by

Google

278  Miracles  of  Mauldnd  Muhammad,

and  all  the  Amirs,  of  every  degree,  used  to  wait  upon  him,  and
profit  by  the  blessing  of  his  converse.  I  also  took  upon  myself  the
duty  of  wainng  on  him  frequently,  and  he  continued  to  shower
upon  me  the  same  kindly  favours  as  he  had  done  when  I  was  a
child  in  Uratippa  (at  the  time  of  the  calamities  in  Bokhara) ;  and
by  the  blessing  of  which  favours,  I  was  rescued  from  that  terrible
abyss,  all  of  which  has  been  already  explained.

Hazrat  Maulaua  performed  miracles  and  wonders.  Among  others
was  the  following:  One  of  my  father's  retainers,  Sayyidim
Kukildash,  who  was  a  disciple  of  Hazrat  Maulana,  was  one  day
waiting  on  the  latter.  Hazrat  Maulana,  seeing  that  he  looked
sad,  questioned  him  [as  to  the  cause].  Sayyidim  Kukild48h
replied :  "  A  certain  person  "  (meaning  me)  "  has  come  from  Hisar
in  the  hopes  of  obtaining  the  Khan's  daughter  in  marriage,  and
being  thus  raised  to  the  dignity  of  Kurkani.^ All  the  Amirs  are

'  The  title  Lere  spelt  Kurkdn^  is  also  written  in  a  number  of  other  ways  by  the
Musulman  authors.  The  difference,  as  it  appears  in  translation,  is  in  some  cases
only  due  to  confusion  of  the  K  with  the  G  in  the  original  text,  for  Persian  and
Turki  writers  make  no  difference  between  these  two  letters.  Thus  the  lirst
syllable  may  be  read  Kur  or  Gwr  indifferently,  and  in  many  instances  the  second
syllabic  may  also  be  read  "kdn  or  gdn^  according  to  choice.  But  it  frequently
happens  that  an  author  lias  written  the  second  syllable  hh&i^  and  in  this  way
has  implied  a  totally  different  meaning  for  the  word.  Kurkan«  Gurkan,  Gurgau,
or  Kurgan,  would  mean  nothing  in  Persian  or  Turki,  but  in  Mongol  (trans-
literated Khurgheii  in  Kowalowski's  dictionary)  it  means  **  son-in-law,"  and  the
title  is  known  to  have  been  a  Mongol  one  by  origin.  The  matter  has  been  much
discussed,  but  with  no  very  definite  result;  tliough  Dr.  Erdmann  has  come  to
the  conclusion  that  there  were  two  separate  titles,  and  that  when  the  word  is
met  with  under  different  spellings,  in  the  best  of  the  Persian  and  Turki
histories,  it  is  accounted  for  by  the  author  having  used  two  separate  words,  with
a  distinct  purpose.  Thus  he  maintains  that  Kurkan  or  Gurgan,  etc.,  stands  for
*  son-in-law,*  or  for  a  prince  who  is  allied  by  marriage  with  some  "mighty
monarch."  In  this  way — its  Mongol  sense — it  is  used,  he  tells  us,  by  Kashid-
ud-Din,  '*  who  knows  well  how  to  draw  the  distinctiun."  He  also  tells  us  that
Kurkdn  or  Gurgdn  represents  the  Chinese  expression  Fu-jna,  and  that  tiie  Amir
Timor  was  called  Timur  Fu-ma  by  the  Chinese,  because  ho  married  the  daughter
of  Chun-ti,  the  ninth  and  last  emperor  of  the  Mongol  dynasty.  Fu-may  in  fact,
means  *  son-in-law  '  in  Chinese,  when  applied  to  princes,  and  thus  is  a  translation
of  the  Mongol  word ;  but  Dr.  Erdmann  does  not  mention  his  authority  for  the
statement  that  Timur  married  a  Chinese  princess.  In  all  probability  he  has
lound  it  in  some  of  the  Musulman  authori*,  for  it  is  a  statement  that  several  of
them  appear  to  have  made,  though  there  is  goo<l  reason  to  believe  that  they
were  mistaken.  Dr.  Bretschneider  says  that  the  Ming  annals  use  for  Amir
Timur  the  title  Fwna  Tie-mu'rhy  and  he  goes  on  to  remark:  **Fu-ma  is  a
Chinese  term  meaning  *  son-in<law  of  the  Chinese  Emperor.'  But  the  Chinese
I'hroniclcr  docs  not  mean  to  say  that  the  great  Timur  had  married  a  daughter  of
the  Emperor  of  China.  Fu-ma  hero  is  a  translation  of  the  Mongol  title  Ourkan
or  Kurgan^  which  was  bestowed  only  on  the  princes  allied  by  marriage  with  the
house  of  Chingiz  Khan.  In  modem  Mongol  KJiurghen  means  son-in-law.'*  He
then  phows  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Timur  never  married  a  Chinese  princess,
notwithstanding  tlio  assertions  of  several  writers  to  the  contrary.  **  I  have  not
been  ahlo  to  find,"  hv  continues',  "either  in  the  Yuan  Shi  or  the' Ming  Shi\  where
lists  of  the  imperial  princesses,  under  each  reign,  and  their  re.speetivo  husbtinds
are  given,  any  corroboration  of  this  suggestion.  The  Zafar-nanmh,  al«),  which
notices  nine  wives  of  Timur,  knows  nothing  about  a  Chinest^  princess  among
them.*'  TIraur's  favourite  wife  was  (ar-coniing  to  the  Zufar-Niimu)  one  Sarai
Mulk  Khdnim,  daughter  of  Kdz^n Sultan, Khan  of  Turki^tan  and  Mavara-

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Miracles  of  Mauldnd  Muliammad.  279

now  opposed  to  this  match,  and  it  is  difficult  to  carry  through  any-
thing that  the  Khdn's  Amirs  have  set  their  faces  against.  This
is  the  reason  of  my  sorrow  and  dejection."  Hazrat  Maulana  then
said :  "  I  feel  convinced  that  God  has  fore-ordained  this  union ;
therefore  the  efforts  of  the  Amirs  can  avail  nothing.  This  marriage
will  certainly  take  place."  When  Sayyidim  returned,  he  repeated
to  me  the  words  of  Hazrat  Maulana,  and  announced  the  good  news.
It  was  at  this  time  that  the  Khan  was  away  among  the  Kazak,  but
a  few  days  later  he  returned,  and  raised  me  to  that  dignity  which
Hazrat  MauUn4  had  foretold.  Thus,  in  Bajab  of  the  year  919  I
was  elevated  to  the  rank  of  Kurkan.

un-Nahr,  who  was  a  descendant  of  Ghingiz.  8ho  was  married  to  Timur  in  13G9,
and  beoame  the  mother  of  Shah  Rnkh.  The  next  year  he  married  another
Moghul  prinoess,  named  Tukal  Kbdnim,  who  was  a  daughter  of  Khizir  Khwdja,
Khan  of  Moghnlistan,  and  was  also  a  descendant  of  the  house  of  Ghingiz.

But  the  personages  in  Asiatic  history,  to  whom  a  title  in  the  form  Ourkhdn  is
most  generally  applied,  are  the  kings  of  the  Kara-Khitai  or  Si-liao ;  and  more
especially  to  that  one  of  the  line  (named  Ye-liu  Taishi)  who  made  himself
notorious  in  tlie  early  part  of  the  twelfth  century.  In  this  instance,  Bashid-ud-
Din,  Abnl  Ghdzi,  Juvaini,  Mirza  Haidar,  and  Ahmad  B&zi,  all  agree  in  writing
Gur-Khdn,  and  three  of  them  explain  the  meaning  of  the  word  to  be  "  great "  or
"  uniyersal,  king  " — a  translation  which  one  of  thom  (Abul  Ghdzi,  p.  50)  derive
from  the  Kara-Khitai  lan^^ge.  There  is  this  that  is  noticeable,  however,  in
Abul  Oh&zi :  throughout  his  book,  to  whomsoever  the  title  is  applied,  he  (or  his
translator,  Desmaisons)  spells  Gur-Khan;  while  Bashid-ud-Din  (according  to
Erdmann)  makes  a  distinction.  Mirza  Haidar  also  distinguishes  between  the
two  forms.  He  uses  the  word  Kurkdn  as  a  title  applied  to  several  characters  in
his  history,  but  in  the  passage  under  note  here,  he  records  that  he  himself,  by
marrying  the  daughter  of  Sultan  Said,  Khan  of  Kashghar,  was  raised  to  the
dignity  of  a  Kurkdn ;  while  only  a  few  pages  later  (p.  287)  he  writes  of  the  chief
of  the  Kara-Khitai  by  the  title  of  Gur-Khdn  or  Kur-Khdn.

It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  there  were  two  titles  in  use :  but  if  this  was  the
case,  how  is  it  that  we  find  Shah  Bukh,  the  son  of  Timur,  styling  himself  on
his  coins  Gwrkhan^  while  those  of  his  own  son  and  successor,  Ulugh  Beg,  are
struck  with  the  form  Kurkdn  (S.  L.  Poole,  as  below)?  These  two  princes  were
both  descendants  of  Timur,  who  used  Kurkdn^  and  who  could  not  possibly  trace
any  line  of  descent  from  the  Chirlthane  of  the  Kara-Khitai.  At  first  sight,  this
seems  to  be  an  objection  to  the  opinion  that  there  were  two  quite  separate  titles ;
but  the  evidence  is  so  complete  on  the  other  side,  that  I  do  not  thmk  the  coins
of  Shah  Bukh  need  have  much  weight.  In  all  probabllitv  the  legend  on  them
is  a  mere  misrendering  of  the  style  Kurkdn  on  the  part  of  the  designer,  who  was
very  possibly  ignorant  of  the  word  Kurkdn  and  its  derivation,  though  well  used
to  the  employment  of  the  title  of  KJidn  in  one  form  or  another.

If  this  he  admitted,  perhaps  the  most  likely  explanation  of  the  matter  is :  that
originally  Kurkdn  was  a  Mongol  title  used  only  for  sons-in-law  of  the  Khakaii
(first  of  Mongolia,  and  afterwards  of  China),  while  in  later  times,  it  was  assumed
by  all,  or  at  any  rate  by  many,  ^1)  who  married  daughters  of  other  reigning
princes ;  or  (2)  by  those  who  married  descendants  of  Ghingiz  Khan,  thougii  not
actually  his  daughters ;  or  (3)  that  when  its  true  signification  was  once  for-
gotten, it  became  a  mere  honorific,  and  was  perhaps  made  hereditary.  My  im-
pression is  that,  as  in  the  case  of  Mirza  Haidar,  No.  1  of  the  above  propositions
is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  manner  in  which  the  title  was  used  by  Timur  and
his  descendants,  and  by  most  others  who  assumed  it.  Indeed,  if  applied  in  that
way,  it  would  suit  nearly  every  Khan  or  Amir  in  Gentral  Asia,  for  most  of  them
must  have  been  able  to  take  to  wife  the  daughter  of  one  ruler  or  another,  and
most  likely  did  so.

Thus  Dr.  Erdmann's  opinion  tliat  there  were  two  separate  titles,  appears  to  be
established,  although  the  facts  he  brings  in  support  of  it  may  not  be  correct.
One  of  these  titles  was  of  Mongol  origin,  and  meant "  son-in-law  " ;  the  other.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

28o  Details  regarding  foregoing  Events.

CHAPTER  XXXVL

SOME  FURTHER  DETAILS  IN  THE  SAME  CONNECTION.

At  the  beginning  of  this  book,  in  enumerating  the  offspring  of
Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,  it  was  mentioned  that  the  Khan  had  four
daughters.  The  third  daughter,  Muhibb  Sultdn  Khdnim,  on  the
death  of  [her  first  husband]  was  married  to  his  brother,  Sultan
Mahmud  Khan,  who  was  martyred  at  Akhsi  by  order  of  Shahi
Beg  Khan.  Muhibb  Sultan  Khdnim  then  remained  with  Kutuk
Khanim,  daughter  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Khan,  and  who,  after  the
devastation  of  Tashkand,  was  given  to  Jani  Beg  Sultan,  as  has
been  mentioned.  After  my  uncle  had  risen  up  against  J4ni  Beg
Sultan,  and  driven  him  out  of  the  province  of  Farghana,  Muhibb
Sultan  Khanim  separated  from  Kutuk  Khanim,  who  was  her  cousin.
On  the  Khan's  return  to  Andijan,  she  rejoined  him.  Of  all  his
four  sisters,  the  Khan  loved  her  the  best,  so  that  when  she  came  to
him,  he  showed  her  the  greatest  regard  and  affection.  The  occasion
of  my  marriage  was  celebrated  by  magnificent  banquets  and  enter-
tainments, which  were  remembered  long  after.

That  winter  the  Khan  took  up  his  winter-quarters  at  Pishkharan,
a  township  of  Akhsi.  In  the  middle  of  the  same  season,  Mir  Ghuri
Barlas,  Governor  of  Akhsi,  died  a  natural  death,  whereupon  the
Khan  moved  from  Pishkhardn  to  Akhsi,  where  he  remained  the
rest  of  the  winter.  Early  in  the  spring,  Mir  Ayub  and  the  Moghuls
who  had  been  in  Hisar,  having  been  defeated  by  Ubaid  Ullah
Khan,  as  above  related,  came  [to  Farghana].^  The  Khan  gave
Akhsi  to  Mir  Ayub  Begjik.

Meanwhile,  news  was  brought  that  the  Uzbeg  were  approaching.
The  reason  for  their  coming  was  that,  the  year  before,  Kasim  Kh4n
had  advanced  [and  had, again  retired],  but  during  the  whole  of

probably  of  Kora-Khitaian,  or  perhaps  Mancbu  origin,  meant  **  Great  Khan.'*
Both  seem  to  have  become  familiar  to  Western  writers  about  the  same  time — the
twelfth  century — and  they,  knowing  nothing  of  the  languages  in  which  the
words  originated,  began,  in  the  course  of  time,  when  writing  their  histories,  to
confuse  the  two.

In  spelling  the  words,  I  have  adopted  throughout  the  form  Kurkdn  for  the
Mongol  title,  as  being  the  most  exact  and  simple  transliteration  of  it,  as  it  is
found  in  the  Tarikh-i-Rashidi  as  well  as  in  other  texts;  while  the  Kara-Khitai
title  I  have  written  ^-ith  a  G — Our  KJidn— in  order  to  distinguish  it  as  much  as
possible  from  the  other.  (See  Erdmann,  Temudsehin  der  UtierschuUerlieke,
p.  580:  Brotschneider,  ii.,  pp.  256-8;  S.  L.  Poole,  Cat.  Orient,  Chins  in  Brit,
Jtftw.,  yil.,  p.  XXX.;  Abul  Ghdzi,  p.  50;  Haft  Iklim  in  Quatremere's  Not.  et
Extraifa^  XIV.,  p.  478).  Klaproth,  Berezin,  Amyot,  and  many  other  Orientalists
have  discussed  this  subject,  but  there  appears  t<i  be  no  necessity  to  lengthen  this,
nolo  by  oiling  their  views.

'  Or  porhapij  to  Akhsi.

Digitized  by

Google

Accotmt  of  SJidh  Ismaits  End.  281

the  spring,  the  Uzbeg  were  afraid  [that  he  might  advance  again].
When  winter  set  in,  they  were  fearful  lest  Shdh  Ismail  should  come
and  avenge  Mir  Najm,  [taking  advantage  of]  the  low  state  of  the
Amu.  For  these  reasons  they  had,  for  a  whole  year,  desisted  from
attacking  the  ShaibAni.^  When  Shah  Ismail  returned  to  Irak,  and
Kasim  Khdn,  likewise,  went  back  to  his  original  residence,  and
B4bar  PAdishah  fled  to  Kabul,  there  was  nothing  left  for  the
Shaib4n  Uzbeg  to  attend  to,  but  an  expedition  against  the  Khan
and  Andijan.  So  that  spring  they  set  out  in  full  force  against
Andijan.  On  hearing  of  this,  the  Khan  left  the  province  of
Farghana  [and  went  to  Kashghar],  as  will  be  told.

CHAPTEE  XXXVII.

SHORT ACCOUNT  OF SHIh  ISMAIL's  END.

Fbom  the  time  when  Shah  Ismail  came  from  Ir&k  and  killed  Shahi
Beg  Kh4n  in  Merv,  he  inspired  great  dread  among  the  Sultans
on  all  sides.  Thanks  to  this  dread,  and  with  a  little  assistance
from  Shah  Ismail,  the  Emperor  was  able  to  meet  and  defeat  Hamza
Sultan.  After  this,  his  fame  spread  in  every  direction;  and
following  up  his  success,  he  subdued  Bokh4ra  and  Samarkand
[without  difficulty],  as  has  been  related.  When  the  Emperor  a
second  time  quitted  Samarkand  and  retired  to  Hisdr,  [he  asked
Sh&h  Ismail  for  help].  Sh4h  Ismail,  thereupon,  sent  him  60,000
men  under  the  command  of  Mir  Najm.  They  were,  however,
defeated  at  Ghajdavdn,  all  [the  Emperor's]  arms  and  military
accoutrements  being  lost  [while  Mir  Najm  perished].  On  this
account,  [the  Uzbeg]  feared  lest  Shdh  Ismail  should  march  into
Mavara-un-Nahr  to  avenge  Mir  Najm.  They  had  been  expecting
this  event  the  whole  3'ear,  and  made  no  expeditions  in  any  direction.
At  that  period  Shah  Ismail  returned  to  Ir4k,  where  he  was
attacked  by  the  Sultan  of  Bum,  Sult4n  Salim,  with  an  army  of
several  hundred  thousand  men.  Shah  Ismail  met  him  with  a  force
of  30,000,  and  a  bloody  battle  was  fought,  from  which  he  escaped
with  only  six  men,  all  the  rest  of  his  army  having  been  annihilated
by  the  Bumi.  Sultdn  Salim  made  no  farther  aggressions  after  this,
but  returned  to  Bum,  while  Shah  Ismail,  broken  and  [with  his
forces]  dispersed,  remained  in  Ir4k.  A  short  time  after  this  event,
he  went  to  join  his  colleagues  Nimrud  and  Pharaoh,  and  was  suc-

>  The  Turki  translator  iisps  tlie  word  TJzheg  here  instead  of  Shaihdni;  but  the
meaning  is  the  ShaihanUz^yegg.

Digitized  by

Google

282  Account  of  tJie  Usbeg-Skaibdn.

ceeded  by  his  son  Shah  Tahraasp.  This  Shah,  likewise,  was  on
several  occasions  exposed  to  the  kicks  of  the  Bumi  army ;  moreover,
from  fear  of  the  Rumi  he  was  not  able  to  maintain  his  accnrscd
religion,  nor  nphold  the  evil  practices  of  his  father.  He  continues
to  sit  on  the  throne  of  Irak  down  to  the  present  day.

CHAPTER  XXXVIII.

ACCOUNT OP THE SHAIbAnI WHO HAVE REIGNED IN SUCJCESSION IN
mAvArA-UN-NAHR, down  to  the  PRESENT DAY.

The  Uzheg  Shaiban,  in  the  beginning  of  the  winter  of  the  year  918,
had  killed  Mir  Najm  and  defeated  the  Turkomans  and  the  Emperor.
In  the  spring  of  the  same  year  they  desisted  from  further  aggres-
sions on  any  side,  being  apprehensive  both  of  Shah  Ismail's
vengeance  and  E&sim  Khan's  invasion  \istUd\  as  has  been  ex-
plained. But  in  the  winter  of  919  [1513],  Sh&h  Ismail  returned  to
Irak  to  oppose  Sult4n  Salim  the  Rami,  while  K4sim  Kh4n  in  order
to  look  to  his  own  kingdom,  went  to  Ubaira-Subaira.^  The  minds
of  the  Shaibdn  being  now  set  at  rest  with  regard  to  these  two
formidable  enemies,  Ubaid  Ullah  Khdn,  near  the  end  of  the
winter,  set  out  for  Hisdr,  delivered  it  from  the  tyranny  of  the
Moghuls,  and  made  an  end  of  them,  as  mentioned  before.  In  the
spring  of  920,  the  Shaiban  marched  against  Andijan.  On  careful
consideration,  the  Khan  realised  that  in  disputing  over  Andijan
with  the  Uzbeg,  there  could  result  nothing  but  the  dimness  of
trouble  and  ruin  upon  the  mirror  of  his  fortune.  For  those  who
had  power  to  withstand  them,  had  moved  out  of  the  Shaiban
territory,  and  he  who  had  offered  them  the  stoutest  resistance,
namely  Babar  Pddishah,  having  placed  the  foot  of  despair  in  the
stirrup  of  despondence,  had  gone  back  to  Kabul.  He  thought  the
wisest  plan  for  him  was  to  retire  from  the  country,  before  tho
enemy  arrived.  So  the  Khan  set  out  for  Kashghar,  by  way  of
Moghulistan.  [Thus]  the  province  of  Farghana  was  joined  on  to
Mavara-un-Nahr  [under  the  domination  of  the  Uzbeg].

Tho  dignity  of  Khan  was,^  according  to  the  old  custom,  vested

>  This  name  is  translitoratcd  as  written,  and  thoroughly  pointed,  in  the  Turki
text.  It  is  usually  found  in  the  form  Ibir'Stbir,  but  other  variants,  such  as  Abar^
i^ebufj  etc.,  are  found  among  Musulman  writings,  while  the  Chinese,  in  tho
Yuan  dynasty,  used  I-ln-rh  Shi-hi-rh.  ,The  double  name  was  the  ordinary  term
for  Siberia,  but  there  was  also  a  Tatar  town  of  Sihir,  in  tho  sixteenth  century,
situated  on  the  river  Irtish,  sixteen  versta  alK>vo  Tobolsk.  This  place  (as  Brot-
Bchneider  informs  us)  was  tho  capital  of  the  Tatar  Khan,  Kuchum,  and  was
taken  in  1581  by  the  Russians  under  Yermak. (See  Med.  lie^.^  ii.,  37  and  1.54.)

«  That  is,  after  the  death  of  Shdhi  Bog  Khan ;  tee  note,  p.  206. The  best

Digitized  by

Google

Account  of  tlie  Uzbeg-Shaibdn.  283

in  tho  eldest  Sultan,  who  was  Kuchum  Sultan,  and  the  heir-
apparent  [jBToaZ/a]  was  Suyunjuk  Sultan,  who  however  died  before
Kuchum  Sultan,  when  Jdni  Beg  Sultan  became  the  heir-apparent.
He  followed  Suyunjuk  Sultan,  and  Kuchum  soon  after  journeyed
along  tho  same  rocwi.  The  Khanship  now  devolved  upon  Abu
Said,  son  of  Kuchum  Khan,  and  on  his  leaving  tho  throne  of  tho
Kh4nate  vacant,  Ubaid  Ullah  B^an  sat  in  his  place.  From  tho
year  911  down  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  the  last-mentioned  Khan
[Abu  Said],  he  had,  in  reality,  conducted  the  entire  afiFairs  of  the
State ;  and  if  he  had  chosen  to  assume  the  title  of  Khan,  no  one
could  rightfully  have  opposed  him.  Nevertheless  [the  Uzbeg]
adhered  to  the  old  rule  and  conferred  the  Khanship  upon  the  most
advanced  in  years.  After  Abu  Said,  there  remained  no  one  older
than  [Ubaid  Ullah]  himself,  and  he  therefore  ascended  the  throno
of  the  ELhans,  and  continued  to  perfume  the  world  with  the  sweet
breezes  of  justice  and  the  scent  of  right-dealing,  until  the  year  946,^
when  he  bade  this  transitory  earth  adieu,  and  his  pure  soul  passed
to  the  regions  of  the  blessed.

I  have  neither  seen  nor  heard  speak  of  such  an  excellent  ruler  as
he,  during  the  past  hundred  years.  In  the  first  place,  he  was  a
true  Musulmdn,  religiously  inclined,  pious  and  abstinent ;  he  also
regulated  all  the  affairs  of  religion,  of  the  state,  of  the  army,  and  of
his  subjects,  in  conforiuity  with  the  ordinances  of  the  Holy  Law ;
never  deviating  from  it  one  hair's-breadth.  He  was  pre-eminent
for  his  valour  and  for  his  generosity.  He  wrote  seven  different
styles  of  handwriting,  but  best  of  all  he  wrote  the  Naskhu  Ho
made  several  copies  of  ihe  Koran  and  sent  them  to  the  two  holy
cities  [Mekka  and  Medina].  He  also  wrote  Naakh  Tdalik  well.  He
possessed  the  divdna  of  the  various  Turki,  Arabic  and  Persian  poets.
He  was  versed  in  the  science  of  music,  and  several  of  his  composi-
tions are  still  sung  by  musicians.  In  short,  he  was  a  king  endowed
with  every  excellence,  and  during  his  lifetime,  his  capital  Bokhara,
became  such  a  centre  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  that  one  was
reminded  of  Herat  in  the  days  of  Mirza  Sultdn  Husain.  Although
both  tho  Emperor  and  the  KJiAn  died  before  Ubaid  Ullah  Khiin,
and  the  acoount  of  the  end  of  his  days  should  have  been  given
after  their  deaths  had  been  recorded,  yet  since  the  stories  of  the
Emperor  and  the  Khan  occupy  much  space,  and  since  Ubaid  Ullah
Khan  has  no  further  connection  with  my  story,  I  have  summarily
completed  my  account  of  him  here.  I  shall  have  no  further
occasion  to  refer  to  the  Uzbeg  in  this  history.

oooount  of  the  events  briefly  touched  upon  in  this  section,  will  be  found  in
chap.  ix.  of  vol.  ii.  of  Sir  H.  Howorth's  Hist,  of  ihe  Mongols,  where  till  available
Bources  of  information  have  been  laid  under  contribution.

»  The  year  946  began  19tli  May,  1539. See  alao  Howorth,  ii.,  p.  723,  for
Ubaid  Ullah'8  death.

Digitized  by

Google

284  Said  Khdn  Quits  Farghdna

CHAPTER  XXXIX.

REASONS  FOR  SULTAN SAID KHAN  QUITTING  FARGHANA AND REPAIRING

TO KASHGHAR.

In  the  summer  of  the  year  920,  the  Uzbeg  Shaiban  who  were  Id
Tashkand,  advanced  under  the  command  of  Suyunjuk  Khan,  against
Andijan.  When  the  Kh&n  learnt  this,  he  convened  a  meeting  of
all  his  Amirs  and  councillors,  and  they  discussed  what  were  the
wisest  steps  to  take  in  the  matter.  They  tried  to  foresee  the
final  issues  of  things,  and  were  plunged  in  the  ocean  of  meditation.
[At  last]  my  uncle  said:  "The  neighbouring  Sultans  are  not
inclined  to  sacrifice  their  reputation,  and  have  gone  to  look  after
their  own  affairs.  Our  numbers  are  not  sufficient  to  compete  with
the  Shaibani,  nor  are  our  armaments  equal  to  theirs.  If  we  offer
their  legions  fight,  however  zealous  and  loyal  we  may  be,  we  shall
only  be  as  men  with  broken  weapons,  and  a  defeat  will  not  mean
the  destruction  of  one  particular  person,  but  will  result  in  constant
disputes  and  continual  fighting.  If,  by  some  strange  chanoe,
matters  should  turn  out  otherwise,  they  will  have  to  make
reparation  for  what  has  gone  before,  and  all  their  power  will  be
destroyed.  Such  an  advantage  we  should  turn  to  account.  We
shall  be  able  to  make  no  reparation  for  what  has  passed.  Nor  will
any  amount  of  binding  make  that  breakage  whole.^

**  The  province  of  Farghdna  is  the  territory  and  ancient  dwell-
ing-place of  the  Chaghatai.  The  Shaibani  have  deprived  them  of
it  by  force  and  violence.  We  have  become  the  guardians  of  the
Chaghatai  country.  Now  that  all  the  Sultdns,  in  general,  and  the
Chaghatdi  Sultdns  in  particular,  have  given  up  the  contest,  it
would  be  absurd  for  us  to  engage  in  this  dangerous  affair  on  their
account.  If  you  wish  to  be  on  the  safe  side  and  consider  the  wisest
plan,  then  block  up  the  path  of  war  and  follow  the  road  of  flight,
before  the  borders  of  this  kingdom  have  been  darkened  by  the
dust  of  the  enemy's  army.  Ijet  our  reins  be  drawn  towards
Moghulistdn,  which  is  the  old  home  of  the  Moghuls ;  this  will  tend
to  the  consolidation  of  the  State.  And  yet  another  fact  must  be
taken  into  consideration :  namely,  that  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  in  the
face  of  [the  Khdn's]  victorious  host,  is  like  a  wounded  quarry,  for
has  he  not  once  before  fought  a  pitched  battle,  at  Tutluk,  and  been
defeated  ?  If  we  enter  his  province,  and  if  he  keeps  a  brave  heart,
he  will  probably  again  offer  battle,  and  fighting  with  him  will  be
an  easy  matter  in  comparison  with  fighting  the  Uzbeg. In  fact,

*  Down  to  this  point,  nearly  the  whole  of  this  speech  is  obBCurc  in  meaning
and  the  translation  doubtful.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

and  Repairs  to  Kdskghar,  285

there  will  be  little  to  fear  and  much  to  gain.  Another  point  that
ought  to  count  in  favour  of  this  plan  is  that  the  Mirza  is  over
sixty  years  of  age,  and  he  has  reigned  close  on  fifty  years.  The
Almighty  has,  during  forty  years,  suffered  him  to  exercise  tyranny.
The  time  has  probably  now  come  for  his  day  of  oppression  to  be
changed  to  the  night  of  annihilation.  Moreover,  ho  has  cast  aside
all  his  own  Amirs,  and  has  neglected  the  loaders  of  his  army,
setting  up  in  their  places  a  number  of  mean  people  of  low  birth,
who,  by  reason  of  their  lack  of  judgment  and  small  intelligence,
stand  in  great  fear  of  him.  Therefore,  we  ought  to  direct  all  our
energies,  devote  all  our  strength,  to  the  conquest  of  Kashghar.
Haply  the  opener  of  all  gates  will  open  to  us  the  gate  of  victory.
Finally,  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr's  men,  who  wore  my  companions  in  the
service  of  my  brother,  when  they  see  me  in  your  train,  will
probably  return  to  me.  And  they  will  be  a  substantial  assistance
to  us  in  conquering  Kdshghar.

"  Although  Mirza  Abd»  Bakr  is  my  own  brother,  (Verse)  ....  my
loyalty  and  devotion  are  to  the  Kh4n  alone :  and  any  head  that
will  not  bow  to  him,  verily  will  I  bring  it  down,  though  it  be
that  of  my  own  brother.  In  my  devotion  to  the  Khan,  no  such
consideration  as  a  tie  of  brotherhood  shall  stand  in  the  way.  In
the  Mirza's  downfall,  I  now  recognise  the  establishment  of  the
Khdn's  prosperity.  If  my  plan  is  approved,  let  it  be  at  once
proceeded  with."

When  my  uncle  had  finished  his  speech,  the  Khan,  who  had
been  listening  with  evident  satisfaction,  began  to  praise  and
commend  him,  saying :  ''  My  thoughts  have  for  a  long  time  been
occupied  with  such  considerations ;  but  in  our  discussions,  all  the
suggestions  made  have  been  either  impossible  or  inexpedient.  I
find  your  plan  most  reasonable,  and  preferable  to  any  other.  My
opinion  is  the  opinion  of  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd.  If  any  one
has  anything  further  to  say  on  the  matter,  let  him  speak."  All
the  Amirs  were  unanimous  in  their  agreement,  and  began  to
approve  my  uncle's  suggestion.

Being  all  of  one  mind,  the  Khun,  in  the  month  of  Rabi-ul-avval,
of  the  aforesaid  year,^  left  Farghana  before  Suyunjuk  Khan  had
entered  it,  and  marched  towards  K4shghar  by  way  of  Moghulistiin.
At  this  time  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  executed  a  very  surprising  work,  the
truth  of  which  is  attested  by  all  who  were  in  Kashghar  at  the
time,  and  I  myself  have  seen  and  measured  the  building  .  .  .  .'-^
Now,  he  had  destroyed  the  ancient  citadel  of  Kashghar  a  long  time
before,  as  well  as  its  suburbs,  and  had  carried  the  inhabitants  off
to  Yarkand,  while  he  had  turned  several  inhabited  places  into
cultivated  fieWs. When he heard of  the Khdn's  approach,  he

>  Rabi  I.,  920,  or  May,  1514.

'  Here  six  lines  have  been  much  condensed,  and  a  repetition  omitted.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

286  Description  of  KdshgJuir,

oommanded  a  fort  to  be  built  on  the  banks  of  the  Biver  Tuman.  I
have  taken  the  dimensions  of  that  fort  several  times.  It  may
include  about  Mtyjartb,  more  or  less,  and  its  height  in  some  places
is  twenty  maid  gaz}  The  circumference  of  the  towers  at  each
angle  is  more  than  thirty  gaz.  On  the  ramparts,  in  most  places,
four  horsemen  can  ride  abreast.  This  huge  fort  was  constructed
in  seven  days,  which  is,  of  coarse,  a  most  extraordinary  feat,  and
confirms  what  has  been  said  above,  of  Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr's  power  and
activity. It  is  now  necessary  to  give  some  account  of  E4shghar.

CHAPTEE  XL.

DESCRIPTION  OF KASHQHAR.

KAsHOHAR  is  an  old  and  famous  town.^  In  former  times  the
Sult&ns  of  E&shghar  were  of  the  family  of  Afrdsiab  the  Turk,
whom  the  Moghuls  call  Bugh4  Khan.  His  genealogy  is  as  follows :
Afrdsiab,  son  of  Pish,  son  of  Dad  Nashin,  son  of  Tur,  son  of
Afaridun.  It  is  thus  given  in  the  Tdrikh-i'Gwsida^  which  has
copied  fi*om  the  Majma-ut-Tavdrikh^  of  Khwaja  Hashid-ud-Din
Fasl  Ullah.  In  some  other  histories  the  descent  is  traced  yet
further. But  God  alone  knows  the  truth.

Among  the  Sultans  of  Kashghar  was  a  certain  S4tuk  Bughra
Kh4n,  who  was  converted  to  Isl4m  in  his  early  years.  During  his
occupation  of  the  throne,  he  brought  over  the  whole  country  of
K4shghar  to  the  true  faith.  After  his  death,  several  of  his
descendants  ruled  in  Kdshghar,  and  even  in  Mavar4-un-Nahr,  until
the  conquest  of  Chingiz  Kh4n.

^  The  ordinary  g(u,  as  we  have  seen  (notes,  pp.  58  and  256),  probably  measured
about  26  to  28  inches.  The  maid  gaz^  or  gaz  for  measuring  goods  or  effects,  may
have  differed  slightly  from  other  gaz  in  use,  but  probably  one  will  suit  as  well  as
another  for  Mirza  Haidar's  loose  statements.  The  jartb  is  a  land  measure,
generally  said  to  be  equal  to  60  square  ells,  or  zar ;  but  the  value  of  the  tar  is
very  uncertain.  At  the  present  day,  in  Persia,  it  is  equal  to  about  40  inches.
Ck)l.  Jnnett  shows  that  it  is  taken  U)  mean  the  same  as  the  Taiuib  of  Persia,  and
the  Bigah  of  India,  but  that  its  value  differs  greatly  according  to  locality  and
different  historical  periods.  In  Akbar*s  time  it  was  fixed  at  8600  lldhi  gaz ;
while  the  standard  Bigah  in  the  north-west  provinces  of  Bengal,  contains  nowa-
days 3025  square  yards,  or  §  of  an  acre. (Ain-i-Akbariy  ii.,  p.  61 .)

»  The  word  used  here  is  thdhrj  or  town.  In  the  following  paragraph  the
author  speaks  of  the  **  country  of  Kashghar,"  and  it  may  be  remarked  that  he
employs  the  name  Kdshghar  indiscriminately  for  the  town,  for  the  province,  and
for  the  whole  of  Eastern  Turkistan  as  far  east  as  Chdlish,  or  Karashahr.  In  meet
instances  his  meaning  is  obvious,  but  in  many  others  it  is  not  so  dear,  and  in
these  I  have  usually  added  either  a  word  in  parenthesis,  or  a  brief  note  by  way  of
elucidation.

*  Usually  called  the  JamutU'Tavdrihh,

Digitized  by

Google

Description  of  Kdshghar,  287

[Tai  Yang  Khan  fled  from  Chingiz  Khan.  Knshlilk,  son  of  Tdi
Yang  Kiian]  took  Kdshghar  from  the  vassals  of  the  Gur  Khan  of
Kara  Khitai,  who  had  himself  taken  it  from  the  vassaJs  of  the
descendants  of  Afrasiab.  At  that  time  Sultan  Osman,  of  that
family,  was  ruling  in  Samarkand  and  in  the  greater  part  of
Mavara-iin-Nahr.  What  passed  between  him  and  Khwarizm  Shah
is  to  be  found  in  every  history.^

The  rebellion  of  Kushluk  and  the  conquest  of  K&shghar  by  the
Moghuls,  I  have  copied  from  the  Jahdn-Kushdi,  as  it  stands  [there].

>  Taken  separately,  Mirza  Haidar's  facts  are,  in  the  main,  oorreot,  but  his
aooount  is  oonfusing.  He  derived  his  knowledge  ftom  books,  and  has  stated  it
imperfectly.  The  "family  of  Afiasidb  the  Tnrk"  may,  perhaps,  be  more
properly  called  the  dynajsty  of  the  Uak  Khans,  who  were,  according  to  the
best  authorities,  Uighurs.  Some  writers  prefer  to  call  them  the  KdrdJchdni,  after
the  title  said  to  have  been  adopted  by  the  first  Musulman  chief  among  them.
Afrasiib  himself  (otherwise  Bugh^,  or  Buku,  Khan)  waa  probably  a  mythical
personage,  but  the  Uighur  dynasty  that  bears  his  name  was,  no  doubt,  an  ancient
one,  of  purely  Turki  origin.  It  only  takes  a  place  as  a  practical  factor  in  history,
howeyer,  with  the  reign  of  S&tuk  Bughra  Kndn,  who  was  the  first  to  become  a
Musulman.  Sdtuk  Bughra  is  said  to  have  ruled  over  all  Turkistan  (Eastern  and
Western)  as  fur  east  as  the  borders  of  China,  while  shortly  before  his  death,  about
the  end  of  the  tenth  century,  he  is  reported  to  have  captured  Bokhara.  His
capital  was  Kashghar,  then  called  Urdukand ;  but  not  long  after  his  death,  his
descendants  would  seem  to  have  moved  the  seat  of  government  to  Balas^gnun.
His  immediate  successor  appears  to  have  taken  the  title  of  Uak  Khan,  or  "  Great
King  *'  or  '*  Sovereign,'*  wnich  seems  to  have  been  perpetuated  in  that  of  the
dynasty,  though  it  is  often  vrrongly  written  Il-Khan,  This  Ilak  Khan  (perhaps
Nasr  by  name)  conquered  M6vari-un-Nahr  about  1008,  drove  out  the  Bam^ni
rulers,  and  established  his  authority  over  the  country.  The  date  of  his  death
does  not  appear  to  be  recorded,  but  he  is  said,  in  some  accounts,  to  have  been
succeeded  by  his  brother  Toghan  Khan,  who  is  known  to  have  been  reigning  at
Balasdghun  in  1018.  He,  again,  was  succeeded  by  Arslan  Khan  L;  then
followed  Kadir  Khan,  then  Arslan  II.,  and  then  a  second  Bughra,  who  was  in

Eower  in  the  year  1070 ;  but  there  may  have  been  others  between  those  named
ere.  Whether  the  second  Bughra  was  immediately  succeeded  by  one  Mahmud
Khan  is  not  clear,  but  we  learn,  at  any  rate,  that  a  Khan  of  that  name  was  ruler
of  ,the  Ui^hur-Dak  kingdom  about  the  year  1124,  when  the  Gur  Khan  of  tho
Karakhitai  invaded  Eastern  Turkistan  and  conquered  it,  together  with  Bala-
s^hun,  and  perhaps  also  Western  Turkistan.  At  about  this  date,  the  Uighur
kingdom  is  represented  as  coming  to  an  end.  But  the  Karakhitai  do  not  appear
to  have  disturbed  M^vard-un-Nabr,  which,  as  a  part  of  the  Uighur  dominion,  was
administered  by  vassals  or  tributary  Sultans.  These  Sultans  continued  to  govern
till  1213,  when  the  last  of  them,  named  Usm^n,  was  killed  by  Muhammad
Khwdrizm  Shah,  who  took  possession  of  the  country,  and  held  it  untU  he  was
himself  ousted,  shortly  afterwards,  by  Chingiz  Khan,  with  the  Uighurs  as  his
allies.

Thus,  dating  only  from  S^tuk  ^Bughra  Khan,  this  Musulman  Uighur  dynasty
flourished  in  Turkistan  for  nearly  a  century  and  a  half,  and  in  Mdvari-un-Nahr
for  over  two  centuries;  but  their  history,  as  we  have  it,  is  somewhat  uncertain  if
not  contradictory.

As  regards  the  habitat  of  this  nation,  the  author  of  the  Tabdhdiri-Ndsiri  says
tliat  the  Afrasi&bi  Turks  under  the  Dak  Khans,  or  Afrasiibi  Maliks,  occupied
the  tracts  about  K&yalik  and  Balasaghun  until  dispossessed  by  the  Karakhitai.

Dr.  Bretschneider  may  be  consulted  for  a  brief  account  of  the  Uak  Khans,
which  he  appears  to  have  derived  from  the  KdmU-utrTavdrilch  of  Ibn-ul-Athir
(1160-1233  A.D.).  Dr.  Bellew  has  published  a  fiiU  summary  of  the  earlier  history
of  the  same  dvnasty,  extracted  from  the  Taxhirori-SulUm  8dtuk  Bughra,  a  worf,
however,  which  he  evidently  mistrusts.  Mr.  S.  Lane  Poole  gives  a  brief  sketch
of  their  history,  and  a  list,  as  far  as  it  can  be  authenticated,  of  the  Khans ;  and

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

288  Extract  from  the  Jaltdn  Kushdi.

CHAPTER XLL

EXTRACT FROM THE  JAHAN-KUSIIAI.

When  Chingiz  Khan  carried  his  victorious  arms  into  the  countries
of  the  East,  Kushluk,  son  of  Tai  YAng  Khan,  fled  by  way  of  Bish
Baligh,  to  the  country  of  the  Gur  Kh4n.  He  wandered  about
among  the  hills,  in  great  want,  while  those  tribes  who  had  accom-
panied him  became  scattered.  Some  people  say  that  he  was
captured  by  a  body  of  the  Gur  Khan's  soldiers,  who  led  him  before
their  chief;  another  story  is  that  he  went  and  presented  himself
of  his  own  accord.  He  at  any  rate  remained  some  little  time  at
the  court  of  the  Gur  Khan.  Sultdn  Muhammad  Khwdrizm  Shah
rose  in  revolt  against  the  Gur  Khdn,  while  other  Amirs  in  the
eastern  quarter,  rebelled  also,  and  put  themselves  under  the  pro-
tection of  the  Emperor  of  the  world,  Chingiz  Kban,  by  whose
favour  they  obtained  immunity  from  the  evil  acts  of  the  Gur  Kh&n.
Kushluk  then  said  to  the  Gur  Khan:  "My  tribes  are  very
numerous,  and  are  scattered  over  all  the  territory  of  Imal,  Kiyak,^
and  Bish  B41igh,  where  they  meet  with  opposition  from  every  one.
If  you  will  allow  me,  I  will  cause  them  to  assemble  and  with  their
assistance  [I  will  bring  the  rebels  again  under  your  authority].
Thus will  I  help  the  Gur  Khan; and  I  will  not  in  any  way

lastly,  Major  Baverty,  in  his  translation  of  the  Tabdhdt-i-Ndnriy  famishes  a  long
list  of  Dak  Khans,  together  with  much  comment,  but  he  does  not  mention  liis
authorities. All  these  Usts  differ  as  to  names  and  dates.

The  word  Ilh  or  lldk^  Dr.  Terrien  de  Laoouperie  informs  us,  meant  Sovereign.
It  was  a  title  first  used  by  a  Prince  of  the  Tukiieh,  and  was  revived  by  the  Uighar
Khans  of  Turkistan,  who  used  it  from  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century  till  the
year  1213.  Subsequently,  it  was  revived  a  second  time  by  the  Mongols  in
Persia;  Hulaku  having  changed  his  own  title  of  Khan,  which  he  had  held
during  the  reign  of  Mangu  Kadn,  for  llah  Khan,  under  the  reign  of  Kublai
Kaan.  The  form  Il-Khan,  often  said  to  mean  "  Khan  of  the  Ilydt  "—the  lU  or
tribeB — is  therefore  erroneous.  (See  Brotschneider,  Med.  J3e«.,  i.,  pp.  252-3;
Bellew,  Tar.  Rept,  pp.  121-30;  8.  L.  Poole,  Muham.  Dyn.,  pp.  132  and  131-5;
Raverty,  pp.  900-10;  |  Laoouperie,  Babylonian  and  Orient.  Keoordj  Dec.,  1888,
p.  13.)

*  In  the  Persian  texts  this  name  may  be  read  Kabdh,  Kaidk,  or  Kiydk,  but  tho
Turki  reads  consistently  Kiydk,  so  I  have  adopted  that  form.  If  it  is  correct,  I
think  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  Kaydlik  of  some  ancient  writers,  and  the  Cailae
of  Bubruk,  is  the  place  intended.  It  was  situated,  according  to  the  most  trast-
worthy  critics,  to  the  south-west  of  the  Imil  river,  and  near  the  modem  Kopdl,
and  in  this  position  would  accord  well  with  what  is  known  of  the  localities  of
Kushluk's  tribes — the  Naim&ns,  or  properly  the  Naimdn-Uighurs ;  fe.,  the
Eight'Uighurs.  (See  Yule,  Cathay,  p.  576 ;  F.  M.  Schmidt  in  Zeitschri/t  der
GeseOt.  fur  Erdkunde,  Berlin,  1888,  xx.,  Bd.,  Heft  3,  pp.  201-5;  Bref-
sohueider,  !.,  p.  230.  Also  Schuyler,  i.,  p.  405 ;  Valikhanoff  in  RussianM  in
C.  AtiOy  pp.  62  and  527 ;  and  D'Ohsson,  ii.,  p.  516,  who  quotes  Y&s&f  to  the  effect
that  in  1301  Kaydlik  was  on  the  frontier,  between  the  territories  of  Kaidu  and
the  Khdkdn,  though  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  where  this  frontier  actually

Digitized  by

Google

Extract  from  t/ie  Jahdn  Kmkai  289

deviate  from  his  commands."  With  such  flattery  and  deceit  did
he  throw  the  Gur  Khan  into  the  well  of  pride.  Then  having
loaded  him  with  gifts,  he  begged  that  the  title  of  "  Knshluk  Eh4n  "
might  be  bestowed  on  him.  The  Gur  Kh4n  accepted  the  gifts  and
gave  him  the  title  he  desired,  whereupon,  quick  as  an  arrow  shot
from  a  bow,  Kushluk  left  the  territory  of  the  Gur  Khan  and  came
to  the  country  of  Imal  and  Kiyak.  When  the  report  of  the
invasion  of  Kushlnk  got  abroad,  Tuktai,  who  was  one  of  the
Makrit  Amirs,  had  fled  and  joined  Kushluk.  This  was  before  the
rumours  of  the  conquests  of  the  Emperor  of  the  world,  Chingiz
Khan,  had  been  spread  abroad.  And  wherever  they  went,  they
were  joined  by  bands  of  men,  with  whom  they  conducted  forays —
plundering  and  burning  as  they  came  and  went.

When  they  heard  of  the  successes  of  Muhammad  Khwarizm
Shah,  they  sent  numerous  ambassadors  to  persuade  him  to  attack
the  Gur  Kh4n  from  the  west.  Kushluk,  at  the  same  time,  was  to
attack  him  from  the  east,  so  as  to  bring  him  out  of  the  centre  [of
his  dominions].  [The  conditions  were  that]  if  Sult4n  Muhammad
Khwdrizm  Sh&h  shoidd  be  the  first  to  gain  a  victory,  Alm41igh,
Khotan  and  Kashghar,  which  were  in  Knshlnk's  kingdom,  should
be  ceded  to  him ;  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  Kushluk  should  have
the  first  success,  Kard  Khitai  as  far  as  Findkand  should  be  delivered
over  to  him.  These  conditions  having  been  agreed  upon,  a  treaty
was  concluded  between  them.  (Findkand  means  Shahrukhia.)^
Thus  the  two  armies  set  out  for  Kara  Khitai  from  opposite  direc-
tions. Kushluk  arrived  before  Sultan  Muhammad  Khwdrizm  Shdh
[and  defeated  the  Gur  Khdn],  since  the  army  of  this  Sultdn  was
more  distant.  Then,  having  plundered  his  treasury,  which  was  at
Uzkand,  he  proceeded  to  Baldsdkun,  where  the  Gur  Khdn  himself
was,  and  a  pitched  battle  was  fought  at  Jinuj,^  in  which  Kushluk
was,  however,  defeated,  and  most  of  his  men  being  worn  out  [kuftd]

*  The  texts  throughoat  this  extract  from  the  Jahdn  Ktuihai  are  corrupt  and
obscure.  In  this  instonce  the  name  is  spelled  in  one  text  Shahr-Khiah,  in  another
Shahr-Kah,  and  so  on.  I  have  no  doub^  howeyer,  that  Shahrukhia  is  meant ;  for
Shahrukhia,  as  we  learn  from  the  Zafar-Ndma^  was  founded  by  Timur,  on  the
ruins  of  the  ancient  Finakand,  towards  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century.  The
author  of  the  JcJidn  Ktu^i,  however,  died  in  687  a.h.,  or  about  a  hundred  years
before  any  such  place  as  Shahrukhia  had  come  into  existence  1  The  inference,
thereforef  is  that  the  sentence,  **  Findkand  mG&uB  Shahrukhia,*'  is  an  interpolation,
either  by  Mirza  Haidar,  or  by  a  copyist,  while  the  bad  spelliog  of  the  latter  name
is  due  to  the  interpolator. 8ee  P^tis,  Timur  Bec^  iv.,  p.  207. Also  Baber,  p.  1.

It  may  be  added  here  that  the  forms  Finakand,  Finakat,  and  Binakat^  denote,
without  doubt,  one  and  the  same  place,  as  Sadik  Ispdhani  (p.  78)  expressly  notes
that  BinaJiot  was  also  called  Shahrukhia,

*  By  variationB  in  pointing,  the  name  here  written  Jinuj  may  become  Jinbuj  or
ChinbuJ ;  it  may  therefore  be  taken  to  stand  for  the  Chiiiudje  of  D'Ohssou
(i.,  p.  168),  where  this  episode  is  alluded  to.  It  was  the  name  of  a  river  in
Turkistan,  according  to  Bretschneider  (i.,  p.  231),  bat  if  near  Balasaghun,  it  must
have  been  in  the  extreme  north-eastern  quarter  of  that  territory — near  the  upper
left  tributaries  of  the  Ghu ;  for  it  was  among  these  strenmM  that  Balastiglnin
(or  perhai)s  better  Balnsukun)  wns  most  probably  situated.

u

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

290  Extract  from  tJte  Ja/idn  Kusliau

he  retired  and  set  aboat  reorganising  his  army.  He  heard  that
the  Gnr  Khan  had  returned  from  his  war  with  Sultan  Muhammad
Khwdrizm  Shah,  and  had  been  ill-treating  the  people  of  the
province;  also  that  the  army  had  returned  to  its  own  country.
Then,  like  lightning  from  a  cloud,  he  rushed  out  to  meet  him,  and
having  seized  his  followers,  brought  his  kingdom  and  his  army
under  his  own  power ;  he  then  demanded  one  of  his  daughters  in
marriage.  Now  the  tribe  of  Ndiman  were  mostly  Christians
\Tar9&\^  and  when  he  took  that  daughter  in  marriage,  he  made
her  abandon  Christianity  and  become  an  idol  worshipper.

After  Eushluk  had  firmly  established  himself  on  the  throne  of

*  The  word  Tarta  is  rendered  ChrUiian  here,  as  its  most  probable  signification
when  applied  to  the  Naim^ns.  It  was  a  term,  however,  that  was  used  for
Huddhists,  for  Zoroastrians,  and  for  idolaters.  Perhaps  altio,  anions:  Mnsulmana,
it  may  have  meant  any  non-Musulman  religion.  Tliere  is  much  evidence  to
show  that  Nestorian  Ghnstianity  was  prevalent  among  the  Naimdns  in  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries,  as  well  as  among  other  Uighnrs,  though  it  cannot  perhaps
be  said  for  certain,  as  Juvaini  is  made  to  do  in  the  translation  at  this  place,  tliat
they  were  **  mostly  Christians."  It  is  possible  that  his  meaning  may  iitivo  been
that  they  were  mostly  Buddhists ;  he,  at  any  rate,  cannot  have  applied  the  word
to  idolaters,  as  the  succeeding  sentence  proves — ^the  woman  was  made  to  abandon
the  religion  called  Tar«a  and  become  an  idolater.  Thus,  so  much  stands  out
clearly  in  this  passage — that  Fire-worsliip  not  beiue  in  question  with  the
Naimans,  Tarsa  cannot  stand  for  any  religion  except  Christianity  or  Buddhism.
But  Buddhism  and  idolatry  are  frequently  regarded  as  one  and  the  same  by
MuBulmans,  and  called  by  the  same  name,  so  tiiat  if  it  could  be  regarded  as
probable  that  Juvaini  took  this  view,  there  would  remain  no  other  translation
tor  TatML  than  ChritHan,  On  all  considerations,  therefore,  it  is  probable  that  the
words  C7msttan  and  Christianity  render  the  author's  meaning  in  these  passages,
and  hence  they  become  an  important  contribution  to  the  evidence  (1)  that  the
Naira^ins  were,  indeed,  **  mostly  Christians,"  and  (2)  to  the  fact  that  the  term
Tana  was  used  for  Christianity,

Dr.  Bretschneider  remarks  that  the  Aichimandrate  Palladius  (in  a  Russian
publication)  states  that  '*  Tie  Sie  is  the  Chinese  iranscjiption  of  the  word  Tarsa,
used  by  the  Persians  since  the  time  of  the  Sassanides  to  designate  the  Christians,
und  sometimes  also  the  Fire-worshippors  and  Magi.  The  name  of  Tarse  is
applied  expressly  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Yogurs  (Ui^hurs)  by  Haithon,  the
Armenian,  in  his  account  of  the  kingdoms  of  Asia  (beginning  of  the  fourteenth
century).  John  of  Monteoorvino,  in  a  letter  written  at  Peking  about  the  same
time,  speaks  of  Tarsic  characters,  meaning  evidently  Uighur  letters."  Thus  the
name  was  applied  also  to  the  Uighurs  as  a  nation,  but  probably  only  on  aoouunt  of
their  Christianity  or  Buddhism — for  both  religions  were  prevalent  among  them.

D'Ohsson  states  that  in  the  Jahdn  Kushai,  Jnyaiui  explains  that  the  Chribtiana
(thirteenth  century)  were  called  by  the  Mongols  Arcaoun  [Arghuii],  while
Buddhist  monks  were  known  as  Touines.  He  also  says  that  Rubruk  speaks  of
the  Buddhists  generally  as  Touiniens,  und  adds  that  Touin  is  in  reality  the
Mongol  name  fur  Buddhist  ecclesinsties.  He  quotes,  moreoYer,  the  Armeniau
wnter  Orpelian,  to  the  eilect  that  tlie  Christians  were  known  as  Arkhaiotm
[Arghun].  Tiiebo  designations  point  to  a  well-understood  difference  between
Christianity  and  Buddhibm  among  the  Mongols,  but  this  may  not  have  been  the
case  among  Mmiulmans.  The  term  Arghun  is  now  used  in  Ladak  to  mean  a
*'  half-breed,"  audit  was  so  used  also  in  the  time  of  Polo  in  North- Western  China*
'J'he  real  meaning  of  the  word,  in  Turki,  in  '*  fair  "  (complexioned),  and  is  said  to
have  been  current  in  Mongol  as  well  as  Turki,  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  but  it  was
by  no  means  always  applied  to  Christians.  A  full  discussion  of  the  term  Arghun
will  be  found  in  Yule's  Marco  Polo,  i.,  pp.  279  aeqq.  (See  also  D'Ohsson,  ii.,
p.  264 ;  Remusat's  Nmw.  M^ngeSy  ii.,  p.  198.)

As  regards  the  country  known  as  Tarw  or  r<rr«m,  tlio  reduced  facsimile  of  the
Catalan  map  in  Yule's  Cathay  shows,  in  lurge  letters,  a  kingdom  called  Tamd,

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Extract  from  the  JaJidn  Kus/iai,  291

Kara  Khitai,  he  fought  several  battles  with  him  [the  Gur  Khan  ?]
at  Jam  B41igh,^  and  finally  he  surprised  the  Gnr  Kh4n  on  his
hunting  grounds,  when  having  captured  him,  he  put  him  to  death.

The  chief  men  of  Eashghar  and  Khotan  had  also  become  hostile.
The  Gur  Khdn  had  imprisoned  the  son  of  the  Eh4n  of  Kashghar.
[Kushluk]  now  set  him  at  liberty  and  sent  him  back  to  Kdshghar.
But  the  Amirs  declined  him,  and  before  he  had  placed  his  foot
within  the  city,  they  put  him  to  death  between  the  gates.  At  the
time  when  the  com  was  ripe,  Kushlnk  sent  his  army  to  eat  or  bum
it.  When  the  inhabitants  had  been  deprived  of  three  or  four
quarters  of  their  income  [ddkhT\  and  com,  a  famine  broke  out.
The  people  of  Kdshghar  sufiFered  great  distress,  and  had  therefore
to  submit.  After  that,  Kushluk  marched  away  with  his  army.
And  his  soldiers  used  to  lodge  in  the  houses  of  the  people  of
Kashghar  and  mix  with  their  families,  so  that  [the  Kdshghari]
had  no  homes  left.  [His  trwps]  practised  every  form  of  violence
and  wickedness.  They  did  everything  to  encourage  idolatry,  and
no  one  was  able  to  prevent  them.  They  next  went  to  Khotan,
which  they  captured,  and  compelled  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
surrounding  districts  to  abandon  the  religion  of  Muhammad,
giving  them  the  choice  of  becoming  either  Christians  or  idolaters.
[Arabic  quotation  from  Kor4n  .  .  .  .]  Verily  God  is  forgiving  and
merciful.  Having  adopted  the  garments  of  sin,  the  cry  of  the
Muazzin  and  the  confession  of  the  Unity  of  the  God  of  Believers
was  no  longer  heard.  The  mosques  were  closed  and  the  schools
abandoned.  One  day  they  conducted  the  Imdms  of  Khotan  out
into  the  plains  and  began  to  argue  with  them.  Among  their
number  was  Imdm  Ala-ud-Din  of  ELhotan.  He  was  asked  questions
and  gave  answers,  and  at  length  they  hanged  him  up  over  the
door  of  a  college.  Of  this  matter  I  shall  speak  presently.  After
this,  the  faith  of  Islam  having  lost  all  its  splendour,  the  darkness
of  evil  spread  over  all  the  servants  of  God,  and  they  raised  their
supplications  to  heaven.  [Five  couplets  in  Arabic  .  .  .  .]  The
arrow  of  their  entreaties  reached  the  target,  and  God  heard  and
answered  them.

When Kushluk was setting  out to  attack the  kingdoms  of

bnt  the  distorted  geosrraphy  of  the  tinnee,  renders  any  location  of  the  region  on  a
modern  map  impoflsible.  Haithon  of  Gorigos,  the  historian  (Mr.  Warren  tolls  us
in  his  notes  to  MandemUe^s  Travds)  expressly  says  that  the  Mngdom  of  Tarae  was
the  land  of  the  Uighurii,  and  thnt  it  ndjoined  Tangut  on  the  west.  It  can,
however,  hardly  be  said  to  be  so  placed  on  the  Catalan  map.  (See  MandevUle^
p.  211,  and  note,  p.  125.)

'  This  place  stood  on  the  north  of  the  Tian  Shan  mountains,  between
Bishbalik  (the  modem  Urumtsi)  and  the  Man^  riyer.  It  is  frequently
mentioned  in  this  position,  under  the  names  of  Chang-ba-la  and  Jang-ba-li,
by  the  Chinese  travellers  of  the  thirteenth  century,  whose  narratives  have  been
so  aldy  translated  and  elucidated  by  Dr.  Bretechneider.  It  is  also  mentioned  by
King  Haithon  of  Little  Armenia  in  the  account  of  his  homeward  journey  from
Mongolia. (See  Bretschneider,  i.,  pp.  67, 160,  etc. ;  ii.,  p.  32.)

U  2

Digitized  by

Google

292  Extract  from  the  Jahdn  Kus/iai.

ChiDgiz  Khan,  the  latter  sent  a  body  of  Nuin  ^  to  check  Kushluk's
evil  progress.  He  [Kushluk]  was,  at  that  time,  in  Kdshghar.
The  chief  men  of  Kashghar  related  that  when  [the  Nuin]
arrived,  and  before  they  had  drawn  up  in  line,  Kushluk  tnraed
his  back  and  fled,  while  the  regiments  that  arrived  one  after
the  other,  of  the  Moghuls  [az  Mogliuldn\  demanded  nothing
of  them  but  news  of  Kushluk.  They  sanctioned  the  "  call  to
prayer  "  \^Takhir]  and  the  prayers  [^Uzan] ;  and  they  issued  a  pro-
clamation in  the  town,  that  every  one  might  practise  his  own
religion.  The  advent  of  those  people  was  held  to  be  an  act  of
mercy  and  bounty  from  the  Almighty.  When  Kushluk  fled,
every  one  who  lived  in  a  Musulman  town  or  house,  suddenly
disappeared,  like  quicksilver;  and  the  Moghul  army  went  in
pursuit  of  Kushluk.  Wherever  he  halted,  they  came  up  behind
him  and  drove  him  od,  like  a  mad  dog,  until  they  reached  the
frontier  of  Badakhshdn,  which  is  called  Darazukhdn.

When  he  arrived  at  Sarigh  Chupan,  he  missed  the  road,  and
entered  a  valley  that  had  no  egress.  There  happened  to  be  a
party  of  Badakhshani  hunters  in  those  hills,  and  when  they  saw
[the  fugitive  party]  they  went  towards  them,  while  the  Moghuls
advanced  from  the  other  side.  The  valley  being  rough,  the
Moghuls  found  walking  difficult,  and  came  to  an  agreement  with
the  hunters,  saying:  **This  band,  namely  Kushluk  and  his
followers,  have  escaped  from  us ;  if  you  will  capture  them  and  give
them  over  to  us,  we  will  do  them  no  harm."  JSo  they  went  and
surrounded  [Kushluk]  and  his  party,  and  having  bound  him,
delivered  him  up  to  the  Moghuls,  who  cut  off  his  head  and  carried
it  away  with  them.  The  Badakhshani,  having  found  endless
booty  and  precious  stones,  returned.

How  clear  it  is  that  no  one  can  ever  be  victorious  who  opposes
the  religion  of  Ahmad  and  the  Holy  Law  of  Muhammad;  while
he  who  promotes  it  becomes  more  successful  day  by  day  !

*  Tiiis  sentence,  again,  is  without  donbt  a  corraption.  All  tlie  texts  have
**'janC  %  Nuirk,"  and  no  other  reading  seems  possible.  Suin  would  represent  the
well-knuwn  Mongol  runk  or  title,  Noyan  (meaning  general,  or  commander  of
10,000) ;  bat  there  could  not  have  been  a  body  or  assembly  of  Noyans,  as  the
wurd  jam*  implies.  The  sentence  should  read,  probably,  that  a  force  under  one
Clwbdh^  or  Jabahf  Noyan,  was  sent,  etc.  The  episode  is  to  be  found  described  in
most  of  the  Musulman  histories,  and  is  always  giveu  in  this  way  :  tlius  the  Ha/l
Jklim  (Quatremcre,  Not.  et  Eztr.^  xiv.,  p.  478)  says  that  CliiiiKtz  "envoya  DJeheii
Novian.'*  Abul  Ghazi  (p.  102)  has  Tchepe-Noian,  The  Habib-us-Sayar  (in
l*rice*s  Muhd,  History ,  vol.  ii.,  p.  496)  has  Hahhah  Noyan,  thou>;h  Price  adds  in
a  note,  that  the  word  is  pointed  JaJibahi  while  D'Ohsson,  citing,  t«pparently,
Jtashid-ud-Din,  says  that  **  20,000  hommes  sous  les  onjrea  de  Noyan  Tcheh^*'  wero
bent.  This  Noyan  Chahah  was  a  famous  general  of  Ghiugz  Khan's,  and  hid
name  frequently  occurs  in  connection  with  the  Mongol  conquests.  Dr.  Bellew
{Yarlcand  Report,  p.  179)  gives  the  meaning  of  Noyan  as  **a  Kalmak  noble."
8ir  H.  Howorth  says  that  among  the  Mongols  and  Ealmaks  it  means  "  a  prince
or  any  member  of  the  Royal  family ;  *'  also  that,  acconlinj^  to  Quatrtmen ,  it  is
the  title  of  a  leader  of  a  toman,  or  division  of  10,000  men  (iii.,  p.  152).

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Description  of  Kdshghar.  293

CHAPTER  XLir.

THE MARTYRDOM  OF IMAM AlA-UD-DIN  MUHAMMAD  OF KHOTAN,  AT  THE
HANDS  OF KUSHLUK.

When  Kushluk  conquered  Kashghar  and  Kiotan,  he  changed  from
the  religion  of  Jesus  to  the  practice  of  idolatry,  and  the  rest  of  the
people  he  caused  to  abandon  Hanifism  and  become  fire  worshippers.
He  changed  the  lights  of  the  true  path  into  the  darkness  of
unbelief,  and  the  service  of  the  all  merciful  into  the  serfdom  of
Satan.  .  .  >

Thus  far,  I  have  copied  from  the  Tdrikh-i-Jdhdn-KusMi.

After  Chingiz  Khan  had  subjugated  the  whole  of  K4shghar,  he
went  and  set  his  mind  at  rest  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  Iran
and  Turan — nay,  rather  of  the  whole  world.^  He  then  returned  to
his  capital  and  d!ivided  all  his  kingdoms  among  his  four  sons.  We
learn  from  the  MuJTna'Ui-Tavdrikh  of  Eashidi  and  from  the  Guzida
(the  former  entering  into  detail,  the  latter  giving  it  in  brief),  that
the  whole  of  the  Dasht-i-Khizr  and  [Dasht-i]-Kipchak,  whose
boundaries  are  Rum,  the  ocean  [Muhit]  Mavara-un-Nahr,  and
Moghulistan,  was  given  to  his  eldest  son,  Juji  Khan.  Moghulist^n,
Kara  Khitai,^  Turkistan  and  Mavard-un-Nahr  to  Chaghatai  Khan.
To  Tuli  he  gave  the  whole  of  Khitdi,  while  hie  original  seat  of

>  About  one  folio  and  a  half  of  text  is  omitted  hero,  as  it  has  no  bearing  on
the  history.  It  oonsists  chiefly  of  Arabic  phrases,  etc.,  and  is,  like  the  rest  of  the
extract  from  the  Jdhdn  Kushai,  very  corrupt  and,  in  places,  unintelligible.

It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  in  the  British  Mnseum  there  is  only  one  copy  of
the  Tarikh'i-Jahdn'Ktuhaif  and  that  one,  Mr.  Ross  informs  me,  is  so  corrupt
that  he  is  unable  to  make  much  use  of  it.  It  might  perhaps  have  been  advan-
tageous, had  a  good  copy  been  obtainable,  to  translate  Mirza  Haidar's  extrat^t
direct  from  the  original,  as  was  done  with  the  Zafar-Ndma  in  Part  I. ;  but  Mr.
Ross  found  this  impossible.  On  the  other  hand,  a  new  translation  of  this  section
of  the  JaMn-Kuihai  is  not  of  great  importance,  seeing  that  the  subject  matter
has  appeared  already  in  many  other  works — European  as  well  as  Asiatic — and
has  been  well  elucidrtted  by  able  Orientalists.  In  fact,  on  the  particular  subj»*ft
of  the  transactions  of  the  Kara  Khitai  and  the  Naiman,  etc.,  it  is  constantly  uned
as  an  authority,  although  no  translation  of  the  whole  work,  into  any  European
Jangua<;e,  has  yet  been  made.  The  author,  Ala-ud-Din  Ata-uUMulk,  known  as
Juvaini,  was  bom  in  Kborasau  in  624  or  625  a.h.,  and  died  681.  He  went  on  a
mission  to  the  Court  of  Mangu  Khakan  at  Karakorum  about  617  (or  1249  a.d.),
nnd  thus  had,  himself,  travelled  through  the  countries  on  which  he  wrote.  He
is  probably,  therefore,  a  good  authority  on  all  matters  relating  to  the  tribes,  tho
geography,  etc.,  of  these  r^ions  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries.  For  a
full  account  of  liis  life  and  book,  see  Fundgrvben  des  Orients  (Mines  de  I'Orient),
i.,  pp.  220-234.

*  Meaning  that  he  conquered  Iran  and  Turan,  and  the  whole  world.

'  While  at  p.  152,  the  author  makes  Moghulistan  coincide  with  Kara
Khitai,  he  here  distinguishes  between  them.  The  matter,  however,  has  been
explained  in  the  Intri^uction ;  the  mention,  here,  of  two  countries,  may  be
regarded  merely  as  one  of  the  ordinary  inoouBi:jtencies  or  loo^e  expressions,  iu
which  the  book  abounds.

Digitized  by

Google

294  Description  of  KdskgJtar

•government,  that  is  to  say  Kardkordm  and  the  Kalmak  [country]
he  entrusted  to  Uktai.  In  the  same  manner  he  distributed  his
army  and  his  Amirs ;  and  in  that  division,  the  Dughlat  fell  to  the
lot  of  Chaghatai,  who  entrusted  to  them  Mangaldt  Suyah^  which
means  "  facing  the  sun  "  \_Aftdh  rui].^  This  country  is  bounded  by
Shash,  Chdlish,  Issigh  Kul  and  Sarigh  Uighur ;  and  on  the  confines
of  these  four  limiting  provinces  are  situated  Kashghar  and  Kbotan.
The  particular  Dughl&t  who  was  established  in  this  kingdom,  was
Amir  Babddghan,^  in  whose  family  it  remained,  from  father  to  son,
until  the  time  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.  The  Jdm-i-Giti  Numdi  ^  says
that  Kashghar  is  the  most  important  town  of  the  Turks,  and  goes
on  to  describe  several  objects  in  it,  of  which  now  no  trace  remains.
Among  other  things  it  says  is,  that  people  used  to  carry  clothing  of
ermine  \Kdkum\  and  squirrel  [Sinjdh]  from  Kashghar  to  all  parts.
But  nowadays  there  are  no  such  [animals]  to  be  found  there.

K4shghar  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the  mountains  of  Moghul-
istan,  which  stretch  from  west  to  the  east,  and  from  them  rivers
flow  towards  the  south.  Those  hills  extend  from  Shash,  on  one
side,  to  beyond  Turfan  [on  the  other],  their  extremities  reaching
into  the  land  of  the  Kdlmdk,  which  quarter  none  but  the  Kalmak
themselves  have  seen,  or  know  anything  about.  I  have  questioned
some  of  those  who  have  seen  something  of  that  country,  but  I  can
recall  nothing  of  what  they  told  me,  which  would  be  worthy  of
mention  in  this  book.  Moghulistan  will  [afterwards]  he  described
shortly.  From  Shash  to  Turfan  is  three  months'  journey.  On  the
west  side  of  Kashghar  is  another  long  mountain  range,  of  which
the  mountains  of  Moghulistan  are  an  off-shoot  [munshaih^  This
range  runs  from  north  to  south.  I  travelled  on  those  mountains
for  six  months  without  coming  to  their  extremity.  They  also  shall
be  presently  described,  in  the  account  of  Tibet.  From  these
mountains,  rivers  run  from  west  to  east,  and  to  these  rivers
Kashghar  owes  its  fertility  [ah6Mni\  The  whole  of  the  countries
of  Khotan,  Yarkand  and  Kashghar  lie  at  the  base  of  these  mountains.

*  For  some  remarks  on  Mangalai  Suyah,  see  note,  p.  7.

'  The  Turki  MS.  reads  Bdbddghdn,  as  did  also  one  of  the  Persian  texts
originally,  but  some  native  reader  has  altered  the  name  into  Amir  Bdbdd
KurhdUy  in  both  places  where  it  occurs.  That  this  is  a  Musulman  oonoeit,  is
obvious.  The  mention,  however,  of  the  name  of  a  Dughldt  Amir  before  the
time  of  Bulaji  is  interesting,  and  is  the  only  one  I  have  met  with  in  the  Tarikh-
i-Rashidi,  or  elsewhere,  except  that  of  Urtubu,  who  is  spoken  of  by  Mirza
Haidar  in  the  first  chapter  of  Part  I.  as  grandfather  of  Bulaji.  He  has,  as  he
says,  avoided  all  mention  of  infidels,  and  the  Dughlats  previous  to  Bulaji  had
not  yet  become  Musulmans.  Dr.  Bellew  makes  the  name  of  Bdbddghdn  into
Amir  Bdyzidy  and  has  also  misread  his  author,  so  far  as  to  make  him  state  that
this  Amir  **  resided  in  the  Sarigh-Uighur  region."  Mirza  Haidar*s  statement,
however,  refers  to  **  Mangalai  Suyah,"and  not  to  the  Sarigh-Uighur  country.
(See  Yarhind  Rep.,  p.  166.)

*  The  Jdm-i-Giii  Numai  is  by  one  Mir  Giydth-ud-Din  Mansur.  The  British
Museum  does  not  possess  a  copy,  but  in  the  Catalogue  of  Persian  MSS.  in  the
Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford,  the  work  is  mentioned.

Digitized  by

Google

and  the  Neighbouring  Regions.  295

To  the  east  and  south  of  Kashghar  and  Khotan  are  deserts,  which
consist  of  nothing  but  heaps  of  shifting  sands,  impenetrable  jungles,
waste  lands  and  salt-deserts.  In  ancient  times  there  were  large
to>vns  in  these  [wastes],  and  the  names  of  two  of  them  have  been
preserved,  namely  Lob  and  Katak ;  but  of  the  rest  no  name  or
trace  remains :  all  are  buried  under  the  sand.  Hunters,  who  go
there  after  wild  camels,  relate  that  sometimes  the  foundations  of
cities  are  visible,  and  that  they  have  recognised  noble  buildings
such  as  castles,  minarets,  mosques  and  colleges,  but  that  when  they
returned  a  short  time  afterwards,  no  trace  of  these  was  to  be  found ;
for  the  sand  had  again  overwhelmed  them.  On  such  a  scale  were
these  cities  of  which,  nowadays,  neither  name  nor  vestige  remains  \
lu  a  word,  the  habitable  districts  of  Kashghar  and  Khotan  lie  along
the  western  skirts  of  these  mountains.  On  the  frontier  of  Kashghar
is  the  district  of  Artuj ;  ^  from  there  to  the  confines  of  Khotan,  at
Kariya  and  Jariyd,^  is  one  month's  journey.  But  as  for  the
breadth  of  fertility  of  the  cultivated  region  (from  the  foot  of  the
western  range  to  the  eastward)  by  travelling  quickly  one  can  leave
all  cultivation  behind  in  a  day  or  two.  On  the  banks  of  every
stream  that  comes  down  from  Uiat  range,  com  is  sown  and  the  land
is  cultivated.

The  first  of  these  is  the  Biver  Timan,^  which  comes  from  a
mountain  standing  between  Kashghar  and  Farghana.  This  river
flows  between  the  ancient  citadel  of  K4shghar,  which  Mirzd  Aba
Bakr  destroyed,  and  the  new  one  which  he  built,  on  the  banks  of
this  river,  as  has  been  related.  Fart  of  K4shghar  is  fertilised  by  this
same  river.  The  second  river  is  the  Kar4  Tazghun.  In  the  dialect
of  Kashghar,  Tazghun  means  a  river.*  It  flows  about  three  faraaklis
to  the  south  of  the  above  mentioned  fort.  The  greater  part  of  the
province  of  Kashghar  is  watered  by  it.  At  a  distance  of  three
faradkha  from  it,  is  a  third  river  called  Kusan  Tazghun,  on  the
banks  of  which  is  the  town  of  Yangi-Hisar,  and  its  dependent
districts.  The  town  is  supplied  with  water  by  this  river.  The
distance  from  Kashghar  to  Yangi-Uisdr  is  six  statute  [ahari]
farsdkhs. At  about  six  farsdlchs  from  Yangi-Hisar  is  an  insignifi-

^  This  place  is  often  mentioned  in  the  Tarikh-i-Rashidi.  It  is,  nowadays,  a
favourite  summer  resort  of  the  townspeople  of  Kashghar.  According  to  the  late
Mr.  R.  B.  Shaw  the  proper  spelling  is  AHush. (/.  K  Q.  8.,  1876,  p.  282.)

*  Usually  Kiria  and  Chiria,  or  CkircL  Both  exist  to  the  present  day,  the
former  as  a  town  of  some  size.

■  Nowadays  called  Tumdn  or  Tuman,  Mr.  Shaw,  in  speaking  of  the  situation
of  the  present  Kashghar — t.e.,  the  Kohna  Shahr  or  old  city— the  Musulman  and
not  the  Chinese  city — says  the  Tvmany  or  Ara  Tuman  (meaning  Middle  Tuman)
washes  the  ecbstem  side  of  the  town.  A  short  distance  below,  it  joins  the  river
Kizii ;  thus  Kashghar  is  situated  on  the  tongue  of  land  between  these  two  rivers.
{Loe  cU,,  p.  282-3.)

*  Mr.  Shaw  says  the  real  meaning  of  Tdzghun  is  "  a  flood  " ;  while  the  river
in  question — the  Kara  Tdzghun — is  also  known  as  the  Yupurghi, (25.,  p.  283.)

Digitized  by

Google

296  Description  of  Kdshghar

cant  hamlet  called  Kara  Chanak,^  in  front  of  wbich  flows  another
stream  called  Shahnaz,  which  waters  several  [other]  places.  The
valley  of  the  Shahnaz  lies  in  the  western  range,  and  the  [high]  road
from  Eashghar  to  Badakhshan  runs  throngh  this  valley.  On  the
road  from  Kara  Chanak  to  Kilpin  Babat,  is  a  resting  place  [man^t'Z]
for  those  coining  and  going  [on  the  road] ;  the  distance  between
Kilpin  Babat  and  Kara  Chandk  is  five  statute  farsdkhs.  Farther
on  is  another  halting  place — a  monastery  [langar^ — which  is  called
Kush  Gumbaz,  an  excellent  stage  [mamil]  watered  by  the  Shahnaz.
It  has  both  cultivated  grounds  and  gardens  \hdghdi]  which  all
form  a  part  of  the  foundation  [vdkf\  of  this  "  langar."  Travellers
enjoy  the  advantages  which  the  "  langar  "  offers.  The  next  stage
is  a  village  called  KizQ.  The  water  there  is  brackish,  and  nobody
stops  there  who  is  not  obliged  to.  It  is  considered  the  halfway
stage  between  Yangi-Hisar  and  Yarkand.  It  is  about  ten  farmkhs
from  Kizil  to  Kuk  Babat,  and  from  Kuk  Babat  to  the  edge  of  the
district  of  Yarkand,  which  is  called  Babatchi,  is  by  measurement
seven  statute /ar^dA;^.^  Between  Babatchi  and  KarA  Chanak  there
is  but  little  inhabited  country,  except  for  the  stages  that  have
been  mentioned.

Yarkand  was  formerly  a  very  important  city.  The  old  town  was
dug  out  by  Mirz&  Aba  Bakr ;  it  was  among  the  excavations
\kdzihkd]  which  we  have  spoken  about,  and  much  treasure  was
found  [in  it].  It  is  not  known  whether  the  old  town  was  called
Yarkand,  or  whether  it  had  another  name.  In  the  days  of  my
ancestors,  Yarkand  was  a  companion  city  to  Y&ngi-Hisdr.  Mirza
Aba  Bakr  made  Yarkand  his  capital.  He  introduced  streams  [into
the  town]  and  laid  out  gardens  ;  and  it  is  generally  reported  that
these  numbered  12,000,  most  of  which  were  in  the  city  and  its
environs.  But  I  cannot  imagine  that  this  figure  is  correct.  Mirza
Aba  Bakr  built  a  citadel  which,  in  most  places,  is  thirty  statute  gaz
in  height.  The  inside  of  the  citadel  is  roughly  about  a  hundred
cAtt6,  and  in  it  has  been  built  a  very  high  fort  [arh].  The  citadel
has  six  gateways,  which  are  devised  for  great  strength.  The  gates
themselves  are  placed  about  a  hundred  gaz  within  [the  walls]  and
on  either  side  are  two  towers  near  together,  so  that  should  any
one  wish  to  enter  either  of  the  gates,  he  must  [first]  pass  between

»  Or  Kara  Khandk.  But  in  either  form  the  name,  according  to  ^fr.  Shaw,  Is
nowadays  unknown ;  it  is  called  now  Suget  BuLdk. (J6.,  p.  284.)

'  Except  the  first  two  marches  from  Kashghar  all  the  distances  given  by  the
author  are  greatly  exaggerated.

For  a  complete  analysis  of  Mirza  Haidar's  description  of  this  road,  and
of  his  geography  of  all  the  regions  bordering  on  Eastern  Turkistan,  see
Mr.  Shaw's  paper  in  the  Journal  of  the  R.  G.  S.  for  1876,  entitled  A  Prince
0/  Kathghar  on  the  Geography  of  EoMtern  Turkistan.  When  in  Yarkand  and
Kashghar  in  1874-75,  Mr.  Shaw  had  with  him,  if  I  remember  rightly,  a  copy  of
the  Tarikh-i  Raghidi,  and  was  thus  able  to  criticise  it  on  the  spo^  with  the  help
of  native  informants.

Digitized  by

Google

and  tJie  Neighbouring  Regions,  297

these  two  towers.  If  an  enemy  attack  the  interior,  he  is  assailed
with  arrows  and  stones  from  front  and  rear,  as  well  as  from  right
and  left.  This  system  is  to  be  met  with  in  very  few  forts.  In
the  fort  \aTk'\  of  this  citadel,  magnificent  buildings  have  been
constrncted ;  but  to  describe  them  would  be  tedious.  In  the
suburbs  are  about  ten  gardens,  in  which  are  erected  lofty  edifices,
containing  about  a  hundred  rooms  each.  All  these  rooms  are
fitted  with  shelves  and  recesses  in  the  wall  \iak  and  t&kclia  banelt],
they  have  ceilings  of  plaster  work,  and  dados  of  glazed  tiles  \k6L»h%\
and  frescoes.  Along  the  public  ruads  are  avenues  of  white  poplar
\yafidaT\  so  that  one  may  walk  for  a  statutory  \far9akK\  and  a  half
on  every  side  of  the  city,  under  the  shade  of  these  trees.  Streams
run  by  most  of  the  avenues.

The  water  of  Yarkand  is  the  best  in  the  world.  Every  praise
which  doctors  have  bestowed  upon  any  water  is  true  of  this.^  It
comes  down  from  the  mountains  of  Tibet  (a  month's  journey
distant),  which  are  covered  with  snow  and  ice ;  it  flows  swiftly
over  a  stony  and  sandy  soil  from  south  to  north,  and  when  it
reaches  Sdrigh-Kul,  which  forms  the  extremity  of  the  hilly
country  of  Kdshghar,  it  rushes  on,  with  like  rapidity,  from  rock  to
rock,  leaping  and  tossing,  for  seven  days  [journey]  in  an  easterly
direction,  until  it  arrives  at  the  level  ground.  Here  it  continues
its  rapid  course  over  a  stony  bed  for  two  days  more,  and  when  it
re6U)hes  the  bed  [wio/art]  of  the  river  of  Yarkand,  in  which  there  are
few  stones,  the  current  in  some  degree  abates  its  speed.  A  curious
fact  concerning  this  stream  is,  that  in  the  early  part  of  the  spring
it  becomes  so  small  that  one  mi^ht  almost  cross  it,  in  some  places,
by  stepping  from  stone  to  stone.  In  the  season  of  Leo,  [il»<wi]  it
swells  so  much  that  it  becomes,  in  places,  nearly  a  statutory  mile
[wt7]  *  in  breadth,  [while  its  depth  is  then  nowhere  less  than  four
gaz\^  and  for  a  distance  of  one  Jtarvh  ^  it  is  no  less  than  ten  gaz  in

*  The  Torki  MS.  interpolates  bore :— **  ITie  waters  of  Yarkand  and  Khotau
owe  tlicir  excellence  to  the  fact  that  jade  and  gold  are  found  in  them;
and  they  are  found  in  no  other  rivers.  The  people  of  Yarkand  praise  tlie
water  of  the  Kara  Tazghun  very  highly,  and  indeed  it  is  an  excellent
beverage."

As  a  fact,  the  water  of  the  city  of  Yarkand  and  its  neighbouring  districts
should  be  classed  among  the  most  impure  and  insanitary  that  can  be  imagined.
Even  the  natives  are,  nowadays,  in  the  habit  of  attributing — and  perhaps
rightly — some  of  the  worst  diseases  they  suffer  from,  to  the  impurity  of  the
drinking  water. In  the  towns  it  is  of  course  worse  than  in  country  places.

'  All  the  rivers  and  streams  of  these  regions  are  at  their  lowest  in  early
spring,  and  rise  in  summer.  It  is  strange  that  the  author  should  regard  so
oommonacireumstance  as  **  curious.**  Wha^  however,  is  somewhat  curious  is  that
he  should  use  the  term  mt7  as  a  measurement,  for  it  is  a  word  he  has  not  pre-
viously employed.  He  probablv  derived  it  from  some  of  the  authors  he  had  read,
for  it  was  often  used  by  the  Arab  writers  to  denote  a  measure  of  one  thousand  paces.
Whether  Mirza  Haidar  really  intends  this  measurement  is  doubtful.

'  Karvh  or  iTtiroA— the  Kro  or  Kos  of  India — usually  taken  to  measure  about
1^  statute  mile. See  note,  p.  424.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

298  Description  of  Kdshgliar

depth.  Jade  [Fa«^6]^  is  found  in  this  stream.  Most  of  the
country  and  districts  of  Yarkand  are  irrigated  by  it.  At  a  diutance
of  about  seven  faraakha^  flows  another  stream  called  Tiz-Ab,^  which
waters  the  rest  of  the  country'.  For  about  three  days'  journey,  at
a  medium  pace,  from  Yarkand  [in  the  direction  of  EJiotan]  are
well  populated  towns  and  villages ;  the  farthest  of  these  is  called
Lahuk.^  From  this  place  to  Khotan  is  ten  days'  slow  marching,
during  which  time,  excepting  at  the  halting  places,  one  meets
with  no  habitations  [abdd&ni].

In  Khotan  there  are  two  rivers,  called  Kara  Kash  and  Urung
Kash,^  in  both  of  which  jade  is  met  with,  and  it  is  found  nowhere
else  in  the  world.  The  waters  of  these  two  rivers  are  preferred
[by  some]  to  that  of  Yarkand,  but  personally,  I  could  never  find  the
superiority  in  them.  Khotan  is  amongst  the  most  famous  towns
in  the  world,  but  at  the  present  time  its  jade  is  the  only  thing
that  remains  worth  writing  about.  One  curious  circumstance
concerning  Khotan,  is  that  magpies  ^  are  never  seen  there ;  or  if,  at
any  time,  one  happens  to  appear,  it  is  taken  as  a  bad  omen,  and
the  people  band  together  and  drive  it  away.

The  Imdm  Al4-ud-Din  Muhammad  of  Khotan  is  mentioned  in  all
histories,  but  no  one  in  Khotan  knows  which  is  his  tomb,  nor  even
recalls  his  name.  There  are  many  other  tombs  there,  about  which
nothing  is  known.  According  to  tradition  (the  truth  of  which  is
contradicted  by  books  on  history)  there  lie  buried  there,  among
others,  many  martyrs,  such  as  Imam  Zabiha  [or  Zabija],  Jafar
Tayy4r,  and  Im4m  Jafar  Sadik,  and  several  others  of  the  Com-
panions [of  the  Prophet].  But  the  falsehood  of  these  traditions  is
evident.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  the  followers  of  these  com-
panions [tMiii]  bearing  their  names,  came  here  and  sufiered
martyrdom,  for  before  the  conversion  of  Kashghar  to  Islam,  somo
of  the  followers  of  the  companions  came  to  Kashghar  and
conducted  a  holy  war  [cfhazdi]  there  [and  at  Khotan].  But  the
strange  thiug  there  is  that  the  martyrs,  whom  they  have  deposited
in  the  tombs,  are  sometimes  exposed  to  view,  from  the  sand  being
blown  away  by  the  wind,  and  no  change  is  noticeable  in  them ;
they  are  recognisable,  and  their  wounds— nay  more,  the  very  blood
which  has  issued  from  the  wounds,  all  dried  up,  is  still  visible.

*  Sang-i-Ycuihb  (or  Yashin)  is  rendered  in  the  Tarki  by  Kdkh  tdtk,  in  Shaw*s
Vocabulary,  where  there  is  also  an  interesting  note  on  the  subject

*  Now  called  the  Tiznd/.

*  The  LuJc  hangar  of  modem  maps,  and  the  LaJchouf  of  the  Haft  Ihlim,  (See
Quatreoi^re,  Not.  et  Extr.,  xiv.,  p.  476.)

*  The  Yurung  Kdsh  of  ordinary  maps,  and  according  to  modem  pronunciation.
On  and  near  its  upper  waters,  jade  is  still  quarried.  The  late  Mr.  W.  U.  John-
son, who  was  at  Karinghu-t&gh  on  the  Upper  Yurung  in  1865,  wrote :  ^  It  is
noted  for  the  YasJim  wMch  is  met  with  in  the  stream."  (See  /.  R,  G.  S.^  1867,
p.  7.)

*  In  the  Persian  *Aka^  and  in  the  Turki  Saghizghdn. — R.

Digitized  by

Google

and  tJie  Neighbouring  Regions.  299

Every  one  who makes the  circuit  [taw&f]  ^  of these  graves,
witnesses  these  things.

The  tombs  of  Yarkand,  however,  beloDg  to  no  one  who  is  men-
tioned in  histories  or  other  books.  But  the  people  of  Yarkand
believe  that  there  lie  [buried  there]  the  Seven  Muhammadans.
Their  story,  as  related  by  the  mujdvir^^  is  not  worth  recording  here,
but  Maulana  Ehw4ja  Ahmad,  who  was  a  disciple  of  Hazrat  Ishan,
and  a  good  and  industrious  old  man  (of  whom,  God  willing,  I  shall
speak  in  the  First  Part),  has  told  me  that  the  Seven  Muhammadans
were  grandees  [uidd] ;  but  I  do  not  remember  having  read  of  them
in  any  history.  Another  tomb  is  that  of  Dava  Khan  Padishah ;
but  concerning  him  I  could  learn  nothing  from  the  mujdvir.
Suddenly  Hazrat  Shahab-ud-Din  Khwdja  Khavand  Mahmud
passed  in  front  of  the  tomb,  and  turning  to  me  said :  ''  This  man
possesses  a  wonderfully  strong  power  of  attraction  [jazaba]^  and  I
never  pass  by  here  without  being  strongly  drawn  towards  [his
tomb]."  The  edifice  is  a  lofty  one  and  is  covered  outside  with
plaster,  upon  which  are  paintings  and  inscriptions.  In  spite  of
having  examined  them  carefully,  my  efforts  did  not  enable  me  to
read  them,  for  most  of  them  were  in  Kufic  character,  but  not  in
the  Kufic  which  is  employed  nowadays.  A  few  are  in  Suls  ^  writing,
but  it  is  not  inscribed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  easily  rec^.  Near
this,  is  a  dome,  upon  the  archway  of  which  is  some  Turki  writing
which  is  mostly  destroyed.  It  is  there  written:  **In  the  year
656  ....,"  but  the  rest  is  obliterated  and  cannot  be  read.  This
date  corresponds  very  nearly  with  the  date  of  Dava  Khau,  better
known  as  Dava  Sahan,^  and  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  his  tomb.
I  hold  the  proof  to  be  conclusive  for  several  reasons.  Firstly,  at
that  date  there  was  no  other  Dava  Khan  reigning ;  and  this  name
of  Dava  Khan  does  not  indicate,  in  the  least,  that  he  was  a  Shaikh
or  an  Imam ;  nor  does  the  fact  of  such  a  magnificent  tomb  having
Ixicii  raised  over  him.  Again  the  father  of  Dava  Khan,  Barak
Khan,  became  a  Musnlman  in  Bokhara,  received  the  title  of  Ghay-
yas-ud-Din,  and  was  succeeded  on  the  throne  by  his  son  Dava
Khan.^ From this  it  is  quite  evident  that  Dava  Khan  was  a

'  A  ceremony  which  oonsiBts  of  walking  round  the  Kaaba  at  Mecca,  or  other
tombs  and  sacred  edifices. — ^R.
»  Properly  the  mosque  sweepers,  but  here  the  guardians  of  tlio  tombs. — R.

*  Suls  is  a  sort  of  large  Naskhi  hand. — B.

*  As  far  as  is  known,  Davi  Khan  died  in  706  a.h.  (or  1306  a.d.)  ;  the  date  on
the  dome,  therefore,  is  just  fifty  years  too  early,  and  can  hardly  refer  to  tlio
Ch^hatai  Khan  of  that  name.  (See  8.  L.  Poolers  Mufuim.  Dynasties^  p.  242  ;  and
E.  E.  Oliver  in  J.  R.  A.  8.,  xx.,  N.8.,  p.  104.)

The  second  title,  given  as  Sahan  in  the  text,  is  found  in  this  form  in  the
Turki  and  in  one  Persian  MS. In  another  Persian  MS.  it  reads  CAtc^n.— R.

*  Barak  Khan  was  a  g^eat-grandson  of  Ghaghatai.  He  reigned  in  Bokhara
down  to  about  the  year  670  h.  (1270  a.d.),  and  was  succeeded,  not  by  his  son  Dav^,
but  by  his  great-uncle  Nikpai,  who  reigned  for  two  years,  and  was  followed  by  a
nephew  called  Tuka  Timur  for  a  further  period  of  two  years. It  was  only  aftfr

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

300  Description  of  Kashghar

Musulman.  He  is  very  mucli  lauded  in  histories,  and  it  is  not
surprising  that  God  should  have  raised  him  to  such  high  rank,
considering  his  '*  IsUm,"  and  his  noble  qualities.  After  his  death,
any  man  who  believed  this  to  be  his  tomb,  did  it  reverence,  and  as
time  went  on  [its  identity]  became  an  established  fact ;  but  God
alone  knows  the  truth.

If,  as  is  indeed  the  case,  this  is  the  tomb  of  the  famous  Dava
Khan,  his  story  is  told  in  histories.  In  the  Prolegomena  to  the
Zafar-Ndma^  Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Yazdi  fays  :  "  Dava  Khan  was  the
son  of  Barak  Khan,  son  of  Kara  Isu,  son  of  Bamnagai,  son  of
Chaghatai,  son  of  Chingiz  Khan.  He  was  a  powerful  and  worthy
monarrh.  [Couplet. . .]  Mamalikiz  Nuyan,  son  of  Amir  Aihal,  son  of
Nisun,  was  of  the  race  of  Karachar  Nuyan  Barlas.  According  to  the
ancient  charter  ^^Ahd-Ndma]  Davd  Khdn  was  made  king,  and  the
duties  and  privileges  of  his  forefathers  devolved  upon  him.  He
ruled  for  thirty  years,  and  through  the  excellent  management  of
Altigiz  Nuy4n,  the  Chaghatai  Ulus  attained  great  prosperity.
[Couplet.  .  .  .]  Finally  having  drawn  a  few  breaths  he  perished."
Thus  far  from  the  Znfar-Ndma.

Within  the  citadel  of  Yarkand  and  near  to  the  foii;  [ark]  is  a
tomb  called  Abjaji  Ata,  in  which  is  the  bone  of  a  man's  thigh,  in
two  pieces.  I  have  always  noticed  this  with  great  wonder.  I
once  pointed  it  out  to  Khidraat  Maulana  Shah  Sayyid  Ashik,  one
of  the  most  profoundly  learned  and  pious  Ulama  in  Mavara-un-
Nahr,  who  expressed  great  astonishment,  and  said :  "  Let  us  take
the  measurement.'*  He  ordered  to  be  brought  the  corresponding
thigh-bone  of  a  man  of  the  present  time ;  he  broke  off  clods  of  earth
of  the  weight  of  that  bone  and  tied  them  up  in  handkerchiefs,  till
they  were  exactly  the  weight  of  the  bone  which  was  in  two  piecrs.
He  afterwards  counted  the  clods  and  found  there  were  sixty.
Then  the  Maulana  said :  "  The  owner  of  this  bone  must  have  been
sixty  times  the  size  of  men  of  our  time."  This  is  indeed  a  most
wonderful  thing !

As  for  the  tombs  of  Kashghar,  the  first  is  that  of  Satuk  Bughra
Khan,  of  the  race  of  Afrasiab,  and  ancestor  of  Yusuf  Kadr  Khan
and  Sultan  Ilak  Mazi.  He  was  the  first  Turk  to  become  a  Musul-
man, and  he  is  related  to  have  said  :  **  Satuk  was  the  firbt  of  the
Turks  to  become  a  Musulman."  ^  I  have  heard  from  darvibhts
that  to  visit  his  tomb  is  a  source  of  great  spiiitual  advantage.
There  are  many  other  tombs,  excellent  accounts  of  which  are  to  be
found  in  books. Among  them  are  those  of  Husain  Fasl  Khwaja,

Tuka  Timur  that  Davi  attained  the  sovereignty — viz ,  in  1274.  (See  Chap.  II.
of  Introduction ;  also  S.  L.  Poole,  Muham.  DynaxtieSy  p.  242 ;  and  £.  £.  Oliver,
/.  H.  A.  S.,  XX.,  N.S.,  pp.  123,  127,  etc.)

*  See  for  some  ruiuarks  on  iBatuk  Bughra  Khan  and  his  successors  note,  p.  287.
The  saying  here  attributed  to  Satuk  is  in  Arabic.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

and  tlie  Neighbouring  Regions,  301

Kutb-i-Alam,  Shaikh  Habib,  Fakih  ibn  Bakr  and  others.  The
strangest  is  the  enclosure  \haz%Ta\  of  Husain  Fasl  Khwaja,  which
they  call  the  "  Enclosure  of  the  Mufiis,"  for  a  hole  has  been  made
in  his  grave  opposite  to  where  his  face  is.  No  change  has  taken
place :  his  beard  is  [still]  perfectly  straight,  and  he  is  recognisable.
I  have  heard  the  Dlama  of  Kdshghar  say  that  whenever  they  had  a
difficult  question  to  decide,  they  would  write  a  copy  of  it  and  place
it  in  the  tomb ;  on  the  morrow,  when  they  came,  they  found  the
answer  written  down.  And  this  has  been  tried  and  tested.  (The
responsibility  be  upon  their  shoulders.)

All  the  people  of  Khotan  and  Kashghar  are  divided  up  into  four
classes.  One  is  called  Tuman,  which  means  peasantry  :  they  are
dependent  upon  the  Khdn,  and  pay  their  taxes  to  him  yearly.
Another  class  is  called  Kuchin,  which  means  soldiery,  who  are  all
dependent  upon  my  relations.^  A  third  is  called  Tmak  [or  Aimak],
all  of  whom  receive  a  fixed  revenue  \fmk&t6.a\  of  grain,  cloth  and
the  like.  These  people  are  also  dependent  upon  my  relations.  The
fourth  class  are  the  controllers  of  legal  jurisdiction,  and  the  cus-
todians of  religious  houses  and  pious  foundations ;  most  of  these
are  of  my  family.  They  need  not,  however,  be  specified  in  this
place.

There  are  in  that  country  one  or  two  things  quite  peculiar  to
it.  Firstly,  the  Jade-stone,  which  is  found  in  the  rivers  of
Ydrkand  and  Khotan,  and  of  which  not  a  trace  is  to  be  found  in
any  other  part  of  the  world.^  Secondly,  the  wild  camel,  which  if
taken  in  such  a  way  that  it  receives  no  injury,  can  be  placed  in  a
line  [of  camels],  and  will  follow  exactly  like  a  domestic  camel.
This  animal  is  found  in  the  deserts  to  the  south  and  east  of
Khotan.^ Thirdly,  in  the  hills  of  that  country  are  wild  oxen

*  By  "  relations/'  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  DughMt  are  meant
'  This  statement  is  not  quite  accurate ;  jade  is  foand  also  in  Burma  and
Western  China.

3  The  wild  camel  is  an  interesting  subject,  but  this  is  scarcely  the  place  to  do
more  than  remark  that,  though  its  existence  has  been  mentioned  by  Asiatic
authors  for  many  centuries  past,  no  one  of  them  but  Mirza  Haidar,  as  far  as  I  am
aware,  has  noticed  the  possibility  of  taming  it  There  is,  I  believe,  a  question
among  naturalists  as  to  whether  the  animal  is  really  wild,  or  whether  it  is  not
the  tame  camel  run  wild,  its  form  and  colour  having  changed  somewhat  during
the  centuries  it  has  had  to  shift  for  itself.  Mirza  Haidar*s  statement,  if
correct,  might  have  some  bearing  on  this  question,  though  if  judged  by  the  case
of  the  wild  ass  of  Central  Asia  (the  Emiv*  }{,emi&MiA)  it  would  not  go  far.  Tberc
is  no  question  of  the  latter  animal  being  otherwise  than  really  wild,  yet  If
caught  young,  it  Ciu  be  readily  tamed,  up  to  the  point  of  marching  in  line  with
tame  asses  or  ponies,  though  not  beyond  that  point — ^all  attempts  to  load,  saddle,
or  bridle  it  (as  far  as  I  have  seen  or  heard  in  Mongolia  and  Ladak)  being  un-
successful. The  earliest  mention  of  wild  camels  that  I  am  acquainted  with,  is  in
the  narrative  of  King  Haithon  of  Lesser  Armenia,  who  saw  them,  or  heard  of
them,  to  the  north  of  the  Tian  Shan,  about  tlie  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  ;
but  it  is  possible  that  the  Arab  authors  may  have  mentioned  them  still  earlier.
In  modern  times  their  existence  was  first  reported  by  an  English  explorer  in  1873,
and  he  was  duly  laughed  to  scorn  by  the  naturalists.  A  few  years  afterwards,  they
were  seen  iu  the  Lob  region  by  the  Hussian  traveller  and  naturalist,  Projovalski,

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC

302  Description  of  Kdshghar

\hda9\  of  extreme  size  and  nobility ;  they  are  the  most  ferocious
of  savage  beasts  When  one  of  them  attacks  a  human  being,  its
butting  with  the  horns,  its  kick,  and  its  lick  are  all  equally  fatal.
When  on  my  journey  from  Tibet  to  Badakhshan  (which  journey
I  will  speak  of  presently)  we  were  a  party  of  twenty-one  persons,
and  on  the  road  a  'hiioB  was  killed.  It  was  only  with  the  utmost
trouble  and  difficulty  that  four  men  were  able  to  extract  the
beast's  stomach.  One  man  could  not  lift  one  of  its  shoulder
blades.  After  the  twenty-one  persons  had  each  carried  away  as
much  as  he  was  able  for  food,  two-thirds  were  still  left.^

who  obtamed,  from  the  native  bunteis,  a  skin  and  skeleton,  which  be  sent  to
St  Petersburg.  Since  then  they  have  been  found,  and  shot,  by  Mr.  St  G.  Little-
dale  on  the  skirts  of  the  mountains  to  the  south  and  east  of  Lake  Lob,  and  the
specimens  have  been  brought  to  England.  The  Chinese  Buddhist  pilgrims  of  the
fifth  to  seventh  centuries  do  not  appear  to  have  mentioned  tliem.  It  is  probable
that  the  wild  camel  nowhere  exists,  nowadays,  to  the  north  of  the  Tian  Shan.

>  The  Kutds  is  the  Bw  Poi'phagui^  the  Kh&shgau,  the  Tibetan  Yak,  or  Dong.
Nearly  evenrwhere  in  Central  Asia  stories  are  told  of  the  ferocity  of  the  wild
yfdc,  and  of  the  dreadful  nature,  even,  of  the  tame  yak.  One  of  the  most
common  is  the  allegation  that  its  lick  is  fatal.  Its  tongue,  as  a  matter  offset,  is
peculiarly  rough,  and  this  circumstance  ofton  leads  to  the  fable  that  it  is  made
of  red  hot  iron.  The  evidence  of  modem  sportsmen  and  travellere  by  no  means
bears  out  our  author,  as  to  the  ferocity  of  the  wild  yak.  They  are  frequently  sliot
on  the  eastern  frontiers  of  Ladak,  but  I  have  never  heard  of  an  instimce  of  even
a  wounded  yak  making  a  charge.  Captain  Hamilton  Bower,  in  the  narrative  ot
his  recent  journey  across  Tibet,  especially  notices  the  same  thing;  he  says,
'*  They  are  extremely  easy  to  stalk,  their  sight  not  being  nearly  as  acute  as
that  of  most  wild  animals.  Their  powers  of  scent  are,  however,  fairly  good
...  I  have  never  known  one  charge,  even  when  wounded  and  with  his  aissailant
in  view."  {Journey  Across  Tibet,  p.  286.)  General  Prejevalski  also  bears  witness
to  the  hannless  qualities  of  these  animals.  In  1873  he  wrote :  ^  Their  principal
characteristics  are  indolence  and  stupidity,  which  render  them  less  formidable
than,  at  ^rst  sight,  they  would  appear  to  be.  If  the  yak  were  possessed  of  more
intelligence  he  would  be  far  more  dangerous  to  the  sportsman  than  the  tiger,  for
one  can  never  be  sure  of  killing  him  with  wliatever  weight  of  ball."  As  regards
the  dimensions  of  the  wild  yak,  we  have  good  evidence  from  two  careful  and
accurate  observers — General  Frejevalaki,  in  Eastern  Tibet,  and  my  friend  Colonel
A.  E.  Ward,  in  Western  Tibet.  The  former,  after  mentioning  that  he  had  shot
twenty  specimens,  continues :  **  The  adult  male  attains  to  enormous  dimensions.
The  one  whose  skin  now  figures  in  my  collection  measured  11  feet  in  length  with-
out the  tail,  which,  of  itself  was  .S  feet :  thus  the  total  lenprth  was  2  sazhens  [just
14  feet,  English],  tlic  height  of  the  hump  was  K  feet  [t.e.,  18  hands],  the  oinrum-
ference  of  the  body  in  the  middle  11  feet,  and  the  weight  of  the  animal  from
35  to  ^Opouds  [11 J  to  12}  cwt].*'  Colonel  Ward,  who  has  also  shot  many  yak,
writes :  *'I  put  tlie  measurements  of  a  full-g^own  animal  at  15}  tol6  hands.  The
bull  whose  horns  I  saw  in  1869  was  measured  as  17}  hands,  and  a  writer  in  the
Asian  [a  sporting  periodical  published  in  India],  in  1884,  gives  18  hands  as  the
height  of  a  bull  yak.  It  is  not  easy  to  measure  a  dead  animars  height,  and  I
ihink  there  was  some  error  in  both  these.  Two  measunments,  carefully  made  of
big  bulls,  gave  a  record  of  16  hands,  and  I  do  not  think  that  they  ever  vary  as
much  as  6  and  8  inches,  which  would  be  the  case  if  thev  rvach  17j^  to  18  hands
in  heij^ht.  ...  A  solid  bullet  from  a  '500  Express  will  "be  found  heavy  enough
for  yak.''  He  also  mentions  that  the  horns,  alluded  to  as  seen  in  1869,  measured
31  inches  in  length,  while  another  pair,  in  1886,  were  31}  inches  long.  Both
these  specimens  were  shot  in  the  eastern  part  of  Ladak.  The  circumference  of
the  horns  at  the  base  has  been  found  to  be  15  inches.  (See  Prejevalski,  P.  R,  G.  S,^
xviii..  No.  1,  Jan.  1874,  p.  81 ;  Ward's  Sportsmen^ s  Guide  to  Kashmir  and  Ladak,
3rd  ed.,  Calcutta,  1887,  pp.  76,  77.)

Digitized  by

Google

and  the  Neighbouring  Regions.  303

Again,  most  of  the  fruits  of  tJiat  country  are  very  plentiful.
Among  others  the  pears  are  especially  good,  and  I  never  saw  their
equal  anywhere  else ;  they  are,  in  fact,  quite  incomparable.  Its
roses  and  rose-water  are  also  excellent,  and  almost  as  good  as  those
of  Herat.  Moreover,  its  fruits  have  an  advantage  over  the  fruits
of  other  countries,  in  that  they  are  less  unwholesome.  The  cold
in  winter  is  very  severe,  and  the  heat  in  summer  is  moderate ;
hut  the  climate  is  very  healthy.  The  fruits,  which  generally  are
injurious  when  taken  at  breakfast  or  after  any  food,  are  there,  on
account  of  the  excellence  of  the  climate,  followed  by  no  evil
consequences  and  do  no  harm.  During  the  autumn  [ftrmaA]  it  is
not  the  custom  to  sell  fruit  in  the  proTinces  of  Edshghar  and
Khotan,  nor  is  it  usual  to  hinder  any  one  from  plucking  it.  Nay
more,  it  is  planted  along  the  roadsides,  so  that  any  one  who  wishes
to  do  so,  may  take  of  it.

But  [Kdshghar]  has  also  many  defects.  For  example,  although
the  climate  is  very  healthy,  there  are  continual  storms  of  dust  and
sand,  and  violent  winds  charged  with  black  dust.  Although
Hindust&n  is  notorious  for  this  phenomenon  \jnfai\,  yet  in  Kdshghar
it  is  still  more  prevalent.*  The  cultivation  of  the  ground  is  very
laborious  and  yields  but  little  profit.  In  E&nhghar  it  is  impossible
to  support  an  army  upon  the  produce  of  the  country.  Compared
with  the  Dasht-i-Kipch4k,  the  Edlm&k  country  and  Moghulist&n,
it  has  the  semblance  of  a  town,  but  with  regard  to  productiveness
and  its  capacity  to  support  an  army,  it  cannot  be  compared  to
those  steppes.  The  inhabitants  of  towns  who  go  there  regard
E&shghar  as  a  wild  country  [rtM^],  while  the  people  of  the  steppes
consider  it  a  refined  city.  It  is  a  sort  of  Purgatory  between  the
Paradise  of  Towns  and  the  Hell  of  Deserts.  "  Ask  those  from
Hell  of  Purgatory,  and  they  will  call  it  Paradise."*  In  a  word,  it
is  free  from  the  discord  of  men  and  the  trampling  of  hoofs,  and  it
is  a  safe  retreat  for  the  contented  and  the  rich.  Great  blessings
accrue  to  the  pious,  now,  from  the  blessed  saints  who  lived  there
in  time  past.  From  two  pious  persons,  out  of  many  I  have  seen,
I  have  heard  that  when  people  migrate  from  that  country  to  some
other,  they  cannot  find  the  same  peaoe  of  mind,  and  they  remember
Eashghar  [with  regret]. This  is  the  highest  praise.

'  The  haze  pci'uliar  to  Eastern  Turkistan  is  described  in  nearly  all  modem
writings  on  that  ooantry.  It  is  not  of  tlie  nature  of  the  Indian  dust-storm,  as  the
anthor  ceems  to  imply,  but  is  pretjont  in  the  calmest  >>eather,  and  only  di^8ppeaIS
for  a  brief  interval  after  a  fall  of  rain  or  snow.  The  sand-storms  that  occur
occasionally  are  altogether  independent  of  the  haze  phenomenon.  For  some
particulars  regarding  both  haze  and  sand-storms,  see  note.  p.  12,  and  Sec.  III.  of
the  Introduction  to  this  Tolume.

'  A  quotation  from  Sadi's  G^uZM^dn.— B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

304  Return  to  the  Narrative

CHAPTER  XLHI.

BETURN  TO  THK  GENERAL  NABRATIVE.

I  HAD  brought  the  Ehdn's  history  down  to  the  point  where  he,
having  left  the  province  of  Farghana,  set  out  for  Kdshghar  by  way
of  Moghulist4n.  As  soon  as  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  heard  of  this,  he
built  the  citadel  of  Kashghar  in  seven  days,  and  placed  in  it  one
thousand  horse  and  foot,  with  provisions  for  several  years,  giving
his  own  son  Yusf4n^  command  over  them.  Then,  having  settled
whatever  business  he  had  there  as  best  he  could,  he  started  for
Ydngi-Hisar,  which  he  edso  supplied  with  provisions,  arms,  and
siege  implements,  and  finally  went  on  to  Yarkand.

In  the  meanwhile  the  Kh4n  reached  Atu  Bum  B&shi,^  which  is
one  of  the  frontiers  of  Moghulistan  on  the  side  of  Kashghar.
Leaving  his  family  and  baggage  there,  to  follow  slowly  after,  he
marched  forward  with  an  unencumbered  army.  On  the  first
night  he  encamped  at  a  place  called  Mirzi  Turki ;  on  the  second
day  he  halted  at  Tushku,  arriving  at  Artuj  on  the  third  day,
and  there  he  performed  the  circuit  [toira/]  of  the  shrine  of
Shaikh  Habib,  an  eminent  Shaikh.  The  miracle  is  recorded  of
him  that  in  building  the  monastery,  one  of  the  beams  \chvh'\
was  found  too  short,  and  that  he  pulled  it,  and  extended  it  [to
the  required  length].  This  beam  [the  Khan]  saw,  and  having
repeated  verses  from  the  Kor4n  and  uttered  prayers,  he  begged
that  he  might  profit  by  the  spirit  of  the  Shaikh.

On  the  following  day,  when  the  troops  of  the  east  put  to  rout
the  army  of  the  west,  and  in  one  moment  seized  the  rays  of  the
lights  of  the  world  [when  the  sun  rose,  etc.  .  .  .  Two  couplets],  they
set  out  from  Artuj  and  came  to  Uch  Barkhdn,  a  village  near
which  the  river  Yutun  B4shi  [or  Tuyun  B.],  which  flows  down  from
the  valley  of  K4lik  Kiy4  [or  Kabd],  must  be  crossed  by  travellers.
There  is  some  rising  ground  above  it,  from  the  top  of  which
Kashghar,  which  is  exactly  three  statute  S^faTsa}chi\  distant,  \a
visible.  On  this  eminence  Mirz4  Aba  Bakr  constructed  a  wall
with  battlements,  reaching  from  the  highest  point  of  the  hill  down

1  Only  one  MS.  has  "  son  " ;  the  others  have  **  his  own  tntr."  The  name
Yxi^fdn  is  prohablv  a  corruption,  though  possibly  it  may  be  an  abbreyiation— after
the  Andijani  method — of  YM»%k}  Jdn.

'  Perhaps  the  Qulja  Edshi  of  modem  maps,  though  the  name  of  Atu  Bum
Bashi  would  rather  point  to  At  Bd$hi — a  tributary  of  the  Karin — a  plaoe  often
mentioned  in  this  history.  At  Bdshi,  howeyer,  would  be  too  far  off  and  not  ouite
ill  the  right  direction,  while  Chdja  Bdshi  would  be  about  one  march  aboye  Mina
Tirak,  as  marked  on  maps,  and  that  plaoe,  again,  would  stand  about  the  same
distance  from  Tishak  TdBh,  for  which  the  Tuthku  of  text  would  seem  to  bo
intended.

Digitized  by

Google

and  the  Invasion  of  Kdshghar,  305

to  the  ravine  which  overhangs  the  river,  and  there  he  placed  a
gate.  Implicit  orders  were  issued  that  the  commanders  [tora/t]
should  take  up  their  stand  in  that  narrow  passage  \iang%\  and
count  the  army.  The  troops  passed  through  the  defile  \Umg\\
regiment  by  regiment,  and  as  they  passed,  the  iavaji  counted  them
and  the  scribes  \ba}zh»h%\  wrote  down  the  numbers.  Besides  those
who  stayed  behind  with  the  women  and  children  and  the  baggage,
and  those  who  were  strong  enough  to  guard  the  roads,  there  were
inscribed  four  thousand  seven  hundred  and  odd.

Though  the  number  is  small,  it  was  composed  entirely  of
famous  generals  \9a'niaT\  mighty  Amirs,  wise  councillors  and
brave  warriors,  who  were  ripe  in  experience  and  well  tried  in
adversity.  From  the  date  of  the  devastation  of  Tashkand  in  908,
coiTCsponding  to  the  year  of  the  Hog  [of  the  Moghul  cycle],  to  the
present  date  920,  corresponding  [again]  to  the  year  of  the  Hog —
that  is  for  twelve  years — they  had  been  persecuted  by  evil  for-
tune, and  had  been  continually  engaged  in  warfare  and  contests
and  disputes.  Of  the  four  [great]  tribes,  three — namely  the  Uzbeg,
the  Chaghatdj,  and  the  Moghuls — ^had  always  been  at  variance,
[Couplet  .  .  .  ]  as  has  been  explained  above.  During  those  twelve
years,  these  people  had  been  subject  to  many  vicissitudes  and
changes  of  fortune,  and  had  endured  innumerable  reverses  and
trials,  so  that  each  one  of  them  had  gained  great  experience,  and
was  acquainted  with  all  the  details  of  the  art  of  war,  such  as
marches  and  countermarches  and  forced  marches.  Nor  was  this
knowledge  peculiar  to  the  Amirs — nay,  rather,  in  every  tribe  of  the
Moghuls  many  men  were  to  be  found  in  whose  judgment  and
advice  every  one  placed  reliance.

The  following  is  a  short  account  of  some  of  those  who  passed
in  review  that  day,  as  well  as  I  can  call  them  to  memory.
First  of  all  the  family  of  Dughlat,  of  whom  the  leader — the  most
noble  and  the  eldest—was  my  uncle,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd.
Ho  was  at  that  time  about  forty-one  years  of  age.  He  was  the
prop  and  stay  and  overseer  of  the  whole  of  that  army.  His  wisdom
and  foresight  were  well  known,  and  he  was  famed  for  perception
and  penetration.  His  story,  and  all  that  he  did,  has  been  already
related.  He  was  conspicuous  among  his  contemporaries,  and
without  an  equal  among  the  tribesmen.  According  to  the
reckoning  then  drawn  up,  he  had  one  hundred  and  eighty  men  in
his  following.  Next  [in  standing]  was  Kara  Kulak  Mirza,  who
has  been  mentioned  above,  in  connection  with  the  Khdn's
adventures  in  Moghulisttin.  During  those  events,  this  Kara  Kulak
Mirzd  held,  at  one  time,  the  dignity  of  Amir,  and  at  another,  fell
into  the  most  abject  poverty,  until  at  last,  leaving  the  Khan,
he  went  to  Andijan  and  there  managed  to  live  with  the  Uzbeg,  in
some  way  or  another,  exchanging  the  bitterness  of  poverty  for  the

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

3o6  TJie  Invasion  of  Kdshghar.

Bweets  of  commerco.  At  the  timo  the  Khan  captured  Andijan,  he
again  entered  his  eei-vioe.  In  a  word,  this  Ear4  Kulak  Mirza
was  renowned  both  for  his  courage  and  sound  judgment,  and  great
reliance  was  placed  in  him.  In  the  enumeration  [of  the  army],
one  hundred  followers  were  entered  in  his  name.  [Another  was]
his  brother,  Shah  Nazar  Mirza,  who  had  precedence  over  his  elder
brother  in  all  matters.  His  retainers  were  entered  as  sixty  in
number.  Another  was  Mirza  Ali  Tagh^i ;  the  wiles  this  man  could
devise  after  a  moment's  reflection,  could  not  have  been  invented  by
a  cunning  Delilah  after  years  of  deep  thought.  The  hump-backed
old  woman  [who  personifies]  deception  used  to  come  to  learn  wiles
and  tricks  £rom  him,  and  to  serve  him  in  order  to  learn  how  to  stir
up  sedition.  This  will  be  explained,  in  the  account  of  the  end  of
the  Khdn's  days.  Ninety  men  were  entered  in  the  list  under  his
name.  Another  was  his  brother,  Kutluk  Mirak  Mirzd,  of  whom
everyone  expected  great  achievements.  Seventy  persons  camo
under  his  name.  Another  was  Bahrika  Mirzd,  who  was  of  the
military  caste  [a^Z-t-JhM^un],  and  he  had  forty  followers.

Anotiier  was  the  compiler  of  these  pages  and  the  chronicler  of
this  history,  your  humble  servant  The  dawn  of  childhood  had
not  yet  changed  to  the  morning  of  youth,  nor  was  my  intelligence
yet  fully  developed.  I  was  but  fifteen  years  of  age.  Although
the  Kh&n  had  honoured  me  with  the  title  of  Kurk^n,  yet  on
account  of  my  youth,  and  immaturity,  both  physical  and  mental,  I
was  not  able  to  participate  fully  in  that  dignity.  I  however
carried  out  as  much  as  was  possible.  The  retainers  and  followers
of  my  father,  as  many  as  had  remained  behind,  supported  and
aided  me  nobly  in  every  way,  so  that  in  spite  of  the  general  scarcity
of  attendants  upon  the  Moghuls,  one  hundred  and  twenty  persons
were  entered  in  my  name.

There  were  many  nobles  \m%rz&da»\  of  the  Dughlat  family,  who
were  entered  as  single  individuals,  since  by  reason  of  their  poverty
they  had  no  retinue.  All  those  who  were  Amii*s,  and  had  a
following  and  attendants,  were  mentioned  [in  the  lists].

In  this  way,  I  propose  to  speak  of  all  the  families  of  the  Moghul
Amirs.

Another  family  \idhaka\  was  that  of  the  Dukhtui,  whose  chief
was  Amir  Daim  Ali.  At  that  time  his  brothers,  Ahmad  Ali  and
Mahmud  Kuli,  had  not  yet  come.  This  Amir  Daim  Ali  was  one
of  the  least  worthy  of  the  great  Amirs.  He  will  be  frequently
mentioned  hereafter  in  this  book.  There  was  a  serious  dispute
between  him  and  [the  family  of]  Barlas  as  to  precedence,  which
was  at  that  time  still  undecided.  But  Amir  D4im  Ali  took
precedence  whenever  he  could,  till  on  the  first  occasion  of  the
meeting  with  Mansur  Kh4n,  which  shall  be  spoken  of.  The  question
was  referred  to  Amir  Jabar  Birdi,  who  was  a  Dughldt,  and  of

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Invasion  of  Kdshghar.  307

whom  I  have  spoken  above,  and  he  decided  that  the  Dnkhtui
should  have  precedence.  After  that  the  right  of  Amir  Daim  All
over  the  BarUs  was  established.

I  do  not  recollect  precisely,  but  I  think  there  were  more  than
two  hundred  persons  recorded  in  the  list  of  this  family.

Another  family  was  the  Barlas,  whose  leader  was  Ali  Mirak
Mirza,  the  maternal  uncle  of  my  paternal  uncle.  He  had  both  sons
and  brothers.  One  of  his  sons,  named  Muhammad,  will  be
mentioned  later.

There  were  many  of  the  Moghul  Amirs  and  notables  who  were
very  aged,  older  indeed  than  any  one  else  at  that  time  in  the
Moghul  TJlm\  upon  all  mattei-s  such  as  the  Twa  and  the  TWuib
they  were  consulted,  and  reliance  was  placed  in  their  discretion
and  judgment  in  all  important  consultations  and  councils.  Of
these  old  men  was  Ali  Mirak  Mirza ;  among  others  were  K4k4  Beg,
Kard  B4sh  Mirzd,  Sayyid  AU  Agh4,  Allah  Kuli  Kukildash,  apd
Abdul  Aziz  Mirzd.  Among  this  group  pf  aged  men  too,  was
Ali  Mirdk  Mirz4  himself.  Like  the  rest  of  the  old  men,  he  was
much  enfeebled  by  age,  both  physically  and  mentally,  but  his
courage  was  still  firm.  In  spite  of  his  having  both  brothers  and
sons,  he  conducted  all  his  own  affairs,  civil  as  well  as  military.  In
the  list,  the  number  of  his  retainers  is  nearly  as  great  as  those  of
Mir  D4im  Ali.

Another  [of  them]  was  H4ji  Mirzd,  who  was  renowned  for  his
valour. He  had  more  than  one  hundred  in  his  train.

Another  family  was  that  of  B4rki,^  of  whom  the  first  and
eldest  was  Mir  E4kd.  But  his  extreme  old  age  prevented  him
from  taking  part  any  longer  in  the  hardships  of  warfare,  so  he
entrusted  his  affairs  to  his  son  l^Iir  Kambar.  Many  oonspicuotls
and  able  men  of  the  Bdrki  family  accompanied  the  Ehdn  from
Kunduz  to  Andij4n,  and  numbers  of  them  fell  in  the  battles  that
took  place  in  Andijdn.  When  no  more  of  these  were  left,  the
management  of  the  a&irs  [of  the  family]  devolved  upon  Mir
Eambar.  His  brothers  Maksud,  H4fiz,  and  Tuluk,  were  in
immediate  attendance  upon  the  Khdn.  The  following  of  Mir
Eambar  was  larger  than  that  of  H4ji  Mirza ;  I  cannot,  however,
recall  the  exact  number.

Another  family  was  that  of  the  Urdubegi;  their  leader  was
Eara  B4sh  Mirza,  who  has  been  mentioned  in  the  list  of  old  men.
His  sons  and  brothers  were  men  of  note,  such  as  Gadai  Mirz4,
Sabur  Mirza,  Muhammad  Hdji  Mirza,  and  Muhammad  Y41i  Mirzd.

Another  family  was  that  of  Itdrji.  Their  chief  was  Bish  Ea
Mirzi,  who  had  some  capable  sons  and  also  some  brothers.  Their
retinue  numbered  about  one  hundred  men.

BdrU  or  Ydrki, The  Turki  text  reads  Ydrki  persistently.— B.

X  2

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

308  The  Tnvasiofi  of  Kdshghar,

Another  family  was  that  of  Kunji,  whose  chief  Amir  at  that
time  was  Mir  J4nAka.  Mir  Sharan,  Eul  Nazar  Mirza,  Mir  Mazid,
and  Mir  Jaka  had  not  yet  arrived.  His  retinue  exceeded  that  of
Bish  Ka  Mirza  in  numbers.

Another  family  was  the  Jaras,  at  the  head  of  whom  was  Munka
Beg,  a  man  distinguished  among  his  equals  fur  his  bravery.  His
suite  numbered  more  than  one  hundred  men.  He  had  a  brother
named  Bab4  Sarik  Mirzd,  who  was  a  man  of  a  similar  nature  to
the  above-mentioned  Kara  Euldk  Mirzd  and  Miiza  Ali  Taghai.
All  that  is  said  of  them  applies  equally  to  him.  His  following
was  not  less  than  that  of  Munka  Beg.  He  had  a  brother  named
Shahb&z  Mirza,  who,  in  the  conduct  of  affairs,  was  not  inferior  to
his  brother.

Another  family  was  the  Begjik.  The  chief  among  them  was  Mir
Ayub,  whose  history  has  been  related  in  connection  with  Bdbar
PAdishdh  and  Ubaid  IJllah  Ehan.  He  is  one  of  the  most
distinguished  of  all  the  famous  Moghul  Amirs.  During  those
twelve  years  of  disturbances,  wherever  he  was,  he  took  the  lead.
Indeed,  he  was  a  man  admirably  qualified  in  every  respect  to  bear
the  dignity  of  Amir.  Nearly  two  hundred  men  were  entered  in
his  name.  His  brother  Muhammad  Beg  was  an  extremely  calm
and  polite  man,  of  noble  birth  and  breeding.  His  mother  was  a
Sayyida  of  Tirmiz.

[Of  the  same  family]  was  Sultan  Ali  Mirza,  whom  I  have
mentioned  above,  in  speaking  of  the  Ehan.  Also  Y&dgar  Mirza,
who,  soon  after  this  event,  left  the  Ehan's  service,  made  the  Holy
Pilgrimage,  and  then  rejoined  the  EhAn,  by  whom  he  was  highly
hpnoured.  After  this  he  again  made  the  Pilgrimage,  and  he  is  at
the  present  time  a  recluse,  having  dealings  with  no  man  and
disturbed  by  none.  [Of  these  too]  was  Nazar  Mirza.  Each  of
them  had  a  following  of  one  hundred  men  or  less.  Another  waa
Mirz4  Muhammad,  who  had  exercised  the  authority  of  Amir
among  the  Begjik  and  the  Tumdn  of  Mir  Ayub,  before  the  arrival
of  this  latter.  But  when  Mir  Ayub  came,  being  the  elder  brother,
all  the  duties  of  Amir  were  passed  over  to  him;  he  [Mirza
Muhammad]  submitted  to  Mir  Ayub,  and  in  the  administration  of
business  was  associated  with  him.  His  followers  were  better
equipped  than  those  of  Amir  Ayub.  Another  was  Beg  Muhammad ,
the  same  young  man  whose  excellent  qualities  were  alluded  1o  in
the  account  of  the  Ehan's  doings  in  E&bul.  Among  all  the  young
men  he  had  not  his  equal  in  courage.  He  had  one  hundred  well
armed  retainers.

There  were  violent  disputes  between  the  families  of  Jards  and
Begjik  on  the  question  of  priority.  On  this  account,  the  elder
Amirs  assembled  and  held  an  inquiry.  It  was  at  length  ascertained
that,  in  the  time  of  each  Ehan,  priority  and  inferiority  had  been

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Invasion  of  Kdshg/iar,  309

decided  by  the  favour  [indyai]  of  that  Eh£n.  Therefore  the  Ehan
now  issued  the  following  mandate  [ifdrligh]  :  "  I  will  not  at  present
determine  your  precedence.  You  must  decide  it  among  yourselves.
You  must  take  it  by  tunis,  year  by  year,  and  whichever  family
shows  the  greatest  valour,  that  one  will  take  precedence."  They
carried  out  the  order,  but  the  dispute  exists  to  the  present  day,
and  has  found  no  settlement.

All  the  above-mentioned  men  were  Amirs  and  commanders  of
regiments  and  detachments.  There  was  another  set  of  men,  who,
although  not  Mirs  or  sons  of  Amirs,  had  yet  each  his  own  tribe
and  following.  They  had  been  at  the  head  of  some  of  the  Moghul
tribes  during  those  twelve  eventful  years,  and  having  directed
their  affairs,  had  thereby  gained  so  much  experience  that  every
one  placed  confidence  in  their  advice  and  opinions.  Among  them
was  Ehwaja  Ali  Bahadur,  of  whose  valuable  services  to  the  Kh4n
in  his  early  days  in  Moghulistan,  I  have  spoken  above.  Another
was  Beg  Kuli,  whose  name  was  mentioned  in  the  history  of  Shahi
Beg  Khan.  At  the  time  when  the  Emperor  was  defeated  at  Kul
Malik  by  XJbaid  Ullah  Khan,  and  retired  from  Samarkand,  this
Beg  Kuli,  placing  himself  at  the  head  of  8000  men,  came  and
joined  the  Khan.  He  was  a  trustworthy  man.  Another  was
Ishak  Bahadur,  renowned  for  his  valour  and  his  sound  judgment.
Others  were,  Marik  Bahadur,  Putaji  Bahadur,  Kara-Uchunghal,^
Shabdn,  Sultakdr^  Tufta  Kuli,  and  Uzun  Sakal  Tufta  Kuli.  [Each
of  these  was  head  of  a  tribe]  and  all  were  trustworthy  and  experi-
enced men.  Another  was  Turaan  Bahadur,  loader  [sar-khail]  of
the  Kaluchi,  and  one  of  the  most  notable  generals  of  his  time.  He
will  be  mentioned  in  the  account  of  the  Khan's  last  days.  Another
was  Malik  Ali,  commander  [sirdar]  of  the  tribe  of  Kdrluk  and  a
brave  soldier.  Another,  Kulka,  head  [sar  IchaH]  of  the  Makrit.
Another,  Omar  Shaikh,  chief  [kal&niar']  of  the  Shulkarchi.

All  these  were  chiefs  of  tribes,  and  each  had  a  retinue.  There
was  yet  another  class  of  men,  who  had  no  following,  but  were
quite  alone ;  yet  they  had  distinguished  themselves  above  the  rest,
by  their  courage  in  many  battles  and  engagements,  and  thus  they
had  acquired  the  name  of  "  heroes "  \hah&dur\  Some  of  their
deeds  of  warlike  valour  will  be  mentioned  below.  A  list  of  the
names  of  a  few  of  them  follows :  Midaka  [Bahadur],  Abdul  Yahid
[Babddur],  Khudai  Kuli  [Bahadur],  Shakaval,  Yusuf  Bakaval,
Muhammad  Ali  Tumdn,  Kishkui  Div4na,  Kara  Dana  Kuli,  Shaikh
Nazar  Yasaval,  Barka  Yastlval,  Hakk  Nazar  Divana,  Ali  Kurchi,
Shah  Mirak  Kalandar,  Baba  Kuldghan,  Tangri  Bardi,  Bdi  Tisha,
Hakk  Nazar  Kughuchi,  Pak  [or  Jabak]  Mir  Akhur,  Palicha  Mir
Akhur,  Bar  Mazid  Mankish,  Sukdr  Kaluchi,  Sukar  Ukhsi,  Biibarin

*  The  vowela  in  this  namo  are  uncertiiin.-
»  Perhaps  Namk6r.— B.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

3IO  The  Battle  at  Kdshghar,

Aznk  Mirza,  and  others.  They  were  the  talk  of  their  time,  and
all  of  them  heroes  like  Rustam,  Zal,  and  Afrdsidb  the  bnusen-
bodied.  I  ha^e  mentioned  a  few  of  them,  but  it  would  be  tedious
to  mention  them  all ;  moreover  many  of  them  have  no  plaoe  in  this
history — ^no  oonneotion  with  the  main  events.

CHAPTER  XLIV-

BATTLES  OF  SULTAN  SAID  KHAn  WITH THE ARMY  OF  MIRZA  ABA  BAKR

AT  KASHGHAR.

The  army  having  been  mustered,  it  began  to  descend  from  the  rising
ground  of  Uch  Barkhan.  .  .  ^  The  Amirs  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr's
troops  saw  the  masses  of  soldiers  from  afar,  and  estimated  their
numbers  at  60,000.  When  a  nervous  person  counts  the  enemy,
he  mistakes  a  hundred  for  a  hundred  thousand.  On  nearing  the
Tomb  of  the  Ehwdja,  they  drew  their  bridles  to  the  right  and
turned  towards  a  village  called  Sarman,  two  farsdJcha  from
Kashghar,  where  there  is  a  ford  over  the  TimAn.  Crossing  the
Timan  they  passed  on  to  a  place  called  Sughunluk,  where  Mirza
Ab£  Bakr  had  laid  out  beautiful  gardens  and  meadows;  in
these  they  encamped.  Some  of  the  Amirs,  taking  their  troops,
approached  the  citadel  of  Kashghar,  thinking  that  the  enemy
M  ould  wish  to  defend  the  fortifications  and  decline  to  come  out.
They  approached  quite  close  to  the  citadel  and  were  examining  it  and
admiring  how  well  it  had  been  fortified,  when  the  enemy,  sallying
forth,  drew  up  in  battle  order  and  stood  ready. [Couplet].  .  .  .

On  arrival  of  the  Amirs  the  battle  began.  Some  courageous
youths,  to  whom  the  day  of  battle  was  as  the  nuptial  night,  and
the  rumbling  of  the  drums  of  war  was  as  the  murmuring  of
harps.  .  .  .  [three  couplets]  now  threw  themselves  upon  the
enemy's  ranks,  wielding  their  sabres  on  every  side.  All  around
was  disorder  and  confusion :  victory  and  defeat  fell  sometimes  to
one  and  sometimes  to  the  other.  The  enemy  having  turned  their
faces  towards  Baz-Shirak,^  all  the  infantry  and  cavalry  poured
out  of  the  citadel  to  their  assistance  and  joined  in  the  fray.  The
battle  lasted  till  past  midday.  .  .  .^  Then  some  of  the  Amirs
sent  messengers  1o  the  Khdn,  representing  that  the  enemy  bad

*  Three  couplets,  probably  from  Firdausi,  are  omitted  hero.— R.

'  The  paatiage  reads :  "  Ru  ba  bdz  shirak  shuda." Thus  haz  shirak  probably
stands  for  the  name  of  a  place ;  but  this  is  not  certain. — R.

•  Some  rhetoric  is  omitted  here.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Battle  at  Kdshghar.  311

left  their  strong  position  and  bad  descended  into  the  plain.  If
the  Kh4n  wished  to  meet  them  on  equal  terms,  now  was  the
opportunity.  Let  him  come  before  the  sun  should  set,  for  then
the  enemy  would  retire  to  the  oitadel,  and  would  not  come  out
again.  When  the  Eh&n  received  this  message, ....  [three  couplets]
he  arranged  his  array  in  the  manner  above  described,  and  went
forward,  but  as  the  ground  was  rough  and  broken,  the  troops  were
not  able  to  preserve  their  formation.  The  Amirs  of  the  left  wing
were  ordered  to  go  in  advance,  while  the  centre  was  to  follow
them.  The  Amirs  of  the  right  wing  had  many  of  them  advanced
in  the  early  morning.  When  the  Khan  drew  near  he  said :  "  Let
the  force  advance  slowly,  while  I  ride  forward  and  see  how
matters  are  going."  The  Kh4n  arrived  just  as  the  left  wing  had
come  up.  The  men  who  had  been  fighting  [all  the  morning],
seeing  the  Khdn  arrive,  received  fresh  courage  and  were  overjoyed ;
for  they  had  been  anxiously  expecting  him.  They  now  made  a
combined  charge  ....  [three  couplets]  and  before  the  centre  had
time  to  come  up,  had  overwhelmed  the  enemy.

Khwaja  Saki  Ali  was  chief  minister  \mu8%r%f-i-divdn\  and  was
sprung  from  the  Uighurs  of  Khorasan.^  He  had  always  dis-
tinguished himself  by  his  extreme  valour,  but  through  his
impetuosity  the  thread  of  his  life  was  cut  in  two.  He  had  been
one  of  the  first  to  arrive  on  the  scene  of  action,  and  was  standing
with  his  men  in  the  front  of  the  army,  when  he  saw  that  the
Kh4n  had  come.  Before  all  the  rest,  he  threw  himself  upon  the
centre  of  the  enemy,  and  allowed  the  reins  of  discretion  to  be
guided  by  the  palm  of  recklessness.  The  infantry  archers  had
formed  an  ambush  in  a  large  stream  called  the  Sarman.  Khwaja
S4ki  Ali,  without  hesitating,  made  his  horse  leap  this  stream,
wishing  to  use  his  sabre  against  the  cavalry  that  were  standing
on  the  opposite  bank.  But  one  of  those  foot  bowmen  who  were
standing  in  ambush  in  the  water,  shot  an  arrow  into  Khwaja  Saki
All's  eye,  so  that  it  came  out  at  the  back  of  his  head,  and  he
immediately  fell  [lifeless]  from  his  horse.

In  the  meanwhile  the  enemy  had  been  put  to  rout,  having  been
dislodged  from  their  ground  by  the  violence  of  the  onslaught  of
the  Khan's  warriors.  Before  the  whole  army  could  come  up,  the
advanced  body  pushed  on,  striking  and  killing,  up  to  the  gates  [of
Kashghar].  In  a  short  space  of  time  the  King  of  Kings  of  tho
universe,  and  rightful  Lord  of  the  realm,  utterly  destroyed  tho
numerous  host  together  with  its  weapons  and  material  of  war.
They  were  only  just  able  to  creep,  crushed  and  routed,  into  tho
citadel  and  to  close  the  gates.  That  night  the  Kh4n  pitched  his
royal  camp  in  the  immediate  vicinity  [of  the  town],  and  on  the

>  Meaning  Uighnra  settled  m  Khor&a&n.  This  allusion,  brief  thongh  it  is,  to
Uighurs  in  Khoris^n  is  interesting. Compare  Abnl  Qihkzx,  pp,  50,  51.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

312  March  of  t/ie  Khan  against

morrow,  at  break  of  day,  again  drew  up  his  troops  and  approached
the  citadel.  But  as  there  was  nobody  within,  except  a  few  soldiers
lightly  armed,  he  retired  to  Tukuzak,  where  he  encamped.  On
the  following  day,  having  crossed  the  river  Kara  T&zghun,  his
army  went  and  pitched  their  camp  at  Tirdk,  one  of  the  districts
depending  on  Yangi-Hisar.  Here  they  were  joined  by  the
families  [Jhw^]  who  were  following  after  them;  these  they  left
here,  and  marched  on  to  the  gates  of  the  citadel  of  Tangi-Hisdr.
The  men  in  the  citadel  did  not  come  out,  but  there  was  some
infantry  stationed  below  the  citadel,  and  upon  these  Midaka
Bahadur  (who  has  been  spoken  of  already,  and  will  be  mentioned
again)  made  a  bold  attack.  As  their  position  was  a  strong  one,  he
retired,  and  they,  in  turn,  having  stood  their  ground  for  awhile,
also  retreated.  The  Khdn  remained  several  days  in  that  neighbour-
hood, changing  his  position  from  place  to  place,  in  the  expectation
that  Mirza  Abd  Bakr,  having  collected  an  army,  would  bo  coming.
He  passed  nearly  two  months  in  those  parts,  without  hearing  any
news  of  Aba  Bakr  Mirza.  In  the  meantime  Mirza  Ali  Taghai
and  Haji  Mirza,  together  with  a  few  men  from  every  division,
conducted  forays  round  about  the  hills  of  Sdrigh  Kul,  where
they  became  possessed  of  much  booty  and  countless  sheep.

At  this  time  Muhammad  Kirghiz  came  to  wait  on  the  Khan  and
was  favourably  received.  He  begged  to  be  allowed  to  go  to
Yarkand  and  bring  back  definite  news  [of  Mirza  Abd  Bakr],  [The
Khan  approving  of  the  plan  allowed  him  to  depart],  sending  with
him  several  persons  of  consequence.  They  plundered  Arslan
Bagh,  which  is  two  farsdkhs  from  Yarkand,  and  found  much  booty,
which  they  brought  with  them,  together  with  the  news  that
[Mirza  Aba  Bakr]  was  doing  his  utmost  to  collect  an  army,  and
was  giving  out  horses  and  arms  to  the  peasantry  and  villagers.
But  he  had  no  force  on  which  he  could  rely.  Upon  hearing  this
the  Khan  set  out  against  Yarkand.

CHAPTER  XLV.

MAHCH  OF  SULTAN  SAID  KHAN  AGAINST  YARKAND,  AND  SEVERAL  MATTERS
IN THE  SAME  CONNECTION.

When  Muhammad  Kirghiz  brought  the  news  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,
all  the  councillors  were  for  marching  against  Ydrkand.  If  Mirz4
Abd  Bakr  were  to  come  forth  and  give  them  battle,  well  and  good ;
if  not,  there  was,  at  any  rate,  an  abundance  of  corn and  other

Digitized  by

Google

Ydngi'Hisdr  and  Ydrkand,  313

necessaries  round  about  Ydrkand.  They  must  lay  siege  to  the
citadel  of  Ydrkand.  If  it  should  fall,  Edshghar  and  Y&Dgi-Hisar
would  naturally  fall  also.  With  such  projects  they  moved  on
towards  Yarkand,  until  they  came  to  Suk4t,  a  village  at  ten  farsdkhs
distance  from  Ydngi-Hisar.

At  this  place  some  of  those  who  had  come  in  flight  to  Mir  Ayub,
with  neither  family  nor  dependents,  formed  a  plot  [daghdagha]  to
desert  and  go  off  towards  Karatigin  and  Hisar.  But  when  their
scheme  was  discovered,  most  of  them  were  unable  to  get  away :
a  certain  number,  however,  went.  While  the  talk  about  this
continued,  Midaka  Bahddur  represented  that  Eitta  Beg  had  had  a
similar  intention.  This  Eitta  Beg  is  the  same  person  who  was
mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  this  book.  He  was  the  brother  of
Mir  Ahmad  Easim  Euhbnr  and  when  Mir  Ahmad  Edsim  left
Tashkand,  he  was  in  Sairam,  which  place  he  kept  for  himself  for  a
whole  year.  When  the  Emperor  retired  to  E&bul,  and  no  hope
was  left  him  of  relief  from  any  quarter,  he  [Eitta  Beg]  sent  a
message  to  Easim  Eh4n  offering  to  give  up  Sairdm  to  him,  and
thus  brought  Easim  Eh&n  against  Tdshkand.  This  anecdote  has
been  already  told.  On  leaving  the  service  of  Easim  Ehan,  Eitta
Beg  went  over  to  the  Ehan  in  Andijan.  All  the  Amirs  approved
the  words  of  Midaka  Bahadur,  who  said :  '*  His  flight  is  quite
proper,  because  he  is  B4bar  Padishdh's  subject,  and  he  wished  to
go  away.  But  he  must  not  be  put  into  chains  until  the  matter
has  been  more  thoroughly  inquired  into."  When  the  Amirs  had
confirmed  this  plan,  the  Ehdn  said :  **  I  will  myself  stand  security
for  Eitta  Beg,  and  if  he  ge*ts  away,  I  will  be  responsible."  The
Ehan  then  sent  for  Eitta  Beg  and  said  to  him  :  "  They  have  been
telling  such  and  such  stories  about  you.  Now  you  are  a  brave
man.  It  is  not  fitting  that  you  should  desert  us.  I  have  made
myself  security  for  you  to  the  Amirs.  If  on  this  occasion  you
show  me  attachment,  your  desires  shall  be  satisfied;  but  if  you
disgrace  me  in  the  sight  of  the  Amirs  by  running  away,  that
course  is  also  open  to  you."  To  this  Eitta  Beg  replied  :  "  I  am
not  such  a  coward  as  to  desert  just  at  the  time  of  battle."  He
said  nothing  more,  but  remained,  in  silence,  in  close  attendance
upon  the  Ehdn.

In  consequence  of  these  dissensions,  the  proposed  march  on
Yarkand  was  abandoned,  and  at  dawn  on  the  following  day  they
set  out  in  haste  for  Yangi-Hisdr  .  .  .  [three  couplets],  where  they
arrived  at  midday.  There  was  one  circumstance  which  was
most  propitious  for  them.  When  the  army  that  was  occupying
Edshghar  heard  that  the  Ehdn  had  marched  against  Ydrkand,
they  sent  a  message  to  the  Amirs  in  Ydngi-Hisdr,  to  the  effect
that  the  light  force  in  occupation  were  uneasy  on  many  accounts.
If  a  few  of  the  Edshgh^r}  wpre  sent  back  to  them,  they  would  be

Digitized  by

Google

314  March  of  tlie  Khdn  on Ydngi-Hisdr.

of  material  aid  to  the  garrison.  The  Amirs  in  Yangi-fiisar
thinking  this  reasonahle,  sent  back  a  large  number  of  Kdshghari
to  Eashghar.  These  men,  issuing  from  the  citadel,  crossed  the
river  of  Yangi-HiB4r  and  were  proceeding  [homewards],  when
suddenly  the  Moghuls^  fell  upon  them,  and  the  whole  body
became  a  prey  to  the  EhAn's  army.

At  this  juncture,  the  Eh&n  himself  came  up.  The  Yangi-Hisar
men,  who  were  all  on  foot,  had  come  into  the  midst  of  ravines  and
streams,  and  rough,  broken  giound,  but  they  made  a  brave  stand.
When  the  Khdn  came  upon  the  scene,  Eitta  Beg  pushed  for-
ward and  struck  Midaka  Bahadur,  saying:  "On  that  day  you
told  me  that  I  was  going  to  run  away.  Let  it  be  seen  to-day,  who
it  is  that  will  run  away."  Now  Midaka  was  one  of  the  most
eminent  warriors,  and  the  bravest  of  the  brave.  He  replied :  "  I
have  been  longing  for  this  day  for  years;"  and  therewith  he
pressed  forward.  The  two  charged  forward  upon  [the  enemy]
[Verses]  ....  The  road  down  which  they  rode  was  very
narrow ;  on  one  side  of  it  flowed  the  river  of  Ydngi-Hisar,  in  which
the  water  was  surging  in  waves,  while  on  the  other  side  was  a
deep  ravine.  The  road  was  wide  enough,  perhaps,  for  three  horse-
men to  ride  abreast.  In  the  middle  of  this  had  been  placed  a  gate,
through  which  infantry  could  pass,  and  in  which  many  soldiers
in  armour  were  posted,  while  outside  it,  others  were  engaged  in
discharging  their  arrows.  When  these  two  horsemen  charged,  the
soldiers  put  their  backs  against  the  gate.  The  horse  of  Kitta  Beg
came  up  in  advance  of  Midaka's,  and  however  much  the  latter
might  use  his  whip,  he  was  not  able  to  pass  in  front.  When  Eitta
Beg  came  near,  the  archers  began  to  aim  their  arrows  at  his  horse,
so  that  it  fell  on  the  spot,  and  Eitta  Beg  was  dismounted.  As  the
passage  was  narrow,  the  horse  fell  into  the  water,  while  Eitta  Beg
advanced  on  foot  to  attack  the  soldiers.  They,  however,  placed
themselves  so  that  his  sword  could  not  reach  them,  and  Midaka,
coming  close  after,  drew  his  horse  up  and  said :  "  Peace  be  on  you.
Let  this  be  a  sufficient  display  of  valour ;  let  us  now  return."  But
Eitta  Beg  replied  :  "I  will  not  retire  until  you  do."  Now  as  the
arrows  were  pouring  down,  like  rain,  from  the  gate,  and  from  the
top  of  the  ravine,  Midaka  saw  that  if  they  advanced,  both  would
perish,  he  therefore  withdrew  first,  while  Eitta  Beg  followed  very
slowly  behind  him.  The  Ehan  praised  Eitta  Beg  loudly,  while
the  people  blamed  Midaka,  who  replied  :  '*  It  was  not  a  position  in
which  we  could  do  the  enemy  any  injury.  Eitta  Beg,  in  his
excitement,  behaved  like  a  madman ;  if  I,  too,  had  made  a  fool  of
myself,  the  only  result  would  have  been  the  death  of  us  both.  I
yielded  to  his  passion."  This  excuse  was  approved  by  some,  but
not  by  others,

'  Apparently  those  who  were  retixrniiig  from  Siik^t  with  the  Kbaii.

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

TIte  Siege  of  Ydngi-Hisdr,  315

To  be  brief,  every  one  took  np  his  quarters  [muljdr]  in  the
snbnrbB  of  Ydngi-Hisdr.  A  few  days  later,  Mir  Ayub  was  carried
off  by  a  form  of  dropsy.  Towards  the  end  of  his  illness  the  KhAn
went  to  visit  him,  and  he  said  to  the  Eh4n  :  "  I  have  not  observed
fidelity  and  loyalty  to  B4bar  P&dish4h  [but  have  broken  my  oath],
owing  to  the  instigation  of  those  hogs  and  bears,"  alluding  to  the
Moghul  generals  who  had  incited  him  to  join  in  the  revolt  at
Hisdr,  which  has  been  mentioned.  "  That  [broken]  oath  is  now
lacerating  my  bowels,  and  I  am  being  killed  by  remorse.  As  for
those  hogs  and  bears,  may  Gh)d  restrain  His  wrath  from  them,  for
causing  me  to  break  solemn  vows."  [Quatrain]  ....  After  the
death  of  Mir  Ayub,  his  rank  descended  to  his  brother  Muhammad
Beg.

During  those  times  there  were  daily  engagements,  and  every
man  was  eager  to  bring  into  evidence  the  precious  stones  of  bravery
which  he  had  stored  up  in  the  treasure-house  of  his  heart.  Among
those  who  distinguished  themselves,  were  Midaka,  Abdul  Vdhid,
Khudddi  Euli  Shak4vul,  and  Muhammad  Ali  TumaD.  Other
individuals  displayed  their  gallantry  on  one,  or  two,  or  three
occasions,  but  as  for  these  four  men,  there  were  few  battles  in
which  they  did  not  do  something  remarkable,  and  scarcely  a  day
passed  without  a  battle  taking  place.  When  it  was  ascertained
that  Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr  did  not  intend  leaving  Tarkand,  all  were
agreed  that  Yangi-Hisar  ought  to  be  canied  by  storm,  and  this
having  been  determined  upon,  they  sent  off  Ali  Bah4dur  (who  has
been  alluded  to  above  in  the  list  of  eminent  Moghuls)  to  Kizil,
which  is  on  the  border  of  the  desert  of  Yarkand,  that  he  might
reconnoitre,  and  watch  the  movements  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.  If,
during  the  siege,  he  should  make  a  sally,  the  Khwaja  was  to  return
immediately  with  the  news,  so  that  [the  Eh4n]  might  be  prepared
to  meet  him.

CHAPTER  XLVL

TAKING  OF YANGI-HISAr: THE KEY TO THE  CONQUEST  OF THE KINGDOM

OF KASHOHAB.

In  the  beginning  of  Rajab  of  the  year  920,  the  Khan  disposed  his
troops  round  the  citadel  of  Yangi-Hisar,  and  pitched  his  camp  so
close  to  it,  that  if  gazAong  arrows  had  been  aimed  at  his  tent  from
the  top  of  the  citadel,  they  might  have  reached  the  edge  of  the  cliff
under  which  he  had  camped.  The  intrenchments  [murchal]  were
arranged  on  the  following  plan.  On  the  north  side  there  was  no
need  for  intrenchments,  because  the  fort  was  situated  on  the  top

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

3i6  Ttie  Siege  of  Ydngi-Hisdr.

of  a  cliff,  which  ended  in  a  sheer  precipice.  Mines  would  there
take  no  effect,  while  to  ascend  the  cliff  was  impossible.  For  these
reasons  trenches  were  useless  on  the  north  side.  The  first  tower
on  the  west,  was  taken  in  hand  by  the  Khan  himself  and  the
wamors  of  the  centre,  who  were  always  in  attendance  upon  him  ;
these  belonged  to  no  particular  regiment,  but  their  names  have  been
mentioned  above.  Another  tower  on  the  same  side — west  of  the
Khan's — was  entrusted  to  me,  and  to  my  right  were  Mirz4  Ali
Taghai,  Kutluk  Mirak  Mirza,  and  Babrika  Mirza,  who,  together,
were  laying  a  mine.  Beyond  them,  Baba  Sarik  Mirza  and  Shahbaz
Mirza,  and  a  body  of  Bahrin,  had  charge  of  another.  Farther  on
again,  were  Mirz4  Muhammad  Beg  and  Beg  Muhammad  Beg,  who
had  chosen  [a  site  for]  a  third.  Beyond  them  was  a  tower,  the
gate  of  which  looked  due  south.  To  this  tower  were  appointed
Janka  Mirza  and  Bishka  Mirza ;  while  on  the  south  side  Munka
Beg  had  charge  of  another  mine.  At  his  side  was  yet  another,
under  the  supervision  of  Mir  Muhammad,  who  had  lately  succeeded
to  the  position  held  by  Mir  Ayub.  Near  him  was  Mir  Kambar,
then  came  Ali  Mirdk  Barlas,  next  Mir  Ddim,  next  Kara  Kulak
Mirza,  then  my  uncle ;  and  beyond  him  was  the  eastern  gate  of
the  citadel,  which  side,  like  the  northern,  overlooks  a  precipice.
For  five  days  and  nights  all  our  energies  were  devoted  to  digging
and  advancing  galleries.

The  first  mine  that  was  ready  to  be  tried  was  the  Khan's.  It
went  off  at  midnight,  and  that  tower  which  had  raised  itself  to  the
skies,  now  fell  with  a  crash,  level  with  the  ground ;  but  part  of  the
original  wall  was  left  standing.  On  that  day  every  one  exert.od
himself  to  the  utmost,  and  the  mines  were  so  far  advanced,  as  to  be
ready  to  blow  up  the  walls  with  very  little  further  labour.  [The
strongest  of  all  the  towers  was  the  one]  given  to  Janka  Mirza  and
Bishka  Mirzd  to  undermine,  but  they  made  cracks  along  the  wall
for  a  distance  of  about  sixty  gca.

While  the  siege  was  thus  proceeding,  one  of  Khwaja  Ali  Baha-
dur's men  brought  in  a  certain  Alika  and  a  few  generals.  This
Alika  was  the  son  of  the  commander  of  the  citadel,  who  was  called
Amin  Darugha,  and  who  was  one  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr's  most  distin-
guished Amirs.  To  him  had  been  committed  the  entire  charge  of
the  citadel  of  Yangi-Hisdr.  It  came  about  in  this  way.  Mirza
Abd  Bakr  had  collected  a  force  in  Yarkand  and  had  amassed  a
quantity  of  arms,  hoping  to  come  and  relieve  Yangi-Hisar.  He  then
detached  a  bod}*  of  picked  men  and  sent  them  off  to  reconnoitre  at
Kizil,  with  orders  to  bring  back  any  news  they  might  learn,  so
that  he  might  form  his  plans  accordingly.  This  body  was  under
the  command  of  Pir  Ali  Beg,  the  brother  of  Vali  Beg,  who  has
been  alluded  to  already.  On  reaching  Kizil,  they  found  that  a  party
of  Moghuls were  reconnoitring  in  the  same  district. Having

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Ttie  Siege  of  Ydngi-Hisdr.  317

ascertained  tis  exact  position,  they  fell  upon  KhwAja  Ali  Bahadur
unexpectedly,  the  same  night.  The  horsemen  were  sleeping
soundly,  when  the  din  of  giving  and  taking  of  blows,  war  cries,
and  trumpets  startled  them  from  their  slumbers.  [Verses]  ....
It  was  a  pitch  dark  night — neither  moon  nor  stars  were  visible — '
nor  could  friend  be  distinguished  from  enemy.  [Two  couplets]
....  All  who  awoke  were  mad  with  confusion  at  the  alarm,
and  were  unable  to  collect  their  thoughts  sufficiently  to  realise  what
was  passing,  so  all  fled  in  dismay,  excepting  Khwdja  Ali  Bah&dur,
who  did  not  lose  his  presence  of  mind,  but  stood  his  ground  firmly,
and  called  out  to  his  followers  by  name.  All  who  heard  his  voice
rallied  to  his  side,  till  at  length  a  good  number  were  gathered
round  him,  and  they  too  began  to  call  their  war-cry  loudly.  Some
of  those  who  had  been  stupefied  by  the  sudden  awakening,  now
recovered  their  senses,  and  on  listening  attentively,  heard  the
voices  calling  the  war-cry.  On  this  their  courage  was  renewed,
and  they  went  and  rejoined  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur.  They  dis-
charged their  arrows  in  the  dark,  and  fought  on  till  the  brightness
of  dawn  overcame  the  shadows  of  night,  when  by  that  light  the
combatants  began  to  see  [the  real  state  of  things].  The  enemy
became  aware  of  their  small  numbers,  while  our  men  saw  their
own  superiority.

Pir  Ali  Beg  had  but  a  hundred  men  with  him,  while  Khwaja
Ali  Bahddur  had  three  hundred.  Since  in  the  darkness  they  had
become  confused  and  disordered,  Pir  Ali  Beg  saw  that  flight  would
be  a  cowardly  death,  while  to  hold  his  ground  was  to  die  nobly.
Near  to  that  spot  was  a  garden ;  within  this  he  tried  to  defend
himself  Ere  the  sun  had  reached  the  meridian,  the  sun  of  the
lives  of  those  men  had  set.  Out  of  a  hundred,  only  two  escaped  to
bear  the  news  that  the  rest  of  their  party  had  perished.  The
above-mentioned  Alika  had  been  wounded  in  the  fight.  To  prevent
his  giving  information,  they  did  not  send  him  back  to  his  friends,
but  despatched  him  to  the  Eh&n  with  the  heads  of  the  slain  hung
round  his  neck — the  throats  running  with  blood.  He  reached
the  Khan  at  midday,  and  the  heads  of  those  generals  were  sent
into  the  citadel  as  a  gift.  Alika  was  then  asked  for  news.  He
replied :  "  Mirza  Ab&  Bakr  has  made  all  the  necessary  preparations
for  an  expedition.  All  the  people  know  that  he  has  got  horses,
and  arms  of  every  kind,  such  as  coats  of  mail,  horse-armour,  and  so
forth  ;  that  nothing  is  wanting — nay,  rather  there  is  a  superabun-
dance of  all  such  things.  But  he  has  no  generals — no  renowned
Amirs  or  brave  warriors,  whose  strength  and  judgment  are  the
very  foundations  of  true  sovereignty.  For  all  of  these,  he  has
himself  put  to  death.  And  now,  in  order  to  complete  his  army,
he  is  obliged  to  choose  men  from  among  the  peasantry,  artizans
and  market-people,  making  one  a  Yazir,  another  an  Amir:  the

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

3i8  The  Siege  of  Ydngi-Hisdr,

first  a  Mir  and  the  second  a  councillor.  The  rustic  who  has  spent
his  life  with  his  hand  on  the  plough,  and  has  never  done  any
work  but  ploughing,  how  can  he  begin  to  wield  a  sword  or  hold
the  reins  of  government  ?  Though  he  may  try  ever  so  hard,  I  am
sure  he  cannot  succeed  ;  such  foolish  ideas  can  come  to  nothing."
And  he  laid  much  stress  upon  the  improbability  of  Mirza  Abd
Bakr  advancing.  [Our]  people,  however,  did  not  fully  trust  his
words,  but  suspected  that  this  man,  drowning  in  the  whirlpool  of
misfortune,  was  employing  flattery  as  a  means  of  reaching  the
shore  of  salvation.

About  evening  prayer  time,  one  of  Khw&ja  Ali  Bahadur's  fol-
lowers brought  in  another  man  who  had  come  to  him  in  flight.
This  fugitive  reported  that  Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr,  having  mustered  an
army,  had  advanced  two  far9&}ih»  out  of  Ydrkand,  when  he  deserted
him.  Many  were  loth  to  believe  this  also,  and  imagined  it  to  be  a
trick  on  the  part  of  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr,  by  which  he  hoped  to  retard
the  operations  against  the  citadel  of  Y4ngi-His4r ;  so  they  tortured
this  informant  till  he  died,  but  he  persisted  in  his  story  to  the  end,
and  then  they  believed  it.

All  the  Amirs  were  for  raising  the  siege  that  same  night,  and  for
marching  out  to  meet  and  engage  Mirzi  Ab4  Bakr,  before  he  should
be  joined  by  the  armies  of  K4shghar  and  Y4ngi-Hi84r.  But  the
Ehan  said:  **I  intend  to  remain  at  the  foot  of  this  cliff  until
Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr  comes,  and  to  aim  my  arrows  at  the  citadel  and
at  Mirz4  Aba  Bakr,  until  I  am  killed  on  this  spot.  Those  who  do
not  [wish  to]  follow  my  example,  let  them  do  what  they  like."
When  the  Khan  had  said  this,  all  knelt  down  before  him,  saying :
"  May  your  exalted  majesiy*s  road  be  [strewed]  with  our  lives  as
a  thousand  sacrifices  !  Who  is  there  among  us  who  holds  his  own
wretched  existence  more  dear  than  the  precious  life  of  the  Eh4n,
or  thinks  of  his  own  personal  safety  first,  in  this  undertaking  ?  "
Then  all  again  set  to  work,  with  contented  hearts,  at  the  mines.

At  daybreak  of  the  sixth  day  of  the  siege,  the  Ehdn  rode  round
all  the  trenches  and  infused  his  own  enthusiafim  into  the  hearts  of
his  Amirs  and  soldiers :  praising  those  who  had  exerted  themselves,
and  ordering  to  be  whipped  any  who  had  been  remiss.  In  this
manner  did  he  pass  round  the  citadel.  As  he  approached  the
trench  of  my  uncle,  some  one  called  out  from  the  top  of  the
citadel.  They  listened.  He  was  saying :  '*  Let  one  of  the  followers
of  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza  come  forward ;  I  have  something  to
tell  him."  Thereupon  a  man  was  sent  forward,  who  [however]
asked  whether  Kukildash  Mirza  Ali  Sayyid  Bahddur  was  therei,
[and  if  so]  had  they  not  better  send  him  [to  parley]  ?  [So  they
sent  him.]  After  a  short  time  Ali  Sayyid  returned  reporting  that
Amin  Ddrughahad  spoken  as  follows :  '*  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirz4
lis  Mirza  Aba  Bakr's  brother. For  generations  past  I  and  my

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Decline  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr.  319

sons  have  been  their  servants.  In  our  loyalty  we  have,  daring
three  months,  been  in  peril  of  our  lives,  in  spite  of  never  having
enjoyed  during  forty  years,  a  moment's  security  from  Mirza  Aba
Bakr.  Those  whom  he  wished  to  kill  he  killed,  and  those  who
were  left  alive  were  all  subjected  to  violent  punishments,  such
as  castration — that  is  to  say,  depriving  of  virility — cutting  off  the
hands  and  feet,  putting  out  eyes,  and  the  like.  All  were  sure  to
be  exposed  to  some  calamity.  In  spite  of  all  this,  I  felt  it  still  my
duty  to  remain  loyal.  Now  it  has  come  to  a  question  of  life  and
death ;  the  knife  has  reached  the  bone.  If  Sayyid  Mnhammad
Mirz4  will  forget  our  enmity,  forgive  our  sins,  and  spare  our  lives
and  our  goods,  we  will  deliver  the  citadel  into  his  hands  and
become  his  vassals."  When  the  Kh4n  heard  this  message  he  was
overjoyed,  and  sent  Ali  Sayyid  back,  saying  that  their  offer  was
accepted.

CHAPTER  XLVn.

DECLINE  OF  MIRZl ASi  BAKB ; FACTS  CONNECTED  THEBEWFTH,  AND  THE
END  OF  ms  DOMINION.

One  of  the  worst  of  the  wicked  practices  of  Mirza  Abd  Bakr  was
that,  having  laid  down  the  most  strenuous  and  exacting  regula-
tions and  observances,  he  would  not  be  satisfied  with  anything  less
than  the  death  of  any  person  who  should,  in  the  least  degree,  in-
fringe them.  Having  put  that  person  to  death  for  a  trifling  fault,
he  would  become  apprehensive  of  his  tribe  and  relations,  and  would
persuade  himself  that  they  could  never  be  pacified.  He  would
therefore  set  about  their  extermination,  sparing  neither  suckling
babes  nor  women  with  child ;  but  punishing  them  all,  from  mature
men  to  the  child  at  the  breast,  so  that  after  he  had  been  satisfied  a
thousand  times  with  their  death,  they  died  with  thankfulness  (as
has  been  related  before).

In  short,  towards  the  end  of  his  life,  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr  entrusted
his  army  and  all  military  affairs  to  Mir  Yali,  placing  the  adminis-
tration of  the  State  and  the  people  in  the  hands  of  Shah  Dana
Kukildash.  These  two  men  fulfilled  their  duties  with  the  utmost
possible  diligence.

As  has  been  briefly  stated  above,  Mir  Yali  succeeded  so  thoroughly

in  driving  the  Moghuls  and  Kirghiz  out  of  Aksu  and  Moghulistdn,

that  for  a  long  time  none  of  them  dared  come  within  two  or  three

months'  journey  of  Edshghar.^ All  the  Moghuls  crept  into  Chdlish

*  Here,  no  doubt,  the  province  of  Ktohghar  is  meant.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

320  Decitne  of  Mirzd  Aha  Bakr,

and  Tuiian,  but  the  Kirghiz  were  allowed  to  dwell  on  this  side  of
Issigh  Kul.  In  the  same  manner,  Mir  Vali  took  entire  possession
of  certain  places  in  Farghana,  such  as  Uzkand  (which  is  the  most
important  [town]  of  that  province),  Ush,  Madu,  and  Jagirak  ;  all
of  which  places  lie  above  Andijan.  He  also  brought  under  his
power  much  of  Earatigin  and  Badakhshan,  and  the  districts  of
Balur  and  Tibet  as  far  as  Kashmir.  All  this  was  the  achievement
of  Mir  Vali.

Before  the  battle  of  Tutluk,  my  uncle  endeavoured  to  bring
about  a  meeting  with  Mir  Vali,  in  order  that  they  might  discuss
the  terms  of  a  peace.  [When  Mir  Vali  heard  this]  he  thought  my
uncle  must  be  reduced  to  straits  and  in  despair;  thus  he  might
be  able  to  seize  him  by  deception,  and  send  him  to  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr
as  a  present.  He  felt  that  he  could  not  possibly  perform  a  more
worthy  or  important  service.  These  considerations  induced  him
to  assent  to  the  interview.  They  met  at  a  place  agreed  on,  between
two  lines  of  men  appointed  respectively  by  either  side,  and  they
began  to  confer  together  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  occasion.
During  the  conference,  my  uncle  said  to  the  Amirs  who  had  accom-
panied Mir  Vali :  **  I  have  a  few  words  to  say  to  Mir  Vali ;  leave
us."  Thereupon  the  Amirs  rose  up  [and  withdrew] ;  Mir  Vali
alone  remained.  The  few  words  were  merely  a  repetition  of  some
civilities  relating  to  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  which  he  had  already  uttered
in  the  presence  of  the  Amirs.  They  then  separated,  and  each  man
return^  to  his  own  army.  After  this,  occurred  the  event  [battle]
at  Tutluk,  which  weighed  down  the  scale  of  Mir  Vali  in  the  balance
of  the  regulations  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr.  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  asked  the
generals  who  had  been  present  at  the  interview  what  had  been
said ;  they  told  him  all  that  had  passed,  and  added :  "  This  is  what
was  said  in  our  presence,  but  afterwards  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza
spoke  to  Mir  Vali  in  private,  and  we  do  not  know  what  he  said
then."  When,  after  the  battle  at  Tutluk,  Mir  Vali  came  to  Mirzd
Abd  Bakr's  presence,  the  latter  asked  what  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirzd  had  said  to  him  in  private,  and  Mir  Vali  told  him  what  my
uncle  had  said.  Then  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  replied:  **  But  that  is
exactly  what  he  said  before  all  the  others ;  one  does  not  demand  a
private  interview  merely  to  repeat  such  things  as  these."  He
said  nothing  further,  but  from  that  moment  he  began  to  suspect
Mir  Vali,  thinking:  "What  Sayyid  Muhammad  really  said  to
him  in  private  he  will  not  tell  me ;  perhaps  he  is  in  league  with
him,  and  is  planning  my  ruin."  So  he  seized  Mir  Vali  and  sent
him  to  the  Kdzik,  together  with  his  brothers.  Some  of  them
he  castrated.  And  thus  did  he  annihilate  all  these  people  for  the
simple  question  :  "  why  did  Sayyid  Muhammad  demand  a  private
interview?"  and  subjected  them  all  to  hard  punishments  and
bitter  suffering. [Verses]  ....

Digitized  by

Google

and  End  of  his  Dominion.  321

This  ifl  an  iDstanoe  of  Mirz&  Ab4  Bakr's  cruelty.  Another
example  is  his  treatment  of  Shah  D&na  Kukild^sh,  to  whom  were
entrusted  the  affairs  of  the  State  and  the  people,  and  the  control  of
the  treasury.  He,  too,  had  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  in  the
performance  of  his  duties.  For  example,  the  flocks  of  sheep  he  had
collected  at  the  conquest  of  Eashghar  were  beyond  reckoning,  and
when  by  reason  of  my  extreme  youth  I  ooiild  not  attend  to  business,
and  on  this  account  did  not  attempt  to  estimate  the  profits  of  the
booty  [then  taken],  I  only  know  that  more  than  15,000  sheep  fell
to  my  lot.  No  one  on  that  occasion  got  a  smaller  share  than
myself,  of  Mirzd  Ab&  Bakr's  property.  The  soldiers  who  had
accompanied  the  Eh4n,  and  the  men  from  the  armies  of  the  Mirza,
all  received  an  equally  large  share ;  and  from  this,  one  can  form
an  estimate  of  the  whole  I  In  the  same  manner,  his  cattle  and
flocks,  grain  and  treasure  (which  have  been  mentioned,  and  will
be  mentioned  again),  were  so  numerous  and  abundant,  that  the
intellect  is  incapable  of  conceiving  the  quantity  that  fell  to  each
man.  All  this  had  been  amassed  under  the  superintendence  of
Sh&h  Dana  Eukild&sh.

After  the  fall  of  Mir  Yali,  the  Mirz4's  suspicions  extended  to
Sh4h  D&na  Eukilddsb,  [thinking]  that  he  might  say  to  himself:
*^  Mir  Yali  was  a  greater  man  than  I  am,  yet  the  Mirz4  seized
him :  perhaps  he  will  seize  me  too."  These  thoughts  had  never
entered  Sh&h  D4na's  mind,  nor  that  of  anybody  else ;  he,  however,
seized  Sh4h  D4na  upon  suspicion,  saying  [by  way  of  pretext]  that
Sh&h  D&na  had  reduced  the  value  of  his  property ;  and  there,  in
front  of  the  seat  of  judgment  [dtvan-Hdna],  he  ordered  people  to
pluck  out  the  whole  of  his  beard  and  to  castrate  him ;  while,  as
soon  as  his  wounds  were  healed,  he  sent  him  to  work  [in  the
E4zik.]

In  the  places  of  these  two  [officers]  he  set  up  mean  creatures
\aT6a,%Xi\  irom  among  the  Amirs;  and,  though  he  found  himself
better  off  than  formerly  as  regards  worldly  substance,  the  affairs
of  the  army  ceased  to  flourish ;  for  such  another  commander  as
Mir  Yali  was  not  readily  to  be  met  with.  In  the  meanwhile,  the
news  of  the  Eh&n's  march  from  Andij&n  to  E&shghar  received  con-
firmation. [The  Mirz4]  immediately  proceeded  to  Edshghar,  and
there,  in  seven  days,  constructed  a  citadel,  as  has  been  explained
above.  By  the  time  it  was  known  that  the  Ehdn  had  reached  At-
B&shi,  which  is  seven  days'  journey  from  E&shghar,  the  fort  of
T4ngi-His4r  had  likewise  been  filled  with  stores,  arms,  and  all
that  was  fitting  and  necessaiy.  It  was  placed  in  the  charge  of  a
few  officers  in  whom  he  reposed  confidence — namely,  Amin  Darugha,
J4n  Hasan  of  the  tribe  of  E4rluk,  Euli  It4rji,  Ajmaga  Akhta  and
Jdni  Beg  Akhta,  Mir  Yali,  Sh4h  Dana,  and  Muhammad  Beg  (whom
he  had  lately  castrated),  together  with  some  of  their  followers.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

322  Decline  of  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,

Although  he  had  just  taken  many  of  them  from  the  works,^  he
gave  them  each  horses  and  arms,  saying :  *•  If  yon  prove  to  me
your  devotion  and  loyalty,  I  will  again  take  you  into  favour."

At  this  juncture,  it  was  reported  that  the  Kh&n  had  reached
Tu«hgu.  [Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr]  thereupon  set  out  for  Y4rkand,  giving
his  final  injunctions  [to  the  officers]  in  Yangi-Hisar.  He  promised
the  people  that  he  would  go  and  muster  an  army  in  Y4rkand,  and
come  to  their  relief.  Upon  his  arrival  at  Y&rkand  he  at  once  set
about  collecting  forces.  He  filled  the  country  with  horses  and
arms.  [There  was  a  certain]  Ustdd  Abdal  Sh4ikh,  who  was  a
perfect  master  [iw^c2],  and  unrivalled  in  all  kinds  of  work  with
hammer  and  anvil.  After  the  fall  of  Mir  Yali  and  Shah  D4na
Kukildash,  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  had  set  up  this  Shaikh  Abddl  in  the
place  of  Shdh  D4na,  and  I  liave  heard  [Shaikh  Abd&l]  say  that
there  were  in  the  Mirz&'s  armoury  60,000  coats  of  mail  \jivha\
and  12,000  sets  of  horse  armour  [Jbteftttn],  besides  other  arms  and
accoutrements,  the  number  of  which  may  be  judged  by  these
figures.  But  the  army  itself  was  composed  of  peasants,  axtizans,
gardeners,  and  cultivators  of  the  soil.  Upon  those  he  judged  the
most  capable  among  them,  he  conferred  the  rank  of  Mirzd.  A
hundred  and  twenty  of  them  he  made  his  own  escort,  and  the  rest
all  received  horses  and  arms. [Three  couplets.]

(1)  It  takes  many  a  year  for  the  natural  stone  to  become,  by  the  sun's
power,  a  ruby  in  Badakhshan,  or  an  amethyst  in  Yemen.

(2)  It  is  many  months  before  a  seed  of  cotton  is  ready  to  be  made  into  a
robe  fur  a  ^urt',  or  a  shroud  for  a  corpse.

(.'i)  It  is  many  days  before  a  handful  of  wool  fi»m  the  back  of  a  sheep,
becomes  a  zealot's  shirt  or  a  donkey's  halter.

.  .  .  .^  However  this  may  be,  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  having  mustered
his  army,  marched  with  it  to  a  point  two  farBdleh»  distant  from
Ydrkand ;  thence  he  detached,  and  sent  in  advance,  some  picked
men,  who  fell  in  with  Khwdja  Ali  Bahddur  at  Kizil,  as  has  been
told  above.  [Thus  we  see]  that  the  man  who  was  brought  before
the  Khan  at  Ydngi-Hi^ar  during  the  siege  operations,  and  who  had
been  tortured  to  death,  spoke  the  truth.  He  had  deserted  at  the
time  when  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  having  led  his  army  two  fara&khs
out  of  Ydrkand,  sent  forward  the  advance  guard.  The  man  had
reported  exactly  what  he  had  witnessed.

When  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  had  pitched  his  camp  at  this  spot,  he
wished  to  pass  his  forces  in  review,  but  his  e£fort8  to  do  so  were
in  vain.  For  these  Amirs,  who  had  been  used  all  their  lives  to
handling  the  yoke  [yugh]^  when  they  now  raised  the  standard

'  The  word  is  Kdr  (work),  and  eyidently  refers  to  the  K6Hk,  or  excavation
works.

*  A  rhetorical  passage  of  one  folio  is  omitted  here.  It  is  chiefly  in  verse,  and
relates  to  the  impossibility  of  a  ploughman  making  a  good  soldier.

Digitized  by

Google

and  End  of  his  Dominion,  323

[/tt^A]^  and  formed  in  line,  thought  they  were  thrashing  com,
and  got  in  each  other's  way ;  nor  could  they  distinguish  between
right  and  left  and  centre.  When  their  spirited  steeds  reared  and
shied,  they  held  on  anyhow  to  the  withers,  and  when,  in  fear  of
their  lives,  they  pulled  at  the  bridle,  and  the  horse  would  rear,
the  rider  would  lose  his  control,  and  slip  back  on  the  horse's
haunches.  If  the  animal  started  off,  they  would  throw  up  the
bridle  and  fall,  like  a  drop  of  sweat,  to  the  ground.  Their  bows
got  broken,  and  their  arrows  fell  out  [of  the  quivers].  When  Mirzd
Ab&  Bakr  saw  this  kind  of  horsemanship — such  soldiering  and
such  archery — he  said :  "  With  such  a  troop  as  this,  it  would
be  dangerous  to  try  and  rob  a  kitchen-garden "  [poZts;] ;  and  he
returned,  dispirited  and  anxious,  to  his  tent,  seriously  meditating
flight.

Following  this,  came  news  that  the  citadel  of  Yangi-His4r  had
fallen ;  and  when  the  people  of  Kashghar  heard  of  that,  they  too
abandoned  their  citadel  and  dispersed.  On  this  intelligence  reaching
the  Mirzd,  he  felt  that  farther  delay  was  useless  [and  that  the  hour
for  flight  had  come]  [Couplet]  ....  Therefore,  having  packed
up  the  richest  of  his  clothes  and  his  valuables,  having  divorced  his
kingdom,  and  handed  Yarkand  over  to  his  eldest  son,  Jahangir
Mirzd,  he  fled. [Verses]  ....

Jahdngir  Mirza,  who  had  passed  all  his  life  in  seclusion,  was  of
a  timorous  disposition.  Finding  himself  suddenly  placed  upon  the
throne  of  a  disordered  State,  he  did  what  he  was  able  in  the  way
of  government,  and  then,  at  the  end  of  five  days  (hearing  that  his
father  was  at  a  distance,  and  that  the  enemy  were  near  at  hand),
set  out  in  flight.  He  collected  all  the  treasure  he  could  carry  off,
and  issued  a  general  order  that  every  one  might  take  what  he
wished.  Those  who  were  afraid  of  the  Moghuls,  accompanied  him
in  his  flight.  The  rest  fell  upon  whatever  treasure  remained,
plundering  the  granaries  and  burning,  or  destroying,  property  of
all  kinds.

Four  days  after  the  departure  of  Mirza  Jahangir,  Ehw&ja  Ali
Bah&dur  arrived  with  two  or  three  thousand  men,  and  two  dajs
later  the  Eh4n  followed,  all  of  which  shall  be  related  presently.
Mirzd  Jahdngir  retired  to  Sdnju,  which  is  the  frontier  on  the  high-
road to  Tibet,  while  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  went  to  Ehotan.  But,  seeing
no  possibility  of  making  a  stand  in  the  citadel  there,  he  marched
on  to  Eardnghutdgh,  whither  he  was  followed,  in  hot  pursuit,  by  a
party  of  Moghuls.  As  the  roads  were  difficult,  it  would  have  been
hard-- nay,  impossible,  for  him  to  carry  off  all  the  property  he  had
with  him ;  he  therefore  collected  it  all  together,  and  set  it  on  fire.
I  have  heard  from  those  who  had  charge  of  it,  that  there  were  nine
hundred  mule-loads  of  embroidered  and  brocaded  garments.  Many
*  A  play  on  the  words  Yvu^  and  2nu^^.~B.

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

324  End  of  Abd  Bakr's  Dominion.

of  them  were  embroidered  in  gold  in  the  European,  Ottoman  [Burnt],
and  Chinese  fashions ;  while  some  of  the  robes  were  studded  with
jewels  and  all  kinds  of  precious  stones.  All  these  were  consumed
in  the  fire;  while  his  gold  and  silver  vases,  cups,  and  various
kinds  of  ornaments  set  with  jewels,  and  his  saddle-bags  filled  with
gold-dust,  he  tlirew  from  the  bridge  into  the  River  Ak-Tash,  which
flows  through  the  middle  of  [the  valley  of)  Karanghutagh.  He
killed  his  riding  horses  \iwpchh}i\  and  mules ;  then,  taking  what
it  was  possible  to  carry  on  such  a  road,  set  out  for  Tibet.

On  reaching  Tibet  [Ladak],  he  found  that  all  the  forts  which  ho
had  garrisoned  had  been  abandoned  by  his  men,  who  had  fled  in
different  directions ;  so  that  his  forts  and  treasures  had  again  fallen
into  the  hands  of  the  infidels  of  Tibet.  Hence  he  could  do  nothing
in  that  country.  He  could  discern  no  shore  of  safety  from  amid
the  furious  waves  of  hardship  and  trial,  which  tossed  around  him.
Mirz4  Ab&  Bakr  had  now  for  a  space  of  forty-eight  years  ^  so  filled
the  book  [of  life]  with  black  records,  that  there  was  no  space  left
to  write  anything  more.  He  had  devoted  all  his  energies  to
accumulating  earthly  goods,  and  the  pen  is  unable  to  describe  his
worldly  magnificence.  But,  although  he  used  ostentatiously  to
speak  of  the  next  world,  and  to  express  hopes  of  attaining  it,  yet
he  never  performed  an  action  that  did  not,  as  it  were,  open  to  him
a  door  of  hell  or  shut  upon  him  a  gate  of  paradise. Between  himself

and  paradise  was  a  long  road ^

In  short,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  he  reaped  the  fruits  of  his  past
misdeeds;  so  that,  finding  it  impossible  to  remain  in  Tibet,  he
preferred  death  to  life.  Leaving  his  family  and  children  there,  he
departed,  saying:  "  I  am  going  [to  give  myself  up  to  the  Khan].
It  is  evident  that  I  shall  be  killed  with  the  poison  of  oppression.
If  this  happens,  bury  my  body  in  the  sepulchre  of  my  ancestors.
Although  I  have  not  discharged  the  duties  of  kinship  towards
Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza  and  Mirza  Haidar,  I  beg  you  to  show
them  kindness.  And  if,  contrary  to  my  expectations,  they  should
not  kill  me,  I  have  still  a  plan  [which  may  be  executed]."  With
such  intentions  he  set  out,  towards  the  middle  of  winter,  to  visit
the  Kbdn.  On  his  way,  he  met  with  a  party  of  his  own  servants,
whom  my  uncle  had  sent  into  Tibet  to  fetch  him,  threatening  them
with  this  and  that  [penalty]  if  they  did  not  succeed.  When  Mirza
Ab&  Bakr  met  them,  he  asked  their  news ;  they  replied :  *'  We
have  been  sent  to  find  you : "  and  then  they  strung  together  a  few
lies  to  try  and  reassure  him. But  he  did  not  believe  them,  and

>  This  figure  evidently  has  reference  to  Aba  Bakr's  reign,  and  not  to  his  age.
If  we  count  from  the  death  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mirza  in  868,  Aba  Bakr's
reign  would  be  thirty-five  years ;  but  he  was  in  power  over  parts,  if  not  the  whole
of  the  country,  at  intervals,  for  some  years  during  the  Mirza's  lifetime.  It  is  not
clear  from  what  event  our  author  dates  Aba  Ba&s  reign  of  forty-eight  years.

*  Three  lines  of  rhetoric  are  omitted  here  concerning  Aba  Bakr's  evil  deeds.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Final  Conqt^st  of  Kdshgliar.  325

said  :  "  All  I  want  you  to  do  is  to  take  me,  living,  before  the  Khan
and  Sayyid  Muhammad ;  after  that,  you  can  do  what  you  please."
They  launched  out  into  professions  of  readiness  to  comply  with  his
wish.  Then,  as  it  was  late,  having  said  his  night  prayers,  he  went
to  sleep :  and  the  saying,  ♦*  Sleep  is  the  brother  of  Death,"  was
verified  in  his  case.  When  he  retired  to  rest,  the  men  of  the  party
consulted  together,  resolved  to  cut  off  his  head  and  carry  it  to  the
Khan,  [as  this  would  appear  an  important  service]  and  cause  the
Kh&n  to  place  confidence  in  them.

Bad  as  he  was,  these  people  [should  not  have]  betrayed  their
charge,  and  used  perfidy  in  place  of  good  faith.  However,  they  cut
off  his  head  while  he  slept  and  then  returned,  as  shall  be  narrated
shortly.  Thus  were  all  his  subjects — prince  and  pauper,  high  and
low — delivered  from  his  wickedness. [Verses,  etc.]  .  .  .

CHAPTER  XLVIII.

THB  CONQUEST  OF  kAsHGHAB.

Having  taken  the  citadel  of  Yangi-Hisdr,  in  the  manner  above
described,  the  Kh4n  turned  his  attention  to  [the  reduction  of]
Kashghar.  On  the  third  day  he  learnt  that  the  garrison  of  K4sh-
ghar  had  abandoned  their  citadel  and,  taking  their  horses,  had  fled
to  whatever  place  each  thought  safest  for  himself.  The  Khan's
noble  mind  being  thus,  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner,  set  at  rest
with  regard  to  Kashghar,  he  placed  the  foot  of  success  in  the
stirrup  of  victory,  and  drew  his  reins  towards  Yarkand,  confident
of  success  and  triumph.  He  sent  Khw4ja  All  Bahadur  in  advance
[Verses]  .  .  .  The  first  stage  from  Yangi-Hisar  is  Satlik,  and  here
the  Khan  pitched  his  camp.  [On  the  same  day]  news  came  that
Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  having  given  over  Yarkand  to  the  charge  of  his
son  Jahangir  Mirzd,  had  retired  to  Khotan.  [On  hearing  this
news]  the  Kh4n  hastened  still  more,  and  on  reaching  Kizil  heard
that  Jahangir  Mirza  also  had  fled,  and  that  Khwdja  Ali  Bahadur
had  entered  Ydrkand.  At  the  end  of  Bajab  of  the  year  920,  the
Khan  made  his  triumphant  entry  into  the  town  of  Yarkand,  and
with  the  splendour  of  his  glittering  sword,  he  allayed  the  dust  of
tyranny  and  enmity  [etc.]  ....

Before  [his  army]  entered  the  town,  he  sent  on  Amir  D&im  Ali
and  Beg  Muhammad  to  occupy  Khotan;  he  also  despatched  in

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

326  Final  Conquest  of  Kdshghar.

pursuit  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  seven  brave  generals — namely,  Kara
Eulak  Mirz4,  H&ji  Mirzd,  Siiltdn  All  Mirza,  Nazar  Mirza,  Mir
Kambar,  Mirz4  Ali  Taghdi  and  Beg  Kuli  Makrit.  These  seven
generals  started  in  pursuit  with  the  greatest  eagerness.  This
a£fair  having  been  attended  to,  the  Eh&n  issued  a  general  order
that  every  one  might  go  and  plunder  wherever  he  liked.  And
every  man  in  the  army  who  cared  for  pillage  and  booty,  immedi-
ately hastened  out  [to  take  advantage  of  the  permission].  Only  a
few  of  the  Amirs,  who  held  plundering  to  be  derogatory,  remained
in  attendance  on  the  Kh&n.  Having  settled  this  matter  also,  the
victorious  Kh4n  mounted  the  throne  of  the  town.  He  then  went
up  to  the  citadel  \ark\  within  which  were  many  lofty  buildings,
containing,  each  of  them,  rooms  and  upper-apartments  and  battle-
ments, so  numerous  as  to  astound  the  beholder.  And  these  build-
ings were  filled  with  cloths,  chintzes,  carpets,  porcelain,  cuirasses,
horse-trappings,  saddles,  bows  and  other  things  useful  to  man.
All  these  things  had  been  seized  by  Mirz4  Aba  Bakr,  or  procured
by  whatever  means  he  chose  to  employ,  and  had  been  hidden  away
by  him,  so  that  no  one  might  know  of  their  existence.  Of  such  as
remained  over,  Mirzd  Jahdngir  had  destroyed  and  wasted  as  much
as  he  was  able;  and  on  his  departure  had  sanctioned  a  general
pillage,  which,  until  the  arrival  of  Ehw&ja  Ali  Bah&dur,  was
carried  on  by  the  whole  population — each  taking  what  he  could.
When  Ehw4ja  Ali  Bahadur  entered  the  town,  he,  likewise,
devoted  himself  to  pillage.  Seven  days  later  the  Khan  arrived,
and  he  too  gave  his  men  permission  to  plunder  right  and  left.
Everything  in  the  way  of  money,  as  well  as  the  valuable  cloths
and  stu£f8,  had  been  carried  off,  but  the  bouses  were  still  full  [of
other  things].  Two  months  after  the  flight  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,
there  were  still  great  quantities  of  cuirasses  and  the  like,  lying
about  the  houses  and  passages,  that  no  one  had  cared  to  carry
away. [Five  couplets].  .  .  .

Thus,  all  that  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr  had,  in  the  course  of  forty-eight
years,  amassed  with  infinite  toil,  and  guarded  with  savage  miser-
liness, he  was  finally  obliged,  with  a  thousand  heart-rendiugs,  to
abandon ;  while  the  Kh4n,  with  one  stroke  of  his  pen,  gave  it  all
over  to  a  general  sack,  and  during  two  months  the  dust  thereof
rose  to  the  sky, [Verses].  .  ,  .

At  the  end  of  two  months,  every  man  returned  safely — laden
with  plunder  from  different  directions— and  presented  the  Kh4u
with  tribute  \jpi8hkash\  according  to  the  quantity  of  booty  he  had
taken.  Bui  the  Khan,  in  order  to  win  the  hearts  of  his  people,
divided  the  property  up  into  shares  [jswyurghal]  in  accordance
with  the  old  Moghul  custom,  and  distributed  it  among  his  soldiers.
I  remember  distinctly  that  some  of  the  Amirs  who  had  oome  from
Kar4nghutdgh,  presented,  besides  arms  \al&t\  and  vases,  an  Andij4n

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Pursuit  of  Mirzd  Add  Bakr.  327

t»a»  of  gold-dufit.  Now  an  Andij4n  man  is  sixty-four  th&nk  and  a
(Mnk  is  400  mJdhMXy  From  this  the  extent  of  the  rest  of  the
booty  may  be  oonoeived.

CHAPTER  XLIX.

8TOBY  OF  THB  AMIBS  WHO  WENT  IN  PUBSUIT  OF  MIBZA  ABA  BAKB.

Those  nine  Amirs  whom  the  Ehan  had  sent  off  to  settle  affairs  in
Khotan  and  to  pursue  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr,  started  off  with  great
eagerness  and  exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost  of  their  powers.
On  reaching  Ehotan,  the  inhabitants  oame  out  to  receive  them,
and  delivered  into  their  hands  all  their  treasuries  and  granaries,
their  flocks  and  herds,  and  everything  connected  with  these.  Mir
Daim  All  and  Mir  Beg  Muhammad,  according  to  [the  Khan's]
orders,  stayed  in  Khotan,  and  occupied  themselves  with  the
administration  of  the  State  and  the  government  of  the  people*
The  other  seven  Mirs,  like  the  seven-headed  devils  fighting  on  the
top  of  the  mountains  of  K&f,  swept  on  to  Karanghutdgb,  but  when
they  arrived  there,  found  that  Mirza  Ab&  Bakr  had  left  the  moun-
tains of  Kardnghutagh,  and  had  gone  on  to  Tibet  [Ladak],  in
which  direction  it  was  difficult  to  follow  him.

When  they  came  to  the  bridge  over  which  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  had
thrown  his  effects,  they  found  the  roads  blocked  with  the  carcases
of  the  tupchdh  horses  [three  couplets].  .  .  .  which  he  had  killed,  and
of  the  mules,  on  which  had  been  loaded  the  saddle-bags  [khachir]
fall  of  money  and  stuffs.  I  do  not  quite  recall  whether  there  were
900  mules  or  900  strings  [kitdr]  ^  of  mules.  They  next  came
to  the  spot  where  he  had  burnt  his  brocades,  etc.,  and  saw  that
these  valuables  were  become  an  ash-heap  from  which  smoke  was
btill  rising.  The  gold  and  precious  btones  with  which  these
clothes  had  been  adorned,  were  still  remaining.  These  they
gathered  from  among  the  ashes,  and  found  that  the  jevirels  and
rubies  had  not  been  affected  [by  the  fire].  But  the  turquoises
[firuzd]  had  turned  black,  and  become  brittle. Ko  trace  of  their

>  No  doubt  Aba  Bakr  plundered  the  oonntry  and  aocumnlated  a  large  amount
of  viopertj  and  some  treasure,  but  the  exaggerations  of  Mirza  Haidar  on  the
suhject,  in  this  chapter  and  the  next,  are  too  apparent  to  require  pointing
out.  As  regards  the  Andij&ni  man,  if  the  data  he  gives  are  correct,  and  if  the
mUhkdl  be  reckoned  at  its  exact  numismatic  value  of  71*18  grains,  the  chdrik
should  weigh  59-82  oz.  troy,  or,  roughly  speaking,  5  Ibe.;  so  that  the  Andijini
man  of  gdd  would  be  nearly  ^0  lbs.  troy  and  its  value  some  £15,000 !

'  A  hUdr,  or  strinp;  of  mules  or  ponies,  consists,  usually,  of  four  in  the  hills
and  of  five  in  the  plains.

Digitized  by

Google

328  Story  of  Aba  Bakrs  Offspring.

original  colour  was  left  The  rubies  [2dZ]  too,  were  broken  into
little  pieces,  and  had  changed  to  an  ugly  colour.  The  pearls  were
reduced  to  ashes,  so  that  they  could  no  longer  be  distinguished ;  also
the  amber — which  had  lost  all  its  charm.

The  Amirs  and  their  men,  having  gathered  what  they  could  from
the  ashes,  again  set  out  upon  their  road,  when  they  suddenly
noticed  the  boxes  of  gold-dust  shining  at  the  bottom  of  the  river.
Indeed  the  jewelry  \hjX\\  and  vessels  of  silver  and  gold,  shone  forth
the  rays  of  the  sun,  as  it  were,  from  the  depths  of  the  stream.
They  thereupon  proceeded  to  attempt  the  recovery  of  these  valu-
ables, from  the  water.  The  river  was  rushing  over  the  rocks  in
such  a  torrent  that  no  one  could,  by  any  device,  have  entered  it.
So  each  man  prepared  a  long  pole,  at  the  end  of  which  a  hook  was
attached.  To  reach  the  bottom,  it  was  necessary  to  join  several  of
these  poles  together.  Now  when  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  had  thrown
these  treasures  into  the  river,  he  had  ordered  his  men  to  cut  the
leather  cases  into  pieces,  so  that  the  gold-dust  might  be  scattered
in  the  water.  But  since  the  cutting  up  of  the  cases  took  a  long
time,  and  the  Mirz4  was  impatient  to  go  forward,  he  [finally]
ordered  them  to  be  thrown  in  just  as  they  were,  and  thus  they  had
remained  from  that  time.

When  they  struck  the  cases,  their  hooks  broke  most  of  them  in
pieces,  and  [the  contents]  were  washed  away  by  the  current
Sometimes,  however,  if  a  man  took  great  care,  it  did  not  break,  and
was  lifted  out  of  the  water.  They  were  found  to  contain  a  mule's-
load  each.  Such  of  the  vases  and  vessels  as  had  handles,  or  some-
thing to  lay  hold  of,  were  hooked  up,  but  nothing  was  recovered
upon  which  a  firm  hold  with  the  hooks  could  not  be  obtained.
They  only  secured  a  very  small  quantity  of  the  gold-dust ;  about
a  hundred-thousandth  part  of  the  whole.  However,  they  were
enriched  by  what  they  did  secure,  and  got  more  than  enough  to
enable  them  to  realise  all  their  desires.  At  present,  as  compared
with  those  times,  all  this  wealth  and  all  these  Moghuls  are  as  a
mere  drop  in  the  ocean.

CHAPTER  L.

CONCLUSION OF  THE  STORY  OF MIKZA  ABA BAKR'S  OFFSPRING.

After  the  victorious  Ehan  had  settled  all  his  important  aflfairs  in
Yarkand,  it  was  discovered  that  Mirza  Jahangir  had  not  followed
his  f&ther  into  Tibet,  but  that  he  had  settled  down  in  the  district

Digitized  by

Googk

Story  of  Abd  Bakrs  Offspring.  329

of  Sanju.  The  Khan,  thereupon,  sent  my  uncle  to  bring  back  his
nephew,  by  some  means  or  other.  When  my  uncle  reaobed  Sauju,
Mirz4  Jahangir  came  out  to  receive  him,  offering  rich  gifts,
and  said  to  him :  ''  It  is  evident  to  all,  that  during  my  father's
reign  I  lived  in  retirement  and  in  mortal  dread  of  him.  During
all  that  time,  I  did  not  enjoy  a  single  moment's  security  or  freedom
from  anxiety.  Fear  of  violence  had  always  made  me  seek
seclusion,  and  thus  the  eye  of  my  nature  became  closed  to  the
splendours  of  wealth  and  rank,  and  I  have  always  been  obliged  to
drink  from  the  cup  of  dissatisfaction.  When  the  evil  foundations
of  my  father's  realm  began  to  give  wav,  and  his  power  to  crumble
from  the  earthquakes  caused  by  the  Khan's  forces,  he  drew  me
forth  from  my  coiner  of  seclusion,  and  set  me  upon  the  throne
of  pomp.  And  I,  who  during  forty- two  years,  being  in  fear  and
trembling  for  my  life,  had  never  gained  any  experience  of  the
world,  how  could  I  suddenly  be  expected  to  supervise  a  whole  State  ?
Besides  these  difficulties,  it  was  my  father's  constant  practice,
whenever  lie  stripped  one  of  his  children  of  the  garments  of  life,
to  lament  the  unfortunate  victim  in  my  presence,  sapng :  '  He  was
a  full  grown  youth.  I  dreaded  lest  he  might  treat  roe  as  Shiruya
treated  Khusrau  and  Abdul  Latif  Mirzd  treated  XJlugh  Beg  Mirza.'  ^
Hearing  such  things  as  this,  I  endeavoured  to  the  utmost,  for  the
sake  of  my  personal  safety,  to  appear  very  inefficient  in  my
behaviour.  How  shall  I,  who  have  thus  spent  forty-two  years  in
cultivating  ineptitude  and  helplessness,  revive,  in  one  moment,  the
welfare  of  a  State  which  [my  father]  himself  has  ruined  ?  More-
over, I  had  no  information  concerning  any  of  my  father's  affairs.
Nor  has  any  one  ever  experienced  so  much  as  an  inconvenience,  at
my  hands.  Whatever  the  people  have  suffered  is  due  to  my
father.  They  do  not  blame  me,  nor  hold  me  responsible  for  his
sins.  Let  me  now  go  to  the  Khan,  and  spend  the  rest  of  my  days
in  his  service."  Words  of  abject  humility,  such  as  these,  and
many  more  like  them,  he  continued  to  pour  forth ;  but  my  uncle
comforted  him,  and  conveyed  him,  together  with  much  treasure
and  many  horses,  before  the  Khan.

Mirza  Jahangir  was  born  of  one  of  the  daughters  of  Isan  Bagha
Khan,  the  youngest  brother  of  Yunus  Kh4n,  who  was  the  Khan's
grandfather.  At  the  time  when  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr  captured  Aksu,
the  residence  of  Alacha  Kh4n  (which  event  has  been  fully  described
above),  the  fourth  daughter  of  Alacha  Khan  fell  into  his  hands.
And  he  took  care  of  her  and  treated  her  with  great  honour.
When  she  was  of  age,  he  gave  her  in  marriage  to  his  son  Jah&ngir
Mirza. The  latter,  arriving  now  in  the  Kh&n's  presence,  was

'  The  alluaionB  are  (l)io  a  fable  in  the  Sh^ih-n&mah^  where  Khnfiraa  is  said  to
have  been  killed  by  his  son  Shuruya:  and  (2)  to  the  murder  of  Mirza  Ulngh
Beg  of  BUyard-un-Nahr,  by  his  son  Abdul  Latif,  in  the  year  1449.

.Digitized  by

Qoo^z

330  Story  of  Abd  Bakr's  Offspring.

received  with  respect,  and  this  fourth  daughter  of  Alacha  Khan,
whose  name  was  Khadija  Soltdn  Eh&nim,  also  joined  the  EJtL4n»
whose  fullHsister  she  was.  The  Khan  showed  favour  to  Jahangir
Mirz4,  in  accordance  with  the  verse,  **  I  will  not  ascribe  to  thee  the
sins  of  others  " ;  and  ignoring  the  cruelties  and  hideous  deeds  of
his  father,  entered  him  among  the  men  of  trust  around  his  person,
and  promised  that  feasts  should  be  celebrated  in  honour  of  E^hadija
out  of  regard  for  her  noble  birth.

One  night  towards  the  end  of  that  winter,  Jahangir  Mirza  was
killed  in  Y4ngi-Hisar,  together  with  several  of  his  followers.  It
was  never  known  who  committed  this  deed.  Every  one  had  his
own  suspicions,  but  Grod  alone  knows  the  truth.  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr
had  many  children.  Several  of  his  grown  up  sons  he  had  put  to
death,  with  the  most  horrible  tortures,  for  totally  inadequate
reasons.  Of  those  that  survived,  the  eldest  and  most  honourable
was  Jahangir  Mirza,  whose  fate  has  been  related.  There  were
two  other  sons,  named  Turangir  Mirza  and  Bustdngir  Mirza,  the
children  of  the  daughter  of  Mirz&  Sultdn  Mahmud,  son  of  Mirz4
Sultdn  Abu  Said.

In  the  spring  following  the  winter  in  which  Jahdngir  Mirza
had  been  murdered,  a  person  was  sent  to  Tibet  to  bring  back  the
£Eimily  of  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr ;  his  wife,  KhiLnz4da  Begum,  and  her
elder  son,  Turangir  Mirza,  were  thus  brought  to  Kashghar.  In
conformity  with  the  custom  of  the  Tangaj  she  was  married  to  my
uncle,  while  Turangir  remained  in  the  Khan's  service,  until  he
was  drowned  in  the  river.

Bustdngir  Mirza  did  not  accompany  his  mother  and  brother.
He  went  from  Tibet  to  Kashmir  and  thence  into  Hindustan.  (At
that  time  Babar  Pddishah  had  not  conquered  Hindustan.)  Fxx>m
Hindustan  he  retired  to  Kabul,  but  although  he  was  [the  son  of
the  daughter  of  the  Emperor's  uncle],  his  father's  misdeeds  made
him  repulsive  to  the  Emperor,  so  that  he  could  not  stay  in  Kabul,
but  fled  into  Badakhshan,  to  Mirza  Khan,  who  was  his  maternal
uncle.  Mirza  Khan,  however,  instead  of  showing  him  the  affection
of  an  uncle,  displayed  hostility  towards  him  on  account  of  his
father,  Mirz4  Aba  Bakr ;  so  that  he  was  forced  to  fly  from  him
also,  and  betake  himself  to  the  Uzbeg  Shaiban.  Suyunjuk  Khan
received  him  with  the  utmost  courtesy  and  honour,  saying :  ''He
is  a  human  being,  and  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  treat  him  with
kindness."

He  is  still  about  Andij&n  and  Tashkand,  where  he  enjoys  high
distinction,  and  is  famous  among  the  Uzbeg  for  his  honourable
conduct.

Digitized  by

Google

The  KkdUf  after  the  Conquest  of  Kdshghar.  331

CHAPTER  LI.

BISTORT  OF  THE  KHJLn  AFTER  THE  CONQUEST  OF  kJLsHGHAR.

As  soon  as  tho  Ehan  had  reduoed  the  State  to  order,  he  bestowed
liberal  gifts  and  rewards  upon  his  followers,  especially  npon  those
who  had  distdngxiished  themselves  in  battle,  by  their  courage  and
daring ;  these  have  been  enumerated  above.  [Verses]  ....  He
poured  down  fEivours,  more  plentiful  than  drops  of  rain,  upon  his
soldiers;  and  by  the  splendour  of  his  justice,  he  dispelled  the
darkness  of  tyranny  which  had  settled  on  the  inhabitants  of  the
country.  [Yerses] ....  The  roads  which  had  before  been  too
dangerous  to  traverse,  were  now  made  so  safe  and  tranquil  as  to
become  proverbial,  that  if  an  old  woman  were  to  travel  along  them,
bearing  a  jar  of  gold  on  her  head,  she  would  not  be  molested.  At
that  time  there  was  a  popular  song  which  ran :  '*  A  solitary  person
may  carry  a  jar  of  gold  from  east  to  west,  for  the  respect  he  [the
Kh^n]  inspires,  causes  all  comers  of  the  earth  to  be  safe."  But
what  is  yet  more  remarkable,  and  more  creditable,  is  that  if,  for
example,  a  woman  should  leave  a  vessel  full  of  gold  and  proceed
on  her  road,  she  would,  on  returning  at  any  time,  find  it  untouched.
[Verses]  ....

Into  such  a  complete  state  of  order  did  the  Khan  bring  the  king-
dom, that  the  doors  of  pleasure  and  the  gates  of  security  were
opened  to  high  and  low  alike.  And  now  all  the  people  gave  them-
selves up  to  wine  and  song  and  dancing. [Verses  and  rhetoric]  . . .

The  entire  population  of  the  country,  and  the  Khan  and  his
courtiers  in  particular,  turned  night  into  day  and  day  into  night
in  draining  the  wine  cups ;  nor  did  they  care  to  learn  of  events
that  were  passing  [around  them].  [Verse]  ....  *'  I  came  intoxi-
cated to  thy  street  and  I  left  mad  :  I  know  not  how  I  came  nor  how
I  departed."  Bevelling  became  so  much  the  fashion  that  sobriety
was  held  as  a  disgrace,  and  drunkenness  as  a  cardinal  virtue.
These  illicit  indulgences  \man&M]  lasted  from  Rajab  of  the  year
920,  to  the  end  of  the  year  928,  after  which  time  the  Khan  waii,  by
the  favour  of  Heaven,  defended  from  exposing  himself  to  further
censure,  as  shall,  God  willing,  be  related  in  its  proper  place.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

332  Arrival  of  Aiman  Khwdja

CHAPTER  LII.

ARRIVAL  OF  AIMAN KHWijA SULTAn FROM  TURFIn  TO  WAIT  ON  TIIK

khAn.

In  the  middle  of  this  winter,  Aiman  Khw4ja  Sultan  arrived.  The
explanation  is  as  follows.  In  the  list  given  of  the  ofibpring  of
Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,  it  was  noticed  that  Aiman  Khw&ja  Sultan
was  the  full  brother  of  the  Ehdn.  After  the  death  of  Sultan
Ahmad  Ehan,  when  Aksu,  on  account  of  the  hostility  of  Amir
Jabar  Birdi,  fell  under  the  domination  of  Mirza  Ab4  Bakr,  all
Sultan  Ahmad's  children,  together  with  the  tribe  \TJlwi\}  migrated
to  Turfan  and  Chalish,  and  Mansur  Khdn  reigned  in  his  father's
stead.

All  his  brothers  were  in  his  service,  as  was  also  this  Aiman
Ehw4ja  Sult4n,  till  he  attained  to  adolesoenoe,  when,  at  the  insti-
gation of  some  seditious  persons,  he  laid  claim  to  the  throne —
an  act  which  resulted  in  an  insurrection  [A^^urtt/j  and  much
intrigue.  At  first  Mansur  Ehan  acted  generously  in  counselling
him  to  desist  and  in  forgiving  him,  but  finally,  since  Aiman
Khwaja  Sultan  would  not  cease  to  urge  his  claims,  Mansur  Eh4n
ordered  him  to  be  put  to  death.  On  Yaraka  Atika,  the  Khan's
trusted  servant,  was  imposed  the  duty  of  carrying  out  the
order;  but  he  took  Aiman  Ehw4ja  Sult&n  to  [his  own]  house
and  hid  him  in  an  underground  [chamber],  eqpreading  the  report
that  he  had  put  him  to  death.  Not  long  after  this,  came  news  of
the  Ehan's  victory  over  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  and  the  conquest  of
Kashghar.  [Thereupon]  Mansur  Khan  repented  his  deed,  and
showed  strong  marks  of  regret  and  sorrow.  Ydr&ka  At&ka  repre-
sented that  learned  men  had  said :  ** '  It  is  an  easy  matter  to
deprive  a  man  of  his  life's  breath ;  but  life  cannot  be  restored  to  a
dead  man.'  I  acted  in  opposition  to  orders,  and  have  kept  him
safe."  On  hearing  this  the  Khan  was  overjoyed,  and  expressed
his  gratitude  to  Yardka  Atdka,  who  brought  forth  Aiman  Khwdja
Sultdn  from  the  honpe.  Aiman  Khwdja  Sultdn,  on  being  set  at
liberty,  went  to  Bdbdjdk  Sultdn,  the  full  brother  of  Mansur  Khan,
who  had  lately  settled  in  Kusan  and  Bdi.

These  places  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  had  destroyed,  and  they  had
remained  for  some  time  in  ruins,  but  Bdbdjdk  Sultdn  restored
them.  He  lives  there  to  the  present  day.  Thence,  taking  leave,
[Aiman  Khwdja]  proceeded  to  Kdshghar,  and  when  the  Khdn  heard

*  It  is  not  clear  what  irftts,  or  tribe,  is  alladcd  to.  Probably  the  family  of
Ahmad  Kh^o,  together  with  their  relations  and  retainers,  is  all  that  is  meant ;
but  the  word  tiZiM  is  nowhere  else  nsed  in  so  restricted  a  sense.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

at  the  Khdris  Court.  333

he  was  coming,  his  joy  knew  no  bounds ;  a  new  delight  sprang  up
in  his  heart.  In  accordance  with  his  frame  of  mind,  he  began  to
sing:  ''*^Kar  dam  az  in  hdgh  hart  miraMd:  Tdza  iirdz  idza  tart
mirasad.'*  (At  that  time  I  often  hecurd  the  Khdn  sing  this  song.)
[Couplet]  ....  The  Eh&n  did  all  that  was  possible  to  make  the
reception  of  Aiman  Khw&ja  Sult4n  a  splendid  one,  and  in  his
affection,  honoured  him  so  far  as  to  go  out  himself  and  receive  him
[tatikhdl].  He  treated  him  as  a  brother  in  his  domestic  life
[huyuidt].  All  that  winter  was  spent  in  entertainments  and
banquets,  and  with  the  setting  in  of.  spring,  princely  feasts  were
celebrated  in  honour  of  Aiman  Khw4ja  Eh&n.  The  Eh&n  selected
men  [as  retainers]  for  him  from  among  all  the  Moghul  tribes.
S&rik  Mirzd,  a  Dughl&t  and  nephew  of  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi,  was
appointed  to  be  his  Ulusheg.  The  greatest  of  his  Amirs  of  the
right  wing  [hdrdnghdr]^  namely,  Munka  Beg  (who  has  been  men-
tioned in  the  battles  of  E&shghar),  Nazar  Mirza,  brother  to  Mir
Ayub  Begjik,  and  others,  together  with  a  select  band  chosen  from
among  the  various  tribes  and  Uhu  of  the  Moghuls,  were  sent  to
Aksu  [with  Aiman  Ehw4ja],  The  inhabitants  of  Aksu  also,
whom  Mirz4  Abd  Bakr,  after  conquering  the  place,  had  led  away
to  E&shgbar,  were  now  permitted— nay,  rather  urged — to  return,
all  together.  Thus,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  921,  Aiman
Ehw4ja  Sultdn  repaired  to  Aksu.

At  tbe  time  of  his  conquest,  Mirz4  Ab&  Bakr  had  laid  waste
Aksu  and  all  its  dependencies,  and  had  carried  its  inhabitants
away  to  E&shghar.  He  had  also  placed  a  lightly  armed  [jaridd]
gariison  in  Ucb,^  which  is  a  strong  place.  This  garrison  carried
on  a  little  cultivation  of  the  soiL  When  [the  Eh4n]  conquered
Edshghar,  he  immediately  sent  to  Uch  to  fortify  it,  in  the  same
way  that  Mirzd  Ab&  Bakr  had  done.  Aiman  Ehw&ja  Sultdn,
setting  out  at  once,  proceeded  to  Uch,  and  there  pitched  his  camp.
Having  restored  the  cultivation  of  the  town  and  its  districts,  he
went  on,  during  the  second  year,  to  Aksu,  where  he  rebuilt  the
citadel.  The  i-est  of  Aiman  Ehwaja  Sultan's  life  will  be  told  in
a  fitting  place.

*  By  Ueh  is  meant,  no  doubt,  Ush-Turfan.

Digitized  by

Google

334  TJie  KMn  Submits  to  Mansur.

CHAPTEB  Lin.

THE  KHAN (iN  SPITE  OF  PAST  ILL-TREATMSNT)  CRAVES  AN  INTERVIEW
WITH  MANSUR  KHAn AND  SITBHITS  TO  HIM.

The  Almighty  Creator,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world,  so  ordained
that  nothing  but  good  should  proceed  from  those  beings  whom  He
had  endowed  with  laudable  qualities  and  a  praiseworthy  character,
so  that  even  when  treated  badly,  they  should  return  good  for  evil.
This  truth  is  instanced  by  what  follows.

It  was  explained  at  the  beginning  of  this  book,  that  the  Khan
was  in  Moghulistan  with  his  brother,^  that  the  Kirghiz  were  sub-
ject to  them,  and  that  they  lived  in  comparative  comfort  and
security,  till  Mansur  Khan  led  an  expedition  against  them.  The
opposing  armies  met  at  Ch4run  Ch4Uk,^  and  a  fierce  battle  ensued,
in  which  these  two  brothers  were  ultimately  defeated.  On  this
account  they  were  unable  to  remain  longer  in  Moghulistdn,  and
all  other  asylums  in  the  world  being  closed  to  them,  they  were
obliged  to  retreat  into  the  province  of  Farghdna.  Snltdn  Khalil
Sultan,  the  Khan's  brother,  was  drowned  by  the  Sultdns  of  Shahi
Beg  Kh&n  in  the  river  of  Akhsi,  while  the  Khan  himself  was
thrown  into  prison,  whence  he  finally  escaped  to  K&bul  in  the
guise  of  a  kalandar.  The  details  of  these  events  have  all  been
given  above.  It  was  at  the  hands  of  Mansur  Kh&n  that  the  Khan
suffered  all  these  calamities.  [Verse]  ....  The  enmity  of  brother
to  brother  is  worse  than  that  of  other  foes.  But  when  the  Khan
had  laid  the  foundations  of  a  lasting  State,  had  collected  a  countless
host  and  gathered  round  him  the  most  distinguished  warriors
[verses]  ....  the  surrounding  rulers  began  to  be  sorely  afraid  of
his  might  and  majesty.  More  especially  [was  he  feared  by]
Mansur  Khdn,  who,  having  fled  from  Mirzd  Ab&  Bakr,  had  retired
to  Turf&n  and  Ch41ish,  and  now  had  neither  strength  to  oppose,
nor  place  of  refuge  to  fly  to.  The  saying :  "  Alas  I  they  have
stopped  my  road  on  six  sides,'*  now  became  applicable  to  Mansur
Kh&n.  Furthermore,  Aiman  Khwaja  Sult&n  had  attached  himself
to  the  Kh4n,  who  recounted  to  him  all  he  had  endured  at  the
hands  of  Mansur  Khan,  and  opened  afresh  his  old  wounds.

All  the  chiefs  of  the  State,  and  the  nobles,  were  unanimous  in
wishing  to  lead  an  army  against  Mansur  Khdn,  and  to  attack

1  Khalil  Sultan.

*  This  place  has  heen  mentioned  hefore  under  the  same  form.  I  cannot  iden-
tify it,  bat  it  seems  just  possible  that  it  may  be  the  same  as  the  Jarvn  mentioned
in  the  account  of  one  of  Timor's  invasions  of  Moghulistan.  If  this  is  the  case,
it  lay  probably  not  far  to  the  eastward  of  Sairdm—perhaps  about  the  upper
waters  of  the  Talds.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

TJte  Khdn  Submits  to  Mansur,  335

Turf4n.  They  represented  that :  "  When  he  had  the  opportunity,
Mansur  Eii4n  did  what  has  been  related ;  if  he  is  given  his  own
way,  he  will  do  suoh  things  as  cannot  be  told.  It  is  therefore
fitting  that  we  should  flstll  upon  him  at  once,  and  in  such  a  way
that  our  minds  may  be  set  finaUy  at  rest  with  regard  to  him."  To
this  the  Kh4n  replied :  '^  The  duty  of  the  young  is  obedience ;  that
of  adults  is  favour  [tfuiya/]. If  the  young  neglect  their  duty,  it

is  incumbent  upon  their  elders  to  correct  them ^ At  this

time,  the  elder  brother  is  in  the  place  of  the  father.  To  him  repa-
ration can  be  made  for  disobedience  to  the  father."  He  then  sent
several  ambassadors  [to  speak  as  follows] :  **  What  I  have  suffered
from  my  elder  brother  (that  is  to  8ay,  Mansur  Eh4n)  was  all  on
account  of  my  own  shortcomings.  Even  if  this  were  not  the  case,
the  elder  brother  is  the  father's  successor,  and  although  he  has
treated  his  younger  brother  with  the  reverse  of  kindness,  how
should  this  younger  brother  venture  (in  his  position  of  son)  to
overstep  the  prescribed  limits?  [Verse]  ....  Forgiveness  for
past  offences  is  now  humbly  solicited.  May  they  all  be  swept  from
the  recesses  of  your  blessed  memory.  I  would,  moreover,  crave
for  permission  to  kiss  the  carpet  at  your  noble  feet.  From  our
[meeting]  many  advantages  will  result.  One  of  them  being  that
you  will  wash  away,  with  the  water  of  good*will,  the  stains  of  my
offences.  Another  that  (thanks  be  to  God)  from  this  victory  our
friends  will  derive  strength  and  elation,  while  our  enemies  [will
foresee]  disaster  and  despair.  If  we  meet  in  harmony,  our  troubles
will  be  at  an  end,  and  the  backs  of  all  evil-wishers  will  be  broken."
Many  other  advantages  were  mentionedi  which  it  is  needless  to
repeat. [Verse]  ....

When  Mansur  Eh4n  saw  all  these  ambassadors  arrive,  one  after
the  other,  bearing  costly  gifts,  his  soul,  which  had  risen  to  his  lips,^
was  refreshed  with  unboimded  joy.  After  much  passing  backwards
and  forwards  of  envoys,  and  the  discussion  of  preliminaries,  an
interview  was  arranged.

1  Three  linef  of  rhetoric,  on  the  disohedienoe  of  children,  are  omitted  here.— R.
*  Or :  '*  waa  ahont  to  take  flight";  ».&,  from  fear.— B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

336  Transactions  of  Mansur  Khdn.

CHAPTEB  LIV.

TRANSACnOKS  OF  MAHSUR  KHAK.

The  context  here  demands  some  further  details  of  the  life  of
Mansur  Khan.  He  was  the  oldest  son  of  Snlt4n  Ahmad  Eh4n,
son  of  Yunos  Eh4n.  The  experiences  of  Snlt4n  Ahmad  Khan's
elder  brother,  Snltan  Mahmnd  Khan  (which  have  been  touched
upon  in  their  proper  place  in  this  book,  and  will  be  mentioned,  in
detail  in  the  First  Part,  are  briefly  as  follows.

[Sult&n  Ahmad  Khan]  dismissed  the  old  Amirs  of  Tunus  Khan,
and  set  up  in  their  places  some  mean  persons  [ar<£ztl]  whose  flattery
suited  the  Khan's  nature.  To  these  men  he  gave  up  the  manage-
ment of  all  important  a£fairs  of  State,  and  they,  with  their  narrow-
minded  views  and  want  of  judgment,  so  worked  upon  the  Kh4n,
that  he  estranged  his  old  friends — that  is  to  say,  the  Uzbeg  Kaz&k
and  the  kings  of  the  Chaghatai — and  made  new  ones  of  his  old
enemies,  thinking  that  they  would  be  his  true  allies ;  but  these  [in
the  end]  ruined  him.

Thus  Sh4hi  Beg  Khin,  after  he  had,  with  the  assistance  of
Sultdn  Mahmud  Kh4n^  defeated  the  Chaghatai  and  conquered
M4var4-un-Nahr,  turned  against  Sult4n  Mahmud  Kh&n  and  took
Tdshkand  [from  him].  [Verses]  ....  When  Sult4n  Ahmad  Khan
heard  of  the  helpless  condition  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Kh4n,  brotherly
love  began  to  glow  in  his  heart.  Seizing  the  skirt  of  fraternal
affection  with  the  hand  of  resolution,  he,  in  the  course  of  the  year
907,  set  out  towards  Tdsbkand  to  the  relief  of  his  brother,  leaving,
in  his  own  plaoe,  his  eldest  son  Mansur  Kh4n,  with  absolute
authority  and  power  over  the  whole  of  Chalish,  Turf&n,  B&i,  Kus,
Aksu,  and  Moghulistdn.^  The  events  that  now  followed  in  T4sh-
kand  have  been  already  rellited.  When  Ahmad  Kh4n  returned,
defeated  and  sick,  to  his  capital  Aksu,  he  was  met  in  state  by  his
son  Mansur  Kh4n.  After  entering  the  dty,  he  became  anxious
about  his  illness,  and  sent  Mansur  Kh4n  away  to  Turf4n,  where  the
latter  remained  till  his  fetther's  death,  when  he  returned  to  Aksu.
But  Sultdn  Mahmud  Kh4n,  despising  the  sovereignty  of  Aksu,  left
it  and  went  to  Moghulist4n. [Verses]  ....

Mansur  Kh4n  continued  to  dwell  in  Aksu,  and  Amir  Jab&r  Birdi
in  Uch.  This  Amir  Jab4r  Birdi  was  a  Dughlat,  and  filled  the
post  of  Uhuhegi  under  Sultdn  Ahmad  Eh&n,  by  whom  he  had
been  held  in  the  highest  honour  and  esteem.  Indeed,  he  was  a  wise

1  The  year  907  H.  fell  in  1501-2.  At  the  tune,  it  will  be  remembeied,  Abd
Bakr  was  in  poeaesnon  of  the  rest  of  the  Moghol  dominions.

Digitized  by

Google

Transactions  of  Mansur  Khdn^  337

man  and  worthy  of  the  rank  he  held ;  for  he  was  without  an  equal
as  an  administrator.  [Verses].  .  .  .  In  those  turbulent  days  he  was
of  the  greatest  value.  But  Mansur  Khan,  for  the  reason  explained
above — namely,  that  heirs  are  not  always  able  to  estimate  the
value  [of  their  inheritance] — purposed  putting  Amir  JabAr  Birdi
to  death,  saying :  "  Until  I  have  put  him  out  of  the  way,  I  shall
never  feel  safe  on  the  throne."  As  a  fact,  the  very  reverse  of  this
was  true.  When  Amir  Jab^r  Birdi  [became  aware  of  this  design],
though  he  lamented  and  bewailed  the  matter  much,  he  exerted
himself  in  every  possible  way  to  avert  the  impending  danger.  He
continued  to  carry  on  the  Khan's  business  and  offered  explanations
\9ukhwa&n  gufi\  But  it  was  of  no  avail :  be  saw  that  nothing  but
his  death  would  satisfy  the  Khdn.  He  therefore  set  about  planning
his  own  safety,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  invite  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  to
come.

Now  this  had  been  the  Mirza's  intention,  independently  of  the
invitation,  so  he  marched  at  once  and  appeared,  like  a  flash  of
lightning,  at  the  head  of  30,000  men.  Amir  Jabar  Birdi  offered
him  the  best  presents  he  could  [command],  and  himself  became  the
guide  [yazak]  of  the  army.  He  went  in  advance,  while  Mirza  Aba
Bakr  followed  after.  Mansur  Khan,  being  informed  of  these  move-
ments, took  away  as  many  men  as  he  could  muster  and  [started  for
Turfdn],  while  the  rest,  together  with  some  of  the  Amirs,  stayed
to  defend  the  citadel  of  Aksu.  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  came  up,  and
took  the  citadel  by  storm ;  then,  forming  a  junction  of  his  troops,
with  those  of  Amir  Jabar  Birdi,  he  conducted  forays  against  Bai
and  Kusan.  All  the  inhabitants  of  those  districts  were  carried  off
to  Aksu,  so  that  the  country  became  entirely  depopulated.

Then  Amir  Jabar  Birdi  said  [to  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr]:  "It  must  be
quite  evident  to  you,  that  I  have  now  gone  to  too  great  lengths  ever
to  expect  protection  at  the  hands  of  the  Moghul  Khakdns.  For  I
have  treated  them  as  no  one  ever  treated  them  before.  I  have
scattered  to  the  winds  of  perdition  their  throne,  kingdom,  and
men :  their  wives  and  children.  My  loyalty  now  prompts  me  to  go
again,  and  utterly  devastate  B4i,  Kusan  and  Aksu  [and  to  carry  off
the  inhabitants  to  Kashghar],  while  Uch  must  be  defended  by  a
light-armed  [jarida]  force.  My  household  and  family  shall  remain
with  you.  You  must  give  me  leave  to  go  to  Chalish  and  the
mountains  around,  and  I  will  drive  all  the  inhabitants  into  your
hands,  in  order  that  I  may  make  an  end  of  the  Moghul  Khdkans,
and  have  no  longer  any  cause  to  fear  them."  Mirza  Aba  Bakr
highly  approved  of  these  plans,  and  having  allowed  Amir  Jabar
Birdi  to  depart,  carried  off  his  family,  together  with  all  the  Moghul
people.  Thus  did  Amir  Jabdr  Birdi  make  his  wives  and  family  a
sacrifice  for  his  own  life ;  for,  with  the  exception  of  two  sons,  he
sent  them  all— though  with  many  misgivings  [ihtimdvi] — to  Kash-

z

Digitized  by

Google

338  Transactions  of  Mansur  KJidn.

ghar.  He  displayed  so  much  energy  in  the  whole  matter,  that  he
won  the  entire  confidence  of  Mirza  Aba  Bakr,  who,  leaving  his
army  with  him,  then  returned.

Amir  Jabar  Birdi  drove  the  inhabitants  out  of  all  the  towns,
districts,  open  countiy,  and  uplands.  The  owls  were  left  in
possession  of  the  cities  and  villages,  while  the  plains  were  made
over  to  the  antelopes.  It  would  be  impossible  to  give  an  idea  of
the  numbers  of  the  flocks  and  herds,  and  the  quantity  of  treasure
that  he  took  in  those  countries  and  cities,  all  of  which  he  carried
back  to  Kashghar.  Mirza  Aba  Bakr  entered  Kdshghar  in  great
pomp.  Mir  Jabar  Birdi  having  conducted  countless  forays  with
Mirz4  Ab4  Bakr's  army,  at  length  left  it :  ho  himself  going  into
Moghulistdn,  while  the  army  returned  to  Edshghar,  driving  the
flocks  before  them.

Meanwhile,  Mansur  Khan  repented  of  the  designs  he  had  enter-
tained against  Amir  Jab4r  Birdi,  and  saw  that  prosperity  was
impossible  without  such  men  as  he.  So  he  sent  a  person  after
him,  with  apologies  and  entreaties  to  return.  Mansur  Eh4n  was
born  of  Mir  Jabar  Birdi's  sister.  Mir  Jabar  Birdi  knew  that
Mansur  Khan  was  sorry  for  what  he  had  done ;  he  therefore  made
an  end  of  the  quarrel  [az  niza  harkhdsia],  for  he  saw  that  if  he
did  not  go  quickly,  the  efifect  of  separation  would  be  the  entire
destruction  of  Mansur  Khan.  So  having  accepted  apologies  and
strengthened  matters  by  concluding  a  covenant,  he  set  forth  [to
visit  Mansur  Kh4n].

There  is  a  story  current  at  the  present  time,  which  is  very
appropriate,  and  which  I  give  here.  Talkhak  died  in  Tirmiz.
Before  dying,  he  expressed  a  wish  that  he  might  be  buried  at  a
certain  cross-way,  that  his  tomb  might  be  high,  and  that  on  it  might
be  inscribed  in  large  letters  :  "Every  one  who  passes  by  here  and
repeats  the  Fatiha  for  my  soul,  may  he  be  cursed ;  and  if  he  do  not
repeat  it,  may  his  father  be  cursed  I  "  Those  who  were  present
laughed,  and  asked  :  "  But  how  can  one  avoid  both  these  curses  ?  "
[The  dying  man]  replied :  "  There  is  one  means  of  escape,  and
that  is  to  keep  away  from  Tirmiz."  ^  This  saying  applies  to  the
situation  of  the  Moghul  Khdkans  and  Dughl&t  nobles.  For
[they  reasoned],  if  they  imitated  Mir  Jab4r  Birdi  [in  his  behaviour
towards  Mansur  Khan],  they  would  save  their  own  lives,  but
would  be  accused  of  ingratitude  and  disloyalty ;  if,  on  the  other

1  Tirmiz  is  sometimeB  found  written  Termedh.  The  city  was,  in  tbo  earl  v
Bliddle  Ages,  a  famous  seat  of  learning  and  commeioe,  and  stood  on  the  north
bank  of  tbe  Oxns.  It  was  destroyed  during  the  campaigns  of  Cbingiz,  but  was
rebuilt  in  the  fourteentb  century,  about  two  miles  away  from  tbe  river  buik.
During  tbe  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  century,  Uie  new  town  was  visited  and
described  by  tbe  Moorish  traveller  Ibn  Batuta,  who  speaks  of  it  as  a  great  city
provided  with  fine  markets,  numerous  gardens,  and  traversed  by  streams.  It  has
now  passed  almost  out  of  existence.  (See  Defr^mery's  Jim  BaJtvta^  iii.,  pp.  56,
57,  and  Yule  in  Wood's  Oxm,  p.  Ixx.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Transactions  of  Mansur  K/idn.  339

hand  (following  the  example  of  my  nnde),  they  remained  faithful,
and  stood  round  the  tomb  of  the  late  Khan,  wailing  and  weeping,
their  heads  would  be  struck  off  then  and  there :  though  it  might  be
said  of  them  that  they  were  incapable  of  a  cowardly  action.  The
result  of  remaining  in  the  service  [of  the  Moghul  Ehdns]  will  in
the  end  only  be  to  gain  the  name  of  cowards  or  traitors.  [There-
fore, it  may  be  said,  the  only  way  to  avoid  these  two  bad  names,
is  not  to  remain  in  the  service  of  the  Moghul  Eh4nB,  nor  to  go
near  them.]

As  my  maternal  uncle  Mahmud  Khan  has  said  [couplet  in
Turki]  ....:"  No  one  ever  met  with  fidelity  from  the  world  or  its
people.  Oh,  happy  that  man  who  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
world  I ''1 [Verses.]  .  .  .

But  the  pearls  of  these  intentions  found  no  place  in  the  shell  of
the  Moghul  Kh4kan*s  ears.  .  .  .  ^  Thanks  be  to  the  Most  High
God  that  this  servant  has  at  length  found  the  means  of  avoiding
them.  It  were  also  preferable  to  abstain  from  further  words  on
this  matter.

To  return  to  the  thread  of  my  narrative.  Mansur  Kh4n,  having
given  him  every  possible  assurance  of  safety,  took  Amir  Jab4r  Birdi
back  into  his  service,  and  after  the  return  [of  the  Amir],  the  Khan's
affairs  began  again  to  improve.

From  the  year  910,  which  is  the  date  of  [the  commencement  of]
Mansur  Kh4n's  disturbed  and  turbulent  reign,  to  the  year  922,  the
date  ^  we  have  now  reached  in  our  history,  Mansur  Kh4n  lived  in
Chdlish  and  Turfdn.  During  this  period  many  important  events
occurred.  In  those  times  the  brothers  [of  the  Khan's  family]
quarrelled  among  themselves,  and  everybody  in  the  Moghul  tribes
was  rebellious.  On  this  account,  Mansur  Kh4n  dismissed  the  Arlat
— an  ancient  order  of  Amirs — and,  bringing  the  Kirghiz  into  his
power  by  stratagem,  put  many  of  them  to  death.  He  once  went  to
war  with  the  K41mdk,  and  won  a  signal  victory  over  them.

After  these  events,  his  government  began  to  assume  an  orderly
shape,  which  was  due  to  the  wisdom  and  tact  of  Mir  Jab&r  Birdi.
Towards  the  end  of  this  period,  Babajdk  Sultan  separated  himself
from  Mansur  Khan,  and  together  with  his  following,  proceeded  to
Kusan.  Mansur  Kh&n  pursued  him,  in  person,  and  besieged  him.
IJis  object,  however,  was  not  to  destroy  Bdb4j4k  Sultdn,  so  he
sought  terms  of  peace.  The  answer  he  received  was:  ''Aiman
Khw4ja  Sult&n  was  also  [your]  brother,  and  him  you  killed  like  a
stranger.  What  reliance  can  I  place  in  you,  that  I  should  make
peace?" Now  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultdn  had  devised  treasonable

>  The  Persian  ]e  not  clear  in  the  above  paaeageB.  I  have,  therefore,  followed
the  Turki— R

'  Here  are  omitted  a  pasBage  of  two  lines  containing  an  untranslatable  play
on  words,  and  some  verses. — B.

'  A.U.  910  to  922  would  be  1504  to  1516  a.d.

Z  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

340  Birth  of  Iskandar  Sultdn,

plots,  and  on  this  account  Mansur  Khan  had  ordered  Yaraka  Ataka
to  put  him  to  death,  but  [instead  of  this]  Yaraka  Ataka  had  hidden
him  in  an  underground  place,  as  has  been  already  related.  When
Babajak  Sultan  mentioned  the  affaii-  of  Aiman  Khwaja  Khan,
Yaraka  Atdka  saw  the  Khan  was  much  distressed,  and  represented :
"  I  had  the  presumption  to  disobey  the  order,  [and  did  not  put  him
to  death], "  Thereupon  Mansur  Khan  fell  to  commending  Ydr4ka
Ataka,  and  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan  was  brought  out.  After  this,
Babdjdk  surrendered,  and  peace  was  made.  Mansur  KhAn  then
returned,  while  Aiman  Khwaja  Kh4n  went  to  KAshghar,  as  has
been  mentioned  already.  Babajak  Sultan  stayed  on  in  Kusan,
where  he  is  to  this  day.

After  this  occurrence,  negotiations  for  a  peace  ensued  between
the  Khan  and  Mansur  Khan.  Mansur  Kh4n  came  forth  from
Turfdn,  Kusan,  and  Bai,  and  sent  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi  in  advance.
The  meeting,  which  shall  be  described  below,  took  place  in  the
plains  of  Arbat.^

CHAPTER  LV.

BIRTH OF ISKANDAR.

In  the  month  of  Jumada  II.  921,  new  fruit  was  added  to  the  tr^

of  the  Khdnate ^ As  the  Khan  was  the  grandson  of  Shah

Begum,  who  was  descended  from  Zulkamain,  he  was  called
Iskandar.  Learned  men  have  found  chronograms  for  this  child*s
birth.  Among  them  was  Mauland  Muhammad  Shirazi,  who  was
one  of  the  great  Ulama,  being  not  only  versed  in  all  the  sciences,
but  also  a  skilled  physician.  For  a  space  of  thirty  years  ho
rendered  praiseworthy  services  to  the  Moghul  Khdkdns,  and  was
appointed  Sadr-t-Sudur.  Some  details  of  his  life  will  be  given
below.  He  discovered  the  chronogram  :  "  Shdh-i-hJcandar  far  "  [a
king  equal  in  power  to  Iskandar].  Khwaja  Nur-ud-Din  Abdul
Yahid  Tuhuri  Kazi,  who  shall  also  be  mentioned,  found  the  date
in :  **NaJchl'i-Iram"  [the  tree  of  Iram].  Many  discovered :  •*  Lash-
hard  shikan  *'  [army  breaker].  There  were  many  more,  but  I  have
given  as  many  as  I  can  remember.

At  that  time,  the  Khan's  health  was  somewhat  affected  by  his
excessive  wine-drinking.  He,  therefore,  went  to  Moghulistan
hoping  to  restore  his  health  by  a  change  of  air. On  his  return,  he

'  Arhdt,  Arwdt,  or  Aruvdt,  is  marked  on  most  modern  maps  to  the  north-east  of
Aksu  and  west  of  Bai.  There  iwas  (and  perhaps  is  still)  a  placo  called  Arawditf
near  Ush  in  Eastern  Farghdna.

'  Five  lines  of  rhetoric  omitted.

Digitized  by

Google

Rebuilding  of  Aksu.  341

said  to  me  :  ''  To  you,  who  are  like  a  son  to  me,  I  have  given  my
dear  sister,  who  is  a  pearl  in  the  shell  of  the  Khanate.  My  hope
is  that  if  a  child  should  be  bom  to  you,  I  may  be  a  father  to
him  as  well  as  you.  Thus,  a  child  with  two  loving  fathers ;  two
fathers  with  one  happy  child.  But  since  you  have,  up  to  this  time,
no  offspring,  you  must  look  upon  thiB  son  of  mine  [Iskandar]  as  your
child,  so  that  what  I  hoped  of  you,  you  may  realise  in  me.  If
eventually  you  should  have  a  son,  he  will  be  a  brother  to  this  child ;
if  you  should  have  no  children,  you  will  have  no  need  of  another
son."  Favours  and  kind  words  such  as  these,  did  he  express  to  me
and  his  sister ;  we  accepted  them  with  gratitude,  and  feasts  were
instituted  and  presents  given.  The  life  of  Iskandar  shall  be
presently  related.

CHAPTEB  LVL

KEBUILDIN6  OF AKSU  AND  NEGOTIATIONS  OF  THE  AMBASSADORS  OF
MANSUB  KHAN  AND  THE  KHAN.

AiMAN  Ehwaja  Sultan,  having  been  sent  to  Aksu,  departed
thither,  and  in  the  spring  set  about  rebuilding  the  town,  while
ambassadors  went  backward  and  forward,  between  Mansur  Khan  and
the  Khan,  to  arrange  a  friendly  settlement.  In  the  summer  the
Khan's  health  became  much  impaired  by  excesses  in  wine-drinking,
as  was  stated  above,  and  he  was  finally  seized  with  ague  [tap
larzd],  Maul4na  Shirasd,  who  was  a  talented  man  and  a  skilled
physician,  and  who  had  spent  all  his  life  in  attendance  on  the
Khans,  pronounced  a  change  of  air  to  be  needful.  So  the  Khan
betook  himself  to  a  place  in  Moghulistan,  not  far  from  Kashghar.
But  as  he  did  not  yet  trust  the  people  of  Kdshghar,  he  left  me  in
Yarkand,  while  he  himself  went  on  his  way.  I  did  all  I  could  to
keep  order  in  the  country.  At  the  end  of  the  autumn  the  Khan
returned  from  Moghulistan,  in  good  health ;  the  pure  air  of  those
plains  having  cured  him  of  the  malady  which  indulgence  in  wine
bad  produced  in  him. He  alighted  in  Yarkand.

CHAPTEB  LVIL

DEATH  OF  HAZKAT  MAULInI  MUHAMMAD  KAZI.

In  different  parts  of  this  history,  the  life  of  Hazrat  Maulana  has
been  told,  down  to  the  point  where  he  went  to  Akhsi  and  itsdepen-

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

342  Death  of  Mauldnd  Mu/tatnmad  Kdzu

dencies.  Wherever  he  stayed  the  people  received  the  blessing  of
his  converse.  In  that  province  he  gained  many  followers  and
devotees,  all  of  whom  were  hononred  by  witnessing  some  miracle
or  wonderful  act. [Verses]  ....

When  the  Kh4n  left  Akhsi,  Hazrat  Mauldnd  remained  there.
When  Suyunjuk  Khan  came  to  that  town,  he  waited  on  Hazrat
Mauldnd  and  entreated  him  to  honour  Tdshkand  with  a  visit. He

went  to  Tdshkand, but  a  short  time  afterwards  died

[Verses  and  rhetoric]  ....  His  intimates  and  followers  discovered
the  date  of  his  death  in  "  Nakd-i-Khwdja  Uhaid  Ullah  "  [  =  922].^  He
was  between  sixty  and  seventy  years  of  age,  was  versed  in  all
sciences,  and  wrote  several  interesting  and  profitable  works.

His  tracts  are  text-books  for  the  pious.  Among  his  compositions
is  the  SaUalat  ul  Arijin,  written  in  excellent  style.  It  is  divided  into
three  parts.  The  first  of  these  treats  of  the  manners  of  Shaikhs
and  the  conditions  of  discipleship.  The  second  part  contains  the
life  of  Hazrat  Ishdn,  together  with  the  truths  and  sayings  he
uttered  in  various  assomblies,  in  the  language  of  the  country  ;  also
some  of  his  miracles  and  wonders.  The  third  part  comprises  the
sayings  and  miracles  of  various  x>^ous  men.  The  tongue  is
incapable  of  adequately  praising  this  book.  There  are  about  fifty
parts.

Besides  this  work,  ho  composed  many  pamplilets  [rasdil].  Among
them  are  answers  to  certain  questions  which,  in  the  course  of
different  meetings  [majlis],  I  had  the  presumption  to  put  to  him.
These,  together  with  some  rules  and  maxims,  he  put  into  book
form,  but  never  found  an  occasion  of  giving  it  to  me.  After  his
death,  however,  his  son  and  successor,  Mauldnd  Eutb-ud-Din
Ahmad,  sent  it  to  me,  and  I  have  copied  the  whole  of  it,  as  it  stood,
into  this  work.  I  know  well  that,  with  my  lack  of  literary
capacity,  this  rough  copy,  written  by  the  pen  of  carelessness,  with
the  help  of  ignorance,  will  have  but  small  merit  in  the  eyes  of
critics;  but  I  trust  that  the  embodiment  of  the  pamphlet  will
bring  a  blessing  on  my  work,  and  that  my  shortcomings  may  be
overlooked.  I  look  to  the  Pardoner  of  all  Sins  to  forgive  me  my
faults  and  errors  in  this  Epitome,  in  consideration  of  the  truths
contained  in  [the  Hazrat's]  pamphlet. [Verses]  .  .  .  .^

»  The  year  922  h.  began  5  Feb.  1516.

^  Ab  the  Maulana's  pamphlet  has  no  reference  whatever  to  the  hifttory  of  the
Moghuls,  or  to  any  historical  subject,  it  is  omitted.  It  is  a  purely  religions
treatise,  but  is  not,  I  believe,  what  is  usually  known  as  the  SahaUU  ul  Aiifin.
It  occupies  about  four  folios  of  the  Persian  texts.

Digitized  by

Google

Meeting  of  Mansur  and  the  Khdn.  343

CHAPTER  LVIII.

MEErriNG  OF  MiLNSUR  KHAN  AND  SULTAN  SAID  KHIn, AND  CONCLUSION
OF  PEACE  BETWEEN  THEM.

The  winter  was  passed  in  Yarkand,  in  feasting  and  merry*-making.
As  Turfan  was  a  two  months'  journey  from  Edshghar,  the
negotiations  of  the  ambassadors,  the  settlement  of  the  place  of
meeting  and  other  preliminaries  lasted  a  whole  year.  In  the
month  of  Moharram  922,  the  Khan  started  for  Aksn.  [Verses]
....  He  entered  Eashghar  in  great  pomp  and  splendour.  [On
the  road]  I  had  a  fall  from  my  horse  and  dislocated  my  right
elbow ;  it  was  a  bad  accident,  and  I  was  confined  for  some  days  in
Kashghar  before  getting  well.  As  soon  as  the  pain  began  to  abate,
the  Khan  set  out  again,  while  I  remained  a  few  days  longer  in
Kashghar.  On  my  arm  becoming  cured,  I  followed  the  Kh&n  and
came  up  with  him  at  Jai  Tuba,  whence  we  proceeded  stage  by
stage  to  Uch. [Verses]  ....

At  that  time  Aiman  Khwdja  Sultan  was  living  in  Uch,  for  Aksu
was  not  yet  habitable.  On  the  Khan's  approach,  he  came  out  to
meet  him  with  gifts  [verses]  ....  and  invited  him  to  come  and
bless  his  house  by  alighting  there.  He  entertained  the  Khan  with
regal  banquets.  [Verses]  ....  [Departing  again]  the  Khdn
passed  Aksu  and  pitched  his  royal  camp  at  a  place  called  Jam,
while  Mansur  Kh4n,  coming  from  the  opposite  direction,  reached
Arbat,  which  is  seven  farsdkhs  from  Jam.  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi  now
came  and  waited  on  the  Khdn,  and  finally  settled  [under  what
conditions  the  two  Khdns  were  to  meet].  The  two  armies  were  to
advance  and  stand  opposite  each  other  in  battle  array ;  hostages
were  then  to  be  exchanged ;  the  two  Kh&ns  were  to  come  forward,
each  attended  by  thirty  men  selected  from  his  own  army,  and
were  to  meet  between  the  two  lines  [of  troops].  As  soon  as  these
plans  had  been  agreed  upon,  I  was  sent  to  Mansur  Khan  as  a
hostage.  Assiz  Birdi  was  appointed  to  select  the  men  who  were
to  accompany  Mansur  Khdn.  I  was  received  with  much  affection
and  friendship  by  Mansur  Khan,  who  poured  down  honours  upon
my  head. [Verses]  ....

When  the  King  of  the  East  placed  his  foot  upon  the  steps  of  the
throne  of  the  firmament,  and  brought  the  whole  world  under  the
sway  of  his  brightness,  repulsing  the  powers  of  night,  Mansur
Khan  set  his  noble  foot  in  the  stirrup,  and  having  drawn  up  his
troops,  rode  forth.  On  reaching  the  trysting-place,  he  sent  for
B4baj&k  Sult4n  and  Shah  Shaikh  Muhammad,  who  were  his  full

Digitized  by

Google

344  Meeting  of  Manmr  and  the  Khdn.

brothers,  and  enjoined  them  to  exercise  caution  and  judgment.
Aziz  Birdi  Agha,  standing  at  the  head  of  the  passage  [between
the  lines],  told  off  exactly  thirty  persons.  From  the  side  of
Mansur  Khdn,  Sahib  Daulat  Begum,  sister  of  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi,  and
Mahim  Kh4nim,  sister  [^awwAtVa]  of  Mansur  Khan,  were  given  as
liostages.  The  Khan  advanced  from  the  other  side,  accompanied
also  by  thirty  persons.  At  the  meeting-place  between  the  armies,
awnings  {Baya-hanl  were  erected.  [Couplet]  ....  Mansur,
advancing  first,  went  and  seated  himself  upon  a  throne  under  the
shade  of  the  awnings.  [Couplet]  ....  Then  the  Khan  came,
and  dismounted  at  a  respectful  distance. [Couplet]  ....

When  he  had  approached  within  the  distance  assigned  by  the
Moghul  custom,  he  fell  on  his  knees  [zatm  zad\  Although  Mansur
Khan  was  the  elder  brother,  he  got  up,  advanced  towards  the
Khan,  and  embraced  him  affectionately  [couplet]  .  .  .  .;  then
taking  him  by  the  hand,  he  walked  towards  the  throne.  When
Mansur  Khan  was  seated  on  the  throne,  the  Khdn  rose  up  and
returned  to  the  place  where  he  had  first  made  his  obeisance.
[Two  couplets]  ....  He  then  offered  him  such  presents  as
became  the  dignity  of  both ;  while  Mir  Jabar  Birdi,  in  presenting
the  gifts  [jna^A;a«^]  to  Mansur,  made  an  eloquent  speech,  as  is  the
custom  of  those  who  observe  the  Tura.  Mansur  Khan  was  pleased
with  his  words,  and  accepted  all  the  gifts.  The  Khan  having
knelt  again,  stood  with  his  arms  respectfully  crossed  on  his  breast.
Mansur  Khan  then  invited  him  to  come  and  sit  at  his  side,  saying :
"  I  know  I  am  your  elder  brother,  but  why  should  you,  with  your
high  rank,  be  so  modest  before  me,  who  am  in  the  place  of  a  father
to  you  ?  "  The  Khdn,  having  once  more  made  obeisance,  expressed
his  profound  respect  for  Mansur  Khan,  and  returned  to  his  seat.
Mansur  Khan  called  him  forward  again  and  repeated  what  he  had
said  before,  but  with  greater  emphasis.  He,  moreover,  took  the
Khdn  by  the  hand  and  drew  him  towards  himself,  when  the  Khan,
having  knelt  again,  took  a  seat  beside  him. [Couplet] ....

Mansur  Khan  began  by  asking:  "How  did  you  fare  in  those
disturbed  times?"  To  which  the  Khdn,  with  every  token  of
respect,  replied:  "Misfortunes  that  end  in  success — separations
that  terminate  in  union — are  not  remembered.  The  sweetness
of  the  end  causes  the  bitterness  of  the  beginning  to  be  forgotten.
[Two  couplets]  ....  Thanks  be  to  God,  that  in  one  moment
reparation  can  be  made  for  what  has  happened  during  long  years."
They  went  on,  then,  to  discuss  policy,  military  tactics,  and  justice ;
they  also  swore  a  solemn  oath  to  remain  at  peace,  and  to  strengthen
the  bonds  of  friendship.  By  the  time  they  had  finished  all  their
business,  the  day  was  also  ended.  Mansur  Khan  next  gave  the
Khan  rich  presents  in  the  shape  of  horses  and  silver,  brocades
and  embroidered  robes. At  the  hour  of  bidding  farewell,  they

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Return  of  the  Khdn,  345

embraced  once  more)  and  exchanged  the  clothes  they  were  wearing
and  the  horsoB  they  were  riding.  They  finally  separated  in  the
most  friendly  manner,  and  each  went  back  to  his  own  army.

When  Mansur  Khdn  returned  to  his  owix  ranks,  he  called  for
me  and  explained  all  the  particulars  of  the  interview,  as  I  have
given  them  above.  Thus  conversing,  he  accompanied  me  from  his
troops  to  the  camp.  He  said :  **  The  thirst  of  longing  and  the
hunger  of  absence  cannot  be  satisfied  with  this  small  quantity  of
the  wine  of  union."  [Verses]  ....  He  continued  to  speak  in
such  terms  until  we  arrived  at  the  camp,  which  we  did  at  about
the  middle  of  the  first  watch  of  the  night.  At  sunrise  Mansur
Ehdn  sent  for  me,  and  loaded  me  with  favours  and  distinctions
becoming  his  own  greatness.  He  then  permitted  me  to  return,
and  having  travelled  all  night,  I  reached  the  Khan  [on  the
following  day].  The  Khan  told  me  what  Mansur  EJi4n  had  said,
and  showed  marks  of  regret  at  separation  from  him.  The  result
of  this  peace  was  that  soldiers  and  civilians — ^in  fact,  every  indivi-
dual— enjoyed  full  repose  and  freedom*  from  anxiety,  and  testified
their  tbankfulness  to  the  two  Khans.

Ingenious  scholars  devised  many  chronograms  to  commemorate
this  happy  event.  Among  others,  the  date  was  found  to  be  con-
tained in  "Dtt  lasKkar  ha  niahdt*^ — Two  armies  in  gladness—
922  [1516].

CHAPTER  LIX.

THE  khan's  return  AFTER  THE  PEACE — SUBSEQUENT  EVENTS  AND  VISIT

OF  bAbAjak  sultIn.

[After  the  conclusion  of  this  affair]  the  Kh&n  made  for  Ydrkand.
At  Sungtash,  which  is  three  days'  journey  from  Uch,  on  the  road
to  Kashghar,  he  separated  from  his  army,  and  riding  long  stages
[ilghdr],  arrived  at  Yarkand  in  six  days.  Here  new  displays  of
festivity  and  rejoicing  were  commenced  [verses]  .  .  .  .  ;  and
every  one,  according  to  his  means,  made  merry  and  rejoiced.

At  the  season  of  the  Khan's  return  to  Yarkand,  the  King  of  Kings
of  the  Firmament  had  placed  the  fourth  throne  of  his  sovereignty
in  the  palace  of  Taurus,  and  the  Prince  of  the  Flowers  had  pitched
his  tent  on  the  plains.  [Verses]  ....  From  the  time  of  his
accession  to  that  day,  a  period  of  about  two  years,  the  Khan  had
lived  in  the  citadel  of  Ydrkand,  both  summer  and  winter.  But
this  year,  feeling  his  mind  relieved  of  all  its  anxieties,  when  the
season  of  flowers  and  foliage  came  round  [verses] ....  he

Digitized  by

Google

346  Return  of  t/ie  Khdn

changed  his  quarters  from  the  town  to  the  palace  of  Gul  Bagh,
[which  had  been]  a  &Yourite  residence  of  Mirzd  Ab4  Bakr.  When
the  temperate  days  of  spring  changed  to  the  oppressive  heat  of
summer,  the  only  waj  to  keep  in  health  was  to  sit  nnder  the
shade  of  the  trees.  On  this  account  the  Kh4n  retired  to  Gul  Bagh,
and  there  enjoyed  the  protection  afforded  by  the  shade  of  his
garden.  Meanwhile  the  army  and  the  populace  were  dwelling  in
peace,  and  the  nobles  and  pillars  of  the  State  lived  in  the  lap  of
luxury  and  magnificence.  Every  brain  had  its  scheme,  and  every
scheme  had  a  brain  [to  work  it].

All  the  Amirs  came  to  the  palace  of  the  Khan  to  sit  in  council ;
they  made  the  following  representation  to  him :  [Most  noble
Kh4n]  to-day,  by  the  favour  of  God's  assistance,  the  arm  of  our
State  is  strong  enough  to  lay  low  its  enemies,  and  annihilate  its
opponents  at  one  blow.  If  you  do  not  take  vengeance  on  your
enemies  now,  when  will  you  be  able  to  do  so?  If  you  do  not
destroy  them  now,  when  will  you  have  the  power  to  destroy  them  ?
[Verses]  ....  •

Thus  were  the  Khan's  old  projects  revived,  and  he  issued  a
mandate  [^dr%A]  for  the  mustering  of  troops  and  preparation  for
an  expedition.  At  the  close  of  summer  [922]  he  marched  for
Andijdn,  to  make  war  on  Suyunjuk  Kh&n.  He  gathered  all  his
army  together  in  K&shghar,  and  set  out  from  there.  On  reaching
Tuyun  Bashi,  he  resolved  upon  a  hunt,  and  issued  stringent  orders
for  the  preparations.  On  the  second  day  [the  beaters]  formed  a
ring.  [Three  couplets]  ....  When  the  hunt  was  at  an  end,
they  left  that  place  and  proceeded  to  encamp  on  the  south  side  of
Chadir  Kul.  There  they  learnt  the  approach  of  Bab4jdk  Sultan.
His  reason  for  coming  was,  that  on  the  occasion  of  Mansur  Khan's
interview  with  the  Khan,  Babajak  Sultdn,  being  in  the  service
of  the  former  (whose  full  brother  he  was)  could  not  go  and  wait
on  the  Khan.  But  when  autumn  came  round,  he  asked  permission
from  Mansur  Khan  to  do  so,  saying,  that  if  he  did  not  wait  on  his
brother,  he  would  be  considered  guilty  of  disrespect.  Mansur
Khan  had  given  him  leave,  and  he,  having  set  off  from  his  home
of  Bai  and  Kusan,  was  now  arriving.

When  he  reached  Kashghar,  he  learnt  that  the  Khan  had  [just]
left  on  his  way  to  fight  Suyunjuk  Khdn  and  to  invade  Andijan.  He
immediately  moved  on  after  him,  and  overtook  him  at  Chadir  Kul.
The  Khan,  in  his  brotherly  affection,  was  quite  overcome  with
emotion,  and  though  Babaj4k  was  his  junior  in  years,  went  out
to  receive  him.  He  embraced  him  warmly,  and  bestowed  upon
him  brotherly  attentions  and  fatherly  kindness.  [Couplet]  ....
[The  Kh4n  said] :  "  I  was  then  bent  on  avenging  myself  on  my
foes  :  to  have  summoned  my  brother  at  that  juncture  would  have
been  open  to  misinterpretation. Thank  God  that  we  have  both

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

and  Visit  from  Bdbdjdk  Sultdn,  347

obtained  the  f alfilment  of  our  wishes.  The  arrival  of  my  brother
is  as  the  commencement  of  conquest  and  victory."  So  saying,  the
two  brothers  (Conquest  and  Victory,  as  it  were)  rode  off  side  by
side  towards  Andij4n.

On  reaching  Arpa  Y&zi,  they  hunted  the  wild  ass,^  the  deer
[i^avazan]  and  other  animals.  So  much  game  did  they  kill,  that
the  beasts  of  the  plains  and  the  fowls  of  the  air  were  able  to
feast  upon  the  flesh,  without  fighting  for  it  among  themselves.
[Couplet]  ....  The  KhAn,  from  his  ambush,  brought  down
some  quarry  with  every  arrow  he  shot.  When  the  hunt  was  over,
a  sumptuous  banquet  was  prepared,  in  a  delicious  spot  where  the
air  was  fresh  as  in  the  garden  of  Iram,  and  where  [the  heavens]
seemed  filled  with  birds  from  Paradise.  Bdbdjak  Sultan  and
Aiman  Khwdja  Sultan  were  in  attendance  on  their  brother  the
Khan,  surrounded  by  a  distinguished  assembly.  [Two  couplets]  . . .
When  the  feast  was  over,  Babajak  Sultdn  represented  apolo-
getically to  my  uncle :  "  At  the  beginning  of  the  spring  I  was
guilty  of  a  neglect  of  courtesy ;  I  had  longed  for  years  to  have  the
happiness  of  waiting  upon  you,  but  my  aspiration  could  not  then
be  reaJised.  After  that  opportunity  had  elapsed,  I  saw  that  it
would  be  respectful  on  my  part,  to  come  to  your  court  at  Yarkand
and  sprinkle  my  eyes  with  the  dust  of  your  palace.  On  reaching
Kashghar,  I  heard  of  your  expedition  [against  Andijan],  where-
upon I  set  out  in  all  haste  after  you,  not  waiting  to  collect  an
army  or  make  ready  the  necessaries  for  an  expedition.  Thus  did
I  come,  [thinking]  this  time  the  preparations  have  been  delayed ;
but  next  time  [that  I  go  against  Andijan]  my  arrangements  shall
be  perfect,  and  I  will  bring  into  my  service  all  the  Sultans  and
.  soldiers,  with  their  arms,  that  are  to  be  found  in  my  country.  I
will  collect  such  a  mighty  host  that  it  will  be  evident  to  friend
and  foe  alike,  that  the  Khdn  has,  in  his  train,  subjects  who  can  rival
the  kings  of  the  earth.  [If  this  proposition  is  acceptable  to  you,
well  and  good] ;  if  not,  it  will  do  me  no  harm  to  change  my  plans.
I  am  ready  to  devote  myself,  body  and  soul,  to  the  Kh4n."

In  reply  to  these  words  the  Khan  said :  "  For  many  years  I
have  longed  to  see  this  dear  brother.  The  most  fitting  form  of
thanksgiving  is  that  we  should  return  now,  and  spend  a  few  days
together.  We  will  devote  ourselves,  until  next  spring,  to  prepara-
tions such  as  those  described  by  our  dear  brother ;  we  will  then
go  forward.  At  the  present  time  the  occasion  is  not  suitable  ;  the
season  is  too  far  advanced. While  the  enemy  remains  where  he  is,

>  The  Persian  texts  have  Khar-qura  as  the  name  of  this  animal,  and  the  Turki
text  the  ordinary  one  of  KvXdn,  It  is  the  Aainus  hemionus — the  Jtgatai  of  the
Mongols  and  the  Kiang  of  the  Tibetans.  The  wild  ass  of  Western  India,  though
a  somewhat  different  animal,  is  known  by  almost  the  same  name  as  that  used
here  by  Mirza  Haidar—yiz.,  Qhor  Khar.

Digitized  by

Google

348  The  Sdrigh  Uighur  Expedition.

we  can  advance  whenever  we  choose.  [Even  though  we  do  not
go  to  Andijan  at  all,  nothing  will  be  lost."]  So  they  turned  back
from  Arpa  Yazi,  and  travelled  by  a  direct  route  towards  Kiishghar.
Babajak  Sultdn  accompanied  the  Khan  to  Yarkand,  and  thero
they  gave  themselves  over  to  feasting.  The  Khan  bestowed
countless  presents  and  inestimable  favours  upon  him ;  while  each
of  the  Amirs  offered  presents  according  to  his  rank  and  means.
[Verses]  ....  When  these  hospitable  entertainments  had  been
concluded,  Babajak  Sultan,  having  obtained  leave  to  return  to
his  own  country,  rode  away  in  that  direction.  Those  events
happened  in  the  autumn  of  the  aforesaid  year  [922  =  1516].

CHAPTER  LX.

THE  khan's  holt  WAR  AGAINST  SARIGH  UIQHUB  AND  THE  REASON  FOU
HIS  TURNING  BACK,

9

The  winter  was  passed  in  the  festivities  and  enjoyments,  above
described  .  ,  ,  }  The  Khan's  mind  had  always  been  occupied
with  plans  for  making  a  holy  war  \rihamt\  and  after  much
thought  he  finally  decided  [whom  he  should  attack].  Between
Khotan  and  Khitai  there  v^as  a  race  of  infidels  called  Sarigh
Uighur,  and  upon  these  people  he  proceeded  to  make  a  holy  war.
It  is  a  twelve  days'  journey  from  Ydrkand  to  Khotan,  and  most  of
the  stages  are  without  cultivation  or  inhabitants.  When  the
Khan  reached  Khotan,  a  change  in  his  health  became  evident.
The  holy  war  is  one  of  the  supports  of  Islam  and  a  plenary
duty.  The  Khan  desired  to  discharge  this  obligation  towards  the
faith;  but  now  that  his  health  failed  him,  he  was  obliged  to
appoint  certain  Amirs  to  perform  the  duty  for  him,  and  having
thus  relieved  himself  of  this  necessity,  he  returned  [to  Yarkand],
On  the  homeward  journey,  cups  of  wine  were  brought  every
morning,  and  drinking  went  on  all  through  the  day,  so  that  [the
Khan  and  his  companions]  were  generally  unable  to  distinguish
the  light  from  the  darkness.  At  the  end  of  a  few  days  they
reached  Yarkand.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year,  the  expedition
against  the  Kirghiz  took  place.

Those  Amirs  who  had  been  sent  against  the  Sdrigh  Uighur,  after
spending  two  months  in  the  plains  between  Khotan  and  Khitai,

>  Here  are  omitted  ten  lines  of  florid  description,  regarding  the  effects  of  spring
upon  nature.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

The  Kirghia  Campaign.  349

returned  in  safety,  laden  with  plunder,  but  without  having  seen
or  heard  anything  of  the  infidels.^

CHAPTER  LXI.

THE  KIRamZ  CAMPAIGN  AND  THE  CAPTURE  OF  MUHAMMAD  KIRGHIZ*

Ik  the  acoount  of  the  conquest  of  Kashghar,  it  was  mentioned  that
Muhammad  Kirghiz  had  come  from  Moghulisttin  and,  in  those
days  of  strife  and  turmoil,  had  rendered  good  service.  After  the
conquest  he  became  possessed  of  much  spoil  and  booty.  Moreover,
on  his  departure,  the  Ehdn  had  loaded  him  with  valuable  presents,
such  as  sword-belts,  vases,  and  drinking-cups  of  gold  and  silver.
[Verses]  ....  On  his  return  to  Moghulistan  all  the  Kirghiz  had
submitted  to  him.  He  conducted  plundering  parties  into  Turkis-
tan,  Tashkand,  and  Sairam,  and  created  much  alarm.  The  Shaibani
Sultans  in  those  districts  found  great  difficulty  in  repulsing  him.

On  one  occasion  he  made  on  inroad  on  Turkistan,  and  had  started
to  return.  At  that  time  Abdullah  Sultan,  the  son  of  Kuchum
Khan,  was  not  yet  Khan,*  but  he  was  Governor  of  Turkistan. He

*  The  country  of  the  Sdrigh  Uighur,  or  Yellow  Uighnrs  (as  we  have  seen  in  the
note  at  p.  9),  is  probably  to  be  sought  for  to  the  eastward  6f  Gharchdn,  or
perhaps  nearly  sonth  of  lAke  Lob ;  though  to  judge  from  the  indication  of  its
position,  derived  by  Dr.  Bretschnelder  from  the  Ming  Shi,  it  would  seem  to  have
lain  somewhat  farther  eastward,  or  to  the  north  of  the  Zaidam  valley.  It
appears  from  Mirza  Haidar's  statement  that  the  expedition  occupied  two  months,
as  if  the  country  of  the  Sdrigh  Uighurs  might  reasonably  be  looked  for  about  ono
month's  journey  east  of  Ebotan.  The  Sdrigh  Uighur  are  spoken  of,  not  only  in
the  Ming  annals,  but  in  those  of  the  Yuans,  as  Sa-li  Wei-vm-erh ;  whUe  it  is
possible  that  the  district  of  An-ting,  mentioned  by  the  Minp:  writers,  may  also  be
meant  for  the  Sdrigh  Uighur  country.  Piano  Garpini  (the  Franciscan  monk  who
visited  the  court  of  Mangu  Kaan,  as  the  envoy  of  Pope  Innocent  IV.  in  1245-47)
also  mentions  a  nation  of  Sari  Huiur,  among  those  conquered  by  Chingiz.  Again,
Abel  B^musat  tells  of  an  envoy  sent  from  Khotan  to  the  Chinese  court  in  1081,
who  reported  that  between  Khotan  and  the  Tangut  country  (this  last  would
include  probably  the  Zaidam  valley)  he  had  to  cross  the  great  desert  of  the
'*  yellow-headed  iZbci-/i«  "  (Hoei-he  Ji  tcte  jaune).  B^musat  raises  the  question
whether  this  denomination  refers  to  the  colour  of  the  head-dress  worn  by  these
people,  like  in  the  oases  of  the  Kard  Kalp^  the  Klzil-bdsh,  and  others,  or  whether
it  points  to  the  existence  of  a  Turkish  tribe  with  light  hair.  Judging  from  the
numerous  instances,  in  Central  Asia,  of  tribes  or  peoples  being  named  by  their
neighbours  after  the  colour  of  their  head-dress,  it  would  seem  likely  that  some
yeUow  cap,  or  turban,  that  they  may  have  worn,  would  be  sufficient  to  account
for  the  name.  It  would  also  seem  quite  likely,  from  the  situation  of  their  terri-
tory, that  the  Sdrigh  Uighur  were  a  remnant  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  old  Uighur
states  which  lay  south  of  the  Tian  Shan,  and  which  have  been  mentioned  in
Sees.  IV.  and  V.  of  the  Introduction  to  this  volume.  Like  the  Aryan  communities
in  Shighndn,  Wakhdn,  etc.,  some  sections  of  the  Uighurs,  from  dwelling  in  remote
mountain  tracts,  may  have  preserved  their  national  characteristics  and  name,  till
a  later  date  than  the  mass  of  the  population  from  which  they  sprang.  (Bret-
Schneider,  i.,  p.  263 ;  Bemusat,  Hist.  Ae  la  Ville  de  Khotan,  p.  95.)

'  He  became  Khan  in  1540,  but  reigned  only  six  months  (Howorth,  ii.,  p.  723.)

Digitized  by

Google

350  The  Kirghiz  Campaign,

immediately  set  off  in  pursuit  of  Muhammad  Kirghiz,  and  overtook
him  when  he  was  at  some  distance  from  the  town.  Muhammad
Kirghiz  turned  upon  him,  and  they  closed  in  battle.  After  a
[short]  engagement  the  day  was  decided  in  favour  of  the  Kirghiz.
Most  of  their  enemies  they  killed,  but  Abdullah  Sultan  was
captured,  kept  by  Muhammad  Kirghiz  for  one  day,  and  then
sent  back  to  Turkistan  with  the  rest  of  the  survivors.  [Muham-
mad Kirghiz]  sent  their  Khdn  a  few  horses,  arms,  and  other
suitable  gifts,  with  the  following  excuse :  "  I  made  a  vow  that  if
any  of  the  Shaibani  Sultdns  should  fall  into  my  hands,  I  would
release  them.  I  have  been  true  to  my  word,  and  trust  that  I  am
forgiven."  When  the  Khdn  heard  this  he  was  enraged,  and  in
the  autumn  of  the  year  923  marched  upon  Moghulistdn  with  an
army,  to  punish  Muhammad  Kirghiz. [Verses]  ....

He  assembled  his  forces  in  Kashghar.  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur
was  appointed  *'  Yazak "  of  that  army.  In  the  Turki  language
they  called  a  Kar&mtl  [picquet  or  guard]  *'  Yazak.*'  On  reaching
Kafir  Y4ri  [they  were  joined  by]  Aiman  Khw&ja  Sultdn,  who  had
come  from  Aksu  by  way  of  Sarigh-at-Akhuri.  In  the  night  it  was
decided  that  the  Kh4n  should  proceed  by  way  of  Bdris  K4un,  and
Aim4n  Khwaja  Sult4n  by  way  of  Jauku.^

On  the  next  day,  Aiman  Khw&ja  Sultan  marched  off  on  the  Jauku
road,  while  the  Kh4n  proceeded  in  the  direction  of  Baris  Kdim.
As  they  were  descending  from  the  pass  of  B^ris  Kdun,  Khwdja
Ali  sent  two  men  of  the  Kirghiz,  whom  he  had  captured,  with
news  that  [Muhammad  Kirghiz]  and  his  followers  were  lying  on
the  shores  of  Issigh  Kul,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Bdris  K4un  [stream],
ignorant  [of  the  approach  of  the  enemy].  Now  Issigh  Kul  is  a
month's  march  from  K4shghar.  That  day  they  hastened  their
march  and  reached  the  mouth  [of  the  pass],  which  is  known  as
Hujra,  at  the  hour  of  afternoon  prayers.  The  Kh4n,  attended  by
a  few  of  his  chief  officers,  went  [to  reconnoitre]  and  from  a  distance
espied  the  tents  and  pasture-grounds  of  the  enemy.  After  the
sun's  disc  had  sunk  into  darkness — ^when  Jonas  had  entered  the
fish's  mouth — the  commanders  gave  orders  that  of  every  ten  men,
four  were  to  be  fully  armed  in  the  centre  of  the  force,  and  six
were  to  be  equipped  for  rapid  movements  [chdphun] ;  also  that
every  man  was  to  make  ready  his  arms  and  be  prepared  for  an
assault.  By  midnight  all  were  assembled  and  in  order.  When
the  sun  rose  .  .  .  .^  the  army  was  drawn  up  in  battle  array  on  the
level  ground. All  stood  perfectly  still,  and  the  verse  of  "  the  deaf

1  Evidently  tho  passes  of  Barskun  and  Zauka  (as  shown  on  our  maps)  which
lead  aoroes  the  range  bounding  the  Issigh-Kul  valley  on  the  south.  Kdfir-Ydri
must  have  heen  near  the  sonthem  end  of  these  passes,  and  Sdrigh-At  some
distance  to  the  south-east. (See  Eostenko's  TurHstori,  vol  ii.,  pp.  66-7.)

^  The  usual  metaphor  on  sunrise  is  omitted  in  this  passage,  ana  will  hereafter
usually  be  omitted  or  abridged.

Digitized  by

Google

Arrival  of  DaidcU  Sultan  K/idnim.  351

and  the  dumb  '*  was  recitod.  After  a  short  interval,  when  it  was
seen  that  the'  whole  army  was  in  perfect  readiness  and  order,  there
came  a  sndden  blast  frotii  the  trumpets  and  horns,  mingled  with
the  sounding  of  drums  and  cymbals  and  snorting  of  horses.  That
portion  of  the  army  which  had  been  told  off  for  the  attack,  suddenly
let  loose  the  reins  of  patience  [verses]  ....  and  rushed  down.
The  whole  of  the  attacking  [ckdj^lcuncki]  party  advanced,  while
the  centre,  as  pre-arranged,  remained  in  one  body  and  supported
the  assaulters.  When  the  sun  had  fully  risen,  Taka,  the  brother
of  Khwdja  Ali,  who  had  distinguished  himself  by  former  services
(which  have  been  mentioned  above),  brought  Muhammad  Kirghiz
bound  before  the  Kh4'D.  The  Kh4n  said  to  him  :  *'  Although,  by
the  laws  of  the  Tura,  you  are  guilty  of  death,  I  will  nevertheless,
out  of  benevolence,  spare  your  blood."  And  he  issued  a  mandate
for  his  imprisonment,  under  the  charge  of  my  uncle.  The  soldiers
were  enriched  with  his  droves  of  horses,  his  flocks  of  sheep,  and
his  strings  of  camels ;  while  all  the  Kirghiz  whom  they  had  made
prisoners,  were  set  at  liberty.  [Verses]  ....  Having  remained
on  the  spot  a  few  days,  the  Kh4n  set  out  at  his  ease  for  the
capital,  Kdshghar,  which,  by  the  help  of  God,  he  reached  at  the
beginning  of  the  winter.

CHAPTER  LXII.

DAULAT  SULTXk  KHIkIM,  DAUGHTER  OF TUKUS  KHAn,  OOMES FROM

badaehshXn  TO  kAshohar.

I  HAVS  mentioned  above,  in  enumerating  the  offspring  of  Yunus
Khan,  that  the  youngest  of  all  was  Daulat  Sultdn  Kh4nim.  At
the  devastation  of  Tashkand,  she  fell  into  the  hands  of  Timur
Snlt&n,  son  of  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  and  remained  in  his  haram  till
Babar  Pddishah  captured  Samarkand,  when  she  joined  the  P&dishah.
With  the  departure  of  the  latter  for  K&bul,  she  separated  from  her
nephew  and  went  to  Mirzd  £^4n,  who  was  also  her  nephew,  and
remained  [with  him]  in  Badakhshdn.  Mirz4  Kh&n  treated  her  as
his  own  mother.  On  the  Khdn's  return  from  Aksu,  he  sent  for
her;  Daulat  Sult&n  Khanim  being  his  paternal  aunt.  The  mes-
sengers bore  her  gifts  from  the  Kh4n  in  the  shape  of  horses,
vessels  of  gold  and  silver  and  fine  cloths.  While  the  Kh4n  was
away  on  Ids  expedition  against  the  Kirghiz,  she  arrived  at
Ydrkand  from  Badakhshan. On  his  return  from  the  campaign  he

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

352  Marriage  of  Aiman  Khwdja,

went  to  visit  his  aunt,  and  tlins  all  her  relations — all  of  us  to  whom
the  Khanim  was  either  maternal  or  paternal  aunt — ^hacl  the  felicity
of  meeting  her.  She  remained  there  to  the  end  of  her  precious
life.  An  account  of  her  end  will  be  given  at  the  close  of  the
Ehdn's  history.

CHAPTER  LXIIL

CELEBRATION  OF  THE  MARRIAGES  OP  AIMAN KlnVAJA SULTAN  AND
SHJLn  MUHAMMAD  SULTAN.

When  Aiman  Khw4ja  Sultan  came  from  Turf4n,  ho  asked  my
uncle's  daughter  in  marriage.  My  uncle  willingly  granted  his
request,  and  from  that  time  forward  was  busy  with  preparations
for  the  event. This  winter  the  marriage  festivities  began.

Shah  Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Sultan,  son  of
Sultdn  Muhammad  Khdn,  was  still  a  child  when  his  father  and
grandfather,  together  with  many  others,  were  put  to  death  by
Sh4hi  Beg  Khan.  One  of  the  Uzbeg  Amirs,  taking  pity  on  him,
saved  him.  When  the  Emperor  went  from  Edbul  to  Kunduz,  that
Uzbeg  sent  off  Sh4h  Muhammad  Sultdn  to  Eunduz,  where  he  joined
the  Emperor,  and  remained  in  his  service  until  the  latter  returned
to  Kabul,  when  he  obtained  permission  to  join  the  Khan  in
Kdshghar.  [This  was]  one  year  after  the  conquest  of  Kdshghar.
The  Khan  treated  him  as  a  son  and  honoured  him  even  above
Baba  Sultdn,  his  brother's  son,  and  Eashid  Sultdn,  his  own  son.
While  the  festivities  in  honour  of  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan's  marriage
vTith  my  uncle's  daughter  were  proceeding,  it  occurred  to  the
Khan  to  give  in  marriage  to  Sh4h  Muhammad  Sultdn,  his  sister
Khadija  Sultan  Khanim,  whose  story  has  been  already  related.
After  Jahangir  Mirz4,  son  of  Mii-za  Aba  Bakr,  had  been  ai^sassi-
nated  by  some  unknown  hand,  this  Khadija  Sultdn  Khdnim,
having  survived  him,  had  remained,  respected  and  honoured,  in
the  Khdn's  haram.

Thus  these  two  important  marriages  were  celebrated  at  ono
time ^

When  some  time  had  been  passed  in  feasting  and  rejoicing,  an
assembly  of  all  the  nobles,  great  men  and  pillars  of  the  State,  was
convened,  who,  in  the  first  place,  fastened  the  marriage  knot  of
the  daughter  of  the  Khdn  with  Aiman  Khwdja  Sultdn,  and  after
that,  of  Khadija  Sultdn  Khdnim  (my  maternal  uncle's  daughter,

»  About  sixteen  lines  of  rhetoric,  interspersed  with  verses  descriptive  of  tlio
banquets  and  festivities,  are  left  out  here. — £.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

First  Invasion  of  Badakkskdn,  353

and  the  £han's  full  sister)  with  Sh&h  Muhammad  Sultan.  .  .  .^
At  the  same  time  I  built  myself  a  house,  and  by  way  of  compli*
ment,  some  learned  men  invented  chronograms  to  commemorate
the  date  of  the  event  [923=1517]*

CHAPTER  LXIV.

BEOINNma OF  THE! QUARRELS  BBTWEBN  THE  KHJLk AND  MIRZA KHAN.
THE  khan's  first  INVASION OF  BADAKHSHIn.

DuRiNo  the  summer^  which  followed  this  winter,  the  Khan  invaded
Badakhshan.  It  came  about  in  this  way.  In  the  story  of  Mirz4
Ab4  Bakr,  it  was  stated  that  after  the  reign  of  Khusrau  Sh4h,  the
Mirza  had  subdued  several  of  the  upper  Hazdra  [districts]  of
Badakhsh&n,  such  as  Sarigh  Chupan,  Ghund,  Parvaz,  Yarkh,  Pasar
and  Shiva-i-Shighnan.'^  Before  Khusrau  Shah  was  able  to  adopt
any  plan  for  avenging  himself,  he  sustained  a  defeat  at  the  hands
of  Sh4hi  Beg  Khan.  But  when  Sh&hi  Beg  Khan  established  him-
self in  the  kingdom  of  Khusrau  Shah,  the  Mir  of  the  Hazdra
refused  to  yield  to  him,  and  after  a  few  engagements,  the  Uzbeg
were  repulsed.  In  those  days,  all  the  upper  defiles  [tang-i-Mla]  of
Badakhshdn  were  held  by  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr.

After  Mirzd  Kh4n  had  established  his  power  in  Badakhshan,  he
was  still  trammelled  [darmdnda]  by  the  hostility  of  the  Uzbeg.
Nor  was  he  able  to  restrain  the  usurpations  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr.
[The  country  extending]  from  the  upper  defiles  [tang-i'hdld'\  as
far  as  S&righ  Chup&n,  had  fallen  under  the  jurisdiction  of  K&sh-
ghar.  "When  your  enemies  are  occupied  with  each  other,  sit
down  at  your  ease  with  your  friends ;  "  this  saying  applies  to  the

*  Three  lines  of  rhetoric  omitted. — ^B.

'  This  is  given  in  a  yerse  of  four  lines  containing  the  words : — ha  dauUU  Mirza
Haidar  =  923.— B.
^  Viz.,  the  summer  of  924,  or  1518  a.p.

*  All  these  names  are  easily  recognised  except  Parvdz.  At  first  sight  it  would
appear  to  stand  for  DanedZy  and  X  belieye  that  to  be  the  place  intended,  although
the  initial  letter  cannot  be  read  as  a  i?  in  any  of  the  MSS.  The  Turki  MS.,
which  is  usually  the  most  perfect  and  trustworthy  on  the  subject  of  names,
specially  points  the  letter  in  order  to  make  it  a  P.  Nevertheless  I  suspect  that
it  is  only  a  misrendering  of  a  little  known  name.  The  other  places  named,  all
point  to  the  direction  of  Darwdz,  and  there  is  every  probalnlity  that,  up  till  quite
recent  times,  it  was  regarded  as  a  Hazara  (or  hill  district)  of  Badakhsh&n,
equally  with  the  various  divisions  of  Wdkhkn,  Shighn^n,  etc.  Ghund  and
Shiwa  are  marked  on  all  maps ;  Pasdr  is  the  upper  division  of  Boehdn,  in  which
stands  the  village  of  T^Uh-Kurgh^n,  or  Sondb  on  the  Bartang ;  while  Ydrkh,
or  Y&rokh,  is  a  small  village  and  district  at  the  lower  end  of  Boshdn,  near  the
border  of  Darw^.  Paryduy  near  Jarm  in  Badakhahdn,  might  possibly  be  a
reading  of  Parvdz,  but  it  does  not  lie  in  the  dij^ction  towards  which  the  author
is  obyioualy  pointing.

2  A

Digitized  by

Google

354  First  Invasion  of  Badakhshdn.

Btato  of  a&irs  [at  that  time].  During  twelve  yearfi,  the  districts
above  the  upper  gorges  were  outside  of  Badakhsh&n,  and  formed  a
part  of  Eashghar.  The  Ehan,  therefore,  after  his  conquest  of
Edshghar,  ordered  those  districts  to  be  divided  into  [administra-
tive] sections  as  if  they  formed  part  of  the  province  of  Kashghar.
Thither  he  sent  Mir  Beg  Muhammad,  whose  story  has  been  told
above,  and  during-  [his]  government,  Wakh&n  was  a  JHewdra  of
the  Hazdrajdt  of  Badakhshdn.

The  people  of  Badakhshdn  call  the  frontier  [between  Badakh-
shdn and  Wakhdn]  DardzukKdn,  The  Kdshghari  call  it  Sdrigh
Ckupdn.  The  people  of  Dardzukhdn  took  violent  possession  of  it
and  appealed  to  Mirzd  Khdn  for  protection.^  [They  said :  "  Let
us  become  the  subjects  of  Mirzd  Khan."]  So  Mirzd  Khdn  took
possession  of  the  country  without  hesitation,  his  claim  being  that
it  belonged  originally  to  Badakhshdn :  nay  more,  that  Badakhshdn
was  but  another  name  for  these  Hazdrajdt.  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  had
taken  it  by  force.  With  the  extinction  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr's
power,  the  region  should  again  fall  within  its  original  [kingdom
of  Badakhshdn].  Everything  returns  to  its  prime  origin.  [ABrzd]
Khdn  also  contended  as  follows  :  **  In  consequence  of  Minsd  Abd
Bakr's  conquests,  this  country  was  cut  o£f  from  its  ancient  attach-
ment and  was,  for  twelve  years,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Kdshghar.
The  Emperor,  with  the  help  of  his  brave  troops,  delivered  into
my  power  the  regions  usurped  by  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr.  If  you  desire
to  have  this  kingdom  it  will  be  necessary,  in  the  first  place  (on
account  of  my  relationship  to  the  Emperor),  that  I  should  send
him  a  salutation  and  beg  him  to  despatch  an  army  to  assist  me,  as
I  am  too  weak  [to  act  independently].  .  .  .  When  so  requested
he  may  answer  :  •  that  country  which  I  have  unlocked  with  the
key  of  conquest,  you  may  take  possession  of  without  fear.'  "^ After

*  The  three  last  sentences  are  obecnre,  and  read  somewhat  differently  in  the
different  texts ;  but  I  believe  the  true  sense  to  be  preserved  in  the  translation.
The  name  of  Dardziikhdn  is  new  to  me :  I  know  it  neither  locally,  nor  in  any
book  or  document,  modem  or  ancient.  It  evidently  originates  with  some  Persian
or  Ohalcha  (not  Turki)  speaking  people.  Most  probably  it  was  peculiar  to  the
locality  itself,  and  is  now  obsolete.  It  may  be  mentioned  also,  that  the  first  two
syllables  of  the  name  have  no  connection  with  the  word  dara^  meaning  a  vallev  or
gorge:  that  word  is  differently  spelled.  I  suspect  that  the  term  mtendei  is
Dardzi-i'Wahhanj  or  Dardz-Wdkhan,  and  that  it  points  to  the  long  narrow
valley  of  the  upper  Patgab,  sometimes  known  in  modem  days  as  Sarigh  Uhupdn  or
Sarhad.  The  word  tangt  for  "  a  narrow **  or  **  a  strait"  is  often  used,  and  even
balai  is  heard  occasionally  for  **  a  height "  or  **  small  table-land."  It  appears  to  me
quite  possible,  therefore,  that  in  the  colloquial  language  of  people  who  have  to  name
briefly,  and  for  practical  purposes,  the  various  features  of  a  mountainous  country,
such  a  term  as  dardzi  may  easily  have  prown  up  out  of  the  adjective  drdz,  or  long.
Parallel  instances  to  this  kind  of  adjectival  nomenclature  are  to  be  found  in
English,  in  such  terms  as  the  "  narrows  "  of  the  Hugli,  the  ''  broads  "  of  Norfolk,
the  *'  flats"  in  New  South  Wales,  etc.

*  This  speech  is  so  obscure  and  involved,  that  it  is  only  possible  to  give  a  brief
and  freely  translated  abridgment  of  it.  When  ftiUy  and  literally  translated,  it
makes  no  sense ;  and  even  in  the  few  sentences  now  standing  in  the  text,  I  am

Digitized  by

Google

First  Invasion  of  Badakhshdn,  355

informal  oommnnioations,  such  as  these,  had  passed  between
[the  two  Khans]  the  matter  was  finally  concluded  by  the  Khan
marching  against  Badakhshdn.

At  the  time  when  he  determined  upon  this,  one  of  Mirz4  Ab4
Bakr's  sons,  whom  my  uncle  had  protected  [and  cared  for]  as  a
child  of  his  own,  ran  away ;  the  report  got  abroad  that  he  had
gone  to  Suyunjuk  Eh4n  to  inform  him  of  the  Kh4n's  movements,
and  to  induce  him  [to  attack]  Eashghar.  On  this  account  I  was
left  in  Kdshghar,  where  I  busied  myself  with  the  management  of
all  that  was  important  in  the  affairs  of  that  country.  Mirz4  Ab4
Bakr*s  son  was  overtaken  on  the  road,  and  put  to  death  by  some
persons  who  had  been  sent  in  pursuit  of  him.

The  Khan  advanced  into  Badakhsh&n  and  carried  all  before
him.  Mirz4  Khan,  helpless  and  in  despair,  took  refuge  in  Kala-i-
Zafar,  and  gnawed  his  hands  with  the  teeth  of  regret,  for  having
done  what  had  been  better  left  undone.  When  the  Khan  saw  that
absolute  ruin  had  fallen  upon  [Mirz4  Khdn]  and  his  country,
he  was  moved  to  pity  and  withdrew.  Mirz4  Kh4D,  moreover,
realising  his  own  [weakness]  did  not  make  any  further  attempt
to  overstep  his  boundaries.  Down  to  the  present  day  that
country  remains'  under  Kdshghar.

Thus  was  the  dust  of  dissension  raised  between  those  two  rela-
tions on  account  of  a  few  acts  of  inhumanity.  To  the  end  of  their
lives  they  carried  on  official  intercourse,  but  their  protestations
of  friendship  were  usually  tainted  with  insincerity;  while  [the
people  of]  the  country  itself,  were  faithful  neither  to  Mirz4  Khan
at  the  beginning,  nor  to  the  £^&n  afterwards.  In  short,  the  Khan
withdrew  from  Badakhshdn  with  pomp  and  ceremony,  and  on
reaching  Ydrkand,  his  capital,  gave  himself  up  to  all  kinds  of
rejoicing  and  pleasure.

not  sure  that  tbe  author's  meaning  is  oorrectlv  conveyed.  The  broad  foots,  how-
ever, remain :  that  Snltan  Said  Khan  based  his  right  to  Sdrigh  Chnpdn  on  Mirza
Abd  Bakr^B  oonqnest  and  tennre  of  the  district  for  twelve  years,  while,  in  the
meantime,  he  had  become  the  lUirza's  successor,  and  heir  to  his  kingdom.
Mirza  Khan  contended  that  Sdrigh  Chupdn  was  an  integral  part  of  Badakh-
8h&o,  and  had  been  wrongfully  detached  by  the  superior  force  of  Abd  Bakr.
He  confessed  himself  too  weak  to  offer  armed  resistance,  but  put  forward  the
desire  of  the  inhabitants  to  live  under  his  rule.  He  also  remmded  the  Khan
that  it  was  his  cousin  Baber,  who  had  put  him  in  possession  of  Badakhshdn
(alluding  to  the  events  of  918,  or  1507)  and  threatened  to  call  him  in  again.
But  the  Khan,  feeling  himself  the  stronger,  and  knowing  perhaps,  that  Baber
was  too  much  engaged  in  India,  at  this  time,  to  take  any  active  interest  in
Badakhshdn,  out  Sx  argument  short  by  marching  on  Kila-Zfuai.

2  A  2

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

35&  Second  Visit  to  Mansur  Kkdn.

CHAPTEE  LXV.

THE khan's  second INTERVIEW WITH MANSUR  KHAN.

In  the  following  year,  Mansur  Khdn  purposed  visiting  his  beloved
paternal  aunt,  Danlat  Sultan  Ehanim,  in  order  that,  by  looking  on
her  kind  face,  bis  grief  at  the  loss  of  his  father  might  be  mitigated.^
The  Khan  having  agreed  to  this,  [Mansur  Khan]  set  out  for  Aksn
in  the  summer  of  that  year,  and  in  the  same  manner,  on  the  same
spot,  and  with  similar  formalities,  as  on  the  occasion  of  their  first
interview,  they  met,  and  the  bonds  of  affection  were  drawn  tighter.
After  this,  each  returned  to  his  own  seat  of  government.  From
this  date— 926— to  928  [1520-22]  the  Khan  and  his  people  enjoyed
perfect  repose  and  freedom  from  care,  nothing  occurring  which
would  be  worthy  of  record.

CHAPTER  LXVI.

conclusion  Of*  THE  AFFAIRS  OF  bIbAR  PADISHIH  AFTRR  HIS  BETaRK
TO  kAbUL.  death  of  his  brother  SULTJLn  nIsIR  MIRZi.
CAUSE  OF  THE  INSUBORDINATION  OF  HIS  AMIRS.

That  point  in  B4bar  P&dishdh*s  history  has  been  reached,  at  which
he  returned  from  Kundaz  to  Kabul.  He  committed  Kabul  to  the
care  of  his  brother  Sult4n  N4sir  Mirzd,  who  [however]  died  from
excessive  indulgence  in  wine  in  the  course  o(  the  year  921.
[Couplet]  ....  Ghazna  had  belonged  to  Sult4n  N&sir  Mirza,
and  after  his  death  a  dispute  arose  among  the  Amirs  of  that  town,
which  took  the  form  of  a  mutiny,  in  which  all  the  Moghuls  and
the  rest  of  the  people  in  the  Emperor's  sei-vice  joined.  As  for
example,  Mir  Shiram,  the  uncle  of  the  Emperor's  mother,  who  had
spent  all  his  life  in  the  Emperor's  service ;  his  brother,  Mir  Mazid,
Jaka,  Kul  Nazar,  and  others ;  also  of  the  Chaghatai  and  Tajik
Amirs,  Mauldnd  Bab4  Bashdghiii  and  his  brother  B&bd  Shaikh.
This  Maulana  Baba  was  one  of  the  associates  [«AartA:]  of  the
village  of  Bashaghir  in  Samarkand.  He  won  such  favour  with
the  Emperor  that,  when  the  latter  took  Mavara-un-Nahr,  he  gave
Maulan4  Baba  the  government  of  Samarkand,  Uratippa,  and
part  of  Kuhistdn. Others  [who  rebelled  were]  Mir  Ahmad,  whose

*  The  Tarki  MS.  subBtitutes  for  this  passage :  "  being  prompted  thereto  by  the
extreme  warmth  of  his  affection  for  her."— R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Tlie  Affairs  of  Bdbar  Pddislidh.  35/

story  has  been  given  above,  and  bis  brother  Eitta  Beg  (the  one
being  Governor  of  Tasbkand,  and  the  other  of  Sairam)  Maksnd
Karak,  Sultan  Enli,  Chunak,  and  others.  These  were  all  distin-
guished Amirs  and  great  chiefs.  But  Satan  took  possession  of
their  brains,  and  put  there,  in  the  place  of  sound  reason,  vain-
glory and  wickedness,  which  are  the  outcome  of  cursed  natures.

They  rose  in  rebellion,  putting  round  their  necks  the  accursed
collars  left  behind  by  Mir  Ayub.  In  short,  after  a  few  intrigues
and  skirmishes,  a  pitched  battle  was  fought  between  themselves
and  the  Emperor.  As  soon  as  the  opposing  troops  had  been  drawn
up  facing  each  other,  the  son  of  Amir  Easim  Kuchin,  named  Amir
Kambar  AH,  arrived  from  Kunduz  with  a  powerful  force,  and  the
rebels  were  defeated.  [A  proverb]  ....  Several  of  them  were
captured  [and  met  with  their  due  reward ;  others  fled  in  shame  to
Kashghar.]  Among  these  were  Mir  Shiram  and  his  brothers,  who
[on  the  occasion  of  the  Khan's  first  interview,  and  conclusion  of
peace,  with  Mansur  Eh&n]  had  gone  to  wait  on  the  Khan,  and  had
remained  for  some  time  in  his  service.  They  were  ashamed  and
dejected.  Mir Mazid,  on  account  of  insufiQcient  means  of  livelihood,
went  to  Tibet  in  hopes  of  plunder.  But  at  Ghazwa  ^  a  stone  fell
on  his  head,  and  he  was  killed.

Mir  Shiram,  likewise,  finding  it  impossible  to  stay  near  the
Khan,  returned  to  the  Emperor,  who  with  his  usual  benevolence,
received  him  kindly,  and  closing  the  eye  of  wrath  on  his  wrong-
doings, opened  the  eye  of  favour  upon  past  services.  He,  however,
soon  afterwards,  left  this  faithless  world.  The  Emperor,  having
become  firmly  established  in  Kabul,  marched  upon  Kandahar,  which
was  then  in  the  hands  of  Sh4h  Beg,  son  of  Zulnun  ^  Arghun,  as
mentioned  above.  He  besieged  it  for  five  years.  At  length,  Shah
Beg,  having  resolved  on  flight,  went  to  Sivi,  and  thence  to  Tatta,
which  be  took,  together  with  Ucha  and  Bakar,  ^  as  vdll  be
mentioned  in  the  proper  place.  The  Emperor,  having  captured-
Kandahar,  proceeded  to  Hindustan.  He  made  several  inroads,  but
retired  after  each  one.  At  last,  he  met,  in  a  pitched  battle  at
Panipat,  the  Ughan  Sultan,  Ibr&him,  *  the  son  of  Sultan  Iskandar,
who  was  king  at  that  time.* Ibrahim's  army  numbered  more

^  The  word  appears  rather  aa  Q\at%Ba  in  one  text,  but  the  others  mention  no
place-name.  I  can  find  no  name  to  answer  to  Ghazwa  in  Ladak,  or  on  the  road
to  it.

*  This  name,  here  and  elsewhere,  has  been  spelled  Zulnun  for  convenience  of
recognition  of  a  hislorical  personage ;  but  the  proper  spelling  should  bo  Zu^un
Nun^OB  in  the  original  texts.

'  This  would  mean  that  he  conquered  Sibi  and  the  whole  of  Sind  from  the
Delta  of  the  Indus  up  to  near  Multan ;  for  of  the  many  places  in  uppr  India
bearing  the  name  of  Veh,  or  Ucha,  the  one  indicated  here  is  the  ancient  town
situated  on  the  Pai^'nad,  70  miles  S.8.W.  of  Multan.  See  note  2,  p.  431).  All
^hese  names  are  easily  recognised.

*  Tiie  Alglutn  SulLni,  Ibrahim  I^i. Ughdn  shouUl  read  Aonhitu.
»  The  Iwttle  of  Pjinipat,  April  21,  152G.

Digitized  by

Google

358  Settlement  of  Moghulistdn

than  100,000  men,  but  the  Emperor  utterly  defeated  him  with
10,000  men.  He  and  his  army  became  possessed  of  so  much
treasure,  that  all  the  world,  from  there  to  Bum  and  to  Khitai,
benefited  by  it.  The  rich  brocades  of  Bum  and  the  embroidered
satins  of  Khitai,  which  are  scarce  in  those  countries,  were  found
in  ass-loads. All  this  will  be  explained  presently.

CHAPTEB  LXVII.

SETTLEMENT OP MOGHULISTAn AND THE KIRQHIZ. BEGINNING OF
RASHID  sultan's  CAREER.

In  the  year  928  [1522]  the  Khan  conceived  the  plan  of  invading
MoghuUstan,  and  subduing  the  Kirghiz.  He  was  prompted  thereto
by  several  considerations,  the  first  of  which  was  as  follows:  It
has  been  mentioned  that  in  the  year  923  he  had  made  Muhammad
Kirghiz  prisoner,  because  he,  after  having  taken  Abdullah,  son
of  Kuchum  Khan,  in  battle,  had  let  him  go  free  again,  and  had
sent  some  poor  excuses  [for  his  action]  to  the  Khan.  For  this  he
was  detained  in  prison  for  five  years,  and  the  Kirghiz,  who  [all
this  time]  were  without  a  chief,  carried  plunder  and  rapine  into
the  territories  of  Turkistan,  Sairam,  Andijan,  and  Akbsi ;  they  had
been  guilty  of  many  excesses,  carrying  oiF  into  bondage  many
Musulman  women  and  children.  Although  these  provinces  were
under  the  government  of  the  Shaiban,  and  these  people  were  bis
old  enemies,  the  Khan,  being  a  pious  and  God-fearing  man,  was
offended.  He  determined  to  avert  this  misfortune  from  the
Musulmtins,  and  thereby  to  secure  a  high  place  in  the  next  world
and  a  good  name  in  the  present  one.  Besides  this,  Khwaja  Ali
Bahddur,  whose  valiant  and  worthy  services  have  been  spoken  of
above,  had,  according  to  his  natural  instincts,  a  great  longing  for
Moghulistan.  He  always  complained  of  town  life,  and  pined  for
the  plains  of  Moghulistan,  He  had  been  appointed  AtAbeg  to
Baba  Sultan,  son  of  Khalil  Sultan  (and  a  nephew  of  the  Khan),
and  had  had  the  care  of  his  education  from  the  age  of  seven  till  ho
was  fifteen.

He  represented  to  the  Khan:  '*  By  the  grace  of  God,  the
Moghul  Vlu8 — both  man  and  beast — have  so  greatly  increased  in
numbers,  that  the  wide  grazing  grounds  of  Kashgbar  have  become
too  confined  for  them,  and  frequent  quarrels  arise  concerning
pasture.  If  you  will  issue  a  decree  [to  sancticm  my  doing  so],  I
will  take  Baba  Sultan  into  Moghulistan,  subdue  the  whole  of  that

Digitized  by

Google

and  of  the  Kirghiz,  359

country,  and  reduce  the  affairs  of  the  Kirghiz  to  order,  so  that  our
people  may  have  ample  pasture  and  quiet  minds."  The  Khan
quite  approved  of  this  proposal,  and  held  a  consultation  with  his
Amirs,  who  were  unanimous  in  their  concurrence,  with  the  excep-
tion of  my  uncle,  who  said :  '*  The  first  part  of  this  plan  is  most
reasonable,  but  it  is  not  advisable  to  send  Bab4  Sultan.  For  the
Moghuls,  being  originally  from  Moghulistan,  have  a  natural
attachment  to  that  country,  and  as  soon  as  it  is  conquered  they
will  all  wish  to  return  thither.  If  Baba  Sultan  is  there,  he  will
be  offended  should  we  forbid  [the  Moghuls  going  there];  and
should  we  not  forbid  them,  the  whole  mass  of  them  will  rush  in,
the  inevitable  result  of  which  will  be  confusion  and  discord.
Instead  of  [Baba],  let  us  send  Bashid  Sultan,  your  son ;  let  him
become  ever  so  powerful,  that  cannot  injure  you ;  and  if  it  is  seen
lit  to  hinder  the  people  from  migrating  into  Moghulistan,  he,  at
any  rate,  will  not  object.  If  they  should  do  so  [there  is  nothing
to  be  feared,  for  he  is  your  son]."

In  the  meantime,  Khwaja  Ali  Bahadur  died  from  excessive  wine-
drinking.  Thus  the  conduct  of  the  expedition  devolved  upon
Bashid  Sultdn.  Now  it  happened  that  at  this  time  my  sister  (by
the  daughter  of  Sayyid-as-Sadat  Khavand-zada  Sultan  Muhammad
Arhangi)  had  been  wedded  to  Bab4  Sultan.  Nevertheless  my
uncle  did  not  allow  this  family  tie  to  stand  in  the  way,  but  caused
Bashid  Sultan  to  be  appointed  for  the  enterprise.  Baba  Sultan
was  much  offended,  but  my  uncle  feared  nothing ;  he  persisted  in
pushing  forward  Bashid  Sultan,  and  proposed  a  plan  which  shall
be  mentioned  later.

It  is  now  necessary  to  give  some  account  of  the  country  of
Moghulistan.  No  book  contains  an  exact  description  of  its  locali-
ties :  though  incidentally,  in  some  histories,  the  names  of  a  few
towns  are  given,  and  in  the  Suvar-i-Akdlim  and  the  Taarif-i-Bulddn
may  be  found  some  notices.  For  the  most  part  these  accounts
are  inaccurate ;  but  all  that  can  be  verified  in  them,  I  will  state
here  in  abridgment.

Digitized  by

Google

360  Extracts  from  the  Jakdn-Kushdi,

CHAPTER  LXVIII.

EXTBACTS  FBOM  THE  JAhIi^-KUShAi  OF  ALA-UD-Dm  MdHAMHAD
JUVAINI.*

(I  HAVE  copied  exactly  what  the  aathor  has  written  descriptive  of
Moghulistdn).  Thus  it  is  written  in  the  Jahdn-Kushdi^  that  the
dwelling,  original  seat,  and  birthplace  of  the  Tdtar  was  a  valley
devoid  of  cultivation ;  ^  the  length  and  breadth  of  which  was  seven
or  eight  months'  journey.  It  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  country
of  Khitdi,  on  the  west  by  the  province  of  Uighur,  on  the  north
by  Kara  Kiz  and  Sdlinkai,^  and  on  the  south  by  a  side  [jdntb]  of
Tangut.  Of  these  four  limiting  countries  [hudud],  mentioned  in
the  Jdhdn-KusMi,  Khitdi  is  definitely  known,  and  [can  be]  speci-
fied. But  what  [the  author]  calls  *  Uighur '  is  quite  unknown  at
the  present  time ;  it  is  not  understood  which  country  is  meant.^
Nor  is  anything  now  known  of  Kara  Kiz  and  Salinkai,  nor  have  any
places  been  discovered  with  such  names.  The  name  of  Tangut  is
frequently  mentioned  in  Moghul  histories.  At  the  outset  of
Chingiz  Kdhn's  conquests,  he  sent  an  army  thither.  UktAi  Kaan
also,  when  settling  his  dominions,  sent  some  persons  to  Tangut,
among  other  places ;  and  from  the  way  it  is  spoken  of  in  histories,
it  was  evidently  a  very  important  province.  At  that  time  tho
king  of  this  country  bore  the  name  of  Sbidarku.  Most  histories
state  that  his  army  numbered  800,000  men.  However,  at  the
present  time  it  is  not  even  known  where  it  was.  Thus  it  is
impossible  to  say  anything  about  those  limiting  countries  which
are  specified  in  books.*

^  The  heading  is  somewhat  misleadlDg,  for  the  chapter  is  not  an  ** extract'*
from  the  Jdhdn-Ktuhaif  hut  rather  an  account  of  the  author's  own,  based  on  that
book.

«  From  the  Koran  S.  XIV.,  v.  40.— B.

'  Kara  Kiz  would  be  Lake  Zaisan,  or  the  place  of  that  name  on  its  banks ;
Salinlcaif  the  Selenga  river  in  northern  Mongolia.

*  The  author  of  the  Jahdn  Kushai  (writing  about  1259  a.d.)  has  perhaps
better  reason  for  making  the  Uighur  countij  the  western  border  of  Moghulistan
than  Mirza  Haidar  gives  him  credit  for.  Uc  is  alluding,  no  doubt,  to  the  king-
dom of  the  Ilak  Khdns  in  Turkistan  and  to  Mavara-un-Nahr,  which  was  under
tho  rule  of  an  Uighur  dynasty  down  to  about  the  year  1213,  and  consequently
almost  to  within  the  writer's  own  lifetime. (See  note,  p.  287.)

*  It  was  towards  the  end  of  the  career  of  Chingiz,  that  Shidarku  became  king
of  Tangut ;  indeed  the  campaign  which  Chingiz  undertook  against  that  country,
at  the  close  of  the  year  1225,  was  his  last.  Tangut  was,  as  Mirza  Haidar  says,
a  powerful  kingdom  at  that  time.  It  played  a  great  part  in  Chinese  history  for
alx)ut  a  hundred  years,  and  Tangut  rulers  conquered  large  tracts  of  territory
from  the  Chinese  and  the  Uighurs.  It  may  be  said  to  have  included,  in  its  best
days,  all  the  regions  lying  between  Turfan  and  the  Chinese  province  of  Shansi,
together  with  Zaidam — the  homeland  of  tho  y)eople — and  some  portions  of  northern
Tibet. The  name  of  tho  king  here  mentioned  is  variously  written — Shidarkn

Digitized  by

Google

and  Description  of  Moghulistdn.  361

In  the  Bame  way,  some  of  the  towns  in  Moghulistan  are  men-
tioned by  name  and  described,  in  standard  works.  Among  them  is
Bald-Saknn,  which  in  the  Suvar-i-AMUm  is  reckoned  among  the
cities  of  Ehitdi,  and  called  '  Kh4n  B4ligh ' ;  while  in  Moghulistan
and  Kar4  Khitai  they  have  written  the  same  '  Bald  Sakun.'  They
have  applied  the  name  to  no  other  city.^ In  books  of  repute  and

Shidurgho,  Shidatku,  etc.— while,  aooording  to  the  Tahdkat-i-Ndairi,  he  styled
himself  the  Tingri  Khan  (or  Heavenly  King),  and  was  known  to  the  Chinese  as
Li-Hien.  The  country  also  is  found  mentioned  under  many  names  and  corrup-
tions of  names.  Tangid,  Tingitj  Koshi,  Kashir^  etc.,  are  the  most  common  among
western  Asiatic  writers ;  Stia  and  Son  among  the  Chinese.  Indeed  it  is  this
last  name,  meaning  **  west*  of  the  river ''  (i.e.  the  Yellow  River)  that  has  heen
corrupted  into  Koshi,  etc.  The  Tibetans  seem  to  have  known  it  as  Minyog.  By
Mirza  Haidar's  time  Tangnt  had  simk  to  very  small  proportions,  and  it  is  now
only  a  geographical  expression,  for  there  is  no  separate  state  bearing  the  name.

The  story  of  Bhidarku  and  Chingiz's  last  war  with  Tangut  will  be  found  in
Sir  H.  Howorth's  Northern  Frontagers  of  China  (J.  R.  A.  B.,  xv.,  (vs.)  pp.  472
seqq.\  the  Habib  ua  Siyar  (Price's  Mahd.  Hist,  ii.,  pp.  535-6),  Major  Baverty's
TdSakdt-i-Ndnri,  pp.  1084  aeqq.,  etc.

It  may  be  added  that,  according  to  Mr.  W.  Woodville  RockhiU,  Tangut  is  only
another  name  for  Tibet  in  general — the  8i  Tsang  of  the  Chinese.  "•  The  word
Tangui^^*  he  writes,  ''is  interchangeable  with  Usi-Tsang,  or  Tibet,  although
since  Col.  Prejevalsky's  travels,  it  has  come  to  be  used  by  Europeans  as  desig-
nating the  Tibetan-speaking  tribes  in  the  Kokonor  region,  known  to  Tibetans  as
Andowa  and  Panaka.*^  In  saying  this  Mr.  Rockhill  is,  I  presume,  referring  to
the  Chinese  or  Mongol  nomenclature;  as  is  the  case  also  when,  in  anotner
passage,  he  cites  a  Chinese  work  to  the  effect  that :  **  The  name  Tangutan  wati
originally  applied  to  tribes  of  Turkish  origin  living  in  the  Altai."  Although
the  name  Tangut  was  in  use  for  the  regions  about  Zaidam,  Kokonor,  etc.,  many
centuries  before  Col.  Prejevalsky's  time,  and  although  the  Tangut  tribes  can
never  have  been  Turks  (in  an  ethnical  sense),  the  application  of  the  word,  as
pointed  out  by  Mr.  Bockhill,  is  interesting  and  instructive.  (See  Mr.  Bockhill's
valuable  papers  on  Tibet  in  J.  R.  A.  S..  1891,  pp.  21, 189,  etc.)

*  It  is  quite  possible  that  this  curiously  inaccurate  statement  may,  indeed,  have
some  truth  in  it  The  work  the  author  names,  may  very  likely  call  Eh^n-b61igh
— the  Cambalu  of  Marco  Polo  and  the  Mongol  name  for  the  modem  Peking— by
the  Turki  term  Bdla  Sdghwir— or  Bdla-Sdkun,  as  Mirza  Haidar  spells  it.  It  is
known  that  Elirakorum  was,  and  even  is  to  the  present  day,  laiown  as  Bdla
Sdkun,  and  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  name  was  used,  in  a  general  way,  to
denote  a  large  town,  or  capital  of  some  influential  ruler.  Still  it  is  evident  that
Mirza  Haidar  is  not  alluding  here,  to  any  capital  in  northern  China  or  in  Mongolia,
but  to  the  seat  of  the  old  Turkish  dynasty  of  Western  Turkistan.  It  is  all  the
more  strange  that  he  should  have  allowed  himself  to  fall  into  an  apparent
confusion,  seeing  that  he  cites,  immediately  below,  an  account  of  Bdta-Sdkun  by
Rashid-ud-Din,  which  shows  that  it  was  an  altogether  se]^arate  city  from  Khan-
bdligh.  He  had,  moreover,  the  Jdhdn-Kushai  before  hmo,  where  an  exactly
simuar  description  of  Bdla-Sdkun  is  given  to  that  in  Rashid-ud-Din,  who
apparently  copied  from  the  Jdhdn-Kutihai.

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  Bdla-Sdkun  spoken  of  in  this  passage,
was  situated  on  or  near  the  head  waters  of  the  Kdragdty  branch  of  the  Biver
Chu  in  Moghulistan,  and  that  it  was,  up  to  the  first  quarter  of  the  twelfth
century,  the  capital  of  the  Dak  Khans,  or  the  so-called  Afrieiihi  Turks ;  while
later  it  became,  for  a  time,  the  chief  town  of  the  Klira-Khitai.  (See  note  1,
p.  287).

As  there  has  been  some  difference  of  opinion  respecting  the  identity  and  posi-
tion of  Bdla-Sdkun,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  explain,  in  this  place,  that  probably
the  basis  of  our  information,  regarding  the  times  when  it  flourished,  is  the  brief
account  contributed  by  Ala-ud-Din  Ata  Mulk,  Juvaini,  in  the  Jahdn-Kushai,  a
work  that  he  completed  about  the  year  1259.  He  had  himself  travelled  through
the  country  in  question,  when  on  a  mission  to  the  court  of  Mangu  Ka^n  at

Digitized  by

Google

362  Extracts  from  the  Jahdn-Ktislidi,

hifitories,  Bala-Sakun  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  cities  built  by
Afrdsidb,  and  [the  authors]  have  praised  it  very  highly.  In  the
l&ujmoL'UUTav&'nkh  it  is  written :  "  Bal^S&kun,  until  tiie  time  of

Kaiakoram,  and  had  made  several  other  jonmeyB  in  Turkisian  and  the  neighbour*
ing  regions.  He  may  be  assumed,  therefore,  to  have  heard  the  rights  of  a  story
which  was,  in  his  day,  not  particularly  ancient.  His  work  is  one  of  the  few
original  ones  of  the  period  of  which  it  treats.  Unfortunately  it  has  never  been
translated  into  anv  European  language,  but  some  extracts  from  it  have  been
published  by  D'Ohsson,  and  these  Imve  been  utilised  by  many  subsequent
writers.  On  the  subject  of  the  city  itself,  D'Ohsson's  extract  (i.  p.  4S3)  merely
shows  that  the  buildmg  of  Bdla-Sdkun  is  attributed  to  Afrdsi&b,  otnerwisc  Buku-
Khan,  believed  (according  to  tradition)  to  have  been  the  first  of  the  line  of
so-called  AMsiihi  kings  of  Turkistan ;  that  it  stood  amon^  fine  pastures  in  a
woU-watered  plain ;  and  that  after  the  time  of  the  Kara-Khitai  invasion,  in  the
twelfth  century,  it  was  called  by  the  Mongols  **  Gu-balik."  No  geographical
indication  of  its  position  is  given ;  and  all  that  can  be  inferred  is  that  it  stood
within  the  very  uncertain  limits  of  what  was  then  called  Turkistan.  From
another  extract,  however,  (i.,  p.  167)  it  may — ^by  inference  again — ^be  placed  a
little  more  precisely  towards  the  southern  part  of  Turkistan — i.e.  near  the
northern  limit  of  Farghana.  Abul  Qhizi  is  equally  unsatisfactory  in  his
reference  to  the  situation  of  Bdla-Sdhun.  But  some  of  the  Arab  geographers  of
an  earUer  epoch  are  more  explicit,  and  they  point  to  the  city  having  stood  at  no
great  distance  from  ELdshghar.  Thus  Abul-feda  (ii.,  pt.  2,  p.  227X  quoting  from
a  work  called  the  Ldbuby  says  that  it  was  on  the  frontier  of  Turkistan,  near
K^hghar ;  Mukaddasi  (as  cited  by  Sprenger,  p.  19)  places  it  within  the  province
of  Isfijdb  (which  was  the  ancient  representative  of  the  present  Ghimkent)  and
very  near  Merke,  on  one  of  the  upper  affluents  of  the  Ohu.  Sprenger,  also,  on
the  authority  of  IbnKhordadba  and  Kod^ma,  gives  (pp.  22-3)  the  distance  from
Isfijdb  to  **  the  capital  of  the  Turkish  Khan "  as  75  farasangs,  and  he  demon-
strates (p.  xxvi.)  &at  a  farasang  was  equal  to  throe  Arabian  miles,  while  each  of
the  latter  he  calculates  at  a  fraction  over  one  English  geographical  mile.  Thus
one  farasang  might  be  about.  3|  English  ztaluite  miles,  making  the  total
distance  from  Isf^jdb  about  281  statute  miles.  Whether  by  *"  the  capital  of  the
Turkish  Khan,"  Bdla-Sdkun  is  intended,  is  of  course  uncertain,  but  taking  the
nomenelaturo  of  the  period  into  consideration,  it  may,  I  think,  be  concluded  that
this  and  no  other  town  must  be  meant.  The  late  Mr.  E.  Schuyler,  who  studied
the  subject  of  Bdla-SdJmn  and  other  old  sites  in  Turkistan,  presumed  this  to  be
the  case  {Geo,  Mag.,  1874,  p.  389)  and  his  opinion  is  worthy  of  attention.  If
281  miles  be  measured  off  to  the  E.N.E.  of  Ghimkent,  so  as  just  to  dear  the
great  range  of  mountains,  now  called  the  "Alexander  chain,*'  and  allowing
one-fifth  for  windings  of  the  road,  a  point  will  be  reached  within  the  upper
system  of  the  Ohu,  aoout  50  miles  west  of  Oonstantinowski,  and  about  83  miles
east-north-eastward  of  Merke— or  approximately  in  Lat.  43  and  Long.  73-40
from  Greenwich.

Thero  is,  however,  another  way  of  arriving,  or  endeavouring  to  arrive,  at  the
position  of  Bdla-Sdkun.  Mr.  Schuyler  (loc.  cit.)  has  given,  in  translation,  a
valuable  extract  on  the  subject  from  the  "  Ohronide  of  the  chief  astrologer  **  at
the  court  of  the  Osmanli  Sultan,  Muhammad  lY.  This  author  was  an  Arab
who  lived  from  1630  to  1701,  and  is  usually  known  as  the  '*  Munajim  B^ishi."
Two  passages  from  this  extnMst  run :  (1)  *'  Balasagun  ....  situated  at  the
beginning  of  the  7th  climate  in  102^  of  Long.,  and  48^  of  Lat,  not  far  from
Kashffhar,  and  considerod  from  of  old  the  boundary  city  of  Turkistan."
(2)  ''Kashghar,  the  capital  of  Turan,  in  the  6th  climate,  in  106  of  Long.,  and

45  of  Lat " Thus  the  difference  of  longitude  between  the  two  towns

would  be  4°  and  the  difference  of  Lat.  3°.  Now  the  latitude  and  longitude  of
Kashgliar  were  correctly  fixed  by  CoL  H.  Trotter,  B.E.,  in  1873-4.  If  we  take
his  values  (to  the  nearest  half  degree)  as  39i  N.  and  76  £.  and  apply  to  them
tho  differences  in  the  Munajim  Bdshi's  figures,  we  obtain  for  Bdla-Sdkun  Lat  42^
N.,  and  Long.  72  E.,  approximately.  This  would  bo  a  point  altogether  west  of
the  Chu  basin,  on  the  head  streams  of  the  Tal&s,  about  80  miles  S.E.  of  T£r6z,
(or  Aulia-Ata)  and  about  140  miles  (allowing,  on  this  more  plain  section  of  the

Digitized  by

Google

and  Description  of  MoghtUistdn,  363

the  Kara  Ehitdi,  was  under  the  rule  of  the  offspiing  [and  descend-
ants] of  Afr4siab.  The  Gur  Ehdn  of  Kara  Khitai  took  it  from  one
of  these  descendants,  Uak  Kh&n,  and  made  it  his  own  capital. For

road,  (me  bixth  for  deyiations)  from  Ghimkent.  Again,  it  will  be  found  that  in
the  geographical  tables  of  Sadik  Ispahdni,  BdlorSdkun  is  placed  (p.  76)  in
Lat  46,  and  Long.  107,  while  to  Kashehar  is  assigned  (p.  126)  Lat.  44,  and
Long.  106.  Applying  the  differences  between  these  figures  and  Col.  Trotter'd
Yulue,  in  the  same  way  as  before,  we  get  for  Bdla-Sdkua  Lat.  41},  and  Long.  77,
or  a  position  just  on  the  banks  of  the  N^rin  river,  nearly  fifty  miles  above  Fort
N&rin.  Further,  the  Arab  geographer  Abul-feda  supplies  us  with  two  more
indications  of  the  position  ofBdla-SdJeuny  with  reference  to  K^hghar.  One  of
these,  on  the  authority  of  Atwil,  is  a  perfect  one,  and  results  (when  computed  as
before)  in  Lat.  43*10,  and  Long.  71 ;  while  the  other,  on  the  authority  of  Kanun,
fails  in  the  Latitude,  and  furnishes  the  Longitude  only  as  72).
. Thus  the  positions  taken  from  the  Arab  writers  stand  :—

Munajim  Bisbi . . Lat.  42*30,  and  Long.  7200  fr.  Greenwich.
Sadik  IspahAni  .  „ 41*30 „ „ 7700 „  „

Atw^  .  .  .  .  „  43*10  „  „  71*00  „
Kanun  .  .  .  .  „  „  „  „  72*80  „
The  mean  of  these  data,  to  the  nearest  half  degree,  would  be  Lat  42},  and
Long.  78 ;  or  a  point  near  the  sources  of  some  of  the  heads  of  the  Karagaty  branch
of  the  Chu,  some  eighty-five  statute  miles  E.8.E.  of  Aulia-Ata,  and  alwut  twenty-
six  miles  S.S.W.  of  Merke.  Other  statements  of  the  Latitude  and  Longitude  of
Bdla-Sdkun  are  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Asiatic  geographers,  but  us  no
value  is  given  for  any  other  scientifically  fixed  point  in  the  neighbourhood,  to
which  the  figures  may  be  referred,  they  cannot  be  utilised.

The  only  conclusion  that  can  be  arrived  at  is,  tiiat  the  positions  assigned  by
the  Arab  authors  are  wortliless  for  anything  approaching  an  accurate  determi-
nation. All  that  can  be  gathered  from  them  is  that  the  city  most  likely  stood  among
the  left  head-tributaries  of  the  Chu,  and  was  more  probably  to  the  north  than  to  the
soutii  of  the  Alexander  mountains.  In  this  way  it  may  be  said  not  to  differ  seriously
with  the  position  which  Sir  H.  Howorth  would  assign  to  the  town,  after  examining
the  narratives  of  the  Chinese  travellers,  Hiuen  Tsang  and  Hueli.  He  finds  that
the  city,  known  in  those  days  to  the  Chinese  by  the  name  of  Su-Yeh,  stood
almost  certainly  on  the  River  Chu,  and  not  far  from  the  northern  slopes  of  the
Alexander  mountains.  Also  that  it  was  the  capital  of  the  Turkish  kingdom  of
that  region,  and  therefore,  BdlorSdkun  under  another  name.  This  conclusion
appears  to  be  extremely  likely,  more  especially  when  it  is  considered  in  connec-
tion with  Hiuen  Tsang's  itinerary,  wLich  places  Su-Yeli  at  540  or  550  It  east  of
Tar^,  and  north  of  a  range  of  snowy  mountains :  for  taking  five  2t  to  the  mile,
for  Hiuen  Tsang's  time— or  about  110  miles — ^and  allowing  one-fifth  for  devia-
tions along  the  skirts  of  the  hills,  Su-Yeh  would  be  located  about  eighty-oight
miles,  in  direct  distance,  eastward  of  Tar^  (Aulia-Ata),  or  at  a  spot  only  just  to
the  west  of  Merke.  This  bears  out  also  Mr.  Schuyler's  contention.  (See  for
Howorth,  Gto,  Mag,,  1875,  pp.  215-17,  and  for  Hiuen  Tsang's  itinerary,  Boal's
BuddhUt  Beeords,  1.,  p.  26.)

As  regards  the  orthography  of  the  name,  Mirza  Haidar  throughout  writes
Bdla^Sdkun^  and  for  this  reason  I  have  retained  that  form.  When,  however,  ho
comes  to  the  passage  in  the  Jahdn-Kmhai^  which  includes  the  name  said  to  havu
been  given  to  the  town  by  the  Mongols,  ho  writes  OJtar  hdlik,  while  in  D*Ohssou
and  other  extracts  from  the  Jahdn-Ktuhai  hitherto  published,  this  namo  has
always  stood  Ou-bdlikj  and  has  been  translated  "  good  city."  Desiring  to  clear
up  this  diacrepanoy,  I  examined,  with  Mr.  Ross,  the  British  Museum  copy  of  thu
Jdhdry-KfUkai,  and  am  satisfied  that  (in  that  copy  at  any  rate)  the  name  should
be  read  Ghar-bdligh,  or  possiblv  Ghur-bdligh.  The  passage  runs  " .  .  .  .  they
passed  on  to  Bdla  8dkun,  which  the  Moghuls  now  call  Ghar  [or  Ghur]-baligh.
The  Amir  of  that  country  claims  descent  from  Afrasiab.'*  Thus  in  the  original
we  find  Sdkun  instead  of  iiughun,  Moghuls  instead  of  MongdU^  and  Ghiir  {pt
perhaps  Ghur)  in  plaoe  of  Gu\  while  there  is  no  sentence  after  the  word  Ghar'
bdZtA;  to  indicate  that  the  meaning  of  the  name  is  *'good  city."  (See,  among
other  works,  D'Ohsson,  i.,  pp.  433  and  442  ;  Bretschneider,  i.,  p.  226.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

364  Extracts  from  the  yoJtdn-Kushdiy

ninety-five  years  Bala-Sakun  remained  the  capital  of  Kara  Ehitai,
and  all  the  countries  on  this  side  of  the  Jihun — that  is,  I0  the  east
of  it — carried  tribute  to  Bala-Sakun.  The  Moghuls  call  Bala-
Sakun,  '  Ghar-baligh.'  The  author  of  the  Surdh-id-Lughat,  in  his
Supplement,  says  that  his  father  was  one  of  the  traditionists  [Mfiz]
of  Bala-Sakun.  He  gives,  in  this  Sapplement,  the  names  of  emioont
men  [afdzil]  of  every  town.  In  Samarkand  he  reckons  fewer  than
ten.  But  in  Bald-Sakun  he  mentions  Ihe  names  of  a  great  number
of  learned  and  notable  persons,  and  quotes  traditions  concerning
some  of  them.  The  mind  is  incapable  of  conceiving  how  there
could  have  been,  at  one  time  and  in  one  cit}-,  so  many  men  of
eminence,  and  that  now  neither  name  nor  trace  is  to  be  found  of
Bala-Sakun.  Nor  have  I  ever  heard  of  a  place  called  Ghur-
baligh.

Another  town  mentioned  in  books  is  Taraz.  It  is  said  that  the
Moghuls  call  Taraz,  *  Yangi  ' ;  and  this  Yangi  is  placed  in  Moghul-
istan.  There  are  many  men  of  Yangi  in  Mavara-un-Nahr  who  are
called '  Yangiligh.'  Now  in  those  deserts  [mafdza]^  which  they  call
Yangi,  there  are  remains  of  many  cities,  in  the  form  of  domes,
minarets,  and  traces  of  schools  and  monabteries;  but  it  is  not
evident  which  of  these  ruined  cities  was  Ydngi,  or  what  were  the
names  of  the  others.

Another  famous  town  was  Almaligh,*  which  is  known  at  the
present  day.  The  tomb  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan  is  there,  together
with  [other]  traces  of  the  city's  prosperity.  The  dome  of  the
Khan's  tomb  is  remarkable,  being  lofty  and  decorate*! ;  while  on
the  plaster,  inscriptions  are  written.  I  recall  one-half  of  a  line,
from  one  of  the  books,  namely:  "This  court  [hdrgdh]  was  the
work  of  a  ma&ter- weaver  [ahar-hdf]" — words  which  show  that
this  master  was  an  Iraki ;  for  in  Irak  they  call  a  weaver  [Raffia-
hdf]  *  shar-hdf,*  As  far  as  I  can  recollect,  the  date  inscribed  on  that
dome  was  seven  hundred  and  sixty  and  odd.'

There  are  many  other  cities  in  Moghulistan,  in  which  traces
remain  of  very  fine  buildings.  In  some  places  they  still  stand
intact.^  In  [the  district  of]  Jud  *  there  are  traces  of  an  important
town,  and  remains  of  minarets,  domes,  and  schools. Since  the

*  AlmAligh — the  Armalee  of  the  mediaaval  European  travellers — was  the
capital  of  Gbaghotai  Khan  and  his  immediate  successors.  It  was  situated  on,  or
near,  the  Hi  river,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  modem  town  of  Kulja.  Dnring
the  Monj2;ol  period  it  was  a  Latin  bishopric,  and  had  previously,  most  likely
been  a  Nestorian  See. (See  Cathay,  pp.  ccxiii.,  23C,  6to.)

>  The  death  of  Tagliluk  Timur  was  about  764  h.,  or  1363  a.d.

»  The  Persian  texts  arc  incomplete  hero.  The  Turki  MS.  reads  : — "  In  some
places,  where  tlie  buildings  were  solid  they  will  stand,  in  others  they  have  been
restored,  while  in  others  again  they  have  already  fallen  into  ruins."

*  This  word  may  be  read  Juv  or  Jud,  or  the  /in  each  case  maybe  replaced  by
Ch.  The  Tarki  MS.  has: -''a  village  called  Ju.'*  It  seems  possible  that  the
region,  <.r  district,  of  the  River  Cliu  may  bo  intended.  See  text,  iram**diately  below.

Digitized  by

Google

and  Description  of  Moghulistdn,  365

name  of  that  town  is  not  known,  tlie  MoghnlB  call  it  '  Minara.'
In  the  same  place  is  also  a  dome  made  of  stone,  into  which  the
following  insci-iption  has  been  cut,  in  the  Naskhi  writing :  "  This
is  the  tomb  of  [titles  omitted]  Imam  Muhammad  Fakih  Bala
Sakuni  [Arabic  invocation],  who  died  in  the  year  711.  Written  by
Khwaja  Omar  Haddvi."  Jud  is  a  district  \mauza\  of  Moghulistdn,
of  a  month's  journey  in  length.  In  it  there  are  many  cities  like
this  oue.

In  Moghulistan  there  is  a  place  \mavaa\  called  Yumghdl,^  which
is  well  known.  There  a  dome  is  to  be  found,  half  fallen  into
ruin.  The  inscription  on  it  reads :  "  Shah  Jalil,  son  of  Kism,  son
of  Abbds.  .  .  ."  The  rest  has  broken  away,  so  it  is  not  clear
whether  this  was  his  tomb,  or  whether  the  inscription  refers  to  some
one  else.  God  alone  knows.  Such  remains  as  these  are  to  be  found
all  over  Moghulist4n,  but  the  names  of  the  towns  are  never  known.
The  tomb  of  Maulana  Sakkdki,  author  of  "  The  Key  "  \M%ft6h\
has  a  lofty  dome.  It  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Biver  Tika,
which  flows  from  the  foot  of  the  lake.^  With  the  exception  of  this
dome,  there  are  no  remains  in  that  place.  It  was  either  a  town  of
which  nothing  is  left,  or  else  it  was  there  that  Ghaghatdi  Ehdn
slew  [the  Maul4n&],  the  building  being  afterwards  raised  [over  the
spot].  God  knows  best.  The  story  of  Maulana  Sakkdki  is  told  in
histories.

Beyond  this,  nothing  is  recorded  of  the  districts  \had%jd'\  of
Moghulistdn  in  the  histories  and  books  of  former  writers,  nor  does
any  one  know  the  [above]  names  nowadays.  What  is  now  known
as  Moghulistan  has  a  length  and  breadth  of  seven  or  eight  months'
journey.  Its  eastern  frontier  adjoins  the  Kdlmak  country :  that  is
to  say,  Baris  Eul,  Imal,  and  Irtish.  It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by
Eukcha-Tangiz,  Bum  Lish,  and  Eardtal ;  ^  on  the  west  by  Turkistan
and  Tashkand ;  and  on  the  south  by  the  provinces  of  Fargh&na,
Edshghar,  Aksu,  Ghdlish,  and  Turfan.

Of  these  four  boundaries  I  have  seen  the  southern. From  Tdsh-

*  The  name  Jumgdl  and  JumgMl^  which  oocnra  oa  modern  maps  in  the  heart
of  the  region  that  was  Moghulistan,  may  perhaps  represent  the  Yumghdl  of  the
text.  It  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  head  tributaries  of  the  N^rin  and  of  a  small
plaoe — encampment  or  village — on  Its  banks.

*  Which  lake  is  not  specified,  hut  I  take  it  to  mean  Issigh-Eul.  The  sentence
may  read  in  the  Persian  texts :  **  which  flows  from  Bal  Eul,'*  hut  the  Turki  MS.
makes  the  reading  plain — **  from  the  foot  of  the  lake."  Thus  Pai-i-Kul  should  be
read  in  the  Persian.  The  Tika  river  probably  stands  for  the  Tekes,  which  takes
its  rise  near  the  eastern  end,  or  foot,  of  Issigh-Kul,  and  flows  eastward.

'  These  names  may  be  rc»d  Bdri  Kid  (sometimes  BdrJad,  and  in  Chinese  Pa-
2t-E«n),  ImU  and  Irtish,  Kukeha  Tin^z  or  Tangiz  is  lake  BctUcoBh,  and
Kardtdl  is  the  name  of  a  river  which  flows  into  it  from  the  south-east.  Bumlish
I  cannot  identify.  As  regards  lake  Balkash,  Mr.  J.  Sporer  (in  Petermann  for
1868,  p.  74)  says,  Tengia  is  the  old  Kirghiz  name,  and  that  Balkcuh  originated
with  the  Zungars  [who  were  Kalmyks].  But  farther  on  (p.  893)  he  tells  us  that
'* Balkhazi  Nor*'  meaning  ** great  lake,"  is  Ealm&k,  while  the  Kirghiz  name  is
**  Ah  Dennis,**  or  **  white  lake. The  two  statements  are  not  quite  consistent.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

366  Description  of  Moghulistdn.

kand  to  Andijan  is  ten  days'  journey ;  from  Andij4n  to  E48lighaTy
twenty  days;  from  there  to  Aksu,  fifteen  days;  from  Aksn  to
Chalish,  twenty  days;  from  Chalish  to  Turf4n,  ten  days;  from
Turfan  to  Baris  Kul,  fifteen  days ;  ^  and  B4ris  Kul  is  the  eaatem
boundary  of  MoghulistAn.  [The  whole  of  the  southern  boundary]
is  about  three  months'  march  at  a  medium  pace,  for  it  is  ninety
stages.  I  have  never  visited  the  other  three  boundaries,  but  I
have  learned  [something]  about  them  from  the  descriptions  of
persons  who  have  travelled  in  those  quarters.  The  greater  part  of
this  country,  which  is  seven  or  eight  months'  jouruey  [in  circuit],
is  mountain  or  desert,^  and  is  very  beautiful  and  pleasant — so
much  so,  that  I  am  incapable  of  describing  it  in  words.  On  the
mountains  and  in  the  plains,  grow  numberless  flowers,  whose  names
no  one  knows;  they  are  not  to  be  met  with  outside  Moghul-
istdn,  nor  can  they  possibly  be  described.  The  summer  is,  in  most
parts,  quite  temperate,  so  that  if  a  single  tunic  SjAx  facrto]  be
worn,  no  other  covering  is  required,  though  even  if  more  be  worn,
the  heat  does  not  make  one  uncomfortable.  However,  in  some
parts  of  the  country,  the  temperature  inclines  to  be  cold.

There  are  many  large  rivers  in  Moghulist4n — as  large,  or  nearly
so,  as  the  Jihun ;  for  example,  the  Ila,  the  Imil,  the  Irtish,  and
the  N4rin,  not  one  of  which  is  inferior  to  the  Jihun  or  the  Sihun.
Most  of  them  flow  into  the  lake  of  Kukcha  Tangiz,  which  sepa-
rates Moghulistan  from  XJzbegistdn.  Its  length  is  eight  montiis'
journey,^  and  its  breadth,  in  some  parts,  thirty  faradJchs,  by  estimar
tion.  In  winter,  when  it  is  frozen  over,  the  Uzbeg  cross  Kuk-
cha Tangiz  on  the  ice,  and  thus  enter  Moghulistan.  By  using  all
possible  speed,  they  can  cross  in  two  nights  and  a  day  into
Moghulistan,  and  can  return  in  the  same  time.  At  the  end  of
winter  they  cross  with  the  same  rapidity ;  but  at  that  time  of  the
year  it  is  dangerous,  and  it  often  happens  that  the  ice  gives  way.
On  one  occasion  a  hundred  and  twenty  families,  more  or  less,
perished  under  the  ice.  The  water  of  this  lake  is  sweet  The
same  quantity  of  water  that  flows  into  the  lake  is  not  discharged
from  it.  What  does  flow  out  is  about  equivalent  to  one  of
the  rivers  which  enters  it.  It  flows  down  through  Uzbegistdn,
under  the  name  of  Atal,  and  empties  itself  into  the  Kulzum
[Caspian].

Another  point  of  interest  in  Moghulist4n  is  Issigh  Kul,  [a  lake]
into  which  nearly  as  much  water  flows  as  into  Eukcha  Tangiz. It

>  These  stages  are  about  correct,  according  to  modem  itineraries.

*  The  word  in  the  texts  is  so^ro,  and  has  been  literally  translated  de»erl ;  bat
Mhra  is  often  used  to  designate  plains,  open  country,  or  "  steppes,**  and  it  is
employed  in  this  sense  here.

'  There  is  either  some  mistake  in  this  estimate  of  the  length  of  the  lake,  or
else  it  is  a  reckless  exaggeration.  The  estimate  of  30  farsakhs  (120  miles)  foi*
the  breadth  is  also  far  too  high,  even  if  the  broadest  part  be  taken.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Events  of  i/ie Year  9^8  [1522].  367

18  twenty  days'  journey/  and  no  water  issues  from  it  on  any  side.
It  is  surrounded  by  hills.  All  the  water  that  flows  into  it  is
sweet  and  agreeable,  bat  onoe  it  enters  the  lake  it  becomes  so
bitter  and  salt  that  one  cannot  even  use  it  for  washing,  for  if  any
of  it  enters  the  eyes  or  mouth,  seyere  inflammation  is  produced ;
it  has  also  a  most  unpleasant  taste  in  the  mouth.  It  is  remarkably
pure  and  clean,  so  that  if,  for  example,  some  is  poured  into  a
china  cup,  no  sediment  appears  at  the  bottom.  The  water  of  the
rivers  around  is  delicious.  Aromatio  herbs,  flowers  and  fmii-
bearing  trees  are  plentiful,  while  the  surrounding  hills  and  plains
abound  in  antelopes  [&ku\  and  birds.  There  are  few  localities  in
Moghulistan  more  remarkable  for  their  climate.

From  the  year  916  the  Kirghiz,  for  the  reasons  mentioned
above,  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  any  Moghul  to  live  in
Moghulistdn.  In  the  year  928  the  Khan  resolved  to  subdue
Moghulistdn,  as  shall  be  explained.

OHAPTEB  LXIX.

RETURN TO  THE  THREAD  OF  THE  HISTORY.

•  •  «  «  «2

The  flocks  and  herds  had  so  greatly  increased,  that  the  plains
and  hills  of  Kashghar  could  no  longer  provide  sufficient  pasturage,
and  therefore,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  wants  and  demands  of  his
people,  the  Khan  formed  the  bold  project  of  subduing  Moghulistan.
Moreover,  the  Kirghiz,  who  were  for  the  most  part  devoid  of  faith
and  given  over  to  evil  deeds,  had  thoroughly  intimidated  the
Musulm4ns  of  Turkist4n,  Shash  and  Farghana,  by  their  constant
invasions  and  forays.  Althoagh  that  province*  was  under  the
rule  of  the  Uzbeg  Shaiban,  who  were  his  old  enemies,  the  Khan,
on  account  of  his  devotion  to  the  faith  and  out  of  pity  for  the
MusulmAns,  took  the  matter  to  heart,  and  determined  that  no
Musulman  should  be  molested  and  no  infidel  should  prosper ;  but
rather  that  the  Musulmans  should  thrive  and  the  infidels  should  be
subdued. For  these  two  actions  he  expected  to  gain  a  good  reputa-

*  If  twenty  days'  journey  in  circuit  is  me&nt,  the  statement  might  be  not  far
from  ooriect. For  some  remarks  on  Issigh  Knl,  see  note  pp.  78-9.

^  This  chapter  opens  with  five  lines  of  rhetoric  (whion  are  omitted)  showing
liow  the  Khan  desired  to  gain  fame  in  this  world  and  **  a  high  place "  in  the
next— R.

'  Apparently  Farghdna  is  meant. Only  the  words  *'  dn  valdyat^  are  used.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

368  Events  of  tlte  Year  928  [1522].

tion  in  this  world  and  merit  in  the  world  to  come.  May  God
reward  him  well ! [Three  couplets].  .  .  .

MirzA  Ali  Taghai,  Khw&ja  Ali  Bahddur,  and  most  of  the  Amirs,
supporting  the  cause  of  Baba  Sultan,  desired  that  he  should  be
sent  in  command  of  the  expedition  against  Moghulistan  and  the
Kirghiz.  His  father,  Sultan  Khalil  Sult4n,  had  been  leader  of
the  Kirghiz,  as  has  been  explained;  and  he  therefore  had  some
right  in  the  matter.  My  uncle  alone  supported  Eashid  Sultdn,
who  was  the  Kh&n*s  son,  and  upon  him  the  conduct  of  the
expedition  finally  devolved.  Active  preparations  were  set  on
foot  [verses] :  .  .  .  and  in  the  course  of  the  year  928,  Bashid  Sultdn
set  out  loaded  with  favours.  Mirzd  Ali  Tagh4i  was  appointed  TRu^-
heg^  and  Muhammad  Kirghiz  being  released  from  confinement,
was  made  Amir  of  the  Kirghiz ;  while  brave  warriors  and  dlBtin-
guished  Amirs  were  chosen  out  of  all  the  Moghul  tribes.  [Couplet].
•  .  .  Everything  becoming  the  prince's  rank  and  dignity  was  made
ready;  such  as  banners  [tugh],  trumpets,  mint  [zardh-khdnd]
and  all  kinds  of  furniture.  Feasts  were  given  to  the  Amirs  and
soldiers,  who  made  merry ;  and  favours  were  bestowed  on  all.
[The  Khan]  gave  his  son  much  good  advice.  [Verses]. . .  Indeed  he
lavished  sermons  and  wise  counsels  on  the  young  prince,  who  did
not  heed  them,  for  is  it  not  said :  Sermons  and  advice  are  as  wind
to  the  profligates  of  this  world  ?  Finally,  however,  the  army  was
despatched.

At  the  hour  of  his  taking  leave  of  Bashid  Sultan,  the  Khan  said
to  me :  *'  You  accoutre  him :  fasten  on  his  quiver  and  sword,  and
mount  him  on  his  horse :  it  may  bring  good  fortune.  In  respect
of  what  *I  have  told  him,  let  him  be  your  pupil :  you  shall  be  his
master.  .  .  .^

In  short  the  Kh4n  sent  them  off  in  the  handsomest  manner,  «uid
himself  returned  to  Kashghar. [Two  couplets]  ....

With  their  entrance  into  Moghulistan,  Muhammad  Kirghiz
marched  on  in  advance.  He  brought  in  most  of  the  Kirghiz,
though  a  few  fled  to  the  farthest  confines  of  Moghulistdn.  When
winter  set  in,  quarters  were  taken  up  at  Kuchk4r.

*  A  couplet  from  8^1  and  five  lines  of  rhetoric  and  verses  are  omitted. — ^R.

Digitized  by

Google

The  Khans  Repentance.  369

CHAPTER  LXX.

THE  KHIn'S repentance.

•  ««««!

It  has  been  already  explained  to  how  great  an  extent  the  Khan
was  addicted  to  wine-drinking.  If,  for  example,  he  dreamt  of
sobriety,  he  interpreted  it  to  mean  that  he  ought  to  get  drunk ;
this  is  [the  system  of]  interpretation  by  contraries.  [Turki
couplet],  .  .  •

No  one  would  ever  have  imagined  that  the  Khan  could  give
up  this  habit,  but  by  the  intervention  of  Providence  he  repented
him  of  his  intemperance  .  .  .  .*

In  short,  at  the  end  of  the  winter  following  that  spring  which
saw  Bashid  Sultan  set  out  for  Moghulistan,  the  Khan  happened
to  be  in  Y4ngi-Hisar.  My  uncle  was  in  attendance  on  him,  while
I  was  in  Yarkand.  I  have  frequently  heard  the  Kh4n  relate
that,  one  night  when  a  drinking  bout  was  coming  to  an  end,  the
following  verse  came  into  his  head :  "  *  At  night  he  is  drunk,  at
dawn  he  is  drunk,  and  all  day  he  is  crop-sick ;  see  how  he  passes
his  noble  life  I  It  is  time  that  thou  should'st  return  to  thy  God
[and  abandon  these  unseemly  practices].'  When  this  purpose  had
become  fixed  in  my  heart,  I  again  became  irresolute  [and  said  to
myself] :  *  these  ideas  are  merely  the  outcome  of  excessive  inebriety.
For  otherwise,  who  could  endure  life  without  this  form  of  enjoy-
ment?' Thinking  thus  I  fell  asleep;  when  I  awoke  I  writhed
like  a  snake  with  crop-sickness,  and  to  dispel  this  I  called  for
a  draught.  When  it  was  brought,  the  intentions  of  the  night
before  again  took  possession  of  my  brain,  and  I  sent  for  Sayyid
Muhammad  Mirza,  and  said  to  him:  *I  am  tired  of  this  wine-
drinking,  and  wish  to  reform.' "  Now  my  uncle  had  for  a  long
while  been  a  disciple  of  the  order  of  Yasavvi  Shaikhs,^  and  practised
austerity  and  abstinence ;  thus  he  had  been  greatly  distressed
at  the  Khan's  shortcomings ;  but  when  the  Khan  now  announced

*  The  five  lines  with  whioh  the  ohaptor  opens  contain  only  rhetorical  flights
concerning  **  Bepentanoe." — ^R.

'  Foar  more  lines  on  the  virtue  of  Repentance  are  omitted  here. — ^R.

'  The  YasavTi  Shaikhs  were  the  followers  of  one  Shaikh  Ahmad,  otherwise
Hazrat  Khwdja  Ahmad,  of  Yassi,  who  was  the  founder  of  the  sect  of  Jahria,  and
died  about  1120  a.d.  He  is  said  by  Mr.  E.  Schuyler,  who  visited  his  tomb  at
Turkistan,  to  be  one  of  the  most  celebrated  saints  of  Central  Asia,  and  the  special

Sation  of  the  Kirghiz.  The  town  of  Turkistan,  near  the  right  bank  of  the
azartes,  is  the  modern  representative  of  Yassi.  There  the  mosque  of  *  H&zrat '  is
still  to  be  seen,  which  was  built  over  the  tomb  of  Shaikh  Ahmad,  by  Timur,  at
the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  was  restored  in  the  latter  half  of  the
sixteenth,  by  Abdullah  Khan  II.,  the  famous  Uzbeg  chief.  It  is  considered  one
of  the  holiest  mosques  in  Central  Asia. (See  Schuyler,  i.,  pp.  70-72.)

2  B

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

370  The  Khdn  is  Dissuaded

to  Him  his  desire  to  mend  his  ways,  my  uncle  hurst  into  tears  and
urged  him  strongly  to  carry  out  his  intention.  Having  repented,
the  Eh4n  went  into  the  assemhly ;  [verses]  ....  the  wine-hibbers
and  profligates  were  dejected  and  distressed,  but  all  the  pious  and
the  learned  rejoiced,  while  the  zealots  and  devotees  began  to  thank
God,  and  the  townsfolk  and  peasantry  stretched  their  hands  in
praise  to  heaven.  Thus  the  Ehan  repented  of  his  past  deeds,
and  night  and  day  begged  the  forgiveness  of  God  for  his
offences.  .  .  ^

CHAPTER  LXXI.

HOW  THE  KHIn,  WISHINQ  TO  BECOME  A  DABVISU,  INTENDED  TO
ABDICATE  THE  THRONE,  AND HOW  HE  WAS  DISSUADED.

After  the  Kh4n  had  been  distinguished  with  the  honour  of  repen-
tance, and  had  entered  the  circle  of  those  of  whom  it  is  said,  *'  God
loves  the  penitent,"  he  passed  into  Moghulist&n,  and  joined
Rashid  Sultdn  at  Euohkdr.^  Remaining  himself  in  Eucbkar,  he
sent  forward  Rashid  Sult4n,  with  his  Amirs  and  Muhammad
Eirghiz,  to  the  farthest  limits  of  Moghnlist4n.  They  collected
and  brought  back  the  scattered  Eirghiz,  thus  setting  [the  Eh&n's]
mind  at  rest  with  regard  to  this  affair.  In  the  spring  the
Ehan  went  back  to  Edshghar.  After  this,  he  used  to  return  every
year  to  Moghulistan  with  his  family,  to  see  that  the  country  was
in  order,  and  to  confirm  the  authority  of  Rashid  Sultan.  In  the
second  spring  that  he  took  his  family  there,  most  of  the  Moghul
{TZtw,  who  were  able  to  do  so,  went  with  him  of  their  own  accord
and  desire.  That  winter  the  Ehan  and  Rashid  Sult4n  took  up
their  quarters  in  Euchkdr,  and  at  the  end  of  the  winter  the  Ehan,
leaving  his  family  there,  went  back  to  Ydrkand.

The  reason  for  this  was  that,  since  his  repentance,  he  had
devoted  himself  much  to  the  study  of  Sufi  books;  and  having
pondered  deeply  on  their  sayings,  was  greatly  influenced  by
them.  .  .  ?  The  Eh4n  entered  fully  into  the  tenets  of  the  sect,
and  was  profoundly  impressed  by  them.  From  their  books  and
pamphlets,  he  learnt  that  the  blessing  [of  Sufistic  knowledge]  was
only  to  be  attained  by  devoting  himself  to  the  service  of  a  perfect

*  Two  oouplets  and  four  Udob  of  rhetoric  are  omitted  here.  They  contain  miich
the  same  matter  as  the  preceding  poaaages. — B.

'  The  Enohkar,  Koahkur,  or  Gnohgar  river  is  one  of  the  head  atreanw  of  the
CShu.  Its  vallejr  lies  to  the  south-west  of  Isaigh-Kul,  and  appears  to  have  been  a
favourite  campmg,  and  grazing,  ground  of  the  Moghuls. »ee  the  Map.

'  An  irrelevant  anecdote  concerning  some  saintd  is  left  untmnslated.

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

from  Abdicating,  371

[Sufi];  on  this  account  he  withdrew  his  mind  from  his  earthly
kingdom,  while  his  heart  became  entirely  detached  from  the
world.  He  spent  most  of  his  time  in  seclusion;  engaged  in
discussions  on  Sufism.  Not  every  one  was  allowed  to  intrude  on
his  privacy.  One  of  his  companions  was  my  uncle,  who  had  been
a  disciple  of  the  Tasavvi  Shaikh's,  and  who,  under  the  guidance
of  that  sect,  practised  abstinence.  Most  of  the  conferences  took
place  in  his  presence.  Another  was  Shah  Muhammad  Sultdn,
who  was  a  cousin  of  the  Eh4n  and  a  son-in-law  of  his  sister,  and
who  has  been  mentioned  briefly  above ;  at  times  I  was  also
admitted.  No  one  else  was  allowed  to  enter,  and  the  people  used
to  wonder  what  kind  of  discussions  those  could  be,  to  which  only
these  four  persons  were  admitted. [Couplet].  .  .  .

It  was  finally  decided  that  the  Kh4n  should  go  to  Y&rkand,  and
that  his  brother,  Amin  Khw&ja  Sultdn,  should  be  brought  from
Aksu  and  set  up  as  king  in  his  stead.  To  him  should  be  confided
the  whole  TJlva^  while  the  Khan,  divesting  himself  of  everything,
should  set  out  on  his  journey;  haply  he  might  thus  render  the
Most  High  God  perfect  service.  My  uncle  then  suggested  that
before  taking  this  step,  preparations  should  be  made  for  the
journey  to  Mekka,  and  all  necessaries  got  ready ;  that  he  would
accompany  [the  Kh4n];  that  wherever  he  was  he  would  spend
his  whole  life  in  attendance  on  him,  and  that  Sh&h  Muhammad
Sultdn  and  myself  should  also  be  in  waiting.

No  sooner  had  these  plans  been  determined  on,  than  Ehw4ja
Muhammad  Yusuf,  son  of  Khw4ja  Muhammad  Abdullah,  son  of
Ehwdja  Nasir-ud-Din  TJbaid  Ullah,  arrived  in  E^shghar  from
Samarkand,  and  the  news  [of  his  arrival]  reached  Moghulistdn.
The  Ehwdja  was  an  exceedingly  pious  and  austere  man,  and  the
Ehan  longed  to  wait  upon  him,  in  the  hope  that  [in  his  service]
his  desire  might  be  realised.  So  he  journeyed  from  Euchk&r  to
Yarkand,  where  he  arrived  at  the  end  of  the  winter  and  waited
on  the  Ehwdja.  [But]  when  he  explained  to  him  his  resolve,  the
Ehwdja  remarked:  *'Much  has  been  said  by  wise  men  on  this
subject ;  such  as :  Bemain  on  the  throne  of  your  kingdom,  and  be
like  an  austere  darvish  in  your  ways  !  And  again :  set  the  crown
on  your  head,  and  science  on  your  back !  Use  eflfbrt  in  your  work,
and  wear  what  you  will !  In  reality  sovereignty  is  one  of  the
closest  walks  [with  God],  but  kings  have  abused  its  rights.  A
king  is  able,  with  one  word,  to  give  a  higher  reward  than  can  a
darvish  (however  intent  upon  his  purpose)  during  the  whole  of
a  long  life.  In  this  respect  sovereignty  is  a  real  and  practical
state  .  .  .  .^ But  I will  show  you  one  line  that  my  father,

*  Ponr  lines  omitted,  oontaining  a  qnotation  from  Najm-nd-Din,  whioh  points
out  what  a  faithful  disciple  may  attain  to,  and  what  an  unfaithful  one  must
forego. — K.

Dilizld^y  Google

3/2  Khwdja  Tdj-ud-Din.

Khwdja  Muhammad  Abdullah,  wrote  for  me."  And  he  gave  the
writing  to  the  Khan.  It  was  written  :  "  The  most  important  con-
ditions, for  a  seeker  of  union  with  God,  are :  little  food,  few
words,  and  few  associates."  This  brief  [sermon]  sufficed  to
compose  the  Khan,  and  he  resolved  to  pursue  the  road  of  justice
and  good  deeds.  He  began  to  occupy  himself,  at  once,  with  what
he  was  able,  until  the  words  of  Shaikh  Najm-ud-Din  should  be
realised.  A  short  time  after  this,  Ehwaja  Nuni  came,  and  the
Khan*s  desire  was  fulfilled.  In  the  meanwhile  Khwiija  Taj-ud-
Din  arrived  from  Turfan.

CHAPTER LXXII.

khwAja  tIj-ud-dix.

Khwaja  Taj-ud-Din  was  of  the  race  of  Maulana  Arshad-ud-Din,
who  was  of  the  race  of  Khwaja  Shuja-ud-Din  Mahmud,  brother
of  Khwdja  Hafiz-ud-Din  of  Bokhara,  the  last  of  the  Mujtahids.
During  the  interregnum  \fatrai]  of  Chingiz  Kban,  this  Shuja-ud-
Din  was  brought  [into  this  country],  and  of  his  race  is  Maulana
Arshad-ud-Din,  who  brought  about  the  conversion  of  the  Moghuls
to  IsUm.  All  this,  God  willing,  will  be  fully  described  in  the
First  Part.  This  Khwaja  Taj-ud-Din  is  of  the  race  of  MauUna
Arshad-ud-Din.  His  father's  name  was  Khwaja  Ubaid  Ullah.
He  was  a  disciple  of  Mir  Abdullah  of  Bushir&b&d  .  .  .  .^  Having
remained  for  some  time  in  the  service  of  Hazrat  Ishan,  the  latter
gave  the  Khwaja  leave  to  go  to  Turf&n,  where  he  was  cordially
received  by  Sultdn  Ahmad  Khan  .  .  .  .^

*  The  omiflsions  here  consist  of  a  number  of  names  of.  unimportant  saints,  and
of  a  brief  reference  to  an  anecdote  relating  to  one  of  them.— R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Peace  with  t/ie  Kazdk-Uzbeg.  373

CHAPTER  LXXIII.

KHWAJA  TAJ-UD-DIX  IS  ALLOWED  TO  RETURN  TO  TURFAN.  THE  KHIn
MAKES  PEACE  WITH  THE  KAZiK>UZBEG.  OTHER  OONTEMroRARY
EVENTS.

When  Khwaja  Taj-ud-Din  came  from  Turfan,  the  Khan  received
him  with  due  honour.  He  stayed  one  year  in  Yarkand,  and  then
returned  [to  Turfan].  Next  winter  Rashid  Sult4n  went  and
plundered  the  Edlmak,  slew  one  of  their  Amirs  named  Baran
Talifih,^  and  acquired  the  honourahle  name  of  Ghizi.  He  had  his
winter  quarters  at  Kuchkar,  whither  the  Eh&n  went  with  a  small
attendance  [yart(2a]  and  joined  him.  With  the  middle  of  the
winter  arrived  Tahir  Khan,  who  has  been  briefly  mentioned  above
among  the  Kazak  Kh4ns.  After  a  long  intercourse  by  means  of
ambassadors,  it  was  ascertained  that  he  had  come  to  wait  on  the
Kh4n,  and  to  deliver  over  to  him  Sultan  Nigdr  Khanim,  the
Khan's  aunt.

This  Sultan  Nigar  Khanim  has  been  already  spoken  of  above.
She  was  the  fourth  daughter  of  Yunus  Khan,  and  after  the  death
of  Saltan  Mahmud  Mirzd,  son  of  Abu  Said  Mirza,  she  was  given
to  Adik  Sultan,  son  of  Jani  Beg  Khan,  the  Kazak.  By  Mirza
Sultan  Mahmud  she  had  one  child,  Mirza  Khdn,  who  became  king
of  Badakhshan,  and  in  the  year  917^  died  a  natural  death.  His
son,  Sulaiman  Shah  Mirz4,is  now  ruling  in  Badakhshan.  By  Adik
Sultan  she  had  two  daughters,  the  elder  of  whom  was  married  to
Abdullah  Sult&n,  son  of  Kuchum  Khan,  but  died  soon  after.  The
younger  was  given,  at  this  time,  to  Bashid  Sult4n,  as  shall  be
mentioned.  After  the  death  of  Adik  Sultan,  this  Sultdn  Nigar
Khanim  married  his  brother  K4sim  Kh4n.  When  this  last  died,
the  Khdnship  devolved  upon  Tahir  Khan,  who  was  the  son  of
Adik  Sultan.  He  was  very  much  attached  to  the  Kh&nim,  and
even  preferred  her  to  the  mother  that  had  given  him  birth.  She
showed  him  her  gratitude,  but  entreated  him,  saying :  "  Although
you  are  my  child,  and  I  neither  think  of  nor  desire  any  child  but

>  TdXUh  should  probably  bo  read  jfditfe,  a  common  title  among  Kalmak
leaders.

'  This  date  is  no  doubt  intended  for  927.  It  is  given  in  the  texts  in  Arabic
numerals,  but  in  such  a  way  that  it  may  bo  easily  misread  {(ukr  for  tiihrun).
Mirza  Khan  (properly  Yais  Mirza)  was  only  son  of  Saltan  Mahmud  Mirza  and
cousin  of  Babor.  [n  913  (1507)  he  became  ruler  of  Badakhshan.  He  is  believed
to  have  died  aboat  926  C152U),  and  if  the  date  here  should  read  927,  as  I  surmise,
it  woald  be  perhaps  exact.  Mirza  Khan  left  one  child,  Sulaiman  Mirza,  whom
liabtr  took  care  uf.  At  the  same  timo,  Baber  appointed  to  Badakhshan  his  sou
Humayan,  who  retaini  d  charge  of  the  province  till  932  (1526).  (See  Er-kifie,
Uifi,  i.,  pp.  249,  286,  511,  etc.)

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

374  Peace  with  the  Kazdk-  Uzbeg.

you,  nevertheless  I  am  grown  old,  and  liave  no  longer  the  strength
to  bear  this  migratory  life  in  the  deserts  of  Uzbegistan.  I  wish
you  now  to  take  me  to  my  nephew,  Sultan  Said  Kh4n,  that  I  may
pass  my  last  days  in  a  city  and  enjoy  some  quiet  and  repose.
Moreover,  in  oonsequenoe  of  [the  hostility  of]  the  Mangit  your
affairs  in  Uzbegistdn  are  not  thriving.  On  account  of  the  opposi-
tion [of  the  Moghuls]  *  your  army  has  decreased  from  1,000,000
men  to  400,000,  and  you  have  no  longer  strength  to  oppose  them.
I  will  be  a  mediator  for  you,  and  will  bring  about  a  reconciliation
between  you  and  the  Moghul  Ehdkans.  In  this  way  the  Mangit '
may  be  kept  in  check."

Tahir  Ehdn  fell  in  with  this  plan  and  came  to  the  borders  of
Moghulistan,  where  negotiations  for  peace  were  entered  upon.  He
came  in  person  to  Kuchkdr  and  waited  on  the  Kh4n.  The  latter,
from  love  of  his  aunt,  rose  [to  receive  him],  saying :  "  Although
my  rising  [to  receive]  you  is  contrary  to  the  Tura^  yet  my  great
gratitude  to  you  for  having  brought  my  aunt,  makes  it  possible  for
me  to  rise."  Thus  saying  the  Khdn  rose,  but  [Tahir  Khan],
observing  all  the  formalities,  bowed  his  head  to  the  ground,  and
then  advanced  towards  the  Kh&n,  who  having  embraced  him,
showed  him  great  honour  and  showered  royal  favours  upon  him.
After  this,  his  sister,  the  Ehdnim's  daughter,  was  given  in  marriage
to  Eashid  Sultan,  in  whose  haram  she  is  at  the  present  time.  She
has  children,  each  of  whom  will  be  mentioned  in  the  proper  place.

At  the  time  of  [Tdhir  Eh4n's]  departure,  Muhammad  Kirghiz
was  captured  a  second  time,  and  brought  bound  to  Edshghar.
The  reason  for  this  was  that  he  had  shown  signs  of  insubordina-
tiou,  and  a  desire  to  escape  to  the  Uzbeg.  He  was  therefore
detained  in  custody,  but  after  the  Ehdn's  death  ho  was  released.
The  Ehdn  now  returned  to  Edshghar,  and  I  was  left  in  Moghul-
istan to  keep  the  people  qtiiet.  But  in  spite  of  my  efforts,  I  was
unable  to  pacify  the  Eirghiz,  who  fled  and  again  betook  them-
selves to  the  remotest  parts  of  Moghulistdn,  where  they  joined
Tdhir  Sultdn.  Some  of  them,  however,  remained.  In  this  year  a
son  was  bom  to  the  Ehdn.

*  The  texts  do  not  mention  whose  opposition  is  referred  to,  but  I  presume  the
Moghuls  are  indicated  (if  the  translation  is  correct),  and  that  the  speaker
is  alluding  to  the  defeats  which  Sultan  Said  had  recently  inflicted  on  the
Kirghiz  Kazik.  The  next  sentence  bears  out  this  presumption.  But  see  next
note.

»  The  uncertainty  regarding  this  name  was  alluded  to  nt  p.  134.  It  occurred
on  that  occasion  once,  in  the  form  of  Manfakit  or  MarCdkit ;  here  it  is  twice  made
use  of,  but  is  spelled  differently,  and  in  such  a  way  that  it  may  be  read  Mankafity
Mikaft,  etc.,  etc.  Dr.  Rieu,  howeyer,  who  has  done  roe  the  kindness  to  examine
the  passages  in  the  original  text,  is  of  opinion  that  in  both  cases  the  incompre-
hensible words  may  stand  for  the  tribal  name  of  Mangit  or  Mangut-^  corruptly
reproduced  by  the  copyist.  It  is  significant  that  the  word,  in  both  forms,  should
only  occur  in  reference  to  the  one  subject — viz.,  the  relations  of  the  Kazjik  with
the  rest  of  tlie  Uzbeg  trilx*. It  is  found  nowhere  else  in  the  book.

Digitized  by

Google

Birth  of  Sultan  Ibrdkim.  375

CHAPTER  LXXIV.

BIRTH OF  SULTAN IBRIhIM, SON  OF  SULTAN SAID  KUAN.

In  the  month  of  Shawal  of  the  year  930  .  .  .  .^  [a  son  was  bom
to  the  Khan],  and  he  was  given  the  name  of  Sultan  Ibrahim.
Khw4ja  Muhammad  Yusuf  received  him  an  a  son,  and  Baba  Sarik
Mirza,  whose  name  was  mentioned  in  the  review  [of  the  army]
of  Eashghar,  was  appointed  his  Atdheg.  Magnificent  banquets
were  held  in  honour  of  his  birth — more  splendid,  in  fact,  than  any
that  had  been  held  on  previous  occasions.  The  Khan  loved  him
above  all  his  other  children  •  .  .  .^  His  life  will  be  recounted  in
its  proper  place.'

CHAPTER  LXXV.

THE  khan's  second  INVASION OF ANDIJAN.

On  return  of  the  spring  .  .  .  .^  the  Khan  saw  fit  to  go  again  into
Moghulistan  to  confirm  Bashid  Sultan's  authority.  He  set  forth
from  Y&rkand,  and  on  reaching  Kashghar  met  Hazrat  Ebwdja
Nurd,  who  was  coming  from  the  direction  of  Andijan.  Having
had  the  felicity  of  kissing  the  Ehw&ja's  feet,  the  Khan  proceeded
on  his  journey  to  Moghulist4n,  while  the  Khwaja  went  on  to
T4rkand.  Towards  the  end  of  summer  the  Khan  reached  Issigh
Kul,  where  he  learnt  that  the  K41mdk  had  approached  the  frontiers
of  Moghulistdn.  The  Kh4n,  putting  his  trust  in  God,  hastened  on
with  all  speed  to  Kabik4l4r,  which  is  ten  marches  from  Issigh  Kul.
Here  a  messenger  from  my  uncle  in  Kashghar  brought  the  news
that  Suyunjuk  Khan  was  dead,  that  the  Uzbeg  Sultans  were
without  a  leader,  and  that  a  better  opportunity  than  the  present

*  Three  lines  of  verse,  etc.,  omitted.

^  Hero  follows  a  ohronogram  in  four  lines  of  verse,  oontaining  the  word  Zill —
equal  to  930— [1524].

3  The  author  has  not  followed  out  his  intention  in  this  matter.  Ho  mentions
Ibrahim  only  once  hereafter,  as  having  been  taken  to  Kabul  by  his  mother
Zainab  Sultan  Kbtoim,  on  being  banished  from  her  home  in  Kashghar,  by  Abdur
Bashid  (see  p.  467).  At  that  time,  this  third  eon  of  Said  Khan  would  have  been
about  tbirteen  years  of  age,  and  even  when  the  author  wrote  his  history,  he
mnst  have  been  too  young  to  have  accomplished  anything  worthy  of  record.

*  Four  lines  of  verse  in  praise  of  spring  are  left  out

Digitized  by

Google

3/6  Second  Invasion  of  Andijdn.

one  for  revenge,  was  never  likely  to  occur ;  for  how  long  had  such
a  day  been  awaited?

The  reason  for  my  uncle's  remoining  in  Kashghar  was  that  in
the  last-mentioned  spring  [summer],  on  account  of  the  extreme
heat  of  the  weather,  he  had  caused  fresh  green  grass  to  be  spread
on  the  ground  and  iced  water  to  be  sprinkled  over  it ;  he  had  then
lain  down  naked  on  it  and  had  gone  to  sleep.  On  awaking  he  found
that  he  had  become  paralytic  \lah)oa\^  and  noticed  an  impediment
in  his  speech.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  Kh4n  arrived  at  Kashghar
on  his  way  to  Moghulistan,  and  Khwdja  Nura^  from  Andijan.
[Two  couplets  .  .  .  .]  There  is  a  proverb  which  runs  :  "  When  a
sick  man  is  destined  to  recover,  the  doctor  comes  uncalled" — a
saying  which  illustrates  the  good  luck  of  my  uncle.  Khwaja
Nura  applied  himself  to  his  treatment,  and  that  is  why  he  had
stayed  behind  in  Kdshghar.  On  learning  the  death  of  Suyunjuk
Khan,  he  had  sent  off  a  messenger  to  the  Khan,  and  when  this
messenger  arrived  in  K&bilkakla,^  [the  Khan]  quickly  returned.
His  family  being  in  Issigh  Kul,  thither  he  went;  then,  taking
them  with  him,  he  proceeded  to  Kunghar  Ulang,  and  thence
towards  Andijan. [Verses  .  .  .  .]

The  fort  of  Uzkand,  which  was  a  very  strong  one,  was  taken.
[From  Uzkand]  he  marched  on  to  Madu,  where  the  fort  is  the
btrongest  in  all  the  province  of  Farghdna.  It,  too,  fell  an  easy
prey  to  his  army.  Thence  they  advanced  on  Ush.  All  the
nobles,  learned  men,  artisans,  and  peasantry  in  this  neighbour-
hood were  agreed  that  since  Suyunjuk  Khdn  was  dead,  it  would
be  some  time  before  the  XJzbeg  could  come  to  any  agreement.
"Until  they  have  decided  upon  some  definite  plan  [of  action],"
said  they,  "let  us  go  and  strengthen  and  provision  the  fort  of
Andijan;  then  let  us  take  up  a  position  in  the  mountains.  As
the  Khdn  [cannot  penetrate  into  the  Uzbeg  mountains]  ho  will
not  be  able  to  touch  us,  nor  will  he  succeed  in  laying  siege  to  the
fort."  [So  saying,  they  set  out  for  Andijan.]  But  when  the
Uzbeg-Shaiban  heard  of  the  Khan's  advance  towards  Andijan,
without  further  conferring  or  planning,  all  poured  into  [Andijan],
like  locusts  or  ants,  from  every  quarter.  There  was  nx)  time  for
making  the  necessary  preparations  for  a  siege,  and  the  Khan  was
obliged  to  send  many  [of  his  people]  back.  In  that  expedition  the
Khan's  army  was  composed  of  26,000  men  all  told,  while  the
Uzbeg  had  more  than  100,000. [Couplet]  ....

*  Nura  stands  for  Nur-ud-Din. — R.

•  This  is  evidently  the  same  name  that  occurs  at  the  begioning  of  the  chapter
under  the  form  KdhihdUr.  The  Turki  MS.  has  Kdpilkfildr.  I  can  trace  neither
tins  name  nor  that  of  Kunghdr  Ulang,  which  follows  a  few  lines  below.  They
were  both,  most  likely,  mere  camping  groimds,  and  consequently  it  may  well
happen  that  no  trace  of  them  remains.  Kiipilkdlar  must  liavc  been  ten  days
to  the  eastward  of  Issigh-Kul,  seeing  that  it  was  against  the  Kalmyks  that  the
Khan  was  marching.

Digitized  by

Google

Withdrawal  of  tfte  Moghuls  to  Kdshgkar.  377

The  men  who  had  been  turned  away,  were  sent  to  Eashghar.
The  Khan  himself  went  back  to  Moghulistan  and  joined  his
family,  which  was  in  TJtluk — a  well-known  place  [matf^sa]  in
Moghulistan.  Then,  leaving  Eashid  Sultan  in  Moghulistan,  he
returned  to  Kashghar,  where  he  again  waited  on  Ehw4ja  Nura.
These  events  took  place  in  the  year  931  [1624-5].

CHAPTER  LXXVL

LAST  VISIT  OF  THE  KUiN  TO  MOGHULISTAn.  THE  MOGHULS  ARE  BROUGHT
TO  KiSHGHAR  FROM  MOGHULISTJLn;  AND  SOME  OTHER  CONTEMPORARY
EVENTS.

As  Rashid  Sultan  remained  in  Mogbulistdn,  he  made  Kuchkar  his
winter  quarters.  Now  Tahir  Khan  was  in  Uzbegist^n,  but  some
events  occurred  there  which  obliged  him  to  retire  to  Moghulistan.
He  therefore  came  [and  settled  down]  near  Kuchkar,  where  he  was
joined  by  half  the  Kirghiz,  to  whom  he  gave  protection  in  his  own
teri-itories.  On  this  account  Basbid  Sult4n  became  alarmed,  and
in  the  depth  of  winter  fled  from  Kuchkar  to  At-Bdshi.  On  learning
this,  the  Kh4n,  towards  the  end  of  that  same  winter,  repaired  to
At-Bdshi,  and  joined  his  son  at  [the]  Kdtilish^  of  At-Bashi.
[Rashid's]  followers  were  [thus]  reassured.

In  the  [following]  spring,  the  Uzbeg  penetrated  to  the  eastern
quarter  of  Moghulistan,  which  is  called  Khass  and  Kunkas.^

All  the  Kirghiz  who  had  remained  with  Rashid  Sultan,  were
anxious  to  unite  with  those  Kirghiz  who  had  joined  the  Uzbeg.
The  Khan  ordered  me  to  accompany  Rashid  Sultan,  and  [we]
having  driven  the  Kirghiz  out  of  Bumghal  and  Kuchkdr,  brought
them  to  At-Bashi.  The  Khan  himself  went  to  Kdshghar,  in  order
to  gather  all  the  people  together,  and  to  see  if  any  agreement  could
be  brought  about  between  them  and  the  Uzbeg.  He  left  me  in
Moghulistan  to  ensure  law  and  order  among  the  inhabitants.  I
accompanied  Rashid  Sultan,  until  the  Khan  returned  from  Kash-
ghar with  his  family  and  rejoined  our  people ;  then  he  sent  me  off
to  the  Kashghar  [province]  to  bring  Sultdn  Nigar  Kh4nim  into
Moghulistan,  that  she  might  mediate  with Tdhir  Khan  for  the

*  Kdtilish  means  the  confluence  of  two  Btreams :  in  this  caeo  probably  of  some
stream  with  At-Bushi,  or  of  the  At-Bdshi  with  the  N^rin.  The  At-Bdshl
valley,  situated  about  half  way  between  Kashghar  and  Issigh-Kul,  seems  to  have
been  one  of  the  chief,  and  most  central,  camping  grounds  of  the  Moghul  Khans,
^ost  likely  there  was  no  town  or  village  there.

*  The  rive^  fCdsh  and  Kunges,  as  usually  written  by  the  Russians.

Digitized  by

Google

3/8  WWfdrawal  of  tlu  Moghuls  to  Kdshgtuir.

settlement  of  a  peace  [with  ourselves].  So  I  went  to  Yarkand,
and  conveyed  the  Khanim  back  to  Moghulistan.  The  Eh4n  was
at  Aksdi.^

Before  I  arrived,  he  learnt  that  the  Kirghiz  had  separated  from
the  TTzbeg.  On.  hearing  this,  he  thought  it  advisable  to  go  and
subdue  the  Kirghiz,  and  started  from  Aks4i  [for  that  purpose].
When  they  had  gone  one  stage,  Bashid  Sult4n  fell  ill.  Bandagi
Hazrat  Khwaja  ^  happened  to  be  there,  on  an  excui-sion.  When  ho
arrived,  he  was  able  in  three  days,  by  means  of  his  Christ-liko
healing  power,  to  change  sickness  into  health.

Having  delivered  the  Khanim  into  the  hands  of  the  people,  I
hastened  on  to  join  the  army,  and  came  up  with  them  the  same
day  that  they  left  that  stage.^  I.  had  the  felicity  of  kissing  the
stirrup  of  Khwaja  Nura,  who  then  turned  back.  The  Khan  [at
the  same  time]  pushed  forward,  and  in  twelve  days  accomplished
forty  days'  journey. The  details  of  the  matter  are  as  follows.

When  we  reached  Ak  Kumas,  the  Khan  sent  me  with  5000  men
to  accompany  Bashid  Sultan  against  the  Kirghiz,  who  were  then
in  Arish  L4r.^  On  arriving  at  this  place,  we  found  their  camp
and  their  tents  left  standing.  It  was  clear  that  they  had  fled
and  got  away.  Some  of  their  arms  and  baggage  yj^ri&r^  were
lying  tumbled  about.  We  concluded  that  they  got  news  of  [our
approach].  As  we  proceeded,  we  came  across  some  dead  bodies,
and  several  horses,  wounded  or  killed  by  arrows,  besides  many
broken  arrows.  After  careful  search,  we  discovered  a  man  who
was  half-dead,  from  whom  we  learnt  that  Babajak  Sultan  had
come  from  Kusan,  and  attacked  the  Kirghiz;  that  three  days
previous  to  our  arrival  a  fierce  battle  had  been  fought,  resulting  in
the  defeat  of  Babajak  Sultan.  The  Kirghiz,  having  despatched
their  families  towards  the  TTzbeg,  had  then  gone  in  pursuit  of
Babdjak  Sultdn.

Advancing  yet  further,  we  lighted  upon  some  100,000  sheep  of

'  No  doubt  a  campinff  noimd  on  the  Aksai  river,  between  Kashghar  and
At-Bdshi.

*  Otherwifle  Ehw&ja  Nura,  or  Nur-ud-Din.

'  Meaning,  apparently,  one  stage  from  the  Alwxi  river.

^  Ak  Kumd$  may  perhaps  be  identified  with  Ak  Kwn,  between  the  lower  Told*
and  the  Chu ;  and  AHjik  Lar  with  Lake  ArU^  which  lies  to  the  west  of  the  Sari
river  and  nearly  north  from  Ak  Masjid  on  the  Sir  Daria.  These  places  are  a
long  distance  from  Moghnlistan,  and  one  can  scarcely  imagine  the  Moghuls
following  the  Kirghiz  so  far.  Still,  it  is  evident  from  the  text,  that  the  chase  was
a  lon^  one,  and  it  was  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  for  it  is  stated  below  that
the  Kirghiz  took  refuge  with  the  Uzbegs,  who  occupied  the  steppes  to  the  north-
west. There  is  anotiier,  and  smaller,  Ak-Kwon  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Hi  river,
a  short  distance  above  the  modem  fort  of  llijsk,  but  this  would  not  lie  in  the
right  direction,  and  would  not  be  distant  enough  to  suit  tlie  narrative ;  nor  is
there  any  Arish  in  the  vicinity  that  I  am  aware  of.  The  only  other  possible
Arish  (or  Arts)  suggested  by  modem  maps,  would  be  on  the  river  of  that  name
which  falls  into  the  Sir,  near  Chimkcnt,  but  this  would  be  a  settled  country  to
which  the  Kirghiz  would  be  imlikely  to  fly  for  refuge,  or  the  Moghuls  to  enter,
in  pursuit. The  wor<l  Lar  I  can  find  no  trace  of.

Digitized  by

Google

Story  of  Bdbd  Sultan.  379

the  Kirghiz,  which  we  drove  along  with  us.  As  the  Kirghiz  had
united  with  the  Uzbeg,  we  were  unable  to  offer  them  further  oppo-
sition, so  we  turned  back  and  rejoined  the  Khan,  for  the  original
object  of  this  expedition  was  to  punish  the  Kirghiz,  and  not  to
attack  the  Uzbeg.  This  campaign  got  the  name  of  Kui  Jarikiy
or  the  "  sheep-army."

Now  at  that  time  T&hir  Kh4n  had  a  force  of  20,000  men,  but
his  fortune  was  on  the  decline ;  for  his  army  had  formerly  counted
a  million.  He  began  to  increase  his  violence  and  severity,  and  on
this  account  he  was  abhorred  of  the  surrounding  Sult4ns  and  men
of  note.  He  had  a  brother  named  Abul  K&sim  Sultan.  The  people
were  able  to  judge  of  him  by  the  violent  treatment  he  meted  out
to  this  brother,  whom  he  suddenly  put  to  death ;  they  therefore
all  at  once  fled  from  him,  so  that  none  remained  but  he  and  his
son.  These  two  huiTied  forward  and  joined  the  Kirghiz.  This
news  reached  the  Khan  when  he  had  arrived  in  Kashghar.

The  reason  for  his  going  there,  was  that  the  Moghuls  had  repre-
sented to  him  that  the  Kirghiz  had  united  with  the  Uzbeg,  and
these  latter  intended  to  settle  down  in  Moghulistan,  while  he  knew
that  he  had  not  strength  sufficient  to  cope  with  the  numbers  of  the
Uzbeg.  It  would  therefore  be  dangerous  for  them  [the  Moghuls]
to  remain  in  Moghulistan  that  winter.  For  those  reasons,  the  Khan
brought  Kashid  Sultan,  and  all  the  Moghuls  of  Moghulistan,  to
Kashghar.^  Here  they  learned  the  news  of  the  rout  of  the  Uzbeg.
At  the  end  of  the  spring,  it  being  difficult  to  return  to  Moghulistan,
they  remained  in  Kashghar.  It  was  about  the  beginning  of  spring
that  Tahir  Kh4n  joined  the  Kirghiz.  He  carried  off  all  the  Kirghiz
who  had  been  left  in  At-Bashi,  together  with  the  droves  of  horses
which  the  Moghuls  had  left  in  Moghulistan.

CHAPTER  LXXVII.

BBASONS  FOR  BABJL  SULTAN's  FLIGHT, AND  THE  CONCLUSION  OF HIS

STORY.

BabA  SultAn  has  been  already  mentioned  above,  as  the  son  of  the
Kiian's  brother,  Sult4n  Khalil  Sultan.  He  was  a  mere  child  when
his  father  was  drowned  in  the  river,  at  Akhsi,  by  Jani  Beg  Sultan,

^  Meaning,  no  doubt,  to  the  Kashghar  proTince,  or  to  the  hills  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Kashghar.  Nothing  marlu  the  decay  of  the  Moghuls,  as  a  nation,  more
strongly  than  this  episode.  They  had  now  to  abandon  their  own  country  to  their
enemies,  and  though  they  afterwards  returned,  nt  intervals,  this  was  the  beginning
of  their  end.

Digitized  by

Google

380  Story  of  Bdbd  Sultdn,

in  the  year  914.  After  the  Khan  took  Andijan,  Baba  Sultan
remained  in  the  Khan's  service,  and  was  treated  with  such  con-
sideration that  he  became  an  object  of  envy  to  [the  Khan's
own]  children.  Khwaja  Ali  Bah&dur,  who  has  been  frequently
mentioned,  was  appointed  his  governor  \^Aiaka\.  This  man,  as
has  been  explained,  had  a  plan  [for  seizing]  Moghulistan,  and
taking  Baba  Sultan  with  him.  But  my  uncle  opposed  this,  and
arranged  that  Kashid  Sultan  should  go  instead.  On  this  account,
Baba  Sultan  was  offended.  Despite  the  attentions  the  Kban
showed  him,  his  resentment  increased  daily,  and  in  proportion  as
Eashid  Sultdn  rose  [in  power],  his  jealousy  became  the  more  bitter.
Moreover,  some  devils  of  companions  (who  are  to  be  found  every-
where, and  who  sow  the  seeds  of  hypocrisy  in  the  soil  of  men's
hearts)  did  their  best  to  incite  him  to  sedition  and  revolt ;  so  that
at  length  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  nothing  left
but  flight.

One  of  these  men  was  named  Mazid,  a  person  of  evil  ways,  whom
the  Kh4n  had  at  first  favoured,  but  finding  that  he  did  not  perform
his  duties  in  the  posts  to  which  he  was  appointed,  the  Kban  de-
prived him  of  his  rank.  This  person  found  it  inconvenient  to
remain  in  Kasbghar,  so  he  approached  Baba  Sultan,  and  filled  his
ears  with  many  idle  tales,  which  Baba  Sultan,  from  the  vanity  of
youth,  or  rather  from  sheer  ignorance,  took  for  truth.  Among
other  deceitful  statements,  he  said  to  him:  "It  is  a  ruler  of
capability  such  as  you,  that  Kashghar  stands  in  need  of,  and  every-
body is  seeking  for  a  really  good  king.  Wherever  you  go,  the
people  accept  you  as  Baba  Shahi.  Look,  for  example,  at  Sultan
Avals  in  Khatlan-Hisar.  Failing  to  find  a  good  king,  he  set  him-
self up  on  his  own  account,  and  now  bows  his  head  to  no  one.  If
you  present  yourself  before  him,  he  will  make  you  king,  while  he
himself  will  advance  and  take  the  whole  of  Badakhshan,  and
accomplish  much  that  I  cannot  [now]  explain.  The  truth  of  the
matter  is,  that  the  sovereignty  of  Khordsan  and  Mavard-un-Nahr
is  far  more  important  than  that  of  Kashghar  and  Moghnlistdn
[and  you  may  attain  it]."  Such  idle  tales  as  these  did  he  string
together,  and  by  persistence,  made  them  appear  reasonable.  Thus
was  B4b&  Sultan  duped  by  this  man  and  one  or  two  others  of  the
same  sort.

In  the  summer  of  the  afore-mentioned  year,  they  fled  from
Yarkand.  The  Kh&n  did  not  send  in  pursuit  of  them,  but  said  :
"  If  they  find  some  one  better  than  I  am,  well  and  good ;  if  not,
they  will  retnm."  Baba  Sultan  fled  to  Sultiin  Avais,  and  thence
to  Badakhshan.  Here  he  saw  that  he  had  been  deceived,  and  that
these  cowardly  men  had  misled  him  for  their  own  private  ends.
Repentant,  he  returned  to  Kashghar.  But  the  Khan  was  un-
willing [that  he  should  remain],  as  shall  be  shortly  explained.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Story  of  Shdh  Mu/iavtmad  Sultdn,  381

So  being  obliged  to  quit  the  country,  he  withdrew  to  Hindustdn,
where  he  conducted  himself  badly.  Babar  Padishah  gave  hitn
Bubtak,  an  important  town  in  Hisar-Fii-uza,  where  ho  followed
his  uncommendable  courses,  but  shortly  afterwards  was  seissed
with  dysentery,  and  died  in  the  course  of  the  year  937,  at  the  age
of  twenty-four.  In  his  youth  he  had  been  so  spoiled  by  the  Khan,
that  his  masters  could  do  nothing  with  him,  and  his  studies  came
to  naught.  [Two  couplets].  .  .  .  Yet  he  was  not  devoid  of  natural
talents,  for  he  was  a  skilled  archer  and  conversed  well.  At  an
early  period  he  was  fond  of  me,  and  we  were  such  warm  fiiends
that  we  always  used  the  same  tent  on  journeys,  and  the  same
dwelling  at  court.  His  aunt  was  with  me  and  my  sister  with
him,  on  which  account  we  were  always  able  to  associate  without
ceremony.  Then  occurred  the  affair  of  my  uncle;  a  bitterness
arose  between  them,  and  he  plotted  against  the  Khdn.  All  my
warnings  and  reproofs  were  in  vain,  and  after  this  our  friendship
began  to  cool.  When  he  came  back  [from  his  flight  into  Badakh-
shdn]  the  Khan  sent  me  to  order  him  away  again.  [On  our
meeting,  Bab&  Sultan]  began  to  make  profuse  excuses  and  apologies
and  to  profess  regret  that  he  had  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  my  counsels.
[Verses].  .  .  .  Seeing  him  thus  sad  and  repentant,  I  hoped  he
might  persist  in  reforming  his  conduct,  but  on  reaching  India,  a
change  for  the  worse  came  over  him,  and  on  account  of  his  former
evil  associations,  he  never  again  mended  his  ways.  [Yei^se].  .  .  •
His  body  was  carried  from  Buhtak  to  Badakhsh&n,  and  was  buried
in  the  tomb  of  Sh4h  Sultan  Muhammad  Badakhshi — his  grand-
father on  his  grandmother's  side.

CHAPTEE  LXXVIII.

SHAH  MUHAMMAD  SULTAN, AND  CONCLUSION  OF  HIS  STORT.

Shah  Muhammad  Sultan  was  the  son  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Sultan,
son  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khan,  son  of  Yunus  Khdn.  He  was  only
a  child  when  Sultan  Mahmud  Eb4n,  with  his  [other]  children,  was
put  to  death  by  Shahi  Beg  Khan,  as  has  been  explained.  One  of
Sh4hi  Beg  Kb4n's  Amirs,  taking  pity  on  this  child,  instead  of
putting  him  to  death,  kept  him  safe  in  hiding.  After  Shahi  Beg
Khan  had  been  killed,  and  Babar  P&dishah  conquered  M&var4-un-
Nahr,  this  IJzbeg  Amir  sent  the  child  to  the  Emperor,  in  whose
service  he  remained  [for  some  time].  When  the  Emperor,  on
account  of  the  successes  of  the  IJzbeg,  was  obliged  to  return  to

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

382  Story  of  Shdh  Muhammad  Sultdn.

Edbuly  Shah  Muhammad  Sultan  stayed  in  Badakhshan  with  Mirza
Khan.  On  hearing  of  the  conquest  of  Eashghar,  he  went  to  join
the  Khan,  who  loved,  and  treated,  him  as  his  own  Bon«  He  was
brought  up  in  the  special  apartments  of  [the  Ehan*s]  children,  and
when  he  was  grown  up,  the  Eh4n  gave  him  his  fiiU  sister,  Ehadija
Sultan  Ehdnim,  as  a  proof  of  his  love  and  a  token  of  his  perfect
regard  for  him. [Couplet].  .  .  ,

We  spent  most  of  our  time  in  each  other's  society.  During  nine
years  Shdh  Muhammad  Sultan,  B41)4  Sultan  and  I  had  remained
continually  in  the  Eh&n*s  service.  Like  the  three  dots  under  the
letter  Sin  in  Said,^  we  were  never  separated,  nor  did  we  leave  his
service  for  a  moment  on  any  pretext.  Our  worldly  goods  we
shared  in  common,  and  were  participators  in  each  other's  praise
and  blame.  .  .  ?

For  nine  years  this  unanimity  of  feeling  and  action  continued.
But  at  length  the  crooked  wheel  of  fortune  worked  a  change.  .  .  ?
In  the  spring  following  the  winter  in  which  B4ba  Sultan  fled,  a
strange  circumstance  happened  to  Shah  Muhammad  Sult&n.  The
details  are  as  follows.  There  was,  at  this  time,  a  certain  B4ba
Sayyid,  son  of  the  sister  of  Mirz&  Muhammad  Begjik,  for  whom
Sh4h  Muhammad  Sultan  conceived  a  great  friendship.  But  Baba
Sayyid  was  a  young  man  who,  from  the  first,  passed  the  limits
of  decency  and  moderation.  [Verses  concerning  impiety  and  im-
morality]. .  .  .  The  remonstrances,  reproofs  and  advice  of  the  Eban
and  myself  were  in  vain;  his  immoral  conduct  could  not  be
checked,  and  he  went  so  far  as  to  prompt  the  young  Sult4n  to
aspire  to  sovereignty.  The  matter  was  rumoured  everywhere  and
discussed  by  every  one,  till  at  last  the  Eh&n  saw  no  remedy,  but  to
banish  the  young  Sultan  from  the  country.  [Couplet].  .  .  .  He
therefore  sent  Sh&h  Muhammad  Sultdn,  together  with  B4ba
Sayyid  and  some  attendants,  to  Earatigin.  Two  of  the  Amirs,
Muhammadi  Barlas  and  Amir  J4naka,  attended  them  as  an  escort
But  on  the  road  Amir  J4naka  showed  some  hostility  and  wished
to  convey  the  Sultdn  to  some  place  [other  than  their  destination],
on  which  account  Muhammadi  Barlds  seized  him.  Thereupon
Baba  Sayyid  incited  Shdh  Muhammad  Sultdn  to  attempt  the
release  of  Amir  Jdnaka,  saying :  **  It  is  his  fidelity  to  you  that
has  exposed  him  to  this  misfortune.  You  must  save  him  from
the  hands  of  Muhammadi  Barlds,  by  main  force.  What  can
Muhammadi  do  to  you  ?  "  Shdh  Muhammad  Sultdn,  deceived  by
these  words,  turned  back  and  at  midnight  approached  the  party,

>  This  refers  to  the  custom,  in  very  oarefol  writing,  of  placing  three  dots  under
the  letter  Sin  to  distinguish  it,  with  certainty,  from  the  Shin  witii  three  dots
above. — ^B.

*  This  passage  is  slightly  abridged  and  a  quatrain  omitted.^-B.

*  Six  lines  and  some  verses,  on  fortune  reversing  the  order  of  things,  are  left
out  here. — R.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Story  of  Slidh  Muhammad  Sultan.  383

who  being  apprehensive  [of  some  such  danger]  were  standing
folly  armed.  [As  he  approached]  he  called  out :  *'  Belease  Amir
J4naka  I  "  to  which  they  replied :  "  Whosoever  you  may  be,  retire  I
otherwise  we  will  smother  you  in  arrows."  The  Sultan  heard
this  threat,  but  paid  no  attention  to  it.  (Has  it  not  been  said  :  at
night  the  king  is  unjust?)  The  party  then  let  fly  their  arrows
and,  by  chance,  the  Sultan  was  struck  [in  the  breast] ;  he  retired  a
short  distance  and  then  expired.  Mnhammadi  captured  Amir
J&naka.

Having  acted  thus  violently  without  orders,  the  party  were
thrown  into  the  utmost  consternation  and  knew  not  what  to  do
next.  A  strange  discussion  took  place  among  the  ZTZua.  Some
who  had  advised  the  Sult&n,  fled.  Others,  the  Kh4n  reassured
with  promises  and  agreements.

In  the  meanwhile  B4b4  Sult4n,  who  had  fled  the  previous  winter
to  Khatl&n  and  Kunduz,  having  discovered  that  what  Mazid  and
the  rest  of  them  had  told  him  was  false  and  groundless,  returned
ashamed  and  penitent.  The  Khan  sent  me  to  meet  him,  and  I
turned  him  back ;  but  I  supplied  him  with  all  necessaries  for  the
journey,  before  bidding  him  farewell,  as  has  been  related.  The
wife  of  Sh&h  Muhammad  Sult4n  (the  Khan*s  sister)  and  Sultdn
Nigar  Ehdnim  and  Daulat  Sultan  Khanim  (the  Khan's  aunt)  and
also  the  aunt  of  Sbah  Muhammad  Sultan's  father,  and  the  E^4n's
wife,  Zainab  Sultdn  Ehdnim  (Sb4h  Muhammad  Sultan's  aunt)  all
came  and  demanded  of  the  Kh&n  why  he  had  ordered  the  death  of
Sb4h  Muhammad  Sult4n.  Whereupon  the  Kh4n  swore  a  solemn
oath,  saying :  "  I  did  not  give  the  order."  They  then  said :
"Deliver  Muhammadi  over  to  us!  that  we  may  avenge  on  him
the  death  [of  the  Sult4n]." To  this  the  Ehan  agreed.

Muhammadi  appealed  to  me  and  my  uncle  to  I'escue  him.  He
was  in  the  service  of  Bashid  Sultan.  He  begged  me  to  use  my
endeavours  for  his  security,  so  I  took  his  part,  and  privately,  but
with  great  emphasis,  represented  to  the  Kh4n  as  follows :  *'  The
Sultdns  who  were  brothers  are  all  gone  :  this  Sultan,  who  is  your
son,  and  still  remains,  will  also  be  offended,  and  I  too  should  be
much  af9.icted  [if  you  put  Muhammadi  to  death],  for  he  is  a  blood
relation  of  mine."  The  Ehan  then  placed  the  whole  matter  in  my
hands  [saying :  '*  You  can  act  as  you  choose ;  if  you  wish  to  retaliate,
do  so  :  if  you  wish  to  let  him  go,  the  choice  lies  with  you."]  But
the  above-mentioned  Kh&nims,  who  were  all  either  my  maternal
aunts  or  their  daughters,  began  with  one  accord  to  blame  and
reproach  me,  saying:  "What  in  the  world  will  your  blood
connection  with  the  Barlas  lead  you  to,  if  it  make  you  neglect
such  an  important  duty  as  this?  Shdh  Muhammad  Sult4n  was  a
closer  connection  by  many  degrees  than  he.  If  [Muhammadi]  is
your  father's  uncle,  this  man  [Sh4h  Muhammad  Sultan]  was  your

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

384  Invasion  of  Balur.

own  uncle,  and  besides  this,  your  friend  and  companion.  Your
cousin  ^  Khadija  is  his  wife,  and  his  wife's  sister  (the  daughter  of
his  paternal  uncle)  is  of  your  household.*  How  can  you,  in  con-
sideration of  all  this,  attach  yourself  to  the  side  of  Muhammadi?  "
[Such  were  the  taunts  and  reproaches  they  poured  down  on  me]  ;
nevertheless,  Fate  willed  that  I  should  pay  no  attention  to  the  true
words  of  my  relations ;  I  i-etumed  falsehood  for  truth  and  would
not  hear  of  retaliation.  I  put  Muhammadi  under  the  care  of
my  uncle,  who  carried  him  ofif  into  the  mountainous  tracts  of
K4shghar.

This  incident  led  to  a  certain  degree  of  ill-feeling  between
myself  and  my  relations,  [which  was,  however,  dispelled  a  short
time  after].  But  I  was  caused  much  trouble  and  exposed  to  great
annoyance,  ere  I  was  able  to  deliver  Muhammadi  Barlds  out  of  the
hands  of  the  Eh&nims ;  and  [in  doing  so]  I  raised  an  executioner
for  my  uncle  and  his  children.  I  brought  calamity  upon  myself —
God  forgive  me !  and  again  I  say  God  forgive  me !  Since  I  did
this  unjust  action,  God  sent  this  same  Muhammadi  [to  overpower
us].  Verily  injustice  can  only  bring  ruin  in  its  train.  This
same  Muhammadi,  whom  I  and  my  uncle  had  saved  from  so  great
a  danger,  neglected  nothing  in  his  endeavours  to  murder  my  uncle
and  his  children,  and  to  bring  about  the  extinction  of  myself  and
my  house — a  house  upon  which  four  hundred  years  had  worked  no
change.  The  Prophet  said  :  "  Whoso  helpeth  a  tyrant,  God  will
give  the  tyrant  power  over  him."  .  .  .  .^

CHAPTER  LXXIX.

ttASHID  SULTAN  AND  THE  AUTHOR  LEAD  A  HOLT  WAR  INTO  BALUR«

After  the  affair  of  Shdh  Muhammad  Sultan,  misunderstandings
arose  among  my  relations.  In  the  winter  of  the  same  year,  the
Eh&n  commanded  Rashid  Sultan  and  myself  to  make  a  holy  war
on  Balur.  Though  we  had  been  at  variance  with  our  relations,  we
made  it  up,  and  set  out  in  all  haste  for  Balur.

Balur  is  an  infidel  country  [JBTo/frw/an],  and  most  of  its  inhabitants
are  mountaineers.  Not  one  of  them  has  a  religion  or  a  creed.  Nor
is  there  anything  which  they  [consider  it  right  to]  abstain  from  or  to
avoid  [as  impure] ;  but  they  do  whatever  they  list,  and  follow  their

1  Lit :  daughter  of  maternal  uncle. — ^B.

«  By  **of  your  houaehold"  is  meant  (as  the  Turki  version  explains)  "your
wife."— B.

*  Some  verses  from  the  Koran  and  a  prayer  of  about  seven  lines,  arc  left  out
here.— R.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Invasion  of  Balur,  385

desires  without  check  or  compunction.  Baluristan  is  bounded  on  the
east  by  the  provinces  of  E&shghar  and  Y4rkand  ;  on  the  north  by
Badakhshdn  ;  on  the  west  by  K4bul  and  Lumgh&n ;  and  on  the
south  by  the  dependencies  of  Kashmir.^  It  is  four  months*  journey
in  circumference.  Its  whole  extent  consists  of  mountains,  vallevs,
and  defiles,  insomuch  that  one  might  almost  say  that  in  the  whole
of  Balaristan,  not  one  farsdkh  of  level  ground  is  to  be  met  with.
The  population  is  numerous.  Ko  village  is  at  peace  with  another,
but  there  is  constant  hostility,  and  fights  are  cootiiiually  occurring
among  them.

^  The  author  gives  so  sood  a  definition  of  the  region  that  was  formerly  called
bv  Western  Asiatics  Bohr,  Balur,  Baluristan,  Malur,  etc.,  and  by  the  Chinese
Po-lo-lo,  that  further  elucidation  is  scarcely  required.  In  one  form  or  another  tlie
name  is  found  in  writings  dating  from  the  seventh  century  down  to  the  eighteentli.
Even  at  the  present  day  it  may  not  be  entirely  extinct,  for  some  twenty  years
ago,  Mr.  R.  B.  Shaw  found  that  the  Kirghiz  of  the  Pamirs  called  Chitrdl  by  the
name  of  Fdlor.  To  all  other  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding  regions,  however,
the  word  appears  now  to  be  unknown.

I  would  only  remark  that  when  our  author  gives  the  provinces  of  Kashghar
and  Yarkand  as  the  eastern  boundary  of  Balnr,  be  appears  to  be  somewhat  at
fault  in  his  orientation.  The  province  of  Kai^bar,  at  any  rate,  can  hardly
have  formed  part  of  the  eastern  ooundary,  if  Kabul  and  Lughmdn  (the  Lumgh^n
of  the  text)  formed  the  western,  and  Badakhahto  the  northern  limits,  as  he  con-
ceives them  to  do.  He  appears  to  have  been  facing  about  north-west,  when  he
imagined  himself  to  be  looking  to  the  north,  and  thus  to  have  displaced  his
bearings  by  about  45  degrees,  all  round  the  horizon.  If  Kashghar  was  the
eastern  neighbour  of  .BaZur,  Badakhshan  must  have  been  the  western  and  not  the
northern,  and  so  on.  Again,  Sarigh-Kul  and  the  Pamirs  must  have  formed  part
of  Balur,  but  this,  from  If  irza  Haidar*8  own  statements,  does  not  appear  to  have
been  the  case.  His  description  of  the  country,  products,  and  people  applies
obviously  to  the  region  south  of  the  Indus  water-parting  ran^e  (the  Eastern
Hindu  KushX  and  not  to  the  open  Pamirs ;  while  his  return  from  Balur  to  Sdrigh
Ghnp6n,  also  implies  advent  from  the  region  south  of  the  mountains.

Yarkand  may,  in  a  sense,  have  formed  part  of  the  eastern  boundary,  for  it  ib
possible  to  reckon  all  the  uninhabited  mountain  masses  lying  between  the
southern  plains  of  Yarkand,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Baltist&n,  or  little  Tibet,  on
the  other,  as  included  in  the  Yarkand  province.  Possibly  even  the  comparatively
low-lying  district  of  Tish-Kurgh&n,  though  north  of  the  watershed,  may  also
have  been  included  in  Balur.  Thus  it  would,  perhaps,  be  more  correct  to  say
that  the  provinces  of  Yarkand  and  Baltist&n  formed  the  eastern  boundary  of  the
region  in  question.

The  Balur  country  would  then  include  Hunza,  Nagar,  possibly  T^h-Ku^h6n,
Gilgit,  Pany&l,  Yasin,  Chitr^l,  and  probably  the  tract  now  known  as  Kafiristan :
while,  also,  some  of  the  small  states  south  of  Gilgit,  Yasin,  etc.,  may  have  been
regarded  as  part  of  Balur.

The  location  of  Balur,  or  Bolor,  was  long  a  subject  of  uncertainty  for  geo-
graphers and  commentators,  but  as  the  matter  has  now  been  cleared  up,  the  old
questions  need  not  be  discussed  afresh.  The  most  complete  dissertation  on  the
entire  subject  that  I  know  of,  is  that  contained  in  Sir  H.  Yule*s  notes  in  the
J,  M.  G.  S,  for  1872  (pp.  473  seq.)  and  in  his  Marco  Polo,  i„  pp,  187, 188,  where
the  conclusions  arrived  at,  are  very  nearlv  borne  out  by  Mirza  Haidar's  description.
The  only  differences  are  (1)  that,'  according  to  our  author,  Baltistlbi  cannot  have
been  included  in  Balur,  as  he  always  speaks  of  that  country,  later  in  his  work,
as  a  separate  province  with  the  name  of  Balti,  and  says  that  it  bordered  on
Balvir;  and  (2)  that  Balur  was  confined  almost  entirely,  as  far  as  I  am  able  U^
judge  from  his  description  in  this  passage  and  elsewhere,  (see  for  example  his
statements  pp.  405  and  417)  to  the  southern  slopes  of  the  Eiistpm  Hindu  Rush,
or  Indus  water-parting  range ;  while  Sir  H.  Yule*s  map  makes  it  embrace  Siirigh-
Kul  and  the  greater  part  of  the  eastern  Pamirs.

2  C

Digitized  by

Google

386  Invasion  of  Balur.

Moat  of  their  battles  are  conducted  in  the  following  manner.
Their  women  are  employed  in  the  management  of  the  house  and
the  labonr  of  the  fields ;  the  men  in  war.  While  their  wives  are
in  their  houses  preparing  the  food  [the  men  will  be  engaged  in
fighting].  Then  the  wives  vrill  come  out  to  them  and  make  them
desist,  saying  it  is  time  for  a  meal,  and  they  must  leave  ofi^  fighting.
So  they  separate  and  go  back  to  their  homes  to  eat  their  food,
after  which  they  return  to  the  fight  until  afternoon  prayer-time,
when  the  women  will  again  come  on  the  scene  and  make  peace,
which  endures  till  sunrise,  every  one  having  returned  to  his  own
house.  Sometimes  it  happens  that  no  pacification  is  brought  about,
in  which  case  they  fortify  and  watch  their  houses  all  through  the
night  with  the  utmost  vigilance.  In  this  way  do  they  spend  the
whole  of  their  lives.

As  plains  and  pasture  grounds  are  scarce,  the  people  can  keep
but  few  cattle.  They  own  a  small  number  of  sheep  and  goats  from
whose  wool  they  make  clothes,  and  cows  which  furnish  them  with
milk  and  butter ;  beyond  these  they  have  nothing  [in  the  way  of
fiocks].  llie  tribe  of  each  separate  valley  speaks  a  different
language  [to  that  of  its  neighbours],  and  no  one  tribe  knows  the
language  of  another.  On  account  of  being  continually  at  war,  few
of  them  have  seen  any  other  village  than  their  own.  In  Balur
there  are  beautiful  gardens  and  an  abundance  of  fruits,  especially
of  pomegranates,  which  are  excellent  and  most  plentiful.  There
is  one  kind  of  pomegranate  which  is  peculiar  to  Baluristan.  Its
seeds  are  white  and  very  transparent ;  it  is  also  sweet,  pure,  and
full-flavoured. Honey  is  also  abundant.

To  resume:  we  passed  that  winter  in  Balurist&n  and  fought
many  bloody  [«a&]  battles,  in  which  victory  was  on  our  side.  In
the  spring  we  returned  in  safety,  laden  with  spoil,  and  came  to
Sarigh  Ohup4n,  where  a  fifth  of  the  booty  was  set  apart ;  and  a
fifth  amounted  to  more  than  a  thousand  [loads].

In  the  early  part  of  the  spring  of  934  we  rejoined  the  Eh&n.  In
the  summer  following,  Sultan  Nigdr  Kh4nim,  whom  I  have  had
occasion  to  mention  so  frequently  in  this  book,  died  of  a  hcemorrhage.
I  discovered  the  date  in  [the  word]  "  khildmh.^^

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Second  Expedition  into  Badakhsfidn.  387

CHAPTER  LXXX.

SECOND EXPEDITION  OP THE  KHIn  INTO  BADAKHSHIn,  AND  THE  CAUSES
OF  CERTAIN CONTEMPORARY EVENTS.

In  the  year  935  [1528-9]  B4bar  P4disli&h  recalled  HTimdyun  Mirz4
into  Hindustan.  The  reason  for  this  was  that  Mirza  Khdn  (the
son  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Mirz4,  son  of  Abu  Said  Mirza)  had  died  in
Badahkshan,  as  has  been  related,  and  left  behind  him  a  child
named  Sulaim4n.  Babar  Padishdh  took  this  boy  and  kept  him
near  himself,  placing  his  own  distinguished  son,  Hum4yun,  on  the
throne  of  Badakhshan,  where  he  reigned  from  926  to  935.

At  the  time  when  Bdbar  Pddishdh  had  subdued  Hindustdn  and
overthrown  his  enemies,  two  of  his  sons  had  become  youths —
Humayun  Mirzd  and  Kamran  Mirza.  Leaving  the  latter  in
Kandah&r,  he  sent  for  Hum&yun  in  order  that  he  might  have  one
of  his  sons  [continually]  by  him,  so  that  if  he  were  to  die  suddenly,
there  would  be  a  successor  near  at  hand.  For  these  reasons  he
recalled  Ham&yun  Mirz4  into  Hindust&n.  But  the  people  of
Badakhsh&n  made  the  following  representation  to  Hum&yun
Mirza  :  *'  Badakhshdn  borders  on  the  [territory  of  the]  Uzbeg,  who
cherish  in  their  hearts  an  ancient  hatred  for  Badakhshan.  [If  they
attack  Badakhshdn]  our  Amirs  will  be  unable  to  check  them."
To  this  Humdyun  Mirz4  made  reply  :  "  All  that  you  say  is  true,
still  I  am  unable  to  deviate  from  my  father's  commands.  But
I  will  do  my  best  to  send  one  of  my  brothers  to  you,  as  soon
as  possible."  Having  thus  reassured  the  people,  he  started  for
Hindustan.

[No  sooner  was  he  gone  than]  the  inhabitants  of  [Badakhshan]
began  to  despair ;  and  all  the  Amirs,  with  Sultdn  Avals  at  their
head,  despatched  express  messengers  to  the  Kh4n,  representing :
^*'  Humayun  Mirzd  has  gone  to  Hindust&n,  leaving  this  province  in
the  hands  of  Fakir  Ali,  who  is  quite  incapable  of  coping  with  the
Uzbeg,  [and  therefore]  of  establishing  tranquillity  in  Badakhshan.
If,  by  such  and  such  a  date,  the  Khan  were  to  come,  all  would  be
well ;  otherwise  we  must  succumb  to  the  Uzbeg.  But  if  the  Uzbeg
come  and  attack  us  before  the  arrival  of  the  Khan,  they  will  not  be
able  [by  the  date  mentioned]  to  obtain  a  firm  footing.  We  implore
his  help.  Perhaps  he  may  be  the  cause  of  our  salvation.  More-
over, Badakhsb&n  belongs  to  the  Khan  by  right  of  inheritance  from
his  grandmother,  Sh&h  Begum ;  nor  is  there  a  more  rightful  heir
than  he."  So  persistent  were  they  in  their  appeals,  that  the  Khan
became  convinced  that  if  he  did  not  go  [to  their  aid]  Badakhshan
would  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Uzbeg. Therefore,  at  the  begin-

2  c  2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

388  Second  Expedition  into  Badakltshdn.

ning  of  Mobarram  of  the  year  '36,  be  set  out  foi*  Badakbshan,  leaving
Basbid  Sultan  in  Y&rkand.

It  bas  been  mentioned  above,  tbat  Tabir  Kban  bad  becTi  left
alone,  and  in  tbe  winter  bad  been  deserted  by  tbe  Kirgbiz  and  all
bis  following.  On  tbis  account  tbe  Kban  sbowed  bim  magnanimity
and  did  notbing.  After  bo  bad  been  a  short  time  among  the
Kirgbiz,  about  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  Uzbeg  again  gathered
I'ound  bim;  and  ho  prepared  himself  in  every  way  [for  war].
[The  Khan  on  his  departure]  therefore  left  Eashid  Sultan  to  guard
and  protect  tbe  province  of  Kashghar.  On  reaching  Sarigh
Cbupan,  tbe  Khan  sent  me  forward  with  an  advance  guard
\manghala\\t  while  he  followed  after.  I  anived  in  Badakbshan
and  learnt  that  Hinddl  Mirza,  the  youngest  of  the  Emperor's  sons,
had  been  sent  from  Kabul  by  Humayun  Mirzd ;  also  that  twelve^
days  previous  [to  my  arrival]  he  had  reached  and  entered  Kala
Zafar.  As  it  was  the  season  of  Capricorn  and  tbe  middle  of
winter,  to  turn  back  would  have  been  diffiouU.  So  [we  were
obliged  to]  go  on  to  Kala  Zafar,  where  we  tried  to  enter  into  some
negotiations,  suggesting  that  some  of  the  districts  of  Badakbshan
should  be  given  up  to  us,  and  at  the  close  of  the  winter  tbe
Kh4n  would  again  retire.  But  they  did  not  trust  us ;  nay,  more,
tbey  suspected  us  of  deceit.  So  we  finally  resolved  upon  pillage,
and,  until  the  Khan  arrived,  I  scoured  the  whole  country  round
Kala  Zafar ;  I  brought  together  both  man  and  beast,  and  indeed
all  to  which  the  word  "  thing  "  could  be  applied.  At  the  end  of
a  few  days  tbe  Khan  himself  anived,  and  during  three  months
laid  siege  to  Kala  Zafar,  while  his  men  carried  off,  from  tbe  &ur-
rounding  country,  the  little  that  I  had  left.  Near  the  end  of
winter,  many  of  tbe  Amirs  who  had  sent  for  tbe  Kbdn,  came  and
waited  on  him,  representing,  with  profuse  apologies,  that  if  Hindal
Mirza  had  not  come,  they  would  have  hastened  to  meet  and
receive  the  Kh&n.  To  this  the  Khan  replied :  "  It  is  out  of  the
question  that  I  should  oppose  Bdbar  Padisb&b.  You  sent  me
entreating  letters,  saying  that  you  would  be  swallowed  up  by  the
Uzbeg,  and  tbat  the  presence  of  the  Uzbeg  in  Badakbshan  would
be  equally  hurtful  to  both  sides ;  ^  for  this  reason  I  came.  As
matters  stand,  every  man  ought  now  to  return  to  his  own  home."
[Thereupon]  tbe  Khan  left  Kala  Zafar,  and  set  out  again  for
Kashghar.

When  news  of  the  Khan's  entry  into  Badakbshan  reached  the
Emperor,  he  was  greatly  displeased,  and  after  due  consideration
and  reflection,  he  despatched  Sulaimdn  Sh&h  Mirza  [to  Badakhsh&n]
and  recalled  Hinddl  Mirzd  [into  Hindusidn]. At  the  same  time

>  Tbe  Tnrki  version  baa  fifteen  days. — ^B.

*  Here  tbe  Turki  MS.  bas:  "equally  burtfal  to  us  and  to  the  Emperor,"
which  is  obviously  the  sense  intended.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

[Second  Expedition  into  Badakhshdn,  389

lie  wrote  to  the  Khan :  *•  ConBideriiig  my  numerous  claims  [on
your  oonsiderafion]  [and  the  ties  that  exist  between  us]  this  affair
seems  strange.  I  have  recalled  Hind&l  Mirza,  and  have  sent
Sulaim&n.  If  you  have  any  regard  for  hereditary  rights,  you
will  be  kind  to  Sulaimdn  Shdh,  and  leave  him  in  possession  of
Badakhshan,  for  he  is  as  a  son  to  us  both.  This  would  be  well.
Otherwi<$e  I,  having  given  up  my  responsibility,  will  place  the
inheritance  in  the  hands  of  the  heir. The  rest  you  know."

When  Sulaimdn  Sb4h  Mirzd  reached  Kdbul,^  [he  found  that  the
Khan]  had  retreated  some  time  before.  Hinddl  Mirzd,  in  obedience
to  the  orders  he  had  received,  gave  up  Badakhshan  to  Sulaiman
Shah  Mirza,  and  proceeded  to  India.  From  that  time  to  the
present,  Sulaimdn  has  reigned  in  Badakhshdn.

The  Khdn  [returning  from  Badakhsh4n]  reached  Yarkand  at
the  beginning  of  spring.  On  the  road  my  uncle  fell  ill,  and  when
he  arrived  at  Kashghar,  his  complaint  took  the  forms  of  intermittent
fever,  dropsy,  asthma  and  ague,  so  that  all  the  doctors  who  were
attending  him,  such  as  Ehw&ja  Nur-ud-Din,  Abdul  Ydhid  Tuhuri,
Kazi  Shaujs-ud-Din  Ali  and  others,  were  at  a  loss ;  the  symptoms
at  last  became  so  grave  that  his  life  was  despaired  of.  In  the
meanwhile  Khwaja  Nura  arrived  from  Turfan,  whither  he  had
gone  on  the  invitation  of  Mansur  Rh&n,  who  had  said  thnt  if  [the
Hazrat]  would  honour  him  with  a  \isit,  he  and  his  friends  would
esteem  it  a  great  blessing.  [Couplet]  .  .  .  Accepting  this  invitation,
Khwdja  Nura  went  to  Turfan,  and  having  quenched  the  thirst  of
those  parched  wanderers  in  the  desert  of  longing,  with  the  wine
of  his  presence,  he  returned  to  K4shghar. [Two  couplets]  .  .  •

My  uncle's  state  was  now  such  that  he  fainted  every  few  minutes,
and  became  unconscious.^  Soon  after  his  Holiness  began  to  attend
to  my  uncle,  the  gravity  of  the  disease  showed  sigps  of  abatement*
All  his  remedies  had  a  beneficial  effect,  yet  as  a  fact,  this  was  not
medical  treatment,  but  miraculous  power  and  holy  influence :  for
the  patient  had  become  so  weak  and  emaciated  that  he  could  not
take  medicines,  and  in  such  circumstances  what  can  a  doctor  do  ?
Therefore  this  was  a  miracle.

During  this  time  a  difference  arose  between  Khwdja  Nurd  and  his
younger  brother,  Khwdja  Muhammad  Yusuf,  on  account  of  the  neg-
lect of  a  point  of  etiquette.  The  breach  widened  [from  day  to  day].
One  day  I  went  to  wait  upon  Khwaja  Nurd,  and  found  Khwdja
Muhammad  Yusuf  sitting  in  his  presence.  Khwaja  Nurd  had
worked  himself  into  a  passion,  and  as  soon  as  I  had  taken  my  seat,
f  aid  :  **  Muhammad  Yusuf,  why  do  you  act  thus  ?  If  you  are  the
disciple  of  our  father,  I  am  the  disciple  of  his  Holiness— that  is,

1  All  the  tcztB  read  KabvX^  but  apparently  that  name  is  a  slip  for  Badahhshdn.
As  it  stands,  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  not  evident.
'  Some  details  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  omitted.

Digitized  by

Google

390  Death  of  Khwdja  Muhammad  Yusuf.

of  Khwdja  Ihrar  Khwdja  Ubaidullah ;  and  besides  this  I  have
many  points  of  superiority  over  you.  You  are  foster-brother  to
my  eldest  son.  Apart  from  all  this,  I  am  supported  by  God  and
His  Prophet ;  what  strength  have  you  to  oppose  me  ? "  Khw&ja
Muhammad  Yusuf  replied  :  '*  I  also  am  hopeful  of  the  help  of  the
Prophet."  Then,  asked  Khwaja  Nura :  "  Are  you  willing  that  the
Prophet  should  be  mediator  between  us?"  Khwdja  Muhammad
Yusuf  answered :  "  I  am  quite  willing,"  and  Khwdja  Nurd  having
intimated  that  he  also  was  willing,  not  another  word  was  said.
Thus  the  meeting  terminated.

Shortly  after  this,  Khwdja  Nurd  set  out  for  Badakhshdn.  One
day  somebody  came  and  told  him  that  Khwdja  Muhammad  Yusuf
had  fallen  ill,  and  was  asking  for  him.  I  went  to  visit  him  and
found  he  had  a  fever.  The  Khwdja  said  to  me :  '^  I  know  well
that  Khwaja  Khdvand  Mahmud  has  taken  an  interest  in  me  for
some  time  past,  he  is  kindly  disposed  towards  me  and  gives  me
comfort  from  the  Prophet.  But  now  I  do  not  know  what  haa
become  of  this  comfort ;  for  not  a  trace  of  it  is  apparent,  and  I  am
quite  convinced  that  I  shall  not  recover  from  my  present  illness.
Khwdja  Khdvand,  who  is  my  brother — ^nay  more,  stands  in  the  place
of  a  father  to  me,  ought  not  to  have  treated  me  thus ;  he  has  put
aside  all  his  brotherly  love  and  fatherly  afifection."  These  and  a
thousand  such  lamentations  did  he  pour  into  my  ears.  He  also
told  me  a  few  anecdotes,  and  entrusted  some  of  his  household  to
my  care.  He  gave  me  a  garment  of  camel's-hair  and  an  apron,  as
souvenirs.  In  vain  did  I  attempt  to  dispel  his  ideas  [of  impending
death] ;  he  only  replied  :  "  I  am  convinced  ;  there  is  not  a  shadow
of  doubt."  He  died  on  the  sixth  night  of  his  illness,  on  the  14th
of  the  month  Safar  of  the  year  937.  I  discovered  this  date  in
"  Tdir-i'Bxhishti  "  [a  bird  of  paradise].

After  this,  the  Khdn  sent  me  to  Khwdja  Nurd  to  entreat  him  to
return,  which  he  did,  and  the  Khdn  came  out  to  receive  him  ;  ho
placed  his  head  at  the  Khwdja's  feet  and  offered  him  profuse
apologies.  The  funeral  rites  of  Khwdja  Muhammad  Yusuf  were
then  performed,  [including]  the  giving  of  alms,  distribution  of  food
and  reading  the  Kordn  through.

But  Khwdja  Nurd  chose  to  dwell  in  Yangi-Hisdr,  and  the  Khdn,
in  order  to  wait  on  him,  left  Ydrkand  and  went  thither  likewise.
There,  they  and  the  friends  and  disciples  of  the  Khwdja  spent  that
winter.  The  Khwdja  performed  wondrous  things  in  their  sight.
The  Khdn  was  continually  in  bis  service.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Rupture  between  tfie  Kftdn  and  Aiman.  391

CHAPTEE  LXXXL

CAUSES  OF  THE  RUPTURE  BETWEEN  THE  KHIn AND AIMAN KHWAJA

sultIn.

The  details  of  this  affair  wonld  be  tedious  and  irrelevant ;  but  it
was  briefly  as  follows.  Mirza  Ali  Tagh&i,  whose  name  appears  in
the  lists  made  at  E&shghar,^  was  exceedingly  jealous  of  my  uncle,
but  this  did  not  show  itself  outwardly.  Although  he  tried  hard
[to  injure  him],  slander  and  detraction  could  gain  no  hearing  in
the  service  of  the  Khan.  As  was  mentioned  above,  the  Kh4n  gave
my  uncle's  daughter  to  Aiman  Ehw4ja  Sultdn  in  marriage,  and
from  this  connection  had  come  many  fine  children ;  thus  a  bond  of
union  [which  should  have  lasted  till  the  day  of  judgment]  was
formed  between  my  uncle  and  the  Sult&n.

But  seditious  thoughts  suggested  themselves  to  Mirz4  Ali
Taghai.  Since  the  spirit  of  jealousy  had  no  effect  on  the  Khan's
relations  with  the  Mirzd,  he  tried  to  beguile  Aiman  Ehwdja  Sultan,
and  stir  up  the  dust  of  dissension  between  the  brothers.  He
would  thus,  he  thought,  gain  his  end.  For  if  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza  took  the  part  of  his  son-in-law  and  the  latter's  children,  ho
would  have,  of  necessity,  to  break  with  his  maternal  uncle,  which
would  suit  his  [Mirza  Ali  Taghai's]  purposes  well.  If,  on  the
other  hand  [the  Mirz4]  sided  with  the  Ehdn,  he  would  be  closing
the  eye  of  fatherly  affection  on  Aiman  Khwdja  Sultdn,  and  his
children.  In  this  event  likewise  [the  Mirza]  would  suffer,  for  the
cause  of  Aiman  Ebw&ja  Sultdn  would  be  ruined,  and  the  power
of  the  Mirz4,  in  a  measure,  broken.  Acting  upon  these  mis-
chievous calculations,  he,  by  a  series  of  misrepresentations  and
suggestions,  made  the  Eh&n  and  Aiman  Ehw4ja  Sultdn  mutually
apprehensive  of  one  another.

The  details  are  briefly  these  :  At  the  time  when  the  Khan
marched  against  Andijdn,  [Mirza  Ali  Taghai]  said  privately  to
Aiman  Ehwaja  Sultan :  "  I  perceive  that  the  Ehan  has  changed
[in  his  conduct]  towards  you,  on  account  of  my  loyalty  ;  he  wishes
to  set  up  his  son  Rashid  Sult&n  in  your  place,  and  give  him  the
province  of  Aksu.  You  must  now  look  well  to  your  own  interests,
and  trusting  my  words,  act  upon  them/'  While  to  the  Ehan,  he  was
for  ever  saying :  "  Aiman  Ehwaja  Sultan  is  afraid  of  you  without
right  or  reason. It  is  very  probable  that  he  will  appeal  to  your

>  The  author  frequently  refers,  in  these  words,  to  the  analysis  or  review  of
the  Khan's  army,  when  on  the  point  of  invading  Eashghar  in  the  spring,  of
020  B. (Bee  pp.  305  %eq^

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

392  Rupture  between  tlie  Khan  and  Aiman.

enemieB  for  aid  [and  stir  np  a  revolt].  But  the  Khan  does  nut
credit  my  words,  and  says  they  are  the  outcome  of  mere  delusion.
His  evidence  is  that  this  year  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan  is  committing
such  and  such  acts."  [Then  Mirza  Ali  Taghai]  Fends  secretly  to
the  Sultan,  saying :  "  The  right  time  is  now  come  for  you  to  do  so
and  so."  In  his  artlessness  and  stupidity  [the  Sultan]  does  what
has  been  suggested.  Then  Mirza  Ali  Taghai  represents  to  the
Khdn  :  **  I  told  you  that  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan  would  do  such  and
such  a  thing  this  year. My  words  have  come  true."

From  the  time  of  the  Kh4n's  march  against  Andijan  until  his
death,  a  period  of  some  six  years,  this  sort  of  intrigue  was  con-
tinually going  on.  And  finally  the  Khan  became  altogether
estranged  from  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultdn.  It  was  in  vain  that  my
uncle  and  I  reproved  Aiman  Khw4ja  Sult4n;  when  we  asked
him  why  he  acted  in  this  way,  he  could  give  no  satisfactory  reply,
but  persisted  in  his  course ;  his  motives  were  unknown  to  us.

At  last  we  discovered  that  it  was  all  the  work  of  Mirza  Ali
Taghai.  When  Mirz4  Ali  Taghai  remarked  the  great  change  in
the  Khan's  feelings  towards  Aiman  Khwdja  Sultan,  he  took  advan-
tage of  the  opportunity,  and  represented  as  follows  to  the  Khan  :
*'  Since  Aiman  Khwaja  Sultan's  presence  in  Aksu  may  lead  to  a
revolt,  it  will  be  better  to  set  up  Rashid  Sultan  in  his  place,  and
send  him  to  govern  some  district  of  Badakhshan.  This  would  be
greatly  to  your  advantage.  But  I  am  fearful  lest  the  Mirzas
become  angry  with  me.  If  they  consent  [to  the  arrangement]
you  will  find  it  most  advantageous ;  but  it  will  be  a  difficult  thing
to  mention  to  the  Mirzds."  (By  the  Mirzas,  ho  meant  my  uncle
and  myself.)

The  Khdn  told  me  of  this ;  I  replied  :  "  In  what  way  is  Aiman
Khwdja  Sult4n  preferable  to  your  Highness'  [other]  servants,  that
this  change  should  be  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  State  ?  I  do  not
consent  to  it.  His  relationship  to  your  Highness  is  [only]  equal  to
ours.  If  my  uncle's  daughter  is  of  his  household  and  has  children
[by  him],  the  daughter  of  my  paternal  uncle  is  in  your  haram,
and  these  two  amount  to  precisely  the  same  [degree  of  relation-
ship], Eather  there  is  the  advantage  [on  our  side]  that  I  have
been  in  your  service  for  twenty-three  years,  and  you  have  always
singled  me  out  for  your  fatherly  care  and  brotherly  love.  How
then  shall  I  exchange  the  Kh4n's  cause  for  that  of  the  Sultan?  I
will  forward  any  measure  that  may  be  for  the  benefit  of  your  State,
by  all  the  means  in  my  power."

The  Kh&n  spoke  also  of  this  matter  to  my  uncle,  who  said:
**  [Your  Highness']  opinion  is  always  enlightened ;  I  am  ready  to
do  your  bidding  on  every  occasion.  .  .  }  Although  I  did  not
know  th'it  [the  Saltan]  could  harm  you,  yet  I  trust  your  hitherto
'  One  line,  containing  a  passage  of  which  no  sense  can  be  made,  is  omitted. — B.

Digitized  by

Googk

Tlie  Author's  Mission  to  Aksu,  393

infallible  judgment,  and  will  do  whatever  is  moat  fitting  in  the
matter."

These  discussions  being  terminated,  the  Khan  explained  to  us
his  proposals.  He  ordered  me  to  take  Bashid  Sultdn  [to  Aksu],
and  after  sending  Aiman  Khwdja  Sult4n  away  from  there,  to
place  Eashid  Sultan  upon  the  throne.  Aiman  Khwdja  Sultan  was
to  come  to  [the  Khan's]  court,  and  to  remain  there  until  the
country  should  be  reduced  to  order.  All  must  be  done  to  advance
the  afifairs  of  Bashid  Sultdn.  To  my  uncle  he  said :  '*  Let  all  be
carried  out  as  I  have  ordered."  I  said :  **  With  all  willingness  I
undertake  the  task."

Two  days  later  I  started  for  Aksu.  On  reaching  Uch  I  was
received  by  Shah  Baz  Mirza,  who  was  also  mentioned  in  the  lists
at  Kashghar.  After  leaving  Uch,  I  was  met  \i8tikh6X]  by  all  the
men  of  Aiman  Khw4ja  Sult4n,  who  sent  a  message  to  me  asking  :
"  What  has  happened?  How  would  it  be  for  us,  having  set  aside
all  considerations  of  relationship,  to  meet  [in  consultation]  ?  **  But
I  would  not  consent  [to  an  interview]  and  said:  "As  there  is
nothing  to  be  gained  by  an  interview,  it  is  not  worth  while  to
have  one."  I  then  sent  a  person  to  [the  Sultan]  with  all  the
necessary  provisions  for  a  journey,  and  also  some  trusty  men  to
accompany  him.  [After  that  I  set  myself]  to  encourage  the
soldiers  and  populace  [of  Aksu]  and  to  settle  their  affairs  in  the
most  profitable  manner ;  I  passed  the  necessary  orders  to  the  old
servants  of  Bashid  Sultan,  and  arranged  the  government  of  the
province  by  dividing  it  equally  into  villages  and  districts.  Thus
all  the  people  were  reassured. I  stayed  there  six  months.

Bashid  Snlt4n  was  satisfied  with  all  that  was  done,  and  there
grew  up  between  us  the  strongest  attachment.  During  my
sojourn,  we  were  never  apart  for  a  moment.  There  was  not  the
slightest  disagreement  between  us.  All  that  he  did  was  pleasing
in  my  sight ;  and  all  that  I  performed  met  with  his  approval.

Whatever  I  had  suffered  in  being  separated  from  my  old  friends,
that  is  to  say,  Shah  Muhammad  Sultan  and  Baba  Sultan,  was
atoned  for  in  my  friendship  with  Bashid  Sultan.  One  day  Bashid
Sultan  said  to  me  :  "  Although  formerly  in  Moghulistdn,  in  accord-
ance with  the  Moghul  usage,  and  by  the  Khan's  express  command,
there  existed  between  us  close  friendship,  and  we  used  to  give  each
other  horses,  nevertheless  this  fellowship  was  not  confirmed  by  any
vow.  I  am  now  desirous  of  renewing  the  old  friendship  and  of
ratifying  it  by  solemn  oaths."  I  too  showed  my  willingness,  and  the
conditions  of  our  covenant  were  that,  on  my  side,  as  long  as  the
Khdn  should  live,  I  would  remain  in  his  service ;  but  if  the  Khan
were  to  die,  I  would  serve  no  one  but  him  [Bashid  Saltan] — and
serve  him  in  the  Khan's  place,  as  he  had  served  the  Khan.  Bashid
Sultan  said : "  After  the  Khan,  I  look  upon  you  as my  eldest

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

394  TIte  Author* s  Mission  to  Aksu.

brother.  If,  in  public,  you  reverence  me  in  the  place  of  the
Khan,  I  in  private  will  honour  you  as  you  deserve,  and  will
show  you  even  greater  kindness  and  favour  than  did  the  Ehan.  I
will  give  such  offices  to  your  uncle  and  relations  as  yon  may  judge
best."  And  all  this  we  confirmed  with  binding  oaths.  [Two
couplets].  .  .  .

This  matter  being  concluded,  he  bade  me  farewell,  and  I  returned
to  the  Ehan,  who  was  in  Y4ngi-Hisdr.  He  received  me  in  a  most
flattering  manner,  and  would  not  hear  of  my  going  back  to  my
home;  in  Yarkand ;  but  instead,  took  me  with  him  on  a  hunting
expedition  to  Tuyun  Bashi — one  of  the  frontiers  of  Moghulistan.
On  reaching  the  hunting  ground,  we  were  joined  by  the  Sultan,
who  came  from  Aksu.  Soon  after  this  the  Kh4n  had  a  return  of
his  old  chronic  illness,  which  took  the  form  of  flatulence,  or  wind
in  the  belly  and  stomach,  fits  of  shivering,  and  partial  paralysis.
Often,  after  hunting,  he  got  a  chill  on  the  stomach,  and  his  malady
returned.  But  on  this  occasion  the  symptoms  were  worse  than
they  had  ever  been  before.  My  uncle  was  immediately  sent  for
from  Eashghar;  but  by  the  time  he  arrived  the  doctors  of  the
royal  camp  had  succeeded  in  curing  the  disease,  by  means  of
effective  remedies.

StiU,  this  time  the  Eh&n  was  much  concerned  about  his  illness.
He  sent  for  my  uncle  and  Bashid  Sultdn,  and  said  to  them :  *'  This
illness  has  made  me  very  anxious.  I  have  frequently  had  such
attacks  before ;  for  several  years  they  have  happened  annually^
but  this  year  I  have  been  seized  twice,  and  the  second  time  more
severely  than  the  first.  My  wish  now  is  that  there  should  be  a
covenant  between  you  (meaning  my  uncle)  and  Bashid  Sultan.
In  Mirza  Haidar's  case  tiiere  is  no  need  of  renewal,  for  not  only
did  I  establish  them  on  a  friendly  footing  in  Moghulistdn,  but
they  have  lately  again,  in  Aksu,  concluded  a  satisfactory  agree-
ment." Then,  addressing  them  both  in  the  Turki  language,  the
Ehan  continued:  '*0h,  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirza,  if  anything
should  happen  to  me,  look  upon  Bashid  Sultan  as  standing  in  my
place.  And  you,  Bashid,  look  upon  the  Mirza  as  in  my  place  ahio."
He  said  many  kind  things  besides,  all  of  which  it  would  be  tedious
to  repeat  here.

The  Khan  took  up  his  winter  quarters  in  Yangi-His4r,  while  I
went  to  Yarkand.  Previously,  when  I  had  come  from  Aksu  I  had
found  the  Eh4n  busily  engaged  in  reading  with,  and  learning
under  [iradat\  Hazrat  Makhdumi  Nurd.

Digitized  by  VjOO^IC

Ttie  Klidn  and  Khwdja  Kftdvand.  39S

CHAPTER  LXXXir.

THE  KhIn becomes  A  DISCIPLE OF KHWAjA KHIyAND MAHMUD.

AriER  the  Khwaja  Muhammad  Ynsuf  incident,  I  tried  constantly
to  indnce  the  Khdn  to  place  himself  under  the  guidance  of  Hazrat
Makhduiiii  Nurd.  The  Khan  would  reply :  "  I  desire  this  with  all
my  soul.  Without  seeking  [what  you  suggest],  I  wished  to  resign
the  government  in  order  that  I  might  follow  that  most  perfect
guide,  Khwaja  Nura ;  but  the  more  I  examiued  myself,  the  le^s
capable  did  I  feel  of  making  an  open  request  to  his  Holiness.  I
then  resolved  to  change  my  mode  of  living  and  to  mend  my  ways,
80  as  to  render  myself  more  fitting  for  his  service.  If  1  should
acquire  proficiency  and  capacity  in  the  right  path,  then  would
Khwaja  Nura  show  me  favour,  without  any  request  on  my  part ;  but
if  I  should  fail,  my  petition  would  be  fruitless.  I  trust  that,  by
God's  grace,  I  may  attain  my  end  without  addresbing  an  open
request  to  his  Holiness.  If  such  a  happy  consummation  should
bo  reached  I  shall  feel  reassured.'*  However  much  I  insisted,
the  Khan  always  gave  the  same  reply.  A  few  months  after  my
departure  for  Aksu,  a  letter  arrived,  directed  in  my  name,  con-
taining certain  [instructions]  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  Aksu  ;
and  on  the  margin  there  was  some  of  the  Khan's  blessed  hand-
writing, I  have  it  intact  before  me  at  this  moment.^

CHAPTER  LXXXIIL

GENEALOGY AND LIFE  OF  HAZRAT KHWAJA KHIvAND  MAHMUD

shahIb-ud-din.

(He  is  always  spoken  of  in  this  book  as  Hazrat  Mnkhdumi  Nuru.)
He  received  the  name  of  Mahmud  from  his  father,  and  that  of
Shahab-ud-Din  from  his  grandfather.  Out  of  veneration  they
gave  him  the  name  of  Khw&ja  Khavand  Mahmud  .  .  .  .  ^

I  have  heard  Hazrat  Makhdumi  Nnr4  relate  that  when  his
father  died  he  was  twenty-seven  years  of  age. He  had  heard  his

'  The  omisaion  here  coDsistg  of  some  long  high-flown  passages  on  the  subject
of  saints. The  Kh&n's  marginal  note  is  not  given  by  the  author. — ^R.

'  Some  more  irrelevant  matter  regarding  saints  and  their  virtues,  is  left
out  here. — "B^.

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

30  Life  of  Khwdja  Kltdvand  Mahmud,

father  say :  "  In  Shahr-i-Sabz  of  Samarkand  there  is  a  garden,
and  in  the  garden  a  mulberry  tree;  and  Khwaja  Baha-ul-Hakk
iva  nd-Din  Nakhshband  used  to  sit  leaning  against  that  tree.
Hazrat  Ishan,  on  account  of  this  blessing,  bought  the  garden.  In
front  of  the  tree  is  a  tank.  One  night,  on  the  edge  of  the  tank,
Hazrat  Ishan  related  to  Khwaja  Ubaid-ul-H4di  and  myself  as
follows  :  "  During  the  lifetime  of  Hazrat  Ishdn  ^  I  suffered  from  a
weakness  of  the  stomach,  which  the  doctors  of  M4vara-un-Nahr
were  unable  to  cure.  I  then  went  into  Ehordsan,^  where  the
Shaikh  ul  Is1dm,Mauldn4  Abdur  Eahman  Jami,  brought  me  to  hin
own  house,  and  in  his  service  I  remained  [for  some  little  time].
I  studied  some  of  his  tracts  under  him."  I  learnt  that  he  had
received  his  education  at  the  hands  of  Bandagi  Maulavi  [Jdmi],
and  from  the  pamphlet  which  I  have  copied  into  this  book,  ^  it
appears  that  Khwdja  Nur4  read  standard  books  under  him.
After  the  death  of  Jdmi,  he  went  into  Ir4k,  where  he  enjoyed  the
society  of  Mir  Hasan  Yazdi  and  Mir  Sadr-ud-Din.  He  next  went
and  studied,  for  a  period  of  six  years,  under  Maulana  Jalal-ud-Din
Davani,  and  he  also  studied  medicine  under  Mauldnd  Imad-ud-
Din,  who  was  the  most  eminent  physician,  not  merely  in  Irak,
but  in  the  whole  world *

Having  completed  his  medical  studies  in  Shir4z,  he  passed  into
Hum,  where  also  he  devoted  himself  to  study.  Thence  he  journeyed
into  Egypt.  Having  performed  the  pilgrimage  [to  Mekka],  he
embarked  at  Jadda,  and  went  to  India  by  way  of  Gujrat.  Thence
he  repaired  to  Kdbul,  where  Babar  Fddishdh  was  at  that  time;
and  I,  as  already  mentioned,  was  there  also.  These  travels  had
occupied  Khwaja  Nurd  twenty-three  years.  When  the  Emperor
took  Samarkand,  the  Khwdja  went  thither,  and  on  the  Emperor's
returning  to  Kdbul,  the  Khwdja  remained  in  Samarkand  until  the
year  931,  when  ho  returned  to  Kdshghar,  as  was  mentioned.  In
those  days  he  related  :  '*  In  Samarkand  I  saw,  in  a  vision,  Mauldnd
Hdji  Kdsim  (one  of  Hazrat  Ishan's  servants)  come  with  two  horses,
saying  that  Hazrat  Ishdn  had  ordered  him  to  tell  Khwdja  Nurd  to
take  these  two  hordes  and  go  to  Kdshghar."  Before  the  Khwaja
reached  Kdshghar  my  uncle  was  attacked  by  paralysis,  but  on  his
arrival  the  Khwdja,  by  means  of  his  remedies,  completely  restored
him  to  health.  He  stayed  two  years  in  Kdshghar,  where  his
associates  were  enriched  by  his  blessings.

Mansur  Khdn  sent  some  persons  to  him,  saying  that  no  Makh-

*  The  Hasrat  Ishdn  alluded  to  here,  is  appareDtly  one  who  has  not  heen
hitherto  mentioned.

*  In  the  Tiirkl  stands:  '*Ia  order  to  be  cured,  I  was  obliged  to  go  lo
Ehorasdn."— B.

*  Quoted  in  extenso  lower  down,  but  omitted  in  this  translation,  as  having  na
bearins;  on  the  history.

*  A  Tine  of  rhetoric  omitted. — R.

Digitized  by

Google

Life  of  Khwdja  Khdvand  Mahmud.  397

dumzada  had  ever  come  to  those  comers  [of  the  earth],  Turfan  and
Chdlish,  which  were  the  residence  of  the  disciples  of  his  [spiritual]
fathers ;  these  people  and  this  country  had  never  been  blessed  by  a
visit  from  the  Ehwaja.  As  it  would  be  diflScult  for  his  friends  in
those  quarters  to  go  to  him,  all  their  blessings  would  be  upon  him
if  he  would  come  and  honour  them.  The  E^wdja  accepted  this
invitation  of  Mansur  Eh4n,  and  set  out  for  Turfdn,  where  he
remained  nearly  three  years,  and  brought  blessings  to  those  who
associated  with  him.

On  the  Khan's  return  from  the  Badakhshdn  campaign,  Khwdja
Nura  left  Turf4n  and  stayed  in  Edshghar  to  attend  my  uncle,
who,  as  mentioned  above,  had  become  subject  to  fits  of  vomiting
\}»iu^i&\.  Having  again  restored  my  uncle  to  perfect  health,  he
proceeded  to  Yarkand.  Here  Ehwaja  Muhammad  Yusuf,  as  has
been  related  above,  did  not  come  out  to  greet  him  in  the  prescribed
manner,  from  which  circumstance  a  dispute  arose,  which  termi-
nated as  already  described.  After  this  affair  he  went  to  Ydngi-
His&r,  in  which  place  the  Khdn  also  spent  the  winter,  in  order  to
wait  upon  his  Holiness  .  .  .  .^  The  Ehwdja  told  me  that  after
the  death  of  Abdur  Bahm4n  Jdmi,  he  found  under  his  pillow
some  rough  copies,  one  of  which  he  {S&^e*  written  out,  to  me ;  an  i
I  have  copied  it  here.  He  gave  me  these  passages  in  Yangi-Hisdr
in  the  year  937  [1530-31] »

At  the  end  of  the  winter  I  went  to  Aksu,  and  there  [found]  the
Ehan  and  some  of  his  adherents,  liigh  officials,  nobles,  and  oUiers.
At  their  request  the  Ehw&ja  wrote  several  pamphlets.  One  of
these  is  the  following,  which  I  have  copied  out  in  full.  ^

*  About  five  llDes  left  out,  regftrdiog  some  miraoles  performed  by  the  saint,
together  with  three  verses  of  an  (Kle  by  the  author.

*  Here  follows  half  a  folio  containing  J&mi's  "rough  oopies,"  which  need  not
bo  inserted.

'  The  pamphlet  is  omitted.  It  is  entirely  theological,  and  has  no  reference
to  the  Tarikh'i'Bashidi,  or  to  any  historical  subject

Digitized  by

Google

398  Journey  of  Hazrat  Makhdumu

CHAPTER  LXXXIV.

J0UR19ET  OF HAZRAT  MAKHDUMI INTO  INDIA/ AND  CERTAIN  MATTERS*
CONNECTED  THEREWITH.

That  spring,  Hazrat  Makhdumi  Nnra  set  out  for  India  by  way  of
Badakhsh&n.  The  Eh4n  esoorted  him  as  far  as  the  pass  of  Shah-
n4z,2  [representing]  seven  or  eight  days*  journey.  I,  being  in  Aksn
at  the  time,  was  denied  participation  in  this  happiness.  On  my
return  from  Aksu  the  Eh4n  said  to  me :  **  On  bidding  farewell  to
Khwaja  Nurd,  I  begged  him  to  recite  the  F6X%ha^  and  just  as  he
was  about  to  commence  I  asked  him,  as  a  favour,  to  first  of  all
repeat  it  for  Mirzd  Haidar  and  afterwards  for  me.  He  granted  my
request,  and  having  first  recited  it  for  you,  he  then  did  so  for  me."
[Two  couplets].  .  .  .  Those  who  were  present  relate  that  the
Khan,  during  the  few  stages  he  made  with  the  Khwdja,  was  over-
come with  grief,  and  whenever  the  Khwaja  spoke,  he  was  so  over-
powered with  emotion,  that  he  could  not  restrain  his  tears, — a
circumstance  that  greatly  impressed  those  who  were  present.
[Verses].  ...  As  this  was  the  last  time  the  Kh4n  would  see  the
Khwdja,  he  naturally  felt  severely  the  pangs  of  separation.

In  short,  Khw4ja  Nura  arrived  in  Hindustan.  The  frontier
towns  of  Hindustan,  namely,  Kabul  and  Ldhur,  were  then  held  by
Kamran  Mirzd,  who  humbly  begged  the  Khw4ja  to  stay  in  Lahnr,
but  the  Khwdja  replied :  "  From  the  first,  it  had  been  my  intention
to  wait  upon  the  Emperor  [Babar] ;  therefore  I  must  now  go  and
condole  with  Humayun.  Having  performed  this  duty,  should  I
return,  I  will  accept  your  invitation."  He  then  went  to  Agra,  the
capital  of  India,  where  he  was  received  with  great  honour  by  the
Emperor  [Humayun].

At  that  period  there  had  arisen  in  Hindustan  a  man  named
Shaikh  Ful.  Humdyun  was  anxious  to  become  his  disciple,  for  he
had  a  great  passion  for  the  occult  sciences — for  magic  and  conju-
ration. Shaikh  Ful  having  assumed  the  garb  of  a  Shaikh,  came  to
the  Emperor  and  taught  him  that  incantations  and  sorceiy  were
the  surest  means  to  the  true  attainment  of  an  object.  Since
doctrines  such  as  these  suited  his  disposition,  he  became  at  once
the  Shaikh's  disciple.  Besides  this  person,  there  was  Maulana
Muhammad  Farghari  who,  though  a  MuUa,  was  a  very  [irreligious]
and  unprincipled  man,  and  who  always  worked  hard  to  gain  his

'  The  Turki  rubric  reads:  "Journey  into  Badakhshan."

'  I  do  not  know,  which  of  the  pAsees  reached  by  ascending  the  Shahndz  river,  is
meant  by  this  name.  It  might  be  the  Kdtkdtu^  or  perhaps  the  Kara-tAsk.  The
Khan  appears  to  have  returned  at  this  time,  from  Aksa  to  one  of  the  western
towns.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Miracles  of  Khwdja  Nurd.  399

ends,  even  when  they  were  of  an  evil  nature.  The  Shaikh  asked
the  aid  of  Mnlla  Muhammad  and,  in  common,  bj  means  of  flattery,
they  wrought  upon  the  Emperor  for  their  own  purposes,  and
gained  his  favour.

Not  long  after  this  I  went  to  visit  the  Emperor,  as  shall  be
presently  related,  but  I  could  never  gather  that  he  had  learned
anything  from  hisPtr,  Shaikh  Pnl,  except  magic  and  incantations.^
But  God  knows  best.  The  influence  of  Shaikh  Pul  being  thus
confirmed,  Mauldna  Muhammad,  or  rather  the  Emperor  and  all
his  following,  neglected  and  slighted  Ehwaja  Nurd,  who  had  an
hereditary  claim  to  their  veneration.  This  naturally  caused  the
Khwdja  great  inward  vexation.  It  was  mentioned  above  that
when  passing  through  Ldhur,  he  had  been  invited  by  Edmrdn
Mirzd  to  take  up  his  abode  in  that  place,  and  he  had  promised  to
do  so  on  his  return.  In  pursuance  of  his  promise,  he  now  set  out
from  Agra  to  Ldhur.  Humdyun  and  his  companions  be^ed  him
[to  stay],  but  he  would  not  listen  to  their  entreaties.  He  reached
Ldhnr  in  the  year  943  [1536-7].  I  had  arrived  in  Ldhur  just
before,  and  I  now  had  the  honour  of  kissing  his  feet.

In  those  days  I  used  frequently  to  hear  him  say :  *'  I  have  seen
in  a  vision,  a  great  sea  which  overwhelmed  all  who  remained
behind  us  in  Agra  and  Hindustdn  ;  while  we  only  escaped  after  a
hundred  risks :  "  and  thus  did  it  come  about  three  years  later —
just  as  he  had  said — ^as  shall  be  presently  related."^  After  the
devastation  of  Hindustdn  he  escaped,  in  safety,  to  Mdvard-un-Nahr,
by  way  of  Kdshghar.

CHAPTER  LXXXV.

MIRACLES OF KHWijA NUBI.

I  WAS  present  in  the  assembly  when  Mauldnd  Muhammad  Par-
ghari  arrived  from  Agra,  with  a  letter  from  Humdyun  Pddishdh  ;
he  also  was  present  when  the  Khwdja  gave  the  answer  before-
mentioned.  Mauldnd  Muhammad  began  to  weep  and  begged  that
his  sins  might  be  forgiven  him ;  he  beseeched  [the  Khwdja]  with
great  earnestness  to  write  a  letter  to  Humdyun.  The  Khwdja
wrote :  "  Oh  I  Humd,  do  not  throw  thy  noble  shadow,  in  a  land

1  Shaikh  PtfZ,  PAttZ  or  ^uAluI,  was  well-known  in  India  as  a  saint  and  sorcerer.
He  was  put  to  death  at,  or  near,  Agra  by  adherents  of  Hinddl  Mirza  in  1537.
(See  BeaJe's  Or,  JBiogra,  Diet,)

«  The  author  alludes,  apparently,  to  the  battle  of  Kanauj  in  947  (1540X  when
the  Moghuls  were  overwhelmed  by  the  army  of  Shir  Shah,  Snr.

Digitized  by

Google

400  Miracles  of  Khwdja  Nurd.

where  the  paiTot  is  less  oommon  than  the  kite  \%aghany^  Now,
in  this  miracle  there  is  a  curious  pun,  for  Humd  Pddishdh  did  not
throw  his  shadow  in  the  country  where  the  parrot  is  rarer  than
the  kite. [Maul&nd  Muhammad]  returned  stupefied.  .  .  ^

While  I  was  in  L4hur,  Tahmasp  Sh4h,  son  of  Sh4h  Ismdil,  came
from  Irak,  took  Eandahdr  from  the  deputies  of  E4mr&n  Mirza,
and  having  given  it  over  to  some  of  his  trusted  officers,  he  returned.
This  caused  K4mrdn  Mirza  intense  grief,  and  he  asked  me  to  tell
the  Ehwdja  of  his  misfortune.  The  next  day,  when  I  went  to  wait
on  the  Khwdja,  he  said  to  me :  "  I  have  seen  his  Holiness  in  a
vision,  and  he  asked  me,  *  Why  are  you  sad  ? '  I  replied :  '  On
account  of  E4mran  Mirza,  for  the  Turkomans  have  taken  Eandahdr.
What  will  come  of  it?'  Then  his  Holiness  advanced  towards
me  and  taking  me  by  the  hand  said  :  '  Do  not  grieve ;  he  will
soon  recover  it.'  '*  And  thus,  indeed,  it  came  to  pass,  for  E&mr&n
Mirz4  marched  against  Eandahdr,  and  the  troops  of  Tahmdsp  Sh4h
gave  up  the  city  to  him  in  peace.  This  is  an  especially  strange
thing  to  have  occun-ed,  since  the  Turkoman  rulers  are  very  severe
with  their  subordinates.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  matter  was  termi-
nated quite  simply.

EMnzada  Begum,  the  Emperor's  sister,  who  has  been  frequently
mentioned  in  this  book,  fell  ill  in  Edbul.  She  wrote  a  letter  to
the  Ehwdja,  and  sent  it  by  me,  to  ask  him  for  a  cure  for  her  malady.
Now  as  that  letter  was  badly  composed,  I  rewrote  it  correctly,
and  then  took  it  to  the  Ehwaja.  He,  on  my  arrival,  said  to  me :
**  I  wish  to  make  you  partner  in  a  secret,"  whereupon  I  stood  up
humbly.  He  continued:  ''Give  me  the  letter  that  the  Begum
herself  wrote."  Now,  as  a  fact,  I  had  written  my  letter  in  secret,
and  no  one  knew  anything  about  my  having  done  so.

I  witnessed  many  other  wonders  performed  by  him.

«  *  *  «  «a

*  Huma  is  the  name  of  a  mythical  bird,  supposed  to  watch  over,  and  throw
its  shadow  upon,  kings.  By  the  land  where  the  parrot  is  common,  India  is  no
doubt  meant.  The  omission  here  consists  of  a  miraculous  tale  concerning  the
fasting  of  the  author.

'  Here  follows  a  Bufi  letter  by  Khwdja  Nura,  copied  by  the  author  into  his
text,  but  not  translated.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Khwdja  Nurds  Biography.  401

CHAPTER  LXXXVI.

THE  END  OF  KHwAjA NURA's  BIOGRAPHY.

Though  I  am  not  suited  to  the  task,  the  context  demands  that  I
shonld  give  Khwdja  Nurd's  line  of  descent  in  discipleship.  .  .  >

He  was  the  disciple  of  his  grandfather  Khwdja  Ndsir-ud-Din
Ubaidullah,  the  disciple  of  Mauldnd  Ydkub  Charkhi,  the  disciple
of  Khwdja  Bahd-nd-Din  Nakshband,  the  disciple  of  Mir  Kaldl,
the  disciple  of  Khwdja  Muhammad  Bdbd-i-Samdsi,  the  disciple  of
Khwdja  Ali  Rdmatini,  the  disciple  of  Khwdja  Mahmud  Anjir
Faghravi,  the  disciple  of  Khwdja  Arif  Rivgarvi,  the  disciple  of
Khwdja  Abdul  Khdlik  Ghajdavdni.  It  were  fitting  that,  in  this
place,  I  should  speak  of  each  of  these  holy  men  individually,  but
on  consideration  I  do  not  think  myself  equal  to  the  task.  [Coup-
let]. ...

I  am  fully  aware  that  what  I  have  already  written  is  beyond
my  powers,  but  the  requirements  of  the  context  have  been  the
cause  of  my  boldness,  and  I  ask  forgiveness  for  anything  that  be
not  pleasing  to  God  or  His  Prophet,  or  the  friends  of  God.
[Verses].  .  .  .

After  Khwdja  Nurd  went  to  Hindustdn,  the  Khdn  gave  Amin
Khwdja  Sultan  (who  had  been  brought  from  Aksu  to  Badakhshan)
leave  to  go  to  India  also.  Although  this  step  was  necessitated  by
the  affairs  of  the  State,  yet  it  did  not  cut  the  Khdn  off  from  his
kin.  However,  Amin  Khwdja  Sultdn  went  to  India,  where  ho
died  a  natural  death.  His  eldest  son,  Masud  Sultdn,  followed  him
into  India.  Khizir  Khwdja  Sultdn,  Mahdi  Sultdn,  and  Isdn  Daulat
Sultdn,  after  this  dispersion  towards  India,  settled  themselves  in
different  places,  but  there  is  no  object  in  entering  into  further
details.  Whatever  God  wills  that  should  be  said  of  them,  will
appear.

*  Some  Snfistio  details  are  omitted  here. — R.

2  D

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

402  Conclusion  of  Bdbar's  History.

CHAPTER  LXXXVIL

CONCLUSION OF BABAR pAdISHAh's HISTORY.

We  have  brought  the  Emperor's  history  down  to  the  date  contained
in  the  words  "  Fai\A)adaulat "  [930  =  1524],  So  much  treasure  fell
into  his  hands,  that  all  the  people  of  the  world  benefited  by  it.  In
short,  I  went  to  India  and  was  employed  in  the  direction  of  the
affairs  of  that  country,  as  will  be  mentioned.  The  Emperor  took
possession  of  all  the  dominions  of  Sultdn  Iskandar  Aoghdn.  Band
Sing4,  one  of  the  Eajas  of  Hindustin,  came  against  Babar  Fadish&h
with  an  army  of  several  hundreds  of  thousands.  The  Emperor
engaged  him  in  battle,  and  defeated  him ;  ^  and  in  his  mandates
took  the  title  of  Ghdzi,  After  this,  he  marched  towards  Chitur,
where  he  won  decisive  victories  over  the  infidels.  Betuming,  he
devoted  himself  to  the  settlement  of  the  whole  of  Hindustan.  In  the
course  of  the  year  937  he  fell  a  victim  to  a  severe  illness,  which  the
efforts  of  the  doctors  were  powerless  to  cure.  [Two  couplets]  ....
As  his  end  approached,  he  entrusted  all  the  Amirs  and  people  of
the  world  to  Humayun  Mirza  (whom  he  had  recalled  from  Badakh-
shan)  and  his  own  soul  to  the  Creator  of  the  world.  As  soon  as
Humdyun  had  mounted  his  father's  throne,  such  persons  as
Muhammad  Zaman  Mirza  (son  of  Badi-uz-Zamdn  Mirzd,  son  of
Mirza  Sultdn  Husain),  who  had  been  in  Babar  Fddishdh's  service,
and  was  his  son-in-law,  together  with  others,  began  to  raise  the
flag  of  revolt  and  sound  the  drums  of  sedition.  But  Humdyun
quieted  them  all  by  his  kindness.  He  conquered  what  little  of
Hind  had  been  left  unsubdued  by  his  father,  and  went  into
Guzrdt  and  captured  it;  but  on  account  of  discord  among  his
brothers  and  the  Amirs,  he  had  to  abandon  it.  The  rest  of  his
story  will  be  told  later.

^  Band  Singa,  or  Sdnka,  of  Chitur — ^now  Udaipur  in  Bajputana.  The  author
appears  to  allade  to  the  battle  of  Kanwa,  in  March,  1527,  (/amddi  n.,  938)  when
BiokDer  defeated  the  Bdna.

Digitized  by

Google

Projected  Invasion  of  Tibet,  403

CHAPTER  LXXXVin.

INVASION  OF TIBET  BY THE KHAN.

When  Khwaja  Nura  passed  into  Hindust&n,  and  I  withdrew  from
Aksu,  Basbid  Sultan  also  returned,  as  has  been  already  mentioned.
During  the  same  winter  Basbid  Sultan  went  baok,  with  his  family,
to  Aksu.  In  the  spring  of  that  year,  the  Khan  resolved  to  oonduct
a  holy  war  against  Tibet.  Previous  to  this,  [his]  Amirs  had
frequently  invaded  and  plundered  that  country,  but  on  account  of
their  ignorance  and  folly,  Isldm  had  made  no  progress,  and  there
were  still  numberless  infidels  in  Tibet,  besides  those  whom  the
Amirs  had  subdued.^

The  Eh4n  had  always  been  animated  by  a  desire  to  carry  on
holy  wars  in  the  path  of  God,  and  especially  so  now  that  he  had
just  assumed  the  saintly  ways  of  the  Khwajas.  He  was  always
ready  to  devote  himself  to  the  cause  of  the  faith,  and  felt  that  the
holy  war  was  one  of  the  surest  roads  to  salvation  and  union  with
God.  Prompted  by  such  pious  feelings  as  these,  at  the  end  of  the
year  938^  he  set  out  to  invade  Tibet

Having  reached  this  point  in  my  narrative,  it  is  necessary  for
me  to  give  some  account  of  the  land  of  Tibet,  for  this  country  is
so  situated  that  only  a  few  travellers  have  been  able  to  visit  it.  On
account  of  the  difficulties  of  the  route,  which  from  every  point  of
view  is  most  dangerous — ^whether  by  reason  of  its  hills  and  passes,
or  the  coldness  of  the  air,  or  the  scarcity  of  water  and  fuel,  or  the
shameless  and  lawless  highwaymen,  who  know  every  inch  of  the
roads  and  allow  no  travellers  to  pass— no  one  has  ever  brought
back  any  information  concerning  this  country.  In  such  standard
works  as  the  Muajjam  vl  BM&n^  the  Jdm-i-Oiti  Numdij  and  the
Supplement  to  the  Surdh,  Tibet  is  not  described  as  other  countries
are ;  they  merely  mention  that  there  is  such  a  region,  and  some
few  facts  regarding  it  are  given.  I  am  therefore  emboldened  to
furnish  some  details  about  the  kingdom  of  Tibet  which  are  to  be
found  in  no  book.

*  There  appear  to  be  no  precise,  or  detailed,  records  of  invasioiiB  of  Ladak,  from
the  Bide  of  Eastern  Tarkiston.  From  the  allusions  to  them  which  Mirza  Haidar
makes,  they  mnst  have  oocurred  pretty  frequently  during  the  early  years  of
the  sixteenth  century,  though  previous  to  that  period  I  know  of  no  mention  of
them.  Besides  those  incidentally  referred  to  in  this  passage,  it  will  be  remem-
bered that  Ab6  Bakr's  general,  Mir  Yali,  overran  Ladak,  and  afterwards  one  Mir
Mazid,  who,  however,  was  killed  there  by  a  stone  falling  on  his  head.  The  date
of  Mir  Yali's  exploit  can  only  be  roughly  placed  towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth
century.  That  of  Mir  Masdd  must  have  been  about  the  year  928  (1517).  All
were,  no  doubt,  wanton  plundering  expeditions,  hypocritically  disguised  as  holy
wars.

"  988  H.  ended  2  August,  1532.

2  D  2

Digitized  by

Google

404  Description  of  Tibet,

CHAPTER  LXXXIX.

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  POSITION, MOUNTAINS, AND PLAINS  OF  TIBET, AND
AN ACCOUNT  OF THE  CUSTOMS AND  EEUGION OF  THE  INHABITANTS.

Tibet  is  a  loDg  [and  narrow]  country.^  From  B,%kan  Bdin^  which
means  **  between  the  north  and  the  west,"  towards  Bcikani,'  which
is  "between  the  south  and  the  east,"  is  eight  months' journey.
Its  breadth  is  [nowhere]  more  than  one  month's  jonmey,  nor  less
than  ten  days.  Its  frontier  on  the  side  of  Bikan  jBdtn,  adjoins
Balnristan  (as  was  stated  above,  in  the  description  of  Balur) ;  that
on  the  Bakani  side,  touches  Huchu  Salar,  which  is  a  dependency
of  [what  is  called]  Kanjdnfii  ^  of  Khit4i. In  the  description  of  the

^  The  oxpresnion  literaUj  translated  is  **  running  lengthwiBe."

'  These  terms  are  not  to  be  found  in  Persian  or  Turki  dictionaries,  and  I  am
not  aware  what  language  they  belong  to.  The  first  one  especially  is  subject  to
many  readings,  and  that  adopted  in  the  text  is  by  no  means  certainly  the  right
one.  It  may  be  Rukn,  Zikan,  etc.,  and  Baib,  Fayin^  etc.,  etc.  Bakani  may  also
be  read  in  several  ways.  Fortunately,  the  author  himself  enlightens  us  as  to  the
meaning.

'  Huchu,  properly  Bochou,  is  a  town  of  the  Kansu  province  of  China
standing  on  a  right  tributary  of  the  Yellow  Kiver,  about  320  11  (or  some  80  miles)
south-west  of  Lanchou.  Sdar  consists  of  a  large  group  of  villages  on  the  south
bank  of  the  Yellow  Biver,  to  the  north  and  north-west  of  Hochou,  Kanjdn-fu
represents  the  modem  Si-Ngdn-fu,  the  capital  of  the  province  of  Shensi.  The
region  does  not  fall  within  the  limits  of  the  map  attached  to  this  volume,  but
from  a  general  map  of  China,  it  will  be  seen  that,  in  reality,  it  lies  more  to  the
north-east  of  Tibet  than  to  the  south-east,  as  Mirza  Haidar  places  it ;  but  his
statement  of  the  general  position  he  is  indicating,  is  a  remarkably  dear  one.

Si-Ngan-fu  was  known  in  the  time  of  the  Mongols  as  Kenjan-fu,  or  KanrZdn-fUy
and  it  was  so  called  by  Marco  Polo,  who  wrote :  ^  And  when  yon  have  travelled
those  eight  days*  journey,  you  come  to  that  great  city  ....  called  Eenjan-fu.
A  very  great  and  fine  city  it  is,  and  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  Kenjan-fu,
which  in  old  times  was  a  noble,  rich,  and  powerful  realm,  and  had  many  great
and  wealthy  and  puissant  kings.*'  Previous  to  the  Mongol  era  it  was  the  capital
of  several  of  the  Chinese  dynasties  and  bore,  at  different  times,  the  names  of
Chan-gan  and  Kingcfiou-fu.  It  is  the  latter  which  is  believed  to  have  been
corrupted  by  the  li&ngols  into  Kenjan-fu.  Thus  its  Mongol  form  seems  to  have
survived  among  the  nations  of  Turkistan,  etc.,  down  to  the  days  of  Mirza  Haidar.

The  Sochou  and  Solar  district  is  chiefly  known  as  the  seat  of  a  large  and  fanatical
Musulman  nopnlation,  which  has  been  settled  there  for  at  least  four  centuries.
The  region  has  lately  been  visited  by  Mr.  W.  W.  Bockhill,  who  tells  us  that  these
Musulmans  are  of  Turki  extraction,  and  speak  a  language  mixed  with  Tnrki
words.  They  are  divided  into  two  sections  called  locally  the  *^ black  capped"
and  the  *^  white  capped  "  Muhammadans.  Sdar  is  rather  the  name  of  the  people
than  of  a  locality,  though  their  chief  town  goes  bv  the  name  of  Salar-pdeun  (at
paken).  It  is  the  Solar  who  are  designated  **  Black  Caps"  by  the  Chinese.  In
an  interesting  note,  Mr.  Bockhill  observes  that  the  annals  of  the  Ming  dynasty
make  mention  of  the  S€ilar,  as  the  remnants  of  various  Turki  tribes  who  had
settled  in  the  H<hchou,  Hwang^hou,  and  other  neighbouring  districts,  and  had
become  a  source  of  much  trouble  to  the  Empire.  He  concludes  by  pointing
to  the  notice  in  the  *^  Ming  Shi,"  of  the  Salt  Uighur  (see  note,  p.  849),  and
inquires  whether  the  Solar  can  be  the  same  as  the  Sari  (in  Chinese  8<diy  The
answer  is  that  the  two  words  can  have  no  connection.  Sdrigh  Uighur  ia  the
right  tetm—Sdrfgh  being  the  Turki  for  yellow,  and  Sali  only  its  Chinese  corrup-

Digitized  by

Google

Description  of  Tibet.  405

mountains  of  Moghulistan  and  Kdshghar,  it  was  stated  that  the
principal  range  in  Moghulistan,  from  which  all  the  other  hills
branch  out,  passes  the  north  of  Kdshghar,  runs  towards  the  west,
and  continues  to  the  south  of  Eashghar.  It  was  also  mentioned
that  the  province  of  Farghana  lies  to  the  west  of  Kashghar,  this
range  running  between.  [This  part  of  the  range]  which  lies
between  Kashghar  and  Farghana  is  called  Aldi.

Badakhshdn  is  on  the  west  of  Yarkand.  These  countries  are  also
divided  by  [a  part  of]  this  same  range,  which  here  takes  the  name
of  Pamir.  The  width  of  the  Pamir,  in  some  places,  is  eight  days'
journey.  Passing  onwards,  one  comes  to  some  of  the  Yarkand
mountains  which  adjoin  Balur,  such  as  Easkam  ^  and  Tagh  Dum
Bash;  proceeding  yet  further,  one  an*ives  in  the  land  of  Tibet.
Badakhshan  is  in  the  direction  of  summer  sunset  {iahiat&ni)  from
Yarkand,  as  stated  above,  and  Kdshmir  is  in  the  direction  of
winter  sunset  {zamistAni)  from  Yarkand.^  That  same  range  runs
between  Ydrkand  and  Kashmir,  and  is  here  called  Balti;  this
[district]  belongs  to  the  province  of  Tibet.  There  is,  in  these
parts,  a  mountain  ^  wider  than  the  Alai  or  the  Pamir.  The  width
in  Balti  is  twenty  days'  joumey.

The  pass  ascending  from  Ydrkand  is  the  pass  of  Sanju,  and  the
pass  descending  on  the  side  of  Kdshmir  is  the  pass  of  Askardu.^
[From  the  Sanju  pass  to  the  Askardu  pass]  is  twenty  days' journey.
In  the  direction  of  winter  sunset  from  Khotan,  are  some  of  the
cities  of  Hind,  such  as  Ldhur,  Sultanpur,  and  Bajwara,^  and  the

tion — while  Salar  is  written  in  the  Torki  quite  differently ;  it  is  a  proper  name
and  not  an  adjeotive.

It  may  be  noted  that  it  was  among  these  turbulent  Musulmans  of  Hoohou  and
Salar,  that  the  revolt  broke  out  in  1862,  which  afterwards  acquired  the  name  of
**the  Tungani  rebellion'' — a  movement  which  spread  all  over  Shensi,  Kansu,
Eastern  Turkistan,  Zungaria,  and  some  parts  of  Mongolia.  (See  Yule's  Marco
Pdo,  ii.,  pp.  18-23 ;  Rockhill  in  Land  of  the  Lamas,  pp.  38-40  ;  and  in  /.  jB.  A,  8.^
1892,  p.  598).

1  The  Turk!  text  spells  Rdri-Kdm,

'  The  expressions  used  for  indicating  theso  directions  are  peculiar.  They
stand  respectively,  in  the  texts,  gJutrab  i  tahistdni  and  gharb  i  zamhtdni  of
Ydrkand.  The  passage,  however,  falls  within  the  brief  extracts  translated  by
the  late  Mr.  B.  B.  Shaw  in  his  paper  entitled  *  A  Prince  of  Kashghar  on  the
Geography  of  Eastern  Turkistan,'  and  I  have  taken  the  rendering  from  him,
knowing  that  ]ie  had  the  advantage,  when  using  his  Tarikh-i-Jiashidiy  of  some
excellent  local  instruction  on  such  points.  (See  /.  R.  G.  S.y  1876.  p.  279.)  The
author's  orientation  is  not  particularly  accurate,  for  Badakhshdn  lies  nearly  due
west  of  Yarkand,  and  Kashmir  between  south  and  south-west.

*  The  meaning  is  a  mountain  mass,  or  mountainous  region.

*  Properly  Skardu,  or  Skardo,  written  Askardu  on  account  of  the  inability  of
Persian,  Tnrki,  and  Hindustani-speaking  peoples  to  pronounce  an  s  immediately
preceding  a  hard  consonant  at  the  beginning  of  a  word.  Skardo  is  a  Tibetan
name.  From  this  reference  to  a  pass  behind  Skardo  it  would  appear  that  a  road
led  over  it  in  Mirza  Haidar's  time.  The  passes  in  that  quarter  are  nowadays
blocked  l^  glacit-rs,  and  the  rood  has  becomu  impracticable  for  travellers.

*  The  StiUanpur  mentioned  here,  must  be  the  chief  town  of  Kulu  in  the  valley
cif  the  upper  Bias  river.  Just  south  of  Sultanpur,  and  on  the  same  side  of  tho
Bias,  there  is  also  a  small  place  called  Bajdora,  which  would  appear,  at  first  sight.

Digitized  by

Google

4o6  Description  of  Tibet

afore-mentioned  mountain  range  lies  between.  Between  Ehotan
and  the  towns  of  Hind  above-named,  are  situated  Arduk,  Guga,
and  Aspati/  which  belong  to  Tibet ;  and  it  must  be  supposed  that
those  mountains  extend  into  Ehitai.  On  the  west  and  south  of
the  range  lies  Hindustdn ;  while  Bhira,^  Lahur  and  Bangdla  are
all  on  the  skirts  of  it.  All  the  rivers  of  Hind  flow  down  from
these  hills,  and  their  sources  are  in  the  country  of  Tibet.

On  the  north  and  east  of  Tibet  lie  Yarkand,  Khotan,  Charchan,
Lob,  Katak  and  Sdrigh  Uighur.  The  rest  is  a  sandy  waste
\r%gi8tan\  whose  frontier  adjoins  Kanju  and  Sakju  ^  of  Khit4i.  All
the  streams  which  ^flow  down  from  the  mountains  of  Tibet,  in
a  westerly  and  southerly  direction,  become  rivers  of  Hind,  such  as
the  Nilab,  the  river  of  Bhira,  the  Chinab,  the  river  of  Lahur,  the
river  of  Sultanpur  and  the  river  of  Bajwara,  which  are  all  rivers
of  Sind.  The  Jun  and  the  Gang  and  others  flow  through  Bangala
into  the  oce^n  ^ ;  all  the  streams  which  flow  in  an  easterly  and
northerly  direction  from  the  mountains  of  Tibet,  such  as  the  river  of
Yarkand,  the  Ak  Ka?>h  and  the  K4ra  Kash,  the  Kirya,  the  Charchan,
and  the  rest,  all  empty  themselves  into  the  Kuk  Naur,^  which  is  a

to  be  the  locality  alluded  to  by  our  author ;  but  Mr.  6haw  notes :  "  I  incline  to
think  that  Bajwdra  must  be  an  old  town  of  that  name,  not  far  from  the  Satlej,
near  Phillor,  from  its  being  mentioned  afterwards  in  connection  with  that  river.**
(loc.  cit,  p.  279.) This  is  probably  the  correct  view.

'  These  three  names  obviously  ctand  for  BudcHc^  Ougehy  and  SpUi — the  two
first  in  Lassa-governed  Tibet,  the  third  within  British  territory.

^  The  Bhira  here  pointed  to  is,  no  doubt,  the  town  of  Bhira  on  the  left  bank  of
the  J  hi  lam  below  Pind-D^dan-Khan.  It  was  a  place  much  in  evidence  in  Mirxa
Haidar's  time,  and  is  often  mentioned  by  Baber.  Qen.  A.  Cunningham  remarks
that  until  it  was  supplanted  by  Pind-Padan-Khan,  Bhira  was  the  principal  town
in  that  part  of  the  country.  Me  tells  us  also  that  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the
river,  near  Ahmadabad,  there  is  a  very  extensive  mound  of  ruins  called  Old  Bhira,
or  Jobudthnagar.  (See  Baber,  pp.  253  seqq.;  Elliot,  ii.,  p.  892;  and  Cunningham,
Ancient  Geog.  Ind.,  p.  155.)

'  Ean-chou  and  Su-chou  in  the  province  of  Kansu.

*  The  Nilab,  or  Blue  River,  was  the  name  almost  always  in  use  among  the
Musulman  authors  down  to  the  seventeenth  century  (and  perhaps  later)  for  the
Ab4-Sind,  or  Indus ;  and  must,  fVom  the  sequence  and  the  absence  of  any  other
mention  of  the  Indus,  be  the  river  intended  nere.  The  *'  river  of  Bhira  "  is  the
Jhilam,  and  that  of  Bajwdra,  as  we  have  just  seeu  from  Mr.  Shaw's  note,  in  all
probability  the  Satlej.  The  Jun  and  the  Gang,  it  is  almost  unnecessary  to
remark,  stand  for  the  Jamna  and  Ganges.

*  The  Kolio  Nor,  or  Blue  Lake — tho  Tsing-hai  of  the  Chinese.  Though  the
author  is  remarkably  correct  regarding  the  rivers  of  India,  bo  apix)iiis  U)  have
confused  Lob  Nor  with  Koko  Nor.  He  could,  with  his  excellent  knowledge  of  tho
geography  of  Eastern  Turkistan,  have  hardly  been  unaware  of  the  fact  that  the
Kara  Kdsh  empties  itself  into  Lob  Nor.  The  river  of  Kirya  he  very  probably
regarded  as  a  tributary  of  the  Yurung  Kdfh,  or  of  the  united  Yurung  and  Kara
Kdth,  though  in  reality,  it  loses  itself  in  the  sandy  desert  before  reaching  any
great  stream.  The  Ak-Kdsh  I  cannot  trace  under  that  name,  but  I  suspect,  from
the  context,  that  he  uses  the  term  as  another  name  for  the  Yurung-Kdih.  Both,
indeed,  mean  the  same  thing— t.c.  *  white  jade ' ;  while  Kara  K^sli  means  *  black
jade.*  (See  Bcmusat,  Hist,  de  la  vUU  de  Klioian,  p.  151.)  When,  and  immediately
below,  he  writes  that  the  Kara  Muran  (tho  Mongol  name  for  the  Yellow  TUver
of  China)  issues  from  Koko  Nor,  he  is  of  course  in  error,  but  he  would  have  been

Digitized  by

Google

Description  of  Tibet,  407

lake  in  the  aforesaid  sand  waste.  I  have  heard  some  Moghuls  say
that  one  may  travel  round  [the  lake]  in  three  months.  From  one
end  of  it,  issues  a  large  river,  which  is  called  the  Eard  Muran  of
Khitai.

From  these  details  it  will  be  clear  that  Tibet  is  a  very  high-
lying  country,  since  its  waters  run  in  all  directions.  Any  one
wishing  to  enter  Tibet,  must  first  ascend  lofty  passes,  which  do
not  slope  downward  on  the  other  side,  for  on  the  top  the  land  is
level ;  in  a  few  cases  only,  the  passes  have  slight  declivities  [on  the
far  side].  On  account  [of  the  height]  Tibet  is  excessively  cold — so
much  so,  that  in  most  places  nothing  but  turnips  can  be  cultivated.
The  barley  is  generally  of  a  kind  that  ripens  in  two  months.  In
some  parts  of  Tibet,  the  summer  only  lasts  forty  dajs,  and  even
then  the  rivers  are  often  frozen  over  after  midnight.  In  all  Tibet,
in  consequence  of  the  severity  of  the  cold,  trees  never  reach  any
height;  nor  does  the  com,  for,  being  low  on  the  ground,  it  is
trodden  down  by  the  cattle.

Now  the  inhabitants  of  Tibet  are  divided  into  two  sections.
One  is  called  the  Yulp4 — that  is  to  say,  *  dwellers  in  villages,'  and
the  other  the  Champa,  meaning  *•  dwellers  in  the  desert.'  ^  But
these  last  are  always  sabject  to  one  of  the  provinces  of  Tibet,  The
inhabitants  of  the  desert  [nomads]  of  Tibet  have  certain  strange
practices,  which  are  to  be  met  with  among  no  other  people.
Firstly,  they  eat  their  meat  and  all  other  foods  in  an  absolutely
raw  state,  having  no  knowledge  of  cooking.  Again,  they  feed
iheir  horses  on  flesh  instead  of  grain.^  They  also  use  sheep  ex-
clusively, as  beasts  of  burden.  Their  sheep  carry,  perhaps,  twelve
statute  fMva*  They  harness  them  with  pack-saddles,  halters,  and
girths;  they  place  the  load  upon  the  sheep,  and  except  when
necessary,  never  take  it  o£f,  so  that  summer  and  winter  it  remains
on  the  animal's  back.^

no  more  incorrect  had  he  described  it  as  issuing  from  LakA  Lob,  Indeed,  the
legend  that  the  Yellow  River  flows  by  an  underground  channel  from  Lake  Lob,
is  a  very  ancient  one  among  the  Chinese  and  some  of  their  neighbours.  The
situation  of  the  great  lake  in  a  sandy  waste,  would  point  far  more  accurately  to
Lob  Nor  than  to  KoJco  Nor.

1  Probably  Yul-^d  is  an  abbreviation  of  Yvl-eho-pot  firom  Ytd-cJiOy  or  FuZ-c/ie,
meaning  a  village.  The  Cham-pa  are,  as  the  author  says,  the  dwellers  in  tents —
the  pastoral  people,  or  nomads— of  Tibet  But  the  ordinary  meaning  of  Ytdpa,
Pr.  Waddell  tells  me,  is  "  native  of  the  country."

*  The  first  of  these  statements  requires  moaification ;  the  second  is,  of  course,
ludicrously  wrong.  In  winter,  when  meat  is  frozen  hard,  the  Champa,  and
indeed  other  Tibetans,  have  no  objection  to  eat  it  raw,  but  they  usually  cook  it
after  a  fashion.  In  this  respect  their  customs  are  the  same  as  those  of  the
Mongols,  Ealmiks,  and  other  similar  tribes.

'  Here  too,  the  author  mixes  fact  and  fiction  in  a  somewhat  easy  manner.
The  load-carrying  sheep  are,  as  far  as  I  am  awarcs  peculiar  to  Tibet  and  Tibetan
regions,  and  are  to  the  nomad  tribesmen  of  those  regions  what  the  camel  is  to  the
B^ouin.  They  are  of  a  large  and  handsome,  though  perhaps  a  rather  leggy
breed,  and  they  carry  a  load  of  some  32  lbs.  weight  for  a  distance  usually  of  about
7  or  8  miles  a  day. Qen.  A.  Cunningham  gives  27  to  30  inches  as  their  average j

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

4o8  Description  of  Tibet.

The  Champa,  or  nomads,  live  in  the  following  manner.  In  the
winter  they  descend  towards  the  western  and  southern  slopes  of  the.
aforesaid  mountains — that  is  to  say,  to  Hindustan — taking  with
them  wares  of  Khitai,  salt,  cloth  of  goats'  hair  \tanar'kaT\  zedoary,*
kutas  [yaifc«],  gold,  and  shawls,^  which  are  Tibetan  goods.  They
trade  in  Hindustan  and  in  the  mountains  of  Hindustan,  and  in
the  spring  they  return  from  that  country,  bringing  many  of  its
products,. such  as  cloths,  sweets,  rice,  and  grain,  loaded  upon  their
sheep.  After  feeding  their  flocks,  they  advance  slowly  but  con-
tinuously into  Khitai,  which  they  reach  in  the  winter.  Having
laid  in  a  stock,  during  spring,  of  such  Tibetan  products  as  are  in
demand  in  Khitai,  they  dispose  of  the  Indian  and  I'ibetan  goods
there  in  the  winter,  and  return  to  Tibet  in  the  [following]  spring,
carrying  with  them  Khitai  wares.  The  next  winter  they  again
go  on  to  India.  The  burdens  which  they  load  on  the  sheep  in
Hindustan  are  removed  in  Khitai,  and  those  put  on  in  Khitai  are
taken  off  in  Hindustdn.  Thus  they  spend  their  winters  alternately
in  Hindustan  and  Khitai.^  This  is  the  mode  of  life  of  all  the
Champa.  A  Champa  will  sometimes  carry  as  many  as  10,000
sheep-loads,  and  every  sheep-load  may  bo  reckoned  at  twelve  wan.
What  an  enormous  quantity  is  this  I  That  amount  is  loaded  in
one  year,  either  in  Hindust4n  or  in  Khitai. On  every  occasion.

height.  As  a  rule,  their  burden  couBists  of  salt,  soda,  or  borax  when  travelllDg
towards  India,  and  grain  or  flour  when  returning  homeward.  These  products  aro
sewn  up  in  bags  and,  indeed,  any  other  kind  of  load  it  would  be  almost  im|>088iblo
for  them  to  carry.  Gol.  J.  Biddulph,  when  attached  to  $ir  D.  Forsyth's  mission  to
Kasbghar  in  1873,  made  an  Interesting  experimeut  with  a  flock  of  30  shoep,
carrying  loads  of  grain  and  flour.  Ho  marched  with  them  from  Tankseh  in
Ladak,  to  Shahidulla  on  the  Kara  Eish,  a  distance  of  330  miles,  by  the  Chang
Chenmo  road,  in  31  days,  but  loaded  only  with  20  lbs.  each.  In  his  report  he
remarks :  "  The  loads,  secured  by  breast  and  breach  ropes,  ride  well,  sinking  into
tlie  fleece  and  not  being  liable  to  shift.  On  fair  ground,  where  they  trayellod
with  a  broad  front,  they  marched  at  the  rate  of  If  miles  an  hour;  a  large  number
would  no  doubt  travel  slower,  and  much  must  depend  on  the  breadth  of  the  road.
....  On  days  when  the^  had  no  grass,  they  had  literally  nothing  to  eat,  for

they  refused  grain,  not  being  accustomed  to  it On  arrival  in  camp,  they

were  unloaded,  and  tumod  out  to  shift  for  themselves  till  dark,  when  they  were
herded  for  the  night."  The  Champa  frequently  march  with  sevend  thousands
of  sheep,  divided  into  flocks,  whicli  are  driven  separately,  but  within  a  few  miles
of  each  other,  the  whole  formin<2^  one  caravan.  They  usually  camp  about  midday,
turn  the  sheep  loose,  and  stack  the  loads  till  the  next  morning.  To  leave  them
on  their  backs,  as  the  author  states,  would  soon  make  an  end  of  both  sheep  and
merchandise.  When  Mirza  Haidar  speaks  of  12  statute  man^  he  is  probably
alluding  to  the  man  of  Andijdn,  which,  as  we  have  seen  above  (p.  327),  weighed
a  fraction  under  5  lbs.,  so  that  between  G  and  7  Andijiiii  man  would  be  a  more
correct  figure.  (See,  for  Col.  Biddulph's  report,  YarJcand  Mission  Beport,  p.  492,
and  Cunningham,  Ladaliy  pp.  210-11.)

^  Zedoary^  or  jadwdr,  is  an  aromatic  root  used  in  medicine  by  Orientals.  (See
Yule's  OloMary,  p.  74.)

*  By  *  shawls*  the  author  probably  means  shawl -wool,  for  in  this  sense  the  w*wd
flidl  is  frequently  used  in  Kashmir  and  Ladak.  Similarly  tlie  word  K\Ud%  or  Yak
irf,  I  buspect,  intended  for  *  Yak's  wofl.'

'  Tiiis  acoount  of  t!iO  mode  of  life  led  by  the  Champa  sherp-traders,  though
correct  in  the  main,  is  somewhat  confused ;  it  is,  however,  given  literally,  as  the
author  states  it.

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

Description  of  Tibet  409

wherever  they  go,  they  take  all  these  loads  with  them,  and  are
never  caused  fatigue  or  trouble  by  them.  I  have  never  heard  of
a  similar  practice  among  any  other  people.  In  fact,  some  do  not
even  credit  this  story.

These  Champa  are  a  numerous  race,  inasmuch  as  one  of  their
tribes,  called  Dulpa,^  numbers  more  than  50,000  families. And

*  The  word 2>ttZpa  maybe  read  in  Beveral  different  ways,  such  as  DuZto,  BvXia^
Pulba,  etc.,  etc.  It  seems  also  possible,  as  regards  the  text,  that  a  k  may  be  read
for  the  2.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  anther  intended  a  k,  and  that  the
word  is  meant  either  for  Dulepa  or  Pukpa ;  though  Pr.  Waddell  informs  me  that
Dolpa  (spelt  got  pa)  is  the  name  of  an  aboriginal  tribe  in  Tibet  (analogons  to
the  Ghandals  of  India)  to  which  the  Tibetan  butchers  belong.  From  Jaeschke's
dictionary,  however,  I  infer  that  these  Dolpa  are  more  a  caste  than  a  tribe,  and
that  they  are  persons  dishonourably  distinguished  for  taking  animal  life.

First,  as  to  Dukpa,  This  word,  or  properly  Dogpa  in  Western  and  Central
Tibet,  is  a  corruption  all  over  the  Tibetan  provinces  for  Drugpa,  Drokpa^  or
Brohpa.  But  if  the  author  meant  Dokpa,  he  could  scarcely  ctdl  them  a  tribe  of
the  uhampa,  or  nomads,  though  their  habits  are  to  some  extent  similar  to  those
of  the  Champa ;  so  much  so,  in  some  parts  of  Tibet,  that  Mr.  Rockhill  calls  them
**  semi-nomadic  herdsmen."  The  true  definition  of  the  word  Drok,  etc.,  is  a
mountain  pasture  used  in  summer  only,  or,  as  Mr.  Shaw  has  happily  translated
it,  *'  an  Alp  ;*'  while  both  he  and  Mr.  Drew  render  Drokpa,  Brokpa^  etc^  by  the
term  **  highlander."  In  Ladak  the  Drokpa  differs  from  the  Champa  in  so  far
that  he  is  only  away  in  the  Drok  dunng  summer ;  in  winter  he  descends
with  his  sheep,  yaks,  etc.,  to  the  settled  villages  and  lives  as  an  ordinary  villager.
The  Champa,  on  the  other  hand,  lives  his  whole  life  in  tents  made  of  yak  hair,
and  merely  moves  between  higher  and  lower  grazing  grounds,  according  to  the
seasons.  In  most  villages  in  Ladak  and  the  neighbouring  provinces,  there  are  a
certain  number  of  Drokpa,  who  take  charge  of  the  flocks  and  herds  of  their
settled  neighbours  in  summer,  and  drive  them  up  to  the  Vroks  for  pasture.
Thus,  judging  by  customs  and  mode  of  life,  it  appears  doubtful  if  Mirza  Haidar
is  alluding,  here,  to  the  Drokpa  or  Dukpa,  It  may  be  added  that  the  term  is
often  used  to  denote  a  strange,  or  foreign  tribe,  belonging  to  neighbouring  hill
countries,  if  of  pastural,  or  semi-pastural,  habits;  such  as  the  inhabitants  of
Bhutan  and  the  hill  tribes,  mis- called  Dards,  living  west  of  Baltistan.

Secondly,  as  to  Pukpa.  A  little  lower  down  (p.  411),  Mirza  Haidar  tells  us  of
gold  mines  worked  bv  a  branch  of  the  Dulpa  tribe,  who  live  in  caves,  or  boles
in  the  ground  near  their  mines.  These  gold  mines  and  those  who  work  them
arc  described  in  almost  exactly  the  same  way  by  Pandit  Nain  Sing,  who  visited
them  on  his  journey  from  Ladak  to  Lassa  in  1873.  Speaking  of  the  localities
north  of  the  Tsang-pn  valley,  he  says,  **tlie  diggers  mostly  dwell  iu
caves  excavated  in  the  eartli.  These  habitations,  which  are  locally  termed,
Phukpa, ....  contain  populations  varying  from  five  to  twenty-five  in  each,
according  to  the  wealth  of  the  proprietors,"  who  live  in  them  as  a  means  of
protection  from  robbers,  the  caves  being  easily  defensible,  while  tents  are
peculiarly  open  to  attack.  These  gold  diggers  the  Pandit  states  to  have  been
mostly  Champa.  Here  the  habitations,  and  not  the  inhabitants,  are  termed
Phukpa  (or,  more  probably,  in  Tibetan,  Pugpa  or  Pukpa) ;  but  it  is  quite
possible  that  the  word  may  have  been  applied,  oy  the  Moghuls,  to  the  diggers,
and  that  Mirza  Haidar  came  to  know  the  latter  as  Pukpa  Champa.  It  is  also
possible  that  he  may  have  heard  of  both  Dukpa  and  Pukpa,  when  in  Tibet,  and
that  when  writing  his  history,  some  twelve  years  subsequently,  may  have
confused  the  two  strange  words.  In  any  case,  he  rightly  describes  the  miners  as
Champa ;  while  he  would  be  scarcely  correct  in  speaking  of  the  Drok  men  as
belonging  to  that  class.  The  caste  of  Dogpa  appear  to  liave  no  special  habitat,
and  it  seems  impossible  that  Mirza  Haidar's  narrative  can  apply  to  them,  as  it
does  to  the  Pug-pa,  or  cave-men.  (See  Bockhill,  J,  B.  A.  8.,  1890,  pp.  56  and
128 ;  Shaw,  /.  /.  8.  B.,  XLvn.,  No.  1,  1878,  p.  36 ;  Drew,  Jummoo  and  Kashmir,
p.  43  * ;  and  Pundit  Natn  Sing  in  Bep.  Trana-Himalaffan  Explorations,  1873-5,
p.  58 ;  also  Jai-schke*a  Tib.  Did.  for  meanings.)

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

410  Description  of  Tibet,

there  are  many  more  tribes  like  this  one.  From  some  of  the
chiefs  I  have  asked  their  nnmbers,  but  they  have  been  unable  to
inform  me.  God  knows  best;  and  the  responsibility  be  upon
[those  who  have  £Etiled  to  infoim  me].

The  dwellers  in  villages  afe  called  Yulpa ;  they  inhabit  many
districts — such  as  B4lti,  which  is  a  province  of  Tibet ;  B41ti,  in
turn,  comprises  several  [smaller]  districts,  such  as  Funk,  Ehapula,
Ashigar,  Askdrdu,  [Eunk],  and  Ladaks,  and  each  of  these  oon-
tains  fortresses  and  villages.  Wherever  I  went  in  Tibet,  I  either
took  the  country  by  force  or  made  peace,  on  the  inhabitants
paying  tribute.  Among  these  [places  may  be  mentioned]  Balti,
Zanskar,  M4ryul,^  Eudok,  Goga,  Lu,  Burds,  Zunka,  Minkab  [or
Hinkab],  Zir-Sud-Kankar,  Kisau,  Ham,  Alalai-Lutak,  Tuk,  Labug
[or  Lanuk],  Astakbark  [or  Askdbrak],^  which  is  the  limit  of  my

'  The  name  of  JAar  FuZ,  though  never  uaed  iu  Ladak  nowadays,  is  not
entirely  forgotten  there.  It  is  said  by  Dr.  Marx  to  include  the  upper  and
lower  districts  of  Ladak  proper,  together  with  Nubra,  Zangskar,  etc. ;  General
Cunningham  speaks  of  it  as  applied  to  Ladak  generally ;  while  General  Strachey
gives  it  a  much  wider  definition,  and  makes  Maryul  include  the  whole  of
Baltistan.  I  venture  to  think  that  Dr.  Biarx's  demiition  is  the  one  usually
accepted  by  the  natives  of  the  province.  On  the  meaning  of  the  word  too,  our
authorities  are  at  variance.  Dr.  Msjrx,  quoting  a  highly  intelligent  and  well-
instructed  lama  (my  old  acquaintance  Tdshi-Tanpel)  says  the  word  is  derived
from  me-ru,  meaning  *  bare  rocks ; '  General  Cunningham  translates  *  red  land; '
Strachey  and  Csoma  de  Kciros  (cited  by  Cunningham),  render  it  *  low  countiy ; '
while  Dr.  Waddell  agrees  with  the  rendering  of  de  Koros.  There  may,  therefore,
be  still  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  term.  It  may  be  thought
that  a  country  including  no  spot  lower  than  about  9,500  ft  above  sea-level,
could  scarcely  gain  the  name  of  *  low,'  but  with  reference  to  Gugeh,  Rupohu,
and  the  mountain  tracts  surrounding  Maryul^  the  settled  parts  of  the  country,
are,  in  fact,  at  a  low  elevation.  The  division  between  Upper  and  Ix>wer  Ladidc
is  said,  bv  Dr.  Marx,  to  be  the  phiteau  dividing  the  village  distriots  of
Basgo  and  Saspola  on  the  Indus.  Maryul,  however,  must  not  be  confounded
with  Mang-yvl^  or  the  "  Mang  country."  Mang,  as  Dr.  Waddell  points  out,  is  a
specific  name  for  the  province  lying  between  Ladak  and  Western  Tibet,  or
Tsang ;  and  is,  in  fact,  another  name  for  part  of  Ngari.

Mirza  Haidar,  when  speaking  of  Ladak  as  a  country,  always  applies  to  it  the
name  of  *  Tibet,'  as  is  the  custom  at  the  present  day  among  all  natives  of  Eastern
Turkistan,  Badakhsh&n,  etc.  It  is  only  on  the  south  of  the  Karakorum  and
Hindu  Kush  that  the  name  of  '  Ladak '  is  heard ;  and  in  those  regions  it  is
applied  to  the  chief  town,  Lch,  as  well  as  to  the  whole  oountry^just  as  the  name
of  *  Kaslimir '  is  given  to  Srinagar,  because  it  is  the  capital  of  Kashmir.  '  Leh '
and  'Srinagar'  are  rarely  heard,  among  the  natives,  in  Ladak  and  Kashmir.
In  the  same  way,  when  Mirza  Haidar  speaks  of  Maryul,  ho  usually,  if  not
always,  denotes  the  capital  and  its  immediate  district— either  the  town  of  Leh,
or  else  Sheh,  in  its  near  neighbourhood.  The  author  is  wrong  in  making  Ladak
a  part  of  Baltistan  in  the  sixteentli  century.

The  exact  Tibetan  spelling  of  the  name  LadaJi,  it  may  bo  added,  is  LadvagM^
but  in  pronouncing  these  syllables,  certain  letters  are  dropi>ed  and  others  alter^,
HO  that  the  lesxilt  arrived  at  is  Ld-ddh.  'I'ho  final  Kh,  so  often  seen  iu  the  name,
is  a  Kashmiri  and  Hindustani  corruption.  (See  Marx,  /.  A,  S.  B,  as  above,
pp.  115,  116;  Cunningham's  Ladah,  pp.  18,  19;  and  H.  Strachey,  Pky$,  Geog,  of
West,  Tibet,  p.  13.)

'  These  names,  as  far  as  ^Gugeh'  inclusive,  arc  easily  recognised;  for  some
attempts  at  identifying  the  remainder  see  lower  down — Note  1,  p.  456.  As
regards  Ursafig,  which  follows  immediately,  a  reference  to  note  8,  p.  136,  in
Part  I.,  will  show  that  Laftta  is  intended.

Digitized  by

Google

TIte  Curiosities  of  Tibet,  411

journey.  From  Aekabrak  to  Bangala  is  twentj-four  days' journey,
and  Ursang  is  on  the  east,  and  Bangala  on  the  south,  of  Askabrak..
Ursang  is  the  Eibla  and  E'aba  of  all  Khitai  and  Tibet,  and  has
a  vast  idol-temple.  As  what  I  heard  concerning  this  temple  is
incredible  I  have  not  written  it.  There  are  many  false  stories
told  of  it.  In  short,  it  is  the  seat  of  learning  and  the  city  of  the
pious  of  Tibet  and  Ehitdi.

CHAPTEB  XC.

ACCOUNT OF THE  CURIOSITIES  OF TIBET.

The  nature  of  those  portions  of  Tibet  that  I  have  visited,  and  of
its  inhabitants,  is  such  that  in  spite  of  my  strong  wish  to  describe
it  I  find  it  impossible.  I  will,  however,  on  account  of  their  strange-
ness, mention  a  few  of  the  particulars  which  I  have  either  seen
myself  or  heard  spoken  of.

One  of  these  is  the  gold-mines.  In  most  of  the  Champa  dis-
tricts gold-mines  are  found.  Among  them  are  two  strange  mines ;
one  is  called  by  the  Moghuls  the  Altunji  [or  Goldsmith]  of  Tibet,
and  it  is  worked  by  a  branch  of  the  above-mentioned  tribe  of
Dulpa.  On  account  of  the  extreme  coldness  of  the  atmosphere,
they  are  not  able  to  work  more  than  forty  days  in  the  year.  In  the
level  ground  are  pits  [or  caves]  largo  enough  for  a  man  to  enter.
There  are  numbers  of  these  holes,  and  most  of  them  terminate  by
running  into  one  another.  It  is  said  that  three  hundred  heads
of  families  live  permanently  in  those  caves.  They  watch  the
Mc^huls  from  afar,  and  when  these  come  near,  they  all  creep  into
their  caves,  where  no  one  can  find  them.  In  the  caves  no  oil
burns  except  the  oil  made  from  sheep's  milk  [sar-jush]  that  has  no
fat  in  it.^  Out  of  these  caves  they  bring  soil,  which  they  wash,
and  (the  responsibility  be  upon  those  who  tell  this  story)  it  is  said
that  in  one  sieve  of  soil  from  those  mines,  ten  mithkdh  of  gold  are
sometimes  found.  One  man  digs  the  earth,  carries  it  out  and
washes  it  by  himself.  Some  days  he  sorts  twenty  sieves  full.
Although  this  may  appear  incredible,  I  have  heard  it  confirmed
all  over  Tibet,  and  for  this  reason  I  have  written  it  down.

Again,  Guga  has  two  hundred  forts  and  villages.  It  is  three
days'  journey  in  length,  and  in  it  gold  is  everywhere  to  be  found.
Wherever  they  dig  up  the  earth  and  spread  it  on  a  cloth,  they  find
gold.  The  smallest  pieces  are  about  the  size  of  a  lentil  [adas]  or
a  pea  [mdsh],  and  they  say  that  sometimes  [lumps]  are  found  as
large  as  a  sheep's  liver. At  the  time  when  I  was  settling  the

1  The  tranalation  of  this  paseage,  regarding  the  oil»  is  unoertain.

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

412  Tlie  Curiosities  of  Tibet.

tribute  upon  Gaga,  the  head  men  related  to  me  that  a  man  was
lately  digging  a  piece  of  gronnd,  when  his  spade  stuck  fast  in
'something,  so  that  he  coidd  not,  with  all  his  eflfort-*,  di'aw  it  out.
Having  removed  the  earth,  he  saw  that  it  was  a  stone,  in  the
middle  of  which  was  gold ;  in  this  Lis  spade  had  become  fixed.
Leaving  the  spa(1e  where  it  was,  he  went  and  informed  tho
governor.  A  body  of  men  went  to  tho  spot  and  extracted  it,  and
having  broken  the  stone,  found  in  it  1,500  Tibetan  mithkdls  of
pure  [mohri]  gold  (a  Tibetan  mithkdl  is  worth  one-and-a-half
ordinary  mithkdls),  and  God  has  so  created  this  soil  that  when  tho
gold  is  taken  from  the  ground  it  does  not  diminish  [in  bulk]  how-
ever much  they  beat  it  out,  bake  it  and  stamp  it ;  it  is  only  fire
that  has  any  effect  on  it.  This  is  all  very  wonderful,  and  is
looked  upon  by  assayers  as  very  strange  and  curious.  Nor  is  this
peculiarity  to  be  met  with  anywhere  else  in  the  world. ^  In  the
greater  part  of  Tibet  the  merchandise  of  Khatai  and  India  is  to  be
found  in  about  equal  quantities.

Another  peculiarity  of  Tibet  is  the  dam-girt,  which  the  Moghuls
call  Yas,^  and  which  is  common  to  the  whole  country,  though  less
prevalent  in  the  vicinity  of  forts  and  villages.  The  symptoms  are
a  feeling  of  severe  sickness  [ndkhushi],  and  in  every  case  one's
breath  so  seizes  him  that  he  becomes  exhausted,  just  as  if  he  had
run  up  a  steep  hill  with  a  heavy  burden  on  his  back.  On  aocount
of  the  oppression  [it  causes]  it  is  difficult  to  sleep.  Should,  however,
sleep  overtake  one,  the  eyes  are  hardly  closed  l)eforo  one  is  awoke
with  a  start  caused  by  oppression  on  the  lungs  and  chest.  And  this
is  always  the  case  with  everybody.  When  overcome  by  this  malady
the  patient  becomes  senseless,  begins  to  talk  nonsense,  and  some-
times the  power  of  speech  is  lost,  while  the  palms  of  the  hands  and
soles  of  the  feet  become  swollen.  Often  when  this  last  symptom
occurs,  the  patient  dies  between  dawn  and  breakfast  time ;  at  other
times  he  lingers  on  for  several  days. If,  in  the  interval,  his  fate

*  The  existence  of  gold  Iq  the  weetem  provinces  of  Tibet  is  well  known,  bat
the  quantities  found  arc  very  small  and  usually  confined  to  dust — nuggets  being
seldom  heard  of.  The  quality  is  said  to  be  good,  and  most  of  it  finds  its  way  to
Kashmir  and  India.  The  workings — in  Ladak  at  any  rate — are  in  the  fonn  of
caves  or  pits,  much  as  Mirza  Haidar  describes  them.  His  mention  of  the  minen
watching  for  *  the  Moghuls '  is  curious,  but  it  is  not  quite  clear  whether  he  is
alluding  to  his  own  expedition  (presently  to  be  described),  when  lie  may  have
seen  the  miners  escape  from  his  party  by  taking  refuge  underground,  or  wnetlier
he  points  to  a  general  custom.  If  to  the  latter,  it  would  imply  that  the  Moghuls
from  Eastern  Turkistan  were  in  the  habit  of  raiding  on  the  gold  digeers.  In
Chaps.  XCII.  and  XCIV.,  wo  shall  see  that  to  plunder  the  Dulpa  or  Poicpft  was,
indeed,  the  chief  object  of  the  Khan's  expedition  to  Tibet,  though  it  was
disguised  as  a  holy  war ;  and  if  this  was  the  case  in  one  instance,  it  is  possible
that  former  raids  liad  been  undertaken  with  the  same  end  in  view.

^  The  proper  spelling  of  this  word,  aooordlDg  to  Mr.  Shaw  would  be  I».
There  is  no  English  word  for  dam-giri  or  **  breath  seizing,"  caused  by  the
rarefied  air  at  high  altitudes.  It  is  the  French  '*mal  de  montagne,"  and
the  Gorman  '*  Passen-gift." (See  note  next  page.)

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Tlie  Curiosities  of  Tibet  41 J

has  not  been  sealed,  and  lie  reach  a  village  or  a  fort,  it  is  probable
that  he  may  survive,  otherwise  he  is  sure  to  die.  This  malady
only  attacks  strangers ;  the  people  of  Tibet  know  nothing  of  it,
nor  do  their  doctors  know  why  it  attacks  strangers.  Nobody  has
ever  been  able  to  cure  it.  The  colder  the  air,  the  more  severe  is
the  form  of  the  malady.  [Couplet]  ....  It  is  not  peculiar  to
men,  but  attacks  every  animal  that  breathes,  such  as  the  horse,  as
will  be  presently  instanced.  One  day,  owing  to  the  necessity  of  a
foray,  we  had  ridden  faster  than  usual.  On  waking  [next  morning]
I  saw  that  there  were  very  few  horses  in  our  camp,  and  [on
inquiring]  ascertained  that  more  than  2000  had  died  in  the  night.
Of  my  own  stable  there  were  twenty-four  special  [riding]  horses,
all  of  which  were  missing.  Twenty-one  of  them  had  died  during
that  night.  Horses  are  very  subject  \%ara]iai\  to  dam-giri.  I  have
never  heard  of  this  disease  outside  Tibet.  No  remedy  is  known
for  it.i

'  The  effects  of  the  rarefied  atmosphere  at  high  altitudes  on  respiration  and
circulation  are,  on  the  whole,  well  described,  though  the  author  had  no  idea  of
the  cause  of  the  symptoms.  In  some  respects  he  is  at  fault,  as  when  he  says
that  the  natives  of  Tibet  do  not  suffer  from  ii  Tibetans  bom  and  bred  at  an
elevation  of,  say,  12,000  feet,  will  often  suffer  more  severely  from  dam-giriCpt  dam
as  it  is  usually  called)  when  they  ascend  to  17,000  or  18,000  feet,  than  natives  of
countries  on  about  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  degree  of  suffering  depends  on  tho
constitution  of  the  individual,  or  on  how  far  he  has  become  accustomed  to  high
altitudes.  The  cold  too,  so  far  from  intensifying  the  symptoms,  slightly  miti-
gates them,  as  it  modifies  the  pressure  to  some  extent  This,  however,  is  more  a
matter  of  theory  than  of  experience.  The  only  cure  which  modern  science  has
suggested,  is  the  use  of  salts  which  increase  the  supply  of  oxygen  to  the  system,
such  as  chlorate  of  ^tash ;  but  no  very  marked  result  has,  I  believe,  ever  been
attained  from  expenments  of  this  kind.  Dr.  Bellew  was  of  opinion  that  chlorate
of  potash  ^  relieves  the  dreadful  nausea  and  headadie  produced  by  the  circulation
of  insufSciently  oxygenated  blood."  Mirza  Haidar,  when  he  prescribes  tho
removal  of  the  patient  to  the  neighbourhood  of  forts  and  villages,  unconsciously
proposes  what  is  perhaps  the  only  real  cure — ^viz.,  a  descent  to  a  lower  altitude,
for  it  is  only  at  comparatively  low  elevations,  that  villages  or  buildings  of  any
land  are  to  be  found.  The  natives  of  the  Tibetan  and  Pamir  regions  have  many
nostrums,  such  as  onions,  dried  apricots,  aromatic  herb^,  etc.,  for  mitigating  the
effects  of  attenuated  air,  which  they  almost  invariably  ascribe  to  poisonous
exhalations  from  the  ground,  or  to  the  presence  of  noxious  weeds.  Good
accounts  of  the  effects  of  "  dam  "  or  height  sickness,  in  Central  Asia,  will  bo
found  in  Wood's  Oxua,  pp.  236-238;  Drew's  Jummoo  and  Kashmir,  pp.  290-2;
Bellew's  Kcuhmir  and  Kaahghar,  pp.  164,  etc.,  and  other  work^.  6ir  H.  Yule
{Prdim :  Euay  to  Wood's  Oxw,  p.  Ixv.)  says  that  the  malady  **  is  called  by  the
Badakhshis  and  Wakhis  Tunk,  by  the  Turkis  E%h  [luH^  signifying  an
odour  or  miasm,  and  by  the  Indian  population  of  the  Himalaya  Buh-Jcd'hawa,  or
poisonous  air."  In  the  Turkl  MS.  employed  for  this  translation  the  word  used
is  iiUki,  which  (Mr.  Boss  informs  me)  is  "  from  the  verb  tut-mah  to  seize,  as  gir
from  griftan**  The  Tibetan  words  (as  Dr.  Waddell  is  good  enough  to  note)  are
Dug-ri,  or  "  poison  of  the  mountain,"  and  La-dug,  or  **  pass  poison."  Other
accounts  of  the  malady  are  no  doubt  common  in  books  dealing  with  tho  Alps,  tho
Andes,  etc.

Digitized  by

Google

414  Customs  of  the  Tibetans.

CHAPTER  XCI.

TIB^  AND  THE  CUSTOMS  OF  ITS  PEOPLE.

Their  men  of  learning  [  lJlaLraa\  are,  as  a  body,  called  Lamas.  But
they  have  different  names,  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  their
learning.  Just  as  we  say  *'Imam  and  Mujtahid,"  they  say
**  Tunkana  and  Eahjav4r.'*  ^  I  had  much  conversation  with  them
with  the  help  of  an  interpreter.  But  when  it  came  to  nice  dis-
tinctions, the  interpreter  was  at  a  loss  both  to  understand  and  to
explain,  so  that  the  conversation  was  incomplete.  Of  their  tenets
and  rites,  however,  I  was  able  to  discover  the  following  particulars:
They  say  that  the  Most  High  God  is  from  all  eternity.  At  the
beginning  of  creation,  when  He  called  the  souls  into  being,  He
taught  each  one  separately  how  to  attain  to  the  regions  of  the
blessed  (which  was  the  path  that  leads  to  Paradise),  and  how  to
escape  from  hell.  [This  He  taught  them]  without  palate,  or  tongue,
or  any  other  [corporeal]  medium.  These  souls  He  sent  down  at
various  times,  as  seemed  fitting  to  Him,  and  mixed  them  with  earth.
And  this  is  the  origin  of  the  power  of  vegetation  of  plants  in  the
earth.  When  the  soul  has  descended  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest
degree,  it  is  no  longer  pure,  but  unconsciousness  and  oblivion
dominate  it.  In  the  process  of  time,  it  migrates  to  some  vile  body ;
and  this  migration,  although  it  be  into  a  base  degree,  is  yet  an
advance  upon  the  state  of  being  mixed  with  earth.  In  every  body
[the  soul]  makes  progress  according  to  its  conduct.  If  its  conduct
is  perfect  in  that  body,  it  enters  into  a  better  body ;  if,  on  the  other
hand,  it  errs,  it  enters  a  yet  viler  body ;  and  if  in  this  [last]  body

*  Kahjavdr  may  also  read  Kichuva.  On  these  terma  Dr.  Waddell  has  f avoiued
me  with  the  following  remarks : — **  The  ordinary  Tibetan  degree  of  dlyinity ,
somewhat  analogous  to  our  b.d.,  carries  with  it  the  title  of  Tung-JBa  (properly
Tung^am-pa — spelt  DrunrramB-pa^)  when  the  degree  is  conferred  by  the
Tashi-lhunpo  university ;  or  (^e^she  (spelt  dge'tA)  when  conferred  by  the  great
universities  of  Central  Tibet  (viz.,  Depung,  Berra  and  Ghihldan^.  These  may  be
the  names  here  mentioned.  The  highest  degree,  however,  which  may  be  cMled
the  Doctorate,  and  held  by  very  few  Lamas,  gives  the  title  of  Kak-chanj  or  Kah-
chu,  or  Kah-iBhu  (spelt  skabs-bchuj  or  akab^S'ttohu*)  when  the  degree  is  con-
ferred by  Tadii-lhunpo ;  but  Baihbyam-pa  when  given  by  those  of  (Tentral  Tibet.
Khajavdr  or  Kichuva  may  thus  be  intended  either  for  Kah-cUutn  or  Oe^she — ^the
former  more  probably,  though  it  is  possibly  meant  for  Ku  Sho^^  a  title  given  by
courtesy  to  educated  Tibetans,  even  amongst  the  luity,  though  m  Lad^k  it  seems
restricted  to  the  highest  Lamas — those  who  pose  as  reincarnated  hierarchs.

Nor  does  Tunkana  probably  mean  Tul-Ku — ^the  proper  title  of  reincarnated
Lamas — the  Khutvktu  of  the  Monjgols.  Taking  the  two  titles  together,  I  think
thev  are  probably  intended  for  Tun^-ram-pa  and  Kah-Chu^  thus  rendering  it
probable  that  the  author  was  conversmg  with  Lamas  affiliated  to  Taahi-lbunpo
which,  in  Northern  Tibet  and  Mongolia,  enjoys  greater  repute  as  a  teaching
centre  than  the  universities  of  Lhasa  (*  Cf.  Jaeschke's  Tibetan  DicL,  p.  268,
and  >  Koppen,  Die  Beligum  dee  Buddha,  ii.,  p.  253).— L.  A.  W."

Digitized  by

Google

Customs  of  the  Tibetans,  415

it  still  does  evil,  it  again  becomes  mixed  with  the  ecurth,  and  again
remains  inanimate  \mwxtiaJC\  for  some  time.

In  this  manner  [the  soul]  migrates  from  one  body  to  another,  and
progresses  nntil  it  attains  the  human  body.  In  the  human  body
it  first  of  all  reaches  the  lowest  degree,  such  as  that  of  a  })easant
or  a  slave.  It  gradually  rises  in  the  scale  of  humanity,  until  it
enters  the  body  of  a  lama,  in  which  state,  if  [the  entity]  conducts
itself  in  a  becoming  manner,  it  attains  a  knowledge  and  insight
into  former  states,  and  knows  what  it  has  done  in  each  separate
body,  what  has  been  the  cause  of  its  progress,  and  what  the
reason  of  its  degradation.  This  knowledge  and  consciousness  is
the  degree  of  saintliness.  And  in  like  manner,  by  means  of  much
contemplation,  people  attain  to  the  stage  in  which  tbey  recall  what
was  taught  them  at  the  beginning  of  eternity;  they  remember
everything  that  the  Most  High  Ood  communicated  to  them,  with-
out palate,  tongue,  or  any  other  [physical]  medium.  This  is  the
degree  of  prophecy.  In  it  men  learn  what  they  have  heard  from
God  Almighty,  and  [on  these  revelations]  are  their  religion  and
faith  based.  The  soul  which  has  attained  to  the  degree  of  prophecy
is  no  longer  subject  to  death,  but  has  eternal  life.  The  being
continues  until  his  physical  strength  is  quite  broken,  when  his
body  perishes,  and  nothing  remains  but  his  spirituality.  All  who
have  spiritual  force  of  this  kind  may  see  [the  soul]  ;  but  otherwise
it  cannot  be  seen  with  the  eye  of  the  hecKl,  which  is  bodily  vision.

Such  are  the  tenets  of  the  religion  of  Sbaka  Muni.  All  Ehitdi
is  of  this  faith,  and  they  call  it  the  religion  of  "  Shaki4  Muni  " ;
while  in  Tibet  it  is  called  "  Shakd  Tu  B4,"  ^  and  "  Shakd  Muni."
In  histories  it  is  written  *'  Shakd  Muni."  In  some  histories,  Shaka
Muni  is  reckoned  among  the  prophets  of  India,  and  some  hold  that
he  was  a  teacher  \hakim\.  Also,  it  is  maintained  that  no  one  goes  to
Heaven  by  the  mere  acceptance  of  the  faith  and  religion,  but  only
in  consequence  of  his  works.  If  a  Musulman  performs  good  acts,  he
goes  to  Heaven ;  if  he  do  evil,  he  goes  to  Hell.  This  abo  applies
to  [these]  infidels.  They  hold  the  Prophet  in  high  esteem,  but
they  do  not  consider  it  the  incumbent  duty  of  the  whole  of  man-
kind to  be  of  his  religion.  They  say :  **  Your  religion  is  true,  and
so  is  ours.  In  every  religion  one  must  conduct  oneself  well.
Shak4  Muni  has  said :  After  me  there  will  arise  124,000  prophets,
the  last  of  whom  will  be  called  Jana  Kasapa,^  an  orphan,  without

>  Dr.  Waddell  writes :  *'  Sakya,  Ta-Bi.  Tvh-^ga  is  the  Tibetan  equivalent  of
the  Sanscrit  Bdkwi^  and  means,  literally,  'the  mighty  one.'  (Cy.  Jaesohke's
Diet,  p.  234.>-L.  A.  W."

*  This  word  is  not  badly  transliterated.  It  should  read,  Professor  Bendall
informs  me,  Jndna-Kdgyapa,  Dr.  Waddell  notes  on  this  subject:  **Kdsyapa
was  the  last  mythical  hnnian  Buddha  who  preceded  Sakya-Muni,  and  he  is
especially  worshipped  now  by  the  Bmpa  followers  of  the  pre-Lamairt  religion
of  Tibet.  Ck)mpare  Fa  Hian's  reference  to  the  followers  of  the  mystic  cross  in
the  regions  about  Ladak.— L,  A.  W."

Digitized  by

Google

4i6  Customs  of  the  Tibetans.

father  or  mother.  All  the  world  will  comprehend  his  religion.
When  he  is  sent,  it  will  be  necessary  for  the  whole  world  to  submit
to  him,  and  blessed  will  he  be  who  hastens  to  adopt  his  faith.  I
bequeath  my  own  religion  in  order  that  it  may  be  handed  down
from  generation  to  generation  until  the  blessed  time  of  his  appear-
ance. The  semblance  of  this  prophet  will  be  in  this  wise  " — and
therewith  he  gave  an  image  which  the  people  were  to  remember,
for  in  this  form  the  prophet  would  appear.  People  should  believe
in  him  before  all  other  men.

At  the  present  time,  the  chief  idol  (which  they  place  in  the
entrance  of  all  the  Idol  Temples)  besides  all  their  jfables,^  have
reference  to  him.  This  idol  is  the  figure  of  Jana  Easapa.  And
they  attribute  most  of  those  qualities  to  J4na  Easapa,  which  apply
to  our  Prophet.  I  observed  to  them :  "  What  Shakd  Muni  said  refers
to  our  Prophet.*'  They  replied:  **Shak4  Muni  said  he  would
come  after  124,000  prophets,  and  after  him  would  come  no  other
prophet.  Now  of  those  124,000,  but  few  have  appeared  as  yet."
I  insisted  earnestly  that  they  had  all  appeared,  but  they  would
not  admit  it,  and  so  remained  in  their  en*or.

At  Zunka,  which  is  the  most  famous  [place]  in  Tibet,  and  one
which  produces  zedoary  \m&h  farfin\  I  saw  another  [interesting
object],  viz.,  an  inscription  of  the  Pddishah  of  Ehitai.  It  was
written  in  the  Ehitai  character,  but  in  one  comer  it  was  in
Tibetan  writing,  while  in  another  corner  was  a  dear  Persian
translation  in  the  Naskhi  hand.  It  ran  as  follows :  "  His  Highness
the  king  sends  greeting  to  all  his  people,  saying :  It  is  more  than
3,000  years  ago  now,  that  Shaka  Muni  introduced  idol-worship
and  spoke  words  which  are  not  intelligible  to  all.  .  .  ."  This
much  I  have  retained;  the  rest  related  to  some  orders  for  the
repairing  of  the  temple.  I  have  quoted  this  to  show  that  Shaka
Muni  lived  3,000  years  previous  to  the  date  of  the  inscription,'-*
which,  however,  not  being  [dated]  in  the  Hajra,  I  could  not
understand.  But  judging  from  the  extent  to  which  the  inscrip-
tion was  worn,  not  more  than  a  hundred  years  could  have  elapsed
since  it  was  written.  But  God  knows  best  I  was  in  Zunka  in
the  month  of  Babi  ul  Awal,  940  [October  1533].

Another  [curiosity]  is  the  wild  hitda.  This  is  a  very  wild  and
ferocious  beast.  Li  whatever  manner  it  attacks  one  it  proves
fatal :  whether  it  strike  with  its  horns,  ^r  kick,  or  overthrow  its

1  The  fables  here  alluded  to,  Prof.  Bendall  thinks,  are  probably  the  JdtaJ{a$.
or'*  Birth  stories."

*  The  date  nsnally  assumed  for  the  Kirr&na  of  Sakya-Muni  is  about  the
middle  of  the  fifth  century,  b.o.  ;  thus  Mirza  Haidar's  estimate  would  appear  to
be  about  1,000  years  too  early,  but  Dr.  Waddell  informs  me  that,  among
the  Tibetan  Lamas,  an  antiquity  of  8,000  years  is  often  assigned  to  Sakya-
Muni.  Mirza  Haidar,  therefore,  may  have  had  authority  for  what  he  sets  down
here.

Digitized  by

Google

Arrival  of  tJie  Author  in  Tibet.  417

victim.  If  it  has  no  opportunity  of  doing  any  of  these  things,
it  tosses  its  enemy  with  its  tongue,  twenty  gaz  into  the  air,  and
he  is  dead  before  reaching  the  ground.  One  male  kut&s  is  a  load
for  twelve  horses.  One  man  cannot  possibly  raise  a  shoulder  of
the  animal.  In  the  days  of  my  forays  \lcaz&k%]  I  killed  a  hktds^
and  divided  it  among  seventy  persons,  when  each  had  sufficient
flesh  for  four  days.^  This  animal  is  not  to  be  met  with  outside
the  country  of  Tibet.  The  remaining  particulars  concerning  Tibet
will  be  given  in  the  account  of  the  campaign.

CHAPTEB  XCII.

THE  KHIn  hakes  a  HOLT  WAR  ON  TIBET.

The  Holy  War  is  the  main  support  and  fortifier  of  Islam — the
most  efficient  ground*work  for  the  foundations  of  the  Faith  .  .  .  .^
After  the  Kh&n's  repentance,  he  had  always  awaited  an  opportunity
for  personally  conducting  a  holy  war  \jghaz&t]^  nor  could  his  hunger
and  thirst  for  this  exploit  be  in  any  way  satisfied  by  merely  sending
out  a  ghazdt  expedition,  every  year ;  so  at  length,  in  Zulhijja  of
the  year  938  [July  1532]  he  set  out  to  attack  the  infidels  of  Tibet.
As  I  mentioned  above,  Tibet  is  bounded  on  the  north,  where
it  is  called  Balti,  by  Balur  and  Badakhshan ;  in  the  direction
of  winter  sunrise  ^  of  that  place  is  Yarkand,  and  on  the  west  is
Kashmir.  Having  bidden  Iskandar  Sultan  accompany  me,  and
having  deputed  me  to  that  countr}-,  the  Khan  himself  started  (by
way  of  Khotan)  for  the  Altunji  ^  of  Tibet,  which  is  another  name
for  the  Dulpa.

CHAPTER  XCIII.

ARRIVAL  OP  THE  AUTHOR  IN  TIBET, AND  SUBSEQUENT  EVENTS.

I  SET  out  in  Zulhijja  of  the  aforesaid  year,  and  in  the  beginning
of  Safar,  reached  Nubra,  a  dependent  province  of  Tibet.  I  then
sent  a  person  all  over  that  country  to  greet  the  people  with  a

*  For  the  true  dimensions  of  the  Icutds,  or  ydJ:^  see  note,  p.  802.

*  Here  ten  lines  of  rhetoric  on  the  virtues  of  the  Ohazdt,  or  holy  war,  arc  left
untranslated.

'  The  expression  is  Shark-i-Zamiaidni,  and  is  translated,  according  to
Mr.  Shaw,  "  direction  of  winter  sunrise,"  as  in  the  cnses  mentioned  in  note  2,
p.  405.

*  See  notes,  pp.  409  and  412.

2  E

Digitized  by

Google

41 8  Arrival  of  the  Author  in  Tibety

general  invitation.  [He  was  to  say] :  '*  This  is  a  general  invitation
to  the  faith  of  Ahmad.  Happy  the  man  who  comes  to  the  Faith
and  obtains  his  portion."  The  greater  number  submitted ;  but  not
the  chiefs  of  Nubra,  who  wore  refractory  and  rebellious,  and
retired  to  their  castles  and  forts.  A  certain  man  named  Bur  Eapa,
who  was  at  the  head  of  the  chiefs  of  the  infidels,  strengthened
himself  within  the  castle  of  Mutadar/  which  is  the  chief  fort  of
that  country.  I  laid  siege  to  this  fort,  and  waa  for  some  days
employed  in  making  ready  the  siege  implements,  such  as  catapults,
shields  [tura\  etc.  On  the  appointed  day  I  approached  the  fort,
and  the  talons  of  IsUm,  seizing  the  hands  of  infidelity,  the
enemy  were  thrown  into  disorder  and  routed.  Having  deserted
the  fort,  tbey  fled  in  confusion  and  dismay,  while  the  Musulmans
gave  them  chase,  as  fiir  as  was  possible,  so  that  not  one  of  these
bewildered  people  escaped.  Bur  K4p&  was  slain  together  with
all  his  men ;  their  heads  formed  a  lofty  minaret — ^and  the  vapour
from  the  brains  of  the  infidels  of  that  country  ascended  to  the
heavens.

Thenceforth  no  one  dared  offer  resistance.  Having  thus  reduced
the  whole  province  of  Nubra,  a  garrison  was  placed  in  the  fort  and
order  established.

Thence  we  passed  into  Maryul,  and  there  encamped.  In  M4ryul
there  are  two  rulers.  One  called  Lata  Jughddn,  and  the  other
T4shikun.2 They  both  hastened  to  wait  [on  me]. At  that  period

'  This  name  may  also  read  MaUt-ddr,  but  is  probably  intended  for  Hvmdary
near  the  junction  of  the  Nubra  and  Shayok  rivera.  The  chief  Tillage,  and  seat  of
the  district  officials  in  the  Nubra  Valley  is,  nowadays,  Tagdr — a  name  which  bears
a  certain  resemblance  to  a  part  of  the  word  Mutadar.  At  one  time  Chardia^  on
the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  was  the  chief  place.

'  The  kings  or  rulers  of  Lieuiak  are  not  easy  to  trace  about  this  period.  In  the
first  plaoe,  the  history  of  the  country  has  not  yet  been  completely  worked  out :
in  the  second  plaoe,  no  dates  are  recorded  (except  one  uncertain  one)  till  the  year
1580  A.D.  is  reached.  We  possess  two  lists  of  rulers  previous  to  tnat  date— one
by  the  late  Emil  v.  Schlagintweit,  and  the  other  by  the  late  Dr.  Karl  Marx  of  the
Moravian  mission  in  Ladak.  Both  are  taken  from  the  same  Tibetan  work — ^the
Ladak  Cfytdrabs — ^but  thoy  differ  to  some  extent,  and  more  especially  about  the
period  which  embraces  the  transactions  related  by  Mirza  Haidar.  On  the  whole,
probably  the  later  version  of  Dr.  Marx  is  the  one  to  be  most  trusted,  as  he  collated
several  manuscripts  of  the  Ladak  Gyalrahsj  and  had  the  assistance  of  good  local
authorities  on  the  history  of  the  country.  Had  he  only  been  able  to  supply  dates
for  the  reigns  of  the  kings  and  for  the  events  he  mentions,  his  work  would  indeed
have  been  valuable.  The  only  way  in  which  I  have  been  able  roughly  to  set  up
a  reference  mark  for  the  dates,  is  to  assume  that  the  sixteenth  king  of  the  line,
reigned  not  later  than  the  early  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  for  it  is  during  this
king*s  time  that  an  event  is  mentioned,  showing  that  the  famous  religious
reformer  Tsong-Kapa  was  then  alive,  and  the  period  of  Tsong-Kapa's  life  is  well
known  ^rom  Chinese  sources)  to  have  been  1355  to  1417  a.d.  Thus  the  sixteenth
king  of  Ladak  must  have  been  ruline  before  1417,  while  Mirza  Haidar^s  invasion
took  place  in  the  autumn  of  1532  (Safar  939  h.),  when  the  name  of  one  of  the
rulers  was  Lata  Jughd&n,  or  Ohogda^.  Now  the  only  ruler  of  the  name  of  Chogdan
(fully  Lo-dos-chog-ldan)  is  the  seventeenth,  who  was  son  of  the  sixteenth,  and  it
would  seem  impossible  that  a  man  should  be  reigning  in  1532  whose  father  was
king  some  time  previous  to  1417.  There  is,  therefore,  some  discrepancy  here
which  I  see  no  way  of  reconciling. Tlie  name  of  the  other  ruler,  given  by  Bdna

Digitized  by

Google

and  Beginning  of  the  War,  419

Libra  began  to  chaDge.  In  the  whole  of  Tibet  during  Libra,  the
cold  is  so  intense  that,  compared  with  it,  the  winter  of  otlier
countries  is  as  the  hottest  days  of  summer.  I  then  held  a  con-
sultation with  the  Amirs,  who  were  with  me,  as  to  which  district
of  Tibet  would  be  best  suited  to  establish  our  winter  quarters  in,
and  where  we  might  find  grain  and  provender  for  the  cattle  during
the  winter.  As  no  such  place  was  to  be  found  in  those  parts,
Kashmir  was  decided  upon  for  the  winter  quarters.  If  we  could
conquer  it,  well  and  good ;  if  not,  we  could  winter  there  and  leave
in  the  spring.

This  matter  having  been  settled,  we  left  Maiyul  and  the  neigh-
bouring districts,  and  taking  the  army  of  Tibet  along  with  us,
advanced  towards  Kashmir.  At  this  juncture  Abd&l  Kuli  Tasdvul,
one  of  the  Kh4n's  trusty  chamberlains,  arrived  with  news  that
the  Kh4n  was  making  for  this  quarter  [M 4ryul],  that  on  the  road
he  had  been  afflicted  with  dam-^iri  (which  is  the  peculiarity  of
that  infidel  country),  and  [adding]  that  he  wished  to  see  me  as
soon  as  possible.  That  same  hour  I  set  out  to  [meet]  him,  leaving
the  army  where  it  was.

Haidar  as  T&shikan,  or  Tashi-gon,  maj  fit  in  somewhat  better,  for  Dr.  Marx's
nineteenth  kine  has  the  name  of  Ta-Bhia-nam-gval.  In  reality  this  would  be  two
very  common  Tibetan  names,  and  the  seoond  s  in  shi$  would  not  be  uttered ;  the
whole  would  be  pronounced  Td$hi  Naimgyal,  It  is  related  of  this  personage  that
he  made  himself  master  of  the  whole  of  the  country  from  Pniig  (or  Punk— lying
between  lower  Ladak  and  Bum)  in  the  west,  to  Do  Shod,  near  we  source  of  the
Tsang-po  (Brahmaputra)  in  the  east :  that  **  he  fought  against  an  invading  foroe
.  of  Turks,  and  killed  many  Turks.  He  erected  a  temple  (dedicated)  to  the  (four)
Lords  ....  and  laid  the  corpses  of  the  Turks  under  the  feet  of  (the  images  of)
the  (four)  Lords.  Again,  by  building  the  temple  to  the  (four)  Lords,  he  obtained
power  over  the  demon  that  turns  \m&  hostile  armies."  Whether  this  invasion  of
^  Turks  "  points  to  Mirza  HaidaPs  exploit,  can  only  be  a  matter  of  conjecture,
and,  indeed,  it  seems  to  me  very  doubtml  if  Tdshi-Namgyal  and  T^shi-Eun  can
be  regarded  as  one  and  the  same  person.  Tashi  is  so  common  a  name  among  the
natives  of  Ladak,  that  it  scarcely  distinguishes  one  person  from  another.  The
Tashi-Eun  named  here  is  apparently  the  same  chief  who  is  mentioned  later
as  having  welcomed  Mirza  Haidar  on  returning  from  his  expedition
towards  Lassa ;  while  another  person  of  the  name  seems  to  have  been  the  head
man  of  Nubm,  and  is  recorded  lower  down  to  have  been  executed  by
the  Moghuls.  On  the  whole,  nothing  very  distinct  can  be  made  out  of  the  Ladak
annals  as  we  have  them.  (See,  for  Marx's  translation,  /.  A.  8.  B.,  Vol.  LX.,
1892,  Part  III.,  pp.  97  aeqq. ;  and  for  Schlagintweit's  tables  in  Stokvia'  Manud
d^Histoire,  etc^  1.,  pp.  242-3.)

2  E  2

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

420  Arrival  of  tJte  Klidn  in  Tibet,

CHAPTER  XCIV.

ARRIVAL  OF  THE  KHAN  IN  TIBET,  FOLLOWING  THE  AUTHOR. HIS  ENTRANCE
INTO BALTI. JOURNEY OF THE AUTHOR  TO KASHMIR.

It  was  mentioned  above  that  the  Khan  had  decided  to  advance
against  the  Dulpa,  by  way  of  Khotan,  and  had  sent  me  forward  to
Balti.  At  that  time  the  Emperor  of  the  firmament  was  in  the
sign  of  Leo ;  the  Khan,  having  marched  for  one  month,  took  np  his
summer  quarters  among  the  hill  pastures  of  Khotan,  nntil  the  end
of  the  season  of  Virgo.  Those  who  had  had  experience  of  that
region  then  represented  to  the  Khan :  *'  It  is  now  too  late  [in  the
season]  to  achieve  anything:  for  very  soon  all  the  waters  and
rivers  will  be  frozen  over,  so  that  no  water  will  be  obtainable :  nor
is  there  sufficient  firewood  to  be  found  to  melt  the  ice,  for  watering
the  cattle  and  horses.  It  will  also  be  hardly  possible  to  kill  enough
hut&s  to  make  a  sufficient  supply  of  soup.  It  is  for  these  reasons
that,  on  previous  occasions,  several  armies  have  been  dismounted
[lost  their  horses]  on  this  road."  The  Khan  being  convinced  [of
the  impracticability  of  continning  by  that  route]  said  :  **  Were  I
to  give  up  the  holy  war  in  Tibet,  I  should  be  disappointed  of  great
recompense  hereafter.  If  this  route  is  too  difficult,  it  will  be  best
for  me  to  follow  in  the  steps  of  Mirza  Haidar,  and  complete  the
holy  war  in  that  quarter."  So  saying,  he  turned  back  from  Khotan
and  advanced  along  the  road  which  I  had  taken.^

On  the  way  he  was  so  severely  attacked  by  damgiri^  that  for
some  days  he  was  quite  insensible,  and  his  life  was  reduced  to  a
breath.  The  doctors  applied  suppobitories  [8h%y6f^^  and  used
aperients,  and  whenever  these  took  effect  he  became  conscious  for
the  moment,  but  soon  again  fainted  away.  To  the  nobles  and
courtiers  he  said :  *'  Although  my  health  is  not  strong  enough  to
admit  of  my  conducting  a  holy  war,  I  shall  not  be  wanting  in
intention.  When  I  am  deprived,  as  I  certainly  shall  be,  of  the
companionship  of  the  living,  it  will  only  be  to  join  the  band  of  the
departed.  Perhaps  I  may  die  on  the  road.  As  long  as  there  is
a  breath  of  life  in  me  I  will  not  abandon  the  war. When  all  life

*  From  this,  it  appears  that  the  Khan  had  started  from  Khotan  with  the  inten-
tion of  crossing  by  one  of  the  direct  routes  to  Ngari-Khorsnm,  or  the  western
province  of  what  is  now  Lassa-govemed  Tibet — ^the  region  where  the  gold
workings  are  to  be  found.  These  routes,  whether  by  the  upper  Kdrak&sh,  or  by
Polu,  are  so  difficult  and  at  such  excessive  altitudes,  as  to  be  practically  impass-
able, except  for  light  and  well-equipped  parties  at  the  best  season  of  the  year.
They  are  never  used  by  traders  or  travellers  and  are  very  little  known.  Mirza
Haidar's  route  (and  the  one  tiie  Khan  afterwards  followed)  was  the  ordinary  one
over  the  Karakorum  pass,  as  is  evident  from  Nubra  being  mentioned  aa  the  first
point  reached  on  arriving  in  Ladak.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

and  Distribution  of  the  Army.  421

has  gone  out  of  me,  you  can  do  as  you  please/'  During  this  time
he  frequently  asked  after  me,  and  used  to  say,  with  emotion  and
regret :  '*  At  the  present  moment  I  have  no  other  desire  than  this
[seeing  the  author],  and  I  pray  God  that  my  life  may  be  preserved
until  I  meet  him  once  more."  He  also  repeated  verses  suited  to
his  frame  of  mind :  among  them  the  following  couplet.  [Verses].
...  He  constantly  uttered  such  sentiments  during  his  intervals
of  consciousness.

It  is  strange  that  in  spite  of  the  severity  of  this  malady,  ono
never  desires  to  stay  in  one  place  [for  any  length  of  time].  Indeed,
so  excessive  is  the  cold,  and  so  great  the  scarcity  of  water  and  com,
that  supposing  one  to  make  a  halt,  it  would  only  aggravate  the
disease.  The  cure  is  to  do  one's  best  to  reach  some  place  where
dam-^ri  is  less  prevalent.  Whenever  the  Khan  reached  such  a
place  he  recovered  consciousness.

On  the  day  that  the  Khan  returned  to  his  senses,  I  joined  his
camp.  Having  embraced  me  affectionately,  he  said :  ''  Of  all  my
friends  or  children,  it  is  you  who  have  been  in  my  thoughts  [the
most],  and  I  thank  God  for  having  been  allowed  to  see  you  again."
[Verses].  .  .  .  From  that  hour  he  began  to  regain  his  usual
health  and  strength,  and  by  the  time  we  reached  Nubra  he  was
entirely  restored,  so  that  he  was  able  to  enter  that  district  on
horseback.  After  this,  all  the  Amirs  assembled  together  in  council
and  each  gave  his  opinion  on  the  best  course  to  pursue.  I  sug-
gested: "After  careful  investigation,  I  can  discover  no  spot  in
these  districts  of  Tibet,  which  can  provide  winter  quarters  for
more  than  one  thousand  men.  But  with  a  thousand  men,  there  will
be  no  possibility  of  insubordination  or  revolt.  There  seems  to  be  no
place  capable  of  supporting  a  large  army  in  winter,  except  Kash-
mir. But  on  the  road  to  Kashmir  there  are  many  passes,  which
the  Khan's  strength  will  not  allow  him  to  cross.  If  the  Khan
would  issue  the  needful  order,  he  might  retain  1000  men  in  his
own  service  and  proceed  to  Balti  with  them ;  for  in  Balti  there  is
no  dam-giriy  and  no  passes  need  be  traversed  [to  reach  it].  He
might  place  me  in  command  of  the  rest  of  the  troops,  when,
having  spent  the  winter  in  Kashmir,  we  could,  on  the  return  of
spring,  do  whatever  seemed  wisest."

Of  all  the  propositions  this  one  pleased  the  Khan  most,  and  thus
it  was  decided.  At  the  outset  of  his  expedition  [the  Khan]  knew
that  Tibet  was  no  place  for  a  large  army.  Five  thousand  men  had
been  fixed  [as  the  number] ;  3,000  belonged  to  the  Khan's  army
and  2,000  to  mine.  Of  those  3,000  men,  the  Khan  [now]  retained
1,000  for  his  personal  service  and  advanced  towards  Balti,  while  I
turned  in  the  direction  of  Kashmir  attended  by  4,000  men,  ^nd  also
by  several  distinguished  Amirs,  such  as  Amir  Daim  Ali,  who  was
mentioned  in  the  liflts  at  Ka^hghar,  BdWi  Sarik  Mirza,  and  others.

Digitized  by

Google

422  The  Khdfis  Experiences  in  Bdlti.

CHAPTEB  XCV-

THE  khan's  experiences  IN BALTI.

At  the  end  of  Libra  the  Khan  arrived  in  Balti.  Bahrain  Chn,  one
of  the  head  men  of  Balti,  submitted  and  waited  on  the  Khan.  All
the  other  Chu^  began  to  practise  sedition  and  revolt,  the  natural
outcome  of  infidelity.  In  the  first  place,  under  the  guidance  of
Bahram  Chu,  the  Ehdn  took  the  fort  of  Shigar  ^  (which  is  the
capital  of  all  Balti)  at  the  first  assault;  All  the  men  of  the  place
were  mown  down  by  the  blood-stained  swords  of  the  assailants,
while  the  women  and  children,  together  with  much  property,  fell
a  prey  to  the  victorious  army.  Furthermore,  wherever  in  that
hill-country  a  hand  was  stretched  out,  it  never  missed  its  object ;
[and  even  the  strongly  fortified  ravines  and  castles  were  trampled
under  foot  by  the  horses  of  the  Kh4n's  army.]  ^

On  account  of  the  snow,  no  news  from  Kashmir  could  reach  the
Khan  during  that  winter,  and  the  infidel  insurgents,  to  serve  their
own  vile  purposes,  spread  many  false  reports,  thereby  causing
the  Khan,  and  all  the  army,  to  become  distressed  and  anxious.  At
length,  towards  the  end  of  winter,  an  express  messenger  who  had
been  sent  from  Kashmir  arrived,  bearing  news  of  our  successes,
whereupon  the  apprehension  and  distress  of  the  Khan  [and  his
troops]  were  changed  to  joy  and  gladness ;  and  they  recited  the
verse :  "  Thanks  be  to  God  who  has  put  sorrow  away  from  us."

At  the  beginning  of  spring  they  withdrew  from  Balti.  [At  this
juncture]  the  Khan  entrusted  to  Amir  Kambar  Kukildash,  who
was  mentioned  in  the  lists  [muster  roll]  at  Kashghar,  the  pKJvince

^  Ghu  may  also  read  Ju,  which  is  a  very  common  termination  to  the  names  of
natives  of  the  Kishtaw^r  province  of  Kadimir,  whether  Hindus  or  Blusulmins.
Bnt  this  can  hardly  be  the  sense  in  which  Mirza  Haidar  employs  it,  in  this  and
many  passages  to  come.  He  obviously  means  it  to  signify  an  official  of  some
kind,  and  I  beWeve  it  to  be  the  word  Chlio^  or  Cfcw,  of  Gen.  Ounninjjfham.  He
writes  (p.  260) :  ^  Among  the  Mahomedans  of  Ladak  ....  the  petty  chiefs  arc
invariably  called  Ckho" ;  while  (p.  277)  he  gives  Chu-pon  as  the  cquivalimt  of
an  inferior  olficial— a  "  chief  of  ten,"  or  sergeant.  Moorcroft,  too,  (ii.,  pp.  29,  30,
etc.)  speaks  of  an  inferior  official  by  the  style  of  Chu-diu.  I  do  not  know  the
word,  in  local  use  among  modem  officials  in  Ladak,  bat  it  may  bo  current  in
Baltistan.  Bahram  was,  to  judge  bv  his  name,  a  Musulman,  and  it  will  be  seen
below,  that  it  is  with  reference  to  Musulman  chiefs  that  Mirza  Haidar  always
cmplovs  the  word  Chu.

»  TLe  right  spelling: ;  but  written  Ashigdr  at  p.  410.

'  The  Persian  texts  make  no  apparent  sense  of  this  passage,  so  the  Tnrki
alone  has  been  translated.  The  allusion  is,  I  think,  to  the  Tibetan  method  of
defence,  in  barricading  ravines  by  buildins:  walls  of  loose  stones  aorom  them.
The  remains  of  <Iefensivo  barricades  of  this  kind,  are  found  still,  in  many  parts  of
Ladak.  There  are  two,  for  instance,  on  the  direct  road  to  Yarkand,  which  wer?
originally  built  to  assist  in  keeping  out  the  Mogliuls.

Digitized  by

Google

T]ie  Aut/iot^s  Invasion  of  Kashmir*  423

of  Nnbra,  which  I  had  set  in  order  and  handed  over  to  the  Eh4n.
But  in  oonsequence  of  the  Amir's  bad  judgment  and  want  of
oapaoitj,  the  conntry  went  to  ruin  and  the  inhabitants  rose  in
revolt,  each  man  betaking  himself  to  some  strong  place.  Utterly
disregarding  those  weak  men  who  had  been  placed  over  them,  the
people  gave  themselves  up  to  robbery  and  every  kind  of  crime.
On  this  acconnt  [the  Khdn's  officials]  not  deeming  it  safe  to  remain
any  longer  in  Nubra,  came  to  Maryul.^  Tasbikun,  for  his  neglect
of  duty,  was  deprived  of  his  fortress  and  put  to  death.^  It  was
here  [in  Maryul]  that  I  found  [the  Khan's  officers]  encamped
when  I  arrived  from  Kashmir,  as  shall  be  presently  related.

CHAPTEE  XCVI.

THE  author's  arrival  IN KASHMIR  AND  EVENTS CONNECTED
THEREWITH.

I  LEFT  Nubra  with  the  Amirs  and  the  new  army,  which  the  Khan
had  sent  with  me,  and  joined  my  own  forces  in  the  district  of
M4ryul ;  after  which  I  set  off,  by  forced  marches,  in  the  direction
of  Kashmir.  On  the  road,  all  the  chief  men  of  Tibet  submitted
and,  joining  us,  greatly  increased  the  numbers  of  our  army.  Some
of  the  Balti  Tibetans,  who  live  in  the  valleys  of  Kashmir,  acting
as  our  guides,  we  reached  that  country  at  the  beginning  of  the
sign  of  Scorpio — Jamad  II.  939 — ^after  crossing  the  pass  of  Kashmir,
which  is  called  Zuji.  The  chiefs  of  Kashmir  had  already  heard  of
the  approach  of  our  army,  and  were  occupying  the  narrow  defile  of
Lar.^  Having  crossed  the  pass  [of  Zuji]  I  sent  forward  400  men,
chosen  out  of  the  whole  army  for  their  experience,  under  the  com-
mand of  Tuman  Bah4dar  Kaluchi,  who  was  one  of  those  mentioned
in  the  lists  at  Kashghar.  When  they  reached  the  narrow  defile,
they  found  it  occupied  by  the  Kashmir  army,  a  few  of  whom  were
stationed  as  outposts  at  its  [upper]  end.  At  dawn  our  soldiers
made  a  charge  on  these  pickets,  who  fled  down  the  defile,  followed
by  our  men.  When  the  main  body  perceived  this,  seeing  no
way  of  holding  the  road,  they  too  turned  and  fled. Arriving  [at

^  Maryul  is  here  differentiated  from  Nubra,  and  obviously  stands  for  thu
district  of  the  capital— at  that  time  probably  Sheh,  near  Leh.  (See  note,  p.  410 ;
also  tibe  first  translated  sentence  of  Chap.  CV.,  where  it  is  obTiously  nsed  for  tho
capital,  and  not  for  Ladak  in  general.)

-  See  note,  pp.  418-19,  regarding  Tashikun.

'  The  Sind  river  (of  our  maps)  flowing  from  the  Zoji  pass  down  towards  tho
Jhilam,  was  called  the  Lar,  The  narrow  and  diffionlt  defile  mentioned  imme-
diately below,  as  the  position  defended  by  the  Kashmiris,  is  most  likely  the
defile  of  JSofi^,  or  JSang  Saiu^  between  the  villages  of  (Hngangir  and  Sonamarg
— or  about  twenty  miles  below  the  westeri)  foot  of  the  Zogi  pass.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

424  Description  of  Kashmir.

this  moment]  I  gavo  them  chase ;  thus  easily  did  our  whole  foroo
pass  such  a  difficult  place.  On  the  second  day  after  [this  affair]
we  alighted  in  Kashmir.  Having  reached  this  point,  it  seems
fitting,  in  order  to  render  the  subject  clear  and  intelligible,  to  give
some  account  of  the  country  of  Kashmir  and  its  rulers.

CHAPTER  XCVII.

DESCRIPTION  OF KASHMIB.

Kashmir  is  among  the  most  famous  countries  of  the  world,  and  is
celebrated  both  for  its  attractions  and  its  wonders.  In  spite  of  its
renown,  no  one  knows  anything  about  its  present  state,  nor  can
any  of  its  features  or  its  history  be  learned  from  the  books  of  former
writers.  At  this  present  date  of  Moharram  950,  [1543-4]  now  that
I  have  subdued  this  beautiful  country  and  seen  all  that  is  notablo
in  it,  whatever  I  shall  write  will  be  what  I  have  witnessed.

The  second  time  that  I  entered  Kashmir,  and  when  I  had  not
reduced  the  whole  of  the  country,  I  drew  an  omen  [fdl]  from  the
Koran,  with  reference  to  its  conquest  and  to  my  becoming
established  there.  The  verse  that  tui*ned  up  was :  *'  Eat  of  the
daily  bread  from  your  Lord,  and  return  your  thanks  to  him  in  the
shape  of  a  fair  city. The  Lord  is  forgiving."

The  plain  [juZ^d]  of  Kashmir  extends  from  the  Bakani  quarter,
which  means  "  between  the  south  and  the  east,*'  towards  the  Bikan
Bain  [or  north-west] ;  it  is  a  level  expanse  about  a  hundred  kruh
(equivalent  to  thirty  farsdkhs)  in  length.  Its  width  is,  at  some
parts,  about  twenty  kruh,  and  in  a  few  places  ten  kruh.^ In  this

'  The  word  Kruh  or  Kwroh  is  the  Persian  form  for  the  familiar  Kro  or  Ko$  of
India.  Aa  a  measure  of  distance,  it  has  yaried  so  greatly  with  time,  and  still
varies  according  to  locality,  that  a  better  estimate  could  hardly  be  giyen  thnn
our  author's,  when  he  makes  it  0*3  of  a  fandhh,  or  about  1^  mile.  In
Noithern  India  and  Kashmir,  in  our  own  times,  the  Kos  is  usually  t^en  at  about
1}  mile.  The  Emperor  Akbar  established  the  Kos  on  the  basis  of  5000  Hdhi  Gaz,
which  produces  an  English  equivalent  of  rather  over  2|  miles  ;  but  it  is  probable
that  the  value  of  the  Koa^  liko  that  of  the  Gtu,  had  fallen  yery  low  previous  to
Akbar*8  reform,  so  that  Mirza  Haidar's  Kruh  may  well  liave  measured  much  less
thnn  the  Ildhi  Ko$.  Eyen  later  than  Akbar's  time,  as  General  Cunningham  shows,
a  Kos  measuring:  much  less  than  2^  miles  was  in  frequent  use.  On  the  whole,
therefore,  1^  mile  may  be  fairly  assumed  to  haye  been  the  approximate  length
of  Mirza  Haidar's  Krfi7<,  and  may  be  applied  in  all  coses  where  he  states  distanoee
in  that  measure.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  length  of  the  Kashmir  yaUey  is
about  80  English  miles,  while  its  breadth  yaries  so  greatly  that  it  is  impossible
to  state  it  in  figures.  (For  full  and  interesting  discussions  on  the  origin,  etc.,  of
the  words  Kruh  nnd  Kos,  and  the  measurements  they  haye  represented  at
different  periods,  0^  Cunningham's  Anr,t.  (reofj.  IndiOy  Appendix  B,  and  Yule's
Olossaryy  p.  202.)

Digitized  by

Google

Description  of  Kashmir.  425

region  all  the  land  is  divided  into  foiir  kinds.  The  cultivation  is :
(1)  by  irrigation  [<£6tj,  (2)  on  land  not  needing  artificial  irrigation,
(3)  gardens,  and  (4)  level  ground,  where  the  river  banks  abound  in
violets  and  man j-ooloured  flowers.  On  the  [level]  ground,  on  account
of  the  excessive  moisture,  the  crops  do  not  thrive,  and  for  this  reason
the  soil  is  not  laboured,  which  constitutes  one  of  its  charms.^  The
heat  in  summer  is  so  agreeable,  that  there  is  at  no  time  any  need
of  a  fan. A  soft  and  refreshing  breeze  is  constantly  blowing.  .  .  .^

The  climate  in  winter  is  also  very  temperate,  notwithstanding
the  heavy  snowfalls,  so  that  no  fur  cloak  [piMitn]  is  neoessaiy.  In
fact  its  coldness  only  serves  to  render  the  heat  yet  more  agreeable.
When  the  sun  does  not  shine,  the  warmth  of  a  fire  is  far  from  un-
pleasant. [Couplet].  .  .  .^  In  short  I  have  neither  seen  nor  heard
of  any  country  equal  to  Kashmir,  for  charm  of  climate  during  all
the  four  seasons.

In  the  town  there  are  many  lofty  buildings  constructed  of  fresh
cut  pine.  Most  of  these  are  at  least  five  stories  high  and  each
story  contains  apartments,  halls,  galleries  and  towers.  The  beauty
of  their  exterior  defies  description,  and  all  who  behold  them  for
the  first  time,  bite  the  finger  of  astonishment  with  the  teeth  of
admiration. But  the  interiors  are  not  equal  to  the  exteriors.

The  passages  in  the  markets,  and  the  streets  of  the  city,  are  all
paved  with  hewn  stone.  But  the  bazaars  are  not  laid  out  as  they
are  in  other  towns.  In  the  streets  of  the  markets,  only  drapers  and
retail  dealers  are  to  be  found.  Tradesmen  do  all  their  business  in
the  seclusion  of  their  own  houses.  Grocers,  druggists,  beer-sellers
[fukdi\  and  that  class  of  provision  vendors  who  usually  frequent
markets,  do  not  do  so  here.  The  population  of  this  city  is  equal
to  that  of  [other]  large  towns.

As  for  the  fruits — spears,  mulberries,  [sweet]  cherries  and  sour
cherries  are  met  with,  but  the  apples  are  particularly  good.  There
are  other  fiiiits  in  plenty,  sufficient  to  make  one  break  one's
resolutions.  Among  the  wonders  of  Kashmir  are  the  quantities  of
mulberry  trees,  [cultivated]  for  their  leaves,  [from  which]  silk  is
obtained.  The  people  make  a  practice  of  eating  the  fruit,  but
rather  regard  it  as  wrong.  In  the  season,  fruit  is  so  plentiful  that
it  is  rarely  bought  and  sold.  The  holder  of  a  garden  and  the  man
that  has  no  garden  are  alike ;  for  the  gardens  have  no  walls  and  it
is  not  usual  to  hinder  anyone  from  taking  the  fruit.

*  The  whole  of  this  passage,  regarding  the  land,  is  ohflonre  and  the  translation
nnoertain.  The  Tnrki  MS.  is  clearer,  but  mentions  only  three  categories  of  land :
**  One  kind  is  land  where  agriculture  is  done  with  [river]  water.  Another  where
it  is  done  with  rain-water.  Another  is  the  level  ground,  where  the  river-
banks  abound  in  violets  and  many-coloured  flowers;  this  land  is  too  damp  to
cultivate.'*

'  Some  rhetorical  sentences  slightly  abridged  and  a  couplet  omitted.~R.

»  About  half  a  folio  of  florid  prose  and  verse,  descriptive  of  the  flowers,  birds,
^tc.,  is  omiited  here. — R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

426  The  Wonders  of  Kashmir,

CHAPTEB  XCVIIL

FURTHER  WONDERS.

First  and  foremost  among  the  wonders  of  Kashmir  stand  her  idol
temples.  In  and  around  Kashmir,  there  are  more  than  one
hundred  and  fifty  temples  which  are  built  of  blocks  of  hewn  stone,
fitted  so  accurately  one  upon  the  other,  that  there  is  absolutely  no
cement  used.  These  stones  have  been  so  carefully  placed  in
position,  without  plaster  or  mortar,  that  a  sheet  of  paper  could
not  be  passed  between  the  joints.  The  blocks  are  from  three  to
twenty  gaz  in  length,  one  gat  iu  depth,  and  one  to  five  gasn  in
breadth.  The  marvel  is  how  these  stones  were  transported  and
erected.  The  temples  are  nearly  all  built  on  the  same  plan.  There
is  a  square  enclosure  which  in  some  places  reaches  the  height  of
thirty  gaz^  while  each  side  is  about  three  hundred  gaz  long.
Inside  this  enclosure  there  are.  pillars,  and  on  the  top  of  the
pillars  there  are  square  capitals ;  on  the  top  of  these  again,  are
placed  supports,^  and  most  of  these  separate  parts  are  made
out  of  one  block  of  stone.  On  the  pillars  are  fixed  the  supports  of
the  arches,  and  each  arch  is  three  or  four  gaz  in  width.  Under
the  arch  are  a  hall  and  a  doorway.  On  the  outside  and  inside
of  the  arch  are  pillars  of  forty  or  fifty  gaz'^  in  height,  having
supports  and  capitals  of  one  block  of  stone.  On  the  top  of  this  are
placed  four  pillars  of  one  or  two  pieces  of  stone.

The  inside  and  the  outside  of  the  halls  have  the  appearance  of
two  porticos,  and  these  are  covered  with  one  or  two  stones.
The  capitals,  the  ornamentation  in  relief,  the  cornices,  the  "  dog
tooth  "  work,  the  inside  covering  and  the  outside,  are  all  crowded
with  pictures  and  paintings,  which  I  am  incapable  of  desciibing.
Some  represent  laughing  and  weeping  figures,  which  astound  the
beholder.  In  the  middle  is  a  lofty  throne  of  hewn  stone,  and  over
that,  a  dome  made  entirely  of  stone,  which  I  cannot  describe.  In
the  rest  of  the  world  there  is  not  to  bo  seen,  or  heard  of,  one
building  like  this.  How  wonderful  that  there  should  [here]  bo  a
hundred  and  fifty  of  them  1  ^

'  Literally,  **  small  arm-pits." — R.

^  Miraa  Haidar's  gazy  as  we  have  already  seen  (nolo,  pp.  58  and  256),  was  probably
the  same  as  that  used  by  Baber,  and  therefore  measured  some  26  to  28  inches.
But  even  if  he  is  using,  here,  the  smaller  gaz  of  India — the  ell,  of  18  inches — it
will  be  seen,  in  the  note  below,  that  his  measurements  are,  out  of  all  proportion,
too  great.

'  There  is  nothing,  in  this  account,  to  show  wldch  of  the  ruined  temples  of
Kashmir  the  author  is  describing.  When  he  gives  one  hundred  and  fifty  as  the
number  of  them,  he  probably  commits  no  great  exaggeration,  for  even  in  Mr.
Vigne's  time  (about  1834-8)  the  number  was  reckoned  at  not  less  than  seventy  to

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

The  Wonders  of  Kashmir.  427

Again,  to  the  east  of  Kashmir  there  is  a  district  called  Bam4g
[Vimdg].  Here  there  is  a  hill  on  the  top  of  which  is  a  ditch
\h<ui\\  like  a  tank,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  tank  is  a  hole. It

eighty.  Daring  the  three  interyeniiig  oentnries,  very  many  must  have  disap-
imured.  Some  are  known  to  have  been  destroyed,  and  the  stones  they  were  made
of  used  for  varions  purposes.  Others,  affain,  haye  been  bnilt  over,  or  otherwise
hidden  from  sight ;  while  some,  no  donot,  have  been  overgrown  by  the  jnngle.
The  five  most  remarkable  ruins  now  known,  are  those  at  Martand,  or  Panda
Kora,  abont  five  miles  east  of  IsUmabUl  (the  ancient  capital  of  the  valley,  and
now  called,  by  the  Hindus,  Anant  N^),<  at  Bhaniyar  (near  Uri),  Avantipur,
Pandrettan,  and  Pdvech.  The  Martand  temple  is  not  only  the  largest  of  thorn
all,  but  by  far  the  finest,  and  as  the  late  Mr.  Fergusson  observes,  is  the  most
typical  example  of  the  Kashmir  s^le.  It  dates  from  about  750  A.D.,  and  some
of  the  others  may  be  somewhat  older;  '*but  none,"  writes  Mr.  Fergosson,  "can
be  carried  farther  back  than  the  reign  of  Bdniditya— a.i>.  578  to  594.^  Nor  can
any  be  brought  down  below  say  1200,  which  is  probably  the  date  of  that  of
Pdyech.  .  .  .  The  style  during  these  six  centuries  is  so  uniform  that  it  may  be
taken  as  one,  for  the  purposes  of  general  history."

If  we  assume  Mirza  Haidar's  description  to  refer  to  this,  the  larj^est  of  the
temples,  it  may  be  interesting  to  compare  Mr.  Fergusson's  account  with  it.  He
says :  ^  The  temple  itself  is  a  very  small  building,  being  only  60  feet  in  length,
\iy  88  feet  in  width.  The  width  of  the  facade,  however,  is  eked  out  by  two
wings,  or  acynnots,  which  make  it  60  feet."  He  then  cites  General  Cunningham,
who  estimated  its  height  to  be  also  60  feet  when  complete,  thus  making  each
dimension  60  feet.  ]|fi.  Fergusson  doubted  if  the  temple  ever  had  a  roof.  No
fragments  of  a  roof  have  be4Ui  found  in  modem  times  on  the  floor  of  the  temple,
and  judging  from  the  tenuity  of  the  walls,  and  the  large  voids  they  include,  he
doubted  if  Qiey  could  have  supported  a  stone  roof.  If,  indeed,  there  was  a  roof
he  believed  it  must  have  been  of  wood.  The  courtyard  that  surrounds  and  en-
closes the  temple,  was  regarded  by  Mr.  Fergusson  as  a  more  remarkable  object
than  the  temple  itself,  its  internal  dimensions  he  gives  as  220  feet  by  142  feet.
On  each  face  is  a  central  cell  which,  if  complete,  would  have  reached  to  30  feet
in  height,  at  the  summit  of  its  roof,  while  the  pillars  on  each  side  of  the  cells  are

9  feet  nigh.  No  inscription  has  been  found  ou  the  Martand  ruin,  and  its  date  has
been  fixed  from  historical  records  only.

Mr.  T.  G.  Vigne  who  published,  in  1842,  a  narrative  of  his  travels  in  Kashmir,
had  measurements  made  of  the  Martand  temple,  and  records  that  the  greatest
length — th^t  of  the  side  walls — was  about  270  feet,  while  that  of  the  front  was
168  feet. The  height  of  the  pillars,  including  foot  and  capital,  he  made  barely

10  feet,  and  the  huge  blocks  of  limestone  of  Tmch  the  temple  was  built,  6  to  9  feet
in  length,  "  of  proportionate  solidity,  and  cemented  with  an  excellent  m6rtar."
His  measurements  of  the  side  walls  and  front,  evidently  refer  to  the  outer  en-
closure, and  not  to  the  temple  itself.  They  are  somewhat  in  excess  of  those  given
by  Mr.  Fergusson,  but  this  discrepancy  may  be  accounted  for  by  Mr.  vigno
having  perhaps  measured  the  outside  of  the  walls,  while  Mr.  Fergusson  par-
ticularly mentions  that  his  figures  relate  to  the  interior  of  the  enclosure.  But
however  this  may  be,  the  Brobdingnagian  proportions  of  Mirza  Haidar's  account
have  to  be  considerably  pared  down  in  eveiy  instance,  as  is  usually  the  case  with
statements  made  in  figures  by  Asiatics.  The  chief  interest  that  his  description
possesses  is,  that  it  is  one  of  uie  oldest  notices  of  the  Elashmir  ruins  that  have
come  down  to  us — ^perhaps  the  oldest  from  the  pen  of  any  Musulman,  or  foreign,
writer.

As  regards  the  question  of  the  roof,  if  our  author's  account  were  other wIho
exact,  his  particular  mention  of  the  existence  of  a  dome  would  be  important ;  but
judging  from  the  inaccuracy  of  his  other  statements,  this  one  can  scarcely  (leservc
much  consideration.  (See  Fergusson's  Hxti,  of  Indian  and  Eastern  Architecture^
1876,  pp.  279  seqq. ;  Vigne's  TVaveb  in  Kashmir^  i.,  pp.  385-6 ;  also  Moorcroft,  ii.,
pp.  289  fieqq. ;  and  an  interesting  paper  by  Mr.  W.  Simpson,  in  the  Journal  of  die
iMt.  of  Brit.  ArehiteetB  for  May,  1862.)

f  Other  authorities  differ  somewhat  as  to  this  date. (See  Stokvis,  i.,  p.  239.)

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

428  Tlie  Wonders  of  Kashmir,

remains  dry  tbrougbout  the  year,  except  during  the  Beason  of
Taurus,  when  water  issues  from  it.^  Two  or  threo  times  a  day  it
gushes  out  [with  such  force]  that  the  tank  is  filled,  and  enough
water  flows  down  the  side  of  the  hill  to  drive  one  or  even
two  mills.  After  this  it  subsides,  so  that  no  water  remains
except  in  the  hole.  When  the  season  of  Taurus  is  passed,  it  again
becomes  dry  for  a  whole  year.  Though  endeavours  have  been
made  to  stop  it  up  with  lime  and  mortar,  yet  when  the  season  has
come,  all  this  has  been  washed  away,  and  it  has  never  been
found  possible  to  stop  its  flow.

Further,  in  Nagam,  a  notable  town  of  Kashmir,^  there  is  a  tree
which  is  so  high  that  if  an  arrow  be  shot  at  the  top,  it  will
probably  not  reach  it.  If  anyone  takes  hold  of  one  of  the  twigs  and
shakes  it,  the  whole  of  this  enormous  tree  is  put  in  motion.

Again,  Div  Sar,^  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  districts  of
Kashmir,  contains  a  spring  twenty  gaz  square.  On  the  sides  of  it
are  pleasant  shady  trees  and  soft  herbage.  One  boils  some  rice,
puts  it  in  a  bottle,  closes  up  the  mouth  [of  the  bottle]  tightly,
and  having  written  a  name  on  it,  throws  it  into  the  spring  and
then  sits  down  [to  wait].  Sometimes  the  bottle  remains  there
five  years ;  on  other  occasions  it  comes  up  again  the  same  day :  the
time  is  uncertain.  If,  when  it  reappears,  the  rice  is  found  to  be
warm,  the  circumstance  is  regarded  as  a  good  omen.  Sometimes
the  rice  has  undergone  a  change,  or  earth  and  sand  may  have  got
inside  it.  The  more  [substances]  that  find  their  way  into  it,  the
more  unfavourable  is  the  omen  considered.

Moreover,  there  is  in  Kashmir  a  lake  called  Ulur,  the  circum-
ference of  which  is  seven  farsdkhs.  In  the  middle  of  this  lake
Sultan  Zain-ul-Abidin,  one  of  the  Sultans  of  K^hmir,  erected  a
palace.  First  of  all  he  emptied  a  quantity  of  stones  into  the  lake,
[at  this  spot]  and  on  these  constructed  a  foundation  [or  floor]  of
closely-fitting  stones,  measuring  two  hundred  square  gaz  in  extent,

'  The  Bpriug  of  Yirndg  is  one  of  the  most  famous  in  Kashmir,  and  is  made
much  of  by  the  Hindus.  It  is  reputed  to  be  the  source  of  the  Jhilam,  but  the
real  sources  are  in  the  hills  at  some  distance  to  the  south  and  east  of  Vimag.
Wo  read  in  lace's  KcuJimir  Handbook :  **  The  water  of  the  spring,  which  is  yeiy
cold  and  of  a  deep  bluish-groen  colour,  is  received  into  an  octagonal  stone  basin,
about  111  feet  wide,  50  feet  deep  in  the  centre,  and  10  feet  deep  at  the  sides, and
filled  with  sacred  fish  ;  after  flowing  through  the  garden  in  stone-lined  canals,  it
shortly  joins  the  Sandrabdn.  Around  the  basin  is  an  old  building  consisting  of
twenty-four  arched  alcoves,  which  were  faced  with  laree  and  elaborately  carved
stones,  many  of  which  still  remain.  .  .  .'*  The  stone  basin,  the  canals  and  other
constructions  are  of  a  later  date  than  Mirza  Haidar :  they  are  ascribed  to  the
Emperor  Jahangir,  whose  favourite  resort  was  Virn^g.

*  Now  a  mere  village. It  lies  one  short  march  south  of  Brinagar.

'  The  name  of  Div  Sar^  or  Deo  Sar,  does  not  appear  to  be  in  use  nowadays.  It
was  the  district,  however,  of  which  Kolagdm  was  the  chief  town  or  village,  and
Kolflgam,  or  Eulgim,  stands  to  the  left  of  the  upper  Jbilam — ^to  the  south-
west of  Islamabad.  (See  Moorcroft,  ii.,  p.  113;  also  the  map  in  Cunningham's
Ladali.)

Digitized  by

Google

The  Woftders  of  Kashmir.  429

and  ten  gaz  in  height.  Hereupon  he  built  a  charming  palace
and  planted  pleasant  groves  of  trees,  so  that  there  can  be  but  few
more  agreeable  places  in  the  world. ^  Finally,  this  same  Sultdn
Zain-ul-Abidin  built  himself  a  palace  in  the  town,  which  in  the
dialect  of  Kashmir  is  called  R4jd4n.  It  has  twelve  stories,  some
of  which  contain  fifty  rooms,  halls,  and  comdoi  s.  The  whole  of
this  lofty  structure  is  built  of  wood.'-*

[Among]  the  vast  kiosks  of  the  world  are : — in  Tabriz,  the  Hasht
Bihisht  Kiosk  of  Sult&n  Yakub ;  in  Herat  the  Bagh-i-Khan,  the
B&gh-i-Safid,  and  the  Bagh-i-Shahr ;  and  in  Samarkand  the  Kuk

*  The  ZTZar,  or  Wvlar  lake — ^the  largest  sheet  of  water  in  Kashmir.  The  author
usually  exaggerates  measurements,  but  in  givine  28  miles  as  the  circumference
of  the  Wular,  he  has  somewhat  understated  the  mot  It  is  about  12  miles  by  10,
but  varies  according  to  season.  As  regards  the  palace  on  the  island  of  Lanka,
its  ruins  are  to  be  found  still,  and  have  otten  been  explored  by  travellers  since  the
days  of  Mirza  Haidar.  The  island  is  near  the  entrance  of  the  river  Jhilam  into
the  lake,  and  measures  some  95  yards  by  75.  The  French  traveller,  Bemier,
visited  Lanka  in  1665,  and  speaks  of  the  palace  as  "  an  hermitage  .  .  .  which  it
is  pretended  floats  miraculously  upon  the  water" ;  though  he  also  explains  that,
according  to  tradition,  **  one  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Kachemire,  out  of  mere  fancy
built  it  upon  a  number  of  thick  beams  fastened  together."  In  1821  Mr.  Moorcroft
landed  on  the  island  and  found  two  ruined  buildings :  one  of  stone  at  its  eastern
extremity,  around  which  were  strewed  several  massive  polygonal  columns;  tiie  other
merely  an  oblong  house,  with  pitched  roof  and  plastered  walls*  bearing  frag-
ments of  blue  enamel.  The  first  of  these  he  regarded  as  of  undoubted  Hindu
oonstruction,  but  he  makes  no  mention  of  the  origin  of  the  other.  The  founda-
tions of  both,  however,  according^  to  his  native  informants,  had  been  made  up  of
the  stones  derived  from  the  ancient  Hindu  temples  in  other  parts  of  Kashmir,
which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  Musulmans.  If  this  is  the  case  it  is  possible
that  in  constructing  the  mosque  or  palace  itself,  slabs,  columns,  etc.,  from  the
ancient  temples  may  have  been  used ;  and  this  may  have  led  Mr.  Moorcroft  to
believe  the  ruin  to  be  of  Hindu  origin,  although  he  records  having  seen  an
inscription  relating  that  the  building  had  been  erected  bv  Sultan  Zain-ul-Abidin,
who  reigned  about  827  to  874  a.h.  (1424  to  1469  a.d).  There  are  many  traditions
connected  with  this  island  and  its  ruins,  but  all  seem  to  point  to  an  artificial
foundation  for  the  buildings  that  were  erected  there.  In  all  probability  there
was  a  shoal  rather  than  an  island;  or  perhaps  a  shoal  that  Appeared  as  an
island  above  the  surface  of  the  lake,  only  during  the  low-water  season.  If  this
be  the  case,  the  spot  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  soft  and  muddy,  and  the  founda-
tion for  any  palace  or  temple  put  up  there,  would  have  had  to  be  laid.  However
this  may  be,  Mirza  Haidar  rightly  ascribes  the  building  to  Sultan  Zain-ul-Abidin,
whose  reign  dates  only  about  a  hundred  years  previous  to  his  own  time.  In  1874
Mr.  A.  Constable  (Bemier's  editor)  saw  there,  like  Mr.  Moorcroft,  a  dab  of  black
slate  bearing  a  Persian  inscription,  dated  1443-4,  which  had  been  carved  to  com-
memorate the  erection  of  the  edifice  by  that  Sultan — Bemier's  **  ancient  king  of
Kachemire." The  inscription  is,  I  believe,  still  nreserved.

The  name  of  Lanka  would  seem  to  be  of  pre-Musulman  origin,  though  Moor-
croft heard  that  Zain-ul-Abidin  had  so  named  the  place  in  ridicule  of  Hindu
traditions.  Lanka^  or  LanJca-dipa,  is  the  ancient  Hindu  and  Pali  name  for  the
island  of  Ceylon,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  this  small  island  in  the
Wular,  may  have  been  named  after  the  greater  one,  long  before  the  days  of  the
Musulman  kings  of  Kashmir.

It  may  be  remarked  that  it  is  with  reference  to  this  spot,  that  Moorozoft  shows
his  acquaintance  with  our  author.  He  writes :  **  The  celebrated  Mirza  Haidar
extols  Lanka  as  a  delightful  spot  for  a  party  of  pleasure  " — but  nothing  more  I
(Constable's  Bemier,  pp.  416-17 ;  Moorcroft,  ii.,  pp.  228^.)

'  There  appears  to  be  no  trace  left  of  a  palace  bearing  the  name  of  Rdjddn.
That  the  building  should  have  disappeared  is  not  surprising,  since  it  is  reported
to  have  been  constructed  of  wood.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

430  Extract  from  Zafar-Ndma

SaT&i,  the  Ak  Sardi,  the  Bagh-i-Dilkoshdi,  and  the  Bigh-i-BnldL
Though  [the  Bajdan]  is  more  lofty  and  contains  more  rooms  than
all  these,  yet  it  has  not  their  elegance  and  style.  It  is,  neverthe-
less, a  more  wonderful  structure.

In  the  Zafar-Ndnuiy  Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Yazdi  has  stated  a  few
facts  with  regard  to  Kashmir,  but  he  is  not  quite  consistent  with
reality.  He  had  never  been  there  himself,  but  derived  his
information  from  travellers,  who  had  not  a  proper  regard  for
accuracy ;  hence  his  statements  are  not  always  exact.

CHAPTEE  XCrX.

EXTRACT  FROM  THB  "  ZAPAR-nImA."

Though  Kashmir  is  one  of  the  most  famous  spots  in  the  world,  yet
on  account  of  its  secluded  position,  it  is  seldom  visited  by  any  but
those  who  make  it  the  express  object  of  a  journey.  I  here  give
such  details  as  I  have  been  able  to  verify ;  having  derived  them
from  trustworthy  sources  and  also  from  the  natives.  I  have  taken
its  position,  size,  and  extent  from  geographical  works.  ^

Kashmir  lies  near  the  middle  of  the  fourth  climate,  for  the  begimiing  of
the  fourth  climate  is  where  the  latitude  is  33°  54',  and  the  latitude  of
Kashmir  is  34°  from  the  equator.  Its  longitude  from  the  Jazdir-i-Sad^'  is
105°.  This  country  runs  longitudinally,  aud  is  eoclosed  by  mountains  on  every
side ;  the  southern  rauge  [lies]  in  the  direction  of  Dahli  [Delhi] ;  the  northern
[looks]  towards  Badakhshdn  and  Khorasdn;  the  west  towards  the  county
inhabited  by  the  U^hani  [Afghans]  tribes ;  its  eastern  side  terminates  in  the
outlying  districts  of  Tibet.  The  extent  of  its  level  plains  from  the  eastern
limits  to  the  western,  is  about  40  farsdkhs^  and  from  south  to  north
20  farsdkhs.  In  the  heart  of  the  level  plain  lying  within  this  mountainous
district,  are  1000  inhabited  villages,  abounding  in  wholesome  streams  aod
vegetation.  It  is  popularly  believed  that  in  the  whole  of  the  province — plains
and  mountains  together — are  comprised  100,000  villages.  The  land  is  thickly
inhabited,  and  the  soil  is  cultivated.  The  climate  is  very  salubrious,  while  the
beauty  of  the  women  of  the  country  is  proverbial [Verses.]  .  .  .

In  the  mountains  and  plains  are  to  be  found  many  kinds  of  fruit-trees,  and
the  fruits  are  especially  good  and  wholesome.  But,  since  the  temperature
inclines  to  be  cold  and  the  snow  falls  in  great  abundance,  those  fruits  which

^  The  remainder  of  the  chapter  is  from  the  Zafar^Ndma.

*  The  Arabic  name  for  the  InsuUs  Fortunatm,  which  the  ancieDtgeographen—
Arabs  as  well  as  Greeks— took  for  their  prime  meridian,  subsequent  to  the  date
of  Ptolemy.  The  latitude  given  here,  it  may  be  observed,  is  remarkably  ooxrect,
for  Srinagar  stands  in  34°  T  north  lat

Digitized  by

Google

on  Kashmir,  431

require  much  warmth,  such  a^  dates,  oranges  and  lemons,  do  not  ripen  there ;
these  are  imported  from  the  neighhouring  warm  regions.

In  the  middle  of  the  valley  there  is  a  town  called  Srinagar,  which  stretches
eastward  and  westward  for  a  farsdkh  in  either  direction.  This  is  the
residence  of  the  governor  of  the  country.  Like  at  Baghdad,  there  flows
through  the  middle  of  it  a  great  river,  which  is  even  larger  than  the  Tigris.
The  wonderful  thing  is  that  this  mighty  river  comes  from  one  spring,  which
rises  within  the  limits  of  the  country,  and  is  called  the  spring  of  Yir  [Yirndg].
The  people  of  the  place  have  constructed  across  this  river  about  thirty  bridges
of  boats  bound  together  by  chains,  through  which  they  can  open  a  way.
Seven  of  these  bridges  are  in  the  town  of  Srinagar,  which  is  the  capital  of
the  province  and  the  seat  of  the  governors.  After  the  river  has  passed  the
limits  of  Kashmir,  it  takes  in  one  place  the  name  of  Banddna,  in  another
that  of  Jumla ;  ^  it  flows  through  the  upper  portion  of  Mult^n  and  joins  the
river  Siy&b.  The  united  streams  empty  themselves  into  the  Sind  near  the
[town  of]  Ucha,  and  the  whole  river  thenceforth  takes  the  name  of  Sind,
which  discharges  itself  into  the  sea  of  Oman  at  the  extremity  of  the  land  of
Tatta."

'  The  two  names,  it  will  be  remarked,  are  not  Mirza  Haidar's,  but  those  of  the
author  of  tiiie  Zafwr-Ndma,  'Whether  either,  or  both,  are  correotly  given,  or
whetiier  they  are  misrenderings  copied  from  one  history  into  another,  it  is  not
easy  to  conjecture,  but  my  impression  is  that  the  Juma  of  the  text  is  a  cor-
ruption of  Jamd,  Though  Mirza  Haidar  professes  to  quote  the  Zafar-Ndma,
these  passages  by  no  means  aooord  closely  with  the  extracts  on  the  same  subject
translated  in  Elliot's  Hist,  of  India,  They  correspond  &r  better  with  a  part  of
the  descriotlon  of  Kashmir  contained  in  Abu  Tdlib  Husaini's  Persian  version
of  the  Miifazdl^'Timuri,  also  reproduced  in  English  bv  Elliot.  It  would  not
be  unlikely  that  Mirza  Haidar,  possessed  as  ho  was  of  local  knowledge,  should
amend  the  Zafar-Ndma  while  copying  it,  but  whether  Sharaf-ud-Din  copied  from
the  original  Turki  of  the  Mfdfazdt  (if  there  was  one),  or  whether  Abu  Talib
(whose  translation  dates  from  1620)  copied  from  Sharaf-ud-Din,  is  by  no  means
clear.  The  two  accounts  are,  however,  one  and  the  same,  small  diflerences  not-
withstanding. The  two  names  now  in  question  for  the  JMlam,  are  precisely  the
same  in  both,  and  Mirza  Haidar  has  made  no  amendment  in  this  instance.
Danddna  is  mentioned,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  nowhere  else  than
in  these  passages  of  the  Zafar-Ndma  and  the  Mulfazdt;  but  Jamd  (perhaps
Jamad)  occurs  constantly  in  tlie  latter  work  as  the  name  of  the  Jhilam,  not  only
in  the  neighbourhood  or  Kashmir,  but  throughout  its  course.  The  historian  of
Timur*s  campaigns  seems  to  have  deemed  it  the  common  name  for  the  river.
The  TdriJch'i'Edflz  AbrUj  a  work  which  dates  from  about  the  same  period  as  the
other  two  (the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  century)  describes  the  whole  length  of
the  Jhilam,  from  its  source  in  Kashmir  to  its  confluence  with  the  Indus,  under
the  name  of  Jamd ;  while  the  MaUa*  u$  8a*datn  (dating  from  about  the  middle
of  the  fifteenth  century)  likewise  speaks  of  the  Jhilam  as  the  Jamd,  Somewhat
less  than  a  century  later,  however,  we  find  Baber  calUng  it  the  Behat—^  name
which  has  remained  in  use  down  to  our  own  time,  and  is  a  form  of  the  ancient
Bidasta  or  VidoMia,  Thus,  at  whatever  period  Jamd  or  Jamad  may  have  first
come  into  use,  it  seems  to  have  been  forgotten  by  Musulman  writers  since  Uie
fifteenth  century.  (See  Elliot  for  Zafar-Ndma^  iii.,  p.  521;  for  MvXfazdtr^-
Timuri,  iii.,  pp.  410-^3;  for  Tdrikk-t-Edflz  AbrUy  iv.,  p.  4;  and  for  Maiia'  us
8a*dain^  iv.,  p.  94;  Baberj  p.  294;  also  Major  Baverty,  /.  A.  8.  B.,  IxL,  1893,
pt  i.,  pp.  290-1.) 8iydb  is  evidently  Chindb^  badly  copied.

^  The  Ueih,  alluded  to  here,  is  no  doubt  the  old  town  of  that  name,  situated  near
the  left  bank  of  the  Pax^nad  just  below  the  Sntlej  confiuence.  **  In  the  time  of
Timur  and  Akbar,"  says  General  Cunningham,  "  the  junction  of  the  Ghenab  and
Indus  took  place  opposite  l7o/i7t,  60  miles  above  the  present  confiuence  at  Mithan-
kot.  .  .  .  But  early  in  the  present  century  the  Indus  gradually  changed  its
course,  and  leaving  the  old  channel  at  20  miles  above  Uckhf  continued  its  course  to

Digitized  by

Google

.  432  Tlie  Religion  and  tlie

This  country  [Kashmir]  is  protected  naturally  by  its  mountains  on  every
side,  so  that  the  inhabitants,  without  the  trouble  of  fortifying  themselves,
are  safe  from  the  attacks  of  enemies.  Nor  have  they  anything  to  fear  from
the  revolutions  worked  by  time,  or  by  the  rain  or  the  wind.

There  are  three  principal  highways  into  Kashmir.  The  one  leadinp:  to
Khordsdn  is  such  a  difficult  route,  that  it  is  impossible  for  beasts  of  burden
with  loads  to  be  driven  along  it;  so  the  inhabitants,  who  are  accustomed  to
such  work,  carry  the  loads  upon  their  own  shoulders  for  several  days,  until  they
reach  a  spot  where  it  is  possible  to  load  a  horse.  The  road  to  India  offers  the
same  difficulty.  The  route  which  leads  to  Tibet  is  easier  than  these  two,
but  during  several  days  one  finds  nothing  but  poisonous  herbs,  which  make  the
transit  inconvenient  for  travellers  on  horseback,  since  the  horses  perish.*

CHAPTER  C.

THE  OONVERSION OF KASHUIR  TO ISLAM, AND  A  SHOIlT ACCO0NT OP
THE MU3ULMAN SULTANS OF KASHMIR.

The  oouyersion  of  Kashmir  is  a  comparatively  recent  event.  The
people  were  all  Hindus  and  professed  the  faith  of  Brahma.  A
certain  Sultdn  Shams-ud-Din  came  thither  disguised  as  a  kalandar.
At  that  time  there  was  a  governor  in  every  district  of  Kashmir.
There  was  also  a  queen,  into  whose  service  Sult&n  Shams-ud-Din
entered.  After  a  short  time  the  queen  desired  to  marry  Sultan  Shams-
ud-Din  ;  and  not  long  after  this  event,  his  power  became  absolute
throughout  Kashmir.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Ald-ud-Din,  who
was  in  turn  succeeded  by  his  son  Kutb-ud-Din,  during  whose  reign
Amir  Kabir  Ali  the  Second,  called  Sayyid  Ali  Hamadani,^  appeared

the  soutli-Bouth-west,  until  it  rejoined  the  old  channel  at  Mithankot"  At  the
time  of  Mirza  Haidar,  then.  Tick  must  have  been  near  the  confluenoe  of  the
greater  rivers,  and  was,  for  this  reason  perhaps,  a  city  of  some  importance.  The
name  of  Ueh  or  UehdM  is  common  in  iMortbem  India ;  and  one  place  so  called,  is
to  be  found  a  short  distance  west  of  the  junction  of  the  Jhilam  with  the  Ghimib;
while  a  third  lies  some  80  miles  north  ot  Jaoobabad.  (See  Cunningham,  Ancient
Geog.y  pp.  220>21  and  242  teq.)

Tatta,  standing  near  the  apex  of  the  delta  of  the  Indus,  though  a  town  of  not
much  importance  now,  is  a  place  of  great  antiquity,  and  at  the  period  of  the
earlier  Moghuls,  seems  to  have  given  its  name  to  the  whole  of  Lower  Sind.  (See
for  a  complete  account  of  TcUta,  Cunningham,  pp.  288  m^.)

^  The  Zafar-Ndma  contains  this  passage  about  the  poisonous  herbs  on  the  rood
from  Kashmir  to  Ladak.  Whoever  originally  wrote  it,  had  remarkably  accurate
local  information,  and  the  statement  holds  good  to  the  present  day.  Bound  aboot
the  spot  called  Bdltal,  at  the  western  foot  of  the  Zoji  pass,  there  are  poisonous
weeds  among  the  grass,  which  frequently  prove  fatal  to  horses  if  turned  oat  to
graze.  Nowhere  else  in  these  regions  (as  rar  as  I  am  aware)  do  similar  poisonoos
herbs  occur.

^  This  Sayyid  Ali  Hamadani  was  a  refugee  from  Hamad&n  in  Persia,  whence
he  and  those  of  his  order  are  said  to  have  been  expelled  by  Timur,  about  the

Digitized  by

Google

Sultans  of  Kashmir,  433

there.  Kutb-ud-Din  died  in  less  than  forty  days,^  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  his  son  Sultdn  Iskandar,  who  established  the  Musnlman
faith  and  destroyed  all  the  idol- temples.  His  son  Sultan  Zain-ul-
Abidin  succeeded  him,  and  reigned  for  fifty  years.^ He  devoted

year  1380.  Mr.  Beale  records  that  seven  hundred  Sayyids  accompanied  their
leader  in  his  flight  to  Kashmir  in  that  year,  while  this  large  party  was  afterwards
followed  hj  another,  of  three  hundred  of  the  order,  in  the  train  of  Sayyid  Ali's
son,  Mir  Muhammad.  It  is  to  these  immigrations  of  Persian  Sayyids,  during
the  reign  of  Kutub-ud-Din,  that  the  conversion  of  Kashmir  to  Islam  ia  usnally
attributed.  Sayyid  AH  died  in  Pakhli  about  the  year  1386,  and  the  son  seems
to  have  left  the  country  only  some  six  years  later.  The  name  by  which  the
father  is  usually  known  in  Kashmir  is  *'  Sayyid  Uamadani,"  and  he  may  be
regarded  as  a  sort  of  patron  saint  of  the  Musulman  section  of  tlie  population.
His  descendants — or  persons  claiming  this  distinction — ^still  exist,  I  believe,  in
Brinagar,  while  the  mosque  of  Bhdh-i-Haroad^n  is  perhaps  the  most  reverenced
of  any  in  the  town.  A  recent  writer  in  the  Time*  tells  us  that  the  original
Sayyid*8  **  place  of  retreat  and  devotion  "  is  still  shown  in  the  gloomy  interior  of
the  building,  *'  where  but  little  light  breaks  upon  the  pillars  and  ceiling  and
walls  of  stained  deodar."  The  architecture  he  describes  as  peculiar  to  Kashmiri
mosques,  for  neither  cupola  nor  minaret  exists,  *' but  only  a  eloping  four-sided
roof,  surmounted  by  a  conical  wooden  steeple  .  .  :  from  time  to  time  tlio  mosque
of  Shah-i-Hamadan  is  burned  down,  but  is  re-erected  with  faithful  attention  to
the  original  model."  (See  Beale's  Orient,  Biog.  Diet.,  p.  238,  and  the  Tt'mea,
7tli  November,  1894).

*  This  would  appear  to  mean  that  the  length  of  Kutub-ud-Din's  reign  was  less
than  forty  days,  but  a  possible  reading  may  be  that  he  died  less  than  forty  davs
after  the  arrival,  in  Kashmir,  of  Sayyid  Ali  Hamad^ni.  The  dates  for  Kutub-
ud-Din*s  reign  are  uncertain,  but  they  usually  indicate  for  it  a  length  of  about
fifteen  years. (See  the  next  note.)

'  It  would  have  been  interesting  and  satisfactory  to  bo  able  to  accept  Miiza
Haidar  as  an  original  authority  on  the  history  of  the  kings  of  the  country  he
ruled  over  so  long;  but  his  data  are  so  entirely  at  variance  with  two  of  the  oest
historians  of  India — Firishta  and  Abul  Fazl — that  it  is  impossible  to  place  his
brief  remarks  in  the  scale  against  their  detailed  accounts,  and  carefully  elaborated
tables.  Firishta  and  Abul  Fazl  by  no  means  agree  in  the  dates  they  assign  to
the  various  Sultans,  or  in  the  length  of  their  reigns ;  and  even  the  different
editions  of  Firishta  vary  to  some  extent  among  tJiemselves.  Mr.  G.  J.  Bodgers
has  published  a  careibl  summary,  from  collated  copies  of  Firishta,  of  the
history  of  Kashmir,  and  has  shown  how  uncertain  some  of  the  dates  are ;  also
how  the  coins  in  many  cases  give  diflerent  results  to  the  historical  tables.  It  is
possible,  as  be  seems  to  think,  that  Firishta  is  a  better  authority  than  Abul
Ftfzl :  but  as  this  note  makes  no  pretension  to  investigate  discrepancies,  or  to
give  a  history  of  the  Musulmdn  kings  of  Kashmir,  I  have  only  compiled  a  rough
table,  from  Mr.  Bodgers'  translation,  of  those  kings  whose  names  a  little  more
than  cover  the  period  which  Mirza  Haidar  briefly  touches  on.  Where  the
sign  ?  precedes  a  date,  it  means  that  I  have  merely  taken  an  average  figure
among  those  Mr.  Bodgers  has  found  authority  for,  or  one  that  appears  to  bo
preferable  to  the  others : —

A.H. A.D.

1.  Shah  Mir,  or  Shams-ud-Din  ,. . . began  to  reign  ?  743  =  1342

2.  Jamahid „  „  746  =  1345

3.  Ala-ud-Din „  „  748  =  1347

4.  Shahdb-ud-Din „  „  761  =  1360

5.  Kutub-ud-Din „  „  781  =  1879

6.  Sikandar „  „  ?  796  =  1394

7.  Ali  Shir ,  „  819  =  1410

8.  Zam-ul-Abidin „  „  ?  827  =  1424

9.  Haidar  Shah n  „  ?  874  =  1469

10.  Hasan  Shah ,  „  ?  891  =  1486

After  Hasan  Shah  there  was  much  dissension,  and  those  who  followed  him—

2 F

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

434  Religiojis  Sects  of  Kashmir,

himself  to  embellifihing  Kashmir  with  buildings,  and  in  order  to
humour  all  the  nations  of  the  world,  he  paid  attention  neither  to
Infidelity  nor  Islam.  It  was  in  his  reign  that  Kashmir  ^  became  a
city,  which  it  has  remained  to  this  day.

In  Kashmir  one  meets  with  all  those  arts  and  crafts  which  are,
in  most  cities,  uncommon,  such  as  stone-polishing,  stone-cutting,
bottle-making,  window-cutting  \tahdoM-tuTa9h\  gold-beating,  etc.
In  the  whole  of  Mavara-un-Nahr,  except  in  Samarkand  and
Bokhara,  these  are  nowhere  to  be  met  with,  while  in  Kashmir
they  are  even  abundant.  This  is  all  due  to  Sultdn  Zain-ul-Abidin.
After  him,  the  power  of  the  Sultdns  of  Kashmir  began  to  decline,
and  the  Amirs  became  so  strong  that  the  Sultans  ruled  in  name
only;  insomuch  that  outward  respect  was  no  longer  paid  them.
Those  helpless  Sult&ns,  therefore,  in  order  to  secure  their  own
safety,  had  to  flee  the  country  and  endure  much  advei-sity.

To  Sultan  Nazak,  who  is  to-day  my  companion,  I  have  shown
far  more  respect  than  the  former  administrators  of  the  kingdom
ever  showed  [their  contemporary  Sultans].  Since  [the  reign  of]
Zain-ul-Abidin  a  few  of  his  offspring  have  borne  the  title  of
'  king,'  but  of  authority  they  have  had  none.

CHAPTEE  CI.

ACCOUNT OF THE REUQIOUS SECTS OF KASHMIR.

The  people  were  [formerly]  all  Hanifi,  but  in  J;he  reign  of  Fath
Shah,  the  &ther  of  this  Sultan  Nddir,^  a  man  of  the  name  of

Muhammad,  Fath  Shah,  Ibrahim,  Ismail,  and  Nazuk— came  to  the  throne  and
went  down,  time  after  time,  until  the  date  of  Mirza  Haidar's  inyaaion  of  the
country  in  948  (  =  1541).  Ndzuk  was  the  nominal  Bultan  during  the  Mirza's
regency— t^.,  till  958  (  =  1551).  The  date  of  the  first  of  these  Mnsulm&o  kingi«
Shams-ud-Din,  is  especially  uncertain,  for  Mr.  llodgers  appears  to  think  that
747  is  as  likely  a  one  as  748.  In  that  case  the  whole  of  the  aboye  table  would
be  inexact^  as  each  date  is  usually  based  on  the  one  that  precedes  it  This
Bhams-ud-Din,  under  the  name  of  Shah  Mirza,  or  Shah  Mir,  nad  been  minister
to  the  last  Rajah  of  the  preceding  Hindu  dj^nasty,  Sinha  Deva  by  name,  and  of
his  successors,  and  had  served  in  that  capacity  for  somewhere  about  thirty  year?,
before  he  made  himself  kine  and  married  Sinha  Deva's  widow.

Abul  Fazl's  complete  table  of  this  Musulmin  line  of  rulers  will  be  found  in
vol.  ii.  (Colonel  Jarrett's)  of  the  Ain-i-Aldiari,  pp.  879-80.  Briggs'  Firiskki^
vol.  iv.,  pp.  444  to  508,  also  contains  their  histoj^,  together  with  a  genealogioal
tree.  (See,  for  Mr.  Bodgers'  transUtion,  /.  A,  8.  B.,  1885,  pt  i.,  pp.  98  seg.)
*  Meaning,  here,  the  town  of  Srinagar,  usually  called  '*  Kashmir."
'  By  Nddirt  the  author  probably  means  the  same  Sultan  that  he  has  just
styled  Ndzak,  Mr.  Bodgers  shows  that  on  the  coins  of  Kashmir  the  name
usually  occiurs  as  Nadir,  though  in  histories  it  is  more  often  met  with  in  the
form  of  NumJc. (Bodgers  loc.  cit.)

Digitized  by

Google

Religious  Sects  of  Kashmir.  435

Shams  came  from  T^lisk  in  Irak,^  who  gave  himself  out  as  a
Nurbakhshi.  He  introduced  a  corrupt  form  of  religion,  giving  it
the  name  of  Nurbakhshi '  and  practised  many  heresies.  He  wrote
a  book  for  these  cowardly  people  called  Fikh-i-Ahwat,  which  does
not  conform  to  the  teachings  of  any  of  the  sects,  whether  Sunni  or
Shia.  [These  sectaries]  revile  the  companions  of  the  Prophet  and
Aisha,  as  do  the  Shias,  but  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  these  latter,
they  look  upon  Amir  Sayyid  Muhammad  Nur  Bakhshi  as  the  Lord
of  the  Age  and  the  promised  Mahdi.

They  do  not  believe  in  the  saints  and  holy  persons  in  whom
the  Shias  believe,  but  regard  all  these  as  [appertaining  to]  Snnnis.
[Shams]  introduced  many  impious  practices  and  infidel  beliefs,
and  gave  his  heretical  sect  the  name  of  Nurbakhshi.'  I  have  seen
many  of  the  Nurbakhshi  elders  in  Badakhsh&n  and  elsewhere.  I
discovered  that  outwardly  they  follow  the  precepts  of  the  Prophet
and  hold  with  the  Sunnis.  One  of  the  sons  of  this  Amir  Sayyid
Muhammad  Nurbakhshi  showed  me  his  tract.  In  it  was  written  :
*'  Sultans,  Amirs  and  fools  [or  the  ignorant]  maintain  that  worldly
power  cannot  be  combined  with  purity  and  piety.  But  this  is
absolutely  false^  for  the  great  prophets  and  apostles,  in  spite  of
their  missions,  have  exercised  sovereignty,  and  have  likewise
striven  diligently  after  those  other  matters  [t.e.,  purity  and
piety],  as  for  example  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  Solomon  and  our
Prophet."

Now  this  is  opposed  to  the  belief  of  the  Nurbakhshi  of  Kashmir,
and  is  in  accordance  with  that  of  the  Sunnis.  That  book,  the
Fikh-i'Ahtoat,  which  is  celebrated  in  Kashmir,  I  sent,  complete,  to
the  Ulamti  of  Hindustdn,  who  repudiated  it  and  wrote  on  the
back  of  it  a  decree  [fatwd]  of  remonbtrance  as  follows :  '*  In  the
name  of  God  the  Merciful.  Oh  !  God,  show  unto  us  the  truth  in
its  reality,  and  the  false,  wherein  it  is  void ;  also  show  us  things
as  they  are.  After  perusing  this  book  and  weighing  its  contents,
it  seemed  clear  [to  us]  that  the  author  of  it  was  of  a  false  sect,
who  had  gone  against  the  Book  and  the  Sunna,  and  did  not  belong
to  any  denomination  of  the  people  of  Truth.  His  pretension  is
that  God  hath  commanded  him  to  do  away  with  all  differences
among  the  people  ;  (Firstly)  in  the  developments  and  ordinances  of
the  Holy  Law,  and  to  make  them  as  they  were  in  his  time,  with
neither  increase  nor  diminution;  and  (Secondly)  in  the  funda-
mental piinciples  among  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  [In  this]
he  is  certainly  lying,  and  inclined  to  heresy  and  schism.  It  is  the
duty  of  such  as  have  the  power,  to  obliterate  such  a  book,  and  a
religious  necessity  for  them  to  stamp  out  and  extirpate  this  sect ;

*  Tdli$h  appears  to  have  been  a  name  that  was  applied  to  the  provinoeof  Gilan,
though  properly  speaking,  it  was  only  that  of  a  tribe  which  inhabited  a  part  of
QiUu. (See  Sddik  Ispahdni,  p.  15.)

2  F  2

Digitized  by

Google

436  Religious  Sects  of  Kashmir,

to  prohibit  persons  from  following  it  and  acting  according  to  its
dogmas.  If  they  persist  in  their  belief  and  abandon  not  their
false  creed,  it  is  necessary  for  the  security  of  Musulmans,  from
their  evil  example,  to  repulse  them  with  chastisement  and  [even]
death.  If  they  repent  and  abandon  the  sect,  they  must  be  com-
manded to  follow  the  teaching  of  Abu  Hani  fa."

At  the  present  time  in  Kashmir,  the  Sufis  have  legitimatisod  so
many  heresies,  that  they  know  nothing  of  what  is  lawful  or
unlawful.  They  consider  that  piety  and  purity  consist  in  night-
watching  and  abstinence  in  food ;  yet  they  take  and  eat  whatever
they  find,  without  ever  considering  what  is  forbidden  or  what  is
lawful.  They  give  way  to  their  lusts  and  desires  in  a  manner
not  consistent  with  the  law.  They  are  for  ever  interpreting
dreams,  displaying  miracles,  and  obtaining  from  the  unseen,
information  regarding  either  the  future  or  the  past.  They
prostrate  themselves  before  one  another  and,  together  with  such
disgraceful  acts,  observe  the  forty  [days  of  retirement].  They
blame  and  detest  science  and  men  of  learning ;  consider  the  Holy
Law  second  in  importance  to  the  True  '  Way,'  and  that  in  con-
sequence the  people  of  the  *  Way '  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
Holy  Law.  In  short,  nowhere  else  is  such  a  band  of  heretics  to
be  found.  May  the  Most  High  God  defend  all  the  people  of  Islam
from  such  misfortunes  and  calamities  as  this,  and  turn  them  all
into  the  true  path  of  righteousness.

Thanks  be  to  God  that,  at  the  present  time,  no  one  in  Kashmir
dares  openly  profess  this  faith ;  but  all  deny  it,  and  give  them-
selves out  as  good  Sunnis.  They  are  aware  of  my  severity  towards
them,  and  know  that  if  any  one  of  the  sect  appears,  he  will  not
escape  the  punishment  of  death.  I  hope  and  trust  that  through  the
intervention  of  God  and  by  my  own  efforts,  the  land  will  gradually
be  entirely  delivei-ed  of  this  misfortune,  and  that  all  will  become,
as  they  now  profess  to  be,  Musulmans  from  the  bottom  of  their
hearts. Amen !  Oh  Lord  of  the  two  worlds  !

There  was  also  a  sect  of  infidels  who  were  Sun-worshippers,
called  Shammasi.  Their  creed  is  as  follows :  *•  The  phenomenon
of  luminosity  of  the  sun  is  due  to  the  purity  of  our  faith  :  and  our
being  is  derived  from  the  sun's  luminosity.  If  we  defile  the
purity  of  our  creed  the  sun  would  no  longer  have  any  existence,
and  if  the  sun  withdraw  its  bounty  from  us,  we  should  no  longer
have  any  being.  We  are  dependent  on  it  for  our  existence,  and  it
on  us.  Without  us  it  has  no  existence,  without  it  we  have  none.
As  long  as  the  sun  is  visible,  our  actions  are  visible  to  it,  and
nothing  but  uprightness  is  lawful.  When  night  falls,  it  does  not
see  us  or  know  us."  Since  the  sun  is  not  aware  of  what  pafssea  in
the  night,  they  cannot  be  called  to  account  for  what  they  do  in
the  night  season. This  sect  used  to  be  called  Shammasi

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Return  to  the  Narrative,  437

When  this  Mir  Shams  a2)peared  in  Kashmir  and  corrupted  its
people,  he  bore  the  title  of  Shams-ud-Din  [Sun  of  the  Faith].  All
titles  descend  from  heaven,  and  the  real  one  must  have  been
Shammas-ud-Din.  It  has  been  misunderstood  by  the  Kashmiris,
or  else  they  called  him  Shams-ud*Din  by  way  of  reproach.  For
this  reason  they  called  him  Mir  Shams.

CHAPTER CII.

RETURN TO THE  MAIN NARRATIVE.

Before  entering  upon  the  description  of  Kashmir,  I  had  brought
the  thread  of  my  story  down  to  the  point  where,  after  passing  the
defile  of  Lar  without  difficulty,  we  entered  the  city,  llie  army  of
Kashmir  was  dispei-sed,  and  the  townspeople,  forsaking  their  city
and  homes,  fled  towards  the  hills  and  glens,  leaving  their  property
in  their  dwellings.  I  took  up  my  quarters  in  the  Rajdan,  which
has  been  mentioned,  and  entrenched  my  men  within  its  walls.
During  many  days  no  trace  of  any  one  was  visible.  For  twenty-
four  days  we  remained  there,  by  which  time  the  horses  and  cattle
had  quite  recovered  their  strength.  The  army  of  Kashmir  was
stationed  in  the  middle  of  some  swamps  [^t]  at  about  two
farsdkhs  to  the  south  of  the  city,  where  they  could  be  seen.  Wise
men  were  of  opinion  that  we  ought  not  to  remain  within  the  city,
but  thought  that  we  should  march  out  and  watch  for  an  oppor-
tunity to  give  them  battle.  For,  though  the  enemy  were  far
stronger  than  we,  both  in  arms  and  numbers,  we  might  yet  defeat
them  by  strategy.  [Couplet]  ....  So,  sallying  forth  from  the
cit3%  wo  passed,  in  line,  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  and  went  and
encamped  at  a  place  called  Baklata  ^  on  the  east  side  of  Kashmir.

In  a  word,  from  that  date  of  Jamad  II.  till  Shaban — that  is  to
«ay,  from  the  end  of  autumn  till  the  spring — we  avoided  the  army
of  Kashmir,  who  on  this  account  became  elated,  and  grew  so  bold
that,  at  first,  every  time  we  marched  on,  they  halted  for  some  days,
finding  some  strong  position  from  which  to  oppose  us.  In  the
fir«t  place  they  would  fortify  the  position  secretly,  by  every
means  in  their  power,  and  then,  advancing  in  the  night,  would
take  up  a  defensive  station  in  the  place  [where  they  halted]. At

»  Or  Balcldna,  or  Nalcldm,  etc.  It  is  not  traceable  on  existing  maps.  By  the
*'  east  side  of  Kashmir,"  ^he  author  probably  means  "  to  tno  eastward  of
prinagar."

Digitized  by

Google

438  T lie  Campaign  in  Kashmir,

length  they  became  so  [confident]  that  they  would  follow  after  us
on  the  same  day  that  we  made  a  move,  without  taking  any
piecautions.  Finally,  in  a  Tillage  called  B4gh  Navin,^  after  they
had  advanced  fearlessly  and  had  hastened  over  some  level  ground,
having  drawn  up  my  men,  I  turned  and  faced  them.  It  would  be
tedious  to  enter  here  into  details,  but,  to  be  brief,  in  the  twinkling
of  an  eye,  the  wind  of  victory  began  to  blow  and  the  enemy  were
scattered  and  discomfited  ....  *  The  chief  Malik  of  Kashmir,
Malik  Ali,  together  with  several  other  eminent  Maliks  who  were
generals  and  commanders,  perished.'  Those  who  escaped  the  sword,
fied  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains.  Many  were  wounded,  while
such  as  remained  unhurt  had  their  hearts  broken  in  two  from  fear.
That  night  they  resolved  on  flight,  lest  on  the  morrow  it  should
be  impoRsible. Their  generals  were  alarmed  and  stupefied.

By  the  ordering  of  Providence,  the  following  noteworthy
incident  occurred  to  me  :  I  discovered  the  deviliy  and  base  nature
of  Mirza  Ali  Taghai,  who  for  devilish  designs  is  more  famous  than
Satan  himself.  [Couplet]  ....  In  short,  Mirza  Ali  Tagliai  came
to  me  and  offered  his  advice,  saying :  '*  If  our  anny  had  fled,  it
would  have  been  utterly  broken.  When  the  [enemy]  reach  the
hills,  it  is  clear  that  they  will  there  take  up  a  strong  position,  and
it  will  not  be  pmdent  for  Ud  to  advance  into  the  hills  to  attack  them.
It  is  foolish  to  risk  a  disgrace.  The  way  to  destroy  the  enemy  at
this  juncture,  is  for  us  to  descend  with  all  speed  to  the  lowlands  of
Kashmir,  and  attack  their  families;  it  will  then  be  impossible  that
they  should  remain  where  they  are ;  they  will  j)erforce  come  down
lo  defend  their  families.  Those  that  have  their  households  with
them  in  the  hills  will  not  want  to  descend,  while  those  whose
families  are  on  the  lowlands,  will  make  for  the  hill-tops.  A  certain
number  will  remain  where  they  are.  Being  once  separated  in  this
manner,  they  will  find  no  possibility  of  reuniting,  and  no  further
fighting  will  be  necessary."

I  allowed  myself  to  be  deceived  by  these  devilish  promptings
and  lying  suggestions,  and  decided  that  on  the  following  morning
we  should  descend  with  all  haste.  [Couplet]  ....  At  dawn  [next
day]  we  started  on  the  downward  road.  Mir  Daim  Ali  came  to
me  and  said  with  much  severity :  "  What  bitterness  have  we
swallowed  that  matters  should  have  come  to  this  pass  ?  Now  that
we  have  scattered  the  enemy  and  have  driven  him  into  these  hills,
you  would  leave  him  ?  Where  are  you  going  ?  "  I  then  hesitated
and  halted,  when  Mirzd  Ali  Taghai,  who  had  marched  forward,
came  back  and  asked  why  I  had  stopped. Mir  D4im  Ali  then

*  The  variants  might  be  BaniUf  Baun,  etc. It  does  not  appear  on  raodetrn

*  Two  lines  of  rhetoric  and  a  couplet  omitted. — H.
'  This  sentence  is  somewhat  abridged. — R.

Digitized  by

Google

Tlie  Campaign  in  Kashmir.  439

repeated  to  him  what  he  had  said  to  me.  IViirza  Ali  Taghai,
turning  towards  me  his  double-faced  countenance,  said:  "It  is
childish  to  alter  one's  decisions;  I  maintain  my  opinion  still"
[Couplet]  ....  But  I,  setting  aside  the  wise  counsel  of  the
proyident  Mir  Daim  Ali,  followed  the  evil  advice  of  that  worthless
wretch  .  .  .  .^

In  short,  we  set  out  and  came  to  the  district  of  Nagam.  Mirza
Ali  Taghai  went  in  advance.  At  the  second  stage  we  learnt  that
lower  down  there  was  no  road,  or  if  there  were  one,  it  was  not
suitable  for  the  passage  of  an  army.  Chased  from  one  place,
and  stopping  in  another,  we  finally  halted  at  a  spot  called  Jarura.
The  army  of  Kashmir,  overjoyed  with  this  march  of  ours,  began
again  to  collect  their  scattered  forces  from  all  sides,  and  descending
from  the  hills,  stationed  themselves  in  a  strong  position,  round
which  they  threw  a  stockade  [sMhh\  [Couplet]  ....  This
happened  on  the  4th  of  Shabdn,*939.  (An  ingenious  person  found
the  date  in  'Ruz-i-ckahdrum  az  mah-i'Shahdn),  When  Shaban  was
over  and  the  season  of  Taurus  had  come  to  an  end,  the  snows  of
mid-winter  (that  is,  the  season  of  Capricorn)  wore  melted  from
the  passes  by  the  heat  of  the  summer  sun.

Mirz4  Ali  Tagh4i,  continuing  his  intrigues,  began  to  point  out,
and  enlai^e  upon,  the  enormous  difficulties  which  the  conquest  of
Kashmir  would  involve.  He  thus  turned  the  hearts  of  the  whole
army  from  a  desire  to  conquer  Kashmir.  The  only  exception  was
Mir  Daim  Ali,  upon  whom  these  base  reasonings  had  no  effect.
All  the  leaders  of  the  army  of  the  Moghuls  .  .  .  '  who  had  been
scattered  about,  and  were  now  re-united,  came  to  Mir  Daim  Ali,
and  with  one  mind  and  one  accord  said,  amid  much  noise  and  com-
motion :  **  Tell  a  certain  person  "  (by  which  they  meant  me)  "  that
we  are  Moghuls,  and  we  have  been  continually  occupied  with  the
affairs  of  Moghulistdn.  The  natural  solace  and  joy  of  the  Moghul
Dlu8  is  the  desert,  in  which  there  is  no  cultivation  [dbdddni].  The
screeching  of  the  owl  in  the  wildei-ness  is  sweeter,  to  our  ear,  than
the  song  of  the  nightingale  in  the  grove. .  We  have  never  made  a
cultivated  land  our  home.  Our  companions  have  been  the  ravenous
beasts  of  the  mountains,  and  our  associates  the  wild  boars  of  the
desert.  Our  favourite  haunts  and  our  most  agreeable  dwellings
have  been  the  caves  in  the  mountain  tops ;  our  clothing  the  skins
of  dogs  and  wild  animals,  our  food  the  flesh  of  birds  and  wild
beasts.  How  can  men  of  our  race  associate  with  this  besotted  band
of  infidels  of  Kashmir,  which  is  the  garden  of  Aram — nay  more,  a
specimen  of  Paradise  ?  It  has  been  said  :  The  idolaters  shall  not
enter  Paradise. Moreover,  from  Kashmir  to  Kashghar  is  a  long

>  A  quatrain  and  a  play  on  words  are  omitted  here. — B.
'  The  passage  left  out  nere  isi  halka.  Jamhur^'zardil4"chaghvldn, I  can  make
nothing  of  it. — R.

Digitized  by

Google

440  The  Campaign  in  Kashmir,

journey,  and  not  only  is  the  distance  great,  but  the  difficulties  of
the  road  are  well  nigh  insurmountable.  There  are  [to  be  con-
sidered] our  families,  our  baggage,  and  our  flocks  and  herds.
"Without  flocks  we  must  despair  of  our  lives  :  separated  from  our
herds  we  shall  have  to  give  up  existence,  and  resign  ourselves  to
death.  Therefore,  it  is  better  that  having  ruined  the  army  of
Kashmir,  we  should  return  to  the  Khan.  If  the  Khan  kills  us,  our
bodies  will  at  least  be  buried  by  our  own  people.  If  he  does  not
kill  us,  we  will  certainly  never  again  draw  our  bridles  towards  any
other  place  than  Moghulistan."  [Couplet]  ....

Mir  Daim  Ali  came  to  mo  and  reported  what  had  been  said.  I
was  astounded  at  the  men's  behaviour.  [Verse]  ...  It  is  related
that  a  certain  sweeper  \kanna%\  was  passing  a  perfumer's  shop,  and
when  the  scent  got  into  his  head,  he  fainted  away.  A  doctor,  who
happened  to  be  present,  cried  :  '*  Apply  some  fllth  to  his  nose ; "

and  the  man  immediately  came  to  his  senses. [Two  couplets]

Finally,  I  said  to  Mir  Daim  Ali :  '*  [If  I  make  an  attempt  to  com-
plete the  conquest  of  Kashmir],  these  cowardly  men  will  be  eager
to  do  something  to  shatter  the  foundations  of  sovereignty."  Mir
Daim  Ali  replied :  "  On  our  departure,  the  Khan  told  us  that  Mirza
Ali  Taghai,  in  all  affairs  of  the  State,  considered  in  the  flrst  place,
his  own  advantage,  and  generally  neglected  the  rest.  By  this  rule
he  abides,  so  that  in  considering  his  own  personal  gain,  he  entirely
ignores  the  necessities  of  the  State ^

"  Let  us  put  the  Khan's  proposal  into  practice,  so  that  henceforth
no  one  will  dare  to  show  signs  of  insolence  or  insubordination ;
perfect  concord  will  ensue,  and  thus  the  kingdom  of  Kashmir,
which  has  never  yet  been  subdued  by  a  Moghul  Khakdn,  will  fall
into  your  hands.  You  will  earn  a  great  name  for  all  time,  and  the
gratitude  of  the  race  of  Moghul  Khans.  For  this  country  has
never  been  conquered  by  any  one  [of  them]."

To  tbis  I  replied  :  "  It  is  now  ten  years  since  the  affairs  of  the
Khan's  army  have  been  placed  under  my  direction,  and  suitable
Amirs  have  always  been  associated  with  me.  I  thank  God  that
hitherto  all  has  gone  well  with  me,  and  that  nothing  has  ever
occurred  to  cause  the  finger  of  reproach  or  blame  to  be  pointed  at
me.  If  this  [execution]  should  take  place,  all  the  blame  will  be  laid
at  my  door,  and  all  these  Amirs,  whose  minds  are  full  of  devilish
promptings,  will  be  convinced  that  he  [Mivza  Ali  Taghiii]  was  sent
with  the  army  in  order  that  I  might  carry  out  the  orders  of  the
king  of  death. Ue  would  doubtless  make  every  effort  to  save  his

*  In  this  place  there  follows  a  passage  of  which  I  have  been  able  to  make  but
little  sense.  The  substance  seems  to  be  that  tlie  Khin  had  frequently  oyerlooked
the  misdeeds  of  Mirzd  Ali  Taghai ;  but  desired  that  if  he  were  found  to  be  laying
plots,  such  as  winning  over  Sultdn  Iskandar  to  his  side,  there  should  be  no  cjelay
in  putting  him  to  death.  This  is  the  end  of  what  the  Khin  told  IMim  Ali,  who
continues  to  Mirza  Haidar  as  follows  in  the  t<.^t. — B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Retreat  from  Kashmir.  441

own  life,  and  eveiy  one  ivill  imagine  that  in  accompanying  me,  hiB
own  life  is  in  danger.  Moreover,  it  would  not  be  acting  like  a  good
Musulman."

After  much  reflection,  I  saw  that  there  were  only  two  courses
open  to  me  to  pursue.  On  the  one  hand,  to  kill  Mirz4  Ali  Tagh4i
and  subdue  Kashmir  ;  on  the  other,  to  spare  him  and  retire  from
the  country.  I  finally  decided  upon  the  latter  course,  and  sent
messages  of  truce  to  the  Maliks  of  Kashmir.  Thus  did  I  disregard
the  dictates  of  wisdom,  and  my  action  has  caused  me  much  suffering.
I  have  seen  what  I  have  seen.  As  has  been  said :  '  He  that  hath
his  enemy  before  him,  if  he  do  not  kill  him,  he  is  his  own  enemy.'
[Couplet]  .  . .

CHAPTER  cm.

KETREAT FROM KASHMIR AND  SUBSEQUENT EVENTS,

The  government  of  Kashmir  was,  at  that  time,  conducted  in  the
name  of  Muhammad  Shdh.  Among  the  Maliks  of  Kashmir,  after
Ali  Mir,  who  was  killed  [in  an  engagement  with  us],  there  were
Abdal  Makri,  Kajichak,  Lahur  Makri  and  Yakchak.  When  terms*
of  peace  were  proposed,  they  wei-e  very  thankful,  but  they  did  not
credit  [our  good  faith],  wondering  how  people  who  had  once
conquered  such  a  beautiful  country,  could  be  so  senseless  as  to
give  it  up.

In  a  word  the  Khuiba  was  read  and  coins  were  struck  in  the
exalted  name  of  the  Khan.  The  revenue  of  Kashmir,  which  was
due  to  the  Moghuls,  we  took.  One  of  Muhammad  Shah's  daughters
was  wedded  to  Iskandar  Sultan.  And  everyone,  according  to  his
rank,  formed  a  connection  [mtddkdi]  with  one  of  the  Sultans  or
Maliks  of  Kashmir.  I,  for  example,  became  connected  with
Muhammad  Shah,  and  in  accordance  with  the  Moghul  practice  we
called  each  other  *t,/riend."  Similar  [relations]  were  established
between  Mir  Daim  Ali  and  Abdul  Makri ;  Mirza  Ali  Taghai  and
L4hur  Makri;  Baba  Sarik  Mirza  and  Kajichak;  my  uncle's  son
Mahiuud  Mirza  (who  will  be  mentioned  below)  and  Yakchak.
Numerous  presents  and  offerings  were  interchanged.^

>  It  may  be  worth  while  to  transciibe  in  tliis  place  Firishta's  account  of  Mirza
Haidar's  campaign  in  Eaahmir,  as  tranalated  by  Mr.  C.  J.  Rodgera.  **In  939,"
he  snys,  **  the  Sultan  of  Kashghar,  Said  Shah,  sent  his  son,  Siknndar  Khan,
together  with  Mirza  Haidar  and  12,000  soldiers,  by  the  way  of  Tibet  and  l.ur,  to
invade  Kashmir.  The  inha>)itanis,  fearing  the  hardy  yalonr  of  the  Central
Asians,  fled  from  tlieir  homes  in  all  directions,  and  took  refuge  in  the  mountains.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

442  Retreat  from  Kashmir,

At  the  end  of  Shawal  we  set  out  again  by  way  of  Lar,  as  we
had  oome.  On  reaching  the  frontiers  of  Tibet  many  of  the
inhabitants  hastened  out  to  receive  ns,  bringing  presents  and  flocks*
Bnt  Karsa,^  which  is  a  district  of  Tibet,  contains  a  valley,  which
is  as  narrow  as  a  miser's  heart,  and  in  it  is  a  very  deep  ravine,
forming  a  lofty  rampart  wall,  which  seemed  beyond  the  realms  of
possibility  to  pass.  So  narrow  indeed  was  the  road,  that  on  the
brightest  day  the  darkness  of  night  prevailed  there.  Trusting  to
this  valley,  which  they  considered  no  human  being  could  take,  they
were  refractory  and  refused  to  pay  the  tribute  [demanded  of  them].
We  encamped  there  at  the  noontide  prayer-hour.  During  the
night  all  were  engaged  in  making  preparations  for  an  assault.  At
dawn  next  day  ^  all  the  warriors  raised  a  shout,  and  made  ready
to  fight.  In  short,  fierce  fighting  ensued.  More  than  once  the
3£usulraan  forces  were  driven  back  by  blows,  or  by  rocks  which
were  rolled  [down  the  sides  of  the  ravine],  but  each  time  they
again  made  fast  the  skirt  of  valour  in  the  girdle  of  endeavour,  and
kept  a  firm  footing  on  the  hill-side  of  holy  war!  Finally  the
infidels  were  routed  and  most  of  them  perished;^  those  who
escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword  fled  like  chaff  before  the  wind.  All
their  women,  children  and  families  fell  a  portion  to  the  victorious
army. The  rest  of  the  infidels  were  filled  with  the  utmost  alarm.

To  save  their  own  lives  and  those  of  their  children,  they  came
and  delivered  up  whatever  they  possessed.  All  the  property  of  the
province  of  Furik,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  in  Tibet,
was  collected  together  and  distributed  among  the  Amirs  and
soldiers  of  our  army.  Having  selected  a  few  curiosities  and
rarities  for  the  Eh4n,  we  set  out  for  M4ryul.

The  invaders,  finding  everything  open  before  them,  destroyed  the  palaces  of  iho
olden  kings  and  levelled  them  with  the  dust.  The  city  was  bomt.  The
treasury  and  the  buried  treasures  were  plundered,  and  the  whole  army  of  in-
vaders was  laden  with  goods  and  gold.  Wherever  the  Kashmiris  were  found
hidden,  they  were  pursued  and  slain  or  imprisoned.  This  state  of  things  lasted
six  months."  A  great  battle  then  took  place,  and  is  described  in  detail ;  but
Firishta  does  not  assign  the  victory  to  either  side.  He  continues:  "In  the
evening  the  prisoners  were  numbered  on  both  sides  and  were  liberated,  and  both
armies  were  ready  to  accept  peace,  the  Kashghar  party  taking  with  them  presents
of  wool,  hawks,  and  precious  things^  went  to  Muhammad  Shah  (the  kiuK  then
reigning)  and  asked  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Sikujidar  BLhan,  and  desired
that  the  women  whom  the  Moghuls  had  in  their  hands  should  there  remain.
Peace  being  thus  concluded  the  Central  Asians  returned  to  their  homes,  and
peace  once  more  reigned  in  Kashmir.**  (/.  A,  S.  B.,  1885,  pt  i.,  p.  115.)  Mr.
Bodgers  does  not  indicate  what  the  term  is  which  he  translates  **Cenind
Asian."

^  Probably  Kdrtte  is  intended  by  Kdrsa.  It  is  a  district  and  village  between
Kargil  and  Bum.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  KdUa,  or  Kdlsi,  may  be  meant — a
village  on  the  Indus,  on  the  main  road  to  Ladak,  and  near  the  foot  of  an  extra*
ordinarily  deep  and  narrow  gorge.

'  and  '  Theso  two  passages  are  slightly  abridged. — R.

Digitized  by

Google

Return  of  the  Khdn  towards Ydrkand.  443

CHAPTER  CIV-
RETURN  OF  THE  KHAN FROM  mIrYUL  TO  HIS  CAPITAL, YABKAND;
AND  THE author's  MISSION  TO URSANG.

On  my  return  from  the  war,  I  was  most  affectionately  welcomed
by  the  Khan,  who  embraced  me  and  showed  his  abnndant  regard
for  me  in  every  way.^  After  these  demonstrations,  the  Khdn
questioned  me  concerning  the  particulars  of  the  campaign.  I
told  him  what  I  have  herein  written  down.  When  I  arrived  at
the  end  of  my  recital,  the  Khan  said :  **  Hitherto  no  one  of  the
conquering  Khakans,  from  the  time  of  Chingiz  Khan  to  the  present
day,  has  laid  the  hand  of  dominion  upon  the  collar  of  Kashmir.
But  now,  by  your  laudable  and  strenuous  efforts,  the  pulpits  of
Kashmir  have  been  decorated  with  the  titles  of  the  Moghul
Khakans.  The  SuMns  of  Kashmir,  who  in  former  times  owed
allegiance  to  none,  and  the  governors  who  were  dependent  on  them
alone,  are  now  subject  to  the  Moghul  Kh&ns.  For  this  mighty
achievement,  not  only  T,  but  all  the  Moghul  Khdkdns  owe  you  a
debt  of  gratitude,  as  do  also  my  nobles,  and  especially  my  own
children,  for  whom  such  a  glorious  name  has  been  won."

By  order  of  the  Khdn,  I  left  the  army  and  entered  his  [personal]
service.  On  the  next  day,  the  rest  of  the  Amirs  and  Iskandar
Sultan  had  the  honour  of  waiting  on  the  Khan.  I  laid  before  the
Khan,  as  offerings,  some  valuables  from  Kashmir  and  some  coins
both  silver  and  gold,  which  had  been  struck  in  his  name,  together
with  other  treasures  which  I  had  brought  back  from  the  various
countries.  All  of  these  he  graciously  deigned  to  accept,  and,
according  to  the  custom,  distributed  them  [among  his  men].

These  formalities  being  terminated,  he  summoned  a  council  of
all  the  great  Amirs  and  nobles.  Each  one  spoke  as  his  feelings
prompted  him.  Having  listened  to  these  speeches,  the  Khan
pondered  for  a  while  and  then  said  to  me :  "  You  well  know  that  it
has  always  been  my  ardent  desire  and  earnest  intention  to  conduct
the  holy  wars  in  person.  I  am  resolved  on  the  destruction  of  the
idol- temple  of  Ursang,  which  is  the  point  of  adoration  of  the
whole  of  Khitai.  Now,  this  has  never  been  achieved  by  any
MuBulmdn  king ;  not  one  of  them,  indeed,  has  ever  been  near  the
place. My  health  will  not  withstand  such  an  undertaking.^ I

^  The  chapter  opens  with  a  few  lines  of  rhetoric  and  verse,  concerning  separa-
tion and  union,  which  are  omitted,  while  this  sentence  is  much  abridged. — B.

*  In  the  Turki  Tendon  this  sentence  stands :  It  is  a  pity  that,  having  made
0uch  a  resolution,  my  health  should  have  failod  me. — R.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

444  Return  of  tJu  Khdn  towards  YdrkatuL

have  come  to  the  end  of  niy  strength,  and  sinoe  I  have  this  feeling
of  weakness,  which  is  apparent  from  my  exterior,  I  desire  you  to
commend  me  to  the  protection  of  God,  and  full  of  euniestncss  and
religious  fervour,  to  hasten  to  destioy  that  temple.  I  will  mean-
while return  to  my  loved  home,  leaving  the  whole  of  the  admitiib-
tration  in  your  hands.  Let  me  and  j-our  uncle,  who  have  lK>th
grown  old,  retire  to  the  corner  of  devotion,  which  is  a  haven  of
repose,  while  you  take  upon  yourself  the  affairs  of  the  State.  We
will  help  you  with  our  prayei  s  for  your  welfare ;  you  will  benefit
us  by  your  good  actions."

After  this  lengthy  speech,  he  issued  a  mandate  of  the  following
purport,  viz. :  *'  Mirza  Haidar  had  been  elected.  He  may  take  with
him  whomsoever  he  chooses.  Those  who  accompany  him  are
subject  to  his  commands  and  not  to  mine."  ^  When  this  mandate  had
been  promulgated,  I  gave  the  great  Amirs  leave  to  return  home.
I  then  chose  to  accompany  me,  my  brother  Abdullah  Mirza  and
my  uncle's  son  Mahmud  Mirza.  I  set  in  command  of  the  army
Janaka  Mirza  and  Bahrika  Mirza,  who  were  both  mentioned  in
the  lists  [muster  roll]  at  Eashghar.  From  the  rest  of  the  soldiers
I  selected  2000  men.  I  then  turned  my  attention  to  this  matter
[the  invasion  of  Ursang],  and  before  the  [preparations]  wero
completed,  six  days  of  Zulhijja  were  past.  This  was  the  extent
of  my  attendance  [on  the  Khan].

On  the  day  of  leave-taking,  the  Khan  sent  for  me  privately,  and
bestowed  on  me,  as  gifts,  all  the  royal  clothing  he  had  at  hand,
besides  some  horses.  In  addition  he  gave  me  a  belt  and  a  sheath
containing  several  knives,  both  of  which  he  had  devised  himself.
He  gave  these  to  me  with  his  own  hands,  saying :  *'  These  I  have
acquired  myself,  I  entrust  them  to  you  as  a  keepsake.  If  you
return  in  safety,  and  find  me  still  among  the  living,  you  can  return
them  to  me.  They  are  a  deposit.  But  if  anything  should  occur
which  should  separate  us  for  ever,  you  can  keep  them  as  a
remembrance  of  me."  I  thanked  him  greatly  for  his  kindness;
but  the  reins  of  self-control  fell  from  my  hands,  and  my  extreme
grief  and  sorrow  caused  the  humidity,  w^hich  lay  in  the  recesses  of
my  heart,  to  pour^  forth  by  way  of  my  eyes  :  I  was  much  affected.
The  Khan,  in  his  kindness  of  heart,  began  to  comfort  me,  and  after
he  had  in  a  measure  succeeded  in  quieting  m}*  mind,  I  said  to  him  :
"  What  heart  would  be  strong  enough  to  be  consoled  after  hearing
such  words  as  yours  ?  Allow  me  to  accompany  you  as  far  as  your
capital,  Yarkand.  When  I  have  seen  you  seated  on  your  happy
throne,  I  will  then  return  to  my  own  duties ;  in  the  meanwhile  tie
rest  of  the  army  can  pasture  their  cattle  in  one  of  the  grazing
grounds  of  Tibet."

>  This  sentence  is  somewhat  obscure  in  the  text,  and  I  Imve  not  been
literal.— B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Death  of  the  Khdn,  445

■•  But  the  Khan  replied:  "It  is  not  wise  to  def^pise  difficult
undertakings.  You  have  misunderstood  what  I  said  to  you.  [My
meaning  was  that  there  is  no  living  person  who  does  not  doubt
whether  he  will  remain  in  the  world,  or  whether  he  will  not  taste
of  the  wine  of  death]  ;  nor  is  this  dependent  on  an  illness.  I  am
not  exempt  from  the  hand  of  fate.  Even  though  I  roach  Yarkand
in  safety,  I  am  not  secure  from  death.  Since  our  separation  is
likely  to  be  of  long  duration,  and  since  no  man  can  hear  what  is
said,  I  have  taken  this  opportunity  of  speaking  to  you.  What  I
have  said  to  you  I  have  said,  and  I  do  not  think  that  your  accom-
panying me  and  then  returning,  is  compatible  with  what  I  have
arranged.^  In  every  circumstance  one  must  look  to  God.  Every-
thing must  be  entrusted  to  Him.  I  consign  you  to  Ood,  and  I
hope  that  we  may  meet  again  in  Yarkand.  Be  strong  of  heart
and  energetic !  The  great  name  you  have  won  by  the  conquest
of  Kashmir  will  be  magnified  by  this  expedition."  Having  uttered
these  words  he  allowed  mo  to  depart,  and  himself  set  out  on  the
return  journey.

CHAPTER  CV.

THE  DEATH  OF  THE KHAn AND  AN EPITOME  OF HIS  LIFE.
«  «  •  «  «  •a

In  short  the  Khan,  having  finally  arranged  the  above-mentioned
affairs,  set  out  from  Maryul  in  Tibet,  for  Y&rkand.  1  attended
him  on  his  first  stage,  and  then,  with  evil  forebodings,  took  a
touching  and  melancholy  leave  of  him.  [Two  couplets].  .  .  .  Four
days  later  I  received  a  letter  in  the  Khdn*s  own  handwriting,  stat-
ing that  he  had  crossed  the  pass  of  Sdkri,^  and  that  the  feelings  of
weakness  which  he  apprehended,  had  not  come  over  him.  He
had  reached  Nubra  in  safety  and  was  camped  there,  intending
to  proceed  towards  Yarkand  after  the  festival  of  the  Sacrifice.

>  In  these  passages,  the  Persian  texts  being  Tery  corrupt,  I  have  partially
followed  the  Turki.— R.

*  This  chapter  opens  with  l^alf  a  folio  of  verse  and  rhetoric  on  the  mortality  of
man,  the  whole  of  which  is  passed  over.

'  By  the  BSeri^  probably  the  Kardung  pass  is  indicated.  It  leads  across  the
range  immediaidy  north  of  the  town  of  Leh,  and  is  about  17,800  feet  in  height.
If  not  the  Kardnng,  the  pass  within  a  few  miles  east  of  it,  called  the  Digar,  and
of  about  the  same  height,  may  be  meant.  The  local  names  for  these  passes  vary
considerably  among  the  people  of  the  country ;  but  as  these  are  the  only  practic-
able ones  tiiat  lead  into  Nubra  in  about  three  marches,  the  Khan  must  have
followed  one  or  title  other,  if  news  of  liis  arrival  there  was  received  in  Leh  four
days  after  his  departure.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

446  Death  of  the  Khdn

[Turkish  quatrain.]  The  last  letter  sent  me  from  the  Khan*8
[camp]  was  to  the  following  effect: — Having  celebrated  the
Festival  of  the  Sacrifice,  they  set  forth  on  their  homo  ward  road
with  all  speed.  When  they  had  crossed  the  ice  passes  \mvaajai^
a  grave  change  for  the  worse  took  place  in  the  Khan's  condition,
from  the  effects  of  that  hell-tainted  air.  From  tbat  place  to  a
region  where  there  was  no  dam-girif  was  eight  days'  journey.  (I
have  already  explained  the  symptoms  of  this  malady,  in  my  account
of  Tibet.)  All  the  Amirs  were  agreed  that  both  hurry  and
delay  were  to  be  feared.  Still,  they  considered  that  a  place  where
there  was  no  dam-giri  should  be  reached  as  quickly  as  possible,
hoping  that  the  Khdn's  natural  strength  would  enable  him  1o
combat  the  violence  of  the  malady,  until  suoh  a  spot  should  bo
attained.  If  they  delayed  any  longer  in  a  neighbourhood  where
dam-girt  prevailed,  his  strength  might  not  hold  out. [Couplet]  .  .  .

But  the  ill-advised  nobles,  foremost  among  whom  was  Mirza
Ali  Tagh4i,  mounted  the  Eh&n,  in  his  weak  condition,  upon  his
horse,  and  then  started  with  all  speed,  supporting  him  on  every
side.  As  it  is  dangerous  [with  this  malady]  to  remain  in  an
upright  position,  it  would  have  been  proper  to  construct  a  litter.
But  these  Amirs  excused  themselves  for  not  making  one,  on  the
ground  tbat  it  could  not  be  carried  over  the  passes.  [Verse].  .  .  .
They  made  eight  days'  journey  in  four,  and  at  eventide  prayers
they  arrived  within  three  farsdkhs  of  a  stage  where  dnm-giri  is
less  prevalent.  There,  suddenly,  the  Khan's  strength  gave  way
before  the  violence  of  his  malady,  and  his  nature  became  utterly
exhausted  by  that  hell-tainted  climate.^  Thus  did  the  pure  soul
of  that  noble-minded  and  just  ruler  hasten  to  the  regions  of  the
blessed.  [Three  couplets].  .  .  .  This  awful  and  heartrending
event  happened  on  the  16th  of  Zulhijja  in  the  year  939  [9  July,
1533].  After  this  calamity  many  terrible  and  strange  things
came  about,  of  which  I  shall  speak  presently.

The  life  of  the  Kh&n,  his  noble  character  and  worthy  qualities
have  already  been  fully  described  in  these  pages :  but  although
an  account  of  the  whole  of  his  life  is  contained  in  this  history,
the  context  has  rendered  it  necessary  to  give  the  facts  in  a  some-
what disjointed  and  scattered  manner.  I  will  therefore  add  here
a  brief  recapitulation. His  genealogy  is  as  follows :  Abul  Fath

^  Meaning  the  *  glader  pasB,'  or  Sasser,  which  oonsists  of  a  aeries  of  glacien.
The  elevation  of  the  highest  point  is  about  17,700  f^t.

*  The  eighth  stage  on  the  road  to  Yarkand,  from  the  east  foot  of  the  Basser
pass,  is  in  the  Suget  laTine,  which  leads  from  the  Saget  pass  down  to  the  Kara-
bsh  river,  a  little  aboTe  Sh&hidalla.  Three  farsdkhs  short  of  the  Suget
halting-plaoe  would  mean  some  spot  on  the  pass  of  that  name,  whioh  is,  as
nearly  as  possible,  18,000  feet  in  altitude.  It  is  a  locality  noted  for  height-
sickness,  and  no  doubt  it  was  on  this  pass  that  Sultan  Said  sucoumbed.  The
twdve  miles  which  he  failed  to  accomplish,  would  have  carried  him  to  a  level
nearly  6000  feet  lower.

Digitized  by

Google

and  Epitome  of  His  Life.  447

Sultan  Said  Khan  Ghazi,  was  son  of  Sultan  Ahmad  Khan,  son  of
YunuB  Kh^Q,  son  of  Shir  Ali  ELhan,^  sou  of  Muhammad  Khdn,  son
of  Khizir  Khwaja  Khan,  son  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan.  The
desoent  of  Tughluk  Timur  Khan  from  Japhet,  the  son  of  Noah,  is
traced  in  both  the  Mujma  ut  Tavdrikh  and  in  the  Prolegomena  to
the  Zafar-Ndma^  and  God  willing,  the  details  shall  be  given  in
the  first  part  [of  this  history]  ;  I  will  therefore  avoid  repeating  it
[in  this  place].

He  was  born  in  Moghulistan  in  the  year  892  [1487].  He  received
his  name  £rom  his  distinguished  grandfather,  Yunus  ELh4n.  Up  to
the  age  of  fourteen  he  remained  in  Moghulist&n,  under  the  care
and  guidance  of  his  father.  But  when  Sult4n  Ahmad  Kh4n  went
to  Tdshkand  to  meet  his  brother  SulUn  Mahmud  Khdn,  he  took  the
[young]  Khan  with  him.  On  the  occasion  when  the  battle  took
place  between  Sh4hi  Beg  Kb4n  and  the  two  brothers,  at  Akhsi,  in
which  the  Khdns  were  defeated,  the  [young]  Khdn  being  wounded,
fell  into  the  hands  of  Shaikh  Bayazid,  who  was  Gk)vemor  of  Akhsi.
As  was  shown  above,  there  was  but  an  insincere  alliance  between
Shaikh  B&yazid  and  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.  [Shaikh  B&yazid]  detained
the  Kh4n  in  prison  one  year,  but  the  following  year  Shahi  Beg
Khdn  came  and  put  Shaikh  B&yazid,  and  his  brother  Tambal,  to
death,  and  conquered  the  province  of  Fargh&na.  He  next
released  the  Kh4n  from  his  confinement  in  Akhsi,  and  took  him
with  him  on  the  expedition  which  resulted  in  the  capture  of  Hisar
and  Kunduz.  On  his  return  from  that  expedition,  [Shdhi  Beg]
set  ont  to  attack  the  Khwdrizin.

The  Khdn,  who  was  then  sixteen  years  of  age,  having,  together
with  seventeen  other  persons,  escaped  from  Samarkand,  went  and
joined  his  uncle,  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  in  Moghulistdn.  Finally,
fleeing  after  one  of  the  contests  in  Moghulistdn,  he  repaired  to
Andijdn,  where  the  governor,  who  was  subject  to  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn,
threw  him  into  prison,  with  the  intention  of  putting  him  to  death ;
but  escaping  thence,  he  took  refuge  with  his  cousin,  Bdbar
Padishdh,  in  Kdbul.  When  the  Emperor  marched  again  upon
Hisdr,  with  the  purpose  of  subduing  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  he  sent  the
Khdn  to  Andijdn.  On  reaching  this  place,  it  was  given  up  to
him  by  my  uncle,  who  entered  his  service.  When  the  TJzbeg
a  second  time  became  masters  of  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  the  Khdn
abandoned  Andijdn  and  went  to  Kdshghar,  which  he  took  by
force  of  arms,  and  there  he  reigned  absolute  during  twenty  years.
At  the  end  [of  his  reign]  he  undertook  a  holy  war  against  Tibet,
where,  in  the  year  939,  he  died  of  damrgiri  at  the  age  of  forty-seven.

He  was  a  Hanifi  by  descent.  In  his  youth  he  was  addicted  to
forbidden pleasures,  and little  inclined  towards laudable and

1  The  author  Las  omitted  Yais  Khan,  who  was  father  of  Yunus :  see  pp.  73
and  120.

Digitized  by

Google

44^  Epitome  of  the  Khdfis  Life,

becoming  pursuits.  On  attaining  the  age  of  tliittynseven,  lie
renounced  all  unlawful  enjoyments  and  betook  himself  to  a
religious  life,  under  the  guidance  of  Hazrat  Makhdumi  Khwaja
Shah4b-ul-Millat  wa  ud-Din,  better  known  as  Ehw4ja  Kh4vand
Mahmud.  He  devoted  all  his  attention  and  thought  to  this  noble
course,  fasting  by  day  and  watching  by  night.'  In  all  his  private
gatherings  little  else  was  discussed  but  religious  matters,  and  by
these  conferences  he  was  much  influenced.  Justice  had  a  strong
hold  over  his  mind,  and  in  all  his  affairs  he  conformed  with  the
Holy  Law,  never  tiring  of  its  observances,  but  rather  delighting
in  them.  He  referred  most  questions  to  the  spiritual  courts  \dAT
\i*hr9haT\  for  settlement.

He  had  the  greatest  reverence  for  the  Ulama.  For  this  he  was
much  blamed  by  the  Sultdns  of  the  day ;  but  he  answered  them
saying :  ''  It  is  fitting  to  honour  and  exalt  those  of  my  own  rank :
these  people,  considering  their  station  in  life,  cannot  claim  equality
with  the  humblest  of  my  servants,  but  I  reverence  them  on
account  of  their  knowledge.  Whether  they  are  great  or  whether
they  are  humble  [in  station,  makes  no  difference],  I  regard  only
their  learning.  No  reproach  can  be  levelled  at  me  for  this.  Those
who  honour  the  man  for  his  learning,  and  not  the  learning  [for  its
own  sake]  commit  an  act  of  folly."  ^  He  treated  Sufis  and  pious
men  as  brothers,  and  they  never  overstepped  the  bounds  of
propriety  with  him  [though  there  was  no  ceremony  between  him
and  them].  Thoughts  of  sovereignty  and  royal  dignity  never
entered  his  head.  He  was  equally  polite  to  all ;  and  although  he
upheld  the  dignity  of  the  royal  state,  he  observed  an  attitude  of
affability  beyond  all  conception.

I  was  twenty-four  years  in  his  service,  and  do  not  remember
ever  having  heard  him  use  abusive  or  obscene  language  to  an
inferior.  If  any  of  the  slaves  in  his  attendance  committed  an
offence  worthy  of  punishment  or  reproof,  he  would  frown,  but
keep  his  temper  and  say  very  little.  If  he  did  speak  and  wished
to  use  abusive  language,  he  never  went  beyond  calling  any  ono
"  unclean  "  or  **  carrion,"  and  if  he  spoke  in  Turki  he  said  much
the  same.

>  That  1b,  obBerving  the  hours  for  night  prayers.— -R.

'  This  passage  is  not  an  exact  rendering.  In  order  to  make  sense,  the  tmns-
lation  has,  of  necessity,  been  somewhat  freely  dealt  with.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Events  in  Kdshghar.  449

CHAPTEB  CVI.

EVENTS  IN KASHGHAR  AFTER  THE  KHAN's  DEATH.
•  «  «  «  «  1

In  short,  after  the  Ehdn  had  resigned  his  life  into  the  hands  of
the  angel  of  death,  Mirza  Ali  Tagh&i  (that  Shaikh  of  Satans)  and
Khwdja  Shdh  Muhammad  Div&n  (mother  of  Satans,  in  whose  eyes
for  years  past,  the  ophthalmia  of  envy  had  filled  the  place  of
light)  having  conspired  together,  sent  Yddgar  Muhammad,  son-in-
law  of  Mirzd  Ali,  to  Bashid  Sult&n  in  Aksu,  with  a  letter  issued
in  the  Kh&n's  name  and  made  up  of  impertinences  and  falsehoods.
They  declared  it  to  be  the  Ehdn's  last  testament,  and  that  he,
before  dying,  had  said :  "  I  did  not  wish  to  make  the  holy  war
in  Tibet.  It  was  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd  and  Mirz4  Haidar  who
forced  me  to  take  the  step.  I  shall  never  be  satisfied  with  my
son  Abdur  Bashid,  if  he  does  not  put  these  men  to  death.  Their
death  will  be  in  retaliation  for  mine.  Moreover,  as  long  as  they
exist,  the  sovereignty  will  not  be  his."  Having  devised  such
infamous  lies  as  these — the  outcome  of  that  devilry  which  for  so
many  years  had  held  possession  of  their  brains — they  sent  [the
letter]  off.  At  the  same  time,  they  sent  another  messenger  to  my
uncle,  relating  the  manner  of  the  Khan's  death,  asking  what  was
to  be  done,  and  adding  that  any  instructions  should  be  carried  out
in  full. These  lies  were  confirmed  by  the  most  solemn  oaths.

When  this  message  reached  my  uncle,  he  was  filled  with  emotion
and  alarm.  He  performed  the  proper  ceremonies  of  mourning,  and
set  out  from  Eashghar  for  Yarkand.  As  it  was  the  season  of  Asad
and  the  heat  was  excessive,  the  Khan's  remains  were  brought  in  and
buried,  as  quickly  as  possible,  in  a  chamber  of  the  palace  [Dtvan-
'kkana\  In  the  meanwhile,  my  uncle  arrived  from  Kdshghar.
Having  paid  a  visit  of  condolence  to  the  ladies  of  [the  late  Khan's]
haram,  he  performed  similar  duties  with  respect  to  the  rest  of  the
household.  All  the  Amirs  who  were  on  the  spot,  came  and  begged
my  uncle  for  a  compact  or  treaty.  First  of  all,  in  the  presence  of
this  body  of  grandees,  IJlama  and  Amirs,  he  promised  that  their
interests  should  be  attended  to  even  better  than  they  had  been
in  the  lifetime  of  the  late  Khan.  They,  on  their  part,  professed
their  allegiance  to  him  by  means  of  the  strongest  and  most
solemn  oaths.  **  We  too,"  [they  said]  **  will,  even  more  than  in
times  past, show  our  loyalty  and  singleness  of  purpose." In

»  This  chapter  opens  with  about  ten  linen,  chiefly  of  verse,  regretting  the
seyerity  of  the  Fates  in  cutting  off  the  Khdn's  lifc.—B.

2  (}

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

450  Events  in  Kdshghar

particular,  Mirza  All  Taghai  was  profuso  in  his  piotestations  of
devotion  and  sincerity.

Having  satisfied  their  minds  on  these  points,  they  turned  their
attention  to  the  raising  up  of  Abdur  Rashid  Sult&n  as  the  new
Khan,  and  plans  were  suggested  for  his  installation.  These
having  been  settled  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner,  they  only
awaited  the  arrival  of  Rashid  Sultan.  It  was  the  last  day  of  Zal-
hijja  when  news  of  his  arrival  was  received.  My  uncle  sent
forward  the  grandees  to  meet  him,  and  made  every  preparation
for  a  royal  and  dignified  reception.  ''  But,''  he  said,  '*  it  is  not
proper  that  he  should  make  his  entry  on  the  last  day  of  the  month
and  of  the  year,  and  on  a  Wednesday.  To-night  he  had  better
remain  in  ^e  suburbs,  and  to-morrow,  Thursday,  the  first  of
Moharram,  and  the  beginning  of  the  year  940,  he  should  enter  the
town." This  plan  was  decided  upon  and  the  Amirs  went  forward.

But  Mirza  Ali  Taghdi  went  privately,  and  said  to  [Rashid
Sultan]  : — "  As  the  Khdn's  honour  is  in  my  keeping,  I  feel  it  my
duty  to  tell  him  of  a  scheme  now  being  laid,  which  was  proposed
to  myself  and  the  Amirs  by  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirz4.  I  would
lay  it  before  you  now,  in  order  that  timely  measures  may  be  taken
to  check  it.  The  promise  he  exacted  from  us  was,  that  as  soon  as
Rashid  Sult4n  arrived,  we  should  lay  him  by  his  Other's  side,
and  that  we  should  set  upon  the  throne  of  the  Khanate,  Iskandar
Sult4n,  who  is  in  Tibet.^"  Such  lies  as  these  he  not  only
invented,  but  impressed  in  such  a  way  [on  Rashid  Sult&n]  that
[the  latter]  saw  no  good  reason  for  doubting  him.  On  the
morning  of  Thursday,  the  first  of  Moharram  940,  Rashid
Sultan  set  out  towards  his  father's  tomb.  My  unde,  clothed  in
mourning,  [two  couplets] . .  .  was  seated  by  the  [late]  Ehin's  grave.
As  Rashid  Sult&n  rode  up  to  the  door  of  the  house,  my  unde
came  forward,  his  vest  rent  open,  his  beard  torn,  his  black  turban
thrown  upon  the  ground,  and  on  his  shoulders  black  felt  [two
couplets], .  .  .  uttering  moans  and  laments.  Rashid  Sultan  [imme-
diately] ordered  his  men  to  seize  him,  which  they  did  from  either
side,  and  let  fall  upon  his  Musulm&n  neck,  a  non-Musulman  sword
— severing  his  head  from  his  body.  Ali  Sayyid,  likewise,  who  has
been  mentioned  in  several  places,  attained  the  degree  of  martyr.

Having  murdered  these  two  unfortunates,  he  dismounted  and
advanced  to  the  head  of  his  father's  tomb.  Thence,  he  went  and
paid  a  visit  of  condolence  to  the  ladies  of  the  haram.  Mean-
while, he  sent  Mirza  Ali  Tagh4i  to  Kashghar  to  put  to  death
my  uncle's  children,  Husain  Mansur,  son  of  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza,  and  Sultdn  Muhammad  Mirz4,  son  of  Mirzd  Aba  Bakr,  and
also  the  son  of  Sayyid  Mahmud ;  none  of  these  three  had  attained
the  age  of  twenty.  He  spared  no  act  of  insult  or  violence  [towards
those  who  were  left  alive — namely,  the  wives  and  families  of  my

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

after  the  KMfCs  Death,  451

uncle].  Thus  were  my  uncle's  faithful  and  devoted  services  to
Bashid  Sultan,  rewarded  with  murder  and  violence,  and  those
solemn  oaths  and  binding  compacts  which  they  had  mutually
sworn  to,  consumed  like  blood-money.^  [Couplet].  ,  .  It  is  a  practice
among  [some]  nations  to  do  honour  to  their  dead,  by  sacrificing
the  choicest  of  their  flocks  and  the  best  of  their  cattie.  Bashid
Sultan,  on  his  father's  demise,  put  to  death  my  unde,  his  children
and  Ali  Sayyid :  that  is  to  say,  he  sacrificed  them.  [Two  couplets]. . .

After  he  had  killed  my  uncle,  and  had  ill-treated  [his  family],  he
went  on  to  offer  such  insults  and  indignities  to  the  haram  of  his
noble  father,  as  modesty  prevents  me  from  describing.  Maulana
Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Yazdi,  in  the  Zafar-Ndma^  describes  the  misdeeds
of  Sultdn  Khalil  Mirzd,  one  of  the  grandsons  of  Amir  Timur,  who
succeeded  his  grandfather  on  the  throne  of  Samarkand.  This
passage  I  have  copied  exactly  into  this  place.  Certainly,  with  the
exception  of  Sult&n  Khalil  Mirzd,  no  one  but  Bashid  Sult&n  has
practised  such  tyranny  and  wrong.  These  matters  being  some-
what delicate  to  relate,  I  have  copied  out  the  passage  in  order  to
give  some  idea  of  this  lamentable  affair.  The  evident  intention  of
Sharaf-ud-Din  Ali  Tazdi,  in  mentioning  these  hideous  deeds,  was
that  his  readers  and  men  of  note  might  be  warned  to  avoid
criminal  acts,  and  practise  works  of  righteousness.^

Bashid  Sultdn  did  not  stop  here,  but  also  subjected  to  every  kind
of  harsh  treatment  and  insult,  his  aunts,  who  were  members  of
my  haram,  and  the  mother  of  the  children  of  Sh&h  Muhammad
Sultdn,  who  have  been  mentioned  above  on  various  occasions,  and
will  be  spoken  of  again  in  their  proper  place.  The  mother  of  the
children  of  Shah  Muhammad  Sult&n  is  Khadija  Sultdn,  a  fall
sister  to  the  late  Ehdn.  Though  she  was  suffering  from  hectic
fever  and  dropsy,  and  confined  to  her  bed,  he  banished  her  and  her
children  into  Badakhshdn,  but  ere  she  could  arrive,  she  died  on
the  road,  after  undergoing  a  thousand  trials  and  hardships.  Her
children,  Ismail  Sultdn,  Ishdk  Sultdn,  Yakub  Sultdn,  and
Muhtarima  Ehdnim — some  in  infancy,  some  still  .at  the  breast,
desolate  and  friendless  exiles — were  sent  to  Kdbul,  where  they
were  received  with  fatherly  kindness  by  Timur  Sultdn,  who  has
been  mentioned  as  being  in  Hind,  in  the  service  of  Kdmrdn
Mirzd. He  undertook  the  entire  charge  of  his  sister's  sons.

Ismail  Sultdn  perished  in  the  wars  in  Hindustdn.  Yakub  Sultdn
died  a  natural  death.  Muhtarima  Ehdnim  was,  by  my  agency,
married  to  Kdmrdn  Mirza,  as  will  be  related ;  Ishdk  Sultdn,  also
through  my  influence,  is  still  with  Kdmrdn.

'  This  is  nearly  a  litexal  iraaslaiion  of  the  sentenoe  Chun  Khunbahd-i-iskdn
dshdmid,  whioh,  howeTer,  has  no  meaning  in  English. — B.

^  Here  is  omitted  a  short  extraot  from  the  Zafar-Ndma  consisting  of  abont  a
dozen  lines  of  mere  rhetoric  and  some  yerses. — ^R.

2  a  2  ^  T

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

452  Account  of  Muhammadi  Bar  Ids,

CHAPTER  CVII.

ACCOUNT OF MUHAMMADI BARLAB WHO WAS  » AMIR-UL-UMARA  TO
RASHID KhAn— OR RATHER  HIS  REASONING  SOUL.

He  was  son  of  Ali  Mir4k,  son  of  Daryish  Husain  BarUs.  Daring
the  Khan's  sojourn  in  the  province  of  Farghdna,  on  the  occasion
of  the  release  of  Rashid  Snltan  from  the  captivity  of  the  Uzbeg,
and  when  he  rejoined  his  father,  the  latter  appointed  Ghuri
BarMs,  Muhammadi's  nncle,  to  be  [Rashid's]  Ai4  Beg.  But  about
the  same  time,  Ghuri  Barl&s  died  a  natural  death.  The  office  of
Ata  Beg  was  then,  quite  properly,  conferred  upon  Ali  MirAk  Barlas.
A  few  years  after  the  reduction  of  Kdshghar,  Ali  Mir&k  BarlAs  went
on  a  holy  war  to  Tibet,  and  the  office  of  Atd  Beg  to  Rashid  Sultan,
descended  by  inheritance,  to  Muhammadi.  Soon  after  this,  Rashid
SultAn  was  brought  into  Moghulistdn.  The  Amirship  over  all,  was
given  to  Mirza  Ali  Taghai,  while  the  affiiirs  of  the  Kirghiz  were
placed  under  the  control  of  Muhammad  Kirghiz.  Muhammadi  was
likewise  in  the  service  of  Rashid  Sult4n,  as  has  been  explained.

Ali  Mirak  Barlds  was  my  uncle's  maternal  uncle,  by  reason  of
which  connection,  my  uncle  and  I  used  every  effort  to  further  his
interests.  But  Mirza  Ali  Taghai  was  not  friendly  towards  him.
Without  showing  it,  he  was  afraid  that  my  uncle's  intentions  were
evil  and  his  devotion  insincere.  On  [Muhammadi's]  account,  Mirza
Ali  Taghdi's  dislike  for  my  uncle  increased,  while  Muhammadi,
on  every  occasion,  sought  \a>  defend  my  uncle.  At  length.  Shah
Muhammad  Sult&n  was  killed  by  [Muhammadi].  It  has  been  men-
tioned above,  how  the  Kh&nims  and  the  heirs  of  the  dead  man,  were
bent  on  retaliating  by  the  death  of  Muhammadi,  and  how  my  uncle
and  I  rescued  him  from  that  calamity.  This  produced  bitterness
against  me  on  the  part  of  my  maternal  aants,  their  children  and
my  other  relations.  All  this  [hostility]  was  encountered  for  the
sake  of  Muhammadi.

The  atrocities  which  took  place  after  the  death  of  the  Rh&n,  the
murders,  the  violence,  all  [seemed  to  be  the  working  of  Mirza  Ali
Tagh&i].  Though  Mirza  Ali  Taghai  used  all  his  influence,  yet
without  the  sanction  of  [Muhammadi],  Rashid  Sultan  would  never
have  committed  such  scandalous  acts.  In  fact  [Muhammadi's]
influence  for  evil  was  greater  [than  Mirza  Ali  Taghdi's],  and  his
control  over  Rashid  Sultan's  mind  was  so  great,  that  the  latter

*  A  word  oocun  here  signifyiDg  apparestly  some  othtfr  office,  but  it  is  illegible
in  the  text.~B.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Account  of  Muliammadi  Barlds.  453

did  whatever  he  told  him,  however  **  infidel "  the  action  might  be.
All  these  lying  tales  and  unrighteous  deeds  were  for  the  sake  of
[Muhammadi].  The  ladies  of  the  Khan's  haram — Bashid  Sultan's
[step-]  mothers — were  pressed  to  marry  Muhammadi,  and  those
who  did  not  yield,  he  went  so  far,  in  his  resentment,  as  to  plunder
and  expel.  But  he  did  not  see  fit  that  the  mates  of  the  humd
should  become  the  co-mates  of  the  crows.

His  own  sister  Badi-ul-Jamal  Eh4nim  had  been  engaged  to
Baush  Sultan,  son  of  Adik  Sultdn,  the  Uzbeg  Kazak.  When  he
[Eashid  Sultan],  in  alliance  with  the  Uzbeg  Shaiban,  routed
the  Uzbeg  Kazdk,  Baush  Sultan,  because  of  his  position  as  son-in-
law,  and  relying  on  this  [for  safety],  came  forward  to  meet  Rashid
Sultan,  who  threatened  to  put  him  to  death  if  he  did  not  at  once
divorce  Badi-ul-Jamal  Khanim.  Having  taken  her  from  this
chief,  who  was  worthy  of  the  alliance,  he  gave  her  to  Muham-
madi, whose  ancestors  had  never  attained  to  a  dignity  nearly
so  great.  This  act  was  a  complete  breach  of  propiiety:  for  a
peasant  was  treated  as  of  equal  rank  with  a  prince.  But  Eashid
Sultan  disregarded  everything,  and  brought  disgrace  upon  his
own  house.  He  could  not  distinguish  a  man  endowed  with  reasoD,
from  a  brute  beast.  Still  the  most  infamous  thing  of  all,  was
taking  her  from  a  worthy  man  and  giving  her  to  an  unworthy
one. Such  a  deed  is  quite  unheard  of.

[Muhammadi's]  influence  over  Kashid  Sultiln  was  without
limit,  but  the  reason  for  it  was  never  apparent.  It  did  not  lie  in
the  merit  of  past  services,  nor  in  his  intelligence  and  sagacity  as
an  Amir ;  nor  yet  in  eloquence  in  council,  nor  in  affable  manners
or  good  breeding,  nor  in  vivacious  humour  at  feasts,  nor  in
courage  in  battle,  nor  in  grace  or  charm  of  bearing.  [Verses]
.  .  .  All  that  he  said  and  did,  was  tainted  with  falsehood  and
evil.  In  short,  all  the  unworthy  deeds  of  Rashid  Sult4n  are  to  be
traced  to  him.  We  have  nothing  further  to  blame  Rashid  Sultan
for,  than  that  he  allowed  himself,  on  every  occasion,  to  be  guided
by  Muhammadi.  There  has  lately  come  a  report  that  Muham-
madi has  bidden  this  life  farewell.  If  it  is  true,  it  is  not  unlikely
that  Rashid  Sultan  will  grasp  the  reins  of  rectitude,  and  re-
nouncing his  evil  ways,  will  repent  him  fully.  Amen.  Oh  Lord
of  the  two  worlds !

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

454  ^^  Autfior's  Invasion  of  Ursang.

CHAPTER  CVIII.

>iARCU  OF  THE  AUTHOR  TOWARDS  URSANli. THE  SLAYING  OF  HIS
BROTHER  ABDULLAH  HIRZi. DETAILS  OF  THE  EXPEDITION.

When  the  Khan  set  out  for  Yarkand,  I  took  leave  of  him,  and  in
the  first  ten  days^  of  Znlhijja  of  the  year  939,  after  keeping  the
feast  of  the  Sacrifioe  in  Marytil,  I  set  out  to  destroy  the  idol-temple
of  Ursang.  After  marching  for  twenty  days  in  that  part  of  Tibet,
we  found  no  signs  of  infidels,  except  a  few  fortresses.  These
were  so  strongly  situated  and  fortified,  that  they  could  only  have
been  taken  with  groat  difficulty,  and  the  gain  was  not  worth  the
pain.  Leaving  behind  Iskandar  Sultan,  my  brother  Abdidlah
Mirza  and  my  cousin  Mahmud  Mirza,  together  with  the  heavy
baggage  and  the  tired  beasts  of  burden,  I  took  the  strongest  and
freshest  of  the  horses  with  me,  and  started  in  all  haste.

On  the  first  of  Safar  we  reached  a  place  called  Barmang.  Here
we  found  some  of  the  Champa  people  of  Tibet*,  whom  we
plundered ;  nearly  300,000  sheep  fell  to  the  lot  of  our  victorious
army,  besides  prisoners,  hoi-ses  and  goods,  in  proportion.  For  the
completion  of  our  desires,  and  the  satisfaction  of  our  necessities,
we  nalted  in  a  suitable  pasture  land,  to  rest  and  refresh  our
horses;  by  this  means  we  afforded  Iskandar  Sultan,  Abdullah
Mirza  and  Mahmud  Mirza,  time  to  overtake  and  rejoin  us.  But
while  I  had  hastened  forward,  they  had  followed  leisurely,  and  on
the  first  of  Moharram  940,  they  had  approached  one  of  the  above-
mentioned  fortresses,  which  was  called  Eardun.
.  The  despicable  men  [in  the  fortress]  being  i  educed  to  ex-
tremities, applied  for  aid  to  one  of  the  Kai  of  Hindustan,  who
sent  3,000  Hindu  Kaiard-dar  infantry^  [men  armed  with  short
swords].  [Couplet  .  .  .].  Iskandar  Sultan  and  my  brothers
advanced  with  200  men,  to  give  them  battle,  but  they  pushed

*  Tills  sentenre  should  perhaps  read,  **  on  the  eleventh  day  of  .  .  .*' — R.

*  The  Rai,  or  Raja,  of  Hindnstin  would  appear  rather  to  have  been  one  of  the
rulers  of  Nipul,  for  the  events  described  in  this  passage,  took  place  in  the  near
neighbourhood  of  the  Nipal  frontier.  The  circumstance  that  the  men  sent  by
the  Rai,  to  help  the  Tibetans,  were  armed  with  **katara/'  or  short  swords,  would
alfeo  point  to  inhabitants  of  Nipal— of  one  tribe  or  another — ^armed  witli  their
national  weapon,  the  kukri.  The  katira  is,  in  fact,  not  the  same  as  the  kukri ;
it  is  an  Indian  weapon,  of  which  the  handle  consists  of  two  parallel  bars  with  a
cross-piece  joining  them;  but  it  is  short,  and  its  name  would  probably  be  u
sufficiently  iicciirate  description  of  the  kukri,  for  a  writer  who  may  not  have
known  the  name  of  '*  kukri."  At  tlie  date  in  question,  the  ruling  dynanty  in
Nip^l  was  that  of  the  Malla,  a  line  of  reputed  Rajput  origin,  like  that  of
the  Ghurkas,  or  Ghurkh^lL,  wlio  succeeded  them,  but  the  paiticular  Rai  or
Raja  who  was  reigning  in  1533  does  not  appear  to  be  known.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Tlie  Author's  Invasion  of  Ursang.  455

forward  so  rapidly  that  only  a  few  of  the  200  kept  up  with  them.
My  brother,  Abdullah  Mirza,  was  a  daring  youth,  and  had  already
distinguished  himself  in  the  Khan's  service  in  Balti,  where  having
gained  the  jvUduy  he  was  respected  by  all  the  army.  Elated  and
animated  by  this  distinction,  and  without  reflection,  he  neglected
to  await  the  main  body,  but  advancing  with  only  three  men,
threw  himself  into  the  middle  of  the  3,000.  He  was  dismounted,
but  at  this  juncture  my  cousin  Mahmud  Mirza  came  up  with  four
men.  Seeing  his  brother  [cousin  ?]  in  this  plight,  he  too  made  a
daring  charge,  and  saved  his  brother  from  imminent  danger;
whereupon  the  latter  again  returned  to  the  charge,  only  to  bo  a
second  time  dismounted.  At  this  moment  Ave  of  the  bravest
warriors  arrived  on  the  scene,  and  seeing  the  two  brothers  so  hard
pressed,  they  charged  the  enemy ;  but  by  this  time  my  brother,
Abdullah,  had  been  cut  in  pieces — ^so  con[ipletely  that  each
separate  part  of  his  cuirass  and  coat  was  in  the  possession
of  some  infidel.  [Pour  couplets]  ....  I  repeated  the  verse,
**  Verily  unto  God  do  we  return."

I  halted  for  some  days  in  that  pasturo-ground,  until  the  beasts
were  rested  and  refreshed.  I  then  sent  back  all  the  booty  that
had  fallen  into  our  hands,  and  having  chosen  out  900  men  from
the  army,  set  forth  with  them  for  Ursang.  From  M4ryul  of  Tibet
to  that  place  is  two  months'  journey.  After  one  month's  journey,
one  comes  to  a  spot  where  a  lake  is  situated ;  it  is  forty  farsakhs  in
circumference,  and  on  its  shores  there  is  a  castle,  which  is  called
Luk-u-Labuk.  We  halted  there  for  the  night ;  the  next  morning
we  found  all  our  horses  had  died,  except  a  few  that  were  half
dead — groaning  and  writhing  [with  pain].  Thus  of  my  own
twenty-seven  horses,  only  one  was,  on  that  morning,  in  a  sound
condition,  two  others  were  dying,  and  the  remaining  twenty-four
were  dead.  The  cause  [of  their  death]  was  the  dam-giri,  which
has  been  described  above.

When  we  left'  that  place,  [only]  a  fifth  part  of  the  army  were
mounted,  all  the  rest  proceeded  on  foot.  On  the  second  day  we
plundered  the  province  of  Ham  [or  Hari].  The  people  of  that
place  assert  that  it  is  twenty-four  days'  journey  into  Bangala.
Many  captives  were  taken  by  us.  Those  of  our  army  who  were
mounted  on  serviceable  horses,  only  numbered  ninety  men.  With
these  ninety,  I  advanced  and  plundered  a  place  called  Askdbrak.
About  100,000  sheep,  20,000  kutds  and  a  proportionate  number  of
prisoners  and  horses,  fell  into  our  hands.  There  remained  eight
days'  journey  from  Askabrak  to  Ursang.  However,  the  horses  of
our  party  being  entirely  broken  down,  we  were  obliged  to  turn
back.  Six  days  later,  we  reunited  and  set  out  on  our  return.  This
took  place  on  the  8th  of  Rabi  II.  On  the  last  day  of  Jam4d  II.
we  overtook  the  party  that  had  been  sent  back  with  the  booty  and

Digitized  by

Google

456  The  Autltor^s  Invasion  of  Ursang.

plunder,  at  a  place  called  Tamlik,  which  is  twenty  days'  journey
from  Maryul.^

The  Guga  people  came  and  represented  to  us  that  Guga  was  the
chief  district  of  Tibet ; they  were  willing  to  pay  any  capitation

^  Mirza  Haidar*B  expedition  into  Tibet,  though  one  of  his  most  remarkable
exploits,  is  related  with  tantalising  brevity  and  with  an  absence  of  explicitness,
as  to  localities  and  dates,  that  renders  his  record  of  it  unsatisfactory  in  tbo
extreme.  It  would  be  interesting  to  be  able  to  trace  his  route  from  the  borders
of  Ladak,  to  the  point  where  he  had  to  turn  back,  and  give  up  his  designs  on
Lasea.  If  indeed,  this  one  point,  the  name  of  wliich  ha  writes  Attdldxirk,  or
Atkdbraky  could  be  identified,  the  extent  of  his  incursion  might  be  determined,
and  a  clue  would  be  obtained  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  other  places  ho  mentions.
But  I  am  unable  to  trace  the  name  AakdbrcUc,  on  any  map  or  in  any  account  of  Tibet
known  to  me.  It  appears  from  his  nairative  that  he  started  from  Maryul  (Leh,
or  its  immediate  neighbourhood),  and  passed,  on  his  line  of  march  to  A^hdbral:^
four  places,  the  first  of  which  he  names  Barmang  (or  Yarmang,  or  Bartang^
etc. — the  variants  would  be  numerous) ;  the  second  Kardun ;  the  third  Luk  Liuk
(or  Tvk  u  Lahukf  or  Luk  Lanuk^  etc.),  on  a  large  lake,  and  halfway  from  Leh  to
LnRsa ;  the  fourth  Ham  (or  Hariy,  two  marches  farther  on ;  and  iinallv  arrived
at  Axkdbrdky  which  he  puts  at  eight  days'  journey  from  Lassa.  Here  ho  stayed
six  days,  and  then  took  eightv  days  to  return  to  a  place  which  he  writes  Ttfm-
lih.  This  last  was  two  days  short  of  Chigeh  (the  chief  village  of  the  Gugeh
district  may  bo  assumed)  and  twenty  days  from  itfaryuZ,  or  Leh.

The  distance  from  Leh  to  Lassa  is  actually  reckoned  at  sixty  ordinary  marches,
just  as  Mirza  Haidar  has  it ;  and  about  halfway  on  this  journey — or  one  month,
as  he  also  puts  it — the  great  lakes  of  Mimsarowar  (the  Tso  Lannk  and  Tso
Mapham)  are  passed.  Thus  we  eeem  here,  to  have  a  referring  point ;  for  no
other  lake  that  he  could  estimate  at  40  farsakhs  (160  miles)  in  circumference,  is
to  be  found  anywhero  near  the  halfwsy  point  between  Leh  and  Lassa.

According  to  the  itinerary  compiled  by  the  Indian  Survey  Pundit  in  1866,  the
post-station  called  Barhha^  close  to  the  north  shore  of  the  Lanak  Lake,  is  the
twentieth  from  Lassa,  while  each  post-stage  v^ould,  on  the  average,  be  35^  miles
in  length — ^total,  710  miles.  The  onlinary  marches  shown  by  the  Pundit's  table,
average  something  under  14  miles  each,  but  these  are  traders'  stages,  intended  only
for  loaded  animals.  If  we  take  ordinary  marches  fur  travellers  without  caravans,
at  an  average  of  about  28^  miles,  the  estimate  for  tliirty  days*  journey  would  brio|;
the  distance  tolthe  same — or,  nearly  710  miles.  Mirza  Haidar  is  speaking  every-
where, apparently,  of  ordinarv  marohes  for  mounted  travellers,  but  he  muy  havo
obtained  his  information  of  the  distance  between  Atkdbrak  and  Lassa,  in  post-
stages,  or  in  either  kind  of  ordinary,  or  road,  march.  If  the  first  be  reckoned,
Aakabrak  should  be  looked  for  about  284  miles  from  Lasea ;  if  the  last,  only  some
102  miles.  The  name  of  the  eighth  post  station  from  Lassa,  «n  the  Pundit's  list,
is  Jang  Lache ;  the  name  of  the  eightli  traders*  halting-place  is  Gobzi;  whilo  tho
eighth  stage,  at  about  23^  miles,  would  be  Pcna-jong.  Of  these  names,  not  one
has  any  resemblance  to  Askdbrak  or  Astdkbark.

But  tliere  Is  reason  to  believe  that  Askdbrak  was  much  moro  than  eight
marches,  or  indeed,  than  eight  post-stages,  distant  from  Lassn,  and  that  the
Mirza  was  not  so  near  his  goal  as  he  imagined.  The  only  one  point  that  is
certain,  on  tlie  route  from  Ladak,  is  tiie  great  lake;  even  tlie  name  of  tho
'*  castle,"  <»r  fort,  which  stood  near  it  (tliough  it  may  contain  the  word  "  Lanak  ">
cannot  be  located  exactly.  The  Pundit  shows  a  place  he  calls  Long-gong  near
the  northern  shore  of  the  Lanak,  which  bears  a  faint  likeness  to  Luk-Liuk,  but
not  sufficient  to  hazard  an  identification.  However,  Mirza  Haidar  tells  us  that
lie  marched  only  two  days  from  this  *•  castle"  to  the  pn)vinoe  of  Ham  (or  Hari)^
whence  it  required  twenty-four  days*  journey  to  reach  Bengal.  After  pro-
ceeding for  an  undefine<i  distance  towards  Lassa,  and  on  arriving  at  Askdbrak,
he  records  that  from  that  place  also,  the  journey  to  Bengal  was  twenty-four
days.  If  the  same  distance  to  Bengal  was  reckoned  from  iMth  these  places,  the
probability  is  that  they  were  not  far  apart.  Moreover,  it  was  at  the  castle  near
the  great  lake  that  the  disastrous  loss  of  horses  occurred  ;  it  was  from  here  that
the  Mirza  sot  out  with  only  ninety  mount*  d  men,  whije  four  times  that  number

Digitized  by

Google

The  Autlior's  Invasion  of  Ursang.  457

tax  which  I  might  impose,  in  accordance  with  the  extent  and
wealth  of  the  country;  I  therefore  proceeded  to  Gnga,  where
I  arrived  in  two  marches  from  Tamlik.  I  was  received  by  the
people  in  the  most  respectful,  obedient,  and  hospitable  way. After

went  on  foot  Thus  it  is  scarcely  likely  that  with  his  force  in  this  condition,  and
with  winter  setting  in  (for  it  was  towards  the  end  of  October),  he  would  have
pushed  forward  to  any  great  distance.

Again,  the  dates  given  in  the  narrative  are  too  imperfect  to  afford  any  sure  basis
for  an  estimate  of  distances  or  halts.  We  find  sciircely  more  than  that  the  ex-
pedition left  Leh,  on  or  about  the  4th  July,  1533 ;  that  it  reached  Asknbrak  on  the
22nd  October ;  started  thence  on  its  retreat  28th  October ;  and  arrived  at  Tdndik
on  the  border  of  Gtiaeh  on  the  10th  Januarv,  1534.  This  TdmUk  was  two
days  from  the  chief  place  in  Ougeh  (possibly  Tsajprang  or  Dankar),  and  twenty
days  from  Maryul  or  Leh.  Of  the  other  places  the  author  mentions  on  this
expedition,  Barmang  (or  Barkang,  etc.)  should  probably  be  looked  for  in  the
districts  of  either  Ougeh  or  Chumurti,  in  order  to  accord  with  the  estimate  of
twenty  days  from  Leh ;  while  Kardun  may  be  the  Kardam,  or  Kardungt  marked
on  the  maps  of  Tibet  at  about  twelve  miles  south  of  the  Lanak  lake.

The  names  detailed  at  p.  410,  are,  from  that  of  Gugeh  onwards,  fully  as
puzzling  as  those  on  the  line  of  march  towards  Lassa.  Indeed,  most  of  them
appear  to  refer  to  places  visited  in  the  course  of  that  march.  For  the  position
of  tho  place  written  Zunka  in  the  text,  a  vap;ue  clue  might  be  obtained  from  the
pabsagc  at  p.  416,  if  the  author  can  be  credited  with  a  mistake  of  a  month  in  the
dates.  He  records,  there,  that  he  was  at  Zunka  in  the  month  of  Rabi  L,  940.
He  also  says  (1)  ib&t  he  reached  Barmang  on  the  Ist  Safar,  and  (2)  that  that
place  was  only  twenty  days  from  Maryul,  while  he  marched  rapidly  from  ono  to
the  other.  From  the  date  of  leaving  Maryul,  twenty  days  would  bring  the  date
to  1st  Muharam,  while  fiftv  days  would  be  needed  to  attain  the  1st  Safar.  But
at  the  same  time,  the  author  implies  that  he  was  at,  or  near,  Kardun  on  tho
1st  Muharam,  and  halted  there  for  some  days.  Kardun  (if  Kardum)  is  a  good
distance  farther  removed  from  Maryul  than  is  Barmang,  or  than  any  point
twenty  days  from  Leh ;  but  the  author  places  himself  at  the  former  spot  one
month  earlier  than  at  the  latter.  Thus,  in  all  probability,  the  dates  in  the  text
should  read,  1st  Muharam  at  Barmang,  and  1st  Safar  at  Kardun — that  is,  twenty
days  from  Maryul  to  the  former,  and  fifty  days  to  the  latter.  And,  if  so,  Zunka
would  have  to  lie  (according  to  the  dates)  between  Kardun  (or  the  great  lake)
and  Atkdbrak,  This  correction  is  the  more  reasonable,  as  the  author  states  that
he  went  on  rapidly  from  Maryul  to  Barmang,  and  that  his  relations  followed
leisurely  till  the  two  parties  met  near  Kardun,  If  such  an  amendment  is
admissible,  the  clue  to  Zunka  would  be  as  above.

Now,  an  itinerary  obtained  by  Captain  H.  Strachey  in  1846,  gives  a  place  called
Samku  as  the  fourteenth  post-stage  from  Lsssa,  which  would  locate  it  at  Sarka
of  the  Pundit's  and  other  map.^  and  in  this  position  Zunka  (if  Samku)  might
full  within  Mirza  Haidar's  location  for  the  month  of  Babi  I.  In  this  case  Mam
(or  Hart)  and  Atkdbrak  could  not.  with  regard  to  dates,  have  been  lar  off,  and  it
is  just  possible  that  if  Hari  be  tho  right  reading,  that  ploce  may  be  represented
by  the^rt  dsong  shown  on  D'Anville's  map,  as  standing  near  an  unnamed  lake  to
the  south  of  the  great  river,  but  intended  obviously  for  the  loke  Palgu,  or  Palu,
of  later  maps.  Yet,  strangely  enough,  the  position  of  D'Anville's  Ari-dtong  is
occupied,  on  more  modem  maps,  by  u  spot  called  Jongku — a  word  bearing  a
curious  resemblance  to  Zun-ka.  However,  the  Samku  of  Strachey's  itinerary  is
not  far  off,  and  is  the  preferable  of  the  two  names,  as  a  possible  identification
of  Zunka.  If  not  a  corruption  of  the  same  word,  Samku  may  be  another  name
for  Sarka.  Captain  Strachey  gives  no  particulars  of  the  place,  but  the  Pundit
describes  it  as  •*  a  large  village  containing  numerous  houses,"  while  Mirza  Haidar
says  it  was  the  most  tieimous  place  in  Tibet.  The  result,  in  any  case,  is  that  Mirza
Haidar's  farthest  point  towai^s  Lassa  could  not  (on  these  assumptions)  have  been
beyond  the  Polgu,  or  Palu  lake,  situated  about  the  86th  degree  of  E.  long.,  or
some  350  uiiUs,  at  least,  from  Lassa.

Still,  all  this  is  based  on  more  or  less  of  speculation,  for  very  little  can  bo
certainly'  tstablisli.ed. ThjB Tibrtru  nnmes  nre,  in  all  piobability  fairly  will

Digitized  by

Google

458  Tlie  Ajithors  Invasion  of  Ursang,

staying  there  three  days,  and  fixing  the  levy  at  3,000  Tibetan
iniilik&h  (one  of  which  is  equal  to  one  and  a  half  statute  'mMAV)
I  returned,  and  on  the  road  heard  of  the  dispersion  [virdn]  of  my
army,  which  I  will  speak  of  immediately.

represented  in  Mirza  Haidar's  Persian,  since  in  the  list  of  places  at  p.  410,  those
that  are  known  in  Ladak  and  Baltistan,  are  transliterated  with  remarkable
accuracy,  and  it  is  only  when  we  come  to  localities  which  are  (almost  certainly)
in  the  imperfectly  known  regions  of  Tibet  proper,  that  difficulties  occur.  The
explanation  probably  is,  that  we  know  too  little  of  this  region  to  be  aware  of  the
names  of  places  orainarily  in  use.  Most  of  those  on  our  maps  reach  us  from
foreign  sources — the  Chinese  of  the  last  century,  and  the  Indian  Surrey
Pundits— and  are,  therefore,  as  likely  to  be  distorted  as  those  in  Mirza  Haidar^s
text.  The  narratives  of  more  modem  travellers,  moreover,  do  not  help  us.  Even
that  of  Ippolito  Desideri,  the  Jesuit  missionary  of  the  first  quoFter  of  the  last
century,  contains  scarcely  the  name  of  a  place  between  Ladak  and  Lassa,  or  so
much  as  a  glance  at  the  geography  of  the  country.  Yet  lie  travelled,  it  seems,
over  almost  exactly  the  same  route  as  Mirza  Idaidar.  The  same  must,  as  we
have  seen,  be  said  of  the  Pundifs  narrative.

It  may  be  added  here,  that  Dr.  Waddell  informs  me  the  meaning  of  Stak-brak
is  Tiger  Bock,  which  would  be  a  very  likely  name  to  occur  in  Tibet.  In  Western
and  Central  Tibet  these  syllables  would  be  pronounced  Ta  Dak,  or  Ta  Da ;  but
even  in  this  form  I  cannot  trace  the  name.  (See  for  Strachey,  Journey  ,  .  .  in
Tibet,  Extr.,  J.  A,  8,  B,,  1848;  and  Physieal  Geography  &[  Tibet,  J.  R,  G.  S.,
1854;  the  Pundit  in  Report  of  Trans.  Himalayan  JEacphratuma,  1865-7;
D'Anville's  map  in  DtkhaMe,  iv.,  pL,  p.  458 ;  and  Desideri  in  MS.  belonging  to
Hakluyt  Society.)

The  likeness  that  Mirza  Haidar's  expNsdition  bears  to  ttiat  of  the  Dogras  under
Zorawar  Sing,  just  300  years  later,  is  remarkable.  GoUb  Sing,  the  Dogra
Bajah  of  Kashmir,  having  subdued  Ladak  without  much  difficulty,  thought  it
also  an  easy  matter  to  extend  his  conquests  to  Lassa  territory.  In  the  spring  of
the  year  1841,  a  force  commanded  by  Zorawar  Sing  was  pushed  forward  into  the
Tibetan  province  of  Nari  Khorsum,  in  three  columns — one  advancing  by  Taukse,
one  by  the  Indus  valley,  and  the  third  over  the  Bupshu  table-land.  At  first  no
resistance  was  offered  by  the  Tibetans,  and  the  Dogras  made  easy  progress ;  but
after  passing  to  the  south-eastward  of  the  Mansarowar  lakes,  and  while  in  a
region  some  15,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  the  winter  set  in.  The  cold
was  intense;  supplies  and  shelter  were  alike  wanting,  and  the  sepoys  are
recorded  to  have  burned  their  arrows  and  gunstocks  for  fuel.  The  Tibetans,
having  awsited  their  opportunity,  sent  up  a  large  force  from  the  eastern
provinces,  and  attacked  the  invaders  while  hard  preyed  by  cold  and  hunger,  or,
as  the  Doffra  chronicler  puts  it,  '*  by  the  army  of  the  season."  The  Dogras  were
defeated  about  the  middle  of  December,  in  a  battle  which  took  place  between
KarduDg  and  Purang.

Though  Mirza  Haidar's  expedition  ended  in  a  somewhat  less  disastrous  way,
the  similarity  with  that  of  Zorawar  Sing  extends  to  the  circumstance  of  the
Nipnlis  .becoming  alarmed  at  the  presence  of  an  invading  army  so  near  their
frontier.  Their  Government  bent  envoys  to  demand  explanations  of  the  Dogra
commander,  and  apparently  they  received  satisfaction,  for  no  hostilities  are
recorded  to  have  occurred  with  Nipal,  while,  after  the  disaster  near  Kardung,
the  fugitive  sepoys  were  permitted  to  take  refuge  in  the  Ghurka  Baja's  territory.

(An  account  of  this  expedition  will  be  found  in  tiie  Gvldb-Ndma  of  Diw&n
Kirpa  Bdm  of  Kashmir:  a  Persian  history  of  the  Dogras  in  Kashmir,  somo
extracts  from  which  I  translated  some  years  sgo.)

It  may  be  added  that  the  Government  of  India,  believing  Nari  Khorsum  to
belong  to  China,  decided,  on  hearing  of  the  invasion,  that  the  Dogras  should
evacuate  the  territory  they  had  seiz^,  in  order  to  avoid  complications  with  the
Chinese  Government,  and  the  10th  December,  1841,  was  fixed  for  the  surrender.
A  British  officer,  Captain  J.  Davey  Cunningham,  K.E.,  was  sent  to  see  that  the
decision  was  carried  out,  and  Zorawar  Sing  was  accordingly  recalled.  But
before  the  onler  could  reach  him,  the  disaster  above  related,  had  overtaken  bis
force. (See  J.  D.  Cunningham's  Hist,  of  the  SikhB,  pp.  256-8.)

Digitized  by

Google

Sufferings  in  Tibet, .  459

CHAPTER  CIX.

SUFFERINGS  IH TIBET,  AND 'THE DEATH  OF  THE  AUTHOR's  COUSIN^
MAHMUD  MIBZi.

As  soon  as  Bashid  Sultan  had  made  an  end  of  murdering  and
insulting  my  uncle  and  others  of  his  near  relations,  he  sent  a
messenger  into  Tibet  bearing  divers  mandates.  One  of  these  was
for  his  brother  Iskandar  Sultan,  and  ran  thus :  "  We  have
conferred  upon  you  the  country  of  Tibet.  [We  desire]  Mirza
Haidar  and  Mahmud  Mirzd  also  to  remain  tliere."  Another  was
addressed  to  the  whole  army  as  follows  :  "  The  wives  and  families
of  all  those  who  are  in  Tibet  will  be  sold.  Immediately  upon  the
arrival  of  this,  you  are  ordered  to  disperse  and  set  out  for  Yarkand.'*
When  these  unwelcome  orders  arrived,  I  had  gone  to  Guga,  as
has  been  said.  No  sooner  did  the  soldiers  learn  the  purport  of  the
message  than,  seizing  their  opportunity,  they  set  out  for  Ydrkand ;
but  Iskandar  Sultan  and  my  cousin  Mahmud,  with  a  handful  of
men,  having  got  away  [from  the  rest],  remained  behind.  Two
days  later,  I  reached  the  stage  where  the  men  had  disbanded
[virdn  ahvda],  Iskandar  Snlt4n  aiid  my  cousin  Mahmud  pointed
out  that  we  had  better  remain  there  that  night,  as  many  of  the
soldiers  had  fled  unwillingly,  and  were  probably  only  watching
for  an  occasion  to  rejoin  us.

There  yet  remained  with  me  more  than  a  hundred  men ;  these
were  all  brave  soldiers  or  commanders  of  battalions,  whose  service
was  hereditary,  who  had  often  distinguished  themselves  in  battle,
and  had  won  juldua ;  each  one  also  had  been  born  to  the  title  of
Amir.  Some  of  them  were  my  [fosterj-brothers,  and  were  called
[by  me]  Kukilddsh  ;  from  these  I  had  no  reason  to  expect  opposition.
But  on  the  morrow  I  discovered  that  all  my  trusted  men  had  dis-
appeared, like  the  stars  at  dawn.

After  the  sun  had  lit  up  the  earth's  dark  surface,  Jan  Ahmad
Ataka,  who  has  been  already  mentioned  as  my  foster-brother,  camo
to  me  with  a  certain  Shah  Muhammad,  a  Kuhildash^  and  one  of
the  most  distinguished  of  that  band.  With  them  they  brought
five  followers.  Thus  was  the  fear  of  loneliness  dispeUed.  After
a  while,  Iskandar  Sultdn  and  my  cousin  Mahmud  came  back,  and
having  collected  about  fifty  men  we  proceeded  towards  Maryul.

*  The  chapter  opens  with  Bome  high-flown  passages  and  many  verses  oon-
cenuDg  had  news,  misfoitunes,  and  the  like.  The  author  then  says  that,  for  the
information  of  the  reader,  he  will  venture  to  record,  briefly  but  truly,  some  of  the
terrible  events  which  immediately  succeeded  upon  the  death  of  the  Kh^n. — B.

Digitized  by

Google

460  Sufferings  in  Tibet  and

It  was  tbe  beginning  of  the  season  of  Capricorn,  and  the  commence-
ment of  winter-time.  [Couplet].  .  .  The  cold  was  so  intense  that
were  I  to  describe  it,  I  should  be  accused  of  word-painting.  Ont
of  those  fifty  men,  more  than  forty  had  either  hands  or  fuet,  or
nose  or  ears,  taken  oif  by  the  cold  [frost-bitten].  Sustaining  such
fatigues  and  sufferings  as  these,  at  the  end  of  twenty-five  days  we
reached  Maryul.  The  Chui  of  Maryul,  named  Tashikun  and  Lata
Jughdan,  who  have  been  mentioned  in  a  few  places  already,
hastened  out  to  wait  upon  us.  Since  we  had  [on  a  former  occasion]
treated  them  with  violence,  both  plundering  and  killing  [their
people],  I  was  inwardly  in  great  fear  of  them.  But  contrary  to
my  apprehensions,  they  showed  their  willingness  to  assist  us  in
eveiy  way,  and  even  proffered  excuses,  saying:  "For  four
hundred  years,  from  father  to  son,  we  have  been  the  subjects  and
you  the  king ;  we  the  slave,  you  the  master ;  if  in  the  days  of
your  glury  and  greatness  we  were  alarmed  and  trangressed,  we
met  with  our  duo  retribution  at  your  hands.  At  that  time  the
C7mt  of  Tibet  submitted  to  and  obeyed  you,  solely  from  fear.  But
now  we  offer  our  services,  out  of  attachment  to  you,  and  in  all
sincerity." [Verses.]

They  gave  us  the  castle  of  Shaya,  which  is  the  capital  of
Maryul.^  In  Shaya  we  took  the  opportunity  to  recover  [from  our
fatigues],  and  here,  some  of  the  army  who  had  stayed  behind,  now
rejoined  us.  Among  them  was  Maulana  Darvish  Muhammad  Kara
Tagh,  one  of  the  attendants  of  Ehwaja  Muhammad  Yasuf,  who  has
been  mentioned  above.  This  Maulana  Darvish  Muhammad  was
a  pious  and  devoted  Musulman.  He  knew  the  Tibetan  language
remarkably  well,  and  enjoyed  the  entire  confidence  of  all  the  Ckui
of  Tibet.  He  was  thus  able  to  settle  all  our  affairs  with  them  in
a  satisfactory  way.

From  Kashmir  there  came  a  certain  man  named  Haji,  who
attached  himself  to  my  service ;  he  will  be  mentioned  frequently
hereinafter ;  our  party  now  numbered  more  than  sixty  persons.

But  the  disbanded  army,  as  it  advanced,  began  to  suffer  from

*  Shaya,  ordinarily  called  Sheh,  or  Shay,  but  properly  written  Shd  in  Tibetan,
is  a  village  about  eight  mQes  south-east  of  Leb,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Indus.
On  a  high  rook  above  the  village,  stands  one  of  the  old  residences  of  the^Ladak
Kings,  who,  at  various  times,  have  made  it  their  headquarters.  This  naay  have
been  the  case  in  Mirza  Haidar's  time,  and  for  this  reason,  probably,  he  calls  Shek
the  capital  of  Ladak.  The  period  when  Leh  became  the  capital  is  nowhere
recorded  that  I  nm  aware  of,  but  the  Ladak  Chronicle,  translated  by  Dr.  Marx,
states  that  the  19th  King  (the  Tishi  Namgyal  mentioned  in  note  2,  p.  418)
was  the  builder  of  the  old  fori  at  Leh,  the  ruins  of  which  are  still  to  be  seen  on  a
pinnacle  overlooking  the  town.  As  the  Leh  ^'palace,**  which  stands  on  the
same  hill,  but  a  little  lower  down,  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Chronicle,  I  infer  that
it  was  built  somewhat  later,  though  it  is  generally  said  to  date  from  over  three
hundred  years  as:o.  It  was  at  Sheh  that  Moorcroft,  in  1821,  found  settled  one
KhwiLJa  Shah  Nidz,  whom  he  describes  as  a  descendant  of  **  a  branch  of  the  same
family  as  the  Emperor  Baber."  (Sec  Marx,  /.  A.  S.  B.,  Ix.,  pt.  iii.,  1891,
pp.  12S-4;  and  Moorcroft,  i.,  p.  241.)

Digitized  by

Google

Death  of  Mahmud  Mirzd,  461

the  change  in  the  season ;  so  much  so,  that  most  of  the  men  were
unable  to  proceed,  while  those  who  attempted  to  go  on,  lost  all
their  eflFects.  Nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  men  died  from
exposure  to  the  cold.  The  rest  arrived  in  a  half-dead  state  at
Y4rkand.  Another  party,  turning  back,  reached  Maryul  in
a  helpless  condition.  Thus  a  body  numbering  five  hundred  men
was  again  assembled,  together  with  about  10,000  sheep.  [For  a
time]  we  enjoyed  a  complete  rest.

Before  reaching  Maryul,  I  sent  foi-ward  Jan  Ahmad  Ataka  and
Sh4h  Muhammad  Eukildash,  to  Bashid  Sultan  in  Yarkand,  with
many  gifts  from  the  spoil  we  had  taken  in  our  last  expedition.  I
also  wrote  him  a  few  lines,  reminding  him  of  our  ancient  bonds  of
friendship,  and  sent  him  as  proof  thereof,  some  old  tokens  we
had  interchanged.  A  dark  coloured  Arab  pustiuy  and  a  steel  hdluka,
both  of  which  Bashid  Sultan  had  given  me,  I  now  sent  back  to
him,  just  as  they  were  [ha-jins], [Verses]  .  .  .

Towards  the  close  of  that  winter  Eashid  Sult&n  sent  Bidakan,
son  of  my  foster-brother  Jan  Ahmad  Ataka,  accompanied  by
Hasan  Div&na,  to  bear  to  me  messages  of  apology  and  expressions
of  repentance.  His  past  behaviour  [he  admitted]  had  been  due  to
his  ignorance,  and  was  a  cause  for  shame  in  this  world  and  the
next.  He  now  frankly  begged  the  forgiveness  of  his  dear  friend.
He  had  sent  Mauldhd  Eudash  with  two  hundred  men,  for  my
service.  All  those  of  my  following  who  had  gone  over  to  him,
might  now  return  to  me ;  no  one  should  hinder  them.  He  also
sent  me  some  horses  and  other  gifts.  I  was  not  a  little  encouraged
by  these  messages,  and  most  of  Tibet  submitted.

In  the  meanwhile  Mauland  Euddsh  arrived,  bringing  with  him
some  of  my  chief  retainers.  Being  reinforced  by  this  band,  we
marched  for  Balti,  which  touches  the  confines  of  Kashmir.  All
Balti  paid  the  appointed  tax  in  kind,  without  hesitation  or  delay.
Suini  is  a  department  of  Balti,  and  its  chief  defence  and  stronghold.
Maulana  Eudash  asked  permission  from  me  to  go  and  impose
a  levy  upon  Sum,  but  I  would  not  consent  to  this,  knowing  that
those  infidels  would  not  be  willing  to  let  any  one  visit  their
districts  and  valleys.^  [Indeed  the  people  of  Sum]  begged  that
[no  one  might  come].  "Whatever  amount  is  due,"  [they  said],
**  that  we  will  ourselves  bring  to  the  camp  where  you  now  are ;
there  is  no  need  for  you  to  come  [to  us]."  However,  when  the
fowler  of  destiny  places  the  grain  of  earthly  desire  in  the  net  of
fate,  not  even  a  bird  of  wisdom  can  escape  from  that  net.
[Couplet].  .  .  . But  Eudash,  not  accepting  my  refusal,  was  so

*  It  is  remarkable  that,  even  in  our  own  times,  the  people  of  Snru  have  the
reputation  for  being  contumacious;  they  have  a  strong  dislike  to  foreigners
visiting  their  district,  and  throw  whatever  obstacles  they  are  able,  in  the
traveller's  way.  The  invasion  of  the  Dogras,  in  the  present  century,  was  resisted
by  them  with  much  determination.

Digitized  by

Google

462  Sufferings  in  Tibet  and

importunate  in  his  demands  that  I  at  last  sanctioned  his  going,
and  he  set  forth.  The  people  of  Sam  pnt  him  to  death  in  a
narrow  pass,  together  with  twenty-fonr  worthy  men  who  were
with  him ;  they  were  subjected  to  a  hundred  ignominies,  and  were
unable  to  strike  a  blow.  Although  our  force  numbered  some  seven
hundred  men,  yet,  on  account  of  our  poverty  and  want  of  arms,
we  were  unable  to  avenge  him. [Three  couplets].  .  .  .

Leaving  Bdlti,  we  set  out  towards  a  province  in  Tibet  called
Zangskar.  The  crops  had,  as  yet,  attained  no  height;  harvest
time  was  not  yet  come,  when  we  arrived.  While  we  were  waiting
for  the  harvest,  that  we  might  divide  the  crops,  one  of  the  Chvi  of
Balti,  named  Tangi  Sakab,  who  had  in  the  past  rendered  us
useful  services,  came  and  told  us  that  the  time  had  come  to  go
and  attack  the  murderers  of  Kuddsh,  that  is  to  say,  the  people  of
Sunt.  "  You  can  go  and  pillage  their  country,"  [he  said],  "  carry
off  their  women  and  tAke  vengeance  on  their  men."

Some  of  those  who  had  lost  their  strength,  were  at  once  despatched
to  Maryul,  in  order  that  the  strong  men  among  us  might  proceed
with  all  speed.  I  sent  my  cousin  to  escort  the  party  [going  to
Mdryul],  as  one  day's  march  of  that  journey  was  very  dangerous.
He  waa  to  see  them  [safely]  through  this  part  of  the  road.  At
night  he  encamped  there.  As  the  place  was  dangerous,  he  kept
his  horse  by  him  all  through  the  night.  During  his  sleep,  the
horse,  while  grazing,  kicked  him  so  hard  on  the  forehead  as  to
fracture  his  skull  [making  a  wound]  the  size  of  the  hoof.  On  the
next  day  he  came  to  me  and  showed  me  his  wound.  Acoording  to
the  practice  of  Moghul  surgeons,  I  broke  the  bone  [again],  and
seizing  the  edge  of  it,  applied  remedies.  I  then  sent  to  tell  Tangi
Sak&b  what  I  had  done.  He  sent  back  answer:  ** Since  your
coming  would  involve  no  little  difficulty,  [you  had  better]  send  me
a  small  contingent  to  take  Sum.  We  will  send  you  a  fifth  part
of  all  that  falls  into  our  hands.  This  also  would  be  an  acceptable
service."

Between  Zangskar,  where  I  was  dwelling,  and  Sut,^  the  home
of  Tangi  Sakab,  is  five  days'  journey.  I  sent  [to  Tangi  Sakab],
seventy  men  under  the  command  of  Maulana  Darvish  Muhammad
Kara  Tagh,  who  enjoyed  the  entire  confidence  of  the  Gkui  of  Tibet,
and  Nur  All  Divdna,  one  of  the  most  promising  young  soldiers,
and  who  had  turned  back  to  rejoin  me.  Nearly  two  months  were
passed  in  exchange  of  messages  before  a  decision  was  arrived  at.
Mahmud  Mirza's  wound  had  opened  afresh,  and  it  became  quite
impossible  for  him  to  remain  in  Zangskar,  on  account  of  the  severity
of  the  weather. So  I  was  obliged  to  send  him  back  to  Maryul,

^  iM  or  So<  is  a  name  not  often  seen  on  modem  maps.  It  will  be  fonnd,
however,  on  Moorcroff s  map,  spelled  80^.  It  ia  one  of  the  group  of  villages
usually  known  as  £argt7. It  may,  indeed,  bave  been  another  name  for  EaigiL

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Death  of  Mahmud  Mirsd.  463

while  I  remained  in  ^ngskar,  in  order  that,  as  soon  as  he  had
reached  Mdryul  in  safety,  I  might  myself  proceed  to  Snru,  where
I  hoped  to  find  some  means  of  existence.  When  Mahmud  reached
the  spot  where  he  had  received  the  kick  from  his  horse,  he  halted
for  the  night,  and  on  the  morrow,  as  he  was  abont  to  mount,  he
exposed  his  head  to  apply  the  dressing.  The  cold  got  into  the
wound  and,  fainting  away,  he  became  insensible.  At  noontide
prayers  a  person  came  and  informed  me  of  his  condition.  I  at
once  set  out  in  all  haste  to  see  him.  I  arrived  at  midnight  and
found  him  unconscious.  On  the  following  day  be  came  to  himself
and  entirely  recovered  consciousness.  The  next  day  also,  he  was
conscious,  but  on  the  third  day  he  began  to  talk  incoherently,  and
two  nights  later  he  died.^

Meanwhile  a  messenger  arrived  from  the  party  which  I  had
despatched  against  Sum,  saying  that  Nur  Ali  Div&na,  in  company
with  his  companions  and  M^uldn4  Kar4  T4gh,  had  gone  to  attack
Bagh4n,  who  was  a  Ghni  of  the  provinces  of  Tibet.  Maulana
Darvish  Muhammad  having  enticed  him  into  a  place  [apart],  they
exchanged  blows,  and  at  length  Bdgh4n,  being  mortally  wounded,
they  made  a  present  of  that  infidel  to  the  Musulmdns,  and  taking
leave,  proceeded  to  Ydrkand.^  That  infidel  killed  the  Mauland
by  transfixing  him  with  a  stick.  Thus  the  Sum  expedition  came
to  nothing.  Having  conveyed  Mahmud's  body  to  Maryul,  I  sent
it  on  thence  to  E4shghar  [to  be  buried  in  the  tomb]  of  his  forefathers.
These  events  happened  in  the  beginning  of  the  season  of  Scorpio.
It  was  at  the  commencement  of  the  cold  season  of  Tibet,  that  we
went  to  Maryul.  That  winter,  until  spring  came  round,  we  passed
in  such  a  manner  that,  were  I  to  describe  our  sufferings,  I  should
be  suspected  of  exaggeration.

On  the  return  of  spring,  seventy  persons  wore  sent  with  the
horses,  to  a  place  called  Utluk — a  ravine  [mugMra]  famous  in  all
Tibet  for  the  richness  of  its  crops.  I  spent  the  interim  in  hunting
the  wild  ass  and  the  wild  hUd8^  and  then  returned.  On  my
departure,  I  had  left  Iskandar  Sultan  in  Maryul  with  a  body  of
men.  When  we  had  once  again  reassembled,  the  horses  had  grown
fat  and  strong,  but  our  men,  unable  to  support  the  pressure  of
misfortune  and  trial,  all  at  once  dispersed  and  went  off  to  Ydrkand  ;
only  fifty  of  them  stayed  behind,  the  rest  all  fled.  At  this  junc-
ture Jan  Ahmad  Ataka,  whom,  two  years  previously  (on  my  return

>  Half  a  folio  of  verse  and  florid  passages  is  omitted  heie.  The  author
complidiis  of  the  grief  he  has  suflered  from  the  loss  of  his  uncle  and  other
relatives.  His  troubles,  he  says,  reached  their  climax  when  he  was  past  thirty
years  of  age  and  not  yet  forty. — R.

'  This  passage  is  oheoure,  and  makes  little  sense.  It  would  appear  that
Bigh&n  kuled  tiie  MauUnit,  and  was  afterwards  made  over  to  the  Musulmans  of
the  district,  as  a  slave,  by  the  Maul&n&'s  companions,  who  then  went  on  to
Ytirkand.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

464  Journey  to  Badakksftdn.

from  the  Ursang  expedition)  I  had  sent  to  Eashid  Sultan  (as  was
mentioned),  came  back  from  Yarkand,  bringing  the  oi-ders  that  we
were  to  stay  no  longer  in  Tibet.  Hitherto  m}'  reason  for  lingering
in  Tibet  had  been,  that  if  of  my  own  choice  I  moved  to  some
other  place,  I  should  be  accused  of  breaking  my  engagement.  He
[Rashid  Sultan],  however,  while  outwardly  pretending  to  be  up-
right, had  broken  this  engagement,  which  he  had  sworn  to  with
the  most  solemn  oaths,  and  now,  disregarding  every  [honourable]
consideration,  ordered  me  to  take  flight.  [Verses].  ...  No  sooner
had  Jan  Ahmad  Ataka  delivered  his  message,  than  I  set  out
for  Badakhshan.

CHAPTER  ex.

THE  AUTHOR  CROSSES  FROM  TIBET  TO BADAKHSHAN.

1  MENTIONED  above  that  out  of  my  force  of  700  men,  only  fifty
remained  with  me.  The  rest  all  got  away  to  Y4rkand,  as  best  they
could.  It  has  also  been  already  observed,  that  the  difliculties  of
traveUing  in  Tibet  are  due  to  the  scarcity  of  provender  and  the
terrible  severity  of  the  cold,  while  the  roughness  of  the  paths  is
almost  beyond  conception.  We  were  without  a  proper  supply  of
clothing  and  food,  and  more  particularly  of  horse-shoes,  which  are
above  all  things  indispensable  on  those  roads ;  our  horses  were  few,
and  were  in  a  broken  condition.  To  remain  in  Tibet,  therefore,
became  impossible;  while  to  leave  it  was  difficult.  However,  if
to  stay  and  to  go  were  both  attended  by  obstacles,  there  was  at
least  hope  in  the  latter  course  ;  to  it  we  might  look  for  a  termina-
tion of  our  troubles,  but  we  could  foresee  none  if  we  determined  to
stay.  [Verse],  .  .  .  [The  routes]  to  Kashmir,  Kashghar,  Turf4n,
and  Hindustan  were  all  equally  impossible.  The  road  to  Badakh-
shan was  the  only  one  that  offered  any  hope  of  safety.

No  one  of  us  had  ever  travelled  from  Tibet  to  Badakhshan,
excepting  by  way  of  Kashghar.  But  among  those  who  had
deserted  and  fled  to  Yarkand,  was  a  certain  man  named  Jahan  Sh4h.
He  once  related  that  he  had  heard  from  the  people  of  the  moun-
tain districts  of  Yarkand,  that  from  a  place  called  Tagh  NAk,^

>  Mirza  Haldar's  spelling  of  this  name  is  probably  the  right  one.  It  appears
on  our  latest  maps  as  Tokanakt  and  is  a  spot  on  the  Ydrkand  river  just  below
Kulan-nldi,  where  the  track  to  Kugiar  and  Ydrkand  leaves  the  valley  of  that
river.  Mirza  Haidar's  party  (it  will  be  seen  by  the  map)  branched  of  from  the
direct  ronte  to  Yirkand  at  Ak-Tagh,  then  followed  down  the  Yirkand  river  past
Kulan-uldi,  Tdgh-ndk,  etc.,  first  into  the  district  known  as  Bilskiim  and  eventii>
ully  on  to  the  Pamir  of  Taghdumbdsh.  The  route  is  an  exceedingly  difficult
one,  on  account  of  the  river  crossings,  and  is  seldom  or  never  followed  by  traders
or  travellers.

Digitized  by

Google

Journey  to  Badakhslidn.  465

there  was  a  bye-path  leading  to  the  Pamirs  of  Badakhshan.  I
had  inquired  the  particulars  of  him.  By  that  unknown  road  we
now  advanced.  "  Can  one  travel  by  a  road  one  has  never  seen  and
knows  not  ? "  Of  the  fifty  persons  who  had  remained  with  me
many,  from  want  of  strength,  stayed  behind  in  Tibet.

I  moved  off  finally,  with  twenty-seven  men.  [We  suffered  much]
from  want  of  supplies  for  the  journey — from  the  weakness  of  the
beasts  of  burden,  from  the  difficulties  of  the  road  and  from  the
cold.  For  although  it  was  now  the  season  of  Virgo,  the  cold  was
BO  severe,  that  at  a  place  we  came  to  called  Kara  Kuram,  as  the  sun
sank,  the  river  (which  is  a  large  one)  froze  over  so  completely,  that
wherever  one  might  break  the  ice,  not  a  drop  of  water  was  forth-
coming.^ We  continued  our  efforts  [to  obtain  water]  until  bed-
time prayers.  The  horses  that  had  travelled  all  day  over  dam-girt
ground,  arriving  at  a  stage  where  there  was  neither  water  nor
grass,  refused  to  eat  the  little  barley  that  was  left  (and  which  we
now  gave  them)  because  they  had  not  drunk.  Jan  Ahmad  Ataka
said :  "  I  remember  once  noticing  a  spring  at  about  half  a  farsdkh'e
distance  from  here."  lie  indicated  a  spot  in  the  middle  of  the  ice,
where  we  had  to  out  a  hole ;  this  time  there  was  water,  and  we
gave  the  horses  to  drink.  There  was  one  mare  [hajr]  among  them,
the  strongest  of  all  the  beasts,  whose  teeth,  from  want  of  water,
became  so  tightly  locked  together,  that  in  spite  of  every  exertion
she  could  not  drink,  and  therefore  died.^  The  baggage  which  she
had  carried  was  thus  left  behind.  This  will  give  some  idea  of  the
intensity  of  the  cold. [Verse.]  .  .  .

When,  after  much  hardship,  we  reached  the  spot  where  the
untried  road  to  Badakhshan  branched  off,  Tskandar  Sultan  came
to  ask  my  permission  to  make  his  way  to  Eashid  Sultan,  saying :
'•  Perhaps  his  brotherly  affection  will  induce  him  to  take  pity  on
me,  and  cause  him  to  heal  the  wounds  which  have  hitherto  cut  him
off  from  his  relations."  I  replied :  "  Your  brother  is  certainly  not
a  man  of  his  word,  as  his  actions  testify.  Good  faith  is  the  first
duty  of  a  Musulman ;  but  he  is  so  entirely  under  the  evil  influence
of  Muhammadi,  that  you  need  never  expect  mercy  at  his  hands."
[Quatrain]  .  .  .  With  such  words  did  I  attempt  to  dissuade  him,  but

*  The  meaning  is  that  the  river  was  flowing  till  the  sun  set,  and  then  suddenly
froze  over — not  an  unoommon  circnmBtance,  in  clear  weather,  at  great  altitudes.

'  Neither  is  it  uncommon  to  find  that  horses  refuse  their  ration  of  grain,  when
they  have  been  some  days  without  grass  or  chopped  straw,  or  when  suffering
from  height-sickness.  Wlioii  food  is  refused  for  these  reasons,  usually  no  great
harm  results  to  the  animal,  but  when  he  declines  it  on  account  of  thirst,  he
generally  succumbs  within  a  short  time.  Lockjaw  ii,  as  the  author  rightly
implies,  caused  by  the  cold  and  not  by  the  rarefied  air,  as  is  often  supposed.  It
occurs  even  at  low  altitudes  during  severe  cold.  It  may  be  observed  here,  that
though  the  word  *'  horse "  is  always  used  in  this  translation,  the  more  correct
term  would  be  '*  pony ; "  for  in  none  of  the  regions  east  of  Afghanistan  and
Western  Turkistan  are  the  horses  more  than  about  18  hands,  as  a  rule.  In  some
places  they  are  seldom  above  12  or  12.^  hands.

2  II

Digitized  by

Google

466  Journey  to  Badakhshdn

he,  being  worn  out  with  the  sufferings  of  the  journey  and  the
misfortunes  in  Tibet,  shut  his  eyes  to  the  path  of  reason,  and  was
BO  persistent  in  his  demands,  that  at  last  I  gave  him  leave  to  go,
sending  four  men  to  accompany  him.

My  party  of  twenty-seven,  by  the  loss  of  these  five,  was  thus
reduced  to  twenty-two,  and  with  these  I  went  forward  upon  this
[strange]  road.  A  few  of  our  horses  had  become  useless  from
want  of  shoes.  On  the  same  day  that  we  parted  from  Iskandar
Sultdn,  towards  midday  prayer-time,  we  killed  a  wild  Aruidtf.
With  its  skin  we  made  coverings  for  the  feet  of  our  disabled
horses :  of  its  flesh  we  carried  away  as  much  as  we  were  able,  and
even  then  there  remained  what  would  have  been  sufficient  for  a
day  or  two.  This  was  a  favour  bestowed  upon  us  by  the  Giver  of
daily  bread.  We  carried  away  as  much  as  our  beasts  could  bear,
which  amounted  to  about  five  days'  provisions  for  the  party.  I
suppose  about  a  quarter  of  the  h»i6u9  was  lost :  that  is  to  say  about
that  quantity  remained  behind.  The  crows  and  ravens,  by  their
screams,  gave  a  general  invitation  to  the  beasts  of  prey  of  the
neighbourhood,  and  they  celebrated  a  feast  in  company.^

We  proceeded  in  this  manner,  guessing  [our  way].  On  the
next  day  we  killed  another  'htlas^  of  a  very  large  breed.
[Couplet.]  .  .  .

From  the  information  I  had  gathered  from  Jah4n  Shah,  I
reckoned  that  it  woiQd  be  another  six  days,  before  we  should  come
to  a  cultivated  region ;  but  on  the  third  day  after  our  separation
from  Iskandar  Sultan,  at  about  breakfast-time,  we  met  with  some
men  with  their  families,  some  of  whom  came  out  to  receive  us
with  great  cordiality,  and  asked  us  whence  we  had  come  and
whither  we  were  going.  They  told  us  that  this  valley  was  called
Bas  Kam,  and  that  from  here  to  [the]  Pamir  was  five  days'  journey.
When  we  arrived  at  this  place  [Bas  Earn],  all  of  us  took  a  rest,
after  the  trials  of  so  many  years.

The  people  took  over  all  our  broken  horses  and  gave  us  strong
ones  in  their  stead.  They  also  supplied  us,  in  the  most
hospitable  majiner,  with  such  meat  and  drink  as  they  had  to  give.
When  they  saw  me,  they  all  began  to  weep  and  cried,  in  their
own  language:  ''Thanks  be  [to  God]  that  there  still  remains
a  princo  of  the  dynasty  that  has  ruled  over  us  for  four  hundred
years :  we  are  your  faithful  and  devoted  servants."  They  then
attached  themselves,  with  their  wives  and  families,  to  me.  I  was
powerless  to  hinder  them.  At  every  place  we  came  to,  I  was  joined
by  all  the  men,  women  and  children  of  the  district For  the  space

>  It  may  be  notioed  that  the  vrild  yak,  or  kutis,  is  not  foand  nowadays  so  far
west  as  the  valley  of  tlie  Yarkand  river.  Its  most  westerly  limits  are  the  head-
waters of  the  Kaiakash  and  the  Chang  Clienmo  valley,  in  the  extreme  east  of
Lodak.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

and  to  Hindt4Stdn.  467

of  seven  days  they  lavished  every  attention  and  honour  upon  ns,
brought  us  to  the  Pamir,  and  induced  us  to  proceed  to  Badakbshdn.
(Sulaim4n  Shdh  Mirza,  the  son  of  Mirza  Khdn,  the  son  of  my
maternal  aunt,  has  been  mentioned  in  several  places  above.  When
I  came  to  his  [abode]  he  hastened  out  to  receive  me,  showing  me
honour,  by  every  means  at  his  disposal.)^  We  then  offered  up  a
thousand  thanks  to  God  Almighty,  who  had  delivered  us  from
such  great  dangers,  and  had  brought  us  into  safety ;  [verse]  ^  .  .  .
and  from  a  land  of  Infidels  to  one  of  true  Believers.  [Three
couplets.]  ...

When  we  reached  W&khan,  which  is  the  frontier  [sar-hadd]  of
Badakhshan,  there  came  to  me  one  of  Bashid  Sultan's  Mlowers,
who  vras  there  on  some  business.  - 1  gave  him  some  Turki  verses,
which  I  had  composed,  to  deliver  over  to  his  master.  .  .  .^

If  I  were  to  detail  the  acts  of  violence  and  unkind ness  of  Bashid
Sultan,  a  separate  chapter  would  be  necessary.  God  willing  an
account  of  his  life  will  be  given  in  the  First  Fart;  repetition
would  not  be  pleasing.

To  be  brief,  at  this  time  my  wife,  who  was  Bashid  Sult4n's
paternal  aunt,  was  banished  [ikhrdj^  in  a  kindly  way,  with
Iskandar  Sultan  to  accompany  her.  Another  act  of  kindness  was
that  she  was  not  robbed,  or  deprived  of  anything ;  all  that  she
had  at  hand  was  sent  with  her.  She  reached  Badakhsh4n,
however,  in  a  pitiable  and  destitute  condition.  About  ten
persons  were  allowed,  by  Bashid's  fervour,  to  accompany  her,  and
these  took  with  them  all  their  cattle.^

That  winter  I  passed  in  Badakhshdn  in  perfect  comfort,  and
the  spring  I  spent  in  the  plains  and  hills  of  that  country ;  in  the
summer  I  went  to  Kabul.  Soon  after  my  arrival,  there  came
together,  in  Kdbul,  some  of  my  connections  who  had  been  banished
[by  Bashid  Sult4n] : .  namely,  the  Eh4n's  wife,  Zainab  Sult&n
Khanim,  who  was  his  cousin,  with  her  children  Ibr&him  Sult&n
(the  Eh4Ti*s  favourite  child),  Muhassan  Sultan  and  Mahmud
Yusuf.

[Afterwards]  I  passed  on  into  Hindustan.  When  I  reached
L4hur  1  found  E4mr6n  Mirzd,  son  of  Babar  Fddishah,  there.
Ho  came  out  to  meet  me  with  every  mark  of  respect,  and
bestowed  honours  on  me.  From  the  depths  of  distress  and
hardship,  I  found  myself  raised  to  honour  and  dignity.  [Verses.]
.  .  . The  princely  patronage  and  attention  [of  E4mr4n  Mirz4]

'  The  two  sentenoes  enclosed  within  parentheses  are  obyionsly  out  of  place
here.  They  anticipate  the  narrative,  for  it  conld  not  have  been  till  after  passing
through  Wakh^n  and  arriving  in  Badakhsh&n,  that  the  author  was  received  by
Sulaimdn  Sh&h.

*  Three  couplets  in  Turki  omitted.  They  contain  reproaches  addressed  to
Bashid  Sultan  for  his  bad  faith.— R.

'  The  translation  of  this  passage  is  uncertain.

2  H  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^^

468  Kdmrdn  Mirzd  and  the  Persians,

acted  as  an  antidote  to  tlio  numerous  sufferings  and  griefs,  which
had  made  the  sweetness  of  life  bitter  on  the  palate  of  my  soul.
[Verses.]  .  .  .

At  this  period,  one  of  the  sons  of  Shah  Ismail  marched  tipon
Kandahar,  and  captured  it.  It  came  about  thus :  Sam  Mirza,  one
of  ShAh  Ismail's  sons,  fleeing  with  a  body  of  men  from  his
brother  Shah  Tahmasp,  reached  the  territory  of  Sistan.  Thenoe
he  turned  towards  Kandahar,  where  was  Mir  Khwaja  Kilan.
This  Mir  Khwaja  Kilan  was  the  son  of  Maulana  Muhammad  Sadr,
one  of  the  pillars  of  religion  and  state- to  Mirzd  Amai*  Shaikh,  son
of  Mirza  Sultan  Abu  Said.  His  [Maulana  Sadr's]  children,  after
the  death  of  Mirza  Amar  Shaikh,  entered,  by  hereditary  succession,
the  service  of  Bdbar  Padishah,  for  whom  they  achieved  great
things.  In  that  family  their  reputation  stands  high,  for  six
brothers  were  killed  in  battle  on  separate  occasions,  and  this  one,
Mir  Khwaja  Kilan,  alone  survived.

He  was  a  brave  and  learned  man,  and  by  his  sound  judgment
was  able  to  regulate  most  of  the  Emperor's  affairs  of  State.  It
was  owing  to  his  exertions  that,  under  the  divine  decree,  the
Emperor  achieved  the  conquest  of  Hindustan.*  In  short,  he
defended  the  fort  of  Kandahar  in  such  a  way,  that  Sam  Mirza,
after  besieging  it  vigorously  and  persistently  for  eight  months,
was  unable  to  take  it.  At  the  end  of  eight  months,  Kdmran
Mirz4  arrived  from  Hindust&n  and  engaged  [Sam  Mirza]  in  battle,
at  the  very  gates  of  the  fort  of  Kandah&r.  Through  the  gallantry
and  energy  of  Mir  Khwaja  Kilan,  victory  declared  for  Kdmran
Mirza  after  a  hard  fought  combat,  and  Sam  Mirza,  humbled  and
discomfited,  fell  back  on  Irak,*  while  Kamran  MirzA  returned  to
Ldhur. It  was  at  that  time  that  I  arrived  at  L4hur.

That  winter  passed  over,  and  in  the  following  spring.  Shah
Tahmasp  marched  against  Kandahar  to  avenge  his  brother.  It
was  this  Shah  Tahmasp  who,  whenever  he  ma.de  war  upon
Khorasan,  met  with  such  determined  opposition  from  the  Uzbeg
under  Ubaid  UUah  Kh4n,  and  such  overpowering  resistance  from
their  numerous  forces,  that  he  was  always  compelled  to  retreat
[Couplet].  .  .  .  Mir  Khw&ja  KiUn  was  not  able  to  put  the  fort
in  a  state  to  withstand  a  siege,  on  account  of  the  numbers  and  the
strength  of  Shah  Tahmdsp's  army,  and  also  because,  having  the
year  before  sustained  a  siege  of  eiglit  months,  his  ammunition
and  other  necessaries  were  exhausted. Moreover,  he  entertained

*  Tills  Mir,  or  Amir,  Khwdja  Kildn  is  frequently  mentioned  by  Baber.  He
M'Bs  one  of  the  Emperor's  best  ^erals  and  most  trasted  followers.  At  one  time
be  held  the  governorship  of  Bajanr,  and  at  another  was  in  charge  of  Ghazni  and
Kabul ;  but  during  the  later  part  of  Baber*s  cnreer,  was  always  entrusted  with
some  important  command. (See  Memain^  pp.  218,  298,  335,  etc.)

'  The  dntc  of  this  victory  is  given  by  Erskine.  as  25tb  January,  1536.  (^Hist.^
ii.,  p.  101.)

Digitized  by

Google

The  Emperor  Humdyun.  469

BO  hope  of  Eamrdn  Mirza  coming  to  his  relief.  Under  these
conditions,  he  abandoned  Kandahar  and  retired  to  Ucha  and
Tatta,  whence  he  passed  on  to  Lahur.

When  this  news  reached  the  ears  of  Eamr4n  Mirza,  he  resolved
to  march  [at  once]  for  Kandahar.  Leaving  the  whole  of  Hindu-
stun  and  its  dependencies  in  my  charge,  and  giving  me  entire
authority  over  all  his  officials  and  nobles — setting  me,  in  fact,
over  the  whole  of  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom — he  proceeded  to
Kandahar.  On  reaching  this  place,  the  emissaries  of  Shah
Tahmasp  gave  the  fort  up  to  him  peacefully,  and  returned  to
Irak.  This  journey  [of  Kaniran  Mirza]  lasted  rather  more  than  a
year,  during  which  period  I  did  all  that  was  possible  to  discharge
my  duties,  in  the  administration  of  the  State.  I  attended  carefully
to  collecting  taxes,  suppressing  revolt,  protecting  the  frontiers
and  establishing  Ltlam,  so  that  when  Kamran  Mirza  returned,  in  the
full  glow  of  victory,  to  his  capital  Lahur,  he  raised  my  salary
from  fifteen  to  fifty  laks^  and  distinguished  me  among  my  peers,
by  his  favours.  One  lak  of  Hindustan  is  worth  twenty  thousand
shdhrukhis. A  current  shdhrukhi  is  worth  one  mithkdl  of  silver.^

CHAPTER  CXI.

HUMAYUN PADISHAH, SON  OF BJIbAB PADISHAh, AKD HIS  DOWNFALL.

Bum  AY  UN  PadishAh  was  the  eldest,  greatest,  and  most  renowned
of  B4bar*s  sons.  I  have  seen  few  persons  possessed  of  so  much
natural  talent  and  excellence  as  he,  but  in  consequence  of  frequent
intercourse  with  the  sensual  and  profligate  men  who  served  him,
such  as  Maulan4  Muhammad  Parghari  in  particular,  and  others
like  him,  he  had  contracted  some  bad  habits ;  among  these  was
his  addiction  to  opium.  All  the  evil  that  has  been  set  down  to
the  Emperor,  and  has  become  the  common  talk  of  the  people,  is
attributable  to  this  vice.  Nevertheless  he  was  endowed  with
excellent  qualities,  being  brave  in  battle,  gay  in  feast  and  very
generous.  [Couplet.]  ...  In  short,  he  was  a  dignified,  stately
and  regal  sovereign,  who  observed  much  state  and  pomp.  When,
for  example,  I  entered  his  service  at  Agra,  as  shall  be  mentioned,
it  was  after  his  defeats,  and  when  people  baid  that  oc^par^  with

'  Thus,  oDe  ehdhruJihi  was  equal  to  five  of  some  coin  of  India  theu  current,
and  coutaiDed  71*18  grains  of  silver — for  this,  a-*  we  have  seexr,  was  tbe  true
weight  of  the  mUhlcal,  Its  value  is  estimated,  us  already  n^ted,  at  about
9 J  pence ;  at  which  rate  the  Indian  current  coin  or  money  of  aooonnt  would  have
))ecn  worth  somethinii^  under  two  jwnco. But  see  Erskine,  Hist.  i.  App.  E.

Digitized  by

Google

470  The  Emperor  Humdyun,

what  it  had  been,  there  was  nothing  left  of  hiB  pomp  and
magnificence.  Yet  when  his  army  was  arrayed  for  the  Ganges
campaign  (in  which  the  whole  direction  deyolved  upon  me)  there
were  still  17,000  menials  [shagird  pitiha]  in  his  retinne,  from
which  circumstance  an  estimate  may  be  formed  of  the  rest  of  his
establishment.

To  bo  brief;  when  Kamran  Mirza  went  the  first  time  to
Kandahar,  the  Emperor  invaded  Gujrat  and  conquered  it.  But
on  account  of  the  insubordination  and  discord  that  prevailed
among  the  Amirs,  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  country,  and
return  empty  handed.  To  repair  this  disappointment — being  still
at. the  height  of  his  power — he  turned  to  attack  Bang4la,  which
he  also  conquered,  and  where  he  made  a  protracted  stay.

Hindal  Mirza,  his  youngest  brother,  was  in  Agra.  [Hearing
that]  Shir  Kban  was  coming  from  Barkunda  and  Ruht^s,  against
Agra,  [Hindal]  put  to  death  Shaikh  Pul  who  has  been  mentioned
as  the  Emperor's  spiritual  guide,  and  caused  the  Khu^  to  be
i*ead  in  his  own  name.  He  began  openly  to  sound  the  drums  of
sovereignty.  As  the  proverb  says :  "  Whenever  sedition  arises,
pi  osperity  gets  up  [to  go]."  *  When  this  news  reached  Bangala,
the  Emperor  at  once  set  out  for  AgrH,  leaving  Bangala  in  charge
of  Jabangir  Kuli,  son  of  Ibrahim  Begjik,  the  Moghul,  supported
by  5000  men.  But  when  Hindal  read  the  Khu&a  in  his  own
name,  none  of  the  Emperor's  Amirs  who  were  in  the  surrounding
cities,  would  acknowledge  him.  With  his  lack  of  good  sense  —and
this  was  the  cause  of  his  misfortunes — he  left  Shir  Khan  behind,
and  turned  to  conquering  the  Emperor's  dominions.  As  has  beeu
said  :  "  Do  the  work  of  your  friends,  that  your  enemy  may  do  his
own  work."  In  the  first  place  he  marched  against  Dehli,  the
capital  of  the  whole  of  Hindustan.  But  the  governors  of  Dehli,
who  were  Amirs  of  the  Emperor,  would  not  give  up  the  town,
and  a  fierce  encounter  ensued  between  the  two  parties,  each
filling  its  enemy  with  fear,  and  its  friends  with  courage.

While  Hindal  Mirz4  was  thus  engaged,  Humayun  came  from
Bangala  to  Jusa  and  P&ik.  Shir  Khdn,  seizing  his  opportunity,
cut  oif  his  progress."  The  Emperor  had  lost  all  his  horses  in
Bangala,  and  the  strength  of  his  army  was  wasted;  the  rainy
season  too,  had  come  on.  He  remained  for  three  months  encamped
opposite to Shir  Kh^n. Bepeated  messengers  came  [from  the

1  This  is  really  a  play  on  the  Persian  verbs  khatt  and  har-khdtt,—Vi.

^  The  allusion  here  is  to  the  defeat  which  Humayun  suffered  at  Ghausa
(tlie  Jiiaa  of  the  text)  near  Buxar  on  27th  June,  1539,  while  marohing  north-
ward from  Bengal.  Shir  Kh&n,  after  coming  to  an  underatanding  with  tiie
Emperor,  treacherously  attacked  his  camp  on  the  banks  of  the  Karamn^Ma,  and
afterwards  endeavoured  to  cut  off  his  road  to  Kalpi  and  Agra.  In  most  histories,
the  surprise  of  Humayun's  camp  is  said  to  have  occurred  at  Chapa  Ghit  on  the
Ganges — a  spot  not  far  from  Ghausa.  The  name  written  Patk^  or  JBatVr,  in  Uie
text  does  not  appear  in  any  other  account  of  these  events  that  I  am  a<H|naintod  with.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

Tlie  Battle  of  the  Ganges.  471

Emperor]  saying  that  Shir  Khan  was  at  the  bottom  of  all  the
oonfxision  in  Hindust&n,  that  he  was  now  face  to  face  with  him,  and
that  his  brothers  should  oome  quickly,  as  it  was  necessary  to  make
an  end  of  Shir  Kh4n.  [The  letters  arrived,  but]  the  brothers
were  engaged  in  hostilities,  so  the  enemy  remained  at  his  ease.

When  news  of  these  events  reached  K4mran  Mirza^  he  at  once
led  his  army  against  Dehli.  [On  his  approach]  Hindal  Mirza  fled,
and  the  Emperor*s  Amirs  came  out  to  meet  him.  His  arrival  filled
the  breasts  of  the  people  with  fresh  courage,  so  that  the  veterans
exerted  themselves  in  aifording  assistance  to  the  Emperor  in
Jusa.  But  some  perverse  advisers  offered  different  counsel,
saying :  **  To  go  to  Jusa  would  release  the  Emperor,  destri^y  the
enemy  and  ensnare  us."  Kamran  Mii-za,  in  his  ignorance  and
childlike  folly,  mistook  this  bad  advice  for  wisdom,  and  delayed  in
setting  forth.  But  men  of  experience  said :  ^*  Since  he  is  putting
off  his  departure,  we  had  better  return,  lest  the  equipment  of  the
army  be  spoiled.  Let  every  one  go  back  to  his  own  home  and
make  fitting  preparations  for  an  active  campaign.  If  Shir  Khan
defeat  the  Emperor,  we  shall  be  equipped  and  ready  [to  meet
him].  K,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Emperor  destroys  Shir  Khan,
well  and  good."

But  this  did  not  quite  satisfy  [the  discontented].  They  argued :
*'  If  the  Emperor  destroy  Shir  Khan,  he  will  be  enraged  against
us.  We  must  contrive  some  means  to  procure  the  forgiveness  of
the  offended  Emperor."  In  short  they  returned  to  Agra.  After
they  had  been  there  a  little  more  than  a  month,  the  Emperor
arrived,  defeated  and  crestfallen.  lu  the  middle  of  the  rains
[|MwAJb(i/]  the  brothers  came  together.  This  occurred  in  Safar  of
the  year  946.^

CHAPTEB  CXII.

THE BATTLE OF THE  GANOBS.*

When  all  the  brothers  were  assembled,  they  conferred  together
upon  the  state  of  affaire.  The  discussion  was  protracted,  but  no
profitable  decision  was  arrived  at ;  in  fact,  nothing  was  proposed
that  was  worthy  of  the  occasion,  for  as  it  is  said :  *'  When  fortune's
adverse,  minds  are  perverse."  Kdmr4n  IViirza  was  very  anxious
to  return,  but  Humayun,  conceding  all  other  representations,  dis-
regarded his  request  on  this  point. Seven  months  were  wasted

>  The  month  of  Safar  946  h.,  fell  18th  June  to  17tb  July,  1539.

'  Throughout  this  chapter  the  woid  Ga-ng  has  been  rendered  Oange».

Digitized  by

Google

472  The  Battle  of  the  Ganges ^

in  weary  indecisiou,  until  the  opportunity  was  lost,  and  Shir  Khan
was  on  the  Ganges,  ready  for  war.  [Verses].  ...  In  the  midst
of  this  discussion  and  argument,  Edmran  Mirza  became  "irery  ill.
The  climate  of  Hindustan  had  brought  on  some  serious  disorders.^
When  he  had  thus  suffered  for  two  or  three  months,  he  lost  the  use
of  his  hands  and  feet.  [ Yei  ses].  ...  As  no  medicine  or  treatment
relieved  him,  he  became  more  desirous  of  departing  to  L4hur.  At
length  his  maladies  so  increased,  that  he  made  up  his  mind  to
return  thither.

This  departure  of  Eamran  Mirza  was  the  turning-point  in  the
rise  of  Shir  Khan,  and  in  the  downfall  of  the  Ghaghatai  power.  The
Emperor  strongly  urged  him  to  leave  some  of  his  officers  and
forces  as  auxiliaries,  but  Kamran  Mirza,  on  the  contrary,  did  all
he  could  to  induce  those  who  were  at  Agra  to  go  away  with  him,
and  strenuously  rejected  the  proposal  to  leave  his  own  army
behind.  Mir  Khwaja  Kilan,  who  v;as  his  prime  minister  (and  a
slight  allusion  to  whose  chai-acter  has  been  made  above),  exerted
himself  to  the  same  purpose.  Eumran  Mirz4  sent  him  on  in
advance,  and  then  followed  in  jierson.

While  this  was  passing.  Shir  Ehan  advanced  to  the  banks  of  the
Ganges  and  crossed  his  army  over.  Eutb  Ehdn,  his  son,  marched
towards  Atava  [Etawa]  and  E4lpi.  These  teriitories  were  the
fiefs  [t'Ar^a]  of  Husain  Sultan,  who  was  one  of  the  Uzbeg  Sultans,^
and  Yadgar  Nasir  Mirza,  son  of  Sultan  Nasir  Mirza,  the  brother  of
the  Emperor  Babar,  whcse  story  has  been  t-old  above.  Part  of
Kalpi  had  been  given  to  E4mrdn  Mirza  and  he  had  sent  to  that
district  Iskandar  Sultdn,  as  his  representative.  These  three
persons  advanced  against  Eutb  Eh4n,  who  was  slain  in  the  battle,
and  they  gained  a  complete  victory.  The  Emperor  now  marched
from  Agra  towards  the  Ganges  against  Shir  Ehdn.

Eamran  Mirz4,  having  placed  the  entire  management  of  his  own
affairs  in  my  hands,  strongly  urged  me  to  return  to  Lahur.  He
represented  as  follows :  "  You  left  Eashghar  on  account  of  the
unworthy  treatment  of  your  own  people,  whom  you  had  served
faithfully  all  your  life :  the  result  is  evident.  When  you  came  to
me,  I  treated  you,  in  consideration  of  our  relationship,  like  a
brother — nay,  even  better:  I  entrusted  the  conduct  of  all  my
affairs  to  you  and  gave  you  full  authority  to  appoint  and  displace,
and  generally  to  administer  [my  dominion].  If  in  these  matters  I
have  been  guilty  of  any  shoiicoming,  you  must  point  it  out  to  me,
that  I  may  make  reparation.  But  do  not,  on  the  other  hand,
at  such  a  crisis  as  this,  when  the  enemy  has  the  upper  hand  in  my
kingdom  and  disease  in  my  body,  withdraw  the  hand  of  brotherly

*  The  various  romplicntione  are  pp ecified,  but  omitted  in  tranBlation.

•  One  Persian  MS.  has  here:  "The  Uzbeg  and  Kirim  Sultana"  t.«,
«*  Crimean."

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

at  Katiauj,  473

oompasaion  from  aote  of  kindness ;  rather  save  me  from  these  two
imminent  dangers,  and  accompany  me  to  Lahnr."

Now  the  Emperor  and  myself  had  become  friends,  after  the
Moghiil  fashion,  and  he  had  given  me  the  name  of  &u%t  [friend].
In  council  he  never  addressed  me  by  any  other  name,  and  on  the
firmdns  it  was  wiitten  in  this  manner.  No  one  of  my  brothers  or
the  Sultans  of  the  time,  who  had  been  in  the  Emperor's  service,
had  ever  been  honoured  in  such  a  way  as  was  I,  Muhammad  Haidar
Eurkan,  who  being  the  approved  friend  of  such  a  prince  as  the
Emperor,  was  called  not  merely  '  brother '  but  was  chosen  as  dust.

Although  I  was  already  in  the  service  of  Eamran  Mirza  [the
Emperor]  acted  upon  my  advice  in  all  his  affairs.  He  said :
**  What  KAmran  Mirza  asks  of  you,  with  regard  to  escorting  him
[to  Lahur],  in  consequence  of  the  aggravated  symptoms  of  his
malady,  which  prevent  his  full  comprehension  of  things  as  they
are,  is  not  an  affair  of  youi-s.  His  going  does  not  depend  upon
your  accompanying  him,  nor  are  you  in  any  way  bound  to  go  to
Lahur.  If  he  gives  his  illness  as  a  reason,  you  are  not  a  physician,
nor  have  you  any  remedies.  If  he  urges  you  on  the  ground  of
kinship,  your  relationship  descends  from  the  [late]  Emperor,  and
therefore  your  connection  with  me  and  with  Kamran  Mirzd  is
exactly  equal.  Consider,  for  the  sake  of  justice,  the  truth  of  what
I  am  saying  to  you  !  On  the  issue  of  this  battle  between  myself
and  Shir  Ehdn,  depends  the  fate  of  all  India  and  all  the  house  of
Babar  Padishah.  If,  with  such  a  conflict  about  to  take  place,  you
betake  yourself  to  Lahur  on  account  of  Eamran  Mirz4's  sickness,
two  things  will  ensue.  Firstly,  having  escaped  from  the  yawning
abyss,  you  will  save  your  own  head,  and  by  means  of  Eamran
Mirzd's  feigned  illness,  will  regain  safety.  All  the  rest  will  die,
but  you  will  be  safe !  Secondly,  3'ou  being  the  cousin  of  Babar
Padishah,  your  relationship  [to  his  sons]  is  equal,  and  it  is  fitting
that  you  should  show  your  sympathy  with  the  whole  of  the
Emperor's  race.  In  such  a  flight  ^s  you  meditate,  you  will  bear
nobody's  sorrow.^  Escaping  in  safety  to  Lahur,  you  will  thence
proceed  to  whatever  place  you  consider  secure.  If  you  think  this
conformable  with  the  conduct  of  a  '  friend  '  and  a  *  brother,'  you
may  act  accordingly:  but  know,  for  a  certainty,  that  you  will
encounter  the  opposition  of  the  people.  Instead  of  their  saying  :
'In  spite  of  Eamr&n  Mirza's  illness,  he  did  not  escort  him  to
Lahur,  but  with  sound  judgment,  took  part  in  the  Gauges
campaign  with  the  army : '  they  will  say  that  you  leit  me  alone  to
undertake  a  combat,  on  the  result  of  M'hich  hung  the  fate  of  the
house  to  whom  your  loyalty  is  owing;  [They  will  add]  that  giving
as  an  excuse  the  illness  of  Eamran  Mirzd,  you  found  for  yourself

'  Or  •*  70U  will  he  showing  sympathy  with  none." — R.

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC

474  Tlie  Battle  of  the  Ganges^

a  place  of  secwrity.  Besides,  it  is  a  fact  that  if  we  lose  Ihe  day
here,  Lahur  too  will  quickly  fall."

These  argaments  quite  convinced  me,  and  being  unable  to
obtain  Kamran  Mirza's  permission,  I  remained  behind  without  it,*

Kamr&n  Mirzd  himself,  shamefully  leaving  only  Iskandar  Snlt&n
with  about  one  thousand  men  as  auxiliaries,  went  off  to  Lahur,
taking  with  him  all  the  men  from  Agra  whom  he  could  carry  with
him,  thus  giving  strength  to  the  enemy  and  preparing  defeat  for
his  friends.

The  Imperial  army  reached  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  in  the  best
way  that  it  could.  There  it  encamped  and  lay  for  about  a  month,
the  Emperor  being  on  one  side  of  the  river,  and  Shir  Ehan  on  the
other,  facing  each  other.  The  armies  may  have  amounted  to  more
than  200,000  men.  Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza,  a  descendant  of
Ulugh  Mirza  and  Shah  Mirza  (who  were  of  the  house  of  Timur)
and  grandson  (by  a  daughter)  of  Sultan  Husain  Mirza  (of  Khorasan),
had  come  to  India  to  wait  upon  the  Emperor  B4bar,  and  had  been
received  with  every  mark  of  kindness  and  royal  favour.  After
Babar's  death,  he  had  several  times  revolted  against  Humayun ;
but  being  unsuccessful,  he  had  sought  forgiveness,  and  had  been
pardoned.  Now  having  colluded  with  Shir  Khdn,  he  deserted.  A
new  way  was  thus  opened.  Everybody  began  to  desert,  and  the
most  surprising  part  of  it  was,  that  many  of  those  who  deserted
did  not  go  over  to  Shir  Ehan,  and  so  could  expect  no  favour  from
him.  An  excited  feeling  ran  through  the  army  and  the  cry  was,
^'Let  us  go  and  rest  in  our  homes."  A  number  of  E&mr4n's
auxiliary  forces  also  abandoned  him  and  fled  to  Lahur.

Among  the  equipments  which  wei'e  in  the  train  of  the  Emperor
were  700  carriages  {garduii)^  each  drawn  by  four  pairs  of  bullocks,
and  carrying  a  swivel  {zarh-zaii)^  which  discharged  a  ball  (hdola)
of  500  mithkdh  weight.  I,  myself,  saw  several  times  that  from  the
top  of  an  eminence  they  unfailingly  (bi4c7iatd)  struck  horsemen  who
slightly  and  unsuspectingly  exposed  themselves.  And  there  were
twenty-one  carriages,  each  drawn  by  eight  pairs  of  bullocks.
Stone  balls  were  of  no  use  in  these,  but  the  shots  were  of  molten
brass  weighing  5000  mitHJcdls^  and  the  cost  of  each  was  200  mitMcdls
of  silver.  They  would  strike  anything  that  was  visible  at  the
distance  of  a  parasang.

As  the  army  had  taken  to  desert,  it  was  judged  better  to  risk  a
l^atile,  than  to  see  it  go  to  ruin  without  fighting.  If  the  result
were  unfavourable,  we  could  not,  at  least,  be  accused  of  having

*  Firishta,  according  to  Brigg^'  traDslation,  disposes  of  this  subject  in  one
short  sentence  :~'*  Mirza  Haidar  Doghlat,  disgusted  with  his  [Kamran's]
conduct,  abandoned  his  standard  and  joined  Hoomayoon,  to  whom  he  was  afkei-
^Yards  of  great  service."  And  the  translator  adds  in  a  footnote  :~**This  person
ascended  the  tlirone  of  Kashmir,  and  is  the  author  of  tlie  most  authentic  history
of  that  interesting  principality." Would  that  it  were  so ! (Briggs,  il.,  p.  89.)

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

at  Kanauj,  475

abandoned  an  empire  like  Hindustan,  without  striking  a  blow.
Another  conbideration  was,  that  if  we  passed  the  river,  desertion
would  no  longer  be  possible. We  therefore  crossed  over.

Both  armies  entrenched  themselves.  Everyday  skirmishes
occurred  between  the  adventurous,  swaggering  spirits  of  both  sides*
These  proceedings  were  put  an  end  to  by  the  monsoon  rains,  which
came  on  and  flooded  the  ground,  rendering  it  unfit  for  a  camp.  To
move  was  indispensable.  Opinions  were  expressed  that  another
such  a  deluge  would  sink  the  whole  aimy  in  the  abyss  of  despair,
and  it  was  proposed  to  move  to  some  rising  ground  which  the
inundation  could  not  reach,  and  which  lay  in  front  of  the  enemy.
I  went  to  reconnoitre,  and  found  a  place  suitable  for  the  purpose.

I  said  that  we  would,  on  the  morrow,  try  the  enemy  on  the  touch-
stone of  experience ;  for  he  ought  not  to  attack  while  we  were  on
the  march,  but  if  he  should  do  so,  it  would  be  vrrong  to  attempt  a
pitched  battle  while  moving.  The  morrow  would  be  the  10  th  of
Moharram,  and  we  must  keep  our  forces  well  under  control,  until
we  should  see  if  tbe  enemy  came  out  of  his  trenches  and  advanced
against  us.  llien,  at  last,  a  regular  pitched  battle  would  be
fought  between  us.  The  proper  plan  would  be  for  us  to  place  the
mortal's  and  swivels  in  front:  and  the  gunners,  nearly  5000  in
number,  must  be  stationed  with  the  guns.  If  he  should  come  out
to  attack  us,  there  would  be  no  time  or  place  more  suitable  than
the  present,  for  battle.  If  he  should  not  come  out  of  his  entrench-
ments, we  must  remain  drawn  up  till  about  midday,  and  then
return  to  our  position.  Next  day  we  must  act  in  just  the  same
way.  Then  the  baggage  must  move  to  the  new  position,  and  we
must  follow  and  occupy  the  place.  This  scheme  of  mine  met  with
general  approbation.

On  the  10th  Moharram,  947,  we  mounted  to  carry  the  plan
into  effect,  and  made  our  dispositions.  As  had  been  determined,
the  carriages  and  mortars  and  small  guns  were  placed  in  the
centre.  The  command  of  the  guns  was  given  to  Mtihammad  Khan
Rumi,  to  the  sons  of  Ust4d  Ali  Kuli,  to  Ustid  Ahmad  Bumi  and
Husain  Khalifa.  They  placed  the  carriages  and  mortars  in  their
proper  positions,  and  stretched  chains  between  them.  In  other
divisions  there  were  Amirs  of  no  repute — men  who  were  Amirs
[nobles]  only  in  name.  They  had  got  possession  of  the  country,
but  they  hud  not  a  tincture  of  prudence  or  knowledge,  or  energy  or
emulation,  or  dignity  of  mind  or  generosity — qualities  from  which
nobility  draws  its  name.

The  Emperor  had  posted  the  author  of  this  work  upon  his  left,
so  that  his  right  flank  should  be  on  the  Emperor's  left.  In  the
same  position  he  had  placed  a  force  of  chosen  troops.  On  my
left  all  my  retainers  were  stationed.  I  had  400  chose q  men,
inured  to  warfare  and  familiar  with  battle,  fifty  of  whom  were

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

476  The  Battle  of  the  Ganges,

mounted  on  horses  accoutred  with  armour.  Between  me  and  the
river  (jui-hdr)  there  was  a  force  of  twenty-seven  Amirs,  all  of
whom  carried  the  high  [banner].  In  this  position  also,  were  the
other  components  of  tho  left  wing,  and  the}^  must  be  judged  of  by
the  others.  On  the  day  of  battle,  when  Shir  Khau,  having  formed
his  divisions,  marched  out,  of  all  these  twenty-seven  banners  not
one  was  to  be  seen,  for  the  great  nobles  had  hidden  them,  in  the
apprehension  that  the  enemy  might  advance  upon  them.  The
soldiership  and  bravery  of  the  Amirs  may  be  conceived  from  this
exhibition  of  courage.

Shir  Eban  came  out  in  five  divisions  of  1000  men  each,  and  in
advance  of  him  were  3000  men.  I  estimated  the  whole  as  being
less  than  15,000,  but  I  calculated  the  Chaghatai  force  at  about
40,000,  all  mounted  on  tipchdk  horses,  and  clad  in  iron  armour.
They  surged  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,  but  the  courage  of  the
Amirs  and  officers  of  the  army  was  such  as  I  have  described.
When  Shir  Khan's  army  came  out  of  its  intrenchments,  two
divisions  {jauk)  which  seemed  to  be  equal  to  four  divisions,  drew
up  in  that  place,  and  three  divisions  advanced  against  their
opponents.  On  our  side  I  was  leading  the  centre,  to  take  up  the
position  which  I  had  selected.;  but  when  we  reached  the  ground,
we  were  unable  to  occupy  it,  for  every  Amir  and  Vazir  in  the
Chaghatai  army,  whether  he  be  rich  or  poor,  has  his  camp-
followers  [ighalaiii].  An  Amir  of  note,  with  his  100  retainers  and
followers,  has  500  servants  and  ghulams,  who  on  the  day  of  battle
render  no  assistance  to  theii*  masters  and  have  no  control  over
themselves.  So  in  whatever  place  there  was  a  conflict,  the
ghulams  were  entirely  ungovernable.  When  they  lost  their  masters,
they  were  seized  with  panic  and  blindly  rushed  about  in  terror.
In  short,  it  was  impossible  to  hold  our  ground.  They  so  pressed
us  in  the  rear,  that  they  drove  the  centre  upon  the  chains  stretched
between  the  chariots,  and  they  and  the  soldiers  dashed  each  other
upon  them.  Those  who  were  behind,  so  pressed  upon  those  who
were  in  front,  that  they  broke  through  the  chains.  The  men  who
were  posted  by  the  chains  were  driven  beyond  them,  and  the  few
who  remained  behind  were  broken,  so  that  all  formation  was
destroyed.^

*  The  Indian  historian,  Jauher,  refers  to  this  episode  of  breaking  through  the
ohaips  of  the  gun-carriages.  He  implies  that  the  chains  were  loosened  b^  order  of
Humayun,  and  attributes  the  order  to  bad  advice  given  by  Mirza  Haidar.  He
writes :  '*  Mirza  Haidar  represented  that,  in  order  to  let  the  fugitives  pass,  it  was
requisite  to  loose  the  chains  of  the  carriages  which  formed  a  barricade  in  front  of
the  centre;  His  Mnjestv  unfortunately  complied  with  this  advice,  and  the
chains,  being  unloosed,  the  runaways  passed  tiirough  the  line  of  cariiages  in
files."  There  appears,  liowever,  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  Mirza  Haidar*s  version
of  the  affair.  He  took  an  active  part  in  tho  battle,  and  was  an  eye-witness  of
what  occurred.  (For  Jauiier,  sec  EUioty  v.,  p.  143 ;  or  C.  Stewart's  Mem.  of
Humayun,  p.  21.)

Digitized  by

Google

Flight  of  the  Cliaghatdi  to  Ldhur.  477

Sncli  was  the  state  of  the  centre.  On  the  right  Shir  Khan
advanced  in  battle  array ;  but  before  an  arrow  was  discharged,  the
camp  followers  fled  like  chaff  before  the  wind,  and  breaking  the
line,  they  all  pressed  towards  the  centre.  The  ghulams  whom  the
commanders  had  sent  to  the  front,  rushed  to  the  lines  of  chariots,
and  the  whole  array  was  broken  :  the  Mir  was  separated  from  his
men,  and  the  men  from  the  Mir.  While  the  centre  was  thus
thrown  into  disorder,  all  the  fugitives  from  the  right  bore  down
upon  it.  So  before  the  enemy  had  discharged  an  arrow,  the  whole
army  was  scattered  and  defeated.  I  had  estimated  the  Chaghatai
army  as  numbering  40,000  men,  excluding  the  camp-followers
[ghulam]  and  workmen  [shdgird  pisha].  They  fled  before  10,000
men,  and  Shir  Eh&n  gained  a  victory,  while  the  Chaghatai  were
defeated  on  this  battle-field,  where  not  a  man,  either  frieud  or  foe,
was  wounded.  Not  a  gun  was  fired  and  the  chariots  [gardun]
were  useless.

When  the  Chaghatai  took  to  flight,  the  distance  between  their
position  and  the  Ganges  might  be  nearly  a  farsdkh.  All  the
Amirs  and  braves  [hdhadurdn]  fled  for  safety  to  the  river,  without
a  man  of  them  having  received  a  wound.  The  enemy  pursued
them,  and  the  Chaghatai,  having  no  time  to  throw  off  their  armour
and  c6ats,  plunged  into  the  water.  The  breadth  of  the  river  might
be  about  five  bowshots.  Many  illustrious  Amirs  were  drowned,
and  each  one  remained  or  went  on,  at  his  will.  When  we  came
out  of  the  river,  His  Majesty,  who  at  midday  had  a  retinue  of
17,000  in  attendance  upon  his  coart,  was  mounted  upon  a  horse
which  had  been  given  to  him  by  Tardi  Beg,  and  had  nothing  on
his  head  or  feet.  ^'  Permanence  is  from  God  and  dominion  is  from
God."  Out  of  1000  retainers  eight  persons  came  out  of  the  river ;
the  rest  had  perished  in  the  water.  The  total  loss  may  be
estimated  from  this  fact.  When  we  reached  Agra,  we  made  no
tarry,  but,  broken  and  dispirited,  in  a  state  heart-rending  to  relate,
we  went  on  to  Lahur.

CHAPTER  CXIIL

FLIGHT OF THE  CHAGHATAI FROM HINDUSTAN TO LAHUR.

On  the  Ist  of  Babi  I.  947,  all  the  Sultans,  Amirs  and  people
assembled  together.  So  great  was  the  crowd  of  people  that  there
was  but  little  space  for  moving  about,  while  it  was  difficult  to
find  a  lodging.  High  and  low,  each  had  his  own  ends  to  serve,
and  each  made  suggestions; every  man  of  noble  birth  had  his

Digitized  by

Google

478  Flight  of  the  Chaghatdi  to  Ldhur,

scheme,  and  all  those  of  low  parentage  their  ideas.  Amonj^  them
were  Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza  and  TJlugh  Mirz4,  who  had  deserted
on  the  banks  of  the  Gang,  on  the  eve  of  the  battle.  Not  finding
any  place  in  which  they  could  remain,  they  came  in  a  most  pitiable
condition  to  L4hur.  They  kept  apart  [from  the  others]  and  were
still  boasting  hostib'ty.  [These  two]  made  themselves  the  heads,
or  rather  the  donkeys'-heads,  of  a  rabble  of  ruffians  and  senseless
Hindus.  Hinddl  Mirza  and  Yddg&r  N&sir  Mirz&  likewise  entered
into  baseless  and  idle  plans,  [saying] :  We  will  go  to  Bakar  and
take  it  from  Shah  Husain  Arghun,  and  with  his  forces  will  subdue
Gujrdt.  Kdmrdn  Mirza  was  engrossed  with  devising  some  plan
for  dispersing  all  this  assemblage,  while  he  should  repair,  alone,  to
R4bul.

Humayun  Padish&h  for  a  time  thought  of  reunion,  but  seeing
difficulties  in  the  way,  he  abandoned  all  hope  of  this,  and  was
at  a  loss  what  to  do  next.  [Reunion],  however,  was  his  object.
At  this  time  repeated  meetings  were  held,  out  of  mere  hypocrisy.
Union  was  discussed,  but  they  had  only  disunion  at  heiurt ;  they
called  in  the  magnates  and  leading  men,  to  be  witnesses  that  no
one  opposed  or  deviated  from  the  resolutions  agreed  to.  Thus
were  summoned  Ehw&ja  Khdnd  Mahmud,^  his  younger  brother
Khwaja  Abdul  Hakk  and  Mir  Abul-bak&,  who  were  all  noted  for
their  learning  and  esteemed  for  their  piety,  together  with  many
other  great  men,  whose  names  it  would  take  too  long  to  mention
individually.  The  Sultans,  Amirs  and  many  others  were  present.
At  first  they  assented  to  reunion  and  drew  up  a  written  engage-
ment, upon  the  margin  of  which  the  magnates  signed  their  names
as  witnesses. They  then  embarked  upon  the  discussion.

First  of  all  the  Emperor,  pointing  to  me,  said  :  **  You  must  tell
us  what  you  consider  the  most  suitable  line  of  action  to  pursue  at
this  moment."  I  represented:  *'When  Sultdn  Husain  Mirz4  of
Ehor&s&n  departed  this  life,  his  seventeen  sons,  in  consequence
of  their  disunion,  abandoned  Ehorasdn  to  Sh4hi  B^  Eh&n,  so
that  to  the  present  day  they  are  objects  of  reproach  to  the  people,
and  rejected  of  all  mankind.  To  add  to  this  disgrace  they  have
all  been  extinguished;  insomuch  that  within  the  space  of  one
year,  excepting  Badi-uz-Zam&n  who  went  to  Bum,  not  one  remains
alive.  The  late  Emperor,  B&bar,  conquered  this  far-stretching  land
of  Hindust&n  with  much  exertion  and  toil,  and  on  leaving  this
world,  transmitted  [the  empire]  to  you.  Would  you  suffer  a
country  like  Hindustdn  to  be  seized  by  such  a  man  as  Shir  Eb4n?
Consider  what  a  difference  there  is  between  Hindustdn  with  all
its  revenues,  and  Ehords&n;  and  how  inferior  is  Shir  Eh&n  to
Shdhi  Beg  Eh4n  I Also  remember  the  degree  of  censure  you  will

>  Tbiee  lines  of  tittee  of  the  Ehif&ja  are  omitted.— B.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

Flight  of  tlie  Chaghatdi  to  Ldhur.  479

incur  from  mankind  I  Now  is  the  moment  for  you  to  consider
your  condition,  and  having  removed  your  head  from  the  collar  of
envy,  to  place  it  in  the  pocket  of  meditation,  that  you  may  acquire
the  esteem  of  the  people.  Formerly,  when  matters  could  have
been  arranged  with  ease,  you  put  obstacles  in  the  way,  by  your
want  of  constancy  and  of  purpose.  At  present  it  is  impossible  to
achieve  anything,  without  encountering  untold  difficulties. '

"  I  will  now  lay  before  you  what  seems  to  mo  your  wisest  coarse.
It  involves  great  hardships,  but  it  is  you  who  have  made  hard
what  was  once  easy.  And  moreover,  if  you  do  not  bear  patiently
your  present  troubles,  they  will  become  yet  more  onerous.  My
advice  is  as  follows:  Shir  Kh&n  will  still  take  four  months  to
reach  Lahur.  During  these  four  months,  the  mountain  slopes  of
Hindustan  should  be  given  to  the  Sultdns,  and  each  one,  in  pro-
portion to  his  share,  should  be  made  to  pledge  his  allegiance.

"  Let  every  man  attend  to  the  particular  business  to  which  he  has
been  appointed.  Let  me,  for  instance,  be  appointed  to  the  task  of
subduing  Kashmir,  and  I  engage  that  within  two  months  I  will
accomplish  it.  As  soon  as  you  hear  of  my  arrival  in  E^ashmir,  let
every  one  send  his  family  and  baggage  thither,  while  he  betakes
himself  to  the  mountains,  and  forms  a  strong  position  on  the
slopes — from  the  hiUs  of  Sarind  to  those  [occupied  by]  Sarang.^

*  Ab  this  passage  has  been  differently  translated  in  two  published  works—
those  of  Mr.  Erskine  and  Major  Price — a  few  words  of  explanation  are  necessary,
to  account  for  the  alteration  I  have  made  in  the  text.  The  Tdrikh-i-Rashidi
reads  (and  Mr.  Boss  translated  the  sentence  in  this  way)  just  as  Erskine  has  it,
t.«.,  **  the  skirts  of  the  hill- country  between  Sirhind  and  S^ng  " ;  but  no  indica-
tion is  afforded  of  the  meaning  of  Sdrang.  It  appears  to  be  intended  for  the
name  of  a  place  or  district,  but  no  such  place-name  occurs  in  the  part  of  India
in  question.  Price's  translation  is  not  from  the  Tdrikh-i-Bashtdt^  out  from  tlic
Akbar-Ndma,  though  the  author  of  that  work  eyidently  copied  from  Mirza
Haidar.  The  passage  stands  thus,  as  Price  gives  it :  **  they  should  .  .  .  occupy
the  acclivities  of  the  hills  all  the  way  from  Sehrind  to  Saurimg,  that  is,  aU  across
the  sources  of  the  Kuggar,  Sareswaty,  and  Jumna  rivers,  from  Sehrind  to
Sauhaurungponr."  The  last  sentence  is,  apparently,  an  insertion  by  the  author
of  the  Akbar-Ndma,  added  by  way  of  explanation.

In  the  next  chapter  but  one  of  the  Tdrikh-i-Ra$hidi,  it  will  be  seen  that  the
name  Sdrang  appears  again,  and  this  time  is  applied  to  a  person  and  not  to  a
place.  But  Strang  is  then  described  as :  **  One  of  the  Sultans  of  the  slopes  of
the  hills  of  Hind."  From  this  indication,  it  is,  I  think,  clear  that  the  personage
alluded  to,  can  be  no  other  than  Sultan  Sarang  of  the  tribe  of  Gakars,  and  that
the  region  which  Mirza  Haidar  advised  should  be  occupied  by  the  Gbaghatai
princes  and  army,  was  that  of  the  lower  or  outer  hills,  extending  from  Sirhind  to
the  Salt  Range — ^for  it  was  in  and  about  the  Salt  Bange,  that  the  Qftkar  country
was  situated.  Therefore,  in  making  the  passage  read  as  it  now  does  in  the  text,
the  only  intelligible  meaning  has  been  given  to  it.

Sultan  S&rang,  as  chief  0!  the  Ghtkars  and  the  ally  of  the  Chaghaiais,  in  the
early  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  is  a  character  fairly  well  known  in  Indian
history,  and  the  tract  of  country  which  was  occupied  by  the  Gakar  tribe,  was
then  very  much  the  same  as  now.  Niz&m-ud-Din  Ahmad,  in  the  Tabdkdt4-
Akbari  says :  ^  The  country  of  the  Gakars  lies  upon  the  banks  of  the  river  Sind,
well-known  as  the  Nilfib.  This  territory,  from  the  Siwalik  hills  to  the  borders
of  Kashmir,  has  been,  from  all  time,  the  possession  of  tiie  Gakars."  Bv
the  Siwalik  hills  he  means,  apparently, the  Salt Range. Though Sddik

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

480  Flight  of  the  Chaghatdi  to  Ldhur.

The  mortars  [_di(j']  and  swivels  \zarh-zan]  of  Shir  Khan  are  the
mainstay  of  his  fighting  power.  It  is  impossible  to  bring  gun-
carriages  into  the  hills,  and  he  will  not  hazard  a  battle  without
them.  His  army,  from  stress  of  numbers,  will  perish  for  want  of
grain,  and  must  perforce  retreat"

iBpabdni,  it  may  be  mentioned,  speaks  oF  Jammu  as  '*  a  territory  in  the  Kuhistan
of  Suvdlik  "  (p.  86)— thus  the  skirts  of  the  Pir  Panjal  range.  Abul  Faz1«  in  the
4J^r'Ndmay  more  briefly  locates  it  **  between  the  Sind  and  the  Behat,**  that  is,
between  the  Indus  and  the  Jhilam.  What  little  is  to  be  found  about  the  Gakars  in
the  two  authors  above-named,  in  the  Tarikh-i'Daudi,  and  the  Tarikh-i-Jdhdn  Khdn
Lodiy  differs  very  considerably,  while  dates  bre  very  sparingly  furnished  in  any
of  the  extracts  from  these  works,  as  published  by  Elliot  It  appears,  however,  that
the  Gakar  country  belonged  to  Kaslimir  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifteenth  centary,
but  during  the  reign  of  the  Kashmir  Sultan,  Zain-ul-Abidin  (1423-69  according
to  Firishta,  and  1422-72  according  to  others),  one  Malik  Kad,  Amir  of  Ghazni,
invaded  the  territory  and  wrested  it  from  the  Kashmiris.  Malik  Kad  was
succeeded  by  his  sun,  Malik  Kilan,  as  chief  of  the  tribe,  and  the  latter  by  his
son,  Malik  Pir.  After  the  reign  of  Malik  Pir,  and  shortly  before  the  year  1519,
the  Gakars  seem  to  have  been  divided  into  two  factions.  One,  Hati  Khan,
possessed  the  higher  and  more  inaccessible  country,  while  a  certain  Tatar  Khan
held  the  lower  tracts.  When  Baber  was  about  to  return  from  Bhlra  to  Kabul  in
1519,  Hati  Grakar  had  made  war  on  Titdr,  had  defeated  and  slain  him,  and  seized
his  territory.  Baber  planned  an  expedition  against  Perhiilah  (or  Pharwala),
which  had  been  the  capital  of  Tatar,  and  took  it,  together  with  the  whole
country.  Shortly  afterwards  Hati  Khan,  who  had  escaped  from  Perh^lah,
tendered  his  submission,  and  from  that  time  forward  his  family  became  the
staunch  allies  of  the  Chaghatais.

At  his  death,  which  appears  to  have  taken  place  about  1525,  he  loft  two
sons  named  Strang  and  Adam  respectively ;  the  former  succeeded  to  the  chief  -
ship,  and  at  once  gave  in  his  allegiance  to  Baber.  After  the  disasters  ezperienoed
by  Humayun  in  1540,  and  his  flight  across  the  Indus,  Sarang  maintained  himself
bravely  against  the  Afghans,  under  Shir  Shah,  but  was  at  last,  after  several
years  of  hostilities,  taken  i)ri8oner  and  flayed  alive.  The  date  of  his  death  I  find
nowhere  stated  with  certainty,  and  moreover,  the  native  authors  disagree  as  to
the  name  of  the  Afehan  king  of  Hindustan  who  committed  this  act  of  tMtrbarity.
Niamat  Ullah  and  Nizdm-ud-Din  Ahmad  ascribe  it  to  Shir  Shah,  and  in  this
case  it  must  have  occurred  before  the  year  1545,  when  the  latter*s  death  took
place.  Shir  Shah  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Salim,  in  May  of  that  year,  and  two
years  later  marched  to  attack  the  Gakard.  It  is  to  this  prince  that  AbduUa,
the  author  of  the  Tarikh-i-Daudh  attributes  the  death  of  Snrang,  and,  if  his  story
is  the  correct  one,  the  date  would  be  1547  or  1548.  At  any  rate  the  authorities
appear  to  be  so  far  agreed,  as  to  make  Sultan  Adam,  Strang's  brother,  the  reigning
chief  of  the  Gakars,  when  Salim  prevailed  over  them  in  1548.  In  the  dosing
chapters  of  his  book,  which  relate  to  Kashmir,  Mirza  Haidar  gives  few  par-
ticulars, but  by  a  comparison  of  the  events  of  that  period,  as  recounted  by
Firishta,  Abul  Fazl  and  others,  it  would  appear  that  the  end  of  Sdrang*s  career
must  have  occurred  about  the  date  estimated  above.

However  this  may  be,  it  is  evident  that  Sdrang  was  not  a  place-name,  but  that
of  a  Gakar  chief,  who  was  an  allv  of  Humayun  and  the  house  of  Ghnghatai,  and
who  was  alive  in  1540 ;  while  nothing  is  more  consistent  with  the  narrative  than
that  Mirza  Haidar  should  have  advised  his  master,  after  the  defeat  at  Kanauj,  to
take  up  a  position  that  included  Sarang  s  territory  as  a  support.  A  subsequent
allusion  to  Adam,  Sultan  of  the  Gakus,  occurs  in  Firishta,  when  he  is  repre-
sented as  having  met  Mirza  Haidar  at** the  fortress  of  Dibal"  [Deobal?]  in
1549,  for  the  purpose  of  mediating  between  the  refugee  Maliks  of  Kashmir.
(See  Erskine,  HUt.,  i.,  pp.  414-15;  ii.,  pp.  425-27  and  465-6.  Also  Baber^
pp.  259-62 ;  Abul  Fazl  in  Price's  Muham.  Hi$t.,  iii.,  pp.  787-8 ;  Tarikh-i-Ihudi
in  Elliot,  iv.,  p.  493;  Tarikh-i-Jdhdn  Khdn  Lodi,  ib.,  p.  114;  Tnhdkdt-i-AkbaH^
*.,  v.,  pp.  278-80;  Firishta  (Briggs),  iv.,  p.  501,  and  16,  (Rodgers),  J.  A.  ^^  B.,
1855,  pt.  i.,  p.  118.)

Digitized  by

Google

Origin  of  the  Expedition  to  Kashmir.  481

Eamran  Mirza,  frowning  at  these  words,  said :  *'  Although
what  you  recommend  is  plausible  enough,  it  involyes  difficulties
too  great."  I  replied :  "  When  I  began,  I  represented,  in  excuse
for  myself,  that  the  business  was  a  difficult  one.  All  easy  methods
are  now  out  of  question.  Nothing  but  difficulties  remaio.  If  any
one  can  suggest  an  easier  solution,  let  him  speak."  E4mran  Mirza
said  :  "  We  have  now  with  us  nearly  200,000  householders  {jMi^wi'
vdr  mardum].  Should  the  advice  just  offered  be  acted  upon,  and
the  attempt  fail,  it  is  probable  that  all  this  multitude  will  be
destroyed.  It  is,  therefore,  better  that  the  Emperor  and  the
Mirz4s  should  go  unencumbered,  either  to  the  hills  or  to  Kashmir,
leaving  their  families  to  be  conducted  to  E4bul  by  me.  Having
safely  disposed  of  the  families,  I  will  return  to  join  the  army."

All  were  bewildered  by  this  suggestion  and  asked  themselves,
"  What  has  now  become  of  our  oath  of  union  ?  What  are  these
sentiments?  Who  would  think  of  sending  his  family  to  Kabul
and  himself  remaining  without  baggage?  Between  Lahur  and
Kabul  there  are  rivers,  highway  robbers,  and  mountains.  The
Mirza's  scheme  is  quite  impracticable."  Although  much  discussion
followed,  K&mr&n  Mirz&  did  not  carry  a  single  point.  Thus
[ostensible]  desires  for  union  were  shown  to  be  hypocrisy,  and  the
meeting  broke  up.  But  time  passed,  and  meanwhile  Shir  Khan
had  reached  the  banks  of  the  river  of  Sult&npur.^  Every  man
ohose  a  place  of  retreat  for  himself.  The  Emperor  consulted  with
me  in  this  exigency,  and  I  again  respectfully  represented  that  I
still  held  by  the  Kashmir  plan.  ''  At  any  rate,"  I  continued,  **  if
you  allow  me  to  go  in  advance,  the  rest  can  follow  after,  and  I
guarantee  that  I  will  conquer  Kashmir."  The  Emperor  then  gave
me  leave  to  depart,  furnishing  me  with  what  help  he  was  able ;
so  that  with  four  hundred  freed  men  and  slaves,  I  set  out  for
Kashmir.

CHArTER  OXIV.

ORIGIN  OF  THE  AUTHOR's  EXPEDITION  TO  KASHMIR.

It  has  been  observed  above,  that  the  Sultdns  of  Kashmir  had  Mien
under  the  power  of  their  worthless  Amirs,  every  one  of  whom  acted
in  whatever  way  he  saw  fit.  At  the  time  when  K4mr4n  Mirzd
went  to  Kandah&r  to  fight  the  son  of  Shah  Ismail,  as  was
mentioned,  the  ohiefs  [mdliJui]  of  Kashmir  were  engaged  in  mutual

The  Bi^.

2  I

Digitized  by

Google

482  Origin  of  the  Expedition  to  Kashmir,

hoBtilities.  Eachi  Chak,  Abdal  Makri  and  Zaogi  Ghak  had  been
turned  out  of  Kashmir  and,  having  taken  up  their  abode  at  the  foot
of  the  mountains  of  Hind,  they  appealed  to  me  for  help.^  H4ji,
who  was  mentioned  in  the  relation  of  events  in  Tibet,  acted  as
intermediary.  Frequently,  and  with  insistence,  had  I  tried  to
convince  Eamran  Mirza  on  the  subject  of  Kashmir.  At  the  time
of  [K4mr4n  Mirza's]  march  on  Dehli,  an  army  was  mustered  in
Agra,  and  a  certain  Bab4  Ohuchak  was  placed  at  the  head  of  it.
Haji  came  from  Agra  to  Lahur  with  Baba  Chuchak,  to  join  in  the
expedition  against  Kashmir.  But  Bab4  Chuchak,  being  weak-
minded  and  incapable,  could  not  manage  this  business,  and  delayed
in  8etting  out  till  the  news  of  the  defeat  on  the  Gkng  arrived.
The  soldiers  stood  fast,  and  Baba  Chuchak  was  released  from  [the
duty  of]  conducting  the  Kashmir  expedition.

At  the  time  when  the  general  assemblage  took  place  in  Lahur,
Haji  carried  many  messages  to  and  fro,  between  myself  on  the  one
hand,  and  Abdal  Makri  on  the  other,  in  furtherance  of  my  plan.
All  terminated  in  a  most  desirable  way,  and  I  was  thus  able  to
impress  it  strongly  on  the  Emperor.  I  showed  him  the  letter
which  had  been  sent  me,  and  he  became  convinced  that  Kashmir
would  be  conquered  as  soon  as  I  should  appear  there.

*  It  may  be  noted  here,  that  there  had  existed  in  Kashmir,  since  the  days  of
the  first  Musulman  Sultan,  8hah  Mir,  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth
century,  two  great  families,  or  houses,  Imown  as  the  Chak  and  the  JtfoM.  Their
rivalry  seems  to  have  been  the  cause  of  most  of  the  disorder  and  confusion,  &om
which  the  State  suffered  for  the  greater  part  of  the  sixteenth  century.  They
contended  with  one  another  perpetually,  for  the  office  of  chief  minister  under  the
dynastic  princes,  whose  ^wer  was  merely  nominal,  and  who  were,  apparently,
incapable  either  of  administering  their  dominions,  or  suppressing  the  ambitions  of
these  two  influential  houses.  The  names  of  the  Chak  and  Makri  are  veiy
variously  spelled  by  Mirza  Haidor,  Firishta,  Abul  Fazl,  and  other  writers,  but
they  may  generally  bo  identified  one  with  another.  One,  Malik  Achi,  Kachi,  or
Ajhi,  of  the  Chak  family,  appears  to  have  been  the  minister  in  power,  under  a
prince  called  Nizuk  Shah  (or  sometimes  Nidir  Shah)  when  Mirza  Haidar
invaded  the  country.

A  detailed  account  of  the  affairs  of  Kashmir  during  Mirza  Haidar's  regency,
will  be  found  in  Appendix  A.  It  consists  of  an  extract  firom  Mr.  G.  J.  Rodgers'
able  paper  on  '*  The  Coins  of  the  Sultans  of  Kashmir,"  which  is  based  chiefly  on
translations  made  by  him  from  collated  copies  of  Firishta.  (See  /.  A,  iS.  B.,  liv.,
pt.  i.,  1885,  pp.  92,  «eg.)

Digitized  by

Google

Conquest  of  Kashmir.  483

CHAPTER  CXV.

THE A.UTHOR  OONQUERS KASHMIR. ADVENTURii^S  OF  THE  CHAGHATIi
AFTER  THEIR DEPARTURE  FROM HINDUSTIn.

I  HAD  arranged  with  the  Emperor  that  I  should,  in  the  first  place,
proceed  with  a  small  number  of  men  to  Nau  Shahr,^  and  that  as
soon  as  the  Maliks  of  Kashmir  should  have  joined  me,  Iskandar
Tupohi  should  overtake  me  there.  When  I  should  have  reached
the  pass,  Mir  £Jiw4ja  Kilan,  in  praise  of  whom  I  have  spoken
above,  was  to  enter  Nau  Shahr.  On  my  descending  into  Kashmir
Mir  KJiwaja  Kildn  was  to  advance  to  the  foot  of  the  pass  of
Kashmir,  while  the  Emperor  would  pitch  his  camp  at  Nau  Shahr.
Matters  having  been  thus  arranged,  K4mr4n  Mirz4  and  the  rest
were  allowed  to  go  wherever  they  pleased.

All  being  settled,  I  set  out,  and  in  Nau  Shahr  was  joined  by  all
the  Maliks  of  Kashmir.  Iskandar  Tupchi  was  one  day's  journey
from  Nau  Shahr.  Mir  Khw4ja  Kil4n  was  in  Sialkut.  Ob  the
same  day  that  I  despatched  a  messenger  to  Iskandar  Tupchi,  news
reached  me  that  all  our  people  had  evacuated  L4hur.  I  started  in
all  haste:  when  I  arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  pass  [leading  to]
Kashmir,  K&chi  Chak  ascended  by  one  road,  and  we  by  another,
and  without  further  contention  or  discussion  we  [all]  arrived  at
[Kashmir].

Now  when  Iskandar  Tupchi  and  Mir  Khw4ja  Kilan  heard  of  the
evacuation  of  L&hur,  the  former  sought  a  refuge  with  S4rang,  who
was  one  of  the  Sultdns  of  the  slopes  of  the  hills  \lcuk  paya]  of
Hind,  while  the  latter,  leaving  Si&lkut,  went  and  joined  the
fugitives  [from  L4hur].  In  spite  of  the  Emperor's  endeavours  to
reach  Kashmir,  he  could  induce  no  one  to  accompany  him.  Some
foolish  imbeciles,  namely,  Hindal  Mirz4,  Yadgar  Nasir  Mirz4  and
others  beside,  carried  him  off  to  Tatta  and  Bakar,  to  attack  [hasar]
Mirz4  Sh4h  Hiisain  the  son  of  Sh&h  Beg  Arghun  (son  of  Zulnun
Arghun).  This  Mirza  Shdh  Husain  is  the  same  personage  who
was  spoken  of  above.  When  B4bar  P4dishah  wrested  Kandahdr
from  Sh4h  Beg,  the  latter  retired  to  TJcha  and  Tatta  and  subdued
the  whole  of  the  surrounding  country.  He  was  succeeded  on  his
death  by  his  son  Mirzd  Sh4h  Husain,  who  busied  himself  for  some
time  in  strengthening  his  forts  and  settling  his  country ;  for  he
was,  in  truth,  a  methodical  and  prudent  man.^ Against  him  it

'  A  Tillage  in  the  lower  hills  of  BajaorL

'  Sliah  Beg  Beems  to  be  uflually  known  in  history  as  Bhah  Shi]y&  Beg,  while
his  son  is  as  often  called  Shah  Hasan,  as  Shah  Husain.  The  former's  conquest
of  Tatta  (or  Sind),  here  alluded  to,  took  place  in  1521.  He  died  in  1524,  when
his  dominions  in  Sind  passed  to  his  son  Husain  or  Hasan,  who,  after  two  years

2  I  2

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

4^4  Conquest  of  Kashmir,

was  that  this  blundering  band  inarched.  But  being  able  to  achieve
nothing,  Hindal  Mirzd  went  to  Eandahdr,  whose  governor  came
out  to  receive  him.  He  began  to  boast  of  empire,  [whereupon]
E4mran  Mirza  marched  against  him,  from  Kabul.  After  some
unfortunate  occurrences,  and  being  reduced  to  extremities,  he
begged  Kamran  Mirz4  to  spare  his  life,  promising  that  he  would
enter  his  service.  Not  long  after  this,  Yadg4r  N4sir  Mirz4  and
Kdsim  Husain  Sultan  also  fled  from  the  Emperor  and  joined
Eamran  Mirza.  The  Emperor,  after  endless  hardships  and
incalculable  misfortunes,  passed  on  to  Ir4k,  but  up  to  the  present
time  it  is  not  known  wh^t  has  become  of  him.  Ab  for  Edmrdn
Mirzd,  he  is  at  E&bul  and  in  despair  from  the  bufifetings  of
fortune.

My  trust  is  in  the  most  glorious  and  merciful  God,  that  He  will
again  raise  to  the  throne  of  sovereignty  Hum4yun  Padishah,  than
whom  there  have  been  few  greater  Sultdns.  He  has  endured  such
suflFering  and  misery  as  have  fallen  to  the  lot  of  few  Emperors.
May  he  make  the  people  prosperous  and  contented  under  his
benevolent  shadow.  It  is  thus  written  in  the  **  Sunna " :  that
when  the  affairs  of  a  great  ruler  go  to  ruin,  he  is  himself  the  canoe.
If,  as  is  rarely  the  case,  the  ruler  be  spared  these  calamities,  his
escape  must  be  cei*tainly  attributable  to  his  good  sense.

It  is  related,  in  the  earlier  portion  of  this  book,  that  his  [Hxun4-
yun's]  father,  Bdbar  Pddishdh,  on  several  occasions  mounted  the
throne  of  Samarkand,  but  as  often  suffered  ruinous  defeats.  In
those  defeats  his  own  head  was  kept  safe,  and  finally  Grod  raised
him  to  such  power,  that  all  the  world  felt  his  influence,  while  his
name  remains  among  the  [immoii»l]  Sultans.  May  God,  having
delivered  Hum&yun  P^dishdh  from  these  perils  and  dangers,  grant
him  similar  well-being  and  wisdom !

CHAPTEB  CXVI.

rARTINQ  OF  l-HE  AUTHOR  FROM  HUhItUN  pAdIShAh.  HIS  MARCH
AGAINffT,  AND  CONQUEST  OF  EJLBHMIR.  CONTEMPORANEOUS  EVENTS,
AND CONCLUSION OF THE "  tIrIKH-I-rIsHIDI."

After  a  settlement  of  some  kind  had  been  arrived  at  among  the
Mirz4s,  I  obtained,  by  the  grace  of  Providence,  the  permission  of
Humayun  to  depart,  and  for  the  reasons  above  stated,  started  from

of  hard  starnggles,  possessed  himself  of  Udh  and  Multan.  He  lost  the  latter
province  to  Baber  in  1527,  but  eventually  recovered  it  from  Hnmaynn.  He  waa
the  third  and  last  of  the  Arghun  line,  while  his  rule  continued  tul  155i.  (See
Erskine,  //««£.,  i.,  chap,  vi.,  sees.  1  and  2 ;  and  Stokvis,  i.,  p.  253.)

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Conquest  of  Kashmir.  485

Ldhur  in  the  directioii  of  ELaslmiir.  I  have  explained  that  on  the
22nd  of  Bajab,  I  cro68ed  the  pass  of  Kashmir.  This  date  I  dis^^
covered  in  the  words  '*  JUfis-i-cMr-tf^iiZfc-t-fituftmtr,''  [ascending
the  throne  of  Kashmir].  It  was  the  season  of  Sagittarius.  I  had
scarce  ascended  the  throne  of  triumph,  when  the  snow  began  to
fall  and  the  faoe  of  the  earth  became  white,  while  the  eyes  of  the
enemy  turned  dark.  By  the  divine  favour,  that  winter  passed  in
quiet.

Now  K4ohi  Ghak  had  been  forced,  thrice  previously,  to  dis-
connect himself  from  the  government  of  Kashmir.  His  own  wife
and  children  had  not  seen  him,  for  he  had  left  them  in  the  care
of  Malik  Abd&l  and  Zangi  Chak,  and  had  gone  o£f,  thinking  that,
as  on  former  occasions,  his  resignation  and  resumption  of  power
would  not  be  settled  within  a  year.  [Verse]  .  .  .  All  the  [chief]
men  of  Kashmir,  believing  this  too,  went  with  him,  ignoring  that
Qod  gives  to  whomsoever  He  will,  and  takes  away  from  whomso-
ever He  will.  [Two  couplets].  .  .  .  K4chi  Ghak,  vainly  imagining
that  Shir  Kh4n,  by  force  of  arms,  could  change  the  decree  of  the
Most  High  Gk)dy  appealed  to  him  for  aid.

In  the  beginning  of  spring  .  .  .  .  ^  having  obtained  auxiliaries
from  Shir  Kh&n,  he  again  moved  forward  with  a  large  force.  Just
at  this  juncture,  and  when  this  news  was  confirmed,  Malik  Abdal
[Makri]  who  was  the  mainstay  of  the  whole  scheme,  was  attacked  by
paralysis,  and  migrated  to  the  Eternal  abode,  so  that  the  brunt  of
the  affair  fell  on  Zangi  Ghak.  In  a  word,  after  various  difficulties
had  been  surmounted,  which  it  would  be  tedious  to  relate  in
detail,  we  left  our  families  in  the  fort  of  Andarkul  ^  and  went  out
to  meet  and  oppose  [the  enemy],  with  a  vacillating  band.  [Two  coup-
lets] .  • .  During  three  months  we  attacked  their  strongholds  and
met  them  in  the  field ;  till  at  length,  K&chi  Ghak,  having  formed
a  junction  with  the  auxiliaries  of  Shir  Kh&n,  marched  boldly  out
of  the  hill  district  [BdlddoBt]  which  he  had  fortified,  and  took  up  a
position  on  a  spot  that  was  a  halting  stage.  At  this  place  the
army  of  Kashmir,  who  from  their  outward  appearance  looked  as  if
they  must-  disperse  in  flight,  held  their  ground.  [On  our  side]
[only]  the  Moghul  army  kept  its  position.  No  one  expected  a
battle  that  day ;  most  had  gone  off  in  different  directions  to  attend
to  their  own  aflairs ;  so  that  only  about  250  men  were  present,
together  with  a  few  Kashmiris  who  had  joined  the  Moghuls,  making
in  all  about  300.  These  advanced  and  attacked  a  force  comprising
5000  cavalry,  two  elephants,  and  a  body  of  infEmtry  more
numerous  than  the  cavalry. Falling  upon  their  rear,  [our  army]

*  The  omission  here  oonsifits  of  a  few  lines  descriptiye  of  spring. — R.

'  Firishta  makes  tiiis  name  (according  to  both  Bodgers  and  Briggs)  InArakot,
a  form  which  would  be  thoroughly  Kashmiri,  and  more  likely  to  be  correct  than
AndarkUl,  I  cannot  identify  the  place,  but  infer  from  the  context  in  Firiiihta
(see  App.  A.,  p.  489)  that  it  must  have  been  near  the  modem  Bdr&mnla.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

486  Conquest  of  Kashmir.

began  by  plundering  their  baggage  and  stores.  The  battle  was
so  desperate,  that  should  I  enter  into  the  particulars,  the  reader
-would  imagine  I  was  exaggerating.  Therefore,  avoiding  details,
I  will  content  myself  with  a  summary  account.  To  resume,  at
noonday  prayers  on  Monday,  the  8  Babi  11.  948,^  we  routed  an
army  of  5000  cavalry,  and  several  thousand  foot,  with  a  body  of  only
300  men.  [Verses]  .  . .  The  preacher  {EKaiih^  of  Kashmir,  MauUni
Tusuf,  found  tht.  date  in  Fath-t-Mukarrar  [The  repeated  victory],
for  I  had  already  once  entered  Kashmir  and  gained  a  victory  there,
as  has  been  related.

[Here  follows  a  prayer,  ending  with  an  apology  to  the  reader  for
the  faults  and  shortcomings  of  the  ''  Epitome."]

>  2nd  August,  1541  a.d.

THE  eud.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Appendix  A,  487

APPENDIX  A.

Extract  from  a  paper  entitled :  The  Square  Silver  Coins  of  the
Sultans  of  Kashmir^  by  Mr.  C.  J.  Rodgers,  M.R.A.S.,  &c.,
in  the  Joum.  Asiat.  Socy.  Bengal,  Vol.  LIV.  Pt.  I.,  No.  2,  1885,
pp.  92  to  139  (see  pp.  116-21).

In  Notes  2,  p.  433—1,  p.  441—1,  p.  482,  and  in  Sec.  I  of  the
Introduction^  reference  has  been  made  to  Mr.  C.  J.  Bodgers'  transla-
tions from  Firishta's  History  contained  in  the  able  and  interesting
paper  cited  above.  As  Mirza  Haidar  closes  his  narrative  some-
what abruptly,  at  the  time  of  his  conquest  of  Kashmir,  I  believe
that  a  summary  of  the  affairs  of  the  country  during  his  regency,
will  be  found  useful  to  the  reader,  and  therefore  transcribe  here,
that  portion  of  Mr.  Bodgers'  published  paper  which  deals  with  the
period  in  question.  It  comprises  ihe  last  ten  years  of  Mirza
Haidar*s  life,  and  is  also,  no  doubt,  the  best  account  that  exists
of  a  little  known  phase  of  Indian  history.

Ndzuk  Shah.  2nd  Time, — After  his  father,  Ndzuk  sat  on  the  throne  of
the  kingdom.  (His  father  we  are  told  was  Ibndiim  Sh&h.  There  is  confusion
again  here.)  He  had  not,  however,  reigned  more  than  five  or  six  months
when  Mirzi  Haidar  Turk,  having  obtained  a  firm  footing  in  Kashmir  ruled  it.
In  his  time  the  Ehutba  was  read  and  coins  were  struck  in  the  name  of  Ndsir'
ud-Din  Muhammad  Humdyun  Bddshdh.  (The  coins  of  Hum^yun  struck  in
Kashmir  are  exceedingly  rare.  They  are  exactly  of  the  same  type  as  those  of
the  preceding  kings.  There  are  some  small  differences  in  the  inscriptions  in  the
arrangements  of  the  letters.  One  coin  has  a  ^  in  the  field  to  the  right,  which
I  consider  to  be  the  first  letter  of  Haidar's  name.  The  dates  of  the  coins  fall
within  the  period  during  which  Mirz&  Haidar  ruled  Kashmir  nominally  in  his
master's  name.  But  all  these  ten  years  poor  Hum^yim  was  a  fugitive  in
Sind  and  Persia  and  Affghdnistdn  and  he  never  derived  any  benefit  from  the
fact  that  prayers  were  used  in  Kashmir  with  his  name  in  them,  and  coins
current  with  his  name  on  them.)

In  the  year  948  a.h.^  when  Humdyun,  flying  before  Sher  Sh&h  Suzi,
reached  Ijabore,  Malik  Abd^  Mdkari,  Zangi  Chakk  and  other  petitioners
wrote  about  Hum&yun's  taking  Kashmir  and  sent  the  letter  by  the  hands  of
Mirz^  Haidar. The  emperor  diHmisRed  the  Mirzd  in  the  direction  of  Kashmir

»  Should  be  947.— TEd.].

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

488  Appendix  A.

and  gave  it  out  as  his  inteution  to  follow  shortly  himself.  When  the  Mirzd
arrived  at  Bhir  he  was  met  by  Abd&l  M&kari  and  Zangi  Chakk.  The  Mirzi
had  with  him  only  three  or  four  thousand  horsemen,  but  when  he  arrived  at
lUjdori,  Malik  Giji  Chakk  who  was  the  ruler  of  Kashmir,  arrived  at  Ehabal
Eartal  (it  is  called  Earmal  by  Erskine)  and  entrenched  himself  with  from
three  to  four  thousand  horsemen  and  50,000  infimtry.  Mirz4  Haidar
therefore  changed  his  route  and  went  by  Pabhaj  (the  Panuj  of  Erskine)
which  Gdji  Chakk  in  his  pride  had  forgotten  to  defend.  The  Mirzd  crossed  the
mountains  and  descending  into  the  plain  of  Eashmir  took  possession  at  once
of  Srinagar.  Abdil  Mikari  and  Zangi  Chakk  finding  themselves  strong,  boned
themselves  with  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom,  and  they  gave  several  pergunnahs
to  the  Mirz4.  But  just  at  this  time  Abddl  M4kari,  died  after  recommending
his  sons  to  the  care  of  the  Mirzd.

After  the  arrival  of  Mirzd  Haidar  in  Eashmir,  Malik  G^ji  Chakk  went  to
Sher  Shdh  Afgh^  for  assistance.  He  obtained  five  thousand  horsemen,  over
whom  were  Husain  Sharv&ni  and  Adil  Eh&n ;  and  two  elephants.  Mirza
Haidar  met  him  between  Danahdy&r  and  K^wah,  and  the  zephyr  of  victory
blowing  in  favour  of  the  Mlrz^  the  Malik  and  his  Affghan  allies  fled  firom  the
field  and  took  possession  of  BahrdmgaUa.

In  the  year  960  a.h.  Mirzi  Haidar  settled  himself  in  the  fort  of  Indarkot.
Zangi  Chakk  being  suspected  by  him  fled  to  G^ji  Chakk  and  in  951  a.h.
the  two  set  out,  in  the  direction  of  Srinagar,  determined  to  root  out  Mirzd
Haidar.  Bahr^m  Chakk,  son  of  Zangi  Chakk  arrived  first  at  Srinagar,  but
he  was  easily  put  to  flight  by  two  of  the  Mirzd's  generals,  and  his  disorganised
troops  falling  back  on  the  main  army  Zangi  Chakk  and  Giji  Chakk  also  fled
and  returned  to  Bahr^mgalla.  After  this  the  Mirzi  employed  his  army  in
invading  Tibet. He  took  Lansur  and  many  other  large  forts.

In  952  A.H.  Giji  Chakk  and  his  son  Muhammad  Chakk  died  of  fever  and
ague. This  year  the  Mirz4  spent  in  ease.

In  953  .A.H.  Zangi  Chakk  fighting  with  Mirza  Haidar  was  killed.  His
head  with  the  head  of  his  son  Gizi  Khdn  were  presented  to  Haidar.

In  954  A.H.  ambassadors  came  to  the  Mirzd  from  E&shgar  and  he  went
with  many  nobles  as  far  as  Ldr  to  meet  them.  In  Ldr  the  head  of  Ehwija
Ujh  son  of  Masaud  Chakk  was  brought  to  him.  This  man  had  for  the  space
of  seven  years  been  fighting  in  Eamr&j,  but  at  last  he  had  desired  peace.
Mirza  Mirak,  swearing  that  all  should  be  right,  asked  him  to  attend  on  him
to  make  a  treaty.  But  when  Ujh  came  into  the  assembly  he  was  stabbed  by
Mirak  and  he  fled  to  the  jungle  pursued  by  Mirak  who  took  his  head  off  and
sent  it  to  Mirz^  Haidar.  Ide  Zin&  was  far  from  pleased  at  seeing  it,  and,
standing  up  in  anger  said,  that  after  an  oath  and  covenant  had  been  made
the  slaughter  of  one  man  was  not  necessary.  Haidar  replied  that  he  was  not
privy  to  the  circumstances  of  the  death.

After  this  Mirzi  Haidar  turned  his  attention  to  Eishtwir.  Bandagin  Exikah,
Muhammad  Mdkari  and  Yahi  Zind  led  the  van.  The  Mirzi  took  up  his
abode  at  Jhapur  near  Eishtw&r.  The  van,  doing  three  days*  journey  in  one
descended  on  Dahlot,  where  the  river  winds,  and  they  were  not  able  to  fcurd
it,  for  the  enemy  too  opposed  them.  The  next  day  the  army  of  Haidar  made
a  diversion  to  the  right  in  hopes  of  reaching  Eishtw&r,  but  when  they  reached
the  town  of  Dhdr,  gusts  of  cold  air  laden  with  dust  came  down  upon  them,
the  day  became  dark  and  the  people  of  the  town  made  an  attack  on  them.
Bandagdn  Eukah  with  five  other  men  was  slain. The  rest  of  the  army  with

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Appendix  A,  489

a  thousand  exertions  at  last  joined  themselves  with  Haidar.  The  Mirzd  was
not  Bucoessful :  he  was  obliged  to  retrace  his  steps  ingloriously.

In  955  he  turned  his  attention  to  Tibet.  Taking  lUjdori  he  gave  it  to
Muhammad  Nazir  and  Nasir  Ali.  Pakli^  he  gave  to  Mulla  Abdullah  and
Little  Tibet'  he  gave  to  Mullah  Qdsim.  Ck)nquering  Great  Tibet,'  he  appointed
Mulla  Hasan  its  governor.

In  956  he  took  the  fort  of  Danel.  At  this  time  Adam  Ghakkar  came
before  the  Mirzi  and  asked  him  to  pardon  Daulat  Ghakk.  He  agreed  to  do  so
and  Adam  called  Daulat  into  the  tent.  The  Mirz4,  on  his  coming  in,  showed
him  no  honour.  For  this  reason  Daulat  became  very  angry,  and  taking  away
the  elephant  he  had  brought  as  a  present,  he  went  away,  llie  courtiers
wished  to  pursue  him  but  the  Mirzi  forbade  them.  After  some  time  Haidar
returned  to  Kashmir.  Daulat  Ghakk  and  Gdzi  Eh^n  and  Jai  Ghakk  went  to
Haidar  Ehin  who  had  fled  from  IsliUn  Sh&h  to  Rdjiori.  When  IsUm  Shdh
who  was  pursuing  the  Niy^izis  arrived  at  the  town  of  Madaw^  from  Naoshahra,
Haibat  Kh&n  Niy&zi  sent  Sayyid  Eh^  to  him.  Sayyid  Ehdn  making
propositions  of  peace  gave  up  the  mother  and  son  of  Haibat  Ehdn  Niydzi  to
IsUm  Sh&h  who  turning  back  went  to  the  town  of  B^  near  Sidlkot  and
agreed  to  the  conditions.  The  three  Eashmiris  above-mentioned  then  took
Haibat  Ehin  to  Mrdmula  and  wished  to  take  him  to  Kashmir,  and  carry
away  Haidar.  As  Haibat  did  not  see  his  way  to  doing  this  he  sent  a  Brdhman  to
Haidar  with  conditions  of  peace.  When  he  had  received  a  promise  from  Haidar
he  went  to  live  at  Hir  (Nir  in  MS.  No.  6571  opening  190  in  British  Museum)
in  Jammu  and  the  Eashmiris  went  to  Isldm  Sh&h.  Ghdzi  Eh&n  Ghakk,
however,  went  to  Mirzi  Haidar.  (It  is  evident  that  at  this  time  the  Eashmiris
were  tired  of  Haidar.  They  wished  Isl^m  Shih  to  be  king.  We  do  not  read
that  Isldm  ever  went  so  far  as  Eashmir.  The  nobles,  however,  must  have
struck  coins  in  his  name,  using  the  formula  vtrwik  in  Kashmir  on  the  reverse.
I  have  seen  two  coins  of  Islim  Sb^h  of  this  time.  It  was  a  common  practice
to  strike  coins  anticipating  events  which  did  not  come  to  pass.  The  date  on
this  coin  is  957  a.h.  It  may  have  been  struck  by  Haidar  as  a  compliment
to  Isl&m  Sh&h.)

In  the  year  957  a.h.  Mirz&  Haidar  being  at  peace  with  his  neighbours
sent  presents  of  saffron  to  IsUm  Sh&h  by  the  hands  of  Ehw&jah  Shams
Mughal.  In  the  following  year  Isl&m  Sh4h  sent  the  ambassadors  back  with
presents  of  silk  cloth  and  goods  accompanied  by  T&sin  (Bdsin  in  above  MS.)
as  envoy.  Mirzi  Haidar  sent  back  T&sin  laden  with  shawls  and  saffron  to
Isldm  Sh^h.

Mirzi  Qarrd  Bah^ur  was  appointed  governor  of  Bhirpul  (or  Bharmal)  and
along  with  him  were  sent  from  amongst  the  Eashmiris  Idi  Zin&  and  Ndzuk
Shih,  Husain  M^kari  and  Ehwdjah  Hiji.  The  whole  of  these  with  Mirzi
Qarri  came  back  to  Indarkot  and  went  thence  to  B&r&mula  and  became
rebellious.  The  reason  of  this  rebellion  was  that  the  Mughals  (the  forces  of
Mirz&  Haidar)  were  not  acceptable  to  them.  When  the  Mughals  informed
the  Mirz&  of  this  he  told  them  they  were  no  less  ready  than  the  Eashmiris  to
rebel.  Husain  M&kari  sent  his  brother  Ali  Mdkari  to  Mirzd  Haidar  to  make
excuse  for  the  Eashmiris  and  to  call  again  the  army. Haidar  was  not  aware

*  The  western  province  of  Kashmir. See  Pakhli  on  map. — [Ed.].

*  Baltistan.— [Ed.].
>  Ladak.— [Ed.].

Digitized  by

Google

490  Appmdix  A.

of  the  condition  of  things,  and  told  them  that  the  Kashmiris  were  powerless
and  that  there  was  no  use  in  calling  the  army.

On  the  27th  of  Bamz&n  a  great  fire  burst  out  in  Indarkot  Mirz&  Qarrd
and  his  following  sent  word  that  their  houses  were  destroyed,  and  asked  for
orders  saying  that  if  convenient  they  would  rebuild  their  houses  and  next
year  go  to  Bhirpul.  Mirzd  Haidar  was  displeased  at  this  conduct.  Never-
theless whether  he  would  or  not  the  army  went  towards  Bhirpul.  At  night
time,  however,  Idi  Zin&  and  the  rest  of  the  Kashmiris  left  the  Mughals  and
came  to  the  pass  of  Bhirpul  and  took  with  them  Husain  Mikari,  All  Mdkari
and  others  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  slain  by  the  Mughals.  When  it
was  morning  the  men  of  Bhirpul  fought  with  the  Mughals  who  were  fastened
in  the  mountains.  Sayyid  Mirzi  fled  and  went  into  the  fort  of  Bhirpnl.
About  80  Mughals,  men  of  note  were  slain  in  this  affair.  Muhammad  Nazir
and  Mirza  Qarrd  Bah^ur  were  captured.  The  rest  of  the  army  came  to
Bahrdmgalla.  When  Mirz^  Haidar  heard  of  this  he  was  sorely  vexed  and
ordered  all  the  silver  vessels  to  be  broken  and  the  coin  now  current  in
Kashmir  was  struck  from  them.  Jahtogir  M&kari  at  this  time  got  into
favour  and  the  estates  of  Husun  Mdkari  were  bestowed  upon  him.  Trades-
people had  horses  and  outfits  given  to  them  and  were  made  soldiers.  After
this  news  came  that  Mulla  Abdullah,  hearing  of  the  exodus  of  the  Kashmiris,
was  coming  to  Kashmir.  When  he  got  near  to  Bdrimula  the  Kashmiris
crowded  on  him  and  slew  him.  Khwdjah  Qisim  was  slain  in  Little  Tibet.
Muhammad  Nazir  was  imprisoned  in  R&j&ori.  The  Kashmiris  leaving  Bahrdm-
galla  came  to  Hambarapur.  Mirzd  Haidar  was  thus  forced  to  fight  them  and
he  came  to  Indarkot.  He  had  with  him  only  a  thousand  men.  With  him
were  Mughal  nobles  who  had  700  men  more.  The  whole  took  up  a  position
in  Shahdb-ud-Dinpur.  Daulat  Ghakk  and  Ghdzi  Khdn  Chakk  went  to
Hambarapur  to  help  Idi  Zind  and  coming  firom  that  place  assembled  in
Kh&npur.  Mirzd  Haidar  took  up  his  position  in  the  plain  of  Khilidgarh
near  Srinagar.  Fath  Ghakk,  whose  father  had  been  slain  by  the  Mughals,
Khwdjah  Bahr&m  brought,  with  3,000  men  to  Indarkot  to  revenge  his  father's
death.  They  burned  all  the  palaces  of  Mirzd  Haidar  in  the  Saf&  gardens.
When  Mirzd  Haidar  heard  of  this  he  said,  '*  I  have  not  brought  this  from
K^hgar  that  I  might  by  the  grace  of  Gkxl,  again  build  it.'*  Jai  Ali  in  revenge
burnt  the  palaces  of  Zain-ul-Abidin  in  Suiy&pur,  but  this  did  not  please
Mirzd  Haidar  and  the  army  burnt  the  palaces  of  Idi  Zinil  and  Nauroz  Chakk
in  Srinagar.  Mirzd  Haidar  himself  took  up  a  position  in  Khdnpur  in  which
place  was  a  willow  tree  under  which  22  horsemen  could  stand.  If  one  branch
of  this  tree  were  shaken  the  whole  tree  was  moved.  At  last  the  Kashmiris
came  from  Kbdnpur  and  took  up  a  position  at  Adnipur  and  not  more  than  a
distance  of  two  kos  remained  between  the  two  armies.  Mirzi  Haidar
determined  to  make  a  night  attack  on  the  enemy.  He  first  of  all  made  his  own
younger  brother  Mirzd  Abdur  Bahm&n  his  heir^pparent  and  inaugurated
him,  then  getting  his  men  into  order  he  prepared  for  the  night  attack.  It  so
happened  that  the  night  was  very  cloudy  and  when  he  got  to  the  tent  of
Khwdjah  Hdji  who  was  the  soul  of  the  rebellion  and  the  agent  of  the  Mirzi,
the  darkness  hid  everything.  Shih  Nazar  a  cuirassier  of  Mirzd  Haidar  said,
''  When  I  shot  an  arrow  the  voice  of  the  Mirzd  fell  on  my  ear,  saying, '  you
are  at  fault.'  I  then  knew  that  the  arrow  had  accidentally  struck  Uie  MiTzd."*
It  is  also  said  that  a  butcher  shot  him  in  the  thigh  with  an  arrow.  In  another
tradition  it  is  stated  that  Kamdl  Kuka  killed  him  with  a  sword. But  except  an

Digitized  by  VjL^UV  IC

Appendix  B,  491

arrow-wound  in  his  heart  no  other  thing  was  visible.  In  reality  this  is  the  snm
of  the  traditions.  When  morning  dawned  it  became  noised  abroad  amongst  the
Kashmiris  that  a  Mughal  was  lying  slain  in  their  camp.  When  Ehwdjah
Hiji  came  to  view  the  corpse,  he  said  it  was  that  of  Haidar.  He  held  up  the
head  from  the  earth  but  nothing  but  the  last  breath  remained.  He  moved
his  eyes  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  After  this  the  Mughals  fled  to  Indarkot  and
the  Kashmiris  buried  the  corpse  of  Haidar  and  then  pursued  the  Mughals.
They  took  refuge  in  Indarkot  and  for  three  days  defended  themselves.  On
the  fourth  day  Muhammad  Rumi  loaded  the  cannon  with  copper  coins  and
fired  them  on  the  enemy.  Every  one  who  was  struck  with  them  died.  At
last,  however,  Khdnmai,  the  widow  of  Mirzi  Haidar,  and  her  uster  Khdnji
spoke  to  the  Mughals  and  said, '  Inasmuch  as  Mirzd  Haidar  has  departed  from
our  midst,  it  would  be  better  to  make  peace  vdth  the  Kashmiris.'*  The
Mughals  agreed  to  this  and  sent  Amir  KhiUi,  builder,  to  the  Kashmiris  to  ask
for  peace.  The  Kashmiris  were  pleased  at  this  and  wrote  a  letter  with  oath
and  covenant  that  they  would  not  persecute  the  Mughals  any  more.  The
government  of  Haidar  Turk  lasted  for  ten  years.

Ndzuk  Shdh,  3rd  Time, — ^When  the  doors  of  the  fort  were  opened,  the
Kashmiris  went  into  the  treasury  of  Mirz4  Haidar  and  plundered  it,  taking
away  the  beautiful  and  delicate  garments  it  contained.  The  family  of  the  Mirzd
was  taken  to  Srinagar  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  Manujd.  The  Kashmiri  chiefs
then  divided  Kashmir  between  themselves.  Daulat  Chakk  got  the  pargannah
of  Deosar,  Ghdzi  KhAn  the  pargannah  of  WAhi ;  Yusuf  Chakk  and  Bahrdm
Chakk  obtained  Kamr&j.  Khwdjah  Hdji  the  wakil  of  the  Mirz&  took  a  liikh
of  shawls  and  the  whole  of  the  nobles  of  Kashmir,  but  especially  Idi  Zind,  took
the  government  of  the  province  into  their  hands.  Ndzuk  Shdh  as  a  kind  of
shadow  of  a  king  was  upheld  in  name. In  truth  Idi  Zind  was  king.

APPENDIX  B.

THE  KARAWANAS.

Some  inquiries  regarding  the  Kardwdnds,  which  were  very  kindly  made  for
me  in  Khorasdn  by  Mr.  Maula  Bakhsh,K.B.,  Attach^atthe  Meshed  Consulate
Crenend,  have  resulted,  it  would  seem,  in  tracing  some  of  the  posterity  of  the
Kardwdn&s.  Mr.  Maula  Bakhsh  writes  from  near  Asterabad : — **  Only  the  other
day,  whUe  passing  through  the  Mdna  district  of  Bujnurd,  I  heard  of  a  village
called  Samandarra  or  Kdrnds.  This  excited  my  curiosity  and,  on  inquiry,  I
found  that  the  village  derived  its  name  from  its  Kdmds  inhabitants,  about
thirty  families  of  whom  (the  total  population  of  the  village)  are  settled  there.
In  the  Gurgin  country  again,  which  extends  from  Ddhana-i-Gurgdn  on  the
east,  to  the  Gunbad-i-Kdbus  (or  Kdus)  on  the  west,  on  both  banks  of  the
Gurgdn  river,  and  is  occupied  by  the  Gokldn  Turkomans,  I  found  about  fifty
families  of  Kdmds,  and  was  told  that  there  were  some  families  in  Khiva  also.
"  These  people  speak  Turki  now,  and  are  considered  part  of  the  GokUn
Turkomans. They,  however,  say  they  are  Chingiz-Khdni  Moghuls,  and  are

Digitized  by

Google

492

Appendix  B,

no  doubt  the  desoendants  of  the  same  Eirnds,  or  Eardvanis,  who  took  such
a  prominent  part  in  the  Moghul  yictories  in  Persia.

"  The  word  EAmds,  I  was  told  by  a  learned  Goklan  Mullah,  means  2Vr-
anddZf  or  Shikdri  (t.e.,  Archer  or  Hunter)  and  was  applied  to  this  tribe  of
Moghuls  on  account  of  their  professional  skill  in  shooting,  which  apparently
secured  them  an  important  place  in  the  army.  In  Turki  the  word  E&mto
means  Shikam-paroBt — ^literally  'belly  worshippers,'  which  implies  avarice.
This  term  is  in  use  at  present,  and  I  was  told,  by  a  E&zi  of  Bujnurd,  that  it  is
sometimes  used  by  way  of  reproach  ....  The  E&m^  people  in  M&na  and
Gurg&n  say  it  is  the  name  of  their  tribe,  and  they  can  give  no  other
explanation."

Although  the  modem  name  has  become  curiously  abbreviated,  there  appears
to  be  little  reason  to  doubt  that  these  Eimils,or  '*  shooters,"  represent,  at  any
rate,  the  «  artillerists"  of  WaPsAf  (see  pp.  76,  77,  Tntrodwtion).

APPENDIX  C.

CIIliONOLOGICAL  TABLE  OF  EVENTS.

ENGLAND.

1327.  Edward  II.  deposed  and  mur-
dered.

1338.  Edward  III.  invaded  France.

1346.  Battle  of  Cre9y.

1356.  Battle  of  Poictiers.

1371.  Stuart  dynasty  established  in
Scotland.

1377.  Accession  of  Richard  11.

1399.  Deposition  of  Kichard  II.

1403.  Battle  of  Shrewsbury.

1413.  Accession  of  Henry  Y.

1415.  Battle  of  Agincourt.

1422.  Henry  VL  proclaimed  king  of
France.

1461.  Edward  lY.  becomes  king.

1485.  Battle  of  Bosworth  Field.  Tu-
dor dynasty  founded.

1509.  Death  of  Henry  YIL

1512.  Henry  YIII.  invades  France.

1520.  Field  of  the  Qoth  of  Gold.

1534.  Papal  authority  abolished.

1547.  Accession  of  Edward  YI.

1553.  Accession  of  Mary.

1658.  Accession  of  Elizabeth.

CONTINENTAL  EUROPE.

1328.  Yalois dynasty founded in

France.
1358.  Turks  first  cross  the  Hellespont.
1378.  The  Papacy  restored  in  Rome.
1385.  Independence  of  Portugal
1396.  Crusade  in Hungary  against

the  Turks.
1403.  Sultan B&yazid  defeated  by

Timur.
1428.  Joan  of  Arc  delivers  Orleans.
1436.  Supposed  date  of  invention  of

printing.
1453.  Constantinople  taken  by  the

Turks.
1462.  Ivan  III.  becomes  Prince  of

Muscovy.
1467.  Bombs  and  mortars  invented

in  Italy.
1478.  Ehans  of  Crimea  submit  to

Turks,

1482.  Ivan  III.  becomes  first  Tsar

of  Muscovy.

1483.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  discovered.

(Portugal).

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Appendix  C.

493

1492.  Diflcovery  of  America.  (Spain).
1501.  Naples  subdued  by  France.

1516.  Charles  V.  ascends  the  throne

of  Spain.

1517.  Egypt  conquered  by  Turks.
1523.  Gustavus  Wasa  becomes  king

of  Sweden.

1529.  Vienna  besieged  by  the  Turks.

1533.  Ivan  IV.  (the  Terrible)  suc-
ceeds as  Tsar.

1545.  Council  of  Trent  assembles.

1552.  Treaty  of  Passau.

1584.  Death  of  Ivan  the  Terrible.

INDIA.

1325.

Death  of  Mahom« Tughluk,

founder  of  Tughluk  dynasty

of  Delhi.
1398.  Timur  invades  India.
1450.  Lodi  dynasty  of  Afghans.
1498.  Arrival  of  Vasco  de  Gama  at

Malabar.
1509.  Albuquerque  becomes  viceroy

of Portuguese India (d.

1519).
1526.  Baber  founds  Moghul  (Ch^-

hatai)  Empire.
1530.  Humayun  succeeds.
1538.  Turkish  attack  on  Portuguese

at  Diu.

1540.  Humayun defeated by  Shir

Khan  at  Eanauj.
1540.  Bule  of  Afghan  Sur  dynasty

begins.

1555.  Return  of  Himiayun  to  India.

1556.  Accession  of  Akbar.

CHINA.

1333.

1368.

Accession  of  Ching-tsung  (or
Tohan  Timur),  last  Emperor
of  Mongol  dynasty.
Ming  dynasty  established.
Emperor  Hung  Wu.  Capi-
tal at  Nanking.

1403.  Yung  Loh,  2nd  Ming  Emperor,
changes  capital  to  Peking.

1536.  Macao  granted  to  the  Portu-
guese.

1580.  (abt.) Jesuit missions first
established.

1644.  Ming  dynasty  ends.

PERSIA.

1380  Invaded  by  Timur.
1399. „  „

1468.  Conquered  by  Turkomans.
1501.  Sufavi dynasty  founded

Shah  Ismail.
1519.  Ismail  conquers  Georgia.
1525.  Accession  of  Shah  Tahmasp.
1576.  Ismail  II.  succeeds.

by

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Digitized  by

Google

INlDEX.

(Abbbeyiationb  :  *  denotes  *  Iiitroduotion ' ;  and  n.  signifies  *  footnote.')

Aba  Bakb,  Mirza,  8un  of  Sdniz  Mirz&,
defeat  and  murder  of,  11*  ;  invasion
of  Ladak,  13*;  Moghul  invasions
during  reign  of,  65,*  66  * ;  exploita*
tion  of  sand-buried  towns  by,  70*;
married  to  Husn  Nig&r  Kbiinim,  88.
89,  99  ;  makes  himself  master  ot
Yarkand,  99;  attempt  to  subdue
Khotan,  99-101;  and  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirz^  102,  103;  defeats
Amir  Abdul  Kudus,  103;  battles
with  Yunus  Khdn  and  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirz^  104-107 ;  attacked  by
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz^  who  is
taken  prisoner,  111,  112;  defeats
Sultiin  Ahmad  Kh^n  In  Y&rkand,
122;  attacks  Aksu  with  Mir  Jabir
Birdi,  125,  337;  defeated  by  SulUn
Said  Khiin  at  TuMugh,  132,  249,
250,  284;  pursued  by  Sultan
Said  Khin  to  the  mountains  of
Tibet,  133;  exterminates  the  Jagi-
Tik,  165;  raids  of  his  anny  into
MoghuUstan,  188;  captures  Shih
Begum,  203,  258 ;  and  Badakhshiln,
221;  and  Farghan^  248-250;  his
parents  and  early  days,  251 ;  gene-
rosity of,  252 ;  takes  Y^kand,  252 ;
defeats  Yunus  Kh^n,  253;  and
AUcha  Khdn,  253 ;  sends  armies  to
Tibet  and  Balur,  253^;  also  to
Badakhshdn,  254 ;  defeats  Jani  Beg
Kb&n,254;  seizes  Aksu  and  Ucb,  254;
his  evil  deeds  and  ways,  254-9, 319 ;
excavations  (Kdzik)  of,  254-9 ;  fort
built  by  him  on  the  Tuman  River,
285-6;  citadel  of  Rllshghar  built
by,  295,  304;  and  city  of  Ydrkand,
296-7 ;  at  Kdshghar,  804, 321 ;  battle
with  Said  Kh^n  at  K^shghar,  310-
312;  at  Y^kand,  312-13,  322;  be-
sieged at  Y&ngi-His&r  by  Said  Khin,
313-19,322-3;  his  treatment  of  Mir
VlUi,  320 :  and  of  Sh^  Ddna  Kukil-
d^b,  321 ;  retires  to  Khotan,  323 ;
stays  in  Tibet,  324 ;  reign  of,  324  n. ;
islolled  while  journeying  to  surrender
to  Said  Kh&n,  324-5;  his  treasure
at  T&rkand,  326 ;  pursued  by  Said

Khan's  Amirs,  327 ; throws  away

his  treasures  on  the  road  to  Tibet,

827-8  ;  children  of,  330  ;  Kusan  and

B&i  destroyed  by,  332;  lays  waste

road  to  Aksu,  333 ;  enters  Kkshghar,

338 ;  subdues  the  upper  districts  of

Badakhshdn,  353,  354.
Abdk^  H-Khan  of  Persia,  35*,  80*  n.
AbblLs  Bah^ur,  32,  36,  37, 50.
Abdil  Makri,  Malik  of  Kashmir,  441,

482,  487.
Abdara,  243.
Ab-dara  Pass,  the,  237  n.
Abdul  Ali  Tarkhlin,  Amir,  116, 166.
Abdul Aziz,  fourth son of Kashid

Sultin,  121,*  307.
Abdul  Hakk,  Khwiija,  478.
Abdul  Karim,  second  son  of  Bashid

Sultdn,  121*,  123*.
Abdul  Karim,  Khw&ja,  72.
Abdul  Kisim  Baber,  88  n.
Abdul Kudus, Amir, kills Shaikh

Jam&l-ud-Pin,  94,  111 ;  defeated  by

AH  Bakr  Mirzd,  103.
Abdul  Kuli  Yas^vul,  419.
Abdul  Latif,  son  of  Ulugh  Beg,  59  n. ;

murders  his  father,  829  n.
Abdul  Latif,  first  son  of  Bashid  Sultto,

121*.
Abdul  Bahim,  third son  of Bashid

Sultan,  121.*  122.*
Abdul  Ydhid  Bah&dur,  275,  309,  315.
Abdul  y&hid  Tuliuri,  389.
Abdulla,  author  of  the  TarikJ^'Daudi ;

fight  between  the  Si&zi  and  Mirzd

Haidar's  force,  21,*  22.*
Abdulla,  governor  at  Khotan,  123.*
Abdullali  Barl&s,  Shaikh,  108.
Abdullah,  son  of  SuMnim  Begum,  170.
Abdullah  Khto,  son  of  Mahmud  Kh^n,

193.
Abdullah  Mirz^  son  of  Sultdn  Ibrahim,

85  n.;  83,193.
Abdullah Ikfirzd, brother of Mirz6

Haidar,  444,  454,  455.
Abdullah Sultdn (UzbegX son of

Kucbum  Kh&n,  349,  350.
Abdur  Bahman  Jinn,  MauUnd,  194,

396,397.

Digitized  by

Google

496

Index.

Abdur  Rashid  Kh6n :  m0  Rashid  Sul-
tdn.

Abdur  Bazz&k,  MauUni,  the  Ka&a'
Asaadin  of,  42,*  75  n. ;  the  Tarikh-
i'Mangum  of,  151.

Abdur  RazzlUc  Mirzi,  defeated  by
Bdbar  Padishah,  204.

Abjiyi  Ata,  tomb  called,  in  Tdrkand,
800.

Abul-baki,Mir,478.

Abul  Fazl  the  historian,  246  n.,  247  n. ;
account  of  the  batUe  of  Kanauj,
17*  n.;  Humayun's  inyaaion  of
Kashmir,  19,*  20*;  the  death  of
Mirz&  Haidar,  22* ;  on  Miiz&  Hai-
dar's  character  and  goYemment  of
Kashmir,  28* ;  coins  struck  in
Humayun's  name,  24*;  Mirz&  Hai-
dar's  love  of  music,  147  n. ;  on  the
Snlt4ns  of  Kashmir,  483  n.,  434  n. ;
on  the  Gakars,  480  n.

Abul-feda,  86  n.;  on  Taikhin,  24  n.;
on  the  city  of  B61a-8ikun,  362  n.,
363  n.

Abul  Gh&zi  Khto  the  historian,  on  Is6n
fiugba,  39,*  40*;  on  the  Kinkali
tribe,  16  n. ;  on  the  inhabitants  of
Moghulistan,  73*;  use  of  the  word
Turk,  84,*  89*  n. ;  on  the  Uighurs,
95*;  and  UighuiisUn,  100.*  101*;
on  the  title  Gnr-Rh£n,  279  n. ;  on
the  situation  of  Blila-Sikun,  362  n.

Abu>  Gh6zi  Huesain  (Sultin  Hussain
Baikari),  154  n.

Abu  Ishik,  son  of  Khizir  Yasuri,  40.

Abu  Lais,  Shaikh,  40

Abulkhair  KhIUi,  79 ;  death  of,  82,  92  ;
his  sons,  92  n. ;  and  the  Juji  Sultans,
272.

Abu  Ma'&li  Turmadi,  the  KhinzlUla,
40.

Abu  Nasr  Kuloi  Naddif,  87.

Abu  Said,  son  of  Kuchum  Kh6n,
288.

Abu  Said  Miizd,  Sultan,  and  Is^n
Bnghd,  79-81  ;  takes  Samarkand
from  Abdullah  Mini,  88;  takes
KhorMn,  88,  85 ;  Tuuus  appointed
Khin,  88,  84 ;  visit  of  Tunus  Kh&n
at  KhoriMLn,  87  ;  sends  Tunus  Khin

.  a  second  time  to  Moghnlist^  90;
death  of^  93 ;  marries  a  daughiar  of
Sh^  Sultto  Badakhshi,  108 ;  friend-
ship with  Tunus  Khiin,  172;  his
personal  appearance,  79.*

Adam,  Sult&n,  S&ran^s  brother,  480  n.

Adham  SulULn  (Sufi  Sult^),  fifth  son
ofBashidSulULn,  121.*

Adik  Sultto,  273,  373.

Adilsh&h  JaUir,  41,  43;  revolt  of,  44,
45 ;  put  to  death,  49.

Adun  Kuri,  40.

Afghanistan,  subjugation  of,  in  1545,
25.*

A&hans  of  Hindustan,  the,  Mlrza
Haidar  and  Uie  Niizi  tribe,  21,*  22  * ;
with  Said  Khiin's  army,  66.*

Afrisidb,  the  Turk  (Bughi  Khin),
286,  287  n. ;  BdU-Sikun  built  by,
362,  363,  and  n.

Afridi  country,  an  early  conquest  of,
by  "Turki  tribes,"  127*  ».

Afshir  tribe,  214  n,

Aftab  Ru :  tee  Mangalai  Suyah.

Agh&  Sultin  Sult&nim,  103.

Agra,  marcii  on,  by  Shir  Shih  Sur,  16*,
17* ;  Khwija  Nur6  at,  398 ;  Shir
Khin  and,  470,  471 ;  Emperor  Hn-
m&yun  returns  defeated  to,  477.

Aghi,  Mir,  mother  of  Amir  Khudiidid,
89,  51.

Ahangarin,  plundered  by  Said  Khin,
275.

Ahmad,  Amir,  226,  356;  Oovemor  of
Sairim,  171.

Ahmad  Mirz^  62.

Ahmad,  Maulini  Khwija,  10 ;  and  the
death  of  Vais  Khin,  72,  73;  and
the  Seven  Muhammadins,  299.

Ahmad  Mins^  Sultto,  Alicha  Khin,
son  of  Husain  Mirzi,  80*  n.,  104.*
107*;  93,  111,  156,  157,  167,  336;
marriage  to  Mihr-i-Nisir  Khinim,
94,  96,  117,  155,  196;  his  brothers,
112;  dispute  with  Omar  Shaikh
Mirsi,  112;  hostilities  with  his
brother  Sultin  Mahmud  Khin,  118,
115,  116;  death  of,  119,  120,  123,
100 ;  his  administration  of  Moghul-
istin,  120, 121, 166;  hostilities  with
the  Uzbeg  Kazik,  122,  146;  cap-
tured byShihi  Beg  Khin,  122, 128;
treasure  of,  stored  at  Aksn,  124;
Khwiia  Tijuddin*s  attendaiMse  on,
127;  his  sons,  180;  seized  by  the
Moghuls,  156;  Maulini  Khwiia
All,  his  sptritual  guide,  218;
eighteen  sons  and  four  daughters
of.  160,  161,  178,  280;  defeated  by
Mirzi  Aba  Bakr,  258.

Ahmad  Khin,  son  of  Tunus  Khin,
108, 10»-111.

Ahmad  Shaikh  (Hazrat  Khw^ja  Ah-
madX  tomb  of,  369  n,

Ahmad,  son  of  Sultin  Ali  of  Turfin,
105*.

Ahmad  Ali,  brother  of  Diim  All,  247,
306.

Ahmad  Itirji,  Amir,  240.

Ahmad  Kariul,  Sultin,  177.

Ahmad  Kisim  Kuhbur,  Amir,  197,
259,  271,  318.

Ahmaid  Rizi,  Amin,  author  of  the
H<rft  Iklim,  mention  of  Miizi
Haidar  in,  25,*  26*;  Rashid  Sultin
and  his sons,  120*-123* ; on  the

. title  Gur-Khin,  279  n.

Ahmad  Tambal,  Sultin,  130.

Digitized  by

Google

Index,

497

Ai-Eh&mm,  rains  of  a  fort  oaUed,  220  n.,
221  n.

Ailah  (Dah)  Biver,  66,  91.

Aimal, 'city'of,58*.

AJmal  Khw&ja :  we  Is&n  Blight.

AimaD,  Amir,  31.

Aiman  Khw&ja  Sultdn,  son  of  Sultdn
Ahmad  Khdn,  125,  126,  183,  144,
161,  371;  rebuilds  town  of  Aksu,
135,  341 ;  revolt  of,  142, 143 ;  Man-
sur  KhUn  and,  332,  339,  340 ;  Said
Khiin  and,  333, 334 ;  repairs  to  Aksn,
333 ;  meets  Said  Eh^n  at  Uch,  343 ;
goes  to  attack  Muhammad  Eorghiz,
350;  marriage  of,  352-3;  rupture
between  Said  Khdn  and,  391-4;
dies  a  natural  death  in  India,  135,
401.

Ais  Bughi :  «ee  Isdn  Bugh^.

Aisbah  ElULtun,  Biver,  39.

Aisha  Sultdn  Eh&nim  (Moghul  Ehll-
nim),  160.  192,  193.

Aimaga  Akhta,  321.

hSs&t  (Ak6r  Eamar),  place  called,  29,
32.

Akbar,  Emperor,  and  the  Ko%y  424  n.

Ak  Bngbf  Amir,  44,  45,  49.

Akhfii,  given  to  Yunus  Khin,  96;
battle  at,  between  Sh^hi  Beg  Khin
and  two  Ehins,  122, 130 ;  occupied
by  Shaikh  Bdyazid,  159;  Omar
Shaikh's  death  at,  174  n. ;  Said
Ehlin  wounded  at  the  battle  of,  178;
KhalU  Sult&n  drowned  in  the  river
at,  183,  264-5;  Said  Kh&n  kills
Tubra  at,  265;  defended  by  Mir
Ghnri  Barl^  271 ;  Said  KhiUi  at,
276,  280,  378  and  n. ;  plundered  by
the  Kirghiz,  358.

Akh8iket,9n. *

Akhur.  Mir,  309.

Akka  Begi,  Princess,  40.

Ak  Kabds,  78.

Ak-Koinlu  (White  Sheep  Turkomans),
line  of,  154  n.

Ak  Nazar,  chief  of  the  White  Horde,
121*  n.

Aksu,  province  of,  under  the  rule  of
the  eastern  Khan,  100,*  101*;  Man-
sur,  chief  of,  109;*  Benedict  GK)e8
and,  122* ;  city  of,  51  *  n. ;  Euchar,
a  dependency  of,  54  * ;  residence  of
Amir  Bulaji, 7-9;  Tughluk  Timur  at,
12 ;  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  at,  75 ;  Ifilin
Bugh^  governor  of,  78,  79 ;  seized
by  Yunus  Khiln,  90,  91;  given  to
Ilyis  Ehin,  100;  given  to  Is&n
Bughli  Eh&n,  101  ;  Muhammad
Haidar  Mirzi  and  Yunus  Eh&n  at,
106, 108-111 ;  Mansur  Eh&n  at,  123,
336;  taken  by  Mirzi  Ab6  Bakr,
124,  254,  837;  marched  against  by
Mansur  Ehin,  128,  145;  rebuilt  by
Aiman  Eliwdja  Sultin,  135 ;  Basbid

Sultdn  sent  to,  142,  143;  visit  of
Mirz&  Abi  Bakr  to,  252;  Mir  V&li
drives  the  Moghuls  out  of,  319;
Aiman  Ehwij^  Sultan  repairs  to,
333,  341 ;  Bashid  SulUn  at,  393-4,
403.

Aksum^  tower  of,  49.

Aktdgmh^  the  party  of  the  **  White
Mountain,"  125.*

Ak-T^hfih,  river,  324.

Aktimur  Bahidur,  43,  46,  50.

AUbugh^  place  called,  78.

Al&ch4  Eb^n  :  tM  Ahmad  Ehin  Sul-
tto.

AUi,  mountain  range,  168  n.;  405.

Alaknut  tribe :  aee  Arkenut

Allika,  fortress  called,  76.

Alalai-Lutak,  in  Tibet,  410.

AUnkui-Eurkluk,  story  of,  in  the
Zafar-l^dvMXy  5.

Ala-Nor  Lake,  30.*

Ala-ud-Din  Ata-ul-Mulk :  ms  Juvaini.

AU-ud-Din  Muhammad,  Imim  of
Ehotan,  291,  298.

Ald-ud-^Din,  SulUUi,  432.

Alemanni,  the  tribe.  Sir  H.  Howorth
on,  91*  n.

Alexander  the  Great,  the  princes  of
Badakhshin  descended  from,  107  n.

Algu  (great-grandson  of  GhingizX  34.*

Ali,  AjDir,  son  of  Sayyid  Ahmad :  aM
Sayyid  Ali.

Ali,  Ehw&ja,  Mirza  Haidar  entrusted
to  his  care,  275.

Ali,  Mirzi,  247.

All,  of  the  house  of  Oktai,  37.*

Ali,  a  Turfin  chief,  104.*

AH,  Malik  of  Eashmir,  438,  441.

Ali  Bablidur,  Ehwija,  140,  141.  144,
183-188,  222-225,  251,  309,  315,317,
323,  325-6,  350,  358, 368 :  his  death,
359;  appointed  Bib^Sultdn's  gover-
nor, 380.

Ali  Bahddur,  Shaikh,  39,  46.

Ali  BarUs,  Sull^,  70,  71.

Ali  Darvish,  son  of  Bay^d  Jaliir,
43.

Ali  Gharrtin,  MauUn^  127.

Alika,  son  of  Amin  D^ugha,  316,  317.

Ali  Euchuk,  Mirz^  81.

AU  Eurohi,  309.

Ali  Mirik  Barlds  Eh^n,  brother  of
Ehw6ja  AU  Bah^ur,  140, 141, 187,
307,  316,  452.

Ali  Mirzi  Begjik,  Sultin,  248,  264.

AU  Sayyid,  450 ;  put  to  death,  143.

Ali  Sayyid  Gur,  204.

Ali  Sin&r,  204.

AU  Tagh4i  Mirz^  136  n,  141-145,  306,
312,  316,  326,  368;  and  Aiman
Ehwija  Sultin,  391;  in  Eashmir,
438-441,  446;  in  E&shghar,  449,
450  452

AUm  Shaikh  Bahadur,  105, 106.

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

498

Index,

AlUh  KiiU  KukUd^h,  807.
AUdh  Biidi,  224.

Alzn&lifi:h,  towniof,  32,*  58*,  864,  and  n.;

attacked  by  Euyuk,  83* ; marched

against  by  Alga,  34* ;  reseryoin  at,

60*  ;  Friar  Nicholas  reaches,  117.*

Alzn&to,  territory  of,  invaded  by  Amir

Timur,  39,  40 ;  battle  of.  182.
Alti-Shahr,  Amirs  of,  contemporary
with  the  Khtos  of  Moghnlistan,  48,*
49* ;  province  of,  51* ;  (Land  of  the
Six  Cities)  the  boundaries  of  the
province,  53  ♦  54* ;  ruined  towns  in,
mentioned  by  Mirza  Haidar,  59* ;
the  *•  six  cities"  of,  63,*  64*;  un-
warlike  people  of,  65,*  66* ;  central
desert  of,  66,*  67*;  the  Uighurs,
ancestors  of  the  population  of,  92*-
97*;  the  Kalmyks  in,  97*;  few
Moghnls  in,  98*;  the  Dughl&t
Anurs  in  power,  99,*  111*;  the
Kirghiz  descend  into  the  lowlands
of,  124.*
Altun  Artush,  village  of,  77  n.
Altunji  (Dulpa),  gold  miners  in  Tibet,

411,  417  n.
Altyn  Tieh,  Tibetan  highland,  54.*
Am&n  Sarbadil,  45.
Amar  Shaikh,  Mirza,  468.
Amdsdnii  T&ishi  (son  of  Is^n  T&ishi),
79 ;  flight  to  Moghulistan  and  defeat
of  Tunus  Kh£n,  91.
Amirs  called  Enkild&sh,  52.
Amirs  of  Ktuhuns,  55.
Amol  (Amuya),  town  of,  170  n.
Amu  River,  211, 234.
Amuya  River,  170  and  n.,  193.
Amuyah  (or  Amol)  ford,  36  and  n.
Amyot,  P^re ;  Chinese  documents  re-
lating to  Turf^n,  107*-109*.  111*.
Andarkul  (Indrakot),  fort  of,  485, 488.
Andij&n,  75, 180  n.,  181  n. ;  Mirz6  Hai-
dar at,  11* ;  Moglml  attacks  on,  68;
plundered  by  Mir  Earim  Bardi,  78  ;
taken  by  Isdn  Bugha,  81;  Tunus
Ehin at,  96,  97; Sult&n Ahmad
Mirzd  and,  119;  invaded  by  Sayyid
Muhammad  Mirzi,  181,  182,  144;
advance of the Uzbeg Sult&ns
against,  183 ;  Rashid  Ehdn  marches
on,  146;  quarrels  between  the  sons
of  Omar  Shaikh  at,  154,  173 ;  revolt
of  Sult&n  Ahmad  Tambal,  158, 167-
169 ;  given  to  J&ni  Beg  Sultdn,  169,
178  ;  mbar  Padishdh  goes  to  relief
of,  175;  Mahmud  Khdn's  advance
on,  207 ;  Said  Khin  imprisoned  at,
222, 224  ;  Said  Ehdu  made  governor
of,  225,  242,  247-8,  264  ;  Mirzd  AU
Bakr  lays  siege  to,  and  is  defeated
by  Said  Eh&n,  249,  250 ;  fortified  by
Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzi,  271 ;  Said
Ehin  returns  Uj,  277 ;  the  Uzbeg  set
out  against,  280-2 ;  Suyunjuk  Ehin

adviinoes  on,  284-5,  346 ;  plundered
by  the  Kirghiz,  358;  Said  Kbin's
second  invasion  of,  376-7 :  sm  aim
Faighina.
Andkhud,  44.

Ankghun,  desert  plains  of,  189.
Arabs,  invasion  of  Kastem  Turkiatan,

96.*
Arawdn,  place  called,  340  n.
Arb&t,  plains  of,  340.
Aicaoun  (Arghun),  ChristiaiiB  called,

290  n.
Arduk  (RudokX  406,  and  n.
Aishun  tribe,  55  n.
Arhang,  24.
Arif  Sultdn,  son  of Rashid  Snltin,

122.*
Arisb,  battle  at,  127  and  n.,  128  n.
Arish  Lir,  878  and  n.
Arjirak,  the  Amirs  of  Itiiji  descended

from,  51.
Arkenut  (Azkenut),  tribe  of;  16  ».
Arlat  tribe,  55  n. ;  Mausor  Khin  and,

339.
Arpa  T&zi,  42,  847.
Axsalan  Khiin,  fort  destroyed  by,  67.*
Arshad-ud-Din,  ManUni,  8, 10, 18, 14,

127,  872.
ATsh61Atir(Otar),41.
Aislin  B&gh,  plundered,  812.
Artuch  (ArtusnX  village  of^  77.
Artuj  (ArtushX  district  of,  295;  Said

Khin  at,  304.
Ashigir (ShigarX  district of  Baiti,

410.
Ashlar  Abd&l :  tee  Sayyid  All,  Amir.
Asil  Pulid,  Bon-iu-law  of  Khw4ia  Ali

Bahidnr,  187.
Askdbrak,  place  in  Tibet,  455,  456  n.
Askirdu,  pass  o^  405*
Askirdu  (Runk),  district  of  Balti,  410
Aspati  (Spiti),  406  and  n.
Aspera  (Aspar&h)  town  in  MoghuliA-

tan,  79n,80o.
Assassins  (Ismaili),  a  sects  of  Sbiahs,

218  n.
Ast^kbark  (or  Askibrak),  in Tibet,
410, 411; plundered by Mixsa
Haidar,  14.*
Astartlbid,  battle  at,  206.
A$t€rkhay  33.

Ataka  Fakir :  Me  Jin  Ahmad  Ataka.
At^um,  47.

Atal,  ouUet  of  Kukcha  Tangis,  366.
Atilik,  the  (guardian  or  tutor),  222  n.
Ativa  (Et&wa),  472.
At  B&8hi,  42,  46,  304  n.,  321.  877 ;  en-
campment of,  59.*
At  Kdab  River,  406  and  n.
At  Kumds,  378  and  n.
Atu  Bum  Bishi,  804.
Atwal,  Arab  writer,  on  altuatioa  of

}Ula-Sikun,363ii.
Aulia-Ata,  town  of,  63  n.

Digitized  by

Google

Ittdex.

499

AuU  (or  encampments)  of  the  MoghnlB,

57»-59».
Avais,  Snlt&n  (Vais),  380.
Avantipnr,  ruins  of  temple  at,  427  n.
Ayar  Nor,  Lake,  53.*
Ayub,  Mir,  241,  808,  313;  death  of.

315.
Ayub Begjik, Mir. 261, 263, 265,

280.
Azarbi^'in,  Yunus  Khan  journeys  in,

85.
Aziz  Birdi  Aghi,  185,  187,  188,  343,

94x.

Baba  BashXohibi,  Maulana,  356.

Blib6  Chuchak,  18*,  482.

BiU  KuUghin,  809.

B6U  S^Urik  Mirzi,  308,  316,  875,  421.
441.

BMk  Sayyid,  882.

B6b&  Sultin,  142,  144,  250,  251,  358,
368;  kept  a  prisoner  by  Jini  B^
8ultin,140;  marries  Mirzi  HaidaPs
sister,  859 ;  Mb  history,  879-383.

B6b&jik  Kh^n,  son  of  Sultin  Ahmad
Ehin,  122, 180,  160 ;  Mansur  Kh&n
and,  126.

Bdbij6k  Sult&n.  178,  332;  pursued  by
the  Kirghiz,  378 ;  forays  agaiust  by
Miizi  Ab6  Bakr,  837 ;  proceeds  to
Kusan,  339;  surrenders  to  Kansur
Kh&n,  340,  343;  friendly  meeting
with  Said  Khiin,  34&-8.

Bdbarin  Azuk  Mbzi,  309.  310.

Bibar  Kalandar.  Mirai  (Abdul  YUmol
Baber),  83.

Bibar  PMishllh  (Baber  Emperor),  the
first  of  the  Moghuls  of  India,  com-
pared with  Mirzi  Haidar,  3  * ;
contempt  for  the  Moghul  race,  4*;
memoirs,  written  in  Turki,  4"^;  his
son:  8ee  Uumasrun.  MirziL  Haidar
related  to,  9*;  plot  against,  by
Haider's  &ther,  9*;  takes  Mirzi
Haidar  into  his  household,  10*;
defeats  the  Uzbegs  at  Hisar,  10* ;  the
battle  of  Ghajdiwan  and  subsequent
retreat  to  Kabul,  10*;  threatens
to  support  the  chief  of  Badakhsh&n
a^^ainst  Sultin  Said,  12* ;  a  copy  of
his  *  Memoirs '  in  Mirzd  Haic[ar*s
possession,  23*;  foroee  of,  the  Mo-
ghuls  and  the  Uzbegs  against,  57* ;
ancestors  of,  were  Turlo,  78,*  79*  ;
and  the  Turahj  22  n. ;  on  the
Jadah  stone,  32  n.;  the  Shibartu
PaML  36  n. ;  buildings,  etc.,  erected
by  Ulugh  Beg  at  Samarkand,  60  n.
▼kted  by  Sultdn  Said  Kh6n,  131
defeats  the  Uzbeg  Bultins,  132
Sultin  Mahmud's  nephew,  158. 159
his  kind  treatment  of  Chin  Timur
Sultan  and  Yudun  Timor  Sultan,

161;  son  of  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzll,
154. 155. 156;  his  birth,  173;  gene-
alogy of,  173;  his  *  Memoirs'  and
other  works,  173,  174  n. ;  rallied  to
the  throne  at  the  age  of  twelve,
174 ;  attacks  Samarkand.  174 ;  de-
feated by  Shahi  Beg  Khdn  and  sub-
sequent flight.  175, 196 ;  meets  with
Khusrau  Sb&h,  176;  takes  Kabul,
177,  191 ;  welcomes  Muhammad
Husain  Kurkan,  196,  199  n.;  ex-
pedition into  Khor^in,  197-8 ;  and
Shdh  Begum,  200;  his  sojourn  in
Kabul,  199,  201-204,  263-4,  356;
battle  with  Sh^  Beg  near  Kan-
dahar, 202 ;  battle  with  Abdur  Baz-
zdk,  204;  executes  Hamza  Sultdn,
217 ;  reception  of  Mirz6  Haidar  at
Kabul,  228-230;  sets  out  for  Kunduz,
237-8,  267 ;  proceeds  against  Hisar,
238,  243,  260-1,  268 ;  Sultdn  Said
Kh^  and,  242 ;  enters  city  of  Samar-
kand, 246,  250,  268;  defeated  by
Ubaid  Ullah  Khdn  at  Kul  Malik,
260 ;  defeated  by  the  Uzbeg  at  Qha,y
davin,  261 ;  revolt  of  the  Moghul
Amirs,  261,  357;  and  Sultin  Nasir
Mirz&,  264 ;  obtains  help  from  Shih
Ismail,  281 ;  Daulat  Sult&n  Kh6nim
joins,  851 ;  marches  upon  Kandah^,
357;  proceeds  to  Hindost^  357,
387;  defeats  Ibr&him,  the  Aoghiu
Sultto,  357-8;  gives  Buhtak  to
B6b&  Sultlbi,  381;  his  two  suns,
387 ;  sends  Sulaimin  8b6h  Mirz^  to
Badakhshin,3?<8,389;  defeats  Ban6
Singli  at  Kanwa,  402;  marches
against  Ohitur,  402 ;  his  death,  402 ;
and  the  town  of  Bhira,  406  n. ;  sends
Said  Kbdn  to  Andijdn,  447 ;  expedi-
tion against  Perh&lah,  480  ». ;  and
the  throne  of  Samarkand,  484 ;  the
province  of  Sind,  484  n,:  see  also
Zahir-ud-Din  Muhammad.

Baber  Emperor :  $ee  Bihar  Pddishih.

Baber's  *  Memoirs,'  by  Erskine,  173 ;  on
the  *  Dispersion  of  the  Irizuo,'  73  n. ;
and  Tangi.  79  n.,  86  n. ;  and  Tunus
Kh&n,  85  n.;  the  battle  of  Tika-
Sakaratku,  97  n. ;  and  Kattor,  a
division  of  Kafiristan,  104  fk ;  the
tribe  of  Jagir6k,  165  n. ;  description
of  his  father's  death  in,  174  n. ;  his
battles  with  the  Uzbeg  Sultins
wanting  in,  245  n.-248  n. ;  other
gaps  in,  247  n.,  248  n. :  see  aho
Erskine.

B&bd&ghdn  (Bibdi  Kurkin)  Amir,
294.

Bibis,  the.  in  Persia,  69  n.

Bdbrika  Mirz^  316.

Bibulii.  son  of  Ibrahim,  91«

Badakhsh&ii  (Daiizukhin),^  108,  111 ;
province  of,  10,*  24*  ;  Sultdn  Said's
2  K  2

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

Soo

Index.

campaign  against,  12,*  135;  Mirz&
Haidar  winters  in,  16* ;  oyemin  by
foreign  troops,  65*;  E^arluks  in,  at
the  present  day,  19  n.;  return  of
Husttin  and  Timur  to,  23, 24 ;  Sikan-
dar  in,  107  and  n.;  subjugated  by
Khusrau  Shih,  130, 163;  the  Uzbeg
army  and,  203;  claimed  by  Shdh
Begum,  203;  Mirz6  Eh&u's  reign
over,  203,  219-221;  Sb&h  fUzi-ud-
Din  in,  217,  219 ;  the  MuUhida  in
hill  districts  of,  218  n. ;  capital  of:
tee  Eala-Zafar ;  escape  of  Sultin  Said
to,  226;  Mirzd  Haidar  at,  221.  227-
28,  467 ;  Mlrz6  Ab&  Bakr  sends  an
army  tu,  254 ;  Eoshluk  captured  in,
292;  Mir  Yali  and,  320;  Bustingir
Mirz&  flees  to,  330 ;  upper  districts
of,  subdued  by  Mirzd  Ab6  Balo*,
353  ;  Said  Ebdn  and,  354, 355 ;  B£b6
SulUn  flees  to,  380,  381;  Said
Khin's  second  expedition  into,  387-
390;  Sulaimia  SMh  Mirz^'s  reign
in,  389.

Badi-ul-Jam61  Khanim,  453.

Badi-uz-Zamdn,  son  of  Mirzd  Sultin
Husain,  164, 195, 196.

Bdgh-i-Ziigbin,  garden  at  Herat,  83.

Bdghin,  kills  Maulan^  Kar&  Tllgh,
463.

B6gh  Navm,  village  called,  438.

B%h  Yasdr  OghUn,  165.

Bahirln  tribe,  214  n.

Bahliuddin,  Khwdja,  67.

Babi-ul-Hakk,  Khwija,  396.

Bahr&mgalla,  488.

Bahrdm  Ghu,  of  Balti,  422.

Bahr&m  JaUir,  Amir,  26,  39,  41 ;  re-
volt of,  44,  45.

Bahrika  Mirzi,  306,  444.

Bahrin,  tribe  of,  183-185,  316.

Bii,  75  ;  raids  into,  by  Mir  Jabdr  Birdi,
124;  Bibdj^  SulUn  and,  126;
Bibdjdk  Sultan  in,  332;  forays
against,  by  MirzH  Ab6  Bakr,  387.

Blii  Gul  (Oikul)  near  Aksu,  12.

Biisanghar  Mirz6, 119, 154;  Khusrau
Shtii  and,  163, 174,  203  n.

Bditdk,  village  of,  42.

B4i  Tisha,  309.

Bai-ya-dsi,  Prince  of*Hami,  105.*

B^jw&ra  (Baj^ra),  city  of,  405  and  »».,
406  n.

Bajw&ra,  Biver  of,  406  and  n.

Bak£bulnng,  72.

Bakar,  357.

Bakbulan,  Bivers  called,  72  n.

Bakhsh,  Mr.  Maula,  on  the  Ear&w^nis,
491,  492.

Bakhtimulk  Aghi,  wife  of  Prince
Jah^Uigir,  48.

B6ki  Ghaghanidni,  165  n.,  177  and  n.

Baki  Nila  Furusli,  177.

Baklin  (BaghUn),  plain  of,  37, 175.

Baklata,  plaoe  in  Kashmir,  437.
Baltoghun,  city  of,  58,*  287  n.,  289  ;

captured  by  Yeliu  Taishi,  94.*
Ba-U-ma-rh,  a  chief  of  Turfi&n,  103.*
Bdla-Sdkun  (Khdn  B61igh),  dty  of,

361  and  n. ;  362-4.
Balgh^ji,  79.
BdLuh,  a,  256-7.
Balk&dh,  Lake,  53.*
Balkh,  36;  conquered  by  Sultin  Abu

Said,  81  n. ;  besieged  by  Sliihi  Beg,

164,  165.  167,  204^.
Balti,  mountain  range,  405.
Balti  (Baltistan),  invaded  by  Mirz4

Haidar,  13,*  14*  ;  again  in  1548, 21*;

province  of  Tibet,  410 ;  Said  Khin

m,  421,  422 ;  Mirzi  Haidar  in,  461,

462.
Balti,  tribe  of  Baltistan  (Little Tibet),

82* ;  Balti,  tribe  of,  82,*  83*;  pio-

vinco  of.  135  n.;  holy  war  against,

by  Sult&n  Said  Khin,  136.
Balur  rBolorXi  country  of,  135  ».;  in-

vadea  by  Miizi  Haidar  and  Rashid

Sultin,  142,  384-386; Mirzi  Abi

Bakr  and,  254 ;  Mir  Yili  takes,  320.
Baluristin,J)rovinoe  of;  385  n.,  386.
Bandagin  Koka,  attack  on  the  province

ofKSihtawir,21.*
Bandagi Hazrat Khwija, 378: mo

Nura,  Khwf^a.
Bandagi  Khwija  Tijuddin,  127.
Bandagi  Maulavi  Jami,  396.
Bangila,  406,  410,  411 ;  attacked  by

Emperor  Humiyun,  470.
Bangi :  $ee  Pir  Muhammad  fiarlis.
Banihil,  district  of;  21.*
Barik  Khin,  father  of  Davi  Khin,  3 ;

his  tomb,  299,  SOO.
Biramula,  Mirzi  Haidar  killed  near,

22.*
Baranduk  Khin,  82, 154.  168,  230,

272  n.
Birin  Tilish,  Amir,  373.
Barit  Khw^'a  KukUdiah,  49.
Birin,  tribe  of,  79.

Biris  Kiun  (Barskun  Pass),  350  and  n.
Barka  Yasival,  309.
Barkha,  post  station  in  Tibet,  456  n.
Birki  (or  Yirki),  family  of,  307.
Barlis tribe,  55  n.,  146; Timur, a

member  of,  3.*
Barlis,  family  of,  dispute  with  Amir

Diim  All,  306-7.
Firming,  place  in  Tibet,  454,  456  n.
Bar  Mazid  Mankish,  309.
Bamig  (Yiruig),  district  called,  427.
Barskun  Pass,  350  n.
Bashgirds,  the,  88.*
Batu,  son  of  Juji ;  dominion  of,  30*  ;

and  the  province  of  Turkistau,  34.*
Biush  Sultin,  453.
Biyin  Sulduz,  Amir,  19,  22.
Bayin  Timur,  40.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Index,

SOI

B&y&zid  Jaldir,  Amir,  16, 18, 19,  Bl.
Biyazid,  Shaikh,  ISO,  159, 167 ;  throws

Said  Ehin  into  prison,  178,  447.
Biyazid  (Bihd^hto)  Amir,  294  n.
B^z-Shirak,  810.
Beale,  Mr.,  on  Khw^ja Bah^uddin,

67  n.;  on  Sayyid Ali Hamad^ni,

48311.
Beam in  the  monastery of  Shaikh

Habib,  304.
Beg  Abdollah,  chief  of  the  province

of  Hami,  124*  n.
Begjik,  Amir,  taken  prisoner  by  Amir

Timnr,  28.
Begjik,  merchant  named,  9.
Begjik  of  the  tribe  of  Kdnkali,  16,

B^ik,  family  of,  308;  dispute  with
the  family  of  Jar6s,  308-9.

Beg  KuU  Makrit,  309,  326.

Beg  Muhammad  Mir,  241,  247,  308,
316,  325,  327,  354.

Bellew,  Surg.-Genl.  W.  H.,  *  History  of
Eastern  Turkistan,'  largely  drawn
from  the  TairiVhri-'EUuhidLi^  vii.,  on
Uch  Burhin,  42  n. ;  on  the  oolunm
of  Ak'sumi,  49  n. ;  on  Indghu,
50  n.;  ten  privileges  granted  to  an-
cestors of  Amir  Ehud&id&d  by  Chin-
giz  Khto,  54  n.,  55  n. ;  on  the  cities
of  Eastern  Turkistan,  51*  n. ;  on
Tdsh-Babdt,  59  n. ;  on  towns  buried
by  moving  sands,  67,*  68*;  on
Buruj  OghUn,  92  n. ;  on  the  tombs
of  the  Kbw&jas,  125* ;  on  small  re-
sidue of  Moghuls  still  existing  in
Eastern  Turkistan,  127*;  on  Man-
lik,  7  n. ;  on  ruins  of  ancient  towns
in  Eastern  Turkistan,  11  n.,  12  n.;
on  the  word  Twpclid^  260  n.;  on
the  Dak  Eh^ns,  287  m.;  on  the
name  of  B^bd^ghin,  294  n. ;  on
dam^ri,  413  n.

Bendall,  Professor,  on  Jndna-Kdsyapa,
415  n. ;  on  the  Jdtakas,  416  n.

Bengal,  Humayun  defeated  by  Shir
Sh&h  Sur,  16.*

Bemier,  French  traveller  on  island  of
Lanka,  429  ».

Bhaniyar,  ruins  of  temple  at,  427  n.

Bhira,  town  of,  406  and  n.

Bhirbal,  district  of,  22.*

Bi^  Biver,  the,  481.

Bidakan,  461.

Biddulph,  Col.  J.,  on  Kature^  the
rulers  of  Ghittal,  104  n. ;  on  load-
carrying  sheep,  408  n.

Biljav^n,  24.

Biloch  frostier,  the ;  use  of  the  word
Turk  on,  90.*

BUuchi,  Sir  H.  Yule  and,  77.*

Bilur  (or  Bolor)  hiU  country,  invasion
of.  12* ;  9ee  also  Balur.

Binakat  (Shahmkbia),  289  n.

BiriUsh,  brother  of  T&hir  Kh&n,  82.

Birkeh-i-Ghurito,  41.

Bish  Bdligh,  territory  of,  288.

Bishb^lik  (or  Bishbdligh),  dty  or '  town '
of,  58*;  its  situation,  62*;  the
Chinese  and  the  name  of,  61* ;  (the
Five  Towns)  the  Toghuz  Uighurs
of,  93*  ;  (the  modem  Ummtsi)  100.*

Biah  Ka  Miiz^  307,  316.

Bishkand,  battle  at,  266.

Blochmann,  Professor,  89* ;  and  privi-
leges granted  by  Ghingiz  Ehto  to
ancestors  of  Amir  EJiudkid&d,  54  n.,
55  n.

Bogdo-Ula  Mountain,  in  the  Tian
Shan,  112.*

Bokhara,  Mirzi  Haidar  carried  off  to,
9* ;  taken  by  Baber,  10* ;  seized  by
the  Uzbegs,  10*;  in  1232,  Chaghatai
and,  31*  ;  death  of  BortLk  at,  35* ;
plundered  and  burnt  by  Ab6k^,  36* ;
wars  in,  154;  conquered  by  Shihi
Beg  Ehdn,  158, 166;  ruled  by  Ubaid
Ullah  Ehdn,  206  n.,  207 ;  the  Uzbeg
driven  out  of,  by  Emperor  B&bar,
245;  marched  against  by  Ubaid
Ullah  Khto,  259,  260;  during  roign
of  Ubaid  Ullah  KhiUi,  283.

Boldai,  tribe  of,  23.

Bolor :  see  Balur.

Borak  (or  Barik),  great-grandson  of
Chaghatai,  34*  ;  invades  Khorasdn,
35* ;  death  at  Bokhara,  35.*

Bower,  Capt.  Hamilton,  birch-bark
MSS.  found  near  Kuchar,  70,*  71,*
124*  ;  ou  the  wild  yak,  302  n.

Brotschneider,  Dr.,  translation  of  the
history  of  tlie  Ming  dynasty;  on
the  Moghul  Khtos,  41*-46* ;  on
the  ancient  kingdoms  of  Earashahr
and  Kuchar,  62*;  ancient  Tar6z.63n.;
the  River  m,  66  n.;  the  work  of  Arab
Shah,  79  fi. ;  on  the  history  of  Turfto,
102*-106,*  113;  on  the  Khans  of
Uigljuristin,  123,*  124*;  on  the
Sarigh  Uighur,  9  n. ;  Chinese  names
for  liC^e  Lob,  12  ». ;  on  the  K&n^i
tribe,  16  n. ;  on  the  Karluk  tribe,
19  n. ;  on  the  Kara  Khitai  capital,
153  n. ;  on  the  title  Fuma,  278  n. ;  on
Ubaira-Subaira,  282  n. ;  on  the  Hak
Kh&ns,  287  n.;  the  Biver  Jinuj,
289  n. ;  the  TieSie  (TarsaX  290  n. ;
on  Qiang-ba-la  (J&m  Bdligh),291n.;
on  country  of  the  Yellow  Uighurs,
349  n.

"  Bridge  of  Stone,"  the,  24  and  n.,  25.

Briggs,  Gen.,  and  Firishta's  version  of
Muz&  Haidar's  death,  22.*

British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  :
copies  of  the  farikh't-Rcuihidi  in
possession  of,  iz.,  z.

British  Museum :  Erskine's  partial
trauslation  of  the  Tarikh-t-Rashidit

Digitized  by  VjL^OQIC

502

Index.

Id,  v.,  vi.,  xi. ; copy  of  the  Tari^fc-

i-Radiidi  at,  ix.
Buddhists,  the,  known  as  Tani,  96* ;

Uighurifltdn, centree of the, in

Middle  Ages,  113.*
Bnghib  Khto  ( AfrisUb  the  Turk),  286,

287  n. ;  B<Ua-Siknn  bnilt  by,  362  n.
Bngb&m  Issigh-Kul,  50.
Builash  Kh&n,  son  of  Uyak  Snlt&n,

161.
Bu  Katlugh, Amir TimuPs private

secretary,  46,  47.
BuUji  DughUt,  Amir,  7,*  26,*  118*,

38,  51  n. ;  sends  after  Manlik  and

her  child,  6,  7 ;  his  territory,  7 ;  snr-

name  of,  9 ;  nine  privileges  granted

to  by  Tnghluk  Timur,  28,  55 ;  intro-

dnoes  IsUm,  153.
Bulish  (Tal6sh)  Khin,  273.
Bur^  in  Tibet,  410.
Burh^-nd-Din  Kilij,  Shaikh,  46.
Bur  KfLpi,  a  Nubra  chief,  418.
Buruj  Oghl&n,  son  of  Abnlkhair  Kh&n,

92;  his  murder  by  Tunns  Kh&D,  92,

93,  116.
Bustingir  Mirz^  830.
Buya,  179.
Buyan  Euli,  servant  of  Yunus  Khto,

87.
Buynn  Pir  Hasan,  231.
Buzana,  son-in-law  of  Khw^ja  Ali  Ba-

liidur,  187.
Buz-ghala  Kh&na  (the  Iron  Gate),  20  n.

Cailao  (KiriK),  288  n.

Camels  in  the  desert  of  Kbotan,  295,
301,  301  n. ;  hunted  by  Yais  Ehdn,
67.

CaraoTuu  (the  Ghaghatais),  Marco  Polo
on,  77*.

Carpini,  Piano,  traveller  in  Asia,  117*,
119* ;  account  of  the  Uighurs  in  the
Middle  Ages,  96*.

Cathay :  see  China.

Central  Asia;  Mongol  rule  during
days  of  Chingiz,  115*  ;  imp<;netrahle
to  European  travellers  then,  116*-
118.*

Chddir  Kul,  Bab6t  (rest  house)  at,  58,
346.

Ch6gn,  Amir,  29,  32.

ChagbaniAn,  country  of,  177  n.

Chaghatai  Khan  (Chingiz's  seconil
son),  dominion  of,  30* ;  us  a  gover-
nor, 31* ;  his  capital,  32* ;  death  of,
32,*  33* ;  and  the  province  of  Uig-
huristan,  100*;  kingdom  of,  293;
the  DughUt  army  given  to,  294.

Chaghatai  Kh^ns;  wetitem  branch  of
the  line  of,  49*;  genealogical  table
of  the  house  of,  facing  p.  49*.

Chaghatai,  otherwise  *  the  Moghuls  of
India,*  2,*  3* ;  branch  of  the  Mongol
djmasty,  history  of,  ns  recorded  in

the  Tar%kh-i-Ba»hidi,  28,*  29*;  other
historians  and  the,  28,*  29*;  tJbe
line  oi^  28*-49* ;  subordinate  princes
of,  styled  Ehdn,  SO*  n. ;  division  of
the  realm  of,  37* ;  deelining  power
of  the  Kh&na,  39*;  two  separate
lines  of  Kh&ns  established,  40* ;  oaU
the  Moghuls  Jatah,  75*;  called
Eariwto^  by  the  MoghuU,  in
return,  76*;  Khwl^a  Sharif  and,
76 ;  a  branch  of  the  Moghuls,  148 ;
at  enmity  with  the  Moghuls,  172 ;
and  name  of  B&bar  P^dishih,  173 ;
overthrown  by  Shiihi  Beg  Khdn,
201,  206 ;  part  of  Said  Eh4n's  army,
305 ;  in  India :  Mirzi  Haidar's  ser-
vices transferred  to,  12* ;  their  re-
treat after  the  battle  of  Eanaui,  17,*
18,*  476,  477 ;  their  flight  to  Uhwr,
477-480.

Ohak,  family  of,  in  Kashmir,  482  n.

Chakui  Barks,  26.

Chilish  (J&lish)  town  of;  99,*  100*  ;
province  of;  102*;  Benedict  Goeb
and,  122*;  Kabak  Sultan  Oghl^
taken  to,  90.

Chilish  (Earaehahr),  125;  Mansur
Ehin's  expeditions  into,  128,  131 :
see  also  Kiurashahr.

Ch&lish,  tribe  of,  51.

Chdlish-Turf&n :  see  Uighuristan,  pro-
vince of.

Champa,  inhabitants  of  Tibet,  407  and
n.,  408-410.

Champa,  people  of  Tibet,  plundered
by  Mirz&  Haidar,  454.

Chan^k  BuUk,  15.

Chang  Chun,  Chinese  traveller,  and
Bo-lu-dji  (Bnlaji  Amir),  6  n.;  the
Taoist  monk,  passage  of  the  'Inm
Gate,'  20  n.

Ch&ng-t4n,  or  the  Northern  Plain  of
Tibet,  1 36  n.

Chang-Te,  the  Chinese  traveller,  60  n. ;
and  the  Talk!  defile,  20  n.

Chapdr,  son  of  Kaidu,  35*;  succeeds
to  Khanate,  36*;  battles  against
Dav&,  36* :  attacks  Eabak,  37*.

Ch&Tchin(d),  52.

Ch&roh6n  River,  406.
I Chirgalik,  village,  12  n.

Chartara,  the  (instrument),  139  n.

Chiiruchi,  36.

Charun  Ch&Uk,  battleat,  125, 131, 139,
334.

Chausa  (Chapa  Ghiit)  Emperor  Humi-
yun  defeated  at,  470  and  n.,  471.

Chekad^lik,  town  of,  26.

Chi-gn,  the  city  of,  79  n.

Cbindb  Biver,  406.

China,  tribute  paid  to,  by  the  Khins
of  Moghulistan  and  the  Dughlit
Amirs,  63* ;  the  Mongols  still  called
Tatars  in,  88* ;  Turfin  sends  tribute

Digitized  by  VjL^OV  IC

Index,

503

to,  lOSj*  107* ;  ezpeditioxiB  of,  to  re-
cover Hami,  104,*  105* ;  counterfeit
tribute  misaionB  to,  109* -111*;
Mongol  rule  during  days  of  Ohingiz,
115*;  known  ae  Ehitai  or  Cathay,
152  n

Chinese  and  the  name  of  Biahbdlik,
61,*  62* ;  the  Kh^uB  of  Eao-Chang
and  the,  94* ;  ingots  of  silver  ( Ynan-
paoX  25611.

Clunese  annals  of  the  Sung  and  Yuan
dynasties,  on  the  town  of  K&ra-
Khoja,  100.*

Chinese  chronicles  of  the  Ming
dynasty  (Afina  Ski\  on  the  history
of  Tnr&n,  102,*  108,*  US* :  ass  also
Bretsohneider,  Dr.

Chingiz  Khdn  assigns  bis  dominions  to
his  four  sons,  29*-31* ;  and  Mogbnl-
istan,  58,*  73* ;  and  Bishbdlik,  62* ;
partition  of  the  empire  of^  100*;  puts
Hiflz-nd-Din  to  death,  10 ;  the  *  Iron
Gates '  at  the  time  0^  20  n. ;  leeal
code  of  the  Mongols  instituted  oy,
22  A. ;  nine  {jrivOeges  granted  1^,
28* ;  seven  piivilegee  granted  to  the
ancestors  of  Amir  Knudiidid,  54,
55;  date  of  his  death,  56  n.;  the
Turah  of,  70;  divides  kingdom
among  bis  four  sons,  148,  298-4;
history  of  his  ancestors  and  de-
scendants: M6  {TZiM  Afbaa;  and  the
Kara-Kbitai,  158  n. ;  and  Tai  Yang
Eh^  287;  Khw^zm  Sh6h  and,
288;  sends  an  army  to  capture
Knshlnk,  292 ;  subjugates  the  whole
of  Kishghar,  293;  and  Tangut,  860,
361  n.;  his  father:  see  Timurohi;
his  second  son :  eee  Chaghatai.

Chin  Sufi,  204.

Chin  Timur  Sultin,  son  of  Sultan
Ahmad  Khin,  161.

Chirdgh'Kuih,  the  word,  218  n.,  219,
221.

Chir  River,  battle  of  the,  116, 118.

Chitral,  invasions  of,  during  reigns  of
Ab6  Bakr  and  Sultin  Said,  65*;
rulers  of  (Shah  Katur),  104  n.;
known  by  the  name  of  F61or,  885  n.

Chitur,  Emperor  B6bar  takes,  402.

Chuan  Yuan,  Chinese  traveUers,  and
the  Zungars,  97*  n.

Chu,  town  of,  69.

Chu  River,  50  n. ;  the  EararKhitai
capital  on,  152  n.

Chu,  the,  officials  in  Balti,  422  n.

Chun6k,  357.

Churchi,  the,  88.*

Citadel  at  Y^kand,  built  by  Ab&
B&ki,  296-7 ;  at  E6sbghar,  804.

Cities,  sand  buried,  295.

Ckaranut  (Ckurul^):  see  Kurinas.

Clavijo,  Ruy  Gonzalez,  118* ;  on  the
Kulugha  Pass,  20  h.

Coins :  of  N&znk  Sb&b,  20*  n. ;  of
Kashmir,  struck  in  Huma^un's  name,
24* ;  ancient  Greek,  obtamed  by  Sir
D.  Forsyth  from  a  submerged  town,
70*;  Shih  Rukh's,  *Gurl3ian'  on,
279  n. ;  of  Kashmir,  Mr.  Rodgers
on,  434  n.,  487-491 ;  brought  to  Said
Kh&n  by  Mirzi  Haidar,  443.

Culebrooke,  Mr.,  and  the  Mul&hida,
218  n.

Cowell,  Prof.,  copy  of  the  Tarikh-^-
Bcuhidi  in  possession  of,  ix.

Croix,  Petis  de  la,  translation  of  the
Zafar-Ndina,  ziii.,  85  n.;  on  the
name  Jatah,  75* ;  on  the  legal  code
of  the  Mongols,  22  n. ;  on  Arhang,
24  n.;  and  Siili-Sarii,  24  n.;  on
the  Kerranai  (trumpet),  34  n. ;  on
Firyib  (Otrar),  44  n.;  and  Kit,
45  n. ;  number  of  Amir  Timur's  ex-
peditions affainst  the  Moghuls,  48  n :
see  aUo  Zaiar-N&ma.

Cultivation  in  Kashmir,  425.

Cunningham,  Gen.  A.,  on  the  town  of
Bhira,  406  n. ;  on  the  Champa  sheep

.  traders,  407  n. ;  and  Murul,  410  n. ;
on  Chu,  422  n.;  and  Aot,  424  n.;
on  the  temples  of  Kashmir,  427  n ;
and  the  Indus  at  Uch,  431  n.,  432  ri.

Cunningham,  Capt.  J.  Davey,  and
Zoriwar  Sing,  458  n.

DJLIM  Ali,  Amir,  241,  247,  271,  306,
307,  316,  325,  327,  421 ;  campaign
in  Kashmir,  438-441.

Dam-giri  {Td$\  the,  in  Tibet,  273  n.,
412  and  n.,  413  and  n. ;  Sultto  Said
Khto's  death  from,  137  and  n.,  446.

Ddna  Kukild^h,  Sh&h,  319;  Ab&
Bakr's  treatment  of,  321.

Dand&na  (Sind)  River,  431.

Danel,  fort  of,  489.

Danibeg,  the  Georgian  traveller,  and
dust  showers,  69*  n.

Dinishmanjah,  of  the  house  of  Oktai,
37.*

"Dir  al  Isl&m"  (the  Seat  of  IsUm),
52.

Dardzukh^n,  354 :  see  Badakhsh^n.

Darband-i-Ahanin  (Iron  Gate),  pass  of,
20  n.,  21  n.,  179,  245.

Darugha,  Amir,  316,  321.

Darugha,  a  tribe  of  Khotan,  67.

Darvuh  Muhanmiad  KariT^h,  Mau-
ling 460,  463.

Ddahmand,  messenger  named,  46.

Dasht-i-E^hizr,  given  to  Juji  Kh&n,
298.

Dasht-i-Kipch£k,  subdued  by  KiUim
Kh&n,  207 ;  Abulkhair  Khin  in,  92 ;
given  to  Juji  Khin,  293  ;  K£sim
Khdn  ruler  of  the,  82, 133,  273;  the
Uzbeg  Kazik  leave  the,  135;  Baran-

Digitized  by

Google

S04

Index.

dnk  Kh&n  in  power,  154, 168 ;  Abul-
khair  Ebin  master  of,  272.
DaBht-i-Eolak,  267.
D&ad  Ehw^'a,  Amir,  31,  36.
Daulat  Ni^r  Khtoim,  wife  of  Moham-
mad Haidar  Mirz6,  88.
Danlat  Sh6h,  28.

Daulat  Sultdn  Ehinim,  108,  118, 156,
356 ;  married  to  Timur  Sultin,  160  ;
daughter  of  Tunus  Kh6u,  851-2.
Daulat  Sultan  Sakanj,  marries  Ya^s

Kh&n,  64.
Dav6  (son  of  Bor6k),  reign  of,  35,*  36* ;
his  battles  with  Chap6r,  36* ;  death
of,  36.»
Dayi  Eh4n  Pidish^  (DavA  SahanX

tomb  of;  299,  300.
Daz&k  Bulbul,  place  called,  29.
Deguignes,  work  of;  on  the  house  of
Ohai^hatai,  28* ;  on  the  legal  code  of
the  Mongols,  22  n.
Delhi,  sacked  by  Day^,  36* ;  Moghuls
still  living  in  neiehbonrhoodof,  128* ;
captured  by  HindiU  Mirz6, 470,  471 ;
retaken  by  EimrtLn  Mirz6,  471.
Desert  (or  *  steppe')  in  Moghulistsn,
55*;  central,  of  Alti-Shahr,  66,*  67*.
Deserts  to  the  east  and  south  of  K^sh-

ghar  and  Ehotan,  295.
Desideri,  Jesuit  missionary,  on  Tibet,

135  n.
Digur  Pass,  445  n.
Dili  Bizdr,  village  of  KhatUn,  219.
Dilsh&d  Agh^  Princess,  42 ;  her  mar-
riage with  Amir  Timur,  43.
Div  Sar,  district  of  Kashmir,  428  and  n.
Dugras, expedition to  Tibet,  under
Zor&war  Sing,  in  1841,  458  n.,  461  n.
D'Ohsson,  worx  of,  and  the  house  of
Chaghatai,  28*;  on  the  inhabitants
of  Moghulistan,  73* ;  and  the  name
ToioLTy  84*  n.,  85* ;  and  the  Chin-
hudje,  289  n. ;  Christians  and  Budd-
liibt  monks,  290  n. ;  on  city  of  Bila-
B6kun,  362  n.
Dowson,  Prof.,  87*  n. ;  episode  of  the
battle of Kanauj translated  from
Tarikh-i'Bcuikidi,  viii.
Dowaira,  fortress  of,  79  n.
Vrokpa,  the,  409  n.

Dughl&t  tribe ;  Mirz6  Haidar  a  mem-
l^r  of,  3* ;  mixed  with  Turki  tribes,
4* ;  the  Amirs  of  Eastern  Turki<itan,
7*,  39* ;  the  latter  province  given  to
the  house  of,  33* ;  genealogical  table
of  the  Amirs  of,  50* ;  MangdUi
Suyah  under  administration  of,  75 ;
given  to  Chaghatai  Khiin,  294;
commanded  by  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza  at  siege  of  Kashghar,  805, 306.
Dughldt  Amirs ;  pay  tribute  to  China,
63* ;  in  power  in  Alti-Shahr,  99* ;
entrusted  with  the  province  of
"Mangalai  Suyah,"  100*.

Dukhtui,  &mUy  of  the,  806,  807

Dnkhtui  Bhai6wal,  Amir,  6,  7.

Dul&n,  188.

Duldi  tribe,  55  n.

Dulpa  (DukpaX  tribe  of  (Champa  called,
409  and  n.,  411,  412  n.,  417.

Dust  AU  ChuUk,  224.

Dust  Muhammad  Khin,  son  of  lain
Bugh6  Kh&n,  Khinship  of,  88-80 ;
his  death,  91, 98 ;  manies  the  widow
of  Simz  Mirz£,  99, 102 ;  bis  great
stature,  99 ;  Ab6  B&kr  pays  respects
to,  252.

Dost  Nisir,  Amir,  260.

Basle's  'Philology  of  the  English
Tongue,'  91.*

EM  Nor,  Lake,  53.*

Ebuskun,  Ghaghatai's  widow,  83.*

Eleutha,  the,  97*  n.

Elliot's  'History  of  India;'  extract
from  the  Tarikh-i'Bashidi  in,  viiL

Ellis,  Bfr.  A.  O.,  and  the  term  Tdjik,
90.*

Encampments  of  the  Moghuls :  tee  Aul.

Enigmas,  introduced  by  Maulini
Sharaf-ud-Din  Tazdi,  84.

Erdmann,  Dr.,  on  the  Kur6nas  tribe
(Ckaranut),  76,*  77*;  the  Mongol
originally  connected  with  the  Turk,
78*  n. ;  and  Bashid-ud-Din's  list  of
Mongol  tribes,  16  n.;  on  the  title
Kurk^ni,  278  n.,  279  n.

Erakine,  Mr.  W.,  the  historian,  2,*
89* ;  his  partial  translation  of  the
Tarikh'i'Uashidi,  v.,  vi.,  xL,  4*  n.,
479  n.;  Mirz^  Haidar  wounded  at
Fattehpur  Sikri,  17*  n;  date  of  the
recovery  of  Kabul  by  Humayun,
25* ;  on  Mirzii  Haidar's  personal
characteristics,  26*;  Hiatory  oflndia^
information  regarding  tlie  Chaghatai,
29* ;  and  Manlik  (M&nselik),  7  n. ;
on  the  Jatah  stone,  82  n.,  33  n. ;  the
Turah  of  the  Moghul  tribes,  22  m;
and  Kdt,  45  n. ;  the  twelve  privileges
granted  by  Chingiz  Ehin  to  the
ancestors  of  Amir  Khudiid&d,  54,
55  n ;  the  chief  computers  of  the
astronomical  tables  (Zik  Knrk&nX
59  n.,  60  n. ;  on  Shir  Kuli,  60 ;
and  Masiki  (Yangi),  79  n.,  80«.;
on  Muhammad  Haidar  Miner's  role,
98  n.;  Sh&hi  Beg  and  the  siege
of  Eelat,  192  n. ;  on  lAiai  Sultan
Husain,  193  n. ;  on  Sivi  (SibiX
202  n.;  on  Shahrukhi  coin,  202  n.;
on  the  word  Sarddr^  203  n.;  on  the
Kita-bdtih,  214  fi. ;  Hittory  of  India^
the  Emperor  B&bar  and  Bh£h
Ismail,  246  n.,  247;  on  the  ^os
(measure),  256  n. ;  the  Kaz^  and
their  Sultins,  272  fi.

Erakine's  HUtory  of  India  under  ihe

Digitized  by

Google

Index.

505

lAoghvJU :  extracts  and  oomments  of,
the  TaH}^-i'BiaMdi^  yi.,  vii;  and
the  saocession  of  the  Moghnl  Ehins
from  the  time  of  lain  Sugh^  40*-
47.*

Eoropean  trayellers ;  Central  Asia  im-
penetrable to,  during  the  period  of
Mirz&  Haidar's  history,  116^-118.*

Excavations  (Kizik),  by  Mirz6  Ab&
Bakr,  255  n.,  256-7,296.

Faxhbuddin,  Khw&ja,  a  merchant,  76,
77.

Fakir  Ali,  387.

Fakih  ibn  Bakr,  tomb  o^  in  K^hghar,
301.

Famine  in  Hisar,  262.

Farfth,  Muhammad  Husain  Kurk^n  in,
201,  205-6.

Fargh^a,  8  n.,  9  n. ;  a  possession  of  the
KMns  of  Moghulistan,  52*;  Is&n
Bugh6  Khto's  incursion,  85;  pro-
vince of,  87  n. ;  capital  of:  see  Akhsi ;
Sultdn  Ahmad  Mirz^  and,  110;
taken  by  Sh^hi  Beg,  130;  MirziL
Abd  Bakr's  advance  on,  132 ;  raided
by  Muhammad  Kirghiz,  134;  at-
tack and  conquest  of,  by  Sayyid
Muhammad  Mirz^  140,  239-41;
quarrels  and  disputes  between  the
sons  of  Mirzd  Omar  Shaikh  Eurk&n,
154,  173;  ASA  Bakr  and,  248:  %ee
also  Andij^n ;  province  of  Said  EJiin
and,  276, 284-6 ;  joined  on  to  Mav6r6-
un-Nahr,  282 ;  Mir  Yali  and,  320 ;
plundered  by  the  Kirghiz,  367.

Farh^  Aberdi,  32,  34.

F&rs,  Yunus  Kh6n  journeys  in,  85.

Fdry6b  (Ffirttb),  44.

Fattehpur  Sikri,  Humayun  shot  at,
17*  n.

Foiird,  Mirz^  Ab6  Bakr's  use  of,  258-9.

Ferebr  (Farab),  170  n.

Fergnsson,  Mr.,  on  the  Martand  temple,
427  n.

Fikh-i-AhwcU,  book  celebrated  in  Kash-
mir, 435,  436.

FiufLkand  (Shahrukhia),  289  and  n.

Firishta,the  historian,  19,*  29,*  246  ».,
247  n. ;  on  the  Niazi  tribe  of  Af-
ghans, 21,*  22*;  on  the  death  of
Mirzi  Haidar,  22* ;  on  the  Sultans
of  Kashmir,  433  n.;  account  of  Mirz6
Haidar's  invasion  of  Kashmir,  441  n.,
442  n.;  on  Kdmr&nMirz^'s  behaviour
to  Mirzi  Haidar,  474  n. ;  on  Indra-
kot,  485  n.;  history  translated  by
G.  J.  Bodgers,  487.

Firmdn,  country  o(  42.

'Five  Cities'  (Bishbilikl  61,*  62*  n.

Forsyth,  Sir  Douglas,  and  towns  buried
by  moving  sands,  67*  ;  on  sand-
buried  towns  of  Lob  and  Katak,
1 1  n.,  12  n. ;  on  ancient  Greek  coins

obtained  from  a  submerged  town,

70* ;  mission  to  Kashghar  in  1873,

vii.,  408.
Fort  built  on  Tuman  Biver  by  Ab6

Bakr,  285-6.
Fort  at  Tarkand,  built  by  Abd  Bakr,

296-7.
Fraser,  Mr.  James,  on  Faridby  44  n. ;

on  the  Kizilb^Uh,  214  n.
Fruit,  in  the  provinces  of  Kashghar

and  Khotan,  303.
Ft^ma,  the  title,  278  fi.

Gabelentz,  Professor  von  der,  and  the

Haz&ras,  80*.
Gad^i  MirzA.  307.
GadlLi  Piri,  226.
Gakars,  tribe  of,  479  n.,  480  n.
Gang  (Ganges)  Biver,  406.
Ganges,  battle  of,  at  Kanauj,  471-477.
Gauhar  Shah  Begum,  193.
Gauhar  Shiid  Agb^  wife  of  Shah  Rukh,

83  n.
Oaz  (measure),  256  n.,  286  n.,  426  n.
Oeta,  the  word  :  see  *  Jatah.'
Ghajdav&n,  fort  o^  261,  270 ;  battle  of,

10,*  281.
Ghar-bdligh :  see  B61a-Sakun.
Ghar-b61ik :  see  Kara  Khitai.
Ghayy^ud-Din :  see  Bardk  Khin.
Ghazna,  356, 357 ;  Sultin  Ndsir  Mirzd,

governor  of,  264.
Ghazni,  taken  by  Davi,  36* ;  Jah^ngir

Mirz£  in,  196.
Ghi^ud-Din  Jam^hidi,  MauUn^,  60  n.
Ghor  Khar  (wild  ass),  847  n.
Ghund,  a  district  of  Badakhshdn,  353.
Ghuri,  hills  of,  Bihar  P&disha's  flight

to,  175, 176.
Ghuri  Barl^  Mir,  140,  241,  247,  271,

452;  death  of,  280.
GiraiKh&n,  272n.
Gmelin,  the  Bussittn  savant,  and  the

Mongol  race  in  general,  81.*
Goes,  Benedict  (rortugueee  mission-
ary), travels  of,  in  China,  1603-4,

109,*  111,*  122,*  123.*
GoUb Sing, the Dogra Bajah of

Kashmir,  458  n.
Gk>ld  mines  in  the  Champa  districts  of

Tibet,  409  n.,  411,  412  and  n.
Grigorieff,  Prof., uses  the Tarikh-i-

&tshidi,  viii. ;  on  the  name  Mongol

(or  Mogol),  74*  n. ;  on  the  Kalmyks,

97.*
Grijmailo,  the  Russian  traveller,  113.*
Guga  (GugehX  district  of  Tibet^  406

and  ffi.,  410  and  n.,  456-8,  457  fi. ;  fort

and  villages  in,  411,  412.
Gujarat  (Ginarib),  25.
Gigrit,  invaded  by  Emperor  Hnm&yun,

470.
GuUk,  24.
Gul  Bigh,  palace  of,  346.

Digitized  by

Google

5o6

Index,

(TQli-zindan,  yillagu  called,  24  n.
Gulja  B&flhi,  304  n.
Gorgan  (Gar  Kh&n) :  m0  Knrkini.
Gar  KblLn,  288-291 ;  takes  B^a-Sitkan,

863.
Q^uidoy  the,  293.
Gazrilt,  captared  by  £mperor  Homi-

yxin,  402.

Habib,  Shaikh, 194; tomb of, in
Eibhghar,  301,  304.

Habib  Ullab,  Khwija,  216,  217.

Habiba  Salt&n  Khtoish,  140, 192. 207,
268.

EUlfiz,  brother  of  Biir  Eambar,  307.

"H&fiz  Magas-i-sag,*'  Mansor  Ehin's
reader,  128, 129  n.

H4fiz  Miram,  207,  209.

Hibfiz-ad-Dm,  235 ;  pat  to  death,  10.

Haft  Deh :  9m  Tatikand.

Raft  Ihlim,  the,  120,»  121.'»

Haidar  Andarkhadi,  Amir,  80.

Haidar  Khan»az,  Maal&n&,  223.

Haidar  Mirz&  (aathor'B  grandfather)
sends  Amir  Abdal  Kadas  against
Mirz^  Ab6  Bakr,  103 ;  battles  with
Taaas  Ehdo  against  Mirz6  Ab&
Bakr,  104-107;  difference  with
Yanns  Khto  at  Aksa,  109-111;
attacks  Ab&  Bakr  Mirzd  and  is  taken  '
prisoner.  111,  112;  waits  on  Yunns
Khdn  on  his  death-bed,  115 :  see  also
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirz6

Haidar,  Mirzi,  the  only  historian  of
the  Moghuls,  vi.,  xv.,  1,*  2* ;  com-
pared with  Baber,  3*;  member  of
the  DagbJ&t  tribe,  3* ;  language  o(
4*;  the  Tarikh-i-RaBkidi,  summary
of,  4*-27* ;  full  name  and  designa-
tion, 8*;  birth  and  de:ioent,  9*;
early  life,  9*;  enters  Emperor
Baber's  household,  10*;  follows
SulUn  Ahmad  (his  uoole)  to
Andij&n,  11*;  enters  the  service  of
SultAn  Said,  11,*  12,*  25*;  transfers
his  survioes  to  the  Gbaghatais  in
India,  12*;  invades  the  Balur  hill
country,  12*;  campaign  against  i
Badakhshdn,  12* ;  invasion  of  Ladak,
Kashmir  and  Baltistan,  13* ;  starts
to  destroy  the  great  temple  at  Lassa,
14*  ;  returns  to  Ladak,  15*  ;  winters  !
at  BadakhshiLn,  16*:  appointed  ;
Governor  of  the  Punjab  1538, 16* ;
an  adherent  of  Humiyim,  17* ;  at
the  battle  of  Kanauj,  17* ;  wounded
at  Fattehpur  Sikri,  17*  ti. ;  invasion
and  administration  of  Kashmir,  17*-
20*;  invasion  of  Ladak  in  1548^  20*;
attacks  Kishtaw&r  and  other  pro-
vinces in  1548,  21*;  on  the  Nidzi
tribe  of  Afghans,  21*;  his  death,  I
22*;  estimate  of  his  character  by
various  historians,  22*-27*  ;  Iiistory  |

of  the  Dughlit  Amirs,  39*  ;  no  men-
tion in  his  history  of  intercourse  with
China,  63*;  on  Alti-Shahr,  64,*  65*:
analysii  of  the  chiefs  of  Sultin  Said's
army,  66* ;  description  of  the  over-
whelming of  Katak,  67.*  68*,  12  «. ;
on  Jatah  (Moghulistan),  75  * ;  the
Mo^ul  Ulu9  a  separate  people  from
the  Turks,  82*;  the  word  3Vr*  used
by  him  in  a  non-radal  sense,  84*;
on  Uighuristan,  100,*  101*;  suo-
oeasors  of  in  Kashmir,  126,*  127* ;
difficult  task  of  writing  the  story  of
the  Moehul  Khiikins,  2;  Tarikk-
i'Boihidit  reasons  for  being  so-
called,  3,  and  personal  history  re-
corded therein,  3,  4;  and  use  of
'  Jatah,*  45  n. ;  number  of  Amir
Timur's  expeditions  against  Mo-
ghuls, 48  n.;  twelve  privileges  of,
56;  and  the  district  of  Sdrigh-
Kul,  54*;  the  climate  of  Moghol-
istan,  54,*  55* ;  and  battles  of  the
Moghuls,  56*;  on  the  'cities'  and
'towns'  of  Moghulistan,  57*-60*:
his  chronology  unreliable,  68  n.;
war  against  country  of  Balur,  135,
142,384-6;  holy  war  on  the  country
of  Tibet,  135,  136,  417-419;  in-
vasion of  Kashmir,  136;  sent  to
Ursdng  (Lassa),  136 ;  goes  to  Akso,
142,  148 ;  and  Muhammadi  Barl^
145  n.;  his  love  of  music,  147  n. ;
history  of  the  Moghul  Khikins
as  recorded  in  the  Tarikh-i-BoMhidu
148-151 ;  date  of  his  birth,  152;  on
the  Kara  Khitai  country,  152  n.;
gives  his  father's  pedigree,  153;
marries  the  daughter  of  Sultdn
Kh&n,  161,  280,  341;  subject  to
hemorrhoids  soon  aft^  birth,  157,
158;  living  iu  Bokhdri,  207;  hht
teacher,  Haflz  Miram,  207, 209;  fare-
well interview  with  his  father,  207-
209 ;  Sh&hi  Beg  Kh4n  orders  his
destruction,  210,  211;  escape  to
Mirz&  Khin  in  Badakhsh&n,  215-
221,  227,  228;  accidents  to,  216.
227-8;  and  the  Chirdgh - Ku$k,
218  n. ;  his  reception  at  Kibnl  by
the  Emperor  B6bar,  228-230 ;  meets
8aidKh&n,229,421;  B4barPadiah&h
and  his  followers,  244,268;  Emperor
Bihar's  affection  for,  267 ;  the  cam-
paign of  HisAr,  268 ;  stricken  with
fever  at  Samarkand,  268;  goes  to
Andijin,  268 ;  rank  of  Korkini  con-
fened  on,  by  Said  Khin,  269.  278-
79;  entrusted  with  the  afiairs  of
Said  Khin's  army,  269,  270;  en-
trusted to  care  of  Khwtfja  Ali.
275;  with  Said  Khin's  army  before
Kitflighar,  306;  at  the  siege  of
Yangl-His^r,  316 ;  transcribes  pam-

Digitized  by

Googk

Index,

507

phlet  by  Hazrat  I^tddn^,  342;
accident  to,  near  Kishghar,  343;
sent  to  Mansur  Kh&n  as  a  hostage,
343,  345;  stays  in  E[|^hghar,  355;
and  the  Kirghiz  in  Moghnlistan,
374-5,  377;  friendship  ^th  Shih
Mnhammad  Sultin,  B&U  Snlt^
and,  382-4;  second  expedition  to
Badakhshto,  388;  visits  Khwdja
Mohammad  Yusnf,  890;  goes  to
Aksn  with  Rashid  Sult&n,  393-4;
Said  Kh&n's  illness,  394;  meets
Khw&ja  Nnr6  at  L&hur,  899,  400 ;
on  Ladak  as  a  country,  410  n. ;  his
remedy  for  dam-atri,  413;  on  the
wild  "kvAMy  417 ;  besieges  the  castle
of  Mutad^.  418;  at  Kashmir,  421,
423-4;  campaign  in  and  retreat
from  Kashmir,  437  -441 ;  meeting
with  Said  Khan  on  his  retnm,
443 ;  enters  the  Khan's  personal
service,  133,  443-445;  invasion  of
Tibet,  444 ;  march  towards  Ursang,
454-459;  stays  in  Marynl,  460;
sends  sifts  to  Rashid  Snltdn,  461 ;
in  Balti,  461,  462;  crosses  from
Tibet  to  Badakhsh&n,  464-7;  goes
to  Kibnl,  467;  left  in  charge  of
Punjab,  469 ;  urged  by  Kdmrdn
Mirz^  to  retnm  to  Lahur,  472-3;
Emperor  Hnm^ynn  and,  473-4,  478-
480;  at  the  battle  of  the  Ganges,
475-477;  origin  of  his  expedition
to  Kashmir,  481-2;  conquest  of
Kashmir,  483-8* ;  Kishtwir,  488;
captures  the  fort  of  Danel,  489;
sends  presents  to  IsUm  Shih,  489.

Haidar  Kizi,  on  the  death  of  Ab  Jul
Latif,  121*  n,

Haidar,  Shaikh,  on  theKizilb^h,214  n.

Hai  Shan  (or  Wu  Tsung) :  ue  Kuluk.

Haithon  of  Gorigos,  on  the  kingdom  of
TarMB.  291  n.;  on  wild  camel  io
Khotan,  301  n.

H&ji,  joins  Mirz&  Haidar,  460,  482.

Haji  Barl^,  Amir,  16;  Amir  Timur
intrigues  with,  17,  18 ;  killed,  19.

Haji  Beg  of  the  tribe  of  Arkenut,  16,
34.

Haji  K^im,  Mauldn^,  396.

Hdji  Mahmud  Sh&h  Yasuri,  18.

Haji  Mirz^  307.  312,  326.

H^ji  Muhammad  Shayistah,  battle  with
Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  75,  76.

Hakas ;  Sir  H.  Howorth  and  the  people
called,  93*  n.

Hakk  Bardi  Begjik,  Mir,  78.

Hakk  Nazar  Div&na,  309.

Hakk  Nazar  Kughuchi,  809.

Halmau  (Helmaud)  Biver,  231.

Ham  (or  Rarx)  in  Tibet,  410 ;  province
of,  455,  456  n.

Hamdami,  adherent  of  Amir  Husain,
35.

Hami :  see  KiLmul.

Hami,  captured  by  Sultdn  Ali,  104,*
105* ;  province  dependent  on  Turfin,
124*  n.

Hamid,  Amir,  19,  26,  27;  taken
prisoner  by  Timur,  28;  his  death,
31.

Hamid  Ullah  Mustaufi,  the  TarHthri-
Otusida  of,  151.

Hamza  Sult&n,  Uzbeg  chief,  178,
179  n.,  217  ft.,  238;  defeated  and
killed  by  B&bar  Pddishih,  243-5,
248  250  268

Hang'(or  kang  Satu),  defile  of,  423  n.

Harimulk  Salduz,  43.

Hasan  Div&na,  461.

Hasan  Sult&n,  66.

Haaan  Yazdi,  Mir,  396.

H^hishin  (Ismaili)  a  scot  of  Shiahs,
218  n.

Hasht  Bihisht,  Kiosk  of  Sultan  Yakub,
429.

Hati  Khin,  480  and  n.

Hayton,  Prince  of  Gorigos,  Armenian
author,  96.*

Haz^ros,  the  (hiU  tribes),  80,*  31*;
of  Afghanistan,  their  descent,  80,*
82*;  home  of,  83,*  91*;  of  Kudak,
46 ;  of  Badakhsbdn,  221.

Haz^ra  country, sub-tribes  still  flourish-
ing in,  under  the  name  of  Mongol  or
Manual,  127.*

Haz^ra  highwaymen,  197 ;  Sh&hi  Beg
Elhan's  expedition  agaimit,  231,  238.

Haz&ra  mountains,  200.

Haz^rajit,  354.

Haze  phenomenon  in  Eastern  Turki-
stan,  303  n.

Hazrat  Af6k,  the  celebrated  saint,
125.*

Hazrat  Begum,  shrine  of,  buried  by
sand,  67.*

Hazrat  Ish&n,  213,  396.

Hazrat  Khwdja  Ahmad,  tomb  of,  369  n.

Hazrat  E^hwiija  Hasan,  67.'

Hazrat  Khwdja  Kh&vand  Mahmud
Shah6b-ud-Din :  «ee  Nur^  Khwiija.

Hazrat  Makhdumi  Nur6:  tee  Nur^
Khw&ja.

Hazrat  MaullUiii  Muhammad  K^zi,
211-15 ;  escapes  with  Mirz&  Haidar
to  Badakhshiin,  215-21;  miracles
performed  by,  277-9 ;  death  of,  341-2.

Hazrat  Shahdb-od-Din  Khw^'a  KM-
vand  Mahmud,  299.

Herat  (Heri),  Muhammad  Husain
Kurk&n  at,  9* ;  the  capital  of  Sultan
Abu  Said,  81  n. ;  celebrated  garden
at,  83  n.;  capital  of  Khorie^n,
193  n.,  195  ;  attacked  by  Shdhi  Beg
Khin,  202,  205;  Shih  Ismail
returns  to,  235;  famous  kiosks  in,
429.

Hibat  Shuri  Sut,  tribe,  67.

Digitized  by

Google

5o8

Index.

Hiddyat  Ulla,  Khw^ja  Hazrat  Afik,
the  celebrated  saint^  125.*

**Him&r/'  epithet  of,  applied  to  the
tribe  of  BarUs,  146.

Hindil  Miizi,  388,  389,  478,  483,  484  ;
maruhes  against  Delhi,  470.

Hindu  Ku8h,  passes  of,  200.

Hindushah,  3t).

Hindnst&n,  Emperor  Bibar  decides  to
invade,  201 ;  Bibar  Pidish^  pro-
ceeds to,  357  ;  B&bli  Sult&n  in,  381 ;
Ehw^ja  Nnri's  journey  to,  398-9  ;
source  of  rivers  of,  406 ;  tho  Champa
traders  to,  408 ;  the  Bai  or  Baja  of,
454  n. ;  Mirzli  Haidar  goes  to,  467.

Hisar,  Baber^s  attempts  on,  10* ;
Baber's  retreat  to,  10,*  132, 175, 238 ;
Khihi  Bog's  campaign  against,  130 ;
in  possession  of  Khnsrau  Shiih,  163,
164,  174;  ravaged  by  Shdhi  Beg
Khdn,  167,  170,  178;  advance  of
Sh^i  Beg  Khto  on,  176;  Uzb^
Sultans  in,  245,  248;  Emperor
B6ber  at,  260,  261,  268 ;  falls  into
hands  of  Moghuls,  261-2;  famine
in,  262 ;  taken  by  Ubaid  Ullah  from
the  Moghuls,  262-3;  Ubaid  Ullah
Kh&n  sets  out  for,  282.

Ilisdr  Sh&dmin,  town  of,  216 ;  battle
at,  132.

Hiuen  Tsang,  and  sand-buried  towns,
67*-^9*;  and  the  name  Su-Teh,
8  n. ;  and  the  Iron  Gates,  20  n.

Hiung  Nu,  the  (a  Turki  race),  87*  n

Hoernle,  Dr.,  on  MS.  discofered  by
Captain  Bower,  124  n,

Ho-lo-lo  Kia,  town  of,  a  sand  heap,
67.*

Horses  (ponies),  killed  by  the  dam-girt,
413,  455,  465  n.

Howorth,  Sir  H.,  xiv.,  zv. ; Hutory
of  the  Mongols,  Mirza  Haidar's  data
referred  to  m,  vii. ;  work  of,  and  the
house  of  Chaffhatai,  28*; on  the
inhabitants of Moghulistan, 73,*
74*  n. ;  the  common  origin  of  the
Mongol  and  the  Turk,  78*  n. ;  the  ,
name  Oypsey  a  coiruption  of  Egypt-  ,
ian,  90*  n. ;  on  the  Turki  tribe  of  |
Khazars,  21*  n.; on the specific
tribe Alemanni, 91*  n.  ; on the  ,
people called Hakas,  93*  n. ; on i
remnants  of  the  Mongols  still  exist-
ing in  northern  Haz&ra  country,  127*
and  n. ;  on  the  Kara!  (or  Karait)
tribe,  16  n. ;  on  the  six  tribes  form-
ing the *Kunkurat' confederacy,
16  n. ;  on  the  Kdnkali  tribe,  16  n. ;
on  the  Earluk  tribe,  19  n. ;  on  the
Ydtdk,  22  fk ; on  ancient  Tartlz,
63  n. ; on  the  sons  of Abulkhair
Khin,  92  n.,  116  n. ;  on  the  Uzbeg
government,  206  n.;  on  the  duties
of  the  Atdlik,  222  n. ;  on  the  Say-

vid  and  Sayyid&td,  239  n. ;  on  Mir
Najm,  260  n. ;  on  the  Kazik  and
their  Sultdns,  272  n. ;  account  of  the
Uzbeg  Shaib^  in  M&var&-un-Nahr,
283  n. ;  and  the  meaning  of  Noyan,
292  n. ;  and  situation  of  the  ci^  of
Bdla-S&kun,  363  n.

Huchu  (Hochou),  404  n.

Huchu  86l&r,  404.

Hmra,  the  mouth  of  the  B&ris  Kiun
Pass,  350.

Hum&  (a  mythical  bird),  400  fi.

Humayun  (£!mperor),  son  of  Baber,  4* ;
defeated  in  Bengal,  1538, 16* ;  de-
feated by  Shir  Shih  Sur,  16*;  and
the  battle  of  Kananj,  17* ;  his  life
attempted  at  Fattehpur  Silori,  17*  n. ;
return  from  exile,  23,*  24*;  coins
struck  in  his  name  in  Kashmir,  24* ;
recovery  of  Kabul,  25*;  on  the
throne  of  Badakhshin,  387 ;  visited
by  Khwdia  Nuri^  398 ;  the  Khw^'a
Blighted  by  the  Emperor,  399 ;  suc-
ceeds his  father  Bdbar  Pidishah  on
the  throne  of  Hindustin,  402 ;  com-
mencement of  his  downfall,  469;
defeated  by  Shir  Khan  at  CSiauaa,
470,  471 ;  battle  of  the  Ganges,  471-
477 ;  and  Mirzd  Haidar,  473-4, 47&-
480;  flight  to  Lahore,  477-9;  goes
to  Irttk,  484 ;  coins  of,  487.

Husain,  Amir;  pursues  the  army  of
Jatah,  26;  battle  with  the  army  of
Jatah,  27-29 ;  conference  with  Amir
Timur,  29-31;  the  battle  of  the
Mire,  31-36.

Husain  Barlis,  Shdh,  70, 71.

Husain  Fasl  Khwdja,  tomb  of,  in
K&shghar,  300,  301.

Husain  Khalifa,  son  of  Ustdd  All  KuU,
475.

Husain  Mansur,  450.

Hutoin  Mirzd,  Sult&n,  98, 108.

Husain  Sultdn,  472.

Husn  Nigdr  Khluiim,  89,  99.

iBBiBTflON,  Mr.  Denzil,  on  the  words
Turk  and  Moghulj  89*-91*,  128*;
and  the  Kizilbish,  214  n.

Ibir-Sibir,  282  n.

Ibn  Ali  Muhammad  Kos^ji,  60  n.

Ibn  Batuta,  Moorish  traveller,  on
Tirmiz,338n.

Ibn  Dast,  an  author  of  the  tenth  cen-
tury, and  Khakdn,  21  n.

Ibn  Haukal,  86* ;  and  Fary&b,  44  n.

Ibrahim,  Mir,  son  of  Pir  Haji  Kunji,
86,  241,  265.

Ibrahim  Barl^  108.

Ibrahim  Lodi,  the  Aoghin  Sult^
357.

Ibrihim,  son  of  Makhtum  Khanim,
91.

Digitized  by

Google

Index,

509

Ibrihim,  Sultdn,  son  of  Said  Khdn,
375,467.

Ibrahim,  Sultin,  eon  of  Shah  Bnkh,
85  n.

Idegu,  brother  of  Amir  Hiji,  19.

Idol  temples  in  Tibet^  416 ;  of  Kashmir,
426  and  n. ;  427  n.

Idrisi  mentions  Tibetan  Turks,  86,*
87.*

Ha  Biver,  366.

Ilak-Ehans  (Eard-KhansX  rnlers  of
the  Earlughi  XJighnrs,  94* ;  dynasty
of  the,  287  n.,  288  n. ;  kingdom  of
the,  360 ;  capital  of  the,  361  n.,  363.

IWydl  Ndma  Jahdngirit  the,  of  Mutamad
Ehin,  yi.

Ilchi  Bughd,  45,  49.

Ili  (Ailah)  Biver,  66  n.

IH-b^lik;  the  <' Earlughi"  Uighurs
at,  93*  :  see  alto  Bishb&lik.

Bh  or  llak^  the  word,  288  n.

n  Ehwdja :  see  Is&n  Bugha.

llk^in  tribe,  the,  16  n.

Ily^  son  of  Makhtum  Khdnim,  91.

Ily^  Khw&ja  Ehdn,  34 ;  his  last  days,
38.

lly&a  Khw^a  Oghldn,  son  of  Timur,
22,  23 ;  encamped  at  TlLsh  Arighi,
26;  Amir  Timur  decides  to  make
war  on,  27;  is  taken  prisoner  by
Timur,  28.

Uyis  Sh6h,  brother  of  Amir  Ehuddid^
100.

Im6d-ud-Din,  MauUna,  396.

Im^  (or  Aimak),  people  so  called,  in
Ehotan  and  E^shghar,  301.

Imal,  territory  of,  288.  289.

Im&m  Muhammad  Fakih  BaM,  S&kuni,
tomb  of,  365.

Imil  Khwiija,  son  of  Day^  39.*

Imil  Biver,  the,  53,*  366.

In&ghu  (Jumgin),  50  n.

Inchumalik,  son  of  Shard wal,  7.

India,  expeditions  by  Dayd  into,  36* ;
north  of ;  the  words  Turk  and
Moghfd  used  at  the  present  day  in,
89*,  90*,  128* :  see  also  Hindustan.

Indus  Biver,  431  and  n.

In-ghi-rh-oha,  a  chief  of  Turfdn,  103*.

Inkirass  tribe,  the,  16  n.

Irdk  (Persia),  custom  in  the  army  of,
53 ;  Sultdn  Abu  Sdid  and,  81,  83,
85 ;  annals  of  kings  of,  151 ;  invaded
by  Shdh  Ismdil,  154,  232;  Shih
Ismail  returns  to,  281;  Sim  Mirzi
at,  468 ;  Emperor  Humdyun  in,  484.

Irdn,  conquered  by  Gbingiz  Ehdn,  293.

Irdzin  Birin,  73,  84 ;  killed  by  Ulugh
Beg,  74.

Irldt,  the  powerful  chiefs  suppressed
by  Sultdn  Ahmad  Ehdn,  121.

Ir  NaJEar  Ehwdja,  a  noted  Fir,  67  n.

Iran  G^te,  the  (Kulugha  Pass),  20  n.,
21  n.,  26 :  see  also  Darband-i-Ahanin.

Irrigation ;  in  Moghulistan  in  1253,
60*;  in  Turf&n  and  Eara-Ehoja,
112* ;  in  Turfdn,  by  Vais  Ehan,  67.

Irtish  Biver,  366.

Lrtukbuka,  war  Ckgainst  Eublai,  34.*

Isdn  Bughd  Ebin  (son  of  Davd\  7* ;
asoencU  the  throne  of  the  Chagnatai,
37*  ;  invades  Ehorasdn,  37* ;  turns
his  steps  towards  Moghulistan,  39* ;
identity  of,  39,*  40*;  Mr.  Erskine
and,  39*,  40*;  his  wives,  6;  reign  of,
6n.

Isdn  Bughd  II.,  son  of  Vais  Ehan,
73-75 ;  separate  principality  of,  99* ;
quarrels  with  his  Amirs,  77-82;
and  AndHan,  81 ;  fights  against  his
brother  i  unus  Ehan,  81,  82 ;  reign
of,  82  n. ;  incursions  into  Turkistan,
ShashandFarghluia,85;  helps  Amir
Sayyid  Ali  to  defeat  Tunus  Eh&n,
86;  his  death,  88;  opposed  by  Yunus
Ehin,  172;  and  the  Juji  Sultdns,
272.

Isdn  Daulat  Begum,  wife  of  Yunus
Ehdn,  86,  94,  175,  197.

Isdu  Tdishi,  91 ;  combats  with  Vais
Ehan,  65, 67;  Ahmad  Khdn's  battles
with,  121.

I^Jdb  or  Isbifdb  (Sairim),  province  of,
80  f^  171  n.

Ish&k  Bahddur,  309.

Ishdk  Sultdn,  451.

Iskandar  Aoghdn,  Sultin,  402 ;  taken
prisoner  by  Timur,  28,  31.

Iskandar  Beg,  Persian  author,  246  n.,
247  n.

Iskandar  Sultdn,  son  of  Sultdn  Ahmad
Ehdn,  160.

Iskandar  Sultdn,  son  of  Sultdn  Said,
14,*  15,*  102,*  130;  his  birth,  840,
341 ;  invasion  of  Eashmir,  136, 143 ;
marries  daughter  of  Muhammad
Shdh,  136.

Iskandar,  Sult&n,  son  of  Eutb-ud-Din,
483;  marries  one  of  Muhammad  Sh&h's
daughters,  441 ;  holy  war  on  Tibet,
417,  454,  459;  returns  to  Bashid
Sultdn,  465-6.

Iskandar  Tupchi,  expedition  to  Eash-
mir, 18,*  19,*  483.

Isldm,  sons  of  Makhtum  Ehdnim  con-
verted to,  91;  Tughluk  Timur's
conversion  to,  10-15 ;  introduced  by
Amir  BuUji,  153.

Isldm  Shdh  (otherwise  Sdlim)  son  of
Shir  Shih,  21,*  22.*

Islim,  Shaikh  ul,  396.

Ismail  Ehdn,  ruler  of  Easlighar,  123.*

Ismail,  Shah,  seven  Turki  tribes  sup-
porters of,  214  n. ;  kills  Shdhi  Beg
Ehdn,  226,  231-7 ;  sends  an  ambas-
sador to  Emperor  Bdbar,  238-9 ;  and
Ebanzddd  Begum,  239 ;  helps  Bdbar
Padishdh,  243,  245,  246  n.,  247  f».,

Digitized  by

Google

5IO

Index,

259,  260,  266,  281 ;  returns  to  Irak,
248 ;  attacked  by  Snltin  S£lim,  281.

IsmaU  Sulttfn,  451.

Ismaili,  a  eect  of  Sbialis,  218  n.

iMigh-Kul  Lake,  30,*  53,*  72,  75, 78  n.,
79  n.,  865  n.,  366-7 ;  moDastery  near,
59  n. ;  the  Begjik  Amirs  in,  86 ;
Said  Eh&n  at,  875.

It^i,  the  Amirs  of,  51 ;  family  of,  307.

Izzat  UUah,  Mir,  and  the  Jadah  stone,
83  n.

JIbIk  (or  Pdk),  309.

Jabdr  Birdi,  Amir,  306,  336,  34^-4;
and  Mansur  Ebin,  123-5  ;  death  of,
127 ;  joins  MirziL  AbiL  Bakr,  337-9.

t/odaft  stone,  superstition  of  the,  32  n.,
38  n.

Jade-stone  found  in  the  Kard  Tdzghnn,
298 ;  in  the  rivers  of  Khotan,  298, 801 ;
and  in  the  rivers  of  Tarkand,  301.

Jafar  S^ik,  tomb  of,  289.

Jafar  Tayydr,  tomb  of,  298.

Jagirik,  people  called,  165  and  n.,  168.

J&girdk,  Mir  Y&U  takes,  820.

Jah&ngir  Barlds,  108.

Jahingir  Mirzi,  brother  of  Baber,  174,
196,  197;  expedition  to  Khor&bdn,
199-200;  death  of,  201-2.

Jatidngir,  Mirzi,  son  of  Mirz6  Ab&
Bakr,  323,  325,  380;  marries  Kha-
dija  Sultan  Kh&nim,  161 ;  seUled  at
S^nju,  328-9;  is  brought  to  Said
Eh6n,  829,  380.

Jahdngir,  Emperor,  and  Vim&g,  428  n.

Jahtogir,  Prince,  son  of  Timur,  154;
defeats  Eamar-ud-Din,  41, 42  ;  battle
at  Earmina,  45 ;  his  illness,  46 ;  and
death,  47,  48.

Jahingir  Euli,  470.

Jdkan  Ktuhaiy  the,  of  Juvaini,  86,*  1 19.*

Jah^  Sh^h,  464.

Jai-Tubtt,  343.

Jaka,  Mir,  308,  356.

Jdkir,  servant  of  Mir  Muhammad
Shah,  72.

JaUir,  tribe  of,  88,*  41,  45,  55  n.

3i}&  (Bar  Jdla),  24.

Jal&l,  226.

JaMl-ud-Diu  Barlds,  26.

Jal&l-ud-Din,  MauUna,  396.

JalU  Sh&h,  tomb  of,  365.

J6m,  place  called,  348.

Jam  J  Agbd,  wife  of  Sdniz  Mirz^  88,
89,  99,  102,  104.

Jamdl  Ehar,  Shaikh,  112.

Jamdl-ud-Din,  Shaikh,  5,  93;  the  de-
struction of  Katak,  11, 12n. ;  meets
Tughluk  Timur  near  Aksu,  12,  13 ;
his  death,  13,  94;  captures  Yunus
Eh^n,  94.

Jdm  Biligb,  battles  at,  291.

Jdm  Giti  Numdi,  the,  on  Tibet,  403  ;
on  Edshgl  ar,  294,  and  n.

J&n  Ahmad  Ataka  (Atka  Fakir),  244,
267,268,459,461,463-5.

Jina  Easapa,  415,  416.

J&naka,  Amir,  308,  382,  383.

J6naka  Mirza,  444.

Jin  Haidar  Sultto,  276.

J&n  Hasan,  321.

J&ni  Beg  Akhta,  821.

Uui  Beg  Eh&n,  82,  92, 159,  272,  283 ;
puts  Sultdn  EhaUl  Sult&n  to  death.
131, 183 ;  driven  out  of  And^jAn,  132 ;
keeps  Bashid  Ehto  a  prisoner,  140 ;
marries  Eutuk  Ehdnim,  160 ;  Andi-
j6n  given  to,  169,  178;  and  Said
£Ji6n,  191 ;  orders  the  release  of
Said  Eh&n,  222-225;  and  Sayyid
Muhammad  Mirza,  241 ;  defeated  by
Bab^  Padish&h,  243.  248;  and  by
Mirzii  Ab6  Bakr,  254 ;  and  the  fort
of  Ghajdav&n,  261 ;  accident  to,  264.

Jinish  Ehto,  276.

Janki  Mirzi,  248  n.,  816.

J4n  Vafi,  Amir,  192.

Jarto,  Amirs  of,  79.

Joris,  a  prince  of  Moghulistan,  14.

Jar&s  family,  the,  308;  dispute  with
the  family  of  Begjik,  308-9.

Jariby  the,  a  land  measure,  286  n.

Jariyd  (Chiria),  town  of,  295.

Jarrett,  Col.,  on  the  jarib^  286  n.

Jnnm,  place  called,  41.

Jamra,  in  Eashmir,  439.

Jatah,  P^tis  de  la  Croix  on  the  name,
75* ;  Timur  and  the  three  princes  of,
17, 18 ;  army  of  put  to  flight,  25,  26 ;
its  defeat  by  Amir  Timur  and  Amir
Hussain,  27-29 ;  the  battle  of  the
Mire,  31-36;  siege  of  Samarkand,
37;  Amir  TimuPs  third  invasian
of,  41,  42 ;  his  fourth  expedition
into,  46,  47 ;  and  fifth  expedition,
48  n.,  50 ;  the  Moghuls  so  called,
by  the  Ghaghat&i,  148:  we  alto
Moghulistan.

Jauhar  (Indian)  historian;  on  Unm-
ayun,  17*  n. ;  and  Mirz6  Haidar  on
his  Jtfemoirs  of  Huma^/wa^  25* ;  on
the  battle  of  the  Oanges,  476  n.

Jauku  (Zauka  Pass),  350  and  n.

Jhilam  Biver,  406  n.,  431  n.

Jihun  River,  17,  35,  366.

Jinuj,  battle  at,  289.

Jobnithnagar  ^,01d  Bhira),  406  n.

John  of  Marignolli,  117*

John,  Friar,  of  Montecorvino,  96* ;  and
Tarnc  characters,  290  n.

Johnson,  Bfr.  W.  H.,  on  dust  showers,
69*  n. ;  on  the  Yurung  River,  298  n.

Jones,  Sir  W.,  method  of  translitera-
tion, xii.

Jorj&n  (Chdrchdn),  9  n.

Jud,  town  in  Moghulistin,  276;  dis-
trict of,  in  Moghulistan,  364  and  n.,
365.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Index.

Sii

Jnd  Kuasi,  enoampment  of,  60.*

Jud  Kuzi  B^hi,  82  n.

Jugh&m  BarULs,  19.

Jini  (or  Tuahi),  eldest  son  of  Chiugiz,
29.*  30*.

jQJi,  the  raoe  of;  82,  92.

Juji  Kb^  Ohingiz  Khin's  eldest  aon,
273;  kingdom  of;  293.

Ji^i  Sult^Liu,  Bubsement  to  Barandnk
Eh^,  154;  Abolkhair  Kh^n  and
the,  272 ;  reception  by  Said  Kh&n,
276.

Jamg&l  (Jumgb^),  place  called,  365  n. ;
enoampment  o^  60.*

Jomilat-ul-Mulk,  a  Mnanlman,  31.*

Jomla  (Jamd)  Bivor,  431  and  n.

Jun  (Jamna)  Biyer,  406.

Jnngar  (oi  Znngaria),  country  of,  31,*
84.*

Jmjdn :  9m  Ghirohdn.

Jnsa  (Chausa),  470  and  n.

Juvaini,  Ala-ud-Din,  author  of  the
JdUn  Kushai;  AtarMulk,  the  his-
torian, 35*  n.,  86,*  293  n. :  on  the
title  Gur-Khan,  279  n. ;  names  for
Christians  and  Buddhist  monks,
290  n.

Juvain,  plain  of,  19  n.

Kabax,  son  of  Day^  36,*  104,*  3;
attacked  by  Ohapir,  37.*

Kabak  SulUn  Oghl^n,  son  of  Dust

f  iMuhammad,  90,  91 ;  murder  o^  95.

Kabika,  battle  at,  65.

Kaba  Matan,  place  called,  28.

KibikiUr,  875,  876  and  n.

Kibil  Shih  Oghl&n  raised  to  the  rank
of  Kh^  29-31.

Kabir  Ali,  Amir  (Sayyid  Ali  Hama-
diniX  432 ;  death  of,  433  n.

Kabul,  Baber  at,  9,*  10,*  131,  140,
201-4;  Hum^yun  at,  24*;  recovery
of,  by  Humiyun,  25*;  taken  by
B^bar  P&dishlUi,  177,  196;  left  iu
charge  of  Muhammad  Husain  Kur-
kan,  197;  troubles  in,  198,  199;
Shah  Begum's  attempt  to  take,  200 ;
the  Kizilbdfih  in,  214  fi. ;  Said  EMn
arrives  at,  226,  242 ;  Mirzi  Haidar
goes  to,  228-230, 467 ;  Babar  returns
to,  356 ;  held  by  Kimrin  Ehin,  398.

Kichi  Chak«  20,*  482,  483,  485.

K£dir  Bardi  Miizi,  91.

Kifiristan,  see  Khust.

Kafir  tribes,  104  n.*

Kifir  Tiri,  350.

Kahjay^  (KichuvaX  a  degree  of  the
Ldmos,  414  ».

Kaidu  (grandson  of  Oktai),  34*;  ac-
knowledged the  rightful  Khak^
of  the  Moghuls,  35*  ;  wars  with
Khak^  Kublai,  86,*  38* ;  death  of,
36* ;  dominion  and  power  of,  38.*

Kaikhusru,  24.

Kaikob^d,  brother  of  Kaikhusru,  21  n.

Kajar  tribe,  214  n.

K^lichak,  Malik  of  Kashmir,  441.

K6k£,  Mir,  of  the  family  of  B^ki,
307.

Kala-i-Zafar  (fort),  220,  855 ;  ruins  of,
220  ffi.,  221  n.;  residence  of  Khiin
Mirzi,  221,  226;  siege  of,  388.

Kalandars,  Amir  Sayyid  Ali  and  some,
63 ;  Dust  Muhammad  Khdn  affects
the  ways  of,  88.

KiMk  Kiyd  (or  KahiX  valley  of,  804.

Kalmyk,  the,  tribe  in  Moghulistan,  73,*
74*  n.,  80,*  87* ;  in  Alti-Shahr,  97* ;
few  Moghuls  in,  98*;  (OirtLt),  101,*
104,*  105*  n.,  113,*  124*;  Vais
Kh&n's  battles  with  the,  65-67 ;  land
of  the,  79  n. ;  *  Ung '  in  the  language
of,  91 ;  return  to  their  own  homes,
1472, 95 ;  Sult&n  Ahmad  Khdn  and.
121;  Mansur  Kh&n  and,  125
country,  giyen  to  Uktii  Khin,  294 ,
Mansur  Kbto  goes  to  war  with  the,
339,  375;  plundered  by  Rashid
Sultdn,  373 ;  Tibetan  customs  similar
to,  407  n.

Kilpi,  472.

K&lu  Aj  B&ri,  place  near  Yirkand,  105.

K^luchi  tribe,  the,  187,  309.

K&luji  tribe,  the,  in  Moghulistan,  79,
121.

Kiim,  province  of  Tibet,  136  n.

Kambar  Ali,  Mir,  son  of  Mir  K6k&,
241,  248,  265,  266, 807, 316, 326, 357.

Kamar-ud-Din,  Amir,  the  Moshuls
under,  56*;  reign  in  Moghulistan,
102,*  103*;  history  of,  38-40;  at
Keuk  -  Tnbeh,  41  ;  defeated  by
Prince  JahiUigir,  42;  battle  with
Amir  Timur,  46,  47;  Timur  sends
an  army  against,  48-50;  last  days
of,  50,  51 ;  his  brothers,  51  n.

Kambar  Kukild^h,  Amir,  422.

Kimrin  Mirzd,  son  of  the  Emperor
Baber,  16,*  17,*  24,*  387;  and
Khwaja  Nurd,  398,  399;  retakes
Kandahar  from  Tahmdsp  Shah,  400,
467-469, 471, 484 ;  returns  to  Lihur,
472,  478,  481.

Kimul  (Kumul)  in  Khitai,  126.

Kdmydi,  battle  at,  119.

ELanauj,  battle  of,  in  1540,  viii.,  6,*
17* :  tee  Ganges.

Kandahar,  besieged  by  the  sons  of
Sb&h  Ismail,  16*;  Bihar's  battle
with  Shih  Beg  near,  202,  206
B6bar  Padishah  marches  on,  357
tnken  by  Shdh  Tahmisp,  400, 468-9 ,
retaken  by  KiUnrin  Mirzi,  400;  cap-
tured by  Sim  Mirzi,  468.

Kandarlik,  pass  of,  275.

Kanjinfu,  of  Khitai,  404.

Kanju  (Kan-chou),  406.

Kankali  (or  Kingali)  tribe,  the,  16  n.

Digitized  by

Google

S12

Index.

Kanuo,  Arab  writer,  on  eitaation  of
B&la-Siknn,  863  n.

Eanwa,  battle  of,  402  and  n.

Eao- Chang,  the  ancient  Uighnr  ca-
pital, 113.*

Kapak  Timiir  Khdn,  36 ;  palace  built
by,  37.

Kar&  B&sh  Mirz^  307.

Karabulnn,  72  yi.

KariL  Chanik  (Suget  Buliik),  hamlet
called,  296.

Kar&ohdr,  Amir,  18.

KartL  Dina  Euli,  309.

Kar^guz  Begnm,  114, 116.

Kara  Hnlaku,  38.*

Karia  (Girai)  Khdn,  82,  92,  272,  273.

Karait  (Karai),  the,  a  Mongol  tribe,
88,*  16  n.,  39.

Ear&jik,  moantainB  of,  49.

Eara-kalpdks :  «ee  Ealm&ks.

Earik^sh,  river  in  Ehotan,  298,  406  n.

Eara  Easmak,  42.

E&rikhtoi,  the,  287  n. :  u»  Edrluk.

Ear&-khanB  (Ilak-khans),  mlers  of  the
Earlughi  Ui^hnrB,  94.*

Kara-Ehitai,  the,  57*;  ruins  of,  60,*
61* ;  tribe  in  Moghuliatan,  73,*  74* ;
the  dominion  of,  in  11 24.. 94*;  the
Uighurs  and,  95* ;  country  and
people  of,  152  and  n. ;  (Si-liao),
kings  of  the,  279  n.;  Eushluk  de-
feats the  Gur  Ehan  of,  289-291 ;
given  to  Ghaghatai  Ehin,  293;
capital  of:  sea  Bdla-S&kun.

Eura-Ehoja  (called  also  81-Ghao,  Ho-
Chao,  and  Eao-Chang),  the  Naim6n
Uighurs  of,  93* ;  town  of,  100,*  102,*
106*;  conquest  of,  by  EhizirEhw^a,
103,*  62;  depression  below  the  sea
'  level,  112*;  ruins  of  ancient,  113.*

Ear6  Eiz,  360,  and  n.

Earakornm,  Chingiz  Ehin*B  capital,
31* ;  every  form  of  worship  at,  32* ;
the  Mongol  capital  in  1253.. 60*;
ancient  city  o^  10 ;  known  as  B&la-
S&kun,  361  n.

Earakorrun  Pass,  420  n.

EartL  EuUk  Mirz£,  185,  305-6,  316,
326.

EarA  EurtUn  (Earakorum),  465 ;  given
to  Ukt&i  Eh&D,  294.

Earinghutdgh,  Abd  Bakr  marches  to,
323,  326,  327.

Earang  EiingliRh,  fight  at,  64.

Earanut  tribe,  the,  16  n.

Eard  Samin,  40.

Earashahr  (Cbdlish),  town  of,  54,*
62*n.,99,*125.

Eard  8ultdn  Ali  Miiza,  241.

Eard  Tdgh,  Maui&nd,  460,  463.

Kara-iaMilcy  the  party  of  the  "Black
MnuntaiD,"  125.*

Earitil,  274,  and  n.

Eare-tish,  pass  of,  898  n.

Eara  Tatar  (a  Tartar  tribeX  79  n.

Eirataa  HUls,  53.*

Eard  Tizghun  (riverX  295,  812;  water
of,  297  n.

Earatigin,  145 ;  mountains  of,  261 ;
Mir  Vdli  conquers,  320 ;  Shdh  Mu-
hammad Sult&n  sent  to,  382 ;  (Eair
Tagin)  241 ;  Muhammad  Husain
Eurkdn  at,  163, 164.

Eard  Tukdi,  181  n. ;  Yunus  Ehdn  at,
92,  93.

Eard-Uchunghdl,  309.

Eariwdnis,  the  Chaghatdi,  so-called
by  the  Moghuls,  76,*  148,  491,  492.

Earawinah  (or  Earawinas),  the,  77.*

EfLrdun,  fortress  of,  454,  456  n.

Eardung  Pass,  the,  445  n.

Earids  Lake,  54.

Earim  Bardi,  Mir,  78,  86.

Eari-Sairam,  city  of,  171  n.

Eirish  Ehdn,  276.

Eariyd  (Eiria).  town  of,  295.

Earlughi,  section  of  Uiffhurs,  93.*

E&rluk  tribe  in  MoghuTlstan,  the,  73,*
74*  n.,  88,*  19  n^  309 ;  with  Sultin
Said*s  army,  66* ;  (or  Edrikhdni),
kin^om  of,  94.*

Earmma,  battle  at,  45.

Edmds,  the  word,  492.

Earsa  (Eirtse)  district  of  Tibet,  442.

Earshi,  Amir  Timur  encamped  at,  37 ;
the  Uzbeg  encampment  at,  243;
Ubaid  Ullah  Ehin  fortified  in  castle
of,  245,  248,  260.

Karxjih  (ErohX  measure  of  distance,
297  n.

Edsin,  town  of,  9  n. ;  given  to  Sayvid
Muhammad  Mir»£,  240;  attackoil
by  the  Uzbeg  Sultins,  248,  249.

Edshghar  (or  Alti-Shahr),  Sir  D.  For-
sv£*s  mission  to  in  1873,  vii.,  408 ;
the  Amirs  of,  7* ;  invaded  by  8ult4n
8aid  Eh&D,  11,*  138,  825-7,  331 ;
Amirs  of,  contemporary  with  the
Ehdns  of  Moghulistan,  48,*  49*;
Sultin  Said's  headquarters,  56* ;
his  operations  agaiiut,  66,*  98* ;
the  Earlughi  Uighurs'  chief  town,
94*  ;  ancient  name  Su-li,  8  n. ;  the
modem  town  of,  42  n.;  and  Amir
Ehuddid&d,  61 ;  expedition  of  Amir
Sa>yid  Ali  to,  75-78 ;  Yunus  Eh6n*8
expeditions  against,  86,  90 ;  8ayyid
Ali's  mausoleum  at,  87;  rule  fA
Mirzd  Sdniz  in,  87,  88;  attacked
by  Dust  Muhammad  Ehdn,  89 ;
rule  of  Muhammad  Haidar  Mind,
95,  98,  102,  104,  252;  ravaged  by
Abd  Bakr  Mirzd,  103,  252-3,  338;
captured  by  Sultdn  Ahmad  Ehdn«
122;  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd's
expedition  against,  144;  Moghuls
in,  148;  treasure  found  in  city  of,
257; the  Sultdns  of,  286; rebel-

Digitized  by

Qoo^z

Index.

S13

lion  of  Kufihluk  in,  287-291 ;  ood-
quest  of,  by  the  Mofl'huls,  292-294;
famine  in,  291 ;  tiie  Jdm-i-Oiti
Numdi  on,  294 ;  boundariea  of,  294 ;
rivers  in,  295-6;  situation  of  the
town  of,  295  9k ;  tombs  in,  300,  801 ;
people  of,  301;  fruit  plentiful  in,
308;  climate  of,  808;  its  defects,
308;  haze  phenomenon  in,  308  and
n. ;  citadel  of,  804 ;  bettles  between
Said  Kb^n  and  Mirz&  Ab&  Bakr  at,
810-812;  citadel  abandoned  by  Ab6
Bakr's  army,  823;  Said  £h&n  re-
enters, 348,  351;  events  in,  after
Said  Khan's  death,  449-51.

Kashmir,  no  copies  of  the  Tarikh-i-
Scuhidi  to  be  found  in,  ix. ;  second
invasion  of  in  1541,  8.*  17*-20*;
invaded  by  Mirz&  Haidar  in  1581,
18,*  14,*  186,  143;  administration
of,  17*-20.*  23* ;  coins  in,  struck  in
Humayun's  name,  24 ;  invasions  of,
during  reigns  of  Abd  Bakrand  Sultdn
€aid,  65,*  66*;  Miizd  Haidar's  suc-
cessors of,  in,  126,*  127* ;  regiment  of
the  Jatah  army  defeats  Amir  Hiji,
19;  ancient  temples  of,  58  and  n.;
MirziL  Haidar  and,  419,  421,  423-4;
the  plain  of,  424 ;  climate  of,  425 ;  cul-
tivation in,  425 ;  buildings  and  streets
of,  425;  fruit  in,  425;  idol  temples
in,  426 ;  wonders  in,  426-430 ;  ac-
count of,  in  the  Zafar-Ndma,  430-
432;  conversion  of,  to  Isl^m,  432-3  ;
the  Musulman  Sultinsof^  483  and  n.,
434;  religious  sects  in,  434-437;
Mirzd  Haidar's  campaign  in  and
retreat  from,  437-441;  Firishta's
account  of  Mirz6  Haidar's  invasion,
441  n.,  442  n. ;  origin  of  Mirzi
Haidar's  expedition  to,  481,  482 ;  its
conquest  by  him,  483-8.

Kisim  Husain  Sultto,  484.;

K^im  Kh&n  (K^im  Beg),  son  of  J&ni
Beg  Kh&n,  82,  163,  230,  231,  271,
278,  373;  visited  by  Sultdn  Said
Khiln,  133;  takes  Tuiiz  and  Tash-
kand,  274 ;  attacks  Suyunjuk  Kh6n
in  Tdshkand,  275,  313 ;  reception  of
Said  Khan,  276-7 ;  goes  to  Ubaira-
Subaira,  282.

K^im  Kuchin,  Amir,  242.

Kiam  MauUn^  2ia

Kiskira,  pass  of,  398  n.

K&t,  ancient  capital  of  KhwiUizm,  45.

Katak,  the  overwhelming  of,  67,*  68* ;
as  described  by  Mirzil  Haidar,  10  n.,
12  n.;  town  of,  67,  295.

Kattagh&n,  territory  of,  203  n.

Katur  (or  Kitaur)  a  Kafir  tribe,  108,
104  fi.

Kawn  (tribe),  the  word,  148  n.

Kaz^,  Sult&n  (the  '*  Grand  Can  "  of
the  Ghaghatai),  20  n.

Kazaks,  the,  126* ;  supplant  the  Mo-
ghuls,  56* ;  gradual  disappearance
of,  82;  Slime  of  Abulkhair  Khan's
people  join,  92;  Mansur  Khan's
battle  with.  127,  128;  Said  Kh&n
and,  276-7;  in  M&vari-un-Nahr,
attacked  by  Sh^hi  Beg  Khan,  207,
230.  231 ;  history  of,  and  their  Sul-
tins,  272-4.

Kazdk-Kirghiz,  the  (White  Horde),
121*  n.

Kazik-Uzbegs,  Said  Khiln  and  the,
120*;  Sult^  Mahmud  Kh&n  and
the,  119,  122.

Kizi  Imiul-ud-Din  Maskin,  212.

Kdzik,  the  word,  255  n.,  256-7.

Kizi  Shams-ud-Din  Ali,  389.

Kazi-Zadah  Bumi :  see  Sal^-ud-Din
Musa.

Keene,  Mr.  H.  (2.,  on  transliteration,
xii.  n. ;  '  Turks  in  India,'  88,*
89.*

Kelat  (KaUt),  Shahi  Beg  besieges,
192  n.,  209.

Kerran^i,  the  (trumpet),  84.

Keah,  Timur  meets  the  three  princes
at,  18;  *Iron  G^te'  near,  21  n. ;
plains  of,  26 ;  the  princes  of  Jatah
return  to,  85 ;  Prince  Jahingir
buried  at,  48.

Keuk  Tubeh  (or  Kuk  Tipa),  41.

Khadija  Beeum,  196.

Khad^a  Smt&n  Kh&nim,  daughter  of
SultiUi  Ahmad  Kh^  161,  330,  382 ;
marriage  of,  352.

Khadija  Sultin,  451.

Kh^fi  Khin,  the  historian,  89,*  246  n.

Kh&k&n,  the  word,  30  n.

Khdliki,  Mauldn^,  225,  226.

Khalil  Sultdn,  defeated  by  Mansur
Kh&n  at  Almitu,  182 ;  drowned  by
Jani  Beg  Khin  in  the  river  at
Akhsi,  183,  191,  264-5,  334;  and
Moghulistan,  240;  his  son  Blibd
Sultto,  250,  251.

Khalil.  Mirz4,  Sultin,  grandson  of
Timur,  misdeeds  of,  451.

Khamilr  Kh^tun,  257.

Kh^n,  subordinate  princes  of  Chagha-
tai  styled,  30*  n.

Khdn  B^ligh  (Bila-Sikun),  town  of.
861^.

Kh^  Mirz6 :  see  Mirzll  Khiin.

Kh&n  Nazar,  Mirzi  of  Khotan,  100 ;
killed  by  AU  Bakr,  101.

Kh&n  Sultin  Kbinim,  daughter  of
Saniz  Mirzi,  88.

Eh&a  Sult&n  Sult&nim,  sister  of  Mirzi
Aba  Bikr,  258.

Khind  Mihmud,  Khwl^'a,  478.

Khinikoff  on  the  Haz&ras,  80*  n.

Khandnki  Mirzi,  248.

Khans,  succession  of  Moghul,  from  the
time  of  Isin  Bughi,  40*-47* ;  power
2  L

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC

514

Index,

of  the,  from  the  reign  of  Amir  Timur
to  Uluch  Beg,  83.
KbauB  of  the  White  Hoi-de  (Kirghiz

Kazdks),  272n.
Khanz&da  Begum,  117,  155 ;  married
to  Shihi  Beg  Khdn,  175,  196,  239;
wife  of  Mirzd  Jah&ngir,  48,  330;
and  Ehwija  Nur^  400.
Khlipnla,  district  of  Balti.  410.
Khardak  Bukhdri,  MauUn^  37.
Khar-gura  (wild  ass),  847  n.
Khashgau,  the,  302  ».
Kh^  part  of  Moghulistan,  377.
Khatldn  (or  Khnti^X  ^^  tracts  of,
10*  ;  Baber  gains  possession  of,  10* ;
province  of,  21  n.
Ebdvand  Mahmud,  Khwdja,  448 :  see

Nuri  Ehwaja.
Khazars,  Turkish  tribe  o^  91*  n.
Khidmat  MauHnd,  14,  15,  67,  85.
Khidmat  MauUnd  Sh&li  Sayyid  Ashik,

300.
Khitai  (or  China),  152  n.,  360 ;  people
of, 88* ; Mansur's wars against,
91,  104,*  127 ;  holy  war  against,  by
Khizir  Khwaja,  52 ;  Amir  Timur's
expedition against, 53; given to
Tuli  Khdn,  293;  wares  of,  408;  the
Pddish&h  of,  416.
Khitai  Bahddur,  39,  45,  46,  49.
Khiva,  Husain  and  Timur  at,  23  n.
Kbizar  Yasuri,  Amir,  18.
Khizir  Sh^,  brother  of  Amir  Khud&i-

did,  100.
EJiizir  Khw&ja  Kh^n,  commencement
of  his  reign,  51-57,  68;  sons  and
successors of, 43*, 44*, 67 ; of
Mof^hulistan,  101,*  39; death  of,
102* ;  temporary  conquest  of  Turf^n
and  Kara  Khoja,  103.*
Khodaid^d,  Amir,  45.*
Khojand,  Amir  Timur  at,  43 ;  the  river

of,  29, 113, 120.
Khoja8,th6,239n.

Khorasto,  country  of,  30* ;  invaded  by
Bonik,35*;  invaded  by  Isin  Bugha,
37 ;  Amir  Timur*s  conquest  of,  19 ;
conquered  by  Sult&n  Abu  Said,
81  n.,  83,  85;  Tunus  Khan  at,  87;
annals  of  kings  of,  150, 151 ;  Sultlbi
Husain  Mirzd  in,  154;  193,  195;
capital  of;  193  n. ;  Bdbar  P&dishah's
expedition  into,  197,  198;  conquest
by  Shdhi  Beg,  164,  201,  205 ;  Khus-
rau  Shdh  proceeds  to,  176,  177 ;
Shiih  Ismail  in,  236;  Uighurs  in
311  n.
Khoras^i  Mirzas,  the  Moghuls  and

the  Uzbegs  against,  57.*
Khorllshi  (Kud^hah),  village  of,  19.
Khotan,  108.*

Khotan,  city  of,  51*  n.;  Goes'  visit  to,
122* ;  hills  of,  52 ;  Ahn  Bakr  Mirza
and  Omar  Mirz&'s  attempt  to  subdue.

99,  101;  the  Mirz^  of,  100;  and
their  extirpation,  101 ;  Rashid  Khan
follows  mrU^  Ali  Taghdi  to,  145;
dtadal  of,  treasure  found  at,  25&-7 ;
captured  by  Kushlnk  Kh&n,  291,
293 ;  water  of,  297  n. ;  rivers  of,  298 ;
jade  found  in,  298,  301;  tombs  in,
298;  ^ple  of,  301;  wild  camels
found  m  deserts  of,  301 ;  wild  oxen
in  the  hills  of,  301-2 ;  fruit  in,  303 ;
climate  of,  303;  Mirz&  Ab£  Bakr
flees  to,  133,  323,  325.  327.

Khub  Nigir  Khdiiim,  mother  of  Mirza

♦  Haidar,  9,*  156;  marries  author's
father,  Muhammad  Husain,  117, 118,
153.

Khudabanda,  governor  at  Aksu,  123.*

Kliuddidid,  Amir,  son  of  Bulkji,  38,
39,  51-54;  nine  privileges  granted
to  the  ancestors  of,  by  Chmgiz  Khan,
54,  55;  three  additional  privileges
granted  by  Khizir  Khw^'a,  56 ;
Khans  raised  by,  to  the  Khanate,  58,
68;  K&shghar  his  native  country,
61;  pilgrimage  to  Mekka,  67-71;
his  death  and  burial  at  Medina,
71 ;  division  of  dependencies  of  the
DughUts,  100.

Khuddi  Kuli  Bahddur,  309.

Khuddii  Kuli  Shak&vul,  315.

Khundamir,  Persian  author,  246  n.,
24711.

Khunam  Sh&h  Sultan,  239.

Khush  Gildi  KuMlddsh,  185, 187.

Khush  Rdi  KuMld&sh,  165.

Khusrau  Sh&h,  and  the  province  of
KhutUn,  21  n. ;  in  possession  of
Hisar,  Kunduz,  etc.,  130, 163, 167, 177,
203  n. ;  defeat  at  the  hands  of  Shahi
Beg  Kh&n,  164-166, 169,  353;  pnta
Baisanghar  Mirzi  to  death,  174;
and  Bdbar  Pidish^,  175, 176;  his
death,  177,  329  n.

Khusru,  Amir,  the  poet  of  medisval
India,  and  the  Moghuls,  81,*  82,*
87.*

Khust  (Khost),  Amir  Abdul  Kudus,
governor  of,  103, 104  n.

Khuzdr,  town  of,  26;  Babar  gains
possession  of,  10* ;  meeting  of  Amir
Timur  and  H&ji  Mahmud  at,  18.

Khwdjas,  the,  of  Kashghar,  123.*

Khwdjas  (priests)  in  Alti-Shahr,  124*-
126.*

Khwdjis  (sect),  Ahmad  one  of,  10.
Khw&ia  Ali,  Maulto^  213.
Khwdja  Bahd-ud-Dln,  33.*
Khw^a  Elaldn,  expedition  to  Kashmir,
18,*  19* ;  murdered  by  YunusKhto's
wife,  94.
Khwija  Nurd  :  «ee  Shah6b-ud-Din.
Khwdnd  Mir,  history  of,  108,  121.
Khwandamir,  and  reign  of  Isdn  Bugha,

89.'

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

Index,

l"^^

Khwto4-Sdl&r,  battle  at,  86.

Ehw^irizm,  thud  expedition  of  Amir
Timnr  into,  44;  inyaded  by  ShlOii
Beg  Kh6n,  130, 171.  180,  191,  192,
195,  204.

Kil6n,  Mir  Khwdja,  212 ;  defendB  Kan-
dahar, 468,  469,  472;  in  Kashmir,
483.

Kila  Zafar,  chief  town  of  Badakhshdn,
10,*  12.*

Kilpin  Bab&t,  resting  plaoe,  296.

Kimiz,  a  beverage,  53  n.,  62,  277.

Kiosks,  the  vast,  of  the  world,  429.

Kipohak,  plains  of,  80* ;  tribes  of,  31.*

Kipchllk  tribe,  87,*  88,*  45,  65  n.;
White  Horde  of,  45  n. ;  deserts  of,  45,
49;  with  Bolton  Said's  army,  66*;
mixed  up  with  the  Kingali  tribe,
16  n.

Kirin  Bah^nr,  governor  of  the  dis-
trict of  Bhirbal,  22.*

Kirghiz,  the.  87,*  88*;  supplant  the
Moghuls,  56*  ;  in  Alti-Shalir,  124*-
126* ;  originators  of  all  the  revolts
in  Moghulistdn,  125;  rebellions
against  the  Moghul  Khiikins,  148 ;
tribe,  the,  181  n. ;  join  Mansor  Khin
in  Oh^lish,  254 ;  Mansnr  Khdn  and
the,  339;  Said  Kb&n's  campaign
against,  348-351 ;  plunder  Turkistan
etc.,  358 ;  in  Moghulist&n,  367 ;  at
At-Bik8hi,377,378;  pursue  Bdb^'iUc
Snltdn,  878;  T^  Kh&n  Joins
forces  with,  379;  desert  T&hir  Olbi,
388.

Kirghiz  Kaz^s,  Khins  of;  272  n.

Kim&n,  the  Garaonas  at,  77.*

Kirya,  River  of,  406  n.

Kishkui  Div&na,  809.

Kishtaw&r,  province  of,  attacked  by
Mirzi  Haidar,  21*.

Ki  Shwang  Na  (Kesh),  8  n.

Kitan,  the :  see  Kara  Khitai.

Kitta  Beg,  818,  357;  and  Midaka
Bah^ur,  314 ;  in  charge  of  SairiUn,
271,  274.

Kiy&k  (Kayalik,  etc.),  territory  of;  288,
289.

Kizil,  village  called,  296,  315, 316.

Kizil  Biver,  295  n.

Kizilbdsh,  the,  214  and  n.,  285,  246.

Klaproth  and  Uighuristto,  101*  ;  and
Turfin,  104*  n.

Kokcha  valley,  the  ruins  in,  220  n.,
221  fi.

Koko  Nor,  406  ts  407  n.

Kolagim,  in  district  of  Div  Sar,  428  n.

Kolpakofeky,  Gen.,  on  Lake  Issigh-
Kul,  78  fi.

Koraish  Sult6n,  eighth  son  of  Rashid
Sultan,  121.*

Koran,  the,  sections  of,  1 ;  treaties  and
solemn  engagements  written  and
sealed  in  copies  of,  101  n.

/'

Koroi-Saroi,  place  called,  78  n.
Koros,  Csoma  de,  on  Maryul,  410  n.
Kbs  (kruh),  a  measure  of  distance  in

India,  424  n.
Kostenko,  and  island  of  Kui  Sui,  78  n.
Knih  (or  Kuroh)  a  measure  of  distance,

424  n.
Kublai,  Mongol  Emperor of  China,

styled  Ka&ny  30*  n. ;  war  against

Irtnkbuka,  34* ;  the  "  Great  Ktoi"

of  Marco  Polo,  84,*  35*  ;  wars  with

Kaidu,  36,*  38*  ;  death  of,  36.*
Kucbar  (Kuitze)  district  of,  54,*  93*  ;

town  of,  62*  fi.,  70,* 100,* 102*;  *

remains of Buddhistic buildings,

etc.  in,  124  n.
Kuohin,  people  so  called,  in  Khotan

and  K^hghar,  301.
Kuchkar  (KoshkarX  50  n.,  368,  370

and  n.,  377 ;  encampment  of,  59.*
Kuchnm  (Tartar  Kbin),  282  n.
Kuchum  Sult&n,  159,  283.
Kuchum  Khto,  206  n.,  243,  248.
Kudlksh,  Maul&n^  461,  462.
Knen-lun,  Tibetan  highland,  54.*
'*  Kui  Jariki,''  campaign  of,  379.
Kuhlagha  (the  Iron  Gate),  87.
Kui-Kule,  pass  of,  21  n.
Kui-Sui,  island  of,  in  Lake  Issigh-Kul,

78,  and  n.
Kuitze,  town  of:  we  Kuchar.
Kukanit,  a  tribe  of  Khotan,  67.
Kukcha  Tangiz,  lake  of,  366.
Kukildish,  Amirs  called,  52.
Knkildish  Mirzi  Ali  Sayyid  Bahidur,

318—9.
Kuk  Kdshtoa,  district  of,  281.
Kuk  Naur  (Koko  Nor),  406,  and  n. ;

407.
Kuk  Babdt,  296.
Kuk  Uchgu,  surname  of  Amir  Bulaji,

9.
Kulak,  plain  of,  238.
Kui  Malik,  battle  of,  260,  268.
Kui  Nazar  Mirzi  of  Khotan,  100,  241,

248,  308,  356;  kUled  by  Ab&  Bakr,

101.
KulunjiUc  Sultin,  164.
Kulllb,  hill  tracks  of,  10.*
KuU  It&rji,  321.
KuU,  Sultin,  357.
Kulja,  the  present  town  of,  32.*
Kuika,  head  of  the  Makrit  tribe,  809.
Kulugha  (or  Kuhl^ha)  Pass,  the  (Iron

Gate),  20  n.,  21  n.,  26.
Kuluk,  nephew  of  Uljaitu,  87.*
Kum^  KlUshur,  jungle  of,  189.
Kumul  (Humi),  State  of,  101,*  124*  n.
Kumzah,  39.
Kunah-Shahr,  ruins  of;  Sir  H.  Tula

on,  12  n.
Kunduz,  23,  56;  Baber  gains  posses-
sion  of,  10*; regained by Mirz6

Haidar,  24* ;  Shihi  Bog's  campaign
2  L  2

Digitized  by  VjCJOQIC

Si6

Index,

against,  130;  BabttrPddi8hi1iat,131;

in  posseBsion  of  Khnsraa  Shih,  163,

177, 203  and  n. ;  attacked  by  Mahmnd

Sultdn,  169, 170, 176, 178 ;  Emperor

Babar  and,  237-8,  267.
Knngh^  Ulang,  376  and  n.
Eunji,  Amir,  86.
Eunji,  the  Amirs  of,  51 ; family  of,

808.
Ennk^  part  of  Moghnlistan,  377.
Eunkurat  tribe,  the,  16  n.
Eur&ma,  Eazaks  in,  126*  ;  district  of,

181  n.
'  Eur^nas,  a  tribe  among  the  MongoK

76.*
Eur&tu,  desert  of,  49.
Eurgin-Tnbe  (or  Tipa),  21  n.
Eur^uz,  a  Uighur  named,  95.*
EurkAnl.  the  title,  278  n.-280  n.
Enrlnkut,  tribe  of,  19.
Euralat  (or  Eurlnt),  tribe,  the,  16  ».
Eus,  75.
Eusan  (Euchar),  9  n.,  378 ;  raids  into

by  Mix  Jab6r  Birdi,  124 ;  B^b^ik

Sult^  and,  126 ;  BdNLj&k  Sultdn  in,

332,  339.
Eush  Gumbaz,  monastery  called,  296.
Enshji,  Amirs  called,  52.
Eushk-i-B&gh-i-Z^hftn,  a  garden  at

Herat,  83.
Eushluk, son of  Tdi Tang  Ehin;

rebellion of, in lEashgbar, 287-

291,  293; his  capture  and  death,

292.
Eushlnk's  tribes  (the  Naimin  Uighuis),

288  n.
Kui&i  (wild  oxen) in the hills of

Ehotan,  301-2,  302  n. ; in  Tibet,

416,  417,  446  and  n.
Eatb-i-Alaiu,  tomb  of,  in  Eashghar,

301.
Entb-ud-Din  Ahmad,  342.
Entb-ud-Din,  Sult&n,  432,  433.
Eutb  Ehin,  472.
Eutluk  Mirak  Mirzd,  241,  247,  306,

316.
Eutluk  Nigdr  Ehinim,  94,  96,  117,

155,  160,  196,  197.
Eutlugh  Turk&n  Agh^  43.
EuYuk  (eon  of  Oktai),  attacks  Alm6-

ligh,  33*.
Euvuk  (son  of  Davi),  36.*
Euzi  B&shi,  82.
Euzruin,  province  of,  44  and  n.

Labug  (or  Lanuk),  in  Tibet,  410.

Lacouperie,  Prof,  de,  on  the  Hiung
Nu,  87*  n. ;  on  the  compilation  of
the  Ming  Shi,  107*  n.  ;  on  the
term  Mangalai  Suyah,  8  n. ;  on  the
word  Bk  or  itefc,  288  n.

Ladak;  invaded  by  Aba  Bakr,  IS*;

I  expedition  into,  by  Saltan  Said  in
1531,  13,*  14*;  Mirzi  Haidar's  re-
turn to,  in  1534,  15*;  expedition
against,  in  1533, 12*  n. ;  invasion  of,
in  1543,  20*  ;  in  1548,  21* ;  overrun
by  foreign  troops,  65*;  invaded  by
Sultan  Said  in  1532,  66* ;  invasions
of,  270  n. ;  410  n. ;  district  of  Balti,
410 ;  kings  and  rulers  of,  418  n. :
«e6  aho  Tibet

Ladak  Gyalrab»y  the  work  called,
418  n.,  419  n.

Lahore  (Lihur),  city  oF,  405,  406;
Mirz^  Haidar  received  by  Eu&mrin
at.  16,*  467 ;  sacked  by  Dav6,  36* ;
held  by  Elimr^n  Mirz6,  398,  468,
472;  Ehw6ja  Nur&  at,  399,  400;
flight  of  the  Chaghatai  to,  17,*  18,*
477-9.

L6hur  Makri,  of  Eashmir,  441.

L&huk  (Luk  Langar),  town  of,  298
and  n.

Lai  (mire  or  mud),  battle  of,  31-6.

Lak  of  Hindustan,  469.

Lili:  see  Shih  Sult4n  Muhammad
Badakhshi.

Lai  Shid  Ehinim,  daughter  of  SultiLn
Ahmad  Ehdn,  161.

Lamas  of  iibet,  414-416.

Lanak  Lake,  456  n.

Langar  Mir  Am^  (dependency  of
Hisar),227.

Lanka,  island  of,  429  n.

Lansdell,  Dr. ;  travels  in  Chinese  Tar-
kistan,  58  n.,  59  n.

Lansur,  fort  of,  48a

L6r,  narrow  defile  of^  423,  and  n.

Lassa  (Ursans;);  Mirz&  Haidar  starts
to  destroy  the  great  temple  at,  14,*
136  n.,  143,  454-459;  temple  at,
411,  443 :  see  also  Ursaag.

Lata  Jugh  Dto,  ruler  of  M^Uynl,  418
and  n.,  419  n.,  460.

Leh,  town  of,  410  n.;  distance  from
Lasn,  456  n.,  457  n. ;  capital  of
Ladak,  460  n. ;  palace  of,  460  ti.

Lerch,  Mr.  P.,  and  the  Eirghis  proper,
in  1873, 126* ;  on  Yangi,  80  n.

Littledale,  Mr.  Bt  («. ;  on  wild  camels
in  neighbourhood  of  Lake  Lob,
302  n.

Little  Tibet,  Balti  tribe  of,  82,*  88* :
see  also  Baltistan.

Liu  8ha  (or  Moving  Sandu)  of  Alti-
Shahr,  67.*

Lob,  67,  295.

Lob  Eatak,  town  of.  10  n.,  11  n.,  52, 64.

Lob,  Lake.  54,*  406  n.,  407  n. ;  Ghineae
names  for,  12  n. ;  wild  camels  in
neighbourhood  of,  302  ii.

Lu,  in  Tibet,  410.

Lu-ko-tsin  (Liu  GhSng),  town  of,  106*;
situation  of,  113*n.

Luk  Langar,  town  of,  298  n.

Digitized  by

Google

Index,

S17

Liikni4n  Sultan,  66.
Luk-u-Labnk,  oaafle  0^  455,  456  n.

MiDU  (Bfadi),  fort  of,  seized  by  AbA
Bakr,  249, 254. 259  ;  Mir  Ydli  takes,
320 ;  taken  by  Said  Khftn,  376.

Magpies  never  seen  in  Ehotan,  298.

Mahdi  Sultin,  179  audn.,  238,  243,
245,  248.

Ma-bei-ma  (Mubanunad)  brotber  of
Shah  Kh&n,  123,*  124.*

M^him  Ehinim,  344;  daaghter  of
Sultan  Ahmad  Kbdn,  161.

Mahmnd  Eh&n,  Soltdo,  son  of  Yanus
Khlin,  72,  83,  153,  156,  336;  early
days  of,  107, 108 ;  sent  against  Snltto
Ahmad  Mirz6, 1 13 ;  pays  his  respects
to  N^Uiruddin  Ubaldullab,  114 ;  war
with  Sultin  Ahmad  Mirz^  115,
116;  marries  KHrigaz  Begum,  116,
117;  hia  reign  in  Tl^kand,  118,
119;  death  of  120,  131,  179,  192,
208-9 ;  war  with  the  Uzbeg  Eazik,
119.  122;  defeated  by  Mirzi  Abi
Bakr,  122 ;  expedition  into  Mivar^-
nn-Nahr,  125;  in  Yatikand,  130;
rdgn  in  Shish,  155 ;  sucoeeds  Yunne
Kbin  in  T^tshkand,  157 ;  helps  Sh^hi
Beg  Kh&n  to  conquer  Samarkand
and  Bokbiird,  158, 166 ;  advances  on
Ennduz,  169, 170, 176, 178 ;  plunders
Sair^m,  171 ;  martyrdom  of,  and  his
children,  162,  163 ;  friendship  with
Muhammad  Husain  Eurkin,  171 ;
Bdbar  Pidislillh  and,  175 ;  and  his
mother  Shah  Begum,  180 ;  goes  over
to  Shahi  Beg  Ehdu,  182, 207-8. 240 ;
Hazrat  Maultln^  liis  spiritual  guide,
213;  Said  Eh&n  joins  him  in  Mo-
ghulistan,  447.

Mahmud  Euli,  247,  306.

Mahmud  Mirza,  son  of  Sayyid  Mu-
hammad, 444,  454,  455,  459;  his
death,  462-3.

Mahmud  Ynsuf,  467.

MHkhtum,  woman  named,  187, 190.

Makhtum  Ehtoim,  sister  of  Yais  Elidn,
67,  91.

Makri,  fJBimily  of,  in  Eashmir,  482  n.

Makrit  tribe,  30lj.

Maksud,  brother  of  Mir  Eambar,
307.

Mak&nd  Ali,  wounds  Said  Ehin  in
battle,  137, 181, 182.

Maksud  Earak,  357.

Malcolm,  Sir  J.,  and  the  Eizilb^sh,
214  n.

Malik,  adherent  uf  Amir  Husain,  35.

Malik  Ali,  309.

Malik  Bah^ur,  32.

Malik  Duliddi,  Governor  of  Eashghar,
7;").

Malik  Pir,  480  n.

Maliks  of  Eashmir,  438,  441.

Malleson,  Col.,  on  Shahrukhi  coin,
202  n.

Malur :  tee  Balur.

Mamdk  Sultan,  245.

Mamlakat  At6,  63.

Man  of  gold  dust,  weight  of  Andij^n,
327  and  n.

Mungai,  ancient  town  of^  124  n.

Mangalai  Suyah  (^Afiah  Buy,  province
of,  99,*  100*;  given  to  Urtubu,  7;
the  name,  7  n.-9  ». ;  under  adminis-
tration of  the  DughUts,  75,  294 :  tee
aho  Farghiina.

Mangit,  the  tribe  of,  134  and  n.;  374
and  n.

Mangn,  succeeds  Euyuk  as  Ehakto,
33,*  34.*

Mangn  Eian  (Chingiz's  grandson),
60.*

ManhaJU  or  Man/akit  (Mangit):  tee
Mangit.

Manlik,  wife  of  Isan  Bughli,  and  her
child,  6,  7.

Mansnr  Ehdn,  son  of  Sultdn  Ahmad
Ehto,  122, 156,  160,  178,  190,  306 ;
holy  war  against  Ehitai,  91,  127 ;
annexes  Eumul  to  Turfdn,  101*;
wars  agaiust  Ehitai  or  China,  104*,
105*  ;  succeeds  to  Uighuristan,  109,*
123* ;  fortifies  Aksn  against  Mirzd
Ab&  Bakr,  123,  124 ;  return  of  Mir
Jab^  Biidi  to  the  court  of,  125;
battle  against  his  brothers  at  Chirun
Ch&l&k,  125,  131,  139;  and  the
Ealiiidk,  125 ;  and  Bllbdj&k  Sultdn,
126 ;  meeting  with  his  brother  Sultdn
Said  Ehin,  126 ;  Ehw&ja  T&iuddin's
attendance  on,  127 ;  defeated  by  the
Uzbeg  Eaz^k  at  Ariah,  127  ;  marches
against  Ai»u,  128,  145;  his  death
after  a  reign  of  forty-three  years,
128,  129 ;  makes  peace  with  Sultin
Said  Ebin,  134 ;  and  Chin  Timur
Sultan,  161 ;  defeats  Said  Eh^n  and
Ehalil  Sultan  at  Almdtu,  182;  and
Aiman  Ehw&ja  Sultto,  332,  339,
340 ;  treatment  of  Said  Eh^n,  334  ;
submission  of  Said  Ehdn  to,  335 ;  at
Aksu,  336,  337 ;  quarrel  with  Amir
Jabir  Birdi,  337-9;  war  with  the
E^Imdk,  339  ;  pursues  B&bdj^k
Sultan,  339, 340 ;  meeting  with  Said
Ehan  at  Arb&t,  340,  343-5;  and
Mirzli  Haidar,  345;  second  inter-
view with  Said  Ebto,  356 ;  Ehw&ja
Nura  visits,  396-7.

Manuscript  found  by  Capt.  Bower  near
Enchar,  70,*  71,*  124.*

Marilbashi,  city  of,  51*  n.

Marco  Polo,  117,*  119* ;  on  the  mov-
ing sands  of  Alti-Shahr,  67;  and
KadHy  30*  n.;  styles  Eublai  '*tlio
,  Qreat  Eaan," 34* ; on  wars be-

Digitized  by

Google

518

Index,

tween  Eaidn  and  Eablai,  36* ;  on
the  CjarwofMu  (Ghaebatais),  77* ;  on
ruins  called  Gis  Snahr,  12  n. ;  on
Si-Ngan-fu,  404  n.,  405  n.

Margbinan  (Margbilin),  87*  n. ;  town
of,  119, 167 ;  otadel  of,  beld  by  Mir
D&im  Ali,  271  ;  given  to  Yunus
Khdn,  97.

MarLk  Bah&dur,  809.

Martand,  ruins  of  temple  at,  427  n.

Marx,  Dr.,  on  Mar  Tul,  410  n. ;  on  the
rulers  of  Ladak,  418  n.,  419  n. ;  on
old  fort  of  Leb,  460  n.

Maryul,  in  Tibet,  410  and  n.;  Mirzi
Haidar  in,  418,  423,  460,  461,  463.

Maabbad,  battle  at,  206.

Masiki  (Tangi  or  T&r6z),  79  n.-81  n.

Masud  K&buli,  Sult&n,  108.

Masud  MirzH,  Snlt&n,  163, 176,  203  n.

Maaud  SultlLn,  401.

IfaUa'  AaaadiTij  the,  42* ;  description
of  River  Jbilam,  481  n.

Maula  Bakbsb,  Ebin  Bah^ur,  on
the  Kurinas  tribe,  76*  ik,  77*  n.,
App.  B.

MauUn^Zada  Samarkandi,  37.

Mdvar6-un-Nabr  (Transoziaua),  king-
dom of  Ghagbatai,  29,*  30* ;  tribes
of,  31*;  Eaidu  and,  85*;  the  rise
of  Timur,  37*;  declining  power  of
the  Ebins  of  Obagbatai,  39* ;  dis-
appearance of  Is&n  Bugba  from,  40* ;
list  of  Kb^ns  of,  49* ;  invaded  by
the  Mogbuls,  54,*  58*  65*;  the
Ghagbatais  of,  and  Jatah,  61*;
Tughluk  Timur^s  expedition  into,
15,  16;  bis  second  invasion  of,  18-
22;  delivered  from  the  people  of
Jatab,  29,  30;  Sultan  Abu  Said
Mirzd  pddishdh  of,  79,  80;  Sultiin
Abu  Sdid,  ruler  of,  81  n.;  Yunus
Khdn  and  the  kings  of,  95-98 ;  ex-
pedition of  8ult&n  Mahmud  Ebdn
into,  125;  annals  of  kings  of,  150,
151;  Shihi  Bog  Ehdn  at,  166;  the
Eaz&k  in,  attacked  by  Sh^bi  Beg
Eb&n,  207,  230,  231;  accession  of
B&bar  P^isbib  to  the  throne  of,
243-6;  the  Sbaibdn  Uzbeg  masters
of,  274,  282-8 ;  under  Ilak  Ebins,
287  n. ;  given  to  Ghagbatai  Eh&n,
293.

Mayef,  Mr.  N.  A.,  on  the  Iron  Gate,

20  n. ;  on  the  province  of  EhatUln,

21  n, ;  on  the  'Bridge  of  Stone,'
24  n.

Mazid,  Mir,  241,  308,  356,  357;  and

BiU Sultdn, 380, 383; invades

Ladak,  403  n.
Medina,  Amir  Ehuddid&d  at,  70,  71.
Mekka,  Amir  Ehudliidid's  pilgrimage

to,  67-71.
Merv,  battle  near,  between  Sh&bi  Beg

Ehto  and  Shdh  Ismail,  233-237.

Midaka  Bahddur,  309,  312,  313,  315;
Eitta  Beg  and,  314.

Mibr  Nig6r  Ebinim,  86,  94,  90,  117,
155, 196, 197,  200,  258.

Mim&sh  EMn,  82.

MindrtL,  town  of,  364-5.

Ming  L^  battle  at,  65.

Ming  dynasty.  Dr.  Bretscbneider's
translation  of  the  history  of  the;
and  Moghul  Eh&ns,  41*-46*;  and
Bisbbiiik,  62* ;  and  the  Sali  Uigbur,
404  n.

Ming  Shi,  the :  see  Gbinese  chronicles
of  the  Ming  dynasty;  aUo  Bret-
schneider.  Dr.

Mingli :  see  Manlik.

Minb&j-ud-Din,  author  of  the  Tabdhdl-
irNdnH,  86.*

Mink&b  (Hinkib),  in  Tibet,  410.

Miracles  attributed  to  Amir  Ebud^i-
ddd,69.

Miraoles  of  lfauUn&  Muhammad  E6zi,
277-9.

Mir&k  EaMdar,  Sbdb,  309.

Mir&k  Turkoman,  73,  84 ;  killed  by
Ulugb  Beg,  74.

Mire,  battle  of  the,  31-^.

Mir  Ebwand,  108, 121 ;  the  Bauioi  us
Safdf  ;  and  the  suooession  of  the
Moghul  Ehdns,  41*-46* ;  and  the
*  Earavanas*  (Ghagbatais),  76.*

Mir  Muhammad  Shib,  son  of  Amir
Ebuddid&d,  71,  73.

Mirz4  Eh£n,  son  of  Mirz^  Sult&n
Mahmud,  156;  and  Ebusrau  Shtlb,
176 ;  besieges  Eabul,  200, 201 ;  goes
to  Eandahar,  201, 202, 205 ;  sets  out
against  the  Uzbeg,  244  ;  kills  Zobir
Blighi,  203,  and  reigns  over  Badakh-
sb6n,  203,219-221,226;  his  parents,
203  n. ;  Mirz&  Haidar  in  service  of,
221,  227-8;  sends  news  of  Shahi
Be^  Eb^n  to  Emperor  B&bar,  237-8,
243, 263 ;  and  BustlLngir  Mirzi,  830 ;
Daulat  Sultan  Ebdnim  stays  with,
351;  in  Badakhsb^n,  353 ;  attacked
by  Said  Eh6n,  354,  355;  dies  in
Badakhshdn,  387.

Mirz6  Turki,  place  called,  304.

Mirz^  Haidar :  see  Haidar.

Mirzd  Shah  Husain,  483.

Mithkal  the  weight,  256  n,,  469  n.

Mizrab  BiirUs,  108.

Moghul  tribe,  and  Sdtuk  Eb&n,  73;
the  word  Turk  in  connection  with,
98  n. ;  Moghul  custom  of  TangaUk,
251 ;  name  of:  see  Ghaebatai.

Moghul  UluSy  a  mere  band  of  refngeeB
about  1525-6 . .  98* ;  division  in  the,
99*;  submits  to  Shaikh  Jam^l,
94.

Moghul  Ebakans,  the,  MubanmiMd
Ehdn,  the  last  of,  57 ;  Mirzd  Haidar's
history  of,  148, 149 ;  their  power  at

Digitized  by

Google

Index,

519

the  time  of  Mirz^  HaidaeB  birth,
152, 158.

Moghiil  Khdnim,  160, 192, 193.

MoghuUstan  (Jatah),  the  Moghuls  of,
1,*  2* ;  history  of,  in  the  TartA*-*-
BxMUdi,  7*;  Khdns  of,  29*:  pro-
vince of,  37*-39*;  epitomised  ac-
count of  the  Khins  of,  46*-48*;
the  land  of,  51,*-71* ;  proper  boun-
dary of  the  province,  52,*  53* ;  the
clixnate  of,  54,*  55*;  'cities  and
towns'  of,  57*-61*;  irrigation  in,
60* ;  known  as  *  Jatah'  by  the  Oha-
ghatais  of  M^var6-un-Nahr,  61*;
the '  steppes '  of,  54,*  55* ;  Khans  of,
pay  triDuto  to  China,  63*;  the
people  of,  72*-98* ;  the  name  of
Jatah,  75*;  Tughluk  Timur  ruler  of,
13, 14 ;  invasion  of,  by  Amir  Timur,
39;  Yunus  Khdn  in,  86,  87,  95;
Sultin  Ahmad  Khto's  administra-
tion of,  120,  121 :  Sultdn  Mahmud
Khto  and,  122,  131;  the  Kirghiz
the  originators  of  revolts  in,  125;
subdued  by  Sult&n  8aid  Khan,  134 ;
Rashid  Sultdn  sent  to,  141. 142, 144 ;
Mahmud  Eh&n  and,  181;  Khalil
Sultto  flees  to,  182 ;  raids  of  Mirzd
Ab4  Bator's  army  into,  188,  254;
governed  by  Sayyid  Muhammad
Sultan,  240;  visit  of  Ab6  Bdkr  to,
252:  Juji  Sultins  flee  to,  272;
given  to  Ghaghatai  Khan,  293;
mountains  of,  294 ;  Mir  Yali  drives
the  Moghuls  and  Kirp^hiz  out  of,
319 ;  Amir  Jabdr  Birdi  retreats  to,
338;  Said  Kh^n  invades,  350,  351,
358-9,  368;  description  of,  in  the
Ja^n-£u«Adt,  360-367 ;  boundaries
of,  365  and  i».,  366 ;  summer  in,  366 ;
rivers  in,  366-7  ;  mountains  of,  405  :
we  oilM  Bishb&lik,  anS,  Jatah.

Moghuls  of  India,  the  :  «e«  Ghaghatai.

Moghuls  of  Mogbulistan,  the,  1,*  2*;
as  described  in  the  Tarikh  -  i  -
Bashidit  7* ;  succession  of  the
Khans  from  Isan  Bugha,  40*-47* ;
the  land  of,  51*-71*;  traditions  of
the,  55* ;  numbers  engaged  in  their
battles,  56*;  battles  under  Kamar*
ud-Din  with  Amir  Timur,  56* ;  their
fear  of  the  Uzbegs,  56* ;  the  auU  or
encampments  of  the,  57*-59* ;  raids
in  Western  Tarkistan,  65* ;  compo-
sition of  Sultin  Said's  armies,  66* ;
called  Jatah  by  the  Chaghatais,  75* ;
in  return  the  M.'s  call  the  Chagha-
tais *  Kardwin&s,'  76* ;  declining  in
power  and  numbers,  77,*  78*;  the
Moghul  Ulu8  a  separate  people  from
the  Turks,  82* ;  the  history  of,  Mirza
Haidar  the  only  Musulman  authority
for,  119*;  small  residue  of,  still
existing  in  Eastern  Tnrkistan,  127* ;

history  of;  as  recorded  in  the  Zafar-
Ndma,  2;  title  of  Tarkhan  among
the,  55  n. ;  Muhammad  Khdn's  me-
thod of  converting  to  Islam,  58;
friendly  with  the  Kaz^ks  from  the
days  of  Isdn  Bughd  Khin  to  the
time  of  Rashid  Kh^n.  82 ;  UluAegi
(chief  of  the  tribe),  132  n.;  many
battles  with  the  Uzbeg,  146 ;  at  the
beginning  of  reign  of  Tunus  Khdn,
156 ;  at  enmity  with  the  Chaghatai,
172 ;  custom  among  the  young,  185,
186;  province  of  Hisar  taken  by,
261 ;  aefeated  by  the  Uzbegs  under
Ubaid  Ullah  Kh^  262-3 ;  conquest
of  K^lshghar,  292-4;  BvlIUxl  Said
EMn's  army,  305,  314.

Mongol  and  Moghul,  the  terms,  72,*
73* ;  called  Jatah,  75*  ;  common
origin  with  the  Turk,  78,*  79* ;  type
of  features  still  preserved,  81.*

Mongol  rule  in  Central  Asia  and  China
in  the  days  of  Chingiz,  115.*

Mongol  (Mangal),  a  few,  still  flourish-
ing in  the  Hazara  country,  127*;
and  in  the  Punjab,  128.*

Mongolia,  region  known  to  Europeans
as,  73.*

Mongols,  history  of,  by  Bashid-ud-Din,
88*;  Yizik,  or  legal  code  of  the,
22  n.

Moorcroft,  travels  of,  viii;  on  the
island  of  Lanka,  429  n.  ;  finds
Ehw^ja  Shah  Niaz  at  Sheh,  460  ?».

Mw^jjam  ul  Bulddriy  the,  on  Tibet,
403.

Muayad,  Amir,  46.

Mubdrak  Shah  (son  of  Algu),34,*  35,*
220;  killed  by  Zobir  lUghi,  221.

Mubdrakshdh  Makrit,  42.

Mughol  Khdn,  89.*

Muhammad  (son  of  Ali  Mirdk  Mirzi),
307.

Muhammad  (son  of  Salduz),  26.

Muhammad  AIL  Tum&n,  309,  315.

Muhammad  Amin,  MauUni,  213.

Muhammadabad,  battle  at,  237  n.

Muhammad  Amir  Mirzd  (son  of  Amir
Jabir  Birdi),  161.

Muhammad  Attar,  Mauhind,  89.

Muhammad  Biki  (seventii  son  of  Ra-
sliid  Sultdn),  121.*

Muhammad  Baranduk  BarUs,  Mir,
195.

Muhanmiadi  Barl^,  Amir,  382-384,
4.12,  453.

Muhammad  Baydn  Salduz,  Shaikh,  41,
43.

Muhammad  Beg,  brother  of  Mir  Ayub,
308,  315,  316.

Muhammad  Beg,  one  of  Mirzd  Ab&
Bakr's  officers,  321.

Muhammad  Beg,  son  of  Musd,  50.

Muhammad  Begjik,  Mirz&,  247.

Digitized  by

Google

S20

Index.

Muhammadi  bin  Ali  Mirdk  BarUs,
141, 142 ;  Mirz&  Haidar  and,  145  n.;
his  influence  on  Raehid  Kh&n,  146,
147.

Mohammad  bin  Burh&n-ud-Din :  we
Hazrat  Maulani.

Muhammad  DuUdi  SulUn,  260.

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  son  of  Say-
yid  Ali,  56.

Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzi,  grandfather
of  Mirzd  Haidar,  76,  87,  88,  251;
governor  of  the  districts  of  K&sh-
ghar,  95,  98,  102,  252 ;  joins  Yunus
Ehdn,  89, 90 ;  and  Mirz&  Ab6  Bakr,
99,  100,  102,  103:  we  also  Mirz^
Haidar.

Muhammad  H&ji  Mirz^  307.

Muhammad  Husain  Eurk&n,  father  of
Miizd  Haidar,  9;*  56,  102,  106-108,
111,  115,  153;  plot  against  Baber,
9*;  put  to  death  by  Shahi  Beg
Eh^,  9,*  209;  marries  Ehub  Nigdr
Ehanim,  117, 118,  156 ;  left  in  Ura-
tippa  to  oppose  Shdhi  Beg  Elhdn,
158,  163;  visits  Ehusrau  Shdh  in
Hisdr,  163, 164 ;  escapes  to  the  hills  of
Fargh^na,  165 ;  attacked  bv  Tambal,
168;  the  guest  of  Sh&hi  Beg  Ehin,
169,  205  6;  returns  to  Samarkand,
199 ;  marries  SuMnim  Begum,  164,
170 ;  friendship  with  Mahmud  Sul  tin,
171, 192 ;  flees  to  Ehords&n,  171, 192,
195 ;  his  children  left  in  SLahr-i-Sabz,
192,  193 ;  visits  B&bar  Pddishih  in
Eabul,  196-198.  199  n. ;  at  Eabul,
200 ;  goes  to  Eandahar,  201 ;  and
thence  to  FanUi,  201 ;  stays  in  Samar-
kand, 207;  goes  to  Ehor^&n,  207;
tells  the  story  of  Sultan  Mahmud
Ehan's  martyrdom,  207-9;  governs
Edshghar,  252-3;  defeated  byMirzi
AU  Bakr,  253.

Muhammad  E&zi  (Maulind),  and  Yu-
nus Ehdn,  8,*  84,»  85,*  97, 113, 114 ;
and  Mirz6  Haidar,  157, 158 ;  miracles
of,  277-9 :  iee  <iUo  Hazrat.

Muhammad  Eh&n,  son  of  Ehizir
Ehw&ja;  reign  of,  57-59,  68 ;  Bab6t
oonstruoted  by,  58;  his  sons,  60;
governor  at  Yarkand,  123.*

Muliammad  Ehto  Bumi,  475.

Muhammad  Eirghiz,  812,  358,  368,
374,  452;  attacked  by  Sultdn  Said
Eh&n,  134 ;  released  from  prison,
141 ;  appointed  Amir  of  the  Eirgl)iz,
141,  142 ;  captured  by  Said  Ehan,
349-351.

Muhammad  Ehwarizm  Shih,  287-289.

Muhammad  Mauldnii,  entrusted  with
the  care  of  Mirz6  Haidar,  9,*  209-
211,  228.

Muhammad  Mazid  Tarkh&n,  118.

Muhammad,  Mir,  241,  261,  265,  316.

Muhammad,  Mirza,  241,  308.

Muhammad  Parghari,  MauUnii,  398-9,

469.
Muhammad  Sadr,  MauUn^  468.
Muhammad  Sdlih,  Mir,  205.
Muhammad Sh&h,  the PidishiLh of

Eashmix,  136,  193, 196,  203,  441;

Mirzd  Ab£  Bakr  and,  258.
Muhammad,  Sbdh  Shaikh,  343.
Muhammad  Shih  Eurkan,  Amir,  56,

78,  79.
Muhammad  Shiiazi,  IfauUn^  140, 340,

341.
Muhammad  Sult&n,  sixth  son  of  Bashid

Sultin,  121*; Benedict  Goes  and,

122,*  123*  ;  marriage  of,  352.
Muhammad  Sultlin  Mirzi,  474,  478.
Muhanunad Sultdn, son of Prince

Jah&ngir,  48.
Muhammad Sultdn,  son of Mansnr

Ehto,  129.
Muhammad  Sultdn,  Sh&h,  371 ; his

history,  381-4.
Muhammad  YiU  Mirzd,  307.
Muhammad  Yusuf,  Ehwdja,  371,  372,

375; dispute  with  Ehw&ja  Nur^

389,397;  death  of,  390.
Muhammad  Zamin  Miiz^  402.
MuhammadiDS,  seven,  tombs  of  the,

at  Y^kand,  299.
Muhasban  Sult&n,  467.
Muhibb  Sultdn  Eh&nim,  280.
Muhtarima  Ehdnim,  451.
Mujtahids,  the  last  of  the,  10.
Mujma-ut-Tavdrikhf the,  of  Bashid-

ud-Din,  151,  293.
Mukadasi,  the  Arab  writer,  on  Tariz,

80  fi.
Mukaddasi, on situation of Bdla-

S&kun,362n.
Mukim,  son  of  Zunnuu  Arghun,  177,

201,  204  n.
Mulihida  of  Eohistin,  the  sect,  217,

218  and  n.,  220.
Mulberry  trees  in  Eashmir,  425.
AfuZ/az<f£-t-Ttm«rt,  description  of  Eash-
mir in,  431  n.
Multan,  sacked  by  Dav4  36.*
MumlUh  Ehdn,  273,  276.
Mumin  Mirz&,  75.
Munajim  Bdahi,  on  situation  of  B&la-

Sikun,362n.
Munir  Sforghin&ni,  MauUn^  173.
Munka  Beg.  308,  316,  333.
Murdd  BarUs,  Amir,  32.
Musi,  Amir,  25,  40.
Muslih-ud-Din,  Shaikh,  mauBoleam  of,

209.
Musulmin  influence,  rise  of^  in  Aaia,

115,*  116.*
Musuhnin  prisoners,  Amir  Ehudiidid

and,  68.
Musulm&n  Sultftns  of  KashmiT,  438  n.,

434  n.
Mnsulmins,  the,  chiefly  of  Turk!  race.

Digitized  by

Google

Index.

521

86* ;  in  Hochoa  and  Salar  dietricts

ofTibet,  404n.,  405n.
Mutaddr  (Hundivr),  castle  of,  in  Tibet,

418.
Mutamad Kh&n, the 7%&<a l!f&(ML

Jdhdngiri,  vi.
MuTayid  Axldt,  Amir,  25.
Muaaffar  Husain  Mini,  196.
Muzafiari,  tribe  called,  220.

NXdir  ShXh,  invades  India,  214  n.
Nte&n,  town  in  Kashmir,  428 ;  district

or,  in  Kashmir,  489.
Naim&n,  the,  tribe  in  Moghulistan,  73,*

74*n.,  88,*288n.,290r».
Naimdn  Uighwr  (or  "  Eight  Uighnrs  "),

the,  93.*
Najm,  Mir  (Najm  Sdni),  marches  on

Samarkand,  132,  133;  Shah  Ismairs

conmiander-in-chief,  260,  261,  266,

268,  281.
Nakhshab  (Karshi),  243;  palace  near,

37.
Nakhshbandi  Order  in  Central  Asia,

67  n.
Naklish-i-Jah&n  Khdn,  43,*  57,  68.
Naliykine,  Mr.,  and  village  of  B&itdk,

42  n.
Ndmangdn,  town  of,  9  n.
Nan-gvass  (Southern  China),  88.*
Ndrin  River.  53,*  366.
Nasir  Mirzd,  Sultdn,  brother  of  Bdbar

Padishdh,  202,  206,  250;  death  oE;

356
Nasiraddin  Ubaidallah,  Kbw&ja,  111,

212; visit to Ynnus Kh&n, 97;

makes  peace  between three  P&di-

shdhs,  113;  visit  of  Solt&n  M&hmad

Kh6n,  114;  and  Khwdja  Tdjnddin,

127;  Tunus  Khdn  and,  155.
Nasr,  an  Ilak  Khdn,  287  n.
Nau  Shahr,  483.
Navlib  Matlab  Saltan,  217.
Nazar  Mirzd  Sultdn,  261,  264,  306,

308,  326,  338.
Nazak  (Nddir),  Sultdii,  434  and  n.
Nazar  Yasdval,  Shaikh,  309.
Ndzuk  Shah,  20,*  28,*  24,*  482  n.,  487,

491.
Neetorian  Christianity  prevalent  among

the  Ui^hurs,  96* ;  prevalent  among

the  Namidns,  290  n.
Nestorian  monastery  at  Chi-gn,  79  n.
Ngariy  province  of  Tibet,  136  n.
Niizi,  tribe  of  Afghans,  21,*  22.*
Nicholas,  Friar  (Bishop  of  Cambalu),

117.*  118.*
Nikdlla  tribe,  214  n.
Nik^i,  grandson  of  Chaghatai,  35* ;

reigns  in  Bokhara,  299  n.
Nik  Pai  Shdh,  219.

Nikndar Oghldn, the Haz&ras de-
scended from  the  remnants  of  the

army  of,  80.*

Nildb,  or  Blue  River  (Indus),  406
and  n.

Nipdl,  the  Rai  or  Ri^a,  rulers  of,  454  n.

Nisan,  in  Tibet,  410.

Nishdpur,  baUle  at,  206.

Nizam-ud-Din  on  the  Gakars.  479  n.

Nizam-ud'Din  Ali  Khalifia  MaaUnd
Bdbd  Bisbdghari,  194, 197.

Nogais,  tribe  of,  16  n.

Nofdeke,  Professor,  and  the  word
Tdjik,  91.*

Noyan  Chabah,  one  of  Chingiz  Khdn's
generals,  292  n.

Nubra,  province  of  Tibet,  417,  418,
420  n.,  423.

Nuin,  sent  to  capture  Kushluk,  292.

Nur  Ali  Divdna,  462,  463.

Nurd  (Nur-ud-Din)  Khwdja,  372, 375-
378,  448 ;  cures  Sayyid  Muhammad
Mirza  of  an  illness,  389,  397;  dif-
ference with  his  brother  Muhammad
Yusuf,  389,  390;  goes  to  Yanci-
Hisdr,  390 ;  Said  Khdn  under  the
guidance  of,  395,  398;  genealogy
and  life  of,  395-7 ;  his  journey  to
India,  398-9;  miracles  of,  399,  400;
line  of  descent  iu  disoipleship,  401 ;
and  Iskandar's  birth,  340.

Nurbakhshi,  sect  called,  in  Kashmir,
435-7.

Nuraddin,  Amir  Shaikh,  Governor  of
Turkistan,  64.

Observatory  bailt  by  Uiugh  Beg  at

Samarkand,  60  n.
Odoric  of  Pordenone,  117.*
Oivaty  the  Kalmdks  known  as,  97* :

see  ciUo  Kalmdks.
Oktai  (or  Ogodui),  third  son  of  Chingiz

Khdn,  95*;  dominion  of,  31,*  32*;

death  of,  32*;  Chapdr,  the  last  of

the  house  of,  37.*
Oliver,  Mr.  E.  E.,  paper  entitled  *  The

Chaghatai  Mughals,'  28,*  29*;  and

the representutives of Chaghatai,

32,*  33*;  and  the  reign  of  Bordic,

35*  ;  and  Cliapdr,  37.*
Olkhonod  tribe,  the,  16  n.
Omar  Mirzd,  son  of  Sdniz  Mirzd,  88 ;

attempt  to  subdue  Khotan,  99,  101.
Omar  Mirzd, brother of Aba  Bdkr

Mirzd,  251 ;  has  his  eyes  put  out,

253.
Omar  Shaikh,  chief  of  the  Shulkdrohi

tribe,  309.
Omar  Shaikh,  governor  of  Andijdn,  45,

46; sent  by  Amir  Timur  against

Kamar-ud-Din.  49.
Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd,  Timur's  son,  20  n.,

21  n.
Omar  Shaikh.  Mirzd,  son  of  Sultdn

Abu  Said,  93,  110,  111 ;  married  to

Ktttluk  Nigdr  Khdnim,  94,  96,  117,

155  ;  and  Yunns  Khdn,  96 ;  battle  at

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

522

Index,

the  bridge  of  Tik6  Sagrutku,  96,  d7 ;

hostilities  with  Sultan  Ahmad  Mirz^

112,  118,  115,  116; his  sons,  154;

death  of,  119,  174;  yisit  of  Tnnus

Ehin  to,  173.
On  Archa  (Ankghan  Aicha),  189  n.
Orgdnah Khatun, widow of Kara

Hulaku,  38,*  34*;  driven  from  Al-

mAligh,  34.*
.  Orong  Timur,  34.
Orpelian,  the  Armenian  writer,  and

Arqhuti^  290  n.
Osm^n  Mirz^  112.
Osmdn  Sultiui  and  Ehwdrizm  Sh^

287.
Ot&r  (Arsh&l  At^r),  41  n.
Otrar  (F6r&b),  44  n.,  49,  63  n. ;  Amir

Timur*8  death at,  54 :  m6  T&r6z,

Yangi,  etc.
Ottogush-Shahr,  remains of  anoient

town  of,  12  n.
Oxen,  wild  {Jwtdi)^  in the hills  of

Ehotan,  301-2,  302  n.

PiiK,  476.

Paitong  (Baitok),  village,  42  n.

Pdk  (or  Jdbdk),  809.

Pakhli,  province  of,  invaded  in  1548

by  Mirzd  Haidar,  21.»
P&licha  Mir  Akhur,  309.
Pamirs,  the,  64,*  405.
Pandit  Nain  Sing,  and  the  gold  mines

of  Tibet,  409  n.
Pandrettan,  ruins  of  temple  at»  427  n.
P^ipat,  battle  at,  357.
Panja-Eand :  see  Bishkand.
Pandu  Koni,  ruins  of  temple  at,  427  n.
Parak :  we  Ghir  River.
Parvdz  (Darwiz),  a  district  of  Badakh-

shdn,  353.
Pasltr,  a  district  of  Badakhshdn,  353.
P&yech,  ruins  of  temple  at,  427  n.
Perh&lah  (PharwalaX  Bihar's  expedi-
tion against,  480  n.
Persia, no copies of the Tarikh-i-

Raihidi  to be  found in,  ix.; tho

Moghul  army  in,  58.*
Peshawar,  ravaged  by  Dav&,  36.*
PkukpcL,  habitations  of  the  Dulpa  tribe,

409  n,
Pir  Ali  Beg,  316,  317.
Pir  Haji  Eunji,  Mir; his  daughter

married  to  Tunus  Kh^  86.
Pir Muhammad Barlis (called

'Bangi'),  75,  76.
Pir  Muhammad,  Mirza,  son  of  Prince

Jahiiigir,  48.
Pisbku  Mirzi  Itdrji,  248.
Pishkartln,  a  township  of  Akhsi,  280.
Piano  Garpini ;  the  aari  Huiur  nation,

349  n.
Poisonous  herbs,  on  road  from  Eashmir

to  Tibet,  432  and  n.
Po-lo-lo  (Balur),  385  h.

Pomegranate  pecoliar  to  Balur,  386.

Poole,  Mr.  B.  Lane,  Muhammadan
DywuLies^  and  the  western  branch
of  Cbaghatai  Ehins,  49*;  Emperor
Baber  and  Sh^  Ismail,  247  n.;
dual  character  of  Shaibani's  dynasty,
206  fi. ;  on  the  MUHcdl,  256  n. ;  on
the  Ilak  Ehins,  287  n.;  on  Davi
Eli&n,  299n.

PrejevaLski,  Gen.,  on  wastes  of  moving
sand,  69*  ;  on  ruins  of  ancient  towns
inTurkistan,llfi.,12n.;  wild  camel
seen  in  the  Lob  region  by,  301  n.,
302fi. ;  on  the  wild  yak,  302  ». ;  on
TamgtU^  361  n.

Price,  Major,  translation  from  Ahbar-
Ndma,  479  n.

Fukpa  (Dulpa  tribeX  409  n.,  411, 412  n.

Pul,  Shaikh,  and  the  Emperor  HumA-
yun,  398-9;  put  to  death,  470.

Pul-i-Sangin,  243.

Pulibd  Bughd,  24, 32, 34,  44,  45 ;  death
01^47.

Punch  PasB^  the,  19.*

Punjab,  Mirzi  Haidar,  governor  of,
16*;  ravaged  by  DavA,  36.*;  Mr.
Ibbetson  and  the  words  Turk  and
Moghul  in,  89*-91,*  128.*

Purdnv&r  Sludkh,  tomb  of,  in  Tish-
kand,  115.

Purik,  a  district  of  Ladak,  16,*  442 ;
district  of  Balti,  410.

Pushang,  village  of,  216,  227.

Putiji  Bah^ur,  809.

QuATREM^BB,  translations  from  the
Hafi  IMim,  25,*  26* ;  his  transla-
tions of  the  McUla'  Ataadin,  42*  ;
on  the  term  Jatdhj  75*  n.;  on  the
*  Earavenas '  (GbaghataisX  76,*
77*;  onTArtiz,  80n.

Babat  (or  traveller's  rest  houseX  built
by  Muliammad  Eb6n,  58.

Rab£t-i-Eata&n,  the,  41.

Rabdt-i-Malik,  45.

Rabitchi,  district  of,  296.

Kdgh,  hill  district  of  Badakhshto,
203  n.,  219.

Bajaori,  province  of,  invaded  in  1548
by  Mirzd  Haidar,  21.*

Rdjdin,  palace  built  by  Sultan  Zain-
ul-Abidin.  429  and  n.,  430,  437.

Rashid  Ehdu,  son  of  Sultan  Said,  14,*
25,*  57,  82, 251 ;  puts  to  death  many
of  Mirzi  Haiders  relatives,  15* ;
battles  with  the  Uzbegs,  120*;  sons
of,  121*-123*;  governor  of  Enchar
and  Turfdn.  123*;  the  Tarikk^-
jRcuAidi  named  after  him,  3 ;  invades
Balur  with  Mirzi  Haidar,  12,*  142  ;
goes  to  Aksu,  142, 143;  puts  Mirzd
Haidar's  uncle  to  death,  143,  144 ;
i defeats  Mansur  Ehan  at  Aksu,  145 ;

Digitized  by

Google

Index.

523

•  goes  to  Khotau,  145;  greatly  in-
fluenced by  Muhammadi  Barl^  146,
147 ;  defeats  the  Uzbeg  Kazak,  146 ;
oharaoteristics  of,  147;  enters  Mo-
ghnlistlin,  134 ;  retires  to  E^kshghar,
135;  at  Aksu,  135;  Mirzd  Haidar
inscribes  his  history  {TariJ^-i'ILM-
hidt)  to,  139;  his  mother,  140;  his
birth  and  early  education,  140 ;  kept
a  prisoner  by  Jini  Beg  Sult&n,  140 ;
sent  to  Moghulist^n,  141-2;  invades
Moghulist^n,  359,  368,  370,  378-9 ;
plunders  the  Kalmak,  373 ;  marries
the  daughter  of  Sultdn  Nigar
Khinim,374;  flees  to  At-B^hi,  377;
illness  of,  378 ;  invades  Balur,  884-
386 ;  friendship  with  Mirz&  Haidar,
393-4  ;  goei  to  Aksu,  393-4,  403 ;
succeeds  his  father  in  Kashghur,
450 ;  puts  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzd
to  death,  450-1;  banishes  Khadija
Sultin,  451 ;  Muhammadi  Barliui's
influence  over,  452-3;  sends  apolo-
gies to  Mirzd  Haidar,  461;  his
violence  and  cruelty,  467.

Bashid-ud-Din,  the  history  of,  84*  n. ;
on  the  bravery  of  the  Chaghatais,
76* ;  use  of  the  word  Turk,  85*  ;  and
the  name  Tatar,  86,*  88*;  on  the
Uigliurs,  95*  ;  and  the  Eari&it  tribe,
16  fk;  the  Alkunut  tribe,  16  n;  the
Einkali  tribe,  16  n.;  the  Earluk
tribe,  19  n. ;  the  Mujma-ut'Tavarihh
of,  151 ;  and  tbedtyof  Eari-Sairam,
171  n. ;  and  the  title  Eurkdni,  278  n.,
279  n.

Blisk^m,  mountains,  405;  valley  of,
466.

Rauzat  tu  Sa/d,  the,  and  succession  of
the  Moghul  Ehins,  41*-46.*

Baverty,  Major,  translation  of  the
TabdIcdt-i-Ndnn,  85* ;  on  the  Ilak
Eh^ns,  288  n.

Bazi-ud-Din,  Shah,  217,  218  n.,  219,
221.

Begel,  Dr.,  on  reservoirs  in  Turfi&n,
112* ;  on  the  situation  of  Lu-ko-tsin,
113*  n.;  on  ruins  of  "Old  Turfin,"
113.*

B^musat,  Abel,  and  country  of  the
Yellow  Uighurs,  349  n.

Benaudot,  and  the  Ydza,  22  n.

Besmes,  Ehwdja,  tomb  of,  26.

Best-house  (Babat)  constructed  by
Muhammad  Ehdn,  58,  59  n.

Bioci,  Father  Matthew,  122* ;  story  of
Goths'  adventures,  110.*

Bieu,  Dr.  Chas.,  on  the  Tarikhri-
Bcuhidiy  zi.,  xv. ;  description  of  the
TaHkh-^'Baahidi,  6,*  7*  ;  on  date  of
Sharaf-ud-Din*s  death,  85  n. ;  on
saints  of  the  time  of  Mirza  Sult&n
Husain,  194  n.

Bitter ;  on  the  Eafir  people,  104  n.

Bockhill,  Mr.  W.  W.,  on  the  word
Tibety  135  n.;  on  Tangut,  361  n.\
the  Musulman  population  in  Hochou
and  Salar,  404  n.,  405  n. ;  on  the
Dulpa  tribe,  409  n.

Bodgers,  Mr.  G.  J.,  on  coins  of  N^uk
Shiih,  20*  n. ;  version  of  Mirzd
Haidar's  death,  22*;  and  coins  in
Eashmir  struck  in  Hum&yun's
name,  24* ;  on  the  Suites  of  Eash-
mir, 433  n.,  434  n. ;  translation  of
Firishta's  History,  441  n,  442  n ;
extract  from  paper  entitled  *The
Square  Silver  Coins  of  the  Sult&ns
of  Eashmir,'  Appendix  A,  487-491.

Boss,  Mr. :  translator  of  the  Tarikhi-
Baskidiy  ix.,  xl.-xiii. ;  on  Aldjd,
121  n.

Bubruk,  Wm.,  traveller  in  Asia,  117,*
119*;  narrative  of  visit  to  Mangu
E£an  in  1253,  60* ;  account  of  the
Uighurs  in  the  Middle  Ages,  96.*

Budok,406n.,410.

Buhtak,  town  of,  381.

Buins  of  ancient  towns,  near  the  Biver
Chu,  69  n.

Bum  (Turkey),  custom  in  the  army  of,
53.

Bumi,  the,  annihilate  Sh&h  IsmaiVs
army,  281-2.

Bussian  Hisar  expedition,  the,  20  ti.

BuBsians,  the,  called  a  people  of  Turki
race,  86*.

Bustdk,  219,  220.

Sabub  MirzX,  307.

Sab^sh  (Shish^  Eh&n,  276.

Sidik  If^h&ni,  on  situation  of  Bdla-
Sdkun,363n.

Sadr-ud-Din,  Mir,  396.

Sad-ud-Din  Eilshghari,  MauUnd,  194.

Saghej,  wells  of,  23  n.

Sdhib  Daulat  Begum,  125, 344.

Said  Eazaruni,  Shaikh,  145  n.

Said  Ehin,  son  of  Sultdn  Ahmad
Ehto,  56,*  109,*  122,  160;  takes
Mirza  Haidar  into  his  service,  11,*
25* ;  3,  4 ;  invades  Eashghar,  11*  ;
expeditions  against  Balur  and  Ba-
dashshin,  12*;  invades  Ladak,  Eash-
mir, and  Baltistan,  13,*  14* ;  death
of,  14* ;  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzi
and,  15,*  16*;  Moghul  invasions
during  reign  of,  65,*  66* ;  the  chiefs
of  his  army,  66* ;  and  the  Uighurs
of  Eashghar,  98* ;  religious  advisers
of,  116*;  expedition  into  Ladak,
120* ;  batUe  with  Mansur  Eh&n,  125,
131,  145;  friendly  meeting  with
Mansur  Eh6n,  126 ;  wounded  at  the
battle  of  Akhsi,  130;  taken  to
Samarkand  by  Sh£hi  Beg,  130;
visits  his  broUier  in  Moghulistan,
131; stays  at  Eibul  with  B&bar

Digitized  by  VjC>OQIC

524

Index,

P^ishdh,  131;  sent  to  Andijdn,
132;  defeats  Mirz6  AM  Bakr  at
Tut-lugh,  132;  defeated  by  Suynnj
Ehwdja  Ehin  near  Tishkand,  133 ;
oaptoreB  Edshgbar,  133;  makes
peace  with  his  brother,  Mansnr
Kh6u,  134;  attacks  Muhammad
Kirghiz,  134 ;  enbdues  the  whole  of
Moghulistan,  134  ;  Invasions  of
Badakhsh&n,  135 ;  holy  war  against
Tibet,  135,  136, 143 ;  and  Baltistan,
136;  and  Mirzi  Haidar's  conquest
of  Kashmir,  136;  his  death,  137,
143 ;  virtues  and  rare  attainments  of,
137>13U;  andBashidEhiinatAkBu,
143 ;  his  favourite  wife,  146 ;  birth
and  early  days,  178;  accompanies
Shdhi  Beg  Ehdn  on  his  expedition
to  Misar  and  Eunduz,  178,  179;
stays  with  Sultan  Mahmud  Kh&n  at
Yatikand,  181 ;  wounded  by  Maksud
All,  181,  182;  his  generosity,  182;
defeated  by  Mansur  Khin  at  Al-
m&tu,  182,  183;  and  Ehwija  Ali
Bah&dur,  183-188,  222-226 ;  marri-
age contracted  with  Makhtum,  187,
190;  attacked  by  Mirzi  Abd  Bakr's
men,  188, 189 ;  decides  to  go  to  Shahi
Beg  Khdn  at  Andijin,  190,  191,  222,
247-8,  264,  266,  268-9;  flight  to
Moghulistan,  192,  195;  MauUnd
Easim,  his  spiritual  guide,  213 ;
imprisoned  at  Andijin  by  Ehwija
Ali  Bahddur,  222;  sent  to  Jdni  Beg
Eh£n  wliu  orders  his  release,  222-
226;  escapes  to  Mirza  Ehdn  at
Bad^Uchshan,  226;  welcome  by  Em-
peror Bdbar  at  E&bul,  226;  meets
Mirz£  Haidar  at  E£bul,  229 ;  and
Moshulistau,  240 ;  and  Bdbar  P^i-
t«hdJti,  242 ;  battle  with,  and  defeat
of  Mirz^  AU  Bakr,  249,  250,  254,
310,  312 ;  kills  Tubra,  265 :  attacks
Suyunjuk  Khan,  266,  270-271,  346 ;
and  Mirz&  Haidar, 'if 68-270 ;  plunders
Ahangar^n,  275 ;  proceeds  to  Akhsi,
276;  meeting  with  E&sim  Kh&n,
276 ;  presented  with  horses  by  K&sim
Kh&n,  276-7;  his  sistors,  280;  quits
Fargb&ua  and  repairs  to  K^hgnar,
284-6,  304,  321 ;  review  of  his  troops
before Klishghar, 305-310;  his  march
against  Y&rkand  abandoned,  312-
313 ;  sets  out  for  Yingi-Hlsdr,  313-
314,  390,  394;  visits  Mir  Ayub,
315 ;  Y^ngi-Hisdr  besieged,  815-
319;  Ab6  Bakr  killed  while  on  his
way  to  see,  324^ ;  conquest  of
ElUhghar,  325-7,  331;  and  Mirz£
Jah^ngir,  330 ;  his  reception  of
Aiman  Ehw&ja  Sultdn,  333 ;  Mansur
Ebin*s  treatment  of,  334 ;  sends  sub-
mission to  Mansur  Ehdn,  335 ;
meeting  with  Maubur  Khdn  on  the

plains  of  ArhLt,  340,  343-5;  health
affected  by  excessive  wine-drinking,
340,369,  370;  goes  to  Moghulistan,
341 ;  returns  to  Kftsfaghar,  343, 351 ;
returns  to  Y&rkand,  345;  meeting
with  BibAi^  Sultan,  346-8;  holy
war  against  S&righ  Uiebur,  348^851 ;
capture  of  Muhammad  Kirghiz,  351 ;
sends  for  Danlat  Sultan  Kbdnim,
daughter  of  Tunus  Khdn,  351-2;
marriage  of  his  sister,  352 ;  first
invasion  of  Badakhsh&n,  354-5 ;  his
second  meeting  with  Mansur  Khdn,
356;  invasion  of  Moghulistan,  358-9,
368;  Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirsd  in
attendance  on,  871 ;  birth  of  his  son,
Sultdn  Ibrdhim,  375 ;  second  in-
vasion of  Andijdn,  375-7 ;  retoms  to
Moghulistan,  377 ;  goes  to  At-Bdshi,
377 ;  thence  to  Kdshgliar.  377,
379 ;  and  Bdbd  Sultdn,  379-381 ;  and
Shdh  Muhammad  Sultdn,  382-3 ;  se-
cond expedition  into  Badakhshdn,
387-390 ;  siege  of  Eala  Zafar,  888 ;
meets  Ehwdja  Nurd,  390,  401 ;  rup-
ture between  Ainmn  Ehwdja  Bnltdn
and,  391-4 ;  illness  of,  394 ;  places
himself  under  the  guidai  ice  of  Eh  wdja
Nurd,  395, 398 ;  invasion  of  Tibet,  403 ;
holy  war  on  Tibet,  417,  420,  421;
attacked  by  dom-^'rt,  420, 421 ;  pro-
ceeds to  Balti,  421,  422 ;  and  mrzd
Haidar,  on  return  from  the  invasion
of  Eashmir,  443-445  ;  goes  to
Yarkand,  445;  death  of,  from  the
effects  of  dam-girii  446 ;  genealogy
of,  446, 447 ;  epitome  of  his  life,  447,
448 ;  burial  o^  449.

Said  (Shahid)Ehdn,56;  date  of  death,
57  n.

Saifuddin,  Amir,  26,  31,  32,  48.

Sairdm.  town  of,  53,*  40,  41;  laid
waste  by  Isdn  Bughd  Klidn,  79
given  to  Yunus  Khdn,  112,  113
Mahmud  Sultdn's  advance  on,  171
in  charge  of  Kitto  Beg,  271,  274
Kitta  Beg  and,  313;  plundered  by
the  Kirghiz,  358.

Sdki  Ali,  Khwdja,  311.

Sakiu  (Su-obow),  406.

Sakkdki,  Mauldnd,  tomb  of,  365.

Sakri,  pass  of,  445  and  n.

Saldh-ud-Din  Musa,  Mauldnd,  59  n,

'*  Saldi  Begum,"  battle  caUed,  75.

Salar,  group  of  Tillages,  404  n.,  405  n.

Sdlibari,  Khwdja,  26.

Sdlik,  Khwdja,  225,  226.

Sdlinkdi,  360.

Salim,  son  of  Shir  Shdh,  480  n.

Salim  Khdn :  $ee  Islam  Shdh.

Salim  Sultdn,  defeats Shdh Ismail,
281.

Sdli-Sardi,  Amir  Husain's  residence,
24,  31,  35,  37.

Digitized  by

Google

Index.

525

SalMUOrvX-Afifiii,  work  by  Haziat
MauUD^  lis,  212,  213,  S42  and  n.

Salt  Bange,  the,  479  n.

Samarkand,  BabtT's  advanoe  on,  10* ;
Tughlnk  Timur  Khdnat,  22, 28 ;  at-
tucked  by  Amir  Ch6g:a  in  1363,  29 ;
siege  of,  by  the  army  of  Jatah,  37 ;
return  of  Amir  Timur  to,  47,  60;
buildings,  etc.,  erected  by  Uln^h
Beg,  60  n. ;  Riydiri-EMn  at,  72 ;
taken  by  Sultdn  Abu  Said,  83;
Sultdn  Mahmud  KbIUi  and  Bhihi
Be^  Kbdn  attempt  to  take,  119, 120 ;
B&bar  Pddisli&h  marches  on,  132,
133;  wars  in,  154;  oonqnored  by
Sh&hi  Beg  Ehin,  158, 166;  attacked
by  B^bar  Padisbdh,  174,  175 ;  falls
upain  into  hands  of  Shdhi  Beg
KhiLn,  175, 196;  Emperor  Bdbar  at,
246,  2G0,  266,  268;  famous  kiosks
in,  429,  430 ;  Emperor  Babar  on  the
throne  of,  484.

Sdmf  az  (Sam  SeirakX  8  n.

Samku,  place  in  Tibet,  457  n.

Sdm  Mirzli,  besieges  Kandahar,  16,*
468.

Sand,  advance  of,  as  seen  by  Sir  D.
Forsyth  and  Dr.  Bellew,  12  n.

Sand-buried  ruins,  67,*  68* ;  exploita-
tion of,  by  Abd  Bukr,  70.*

Sand-storms  in  Eastern  Turkistan,
303  n.

Sangarighdj,  place  called,  40.

Sang  Zighaj,  nght  with  Eamar-ud-Din
at,  47.

Sanju,  323,  328-9;  pass  of,  405.

S6nka  Bina  of  Chitnr,  402  and  n.

Stoiz  Mirz&,  son  of  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,
251 ;  his  rule  in  E^ishghar,  87,  88;
joins  Yunus  Kh&n,  90;  death  of,  98,
99.

Sarai,  yillage  of,  24  n.

Sarai  Ghuk,  274  and  n.

Sarai  Mulk  Khinim,  Timur's  favourite
wife,  40,  278  n.,  279  n.

Strang  SulULn,  479  n.,  480  n.,  483.

Sdr  Bughli,  Amir,  32;  revolt  of,  44,
45 ;  pardoned  by  Amir  Timur,  49.

Sdrigh  Chupin,  a  district  of  Badakh-
shin,  292,  353,  a')4,  355  n.,  386,
388

S6righ-Kul,  district  of.  54.*  297;  hiUs
of,  312.

SArigh  Uighur  (Yellow  Uighur),
country  of,  9  n.,  52,  64,  349  n.,
404  n.,  405  n. ;  Said  Khin's  holy
war  against,  348-351.

S^rik  Mirzd,  333.

Sarman,  village  called,  310;  stream
caUed,311.

SairU  tlie  word;  definition  of,  87*  n.

Baaser  Pass,  446  n.

Satlej  River,  406  n.

Sataghni  Buka  (banghoy  Boca),  14.

Sitilmish  Khiitun,  wife  of  Isan  Bughd
Khin,  6.

Sdtlik,  325.

S6tuk  Kara  Ehiin,  a  Karlughi  Uighur,
94*.

S^tuk  BughrA  Kh&n,  286,  287  n. ;
tomb  of,  in  Kishghar,  300.

S6tuk  Kh&n,  71;  Yais  Kh&n  and,
73.

Sayy^i  (or  Si&di),  of  the  tribe  of
Chdlish,  51.

Sayyid  Ali,  Amir,  61 ;  expedition  to
E&shghar,  75-77 ;  and  Is^n  Bugha,
78;  hunting  parties  of,  76,  77;  a
proof  of  his  justice,  77 ;  makes  Isin
Bughd  governor  of  Aksu,  78 ;  defeats
Yuuus  Eh&n  with  the  aid  of  Isto
Bughd  Ehdn,  86;  death  of;  87;  his
distinguished  generals  and  captains,
99,104.

Sayyid  Ali  Eurkto,  Amir,  56.

Sayyid  Ali,  Mir,  in  the  service  of
Shaikh  Habib,  194;  his  two  sons,
251.

Sayyid  Ali  Agh^  307.

Sayyid  Ali  Hamad£ni  (Amir  Eabir
AU),  432 ;  death  of,  433  n.

Sayyid  Ahmad,  Mir,  60,  61, 75 ;  stories
relating  to,  61-64 ;  saves  Yais  Ehin,
65-67.

Sayyid  Ahmad  Mirza,  100.

SdyyiddXdi,  the,  239  and  71.

Sayyid  D&ud.  Amir,  42.

Sayyid  H&di,  the,  239.

Sayyid  Husaini,  Amir,  mausoleum  of,
209.

Sayyidim  Kukildish,  278-9.

Sayyid  Mahmud  Mirzd,  75.

Sayyid  Muhammad  Mirzi,  uncle  of
Mirzd  Haidar,  56,  102,  111,  133»
203  n.,  252 ;  put  to  death,  15*,  57  n.,
143.  144,450,  451 ;  invades  AndijiUi,
131, 132, 144 ;  attacks  Farghdn^  140 ;
and  battle  of  Tutluk,  132,  249,  250 ;
J&ai  Beg  Sultiu  and,  241 ;  conquest
of  Fdrgbana,  239-241 ;  senttoTurfto,
240;  sends  from  Andijin  for  help,
242 ;  drowns  Ehalil  Sultdn  by  order
of  J^  Beg  Eh^,  183,  240,  264-^;
Said  Eh^n  and,  265-6;  fortifies
Andijin,  271;  advises  Said  Ehdn
to  leave  Farghdna,  284-5 ;  in  charge
of  the  Dughldt  army  before  Ea£-

fhar,  305 :  at  the  siege  of  Yangi-
[isar,  316,  318-19;  and  Mir
Vali,  320;  goes  to  fetch  Mirzd
Jabingir,  329;  in  attendance  ou
Said  Ebdn,  369,  371 ;  a  disciple  of,
the  order  of  Yasavvi  Shaikhs,  869,
371 ;  taken  ill,  and  healed  by  Ehw^ja
Nuri,  389,  397;  Said  Ehto  and.
392-4.
Sayyid  Muhammad  Nurbakhshi,  Amir,
435.

Digitized  by

Q^oo^z

526

Index.

Sayyid  N6  Mahdnmi  Mauling :  we
Muhammad  Eazi.

Bayyid  Sh&h  Bazurg  Arhangi,  108.

Sayjids  of  Khorasiin,  the,  called
Mugholfl,  89.»

Schuyler,  E.,  on  the  obeervatory  at
Samarkiud,  60  n. ;  the  ancient  Td-
rdz,  63  n. ;  account  of  Lake  Issigh-
Kul,  78  n. ;  on  city  of  Ohi-gu,  79  n. ;
on  city  of  B&la-S&kun,  362  n.,  363  n.;
and  Rliaikh  Ahmad,  369  n.

Seeland,  Dr.  N. ;  rest-house  constructed
by  Muhammad  Kbin,  58  n.,  59  n.

Shabdn,  309.

Shih  Badd^h  Sultan,  son  of  Abulkhair
Kh^n,  92  n.

Sh&h  Bdz  Mirzd,  393.

Shdh  Beg,  defeated  near  Kandahar  by
B&bar  Padishah,  202 ;  son  of  Zulnun
Arghun,  357,  483  n.

Shdh  Begum,  108,  135,  180, 195, 196,
258;  attempt  to  seize  Kabul,  199,
200;  lays  claim  to  Badakhsh&n,  203 ;
captured  by  Ab4  Bakr's  army,  203 ;
sent  into  Khorasdn,  204.

Shah  Hasan,  conquest  of  Tatta,  483  n.

Shdh  Ismail,  sons  of,  16,*  132 ;  finally
defeats  Sh&hi  Beg  Khan,  131 ;  in-
vades Irdk,  154.

Shah  Khdn,  son  of  Marsur  Khin,  105,*
128,*  124,*  129.

Sh&h  Mlr&k,  185.

Sh&h  Muhammad,  a  Kukild^sh,  459,
461.

Shdh  Muhammad  Div&n,  Khwdja,  449.

Shah  Muhammad  Sultdbi,  son  of  Sultdn
Muhammad  Sultan,  142,  161,  163,
452.

Sh^  Nazar  Mirzi,  241,  247.

Sh&h  Bukh,  Mirzd,  43,*  59,  62,  84 ;
Haziras  the  posterity  of  an  army  of,
80  *  n. ;  his  mother,  40  n. ;  founds
B&gh-i-Zagh^n,  83  n.;  the  Za/ar-
Ndma  dedicated  to,  85  n.

Sh&h  Shaikh  Muhammad  Sultan,  son
of  Sultdn  Ahmdd  Khin,  160.

Sh6h  Sultdn  Muhammad  Badakhshi,
107.

Sh6h  Tahm^p;  besieges  Kandahar,
16,*  24.*

Shahdb-ud-Din,  a  holy  Shaikh,  8*;
description  of  Moghulistan  in  the
MafAlak-al'Ah^r,  57.*

Shahbdz  Mirzd,  308,  316.

Shdhi  Beg  KLdn,  56,*  57,*  56,  116;
puts  Mirza  Uaidar's  father  to  death,
9  * ;  defeat  and  death  of,  10* ;  his
grandfather,  Abulkhair  Khin,  79  n. ;
Turkistin  given  to,  118;  takes
Samarkand,  119, 120 ;  murders  Sult&n
Mahmud  Khdn,  120 ;  defeats  Sultdn
Mahmud  Khdn  and  Sultan  Ahmad
Khan  at  Akhsi,  122,  123,  159;  cam-
paigns against  Farghdna,  Hisdr,  and

Kundnz,  180;  the  Mangit  tribe  fol-
lowers oi^  184  n.,  154 ;  conquers
Samarkand  and  Bokhird,  158,  166;
forms  three  marriaee  alliances,  160 ;
and  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  168. 167 ;
and  Khusrau  Shdh,  164-166,  169;
beheads  Mir  Vali,  165  n. ;  and  Tarn-
bars  revolt  in  Andijdu,  167-9 ;  mar-
ries Khdnz&da  Begum,  175,  190,
239;  advaoce  on  Hisar,  176.  178;
puts  Tambal  to  death,  178 ;  and  the
death  of  Sultdn  Mahmud  Khdn,  179,
208-9;  invades  Khwdrizm.  180, 191,
195,204;  Said  Khdn  decides  to  go
to,  at  Andijdn,  190,  191 ;  and  Habiba
Sultdn  Khanish,  192;  besieges  Ko-
lat,  192  n.,209 ;  marries  Mihr  Nigdr
Khanim.  196;  besieges  Bdbar  Padi-
shdh  in  Samarkand,  196;  oonqueat
of  Khordsdn,  201,  205;  captures
Balkh,  204-5;  receives  Muhammad
Husain  Kurkan,  205-6,  208-9 ;  and
afterwards  puts  him  to  death,  209 ;
orders  Ubaid  Sultdn  to  drown  Mined
Haidar,  210,  211 ;  and  Sultdn  Said
Khdn,  221-225;  killed  by  Shdfa
Ismail,  226,  234 ;  expedition  against
Kazdk,  230,  231  ;  hostUities  with
Shdh  Ismail,  232-7:  followers  of,  in
Mdvard-un-Nahr,  274,282-3;  takes
Tashkand,  336;  defeats  Khusrau
Shdh,  353;  conquers  province  of
Farghdna,  447.

Shdhndz,  103 ;  pass  of,  398  and  n. ;
river,  296.

8hahr-i-Sabz,  town  of,  171,  191-93.

Shahrukhi.  coin,  202  n.,  469  n.

Shdhrukhia  (Findkand),  town  of.  53,*
112,  289  and  n.

Shaibdni  Khdn:  see  Shdhi  Beg  Khdn.

Shaibdn  Uzbegs,  Said  Khdn  and  the,
120*;  in  Mdvard-un-Nahr,  282-^;
take  the  province  of  Farghdna,  284.

Shaikham  Mirzd,  216  n.,  260.

Shaikh-i-Daulat,  Amir,  38,  51.

Shaikh-ul-Isldm,  235,  236.

Shakd  Muni,  religion  o(  414-16.

Shakdval,  309,  815.

Sham-i-Jahdn  Khdn,  57,  68.

Shamlu  tribe,  214  n.

Sliammdsi,  or  sun-worshippers  in  Kash-
mir, 436.

Shams  Abddl :  eee  Dust  Muhammad
Khdn.

Shams-ud-Din,  Amir,  38 :  at  the  battle
of  the  Mire.  34,  35,  51  n.;  and  his
sect  of '  Nurbakbshi,'  435-437.

Shams-ud-Dln  Juvaini,  35.*

Shams-ud-Din,  Sultdn,  432;  tomb  of,
26  fi.

Sharaf-ud-Din,  author  of  the  Zafar^
Ndma,  7,*  118,*  119*f  on  the  suc-
cession of  the  Moghul  Khdns,  41*-
46,*74,84,85n.,  151, 155.

Digitized  by

Google

Index,

527

Shar&wal,  34.

Shariat,  the  (Muhammadan  law),  70.

Hharif,  Khwija  of  K^kshghar,  61,  75,

76,90.
Sharim,  Mir,  241,  308.
Shiah  (T&shkand),  province  of,  52,*
53*;  invaded  by  theMoghulB,54,*  68;
Isdn  Bughd  Ehdn  and,  85 ;  oountry
of,  153,  154 ;  reign  of  Sultan  Mah-
mud,  155 ;  plundered  by  the  Kirghiz,
367.

Shaw,  Mr.  R.  B.,  geography  of  Eastern
Tiirkistau  gathered  from  the  TariWi"
i'Bashidij  viii  10  n.,  417  n. ;  death
of,  10;  and  the  word  Te{jik,  87*;
definition  of  8arU  87*  n. ;  on  the
word  Aldch,  121  n. ;  and  the  sons  of
Eaahid  SulttLn,  121*  n,,  123* ;  and  the
word  ghaleha^  220  n.  ;  on  Artu$h,
295  n. ,  situation  of  town  of  Kash-
ghar,  295  n. ;  meaning  of  Tizghun,
295  n. ;  and  Buget  Bulik,  296  n  ;
paper  entitled  'A  Prince  of  Eash-
ghar  on  the  Geography  of  Eastern
Turkistan,'  296  n. ;  on  Kdshtdsh,
298  n;  Ghitral  called  Falor,  385  n.;
on  idioms  used  by  Mirz^  Haidar,
405  n.,  406  n. ;  on  the  word  DroJc,  409.

Shaya  (Sheh),  castle  of;  460  and  n.

Sheep  as  beasts  of  burden  in  Tibet,
407  and  n.

Sheep  traders,  the  Champa,  of  Tibet,
407  and  n.,  408  n.

Sheh,  town  of,  410  n.

Sheh  (or  Shay),  a  viUage  in  Tibet
(Ladak),  460  n.

Shenkummuy^  brother  of  Amir
Hamid,  34.

Shiahs,  sect  of  (the  MuUhidaX  218  n.,
247  n.;  use  of  the  word  Mwtdhidy
10  fi. ;  sect  in  Kashmir,  485-7.

Shibargh&n;  Bay  to  Timnr,  governor
of,  40.

Shibartn,  place  called :  we  Shibr.

Shibr  Pass  (or  Shibartu),  the,  36  n.

Shidarku,  name  borne  by  the  King  of
Tangut,  360  and  n.,  861  n.

Shig£r,  fort  of,  422.

Bhighnaii,  54.*

Shir  Ali  Oghlan,  son  of  Muhammad
Khdn,  60.

Shir  Bahrim,  24,  26,  29,  32,  34.

Shir  Khin  defeats  Emperor  Humiyun
at  Chansa,  470,  471 ;  battle  of  the
Ganges,  471^77.

Shir  Muhammad  Khdn,  son  of  Mu-
hammad Kbdn,  60,  63,  68 ;  hostility
between  Vais  Khin  and,  43,*  64,  65.

Shir  Shdh  Sur,  480  n. ;  defeats  Huma-
yun  in  Bengal,  16* ;  battle  of  Kanauj,
viii.,  17*,  18*;  battle  in  Kashmir
against  Mir^  Haidar,  20.*

Shiram  Ohahm,  169.

Shiram,  Mir,  356,  357.

Shiriz,  residence  of  Tunus  Kh6n,  85.

Shirun  Tagh^  228.

Shiva-i-Smgnto,  353.

Shulkirchi  tribe,  309.

Shun-Chi,  Emperor  of  China  and  Tur*

fin,  107,*  108,*  114*.
Shuruya,  kills Khusrau, his  &ther,

329  n.
Shajd-ud-Din,  Mauling  10, 13,  14.
Sihpdyah,  place  called,  44.
Sihun  River,  battle  of  Lai  on  the  bank

of,  31-36.
Si-liao  (Kara-Khitai),  kings of the,

279  n.
Sikandar  Znlkarnain,  107.
Sind,  ravaged  by  Davd,  36.*
Sind  (Tatta)  conquered  by  Shah  Hasan,

483  n.,  484  n.
Sind  River,  the,  423  n.,  431  and  n.
Sind,  rivers  of,  their  source,  406.
Singi,  Rand  (SankaX  defeated  by  Bdbar

Pidishdh,  402.
Si-Ngan-fu,  404  n.
Singim,  113.*
Sir  River,  the,  53,*  54.*
'Six  Cities'  of  Eastern  Turkistau :  Ane

Alti-Shahr.
Skardu  (Skardo),  pass  of,  405  n.
Snake  stone,  the  (called  Jadab),  33  n.
So-fei (Sufi) sends an embassy to

China,  124.*
Spiti,  406  n.
Sprenger,  on  situation  of  Bdla-Sdkun,

362  ti.
Square  silver  coins  of  the  Kashmir
Sultans,  Mr.  C.  J.  Rodgers  on,  487-
491.
Srinagar  (Kashmir)  town  of,  410  n.;
described  in  the  Zafar-NdmcLj  431-2,
433  n. ;  attack  on,  in  1543.  .20  *.
Stak-brak,  meaning  of, 458  n. : see

Askdbrak.
Steppes,  nomads  and  inhabitants  of

the,  called  Turks,  83.*
Stewart, Major  C,  on  Amir  Timur

(Sahib-i-KirdnX17n.
Stone  Bridge,  the,  Amir  Timur  at,  24-26.
Strachey,  General,  on  Maryul,  410  n,
Straohey,  Capt.  H.,  on  Bamku,  457  n.
Sufi  Mirzd,  kUled  at  the  battle of

AriBh,  127.  128.
Sui  (Sibi),  202.

Suchou,  town  of,  in  Kansu,  109.*
Sufi  Sultdn :  »ee  Adham  Sultdn.
Sufis,  the,  sect  in  Kashmir,  436,  437 ;

Said  Khdn  and,  448.
Suget  Buldk,  hamlet  of,  296  ».
Suget  Pass,  446  n.
Snghunluk,  place  called,  310.
Sukdr,  187.
Suk&r  Kaluchi,  309.
8ukdrUkhsi,309.
Sukdt,  village  of,  313,  314  n.
Sulairoin,  son  of  Mirzd  Khin,  156.

Digitized  by

Google

528

Index,

Sulaimin  Barlia,  26.

Sulaimdn 8h&1i Mirzd, 373  and  n.,  i

887, 467;  reigns  in  Badakhsh^,  388,  |

389.
SuUt-Eand,  222.  ,

Snlduzi  tribe,  55  n.  i

Su-li,  ancient  name  for  Kashgliar,  8  n.
Sultdkdr  Tufta  Euli,  309.
^uitdn  Ahmad,  uncle  of  Mirzd  Haldar,

Sultdn  Ahmad  Tambal,  revolts  in
Andijdo,  158, 159 ;  8hdhi  Beg  Kbdn
and,  167-169, 174,  178.

Sultdn  Ali  Jaras,  Amir,  121.

Sultan  Ali  Mirz^  son  of  8ult&n  Ahmad
Khin,  154,  174,  175,  183, 196,  265,
308,  326.

Sult&n  Avais,  Amir,  387.

Sultdn  Husain  Mirzli,  in  Khor&s&n,
154,  193;  and  Muhammad  Husain
Eurkan,  195;  death  of,  196,  210.

Sultin  Ehatun,  mother  of  Yais  Ehan,
67.

Sultan  Ehalil  Sultdn,  brother  of  Man-
sur  Ehdn,  125,  131,  139,  161 ;  his
death,  125,  126, 131.

Sultdn  Mahmud  Mirzd,  93, 103;  mar-
ries Sult^  Nig^Ehdnim,  117,  llx.

Bultdn  Muliammad  Mirzi,  450.

Sult&n  Muhammad  Sultdn,  son  of
Mahmud  Ehin,  158,  159,  162,  163.

8ultdn  Nig&r  Ehdnim,  daughter  of
Yunus  Ehin,  108,  117, 156,373, 377,
378 ;  death  of,  386 ;  taken  to  wife
by  Eisim  Ehin,  273.

Sultanpur,  city  of,  405.

Sultin  Sanjar,  108.

Sult&n  Valad  Mirzi,  112.

Sultdnim  Begum,  daughter  of  Sultdn
Ahmad  Mirzd,  164, 170,  193.

Sultdns  of  Eashmir,  433  n.,  434  n.

Sultin  Vais  Mirzi :  see  Mirzi  Ehin.

Sungtish,  345.

8unnis,  the,  soot  in  ECashmir,  247  n.,
262  n.,  435-7 ;  and  use  of  the  word
Mujtahid,  10  n.

Sun-worshippers  (Shammisi)  in  Eash-
mir, 436.

Buperstition :  the  Jadah  stono,  32  n.,
33  ».

Surkhib  River,  263.

Suru,  a  district  of  Ladak.  15* ;  depart-
ment of  Haiti,  461,  462.

Sut,  Tangi  Sakab's  home,  462  and  n.

Hut  Im  Bahidur,  121.

Sitvar-i'Akdlimy  the,  359,  361.

Suyahy  the  word,  7  n.,  8  n.

Su-Yeh  (or  Su-Sa),  the  name,  8  n. ;
city  of :  see  BilarSikun.

Suyunj  Ehwija  Ehin  defeats  Sultin
Said  Ehin  near  Tishkand,  133.

Suyunjuk  Ehin  puts  Said  Khin  to
rout,  266,  268,  271,  274,  283;  at-
tacked by  Easim  Ehin,  275 ;  ad-

vances against  Andijin,  284-5 ;  and
Bustangir  Mirzi,  330; at Akhsi,
342 ;  Said  Ebin  makes  war  on,  346 ;
death  of,  375,  876.
Suyunjuk  Sultin,  159,  243,  24&
Suyurghitmish  Ehin,  72  n.,  83.

Taarif-i'Bulddn,  the,  359.

Tibin  Bahidur,  34,  35.

Tabriz,  Sultin  Yakub*s  kiosk  in,  429.

Tagir,  in  the  Nubra  Valley,  418  n.

Tigh-Dum-Bish  mountains,  405.

Tigh  Nik,  place  called,  464  and  n.

Ta-gaz-gaz, the Eariughi Uighura

known  as,  94.*
Ta-hi,  Arabs  referred  to  as,  90*  n.
Tihir  Ehan,  82.  27.S,  373,  374,  377;

joins  forces  with  the  Eirghiz,  379;

deserted  by  the  Eirghiz,  388.
Tahit,tribeof,  20n.
Tahmisp  Shih,  282;  takes  Eandahir,

400,  468,  469; and  is  retaken  by

Eimrin  Ehin,  400.
Tiikhin  (Talikin),  return of  Amir

Husain  and  Amir  Timur  to,  23.
Taishi,  a  designation  of  Eilmik  chiefs,

79  n.
Tai  Yang  Ehin,  flees  from  Ghingiz

Ehin,  287.
Tijik  (or  Tizik),  the,  13,  141 ;  name

given  by  the  Mongols  to  the  Mu-

hammadans,  85,* 87* ; Mr.  A.  6.

Eeene  on,  90,*  91*  ; features of

Yunus  Ehin,  97  n.,  98n.
Tijri  of  Ehwirizm,  51.
Tij-ud-Din  Muhammad,  Ehwija,  127,

160,  372,  373.
Taka,  brother  of  Ehwija  Ali  Bahidur,

851.
Takil  (or  Jakil),  governor  of  Ehiva,

23  n.
Takudar  Oghlin,  80*  n.
Talak  Muhammad,  112.
Talas  (Tiriz),  city  of,  171  n,
Tilis  River,  80  n.,  81  n.
Taliku,  descendant  of  Chaghatai,  36.*
Tilish,  tribe  in  Gilin,  435  ».
Talkhak,  death  of,  in  Tirmiz,  338.
Talki,  defile  of,  20  n.
Tamerlane  (Timurlang)  :  see  Timur,

Amir.
Timlik,  place  in  Tibet,  456  and  n.,

457  and  n.
Tangi  Bali,  the,  of  Badakhshin,  227.
Tangi  Sakib  of  Balti,  462.
Tangri  Bardi,  309.
Tangut,  the,  88*;  Ghingiz  Ehin  and,

360 ;  rulers  of,  360  n.,  361  n.
Tank  in  district  of  Bamag,  427,  428.
Tiriz  (Yangi),  city  of,  58,*  79  n.,  80  n„

81  n.,  864 ;  taken  by  Eisim  Khin,

274.
Tirbigatai  mountains,  53.*
Tirbugur  (Bugur),  9  n.

Digitized  by

Google

Index.

529

Tartkh-i-Quiida^  the,  of  Hamid  UUah

Mostaufi,  151.
TariWiri'Jahdn  Kushdij  extract  from,
288-298,  293  n.;  aocoant  of  Moghtd-
istdn  in,  360-367.
Tarikh  -  i  •  Manzum, the, of Abdur

Bazz^k,  151.
Tarikh-i'BoBhidiy  the,  first  translation
of,  into  English,  v.;  Erskine*8
partial  translation,  v.,  vt;  data
obtained  from,  by  Sir  H.  Howorth,
vii ;  by  Sir  D.  Forsytii,  vii. ;  by  Mr.
B.  B.  Shaw,  viii. ;  by  Professor  Dow-
son,  viiL  ;  Moororoft's  reference  to,
viii. ;  copies  of,  in  England,  ix. ;  in
Asia,  ix. ;  the  object  of,  1,*  4,  5 ;  its
shortcomings,  5,*  6*;  scope  and
character,  6,*  7* ;  divided  into  two
parts,  7,*  8* ;  written  during  Mirzd
Haidar's  administration  of  Kashmir,
23*:  a  history  of  the  Chaghatal
branch  of  the  Mongol  dynasty,  28,*
29* ;  weak  points  in,  regarding  the
sucoesrion  of  the  Moghnl  Eh&ns,
41*-46* ;  the  Khilns  of  Uighurist&n
mentioned  in,  106*;  religions  ad-
visers of  the  Khins  and  Amirs,  116*;
its  valne  as  a  lustory,  119* ;  seqnel
to,  120*-128* ;  reasons  for  being  so
called,  8 ;  its  contents,  3,  4 ;  nse  of
the  word  Tibet  (Ladak)  in,  135  n. ;
when  completed,  149;  reason  for
Mirz6  Haidar  writing,  150, 151.
Tarikh'i-Sdhib  •  Kirdni  : see  Zafar-

Ndma.
Tirim,67.
Tarkhin,  title  of,  among  the  Moghuls,

55  fi.
Tarso,  the  word,  290  n.
Tarsiy  the  Uighnrs  spoken  of  as,  96.*
Tarse (TaniaX country  of, 290  n.,

291  fi.
Tiah  Arighi,  26,  27.
Tishikun,  ruler  of  M^yul,  418  and  fk,

419n.,423,460.
T^ishkand,  town  of,  53*  ;  Timur  camps
at,  29;  deyastated  by  Isin  Bugn&
KhlUi,  79 ;  Tunus  Eh6n  capturedfat,
94,  95;  passes  into  the  power  of
Shaikh  Jamil  Khar,  112;  made  over
to  Tunus  Ehto,  113;  death  and
burial  of  Tunus  Kh6n  in,  114, 115 ;
events  in,  during  the  rule  of  Sultlin
Mahmud  Eh&n,  118-120;  Sultto
Said  Khto  defeated  near,  133;
(Shish)  Sultto  Mahmud  and,  155,
157;  Sh^BegKhinat,178;  taken
by  Shihi  Beg  Khto,  159, 167,  336 ;
destruction  o^  by  ShiUii  Beg  Khin,
164, 171 ;  Hazrat  MauUni  at,  213 ;
Uzbeg  march  against,  259,  271 ;  in
charge  of  Ahmad  Kiisim  Kuhbur,
271 ;  taken  by  Kasim  Ehin,  274 ;
Kisim  Kh&n  attacks  Suyunjuk  KhlUi

in,  275;  death  of  Hazrat  Muhammad
at,  342.

Tish-Babdt,  not  a  Hindu  temple,  59  n.

Tish  Timur;  sent  after  Manlik  and
her  child,  6, 7.

Tatar  (or  Tartar),  the  nomadic  nations
of  the  interior  of  Asia,  83,*  84,*
87.*

Tatar  tribe,  55  n.

Tatars,  the ;  Bashid-ud-Din,  the  histo-
rian, and,  88.*

Tatta  (Sind),  town  of,  357,  431,  432  n. ;
conquest  of,  by  Sh6h  Hasan,  483  n.,
484  ».

Tavakktil  Eh&nim,  52.

Tax-gatherer,  story  of  the,  159.

Tdz^uUy  meaning  of,  295  n.

Tizi:  weTdjik.

Taziks,  the,  88.*

Tazkira^'KJiwdJagdH  (Memoirs  of  the
Ehwdjas),  x.

Tengri-Tigh  Mountain,  in  the  Tian
Shan,  112.*

Termedh  (TirmizX  town  of,  338  n.

Tian  Slian  mountains,  53,*  112* ;  sub-
merged towns  along  the  southern
spurs  of,  70.*

Tibet  (see  also  Ladak),  Dr.  L.  A.
WaddelPs  work  on,  xv. ;  invaded  in,
1531  by  Mirzi  Haidar.  13*-15* :  also
in  1548.  21*;  invasions  of,  during
reigns  of  A)>a  Bakr  and  Sultin  Said^
65,*  66*,  253-4 ;  invasion  of,  men-
tioned by  Minhaj-ud-Din,  86* ;  Idrisi
on  the  Tibetan  Turks,  86,*  87*;
holy  war  against,  by  Sultdn  Said
Ehdn,  135, 136, 143 ;  Mir  Y&li  takes,
320;  Mirzi  Ah6.  Bakr  flees  to,  324;
invaded  by  Said  Ehin,  403;  position
of,  404;  mountains  and  rivers  of,
405-7;  inhabitants  of,  407-11 ;  gold
mines  in,  411, 412;  the  dam-giri  in,
412,  413;  Lamas  o^  414-16;  idols
in,  416;  wild  kutd$  in,  416,  417;
idol  temples  in,  416,  443 ;  holy  war
on,  417-419;  cold  in,  419;  method  of
defence  in,  422  n. ;  temple  at  Ursang,
443;  invasion  of,  444,  454-464.

Tibetan  Tok  (or  Dong),  the,  302  n.

Tie-mm-Ktian  QJion  Gate'  barrier),
20  n.

Tika,  brother  of  Ehwija  Ali  Bahadur,
187.

Tiki  Biver,  365  and  n.

Tiki  (or  Tekka)  Sagmtkn,  battle  at,
96,  97  and  n.

Tilinji,  34.

Timur,  Amir  (Tamerlane),  the  rise  of,
37*;  selects  Ehftns  from  the  Oktai
stock,  37* ;  genealogical  table  of  the
house  of^  faeing  p,  50* ;  expedition
of  in  1389-90,  53^ ;  batUes  with  the
Moghuls  under  Eainar-ud-Din,  56* ;
tho. conquests  of,  61* ;  expedition  in
2  M

Digitized  by

Google

S30

Index,

1388  againht  the  Kalmyks,  101*;
sends  one  of  his  oolumns  to  Kara-
KUoia,  102*;  passage  of  the  Biver
Vakhsh  at  the  Btone  Bridge,  25,  26;
arrives  at  Chekaddlik,  26 ;  his  dream,
27 ;  battle  with  the  army  of  Jntah,
27-29;  conference  with  Amir  Hu-
sain,  29-31 ;  the  battle  of  the  Mire,
31-36;  and  the  country  of  Jatah,
37;  invasion  of  Almdtu,  39;  his
chief  wife,  40  n. ;  third  invasion  of
Jatah,  41,  42 ;  marriage  with  the
Princess  Dilsliad  Agh^,  43;  third
expedition  into  Ehwdrizm,  44,  45;
fourth  expedition  into  Jatah,  46,  47 ;
the  death  of  his  son,  Prince  Jahangir,
47, 48 ;  sends  an  army  against  Kamar-
ud-Din,  48,  49,  51 ;  fifth  expedition
into  Jatah,  50;  expedition  against
Ehitdi,  53;  death  of,  at  Otrir,  54;
tribes  submitted  to  his  government,
55  n. ;  and  Sultan  Mahmud  Khdn,
72 ;  Tartar  tribe  banished  by,  79  n. ;
difficulty  with  the  Moghuu  under
Kamar-ud-Din,  81  n. ;  and  his  gene-
rals, 83 ;  called  Timnr  Fu-ma  by
the  Chinese,  278  n. ;  nine  wives  of,
278  7*.,  279  n. ;  of  the  Uighur  tribe
ofTurfdn,77,78.

Timur,  a  member  of  the  Barl&s  tribe,
3.*

Timurchi,  father  of  Chingiz  Khdn,
86.*

Timur-Khalajia  (Iron  Gate),  20  n.

Timur  Khwij^  Oghldn,  32,  36.

Timfin  (Tum6n)  River,  295  and  «.,
310.

Timur  Sultin,  son  of  Hhdhi  Beg  Khdn,
160, 169,  234, 351,  451 ;  defeated  and
killed  by  Babdr  Padishdh,  243-5,
248.

Timurtu  Nor  (Lake  Issigh-Kul),  79  n.

Timur  Uljaitu :  see  Uljaitu.

Tirik,  district  of,  312.

Tir^z  (Tdrdz),  86.*

TirUnji  Irlat,  32.

Tirmiz  (Termedh),  town  of,  179,
338  n.

Tiz-Ab  (TizndO,  stream  called,  298.

Toghuz  Uighufy  the  (or  "Nino  Ui-
ghur8"),93.*

Tokanak,  464  n.

Tokhttt  Rashid  (Uighur  chief),  67.*

Toktdmish  OghUn,  brought  before
Amir  Timur,  50.

Tombs  in  Khotan,  298-9  ;  of  Yarknnd,
299,  300;  of  Kdahghar,  300,  301.

Touines,  Buddhist  monks  called,  290  n.

Ton  Nazar  Khdn,  kills  Abdul  Latif,
121  ♦«.

Trdgdi,  Amir  (father  of  Amir  Timur),
death  of,  17.

Transoxiana  (Mavard-un-Nahr),  tribes
of,  31*;  capital  of:  see  Samarkand;

the  Uighurs  and,  95* ;  ruled  by  Ubaid
UUah  Kh£n,  206  n. :  aee  Mdvari-un-
Nahr.
Tribute  missions  to  China,  Benedict

Goes  and,  110,*  111.*
TsonpT-Kapa,  religious  reformer,  418  n.
Tub  River.  78  n,

Tubra  Nuydghuth  (Tubra  TidghuthX
183,  248, 264 ;  killed  by  Said  Khdn,
265.
Tughai  tribe,  55  n.
Tughluk  Salduz,  24.
Tughluk  Timur  KhAn,  his  reign,  7,*  2 ;
converted  to  IsUm,  2,  8, 10-15;  and
Shaikh  Jamdl-nd-Din,  5,  12,  13;
forefathers  of,  5 ;  early  history,  6-9 ;
expedition  Into  M^vahL-un-Nahr,  15,
16 ;  intrigues  with  Amir  Hdji  Barlaa,
17, 18;  second  invasion  of  Mivari-
un-Nahr,  18-22 ;  and  Amir  Husain,
22fi.,  23n.;  return  to  Tliikh&n  and
Badakhshdn,  23,  24;  death  of,  26,
88 ;  one  of  his  sons,  39 ;  {jrivilegea
conferred  upon  Amir  BnUji,55;  hia
rule  extended  as  far  as  Kunduz,  56 ;
tomb  of,  in  Alm&ligh,  364.

Tuk,  in  Tibet,  410.

Tukal  Khdnim,  one  of  Timur's  wivea,
279  n.

Tuka  Timur,  299  n.,  300  n.;  succeeds
Nikpai  to  the  Khanate,  35.*

Tnkt&i,  a  Makrit  Amir,  289.

Tuk  Timur,  Amir,  slain  in  battle,  28.

Tukuz  T&r^m,  ford  of,  238  and  n.

Tulik  Amir,  governor  at  Kaahghar,  14,
38,  51  n.

Tnli  Khan ;  Khit&i  given  to,  293.

Tulkchi  tribe,  55  n.

Tului,  son  of  Giiingiz  Khto,  and  the
JadAh  stone,  33  n.

Tuluk,  brother  of  Mir  Kambar,  307.

Tu-lu-fan  (Turfan),  prince  of,  102.*

Tum^n,  people  ^o  called,  in  Khotan  and
Kdshghar,  301.

Tumdn  (Kdrman),  town  of,  20.

Tum&n  Agh&,  Amir,  42,  50.

TnmHn  Bahidur  Kahichi,  309,  423.

Tnmdn  Bugh^ii  Salduz,  36.

Tum&n  Kapak  Khdn,  36.

Turadn  River,  205  n.;  fort  built  by
Abd.  Bakr  on,  285-6.

Tnnkana,  a  degree  of  the  Ldmaa,  414
and  n.

tupchdk  (a  fine  horse),  260  n.

Turakima,  Oktai's  widow,  82,*  33.*  -

Turdn,  conquered  by  Chingiz  Khdn,
293

Turtogir  Mirzd,  330.

Turah,  the :  tee  Ydzdk.

Turfdn,  district  of,  67,  99,*  100,*  125,
332 ;  Kumul  annexed  to,  101* ;  con-
quest  of.  by  Khizir  Khwdja,  103* ;
a  tribute  to  China,  103* ;  history  of,
as  recorded  in  the  Chinese  Cbronioles

Digitized  by

Google

Index,

531

of  the  Ming  dynasty,  102*-109* ;
depression  below  the  sea  level,  112* ;
the  modem  oity  of.  Captain  F.  E.
Yonnghnsband  on,  112* ;  Dr.  Beeel
on  mins  near,  113*  ;  attacked  oy
Khizir  Kbw&ja,  52 ;  Mansur  Khin's
expeditions  into,  128;  Bashid  Kh^n
marches  on,  14G;  Moghuls  in,  148;
Sayyid  Mnhammad  Mirz&  sent  to,
240;  Ebwija  Nur^  visits  Mansur
Kh&n  in,  396-7;  we  also  Uighurb»-
t6n.

Turkdn  ArUt,  43-5.

Turk,  dual  use  of  the  word,  78,*  98  n. ;
common  origin  with  the  Mongol,
78*-80* ;  misleadins  employment  of
the  name,  83*;  AduI  Ghazi  and
others,  use  of  the  word,  84*-87*;
used  in  opposition  to  the  word  Sari.
87*  n. ;  Mr.  H.  G.  Keene  and  others,
on  the  word,  88*-92* ;  the  first,
to  become  a  Musulm^n,  300.

Turkdt  tribe,  67.

Turki  language,  tbo  Uighurs  first  to
reduce  to  writing,  95.*

Turki-Uighur  people :  see  Uighurs.

Turks,  literary  compositions  of  the,  2. ;
a  separate  people  fh)m  the  Moghul
XnxMy  82* ;  see  (jX^o  Uighurs.

Turkistan,  delivered  from  tlie  oppres-
sion of  the  Jatuh,  29,  30 ;  province
of,  53*;  invaded  by  the  Mogliuls,
54,*  68*;  town  of,  63  n.;  Moghul
attacks  on,  68 ;  laid  wusto  by  Isdn
Bugbd  Khdn,  79;  inhabitants  of,
of,  under  Buruj  Khdn,  defeated  by
Yunus  Khdn,  92,  93;  given  to
Sh^hi  Beg  Kh^n,  118;  Muhammad
Kirghiz  in,  1 34, 349 ;  Uzbeg  SnlUns
floe  to,  245,  250 ;  Uighur  dynasty  in,
287  n. ;  given  to  Chaghatai  Kh^n,
293;  plundered  by  Kirghiz,  358,
367.

Turkistan,  Eastern,  province  of,  given
to  the  liouse  of  Dugblit,  33* ;  Batu
and,  34*;  Dr.  Bellcw's  hibtory  of,
vii.';  the  'Six  Cities*  of,  51* ».:  see
AUi'SJuifir ;  towns  ruined  by  moving
san(ld,68*;  overrun  by  Yeliu  Taishi,
94* ;  small  residue  of  Moghuls  still
existing  in,  127,*  128* :  the  air  of,
12  n. ;  Buddhism  in,  124  n.;  haze
peculiar  to,  303  n.

Turkistan,  Western,  raids  of  the
Moghuls  into,  65.*

Turkoman,  the,  88.*

Turkomuns,  with  Sultdn  Said's  army,
66.*

Turkomans,  under  Bdbar  Pidinhdh,
defeated  by  the  Uzbeg  Sultdns,
260-1.

Turmish,  brother  of  Turkdn  ArUt,  44,
45.

Turahiz,  battle  at,  206.

Tnrak  Sh^Lrto,  vaUey  of,  168.

Tushi  (or  Juji),  eldest  son  of  Chingiz,

29,*  30.*
Tushku,  placed  called,  304,  822.
Tutluk  (TutlughX  battle  of,  Said  Kh&n

defeats  Ab6  Bakr Mirzd  at, 11,*

132,  249,  250,  284,  320.
Tutuk  Khdnim,  daughter  of  Mahmud

Kh^n,  251.
Tuyun  Bdshi,  River,  304,  346,  394.
Tuz-kul  (Lake  Issigh-Kul),  79  n.

Ubaid-ul-Ua]>i,  Khwaja,  396.

Ubaid  Ullah  Kh^n,  206,  234,  243,
247  n. ;  battle  with  Bdbar  P^ish&h,
132;  married  to  Habiba  Sultan
Kbinish,  207;  ordered  by  Sh^hi
Beg  Khin  to  drown  Mirz6  Haidar,
210,  211;  fortified  in  castle  of  Karshi,
245,  248 ;  marches  against  Bokhdra,
259;  is  met  by  Babar  P&disbdh,
260;  battle  at  Kul  Malik,  260,  268 ;
takes  Uisar  from  the  Moghuls,  262-
3;  his  reign  iu  Mavdii-un-Nahr,
283.

Ubaira-Subaira,  282.

Uch  (Ush  Turfin),  town  of,  393, 431  n.,
432  n. ;  country  of,  42  ;  fort  of,  124 ;
seized  by  Abd  Bakr,  254 ;  garrisoned
by  Mirzd  Abd  Bakr,  38a ;  Aiman
Khwdja  Sultdn  in,  343.

Ucha,  357.

Uch  Barkhdn,  village  of,  75,  304,  310.

Uch  Burhan.  42  n.

Uchibi,  a  lieutenant  of  Amir  Timur,
45.

Uch  Kara  Bahadur,  Amir,  25,  42,  47.

Uchku  Muhammad  Mirza,  185.

Uighur,  the,  88*  ;  province  of,  360.

Uighurs,  the  (a  Turki  tribe),  57*  ;  re-
mains of  one  of  their  towns  or  forts,
59* ;  countiy  of,  61* ;  in  Moghulis-
tan,  73,*  74*  n. ;  their  origin  and
early  history,  92*-97* ;  credited  with
linviug  first  reduced  the  Turki  lan-
guage to  writing,  95* ;  spoken  of  as
Tarsi,  96,*  97*  ;  displaced  by  the
Karai  tribe,  16  n.;  the  **  family  of
Afrasiab  the  Turk,"  287  n.;  Nes-
torian  Christianity  prevalent  among,
290  n. ;  Tarse,  land  of  the  Uighurs,
291 71. ;  settled  in  Khordsdn,  811  n.

Uighuristan  (Twr/dn),  the  province  of,
7,*  54,*  99*-114*;  mentioned  by
Mirzd  Haidar,  100,*  101*;  given  to
Chaghatai  Khan,  100*;  people  of,
101.*  102,*  112*;  subdued  by  the
Ming  army,  103*-106* ;  the  Khdns
of,  105,*  106*  ;  irrigation  in,  by  Vais
Khdn,  112* ;  onoe  one  of  the  chief
centres  of  the  Buddhists,  113*;
ancient  capital  of^  1 13* ;  becomes
Chinese  territory, 113-4*; sucees-

Digitized  by

Google

532

Index,

siou  of  Kh&DB  of,  after  date  of  MiiaUl
Haidar'B  history,  123.*  124*:  Khizir
Ehw&ju  and,  52  n.
Uirit,  the.  88*
Uj6  Betu  Irdi  (Ulja  Yetu  Abeidi),

32.
Uktii  KbdD,  360 ;  kingdom  of,  294.
Ulaina,  the :  Dust  Muhammad  Kiiin

and,  89 ;  Said  Khan  and  Uie,  448.
Ul&ng  Kdhdastan,  206.
Uliing-zddag&n.  162.
Ul  IsUm,  Shaikh,  194.
Ulj&i  Tnrkdn,  Princess.  29.
Uliaitu,  grandson  of  Eublai,  36* ;  routs

Chapdr,  36*.
Ulugh  Mirzi,  478.
Ulugh  Timnr,  26.
Ulugh  Tuktimnr,  of  the  tribe  of  Karait,

15,  16.
Ulugh  Beg  Mirz&,  59,  68  n.;  defeats
Shir  Muhammad,  43* ;  battles  with
the  Moghulfi,  56*;  his  reign  and
death,  59  n. ;  governor  of  Edshghar,
61 ;  and  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  62 ;  and
Khw&ja  Sharif,  76;  summoned  to
Moghulistan  by  Khud&idid,  69;
reception  of  Tunus  Kh&n  at  Samar-
kand, 74 ;  history  called  the  TJIim
ArbcMy  148,  151 ;  murdered  by  his
son,  Abdul  Latif,  329  n.
Ulur  (or  Wular)  lake  in  Kashmir,  428,

429  n.
Vlus  Arhaa  (the  four  hordes^  work  of

Mirzd  Ulugh  Beg,  148.  151.
Ulutibegi,  the  title  of,  132  n. ;  office  of,

38.
Ulus  Sult&n,  son  of  Rashid  Sultdn,

122.*
Ungut,  the,  88.*
Urdubegi,  family  of  the,  307.
Uidukand  (Kashghar),  287  n.
Urtltippa,  country  of,  118,  154,  158,

163. 164.
Urdu,  an :  ^ee  Aul.
Urdum  Padshah,  sand  dunes  at,  12  n.
Ur8ang(Las8a).410n.,411,443;  Mirzli
Haidar  sent  to,  136  and  n.,  143;
temple  of,  454-459.
Urtubu,  Dughlit  Amir,  294  n. ;  Man-
galai Suyah given to, 7; seven
privileges  conferred  upon,  by  Chin-
giz  Eh&n,  54,  55.
Uruk,  183.
Urumtsi,  town  of,  62*; the  present,

93* :  see  also  Bishbdlik.
Urung  Kfiah  (Yurung  E^h),  river  in

Khot^n.  298.
Urun  Sultdn  Ehinim.  88.
Urus  Durman,  Amir,  237.
Urns  Khdn,  45,  50.

Ush,  province  of,  given  to  Tunus  Khdn,
110,  111 ;  taken  by  Ab&  Bakr,  249,
254;  Mir  Y&li  takes,  320;  Said
Ehdn  and,  876.

Ushter  Ushna  (Uritippa),  country  of,
154

Ushtur,  fort  of,  in  TiKshkand,  115.

Ush-Turffin,  city  of,  51*  n.

Ust&d  Abddl  Sh&ikb.  322.

Ustdd  Ahmad  Bumi,  475.

Ust^d  Yunus  (Yunus  Khin),  85.

Ustdilu  tribe,  214  n.

Utluk,  place  in  Moghulistan,  377, 463 ;
desert  plains  of,  189.

Uzbeg.  a  tribe  of  Khotan,  67.

Uzbegs,  the,  defeated  at  Hisar,  10*;
route  of  Baber  at  the  battle  of  Ghaj-
diw^n,  10* ;  lay  siege  to  Andijto,
11*;  theMoghul8and,56,*57*;  de-
feated by  Rashid  Sult^  120*,  146 ;
present  line  of  Bokhara  Eh&ns  de-
scended from,  126* ;  defeat  the
Chaghatai  under  ShiUii  Beg  Eh£n,
206,  234 ;  government  of  the,  206  n. ;
defeated  by  B6bar  PadisbHh,  243-6 ;
set  out  against  Andijdn,  280-2;  in
Said  Khan's  army,  305 :  see  also
ShiUban-Uzbeg.

Uzbeg :  see  also  Eaz^k-Uzbegs.

Uzbegistin,  366,  374.

Uzbeg-Kaz^  the  tribe  of,  82;  de-
feated by  Rashid  Eh6n.  146.

Uzbeg-Shaibin,  Rashid  Kh&n  and,  146;
retire  from  Andij^n,  376 ;  to  Khiss
and  Kunk^  377.

Uzbeg  Sult&ns,  the,  defeated  at  Hia&r
Shkdmdn,  132 ;  advance  on  Andijin,
133;  attack  fort  of  E&sdn.  248-9;
flee  to  Turkist&n.  245,  250;  march
against  Ttehkand,  259,  271 ;  defeat
the  Turkomans  and  B6bar  Pddi-
sh&h,  260-1 ;  decimated  by  famine,
262 ;  take  Hisar  from  the  Moghuls,
262-3.

Uzbeg  Timur,  39.

Uzbeg  UluSy  division  among,  on  the
death  of  Abnlkhair  Kh&ii,  272.

Uzchand  (Uzkand),  seized  by  Abi
Bakr,  248-9,  254,  259.

Uzkand,  50;  Amir  Timur  at,  43;
plundered  by  Eushluk  Kh^n.  289;
Mir  y&li  takes,  320;  taken  by  Said
Kh&n,  376.

Uzun  Ahmad,  130.

Uzun  Sakal  Tufta  Euli,  309.
Uzun  Sultan  Khdnim,  64.

Vakai,  or  Turki  History :  see  Baber'a
"Memoirs."

Yais  Eh&n,  son  of  Shir  Muhammad
Ehdn.  103* ;  attacks  Shir  Muhammad
Oghl&n,  43*;  and  irrigation  in
TurfdnandEara-Ehoja,112*;  early
life  of,  60,  61 ;  takes  to  highway
robbery,  63;  hostility  between  Shir
Muhammad  Khin  and,  64,  65;
battles with  the  Kalmyks,  65-67;

Digitized  by  VjL^OV  IC

Index,

533

saTed  by  Amir  Sayyid  Ali,  65-7;

studies theology, 67; and Amir

Khudiid^  69 ;  mftrtyidom  of  71-8 ;

his  sister,  91.
Yais  Mirzi,  son  of  Saltan  Mahmud

Mirzfi,  10*,  373  and  n,
Yais  Ehdn :  ue  Mirz6  Khin  and  Yais

Mirzi.
Vakhsh  River,  20.
Yakhsh,  mountains  of,  263.
VaU  Beg,  316,  317.

Yali,  Mir,  brother  of  Khusrau  ShiUi,  165.
Yali  Mir,  Ab6  Bakr's  general,  entrusted

with  army  and  military  affairs,  319,

320 ;  at  Yangi-Hisar,  321 ;  overruns

Ladak,403n.
Yallldiaiiof, Captain, and ancient

Tariz,  63  n.
Yigne,  Mr.  T.  G., and  the ruined

temples  of  Kashmir,  426  n.,  427  n.
FtVdm  of  Ir^lzdn,  the,  73  n.
Yim^  (BamagX  spring  of,  428  and  n.,

431.

Waddell,  Dr.  L.  A.,  xv. ;  on  the  mean-
ing of  Yulpa,  407  n. ;  on  the  DoZjxi
tnbe,  409  n. ;  on  Maryul,  410  n. ;  on
dai»-</t'rt,  413  n. ;  on  the  Lamas,
414  n.,  415  n.,  417  n. ;  meaning  of
Stak-brak,  458  n.

Wakhto,  54,*  467.*

Wala:  Me  Oiiat

Wang  Kh&n  (or  Prester  John),  the
Earai  tribe  ruled  by,  16  n.

Ward,  Colonel  A.  E.,  on  dimensions  of
the  wild  yak,  302  n.

Warren,  Mr.,  on  the  kingdom  of  Tarse,
291  n.

Wassdf,  and  the  Kurdnas  tribe,  76,*
77.*

Walters,  Mr.,  and  the  **Five  Cities,"
62*71.;  on  the  town  of  Euchar,
100*  ». ;  on  Su-Sa  (8u  Yeh),  8  n.

Wheeler,  Mr.  Stephen,  xv.,  91*  «.

White  Horde,  Tokt&mish  Eh£n  of  the,
50  M.

White  Horde  (Eaz^),  Ehins  of,  272  n.

William  of  Modena,  117.*

Wilson,  Prof.  H.  H.,  and  Moorcroft's
travels,  viii.

Wular,  lake  of :  m0  Ular.

YAdqAb  Muhammad,  449.

Yddgir  Nisir  Mirzd,  241,  261,  308,

472,  478,  483,  484.
Yadrintzeff,  Mr.  N.,  and  ancient  city  of

Ear&komm,  10  n.
Ydghistan,  petty  states  known  as,  12.*
Yak,  wild  QeiiJt6»\  466,  and  n. ; in  the

hUIsofEhotau,302n.
Yakchak,  Malik  of  Eashmir,  441.
Yak6bulung,72n.
Yakut,  the  Ajab  author,  and  Farghtoa,

8».

Yaknb  Sultan,  451;  kiosk  of,  in
Tabriz,  429.

Yakuti,  the  Arab,  and  Taqhaz-qiuu^
94*91.

YiLm,  Biver,  29.

YangaUk,  Moghul  custom  of,  251.

Yanki  (Chilish  or  Eara  Shahr),  town
of,  99.*

Yangi  (Tartiz),  town  of,  40,  63  n.,  81  n.,
364;  Isin  Bughi  Ehin  in,  79  n.,
80  ».

Yangi-Hisar,  city  of,  51*  n. ;  siege  of,
6,*  11*;  Sultan  Said's  operations
against,  66,*  133,  369,  394;  sand
buried  ruins  in  the  neighbourhood
of,  67* ;  given  to  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirzd,  88, 89;  ravaged  by  Ab6  Bakr
Mirz^  103 ;  taken  by  Sultto  Ahmad
Ehin,  122;  its  situation,  295;  Y6r-
kand  a  companion  city  to,  296 ;  Abd
Bakr  at,  304,  321;  attack  on  the
citadel  of,  by  Said  Ehto,  312  319;
Mirzi  Jahangir  killed  in,  330;
Ehw&ja  Nur&  at,  390.

Ydngi-Eand  (Yangi),  80  n.,  81  n.

Y6r,  Amir,  son  of  Amir  Jin  Vaffi,
193.

Y&r&ka  Atdka,  125, 126,  332,  340.

Yarkh,  a  district  of  Badakhsh&n,  353.

Yarkand,  city  of,  51*«.,  296;  fall  of,
11*;  Benedict  Goes  at,  in  1603..
122* ;  attacked  by  Dust  Muhammad
Eh£n,  89;  Yunus  Ehdn's  head-
quarters, 90 ;  Mirzi  Ab&  Bakr  master
of,  99,  304,  322 ;  his  batQes  at,  with
the  joint  armies  of  Yunus  Ehdn  and
Muhammad  Haidar  Mirzd,  104-107;
Mirzd  Abd  Bakr  defeats  Sultan
Ahmad  Eh6n,  122;  reduced  by  Mirzd
Abd  Bakr,  252,  253 ;  treasure  found
in,  257,  326-7;  citadel  at,  built  by
AH  Bdkr,  296-7 ;  water  of,  297 ;
river  of,  297-8;  t<«nbs  of,  299,  300;
Sult&n  Said  Ehdn's  march  against,
312-313,  445;  Said  Eh&n  enters,
325-6,  345.

Yar  Muhanmiad :  see  Najm,  Mir.

Yas :  see  Dam^iri.

Yasavvi  Shaikhs,  order  of  the,  369
and  n.

Yashm :  see  Jade.

Yasu  (or  Isu)  Mangu,  83,*  180 ».,
181  n. ;  given  to  Yunus  Ehto,  87.

Y^zik  (Turah)  of  Chingiz  Ehdn,  70.

Yizak  (Yto&)  the,  legal  code  of  the
Mongols,  22  n.;  Ehw&ja  Ali
Bah£lur,  appointed,  350.

Y^i  Dabto,  Pass  uC  43.

Ye-liu  Taishi,  a  Eara-Ehitai  king,
279  n. ;  the  Gurkhdn  of  the  Eara-
Ehitai«94.*

Yellu  T&ashi,  Liao  prince,  152  n.

Yellow  Biver,  legend  concerning,
406  n.,  407  n.

Digitized  by

Google

534

Index,

Yellow  Uighurs,  ooantry  of  the,  349  n.

Ye-mi-li  Huo-jo,  Turfin  chief,  103.*

Yeu-liai,  Gliineee  name  for  Lake  lasigh-
Kul,79n.

Yenki :  «ee  Karaahahr.

Yogurs,  the :  %ee  Uighurs.

Youn&;hu8band,  Captain  F.  E.,  x.  n.;
and  the  modem  citv  of  Turfdn,
112*;  and  Mr.  Shawns  papen,
121*  n.

Yuan-pao,  Chinese  ingots  of  silver,
256  n.

Yulduz  of  Moghulistdn,  86.

Yule,  Sir  IL,  on  counterfeit  tribute
mission  to  China,  lll*n. ;  ou  occu-
pants of  the  throne  of  Moghulistan,
2,  3;  on  the  word  Khikin,  30*  n.;
on  the  Caraonas,  77* ;  on  old  town  of
Kunah-Shabr,  12  n. ;  on  the  *'  Iron
Gate,"  20  n. ;  on  the  province  of
KhatUn,  21  n. ;  on  Arhang,  24  n. ;
on  the  word  Jadoh,  33  n. ;  on  the
Eatur  tribe,  104  ti. ;  on  a  Bishop  of
Kumul,  126  71. ;  on  the  town  of
Sairam,  171  n. ;  on  Yiian-jxto,  Chinese
ingots  of  silver,  256  n. ;  on  the  Kizil-
bdsh,  214  n. ;  on  Balur  (or  Bolor),
385  n. ;  on  dam-girl,  413  n.

Yulp&i  inhabitants  of  Tibet,  407  and  n.,
410.

Yultiujur,  26.

Yumghdl,  place  called,  365  and  n.

Ynnus  Khdn,  sonof  Vais  Kbda,  73, 153;
personal  appearance  of,  79 ;  Muham-
mad Kdzi  and,  84,*  85*  ;  his  recep-
tion in  Samarkand  by  Ulugh  Beg,
74  ;  fights  against  his  brother  Is&n
Bughd  Khan.  81, 82, 172 ;  appointed
Khdn  by  Sultdn  Abu  Said,  83,  84  ;
eurly  life  of,  84,  85;  liis  arrival  in
Moghulistan,  86,  87;  marries  Isdn
DauUt  Begum,  86 ;  Yatikand  given  ,
to,  87;  seizes  Aksu,  90;  second
return  to  Moghulistdn,  90-92;  de-
feated by  Amdsdnji  Tdishi,  91 ;
defeat  and  murder  of  Buruj  Oghldn,
92,93;  captured  by  Shaikh  Jamal-
ud-Din  at  Tashkand,  94,  95;  and
ti)e  Kings  of  Mavard-un-Nahr,  95-
98 ;  battle  with  Omar  Shaikh  Mirzd
at  Tika  Sagrutku,  96, 97 ;  visited  by
Khw^a  Nasiruddin  Ubaiduilah,  97,
114;  the Tdjik  features of,97n.,98n.;
battles  in  conjuuction  with  Muham-
mad Ilaidar  Mirzd  against  Mirzd
Abd  Bakr,  104-7;  marries  Sbdh
Begum,  108 ;  obtains  complete  con-
trol over  the  Mogbuls.  108;  dif-
ference with  Muhammad  Haidar
Mirzd  at  Aksu,  109-111 ;  enters
Tdshkand,  112,  113;  his  death  and
burial  in  Tdshkand,  114,  115,  157;
daughter j)  of,  117,  118;  account  of
liis  life  ami  list  of  bis  ofTspring,  1.55,

156.  197,  198; defeated  by  Mixz^

Abd  Bakr  at  Yarkand,  253.
Yupurghi  Biver,  295  «.
Yurung  Kdsh,  river  in  Kbotdn,  298.
Yuafdn, son of Miizd Abd Bakr,

304.
Yusuf,  Amir,  taken  prisoner  by  Timur,

28
Yusiif  Ali  Kukilddsh  Divdnd,  203.
Yusuf  Bakdval,  309.
Yusuf  Kdsbghari,  226.
Yusuf,  Mauldcd,  486.
Yusun  Timur  Sultdn,  son  of  Saltdn

Ahmad  Khdn,  161.
YusurghdtmJsh  Khdn,  72.
Yutun  Bdshi  River,  304.

Zabiha,  ImAm,  tomb  of,  298.

Zafar-Ndmoy  Sharaf-ud-Din  All  Yazdi,
author  of,  84,  85  n.,  151 ;  Petis  de  la
Croix's  translation  of,  75* ;  extracts
from,  in  the  Tarihh-i'IUuihidi,  xi.,
xiii. ;  and  succession  of  the  Moghul
Khans,  41*-46*;  mention  of  the
'cities'  of  the  Moghulistan,  57*;
and  Moghul  encampments,  60* ;  and
wars  between  Timur  and  the  Mo-
gbuls, 99*  ;  liistory  of  events  in
Moghulistan,  118,*  119*;  history  of
the  Moghuls  and  their  Khdkdna,  2 ;
story  of  AJdnkud  Kurkluk,  5 ;  spoiks
of  Amir  Timur  as  Siihib-i-Kurdn,
17  n. ;  victory  of  Timur  over  a  Jatah
Amir,  21». ;  adventures  of  Timur
and  Husain,  22  n.,  23  n.;  and  Dyds
Khwdja  Khdn,  23,  38 ;  rebellion  of
Knmar-ud-Din,  38-40 ;  and  Amir
Timur's  expedition  against  Khitdi«
53;  liistory  of  Tughluk  Timur  re-
corded in,  56 ;  nine  wives  of  Timur,
278 n. ;  and  Davd  Khdn, 800;  aocount
of  Kashmir  in,  430-432;  the  mis-
deeds of  Sultdn  Khalil  (grandson  of
Timur)  recorded  in,  451.

Zardfshdn,  valley  of,  invaded  by  the
Jatah  army,  29  n.;  Kazdks  in  tlie,
126.*

Zdhid,  Khwdja,  69.

Zahir-ud-Diu  Muhammad  BabarPddi-
shdh  Gbdzi,  117, 119, 120 :  seeBdbar
Pddishdh.

Zainab  Sultdn  Khduim,  146,  467.

Zain-ul-Abidin,  Sultdn,  428,  433,  434 ;
palace  of,  on  the  island  of  Lanka,
429  and  n.,  430.

Zaminddwar,  Slidh  Beg  conducts  afihirs
of,  202.

Zangi  Chak,  482,  487.

Zangskar,  a  district  of  Ladak,  15,*
410,  462.

Zanjir  Sardi,  43.

ZdukaPass,  350n.

Zid-ud-Din,  Amir,  107,  108.

Digitized  by

Qoo^(z

Index.  535

Zij  KurkiiD,  afitronomical  tables  called,  I  Zoroc»trians,  the,  in  Asia,  known  as

59  and  «. ;  60  n.  I Tarn,  96.*

Zlknl  Bah&dur,  185.  I  Znii,  the  pass  of  Kashmir,  423.

Zinda  Hasham,  32,  34,  40.  I  Zulkadar  tribe,  214  n.

Zir-Sud-Kankar  in  Tibet,  410.  ; Znngaria (or Jnngar), country of,

Zobir  R6ghi,  kiUed  by  Mirz£  Khan,  I 31,»  34.*  53* ;  the  Uighure  of,  93,*

203, 219.  I 95.*
Zordwar  Sing,  the  Dogra  general,  15* ; Zungars,  the,  97*  n.

expedition  of,  to  Tibet  in 1841..  I  Zunia,  in  Tibet,  410,  416.

458  n.,  461  n.  i  Zu'nnun,  Mirz£,  205.

Digitized  by

Google

LONDON:

FRINTKD  BT  WILLIAM  CLOWES  AND  80K8,  LIMTID,  8TAXF0BD  STREST

AND  CHABIKO  CB0B8.

Digitized  by

Google

^Xl.

Digitized  by

Google

i

i

I

i

H

Digitized  by'
