The Sermons of John Tauler (Johannes Tauler, trans. Susanna Winkworth, 1857)
==========================================================
Winkworth's 1857 translation of Tauler's sermons — the Strasbourg Dominican's mystical preaching that shaped the German Friends of God. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.


,  o.


HISTORY    and     LIFE


OF    THE


REVEREND


DOCTOR     JOHN     TAULER;


WITH


TWENTY-FIVE    of    his    SERMONS.


LONDON :

Printed  by  SPOTTISWOODE  &  Co.
New-ftreet-Square.


SAN  DIEGO

HISTORY      and      L  I  F  K

OF       THE

REVEREND

DOCTOR   JOHN    TAULER

of  STRASBOURG  ;    with

TWENTY-FIVE  of  his  SERMONS

(Temp.   1340).

Tranilated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notices  of
Tauler's  Life  and  Times,  by

SUSANNA     WINKWORTHL

Tranflator  of   Tbeologia  Germanica  f
AND     A

Preface    by    the    Rev.    CHARLES     KINGSLEY,

Reftor  of  Everfley  and  Canon  of  Middleham.

LONDON :

SMITH,      ELDER,      AND      COMPY,      65,      CORNHILL.

M.DCCC.LVII.


TABLE     OF     CONTENTS.


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE


PAGE

xi


PREFACE  BY  THE  REV.  CHARLES  KINGSLEY


xxxi


THE    HISTORY    AND  LIFE   OF   THE    REVEREND  DOCTOR

JOHN  TATTLER        .......          i

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE  RESPECTING  TAULER'S  LIFE  AND

TIMES,  BY  THE  TRANSLATOR          ....       73


SERMON


I.  SERMON  FOR  THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT    .     179

How  that  toe  are  called  upon  to  arife  from  our  fins,  and  to  conquer  our
foes,  looking  for  the  glorious  coming  of  our  Lord  in  our  fouls.


vi

Table  of  Contents.

SERMON

PAGE

II.

SERMON  FOR  THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT  .

I87

How  that  God  is  very  near  to  us,  and  bow  we  must  feek  and  fnd  the
Kingdom  of  God  within  us,  without  rejpeft  to  time  and  place.

III.

SERMON  FOR  THE  THIRD  SUNDAY  IN  ADVENT

'93

How  that  we  mujl  wholly  come  out  from  ourfelves,  that  we  may  go  into
the  wildernefs  and  behold  God.

IV.

SERMON  FOR  CHRISTMAS  DAY

203

O/  the  things  by  which  we  become  children  of  God.

V.

SERMON  FOR  EPIPHANY

211

This  Sermon  on  the  Gofpel  for  the  day,  from  St.  Matthew,  Jhowetb
how  God,  of  His  great  faithfulnefs,  hath  forefeen  and  ordained  all
fufferings  for  the  eternal  good  of  each  man,  in  whatever  wife  they
befall  us,  and  whether  they  be  great  or  f  mall.

VI.

SECOND  SERMON  FOR  EPIPHANY   r  .

218

Sbowetb  on  what  wife  a  man  Jh  all  arife  from  bimfelf  and  from  all  crea-
tures, to  the  end  that  God  may  find  the  ground  of  bis  foul  prepared,
and  may  begin  and  perfeft  His  work  therein.

VII.

SERMON    FOR    THE    FOURTH     SUNDAY    AFTER

EPIPHANY  ...

223

Of  the  great  wonders  which  God  has  wrought,  and  ftill  works  for  us
Cbrjftian  men  ;  wherefore  it  is  juft  and  reafonable  that  wejbouldtum
unto  Him  and  follow  Him,  and  whereby  we  may  difcern  between  true
andfalfe  converfion.

VIII.

SERMON     FOR     THE     SIXTH     SUNDAY     AFTER

EPIPHANY   .....

337

O/  the  proper  marks  of  true  humility.

Table  of  Contents.  vii


SERMON  PAGE

IX.  SERMON  FOR  SEPTUAGESIMA  SUNDAY        .         .     241

In  this  Sermon  following  we  are  taught  how  we  muft  perpetually  prefs
forward  towards  our  higheft  good,  without  paufe  or  reft ;  and  how  we
muft  labour  in  the fpiritual  vineyard  that  it  may  bring  forth  good  fruit.

X.  SERMON  FOR  ASH  WEDNESDAY          .         .         .     255

An  Expojttion  of  the  three  crojfes,  that  of  Chrift,  that  of  the  malefaflor
on  His  left,  and  that  of  the  malefaflor  on  His  right  hand,  how  they
are  a  type  of  the  fujferings  of  three  clajfles  of  men  who  are,  in  afpirit-
ualfenfe,  nailed  to  thefe  three  crojjes.

XI.  SERMON  FOR  THE  SECOND  SUNDAY  IN  LENT      .     266

Tells  us  how  God  drives  forward  fame  of  His  children  by  the  ftruggle
between  the  inward  and  outward  man.

XII.  SERMON  FOR  THE  FOURTH  SUNDAY  IN  LENT   .  278

Of  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God,  of  fiery  dejtres,  and  the  ejjence  of
felf-renunciation.

XIII.  SERMON  FOR  PALM  SUNDAY      ....     283

How  a  man  ought  in  all  His  works  to  regard  God  alone,  and  purely  to
make  Him  his  end  without  anything  of  his  own,  and  Jhall  freely  and
Jimply  perform  all  thefe  works  for  the  glory  of  God  only,  and  not  fee k
his  own,  nor  dejire  nor  expeft  any  reward.  Wherewith  he  may  do
fuch  works  without  any  felf-appropriation  or  reference  to  time  and
number,  before  or  after,  and  without  modes.  How  the  Divine  Word
fpeaks  and  reveals  itfelfin  the  foul,  all  in  a  lofty  and  fub tile  fenfe.

XIV.  SERMON  FOR  THURSDAY  IN  EASTER  WEEK         .     292

How  we  ought  to  love  God,  and  bow  Chrift  is  a  Mafter  of  the  Eternal
Good,  wherefore  we  ought  to  love  Him  above  all  things  ,•  a  Mafter  of
the  Higheft  Truth,  wherefore  we  ought  to  contemplate  Him  ;  and  a
Mafter  of  the  Higheft  Perfeflnefs,  wherefore  me  ought  to  follow
after  Him  without  let  or  hindrance.


Vlll


Table  of  Co?itents.


SERMON

XV.  SERMON  FOR  THE  FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER  EASTER

How  we  are  to  afcend  by  three  ft  ages  to  true  peace  and  purity  of  heart.


PAGE
299


XVI.  SERMON    FOR    THE    FOURTH     SUNDAY    AFTER

TRINITY     ....      .^»4i      ,         .     305

How  the  Holy  Gboft  rebukes  the  World  in  man  for  Jin,  righteoufnefs,
and  judgment ;  bow  hurtful  it  is  to  judge  one's  neighbour ;  after
what  fajhion  a  pious  man  may  rebuke  his  neighbour  ;  further,  what
the  Holy  Gboft  teacheth  when  he  cometh  to  us.


XVII.  SECOND    SERMON
AFTER  EASTER


FOR    THE    FOURTH    SUNDAY


Of  three  hindrances  which  rejift  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Gboft  in  three
claJJ'es  of  men.

XVIII.  SERMON  FOR  ASCENSION  DAY  .         .         «

This  third  ftrmon  on  the  Afcenfion  tells  us  how  man  ought  continually  to
follow  after  Cbrift,  as  He  has  walked  before  us  for  three  and  thirty
years,  pajfing  through  manifold  and  great  Sufferings,  before  He  re-
turned unto  His  Father.


3*9


XIX.  SERMON  FOR  WHIT  SUNDAY     ....

How  God  drew  the  Apoftles  unto  Cbrift  by  fix  degrees  until  they  at-
tained unto  union  with  Himfelf,  and  fo  likewife  draweth  His  friends
unto  Himfelf  now.


328


XX.  SERMON    FOR
TRINITY


THE    FOURTH    SUNDAY    AFTER


This  fermon  telletb  us  of  four  meafures  that  Jb  all  be  rendered  unto  man,
and  of  two  grades  of  a  godly  life,  and  how  we  ought  to  love  our
neighbour.


341


Table  of  Contents.


SERMON  PAGE

XXI.  SERMON     FOR    THE     TENTH     SUNDAY    AFTER

TRINITY      .......     353

Admonljhing  each  man  to  mark  what  is  the  office  to  which  he  is  called
of  God,  and  teaching  us  to  praflife  works  of  love  and  virtue,  and  to
refrain  from  f elf -will.

XXII.   SERMON    FOR   THE    TWELFTH    SUNDAY    AFTER

TRINITY      .......     361

Teaching  us  that  we  ought  to  receive  God,  in  all  His  gifts,  and  in  all
His  burdens,  with  true  long-fuffering.


XXIII.   SECOND  SERMON  FOR  THE  TWELFTH  SUNDAY

AFTER  TRINITY  ......     367

This  fermon  tells  us  how  a  man  who  truly  loves  God,  whofe  ears  have
been  opened  to  receive  the  feven-fold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is
neither  lifted  up  in  joy  nor  caft  down  in  for  row.


XXIV.  SERMON    FOR   THE   FIFTEENTH  SUNDAY  AFTER

TRINITY  ......     373

This  fermon  forbiddeth  all  carefulnefs,  and  telleth  in  what  righteoufnefs
conjiftetb,  and  rebukes  fundry  religious  people  and  their  works,  liken-
ing their  ways  to  Jlmony.


XXV.   SERMON  FOR  ST.  STEPHEN'S  DAY      .          .          .     383

Of  three  grades  of  tbofe  who  learn  to  die  unto  themfehes,  like  a  corn  of
wheat,  that  they  may  bring  forth  fruit ;  or  of  tbofe  who  are  be-
ginners, tbofe  who  are  advancing,  and  tbofe  who  are  perfect  in  a
Divine  life.


Table  of  Contents.


SERMON  PAGE

XXVI.  SERMON  FOR  ST.  PETER'S  DAY        .         .         .     398

Of  brotherly  rebuke  and  admonition,  bow  far  it  is  advifablc  and  feemly
or  not,  and  efpecially  bow  prelates  and  governors  ought  to  demean
tbemfehes  towards  their  fubjefts.

XXVII.  SERMON  ON  A  MARTYR'S  DAY  ....     404

Of  three  forts  of  fpiritual  temptation  by  which  holy  men  are  fecretly
ajfailed  ;  to  wit :  fpiritual  uncbaftity,  covetoufnefs,  and  pride.


TRANSLATOR'S      PREFACE.


N  publifhing  a  feleclion  from  the  writings  of  a  divine
who  flourifhed  in  an  age  and  under  focial  conditions  fo
remote  from  our  own  as  thofe  of  a  German  Dominican
monk  of  the  fourteenth  century,  it  feems  right  to  ftate
at  the  outfet  whether  the  aim  which  has  governed  the  feleclion
is  chiefly  hiftorical  or  devotional.  The  prefent  work  was  under-
taken, in  the  firft  inftance,  with  a  fimply  practical  object.  My  ear-
lieft  acquaintance  with  Tauler's  Sermons  was  made  while  hearing
them  read  in  a  family  fervice ;  and  believing,  from  further  ftudy,
that  they  contained  elements  of  truth  not  often  brought  into
fufficient  prominence  in  thefe  days,  yet  pofleffing  a  moft  direcl:
and  valuable  influence  on  Chriftian  life,  I  wimed  to  compile
a  volume  of  fermons  for  the  Sundays  and  Holydays  of  the  year,
fuch  as  any  head  of  a  family  might  read  to  his  houfehold,  or
any  diftricl;  vifitor  among  the  poor.

a2


xii  Tranjlators  Preface.


To  have  carried  out  this  idea  completely  would,  however,  have
involved  the  omiffion,  in  many  of  the  fermons,  of  paflages  either  too
abftrufe  for  eafy  comprehenfion,  or  too  much  imbued  with  re-
ferences to  the  Romifh  ritual  and  difcipline,  to  be  fuitable  for
the  Proteftant  common  people.  But  fuch  a  mutilation  feemed
to  me  fcarcely  honeft  in  the  cafe  of  a  writer  now  to  be  prefented
for  the  firft  time  in  a  foreign  language,  and  it  appeared  better
therefore  to  reconcile  hiftorical  truthfulnefs  with  practical  ufeful-
nefs,  by  reftri&ing  the  fele&ion,  but  giving  all  the  fermons  included
in  it  in  their  complete  form.  Had  it  been  my  object  merely
to  prefent  an  interefting  piclure  of  a  remarkable  man,  the
feleclion  would  poffibly  have  been  fbmewhat  different,  —  cer-
tainly much  wider.  As  it  is,  I  have  chofen  the  practical  rather
than  the  more  metaphyfical  fermons,  and  have  included  none
which  feemed  to  me,  in  my  confcientious  judgment,  open  to
objections  as  to  their  moral  tendency.

Among  fuch  I  fhould  reckon  fome  tinctured  with  an  afceticifm
throwing  contempt  on  the  affections  of  ordinary  life.  Of  the
duties  of  ordinary  life  Tauler  never  fpeaks  difparagingly.  When
he  fays  that  the  inward  work  in  the  foul  is  more  than  all  out-
ward good  works,  it  is  always  the  outward  practices  of  religion  of
which  he  is  fpeaking — attendance  in  church,  failing,  the  repeating  -
of  prayers,  &c. ;  never  of  the  exercife  of  active  benevolence,  or


Tranjlator's  Preface.  xiii

even  the  performance  of  minor  houfehold  duties.  It  is  one  good
feature  of  the  fchool  to  which  he  belonged,  that  thefe  things
are  reftored  to  their  due  honour,  fo  far  as  that  is  compatible
with  the  whole  fyftem  of  conventual  life.  But  Tauler  does
teach  that  repreffion  of  the  natural  affeffiwns  which  is  inevitable
fb  long  as  the  vital  idea  of  monafticifm, — viz.,  the  feverance
of  the  religious  from  the  fecular  in  life, —  is  retained.  That
this  feverance  is  falie  and  mifchievous,  Tauler  no  more  perceived
than  did  the  whole  body  of  his  contemporaries ;  but  while  we
have  no  right  to  cenfure  him  for  errors  which  he  mared  with
all  the  men  of  his  age  (and  which  he  often  diverted  for  his  own
hearers  of  much  of  their  baneful  influence),  it  is  equally  un-
necefTary  to  place  fuch  docTrine  before  people  at  the  prefent
time.  So,  too,  the  fermons  on  the  Mafs  and  on  the  Virgin
Mary,  while  containing  many  excellent  practical  remarks,  are
of  courfe  bafed  on  beliefs  that  would  render  them  unprofitable
to  the  great  multitude  of  Englifh  Proteftants  now-a-days,  and
I  did  not  deem  it  needful  to  infert  them  merely  for  the  fake  of
prefcnting  a  full  view  of  all  that  Tauler  believed  or  taught.
But  neither  did  it  feem  effential  to  practical  ufefulnefs  to  elimi-
nate from  fermons  whofe  general  fcope  is  rich  in  Chriftian
inftruclion,  all  fuch  paiTages  as  might  contain  patting  allufions
to  purgatory,  tranfubftantiation,  the  invocation  of  faints,  &c. ;

a3


Tranjlators  Preface.


myftical  and  figurative  interpretations  of  Scripture,  or  qucftionablc
philosophical  fpeculations,  in  order  that  nothing  might  be  left  but
what  Proteftant  Chriftians  at  the  prefent  day  actually  believe.
For  private  reading  it  is  the  lefs  necefTary,  as  it  is  often  curious
and  inftructive  to  obferve  how  Tauler,  in  many  cafes,  fupplies
the  practical  antidote  to  the  hurtful  effects  of  a  Romifh  doctrine
without  in  the  leaft  feeing  through  the  doctrine  itfelf  ;  while,
mould  thefe  Sermons  be  ufed,  as  I  earneftly  wim  they  may  be,
for  family  reading,  it  will  be  very  eafy  to  omit  anything  which
it  might  be  undefirable  to  read  to  uneducated  perfons.

With  regard  to  thofe  not  included,  the  greater  number  have
been  rejected  fimply  becaufe  many  of  their  ideas  occurred  in  the
fermons  which  I  have  chofen,  and  I  was  anxious  to  avoid  repe-
tition ;  and  among  thefe  many  were  fb  good  as  to  render  the
tafk  of  felection  very  difficult.  A  very  fmall  proportion  have
been  omitted  on  account  of  their  Romim  doctrine  ;  more  becaufe
of  their  obfcure  myfticifm,  and  a  few  becaufe  they  contained
figures  that  would  found  coarfe,  or  at  leaft  grotefque  and  un-
fuitable  for  the  pulpit,  to  our  modern  ears.  I  believe  that  thofe
I  have  given  may  be  regarded,  from  the  abfence  of  omiflions  and
the  variety  of  their  fcope,  as  furnifhing,  on  the  whole,  a  correct
picture  of  the  mind  and  faith  of  their  author.

The  edition  of  Tauler's  Sermons  which  I  have  ufed  for  my


Tranjlator's  Preface.  xv

Tranflation  is  that  publifhed  at  Frankfort  in  1856.  Among
the  numerous  ancient  and  modern  editions  of  thefe  Sermons,
that  publifhed  at  Leipfic,  in  1498,  holds  the  higheft  rank  as  an
authority ;  but  of  this,  now  very  rare  work,  it  has  not  been  in  my
power  to  confult  a  copy  ;  and  of  the  later  editions  that  of  Frankfort
is  the  beft.  It  is  bafed  upon  an  edition  publifhed  at  Cologne  in
1543,  and  contains  one  hundred  and  fifty-three  fermons ;  only
eighty-four  of  thefe,  however,  are  to  be  found  in  the  MSS.  now
extant.  Many  of  the  MSS.  have,  indeed,  only  portions  of  thefe
eighty-four ;  but  the  beft  and  oldeft  are  alfo  the  moft  complete.
They  are  two  which  are  in  the  Strafburg  Library,  and  are  moft
probably  contemporary  with  Tauler  himfelf,  —  certainly  not  of
much  later  origin.  The  oldeft  printed  edition,  too,  that  of
Leipfic,  in  1498,  has  only  thefe  eighty-four  fermons.  Thefe
are,  therefore,  all  of  whofe  genuinenefs  we  have  diftincl;  certainty
from  external  evidence.  In  an  edition,  however,  which  Johann
Rynmann  publifhed  at  Bafle  in  1521  (probably  induced  to  do
fb  by  Luther's  republication  of  the  Tbeologia  Germanica,  in
1517,  and  his  recommendation  of  Tauler's  writings  to  his
friends*),  forty-two  more  fermons  are  added  with  the  preface :


*  Thus    he  writes  to  Spalatin  in  Dec.   1516:  "Si  te  deleftat  puram,   folidam,  antiquaz
"  fimillimam  theologiam  legere,  in  Germanica  lingua  effufam ;  Sermones  Johannis  Tauleri,

a  4


xvi  Tranflators  Preface.

"  Here  followeth  the  fecond  part  of  the  Sermons  of  the  faid
"  John  Tauler,  which  have  been  more  recently  difcovered,  and
"  collected  with  great  care  and  diligence.  Although  there  may
"  be  a  doubt  about  fome  of  them,  let  not  that  offend  thee ;  for
"it  is  certain  that  they  have  been  written  by  a  right  learned
"  man  of  his  age,  and  are  all  bafed  on  one  foundation,  namely,
"  true  felf-furrender  and  the  preparation  of  the  fpirit  for  God."

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  feveral  of  thefe  are  not  productions
of  Tauler ;  and  Surius,  in  his  Latin  Edition  of  1548,  appends  the
names  of  the  authors  Eckart,  Sufo,  Ruysbroek,  in  feveral  in-
stances where  he  had  afcertained  them, — in  which  the  Frank-
fort Editor  follows  his  example.*  The  ftyles  of  Eckart  and
Sufo  are,  indeed,  very  diftinguimable  from  Tauler's.  That  of
Ruyfbroch  feems  to  me  lefs  fb.  Finally,  the  Cologne  Edition  of
1543,  which  has  been  the  bafis  of  all  the  later  editions  of  Tauler's
Sermons,  adds  twenty-five  more,  and  among  thefe,  too,  fome  by
the  authors  already  named  have  crept  in.  Still,  I  cannot  fee  any


"  praedicatoriae  profeffionis,  tibi  comparare  potes,  cujus  totius  velut  epitomen  ecce  hie  tibi
"  mitto.  Neque  enim  vel  in  Latina,  vel  in  noftra  lingua  theologiam  vidi  falubriorem  et  cum
"  Evangelic  confonantiorem.  Gufta  ergo  et  vide,  quam  fuavis  eft  Dominus,  ubi  prius  guftaris,
"  et  videbis  quam  amarum  eft,  quicquid  nos  fumus." — De  Wette,  Martin  Luther's  Briefe,  &c.,
Band  i.  Berlin,  1825.

*  It  is  to  the  Preface  of  the  Frankfort  Editor  that  I  am  indebted  for  thefe  particulars
refpefting  the  different  editions  of  Tauler's  Sermons.


Tranjlators  Preface.


rcafon  to  queftion  the  ftatement  of  the  Editor,  Petrus  Novioma-
gus,  who  fays  :  —  "  Having  made  refearch  in  all  directions,  that  I
"  might  obtain  the  moft  correctly-copied  MSS.,  I  have  at  laft,  in
"  1542,  found  in  the  library  of  St.  Gertrude's,  at  Cologne  (where
"  the  faid  Doctor  had  his  abode,  and  was  wont  to  preach  God's
"  word),  and  alfo  in  fome  other  places,  old  written  books,  in
"  which  many  excellent,  nay,  fbme  of  the  beft  of  Tauler's  Ser-
"  mons  ftand  clearly  written,  which  have  not  yet  been  printed
"  or  made  public."

Tauler  did  not  himfelf  write  down  his  difcourfes,  but  they
were  compiled  from  notes  taken  by  his  hearers,  which  accounts
at  once  for  the  fragmentary  character  of  the  ftyle,  and  for  the
great  number  of  various  readings  to  be  found  in  the  different
editions.  It  is  important  to  bear  this  circumftance  in  mind  in
judging  of  the  ftyle  of  the  following  fermons.  It  feems  highly
probable  that  the  eighty-four  fermons  contained  in  the  Strafburg
MSS.  were  publifhed  during  his  life  and  received  his  own  cor-
rections ;  but  there  appear  no  adequate  grounds  for  suppofmg  that
thefe  eighty-four  are  the  only  genuine  ones  we  pofTefs  ;  for  in  the
numerous  places  where  Tauler  preached,  many  of  his  fermons
would  probably  be  taken  down  by  fmgle  hearers,  which  in  thofe
times  of  rare  and  difficult  communication,  were  never  brought
under  the  notice  of  the  Strafburg  Collector,  but,  as  his  fame


xviii  Translator's  Preface.

fpread  in  after  years,  came  to  be  gradually  put  into  the  hands  of
later  collectors  by  their  pofTeflbrs,  as  feems  to  have  been  the  cafe
with  thofe  of  which  Petras  Noviomagus  fpeaks.

The  Frankfort  Edition  has  not,  however,  been  the  fble  fource
of  the  following  tranflation  ;  for  with  great  generofity,  for  which
I  beg  to  tender  him  my  warmeft  thanks,  ProfefTor  Schmidt,  of
Strafburg,  has  placed  at  my  difpofal  a  tranfcript  made  by  him-
felf,  from  the  moft  ancient  manufcript  extant,  by  which  I  have
corrected  thofe  of  the  following  collection,  which  belong  to  the
firft  eighty-four.  In  a  very  few  pafTages  only  have  I  retained  the
verfion  of  the  Frankfort  Edition,  where  the  fenfe  was  fo  evidently
clearer  and  fuller  as  to  indicate  a  high  probability  that  the  later
collector  had  had  the  opportunity  of  confulting  fuller  notes  than
his  more  ancient  predeceflbr.  This,  however,  is  very  rarely  the
cafe ;  in  general  the  oldeft  verfion  is  fo  much  the  beft  as  to  give
great  force  to  the  fuppofition  generally  entertained  that  it  had
been  corrected  by  the  author  himfelf.  Of  the  following  collection
Nos.  5.  6.  9.  ii.  16.  18.  20.  2,1.  2,2,.  23.  24.  may  be  thus  faid  to
.be,  in  effect,  tranflated  from  the  Strafburg  MS.  The  Frankfort
Editor  gives  the  fources  from  which  he  has  taken  his  verfion  of
the  fermons,  and  upon  this  authority  I  may  mention  that
Nos.  3.  4.  7.  8.  10.  13.  14.  17.  25.  26.  27.  are  from  the  Appendix
to  the  Bafle  Edition  of  1521  ;  and  Nos.  i.  z.  12,.  15.  19.  from


Tranjlators  Preface.  xix

that  of  the  Cologne  Edition  of  1543.  The  fermon  No.  2.  is
marked  as  Eckart's  in  the  Frankfort  Edition,  and  No.  4.  as  moft
probably  the  production  of  a  difciple  of  his,  commonly  called
Eckart,  junior.  It  is,  however,  somewhat  doubtful  whether  the
two  Eckarts  were  not  in  truth  one  and  the  fame.  The  Cologne
Editor  exprefles  the  wilh  that  "  God  would  anoint  some  man
"  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  render  this  precious  treafure
"  into  Latin  for  the  comfort  of  many  who  defire  it;"  and  this
wim  was  fulfilled  in  1543,  by  the  Carthufian,  Laurentius  Surius,
the  tranflator  alfo  of  the  works  of  Sufo  and  Ruyfbroch.

The  principal  fources  from  which  my  fketch  of  Tauler  and
the  "  Friends  of  God"  has  been  derived,  are  furnifhed  by  Profeflbr
Schmidt  of  Strafburg,  in  his  Johannes  Tauler  von  Strasburg ;
his  eflay  on  Eckart  in  the  Tbeologtscbe  Studien  und  Kritiken,
1 839,  p.  684.  ;  and  his  work,  Die  Gottesfreunde  im  Vterzebnten
Jabrbundert,  Jena,  1855.  I  have,  however,  alfo  to  acknowledge
my  obligations  to  Wackernagel's  eflay  on  the  Gottesfreunde  in
the  Beltraege  zur  Vaterlaendischen  Gescbicbte  (Bafle,  1843,  B.  ii.
s.  1 1 1 .) ;  toNeander's  Kircbengescbicbte;  Hafe's  Kircbengescbicbte  ;
Milman's  Latin  Christianity,  &c.

Any  one  acquainted  with  the  admirable  Eflays  of  Profeflbr
Schmidt,  above-named,  will  perceive  how  largely  I  am  indebted
to  him  for  the  fa(5ls  of  Tauler's  life,  and  the  account  of  Eckart;


XX


Tranjlators  Preface.


but  will  alfo  obferve  that  my  theory  of  them  is,  in  fome  points,
very  different  from  that  of  M.  Schmidt.  For  my  notices  of  the
Goffesfreunde,  his  recent  work  has  furnilhed  the  whole  of  the
facts ;  but,  again,  it  is  only  fair  to  ftate  that  for  the  light  in
which  I  regard  thefe  fa 61s,  I  am  alone  refponfible.

Manchefter:  Nov.  zpth,  1856.


PREFACE,


BY     THE


Rev.    CHARLES    KINGSLEY.


T  is  with  great  diffidence  that  I  have  undertaken  to
furnifh  a  Preface  to  thefe  Sermons.  It  muft  always
be  an  invidious  tafk  to  {land  toward  a  far  wifer  and
better  man  than  one's  felf  in  a  relation  which  is
likely,  at  every  moment,  to  be  miftaken  either  for  that  of  a  critic
or  that  of  a  commentator.

The  critic  of  Tauler,  no  man  has  a  right  to  become,  who  has
not  firft  afcertained  that  he  is  a  better  man  than  Tauler.

The  commentator  of  Tauler,  no  man  has  a  right  to  become,
who  has  a  ftrong  belief  (as  I  have)  that  Tauler's  Sermons  need
no  comment  whatfoever :  but  that  all  which  is  good  and  eternal
in  them  will  recommend  itfelf  at  once  to  thofe  hearts,  let  their


Preface  by  the


form   of  do&rine   be   what   it   may,  who   have   hold   of,  or  are
feeking  after,  Eternal  Goodnefs.

The  historical  and  biographical  information  which  may  be
neceflary  for  a  right  understanding  of  the  man  and  his  times,
will  be  found  in  the  Life  and  the  Introductory  Notice  which
are  appended  to  the  Sermons  ;  while  any  notions  of  mine  as  to
the  genefis  of  Tauler's  views,  as  to  how  much  of  them  he  owed
to  divines,  how  much  to  his  own  vital  experiences,  are  likely  to
be  equally  unfafe  and  uninterefting.  The  Englifh  churchman  of
the  prefent  day,  enjoying  a  form  of  doctrine  far  more  correct  than
that  of  any  other  communion,  and  refting  on  the  found  dogma
that  nothing  is  to  be  believed  as  neceflary  to  falvation  but  what
can  be  proved  by  Scripture,  has  (whether  rightly  or  wrongly,
I  do  not  here  afk)  become  fo  fatisfied  with  the  good  fruit,  as  to
think  little  of  the  tree  which  bore  it.  The  Church  contro-
verfies,  and  the  metaphyfical  inquiries,  by  which,  after  many  mif-
takes,  and  long  ftruggles,  that  form  of  doclrine  was  elicited  from
Scripture,  are  to  him  fhadows  of  the  paft,  and  "  Schoolmen's
"  queftions."  The  element  in  the  ancient  worthies  of  the
Church  which  is  moft  interefting  to  him  is  their  human  for-
rows,  temptations,  triumphs,  with  which,  as  having  happened
in  men  of  like  paffions  with  themfelves,  they  ftill  can  fympa-
thife.  They  cannot,  however,  now  underftand  how  ftrong  and


Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.  xxiii

generally  juft  an  influence  thofe  private  and  perfonal  experiences
had,  in  forming  the  opinions  of  the  old  worthies  upon  Scriptural
doctrines,  which  we  have  been  taught  from  childhood  to  find
in  Scripture,  and  are  therefore  aftonifhed,  if  not  indignant,  that
every  one  in  every  age  did  not  find  them  there  at  firft  fight.

Thus,  ftanding  upon  the  accumulated  labours  of  ages,  we  are
apt  to  be  ungrateful  to  thofe  who  built  up  with  weary  labour,
and  often  working  through  dark  and  dreary  nights,  the  platform
which  now  fupports  us.  We  complain  impatiently  of  the
blindnefs  of  many  a  man,  without  whom  we  mould  not  have
feen  ;  and  of  the  incompletenefs  of  many  a  man's  doctrine,  who,
was  only  incomplete  becaufe  he  was  {till  engaged  in  fearching
for  fome  truth,  which,  when  found,  he  handed  on  as  a  precious
heirloom  to  us  who  know  him  not.

For  the  many,  therefore,  it  will  be  altogether  uninterefting
for  me  to  enter  into  any  {peculation  as  to  the  fpiritual  pedigree
of  Tauler's  views.  How  far  Philo-Judaeus  and  the  Brahmins  may
have  influenced  the  Pfeudo-Dionyfius  ;  how  far  the  Pfeudo-Diony-
fius  may  have  influenced  John  Erigena ;  how  far  that  wondrous
Irimman  may  have  influenced  Matter  Eckart ;  how  far  that  vaft
and  fubtle  thinker,  claimed  by  fbme  as  the  founder  of  German
philofbphy,  may  have  influenced  Tauler  himfelf,  are  queftions
for  which  the  many  will  care  little ;  which  would  require  to  be


xxiv  Preface  by  the

difcuft  in  a  large  volume,  ere  the  queftion  could  not  merely  be
exhaufted,  but  made  intelligible.  Such  matters  may  well  be
left  for  learned  and  large-minded  men,  to  whom  the  develop-
ment of  Chriftian  doclrine  (both  in  the  true  and  the  falfe  fenfe
of  that  word)  are  a  fcientific  ftudy.

But  let  me  exprefs  a  hope,  that  fuch  men  will  turn  their
attention  more  and  more,  not  merely  to  the  works  of  Tauler,
but  to  thofe  of  his  companions,  and  to  that  whole  movement  of
the  fourteenth  century,  of  which  Tauler  is  the  moft  popular
and  eafily  acceflible  type,  as  to  a  moft  interefting  and  inftruclive
page  in  the  book  of  Chriftian,  and  indeed  of  human,  thought.
I  fay  human ;  for  it  will  be  impoffible  for  them  to  examine  the
works  of  fuch  men  as  Erigena,  Tauler,  Eckart,  and  Ruyfbroek,
any  more  than  thofe  of  the  later  myftics,  whether  Romim  or
Proteftant,  without  finding  that  their  fpeculations,  whether  right
or  wrong  in  any  given  detail,  go  down  to  the  very  deepeft  and
moft  univerfal  grounds  of  theology  and  of  metaphyfics ;  and
howfoever  diftinclly  Chriftian  they  may  be,  are  connected  with
thoughts  which  have  exerciied  men  of  every  race  which  has  left
behind  it  more  than  mere  mounds  of  earth.  They  will  find  in
the  Greek,  the  Perfian,  and  the  Hindoo  ;  in  the  Buddhift  and  in
Mohammedan  Sufi,  the  fame  craving  after  the  Abfolute  and  the
Eternal,  the  fame  attempt  to  exprefs  in  words  that  union  be-


Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.  xxv

tween  man  and  God,  which  tranfcends  all  words.  On  making
that  difcovery,  if  they  have  not  already  made  it,  two  courfes  will
be  open  to  them.  They  can  either  rejecl:  the  whole  of  fuch
thoughts  as  worthlefs,  afluming  that  anything  which  Chriftianity
has  in  common  with  heathendom  muft  be  an  adulteration  and
an  interpolation  ;  or,  when  they  fee  fuch  thoughts  bubbling  up,  as
it  were  fpontaneoufly,  among  men  divided  utterly  from  each  other
by  race,  age,  and  creed,  they  can  conclude  that  thofe  thoughts
muft  be  a  normal  product  of  the  human  fpirit,  and  that  they
indicate  a  healthy  craving  after  fbme  real  objecl: ;  they  can  rife
to  a  tender  and  deeper  fympathy  with  the  afpirations  and  mif-
takes  of  men  who  fought  in  great  darknefs  for  a  ray  of  light,
and  did  not  feek  in  vain ;  and  can  give  frefh  glory  to  the
doclrines  of  the  Catholic  Church  when  they  fee  them  fulfilling
thofe  afpirations,  and  correcting  thofe  miftakes ;  and  in  this
cafe,  as  in  others,  fatisfying  the  defire  of  all  nations,  by  pro-
claiming Him  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  and  in  whom  all
things  confift,  who  is  The  Light  and  The  Life  of  men,  mining
for  ever  in  the  darknefs,  uncomprehended,  yet  unquenched.

There  is  another  clafs  of  readers  worthy  of  all  refpect,  who
may  be  diflatisfied,  if  not  ftartled,  by  many  paflages  in  thefe  fer-
mons.  Men  well  fkillcd  in  the  terminology  of  the  popular  reli-
gion, and  from  long  experience,  well  acquainted  with  its  value,

b


xxvi  Preface  by  the

are  apt  to  be  jealous  when  they  find  a  preacher  handling  the
higheft  matters,  and  yet  omitting  to  ufe  concerning  them  the
formulae  in  which  they  are  now  commonly  expreft.  Such
men  I  would  entreat  to  have  patience  with,  and  charity  for,  a
man  whofe  character  they  muft  fo  heartily  admire.  Let  them
remember  that  many  of  our  own  formulae  are  not  to  be  found
verbatim  in  Holy  Writ,  but  have  been  gradually  extracted  from
it  by  proceffes  of  induction  or  of  deduction ;  and  let  them  allow
to  Tauler,  as  far  as  is  confiftent  with  orthodoxy,  Chriftian
liberty  to  find  likewife  what  he  can  in  that  Scripture,  which  he
reveres  as  deeply  as  they  do.  Let  them  confider  alfo,  that  moft
of  thofe  expreflions  of  his  which  are  moft  ftrange  to  our  modern
pulpits,  are  ftrictly  Scriptural,  and  to  be  found  in  the  Sacred
Text ;  and  that  no  man  can  be  blamed  at  firft  fight,  for  under-
ftanding  fuch  expreffions  literally,  and  for  fhrinking  from  reducing
them  to  metaphors.  God  has  ordained  that  the  Pauline  afpect
of  Chriftianity,  and  the  Pauline  nomenclature,  mould  for  the  laft
three  hundred  years  at  leaft,  mould  almoft  exclufively  the  thoughts
of  His  church  :  but  we  muft  not  forget,  that  St.  John's  thoughts,
and  St.  John's  words,  are  equally  infpired  with  thofe  of  St.  Paul ;
and  that  not  we,  but  Tauler,  are  the  fit  judges  as  to  whether
St.  Paul's  language,  or  St.  John's,  was  moft  fit  to  touch  the
German  heart  in  the  dark  and  hideous  times  of  the  Fourteenth


Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.  xxvii

Century.  The  important  queflion  is — Did  Tauler,  under  what-
foever  language,  really  hold  in  fpirit  and  in  truth  the  vital  doc-
trines of  the  Gofpel  ?  That  can  only  be  afcertained  by  a  fair  and
charitable  induction,  and  of  the  refult  of  fuch  an  induction  I  have
little  fear.

Some,  again,  whofe  opinions  will  be  entitled  to  the  very  higheft
refpect,  will  be  pained  at  the  fantaftic  and  arbitrary  method  (if
method  it  can  be  called)  in  which  Tauler  ufes  Scripture  to  illuf-
trate  his  opinions.  Let  them  remember,  that  this  was  not  a
peculiarity  of  the  man,  but  of  his  age  ;  that  for  various  reafons,  a
fimple,  literal,  and  hiftoric  method  of  interpretation  (which  doubt-
lefs  is  at  the  fame  time  the  moft  fpiritual)  was  then  in  its
infancy  ;  that  it  is  by  no  means  perfect  yet ;  and  that  it  is  quite
poffible  that  our  great  grandchildren  may  be  as  much  furprifed  at
our  ufe  of  many  a  text,  as  we  are  at  Tauler's.

But  there  are  thofe — and  thanks  to  Almighty  God  they  are  to
be  numbered  by  tens  of  thoufands — who  will  not  perplex  them-
felves  with  any  fuch  queftionings  ;  fimple  and  genial  hearts,  who
try  to  do  what  good  they  can  in  the  world,  and  meddle  not  with
matters  too  high  for  them ;  perfons  whofe  religion  is  not
abftrufe,  but  deep ;  not  noify,  but  intenfe ;  not  aggreflive,
but  laborioufly  ufeful ;  people  who  have  the  fame  habit  of
mind  as  the  early  Chriftians  feem  to  have  worn,  ere  yet

b2


xxviii  Preface  by  the

Catholic  truth  had  been  defined  in  formulae ;  when  the  Apoftles*
creed  was  fymbol  enough  for  the  Church,  and  men  were  orthodox
in  heart,  rather  than  exact  in  head.  For  fuch  it  is  enough  if  a
fellow-creature  loves  Him  whom  they  love,  and  ferves  Him  whom
they  ferve.  Perfonal  affection  and  loyalty  to  the  fame  unfeen
Being  is  to  them  a  communion  of  faints  both  real  and  actual,  in
the  genial  warmth  of  which  all  minor  differences  of  opinion
vanifh,  and  a  truly  divine  liberality  enables  them  to  believe  with
St.  John,  that  "  Thereby  know  ye  the  fpirit  of  God  :  every
"  fpirit  that  confefTes  that  Jefus  Chrift  is  come  in  the  flem  is  born
"  of  God."

To  fuch  thefe  fermons  mould  be,  and  I  doubt  not  will  be,
welcome.  If  they  find  words  in  them  which  they  do  not  under-
ftand,  even  words  from  which  at  firft  fight  they  differ,  they  will
let  them  pafs  them  by  for  awhile,  in  charity  and  patience.  See-
ing (as  they  will  fee  at  the  firft  glance)  that  John  Tauler  was  one
of  themfelves,  they  will  judge  of  what  they  do  not  underfland  by
what  they  do,  and  give  him  credit  for  fenfe  and  righteoufnefs,
where  their  own  intellects  fail  to  follow  him.

Efpecially,  too,  if  they  be  diffracted  and  difheartened  (as  fuch
are  wont  to  be)  by  the  fin  and  confufion  of  the  world  ;  by  the
amount  of  God's  work  which  ftill  remains  undone,  and  by  their
own  feeming  incapacity  to  do  it,  they  will  take  heart  from  the


Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.  xxix

hiftory  of  John  Tauler  and  his  fellows,  who,  in  far  darker  and
more  confufed  time  than  the  prefent,  found  a  work  to  do,  and
ftrength  to  do  it ;  who,  the  more  they  retired  into  the  recefTes  of
their  own  inner  life,  found  there  that  fully  to  know  themfelves  wras
to  know  all  men,  and  to  have  a  meffage  for  all  men  ;  and  who,  by
their  unceafing  labours  of  love,  proved  that  the  higheft  fpiritual
attainments,  inftead  of  fhutting  a  man  up  in  lazy  and  Pharifaic
felf-contemplation,  drive  him  forth  to  work  as  his  Mailer  worked
before  him,  among  the  poor,  the  fuffering,  and  the  fallen.

Let  fuch  take  heart,  and  toil  on  in  faith  at  the  duty  which
lies  neareft  to  them.  Five  hundred  years  have  patted  fince
Tauler  and  his  fellows  did  their  fimple  work,  and  looked  for  no
fruit  from  it,  but  the  faving  of  one  here  and  there  from  the  nether
pit.  That  was  enough  for  which  to  labour  :  but  without  knowing
it,  they  did  more  than  that.  Their  work  lives,  and  will  live  for
ever,  though  in  forms  from  which  they  would  have  perhaps  mrunk
had  they  forefeen  them.  Let  all  fuch  therefore  take  heart.  They
may  know  their  own  weaknefs  :  but  they  know  not  the  power  of
God  in  them.  They  may  think  fadly  that  they  are  only  palliating
the  outward  fymptoms  of  focial  and  moral  difeafe :  but  God  may
be  ftriking,  by  fome  unconfcious  chance  blow  of  theirs,  at  a  root  of
evil  which  they  never  fufpected.  They  may  mourn  over  the  failure
of  fome  feemingly  ufeful  plan  of  their  own  :  but  God  may  be,  by

b3


xxx  Preface  by  the

their  influence,  fowing  the  feed  of  fome  plan  of  His  Own,  of
which  they  little  dream.  For  every  good  deed  comes  from  God.
His  is  the  idea,  His  the  infpiration,  and  His  its  fulfilment  in  time;
and  therefore  no  good  deed  but  lives  and  grows  with  the  ever-
laiting  life  of  God  Himfelf.  And  as  the  acorn,  becaufe  God  has
given  it  "  a  forming  form/'  and  life  after  its  kind,  bears  within
it,  not  only  the  builder  oak,  but  made  for  many  a  herd,  food  for
countlefs  animals,  and  at  laft,  the  gallant  mip  itfelf,  and  the  ma-
terials of  every  ufe  to  which  nature  or  art  can  put  it  and  its
defcendants  after  it  throughout  all  time  ;  fb  does  every  good
deed  contain  within  itfelf  endlefs  and  unexpected  poflibilities
of  other  good,  which  may  and  will  grow  and  multiply  for  ever,
in  the  genial  Light  of  Him  whofe  eternal  Mind  conceived  it,
and  whofe  eternal  Spirit  will  for  ever  quicken  it,  with  that  Life
of  which  He  is  the  Giver  and  the  Lord.

There  is  another  clafs  of  readers,  to  whom  I  expecl;  thefe
fermons  to  be  at  once  very  attractive  and  very  valuable ;  a  clafs
of  whom  I  fpeak  with  extreme  diffidence,  having  never  had  their
experiences ;  and  of  whom  I  mould  not  have  fpoken  at  all,  were
they  not  juft  now  as  much  depreciated,  as  they  were  in  paft
centuries  rated  too  highly  ;  I  mean  thofe  who  are  commonly
called  "  Myftics."  Doubtlefs,  they  are  paying  a  penalty  for  that
extravagant  adoration  which  was  beftowed  of  old  upon  the


Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.  xxxi

"  Saint."  Mankind  has  difcovered  that  much  of  what  once,  in
fuch  perfons,  feemed  moft  divine,  was  moft  painfully  human ;
that  much  of  what  feemed  moft  fupernatural,  was  but  too  de-
gradingly  natural,  the  confequences  of  difeafed  brain,  deranged
nervous  fyftem,  or  weaknefs  brought  on  by  voluntary  afcetifcifm  ;
and  fo  mankind,  angry  with  its  idols  for  having  a  flaw  anywhere,
has  darned  them  peevifhly  to  the  ground.  Would  it  not  have  been
better  to  give  up  making  idols  of  fuch  perfons,  and  to  have  ex-
amined patiently,  charitably,  and  philofophically  what  they  really
were,  and  what  they  were  not  ?  By  fo  doing,  I  believe,  men
would  have  found  that  in  thefe  myftics  and  faints,  after  all  bodily
illufions,  all  nervous  fantafies,  all  pardonable  "  confufions  between
the  objecl  and  the  fubjecl:,"  had  been  eliminated,  there  ftill  re-
mained, in  each  and  every  one  of  them,  and  not  to  be  explained
away  by  any  theory  of  difeafed  body  or  mind,  one  of  the  very
lovelieft  and  nobleft  human  characters ;  and  on  that  difcovcrv
the  queftion  muft  have  followed,  -  -  Was  that,  too,  the  pro-
duel;  of  difeafe  ?  And  to  that  there  can  be,  I  truft,  but  one
anfwer  from  the  many.  If  here  and  there  a  man  mail  be
found  daring  enough  to  affert  that  the  moft  exquifite  de-
velopments of  humanity  are  grounded  on  a  lie ;  that  its
feemingly  lovelieft  flowers  are  but  fungi  bred  of  corruption  ;  then
the  general  heart  of  mankind  will  give  their  cynicifm  the  lie,

b4


xxxii  Preface  by  the

and  anfwer,  "  Not  fo  !    this  is  too  beautiful  and  too  righteous
"  to  have  been  born  of  aught  but  God."

And  when  they  found  thefe  perfons,  whatfocver  might  be  their
"  denomination,"   all  inclined  to    claim  fome   illumination,  in-
tuition, or  direct  vifion  of  Eternal  truth,  Eternal  good,  Eternal
beauty,    even  of  that  Eternal  Father  in  whom  all  live  and  move
and  have  their  being ;  yet  making  that  claim  in  deepeft  humility,
amid  confeffions  of  their  own  weaknefs,  finfulnefs,  nothingnefs,
which  to  the  felf-fatisfied  many  feem  exaggerated  and  all  but  in-
fmcere ;   they  would  have  been,  perhaps,  more  philofophical,  as
well  as  more  charitable  ;  more  in  accordance  with  Baconian  induc-
tion, as  well  as  with  Saint  Paul's  direct  affertions  in  his  Epiftles
to  the  Corinthians,  if  they  had  faid  :   "  The  teftimony  of  fo  many
"  ifolated  perfons  to  this  fact  is  on  the  whole  a  fair  probability
"  for  its  truth ;  and  we  are  inclined   to   believe   it,    though   it
"  tranfcends  our  experience,  on  the  fame  ground  that  we  believe
"  the  united  teftimony  of  travellers  to  a  hundred  natural  wonders,
"  which  differ  as  utterly  from  anything  which  we  ever  faw,  as  do
"  thefe  fpiritual  wonders  from  anything  which  we  have  ever  felt."
And,  if  men  are  willing  (as  they  may  be  hereafter)  patiently
to  examine  the  facts  ftill  further,  they  may  poffibly  find,  in  the
very  circumftances  which  now  make  them  fcornfully  incredulous
of  "  myftic  raptures,"  a  moral  juftification  of  their  reality.


Rev.  Charles  King /ley.  xxxiii

It  will  be  found  that  thefe  "  myftics  "  are,  in  almoft  every  cafe,
perfons  who  are  fuffering  ;  perhaps  disappointed,  perhaps  lonely,
perhaps  unhealthy,  perhaps  all  three  at  once,  bereaved  of  all
focial  comfort,  and  tortured  with  difeafe.

It  is  eafy  enough  to  fay  that  fuch  perfons  are  efpecially  liable
to  melancholic  delufions,  liable  to  miftake  the  action  of  their
difeafed  nerves  for  external  apparitions  and  voices  ;  liable,  from
weaknefs  of  brain,  and  the  too  intenfe  felf-introfpection  which
difeafe  often  brings  with  it,  to  inveft  trifling  accidents  with  an
undue  importance,  and  to  regard  them  as  fupernatural  monitions.
Be  it  fo.  Myftics  in  all  ages  have  not  been  unaware  of  their
own  dangers,  their  own  liability  to  miftakes ;  and  have  tried  to
diftinguifh,  by  fuch  canons  as  their  age  afforded  them,  the  falfe
from  the  true,  the  fleihly  from  the  fpiritual.  But  meanwhile,
has  this  hypothefis  no  moral  juftice,  and  therefore  moral  pro-
bability (which  muft  always  depend  on  the  amount  of  moral
juftice  involved  in  any  given  hypothefis), — namely,  the  hypothefis
that  to  thefe  lonely  fufferers  more  was  granted  than  to  the  many,
becaufe  they  needed  more  ?  That  fome  direct  and  inward  "  beatific
"  vifion  "  of  God  was  allowed  to  them,  becaufe  they  had  no  oppor-
tunity of  gaining  any  indirect  and  outward  one  from  a  fmiling
world,  feen  in  the  light  of  a  joyful  heart  ?  There  are  thofe
who  have  health  and  ftrength,  health  and  beauty,  wife  and  child  ;


Preface  by  the


a  pad  which  it  is  pleafant  to  remember,  and  a  future  which  it  is
pleafant  to  work  out.  Such  find  no  difficulty  in  faying  that  God
is  Love  ;  that  God  cares  for  them,  and  His  mercy  is  over  all  His
works.  But  if  they  had  lain,  and  lain  perhaps  from  childhood,  in
the  loweft  deep,  in  the  place  of  darknefs,  and  of  storm,  while
lover  and  friend  were  hid  away  from  them,  and  they  fat  upon
the  parching  rock,  like  Rizpah,  the  daughter  of  Aiah,  be-
fide  the  corpfes  of  their  dead  fbns,  dead  hopes,  dead  health,
dead  love,  as  on  a  ghaftly  battle-field,  ftript  among  the  dead,
like  thofe  who  are  wounded,  and  cut  away  from  God's  hand  ;
if  they  had  ftruggled  in  the  horrible  mire  of  perplexity,  and  felt
all  God's  billows  and  waves  go  over  them,  till  they  were  weary
of  crying,  and  their  throats  were  dry,  and  their  fight  failed  them
with  watching  fo  long  for  their  God,  and  all  the  faith  and
prayer  which  was  left  them  was  :  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  foul
"  in  hell,  neither  fuffer  Thy  holy  one  to  fee  corruption"  —  If  all
this  —  or  lefs  than  this  had  come  upon  them  ;  then  they  might
have  felt  it  not  altogether  fo  eafy  to  fay  that  God  is  Love.  They,
too,  might  have  longed  for  fome  inward  proof,  fbme  token  which
tranfcends  all  argument,  that  though  they  go  down  to  hell,  God
is  there  ;  that  in  their  moft  utter  doubt  and  darknefs,  and  defola-
tion,  all  is  well  ;  for  they  dwell  in  God,  and  God  in  them.
They  might  have  longed  for  it  :  and  God  might  have  been  juft


Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.  xxxv

and  merciful  in  giving  it  to  them  ;  as  He  may  have  been  in
giving  it  already  to  thoufands,  who  by  no  other  means  could
have  been  able  to  face  the  fearful  ftorm  of  circumftances,  which
feemed  to  proclaim  the  Devil,  and  not  God,  the  matter  of  the
world.  Why  not  let  the  myftics  tell  their  own  ftory  ?  It  is
more  philofophical  after  all,  perhaps,  as  well  as  more  Scriptural,
to  believe  that  "  wifdom  is  juftified  of  all  her  children/'

As  for  the  impoffibility  of  fuch  a  direct  aflurance,  it  is  an
aflertion  too  filly  to  be  feriously  anfwered  in  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury, which  is  revealing  weekly  wonders  in  the  natural  world,
which  would  have  feemed  impoffible  to  our  fathers.  Shall  the
natural  world,  at  every  great  ftep,  tranfcend  our  boldeft  dreams :
and  mall  the  fpiritual  world  be  limited  by  us  to  the  mereft
common  places  of  every  day  experience,  cfpecially  when  thofe
very  common  places  are  yet  utterly  unexplained  and  miraculous  ?
When  will  men  open  their  eyes  to  the  plain  axiom,  that  nothing
is  impoffible  with  God,  save  that  He  mould  tranfgrefs  His  own
nature  by  being  unjuft  and  unloving  ?

But  whether  or  not  the  popular  religion  mall  juftify  and  fatisfy
the  afpirations  of  the  myftic,  Tauler's  fermons  will  do  fo.  They
will  find  there  the  fame  fpiritual  food  which  they  have  found
already  in  St.  Bernard,  A  Kempis,  and  Madame  Guyon  ;  and
find  there  alfb,  perhaps  more  clearly  than  in  any  myftic  writer,  a


xxxvi  Preface  by  the

fafeguard  againft  the  dangers  which  fpecially  befet  them  ;  againft
the  danger  of  miftaking  their  pafling  emotions  for  real  and
abiding  love  of  good  ;  againft  exalting  any  peculiar  intuition
which  they  may  think  they  have  attained,  into  a  fource  of  felf-
glorification,  and  fancying  that  they  become  fomething,  by  the
acl:  of  confefling  themfelves  nothing.  For  with  Tauler,  whether
he  be  right  or  wrong  in  any  given  detail,  practical  righteoufnefs,
of  the  divineft  and  loftieft  kind,  is  at  once  the  object,  and  the
means,  and  the  teft,  of  all  upward  fteps.  God  is  The  fupreme
Good  which  man  is  intended  to  behold  :  but  only  by  being  in-
fpired  by  Him,  owing  all  to  Him,  and  copying  Him,  can  he  behold
Him,  and  in  that  fight  find  his  higheft  reward,  and  heaven  itfelf.

But  there  are  thofe  oppreft  by  doubts,  and  fears,  and  forrows,
very  different  from  thofe  of  which  I  have  juft  fpoken,  who  may  find
in  Tauler' s  genial  and  funny  pages  a  light  which  will  ftand  them
in  good  ftead  in  many  an  hour  of  darknefs.  There  are  thofe,
heaped  beyond  defert  with  every  earthly  blifs,  who  have  had  to
afk  themfelves,  in  awful  earneft,  the  queftion  which  all  would  fo
gladly  put  away  :  Were  I  ftripped  to-morrow  of  all  thefe  things,
to  ftand  alone  and  helplefs,  as  I  fee  thoufands  ftand,  what  mould
I  then  have  left  ?  They  may  have  been  tempted  to  anfwer,
with  Medea  in  the  tragedy  :  -

"  Che  refta  ?  .         .  lo  !  "


Rev.  Charles  King/ley.  xxxvii

But  they  have  fhrunk  from  that  defperate  felf-affertion,  as
they  felt  that,  in  the  very  aft,  they  ihould  become,  not  a
philosopher,  but,  as  Medea  did,  a  fiend.  Tremblingly  they  have
turned  to  religion  for  comfort,  under  the  glaring  eye  of  that,
dark  fpeclre  of  bereavement,  but  have  felt  about  all  common-
places, however  true,  as  Job  felt  of  old  :  "  Milerable  comforters
"  are  ye  all !  ....  Oh,  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  HIM.
"  I  would  order  my  caufe  before  Him,  and  fill  my  mouth  with
"  arguments.  I  mould  know  the  words  which  He  would  anfwer
"  me,  and  underftand  what  He  would  fay  to  me  !"

To  fiich,  Tauler  can  tell  fbmething,  though  but  a  little,  of
that  ftill  wafte,  where  a  man,  lofmg  all  things  elfe,  mall  find
himfelf  face  to  face  with  God,  and  hear  from  Him  that  which
no  man  can  utter  again  in  words,  even  to  the  wife  of  his  bofom.
A  little,  too,  though  but  a  little,  can  Tauler  tell  him  how  he
may  die  to  thofe  whom  he  loves  beft  on  earth,  that  he  may  live
to  them,  and  love  them  better  ftill,  in  the  ever-prefent  heavens ;
of  how  he  may  lofe  his  life,  and  all  perfons  and  things  which
make  his  life  worth  having,  that  he  may  find  again  all  of  them
which  God  has  indeed  created,  in  that  God  to  whom  all  live
eternally.

There  are  thofe,  too,  who  have  endured  a  ftruggle  darker
ftill ;  more  rare,  perhaps,  but  juft  as  real  as  the  laft  ;  men  on


xxxviii  Preface  by  the

whom  the  "  nothingnefs  "  of  all  created  things  had  flafhed,  not
as  a  mere  fentimental  and  exaggerative  metaphor,  but  as  a
item,  inevitable,  logical  facl: ;  who  have  felt,  if  for  a  moment,  that
perhaps  they  and  all  they  fee  and  know,  —

"  Are  but  fuch  fluff
As  dreams  are  made  of — "

who  have  hung,  if  but  for  one  moment,  felf-poifed  over
the  abyfs  of  boundlefs  doubt  ;  who  have  Ihuddered  as  they
faw,  if  but  for  a  moment,  fun,  and  hills,  and  trees,  and  the
faces  which  they  loved,  and  the  feeming-folid  earth  beneath
their  feet, — yea,  their  own  body,  flefh  and  blood, — reel,  melt,
and  vanifh,  till  nothing  was  left  of  the  whole  univerfe  but
folitary  felf  with  its  eternal  malady  of  thought ;  who  have  cried
out  of  the  loweft  deep  :  "  What  is  all  which  I  love — all  which
"  I  hate  ?  I  gaze  on  it :  but  I  fee  not  it,  but  a  picture  on  my  own
"  eyeball.  I  clutch  it  in  defpair  :  but  I  feel  not  it,  but  the  nerves
"  of  my  own  finger-tip  :  if,  indeed,  eyeball  and  finger-tip  be  not,
"  like  the  reft,  phantoms  of  a  homelefs  mind,  and  the  only
"  certain  exiftence  in  the  univerfe  is  I — and  that  I  at  war  with
"  myfelf,  felf-difcontented,  felf-defpifing,  and  felf-damned."

That  problem  Tauler  will  folve  for  no  man ;  for  he  will  fay
that  each  man  muft  folve  it  for  himfelf,  face  to  face  with  God
alone :  but  he  can  tell  how  he  folved  it  for  himfelf ;  how


Rev.  Charles  King/ley.  xxxix

he  came  to  find  an  eternal  light  filming  in  for  ever  in  that  utter
darknefs,  which  the  darknefs  could  not  comprehend  ;  an  eternal
ground  in  the  midft  of  that  abyfs,  which  belonged  not  to  the
abyfs,  nor  to  the  outward  world  which  had  vanifhed  for  the
moment,  nor  to  fpace,  nor  time,  nor  any  category  of  hu-
man thought,  or  mortal  exiftence  ;  and  that  its  fubftance  was  the
Everlafting  Perfonal  Good,  whofe  Love  is  Righteoufnefs.  Tauler
can  point  out  the  path  by  which  he  and  others  came  to  fee  that
Light,  to  find  that  Rock  of  Ages  ; — the  fimple  path  of  honeft
felf-knowledge,  felf-renunciation,  felf-reftraint,  in  which  every
upward  ftep  towards  right  expofes  fbme  frefh  depth  of  inward  fin-
fulnefs,  till  the  once  proud  man,  crumed  down,  like  Job  and  Paul,
by  the  fenfe  of  his  own  infinite  meannefs,  becomes,  like  them,
a  little  child  once  more,  and  carts  himfelf  {imply  upon  the  gene-
rofity  of  Him  who  made  him  : —

"  An  infant  crying  in  the  night ;
An  infant  crying  for  the  light,
And  with  no  language  but  a  cry."

And  then,  fo  Tauler  will  tell  him,  there  may  come  to  him  the
vifion,  dim,  perhaps,  and  fitting  ill  into  clumfy  words,  but
clearer,  furer,  nearer  to  him  than  the  ground  on  which  he  treads,
or  than  the  foot  which  treads  it — the  vifion  of  an  Everlafting
Spiritual  Subftance,  Moft  Human  and  yet  Moft  Divine,  who


*1  Preface  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Kingjley.

can  endure ;  and  who,  {landing  beneath  all  things,  can  make
their  fpiritual  fubftance  endure  likewife,  though  all  worlds  and
aeons,  birth,  and  growth,  and  death,  matter,  and  fpace,  and  time,
fhould  melt  in  very  deed,—

"And,  like  the  bafelefs  fabric  of  a  vifion,
Leave  not  a  rack  behind  "

If  there  be  any  to  whom  thefe  fentences  mall  feem  merely  an
enigmatic  verbiage,  darkening  counfel  by  words  without  know-
ledge, I  can  only  beg  them  not  to  look  at  Tauler's  wifdom
through  my  folly ;  his  siccum  lumen  through  my  glare  and  fmoke.
As  I  faid  at  firft,  he  needs  no  Preface.  There  are  thofe  who
will  comprehend  him  without  comment.  There  are  thofe,  alfb,
who  will  rife  up  and  follow  him,  and  his  Matter.


J


The  Hiftory  and  Life
OF  THE

REVEREND  DOCTOR  JOHN    TAULER.


FIRST  CHAPTER.


N  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1340,  it  came  to
pafs,  that  a  Mailer  in  Holy  Scripture
preached  ofttimes  in  a  certain  city,  and
the  people  loved  to  hear  him,  and  his
teachings  were  the  talk  of  the  country  for  many
leagues  round.  Now  this  came  to  the  ears  of  a  lay-
man who  was  rich  in  God's  grace,  and  he  was  warned
three  times  in  his  fleep  that  he  mould  go  to  the  city
where  the  Matter  dwelt,  and  hear  him  preach.  Now
that  city  was  in  another  country,  more  than  thirty


How  a  cer-
tain learned
Majier
taught  in  the
cityofStraf-
bourg.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


How  a  cer-
tain man,
being  warned
in  a  dream,
came  to  him
and  beard
him  preach.


How  the  man
loved  the
Mafter,  and
entreated  bint
for  further
inftruftion.


leagues  diftant.  Then  the  man  thought  within  him-
fclf,  "  I  will  go  thither  and  wait  to  fee  what  God  is
purpofcd  to  do  or  bring  to  pafs  there."  So  he  came
to  that  city  and  heard  the  Matter  preach  five  times.
Then  God  gave  this  man  to  perceive  that  the  Matter
was  a  very  loving,  gentle,  good-hearted  man  by  nature,
and  had  a  good  underftanding  of  the  Holy  Scripture,
but  was  dark  as  to  the  light  of  grace  ;  and  the  man's
heart  did  yearn  over  him,  and  he  went  to  the  Mafter
and  faid,  "  Dear  and  honoured  Sir,  I  have  travelled
a  good  thirty  leagues  on  your  account,  to  hear  your
teaching.  Now  I  have  heard  you  preach  five  times,
and  I  pray  you  in  God's  name  to  let  me  make  my
confeflion  to  you/'  The  Mafter  anfwered,  "  With
all  my  heart."  Then  the  man  confeiTed  to  the  Mafter
in  all  fimplicity,  and  when  he  defired  to  receive  the
Lord's  Body,  the  Mafter  gave  it  him.  When  this  had
lafted  twelve  weeks,  the  man  faid  to  the  Mafter,  "  Dear
Sir,  I  beg  you  for  God's  fake  to  preach  us  a  fermon,
mowing  us  how  a  man  may  attain  to  the  higheft  and
utmoft  point  it  is  given  to  us  to  reach  in  this  prefent
time."  The  Mafter  anfwered,  "  Ah  !  dear  fon,  what
doft  thou  afk  for  ?  how  mall  I  tell  thee  of  fuch  high
things  ?  for  I  ween  thou  wrouldft  underftand  but  little
thereof."  But  the  man  faid,  "  Ah  !  dear  Mafter,  even
though  I  mould  underftand  little  or  nothing  thereof,


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  Tauler*


yet  I  cannot  but  thirft  after  it.  Multitudes  flock  to
hear  you ;  if  there  were  only  one  among  them  all  who
could  underftand  you, your  labour  were  well  beftowed."
Then  faid  the  Matter,  "  Dear  fon,  if  I  am  to  do  as
thou  fayeft,  I  muft  needs  give  fome  ftudy  and  labour  to
the  matter  before  I  can  put  fuch  a  fermon  together/'
But  the  man  would  not  ceafe  from  his  prayers  and
entreaties  till  the  Mafter  promifed  him  that  he  mould
have  his  defire.

So,  when  the  Mafter  had  finimed  his  fermon,  he
announced  to  the  people  that  in  three  days  they
mould  come  together  again,  for  he  had  been  requefted
to  teach  how  a  man  could  attain  to  the  Higheft  and
Beft  and  neareft  to  God  that  might  be  reached  in  this
prefent  time.  And  when  the  day  was  come,  much
people  came  to  the  church,  and  the  man  fat  down  in
a  place  where  he  could  hear  well ;  and  the  Mafter
came,  and  thus  began  his  difcourfe,  and  faid  :


How  the
Majler,  being
much  en-
treated of  the
man,  promijed
to  preach  on
the  bigbeft
good  of  man.


R2


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


SECOND  CHAPTER.


In  t be  following  gracious  Sermon,  twenty-four  articles  are  rebearfed
whereby  a  man  may  perceive  wbo  are  the  proper,  true,  reafonable,
enlightened,  contemplative  men ;  and  what  fort  of  man  It  Is  to
whom  Chrlfl  may  well  fpeak  tbefe  words :  Ecce  vere  Ifraelita  in
quo  dolus  non  eft — Lo  !  see  a  true  beholder  of  God  in  whom  Is
no  guile  (JOHN,  i.  47).


The  Maker's
fermon.


EAR  children,  I  have  much  to  fay  to  you
in  this  fermon  concerning  thofe  things  of
which  I  have  promifed  to  fpeak ;  where-
fore I  cannot  for  this  time  expound  the
gofpel  of  the  day  to  you  as  is  my  wont,  neither  mall
I  fpeak  much  Latin  in  this  fermon  ;  for  what  I  have
to  fay,  I  will  prove  with  Holy  Scripture  [and  he  faid]  :
"  Dear  children,  I  would  have  you  to  know  that  there
be  many  men,  who  indeed  attain  to  a  clear  under-
ftanding  and  reafonable  judgment,  but  who  do  this  by
means  of  images  and  forms  through  the  help  of  other
men,  and  without  the  Scriptures.  Further,  there  be
found  many  who,  when  they  mark  that  fomething  is
known  to  them  through  the  Scriptures,  are  not  there-
with content.  Such  a  man  is  ftill  far  from  his  higheft


The  Revere?id  Doctor  John  T aider,


and  greateft  good.  Dear  children,  if  a  man  had  broken
through  thefe  things,  and  was  become  dead  to  them,
and  had  got  above  forty  ftages  of  contemplation,  and
above  the  conceptions  of  our  reafbn,  whether  they
come  to  us  through  images  or  forms  of  fpeech — if
there  were  a  man  who  had  come  to  this,  he  would  be
dearer  and  more  precious  in  God's  fight  than  a  hundred
thoufand  men  who  never  get  out  of  their  own  felf,
and  live  after  the  way  of  their  own  choofmg;  for  to
fuch  God  cannot  find  entrance,  nor  work  in  their
fouls.  This  all  comes  of  their  own  will,  and  their  felf-
glorifying  folly,  which  takes  delight  in  the  dexterity
of  their  own  reafbn,  in  framing  and  handling  concep-
tions. But  thofe  men  who  while  on  earth  have  broken
through  thefe  things,  and  have  given  themfelves  to
God  in  fuch  fort  that  they  have  died  unto  themfelves,
and  have  both  made  themfelves  free  from  all  outward
forms,  and  the  ufe  of  feniible  images  in  their  exercifes
of  contemplation,  and  humbly  toiled  and  prefTed  on-
wards above  the  images  of  mere  reafon,  as  Dionyfms
lays,  "  the  light  of  faith  requires  that  a  man  fhould
be  raifed  above  the  apprehenfions  of  reafon  ;"•  —  know,
dear  children,  that  in  fuch  fouls  God  doth  find  reft,
and  a  place  wherein  to  dwell  and  to  work  when  He
choofeth.  Now  when  God  findeth  thus  no  hindrance
in  fuch  a  man,  He  works  His  own  works  in  him,  and

B3


Of  the  foul
that  is  pre-
cious in  GOO"J
Jigbt,  having
become  that
which  He
would  have
all  intelligent
fpirits  to  be.


The  Hlftory  and  Life  of


Of  the  hin-
drances why
there  be  Jew
of fucb  fouls.


Of  the  tokens
whereby  fuch
may  be  known.


draweth  him  truly  to  Himfelf  in  Himfelf.  Now  know
that  fuch  a  man  is  rare,  for  his  life  and  ways  arc  hidden
from  others,  and  unknown  to  them,  except  to  fuch  as
have  a  like  life,  of  whom,  alas  !  I  fear  there  be  but  few.
To  this  ftate,  and  this  noble  perfe&nefs,  none  can
come  except  through  boundlefs  humility,  an  unclouded
understanding,  and  a  clear  reafon  ;  for  it  has  happened
ere  now  that  fome  great  dodlors  and  priefts  have  fallen ;
and  a  multitude  of  rational  fpirits  belonging  to  the
angelic  hofts,  who  perceived  nothing  elfe  in  their
nature  and  effence  but  mere  reafon,  have  erred  hence,
and  fallen  everlaftingly  away  from  eternal  truth.
And  this  is  what  happens  ftill  to  all  thofe  who  look  to
their  own  reafon,  and  want  to  be  and  do  as  God  by
the  light  of  their  felf-willed  underftanding.  For  which
reafon  it  is  profitable  and  needful  to  know  who  are  the
proper,  truly  reafonable,  enlightened,  contemplative
men.  Now  as  far  as  I  can  find  from  Scripture,  there
are  four-and-twenty  tokens  which  fuch  a  man  muft
poflefs.

The  Firft  is  given  us  by  the  higheft  Mafter  of  all
doctors,  arts  and  wifdom,  namely,  our  Lord  Jefus
Chrift,  wThen  he  fays  :  "  Hereby  mall  ye  know  whether
ye  be  my  difciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  to  another  even
as  I  have  loved  you."  As  much  as  to  fay,  '  Though
ye  mould  poflTefs  arts  and  wifdom,  and  high  underftand-


ing,  it  is  all  in  vain  if  ye  have  not  withal  fidelity  and
love/  We  believe  that  Balaam  was  fo  replete  with
understanding,  that  he  perceived  what  things  God
purpofed  to  do  or  reveal  hundreds  of  years  after  his
day;  but  it  availed  him  nothing,  forafmuch  as  he  did
not  cleave  with  love  and  loyalty  to  the  things  which
he  underftood.

The  Second  mark  appertaining  to  a  truly  reafonable,
enlightened  man  is  that  he  muft  become  empty  of
felf;  and  this  muft  not  make  him  proud,  but  he
mall  consider  how  he  may  ever  more  attain  to  this
freedom,  and  fit  loofe  by  all  creatures.

The  Third  Article  :  He  mall  refign  himfelf  utterly
to  God,  that  God  may  work  His  own  works  in  him,
and  he  fhall  not  glory  in  the  works  as  being  his  own,
but  always  think  himfelf  too  mean  to  have  done
them.

The  Fourth  Article  :  He  fhall  go  out  from  him-
felf in  all  the  things  in  which  he  is  wont  to  feck  and
find  himfelf,  whether  belonging  to  time  or  to  eternity,
and  by  fo  doing  he  fhall  win  a  true  increafe.

Fifth  Article :  He  fhall  not  feek  his  own  ends  in
any  creature,  whether  temporal  or  eternal,  and  hereby
he  fhall  attain  to  perfect  fatisfaction  and  content.

The  Sixth  Article :  He  fhall  always  wait  on  that
which  God  will  have  him  to  do,  and  mall  try,  with

B4


That  the  fir -ft
and  cbiefeft
token  is  love.


Offelf-re-
nunciation.


Of  refigna-
tion.


Of  poverty  of
fpirit.


Of  true  con-
tent.


Of  waiting
on  God*


8


The  Hiftory  and  Life  of


That  be  mujl
give  up  his
will  to  God's
will,

And  bend  all
bis  powers  to
work  with
God.


Of  feeing  God
in  all  things,


And  receiving
all  from  Him.


Of  freedom
from  the
creature.


Ofjteadfaft-
nefs  in  the
truth.


the  help  of  God,  to  fulfil  that  to  the  uttermoft,
and  mail  take  no  glory  to  himfelf  therefor.

The  Seventh  Article :  He  lhall  daily,  without
ceafing,  give  up  his  will  to  the  will  of  God,  and
endeavour  to  will  nothing  but  what  God  willeth.

The  Eighth  Article :  He  mall  bend  all  his  powers
into  iubmiffion  to  God,  and  exercife  them  fo  con-
ftantly  and  fo  ftrenuoufly  in  God,  and  with  fuch
power  and  love,  that  God  may  wrork  nothing  in  him
without  his  active  concurrence,  and  he  may  do
nothing  without  God.

The  Ninth  Article :  He  mail  have  the  fenfe  of  the
prefence  of  God  in  all  His  works,  at  all  times,  and
in  all  places,  whatever  it  pleafe  God  to  appoint,
whether  it  be  fweet  or  bitter.

The  Tenth  Article :  All  his  pleafure  and  pain  he
lhall  receive,  not  as  from  the  creature,  but  from  God ;
howbeit  God  ofttimes  works  through  the  creature,
yet  he  lhall  receive  all  things  as  from  God  alone.

Eleventh  Article :  He  lhall  not  be  led  captive  by
any  lufting  or  defire  after  the  creatures  without  due
neceflity.

The  Twelfth  Article :  No  contradiction  or  milhap
lhall  have  power  to  move  or  conftrain  him  fo  that  it
feparate  him  from  the  truth ;  therefore  hold  faft
always  and  entirely  by  the  fame.


The  Reverend  Doctor  Joh?i  Tender,


Thirteenth  Article :  He  fhall  not  be  deceived  by
the  glory  of  the  creature,  nor  yet  by  any  falfe
light,  but  in  a  fpirit  of  kindnefs  and  love  he  fhall
confefs  all  things  to  be  what  they  are,  and  from  all
things  draw  out  what  is  beft,  and  ufe  it  to  his  own
improvement,  and  in  no  wife  to  his  own  detriment ;
for  fuch  a  courfe  is  a  certain  fign  of  the  prefence  of
the  Holy  Spirit.

Fourteenth  Article:  He  fhall  at  all  times  be  equipped
and  armed  with  all  virtue,  and  ready  to  fight  againft
all  vice  and  fin,  and  with  his  good  weapons  he  mall
obtain  the  victory  and  the  prize  in  all  conflicts.

Fifteenth  Article  :  He  mall  confefs  the  truth  in  fim-
plicity,  and  he  fhall  mark  what  it  is  in  itfelf,  what  God
requireth  of  us,  and  what  is  poflible  to  man,  and  then
order  his  life  accordingly,  and  acl:  up  to  what  he  con-
fefTes.

The  Sixteenth  Article :  He  fhall  be  a  man  of
few  words  and  much  inward  life.

The  Seventeenth  Article :  He  fhall  be  blamelefs
and  righteous,  but  in  no  wife  be  puffed  up  by  reason
of  the  fame.

The  Eighteenth  Article :  His  converfation  fhall  be
in  all  uprightnefs  and  fincerity ;  thus  he  fhall  let  his
light  fhine  before  men,  and  he  fhall  preach  more  with
his  life  than  with  his  lips.


Ofwifdom
to  dijcern
between  good
and  evil.


Of  courage
and  virtue.


Of  wifdom
to  know
what  is  ex-
pedient.


Of  modera-
tion,

BlameleJ/nefi,


Andjineeritj.


10


The  Hiftory  and  Life  of


Qffinglenefs
of  eye.

Of  docility
and  gentle-
nefs.


Ofthankful-
nefi.


That  all  this
is  worth
nought  if  be
have  not  true
humility,


And  follow
our  Lord  in
all  things,


The  Nineteenth  Article :  He  fhall  feek  the  glory
of  God  before  all  things,  and  have  no  other  aim  in  view.

The  Twentieth  Article :  He  fhall  be  willing  to
take  reproof;  and  when  he  ftriveth  with  any  he  fhall
give  way  if  the  matter  concern  himfelf  alone,  and
not  God.

The  Twenty-firft  Article :  He  mall  not  defire  or
feek  his  own  advantage,  but  think  himfelf  unworthy
of  the  leaft  thing  that  falls  to  his  lot.

The  Twenty-second  Article  :  He  fhall  look  upon
himfelf  as  the  leaft  wife  and  worthy  man  upon  earth,
yet  find  in  himfelf  great  faith ;  and  above  all  he  fhall
take  no  account  of  his  own  wifdom  and  the  works
of  his  own  reafon,  but  humble  himfelf  beneath  all
For  the  Author  of  all  truth  will  not  work  a


men.


fupernatural  work  in  the  foul,  unlefs  He  find  a
thorough  humility  in  a  man,  and  go  before  his  doings
with  his  perfect  grace,  as  he  did  with  St.  Paul.  But
I  fear,  alas !  that  little  heed  is  taken  to  this  in  thefe
our  days.

The  Twenty-third  Article :  He  fhall  fet  the  life
and  precepts  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  before  him  for
a  pattern  to  his  life,  words,  and  works,  and  without
ceafing  look  at  himfelf  therein  as  in  a  mirror,  that,  in
fo  far  as  he  is  able,  he  may  put  off  everything  un-
becoming the  honoured  image  of  our  Lord.


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  Tender,


ii


The  Twenty-fourth  and  laft  Article  is :  He  fhall
comport  himfelf  as  a  man  of  fmall  account, — as
nothing  more  than  a  beginner  in  a  good  life ;  and
though  he  mould  therefore  be  defpifed  by  many,  it
fhall  be  more  welcome  to  him  than  all  the  favour  of
the  world.

Now,  dear  children,  thefe  are  the  figns  that  the
ground  of  a  man's  foul  is  truly  reafonable,  fo  that  the
image  of  all  truth  fhineth  and  teacheth  therein  ;  and
he  who  does  not  bear  in  himfelf  thefe  figns,  may  not
and  muft  not  fet  any  ftore  by  his  own  reafon,  either
in  his  own  eyes  or  thofe  of  others.  That  we  all  may
become  fuch  a  true  image,  in  thorough  iincerity  and
perfect  humility,  may  He  help  us  who  is  the  Eternal
Truth,  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft.  Amen  !


And  count
himfelf  at  laft
not  to  have
apprehended.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


THIRD   CHAPTER.


How  this  pious  man  privately  reveals  to  the  doctor  in  part  his  own
bidden  bolinefs,  and  convitts  the  Majker  that  he  is  Jlill  walking
in  the  night  of  ignorance,  and  has  an  unclean  veffel,  and  there-
fore is  yet  a  Pharifee.


The  man
writetb  out
the  Maker's
fermon,  and
bringetb  it  to
the  Mafter.


HEN  this  fermon  was  ended,  the  man  went
home  to  his  lodging,  and  wrote  it  down
word  for  word  as  the  Mafter  had  fpoken
it.  And  when  he  had  flnimed  he  went
to  the  Mafter,  and  faid,  "  I  have  written  out  your
fermon,  and  if  it  be  not  troublefome  I  mould  like  to
read  it  to  you."  The  Mafter  replied,  "  I  mail  be
glad  to  hear  it."  Thereupon  the  man  read  the  fer-
mon over,  and  then  faid  to  the  Mafter,  "  Dear  fir,
pray  tell  me  if  there  be  a  word  wanting,  that  if  fo  I
may  fet  it  down."  The  Mafter  faid,  "  Dear  fon,
thou  haft  written  every  word  and  phrafe  juft  as  it
came  out  of  my  mouth.  I  tell  thee,  if  any  one  would
give  me  much  money  for  it,  I  could  not  write  down
every  word  fo  exadly  as  thou  haft  done  it  here,  unlefs
I  fet  to  afrefh  to  draw  it  from  the  Scripture.  I  con-
fefs  that  I  am  greatly  aftonilhed  at  thee  to  think  that


The  Revere?id  Doctor  Jo/in  T aider,


thou  haft  been  concealed  from  me  fo  long,  and  I
mould  never  have  perceived  how  full  of  wit  thou  art,
and  fo  often  as  thou  haft  confefled  to  me,  thou  fhouldft
fo  have  hidden  thy  talent  that  I  have  never  perceived
it  in  thee."  Then  the  man  made  as  though  he  would
depart,  and  faid,  "  Dear  Mafter,  if  God  will  I  am
purpofed  to  go  home  again. "  But  the  Mafter  faid,
"  Dear  fon,  what  fhouldft  thou  do  at  home  ?  Thou
haft  neither  wife  nor  child  to  provide  for  ;  thou  muft
eat  there  as  well  as  here  :  for  if  God  will,  I  am
minded  to  preach  again  of  a  perfect  life."  Then  faid
the  man,  "  Dear  Mafter,  you  muft  know  that  I  have
not  come  hither  for  the  fake  of  your  preaching,  but
becaufe  I  thought,  with  God's  help,  to  give  you  Ibme
good  counfel."  Quoth  the  Mafter,  "  How  fhouldft
thou  give  counfel,  who  art  but  a  layman,  and  under-
ftandeft  not  the  Scriptures ;  and  it  is,  moreover,  not
thy  place  to  preach  if  thou  wouldft.  Stay  here  a  little
longer  ;  perchance  God  will  give  me  to  preach  fuch  a
fermon  as  thou  wouldft  care  to  hear/'  Then  the  man
faid,  "  Dear  Mafter,  I  would  fain  fay  fomewhat  to
you,  but  I  fear  that  you  wrould  be  difpleafed  to  hear
it."  But  the  Mafter  anfwered,  "  Dear  fon,  fay  what
thou  wilt ;  I  can  anfwer  for  it  that  I  mall  take  it  in
good  part."  Hereupon  the  man  faid,  "  You  are  a
great  clerk,  and  have  taught  us  a  good  leflbn  in  this


The  Mafter
is  aftonijbed
at  bis  wifdom.


The  man
offer etb  the
Mafter  good
counfel,  but
the  Mafter  >
feeing  be  is
but  a  layman,
receivetb  it
not  at  fir  ft*


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


Tbe  man
Jbowetb  him
that  be  bim-
felf,  though
be  be  not
learned,  is
taught  of  a
Majier  who
is  above  all
Doflors.


Then  the
Mafter  pray-
etb  him  to
abide  with
him,  and  to
J'peak  what-
ever is  in  bis
mind.


fcrmon,  but  you  yourfclf  do  not  live  according  to  it ;
yet  you  try  to  pcrfuadc  me  to  flay  here  that  you  may
preach  me  yet  another  fermon.  Sir,  I  give  you  to
know  that  neither  your  fermons,  nor  any  outward
words  that  man  can  fpeak,  have  power  to  work  any
good  in  me,  for  man's  words  have  in  many  ways  hin-
dered me  much  more  than  they  have  helped  me.
And  this  is  the  reafon  :  it  often  happened  that  when
I  came  away  from  the  fermon,  I  brought  certain  falfe
notions  away  with  me,  which  I  hardly  got  rid  of  in  a
long  while  with  great  toil ;  but  if  the  highcft  Teacher
of  all  truth  mall  come  to  a  man,  he  muft  be  empty
and  quit  of  all  the  things  of  time.  Know  ye  that
when  this  fame  Mafter  cometh  to  me,  He  teaches
me  more  in  an  hour  than  you  or  all  the  doctors  from
Adam  to  the  Judgment  Day  will  ever  do."  Then
faid  the  Mafter,  "  Dear  fon,  ftay  here,  I  pray  thee,
and  celebrate  the  Lord's  Death  with  me."  Whereon
the  man  anfwered,  "  Seeing  that  you  adjure  me  fo
folemnly,  it  may  be  that,  in  obedience  to  God,  I
ought  to  ftay  with  you ;  but  I  will  not  do  it  unlcfs
you  promife  to  receive  all  that  I  have  faid  to  you,  and
all  I  may  yet  fay  to  you,  as  under  the  feal  of  con-
feflion,  fo  that  none  may  know  of  it."  Quoth  the
Mafter  :  "  Dear  fon,  that  I  willingly  promife,  if  only
that  thou  wilt  ftay  here."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Sir,


The  Reverend  Doftor  John  Tauler.


yc  muft  know,  that  though  you  have  taught  us  many
good  things  in  this  fermon,  the  image  came  into  my
mind  while  you  were  preaching,  that  it  was  as  if  one
lliould  take  good  wine  and  mix  it  with  lees,  fo  that  it
grew  muddy."  Quoth  the  Matter  :  "  Dear  fon,  what
doft  thou  mean  by  this  ?"  The  man  faid,  "  I  mean
that  your  veflel  is  unclean,  and  much  lees  are  cleaving
to  it,  and  the  caufe  is,  that  you  have  fuffcrcd  yourfelf
to  be  killed  by  the  letter,  and  are  killing  yourfelf  ftill
every  day  and  hour,  albeit  you  yourfelf  know  full
well  that  the  Scripture  faith,  '  The  letter  killcth,  but
the  Spirit  giveth  life.'  Know,  that  fame  letter  which
now  killeth  you  will  make  you  alive  again,  if  fb  be
you  are  willing ;  but  in  the  life  you  are  now  living,
know  that  you  have  no  light,  but  you  arc  in  the
night,  in  which  you  are  indeed  able  to  underltand  the
letter,  but  have  not  yet  tailed  the  fweetnefs  of  the
Holy  Ghoft ;  and,  withal,  you  are  yet  a  Pharifee."
Then  faid  the  Mailer,  "  Dear  fon,  I  would  have  thee
to  know  that,  old  as  I  am,  I  have  never  been  fpokcn
to  in  fuch  fafhion  all  my  life."  The  man  faid,
"  Where  is  your  preaching  now  ?  Do  you  fee  now
what  you  are  when  you  arc  brought  to  the  proof?
And  although  you  think  that  I  IKIM-  fpoken  too
hardly  to  you,  you  arc  in  truth  guilty  of  all  I  ha\c
laid,  and  I  will  prove  to  you  from  your  own  felf  that


The  man
tellftb  him
plainly  of  bis
ignorance.


71>f  Mafter
is  angered  for
a  moment*


i6


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


Then  the  man
provetb  to  the
Majler  from
bis  anger  that
be  is  a  Pba-
rifee,  and  is
yet  trujling
in  bimfelf.


it  is  true."  Then  faid  the  Matter,  "  I  aik  for  no
more,  for  I  have  ever  been  an  enemy  to  all  Pharifees."
Quoth  the  man,  "  I  will  firft  tell  you  how  it  is  that
the  letter  is  killing  you.  Dear  fir,  as  you  know  your-
felf,  when  you  were  arrived  at  the  age  to  underiland
good  and  evil,  you  began  to  learn  the  letter,  and  in  fo
doing  you  fought  your  own  welfare,  and  to  this  day
you  are  in  the  fame  mind ;  that  is  to  fay,  you  are
trufting  to  your  learning  and  parts,  and  you  do  not
love  and  intend  God  alone,  but  you  are  in  the  letter,
and  intend  and  feek  yourfelf,  and  not  the  glory  of
God,  as  the  Scripture  teacheth  us  to  do.  You  have  a
leaning  towards  the  creatures,  and  fpecially  towards
one  creature,  and  love  that  creature  with  your  whole
heart  above  meafure,  and  that  is,  moreover,  the  caufe
why  the  letter  killeth  you.  And  whereas  I  faid  that
your  veffel  is  unclean  ;  that  is  alfo  true,  inafmuch  as
you  have  not  in  all  things  a  fingle  eye  to  God.  If
you  look  into  yourfelf,  you  will,  for  one  thing,  find  it
out  by  the  vanity  and  love  of  carnal  eafe  whereby  your
veffel  is  fpoiled  and  filled  with  lees ;  wherefore,  when
the  pure  unmixed  wine  of  godly  doctrine  has  gone
through  this  unclean  veffel,  it  comes  to  pafs  that  your
teaching  is  without  favour,  and  brings  no  grace  to  pure,
loving  hearts.  And  whereas  I  further  faid  that  you
were  {till  in  darknefs,  and  had  not  the  true  light ;


The  Reverend  DoEtor  John  Tauler.


this  is  alfo  true,  and  it  may  be  feen  hereby  that  fo
few  receive  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through  your
teaching.  And  whereas  I  faid  that  you  were  a  Pha-
rifee,  that  is  alfo  true ;  but  you  are  not  one  of  the
hypocritical  Pharifees.  Was  it  not  a  mark  of  the
Pharifees  that  they  loved  and  fought  themfelves  in  all
things,  and  not  the  glory  of  God  ?  Now  examine
yourfelf,  dear  fir,  and  fee  if  you  are  not  a  proper  Pha-
rifee  in  the  eyes  of  God.  Know,  dear  Mailer,  that
there  are  many  people  in  the  world  who  are  all  called
Pharifees  in  God's  fight,  be  they  great  or  fmall,  ac-
cording to  what  their  hearts  or  lives  are  bent  upon."

As  the  man  fpoke  thefe  words  the  Matter  fell  on
his  neck  and  kifled  him,  and  faid :  "  A  likenefs  has
come  into  my  mind.  It  has  happened  to  me  as  it
did  to  the  heathen  woman  at  the  well.  For  know,
dear  fon,  that  thou  haft  laid  bare  all  my  faults  before
my  eyes  ;  thou  haft  told  me  what  I  had  hidden  up
within  me,  and  fpecially  that  I  have  an  affection  for
one  creature ;  but  I  tell  thee  of  a  truth  that  I  knew
it  not  myfelf,  nor  do  I  believe  that  any  human  being
in  the  world  can  know  of  it.  I  wonder  greatly  who
can  have  told  thee  this  of  me  ?  But  doubt  not  that
thou  haft  it  from  God.  Now,  therefore,  I  pray  thee,
dear  fon,  that  thou  celebrate  our  Lord's  Death,  and
be  thou  my  ghoftly  father,  and  let  me  be  thy  poor


How  the
Mafter  fnd-
etb  a  likenefs
in  bimfelf  to
the  Woman
of  Samaria.


i8


77/6"  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


He prayetb        fmful  fon."      Then  faid  the  man,   "Dear  fir,  if  you

the  man  for

counfel,pro-  fpcak  lo  contrary  to  ordinances,  I  will  not  itay
with  you,  but  ride  home  again  ;  that  I  afTure  you."
Hereupon  faid  the  Mailer,  "  Ah,  no  !  I  pray  thee,  for
God's  fake,  do  not  fo  ;  flay  awhile  with  me ;  I  pro-
mife  thee  readily  not  to  fpeak  thus  any  more.  I  am
minded,  with  God's  help,  to  begin  a  better  courfe,
and  I  will  gladly  follow  thy  counfel,  whatfoever  thou
deemeft  beft,  if  I  may  but  amend  my  life."  Then
faid  the  man,  "  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  that  the
letter  and  learning  lead  many  great  doctors  aftray,
and  bring  fome  into  purgatory  and  fome  into  hell,
according  as  their  life  here  hath  been, — I  tell  you  of
a  truth,  it  is  no  light  matter  that  God  mould  give  a
man  fuch  great  underftanding  and  fkill,  and  mattery
in  the  Scripture,  and  he  mould  not  put  it  in  practice
in  his  life.''


The  Reverend  Doctor  JoJm  Tauter.


FOURTH    CHAPTER.


How  God  had  wrought  a  great  miracle  through  this  pious  man,  and
how  this  had  come  to  pafs  hecaufe  God  found  in  him  a  good  and
thorough  humility.


HEN  faid  the  Mafter,  "  I  pray  thee,  for
God's  fake,  to  tell  me  how  it  is  that  thou
haft  attained  to  fuch  a  life,  and  how  thou
^^J  didft  begin  thy  fpiritual  life,  and  what
have  been  thy  exercifes  and  thy  hiftory."  The  man
faid,  "  That  is,  indeed,  a  fimple  requeft  :  for  I  tell
you  truly,  if  I  mould  recount,  or  write,  all  the  won-
drous dealings  of  God  with  me,  a  poor  finner,  for  the
laft  twelve  years,  I  verily  believe  that  you  have  not  a
book  large  enough  to  contain  it  if  it  were  all  written  ;
however,  I  will  tell  you  fomewhat  thereof  for  this
time.

"  The  firft  thing  that  helped  me  was,  that  God
found  in  me  a  fincere  and  utterly  felf-furrendering
humility.  Now  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  need  to
tell  you  the  bodily  exercifes  by  which  I  brought  my
flem  into  fubjeclion :  for  men's  natures  and  difpofi-
tions  are  very  unlike  ;  but  whenever  a  man  has  gi\cn

c  2


The  man
telletb  fome-
vibat  of  bh
bi/lory  to  the
Majter.


20


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


How  be  be-
gan toitb  true
humility.


How  be  tried
to  follow  the
example  of
tbe  Saints.


himfelf  up  to  God  with  utter  humility,  God  will  not
fail  to  give  him  fuch  exercifes,  by  temptations  and
other  trials,  as  He  perceives  to  be  profitable  to  the
man,  and  fuch  as  he  is  well  able  to  bear  and  endure
if  he  be  only  willing.  But  this  you  ought  to  know :
he  who  afks  counfel  of  many  people  will  be  apt  to  go
often  affray ;  for  each  one  will  point  him  to  his  own
experience.  But  ofttimes  a  man  may  exercife  him-
felf  in  a  certain  practice  which  is  good  and  profitable
to  himfelf;  while,  if  another  did  the  fame,  it  might
very  likely  be  ufelefs,  or  even  hurtful  to  him.  The
Devil  often  ftirs  up  a  man  to  praclife  great  aufterities,
writh  the  intent  that  the  man  may  grow  fick  and  in-
firm thereby,  or  weak  in  his  brain,  or  do  himfelf  fome
other  injury.

"  I  will  tell  you  how  it  befel  me  in  the  beginning.
I  was  reading  the  German  books  about  the  lives  of
the  Saints,  when  I  thought  to  myfelf,  'Thefe  were  men
who  lived  on  this  earth  as  well  as  I,  and  perhaps,  too,
had  not  finned  as  I  have.'  And  when  thefe  thoughts
came  into  my  head,  I  began  to  exercife  myfelf  in  the
life  of  the  Saints  with  fome  feverities,  but  grew  fo
fick  thereby  that  I  was  brought  to  death's  door.  And
it  came  to  pafs  one  morning  at  break  of  day,  that  I
had  exercifed  myfelf  fo  that  my  eyelids  clofed  from
very  weaknefs,  and  I  fell  aileep.  And  in  my  fleep  it


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  T aider.


was  as  though  a  voice  fpoke  to  me  and  faid,  '  Thou
foolifh   man,   if  thou   art    bent   upon    killing    thyfelf
before    thy    time,    thou  wilt  have   to  bear  a   heavy
punimment ;   but  if  thou  didft  fufFer  God  to  exercife
thee,    He   could   exercife   thee    better    than    thou  by
thyfelf,  or  with  the  Devil's  counfel/     When  I  heard
fpeak  of  the  Devil  I  awoke  in  a  great  fright,  rose  up,
and  walked  out  into  a  wood  nigh  to  the  town.    Then
I  thought  within  myfelf,  I  had  begun  thefe  exercifes
without  counfel :   I  will  go  and  tell  the  old  hermit  all
that  has  happened  to  me.    And  I  did  fo,  and  told  him
the  words  that  I  had  heard  in  my  fleep,  and  befought
him  in  God's  name  to  give  me  the  beft  counfel  he
could.      So  the  hermit  faid,   *  Thou  mull  know  that
if  I  am  to  advife,  thou   muft  firft  tell  me  all  about
thy  exercifes/      So   I   did,   and    he    faid,   '  By  whose
counfel  haft  thou  done  thefe  things  ? '  and  I  answered,
'  Of  my  own  will/     Then   the   hermit  faid,  *  Then
know  that  it  has  been  the  Devil's  counfel,  and  thou
muft  not  obey  him  any  more  as  long  as  thou  liveft,
but  thou   muft  utterly  give  thyfelf  up  to  God ;   He
can  exercife  thee  much  better  than  thou  thyfelf,  or
the  Devil/     Behold,  dear  Mafter,  thereupon  I  ceafed
from  thefe  exercifes,  and  yielded  myfelf  and  my  doings
altogether  up  to   God.      For  the   reft,   dear  fir,   you
muft   know  that  by  nature  I  was  a  very  ingenious,

C3


How  be  erred
therein  by
following  bis
own  counfel.


How  tbe  her-
mit taught
him  to  give
him f elf  up  to
God.


22


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


How  be

fought  to  com-
prehend di-
vine things
by  bis  own
reafon  ;


and  faw  it  to
be  the  Devif;
counfel.


clever,  good-hearted  man  ;  but  I  had  not  the  Scrip-
tures in  my  hand,  like  you,  but  could  only  learn  to
know  myfelf  by  my  natural  intelligence ;  and  with
this  fometimes  I  got  fo  far  that  I  was  furprifed  at
myfelf.  And  once  upon  a  time,  I  thought  in  my
reafon,  *  Thou  haft  fuch  good  parts,  may  be,  if  thou
fhouldft  give  thy  mind  to  it  with  all  earneftnefs,
thou  couldft  attain  to  comprehend  fomewhat  of
divine  things/  But  as  this  thought  came  into  my
head  I  marked  ftraightway  that  it  was  the  Devil's
counfel,  and  faw  that  it  was  all  falfe.  So  I  faid,
'  O  thou  Evil  Spirit,  what  an  impure  falfe  counfel
haft  thou  put  in  my  heart,  thou  bad,  falfe  counfellor !
If  we  had  fuch  a  God  I  would  not  give  a  berry  for
him.'  After  that,  another  night,  when  I  was  faying
my  matins,*  an  ardent  longing  came  over  me,  fo  that
I  faid,  '  O  eternal  and  merciful  God,  that  it  were  thy
will  to  give  me  to  difcover  fomething  that  mould  be
above  all  our  fenfual  reafon  ! '  As  foon  as  I  had  faid
it  I  was  forely  affrighted  at  this  great  longing,  and
faid  with  great  fervour,  *  Ah,  my  God  and  my  Lord,
forgive  me  of  thy  boundlefs  mercy  for  having  done
this,  and  that  it  mould  have  entered  into  the  heart
of  a  poor  worm  like  me  to  defire  fuch  a  great  gift


*  Three  o'clock  in  the  morning.


The  Reverend  Dotfor  John  T aider.


of  fuch  rich  grace,  and  I  confefs  indeed  that  I  have
not  always  lived  as  I  ought  of  right  to  do.  I  confefs,
moreover,  dear  Lord,  that  I  have  been  unthankful  to
Thee  in  all  things,  fo  that  methinks  I  am  not
worthy  that  the  earth  mould  bear  me,  {till  lefs  that
fuch  an  ardent,  gracious  defire  mould  fpring  up  in  me;
wherefore  my  body  muft  be  punifhed  for  my  fin.'
With  that  I  threw  off  my  garments  and  fcourged
myfelf  till  the  blood  ran  down  my  moulders.  And
as  thefe  words  remained  in  my  heart  and  on  my  lips
till  the  day  broke,  and  the  blood  was  flowing  down,
in  that  fame  hour  God  mowed  His  mercy  on  me,
fo  that  my  mind  was  filled  with  a  clear  underftand-
ing.  And  in  that  fame  hour  I  was  deprived  of  all
my  natural  reafon  ;  but  the  time  ieemed  all  too  fhort
to  me.  And  when  I  was  left  to  myfelf  again  I  faw
a  fupernatural  mighty  wonder  and  iign,  infbmuch
that  I  could  have  cried  with  St.  Peter,  '  Lord,  it  is
good  for  me  to  be  here  !  '  Now  know,  dear  fir,  that
in  that  felf-fame  fhort  hour  I  received  more  truth  and
more  illumination  in  my  underflanding  than  all  the
teachers  could  ever  teach  me  from  now  till  the  Judg-
ment Day  by  word  of  mouth,  and  with  all  their
natural  learning  and  fcience.  Now,  dear  Matter,  I
have  faid  enough  for  this  time,  as  to  how  it  stands
with  you."


How  be  was
illuminated
of  God.


c  4


The  Hifiory  and  Life  of


FIFTH  CHAPTER.


How  God  converted  a  heathen  in  a  foreign  land  through  this  pious
layman,  and  how  that  the  Holy  Ghojljlill  to  this  day  difplays  His
grace  with  the  fame  power  that  Hejhowed  on  the  day  of  Pentecoft,
when  He  Jinds  Jitting  hearts  to  receive  Him.  Further,  how  this
pious  man  gives Jlill  better  iiiftruflion  to  theDocJor  in  thefe  matters,
andjhows  him  that  he  is  a  true  Pharifee,  and  brings  him  to  sub-
mit to  be  converted  and  amend  his  ways.


The  Mafter
bearetb  him
gladly.


faid  the  Mafter,  "If  God  give  thee
g  grace  to  fay  ftill  more,  I  mould  heartily
rejoice  in  it,  for  I  tell  thee  in  all  fmcerity
that  I  have  liftened  to  thee  gladly,  dear
fon  :  now  I  beg  thee  for  God's  fake  do  not  leave  me,
but  ftay  here,  and  if  thou  lack  money  I  will  not  let
thee  want  for  anything,  if  I  have  to  pledge  a  book  for
it."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  God  reward  you,  dear
fir  :  know  that  I  need  not  your  kindnefs,  for  God  hath
made  me  a  fteward  of  His  goods,  fo  that  I  have  of
earthly  wealth  five  thoufand  florins,  which  are  God's,
and  if  I  knew  where  there  was  need  of  them,  or  where
God  would  have  them  beftowed,  I  would  give  them
away."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  Then,  dear  fon,  thou


The  Reverend  DoEtor  John  T aider.


art  indeed  the  fteward  of  a  rich  man  and  a  great  Lord  !
I  am  in  great  wonderment  about  that  thou  faidft,  that
I  and  all  teachers  could  not  teach  thee  as  much  by  the
Day  of  Judgment  as  thou  haft  been  taught  in  an  hour.
Now  tell  me,  for  I  wifh  to  hear,  has  the  Scripture
proceeded  from  the  Holy  Ghoft  ?"  Then  faid  the
man,  "  Sir,  methinks  it  feems  impoffible  that  after  I
have  faid  fo  much  to  you,  you  mould  talk  in  fuch  a
childim  fafhion  !  Look  here,  dear  Mafter  !  I  will  afk
you  a  queftion,  and  if  with  all  your  reafbn  you  can  ex-
plain it  to  me,  either  by  the  Scriptures,  or  without
the  Scriptures,  I  will  give  you  ten  thoufand  florins/'
Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  What  is  that  ?"  The  man
faid,  "  Can  you  inftrucl;  me  how  I  mould  write  a
letter  to  a  heathen  far  away  in  a  heathen  land,  in  iuch
fafhion  and  language  that  the  heathen  mould  be  able
to  read  and  underftand  it ;  and  make  the  letter  fuch
that  the  heathen  mould  come  to  the  Chriftian  faith  ?"
Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  Dear  fon,  thefe  are  the  works
of  the  Holy  Ghoft  ;  tell  me  where  has  this  happened  ?
If  thou  know  anything  of  the  matter,  tell  me  in  what
way  this  came  to  pafs,  and  whether  it  happened  to
thyfelf  ?"  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Albeit  I  am  unworthy
of  it,  yet  did  the  Holy  Spirit  work  through  me,  a  poor
finner ;  and  how  it  came  to  pafs  would  take  long  to
tell,  and  make  fuch  a  long  ftory  that  one  might  write


The  man
teacheth  the
Mafter  con-
cerning the
works  of  the
Holy  Gboft.


The  Hiftory  and  Life  of


How  there
was  a  certain
good  heathen
who  prayed
God  to  Jhow
him  the  true
faith :


And  how  the
man  wrote
him  a  letter ;
which

brought  him
thereto.


a  large  book  about  it :  The  heathen  was  a  very  good-
hearted  man,  and  often  cried  to  Heaven,  and  called
upon  Him  who  had  made  him  arid  all  the  world,  and
faid  :  '  O  Creator  of  all  creatures,  I  have  been  born  in
this  land  :  now  the  Jews  have  another  faith,  the  Chris-
tians another.  O  Lord,  who  art  over  all,  and  haft  made
all  creatures,  if  there  be  now  any  faith  better  than  that
in  which  I  have  been  born,  or  if  there  be  any  other
better  ftill,  mow  it  to  me  in  what  wife  Thou  wilt,  fo
that  I  may  believe  it,  and  I  will  gladly  obey  Thee  and
believe  :  but  if  it  mould  be  that  Thou  doft  not  mow  it
me,  and  I  mould  die  in  my  faith,  fmce  I  knew  no
better,  if  there  were  a  better  faith,  but  Thou  hadft  not
mown  it  nor  revealed  it  to  me,  Thou  wouldft  have
done  me  a  grievous  injuftice.'  Now,  behold,  dear  fir,  a
letter  was  fent  to  that  heathen,  written  by  me,  a  poor
finner,  in  fuch  fort  that  he  came  to  the  Chriftian  faith  ;
and  he  wrote  me  a  letter  back  again,  telling  what  had
befallen  him,  the  which  ftood  written  in  a  good  Ger-
man tongue,  that  I  could  read  it  quite  well.  Dear
fir,  there  were  much  to  be  faid  on  this  matter,  but  for
this  time  it  is  enough  ;  you  are  well  able  to  mark  the
meaning  thereof."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  God  is
wonderful  in  all  His  works  and  gifts  !  Dear  Ion,  thou
haft  told  me  very  ftrange  things."

The  man  faid,  "  Dear  fir,  I  fear  that  I  have  faid


The  Reverend  T)o8ior  John  T aider.


The  Mafter
is  vexed  that
be  Jhould  be
injlrufled  of
a  layman.


fbme  things  to  you  which  have  vexed  you  greatly  in
your  mind  ;  it  is  becaufe  I  am  a  layman,  and  you  are
a  great  doctor  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  yet  I  have  faid
fo  much  to  you  after  the  manner  of  a  teacher.  But
that  I  have  meant  it  well  and  kindly,  and  fought  your
foul's  falvation  in  it,  and  {imply  the  glory  of  God,  and
nothing  elfe,  of  that  God  is  my  witnefs."  Then  faid
the  Matter,  "  Dear  fon,  if  it  will  not  make  thee  angry,
I  will  tell  thee  what  vexes  me."  Then  faid  the  man,
"  Yea,  dear  fir,  fpeak  without  fear  ;  I  promife  not  to
take  it  amifs."  The  Matter  faid,  "  It  amazes  me
greatly,  and  is  very  hard  to  receive,  that  thou  being  a
layman,  and  I  a  prieft,  I  am  to  take  inftru&ion  from
thee ;  and  it  alfo  troubles  me  much  that  thou  calledft
me  a  Pharifee."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Is  there  no-
thing elfe  that  you  cannot  take  in  ?"  The  Matter  an-
fwered,  "  No,  I  know  of  nothing  elfe."  Then  faid
the  man,  "Shall  I  alfo  explain  to  you  thefe  two  things?"
He  anfwered,  "  Yes,  dear  fon,  I  pray  thee  in  all  kind-
nefs  to  do  fo,  for  God's  fake."  Then  faid  the  man,
"  Now  tell  me,  dear  Matter,  how  it  was,  or  whofe
work  it  was,  that  the  bleffed  Saint  Katharine,  who
was  but  a  young  virgin  barely  fourteen  years  old,  oxer-
came  fome  fifty  of  the  great  matters,  and  moreover  fo
prevailed  over  them  that  they  willingly  went  to  mar-
tyrdom ?  Who  wrought  this  ?"  Then  faid  the  Matter,


Of  St.  Ka-
tharine.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


How  the
Mafter  is
proved  to  be  a
Pbarifee  by
the  teftimony
of  Holy
Scripture.


"  The  Holy  Ghoft  did  this."  Quoth  the  man,  "  Do
you  not  believe  that  the  Holy  Ghoft  has  ftill  the  fame
power  ?"  The  Mafter,  "  Yes,  I  believe  it  fully."
The  man,  "  Wherefore  then  do  you  not  believe  that
the  Holy  Ghoft  is  fpeaking  to  you  at  this  moment
through  me,  a  poor  tinner  and  unworthy  man,  and  is
minded  to  fpeak  to  you  ?  He  fpoke  the  truth  through
Caiaphas,  who  was  alfb  a  {inner  ;  and  know,  that  fince
you  take  what  I  have  faid  to  you  fo  much  amifs,  I  will
refrain  from  faying  anything  to  you  for  the  future."
Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  Dear  fon,  do  not  do  that :  I
hope,  if  God  will,  to  be  the  better  for  thy  words."
The  man  faid,  "  Ah,  dear  fir,  it  vexes  you  alfo  that  I
mould  have  called  you  a  Pharifee,  and  yet  I  gave  you
fuch  full  proof  of  it  that  you  could  not  deny  it.  This
mould  have  been  enough  to  content  you,  but  fince  it
is  not,  I  muft  fay  ftill  more,  and  prove  to  you  once
again,  that  I  am  right,  and  that  you  are  what  I  faid.
Dear  Mafter,  you  know  very  well  that  Our  Lord  Jefus
Chrift  faid  himfelf,  '  Beware  of  the  Pharifees,  for  they
bind  heavy  burdens,  and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and  lay
them  on  men's  Ihoulders  ;  but  they  themfelves  will
not  move  them  with  one  of  their  fingers.'  Now,  dear
fir,  look  at  yourfelf ;  in  this  fermon  of  yours  you  have
bound  and  laid  upon  us  twenty-four  articles,  and  you
keep  few  enough  of  them  yourfelf.  Again  :  Our  Lord


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  T aider.


faid,  '  Beware  of  the  Pharifees  :  whatfoever  they  bid  you
obferve,  that  obferve  and  do,  but  do  not  ye  after  their
works,  for  they  fay  and  do  not.' '  Quoth  the  Matter,
"  Our  BleiTed  Lord  fpoke  thefe  words  to  the  men  of
his  own  day/'  The  man  faid,  "  He  fpeaks  them  ftill,
now  and  evermore,  to  all  men.  Dear  Matter,  look  at
yourfelf ;  whether  you  touch  thefe  burdens  and  bear
them  in  your  life  is  known  to  God  and  alfo  to  your-
felf; but  I  confefs  that  as  far  as  I  can  judge  of  your
prefent  condition,  I  would  rather  follow  your  words
than  your  life.  Only  look  at  yourfelf,  and  fee  if  you
are  not  a  Pharifee  in  the  eyes  of  God  ;  though  not  one
of  thofe  falfe  hypocritical  Pharifees  whofe  portion  is  in
hell-fire."  The  Matter  faid,  "  I  know  not  what  I  mail
fay ;  this  I  fee  plainly,  that  I  am  a  fmner,  and  am  re-
folved  to  better  my  life,  if  I  die  for  it.  Dear  fon,  I  can-
not wait  longer  ;  I  pray  thee,  fimply  for  God's  fake,  to
counfel  me  how  I  mall  fet  about  this  work,  and  mow
me  and  teach  me  how  I  may  attain  to  the  higheft
perfection  that  a  man  may  reach  on  earth."  Then
faid  the  man,  "  Dear  fir,  do  not  be  wroth  with  me  ;
but  I  tell  you  of  a  truth  that  fuch  counfel  is  fcarcely  to
be  given  you  ;  for  if  you  are  to  be  converted,  all  your
wonted  habits  mutt  be  broken  through  with  great  pain ;
becaufe  you  mutt  altogether  change  your  old  way  of
life  :  and  befides  I  take  you  to  be  near  fifty  years  old."


The  Mafter
confejjetb  bis
Jim,  and  is
refolved  to
amend  bis
life.


The  Hijlory  and  Life  of


He  ajketb  in-
Jiruction  of
the  man  ;


Wbofettetb
him  a  tajk  to
/earn.


Then  faid  the  Matter,  "  It  may  be  fo  ;  but  O  dear  fon,
to  him  who  came  into  the  vineyard  at  the  eleventh
hour  was  given  his  penny  the  fame  as  to  him  who  came
in  at  the  firft.  I  tell  thce,  dear  fon,  I  have  well  con-
fidered  the  matter,  and  my  heart  is  fo  firmly  fet  that
if  I  knew  this  moment  that  I  muft  die  for  it,  I  would
yet,  with  the  help  of  God,  ceafe  from  my  carnal  life,
and  my  earthly  reafonings,  and  live  according  to  thy
counfel.  I  befeech  thee  for  God's  fake  not  to  keep
me  longer  waiting,  but  to  tell  me  this  moment  how  I
muft  begin."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Dear  fir,  becaufe
you  have  received  grace  from  God,  and  are  willing  to
humble  yourfelf  and  fubmit,  and  to  bow  down  before
a  poor,  mean,  unworthy  creature  ;  for  all  this  let  us
give  the  glory  to  God,  to  whom  it  is  due,  for  this  grace
proceeds  from  Him,  and  flows  back  to  Him.  Since
then,  dear  fir,  I  am  to  inftrucl:  you,  and  counfel  you
in  God's  name,  I  will  look  to  Him  for  help,  and  do  fo
in  love  to  Him,  and  fet  you  a  tafk  fuch  as  they  give
children  to  begin  with  at  fchool, — namely,  the  four-
and-twenty  letters  of  the  alphabet,  beginning  with  A  :


The  Reverend  Doctor  JoJm  Tender.


SIXTH  CHAPTER.


This  is  the  Golden  ABC  which  this  pious  man  fet  the  Doflor  to
learn,  for  the  amending  of  his  life,  and  which,  doubtlefs,  it  were
very  pro/if  able  and  needful  for  us  all  to  repeat  many  times  and  oft,
and  amend  our  lives  thereafter.


FTER  a  manly  and  not  a  childifh  fort,  ye
mall,  with  thorough  earneftnefs,  begin  a
good  life.


"DAD  ways   ye   mall   efchew,  and  practife    all  good-

nefs  with  diligence  and  full  purpofe  of  mind.
(CAREFULLY  endeavour  to  keep  the  middle  path  in

all  things,  with  feemlinefs  and  moderation.
"TjEMEAN   yourfelf  humbly  in  word  and  work,  from

the  inward  holinefs  of  your  heart.
ENTIRELY  give  up  your  own  will  ;   evermore  cleave

earneftly  to  God,  and  forfake  Him  not.
PORWARD  and  ready  fhall  ye  be  to  all  good  works,

without  murmuring,  whatever  be  commanded  you.
QIVE  heed  to  exercife  yourfelf  in  all  godly  works  of

mercy  towrard  the  body  or  the  fpirit.


The  tajk
which  the
man  gave  the
Mafter  to
learn.


The  Hijlory  and  Life  of


no   backward  glances  after  the  world,  or  the

creatures,  or  their  doings.
JNWARDLY  in  your  heart  ponder  over  your  paft  life

with  honefty,  fmcere  repentance  in  the  bitternefs

of  your  heart,  and  tears  in  your  eyes.
J^NIGHTLY  and   refolutely  withftand    the  aflaults  of

the  Devil,  the  Flefh,  and  the  World.
J^EARN  to  conquer  long-cherifhed  floth  with  vigour,

together  with    all  effeminacy   of   the    body,  and

fubfervience  to  the  Devil.

AKE    your    abode    in    God,   with  fervent  love,  in

certain  hope,  with  ftrong  faith,  and  be  towards

your  neighbour  as  towards  yourfclf.
o  other  man's  good  things  mall  ye  defire,  be  they

what  they  may,  corporeal  or  fpiritual.
QRDER   all  things    fo  that   you  make  the  beft  and

not  the  worft  of  them.
PENANCE,   that  is,  fuffering  for    your  fin,  you  mall

take  willingly,    whether  it    come    from   God   or

the  creatures.
QUITTANCE,    remiffion,    and    abfolution,    you    mail

give  to  all  who  have  ever   done  you  wrong    in

thought,  word,  or  deed.
DECEIVE  all  things  that  befal  you  with    meeknefs,

and  draw  improvement  from  them.


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  Tauter.


33


COUL  and  body,  eftate  and  reputation,   keep  unde-

filed  with  all  care  and  diligence.  *
TRUTHFUL    and    upright    mall    ye    be   towards    all,

without  guile  or  cunning.
"^/ANTONNESS    and    excefs,    of   whatfoever    kind    it

may  be,    ye   fhall  learn    to   lay  afide,  and  turn

from  it  with  all  your  heart.
XT'>    our   Blefled    Lord's    life    and    death,    mall  ye

follow,   and    wholly  conform  yourfelf  thereunto

with  all  your  might.
YE    fhall    evermore,    without    ceafing,    befeech    our

bleffed  Lady  that  me  help  you  to  learn  this  our

leffon  well.
JEALOUSLY  keep   a    rein    over  your   will  and  your

fenfes,  that  they  may  be  at  peace  with  all  that

God  doth,  and  alfo  with  all  His  creatures.

All  this  leffon  muft  be  learnt  of  a  free  heart  and
will,  without  cavilling.


*  The  letters  R  and  S  have  been  tranfpofed  j  the  reft  follow  the  order  of
the  original,  in  which,  as  in  the  tranflation,  the  important  word  of  the  fen-
tence  is  by  no  means  always  the  one  with  which  it  commences.  The  letters
V  and  W  are  wanting  in  the  original. — TR.


34


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


SEVENTH  CHAPTER.


How  the  Doctor  learns  this  tajk  very  quickly  (though  with  t  rouble J,
and  bow  this  layman  further  inftrucJetb  him  in  thejhorteji  way
to  the  higheji  contemplation  ;  alfo  how  he  was  obliged  to  begin  a
dying  life,  and  exercife  himfelf  therein  till  at  loft  he  prevailed  over
himfelf.  And  in  this  following  /effort  lies  the  true  ground  of
almojl  all  the  fermons  that  Jland  in  this  book,  from  which  lejjbn
alfo  this  Doctor  obtained  his  under/landing  of  Holy  Scripture,  and
the  perfecting  of  his  life,  asjball  be  hereafter  fet  forth.


How  the
Mafter  re-
ceiveth  bis
tajk  from  the
man,  andfet-
tetb  himfelf
to  learn  it.


OW,  dear  fir,  take  kindly  as  from  God,
without  cavilling,  this  child's  tafk,  which
He  fets  you  by  the  mouth  of  me,  a  poor
and  unworthy  human  being."
Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  However  thou  mayft  call
this  a  child's  tafk,  methinks  it  needs  a  man's  ftrength
to  attack  it.  Now  tell  me,  dear  fon,  how  long  a
time  wilt  thou  give  me  to  learn  this  leflbn  ?"  The
man  anfwered,  "  \Ve  will  take  five  weeks,  in  honour
of  the  five  wounds  of  Chrift,  that  you  may  learn  it
well.  You  mall  be  your  own  fchoolmafter ;  and
when  you  are  not  perfect  in  any  one  of  theie  letters,
and  think  yourfelf  hardly  able  to  learn  it,  then  caft


The  Reverend  Do6lor  John  T aider.


35


afide  your  garment  and  chaftife  your  body,  that  it
may  be  brought  into  fubjecl:ion  to  your  foul  and
reafon."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  I  will  gladly  be
obedient."

Now  when  this  difcipline  had  lafted  three  weeks,
the  man  faid  to  the  Matter,  "  Dear  fir,  how  goes  it
with  you  ?"  The  Mafter  faid,  "  Dear  fon,  thou  muft
know  that  I  have  received  more  ftripes  in  thefe  three
weeks  about  your  leflbn  than  I  ever  did  in  all  my  days
before."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Sir,  you  well  know
that  no  man  giveth  his  pupil  a  new  tafk  before  he
have  learnt  the  firft  lines."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,
"  If  I  faid  that  I  knew  them,  I  mould  fay  what  is  not
true."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Dear  fir,  go  on  as  you
are  doing  till  you  know  your  lefTon  right  well."

But  at  the  end  of  another  three  weeks  the  Mafter
fent  for  the  man,  and  faid  to  him,  "  Dear  fon,  rejoice
with  me,  for  I  think,  with  God's  help,  I  could  fay
the  firft  line ;  and  if  thou  art  willing,  I  will  repeat
over  the  whole  lefTon  to  thee."  "  No,  dear  fir,"  faid
the  man,  "  I  will  gladly  rejoice  with  you,  and  take
your  word  for  it  that  you  know  it."  Then  faid  the
Mafter,  "  I  tell  thee  of  a  truth  it  has  gone  hard  with
me.  And  now,  dear  fon,  I  pray  thee  give  me  further
inftru&ion."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  I  can  for  myfelf
teach  you  nothing  further ;  but  if  fb  be  that  God

n  2


How  be  is
forelyfcourged
for,  not  know-
ing it.


How  in  Jix
weeks  be  bath
learnt  the
firft  line.


The  Hijlory  and  Life  of


Themanfore-
telletb  that
be  jh all  be
brought  into
great  diftrefs
and  perplex-
ity


but  counfel-
leth  him  to  be
obedient  to  his
Order  and
fteadfaft  in
his  holy  pur-
pofes  ;


willeth  to  teach  you  through  me,  I  will  gladly  do  my
part,  and  be  an  inftrument  in  the  Lord's  hand  by
which  He  may  work  out  His  purpofes.

"  Hearken,  dear  Matter :  I  will  counfel  you  in
godly  love  and  brotherly  faithfulnefs.  If  it  mould
happen  to  you  as  to  the  young  man  in  the  Gofpel,  to
whom  our  Lord  faid,  '  Go  and  fell  all  that  thou  haft
and  give  to  the  poor,  and  come  and  follow  Me/  I
will  not  be  anfwerable."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,
"  Dear  fon,  have  no  fears  on  that  fcore,  for  I  have
already  left  all  that  I  have,  and,  with  God's  help,  am
refolved  to  go  forward,  and  be  obedient  unto  God  and
to  thee."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Since  your  heart  is
fteadfaftly  fixed  to  commit  yourfelf  wholly  unto  God,
I  counfel  you  in  all  faithfulnefs  that  ye  be  obedient
to  your  Order  and  your  fiiperiors ;  as  it  may  be  that
you  may  be  brought  into  great  perplexity  if  you  be
minded  to  go  the  ftrait  and  narrow  way,  and  that  you
will  be  hard  preiTed  and  affailed,  and  moft  of  all  by
your  brethren.  And  if  this  mould  come  to  pafs,  your
earthly  feelings  wull  feek  everywhere  for  help,  and
make  you  call  to  mind  the  words  in  which  you
pledged  yourfelf  to  God,  and  alfo  other  things,  with
the  intent  that,  if  poflible,  they  might  break  away
from  the  crofs  ;  and  that  muft  not  be,  but  you  muft
yield  a  willing  obedience  to  fuffer  all  that  is  appointed


The  Reverend  DoBor  Joh?i  Tauler.


you,  from  whatfbever  it  may  proceed.  For  know
that  you  muft  needs  walk  in  that  fame  path  of  which
our  Lord  fpoke  to  that  young  man  ; — you  muft  take
up  your  crofs  and  follow  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  and
His  example,  in  utter  fincerity,  humility,  and  patience,
and  muft  let  go  all  your  proud,  ingenious  reafon,
which  you  have  through  your  learning  in  the  Scrip-
ture. You  mall  alfo  for  a  time  neither  ftudy  nor
preach,  and  you  mail  demean  yourielf  with  great
iimplicity  towards  your  penitents ;  for  when  they
have  ended  their  confemon,  you  mall  give  them  no
further  counfel  than  to  fay  to  them,  '  I  will  learn
how  to  counfel  myfelf,  and  when  I  can  do  that  I  will
alfo  counfel  you.'  And  if  you  are  afked  when  you
will  preach,  fay,  as  you  can  with  truth,  that  you  have
not  time  at  prefent,  and  fo  you  will  get  rid  of  the
people."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,  "  Dear  fbn,  I  will
willingly  do  fo  ;  but  how  then  ihall  I  occupy  myfelf?"
The  man  replied,  "  You  ihall  enter  into  your  cell,
and  read  your  Hours,  and  alfo  chant  in  the  choir  if
you  feel  inclined,  and  ihall  fay  mafs  every  day.  And
what  time  is  left,  you  ihall  fet  before  you  the  fuffer-
ings  of  our  Lord,  and  contemplate  your  own  life  in
the  mirror  of  His,  and  meditate  on  your  wafted  time
in  which  you  have  been  living  for  yourfelf,  and  how
fmall  has  been  your  love  compared  to  His  love.  In

D  3


and  to  follow
Cbrift  in  all
humility,


fulfilling  bit
daily  duties
and  meditat-
ing on  tbe  lift
and fujferings
of  our  Lord;


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


and  fo  doing
bejhallbe
made  a  new


God  Jball  not
forfake  him,
but  jhall ful-
fil this  good
work  in  him.


all  lowlinefs  ye  lhall  ftudy  thefe  things,  whereby  in
fbme  meafure  ye  may  be  brought  to  true  humility,
and  alfo  wean  yourfelf  from  your  old  habits,  and  ceafe
from  them.  And  then,  when  our  Lord  fees  that  the
time  is  come,  He  will  make  of  you  a  new  man,  fo
that  you  mall  be  born  again  of  God.

"  Neverthelefs,  you  muft  know  that  before  this  can
come  to  pafs,  you  muft  fell  all  that  you  have,  and
humbly  yield  it  up  to  God,  that  you  may  truly  make
Him  your  end,  and  give  up  to  Him  all  that  you  pof-
fefs  in  your  carnal  pride,  whether  through  the  Scrip-
tures or  without ;  or  whatever  it  be,  whereby  you
might  reap  honour  in  this  world,  or  in  the  which  you
may  aforetime  have  taken  pleafure  or  delight,  you
muft  let  it  all  go,  and,  with  Mary  Magdalene,  fall
down  at  Chrift's  feet,  and  earneftly  ftrive  to  enter  on
a  new  courfe.  And  fo  doing,  without  doubt,  the
Eternal  Heavenly  Prince  will  look  down  on  you  with
the  eye  of  His  good  pleafure,  and  He  will  not  leave
His  work  undone  in  you,  but  will  urge  you  ftill  fur-
ther, that  you  may  be  tried  and  purified  as  gold  in
the  fire ;  and  it  may  even  come  to  pafs,  that  He  mall
give  you  to  drink  of  the  bitter  cup  that  He  gave  to
His  only-begotten  Son.  For  it  is  my  belief  that  one
bitter  drop  which  God  will  pour  out  for  you  will  be
that  your  good  works  and  all  your  refraining  from


The  Reverend  DocJor  John  Tauler.


39


evil,  yea  your  whole  life  will  be  defpifed  and  turned  to
nought  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  ;  and  all  your  fpiritual
children  will  forfake  you  and  think  you  are  gone  out
of  your  mind,  and  all  your  good  friends  and  your  bro-
thers in  the  convent  will  be  offended  at  your  life,  and
fay  that  you  have  taken  to  ftrange  ways.

"  But  when  thefe  things  come  upon  you,  be  not  in
any  wife  difmayed,  but  rejoice,  for  then  your  falvation
draweth  nigh  ;  howbeit,  no  doubt,  your  human  weak-
nefs  will  fhrink  back  in  terror,  and  give  way.  There-
fore, dear  Mafter,  you  muft  not  be  faint-hearted,  but
truft  firmly  in  God,  for  He  forfakes  none  of  His  ier-
vants,  as  you  know  well  from  the  examples  of  the
blefled  faints.  Now,  dear  ilr,  if  fo  be  that  you  are
minded  to  take  thefe  things  in  hand,  know  that  there
is  nothing  better  or  more  profitable  for  you  at  this  pre-
fent  than  an  entire,  hearty,  humble  felf-furrender  in  all
things,  whether  fweet  or  bitter,  painful  or  pleafant,  fb
that  you  may  be  able  to  fay  with  truth,  '  Ah,  my
Lord  and  my  God,  if  it  were  thy  will  that  I  mould
remain  till  the  Day  of  Judgment  in  this  fuffering  and
tribulation,  yet  would  I  not  fall  away  from  thee,  but
would  defire  ever  to  be  conftant  in  thy  fervice/  Dear
fir,  I  fee  well,  by  God's  grace,  how  you  are  thinking
in  your  heart,  that  I  have  faid  very  hard  things  to  you,

and  this  is  why  I  begged  you  beforehand  to  let  me  go,

D  4


The  man
foretelletb
that  the  Maf-
ter Jh  all  be
forfaken  of  all
his  friends,


but  telletb
him  not  to  be
difmayed
thereat.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


The  Mafter
thinking  this
bard  counfel,
the  man  giv-
etb  him  a
fpace  to  con-
jider  of  it.


and  told  you  that  if  you  went  back  like  that  young
man,  I  would  not  have  it  laid  to  my  charge."  Then
faid  the  Matter,  "  Thou  fayeft  truly  ;  I  confefs  it  does
feem  to  me  a  hard  thing  to  follow  your  counfel."  The
man  anfwered,  "  Yet  you  begged  me  to  mow  you  the
fhorteft  way  to  the  higheft  perfe&nefs.  Now  I  know
no  Ihorter  nor  furer  way  than  to  follow  in  the  foot-
fteps  of  our  Lord  Jems  Chrift.  But,  dear  fir,  I
counfel  you  in  all  faithfulnefs,  to  take  a  certain  fpace
of  time  to  confider  thefe  matters,  and  then  in  God's
name  do  as  God  gives  you  grace  to  do."  Then  faid
the  Matter,  "  That  will  I  do,  and  wait  and  fee
whether,  with  the  help  of  God,  I  may  prevail."


The  Reverend  DocJor  John  T aider.


EIGHTH  CHAPTER.

How  it  fared  with  the  Dotfor  after  this,  and  how  befell  into  great
tribulation  and  contempt,  till  he  fell  ill  thereby ;  and  how  the
layman  counfelled  him,  and  allowed  him  to  help  nature  withfome
good  food  and  Juices,  and  afterwards  departed  from  him.


j;N  the  eleventh  day  after  this,  the  Mafter  fent
for  the  man,  and  faid  to  him,  "  Ah,  dear
fon,  what  agony  and  ftruggle  and  fighting
have  I  not  had  within  me  day  and  night,
before  I  was  able  to  overcome  the  Devil  and  my  own
flem.  But  now  by  God's  grace  I  have  gathered  my-
felf  together  with  all  my  powers  inward  and  outward,
and  fet  my  hand  to  this  work  with  good  courage,  and
am  purpofed  to  remain  fteadfaft  therein,  come  weal
come  woe."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Dear  fir,  do  you
remember  ftill  all  I  faid  to  you  when  you  afked  me
how  you  mould  begin  ?"  The  Mafter  anfwered,  "  Yes,
the  moment  thou  didft  depart  I  wrote  down  all  thou
hadft  faid  to  me,  word  for  word."  Then  faid  the  man,
"  Dear  fir,  that  through  God  you  have  found  this  bold
heart,  rejoices  me  from  the  bottom  of  my  foul,  and  I
am  as  well  pleafed  as  if  it  had  happened  to  myfelf,  fo


How  the  Maf-
ter through
great  diflrefs
andfgbtings
resolves  to
begin  the  good
work.


The  man  is
greatly  re-
joiced thereat.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


How  bis  good
refolution
brings  the
Mafter  into
great  tribula-
tion of  mind
and  Jicknefs
of  body.


How  be  fend-
etb  for  the
man,  who
gives  him  re-
medies for  bis
Jicknefs,


God  be  my  witnefs.  And  now  in  the  name  of  our  Lord
Jefus  Chrift,  fet  forward."  Then  the  man  took  his
leave,  and  the  Mafter  did  as  he  had  been  bidden.

Now  it  came  to  pafs  that  before  a  year  was  out  the
Mafter  grew  to  be  defpifed  of  all  his  familiar  friends  in
the  convent,  and  his  fpiritual  children  all  forfook  him
as  entirely  as  if  they  had  never  feen  him.  And  this
he  found  very  hard  to  bear,  and  it  caufed  him  fuch
grief  that  his  head  was  like  to  turn.  Then  he  fent
for  the  man  and  told  him  how  it  fared  with  him  ;  how
he  was  ill  in  his  whole  body,  and  efpecially  in  his  head.
Then  faid  the  man,  "  Sir,  you  muft  not  be  difmayed,
but  you  muft  humbly  cleave  to  God,  and  put  your
firm  truft  in  Him.  Know  that  this  account  of  yours
pleafes  me  well,  and  it  ftands  well  with  your  life,  and
will  grow  better  every  day.

"  Dear  fir,  you  know  well  that  he  who  will  walk  in
the  right  way,  and  tread  this  path,  muft  be  made  a
partaker  of  the  fufferings  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  ;
therefore  be  not  afraid,  but  commit  yourfelf  wholly  to
God.  For  know  that  the  fame  thing  happened  to  me
alfo.  Meanwhile  you  muft  take  fome  remedies  while
you  are  in  this  ftate,  and  treat  your  body  well  with
good  food  which  may  ftrengthen  it.  A  box  of  fpices
was  made  for  me,  and  I  will  have  fuch  an  one  pre-
pared for  you  to  ftrengthen  your  head.  But  you  muft


The  Reverend  DoElor  John  Tauler.


43


know  that  I  always  gave  myfelf  up  body  and  foul  to
God,  that  He  might  do  with  them  what  he  pleafed."
Then  faid  the  Mailer,  "  But  thou  didft  tell  me
before  that  I  muft  Ihun  good  eating  and  drinking."
The  man  anfwered,  "  Yes,  fir,  that  was  in  the  firft
beginning,  when  the  flefh  was  yet  wanton,  but  now
that  it  is  tamed  and  obedient  to  the  ipirit,  we  may
come  to  its  help  with  remedies,  elfe  we  mould  tempt
God.  So  long  as  you  are  in  this  ficknefs,  you  will  be
ferving  God  to  cherim  your  body  by  allowable  means,
but  not  to  live  diforderly ;  that  muft  not  be.  Dear  fir,
make  God  your  help,  and  go  forward  with  cheerful
mind,  and  commit  yourfelf  to  God  with  true  and
thorough  refignation,  and  put  your  truft  in  His  bound-
lefs  mercy,  and  wait  for  His  grace  to  mow  you  what  He
will  have  you  to  do,  and  then  with  His  help  ftrive  to
fulfil  that  to  the  uttermoft,  whether  it  be  bitter  or  fweet.
Further,  I  befeech  you  for  God's  fake  not  to  take  it
amifs  of  me,  but  I  muft  go  home  on  account  of  a  very
important  matter,  which  I  affurc  you  in  all  earneftnefs
I  have  much  at  heart ;  but  if  fb  be  that  you  could
not  or  would  not  do  without  me,  fend  into  the  town
for  me,  and  I  will  gladly  come  ;  but  if  you  can  bear  up
without  the  aid  of  any  creature,  that  would  be  beft  of
all  for  you."  Then  faid  the  Maftcr,  "Dear  fon,  fay  not
fo,  for  I  cannot  and  would  not  do  without  thee  for  any


and  counfels
him  to  truft
in  God,


andtben  takes
bis  leave.


44


The  Hiftory  and  Life  of


The  Mafter
entreatetb  the
man  to  ft  ay.


The  man  tel-
letb  him  of  a
better  Com-
forter, and
bow  be  Jhould
not  lofe  heart,


andfo  depart-
etb.


The  Mafter
is  fore ly
grieved.


length  of  time  ;  it  would  be  hard  indeed  if  thou  didft
forfake  me,  for  then  I  mould  have  no  confolation  left
in  the  world."  The  man  faid,  "Dear  fir,  I  will  mow
you  a  better  Comforter,  that  is  the  Holy  Ghoft,  who
has  called  and  invited  and  brought  you  to  this  point,
by  means  of  me  His  poor  creature,  but  it  is  His  work
which  has  been  wrought  in  you,  and  not  mine ;  I  have
been  merely  His  inftrument,  and  ferved  Him  therein,
and  have  done  fo  right  willingly,  for  the  glory  of  God
and  the  falvation  of  your  foul."  Then  laid  the  Mafter,
"  Dear  fon,  may  God  be  thine  eternal  reward  !  Since
it  is  fo  weighty  a  matter,  I  will  commit  myfelf  to  God,
and  bear  this  fuffering  as  beft  I  may."  The  man  faid,
"  Dear  fir,  fince  you  are  now  under  the  yoke,  and  have
entered  on  a  fpiritual  life  and  obedience  to  God,  and
have  voluntarily  devoted  yourfelf  thereto,  you  mould
know  how  to  live  difcreetly  and  wifely,  and  to  govern
yourfelf  aright ;  and  do  not  let  it  repent  you  becaufe
you  are  forfaken  of  the  creatures,  but  if  it  mould  hap-
pen that  you  lack  money,  or  have  need  of  fome,  put  a
part  of  your  books  in  pawn,  and  do  not  fuffer  yourfelf
to  want  for  anything,  but  by  no  means  fell  the  books,
for  a  time  will  come  when  good  books  will  be  very  ufe-
ful,  and  you  will  have  need  of  them."  Then  the  man
took  his  leave  and  departed  from  that  place,  but  the
Mafter's  eyes  filled  with  tears,  and  he  began  to  weep.


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  Tauler.


45


NINTH  CHAPTER.

How  DocJor  Tauler  was  vi/ited,  touched,  and  illuminated  after  a
wonderful  manner  by  God,  and  how  the  layman  came  to  him  again,
and  admoni/hed  him  tenderly  to  begin  to  preach  afrejh,  and  to
exercife  himfelf  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Alfo  concerning  ajlrange
event  that  befell  him  afterwards,  whereby  he  wasjlill  more  tried
and  humbled,  yet  not  without  fruit.


OW  when  the  Mafter  had  fuffered  thus  for
two  years,  from  fore  affaults  and  tempta-
tions of  the  Devil,  and  great  contempt
from  all  his  friends,  and  alfo  great  poverty,
fo  that  he  was  obliged  to  pledge  a  part  of  his  books,
and  withal  fell  into  great  weaknefs  of  the  body,  and
he  had  demeaned  himfelf  with  great  humility  through-
out ; — behold,  it  came  to  pafs  on  the  Feaft  of  St.  Paul's
Converfion,  that  in  the  night  he  was  overtaken  by  the
moft  grievous  aflault  that  may  be  imagined,  whereby
all  his  natural  powers  were  fo  overcome  with  weaknefs
that  when  the  time  for  matins  came  he  could  not  go
in  to  chapel,  but  remained  in  his  cell,  and  commended
himfelf  to  God  in  great  humility,  without  help  or  con-
folation  from  any  creature.  And  as  he  lay  in  this  {late


The  Mafter
fufferetb
greatly  for
twoyears,and
falletb  into
poverty.


How,  lying
Jtck  in  bis  cell


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


and  meditat-
ing on  our
Lord'sfuffer-


be  hearetb  a
wondrous


and  is

Jlraigbttoay
healed  in  tody
and  mind.


Hefendetb
for  the  man


of  weakncfs,  he  thought  of  the  fufTerings  of  our  Lord
Jefus  Chrift,  and  His  great  love  that  He  had  for  us,
and  confidered  his  own  life,  how  poor  his  life  had  been
compared  to  the  love  of  God.  Whereupon  he  was
overwhelmed  with  contrition  for  all  his  fins  and  all  his
wafted  time,  and  exclaimed  with  tongue  and  heart  :
"  O  merciful  God  !  have  mercy  upon  me  a  poor  fmner,
for  thy  boundlefs  mercy's  fake,  for  I  am  not  wrorthy
that  the  earth  mould  bear  me."  And  as  he  was  lying
in  this  weaknefs  and  great  fadnefs,  but  fully  awake,  he
heard  with  his  bodily  ears  a  voice  faying  :  "  Stand  faft
in  thy  peace,  and  truft  God,  and  know  that  when  He
was  on  earth  in  human  nature,  He  made  the  fick  whom
He  healed  in  body  found  alfo  in  foul."  Straightway
when  thefe  words  were  uttered,  he  loft  his  fenfes  and
reafon,  and  knew  not  how  or  where  he  was.  But  when
he  came  to  himfelf  again,  he  felt  within  himfelf  that
he  was  poffefled  of  a  new  ftrength  and  might  in  all
powers  outward  and  inward,  and  had  alfo  a  clear
underftanding  in  thofe  things  which  aforetime  were
dark  to  him,  and  he  wondered  greatly  whence  this
came,  and  thought  to  himfelf,  "  I  cannot  come  to  the
bottom  of  this  matter.  I  wrill  fend  for  my  friend  and
tell  him  all  that  has  happened."  So  he  fent  for  the
man ;  and  when  he  was  come,  the  Mafter  told  him
all  that  had  befallen  him.  Then  the  man  faid,  "  It


The  Reverend  DocJor  John  Tauler,


47


rejoices  me  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  to  hear  all
that  you  have  told  me.  Dear  fir,  you  muft  know
that  you  have  now  for  the  firft  time  received  the  true
and  mighty  gift  of  God's  grace ;  and  I  tell  you  of  a
truth  that  now,  for  the  firft  time,  your  foul  has  been
touched  by  the  Moft  High ;  and  know  that,  as  the
letter  hath  in  fome  meafure  flain  you,  fo  it  mall  like-
wife  make  you  alive  again,  for  your  doctrine  will
come  now  from  the  Holy  Ghoft,  which  before  came
from  the  flem ;  for  you  have  now  received  the  light
of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  you
already  know  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Therefore  you
have  now  a  great  advantage,  and  you  will  hencefor-
ward have  a  much  clearer  infight  into  the  Scripture
than  you  had  before.  For,  as  you  know,  the  Scrip-
ture founds  in  many  places  as  if  it  contradicted  itfelf,
but  ilnce  that  you  have  now,  by  the  grace  of  God,
received  the  Holy  Scriptures  into  your  own  heart
through  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  you  will
perceive  that  all  Scripture  has  the  fame  intent,  and
does  not  contradict  itfelf,  and  you  will  allb  be  able
rightly  to  follow  the  pattern  left  us  by  the  Lord  Jefus
Chrift.  You  ought  alfo  to  begin  to  preach  again,
and  to  teach  your  fellow-Chriftians,  and  mow  them
the  right  path  to  eternal  life.  The  time  is  come
now  when  good  books  will  be  profitable  to  you  ;  for


and  telletb
him  alltbeje
things.


The  man  re-
joicetb  much
that  the  Maf-
ter  has  been
enlightened  of
the  Ho/y
Gbojl,


and  coumel-
letb  him  to
preach  again.


48


The  Hiftoiy  and  Life  of


The  man
warnetb  the
Mafter  that
be  will  have
need  of  great
humility,  for
the  Devil
will  tempt
him  cun-
ningly.


know  that  one  of  your  fcrmons  will  be  more  profit-
able now,  and  the  people  will  receive  more  fruit  there-
from, than  from  a  hundred  aforetime,  for  the  words
that  you  fay  now,  coming  from  a  pure  foul,  will  have
a  pure  and  fimple  favour.  Wherefore,  juft  as  much
as  you  have  been  defpifed  by  the  people,  fo  mall  you
now  be  efteemed  and  beloved  by  them.  But  it  will
be  moft  efpecially  needful  that  you  keep  yourfelf
humble,  for  you  know  well  that  he  who  carries  a
great  treamre  expofed  to  view  muft  ever  be  on  his
guard  againft  thieves.  I  tell  you  truly  the  Devil  is
in  great  terror  when  he  perceives  that  God  has  be-
ftowed  on  any  man  fuch  a  noble  and  precious  trea-
fure,  and  the  devils  will  fet  all  their  arts  and  wifdom,
and  their  lufts  too,  to  wrork,  to  rob  and  bereave  you
of  this  coftly  treafure ;  wherefore  look  wifely  to  your
goings,  for  nothing  will  fo  greatly  help  you  to  pre-
ferve  it  as  utter  humility.  Now,  dear  fir,  it  is  no
longer  needful  for  me  to  fpeak  to  you  as  a  teacher,  as
I  have  done  hitherto,  for  you  have  now  the  right  and
true  Mafter,  whofe  inftrument  I  have  been :  to  Him
give  ear,  and  obey  His  commands ;  this  is  my  moft
faithful  counfel.  And  now,  in  all  godly  love,  I  defire
to  receive  inftruclion  from  you,  for  I  have,  with  God's
help,  accompliflied  the  good  work  for  which  I  was
fent  and  came  hither.  I  would  fain,  if  God  will,


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  T aider.


49


fbjourn  here  a  good  while  and  hear  you  preach.  If
God  give  you  to  do  fb,  methinks  it  were  well  that
you  mould  now  begin  to  preach  again."  Then  faid
the  Matter,  "  Dear  fon,  what  had  I  better  do  ;  I  have
pledged  a  great  many  good  books,  as  many  as  come
to  thirty  florins  ?"  The  man  anfwered,  "  Look  !  I
will  give  you  that  fum,  for  God's  fake,  and  if  you  have
any  of  it  left  over,  give  it  back  to  God,  for  all  that  we
have  is  His,  whether  temporal  or  fpiritual."  So  the
Matter  redeemed  his  books,  and  ordered  notice  to  be
given  that  he  would  preach  three  days  after.  The
people  wondered  much  thereat,  becaufe  it  was  fb  long
fince  he  had  preached,  and  a  great  crowd  gathered
together  to  hear  him.  And  when  the  Matter  came
and  faw  that  there  was  fuch  a  multitude,  he  wrent  up
into  a  pulpit  in  a  high  place,  that  they  might  hear
him  all  the  better.  Then  he  held  his  hood  before  his
eyes,  and  faid,  "  O  merciful,  Eternal  God,  if  it  be  Thy
will,  give  me  fo  to  fpeak  that  it  may  be  to  the  praife
and  glory  of  Thy  name  and  the  good  of  this  people."
As  he  faid  thefe  words,  his  eyes  overflowed  with  tears
of  tcndernefs,  fo  that  he  could  not  fpeak  a  word
for  weeping,  and  this  lafted  fo  long  that  the  people
grew  angry.  At  laft  a  man  fpoke  out  of  the  crowd,
"  Sir,  how  long  are  we  to  ftand  here  ?  It  is  getting
late  ;  if  you  do  not  mean  to  preach,  let  us  go  home."

E


How  the  man
advifeth  the
Mafter  to
begin  again  to
preach.


Hew  on  the
appointed  Jay
a  great  mul-
titude gather
together  to
bear  the
Mafter.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


But  be  can-
not f  peak  for
weeping  ;


Wherefore  be
become*  a
laughing-
Jlock  to  all,
and  is  for-
bidden to
preach  by  bis
brethren.


But  the  Matter  remained  in  earnett  prayer,  and  faid
again  to  God,  "  Oh,  my  Lord  and  my  God,  if  it  be
Thy  divine  will,  take  this  weeping  from  my  eyes,
and  give  me  to  deliver  this  fermon  to  Thy  praife  and
glory.  But,  if  Thou  doft  not  do  it,  I  take  it  as
a  fign  that  Thou  judgeft  I  have  not  yet  been  enough
put  to  mame.  Now  fulfil,  dear  Lord,  Thy  divine
will  on  me  Thy  poor  creature,  to  Thy  praife  and  my
neceflities."  This  all  availed  nothing  ;  he  wept  yet
more  and  more.  Then  he  faw  that  God  would  have
it  fo,  and  faid,  with  weeping  eyes,  "  Dear  children,  I
am  forry  from  my  heart  that  I  have  kept  you  here  fo
long,  for  I  cannot  fpeak  a  word  to-day  for  weeping  ;
pray  God  for  me,  that  He  may  help  me,  and  then  I
will  make  amends  to  you,  if  God  give  me  grace,
another  time,  as  foon  as  ever  I  am  able."  So  the
people  departed,  and  this  tale  was  fpread  abroad  and
refounded  through  the  whole  city,  fo  that  he  became
a  public  laughing-flock,  defpifed  by  all  ;  and  the
people  faid,  "  Now  we  all  fee  that  he  has  become
a  downright  fool."  And  his  own  brethren  ftriclly
forbade  him  to  preach  any  more,  becaufe  he  did  the
convent  great  injury  thereby,  and  difgraced  the  order
with  the  fenfelefs  practices  that  he  had  taken  up,  and
which  had  difordered  his  brain.

Then  the  Matter  fent  for  the  man,  and  told  him  all


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  T aider.


that  had  happened.     The  man  faid,   "  Dear  Matter,
be  of  good  cheer,  and  be  not  difmayed  at  thefe  things.
The  Bridegroom  is  wont  to  behave  fo  to  all  His  beft
and  deareft  friends,  and  it  is  a  certain  fign  that  God
is  your  good  friend,  for,  without  a  doubt,  He  has  feen
fome  fpeck  of  pride  concealed  within  you.  that  you
have  not  perceived,   nor  been   confcious  of  yourfelf,
and  therefore  it  is  that  you  have  been  put  to  fhame.
You  may  have  received  fome  great  gifts  of  God,  which
you  yourlelf  do  not  know  or  perceive,  that  have  been
given  you  by  means  of  the  patience  with  which  you
have  endured  this  aflault ;   therefore  be  of  good  cheer,
and  be  joyful  and  humble.     Neither  mould  you  think
this  a  ftrange  thing,  for  I  have  feen  many  fuch   in-
flances  in   other  people.     You  mall   not  defpise  this
prcflure  of  the   crofs   which  God  has   fent  you,  but
count   it  a  great   bleffing  and   favour  from  God.      I
counfel  you  that  you  remain  alone  for  the  next  five
days,  and  endure  without  fpeaking  to  any,  to  the  praife
and  glory  of  the  five  wounds  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift.
And  when  the  five  days  are  ended,  beg  your  Prior  to
give  you  permiffion  to  deliver  a  fermon  in  Latin.      It
he  refufe,  beg  him  to  let  you  try  in  the  fchool  and
read  a  lecture  to  the  brethren."     And  he  did  fo ;   and
read  to  his  brethren  fuch  an  excellent  lecture  as  they
had  never  heard  in  their  lives  before,  fo  grand  and

£   2


The  Majler
fends  for  the
man,  who
eonfoles  him,
telling  him
that  it  is  no
ftrange  thing
that  has  hap-
pened to  him.


The  Mafter
reads  a  lefture
to  his  brethren
in  the  Jcbool.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


Then  be  has
permijjion  to
preach  again,
and  delivers  a
fermon  in  a
convent  of
ladies.


deep  and  godly  was  his  doctrine.  Then  they  gave
him  permimon  to  preach  a  fermon  ;  and  after  one  of
their  brethren  had  preached  in  the  church  where  the
Matter  was  wont  to  preach,  he  gave  notice  to  the
people,  and  faid,  "  I  am  ordered  to  announce  that
to-morrow  the  Matter  intends  to  preach  in  this  place  ;
but  if  it  mould  befal  him  as  it  did  lately,  I  will  not
be  anfwerable  for  it.  So  much  I  can  fay  with  truth,
that  in  our  fchool  he  has  read  us  a  lecture  containing
fuch  great  and  profound  inftruclion,  with  high  and
divine  wifdom,  as  we  have  not  heard  for  a  long  time.
But  what  he  will  do  this  time  I  know  not ;  God  only
knoweth."  The  next  day  after,  the  Matter  came  to
the  convent  (it  was  a  convent  of  ladies),  and  began  to
preach,  and  faid :


The  Reverend  Do8lor  John  Tauler.


53


TENTH  CHAPTER.


An  excellent  fermon  which  this  Doff  or  delivered  in  a  convent  after
his  illumination,  concerning  Chrift  the  true  Bridegroom  of  the
foul,  in  the  which  he  Jhowed  how  Jhe  is  to  follow  after  Him  in
true,  Jhamef ace  d,  humble,  and  patient  rejlgnation,  and  how  Chri/i
tries  her  beforehand  in  divers  ways,  and  at  loft  accepts  her  lovingly.
Taken  from  these  words — "  Ecce  fponfus  venit,  exite  obviarn
(MATT.  xxv.  6.)


ei,


EAR  children,  it  may  be  now  two  years
or  more  fmce  I  laft  preached.  I  fpoke
to  you  then  of  four-and-twenty  Articles,
and^it  was  then  my  cuftom  to  fpeak
much  Latin,  and  to  make  many  quotations  ;  but  I
intend  to  do  fb  no  more,  but  if  I  wim  to  talk  Latin,
I  will  do  Ib  when  the  learned  are  prefent,  who  can
underftand  it.  For  this  time  repeat  only  an  Ave
Maria  to  begin  with,  and  pray  for  God's  grace.

Dear  children,  I  have  taken  a  text  on  which  I
mean  to  preach  this  fermon,  and  not  to  go  beyond
it :  in  the  vulgar  tongue  it  runs  thus, — "  Behold  the
Bridegroom  comet b,  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.'1

The  Bridegroom  is  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  the

E  3


The  Maker's
fermon.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


The  Bride-
groom and  the
Bride.


That  which
is  feemly  for
a  faithful
Bride.


Bride  is  the  Holy  Church  and  Chriflendom.  Now
we  are  all  called  brides  of  Chrift,  wherefore  we  ought
to  be  willing  to  go  forth  and  meet  our  Bridegroom  ;
but,  alas  !  we  are  not  ib.  The  true  paths  and  ftraight
highways  by  which  to  go  out  to  meet  the  Bridegroom
are,  alas  !  now-a-days  quite  deferted  and  falling  into
decay,  till  we  have  come  hardly  to  perceive  where
they  are  ;  nay,  this  highway  is  to  many  quite  ftrange
and  unknown,  fb  that  they  do  not  go  out  to  meet
the  Bridegroom,  as  they  are  in  duty  bound  to  do,  of
which  I  will  fpeak  another  time,  with  God's  help  ;
but  now,  fince  we  hear  that  we  are  all  called  brides,
I  will  tell  you  ibmewhat  concerning  what  the  Bride
muft  do  in  order  to  go  and  meet  the  Bridegroom.

It  is  feemly  that  a  faithful  Bride  mould  avoid
everything  that  is  difpleafmg  to  the  Bridegroom,  fuch
as  vain-glory,  pride,  envy,  and  all  the  other  fins  of
this  world,  and  all  the  delights  of  the  body  and  the
flefh,  whether  it  be  the  eafe  and  indulgence  of  the
body,  or  other  things  which  are  beyond  the  necefTaries
of  life.  Further,  it  befeems  a  faithful  Bride  to  be
fhame-faced.  When  this  comes  to  pafs,  and  the
Bride,  for  her  Bridegroom's  fake,  has  defpifed  and
given  up  all  thefe  things,  then  me  begins  to  be  ibme-
what well-pleafmg  to  the  Bridegroom.

But,   if  me  defires  to  be  yet  more  well-pleafing  in


The  Reverend  Do£tor  John  Tauter.


55


His  fight,  fhe  muft  humbly  bow  down  before  Him,
and  fay  with  heart  and  lips,  "  Ah  !  my  dear  Lord
and  Bridegroom,  Thou  knoweft  all  hearts.  I  have
faid  to  Thee,  with  my  whole  heart,  that  I  defire  to
do  all  that  I  can  and  may,  and  to  do  it  willingly,  as
far  as  Thou  giveft  me  to  perceive  through  my  con-
fcience  what  is  agreeable  and  well-pleafing  to  Thee."
When  the  Bride  makes  this  vow  to  the  Bridegroom,
He  turneth  himfelf  and  begins  to  look  upon  her.
Then  fhe  beleeches  Him  to  beftow  upon  her  fbme
gift  as  a  token  of  love.  What  is  the  gift  ?  It  is
that  fhe  is  inwardly  and  outwardly  befet  with  divers
aiTaults,  with  which  He  is  wont  to  endow  his  fpecial
friends.

But  if  the  Bride  be  as  yet  unaccuftomed  to  fuffer,
fhe  will  fay,  "  Ah  !  dear  Lord  and  Bridegroom,  this
is  very  hard  upon  me ;  I  fear  greatly  that  I  fhall
Scarcely  be  able  to  endure  it.  Therefore,  dear  Lord
and  Bridegroom,  I  pray  Thee  to  make  my  burden
fomewhat  more  tolerable,  or  elfe  to  take  a  part  of  it
away."  Then  the  Bridegroom  anfwers,  "  Tell  me
then,  dear  Bride,  mould  the  Bride  fare  better  than
the  Bridegroom  has  fared  ?  If  thou  defireft  to  meet
the  Bridegroom,  thou  muft  imitate  Him  in  fome  fort,
and  it  is,  moreover,  reafonable  that  a  faithful  Bride
fhould  fuffer  fomewhat  with  Him  for  her  Bride-

E  4


The  Bride's
vow.


The  Bride-
groom's fr  ft
gift  of  fore
temptations.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


His  fecond
gift,  that  Jhe
can  take  no
pleafure  in
aught  of 'her
own.


The  Bride's
fears.


groom's  fake."  Now  when  the  Bride  heareth  what
is  the  will  of  her  Bridegroom,  and  how  grave  a  matter
it  is,  me  is  fore  affrighted,  and  fays,  "  Dear  Lord  and
Bridegroom,  be  not  wroth  with  me,  for  I  will  gladly
hearken  unto  Thee :  appoint  unto  me  what  Thou
wilt ;  I  am  willing  to  fuffer  all  things  with  Thy  help
and  in  Thy  love."  When  the  Bridegroom  heareth
this,  He  loveth  the  Bride  yet  better  than  He  did
before,  and  giveth  her  to  drink  of  a  ftill  better  cup.
This  cup  is  that  me  is  to  ceafe  from  all  her  own
thoughts,  and  all  her  works  and  refrainings  will  give
her  no  content,  for  me  can  take  pleafure  in  nothing
that  is  her  own.  However  good  the  actions  may  be
in  themfelves,  me  is  always  thinking  how  me  mall
anger  her  Bridegroom  therewith,  and  feareth  much
that  me  will,  perhaps,  have  to  fuffer  a  great  punilh-
ment  for  them  hereafter.  Moreover,  me  is  derided
by  all,  and  thefe  things  are  accounted  her  folly.

Now,  children,  by  reafbn  of  all  thefe  things,  her
natural  powers  become  wearied  out  and  grow  feeble,
infomuch  that  me  is  conftantly  in  fear  left  me  mould
not  hold  out  to  the  end,  but  muft  die  at  laft ;  and
hereupon  me  is  greatly  terrified,  for  me  is  yet  fome-
what  timorous  and  faint-hearted.  Then  me  cries
earneftly  unto  the  Bridegroom,  and  fays,  "  Ah  !  dear
Lord  and  Bridegroom,  how  great  are  Thy  terrors  ;


The  Reverend  DocJor  John  Tauler.


know  that  I  cannot  endure  them  long  :  I  muft  die."
But  the  Bridegroom  anfwers,  "  If  thou  wilt  in  truth
go  out  to  meet  thy  Bridegroom,  it  is  fitting  that  thou
fliould  firft  tread  fbme  portion  of  the  path  that  He
has  travelled.  Now  whereas  the  Bridegroom  has  fuf-
fered  fliame,  hunger,  cold,  thirft,  heat,  and  bitter
pains,  for  three  and  thirty  years,  and  at  laft  a  bitter
death,  for  the  Bride's  fake,  out  of  pure  love,  is  it  not
juft  and  right  that  the  Bride  fliould  venture  even  her
life  for  the  Bridegroom's  fake,  out  of  love,  and  with
all  her  heart  ?  Verily,  if  thou  hadft  the  right  fort  of
love  and  true  faithfulnefs  unto  thy  Bridegroom,  all
thy  fear  would  vanifli."

Then  when  fhe  hears  thefe  words  of  the  Bride-
groom her  whole  heart  is  moved  with  fear,  and  flie
fays,  "  Ah  !  dear  Lord,  I  acknowledge  in  all  fmcerity
that  I  have  done  wrong,  and  I  am  out  of  all  meafure
terrified  at  it ;  I  grieve  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart
that  I  have  not  with  a  faithful  heart  yielded  myfelf
up  unto  Thee,  even  unto  death.  Dear  Lord  and
Bridegroom,  I  here  vow  and  promifc  to  Thee  furely
that  all  which  Thou  willcft  I  alfo  will.  Come  fick-
nefs,  come  health,  come  pleafure  or  pain,  fweet  or
bitter,  cold  or  heat,  wet  or  dry,  whatever  Thou  willeft,
that  do  I  alfo  will ;  and  defirc  altogether  to  come  out
from  my  own  will,  and  to  yield  a  whole  and  willing


The  Bride-
groom's
anftcer,  that
Jhe  muft  be
made  like
unto  Him.


The  Bride's
bumble  fub-
mijjion.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


The  Bride-
groom's gift
of  yet  for er
trials.


The  Bride's
joy  infuffer-

ing  for  His
fake.


obedience  unto  Thee,  and  never  to  deflre  aught  elfe
cither  in  will  or  thought :  only  let  Thy  will  be  accom-
plifhed  in  me,  Thy  poor  unworthy  creature,  in  time
and  in  eternity.  For,  dear  Lord,  when  I  look  at  what  I
am,  I  am  not  worthy  that  the  earth  mould  bear  me."

Now  when  the  Bridegroom  feeth  this  entire  and
faithful  will  in  the  Bride,  and  her  deep  and  thorough
humility,  what  does  He  then  do  ?  His  heart  yearns
over  the  Bride,  and  giveth  her  a  very  coftly,  noble,
fweet  cup  to  drink.  What  is  this  cup  ?  It  is  that
(he  fuffers  yet  far  more  from  all  manner  of  tempta-
tions and  tribulation  than  me  has  ever  fuffered  before.
And  when  the  Bride  perceiveth  this,  and  feeth  the
Bridegroom's  earneftnefs  and  good  pleafure  concerning
her,  me  fuffereth  all  thefe  things  willingly  and  gladly
for  the  Bridegroom's  fake,  and  boweth  herfelf  down
humbly  before  Him,  and  faith,  "  Ah  !  dear  Lord  and
Bridegroom,  it  is  juft  and  right  that  Thou  fhouldeft
not  will  as  I  will,  but  I  defire  and  ought  to  will  as
Thou  wilt ;  I  receive  this  gift  right  willingly  and
gladly  for  Thy  love  from  Thy  divine  hand,  whether
it  be  pleafant  or  painful  to  the  flefh,  I  acquiefce
wholly  in  it  for  love  of  Thee."

Now  when  the  Bridegroom,  in  His  eternal  wifdom,
perceives  this  difpofition  within  His  humble  Bride,
and  her  thorough  earneftnefs,  me  begins  to  grow  pre-


The  Reverend  Doctor  John  T aider.


59


clous  to  Him,  and  from  hearty  love  He  giveth  her  to
fuffer  in  all  her  nature,  until  the  Bride  is  wholly
purified  from  all  faults  and  {lain  of  fin,  and  become
perfectly  fair  and  unfpotted.  Then  He  fays,  "  Now
rife  up,  my  beloved,  my  pleafant,  my  beautiful  Bride,
for  Thou  art  pure  and  without  fpot,  and  altogether
lovely  in  my  eyes."  Then  He  looks  upon  her  with
infinite,  mighty,  divine  love.  To  this  joyful  high-
tide  cometh  the  Father  of  the  Eternal  Bridegroom,
and  faith  to  the  Bride,  "  Rife  up,  my  lovely,  chofen
beloved,  it  is  time  to  go  to  Church,"  and  He  taketh
the  Bridegroom  and  the  Bride,  and  leadeth  them  to
the  Church,  and  marries  them  to  each  other,  and
binds  them  together  with  divine  love  ;  yea,  God  doth
bind  them  together  in  bonds  fo  faft  that  they  can
never  be  parted  again,  either  in  time  or  eternity.
And  when,  in  thefe  divine  efpoufals,  they  have  been
made  one,  the  Bridegroom  faith,  "  O,  beloved  and
Eternal  Father,  what  mall  be  our  wedding-gift?"
And  the  Father  faith,  "  The  Holy  Ghoft,  for  that  it
is  His  office  to  be  in  the  Father's  flead."  And  He
fheds  forth  upon  the  Bride  the  torrent  of  divine  love,
and  this  love  flows  out  unto  the  Bridegroom,  info-
much  that  the  Bride  lofeth  herfelf,  and  is  intoxicated
with  love,  fb  that  me  forgets  herfelf  and  all  creatures,
in  time  or  eternity,  together  with  herfelf.


The  beauty  of
the  purified
Bride.


The  mar-
riage-feaft.


The  gift  of
the  Father,


6o


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


The  joy  of
tbe  Bride.


The  people
are  Jirangely
moved  kereat.


Now  he  only  who  is  bidden  to  fuch  a  fpiritual,
glorious  marriage-feaft,  and  has  obeyed  the  call,  does
for  the  firft  time  perceive  and  tafte  the  real,  true,
blefled,  gracious  fweetnefs  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Now
is  this  Bride  a  true  worfhipper,  for  me  worfhippeth
the  Father  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  this  marriage-feaft
is  joy  upon  joy,  and  therein  is  more  peace  and  joy  in
one  hour  than  all  the  creatures  can  yield  in  time  or
in  eternity.  The  joy  that  the  Bride  hath  with  the
Bridegroom  is  fo  vaft  that  no  fenfes  or  reafon  can
apprehend  or  attain  unto  it."

As  the  Doctor  fpoke  thefe  words  a  man  cried  out
with  a  loud  voice,  "  It  is  true  !"  and  fell  down  as  if
he  \vere  dead.  Then  a  woman  called  out  from  the
crowd  and  faid,  "  Matter,  leave  off,  or  this  man  will
die  on  our  hands."

Then  the  Matter  faid,  "  Ah,  dear  children,  and  if
the  Bridegroom  take  the  Bride  and  lead  her  home  with
Him,  we  will  gladly  yield  her  to  Him  ;  neverthelefs,
I  will  make  an  end  and  leave  off.  Dear  children,  let
us  all  cry  unto  the  Lord  our  God  in  Heaven.  For
verily  we  have  all  need  fo  to  do,  feeing  that,  alas  !  we
have  grown  fo  dull  of  hearing  and  foolifh  of  heart  that
none  of  us  has  companion  on  his  fellow,  although
we  confefs  that  we  are  all  called  brothers  and  fitters.
There  be  alfo  few  who  are  willing  to  fight  their  way


The  Reverend  DoElor  John  Tauler.


61


againft  their  own  flefh,  and  follow  the  Bridegroom,
in  order  to  reach  a  nobler  joy  and  a  glorious  wedding-
feaft.

I  give  you  to  know  that  in  thefe  days  thofe  be  few
and  far  between  who  do  truly  go  out  to  meet  the
Bridegroom,  fuch  as  there  were  many  in  the  olden
time.  Therefore  it  behoveth  each  one  to  look  at
himfelf  and  confider  his  ways  with  great  earneftnefs.
For  the  time  is  at  hand — nay,  it  is  already  come —
when  it  may  be  laid  of  mofl  who  are  now  living  here,
that  "  they  have  eyes  and  fee  not,  and  ears  that  hear
not."  Dear  children,  let  us  all  ftrive  to  enter  into  this
wedding- feaft,  moil  rich  in  joy,  and  honour,  and
blefTednefs.

But  when  the  Bride  departs  from  this  marriage-
feaft  and  is  left  to  herfelf,  and  beholds  that  me  has
come  back  again  to  this  miserable  earthly  ftate,  me
fays  within  herfelf,  "  O  !  poor  miferable  creature  that
I  am,  am  I  here  again  ? "  And  me  is  fad  in  herfelf;
neverthelefs,  me  is  fb  utterly  refigned  in  boundlefs
humility  to  her  Bridegroom,  that  me  in  no  wife  may
think  of  or  defire  His  prefence,  becaufe  me  deems  her-
felf wholly  unworthy  thereof.  But  the  Bridegroom
does  not  therefore  forfake  her,  but  looketh  upon  His
Bride  from  time  to  time,  becaufe  He  well  knoweth
that  none  will  or  can  comfort  her,  but  He  alone.


The  Majter
biddeth  them
all  ft  rive  to
come  to  this
marriage-
Jeaft.


The  Bride* s
farrows  while
jbe  is  yet  in

this  earthly
ftate.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


The  cvmfort
Jbe  bath
therein  from
the  love  of
the  Bride-
groom.


The  End.


And  now  that  you  have  heard  this,  let  it  not  fur-
prife  you  that  I  have  not  told  you  how  lovingly  the
Bridegroom  talketh  with  the  Bride.  It  might  well
happen  that  none  would  believe  me  (except  fuch  a
one  as  had  tried  and  tailed  it  himfelf),  mould  I  tell
you  what  ftrange  words  the  Bride  faith  to  her  Bride-
groom. We  find,  too,  in  the  Scriptures,  that  the
loving  foul  ofttimes  holds  fuch  converfe  with  her  Be-
loved as  words  cannot  perfectly  exprefs.  Nay,  does
it  not  happen  every  day  with  earthly  lovers,  that  a
bride  and  bridegroom  talk  together  in  fuch  wife  that
if  others  heard  it  they  would  declare  them  mad  or
drunk  ?

Now,  dear  children,  I  fear  that  I  have  kept  you
too  long ;  but  the  time  has  not  feemed  long  to  me  :
alfo,  I  have  faid  it  all  for  your  good,  and  could  not
well  this  time  make  my  fermon  fhorter  if  I  were
rightly  to  explain  my  meaning  ;  therefore  receive  it
kindly.

That  we  may  all  become  real,  true,  perfect  brides
of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  that  we  may  in  fincere,
true,  utter  humility  and  refignation,  go  out  to  meet
our  glorious  Bridegroom,  and  abide  with  Him  for
ever,  may  God  help  us,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the
Holy  Ghoft.  Amen."


The  Reverend  DoEtor  John  Tauler.


ELEVENTH  CHAPTER.


Of  a  great  prodigy  that  was  wrought  in  certain  perfons  through  this
fermon,  as  afterwards  appeared,  whereby  we  are  given  to  under-
Jland  what  great  wonders  God  works  by  good  inftruments,  that

is,  that  He  will  do  more  by  one  fermon  of  an  enlightened  man  than

by  a  hundred  others.


this  fermon  was  ended,  the  Matter
went  down  and  read  Mafs,  and  gave  the
Lord's  Body  to  certain  good  people  ;  but
after  the  fermon  the  man  perceived  that
fome  forty  people  remained  fitting  in  the  churchyard.
When  Mafs  was  over  he  told  the  Mafter  of  it,  and
they  went  out  to  where  he  had  feen  the  people  fitting
that  they  might  fee  how  it  was  with  them.  But  in
the  meantime,  while  the  Mafter  had  been  celebrating
Mafs,  they  had  rifen  up  and  gone  away,  except  twelve,
who  were  ftill  there.  Then  faid  the  Mafter  to  the
Dear  fon,  what  doft  thou  think  we  had  beft


man,


do  with  thefe  people  ?"  Then  the  man  went  from
one  to  another  and  touched  them,  but  they  lay  as  if
they  were  dead,  and  fcarcely  moved.  The  Mafter
knew  not  what  to  think  of  this  ftrange  thing,  for  he


The  man
perceives  the
people  tarry
in  the  church-
yard.


The  Hiftory  and  Life  of


The  Mafter
f ears  fame  of
them  be  dead,


But  the  man
bids  them  be
brought  into
the  convent
until  they
come  to  tbem-
f elves.


had  never  feen  the  like  before,  and  fo  he  faid  to  the
man,  "  Tell  me,  what  doft  thou  think  ?  Are  the  peo-
ple alive  or  dead  ?"  Then  he  fmiled  and  faid,  "  If
they  were  dead,  it  would  be  your  fault  and  the  Bride-
groom's ;  how  then  mould  you  bring  them  round
again  ?"  The  Mafter  faid,  "  But  if  the  Bridegroom
be  with  me  in  this  bufinefs,  ought  I  to  awaken
them  ?"  The  man  anfwered,  "  Sir,  thefe  people  are
ftill  in  this  prefent  ftate,  and  I  wiih.  that  you  would
afk  the  convent  ladies  to  let  them  be  carried  into
their  cloifter,  that  they  may  not  take  fome  ficknefs
and  harm  to  their  bodies,  by  lying  in  the  open  air
on  the  cold  earth."  And  they  did  fo  ;  and  the  people
were  brought  into  a  warm  place.  Then  the  convent
ladies  faid,  "  Dear  fir,  we  have  a  nun  here  to  whom
the  fame  thing  has  happened,  and  me  is  lying  on  her
bed  as  if  me  were  dead."  Then  faid  the  Mafter,
"  My  dear  daughters,  be  patient,  for  God's  fake,  and
look  to  thefe  fick  people,  and  when  any  one  of  them
comes  to  himfelf  give  him  fomething  warm  to  take  ;
if  he  will  have  it,  give  it  him  in  Chrift's  name."  And
the  ladies  faid  they  would  willingly  do  fo.  So  the  Maf-
ter and  the  man  went  their  way,  and  entered  into  the
Mafter' s  cell.  Then  the  man  faid,  "  Now,  dear  Mafter,
what  think  you  of  this  ?  Has  the  like  ever  happened
to  you  in  your  life  before  ?  Now  I  wot  you  fee  what


The  Reverend  Doflor  John  Tattler.


wonders  God  works  with  good  tools.  Dear  fir,  I
perceive  that  this  fermon  will  ftir  many,  and  one  wrill
tell  it  to  another.  If  it  pleafe  you,  methinks  it  were
well  that  you  let  thefe  fick  children  reft  for  awhile,
for  this  fermon  will  give  them  plenty  to  digeft  for
fome  time,  and  if  you  think  it  good,  and  God  give
you  fo  to  do,  that  you  preach  a  fermon  alfo  to  thofe
who  are  in  the  world,  feeing  it  is  now  Lent."  And
the  Mafter  did  fo  gladly,  and  preached  alfo  to  thofe
who  were  in  the  world,  to  the  great  amendment  of
certain  of  them.*


*  Here  follow  two  chapters  in  the  original,  containing  (ketches  of  other
fermons  preached  by  Tauler  j  but  as  they  are  lefs  valuable  than  moft  of  his
fermons,  and  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  progrefs  of  the  ftory,  I
have  judged  it  bell  to  omit  them. — TR.


The  Mafter
preaches  alfo
to  thofe  who
are  in  the
world.


66


The  Hiftory  and  Life  of


FOURTEENTH  CHAPTER.

How  this  holy  DocJor  came  to  his  end,  and  afterward  appeared  to
his  dear  friend  the  layman,  and  Jhowed  him  the  caufe  of  his
painful  departure  from  this  world,  to  wit  that  it  had  been  bis
purgatory,  after  which  he  attained  great  joy  and  eternal  bleffed-
nefs,  which  were  given  him  by  God  as  the  reward  of  his  good
and  faithful  teaching.


The  great  ef-
teem  in  which
the  Majler
came  to  be
held  through
all  the  land.


O  W  you  muft  know  that  the  Mafter  made
progrefs  in  the  divine  life,  and  received
fiich  wifdom,  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  that  he  preached  both  to  clergy
and  laity,  and  came  to  be  held  in  fuch  efteem  and
honour  throughout  the  land,  and  alfb  in  that  city,
that  whenever  the  people  had  any  weighty  matter  to
tranfa6t,  he  was  called  in  to  fettle  it  with  his  wifdom,
whether  it  concerned  fpiritual  or  temporal  affairs,  and
whatever  he  counfelled  them  was  right  in  their  eyes,
and  they  hearkened  unto  him  gladly.  And  after  that
the  Mafter  had  led  this  faithful  life  full  eight  years,
God  would  not  leave  His  fervant  longer  in  this  earthly
mifery,  and  faw  fit  to  take  him  to  Himself  without  pur-
gatory. Wherefore  He  fent  His  judgments  upon  him,
and  vifited  him  with  ficknefs,  fo  that  the  Mafter  kept


The  Reverend  Doffor  John  T aider.


his  bed  for  more  than  twenty  weeks,  and  his  fuffer-
ings  were  very  fore,  and  his  pains  grievous.  Then
he  perceived,  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that
he  was  about  to  depart  from  this  world  (God  was
minded  to  reward  him  for  his  work)  ;  wherefore  he
fent  for  the  man,  his  dear  friend,  and  begged  him  to
come  to  him,  for  he  expected  not  to  be  much  longer  in
this  world.  And  the  man  hearkened  and  came  to  the
Matter,  who  received  him  after  a  moft  friendly  fort ;
and  the  man  was  glad  that  he  found  him  yet  alive,
and  faid,  "  Dear  Mailer,  how  fares  it  with  you  ?"
The  Mafter  faid,  "  I  believe  that  the  time  is  very
near  when  God  purpoles  to  take  me  from  this  world,
for  which  caufe,  dear  fon,  it  is  a  great  confolation  to
me  that  thou  art  prefent  at  my  end.  I  pray  thee
take  thefe  books  which  are  lying  there :  thou  wilt
find  written  therein  all  thy  difcourfe  with  me  afore-
time, and  alfb  my  anfwers,  and  thou  wilt  find  fome-
what  concerning  my  life,  and  the  dealings  of  God
with  me  His  poor  unworthy  fervant.  Dear  Ion,  if
thou  think  fit,  and  if  God  give  thee  grace,  make  a
little  book  of  it."  Then  faid  the  man,  "  Dear  Mafter,
I  have  written  down  five  of  your  fermons,  and  if  it
pleafe  you,  I  will  write  them  out  alfo,  and  will  make
a  little  book  about  you."  Quoth  the  Mafter,  "  Dear

fon,  I  lay  upon  thee  my  moft  folemn  admonition,  that

p2


His  long  and
grievous  jick-
nefs.


He  fends  for
bis  friend  tbt


man.


68


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


He  delivers
bis  writings
to  the  man,
and  charges
him  to  make
a  little  book
concerning
him,  not  nam-
ing their
names.


The  Mafter>s
promife  to
vijit  the  man
after  bis
death,  and
bis  bard  end.


thou  write  nothing  about  me,  and  that  thou  do  not
mention  my  name ;  for  thou  muft  know  that  of  a
truth  the  life,  and  words,  and  works  "which  God  has
wrought  through  me  a  poor,  unworthy,  fmful  man,
are  not  mine,  but  belong  to  God  Almighty,  now  and
for  evermore  ;  therefore,  dear  fon,  if  thou  wilt  write
it  down  for  the  profit  of  our  fellow-Chriftians,  write
it  fb  that  neither  my  name  nor  thine  be  named,  but
thou  mayft  fay  the  Matter  and  the  man.  Moreover,
thou  fhalt  not  fuffer  the  book  to  be  read  or  feen  by
any  one  in  this  town,  left  he  mould  mark  that  it  was  I,
but  take  it  home  with  thee  to  thy  own  country,  and
let  it  not  come  out  during  my  life."

And  for  a  fpace  of  eleven  days  the  Mafter  held
much  difcourfe  with  the  man.  After  that,  the  time
came  that  the  Mafter  mould  die.  Then  he  faid,
"  Dear  fon,  I  pray  thee,  in  God's  name,  to  give  thy
confent  to  it,  if  God  mould  permit  my  fpirit  to  come
back  to  thee,  and  tell  thee  how  it  fared  with  me."
The  man  anfwered,  "  Dear  Mafter,  if  God  will  have
it  Ib,  I  am  alfb  willing."  But  it  came  to  pafs  that  at
the  laft  the  Mafter  had  a  moft  horrible  and  frightful
death-ftruggle,  infomuch  that  all  the  brethren  in  the
convent,  and  alfo  other  people,  were  greatly  terrified
and  diftrefled  thereat,  and  were  fore  amazed  at  the
dreadful  anguifh  that  they  faw  in  his  death.


The  Reverend  DocJor  John  Tauler.


Now  when  he  was  dead,  all  who  were  in  the  con-
vent and  the  city  were  filled  with  forrow.  But  when
they  perceived  who  was  the  man  that  had  been  fo
long  his  bofom-friend  in  fecret,  they  came  and  defired
to  mow  him  honour,  and  befought  him  to  be  their
gueft.  But  when  he  was  aware  of  their  intent,  he
fled  that  fame  hour  out  of  the  city,  and  travelled
home  again.  And  as  he  was  on  the  way,  the  third
day  after  the  Matter's  death,  at  nightfall  he  was  pafs-
ing  through  a  little  village  with  his  fervant,  and  feeing
a  nobleman  go  paft  along  the  road,  he  faid  to  him,
"  My  friend,  is  there  any  inn  in  this  village  ?  "  The
nobleman  anfwered,  "  No."  Then  faid  the  man,
"  Then  mow  us  the  kindnefs,  dear  friend,  in  God's
name,  to  let  us  lodge  in  thy  houie  for  to-night,  and
take  for  it  what  thou  wilt."  Then  he  faid,  "  If  you
will  put  up  with  fuch  things  as  we  have,  I  will  wil-
lingly lodge  you,  and  give  you  the  beft  in  my  power."
So  he  took  him  home  with  him.  \Vhen  it  was  night
he  laid  the  man  upon  a  feather-bed,  and  mowed  the
fervant  into  the  barn  to  lie  upon  the  ftraw.  Now  in
the  night  the  man  awoke  and  heard  a  voice  clofe  by  ;
yet  he  faw  no  one.  Then  a  muddcr  ran  through
him,  and  he  made  the  fign  of  the  Crofs.  Then  the
voice  faid,  "  Fear  not,  dear  fon,  it  is  I,  the  Matter."
Then  faid  the  man,  "  Dear  Mailer,  is  it  you  ?  Then

F  3


The  tobo/e
city  is  filled
with  forrow
for  him,  and
would  do  hon-
our for  bis
sake  to  bis
friend.


His  friend
departetb
fecretly  home-
wards.


The  Hi/lory  and  Life  of


Tbefpirit  of
the  Mafter
comes  to  him
three  days
afterwards,
and  opens  to
him  the  caufe
of  bis  bard
death.


The  Mafter
tells  him  of
bis  prefent
bappinefs,


I  befeech  you,  with  my  whole  heart,  to  tell  me,  if
God  will,  how  it  ftandeth  with  you,  and  how  it  came
to  pafs  that  you  had  fuch  a  dreadful  end  ;  for  your
brethren  in  the  convent  were  much  aftonied  at  you,
and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  your  frightful  end  will  be  a
great  ftumbl ing-block  to  your  own  brethren  in  the
convent."  Then  faid  the  Matter's  voice,  "  Dear  fon,
that  will  I  tell  thee.  Thou  muft  know  that  our
Lord  God  faw  fit  to  appoint  me  fuch  a  hard  death
in  order  that  the  holy  angels  might  ftraightway  re-
ceive my  foul  to  themselves ;  and  for  the  fame  caufe
thou  malt  alfo  have  fuch  a  like  hard  death.  It  was
needful  that  I  mould  fuffer  this  as  a  purgatory  ;  but
know  likewife,  my  dear  fon,  that  the  evil  fpirits  tor-
mented me  greatly,  and  aflailed  me  with  fuch  cun-
ning and  inftancy,  that  I  was  in  conftant  fear  left  my
courage  mould  fail  me.  But,  however  hard  my
death  was,  it  was  as  nothing  compared  to  the  joy
which  the  Almighty,  Eternal,  and  Merciful  God  hath
given  me  in  return.  Know,  dear  fon,  that  the  fame
hour  in  which  my  foul  left  my  body,  the  blefTed  angels
received  it,  and  conducted  me  to  Paradife,  and  faid  to
me,  '  Here  fhalt  thou  tarry  five  days,  and  malt  know
no  anxiety  or  fear  left  the  evil  fpirits  mould  harm
thee  any  more,  neither  malt  thou  labour  any  more,
only  thou  fhalt  be  deprived  for  thefe  five  days  of  the


The  Reverend  Doctor  JoJm  Tauler*


bliffful  company  of  the  bleiTed  in  eternity.  And  then
we  will  come  again  with  joy,  and  bring  thee  to  the
unfpeakable  joys,  and  reward  thee  for  thy  good  and
faithful  teaching  and  ufeful  counfels ;'  all  which  I
have  received  by  thy  excellent  inftruction,  for  the
which  I  can  never  thank  God  and  thee  enough."

Then  faid  the  man  :  "  Dear  Matter,  I  befeech  you
from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  that  when  you  come
into  the  prefence  of  God,  you  pray  Him  for  me."
But  whatever  the  man  faid  after  this,  or  whatever
queftions  he  put,  no  one  anfwered  him  again.  Then
he  would  fain  have  flept,  and  turned  from  one  fide  to
the  other ;  but  it  availed  him  nothing :  he  got  no
more  reft  that  night,  and  could  hardly  wait  till  it  was
light.  And  at  day-break  he  rofe  up,  and  wrote  that
fame  hour  word  to  the  Prior  and  brethren  of  all  things
that  the  fpirit  had  faid  to  him,  and  returned  to  his  own
houfe,  and  came  alfo  to  a  good  and  bleffed  end.

That  we  may  all  follow  the  pattern  of  our  Lord
Jefus  Chrift,  infomuch  that  after  this  miferable  life
and  this  tranfitory  world  we  may  come  to  eternal
and  never-ending  joys, — to  God  and  His  chofen  and
beloved  friends,  may  He  help  us,  God  the  Father,
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Amen  !

Here  endetb  the  Hijlory  of  the  Life  of  the  enlightened

Do  51  or  John  Tattler.

F  4


and  thanks
the  man  for
the  good  in-
ftruftion  be
bad  given
him  in  this
life.


At  daybreak
the  man
arifes  and
writes  word
of  bis  vifeon
to  the  Maf-
ter's  convent  t


The  end.


Intro  duBory  Notice

RESPECTING

TAULER'S    LIFE    AND    TIMES,

By  the  TRANSLATOR.


OHN  TAULER,  who  appears  "as  the  Mafter"  in  the
foregoing  Hiftory,  was  born  at  Strafburg  in  the
year  1290.  His  father  was  moft  probably  Nicolas
Tauler,  whofe  name  occurs  among  thofe  of  the
fenators  of  Strafburg  in  1313.  At  all  events,  he  belonged  to  a
tolerably  wealthy  family,  and  might  have  lived  on  his  patrimony,
fmce  he  tells  us  in  one  of  his  fermons :  "  Had  I  known  when  I
lived  as  my  father's  fon,  all  that  I  know  now,  I  would  have  lived
on  his  heritage  and  not  upon  alms."  He  devoted  himfelf,  how-
ever, in  early  years  to  a  clerical  life,  and  entered  the  Dominican
Order  in  Strafburg,  taking  up  his  abode  in  the  handfome,  fpacious


74  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

convent  belonging  to  that  Order,  the  church  of  which  was  con-
fecrated  in  the  year  1308.  A  fitter  of  his  was  a  nun  in  the
convent  of  St.  Nicolas  at  Krautenau,  likewife  belonging  to  the
Dominican  Order.  In  what  year  Tauler  renounced  the  world
cannot  be  determined  with  precifion,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt
that  he  did  fo  at  the  fame  time  with  his  friend  John  von  Dam-
bach,  in  1308.  From  allufions  in  his  writings,  it  feems  probable
that  he  foon  after,  with  the  fame  friend,  betook  himfelf  to  Paris,
the  great  metropolis  of  Chriftian  learning  in  that  age,  in  order  to
ftudy  theology  in  the  famous  Dominican  College  of  St.  Jacques,
from  which  the  monks  of  that  Order  were  called  Jacobins  in  France.
The  Univerfity  concentrated  within  its  precincts  reprefentatives
of  the  varied  intellectual  tendencies  of  the  age.  Up  to  the
middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  it  had  been  diflinguimed  by
the  freedom  of  thought  which  prevailed  among  its  teachers,
unfhackled  as  they  were  by  any  epifcopal,  almoft  by  any  regal
jurifdi&ion  over  their  doctrine,  and  acknowledging  only  the
authority  of  the  Pope  himfelf,  directly  exercifed.  The  influence
of  the  all-queftioning  Abelard,  the  fubtle  Gilbert  de  la  Pore'e,
the  pantheiftic  Amaury  de  Bene,  and  other  free-thinking  teachers,
was  not  extinct,  though  they  lay  under  the  cenfure  of  herefy.
The  works  of  Ariftotle,  condemned  in  1 209,  had  been  gradually
introduced  into  the  fchools,  with  the  Arabian  commentaries  of
Avicenna  and  Averrhoes.  The  Dominican  Order,  founded  for  the
extirpation  of  herefy,  early  recognifed  the  prime  neceffity  of  pro-
viding inftruclion  which  fhould  purify  the  ftreams  of  human


The  Univerjlty  of  Paris.  75

thought  at  their  fountain-head ;  and  in  fpite  of  the  opposition
raifed  by  the  heads  of  the  Univerfity,  fucceeded,  in  1228,  in  efta-
bliming  theological  chairs  in  their  convent  in  Paris,  from  which  to
combat  the  heathenizing  philofophers  of  Chriftendom  with  their
own  weapons  of  reafon  ;  and  in  Albert  the  Great  and  Thomas
Aquinas  they  may  be  faid  to  have  reconquered  philofophy  for  the
Church,  and  Chriftianized  Ariftotle,  who  thenceforth  became  the
eftablifhed  matter  of  philofophy,  but  was  ftudied  through  the
commentaries  of  the  great  Dominican  luminary.

But  the  coloflal  volumes  of  the  fchoolmen,  embracing  as
they  did  within  the  vaft  fweep  of  their  fpeculation  difquifitions
upon  the  nature  of  the  Godhead,  upon  the  univerfe  of  fuper-
human  intelligence  revealed  by  the  pfeudo-Dionyfms,  and  upon  the
nature  of  man  and  matter, — while  affording  a  tremendous  gym-
naftic  difcipline  to  the  human  intellect,  were  barren  in  actual
practical  refults,  and  might  well  be  unfatisfacliory  to  one  wrhofe  foul
craved  to  be  fomething  more  than  a  logical  athlete.  And  it  is
evident  that,  in  his  later  life,  Tauler  did  not  look  back  upon
the  fcholaftic  theology  which  he  ftudied  during  his  fojourn  in
Paris  as  having  taught  him  that  which  anfwered  to  the  needs  of
his  fpirit.  Thus,  in  one  paflage  of  his  fermons  he  lays  :  "  Thefe
great  matters  of  Paris  do  read  vaft  books,  and  turn  over  the
leaves  with  great  diligence,  which  is  a  very  good  thing ;  but
thefe  [fpiritually  enlightened  men]  read  the  true  living  book,
wherein  all  things  live :  they  turn  over  the  pages  of  the  heavens
and  the  earth,  and  read  therein  the  mighty  and  admirable  won-


Taulers  Life  a?id  Times.


ders  of  God."  He  feldom  cites  any  of  the  fchoolmen  in  his
writings,  with  the  exception  of  "  Matter  Thomas  ;"  but  he  not
unfrequently  refers  to  Ariftotle,  under  the  title  of  the  "  Natural
Mafter,"  or  the  "  Mailer  of  Nature."  The  authors  who  feem
to  have  had  the  greateft  attraction  for  him,  and  whom  he  muft
have  early  made  the  fubjecl:  of  his  ftudy,  judging  from  the
acquaintance  with  them  difplayed  in  his  writings,  and  the  little
leifure  which  he  could  have  had  for  fuch  purfuits  during  the  bufy
activity  of  his  later  years,  were  the  more  myftical  and  fpeculative
among  the  ecclefiaftical  writers,  the  pfeudo-Dionyfius,  the  Monks
of  the  fchool  of  St.  Victor,  St.  Bernard,  and  above  all  St.
Auguftin.  Neither  was  he  a  ftranger  to  the  Neoplatonifb,  —
Proclus  is  referred  to  feveral  times  in  his  writings.

While  the  whole  bent  of  Tauler's  mind  thus  appears  to  have  dif-
pofed  him  to  contemplation  on  the  great  fpiritual  queftions  imme-
diately affecting  man's  actual  deftiny,  rather  than  more  purely  intel-
lectual thefes,  he  muft,  on  returning  from  Paris  to  Strafburg,  have
come  in  contact  with  feveral  of  the  myftical  teachers  whom  we
know  to  have  flourimed  there  about  this  time,  and  who  certainly
cannot  have  been  without  influence  on  the  courfe  of  his  mental
development.  The  moft  eminent  of  thefe  was  the  celebrated
Mafter  Eckart,  a  brother  of  his  own  Order,  who,  after  having
filled  the  important  offices  of  Provincial  in  Saxony  and  Vicar-
General  in  Bohemia,  had  returned  to  Strafburg,  where,  with  the
earneftnefs  of  profound  conviction,  he  was  now  difcouriing  to
the  people  in  their  native  tongue,  on  lofty  philofophical  themes,


The  Schoolmen  and  Mqfter  Eckart.  77

till  then  only  deemed  fit  to  be  treated  of  in  Latin  before  learned
aflemblies ;  and  which  he  handled  in  a  way  that  he  himfelf  con-
fefles  to  be  contrary  to  what  any  of  the  Matters  had  taught
hitherto.  Yet  it  is  clear,  from  the  accufations  afterwards  brought
againft  him  of  mifleading  the  vulgar,  that  the  metaphyfical
fpeculations  which  form  the  ftaple  of  his  fermons,  though  they
would  feem  to  us  utterly  beyond  the  range  of  ordinary  thinkers,
muft  have  touched  fome  chords  in  the  hearts  of  the  multitude,
exprefled  as  they  are,  not  only  in  a  marp,  clear,  forcible  ftyle,  but
often  clothed  in  a  thoroughly  popular  form,  and  illuftrated  by
metaphors  appealing  to  the  eye,  and  allegorical  interpretations  of
Scripture  hiftories.*

The  man  himfelf  and  his  doctrines  were  equally  calculated  to
make  a  powerful  impreffion  on  the  mind  of  the  youthful  Tauler,
already  diflatisfied  with  the  frigid  fubtleties  of  the  dialecticians,
and  arriving  at  an  age  when  he  was  called  on  to  exercife  his  voca-


*  I  borrow  the  following  note  from  Schmidt's  "Eckart"  Theolog.  Stud.  a.  Krit.  1 839,  S.  684,
An.  1 5.  "  The  raifmg  of  the  widow's  fon  furnifhes  him  with  materials  for  more  than  one
"  allegory.  In  the  Second  Sermon  on  the  Sixteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity,  the  widow  is  firft
"  the  foul,  and  her  dead  fon,  the  Reafon,  which  Our  Lord  animates  with  new  life ;  afterwards
"  a  widow  fignifies  a  forfaken  one,  and  taken  in  an  abftract  fenfe,  a  ftate  of  lonelinefs,  and  forth-
"  with  Eckart  fprings  to  the  conclufion,  that  therefore  we  alfo  muft  forfake  all  things.  In  the
•'  ftory  of  the  woman  of  Samaria,  the  woman  is  a  type  of  the  foul,  the  five  hufbands  whom  fhe
"  has  had  are  the  five  fenfes ;  with  thefe  fhe  had  finned,  and  therefore  are  they  dead.  Chrift
"  fays  :  '  Bring  hither  thy  hufband  ;'  this  is  Free-will.  She  replies  :  '  I  have  no  hufband  ;'
"  on  which  Chrift  fays :  '  Thou  haft  well  faid  I  have  no  hufband ;'  that  is,  her  Free-will  was
"  not  her  own,  but  in  bondage  to  fin,  etc."


78  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

tion  as  a  preaching  friar  in  times  of  extraordinary  commotion
and  perplexity.

Eckart's  keen  and  foaring  intellecl:  had  been  trained  by  a  clofe
ftudy  of  the  Fathers  and  the  Schoolmen  before  he  became  a
profeflbr  in  the  convent  of  St.  Jacques  at  Paris,  in  which
petition  he  foon  acquired  no  ordinary  fame ;  being  efteemed
(according  to  the  ftatement  of  the  Abbot  Trithemius  in
his  great  encyclopaedia  of  ecclefiaftical  writers)  "  the  moft
learned  man  of  his  day  in  the  Ariftotelian  philofophy."  The
vivid  remembrance  of  fuch  a  mafter  would  be  ftill  lingering  in
the  hearts  of  many  pupils  when  Tauler  came  to  Paris ;  though
Eckart  himfelf  muft  have  quitted  his  profeflbrmip  fome  years
before,  as,  on  account  of  the  feverity  of  his  morals  and  the
firmnefs  of  his  character,  he  was  appointed,  in  1 304,  Provincial  of
the  Dominican  Order  in  Saxony,  where  he  laboured  with  fuch
fuccefs  in  the  reftoration  of  difcipline,  that  three  years  later  he
was  made  Vicar-General  of  Saxony,  with  the  exprefs  commiffion
to  undertake  any  improvements  and  reforms  in  the  Order  that
he  might  judge  neceflary.  In  this  new  fphere  of  action,  like-
wife,  he  foon  became  celebrated  as  a  preacher  and  metaphysical
teacher.  From  this  date,  when  he  was  held  in  reverence  by  the
Church,*he  difappears  from  our  view  for  a  fpace  of  fome  years;  after
which  we  find  him  in  Strafburg,  diverted  of  his  dignities,  but
preaching  with  great  effect  his  peculiar  doctrines,  now  in  his
mature  life  elaborated  into  a  fyilem  which  has  been  claimed  by
Hegel  and  fome  of  his  difciples  as  the  parent  of  the  German


Mafter  Eckarfs  Do&rines.  79

philofophy.*  To  fay  whether  this  claim  is  juft  would  require  a
knowledge  of  Hegel  and  his  fchool,  which  I  do  not  poffefs.-f*  That
which  was  the  aim  of  all  Eckart's  reafonings,  to  which  all  elfe
was  but  a  means,  was  the  perfecl  repofe  of  a  fpirit  in  abfolute
union  with  God,  and  dwelling  in  a  region  far  above  the  clouds  and
tempefts  of  this  changeful,  barren  life  of  fenfe.  He  himfelf  appears
to  have  attained  in  a  high  degree  to  this  ftate  of  abiding  peace ;
yet  his  writings  are  pervaded  by  a  ftrain  of  deep  lamentation
over  the  imperfections  of  this  earthly  fphere,  and  the  mifery
arifmg  from  a  fenfe  of  feparation  from  God.  In  fad:,  he  certainly
retains  a  pofitive  and  vivid  fenfe  of  the  nature  of  fin ;  whether
this  be  confiftent  with  Pantheifm  or  Hegelianifm,  I  leave  thofe
better  qualified  to  judge.  In  the  paffionate  endeavour  to  free
himfelf  from  the  entanglements  of  the  creature,  and  to  enter
into  living  union  with  God,  he,  however,  undoubtedly  does  not
efcape  the  danger  of  merging  created  exiftence  in  the  one  un-
created EfTence  which  alone  has  true  Being,  and  forgetting  the
limits  that  bar  our  approach  to  the  Infinite.  Thus  he  fays  :
"  That  word,  /  am,  can  none  truly  fpeak  but  God  alone."
"  He  has  the  Subftance  of  all  creatures  in  Himfelf;  He  is  a
"  being  that  has  all  Being  in  Himfelf."  "  All  things  are  in  God,
"  and  all  things  are  God."  "  All  creatures  in  themfelves  are


*  See  Schmidt's  Eckart.  Theol.  Stud.  u.  Krit.  1839,  S.  663.

f  Neither  is  my  acquaintance  with  Eckart  extenfive  ;   but  I  have  made  no  ftatement  in  the
text  which  does  not  feem  to  me  fubftantiated  by  what  I  have  read  of  his  writings.


8o  Tender's  Life  and  Times.

"  naught ;  all  creatures  are  a  fpeaking  of  God."  "  Doft  thou
"  afk  me  what  was  the  purpofe  of  the  Creator  when  He  made  the
"  creatures  ?  I  anfwer,  Repofe.  Doft  thou  afk  again  what  all
"  creatures  feek  in  their  fpontaneous  afpiration  ?  I  anfwer  again,
"  Repofe.  Doft  thou  afk  a  third  time  what  the  foul  feeks  in  all
"  her  motions  ?  I  anfwer,  Repofe.  Confcioufly  or  unconfcioufly
"  all  creatures  feek  their  proper  ftate.  The  ftone  cannot  ceafe
"  moving  till  it  touch  the  earth  ;  the  fire  rifes  up  to  heaven  :  thus
"  a  loving  foul  can  never  reft  but  in  God,  and  fo  we  fay  God  has
"  given  to  all  things  their  proper  place, — to  the  fifh  the  water,  to
"  the  bird  the  air,  to  the  beaft  the  earth,  to  the  foul  the  Godhead."
"  Simple  people  conceive  that  we  are  to  fee  God,  as  if  He  ftood
"  on  that  fide  and  we  on  this.  It  is  not  fb  ;  God  and  I  are  one  in
"  the  acl:  of  my  perceiving  Him."  "  O  noble  foul,  put  on  thefe
"  wings  to  thy  feet  and  rife  above  all  creatures,  and  above  thine
"  own  reafon,  and  above  the  angelic  choirs,  and  above  the  light
"  that  has  given  thee  ftrength,  and  throw  thyfelf  upon  the  heart  of
"  God  ;  there  malt  thou  lie  hidden  from  all  creatures."  But  if,  in
thus  denying  a  feparate  exiftence  to  the  creature,  he  ufes  expref-
fions  which  logically  conduct  to  Pantheifm,  on  the  other  hand  his
God  is  clearly  a  living  God ;  not  a  mere  objecl:  of  philofophical
thought,  but  an  actual  and  working  reality.*  So,  again,  fome  of  his

'  The  fecond  Sermon  in  the  following  collection,  which  is  undoubtedly  by  him,  exhibits
the  mode  in  which  he  prefents  abftraft  doctrines  clothed  in  a  popular  form,  and  is  not  an
unfavourable  specimen  of  his  ftyle,  though  even  more  fragmentary  than  fome  others  of  his
difcourfes.


Teftimonies  to  Eckart  s  Char  after.  81

expreflions  might  feem  to  imply  Antinomianifm,  as  when  he
fays :  "  Whenever  a  man  enters  into  this  union  with  God,  that
"  God  is  fo  dear  to  him  that  he  forgets  himfelf,  nor  feeks  him-
"  felf  either  in  time  or  in  eternity,  fo  oft  does  he  become  free
"  from  all  his  fins  and  all  his  purgatory,  though  he  mould  have
"  committed  all  the  fins  of  all  mankind  :"  and  we  can  hardly
doubt,  from  what  we  read  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit,
that  fome  did  abufe  Eckart's  doctrine  of  the  inward  freedom  of
the  fpirit  to  juftify  fin  in  pretenders  to  piety.  But  it  does  not
feem  that  even  his  enemies  ever  doubted  of  his  own  high  morality ;
while  Quetif  and  Echard,  in  their  Scriptores  or  dints  Pradicatorum,
praife  him  as  a  virum  moribus  et  fcientia  probatiffimum,  omni  laude
Jupenorem,  and  add  that  a  hundred  years  after  him  a  brother  of
his  Order  fays  of  him,  that  he  was  vita  purijjimus,  expeditus
D  off  or  Ecclejite,  fuo  tempore  incomparabilis  eruditione,  Jide,  conver-
Jhtione  et  moribus  injtgnis.

Eckart  always  endeavours  to  bring  his  fpeculations  into  com-
bination with  the  theology  of  the  Church  ;  but  the  interpre-
tation which  he  puts  upon  the  received  dogmas  often  deviates
widely  from  their  fpirit.*  He  evidently  regards,  nay,  openly


*  He  was,  for  inftance,  accufed  of  teaching  that  Hell  did  not  exift  :  his  real  teaching  was
that  it  confided  in  the  abfence  of  God,  as  appears  from  the  following  paflage  : — "  It  is  a
"  queftion,  what  burns  in  hell  ?  The  Matters  commonly  fay,  Self-will.  But  I  fay  of  a  truth
"  that  Nought  burns  in  hell.  Whereof  mark  this  likenefs  Were  you  to  take  a  burning  coal
"  and  lay  it  on  my  hand,  if  I  were  to  fay  that  the  coal  burnt  my  hand  I  mould  do  it  a  great

G


82  Tauler  s  Life  and  Times.

proclaims,  outward  rites  and  obfervances  as  not  neceflary  to  the
eflence  of  piety.  Traces  of  his  familiarity  with  the  Schoolmen
may  be  found  in  his  fubtile  and  often  purely  formal  diftin&ions
and  fyllogifms ;  but  their  fpirit  was  utterly  repugnant  to  his.
On  this  point  Profeflbr  Schmidt  fays : — "  Regarding  Neopla-
"  tonifm  as  by  no  means  incompatible  with  Chriftianity,  his
"  philofophical  views  refemble  in  their  general  tendency  thofe  of
"  Dionyiius  Areopagita,  combining  with  them  the  myftical  ele-
"  ments  contained  in  the  writings  of  St.  Auguftine.  The  theory
"  of  that  great  Father  refpecting  the  total  corruption  of  human
"  nature  does  not,  however,  occur  in  his  writings  in  the  fenfe  in
"  which  it  is  underftood  by  the  Church.  With  Plato  himfelf
"  he  is  not  unacquainted,  but  cites  him  feveral  times,  calling
"  him  '  the  great  Parfon'  ("Der  groffe  Pfajfej.  Scotus  Erigena,
"  the  tranflator  of  the  Platonizing  Dionyfius,  though  not  named
"  in  his  writings,  muft  be  regarded  as  furniming  the  ftarting
"  point  for  his  theories.  Of  the  other  myftics  of  the  middle  ages
"  he  only  names  St.  Bernard.  But  he  has  not  refted  within  the
"  iyftems  advanced  by  any  of  the  philofophers  he  ftudied ;  he


"  injuftice.  Strictly  {peaking,  what  burns  me  is  Nought ;  for  the  coal  has  fomething  in  it  which
"  my  hand  has  not.  See,  it  is  that  fame  Not  which  burns  me.  If  my  hand  poflefled  all  the
"  eflence  dnd  qualities  of  a  coal,  it  would  have  altogether  the  nature  of  fire ;  and  then,  if  you
"  were  to  throw  all  the  fire  that  ever  burnt  upon  my  hand,  it  would  not  give  me  pain.  In  like
"  manner,  I  fay,  if  God,  and  thofe  who  are  in  the  light  of  His  countenance,  have  aught  of  true
"  bleflednefs  which  thofe  have  not  who  are  feparated  from  God,  it  is  that  fame  Not  which  tor-
"  tures  the  fouls  that  are  in  hell,  more  than  any  fire  or  than  felf-will."


Eckarfs  Death  and  Co7idemnation.  83

"  made  all  the  ideas  that  he  may  have  derived  from  them  his
"  own,  and  gave  them  a  further  development,  fo  that  his  pofition
"  is  that  of  a  thoroughly  original  thinker."

After  preaching  fome  time  in  Strafburg,  Eckart  appears  to
have  removed  to  Cologne.  It  is  not  known  whether  or  not  he
had  found  it  neceflary  to  leave  the  former  city;  but  it  feems  not
improbable  that  he  may  have  fallen  under  accufation  of  herefy
there,  from  the  circumftance  that  many  of  the  propofitions
condemned  by  the  Bifhop  (John  of  Ochfenftein)  in  1317,  as
the  doctrines  of  the  Strafburg  Beghards,  agree,  often  word  for
word,  with  propofitions  to  be  found  in  Eckart's  writings.  In
Cologne  he  preached  publicly  for  a  few  years  in  the  church  of
his  convent,  and  taught  in  the  univerfity ;  but  he  was  not
fuffered  to  remain  long  unmolefted.  The  way  in  which  his
writings  were  used  by  the  Beghards,  who  were  condemned  by
the  Archbimop  of  Cologne  in  1322,  appears  to  have  drawn  the
attention  of  the  latter  to  his  preaching.  He  cited  Eckart  to
appear  before  him,  and  accuied  him  of  herefy ;  but  as  Eckart
refufed  to  fubmit  to  his  fentence,  and  continued  to  preach,  the
Archbifhop  appealed  to  the  Pope.  His  wrritings  were  at  length
condemned  in  a  bull  dated  March  1329,  from  which  it  appears
that  he  was  then  no  more,  as  it  is  ftated  that  he  had  returned
to  the  Catholic  faith  before  his  death.  It  feems  utterly  incon-
fiftent  with  the  deep  conviction  that  pervades  his  writings,  and
the  inflexibility  of  his  character,  to  fuppofe  that  he  mould  have
recanted  any  of  his  doctrines  ;  but  probably  he  merely  exprefTcd

G  "2


84  Tender  s  Life  and  Times.

his  adherence  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  which  he  never
feems  to  have  intended  to  impugn,  but  to  place  upon  what  he
regarded  as  their  true  foundation.  He  never  feparated  from  the
communion  of  the  Church,  and  gathered  round  him  in  Cologne
a  circle  of  ardent  admirers,  among  whom  was  probably  Tauler*
(who  feems  to  have  often  vifited  Cologne),  and  certainly  Sufo,
whofe  biographer  relates :  "  After  thefe  dreadful  fufferings  (of
confcience)  had  lafted  near  upon  ten  years,  ...  he  came  to  the
holy  Mafter  Eckart,  and  told  him  of  his  pain,  .  .  .  and  the
Doctor  helped  him  out  of  it."f

Tauler's  influence  upon  his  countrymen  has  been  fo  much
more  powerful  and  enduring  than  that  of  Eckart,  that  he  has
often  been  called  erroneoufly  the  firft  of  the  German  Myftics,
and  Eckart  reprefented  as  his  pupil.  While,  however,  in  his
general  caft  of  thought  and  language,  Tauler  bears  traces  of
Eckart's  influence,  his  views  do  not  appear  at  any  period  to  have
been  identical  with  thofe  of  his  forerunner.  Though  inclined  to
fpeculation,  his  whole  turn  of  mind  and  character  was  more  prac-
tical than  that  of  Eckart,  and  his  attention  more  directed  to  the
application  of  religious  principles  to  real  life.  Even  the  fermon
which,  as  we  have  read,  he  preached  before  the  remarkable  change


'  Tauler  quotes  Eckart.     See  the  Second  Sermon  for  the  Thirteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.

f  See  Diepenbrock's  Sufo.  Regenfburg,  1829.  S.  71.  A  very  interefting  account  of
Sufo's  life,  concerning  which  much  more  is  known  than  of  Tauler's,  is  given  in  Ullmann's
"Reformers  before  the  Reformation."  See  p.  190,  etc.


Nicolas  of  Strafburg.  85

wrought  in  him  through  the  agency  of  the  great  Layman,  though
difplaying  more  formality  and  fubtlety  with  lefs  of  tendernefs,
unction,  and  fpirituality  than  generally  characterize  his  later  fer-
mons,  is  yet  far  lefs  abflrufe  and  metaphyfical,  and  has  far  more
bearing  upon  morals  and  life,  than  is  the  cafe  with  Eckart's  dif-
courfes.

There  was,  however,  another  famous  Dominican  preacher  at
Strafburg,  in  Tauler's  youthful  days,  Nicolas  of  Strafburg,  who
though  alfo  a  myftic,  and  pofTemng  a  very  powerful  intellect,  was
a  man  of  a  very  different  {tamp  from  Eckart,  and  who  appears  to
have  always  flood  in  high  favour  with  the  heads  of  the  Church.
He  was  the  author  of  feveral  works,  and  was  appointed  by  Pope
John  XXII.  Nuncio,  with  the  overfight  of  all  the  Dominican
convents  in  the  province  of  Germany.  I  have  not  had  the  oppor-
tunity of  reading  any  of  his  productions  ;  ProfefTor  Schmidt  de-
fcribes  his  preaching  as  lefs  fpeculative  and  much  more  popular,
intelligible,  and  practical  than  Eckart's,  and  fays  that  "  his  fermons
are  rather  myflical  and  afcetic  than,  flriclly  fpeaking,  metaphyfi-
cal ;  they  breathe  a  profound  yearning  after  inward  peace  and  a
glowing  love  to  God,  but  do  not  difplay  an  intellecl:  fb  lofty  as
that  of  the  great  Myflic."  That  he  was,  however,  a  man  of  ex-
traordinary learning  is  evinced  by  a  work  which  he  wrote  on  the
coming  of  Anti-Chrift,  and  the  fecond  Advent  of  Our  Lord,  in
order  to  prove  that  the  numerous  legends  and  prophecies  current
in  that  age,  as  in  all  times  of  great  calamity  and  mighty  convul-
flons,  were  unworthy  of  credit,  and  that  nothing  pofitive  was

o3


86  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

to  be  learnt  from  Holy  Scripture  refpecting  the  date  of  future
events.*

There  were  many  other  myftics  in  Strafburg  at  this  date,  of
whom  nothing  is  known  beyond  their  names,  but  this  very  facl:
is  fufficient  to  prove  the  wide  diffusion  of  fuch  doctrines  in  that
city.  The  fame  phenomenon  alfo  meets  us  in  a  heretical  guife
among  the  fanatical  Beghards  who  fince  the  clofe  of  the  thirteenth
century  had  filled  the  Rhenifh  provinces  with  their  doctrines  of
the  abfolute  freedom  of  the  fpirit,  and  the  abolition  of  all  diftinc-
tions  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature.  They  were  denomi-
nated (moft  likely  by  the  title  of  their  own  choofing)  the  Brethren
and  Sifters  of  the  Free  Spirit,  and  made  profelytes  equally  among
the  laity  and  clergy.  In  the  year  1317,  Bifhop  Ochfenftein  com-
plains that  Alface  was  full  of  them,  and  in  a  circular  to  the  clergy
of  his  diocefe,  he  condemns  the  myftical  and  pantheiftic  doctrines
of  this  feel:,  whofe  members  were  given  over  to  the  fecular  autho-
rities, and  by  them  apparently  punifhed  with  imprifonment.
Whether  or  no  Eckart  was  connected  writh  them,  they  do  not


*  In  the  firft  part  of  this  treatife  he  cites  authorities  from  the  heathen  authors  to  prove  the
truth  of  Chriftianity  to  thofe  who  rejefted  the  Old  Teftament  with  the  New.  In  the  fecond,
he  reviews  the  writings  of  the  Jews,  and  refutes  their  doctrines  where  they  are  at  variance
with  Chriftianity.  The  third,  de  Anti-Cbrlfto  ac  fne  mundi,  contains  extrafts  from  the  pro-
phecies of  Hildegard,  Joachim,  and  other  mediaeval  pfeudo-feers,  which  he  treats  with  con-
tempt. The  whole  treatife  exhibits  a  vaft  amount  of  reading  in  the  ancient  claffics,  as  well  as
the  Chriftian  and  Jewifh  writers  of  the  Middle  Ages.  This  work  was  dedicated  to  Pope
John  XXII.


Influence  of  the  Me?idicant  Orders.  87

feem  to  have  exercifed  any  influence  upon  Tauler ;  for  in  his  fer-
mons  he  repeatedly  inveighs  againfl  "  the  Free  Spirits,"  who  he
fays,  "  ftriving  after  a  falfe  freedom,  and  on  pretext  of  following
the  inward  light,  follow  only  the  inclinations  of  their  own  nature."
But  befides  the  Beghards,  there  were  ftill  lingering  in  Southern
Germany  and  Italy,  remains  of  the  Albigenfes  and  Waldenfes  and
Manichean  Cathari, — reverers  of  the  Abbot  Joachim's  Eternal
Gofpel  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  (that  was  to  overthrow  the  Gofpel  of
the  Son), — believers  in  the  vifions  of  the  Prophetefs  Hildegard, —
adherents  of  the  revolutionary  Oliva  and  Fra  Dolcino.  There
were,  indeed,  many  reafons  why  herefies  and  religious  divifions
mould  abound  in  thefe  regions  at  this  period.  Not  only  was  the
German  Empire,  as  we  mall  foon  fee,  torn  by  political  diflenfions,
which  in  many  ways  were  interwoven  with  the  religious  con-
troverfies  then  afloat,  but  there  was  variance  between  the  heads
of  the  Church  and  its  moft  efficient  fervants, — the  devoted,
hard-working,  enthufiaftic  Francifcans.  The  two  Mendicant
Orders  were  formed  to  reclaim  for  the  Papacy  her  empire  over
the  human  mind,  which  in  the  twelfth  century  was  threatened
on  the  one  hand  by  the  moral  purity  and  elevation  of  the
Albigenfes,  who  almoft  occupied  the  faireft  provinces  of  France,
on  the  other  by  the  learning  and  civilifation  no  lefs  than  the
arms  of  the  Mahometan  infidels ;  and  faithfully  had  they  accom-
plifhcd  their  vocation,  by  turns  refuting  heretics  by  their  learning
or  dazzling  them  by  miracles,  outfliining  them  in  afcetic  purity,
cruming  them  by  the  Inquifition,  or  winning  them  by  felf-

o4


Taulers  Life  and  Times.


devoted  chanty.  While  the  higher  ecclefiaftics,  above  all  the
Papal  court,  were  enormoufly  wealthy,  and,  with  few  exceptions,
abforbed  in  fecular  objects  and  pleafures, — the  parochial  clergy
likewife  often  worldly  and  vicious,  generally  ignorant  and  inert,
— the  wandering  friars  came  among  the  neglected  flocks,  roufed
them  from  the  fleep  of  fin,  reclaimed  the  vicious,  convinced  the
fcofTer,  brought  hope  to  the  wretched,  confolation  to  the  fick
and  dying ;  and,  as  a  natural  refult,  the  people  were  eager  to
cxprefs  their  gratitude  by  placing  their  property  in  the  hands  of
the  Order  which  had  mown  fuch  zeal  for  their  fouls.  And  thus,
though  forbidden  by  their  original  constitution  to  hold  property,
in  a  few  years  the  amount  of  wealth  which  they  accumulated
from  the  bequeils  of  the  dying  was  fo  large  as  to  excite  the
jealousy  of  the  regular  clergy,  already  irritated  by  the  friars'
denunciation  of  worldlinefs,  and  the  tacit  cenfure  of  themfelves
implied  in  the  afcetic  lives  and  burning  zeal  of  their  rivals,  and
they  repeatedly  demanded  the  fuppreflion  of  the  two  Orders.

But  within  the  Orders  themfelves  had  foon  fprung  up  the  old
ftrife  and  divifion  that  feems  to  threaten  the  life  of  all  fpiritual
organizations  in  the  fecond  generation,  arifing  from  the  innate
antagonifm  between  the  felf-indulgence,  prudence,  and  acquifi-
tivenefs  inherent  in  human  nature,  and  the  pure  but  unreafbning
fpiritual  impulfes  to  which  they  have  owed  their  exiftence.  The
Dominicans,  with  their  characleriftic  addrefs,  retained  the  con-
flicting elements  within  their  own  bofom,  and  equally  availed
themfelves  of  fervent  piety  or  worldly  power.  The  Francifcans,


The  Francifcans  at  Variance  with  the  Pope.      89

more  enthufiaftic  and  lefs  far-fighted,  divided  into  two  parties, —
thofe  who  confented  to  hold  property  in  truft  for  the  fee  of
Rome,  and  thofe  termed  Spiritual  Francifcans,  who  adhered
rigidly  to  the  literal  interpretation  of  their  rule  of  abfolute
poverty.  From  the  latter  fprang  numerous  fpiritual  and
myftical  feels,  differing  in  their  tenets,  but  all  coinciding  in
their  fervid  faith  and  their  inculcation  of  poverty  and  afceticifm,
all  democratic  as  regarded  hierarchical  authority,  and  many  in-
volving all  the  wealthy  and  noble  in  their  hatred  to  wealth  and
power.  Doctrines  of  this  kind  were  indeed  fure  to  find  accept-
ance among  the  opprefTed  ferfs  and  lower  clafles  in  general ;  and
by  their  very  eflence  the  Francifcans  had  entirely  caft  in  their
lot  with  the  people.  Among  thefe  fects  the  Fratricelli,  who
flourifhed  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  foretold  the  overthrow
of  the  corrupt  and  carnal  Papacy,  and  the  eftablimment  of
a  fpiritual  kingdom  ruled  over  by  "  the  Perfect. "  The  eremitical
Cceleftines,  the  charitable  Beguines,  who  originally  devoted
themfelves  to  works  of  mercy,  the  devotional  Lollards,  nay,  pro-
bably the  brethren  and  fitters  of  the  Free  Spirit,  feem  alfb  to
have  been  offfhoots  from  thefe  Spiritual  Francifcans.

The  Pope  now  ruling  had,  however,  put  himfelf  in  oppofition
with  thofe  of  the  Spiritual  party  who  remained  within  the  bounds
of  their  Order,  and  were  guilty  of  no  herefy  but  that  of  aflcrting
the  abfolute  poverty  of  Chrift  and  His  Apoftles.  He  depofcd  the
General  of  the  Order,  and  caufed  the  inmates  of  many  convents
to  be  perfecuted  for  maintaining  a  dodrine  which  {truck  at  the


9°  Tauler's  Life  and  Times.

root  of  the  Papal  authority.  In  return,  they  boldly  denounced
the  Pope  as  a  heretic,  and  became  important  auxiliaries  to  the
Emperor  Louis  IV.  in  that  long  ftruggle  which  occupies  the
period  we  are  confidering.  They  found  powerful  coadjutors  in
the  profoundly  learned  and  able  politicians, — \Villiam  of  Ockham
and  Marfilio  of  Padua,  whose  writings  taught  men  to  inveftigate
the  origin  of  the  Papal  power.  But  not  only  from  the  princes
with  whom  the  Pope  interfered,  and  the  miferable  populace
whofe  paffions  were  at  the  mercy  of  fanatical  preachers  or
demagogues ;  from  the  burghers  in  the  cities  there  alfb  arofe  a
ftrenuous  oppofition  to  the  outrageous  claims  and  the  arbitrary
tyranny  of  the  hierarchy.  This  clafs  had  long  been  rifmg  in
wealth  and  importance  ;  and  in  the  earlier  half  of  this  fourteenth
century  they  fucceeded  in  obtaining  a  mare  of  the  government
in  nearly  all  the  chief  cities  of  Germany ;  and  the  men  who
had  emancipated  themfelves  from  the  temporal  rule  of  the
Bifhop  and  his  ariftocracy,  and  were  rejoicing  in  the  frefh  air
of  freedom  and  the  fenfe  of  manhood,  were  not  inclined  to
follow  any  longer  blindly  and  unqueftioningly  their  fpiritual
m  afters.

With  the  double  election  of  Frederic  of  Auftria  and  Louis  of
Bavaria,  who  were  both  crowned  on  the  2^th  of  November,  1314,
at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  began  a  defolating  warfare,  which  lafted  for
eight  years,  till  the  Battle  of  Muehldorf  in  132 2  left  Frederic  a
prifoner  in  the  hands  of  Louis.  Strafburg  was  divided  between
the  rival  Emperors.  The  Bifhop  and  the  important  family  of


The  Conteft  of  the  Rival  Emperors.  91

the  Zorn  were  adherents  of  Frederic ;  but  the  no  lefs  important
family  of  the  Muellenheim  declared  for  Louis ;  and  the  latter
had  the  greater  part  of  the  citizens  on  their  fide.  Thus,  when
Frederic  afcended  the  Rhine  and  arrived  in  Strafburg  in  January
1315,  he  was  not  received  as  their  fovereign  by  the  citizens,  but
merely  treated  as  an  illuftrious  guelt ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the
Bifhop  and  clergy  paid  him  regal  honours,  which  procured  them
various  proofs  of  his  favour.  Louis,  on  hearing  in  his  camp  at
Spires  the  conduct  of  the  citizens,  confirmed  the  liberties  and
privileges  of  the  city.  When,  five  years  later,  in  Auguft  1320,
Louis  came  with  his  army  to  Strafburg,  the  burghers  folemnly
tendered  him  allegiance  in  the  cathedral,  in  return  for  which  he
again  confirmed  their  privileges ;  but  the  clergy  had  fufpended
the  offices  of  public  worfhip,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  nobles
flill  fided  with  them.  On  the  captivity  of  Frederic,  moft  of  the
imperial  cities  of  Alface  came  over  to  Louis  ;  but  this  did  not
reftore  concord  to  the  afflicted  land :  for  Pope  John  XXII.,  bent
upon  the  humiliation  of  Louis,  whofe  popularity  and  power  were
fuch  as  threatened  to  render  him  too  independent  of  the  Holy
See,  now  interfered  in  the  affairs  of  the  Empire,  and  by  his  per-
frftent  refufal  to  acknowledge  Louis,  brought  down  unfpeakable
calamities  on  Europe,  while  he  ftirred  up  the  people  to  a  rcfiftance
which  could  not  but  in  the  end  prove  fatal  to  their  reverence  for
the  Papal  Chair.  So  long  as  the  ftrifc  lafted  between  Frederic  and
Louis,  John  XXII.,  while  claiming  it  as  his  right  to  decide  between
them,  had  refrained  from  pronouncing  any  aclual  decifion  for


92  Taulers  Life  mid  Times.

either  party ;  but  as  foon  as  the  former  was  fubdued,  and  there
was  a  profpecl:  of  peace,  he  inftituted  a  procefs  againft  the  vic-
torious Louis  for  afTuming  the  title  of  King  of  the  Romans
before  receiving  the  Papal  fan&ion,  admonifhed  him  to  lay  down
all  his  powers,  and  forbade  his  fubje&s  to  render  further  fealty  to
him.  But  when  in  the  following  year  it  appeared  that  the  real
objecl:  of  the  Pope  was  to  depofe  Louis  altogether,  and  raife  the
King  of  France  to  the  throne,  the  Diet  afTembled  at  Frankfurt
declared  almoft  unanimoufly  for  their  brave  Emperor,  in  defiance
of  the  unrighteous  claims  of  the  Romim  See.  The  Pope  in
return  laid  all  who  had  acknowledged  Louis  under  interdict  in
July  1324,  from  which  fome  places  were  not  releafed  for  fix  and
twenty  years.  It  muft  not  be  forgotten  what  this  fentence  in-
volved, how  intimately  its  confequences  were  felt  in  every  parifh
and  every  home,  when  the  churches  flood  filent  and  empty  for
years,  the  lawlefs  and  wicked  were  left  unwarned,  and  the  pious
deprived  of  the  confolation  of  worfhip  and  the  holy  communion
during  all  this  moft  dark  and  troubled  period.  But,  in  fpite  of  its
terrors,  the  German  people,  and  even  the  greater  part  of  the
clergy,  took  part  with  their  princes,  with  the  exception,  however,
of  the  Bifhops  of  PafTau  and  Strafburg.  The  city  of  Strafburg,
however,  remained  faithful  to  Louis,  refifting  by  force  the
officers  who  attempted  to  proclaim  the  Papal  fulmination  againft
the  Emperor,  and  fending  troops  to  his  affiftance.  The  Bifhop
John  von  Ochfenftein  died  in  1338  ;  but  his  fucceffor,  Berthold
von  Bucheke,  trod  in  his  footfteps.  Strafburg  itfelf,  like  moft  of


The  Politics  of  Str a/burg.  93

the  German  cities,  took  but  little  heed  of  the  Interdict  and  the
repeated  fentences  of  excommunication  hurled  againft  Louis  by
the  Pope.  The  internal  divifion  ftill  continued,  headed  by  the
two  families  of  Zorn  and  Muellenheim,  till  in  1332  a  fanguinary
conteft  took  place,  which  refulted  in  the  overthrow  of  the  old
conftitution  of  the  city,  and  the  introduction  of  the  craftfmen
into  the  Senate.  But  the  new  magiftrates  and  the  Bifhop  re-
mained as  much  at  variance  as  ever.  In  1338,  the  latter  induced
his  Metropolitan,  the  Archbifhop  of  Mayence,  to  convene  an
aflembly  of  German  Bimops  at  Spires,  from  which  the  prelates
defpatched  an  addrefs  to  the  Pope  Benedict  XII.,  earneftly  be-
feeching  him  to  be  reconciled  with  Louis,  and  put  an  end  to  this
lamentable  ftate  of  difcord.  Their  petition  was  fupported  by
envoys  from  the  Eftates  of  the  Empire,  moved  thereto  by  Louis,
who  declared  himfelf  ready  to  yield  all  obedience  to  the  Holy  See
which  was  confiftent  with  God's  glory,  his  own  juft  right,  and
the  weal  of  the  Empire.  But  as,  in  fpite  of  thefe  and  fimilar
efforts,  the  Pope  continued  to  prefcribe  conditions  which  made  a
reconciliation  impoffible,  the  Bifhop  of  Strafburg  continued  to
withftand  the  Emperor,  and  do  all  that  lay  in  his  power  to
injure  the  imperial  caufe  in  Alface.  Louis  now  refolved  to  refort
to  decifive  meafures  againft  this  reftlefs  adverfary,  and  in  1329
commanded  the  Rhenim  cities  to  join  the  Duke  Rudolf  of
Bavaria  and  Conrad  Lord  of  Kinkel,  in  attacking  Berthold.  The
latter,  having  for  allies  the  Duke  of  Auftria,  the  Count  of  Wur-
temberg,  the  Bifhop  of  Bafle,  and  other  nobles,  took  the  field,


94  Tender  s  Life  a?id  Times.

beleaguered  feveral  cities  of  Alface,  and  laid  wafte  the  furround-
ing  country :  his  opponents  carried  reprifals  into  his  territories.
Strafburg,  wearied  out  with  the  mifery  caufed  by  this  never-
ceafing  contention,  at  length  declared  to  the  Bifhop  that  it  would
no  longer  yield  him  obedience  unlefs  he  made  peace  with  the
Emperor ;  and  the  Prelate,  whofe  arms  had  moreover  met  with
reverfes,  and  whofe  finances  were  exhaufted,  fearing  left  the  other
towns  of  his  diocefe  mould  follow  the  example  of  Strafburg,  re-
folved  to  do  homage  to  Louis  and  receive  inveftiture  from  him,
under  the  refervation  of  abfolute  obedience  to  the  Pope,  while  he
fent  an  envoy  to  Benedict  XII.  reprefenting  his  defperate  con-
dition, and  requefting  permiffion  to  meathe  the  fword.  Both
Emperor  and  Pope  conceded  his  requefts ;  and  from  this  time
forward  he  did  all  that  he  could  to  maintain  tranquillity  within
his  bifhopric,  which  was  the  more  neceflary,  as  the  controveriy
between  the  Empire  and  the  Papacy  grew  more  envenomed.

After  the  famous  meeting  of  the  Electoral  College  at  Rhenfe,
near  Coblenz,  in  July  1338,  had  declared  that  the  King  of  the
Romans  received  his  dignity  and  power  folely  from  the  free  choice
of  the  Electors,  and  the  Imperial  Diet,  held  immediately  after,
had  made  it  a  fundamental  law  of  the  Empire,  that  "  the  imperial
dignity  is  beftowed  directly  by  God,  and  he  who  has  been  legiti-
mately chofen  by  the  Electoral  Princes,  becomes  thereby  King
and  Emperor  without  further  confirmation  by  the  Pope  or  any
other/'-  —Louis  publifhed  a  Manifefto  to  all  Chriftendom,  refuting
at  full  length  the  accufations  brought  againft  him  by  the  previous


Effe&s  of  the  Inter  diEt.  95

Pope,  and  proving  that  the  Pope  has  no  authority  to  fit  in  judg-
ment on  the  Emperor.  He  further  commanded  that  none  mould
obferve  the  papal  excommunication  and  interdict,  and  fentenced
all  thofe,  whether  individuals  or  whole  cities  and  communities,
who  mould  continue  to  fubmit  to  the  bann,  to  be  deprived  of
their  rights  and  liberties.

Great  was  the  impreffion  made  by  this  bold  Edicl:  upon  the
German  people,  who  rallied  more  and  more  univerfally  around
the  Emperor  who  thus  defended  his  own  rights  and  the  honour
of  the  Empire.  But  concord  was  banilhed  further  than  ever,
for  the  clergy  in  many  cafes  refitted  the  Emperor's  command
to  refume  the  fervices  which  had  been  fo  long  fufpended,  while
the  citizens,  who  had  borne  with  impatience  their  terrible
deprivation  of  the  facred  rites,  now  on  the  ftrength  of  the  Edicl:
hTued  orders  that  all  the  clergy  who  refufed  to  perform  fervice
mould  be  banifhed.  Many  priefts  left  their  churches  and  removed
into  other  provinces,  numerous  convents  flood  empty  of  their  in-
mates ;  ftill  in  moft  places  there  remained  a  fufficient  number  of
priefts  and  monks  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  their  vocation.  This  was
the  cafe  in  Strafburg ;  the  city  had  already  fuffered  all  the  cala-
mities confequent  on  the  Interdict  :  the  clergy  had  fplit  into  two
parties  ;  the  larger  number  obeyed  the  Pope's  commands ;  the
Auguftinians  efpecially  had  for  many  years  fufpended  the  perform-
ance of  all  religious  fervices.  The  Dominicans  and  the  Francif-
cans  had  availed  thcmfelves  of  the  privilege  early  granted  to  their
Orders  of  celebrating  mafs  during  a  time  of  interdict.  But  now,


96  Tauter  s  Life  and  Times.

when  the  Emperor  fo  openly  fet  himfelf  in  oppofition  to  the  Pope,
they  too,  terrified  by  the  fentence  of  excommunication  hanging
over  them,  refufed  in  many  inftances  to  fay  mafs,  on  which  the
Senate  of  Strafburg  proclaimed  :—

"  Either  let  them  go  on  to  fing,
Or  out  of  the  city  let  them  fpring."

The  Dominicans  in  general  quitted  the  city,  and  Koenigfhofen  re-
lates in  his  Chronicle,  that  they  left  their  convent  {landing  empty
for  more  than  two  years  ;  but  no  doubt  many  of  the  democratical
Francifcans,  who  had  always  fupported  the  Emperor,  remained
behind.  There  were,  however,  as  we  mall  fee,  exceptions  in  thefe
Orders  to  the  general  rule,  which  mows  to  how  great  an  extent
the  brethren  muft  have  been  guided  by  their  individual  confcience
rather  than  their  corporate  organization.

Such  were  the  fcenes  amidft  which  Tauler  was  called  to
labour  as  a  Chriftian  minifter  and  Dominican  monk.  Of  the
manner  in  which  he  fulfilled  his  work,  and  the  vicnTitudes  of  his
perfonal  career,  hiftory  has  preferved  but  a  fmall  number  of  fafts,
but  thefe,  though  few,  are  Significant.  All  the  testimonies  that
have  come  down  to  us  refpe&ing  him,  concur  in  bearing  witnefs
to  the  univerfal  affe&ion  and  efteem  with  which  he  was  regarded.
Even  fo  far  distant  as  Italy  his  name  was  known  as  a  teacher  of
high  repute,  who  infifted  on  inward  piety.  The  famous  Brother
Venturini,  of  Bergamo,  who  was  refiding  at  that  time  under
difgrace  in  a  convent  at  Marveges,  names  him  in  a  letter  which


His  Vifit  to  Eajle.  97


he  writes  to  another  Dominican  in  Strafburg,  Egenolph  von
Ehenheim,  calling  him  his  beloved  John  Tauler,  and  wifhing
to  enter  into  correfpondence  with  him,  becaufe  he  perceives  that
"  through  him  and  others  the  name  of  Chrift  will  be  fpread
abroad,  ever  more  and  more,  throughout  Germany."  Egenolph
himfelf  was  one  of  thefe  "  others/'  who  were  fellow- workers
with  Tauler.  His  early  friend,  Johann  von  Dambach,  was  alfb
here  at  this  time.

But  the  moft  remarkable  trait  in  this  period  of  Tauler's  life  is
that  he  not  only,  unlike  moft  of  his  Order,  fided  with  the
Emperor  in  his  whole  conteft  with  the  Pope,  but  did  not
fufpend  his  activity  when,  in  1338,  the  great  ftruggle  came
between  the  abfolutely  contradictory  commands  of  his  temporal
and  fpiritual  lords,  and,  as  we  have  feen,  his  brethren  quitted  the
town,  and  left  their  convent  deferted  for  two  years.  By  the
departure  of  nearly  all  the  clergy  from  Strafburg,  Tauler  found
a  ilill  wider  field  of  labour ;  and  from  allufions  to  him  in  letters
of  his  contemporaries,  it  appears  that  he  did  not  confine  his
exertions  to  that  city,  but  preached  from  time  to  time  at  various
places,  from  Cologne  to  Bafle.  Before  the  clofe  of  1338  he
feems  to  have  made  a  fomewhat  lengthened  vifit  to  the  latter  city,
where  the  ftate  of  things  was  very  fimilar  to  that  in  Strafburg.
The  Bifhop  of  Bafle  belonged  to  the  opponents  of  Louis  of
Bavaria,  and  made  common  caufe  with  the  Bifhop  of  Strafburg
in  attacking  the  adherents  of  the  Emperor  in  1339.  The
citizens  again,  like  thofe  of  Strafburg,  had  remained  faithful  to

H


Tauler  s  Life  and  Times.


Louis,  and  had  even  gone  fo  far  in  their  hostility  to  the  Pope,
that  when,  in  1330,  John  XXII.  despatched  an  envoy  to  publifh
his  bull  againft  the  Emperor,  the  incenfed  mob  hurled  him,
although  a  prieft  and  a  dignitary,  from  the  citadel  into  the  river  ;
and,  when  he  tried  to  fave  himfelf  by  fwimming,  put  out  in
boats  after  him  and  flew  him.  During  the  Interdict,  however,
moft  of  the  clergy,  and  efpecially  the  monks,  had  forfaken  the
churches,  fo  that  in  many  places  the  Sacrament  had  not  been
adminiftered  for  fourteen  years  ;  and  on  the  magiftrates  ordering
them  to  refume  their  functions  the  greater  part  had  refufed  to  do
fo.  About  this  time,  however,  the  people  of  Bafle  by  fome
means  prevailed  on  the  Pope  to  relax  the  feverity  of  the  Inter-
dict for  the  space  of  a  year.

In  Bafle  Tauler  met  with  an  old  friend,  Henry  of  Nordlingen,
from  whofe  letters  moft  of  the  fcanty  notices  of  Tauler  during
this  period  are  derived.  He  was  a  prieft  from  Conftance,  which
city  he  had  been  obliged  to  leave  on  account  of  his  refuial  to
preach  ;  for  though  a  Bavarian  by  birth,  and  intimately  con-
nected with  Tauler  and  others  of  fimilar  views,  he  did  not
recognize  Louis  as  the  lawful  Emperor.  He  is  principally
known  by  his  correfpondence  with  a  very  remarkable  woman,
Margaretha  Ebner,  a  nun  at  the  Convent  of  Maria  Medingen,
in  the  diocefe  of  Augfburg.  Her  fifter  Chriftina  was  Abbefs  of
the  Convent  of  Engenthal,  near  Nuremberg.  Both  were  dif-
tinguifhed  by  their  mental  endowments  as  well  as  their  earneft
piety,  and  were  evidently  held  in  great  refpect  by  Tauler,  Sufo,


Margaretha  and  Chriftina  Eb?ier.  99

and  others  of  that  party.  They  feem  alfo  to  have  taken  up  a
very  decided  pofition  amidft  the  ecclefiaftical  commotions  of
their  age,  and  were  zealous  partizans  of  Louis.  Chriftina,
famous  for  her  vifions,  in  one  of  her  trances  fees  the  Romim
Church  in  the  likenefs  of  a  magnificent  Cathedral,  the  doors  of
which  are,  however,  clofed  by  reafbn  of  the  Interdict.  The
fmging  of  the  priefts  within  is  heard  ;  a  crowd  of  people  are
{landing  round,  but  dare  not  enter.  On  a  fudden  a  man  in  the
garb  of  a  preaching  friar  comes  up  to  the  nun,  and  tells  her  that
he  will  give  her  words  wherewith  to  conlble  the  forfaken  multi-
tude ;  and  this  man  is  Chrift.

Tauler  occasionally  viilted  both  thefe  nuns,  and  was  in
correfpondence  with  Margaretha*,  whom  he  urges  to  write
down  her  vifions  refpecling  the  ftate  of  Chriftendom  and  the
friends  of  God.  For  him  they  had  a  deep  veneration,  and
conftantly  call  him  "  our  dear  Father  Tauler."  Chriftina
learns,  in  one  of  her  revelations,  that  he  is  "  the  holieft  of  God's
children  now.  living  on  earth,"  that  "the  spirit  of  God  breathes
through  him,  as  fweet  mufic  through  a  lute  ;"  Margaret  fpeaks,
too,  fometimes  of  the  joy  that  me  has  had  in  the  pretence  of
this  great  friend  of  God,  and  how  hard  it  has  been  to  part
with  him.  She  appears  to  have  flood  rather  in  the  relation  of
a  wife  Chriftian  friend  and  counfellor,  than  of  a  spiritual  child,


*  Only  one  fhort  letter,  however,  has  been  prcferved,  from  having  been  placed  among  thofe
of  Henry  of  Nordlingen,  and  it  is  too  unimportant  for  infertion.

II  2


ioo  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

to  Henry  of  Nordlingen,  who  from  his  letters  feems  to  have
been  a  man  of  gentle,  pious  fpirit,  more  fitted  for  a  quiet
contemplative  life  than  for  the  energetic  activity  required  by
the  troublous  times  in  which  his  lot  was  caft.  He,  like  Tauler,
was  filled  with  anguifh  at  the  fight  of  the  diftrefs  of  thofe
around  him  ;  but  while  Tauler's  grief  ftirred  him  up  to  vigorous
efforts  in  their  behalf,  and  his  courage  and  energy  role  with
the  emergency,  the  timid  and  hefitating  Henry  was  unable  to
furmount  the  difficulties  in  which  he  found  himself  involved,
and  the  greater  the  preflure  of  the  times,  the  greater  was
his  perplexity  and  longing  for  peace.  Yet,  when  his  fcrupulous
confcience  allowed  him  to  preach,  his  labours  appear  to  have
been  fruitful  in  refult.  This  was  the  cafe  during  Tauler's  vifit
to  Bafle,  where  he  had  previoufly  been  fojourning  for  fbme
time  in  inactivity,  after  long  wandering  and  much  diftrefs.*

When  the  Pope  allowed  public  worfhip  to  be  celebrated
for  a  year  at  Bafle,  Henry's  friends,  without  his  knowledge,
procured  him  permimon  to  preach,  and  give  a  forty  days'
indulgence ;  and  he  then  ventured  to  appear  in  public,  en-


*  His  letters  give  a  lively  pifture  of  the  real  dangers  to  which  his  politics  expofed  him.
Thus  he  fays,  "  I  have  been  called  before  the  princes  of  this  world,  who  have  profcribed  me,
fo  that  there  is  no  place  of  fafety  for  me  in  this  land,  unlefs  I  would  content  to  perform  mafs."
Again,  he  would  come  to  Margaretha,  but  "  I  may  not  as  yet  dare  to  appear  openly  in  this
"  land."  "  If  the  Emperor  mould  leave  the  country,  perhaps  I  might  be  able  to  fee  thee,  if  it
"  were  God's  will."  "  At  Conftance  and  in  the  neighbouring  country  the  priefts  have  been
everywhere  ordered  to  fing  mafs,  fo  that  I  do  not  know  where  I  mall  be  able  to  remain."


Henry  of  Nor dlingen.  101

couraged  by  Tauler's  influence  and  counfel.  Thus  he  fays  : —
"  Afterwards  I  came  to  Bade,  to  my  and  thy  dear  faithful  Father
Tauter  (who  was  with  me  at  thy  houfe),  and  he  helped  me
in  every  way  he  could  with  all  fidelity."  He  then  writes  :  "  The
"  great  mercy  has  been  granted  us  that  we  may  celebrate  mafs  in
"  public,  with  the  Pope's  permiflion  ;  and  now  do  the  hungry  fouls
"  come  with  great  defire  to  receive  the  Lord's  body,  which  they
"  have  not  been  able  to  enjoy  for  fourteen  years  in  Chriftian
"  obedience.  And  now  I  entreat  you,  with  fpecial  earneftnefs,
"  that  you  pray  to  God  for  all  those  whom  I  feed  with  His  Body,
"  that  we  may  receive  His  Holy  Sacrament  in  His  love,  and
"  adminifter  it  to  His  eternal  glory,  and  the  confolation  of  all
"  Chriftian  fouls."  He  now  preached  every  day,  and  often  twrice
a  day,  befides  performing  mafs  daily ;  and  fo  many  of  all  clafTes
ftreamed  to  confefs  to  him  that  he  was  overwhelmed  with  his
duties,  and  writes  to  his  friend :  "  If  I  could  manage  it,  I  would
"  gladly  come  to  you  ;  but  I  am  not  my  own.  I  am  the  pro-
"  perty  of  the  whole  Chapter,  and  the  moft  important  parifhes.
"  The  people  at  Bafle  are  not  willing  that  I  fhould  leave  them,
"  neither,  indeed,  mould  I  have  courage  to  travel  openly  about
"  the  country ;  for  I  mould  be  at  the  mercy  of  any  ruffian  or
"  thief,  and  if  aught  befell  me,  no  complaint  would  be  laid
"  againft  him.  Still  I  truft  in  the  Lord  that  He  will  fuffer  me
"  to  fee  thee,  my  heart's  true  confolation.'  But  fome  months
later  he  writes :  '  Methought  I  clung  too  much  and  with  too
"  carnal  feelings  to  the  eafe,  the  luxurious  and  pleafant  fociety,

H  3


T  aider  s  Life  and  Times.


"  and  the  earthly  comforts  that  I  enjoyed  at  Bafle.  In  truth  I
"  knew  not  that  I  did  fo  while  I  had  them,  but  felt  it  fully  when
"  I  forfook  them.  Befides,  I  perceived  in  my  heart,  through
"  many  fuggeftions  and  admonitions,  that  my  labours  might  be
"  more  needed  elfewhere  than  at  Bafle,  and  fo  I  ventured  my
"  departure  for  the  fake  of  Chrift  and  his  flock,  and  have  ex-
"  changed  the  marvelloufly  holy  and  pleafant  and  acceptable  fo-
"  ciety  there  for  all  manner  of  difcomfort  to  my  inward  and
"  outward  man,  by  night  and  by  day  ;  fo  that  now  I  muft  per-
"  force  retreat  into  myfelf,  and  take  refuge  in  my  only  confblation,
"  Chrift  Jefus,  if  I  were  unwilling  to  do  fo  before."

By  the  perfuafion  of  Tauler,  Henry  appears  now  for  a  time  to
have  preached  even  in  places  which  ftill  lay  under  the  Interdict,
but  afterwards,  terrified  by  the  violent  cenfure  of  the  clergy  for
his  conducl,  to  have  fubmitted  again  to  the  papal  prohibition,
and  renamed  his  wanderings.  Tauler,  on  the  contrary,  waited
for  no  papal  permiffion  to  do  that  which  he  confidered  to  be  the
bounden  duty  of  a  clergyman,  and  after  his  vifit  to  Bafle  it  ap-
pears from  Henry's  letters  that  he  travelled  more  than  once  as  far
as  Cologne.  In  this  city,  where  Mafter  Eckart  had  fpent  the  latter
years  of  his  life,  numerous  preachers  had  gone  forth  from  his
fchool,  who  continued  to  promulgate  his  doctrines  with  more  or
lefs  ability  and  originality.  Nicolas  of  Strafburg,  too,  was  at  this
time  lecturing  at  Cologne,  probably  driven  from  Straflburg  by  the
troubles  to  which  his  papal  politics  would  expofe  him  at  this
period.  This  was  the  cafe  alfo  with  Tauler's  old  friend,  Johann


His  " Hiftory  and  Life"  by  Nicolas.  103

von  Dambach,  who  had  not  only  declared  that  during  the  Inter-
dict it  was  the  duty  of  a  pious  Chriftian  to  fubrnit  unconditionally
to  the  Church,  but  even  compofed  feveral  tractates  to  prove  the
juftifiablenefs  of  the  Interdict  from  the  Canon  law.  Yet,  as  we
have  feen  Tauler  and  the  Ebners  in  undifturbed  friendship  with
Henry  of  Nordlingen,  in  fpite  of  differences  which  entered  fo
deeply  into  the  life  of  thofe  times,  fo,  notwithstanding  Dambach's
antagoniftic  opinions,  and  his  removal  to  the  diftant  Prague*,
the  connection  between  him  and  Tauler  was  not  broken  off,  as  is
proved  by  the  circumftance,  that  after  1350  he  fent  his  book,
"  De  fenfibilibus  delicns  paradiji"  to  their  Alma  Mater,  the  Col-
lege of  St.  Jacques,  in  Paris,  in  their  joint  names.

We  now  arrive  at  the  date  when  that  great  change  was  pro-
duced in  Tauler  with  which  the  foregoing  "  Hiftory"  has  ac-
quainted us.  Till  recently,  little  was  known  of  the  "  Hiftory,"
beyond  the  facl;  that  it  was  found  attached  to  fome  MSS.  of
Tauler's  fermons,  and  many  have  doubted  of  its  genuinenefs.
Que'tif  and  Echard,  for  inftance,  have  treated  it  as  a  mere  allegory.
By  dint  of  laborious  refearches  among  the  old  MSS.  of  the
libraries  of  Strafburg  and  Sarnen,  and  ingenious  combinations  of
the  refults  thence  obtained,  Profeflbr  Schmidt  has  not  only  efta-
blifhed,  in  a  way  that  it  feems  to  me  muft  be  fatisfa&ory  to  any
one  who  goes  through  the  evidence,  that  this  Tractate  is  a  per-


*  He  was  made  Profeflbr  at  the  newly-eftabliflied  Univerfity  there  in  1 347.

H  4


104  T aider  s  Life  and  Times.

feclly  genuine  and  truthful  production,  the  work  of  the  layman
who  profefTes  to  have  written  it,  but  alfo  has  fucceeded  in  identi-
fying this  layman  with  a  myfterious  perfonage,  called  the  Great
Friend  of  God,  in  the  Oberland,  the  head  of  a  fecret  religious
aflbciation  ;  and  the  latter  again,  with  a  certain  Nicolas  of  Bafle,
whofe  name,  however,  only  occurs  twice  ;  once  in  the  account  of
his  own  martyrdom,  once  in  that  of  one  of  his  difciples.

The  moft  important  of  the  MSS.  examined  by  Profeflbr
Schmidt  is  a  large  folio  volume,  only  recently  difcovered  in  the
archives  of  Strafburg,  and  formerly  belonging  to  the  Convent  of
the  Knights  of  St.  John  in  that  city,  called  a  Briefbuch  [book  of
letters],  and  is  for  the  moft  part  a  collection  of  letters  and  papers
left  by  Rulman  Merfwin,  the  founder  of  the  convent.  This
Rulman  Merfwin  was  a  friend  of  Tauler  (who  was  for  fome  time
.  his  confeflbr),  and,  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  of  the  "Layman,"
Nicolas,  by  whofe  advice  he  built  a  houfe  for  the  Brethren  of
St.  John,  on  an  ifland  at  Strafburg  called  the  Gruenen- Worth
(green  meadow),  and  with  whom  he  was  in  conftant  corre-
fpondence  up  to  the  time  of  his  death  in  1382.  Several  portions
of  this  extremely  curious  Bricfbucb  were  carefully  copied  into  the
archives  of  the  convent,  forming  what  is  called  its  Memorial,*
but  the  codex  itfelf  did  not  belong  to  the  public  archives  of  the


The  documents  relating  to  the  founders  of  the  houfe  are  fo  called.     Of  this  Memorial
four  copies  are  known  to  exift.


Nicolas  of  Bafle.


houfe,  being  kept  fecret  from  all  but  a  few,  on  account  of  the
private  letters  and  notes  contained  in  it,  and  therefore  treafured
up  with  peculiar  care.  So  late  as  the  feventeenth  century,  this
was  ftill  the  cafe,  and  a  reader  of  that  period  has  traced  on  the
outer  covering  of  the  Codex  the  words:  "liber  ifte  religiose
cujlodiendus"  The  documents  of  which  it  confrfts  were  arranged,
and  moft  of  them  copied  out,  by  Nicolas  von  Laufen,  who  (ac-
cording to  a  few  notices  of  himfelf,  which  he  has  inferted  at
the  clofe  of  the  Brief buch)  feems  to  have  accompanied  Rulman
Merfwin  as  his  fecretary,  on  taking  pofleilion  of  the  newly-built
Gruenen- Worth  in  1366,  and  a  few  years  later  to  have  become  a
prieft  of  the  order  of  St.  John.  The  codex  contains  among
other  lefs  important  matter,  a  MS.  called  "  The  Book  of  the  Five
Men"  being  an  account  of  Nicolas  and  his  four  companions,
in  the  handwriting  of  Nicolas  himfelf ;  twenty-two  of  his  letters,
apparently  copied  by  Nicolas  von  Laufen,  and  the  original  MS.
of  Rulman  Merfwin's  account  of  the  firft  four  years  of  his
religious  hiftory,  in  his  own  handwriting.  Thus,  after  a  lapfe
of  five  hundred  years,  we  are  able  to  learn  more  about  this  extra-
ordinary half-mythical  "  Friend  of  God  in  the  Oberland,"  than
his  very  contemporaries  knew.

From  thefe  documents  we  are  able  to  obtain  a  general  idea  of
the  character  and  work  of  Nicholas,  though  the  actual  courfe  of
his  hiftory,  efpecially  during  the  earlier  part  of  his  life,  is  ftill
almoft  entirely  fhrouded  from  view.  All  that  we  can  difcover
refpe&ing  the  commencement  of  his  career  is,  that  about  the  year


io6  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

1328  or  1330,  he  was  a  youth  of  good  family  at  Bafle*,  wealthy,
univerfally  efteemed,  and  poflefled  of  abilities  that  enfured  him
fuccefs  in  all  that  he  undertook.  Neverthelefs,  he  was  unhappy,
from  the  confcioufnefs  of  his  fmfulnefs  and  ignorance  of  divine
things.  Being,  as  a  layman,  uninftrucled  in  Holy  Scripture,  he
fought  to  matter  religious  truths  by  the  exercife  of  his  reafon  ;
but  his  efforts  to  obtain  fatisfacl:ion  were  in  vain.  For  years  he
ftruggled  with  his  own  intellectual  difficulties  and  the  tempta-
tions of  the  world.  One  day,  as  he  was  meditating  on  the  tran-
fitory  nature  of  all  earthly  things  and  the  rapid  flight  of  time,  the
thoughtleflhefs,  fmfulnefs,  and  thorough  forgetfulnefs  of  God  in
all  thofe  around  him  were  prefented  in  fuch  vivid  colours  to  his
mind,  that  it  feemed  inconceivable  to  him  how  man  could  take
any  delight  in  this  vain  world ;  and  then,  as  the  thought  of  his
own  wafted  time  rofe  to  his  remembrance,  he  was  filled  with
fuch  bitter  remorfe  that  he  refolved  from  that  moment  to  re-
nounce the  world  and  dedicate  his  life  to  God.  To  this  end,  as
we  have  feenf,  he  read  the  lives  of  the  faints  and  imitated  their
aufterities.  This  difcipline  he  had  carried  on  for  five  years  before
he  found  peace  in  the  way  he  defcribes  in  the  "  Hiftory."  He
afterwards  fet  himfelf  to  ftudy  the  Scriptures  (no  doubt  in  Latin),
and  fays  that  in  a  fpace  of  thirty  weeks  he  had  come  to  be  able


*  The  place  of  his  abode  is  not  certain,  but  inferred  from  the  dialeft  of  the  Tractate  found
in  his  own  handwriting.     See  Schmidt's  Gottesfreunde.     S.  32.
f  See  p.  20.


The  Friends  of  God.  107


to  underftand  it  as  thoroughly,  and  "  fpeak  as  good  grammar,
"  as  if  he  had  ftudied  all  his  days  in  the  bcft  Univcrfitics  ;"  which
extraordinary  facility  of  acquifition  he  refers  to  fpecial  divine
affiftance.  We  know  no  more  of  him  till  we  find  him  at  the
head  of  a  Ibciety  of  "  Friends  of  God,"  who  live  with  him  in
utter  feclufion  from  the  world,  and  form  the  fecret  centre  of  a
wide  circle  of  religious  activity,  unconnected  with  any  recognized
order,  but  yet  not  overftepping  the  pale  of  the  Church.

The  title  of"  Friends  of  God"  is  one  which  meets  us  continually
in  the  writings  of  thofe  who  are  termed  myftics  in  the  fourteenth
century,  and  is  ufed  in  various  connections.  Sometimes  it  feems
to  denote  thofe  who  were  partakers  of  a  fpiritual  in  oppofition  to
a  formalrftic  piety ;  ibmetimes  to  denote  the  members  of  a  par-
ticular body.  Among  thofe  called  "  Friends  of  God"  we  find
the  names  of  individuals  widely  differing  from  each  other  in  rank,
vocation,  opinion,  and  career ;  for  they  counted  among  their
members  Dominicans,  fuch  as  Eckart,  Tauler,  Sufb  of  Conftance,
and  Henry  of  Nordlingen,  and  Francifcans,  fuch  as  Otto  of
PaiTau ;  Knights  married  and  fmgle ;  nuns  like  Chriftina  and
Margaretha  Ebner,  and  a  Queen,  Agnes  the  widow  of  King
Andrew  of  Hungary ;  the  rich  banker,  Rulman  Merfwin,  and
Conrad,  the  Abbot  of  Kaifermeim  in  Bavaria,  who  boafts,  in
a  letter  to  Henry  of  Nordlingen,  that  he  has  not  accepted
the  Bifhop  of  Augfburg's  abfolution  either  for  himfelf  or  his
monaftery ;  Conrad  Brunfberg,  again,  the  Grand-Mailer  of  the
Knights  of  St.  John  in  Germany,  befides  the  layman,  Nicolas


io8  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

of  Bafle,  and  the  great  myftical  author  of  the  Netherlands,
Ruyfbroeck.  The  appellation  common  to  all  thefe,  with  num-
bers of  lefs  diftinguifhed  perfons,  would  feem  to  have  been  ufed
among  themfelves  to  denominate  thofe  who  could  not  but  feel
that  they  were  more  alive  to  the  realities  of  religion  and  its
fpiritual  nature  than  was  the  cafe  with  the  multitude  around
them.  That  thofe  pofleffing  common  fympathies  on  the  fubje&s
of  higheft  import,  mould  infti n&ively  feek  out  and  cling  to  each
other,  and  thus  an  affociation  mould  fpontaneoufly  grow  up,  even
without  any  definite  plan,  is  a  natural  and  inevitable  procefs,
where  a  real,  deep  religious  life  has  arrived  at  felf-confcioufnefs ;
and  from  a  comparifon  of  the  pafTages  in  which  Tauler  and  Henry
of  Nordlingen  ufe  the  term  "  Friends  of  God/'  it  appears  to  me
that  in  the  firft  inftance  the  fenfe  of  having  entered  into  a  living,
perfonal  union  with  God,  bringing  with  it  a  yearning  pity  for
fmners,  and  a  fervent  defire  to  bring  them  to  the  fame  blefled
ftate,  was  the  fole  diftinclion  and  bond  of  the  "  Friends  of  God."
It  is  at  all  events  clear  that  their  union  for  common  action  was
utterly  independent  of  the  attitude  they  aiTumed  towards  the  great
conflicting  queftions  of  the  day  ;  for,  as  we  have  feen  in  the  Abbot
of  Kaiferfheim,  and  Henry  of  Nordlingen,  thofe  are  called  "  Friends
of  God,"  and  treat  each  other  as  brethren,  who  are  as  far  afunder
in  their  politics  as  the  Chartifts  and  High  Tories  of  our  own  days.
Neither  did  they  form  a  feel,  but,  on  the  contrary,  repudiated  the
idea,  as  is  fhewn  by  the  following  paflage  from  Tauler's  fermon
on  the  twenty-fecond  Sunday  after  Trinity,  which  I  think,  too,


The  Friends  of  God  not  a  SeEt.  109

confirms  this  view  of  their  origin.  "  The  prince  of  this  world
"  has  now-a-days  been  fbwing  brambles  among  the  rofes  in  all
"  directions,  infomuch  that  the  rofes  are  often  choked,  or  forely
"  torn  by  the  brambles.  Children,  there  muft  needs  be  a  flight  or  a
"  diftinclion  ;  fome  fort  of  a  feparation,  whether  within  the  cloif-
"  ters  or  without,  and  it  does  not  make  them  into  a  feel:,  that  the
"  '  Friends  of  God'  profefs  to  be  unlike  the  world's  friends."  The
remark  that  the  "  Friends  of  God"  were  not  a  feel:,  would  feem
to  prove  that  this  accufation  was  brought  againft  them  ;  but,
indeed,  proof  of  this  would  feem  fuperfluous,  for  then,  as  in  all
other  times,  it  would  infallibly  happen  that  the  unworldly  and
fpiritual-minded,  who  recognized  a  nobler  fort  of  religion  than
that  comprifed  in  the  due  obfervance  of  religious  rites  and  decent
moral  conduct,  mould  be  charged  with  fectarianifm  and  fufpecled
of  herefy,  even  if  they  broached  no  new  dogmas,  and  went  no
farther  than  to  bring  out  in  their  teaching  and  practice  the  real
fignificance  of  the  Church's  ordinances.

But  the  greater  the  iinfulnefs  and  deadnefs  to  religion  in  a
particular  age,  the  more  ftrongly  marked  muft  be  the  line  of  de-
marcation between  the  carelefs  and  the  earneft  ;  for  the  religious
are  thus  obliged  to  abftain  from  pleafures  and  occupations  which,
innocent  in  themfelves,  have  become  corrupt.  At  the  fame
time,  too,  the  danger  of  enthufiafm,  and  miftaking  one's  own
natural  emotions  for  direcl:  Divine  influence,  will  be  greateft
when  fuch  influences,  known  to  be  real  by  the  pious,  are  altogether
denied  by  the  world  in  general.  Illuftrations  will  inftantly


no  Tenders  Life  and  Times.

fuggeft  thcmfclves  to  the  mind  of  the  reader  from  the  experience
of  our  own  Church  in  the  times  of  Wefley  and  Whitfield ;
and  in  like  manner,  amidft  the  univerfal  deadncfs  of  the
Lutheran  Church  in  the  feventeenth  century,  arofe  the  Pietiftic
movement  of  Spener  and  Franke.  Thus  the  great  wickednefs,
efpecially  of  the  clergy,  the  contentions  and  dreadful  cataftrophes
which  mark  the  firft  half  of  the  fourteenth  century,  would  impel
the  pious  to  come  out  from  the  world,  and  flimulate  them  to
fpecially  earneft  and  direct  efforts  to  enkindle  the  religious  life
of  the  people.  And  Ib,  during  the  terrors  of  the  Interdict,  they
feem  to  have  formed  an  aflbciation  with  no  declared  boundary,
yet  whofe  boundaries  would  be  moft  diftinclly  recognized  by  all
who  were  within  the  line.  To  the  name  they  adopted,  the  text
John  xv.  15.  feems  to  have  given  occafion  ;  for  Tauler  fays:
"  Then  faid  our  Lord  to  His  difciples,  *  From  henceforth  I  call  you
"  '  not  fervants,  but  friends/  The  'henceforth'  that  he  fpoke  was
"  from  the  time  when  they  had  forfaken  all  things  and  followed
"  Him.  Then  were  they  his  friends,  and  not  fervants  ;  and  there-
"  fore  he  who  will  be  a  true  friend  of  God  muft  leave  all  things  and
"  follow  after  Him."  From  this  paflage,  in  the  fpirit  of  which
many  others  concur,  we  fee  at  once  in  what  the  right  to  this  title
confifted — namely,  in  the  thorough  felf-furrender  to  God,  the
forfaking  all  things  to  follow  God  alone.

But  while  this  principle,  which  furely  we  muft  recognize  as
that  which  does  really  conftitute  the  friends  of  God  in  all  ages,
was  brought  out  into  peculiar  prominence  by  thcfe  German


Doffirines  of  the  Friends  of  God.


in


Gottesfreunde,  their  views  could  not  fail  to  be  coloured  by  the
modes  of  thought  and  the  circumftances  of  their  age.  Thus,
in  order  to  this  entire  devotednefs  to  God,  we  find  a  renunciation,
fb  far  as  may  be,  of  all  earthly  cares  and  ties  recommended  by
them  ;  thus,  too,  we  fee  that  their  faith  in  God's  direct,  perfonal
dealings  with  the  individual  foul  is  apt  to  be  accompanied  by  a
fuperftitious  regarding  of  infignificant  phenomena,  or  even  the
mere  effects  of  an  over-active  fancy,  as  a  positive  intimation  of
His  will.  Some  of  us,  too,  would  be  inclined  to  think  that
their  continual  infifting  on  the  duty  of  paffively  yielding  up  the
foul  to  divine  influences,  and  their  exhortations  to  take  all  out-
ward things  as  from  God,  would  involve  a  danger  of  falling  into
an  indolent  quietifm.  But  the  fact,  far  from  juftifying  our
expectations,  would  afford  another  proof  that  when  we  leave  off
trying  to  do  the  work  that  God  will  do  Himfelf,  we  mail  find
our  energies  all  the  more  vigorous  to  accomplifh  that  which  He
has  fet  us  to  do ;  for  inftead  of  regarding  the  events  around
them  with  paffive  indifference,  like  many  of  the  earlier  afcetics,
they  believed  themfelves  called  to  exercife  a  very  positive  influ-
ence on  the  courfe  of  events.

This  was  in  a  fpecial  fenfe  the  cafe  with  Nicolas  of  Bafle  and
his  immediate  companions,  whom  we  find,  from  the  recently  dif-
covered  documents,  to  have  entertained  plans  for  the  extenfion  of
religion  and  the  reform  of  Chriftendom  of  a  wider  nature  than  it
was  fafe  to  difclofe  even  to  their  brethren  indifcriminately,  at  a
time  when  the  Dominican  inquifitors  (who,  moreover,  \\cre  of  the


Tender's  Life  and  Times.


Papal,  while  moft  of  the  "  Friends  of  God  "  were  of  the  Imperial
party)  were  actively  engaged  in  hunting  out  heretics,  efpecially
thoie  who  might  betray  any  leaning  to  the  democratic  and
reformatory  tendencies  of  the  Spiritual  Francifcans  and  their
cognate  feels.  Thus  the  knot  of  men  who  gathered  round
Nicolas  as  their  centre,  feem,  as  compared  with  the  Gottesfreunde
at  large,  to  have  formed  a  church  within  a  church,  having  fecret
fchemes  into  which  the  others  were  not  initiated.

From  hints  of  fuch  private  fchemes  fcattered  in  the  writings
of  Rulman  Merfwin  and  "  the  Layman/'  it  was  formerly  ima-
gined that  the  latter  at  any  rate  was  a  fecret  Waldenfian;  but
this  idea  is  not  confirmed  by  more  extended  refearch  ;  on  the
contrary,  the  importance  which  he  and  his  friends  attach  to  the
rites  of  the  Church,  —  to  obedience  to  ecclefiaftical  fuperiors,  —
their  belief  in  tranfubftantiation  and  purgatory,  &c.,  are  quite  in-
confrflent  with  it.  Indeed,  the  views  of  Nicolas  feem  to  have  been
much  more  in  unifbn  with  the  doclrine  of  the  Church  than  thofe
of  Eckart  and  his  fchool.  The  only  peculiarity  of  his  belief,  that
I  can  difcover,  is  his  ftrong  confidence  in  the  reality  of  the  vifions
and  miraculous  revelations  imparted  to  himfelf  and  his  friends  ;
and  it  muft  be  remembered  that  even  this  peculiarity  he  not  only
mares  in  common  with  the  great  Luther,  who  lived  two  centuries
later,  and  with  the  liberal  and  fagacious  Wefley,  almoft  in  our
own  days,  but  that  his  fpiritual  childhood  had  been  nurtured  on
the  legends  of  the  faints,  with  all  their  marvels  ;  and  that  we  fee,
from  the  hiftory  of  his  times,  that  miracles  and  revelations  were


Nature  of  T  aider  s  Converjion.


of  every-day  occurrence,  at  all  events  among  the  Francifcans  and
fectarians.  The  fecret  of  the  extraordinary  fway  which  Nicolas
obtained,  not  only  over  laymen  lefs  inftru&ed  and  priefts  lefs
thinking  than  himfelf,  but  even  over  a  man  of  fuch  commanding
intellect  as  Tauler,  feems  to  me  to  lie  in  the  intenfe  glow  of
his  piety,  the  utter  felf-devotion  of  his  own  life,  his  force  of
will,  and  his  real  fpiritual  infight.  Not  only  did  he  ftand  im-
meafurably  below  Tauler  in  point  of  learning,  but  his  letters,
while  affording  many  traits  of  fpiritual  wifdom  and  acute
practical  fense,  exhibit  neither  the  reflective  nor  imaginative
power  of  Tauler's  writings.  Yet  the  accomplilhed  fcholar,  the
experienced  paftor,  the  fearlefs  politician,  refigns  himfelf  implicitly
to  the  guidance  of  the  obfcure  layman  as  his  inconteftible  Superior.
The  crifis  which  Nicolas  was  the  means  of  bringing  about  in
Tauler's  life  is  commonly  termed  a  conversion  ;  but  from  all
that  we  have  read  of  his  previous  life,  it  seems  clear  that  it
cannot  be  regarded  as  what  is  ordinarily  meant  by  that  term.
Before  it  took  place  Tauler  was  already  a  iincere,  God-fearing,
active  Chriilian  minifter,  and  recognized  as  their  "  Father  "  and
leader  by  the  "  Friends  of  God  "  fcattered  up  and  down
Switzerland,  Bavaria,  and  the  Rhenim  ftates.  Neither  can
I  difcover  any  conversion,  properly  fpeaking,  in  point  of  doc-
trinal opinions.  Nicolas  agrees  to  all  he  taught  as  very  good,
and  blames,  not  his  preaching,  but  his  life.  Surely,  therefore,
this  notable  change  is  to  be  regarded  in  the  light  in  which
Tauler  himfelf  regarded  it;  as  the  coming  to  a  deeper,  more


Tender's  Life  and  Times.


real  and  practical  experience  of  the  things  of  God.  It  feems,
that  with  all  his  fmcere  piety,  and  hatred  of  fin,  and  abhorrence
of  the  evil  world  around  him,  Tauler  had  never  come  to  a  clear
confcioufnefs  of  all  the  depths  of  fin  concealed  in  his  own  heart,
or  an  apprehcnfion  of  the  full  import  of  the  utter  felf-furrender
to  God  which  he  preached.  Such  a  deficiency  of  felf-knowledge
is  indeed  more  poflible  with  a  confcientious  man  of  Tauler's
character,  pure  and  gentle  by  nature,  than  with  one  of  the  oppofite,
or  more  ftormy  type.  It  is  true  that  the  tafk  which  God  lays
upon  all  is  the  fame  —  the  unceafing  furrender  of  their  own  wifhes
to  the  higher  aims  which  He  fets  fucceflively  before  them.  But
with  men  of  paffionate  temperament  and  felfifh  habits,  who  are
therefore  at  every  turn  expofed  by  circumftances  to  violent
temptation,  their  natural  wifhes  are,  for  the  moft  part,  fb  ob-
vioufly  finful  that,  though  the  ftruggle  of  renouncing  them  may  be
hard,  the  duty  of  doing  fo  is  clear  and  preffing.  And  when  fuch  turn
to  God,  their  falls  in  attempting  the  Chriftian  walk  are  often
frequent  enough,  or  at  leaft  their  battles  with  temptation  fevere
enough,  to  teach  them  the  evil  and  weaknefs  of  their  own  heart.
With  men,  on  the  other  hand,  of  calm,  pure,  and  affectionate
difpofition,  and  trained  in  confcientious  habits,  fo  many  of  their
wifhes  are  for  things  harmlefs,  or  even  good  in  themfelves,  that
it  is  lefs  ealy  to  fee  why  and  how  they  are  to  be  given  up.  Such
men,  juft,  kindly,  and  finding  much  of  their  own  happinefs  in  that
of  others,  live,  for  the  moft  part,  in  harmonious  relations  with
thofe  around  them,  and  have  little  to  difhirb  their  confciences,


Me?ital  Trials.  115


beyond  the  fear  of  falling  fhort  in  the  path  of  duty  on  which
they  have  already  entered.  But  they  are  expofed  to  many  perils,
more  infidious,  becaufe  lefs  ftartling,  than  thofe  which  befet  their
more  fiercely-tempted  brethren.  They  are  in  danger  of  depend-
ing too  much  on  the  refpecl:  and  love  which  others  fo  readily
yield  them ;  of  valuing  themfelves  on  a  purity  which,  if  ever  one
of  ftruggle,  has  come  to  be  one  of  tafte ;  of  prizing  intellectual
clearnefs  above  moral  inlight  and  vigour  ;  of  mistaking  the  plea-
lure  they  feel  in  the  performance  of  duty,  for  real  fubmiflion  to
the  will  of  God;  and  above  all,  of  fhrinking  from  new  truths  which
would,  for  the  time,  confufe  their  belief,  and  break  up  the  calm
lymmetry  of  their  lives.  The  greater  danger  to  the  Chriftian  life
arifmg  from  thofe  hidden  heart-fins,  than  even  from  fmful
acl:s  which  inftantly  wound  the  confcience,  is  a  truth  which
Tauler  infifls  upon  in  his  fermons  fb  ilrongly  and  fb  often,  nay,
fometimes  almoft  to  exaggeration,  that  one  could  not  but  guefs
that  he  was  fpeaking  from  his  own  experience,  even  had  we  not
the  certainty  of  it  from  the  "Hiftory."  For,  as  he  often  declares,
different  natures  require  and  receive  a  very  different  difcipline
from  God.  Sometimes  it  is  by  outward  affliction  that  God  fpeaks
to  fouls  thus  finking  into  the  lethargy  of  formalifm ;  and  the  lofs
of  friends,  or  health,  or  influence  fuddenly  fcems  to  cut  off,  as  it
were,  half  their  means  of  ferving  Him,  and  to  roufe  long-for-
gotten temptations  to  rife  up  againil  His  will.  Sometimes,  on
the  other  hand,  He  fpeaks  to  them  inwardly,  by  opening  their
eyes  to  heights  of  holinefs,  which  they  had  never  before  fteadily

I  2


Taulers  Life  and  Times.


contemplated.  They  now  fuddenly  perceive  that  many  of  the
fancied  duties  which  have  till  now  occupied  their  lives,  and  fatis-
fied  their  confciences,  have  long  cealed  to  be  duties,  and  have
come  to  be  mere  habits  or  pleafures  ;  and  that  while  they  have
been  thus  living  in  felf-love,  unfeen  and  unrepented-of,  they
might  have  been  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  higher  obliga-
tions to  which  they  have  been  fo  blind,  but  which  were  all  implied
in  their  firft  belief,  if  they  had  but  continued  to  read  it  with  a
fmgle  eye.  Thus  they  are  weighed  down  by  prefent  temptations
to  which  they  have  long  been  ftrangers.  For,  in  order  to  follow
the  new  light  granted  to  them,  they  muft  give  up  long-cherifhed
aims  ;  relinquifh  many  opportunities  of  doing  good,  and  even,  it
may  ieem,  the  very  faculties  for  ufmg  them  ;  and  facrifice,  not
only  the  good  opinion  of  the  world,  but  the  truft  and  affection  of
many  who  are  deareft  to  them.  They  fhrink  from  fuch  renunci-
ation; and  then  come  doubt  and  perplexity  to  add  to  the  bitter-
nefs  of  the  ftruggle.  Can  it  be  right  to  abandon  fo  much  that  is
good  and  worthy  in  itfelf,  can  it  be  the  voice  of  God  that  fummons
them  to  do  this,  or  is  it  not  rather  a  felf-willed  fancy  of  their
own  ?  No  :  for  confcience  cannot  be  miftaken  when  it  tells  us  of
fin,  though  it  is  infufficient  to  reveal  to  us  duty  —  and  this  fierce
clinging  to  their  own  wifhes,  what  is  it  but  the  fame  obftinate
refiftance  to  the  will  of  God,  which  they  have  been  accuftomed
to  blame,  nay,  even  wonder  at,  in  the  vicious  and  criminal,  whom
they  have  perhaps  been  feeking  to  reclaim  ?  Such  a  ftruggle,  it
feems,  was  that  which  Tauler  had  to  pafs  through  before  he


Mental  Trials.


could  fully  apprehend  or  be  fitted  for  the  work  which  God  had
for  him  to  do.  And  furely,  without  fome  fuch  ftruggle,  none
can  keep  long  in  the  right  path.  For  the  path  to  life  does  not
ftretch  acrofs  the  levels  of  habit,  but  winds  up  the  heights  of
afpiration,  and  at  every  frefh  ftep  in  the  afcent  a  wider  horizon  of
duty  opens  to  the  view.

I  will  not  mar  the  impreflion  of  the  touching  narrative  given
by  Tauter  himielf  by  tranflating  the  ftory  it  relates  into  any
weaker  words,  but  leave  it  to  make  its  own  way  to  the  heart  of
thofe  who  have  hearts  to  underftand  it.  There  may  be  fome
who  are  unable  to  find  within  the  range  of  their  own  experience
and  obiervation  any  key  which  can  make  it  found  to  them  like
reality  and  common  fenfe,  yet  confidering  the  practical  energy
and  clear  judgment  of  Tauler  in  other  parts  of  his  life,  it  may
furely  be  worth  their  pains  to  ftudy  what  he  confidered  of  fo
much  importance  with  reverent  and  felf-diftruftful  diligence,
rather  than  rejecl;  it  at  once  as  the  mere  product  of  a  heated
fancy.

It  feems  moft  likely  that  the  attention  of  Nicolas  had  firft
been  drawn  to  Tauler  during  the  ftay  of  the  latter  with  Henry
of  Nordlingen,  in  Bafle,  in  1338;  for,  according  to  one  of  the
beft  MSS.  of  the  "  Hiftory,"  the  Layman  fays,  "  I  have  heard
much  of  your  doclrine  in  my  own  country."  Confidering  what
we  know  of  his  previous  hiftory,  and  the  accufation  of  Nicolas
that  he  relied  too  much  on  his  fcholarmip,  it  feems  highly
probable  that  Tauler  may  hitherto  have  been  fomewhat  influ-

i  3


n8  Tauler  s  Life  a?id  Times.

enccd  by  the  caft  of  thought  derived  from  his  Mailer  Eckart,  in
whofe  writings  the  power  of  Knowing  is  fo  highly  exalted  that  it
fometimes  is  made  to  take  precedence  of  the  faculty  of  Love.
That  Nicolas  mould,  after  hearing  Tauler  preach  a  few  times,
have  been  able  to  penetrate  his  fpiritual  condition  and  detect  its
great  imperfection,  would  not  appear  to  imply  anything  miracu-
lous, but  to  be  merely  a  rare,  though  by  no  means  fmgular,
inftance  of  the  fine  fpiritual  inftincl;  fometimes  found  in  men
themfelves  of  extraordinary  religious  attainments.  Tauler  mows
us  what  he  confiders  to  have  been  the  value  of  Nicolas  to  himfelf
when  he  fays,  "  Therefore  for  fuch  as  defire  to  live  for  the  truth,
it  is  a  great  affiftance  to  have  a  Friend  of  God,  to  whom  they
fubmit  themfelves,  and  who  guides  them  by  the  Spirit  of

God It  were  well  worth  their  while  to  go  a  hundred

leagues  to  feek  out  an  experienced  Friend  of  God,  who  knows
the  right  path  and  can  direct  them  in  it."*

The  two  years  of  filence,  which  muft  have  been  fuch  a
terrible  trial  to  Tauler' s  faith  and  obedience,  were  compenfated,
not  only  by  inward  growth,  as  is  always  the  cafe  with  fuch  trials,
but  by  the  evident  increafe  of  his  outward  ufefulnefs,  fo  that  he
found  the  truth  of  Nicolas'  aflurance,  that  one  of  his  fermons
would  bring  forth  more  fruit  now  than  a  hundred  had  before.
His  preaching  is  diftinguimed  from  that  of  mofl  of  his  brethren


Firft  Sermon  on  the  Birth  of  the  Virgin  [No.  127  of  the  Frankfort  Edition,  1826].


Character  of  T  aider  s  Preachi?ig.


among  the  "  Friends  of  God/'  by  its  more  fearching  applica-
tion of  religious  principles  to  the  moral  questions  arifing  in  the
various  emergencies  of  inward  experience  and  outward  life.  How
much  more  widely  ftill  muft  it  have  differed  from  that  of  the
ordinary  preachers,  who  fought  to  captivate  the  educated  by  the
refinements  of  fcholaftic  logic,  employed  on  queftions  of  no  ufe
but  to  difplay  their  own  ingenuity,  or  to  entertain  the  vulgar  by
marvellous  {lories  of  wonder-working  faints  or  demons,  —  when  in
flmple  earneft  language  he  appealed  to  the  confciences  of  his
hearers,  and  then  mowed  them  the  way  of  efcape  from  the
wretchednefs  of  their  finful  lives  to  the  peace  of  God,  which  pafT-
eth  all  underftanding.  And  when  he  taught  them  that  they  muft
forfake  the  creature  and  cleave  to  God  alone,  it  was  no  felfim
fhutting  up  of  the  heart  within  the  narrow  fphere  of  its  own  emo-
tions and  experiences  which  he  preached,  for  he  is  continually
admonifhing  to  works  of  love,  and  ever  places  human  duties  on
their  true  level,  meafuring  their  value  not  by  the  nature  of  the
acl,  but  by  the  obedience  and  love  involved  in  its  performance.
"One  can  fpin,"  he  fays,  "  another  can  make  fhoes  ;  and  all
"  thefe  are  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I  tell  you,  if  I  were  not  a
"  prieft,  I  would  efteem  it  a  great  gift  that  I  was  able  to  make
"  fhoes,  and  would  try  to  make  them  fo  well  as  to  be  a  pattern  to
"all."  "  The  meafure  with  which  we  mall  be  meafured,  is  the
"  faculty  of  love  in  the  foul,  —  the  will  of  a  man  ;  by  this  mall  all
"  his  words  and  works  and  life  be  meafured.

But  that  which  feems  to  me  the  moft  {hiking  chara&eriftic

i  4


Tauler  s  Life  and  Times.


of  Tauler's  fermons  is  his  profound  fympathy  with  the  fpirit  of
Chrift's  life,  efpecially  with  his  infinite  forrow  over  the  fins  of
others.  This  is,  indeed,  a  chara&errftic  of  the  "  Friends  of  God"
in  general,  but  is  exprefled  with  greater  force  and  beauty  in
Tauler  than  in  the  other  writers  of  the  fame  fchool.  In  this
lenie  they  fpecially  deferve  the  title  which  they  aflumed  ;  for,
more  than  any  other  clafs  of  religious  writers  with  whom  I  am
acquainted,  do  they  feem  to  have  entered  into  that  intenfe
appreciation  of  the  evil  of  fin,  mingled  with  endlefs  grief  and
companion  for  its  Haves,  which  could  overwhelm  the  Saviour's
mind  with  agony.

It  is  true  that  a  large  proportion  of  his  fermons  are  addrefled
to  the  inmates  of  cloifters,  and  have  fpecial  reference  to  their
peculiar  requirements  and  dangers.  But  we  muft  remember
that  he  lived  in  an  age  when  the  focial  relations  were  in  a  {late
of  diforganization  ;  and  in  thofe  times  of  general  diftrefs  and  per-
plexity, when  the  outward  miniftrations  of  the  Church  and  the
means  of  obtaining  religious  inftruclion  were  often  cut  off  for
long  together,  the  number  of  thofe  who  retired  into  convents
had  become  very  large.  There  were  great  numbers,  too,  of
laymen  and  women,  who,  without  entering  any  Order,  with-
drew from  the  world  and  formed  communities  or  unions  (called
Sammenungen),  dwelling  together  without  any  monaftic  rules,
yet  differing  little  in  their  mode  of  life  from  the  regular  monks.
Tauler  often  refers  to  thefe  communities  in  his  fermons.  Their
members  generally  chofe  Dominicans  or  Francifcans  for  their


Manners  of  the  Clergy.


confefTors,  and  a  great  number  of  this  clafs  appear  to  have
attached  themfelves  to  Tauler.  They  found  in  him,  however,  a
fevere  cenfbr  of  the  faults  to  which  their  reclufe  life  rendered  them
peculiarly  liable,  —  the  relying  on  outward  acls  of  piety,  defpifing
thofe  who  are  outfide,  killing  the  body,  which  is  God's  inftru-
ment,  with  aufterities,  or  allowing  themfelves  to  wafte  their
time  and  fill  their  minds  with  trivialities,  while  imagining  the
facl:  of  their  being  "  religious"  to  make  them  fafe.

He  is  faid  by  Specklin  to  have  made  the  reformation  of  the
lives  of  the  clergy  a  fpecial  objecT:  of  his  efforts.  The  ftatutes
paired  for  the  regulation  of  their  conducl:  by  a  fynod  convened
by  Bifhop  Berthold  in  1335,  for  the  purpofe  of  removing  abufes,
gives  a  lively  picture  of  the  inordinate  covetoufnefs,  and  utter
neglect  of  the  duties  of  their  vocation,  which  prevailed  among
the  clergy  of  Strafburg  at  this  time.  It  is  the  more  remark-
able, that  the  Bifhop  mould  have  found  it  necefTary  to  take  fuch
ftrong  meafures  during  the  folemn  period  of  the  Interdict,  when
the  very  ftruggle  in  which  the  clergy  were  engaged  with  the  civil
power,  might  have  been  expected  at  leaft  to  roufe  them  to  lead  a
more  decorous  and  fober  life.  From  the  ftatutes  of  this  fynod,
we  fee  that  the  clergy  not  unfrequently  alienated  the  property  of
the  Church  to  laymen,  or  borrowed  money  at  high  intereft  from
the  Jews,  in  order  to  gratify  their  propenfity  to  oftentation  and
pleafure.  There  were  even  fome  who  entered  into  trade.  The
younger  and  more  wealthy  efpecially  diftinguifhed  themfelves  by
their  extreme  fondncfs  for  difplay,  and  the  Bifhop  complains  that,


Taulers  Life  a?td  Times.


inftead  of  going  about  clad  with  due  decorum  in  the  proper  prieftly
garb,  they  allowed  their  hair  to  grow  long  in  order  to  conceal
the  tonfure,  wore  boots  of  red,  yellow,  and  green,  and  adorned
their  coats  with  gold  lace  and  gay  ribbons  ;  that  they  ftrutted  about
in  the  ftreets  equipped  with  rapiers  and  fwords,  attended  tourna-
ments, frequented  the  public  taverns,  and  were  the  moft  jovial
of  boon-companions  at  the  drinking-bouts  of  the  laymen.  In
fome  of  the  more  wealthy  nunneries,  too,  things  had  come  to  fuch
a  pitch,  that  the  ladies  drefled  magnificently,  took  part  in  the
amufements  of  the  tournament,  and  even  danced  with  laymen  in
their  taverns.  In  reference  to  fuch,  Tauler  fays  :  "  If  we  look
"  around  us,  we  fee  that  the  greater  part  of  the  world  are  enemies
"  of  God  ;  and  among  thefe  we  muft  account  certain  who  are
"  fervants  of  God  by  conftraint,  who  muft  be  forced  to  do  any
"  fervices  for  Him,  and  the  little  that  they  do  is  not  done  out  of
"  love  or  devotion,  but  {imply  out  of  fear.  .  .  .  They  are  com-
"  mon  hired  fervants  of  God  ;  and  fuch  are  all  thofe  priefts  and
"  nuns  and  the  like,  who  take  up  a  religious  life  for  the  fake  of
"  revenues  and  fees,  and  if  they  were  not  fecure  of  thefe,  they
"  would  not  ferve  God  at  all,  but  turn  round  altogether,  and  con-
"  fort  with  the  enemies  of  God.  Thus  they  feek  their  own
"  pleafure  in  dainty  fare,  drefs,  jewels,  vanity,  and  the  admira-
"  tion  of  others,  wherever  they  can  find  it.  Nay,  verily,  at
"  laft  they  muft  have  a  fpoufe.  '  Ah,  dear  Lord,'  they  fay,  '  it
"  is  no  harm  ;  it  is  a  fpiritual  love.  We  muft  enjoy  ourfelves
"  a  little  ;  we  muft  have  fome  recreation  ;  we  cannot  do  with-


Rejentment  of  the  Clergy  againft  Tauler.      123

"  out  it.  See,  dear  Lord,  we  are  fpiritual  people,  we  are  in
"  an  Order.'  But  put  on  as  many  cowls  and  hoods  as  thou
"  wilt,  they  will  help  thee  nothing,  if  thou  doeft  not  what  thou
"  oughteft  of  right  to  do.  There  was  once  a  man  who  fell
"  into  fin,  and  he  put  on  a  cowl,  but  did  not  give  up  his  fin.
"  The  Devil  came  and  took  the  man,  and  tore  him  into  a  hun-
"  dred  pieces,  and  left  the  cowl  whole,  but  carried  off  the  man,
"  body  and  foul,  to  the  amazement  of  all  beholders.  Therefore
"  take  heed  to  yourfelves,  knowing  how  full  the  world  is  of  fuch
"  bargainers  with  God,  among  monks  and  nuns."*

Tauler's  denunciations  of  this  clafs  brought  him,  of  courfe,
many  enemies  among  the  clergy,  who  hated  the  ftriclnefs  of
his  principles  and  conduct ;  and  they  ftrove  in  various  ways
to  diftort  his  words,  in  order  to  find  grounds  for  accufation
againft  him.  Thus  he  fays, — "  Children,  I  muft  tell  you  in  love,
"  that  I  am  unjuftly  accufed  of  having  declared  that  I  would  hear
"  no  one's  confeffion  unlefs  he  firft  promifed  me  to  do  everything
"  that  I  wifhed.  That  is  a  very  unjuft  word  :  '  what  I  wifhed.'
"  I  wifh  no  one  to  do  anything  beyond  that  which  is  written,
"  and  I  beg  no  man  to  promife  me  more  than  that."-f  He  had
alfo  to  defend  himfelf  againft  more  ferious  charges,  for  his  enemies
not  only  ridiculed  him  for  making  fo  much  of  the  inward  work,
but  called  him  and  his  followers  unorthodox  innovators.  Thus


*  Sermon  for  the  Eighth  Sunday  after  Trinity.

f  Sermon  on  Aflumption  Day  [No.  125.  of  the  Frankfort  Edition,  1826].


Tender  s  Life  and  Times.


he  fays  :  "  But  if  one  come  and  warn  them  of  the  horrible  danger
"  in  which  they  are  living,  and  what  a  fearful  death  they  are  like
"  to  die,  they  mock  at  him,  and  fay  he  is  a  Beghard,  or  belongs
"  to  the  New  Spirit,  fcoffing  at  him  and  flandering  him  worfe
"  than  ever  was  done  to  the  Chriftians  by  Jews  or  heathens.
"  Thefe  falfe  Chriftians  contemn  us  far  more,  crying  out,  *  Here
"  comes  one  of  the  New  Spirit  ;'  '  Thefe  are  they  of  the  lofty
"  fpirits.'  "*  It  is  even  related  that  the  clergy,  enraged  at  the
charges  he  brought  againft  them,  on  one  occafion  forbade  his
preaching  (which  undoubtedly  was  in  itfelf  an  act  of  difobedience
to  the  Interdict),  but  that  the  magiftrates  obliged  them  to  refcind
their  prohibition.

Meanwhile,  however,  Tauler's  efforts  for  their  amendment
were  not  wholly  fruitlefs,  for  it  is  recorded  that  through  him
"  many  priefts  became  quite  pious  ;  "  while  by  the  people  at
large  he  was  revered  and  affectionately  beloved,  and  "  whatever
"  weighty  matter  the  people  had  to  do,  he  was  called  in  to
"  fettle  it  with  his  wifdom  .  .  .  and  whatever  he  counfelled
"  them  was  right  in  their  eyes."  The  "  Friends  of  God"  natu-
rally attached  themfelves  more  ftrongly  than  ever  to  him,  and
about  this  time  he  feems  to  have  been  the  means  of  adding  a
notable  adherent  to  their  numbers,  in  the  banker,  Rulman
Merfwin,  who  was  at  a  later  period  the  founder  of  the


*  Second  Sermon  for  the  Third  Sunday  after  Trinity.


Clement  VI.  Hojlile  to  the  Emperor.


Gruenen-Worth,  and  author  of  the  "  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks/'
a  very  remarkable  allegorical  picture  of  the  then  condition  and
profpe&s  of  the  Church.  Nay,  even  Bifhop  Berthold  is  related
to  have  "  heard  him  preach  often  and  gladly  with  great
"admiration"  at  this  time;  no  doubt  rejoicing  in  fo  brilliant
an  exception  to  the  general  difgraceful  conduct  of  his  clergy,
which  caufed  him  fo  much  uneafinefs  ;  but  the  Bifhop's  favour
was  not  deftined  to  endure  long,  for  political  events  foon  occurred
which  produced  an  entire  alteration  in  his  views.

After  the  death  of  Benedict;  XII.,  Clement  VI.,  the  moft  in-
veterate opponent  of  Louis  IV.,  was  elected  Pope,  and  he  had
hardly  afcended  the  throne  when  he  renewed  hoftilities  againft
the  Emperor  with  greater  vehemence  than  his  predeceflor.  The
moft  awful  anathemas  were  launched  againft  Louis,  which  again
proved  themfelves  by  no  means  inefficient  weapons  of  attack.
Many  ecclefiaftics,  fecular  no  lefs  than  regular,  who  had  been
performing  divine  fervice  in  the  cities  that  acknowledged  the
authority  of  the  Emperor,  now  turned  to  their  bimops,  humbly
befeeching  them  for  abfolution  for  their  difobedience,  which
petition  was  not  rejected  ;  for  in  many  places  they  obtained  it
without  difficulty  on  payment  of  one  florin  !  Bifhop  Berthold,
too,  whofe  outward  reconciliation  with  Louis  had  been  merely
dictated  by  motives  of  fear  and  felf-intereft,  now  befought  pardon
for  it  from  the  new  Pope  in  an  epiftle  dated  November  9th,  1345,
in  which  he  further  renounces  his  allegiance  to  the  Emperor,  and
promifes  unconditional  obedience  to  the  Romim  See  for  the


Taulers  Life  and  Times.


future.  Clement  granted  his  petition,  and  releafed  him  and  his
diocefe  from  ecclefiaftical  penalties.  Shortly  after  (1347),  Louis
died,  fairly  worn  out  and  broken-hearted  with  the  long  ftruggle
in  which  his  reign  had  been  pafled,  but  not  until  feveral  of
the  Electors,  under  the  inftigation  of  the  Pope,  had  elected
Charles  IV.  King  of  Rome  (1346).  Many  of  the  Eftates
refufed,  however,  even  after  Louis'  death,  to  acknowledge  the
latter,  commonly  called  the  "  Parfon-King,"  becaufe  he  had
been  elected  in  defiance  of  their  wifhes.  Strafburg  was  one
of  thefe  cities,  and  in  confequence  was  again  laid  under  in-
terdict.

To  thefe  political  and  ecclefiaftical  difturbances  were  added
ftill  worfe  miferies.  The  land  was  defolated  fucceflively  by
tempefts,  earthquakes,  and  famine,  and  at  laft,  in  1348,  the
Black  Death  came  to  fill  up  the  meafure  of  the  people's  woe.
This  plague  continued  to  rage  through  Southern  Germany  and
France  until  the  following  year,  bringing  in  its  train  the  ufual
accompaniments  of  frantic  terror,  and  the  dhTolution  of  all  fbcial
bonds.  In  Strafburg  fixteen  thoufand  perfons  fell  viclims  to  it  ;
and  it  is  calculated  that  in  Southern  France  two-  thirds  of  the
population  perimed.  All  thefe  convulfions  of  the  natural  and
focial  world  ftruck  terror  to  men's  very  hearts;  bewildered  and
befet,  they  knew  not  which  way  to  turn.  Then  appeared  the
ghaftly  proceffions  of  the  Flagellants,  who  traverfed  the  country
half-naked  by  hundreds  and  thoufands,  walking  ttF&lfttfi  two  in
white  Ihirts  often  ftained  with  blood,  and  holding  fcourges  in


The  Black  Death.  127


their  hands.  When  they  entered  a  town,  they  broke  out  into
their  wild  howling  chant,

"  Nun  hebet  auf  cure  Hande

Dafs  Gott  dies  grofle  Sterben  wende,

Nun  hebet  auf  cure  Arme

Dafs  fich  Gott  iiber  uns  erbarme ;"

and  gathering  round  them  all  who  would  join,  after  fervice  in  a
church,  threw  themfelves  on  the  ground,  confefling  their  fins
aloud,  and  then  fcourged  each  other  till  they  were  exhaufted.  In
fome  places  the  popular  fanaticifm  accufed  the  Jews  of  caufmg
the  plague  by  poilbning  the  wells;  and  the  multitude,  in  their
fury,  fetting  fire  to  the  Jews'  quarter,  burnt  thoufands  of  the
wretched  creatures  in  their  houfes.  Numbers  of  the  lower
clafles  hoped  for  a  Meffiah  in  the  perfbn  of  the  great  "  Prieft-
hater,"  Frederick  II.,  who,  according  to  an  old  faying  now  ex-
panded into  a  diftincl:  prophecy,  was  in  the  latter  days  to  rife
again  from  the  dead,  to  render  juftice  to  the  widow  and  orphan,
to  punifh  and  humble  the  Clergy,  to  conftrain  monks  and  nuns
to  marry,  and  then  to  fail  over  to  the  Holy  Land  and  lay  down  his
crown  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.*  This  was  not  the  only,  though
it  was  the  wildeft  prophecy  current  at  this  time.  Hermann  von
Fritzlar  declares  that  the  time  is  come  that  precedes  the  end  of
the  world  :f  "  This  time  in  which  we  are  now  living,  is  that


*  See  Wackernagel's  Beitraege  zur  Vaterlaendifcben  Gefcbichte.    Bade.    B.  ii.  S.  122.
f  In  the  Preface  to  his  Heiligen-Leben.


Tattler  s  Life  and  Times.


"  in  which  the  people's  hearts  have  waxed  cold,  for  they  have
"  forgotten  the  life  of  our  Lord.  Wherefore  do  arfon,  and  rape,
"  and  robbery,  and  treafon,  and  ftrife,  and  envy,  and  hatred,  rage
"  now  as  they  never  did  before  ;  as  Chrift  Himfelf  foretold,  that
"  in  thefe  times  the  love  of  many  mould  wax  cold.  The  third,
"  and  coming  age,  is  that  of  Anti-Chrift."  And  Tauler  too,  in
his  Sermon  on  Chrift'  s  {tilling  the  Storm,  warns  his  flock  :  "  O
"  that  ye  knew  wThat  anguifh  and  terror  mall  fhortly  feize  the
"  hearts  of  all  who  have  not  cleaved  to  God  with  all  their  might,
"...  and  all  the  evil  that  mail  overtake  them,  as  has  been  of
"  late  revealed  to  the  Friends  of  God."  In  another  fermon,
preached  before  the  coming  of  the  Black  Death,  he  thus  reca-
pitulates the  judgments  of  God  that  were  threatened  if  the  people
refufed  to  repent  :  "  horrible  things  have  been  foretold,  of  fire,
"  of  water,  of  great  darknefs,  of  hurricanes  and  drought."  In
the  midft  of  thefe  calamities  he  declaims  againft  the  perverted
lefTons  drawn  from  them  by  the  people  ;  the  recklefTnefs  and
defpair  of  fome,  the  craving  of  others  after  marvellous  vifions
and  fupernatural  revelations,  finally  the  fmfulnefs  of  thofe  who,
feeking  only  to  efcape  from  the  world's  evils,  gave  themfelves
up  to  the  paflive  indulgence  of  their  own  emotion.  The  laft
error  was  that  againft  which  he  inveighed  moft  frequently,
being  the  one,  no  doubt,  of  which  his  hearers  wrere  moft  in
danger.  He  himfelf  was  not  one  of  thofe  paflive  myftics.
"  Works  of  love,"  he  fays,  "  are  more  acceptable  to  God  than
"  lofty  contemplation  ;  art  thou  engaged  in  devouteft  prayer,


Tauler  and  his  Two  Friends.  129

"  and  God  wills  that  thou  go  out  and  preach,  or  carry  broth  to  a
"  fick  brother,  thou  ihouldft  do  it  with  joy."

His  own  life  was  confiftent  with  his  teachings.  When  the
Black  Death  came  to  Strafburg,  he  devoted  himfelf  to  admi-
niftering  the  facraments  and  carrying  confolation  to  the  fick  and
dying.  The  renewal  of  the  ban  had  increafed  the  general  terror
and  diftrefs,  and  at  the  fame  time  opened  a  {till  larger  field  for
Tauler's  activity.  A  proclamation  had  been  iflued  exhorting  the
people  not  to  give  way  to  terror,  as  it  would  increafe  their
danger  of  infection ;  but  what  could  a  proclamation  avail,
when  they  often  faw  more  than  fifty  corpfes  carried  through
the  ftreets  in  a  day,  and  there  were  not  priefts  enough  to  per-
form the  funeral  rites  ?  The  deeper  was  their  gratitude  to
Tauler  for  his  noble  ad:  of  difobedience  to  the  Church  that
denied  them  their  only  remaining  confolation.  But  he  did
not  ftand  alone ;  there  were  efpecially  two  monks  who  Ihared
his  labours,  Thomas  of  Strafburg,  an  Auguftinian  and  the
Prior-general  of  his  Order  in  Strafburg,  and  Ludolph  of  Saxony,
Prior  of  the  newly  eftablifhed  convent  of  the  Carthufmns.*
The  three  friends  were  not  content  with  fetting  an  example
of  heroic  zeal,  they  hTued  in  their  joint  names  an  Addrcis  to


*  Both  thefe  were  alfo  writers  of  fome  note.  The  former  was  the  author  of  fome  dry  but
learned  commentaries  on  Peter  Lombard's  Sentences.  The  latter,  who  had  been  a  profeflbr
in  Paris,  wrote  a  Vita  Cbrijli,  which  was  much  celebrated  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  an  Ex-
fo/ttio  in  Pfalterium.

K


i3°  Tenders  Life  and  Times.

the  clerical  body  at  large,  mowing  how  iniquitous  it  was  that
the  poor  ignorant  people  fhould  be  fufFered  to  die  excommunicate
for  no  fault  of  their  own,  and  calling  on  the  priefts  to  vifit
the  fick  and  dying,  and  no  longer  to  refufe  them  the  confola-
tions  of  religion,  forafmuch  as  Chrift  had  died  for  all  men,  and
the  Pope  had  no  power  to  clofe  heaven  againft  an  innocent
perfon  who  fhould  die  under  the  Interdict.  In  a  fecond  Letter
they  went  further  ;  fetting  forth  the  doclrine  of  two  Swords
and  two  Powers,  the  temporal  and  the  fpiritual,  and  teaching
that  the  two  are  not  to  be  confounded,  though  they  ought
not  to  be  fet  in  oppofition  to  each  other ;  that  it  is  indeed
the  duty  of  the  fpiritual  arm  to  endeavour  to  direcl:  the  fecular
in  the  right  courfe,  but  that  if  a  great  one  has  made  him-
felf  liable  to  the  Interdict,  that  does  not  give  the  fpiritual  arm
any  authority  to  curfe  and  excommunicate  poor  people  who,
perhaps,  do  not  even  know  their  guilty  lord,  ftill  lefs  whole  cities
and  countries  without  diftinclion ;  that  it  cannot  be  proved
from  Holy  Scripture,  that  a  King,  chofen  in  a  legal  manner
by  the  Electors,  is  to  be  called  a  heretic  if  he  refift  the  power
of  the  Church ;  and  that  in  any  cafe,  it  is  the  Emperor  alone
who  muft  give  an  account  to  God  for  his  acts  of  infubordi-
nation,  and  not  his  poor  fubjecls.  Therefore  such  an  unjuft
curfe  as  this  Interdict  mall  be  turned  into  a  bleffing  on  the
heads  which  it  ftrikes;  and,  for  their  opprefllon,  God  mall  exalt
them  on  high.  Finally,  they  proclaimed  the  principle,  that
he  who  profeffes  the  true  articles  of  the  Chriftian  faith,  and


Tauler  and  his  Two  Friends.  13*

only  fins  againft  the  power  of  the  Pope,  is  by  no  means  to  be
counted  a  heretic.*

What   impreflion  thefe  free-fpoken  writings  made  upon  the

*  The  following  extraft  on  thisfubjedt  is  given  in  Profeflbr  Schmidt's  Tauler  (p.  53),  from
Specklin's  Colkftanea :  —

"  Specially  were  thofe  two  Articles,  which  were  quoted,  forbidden  and  declared  to  be
"  wholly  heretical.  The  Firft  was,  that  feeing  that  many  perfons,  young  and  old,  rich  and  poor,
"  men  and  women,  innocent  and  wicked,  when  they  came  to  their  death- beds,  lay  under  the  ban
"  on  account  of  the  Emperor  Louis,  they  had  put  forth  a  Letter  to  all  priefts,  bidding  them,  when
"  they  mould  vifit  the  fick  and  dying,  to  comfort  the  fick  with  the  bitter  paffion  and  death  of
"  Jefus  Chrift,  who  had  therewith  made  fatisfaction  before  God,  not  for  their  fins  only,  but  for
"  the  fins  of  the  whole  world,  and  had  opened  heaven,  and  reconciled  us  all  to  God.  And  the
"  Pope  had  no  power  to  fhut  heaven  againft  poor  finners  who  had  innocently  fallen  under  th:
"  ban.  Therefore,  when  one  mould  confefs  his  fins  and  defire  abfolution  and  the  holy  facra-
"  ment,  they  ought  to  give  it  unto  him  and  comfort  him,  for  heed  mould  be  given  rather  to  the
"  Word  of  Chrift  and  His  Apoftles  than  to  the  ban,  which  proceeded  of  envy  and  luft  of  worldly

"  power The  Second  was,  that  they  put  forth  a  genera'  epiftle  (not  among  the  com-

"  mon  people,  but  among  the  clergy  and  the  learned  fathers),  faying  that  there  be  two  fwords,
"  the  fpiritual  fword,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  other,  which  is  the  fecular  govern-
"  ment,  and  the  one  had  nought  to  do  with  the  other.  But  fince  they  are  both  of  God,  they
"  cannot  be  contrary  the  one  to  the  other;  but  the  fpiritual  fhall  be  diligent  in  its  office  and  in  the
"  Word  of  God,  and  defend  the  Government ;  and  the  Government  fhall  defend  God's  laws  and
"  the  pious,  and  punifh  the  wicked.  But  fince  the  pious  who  preach  the  Word  of  God  ought,
"  by  God's  ordinance,  to  be  defended  by  the  fecular  power  againft  the  wicked,  wherefore,  then,
"  fhould  the  Government  be  condemned  by  the  fpiritual  power  ?  for  then  fhould  God  condemn
"  His  own  work.  But  when  a  fecular  Head  fins,  it  behoves  the  fpiritual  Head,  with  great  hu-
"  mility,  to  point  out  unto  the  finner  the  right  way,  and  with  the  reft  of  the  clergy  to  entreat
"  God  day  and  night  with  tears,  that  the  finner  may  turn  again  from  his  way,  and  come  to  a
"  true  knowledge  of  his  fins  ;  for  God  defireth  not  the  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather  that  he  fhould
"  turn  from  his  wickednefs  and  live.

"  But  Chrift,  and  the  Apoftles,  and  the  Church  command  that,  if  the  finner,  after  much
"  admonition,  will  not  be  turned  from  his  ways,  he  be  excommunicated  till  fuch  time  as  he

K  2


132  T aider  s  Life  ajid  Times.

clergy  is  not  known  :  it  is  only  recorded  that,  through  the  exer-
tions of  Tauler  and  his  friends,  the  people  were  enabled  to  die  in


"  fhall  be  converted  and  turn  again  and  amend  his  life ;  and  then  he  lhall  be  again  received  unto
*'  grace.

"Much  lefs  doth  it  behove  a  Chriftian  fhepherd,  if  one  be  defending  of  excommunication,  to
"  condemn  and  excommunicate  without  diftincHon  innocent  perfons,  who  perchance  have  never
"  known  or  feen  the  guilty  man, — nay,  whole  lands,  cities,  and  villages ;  the  which  is  not  com-
"  manded  by  Chrift,  nor  the  Holy  Apoftles,  nor  the  Councils,  but  cometh  of  a  felf-ufurped
"  power.  For  it  is  the  office  of  the  Pope  to  point  finners  unto  the  true  way  of  falvation.

"  But  that  all  thofe  are  heretics  who  will  not  kifs  the  Pope's  foot,  or  that  to  do  fo  mould  be
"  an  article  of  faith,  and  that  he  is  an  apoftate  from  the  Church  who  takes  the  name  and  fulfils
"  the  office  of  King  or  Emperor,  on  being  duly  appointed  thereto  by  the  Electors,  or  that  all
"  who  render  obedience  to  him,  as  to  their  ruler  ordained  by  God,  fin  againll  the  Church  and
"  are  heretics,  cannot  be  proved  by  Holy  Scripture.

"  The  Government  is  a  power  ordained  of  God,  unto  which  obedience  ought  to  be  rendered
"  in  worldly  things,  even  by  fpiritual  perfons,  be  they  who  they  may.  The  Emperor  is  the
"  higheft  magiftrate,  wherefore  obedience  is  due  to  him  ;  if  he  doth  not  govern  rightly,  he,  and
"  not  his  poor  fubjedls,  mult  give  account  thereof  to  God ;  and  even  as  God  will  not  call  the
"  poor  innocent  fubjedl  to  account  for  his  evil  ruler,  fo  ought  not  man  to  condemn  and  excom-
"  municate  the  poor  innocent  fubjeft  for  the  fake  of  his  ruler.  Moreover,  they  who  hold  the
"  true  Chriftian  faith,  and  fin  only  againll  the  Pope's  perfbn,  are  no  heretics  j  but  he  were  a
"  heretic  who,  after  much  admonition,  mould  ftiffneckedly  difobey  the  Word  of  God,  and  would
"  not  amend  his  life  j  for  not  even  a  murderer,  a  rogue,  a  thief,  or  an  adulterer,  who  mould  afk
"  pardon  through  Chrift  with  true  penitence  and  contrition,  and  amend  his  life,  can  be  caft  out
"  of  the  Church.

"Hence  it  is  concluded,  that  all  thofe  who  unjuftly  and  innocently  have  come  under  the  Ban,
"  are  free  before  God,  and  their  curfe  will  be  turned  into  a  bleffing,  and  their  ban  and  yoke  of
"  oppreffion  will  God  lift  off;  even  as  Chrift  did  not  fet  Himfelf  againft  the  fecular  power  when
"  He  faid,  '  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,'  even  as  He  was  obedient  to  the  Government,
"  though  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  commanding  men  to  render  to  God  the  things  that  be  God's,
"  and  to  Caefar  the  things  that  be  Caefar's.  Now  our  fouls  belong  to  God ;  our  bodies  and
"  goods  unto  Cae  ar.  All  this  was  much  better  fet  forth  in  more  words."


Banijhment  of  the  Three  Friends.  J33

peace,  and  no  longer  feared  the  ban,  whereas  before  many  thou-
fands  had  died  without  fhrift,  in  the  agonies  of  defpair ;  whence
we  muft  conclude  that  fome  of  the  other  priefts  were  brought  to
fee  the  truth  of  the  principles  enunciated  by  the  three  monks.
But  it  was  not  likely  that  fuch  doctrine  would  long  be  fuffered
to  work  unchecked  in  the  public  mind.  The  Pope  fbon  inter-
fered, and  commanded  the  Bifhop  of  Strafburg  to  burn  the  books
of  the  three  friends,  and  forbid  their  perufal,  whether  by  priefts
or  laymen,  on  pain  of  excommunication.  Berthold,  anxious  to
prove  his  devotion  to  the  Pope,  without  delay  proceeded  to  take
ftringent  meafures  againfh  Tauler  and  the  two  high  dignitaries
who  had  done  fuch  good  fervice  in  his  diocefe  ;  their  writings
were  everywhere  fearched  for  and  deftroyed,  and  they  themfelves
were  expelled  from  the  city.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that
Henry  of  Nordlingen  mould  write  word  that  his  "  Brother  Tauler
is  now  conftantly  in  great  forrow,"  when  he  was  thus  driven
from  the  field  of  faithful  labours  at  the  very  moment  of  their
greateft  neceffity.  But  he  did  not  lofe  courage  ;  with  his  two
friends  he  retired  into  the  neighbouring  Carthufian  convent,  of
which  Ludolph  was  Prior,  whence  they  continued  to  diffufe  their
writings.

During  the  time  of  their  feclufion,  Strafburg  was  vifited  by  the
Emperor  Charles  IV.,  who  was  making  the  circuit  of  the  Rhenifli
cities,  to  induce  the  citizens  to  acknowledge  him  as  King  of  Rome.
Bifhop  Berthold  had  already  conjured  the  members  of  the  Rhenim
Eftatcs  afTembled  at  Strafburg,  for  the  fake  of  the  public  peace,

K  3


134  T aider  s  Life  and  Times.

to  do  allegiance  to  the  Emperor  whom  they  defpifed.      Charles
was  therefore  received  with  royal  honours,  and  inverted  the  Bifhop
with  the  imperial  fief,  after  receiving  his  folemn  homage  ;  but
he  was  obliged  to  promife  the  citizens  that  he  would  procure  the
removal  of  the  Interdict,  for  only  on  this  condition  would  they  ac-
knowledge him.    From  Strafburg Charles  proceeded  to  Bafle,  where
he  met  the  Pope's  Envoy  bringing  a  commiflion  to  the  Bifhop
of  Bamberg  to  abfolve  the  cities  that  mould  acknowledge  the  Em-
peror.    But  the  terms  of  the  Bull  to  this  effecl:,  in  which  Louis
was  called  a  heretic,  and  the  cities  were  required  to  exprefs  their
contrition  for  their  fidelity  to  him,  irritated  the  burghers  to  the
higheft  degree,  and  they  refufed  to  fwear  to  the  formula  of  abfo-
lution  when  it  was  read  to  them.     Neverthelefs,  as  the  Emperor
flood  in  need  of  their  fervices,  the  Interdict  was  removed.     The
Bifhop  of  Bamberg  next  repaired,  in  his  quality  of  Papal  Legate,
to   Strafburg,  to  proclaim  the  Abfolution   there.      The  citizens
were    afTembled    before  the  Cathedral,    then  rifmg  in  its   new
glories.     From  the  fteps  of  the  weftern  door  the  Legate  read  the
Bull  in  their  ears,  and  then  afked  the  Senate  and  commoners  if
they  defired   abfolution  ?     Peter  Schwarber,  the  Mayor,  replied,
"  Yes/'  in  the  name  of  all ;  and  the  Bifhop  immediately  pro-
nounced the  Abfolution.     On  this  the  Bifhop  Berthold,  turning
to  the  Mayor,  faid,  "  Matter  Schwarber,  once  you  helped  to  force
'  us  to  pay  homage  to  the  heretic  Louis  ;  and  now  that  he  is  dead
"  you  yourfelf  hold  him  to  be  a  heretic."       But  the  Mayor  re-
plied, "  My  Lord  Bifhop,  I  have  never  accounted  the  Emperor


Interview  with  Charles  IV.  135

"  Louis  a  heretic."  "  How  !"  exclaimed  Berthold,  "  have  you
"  not  juft  declared  him  fuch  ?"  "  No,"  faid  Schwarber  :  "  the
"  Bifliop  of  Bamberg  alked  if  we  defired  abfolution  ?  and  to  this  I
"  faid,  'Yes/  in  the  name  of  all.  Had  he  afked  whether  we  believed
"  and  would  obferve  all  the  articles  he  read  to  us,  we  mould  have
"  given  him  a  very  different  anfwer."

During  the  vifit  of  the  Emperor  to  Strafburg  he  heard  much
talk  of  Tauler  and  his  friends,  and  their  free  opinions,  and  fent  for
them  to  hear  their  defence.  They  read  before  him  their  con-
feffion  of  faith,  and  unmrinkingly  declared  their  adherence  to  all
that  they  had  hitherto  taught.  Tauler,  efpecially,  was  not  a  man
to  quail  before  a  temporal  fbvereign  after  he  had  braved  the  more
formidable  terrors  of  the  fpiritual  power ;  moreover,  we  find  that
he  did  not  fcruple  occafionally  in  his  fermons  to  rebuke  the  op-
preflion  of  the  people  by  their  rulers*  ;  and  he  openly  told  the
Emperor  wherefore  he  was  banimed.  The  arguments  of  the
three  monks  produced  fuch  an  impreflion  upon  Charles,  that  he
is  faid  to  have  declared  himfelf  "  fheer  of  their  opinion,"  and
expreflcd  his  defire  that  no  further  proceedings  mould  be  taken
againft  them.  Neverthelefs  the  Bifhops  prefent  condemned,  as


*  Thus,  he  fays  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Twenty-firft  Sunday  after  Trinity  : — "  Now  the
"  Apoftle  tells  us  to  contend  againft  princes  and  powers,  and  the  rulers  of  the  darknefs  of  this
"  world.  This  means  the  devils ;  but  it  means  alfo  the  princes  of  this  world,  who  ought  to  be
"  the  beft  of  all,  and  are  neverthelefs  the  very  horfes  on  which  the  devils  ride  to  fow  difcord
"  and  treafon,  and  who  torment  their  fubjccls  by  their  pride  and  unjuft  tyranny  and  manifold  op-
"  preffions,  as  we  now  fee  throughout  the  world."

K  4


136  Tenders  Life  and  Times.

heretical,  the  doctrines  we  have  already  mentioned  as  contained
in  their  writings,  commanded  them  no  longer  fb  wickedly  to
withftand  the  Church  and  her  Interdict,  enjoined  them  to  iflue  a
public  recantation,  and  for  the  future  to  write  nothing  more  of
the  like  nature  on  pain  of  excommunication.  Specklin  declares
that  they  went  on  and  wrote  ftill  better  than  before ;  but  nothing
more  is  known  of  the  matter  beyond  this  meagre  ftatement
of  his.

From  this  time  forward,  Tauler  difappears  from  the  hiftory  of
his  native  city,  until  a  ihort  time  before  his  death.  It  is  faid  that,
fmce  the  Emperor  and  Bifhops  forbade  him  to  write,  he  forfook
Strafburg,  after  having  fpread  much  good  doctrine  abroad  in
Alface.  His  name  was  held  in  grateful  remembrance,  not  only
by  the  "  Friends  of  God,"  but  by  all  his  fellow-citizens,  for
whom  he  had  faithfully  laboured  and  fuffered  during  the  whole
period  of  their  troubles ;  but  he  needed  a  fphere  of  greater  free-
dom, and  therefore  took  up  his  refidence  in  Cologne,  a  city  already
familiar  to  him,  and  where  he  found  numerous  brethren  in  fpirit.
Here  he  commonly  preached  in  the  church  of  St.  Gertrude,
belonging  to  a  convent  of  Dominican  nuns,  whofe  numbers  were
much  increafed  by  the  defire  of  having  Tauler  for  a  preacher  and
confeflbr.  Among  thefe  fitters,  however,  their  original  ftriclnefs
of  manners  no  longer  prevailed,  and  Tauler  often  found  occafion
in  his  fermons  to  lament  the  decay  of  conventual  difcipline.  The
younger  fitters  too  often  brought  with  them  from  the  world  their
love  of  fociety  and  amufements,  and  were  ftrengthened  in  thefe


Preaches  agalnjl  the  Beghards.  137

taftes  by  their  intercourfe  with  the  older  nuns ;  for  moft  of  them
thought  more  of  drefs  and  trinkets  than  of  devout  exercifes  and
felf-denial,  fo  that  Tauler  tells  them  that  all  their  piety  is  a  mere
outward  femblance,  and  that  many  laywomen  are  much  farther
advanced  in  holinefs  than  they.  Tauler  not  only  difplayed  his
cuftomary  zeal  in  reftoring  a  feverer  discipline,  but  endeavoured
to  fubftitute  for  thefe  mere  outward  works  of  piety,  the  fpiritual,
which  he  regarded  as  the  only  true  fervice  of  God.  He  fought
alfo,  while  in  Cologne,  to  combat  the  pantheiftic  enthufiafm  of
the  Beghards,  who  had  been  extremely  numerous  in  this  city
ever  fmce  the  commencement  of  the  century,  and,  notwithftand-
ing,  or  perhaps  rather  favoured  by,  frequent  perfecutions,  in  which
many  of  their  members  were  burnt  at  the  ftake,  were  continuing
to  make  progrefs  during  this  age  of  anarchy.*  In  the  year  1357


*  I  give  the  following  paflage  from  his  Sermon  on  the  Firft  Sunday  in  Lent  [No.  31,
Frankfort  Edition,  1826],  as  fhowing,  more  diftindtly  than  any  other  I  have  found,  the
portion  in  which  he  ftood  towards  the  antinomian  doctrines  of  the  Beghards,  and  as  furnifhing
the  moft  complete  refutation  of  the  charge  of  antinomian  tendencies  fometimes  brought
againft  his  own  preaching  : —

"  From  thefe  two  errors  proceedeth  the  third,  which  is  the  worft  of  all ;  the  perfbns  who
"  are  entangled  therein  call  themfelves  beholders  of  God,  and  they  may  be  known  by  the  carnal
"  peace  which  they  have  through  their  emptinefs.  They  think  that  they  are  free  from  fin,
"  and  are  united  to  God  without  any  means  whatfoever,  and  that  they  have  got  above  all
"  fubjedlion  to  the  Holy  Church,  and  above  the  commandments  of  God,  and  above  all  works
"  of  virtue ;  for  they  think  this  emptinefs  to  be  fo  noble  a  thing  that  it  may  not  be  hindered
"  by  aught  elfe,  whatfoever  it  be.  Hence  they  ftand  empty  of  all  fubjedlion,  and  do  no  works
"  either  towards  them  who  are  above  or  below  them,  even  as  an  instrument  is  empty,  and
"  waiteth  on  the  mafter  when  he  ftiall  choofe  to  work  therewith ;  for  they  deem  that  if


138  Tender  s  Life  and  Times.

(therefore  during  Tauler's  residence  in  Cologne),  the  Archbifhop,
William  of  Gennep,  instituted  a  freih  fearch  after  them,  and
commanded  the  clergy  of  his  diocefe  Strictly  to  enforce  the
Statutes  of  his  predeceflbrs  againft  them.  Tauler,  however,
though  a  Dominican,  never  took  part  in  any  acl  of  perfecution  ;
the  profound  fpiritual  Struggles  through  which  he  had  had  to


"  they  work,  it  hindereth  the  work  of  God,  and  therefore  they  empty  themfelves  of  all  virtue.
"  Nay,  they  would  be  fo  empty,  that  they  would  not  give  praife  or  thanks  to  God,  nor  have,
"  nor  confefs,  nor  love,  nor  defire,  nor  pray  for  anything ;  for  they  have  already,  as  they
"  fuppofe,  all  that  they  could  pray  for  j  and  think  that  they  are  poor  in  fpirit,  for  that  they
"  are,  as  they  dream,  without  all  felf-will,  and  have  renounced  all  ownerfhip  wholly  and
"  without  referve.  For  they  believe  that  they  have  rifen  above  it,  and  that  they  poflefs  all
"  thofe  things  for  the  fake  of  which  the  ordinances  and  precepts  of  the  Church  were
"  appointed  and  eftablifhed,  and  that  none  can  give  or  take  from  them,  not  even  God
"  Himfelf,  fince  they  think  that  they  have  fuffered  all  exercifes  and  all  virtues,  and  have
"  attained  to  pure  emptinefs  of  fpirit ;  and  they  fay  it  requireth  more  pains  to  become  empty
"'  of  virtue  than  to  attain  unto  virtue.  For  the  fake  of  this  emptinefs  of  fpirit,  they  defire
"  to  be  free,  and  obedient  to  none,  neither  the  Pope,  nor  the  Bifhop,  nor  the  Paftor ;  and  though
"  they  may  feem  outwardly  to  be  fo  at  times,  yet  are  they  inwardly  obedient  to  none,  neither  in
"  will  nor  deed.  For  they  would  fain  be  free  from  all  thofe  things  wherewith  the  Holy  Church
"  is  concerned  ;  and  they  fay  openly  that  a  man,  fo  long  as  he  ftrives  after  virtue,  is  (till  imperfeft,
"  and  knows  nought  of  fpiritual  poverty  and  fpiritual  freedom.  And  they  deem  themfelves
"  exalted  above  the  angels,  and  above  all  human  merit  and  faith,  fo  that  they  can  neither  increafe
"  in  virtue  nor  commit  fin  j  for  they  live,  as  they  fuppofe,  without  will,  and  poflefs  their  fpirits
"  in  peace  and  emptinefs,  and  have  become  nought  in  themfelves  and  one  with  God.  They
"  believe  that  they  may  do  freely,  without  fin,  whatfoever  nature  defireth,  becaufe  they  have
"  attained  to  the  higheft  innocence,  and  there  is  no  law  or  commandment  for  them,  and  there-
"  fore  they  follow  all  the  lulls  of  the  flefh,  that  the  emptinefs  of  the  fpirit  may  remain  unhindered.
"  They  care  not  for  fafts,  nor  feafts,  nor  precepts,  except  fo  far  as  they  may  obferve  them  for
"  the  fake  of  others,  becaufe  they  live  without  confcience  in  all  things.  Let  each  man  examine


T aider  and  the  Antinomian  Setts.  139

pafs,  had  taught  him  how  deep  the  roots  of  belief  lay  beneath
thofe  regions  of  the  foul  that  can  be  reached  by  outward  weapons  ;
and  when  he  fpeaks  of  the  "  Free  Spirits,"  it  is  to  mow  the  error
of  their  doctrines,  not  to  demand  their  extirpation.  Indeed,  his
writings,  and  thofe  of  his  difciple  Rulman  Merfwin,  exhibit  in
this  refpecl:  a  Chriftian  largenefs  of  heart  in  great  contraft  to  the


"  himfelf  whether  he  be  not  one  of  thefe.  But  a  murderer,  or  any  open  finner,  is  better  than
"  fuch  fpiritual  men,  for  he  confefles  his  mifdeed  that  it  is  evil ;  but  thefe  confefs  it  not.  Hardly
"  are  they  to  be  converted ;  and  at  times  they  are  verily  poflefled  by  the  Devil.  They  are,
"  moreover,  fo  ingenious  that  it  is  fcarcely  poffible  to  overcome  them  in  difcourfe,  fave  by  the
"  life  of  Chrift  and  Holy  Scripture  :  through  thefe  may  one  well  difcern  that  they  are
"  deceived.

"  Now  cometh  the  fourth  error.  Many  be  alib  called  beholders  of  God,  who  are  yet  different
"  in  fome  points  from  what  we  have  juft  faid.  Thefe  alfo  think  that  they  are  empty  of  all
"  works,  and  are  tools  of  God  by  whom  God  works  whatfoever  He  will,  and  they  merely  fuffer
"  Him,  without  working  themfelves;  and  they  fay  that  the  works  wrought  of  God  through  them
"  are  more  noble  and  of  greater  merit  than  thofe  of  a  man  who  worketh  his  own  works  in  the
"  grace  of  God ;  and  declare  that  they  are  God-fuffering  men,  for  they  do  but  fuffer  the  works
"  that  God  worketh  in  them.  But  although  they  are  empty  of  the  works,  and  do  nought,  yet
"  will  they  not  be  empty  of  and  mifs  the  reward ;  and  whatever  they  do  is  no  fin,  for  God
"  worketh  their  works,  as  they  fay,  and  whatfoever  He  wills  is  wrought  in  them,  and  nought
"  elfe,  and,  as  we  faid,  inwardly  they  are  wholly  paffive,  and  live  without  care  for  anything  ;
"  and  they  have  a  humble,  fubmiffive  manner,  and  can  bear  well  whatfoever  befals  them,  for
"  they  think  themfelves  to  be  an  inftrument  through  which  God  worketh  as  He  will.  Thefe
"  people  are,  in  many  points,  like  unto  the  true  men ;  but  in  this  are  they  falfe,  that  they  hold
"  everything  whereunto  they  are  inwardly  impelled,  whether  good  or  bad,  to  proceed  from
"  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  worketh  never  unprofitable  things  in  a  man,  fuch  as
"  be  not  contrary  to  the  life  of  Chrift  or  Holy  Scripture,  and  therefore  are  they  deceived.
"  Thefe  men  are  very  hard  to  difcover,  for  they  can  give  good  reafons  for,  and  put  a  fair  face
"  on  all  they  do ;  but  they  may  be  known  by  their  ftubborn  felf-will,  that  they  would  rather


1 4°  Tender's  Life  and  Times.

prevailing  fpirit  of  his  Order.  They  more  than  once  maintain
the  falvation  of  thofe  who  are  in  error  from  ignorance,  and  de-
clare that  their  defire  to  believe  what  is  true  is  accepted  by  God
in  place  of  a  correct  belief,  and  that  thus  many  heathen  and  Jews
are  faved  now  as  well  as  before  the  coming  of  Chrift.  Rulman
Merfwin  afcribes  the  terrible  perfecution  of  the  Jews,  then  raging,
to  the  covetoufnefs  of  the  Chriftians.*


"  die  than  give  up  one  tittle  of  their  own  way.  Thefe  are  contrary  to  them  who  fay  that  they
"  cannot  increafe  in  virtue ;  but  they  deferve  the  fame  meafure.  Behold  all  fuch  errors  are  mef-
"  fengers  of  Antichrift,  preparing  the  way  before  him  unto  unbelief  and  damnation.

"  Now  it  concerns  us  fomewhat  to  know  how  we  may  efcape  thefe  cunning  fnares.  No  man
"  may  be  free  from  keeping  the  commandments  of  God,  and  from  the  practice  of  virtue.  No
"  man  can  unite  himfelf  to  God  in  emptinefs  of  fpirit,  without  loving  and  longing  after  God.
"  No  man  can  be  or  become  holy  without  good  works.  No  man  can  reft  in  God  without  the
"  love  of  God.  No  man  may  empty  himself  of  godly  works  that  he  may  not  hinder  God  in
"  His  works,  but  muft  work  with  Him  in  thankfulnefs.  No  man  may  ferve  God  without
"  praifing  and  thanking  Him ;  for  He  is  the  Maker  of  all  creatures,  and  He  alone  can  give
"  and  take,  for  of  His  riches  and  might  there  is  no  end.  And  a  man  may  increafe  in  virtue
"  and  goodnefs,  and  may  exercife  himfelf  therein  as  long  as  he  lives ;  and  no  man  deferveth
"  more  reward,  though  he  think  that  he  merely  fuffer  the  works  of  God  to  be  wrought  in  him.
"  The  works  of  God  are  eternal  and  unchangeable ;  for  He  worketh  according  to  His  own
"  nature,  and  not  otherwife ;  and  in  thefe  works  of  God  there  can  be  no  merit  and  adding
"  thereunto  of  any  creature,  for  there  is  none  but  God  who  cannot  become  more  or  higher ;
"  but  through  the  power  of  God  the  creatures  have  their  own  work  to  perform,  in  nature,
"  and  in  grace,  and  in  glory."

'  The  following  curious  pafTage  is  extracted  from  Rulman  Merfwin's  Book  of  the  Nine
Rocks ;  but  many  paffages  inTauler's  fermonsfhow  that  his  fentiments  were  quite  in  harmony
with  thofe  here  exprefled  :  —

"  The  MAN  faid  :  '  Ah,  my  Beloved,  have  mercy  upon  poor  Chriftendom,  and  remember
"  how  that  the  wicked  Jewifh  people  and  the  w'cked  heathen  folk  are  all  ftriving  againft  thee


T aider  s  Tolera?ice.


Tauler  continued  to  correfpond  with  Nicolas  of  Bafle.  In
the  year  1356  the  latter  fent  him  a  pamphlet,  in  which,  on  the
ftrength  of  a  warning  vifion,  he  bewails  the  finfulnefs  of  the


"  with  all  their  might,  and  mall  all  be  loft. '  The  ANSWER  faid  :  '  I  tell  thee  thou  art
"  right  when  thou  prayeft  God  to  have  mercy  upon  poor  Chriftendom ;  for  know  that  for
"  many  hundred  years  Chriftendom  has  never  been  fo  poor  or  fo  wicked  as  in  thefe  times ;
"  but  I  tell  thee,  whereas  thou  fayeft  that  the  wicked  Jews  and  heathen  are  all  loft,  that  is
"  not  true  :  I  tell  thee,  in  thefe  days,  there  is  a  portion  of  the  heathen  and  the  Jews  whom
"  God  preferreth  greatly  to  many  who  bear  the  Chriftian  name,  and  yet  live  contrary  to  all
"  Chriftian  order.'  The  MAN  :  * .  .  .  What  ftrange  fpeech  is  this  that  I  hear,  and  what
"  may  it  mean  ?'  The  ANSWER  :  '  .  .  .  The  meaning  is,  that  where  a  Jew  or  heathen,
"  in  any  part  of  the  world,  hath  a  good,  God-fearing  mind  in  him,  in  fimplicity  and  honefty,
"  and  in  his  reafon  and  judgment  knoweth  no  better  faith  than  that  in  which  he  was  born,
"  but  were  minded  and  willing  to  caft  that  off,  if  he  were  given  to  know  any  other  faith  that
"  were  more  acceptable  to  God,  and  would  obey  God,  if  he  ventured  body  and  goods  there-
"  for  ; — I  tell  thee,  where  there  is  a  Jew  or  heathen  thus  earneft  in  his  life-  fay,  ought  he
"  not  to  be  much  dearer  to  God  than  the  evil,  falfe  Chriftian  men  who  have  received
"  baptifm,  and  aft  contrary  to  God,  knowing  that  they  do  fo  ? '  .  .  .  The  MAN  :  .  .  .  '  This
*'  feemeth  to  me  moft  ftrange,  .  .  .for  it  is  written  in  the  Scripture,  and  is  alfo  a  part  of
"  our  Chriftian  creed,  that  no  one  can  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  unlefs  he  firft
"  receive  holy  baptifm.'  The  ANSWER  :  '  That  is  true,  and  the  right  Chriftian  faith.  .  .  .
"  When  God  findeth  fuch  a  righteous  heathen  or  Jew,  what  doth  He  do  ?  Of  His  free  love
"  and  fathomlefs  mercy,  He  cometh  to  his  help :  I  tell  thee  God  findeth  many  fecret  ways
"  that  fuch  a  man  be  not  loft,  wherever  he  may  be  in  this  wide  world.'  .  .  .  The  MAN  :
"'Say!  how  are  thefe  unbaptized  men  faved  from  perdition?'  The  ANSWER:  'God
"  doth  it  by  many  fecret  ways,  which  are  unknown  to  moft  Chriftians  in  thefe  days.  ...
"  One  way,  which  Chriftendom  may  well  believe  and  does  believe,  is,  that  when  one  of
"  thefe  good  heathens  or  Jews  cometh  to  his  end,  God  cometh  and  enlighteneth  him  with  the
"  Chriftian  faith  ;  and  if  he  may  not  be  baptized,  God  baptizes  him  in  his  good

"  defires  and  will,  and  in  his  miferable  death.     Thou  (halt  know  that  there  be  many  of  thefe
"  good  heathens  and  Jews  in  eternal  life,  who  have  entered  thereon  in  this  wife.'   .     .     ."


142  T aider  s  Life  and  Times.

times,  and  foretels  the  coming  of  frelh  calamities,  of  which  the
great  earthquake  that  deftroyed  Bafle  in  the  fame  year  was
regarded  as  the  commencement.  No  details  of  Tauler's  work
in  Cologne  have  been  preferred  to  us.  It  is  not  even  known
whether  the  compofition  of  his  chief  work,  the  "  Imitation  of
"  Chrift's  Life  of  Poverty,"  is  to  be  referred  to  this  period  or  to
that  of  his  feclufion  in  the  Carthufian  Convent  at  Strafburg.  In
this  work  he  fets  forth  the  theory  and  practice  of  felf-renunciation
in  order  to  union  with  God.  In  point  of  language  and  compo-
fition, it  is  fuperior  to  his  Sermons,  nearly  all  of  which  feem  to
be  derived  from  mere  notes  taken  by  his  hearers  with  more  or
lefs  corre&nefs.*  It  is  interefting  to  compare  his  view  of  poverty

*  It  has  been  often  queftioned  whether  the  Latin  or  the  German  form  in  which  we  poflefs
Tauler's  fermons  be  the  original.  On  this  point  I  tranfcribe  Profeflbr  Schmidt's  arguments,
which  feem  to  me  quite  conclufive :  —

"  There  can  be  no  queftion  that  Tauler  delivered  his  fermons  in  German,  and  that  this  lan-
"  guage  is  the  original  one  of  all  the  fermons  of  his  which  we  ftill  poflefs.  After  his  connection
"  with  Nicolas  of  Bafle,  he  had  himfelf  declared  that  he  did  not  intend  henceforward  to  fpeak  fb
"  much  Latin  in  his  fermons.  The  greater  part  of  thofe  ftill  extant  are,  indeed,  addrefled  in  the
"  firft  inftance  to  the  brethren  or  fifters  in  whofe  convent-chapels  he  ufed  to  preach,  but  alfo
"  have  a  reference  to  the  laity,  who  ufually  aflembled  in  great  numbers  in  thefe  churches  to  hear
"  him ;  and  to  be  intelligible  to  fuch  an  audience  he  muft  have  fpoken  in  the  vernacular :  it  was
"  only  in  the  School  attached  to  his  own  convent  that  he  fpoke  in  Latin.  The  language  itfelf  of
"  Tauler's  fermons  and  writings  is,  befides,  a  fufficient  proof  that  they  were  compofed  in  German ;
"  for  they  exhibit  the  moft  complete  adaptation  of  the  thought  to  the  form  n  which  it  is  con-
"  veyed ;  a  form,  moreover,  that  Tauler  had  to  a  confiderable  extent  to  create  for  himfelf.  Up
"  to  his  day,  the  German  language  had  been  little  ufed  for  theological  and  metaphyfical  fubjefls,
"  and  was  poor  in  terms  to  exprefs  any  notions  beyond  thofe  living  in  the  popular  mind,  fo  that
"  the  writers  of  his  fchool  (in  bringing  the  higher  and  more  fpiritual  truths  of  religion  down  to


T aider  s  Writings.  H3


with  that  of  the  Spiritual  Francifcans,  who  taught  that,  to  any
high  attainment  in  the  Chriftian  life,  a  literal  renunciation  of  all
property  was  abfolutely  neceflary.  Tauler,  while  afluming  the
excellence  of  this  external  poverty,  as  relealing  the  Chriftian  from
many  cares  and  temptations  to  anxiety,  mows  that  the  eflence  of
the  poverty  of  Chrift  did  not,  as  they  taught,  lie  in  this  privation
of  earthly  wealth,  but  in  the  poornefs  of  the  fpirit  that  calls
nothing  its  own,  becaufe  itfelf  and  all  that  it  has  are  God's,  and
held  in  truft  for  Him.

Of  Tauler's  hiftory  we  know  no  more  till  we  find  him  at
Strafburg,  in  1361,  already  labouring  under  the  illnefs  which  clofed
his  life.  There  are  no  indications  of  the  date  or  the  reafon  of  his
return  to  his  old  home.  We  are  only  told  that,  after  a  long  life  of
toilfome  yet  fruitful  labour,  he  was  attacked,  at  feventy  years  of  age,
by  a  lingering  difeafe,  attended  with  great  furTering.  During  his


"  the  level  of  popular  apprehenfion)  had  to  frame  for  themfelves  a  terminology  of  their  own,
"  whofe  conftituents  they  borrowed  partly  from  the  Latin  of  the  Schools,  partly  from  figurative,
"  moftly  biblical,  forms  of  fpeech.  Tauler  often  avails  himfelf  of  fuch  German  fcholaftic  terms
"  to  exprefs  abftract  notions :  as,  for  inftance,  Iftekeit  (eflentia),  Eigenjbaftlicbeit,  Creaturlicbeit,
"  Unserheit,  Sinjbeit,  Holtzbeit.  So,  too,  he  often  fpeaks  by  images,  in  order  to  exprefs  fpi-
"  ritual  fadls  or  metaphyfical  ideas,  for  which  the  language  either  poflefled  no  words  as  yet,  or
"  which  in  themfelves  were  too  vague  to  be  exprefled  in  a  clear  and  diftinft  mode.  All  this

"  indicates  a  laborious  wreftling  of  the  thought  with  the  language Hence,  alfo,

"  the  partial  obfcurity  of  Tauler's  ftyle,  which  is  incurred  by  the  pains  he  took  to  attain  a  terfe
"  purity  by  forming  fubftantives  made  up  of  whole  propofitions  :  as,  for  inftance,  'tin  einvaltigei
"  '  gruntlicb-uf-got-Jtcb-loff'en'  ....  Tauler  and  his  fchool  have,  however,  the  merit
"  of  having  given  to  their  nation  a  philofophical  language."  (See  Schmidt's  Tauler,  S.  78.)


1 44  Tauler  s  Life  and  Times.

illnefs  he  caufed  hirnfelf  to  be  removed  to  the  convent  where  his
aged  fitter  was  a  nun,  that  me  might  be  with  him  and  tend  him  to
the  laft, — an  acl  which  is  enumerated  as  one  of  his  faults,  by  one
of  the  writers  of  his  fchool,  who  calls  it  feeking  for  too  much
natural  help  and  comfort.

After  twenty  weeks  of  pain,  he  fent  for  his  myfterious  friend,
and  begged  him  to  vifit  him  once  more,  for  he  perceived  that
his  end  was  nigh.  The  man  was  obedient,  and  came  to  the
Matter,  who  received  him  full  lovingly ;  and  the  man  was  glad
that  he  found  him  yet  alive,  and  faid,  "  Dear  Matter,  how
"  fares  it  with  thee  ?"  Then  faid  the  Matter,  "  Dear  fon,  I
"  believe  the  time  is  near  when  God  is  minded  to  take  me
"  from  this  world ;  therefore,  dear  fon,  it  is  a  great  comfort
"  to  me  that  thou  fhouldft  be  here  at  my  departure."  On  this,
Tauler  gave  him  fome  papers,  in  which  he  had  written  down
the  difcourfe  which  they  had  had  together  twenty  years  before,
and  begged  Nicolas  to  make  a  little  book  of  it,  which  the  latter
promifed  him  to  do.  But  Tauler  earneftly  enjoined  him  to
conceal  both  their  names ;  "  for/'  he  fays,  "  thou  mutt  furely
"  know  that  the  life  and  words  and  works  which  God  hath
"  wrought  through  me,  a  poor  unworthy  fmner,  are  not  mine,
"  but  wrought  by  the  power  of  the  Almighty  God,  to  whom
"  they  eternally  belong.  Therefore,  dear  fon,  if  thou  art  minded
"  to  write  them  for  the  benefit  of  our  fellow-Chriftians,  do  it  in
"  fuch  a  manner  that  neither  my  name  nor  thine  be  mentioned
"  therein.  Thou  mayft  fay,  '  The  Matter  and  the  Man.'  Neither


Taulers  Death.  145


"  fhalt  thou  let  any  one  in  this  city  fee  the  book,  elfe  people  will
"  mark  that  it  was  I ;  but  take  it  with  thee  into  thine  own
"  country,  fo  that  it  do  not  come  out  during  my  life."  For  yet
eleven  days,  it  is  faid  that  they  held  much  difcourfe  together ;  and
then,  under  circumftances  of  extraordinary  fuffering,  the  faithful
fervant  yielded  up  his  fpirit  to  God,  on  the  i6th  of  June,  1361.
He  was  buried  in  his  own,  convent.  The  {lone  which  formerly
covered  his  grave  has  been  recently  fet  up  by  the  Proteftants  in
the  church  in  which  he  warned  and  confoled  his  brethren  more
than  five  hundred  years  ago  by  word  of  mouth,  as  he  teaches  us,
who  are  now  living,  by  the  written  record  of  thofe  words.

Here  ends  our  proper  tafk ;  but  it  can  hardly,  I  think,  be
without  intereft  to  the  reader  to  learn  a  few  more  particulars
about  the  remarkable  fet  of  men  to  which  Tauler  belonged,
efpecially  concerning  the  great  Layman  who  had  fo  powerful  an
influence  on  his  career,  and  the  difciple  and  bofom  friend  of  both
fucceflively,  Rulman  Merfwin,  who  appears  to  {land  third  in
rank  in  this  group  of  "  Friends  of  God."  From  the  account  of
him  given  in  the  "Memorial"  of  the  Gruencn-\Vorth  Convent,
it  appears  that  he  was  originally  a  wealthy  merchant  and  money-
changer, "  but  always  conducted  his  bufinefs  with  great  fear
"  of  God  before  his  eyes,  and  with  fcrupulous  probity,  and  {lood
"  well  with  the  world,  and  was  of  a  very  merry  and  pleafant  tem-
"  per,  ib  that  many  efteemed  and  loved  him,  and  fought  his  fociety,
"  which  was  to  himfelf  alfo  very  agreeable  in  thofe  days.  And  he


146  Tenders  Life  and  Times,

"  had  at  the  firft  an  exceeding  beautiful  and  fweet  young  wife;  but
"  when  they  had  lived  but  a  Ihort  time  together,  me  died ;  and
"  after  that,  he  took  another  wife,  the  daughter  of  a  pious  knight.
"  And  when  they  had  lived  many  years  together  according  to
"  Chriftian  ordinances,  and  he  was  now  forty  years  old,  and  God
"  faw  not  fit  to  give  him  a  child  by  either  wife,  he  turned  with  his
"  whole  heart  to  God,  and  gave  up .  his  trade,  and  forfook  the
"  world,  and  led  a  fmgle  life  henceforward,  with  the  will  and  con-
"  fent  of  his  wife,  who  was  an  honourable  fimple-minded  Chriftian


woman/


His  own  account  of  the  next  four  years  of  his  life,  now  printed
for  the  firft  time  from  the  MS.  in  his  own  handwriting,  is  a
very  curious  and  interefting  document,  in  the  vivid  picture  it
gives  of  the  inward  ftruggles  wrhich  this  determination  brought
upon  him ;  and  however  clearly  we  may  perceive  that  many  of
his  difficulties  arofe  from  the  miftaken  view  of  his  focial  duties
derived  from  the  teachings  of  his  church,  it  is  impoffible  not  to
admire  the  fimple  dire&nefs  of  purpofe  and  intenfe  earneftnefs
with  which  he  ftrove  to  follow  every  indication  he  could  perceive
of  the  will  of  God.  I  give  a  few  paflages  from  it,  taking  the
liberty  to  omit  the  perpetual  repetitions,  which  would  render  an
abfolutely  literal  tranflation  quite  unreadable.  Indeed,  Rulman's
ftyle,  both  in  this  and  his  other  productions,  has  all  the  awkward-
nefs,  circumlocution,  and  tautology,  which  ufually  characterize
the  efforts  of  an  utterly  unlearned  perfon  to  exprefs  himfelf.

'  In  the  name  of  God,  Amen  !     All  ye  dear  Chriftian  men,  I


Rulman  Merfwin — His  Mental  Trials.        H7

"give  you  truly  to  know  that  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  1347,  it
"  came  to  pafs  that  I,  Rulman  Merfwin,  renounced  all  my  traffic
"  and  gains,  and  moreover  all  natural  pleafant  companionmip ;
"  the  which  I  did  with  good  courage  for  God's  fake,  to  the  fole
"  end  that  I  might  atone  for  my  fins.  Now,  though  I  had  taken
"  this  firft  ftep  with  good  courage,  and  of  my  own  free  choice
"  had  given  myfelf  to  God,  yet  it  was  with  great  forrow  to  my
"  nature  afterwards;  for  I  had  enjoyed  great  happinefs  in  the  good
"  things  of  this  world."  After  defcribing  the  dreadful  anguifli
of  mind  he  had  to  endure  on  account  of  his  fins,  and  the  fpiritual
joys  with  which  it  alternated,  he  continues:  "  And  I  came  utterly
"  to  hate  the  world  and  all  belonging  to  it,  and  alfo  my  own
"  flefh,  wherefore  during  this  firft  year  I  chaftifed  my  body  with
"  very  fore  and  manifold  exercifes,  fb  that  I  more  than  once
"  became  fo  weak,  that  I  thought  I  mould  die.  But  about  this
"  time  I  took  Tauler  for  my  confeflbr,  who  difcovered  fomewhat
"  of  thefe  exercifes,  for  he  perceived  that  I  had  become  very
"  fickly ;  and  he  feared  for  my  head,  and  commanded  me  to
"  exercife  myfelf  no  more  in  fuch  wife,  and  fet  me  a  certain  time;
"  and  I  muft  needs  obey  him,  but  my  obedience  went  very  much
"  againft  the  grain,  for  I  had  fet  my  heart  upon  bringing  my
"  body  into  fubje&ion.  But  as  foon  as  the  term  was  out,  I  faid
"  nothing,  but  began  again  to  do  as  I  had  done  before  .  .  .  But
"  our  Lord  was  pleafed,  during  this  firft  year,  to  give  me  a  true
"  difcernment  in  many  things,  fo  that  whenever  I  commended
"  any  matter  with  great  earneftnefs  to  God,  He  gave  me  to  pcr-

L2


148  Tauler's  Life  a?id  Times.

"  ceive  what  I  muft  do  and  leave  undone.  Moreover,  our  Lord
"  alfb  luffered  me  to  be  ofttimes  tormented  with  grievous  and
"  horrible  temptations,  both  by  day  and  night ;  but  it  was  given
"  to  me,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  receive  them  with  humble  and
"  cheerful  fubmiffion,  fo  that  I  could  fay  with  heart  and  mouth,
"  '  My  Lord  and  my  God,  my  nature  hates  and  loathes  this
"  fuffering;  wherefore  I  pray  thee  to  take  no  account  thereof,  and
"  do  not  as  my  poor  nature  would  defire  and  entreat  of  thee,  but
"  fulfil  thy  moft  blefled  will,  whether  it  be  fweet  or  bitter  to  my
"  weak  nature.'  .  .  .  And  when  God  faw  that  it  was  the  proper
"  time,  He  came  to  my  help  with  his  merciful  grace  .  .  .  Now,
"  during  the  fecond  and  the  third  years  (this  laft  was  the  jubilee,
"  when  all  men  went  on  pilgrimage  to  Rome,)  did  God  work
"  many  great  and  fupernatural  works  with  me,  a  poor  fmner,
"  through  great  forrow  and  fpiritual  aflaults,  and  withal  unfpeak-
"  able  temptations,  of  which  it  were  a  fin  to  write.  But  one  which
"  I  may  write  is,  that  God  fuffered  me  to  be  aflailed  with  unbelief:
"  to  wit,  that  the  devil  put  it  into  my  head  to  afk  :  '  How  may
"  it  be,  that  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  may
"  coniift  in  one  nature  ?'  And  this  unbelief  remained  upon  me
"for  a  long  fpace,  and  all  that  time  I  thought  nothing  elfe  but
"  that  I  muft  certainly  burn  for  ever  in  hell ;  and  yet  I  felt  within
"  myfelf  that  neverthelefs  my  will  was  fet  to  love  God.  And
"  after  a  good  while,  I  grew  fo  infirm,  through  this  continual
"  pain,  that  it  was  all  I  could  do,  when  Aflumption  day  came,  to
"  venture  to  go  and  fit  down  to  hear  a  fermon.  And  as  I  put


Merfwiris  Mental  Trials.  149

"  my  hat  before  my  eyes,  I  fell  into  a  fwoon  from  very  weaknefs;
"  but  while  I  was  thus  in  a  trance,  there  appeared  unto  me  a
"great  ftone,  wherein  were  carved  the  likenefs  of  three  men's
"  countenances.  .  .  .  And  it  was  as  though  a  voice  faid  to  me,
"  '  Now  mayeft  thou  well  believe,  fince  thou  haft  feen  how  in  one
"  ftone  may  be  three  perfons,  and  yet  it  is  one  ftone,  and  the
"  three  perfons  have  the  nature  of  one  rock/  And  hereupon  I
"  came  to  myielf,  and  was  feized  with  fear  when  I  found  myfelf  fit-
"  ting  among  the  crowd  .  .  .  So  I  rofe  up  and  walked  out  into  the
"  aifle,  and  found  that  my  faith  had  been  enlightened,  infomuch
"that  I  never  again  was  afTailed  with  unbelief;  but  the  other
"  terrible  temptations  I  had  to  endure  for  two  years  longer  .  .  .
"  infomuch  that  I  often  thought  I  knew  the  pains  of  hell.  And
"  I  was  fo  ill  that  my  friends  would  not  fuffer  me  to  go  on  pil-
"  grimage  to  Rome ;  neither  could  I  fcourge  myfelf  nor  wear  a
"  hair  Ihirt,  nor  a  fharp  crucifix,  nor  endure  any  other  hardmip
"...  but  feared  that  I  Ihould  die,  and  was  fomewhat  troubled
"  thereat,  for  I  could  not  but  love  my  natural  life.  .  .  .  And  in
"  all  thofe  two  years  God  would  not  fuffer  me  to  fpeak  of  my
"  pain  to  any  man,  however  great  it  might  be  ...  I  muft  bear
"  and  endure  to  the  end  alone,  that  I  might  have  no  help  or
"  confolation.  .  .  .  But  in  the  fourth  year,  my  Lord  and  God
"  mowed  his  great  mercy  upon  me,  and  looked  upon  my  affliction,
"  and  came  to  my  help  with  fuch  great  and  fupcrhuman  joy,  that
"  in  that  moment  I  forgot  all  my  woe  and  pain  that  ever  I  had
"  fuffered,  and  became  alfo  in  all  my  natural  powers  quite  ftrong

L3


J5°  Tauler's  Life  and  Times.

"  and  lively,  as  though  I  had  never  known  what  ficknefs  was.
".  .  .  And  he  gave  me,  moreover,  much  gracious  difcernment,
"  fb  that,  when  I  looked  narrowly  at  a  man,  I  could  ofttimes
"  perceive  pretty  well  how  it  flood  with  him  inwardly.  And  I
"  was  further  conflrained,  however  unwilling,  to  write  a  little
"  book  for  the  benefit  of  my  fellow  Chriftians."  From  a  com-
parifon  of  dates,  it  appears  that  this  "  little  book  "  muft  be  the
Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks,  already  mentioned.  In  the  opening  of
this  work,  Rulman,  under  the  allegorical  form  of  vifions,  gives
a  much  more  detailed  account  of  the  mental  conflicts  he  pafTed
through,  arifmg  partly  from  reluctance  to  contemplate  the  wretch-
ednefs  around  him,  partly  from  the  dread  of  being  condemned  by
the  church  as  unauthorised  to  teach  and  heretical, — before  he
could  refblve  to  write.  Finally,  feeing  no  efcape  from  what
appeared  to  him  a  pofitive  duty,  he  fets  to  work.  The  firfl  part
contains  a  defcription  of  the  terrible  condition  of  Chriftendom  ;  all
clafTes  are  pafTed  under  review,  and  their  particular  fins  expofed, —
thofe  of  the  clergy  with  efpecial  freedom.*  The  fecond  part  is
a  defcription  of  nine  rocks  which  fymbolize  nine  flages  in  the
progrefs  of  the  foul  towards  a  higher  life ;  each  more  difficult  of


*  Thus,  in  {peaking  of  the  Popes,  he  (ays,  "  Look  around  thee,  and  fee  what  fort  of  lives
"  the  Popes  have  led  and  do  lead  in  thefe  our  times ;  we  may  not  name  any  one  in  particular.
"  Look  ...  if  they  have  not  taken  more  thought  for  themfelves  and  for  the  maintenance

"  of  their  own  dignity  than  for  the  promotion  of  God's  glory Look  around  thee,

*'  and  behold  the  lives  of  the  bilhops  in  thefe  days,  whether  they  are  not  more  bufied  in  fcraping
"  together  earthly  wealth  for  the  enriching  of  their  relatives  than  in  feeing  to  it  that  men  are


Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks.  151

afcent,  and  more  glorious  than  the  preceding.  From  the  fummit,
he  obtains  a  momentary  glimpfe  into  the  abyfs  of  Deity  ;  then,
looking  back  to  earth,  fees  two  men,  the  one  bright  and  mining
as  an  angel,  the  other  black  as  Satan.  The  latter  was  one  who,
having  reached  the  fummit  of  the  nine  rocks,  had  defired  to  be
fomewhat  for  himfelf,  and  had  thereupon  fallen  ftep  by  ftep  back
into  the  abyfs  ;  the  former,  one  who  having  gazed  at  the  Godhead,
filled  with  love  and  compamon,  defcended  voluntarily  to  fave  his
brethren  from  their  fins.

In  his  autobiography,  Rulman  further  tells  us,  among  other
things :  "  In  this  fourth  year,  the  three  powers  of  faith,  hope,
"  and  love  were  greatly  ftrengthened  in  me.  .  .  .  Moreover,
"  nothing  in  time  or  eternity  could  give  me  content  but  God
"  Himfelf;  but  when  He  came  to  my  foul,  I  knew  not  whether
"  I  were  in  time  or  eternity.  .  .  .  And  in  my  heart  I  felt  a  great
"  yearning,  and  wilhed  it  were  the  will  of  God  that  I  might  go
"  to  the  heathen  and  tell  them  of  the  Chriftian  faith.  .  .  .  And
"  I  would  gladly  have  fuffered  death  and  martyrdom  at  their
"  hands,  in  honour  of  our  Lord's  fufferings  and  bitter  death.
"  But  of  all  this  I  was  not  fuffered  to  fpeak  a  word  to  any,  until
"  there  came  a  time  when  God  gave  a  man  in  the  Oberland  to


"  taught  to  walk  in  righteous,  godly  ways Behold  and  fee  how  many  doftors  and

*'  teachers  are  to  be  found  in  thefe  days,  who  utter  God's  word  from  their  chairs,  and  dare  pub-
"  licly  to  proclaim  the  real  truth,  and  publicly  to  fpeak  of  the  great  and  murderous  crimes  that
"  prevail  in  the  Chriftian  world,  and  to  warn  men ;  and  are  willing  by  fo  doing  to  rifk  their

"  lives  for  God's  honour."

L4


152  Tattler's  Life  and  Times.

"  tmderftand  that  he  fliould  come  down  to  me.  And  when  he
"  came,  God  gave  me  to  tell  him  of  all  thefe  things.  And  this
"  man  was  altogether  unknown  to  the  world,  but  he  became  my
"  fecret  friend,  and  I  gave  myfelf  up  to  his  guiding  in  God's
"  ftead,  and  told  him  all  my  hidden  life  in  thefe  four  years.  .  .  .
"  Then  he  faid  to  me :  '  Behold,  dear  friend,  here  is  a  book  in
"  which  ftand  written  the  firft  five  years  of  my  life  in  God ;
"  give  me  the  hiftory  of  thy  firft  four  years  in  exchange  for  it.'
"  But  I  anfwered :  *  It  would  grieve  me  much  if  my  hiftory
"  Ihould  come  to  the  knowledge  of  any/  Then  he  faid :
"  '  Now  lee,  I  have  given  thee  my  book,  and  I  know  full  well
"  that  thou  wilt  tell  none  of  it.  No  more  will  I  tell  any  of  thee.
"  I  will  take  thy  book  up  into  my  own  land  far  away,  where
"  thou  art  as  unknown  as  I  am  in  Strafburg.  And  ib  begin  to
"  write  thy  hiftory  in  two  books,  and  the  one  I  will  take  and
"  the  other  thou  malt  keep,  and  malt  hang  thy  feal  thereto,  and
"  lock  it  up  where  none  lhall  find  it  during  thy  lifetime.'  .  .  .

"  Now,  notwithftanding  all  the  gifts  and  enlightenment  that
"  God  beftowed  on  me  in  this  fourth  year,  there  was  yet  a  fecret
"  fpot  in  my  foul,  the  which  was  altogether  unknown  to  myfelf.
"...  And  it  was,  that,  when  I  looked  upon  my  fellow-men,  I
"  efteemed  them  as  they  were  in  this  prefent  time,  and  ftood
r'  before  God  in  their  fins ;  and  this  was  a  hidden  fpot,  for  I
"  ought,  through  grace,  to  have  regarded  them,  not  as  they  now
"  were,  but  as  they  might  well  become.  .  .  ."  In  feeing  a
wafte  piece  of  ground  cumbered  with  rubbifh,  and  giving  it  as


Merfwins  Charitable  Foundations.


his  judgment  that  it  might  be  reclaimed  and  made  a  garden  of,
an  inward  voice  reveals  his  fin  to  him,  and  rebukes  him,  faying  :
"  O  thou  poor  miferable  creature  !  how  ftrange  art  thou  ....
"  how  dareft  thou,  then,  to  efteem,  according  to  what  he  now  is,
"  thy  fellow-man,  who  is  made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  whom
"  Chrift  has  made  his  brother  in  his  human  nature,  and  not
"  rather  deem  that  God  may  make  of  him  a  comely  and  excellent
"  garden  wherein  He  himfelf  may  dwell  ?  .  .  ."  The  reft  of  Rul-
man's  narrative  refers  to  his  views  of  the  condition  of  the  Chriftian
world,  and  he  tells  us  :  "  It  was  revealed  to  me  that  I  mould  no
"  longer  be  fo  greatly  exercifed  by  the  temptations  from  which  I
"  had  hitherto  fuffered  .  .  .  but  that  my  affliction  henceforth
"  mould  be  to  behold  how  the  fheep  were  wandering  abroad
"  among  the  proud,  unclean,  ravening  wolves  .  .  .  this  mould
"  be  my  trial  and  my  crofs.  .  .  ."

Rulman,  however,  not  only  fought  "  to  benefit  his  fellow-
"  Chriftians"  by  his  writings,  but  alfo  by  his  deeds  of  active
benevolence.  His  name  occurs  about  this  time  as  one  of  the
managers  of  a  hofpital  ;  he  is  mentioned  as  Provoft  of  the  convent
of  St.  Argobaft,  and  in  the  i6th  century  a  houfe  of  Beguines  in
Strafburg  ftill  bears  his  name  ;  but  he  is  beft  known  as  the
founder  of  the  convent  belonging  to  the  Knights  of  St.  John  at
Strafburg.  After  long  deliberation  with  Nicolas,  whether  it
would  not  be  better  to  "  devote  the  money  to  the  help  of  poor
"  people,  that  they  might  not  die  of  hunger,"  Rulman,  with  fome
pecuniary  affiftance  from  Nicolas,  bought  and  repaired  the  half-


154  T aider  s  Life  and  Titnes.

ruined  convent  of  Gruenen- Worth,  which  he  then  endowed  and
made  over  to  the  Order  of  St.  John,  on  condition  that  its
worldly  affairs  fhould  be  managed  by  three  lay  truftees,  and  that
it  fhould  be  a  refuge  for  any  good  men,  whether  priefts  or  laymen,
rich  or  poor,  who  might  wiih  to  retire  there  for  their  fpiritual
benefit,  and  were  willing,  during  their  ftay,  to  conform  to  the
cuftoms  of  the  houfe.  His  principal  motive  feems  indeed  to
have  been  the  defire  to  provide  a  permanent  afylum  for  pious
perfons  like  himfelf,  whofe  free  opinions  might  at  any  moment
bring  them  into  trouble.  He  entered  on  pofTeffion  of  it  in  1366,
and  continued  to  live  there  till  his  death  in  July,  1382,  having,
however,  two  years  before,  built  himfelf  a  folitary  cell  clofe  to
the  church,  becaufe  he  thought  that  he  took  too  much  earthly
delight  in  the  fbciety  of  his  brethren  of  the  convent.  He  was
buried,  with  his  wife,  who  had  alfo  retired  to  a  convent,  and  had
died  twelve  years  before,  in  the  choir  of  the  church  he  built.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  autobiography  of  Nicolas
fhould  not  have  been  preferred,  like  that  of  his  difciple,  or  at
leaft  has  not  as  yet  been  found.  Though,  however,  we  are
thus  deprived  of  the  fecret  hiftory  of  his  mind,  we  are  able  to
learn  a  good  deal  refpecling  his  work  and  mode  of  life  from  his
Story  of  the  Four  Men  who  lived  with  him,  and  the  recently
difcovered  letters.  Still  thefe  notices  are  very  fragmentary,  and
his  hiftory  is  mixed  up  with  fo  much  of  a  marvellous  and  half-
legendary  character,  that  in  many  cafes  it  is  difficult  to  make  out
the  actual  facls.  He  appears  at  all  events  to  have  been  the


Nicolas  and  the  Four  Men.  155

leader  and  centre  of  a  diftincl:  aflbciation  of  "  Friends  of  God."
That,  even  before  the  date  at  which  he  began  to  colled:  aflbciates
round  him,  he  was  regarded  as  a  remarkably  holy  and  enlightened
man,  is  proved  by  the  circumftance  that  two  of  the  four  men
whofe  inward  hiftory  he  relates,  having  known  him  in  their
youth,  came  to  him  for  help  when  they  found  themfelves  in
fpiritual  perplexity.  At  an  early  period  he  began  to  caft  his  eye
upon  thofe  whom  he  thought  he  could  influence  for  good.  In
1340,  when,  as  he  lived  till  the  beginning  of  the  following
century,  he  muft  have  been  ftill  comparatively  a  young  man,  he
went  on  his  miffion  to  Tauler :  about  1350,  when  the  latter  had
left  Strafburg,  began  his  connexion  with  Rulman  Merfwin  and
probably  with  Berthold  von  Rohrbach,  who  was  burnt  at  Spire,
in  1356,  for  preaching  that  a  layman  enlightened  by  God  was  as
competent  to  teach  others  as  the  moft  learned  prieft.  About  the
fame  time  he  was  in  Hungary,  and  appears  alfo  to  have  fbjourned
in  Italy.  The  four  men  already  mentioned  joined  themfelves  to
him  one  after  the  other.  The  fecond  of  them  had  been  an
intimate  friend  of  Nicolas  from  his  youth ;  he  was  a  man  of
large  property,  and  early  married  to  a  beautiful  wife,  by  whom
he  had  two  children.  After  a  few  years  of  happinefs,  however,
he  began  to  fuffer  from  the  fcruples  by  which  pious  Catholics
have  been  fo  often  tormented,  and  to  doubt  whether  he  ought
not  to  renounce  his  domeftic  joys  in  order  to  do  penance  for  his
fins ;  but  Nicolas,  to  whom  he  came  for  counfel,  enjoined  him
to  remain  true  to  his  duties  as  a  hufband  and  father ;  and  it  was


156  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

not  until  after  the  death  of  his  wife  and  both  his  children  that
he  took  up  his  abode  with  his  friend,  and  became  a  prieft.  The
two  brothers  who  feem  to  have  flood  next  to  Nicolas  in  confide-
ration,  were  a  learned  jurift,  who  had  been  alfo  a  lay-prebend,
and  a  converted  Jew,  named  John,  who  both  afterwards  became
priefts.

The  little  company  lived  together  on  equal  terms.  Nicolas
tells  the  prieft,  when  deliberating  whether  or  not  to  enter  a
monaftic  Order,  and  enquiring  as  to  his  brethren's  mode  of  life  ;
"  They  obferve  no  rules  but  fuch  as  are  common  to  fecular
"  prie/is,  as  indeed  they  are,  but  we  live  together  in  common  as
"  {imply  as  we  can,  and  have  as  little  to  do  with  the  world  as
"  we  may."  The  priefts  among  them  feem  to  have  had  no
peculiar  vocation,  except  that  of  celebrating  mafs ;  the  laymen
never  took  part  in  the  adminiftration  of  the  facraments,  but  in  all
other  refpects  there  was  no  diftinclion  between  them.  As  all  ftood
in  a  direcl:  and  individual  relation  to  God,  they  required  no  prieftly
mediation  ;  nay,  the  priefts  themfelves  fubmitted  to  the  layman
Nicolas,  becaufe  they  regarded  him  as  the  moft  enlightened  of
their  number.  Not  counfel  from  men  ought  we  to  feek  after,
writes  Nicolas  in  1356,  but  that  which  proceeds  from  the  Holy
Spirit ;  and,  fo  long  as  we  have  it  from  that  fource,  it  is  indif-
ferent whether  it  flow  to  us  through  prieft  or  layman.  In  their  reli-
gious fervices  and  fafts  they  did  not  ftriftly  obferve  ftated  hours,  for
they  regarded  external  obfervances  as  unimportant  in  themfelves,
and  only  excellent  as  a  means  of  improvement,  or  a  fign  of


Do&rine  on  Afceticifm.  157

obedience.  Thus,  while  they  admitted  afcetic  exercifes  and
painful  penances  to  be  ufeful  in  the  commencement  of  a  religious
life,  in  order  to  mortify  the  fenfual  inclinations,  they  declared
them  to  be  afterwards  a  matter  of  indifference,  nay,  fometimes
pofitively  contrary  to  the  Divine  will.  According  to  Nicolas,  if
a  man  have  attained  to  a  certain  degree  of  maftery  over  nature,
then  fafting,  fcourging,  the  wearing  of  iron  girdles,  &c.,  is  a  felf-
fought  pain,  and  as  fuch  a  fign  that  he  does  not  yet  allow  God
to  work  alone.  Moreover,  fuch  tormentings  may  be  very  detri-
mental to  the  body ;  for  though  it  muft  needs  be  brought  into
fubjecl:ion  to  the  fpirit,  yet  it  ought  not  to  be  robbed  of  its
ftrength;  for  how  elfe  mould  a  man  fupport  the  fatigue  of  the
labours  and  travels  that  the  "Friends  of  God"  are  fo  often  called
to  undertake  ?

Their  doctrine  on  this  point  would  feem  to  us  more  judi-
cious than  their  practice,  for  it  is  evident  from  their  writings
that  they  frequently,  in  fact,  carried  their  aufterities  fo  far  as
to  endanger  life  or  reafbn.  But  Nicolas  admirably  draws  the
line  between  fuffering  that  is  felf-impofed,  and  that  which
God  lays  upon  us.  The  latter,  whether  it  confift  in  outward
affliction  or  inward  temptation,  we  are  to  take  joyfully,  for  it  is  a
proof  that  God's  grace  is  at  work  within  us ;  Chrifl,  who  has
endured  to  the  lafl  extremity  for  man,  loves  pain,  and  will
not  fpare  it  to  his  friends.  The  main  thing  is  that  we  fhould
find  all  things  good  in  God,  and  look  at  things  not  as  they
appear  to  the  world,  but  as  they  are  in  God's  fight.  When  fome


158  Tattler's  Life  and  Times.

of  the  Strafburg  brethren  of  St.  John  argue  that  finging  and
reading  in  the  chapel  at  fixed  hours  will  hinder  them  in  contempla-
tion, they  are  cenfured  for  it  by  Nicolas,  who  tells  them  that
thefe  acts  are  prefcribed  by  the  rules  of  their  Order,  and  though
they  have  in  themfelves  no  merit,  yet,  if  done  from  obedience,
they  cannot  hinder  the  motions  of  grace ;  even  while  outwardly
bufy,  God  may  be  worfhipped  by  us  in  fpirit  and  in  truth,  if  we
put  no  felfish,  carnal  thoughts  between  our  fouls  and  Him.  And
when  Nicolas  von  Laufen  takes  umbrage  at  the  fecular  manners
of  fome  of  his  brethren  who  ride  about  on  horfeback  clad  in
ihort  coats,  the  Layman  remarks  that  he  has  not  yet  learnt  to
find  all  things  right  in  God,  but  clings  too  much  to  outward
diftincTions.  So,  again,  the  renunciation  of  the  world  does  not
in  his  opinion  involve  the  abfolute  giving  up  of  earthly  pofleffions,
as  was  taught  in  his  day  by  the  Francifcan  Spiritualifts  and
others,  nor  the  violent  rending  afunder  of  focial  ties.  Let  him
who  is  in  an  Order  that  makes  poverty  a  rule,  obey  that  rule  ;
but  he  who  can  rightfully  hold  property  is  at  liberty  to  retain  it,
if  only  he  do  not  feek  his  own  ends  in  the  ufe  thereof,  but  God
alone.  Thus  thefe  "  Friends  of  God "  do  not  appear  to  have
renounced  all  control  over  their  property,  but  merely  to  have
thrown  what  they  regarded  as  fuperfluous  into  a  common  ftock,
which  was  applied  to  the  building  of  their  houfe  and  church,  to
purpofes  of  charity,  to  defray  the  expenfes  of  their  miffionary
journeys,  &c.  This  common  ftock  was  managed  by  their
truftworthy  fteward  Ruprecht,  who  was  the  chief  if  not  fole


Means  of  Secret  Inter  courfe.  159

medium  of  communication  between  Nicolas  and  his   Strafburg
friends.

From  their  feclufion,  however,  they  kept  a  watchful  eye  upon
all  that  was  pafling  in  the  world  around  them,  went  out  to  thofe
whom  there  feemed  a  profpect  of  winning  over,  and  exercifed  no
inconfiderable  influence   upon    thofe  who    had    put    themfelves
under  their  fpiritual  guidance.     This  was  the  cafe  with   many
who  did  not  even  know  Nicolas  by  name.     Thus,  Henry  von
Wolfach,  the  Mailer  of  the  Brethren  of  St.  John  in  Strafburg,
and  even  the  Grand  Matter  of  the  Order  in  Germany,  Conrad
von  Brunfberg,  and  many  others,  defire  his  counfel  to  folve  their
doubts  and  direcT:  their  proceedings.     MeiTengers  from  Nicolas
feem  to  have  been  perpetually  travelling  about,  who  brought  him
letters  from  the  "  Friends  of  God,"  fo  that  he  kept  up  a  conftant
communication,  not  only  with  thofe  in  the  neighbouring  regions
but  alfb  with  the  brethren  on  the  Rhine,  in  Lorraine,  in  Italy,
and  in   Hungary.      In   this  manner  he   became  acquainted  both
with  public  events  and  likewrife  with  the  private  affairs  of  indivi-
duals ;  fo,  for  inftance,  he  made  very  remarkable  revelations  to  an
Auguftinian  monk  in  Strafburg   refpe&ing  one  of  his  penitents.
Thefe  meffengers  had  certain  fecret  figns  by  which  they  recog-
nized each  other.     Thus,  Rulman  Merfwin  was  made  aware  of
the  prefence  of  Ruprecht,  by  hearing  a  peculiar  cough  when  he  was
in   church.     Nicolas  himfelf  took  extraordinary  precautions   to
remain  undifcovered,  and  with  fuch  fuccefs,  that,  after  Rulman's
death,  the  brethren  at  the  Gruenen- Worth,  who  had  previously


160  Tauler  s  Life  a?id  Times.

received  many  letters  from  him,  were  never  able  to  difcover  his
retreat.  When  thofe  with  whom  he  correfponded  defired  to
enter  into  perfonal  communication  with  him,  he  ufually  refufed  it,
limply  faying  that  it  could  not  be.  This  was  the  cafe  with  the
vicar  of  the  Bifhop  of  Strafburg,  John  von  Schaftolfheim,  with
the  Mafter  of  the  Brethren  of  St.  John,  in  Strafburg,  and  even
with  Conrad  von  Brunfberg.  In  1363,  he  writes  that  for
twenty  years  he  had  only  been  able  to  reveal  himfelf  to  jone
perfbn,  and  not  until  God  mould  take  this  one  from  him  would
he  feek  another ;  which  probably  fignifies  that  in  each  city  he
had  but  one  confidential  perfon,  through  whom  he  correfponded
with  all  who  defired  his  counfel.  Meanwhile  he  was  active  by
means  of  his  pen:  in  1356,  as  we  have  feen,  Tauler  received
from  him  a  tractate  on  the  decay  of  true  religion.  The  alpha-
betical lift  of  rules  which  he  had  given  to  Tauler  in  1340,  he
fent  in  1369  to  the  priefts  at  Gruenen-W^orth,  and  in  1371  to
Rulman's  fecretary,  Nicolas  von  Laufen ;  to  the  fame  priefts  he
fent  the  Hiftory  of  Tauler;  and  in  1377,  to  the  Brethren  of  St.
John,  he  fends  the  book  containing  the  Hiftory  of  the  Five
Brethren.  It  is  to  thefe  circumftances  that  we  owe  the  proof  of
the  authenticity  of  Tauler's  life,  and  the  pofTibility  of  identifying
the  "man"  there  mentioned  with  "the  fecret  friend,"  who
meets  us  in  the  writings  relating  to  Rulman  Merfwin.

Up  to  1367,  Nicolas  and  his  companions  dwelt  in  a  "city  in
the  Oberland,"  moft  likely  Bafle ;  but  in  that  year,  finding  it
"  not  helpful"  "  to  live  among  the  common  people,"  they  de-


Political  and  Ecclefiajlical  Feuds.


termined  on  retiring  into  utter  feclufion  ;  principally,  no  doubt,
in  order  to  carry  on  their  work  unwatched  and  undifturbed.  In
accordance  with  a  dream,  as  they  tell  us,  which  commanded
them  to  take  their  black  dog  for  a  guide,  they  fixed  on  a  fite  high
up  on  a  mountain,  far  away  from  any  human  habitation.  This
mountain  was  fituated  in  the  dominions  of  the  Duke  of  Auftria,
and  for  two  leagues  round  there  was  no  town.  A  mefTenger
whom  they  fent  to  the  Duke,  to  requeft  his  permiffion  to  fettle
here,  was  taken  prifbner  in  the  wars  then  raging  in  thofe  countries,
and  a  year  had  elapfed  before  they  were  able  to  obtain  his  releafe.
He,  however,  then  brought  back  the  required  permiffion,  and
they  began  to  build  their  houfe,  in  which  each  was  to  have  his
own  fpacious  apartment,  and  there  were  alfo  to  be  chambers  for
the  reception  of  foreign  brethren  as  guefls  ;  but  they  were  pre-
vented from  finiming  the  edifice,  by  the  political  disturbances  in
the  neighbourhood,  fb  that  it  remained  at  a  ft.andfr.ill  for  feven
years,  and  the  "  Friends"  gave  up  all  idea  of  completing  it.

The  political  and  ecclefiaflical  feuds  by  which  the  Papal  court
was  diflra&ed  excited  a  lively  but  melancholy  intereft  in  Nicolas,
who  conftantly  predicts  in  his  letters  that  they  muft  bring  down
ftill  heavier  judgments  at  God's  hand  than  even  thofe  which  had
already  vifited  the  world  ;  but  when,  after  his  long  refidence  in
Avignon,  Gregory  XI.  returned  to  Rome  in  1376,  a  ray  of  hope
that  it  might  yet  be  poflible  to  reflore  unity  and  concord  to  the
afflicted  Church  feems  to  have  dawned  upon  his  mind,  and  he  felt
called  on  to  make  a  personal  effort  to  influence  the  Pope  himfelf.

M


162  T aider's  Life  and  Times.

Accordingly,  as  we  learn  from  a  letter  to  Henry  von  Wolfach,  in
the  February  of  1377  it  was  refolved  by  the  "Friends"  that
Nicolas  and  the  Jurift  fhould  repair  to  Rome ;  the  Jew,  John,
offered  to  raife  funds  to  defray  the  expenfes  of  the  journey  from
among  his  relatives, — Jews  who  harboured  a  lecret  inclination
towards  Chriftianity.  The  feverity  of  the  Alpine  winter  and  an
attack  of  illnefs  which  befel  Nicolas,  now  above  feventy  years  of
age,  caufed  the  journey  to  be  poftponed  till  the  end  of  March.  I
extract  from  the  account  of  the  "Friends  of  God"  given  in  Rulman
Merfwin's  Briefbuch*  the  following  narrative  of  their  million  and
its  refults :  "  And  when  they  came  to  Rome,  the  Layman  (Rul-
"  man's  fecret  friend) -f  made  inquiry  after  a  Roman  whom  he  had
*'  known  a  long  time  before,  and  found  him  yet  living.  And
"  this  Roman  received  the  two  '  Friends  of  God'  in  a  very  friendly
"  fafhion,  and  would  take  no  denial,  but  they,  with  their
"  fervants,  and  horfes,  and  carriages,  muft  lodge  with  him  fo
"  long  as  their  affairs  kept  them  in  Rome ;  and  he  entertained
"  them  mofl  courteously  with  all  manner  of  good  cheer.  Then
"  he  faid  to  the  Layman :  '  Methinks  it  is  fomewhat  ftrange  that
"  '  thou  in  thine  old  age  fhouldft  come  to  court  from  fuch  a
"  '  diftant  land,  unlefs  it  be  upon  fbme  urgent  occafion.'  Then


*  The  account  itfelf  fays,  "  As  the  Layman  wrote  to  Rulman  Merfwin  and  Brother  Nicolas
"  von  Laufen  ; "  but  thefe  letters  are  not  among  thofe  preferred.

f  The  name  by  which  Nicolas  is  always  defignated,  except  where  he  is  called  "  the  Dear
"  Friend  of  God  in  the  Oberland."


Interview  with  the  Pope.  163

"the  Layman  anfwered:  *  So  it  is:  we  muft  fpeak  to  our  Holy
"  Father  upon  very  weighty  affairs.'  Then  faid  the  Roman :
"  I  fhall  be  able  to  bring  you  into  his  prefence,  for  I  am  very
"  familiar  with  him,  and  often  dine  at  his  table/  And  he
"  procured  that  the  Pope  mould  give  them  a  privy  hearing  on
"  the  third  day  after.  ...  So  they  came  into  the  prefence  of
"  Pope  Gregory,  and  the  Jurift  fpoke  to  him  in  Latin,  and  the
"  Layman  in  Italian,  fince  he  could  not  fpeak  Latin,  and  faid,
"  among  much  other  difcourfe :  '  Holy  Father,  there  be  many
"  grievous  and  heinous  crimes  wrought  throughout  Chriftendom
"  by  all  degrees  of  men,  whereby  God's  anger  is  greatly  pro-
"  voked ;  thou  oughteft  to  confider  how  to  put  an  end  to  thefe
"  evils/  But  he  anfwered  :  *  I  have  no  power  to  amend  matters/
"  Then  they  told  him  of  his  own  fecret  faults,  which  had  been
"  revealed  to  them  of  God  by  certain  evident  tokens,  and  faid,
"  *  Holy  Father,  know  of  a  truth,  that  if  you  do  not  put  away
"  your  evil  doings  and  utterly  amend  your  ways,  you  fhall  die
"  within  a  year/  as  alfo  came  to  pafs.  When  the  Pope  heard
"  thefe  words  of  rebuke,  he  was  enraged  beyond  meafure ;  but
"  they  anfwered  and  faid  :  '  Holy  Father,  take  us  captive,  and  if
"  we  cannot  give  you  evident  tokens,  then  kill  us  and  do  what
"  you  will  with  us/  .  .  .  And  when  they  declared  to  him  thefe
"  tokens,  he  rofe  up  from  his  throne,  and  embraced  them  and
"  kifTed  them  on  the  mouth,  and  faid  to  the  Layman,  *  Let  us
"  '  talk  together  in  Italian,  fince  thou  canft  not  fpeak  Latin/
"  And  they  had  much  loving  difcourfe  together ;  and  among

M  2


164  Tenders  Life  and  Times.

"  other  things  the  Pope  faid,  '  Could  you  tell  the  Emperor  as
"  *  much  as  you  have  told  me,  you  would  indeed  do  a  good
"  *  fervice  to  Chriftendom.'  And  afterwards  the  Pope  prayed
"  the  two  '  Friends  of  God '  that  they  mould  ftay  with  him  in
"  Rome,  and  he  offered  to  provide  them  all  things  needful,  and
"  alfo  to  follow  their  counfel.  But  they  anfwered,  '  Holy  Father,
"  fuffer  us  to  return  home ;  and  we  will  be  at  all  times
"  obedient  to  come  if  you  fend  for  us.  For  we  feek  no  earthly
"  gain,  nor  have  we  come  hither  for  the  fake  of  fuch ;  we  feek
"  only  God's  glory  and  the  welfare  of  Chriftendom  above  all
"  the  perimable  gifts  of  this  prefent  time/  Then  he  inquired
"  of  them  where  their  home  might  be ;  and  when  they  faid,
"  *  We  have  long  dwelt  in  fuch  a  town/  he  marvelled  that  fuch
"  '  Friends  of  God'  mould  dwell  among  the  common  people.
"Thereupon  they  told  him  [all  that  had  happened],  and  how
"  they  had  been  hindered  in  their  building.  Then  the  Pope
"  would  have  given  them  a  bifhopric  and  other  revenues  and
"grants,  but  they  would  not  have  them.  .  .  .  [But  the  Pope
"  gave  them  letters  recommending  their  caufe  to  the  Bifhop  and
"  clergy  of  their  diocefe.]  Now  when  thefe  two  dear  '  Friends  of
"  God '  had  fettled  their  affairs  with  the  Pope,  and  defired  to
"  depart  from  Rome,  their  hoft  would  not  fuffer  them  to  pay  for
"anything  that  they  had  had  in  his  houfe..  .  .  and  moreover
"  gave  the  layman  a  good  ambling  horfe  inftead  of  the  heavy
"  carriage  in  which  he  had  come,  faying  that  a  foft-paced  horfe
"  would  be  much  eafier  for  him  to  ride  over  the  high  mountains


The  Pope's  Letters  to  the  Bi/hop.  165

"  than  the  carriage,  feeing  that  he  was  old  and  weakly.  Now
"  afterward  the  Pope  was  unmindful  of  God's  rnefTage,  and
"  obeyed  it  not,  and  died  that  fame  year  as  they  had  prophefied —
"to  wit,  about  the  fourth  week  in  Lent,  1378."

On  returning  to  their  mountain,  they  found  that  the  Bifhop
of  their  diocefe  was  fojourning  in  a  city  thirteen  leagues  diftant.
It  was  refolved  that  the  two  who  had  been  with  the  Pope  mould
ride  with  his  letter  to  the  Bifhop  to  entreat  aid  for  the  comple-
tion of  their  houfe.  The  prelate  received  them  favourably,  and
gave  them  letters  to  the  clergy  of  the  town  that  lay  neareft  to
their  eftate.  On  this,  all  the  five  brethren  repaired  thither,  where
the  priefts  read  from  the  pulpit  the  letters  of  recommendation
which  they  had  brought  from  the  Pope  and  the  Biihop.  The
magiftrates  alfo  took  up  their  caufe,  promifmg  to  fend  them
armed  men  to  protect  their  fettlement  in  time  of  diflurbance,  and
offering  them  befides  a  houfe  in  the  town  for  a  temporary  abode,
and  in  which  they  could  alfo  take  refuge  if  necefTary  ;  and  further
fent  them  on  leaving  a  complimentary  prefent  of  fifh  and  wine
by  the  hand  of  their  officers.  Three  foreign  brethren,  who  had
for  fbme  time  cherifhed  the  wifh  to  be  received  into  their  fociety,
made  over  to  them  the  whole  of  their  property,  in  order  to  finim
the  houfe  and  erecl:  the  church.  Thus  aided,  the  little  band  were
at  length  able  to  fettle  down  in  the  home  they  had  chofen.  But,
as  far  as  we  can  gather  from  the  obfcure  traces  of  their  fubfequent
hiftory,  it  does  not  appear  that  they  were  allowed  to  enjoy  for  more
than  a  few  years  the  retreat  for  which  they  had  fighed  fb  long.

M  3


1 66  Tauler's  Life  and  Times.

In  the  fame  year  (1377),  Nicolas  learns  from  feveral  foreign
"  Friends  of  God'*  that  the  Church  is  on  the  point  of  falling  into
great  peril,  doubtlefs  from  the  growing  difcord  which  threatened
all  the  convulfions  of  anarchy ;  and  he  forefees  that  things  may
come  to  pafs  which  would  conftrain  the  "  Friends  of  God  "  to
ieparate  and  divide  themfelves  over  the  world ;  but  in  the  mean-
time their  part  is  to  remain  in  concealment  till  "  God  mall  do
"  fomething,  we  know  not  what  as  yet."  Meanwhile  he  entreats
the  prayers  of  his  friends,  for  they  are  greatly  troubled  in  mind,
and  know  not  what  will  come  of  it.  It  is  evident  from  fuch
dark  hints  as  thefe  that  Nicolas  and  his  friends  now  began  to
contemplate  the  poffibility  of  their  duty  calling  them  to  ufe  more
public  means  of  influence  than  the  private,  though  by  no  means
inactive  or  inefficient,  line  of  conduct  they  had  hitherto  purfued.
They  muft  have  foreieen  the  painful  collifion  that  was  impending
between  their  deep  reverence  for  the  outward  authority  of  the
Church  and  the  inward  authority  of  the  indwelling  light.
Neither  can  they  have  been  without  forebodings  of  the  martyr's
doom,  which  actually  befell  all  thofe  of  whofe  fate  any  traces  are
left ;  though  we  may  well  believe,  from  all  we  know  of  them,
that  this  would  occafion  them  far  lefs  anxiety  and  diflrefs  than  the
queftion  whether  they  were  acting  moft  for  the  interefts  of  the
Church  by  continuing  their  prefent  filent  and  therefore  undis-
turbed efforts  to  influence  the  fpiritual  leaders  of  the  people  ;  or  by
going  out  among  the  people  themfelves,  to  call  them  to  repent-
ance, and  proclaim  doctrines  which,  however  true,  might  unfettle


The  Forty  Years  Schifm.  167

the  foundations  of  their  traditional  belief; — the  difficulty  and
perplexity  which  in  many  ages  meets  and  torments  minds  of  the
prophetic  order.

In  the  following  year,  the  great  fchifm  that  had  been  dimly
foretold,  broke  out,  and  for  forty  years  the  church  was  divided
between  two  heads ;  Urban  VI.  was  elected  at  Rome,  under  the
influence  of  terror  at  the  violence  of  the  infurgent  mob ;  and
foon  after,  in  fubfervience  to  the  French  party,  Clement  VII.  et
Fondi,  who  immediately  haftened  to  Avignon.  When  thefe
tidings  reached  the  "  Friends  of  God,"  it  feemed  to  them  that  the
time  was  come  when  the  threatened  judgments  of  God  were
about  to  burft  over  the  world.  It  was,  indeed,  intelligence  fitted
to  make  all  hearts,  for,  as  the  brethren  of  Gruenen-worth  write :
"  After  God  has  been  warning  the  world  for  thefe  forty  years
"  paft,  by  deadly  difeafes  and  earthquakes,  famines,  and  a  wild,
"  mafterlefs  folk,*  laying  wafte  many  lands,  He  is  now  fending  us
"  a  plague  that  is  worfe  than  all  the  reft,  becaufe  it  attacks  our
"  faith  ;  namely,  the  dnTenfions  of  Chriftendom,  in  which  all  the
"  wifdom  of  nature,  of  Scripture,  and  of  the  grace  of  the  Holy
"  Spirit  is  fo  utterly  dried  up  and  extincT:,  that  all  our  learned
"  doctors  and  wife  priefts  have  loft  their  way,  and  know  not
"  which  to  choofe  of  thefe  two  Popes,  that  they  may  help  to  bring
"  back  unity  to  Chriftendom,  and  peace  to  the  See  of  Rome."


*  The  hordes  known  by  the  name  of  *'  Englifhmen,"  who  for  feveral  years  after  1361
ravaged  France,  Lorraine,  a  ~d  Alface.

M4


1 68  Tender's  Life  and  Times.

Their  Matter  wifhed  in  this  perplexity  to  repair  for  counfel  to  the
'  Friends  of  God/  but  Nicolas  forbade  him,  faying :  "  Have  you
"  not  the  Holy  Scripture  ?  Are  you  not  a  profeffor  in  the  chair  ?
"  Why  fhould  you  afk  counfel  from  the  creature  ?  Stop,  and  wait
"  till  God  Himfelf  ihall  conftrain  you  to  come  to  us.  It  is  not  yet
"  time  for  us  to  reveal  ourfelves ;  but  it  may  foon  come  to  pafs
"  that  we  flip  from  our  covert,  to  be  fcattered  abroad  over  the
"  world,  and  if  fb,  I  fhall  come  to  Strafburg  and  make  myfelf
"  known  to  you."

It  is,  however,  evident  that  the  "  Friends  of  God,"  though
concealed,  were  by  no  means  paffive  at  this  time ;  what  fpecial
plans  they  cherimed  are  unknown,  but  that  they  had  fuch  is
clear  from  all  their  proceedings.  So  early  as  November,  1377,
Nicolas  had  been  with  the  prieft,  John,  in  Metz,  on  fome  bufi-
nefs  with  which  we  are  not  acquainted.  During  1378,  much
consultation  by  means  of  meflengers  and  letters  muft  have
taken  place,  for  on  the  1 7th  of  March,  in  the  following  year,
Nicolas  (as  he  relates  in  a  letter  to  Henry  von  \Yolfach),  with
leven  other  brethren,  met  in  ibme  wild  place  high  up  among  the
mountains,  near  a  chapel  hewn  out  in  a  rock,  clofe  to  which  a
prieft  dwelt  with  two  young  brethren  in  a  little  hermitage.
Four  out  of  the  feven  were  laymen,  the  other  three  or-
dained priefts.  Nicolas,  whether  from  humility  or  not,  fpeaks
of  himfelf  as  one  of  the  leaft  among  them.  From  his  letter  it
would  fecm  that  the  chief  purpofe  of  this  meeting  was  united
prayer  to  God,  to  avert  the  "  dreadful  ftorm  "  that  was  menacing


The  Conference  in  the  Mountains.  169

the  Chriftian  world,  that  there  might  be  fpace  left  for  amend-
ment. A  week  was  devoted  to  thefe  fupplications ;  every  after-
noon the  brethren  went  out  into  the  foreft,  and  fat  down  "  befide
"  a  fair  brook/'  to  converfe  upon  the  matters  on  which  they  had
come  hither.  At  length,  on  the  laft  day,  while  thus  aiTcmblcd,
a  ftorm  of  wind  came  on,  followed  by  a  thick  darknefs,  which
they  took  for  a  work  of  the  evil  fpirits.  After  the  ftorm  had
lafted  an  hour,  there  came  a  pleafant  light,  and  the  fvveet  voice
of  an  invifible  angel  announced  to  them  that  God  had  heard
their  prayer,  and  ftayed  His  chaftifements  for  a  year ;  but  when
this  was  ended,  they  mould  entreat  Him  no  more,  for  the  Father
would  no  longer  delay  to  take  vengeance  on  the  defpifers  of  His
Son.  After  this  the  "  Friends  of  God  "  returned  back  again  each
to  his  own  place.  Refpecling  the  courfe  they  refolved  to  purfue,
all  that  we  can  make  out  from  the  vague  hints  in  the  letters  of
Nicolas  is,  that  they  interpreted  the  promife  of  the  angel  to
mean  that  they  were  to  wait  a  year  longer  before  quitting  their
concealment  and  taking  an  open  and  active  part  in  the  affairs  of
the  world ;  the  only  thing  that  is  diftinctly  ftated  is,  that  it  was
refolved  once  more  to  try  the  effecl:  of  perfonal  remonftrances
with  the  Pope.  Nicolas  himfelf  was  entrufted  with  this  miffion,
which,  however,  from  fome  unknown  caufe,  was  not  carried  out.
Meanwhile,  according  to  the  intelligence  received  from  the
brethren  in  foreign  parts  refpecling  the  progrefs  of  the  fchifm,
affairs  were  aiTuming  a  more  and  more  gloomy  afpecl ;  the  con-
fufion  and  perplexity  occafioned  by  the  prcfence  of  two  Popes  was


Taulers  Life  and  Times.


continually  incrcafmg  ;  the  Chriftian  world  was  fplitting  into  two
parties  ;  even  the  fecular  authority  was  in  danger  of  difruption  and
fubverfion.  The  time  drew  nearer  and  nearer  when  Nicolas  be-
lieved himfelf  called  on  to  begin  to  work  among  the  common
people;  already  in  June,  1379,  he  calls  on  the  Strasburg  Mailer
to  warn  the  people  in  his  fermons,  and  hold  up  before  them  the
teftimonies  of  Scripture  concerning  their  duties  in  fuch  a  crifis.

As  the  end  of  the  year  approached,  during  which  the  "Friends
of  God"  were  to  wait,  they  agreed  to  hold  another  meeting.  All
the  accounts  relating  to  this  conference  (the  latefl  diftinclly
recorded  intelligence  we  have  refpecling  this  extraordinary  band  of
aflbciates),  are  fo  mixed  up  with  the  fymbolical  and  the  marvel-
lous, that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  make  out  the  real  facls  of
the  cafe.  According  to  the  narrative  given  by  Nicolas  to  Rulman
Merfwin,  he,  with  twelve  other  "  Friends  of  God,''  were  at
Chriftmas,  1379,  warned  by  dreams  to  aflemble  together  on  the
following  Holy  Thurfday,  at  the  fame  place  where  the  feven
brethren  had  met  the  year  before.  So  early  as  February  fbme
of  the  foreign  brethren  arrived  at  the  abode  of  Nicolas  :  one
from  the  country  of  the  "  Lords  of  Meiglon,"  (probably  Milan)  ;
two  from  Hungary,  whom  he  had  known  thirty  years  before  ;
one  from  Genoa,  a  rich  burgher,  with  whom  Nicolas  was  not
previously  acquainted.  On  Holy  Thurfday,  the  22nd  of  March,
they  met  at  the  little  chapel  in  the  rock,  and,  after  receiving  the
facrament  on  Good  Friday  morning,  repaired,  as  before,  to  the
wood,  and  fat  down  befide  the  flream  to  begin  their  deliberations.


Lqft  Conference.


What  patted  during  thefe  conferences  is  only  related  in  the  form
of  marvellous  vifions  and  fantaftic  occurrences.  After  tempcfts
and  diabolical  apparitions,  a  bright  light  furrounds  the  place,  and
an  invisible  fpeaker  tells  them  that  the  impending  plagues  fhall
be  ftayed  for  three  years  longer,  on  condition  of  their  obeying  the
injunctions  contained  in  a  letter  which  thereupon  drops  down  in
their  midft.  Thefe  commands  are  fomewhat  myfterious :  the
"  Friends  of  God"  are  to  withdraw  from  their  ordinary  communi-
cations with  the  world,  except  in  the  cafe  of  thofe  who  defire
their  counfel ;  to  receive  the  iacrament  three  times  a  week,  &c. ;
and  after  three  years  they  fhall  receive  further  commands  from
God.  After  they  have  declared  their  readinefs  to  obey  the  letter,
they  are  told  by  the  fame  voice  to  light  a  fire,  and  throw  it  in.
Inftead  of  burning,  it  rifes  up  in  the  fire,  a  flam  of  lightning
meets  the  flame,  and  catches  up  fire  and  letter  together  to  heaven,
after  which  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  ieen ;  and  the  brethren
depart  to  their  refpeclive  homes.  The  brethren  in  the  Oberland
commence  their  period  of  retreat  at  Whitfuntide,  after  a  high
mafs  has  been  performed  by  the  prieft  John  in  their  newly-
finimcd  church.  Nicolas  writes  beforehand  to  Rulman  Merfwin
releafing  him  from  his  obedience,  and  recommending  him  to  take
the  Matter  Henry  von  Wolfach  for  a  confeflbr  in  his  {lead.  To
the  latter,  who  had  again  applied  to  know  what  courfe  the
"  Friends  of  God"  meant  to  take  with  regard  to  the  rival
Popes,  Nicolas  replies  with  his  ufual  caution,  that  the  Brethren
of  St.  John  could  not  regulate  their  conduct  in  thefe  matters  by


Tauler's  Life  and  Times.


that  of  the  "  Friends  of  God  ;"  for  they  were  bound  to  obey  the
dictates  of  their  fuperiors  in  the  Order,  while  the  latter  had
received  many  privileges  from  Pope  Gregory,  and  were,  moreover,
only  fubjed:  to  their  Bifhop,  who  did  not  prefs  them  for  a  decifion.
It  is  certainly  very  difficult  to  know  in  what  light  to  regard
the  marvellous  accounts  that  meet  us  in  the  writings  of  Rulman
and  Nicolas.  Some  of  them  feem  to  be  {imply  fymbolical  ;  for  it
is  clear  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of  prefenting  their  views  of
human  affairs  under  the  form  of  an  allegory,  fuppofed  to  be  feen
in  a  vifion  or  dream,  juft  as  Bunyan  does  in  his  "  Pilgrim's  Pro-
grefs."  This  is  the  cafe  with  Rulman's  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks,
Chriftiana  Ebner's  vifion  of  the  Clofed  Cathedral,  and  fbme  unim-
portant vifions  occurring  in  the  letters  of  Nicolas.*  But  the
cafe  is  different  when  wonders  are  related,  as  far  as  we  can  fee,  as
fimple  matters  of  facl.  That,  however,  the  "Friends  of  God"
expected,  and  fb  were  ready  to  receive  without  much  hefitation
as  to  their  reality,  not  only  direcl:  fpiritual  communications  from
the  Divine  Being,  but  alfo  miraculous  interpofitions  in  phyfical
things,  is  perfectly  clear  ;  and  thus  they  were  undoubtedly  open  to
all  the  felf-deception  in  thefe  matters  which  may  arife  from
intenfe  emotion  and  mental  excitement  acting  on  frames  difbr-
dered  by  afceticifm.  Swoons  under  the  prefTure  of  religious
emotion  are  with  them,  as  with  the  Methodifts  of  the  laft
century,  a  matter  of  continual  occurrence  ;  and  with  them,  as

*  See,  for  inftance,  his  vifion  of  the  Three  Birds.     (Schmidt's  Gottesfreunde,  S.  147.)


Vijions  and  Marvels.  1 73


with  the  early  Methodifts,  feem  to  have  been  not  unfrequently
the  crifis  of  a  ftate  of  overwrought  phyfical  and  mental  excite-
ment, after  which  they  regained  a  calmer  and  healthier  condition
both  of  body  and  mind,  with  an  addition  of  fpiritual  experience
and  enlightenment.  Such  an  occurrence  as  a  letter  falling  from
heaven  prefents  much  greater  difficulties.  It  is  poffible  that
Nicolas  may  have  intended  the  whole  ftory  rather  as  an  allegory
than  as  matter  of  facl; ;  if  he  regarded  it  in  the  latter  light,  it
muft  have  been  the  refult  either  of  a  terribly  over-ftrained  imagi-
nation, or  of  fraud  on  the  part  of  ibme  unknown  peribn.  But
to  iuppofe  that  a  man  of  ib  much  fimple  holinefs  and  practical
wifdom  as  Nicolas  appears  to  us,  mould  have  taken  part  in
juggling  tricks  of  luch  dreadful  impiety  in  order  to  perfuade  his
aflbciates  that  the  courfe  he  judged  beft  was  prefcribed  to  them
by  Heaven,  is,  I  confefs,  a  larger  demand  upon  my  powers  of
credence  than  they  are  able  to  meet.  Moreover,  we  muft  judge
thefe  accounts  by  the  age  in  which  they  were  produced, — an  age
when  the  mental  food  of  the  pious  laity  was  the  life  of  St.
Francis  with  his  five  wounds  and  blafphemous  "  conformities"  to
the  life  of  our  Lord,  and  other  works  of  a  fimilar  nature.  And
it  muft  be  remembered  that  the  leaders  of  this  party — Nicolas,
Rulman,  John, — were  laymen  whofe  not  large  ftock  of  erudition
was  {elf-acquired,  comparatively  late  in  life.  In  the  writings  of
the  fcholar  Tauler  (though,  in  common  with  all  his  contempo-
raries, he  believes  in  ghofts  and  heavenly  vifions)  we  find  fcarcely
a  trace  of  the  fanatical  credulity  that  meets  us  in  the  letters  of


174  T aider's  Life  mid  Times.

thcfe  lay  friends  of  his,  if  we  are  to  take  their  ftatements  as
literal  and  not  fymbolical  reprefentations  of  facl.  Even  fb  doing,
however,  if  we  compare  them  with  the  ftories  contained  in  the
ftaple  religious  literature  of  the  day,  or  even  in  the  life  of  Sufo,
Tauler's  companion  and  friend,  Nicolas  and  his  friends,  wild  as
they  may  feem  to  us  rational  Proteftants,  will  appear  fcarcely  to
leave  the  regions  of  fober  common  fenfe ;  *  and  it  is  remarkable
that,  in  moft  of  the  practical  queftions  that  arife  with  regard  to
felf-difcipline,  he  takes  the  moderate  and  judicious  fide.

Whatever  interpretation,  however,  we  may  be  inclined  to  put
upon  the  marvellous  circumftances  attending  the  above-men-
tioned conference,  it  feems  tolerably  clear  that  the  three  years'
fb-called  feclufion  of  the  "  Friends  of  God  "  was  regarded  by
them  as  a  time  of  preparation  for  their  public  work,  when  they
mould  be  "  fcattered  abroad  over  Chriftendom;"  and  that  by
their  retirement,  they  were  breaking  the  ties  that  bound  them  to
thofe  who  had  hitherto  depended  on  them  for  guidance,  and
accuftoming  them  to  acl;  for  themfelves  againft  a  time  when  they
mould  no  longer  have  their  wonted  couniellors  at  hand.  Pro-
bably, too,  the  brethren  took  this  courfe  partly  from  the  defire
that  their  fpiritual  children  mould  not  be  involved  in  the  perfe-


*  This  will,  I  think,  feem  no  exaggerated  expreffion  to  any  reader  who  will  take  the  pains  to
confult  only  Diepenbrock's  Life  of  Sufo  (Ratifbon,  1829),  with  Gorres'  Introduction  to  it,  and
fo  lee  for  himfelf  the  fpace  that  feparates  the  Romifh  from  our  Proteftant  point  of  view  in  thefe
matters;  not  forgetting,  meanwhile,  that  the  Editor  Diepenbrock  was  the  fecretary  of  the  learned
BiftiDp  Sailer,  the  leader  of  the  moft  liberal  party  among  the  Catholics  of  almoft  our  own  day.


The  Brethren  Scattered  Abroad.  1 75

cutions  which  they  could  not  but  perceive  to  threaten  themfelves,
but  might  continue  to  work  for  the  caufe  of  true  religion  in
their  refpeclive  fpheres,  unhindered  by  the  fufpicions  of  herefy,
which  any  known  connexion  with  the  "  Friends  of  God  "  would
have  brought  upon  them.  Not  that  there  is  any  fign  of  the
"Friends  of  God"  having  been  heretical  in  point  of  dogma  ;  it  was
rather  the  remarkable  freedom  with  which  they  criticized  the
conduct  both  of  the  fpiritual  and  temporal  authorities  that  was
likely  to  bring  them  into  trouble.  Thus,  in  one  of  their  meet-
ings juft  before  their  retreat,  the  brother  who  had  been  a  Jurift
fays,  that  if  offices  in  Church  and  State  were  conferred  in  accord-
ance with  God's  law,  neither  Urban  nor  Clement  deferred  to  be
Pope ;  the  former  had  been  appointed  by  the  Roman  mob
through  violent  means,  and  the  latter  was  now  defending  himfelf
by  fimilar  acl:s  of  violence,  which  was  contrary  to  juftice  and
God's  order.  So  likewife,  the  King  of  Rome  had  obtained  the
crown  after  a  mameful  famion  (1376),  for  his  father  had  bought
the  votes  of  the  electors  with  gold ;  how  the  electors  could
reconcile  it  with  their  oath  to  choole  an  inexperienced  boy  for
their  king,  God  only  knew ;  with  the  fubjects  matters  did  not
ftand  much  better:  they  obeyed  their  rulers  only  so  long  as  it
ferved  their  own  interefts  to  do  fb;  a  godly  life  was  almoft
extinct,  everywhere  prevailed  nought  but  the  ftriving  after  riches
and  pleafures.*  This  paflage  throws  much  light  on  the  views

*  See  Schmidt's  Gottesfreunde,  S.  1 70.


176  Taulers  Life  and  Times.

and  aims  of  the  "  Friends  of  God/'  and  enables  us  to  form  an
idea  of  what  muft  have  been  the  frequent  topics  of  difcuflion
among  them.

\Vith  the  ceflation  of  the  correfpondence  between  Nicolas  and
Rulman  Merfwin,  ceafes  our  only  fburce  of  information  about
the  "  Friends  of  God."  Their  term  of  waiting  expired  on  the
25th  March,  1383;  and  fmce  we  know  from  contemporary
hiftory,  that  the  courfe  of  events,  inftead  of  bringing  brighter
profpe&s,  grew  ever  darker  and  more  threatening,  we  feem  juftified
in  concluding  that  they  now  believed  the  time  to  have  arrived
for  them  "to  go  out  into  the  five  ends  of  the  world,"  and  work
for  Chrift.  Moft  likely  they  went  forth  as  preachers  of  repent-
ance, for  there  occur  in  the  letters  of  Nicolas  frequent  com-
parilbns  of  the  preient  ftate  of  the  world  to  that  of  Nineveh,
and  hints  that  they  may  have  to  acl:  the  part  of  Jonah.  But
where,  and  how  long  they  did  fb,  is  wrapt  in  utter  darknefs.  As
far  as  we  can  learn,  Providence  did  not  lee  fit  to  blefs  their
preaching  like  that  of  Jonah,  and,  to  human  eyes,  their  enterprife
was  a  failure.  For  all  we  actually  know  refpe&ing  their  fubfe-
quent  hiftory  is,  that  in  1393  a  certain  Martin  von  Mayence,  a
Benedictine  monk  of  Reichenau,  in  the  diocefe  of  Conftance,
who  is  called  in  the  a&s  of  his  trial  a  difciple  of  Nicolas  of
Bafle  and  a  "  Friend  of  God,"  was  burnt  at  Cologne,  after  the  fame
fate  had  befallen  fome  other  "  Friends  of  God,"  a  fhort  time
before,  at  Heidelberg.  Active  refearches  were  made  after  Nicolas,
but  as  he  had  concealed  himfelf  from  his  friends,  fb  for  a  long


Martyrdom  of  Nicolas  of  Bajle.  177

time  he  was  able  to  elude  the  efforts  of  his  perfecutors.  At
length,  on  a  journey  which  he  had  undertaken  into  France,  in
order  to  diffufe  his  doctrines,  accompanied  by  two  of  his  difciples,
James  and  John  (the  latter  moil  likely  the  converted  Jew  who
always  appears  as  his  boibm  friend),  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Inquifitors  at  Vienne,  in  the  diocefe  of  Poitiers.  He  was
brought  to  trial,  and  perfifted  firmly  and  publicly  in  his  herefles,
the  moft  "  audacious  "  of  which  feems  to  have  been  that  he  pre-
tended to  "  know  that  he  was  in  Chrift,  and  Chrift  in  him."
He  was  therefore  delivered  over  to  the  fecular  power,  and  perimed
in  the  flames,  together  with  his  two  difciples,  who  refufed  to  be
parted  from  him.*

Since,   in  the  trial  of  Martin  of  Mayence,  Nicolas  is  fpoken


*  The  following  note,  inferted  by  Schmidt  in  his  Tauter,  S.  265,  is,  I  believe,  the  only
fource  of  information  we  have  refpefting  the  end  of  the  Layman  : —

"  Joban  Niederus,  formicarius,  Arg.  1517,410.  F.  40,  &c.  :  Vivebat  paulo  ante  [the
"  Council  of  Pifa]  quidam  purum  laicus,  Nycholaus  nomine.  Hie  in  linea  Rheni  circa  Bafiliam  et
"  infra,  primum  velut  Beghardiis  ambulans,  a  multis  qui  perfequebantur  hereticos,  de  eorundem
"  hereticorum  numero  quafi  unus  habebatur  fufpeftimmus.  Acutiffimus  enim  erat,  et  verbis
"  errores  coloratiffime  velare  novit.  Idcirco  etiam  manus  inquifitorum  dudum  evaferat  et  multo
"  tempore.  Difcipulos  igitur  quofdam  in  fuam  feftam  collegit.  Fuit  enim  profeffione  et  habitu
"  de  damnatis  Beghardis  unus,  qui  vifiones  et  revelationes  in  praedifto  damnato  habitu  multas
"  habuit  quas  infallibiles  efle  credidit.  Se  fcire  affirmabat  audafter  quod  Chriftus  in  eo  eflet
"  aftu,  et  ipfe  in  Chrifto,  et  plura  alia,  quae  omnia,  captus  tandem  Wiennae  in  Piftavienfi  diocefi,
"  inquifitus  fatebatur  publice.  Sed  cum  Jacobum  et  Joannem  fufpeftos  in  fide,  et  fibi  confcios
"  fuos  fpeciales  difcipulos,  ad  juflum  ecclefiae  cum  inquirenti  nollet  dimittere  nifl  per  ignem,
"  et  reportis  in  multis  a  vera  fide  devius  et  imperfuafibilis,  lecularium  poteftati  jufte  traditus  eft
"  qui  cum  incinerarunt."

N


178  Tenders  Life  and  Times.

of  as  ftill  living,  his  death  moft  likely  occurred  fubfequcntly  to
that  date,  but  cannot  have  taken  place  much  later,  as  he
muft  then  have  been  near  ninety  years  of  age.  Even  before  this
time,  the  Strafburg  brethren  had  loft  all  trace  of  the  "  Friends
of  God/'  and  their  frequent  attempts  to  difcovcr  them  had
proved  utterly  unavailing ;  *  no  doubt,  becaufe  the  convent
which  they  fought  to  find  was  already  deferted,  and  its  inmates,
whofe  names  they  had  never  known,  were  fcattered  abroad  in
fulfilment  of  their  vocation.  That  which  appears  to  have  formed
the  chief  ground  of  their  perfecution,  was  their  effort  to  free
the  people  from  the  tyranny  of  the  clergy,  and  their  claiming  for
every  one  enlightened  by  God  the  right  to  teach, — a  claim
antagoniftic  to  the  inmoft  elfence  of  the  Romifh  Church.  And
if  their  teaching  failed  to  effecl:  a  wide  reformation  becaufe  it
was  mingled  with  fome  of  the  great  errors  of  Rome,  and  in  place
of  prieftly  authority  over  men's  confciences  fet  up  that  of  their
brethren,  whofe  infpiration  was  often  not  lefs  doubtful,  yet  we
cannot  but  recognife  in  it  the  germs  of  the  true  freedom  of  the
Gofpel,  as  well  as  the  great  and  all-eflential  truth  that  the
Chriftian  life  does  not  confift  in  outward  wrorks,  but  in  the
inward  union  of  the  fpirit  with  God.

*  A  detailed  account  of  thefe  attempts  is  given  in  Schmidt's  Gottetfreunde,  S.  29.


SERMONS


OF   THE


REVEREND  DOCTOR  JOHN   TAULER.


i.


Sermon  for  the  Firft  Sunday  in  Advent.

(From  the  Epiflle  for  the  day.)


How  that  we  are  called  upon  to  arife  from  our  Jlns,  and  to  conquer
our  foes,  looking  for  the  glorious  coming  of  Our  Lord  in  our  Jon  Is.

ROM.  xiii.  2. — "  Now  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  deep."


HIS  day  we  celebrate  the  beginning  of  the
feafon  of  Advent,  that  is  to  fay,  the  coming
of  our  Lord  ;  and  now,  indeed,  we  enter  on
an  exceeding  fweet  and  blefled  time,  con-
cerning which  very  devout  and  joyful  words
are  read  and  fung  by  the  holy  Church.  For  as  May
excels  all  other  months  in  gladnefs  and  delights,  fo  is
this  feafon  fpecially  dear  to  our  hearts,  and  facred  above
all  other  fcftivals.  For  thefe  are  the  days  which  the
prophets  and  righteous  men  of  the  Old  Teftament  for

N2


Ibejtgnif-
cance  and
glory  of  the
J'eajcn  of
Advent.


i8o


Sermo?i  for  the


The  duties  to
which  this
feafon  doth
call  us.


How  we  have
fallen  through
dijobedience  ;


five  thoufand  years  have  longed  and  fighed  for,  crying
out — "  Oh  that  thou  wouldft  rend  the  heavens  and
"  come  down,  to  enlighten  thofe  who  are  fitting  in
"  darknefs  and  the  fhadow  of  death."  And,  indeed,
all  the  hiftories  and  fymbols  of  the  Old  Teftament  are
defigned  to  fhadow  forth  the  greatnefs  of  Him  who
ihould  come,  and  who  now  has  come.  O  let  us,  there-
fore, give  thanks  and  praife  to  God  without  ceafmg,
that  He  has  made  us  to  live  in  this  His  time  of  grace,
and  is  ready  to  beftow  all  His  gifts  and  riches  upon
us  if  we  are  but  willing  to  receive  them.

And  now,  as  at  this  time,  does  the  holy  Apoftle
call  upon  us  to  arife  from  the  fleep  of  fin,  "  for  the
"  night  is  far  fpent,  and  the  day  is  at  hand  :  let  us,
"  therefore,  caft  off  the  works  of  darknefs,  and  let  us
"  put  on  the  armour  of  light,  and  let  us  walk  honeftly
"  as  in  the  day."

Now  to  this  end,  let  us  mark  diligently,  firft,  how
it  is  that  we  have  fallen  ;  and,  fecondly,  how  we  are
to  arife  from  all  our  fins  and  infirmities  into  our  firft
ftate  of  innocence.

God  created  man  to  the  intent  that  he  mould  poffefs
thofe  manfions  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  from  which
Lucifer  and  his  angels  were  thruft  out.  The  fame
Lucifer,  for  his  deadly  hatred  towards  man,  hath  fe-
duced  him  likewife  into  difobedience  againft  God,  by
the  which  he  loft  all  the  graces  and  endowments  that
were  intended  to  make  him  like  unto  God  and  the
angels,  and  poifoned  his  own  pure  nature,  fo  that  it
became  corrupt.  And  through  this  poifon  man  has
wounded  himfelf  mortally  with  blindnefs  in  his  rea-
fon,  with  perverfenefs  or  malice  in  his  will,  with


Firft  Sujiday  in  Advent.


181


fhameful  lufts  in  his  appetites,  and  with  lofs  of  his
juft  indignation  at  fin.  Man,  being  in  honour,  un-
derftood  it  not,  and  is  become  like  unto  the  beafts
that  perifh.

And  hence  it  has  come  to  pafs  that  three  foes  have
rifen  up  againft  him,  who,  alas  !  on  all  fides  have  got
the  .upper  hand,  and  are  ruling  in  the  hearts  of  the
people  :  thefe  are,  the  World,  the  Flefh,  and  the
Devil.  Where  thefe  three  have  their  will,  that  noble
thing,  the  Soul,  is  loft,  on  which  God  hath  looked
with  fuch  great  love  ;  for  thofe  in  whom  they  obtain
the  maftery  do  moft  furely  walk  in  a  way  that  leadeth
unto  eternal  death.  How  cruelly  and  periloufly  thefe
three  enemies  now  reign  in  numbers  of  men,  both  in
the  Church  and  in  the  world,  ftanding  in  God's  place,
is  bewailed  with  bitter  tears  by  the  friends  of  God,
who  love  Him  and  feek  His  glory.  For  the  ever-
lafting  injury  of  their  fellow-creatures  is  a  fore  grief
to  fuch  men,  infomuch  that  their  heart  is  ready  to  dry
up  within  their  body  for  anguifh,  when  they  fee  felt-
love  fo  rooted  in  men's  hearts,  that  there  be  few  left
who  wholly  love  God  and  have  a  fingle  eye  to  His
glory.

The  W^orld  rules  through  pride,  outward  or  in-
ward. How  many  are  members  of  this  Devil's  Order  !
They  defire  to  be  and  appear  to  be  fomewhat  ;  while
their  fins  and  infirmities  are  not  to  be  numbered.

The  Devil's  government  leads  to  bitternefs,  to
hatred  and  anger,  to  fufpicion,  to  judging  others,  to
rocnge,  to  ill-will,  to  difcord.  All  his  difciples  are
quarrelfome,  unloving,  envious  of  their  neighbours.

The  will  of  our  own  Flem  is  fet  upon  earthly  plea-

N  3


and  of  the
three  foes
which  have
rifen  up
againft  us.


How  the
World  rules.


How  tte
Devil  rules.


How  the


Sermon  for  the


Flejb  doth
lead  us  ajl  ray.


By  what
means  we  may
rife  unto  our
firjl  eftate.


How  we  muft
be  like  unto
the  angels,


furcs  and  fenfual  delights,  and  it  cravcth  to  have  the
beft  of  everything,  and  continually  to  find  enjoyment
in  all  things.  How  great  is  the  mifchief  that  fprings
from  this  fountain,  people  do  not  know,  efpecially
thoie  who  are  themielves  blinded  through  it.  By
thefe  three  foes  are  nearly  all  men  led  aftray  to  their
eternal  lofs.

Now  he  who  defires  to  rife  again  to  his  firft  honour
and  dignity,  which  Adam  at  the  beginning,  and  we
after  him,  have  loft  through  fin,  and  to  make  way  for
the  coming  of  Our  Lord  in  his  foul,  muft  flee  the
world,  overcome  the  Devil,  bring  his  flefh  under  do-
minion to  his  reafon,  and  exercife  himfelf  diligently
in  thefe  fix  points  following  : —

Man  fell  in  Paradife  through  two  things, — luft  and
pride  ;  fo  likewife  we  muft  return  by  means  of  two
things,  for  nature  to  wrin  back  again  her  original
powers.  \Ve  muft  refift  and  die  to  all  irregular
defires,  after  a  manly  and  reafonable  fort.  In  the
fccond  place,  we  muft  humble  ourfelves,  and  bow  our
nature  down  to  the  earth  in  deep  humility  before
God  and  all  men  againft  whom  it  had  lifted  itfelf
with  pride.  Take  always  the  loweft  place,  and  fo
fhalt  thou  rife  to  the  higheft.  By  thefe  two  things
nature  recovers  her  original  powers.

Next,  in  two  things  man  muft  become  like  unto
the  angels.  He  muft  pardon  and  forgive  all  thofe
who  do  him  wrong,  and  be  from  his  heart  the  friend
of  his  enemies,  like  the  angels,  whom  we  ofttimes
vex  with  our  fins.  Further,  he  muft  ferve  his  neigh-
bour with  a  willing  fpirit,  as  the  holy  angels  are  ever
miniftcring  to  us  for  God's  fake


Firft  Sunday  in  Advent.


183


Laftly,  in  two  things  man  muft  become  like  unto
our  Lord  Jems  Chrift.  Firft,  in  perfect  obedience,
as  our  Lord  was  obedient  to  His  Heavenly  Father,
even  unto  death  ;  fecondly,  he  muft  perfevere  and
grow  in  obedience  and  in  all  virtues,  unto  his  life's
end.

By  thefe  means  the  heart  is  made  pure  and  hea-
venly, and  the  man  becomes  of  one  mind  with  God
through  deep  humility,  free  felf-furrender,  patient
long-fuffering,  true  poornefs  of  fpirit,  and  fervent  love
to  God.  And  all  who  do  verily  feek  the  kingdom  of
God  (of  whom,  alas  !  how  few  is  the  number),  do
prevail  againft  their  foes,  and  God  delivers  them  from
their  heavy  burdens,  and  helps  them  to  bear  all  their
afflictions.  For  He  lays  upon  them  much  fuffering  of
many  kinds  ;  but  the  righteous  God  does  this  to  the
intent  that  four  ends  may  be  accomplifhed  in  them.
The  firft,  that  they  may  come  to  themfelves,  and  lee
whence  their  trouble  cometh,  and  that  their  thoughts
may  be  turned  upon  themfelves  by  reafon  of  the  pain,
and  fb  be  fixed.  The  fecond,  that  they  may  examine
why  God  has  laid  the  burden  of  pain  upon  them  ;  and
when  they  perceive  God's  purpofe  in  their  fufferings,
let  them  ftrive  to  fulfil  that,  and  refign  themfelves
wholly  to  His  divine  will.  The  third,  that  they  may
come  out  from  themfelves,  and  from  all  creatures.
The  fourth,  that  they  may  learn  true  patience  under
diverfe  afflictions.  But  what  is  true  patience  under
affliction  ?  Is  it  to  remain  unmoved  by  outward
things  ?  No.  True  patience  is  that  a  man  mould
feel  in  his  inmoft  foul,  and  in  utter  fincerity  thus
judge,  that  no  one  could  or  might  do  him  a  real  in-

N4


and  like  unto
our  Lord
Jefus  Cbrift.


How  God  de-
fendetb  and
upholdeth
unto  the  end
tbofe  who
verily  feek
His  kingdom.


Of  true
patience.


1 84


Sermon  for  the


John  v'rii.
3I»  32-


Of  the  two
Jorts  of  men
who  follow
CbriJTs
word.


Oftbofe  who
follow  it  by
their  natural
reafon.


Of  tbofe  who
look  for  God's
leadings  from
within.


juftice,  but  always  remember  that  he  is  receiving  no
worfe  than  his  delerts,  for  he  might  juftly  have  far
more  to  fuffer  and  endure ;  infomuch  that  he  may
feel  nothing  but  gentlenefs  and  companion  towards
all  who  do  him  wrong.  Such  men  are  followers  of
Chrift,  our  humble  Mafter,  in  whom  He  reigns,  and
to  whom  He  faid  :  "  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  then
"  are  ye  my  difciples  indeed ;  and  ye  mail  know  the
"  truth,  and  the  truth  mall  make  you  free."

Now  there  are  two  forts  of  men  who  follow  after
the  word  of  Chrift.  The  one  fort  hear  it  with  joy,
and  follow  after  it  as  far  as  they  are  able  with  their
reafon  to  perceive  its  truth,  and  take  it  in  juft  in  the
fame  way  as  their  reafon  takes  in  what  is  concerned
with  the  world  of  fenfe ;  and  all  this  they  do  by
means  of  their  natural  light,  but  they  make  no  ac-
count of  anything  that  they  themselves  do  not  feel  or
enter  into  ;  but  with  thefe  natural  powers  of  theirs,
they  are  ever  running  out  to  catch  up  and  understand
fbme  new  thing.  They  have  not  learnt  by  experience
that  they  ought  to  die  to  this  reftleflhefs ;  but  if  they
are  ever  to  grow  better  men,  they  muft  try  another  road.

But  the  other  fort  turn  their  thoughts  inward,  and
remain  refting  on  the  inmoft  foundation  of  their  fouls,
fimply  looking  to  fee  the  hand  of  God  writh  the  eyes
of  their  enlightened  reafon,  and  await  from  within
their  fummons  and  their  call  to  go  whither  God
would  have  them.  And  this  they  receive  from  God
without  any  means ;  but  what  is  given  through
means,  fuch  as  other  mortal  men,  for  inftance.  is  as
it  were  taftelefs  ;  moreover,  it  is  feen  as  through  a
veil,  and  fplit  up  into  fragments,  and  bears  within  it


Firft  Sunday  in  Advent.


'85


a  certain  fting  of  bitternefs.  It  always  retains  the
favour  of  that  which  is  of  the  creature,  which  it  muft
needs  lofe  and  be  purified  from,  if  it  is  to  become  in
truth  food  for  the  fpirit,  and  to  enter  into  the  very
fubftance  of  the  foul.  For  thofe  who  perceive  God's
gifts  and  leadings  from  within,  whether  by  the  help  of
means  or  without  means,  do  receive  them  from  their
fountain-head,  and  carry  them  back  again  unto  their
fountain-head  in  the  Divine  goodnefs.  Thefe  are
they  who  draw  and  drink  from  the  true  well,  of
which  Chrift  faid  :  "  Whofoever  drinketh  of  the  water
"  that  I  mall  give  him  mall  never  thirft."  But  the
firft  of  whom  we  fpoke  are  feeking  their  own  things  ;
wherever  they  are,  and  whatever  they  do,  they  are
always  {landing  upon  their  own  foundation.  Yet,  in
truth,  they  can  never  find  their  own  good  fo  certain
and  fb  unmixed,  as  in  its  inward  fburce,  without  the
aid  of  means.

Now  you  may  afk,  How  can  wre  come  to  perceive
this  dired:  leading  of  God  ?  By  a  careful  looking  at
home,  and  abiding  within  the  gates  of  thy  own  foul.
Therefore,  let  a  man  be  at  home  in  his  own  heart,
and  ceafe  from  his  reftlefs  chafe  of  and  fearch  after
outward  things.  If  he  is  thus  at  home  while  on
earth,  he  wrill  iurely  come  to  fee  what  there  is  to
do  at  home, — what  God  commands  him  inwardly
without  means,  and  alfo  outwardly  by  the  help  of
means  ;  and  then  let  him  furrendcr  himfelf,  and  fol-
low God  along  whatever  path  his  loving  Lord  thinks
fit  to  lead  him  :  whether  it  be  to  contemplation  or
action,  to  ufefulnefs  or  enjoyment ;  whether  in  fbrrow
or  in  joy,  let  him  follow  on.  And  if  God  do  not  give


How  we  may
perceive
Gotfi  lead-
ings.


86       Sermon  for  the  Fir/I  Sunday  in  Advent.


How  we

Jhould  follow
Cbrift  in  the
three  aims  of
His  life  f  to
toil :

the  glory  of
His  Heavenly
Father,


the  fa  hat  ion
of  men,


the  fetting
forth  of  a
perfeft  life.


Ofthofe  who
do  thus  follow
Cbrift.


him  thus  to  feel  His  hand  in  all  things,  let  him  ftill
fimply  yield  himfelf  up,  and  go  without  for  God's
fake,  out  of  love,  and  ftill  prefs  forward,  fetting  ever
before  him  the  lovely  example  of  our  Blcffed  Lord
Jefus  Chrift ;  who  did  all  His  works  for  three  ends  :

The  firft  was,  that  in  all  His  doings  He  fought  the
glory  of  His  Heavenly  Father  only,  and  not  His  own
in  any  matter,  whether  great  or  fmall,  and  committed
all  things  into  His  hands  again.

The  fecond  was,  that  with  His  whole  heart  he  pur-
pofed  and  fought  the  falvation  and  bleflednefs  of  men,
that  He  might  lay  hold  on  all  men,  and  bring  them  to
the  acknowledgment  of  His  Name,  according  to  the
words  of  St.  Paul :  "  God  will  have  all  men  to  be
"  faved,  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."

The  third  end  which  He  kept  in  view,  in  all  His
words,  and  works,  and  life,  was,  that  He  might  give
us  a  true  example  and  model  of  a  perfect  life  in  its
higheft  form.

The  men  who  thus  tread  in  His  fteps  do  become,
in  very  truth,  the  nobleft  and  moft  glorious  of  their
race  ;  and  thofe  who  are  thus  born  again  into  His  life,
are  the  rich  and  coftly  jewels  of  the  Holy  Chriftian
Church,  and  in  all  ages  they  work  out  the  higheft
good,  while  they  look  not  to  the  greatnefs  or  mean-
nefs  of  their  work,  nor  to  their  fuccefs  or  failure,  but
look  only  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  things  ;  and  for
this  caufe  all  their  works  are  the  beft  that  may  be.
Neither  do  they  look  whether  God  will  place  them
high  or  low,  for  the  only  thing  they  care  for  is,  that
in  all  things  alike  God's  will  may  be  done.  God
grant  that  it  may  be  thus  with  each  of  us.  Amen.


II.


Sermon  for  the  Second  Sunday  in  Advent.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


How  that  God  is  very  near  to  us,  and  how  we  mujlfeek  and  find  the
Kingdom  of  God  within  us,  without  refpttt  to  time  and  place*

LUKE  xxi.  31. — "Know  ye  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand."


Lord  fays  here  that  the  kingdom  of  God
is  nigh  to  us.  Yea,  the  kingdom  of  God  is
in  us ;  and  St.  Paul  fays,  that  now  is  our
falvation  nearer  to  us  than  we  believe.

Now  ye  ought  to  know,  firft,  how  the
kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand ;  fecondly,  when  the
kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  at  hand.

Now  we  muft  give  earneft  heed  to  take  note  of  all
that  is  contained  in  thefe  wrords,  "  The  kingdom  of
"  God  is  nigh  at  hand."  For  if  I  were  a  king,  and
did  not  know  it,  I  mould  be  no  king  ;  but  if  I  were
fully  convinced  that  I  was  a  king,  and  if  all  men
deemed  me  fo  likewife,  and  further,  if  I  knc\v  that  all
men  deemed  me  fuch,  I  mould  be  a  king,  and  all  the
riches  of  the  king  would  be  mine.  But  if  any  of
thefe  three  things  were  wanting,  I  could  be  no  king.
In  like  manner  does  our  blefTednefs  depend  upon  our


This  Sermon  is  believed  to  be  by  Mafter  Eckhart.


How  the
kingdom  of
God  is  nigh
at  band.


In  tcbat  true


1 88


Sermon  for  the


ble/ednefs


What  is  the
kingdom  of
God.


How  God  is


perceiving  and  knowing  the  Highcft  Good,  which  is
God  Himfelf.  I  have  a  power  in  my  foul  which  en-
ables me  to  perceive  God :  I  am  as  certain  as  that  I
live  that  nothing  is  fo  near  to  me  as  God.  He  is
nearer  to  me  than  I  am  to  myfelf.  It  is  a  part  of
His  very  evTence  that  He  mould  be  nigh  and  prefent
to  me.  He  is  alfo  nigh  to  a  ftone  or  a  tree,  but  they
do  not  know  it.  If  a  tree  could  know  God,  and  per-
ceive His  prefence  as  the  higheft  of  the  angels  per-
ceives it,  the  tree  would  be  as  bleffed  as  the  higheft
angel.  And  it  is  becaufe  man  is  capable  of  perceiving
God,  and  knowing  how  nigh  God  is  to  him,  that  he
is  better  off  than  a  tree.  And  he  is  more  blefled  or
lefs  blefled  in  the  fame  meafure  as  he  is  aware  of  the
prefence  of  God.  It  is  not  becaufe  God  is  in  him,
and  fo  clofe  to  him,  and  he  hath  God,  that  he  is
bleffed,  but  becaufe  he  perceives  God's  prefence,  and
knows  and  loves  Him  ;  and  fuch  an  one  will  feel  that
God's  kingdom  is  nigh  at  hand.

Often,  when  I  meditate  on  the  kingdom  of  God,  I
cannot  fpeak  for  the  greatnefs  thereof.  For  the  king-
dom of  God,  what  is  it  but  God  Himfelf  with  all  His
riches  ?  The  kingdom  of  God  is  no  fmall  thing.  If
we  think  of  all  the  worlds  that  God  could  create,  that
is  not  the  kingdom  of  God.  When  the  kingdom  of
God  is  manifefted  in  a  foul,  and  me  knows  it,  you
need  not  to  preach  or  to  teach  ;  for  that  foul  is  taught
of  God,  and  affured  of  eternal  life.  He  who  knows
and  perceives  how  nigh  God's  kingdom  is,  may  fay
with  Jacob  :  "  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place,  and  I
"  knew  it  not."

God  is  alike  near  in  all  creatures.       The  wife  man


Second  Sunday  in  Advent.


189


fays :  "  God  hath  fpread  out  His  nets  and  fnares  over
"  all  creatures,  fo  that  he  who  defireth  to  perceive
"  Him,  may  find  Him  in  every  one  of  them."

A  Mafter  has  faid  :  "  He  knoweth  God  aright  who
"  knoweth  him  in  all  things  alike."  He  who  ferveth
God  with  fear,  it  is  good  ;  he  who  ferveth  Him  with
love,  it  is  better ;  but  he  who  in  fear  can  love,  that  is
the  beft  of  all.  That  a  man  mould  have  a  life  of
quiet  or  reft  in  God  is  good ;  that  a  man  mould  lead
a  painful  life  in  patience  is  better ;  but  that  a  man
mould  have  reft  in  a  painful  life  is  beft  of  all.
Whether  a  man  walk  out  in  the  fields  and  fay  his
prayers,  and  feel  God's  prefence,  or  whether  he  be  in
the  church  and  feel  God's  prelence,  does  he  perceive
Him  any  the  better  becaufe  he  is  in  a  place  of  reft  ?
If  he  do,  it  comes  from  his  own  infirmity  ;  the  dif-
ference is  not  on  God's  fide,  for  God  is  in  all  things
and  places  alike,  and  is  ever  alike  ready  to  give
Himfelf  to  us,  in  fo  far  as  we  are  able  to  receive
Him  ;  and  he  knows  God  aright  who  fees  Him  in  all
things.

St.  Bernard  fays :  "  Why  does  my  eye  perceive  the
"  heavens,  and  not  my  feet  ?  Becaufe  my  eye  is
"  more  like  the  heavens  than  my  feet."  Thus,  if  my
foul  is  to  perceive  God,  it  muft  be  heavenly.  Now
what  will  bring  the  foul  to  fee  God  in  herfelf,  and
know  how  nigh  God  is  to  her  ?  Confider  !  The
heavens  cannot  take  any  imprint  from  other  things,
neither  can  they,  by  any  violence  or  force,  be  turned
from  their  order.  In  like  manner,  the  foul  that
would  know  God  muft  be  fo  grounded  and  built  up
in  Him,  that  neither  hope,  nor  fear,  nor  joy,  nor  fbr-


evtrywbcrt

alike  near  to
the  foul.


How  the  foul
mujl  be  like
unto  the
heavens  in
fteadfaftnefi
and  purenefs.


190


What  is  need-
ful for  the
joul  to  per-
ceive and
know  God.


row,  nor  weal  or  woe,  nor  anything  elfe,  can  fo  move
it  as  to  force  it  from  its  place  in  Him.

The  heavens  are  everywhere  alike  far  from  the
earth  :  thus  lhall  the  foul  be  alike  far  from  all  earthly
things,  that  me  be  not  nearer  to  one  than  to  another,
but  keep  herfelf  alike  far  from  all,  in  joy  and  forrow,
in  prosperity  and  adverftty,  for  me  mufr.  be  utterly
dead  to  all  that  is  of  the  earth,  earthly,  and  altogether
raifed  above  it.

The  heavens  are  pure  and  bright,  without  a  fpeck  ;
they  have  nought  to  do  with  time  or  fpace  ;  no
bodies  have  a  fixed  place  therein  ;  neither  are  the  hea-
vens fubjecl:  to  time  :  their  circuit  is  fwift  beyond
belief;  their  courfe  is  without  time,  yet  from  their
courfe  cometh  time.

Nothing  hinders  the  foul  fo  much  in  its  knowledge
of  God  as  time  and  place.  Time  and  place  are  parts,
and  God  is  one  ;  therefore,  if  our  foul  is  to  know  God,
it  mufh  know  Him  above  time  and  place,  for  God  is
neither  this  nor  that,  like  thefe  complex  things  around
us,  for  God  is  one.

If  the  foul  is  to  fee,  me  muft  not  look  at  the  things
that  exift  in  time,  for  fo  long  as  me  is  looking  at  time
and  place,  or  at  the  phenomena  dependent  thereon,
me  can  never  perceive  God  Himfelf :  juft  as,  if  mine
eye  is  to  perceive  colour,  it  muft  firft  be  cleared  of  all
tint  in  itfelf.  If  the  foul  is  to  know  God,  me  muft
have  no  fellowfhip  with  that  which  is  Nought.  He
who  lees  God,  knows  that  all  creatures  are  nought ;
for  when  you  compare  one  creature  with  another,  it
indeed  appears  beautiful  and  is  fomewhat,  but  when
you  compare  it  with  God  it  is  nothing.  I  fay  more  :


Second  Sunday  in  Advent.


191


if  the  foul  is  to  know  God,  fhe  muft  forget  herfelf  and
lofe  herfelf,  for  while  fhe  is  looking  at  and  thinking
about  herfelf,  fhe  is  not  looking  at  or  thinking  about
God ;  but  when  fhe  lofes  herfelf  in  God,  and  lets  go
of  all  things,  then  fhe  finds  herfelf  again  in  God.
When  fhe  comes  to  know  God,  then  does  fhe  know
to  perfection  in  Him,  both  herfelf  and  all  the  things
from  which  fhe  has  feparated  herfelf.  If  I  am  truly
to  know  the  Higheft  Good,  or  the  Eternal  Goodnefs,
I  muft  know  it  in  that  wherein  it  is  good,  namely,  in
itfelf, — not  in  thofe  things  in  which  it  is  only  in  part.
If  I  am  to  know  real  Being,  I  muft  know  it  in  that
where  it  is  felf-exiftent,  that  is,  in  God.  In  God  alone
is  the  true  Divine  Subftance  :  in  one  man  you  have
not  all  humanity,  for  one  man  is  not  all  men  ;  but  in
God  the  foul  knows  all  humanity,  and  all  things  in
their  Ideal,  for  fhe  knows  them  in  their  Subflance.
When  a  man  has  been  within  a  beautifully-painted
houfe,  he  knows  much  more  about  it  than  another
who  has  never  been  infide  it,  and  is  able  to  tell  much
about  it.  So  I  am  as  certain  as  that  I  live  and  God
lives,  that  if  the  foul  is  to  know  God,  fhe  muft  know
Him  above  time  and  fpace ;  and  fuch  a  foul  knows
God,  and  knows  how  nigh  God's  kingdom  is  ;  that  is,
God  with  all  His  riches.

The  Mafters  have  fet  forth  many  queftions  in  the
Schools  as  to  how  it  be  poflible  for  the  foul  to  know
God.  It  is  not  of  God's  feverity  that  He  requires
much  from  man  ;  it  is  of  His  great  kindnefs  that  He
will  have  the  foul  to  open  herfelf  wider,  to  be  able  to
receive  much,  that  He  may  beftow  much  upon  her.
Let  no  one  think  that  it  is  hard  to  attain  thereunto.


How  in  God
the  foul  knows
all  things  in
their  Ideal.


192     Sermon  for  the  Second  Sunday  in  Advent.


1T)e  fmeetnefs
of  a  life  in
union  with
God.


Although  it  found  hard,  and  is  hard  at  firft,  as  touch-
ing the  forfaking  and  dying  to  all  things,  yet,  when
one  has  reached  this  ftate,  no  life  can  be  eafier  or
fweeter,  or  fuller  of  pleafures ;  for  God  is  right  dili-
gent to  be  with  us  at  all  feafons,  and  to  teach  us,  that
He  may  bring  us  to  Himfelf  when  we  are  like  to
go  aftray.  None  of  us  ever  defired  anything  more
ardently  than  God  defires  to  bring  men  to  the  know-
ledge of  Himfelf.

God  is  ever  ready,  but  we  are  very  unready  ;  God
is  nigh  to  us,  but  we  are  far  from  Him  ;  God  is
within,  we  are  without ;  God  is  at  home,  we  are
ftrangers.  The  Prophet  fays :  "  God  leadeth  the
"  righteous  by  a  narrow  path  into  a  broad  highway,  till
"  they  come  unto  a  wide  and  open  place  :"*  that  is,
unto  the  true  freedom  of  that  fpirit  which  hath  become
one  fpirit  with  God.  God  help  us  all  to  follow  Him,
that  He  may  bring  us  unto  Himfelf !  Amen.


*  The  Tranflator  has  not  been  able  to  determine  what  is  the  paflage  referred
to  in  the  original,  which  runs  thus  :  Gott  fubret  die  Gerecbten  durcb  einen
engen  Weg  in  die  breite  Strafze,  dafzfie  kommen  in  die  Weite  und  in  die  Breite.


III.


Sermon  for  the  Third  Sunday  in  Advent.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


How  that  we  mujl  wholly  come  out  from  ourfelves,   that  we  may  go
into  the  wilder nefs  and  behold  God.

MATT.  xi.  7. — "  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wildernefs  for  to  fee  ?"


;UR  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  faid  unto  the  Jews,
"  What  went  ye  out  into  the  wildernefs  for
"  to  fee  ?  A  reed  fhaken  with  the  wind  ?"
In  thefe  words  let  us  confider  three  things  :
Firft,  the  going  out ;  fecondly,  the  wilder-
nefs ;  thirdly,  what  we  are  to  fee  there.

Firft,  let  us  confider  the  going  out.  This  blefled
going  out  takes  place  in  four  ways  : —

The  firft  way  is  to  come  out  from  the  world,  that
is,  from  the  craving  after  worldly  advantages,  and  to
defpife  them,  according  to  that  precept  of  St.  John,
"  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the
"  world.  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the
"  Father  is  not  in  him."  Thofe  who  thus  forfake
the  love  of  the  world,  may  be  fitly  faid  to  come  out  of
Egypt,  leaving  King  Pharaoh  behind  ;  that  is,  they
purpofe  to  forfake  pride,  vain-glory,  prefumption,  and
all  other  fins.  And  thofe  who  are  thus  minded  do
greatly  need  a  Mofes  to  be  their  leader  and  com-
mander ;  for  he  was  very  gentle  and  merciful,  and  in

o


Firft,  in  what
wife  we  are
to  come  out
from  the
world.


I  Jcbnii.\$.


194


Sermon  for  the


Is.


.   12.


Secondly,  bow
we  are  to  come
out  from  our
own  wijhes
and  feelings,
and  rejign
events  to  God.


their  coming  out  they  require  to  be  treated  with  great
gentlenefs,  and  kindnefs,  and  forbearance.  But  fuch
as  come  out  from  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  that  is,  thofe
who  have  to  depart  from  covetoufnefs,  intemperance,
and  unchaftity,  and  are  hard  befet  by  thefe  foes,  do
need  an  angel  for  their  leader  and  guide ;  that  is  to
fay,  a  man  who  can  have  companion  on  them,  but  who
is  himfelf  temperate,  pure,  and  ftricl;  in  life.  Now
thofe  who  do  thus  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  led  and
guided,  mall  be  verily  delivered  from  all  their  pride
and  fenfuality,  as  Ifaiah  fays :  "  Ye  mail  go  out  with
"joy,  and  be  led  forth  with  peace;"  and  as  Chrift
alfb  fays  :  "  In  the  world  ye  mall  have  tribulation,  but
"  in  me  ye  mail  have  peace."

The  fecond  kind  of  coming  out  is  to  loofe  thy  hold
on  outward  things,  to  ceafe  from  thy  vain  anxieties,
thy  felfim  wifhing  and  planning,  and  to  turn  thy
thoughts  inward,  that  thou  mayeft  learn  to  know
thyfelf,  and  to  fee  what  thou  art,  how  thou  art,  and
in  what  it  ftandeth  amifs  with  thee.  He  who  is  too
full  of  his  own  joys  or  forrows  to  get  beyond  himfelf
can  never  come  to  know  himfelf.  So  St.  Bernard
fays  :  "  It  were  better  to  know  thyfelf,  and  to  fee
"  how  fick  and  full  of  infirmities  thou  art,  than  to  be
"  matter  of  all  the  fciences  in  the  world."  Therefore
fays  Solomon  in  his  Song :  "  If  thou  know  not  [thy-
"  felf  ],  O  thou  faireft  among  women,  go  thy  way
"  forth  by  the  footfteps  of  the  flock  [of  thy  com-
"  panions]  :"  which  fignifies,  confider  the  lives  of
God's  faints,  and  look  at  thyfelf  in  that  mirror  ;  that
is  to  fay,  follow  their  example,  and  walk  not  after
thine  own  will.


Third  Sunday  in  Advent.


195


The  third  kind  of  going  out  is  to  give  up  thine
own  cafe  and  thine  own  way,  and  to  devote  thyfelf,
fb  far  as  thou  art  able,  to  thy  neighbour,  to  help  him
by  counfel  and  deed,  and  by  thine  own  good  example,
to  the  utmoft  of  thy  power  and  the  beft  of  thy  know-
ledge, in  a  conftant  fpirit  of  hearty  love,  that  he  may
be  brought  to  the  things  that  make  for  his  eternal
peace.  For  this  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,
"  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you.  By
"  this  mall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  difciples,  if
"  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  So  likewife  St.  Paul
fays :  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  fo  fulfil
"  the  law  of  Chrift."  Juft  as  it  is  faid  in  the  Book
of  Genefis  :  "  Except  ye  bring  your  youngefl  brother
"  with  you,  ye  mall  fee  my  face  no  more."  This  is
alfo  plainly  meant  in  the  Book  of  Canticles,  where  we
read,  "  Come,  my  beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into  the
"  field  ;  let  us  get  up  early  to  the  vineyards,  and  let
"  us  lodge  in  the  villages,  and  let  us  fee  if  the  vine
"  flourim."

The  fourth  kind  of  going  out  is  to  forfake  every-
thing but  God,  fo  that  our  love  towards  God  mould
be  the  ftrongeft  love  we  have  ;  and  we  mould  indeed
love  Him  with  all  our  heart,  and  with  all  our  foul,
and  with  all  our  ftrength.  As  it  was  faid  unto
Abraham  :  "  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from
"  thy  kindred,  and  from  thy  father's  houfe  :"  that  is
to  fay,  "  Set  not  your  affections  on  the  things  that
"  perifh,  but  on  God  only  ;  and  whatever  you  pofTefs,
"  thank  God  for  it,  and  ufe  it  for  Him."  Thus  had
the  woman  of  Canaan  come  out,  as  her  words  indeed
teftify  :  "  True,  Lord,  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs

o  2


Thirdly,  bow
toe  are  to  give
up  eafe,  and
live  for
others.


John  xiii.
34>  35-


Gal.  vi.  2.
Gen.xIiv.ZT,,


Cant.  vil.

II,    12.


Fourthly,
bow  we  are
to  love  God
and  not  our-
felvei.

Gen.  xii.  i.


196


Sermon  for  the


The  wilder-
nefe  a  type  of
a  fpiritual
life.

An  evil  wil-
dernefs.


A  good  wil-
dernefs.


Ez.  xx.  35.


"  that  fall  from  their  matter's  table ;"  and  therefore
Ihe  obtained  her  requeft.  Thus  it  is  faid  to  the
loving  foul  and  her  companions :  "  Go  forth,  O  ye
"  daughters  of  Zion."  Well  may  it  be  faid  "  ye
"  daughters,"  and  not  fons;  for  they  are  ftill  feeble  in
understanding,  and  troubled  with  many  womanifh
fears,  and  not  yet  ftrong  in  renunciation,  but  are  ftill
tender  and  weak,  like  maidens  or  daughters.

The  fecond  fubjecl:  for  our  coniideration  is  "  the  wil-
"  dernefs."  When  men  have  forfaken  fins  and  worldly
ambition,  they  come  into  the  wildernefs,  which  fig-
nifies  a  fpiritual  life,  or  the  life  of  one  who  is  dead  to
the  world.  Now  there  are  two  kinds  of  wildernefs,
a  good  and  a  bad.  It  is  an  evil  wildernefs  when  a
man's  heart  is  filled  with  vanity,  and  barren  of  good
deeds,  of  love  and  of  heavenly  afpiration,  and  far
and  wide  in  the  Church,  or  in  the  temple  of  the  foul,
there  rifes  no  incenfe  of  praife  to  God  ;  when  the
fheep  of  the  houfe  of  Ifrael,  that  is  to  fay  all  good
thoughts,  are  fcattered,  each  to  his  own  way.  But
that  is  a  wildernefs  which  is  very  fruitful  and  good,
when  the  whirlwinds  of  earthly  cares  or  paflions  are
laid  to  reft,  and  the  billows  of  worldly  defire  and  crea-
ture aims  ceafe  to  fwell  up  in  the  depths  of  the  heart.
And  then,  even  though  the  firft  fharp  dart  of  pain
pierce  through  every  nerve  of  body  and  mind,  yet  in
the  deep  fources  of  his  will,  the  man  remains  un-
daunted. That  is  a  good  wildernefs  when  without
there  are  ftorms,  yet  within  there  is  peace ;  the  wil-
dernefs of  which  God  faid  by  the  prophet :  "I  will
"  bring  you  into  the  wildernefs,  and  there  will  I  plead
"  with  you  face  to  face  ;"  for  no  one  does  hear  or


Third  Sunday  in  Advent.


understand  what  is  in  him,  and  what  God  fays  in  his
foul,  until  he  is  brought  into  this  wildernefs.

There  are  three  reafons  why  a  fpiritual  life  is  called
a  wildernefs,  or  a  life  in  the  defert.  The  nrft  is  on
account  of  the  fmall  number  who  do  turn  from  the
world  and  go  forth  into  it,  and  becaufe  the  common
way  of  the  world  is  for  each  man  to  follow  his  own
earthly  objects.  But  it  is  the  wifeft  courfe  to  drive
out  the  world  from  the  heart,  by  baniming  the  very
thoughts  and  images  thereof,  and,  with  Mofes,  go  into
the  depths  of  the  wildernefs  and  dwell  therein,  that  fo
we  may  the  better  watch  over  and  guard  our  fheep ;
that  is  to  fay,  efcape  the  affaults  of  inward  temptation,
and  the  wanderings  of  the  imagination  into  forbidden
fields.  And  as,  when  Mofes  drove  his  meep  into  the
fartheft  corners  of  the  wildernefs,  God  revealed  Him-
ielf  to  him  there  in  a  burning  bum,  fo  likewiie  fhalt
thou  be  tilled  with  burning  love  and  holy  longing,
and  follow  on  to  know  God.

This  is  the  beauteous  wildernefs  of  which  Solomon
fpeaks  when  he  fays :  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up
"  out  of  the  wildernefs  like  a  pillar  of  fmoke,  per-
"  fumed  with  myrrh  and  frankincenle  ?"  St.  Gregory
fays :  "  It  is  the  nature  and  property  of  love  to  rife  up
"  unceafmgly  from  itfelf  to  God  with  holy  afpiration,
"  never  refting  till  it  hath  reached  and  embraced  the
"  Higheft  Good  ;  for  nothing  on  earth  can  draw  it
"  down  or  imprifbn  its  flame,  but  it  fbars  ever  up-
"  wards  to  God  above  itfelf."  And  fo  it  is  with  good
men  ;  and  the  clofer  they  cling  to  Him  whom  they
love,  the  more  do  they  turn  from  and  defpife  all  the
fmiles  of  the  world.  They  cleave  with  fteadfaft  defire

o  3


How  to  go  out
into  this  good
wildernefs.


Cant.  Hi.  6.


198


Sermon  for  the


Cant.  viii.  5.


Of  the
ednefs  of  this
wildernefs.


2 Cor.  Hi.  1 8.


Of  the
Jlotuers  that
Jo  grow  in
this  wilder-
nefs.


unto  God,  as  Job  fays  :  "  Even  that  it  would  pleafe
"  God  to  deftroy  me ;  that  he  would  let  loofe  his
"hand,  and  cut  me  off!  Then  mould  I  yet  have
"  comfort."  Of  this  wildernefs  fay  the  angels :
"  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wildernefs,
"  leaning  upon  her  beloved  ?"  and  the  loving  foul
anfwers :  "  I  have  found  him  whom  my  foul  loveth,  I
"  have  laid  hold  on  him  and  will  not  let  him  go."
For  thofe  who  come  into  this  wildernefs  are  able  to
tafte  and  tell  of  fecret  and  inward  matters.  Moreover,
in  the  exercife  of  love  all  virtues  do  fpring  up  and
grow.  So  Chrift,  on  Mount  Tabor,  took  to  Himfelf
all  His  glory,  for  an  image  to  us  of  that  fruit  of  the
wildernefs  which  mall  be  ours  alfb  if  we  give  ourfelves
unto  God.  For  St.  Paul  fays  :  "  But  we  all  with  open
"  face  beholding  as  in  a  glafs  the  glory  of  the  Lord,
"  are  changed  into  the  fame  image  from  glory  to
"glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."

Again,  a  fpiritual  life  may  be  fitly  called  a  wilder-
nefs, by  reafon  of  the  many  fweet  flowers  which
fpring  up  and  flourifh  where  they  are  not  trodden
under  foot  by  man.  In  this  refpecl:  the  life  of  one
dead  to  the  world  may  well  be  likened  to  a  wilder-
nefs, feeing  that  fo  many  virtues  may  be  learned  by
continual  and  earneft  ftriving ;  but  becaufe  the  effort
needed  is  toilfbme  and  painful  at  the  firft,  few  are
willing  to  make  it.  In  this  wildernefs  are  found  the
lilies  of  chaftity,  and  the  white  roles  of  innocence ;
and  therein  are  found  too  the  red  rofes  of  facrifice,
when  flefh  and  blood  are  confumed  in  the  ftruggle
with  fin,  and  the  man  is  ready,  if  need  be,  to  fuffer
martyrdom, — the  which  is  not  eafily  to  be  learned  in


Third  Sunday  in  Advent.


199


the  world.  In  this  wildernefs,  too,  are  found  the
violets  of  humility,  and  many  other  fair  flowers  and
wholefbme  roots,  in  the  examples  of  holy  men  of  God.
And  in  this  wildernefs  malt  thou  choofe  for  thyfelf  a
pleafant  fpot  wherein  to  dwell ;  that  is,  a  holy  life,  in
which  thou  mayeft  follow  the  example  of  God's  faints
in  purenefs  of  heart,  poverty  of  fpirit,  true  obedience,
and  all  other  virtues ;  fb  that  it  may  be  faid,  as  it  is  in
the  Canticles :  "  Many  flowers  have  appeared  in  our
"  land ;"  for  many  have  died  full  of  holinefs  and  good
works.

A  third  likenefs  between  a  fpiritual  life  and  the
wildernefs  is  that  we  find  in  the  wildernefs  fo  little
provifion  for  the  flefh,  and  therefore  the  lovers  of  this
world  cannot  live  there.  Thus  did  the  children  of
Ifrael  complain  againft  Mofes  becaufe  they  lacked
many  things.  By  this  we  are  to  underfland  a  life  of
moderation,  girding  up  the  loins  with  manly  vigour.
And  every  man  is  bound  to  lead  fuch  a  life  ;  for  had  he
the  whole  world  wherewith  to  fupply  his  wants,  he
would  ftill  be  bound  fcrupuloufly  to  take  no  more  than
fufficient  for  his  real  neceffities.  Moreover  by  fuch
a  life  all  the  powers  of  the  foul  are  braced  up.  And
although  there  is  little  to  delight  the  fenfes  in  this
wildernefs,  there  is  much  of  the  comfort  of  the  fpirit,
which  far  excels  the  pleafures  of  the  world.  Ifaiah
fays  :  "  For  the  Lord  mall  comfort  Zion ;  he  will
"  comfort  all  her  wafle  places  ;  and  he  will  make  her
"  wildernefs  like  Eden,  and  her  defert  like  the  garden
"  of  the  Lord."  And  again  :  "  I  will  make  the  wil-
"  dernefs  a  pool  of  water,  and  the  dry  land  fprings  of
"  water."  Thus  the  folitary  foul  bears  many  more

o  4


The  foul  if
ftrengtben  e
by  a  life  in
this  wilder-
nefs.


L.  li.  3.


//.  xli.  1 8.


2OO


Sermon  for  the


What  toe  are
to  fee  in  the
wildernefs.


Is.  ix.  6.


ExoJ.  Hi.  3.


The  burning
bujb  a  type  of
Cbrift.


children  of  good  works  than  fhc  that  is  married  to  the
world.  So  Pharaoh  was  commanded  by  God  to  let
His  people  go  forth  into  the  defert,  that  they  might
facrifice  unto  the  Lord,  and  receive  fpiritual  manna
inftead  of  the  carnal  pleafures  of  Egypt.

The  third  thing  for  our  confideration  is  what  we
are  to  fee  in  the  wildernefs.  When  a  man  has  gone
out  into  the  wildernefs,  he  is  bidden  to  look  with  his
inward  eye  upon  "  the  king  and  his  bride/'  which  is
the  foul,  with  all  her  hidden  treafures  of  lovelinefs.
It  is  written,  "  Go  forth,  O  ye  daughters  of  Zion,
"  and  behold  the  king ;  "  that  is,  Solomon,  who  is
a  type  of  Chrift,  of  whom  Ifaiah  fays  :  "  To  us  a
"  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  fon  is  given :  and  the
"  government  mall  be  upon  his  moulder  ;  and  his
"  name  (hall  be  called  Wonderful."  And  now
behold  how  wonderful  God  is  in  His  deity,  that  He
has  become  man  for  the  fake  of  His  bride  This  is
the  miracle  that  Mofes  faw,  and  faid :  "  I  will  now
"  turn  afide  and  fee  this  great  fight,  why  the  bum  is
"  not  burnt."  The  thorn-bum  is  Chrift's  human
nature  ;  the  flame  is  His  foul  filled  with  burning  love  ;
the  light  is  His  deity  mining  through  His  mortal  body.
Now,  confider  this  Chrift  and  Solomon,  upon  whom
is  poured  out  without  meafure  that  wisdom  which
comprehends  all  things  in  its  grafp:  Ie  is  the  Truth
who  hath  taught  us  the  way  to  heaven  ;  let  the  foul
look  upon  Him,  that  me  may  follow  Him,  to  live
after  His  fpirit,  and  not  after  her  own  inclination,  and
her  nature  mall  be  greatly  ftrengthened  to  fight  the
good  fight  when  me  confiders  the  nature  of  her  King,
how  He  fulfilled  His  pilgrimage.  For  it  mall  greatly


Third  Sunday  in  Advent.


2OI


refrefh  the  loving  foul  to  remember  from  time  to
time  His  human  infirmities,  and  from  time  to  time  to
rejoice  in  His  life  in  the  fpirit.

A  mailer  has  faid  :  "  Excess  in  pleafures  enfeebles
"  the  powers,  and  overflowing  fpiritual  emotions  con-
"  fume  the  fpirit.  Great  joy  cannot  laft  always,  but
"  while  here  we  have  need  of  variablenefs  in  our
"joys;  for  it  is  not  yet  given  to  the  foul  to  ferve
"  God  in  the  holy  of  holies/'  Therefore  mall  the
foul  fometimes  contemplate  the  divine  greatnefs  of
Chrift,  and  fometimes  His  holy  humanity.  A  foul
that  is  as  yet  inexperienced  and  ftrange  in  the  things
of  God  mall  be  bidden  to  believe  in  God ;  but  a
fervent,  tried,  and  experienced  foul  mail  be  invited
to  behold  the  King  in  his  beauty.  And  hence  the
loving  foul  mall  fee  with  her  inward  eye  in  what
wife  me  ought  to  yield  to  or  withftand  her  fellow-
chriftians  of  mankind.  St.  Bernard  fays  :  "  O  Lord,
"  come  quickly  and  reign  on  Thy  throne,  for  now  oft-
'  times  fomething  rifes  up  within  me,  and  tries  to  take
'  pofTeffion  of  Thy  throne ;  pride,  covetoufnefs,  un-
"  cleannefs,  and  floth  want  to  be  my  kings  ;  and  then
"  evil-fpeaking,  anger,  hatred,  and  the  whole  train  of
"  vices  join  with  me  in  wrarring  againft  myfelf,  and
'(  try  to  reign  over  me.  I  refift  them,  I  cry  out
''  againft  them,  and  lay,  *  I  have  no  other  king  than
'  Chrift/  O  King  of  Peace,  come  and  reign  in  me,
"  for  I  will  have  no  king  but  thee  !  "  And  Gilbert
fays :  "  O  Lord,  I  endure  thy  hand  upon  me,  and
"  prefs  forward  with  {training  eyes,  with  knocking,
"  with  prayers,  and  through  many  heights  and  depths
"  of  joy  and  forrow."  But  O,  who  can  faint  and


The


expe-


The Cbrif-
tiarfi  afpira-
tion.


202      Sermon  for  the  Third  Sunday  in  Advent.


grow  weary  in  making  himfelf  ready  for  fuch  a  king,
when  he  remembers  how  God  has  made  our  little
nature  able  to  receive  His  divine  Subftance,  and  has
even  taken  upon  Himfelf  our  nature,  and  inverted
Himfelf  with  the  colours  of  our  humanity,  and  fo
revealed  His  beauty  unto  us,  and  loveth  us  much
more  than  we  love  Him  !  I  were  in  truth  \vorthy  of
all  condemnation,  if  I  did  not  love  Him  above  all
things,  when  He  afketh  nothing  from  me  but  to  love
Him!

Therefore  let  us  in  the  firft  place  come  out  wholly
from  ourfelves,  that  we  may,  in  the  next  place,  enter
into  this  blefled  wildernefs,  and,  in  the  third  place,
defire  to  know  and  behold  the  true  King  and  bride-
groom of  the  foul.  And  to  this  end  the  Mofes  of  a
holy  Will  muft  lead  us  into  the  Mount  of  God.  But
the  people  whom  Mofes  led  up  out  of  Egypt  are  an
image  of  thole  who,  having  newly  laid  afide  their  evil
cuftoms,  do  eafily  return  to  their  old  ways,  and  make
to  themfelves  in  the  wildernefs  a  golden  calf  of  their
old  flefhly  lufts,  of  unchafte  or  worldly  thoughts,  to
live  after  the  flesh,  and  ferve  their  own  bellies  and  not
God,  but  have  their  delight  in  the  creature.  And
hence  we  have  need  of  the  true  Mofes,  even  Chrift
Jefus,  that  He  may  at  all  times  guide  us  and  lead  us,
and  draw  us  to  Himfelf,  ib  that  we  may  go  out  after
Him  into  the  wildernefs  of  our  own  hearts,  wherein
God  lies  hidden  to  us.  May  God  help  us  all  to
attain  thereunto  !  Amen  !


IV.


Sermon   for  Christmas  Day.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


Of  the  things  by  which  we  become  children  of  God.  *


JOHN  i.   12. —  "But  as   many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the

fons  of  God."


HIS  day,  dear  children,  hath  God  wrought
a  great  wonder,  and  manifested  the  great-
nefs  of  His  love  towards  us,  in  that  He  hath
looked  down  upon  us,  who  were  His  ene-
mies, aliens  and  afar  off  from  Him,  with
fuch  mercy  as  to  give  us  power  to  become  His  fons  and
children  ;  therefore  it  behoves  us  not  to  mow  ourfelves
unthankful  for  fuch  kindnefs,  but  to  put  on  the  true
marks  and  qualities  of  the  eled:,  beloved  children  of
God.  And  hereby  ye  may  know  what  thefe  are.

He  who  would  be  a  fon  of  our  Father  in  Heaven
muft  be  a  ftranger  among  the  children  of  this  world,
and  feparate  himfelf  from  them,  and  muft  have  an
earneft  mind  and  a  fingle  eye,  with  a  heart  inclined
towards  God.  Now  fuch  a  one  is  made  a  ion  of  God
when  he  is  born  again  in  God,  and  this  takes  place
with  every  frefli  revelation  of  God  to  his  foul.  A


*  It  has  been  conjectured  that  this  fermon  is  by  Eckhart,  junior ;  but  it  can-
not be  decidedly  afcertained  whether  it  is  by  him  or  Tauler.


How  God
hath  made  us
His  children.


The  marks  of
God's  chil-
dren.

A  beartfxed
upon  God.


204


Sermo?i  for  Chriftmas  Day.


Self-renunci-
ation.


man  is  born  of  the  Spirit  when  he  fuffers  God's  work
to  be  wrought  in  his  foul ;  yet  it  is  not  this  which
makes  the  foul  to  be  perfectly  blefled,  but  that  revela-
tion, of  which  we  have  fpoken  already,  makes  the
foul  to  follow  after  Him  who  has  revealed  Himfelf  to
her,  and  in  whom  me  is  born  anew,  with  love  and
praife.  Thus  me  returns  again  to  her  firft  fource,
and  is  made,  of  God's  grace,  a  child  of  God,  united
to  Him  in  rightful  love.  And  let  him  who  would
attain  hereunto,  copy  Chrift  in  his  human  nature,  and
God  Himfelf  will  verily  come  unto  him  in  His  fuper-
human  Godhead.

The  beloved  children  of  God  renounce  themfelves  ;
and  hence  they  do  right  without  effort,  and  mount
up  to  the  higheft  point  of  goodnefs;  while  he  who
will  not  let  go  of  himfelf,  but  does  right  by  labour  and
toil,  will  never  reach  the  higheft  that  he  might.  In
other  words ;  he  whofe  works  proceed  from  himfelf,
does  little  good  fervice  to  God  ;  while  he  who  fuffers
himfelf  to  be  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  does  great
works  even  in  fmall  actions.  But  he  who  will  attain
to  this  muft  beware  of  men,  fo  far  as  is  confiftent  with
reafon.  A  heathen  teacher  has  declared :  "  I  never
"  mingled  with  men,  but  I  came  home  lefs  of  a  man
"  than  I  went  out."  Men  who  live  on  the  outfide  of
things  are  a  great  hindrance  in  the  way  of  goodnefs
by  their  many  idle  words.  Therefore  thofe  who  wifh
to  fofter  the  inner  life  of  their  fouls,  are  in  great  dan-
ger of  receiving  hurt  from  things  which  are  faid  with-
out thought,  efpecially  when  many  are  together.  He
who  repents  what  he  has  faid  as  fbon  as  the  words  are
out  of  his  mouth,  is  one  of  thefe  carelefs  fpeakers.


Sermon  for  Chrijlmas  Day.


4U^>


He  only  is  a  good  fon  who  has  caft  off  his  old  fins
and  evil  habits  ;  for  without  this  it  is  impoffible  that
he  mould  be  created  anew  in  Chrift  Jefus.  It  is  not
until  the  thoughts  can  find  reft  in  nothing  but  God,
that  the  man  is  drawn  clofe  to  God  Himfelf,  and
becomes  His.  He  is  happy  who  is  always  in  the  full
ufe  of  his  collective  powers ;  and  this  is  the  case  when
God  is  prefent  to  his  fpirit,  and  he  gladly  obeys  all  the
motions  of  God's  Spirit,  and  gives  his  whole  diligence
to  acl;  and  live  agreeable  thereunto.  He  hath  a  right
fpirit  who  is  free  from  all  craving  after  temporal  things,
and  like  a  good  fon  is  united  by  love  to  his  God,  with-
out any  earthly  defires.

The  child  of  God  fhould  fo  order  his  life  as  always
to  promote  his  own  fteadfaftnefs  in  virtue.  When  a
man  always  keeps  his  body  in  due  fubje&ion,  it  is  an
outward  pledge  of  the  ftrength  of  his  virtuous  intents.
Then  is  God  in  the  man,  when  there  is  nothing  in
him  which  is  contrary  to  the  will  of  God.  For  God
makes  a  man's  body  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghoft
when  He  finds  nothing  in  the  man  which  grieves  His
Spirit,  but  He  reigns  with  Jefus  Chrift  over  the  body.
That  is  to  fay  :  when  a  man  knows  of  nothing  in  him-
felf  which  is  difpleafmg  to  God,  then  God  dwells  in
him,  and  he  is  fet  free  from  the  things  that  perifli.
He  who  moft  hates  and  comes  out  from  himfelf  has
the  greateft  mare  in  God,  and  pofleffes  his  earthly
heritage  in  peace.

Maftcr  Eckhart  fays :  "  That  which  kindles  the
"  warmeft  devotion  in  a  man's  heart,  and  knits  him
"  moft  clofely  to  God,  is  the  greateft  benefit  he  can
"  receive  in  this  prefent  time;  and  hence  the  greateft


The  cafting
off  of  evil
habits.


A  virtuous,
well-ordered
life.


206


Sermon  for  Chriftmas  Day.


Humility  and
felf-know-
ledge.


Good  works.


"  good  work  a  man  can  do,  is  to  draw  other  men  to
"  God,  fb  that  they  enter  into  a  union  with  Him.
"  And  this  is  the  beft  work  of  love  to  our  neighbour
"  while  we  are  in  this  world."

Further :  it  is  a  mark  of  the  children  of  God
that  they  fee  their  own  little  faults  and  fhort-
comings  to  be  great  fins.  Now  he  who  entangles
himfelf  with  a  multitude  of  matters,  outward  or  in-
ward, and  will  meddle  with  every  thing  that  is  going
forward,  will  alfo  have  a  mare  in  the  evil  thereof.  We
muft  let  all  things  be  to  us  merely  the  fiipply  of  our
wants,  and  poiTefs  them  in  their  nothingnefs.  The
great  work  and  aim  of  the  beloved  children  of  God  is
to  Ihun  all  fin,  deadly  or  trifling,  that  they  may  not
grieve  God's  Spirit ;  for  they  know,  as  St.  Auguftine
fays,  that  for  the  fmalleft  habitual  fin  which  is  not
punifhed  and  laid  afide  in  this  prefent  life,  they  will
have  to  fuffer  more  than  all  the  pains  of  this  world.
Hence  Anfelm  fays,  that  he  would  rather  die,  and  that
this  world  mould  be  deftroyed,  than  commit  one  fin
a  day  knowingly.  And  Auguftine  fays  :  "  The  foul
"  is  created  eternal,  and  therefore  me  cannot  reft  but
"  in  God."  And  again  :  "  He  who  prays  for  anything
"  except  for  God's  fake,  does  not  afk  aright,  and  will
"  not  be  anfwered  with  a  bleffing."

Again  :  the  child  of  God  muft  have  exercife  in
good  works ;  but  when  he  comes  to  poflefs  the  very
fubftance  of  virtue,  then  virtue  is  no  longer  an
exercife  to  him  ;  for  he  practifes  it  without  an  effort,
and  when  virtue  is  practised  without  labour  or  pain,
we  have  got  beyond  exercifes.  But  none  may  get  fo
far  before  body  and  foul  are  separated  from  each


Sermon  for  Chriftmas  Day.


207


other ;  unlefs,  indeed,  the  foul  were  drawn  out  of
herfelf,  and  it  were  poffible  in  this  prefent  ftate  for
God  to  dwell  in  the  foul,  acting  and  fuffering.  Ah,
Lord,  did  we  all  we  mould,  God  would  do  to  us  all
we  would.  If  any  wifh  to  become  fuch  that  God
can  love  him,  and  look  upon  him  with  complacency,
let  him  forfake  all  that  he  loves  in  the  world,  and  love
nothing  but  God  alone.  He  who  defires  to  receive
with  the  Son  of  God  a  man's  reward,  muft  fuffer
from  and  with  the  wicked  of  this  world  ;  and  if  he
hunger  after  his  falvation  as  one  who  is  periming  for
lack  of  food,  it  will  avail  him  nothing,  until  he  caft
off  fin  and  work  the  works  of  righteoufnefs  which
are  befitting  [a  child  of]  grace,  and  endure  all  wrong
and  injuftice  patiently  for  God's  fake.  For  without
this,  his  hunger  and  thirft  after  falvation  can  neither
be  fatisfied  here  nor  hereafter.  For  it  is  of  the  very
eflence  of  falvation  to  love  God,  to  depart  from  fin,
and  to  work  righteoufnefs ;  not  to  be  able  to  find
happinefs  in  all  the  pleafures  of  earth,  but  to  be
willing  to  fuffer  willingly  all  manner  of  pain  and
contradiction,  and  not  feek  to  avoid  them  :  when  a
man  has  come  to  this  ftate  all  is  well  with  him,  and
not  otherwife.  And  whatever  fuch  a  child  of  God
beholds,  it  works  for  his  good.  If  he  fees  fm,  he
thanks  God  for  having  kept  him  from  it,  and  prays
for  the  converfion  of  the  fmners ;  if  he  fees  goodnefs,
he  defires  to  fulfil  it  in  his  own  practice.  We  ought
always  to  keep  two  ends  in  view, — to  put  away  from
us  all  that  is  hurtful,  and  to  put  on  all  that  is  yet
lacking  to  us  of  good  works.

But    thofe  who  vainly    think   to  be  made   God's


He  who

would  reign
with  Cbrift
mujl  have
His  fympatby
with  Jinncrs,

His  purity,
and  His
readinefs  to
fuffer;


andforfucb
an  one,  all
things  work
together  for
good.


Tbofe  who


20S


Sermon  for  Chrijlmas  Day.


make  much  of
outward  ob-
fervances,
while  not
amending
their  faults,
are  not  God's
children,  but
the  Devil's.


Is.  i.  13.  1 6,

17-


The  joys  of
true  conver-
Jton.


children  by  their  much  watching,  and  fasting,  and
labour,  by  keeping  filence,  by  fmging  hymns,  by
wearing  bad  and  inconvenient  clothing,  or  again
by  great  deeds  and  pious  works,  while  they  do  not
dive  into  the  bottom  of  their  hearts,  and  spy  out  all
their  fecret  inclinations,  to  lefler  as  well  as  to  greater
faults ;  fuch  as  an  inclination  to  think  too  well  of
themfelves  and  too  ill  of  their  neighbours,  or  to  harfh-
nefs,  to  trefpafs  on  the  rights  of  others,  to  morofenefs,
to  a  bitter  fpirit,  to  contradiction,  to  obftinacy,  to
caprice,  and  the  like,  and  do  not  perceive  thefe  things
in  themfelves,  nor  wTifh  to  learn  how  to  get  rid  of
their  old  bad  difpofitions  nor  yet  of  their  outward
bad  habits,  fuch  as  evil  speaking,  lightnefs  of  manners,
unkind  ridicule  of  others,  and  refufe  to  give  ear  to
thofe  who  teach  and  exhort  them  to  what  is  right,  or
to  probe  their  own  motives  ; — thefe  are  all  the  children
of  the  Devil.  Alas  !  how  many  are  martyrs  for  the
Devil !  To  fuch  as  thefe  Ifaiah  fays :  "  Bring  no
"  more  vain  oblations :  cease  to  do  evil ;  learn  to  do
"  well  ;  warn  you,  make  you  clean."  Yea,  if  a  man
were  to  fuffer  himfelf  to  be  torn  to  pieces,  and  did
not  learn  to  cleanfe  himfelf  thoroughly  from  his  lins,
to  behave  towards  his  fellow-creatures  in  a  fpirit  of
generous  love,  and  to  love  God  above  all  things,  it
would  all  be  ufelefs  and  in  vain.

Dionyfius  fays :  "  To  be  converted  to  the  truth
"  means  nothing  elfe  but  a  turning  from  the  love  of
"  created  things,  and  a  coming  into  union  with  the
"  uncreated  Higheft  Good.  And  in  one  who  is  thus
"  converted  there  is  a  joy  beyond  conception,  and  his
"  understanding  is  unclouded  and  unperverted  by  the


Sermon  for  Chriftmas  Day.


209


"  love  of  earthly  things,  and  is  mirrored  in  his  con-
"  fcience,  in  the  mirror  of  God's  mind.  Love  is  the
"  nobleft  of  all  virtues,  for  it  makes  man  divine,
"  and  makes  God  man."  And  again:  "Cleanfe  your
"  hearts  and  make  yourfelves  at  one  with  God,  for
"  one  glimpfe  of  Him  brings  the  foul  clofer  to  Him
"  than  all  the  outward  works  of  all  Chriftendom.
"  He  who  wifhes  to  attain  to  this  union  muft  get  be-
"  yond  all  that  may  be  conquered  and  grasped  by  the
"  underftanding,  for  God  hath  nothing  fo  hidden  that
"  it  cannot  be  revealed  unto  the  foul.  O  that  me
"  were  but  wife  enough  to  feek  after  it  with  all
"  earneftnefs !  "

A  certain  teacher  has  faid,  that  if  a  man  will  give
his  heart  and  life  to  God,  God  will  give  him  in  return
greater  gifts  than  if  he  were  to  furTer  death  over  again
for  him.

Now  that  man  mall  attain  unto  the  Higheft  Good
who  is  ready  to  defcend  into  the  loweft  depths  of
poverty.  And  this  comes  to  pafs  when  he  is  caft  into
utter  wretchednefs,  and  forfaken  of  all  creatures  and
all  comfort.  And  let  him  afk  help  of  none ;  let  him
be  as  knowing  nothing,  and  as  though  he  had  never
been  aught  but  a  fool ;  let  him  have  none  to  take
companion  on  him,  even  fo  much  as  to  give  him  a
cup  of  cold  water  to  drink ;  yet  let  him  never  forget
God  in  his  heart,  and  never  fhrink  from  God's  fearch-
ing  eye  of  judgment,  though  he  knows  not  what  its
verdict  will  be ;  but  with  a  cheerful  and  thankful
fpirit  yield  himfelf  up  to  fuffer  whatever  God  mall
appoint  unto  him,  and  to  fulfil  according  to  his  power,
by  the  grace  of  God,  all  His  holy  will  to  the  utmofl


He  who  /^_
willing  to  be
abafed  for
GoJsfake,
Jball  attain
the  bigbefl
glory  and
work  the
greateft
works.


210


Sermon  for  Chrijimas  Day.


that  he  can  difcern  it,  and  never  complain  of  his
diftrefTes  but  to  God  alone  with  entire  and  humble
refignation,  praying  that  he  may  be  ftrong  to  endure
all  his  fufferings  according  to  the  will  of  God : — Ah,
dear  children,  what  glorious  fons  of  God  would  fuch
men  be  !  what  wonders  would  God  work  through
them  to  the  magnifying  of  His  glory  !  Thefe  are  the
true  and  righteous  men  who  truft  in  God,  and  cleave
to  Him  in  fpirit  and  in  truth  !  That  we  may  thus


become  His
Amen.


fons,  may  God  help  us  by  His  grace


V.


Sermon  for  Epiphany.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


This  Sermon  on  the  Go/pel  for  the  day,  from  St.  Matthew,  Jbowetb
bow  God,  of  His  great  faithfulnefs,  hath  forefeen  and  ordained
all  fujferings  for  the  eternal  good  of  each  man,  in  whatever  wife
they  befall  MS,  arid  "whether  they  be  great  or  f mall.

MATT.  ii.  1 1 . — "  And  they  prefented  unto  him  gifts  :  gold,  and  frankincenle,  and  myrrh."


OW  confider  firft  the  myrrh.  It  is  bitter ;
and  this  is  a  type  of  the  bitternefs  which
muft  be  tailed  before  a  man  can  find  God,
when  he  firft  turns  from  the  world  to  God,
and  all  his  likings  and  deiires  have  to  be
utterly  changed.  For  it  is  neceffary  that  all  which  a
man  has  hitherto  taken  pleafure  in  pofTefTmg  mould
be  given  up,  and  this  is  at  firft  very  bitter  and  very
hard  work  to  him.  All  things  muft  become  as  bitter
to  thee  as  their  enjoyment  was  fweet  unto  thee.  But
to  this  work  thou  haft  need  of  a  full  purpofe  of  heart
and  never-failing  diligence.  For  the  greater  thy
delight  in  anything  has  been,  the  more  bitter  will  it
be  to  give  it  up,  yea  the  very  gall  of  bitternefs.

Now,  it  may  be  afked,  "  How  can  a  man  be  with-
"  out  appetites  and  enjoyment  fo  long  as  he  is  in  this
"  prefent  ftate  ?  I  am  hungry,  and  I  eat ;  I  am
"  thirfty,  I  drink  ;  I  am  weary,  I  fleep ;  I  am  cold,  I


Of  the  bitter-
nefs of  turn-
ing from
earthly
delights.


Tbe  fatisfac-
tion  of  natural
dejiret  not
ftnful,


212,


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


but  it  muft
be  fubordi-
nated  to
higher  aims.


How  to  take
the  bitter
myrrh  of  out-
ward trouble.


"  warm  myfelf ;  and  I  cannot  poffibly  find  that  to  be
"  bitter  nor  barren  of  natural  enjoyment  which  is  the
"  fatisfaclion  of  my  natural  defires.  This  I  cannot
"  alter,  fo  long  as  nature  is  nature."  True :  but  this
pleafure,  eafe,  fatisfa&ion,  enjoyment,  or  delight,  muft
not  penetrate  into  the  depths  of  thy  heart,  nor  make
up  a  portion  of  thy  inner  life.  It  muft  pafs  away
with  the  things  that  caufed  it,  and  have  no  abiding
place  in  thee.  We  muft  not  fet  our  affections  thereon,
but  allow  it  to  come  and  go,  and  not  repofe  upon  the
fenfe  of  pofleffion  with  content  or  delight  in  the
world  or  the  creature.  \Ve  muft  mortify  and  fubdue
nature  with  nature  and  the  love  thereof  within  us,
yea,  even  the  delight  that  we  have  in  the  children  of
God  and  good  men.  Thefe  and  all  other  inclinations
muft  be  brought  under  dominion  to  a  higher  power ;
for  till  this  is  accomplifhed,  Herod  and  his  fervants,
which  feek  after  the  young  child's  life,  are  not  alto-
gether and  of  a  furety  dead  within  thee.  Therefore
beware  that  thou  do  not  deceive  thyfelf,  but  look
narrowly  to  it,  how  it  ftands  with  thee,  and  do  not
be  too  fecure,  nor  live  without  fear.

But  there  is  yet  another  myrrh,  which  far  furpafles
the  firft.  This  is  the  myrrh  which  God  gives  us  in
the  cup  of  trouble  and  fbrrow,  of  whatever  kind  it
may  be,  outward  or  inward.  Ah,  if  thou  couldft  but
receive  this  myrrh  as  from  its  true  fource,  and  drink
it  with  the  fame  love  with  which  God  puts  it  to  thy
lips,  what  bleiTednefs  would  it  work  in  thee  !  Ah,
what  a  joy  and  peace  and  an  excellent  thing  were
that !  Yes,  the  very  leaft  and  the  very  greateft  for-
rows  that  God  ever  fuffers  to  befall  thee,  proceed


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


213


from  the  depths  of  His  unfpeakable  love ;  and  fuch
great  love  were  better  for  thee  than  the  higheft  and
beft  gifts  befides  that  He  has  given  thee  or  ever  could
give  thee,  if  thou  couldft  but  fee  it  in  this  light ;  yea,
however  fmall  a  fuffering  light  on  thee,  God — who,  as
our  Lord  fays,  counts  the  fmalleft  hair  that  ever  fell
from  thy  head,  without  thy  knowing  it — God  has  fore-
feen  it  from  eternity,  and  chofen,  and  purpofed,  and
appointed  that  it  mould  befall  thee.  So  that  if  your
little  finger  only  aches,  if  you  are  cold,  if  you  are
hungry  or  thirfty,  if  others  vex  you  by  their  words  or
deeds,  or  whatever  happens  to  you  that  caufes  you
diftrefs  or  pain,  it  will  all  help  to  fit  you  for  a  noble
and  blefled  ftate ;  and  it  has  been  forefeen  and  fore-
appointed  by  God  that  fuch  and  fuch  things  mould
happen  and  come  upon  you ;  for  all  is  meafured,
weighed,  and  numbered,  and  cannot  be  lefs  nor  other-
wife  than  it  is.  That  my  eyes  are  now  in  my  head,
is  as  God  our  Heavenly  Father  has  feen  it  from  eter-
nity ;  now  let  them  be  put  out,  and  let  me  become
blind,  or  deaf,  this  alfo  has  our  Heavenly  Father  fore-
feen from  eternity,  that  it  ought  to  come  to  pafs,  and
had  His  eternal  counfel  with  refpecl  unto  it,  and
determined  it  from  eternity  within  Himfelf.  Ought
I  not,  then,  to  open  my  inward  eyes  and  ears,  and
thank  my  God  that  His  eternal  counfel  is  fulfilled  in
me  ?  Ought  I  to  grieve  at  it  ?  I  ought  to  be  won-
derfully thankful  for  it !  And  fo  alfo  with  lofs  of
friends,  or  property,  or  reputation,  or  comfort,  or
whatever  it  be  that  God  allots  to  us,  it  will  all  (erve
to  prepare  thee,  and  help  thee  forward  to  true  peace,
if  thou  canft  only  take  it  fb.  Now,  fometimes  people

p3


All  our  far-
rows,  fmall
as  well  as
great,  ap-
pointed by
God.


214


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


All  fuffering
fent  for  a
means  of  our
progrefs  to
higher  things.


Pf/e/f-

created  .
Suffering.


have  faid  to  me :  "  Mafter,  it  is  ill  with  me :  I  have
"  much  fuffering  and  tribulation  ;"  and  when  I  have
anfwered :  "It  is  all  as  it  mould  be,"  they  have  faid,
"  No,  Mafter,  I  have  deferred  it ;  I  have  cherifhed  an
"  evil  thing  in  my  heart."  Then  take  blame  to  thy-
felf ;  but  whether  thy  pain  be  deferved  or  not,  believe
that  it  comes  from  God,  and  thank  Him,  and  bear  it,
and  refign  thyfelf  to  it.

All  the  myrrhs  of  bitternefs  that  God  gives,  are
ordered  aright,  that  He  may  by  this  means  raife  men
to  true  greatnefs.  It  is  for  the  wholefome  exercife  of
fuffering  that  He  has  fet  the  forces  of  nature  as  it  were
at  war  with  man.  He  could  juft  as  well  and  as  eafily
have  caufed  bread  to  grow  as  corn,  but  that  it  is  necef-
fary  for  man  to  have  his  powers  exercifed  in  every  way.
And  He  has  beftowed  as  much  care  and  thought  in
the  arrangement  of  each  fmgle  thing,  as  the  artift  does
when  he  is  painting  a  picture,  who  never  draws  a  fin-
gle  ftroke  with  his  pencil  without  confidering  how
long,  how  mort,  and  how  broad  it  ought  to  be  ;  and
it  muft  be  fo  and  no  otherwife,  if  the  picture  is  to  be
a  perfect  mafter-piece,  and  all  its  bright  red  and  blue
colours  are  to  come  out.  But  God  takes  a  thoufand
times  more  pains  with  us  than  the  artift  with  his
picture,  by  many  touches  of  forrow,  and  by  many
colours  of  circumftance,  to  bring  man  into  the  form
which  is  the  higheft  and  nobleft  in  His  fight,  if  only
we  received  His  gifts  and  myrrh  in  the  right  fpirit.

There  are  fome,  however,  who  are  not  content  with
the  myrrh  that  God  gives  them,  but  think  fit  to  give
themfelves  fome,  and  create  evils  for  themfelves  and
fick  fancies,  and  have  indeed  fuffered  long  and  much,


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


for  they  take  hold  of  all  things  by  the  wrong  end.
And  they  gain  little  grace  from  all  their  pain,  becaufe
they  are  building  upon  {tones  of  their  own  laying,
whether  it  be  penances  or  abftinence,  or  prayer  or
meditation.  According  to  them,  God  muft  wait  their
leifure,  and  let  them  do  their  part  firft,  elfe  no  good
will  come  of  the  work.  God  hath  fixed  it  in  His  pur-
poie  that  He  will  reward  nothing  but  His  own  works.
In  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  He  will  crown  nothing  to
all  eternity  but  His  works,  and  not  thine.  What  He
has  not  wrought  in  thee,  He  takes  no  account  of.

In  the  third  place,  there  is  an  exceeding  bitter  myrrh
which  God  gives  ;  namely,  inward  affaults  and  inward
darknefs.  When  a  man  is  willing  to  tafte  this  myrrh,
and  does  not  put  it  from  him,  it  wears  down  flefh  and
blood,  yea,  the  whole  nature  ;  for  thefe  inward  exercifes
make  the  cheek  grow  pale  far  fooner  than  great  out-
ward hardfhips,  for  God  appoints  unto  his  fervants
cruel  fightings  and  ftrange  dread,  and  unheard  of  dif-
trefles,  which  none  can  understand  but  he  who  has
felt  them.  And  thefe  men  are  befet  with  fuch  a
variety  of  difficulties,  fo  many  cups  of  bitternefs  are
prefented  to  them,  that  they  hardly  know  which  way
to  turn,  or  what  they  ought  to  do ;  but  God  knows
right  well  what  He  is  about.  But  when  the  cup  is
put  away,  and  thefe  feelings  are  {lifted  or  unheeded,  a
greater  injury  is  done  to  the  foul  than  can  ever  be
amended.  For  no  heart  can  conceive  in  what  fur-
paffing  love  God  giveth  us  this  myrrh  ;  yet  this  which
we  ought  to  receive  to  our  foul's  good,  we  fuffer  to
pafs  by  us  in  our  fleepy  indifference,  and  nothing
comes  of  it.  Then  we  come  and  complain  :  "  Alas,

p4


Of  the  bitter
myrrh  of  in-
ward trials.


2l6


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


Of  two
wrong  ways
of  receiving
this  myrrb.


Of  the


"  Lord  !  I  am  fo  dry,  and  it  is  fo  dark  within  me  !"
I  tell  you,  dear  child,  open  thy  heart  to  the  pain,  and
it  will  do  thee  more  good  than  if  thou  wert  full  of
feeling  and  devoutnefs.

Now  men  receive  this  bitter  myrrh  in  two  ways ;
they  try  to  meet  it  as  with  their  practical  fenfe  or  with
their  intellectual  fubtilty.  When  it  fprings  from  out-
ward circumftances,  men  wilh  they  had  known  better,
and  they  would  have  averted  it  with  their  wifdom,
and  attribute  it  to  outward  accidents,  to  fate,  or  mif-
fortune,  and  think  they  might  have  taken  fleps  to  pre-
vent what  has  happened,  and  if  they  had  done  fo,  the
means  would  have  fucceeded,  and  the  calamity  would
have  been  turned  afide.  They  would  fain  be  too  wife
for  God,  and  teach  Him,  and  mafter  Him,  and  cannot
take  things  from  His  hand.  The  fufferings  of  fuch
are  very  fore,  and  their  myrrh  is  exceeding  bitter.

There  are  others,  who  having  tafted  the  cup  of  that
bitternefs  which  fprings  from  writhin,  do  ftart  back  and
forthwith  feek  to  break  away  from  it  by  the  exercife
of  their  natural  wit  and  fubtilty,  and  think  to  quell
the  ftrife  by  dint  of  reafoning  and  arguing  with  them-
ielves.  And  this  kind  of  trouble  often  pafles  away
more  quickly  with  fimple  minds  than  with  thofe  whofe
reafon  is  more  active  ;  for  the  former  follow  God  more
fimply,  they  feel  they  do  not  know  what  to  do,  and
fo  they  truil.  But  if  thofe  of  higher  powers  follow
God's  leading,  and  furrender  themfelves  wholly  to  Him,
their  career  is  far  nobler  and  more  bleffed,  for  their
reafon  ferves  them  in  all  things  more  freely  and
excellently.

Now  from  this  myrrh  fprings  a  noble  branch,  which


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


217


beareth  coftly  frankincenfe.  The  frankincenfe  gum
fends  forth  a  fweet-fmelling  fmoke ;  fo  when  the  fire
catches  the  rod,  it  curls  round  it  and  feeks  to  fet  loofe
the  perfume  that  is  contained  therein,  that  it  may  go
forth  and  fpread  a  fragrant  incenfe  around.  The  fire
is  nothing  elfe  than  burning  love  to  God,  which  is  as
it  were  latent  in  prayer  ;  and  love  is  the  frankincenfe
which  fends  forth  the  true  fragrance  of  holy  devotion.
For,  as  a  writer  has  faid :  "  Prayer  is  nothing  but  the
"  going  up  of  the  fpirit  unto  God."  And  juft  as  the
ftraw  exifts  for  the  fake  of  the  corn,  and  is  good  for
nothing  in  itfelf  but  to  make  a  bed  whereon  to  lie,  or
to  manure  the  earth,  fo  outward  prayer  is  of  no  profit
except  in  fo  far  as  it  ftirs  up  the  noble  flame  of  devo-
tion in  the  heart,  and  when  that  fweet  incenfe  breaks
forth  and  riies  up,  then  it  matters  little  whether  the
prayer  of  the  lips  be  uttered  or  not.  In  faying  this,  I
except  thofe  perfons  who  are  bound  by  the  ordinances
of  the  Holy  Church  to  offer  up  prayers,  and  thofe  who
have  vowed  to  perform  acl:s  of  devotion,  or  have  been
advifed  thereunto  by  their  fpiritual  directors.

May  Jefus  Chrift,  the  King  of  Glory,  help  us  to
make  the  right  ufe  of  all  the  myrrh  that  God  fends  us,
and  to  offer  up  to  Him  the  true  incenfe  of  devout
hearts.  Amen  !*


*  In  the  later  editions  here  follows  an  exposition  of  the  gold,  but  it  is
wanting  in  the  four  earlieft  editions  and  the  beft  MSS.


frankincenfe
of  love  to
God  that


from  this
myrrh.


VI.


Second   Sermon  for  Epiphany.


Sbowetb  on  'what  wife  a  manjball  arife  from  himfelf  and  from  all
creatures,  to  the  end  that  God  may  find  the  ground  of  bis  foul
prepared,  and  may  begin  and  perfect  His  work  therein.

ISAIAH  Ix.  i.— "  Arife,  O  Jerufalem,  and  be  enlightened."*


Of  God's
loving  dejtre
for  our
Jah'ation.


Of 'our  part
in  the  work.


N  all  this  world  God  covets  and  requires
but  one  thing  only,  and  that  He  defires
fo  exceeding  greatly  that  He  gives  His
whole  might  and  energy  thereto.  This
one  thing  is,  that  He  may  find  that  good
ground  which  He  has  laid  in  the  noble  mind  of  man
made  fit  and  ready  for  Him  to  exercife  His  divine
agency  thereon.  For  God  has  all  power  in  heaven
and  on  earth,  and  the  only  thing  that  is  lacking  unto
Him  is  that  He  is  hindered  from  accompliming  the
moft  glorious  of  all  His  works  in  man.

Now  what  muft  we  do  that  God  may  mine  in
on  this  innermoft  ground  of  the  foul,  and  work  there  ?
We  muft  arife,  fays  our  text.  Arife  !  this  founds  as
if  we  could  do  fomething  towards  this  work.  We


*  According  to  our  authorized  verfion :  "  Arife,  ftiine ;  for  thy  light  is
"  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  rifen  upon  thee."  The  German  verfion
of  the  text  has  been  retained,  becaule  the  argument  of  the  Sermon  is  baled
upon  it.


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


219


muft  arife  from  all  that  is  not  God,  from  ourfelvcs
and  from  all  creatures.  And  by  this  aft  of  arifmg,
the  ground  of  the  foul  is  ftirred,  and  a  ftrong  craving
fprings  up  in  it ;  and  the  more  this  deepeft  ground
of  the  foul  is  laid  bare,  and  all  that  occupied  and
cumbered  it  is  cleared  away,  the  keener  grows  this
craving  after  fomething  higher  than  itfelf,  fo  that
ofttimes  with  God's  lighteft  touch  upon  the  naked
foul,  the  .longing  pierces  through  flem  and  blood  and
marrow.

But  there  are  two  forts  of  over-bold  men  who  are
driven  by  this  ftirring  up  of  their  fouls  into  two  ram
courfes.  The  firft  come  with  their  natural  quick-
nefs  of  parts,  and  with  the  conceptions  of  their  own
minds,  and  try  therewith  to  touch  the  principle  of
their  fouls,  and  feek  to  ftill  the  craving  within  them
by  hearing  and  learning  of  lofty  matters.  And  in
this  they  find  great  delight,  and  ween  that  they  are
a  Jerufalem, — a  city  of  peace,  by  the  exercife  of
their  intellect.  There  is  another  clafs  who  think
to  prepare  the  ground  of  their  fouls  for  God  and
to  obtain  peace  by  means  of  felf-chofen  good  works,
or  by  religious  exercifes,  fuch  as  prayer,  meditation,
or  whatever  they  fee  other  people  do  for  the  fame
end ;  and  then  they  fancy  they  are  verily  children
of  Zion,  and  their  works  of  piety  and  charity  do
yield  them  great  peace,  and  they  delight  in  nothing
fo  much  as  in  religious  exercifes  and  the  fulfilling  of
the  tafks  they  have  fet  themfelves.  But  that  their
peace  is  a  falfe  one,  may  be  perceived  by  this,  that
they  do  not  cure  themfelves  of  their  former  faults,
fuch  as  pride,  fenfuality,  felf-indulgence,  love  of  the


Of  tbofe  who
try  to  fnd
peace  by  the
exercife  of
their  reafon.


Of  tbofe  to  bo
think  to  fnd
peace  by
outward  ob-
ferrances.


That  their
peace  is  falfe
is  proved  by
its  fruits.


220


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


Oftbofe  tvbo
do  in  truth
arij'e  and  are
enlightened  of
God.


creature,  pronenefs  to  fufpccl:  or  to  judge  others ;  and
if  any  offend  them,  refentment  forthwith  flames  up
within  them,  and  an  angry  word  efcapes  them,  or
hatred  fmoulders  in  their  heart ;  and  fuch  like  faults
they  indulge  in  with  their  own  confent.  By  this  we
may  know  that  they  wifh  to  manage  their  fouls  after
their  own  famion,  and  work  in  them ;  while  God
cannot  accomplim  His  work  in  fuch  a  foul  and  un-
fwept  chamber.  Therefore,  their  peace  is  falfe,  and
they  have  not  yet  arifen  in  truth.  Let  not  fuch
claim  to  be  children  of  Zion,  nor  dare  to  think  they
have  found  true  peace ;  but  let  them  ferioufly  fet
themfelves  to  work  to  conquer  their  faults,  exercifing
themfelves,  after  the  pattern  of  our  Lord,  in  humility
and  works  of  love,  dying  unto  themfelves  in  all  things,
and  thus  learn  how  to  rife  on  high.

But  thofe  others,  that  is  to  fay  thofe  noble  men
who  do  truly  arife  and  receive  divine  light,  thefe
allow  God  to  prepare  their  fouls  for  Himfelf,  and
renounce  themfelves  in  all  things  without  any  referve,
either  as  regards  their  words  or  their  daily  habits,  or
what  they  do  or  refrain  from,  or  anything  elfe,  whether
things  go  fmoothly  or  croffly  with  them.  Both  in
framing  their  purpofes,  and  in  meeting  what  arifes,
they  refer  all  to  God  in  humble  fear,  and  give  them-
felves wholly  up  to  Him,  in  utter  poornefs  of  fpirit,  in
willing  felf-furrender,  acquiefcing  in  the  divine  will.
They  are  content  to  fay  in  all  matters,  "As  God  will :"
in  quiet  or  in  difquiet ;  for  their  fole  delight  is  the
holy  and  excellent  will  of  God.  To  thefe  we  may
apply  what  Chrifl  faid  unto  His  difciples  when  they
bade  Him  to  go  up  unto  the  feaft :  "  Go  ye  up ;  your


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


2,2,1


"  time  is  alway  ready,  but  my  time  is  not  yet  come."
Thefe  men's  time  is  alway  ready  for  them  to  endure
and  fubmit ;  all  time  is  fitting  for  them  ;  but  God's
time  is  not  alway  ready,  when  He  deigns  or  fees  fit  to
work,  or  to  fend  forth  His  light.  This  they  fubmif-
fively  leave  to  His  divine  will,  and  are  willing  to  wait
as  long  as  He  pleafes.

Now  the  diftinguiming  mark  of  this  better  fort  of
men  is  that  they  fuffer  God  to  order  their  fouls'  affairs,
and  do  not  hinder  Him.  Yet  they  are  not  raifed  above
the  mocks  of  temptation,  nor  even  the  liability  to  fall
for  a  moment  (for  no  one  is  entirely  delivered  from
this  danger) ;  but  afterwards,  as  foon  as  the  firft  onfet
of  paffion  is  over,  and  their  fault  is  held  up  before  them,
whether  it  be  pride,  or  felf-indulgence,  or  anger,  or
hatred,  or  whatever  is  their  fpecial  temptation,  they
come  to  God  in  felf-abafement,  and  fubmit  themfelves
to  Him,  and  bear  without  murmuring  what  He  fees
fit  to  appoint  unto  them.  And  fuch  do  in  truth  arife,
for  they  rife  above  themfelves  in  all  things,  and  they
do  become  in  truth  a  Jerufalem  or  ftronghold  of
peace,  for  they  have  quiet  in  difquietude  and  prof-
perity  in  adverfity,  and  rejoice  in  the  will  of  God
amidfl  all  circumftances.  Therefore  no  power  in
this  world  can  take  awray  their  peace,  nor  could  all
the  devils  in  hell,  nor  all  the  men  on  earth  banded
together.  All  their  affections  centre  in  God,  and
they  are  enlightened  by  Him  of  a  truth  ;  for  He
mines  into  their  fouls  with  a  ftrong  and  clear  light
that  reveals  all  things  unto  them  ;  and  He  fhineth  as
truly,  nay  far  more  brightly,  in  the  blackeft  darknefs
than  in  the  feeming  light.  Ah  !  thefe  are  fweet  and


How  fufh
fuffer  God  to
manage  their
fouls  for
them.


How  tbcj
have  peace
amidjl  dif-
quiet,  becaufe
their  fouls
are  fxed
upon  God.


222


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


Outward
obfervances
not  a  matter
ofnefejffity,
but  of  cboite
to  fucb.


lovely  children  of  God,  raifed  above  nature  by  their
likenefs  to  Him ;  and  fuch  neither  undertake  nor
bring  to  pafs  any  of  their  works  without  God.  Nay,
if  we  may  dare  to  ufe  fuch  language,  they  are,  fo  to
fpeak,  nothing,  but  God  is  in  them ;  as  St.  Paul  fays :
"  I  live,  yet  not  I  but  Chrift  liveth  in  me."  Ah  !
thefe  are  highly-favoured  men ;  they  bear  the  world
upon  their  moulders  and  are  the  noble  pillars  of
fociety.  To  make  one  of  their  number,  what  a
blefled  and  glorious  thing  were  that !

Now,  the  diftinguifhing  mark  of  thofe  two  clafles
of  prefumptuous  men  whom  we  firft  fpoke  of,  is  that
they  choofe  to  govern  their  fouls  for  themfelves,  in-
ftead  of  fubmitting  themfelves  to  the  direction  of
God ;  and  hence  their  powers  are  kept  under  bondage
to  fin,  fo  that  they  cannot  fully  conquer  their  evil
habits ;  nay,  they  even  continue  therein  with  content,
or  at  leaft  with  the  confent  of  their  own  will.  But
thofe  other  noble,  bleffed,  felf-renouncing  men,  who
have  given  themfelves  over  to  God,  are  exalted  above
themfelves ;  and  hence,  if  they  are  overtaken  in  a
fault,  fo  fbon  as  they  are  aware  of  it,  they  flee  unto
God  with  it,  and  ftraightway  the  fin  is  no  more,  and
they  are  in  a  ftate  of  godlike  freedom.  Shall  they  not
then  with  reafon  defire  that  God  may  prepare  their
fouls  ?

There  is  no  need  for  thefe  men  to  perform  outward
works,  in  addition,  as  if  they  were  a  matter  of  necef-
fity.  No  !  Now  the  text  itfelf,  in  this  one  word,
"  Arife  !"  bids  them  to  lift  themfelves  up  :  and  is  not
that  a  work  ?  Yes,  one  work  it  does  behove  them  to
fulfil  without  ceafmg,  if  they  are  ever  to  come  to  per-


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


223


fe&nefs.  They  muft  continually  arife,  and  have  their
minds  directed  upwards  towards  God,  and  their  hearts
free  from  entanglement,  ever  afking,  "  Where  is  He
"who  is  born  a  king?"  and  watching  with  humble
fear  and  quick  eye  to  difcern  what  God  defires  of
them,  that  they  may  do  His  pleafure.  If  God  gives
them  to  fuffer,  they  fuffer ;  if  He  gives  them  to  work,
they  work ;  if  He  gives  them  to  enjoy  Him  in  con-
templation, they  contemplate.  The  ground  of  their
own  fouls  bears  witnefs  that  God  has  cleanfed  them
and  created  them  anew.

And  this  ground  and  fubflance  of  the  foul  will  God
poflefs  alone,  and  will  not  that  any  creature  mould
enter  therein.  In  this  chamber  of  the  heart  God
works  through  means  in  the  one  clafs  of  men,  and
without  means  in  the  other  and  more  bleffed  fort.
But  what  He  works  in  the  fouls  of  thefe  laft  with
whom  He  holds  direcl  converfe,  none  can  fay,  nor  can
one  man  give  account  of  it  to  another,  but  he  only
who  has  felt  it  knows  what  it  is ;  and  even  he  can
tell  thee  nothing  of  it,  fave  only  that  God  in  very
truth  hath  pofleffed  the  ground  of  his  foul.  And
where  this  comes  to  pafs,  outward  works  become  of
no  moment,  but  the  inward  perceiving  of  God  greatly
increafes.  But  when  a  man  reaches  the  higheft  point
that  he  may  attain  unto  by  his  moft  earneft  endeavour
and  the  help  of  God's  grace,  let  him  afcribe  nothing
whatever  unto  himfelf;  as  our  bleffed  Lord  faid :
"  When  ye  have  done  all  thofe  things  which  are  com-
"  manded  you,  fay,  We  are  unprofitable  fervants :  we
"  have  done  that  which  it  was  our  duty  to  do."
Therefore,  let  a  man  be  never  Ib  perfect,  he  mall


Of  the
myfterious
converfe  of
the  foul  with
God.


Luke  xvli.
10.


At  our  beft


224


Sermon  for  Epiphany.


eftate  we
muft  ft  and
in  bumble
fear.


always  ftand  in  humble  fear,  at  his  higheft  glory ;  and
fhall  always  fay  and  feel,  "  Father,  thy  will  be  done!"
and  fhall  at  all  times  keep  a  watch  upon  himfelf,
looking  narrowly  left  he  mould  cleave  unto  one  {ingle
thing  that  is  amifs,  and  God  mould  find  anything  in
the  fecret  chambers  of  his  heart  that  hinders  His
accompliming  His  glorious  work  therein  without  the
help  of  means.

May  God  help  us  all  fb  to  arife  that  He  may  ac-
complifh  His  work  in  our  fouls  !     Amen.


VII.


Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany,

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day;  and  from  Hofea  xiv.  I,  2.)


Of  the  great  wonders  which  God  has  wrought,  andjlill  works  for
us  Chriftian  men ;  wherefore  it  is  jnjl  and  reafonable  that  we
Jhould  turn  unto  Htm  and  follow  Him,  and  whereby  we  may
difcern  between  true  andfalfe  converjion.

MATT.  viii.  23. —  "Jefus  went  into  a  ftiip,  and  His  difciples  followed  Him."  And
HOSEA  xiv.  I,  2. — "  O  Ifrael,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God;  take  with  you  words,  and
"  turn  to  the  Lord."


E  read  in  the  Gofpel  for  this  day  that  Jefus
went  into  a  fhip,  and  His  difciples  fol-
lowed Him.  In  like  manner  muft  all
pious  Chriftians  turn  from  fin  and  follow
Chrift,  as  He  commands  us  by  the  mouth
of  the  Prophet  Hofea,  faying  :  "  O  Ifrael,  return  unto
"  the  Lord  thy  God."

Out  of  all  the  tribes  of  mankind  the  Lord  chofe
one,  to  whom  He  mowed  great  kindnefs,  and  pro-
mifed  to  do  yet  greater  things  for  them,  if  they
would  turn  with  their  whole  heart  unto  Him,  and
not  follow  after  the  ways  of  the  other  nations  who
lived  according  to  their  finful  lufts  in  the  darknefs
and  blindnefs  of  their  hearts,  and  went  aftray  with
wicked  lives  and  perverfe  minds  after  the  vanities  of
the  world  and  the  deceits  of  the  Dc\il.  And  to  this


Of  God's
dealings  with
His  cbofen
people  of
Ijrael.


226


Sermon  for  the


Of  their
peri'erfenefs.


Of  their
punijbment.


'2'beje  things
an  en/ample
for  us.


end,  God  led  His  people  out  bodily  by  the  hand  of  His
fervants  and  prophets,  and  alfo  gave  them  His  law  to
teach  them,  that  they  might  behold  His  great  power
which  He  had  glorified  againft  their  enemies,  and
His  great  love  which  He  had  manifefted  by  number-
lefs  acts  and  unfpeakable  benefits  towards  themfelves,
being  minded  to  do  yet  greater  things  for  them  here-
after, if  they  would  truly  turn  to  Him  with  their
whole  heart,  and  love  Him,  and  keep  His  command-
ments. And  he  commanded  them  that  they  mould
never  forget  the  day  on  which  they  had  been  delivered
out  of  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  and  from  their
cruel  bondage  and  toil,  but  mould  fet  themfelves  with
earneftnefs  and  diligence  to  confider  His  command-
ments, to  keep  them  and  do  them.  But  this  people
was  {tiff-necked,  heedlefs,  and  unthankful,  and  did
not  do  as  God  had  commanded  by  the  mouth  of  His
fervants,  but  was  continually  felf-willed,  perverfe,  and
bent  on  fin  ;  and  therefore  the  Lord  fuffercd  them  all
to  die  in  the  wildernefs,  and  flew  many  of  them.
And  afterwards  He  fent  again  other  fervants  unto
them,  faying :  "  O  my  chofen  people,  if  ye  will  be
"  converted  and  turn  unto  me  with  your  whole  heart,
"  and  not  go  aftray  halting  between  two  opinions,  but
"  follow  after  me  only,  and  forfake  the  way  of  the
"  Egyptians,  the  way  of  darknefs,  of  fin,  and  of
"  death,  I  will  bring  you  into  a  land  of  righteoufnefs,
"  where  all  good  things  fhall  be  given  you."

Now  all  thefe  things  came  to  pafs  under  the  old
difpenfation  in  paft  ages,  with  many  figns  and  in
hidden  myfterious  covenants  fealed  by  oaths.  But
they  alfo  forefhadowed  all  that  fhould  come  to  pafs  in


Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


2,2,7


God  works
as  many
wonders  for
us  as  He  did
for  them.


future  ages  after  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,
in  the  which  we  now  live.  Now  He  purpofes  to
draw  us  likewise  to  Himfelf,  by  the  help  of  thefe  fame
words  and  teachings,  if  only  we  will  turn  unto  Him  ;
and  therefore  does  He  give  us  fo  many  reafons,  exhorta-
tions, inftruclions  or  motives,  that  we  mould  turn
unto  Him  with  our  whole  hearts.  He  works  now-a-
days  quite  as  many  miracles  and  mighty  deeds  as  then,
among  the  Egyptians  of  this  world  and  Pharaoh  its
king,  fpiritually  and  alfo  vifibly,  in  the  converfion  of
each  one  among  us,  if  we  gave  heed  thereto  with
thankful  hearts.  But  alas  !  it  is  with  too  many  of  us
as  it  was  with  the  Ifraelites,  we  are  only  changed  out-
wardly with  the  body,  but  our  heart  is  yet  in  Egypt.
We  all  pafs  under  good  names,  and  make  a  fair  mow,
but  in  reality  our  whole  affections  and  endeavours  are
turned  towards  the  pleafures  and  advantages  of  the
flem  and  the  world.  And  we  are  all  the  time  fo  very
careful  and  diligent  to  keep  ftrid;ly  to  all  that  is  com-
manded refpe&ing  outward  obfervances,  fuch  as  veft-
ments,  chanting,  kneeling,  and  the  like,  and  are  fatis-
fied  if  all  thefe  matters  are  fcrupuloufly  obferved,  and
fit  down  contented,  fancying  that  all  is  well  with  us,
and  that  we  are  far  enough  from  Egypt.  Nay,  verily,
dear  children,  we  are  very  wide  of  the  mark  ;  this  is
all  a  mere  femblance  and  fhadow,  the  leaves  of  the
fig-tree  which  could  not  fatisfy  our  Lord's  hunger  ;
He  muft  find  fruit  on  the  tree,  elfe  it  is  nigh  to  be
curfed  by  Him,  that  no  man  tafte  fruit  thereof  to  all
eternity.  Ah  !  how  often  have  you  been  taught  that
you  ought  not  to  cleave  unto  mere  fhadows  and  out-
ward forms.  Although  thefe  be  w  holefome  and  need-

Q2


Qutward  ob-
fervances
mere  Jbadows
and  forms  of


228


Sermon  for  the


fpiritual
realities.


How  toe  mujt
begin  with
learning  good
habits.


but  never  reft
contented
with  them.


Of  tbofe  who
begin  well  in
a  Cbriftian
life,  but
afterwards
fall  away.


ful  for  beginners,  ftill  they  are  but  a  long  way  off  from
the  real  truth  and  fubftance,  for  the  fake  of  which  all
thele  outward  acl:s  are  performed.  If  you  do  not  look  to
it  betimes,  you  will  have  the  outward  fhape  remaining,
while  within  there  is  all  manner  of  fm  and  wickednefs
cherifhed  in  your  hearts,  as  much  as  with  thole  who
have  not  the  mow  of  religion  ;  and  alas  !  men  often
fall  into  deeper  vice  under  this  cloak,  than  if  they  were
yet  in  the  Egypt  of  worldlinefs.  It  would  be  better
for  them  if  they  had  never  quitted  the  world,  for  now
is  their  damnation  greater  while  they  wear  the  garb  of
holinefs,  not  acting  conformably  to  it,  and  yet  claim
and  make  ufe  of  all  the  privileges  of  their  religious
profeflion.

Children,  I  know  of  nothing  fo  greatly  needed  as
that  thofe  who  are  entering  on  a  religious  life  mould
be  inftru&ed  with  all  care,  that  they  may  know  what
things  they  ought  firft  to  learn,  and  then  afterwards,
when  the  outward  practice  of  good  works  and  piety
has  become  a  habit  to  them,  that  they  may  alfo  know
how  to  advance  farther,  and  not  content  themfelves
or  be  fatisfied  with  outward  habits  ;  for  thefe  do  not
in  themfelves  make  a  perfecT:  life,  but  are  only  a  good
preparation  and  a  flight  furtherance  thereto.  If  this
be  early  inftilled  into  beginners,  while  they  are  yet
young,  docile,  and  quick  of  apprehenfion,  and  alfo  hot
and  earneft,  it  may  be  that  fome  of  them  will  ftudy
betimes  to  prefs  onwards  to  what  is  higher.  But,  alas  !
and  worfe  than  alas !  we  have  fb  often  to  behold  the
forrowful  fpeclacle  of  fome  who  began  in  the  fpirit
with  great  zeal ;  who  at  firft  were  fo  fervid  that  they
would  hardly  turn  their  eyes  upon  any  who  might


Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


229


lead  their  thoughts  aftray  ;  and  who  now  can  hardly
be  perfuaded  to  quit  men's  company  for  an  hour's
meditation  ;  fome  who  at  firft  could  not  bear  to  liften
to  a  worldly  word,  and  now,  early  and  late,  you  can
fcarcely  get  a  refpite  from  their  goffiping,  and  unpro-
fitable queftions  and  anfwers ;  at  firft  they  wanted
to  withdraw  into  filence  and  folitude,  that  they  might
by  prayer  and  work  fuftain  their  devoutnefs  ;  and  now,
the  more  earthly  care  they  can  encumber  themfelves
with,  the  better  they  are  pleafed.  Ah  !  this  and  the
like  is  a  certain  fign  that  they  are  held  captive  by  the
flefh,  that  they  have  wandered  into  darknefs,  and  in
their  hearts  turned  back  again  into  Egypt.  Children  !
for  the  love  of  Chrift,  look  to  yourfelves  each  of  you,
and  fee  how  it  {lands  with  you.  However  well  you
may  begin  in  virtue,  do  not  rely  upon  your  good  be-
ginning, for  all  your  piety  may  pafs  away  if  you  are
not  watchful.  Our  hearts  are  more  unftable  than  we
can  believe.

Some  are  at  firft  fo  zealous  for  all  righteoufnefs,
that  if  they  hear  an  idle  word,  or  witnefs  any  other
little  failing,  it  makes  them  angry  ;  but  when  they
are  a  little  older,  they  indulge  without  any  rebuke  of
confcience  in  fuch  levity,  evil-fpeaking,  and  often
malicious  and  fcornful  fpeeches,  that  they  not  only
caufe  others  vexation,  but  even  ferious  trouble  and
forrow,  and  never  even  give  it  a  thought  whether
they  may  have  done  fo,  but  behave  as  if  they  had
done  perfectly  right.

Some  are  at  nrft  fo  ftrong,  and  ready  to  withftand
temptation  and  afTaults,  that  they  are  not  even  afraid
of  the  Devil  :  yea,  they  would  fain  be  great  and  holy

Q3


Oftbofe  who
begin  with
great  courage
and  energy,


230


Sermon  for  the


yet  after-
war  di  fall
into  perverfe-
nefs  andfelf-
indulgence.


Of  the  con-
trary fort  of
men.


How  we  may
Jiff  over  the
reality  of  true
converjion.


martyrs  ;  yet  afterwards,  when  they  have  lived  for  a
while  among  holy,  pious  people,  you  would  hardly
meet  with  more  perverfe,  crofs-grained,  felt-willed
perfons.  Some  are  at  firft  fb  eager  to  take  upon
themfelves  all  manner  of  hardfhips  and  indignities,
that  the  feverities  and  felf-humiliation  of  thoie  with
whom  they  live  are  too  light  and  few  for  them  ;  but
after  they  have  travelled  this  road  for  a  while,  they
are  not  only  able  to  fubmit  to  the  ordinary  habits  of
others,  but  it  is  hardly  poflible  to  make  things  com-
fortable and  eafy  enough  for  them  to  prevent  their
complaining,  and  every  little  inconvenience  annoys
them.  Ah  !  what  would  not  be  needed  to  flop  their
murmuring  !

Very  different  from  thefe  are  many  pious,  warm-
hearted, fpiritual-minded  men,  who  find  the  crofs
very  hard  to  bear  at  firft,  but  in  a  fhort  time  make
great  progrefs,  and  become  a  moft  edifying  and  ufeful
pattern  to  others,  while  thoie  from  whom  too  much
was  expected  have  come  to  nothing.  Hence  we
muft  be  very  much  upon  our  guard  becaufe  of  our
inftability ;  we  know  not  what  may  overtake  us  in
time  to  come.

Dear  children,  that  each  of  you  may  be  able  in
fome  meafure  to  mark  whether  he  be  converted  or
not,  I  will  lay  open  to  you  a  little,  whereby  we  may
perceive  the  iincerity  of  our  own  converfion,  and
redemption  from  all  the  evil  which  our  Enemy  may
try  to  lead  us  into  by  his  various  incitements  to  fin.
In  our  baptifm  we  promifed  before  God  and  the
Church  to  withftand  all  fin,  and  to  ferve  God  in  all
holy  living.  But  afterwards  our  wicked  adverfary  led


Fourth  Sunday  after  Epipha?iy.


231


us  aftray  again,  fo  that  we  fell  afrem,  and  loft  the
grace  which  had  been  given  us ;  but  God  of  his  un-
Ipeakable  mercy  calls  us  again  to  a  new  repentance,
that  all  which  we  have  loft  may  be  reftored  unto  us.
But  herein  many  are  beguiled  by  the  Evil  One  into
deadly  error,  fo  that  they  mifs  this  opportunity  of
amendment ;  for  he  knows  how,  with  his  cunning
wiles,  to  cover  our  .old  fins  under  the  mantle  of  con-
verfion,  and  thus  to  fruftrate  all  a  man's  labour  and
toil.  That  we  may  be  the  better  able  to  escape  him,
I  will  give  you  fome  tokens  to  mark  which  man  is
truly  converted  and  which  is  not.

A  truly  converted  Chriftian  man  abides  in  a  fmcere
and  humble  confeffion  of  his  nothingnefs ;  all  his
deilre  is  that  none  mould  fet  him  above  others,  nor
yet  to  rule  over  others,  but  rather  to  be  fubject  in  all
meeknefs  to  another,  according  to  whole  will  he  may
fulfil  all  his  works.  He  thinks  lightly  of  himfelf  and
his  own  wifdom,  and  defires  in  all  things  to  take  the
loweft  place  ;  and  is  willing  to  take  advice,  and  inter-
prets everything  for  the  beft  ;  and  fimply  in  the  fear
of  God,  with  a  thankful  heart,  fulfils  all  that  which
he  is  bidden  or  counfelled,  or  that  others  beg  of  him
to  do.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  thofe  who  are  not
truly  converted  think  much  of  themfelves,  and  deem
all  their  works  and  fervices  of  great  value,  and  it  is
not  at  all  to  their  tafte  to  be  fubjecl:  to  others,  or  that
any  mould  have  a  right  to  command  them,  and  are
fond  of  reproving  others  unneceflarily,  and  of  dis-
courfmg  on  lofty  matters,  and  boaft  themfches
proudly  of  all  that  belongs  to  them,  and  yet  cover
all  this  under  a  fpecious  mow  of  piety  and  humility,

Q4


The  true  con-
vert has  a
deep  Jenje  of
bis  own
notbingnefs  ;


but  the  falje
are  arrogant,
contentious,
andfelf-   \
justifying.'


232


Sermon  for  the


The  true
converts  are
candid  and
generous  ;


but  the  falfe
are  fpiteful
andjneering.


The  true
converts  are
patient  and
long-Suffer-
ing i


but  the  f alfe
are  quarrel-
fome  and  cen-
forious.


The  truly
righteous  are
helpful  and
charitable  ;


that  men  may  not  take  it  amifs  of  them.  If  any
feem  to  put  a  flight  upon  them,  they  are  contentious,
and  defend  and  juftify  themfelves  to  the  utmoft  that
they  can.  They  are  arrogant  and  ambitious,  and  un-
yielding in  their  hardnefs  of  fpirit.  Thefe  are  all  {till
in  the  hands  of  the  Enemy,  yea,  did  they  wear  the
Pope's  tiara.

Thofe  who  are  truly  converted  are  kind-hearted  to
their  neighbours,  indulgent  from  brotherly  love,  praif-
ing  the  works  of  their  neighbours  as  far  as  they  can,
and  with  great  fmcerity  of  heart  rejoice  in  the  well-
being  of  their  neighbour,  and  lend  him  a  helping  hand
wherever  they  can,  and  have  great  fympathy  with  him
in  his  troubles ;  but  the  falfely-converted  are  fpiteful,
and  look  with  an  evil  eye  on  the  ufefulnefs  or  piety  of
others,  are  ready  to  breed  mifchief  with  a  taunt,  and
are  revengeful,  fneering,  and  puffed  up  in  their  own
conceits.

The  right  fort  of  men  are  patient  under  all  the
annoyance  and  injuflice  that  God  fuffers  to  befall
them,  and  bear  it  long  with  peaceable  tempers.
They  fpeak  mildly,  ufmg  foft  words,  and  are  wont
meekly  to  feek  reconciliation  with  thofe  who  have
done  them  wrong ;  but  the  falfe  burn  with  anger,
are  envious  of  others'  good  fortune,  flanderous,
quarrelfbme,  and  cenfbrious,  not  orderly  in  all  their
affairs,  and  full  of  murmuring  againft  all,  above
and  below  them,  who  do  not  conform  to  their
wifhes.

The  truly  righteous  are  ever  gentle  and  merciful,
ready  to  give  and  to  affift  as  far  as  they  are  able,
without  regard  to  their  own  advantage ;  for  they


— i


Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


233


defpife  the  perifhable  things  of  time,  and  maintain
their  love,  enjoyment,  and  cheerfulnefs  under  diftrefs,
poverty,  and  contempt,  being  eafily  contented  and
cheerful,  and  thankful  to  Almighty  God,  in  fpirit
looking  up  conftantly  to  God  who  preferves  and  fuf-
tains  them,  and  cafting  behind  them  all  unprofitable
earthly  anxieties,  that  they  may  give  the  more  heed  to
the  things  of  God  and  eternity.  But  the  falfe  burn
like  a  furnace  with  the  defire  of  temporal  things,  and
feek  their  own  pleafure  and  eafe  when  and  how  they
may,  and  often  fteal  time  and  other  things  for  it,
that  they  may  not  be  difcovered  by  their  fuperiors ;
or  if  they  can  no  longer  conceal  their  practices,  then
they  indulge  in  them  with  an  obftinate  bold  face,  and
fteal  time  for  themfelves  mameleffly  in  the  teeth  of
their  mafters.  They  want  to  have  praife  and  earthly
reward  for  all  that  they  do,  and  if  they  are  not
honoured  and  thought  highly  of,  they  become  like
one  pofTefled,  and  openly  or  fecretly  do  all  the  harm
they  can  for  fpite  and  vexation.  They  are  always
hoping  to  receive  a  worldly  and  corruptible  reward  for
their  religious  profeffions,  and  are  often  feduced  into
actual  deceit  and  lying,  in  their  ftruggle  to  get
honour  or  to  fave  their  reputation.

The  upright  are  careful  to  fill  up  their  time  induf-
trioufly,  with  good  and  ufeful  undertakings  to  the
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  their  neighbours,
rejoicing  in  fpirit  as  they  exercife  themfelves  in  good
works,  endeavouring  to  do  all  things  well,  and  con-
tinue with  hearty  truft  in  God,  fteadfaft  in  goodnefs.
The  falfe  converts  are  conftantly  indolent  and  half-
hearted in  their  work,  wavering,  ill-mannered,  eafily


but  the  falfe
love  to  keep
things  for
tbemfelves,


whereby  they
are  often  led
into  grievous
fin.


The  truly
upright  are
induftrious
and  careful
of  their  time  ;


but  the  falfe
are  indolent
and  cowardly.


234


Sermo?i  for  the


The  true
converts  are
difcreet  and
temperate  t


tut  tbefalfe
are  given  to
felf-indul-
gence.


Of  the  evils
that  do  fpring
from  luxu-
rious habits.


difheartcncd,    and     altogether    drowfy,     their    minds
lying  wafte  and  their  hearts  undifciplined.

The  true  converts  are  moderate  and  decorous  in
the  fatisfying  of  their  natural  wants,  fhunning  all
excefs,  and  if  they  by  accident  tranfgrefs,  avoiding  it
for  the  future.  By  moderation  in  eating,  they  keep
their  faculties  clear  and  under  control ;  and  above  all,
they  moft  earneftly  guard  againft  any  excefs  in  drink-
ing. But  falfe  profefTors  are  given  to  eating  and
drinking,  yet  they  can  never  fully  fatisfy  their  de-
fires,  and  are  unthankful  to  God  for  the  food  He
gives  them.  Without  reftraint  or  good  manners,
they  cram  their  bodies,  whereby  they  often  bring  on
grievous  ficknefTes,  and  they  feek  their  pleafiire  without
fhame  wherever  they  can.  And  after  excefs  at  table,
fbme  give  way  to  unfeemly  levity  in  words  and  ges-
tures, and  inconvenient  jefting,  and  telling  and  hear-
ing all  manner  of  tales.  Others  become  quarrelfome,
brawling,  and  fo  noify,  that  to  hear  their  fenfelefs
cries  you  would  think  them  afTes,  not  men.  Some
become  fo  fleepy  and  lazy  after  dinner.,  that  they
could  fcarcely  repeat  the  Lord's  Prayer  without  a
blunder ;  and  in  general,  floth  and  the  like  commonly
proceed  from  ftrong  drinks  and  over-feeding.  Hence
it  is  that  all  holy  men  have  infifted  fo  ftrongly  upon
fimplicity  in  food  and  drink,  that  they  might  give  no
caufe  in  themfelves  or  others  to  fuch  infirmities.  But
now,  alas  !  it  has  gone  fb  far,  that  even  the  clergy,  for
the  moft  part,  cannot,  or  rather  will  not,  content
themfelves  even  with  rich  men's  fare ;  and  from  this
caufe  their  blindnefs  has  grown  fo  great  that  it  is  rare
now-a-days  to  find  one  who  is  really  aware  of  the


Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


235


dangers  from  this  fource  to  which  he  is  expofed  by
the  aiTaults  or  fuggeftions  of  the  Devil.  For  the
adverfary  is  apt  to  bring  thefe  men  fboner  than  they
think  for  into  an  inclination  towards,  or  even  to  com-
mit afts  of  foul  uncleannefs,  by  defiling  their  heart
with  obfcene  thoughts  and  evil  lufts ;  and  in  this  way
they  often  fin  groffly,  and  provoke  God  more  than
they  believe.  And  then  the  tumult  of  evil  defires
within  makes  them  to  be  unfit  for  good  works,  and
difpleafmg  to  God  and  holy  men ;  and  they  are  fo
toiled,  and  driven,  and  blinded  by  paffion,  that  they
actually  try  to  quench  it  in  riotous  company,  and  in
eating  and  drinking.  This  leads  to  inordinate  merri-
ment and  light  difcourfe,  which  are  generally  wont  to
eftrange  a  man  fo  much  from  all  godly  thoughts,  that
afterwards  he  can  hardly  read  a  verfe  with  devotion  ;
and  in  his  very  prayers  the  Devil  brings  the  fcenes  he
haswitnefled  and  the  language  he  has  heard  fo  vividly
before  him,  that  he  can  fcarce  hold  in  his  tittering
and  laughing.

The  righteous  and  truly  converted  men  are  fb
fhamefaced  and  chafte  of  heart  before  God  and  the
angels,  that  they  would  rather  die  than  conceive  an
impure  image  in  their  hearts,  and  with  all  watchful-
nefs  they  preferve  their  mind  pure  and  unfullied,  and
they  diligently  keep  all  their  fenfes  and  members
under  ftricl:  and  conftant  control,  infomuch  that  they
will  hardly  pay  any  attention  to  their  own  bodies,
except  for  fafety  and  cleanlinefs ;  and  for  the  better
preferving  of  their  purenefs  of  mind,  they  chaftife
their  bodies  with  fafting,  and  watching,  and  toil,
exerciilng  conftant  prayerfulncfs  and  truft  in  God,  in


The  true
converts  are
pure  of  'heart


236     Sermon  for  Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


but  tbefalfe
do  let  their
thoughts  run

wild,


which  oft-
times  leads
them  into
outward  Jin
alfo.


How  we

Jbould  all
take  heed  to
our  goings
that  our  foot-
Jlepsjlip  not.


whom  all  their  help  lies.  But  the  falfe  of  heart  do  not
fee  much  harm  in  looking  at  and  dwelling  on  evil,
fmml  thoughts  and  images  in  their  hearts ;  hence  they
often  come  into  fuch  perturbation  of  foul  and  body,
that  they  ftand,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  gate  of  hell ;  yea,
they  often  fall  fo  deep,  as  to  give  confent  to  fin  with
their  heart,  and  would  actually  fulfil  all  wickednefs
if  the  opportunity  arofe.  So  unthinkingly  do  they  fall
through  love  of  themfelves,  in  feeking  the  pleafure
of  the  body !  Some  of  thefe  become  fo  hardened,
and  reftlefs,  and  maddened  with  the  fenfe  of  reftraint,
that  they  come  to  hate  God  for  having  forbidden  the
lufts  of  the  flefh,  and  wifh  He  did  not  know  of  their
fins,  or  was  not  able  to  punim  them,  which  is  as
much  as  to  wifh  that  there  were  no  God.

And  now,  dear  children,  confider  how  you  ftand ;
and,  feeing  the  perils  which  befet  us  all,  let  no  one  be
too  fecure  or  too  bold,  but  let  each  look  to  himfelf  in
fear ;  and  however  w7ell  it  may  be  writh  him  now,  let
him  not  truft  in  his  goodnefs ;  and  however  deeply  he
may  have  fallen,  or  however  far  he  may  have  wan-
dered, let  him  now  turn  and  be  converted  of  a  truth,
for  the  path  to  all  goodnefs  ftands  yet  open  to  him  fo
long  as  God  fpares  him  in  life.  That  we  may  all
enter  therein,  may  God  help  us  !  Amen.


VIII.


Sermon  for  the  Sixth  Sunday  after  Epiphany,

(From  the  Gofpel  for  St.  Matthias'-day,   24th  February.)


Of  the  proper  marks  of  true  humility.


MATT.   xi.   29. —  "Learn  of  Me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."


HRIST,  our  blefTed  Lord,  the  true  matter
and  teacher  of  all  art  and  virtue,  and  a
pattern  of  all  perfection,  when  He  came
down  from  Heaven  to  inftrucl:  us  poor
ignorant  men,  did  not  fee  fit  to  make  ufe
ot  great  fubtleties,  or  myfterious  and  ingenious  ftate-
ments  of  truth  ;  but  in  fhort,  plain,  fimple  words  He
delivered  to  us  a  maxim,  and  gave  us  a  very  fhort,
eafy  leflbn,  which  we  were  well  able  to  learn.  Now
this  ftood  written  in  the  book  of  His  holy  hu-
manity, in  large,  diftincl  letters,  eafy  to  be  read,  and
runs  thus  :  "  Learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly
"  in  heart/'

What  fhorter,  eafier,  more  intelligible  leflbn  could
be  fet  us  ?  But  we  muft  give  our  minds  with  willing
induftry  to  read  it  over  and  over  again  attentively,  and
praclife  it  in  our  life,  ever  looking  to  the  admirable
model  of  the  divine  humanity  of  Chrift,  whole  whole
life  was  not  only  meek  and  humble,  but  whofe  words,
ways,  walk,  and  all  that  ever  He  did,  are  fimply  the


CbrijTi
leJJ'ons  eafy
and  plain.


Sermon  for  the


Cbri/t's
whole  life  an
illujiration  of
humility.


Of  the  tokens
of  true  hu-
mility.


No  outward
office  regarded
as  too  mean.


Faults  readily
acknowledged.


illuftration  of  this  doctrine.  Hence  He  chofe  at  the
beginning  fuch  fcholars  and  difciples  as  were  fpecially
fitted  to  learn  this  doctrine,  and  thefe  were  the  holy
Apoftles,  and  His  blefled  mother,  who  faid  when  fhe
had  conceived  Him  :  "  He  hath  regarded  the  lowli-
"  nefs  of  His  handmaiden."  Thus  He  fays,  in  the
Gofpel  for  this  day,  "  I  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord
"  of  Heaven  and  earth,  becaufe  Thou  haft  hid  thefe
"  things  from  the  wife  and  prudent"  (that  is  from  the
proud),  "  and  haft  revealed  them  unto  babes  "  (that  is
to  the  humble).  From  this  we  gather  that  none  but
the  humble  are  able  to  receive  the  hidden  things  of
God.  Therefore,  dear  children,  that  we  may  obtain
this  grace,  and  the  better  learn  this  leffon,  we  fhall
now  confider  fome  tokens  of  true  lowlineis  which  is
never  without  meeknefs,  and  thefe  are  the  following :

He  who  fmcerely  defires  to  become  lowly  of  heart,
muft  not  be  afhamed  of  performing  any  outward  office
fuch  as  the  worldly  heart  thinks  mean  and  humiliating;
for  as  it  is  a  fure  token  of  converfion  from  fin  that  it
becomes  hateful  to  the  man,  fo  it  is  a  fign  of  true
repentance,  when  he  is  ready  in  all  things  to  take  the
meaneft  place,  if  that  he  may  attain  to  that  true
lowlinefs  of  heart  which  is  feated  inwardly  in  the
foul.  And  he  who  will  go  forward  in  this  blefled
path  muft  faithfully  examine  himfelf,  and  to  this
end  God  alfo  will  beftow  on  him  fuch  great  grace  as
he  has  never  had  before.

He  muft  always  be  ready  to  acknowledge  himfelf
in  fault  towards  whomfoever  it  may  be,  and  efteem
others  better  than  himfelf;  for  by  fo  doing  the  loving
heart  can  beft  foften  the  difpofitions  of  men,  and


Sixth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


239


touch  their  hearts,  and  win  them  over  to  meeknefs.
And  although  he.  be  fometimes  not  juftly  to  be
reckoned  as  in  fault  at  all,  yet  knowing  that  he
might  have  done  the  wrong,  he  mall  always  behave
himfelf  humbly,  for  the  fake  of  love,  to  the  glory  of
God,  feeing  that  God  has  forgiven  him  fins  ere  he
committed  them  ;  for  it  is  equally  an  acl:  of  mercy
to  forgive  fins,  or  to  preferve  us  from  finning.

In  the  third  place,  it  belongs  to  a  lowly  heart  to  be
kindly  affected  towards  all,  not  with  a  partial  love ;
that  is,  not  to  mow  more  kindnefs  to  one  than
another,  to  friends  more  than  ftrangers,  but  to  do
good  to  all  for  God's  fake,  as  our  neighbours,  not
from  mere  natural  affection,  but  to  beftow  on  all  a
free,  generous  love  (like  our  Father  in  Heaven,  "  who
"  maketh  his  fun  to  rife  on  the  evil  and  the  good,
"  and  fendeth  rain  on  the  juft  and  on  the  unjuft"),
and  alfb  to  love  each  according  to  his  worthinefs.

In  the  fourth  place,  it  is  necefTary  to  lowlinefs  of
heart  that  we  diveft  and  difencumber  ourfelves  of  all
things,  that  we  may  cleave  only  to  our  merciful  God,
and  become  one  with  Him  ;  for  God  will  not  and
cannot  unite  Himfelf  or  dwell  with  a  worldly  heart.
Therefore  let  a  man  bow  himfelf  to  the  earth  beneath
God  and  his  creatures,  in  felf-annihilation  inward
and  outward ;  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  forfaking
all  things,  and  putting  away  the  creature.  The  fifth
token  of  true  lowlinefs  of  heart  is  to  know  how  to
fuffcr  to  the  glory  of  God,  for  fincere  love  of  God,
fimply  hoping,  believing,  and  trufting  in  Him.

Thus  a  lowly  walk  confifts  in  three  things  ;  in
patient  endurance,  in  giving  up  out  of  love  and  faith,


A  generous
and  impartial
love  towards
all.


A  readinefi
to  Jujfer  for
the  glory  of
God.


24°    Sermon  for  the  Sixth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.


and  in  hope  towards  God.  And  from  thefe  flows  the
fenfe  of  our  own  wretchednefs,  the  knowledge  of  our
Creator,  and  a  will  wholly  refigned  to  God,  not  for
our  own  fake,  but  for  the  glory  of  God.  May  God
help  us  to  learn  thus  to  be  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.
Amen  !


IX.


Sermon  for  Septuagefima  Sunday.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


In  this  Sermon  following  we  are  taught  bow  we  muft  perpetually
prefs  forward  towards  our  highejl  good,  without  paufe  or  rejl ;
and  how  we  mujl  labour  in  the  fpiritual  vineyard  that  it  may
bring  forth  good  fruit.

MATT.  xx.  I .  —  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man  that  is  an  houfeholder,  which
went  out  early  in  the  morning  to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard."


houfeholder  went  out  early  at  the  firft
hour,  and  again  at  the  third  and  at  the
fixth  hours,  and  hired  labourers  for  a  penny
a  day.  But  when  it  was  quite  late  in  the
evening  he  went  out  again,  and  ilill  found
men  {landing  idle.  Then  he  faid  unto  them,  Why
ftand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?  Go  ye  alfo  into  the
vineyard,  and  whatfoever  is  right  I  will  give  you.

Dear  children,  this  houfeholder  fignifies  our  Lord
Jefus  Chrift ;  His  houfe  is  the  heavens,  and  this  earth,
and  purgatory,  and  hell.  He  faw  that  all  nature  had
gone  aftray,  infbmuch  that  His  lovely  vineyard  lay  a
barren  wafte ;  and  man,  whom  He  had  made  to
poflefs  this  fair  and  fruitful  vineyard,  had  wandered
far  away  from  Him,  and  left  this  excellent  vineyard
to  be  untilled.  But  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  deter-
mined to  invite  men  to  return  into  this  vineyard  for

R


Of  the  boufe-
bolder  who
went  out  to
hire  labourers
into  bu  vine-
yard*


The  boufe-
bolder  is  our
Lord  Jefus
Cbrijl.


242  Sermon  for  Septuagejima  Sunday.


In  tobat  fenfe
He  went  out
early.


Of  tbofe  tobo
are  [landing
idle  both  from
the  world  and
from  God.


which  He  had  created  him,  and  went  out  early  to
that  end.

Dear  children,  in  one  fenfe  Jefus  Chrift  went  out
early  from  the  divine  bofom  of  the  Father,  and  yet
evermore  dwells  there.  But  in  another  fenfe,  He
went  out  early  in  human  nature,  that  He  might  hire
us  into  His  fervice,  and  bring  us  back  again  into  His
noble  vineyard,  and  fo  there  might  be  labourers  to  till
it.  And  He  went  out  at  the  firft  hour,  and  alfo  at  the
third,  and  fixth,  and  ninth  hours.  And  at  the  eleventh
hour  He  went  out  once  more,  and  again  found  men
Handing  idle,  to  whom  he  fpoke  roughly,  faying,  Why
ftand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?  Then  they  anfwered,
No  man  hath  hired  us,  Lord.  Thefe  idle  men
whom  no  man  hath  hired  are  thofe  who  are  flill  in
their  original,  uncorrupt,  and  innocent  {late,  and
hence  they  are  rightly  called  blefled ;  for  God  iaw  as
He  looked  on  them,  that  they  were  unhired ;  that  is,
not  held  in  fervitude  to  the  world  and  the  creatures.
There  are  fbme  who  are  God's  hired  labourers,  and
thefe  are  in  a  higher  fenfe  free,  and  at  large,  and  not
held  in  fervitude  to  the  world  or  the  creature.  But
thefe  of  whom  we  are  now  fpeaking  are  flill  {landing
idle,  which  ought  not  to  be  ;  that  is,  they  are  {landing
in  apathy,  cold,  lovelefs,  and  devoid  of  grace ;  for  fo
long  as  a  man  is  not  {landing  in  the  grace  of  God,  he
is  {landing  alone  in  nature.  And  if  fuch  a  man  (were
it  poflible,  which  it  is  not)  were  to  fulfil  all  the  good
works  which  have  ever  been  done  in  this  world,  he
would  {lill,  neverthelefs,  be  living  altogether  idly,  un-
profitably,  and  in  vain,  and  it  would  avail  him  nothing.
Again,  this  going  out  early  in  the  morning  is  a  type


Sermon  for  Septuagefima  Sunday.


243


of  the  dawning  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the  foul ;  for
the  morning  is  the  end  of  the  night,  when  the  dark-
nefs  vanifhes,  and  the  day-fpring  of  grace  arifes  in  the
foul  of  man,  and  God  fays,  Wherefore  ftand  ye  here
idle  ?  Go  ye  into  my  vineyard,  and  what  is  right,
that  will  I  give  you.

But  the  men  entered  after  a  very  unequal  manner
into  the  vineyard.  One  clafs  are  thofe  who  are  mere
beginners ;  thefe  work  in  God's  vineyard  with  out-
Ward  acls,  and  bodily  exercifes,  and  felf-impofed  tafks,
and  are  perfuaded  that  they  are  accomplifhing  great
good  works  with  their  fatting,  watching,  and  praying ;
while  they  never  look  to  the  purity  of  their  motives,
but  retain  their  love  of  earthly  enjoyments,  and  their
own  likes  and  diflikes.  And  therefrom  do  fpring  up
injuftice,  falfe  judgment,  and  many  faults ;  fiich  as
pride,  earthly  or  fpiritual,  bitternefs  or  enmity,  and
more  of  the  like,  that  greatly  hinder  the  outpouring
of  divine  grace,  if  we  allow  thefe  untoward  difpofitions
to  break  forth  in  words  or  actions.  Let  one  who  has
thus  been  building  upon  a  falfe  foundation  give  heed
to  himfelf,  and  watch  how  he  may  beft  condemn  and
deftroy  this  inward  falfehood,  that  it  lead  not  to  his
own  ruin,  nor  caufe  harm  to  thofe  with  whom  he
may  hold  converfe.

A  fecond  clafs  of  men  who  have  likewife  entered
into  God's  vineyard,  are  thofe  who  are  above  living
for  mere  temporal  things,  and  have  alfb  overcome
their  grofler  fins,  and  have  turned  their  minds  towards
higher  things.  Their  life  is  fpent  in  the  rational
practice  of  virtue ;  and  in  this  they  find  fuch  pleafure
and  delight,  that  they  are  contented  with  their  condi-

R2


Of  the  be-
ginners in
God's  vine-
yard who
think  much
of  outward
works.


Of  the  fecond
clafs,  who  find
pleafure  in
well-doing
without
thinking  of
God  as  its
end.


244  Sermon  for  Septuagefima  Sunday.


Of  tie  third
dafs  of  truly
noble  men,
who  feek
nothing  but
God  Himfelf.


How  they
refer  all
things  to
God.


tion,  and  mifs  the  higheft  and  fublimeft  truth  ;  for
they  abide  in  the  prefent  fenfe  of  fatisfadlion,  and  do
not  pant  to  reach  upward  through  and  above  this
enjoyment  to  the  eternal  God  Himfelf.  For  our
delight  ought  to  be  in  God  Himfelf,  not  in  thefe  gifts
of  His.

But  the  third  clafs  of  thofe  who  go  into  God's
vineyard  are  truly  noble  and  highly-favoured  men,
who  in  deed  and  truth  rife  above  all  creature  things
in  God's  vineyard ;  for  they  feek  and  love  nothing
but  fimply  God  in  Himfelf.  They  neither  look  to
pleafure,  nor  to  any  felfim  end,  nor  to  that  which  is  a
mere  outflow  from  God ;  for  their  inner  man  is
wholly  plunged  in  God,  and  they  have  no  end  but
the  praife  and  glory  of  God,  that  His  good  pleafure
alone  may  be  fulfilled  in  and  through  them  and  in  all
creatures.  Hence  they  are  able  to  bear  all  things  and
to  refign  all  things,  for  they  receive  all  things  as  from
God's  hand,  and  offer  up  to  Him  again  in  fimplicity
of  heart  all  that  they  have  received  from  Him,  and
do  not  lay  claim  to  any  of  His  mercies.  They  are
like  a  river  that  flows  out  with  every  tide,  and  then
again  haflens  back  to  its  fource.  So  do  thefe  men
refer  all  their  gifts  back  to  the  fource  whence  they
proceed,  and  flow  back  again  unto  it  themfelves  like-
wife.  For  inafmuch  as  they  carry  all  the  gifts  of  God
back  unto  their  divine  fountain,  and  do  not  claim  any
ownerfhip  in  them,  either  for  pleafure  or  advantage,
and  do  not  purpofe  this  nor  that,  but  fimply  God
alone,  God  muft  of  neceffity  be  their  only  refuge  and
flay,  outward  or  inward.

But  although  this  aim  carry  a  man  fo  completely


Sermon  for  Septuagejlma  Sunday.  245


out  of  himfelf,  and  be  perfectly  fimple  and  directed
to  nothing  but  God,  yet  nature  has  fbme  regard  to
herfelf,  of  which  a  man  cannot  be  wholly  bereft.
Whether  he  choofe  it  or  no  (this  is  a  fimple  facl:),  he
cannot  but  always  defire  to  feel  God's  prefence ;  and
fb  too  it  is  a  natural  inflincl:  to  wifh.  to  be  happy.
But  this  defire  fhould  be  far  from  his  ftrongcfl,  and
the  leafl  part  of  what  he  takes  into  the  account  in
his  purpofes.  [*And  here  I  wifh  to  rebuke  all  thofe
religious  perfons  who  are  leaning  on  their  good  works,
and  as  it  were  keep  a  right  of  property  in  them,
thinking  themfelves  free  to  do  or  not  to  do  them.
For  whenever  they  fee  or  imagine  any  new  under-
taking or  religious  practice  which  can  afford  them
inward  or  outward  fatisfa&ion,  they  give  themfelves
to  it  with  prayer,  and  ftriving,  and  weeping,  and
watching.  And  as  long  as  they  find  pleafure  in  it,
they  cannot  have  enough  of  it ;  but  if  this  fenfe  of
pleafure  and  interefl  paffes  away,  their  devotion  pafTcs
away  likewife,  and  they  come  to  diflike  their  good
and  holy  work,  and  then  they  grow  lukewarm  and
carclefs,  performing  all  they  do  without  devotion.  All
this  is  owing  to  their  not  having  had  a  fingle  eye  to
God's  glory.  They  have  been  prompted  and  fuftained
in  their  labour  by  the  pleafure  it  has  yielded  them,
and  now  this  has  fled.  For  we  muft  not  feck  enjoy-
ment and  fwectnefs  in  the  gifts  of  God,  either  in  holy
exercifes,  or  in  words  or  works ;  but  we  muft  take
delight  in  God  alone,  and  not  in  His  gifts.


*  The  parts  enclofed  between  brackets  are  wanting  in  the  Strafburg  MSS. ;
but,  according  to  the  Frankfort  Edition  of  1826,  exill  in  the  edition  of  1498.

n3


Of  tbofe  who
treat  their
good  works
as  their  own
property.


Sermon  for  Scptuagejima  Sunday.


We  muft  not
)eek  Jolace  in
/aints  or
angels,  but
it:  God  only.


We  are  not,

therefore,
Jor  bidden  to

honour  God's
jervants.


There  are,  however,  forne  religious  perfons  who  will
not  be  left  without  folace  or  ftay .  For  rather  than  be  left
fimply  and  truly  without  a  folace,  deftitute  and  bare,
they  fet  up  for  themfelves  heavenly  beings,  fuch  as  the
faints  and  angels,  and  claim  a  fort  of  right  to  them  as
a  fource  of  fpiritual  enjoyment,  and  look  to  them  as
a  confolation.  Thus  they  will  fay  :  "  Such  a  faint  or
"angel  is  dear  to  me  before  all  others;"  and  if  you  throw
down  this  prop  of  their  own  raifmg,  and  fay  that  they
ought  not  to  fpeak  thus,  you  leave  them  little  peace ;
nay,  they  are  greatly  difquieted ;  and  this  is  worft  of
all,  and  doing  God  a  great  wrong.  Thou  muft  not
place  thy  reliance  on  any  creature  in  heaven  or  on
earth,  nor  repofe  nor  lean  on  any  fave  God  alone.  If
thou  didft  truft  Him  really  and  truly,  all  His  faints
would  be  truly  and  rightly  honoured  and  reverenced
by  thee ;  for  the  departed  faints  are  always  abforbed
in  the  divine,  fatherly  abyfs  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  For
I  tell  thee  by  that  Truth,  which  is  God  Himfelf,  if
thou  art  ever  to  become  a  man  after  the  will  of  God,
every  thing  muft  die  in  thee  to  which  thou  art  cleav-
ing, whether  it  be  God's  gifts,  or  the  faints,  or  the
angels,  or  even  all  that  would  afford  thee  confolation
for  thy  fpiritual  wants  :  all  muft  be  given  up.  If  God
is  to  mine  in  on  thy  foul  brightly,  without  a  cloud,  and
accomplim  His  noble  and  glorious  will  in  thee,  thou
muft  be  free  and  unencumbered  by  all  that  affords
thee  comfort  out  of  God.

We  are  not,  therefore,  forbidden  to  honour  the
bleffed  faints,  but  only  to  claim  any  property  in  their
merits  for  the  fake  of  our  own  delight  in  them  ;  for  I
tell  thee,  that  if  thou  hadft  all  manner  of  heavenly


Sermon  for  Septuageftma  Sunday.


247


grace  from  God,  and  didft  poflefs  the  good  works  of
all  mankind,  fo  foon  as  thou  fhouldft  claim  it  as  thine
own,  for  the  fake  of  thine  own  delight  therein,  that
moment  all  this  goodnefs  would  be  fullied  and  defaced
with  thine  own  evil.  For  a  true  and  faithful  fervant  of
God  mall  be  always  preffing  upward  to  what  is  before
him,  not  fuffering  himfelf  to  be  held  back  by  comfort
or  pleafure,  joy  or  fbrrow,  wealth  or  poverty.  Through
all  this  he  mall  urge  onward,  till  he  come  unto  the
infinite  ocean  of  the  Godhead.  And  therein  he  mall
be  loft  without  his  own  knowledge,  and  dazzled  by
excefs  of  light  and  love.  There  it  mall  be  given  him
to  know  all  that  belongs  to  true  perfection.]

A  good  and  devout  man  lhall  be  like  the  labourer
in  the  vineyard,  who  works  all  the  day  long,  and
neverthejefs  he  muft  take  food.  But  the  labour  is
long  and  the  meal  barely  lafts  an  hour,  and  he  only
takes  it  for  the  fake  of  the  work.  He  muft  eat  that
he  may  work,  and  the  nourimment  he  takes  difrufes
itfclf  through  every  part  of  his  body,  continually
fupplying  it  with  frem  ftrcngth,  which  again  is  con-
fumed  in  his  labour ;  and  when  it  has  been  confumed
with  labour  he  eats  again  a  little,  that  he  may  again
coniume  it  by  working  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  So  is
it  with  a  noble-minded  man.  When  he  feels  an
inclination  in  himfelf  to  enjoy  God  or  His  heavenly
grace  and  what  is  thereof,  let  him  for  a  little  while
icek  and  purpofe  his  own  good,  but  not  longer  than  is
needful  for  the  nourifhing  of  his  foul,  that  he  may
confume  his  fpiritual  ftrcngth  again  in  labour ;  and
when  it  has  thus  been  fpent  in  the  nobleft  of  all  ways,
from  a  love  flowing  back  unto  God  who  has  infpired

B4


How  fpiritual
enjoyment  is
to  be  to  us  as
food,  taken
that  we  may
have  Jirengtb
to  labour.


248  Sermon  for  Septuagejima  Sunday.


If  we  do  fot
God  will
provide  for
all  our  wants.


How  the
noble/I  men
are  often
outwardly
infignificant
like  the  vine.'


it,  then  the  man  muft  go  for  refremment  again  into
the  river  of  life  that  floweth  out  from  the  throne  of
God,  that  it  may  again  bring  forth  in  him  the  fruit
of  good  works.  All  thefe  Spiritual  men  who  thus
know  how  to  refign  or  to  return  again  unto  God,  with
their  body  and  their  fpirits,  the  gifts  that  He  has
mercifully  beftowed  on  them,  with  deep,  humble
felf-renunciation,  thefe  do  continually  grow  more
able  and  more  worthy  to  receive  bleffing  from  God.
Where  fuch  admirable,  god-like  men  are  to  be  found,
they  were  worthy,  as  none  elfe  are,  to  be  fed  with
gold  and  filver  and  fine  pearls,  and  the  beft  that  the
world  contains  as  their  heritage.  But  there  is  many
a  poor  noble  man  of  God,  who  has  none  of  all  thefe
things ;  let  fuch  an  one  humbly  caft  himfelf  on  the
all-powerful  God  and  truft  him  utterly ;  without
doubt  thy  heavenly  Father  will  and  muft  provide  thee
well,  yea,  wert  thou  hidden  in  a  rock.

Thefe  exalted  and  moft  noble  men  are  juft  like
the  wood  of  the  vine,  which  is  outwardly  hard  and
black  and  dry,  and  good  for  no  purpofe  whatever ;
and  if  we  had  never  feen  it  before,  we  mould  think
it  of  no  ufe  at  all,  and  good  for  nothing  but  to  be
thrown  into  the  fire,  and  burned.  But  in  this  dry
wood  of  the  vine,  there  lie  concealed  the  living
veins  of  fap,  and  power  of  yielding  the  nobleft  of
all  juices,  and  of  bringing  forth  a  greater  abundance
of  fruit  than  any  other  fort  of  wood  that  grows.
And  thus  it  is  with  thefe  beloved  and  lowly  children,
who  are  at  all  times  and  feafbns  plunged  in  God ;
they  are  outwardly  in  appearance  like  unto  black
rotten  wood,  feeming  unto  men  dry  and  unprofitable.


Sermon  for  Septuagefima  Sunday.  249


For  there  are  many  of  thefe  who  are  humble,  noways
remarkable  for  their  gifts,  outward  or  inward,  nor  for
any  extraordinary  works  or  fayings  or  exercifes  of  de-
votion, and  who  move  in  the  narroweft  sphere ;  but
living  veins  from  the  fountain  of  truth  lie  hidden
within  them,  forasmuch  as  they  have  afked  for  no
earthly  heritage,  but  God  is  their  lot  and  their  portion,
their  life  and  their  being.

Now  the  vine-drefTer  goes  out  and  prunes  the  vine,
lopping  off  the  wild  moots ;  for  if  he  neglected  this,
and  fuffered  them  to  remain  on  the  good  ftem,  the
whole  would  yield  bad,  four  wine.  So  likewife  mall
good  men  do :  they  mall  cut  off  from  themfelves
all  that  is  not  according  to  God's  order  in  their  conduct
or  difpofitions,  likings  or  diflikings,  and  deftroy  it  to
the  very  root ;  thou  malt  cut  away  all  evil  failings
from  thy  heart,  and  it  will  do  thee  no  harm,  either  in
head  or  in  hand,  or  any  member.  But  hold  thy
knife  ftill,  till  thou  haft  really  feen  what  ought  to  be
cut  off.  If  a  vine-drefler  be  not  {killed  in  his  art,  he
is  as  likely  to  crop  off  the  good  branches  which  bear
the  grapes  as  the  wild  moots,  and  thus  fpoil  the  vine-
yard. So  it  is  with  thofe  who  do  not  underftand  this
fpiritual  art ;  they  leave  the  roots  of  vice  and  evil
difpofitions  alive  in  the  heart,  and  hew  and  lop  at
poor  nature,  and  thereby  deftroy  this  noble  vineyard.
Nature  is  in  itfelf  good  and  noble,  why  fhouldft  thou
hew  away  aught  that  belongs  to  it  ?  For  I  tell  thee
that  when  the  time  is  come  for  it  to  yield  fruit  in  a
godly,  blefled,  devout  life,  then  it  will  be  feen  that
thou  haft  fpoiled  thy  nature.

After  this  the  labourer  binds  up  the  vine,  putting


How  the
vine-drejjer
prunes  the
vine.


We  muft  not
ufe  the  knife
on  nature,
but  on  vice.


How  tie


23°  Sermon  for  Septuagefitna  Sunday.


vine-drejjer
trains  the
vine.


So  muft  all
our  powers
be  trained
after  the
pattern  of
Cbri/Ps
example.


If  it  were  fo
with  us,  God


in  ftakes  ;  he  bends  the  upper  branches  down  towards
the  earth,  and  fattens  the  vine  to  a  ftrong  framework,
that  it  may  have  a  fupport.  This  is  a  type  of  the
fweet  and  holy  life,  the  facred  example  and  fufferings
of  our  blefled  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  for  thefe  and  nothing  of
our  own  mould  be  a  man's  flay.  For  the  higher  powers
of  his  reafbn  mall  be  drawn  down  into  due  control,
and  he  mall  fink  low  in  deep  fubmiffive  humility  be-
fore Our  Lord,  in  truth  and  not  with  hypocrify,  with
all  his  powers,  outward  and  inward.  For  when  both
the  appetites  of  the  body,  and  the  higheft  intellectual
powers  of  the  foul  are  thus  trained  and  bound  down,
each  in  its  own  place,  ib  that  neither  the  fenfes  nor
the  will,  nor  any  faculty,  is  left  too  free  and  too  proud,
but  they  are  at  all  times  controlled  and  trained  into
due  rightful  order  under  the  Divine  will,  and  man's
defire  at  all  times,  and  in  all  things,  is  to  be,  by  the
help  and  grace  of  God,  to  the  utmoft  of  his  power,
outwardly  and  inwardly  obedient  to  the  Divine  will,
without  contradiction,  in  all  that  the  Eternal  God,
our  Heavenly  Father,  has  determined  in  His  eternal
divine  counfels  ; — [and  when  all  the  powers  humbly
acl:  in  this  way,  in  dependence  upon  God,  whether
they  are  exerciled  or  kept  in  check, —  were  it  within  the
bounds  of  reafbnable  poffibility  that  a  man  could  be
confcious  of  pofleffing  all  the  good  works,  and  all  the
heavenly  graces  of  all  mankind,  and  yet  took  none  of
all  this  unto  himlelf,  but,  calling  nothing  his  own,
ftood  up  deftitute  and  bare,  in  free,  fimple  love  to
God,  as  if  all  this  goodnefs  belonged  to  another,  and
not  himfelf ; — Children,  wherever  fuch  noble  men  may
exift  or  live  in  this  age  of  grace,  in  them  may  the


Sermon  for  Septuagejima  Sunday.  251


Father  of  Heaven  truly  and  abfolutely  accomplifh  His
divine  and  myfterious  work  without  any  hindrance.
And  in  him  whofe  heart  is  not  fincerely  ftanding  thus
toward  God,  as  to  the  guiding  principle  of  his  life,  in
him,  doubt  not  that  this  holy,  divine  birth  cannot  be
truly  brought  to  pafs  or  be  made  fruitful.]

Afterward  the  vine-drefTer  digs  about  the  {terns  of
the  vine,  and  roots  out  all  noxious  weeds.  Thus  fhall
a  devout  man  dig  about  the  foil  of  his  own  heart  by
clofe  obfervation  and  tefting  of  his  own  principles,  to
fee  whether  there  be  aught  for  him  to  root  out.  And
if  he  find  anything,  let  him  that  moment  pluck  it  up,
however  trifling  or  unimportant  it  may  be,  that  the
beams  of  the  eternal  and  divine  fun  may  penetrate  the
farther  into  his  very  midft,  mining  with  unbeclouded
force,  and  fructifying  his  nobleft  powers.  For  thus
the  glorious  fun  draws  the  juices  outward  into  the
living  vefTels  which  lie  hidden  in  the  bark,  and  then
the  fair  clufters  begin  to  appear.  Ah  !  children,  if
man  knew  how  fo  to  tend  his  vine,  that  God's  fun
might  mine  in  on  and  vivify  his  foul,  what  fweet,  ex-
cellent, delicious  fruit  would  the  eternal  fun  draw
forth  from  him  !  For  the  lovely  fun  mines  with  all
its  fulnefs  into  him,  and  works  within  thefe  precious
clufters,  and  makes  them  flourifh  in  fweetnefs  and
beauty.  Their  blofToms  fend  forth  a  fweet  and  delicate
fragrance,  which  difpels  all  poifbnous  vapours  ;  neither
ferpent  nor  toad  can  endure  their  perfume,  when  the
eternal  divine  fun  fhines  direct  among  the  branches,
and  through  the  clufters.  The  fruit  is  fb  entirely  of
God's  producing,  and  flourifhes  in  fuch  beauty  and
richnefs,  in  pure  looking  up  to  God,  whofe  rays  dra\\


would  truly
accomplijh
His  work  in
and  with  us.


How  the

vine-drejjer
weedetb  the
vineyard.


How  t be  fun
maketb  the
vine  to
fruflifj.


Sermon  for  Septuagejima  Sunday.


How  the
divine  fun
ripenetb  the
fruits  of  the
foul.


forth  from  it  fiich  wondrous  and  delicious  favour  and
perfume,  that  it  needs  muft  deftroy  the  venom  of  the
old  ferpent ;  yea,  had  all  the  devils  in  hell,  and  all  the
men  on  earth  confpired  together,  they  would  not  be
able  in  the  leaft  to  injure  a  thoroughly  godly-minded
and  God-loving  man,  but  the  more  they  ftrive  to  in-
jure him,  the  deeper  he  is  rooted  and  the  higher  he  is
built  up  in  God  with  all  his  powers.  And  if  fuch  an
admirable  man,  bearing  his  precious  fruit,  were  to  be
caft  down  to  the  depths  of  hell,  he  muft  needs  turn
it  into  a  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  God  and  eternal
bleffednefs  would  exift  in  hell.  And  a  man  who  mould
bear  fuch  fruit  would  not  need  to  fear  in  anywife  all
the  reproach  that  could  be  heaped  upon  him.  When
we  have  no  aim  but  God,  nothing  can  part  us  from
Him,  or  lead  us  aftray.

Now  after  that  the  vine  has  been  well  pruned,  and
its  ftem  cleared  of  all  weeds,  the  glorious  fun  fhineth
yet  more  brightly,  and  cafteth  his  heat  on  the  precious
clufters,  and  thefe  grow  more  and  more  tranfparent,
and  the  fweetnefs  begins  to  difclofe  itfelf  more  and
more.  And  to  fuch  a  man  as  we  have  defcribed,
all  means  of  communication  between  God  and
his  foul  begin  after  a  time  to  grow  fo  tranfparent
that  the  rays  and  glances  of  the  divine  fun  reach  him
without  ceaiing,  that  is,  as  often  and  as  fbon  as  he
turns  himfelf  towards  them  in  feeling  and  thought.
This  divine  fun  mines  much  more  brightly  than  all
the  funs  in  the  firmament  ever  fhone ;  and  in  its
light  all  the  man's  ways,  and  works,  and  doings  are  fo
changed  into  its  image,  that  he  feels  nothing  to  be  fo
true  as  God,  with  a  certainty  that  is  rooted  in  the  very


Sermon  for  Septuagefima  Sunday.  253


midft  of  his  being,  yet  is  far  above  the  fphere  of  his
reafbn,  and  which  he  can  never  fully  exprefs,  for  it  is
too  deep  and  too  high  above  all  human  reafbn  to  be
explored  and  underftood.

After  this  the  vine-drefTer  loves  to  ftrip  off  the
leaves,  that  thus  the  fun  may  have  nothing  to  hinder
its  rays  from  pouring  on  the  grapes.  In  like  manner
do  all  means  of  grace  fall  away  from  this  man,  fuch
as  images  of  the  faints,  teachings,  holy  exercifes,  fet
prayers,  and  the  like.  Yet  let  none  caft  thefe  things
afide  before  they  fall  away  of  themfelves  through
divine  grace :  that  is  to  fay,  when  a  man  is  drawn  up
above  all  that  he  can  comprehend,  then  do  thefe
precious  and  divine  fruits  grow  more  fweet  and  de-
lightful than  either  fenfe  or  reafon  may  conceive,  and
it  is  poffible  for  him  to  be  carried  fb  far  that  his  fpirit
is  as  it  were  funk  and  loft  in  the  abyfs  of  the  Deity,
and  lofes  the  confcioufnefs  of  all  creature  diftinclions.
All  things  are  gathered  together  in  one  with  the
Divine  fweetnefs,  and  the  man's  being  is  fo  pene-
trated with  the  Divine  fubftance,  that  he  lofes  him-
felf  therein,  as  a  drop  of  water  is  loft  in  a  cafk  of  ftrong
wine.  And  thus  the  man's  fpirit  is  fo  funk  in  God
in  divine  union,  that  he  lofes  all  fenfe  of  diftin&ion ;
and  all  that  has  brought  him  to  this  point,  fuch  as  hu-
mility, the  feeking  God's  glory, — nay,  his  very  felf,—
lofes  its  name,  and  there  remains  a  fecret,  ftill  union,
without  cloud  or  colour.  And  all  good  purpofes  are
fufed  into  a  true  and  pure  onenefs,  and  a  real  but
filent  myftery,  fuch  as  human  powers  can  fcarce  ap-
prehend. [Children,  could  we  but  truly  ftand  in  this
holy  of  holies  for  an  hour  or  a  moment,  it  were  a


Of  the
ble/ednefs  of
utter  union
with  God.


How  one
moment  of


254  Sermon  for  Septuagefima  Sunday.


fucb  a  union
were  better
than  forty
years  of  out-
ward works.


thoufand  times  better  and  more  profitable  for  us,  and
more  pleafing  and  praifeworthy  in  the  fight  of  the
Eternal  God,  than  forty  years  fpent  in  your  own  felf-
impofed  tafks.]

That  we  may  thus  give  place  to  God,  [for  Him  to
do  His  work  in  us,  and  die  to  all  to  which  we  ought
to  die,  that  we  may  live  truly  and  only  to  that  to
which  we  ought  to  live,  if  this  exalted  work  of  God
is  to  be  accomplimed  in  us  and  through  us,]  may  He
help  us.  Amen  !


X.


Sermon  for  Afh  Wednefday.


GAL.  ii.  19.  —  "I  am  crucified  with  Chrift,  never thelefs  I  live;  yet  not  I,  but  Chrift

"  liveth  in  me."


HE  holy  Apoftle  Paul,  whofe  endeavours
towards  a  perfect  life  were  all  founded
upon  endurance  and  true  refignation,
mows  us  in  himfelf  how  a  righteous,  fpi-
ritual  man,  being  nailed  with  Chrift  to
the  crofs,  and  whofe  fufferings  bring  forth  in  him  the
living  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  now  no  longer  liveth  through
himfelf,  but  Chrift  liveth  in  him,  as  is  taught  in  the
words  which  he  writes  to  the  Galatians,  faying :  "I
"  am  crucified  with  Chrift :  neverthelefs  I  live ;  yet
"  not  I,  but  Chrift  liveth  in  me."  Again  he  con-
tinues :  "  The  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flefh,  I  live
"  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me  and
"  gave  Himfelf  for  me."  In  thefe  words  we  have  a
wholefome  admonition  to  ftrive  after  iuch  a  life  as
that  Chrift  may  be  glorified  in  us,  and  His  bitter  grief
and  crofs  may  be  manifefted  in  our  mortal  body,  to
the  bettering  of  our  neighbour  and  ourfelves.  Where-
fore we  ought  to  obferve  here,  that  though  there  be
many  kinds  of  crofs  and  fuffcring,  of  which  each  has
its  own  length,  and  depth,  and  breadth,  and  height,  yet
there  is  only  one  on  which  our  eternal  redemption


How  Paul
could  Jay  that
be  was  cru-
cified with
Cbrijf.


Though  there
be  many
croj/es,  yet
there  is  but
one  that  bring-
etb  falvation.


Sermon  for  Jijli  Wednefday.


Of  tbofe  who
are  banging
on  the  crofs
of  outward
works.


was  accomplimed ;  that  is,  the  crofs  of  Chrift's  hu-
manity, which  again  points  us  to  a  ftill  higher  crofs
(yet,  fb  to  fpeak,  without  crofs  and  pain),  of  His
divine  nature.  So  likewife  there  were  two  crofTes
which  ftood  befide  the  crofs  of  Chrift ;  the  one  bear-
ing the  malefactor  on  His  right  hand,  and  the  other  on
His  left.  From  all  which  we  purpofe  to  gather  fbmc
fpiritual  emblems  that  may  help  us  to  difcern  what
fort  of  crofs  and  grief  it  is  that  we  are  bearing,  and  to
which  of  thefe  three  crofles  it  may  be  compared.
This  we  may  tell  by  the  following  tokens.

By  the  crofs  of  the  malefactor  on  Chrift's  left  hand
may  be  underftood  thofe  who  have  made  a  religious
profeffion,  and  are  hanging  on  the  crofs  of  continual
exercifes  and  outward  aufterities  which  they  have
bound  themfelves  to  pracliife ;  they  have  well-de-
ferved  this  crofs,  but  it  brings  them  no  profit,  becaufe
they  have  not  died  on  it  to  felf-will  and  other  fmful
failings.  It  is  poffible  for  them  after  this  crucifixion
to  go  down  to  eternal  torment  with  the  unjuft  male-
factor ;  fo  that,  to  ufe  a  common  proverb,  they  drag
the  barrow  here  and  the  waggon  in  the  world  to
come.  The  height  of  this  crofs  is  the  fpiritual  pride
and  {elf-complacency  which  they  have  in  the  ftriclnefs
of  their  life,  on  account  of  which  they  fet  themfelves
up  above  others ;  for  none  can  be  good  enough  for
them,  and  they  lay  great  ftrefs  on  fuch  aufterities,
defpifmg  all  who  do  not  lead  fuch  a  life  as  themfelves.

St.  Auguftine  faid  to  his  brethren  :  "  Dear  brethren,
"  rather  than  you  mould  fay  or  think  yourfelves  to  be
"  different  from  or  better  than  other  men,  I  would
"  that  you  mould  return  to  the  world.  You  ought  to


Sermon  for  AJh  Wednejclay.


257


"  fay,  as  Chrift  did  by  the  mouth  of  his  Prophet
"  David  :  '  I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man  ;  a  reproach  of
"  men,  and  defpifed  of  the  people  ;'  and  with  the
"  publican  :  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  {inner/  '

The  depth  of  this  crofs  is  a  type  of  the  depth  of  {in
into  which  fuch  men  fall ;  and  that  comes  hence,  that
their  inward  principle  is  falfe  through  and  through,
and  they  have  never  taken  pains  to  look  within  and
examine  their  evil  unchanged  hearts,  and  amend
them ;  they  lean  altogether  on  outward  exercifes,
which  at  the  fame  time  they  hate,  and  perform  with
backward  hearts.  They  know  nothing  of  a  union
with  God,  or  of  His  myfteries ;  nay,  they  no  more
reach  after  anything  of  this  kind  by  queftioning,  or
inquiring,  or  feeking,  than  they  think  of  the  Sultan
over  the  fea,  and  take  no  more  thought  about  it  than
if  it  in  no  wife  concerned  them.  If  they  hear  talk  of
divine  things,  they  underftand  as  much  of  them  as  a
German  does  of  Italian.  They  fay  their  prayers  and
read  their  Bibles,  and  perform  their  dry  works  of
obedience  with  the  outward  man  and  their  fenfes  ;  and
with  this  they  are  well  fatisfied.  Let  God  unite
Himfelf  with  whom  He  will,  what  does  that  concern
them  ?  But  if  it  were  a  queftion  of  outward  advan-
tage in  re{pecl:  of  gain,  or  honour,  or  other  things
that  might  be  turned  to  account,  which  any  one  had
obtained  thereby,  then  we  mould  fee  whether  it  con-
cerned them  or  not.  Hence,  in  fpite  of  their  pious
afts,  it  comes  to  this,  that  when  they  are  called  on  to
renounce  their  own  way  and  will,  they  behave  as  if
they  were  deaf  or  fenfelefs.  Thus  St.  Auguftine
writes :  "  I  do  not  know  wickeder,  more  utterly


Of  the  depth s

of  fen  into

which  thefe
formalifts  are

in  danger  of
falling.


Sermon  for  AJti  Wcdnefday.


How  tbofe
who  are  ever
feeking  after
lawful  indul-
gences do  often
Jiray  from
the  narrow
way,  and  may
baply  lofe  it
for  ever.


Howfucb  are
apt  to  perfe-
vere  impeni-
tent unto  the
end,  and  be-


"  corrupt  men  than  thofe  who  fall  away  while  main-
"  taining  a  religious  profeflion  ;  for  not  feldom  they
"  fall  fo  deeply  into  fin,  that  they  come  to  err  from
"  the  faith  and  the  things  touching  the  Holy  Scrip-
"  tures,  and  thus  fink  under  the  crofs  to  which  they
"  are  bound  and  fattened."

The  width  or  breadth  of  this  crofs  is  that  they  go  the
wide,  broad,  well-trodden  way  that  leadeth  unto  hell ;
for  they  live  after  the  flefh,  and  therefore  they  do  not
feek  after  the  fweetnefs  of  the  fpirit;  for  he  who  liveth  to
the  flefh  cannot  pleafe  God.  He  who  will  not  feek  the
narrow  path  that  leadeth  unto  eternal  life,  muft  needs
often  be  delayed  and  lofe  the  way,  by  which  means
he  is  made  too  late  to  find  the  way  that  leadeth  unto
life.  This  is  the  cafe  with  thofe  who  feek  and  intend
themfelves  in  all  things,  and  are  always  wanting  to
get  fome  eafe  and  to  gain  fome  indulgence  from  the
Lord,  now  for  this,  now  for  that  forbidden  thing ;  in
a  word,  to  have  nothing  to  bear  is  what  would  fuit
them  beft.  For  this  very  reafbn  they  are  obliged  to
bear  a  heavy  crofs  in  their  confcience  whether  they
like  it  or  no,  and  have  no  confidence  towards  God
whom  they  have  fet  at  nought,  nor  yet  any  confola-
tion  from  the  world  which  defpifes  them.  Ah !
dear  children,  what  a  hard  life  and  crofs  is  theirs  !
They  would  fain  be  without  pain,  and  have  the  very
bittereft  pain ;  which  will,  moreover,  be  followed  by
eternal  pain,  unlefs  they  repent  and  turn  to  God.

The  length  of  this  crofs  is,  that  they  remain  and
perfevere  impenitent  and  without  virtue  unto  the
end ;  and  this  comes  from  their  great  ingratitude,  in-
afmuch  as  God  has  beftowed  on  them  fuch  great  grace


Sermon  for  Ajh  Wednefday.


259


before  other  worldly  people  who  would   have   made
better  ufe  of  it,  and  has  vifited  them  in  fo  many  good
influences  and  admonitions,  inward  and  outward,  as
often  even  to  raife  their  own  wonder;  and  for  all  that
they  do  not  turn  from  evil.    Of  thefe  fays  Paul :  "  For
"  it  is  impoffible  for  thofe  who  were  once  enlightened,
"  and  have  tafted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made
"  partakers  of  the   Holy  Ghoft,  and  have  tafted  the
"  good  word  of  God  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to
"  come,  if  they  mall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again
"  unto  repentance ;   feeing  they  crucify  to  themfelves
"  the   Son  of  God  afrem,  and   put   him   to  an  open
"  mame."    And  he  gives  us  a  likenefs  for  them  :  "  For
"  the  earth  which  drinketh  in  the  rain  that  cometh  oft
"  upon  it,  and  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  foi  them  by
"  whom  it  is  dreiTed,  receiveth  blefling  from  God  :   but
"  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers  is  rejected,  and
"  is  nigh  unto  curfing  :  whofe  end  is  to  be  burned."
As  much  as  to  fay,  Of  thefe  men  who  have  received
great  grace  from  God,  and  to  whom  He  has  mowed
fpecial  tokens  of  His  fecret  favour,  when  they  are  not-
withftanding  obftinately  perverfe  and  unfruitful,  it  is
to  be  feared,  if  they  perfevere  in  fuch   a  courfe,  that
they  will  fall  under  the  eternal  curfe  of  God.     There-
fore beware  that  you  be  not  hanged  on  this  crofs  of
condemnation,  and  meet  your  laft  end  thus.

The  fccond  kind  of  crofs  is  good,  and  is  that  of  the
malefactor  on  Chrift's  right  hand,  who  had  indeed  well
deferred  his  punimment,  but  it  became  unto  him  fruit-
ful and  profitable.  This  crofs  we  may  take  as  a  type  of
the  hardfhip  and  fufferings  needful  to  be  borne  by  thofc
who  have  turned  with  their  whole  heart  from  this

s2


come  of  the
number  of
thofe  of  whom
Paulfpeaks
in  Hel.  vi.
4-8.


Of  the  good
and  fruitful
crofs  laid  upon
tbofe  who  do

•igbtly  turn
unto  God,
like  the  male-
faflor  en


Sermon  for  AJh  Wednefday.


CbriJTs  right
band.


Luke  xx  Hi.
43-


Matt.  xi.  28


Its  depth,
boundlefs
humility,  re-
membering
that  this  fuf-
fering  is  far
lefs  than  their
deferts.


world  and  fm  to  a  life  of  repentance  ;  who  have  indeed
well  deferred  to  fuffer  much  for  their  fins,  becaufe
they  have  wafted  their  time  fo  unprofitably  in  flefhly
and  natural  pleasures,  doing  their  own  will;  but  now
they  wifh  to  forfake  all  thefe  things  for  God's  fake,
and  on  the  contrary  to  fuffer  whatever  God  mall
appoint  for  them.  To  thefe  the  crofs  is  not  only  pro-
fitable and  fruitful,  but  alfo  confoling,  fweet,  and
lovely.  For  to  them  it  brings,  as  it  did  to  this  male-
factor, a  ftrong  faith  with  a  firm  hope  in  the  unfpeak-
able  love  and  mercy  of  God.  Ah  !  children,  what
greater  good  could  befall  this  criminal  hanging  on  the
crofs,  in  this  fhort  fpace  of  time,  than  to  hear  thofe
comfortable  words  :  "  Verily  I  lay  unto  thee,  this  day
"  malt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradife."  And  what  can
better  comfort  thefe  rightly  difpofed  converts  of  whom
we  are  fpeaking,  than  for  Chrift  to  exclaim  unto  them  :
"  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,
"  and  I  will  give  you  reft."  That  is,  I  wrill  receive
you  into  my  favour,  and  help  you  to  bear  your  burdens,
and  after  a  fhort  feafon  of  travail  moft  fweetly  quicken
and  refrem  you.

The  depth  of  this  crofs  is  boundlefs  humility,  not
deeming  ourfelves  higher  than  other  men,  but  having
our  eyes  always  open  to  our  own  mortcomings  ;  like
this  malefaclor,  who  acknowledged  that  he  was  fuffer-
ing  the  juft  reward  of  his  mifdeeds.  So  let  it  be  with
all  thefe  converts ;  in  all  their  forrows  let  them  re-
member that  they  might  juftly  have  fufFered  more,  and
that  no  fuffering  on  earth  or  in  hell  would  be  a  fuffi-
cient  retribution  for  their  fins.  This  makes  them  not
to  defpife,  nor  judge,  nor  condemn  any  but  them-


Sermo?i  for  4Jh  Wednefday.


261


felves  ;  and  when  they  are  brought  to  this  point,  then
their  crofs  begins  to  blofiTom  and  bear  fruit.

The  height  of  this  crofs  is  a  mind  directed  upwards
to  the  contemplation  of  divine  and  heavenly  things,
and  a  forfaking  of  outward  things  ;  that  is,  they  fhall
learn  to  look  upward  toward  eternal  things,  without
letting  their  eyes  wander  after  earthly  things,  and  fix
their  looks  on  the  admirable  life  and  walk  of  our  dear
Lord,  his  fufferings,  his  bitter  death,  his  refurre<5tion,
afcenfion,  and  everlafting  reign.  This  makes  a  man's
fuffering  and  crofs  light  unto  him,  as  it  did  to  this
malefa&or  when  he  faid  :  "  Lord,  remember  me  when
"  thou  comeft  into  thy  kingdom."  Behold,  dear
children,  how  his  mind  and  thoughts  were  filled  with
the  eternal  world.

The  breadth  of  this  crofs  fignifies  a  hearty,  all-em-
bracing love  to  God,  men,  and  all  creatures  ;  for  thofe
who  are  on  this  crofs  pray  with  lip  and  heart,  not
alone  for  themfelves,  but  alfo  for  all  men,  even  for
their  enemies :  thus  their  prayer  extends  unto  all,  and
they  are  ever  ready  to  devote  themfelves,  body  and
foul  to  their  fellow-creatures ;  and  thus  they  do  what
in  them  lies  to  make  amends  to  God,  whom  they  have
aforetime  dimonoured  and  provoked  in  his  creatures.
Thus  love,  as  St.  Peter  faith,  covereth  a  multitude  of
fins ;  and,  as  Chrift  faid  of  Mary  Magdalene :  many
fins  are  forgiven  her,  for  me  loved  much.

The  length  of  this  crofs  is  perfeverance  and  growth
in  good  works ;  for  thefe  men  never  ceafe  from  their
kind  and  virtuous  labours,  but  undertake  one  after
another  with  juft  difcrimination,  and  give  all  diligence
to  put  off  their  old  man,  and  to  put  on  a  new  man

83


Its  height,

heavenly

afpirations.


Luke  xx Hi.
42.


Its  breadth t
unh< erjal  love
for  God  and
men.


Its  length,
perfeverance
in  efforts  to
do  good.


2,62,


Sermon  for  4Jh  Wednefday.


2  Cor.  iv.
17,  iB.


Of  the  crofs
of  Cbrijt  in
which  the
nobleft  men
do  Jhare.


Matt.xx.22.


Its  dfptb,  a
continual
childlike  fear
vfGod.


created  after  God  in  righteoufnefs  and  holinefs  of  life.
And  hence  their  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day,
and  groweth  up  amidft  all  their  forrow,  pain,  and
temptation,  fo  that  they  may  well  feel  how  truly  Paul
has  faid,  that  "  this  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for
"  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and
"  eternal  weight  of  glory ;  while  we  look  not  at  the
"  things  which  are  feen,  but  at  the  things  which  are
"  not  feen  :  for  the  things  which  are  feen  are  temporal,
"  but  the  things  which  are  not  feen  are  eternal."

The  third  crofs  is  the  crofs  of  Chrift,  and  is  a  type
of  the  perfect  men,  on  whom  their  Heavenly  Father
has  beftowed  peculiar  glory  and  honour,  and  fellow-
Ihip  with  His  only  begotten  Son,  in  that  He  fends
them,  after  a  fpecial  fort,  all  manner  of  contradiction,
pain,  affaults,  tribulation,  and  crofles  of  every  kind ;
and  gives  them  to  drink  of  the  cup  of  which  Chrift,
His  only  begotten  Son,  has  drunk.  As  it  was  with  the
holy  Apoftles  James  and  John,  to  whom  Chrifl  faid :
"  Are  ye  able  to  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  mall  drink  of?
"  and  to  be  baptized  with  the  baptifm  that  I  am  bap-
"  tized  with?"  As  much  as  to  fay,  If  ye  defire  to  be
the  chiefeft,  deareft  friends  of  God,  ye  muft,  like  me,
fufTer  the  greateft  contradiction  beforehand ;  for  the
difciple  is  not  above  his  mafter.  If  Chrift  mufl  needs
fufTer  and  enter  by  the  crofs  into  the  kingdom  of  His
Father,  without  doubt  fo  muft  every  friend  of  God
have  fomewhat  likewife  to  endure.

The  depth  of  this  crofs  is  that  they  have  at  all
times  a  childlike  fear,  and  allow  God  to  move  them
as  He  will,  and  keep  a  conftant  care  not  to  offend
God.  Its  height  is  the  well-grounded  hope  which


Sermon  for  Ajli  Wednefday.


263


they  have  of  eternal  bleffednefs,  not  founded  on  their
own  merit  or  good  life,  but  on  a  firm  faith,  in  a
humble  principle  of  entire  felf-furrender  to  the  per-
fectly holy  will  of  God.  And  this  hope  maketh  not
amamed ;  but,  as  St.  Paul  fays,  "  the  love  of  God  is
"  med  abroad  in  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghoft
which  is  given  unto  them."  The  width  or  breadth
of  this  crofs  is  that  they  love  God  with  their  whole
hearts,  and  themfelves  and  all  men  through  God ;  and
endeavour  with  all  their  might  "  to  keep  the  unity  of
"  the  fpirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  They  mun  all
giving  of  offence  and  fcandal,  and  are  ufeful  to  all
and  hurtful  to  none.  And  therefore  they  fuffer
gladly  all  that  befalls  them  in  their  work  of  love,  that
they  may  bring  many  fouls  unto  God.  The  length
of  their  crofs  ftretches  out  into  eternity :  for  they  are
ready  to  fuffer  gladly  all  that  God  mall  appoint  unto
them  in  time  or  in  eternity  ;  it  is  their  highefl  happi-
nefs  to  forward  all  that  God  choofes  to  do  through
them  ;  however  and  whenever  He  will,  they  fimply
follow  His  leading,  without  murmuring  or  queftioning.
They  are  thofe  who  are  able  to  fay  in  fincerity  with
Chrift  :  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  Nothing
grieves  them  more  than  that  they  cannot  utterly  give
up  their  own  will,  by  reafbn  of  human  infirmity  and
weakncfs.  O,  how  blefTed  are  thefe  men,  and  how
fruitful  is  their  crofs,  not  only  to  themfelves,  but  alfo
to  all  Chriftendom  !

This  crofs  leads  and  brings  them  to  the  ineffable
crofs  of  the  divine  nature,  of  which  Paul  was  thinking
when  he  prayed  for  his  friends  that  they  might  "  be
"  able  to  comprehend  with  all  faints  what  is  the

84


Its  height,  a
well-ground-
ed hope  of
eternal  life.


Its  width,  a
perftcl  love
to  God  and
man.
Eph.  if.  3.


Its  length,  a
t  enouncing  of
their  own  will
to  all  eter-
nity.


Of  the  inef-
fable crofs  of
the  divine
nature.
Epb.  Hi.
18,  19.


264


Sermon  for  Jljli  Wednefday.


Thofe  who
will  reach  up
into  this  crojs
muft '  frjt  be
conformed
unto  the  like-
nej's  of
Chri/Ts
death.


"  breadth  and  length,  and  depth  and  height,  and  to
"  know  the  love  of  Chrift  which  pafleth  knowledge,
"  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God."
The  length  is  His  never-ending  eternity ;  the  breadth
His  boundlefs  goodnefs  and  mercy,  which  has  been
fhed  abroad,  and  is  yet  poured  out  over  the  whole
creation  and  mankind  ;  the  height  is  His  omnipotence,
and  the  depth  His  unfathomable  wifdom.  Now  he
who  will  reach  up  unto  the  crofs  of  Chrift's  divine
nature,  muft  firft  be  fafhioned  into  the  likenefs  of  His
crucifixion  in  the  flelh.  And  all  thofe  who  truly  lead
a  life  in  the  fpirit,  fuch  as  we  have  defcribed,  are  thus
crucified  with  Chrift ;  for  they  mall  keep  themfelves
from  all  the  works  of  the  flefh,  which  God  hates,  and
fhall  have  an  earneft  love  to  all  righteoufnefs,  fb  that
they  are  united  with  the  bonds  of  their  foul  unto  His
divine  nature.  They  mall,  moreover,  be  ever  ftriving
to  fulfil  God's  will,  continually  fixing  their  thoughts
on  Him,  and  keeping  themfelves  from  all  that  would
be  difpleafmg  in  His  fight,  and  thus  be  nailed  with
the  right  foot  to  the  crofs  of  the  divine  nature  ;  and
they  fhall  further  learn  to  hold  themfelves  between
thefe  two,  that  they  be  neither  carried  awray  by  un-
blefTed  happinefs,  nor  yet  fhrink  from  blefTed  unhap-
pinefs,  nor  be  led  aftray  between  thefe  two  ;  and  thus
are  they  bound  with  the  left  foot  to  the  crofs  of  the
divine  nature.  Furthermore,  they  fhall  have  an  in-
ward fympathy  with  God,  for  the  difhonour  that  has
been  done  Him  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and
will  yet  be  done  Him  by  men  in  the  Church  and  in
the  world  until  the  last  day,  and  for  the  fhame  and
difhonour  of  His  deareft  friends,  who  have  yielded


Sermon  for  ^/7/  Wednefday.


265


themfelves  to  fuffer  on  this  crofs  with  Chrift,  that  His
divine  glory  may  be  magnified  through  them  ;  for  God
will  guard  them  as  the  apple  of  His  eye,  infomuch
that  whofo  entreateth  them  evil  hath  done  it  unto
God.

That  we  may  thus  be  nailed  with  Chrift  to  the
crofs  of  his  humanity, — that  we  may  be  admitted  to
the  eternal  beholding  of  the  brightnefs  of  His  god-
head, may  the  Almighty  Trinity  grant  and  help  us.
Amen  !


XI.

Sermon  for  the  Second  Sunday  in  Lent.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


Tells  us  bow  God  drives  forward  fame  of  His  children  by  tbejiruggle
between  the  inward  and  outward  man.


MATT.  xv.  21-28.  —  "Jefus  went  thence  and  departed  into  the  coafts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.
'  And,  behold,  a  woman  of  Canaan  came  out  of  the  fame  coafts,  and  cried  unto  Him,
'  faying,  Have  mercy  on  me,  O  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David ;  my  daughter  is  grievoufly
'  vexed  with  a  devil.  But  He  anfwered  her  not  a  word.  And  His  difciples  came  and
'  befought  Him,  faying,  Send  her  away,  for  (he  crieth  after  us.  But  He  anfwered  and
'  faid,  I  am  not  fent,  but  unto  the  loft  Iheep  of  the  houfe  of  Ifrael.  Then  came  me  and
'  worfliipped  Him,  faying,  Lord,  help  me.  But  He  anfwered  and  faid,  It  is  not  meet  to
'  take  the  children's  bread  and  to  caft  it  to  dogs.  And  me  faid,  Truth,  Lord  ;  yet  the
'  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  that  fall  from  their  matter's  table.  Then  Jefus  anfwered  and
'  faid  unto  her,  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith :  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt.  And
'  her  daughter  was  made  whole  from  that  very  hour."


Jefus  departs
from  the
Scribes  and
Pbarifees.


HE  gofpel  for  this  day  points  us  to  a
guiding  principle  which  is  of  all  others
the  nobleft,  fureft,  moft  ufeful  and  moft
eflential  principle  that  we  can  have  while
here  on  earth.  For  be  aflured,  that  unlefs
your  converfion  have  within  it  this  kernel,  all  your
efforts  to  perform  good  works  and  to  abftain  from
tranfgreffion  will  avail  you  little  or  nothing.

Now  let  us  in  the  firft  place  confider  thefe  words :
"  Jefus  went  out  from  thence."  Whence  was  it  that
He  departed  ?  From  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees.  Now
give  heed  to  the  principle  herein  contained :  the


Sermon  for  the  Second  Sunday  in  Lent.        267


Scribes  were  the  wife  men  who  prided  themfelves
upon  their  knowledge ;  and  the  Pharifees  were  thofe
who  prided  themfelves  upon  their  fpirituality,  and
trufted  in  their  religious  practices  and  fet  talks.  Thefe
two  claffes  of  men  are  types  of  two  of  the  moft  dan-
gerous principles  which  can  exift  among  religious
people ;  and  thofe  who  remain  in  their  way  of  think-
ing are  loft,  for  thefe  two  principles  do  ruin  the  foul
like  a  worm  at  the  root,  fb  that  men  come  to  nothing.
And  yet  there  are  few  but  what  are  in  fome  meafure
under  the  influence  of  one  or  both  of  them,  though
fome  much  more  than  others.  By  the  Scribes  we
may  underftand  men  of  a  reafoning  turn  of  mind,
who  try  all  things  by  the  light  of  their  reafbn,  or  as
they  appear  to  them  through  their  fenfes.  They
receive  ideas  by  means  of  their  fenfes,  and  then  exer-
cife  upon  them  their  powers  of  reflection  that  they
may  attain  to  the  comprehenfion  of  high  queftions.
And  they  glory  therein,  and  make  very  lofty  dif-
courfes ;  but  in  the  inward  parts,  where  pure  truth
mould  gum  forth  from  its  fount,  they  are  empty  and
dry,  yielding  nothing.

The  fecond  clafs  are  the  Pharifees.  Thefe  are  the
religious  people  who  look  upon  themfelves  as  the
excellent  of  the  earth,  and  think  highly  of  themfelves,
and  take  their  ftand  upon  prefcribed  cuftoms  and
ways,  and  regard  thefe  ufages  as  of  more  importance
than  anything  elfe,  and  defire  to  be  refpe&ed  on  this
account  and  to  have  praife  of  men  ;  but  their  hearts
are  full  of  judging  thoughts  of  other  men  who  do  not
obferve  or  approve  of  their  ways.  From  thefe  our
Lord  went  out.  The  Scribes  had  afked  him  to  pro-


wbo  are  types
of  many
among  our-
felves.


The  Scribes
tbofe  who  re-
ly upon  know-
ledge.


The  Pbari-
fees  tbofe  wbo
rely  upon  out-
ward afls  of
piety.


26S


Sermon  for  the


Thefe  pray
and  read  their
Bible  while
their  heart  is
filed  with
felfinftead  of
God.


nounce  a  judgment,  faying :  Why  do  thy  difciples
tranfgrefs  the  good  cuftoms  of  our  forefathers,  by
eating  with  unwafhen  hands  ?  And  He  anfwered
them  :  Why  do  ye  tranfgrefs  the  commandments  of
God  ?  Juft  fb  do  thofe  of  the  prefent  day  who
regard  their  own  ordinances  and  practices  of  devotion
as  the  commandments  and  will  of  God,  and  condemn
and  think  flightingly  of  the  friends  of  God  who  refufe
to  follow  ufages  of  man's  prefcribing,  becaufe  they  are
conftrained  to  follow  God's  fecret  motions  in  their
hearts.  In  thus  faying,  we  do  not  mean  that  open
evil-livers  or  defpifers  of  godlinefs  are  not  to  be  judged
by  the  congregation,  for  elfe  there  would  be  an  end  of
all  ecclefiaftical  difcipline ;  but  let  each  beware  of  this
pharifaical  temper  in  himfelf,  looking  to  fee  if  any  falfe
piety  lurk  within  him  that  has  ibme  other  origin  or
end  than  God.  For  Jefus  departs  when  that  is  fb,
and  afTuredly  will  not  flay  where  that  exifts.

Thus  we  find  many  people  who  never  look  to  any-
thing beyond  their  outward  conduct ;  they  perform
good  works  and  behave  with  decorum,  and  then  think
they  have  done  all ;  while  their  inward  part  is  altoge-
ther overgrown  and  choked  up  with  the  creature,  by
which  they  are  held  faft  to  their  great  hurt.  And
while  in  this  {late,  they  pray  much  and  read  their
Bible.  So  likewife  did  the  blind  Jews,  they  read
much  in  the  Scriptures;  and  yet  God  was  an  utter
ftranger  to  them,  and  hidden  from  them  in  fpirit  and
in  truth.  So  it  is  with  this  fort  of  religious  people :
they  fubmit  to  Church  difcipline,  they  pray,  they  faft,
they  watch ;  and  for  all  this,  God  is  not  really  and
truly  the  principle  of  their  life,  but  poor,  miferable


Second  Simday  in  Lent.


269


nature,  toward  which  all  their  love,  and  ftriving,  and
afpiration  is  directed,  notwithstanding  the  abundance
and  the  fervour  of  their  religious  exercifes.  No,  chil-
dren, the  eternal  God  will  have  nothing  to  do  with
thefe  Pharilees ;  for  they  are  not  plants  which  our
Heavenly  Father  has  planted,  but  weeds  which  muft
be  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  as  our  Lord  Himlelf  has
faid :  "  He  who  is  not  with  me  is  againft  me  ;"  and,
"  He  who  gathereth  not  with  me,  fcattereth."  When
the  time  of  harveft  is  come,  and  the  eternal  God  will
gather  His  wheat  into  the  garner,  thefe  will  be  found
to  be  the  called  who  have  not  gathered  with  Him,
and  He  will  not  know  them ;  and  where  He  does  not
find  His  planting  in  the  ground  of  the  heart,  He  will
caft  the  men  out  into  outer  darknefs.  I  have  mown
you  two  falfe  principles ;  I  befeech  you,  for  God's
fake,  beware  of  them,  if  you  would  be  kept  unto
eternal  life.  For  this  zealous  activity  of  the  natural
man,  after  the  fafhion  of  the  Scribes  or  Pharifees,  in
outward  mow  or  prefcribed  ufages,  prevails  greatly,
alas  !  at  this  day  among  all  ranks.  Men's  minds  are
now  a-days  fo  fubtle  and  quick,  after  the  fafhion  of
thefe  Scribes  [raifmg  doubts  and  queftions  of  con-
fcience],  that  a  confcientious  confeflbr  fcarcely  knows
how  to  direct  their  fouls  by  reafon  of  their  fubtlety  or
their  fcrupuloufnefs.  From  fuch  men  Jefus  departed,
as  He  does  ftill  to  this  day.

But  whither  did  the  Lord  Jefus  go  ?  He  went
into  the  land  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Now  Tyre  fignifies
a  ftate  of  apprehenilon,  and  Sidon  fignifies  the  (late
of  one  driven  by  the  hunters.  Ah,  children  !  few,
alas !  are  willing  to  experience  in  themfelves  what  it


How  the
Lord  went  out
to  7yre  and
Sidon,
which  are
types  of  the
inward 'ftrug-


27°


Sermon  for  the


git  between
the  ft -Jb  and
the  fpirit  in
the  children
of  God.


Rom.  fit.

22,   23.    19.


Of  the  pain-
fulnefi  of  this
Jiruggle.


is  to  go  thither ;  and  yet  it  is  a  wondrously  ennobling
and  profitable  thing  that  thefe  two  trials  fhould  be
laid  upon  a  man  together ;  and  if  under  them  he  can
acl:  rightly  and  well,  what  noblenefs,  growth  in  grace,
and  good  fruit  will  be  born  of  this  fharp  tribulation  !
Now  what  is  this  being  hard  preiTed  by  the  hunters  ?
Nothing  elfe  but  that  the  inward  man  would  always
fain  be  with  God  (who  is  his  proper  refting-place)  ;
and  thus  it  ever  drives  the  outward  man  towards  and
after  God  ;  but  the  outward  man  ftrives  in  the  contrary
direction,  always  going  outwards  after  lower  things,
where  indeed  is  his  proper  place ;  and  thus  there  is  a
divifion  in  the  man.  The  inward  man's  own  place  is
God,  and  towards  this  centre  all  his  defire,  and  free-will,
and  endeavours  are  turned  ;  and  he  is  continually  called
and  drawn  this  way  by  God  his  Lord.  But  this  is
contrary  to  the  outward  man,  by  his  very  nature,
which  wars  againft  it  every  day  and  hour.  As  St.
Paul  fays :  "  For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after
"  the  inward  man :  but  I  fee  another  law  in  my
"  members,  warring  againft  the  law  of  my  mind,  and
"  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  fin  which
"  is  in  my  members."  Wherefore,  "  the  good  that  I
"  would,  I  do  not ;  but  the  evil  which  I  would  not,
"  that  I  do."  Thus  the  flefti  and  the  fpirit  ftrive  and
fight  againft  each  other ;  and  then  cometh  God  from
above,  and  purfues  after  them  both  with  His  grace.
And  where  this  is  rightly  and  duly  underftood,  it
ftands  well  with  the  man  ;  for  all  who  are  thus  led  by
God's  fpirit,  are  the  children  of  God.

Now  this  conflict  caufes  to  the  man  fharp  and  bit-
ter pain  and  tribulation.      But  while  he  is  plunged  in


Second  Sunday  in  Lent.


271


the  thick  of  the  ftrife,  perceiving  nothing  beyond  it,
and  deftitute  of  confolation,  then  conies  Jefus  and
enters  in  of  a  furety.  And  to  the  man  who  does  not
obey  the  ftrivings  of  God's  fpirit,  nor  experience  this
inward  conflict,  Jefus  does  not  enter  in.  For  all
thofe  who  have  never  felt  this  inward  ftrife,  nor  God's
hand  heavy  on  their  foul,  and  truly  yielded  to  it  in
their  life,  thefe  will  never  bring  any  good  to  pafs  fo
long  as  they  live.  Moreover,  they  never  come  to  them-
felves,  and  therefore  know  nothing  of  all  that  is  lying
hidden  within  them.  For  many  aflaults  come  upon
us,  both  carnal  and  fpiritual,  which  we  can  beft  with-
ftand  by  meeting  them  with  a  fpirit  of  humility  and
gratitude  ;  and  if  we  await  thefe  trials  with  a  cheerful
fpirit,  we  may  be  afTured  that  God  will  ftand  by  us
with  His  grace.  And  then,  when  the  world  comes
with  its  raging  ftorms,  beating  upon  his  head,  and
the  Devil  with  his  crafty  wiles,  and  the  man's  owrn
flelh  and  fenfes  and  loweft  powers  are  befet  with
great  weaknefs  and  paffionate  impulfes  towards  out-
ward things,  and  all  this  while  the  inward  man  is
urged  on  by  God,  and  by  the  thirft  which  he  by
nature  has  after  God, — then,  indeed,  there  muft  needs
be  within  him  a  bitter  agony  and  tearing  ftrife.  And
what  fhall  the  poor  wretched,  comfortlefs  man  do,
hunted  and  aflailed  as  he  is,  without  way  or  means  of
efcape  ?  He  fhall  do  as  this  poor  woman  did  ;  go  to
Jefus  and  cry  with  the  loud  voice  of  ftrong  defire :
"  O,  Lord,  thou  fon  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me  !  "
And  then  from  the  depths  of  the  ftruggle  an  impetuous
cry  leaps  forth  ;  and  this  cry  of  the  fpirit  flies  over
thoufands  and  thoufands  of  miles  with  its  piercing


Horn  to  meet
affaults.


Qftbedeep
figbing  of  the
Spirit,


Rom.viii.zS.


toben  God
makes  as
though  He
beard  not  the
prayer  of  the
contrite.


call  :  it  is  an  infinite  fighing  from  the  fathomlefs
abyfs.  This  is  fomething  far  above  nature,  whereunto
the  Holy  Spirit  muft  fupply  what  is  lacking  becaufe
of  our  infirmities  :  as  St.  Paul  fays :  "  The  Spirit
"  maketh  interceffion  for  us  with  groanings  which  can-
"  not  be  uttered."  And  by  thefe  means  the  Holy
Spirit  doth  better  prepare  the  ground  of  the  heart
than  by  any  other  preparation  on  earth  that  can  be
imagined.

And  when  a  man  is  thus  hunted  and  plunged  into
the  bottomlefs  pit  of  temptation  and  fuffering,  and
then,  amidft  "  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered/*
cries  to  God  with  a  loud  voice,  fo  that  the  accents  of
his  ftrong  defire  pierce  through  the  heavens ;  and  yet
God  makes  as  though  He  did  not  hear,  or  would  not
liften,  O,  how  utterly  muft  the  man  yield  up  his
own  ielf,  and  fuffer  his  wifhes  to  melt  into  the  depths
of  God's  will,  waiting  with  ever-ftrengthening  pa-
tience upon  God,  till  His  appointed  time  come  to
viiit  him  and  all  creatures  !  For,  oh  !  how  impoffible
were  it  that  the  fount  of  all  mercy  mould  be  fealed
up  !  yet,  when  this  woman  came  crying  after  Jefus
with  a  loud  voice,  the  ftream  from  this  fount  of
mercy  was  not  fuffered  to  flow  out  unto  her.  The
diiciples  prayed  that  it  might  be  opened  ;  and  at  laft,
with  ievere  afpecl:  and  harm  words,  Jefus  answered
them  that  He  was  not  fent  save  to  the  loft  fheep  of
the  houfe  of  Ifrael,  faying  :  "  It  is  not  meet  to  take
"  the  children's  bread  and  to  caft  it  to  the  dogs."
He  not  only  refufed  her  the  blefling  me  fought,  but
did  what  was  much  harder  to  bear, — proved  in  clear,
cutting  language  that  it  was  reafonable  and  juft  that


Second  Simday  in  Le?it.


He  mould  do  fb.  He  not  only  refufed  to  give  her
bread,  which  is  necefTary  to  life,  and  a  common  bleff-
ing,  but  denied  her  the  name  of  a  child,  thus  depriv-
ing her  of  humanity,  and  called  her  a  dog.  Could
our  Lord  have  tried  her  by  a  harder,  fharper  teft,  -
could  He  have  prefTed  her  harder,  or  overwhelmed  her
more  completely  ?  But  what  does  me  do  in  this  her
diftrefs  and  anguifh  ?  She  takes  it  all  meekly  and
patiently,  and  fuffers  herfelf  to  be  driven  and  buffeted
as  He  will.  Nay,  me  finks  much  lower  than  He  had
plunged  her,  and  cafts  herfelf  into  the  very  depths  of
humiliation,  faying  :  "  No,  Lord,  not  a  dog,  but  even
"  lefs,  one  of  the  leaft  of  the  little  whelps."  But  in
her  felf-abafement  and  felf-annihilation  me  holds  fafb
her  confidence,  and  fays  :  "  Yet,  O  Lord,  the  little
"  whelps  are  wont  to  be  fed  and  fatisned  with  the
"  crumbs  that  fall  from  their  matter's  table."

Oh,  how  blefTed  and  holy  were  men  who  could
thus  ftrike  into  the  very  truth  of  things,  and  fee
themfelves  with  the  mind  of  God,  not  through
figures  of  fpeech,  or  cuftomary  phrafes,  or  as  the
world  judges.  Neither  God  nor  all  His  creatures
could  then  abafe  and  annihilate  them  fo  thoroughly
as  they  would  abafe,  and  accufe,  and  annihilate  them-
felves in  the  fight  of  the  truth  !  BlefTed  indeed,
if  then,  notwithftanding  this  wretched  tumult  of
fuffering  and  humiliation,  they  fhould  be  conftant
in  their  hope  and  confidence  in  the  goodnefs  of  God,
and  abide  therein  without  wavering  ;  fo  that  under
all  thefe  afflictions  their  defire  and  carnefr.  purpofe
towards  Him  fhould  flrengthen  more  and  more,  as  it
was  with  this  woman.  However  harfhly  our  Lord

T*


Oftruefelf-
knowledge.


Hoto  that  if
toe  have  a
conftant  dejirt
towards  God
and  truft  in
His  mercy  t


274


Sermon  for  the


He  will  af-
furedly  bear
our  prayer  at
the  lajt.


A  Jlory  of  a
certain  wo-
man,


fpoke  to  her,  and  denied  her  His  acls  of  mercy,  yet
me  never  let  go  her  truft  in  His  grace.  Therefore
everything  was  granted  to  her  that  me  had  fought  and
defired  of  the  Lord.  Dear  children,  this  is  the  right,
true,  godly  way  unto  eternal  truth.  Oh  !  this  way
leads  unto  the  truth  ;  this  alone  leads  ftraight  to  God
without  a  means.  And  fome  have  not  ftrength  to
try  the  depth  of  this  fathomlefs  annihilation  of  felf.
This  was  the  way  the  woman  of  Canaan  took,  and
me  received  at  last  the  blefled  anfwer :  "  O,  woman,
"  great  is  thy  faith ;  be  it  unto  thee  according  to  thy
"  will !  "

Children,  I  tell  you  of  God's  truth,  that  to  every
man  who  mall  be  found  really  and  truly  thus  walk-
ing in  this  way,  God  will  afluredly  one  day  declare  :
"  My  beloved  friend,  whatsoever  thou  choofeft  or
"  defireft,  it  mall  be  done  unto  thee  according  to
"  thy  will ;  forafmuch  as  thou  haft  willingly  given
"  up  all  that  was  thine.  Therefore,  thy  will  is
"  fwallowed  up  in  mine,  and  thou  haft  become  one
"  with  me  by  grace,  and  a  partaker  of  my  nature."
Now  this  becoming  one  with  the  eternal  Goodnefs
cannot  come  to  pafs  but  by  an  abfblute  renunciation
of  our  Self,  and  all  that  is  ours,  natural  or  fpiritual ;
for  in  the  fame  meamre  that  a  man  comes  out  from
himfelf,  in  that  meafure  does  God  enter  in  with  His
divine  grace,  and  he  who  lofeth  his  life  mall  find  it.

Children,  I  will  fay  no  more  now,  but  tell  you  a
little  ftory  that  is  very  apt  to  our  purpofe.  I  knew  a
"  woman  of  Canaan,"  well  deferving  of  the  name.
\Vhat  I  am  about  to  tell  you,  happened  within  thefe
four  years,  and  Ihe  is  yet  living.  This  woman  loft


Second  Sunday  in  Lent.


275


her  fenfes,  and  fell  into  a  trance,  and  was  borne  up
on  high,  till   fhe  came  into  the  prefence  of  God,  and
beheld  our  Lady  and  all  the  faints.     And  as  fhe  looked
upon  this  vifion  fhe  faw  herfelf  to  be  at  an  immea-
furable   diftance    from    God.       Then   her   fpirit   was
feized  with  fuch  unutterable  woe  that  it  feemed  as
if  me    muft    perim    that    moment  with   the   bitter,
fmarting,  hellifh  pain  that  it  gave   her   to   fee  herfelf
fb   far   off  from  God.       (For   know   ye  that   this  is
the  worft  torment  which   the  fouls  in   hell  have  to
endure,  that  they  know  themfelves  to  be  afar  off,  and
utterly  parted  from  God  and  all  His  elecl:,  and  know
that  it  will  laft  for  ever,   and  that  they  mall  never  fee
God.)     Now  in  this  unfpeakable  diftrefs  fhe  turned
to  our  Lady  and  all  the  faints,  and  befought  them  all
that  they  would  intercede  for  her.      But  then  fhe  faw
that  the  blefTed  faints  were  fo  utterly  loft  in  the  con-
templation of  God  that  none  of  them  for  a  moment
liftened  to  her  cries  and  appeals.    In  their  overwhelm-
ing  blifs  and  joy  they  never  even   heard   her  voice.
Then  fhe  turned  after  a  human  fafhion  to  the  facred
fbrrow  and  bitter  death  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and
it  was  anfwered  her,  why  mould  fhe  appeal  to  that
to  which  fhe  had  never  mown  due  honour  and  reve-
rence ?     But  when  fhe  saw  that  neither  our  Lady,
nor  the  faints,  nor  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  brought
her  help,  fhe  turned  herfelf  with  all  earneftnefs  to  God,
and  faid :   "  Ah,  Lord  !  fmce  none  will  come  to  my
"  help,  behold,  O  beloved  Lord,  that  I  am  Thy  poor
"  creature,  and  Thou  art  my  God  ;   I  fall  down  before
"  Thy   righteous    fentence,    according   to  Thy   moft
"  blefTed  will ;  and  whether  Thou  wilt  have  me  to

T  2


who  bad  a

heavenly

vijion.


Sermon  for  the


What  this
fiory  uacbes


Of  tbofe  who
are  in  bajle
to  attain  to
high  things  in
afpiritual
life  without
knowing  what
that  involves.


"  remain  for  ever  in  this  horrible,  hellifh  torment,  I
"  leave,  dear  Lord,  altogether  to  Thy  mod  blefTed
"  will."  But  when  fhe  had  thus  utterly  furrendered
herfelf  to  God  for  all  eternity,  that  moment  fhe  was
lifted  up  far  away  beyond  all  intervening  things,  and
wafted  into  the  abyfs  of  God's  love.  O  what  a  glori-
ous abyfs  is  that !  This  fame  perfon  is  ftill  often
brought  either  into  this  ftate  of  mind,  or  carried  into
the  abyfs  of  the  divine  love.  She  is  a  young  maiden,
and  I  firmly  believe  that  fhe  had  never  in  her  life
committed  any  grofs  fins,  wherewith  fhe  had  provoked
God;  and  yet  fhe  needed  thus  to  fuffer.  Children  !
how  great  and  manifold,  then,  mufr.  be  the  pangs  of
thofe  who  have  often  and  deeply  angered  God,  and
withal  are  ftill  cleaving  while  on  earth  fo  clofely  to
the  miferable  creature  delights  ?  But  this  maiden  re-
figned  herfelf  humbly  to  the  will  of  God,  content  to
bear  an  eternity  of  pain  in  hell,  if  God  in  His  right-
eoufhefs  faw  fit  to  condemn  her  thereunto.

How  unlike  this  woman  are  thofe  who  fancy  that
in  four  or  five  years  they  mall  work  wonders,  and  fay
to  others  :  "  Ah,  my  dear  friend,  pray  the  Lord  for
"  me  that  I  may  become  one  of  his  deareft  friends."
Now  know  that,  if  thou  wert  in  the  right  way,  thou
wouldft  never  think  thyfelf  worthy  to  become  one  of
the  leafl  of  the  friends  of  God ;  therefore  fet  thyfelf
humbly  in  the  loweft  place,  as  the  Gofpel  teaches,  and
then  thou  wilt  be  bidden  to  come  up  higher.  But
thofe  who  lift  themfelves  up,  God  will  afTuredly  cafl
down.  Wherefore  befeech  Him  that  His  good  plea-
fure  may  be  wrought  in  and  with  thee,  according  to
His  ever-blefTed  will,  and  fo  wilt  thou  find  thy  dwelling-


Second  Sunday  in  Lent.


place  and  reft  in  Him,  and  not  elfe.  Children,  on
this  wife  God  entereth  into  the  foul  immediately,  with-
out a  veil ;  that  is,  when  a  man  wholly  renounces  Self
— all  that  he  has.  Now,  if  any  man  while  here  on
earth  mould  obtain  one  drop  of  this  bleffing,  and  one
fpark  of  this  love  mould  be  kindled  in  his  foul,  he
would  be  more  truly  and  really  made  fit  for  God's
dwelling,  and  led  farther  into  the  truth,  than  if  he
were  to  ftrip  all  the  clothes  off  his  body  and  give  them
to  the  poor,  or  to  macerate  his  flem  with  penances.
One  moment  in  this  ftate  were  more  worth  living
than  forty  years  fpent  in  doing  and  leaving  undone
what  we  pleafed.  Moreover  this  would  be  the  nobleft
and  fhorteft,  and  alfo  the  eafieft,  of  all  courfes  that  rea-
fon  can  conceive.  O  God  !  with  what  things  are
men  taken  up,  while  they  wafte  this  precious,  blefled
feafon  of  grace,  and  come  fhort  of  that  pure,  exalted
good  which  might  and  ought  unceafmgly  to  be  wrought
in  them  ;  and  fo  the  long  years  roll  flowly  by,  and
they  are  as  one  in  a  ileep,  never  coming  any  farther,
unftirred  by  God's  grace  ;  and  after  the  many  years
that  they  have  lived,  they  are  as  far  from  true  perfecl;-
nefs  as  the  firft  day  that  they  fet  out.  This  is  indeed
a  terrible  and  awful  thought  for  all  religious  perfons ;
for  if  they  knew  the  great  and  perilous  injury  that
they  do  to  their  fouls  with  their  own  devices,  their
very  marrow  and  blood  would  dry  up  within  their
body.  Now  let  us  pray  God  that  we  may  thus  fink
into  the  divine  abyfs,  and  fall  down  before  God's  fen-
tence,  that  we  may  be  alfo  found  in  Him  like  this
woman  of  Canaan  !  Amen  !


T3


How  that  one
fpark  of/elf-
renouncing
love  teaches
more  than  all
outward  ex-
ercifes..


Qf  our  aw-
fuf  wafte  of
precious  time.


XII.


Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent.


Of  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God,  of  fiery  dejires,  and  the  ejjence

of  f elf -renunciation.

JOHN  viii.  47.  — "  He  who  is  of  God  heareth  the  words  of  God."


How  that  we
ought  not  to
lower  our
flandard  be-
caufe  we  fall
far  below  it.


EAR  children,  ye  ought  not  to  ceafe  from
hearing  or  declaring  the  word  of  God
becaufe  you  do  not  alway  live  according
to  it,  nor  keep  it  in  mind.  For  inaf-
much  as  you  love  it  and  crave  after  it,  it
will  afluredly  be  given  unto  you ;  and  you  mall  enjoy
it  for  ever  with  God,  according  to  the  meafure  of
your  defire  after  it.  There  are  fome  people  who,
when  they  hear  fpeak  of  high  things  which  they  do
not  understand,  and  moreover  fee  that  they  have  no
mare  in  them,  turn  away  from  thefe  things  with
fuch  averfion,  that  they  do  not  even  like  to  hear  them
treated  of,  or  that  others  mould  think  about  them  and
feek  after  them.  Yea,  they  hear  of  high  things,  and
fay  :  "  That  is  not  my  way  of  thinking  ;  I  had  better
"  not  try  to  put  it  into  practice,  for  I  mould  not  keep
"  it,  and  then  I  ihould  be  juft  where  I  was  before."
And  thus  they  turn  away  themfelves  and  others  from
the  truth,  juft  as  if  it  in  no  wife  concerned  them,  and
fit  dowTn  quite  contented  with  their  own  ways,  while


Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent.        279


yet  they  know  in  the  bottom  of  their  hearts  that
their  ways  are  not  the  beft  that  might  be.  This  is
an  infallible  token  that  thefe  perfbns  will  never  reach
the  higheft  point  of  which  they  are  capable ;  nor  will
they  become  partakers  of  the  higheft,  pure,  abfolute
goodnefs,  unlefs  indeed  they  come  to  go  through  a
painful  and  agonizing  ftruggle  after  it.

St.  Bernard  has  faid :  "  Man,  if  thou  defirefl  a
"  noble  and  holy  life,  and  unceafingly  prayeft  to  God
"  for  it,  if  thou  continue  conftant  in  this  thy  defire,  it
"  will  be  granted  unto  thee  without  fail,  even  if  only
"  in  the  day  or  hour  of  thy  death  ;  and  if  God  mould
"  not  give  it  thee  then,  thou  malt  find  it  in  Him  in
"  eternity :  of  this  be  afTured."  Therefore  do  not
relinquifh  your  deiire,  though  it  be  not  fulfilled  im-
mediately, or  though  ye  may  fwerve  from  your  afpira-
tions,  or  even  forget  them  for  a  time.  It  were  a  hard
cafe  if  this  were  to  cut  you  off  for  ever  from  the  end
of  your  being.  But  when  ye  hear  the  word  of  God,
furrender  yourfelves  wholly  to  it,  as  if  for  eternity,
with  a  full  purpofe  of  will  to  retain  it  in  your  mind
and  to  order  your  life  according  to  it ;  and  let  it  fink
down  right  deep  into  your  heart  as  into  an  eternity.
If  afterward  it  mould  come  to  pafs  that  you  let  it  flip,
and  never  think  of  it  again,  yet  the  love  and  afpira-
tion  which  once  really  exifted  live  for  ever  before
God,  and  in  Him  ye  mail  find  the  fruit  thereof;  that
is,  to  all  eternity  it  mail  be  better  for  you  than  if  you
had  never  felt  them.

What  we  can  do  is  a  fmall  thing  ;  but  we  can  will
and  afpire  to  great  things.  Thus,  if  a  man  cannot  be
great,  he  can  yet  be  good  in  will  ;  and  what  he,  with

T  4


For  if  our  de-
Jire  towards
goodnefs  be
conftant,  it
will  be  grant-
ed to  us  to  at-
tain thereunto
here  or  here-
after.


Our  afpirtt-
tions  muft
never  be
bounded  by


Sermon  for  the


the  meafure
ef  our  ability
to  perform
good  works.


Hoto  Goa
trains  up  Hii
children  to
all  for  tbem-
jefoes,


h\s  whole  heart  and  mind,  love  and  dcfire,  wills  to  be,
that  without  doubt  he  moft  truly  is.  It  is  little  we  can
bring  to  pafs ;  but  our  will  and  defire  may  be  large.
Nay,  they  may  grow  till  they  lofe  themfelves  in  the
infinite  abyfs  of  God.  Not  that  we  ought  to  think
within  ourfelves  that  we  wifh  to  be  this  or  that,  like
fuch  a  faint  or  angel,  for  we  ought  to  be  much  more
than  we  can  conceive  or  fathom  :  wherefore  our
part  is  to  give  ourfelves  over  to  God,  and  leave  our-
felves utterly  in  His  hands,  being  wholly  His.  And
if  ye  cannot  be  as  entirely  His  as  ye  fain  would  be,  be
His  as  much  as  ye  may  attain  unto ;  but  whatever  ye
are,  be  that  truly  and  entirely ;  and  what  ye  cannot
be,  that  be  contented  not  to  be,  in  a  fincere  fpirit  of
refignation,  for  God's  fake  and  in  Him.  So  mail
you  peradventure  poflefs  more  of  God  in  lacking  than
in  having.  Therefore  be  God's  ;  yield  to  His  hand,
fuffer  Him  to  do  in  thee,  and  to  thee,  and  writh  thee,
what  He  will ;  and  then  nothing  here  or  hereafter
mall  be  able  to  confound  you.

Think  not  that  God  will  be  always  careffing  His
children,  or  mine  upon  their  head,  or  kindle  their
hearts,  as  He  does  at  the  firft.  He  does  fb  only  to
lure  us  to  Himfelf,  as  the  falconer'  lures  the  falcon
with  its  gay  hood.  Our  Lord  works  with  His
children  fo  as  to  teach  them  afterwards  to  work
themlelves  ;  as  He  bade  Mofes  to  make  the  tables
of  ftone  after  the  pattern  of  the  firft  which  He  had
made  Himfelf.  Thus,  after  a  time,  God  allows  a
man  to  depend  upon  himfelf,  and  no  longer  en-
lightens, and  ftimulates,  and  routes  him.  \Ve  muft
ftir  up  and  roufe  ourfelves,  and  be  content  to  leave


Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent.


281


off  learning,  and  no  more  enjoy  feeling  and  fire,
and  muft  now  ferve  the  Lord  with  ftrenuous  induftry
and  at  our  own  coft.  Our  Lord  afts  like  a  prudent
father,  who,  while  His  children  are  young,  lets  them
live  at  His  coft,  and  manages  everything  for  them.
What  is  needful  for  them,  He  provides,  and  lets  them
go  and  play ;  and  fo  long  as  this  lafts  they  are  at  lei-
fure,  free  from  care,  happy,  and  generous  at  their
father's  expenfe.  Afterwards  he  gives  a  portion  of
his  eftate  into  their  own  hands,  becaufe  he  will  have
them  to  take  care  of  themfelves,  and  earn  their  own
living,  to  leave  off  childifh  play,  and  thus  learn  how
to  grow  rich.  So  it  is  with  us.  In  the  beginning  of
a  holy  life,  there  is  nothing  but  brightnefs,  enjoyment,
and  feeling,  and  God  draws  us  after  Him  with  His
gifts,  that  we  may  praife  Him  in  the  influencing  of
our  wills,  and  we  do  all  with  a  good  will,  and  we
know  and  recognize  therein  God's  will.  But  now  it
is  very  different  ;  now  God  will  have  us  to  give  up
ourfelves  and  our  own  will,  and  to  accept  Him  with
readinefs  in  His  acls  of  feverity,  and  in  all  kinds  of
fuffering,  and  in  darknefs  of  mind,  whatever  He  may
do,  and  however  contrary  it  may  be  to  all  our  natural
wimes.  As  the  Lord  faid  to  Peter  :  "  When  thou
"  waft  young,  thou  girdedft  thyfelf,  and  walkedft
"  whither  thou  wouldeft  ;  but  when  thou  malt  be  old,
"  thou  malt  ftretch  forth  thy  hand,  and  another  mall
"  gird  thee,  and  carry  thee  whither  thou  wouldeft
*'  not."  Thus  did  the  Lord  in  our  early  days  go  be-
iide  us,  drawing  us  onward  by  His  benefits ;  then  we
went  whither  we  would,  for  our  will  was  fweetly
girded  with  the  pleafantnefs  of  divine  things.  But  now


like  a  judi-
cious father.


Jobnxxi.\%.


How  that  the
Lord's  pro-
phecy unto
Peter,


Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent.


is  fpiritually
fulfilled  in
us  His  chil-
dren.


How  that
fubmijjion  is

nobler  than
faming  zeal.


it  muft  be  otherwife  :    another  mall  gird  us,  and  lead
us  whither  we  would  not.

The  Lord  will  draw  us  and  Securely  lead  us  to
Himfelf,  in  a  way  contrary  to  all  our  natural  will,
until  He  have  diverted  us  thereof,  and  confumed
it  and  made  it  thoroughly  fubjedl  unto  the  Divine
will.  For  this  is  His  will :  that  we  mould  ceafe  to
regard  our  own  wiihes  or  diflikes ;  that  it  fhould
become  a  light  matter  to  us  whether  He  give  or
take  away,  whether  we  have  abundance  or  fuffer
want,  and  let  all  things  go,  if  only  we  may  receive
and  apprehend  God  Himfelf;  that  whether  things
pleafe  or  difpleaie  us,  we  may  leave  all  things  to  take
their  courfe  and  cleave  to  Him  alone.  Then  firft  do
we  attain  to  the  fulnefs  of  God's  love  as  His  children,
when  it  is  no  longer  happinefs  or  mifery,  profperity  or
adverfity,  that  draws  us  to  Him,  or  keeps  us  back
from  Him.  What  we  fhould  then  experience  none
can  utter ;  but  it  would  be  fbmething  far  better  than
when  we  were  burning  with  the  firft  flame  of  love,
and  had  great  emotion  but  leis  true  fubmiffion  :  for
here,  though  there  may  be  leis  fhow  of  zeal,  and  lefs
vehemence  of  feeling,  there  is  more  true  faithfulnefs  to
God.  That  we  may  attain  thereunto,  may  God  help
us  with  His  grace.  Amen  !


XIII.

Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


How  a  man  ought  in  all  His  works  to  regard  God  alone,  and  purely
to  make  Him  bis  end  without  anything  of  his  own,  and  /hall

freely  and  Jimply  perform  all  thefe  works  for  the  glory  of  God
only,  and  not  feek  his  own,  nor  dejtre  nor  expert  any  reward.
Wherewith  he  may  do  fuch  works  without  any  f elf -appropriation
or  reference  to  time  and  number,  before  or  after,  and  without
modes.  How  the  Divine  Word  fpeaks  and  reveals  itfelf  in  the

foul,  all  in  a  lofty  andfubtilefenfe.


MATT.  xxi.  10-17. — "And  when  He  was  come  into  Jerufalem,  all  the  city  was  moved,
'  laying,  Who  is  this  ?  And  the  multitude  faid,  This  is  Jefus,  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth
'  of  Galilee.  And  Jefus  went  into  the  temple  of  God,  and  caft  out  all  them  that  fold  and
'  bought  in  the  temple,  and  overthrew  the  tables  of  the  money-changers,  and  the  feats  of
'  them  that  fold  doves :  And  faid  unto  them,  It  is  written,  My  houle  (hall  be  called  the
'  houfe  of  prayer ;  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves.  And  the  blind  and  the  lame
'came  to  Him  in  the  temple;  and  He  healed  them.  And  when  the  chief  priefts  and
'  fcribes  faw  the  wonderful  things  that  He  did,  and  the  children  crying  in  the  temple,  and
'  faying,  Hofanna  to  the  Son  of  David,  they  were  fore  difpleafed,  and  faid  unto  Him,
'  Heareft  thou  what  thefe  fay  ?  And  Jefus  faith  unto  them,  Yea ;  have  ye  never  read,
*  Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  fucklings  Thou  haft  perfected  praife  ?  And  He  left
'  them,  and  went  out  of  the  city  into  Bethany ;  and  He  lodged  there."


read  in  the  holy  Gofpel  how  that  our
Lord  went  into  the  Temple,  and  drove
out  thofe  who  were  buying  and  felling
therein,  and  faid  to  thofe  who  fold  doves :
"  Take  thefe  things  hence."  Herewith  He  fignified
nought  elfe  but  that  He  would  have  the  temple


How  that
our  Lord  will
have  the  tem-
ple of  the  foul
empty,  for
Him  to  dwell
alone  therein.


284


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


What  fort  of
people  are  ty-
pified by  tbofe
who  bought
and  fold  in
the  temple.


empty ;  juft  as  if  He  had  faid  :  "I  have  a  right  to
"  this  temple,  and  will  dwell  there  alone,  and  have
"  the  Ible  rule  therein."  Now  what  is  this  temple  of
which  God  is  minded  to  have  pofleffion  even  by  force,
and  to  rule  according  to  His  own  will  ?  It  is  the  foul
of  man,  which  He  has  created  and  fafhioned  fo  truly
in  His  own  likenefs ;  as  we  read  that  God  faid :  "  Let
"  us  make  man  after  our  image."  And  He  has  done
fo  too,  and  made  the  foul  of  man  fo  like  Himfelf,  that
there  is  nothing  in  heaven  or  on  earth  fb  like  Himfelf
as  that  is.  For  which  reaibn  God  will  have  this  tem-
ple to  be  empty,  that  nothing  be  there  but  He  alone  ;
and  the  caufe  why  this  temple  pleafes  Him  ib  well,
is  that  it  is  ib  like  Himfelf,  and  He  loveth  to  be  in
it  forafmuch  as  He  is  there  alone.

Now  mark,  who  were  the  people  who  were  buying
and  felling,  and  whom  do  they  reprefent  at  this  day  ?
Now  obferve,  I  intend  to  fpeak  only  of  the  good  people
who  thus  bought  and  fold,  and  yet  whom  our  Lord
fcourged  and  drove  out,  and  do  not  mean  to  fay  any-
thing to-day  concerning  open  finners,  who  knowingly
live  in  the  commiffion  of  deadly  fins.  And  the  Lord
does  the  fame  now  a-days  to  all  who  buy  and  fell  in
His  temple,  for  fuch  He  will  not  fuffer  to  remain
therein.  Behold,  dear  children,  all  thofe  are  traders
who  keep  themfelves  from  open  fins,  and  would  fain
be  good  people,  and  do  their  works  to  the  glory  of
God,  and  perform  many  good  works,  fuch  as  fatting,
wratching,  praying,  and  the  like  ;  yet  do  it  all  in  order
that  our  Lord  may  give  them,  or  do  for  them,  fbme-
thing  that  they  wim,  and  thus  they  feek  themfelves
in  all  things.  All  fuch  are  traders ;  that  is,  to  fpeak


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


285


in  vulgar  language,  they  wifh  to  give  one  thing  in
exchange   for  another,    and  would   fain  thus  drive  a
traffic  with  our  Lord ;   and  they  are  deceived  in  their
bargain,  for  all  that  they  poffefs  or  are  able  to  perform
they  have  received  from  God,  and  confequently  God
does   not   owe  them   anything  in  return,  nor  is  He
bound  to  do  anything  for  them,  except,  indeed,  He
would  do  it  of  His  free  bounty.    What  they  are,  they
are  of  God ;   and  what  they  become,  they  have  re-
ceived of  God  and  not  from   themfelves ;    therefore
God  owes  them    nothing   in  return  for  their  works
and  their  gifts,  unlefs  He  do  it  of  His  own  pleafure,
of  His  grace,  and  not  for  the  fake  of  their  works  and
gifts ;    for  they  have  nothing  of  their  own  to  give,
they  do  not  even  do  their  good  works  of  their  own
power ;    as  Chrift    faid :    "  Without    me    ye   can  do
"nothing!"       Thofe  who  would  thus  bargain  with
our  Lord  are  thick-headed  and  ignorant  men,  who
have  little  or  no  infight  into  the  truth,  wherefore  God
fcourges   them   and   drives  them  out  of  the  temple.
Light  and  darknefs  cannot  dwell  together.      God  is
the  Truth  and  Light  in  Himfelf ;  when,  therefore,  He
cometh  into  His  temple,  He  drives  out  of  it  ignorance
and  darknefs,    and    reveals    Himfelf  with    light   and
truth.     Then  when  the  truth  is  perceived,  the  buyers
and  fellers  are  gone ;  and  the  truth  will  have  nothing
to  do  with  trafficking.      God  does  not  feek  His  own ;
all  His  works  are  done  voluntarily  and  in  finglenefs  of
purpofe  :   He  does  them  for  very  love.      So  likewife  is
it  with  the  man  who  is  united  with  God :   his  works
alfb  are  done  voluntarily  and  in  finglenefs  of  mind,
and  he  does  them  for  love  without  any  wherefore—


Of  traffickers
with  God,


wbofe  expec-
tations will
be  deceived.


God  does  all
His  works  for
love,  and  fo
muft  the  man
wbo  would  be
united  with
Him.


286


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


Oftbofe  who
are  Jtgnified
by  the  money-
changers,


that  is,  without  any  regard  to  himfclf — to  the  glory
of  God  only,  and  feeketh  not  his  own  in  them  ;  and
God  works  them  through  him.

I  fay  further,  fb  long  as  a  man  in  any  of  his  works
is  feeking  or  defiring  anything  that  God  has  to  give,  or
will  give  hereafter,  he  is  like  thefe  traffickers.  But  if
thou  wouldft  be  quite  pure  from  fuch  a  mercenary  fpirit,
thou  muft  do  thy  utmoft  in  good  works  fimply  for
the  praife  of  God,  and  malt  ftand  apart  from  it  all,  as
if  thou  hadfl  not  done  it ;  thou  malt  afk  nothing  in
return.  If  thou  doeft  thy  works  in  this  fpirit,  then
are  they  godly  and  fpiritual.  And  then  the  buyers
and  fellers  are  altogether  driven  out  of  the  temple,
and  God  alone  dwelleth  there,  when  thou  purpofeft
nothing  but  what  God  purpofeth.

Now  mark,  there  is  yet  a  higher  ftate  than  that  of
the  traders,  which  is  indicated  to  us  in  this  Gofpel ;
namely,  that  of  the  men  who  perform  their  works
with  a  fincerely  good  intent,  and  yet  are  hindered
from  coming  to  the  clofeft  union  with  God,  inaf-
much  as  they  ftill  carry  on  Ibme  traffic  and  converfe
with  the  creatures,  and  are  thus  like  the  money-
changers and  thofe  who  fold  doves,  whofe  tables  and
feats  the  Lord  overthrew.  For  although  this  their
occupation  was  at  firft  begun  by  certain  of  them  with
a  good  intent,  it  was  an  unfeemly  practice,  and  was
afterwards  turned  to  the  greatefl  abufes  of  covetouf-
nefs,  rather  than  to  the  fervice  of  God.  So  likewife
it  is  with  the  perfbns  of  whom  I  am  fpeaking  ;  for
although  their  intent  is  good,  and  they  do  their  good
works  fincerely  for  God's  fake,  and  do  not  feek  their
own  therein,  yet  neverthelefs  they  do  them  with  felt-


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


287


appropriation,  with  time  and  number,  with  images
and  reference  to  before  and  after.  By  thele  things
they  are  hindered  from  coming  to  the  beft  and  higheft
truth ;  for  they  ought  to  keep  themselves  free  and
empty  of  all  that  is  accidental,  from  pleafure  and  pain,
even  as  our  Lord  is  free  and  alone,  and  receiveth  Him-
felf  ever  afrefh,  without  interval  or  time,  from  His
Heavenly  Father,  and  in  the  fame  Now  is  ever  with-
out ceafmg  begotten  afrefh  in  perfeclness,  with  thank-
ful praiie,  into  the  Majefty  of  the  Father,  in  co-
equal dignity.  In  like  manner  muft  the  man  who
defireth  to  perceive  the  higheft  truth,  and  to  live
therein  without  before  or  after,  and  without  let  or
hindrance  from  any  of  the  outward  acls  or  mental
images  with  which  he  has  ever  been  converfant,  ftand
free  and  alone  in  this  eternal  Now.  He  mall  fimply
receive  the  gift  of  God,  and  bring  it  forth  again  and
render  it  up  to  God  without  let  or  hindrance,  in  His
light,  and  with  thankful  praife  through  our  Lord
Jefus  Chrift.  Thus  he  will  have  done  with  all  the
doves  and  money-changing  ;  that  is,  with  all  the  hin-
drance and  qualification  which  arifes  from  thofe  works
which  are  good  in  themfelves,  but  in  which  a  man
feeks  fbmething  of  his  own.  For  which  cause  also
the  Lord  would  not  fuffer  any  to  carry  veflels  to  and
fro  in  the  temple,  as  St.  Mark  tells  us  ;  all  which  has
to  do  with  the  fame  principle  —  that  a  fpiritual  man
muft  keep  himfelf  free  and  aloof  from  all  objects  that
would  hinder  his  advance  towards  perfedlnefs.

Now  when  the  temple  is  thus  cleared  of  all  that
blocks  it  up,  /'.  e.  of  all  felfifhnefs  and  ignorance,  it
Ihincs  forth  in  fiich  beauty,  and  is  fo  bright  and  re-


being  binder'
ed  by  mixed
motives  in
their  good
works.


Of  the  beau-
ty of  the  tern-
pit  when  it  is
cleared  of  all
but  God.


288


Sermoji  for  Palm  Sunday.


How  that
none  muft


fplendent  above  all  elfe  that  God  has  created,  that
nothing  can  outfhine  it  fave  the  uncreated  God  alone.
Nothing  even  that  belongs  to  angelic  exiftence  can  be
compared  to  this  temple.  The  higheft  angels  do  in-
deed in  many  refpecls  refemble  the  temple  of  a  noble
foul,  yet  not  wholly,  for  there  is  Ibme  meafure,  a  cer-
tain bound,  fet  to  their  fimilarity  to  it  in  knowledge
and  love,  beyond  which  they  cannot  pafs  ;  but  the  foul
is  ever  able  to  advance  fo  long  as  it  is  in  time.  For
if  the  foul  of  a  man  yet  living  in  this  prefent  ftate
were  on  a  level  with  the  higheft  angel,  the  man  could
yet,  by  virtue  of  his  free  felf-determination,  outftrip
the  angel  at  every  fucceflive  moment,  without  count,
that  is  to  fay  without  mode,  and  above  the  mode  of
the  angels,  and  all  created  reafon.  God  is  alone  free
and  uncreated  ;  and  therefore  He  alone  is  equal  to  the
foul  as  touching  freedom,  and  unequal  as  touching
uncreatednefs,  for  the  foul  is  created.  But  when  the
foul  enters  into  the  unmixed  light,  me,  with  her  created
I,  finks  fo  deeply  into  her  own  nothingnefs,  that  me
cannot  by  her  own  power  regain  the  fenfe  of  her  fepa-
rate  exiftence  as  a  creature.  But  God  upholds  her
with  His  uncreated  power,  and  keeps  the  foul  ftill  her-
felf.  The  foul  has  dared  to  become  naught ;  and  yet
me  cannot  attain  thereunto  of  her  own  power,  fo  en-
tirely is  me  loft  until  God  upholds  her  with  His  power.
It  muft  needs  be  fo,  feeing  that,  as  I  faid  before,  Jefus
entered  into  the  temple  of  God,  and  caft  out  thofe
who  bought  and  fold  therein,  and  began  to  Ipeak  in
the  temple.

Now,  dear  children,  know  of  a  truth,  if  any  one
elfe  would  fain  fpeak  in  the  temple,  that  is  in  the  foul,


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


289


except  Jefus  alone,  He  holds  His  peace,  as  if  He  were
not  there  ;  and  in  truth  He  is  not  at  home  in  the  foul,
for  fhe  has  ftrange  guefts  with  whom  me  defireth  to
hold  converfe.  But  if  Jefus  is  to  fpeak  in  the  foul,
fhe  muft  be  alone,  and  muft  be  filent  herfelf  that  fhe
may  hear  the  voice  of  Jefus ;  and  then  He  enters  in
and  begins  to  fpeak.  What  does  He  fpeak  ?  He
fpeaks  that  He  is.  And  what  is  He  then  ?  He  is  the
Word  of  the  Father  ;  in  which  Word  the  Father  utters
Himfelf,  and  all  the  divine  nature,  and  all  that  God
is,  fo  that,  in  that  He  perceiveth  it,  He  alfo  is  it,  and
He  is  perfecl  in  His  perception  and  in  His  power.
Hence  He  is  perfecl:  through  this  His  fpeaking,  for
when  He  uttereth  this  Word,  He  uttereth  Himfelf
and  all  things  in  another  perfbn,  and  giveth  that
perfbn  the  fame  nature  which  He  Himfelf  has,  and
fpeaks  all  rational  fpirits  into  being  in  that  Word,  in
the  likenefs  of  the  fame  Word,  according  to  the
type  or  pattern  which  abideth  continually  in  Him.
And  thus  the  Word  mines  forth  in  man,  according
as  each  word  exifts  in  God.  Yet  is  he  not  in  all
refpedls  like  this  fame  effential  Word  ;  but  rather
the  poflibility  is  granted  to  him  of  receiving  a  certain
likenefs  by  the  grace  of  this  Word,  and  of  receiving
the"  Word  as  it  is  in  itfelf.  This  all  has  the  Father
Himfelf  fpoken  through  the  Word,  and  all  that  is  in
the  Word.

Here  the  queftion  might  be  afked,  If  the  Father
hath  fpoken  this,  in  what  fenfe  doth  Jefus  fpeak  in
the  foul  ?  Here  remember,  dear  children,  what  I
have  faid  of  the  manner  of  His  fpeaking,  namely,
that  He  revealeth  Himfelf  and  all  that  the  Father


u


fpeak  in  the
Joulfave
Jefus,  elfe
will  He  bold
His  peace.


Of  that
tvbicb  He
fpeaketb.


290


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


He  declaretb
the  Power  of
the  Father ,


the  Wifdom
of  the  Son,


and  the  Love
of  the  Holy
Gboft.


hath   uttered  in  Him,  according  to  the  meafure  of
the  foul's  ability  to  receive  it.

In  the  firfl  place  He  reveals  the  Father's  fovereignty
to  the  foul,  by  declaring  His  changelefs,  infinite  Power.
And  when  through  the  Son  the  foul  hath  experience
of  this  power,  it  becomes  ftrong  and  mighty  in  what-
ever happens,  fo  that  it  grows  powerful  and  fleadfafl
in  all  virtues  and  in  perfect  fmglenefs  of  mind,  fo  that
neither  weal  nor  woe,  nor  any  or  all  of  the  things
that  God  has  created  in  time,  have  power  to  ftir  him,
for  that  he  has  firm  and  abiding  footing  in  the  ftrength
of  God,  againft  which  all  things  are  weak  and  un-
availing.

In  the  fecond  place,  the  Lord  reveals  Himfelf  in  the
foul  with  an  infinite  Wifdom,  which  He  Himfelf  is.
In  this  Wifdom  the  Father  perceiveth  Himfelf,  with  all
His  Fatherly  fovereignty.  And  that  fame  Word  which
is  alfo  Wifdom,  and  all  that  it  comprehends,  is  all  the
fame,  fole  Unity.  When  this  Wifdom  is  united  with
the  foul,  all  doubt  and  error  and  darknefs  utterly
vanim  away,  and  me  is  tranfported  into  a  pure  light,
which  is  God  Himfelf.  As  the  prophet  fays  :  "  Lord
"  in  Thy  light  fhall  we  fee  light."  That  is  to  fay  :
"  Lord  in  Thy  light  fhall  we  perceive  the  light  in  the
"  foul."  Then  is  God  perceived  in  the  foul  by  means
of  God.  Then  does  me,  by  means  of  this  Wifdom,
perceive  herfelf  and  all  things,  and  perceiveth  this  Wif-
dom itfelf,  and  through  it  me  perceiveth  the  Father's
majefty,  and  His  effential  felf-exiftence  in  fimple  one-
nefs,  without  diftinclion.

In  the  third  place,  Chrift  reveals  Himfelf  alfb  with
an  infinite  Love,  fwreetnefs  and  richnefs  flowing  forth


Sermon  for  Palm  Sunday.


291


from  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  overflowing  and
ftreaming  in  a  very  flood  of  richnefs  and  fweetnefs
into  the  heart  that  is  waiting  to  receive  it ;  and  with
this  fweetnefs  He  not  only  reveals  Himfelf  to  the  foul,
but  unites  Himfelf  with  her.  Through  this  fweet-
nefs, the  foul  in  its  effence  by  grace  flows  out  with
power  above  all  creatures  back  into  her  firft  origin  and
fount.  Then  is  the  outward  man  obedient  unto  the
inward  man,  even  unto  death,  and  liveth  in  conftant
peace  in  the  fervice  of  God  continually.  That  the
Lord  may  thus  come  into  our  fouls  alfo,  overthrowing
and  cafting  out  all  hindrances,  bodily  or  fpiritual,
that  we  may  become  one  here  on  earth,  and  hereafter
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  may  He  help  us  evermore.
Amen.


U2


XIV.


Sermon  for  Thurfday  in  Eafter  Week.


How  we  ought  to  love  God,  and  bow  Cbrift  is  a  Mafler  of  the
Eternal  Good,  wherefore  we  ought  to  love  Him  above  all  things  ;
a  Mafler  of  the  Highejl  Truth,  wherefore  we  ought  to  contem-
plate Him  ;  and  a  Majler  of  the  Higbeft  Perfeflnefs,  wherefore
we  ought  to  follow  after  Him  without  let  or  hindrance.

JOHN  xx.  1 6 "  She  turned  herfelf  and  faid  unto  Him,  Rabboni;  which  is  to  fay,  Matter."


How  that
our  Lord  ap-
peared unto
Mary  Mag-
dalene after
His  rejur-
reftion.


Wherefore
He  bid  Him-
f elf  from  her
atfirjl.


Him.


HEN  our  Lord  had  rifen  from  the  dead,
Mary  Magdalene  defired  with  her  whole
heart  to  behold  our  blefTed  Lord ;  and
he  revealed  Himfelf  to  her  in  the  form
of  a  gardener,  and  fo  me  did  not  know
Then  our  Lord  faid  unto  her  "  Mary ;"  and


with  that  word  me  knew  Him,    and  faid,  Rabboni !
that  is  to  fay,  Mafter.

Now  mark,  fo  long  as  Mary  flood  by  the  grave
looking  at  the  angels,  Chrift  flood  behind  her,  con-
cealing Himfelf  from  her.  For  the  Lord  our  God
hideth  Himfelf  from  thofe  who  are  full  of  care  about
the  creatures,  and  grieving  over  the  lofs  of  earthly
things  and  creatures ;  but  as  foon  as  man  turns  from
the  creatures  to  find  God,  God  reveals  Himfelf  unto
the  foul.  Thus,  when  Mary  turned  to  tlfe  grave  of
Chrifl,  it  was  faid  unto  her,  "  Mary,"  which  name


Sermon  for  Thurfday  in  Eqfter  IVeek.         293


fignifies  a  ftar  of  the  fea,  a  queen  of  the  world,  and
one  who  is  illuminated  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  who
defireth  to  fee  God,  muft  be  as  a  ftar  in  the  firma-
ment, fevered  from  and  fpurning  all  the  things  of
time,  and  illuminated  to  fee  all  heavenly  things.

When  me  heard  the  word  that  Chrft  spoke,
"  Mary/'  me  knew  our  Lord,  and  faid,  Rabboni,
which  is  to  fay,  Matter ;  for  me  and  His  other  difci-
ples  and  followers  commonly  addrefs  Him  with  this
title,  as  He  fays :  "  Ye  call  me  Matter  and  Lord,  and
"  ye  fay  well,  for  fb  I  am."  For  He  is  truly  a  Matter
of  the  Higheft  Good,  and  therefore  mould  we  love
Him  above  all  things.  He  is  a  Matter  of  Truth,  and
therefore  mould  we  contemplate  Him.  He  is  a  Matter
of  the  Higheft  Perfeftnefs,  and  therefore  mould  we
follow  Him  without  any  looking  backwards  behind  us.

He  is  (as  I  faid  firft)  a  Matter  of  the  Higheft  Good,
and  therefore  mould  we  love  Him  above  all  things.
Now,  thou  mighteft  fay,  "  God  is  infinite,  a  fupreme
"  Good  without  limits,  and  the  foul  and  all  creatures
"  are  finite  and  bounded  ;  how,  then,  can  the  foul  love
"  and  know  God  ?  "  Hearken  :  God  is  infinite  and
without  end,  but  the  foul's  defire  is  an  abyfs  which
cannot  be  filled  except  by  a  Good  which  is  infinite ;
and  the  more  ardently  the  foul  longeth  after  God,
the  more  me  wills  to  long  after  Him  ;  for  God  is  a
Good  without  drawback,  and  a  well  of  living  water
without  bottom,  and  the  foul  is  made  in  the  image  of
God,  and  therefore  it  is  created  to  know  and  love
God.  So,  becaufe  Chrift  is  a  Matter  of  the  Higheft
Good,  the  foul  ought  to  love  Him  above  all  things ;
for  He  is  love,  and  from  Him  doth  love  flow  into  us,

u  3


But  wbenjbe
knew  Him,
called  Him
"  Majler!"


How  that
Cbrijt  is  a
Majier  of  tie
Higbeft  Good.


294


Sermon  for


Wherefore
we  Jbould
love  Him
without  mea-
fure,


"Without  a
rival,


as  out  of  a  well  of  life.  The  well  of  life  is  love  ;  and
he  who  dwelleth  not  in  love  is  dead,  as  St.  John  fays
in  his  Epiftle.  Now,  forafmuch  as  Chrift  is  a  well-
fpring  and  Matter  of  the  Higheft  Good,  therefore  mall
the  foul  love  Him  without  refiftance.  For  it  is  her
property  that  fhe  muft  love  that  which  is  God ;  and
therefore  muft  fhe  love  that  which  is  the  Higheft  Good,
without  meamre,  without  rival,  and  without  ceafing
to  utter  forth  His  praife.

Without  meafure  mall  the  foul  love  God  ;  con-
cerning which  St.  Bernard  fays :  "  The  caufe  where-
"  fore  the  foul  mall  love  God,  is  God  ;  but  the  meafure
"  of  this  love  is  without  meafure,  for  God  is  an  immea-
"  furable  Good,  becaufe  His  benefits  are  without  num-
"  ber  or  end  :  wherefore  the  foul  mail  love  God  with-
"  out  meafure."  Hence  St.  Paul  fays  :  "  I  pray  God
"  that  your  love  may  increafe  and  abound  yet  more
"  and  more."  And  St.  Bernard  fays  :  "  In  our  love
"  to  God  wre  have  no  rule  nor  direction  to  obferve,
"  but  that  we  love  Him  as  He  hath  loved  us.  He
"  hath  loved  us  unto  the  end  that  we  might  love
"  Him  world  without  end.  Therefore,  our  inward
"  defire  ought  ever  to  increafe  fb  long  as  we  are  here  on
"  earth  ;  but  although  the  inward  work  of  our  love  to
"  God  ought  ever  to  increafe,  yet  the  outward  works
"  of  love  ought  to  be  meted  out  with  due  wifdom,
"  that  we  fo  exercife  ourfelves  as  not  to  injure  nature,
"  but  to  fubdue  it  unto  the  fpirit."

In  the  fecond  place,  the  foul  fhall  love  God  with-
out a  fellow  ;  that  is  to  fay,  in  that  degree  of  love  with
which  the  foul  loveth  God,  mall  no  creature  ftand ;
and  all  whom  the  foul  loves,  me  fhall  love  in  God


Thurfday  in  Eqfter  Week.


295


and  to  God.  Furthermore,  me  mall  love  the  creatures
for  God's  fake,  to  God  and  in  God.  She  loves  them
for  God's  fake,  when  me  loves  them  for  that  caufe
which  is  God  ;  me  loves  them  to  God,  when  Ihe
loveth  them  for  that  goodnefs  which  is  God ;  Ihe
loves  them  in  God,  when  me  feeks  no  other  delight
nor  end  in  them  but  God ;  and  thus  Ihe  loveth  the
creatures  in  God,  and  God  in  the  creatures.  Hence
Chrift  tells  us :  "  Thou  malt  love  God  with  all  thy
"  heart,  with  all  thy  foul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,"
which  words  are  thus  expounded  by  St.  Auguftine :
"  Our  Lord  faith  that  we  are  to  love  God  with  all  our
"  heart,  with  all  our  foul,  and  with  all  our  mind,  to
"  the  intent  that  man  mould  have  no  fingle  faculty
"  within  his  foul  that  is  empty  or  barren  of  the  love
"  of  God  ;  that  is,  from  which  the  love  of  God  is  ab-
"  fent ;  and  that  all  which  it  comes  into  our  heart  to
"  love,  we  may  love  for  God's  fake,  and  enjoy  in
"  godly  love  ;  for  God  loveth  the  foul,  and  therefore
"  Ihall  the  foul  love  Him  without  a  fellow."

In  the  third  place,  the  foul  mail  love  God  without
filence ;  for  he  who  is  in  love  cannot  be  filent,  but
muft  proclaim  and  utter  forth  his  love.  St.  Gregory
fpeaks  of  two  forts  of  crying  aloud :  the  one  is  that  of
the  mouth,  the  other  that  of  the  works.  He  fays  of
the  voice  of  the  deeds,  that  it  is  louder  than  that  of
the  mouth.  Of  the  latter,  David  fays  :  "  I  have  cried
"  unto  God  with  my  voice,  and  He  hath  heard  my
"  prayer."  Chryfoftom  fays  :  "  It  is  the  habit  and
"  cuflom  of  loving  fouls  that  they  cannot  hide  their
"  love,  nor  forbear  to  fpeak  of  it,  but  they  tell  it  to
"  their  familiar  friends,  and  defcribe  the  inward  flames

u  4


and  be  ever
declaring  His
praife,


witt  orr  lipst


Sermon  for


and  with  our
deeds,  which
fpeak  louder
than  words.


The  Lord  of
love  rewards
nothing  J>ut
love.


rewards  only
out  of /ore,


"  of  love  ;  and  the  faults  which  they  have  committed
"  againft  God  they  tell  to  thofe  whom  they  love,  and
"  cannot  keep  filence  about  them,  but  often  fpeak  of
"  them,  that  they  may  obtain  relief  and  refrefhment
"  thereby."  The  fecond  cry  is  that  of  the  actions, —
the  wray  in  which  a  man  proves  his  inward  love  by
his  outward  works.  St.  Gregory  fays  the  witnefs  of
love  is  the  proof  given  by  the  works ;  for  where  love
is,  it  works  great  things ;  but  if  it  work  not,  it  is  a
fure  fign  that  it  is  not  there.  Thus  Mary  Magdalene
had  good  reafon  to  exclaim  "  Mafter !"  for  Chrift  is  a
Mailer  of  all  Good.  Therefore  we  ought  to  love
Him  above  all  things.  And  rightly  is  he  called  a
Mafter  of  Love,  for  three  caufes ;  for  He  rewards
nothing  but  love,  He  rewards  only  out  of  love,  and
He  rewards  with  love.

Firft,  I  fay  that  He  rewards  nothing  but  love.  By
three  things  may  a  man  win  reward :  by  outward
a&s,  by  inward  contemplation,  and  by  inward  afpira-
tion  and  love.  The  outward  acl  has  no  merit  unless
it  be  wrought  in  love ;  for  the  outward  acl:  perifhes
and  is  over,  and  cannot  merit  that  which  is  eternal.
For  Paul  fays  :  "  Chanty  never  ceafes  ;"  wherefore  a
man  can  never  win  eternal  life  by  any  wrorks  except
they  be  done  in  love ;  and  hence  he  who  truly  loveth
God  ieparates  himfelf  from  all  that  is  not  God ;  for
he  who  loves  the  uncreated  good,  defpifes  the  created.

In  the  fecond  place,  I  faid  that  God  only  rewards
out  of  love.  For  from  the  love  wherewith  He  loveth
man,  He  giveth  Himfelf,  He  giveth  His  very  lelf  as  a
reward,  He  giveth  Himfelf  wholly,  and  not  in  part ;
for  God  hath  loved  man  with  an  eternal  love,  and  He


Thurfday  in  Eajler  Week.


297


gives  a  man  nothing  lefs  than  Himfelf.  He  faid  to
Abraham :  "  Fear  not,  I  am  thy  ihield,  and  thy  ex-
"  ceeding  great  reward/'

In  the  third  place,  He  rewards  a  man  with  love.
For  this  reward  confifts  in  being  able  to  behold  God
in  His  clearnefs  without  a  veil,  and  to  enjoy  the
fruition  of  His  love,  and  keep  it  for  all  eternity.
Wherefore  it  was  not  without  reafbn  that  Mary  ex-
claimed "  Mafter !"  And  thou  too,  O  man,  cry  unto
Him  devoutly  from  the  bottom  of  thy  heart :  "  O
"  Mafter  of  the  Higheft  Good,  and  my  God,  by  the
"  love  which  Thou  art,  draw  me  to  Thyfelf,  I  long
"  after  Thy  favour,  and  that  I  may  love  Thee  above
"  all  things."

Now  when  I  began  I  mentioned  two  other  points :
firft,  how  that  Chrift  is  a  Mafter  of  the  Higheft
Truth,  and  therefore  we  ought  to  contemplate  Him.
Here  take  note  that  thou  canft  contemplate  God  in
His  creatures,  which  He  has  made  out  of  nothing,
whereby  thou  art  able  to  difcover  His  omnipotence.
But  when  thou  feeft  and  confidereft  how  admirably
the  creatures  are  fafhioned  and  put  together,  and  in
what  wonderful  order  they  are  arranged,  thou  art
able  to  perceive  and  trace  the  Wifdom  of  God,
which  is  afcribed  to  the  Son.  And  when  further
thou  comeft  to  perceive  the  gentlenefs  of  the  crea-
tures, and  how  all  creatures  have  fomething  loving
in  them,  then  thou  perceiveft  the  loving-kindnefs  of
the  Holy  Spirit.  Thus  St.  Paul  tells  the  Romans
that  men  are  able  to  behold  the  invifible  goodnefs  of
God  through  the  things  that  they  can  lee ;  that  is  to
fay,  the  creatures  which  He  has  made.  We  are  alfo


and  rewards
with  love.


How  that
Cbrift  is  a
Mafter  of  'the
Higbefl
Truth,


298         Sermon  for  Tlinrfday  in  Eqfter  Week.


and  a  Majier
of  Perfeft-
nefs.


able  to  perceive  God  by  the  light  of  grace,  as  the
Prophet  fays :  "  Lord,  in  Thy  light  {hall  we  fee  the
"  light ;"  that  is,  God  Himfelf ;  for  "  God  is  light,  and
"  in  Him  is  no  darknefs  anywhere."  Moreover  we  fhall
at  the  laft  behold  God  in  the  light  of  His  glory,  and
there  fhall  we  fee  Him  without  a  veil,  bright  as  He
is ;  for  He  is  a  Mafter  of  Truth,  who  giveth  us  to
know  all  truth.  In  the  third  place,  Chrift  is  a  Mafter
of  Perfection ;  wherefore  a  man  fhall  leave  all  things
to  follow  Him,  for  in  God  he  fhall  find  all  things
united  in  one  perfeclinefs  which  are  fcattered  abroad
among  the  creatures.  Therefore,  O  man,  if  thou
wilt  be  perfect,  be  a  follower  of  Chrift.  He  fays :
"  Wliofo  will  not  forfake  father  and  mother,  and
"  fifters  and  brothers,  and  all  that  he  hath,  cannot  be
"  my  difciple."  For  father  and  mother,  fifters  and
brothers,  and  all  creatures,  are  a  man's  enemies  if
they  keep  him  back  from  God  and  hinder  him  from
treading  the  ftraight  path  to  eternal  blefTednefs.
Therefore  forfake  the  creatures,  and  follow  after  the
Mafter  of  Perfection,  even  Jefus  Chrift,  blefTed  for
ever.  May  He  grant  us  by  His  grace  to  do  fb !
Amen.


XV.


Sermon  for  the  Firft  Sunday  after  Eafter.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


How  we  are  to  afcend  by  threejlages  to  true  peace  and  purity  of  heart.


JOHN  xx.  19.  —  "  Peace  be  to  you."


EACE  be  with  you/'  faid  our  beloved
Lord  to  His  difciples  after  His  refur-
reclion.  All  men  by  nature  defire  reft
and  peace,  and  are  ever  ftriving  after
it  in  all  their  manifold  actions,  efforts,
and  labours  ;  and  yet  to  all  eternity  they  will  never
attain  to  true  peace,  unlefs  they  ieek  it  where  alone  it
is  to  be  found, — in  God.  What,  then,  are  the  means
and  ways  to  find  true  peace,  and  the  pureft,  higheft,
and  moft  perfect  truth  ?  Now  mark,  I  will  fpeak
unto  you  in  a  parable.  As  our  bleffed  Lord  drew  His
difciple  St.  John  to  Himfelf  in  a  three-fold  manner,
even  ib  does  He  now  draw  all  who  ever  arrive  at  the
deepeft  truth.

The  firft  way  in  which  our  Lord  drew  St.  John  to
Himfelf  was  when  He  called  him  out  of  the  world
and  made  him  an  Apoftle.  The  fecond  was  when
He  fuffered  him  to  reft  on  His  bofom  ;  and  the  third
and  moft  perfect  was  on  the  holy  day  of  Pentecoft,
when  the  Holy  Ghoft  was  given  unto  him,  and  a  door


How  that
peace  is  the
aim  of  all
men's  dejire
and  effort.


We  muft  be
drawn  to  God
in  order  to
find  it.


How  St.
John  was
drawn  to
Cbrift.


300


Sermon  for  the


Wemuft  frft
be  drawn  up-
wards by  the
lower  powers
being  govern-
ed by  the
higher.


Secondly,  by
being  changed
into  the  image
of  our  loving
Lord.


was  opened  unto  him  through  which  he  was  taken  up
into  heaven.

Thus,  like  St.  John,  is  each  man  firft  called  out  of
the  world,  when  all  his  lower  powrers  come  to  be
governed  by  his  higheft  reafon,  fo  that  he  learns  to
know  himfelf  and  to  exercife  his  free  felf-guiding
power ;  fo  that  he  fets  a  watch  over  his  words,  faying
nothing  to  anyone  which  he  would  not  wim  to  be
faid  to  himfelf; — over  his  impulfes,  marking  whether
they  proceed  from  God  and  tend  towards  Him  ;  —
over  his  thoughts,  that  he  do  not  voluntarily  indulge
in  any  evil  or  vain  imaginations,  or  that,  if  fuch  fug-
geft  themfelves,  they  mould  be  made  only  an  incentive
and  ftepping-ftone  to  better  things ; — over  his  works,
that  in  his  undertakings  he  may  have  a  {ingle  eye  to
the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  mankind.  On
this  wife  does  the  Lord  call  thee  out  of  the  world,  and
make  thee  an  apoftle  of  Chrift  to  thy  fellow-man,
and  fb  thou  learneft  to  convert  the  outward  into  the
inward  man,  which  is  the  firft  ftep  in  the  Chriftian
courfe.

Secondly ;  wilt  thou  with  St.  John  reft  on  the
loving  heart  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  thou  muft  be
transformed  into  the  beauteous  image  of  our  Lord  by
a  conftant,  earneft  contemplation  thereof,  confidering
His  holy  meeknefs  and  humility,  the  deep,  fiery  love
that  He  bore  to  His  friends  and  His  foes,  and  His
mighty,  obedient  refignation  which  He  manifeftcd  in
all  the  paths  wherein  His  Father  called  Him  to  tread.
Next  call  to  mind  the  boundlefs  charity  which  He
mowed  to  all  men,  and  alfb  His  blefTed  poverty.
Heaven  and  earth  were  His,  and  He  called  them  not


Firft  Sunday  after  Eajler.


301


His  own.  In  all  His  words  and  deeds,  He  looked
only  to  the  glory  of  His  Father  and  the  falvation  of
mankind.  And  now  ye  muft  gaze  much  more  clofely
and  deeply  into  the  glorious  image  of  our  Lord  Jefus
Chrift  than  I  can  mow  you  with  my  outward  teach-
ing, and  maintain  a  continual,  earneft  effort  and
afpiration  after  it.  Then  look  attentively  at  thyfelf,
how  unlike  thou  art  to  this  image,  and  behold  thy
own  littlenefs.  Here  will  thy  Lord  let  thee  reft  on
Him.  There  is  no  better  and  more  profitable  way  to
this  end  while  in  our  prefent  ftate,  than  to  receive
worthily  the  facrament  of  the  body  of  Chrift,  and  to
follow  the  counfel  of  one  on  whom  the  light  of  grace
has  Ihone  more  brightly  than  it  has  on  thee.  In  the
glorious  likenefs  of  Chrift  thou  wilt  be  made  rich,
and  find  all  the  folace  and  fweetnefs  in  the  world.

But  there  are  many  who,  having  advanced  thus  far,
think  in  their  hafte  that  they  have  conquered  for
their  own  the  ground  on  which  they  ftand,  while  yet
they  are  far  from  the  goal.  Although  St.  John  had
lain  on  Chrift's  bofom,  yet  he  let  his  cloak  fall  and
fled  when  the  Jews  laid  hands  on  Chrift.  Therefore,
however  holy  may  be  thy  walk  in  thefe  two  paths,
look  to  it  that,  if  thou  art  aflailed,  thou  do  not  let
thy  mantle  fall  through  thy  hafty  thought  for  thyfelf.
It  is  good  and  holy  that  thou  fhouldft  exercife  thyfelf
in  thefe  two  ways,  and  let  no  creature  turn  thee  afide
therefrom,  until  God  Himfelf  draws  thee  up  into  a
clofer  union  with  Himfelf.  If  He  thus  draw  thee  up,
then  let  go  all  forms  and  images,  and  fuffer  Him  to
work  as  with  His  inftrument.  It  is  more  well-
pleafmg  to  Him,  and  more  profitable  to  thee,  that


Watcbfulnefs
ever  needed.


Sermon  for  the


Thirdly,  bow
the  door  of
heaven  is
opened  to
fame.


thou  mouldft  leave  Him  to  do  as  He  will  in  thee  for
a  moment,  than  that  thou  mouldft  exercife  thyfelf  in
lower  things  for  a  hundred  years.  Now  fome  may
afk  :  Art  thou  not  yet  got  beyond  all  this  ?  I  anfwer :
No ;  beyond  the  image  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  may
no  man  come.  Thou  mouldft  afk :  Art  thou  not  got
beyond  the  ways  and  works  that  thou  haft  called
thine  own  ?  Look  to  it  diligently,  and  be  quick  to
perceive  the  commands  of  God,  and  let  each  good
work  be  followed  by  another.

In  the  third  place,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given
to  St.  John,  then  was  the  door  of  heaven  opened  unto
him.  This  happens  to  fbme  with  a  convulfion  of  the
mind,  to  others  calmly  and  gradually.  In  it  are  ful-
filled thofe  words  of  St.  Paul  :  "  Eye  hath  not  feen,
"  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of
"  man  to  conceive  the  things  which  God  hath  pre-
"  pared  for  them  that  love  Him  ;  but  God  hath  re-
"  vealed  them  unto  us  by  His  fpirit."  Let  no  man
boaft  that  he  is  continually  drawing  nearer  to  the
higheft  perfection  poffible  while  here  on  earth,  unlefs
the  outward  man  have  been  converted  into  the  inward
man  ;  then,  indeed,  it  is  poffible  for  him  to  be  received
up  on  high,  and  to  behold  the  wonders  and  riches  of
God.  Believe  me,  children,  one  who  would  know
much  about  thefe  high  matters,  would  often  have  to
keep  his  bed,  for  his  bodily  frame  could  not  fupport
it.  Further,  know  ye  that  before  that  can  come  to
pafs,  of  which  we  have  here  been  fpeaking,  nature
muft  endure  many  a  death,  outward  and  inward.
But  to  fuch  death,  eternal  life  anfwers.  Children,
this  is  not  the  work  of  a  day  or  a  year.  Be  not  dif-


Firft  Sunday  after  Eajler.


3°3


couraged  ;  it  takes  time,  and  requires  fimplicity,
purity,  and  felf-furrender,  and  thefe  virtues  are  the
ihorteft  road  to  it.  Through  fuch  exercifes  as  we
have  defcribed,  a  man  obtains  true  purity  of  mind  and
body,  fuch  as  St.  John  poflefled  in  a  high  and  pecu-
liar manner ;  what  our  Lord  meant  when  he  faid  :
"  Bleffed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  mall  fee  God."
A  pure  heart  is  more  precious  in  the  fight  of  God  than
aught  elfe  on  earth.  A  pure  heart  is  a  fair,  fitly-
adorned  chamber,  the  dwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  a
golden  temple  of  the  Godhead ;  a  fanctuary  of  the
only-begotten  Son,  in  which  He  worfhips  the  Heavenly
Father ;  an  altar  of  the  grand,  divine  facrifice,  on
which  the  Son  is  daily  offered  to  the  Heavenly
Father.  A  pure  heart  is  the  throne  of  the  Supreme
Judge ;  the  feat  and  fecret  chamber  of  the  Holy  Tri-
nity ;  a  lamp  bearing  the  Eternal  Light ;  a  fecret
council-chamber  of  the  Divine  Perfons  ;  a  treafury  of
divine  riches ;  a  ftorehoufe  of  divine  fweetnefs ;  a  pan-
oply of  eternal  wifdom  ;  a  cell  of  divine  folitude  ;  the
reward  of  all  the  life  and  fufferings  of  Chrift.  A  pure
heart  is  a  tabernacle  of  the  Holy  Father ;  a  bride  of
Chrift  ;  a  friend  of  the  Holy  Ghoft ;  a  delight  to  the
eyes  of  all  faints  ;  a  fifter  of  the  angels  ;  a  caufe  of  joy
to  the  heavenly  hofts  ;  a  brother  of  all  good  men  ;  a
terror  to  the  Devil ;  a  victory  and  conqueft  over  all
temptation  ;  a  weapon  againft  all  aflaults  ;  a  refervoir
of  divine  benefits  ;  a  treafury  of  all  virtue  ;  an  example
to  all  men  ;  a  reftoration  of  all  that  has  ever  been  loft.
Now,  what  is  a  pure  heart  ?  It  is,  as  we  have  faid
before,  a  heart  which  finds  its  whole  and  only  fatis-
faclion  in  God,  which  relifhes  and  defires  nothing  but


Of  a  pure
heart  zubifb
jballfee  God.


3°4      Sermon  for  the  Firfi  Sunday  after  Eajler.


God,  whofe  thoughts  and  intents  are  ever  occupied
with  God,  to  which  all  that  is  not  of  God  is  ftrange
and  jarring,  which  keeps  itfelf  as  far  as  pofliblc  apart
from  all  unworthy  images,  and  joys,  and  griefs,  and  all
outward  cares  and  anxieties,  and  makes  all  thefe  work
together  for  good  ;  for  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure,
and  to  the  gentle  is  nothing  bitter.  Amen  !


XVI.


Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  after  Eafter.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


JOHN  xvi.  7-11.  — "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Com-
"forter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  fend  Him  unto  you.  And  when
"  He  is  come,  He  will  reprove  the  world  of  fin,  and  of  righteoufnefs,  and  of  judgment :
"  of  fin,  becaufe  they  believe  not  on  Me ;  of  righteoufnefs,  becaufe  I  go  to  the  Father  and
"ye  fee  Me  no  more  ;  of  judgment,  becaufe  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged."*


HILDREN,  it  behoves  us  to  give  diligent
heed  to  the  meaning  of  this  paflage,  and
fee  how  it  is  that  the  Holy  Ghoft  could
not  be  given  to  the  dear  difciples  and
friends  of  Jefus,  unlefs  He  firft  went
away  from  them.

What  is  meant  by  Chrift's  going  away  from  us  ?
Nothing  elfe  than  our  deftitution,  hopeleffnefs,  and
helpleflhefs,  when  we  are  heavy  and  flow  in  all  good
things,  and  cold  and  dark ;  for  then  Chrift  is  gone
from  us.  If  perfbns  who  are  in  this  ftate  render  it
ufeful  and  fruitful  for  themfelves,  this  would  be  a
truly  noble  thing  for  them  thus  to  matter  and  bend
it ;  and  to  fuch  an  one  all  variety  will  be  fufed  into
unity,  and  he  will  have  joy  in  fbrrow,  and  be  patient


*  The  greater  part  of  this  and  the  following  fermon  having  been  tranflated
by  Archdeacon  Hare,  in  his  Notes  to  "  The  Miffion  of  the  Comforter,"  I
obtained  his  kind  permiffion  to  extradl  from  that  work  the  paflages  he  had
given  there. — TR.


Wbat  it  is
for  Cbriff  to
go  away  from
us.


360


Sermon  for  the


How  when
the  Holy
Gboft  truly
cometb  to  us
He  reprovetb
the  world  in
our  hearts.


Sin  is  when
the  will  turns
ajtde  from  its
natural  end.


under  reproach,  in  conftant  peace  amid  war  and
trouble,  and  all  bitternefs  will  to  him  become  true
fweetnefs.

Now  our  Lord  faid :  "When  the  Holy  Ghoft
"  cometh,  He  will  reprove  the  world."  What  is  the
world  which  He  will  reprove,  and  how  will  He
reprove  it  ?  He  will  enable  man  to  fee  clearly
whether  the  world  is  lying  concealed  within  him,
hidden  in  the  principle  of  his  being :  this  he  will
detect  and  rebuke.  Now  what  is  the  world  in  us  ?
It  is  the  ways,  the  workings,  the  imaginations  of  the
world,  the  world's  comfort,  joy,  love,  and  grief,  in
love,  in  fear,  in  forrow,  in  care;  for  St.  Bernard  fays:
"  With  all  wherein  thou  rejoiceft  and  forroweft,  thou
"  malt  alfo  be  judged."  Children,  this  will  the  Holy
Ghoft,  when  He  comes  to  us,  clearly  reveal,  and  rebuke
us  on  account  thereof,  fb  that  we  mall  never  have  reft
or  quiet,  ib  long  as  we  know  and  find  this  evil  and
noxious  poffeilion  within  us.  And  when  one  finds
this  evil  inclination  in  a  man,  that  he  is  poflefled  by
any  creature,  be  it  living  or  dead,  and  he  remains  un-
rebuked,  all  this  is  the  world.  And  when  a  man
keeps  this  in  himfelf  unrebuked,  this  is  a  true  and
manifeft  fign  that  the  Holy  Ghoft  has  not  entered
into  the  principle  of  his  life ;  for  Chrift  has  faid :
When  He  comes,  He  will  rebuke  all  thefe  things.

"  He  will  reprove  the  world  of  fin."  What  is  fin  ?
Ye  know  well,  dear  children,  that  God  has  made  all
things,  and  appointed  each  thing  for  its  right  end.
Thus  He  made  fire  that  it  mould  rife  up,  and  ftones
that  they  mould  fall  down.  Thus  nature  has  given
to  the  eye  to  fee,  to  the  ears  to  hear,  to  the  hands  to


Fourth  Sunday  after  Eajier.


work,  and  to  the  feet  to  walk ;  and  thus  each  mem-
ber is  obedient  to  the  natural  will,  without  any  oppo-
fition,  whether  the  matter  be  eafy  or  hard,  fweet  or
four,  if  fo  be  that  the  will  thoroughly  wills  it ;  thus,
too,  the  members  are  thoroughly  obedient,  even  when
it  is  an  affair  of  life  and  death.  This  appears  often  in
many  lovers  of  this  world,  how  they  merrily  and  joy-
fully caft  away  all  eaie,  and  riches,  and  honour,  for  the
lake  of  what  they  love,  to  the  end  that  their  carnal
luft  may  thus  be  fatisfied.  Now  finners  fay,  Who  is
thus  obedient  to  God,  and  thus  exacl;  in  all  His  com-
mandments ?  Which  of  you  dares  thus  to  refign  for
God's  fake  his  body  and  goods,  and  all  that  he  likes
or  fears, — nay,  every  thing  fave  his  confcience,  of
which  God  is  the  rightful  Ruler  ?  Now  this  is  the
fin  which  the  Holy  Ghoft  reproves,  that  man  fo
greatly  and  fo  often  refills  His  divine  will  and  admo-
nitions. This  fin  and  many  hidden  offences  the  Holy
Ghoft  rebukes  when  He  comes  to  a  man.  This
rebuke  works  a  quick,  fharp,  hard  judgment  in  a
man,  and  a  hellifh  pain,  and  an  intolerable  woe,
whereof  worldly  men  know  little.  When  this  judg-
ment is  indeed  borne,  the  cafe  is  fafe.  For  a  thoufand
offences  which  a  man  truly  acknowledges  and  con-
fefles  himfelf  to  be  guilty  of,  are  not  fo  perilous  and
fo  mifchievous  to  a  man  as  a  fmgle  offence  which
thou  wilt  not  recognife  nor  allow  thyfelf  to  be  con-
vinced of.  Children,  thofe  who  are  fo  well  pleafed
with  themfelves  and  others,  nor  have  ever  felt  any
anxiety  about  their  fin,  except  to  prove  that  they  are
in  the  right,  are  very  wrong ;  they  are  in  dangerous
fin,  and  will  never  come  to  any  good.

x2


The  Holy
Gboft  reprov-
etb  this  Jin,
and  maketh  a
man  to  judge
bimfelf.


3o8


Sermon  for  the


Secondly,  the
Holy  Ghoft
rebrovetb  us
Jor  our  felf-
rigbteoufnefi.


Thirdly,  He
reprovetb  us
Jor  our  judg-
ment of
others.


Next :  the  Holy  Ghoft  will  reprove  the  world  of
righteoufnefs.  Alas,  merciful  God,  what  a  poor
miferable  thing  our  righteoufnefs  is  in  the  eyes  of
God  !  For  St.  Auguftine  fays  :  Woe  and  woe  to  all
righteoufnefs,  unlefs  Almighty  God  judge,  for  He  has
faid  by  the  prophet  Ifaiah  :  "  All  your  righteoufnefTes
"  are  as  filthy  rags ;  "  and  our  Lord  faid :  "  When
"  ye  have  done  all  that  ye  can,  fay,  we  are  unprofitable
"  fervants,  we  have  done  that  which  it  was  our  duty
"  to  do."  He  who  thinketh  fomewhat  of  himfelf
when  he  is  nought,  deceiveth  himfelf,  as  St.  John
faith.  Many  a  man  is  fo  heartily  well  pleafed  with
his  own  ways,  that  he  will  neither  open  his  heart  to
God  nor  to  man,  and  keeps  his  eyes  carefully  fhut,
that  he  may  not  let  God  into  his  foul.  If  our  Lord
comes  to  him  with  his  admonitions,  directly  or  indi-
rectly, he  follows  his  own  courfe,  and  heeds  them  not
a  ftraw.  Such  men  are  utterly  untoward,  both  to
God  Almighty  and  to  all  his  creatures  :  but  wher-
ever the  Holy  Ghoft  comes,  he  reproves  thefe  men's
ways  ;  for  wherever  he  is,  man  perceives  his  faults
plainly,  and  learns  felf-renunciatidn,  humblenefs,  and
all  things  that  belong  to  eternal  life.

Thirdly  :  the  Holy  Ghoft  reproves  man  for  judg-
ment. What  is  this  judgment  ?  It  means  that  every
man  paffes  judgment  on  his  neighbour,  and  that  they
have  no  eyes  for  their  own  faults  and  fin,  although
Chrift  has  faid :  "  With  what  meafure  thou  meteft,
"  \vith  the  fame  it  mall  be  meafured  to  thee  again  :  "
"  Judge  not  that  ye  be  not  judged."  A  holy  man
has  faid :  "  By  as  many  as  thou  haft^  unjuftly  con-
"  demned,  malt  thou  be  judged."  The  people  all


Fourth  Sunday  after  E after.


309


want  to  be  priefts  and  provincials,  that  they  may
have  a  right  to  fit  in  judgment,  and  know  not  what
they  are  themfelves.  And  know  that  therewith  ye
build  great  thick  walls  between  God  and  yourfelves.
Children,  beware  of  judging  any  but  yourfelves,  as  ye
love  God  and  your  fouls  and  everlafting  happinefs.  A
man  mould  judge  nothing  that  is  not  a  plain  mortal
fin.  I  would  rather  bite  my  tongue  that  it  bleed,
than  judge  any  man.  One  mould  leave  this  to  the
eternal  judgment  of  God  ;  for  from  man's  judgment
upon  his  neighbours  there  grows  a  complacency  in
one's  felf,  an  evil  arrogance,  and  a  contempt  for  one's
neighbour.  This  fruit  is  therefore  truly  a  feed  of  the
Devil,  whereby  many  a  heart  is  defiled,  and  therein
the  Holy  Ghoft  dwelleth  not.  But  where  the  Holy
Ghoft  is  truly  with  His  prefence,  He  judges  by  that
fame  man  where  it  is  neceflary ;  and  then  that  man
waits  for  the  hour  and  occafion  when  it  is  fitting  to
punifh.  This  muft  not  be  done  fo  that  when  we
would  heal  one  wound,  we  inflicT:  two  in  doing  it ;
not  with  violence,  or  harfh  words,  nor  fo  as  to  crufh
a  man  nor  lower  him  in  any  other  man's  heart ;  but
we  mould  do  it  as  from  love  and  gentlenefs,  and  fb  as
to  preferve  our  own  humility  and  poverty  of  fpirit
which  we  then  bear  within  us  wherever  we  go,  and
whatever  we  do,  whether  amid  a  congregation  or
alone.  And  herewith  we  profit  no  one  elfe  but  our-
felves  in  a  true  fimplicity  ;  and  let  all  fuch  things  alone
as  do  not  concern  us  and  arc  not  committed  to  us.

Children,  ye  mail  not  feck  after  great  fcience.
Simply  enter  into  your  own  inward  principle,  and
learn  to  know  what  you  yourfelves  are,  fpiritually  and

x3


Of  the  fpirit
and  the  man-
ner in  which
we  Jhould
adminifter
rebuke.


Knowledge  is
not  to  be  the
great  end  of
our  ftrh'ing,


310


Sermon  for  the


but  the  obey-
ing of  that
which  toe
know.

Afts  i.  7.


naturally,  and  do  not  dive  into  the  fecret  things  of
God,  afking  queftions  about  the  efflux  and  reflux  of
the  Aught  into  the  Naught,  or  the  eiTence  of  the  foul's
fpark,  for  Chrift  has  faid  :  "  It  is  not  for  you  to  know
"  the  times  or  the  feafons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in
"  His  own  power."  Therefore,  let  us  maintain  a  true,
entire,  fimple  faith  in  one  God  in  a  Trinity  of  Per-
fons,  and  yet  not  as  manifold,  but  as  one  and  fimple.
For  Arius  and  Sabellius,  who  had  a  wonderful  under-
ftanding  of  the  Trinity,  and  the  wife  Solomon  and
Origen,  who  have  marvelloufly  inftrucl:ed  the  holy
Church,  what  has  become  of  them  ?  \V^e  know  not.
Wherefore,  look  to  yourfelves,  and  know  that  no  one
is  anfwerable  for  you  but  yourfelves.  Therefore,  give
heed  to  God  and  His  will,  and  to  the  calling  where-
with He  has  called  you,  that  ye  may  follow  it  in  in-
tegrity and  finglenefs  of  heart.  And  if  you  know  not
what  God's  will  is,  then  follow  thofe  who  have  been
more  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  than  yourfelves ;
and  if  you  have  not  thefe  either,  then  go  alone  to  God  :
without  doubt  He  will  give  you  purely  and  {imply
that  which  you  need,  if  you  continue  inftant  in  prayer
for  it.  If  you  are  not  fatisfied  with  this,  then,  in  all
doubtful  cafes,  confider  the  matter  with  fincerity  and
earneftnefs,  and  choofe  that  courfe  which  you  fee  to
be  moft  bitter  to  nature,  and  to  which  you  feel  Icaft
inclined.  Do  this  in  the  firft  place,  for  in  each  death
of  nature,  God  becomes  moft  truly  living  in  you,  and
wrill  grow  in  you  of  a  certainty.

Now,  children,  fmce  the  Holy  Ghoft  could  not  be
given  unto  the  dear  difciples  unlefs  Chrift  went  away
from  them,  we  mould  in  reafon  look  to  fee  with  what


Fourth  Sunday  after  Eajler.


we  arc  holding  converfe.  Wherefore  forfake  all  things
for  God,  and  then  God  will  be  truly  given  unto  you
in  all  things.  If  you  do  this  in  earneft,  and  with  your
eyes  conftantly  fixed  upon  the  truth,  you  fhall  receive
a  wonderful  reward  of  God,  even  in  this  prefent  time.
And  "  when  He,  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  is  come,  He
"  will  guide  you  into  all  truth."  .  .  .  "  And  He  will
"  fhow  you  things  to  come."  Dear  children,  the
Holy  Ghoft  will  not  teach  us  all  things  in  the  fenfe
that  we  mall  be  given  to  know  whether  there  will  be
a  good  harveft  or  vintage,  whether  bread  will  be  dear
or  cheap,  whether  the  prefent  war  will  come  to  an
end  fbon.  No,  dear  children ;  but  He  will  teach  us
all  things  which  we  can  need  for  a  perfect  life,  and
for  a  knowledge  of  the  hidden  truth  of  God,  of  the
bondage  of  nature,  of  the  deceitfulnefs  of  the  world,
and  of  the  cunning  of  evil  fpirits.  Children,  walk  in
the  ways  of  God  diligently,  earneftly,  and  circum-
fpecHy ;  and  give  heed  to  the  calling  in  which  God  by
His  mercy  hath  called  you,  and  follow  it  faithfully.
Do  not,  as  fbme  do,  who,  when  God  will  have  them
to  mind  the  affairs  of  their  foul,  attend  to  outward
things ;  and  when  God  fummons  them  to  outward
duties,  want  to  turn  their  thoughts  inwards.  This  is
a  hard,  poor,  perverfe  courfe.

Thus  when  the  Holy  Ghoft  comes  to  us,  He
teaches  us  all  truth ;  that  is,  He  mows  us  a  true
picture  of  our  failings,  and  confounds  us  in  ourfelves,
and  teaches  us  how  we  mall  live  fmgly  and  purely  for
the  truth,  and  teaches  us  to  fink  humbly  into  a  deep
humility,  and  to  caft  ourfclves  utterly  down  beneath
God  and  beneath  every  creature.  This  is  a  true  art

x4


In  what  fenfe
the  Holy
Gboft  will
teach  us  all
things.


How  He

Jbotoetb  us  a
true  piflure
of  ourf elves.


312    Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  after  Eafter.


in  which  all  art  and  wifdom  is  concluded,  and  which
we  indifpenfably  need  for  our  true  perfection  and
felicity.  This  is  a  true,  hearty  humility,  without  any
pretence,  and  not  in  word  or  outward  mow,  but  of  a
truth  wrought  into  the  fubftance  of  our  fouls.  May
God  help  us  at  all  times  to  be  thus  prepared  for  the
Holy  Ghoft  to  come  and  enter  in  to  us  !  Amen.


XVII.


Second  Sermon  for  Fourth  Sunday  after  Eafter.


Of  three  hindrances  which  rejlft  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghojl  in

three  clajjes  of  men.


JOHN  xvi.  7.  —  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter

"  will  not  come  unto  you."


;B  SERVE,  dear  children,  how  high  and  in
what  way  man  muft  be  carried  up  to
reach  the  ftate  of  his  higheft  bleflednefs ;
for  this  can  only  be  through  a  real  aban-
donment of  thofe  things  which  are  ef-
pecially  pleafant  and  lovely  to  him  and  his  nature.
To  all  thefe  he  muft  wholly  die,  and  muft  let  them
go,  however  good,  and  holy,  and  fpiritual,  and  precious
he  may  deem  them.  For  if  it  was  neceffary  that
Chrift's  difciples  mould  be  deprived  of  His  lovely,
holy,  gracious  humanity,  to  be  fitted  for  receiving  the
Holy  Ghoft,  no  man,  it  is  certain,  can  be  a  recipient
of  Divine  grace  whofe  heart  is  pofleft  by  any  creature.
Now  we  find  three  forts  of  hindrances  in  three  dif-
ferent clafles  of  men.  The  firft  are  fmful  perfons,  or
open  fmncrs,  who  are  hindered  by  the  creature,  in
that  they  make  ufe  thereof  againft  God,  according  to
their  own  will.  Thefe  people  go  aftray  in  God's  way.
David  fays,  "  Curfed  are  they  who  err  in  God's  way/'


How  we  can
reach  our
bigbejl  blejf-
ednefi  only  by
dying  to
nature.


How  the
Holy  Gboji
is  hindered
Jrom  coming
to  fame  by
tbeir  Jinful
ufe  of  the


3H


Second  Sermon  for  the


good  things
of  this  life.


How  others
are  hindered
from  receiv-
ing Him  by
flopping  at
the  jign  in
the  holy  fa-
craments, in-
jleadof  reach-
ing after  the
eternal  truth
fignifed.


that  is,  in  the  creature.  There  are  alfo  fundry  good
folks,  who  fpend  too  much  care  upon  the  neceflaries
of  this  life,  or  look  too  much  for  pleafure  to  outward
things.  Againft  thefe  Chrift  fays,  "  He  who  loves
"  his  life  mall  lofe  it ;"  that  is,  carnal  love ;  he  who
holds  this  too  dear  lofes  his  life  ;  "  and  he  who  hates
"  his  life  mall  receive  everlafting  life ;"  that  is,  they
who  refift  their  diforderly  lufts  and  delires,  and  do  not
follow  them.

The  fecond  hindrance  is  when  good  people  are  kept
back  in  true  fpirituality  through  the  mifufe  of  the
feven  facraments.  He  who  dwells  with  pleafure  on
the  fign  of  a  holy  facrament,  does  not  get  to  the
inward  truth  ;  for  the  facraments  all  lead  to  the  pure
truth.  Marriage  is  a  fign  of  the  union  of  the  Divine
and  human  natures,  and  alfo  of  the  union  of  the  foul
with  God :  but  he  who  would  ftop  at  the  fign  alone
is  hindered  by  his  outward  fenfes  from  reaching  the
eternal  truth  ;  for  this  is  not  a  true  marriage.  There
are  alfo  fome  who  make  too  much  of  repentance  and
confeflion,  and  cleave  to  the  fign,  and  do  not  ftrive  to
reach  the  pure  truth.  Againft  thefe  Chrift  fays,  "  He
"  who  is  warned  needeth  not  fave  to  warn  his  feet ;"
that  is,  he  who  has  once  been  warned  with  a  hearty
repentance  and  fincere  confefTion  needs  nothing  more
than  that  he  confefs  his  daily  fins,  and  not  his  old  fins,
which  he  has  already  repented  of  and  confeft ;  but  he
muft  warn  his  feet — that  is,  his  defires  and  confcience  ;
thefe  he  muft  purify  from  his  daily  fins.  Moreover
many  good  men,  by  {pending  too  much  anxiety  on  out-
ward geftures  towards  the  facred  Body  of  our  Lord,
hinder  themfelves  in  divers  ways,  fo  that  they  cannot


Fourth  Sunday  after  Eqfter.


receive  Him  fpiritually,  and  enter  inwardly  into  the
truth  ;  for  this  is  a  defire  after  a  real  union,  and  not  in
appearance  merely.  Hence  they  do  not  receive  the
facrament  worthily ;  for  all  facraments  are  the  fign  of
Spiritual  truth.

Here  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  we  ought  to
worfhip  God  in  all  places  and  at  all  times.  He  who
will  worfhip  the  Father  muft  concentrate  his  whole
mind  in  afpiration  and  faith.  Thefe  are  the  higheft
powers  of  the  foul ;  for  they  are  above  time,  and  know
nothing  of  time  nor  of  the  body.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us,
"  that  we  ought  to  rejoice  evermore,  pray  without
"  ceafing,  and  in  everything  give  thanks."  Now,  thofe
pray  without  ceafing  who  do  all  their  works  alike  for
the  love  of  God,  and  not  for  any  felfifh  enjoyment,
and  humbly  bow  down  before  God,  and  let  Him  work
alone.  When  the  higheft  powers  of  the  foul  are  thus
gathered  together  in  prayer,  the  foul  becomes  infpired,
and  if  henceforward  the  fpirit  cleave  unto  God  with
an  entire  union  of  the  will,  it  is  "  made  a  partaker  of
"  the  Divine  nature,"  and  then,  for  the  firft  time,
docs  the  man  offer  up  true  worfhip,  for  he  has  at-
tained the  end  for  which  he  was  created.

But  there  are  fome,  ay,  many  people,  who  do  not
rightly  worfhip  the  Father  in  the  truth.  For  fo  foon
as  a  man  prays  to  God  for  any  creature,  he  prays  for
his  own  harm ;  for  fmce  a  creature  is  a  creature,  it
bears  its  own  bitternefs  and  difquiet,  pain  and  evil,
about  it :  therefore  fuch  people  meet  their  deferts
when  they  have  trouble  and  bitternefs,  for  they  have
prayed  for  it.  He  who  feeks  God,  if  he  fecks  any-
thing befide  God,  will  not  find  Him  ;  but  he  who


How  we  may
worjhip  God
in  all  times
and  places.


Of  tbofe  who
feek  the  crea-
ture and  not
God  in  their
prayers.


316


Second  Sermon  for  the


Of  thofe  who
are  hindered
from  receiv-
ing the  Holy
Gbojl  by  look-
ing only  to
the  humanity
of  Chrift.


John  xiv.  6.


feeks  God  alone  in  the  truth,  will  find  Him,  and  all
that  God  can  give,  with  Him.

Again,  many  good  people  hinder  themfelves  in  their
perfection  by  this,  that  they  look  folely  to  the  hu-
manity of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  that  they  give
themfelves  too  much  to  vifions :  that  is  to  fay,  that
they  are  too  fond  of  contemplating  the  images  of  out-
ward things  in  their  minds,  whether  it  be  angels  or
men,  or  the  humanity  of  Chrift,  and  believe  what
they  are  told  when  they  hear  that  they  are  fpecially
favoured,  or  of  other  men's  faults  or  virtues,  or  hear
that  God  purpofes  to  do  Ibmething  by  their  means
Herein  they  are  often  deceived,  for  God  never  does
anything  through  any  creature,  but  only  through  His
own  pure  goodnefs.  And  He  even  faid  to  His  dif-
ciples,  "It  is  good  for  you  that  I  go  away;"  foraf-
much  as  to  them  that  wifh  to  be  His  difciples  in  high
perfection,  His  humanity  is  a  hindrance  if  they  fix
upon  it,  and  cleave  unto  it  with  efpecial  delight ;  for
they  ought  to  follow  God  in  all  His  ways ;  therefore
His  humanity  fhould  lead  them  onward  to  His  Deity.
For  Chrift  faid,  "  I  am  the  Way,  and  the  Truth,  and
"  the  Life  :  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by
"  Me."  Greatly  then  do  they  err  who  fuppofe  that
they  can  do  anything  good  of  themfelves ;  for  Chrift
fays  that  of  Himfelf  He  did  nothing.

Chrift's  true  humanity  we  are  to  worfhip  only  in
its  union  with  His  Deity  ;  for  the  man  Chrift  is  truly
God,  and  God  is  truly  Man.  Therefore  we  are  not
to  trouble  ourfelves  about  any  creature,  but  folely  to
feck  God,  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who  is  our  only
Way  to  the  Father.  Now  even  if  we  come  into  the


Fourth  Sunday  after  Eajler.


Way  of  truth,  which  is  Chrift,  yet  we  are  not  per-
fectly blefled,  although  we  behold  the  Truth  of  God :
for  while  we  are  beholding,  we  are  not  one  with  that
which  we  behold  ;  fo  long  as  there  is  anything  in  our
perceptions  or  understanding,  we  are  not  one  with  the
One  ;  for  where  there  is  nothing  but  One,  we  can  fee
nothing  but  One :  for  we  cannot  fee  God  except  in
blindnefs,  or  know  Him  except  in  ignorance.  St.
Auguftine  fays  that  no  foul  can  come  to  God  unlefs
it  go  to  God  without  a  creature,  and  tafte  Him  with-
out a  likenefs.  Therefore,  becaufe  the  foul  is  a  crea-
ture, it  mufh  cafh  itfelf  out  of  itfelf,  and  in  its  hour  of
contemplation  muft  caft  out  all  faints  and  angels  ;  for
thefe  are  all  creatures,  and  hinder  the  foul  in  its  union
with  God.  For  it  mould  be  bare  of  all  things,  with-
out need  of  anything,  and  then  it  can  come  to  God
in  His  likenefs  ;  for  nothing  unites  fo  much  as  like-
nefs, and  receives  its  colour  fo  foon  ;  for  God  will
then  give  Himfelf  to  the  faculties  of  the  foul,  fo  that
the  foul  grows  in  the  likenefs  of  God  and  takes  His
colour.  The  image  lies  in  the  foul's  powers,  the  like-
nefs in  its  virtues,  the  Divine  colour  in  its  union  ;  and
thus  its  union  becomes  fo  intimate  that  it  does  not
work  its  works  in  the  form  of  a  creature,  but  in  its
divine  form,  wherein  it  is  united  to  God ;  nay,  that
its  works  are  taken  from  it,  and  God  works  all  its
works  in  His  form.  And  then,  while  it  beholds  God,
and  thus  becomes  more  united  with  Him,  the  union
may  become  fuch,  that  God  altogether  pours  Himfelf
into  it,  and  draws  it  fo  entirely  into  Himfelf  that  it
no  longer  has  any  diftindl  perception  of  virtue  or  vice,
or  recognifes  any  marks  by  which  it  knows  what  it


How  that  it
is  by  union
and  not  by
vijton  that  we
Jhall  be  made
ble/ed.


3 1 8  Second  Sermon  for  Fourth  Sunday  after  Eafter.


The  light  of
nature  mujl
be  fto  allowed
up  in  the
light  of  grace.


IS


itfelf.  But  God  regards  the  foul  as  a  creature.
Therefore  let  the  light  of  grace  overpower  the  light
of  nature  in  you  ;  for  the  higher  knowledge  the  foul
attains  in  the  light  of  grace,  the  darker  does  it  deem
the  light  of  nature.  If,  then,  it  would  know  the  real
truth,  it  fhould  obferve  whether  it  is  drawn  away
from  all  things,  whether  it  has  loft  itfelf,  whether  it
loves  God  with  His  love,  whether  it  be  not  hindered
by  any  things,  and  whether  God  alone  lives  in  it :  if
fo,  it  has  loft  itfelf,  as  Mary  loft  Jefus,  when  He
went  into  the  fchool  of  His  Father's  higheft  doctrine ;
therefore  He  heeded  not  His  mother.  Thus  it  hap-
pens to  the  nobleft  foul  that  goes  into  God's  fchool ;
there  it  learns  to  know  wrhat  God  is,  in  His  Deity
and  in  the  Trinity,  and  what  He  is  in  His  humanity,
and  to  know  the  all-gracious  Will  of  God.  That  man
is  moft  truly  of  God  who  works  all  his  works  out  of
love,  and  gives  up  his  will  to  the  will  of  his  Heavenly
Father.

That  we  may  attain  thereunto,  being  delivered  from
all  hindrances,  may  God  grant  us.     Amen  !


XVIII.

Sermon  for  Afcenfion  Day,


This  third  fermon  on  the  Afcenfion  tells  us  how  man  ought  continually
to  follow  after  Chrift,  as  He  has  walked  before  us  for  three  and
thirty  years,  pajfing  through  manifold  and  great  Bufferings,  before
He  returned  unto  His  Father.


MARK  xvi.  19.  — "  So  then  after  the  Lord  had  fpoken  unto   them,  He  was  received  up  into
"  heaven,  and  fat  on  the  right  hand  of  God."


FTER  the  Son  of  God,  Jefus  Chrift,  had
eaten  with  His  difciples  upon  the  Mount
of  Olives,  and  reproved  them,  that  they
had  been  so  long  time  with  Him  and
yet  were  fo  flow  of  heart  to  believe,  He
was  taken  up  into  heaven  before  their  face.

Ah,  children  !  how  do  you  think  it  ftood  then  with
the  hearts  of  the  difciples,  who  regarded  Him  with
fuch  a  ftrange  love  ?  For  it  was  not  unreafonable
that  they  fhould  be  filled  with  a  reftlefs,  forrowful
yearning  to  follow  after  Him ;  for  where  your  trea-
fure  is,  there  will  your  heart  be  alfb.  By  His  glorious
afcenfion,  willeth  Jefus  Chrift  to  draw  after  Him  the
hearts  and  minds  of  all  His  elecl:  Friends,  and  all  their
powers,  inward  and  outward,  that  we  may  not  hence-
forward have  our  dwelling  with  contentment  and
fatisfaclion  among  the  things  of  time  ;  but  that  all


Hem  the  dif-
ciples of
Cbrift  do
long  to  follow
Him  in  His
glorious  af~
cen/ion.


320


Sermon  on  Afccnjion  Day.


John  xx.  17.


If  we  would
follow  Cbrijl
into  the  glory
of  the  Father,
we  muft  fol-
low in  His
Jootfteps  here.


our  walk  and  converfation,  pleafure  and  fatisfa&ion,
may  be  in  heaven,  and  nowhere  elfe,  where  God
dwelleth  not.  It  cannot  be  otherwife  but  that  the
members  mould  follow  their  Head,  Who,  as  on  this
day,  has  afcended^into  heaven,  and  has  gone  before
us  in  all  humility  to  prepare  a  place  for  thofe  who
mall  come  after  Him  ;  therefore  mould  we  fay  with
the  Bride,  in  the  Song  of  fongs  :  "  Draw  me,  and  I
"  will  come  after  Thee,"  blefled  Lord.  And  who
can  hinder  us  from  following  evermore  after  our
Head,  Jefus  Chrift  ?  For  He  Himfelf  has  faid  :  "  I
"  afcend  to  my  Father  and  your  Father."  His  origin,
His  end,  His  bleffednefs  and  our  bleflednefs,  is  truly  a
bleflednefs  in  Him,  for  we,  with  all  that  we  are,  have
proceeded  forth  from  the  fame  fource,  and  therefore
we  are  partakers  of  the  fame  End,  and  deftined  to
fall  into  the  fame  Ocean  (if  we  for  our  parts  will
only  difpofe  ourfelves  accordingly).

Now  let  us  meditate  how  Chrift  has  gone  before
vis  into  the  glory  of  His  heavenly  Father.  Therefore,
if  we  defire  to  follow  Him,  we  muft  mark  the  way
which  He  has  shown  us  and  trodden  for  three  and
thirty  years,  in  mifery,  in  poverty,  in  fhame,  and  in
bitternefs,  even  unto  death.  So  likewife,  to  this  day,
muft  we  follow  in  the  fame  path,  if  we  would  fain
enter  with  Him  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  For
though  all  our  mafters  were  dead,  and  all  our  books
burned,  yet  we  mould  ever  find  inftrucliion  enough
in  His  holy  life.  For  He  Himfelf  is  the  Way,  the
Truth,  and  the  Life,  and  by  no  other  way  can  we
truly  and  undeviatingly  advance  towards  the  fame
confummation,  than  in  that  in  which  He  hath


Sermon  for  Afcenjion  Day.


321


walked  as  our  Exemplar  while  He  was  yet  upon
earth.

Now,  as  the  loadftone  draws  the  iron  after  itfelf,
fo  doth  Chrift  draw  all  hearts  after  Himfelf  which
have  once  been  touched  by  Him;  and  as  when  the
iron  is  impregnated  with  the  energy  of  the  load-
ftone that  has  touched  it,  it  follows  the  ftone  uphill
although  that  is  contrary  to  its  nature,  and  cannot
rest  in  its  own  proper  place,  but  ftrives  to  rife  above
itfelf  on  high  ;  fo  all  the  fouls  which  have  been  touched
by  this  loadftone,  Chrift,  can  neither  be  chained  down
by  joy  nor  grief,  but  are  ever  rifmg  up  to  God  out  of
themielves.  They  forget  their  own  nature,  and  fol-
low after  the  touch  of  God,  and  follow  it  the  more
eafily  and  directly,  the  more  noble  is  their  nature  than
that  of  other  men,  and  the  more  they  are  touched  by
God's  finger.

Now  let  each  one  mark  for  himfelf,  whether  his
foul  has  been  touched  by  God  or  not.  Thofe  who
have  not  been  touched  by  God  often  begin  many  ex-
cellent undertakings  from  which  we  might  expect  that
great  things  would  come  to  pafs ;  but  if  we  watch
them  for  a  time,  behold  it  all  comes  to  nothing ;  for
they  fbon  fall  back  again,  and  they  plunge  once  more
into  all  their  old  cuftoms,  and  give  themfelves  up  to
their  natural  inclinations.  They  do  juft  as  the  un-
trained dogs  in  the  chafe,  which  have  no  perception
of  the  noble  quarry,  but  run  with  all  fpeed  after  the
good  dogs  of  nobler  breed.  And  verily,  if  they  kept
on  running,  they  would  with  them  bring  down
the  ftag.  But  no  ;  in  the  fpace  of  fbme  fliort  hour
or  fo,  they  look  about  them,  and  lofe  fight  of  their


How  the
hearts  which
have  been
touched  by
Cbrijl  mujl
needs  follow
after  Him.


How  we  may
know  whether
our  hearts
have  been
touched  by
God  by  ex-
amining whe-
ther we  make
progrefs  or
ftandjiill.


322


Sermon  for  Afcenjion  Day.


It  is  ear
fault  if  our
hearts  have
not  been  thus
touched.


companions,  or  they  ftand  ftill  with  their  nofe  in
the  earth,  and  let  the  others  get  ahead  of  them,  and  fo
they  are  left  behind.  But  the  dogs  of  noble  breed,
who  have  come  upon  the  fcent  of  this  noble  quarry,
eagerly  purfue  after  it,  through  fire  and  water,
through  brake  and  bum,  till  they  have  brought  down
their  game.  So  do  thofe  noble-minded  men,  who
have  caught  a  glimpfe  of  the  Higheft  Good ;  they  never
flacken  ftep  till  they  have  come  up  with  it.  Now
the  other  fort  of  men  remain  at  the  fame  point,  and
make  no  progrefs  in  their  whole  life :  but  all  fuch  as
ftand  ftill  while  they  are  in  this  ftate,  and  make  no
progrefs  before  death,  muft  ftand  ftill  for  ever  here-
after; fo  long  as  God  is  eternal.

Children,  if  our  fouls  have  not  been  touched  by
God's  finger,  we  have  no  right  to  lay  the  caufe  of  it
to  the  charge  of  the  Eternal  God,  as  men  often  do
when  they  fay,  figuratively  :  "  God  does  not  touch
"  me,  nor  move  me,  as  He  does  fuch  and  fuch  an
"  one/'  This  aflertion  is  falfe.  God  touches,  im-
pels, and  admonimes  all  men  alike,  and  (fo  far  as  it
refts  with  Him)  will  have  all  men  to  be  faved  ;  but
His  touch,  His  admonitions  and  His  gifts,  find  a
different  reception  and  refponfe  in  different  men.
With  many,  when  God  comes  to  them  with  His
touch  and  His  gracious  gifts,  He  finds  the  chambers  of
their  foul  occupied  and  defiled  by  other  guefts.  So
then,  He  muft  needs  go  His  way,  and  cannot  come
in  to  us,  for  we  are  loving  and  ferving  fome  one  elfe.
Therefore,  His  gifts,  which  He  offers  without  ceafmg
to  every  man,  remain  unaccepted.  This  is  the  caufe
of  our  eternal  lofs :  the  guilt  is  ours,  and  not  God's.


Sermo7i  for  ^tfcenjion  Day.


323


How  much  ufelefs  trouble  do  we  create  for  our-
felves  ;  infomuch  that  we  neither  perceive  our  own
condition  nor  God's  prefence,  and  thereby  do  our-
felves  an  unfpeakable  and  eternal  mischief.  Againft
this,  there  is  no  better  or  surer  remedy  than  an  in-
ftant,  refolute  turning  away  of  the  thought,  and
hearty,  fervent,  continual  prayer.  Hereby  we  may
obtain  this  fteadfaftnefs,  together  with  a  firm,  and
entire,  and  loving  truft  in  the  unfathomable  mercy
of  God,  in  which  lies  all  our  falvation,  and  likewife
a  diligent  and  faithful  watchfulnefs,  to  keep  our
goings  ever  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God,  that
all  we  do  or  abftain  from,  and  all  our  affections,  fpi-
ritual  and  natural,  may  remain  at  all  times  agreeable
to  the  will  of  God.

Children,  the  place  from  which  Chrifl  afcended  up
to  heaven  was  the  Mount  of  Olives.  This  mountain
had  three  forts  of  light.  The  firfl  was  from  the  funrife,
for  the  hill  is  high  and  flopes  towards  the  Eafl ;  and
when  the  fun  no  longer  mone  on  the  mountain,  its
rays  were  reflected  from  the  golden  roof  of  the  temple  ;
and,  thirdly,  on  that  hill  grew  the  eflential  material  of
light,  the  olive-tree.  So  likewife  the  foul  in  which
God  mall  arife  fweetly  as  without  a  cloud,  muft  be  a
lofty  hill,  raifed  above  thefe  perifhable  earthly  things,
and  be  illuminated  by  three  kinds  of  light ;  that  is  to
fay,  there  muft  be  a  place  whereon  the  rays  of  the
high  and  holy  Trinity  can  mine  and  bring  forth
God's  high  and  noble  work  in  the  foul,  according  to
all  His  will,  and  fo  that  the  brightnefs  of  the  Eternal
God  may  flow  into  that  foul.

This  mountain  lay  between  Jerufalem  and  Bethany.

Y2


How  the  foul
muft  be  as  a
kill  for  the
fun  of
rigbteoufnefs
to  rife  upon
it.


Sermon  for  Afcenjion  Day.


The  true  fol-
lowers of
Cbrijl  mujt
defcend  with
Him  into
Bethany,  the
valley  of
tears.


Ps.  lxxxiv.6.


Now,  know  of  a  truth  that  whofoever  will  truly  fol-
low after  Chrift,  muft  mount  or  climb  this  hill,  toil-
fome  or  weary  as  the  tafk  may  be ;  for  there  is  no
mountain  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  however  beautiful
and  delightful,  but  what  is  difficult  and  toilfome  to
afcend.  Thus,  whofoever  will  follow  Chrift,  muft
furely  caft  off  Nature  and  her  lufts.  Now  we  find
many  who  would  gladly  follow  Him  without  pain  or
toil  and  as  long  as  the  path  was  eafy,  and  would  fain
be  upon  this  mountain  on  the  fide  looking  towards
Jerusalem,  which  fignifieth  peace,  that  it  mould
minifter  to  their  peace,  and  they  mould  be  without
contradiction.  Such  perfons  experience  in  themfelves
comfort,  peace  and  joy  ;  yet  they  come  to  nought.
They  will  not  fet  foot  on  the  other  fide  that  looks
towards  Bethany,  which  name  fignifies  the  pain  of
obedience  or  of  fuffering.  Of  which  place  the  prophet
fays  in  the  Pfalms  :  "  Who  palling  through  the  valley
"  of  Baca  make  it  a  well."  Know,  dear  children,  he
who  will  not  pitch  his  tent  in  this  valley,  remaineth
unfruitful, and  nothing  will  ever  come  of  him.  How-
ever great  his  peace,  and  however  fair  his  feeming,  it
muft  have  an  end.  Therefore,  a  devout  heart  mall
ever  have  a  fbrrowful  yearning  after  her  Beloved,  who
has  afcended  to  fuch  diftant  and  lofty  heights,  whither
her  eye  cannot  follow  or  trace  Him.  Hence,  the  more
truly  and  deeply  the  ground  of  a  man's  foul  has  been
touched  by  God,  the  more  truly  does  he  find  this
valley  of  tears  within  him.  And  had  he  no  other
caufe  for  tears,  there  were  need  enough  of  them  by
reafon  of  fin  and  the  defilement  that  lies  hidden  in
our  frail  nature,  by  which  man  is  fo  often  and  fo


Sermon  for  Afcenfion  Day.


325


greatly  hindered  from  a  lofty  converfe  r\-ith  God  (which
might  and  ought  by  God's  grace  to  go  on  without
ceafing  within  the  foul),  and  from  the  fweet  afpira-
tions  by  which  a  man  mould  continually  carry  up  all
things  to  God,  but  that  grofs  nature  hinders  him  and
turns  his  thoughts  afide,  and  alfb  often  rules  in  fecret
where  God  alone  ought  to  have  His  conftant  abode.
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  other  fide  of  the  mountain
looking  towards  Bethany.

But  he  who  mould  experience  in  himfelf  all  that  I
have  faid,  would  then  have  his  face  turned  towards  Jeru-
falem,  the  city  of  peace,  and  thus  would  become  wife  as
to  all  that  he  mould  do  or  leave  undone,  and  able  to  dif-
tinguilh  between  the  promptings  of  God  and  of  nature.
Further,  this  would  ftrengthen  him  that  he  might  be
the  better  able  to  bear  pain  and  forrow,  and  not  grow
too  weak  by  reafbn  of  his  fufferings  and  mifery,  when
he  is  forfaken  of  God,  and  left  without  comfort  or
help  in  bitter  defolation.  The  wile  man  fays  :  "  My
"  fon,  when  the  evil  days  come,  thou  malt  not  forget
"  the  goodnefs  of  God."  Children,  thefe  two  prof-
peels  towards  Jerufalem  and  Bethany  muft  be  both  at
once  in  the  foul  of  man.  For  Jerufalem  means  a  city
of  peace  ;  yet  in  this  fame  city,  Chrift  was  put  to
death,  and  had  to  fuffer  all  manner  of  torments.
Truly,  child,  fo  muft  thou  alfo  in  perfect  peace  fuffer
and  die  to  all  that  is  thine,  for  it  cannot  be  other-
wife  ;  and  commit  thy  caufe  fimply  and  truly  to  God,
and  renounce  thyfelf  utterly,  for  thou  too  muft  needs
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  wicked  Jews,  who  will  and
muft  torment,  fcourge,  and  crucify  thee,  and  caft  thee
out  of  their  borders,  as  if  thou  wert  a  false  traitor  ;  and

Y  3


Thus  Jb  all  l?c
come  unto
Jerufalem,
the  city  of
peace  ;


but,  like
Cbrift,  be
mujidietbere.


326


Sermon  for  Sljcenjion  Day.


John  xvi.  z.


Of  the  olive-
tree  of  true
devoutnefs.


flay  thee  in  the  hearts  of  all  men.  Dear  child,  thou
muft  utterly  die,  if  God  Himfelf  without  a  medium  is
to  become  thy  life  and  being.  Nay,  did  not  Chrift
Himfelf  fay  to  His  difciples  :  "  Whofoever  flayeth
"  you  will  think  that  he  doeth  God  fervice  ?  "  For  all
thofe  who  defpife  and  judge  thee,  or  torment  and  flay
thee,  will  be  perfuaded  in  their  own  minds  that  they
are  doing  God  a  fervice  on  thee,  and  mean  to  do  fo.
Ah  !  dear  children,  how  greatly  blefled  were  fuch  a
man,  if  he  neverthelefs  were  a  dweller  in  Jerufalem,
and  had  a  perfect  peace  in  himfelf,  in  the  midft  of  all
this  difquiet !  Then  would  the  very  peace  of  God  be
indeed  brought  forth  in  man.

Children,  on  this  Mount  grows  the  olive-tree,  by
which  is  fignified  true  godly  devoutnefs.  Ah  !  chil-
dren, the  eflence  of  devoutnefs  is  a  cleaving  of  the
whole  fpirit  to  God,  with  a  mind  ready  and  prepared
at  all  times  to  love  and  to  purpofe  all  that  is  of  God,
fo  that  the  man  is  inwardly  united  with  God  in  will  and
purpofe  and  all  things.  This  is  an  oil  that  overflows
and  rifes  above  all  tafting  and  feeling.  Haft  thou
this  olive-tree  growing  in  the  ground  of  thy  foul,
thou  art  in  truth  a  devout  man.  This  flame  of  devo-
tion lhall  often  be  refrefhed  and  renewed  with  the  fire
of  Divine  love,  and  thou  fhalt  unceafmgly  look  at  and
through  the  ground  of  thy  foul,  that  nothing  may  be
concealed  there  which  is  not  truly  and  merely  God's;
fb  that  nature  may  not  rule  and  work  in  the  ground
of  thy  foul,  where  God  alone  fliould  dwell,  and  nought
elfe.  For,  alas !  we  find  many,  both  among  the  reli-
gious and  the  worldly,  who  do  not  fimply  purpofe  God
in  all  things  and  nothing  elfe,  but  will  intend  them-


Sermon  for  Afcenjion  Day.


327


felves  in  things  fpiritual  and  natural.  \Ve  find  very
few  who  ferve  God  for  His  own  fake,  and  do  not
regard  comfort,  nor  joy,  nor  divine  gifts  in  time  or
eternity,  but  God  alone,  and  no  objed:  befides.

And  now  may  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the
Holy  Ghoft,  grant  us  to  afcend  with  the  eternal  Son
of  God  from  this  miferable  ftate,  and  from  all  crea-
tures, that  we  may  with  Him  poflefs  eternal  life !
Amen.


Y4


XIX.

Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


JOHN  vi.  44. — "  No  man  can  come  to  Me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  fent  Me  draw  him."


Of  tbe  for-
lorn ft  ate  of
tbe  difciples
after  Cbriji's
deatb>


ARs  i.  14.


and  bow  God
drew  them
out  of  it  unto
Himfelf.


HUS  faid  the  bleffed  Jefus :  "  No  man
"  can  come  to  Me  except  the  Father
"  which  hath  fent  Me  draw  him."  The
perfecuted,  difheartened  difciples  of  Jefus,
who  were  held  captive  in  the  bonds  of
ignorance  as  with  iron  fetters,  and  in  their  own
efteem  were  lying  in  the  deep  dungeons  of  their  tref-
pafles,  confefling  themfelves  ftript  of  all  their  own
might,  cried  with  fervent  prayer  to  the  Almighty
Father  (as  St.  Luke  tells  us,  that  while  they  were
"  waiting  for  the  promife  of  the  Father,"  they  "  con-
"  tinued  with  one  accord  in  prayer  and  fupplication"),
praying  that  their  bonds  might  be  loofed,  and  that
they  might  be  delivered  from  their  prifon-houfe.
Wherefore  their  Heavenly  Father,  to  whom  they  had
made  known  their  requefts  in  faith,  heard  their
prayer,  and  fet  them  free  from  all  bonds,  and  drew
them  out  of  their  dungeon  by  fix  fleps  into  the  glo-
rious liberty  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  where  they  were
filled  with  all  truth.

Firft  of  all,  He  turned  His  merciful  eyes  upon
them,  and  made  them  fit  to  receive,  not  only  His
ordinary  influences,  whereby  He  is  wont  to  bring  men


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


3*9


unto  Himfelf,  but  He  fought  to  bring  them  unto
Himfelf  in  a  peculiar  manner  above  other  men.  For
we  find  three  other  ways  by  which  God  draws  men
unto  Himfelf.  The  firft  is  by  means  of  the  crea-
tures, in  whom  He  very  clearly  reveals  Himfelf  to
men  through  the  created  light  of  their  fouls.  Thus
St.  Thomas  tells  us  how  fbme  heathen,  from  the
evidences  of  His  in-dwelling  and  prefence  in  all  the
creatures,  have  maintained  that  God  is  the  creator
and  ruler  of  the  world,  and  how  therefore  in  every
part  of  the  world  honours  ought  to  be  rendered  unto
Him.  In  this  drawing  by  means  of  the  creatures,
does  God  give  a  hint  and  offer  of  Himfelf  to  man.
The  fecond  way  is  by  His  voice  in  the  foul,  when  an
eternal  truth  myfterioufly  fuggefts  itfelf.  So  St.
Auguftine  fays,  that  the  heathens  have  difcourfed  of
certain  truths,  and  thefe  they  have  reached  by  virtue
of  the  eternal  laws  of  God  which  are  working  in  all
men  when  they  fpeak  what  is  true,  and  not  by  the
mere  light  of  their  own  nature.  As  Auguftine  fays :
"  Whatever  is  true,  by  whomfoever  it  is  fpoken,  pro-
"  ceeds  from  the  Holy  Ghoft."  Hence,  at  thole  mo-
ments when  all  the  powers  of  the  foul  are  collected
and  turned  inwards,  it  often  happens  that  fbme
eternal  truth  presents  itfelf  with  irrefiftible  clearness.
This  happens  not  unfrequently  in  morning  fleep,  juft
before  waking.  This  fort  of  drawing  may  be  called
a  whifper  of  love,  or  a  monition.  The  third  way  is
when  the  human  will  is  fubdued,  and  flands  waiting
for  the  blefled  Will  of  God,  truly  ftript  of  itfelf  and
all  things,  fo  that  the  Almighty  Father  draws  the
created  will  without  refiftance,  and  it  leans  towards


How  God
drawetb  men
to  Himfelf  by
means  of  the
creatures,


by  His  voice
in  the  foul
revealing
truths.


by  the  fubdu-
ing  of  the
will  unto
Himfelf.


330


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


Wherefore

God  cboofes
fame  rather

than  others
for  the  objefts

of  His  fpecial

leadings.


Him  with  peculiar  delight.  This  drawing  may  be
called  a  union  and  an  embrace.  This  drawing  of  the
will  towards  God  comes  from  the  Higheft  Good  ;
from  Him  who  has  created  heaven  and  earth,  and  all
the  creatures,  for  man's  fake,  and  yet  humbled  Him-
felf  even  unto  death.  Now  it  is  becaufe  He  has  a
greater  delight  in  man  than  in  all  the  glories  of  heaven
and  earth,  and  for  no  other  reafbn,  that  He  feeks  him
out  and  gives  him  monitions  through  all  things.  It
was  that  He  might  thus  draw  the  beloved  difciples
unto  Himfelf  that  He  caft  His  eye  of  mercy  on  them,
and  through  bleffing  and  affliction  turned  and  difpofed
their  wills  until  He  fitted  them  to  receive  and  follow
His  leadings.  And  it  was  becaufe  the  difciples  let
Him  work  in  them  as  it  pleafed  Him,  that  they  came
at  laft  to  experience  the  fall  power  of  His  drawing,  as
we  may  fee  in  all  that  happened  to  them  afterwards.
Now  fome  may  afk,  Why  did  God  thus  prepare  the
difciples  for  His  leadings,  and  not  me,  or  others  before
me,  in  whom  He  has  not  wrought  after  fuch  a  fpecial
manner  ?  For  this  fpecial  leading  there  were  two
caufes  :  the  firft  is  the  fbvereign  will  of  God,  who
choofes  fome  men  above  others  to  be  partakers  of  His
myfteries  and  hidden  fweetnefs ;  juft  as  a  King,  out  of
his  mere  good  pleafure,  choofes  certain  knights  to
compofe  his  privy  council  and  to  be  about  his  perfbn.
The  fecond  caufe  is  that  one  man  liftens  more  atten-
tively to  God's  voice,  and  takes  more  pains  to  difcover
God's  leadings,  or  endeavours  more  ftrenuoufly  to  lay
afide  his  faults  and  whatever  comes  between  him  and
God  ;  and  for  this  caufe  alfo  one  man  is  more  ftrongly
drawn  than  another.  Now  becaufe  the  dear  difciples


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


33 i


had  this  mind  in  them,  that  with  hearty  repentance
they  befought  forgivenefs  for  all  their  paft  life  of
ignorance  and  fin,  and  meditated  on  the  fweet  teach-
ings and  holy  life  and  death  of  their  beloved  Mafter
and  His  boundlefs  love  and  refignation,  and  forfook  all
things,  and  watched  continually  and  committed  them-
felves  wholly  to  God,  ever  waiting  to  difcern  His  will,
and  gave  heed  thereto,  and  did  without  means  fo  far
as  they  could,  and  prayed  for  help  when  they  could
not ;  therefore  this  fpecial  drawing  was  given  unto
them,  as  it  is  ftill  given  to  this  day  to  thofe  who
follow  in  their  footfteps.

Now  it  may  be  afked,  But  the  difciples  could  not
have  made  this  firft  ftep  of  their  own  power ;  for  the
Word  of  Truth  fays  :  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  no-
"  thing."  Therefore,  it  muft  have  been  neceflary  for
God  to  draw  them,  and  to  influence  their  will,  even  as
regards  thefe  three  points  already  treated  of.  But  if
this  be  fo,  all  hangs  upon  the  firft  caufe,  as  has  been
faid  before.  To  this  the  doctrine  of  Scripture  anfwers  :
It  is  true  that  we  can  do  no  good  thing  without  God's
ordinary  influence,  except  we  make  progrefs  by  means
of  a  fpecial  influence  from  the  Holy  Spirit ;  yet,  at
the  fame  time,  man  may  do  his  part,  inafmuch  as  his
will  has  power  to  withftand  the  offers  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  to  cleave  to  his  own  way.  God  does  not
juftify  a  man  without  his  own  free  will ;  even  as  our
eyes  cannot  fee  except  they  are  enlightened  by  the  fun
or  any  other  light,  yet  even  when  we  have  the  light
we  muft  open  our  eyes,  or  we  can  never  fee  it.  If
the  eyes  were  covered  with  a  thick  veil  or  fcreen,  the
man  muft  take  it  away  or  he  could  fee  nothing,  how-


Oftbe  extent
of  man's
powers,  and
bow  that  be
is  free  to
rejift  the  mo-
nitions of
God's  Spirit.


332


Sermo7i  for  Whit  Sunday.


How  the
Father  drew
the  difciples
out  of  capti-
vity to  fenfe.


Matt.  x.  9,
10.


Of  the  fchool
of  Eternal
Light.


ever  brightly  the  fun  might  pour  forth  his  rays.  Now,
when  the  Almighty  Father  came  unto  the  difciples
with  His  Divine  light,  they  opened  their  eyes,  and
caft  away  the  fcreen  of  outward  forms,  as  much  as
might  be ;  therefore,  God  did  His  part  alfo,  and  drew
them  up  unto  Himfelf  after  a  fpecial  manner.  This
was  the  work  of  the  lovely,  Divine  Son,  who  is  the
reprover  of  all  hearts, —  clearing  out  all  ftumbling-
blocks  and  rending  away  all  veils  of  darknefs  from  the
inward  eye  of  the  foul.

Secondly,  theirHeavenly  Father  drew  them  forth  from
the  bonds  of  flavery  to  fenfe,  fo  that  they  were  delivered
from  this  captivity  never  again  to  fall  into  it,  but  to
ftand  ready  in  perfect  acquiefcence  to  receive  His  further
leadings.  Wherefore  he  gave  them,  by  His  beloved
Son,  four  precepts,  according  to  which  they  mould
order  their  lives,  as  St.  Matthew  tells  us  :  "  Provide
"  neither  gold,  nor  filver,  nor  brafs,  in  your  purfes,  nor
"  fcrip  for  your  journey,  neither  two  coats,  neither  fhoes,
"  nor  yet  ftaves."  He  who  only  confiders  the  matter
aright,  will  find  that  this  drawing  them  up  above  the
things  of  the  body  was  very  necefTary,  if  they  were  to
enter  the  fchool  of  the  Eternal  Light.  For  this  fchool
has  four  qualities.  Firfl,  that  it  is  raifed  far  above  all
time,  not  only  in  the  third  heaven,  phyfically  fpeaking,
but  above  all  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and
all  elfe  that  is  fubjecl:  to  time.  In  the  fecond  place,  that
whatever  maybe  found  ftill  remaining  of  felf-appropria-
tion  is  not  suffered  to  make  itself  a  home  and  refting-
place  in  the  heart.  In  the  third  place,  in  this  fchool  is
perfect  refl ;  for  no  florins,  nor  rain,  nor  fin,  nor  aught
that  can  bring  change,  is  there.  Fourthly,  there  reigns


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


333


perpetual  light,  clear  and  unbedimmed ;  for  the  fun
and  moon,  which  set  from  time  to  time,  and  leave  the
earth  in  darknefs,  do  not  mine  there.  God  is  their
eternal  fun,  mining  in  His  brightnefs.  Now,  feeing
that  all  material,  created  things  are  bafe,  narrow,  fub-
jecl:  to  change  and  alloy,  it  was  needful  that  the  dif-
ciples  mould  be  raifed  above  the  trammels  of  material
things,  for  St.  Jerome  fays :  "  It  is  as  impoffible  for
"  God  to  beftow  Himfelf  under  the  limitations  of
"  time,  or  temporal  things,  as  it  is  for  a  flone  to
"  pofTess  the  wifdom  of  an  angel."

Here  a  queftion  occurs  :  Since  the  Eternal  Father
draws  fome  men  from  earth  by  happinefs,  and  others
by  pain,  by  which  were  the  difciples  mofl  ftrongly
drawn  ?  I  anfwer  :  If  you  confider  their  life,  you  will
find  that  they  were  drawn  to  God  much  more  by
great  hardfhips  than  by  enjoyment ;  for  even  while
Chrifl  dwelt  with  them,  they  were  always  suffering
contempt,  and  contradiction  to  their  felf-love  ;  and
after  His  holy  death,  until  they  were  lifted  up  as  on  this
day,  they  were  indeed  well-nigh  crufhed  to  the  earth
with  fbrrow  and  difappointment,  before  the  bonds
were  withdrawn  from  their  eyes ;  and  their  Heavenly
Father  ordered  it  thus  out  of  fpecial  love  toward
them.  To  be  drawn  to  God  through  pain  is  in  itfelf
a  furer  way  than  by  joy,  as  St.  Gregory  fays,  para-
phrafing  on  the  Pfalmift :  "  In  time  of  perfecution
"  and  tribulation,  a  thoufand  mall  fall  by  thy  fide  ;  but
"  in  a  time  of  profperity  and  good  fortune  ten  thoufand
"  mall  fall  at  thy  right  hand."  So,  too,  is  it  more
like  Chrifl  in  all  His  life  and  death  ;  and,  moreover,  it
is  a  greater  proof  of  love  ;  for  it  is  faid  :  "  Whom  the


The  difciples
were  drawn
unto  God
more  power-
fully by  for  -
row  than  by
happinefs.


Heb.  xii.  6.


334


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


How  the
Father  drew
the  difciples
up  above  the
corporeal
ideas  of
ChrijPs
humanity.


"  Lord  loveth  He  chafteneth,  and  fcourgeth  every  fbn
"  whom  He  receiveth."  Wherefore,  as  the  difciples
were  to  receive  many  peculiar  and  myfterious  favours
from  God,  fo  this  was  to  be  paid  for  beforehand,  and
for  each  gift  a  death  was  to  be  fuffered — a  dying  unto
themfelves  ;  and  if  one  trial  was  removed  by  God,  He
forthwith  fent  another  equally  fevere  (as  He  does  to
this  day  with  His  beloved  friends),  and  they  underftood
this,  and  endured  to  the  end  all  that  their  Hea-
venly Father  laid  upon  them,  until  they  came  to  have
their  fuffering  turned  into  gladnefs,  and  rejoiced  that
they  were  found  worthy  to  fuffer  for  the  name  of
Jefus.

Thirdly,  their  Heavenly  Father  drew  them  up  above
all  the  corporeal  ideas  that  they  had  of  the  humanity
of  Chrift,  making  their  minds  as  bare  of  thofe  and  all
other  images,  as  they  were  when  firft  created,  in  order
that  henceforward,  according  to  their  neceflities,  they
might  learn  for  evermore  in  the  fchool  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  For  this  we  are  able  to  perceive  four  reafons.
Firft ;  that  truth  and  love,  which  are  the  end  of  all
teaching  in  all  fchools,  have  no  images  nor  any  exift-
ence  outfide  the  foul ;  for  no  painting  can,  properly
fpeaking,  depicT:  truth  and  love ;  for  they  have  no
images,  external  or  internal.  No  image  or  type  which
we  can  devife  to  exprefs  love,  is  love  itfelf;  and  it  is
the  fame  with  truth.  Next ;  that  in  the  fchool  of
the  Spirit,  man  does  not  learn  through  books,  which
teach  through  outward  images  addreffed  to  the  fenfes  ;
but  here  the  truth,  which  of  its  nature  does  not  fpeak
by  means  of  images,  is  fpoken  into  the  foul  itfelf.
Hence  the  humble  St.  Francis  commanded  the


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


335


brethren  of  his  Order  not  to  trouble  themfelves  too
much  "with  books  and  letters,  and  that  thofe  who
were  unlettered  ihould  not  be  anxious  about  acquiring
learning,  but  remember  to  covet  above  all  things  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  pray  only  for  a  pure  heart  and  His
influences.  Thirdly ;  becaufe  in  the  fchool  of  the
Spirit  man  learns  wifdom  through  humility,  know-
ledge by  forgetting,  how  to  fpeak  by  filence,  how  to
live  by  dying.  For  St.  John  was  fleeping  when  he
looked  into  the  fount  of  eternal  wifdom,  and  St.  Paul
knew  not  whether  he  was  in  the  body  or  out  of  the
body,  when  he  was  "  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven
"  and  heard  unfpeakable  words,  which  it  is  not  lawful
"  for  a  man  to  utter."  Therefore  it  was  needful  for
the  difciples  to  be  deprived  of  all  images  that  they
might  learn  in  this  fchool.  Fourthly ;  where  the
mind  is  bufied  with  images,  time  muft  neceflarily
enter  into  the  operations  of  the  imagination,  and  this
has  no  place  in  the  higheft  fchool  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;
for  there  neither  time  nor  images  can  help  us,  but
contact  is  all  that  is  needed,  the  which  may  happen
without  time  within  the  fpace  of  a  moment.  St.
Gregory  fays :  "  The  Holy  Ghoft  is  an  admirable
"  mailer-workman  ;  He  fills  a  fifherman,  and  makes  a
"  preacher  of  him ;  He  fills  a  perfecutor,  and  tranf-
"  forms  him  into  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  ;  He  fills  a
"  publican,  and  makes  of  him  an  evangelift.  Who  is
"  this  mafter-workman  ?  He  needs  not  time  for  His
"  teachings  ;  by  whatever  means  He  choofes,  fb  fbon
"  as  He  has  touched  the  foul,  He  has  taught  it,  and
"  His  mere  touch  is  His  teaching."  For  thefe  four
realbns  we  can  perceive  how  that  it  was  neceflary  for


2  Cor.  xii.
2,4.


Of  the  teach-
ing  of  the '
Holy  Gboft.


33°~


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


How  the
Father  drew
the  difciples
forth  from
the  captivity
to  Self  into
the  freedom  of
His  children.


the  disciples  to  have  their  fouls  bereft  of  all  images.
But  when  they  were  drawn  upwards  to  this  end,  not
all  happened  to  them  which  happened  to  St.  Paul,
when  he  was  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven  ;  for,  in
the  opinion  of  St.  Auguftine,  it  was  given  to  Paul  in
his  trance,  and  to  Mofes  in  Sinai,  to  behold  the  God-
head without  a  veil.  This  was  not  the  cafe  with  the
difciples  at  this  time,  for  they  well  knew  that  they
were  ftill  in  the  body.  Yet  their  hearts  were  fo  lifted
up,  and  their  minds  fo  illumined  with  eternal  truth,
that  they  were  enabled  to  receive  that  fame  thing,
though  fbme  more  and  fome  lefs,  which  St.  Paul
afterwards  received  in  his  vifion.

In  the  Fourth  place  ;  the  Holy  Father  drew  them
out  of  themfelves,  and  delivered  them  from  all  natural
felf-feeking,  fo  that  they  flood  at  reft,  in  true  peace
writh  themfelves,  and  in  perfect  freedom.  Then  ceafed
all  the  mourning,  fears,  and  pain  which  they  had  fuf-
fcred  hitherto  ;  for  in  the  lifting  up  of  their  fouls,
there  was  an  acl:  of  fuch  entire  felf-furrender,  that  they
reached  the  fummit  of  that  firft  ftage  of  the  Chriftian
courfe  of  which  we  have  fpoken  above.  Hencefor-
ward the  Eternal  Father  could  fulfil  His  good  pleafure
in  them  without  any  refiftance  from  their  will  or
natural  inclinations.  The  Eternal  Father  thus  drew
them  upwards,  that  He  might  reign  as  a  mafter  in
them,  in  His  omnipotence,  greatnefs,  unity,  and  love,
and  they  mould  learn  of  Him  and  grow  up  into  His
likeness.  Hence  it  was  needful  that  they  mould  be
drawn  out  of  themfelves,  becaufe  they  could  not  be
free,  at  one,  noble  and  loving,  fo  long  as  they  were
held  captive  to  Self.  It  may  be  afked :  When  the


Sermon  for  Whit  Su?iday.


337


difciples  were  thus  drawn  out  of  themfelves,  and  all
images  were  effaced  from  their  fouls,  wras  there  an  ex-
tinction of  their  natural  powers,  fo  that  they  were  dead
to  nature  ?  I  anfwer,  No  :  their  nature  was  not  ex-
tinguifhed,  for  they  were  much  more  truly  according
to  nature  in  their  felf-furrender  than  they  had  ever
been  before  ;  for  what  the  Lord  of  nature  ordains  for
a  creature,  that  it  is  natural  for  the  creature  to  obferve,
and  if  it  departs  therefrom,  it  acls  contrary  to  nature.
Thus  St.  Auguftine  fays,  "  that  the  rod  in  the  Old  Tef-
"  tament  was  turned  into  a  ferpent  was  not  contrary  to
"  nature,  for  it  was  God's  will."  Wherefore  I  fay  too,
that  inafmuch  as  the  difciples  furrendered  themfelves  ut-
terly to  the  Divine  "Will,  they  were  in  the  higheft  fenfe
in  harmony  with  nature;  and  their  nature  did  not  perim,
but  was  exalted  and  brought  into  rightful  order.  There
were  no  fewer  images  in  their  minds  than  before ;  but
the  images  did  not  difturb  their  inward  harmony  or
move  them  out  of  God.  And  when  I  faid  that  their
minds  were  to  be  emptied  of  images,  it  is  to  be  un-
derftood  in  this  fenfe,  that  it  was  juft  as  when  you  let
a  lighted  taper  at  midday  in  the  funmine,  the  taper
continues  to  burn,  and  fheds  forth  no  lefs  light  than
it  did  before ;  but  its  light  is  loft  in  the  funmine,
becaufe  the  greater  light  prevails  over  the  lefTer  and
abfbrbs  it,  fb  that  it  no  longer  feems  to  mine  with  a
feparate  luftre,  but  is  diffufed  and  fhed  forth  in  the
greater  light.  Thus  I  faid  of  images  and  of  creatures
in  the  cafe  of  the  difciples,  that  henceforth  they  per-
formed all  their  works  by  means  of  the  Divine  light,
and  yet  were  much  more  according  to  nature,  and
their  minds  were  as  full  of  images  as  before.


How  that
grace  brings
us  into  har-
mony with
nature.


How  the  light
of  nature  is
loft  and  ab-
forbed  in  the
Divine  light.


338


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


How  God
givetb  Him-
felf unto  tbofe
that  have
given  tbem-
f elves  to  Him.


How  God
givetb  not
Himjelfin
the  fame  de-
gree to  all,
but  according
to  their  capa-
city of  love.


Fifthly :  the  Heavenly  Father  drew  His  difciples,
thus  free  and  acquiefcing,  into  fo  clofe  a  union  that
He  gave  Himfelf  as  truly  unto  them,  as  they  had  given
themfelves  unto  Him.  Then  all  the  defire  of  the
good  pleasure  of  God  was  fulfilled,  and  alfo  all  the  de-
fires  of  the  difciples,  fb  that  God's  will  with  them
went  no  farther  than  their  own  wills.  Not  only  did
the  Holy  Ghoft  give  himfelf  unto  them,  but  alfb  God
the  Father  and  the  Son  gave  themfelves  with  the
Spirit,  as  one  God  without  diftinclion  of  perfons.
For  when  love  is  attributed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  (as
wifdom  to  the  Son),  He  muft  be  confldered  as  a  diftincl:
Perfbn,  as  touching  his  attribute  of  being  the  bond
of  mutual  love,  but  not  as  otherwife  diftincl:.  Here
fome  may  afk,  if  the  difciples  were  all  drawn  out  of
themfelves,  and  gave  themfelves  up  to  God,  did  God
draw  them  all  to  Himfelf  in  the  fame  degree,  and  alfo
give  Himfelf  alike  to  all  ?  I  anfwer  :  though  all  the
difciples  w-ere  fet  free  of  felf,  yet  one  turned  to  God
with  warmer  love  and  ftronger  defire  than  another ;
as  the  angels  who  kept  their  firft  eftate  all  remained
in  perfect  obedience  to  God,  and  yet  one  cleaved  to
Him  with  greater  love  than  another.  \Vherefore  God
gave  Himfelf  more  to  one  than  to  another,  though  all
with  like  fincerity  turned  unto  Him.  Thus  was  it
with  the  difciples ;  they  turned  unto  God  with  un-
equal affections,  and  hence  God  beftowed  Himfelf  and
His  gifts  upon  them  after  an  unequal  manner.  The
beloved  difciple  John  was  the  moft  highly  favoured
becaufe  he  looked  up  to  God  with  the  greateft  fervour
of  love.  It  is  true,  neverthelefs,  that  in  this  matter
much  muft  be  afcribed  to  the  fovereign  will  of  God,


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


339


who  giveth  to  every  man  as  He  will.  Further,  we
muft  note  that  it  was  not  only  on  the  Day  of  Pente-
coft  that  God  gave  Himfelf  perfonally  to  His  difciples  ;
for,  as  Richard  and  other  doctors  fay,  fo  often  as  that
grace  is  given  to  man  which  makes  the  creature  to
find  favour  in  the  fight  of  God,  fo  often  is  the  Perfbn
of  the  Holy  Ghoft  given  unto  him.  Thus  the  difci-
ples had  many  times  before  received  the  Perfon  of  the
Holy  Ghoft,  but  they  had  never  before  utterly  re-
nounced themfelves,  and  opened  their  hearts  to  His
gifts.  Hence,  in  this  fenfe,  He  was  firft  given  unto
them  on  the  Day  of  Pentecoft.

Sixthly,  the  Eternal  Father  brought  them  into  the
higheft  fchool  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  which  they
ftraightway  underftood  the  myfteries  of  the  Holy
Scriptures,  and  the  fimple  naked  truth  of  God,  which
cannot  be  underftood  by  any  of  the  mere  earthly
mafters  in  the  schools.  And  in  this  fchool  the  great-
nefs  of  God  was  firft  laid  open  to  them  ;  and  therewith
the  gift  of  childlike  fear  of  God  fank  down  into  their
hearts,  and  abode  there  unto  their  life's  end.  Next,
all  power  was  given  unto  them,  and  they  were  enabled
always  to  look  up  to  God  ;  and  herewith  they  obtained
the  gift  of  ftrength.  In  the  third  place,  they  learnt
not  only  to  obey  the  precepts,  but  alfo  to  apprehend
the  counfel  of  Chrift,  and  therewith  they  received  the
gift  of  counfel.  Fourthly,  He  taught  them  to  feel  the
hidden  fwectnefs  of  God,  and  gave  them  therewith
the  gift  of  charity.  Fifthly,  He  taught  them  how  to
obferve  and  judge  the  creatures,  and  to  distinguish
between  the  light  of  God  and  the  fuggeftions  of  na-
ture, and  therewith  beftowed  on  them  the  gift  of

z2


How  the  dif-
ciples were
brought  into
the  bigbejl
fcbool  of  the
Holy  Gbojt,
and  received
His  fevenfold


340


Sermon  for  Whit  Sunday.


How  far  the
difciples  bad
an  infigbt
into  natural
fcience.


fcience.  Sixthly,  He  taught  them  to  perceive  aright
their  prefent  condition,  and  all  their  previous  ftates,
and  gave  them  therewith  the  gift  of  underftanding.
Seventhly,  He  taught  them  to  be  transformed  into  the
likenefs  of  God,  by  loving  union  with  Him,  and  gave
them  therewith  the  gift  of  wifdom.  Thefe  fevenfold
gifts  does  the  Holy  Ghoft  convey  to  the  difciples  in
His  fchool :  for  as  the  fchools  of  natural  learning  teach
the  feven  fciences,  and  the  fchool  of  doctrine  the  feven
facraments,  fb  does  the  Holy  Ghoft,  in  his  fchool,
teach  thofe  feven  things  with  His  fevenfold  gifts.

Here  a  queftion  arifes  :  Did  the  difciples  in  this  high-
eft  fchool  of  the  Spirit  obtain  an  infight  into  all  thofe
fciences  which  are  learnt  in  the  fchool  of  nature  ?  I  an-
fwer,  Yes  ;  it  was  given  them  to  underftand  all  fcience,
whether  touching  the  courfes  of  the  heavenly  bodies,
or  what  not,  in  fo  far  as  it  might  conduce  to  God's
glory,  or  concerned  the  falvation  of  man  ;  but  thofe
points  of  fcience  which  bear  no  fruit  for  the  foul,  they
were  not  given  to  know.  This  in  no  wife  abated  their
happinefs,  or  their  perfection  ;  for,  as  St.  Auguftine
fays  :  "  He  is  a  miferable  man  who  knows  all  things,
"  and  does  not  know  God  ;  and  he  is  happy  who  knows
"  God,  even  though  he  know  nothing  elfe.  But  he
"  who  knows  God  and  all  elfe  befide  is  not  made  more
"  blefTed  thereby  ;  for  he  is  bleffed  through  God  alone."
That  God  may  thus  draw  us  up  unto  Himfelf,  and
mine  into  our  inmoft  parts  with  the  fame  truth,
may  He  grant  us  of  His  grace  !  Amen  !


XX.

Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)

This  fermon  telletb  us  of  four  meafures  that  Jball  be  rendered  unto
man,  and  of  two  grades  of  a  godly  life,  and  how  we  ought  to  love
our  neighbour.


LUKE  vi.  36-42.


read  in  the  Gofpel  for  this  day  that  our
Lord  Jefus  Chrift  faid :  "  Be  ye  therefore
"  merciful,  as  your  Father  alfo  is  merci-
"  ful.  Judge  not,  and  ye  lhall  not  be
"judged ;  condemn  not,  and  ye  lhall  not
be  condemned ;  forgive,  and  ye  mall  be  forgiven ;
give,  and  it  lhall  be  given  unto  you :  good  meafure,
prefled  down,  and  lhaken  together,  and  running
over,  lhall  men  give  into  your  bofom.  For  with
the  fame  meafure  that  ye  mete  withal,  it  lhall  be
meafured  to  you  again.  And  He  fpake  a  parable
unto  them,  Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind  ?  lhall
they  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch  ?  The  difciple  is
not  above  his  mafter :  but  every  one  that  is  perfect
lhall  be  as  his  matter.  And  why  beholdeft  thou
the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye,  but  pcrceivcll
not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ?  Either
how  canft  thou  fay  to  thy  brother,  Brother,  let  me
pull  out  the  mote  that  is  in  thine  eye,  when  thou

z3


The  leflbns  to
be  learnt  from
the  Gofpel  for
the  day.


342


How  mercy
teacbetb  us  to
entreat  our
neighbour.


"  bcholdcft  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ?
"  Thou  hypocrite,  cafl  out  firft  the  beam  out  of  thine
"  own  eye,  and  then  malt  thou  fee  clearly  to  pull  out
"  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye."

I  will  fay  a  few  words  on  the  precept :  "Be  ye
"  merciful,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  mer-
"  ciful."  This  noble  virtue  is,  now-a-days,  quite  a
ftranger  to  the  hearts  of  many,  infomuch  that  it  is
grievous  to  behold.  For  each  is  called  to  exercife  this
mercy  towards  his  neighbour,  whereinfoever  the  latter
may  have  need  of  it  ;  not  only  as  regards  the  giving
of  earthly  goods,  but  alfo  the  bearing  with  his  neigh-
bour's faults  in  all  gentlenefs  and  mercy.  But  no  !
each  one  falls  upon  his  neighbour  and  judges  him  ;
and  as  foon  as  any  mifhap  befals  a  man,  whether
deferved  or  not,  ftraightway,  without  wraiting  to  take
thought,  another  comes  along  and  lends  a  helping  hand
to  make  matters  worfe,  to  put  a  bad  face  on  them,  and
fuggefls  the  moft  evil  interpretation  that  he  can  ima-
gine ;  nay,  it  is  thanks  to  God  if  he  do  not  add  a  great
piece  from  the  {lores  of  his  own  wicked  imagination.
This  evil  tongue  (from  which  arife  untold  fbrrows  and
vexations)  is  at  work  at  once  before  a  man  has  time  to
reflect  and  pafs  a  deliberate  judgment.  Poor  crea-
ture !  as  thou  loveft  thy  eternal  falvation,  wait,  at  all
events,  till  thou  canft  calmly  reflecl:,  and  know  what
thou  thinkeft  and  fayeft.  For  it  is  a  bafe  and  fcanda-
lous  thing  for  a  man  thus  thoughtleffly  and  rafhly  to
pafs  fentence,  which  may  not  even  be  deferved,  upon
his  neighbours,  with  his  fharp,  ruthlefs  words,  whereby
he,  fpiritually  fpeaking,  flays  his  neighbour  in  the
hearts  of  others.  And  who  has  commanded  thee  to


Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


343


pafs  judgment  ?  Wherefore  Chrift  tells  us  that  who-
foever  judges  another  fhall  be  judged  by  God  :  "  For
"  with  whatjudgment  ye  judge,  ye  fhall  be  judged;  and
"  with  the  fame  meafure  that  ye  mete,  fhall  it  be
"  meafured  to  you  again."  Of  this  matter  no  more
for  the  prefent ;  but  let  us  confider  thofe  words  of
Chrift  :  "  For  with  the  fame  meafure  that  ye  mete,  it
"  fhall  be  meafured  to  you  again."

\Ve  read  in  the  Gofpel  of  four  forts  of  meafure  that
fhall  be  given  to  a  man, — a  good  meafure,  one  fhaken
together,  one  prefTed  down,  and  one  running  over.  The
doctors  of  divinity  teach  us  that  a  good  meafure  is  for
a  man  while  in  this  prefent  time,  through  the  help  and
grace  of  God,  to  be  in  a  ftate  of  falvation  and  holinefs,
whereby  he  may  enter  into  eternal  life  hereafter.  The
fecond  fort  of  meafure  is  for  the  body  of  a  juftified  man
to  be  glorified  with  his  foul  at  the  day  of  judgment  :
this  is  the  meafure  which  is  added  to.  The  meafure
prefsed  down  is,  that  a  man  mould  have  his  portion
with  all  the  faints  and  angels  of  God  in  eternal  life.
The  meafure  running  over  is,  that  a  man  mould  have
a  perfect  fruition  of  God  directly  without  means.

Now,  dear  children,  we  will  give  you  yet  another
expofition  of  thefe  words,  and  afk :  Firft,  what  is  the
meafure  whereby  we  fhall  be  meafured  ?  Secondly,
who  is  He  that  meafures  ?  The  meafure  whereby  we
fhall  be  meafured  is  the  faculty  of  love  in  the  foul-
the  human  Will.  This  is,  properly  fpeaking,  the
meafure  whereby  all  human  words  and  works  and
life  are  meafured,  for  this  is  neither  added  to  nor
taken  from.  By  fo  large  a  meafure  as  thou  haft
meted  withal  fhall  be  meted  unto  thee  again  with

z4


Of  the  four
meafures  that
may  be  given
to  men.


How  that  we
Jball  be  mea-
Jured  by  the
power  of  love
in  our  fouls.


344


Sermon  for  the


Of  the  good
meafure  of
tboj'e  who  lead
a  godly  and
well-ordered
life.


Of  the  beap-
ed-up  meafure
oftbofe  to
tobom  God
allots  many
inward  exer-
cifes.


thine  own  meafure  in  eternity.  And  the  meter  is  thine
own  enlightened  reafon  and  confcience.  Now  let  us
obferve  firft  concerning  the  good  meafure,  that  it  is,
when  a  man  freely  and  heartily  turns  to  God  in  his
will,  and  lives  circumfpeclly  according  to  the  com-
mands of  God  and  the  holy  Church  ;  and  moreover
lives  orderly  in  the  communion  of  the  holy  facra-
ments,  in  the  true  Chriftian  faith,  being  truly  forry
for  his  paft  fins,  and  having  a  thorough  and  fteadfaft
purpofe  to  abftain  from  them  henceforward,  and  to
live  in  penitence  and  the  fear  of  God,  loving  God
and  his  neighbour.  Alas  !  there  be  few  now-a-days
who  thus  do,  or  even  defire  to  live  in  the  fear  of  God.
Children,  one  who  thus  lives  is  faid  to  and  does  lead
a  juft  Chriftian  life,  and  is  a  true  Chriftian  man ;  and
this  is  a  good  meafure  which,  without  doubt,  hath  a
part  in  eternal  life.  Thefe  are  rules  which  all  really
Chriftian  men  muft  needs  obferve.  There  are  fome
whom  God  has  invited  and  called  to  this  "good  mea-
fure/' and  of  whom  He  demands  no  more  than  this.
And  it  may  very  poffibly  be  appointed  and  come  to
pafs  that  fuch  men  may  walk  fo  unfpotted  and  godly
in  this  way,  that  after  death  they  may  enter  into
eternal  life  without  any  purgatory.  Yet  neverthelefs
this  is  the  loweft  path  by  which  to  approach  to  our
merciful  God.

After  thefe,  there  is  a  fecond  fort  of  men  whom
God  has  called  to  tread  a  much  higher  path,  that  they
may  reach  a  much  higher  goal,  notwithftanding  that
fome  of  thefe  mould  have  to  pafs  through  purgatory,
inafmuch  as  they  have  not  lived  perfectly  and  fault-
leffly  according  to  the  vocation  to  which  God  had


Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


345


called  them.  Thefe  have  to  fuffer  fuch  long  and
fharp  anguifh  in  the  fire  of  purification  as  no  human
heart  can  fathom  or  exprefs.  But  when  they  have
reached  the  term  of  their  purification,  they  rife  a
thoufand  degrees  higher  than  the  former  clafs  of  men.
With  them  it  {lands  thus :  that  having  fet  out  in  a
fpiritual,  blefled,  and  holy  life,  they  were  overtaken
by  death  ere  they  had  reached  their  goal.  Now  when
thefe  men  are  in  the  beginning  of  their  fpiritual  life,
they  praclife  many  excellent  outward  exercifes  of
piety — fuch  as  prayer,  weeping,  failing,  and  the  like ;
but  they  receive  from  God  a  heaped-up  meafure,  in
that  they  have  alfo  inward  exercifes,  fetting  themfelves
with  all  diligence  to  feek  God  in  the  inmoft  ground
of  their  fouls,  for  therein  is  feated  the  kingdom  of
God.  Their  life  is  very  far  different  from  that  of  the
firft  clafs  I  have  defcribed.

Now,  children,  would  a  man  attain  to  fuch  a  point
that  the  outward  things  mould  not  hinder  the  inward
workings  of  the  foul,  that  wmild  be  indeed  above  all  a
bleffed  thing  ;  for  two  things  are  better  than  one.  But
if  thou  find  that  the  outward  work  hinders  the  inward
working  of  the  foul,  then  boldly  let  it  go,  and  turn
thou  with  all  thy  might  to  that  which  is  inward,  for
God  efleemeth  it  far  before  that  which  is  outward.
Now  we  priefts  do  on  this  wife :  for  during  the  faft
days  in  Lent  we  have  many  {ervices,  but  at  Eafter
and  Whitfuntide  we  fliorten  our  fervices  and  fay
fewer  prayers,  for  the  greatnefs  of  the  feilival.  So
likewife  do  thou  when  thou  art  bidden  to  this  high
feftival  of  inward  converfe ;  and  fear  not  to  lay  afide
outward  exercifes,  if  elfe  they  would  be  a  fnare  and


How  that
outward  ob-
fervances  are
good,  but  the
inward  work
far  tetter
and  more
needful.


346


Sermon  for  the


Of  the  bene-
fits of  pious
meditation.


hindrance  to  thee,  except  in  fo  far  as  thou  art  bound  to
perform  them  for  the  fake  of  order.  For  I  tell  thec
of  a  truth,  that  the  pure  inward  work  is  a  divine  and
blefled  life,  in  which  we  mall  be  led  into  all  truth,  if
we  can  but  keep  ourfelves  pure  and  feparate,  and  un-
difturbed  by  outward  anxieties.  So  in  thy  hours  of
meditation,  when  thou  turneft  thy  thoughts  within,
fet  before  thy  mind  whatever  thou  malt  find  moft
helpful  to  thee,  whether  it  be  the  noble  and  unfpotted
life  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  or  His  manifold  fharp
and  bitter  fufferings,  or  His  many  painful  wounds
and  His  precious  blood-fhedding,  or  the  eternal  and
efTential  Godhead,  or  the  Holy  Trinity,  or  the  Eternal
Wifdom,  or  the  Divine  Power,  or  the  gentle  and
compaffionate  kindnefs  of  God,  or  the  countlefs
benefits  that  He  has  beftowed  on  thee  and  all  men,
and  will  beftow  evermore  on  thee  and  all  thofe  who
deferve  them  and  are  found  in  God's  grace  at  their
end.

Therefore,  dear  children,  among  all  thefe  excellent
things,  whichever  moft  ftirs  you  up  to  true  devout-
nefs  and  fervent  defire,  take,  and  humbly  fink  down
into  the  abyfs  of  God,  with  great  thankfulnefs,  and
wait  for  God  with  this  preparation.  For,  by  fuch
exercifes,  with  love,  the  foul  becomes  very  quick  to
feel  God's  touch,  far  more  fo  than  by  any  outward
practices  of  devotion.  For  the  inward  work  is  always
better  than  the  outward  ;  and  from  it  the  outward
works  of  virtue  draw  all  their  power  and  efficacy.
It  is  as  if  thou  hadft  a  noble  excellent  wine,  of  fuch
virtue  that  a  drop  of  it  poured  into  a  cafk  of  water
would  be  enough  to  make  all  the  water  tafte  like


Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


347


wine  and  turned  it  into  good  wine.  This  would  be
a  great  miracle ;  and  fo  it  is  with  the  noble,  excellent,
inward  work  of  the  foul  compared  to  the  outward.

Now,  we  find  fome  men  whofe  love  is  like  a  very
broad  veflel ;  that  is,  they  can  meditate  a  great  deal
upon  our  Lord,  and  with  great  defire  and  fervour,  but
they  are  hardly  two  inches  deep.  That  is  to  fay,
they  lack  humility  and  a  common  godlike  love  toward
all  mankind.  For,  as  St.  Auguftine  fays,  "  Salvation
"  does  not  depend  on  the  length  of  time  that  a  perfon
"  has  been  converted  to  God,  nor  on  the  number  of
"  good  deeds  performed,  but  folely  on  the  greatnefs  of
"  his  love."  This  we  fee  in  the  example  of  the  huf-
bandmen  who,  with  great  labour,  till  the  wheatfields
and  precious  vineyards,  yet  partake  not  themfelves  of
thefe  beft  fruits  of  the  earth,  but  have  only  rye  to  eat
and  water  to  drink.  So  it  is  with  many  perlbns,  in
a  fpiritual  fenfe,  with  regard  to  the  outward  good
works  which  they  do,  that  other  more  noble-
minded  and  devout  perfons  reap  the  fruit  and  benefit
thereof.

Next  comes  the  meafure  that  is  fhaken  together ;
and  this  fignifies  an  overflowing  love  which  draws  all
things  into  itfelf ;  that  is  to  fay,  all  good  deeds  and  all
forrows,  nay  every  good  which  is  brought  to  pafs  in
the  world,  whether  by  good  or  wicked  men,  does  this
overflowing  love  draw  into  its  own  veflel.  And  he
who  pofTeiTes  this  love  has  a  much  larger  ownerfhip
and  delight  in  the  good  actions  of  another,  who  does
thofe  actions  but  lacks  this  love,  than  the  doer  himfelf.
Therefore,  if  all  the  pious  acT:s,  the  mafles,  vigils,  and
pfalters  that  are  read  and  fung,  the  many  great  facri-


Of  thofe  wbo
have  great
fervour  but
little  depth,
from  lack  of
love  to  man.


Of  the  mea-
fure that  is
Jbaken  toge-
ther.


348


Sermo?i  for  the


I  Cor.xiii.$.


How  love
po/e/etb  all
good  things.


fices  that  are  made  for  God's  fake, — of  all  thefe  good
things  is  more  meted  and  allotted  to  fuch  loving  men
than  to  thofe  who  may  have  done  the  good  works,
but  do  not  ftand  in  this  overflowing  love.  For  I  tell
thee  that  God  will  not  accept  the  works  of  which  He
is  not  the  beginning  and  the  end  ;  but,  as  St.  Paul
tells  us,  "  Though  I  beftow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the
"  poor,  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and
"  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  nothing."  Hence
this  virtue  of  godly  charity  is  the  greateft  of  all
virtues ;  for  by  love  it  draws  unto  itfelf  all  good
deeds,  cuftoms,  and  fervices,  in  heaven  or  on  earth,
which  are  the  fruits  of  grace  :  what  evil  a  man  has
remains  his  own,  but  what  good  he  has  is  the  pro-
perty of  love.  Even  as  when  we  pour  corn  into  a
veffel,  all  the  grains  do  hurry  forward  and  prefs
together  as  though  they  defired  to  become  one,  fo
doth  love  fwallow  up  all  the  goodnefs  of  angels  and
faints  in  heaven,  all  fuffering  and  pain,  and  all  the
goodnefs  that  is  found  in  any  creature  in  heaven
and  on  earth,  whereof  more  than  can  be  told  is
wafted  and  thrown  away,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,
but  love  doth  gather  it  all  up  into  itfelf,  and  will  not
fuffer  it  to  be  loft.  The  godly  doctors  of  Holy
Scripture  tell  us  that  in  heaven  the  ele£  do  ever
bear  fuch  great  love  one  to  another  that,  if  one  foul
were  to  perceive  and  fee  that  another  foul  had  a
clearer  vifion  and  greater  fruition  of  the  Deity  than
herfelf,  me  would  rejoice  with  her  fifter  as  though  me
herfelf  had  won  and  enjoyed  this  bleffednefs.  There-
fore, the  more  while  here  on  earth  we  approach  and
are  made  like  unto  this  overflowing  love,  the  more


Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


fhall  we  enjoy  of  its  blefTednefs  hereafter  in  eternal
life  ;  for  he  who  moft  entirely  rejoices  in  good  works
here  on  earth  in  a  fpirit  of  love,  he  alone  fhall  pofTefs
and  enjoy  love  in  eternal  life  hereafter.  But  this
fame  fpirit  of  love  is  what  the  Evil  One  always  hates
in  a  man :  wherefore  he  is  ever  trying  to  bring  fuch
as  have  it  into  a  falfe  felf-righteoufnefs,  and  into
difpleafiire  with  their  neighbours'  ways  and  works,  fb
that  the  man  conceits  within  himfelf  that  his  neigh-
bour's works  are  not  fo  good  as  they  ought  to  be,  and
fb  in  a  moment  he  falleth  away  from  this  love,  and
begins  to  judge  his  neighbour  and  pafs  fentence  on
him.  And  then  from  the  depth  of  this  judging
fpirit  darts  forth  a  flinging  venomous  tongue,  that
wounds  and  poisons  the  foul  unto  eternal  death.
This  fame  arrow  of  judgment  will  fmite  and  flay  all
the  excellent  and  virtuous  works  that  thou  hadft
flored  up  unto  thyfelf  through  an  overflowing  love,
and  thus  thou  wilt  find  thyfelf  defpoiled  and  laid
wafte,  and  thy  peace  deftroyed  within  thce,  and  then
thou  wilt  be  in  a  miferable  and  dangerous  condition.
Wherefore,  in  godly  faithfulnefs,  I  counfel  thee  ever
to  keep  thy  tongue  with  all  diligence,  if  thou  wouldft
be,  and  call  thyfelf,  a  friend  of  God.

Ofttimes  too  does  the  Evil  One  come  and  feduce
thee  into  anger  with  a  pious  and  good  man.  If  thou
uttereft  this  by  pafTmg  a  judgment  on  him,  in  thus
cutting  thyfelf  off  from  the  fellowfhip  of  his  love,
thou  art  alfb  cut  off  from  participation  in  the  benefits
of  the  gifts  with  which  God  has  endowed  him,  and
the  works  of  his  virtue.  Of  this  brotherly  fellowfhip
the  Pfalmift  fays :  "  It  is  like  the  precious  ointment


How  the  Evil
One  fee ks  to
dejlroy  this
love  by  feduc-
ing  us  into  a
judging
fpirit.


35°


Sermon  for  the


Of  the  com-
munion of
brotherly
love.


"  upon  the  head,  that  ran  down  upon  the  beard,  even
"  Aaron's  beard,  that  went  down  to  the  Hurts  of  his
"  garments."      Now  the  beard  has  many  hairs,  and
the  precious  ointment  flows  into  them  all ;  but  if  one
hair  be  cut  off,  it  receives  none  of  this  precious  oint-
ment.     In  like  manner,  fo  long  as  thou  haft  a  whole
and  undivided  love  towards  all  men,  a  mare  of  the
virtues  and  divine  influences  beftowed  upon  all  flows
out  unto  thee  through  this  love.     But  I  tell  thee,  if
thou  doft  fever  any  one  from  this  fpirit  of  univerfal
love,  thou  wilt   not  receive  the  precious   benefits  of
the  outflowrings  of  love.     Wherefore  give  diligent  and
earneft  heed   to   yourfelves   in   this   matter  of  divine
love,  and  maintain  a  hearty  goodwill  towards  all  men,
and  bear  no  grudge  againft  any,  and   defpoil  not  the
facred  temple  of  God,  which  has  been  fanclified  by
our  higheft  pontiff,   Chrift ;    and  beware  that  ye  do
not    call    down   upon    your   heads   God's    everlafting
Interdict.      But,   alas !   now-a-days,  nature  is  fb   per-
verted in  many,  both  clergy  and  laymen,  as  touching
brotherly  faithfulnefs  and  love,  that  if  they  fee  their
neighbour  fall,  they  laugh  at  him,  or  ftand  by  and  let
it  go  on,  and  care  nought  for  it.      Take  heed  to  your
failings,  and  look  how  it  ftands  with  your  inward  love
to   God   and   your   neighbour,    and    keep    ever  alive
within  you  the  fear  of  God ;   for  I  tell  you  that  that
which  you  fail  to  obtain  here  through  your  own  ne-
glecl:,  you  will  lofe  for  ever.     After  this  life  nothing
will  be  added  to  you  or  taken  from  you,  but  ye  fhall
receive  according  to  that  ye  have  deferved,  whether  it
be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil.      I  tell  you  that  then,
though  our  Lady  and  all  the  faints  mould  intercede


Fourth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


35*


for  a  man  with  tears  of  blood,  it  would  not  help  him.
Therefore  give  heed  to  yourfelves ;  for  now  God  is
alway  at  hand,  waiting  for  us,  and  ready  to  give  us
much  more  than  we  are  ready  to  defire  of  Him.  St.
Paul  fays,  Love  never  faileth,  it  doeth  all  things,  and
endureth  all  things.  Therefore  feeing  that  the  love
of  God  is  never  {landing  idle,  fo  be  ye  conftantly
abounding  in  good  works,  enduring  all  that  befals
you  cheerfully,  for  God's  fake.  And  then  mall  ye  be
made  partakers  of  the  overflowing  meafure,  which  is
fo  full,  fo  rich,  fo  generous,  that  it  runneth  over  on
all  fides.

God  touches  this  brimming  vefTel  with  His  finger,
and  it  overflows,  and  pours  itfelf  back  again  into  its
Divine  fource,  from  whence  it  has  proceeded.  It
flows  back  into  its  fource  without  channel  or  means,
and  lofes  itfelf  altogether ;  will,  knowledge,  love,
perception,  are  all  fwallowed  up  and  loft  in  God,  and
become  one  with  Him.  Now  God  loveth  Himfelf  in
thefe  men,  and  worketh  in  them  all  their  works.
The  gum  and  outflowing  of  this  love  cannot  be  con-
tained within  the  man's  own  foul,  but  he  hath  a
yearning  defire,  and  faith  :  "  Oh  !  my  beloved  Lord
"  Jefus  Chrift,  I  befeech  Thee  to  have  companion
"  upon  poor  finners,  and  to  forgive  them  their  fins
"  and  mifdoings ;  and  efpecially  upon  thofe  who,  after
"  having  done  good  works,  have  loft  the  fame  again
"  by  reafon  of  fin  ;  and  grant  them,  dear  Lord,  the
"  crumbs  that  fall  from  the  rich  table  of  Thy  grace ;
"  and  of  Thy  goodnefs  turn  them  from  their  fins
"  through  the  pains  of  purification,  and  impart  unto
"  them  the  overflowings  of  Thy  grace,  that  through


Of  the  mea-
fure that
runneth  over,
and  the  love
tbatfoivetb
back  unto  its
fource  in  Goo".


353     Sermon  for  the  Fourth  Sunday  after  Trmity.


"  Thy  merits  they  may  be  kept  unto  the  end."
Thus  do  thefe  Elecl:  men  carry  up  all  things,  them-
felves  and  all  creatures,  to  their  true  fource  in  God,
and  take  all  things  that  are  done  in  the  holy  Chriftian
Church,  and  offer  them  up,  from  a  joyful,  humble,
fubmhTive  heart,  to  their  eternal,  heavenly  Father,
for  themfelves  and  for  all  men,  bad  and  good ;  for
their  love  excludes  none  here  in  this  time  of  grace,
and  they  are  alway  in  unity  with  all  men.  No  love
or  blefledneis  that  the  faints  or  angels  pofTefs  is  loft  to
them,  but  all  is  poured  into  their  meafure.

Verily,  had  we  none  of  thefe  godlike  men  among
us  at  this  prefent  time,  we  were  doubtlefs  in  evil  cafe.
Therefore  let  us  all  befeech  the  God  of  all  mercy,
that  we  may  fulfil  and  receive  again  this  meafure
that  runneth  over.  Amen.


XXI.


Sermon  for  the  Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.

(From  the  Epiftle  for  the  day.)


Admon't/hing  each  man  to  mark  what  is  the  office  to  which  he  is
called  of  God,  and  teaching  us  to  praffife  works  of  love  and
virtue,  and  to  refrain  from  f elf-will.


i  COR.  xii.  6.  — "  There  are  diverfities  of  operations,  but  it  is  the  fame  God  which  worketh

"  all  in  all."


T.  PAUL  tells  us  in  this  Epiftle  that  there
are  different  kinds  of  works,  but  that  they
are  all  wrought  by  the  same  Spirit  to  the
profit  and  well-being  of  man.  For  they
all  proceed  from  the  fame  God  who  works
all  in  all.  "  But  the  manifeftation  of  the  Spirit  is
"  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.  For  to  -one
"  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word  of  wifdom,  to  another
"faith;"  and  fb  Paul  goes  on  enumerating  many
gifts ;  but  repeats  that  "  all  thcfe  worketh  that  one
"  and  the  felf-fame  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man
"  feverally  as  He  will."  And  he  fays  many  things
for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith.

In  old  times  the  Holy  Ghoft  has  wrought  very
great  and  wondrous  deeds  through  his  fervants  for  a
teftimony  to  the  faith,  having  given  us  great  figns  by


A  A


Of  the  works
wrought  by
the  Spirit  in


Of  the  works
wrought  by
the  Holy
Gboft  in  the


354


Sermon  for  the


men  of  old
time.


Of  the  offices
of  the  various
members  of
Cbrijfs  body,
the  Church.


Our  aptnefs
for  any  art  of
life  is  the  gift
of  the  Spirit
of  God,  and


the  raifmg  up  fuch  a  fucceflion  of  prophets,  and  by
the  blood  of  His  faints,  and  thus  fuffering  unto  death.
For  this  kind  of  teftimonies  there  is  no  longer  any
need.  Yet,  know  that  of  true,  living,  active  faith,
there  is,  alas,  as  little  in  fome  Chriftian  men  as  in
Heathens  or  Jews  !

Now  let  us  meditate  on  thefe  words  of  St.  Paul :
"  There  are  diverfities  of  operations,  but  it  is  the  fame
"  God  which  worketh  all  in  all."  Children,  if  you
look  around  you,  you  fee  that  you  have  bodies,  and  that
thefe  bodies  have  many  members  and  many  fenfes,  and
that  each  member,  fuch  as  the  eye,  the  mouth,  the
nofe,  the  hands,  the  feet,  has  its  own  fpecial  office  and
work.  No  one  of  thefe  takes  upon  itfelf  to  be  another,
nor  to  do  anything  but  what  God  has  ordained  unto
it.  In  like  manner,  we  are  all  one  body,  and  members
one  of  another,  and  Chrift  is  the  head  of  the  body.
In  this  body  there  is  a  great  diversity  of  members ;
the  one  is  an  eye,  the  other  an  ear,  the  third  a  hand
or  a  foot  or  a  mouth.  The  eyes  of  the  body  of  the
holy  Chriftian  Church  are  her  teachers.  This  office
is  none  of  yours ;  but  let  us  common  Chriftians  look
to  see  what  is  our  office,  to  the  which  our  Lord  has
called  and  bidden  us,  and  what  is  the  gift  of  which
our  Lord  has  made  us  the  veiTels.  For  every  art  or
work,  however  unimportant  it  may  feem,  is  a  gift  of
God,  and  all  thefe  gifts  are  beftowed  by  the  Holy
Spirit  for  the  profit  and  welfare  of  man.

Let  us  begin  with  the  loweft.  One  can  spin,
another  can  make  moes,  and  fome  have  great  aptnefs
for  all  forts  of  outward  arts,  fo  that  they  can  earn  a
great  deal,  while  others  are  altogether  without  this


Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


355


quicknefs.  Thefe  are  all  gifts  proceeding  from  the
Spirit  of  God.  If  I  were  not  a  prieft,  but  were  living
as  a  layman,  I  mould  take  it -as  a  great  favour  that  I
knew  how  to  make  fhoes,  and  mould  try  to  make
them  better  than  any  one  elfe,  and  would  gladly  earn
my  bread  by  the  labour  of  my  hands.  Children,  the
foot  or  the  hand  muft  not  defire  to  be  the  eye.  Each
muft  fulfil  the  office  for  which  God  has  fitted  him,
however  weighty  it  may  be,  and  what  another  could
not  eafily  do.  Alfo  our  fitters  mall  each  have  her  own
office.  Some  have  fweet  voices  ;  let  them  fing  in  the
Churches,  for  this  alfb  comes  from  the  Spirit  of  God.
St.  Auguftine  fays :  "  God  is  a  homogeneous,  divine,
"  fimple  fubftance,  and  yet  the  Author  of  all  variety,
"  and  is  all  in  all,  one  in  all,  and  all  in  one."  There
is  no  work  fo  fmall,  no  art  fo  mean,  but  it  all  comes
from  God  and  is  a  fpecial  gift  of  His.  Thus,  let  each
do  that  which  another  cannot  do  fo  well,  and  for  love,
returning  gift  for  gift.  Know  ye,  whoever  does  not
exercife  his  gift,  nor  impart  it,  nor  make  use  of  it  for
the  profit  of  his  neighbour,  lays  up  a  heavy  reck-
oning againft  the  laft  day.  For,  as  Chrift  tells  us,  a
man  muft  give  account  of  his  ftewardfhip,  or  his  office.
Each  mail  and  muft  reftore  that  which  he  has  re-
ceived of  God,  and  is  anfwcrable  in  proportion  to  his
advantages  over  others,  and  the  meafure  of  the  ability
which  God  has  given  him.

Whence  comes  it  then,  that  we  have  fo  many  com-
plaints, each  faying  that  his  occupation  is  a  hindrance
to  him,  while  notwithftanding  his  work  is  of  God,  who
hindcreth  no  man  ?  Whence  comes  this  inward  re-
proof and  fenfe  of  guilt  which  torment  and  difquiet

A  A  2


not  to  be  def-
pifed,  but  ufed
with  all  dili-
gence for  His
fake.


Wherefore  it
is  that  toe
find  our  work
a  hindrance
in  the  divine
life.


356


Sermon  for  the


How  toe  muft
ftft  our  mo-
tives in  our
work.


you  ?  Dear  children,  know  that  it  is  not  your  work
which  gives  you  this  difquiet.  No :  it  is  your  want
of  order  in  fulfilling  your  work.  If  you  performed
your  work  in  the  right  method,  with  a  fole  aim  to
God,  and  not  to  yourfelves,  your  own  likes  and  dis-
likes, and  neither  feared  nor  loved  aught  but  God,
nor  fought  your  own  gain  or  pleafure,  but  only  God's
glory,  in  your  work,  it  would  be  impoflible  that  it
mould  grieve  your  confcience.  It  is  a  mame  for  a
fpiritual  man,  if  he  have  not  done  his  work  properly,
but  fo  imperfectly  that  he  has  to  be  rebuked  for  it.
For  this  is  a  fure  fign  that  his  works  are  not  done  in
God,  with  a  view  to  His  glory  and  the  good  of  his
neighbour.  You  may  know  and  be  known  by  this,
whether  your  works  are  directed  to  God  alone,  and
whether  you  are  in  peace  or  not.  Our  Lord  did  not
rebuke  Martha  on  account  of  her  works,  for  they  were
holy  and  good ;  He  reproved  her  on  account  of  her
anxiety.  A  man  ought  to  bufy  himfelf  in  good  and
ufeful  occupations  of  whatever  kind  they  may  be,
cafting  his  care  upon  God,  and  labour  filently  and
watchfully,  keeping  a  rein  upon  himfelf,  and  proving
himfelf,  fo  as  to  fift  what  it  is  that  urges  and  impels
him  in  his  work.  Further,  he  muft  look  within,  and
mark  whether  the  Holy  Spirit  will  have  him  to  be
active  or  quiet ;  that  he  may  obey  His  godly  leadings
in  each  inftance,  and  do  and  have  undone  by  the
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  now  refting,  now
working,  but  ever  fulfilling  his  due  tafk  in  peace.

And  wherever  you  fee  the  aged,  the  fick,  the  help-
lefs,  you  mould  run  to  their  affiftance,  and  ftrive  with
each  other  in  fulfilling  works  of  love — each  helping


T ejith  Sunday  after  Trinity.


357


the  other  to  bear  his  burden.  If  thou  doft  not  fo,  be
fure  that  God  will  take  thy  work  from  thee,  and  give
it  to  another  who  will  do  it  aright,  and  will  leave
thce  empty  and  bare  at  once  of  gifts  and  of  merit.

If,  when  at  thy  work,  thou  feel  thy  fpirit  ftirred
within  thee,  receive  it  with  folemn  joy,  and  thus  learn
to  do  thy  work  in  God,  inftead  of  ftraightway  fleeing
from  thy  tafk.  Thus  mould  ye  learn  to  exercife  your-
felves  in  virtue ;  for  ye  muft  be  exercifed  if  ye  are  to
come  to  God.  Do  not  expecl;  that  God  will  pour
virtue  into  you  without  your  own  effort.  You  mould
never  truft  in  virtue  that  has  not  yet  been  put  into
practice,  nor  believe  that  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Ghoft  have  entered  into  a  man,  unlefs  the  man  hath
given  evidence  thereof  in  his  own  labours,  outward
or  inward.  Once  as  a  good  man  was  {landing,
threlhing  his  corn,  he  fell  into  a  trance ;  and  if  an
angel  had  not  turned  afide  the  flail,  he  would  have
{truck  himfelf  with  it.  Now  ye  are  all  craving  to  be
thus  fet  free  from  your  work,  and  this  comes,  for  the
moft  part,  from  floth  ;  each  would  fain  be  an  eye,  and
give  himielf  to  contemplation  rather  than  to  work.

I  know  a  man  who  has  the  clofeft  walk  with  God
of  any  I  ever  faw,  and  who  has  been  all  his  life  a  hus-
bandman,— for  more  than  forty  years,  and  is  fb  {till.
This  man  once  afked  the  Lord  in  prayer  if  he  (hould
give  up  his  occupation  and  go  into  the  Church  ;  and
it  was  anfwcred  him,  No  ;  he  mould  labour,  earning
his  bread  by  the  fweat  of  his  brow,  to  the  glory  of
Chrift's  precious  blood,  med  for  him.  But  let  each
choofe  fome  fuitable  time  in  the  courfe  of  every  four-
and-twenty  hours,  in  which  he  can  give  his  whole

A  A  3


Virtue  is  no-
thing til!  it
have  teen
tried.


Of  a  certain
holy  man.


358


Sermon  for  the


Enduring
peace  mufl  be
the  fruit  of
long-tried
virtue.


mind  to  earnefr.  meditation,  each  after  his  own  famion.
Thofe  nobler  men  who  are  able  to  turn  to  God  {imply
without  the  aid  of  images  or  forms,  mall  do  fb  after
their  famion,  and  others  after  theirs.  Let  each  fet
apart  a  good  hour  for  fuch  excrcifes,  each  taking  his
own  method ;  for  we  cannot  all  be  eyes  ;  but  to  our
life's  end  it  is  moft  needful  for  us  to  keep  up  fome
ftrenuous  exercifes  of  piety,  of  whatever  kind  God
may  appoint,  with  loving  and  peaceful  hearts,  and
in  obedience  to  His  will.  He  who  ferves  God  after
God's  will  mall  be  rewarded  according  to  his  own
will  ;  but  he  who  prays  to  God  according  to  his  own
will  mall  not  be  aniwered  in  accordance  with  his
own  will,  but  after  God's  will.

Children,  it  is  of  this  coming  out  from  our  own
{elf-will,  that  the  true,  folid  peace  is  begotten  and
fprings  forth,  and  it  is  the  fruit  of  long-tried  virtue.
Unlefs  thy  peace  come  from  this,  be  fure  that  it  is
falfe  ;  for  inwardly  and  outwardly  thou  muft  be  exer-
cifed.  But  the  peace  that  comes  from  within  none
can  take  away.  Now  fbme  foolifli  men,  who  are  puffed
up  in  their  own  conceit,  come  and  fay  that  ye  ought
to  do  this  and  that,  and  want  to  direcl:  every  man's
mind  according  to  their  own  opinion  and  their  own
notions  and  practices.  And  many  of  them  have  lived
for  forty  years  in  the  profeffion  of  religion,  and  to
this  day  do  not  know  what  is  their  own  real  ftate.
They  are  much  bolder  than  I.  I  hold  the  office  of  an
inftruclor  ;  and  when  people  come  and  confult  me,  I
inquire  how  it  ftands  with  them,  and  how  they  came
into  this  ftate.  Yet  I  dare  not  pafs  a  judgment  on
them  ;  but  I  lay  their  cafe  before  the  Lord,  and  if  He


Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


359


does  not  give  me  what  I  mall  fpeak,  I  fay  to  them  :
Dear  children,  feek  help  yourfelves  from  God,  and  He
will  give  it  you.  But  you  want  to  judge  and  fet  an
eftimate  on  every  man,  trying  him  by  the  ftandard  of
your  own  ufages  and  conceits.  Thus  it  is  that  the
worms  get  in  and  devour  the  good  faplings  that
were  mooting  up  in  God's  garden. — Then  they
fay,  "  We  have  no  fuch  cuftom ;  this  is  an  inno-
"  vation,  and  comes  from  the  new  notions,"  and
never  refled:  that  the  hidden  ways  of  God  are  un-
known to  them.  Alas!  what  ftrange  things  do  we
fee  among  thole  who  fancy  themfelves  in  an  ex-
cellent way  !

Now  St.  Paul  fays,  that  the  Holy  Ghoft,  by  His  ope-
rations, teaches  us  the  difcerning  of  fpirits.  Children,
who  do  you  fuppofe  are  the  men  to  whom  God  gives
this  power  of  difcerning  the  fpirits  ?  Know  ye,  that
the  men  who  have  this  gift  have  been  thoroughly
exercifed  in  all  ways :  by  their  own  flefh  and  blood,
and  have  gone  through  the  moft  cruel  and  perplexing
temptations :  and  the  devil  has  been  in  them,  and
they  in  him,  and  they  have  been  tried  and  tefted  to
the  very  marrow ;  thefe  are  the  men  who  can  difcern
the  fpirits.  When  they  are  minded  to  do  this,  they
confidcr  a  man,  and  ftraightway  they  difcern  his
fpirit,  whether  it  be  of  God  or  no,  and  what  are  the
neareft  roads  of  accefs  for  him,  and  what  is  holding
him  back  from  God.  Oh  !  how  greatly  to  our  hurt
do  we  fall  mort  of  the  nobleft,  higheft  truth  through
fuch  trifling,  mean  things  ;  for  the  fake  of  which  we
muft  fuffer  lofs  for  ever  and  ever,  fo  long  as  God  is
eternal.  For  what  we  here  mifs  through  our  own

A  A  4


How  the  Holy
Gbojl  teacb-
etb  the  dif-
cerning of
fpirits.


360     Sermon  for  the  Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


neglect  will  never  be  made  up  to  us  hereafter.  But
may  God  help  all  of  us  truly  to  fulfil  the  offices  and
works  which  His  Spirit  has  committed  to  us  and
taught  us  to  perform,  each  doing  as  he  is  inwardly
monimed  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  !  Amen.


XXII.


Sermon  for  the  Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity,


(From  the  Epiftle  for  the  day.)


Teaching  us  that  we  ought  to  receive  God,  in  all  His  gifts,  and  in
all  His  burdens,  with  true  long-fiiffering.

2  COR.  iii.  6.  — "  The  letter  killeth,  but  the  fpirit  giveth  life."


JHERE  are  two  forts  of  men  among  God's
friends;  thofe  of  the  Old  Testament,  and
thofe  of  the  New.  All  the  men  who
should  be  faved  before  the  birth  of  Chrift
had  to  obferve  the  old  difpenfation  with
all  its  rites,  until  the  new  difpenfation  came  with  its
laws  and  its  rites.  The  old  law  ferved  as  a  way  unto
the  new,  and  was  a  perfect  forefhadowing  of  it.  And
this  new  law  we  have  under  our  very  eyes,  but  it  was
the  old  law  that  prepared  us  to  receive  it.  And  every
thing  that  is  meant  to  receive  somewhat  muft  firft  be
made  able  to  receive.  The  old  law  had  many  into-
lerable burdens,  and  terrible  judgments  for  offenders,
and  a  far  fterner  manifeftation  or  the  juftice  of  God,
with  a  dark,  diftant  hope  of  redemption.  For  five
thoufand  years  the  gates  were  altogether  clofed  againft
thofe  who  lived  under  the  Old  Covenant ;  so  that,
with  all  their  pain  and  weary  ceremonies,  they  could
not  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  God,  but  had  to  wait


How  the  old
law  was  a
preparation
for  the  new.


Of  the  bur-
dens of  the
old  law.


362


Sermon  for  the


How  we  muft
frft  befub-
jefl  to  the  old
law.


long  in  gloom  and  forrow  for  the  coming  of  the  new
law,  which  is  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft.
Now  he  who  would  come  to  the  new  law  with  full
afTurance  of  faith  muft  firft  be  made  at  one  with  the
old.  Man  muft  learn  to  fuffer,  and  to  bear  heavy
burdens,  and  to  bow  down  humbly  beneath  the
mighty  hand  of  God ;  he  muft  be  afflicted  outwardly
and  inwardly,  from  wherefoever  his  pain  cometh,  and
whether  it  be  deferred  or  not.

Dear  children,  behold  !  this  thing  muft  be  brought
to  pafs  after  a  very  different  fafhion  from  what  you
like  to  dream  ;  but  hold  faft  the  doctrine  of  God,  and
let  him  who  hath  received  it  be  wife,  and  hold  it  faft
as  long  as  he  hath  it.  But  fubmit  and  endure  God's
dealings  in  all  that  befalls  you,  through  whomfoever
it  may  come.  If  you  would  come  to  the  new  law,
you  muft  firft  fuffer  under  the  old  one,  and  be  fubjecl:
to  it  in  the  humility  of  your  hearts.  So,  whatever
confolation  may  be  granted  you,  fpiritual  or  earthly,
it  will  not  follow  you  all  your  courfe  through.  And
you  muft  travel  this  road  and  no  other ;  turn  it
which  way  you  will,  it  muft  be  even  fb.  Therefore,
dear  children,  learn  to  do  without  the  Holy  Sacra-
ments, fpiritual  light,  the  fenfe  of  God's  presence,  and
all  human  help.  Dearly  beloved,  bow  down  your  old
man  under  the  yoke  of  the  old  law,  with  all  meeknefs
and  refignation,  and  receive  all  God's  gifts  with  all
their  burdens.  Of  a  truth,  His  burdens  are  light  and
His  yoke  is  eafy.  Children,  I  commend  you  from  the
bottom  of  my  heart  into  the  captivity  of  the  Crofs  of
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift ;  that  it  may  be  in  you,  over
you,  behind  you,  and  before  you,  lying  heavy  on  you,


Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


363


and  yet  received  by  you  with  free  and  full  acqui-
efcence  to  the  will  of  God,  whatever  it  may  pleafe
Him  to  do  with  you.  May  God,  of  His  mercy,  give
you  to  bear  with  a  good  courage  all  the  forrow  that  is
before  you,  and  alfo,  when  ye  are  defpifed  of  all  men,
and  Slandered,  and  counted  for  nought.  Thus  let
your  old  man  be  fubject  unto  the  old  law,  until
Chrift  be  born  in  you  of  a  truth,  where  peace  and  joy
in  the  truth  do  fpring  up.  The  patriarchs,  greatly  as
they  longed  to  fee  the  advent  of  our  Lord,  yet  had  to
wait  five  thoufand  years.  But,  verily,  if  you  would
thus  humbly  yield  yourfelves  up,  you  need  never  wait
a  year.  If  you  had  had  a  quartan  ague  one  year  or
two,  you  muft  bear  it  till  you  became  well  again ;  ib
you  muft  bear  the  yoke  of  the  old  law.

The  Second  burden  of  the  old  law  was  its  awful
judgments,  and  ftern  difplay  of  God's  juftice.  This
is  manifefted  in  many  ways — by  afflictions  and  by  the
gnawings  of  conscience.  Now  fome  try  to  wrork
themfelves  out  of  this  by  confeffion.  But  if  you  were
to  confefs  your  fins  a  thoufand  times,  it  would  avail
you  nothing,  fave  indeed  the  confeffmg  of  mortal  fin,
accompanied  by  fatisfaftion  for  it.  The  reft  leave
humbly  to  God,  and  bear  what  He  appoints  unto
you,  till  He  of  His  mercy  fend  you  relief.  But  con-
fefs all  to  Him  inwardly  in  your  foul,  to  the  very  laft
tittle,  with  humble  fubmiffion  to  His  will,  and  acqui-
efcing  in  His  unknown  judgments,  without  looking
to  yourfelf  or  to  other  men  for  help.  Meanwhile,
there  are  Some  who  endeavour  to  get  rid  of  the  bur-
den of  fin  by  afking  counfcl  and  hearing  preachers,
hoping  to  hear  fomewhat  that  may  afford  them  a


Oftbeftern
judgments  of
the  old  law
which  muft
be  felt  in  our
confcience  and
borne  pa-
tiently.


Sermon  for  the


We  muff  not
look  without
for  help,  but
ferve  God
and  leave  all
to  Him.


How  the  men
under  the  old
law  knew  not
toben  the


ftay,  and  thus  they  may  find  deliverance.  Behold,
dear  friend,  if  thou  ipend  all  thy  years  in  running
from  church  to  church,  thou  muft  look  for  and
receive  help  from  within,  or  thou  wilt  never  come  to
any  good ;  however  thou  mayeft  feek  and  inquire,
thou  muft  alfo  be  willing  to  be  tormented  without
fuccour  from  the  outward  help  of  any  creature.  I  tell
you,  children,  that  the  very  holieft  man  I  ever  faw  in
outward  conduct  and  inward  life,  had  never  heard
more  than  five  fermons  in  all  his  days.  When  he
faw  and  perceived  how  the  matter  ftood,  he  thought
that  was  enough,  and  fet  to  work  to  die  to  that  to
which  he  ought  to  die,  and  live  to  that  to  which  he
ought  to  live.  Let  the  common  people  run  about
and  hear  all  they  can,  that  they  may  not  fall  into
defpair  or  unbelief;  but  know  that  all  who  would  be
God's,  inwardly  and  outwardly,  turn  to  themfelves,
and  retire  within.  And  know  that  if  ever  you  defire
to  be  fpiritual  and  bleffed  men,  you  muft  ceafe  from
running  outwards  for  help,  and  turn  within  ;  for  you
will  never  get  what  you  want  by  a  multitude  of
words,  hear  as  many  as  you  will ;  but  only  by  loving
and  ferving  God  from  the  bottom  of  your  heart,  and
your  neighbour  as  yourfelf,  and  leaving  all  things  to
ftand  on  their  own  foundation.  But  pant  after  God
with  all  your  heart,  as  the  holy  patriarchs  did,  and
covet  that  which  you  truly  ought  to  covet,  and  leave
all  things,  whether  concerning  yourielf  or  any  other
creatures,  to  God's  moft  bleffed  will.

The  third  characteriftic  of  the  old  law  was  that  it
had  a  dark  hope  of  a  diftant  redemption ;  for  the
gates  were  clofed,  and  there  was  no  prophet  who


Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


365


could  tell  when  the  redemption  might  come  to  pafs.
So  likewife  muft  we  {imply  commit  ourfelves  to  God
with  perfect  truft  in  His  eternal  purpofe ;  for  when
He  pleafes  that  it  mall  be  accomplimed  to  our  wait-
ing fouls,  then,  no  doubt,  He  will  come  to  us,  and
be  born  in  us.  But  when  ?  Leave  that  to  Him  :  to
fome  He  comes  in  their  youth ;  to  others  in  old  age ;
to  fome  in  death  :  this  leave  to  His  Divine  will,  and
do  not  take  upon  thyfelf  to  adopt  any  Singular  exer-
ciies,  but  keep  the  Commandments,  and  believe  the
articles  of  the  Chriftian  faith.  Learn  the  Creed  and
the  Commandments,  and  have  patience,  and  give  up
thyfelf  in  all  things  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and
affuredly  Chrift,  the  new  law,  will  be  born  in  thee
with  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  thou  wilt
have  a  life  like  that  of  the  angels,  in  freedom  from  the
bonds  of  matter  and  in  intelligence.  This  feems  to
thee  a  great  thing !  No  ;  the  truth  is  much  greater.
"  The  Spirit  giveth  life  ;"•  —a  fpark  of  His  own  Divine
life,  which  is  higher  than  all  angelic  life,  and  pafles
man's  comprehenfion,  lying  beyond  the  fphere  of  fenfe
and  of  reafon.  But  this  muft  come  to  pafs  in  the  way
that  I  have  told  you,  and  no  other.  A  man  may,
indeed,  attain  ib  far  as  to  catch  a  glimpfe  of  this  glo-
rious truth,  and  play  upon  the  furface  of  it  with  his
fenle  and  reafon ;  but  to  become  and  be  fiich  an  one,
to  this  none  can  attain  but  by  this  path  of  true
felf-furrender  ;  but  through  that  afluredly  it  will  be
found.

In  the  Old  Teftament  the  Levites  bare  the  ark,
but  here  the  holy  ark  bears  us.  Thus,  whofb  will  not
yield  to  God  in  His  juftice  and  His  judgments,  with-


redemption
Jhould  come,
and  fo  muft
we  too  commit
ourfelves  unto
God,  and  wait
His  time  to
receive  peace
and  joy  in  the
Holj  Gboft.


366    Sermoji  for  the  Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


out  doubt  he  fhall  fall  under  God's  eternal  juftice  and
eternal  condemnation  ;  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  Turn
it  as  thou  wilt,  thou  muft  give  thyfelf  to  fuffer  what
is  appointed  thee.  But  if  we  did  that,  God  would
bear  us  up  at  all  times  in  all  our  forrows  and  troubles,
and  God  would  lay  His  moulder  under  our  burdens,
and  help  us  to  bear  them.  For  if  with  a  cheerful
courage  we  mbmitted  ourfelves  to  God,  no  fuffering
would  be  unbearable.  For  it  is  becaufe  now  we  are
without  God,  and  ftanding  in  our  own  weaknefs,  that
we  are  neither  able  to  endure  nor  yet  to  acl:.  God
help  us  all  worthily  to  bear  His  yoke  !  Amen.


XXIII.


Second  Sermon  for  the  Twelfth  Sunday
after  Trinity.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  day.)


This  fermon  tells  us  how  a  man  who  truly  loves  God,  whofe  ears
have  been  opened  to  receive  the  f even-fold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
is  neither  lifted  up  in  joy  nor  cajl  down  'm  for  row.

MARK  vii.  37.  —  "He  hath  done  all  things  well :  He  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear  and  the

"  dumb  to  fpeak."


E  read  in  the  Gofpel  for  this  day,  that  as
our  bleffed  Lord  was  going  from  one  place
to  another,  they  brought  unto  Him  a  man
who  was  born  deaf  and  dumb ;  as  mufl
needs  be  ;  for  he  who  is  born  deaf  muft  alfb
be  dumb;  for  fince  he  has  never  heard,  he  does  not  know
what  fpeech  is.  The  Lord  put  His  fingers  into  the
ears  of  this  deaf  man,  and  touched  his  tongue  with  His
spittle,  and  faid,  "  Be  opened."  And  when  the  people
faw  what  was  done,  they  came  together  and  wondered
at  the  miracle ;  faying :  "  He  hath  done  all  things
well ;  He  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear  and  the  dumb
to  fpeak."

Children,  it  behoves  us  greatly  to  mark  what  it  is
that  makes  men  deaf,  like  the  man  in  the  Goipcl.
From  the  time  that  the  firft  man  opened  his  ears  to
the  voice  of  the  Enemy,  he  became  deaf  thereby,  and


Of  the  man
who  teas  born
deaf  and
dumb.


How  toe  have
become  deaf
through  lif-
tening  to  the
Tempter,  fo


368


Second  Sermon  for  the


that  we  can-
not bear  the
Eternal
Word.  :


By  what
ways  the
Enemy  /peaks


to  us.


all  we  after  him,  fo  that  we  cannot  hear  or  under-
ftand  the  fweet  voice  of  the  Eternal  Word.  Yet  we
know  that  the  Eternal  Word  is  flill  fb  unutterably
nigh  to  us  inwardly,  in  the  very  principle  of  our  being,
that  not  even  man  himfelf,  his  own  nature,  his  own
thoughts,  nor  aught  that  can  be  named,  or  faid,  or  un-
derftood,  is  fb  nigh  or  planted  fb  deep  within  him,  as
the  Eternal  Word  is  in  man.  And  it  is  ever  fpeaking
in  man  ;  but  he  hears  it  not  by  reafbn  of  the  fore  deaf-
nefs  that  has  come  upon  him.  Whofe  fault  is  this  ?
I  fay  that  fbmething  has  covered  man's  ears,  and  flopped
them  up  that  he  may  not  hear  this  Word ;  and  his
fenfe  is  fo  benumbed  that  he  has  become  dumb,  not
knowing  his  own  felf.  If  he  defired  to  fpeak  of  what
is  within  him,  he  could  not ;  for  he  does  not  know
how  it  flands  with  him,  nor  difcern  his  own  ways  and
works.  The  caufe  whereof  is  that  the  Enemy  has
whifpered  in  his  ear,  and  he  has  liftened  to  the  voice,
and  hence  has  he  grown  deaf  and  dumb.  What  is
this  moft  hurtful  whifpering  of  the  Enemy  ?  It  is
every  diforderly  image  or  Suggestion  that  flarts  up  in
thy  mind,  whether  belonging  to  thy  creature  likings
and  wifhes,  or  the  world  and  the  things  thereof;
whether  it  be  thy  wealth,  reputation,  friends  or  rela-
tions, or  thy  own  flefh,  or  whatever  it  be  that  lays
hold  of  thy  fancy,  making  thee  to  like  or  do  fbmewhat.
Through  all  thefe  he  has  his  accefs  to  thy  foul ;  for  he
is  ever  at  hand ;  and  as  he  marks  to  what  a  man  is
inclined  inwardly  or  outwardly,  what  he  likes  and
diflikes,  ftraightway  he  lays  hold  of  it  and  attacks  him
with  that  weapon,  and  fuggefts  what  agrees  with  that
man's  inclination,  and  pours  into  the  ears  of  his  foul


Twelfth  Sunday  after  Tri?iity.


369


all  manner  of  imaginations  concerning  that  thing,
that  the  man  may  not  be  able  to  hear  the  Eternal
Word.  If  the  man  inftantly  turned  his  ears  and
mind  away  from  the  enemy,  the  aflault  would  be
eafily  repulfed,  but  as  foon  as  he  opens  his  ears  fo  far
as  to  dwell  upon  and  dally  with  temptation,  he  is
already  well  nigh  conquered,  and  the  ftrife  is  at  the
hardeft.  But  as  foon  as  thou  haft  bravely  turned  thy
ear  away,  thou  haft  well  nigh  prevailed ;  for  this
enables  thee  to  hear  the  inward  voice  of  the  Word,
and  takes  away  thy  deafnefs.  Not  only  wordly  but
alfb  religious  men  are  liable  to  this  deafnefs,  if  they
make  the  creature  their  idol  and  aim,  and  their  hearts
are  pofleiTed  therewith.  The  Devil  has  marked  this,
and  fuggefts  to  them  the  imaginations  to  which  he
finds  them  inclined.  W^ith  fome  their  ears  are
ftopped  up  with  their  own  inventions,  and  the  daily
routine  of  habit  with  which  they  go  through  certain
outward  a&s,  learnt  by  means  of  their  fenfes  from  the
creatures.  All  this  dulls  a  man's  hearing  fo  that  he
cannot  apprehend  the  Eternal  Word  fpeaking  within
him,  nor  in  any  wife  underftand  what  it  fays.  It  is
true,  however,  that  we  ought  to  maintain  the  habit
and  practice  of  works  of  piety,  though  without  a  fpirit
of  felf-exaltation  on  account  of  them,  fuch  as  prayer,
or  meditation,  or  the  like,  in  order  that  our  fluggifh
nature  may  be  aroufed  into  vigour,  our  minds  raifed
on  high,  and  our  hearts  allured  and  kindled.  But
there  muft  be  no  claiming  to  ourfelves  thereof,  but
rather  our  ears  muft  be  left  open  to  liften  to  the
whifpers  of  the  Eternal  Word.  Let  us  not  be  as
fome  obftinate  men  who  never  go  forward,  but  to  the


Ofthofe
zvbom  habit
has  made  deaf
to  the  Eternal
Word.


B    B


370


Second  Sermon  for  the


How  that  the
Word  does
not  /peak  to
us  except  we
love  God,  and
of  the  tefts
of  true  love.


day  of  their  death  remain  {landing  on  their  outward
cuftoms,  feeking  for  nothing  further,  and  when  God
would  fay  aught  unto  them,  there  is  always  fomething
that  gets  into  their  ears,  fo  that  His  Word  cannot  be
heard.  Children,  at  the  laft  day,  when  all  things
come  to  be  laid  bare  and  open,  it  will  be  an  ever-
lafting  fbrrow  to  think  of  the  endlefs  variety  of  thefe
things  that  have  come  between  us  and  God,  and  how
we  have  been  entangled  in  mean  bondage  to  our  own
ways  and  habits.

Now  the  Word  is  fpoken  into  no  man's  ear,  ex-
cept he  have  the  love  of  God  ;  for  Chrift  fays  :  "If
"  ye  love  me,  hear  my  words."  On  this  point  fays
St.  Gregory  :  "  Wilt  thou  know  whether  thou  love
"  God  ?  take  note  when  cares,  troubles,  or  forrows
"  overtake  thee  (from  within  or  from  without,
"  whencefbever  they  come),  and  weigh  down  thy
"  fpirit  fb  that  thou  knoweft  not  which  way  to  turn,
"  nor  what  is  to  become  of  thee,  and  canit  find  no
"  counfel  and  art  outwardly  in  a  ftorm  of  affliction,
"  in  unwonted  perplexity  and  fore  diftrefs ;  if  thou
"  then  remaineft  inwardly  at  peace  and  unmoved  in
"  the  bottom  of  thy  heart,  fo  that  thou  doft  not  in
"  any  wife  falter,  either  by  complaint,  or  in  word,  or
"  work,  or  gefture,  then  there  is  no  doubt  that  thou
"  loveft  God."  For  where  there  is  true  love,  a  man
is  neither  out  of  meafure  lifted  up  by  profperity,  nor
caft  down  by  mifhap ;  whether  you  give  or  take  away
from  him,  fo  long  as  he  keeps  his  beloved,  he  has  a
fpring  of  inward  peace.  Thus,  even  though  thy  out-
ward man  grieve,  or  weep  downright,  that  may  well
be  borne,  if  only  thy  inner  man  remain  at  peace,  per-


Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


fectly  content  with  the  will  of  God.  But  if  thou  doft
not  find  it  thus  with  thee,  then  thou  art  in  truth
deaf,  and  haft  not  really  heard  the  voice  of  the  Eternal
Word  within  thee.

Further,  thou  mayeft  try  by  this  teft  whether  thou
haft  the  right  fort  of  love ;  namely,  whether  thou
haft  a  lively  thankfulnefs  for  the  great  benefits  which
God  has  beftowed  upon  thee  and  all  His  creatures  in
heaven  and  on  earth,  and  for  His  holy  Incarnation,
and  for  all  the  manifold  gifts  which  are  ever  flowing
out  from  Him  to  all  men.  And  this  thankfulnefs
mall  comprehend  all  men,  even  as  it  fhall  fpring  from
love  to  all ;  whether  they  be  clergy  or  laymen,  monks,
nuns,  or  in  whatever  condition  of  life  they  be,  or
whatever  be  their  conduct,  thou  malt  cherifh  an
honeft,  true  love  for  them,  not  a  concealed  felf-love,
or  felf-feeking.  This  real,  univerfal  love  is  a  Iburce
of  meafurelefs  benefits.  Know  ye,  children,  that  where
men  are  true,  glorified  friends  of  God,  their  hearts
melt  with  tendernefs  towards  all  mankind,  living  or
dead  ;  and  if  there  were  none  fuch  on  the  earth,  the
world  were  in  an  evil  plight.  Moreover,  thou  malt
let  thy  love  mine  forth  before  men,  fb  far  as  in  thee
lies,  imparting  to  them  of  thy  fubftance,  and  giving
them  comfort,  help,  and  counfel.  It  is  true  that  thou
muft  minifter  to  thine  own  neceffitics  ;  but  when  thou
haft  nothing  to  fpare,  thy  love  mould  be  ftill  lively,
wifhing  that  thou  hadft  aught  to  give,  and  ready  to
do  fo  to  the  utmoft  of  thy  power.  Thefe  are  the  true
figns  of  love  and  that  a  man  is  not  fpiritually  deaf.

Now  when   our  Lord  comes  and  puts  his  finger
into  a  man's  ear  and  touches  his  tongue,  how  elo-

B  B  2


Of  univerfal
tbankfulnefs
to  God}


Jhown  by
benefits  ren-
dered to  man.


37-   Second  Sermon  for  Twelfth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


Oftbefeven
gifts  of  the
Spirit  im-
parted by  the
Lord's  touch.


quent  will  he  become  !  O  children,  of  this  wondrous
things  might  be  faid  !  But  we  will  now  confider  the
feven  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  given  to  man  through  this
touch  whereby  the  ears  of  his  mind  are  opened.  Firft
is  given  unto  him  the  fpirit  of  fear,  which  has  power
to  rid  him  of  all  felf-will,  and  teaches  him  to
flee  from  temptation,  and  at  all  times  to  ihun
unruly  appetites  and  licence.  Next  is  given  to  him
the  fpirit  of  charity,  which  makes  him  fweet-tem-
pered,  kind-hearted,  merciful,  not  ready  to  pafs  a
harm  judgment  on  any  one's  conduct,  but  full  of
tolerance.  Thirdly,  he  receives  the  gift  of  knowledge,
fo  that  he  understands  the  meaning  of  his  inward  ex-
perience, and  thus  learns  to  guide  himfelf  according  to
the  bleffed  will  of  God.  The  fourth  gift  is  Divine
ftrength :  through  this  gift  fuch  Divine  might  is  im-
parted unto  him,  that,  with  Paul,  it  becomes  a  fmall
and  eafy  matter  to  him  to  do  or  bear  all  things  through
God  who  ftrengtheneth  him.  The  fifth  is  the  gift  of
good  counfel,  which  all  thofe  who  follow  become
gentle  and  loving.  Laftly,  come  two  great  gifts,  un-
derftanding  and  the  wifdom  of  infight,  which  are  fo
fublime  and  glorious,  that  it  is  better  to  feek  to  expe-
rience them  than  to  fpeak  thereof.  That  our  ears  may
thus  be  opened  of  a  truth,  that  the  Eternal  Word  may
be  heard  in  us,  may  God  grant  us  !  Amen  !


XXIV.


Sermon  for  the  Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.

(From  the  Gofpel  for  the  Day.)


This  fermon  forbiddetb  all  carefulnefs,  and  telktb  in  what  right-
eoufnefs  coiifijietb,  and  rebukes  fundry  religious  people  and  their
works,  likening  their  ways  tojtmony.


MATT.  yi.  33. — "Seek  ye  firft  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteoufnefs,  and  all  thefe  things

"  mail  be  added  unto  you."


N  this  pafTage,  the  Son  of  God  gives  us  a
fimilitude,  bidding  man,  who  is  a  reafon-
able  creature,  to  look  at  the  flowers  that
deck  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  at  the  un-
reafbning  fowls  of  the  air,  faying  :  "  Con-
fider  the  lilies  of  the  field  howtheygrow;  they  toil  not,
they  fpin  not ;  and  yet  I  fay  unto  you  that  Solomon,
in  all  his  glory,  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  thefe  !"
Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air,  for  they  fbw  not,  neither
do  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns  ;  yet  your  Hea-
venly Father  feedeth  them.  Are  ye  not  much  better
than  they?"  "  Therefore  I  fay  unto  you,  take  no
thought,  faying,  What  mall  we  eat,  or  what  mall
we  drink,  or  wherewithal  mall  we  be  clothed  ?  For
after  all  thefe  things  do  the  Gentiles  feek  :  for  your
Heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all
thefe  things.  But  feek  ye  firft  the  kingdom  of  God,

B  B  3


Of  the  lef-
fons  taught
by  this  Gof-
pel for  the
day.


374


How  that  we
cannot  ferve
God  and
Mammon.


How  all

faitblefs  anx-
ieties are  a
ferving  of
Mammon.


"  and  his  righteoufnefs ;  and  all  thefc  things  lhall  be
"  added  unto  you."

Children,  once  before,  the  Son  of  God  had  faid
that  no  man  could  ferve  two  matters,  that  is  to  fay,
God  and  Mammon,  or  the  riches  of  this  world ;  for
he  muft  love  the  one,  and  hate  the  other.  It  is  in-
deed a  wonder  paffing  our  understanding  how  much
is  comprehended  in  thefe  words.  We  ought  to  fet
them  up  before  our  eyes  as  a  mirror,  and  let  them  be
our  conftant  motto.  How  clearly  does  Chrift  here
inftrucl:  us  in  the  truth  with  plain  unvarnimed  words
and  pertinent  figures,  when,  forbidding  us  to  be  anxious
about  earthly  and  periftiable  things,  he  fays  :  "  Which
"  of  you  by  taking  thought  can  add  one  cubit  unto
"  his  ftature  ?  Therefore,  ye  of  little  faith,  feek  not
"  what  ye  lhall  eat,  or  wrhat  ye  mall  drink  ;  neither
"  be  ye  of  doubtful  mind."  Children,  ye  fee  well  by
this  difcourfe  how  far  we  all  are  in  common  from
living  according  to  the  fimple  truth  of  things,  in  all
our  earthly  relationships.  But  know  that  there  is  an
inward  fecret  defecl:  lurking  under  the  cloak  of  our
anxiety  about  daily  things,  a  {infill,  though  uncon-
fcious  covetoufnefs,  which  is  one  of  the  {even  deadly
fins.  And  this  fin,  working  filently  and  unperceived
in  the  hearts  both  of  worldly  and  religious  people,  is  the
caufe  of  the  greateft  evils  that  afflict  this  earth.  Let
each,  for  inftance,  only  mark  narrowly,  in  himfelf  and
others,  the  marvels  of  labour  and  ingenuity  invented
and  wrought  on  all  fides,  each  ftriving  to  outdo  his
fellow  for  the  fake  of  earthly  gain.  If  we  were  to
probe  to  the  bottom  the  workings  of  this  falfe  prin-
ciple in  worldly  and  in  religious  people,  it  could


Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


375


hardly  be  told  how  deeply  its  roots  have  ftruck,  and
how  widely  they  have  fpread  below  the  furface.
Think  what  it  implies  to  have  fo  little  confidence  in
that  God  who  is  able  to  do  all  things,  when  ye  are
ftriving,  and  toiling,  and  wearing  yourfelves  out  with
anxiety,  as  if  you  meant  to  live  for  ever.  All  this
comes  from  that  evil  principle  of  covetoufnefs.  If
one  really  looked  into  the  matter,  it  were  frightful  to
fee  how  man  feeks  his  own  ends  and  not  his  neigh-
bour's good,  in  all  things  Divine  and  human  ;  his  own
pleafure,  or  profit,  or  glory,  by  all  his  words  and
works  —  nay,  even  gifts  and  fervices.  Children,  this
great  fin  is  fb  deeply  rooted  in  many,  that  every
corner  of  their  heart  is  full  of  earthly,  perifhable
things,  and  they  are  juft  like  the  crooked  woman  we
read  of  in  the  Gofpel,  who  was  bent  down  to  the
earth  by  her  infirmity,  and  could  in  no  wife  lift  her-
felf  up,  or  raife  her  eyes  above  the  ground.

Thou  poor  blind  man,  fpiritual  in  outward  vefhire
but  not  in  reality,  why  mouldft  thou  not  trufl  that
the  God  who  has  done  thee  fo  great  a  benefit  in  re-
deeming thee  from  the  carking  cares  of  this  falfe,
wicked  world,  that  He  is  alfo  willing  to  give  thee
fuch  poor  mean  things  as  are  needful  for  thy  earthly
fuftenance  ?  And  is  it  not  a  pitiful  thing  that  a  reli-
gious man  mould  fpend  his  whole  induftry,  and  fole
effort,  and  have  his  thoughts  turned,  day  and  night,
upon  his  own  little  doings,  and  mould  be  fb  full  ot
them  that  he  can  hardly  properly  hold  converfe  with
God,  or  his  own  heart  ?  And  if  what  he  has  in  hand
fucceeds,  he  feels  no  impulfc  urging  him  onwards  to-
wards eternal  things,  except  in  fb  far  as  it  may  be

B  B  4


How  the
blind  want  of     \
trufl  in  God
bringetb  us
into  divers
temptations
that  eat  out
all  Jpiritual
life.


Sermon  for  the


i  Pet.  v.  7.
Hotv  that  un-
due care
blinds  our
reafon,
quenches  our
love,  and
comes  between
us  and  God.


necefTary  to  fecure  his  own  falvation,  and  from  the
delight  that  he  may  find  in  his  own  good  works ;  and
he  is  as  much  taken  up  with  petty  perfonal  cares  as
wordly  people  are  with  weightier  things.  AVherefore
our  Lord  fays :  Ye  cannot  ferve  two  mailers ;  ye
cannot  ierve  God  and  riches.  But  feek  ye  firft  the
Kingdom  of  God,  which  is  before  all  things  and  above
all  things,  and  His  righteoufnefs,  and  "  all  other
"  things  mall  be  added  unto  you."  Juft  as  if  He  had
faid,  thefe  are  not  worthy  to  be  called  a  gift ;  but  they
mall  be  added  over  and  above  God's  gifts.  How
greatly  thefe  vain,  pitiful  things  are  efteemed  and
loved  and  fought  after,  fecretly  and  openly,  and  what
anxiety  they  give  rife  to,  and  how  eagerly  men  defire
them,  and  heap  up  treafures  by  unlawful  means,  is
not  to  be  fully  fet  forth,  and  I  muft  not  attempt  it.

St.  Peter  fays :  "  Caft  all  your  care  upon  God,  for
"  He  careth  for  you."  This  carefulnefs  concerning
outward  things  works  a  man  three  great  injuries.  It
blinds  his  reafon  and  good  fenfe  ;  it  quenches  the  fire
of  love,  and  deftroys  all  its  fervour  and  heat ;  and  it
blocks  up  the  ways  of  fecret  accefs  to  God.  It  is  like
a  noxious  vapour,  or  thick  fmoke,  that  rifes  up  and
chokes  a.  man's  breath.  This  care  is  born  of  the  fin
and  vice  of  covetoufnefs.  Therefore  look  well  to
your  footfteps,  and  fee  with  what  ye  hold  converfe
while  you  are  in  this  prefent  ftate,  and  feek  the  King-
dom of  God  and  His  righteoufnefs,  that  you  may  find
and  difcover  it  where  it  lies  hidden'  in  the  inmoft
depths  of  the  foul,  that  it  do  not  moulder  away  or
remain  unfruitful  within  you.  But  to  this  end,  he
who  purpofes  manfully  to  withftand  himfelf,  the


Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


377


Devil,  and  the  world,  muft  fuftain  many  bold,  valiant
conflicts,  without  reft  or  intermiffion.  For  the  King-
dom of  God  will  never  be  truly  found  except  thefe
faults  be  firft  caft  off;  and  this  is  not  the  work  of  a
day.  For  whatever  a  man  mall  take  by  force,  he
muft  firft  with  great  pains  conquer  ;  and  thus  he  muft
make  continual  efforts  before  his  outward  man  can  be
drawn  away  from  the  love  of  thefe  perifhable  things.
For  this  vice  has  ftruck  its  hidden  roots  fb  deeply  into
the  animal  nature  of  man,  that  he  feeks  himfelf  in  all
things, — in  his  words  and  works,  in  his  dealings  with
others,  and  in  his  friendfhips ;  nay,  the  miferable  felf-
feeking  of  nature  works  in  fecret  even  as  regards  God,
making  men  crave  to  enjoy  comfort,  illumination,
fweet  emotions ;  in  fhort,  they  are  ever  wifhing  to
obtain  fomething,  and  would  fain  hold  converle  with
the  world  and  yet  poffefs  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.
But  we  ought  to  bear  all  things  in  the  holy  faith  of
Chrift,  and  leave  the  reward  to  God.

Do  good  works,  and  exercife  thyfelf  in  all  virtue,
and  God  mall  give  thee  a  great  reward,  in  fo  far  as
thou  hail  kept  thyfelf  from  judging  thy  neighbour,
and  haft  not  preferred  thyfelf  before  him,  for  that
would  ill  become  thee.  Dear  children,  be  on  your
guard  againft  this  fubtle  felf-feeking  of  nature,  that
ye  do  not  fulfil  good  wrorks  of  piety  for  the  fake  of
any  earthly  reward  ;  for  that  has  fomewhat  of  the
nature  of  fimony,  a  fin  which  the  holy  Church  abhors
above  all  others,  and  which  is  efpecially  contrary  to
God's  righteoufnefs ;  for  God  is  by  His  nature  the
end  of  all  things,  and  thou  letteft  in  His  ftead,  as  the
end  of  thy  works,  an  evil,  mean,  perifhable  thing.


But  many
conflicts  are
needful  to
conquer  it.


We  muft  do
our  duty  for
the  fake  of
duty,  and
leave  the  re-
ward to  God.


378


Sermon  for  the


The  King-
dom of  God
Jor  which  we
pray  is  that
He  Jhould
reign  in  the
hearts  of  us
and  all  men.


What  it
means  to  pray
"  Thy  will
"  be  done,"


We  fhould  feek  God's  rightcoufnefs,  but  this  is  con-
trary to  His  righteoufncfs ;  therefore,  children,  beware
of  this  evil  principle  within  you,  and  feek  the  King-
dom of  God  and  His  righteoufnefs ;  that  is  to  fay,
feek  God  alone,  who  is  the  true  Kingdom  for  which
we  and  all  men  daily  pray  when  we  fay  the  Lord's
Prayer.  Children,  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  a  mighty
prayer :  ye  know  not  what  ye  pray  for  in  it.  God  is
Himfelf  the  Kingdom,  and  in  that  Kingdom  He  reigns
in  all  intelligent  creatures.  Therefore  what  we  afk
for  is  God  Himfelf  with  all  His  riches.  In  that  King-
dom does  God  become  our  Father,  and  manifefts
there  His  fatherly  faithfulnefs  and  fatherly  power.
And  infbmuch  as  He  finds  place  in  us  to  work,  is  His
name  hallowed,  and  magnified,  and  made  known.
That  His  name  mould  be  hallowed  in  us,  means  that
He  fhould  reign  in  us,  and  accomplifh  through  us  His
rightful  work.  And  thus  is  His  will  done  here  on
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  ;  that  is,  when  it  is  done  in  us
as  it  is  in  Himfelf,  in  the  heaven  which  He  Himfelf
is.  Oh  !  how  often  does  man  give  himfelf  up  in  will
to  God,  and  take  himfelf  back  again  as  quickly,  and
fall  away  from  God  !  But  now  begin  again,  and  give
thyfelf  to  Him  afrefh ;  yield  thyfelf  captive  to  the
Divine  \Vill  in  rightful  allegiance,  and  truft  thyfelf  to
the  power  of  thy  Father,  who  has  all  power  and  might,
and  whofe  prefence  thou  haft  fo  often  and  fo  plainly
felt,  and  art  yet  made  to  feel  every  day  and  hour.
TYuft  Him  wholly,  and  feek  His  righteoufnefs.  For
therein  is  His  righteoufncfs  mown,  that  He  abideth
ever  with  thofe  who  heartily  feek  Him,  and  make
Him  their  end,  and  give  themfelves  up  to  Him.  In


Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


379


fuch  He  reigns,  and  all  vain  care  falls  away  of  itfelf
in  thofe  who  thus  keep  clofe  to  God  in  true  felf-
furrender.

Not  that  we  mould  tempt  God ;  for  it  is  our  duty
to  exercife  a  reasonable  prudence  in  providing  fuch
things  as  are  right,  to  the  fupply  of  our  neceffities  and
thofe  of  others,  and  profitable  to  ourfelves  and  the  com-
munity, and  to  fee  that  everything  be  done  in  a  difcreet
and  feemly  manner.  But  that  which  is  your  end
when  you  fit  and  meditate  in  the  church,  mould  be
likewife  your  end  when  you  are  bufied  in  all  the  affairs
of  daily  life  ;  whether  you  work,  or  fpeak,  or  eat,  or
drink,  waking  and  Sleeping,  do  all  to  the  glory  of
God,  and  not  for  thyfelf.  For  a  noble  man  will  make
thefe  periming  things  of  time  a  mere  paflage-way  by
which  he  will  afcend  through  the  creatures,  not  being
held  down  by  any  felfim  cleaving  to  them,  up  to  his
everlafting  home,  his  eternal  fource  from  which  he
fprang  at  his  creation.

Now  fome  may  afk,  how  we  can  fay  that  God  for-
fakes  none  that  truft  Him,  feeing  that  He  often  per-
mits good  men  to  fuffer  great  poverty  and  affliction.
This  He  does,  as  Bifhop  Albert  fays,  for  three  caufes :
the  firft,  that  He  may  try  them,  and  fee  whether  they
utterly  believe  and  truft  Him  ;  thus  God  often  fuffers
men  to  be  brought  into  diftrefs  that  he  may  teach
them  fubmiffion,  and  then  fuccours  them  that  they
may  perceive  His  hand  and  His  friendmip  and  help;
in  order  that  their  love  and  gratitude  may  increase
from  that  time  forth,  and  they  may  draw  clofer  to
God  and  become  dearer  to  Him.  Or  again,  God  will
by  thefe  troubles  mortcn  their  purification  hereafter ;


We  are  not
to  tempt  God
by  negle  fling
due  prudence.


Wherefore
God  ofttimes
feemetb  to
forfake  tboje
that  truft
Him.


38o


Sermon  for  the


How  the  man
is  tranf-
formed  into
the  image  of
God  token
the  Kingdom
of  God  cometb
in  bis  foul.


or  again,  He  fends  them  diftrefs  for  a  judgment  on
thofe  who  might  relieve  them  and  do  it  not.  There-
fore, children,  feek  firft  the  Kingdom  of  God,  which
is  God  Himfelf,  and  nought  elfe.  When  this  cleav-
ing to  the  creature  is  altogether  caft  off,  then  will  the
will  of  God  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  and
fo  mall  the  Father  have  the  power  and  the  glory  for
ever  in  heaven,  that  is,  in  His  Sons.  For  when  man
ftands  thus,  having  no  end,  nor  purpofe,  nor  defire  but
God,  then  does  he  himfelf  become  God's  Kingdom,
and  God  reigns  in  him.  And  then  does  the  Eternal
King  fit  on  His  royal  throne,  and  command  and
govern  in  man.

This  Kingdom  is  feated  properly  in  the  inmoft  re-
cedes of  the  fpirit.  When,  through  all  manner  of
exercifes,  the  outward  man  has  been  converted  into
the  inward,  reafbnable  man,  and  thus  the  two,  that  is
to  fay,  the  powers  of  the  fenies  and  the  powers  of  the
reafon,  are  gathered  up  into  the  very  centre  of  the
man's  being, —  the  unfeen  depths  of  his  fpirit,  wherein
lies  the  image  of  God, — and  thus  he  flings  himfelf  into
the  Divine  abyfs,  in  which  he  dwelt  eternally  before
he  was  created  ;  then  when  God  finds  the  man  thus
fimply  and  nakedly  turned  towards  Him,  the  God-
head bends  down  and  defcends  into  the  depths  of  the
pure,  waiting  foul,  and  transforms  the  created  foul,
drawing  it  up  into  the  uncreated  efTence,  fb  that  the
fpirit  becomes  one  with  Him.  Could  fuch  a  man
behold  himfelf,  he  would  fee  himfelf  fo  noble  that
he  would  fancy  himfelf  God,  and  fee  himfelf  a  thou-
fand  times  nobler  than  he  is  in  himfelf,  and  would
perceive  all  the  thoughts  and  purpofes,  wrords  and


Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


381


works,  and  have  all  the  knowledge  of  all  men  that
ever  were.

Now  thou  fhouldeft  look  into  the  bottom  of  thy
heart,  and  fee  whether  thou  wouldeft  fain  enter  into
this  Kingdom,  and  partake  of  this  high  dignity.  Then
were  all  thy  cares  over  and  gone  for  ever !  This  is
the  Kingdom  which  we  are  told  to  feek  firft  ;  and  this
is  righteoumefs,  that  we  mould  fet  God  before  us,  the
rightful  end  of  all  our  purpofes  in  all  our  doings,  and
truft  in  Him.  For  as  we  can  never  love  God  too
well,  fb.  we  can  never  truft  Him-  too  much,  if  it  be
but  the  right  fort  of  truft,  that  cafts  all  care  upon
Him,  as  Peter  bids  us  do.

Now  St.  Paul  tells  us,  however,  that  we  muft  be
careful  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  fpirit  in  the  bond  of
peace.  Children,  that  peace  which  is  found  in  the
fpirit  and  the  inner  life  is  well  worth  our  care,  for  in
that  peace  lies  the  fatisfaclion  of  all  our  wants.  In  it
the  Kingdom  of  God  is  difcovered  and  His  righteouf-
nefs  is  found.  This  peace  a  man  mould  allow  nothing
to  take  from  him,  whatever  betide,  come  weal  or  woe,
honour  or  fhame.  But  ever  keep  thy  inward  man  in
the  bond  of  peace,  which  confifts  in  the  common  love
of  all  to  all ;  and  fet  before  you  the  lovely  example  of
our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  and  fee  how  His  love  wrought,
leading  Him  to  endure  greater  fuffcrings  than  all  the
faints  or  all  mankind  ever  endured.  For  He  was  all
His  life  more  utterly  deftitute  of  confolation  than  any
man  ever  was,  and  ended  it  by  the  bittereft  death  that
man  ever  died ;  and  yet  in  His  higheft  powers  He
was  never  lefs  blefled  than  He  is  at  this  moment.
Now  thofe  who  are  moft  truly  followers  of  Him  in


Do  we  Jin-
cerely  wijb
to  enter  into
this  King-
dom?


How  the  bond
of  inward
peace  is  the
common  love
towards  all,
working  as
Cbrift's  love
worked.


Sermon  for  the  Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity.


emptinefs  of  outward  confblation,  and  in  true  poverty,
inward  and  outward,  having  no  refuge  or  ftay,  and  in
no  wife  clinging  to  the  creature,  or  feeking  them-
felves,  thefe  come  to  difcover,  in  the  trueft  and  nobleft
fort,  the  Kingdom  of  God.  And  this  is  God's  right-
eoufnefs,  that  He  will  give  us  to  find  His  Kingdom
by  treading  in  Chrift's  footfteps,  in  true  felf-furrender
and  willing  poornefs  of  fpirit.  That  we  may  all  fb
feek  the  Kingdom  of  God  as  truly  to  find  it,  may  He
help  us.  Amen.


XXV.

Sermon  for  St.  Stephen's  Day.


Of  three  grades  of  thofe  who  learn  to  die  unto  themfelves,  like  a  corn
of  wheat,  that  they  may  bring  forth  fruit  ;  or  of  thofe  who  are
beginners,  thofe  who  are  advancing,  and  thofe  who  are  perfect  in
a  Divine  life.

JOHN  xii.  24.  —  "  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone  :  but
"  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit."


Y  the  corn  of  wheat  we  underftand  our
Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  who  by  His  death  has
brought  forth  much  fruit  for  all  men,  if
they  are  but  willing  not  only  to  reign
with  Him,  but  alfb  and  in  the  firft  place
defire  to  follow  Him  in  a  dying  life.  For  this  may
be  called  a  dying  life,  when  a  man  for  the  love  of  God
refufes  to  gratify  his  fenfes  and  take  his  natural  plea-
fure,  and  follow  his  own  will ;  and  as  many  lufts  as  he
dies  to,  fo  many  deaths  does  he  offer  to  God,  and  fb
many  fruits  of  life  will  he  receive  in  return.  For  in
what  meafure  a  man  dies  to  himfelf,  and  grows  out
of  himfelf,  in  the  fame  meafure  does  God,  who  is  our
Life,  enter  into  him.

Now  mark,  dear  children,  that  the  path  of  a  man
thus  dying  may  be  divided  into  three  flages.  Thofe
who  have  entered  on  the  loweft  ftage,  do  a<5ls  of  iclf-


Hozo  the  corn
of  wheat  that
dieth  is  a  type
of  our  Lord
Jefus  Cbrijt,
who  died  to
bring  forth
fruit,  and
bow  we  muft
likewife  die.


Of  the  three
ft  ages  of  a
dying  life.


Sermon  for  St.  Stephen's  Day.


Of  the  fir  ft
Jlage  of  tbofe
who  die  to
earthly  plea-
fur  es  for  the
fake  of  a  re-
ward in
heaven.


denial  from  fear  of  hell,  and  for  the  hope  of  heaven,
with  fome  love  to  God  mingled  therewith,  which
leads  them  to  mun  the  moft  flagrant  fins ;  but  the
love  of  God  feldom  works  ftrongly  in  them,  except  it
be  ftirred  up  by  the  contemplation  of  hell  or  heaven ;
for  by  reafon  of  their  blind  felf-love  thefe  men  are  ter-
ribly afraid  of  death,  and  by  no  means  eager  to  fet
their  hand  to  the  work  of  mortifying  their  undifci-
plined  nature,  which  fhrinks  therefrom  ;  and  they  have
little  faith,  which  is  the  caufe  of  this  timorous  weak-
nefs,  that  leads  them  to  be  ever  fearing  for  their  own
fafety  :  thus,  juft  as  formerly  they  fought  and  loved
themfelves  in  all  kinds  of  carnal  enjoyments  and
worldly  vanities,  and  avoided  bodily  pain  and  incon-
venience out  of  felf-love,  fo  now  is  the  fame  motive
at  work  leading  them  to  mun  fin  on  account  of
punifhment,  in  order  to  efcape  hell,  and  obtain  the
rewards  of  heaven.  And  when  they  are  {till  young
in  the  love  of  God,  they  are  apt  to  tafte  little  fweet-
nefs  in  loving  God,  fave  when  they  hope  to  enjoy
fomething  from  His  love ;  as  for  inftance,  to  efcape
hell  and  get  to  heaven  ;  and  if  fometimes  they  medi-
tate on  the  fufferings  of  our  Lord,  and  weep  over
them  with  ftrong  emotion,  it  is  becaufe  they  think
how  he  was  willing  to  fuffer  fo  much  for  their  fakes,
and  to  redeem  them  by  his  bitter  death  ;  ftill  (becaufe
their  love  is  fmall)  they  are  much  more  inclined  to
dwell  upon  the  bodily  fufferings  that  He  endured  in
His  human  nature,  than  to  reflecl:  how  He  manifefted
by  His  death  the  higheft  perfection  of  all  virtue,  as
humility,  love,  and  patience,  and  therein  fo  greatly
glorified  His  Heavenly  Father.  For  this  fort  of  per-


Sermon  for  St.  Stephen's  Day.


385


fons  fet  out  and  begin  to  die  while  as  yet  they  love
themfelves  far  too  well ;  hence  they  are  not  yet  able
to  fee  truly  what  it  is  to  refign  themfelves  to  God,  and
to  maintain  a  fpirit  of  fubmiffion  ;  and  although  God
does  all  things  for  the  beft,  yet  this  they  will  never
believe,  and  it  is  a  perpetual  ftumbling-block  to  them.
Thus,  they  often  aik  and  wonder  why  our  Lord
chofe  to  luffer  Ib  much,  and  why  He  leads  His
friends  and  followers  to  Himlelf  along  fuch  a  path  of
fuffering.  And  when  they  are  at  the  outlet  of  a  dying
life,  and  only  half-way  inclined  towards  true  perfec"l-
nefs,  nor  perceive  as  yet  wrherein  this  confifts,  they
ofttimes  torment  themfelves  with  watching  and  faft-
ing,  and  an  auftere  way  of  life  ;  for  whatever  is  out-
wardly painful  to  the  flefh,  they  fancy  to  be  greatly
and  mightily  regarded  and  prized  by  God.  So  when
they  eagerly  take  upon  themfelves  all  the  hardfhips
they  can,  then  they  think  they  have  reached  the  fum-
mit  of  perfection,  and  judge  all  other  men,  nay  even
thofe  who  are  much  more  perfect  than  themielves,
and  think  meanly  of  all  who  do  not  praclife  outward
auftcrities,  calling  them  low-minded  and  ignorant  in
fpiritual  things  ;  and  thofe  who  do  not  feel  as  they
do,  they  think  to  have  gone  aftray  altogether  from
a  fpiritual  courfe,  and  defire  that  all  men  mould
be  as  they  are  ;  and  whatever  methods  of  avoiding
fin  they  have  praftifed  and  ftill  make  ufe  of  by
reafon  of  their  infirmity,  they  defire,  nay,  demand,
that  every  one  elfe  mould  obferv  e ;  and  if  any  do  not
do  Ib,  they  judge  them,  and  murmur  at  them,  and  fav
that  they  pay  no  regard  to  religion.  Now,  while  they
thus  keep  themfelves  and  all  that  belongs  to  them  as  it


c  c


Horn  that  it
is  a  jign  of  a
beginner  to
think  much  of
aufterities,
and  judge
thoje  who
praftife  them
not.


386


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


How  fucb
do  lack  a
generous  uni-
verjal  love,
and  rather
do  right  from
fear.


were  working  in  their  own  fcrvice,  and  in  this  felf-
love  unduly  regard  themfelves  as  their  own  property,
they  cut  themfelves  off  from  our  Lord  and  from  the
univerfal  charity.  For  they  ought  to  cherim  con-
tinually a  general  love  toward  all  men,  both  good  and
bad ;  but  they  remain  abforbed  in  their  partial  and
feparate  affections,  whereby  they  bring  upon  them-
felves much  difquiet,  and  remain  a  prey  to  their  be-
fetting  fin  of  always  feeking  and  intending  themfelves.
And  they  are  very  niggardly  of  their  fpiritual  bleflings
towards  their  fellow- Chriftians ;  for  they  devote  all
their  prayers  and  religious  exercifes  to  their  own
behoof ;  and  if  they  pray  or  do  any  other  kind  acl:  for
others,  they  think  it  a  great  thing,  and  fancy  they
have  done  them  a  great  fervice  thereby.  In  fhort,  as
they  look  little  within,  and  are  little  enlightened  in
the  knowledge  of  themfelves,  fb  alfo  they  make  little
increafe  in  the  love  of  God  and  their  neighbour ;  for
they  are  fb  entangled  with  unregulated  affections,  that
they  live  alone  in  heart,  not  thoroughly  commingling
their  foul  with  any  in  the  right  fort  of  thorough  love.
For  the  love  of  God  which  ought  to  unite  them  to
God  and  all  mankind,  is  wanting  in  them  ;  and
although  they  appear  to  keep  the  ordinances  of  God
and  the  Holy  Church,  they  do  not  keep  the  law
of  love.  What  they  do  is  more  out  of  conllraint
and  fear  than  from  hearty  love  ;  and  becaufe  they  are
inwardly  unfaithful  to  God,  they  dare  not  truft  Him,
for  the  imperfection  which  they  find  in  themfelves
makes  a  flaw  in  their  love  to  God.  Hence  their
whole  life  is  full  of  care,  full  of  fear,  full  of  toil  and
ignoble  mifery ;  for  they  fee  Eternal  Life  on  the  one


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


387


fide,  and  fear  to  lofe  it,  and  fee  hell  on  the  other,  and
fear  to  fall  into  it ;  and  all  their  prayers  and  religious
exercifes  cannot  chafe  away  their  fear  of  hell,  fo  long  as
they  do  not  die  unto  themfelves.  For  the  more  they
love  themfelves,  and  take  counfel  for  their  own  welfare,
the  more  the  fear  of  hell  grows  upon  them  ;  infomuch
that  when  God  does  not  help  them  forward  as  much  as
they  wifh,  they  complain ;  and  they  weep  and  figh  at
every  little  difficulty  they  encounter,  however  fmall,
fuch  as  being  tempted  to  vanity,  wandering  thoughts,
and  the  like>  They  make  long  {lories  of  what  is  of
no  confequence,  and  talk  about  their  great  difficulties
and  fufferings,  as  if  they  were  grievoufly  wronged  ;
for  they  efteem  their  works,  although  fmall,  to  be
highly  meritorious,  and  that  God  Almighty  owes  them
great  honour  and  bleffings  in  return.  But  our  Lord
will  tell  them  (as  He  does  in  facl;  afterward,  when  He
has  enlightened  them  with  His  grace)  a  poor  fool
loves  his  own  wooden  flick,  or  any  other  little  worth-
lefs  article,  as  well  as  a  rich  and  wife  man  does  his
fword  or  any  other  great  and  precious  thing.

All  mch  are  {landing  on  the  loweft  fteps  of  a
dying  life,  and  if  they  do  not  mortify  themfelves
more,  and  come  to  experience  more  of  what  a  dying
life  is,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  they  will  fall  back  from
that  little  whereunto  they  have  attained,  and  may
plunge  into  depths  of  folly  and  wickednefs,  from
which  God  keep  us  all !  But  before  a  man  comes  to
fuch  a  fall,  God  gives  him  great  fpiritual  delight ;  and
upon  this  he  is  fo  greatly  rejoiced  that  he  cheerfully
endures  all  forts  of  aufterities  and  penances,  and  then
he  wecneth  that  he  hath  arrived  at  perfection,  and

c  c  2


Wherefore
they  are
grievoufly
opprejfed  with
their  own  in-
firmities, and
with  the  fear
of  hell.


How  that
God  often
fufferetbfucb
to  fall  ter-
ribly, that  He
may  teach
them  f elf-


388


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


knowledge
and  Jhow  His
mercy  upon
them.


Oftbefecond
degree  of  a
dying  life,
when  a  man
is  persecuted
for  rigbteouf-
nefsfake.


begins  to  judge  his  neighbours,  and  wants  to  fhape  all
men  after  his  own  model,  fo  greatly  does  he  efteem
himfelf  in  his  own  conceits.  Then  God  comes  in
His  mercy  to  teach  him  what  he  is,  and  mows  him
into  what  error  he  has  fallen,  and  permits  the  Enemy
to  fet  before  him  and  make  him  tafte  the  fweetnefs
of  fin  ;  and  then,  when  he  has  thus  tafted,  he  conceives
an  inclination  to  one  fin  after  another,  and  he  cannot
rid  himfelf  of  thefe  inclinations.  Then  he  wifhes  to
flee  fin  that  he  may  efcape  hell,  and  begins  to  do
outward  good  works ;  and  yet  it  is  a  dreadful  toil  to
perform  thefe  good  works  as  a  mere  labour,  and  to
put  himfelf  to  pain  ;  thus  he  is  brought  into  an
agonizing  ftruggle  with  himfelf,  and  does  not  know
which  way  to  turn  ;  for  he  dimly  fees  that  he  has
gone  affray.  Then  muft  God  of  His  mercy  come
and  raife  him  up,  and  he  mall  cry  earneftly  to  God
for  help,  and  his  chief  meditation  mall  be  on  the  life
and  works  and  efpecially  the  fufferings  of  our  Lord
Jefus  Chrift.

The  fecond  degree  in  which  the  corn  of  wheat
dies,  is  when  a  man  is  called  upon  to  endure  infult,
contempt,  and  fuch  like  deaths ;  and  fo  long  as  his
grace  lafls  he  would  fain  continue  to  fuffer,  for  by
the  fenfe  of  undeferved  injury  all  his  powers  are  but
quickened  and  raifed  into  a  higher  ftate  of  activity.
But  when  he  is  bereft  of  this  gracious  fenfe  of  the
Divine  prefence,  forafmuch  as  he  is  {till  far  from  per-
fection, he  cannot  bear  up  under  this  fpiritual  deftitu-
tion,  and,  through  his  infirmity,  falls  a  prey  to  miftruft
of  God,  and  fancies  that  God  has  forgotten  him,  and
is  not  willing  to  help  him  towards  perfection.  Often


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


389


he  is  in  a  hundred  minds  what  to  do  or  not  do,
and  if  our  Lord  fhow  him  fome  kindnefs,  then  he
feels  as  if  all  were  well  between  his  foul  and  God,  and
he  feels  himfelf  fo  rich  as  if  he  could  never  more  be
poor,  and  thinks  to  enjoy  the  prefence  and  favour  of
God  (though  as  yet  he  is  quite  untried)  juft  as  if  the
Almighty  were  his  own  perfbnal,  fpecial  friend,  and
is  ready  to  believe  that  our  Lord  is,  fo  to  fpeak,  at  his
difpofal,  will  comfort  him  in  adverfity,  and  enrich
him  with  all  virtue.  But  forafmuch  as  our  gracious
Lord  fees  that  fuch  a  man  will  be  very  apt  to  rely
upon  his  imagined  powers,  and  thus  to  fall  grievoufly,
and  fees  alfo  that  the  beft  and  ripeft  fruit  is  being
loft,  inafmuch  as  the  man  has  not  yet  attained  to
that  perfection  to  which  our  Lord  deflres  to  lead  him,
therefore  in  due  time  He  withdraws  from  him  all
that  He  had  revealed  to  him,  becaufe  the  man  was
too  much  occupied  with  himfelf,  with  thinking  about
his  own  perfection,  wifdom,  holinefs  and  virtues ;  He
thus  brings  him  through  poverty  to  diiTatifta&ion
with  himfelf,  and  a  humble  acknowledgment  that  he
has  neither  wifdom  nor  worthinefs  ;  then  does  he
begin  to  reflect  within  himfelf  how  juftly  Almighty
God  has  ftayed  His  hand  from  beftowing  any  fenfible
tokens  of  His  mercy,  becaufe  he  fancied  that  he  was
fomething ;  now  he  fees  clearly  that  he  is  nothing.
He  was  wont  to  care  for  his  good  name  and
honour  in  the  world  and  to  defend  them  as  a  man
ftands  up  for  his  wedded  wife,  and  to  count  them
who  fpoke  evil  of  him  as  an  enemy  to  the  common
good.  He  was  wont  to  defire  and  thirft  after  the
reputation  of  holinefs,  like  a  meadow  after  the  dew  of

c  c  3


Of  God's
bidden  deal-
ings with
a  man,  by
which  he
learns  that
he  is  nothing.


390


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


How  vie  muft
examine  our-
lelves  under
p(  •  ,f(utio  ns,
whether  we
are  patient,
prat/ing  God
and  man,
and  truly
loving  our
enemies.


heaven.  He  weened  that  men's  praifes  of  him  had
proceeded  altogether  from  real  goodnefs  and  fympathy
of  heart  and  by  God's  ordination,  and  had  wandered
fo  far  from  felf-knowledge  as  not  to  fee  that  he  was
in  himfelf  unfound  from  head  to  foot ;  he  fancied
that  he  was  really  as  he  flood  in  man's  opinion  and
knew  nothing  to  the  contrary.

Here  we  muft  mark  that  he  who  wimes  to  heal
himfelf  of  fuch  like  grievous  miftakes,  and  fubdue
fuch  an  unmortified  nature,  muft  take  note  of  three
points  in  himfelf.  Firft,  how  much  he  has  ftriven  to
endure  cheerfully,  for  the  fake  of  goodnefs,  all  the
rebuke,  flander,  and  mame  that  has  come  upon  him,
patiently  enduring  it  in  his  heart  without  outward  com-
plaint. Secondly,  how  much  in  the  time  of  his  rebuke,
mame,  and  diftrefs  he  has  praifed  and  glorified  God
and  his  fellow-men,  and  mown  kindnefs  to  his  neigh-
bour in  all  ways,  in  fpite  of  all  contradiction  againft
himfelf.  Thirdly,  let  him  examine  himfelf  whether
he  have  loved  with  cheerful  and  willing  heart  the
men  or  creatures  who  have  thus  perfecuted  him,  and
fmcerely  prayed  for  them  ;  and  if  he  finds  that  he  has
not  done  fo,  and  is  unwilling  to  do  fo,  but  is  hard  and
bitter  in  his  grief,  then  he  may  furely  know  and  ought
to  feel  certain  that  there  is  fbmething  falfe  in  him,
and  fome  refting  in  the  praife  of  men  and  in  his  own
fpiritual  pride,  and  that  he  is  not  dead.  He  has  not
yet  come  to  the  fecond  ftep  in  a  dying  life.

But  our  kind  Lord,  like  a  tender  mother  who  is
full  of  love,  or  a  wife  phyfician  who  defires  to  reftore
a  fick  man  to  perfect  health  by  his  powerful  remedies,
fuffers  him  to  fall  many  times,  that  he  may  learn  to


Sermon  for  St.  Stephen  s  Day.


39 l


know  himfelf,  and  thus  he  falls  into  flefhly,  unfpirit-
ual  temptations  fuch  as  he  never  experienced  in  thofe
paft  days,  in  which  he  fancied  himfelf  very  good  and
fpiritual-minded.  Out  of  mercy  God  deprives  him  of
all  underilanding,  and  overclouds  all  the  light  in  which
he  walked  aforetime,  and  fo  hedges  him  in  with  the
thorns  of  an  anguimed  confcience,  that  he  thinks
nothing  elfe  but  that  he  is  caft  off  from  the  light  of
God's  countenance ;  and  he  moans  greatly,  and  often
with  many  tears  exclaims :  "  O,  my  God,  why  haft
"  Thou  caft  me  off,  and  why  go  I  thus  mourning
"  all  the  days  of  my  pilgrimage  ?"

And  when  he  finds  himfelf  thus  from  the  crown  of
his  head  to  the  fole  of  his  foot  unlike  God,  and  at
variance  with  Him,  he  is  filled  with  the  fenfe  of  his
own  unworthinefs  and  with  difpleafure  at  himfelf,
infomuch  that  he  can  hardly  abide  himfelf;  and  then
he  thinks  many  miferable  things  about  himfelf  from
pafTages  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  fheds  many  tears  in
the  fenfe  of  his  finfulnefs,  till  he  is  weighed  down  to
the  earth  with  the  prefTure  of  God's  hand,  and  ex-
claims with  the  Prophet :  "  My  fins  are  more  in
"  number  than  the  fands  of  the  fea ;  they  have  taken
"  hold  upon  me  that  I  am  not  able  to  look  up  ;  for  I
"  have  ftirred  up  God's  anger  againft  me,  and  done
"  much  evil  in  His  fight."  Thcfe  things  he  faith,  and
more  of  the  like.  And  at  times  he  is  not  even  able  thus
to  weep  and  lament  and  then  he  is  ftill  more  tormented
with  tribulation  and  afTaults ;  for  on  the  one  hand  he
feels  a  ftrong  defire  to  caft  himfelf  down  humbly  and
die  to  himfelf,  and  on  the  other  he  is  confcious  of
great  pride  and  arrogance  about  himfelf,  till  he  is  fo

c  c  4


How  God
fometimes
fuffen  carnal
temptations
to  befet  jucb


a  man,


wherefore  be  ,
is  brought
intofucbgreat
diftrefs  and
anger  at
bimfelfy


392


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


that  be  could
fain  dejlroy
bimfelf,  and
is  well-nigh
in  defpair.


How  that
God  fo  exer-
fifes  a  man
that  He  may
purify  him
wholly,


exafperated  at  himfclf,  that  but  for  the  difhonour  to
God  he  could  fain  kill  himfelf.  I  believe  that  all  fuch
conflict  greatly  wears  out  the  intellectual  and  natural
powers,  for  it  is  fb  exceffivc,  that  one  would  rather
fuffer  onefelf  to  be  put  to  death  than  endure  it.  Yet
one  grace  is  left  him,  namely,  that  he  looks  on  it  all
as  of  no  moment,  whatever  may  be  poured  out  over
him,  if  only  he  may  not  knowingly  offend  God.
After  a  while  the  grace  of  tears  comes  back  to  him,
and  he  cries  to  God  and  fays :  "  O  Lord,  arife !  why
"  fleepeft  Thou  ?"  and  afks  Him  why  He  hath  fealed
up  the  fountains  of  His  mercy.  He  calls  upon  the
holy  angels  and  bleffed  fpirits  to  have  pity  on  him.
He  afks  the  heavens  why  they  have  become  as  brafs,
and  the  earth  wherefore  me  is  as  iron,  and  befeeches
the  very  ftones  to  have  compaffion  on  his  woes.  He
exclaims :  "  Am  I  become  as  the  blafted  hill  of
"  Gilboa,  which  was  curfed  of  David  that  no  dew
"  or  rain  mould  fall  on  it  ?  And  how  mould  my
"  wickednefs  alone  vanquilh  the  invincible  God,  and
"  force  Him  to  fhut  up  His  mercies  whofe  property  it
"  is  to  have  mercy  and  to  help  ?"

In  the  fecond  ftage  of  the  dying  life  God  leads  the
foul  through  thefe  exercifes  and  operations  of  His
hand  as  through  fire  and  water  by  turns,  until  the
workings  of  felf-fufficiency  are  driven  out  from  all  the
fecret  corners  of  the  fpirit,  and  the  man  henceforward
is  fo  utterly  afhamed  of  himfelf,  and  fb  carts  himfelf
off,  that  he  can  never  more  afcribe  any  greatnefs  to
himfelf,  but  thoroughly  perceives  all  his  own  weak-
nefs,  in  which  he  now  is  and  always  has  been ;  and
whatever  he  does  or  defires  to  do,  or  whatever  good


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


393


thing  may  be  faid  of  him,  he  does  not  take  it  to  his
own  credit,  for  he  knows  not  how  to  fay  anything
elfe  of  himlelf,  but  that  he  is  full  of  all  manner  of
infirmity.  Then  he  has  reached  the  end  of  this  ftage  ;
and  he  who  has  arrived  at  this  point  is  not  far  from
the  threfhold  of  great  mercies,  by  which  he  mall  enter
into  the  bride-chamber  of  Chrift.  Then  when  the
day  of  his  death  mall  come,  he  mall  be  brought  in  by
the  Bridegroom  with  great  rejoicing.

It  is  hard  to  die.  We  know  that  little  trees  do  not
ftrike  their  roots  deep  into  the  earth,  and  therefore
they  cannot  ftand  long  ;  fo  it  is  with  all  humble
hearts,  who  do  not  take  deep  root  in  earth,  but  in
heaven.  But  the  great  trees  which  have  waxed  high,
and  are  intended  to  endure  long  upon  the  earth,  thefe
ftrike  their  roots  deep,  and  fpread  them  out  wide  into
the  foil.  So  it  is  with  the  men  who  in  old  times
and  now  at  this  prefent  have  been  great  upon  earth,
they  muft  needs  through  many  a  ftruggle  and  death,
die  unto  themfelves  before  all  the  felf-fufficicncy  of
their  heart  can  be  broken  down,  and  they  can  be
furely  and  firmly  rooted  for  ever  in  humility.  It
does,  however,  happen  fometimes  that  the  Holy  Spirit
finds  eafier  ways  than  thofe  of  which  we  have  fpoken,
whereby  He  brings  fuch  fouls  to  Himfelf.

The  third  degree  in  which  the  corn  of  wheat  dies
belongs  only  to  the  perfecl:,  v/ho,  with  unflagging
diligence  and  ceafelefs  defirc,  arc  ever  ftriving  to  ap-
proach perfection.  Thcfe  men's  ftate  is  one  of  min-
gled joy  and  forrow,  whereby  they  are  toiled  up  and
down  ;  for  the  Holy  Spirit  is  trying  and  fitting  them,
and  preparing  them  for  perfection,  with  two  kinds  of


and  bring
him  to  un-
fpeakable
mercies.


How  this
dying  life  is
bar  deft  for
tbofe  who  are
great  upon
earth.


Of  the  third
ftage  of  a
dying  life  ;


394


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


the  ft  ate  of
tbofe  who  are
unccafenglj
afpiring  to-
wards per-
feflion,  and
all  wbofe
griefs  and
joys  are  a
fympatby
with  Cbrijl.


To  this  none
can  attain
except  be  be
emptied  of
Jetf  and  filed
with  the
Holy  Spirit.


grief  and  two  kinds  of  joy  and  happinefs,  which  they
have  ever  in  their  fight.  The  firft  grief  is  an  inward
pain  and  an  overwhelming  fbrrow  of  heart,  in  the
fenfe  of  the  unfpeakable  wrong  done  to  the  Holy
Trinity  by  all  creatures,  and  fpecially  by  the  bad
Chriftians  who  are  living  in  mortal  fin.  The  fecond
grief  confifts  in  their  fellow-feeling  for  and  experience
of  all  the  grief  and  pain  which  the  human  nature  of
Chrift  has  undergone.

The  firft  of  the  two  joys  lies  in  this  dying ;  it  is  a
clear  intuition  and  a  perfect  fruition  to  which  they  are
raifed  in  Chrift  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that
they  may  enjoy  the  fruition  of  Him,  and  triumph  in
all  the  joys  which  they  hope  and  believe  after  this  life
to  behold  in  all  their  perfect  fulnefs.  The  fecond
triumph  is  that  they  are  fulfilled  in  all  the  joys  which
the  human  nature  of  Chrift  pofTefTed.  This  joy  fuch  a
man  hopes  to  ihare  as  a  member  of  Chrift  ;  and  even  if
he  cannot  fathom  the  abyfs  of  God,  he  rejoices  therein,
for  he  fees  that  the  overflowings  of  God's  mercy  are
unfpeakable,  and  feels  that  it  is  good  for  him  that  he  is
vanquished  in  the  effort  to  comprehend  God's  power,
and  bends  down  beneath  God  in  his  felf-dying.

To  this  ftate  a  man  cannot  attain  except  he  unite
his  will  with  God,  with  an  entire  renunciation  and
perfecl:  denial  of  himfelf,  and  all  felfifh  love  of  himfelf ;
and  all  delight  in  having  his  own  will  be  over-maf-
tered  and  quenched  by  the  fhedding  abroad  in  his
heart  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  love  of  God,  fo  that
it  feem  as  though  the  Holy  Spirit  Himfelf  were  the
man's  will  and  love,  and  he  were  nothing  and  willed
nothing  on  his  own  account.  Yea,  even  the  king-


Sermon  for  St.  Stephens  Day.


395


dom  of  heaven  he  mall  defire  for  God's  fake  and  God's
glory,  becaufe  Chrift  hath  earned  it  in  order  to  fup-
ply  his  needs,  and  choofeth  to  beftow  it  on  him  as
one  of  His  fons.  When  in  this  ftage,  a  man  loveth
all  things  in  their  right  order,  God  above  all  things,
—next  the  blefled  (human)  nature  of  Chrift,  and
after  that  the  blefled  Mother  of  Chrift,  and  the  faints
of  all  degrees,  each  according  to  the  rank  which  God
hath  enabled  him  to  attain.  When  his  affections  are
thus  regulated,  he  fets  himfelf  in  the  loweft  place  at
the  wedding-feaft  of  the  Bridegroom.  And  when  the
Bridegroom  comes  who  has  bidden  him  to  the  feaft,
He  faith  unto  him  :  "  Friend  go  up  higher."  Then
he  is  endowed  with  a  new  life,  and  illuminated  with  a
new  light,  in  the  which  he  clearly  perceives  and  fees,
that  he  alone  is  the  caufe  of  his  own  evil,  that  he  can-
not, with  truth,  throw  the  blame  either  on  nature,  the
world,  or  the  devil.  Yea,  he  confcfles  that  God  has
appointed  him  all  thefe  exercifes  and  affaults  out  of
His  great  love,  in  order  that  he  may  glorify  God  in
overcoming  thefe,  and  deferve  a  higher  crown.  Fur-
ther, he  perceives  and  fees,  that  it  is  God  alone  who
has  upheld  him,  and  ftayed  his  fteps,  fo  that  he  has  no
longer  an  inclination  to  fin,  and  who  has  removed  the
occafion  to  fin  that  he  might  not  fall.  Yea  what  is
ftill  worfe,  he  is  forced  to  confefs  that  he  has  often
been  diflatiffied  that  he  was  not  able  to  derive  more
enjoyment  from  his  fins.  Thus  all  his  being  is  fwal-
lowed  up  in  forrow  and  rcmorfe  for  that  he  is  Hill
laden  with  his  boundlefs  infirmity.

But  he  hath  delight  and  joy  in  that  he  feeth  that
the  goodncfs  of  God  is  as  great  as  his  necellitics,  fo


How  that
fucb  an  one
lovetb  all
things  in
their  right
order.


Of  bis  de-
light in  God's


396


Sermon  for  St.  Stephe?is  Day.


unfathomable
goodnefs.


Of  the  griefs
and  joy  $  of
our  Lord
Jefus  Cbrijt.


that  his  life  may  well  be  called  a  dying  life  by  reafon
of  fuch  his  griefs  and  joys  which  are  conformable  and
like  unto  the  life  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift,  which
from  beginning  to  end  was  always  made  up  of  min-
gled grief  and  joy.  Grief,  in  that  He  left  His  heavenly
throne  and  came  down  into  this  world  ;  joy,  in  that  He
was  not  fevered  from  the  glory  and  honour  of  the
Father.  Grief,  in  that  He  was  a  Son  of  Man  ;  joy,  in
that  He  neverthelefs  was  and  remained  the  Son  of
God.  Grief,  becaufe  He  took  upon  Him  the  office  of
a  fervant ;  joy,  in  that  He  was  neverthelefs  a  great
Lord.  Grief,  becaufe  in  human  nature  He  was  mor-
tal, and  died  upon  the  crofs  ;  joy,  becaufe  He  was  im-
mortal according  to  His  Godhead.  Grief,  in  His  birth,
in  that  He  was  once  born  of  His  mother  ;  joy,  in  that
He  is  the  only-begotten  of  God's  heart  from  everlafting
to  everlafting.  Grief,  becaufe  He  became  in  Time
fubjecl:  to  Time ;  joy,  becaufe  He  was  Eternal  before  all
Time,  and  mall  be  fo  for  ever.  Grief,  in  that  the  Word
was  born  into  the  flem,  and  hath  dwelt  in  us  ;  joy,  in
that  the  \Vord  was  in  the  beginning  with  God,  and
God  Himfelf  was  the  Word.  Grief,  in  that  it  behoved
Him  to  be  baptized  like  any  human  fmner  by  St.  John
the  Baptift  in  the  Jordan  ;  joy,  in  that  the  voice  of
His  Heavenly  Father  faid  of  Him  :  "  This  is  my  be-
loved Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleafed."  Grief,  in
that  like  others,  fmners,  He  was  tempted  of  the  Enemy ;
joy,  in  that  the  angels  came  and  miniftered  unto  Him.
Grief,  in  that  He  ofttimes  endured  hunger  and  thirft  ;
joy,  becaufe  He  is  Himfelf  the  food  of  men  and  angels.
Grief,  in  that  He  was  often  wearied  with  His  labours  ;
joy,  becaufe  He  is  the  reft  of  all  loving  hearts  and


Sermon  for  St.  Stephen  s  Day,


397


blcfled  fpirits.  Grief,  forafmuch  as  His  holy  life  and
fufferings  ihould  remain  in  vain  for  fb  many  human
beings;  joy,  becaufe  He  Ihould  thereby  fave  His  friends.
Grief,  in  that  He  muft  needs  ailc  to  drink  water  of
the  heathen  woman  at  the  well ;  joy,  in  that  He  gave
to  that  fame  woman  to  drink  of  living  water,  fo  that
me  mould  never  thirft  again.  Grief,  in  that  He  was
wont  to  fail  in  mips  over  the  fea  ;  joy,  becaufe  He  was
wont  to  walk  dry-mod  upon  the  waves.  Grief,  in
that  He  wept  with  Martha  and  Mary  over  Lazarus  ;
joy,  in  that  He  raifed  their  brother  Lazarus  from  the
dead.  Grief,  in  that  He  was  nailed  to  the  crofs  with
nails ;  joy,  in  that  He  promifed  paradife  to  the  thief
by  His  fide.  Grief,  in  that  He  thirfted  when  hanging
the  crofs  ;  joy,  in  that  He  Ihould  thereby  redeem


on


His  elecl  from  eternal  thirft.  Grief,  when  He  faid,
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  haft  thou  forfaken  me  ?  ':
joy,  in  that  He  would  with  thefe  words  comfort  all
fad  hearts.  Grief,  in  that  His  foul  was  parted  from
His  body,  and  He  died  and  was  buried ;  joy,  becaufe
on  the  third  day  He  rofe  again  from  the  dead  with  a
glorified  body.

Thus  was  all  His  life,  from  the  manger  to  the  crofs,
a  mingled  web  of  grief  and  joy.  Which  life  He  hath
left  as  a  facred  teftamcnt  to  His  followers  in  this  pre-
fent  time,  who  are  converted  unto  His  dying  life,  that
they  may  remember  Him  when  they  drink  of  His
cup,  and  walk  as  He  hath  walked  !  May  God  help
us  fo  to  do  !  Amen.


How  that
His  life  ii  a
tejlament
unto  as.


XXVI.

Sermon   for  St.  Peter's   Day.


Of  brotherly  rebuke  and  admonition,  how  far  it  is  advifable  and
feemly  or  not,  and  especially  how  prelates  and  governors  ought  to
demean  tbemfelves  toward  their  fubjeffs.


2  TIM.  iv.  2.  — "  Reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long-fuffering  and  doftrine."


How  that
ail  pajlors
and  tnagif-
trates  Jbould
pofiefs  long-
fuffering  and
doflrine,  and
rebuke  Jin-
ners  to  bring
them  to
amendment.


How  that
they  mujl  alfo


HIS  is  the  lefTon  which  St.  Paul  gives  to
his  beloved  difciple  Timothy,  whom  he
fet  to  rule  over  men,  and  it  equally  be-
hoves all  paftors  of  fouls  and  magistrates,
to  pofTefs  thefe  two  things,  —  long-fuf-
fering and  doctrine.

Firft,  it  is  their  office  to  rebuke  all  open  iinners,
whom  they  may  poffibly  bring  to  a  better  way,  and
efpecially  thofe  over  whom  they  are  fet  in  authority,
that  they  may  reveal  the  truth  unto  them,  for  this  is
needful,  and  in  many  places  Scripture  doth  tell  us
how  we  ought  to  teach,  rebuke,  and  exhort  thofe  who
are  committed  to  our  charge,  each  according  to  the
office  which  he  holds,  as  St.  Gregory  has  fufficiently
fhown  and  fet  forth  in  his  Paftoral,  wherefore  we  will
refrain  for  the  prefent  from  faying  more  on  that  point.
But  we  will  rather  turn  to  the  iecond  point,  which
is  more  fpiritual,  teaching  a  man  to  look  within  and


Sermon  for  St.  Peter  s  Day.


399


judge  himfelf,  feeing  that  he  who  defires  to  become  a
fpiritual  man  muft  not  be  ever  taking  note  of  others,
and  above  all  of  their  fins,  left  he  fall  into  wrath  and
bitternefs,  and  ajudgingfpirit  towards  his  neighbours.
O  children,  this  works  fuch  great  mifchief  in  a  man's
foul,  as  it  is  miferable  to  think  of;  wherefore,  as  you
love  God,  mun  this  evil  temper,  and  turn  your  eyes
full  upon  yourfelves,  and  fee  if  you  cannot  difcover  the
fame  fault  in  yourfelves,  either  in  times  paft  or  now-a-
days.  And  if  you  find  it,  remember  how  that  it  is
God's  appointing  that  you  mould  now  behold  this  fin
in  another  in  order  that  you  may  be  brought  to  ac-
knowledge and  repent  of  it ;  and  amend  your  ways
and  pray  for  your  brother  that  God  may  grant  him
repentance  and  amendment,  according  to  His  Divine
Will.  Thus  a  good  heart  draws  amendment  from  the
fins  of  others,  and  is  guarded  from  all  harm  judgment
and  wrath,  and  preferves  an  even  temper,  while  an
evil  heart  puts  the  worft  interpretation  on  all  that  it
fees  and  turns  it  to  its  own  hurt.  Thus  is  a  good
man  able  to  maintain  inviolate  a  due  love  and  loyalty
towards  his  fellow-man.  Further,  this  generous  love
makes  him  hold  others  innocent  in  his  heart :  even
when  he  fees  infirmity  or  fault  in  his  neighbour,  he
reflects  that  very  likely  all  is  not  as  it  feems  on  the
outfide,  but  the  ad:  may  have  been  done  with  a  good
intention ;  or  elfe  he  thinks  that  God  may  have  per-
mitted it  to  take  place  for  an  admonition  and  leflbn  to
himfelf;  or  again,  as  an  opportunity  for  him  to  exercife
felt-control  and  to  learn  to  die  unto  himfelf,  by  the
patient  endurance  of  and  forbearance  towards  the
faults  of  his  neighbours,  even  as  God  has  often  borne


look  within
and  judge
tbemfelves,
and  put  the
beft  interpre-
tation they
can  upon  the
condufi  of
others,


and  have


400


Sermon  for  St.  Peter  s  Day.


patience  tvitb
their  Jtns.


Thefpirit
and  mode  in
which  rebuke
Jhould  be  ad-
minijiered.


many  wrongs  from  him,  and  had  patience  with  his
fins.  And  this  would  often  tend  more  to  his  neigh-
bour's improvement  than  all  the  efforts  he  could  make
for  it  in  the  way  of  reproofs  or  chaftifements,  even  if
they  were  done  in  love  (though  indeed  we  often  ima-
gine that  our  reproofs  are  given  in  love  when  it  is  in
truth  far  other  wile).  For  I  tell  thee,  dear  child,  if  thou
couldft  conquer  thyfelf  by  long-iuffering  and  gentle-
nefs  and  the  purenefs  of  thy  heart,  thou  wouldft  have
vanquifhed  all  thine  enemies.  It  would  be  better  for
thee  than  if  thou  hadft  won  the  hearts  of  all  the
world  by  thy  writings  and  wifdom,  and  hadft  mifcr-
ably  deftroyed  thine  own  foul  by  paffing  judgment  on
thy  neighbours  ;  for  the  Lord  fays :  "  And  why  be-
"  holdeft  thou  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye,
"  but  confidereft  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own
"  eye  ? "

In  thus  fpeaking,  I  except  thofe  who  are  bound  by
their  office  in  the  holy  Chriftian  Church  to  rebuke
others.  Let  them  wifely  beware  how  they  reprove,
and  for  what  caufes,  fo  that  they  rebuke  none  with  an
irritable  demeanour,  or  with  harm  and  angry  words,
from  which  much  trouble  and  toil  do  fpring,  for  that
they  have  no  right  to  do,  but  it  is  permitted  to  them
to  reprove  thofe  who  arc  under  them  for  their  own
amendment.  But  alas  !  it  happens  for  the  moft  part
now-a-days  that  thofe  who  occupy  the  higheft  places
do  often  and  greatly  forget  themfelves  in  thefe  rcfpecls,
and  hence  their  rebukes  do  not  produce  any  amend-
ment, but  only  anger  and  alienation  of  heart.  For  if
they  were  to  inftruft  thofe  who  are  under  their  care
in  the  fear  of  God,  in  fuch  wife  that  the  people  could


Sermon  for  St.  Peter  s  Day.


401


mark  and  be  fure  that  it  was  done  folely  for  the  fay-
ing of  their  fouls,  they  would  be  much  the  more
ready  to  fet  themfelves  to  amend,  and  would  be  con-
tent,— but  now,  alas  !  they  fee  that  their  fuperiors  are
only  feeking  their  own  glory  and  profit,  and  taking
upon  themfelves  wrongfully  to  keep  them  down  and
defraud  them  of  their  juft  rights,  and  therefore  reproof
only  makes  them  the  more  refractory  and  indignant.
And  there  are  many  in  authority  who  do  really  believe
that  they  rebuke  thofe  under  them  from  a  reverence
for  righteoufnefs,  and  yet  are  doing  it  from  a  wrath-
ful, domineering,  and  arrogant  fpirit ;  and  what  they
think  they  are  doing  from  hatred  to  fin,  they  are
doing  from  hatred  to  men.

But  I  befeech  you  examine  yourfelves,  whether  you
do  in  truth  love  thofe  whom  you  are  puniming  fb
bitterly  out  of  reverence  and  zeal  for  righteoufnefs  as
you  fuppofe.  For  when  we  fee  men  puniming  and
oppreflmg  with  fuch  vehemence  thole  who  are  under
them,  or  treating  them  fo  harlhly  with  fharp  words
and  four  looks,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  there  is  more
reproof  given  out  of  crabbed  impatience,  than  for  the
fake  of  righteoufnefs  from  the  true  ground  of  charity
and  kindnefs,  especially  by  thofe  who  have  not  yet
experienced  the  inward  joy  of  hearty  fweetnefs  and
godly  love  :  for  the  foul  that  has  not  yet  experienced
inward  love  and  divine  fweetnefs  does  not  know  how
to  hold  a  difcreet  mien  and  juft  language  in  rebuking  ;
but  genuine  love  teaches  us  how  we  ought  to  treat
thofe  who  are  worthy  of  punifhment.

Now  let  him  w-ho  has  to  punifh  in  virtue  of  his
office  firft  take  account  of  God's  difhonour  and  the


D  D


Of  the  danger
of  mijlaking
our  impa-
tience and
wrath  Jor  a
zeal  for
rigbteoufnefs.


How  that  fu-
periors Jbould


402


Sermon  for  St.  Peter's  Day.


confider,  and
not  take  their
own  revenge,
and  punijb
with  gcntle-
neff.


How  they
Jhould  love
all,  without
unjuft  par-
tiality, and
guide  their
Jtock  into
virtue.


injury  done  to  the  fouls  of  his  flock,  and  then  rebuke
with  fweet,  loving  words  and  patient  demeanour  and
geftures,  fo  that  the  weak  mall  be  able  to  mark  that
he  is  feeking  and  purpofing  their  welfare  alone,
and  nothing  elfe.  And  if  in  the  difpenfations  of
God's  Providence  it  mould  happen  that  thofe  who
are  fubjecl:  mould  at  times  rife  up  and  offend  by
licenfe  and  prefumptuous  irreverence  againft  their
fuperiors,  the  latter  ought  not  in  any  wile  to  regard
or  revenge  it,  fo  far  as  that  may  be,  without  fcandal
to  the  reft  of  their  fubjefts  ;  for  if  they  revenge
themfelves  they  fall  under  fufpicion  of  felfifh  motives,
and  it  is  likely  that  God  will  not  be  able  to  work  any
fruit  through  them  ;  but  they  muft  rather  treat  fuch
offenders  with  more  patience,  kinder  words  and  acls,
than  they  do  others.  For  this  is  commonly  the
greateft  temptation  which  befalls  thofe  in  authority,
by  which  they  for  the  moft  either  win  or  lofe  the
greateft  reward  of  their  labours  ;  wherefore  they  mould
ever  be  on  their  guard,  for  gentlenefs  and  a  readinefs
to  forgive  injuries  is  the  beft  virtue  that  a  ruler  can
poflefs.

They  fhall  mow  no  partiality  in  their  affections,
neither  for  their  own  glory  nor  yet  towards  particular
perfons,  but  they  mall  embrace  all  their  flock  in  the
arms  of  a  common  love,  as  a  mother  does  her  children.
To  the  weak  they  mould  ever  mow  the  greateft  love
and  care,  and  without  ceafmg  lift  up  their  hearts  unto
God  in  prayer,  earneftly  befeeching  Him  to  guard
and  defend  the  people  committed  to  their  charge,
and  not  indulging  in  any  felf-gloriflcation.  Likewife,
fo  far  as  it  refts  with  them,  let  them  be  the  firft  to  do


Sermon  for  St.  Peter  s  Day.


403


fuch  works  as  they  would  wifh  to  fee  their  people  do  :
for  fo  it  ftands,  that,  with  the  help  of  God,  all  may
be  accomplifhed  to  a  good  end,  when  thoie  in  au-
thority are  inclined  to  virtue,  for  then  their  fubjecls
muft  needs  follow  as  they  lead,  even  though  they
may  have  been  beforehand  inclined  to  all  evil  and  vice,
and  hoftile  to  their  fuperiors.

But  for  thofe  who  have  received  no  commiffion  to
govern  other  men,  but  {land  in  a  private  character
without  office,  it  is  needful  that  they  fecretly  judge
themfelves  inwardly,  and  beware  of  judging  all  things
without,  for  in  fuch  judgments  we  do  commonly  err,
and  the  true  pofition  of  things  is  generally  very  far
otherwife  from  that  which  it  appears  to  us,  as  we
often  come  to  difcover  afterwards.  On  this  point  re-
member the  proverb :  "  He  is  a  wife  man  who  can
"  turn  all  things  to  the  beft."

May  God  help  us  fo  to  do  !     Amen.


How  tbofe
who  are  not
governors
Jbould  not
take  upon
tbemf elves  to
judge  others.


D  2


XXVII.

Sermon  on  a  Martyr's   Day.


Of  three  forts  of  fpintual  temptation  by  which  holy  men  are  fecretly
ajjailed  ;   to  wit :  fpintual  unchaftity,  covet  oufnefs,  and  pride.


JAMES,  i.  12.  — "  BlefTed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation;  for  when  he  is  tried  he  mall
receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promifed  to  them  that  love  Him."


How  that  this
life  is  full  of
temptation,
but  it  is  all
for  our  proft.


as   we


LL  our  life  (fays  Job),  so  long
are  upon  earth,  is  full  of  ftruggle  and
temptation,  infomuch  that  this  life  is
not  called  a  life  by  the  Saints,  but  a
temptation.  When  one  temptation  is
over,  ftraightway  others  are  awaiting  us,  and  the  caufe
is  that  our  Lord  will  have  us  to  go  and  bring  forth
fruit ;  and  the  fruit  is  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  God
and  go  forward ;  for  the  fruit  confifts  in  the  very
overcoming  of  temptation,  from  which  we  may  draw
out  a  hidden  fpiritual  fweetnefs,  as  the  bees  suck
honey  from  the  thorn-bufhes  as  well  as  from  all  other
flowers.  He  who  has  not  been  tempted,  knows  no-
thing, nor  lives  as  yet,  fay  the  wife  man  Solomon,
and  the  holy  teacher  St.  Bernard.  We  find  more
than  a  thoufand  testimonies  in  Scripture  to  the  great
profit  of  temptation ;  for  it  is  the  fpecial  fign  of  the
love  of  God  towards  a  man  for  him  to  be  tempted
and  yet  kept  from  falling ;  for  thus  he  muft  and  mall


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


405


of  a  certainty  receive  the  crown,  like  the  martyr
whofe  death  the  Chriftian  Church  commemorates
this  day,  finging  of  him  that  he  is  blefTcd  becaufe  he
hath  endured  temptation,  and  has  been  tried  and
proved  therein,  that  he  might  receive  the  crown  of
life  which  the  Lord  has  promifed  to  them  that  love
Him.

Now  obferve,  dear  children,  that  there  are  two
kinds  of  temptation.  The  one  is  carnal,  and  has  its
fphere  in  the  kingdom  of  fenfe  in  this  prefent  life,
as  when  a  man  is  tempted  through  his  outward  fenfes
to  feek  his  happinefs  in  other  men,  be  they  friends
or  relations,  or  any  others,  or  to  undue  fondnefs  for
the  outward  mow  of  life,  fuch  as  drefs,  jewels,  books,
inftruments,  a  pleafant  abode,  and  other  tranfitory
creatures,  and  wilfully  cleaves  thereunto  with  manifold
affections,  and  they  ftick  to  him  like  burrs.  At  times
our  outward  fenfes  are  left  in  peace,  and  are  quit  of
all  aiTaults,  yet  is  the  man  ftrangely  affaulted  inwardly
in  his  flem  and  blood  by  unfeemly  thoughts ;  but,
however  impure  may  be  thefe  temptations,  and  how-
ever horrible  they  may  look,  they  cannot  of  them-
felves  defile  a  man's  purity.  St.  Gregory  fays :
"  Temptations  do  not  defile  a  man  except  through
"  his  own  flacknefs  and  want  of  diligence  in  turning
"  afide  from  them."

The  other  fort  of  temptation  is  inward  and  fpiritual,
and  has  its  feat  in  the  realm  of  the  intellecl:.  The
workings  of  the  Spirit  and  of  Nature  are  fo  mingled
together  and  interwoven  as  long  as  we  are  in  this
prefent  life,  that  all  our  inward  exercifes  and  convcrlc
with  God  arc  carried  on  at  the  fame  time  with  all

D  D  3


Of  outward
and  carnal
temptations.


Of  inward
temptations
in  the  intel-
lefl.


406


Sermon  o?i  a  Martyr  s  Day.


\
1 6.


Offpiritual
felf-feeking  in
the  indulgence
of  emotion.


the  motions  and  workings  of  nature.  Moreover,  our
Lord  has  fo  ordained  it  for  our  good,  that  the  Evil
Angel,  Satan,  has  power  to  tranfform  himfelf  before
the  inward  eye  of  the  mind  into  an  Angel  of  Light ;
and  he  does  it  moft  of  all  at  thofe  times  when  a  man
gathers  up  all  his  powers  to  enter  into  communion
writh  God.  Obferve,  dear  children,  that  St.  John
divides  fin  into  three  kinds,  when  he  fays,  all  that  is
of  the  world  is  "  the  luft  of  the  flefh,  and  the  luft  of
"  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life."  As  thefe  three
fins  that  reign  in  the  world  exift  together  in  the  flem,
fo  do  they  alfb  reign  inwardly  in  the  mind,  under
a  fpiritual  guife.  Outward  fins  are  very  clear  and
eafy  to  fee,  if  a  man  have  a  mind  to  watch  him-
felf; but  thefe  mental  fins  are  in  many  ways  more
covert,  and  can  put  on  fuch  a  good  face,  that  we
are  often  hardly  aware  of  the  grievous  fall  that  is
clofe  at  hand.

Now  mark  :  it  is  to  be  counted  as  fpiritual  un-
chaftity  or  wantonnefs,  when  a  man  feeks  himfelf  too
much,  and  with  eager  defire  ftrives  after  warmth  and
fenfible  devoutnefs,  to  the  end  that  he  may  always
be  in  a  ftate  of  contentment,  and  none  may  have  a
right  to  reprove  him,  though  he  mould  give  himfelf  to
his  own  fpecial  prayers  and  religious  exercifes,  while
leaving  unfulfilled  the  work  that  is  his  duty.  When
fuch  an  one  has  none  of  thefe  fweet  emotions,  he  is
quite  troubled  and  becomes  peevifh  and  very  impatient
in  the  trifling  mifhaps  that  befall  him,  though  they
are  really  of  no  importance  whatever ;  and  when  he
cannot  enjoy  or  obtain  inward  peace  according  to  his
defire,  he  complains  of  the  great  grievances  and  tempta-


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


407


tions  which  he  has  to  endure.      St.  Bernard  fays  that
our   Lord  bcftows    thefe   graces   of  fenfible   emotion
upon  fuch  as  have  done  nothing  to  defcrve  them  nor
are  worthy  of  them,  but  He  does  this  in  mercy,  that
He  may  draw  fuch  to  His  love ;   and  He  withholds
thcfe  gifts  from  fome  who  have  undergone  long  and
painful  exercifes,  and  were  well  fit  to  receive  them  ;
yea  from  fome  He  withholds  them  all  their  life  long,
but  He  will  give  them  a  great  recompenfe  for  it  in
the  next  life.      The  reafbn  of  His  thus  withholding
fcnfible  delight  is   that   our  fpiritual  fruitfulnefs  and
higheft  blefledneis  do  not  lie  therein,  but  in  our  in-
ward trufting  and  clinging  to  God,  in  our  not  feeking
ourfelves  either  in  fbrrow  or  joy,  but  through  joy  and
forrow  devoting  ourfelves  to  God,  and  like  poor  un-
worthy fervants  offering  ourfelves  to  Him  at  our  own
cofts,  though  we  mould  have  to  ferve  Him  thus  for
ever.     Yet  it  may  indeed  be  permitted  to  a  young,
weak  Chriftian,  at  the  outfet  of  his  courfe,  to  pray
for  fuch  graces  or  gifts  from  our  good  God,  in  order
to  be  able  to  glorify  Him  with  the  greater  activity,
and  to   be   grounded   the   more   firmly  in    His  love.
But  when  we  defire  fuch  inward  fervours  and  fweet
peace  (which  are  His  gifts  and  not  our  deferts)  more
for  their  own  fakes  than  the  Giver  Himfelf,  we  fall
into  fpiritual  wantonnefs  and  black  difloyalty,  which
our  good  Lord  has  not  defcrved  at  our  hands  with
His  utter  renunciation  of  Himfelf  outwardly  and  in-
wardly .

Spiritual  covetoufnefs  is  when  a  man  is  always
coxcting  to  have  more  than  bare  neceflaries  while
purfuing  this  earthly  pilgrimage.  For  what  more

D  D  4


SenfibU  de-
light in  Di-
vine things
not  beftowed
in  proportion
to  our  wortbi-
nefs  or  un-
wortbinefs.


Of  fpiritual
covetoufncfsi


408


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


Matt,  xxvii.
46.


How  we  muft
not  be  dif-
couraged  by
the  confe-
quences  of  our
own  tranf-
grejjions,  but
ever  prefs
forward,  and
trujl  in  God.

Prov.  xxiv.
1 6.


mould  a  pilgrim  take  with  him  by  the  way  than  fuch
things  as  are  needful  to  fuftain  him  till  he  come  fafcly
to  his  home  ?  Believe  me,  it  is  a  great  blemifh  in
true  outward  poverty  to  defire  aught  beyond  nc-
ceflaries  ;  fo  likewife  it  is  a  ftill  greater  blemim  in
the  inward  poverty  of  the  fpirit.  Ah  !  who  has  ever
been  fo  poor  as  He,  who,  in  utter  poornefs  of  fpirit,
flood  forfaken  by  Heaven  and  by  the  creatures,  caft
out  alone  in  utter  exile,  when  He  fent  forth  that
bitter  cry  :  "  My  God,  my  God  !  why  haft  Thou
"  forfaken  me  ?"  And  this  was  all  that  He  might  be
an  enfample  unto  us,  to  comfort  our  poverty  and  be-
reavement by  teaching  us  true  fubmiilion.  I  hear
thee  faying :  "  Yes  ;  if  it  were  not  my  own  fault,  and
"  if  I  had  not  failed  to  receive  the  blefling  through
"  my  own  heedleflhefs,  or  thrown  it  away  by  my  own
"  guilty  folly,  I  could  bear  it  all  the  better  ;  what
"  mould  I  then  have  to  mourn  over  ?  But  now  it
"  is  all  my  own  doing  :  I  have  brought  the  mifchief
"  upon  myfelf."  I  anfwer :  Do  not  let  this  lead  thee
aftray ;  doft  thou  not  know  how  that  it  is  written :  "The
"juft  man  falleth  feven  times,  and  rifeth  up  again;"
and  doft  thou  think  to  ftand  always  ?  Yes  ;  I  affert  and
confefs  with  thee,  that  it  is  thine  own  fault,  that  thou
haft  brought  it  upon  thyfelf,  and  well  deferred  it ;  yet,
neverthelefs,  it  is  better  that  thou  mouldft,  with  firm
truft,  pray  our  kind  God  for  His  grace  (who  knows  thy
weaknefs,  and  is  ready  to  forgive  thy  trefpaffes  feventy
and  feven  times  in  a  day),  than  that  thou  mouldft
thus  drive  thyfelf  back  in  thy  courfe  with  fuch  faint-
heartednefs.  O  child,  haft  thou  fallen  ?  arife,  and  go,
with  childlike  truft,  to  thy  Father,  like  the  prodigal


Serfnon  on  a  Martyr '  s  Day.


409


fon,  and  humbly  fay,  with  heart  and  mouth  :  "  Father,
"  I  have  finned  againft  heaven,  and  before  thee,  and
"  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  ion  ;  make  me
"  as  one  of  thy  hired  fervants."  And  what  will  thy
Heavenly  Father  do  but  what  that  father  did  in  the
parable  ?  Affuredly  He  will  not  change  His  efTence,
which  is  love,  for  the  fake  of  thy  mifdoings.  Is  it
not  His  own  precious  treafure,  and  a  fmall  thing  with
Him  to  forgive  thee  thy  trefpafles,  if  thou  believe  in
Him  ?  for  His  hand  is  not  fhortened  that  it  cannot
make  thee  fit  to  be  faved.  Therefore,  beware  of  fpi-
ritual  covetoufnefs ;  for  the  poorer  thou  art  in  thine
own  eyes  when  thou  comeft  to  Him,  the  more  ac-
ceptable art  thou  in  His  fight,  and  the  more  richly
He  will  endow  thee  and  clothe  thee  out  of  His
treafures.

Spiritual  pride  is  when  a  man  is  not  willing  to  be
put  to  mame  in  his  own  eyes  on  account  of  his  tranf-
greflions,  but  is  ever  trying  to  excufe  and  glofs  over
his  faults,  and  is  never  willing  to  abafe  himfelf,  even
in  fmall  matters.  And  this  often  leads  people  to
make  many  ufelcfs  and  wrong  fpeeches  in  order  to
excufe  themfelves  and  to  juftify  themfelves  in  every
refpecl: ;  as  much  as  to  fay,  I  am  not  the  man  to  be
accufed  of  this  and  that ;  and  they  are  unwilling  to
remember,  or  confider,  that  he  who  cannot  clear  him-
felf with  the  fimple  truth  will  not  be  helped  by  the
untruths  by  which  he  often  adds  to  his  guilt ;  and
that  a  man  who  humbles  himfelf  before  God  is  more
in  his  eyes  than  an  arrogant,  feif-righteous  man,  who
deems  himfelf  able  to  anfwer  for  all  his  deeds  with  his
own  righteoufnefs.  Hearken,  dear  child  ;  w  hat  does  all


Luke,  xv.
1 8,  19.


Of  Spiritual
pride,  or  a
jelf-juftifying
Spirit.


4io


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


Is.  Ixiv.  6.


Three  rules
to  avoid  tbefe
three  fats.
All  feeming
evil  that
makes  us  more
like  Chrijt  is
jrom  God.


our  righteoufnefs  come  to  at  laft  ?  Ifaiah  fays  :  "  All
"  our  righteoufnefles  are  as  filthy  rags  ;"  and  however
great  our  righteoufnefs  is,  or  might  become,  yet,  if  the
Lord  mould  fit  in  judgment  on  us,  without  doubt  we
mould  have  to  confefs  ourfelves  His  debtors,  and  place
all  our  hope  in  His  mercy.  Our  Lord  often  difciplines  a
man  by  his  own  failings,  if  he  is  humble  under  them
and  throws  himfelf  at  God's  feet ;  for  God  will  have
every  knee  to  bend  before  Him,  and  will  have  the
praife  and  glory  of  all  goodnefs.  Hence  we  may  ob-
ferve  that  there  is  often  a  fecret  pride  within  us  from
which  many  unfeemly  fruits  do  grow.  But  he  who
gives  diligence  to  beware  of  fpiritual  wantonnefs,
covetoufnefs  and  pride,  mall  be  kept  from  ftraying
out  of  God's  ways,  or  falling  into  error  in  his  inward
exercifes.

But  in  order  to  keep  yourfelves  from  thefe  fins,  and
withftand  this  kind  of  temptation,  you  mufl  obferve
three  rules  which  I  will  tell  you.  The  firft  is  :  none
of  the  inward  difficulties  that  rife  up  from  within,  or
the  adverfe  circumftances  that  ftay  our  hands  from
working,  by  which  we  are  drawn  or  preffed  into  like-
nefs  and  conformity  to  the  humble  image  of  Chrift
and  His  Saints  (not  alone  outwardly,  but  that  of
their  inward  condition),  can  be  the  work  either  of
evil  fpirits  or  of  nature,  but  without  a  doubt  come
from  God.  For  He  is  the  Higheft  Good,  and  from
the  Higheft  Good  nought  but  what  is  good  can  flow  ;
and  all  the  goodnefs  that  God  gives  us  of  His  ftores,
and  that  we  render  back  again  to  Him,  has  pro-
ceeded from  Him  as  its  fource  ;  juft  as  all  ftreams
flow  back  again  to  their  fource,  the  Ocean  whence


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


411


they  have  arifen,  and  all  things  do  rejoice  in  their
return.  But  all  that  draws  us  and  leads  us  afide  from
fuch  conformity  and  likenefs  proceeds  without  doubt
from  the  Spirit  of  Evil,  who  is  ever  on  the  watch  to
difturb  and  draw  us  down,  as  our  Lord  faid :  "  He
"  who  is  not  with  me  is  againft  me,  and  he  who  ga-
"  thereth  not  with  me,  fcattereth."  This  rule  is
againft  the  firft  fpiritual  vice,  that  of  wantonnefs.

The  fecond  rule  is :  Whatever  befalls  a  man  inwardly,
whereby  he  is  brought  to  a  clofer  and  more  fenfible
gathering  up  of  all  his  affections  and  impulfes,  in  fin-
glcnefs  of  heart,  into  a  fteadfaft  truft  in  and  love  of  the
Father's  loving-kindnefs  and  not  his  own  works  and
experiences,  this  is  from  God.  And  he  who  at  all  times
fees  himfelf  to  be  a  poor  beggar,  however  fair  his
works  may  feem,  the  more  narrowly  he  looks  into  his
own  heart,  and  the  more  mattery  he  gains  over  him-
felf, the  more  does  he  difcover  his  own  nakednefs  of
all  virtue.  He  becomes  aware  in  himfelf  that  he  is
nothing  but  an  empty,  worthlefs  vcflel,  fitted  not  unto
honour  but  unto  eternal  deftru&ion,  which  vefTel  God
alone  muft  and  will  fill  with  His  grace.  When  we
cling  to  Him,  fuffer  Him  to  have  accefs  to  our  fpirits,
and  do  not  defend  ourfelves  with  ourfelves,  that  work
is  no  doubt  of  God,  by  which  a  man  is  driven  into
himfelf  to  learn  his  own  poverty.  But  the  fuggeftions
of  the  Enemy  and  of  nature  rob  and  defpoil  a  man  of
all  the  benefits  of  his  virtues ;  and  this  is  the  cafe
whenever  a  man  docs  not  know  his  own  real  ftate,
and  thinks  to  pofTcfs  what  he  never  had,  and  fays  (as
it  is  written) :  "  I  am  rich,  and  increafed  with  goods,
"  and  have  need  of  nothing,"  and  knows  not  that  he


411  that

Jbows  us  our
own  poverty
if  of  God.


Rev.  iii.  17.


412


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


All  that
brings  us  to
fubmijjton  is
of  God.


How  that  all
beings,  bad  or
good,feek  to
draw  others
into  their  own
likenefs.


"  is  wretched,  and  miferable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and
"  naked."  This  is  the  rule  againft  fpiritual  covetouf-
nefs.

The  third  rule  is :  Whatever  befalls  a  man  by
which  he  is  leflened  and  humbled  in  his  own  in-
moft  emotions,  and  which  makes  him  bend  under
the  Almighty  Hand  of  God,  under  all  creatures,
abating  and  annihilating  himfelf  in  true  humility,
this  comes  no  doubt  from  God.  For  as  Lucifer
and  his  followers  defired  to  be  great  and  lofty,
and  were  therefore  thruft  down  from  heaven,  fo
are  we  led  back  again  to  heaven  by  felf-abafe-
ment,  as  it  was  faid  of  the  Kings  of  the  Eaft  that
they  travelled  back  into  their  own  land  again  by
another  way.

Thus  does  every  being  do  and  teach  according  to  that
which  is  his  effence,  drawing  into  his  own  likenefs  all
whom  there  are  to  draw,  as  far  as  in  him  lies.  The
Evil  Spirit  is  puffed  up  in  his  own  obftinate  conceit,
and  in  the  loftinefs  of  his  pride  is  fo  hardened  and
unbending  in  his  own  ftiff-necked  will  and  purpofe,
that  neither  to  win  heaven  nor  for  anything  elfe,  will
he  humble  himfelf  for  one  moment,  fo  fixed  is  he  in
his  evil  mind.  So  likewise  is  it  with  all  the  proud
who  have  learnt  of  him  to  truft  in  their  own  under-
ftandings  above  all  other  men's  opinion  and  rcafon  ;
wherefore  they  fall  into  ftrife  and  variance  with  their
neighbours,  which  begets  much  trouble  and  difquiet
of  heart,  and  hence  arife  many  breaches  of  brotherly
love.  They  will  take  reproof  from  none,  and  grow
fo  hardened  in  their  own  obftinate  evil  will,  and  fet
upon  their  purpofes,  that  they  rafhly  dare  to  with-


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


ftand  all  the  admonitions  of  God  and  His  friends,
as  the  Jewifh  fcribes  and  priefts  withftood  our  blefled
Lord ;  and  of  fuch  the  prophet  Ifaiah,  fpeaking  in  the
perfon  of  Chrift,  complains  :  "  I  have  fpread  out  my
"  hands  all  the  day  unto  a  rebellious  people,  which
"  walketh  in  a  way  that  was  not  good,  after  their
"  own  thoughts/'

But  our  blefled  Lord,  on  the  contrary,  is  meek
and  humble,  yea,  He  is  himfclf  the  eflence  of  hu-
mility, whcreunto  He  is  unceafingly  drawing  all  men
whom  there  are  to  draw,  and  who  are  walling  to
be  drawn.  His  Being  is  the  caufe,  the  eflence,  and
the  origin  of  all  things.  He  is  the  life  of  the
living,  the  refurre&ion  of  the  dead,  the  reftorer  of  all
deformity  and  unfitnefs,  and  of  thofe  who  have  cor-
rupted and  defpoiled  themfelves  through  fin.  He
calleth  back  thofe  who  have  fallen  away  and  wan-
dered from  His  fold.  He  raifeth  up  and  confirmcth
thofe  who  are  in  temptation.  He  is  the  bulwark  of
those  who  ftand,  the  awakener  and  guide  of  all  who  are
looking  and  ilriving  upwards  towards  Him,  the  fource
of  all  light,  the  lamp  of  all  who  walk  in  light,  the
revealer  of  myfteries,  in  fo  far  as  it  is  fitting  for  us  to
know,  and  the  beginning  of  all  beginnings.  His
Eflence  is  incomprehenfible,  unfpeakable,  and  without
a  name.  Therefore  mould  we  honour  and  glorify
His  unfpeakable  myftery  with  holy  reverence  and  fi-
lence,  and  nevermore  covet  to  fathom  or  to  tafte
aught  except  in  fo  far  as  is  to  His  honour  and  to  our
profit,  but  ever  with  fit  reverence  and  devoutnefs  turn
with  all  our  might  in  fhamefaced  awe  to  contemplate
the  radiance  of  His  bright  and  fpotlcfs  mirror.  It  be-


h.  Ixv.  2.


Of  the  humi-
lity and  glory
of  our  Ble/ed
Lord  Jejus
Cbrijl.


414


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


How  toe  muft
not  a/fire  to
high  things
till  called
thereto  of
God.


Of 'receiving
Cbrift  in  His
tranffgura-
tion.


hoves  man  to  be  ever  in  fear  and  to  bethink  him  of
the  word  that  God,  our  Lord,  fpake  by  the  mouth
of  Mofes :  "  If  a  man  or  a  beaft  touch  the  mountain,
"  he  mall  be  ftoned ;"  which  fignifies  that  our  animal
fenfes  muft  not  prefume  to  climb  the  Mount  of  the
Divine  EiTence,  but  muft  rather  keep  themfelyes  be-
low and  take  the  meaneft  place,  until  the  time  come
when  it  mall  be  faid  unto  man  :  "  Friend,  come  up
higher/'  And  then  he  mail  not  go  up  of  himfelf,
but  he  mall  fuffer  himfelf  to  be  led  upwards,  and  his
fenfual  nature  mall  be  purified  and  endowed  with  the
light  of  God,  whereby  he  mall  receive  more  light
than  he  could  ever  win  by  all  his  great  and  ftrenuous
labour.  For  the  Divine  Nature  of  Chrift  is  a  magnet
that  draws  unto  itfelf  all  fpirits  and  hearts  that  bear
its  likenefs,  and  daily  unites  them  to  itfelf  through
love.

Now  Richardus  fays  :  "  I  receive  Chrift  not  alone  on
"  the  crofs,  but  alfo  in  His  transfiguration  on  Mount
"  Tabor.  But  I  may  not  receive  Him  there  except  I
"  find  James,  Peter  and  John,  Moles  and  Elias  with
"  Him,  who  bear  witnefs  to  me  that  it  is  truly  Chrift."
That  is  to  fay  :  in  all  our  diftrefles,  in  all  our  painful
inward  deftitution,  we  may  boldly  believe  that  Chrift
is  prefent  with  us  ;  but  if  He  appears  to  us  on  the
Mount  of  inward  Contemplation,  we  need  thefe
witnefTes  that  we  may  not  enjoy  the  fruition  of  His
gifts  in  a  wanton  fpirit  for  the  fatiffaclion  of  our  own
dcfires,  nor  too  ardently  covet  more  of  His  good  gifts
than  we  can  put  to  a  good  ufe  ;  but  may  ever  abafe
ourfelves  fo  thoroughly  that  we  fall  not  into  any  fpi-
ritual  pride.  Thefe  are  the  true  witnefTes  that  we


Sermon  on  a  Martyr  s  Day.


may  freely  receive  Chrift  in  His  glory  on  the  heights
of  Mount  Tabor  without  hindrance  or  error,  for
where  thefe  witnefles  are  of  a  truth,  there  we  cannot
be  deceived  by  the  Spirit  of  Falfehood.  May  Almighty
God  help  us  fo  to  do  !  Amen.


F  I  N  I  S


LONDON  :

Printed  by  SPOTTISWOODE  &  Co.
New-ftreet-Square.


December,  1856.


NEW  AND   STANDARD   WORKS,


PUBLISHED   BY


SMITH,  ELDER  AND  CO.,

65,  CORNHTLL,  LONDON.


ust


I.


II.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.


LIFE    AND    SERMONS    OF    DR.   JOHN

TAULER,  of  Strasburg  (1340).  Translated  by  Miss
SUSANNA  WINKWORTH.  With  Notices  of  Tauler's  Life
and  Times,  and  some  account  of  the  "  Friends  of  God."
With  a  Preface  by  the  Rev.  CHARLES  KINGSLEY.

THE  LIFE  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF
SIR  JOHN  MALCOLM,  G.C.B.  By  JOHN  WILLIAM
KATE.

A    THIRD    SERIES    OF    SERMONS.

By  the  late  Rev.  FREDERICK  W.  ROBERTSON,  A.M.

ANTIQUITIES      OF      KERTCH.

By  DR.  DUNCAN  M°PHERSON.     With  Coloured  Plates.


LETTERS    TO    BEGINNERS    IN   ART.

JOHN  RUSKIN,  M.A.


BY


FRIENDS  OF  BOHEMIA;  OR,  PHASES
OF  LONDON  LIFE.  By  E.  M.  WHITTT,  Esq.,  Author
of  "  The  Governing  Classes."

ROUND  THE  FIRE:  Six  STORIES  FOR  YOUNG
READERS.  By  the  Author  of  "  The  Day  of  a  Baby
Boy."


Fcap.  4to,
printed  and
bound  in  the
old  style.


Tiro  Volumes,
Sco,  with  Por-
trait, price  36*.


Imperial  4to.


Two  JW»«,  >.
post  8ro.


Square  16mo,
ii-ilh  t'riintis-
piece,  price  3*.
cloth,


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  fy   Co.


LIFE    IN     ANCIENT     INDIA.

BY    MRS.    SPEIK.
With  Sixty  Illustrations  by  G.  SCHAEF.

"  Whoever  desires  to  have  the  best,  the  completest,  and  the  most  popular  view  of  what
Oriental  scholars  have  made  known  to  us  respecting  Ancient  India  must  peruse  the  work  of
Mrs.  Speir ;  in  which  he  will  find  the  story  told  hi  clear,  correct,  and  unaffected  English.  The
book  is  admirably  got  up." — Examiner.

"  A  graceful  and  thoughtful  book,  to  which  we  may  confidently  send  the  reader  in  search  of
an  accurate  and  vivid  picture  of  Ancient  Indian  Life.  The  first  chapter  excites  an  interest
which  is  sustained  to  the  end  It  is  an  uncommon  book  hi  every  way." — Leader.

"  We  should  hi  vain  seek  for  any  other  treatise  which,  in  so  short  a  space,  gives  so  well-con-
nected an  account  of  the  early  period  of  Indian  history." — Daily  Nevis.

"  Mrs.  Speir  has  accomplished  her  useful  object  hi  a  clear  and  attractive  manner." — Spectator.

ii.      A     RESIDENCE     IN     TASMANIA.

BY  CAPTAIN  H.  BUTLER  STONEY.

"  A  plain  and  clear  account  of  the  colonies  hi  Van  Diemen's  Land,  which  besides  being  very
agreeable  reading  may  be  confidently  consulted  on  all  matters  connected  with  their  material
resources,  actual  position,  and  social  industrial  aspects." — Athenaeum.

"  A  perfect  guide-book  to  Van  Diemen's  Land,  describing  simply  and  faithfully  the  country,
the  plants,  animals,  and  people  in  it." — Examiner.

"  The  work  is  intelligent,  practical,  and  amusing." — Press.

III.       VICTORIA ;  WITH  A  DESCRIPTION  OF  MELBOURNE
AND  GEELONG.      Br  CAPT.  H.  BUTLER  SIDNEY.

iv.      SIGHT-SEEING  IN  GERMANY  AND   THE
TYROL,  IN  THE  AUTUMN  OF  1855.

BY   SIR  JOHN  FORBES,  Author  of  "A  Physician's  Holiday,"  &c.

"  The  ground  is  described  clearly,  the  things  that  appeared  most  worth  seeing  to  a  sensible,
observant  tourist,  are  set  down,  together  with  the  natural  impressions  they  produced,  and  the
result  is  a  work  more  agreeable  hi  every  way  than  many  a  book  of  travel." — Examiner.

THE  TREATMENT   OF   THE  INSANE,
WITHOUT   MECHANICAL  RESTRAINTS.

BY  JOHN  GONOLLY,  M.D.

"  There  is  not  a  page  which  will  not  be  perused  with  interest,  even  by  a  non-professional
reader." — Morning  Post.

"  Dr.  Conolly  has  embodied  in  this  volume  his  experience  of  the  new  system  of  treating
patients  at  Hanwell  Asylum.  It  contains  besides  much  original  matter  of  importance." — Economist.

"  It  cannot  fail  to  interest  every  enlightened  reader." — Examiner.

vi.      THE   POLITICAL  LIFE   OF   SIR   R.   PEEL.

BY  THOMAS  DOUBLEDAY,

Author  of  the  "  Financial  History  of  England,"  "  The  True  Law  of
Population,"  &c.

"  Let  all  readers,  before  they  take  in  hand  the  personal  memoirs  of  Sir  Robert  Peel,  peruse
these  volumes  of  Mr.  Doubleday :  in  them  the  statesman's  character  and  public  acts  are
analysed  in  the  spirit  neither  of  a  detractor  nor  of  a  panegyrist.  This  biography  is  a  work  of
great  merit, conscientiously  prepared,  plain,  clear,  and  practically  interesting." — Leader.


8co,  price  15*.
elegantly  bound
in  cloth,  gilt
edge*.


Demy  8tx>,
with  Plates,
Cuts,  and  a
Map,  price  1 4*.
cloth.


With  cuts,  8tx>,
price  7s.  6d.
cloth.

Post  8w>,
a- if/i  Map  and
View,  price
10*.  <••</.  cloth.


Demy  8vo,
price  14*.  cloth.


Two  Vols.  «tw,
price  30s.  clotli.


Works  Published  ly  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


ANNALS  OF  BRITISH  LEGISLATION,

A  Classified  Summary  of  Parliamentary  Papers.
EDITED  BY  PROFESSOR  LEONE  LEVL

The  Yearly  Issue  will  consist  of  1000  pages  super  royal  8vo,the  subscription
for  which  is  Two  Guineas,  payable  in  advance.  The  successive  parts
will  be  delivered  post  free,  and  to  subscribers  only.

"  It  would  not  be  easy  to  over-estimate  the  utility  of  Professor  Levi's  serial.  It  has  the  merit
of  being  an  excellent  idea  zealously  carried  out." — Athenaeum.

"  We  cannot  imagine  a  more  truly  valuable  and  nationally  important  work  than  this.  It  is
Impossible  to  over-estimate  its  usefulness." — Civil  Service  Gazette.

"  Such  a  work  is  much  needed.    The  firstpart  seems  to  be  well  done." — Economist.

vin.       SIGHTS    AND    SCENES    IN    THE    EAST.

BY  JAMES  BRUCE.

"  Mr.  Bruce  has  written  intelligibly  and  unaffectedly  about  Hindostan,  with  acutencss  of
remark  and  ease  of  expression." — Attenaeum.

"  This  book  presents  the  best  of  the  author's  notes  of  life  in  India,  Ceylon,  and  Egypt.  Mr.
Bruce  sees  for  himself,  and  speaks  for  himself,  with  more  than  customary  plainness." — Examiner.

ix.       THE  EUROPEAN  REVOLUTIONS  OF  1848.

BY    EDWARD    CAYLEY.

"  Mr.  Cayley  has  produced  a  book  which  is  in  many  respects  good,  which  might  have  been
better,  but  which,  so  far  from  having  been  yet  superseded,  has  not  at  present  even  a  competitor.
As  far  as  our  examination  has  gone,  we  have  found  it  generally  accurate ;  and  independently  of
its  accuracy  it  is  valuable  for  two  qualities — the  sturdy  common  sense  and  pleasant  humour  of
the  author.  It  is  also  in  the  main  practical  and  sound." — Times.

"  A  graphic,  compendious,  and  popular  narrative  of  by  far  the  most  deeply  interesting  series
of  events  that  have  occurred  in  our  time,  of  which  no  collective  re'sume'  can  anywhere  else  be
found  which  is  at  once  so  condensed  and  so  readable  as  that  here  supplied  by  Mr.  Cayley." — Daily
New*.

"  Mr.  Cayley  has  evidently  studied  his  subject  thoroughly ;  he  has  consequently  produced  an
interesting  and  philosophic  history  of  an  important  epoch." — A'etc  Quarterly  Review.

SIGNS    OF   THE    TIMES:    OR,   THE   DANGERS

TO  RELIGIOUS  LIBERTY  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY.

BY  THE  CHEVALIER  BUNSEN.
TRANSLATED  BY  Miss  SUSANNA  WINKWORTH.

"  An  investigation  of  the  religions  principles  at  work  in  the  Christian  world  ;  tracing,  as  far
as  modern  politics  extend,  the  action  of  priesthood,  associations,  and  secular  decrees  enforcing
spiritual  dogmas.  It  is  the  most  remarkable  work  that  has  appeared  in  modern  times  from  the
pen  of  a  statesman." — Leader.

"  A  valuable  work,  by  a  man  of  consummate  intellect,  and  upon  a  subject  second  to  none  in
interest  and  importance." — Economist.

"  The  moral  character  and  the  intellectual  powers  of  M.  Bunsen  are  impressed  on  every  one
of  these  letters." — Globe.

"  There  is  much  to  bo  found  hero  that  is  really  instructive  and  practical."— John  Dull.


The  EIGHTH
PART  it  just
issued,  which
completes  the
FIRST  VOLUME.


Price  5».  cloth.


Two  Volumes,
Crown  Sto,
price  lt<».  cloth.


One  Volume,
Svo,  price  16*.
cloth.


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  $  Co.


II.


MODERN    PAINTERS,   Vol.   IV.

ON      MOUNTAIN      BEAUTY.
BY  JOHN  RUSKIN,  M.A.

"  Of  all  the  volumes  which  Mr.  Ruskin  has  issued,  there  is  probably  none  that  exhibits  his  two
counterbalancing  faculties  of  speculation  and  observation  in  a  state  of  such  intense  activity.

*  •    *    If  the  reader's  entertainment  flags,  his  deference  for  the  author's  immen.se  study  and
knowledge  of  natural  phenomena,  and  for  his  consequent  judgment  in  art  matters,  must  rise
considerably.    He  will  find  that  it  is  not  without  reason,  not  without  labour  and  preparation  and
experiment,  that  Kuskin  claims  to  know  when  nature  is  truthfully  or  untruthfully  rendered.

*  *    *  Considered  as  an  illustrated  volume,  this  is  the  most  remarkable  which  Mr.  Ruskin  has
yet  issued.    The  plates  and  woodcuts  are  profuse,  and  include  numerous  drawings  of  mountain
form  by  the  author,  which  prove  Mr.  Kuskin  to  be  essentially  an  artist.    Keen  sight,  keen
feeling,  and  keen  power  of  expression  are  the  qualities  which  go  to  the  making  of  an  artist,  and
all  these  Mr.  Ruskin  possesses.    He  adds  to  them  a  peculiarly  subtle  turn  for  theory,  investiga-
tion and  exposition.    This  combination  makes  him  an  unique  man,  both  among  artists  and
writers." — Spectator.

"  The  present  volume  of  Mr.  Rnskin's  elaborate  work  treats  chiefly  of  mountain  scenery,  and
discusses  at  length  the  principles  involved  in  the  pleasure  we  derive  from  mountains  and  their
pictorial  representation.  The  author  is  more  philosophical  and  less  critical  than  before.  Mr.
Ruskin  is  establishing  what  he  considers  to  be  true  principles,  and  only  casually  notices  adversa-
ries who  advocate  theories  which  contradict  his  own.  The  work  is  essentially  positive,  and
we  have  less  negation  than  we  are  accustomed  to  meet  with  in  treatises  by  this  author.  There
is  less  declamation  and  more  proof.  Mr.  Ruskin  does  not  wish  the  reader  to  adopt  his  conclu-
sions merely  on  his  authority.  He  labours  diligently  to  give  evidence  of '  the  faith  that  is  in  him.'
Mr.  Ruskin  occupies  a  peculiar  position  as  a  writer.  He  compels  his  most  vehement
adversaries  to  admire  even  while  they  dissent.  The  singular  beauty  of  his  style,  the  hearty
sympathy  with  all  forms  of  natural  loveliness,  the  profusion  of  his  illustrations,  and  above  all
the  earnest  denunciation  of  cant,  form  irresistible  attractions.  You  may  quarrel  with  the  critic,
but  yon  cannot  fail  to  admire  the  writer  and  respect  the  man.  High  thoughts,  clothed  in  elo-
quent language,  are  the  characteristics  of  Mr.  Ruskin's  productions.  »»•»»•»
The  present  volume  contains  the  most  connected  exposition  of  the  author's  theory  which  be  has
yet  given  to  the  world." — Daily  Newt.

"  All  art  is  one,  and  Mr.  Ruskin  writes  of  painting  with  the  ever  present  consciousness  of
poetry,  sculpture  and  architecture,  as  equally  implied.  This  it  is  which  gives  the  wide  and  per-
manent charm  to  his  writings.  Interesting  as  they  are  to  painters,  they  almost  equally  fascinate
the  general  public,  because  in  them  may  be  read  rare  criticisms  of  natural  appearances  and  of
artistic  representations.  *  •  *  We  must  all  feel  subdued  by  his  eloquence,  enlightened  by
his  novel  views,  stimulated  by  his  thoughts,  instructed  by  his  accurate  observations  of  nature.
Such  a  writer  is  really  a  national  possession.  He  adds  to  our  store  of  knowledge  and  enjoy-
ment."—Leader.

MODERN    PAINTERS,   Vol.  III.

OF      MANY     THINGS.

"  This  book  may  be  taken  up  with  equal  pleasure  whether  the  reader  be  acquainted  or  not
with  the  previous  volumes,  and  no  special  artistic  culture  is  necessary  in  order  to  enjoy  its
excellences  or  profit  by  its  suggestions.  Every  one  who  cares  about  nature,  or  poetry,  or  the
story  of  human  development — every  one  who  has  a  tinge  of  literature  or  philosophy,  will  find
something  that  is  for  him  in  this  volume." — Westminster  Review.

"  Mr.  Ruskin's  third  volume  of  '  Modern  Painters'  will  be  hailed  with  interest  and  curiosity,
if  not  with  submissive  attention,  by  the  Art-world  of  England.  »  *  »  Mr.  Ruskin  is  in
possession  of  a  clear  and  penetrating  mind ;  he  is  undeniably  practical  in  his  fundamental  ideas ;
full  of  the  deepest  reverence  for  all  that  appears  to  him  beautiful  and  holy,  and,  though  owning
to  very  strong  preferences,  founding  those  preferences  on  reason.  »  »  «  His  style  is,  as
usual,  clear,  bold,  and  racy.  Mr.  Ruskin  is  one  of  the  first  writers  of  the  day." — Economist.

"  The  present  volume,  viewed  as  a  literary  achievement,  is  the  highest  and  most  striking
evidence  of  the  author's  abilities  that  has  yet  been  published.  It  shows  the  maturity  of  his
powers  of  thought,  and  the  perfection  of  his  grace  of  style."— Leader.

"  All,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  read  the  book,  for  themselves.  They  will  find  it  well  worth  a
careful  perusal.  This  third  volume  fully  realizes  the  expectations  we  had  formed  of  it."—
Falttrdav  ftfriett.


Imperial  Svo,
trit/i  Thirty-
Jive  Illustra-
tions engraved
on  Steel,  and
110  Woodcut*,
drairn  by  the
A  uthor,  price
2/.  10«.  cloth.


With  Eighteen
Illustrations,
drawn  by  the
Author,  and
enffrnved  on
Steel,  priceSSt.
cloth.


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


Mm.


in.  MODERN     PAINTERS.

"  Mr.  Ruskin's  work  will  send  the  painter  more  than  ever  to  the  study  of  nature ;  will  train
men  who  have  always  been  delighted  spectators  of  nature,  to  be  also  attentive  observers.  Our
critics  will  learn  to  admire,  and  mere  admirers  will  learn  how  to  criticise  :  thus  a  public  will  be
educated." — Blackwood't  Magazine.

"  A  generous  and  impassioned  review  of  the  works  of  living  painters.  A  hearty  and  earnest
work,  full  of  deep  thought,  and  developing  great  and  striking  truths  in  art." — British  Quarterly
Review.

"A  very  extraordinary  and  delightful  book,  full  of  truth  and  goodness,  of  power  and
beauty." — North  British  Review.


Imperial  8vo.

Vol.  I.  FifUi
Edition,  price
18«.  cloth.

Vol.  II.  Fourth
Edition,  price
10«.  6d.  cloth.


iv.  THE    STONES    OF    VENICE.

Now  Complete  in  Three   Volumes.

EACH  VOLUME  MAY  BE  HAD  SEPARATELY,  VIZ.—

VOL.  I.  THE  FOUNDATIONS,  with  21  Plates,  price  "21.  2*.
VOL.  II.  THE  SEA  STORIES,  with  20  Plates,  price  21.  2s.
VOL.  III.  THE  FALL,  with  12  Plates,  price  11.  Us.  6d.

"  This  book  is  one  which,  perhaps,  no  other  man  could  have  written,  and  one  for  which  the
world  ought  to  be  and  will  be  thankful.  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  eloquent,  acute,  stimulating
to  thought,  and  fertile  in  suggestion.  It  shows  a  power  of  practical  criticism  which,  when  fixed
on  a  definite  object,  nothing  absurd  or  evil  can  withstand ;  and  a  power  of  appreciation  which
has  restored  treasures  of  beauty  to  mankind.  It  will,  we  are  convinced,  elevate  taste  and
intellect,  raise  the  tone  of  moral  feeling,  kindle  benevolence  towards  men,  and  increase  the  love
and  fear  of  God." — Time*.

"  The  '  Stones  of  Venice'  is  the  production  of  an  earnest,  religions,  progressive,  and  informed
mind.  The  author  of  this  essay  on  architecture  has  condensed  into  it  a  poetic  apprehension,  the
fruit  of  awe  of  God,  and  delight  in  nature ;  a  knowledge,  love,  and  just  estimate  of  art ;  a
holding  fast  to  fact  and  repudiation  of  hearsay ;  an  historic  breadth,  and  a  fearless  challenge  of
existing  social  problems,  whose  union  we  know  not  where  to  find  paralleled." — Spectator.

"  No  one  who  has  visited  Venice  can  read  this  book  without  having  a  richer  glow  thrown
over  his  remembrances  of  that  city ,  and  for  those  who  have  not,  Mr.  Kuskin  paints  it  with  a
firmness  of  outline  and  vividness  of  colouring  that  will  bring  it  before  the  imagination  with
the  force  of  reality." — Literary  Gazette.

"  This  work  shows  that  Mr.  Ruskin's  powers  of  composition  and  criticism  were  never  in
greater  force.  His  eloquence  is  as  rich,  his  enthusiasm  as  hearty,  his  sympathy  for  all  that  is
high  and  noble  in  art  as  keen  as  ever.  The  book,  like  all  he  writes,  la  manly  and  high-minded,
and,  as  usual,  keeps  the  attention  alive  to  the  last." — Guardian.


Imperial  8vo,
with  Fifty-
three  Plates
and  numerous
Woodcuts,
drawn  by  the
Author,  price
51.  15*.  6/i,  in
embossed  cloth,
with  top  edge
yilt.


THE  SEVEN  LAMPS  OF  ARCHITECTURE.

"  By  the  '  Seven  Lamps  of  Architecture,*  we  understand  Mr.  Kuskin  to  mean  the  seven
fundamental  and  cardinal  laws,  the  observance  of  and  obedience  to  which  are  indispensable  to
the  architect,  who  would  deserve  the  name.  The  politician,  the  moralist,  the  divine,  will  tind
in  it  ample  store  of  instructive  matter,  as  well  as  the  artist.  The  author  of  this  work  belongs
to  a  class  of  thinkers  of  whom  we  have  too  few  among  ns."— Examiner.

"  Mr.  I: u-kin's  book  bears  so  unmistakeably  the  marks  of  keen  and  accurate  observation,  of
a  true  and  subtle  judgment  and  refined  sense  of  beauty,  joined  with  so  much  earnestness,  so
noble  a  sense  of  the  purposes  and  business  of  art,  and  such  a  command  of  rich  and  plowing
language,  that  it  cannot  but  tell  powerfully  in  producing  a  more  religious  view  of  the  uses  of
un  liiuvture.and  a  deeper  insight  into  its  artistic  principles." — Guardian.

"  A  lively,  poetical,  and  thoughtful  book ;  rich  in  refined  criticism  and  glowing  eloquence.
Mr.  Kuskin's  poetry  is  always  to  the  purpose  of  his  doctrines,  and  always  the  vehicle  of  acute
thought  and  profound  feeling." — frater't  Magazine.


Second  Edi-
tion, with
Fourteen  Platis
draicn  by  the
Author,
Imperial  Svo,
price  II.  Is.
cloth.


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  fy  Co.


of  Jity  $ttsftfa

VI.       LECTURES  ON  ARCHITECTURE  AND  PAINTING.

"  Mr.  Raskin's  Lectures — eloquent,  graphic,  and  impassioned— exposing  and  ridiculing  some
of  the  vices  of  our  present  system  of  building,  and  exciting  his  hearers  by  strong  motives  of
duty  and  pleasure  to  attend  to  architecture — are  very  successful ;  and,  like  his  former  works,
will  command  public  attention.  His  style  is  terse,  vigorous,  and  sparkling,  and  his  book  is  both
animated  and  attractive." — Economist.

"  We  conceive  it  to  be  impossible  that  any  intelligent  persons  could  listen  to  the  lectures,
however  they  might  differ  from  the  judgments  asserted,  and  from  the  general  propositions  laid
down,  without  an  elevating  influence  and  an  aroused  enthusiasm,  which  are  often  more  fruitful
in  producing  true  taste  and  correct  views  of  art  than  the  soundest  historical  generalizations
and  the  most  learned  technical  criticism  in  which  the  heart  and  the  senses  own  no  interest." —
Spectator.

VH.  NOTES  ON  THE  PRINCIPAL  PICTURES  EXHIBITED
AT  THE  ROYAL  ACADEMY,  AND  THE  SOCIETY  OF
PAINTERS  IN  WATER  COLOURS.  No.  II.— 1856.

VIII.  PRE-RAPHAELITISM.

"  We  wish  that  this  pamphlet  might  be  largely  read  by  our  art-patrons,  and  studied  by  our
art-critics.  There  is  much  to  be  collected  from  it  which  is  very  important  to  remember." —
Guardian.

IX.  THE  OPENING  OF  THE  CRYSTAL  PALACE:

Considered  in  some  of  its  relations  to  the  Prospects  of  Art.

"  An  earnest  and  eloquent  appeal  for  the  preservation  of  the  ancient  monuments  of  Gothic
architecture." — English  Churchman.

"  A  wholesome  and  much  needed  protest."— Leader.

X.       THE    KING    OF    THE    GOLDEN    RIVERj

OR,  THE  BLACK  BROTHERS.

"  This  little  fairy  tale  is  by  a  master  hand.  The  story  has  a  charming  moral,  and  the  writing
is  so  excellent,  that  if  would  be  hard  to  say  which  it  will  give  most  pleasure  to,  the  very  wise
man  or  the  very  simple  child." — Examiner.

XL        EXAMPLES  OF  THE  ARCHITECTURE  OF  VENICE,

SELECTED   AND   DRAWN   TO  MEASUREMENT   FROM   THE   EDIFICES.

PARTS   I.   TO   III.   ARE   PUBLISHED.
Fifty  India  Proofs  only  are  taken  on  Alias  Folio,  price  21. 2s.  each  Part.


With  Fourteen
Cuts  drawn  by
the  Author.
SecondJEdition
Crown  8vo,
price  8*.  Gd.
cloth.


Sixth  Edition,
with  Postscript
8vo,  price  6d.


8vo,  price  2*.
sewed.


8vo,  price  Is.
sewed.


Third  Edition,
with  Twenty  -
Two  Illustra-
tions by
Richard  Doyle,
price  2*  6d.


In  Parti  of
Folio  Imperial
size,  each  con-
taining Five
Plates,  and  a
short  Expla-
natory Text,
11.  Is.  each.


Works  Pub  Us /ted  by  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


SERMONS.      By  the  late  REV.  FRED.  W.  ROBERTSON,

A.M.,  Incumbent  of  Trinity  Chapel,  Brighton.

"  Mr.  Robertson,  of  Brighton,  is  a  name  familiar  to  most  of  us,  and  honoured  by  all  to  whom
It  is  familiar.  A  true  servant  of  Christ,  a  bold  and  heart-stirring  preacher  of  the  Gospel,  his
teaching  was  beautified  and  intensified  by  genius.  New  truth,  new  light,  streamed  from  each
well-worn  text  when  he  handled  it.  The  present  volume  is  rich  in  evidence  of  his  pious,  manly,
and  soaring  faith,  and  of  his  power  not  only  to  point  to  heaven,  but  to  lead  the  way."—  Globe.

II.       PAPERS  OF  THE  LATE   LORD  METCALFE.

Selected  and  Edited  by  J.  W.  KAYE.

"  We  commend  this  volume  to  all  persons  who  like  to  study  state  papers,  in  which  the  practical
sense  of  a  man  of  the  world  is  joined  to  the  speculative  sagacity  of  a  philosophical  statesman.
No  Indian  library  should  be  without  it." — frets.

III.  RIFLE      PRACTICE.

By   LIEUTENANT-COLONEL   JOHN   JACOB,    C.B.

IV.  TWO    SUMMER    CRUISES    WITH    THE    BALTIC

FLEET  IN  1854-5 ;  BEING  THE  LOG  OF  THE  "  PET."
Br  R.  E.  HUGHES,  M.A.

"  There  are  few  readers  to  whom  this  volume  will  not  be  welcome.  It  is  light  and  pleasant
reading,  and  conveys  not  a  little  valuable  information.  Few  unprofessional  men  are  so  capable
of  forming  a  judgment  on  naval  tactics  as  Mr.  Hughes  appears  to  be." — Economist.

V.  THE     COURT    OF    HENRY    VIII.:

Being  a  Selection  of  the  Despatches  of  SEBASTIAN  GIUSTINIAN,

Venetian  Ambassador,  1515-1519.

Translated   by  RAWDON   BROWN.

"  These  volumes  present  such  a  portrait  of  the  times  as  is  nowhere  else  to  be  found.  They
are  a  most  important  contribution  to  the  materials  for  history." — Quarterly  Review.

VI.        A    CAMPAIGN    WITH    THE    TURKS    IN    ASIA.

BT  CHARLES  DUNCAN.

"  These  volumes  contain  an  account  of  a  winter  residence  at  Erzeroum,  a  sojourn  with  the
Turkish  army  at  Kars,  including  the  campaign  of  1854,  and  journeys  to  and  from  Constantinople
riii  Trebizond.  The  novelty  of  the  scenes  and  characters,  the  picturesque  sketches  of  the
Turkish  army,  and  the  solid  information  which  is  scattered  through  the  book,  render  the  volumes
of  present  interest  and  of  importance  as  a  future  record." — Spectator.

VII.  THE    RED    RIVER    SETTLEMENT.

BT  ALEXANDER  ROSS,  Author  of  "  Fur-Hunters  of  the  Far  West."

VIH.        THE     FUR-HUNTERS    OF    THE    FAR    WEST.

BT  ALEXANDER  ROSS.

"  Many  accounts  of  hardships  and  adventures  with  savage  men  and  beasts  will  be  found  in
these  volumes.  There  are  some  striking  sketches  of  landscape  and  Indian  life  and  character,  as
well  as  a  great  deal  of  information  about  the  old  Fur  Trade.  The  book  is  of  considerable  value
as  a  picture  of  an  almost  past  mode  of  human  existence,  as  well  as  for  its  information  upon  the
Indians  of  Oregon." — Spectator.


FIRST  SERIES
—Third  Edi-
tion, pott  8vo,
price  9*.  cloth.
SECOND  SERIES
—Third  Edi-
tion, price  9*.
cloth.

Demy  8vo,
price  16«.  cloth.


With  Plates.
Third  Edition,
price  2*.

SecondEdition,
post  8t>o,  irith
Views  and
Charts,  price

10*.  Gd  cloth.


Two  Volumes,
crown  Hro,  price
21*.  cloth.


Two  Volumes,
post  8ro,  price
21*.  cloth.


One  TO/MUM,
post  8tx>,  price
10*.  6U  cloth.

Tico  Volumes,
post  Bco,  ifit/i
Map  and  Plate,
price  21*.  cloth.


a


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  $  Co.


IX.


X.


XI.


XII.


II.


in,


RUSSO-TURKISH    CAMPAIGNS    OF    1828-9.
BY  COLONEL  CHESNEY,  R.A.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.

"  The  only  work  on  the  subject  suited  to  the  military  reader." —  United  Service  Gazette.

MILITARY  FORCES   AND   INSTITUTIONS

OF  GREAT  BRITAIN.
BY  H.  BYERLEY  THOMSON,  of  the  Inner  Temple.

"  Such  a  book  is  much  wanted,  and  it  contains  a  great  mass  of  information  on  military  topics,
now  undergoing  daily  discussion." — Economist.

A    MANUAL    OF    THE    MERCANTILE    LAW
OF   GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND.

BY  PROFESSOR  LEONE  LEVI,
Author  of  "  Commercial  Law  of  the  World."

"  We  recommend  to  all  merchants  and  tradesmen,  and  to  all  who  are  studying  great  questions
of  social  reform,  this  Manual  of  Mercantile  Law.  Its  simplicity  and  faithfulness  make  it
an  extremely  serviceable  book." — Examiner.

THE     LAWS     OF     WAR     AFFECTING

COMMERCE  AND   SHIPPING.
BY  H.  BYERLEY  THOMSON,  of  the  Inner  Temple.


LECTURES   ON  THE
OF    THE


orh  0f  jplr.

ENGLISH  HUMOURISTS
18TH   CENTURY.


BY  W.  M.  THACKERAY,

Author  of  "  Vanity  Fair,"  "  The  Newcomes,"  &c.

"  To  those  who  attended  the  lectures,  the  book  will  be  a  pleasant  reminiscence,  to  others  an
exciting  novelty.  The  style— clear,  idiomatic,  forcible,  familiar,  but  never  slovenly;  the
searching  strokes  of  sarcasm  or  irony  ;  the  occasional  flashes  of  generous  scorn  ;  the  touches  of
pathos,  pity,  and  tenderness  ;  the  morality  tempered  but  never  weakened  by  experience  and
sympathy ;  the  felicitous  phrases,  the  striking  anecdotes,  the  passages  of  wise,  practical  reflec-
tion ;  all  these  lose  much  less  than  we  could  have  expected  from  the  absence  of  the  voice,
manner,  and  look  of  the  lecturer." — Spectator.

ESMOND.    By  W.  M.  THACKERAY.

"  Mr.  Thackeray  has  selected  for  his  hero  a  very  noble  type  of  the  cavalier  softening  Into  the
man  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  for  his  heroine  one  of  the  sweetest  women  that  ever
breathed  from  canvas  or  from  book,  since  Raffaelle  painted  and  Shakspeare  wrote.  The  style
is  manly,  clear,  terse,  and  vigorous,  reflecting  every  mood — pathetic,  graphic, or  sarcastic — of  the
writer."  —Spectator.

THE    ROSE  AND    THE   RING;    or,  THE    HISTORY  OF
PRINCE  GIGLIO   AND   PRINCE  BULBO.

BY  MB.  M.  A.  TITMAKSH.


Third  Edition,
pott  8co,  ir it li
Maps,  price
12*.  cloth.

8vo,  price  15 1.
cloth.


8ro,  price  12*.
cloth.


SecondEdition,
greatly  en-
larged.    8co,
price  4s.  &d.
boards.


SecondEdition
crown  8t>o,
price  10s.  6d.
cloth.


StcondEdition
3  vols.  croicn
Svo,  reduced  to
15».  cloth.


With  58  Cuts,
drawn  by  the
Author,  Third
Edition,  price
5s.


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


KATHIE  BRANDE:  THE  FIRESIDE  HISTORY  OF  A  QUIET  LIFE.
BY   HOLME   LEE.

Author  of  "  Gilbert  Massenger,"  "  Thorney  Hall,"  &c.

"  The  story  of  '  Kathle  Brande '  is  intended  to  set  forth  the  beauty  of  self-sacrifice."—
Athenceum.

"  A  story  of  great  interest,  and  full  of  beauties.  The  sketches  of  character  are  powerful,  and
the  incidents  are  graphic." — Daily  Newt.

"  The  story  of  a  life's  silent  martyrdom  rewarded  with  a  crown  of  happiness  at  last." — Literary
Gazette.

" '  Eathie  Brande'  has  a  claim  on  the  regard  of  all  who  appreciate  the  excellent  in  fiction."— Sun.

"  The  quiet  elevation  of  tone  which  pervades  this  book  gives  it  a  stamp  of  superiority." —
Economist.

II.  TENDER     ANDTRUE.

By  the  Author  of  "  Clara  Morison."

"  It  is  long  since  we  have  read  a  story  that  has  pleased  us  better.  Simple  and  unpretending,
it  charms  by  its  gentle  good  sense.  The  strength  of  the  book  lies  in  its  delineations  of  married
life." — AtheniKum.

"  The  book  is  a  good  one.  The  whole  work  has  been  very  pleasantly  and  quietly  conceived,
In  a  pure,  feminine  spirit." — Examiner.

" '  Tender  and  True'  is  in  the  best  style  of  the  sensible  novel.  The  story  is  skilfully  managed,
the  tone  is  very  pure,  and  altogether  the  fiction  is  marked  by  sense  and  spirit." — Press.

"  A  novel  far  above  the  average.  It  is  charmingly  written,  has  sustained  and  continued
Interest,  and  there  is  a  pure,  healthy  tone  of  morality." — Globe.

"  The  main  object  of  the  writer  is  to  depict  the  troubles  of  married  life  arising  from  miscon-
ceptions and  want  of  confidence  and  sympathy." — Spectator.

III.  YOUNG    SINGLETON.    BY  TALBOT  GWYNNE,

Author  of  "  The  School  for  Fathers,"  &c.

"  Mr.  Talbot  Gwynne  lias  made  a  considerable  advance  in  '  Young  Singleton '  over  his
previous  fictions.  In  his  present  story  he  rises  into  the  varied  action,  the  more  numerous
persons,  and  the  complicated  interests  of  a  novel.  It  has  also  a  moral ;  being  designed  to  paint
the  wretched  consequences  that  follow  from  envy  and  vanity." — Spectator.

"  Power  of  description,  dramatic  force,  and  ready  invention,  give  vitality  to  the  story." — Press.

IV.  E  V  E  L  E  E  N.      BY  E.   L.   A.   BERWICK,

Author  of  "  The  Dwarf."

"  A  most  interesting  story,  evincing  power  of  expression  with  vividness  in  detail,  great  feeling,
and  skilful  delineation  of  character." — Sun.

"  As  a  story  to  attract,  to  interest,  to  improve,  few  modern  novels  are  superior  to  it."—  Globt.

"  '  Eveleen'  is  a  work  of  promise  ;  it  bears  evidences  of  care,  pains-taking,  and  honest  hard
work— qualities  to  which  we  always  give  honour."— Athenaeum.

ERLESMERE:    or,   CONTRASTS    OF    CHARACTER.
BY  L,  S.  LAVENU.

"  '  Erlesmere  '  belongs  to  the  same  class  of  novels  as  the  stories  of  Miss  Young, '  The  Heir  of
Redclyfle,'&c.,nor  is  it  inferior  to  them  in  ability  and  in  the  exhibition  of  internal  conflict,
though  the  incidents  are  more  stormy.  There  are  many  passages  of  extraordinary  force;
tragic  circumstances  being  revealed  in  momentary  flashes  of  dramatic  force." — Press.

VI.  PERVERSION;

Or,  THE  CAUSES  AND  CONSEQUENCES  OF  INFIDELITY.
A  Tale  for  the  Times.

"  This  is  a  good  and  noble  book.  It  is  the  best  timed  and  most  useful  book  which  has
appeared  for  years."— New  Quarterly  Htview.

"  A  novel  written  with  a  strong  sense  both  of  what  is  amusing  and  what  is  right  It  is  a
religious  novel,  free  from  dullness." — Examiner.

"  This  work  is  extremely  clever,  and  well  and  temperately  written.  The  story  has  a  touching
interest,  which  lingers  with  the  reader  after  he  has  closed  his  book."— AUtenanttn,


Ttco  Volumes.


Two  Volumes.


Two  Volumes.


Three  Volume*


Two  Volumes.


Three  Volumi*
Second  Editw  n


10


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  fy  Co.


VII.  BEYMINSTRE.

By  the  Author  of  "Lena,"  "King's  Cope,"  &c.

"  We  have  still  some  good  novel  writers  left,  and  among  them  Is  the  author  of  '  Bcymlnstre.'
The  conduct  of  the  story  is  excellent.  Many  of  the  subordinate  parts  are  highly  comic ;  an  air  of
nature  and  life  breathes  through  the  whole.  It  is  a  work  of  unusual  merit." — Saturday  Review.

"  There  are  admirable  points  in  this  novel,  and  great  breadth  of  humour  in  the  comic  scenes.
'  Beyminstre '  is  beyond  all  comparison  the  best  work  by  the  author." — Daily  News.

Vm.  LEONORA.     By  the  Hon.  Mrs.   MABERLY.

"  In  the  story  of  '  Leonora '  Mrs.  Maberly  has  described  the  career  of  an  ambitious,  beautiful,
but  unprincipled  woman.  Many  of  the  scenes  are  drawn  with  great  skill,  and  lively  sketches  of
fashionable  life  are  introduced." — Literary  Gazette.

"  Leonora  is  drawn  with  more  than  usual  power.  Her  pride,  her  imperious  will ,  her  sins,  her
punishment,  and  her  penitence,  are  skilfully  wrought,  and  sustain  the  reader's  attention  to  the
last."— Critic.

IX.  AFTER   DARK.        BY  WILKIE   COLLINS,

Author  of  "Basil,"  "Hide  and  Seek,"  &c.

"  Mr.  Wilkie  Collins  tells  a  story  well  and  forcibly,  his  style  is  eloquent  and  picturesque,  he
has  considerable  power  of  pathos,  understands  the  art  of  construction,  and  has  a  keen  insight
into  character." — Daily  News.

"  The  tales  are  stories  of  adventure,  well  varied,  and  often  striking  in  the  incidents,  or  with
thrilling  situations ;  and  are  as  pleasant  reading  as  a  novel  reader  could  desire." — Spectator.

"  The  volumes  abound  with  genuine  touches  of  nature." — British  Quarterly  Review.

14  These  stories  possess  all  the  author's  well-known  dramatic  power." — New  Quarterly  Review.

X.  AMBERHILL.      BY    A.    J.    BARROWCLIFFE.

"  There  is  great  power  in  'Amberhill,'  and  its  faults  are  forgotten  in  the  sustained  excitement
of  the  narrative.  There  are  in  the  book  some  of  the  shrewdest  sketches  of  character  we  have
ever  met  with." — Press.

'" Amberhill'  is  an  exciting  book,  not  belonging  to  any  established  school  of  novel,  unless  It
be  the  defiant.  There  is  a  freshness  and  force,  a  petulant  grace,  and  a  warm-hearted  satirical
vein  in  'Amberhill,'  which  will  give  it  a  charm  to  every  blast  novel  reader.  The  characters  are
vigorously  drawn  and  have  genuine  life  in  them." — Globe.

XI.  MAURICE     ELVINGTON:

OR,  ONE  OUT  OF  SUITS  WITH  FORTUNE.    AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
Edited  by  WILFRID  EAST.

"  A  very  powerfully  wrought  story.  Passion,  pathos,  and  tragedy  are  mingled  with  artistic
Skill."—  Weekly  Dispatch.

"  A  story  of  English  life  in  a  variety  of  phases,  which  can  scarcely  fail  to  interest  the  English
reader." — Examiner.

Just  Ready.
I.  FLORENCE    TEMPLAR.

II.        OLIVER   CROMWELL :    A  STORY  OF  THE  CIVIL  WARS.
By  CHARLES  EDWARD  STEWART.

HI.       THE  ROUA  PASS  :   OR,  ENGLISHMEN  IN  THE  HIGHLANDS.

BY  ERICK  MACKENZIE.

IV.       THE   EVE   OF   ST.   MARK:    A  ROMANCE  OF  VENICE.

By  THOMAS  DOUBLEDAY.


Three  Volumes.


Three  Volumes.


Two  Volume*.


Two  Volumes.


Three  Volumes.


One  Volume.
Two  Volumes.

Three  Volumes.
Two  Volumes.


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


11


H.


in.


IV.


GILBERT    MASSENGER.      By  HOLME    LEE.

"  One  of  the  best  novettettes  we  have  seen.  The  whole  tone  of  the  book  Is  healthy  ;  the
sentiments  are  just  and  right,  and  the  tVelintts  always  beautiful,  gentle,  and  true  ;  the  delinea-
tion of  character  is  clear,  and  the  style  is  fresh,  flowing,  simple,  and  correct."  —  Economitt.

"  The  subject  is  handled  with  singular  delicacy  and  truthfulness."  —  Examiner.

"  A  condensed  and  powerfully  written  story."  —  Athenaeum.

"  A  work  of  remarkable  skill  and  power."  —  Spectator.

"  The  story  enthrals  and  edifies  the  reader."  —  Qlobe.

THORNEY    HALL.     By    HOLME    LEE.

"  There  is  much  quiet  power  evinced  in  '  Thorney  Hall,'  combined  with  a  thoroughly  healthy
and  invigorating  tone  of  thought.  It  develops  the  practical  heroism  that  lies  in  the  most
unromantic  duties  of  daily  life.  The  story  is  extremely  interesting."  —  -Athenaeum.

"  Few  who  read  this  tale  but  will  feel  that  they  are  reading  something  true,  and  that  they
have  known  the  characters."  —  Guardian.

"A  story  which  sustains  to  the  end  so  unflagging  an  interest  that  few  will  leave  it  unfinished."
—  Morning  Chronicle.

MY    FIRST    SEASON.       By  BEATRICE  REYNOLDS.

Edited  by  the  Author  of  "  Charles  Auchester"  and  "  Counterparts."

"  A  very  well-written  story,  ingenious  in  its  construction,  bold  and  vigorous  in  its  delineation
of  character,  graphic  in  its  descriptive  passages,  and  '  as  full  of  spirit  as  the  month  of  May.'  "
•—Morning  Post.

"  The  story  is  ingenious,  spirited,  and  well  developed  ;  the  dialogue  sparkles  with  talent,  and
the  pages  are  crowded  with  satirical  sketching,  and  close,  clever  presentations  of  life  and
character,  drawn  with  artistic  skill."  —  Press.

A   LOST   LOVE.     By  ASHTORD  OWEN.

"  A  tale  at  once  moving  and  winning,  natural  and  romantic,  and  certain  to  raise  all  the  finer
sympathies  of  the  reader's  nature.  Its  deep,  pure  sentiment,  admirable  style  and  composition,
will  win  for  it  a  lasting  place  in  English  fiction,  as  one  of  the  truest  and  most  touching  pictures
ever  drawn  of  woman's  love."  —  Preu.

"'A  Lost  Love"  is  a  story  full  of  grace  and  genius."  —  Athenaeum.

"  A  striking  and  original  story  ;  a  work  of  genius  and  sensibility."—  Saturday  Renew.

"  A  novel  of  great  genius."  —  New  Quarterly  Review.


G,,chth.


10,.  u.  do*.


io«.c<icfotA.


WOMEN    OF    CHRISTIANITY   EXEMPLARY   FOR
PIETY  AND  CHARITY.

"  A  more  noble  and  dignified  tribute  to  the  virtues  of  her  sex  we  can  scarcely  imagine  than
this  work,  to  which  the  gifted  authoress  has  brought  talents  of  no  ordinary  range,  and,  more
than  all,  a  spirit  of  eminent  piety." — Church  of  England  (Quarterly  Review.

II.        WOMAN  IN  FRANCE  DURING  THE   18ra  CENTURY.

"  Miss  Kavanagh  has  undertaken  a  delicate  task,  and  she  has  performed  it  on  the  whole  with
discretion  and  judgment.  Her  volumes  may  lie  on  any  drawing-room  table  without  scandal,
and  may  be  read  by  all  but  her  youngest  countrywomen  without  risk." — Quarterly  Review.

HI.  GRACELEE.      BY  JULIA  KAVANAGH.

"  A  remarkable  fiction,  abounding  in  romantic  incidents." — Morning  Pott.


Pott  9ro,  trith
Portrait*,  price
l'2s.  in  embotted
cloth,  gilt  edge*.


Two  VoU.post
8tx>,  u-ith  Eight
Portrait*,  price
12*.  in  embossed
cloth.

Three  Volumes,

it  Svo,  price
"31*.  6d  cloth.


12


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  fy  Co.


II.


III.


IV.


II.


III.


IV.


<rf  Ofnrwr  $dl.

VILLETTE.       By  CURRER  BELL.

"  This  novel  amply  sustains  the  fame  of  the  author  of '  Jane  Eyre'  and  '  Shirley*  as  an  original
and  powerful  writer." — Examiner.

SHIRLEY        BY  CURRER  BELL.

"  The  peculiar  power  which  was  so  greatly  admired  in  •  Jane  Eyre*  is  not  absent  from  this
book.  It  possesses  deep  interest,  and  an  irresistible  grasp  of  reality.  There  are  scenes  which,
for  strength  and  delicacy  of  emotion,  are  not  transcended  in  the  range  of  English  fiction." —
Examiner.

JANE     EYRE.        BY  CURRER  BELL.

'"Jane  Eyre'  is  a  remarkable  production.  Freshness  and  originality,  truth  and  passion,
singular  felicity  in  the  description  of  natural  scenery,  and  in  the  analysation  of  human  thought,
enable  this  tale  to  stand  boldly  out  from  the  mass,  and  to  assume  its  own  place  in  the  bright
field  of  romantic  literature." — Times.

WUTHER1NG   HEIGHTS  AND   AGNES   GREY.

BY  ELLIS  AND  ACTON  BELL.
With  a  Biographical  Notice  of  both  Authors,  by  CUHKKK  BELL.


§alh0i


NANETTE  AND  HER  LOVERS.

"  We  do  not  remember  to  have  met  with  so  perfect  a  work  of  literary  art  as  '  Nanette'  for
many  a  long  day  ;  or  one  in  which  every  character  is  so  thoroughly  worked  out  in  so  short  a
space,  and  the  interest  conceutrated  with  so  much  effect  and  truthfulness."  —  Britannia.

THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  SILAS
BARNSTARKE.

"  A  story  possessing  an  interest  so  tenacious  that  no  one  who  commences  it  will  easily  leave
the  perusal  unfinished."—  Standard.
"  A  book  of  high  aim  and  unquestionable  power."  —  Examiner.

THE      SCHOOL      FOR      FATHERS.

"  The  pleasantest  tale  we  have  read  for  many  a  day.  It  is  a  story  of  the  Taller  and  Spectator
days,  and  is  very  fitly  associated  with  that  time  of  good  English  literature  by  its  manly  feeling,
direct,  unaffected  manner  of  writing,  and  nicely  managed,  well-turned  narrative.  The  descrip-
tions are  excellent  ;  some  of  the  country  painting  is  as  fresh  as  a  landscape  by  Constable,  or  an
idyll  by  Alfred  Tennyson."  —  Examiner.

THE     SCHOOL    FOR     DREAMERS.

"  A  powerful  and  skilfully-written  book,  intended  to  show  the  mischief  and  danger  of  follow-
ing imagination  instead  of  judgment  in  the  practical  business  of  life."  —  Literary  Gazette.


New  Edition,
in  One  Volume,
crown  Svo,pricc
6*.  cloth.


Crown  Svo,
price  6*.  cloth.


Fifth  Edition,
crown  Svo,
price  6*.  cloth.


Crown  Svo,
price  6*.  clot/i.


Crown  Svo,
price  5s.  cloth.


Crown  Svo,
price  5s.  cloth.


Crown  Svo,
price  5*.  cloth.


Crown  Svo,
price  5s.  cloth.


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


13


n.


ill.


IV.


VI.


THE    CHINESE    AND    THEIR    REBELLIONS,

WITH    AN    ESSAY    ON    CIVILIZATION.
BY  THOMAS  TAYLOR  MEADOWS.

"  In  this  book  is  a  vast  amount  of  valuable  information  respecting  China,  and  the  statements  it
contains  bear  on  them  the  face  of  truth.  Mr.  Meadows  lias  produced  a  work  which  deserves  to
be  studied  by  all  who  would  gain  a  tnie  appreciation  of  Chinese  character.  Information  is  sown
broad-cast  through  every  page." — Athenaeum.

"  This  instructive  volume  conveys  with  clearness  and  accuracy  the  true  character  of  the
social  and  political  institutions  of  China,  and  the  customs  and  manners  of  the  Chinese  :  it  affords
a  complete  compendium  of  the  Chinese  Empire.  The  whole  of  the  political  geography  and
administrative  machinery  of  the  empire  is  described,  and  the  theory  and  practical  working  of
the  Chinese  aristocracy." — Observer,

THE    CAUVERY,    KISTNAH,    AND    GOD  A  VERY:

Being  a  Report  on  the  Works  constructed  on  those  Rivers  for

the  Irrigation  of  Provinces  in  the  Presidency  of  Madras.
BY  R.  BAIRD  SMITH,  F.G.S.,  Lt.-Col.  Bengal  Engineers,  &c.,  &c.

"  A  most  curious  and  interesting  work."— Economist.


THE    BHILSA


TOPES;  or,  BUDDHIST  MONUMENTS  of

CENTRAL  INDIA.
BY  MAJOR  CUNNINGHAM.

"  Of  the  Topes  opened  in  various  parts  of  India  none  have  yielded  so  rich  a  harvest  of  im-
portant information  as  those  of  Bhilsa,  opened  by  Major  Cunningham  and  Lieut.  Maisey  ;  and
which  are  described,  with  an  abundance  of  highly  curious  graphic  illustrations,  in  this  most
interesting  book."—  Examiner.

TRAVELS    AND   ADVENTURES    IN   ASSAM.

BY  MAJOR  JOHN  BUTLER.

"  This  volume  i»  unusually  successful  in  creating  an  interest  on  an  Eastern  subject.  It  la
illustrated  by  views  of  landscapes,  figures  and  antiquities." — Press.

"  Fourteen  years'  residence  among  the  half-civilized  natives  have  given  the  author — whose
powers  of  observation,  penetration,  and  analysis  are  of  no  ordinary  kind — ample  opportunities
of  studying  the  character  of  the  Hill  tribes  of  Assam." — Britannia.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  WESTERN  INDIA;

Being  the  Early  History  of  the  Factory  at  Surat,  of  Bombay.
BY  PHILIP  ANDERSON,  A.M.

"Quaint,  curious,  and  amusing,  this  volume  describes,  from  old  manuscripts  and  ohscnre
books,  the  life  of  English  merchants  in  an  Indian  Factory.  It  contains  fresh  and  amusing
gossip,  all  bearing  on  events  and  characters  of  historical  importance." — Athenceum.

"  A  book  of  permanent  value."— Guardian.

A    TRACK   CHART  OF    THE    COAST    OF
WESTERN  INDIA,  on  Mercator's  Projection.

COMPILED  BY  LIEUTENANT  FERGUSSON,  Hydrographer  to  the
Indian  Navy.


One  Thick
Volume,  800,
with  Mapt,
price  18*.  cloth.


Demy  8po,  with
Nineteen  Plu  n  t,
price  28*.  clot/i.


One  Volume,
8t>o,  with
Thirty-  three
Plates,  price
30*.  cloth.


One  Volume,
8ro,  with
Plate*,  price
12*.  cloth.


Second  Kdiliun ,
8ro,  price  14*.
cloth.


Two  Sheett
A  tli is  paper,

price  1  •"'.<.


14


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  and  Co.


VII  DR.  ROYLE  ON  THE  FIBROUS  PLANTS  OF  INDIA  FITTED
FOR  CORDAGE,  CLOTHING,  AND  PAPER.  Svo,  price
12s.  cloth.

VIII.       DR.     ROYLE    ON    THE    CULTURE    AND  COMMERCE  OF
COTTON   IN   INDIA.     Svo,  18*.  cloth.

IX.       DR.    WILSON    ON    INFANTICIDE    IN    WESTERN    INDIA.

Demy  8  vo,  price  12s.

X.       JOURNAL  OF    THE  SUTLEJ  CAMPAIGN.    By  JAMES  COLEY,
M.A.     Royal  8vo,  price  5s.  cloth.

XI.       CRAWFURD'S     GRAMMAR    AND    DICTIONARY   OF    THE
MALAY  LANGUAGE.     2  vols.  8vo,  36s.  cloth.

XII.  ROBERTS'S  INDIAN  EXCHANGE  TABLES.  Svo.  Second
Edition,  enlarged,  price  10s.  6d.  cloth.

Xin.       WARING  ON  ABSCESS  IN   THE   LIVER.     Svo,  price  3s.  6d.
XIV.       LAURIE'S     PEGU  .      Post  Svo,  price  14s.  cloth.

XV.  BOYD'S  TURKISH  INTERPRETER:  A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE
TURKISH  LANGUAGE.  Svo,  price  12s.

XVI.       BRIDGNELL'S   INDIAN    COMMERCIAL   TABLES.     Royal  Svo,
price  21s.,  half-bound.

XVII.       THE    BOMBAY    QUARTERLY     REVIEW.

Nos.  1  to  8,  price  5s.  each.

XVIH.       BAILLIE'S  LAND  TAX  OF  INDIA.     According  to  the  Moohum-
mudan  Law.     Svo,  price  6s.  cl.

XIX.       BAILLIE'S    MOOHUMMUDAN    LAW    OF    SALE.     Svo,  price

14s.  cloth.
XX.       IRVING'S   THEORY   AND   PRACTICE  OF  CASTE.     Svo,  price

5s.  cloth.
XXI.       GINGELL'S    CEREMONIAL    USAGES    OF    THE    CHINESE.

Imperial  Svo,  price  9s.  cloth.
XXH.       THE  INSURRECTION  IN  CHINA.    By  Dr.  YVAN  and  M.  GALLERY.

Translated  by  JOHN  OXENFORD.      Third  Edition.     Post  Svo,   with

Chinese  Map  and  Portrait,  price  7s.  6d.  cloth.

XXHL       KESSON'S    CROSS    AND   THE    DRAGON;   OR,  THE  FORTUNES
OF  CHRISTIANITY  IN  CHINA.    Post  Svo,  6s.  cloth.


Works  Published  ly  Smith,  Elder  and  Co


15


I.

II.
III.
IV.

v.

VI.
VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.

XI.

XII.

XIII.

XIV.

XV.

XVI.

XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.
XX.

XXI.


SWAINSON'S     LECTURES    ON     NEW    ZEALAND.

Crown  8  wo,  price  2s.  6d.  cloth.

SWAINSON'S    ACCOUNT   OF  AUCKLAND.    Post  8vo,

with  a  view,  6s.  cloth.

PLAYFORD'S    HINTS    FOR    INVESTING    MONEY.

Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  price  2*.  6d.  cloth.

A  VISIT    TO     SEBASTOPOL    AFTER     ITS    FALL.

Fcap.,  price  1*.

SIR    JOHN     FORBES'    MEMORANDUMS     IN     IRELAND.

Two  Vols.,  post  8vo,  price  ll.  1*.  cloth.

LEIGH  HUNT'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.   3  vols.,  post  8vo,  12*.  do.
MEN,    WOMEN,    AND    BOOKS.      2  vok.,

10*.  cloth.

TABLE    TALK.      3s.  6d.   cloth.

WIT    AND    HUMOUR.     5s.  cloth.

IMAGINATION  AND  FANCY.  5s.  cloth.

—  JAR  OF  HONEY.    5s.  cloth.

SIR    JOHN    HERSCHEL'S    ASTRONOMICAL    OBSERVA-
TIONS  MADE    AT    THE   CAPE    OF     GOOD    HOPE.

4to,  with  plates,  price  41.  4s.  cloth.

DARWIN'S      GEOLOGICAL     OBSERVATIONS     ON   CORAL
REEFS,    VOLCANIC    ISLANDS,    AND    ON    SOUTH   AMERICA.      8vo,

with  maps,  plates,  and  woodcuts,  10s.  6d.  cloth.

LEVI'S   COMMERCIAL    LAW    OF    THE    WORLD.     2  vols.

royal  4to, price  61.  cloth.

JUVENILE    DELINQUENCY.

CORNWALLIS.      Post  8vo,  price  6s.  cloth.

DOUBLEDAY'S    TRUE     LAW

Third  Edition,  8vo,  10*.  cloth.

McCANN'S       ARGENTINE

Two  vols.,  post  8vo,  with  illustrations,  price  24*.  cloth.

ROWCROFT'S     TALES     OF    THE

Fifth    Edition.     6*.  cloth.

TRAITS  OF  AMERICAN  INDIAN  LIFE.    Post  8vo,  7s.  cl.
GOETHE'S    CONVERSATIONS    WITH     ECKERMANN.

Translated  by  JOHN  OXBNFORD.     2  vols.  post  8vo,  10*.  cloth.

CHORLEY'S  MODERN  GERMAN  MUSIC.    Two  vols.,  post  8vo.

price  21*.  cloth.


By   M.   HILL  and  C.  F.
OF    POPULATION.
PROVINCES,      &c.
COLONIES.


16


Works  Published  by  Smith,  Elder  $  Co.


XXII.
XXIIL

XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.


XXVII.


I.

II.
III.

IV.
V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.
X.

XI.


HUGHES'S  DUTIES    OF   JUDGE  ADVOCATES.    Post  8vo,

7s.  cloth.

THE    BRITISH     OFFICER;     HIS     POSITION,     DUTIES,

EMOLUMENTS,  AND  PRIVILEGES.     By  J.  H.  STOCQUELER.    Post  8vo,  15s.
cloth  extra.

THE    NOVITIATE;     OR,   THE  JESUIT  IN  TRAINING.      By

ANDREW  STEINMETZ.     Third  Edition,  post  8vo,  5*.  cloth.

A  CONVERTED  ATHEIST'S  TESTIMONY  TO  THE  TRUTH

OF  CHRISTIANITY.    4th  edition.    Fcap.  8vo,  3s.  cloth.

ELEMENTARY   WORKS    ON    SOCIAL    ECONOMY.

Uniform  in  foolscap  8vo,  half-bound.
I.— OUTLINES  OF  SOCIAL  ECONOMY.     1*.  6rf.
II.— PROGRESSIVE  LESSONS  IN  SOCIAL  SCIENCE.     1*.  6<f.
m.— INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SOCIAL  SCIENCES.    2*.
IV.— QUESTIONS    AND    ANSWERS    ON  THE  ARRANGEMENTS  AND    RELATIONS

OF  SOCIAL  LIFE.     2s.  &d.

V.— OUTLINES  OF  THE  UNDERSTANDING.    2*.

VL— WHAT    AM   I?      WHERE  AM    I?      WHAT    OUGHT  I  TO  DO?    &c.
Is.  sewed.

GREEN'S    BRITISH    MERCHANTS'    ASSISTANT.

CONTAINING  :

PART  I.— TABLES  OF  SIMPLE  INTEREST  at  3,  3J,  4,  4$,  and  5  per  cent.

PART  II.— TABLES    OF  INTEREST  ON  EXCHEQUER  BILLS,   at  from  IJrf.  to

3J</.  per  cent,  per  diem.
PART  IK.— TABLES  OF  ENGLISH   AND  FOREIGN    STOCK,   BROKERAGE,

COMMISSION,  FREIGHT,  INSURANCE,  &c.
Royal  8vo,  II.  11*.  6d.  cloth.      {Each  part  may  be  had  separately.)


ENGLAND  IN  TIME  OF  WAR.     By  SYDNEY  DOBELL,  Author  of  "  Balder,"

"  The  Roman,"  &c.     Crown  8vo,  price  5s.  cloth.

LOTA,  AND  OTHER  POEMS.     By  DEVON  HARRIS.     Fcap.  8vo,  price  4s.  cloth.
POEMS    OF    PAST    YEARS.      By  Sir  ARTHUR  HALLAM  ELTON,   Bart.

Bart.     Foolscap  8vo,  price  3s.  cloth.

POETRY  FROM   LIFE.     By  C.  M.  K.     Fcap.  8vo,  cloth  gilt,  5s.
POEMS.     By  WALTER  R.  CASSELS.     Foolscap  8vo,  price  Ss.  6d.  cloth.
GARLANDS  OF  VERSE.     By  THOMAS  LEIGH.     Fcap.  8vo,  5s.  cl.
BALDER.     By  SYDNEY  DOBELL.     Crown  8vo,  7s.  6d.  cloth.
POEMS.      By  WILLIAM  BELL  SCOTT.      Foolscap  8vo,  with  Three  Etchings,

price  5s.  cloth.

POEMS.     By  CURRER,  ELLIS,  and  ACTON  BELL.     Fcp.  8vo,  4s.  cloth.
POETICS  :  AN  ESSAY  ON  POETRY.     By  E.  S.  DALLAS.     Crown  8vo,  price  9s.  cl.
DOINE  ;    or,    NATIONAL    LEGENDS    OF    ROUMANIA.      Translated  by  E.   C.

GRENVILLE  MURRAY,  Esq.    With  Music.     Crown  8vo,  price  7s.  6d.  cl.

London:  Printed  by  SMITH,  ELDER  &  Co.,  15,  Old  Bailey.


00


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


\


•1

.»r:.  '*lL      fa


ft"


•;  %v*l  Mffii
