Travels in India, Vol. II (Jean-Baptiste Tavernier (Valentine Ball, trans.), 1889)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1889 Macmillan edition, Valentine Ball translation (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.208415). Tavernier's six voyages to Persia and India — firsthand account of Mughal courts, diamond mines and Asian trade.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

cn 

The book should be returned on or before the date 
last stamped below. 




A 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 

BY 

JEAN BAPTISTE TAVERNIER 

BARON OF AUBONNE 


A 






JEAN BAPTISTE TAVERNIER 

BARON OF AUBONNE 

Dressed m the Robes of Honour presented to him by the Shah of Persia 




TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BY 

JEAN BAPTISTE TAVERNIER 

BARON OF AUBONNE 


TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL FRENCH EDITION OF 1676 

WITH A 

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR, 

NOTES, APPENDICES, ETC. 


BY 

V. BALL, LL.D., F.R.S., F.G.S. 

DIRECTOR OF THE SCIENCE AND ART MUSEUM, DUBLIN 
AUTHOR OF ‘JUNGLE LIFE IN INDIA,’ ‘THE ECONOMIC GEOLOGY OF INDIA,’ ETC. 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 


ILonUon 

MACMILLAN AND CO. 

AND NEW YORK 

1889 


All rights reserved 



A 


A 


I’rintediy R. & R, Clark, Edinburgh 



A 


CONTENTS 


Preface .... 
Table -OF the Books and Chapters 

Travels in India — 

Book II, Chapters XII to XXVI . 
Book III, Chapters I to XXIX 

The King’s Licence . 

Appendices I to VI . . .. 

Index and Glossary 


PAGE 

ix 

3iV 

. I-I7I 

173-425 

426 

429 

477 


VOL. II 


b 




A 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

PLATE PAGE 

I. Portrait of Tavernier . . . Frontispiece 

II. Figures of Large Diamonds . . . .124 

III. Figures of Diamonds sold to the King of France 126 

IV. Figures of Rubies and Topaz . . .128 

V. Figures of Pearls . . . . .130 

VI. Figures of the Koh-i-nur . . . .442 

Map shewing the position of the Diamond Rivers 

OF Bengal . . . . • -452 


A 




PREFACE 


In the course of the preparation of a work of so diver- 
sified and complex a character as this, it is almost 
certain to be the case that, even up to the last moment 
before publication, matter bearing upon the subject 
comes to hand. The present occasion, so far from 
forming an exception to the rule, exemplifies it in a 
very remarkable degree. The subjects upon which 
additional information has been acquired during the 
progress of the printing of these volumes are many ; 
but there are some in particular which deserve special 
notice, to which it may therefore be well to call 
attention here. 

Through the kindness of Prof. Joret I have 
received a pamphlet, written by himself, entitled Le 
Voyageur Tavernier (1670-1689), in which he has 
pursued his investigations as to the events of the last 
twenty years of Tavernier’s life. As some of these 
confirm while others modify the conclusions set forth 
in the Introduction to vol. i, it is desirable to notice 
them briefly. 

Prof. Joret describes his examination of the original 
manuscripts of Tavernier’s Memoirs, which are in the 
possession of M. Schefer at his Chateau of St. Alban 
near Chambery. Without entering into details, it 



X 


PREFACE 


may be said that they completely confirm the view 
expressed in the Introduction, that the material made 
use of by Chappuzeau was largely documentary ; that 
it could have been communicated orally by dictation, 
the internal evidence, as it appeared to me, sufficiently 
disproved. 

Chappuzeau’s work consisted in giving a literary 
style, .such as it was, to Tavernier’s simple and rough 
notes ; but in this work Tavernier himself very possibly 
assisted. These MS. Memoirs contain some details 
not included in the Travels, such as personal expenses 
and other minor day-to-day notes. The death of M. 
Ardilli^re, a subject of some confusion (see p. 159 «), 
is fixed by the original record as having taken place 
on the 1 2th December 1652. And Tavernier’s arrival 
at Ispahan in 1654 was on the 9th of July, not in May 
as previously supposed. 

It is hoped that this original text may be published, 
as it would seem, from the glimpse of it thus given by 
Prof. Joret, that it would to a great extent aid in 
co-ordinating various statements in the published 
Travels which are now contradictory. 

The suggestion that J. B. Tavernier had been 
imprisoned in the Bastille on the 13th January 1686 is 
now shown ^ to be a mistake, and that it was a name- 
sake of his, a Tavernier of Villiers-le-Bel, who was so 
incarcerated. 

Passing the important additional information 
obtained as to Tavernier’s relations with the Elector 
of Brandenburg, we find that Prof. Joret has reason 
for concluding that the discovery of the supposed 

1 M. Douen in Bulletin de la Societe du Protestantisme Franqais, 
vol. xxxiv, 1887, p. 95. 



PREFACE 


XI 


tombstone of Tavernier at Moscow is of a somewhat 
mythical character ; but, be that as it may, an important 
letter from the Swedish Resident at Moscow, dated 
8th March 1689, has been discovered, by which the 
Swedish Chancellor was informed that Tavernier had 
died three weeks previously, not at Moscow, but at 
Smolensk, when on his journey to Moscow. 

In Book II, chap, xxi (vol. ii, p. 122) a table is 
given showing the ratio between carats and a weight 
called chegos, which was used by the Portuguese in 
the pearl trade. I was unable to explain this table ; 
but since it has been in type I have shown it to Mr. 
A. Rambaut, Assistant to the Astronomer Royal for 
Ireland, who has very kindly given me what appears 
to be a completely adequate explanation of its con- 
struction, as follows : — For the first six equivalents the 
equation j)/ = 3 -f- + represents the relation where 

y = the number of chegos and x the number of carats, 
subject, however, to the condition that wherever an 
uneven number of eighths of a carat occurs one is 
rejected. If this rule is followed the precise figures 
of Tavernier’s table are obtained. 

From seven carats onwards a very simple rule is 
followed in order to obtain the number of chegos. It 
is to multiply the number of carats by 10, divide by 
1 2, and square the result — thus 36 x 10-4-12 = 30, which 
squared = 900. There is one exception to this rule in 
the case of 25 carats, which in the table is given as 
equal to 430 chegos, whereas it ought to be, when 
calculated as above, 434.05 chegos. This discrepancy 
is probably due to a misprint, so that the table should 
be corrected accordingly. 

When in the course of these pages reference was 



PREFACE 


xii 


made to the Grand Duke of Tuscany’s diamond, it 
was supposed that the weight given by Schrauf for 
this diamond, which is now in the Imperial Treasury 
in Austria, was to be accepted as more correct than 
Tavernier’s, but an examination of Schrauf ’s original 
papers shows that he really confirms Tavernier’s 
weight for the stone in a very remarkable way. The 
present weight is i 33 -|- Vienna carats, which are equal 
to 139^ of the lighter Florentine carats; and as 
Tavernier gives the weight at 139-2- carats we are 
justified in concluding that in this case he used, and 
that in general he was probably in the habit of using, 
the Florentine carat = 0.1972 grams, or 3.04 grs. 
troy, i.e. 4 per cent less than the English carat. The 
previous estimate of the value of the pearl rati given 
in Appendix, vol. i, having been calculated on the 
basis of -l-ths of a modern English or French carat, 
amounted to 2.77 grs. troy ; but as ^-ths of a Florentine 
carat only amounts to 2.66 grs. troy, it seems probable 
that that would more closely approximate to the value 
of the pearl rati which was used in the weighment of 
jewels by Tavernier. From the discussion on the 
weight of Bdbar’s diamond given in Appendix I (p. 432) 
in this volume, it will be seen that there is independent 
testimony by Ferishta in favour of the view that 2.66 
approximates more closely to the true value of the 
rati known to Tavernier and Ferishta. Other con- 
firmatory evidence of this having been the value of 
the pearl ratt will be found in the same Appendix. 

A partial and preliminary notice of Tavernier’s 
work has been referred to on p. 126 as having appeared 

^ Prof. Church, Precious Stones, p. gives the value as 0.1965 



PREFACE 


xiii 


in the Philosophical Transactions, to which it should 
be added that in the same journal abstracts of the 
contents of the first two volumes were subsequently 
published^ 

The reader’s attention is invited to the curious 
facts brought out in Appendix VI, from which it would 
appear that Chappuzeau obtained access to some of 
Tavernier’s Memoirs while the latter was still absent 
on his last voyage. So far as I can ascertain it has 
never before been recognised that the Histoire des 
Joyaux and the English version of it, The History of 
Jewels, were founded on Tavernier’s original Memoirs. 
This work serves to clear up several points commented 
on in the footnotes. 

During a recent visit to Holland I ascertained 
that, as stated in the Bibliography (see vol. I, p. xlvi,) 
there is but one edition of Tavernier’s Travels in 
the Dutch language. It was translated by J. H. 
Glazemaker, and published at Amsterdam in 1682. 
A copy of it which I obtained contains a number of 
engravings by Jan Luyken in addition to copies of the 
original plates in the French editions. 

It is hoped that the present edition of Tavernier’s 
Indian Travels, by drawing attention to the work, will 
hereafter lead to the further elucidation of many points 
of interest ; and the Editor desires to intimate here, to 
those who may be willing to assist, that he will grate- 
fully acknowledge all contributions on the subject 
which he may receive from readers of these volumes. 

1 No. 129, Nov. 20, 1676, p. 711 ; No. 130, Dec. 14, p. 7 SU 




TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


BOOK II (Continued) 

>\ 

Historical and Political Description of the Empire of the Great 

Mogul 

Chapter XII. — Concerning the articles of merchandise yielded by 
the Empire of the Great Mogul, and the Kingdoms of Gol- 
CONDA and Bijapur and other neighbouring territories 

Page I 

Chapter XIII. — Concerning the frauds which can be practised in 
manufactures, whether by the roguery of the workers or the 
knavery of the brokers and buyers . . . .26 

Chapter XIV. — Concerning the methods to be observed for estab- 
lishing a new Commercial Company in the East Indies 33 

Chapter XV. — Concerning diamonds and the mines and rivers 
where they are found j and especially of the Author’s journey 
to the Mine of Ramulkota (Raolconda of the original) . 53 

Chapter XVI. — Journey of the Author to the other Mines, and 
concerning the method of searching for Diamonds . 72 

Chapter XVII. — A continuation of the Author’s journeys to the 
‘Diamond Mines 81 

Chapter XVIII. — The different kinds of weights for weighing 
diamonds at the Mines ; the kinds of gold and silver in circu- 
lation ; the routes by which one is able to travel ; and the rule 
in use for the estimation of the prices of diamonds . 89 

Chapter XIX. — Concerning Coloured Stones and the places where 
thev are obtained . . . . • • -99 



xvi 


TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


Chapter XX. — Concerning Pearls and the places where they are 
fished for . .... . . Page 107 

Chapter XXI. — Concerning the manner in which Pearls originate 
in Oysters, how they are fished for and at what seasons . 116 

Chapter XXII. — Remarks upon the largest and most beautiful 
Diamonds and Rubies which the Author has seen in Europe 
and Asia, the figures of which are here given, together with 
those of the large Stones which he sold to the King on his 
return from his last journey to India, with a representation of 
a magnificent Topaz, and the largest Pearls in the world 123 

Chapter XXIII. — Concerning Coral and Yellow Amber and the 
places where they are found . ^ . . .132 

Chapter XXIV. — Concerning Musk and Bezoar and some other 
medicinal stones . . . . . . .143 

Chapter XXV. — Concerning the places from whence gold is ob- 
tained in Asia and Africa. . . . . -155 

Chapter XXVI. — Account of a notable act of perfidy done to the 
Author when he was about to embark at Gombroon for 
Surat . .164 


BOOK III 


Concerning the religion of the Muhammadans and that of the 
Idolaters of India : the voyage of the Author by sea from 
Surat to Batavia, and from Batavia to Holland ; and of 
many peculiarities in different Kingdoms of the East . 173 


Chapter I. — Concerning the religion of the Muhammadans in the 
East Indies . . . . . . . -175 

Chapter II. — Concerning Fakirs or Muhammadan beggars in the 
East Indies . . , . . . ^ .'178 

Chapter III. — Of the Religion of the Gentiles or Idolaters of 
India ..... 


Chapter IV. — Concerning the idolatrous Kings and Princes of 
Asia . . . . , ^ .187 

Chapter V. Concerning the belief of the Idolaters with respect 
to the Deity , ^ .100 



TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


XVI 1 


Chapter VI. — Concerning Fakirs, or the professional Mendicants 
of India, and their penances .... Page 196 

Chapter VII. — Concerning the belief of the Idolaters touching the 
condition of the soul of man after death . . .203 

Chapter VIII. — Concerning the Idolaters’ custom of burning the 
bodies of the deceased . . . . - .207 

Chapter IX. — How the women burn themselves with the bodies 
of their deceased husbands in India . . . .209 

Chapter X. — Remarkable histories of several women who have 
been burnt after the death of their husbands . . 218 

Chapter XI. — Concerning the most celebrated Pagodas of the 
Idolaters of India . . . . . . .225 

Chapter XII. — Continuation of the description of the principal 
Pagodas of the Idolaters of India . . . .240 

Chapter XIII. — Concerning the pilgrimages of the Idolaters to 
their Pagodas . . . . . . • *244 

Chapter XIV. — Concerning various customs of the Idolaters of 
India ......... 247 

Chapter XV. — Concerning the Kingdom of Bhutan, from whence 
comes musk, good rhubarb, and some furs . . .258 

Chapter XVI. — Concerning the Kingdom of Tipperah . 273 

Chapter XVII, — Concerning the Kingdom of Assam . .277 

Chapter XVIII, — Concerning the Kingdom of Siam . . 286 

Chapter XIX. — Concerning the Kingdom of Macassar and the 
Dutch Embassy to China 297 

Chapter XX. — The Author pursues his journey in the East and 
embarks at Vengurla for Batavia j the danger which he runs 
on the sea, and his arrival in the Island of Ceylon . 308 

Chapter XXI. — Departure of the Author from the Island of 
Ceylon, and his arrival at Batavia . . . .321 

Chapter XXII. — Concerning an affair which was raised unseason- 
ably for the Author in the Council at Batavia . . 326 

Chapter XXIII. — The Author goes to see the King of Bantam, 
and describes several adventures in connection therewith 345 



xviii TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


Chapter XXIV. — The Author returns to Batavia, and some days 
afterwards goes again to visit the King of Bantam, giving an 
account, in connection therewith, of the dangerous extravagances 
of some Fakirs, or pilgrims, on their return from Mecca 

Page 358 

Chapter XXV. — Concerning the Dutch war with the Emperor of 

Java 368 

Chapter XXVI. — The Author renders the last duties to his 
brother, who died at Batavia, and has fresh difficulties with 
the General and his Council . . . . .376 

Chapter XXVII. — The Author embarks on a Dutch vessel in 
order to return to Europe . . . . . .388 

Chapter XXVIII. — The Dutch fleet arrives at St. Helena, and 
the Author gives a description of that Island . .401 

Chapter XXIX. — The Dutch fleet leaves the Island of St. Helena, 
and the Author arrives safely with it in Holland . . 410 

The King’s Licence . . . . . .426 


APPENDICES 


I.— I. 


The Great Mogul’s Diamond and the true History of the 


431 


Koh-i-mir 

2. Summary History of the Koh-i-mir , . .444 

3. The Grand Duke of Tuscany’s Diamond, etc., and some 

further notes on the absolute weights of the carat and 
rati as they were used by Tavernier . . .447 

4. On the weights of some of the Diamonds, other Precious 

Stones, and Pearls, mentioned by Tavernier . 448 

II- — List of all the Diamond Mines in India of which there are 
authentic Records, arranged in Districts, etc. . . 450 


III. — The Diamond Mines of Bengal . 

IV. — The Diamond Mines of Borneo 
'V’. — I. The Ruby Mines of Upper Burmah 

2. The Sapphire Washings of Ceylon 
VI. — I. A Review or Abstract in the Philosophical Transactions of 
Chapuzeau’s (sic) work, entitled Histoire des Joyaux, pub- 
lished in 1665 4-71 

2. Note on the English Edition of the same work . 475 


457 

462 

465 

470 



A 


PLATES IN THE ORIGINAL NOT REPRODUCED 

Figures of three Rubies belonging to His Majesty. 

The animal which produces musk. 

Cobra di capello. 

Banyan tree and Fakirs. 

> A Fakir. 

Canjare {Khanjar\ or dagger. 

Marks on Batavian reales. 

Note . — The Dutch Edition (see ante.^ p. xiii) contains some 
additional Plates. 


A 



ERRATA ET CORRIGENDA. 


Page 53, note i, also page 78, for identification of the fourth mine, 
see p. 476. 

„ 94, line 18, /or i| read ij. 

„ 97, note 2, for Sol 9d read Sol o.9d. 

,, 98, note, line 3, /or 133I- read 133^. 

, , 144, note, line 2, for of read in. 

„ 159, note I, line ir,/or pp. 336 and 690 read 246 and 306. 

„ 206, note, /or Kulliani real Callian Bandar. 

,, 260, note 3, /or Arduiel read Ardeuil. 

,, 282, note 3, for Asia read Assam. 


4 



TRAVELS IN INDIA 


CHAPTER XIH 

Concerning the articles of merchandise yielded by the 
Empire of the Great Mogul and the Kingdoms of 
Golconda and Bijapur and other neighbouring 
territories. 

I CAN easily believe that those who have previously 
written on the condition of the Empire of the Great 
Mogul did not feel themselves called upon to give a full 
list of all the articles of merchandise which it furnishes 
to foreigners. This I shall endeavour to do according 
to the information I have acquired during the lonig 
years I have passed in different journeys in these 
countries. The reader will, without doubt, cheerfully 
approve of this research which I have made with so 
much care, particularly if he is connected with com- 
merce, and if he desires to know what art and nature 
produce that is curious, in different places, in order to 
subserve the human race. 

It is necessary to remember here, what I have 
remarked at the commencement of the first book, 
touching the weights and measures which are used in 

1 In the English translation by John Phillips of 1684, tliis chapter 
is numbered x, the two preceding ones having been omitted. 

'VOL. II 


B 



2 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


liOoK n 


India, where I have spoken of the mmind and of the 
seer} It is still necessary to say a word about the mbit} 

The cubit is a measure for all goods which can be 
measured by the ell, and there are different kinds, 
as we have different kinds of ells in Europe. It is 
divided into 24 tassus} and as the greater part of the 
goods of India are delivered at Surat, there is repre- 
sented on the margin a figure of the fourth part of a 
cubit of the town of Surat, divided into six tassus. 

I ought to commence this list of goods with the 
most precious of all, namely diamonds and coloured 
stones ; but, as that subject is somewhat extensive, and 
is the most important of my accounts, I shall give it 
separate treatment, and only mention in this chapter 
silks, cloths, cottons, spices, and drugs, which are the 
five classes which include all the kinds of merchandise 
obtained from India. 


Concerning Silks. 

KAsimbazAr,^ a village in the Kingdom of Bengal, 
can furnish about twenty-two thousand (22,000) bales 
of silk annually, each bale weighing one hundred (100) 
livres. The 22,000 bales weigh 2,200,000 livres at 
16 onces to the livre. The Dutch generally took, 
either for Japan or for Holland, 6000 to 7000 bales 
of it, and they would have liked to get more, but the 

1 See Appendix, vol. i. 

2 Cobit in the original. According to the figure here given by 
Tavernier of a quarter of a cubit, its length must have been 27-| in. 
The ordinary hdth of India, measured* from the top of the middle finger 
to the elbow, is i 8 in., but is sometimes increased by the width of the 
hand or of three fingers. 

2 Tassots in the original. 

4 Kasembazar in original, elsewhere Cosenbazar, for Kdsimbdz^r. 



CHAP. XII 


SILKEN FABRICS 


3 


merchants of Tartary and of the whole Mogul Empire 
opposed their doing so, for these merchants took 
as much as the Dutch, and the balance remained with 
the people of the country for the manufacture of their 
own stuffs. All these silks are brought to the Kingdom 
of GujarAt, and the greater part come to AhmadAbad 
and Surat, where they are woven into fabrics. 

Firstly, carpets of silk and gold, others of silk, gold, 
and silver, and others altogether of silk, are made in 
Surat. As for the woollen carpets, they are made at 
Fatehpur,^ 12 coss from Agra. 

In the second place, satins with bands of gold and 
silver, and others with bands of different colours, and 
others all uniform are made there, and it is the same 
with the taffetas. 

Thirdly, patoles^ which are stuffs of silk, very soft, 
decorated all over with flowers of different colours, 
are manufactured at AhmadAbAd. They vary in price 
from eight (8) to forty (40) rupees the piece. This is 
one of the profitable investments of the Dutch, who do 
not permit any member of their Company to engage in 
private trade in it. They are exported to the Philip- 
pines, Borneo, Java, Sumatra, and other neighbouring 
countries. 

^ Vettapour in the orig-inal, Fatehpur Sikri, which is 23 miles W.S.W. 
of Agra. See vol. i, p. 89. It was founded as the Metropolis of the 
Mogul Empire by Akbar in 1570. Previously it bore the name of 
Sikri. Its magnificence is testified by the ruins of palaces and mosques, 
which still attract many visitors. Its industries were numerous, including 
silk spinning, weaving, and stone-cutting. At present the carpets pro- 
duced there are of an inferior and coarse kind. 

2 This is from the Kanarese pattuda, “ a silk cloth ” (Yule-Burnell, 
Anglo-Indian Glossary^ Art. “ Patola”). Terry calls ptntadoes^ and 
extols the art displayed in stitching together fresh coloured taffata and 
pintadoeSj and taffata and satin, with cotton wool between, to make 
quilts.” (A Voyage to East India^ London 1777 ? P* 127.) 



4 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


COOK II 


As for crude silks, it should be remarked that none 
of them are naturally white except that of Palestine, 
of which even the merchants of Aleppo and Tripoli 
have difficulty in obtaining a small quantity. Thus 
the silk of KAsimbAzar is yellow, as are all the crude 
silks which come from Persia and Sicily. But the 
people of KAsimbAzAr know how to whiten theirs with a 
lye made of the ashes of a tree which is called Adam’s 
fig,^ which makes it as white as the silk of Palestine. 
The Dutch carry their silks and the other goods which 
they obtain in Bengal by the canal which goes from 
KAsimbAzAr to the Ganges, and this canal is nearly 
15 leagues long. There remains an equal distance to 
descend by the Ganges to Hugly, where they ship 
their goods on board their vessels. 


Concerning Cotton Cloths, and first of the painted 
fabrics called Chiles? 

The chiles or painted cotton cloths which are called 
calmendar,^ that is to say, made with a brush, are 
made in the Kingdom of Golconda, and especially in 
the neighbourhood of Masulipatam ; but the quantity 
made is so small that when one places in requisition 
all the workers who make these cotton cloths it is with 
difficulty that he can obtain as much as three bales. 

The chiles which are made in the Empire of the 

Adam s fig" is a translation of the P ortuguese name for the plantain, 
Musa paradistaca. The Muhammadans believe that its leaves were 
used by Adam and Eve to clothe themselves with in the Garden of Eden. 
Hence the name. The ash of the plantain resembles that of the potato, 
as it contains both potash and soda salts, and the percentage of phos- 
phoric acid and magnesia is said to be about the same in both. 

2 Chintzes. 

8 Properly kalamdar, derived from kalam, Hin., a pen or brush. 



CHAP. XII 


COTTON CLOTHS 


5 


Great Mogul are printed, and are of different degrees 
of beauty, both on account of the printing and the fine- 
ness of the cotton cloth. Those made at Lahore are 
the coarsest of all, and consequently the cheapest. 
They are sold by corges^ a corge consisting of 20 
pieces, and costing from 16 to 30 rupees. The chites 
which are made at Sironj are sold at from 20 to 60 
rupees the corge or thereabouts. 

All the chites of which I am about to speak are 
printed cotton cloths, of which bedcovers are made, 
and also sufras or tablecloths, according to the custom 
of the country, pillowcases, pocket - handkerchiefs, 
and especially waistcoats for the use of both men 
and women, principally in Persia. 

The chites of bright colours are made at BurhAn- 
PUR. They are made into handkerchiefs, which are 
at present much used by those who take snuff, and a 
sort of veil called ormis,^ which the women through- 
out Asia use to put on their heads and about their 
necks. 

The baftas,^ or cotton cloths to be dyed red, blue, 
or black, are taken uncoloured to Agra and Ah- 
madAbAd, because these two towns are near the places 
where the Indigo is made, which is used in dyeing, 
and they cost from 2 rupees the piece up to 30 or 40 
rupees, according to the fineness and the gold at both 
ends, and in some also on the sides. The Indians 
know how to pass some of these cloths through a 
certain water which causes them to appear like a 
waved camlet, and these pieces are the dearest. 

These kinds of cotton cloth, which cost from 2 to 

1 Probably from kori, Hin., a score. ® Or ornts (see vol. i, p. 52). 

s £asias in the original, for Bafias (see vol. i, p. 66). 



6 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


1 2 rupees the piece, are exported to the coast of 
Melinde,’^ and they constitute the principal trade done 
by the Governor of Mozambique, who sells them to 
the Cafres to carry into the country of the Abyssins 
and the Kingdom of Saba,^ because these people, not 
using soap, need only simply rinse out these cloths. 

Those which cost I2 rupees and upwards are 
exported to the Philippines, Borneo, Java, Sumatra, 
and other islands. The women of these islands have 
for their sole garment a piece of this cotton cloth, 
which, without cutting, one end serves as a petticoat, 
and the remainder is wound round the waist and head. 


White Cotton Cloths. 

White cotton cloths come partly from Agra and the 
vicinity of Lahore, partly from Bengal, and some from 
Baroda, Broach, Renonsari,® and other places. They 
come in a crude condition to Renonsari and Broach, 
where they have the means of bleaching them in large 
fields, and on account of the quantity of lemons 
growing in the neighbourhood, for cotton cloths can 
never be well bleached if they are not steeped in lemon 
juice. 

The cotton cloths which come from Agra, Lahore, 

1 Or Melinda, more properly Malinda, an Arab town on the east 
coast of Africa in S. Lat. 3° 9'. (See for notice Yule-Burnell, Anglo- 
Indian Glossary i) 

^ Abyssinia and Saba which was probably the Saboea of Strabo, 
occupying a large portion of Southern Arabia. 

3 With reference to this place. Col. Yule informs me that it is Nosdri 
or Navasdri, and that Van Twist, in his General Description of India 
(1638), says that it was 6 Dutch miles (24 English) to the south of 
Surat, and produced much coarse cloth. 



CHAP. XH 


COTTON CLOTHS 


7 


and Bengal are sold by corges, and they cost from i6 
up to 300 or 400 rupees and more, according as the 
merchant directs them to be made. 

The cotton cloths which come from Renonsari 
and Broach are 21 cubits long when crude, but only 
20 cubits when bleached. Those of Baroda are 20 
cubits when crude, and 19^ when bleached. 

All the cotton cloths or baftas which come from 
these three towns are of two kinds ; for there are both 
broad and narrow kinds, and it is the narrow of which 
I have just spoken, and which are sold at from 2 to 6 
mahmiidis each. 

The broad baftas are cubit wide, and the piece 
is 20 cubits long. They are commonly sold at from 5 
to 12 mahmiidis, but the merchant on the spot is able 
to have them made much wider and finer, and up to 
the value of 500 mahmiidis the piece. In my time I 
have seen two pieces of them sold, for each of which 
1000 mahmddis were paid. The English bought one 
and the Dutch the other, and they were each of 
twenty-eight (28) cubits. Muhammad Ali Beg, when 
returning to Persia from his embassy to India, pre- 
sented Cha Sefi ip with a cocoa-nut of the size of 
an ostrich’s egg, enriched with precious stones ; and 
when it was opened a turban was drawn from it 60 
cubits in length, and of a muslin so fine that you would 
scarcely know what it was that you had in your hand.^ 
On returning from one of my voyages, I had the 
curiosity to take with me an ounce of thread, of which 

1 Shdh Safi or Safvi II. Tavernier describes him in the Persian 
Travels^ Paris Ed., 1676, p. 524. 

2 This must have been like the famous Dacca muslins, upon which 
such names as db rawdn^ flowing water, were conferred. 



8 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


a livre' s weight cost 600 maJwitldis} and the late 
Queen-Dowager, with many of the ladies of the Court, 
was surprised at seeing a thread so delicate, which 
almost escaped the view. 


Concerning Spun Cotton. 

Both spun and unspun cotton come from the 
Provinces of Burhanpur and GujarAt. The un- 
spun cottons do not go to Europe, being too bulky 
and of too small value, and they are only exported to 
the Red Sea, Hormuz, Bassora, and sometimes to 
the islands of Sonde ^ and to the Philippines. As 
for the spun cottons, the English and Dutch Com- 
panies export large quantities to Europe, but they 
are not of the finest qualities ; of the kinds which 
they send the maund weight is worth from 15 to 50 
mahmdidis^ These are the kinds which are used to 
make the wicks of candles, and stockings, and to 
mingle with the web of silken stuffs. As for the finest 
qualities, they are of no use in Europe. 


Concerning Indigo. 


Indigo comes from different localities of the Empire 
of the Great Mogul, and in these different localities 
it is of various qualities, which increase or diminish its 
price. 

In the first place some comes from the country of 

^ /.<?. about £22 : los. 

2 Sunda archipelago, in the Sun da straits, where the volcano of 
Krakatoa is situated. (See vol. i, p. 191.) 

3 I.e, the maund of 34 Uvres is worth iis. 3d. to ; 17 ; 6, with 
the mahmiidi at gd. 



CHAP. XII 


INDIGO 


9 


BianA, from Indoua/ and from Corsa,^ one or two 
days’ march from Agra ; and this is considered to be 
the best of all. It is made also at eight days’ march 
from Surat, and at two leagues from AiimadAbAd, in 
a village called Sharkej.® It is from thence indigo 
cake comes, and some of the same kind and nearly the 
same price comes also from the country of the King of 
Golconda, The maund of Surat, which is 42 seers, 
or 34^ of our livres, is sold for from 15 to 20 rupees. 
There is also made at Broach some of the same quality 
■as this last. As for that from the neighbourhood of 
Agra, it is made in small pieces like hemispheres, and 
it is, as I have said, the best in India. It is sold by 
the maund, and the maund in these regions is 60 seers, 
which are equal to 5 1-| of our livres. One pays generally 
for it from 36 to 40 rupees. Indigo is also produced 
at 36 leagues from BurhAnpur on the road to Surat at a 
large village called Raout,* and other small villages in its 
neighbourhood ; and the people of the place generally 
sell more than 100,000 rupees worth of it every year. 

There comes lastly the indigo of Bengal, which 
the Dutch Company conveys to Masulipatam ; but 
you can buy this indigo and that of BurhAnpur and 
AhmadAbAd cheaper by 30 per cent than that of Agra. 

Indigo is made from a plant® which is sown every 
year after the rains, and which, before preparation, much 

1 Indore ? 

2 Corsa I have not been able to identify with certainty. There are 
villages both to the south and north of Agra with somewhat similar 
names. Perhaps it is Khurjd in the Bulandshahr District. 

^ Sarquesse in the original. (See vol. i, p. 69 n.') 

^ Raout. This place has not been identified. It was probably not 
far from Sindkeir. 

^ The indigo plant, Indzgofera tinctoria^ Linn. 



10 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK II 


resembles hemp. It is cut three times in the year, 
and the first cutting takes place when it is about 2 or 
3 feet high ; and it is cut to within 6 inches of the 
ground. The first leaf is without doubt better than 
those which follow, the second yielding less by 10 or 
12 per cent than the first, and the third 20 per cent 
less than the second. It is classified by the colour, as 
seen when a morsel of the paste is broken. The colour 
of the indigo made from the first crop is of a violet- 
blue, which is more brilliant and more lively than the 
others, and that of the second is more lively than that of 
the third. But besides this difference, which causes a 
considerable effect on the price, the Indians manipulate 
the weight and quality, as I shall elsewhere explain. 

After the Indians have cut the plant they throw it 
into tanks made of lime,^ which becomes so hard that 
one would say that they were made of a single piece 
of marble. The tanks are generally from 80 to 100 
paces in circuit, and when half- full with water, or 
a little more, they are filled up with the cut plant. 
The Indians mix it and stir it up with the water every 
day until the leaf (for the stem is of no account) 
becomes reduced into slime or greasy earth. This done 
they allow it to rest for some days, and when they see 
that all has sunk to the bottom and that the water is 
clear above, they open the holes made round the tank 
to allow the water to escape. Next, the water having 
been drawn off, they fill baskets with the slime, after 
which, in a level field, each man is to be seen near his 
basket taking this paste in his fingers, and moulding it 
into pieces of the shape and size of a hen’s egg cut in 

^ The indigo vats are faced with “ chunam ” (lime), which, especially 
when made from shells, produces a marble-like surface. 



CHAP. XII 


INDIGO 


11 


two — that is to say, flat below and pointed above. But 
as for the indigo of AhmadAbAd, it is flattened and 
made into the shape of a small cake. This is to be 
particularly remarked, that the merchants, in order to 
escape paying custom on useless weight, before send- 
ing the indigo from Asia to Europe are careful to sift 
it, in order to remove the dust attached to it, which 
they afterwards sell to the people of the country, who 
make use of it in their dyes. Those who are employed 
to sift the indigo observe great precautions, for while 
so occupied they hold a cloth in front of the face, and 
take care that all their orifices are well closed, only 
leaving two small holes in the cloth for the eyes, to see 
what they are doing. Moreover, both those who sift 
the indigo and the writers or sub -merchants of the 
Company who watch them sifting, have to drink milk 
every hour, this being a preservative against the 
subtlety of the indigo. All these precautions do not 
prevent those who are occupied for eight or ten days, 
sifting indigo, from having all that they expectorate 
coloured blue for some time. I have indeed on more 
than one occasion observed that if an egg is placed in 
the morning near one of these sifters, in the evening, 
when one breaks it, it is altogether blue inside, so 
penetrating is the dust of indigo. 

According as the men take paste from the baskets 
with their fingers steeped in oil, and mould it in pieces, 
they expose them to the sun to dry. And when the 
merchants buy the indigo they always burn some pieces 
in order to see if there is any sand mixed with it. For 
the peasants who take the paste out of the baskets to 
separate it into pieces, after they have dipped their 
hands in oil, place it in the sand, which mingles with 



12 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK ir 


the paste and makes it heavier ; and when burnt the 
indigo becomes a cinder and the sand remains entire. 
The Governors do all they can to stop this fraud, but 
there are always some who practise it. 


Concerning Saltpetre. 

Saltpetre comes in abundance from Agra and from 
Patna, a town of Bengal ; and that which is refined 
costs three times as much as that which is not. The 
Dutch have established a dep6t at ChaprA,^ which is 
14 leagues above Patna; and the saltpetre being 
refined there, they send it by river to Hugly. They 
imported boilers from Holland, and employed refiners 
to refine the saltpetre for themselves ; but have not 
succeeded, because the people of the country, seeing 
that the Dutch wished to deprive them of the profits 
of refining, would not supply them any longer with 
whey, without the aid of which the saltpetre cannot be 
bleached, for it is worth nothing at all if it is not very 
white and very transparent. A maund of saltpetre 
costs 7 mahmildis.^ 

Concerning Spices. 

Cardamom, ginger, pepper, nutmegs, mace, cloves, 
and cinnamon are the several kinds of spices which 

1 Choupar in the original (see vol. i, p. 122). The crude saltpetre is 
obtained in India by lixiviation of the soil on deserted and even occupied 
village sites. It consists of the potash nitrate, and a simple explanation 
may be given of the chemical reaction which produces it. The nitro- 
genous waste of the village being brought into contact with potash 
derived from wood-ash, the ammonia is converted into nitric acid, which 
combines with the potash, and the salt so formed permeates the soil. 
A century ago most of the saltpetre of the world which was used for 
gunpowder came from India. Now there are other sources of supply. 

2 /.e. 5 s. 3d. for 34 livres. 



CHAP. XII 


SPICES 


13 


are known to us. I place cardamom and ginger as the 
two first, because cardamom grows in the Kingdom of 
Bijapur and ginger in that of the Great Mogul, and 
the other kinds of spices are imported from abroad to 
Surat, where they constitute an important article of 
commerce. 

Cardamom is the best kind of spice, but is very 
scarce, and as but a small quantity is grown in the 
place I have indicated, it is only used in Asia at 
the tables of the nobles. 5®*^ Hvres of cardamom are 
sold at from 100 to no reals} 

Ginger comes in large quantities from AhmadabId, 
where it grows in greater abundance than in any other 
part of Asia, and it is difficult to realise the quantity 
which is exported in a candied condition to foreign 
countries. 

Pepper is of two kinds, one of small size, and the 
other much larger ; these are respectively called small 
and large pepper. The large kind is chiefly from 
Malabar, and Tuticorin and Calicut are the towns 
where it is purchased. Some of it also comes from 
the Kingdom of Bijapur, and is sold at RAjapur,^ a 
small town of that kingdom. The Dutch who purchase 
it from the Malabaris do not pay in cash for it, but 
exchange for it many kinds of merchandise, as cotton, 
opium, vermilion, and quicksilver, and it is this large 
pepper which is exported to Europe. As for the 
small pepper which comes from Bantam, Achin, and 

1 Le, with the real at 4s. 6d., £^2. : los. to £2.6f : 15s. 

2 Regapour in the original is Rdjapur in the Ratndgiri District. 
As a port its importance has much diminished, it being now inaccessible 
for large vessels by the creek which connects it with the sea, 1 5 miles 
distant. In 1660-61 and 1670 it and the English factory were sacked 
by Sivaji. (See Imperial Gazetteer^ vol. xi, p. 385.) 



14 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Other places eastwards, it is not sent out of Asia, where 
much is consumed, especially by the Muhammadans. 
For in a pound of small pepper there are double the 
number of seeds that there are in a pound of the large ; 
and the more grains in the pillatis, into which they 
are thrown by the handful, the more are seen, besides 
which the large pepper is too hot for the mouth. ^ 

This small pepper, delivered at Surat, has been 
in some years sold at the rate of 13 or 14 mahim'cdis 
the maund,^ and I have seen it bought at this price by 
the English, who export it to Hormuz, BassorA, and 
the Red Sea. As for the large pepper which the 
Hollanders fetch from the coast of Malabar, 500 
livres^ of it brings them only 38 reals, but on the 
merchandise which they give in exchange they gain 
100 per cent. 

One can get it for the equivalent in money of 28 
or 30 reals cash, but to purchase it in that way would 
be much more costly than the Dutch method. As for 
large pepper, without going beyond the territories of the 
Great Mogul there is enough to be obtained in the 
Kingdom of GujarAt, and it is generally sold at the 
rate of from 12 to 15 mahmddis the maund.^ The 
wood of long pepper costs but four mahmddis. 

Nutmeg, mace, clove, and cinnamon are the only 
spices which the Dutch have in their own hands. The 
three first come from the Molucca Islands, and the 
fourth, i.e. cinnamon, comes from the island of Ceylon. 

It may be remarked that the whole - pepper obtained in the 
Bazaars, and commonly used in cookery in India, is a much smaller, 
less pungent, and generally inferior seed to that which comes to Europe! 

2 9s. 8d. to los. 6d. per 34 livres, with the mahmUdi at gd. 

2 I,e, £6 : 6s. to £6 : 1 5s. 

^ 9s* to I os, 6d. for 34 livres. 



CHAP, xn 


NUTMEGS 


15 


There is one thing remarkable about the nutmeg, 
namely, that the tree is never planted. This has been 
confirmed to me by many persons who have dwelt for 
many years in the country. They have assured me 
that when the nuts are ripe certain birds which arrive 
from the islands to the south swallow them whole, 
and reject them afterwards without having digested 
them, and that these nuts, being then covered by a 
viscous and sticky substance, fall to the ground, take 
root, and produce trees, which would not happen if 
they were planted in the ordinary way.^ I have here 
a remark to make upon the subject of the Bird of 
Paradise. These birds, which are very fond of the 
nutmeg, assemble in numbers in the season to gorge 
themselves with it, and they arrive in flocks as flights of 
field-fares do during the vintage. As this nut is strong 
it intoxicates these birds and causes them to fall dead 
upon the spot, and immediately the ants which abound 
in the country eat off their feet. It is on this account 
that it is commonly said that a Bird of Paradise with 
feet® has never been seen. This is, however, not 

^ This is so far true as regards the fact that the great fruit-eating 
pigeons are able to swallow large fruits, the stones of which they 
afterwards reject. These pigeons belong to the genera Car;pophaga 
and Myristicivora^ and I have often been amazed at the wide gape 
and the mobility of the articulation of the jaws of these birds. When 
wounded I have seen them disgorge very large fruits. Several species 
occur in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, and other allied species 
in the Malayan Archipelago. That these birds aid in propagating 
plants in remote islands by conveying the seeds cannot be doubted. 

2 As is well known, the true origin of this fable about the apodas is, 
that the natives who prepare the plumes of the birds of paradise for 
decorative purposes remove the feet from the skins, and as the birds 
were in early times only known by these dried and stitched-up skins, 
the idea spread that they had no feet. Tavernier’s explanation shows 
the tenacity of the myth. 



16 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


precisely true, for I have seen three or four with their 
feet intact, upon which the ants had not had time to 
operate. 

A French merchant, named Contour, sent one 
which had feet, from Aleppo, to King Louis XIII, 
who prized it much as it was so beautiful. 

But notwithstanding all the Dutch can do to pre- 
vent it, you can obtain cloves at Macassar, in the 
Isle of Celebes, without the spice passing through 
their hands, because the islanders buy in secret from 
the captains and soldiers of the forts belonging to 
the Dutch at the places where the cloves grow, taking 
them in exchange rice and other necessaries of life, 
without which they would be unable to subsist, being 
miserably supported. Whilst commerce was vigor- 
ously pushed by the English, they acted as though their 
object was to destroy that of the Dutch. After having 
bought a parcel of cloves at Macassar they sent them 
to all the places where the Dutch were accustomed to 
sell them, and giving them at a cheap price, and some- 
times even at a loss, by this means they ruined the clove 
trade of the Dutch. For it is an established custom 
in India that the first who fixes the price of any article 
of merchandise constrains all others, by his example, 
to sell at the same rate during the year. It is for this 
reason that the Dutch have established a factory at 
Macassar, where their officers raise the price of cloves 
as much as they can when the King of the Island 
opens the sale. They make considerable presents to the 
King in order to induce him to uphold the price, which 
neither the English nor the Portuguese, in the miser- 
able state in which their affairs are to-day, are able to 
prevent. 



CHAP. XII 


CLOVES 


17 


Whenever the people of Macassar have cloves 
they pay for the goods brought to them with that 
spice ; payment is also made with tortoiseshell, which 
is in great demand in all the Empire of the Mogul 
and in Europe : it is also made with gold dust, by 
which there is 6 or 7 per cent to be gained instead of 
its being lost on the money of the island, although it 
be gold, because the King adulterates it too much. 
The four places where cloves grow in abundance are 
the land of Amboine, the land of Ellias, the land of 
Seram, and the land of Bouro.^ 

The Islands of Banda, which are six in number, 
known as Nero, Lontour, Pouleay, Roseguin, 
PoLLERON, and Grenapuis,® bear nutmegs in great 
abundance. The Island of Grenapuis is about 6 
leagues in circuit, and culminates in a peak from 
whence much fire issues. The Island of Damne,® where 
the nutmeg also grows in great abundance and of large 
size, was discovered in the year 1647 by Abel Tasman, 
a Dutch commander. 

The prices of cloves and nutmegs, as I have seen 
them sold to the Dutch in Surat in certain years, were 
as follows : — The maund of Surat is equal to 40 seers, 
which make 34 of our livres at 16 onces to the livre. 

A maund of cloves was sold for 103^ mahmUdis. 

^ Amboyna, Gilolo ? Ceram, and Boeroe (or Buru), islands in the 
Molucca Sea. 

2 Pulo Nera {i.e. island of palm wine) ; Lontar (the name of a‘ 
palm) ; Pulo Ai or Pulo Wai {i.e, water-island) ; Rosingen (Rosolanguim 
of De Barros) ; Pulo Run (or Rung, i,e, chamber island) ; and Gunung- 
api (fire-mountain or volcano). These, with four others, constitute the 
Banda group. (Crawfurd, Diet.') 

^ I cannot identify this. Tasman discovered Van Diemen’s Land, 
but nutmegs can hardly grow there ; possibly Tavernier has made some 
mistake. 


VOL. II 


C 



18 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK II 


A maund of mace was sold for 1 5 7-^- mahmiidis 
„ nutmegs „ 56^ ,, ^ 

All the cinnamon comes at present from the Island 
of Ceylon. The tree which produces it closely re- 
sembles our willows and has three barks. The first 
and second only are removed, and the latter is con- 
sidered to be much the best. As for the third, it is not 
touched, for if the knife cuts it it causes the tree to 
die. This is an art which the natives learn from their 
youth. The cinnamon costs the Dutch more than is 
generally believed. For the King of the Island of 
Ceylon, who Is otherwise called King of Kandy,® from 
the name of the capital town, being a sworn enemy of 
the Dutch because they did not keep their promise 
with him, as I have elsewhere related, sends troops 
every year with the intention of surprising them when 
they go to collect the cinnamon. It is for this reason 
that the Dutch are obliged to have 1 500 or 1 600 armed 
men to defend an equal number of men while engaged 
in removing the bark of the cinnamon, and they are 
obliged to feed these labourers for all the remainder of 
the year in addition to the expenditure on the garrisons 
in several parts of the island. These great outlays 
enhance the price of the cinnamon ; it was not so in 
the time of the Portuguese, who had not all this 
expenditure, but placed all to profit. The cinnamon 
tree bears a fruit like an olive, but it is not eaten. 
The Portuguese used to gather quantities of it, which 
they placed in chaldrons with water together with the 
small points of the ends of the branches, and they 

1 Equal respectively to ;£3 : I7 : 6, jfs : 18 : i and ;£2 : 2 : 4 per 
34 livres^ 

Or Candy, as in the original. 



CHAP. XII 


DRUGS 


19 


boiled the whole till the water was evaporated when 
cooled, the upper portion of what remained was like a 
paste of white wax, and at the bottom of the chaldron 
there was camphor. Of this paste they made tapers, 
which they used in the churches during the service at the 
annual festivals, and as soon as the tapers were lighted 
all the church was perfumed with an odour of cinnamon. 
They have often sent them to Lisbon for the King’s 
chapel. Formerly the Portuguese procured cinnamon 
from the countries belonging to Rajas in the neigh- 
bourhood of Cochin.^ But since the Dutch have taken 
this town, and have become masters of the coast of 
Ceylon, where the cinnamon grows, seeing that that 
of the neighbourhood of Cochin injured the trade, 
because, not being so good as that of Ceylon, it was 
sold at a low price, they destroyed all the places where 
it grew, and thus there is no cinnamon now but that of 
Ceylon, which is altogether in their hands. When the 
Portuguese held this coast the English bought cinnamon 
from them and ordinarily paid 50 mahmlidis for a 
maund.'‘‘ 

Concerning the drugs obtainable at Surat, and those 
imported from foreign countries, with the price of 
each, per maund. 

Sal Ammoniac costs per maund according to the 

ordinary price ....... zomahmddts. 

Borax, like the preceding, is brought from Ahmad- 

abAd® without being refined, and costs per maund 35 „ 


^ Bastard cinnamon. (See vol. i, p. 234.) 

2 ;£i : 17 :6. 

® Probably brought to Ahmaddbdd from Thibet, but I have seen a 
statement as to its occurrence in Kathidwdr, which, however, requires 
confirmation. {Vide Economic Geology of India, p. 498.) 



20 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Gum-lac, 1 of which I shall speak below 

„ 5 , washed ...... 

„ „ in sticks of sealing-wax. 

Some kinds cost 50 and 60 77iah7m'idis per 7 ?iau 7 id^ 
and even more when musk is added to it. 
Saffron ^ of Surat, which is only used for colours 
White Cumin ^ . 

Black Cumin ..... 

small ..... 

Incense,® from the Arabian coast . 

Hftrrha.^ The good quality called 3£irrha-gilet 
Mirrha-holte^ from Arabia . 

Cassia . 

Sugar-Candy ..... 

Asutinat^ a kind of grain which is very hot 
Fenouil^ (Fr.), large .... 

„ small and very hot 
Oupelote}-^ root ..... 

Comt7'e^^ • • . . . 

Auzerotit,'^'^ from Persia 


7 i 77iah77if(dis. 


10 

40 


5> 

53 


4I 

s 

3 

3 

3 

30 

15 

2 

18 

I 

3j- 

14 

5 


53 

35 

35 

53 

35 

5 5 
55 
53 
53 
5 5 
55 
53 
5 3 
55 
53 


1 Shellac, produced on certain trees by the Coccus lacca. 

2 Saffron consists of the stigmas of Crocus sativus, L., which was 
an article of trade at the time the “Perz^lus” was written, and has been 
cultivated in the East ever since. 

® cjmmum, L., a small annual indigenous to 

e Uper Nile regions, spread by cultivation to Arabia, India, China 
etc. (Fluckiger and Hanbury, Phar77i(zcographia. p. 'zqk\ 

^ Not identified. 

® The gum resin {plibanuTn') of Boswellia floribunda^ Endl 

8 The precise nature of the trees yielding myrrh is somewhat doubt- 

called (true myrrh) and 

Bzssa Bol (an inferior variety). Arabian myrrh is obtained to the east 
o Aden (see Fluckiger and Hanbury, PharTTtacographid) 

\ L. B No't identified, 

he fruit oi PzTTiptnella amsuTTz^ L., cultivated in India 
Costus or kostus, the root of AucklantUa cosius 

obtained from Bosu^ellia flori- 
bunda^ but that has already been enumerated. 

18 For AnzarUt, a gum-resin once known to Europeans as a druo- 
under the sarcocoUa. According to Ainslie (^Materia Medica, voh 
1 , P. 381 ) It IS derived from Pencea mucronata, Lin., which yields t bv 
spontaneous exudation; it is a native of Afri’ca. It was u^ed by t£ 



CHAP. XII 


SHELLAC 


21 


Aloes Sucotrin^ from Arabia 

28 7 nahmudis, 

Reglisse^ (Fr.) ..... 

4 


Vez Caboulif a kind of root 

12 


Aloe-wood,^ in large pieces . 

. 200 

5 J 

„ in small pieces . 

. 400 



There is a sort of aloe-wood which, if very oily, 


costs per maund .... .4000 „ 

I shall now make some special remarks about gum- 
lac, sugar, opium, tobacco, and coffee. 

Gum-lac ® for the most part comes from Pegu, but 
it also comes from the Kingdom of Bengal ; and it 
is dearer in the latter places because the inhabitants 
of the country extract from it that beautiful scarlet 
colour® which they use to dye and paint their cotton 

Arabs for healing wounds, and by Mesue it was believed to have 
cathartic properties. According to Dymock’s Vegetable Mate 7 ia Medica^ 
2d Ed., Bombay 1885, it is still largely used by the natives of Western 
India. I am indebted to Colonel Yule for the two last identifications. 

1 Socotrine aloes, prepared from the juice of Aloe Socotrina^ Linn. 

2 Liquorice. 

3 Possibly for bish^ Sanskrit visha^ z>. poison, Aconite root. 

^ Bois aloes. This is the Lign Aloes of Latin writers and 
the Lignum Aloes of the Bible, it is quite distinct from the modem 
aloes, being the inside of the trunk of Aquilaria ovata and A. Agal- 
lochum^ which contain a fragrant resinous substance of dark colour. It 
was formerly generally used both for incense and for medicinal purposes, 
but is now only esteemed in the East. From the Portuguese term agila 
or aguila has come the popular name eagle -wood.” There is an 
account of it in Royle’s Illustrations^ etc., and Garcias de Orta devotes 
his 30th Colloquy to it under the title Linaloes, It is described very 
concisely in the Anglo-Indian Glossary^ Art. “ Eagle-wood.” It is used 
in the manufacture of the incense-sticks from Burmah, which are now 
well known in Europe. 

^ I have elsewhere identified the of Ktesias with shellac. 

(See “ On the Identification of the Animals and Plants of India, which 
were known to Early Greek Authors,” Proc. Royal Irish Academy^ 2d 
series, vol. ii, No. 6, p. 331 ; and for an account of the production and 
manufacture of shellac in Bengal, Jungle Life in India^ p. 308.) 

<5 The dye consists of the bodies of the female coccus which alone 
secretes the lac. 



22 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


liooK n 


cloths. Nevertheless the Dutch buy it to export to 
Persia, where it is used to produce the same colour 
which the Persians employ in their dyes. That which 
remains after the colour is extracted is only used to 
embellish toys ^ made in the lathe, of which the people 
are very fond, and to make sealing-wax ; and be it 
for the one or the other purpose, they mix whatever 
colour they desire with it. That which comes from 
Pegu is the cheapest, though it is as good as that of 
other countries ; what causes it to be sold cheaper is 
that the ants, making it there on the ground in heaps, 
which are sometimes of the size of a cask,^ mix with it 
a quantity of dirt. On the other hand, in Bengal, the 
district from whence they bring the lac being a kind 
of heath full of shrubs, the ants secrete it round the 
ends of branches, which makes it fair and clean, and 
it is consequently dearer. The inhabitants of Pegu do 
not employ it as a dye because they receive their cotton 
cloths ready dyed from Bengal and Masulipatam ; 
and, moreover, they are so uncivilised that they do not 
^^^S^ge in any art.® There are many women at Surat 
who gain their livelihood by preparing lac after the 
colour has been extracted. They give it whatever 
colour they wish, and make it into sticks like Spanish 
wax. The English and Dutch Companies export 
about 150 chests annually. Lac in sticks does not 

1 Such as the Benares toys, nests of boxes, etc., of the present. The 
coloured lac is applied in sticks to the wood surfaces as they revolve in 
the lathe, after which they require only to be burnished. 

^ This description may be due to some confusion about white ants’ 
nests. I have failed to find any peculiarity ascribed to the Burmah lac 
which would explain the passage. 

s Tavernier probably knew very little of Pegu, which he never 
visited. Had he done so he wotdd have found certain arts flourishing' 
there. ^ 



CHAP. XII 


TOBACCO AND COFFEE 


23 


cost more than lo sols the livre, and it is worth lo sols 
the once in France, though it be half mixed with resin. 

Moist sugar is exported in quantity from the King- 
dom of Bengal, and there is great traffic in it at 
Hugly, Patna, Dacca, and in other places. On the 
occasion of my last visit to India I went very far into 
Bengal even up to the frontiers of the neighbouring 
states. I heard a thing from many old people of the 
country which should be recorded. It is that sugar 
kept for thirty years becomes poison, and that there is 
nothing more dangerous or prompter in producing 
effect.^ Loaf-sugar is made at Ahmad As Ad, where the 
people understand how to refine it ; and it is called 
on this account royal sugar. These loaves of sugar 
generally weigh from 8 to lo livres. 

Opium comes from BurhAnpur, a good mercantile 
town between Surat and Agra. The Dutch go there 
for it, and exchange their pepper for it. 

Tobacco ^ also grows abundantly in the neighbour- 
hood of BurhAnpur ; and in certain years I have 
known the people to neglect saving it because they had 
too much, and they allowed half [the crop] to decay. 

Coffee grows neither in Persia nor in India.® 

1 It is not unlikely that there may be still a belief to this effect in 
India. I think I have heard something of the same kind about rice 
when kept beyond a certain time. Possibly they both originate in some 
proverbial saying having reference to storing up articles of food too long. 

2 The practice of smoking tobacco, which was first learnt by the 
Spaniards from the Cuban Indians in the year 1492, was introduced 
into Turkey, Egypt, and India about the end of the i6th century; and 
it spread steadily, though opposed by the severest enactments of both 
Christian and Muhammadan governments. (See Fluckiger and H an- 
bury, Pharmacographia.') 

^ It is perhaps needless to point out that this was written two 
centuries before the cultivation of coffee became an important industry 
in Ceylon and Southern India, 



24 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Nevertheless, since some Indian vessels load up with 
it on their return from Mecca, I give it place here 
amongst the drugs. The principal trade in it is at 
Hormuz and Bassora, where the Dutch, when return- 
ing empty from Mocha, load up as much as they can, 
it being an article which they sell well. From Hormuz 
it is exported to Persia, and even to Great Tartary ; 
and from Bassora it is distributed in Chaldee, in 
Arabia along the course of the EuriiRATiis, in Meso- 
potamia, and other Turkish provinces, — for as for India, 
it is but little used there. Coffee, which means wine 
in the Arabian tongue, is a kind of bean which grows 
at eight days’ journey from Mocha, on the road to 
Mecca. Its use was first discovered by a hermit 
Vi'a.ra&diL Sheikh Siadeli {i.e. Sayid Ali), some 120 years 
ago or thereabouts ; for before him there is no author, 
ancient or modern, who has mentioned it.’- 

All goods in coming from Agra to Surat, for 
despatch of bills of exchange at 5 per cent, for packing, 

^ Coffee was first mentioned in European literature in 1573 by 
Ruwolf. Seventy years later a sample of it was brought from Con- 
stantinople to Marseilles by Thevenot. It was first brought to Aden by 
Sheikh Shihdbuddin Dhabhdni, who died in 1470, hence it is concluded 
that its introduction was about the middle of the fifteenth century. 
Niebuhr states that it was first brought from Kaffa in Abyssinia to 
Yemen by Arabs. It appears to have been cultivated principally at 
Jabal, whence it was conveyed to Mocha. The Arabic name is kah^wa, 
pronounced kahveh by the Turks. The plant itself is called bun. As 
Tavernier says, the name kahwa was originally applied to wine. ( Vzde 
Yule-Burnell, An^lo-Indian Glossary^ Terry’s account of the use of coffee 

in India in his time is of sufficient interest to be (quoted in full : Many 

of the people there who are strict in their religion drink no wine at all ; 
but they use a liquor, more wholesome than pleasant, they call coffee, 
made by a black seed boiled in water, which turns it almost into the 
same colour, but doth very little alter the taste of the water. Notwith- 
standing, it is very good to help digestion, to quicken the spirits, and to 
cleanse the blood.” {A Voyage to India, London Ed., 1777, pp. loo-ioi.) 



CHAP, XII 


GOLD AND SILVER 


25 


carriage, and customs, according to their classes, are 
charged from 1 5 to 20 per cent. 

All the gold and silver, whether in ingots or coin, 
pays 2 per cent on entering Surat,^ The merchant 
does what he can to avoid this charge ; nevertheless, 
when caught, he is let off with paying double and 
nothing more. The Princes would like to confiscate 
the whole sum, but the judges are opposed, and main- 
tain that Muhammad forbade all custom dues and 
interest on money. I have spoken fully in the second 
chapter of the first book of the custom dues, the 
money, both gold and silver, and the weights and 
measures of India, to which I refer the reader. 


1 See vol. i, p. 8. 



CHAPTER XIII 


Co%c6V%ing tlie fvctuds which cct/ti be pvdctiscd m vio/iiu- 
factures, whether by the roguery of the workers or 
the knavery of the brokers and buyers. 

I SHALL follow in this chapter the same order as I 
have observed in the preceding, with the object of 
making plain, for the benefit of the merchant, all the 
frauds which can be effected in silk, cotton cloths, 
cotton, and indigo, for there are none in the case of 
spices and drugs. 

Frauds in Silken Stuffs. 

Silken stuffs can vary in breadth, length, and 
quality. The length and breadth are ascertainable by 
measurement, the quality depends upon whether they 
are uniformly woven, whether the weight is equal, and 
whether there is no cotton introduced into the web, as 
the Indians very often introduce it. 

The Indians, not knowing the art of gilding silver, 
put into their striped stuffs threads of pure gold ; on 
this account it is necessary to count the number of 
threads to see if the stuff contains the requisite quantity, 
and the same should be done in the case of stuffs 
striped with silver. As for taffetas^ it is only necessary 
to see whether they have a uniform fineness, and next 



CHAP. XIII 


FRAUDS IN COTTON CLOTHS 


27 


to unfold some of them to see if they contain any 
foreign substance to increase the weight, after which, 
each piece should be weighed separately, in order to 
ascertain whether it is of proper weight. 

It is in AhmadabAd where, as I have said, an 
abundance of these stuffs is made of gold and silk, 
silver and silk, and of silk alone, and carpets of gold 
and silver and silk, but the colours of these carpets do 
not last so long as those of the carpets which are made 
in Persia. As for the workmanship, it is equally 
beautiful. It is for the eye of the broker to observe 
the size, beauty, and fineness of the work in the 
carpets worked with gold and silver, and he ought to 
judge if it is good and rich. Finally, in the case of 
carpets, and in other stuffs worked with gold and 
silver, it is necessary to withdraw some threads to 
prove them, and in order to see if they are of the 
standard which they ought to be. 


Frauds in Cotton Cloths, and, firstly, in White Cloths. 

All the cotton cloths, both fine and coarse, which 
the Dutch company order to be made in the Provinces 
of the Empire of the Great Mogul, are brought in 
bales to the storehouse at Surat, and delivered to the 
broker about the months of October and November. 

The frauds commonly perpetrated are in respect of 
the fineness, the length, and the breadth. Each bale 
may contain about 200 pieces, among which five or 
six and up to ten pieces can be inserted of less fine 

^ The word in the original here is fapis.^ which should perhaps be 
translated otherwise than carpet, though that is the ordinary significa- 
tion of the word. Perhaps table-covers are meant. 



28 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


liOOK II 


quality, thinner, shorter, or narrower than the sample 
of the bale ; this cannot be ascertained without examin- 
ation piece by piece. The fineness is judged by the 
eye, the length and breadth by measurement. But 
they practise in India a still greater refinement, which 
is to count the number of the threads which ought 
to be in the breadth according to the fineness of the 
sample. When the number is lacking it is thinner or 
narrower or coarser. The difference is sometimes so 
imperceptible to the eye that it is difficult to discern it 
without counting the threads,^ nevertheless this differ- 
ence amounts to a considerable sum in the price of a 
large quantity, for it requires but little to abate an 
dcu or even two dcus on a piece when the price is from 
15 to 20 dcus the piece. Those who bleach these 
cloths, in order to save something for their profit on 
the quantity of lemons which are required, beat the 
cloths on stones, and when they are fine the beating 
does them much injury and diminishes their price. 

But it should be remarked that the Indians, when 
making their cloths, if the piece is worth more than 
2 dcus, insert at either end threads of gold and silver, 
and the finer the cost, the more of these threads do 
they insert, the price of which mounts to nearly as 
high a figure as that of the cloth itself. It is for this 
reason that it is necessary to forbid the workers to 
insert these threads of gold in cloths ordered to be 
made for export to France — this gold and silver, 
which the Indians insert as an ornament in their cloths 
and garments, being of no use to the French. But 

^ The Manchester goods of the present day are subjected to the 
same examination in India. It is a matter of some notoriety that fraud 
in connection with them is not unknown. 



CHAP. XIII 


FRAUDS IN COTTON CLOTHS 


29 


for the cloths which are ordered for Poland and 
Muscovie, it is necessary to have this gold and silver 
in the Indian style, because the Poles and Russians 
will have nothing to do with the cloths if they have 
not got the threads of gold and silver. It is necessary 
also to take care that they do not become black, because 
these peoples are unwilling to buy cloths when the 
gold and silver are black. 

As for the cloths dyed with indigo, either violet 
or black, it is necessary to take care that the workers 
do not blacken the threads of gold at the ends of 
the pieces, and that they do not beat the pieces too 
much after being folded, because they sometimes 
beat them so much, in order to make them smooth, 
that when one comes to unfold them he finds them 
broken at each fold. 

It should also be remarked that upon the fag end 
of the pieces of cloth the Indians print with a seal and 
gold leaf an Arabesque flower, which extends the 
whole width of the piece. But if these pieces are 
destined for France, it is necessary to forbid the 
workers to impress this flower, which costs a half 
piastre, and to save this sum on the price of the piece. 
But if it is for exportation to the Indian islands, any- 
where in Asia, or even to a certain part of America, it 
is necessary that this flower should be on the fag end 
of the pieces, and that it should be preserved entire, 
because otherwise one is unable to sell them. 

As for coloured and printed cloths, they are coloured 
and printed while crude, and it is requisite to take 
care that the work is accomplished before the end 
of the rains, because the more the waters where 
they are washed are disturbed, so much the more do 



30 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


the colours applied with a brush or printing block 
remain vividd 

It is easy to distinguish the cloths which are printed 
from those done with a brush, and if the broker is 
intelligent he will distinguish the difference in the 
beauty of one painted cloth from another by the clean- 
ness of the work. But for the fineness and other 
qualities of the stuff, they are more difficult to distin- 
guish in them than in the white cloths, and conse- 
quently it is necessary to observe more precaution. 


Frauds practised in Cottons. 

Cottons are the goods which are always first made 
and the earliest delivered in the stores of Surat, 
because they are all spun in the Province of Gujarat. 
The frauds possible with them are in the weight and 
quality. The fraud in the weight can be effected in 
two ways, the first by putting it in a damp place, and 
by inserting in the middle of each skein some substance 
which increases the weight, the second in not weighing 
it truly when the broker receives it from the worker 
or from the merchant who delivers it. 

The fraud in the quality is accomplished in but one 
way, which is by inserting in every maund three or four 
skeins of worse quality than that which is at the top, 
and in a large quantity that may amount to something 
considerable, for there is a variety of cotton thread 
which costs up to loo dctis the maund. As these two 
frauds are practised very often on the Dutch Com- 
pany, this is the precaution they are obliged to adopt. 

1 In Book I, chap, iv, p. 56, this is differently stated, but apparently 
it is so through an error in the mode of expression. 



CHAP. XIII 


FRAUDS IN INDIGO 


31 


It is to weigh, in the presence of the Commander and 
his counsel, and to examine carefully, each maund, 
skein by skein, to see if there is any fraud in the 
weight or quality. When that is done the Vice-Com- 
mander and those who are appointed under him to 
make this examination are obliged to attach to each 
bale a statement of the weight and quality ; and when 
the bale is opened in Holland, if there is anything 
wanting in either of these respects, those w’ho have 
affixed the statement are obliged to pay the deficit. 


Frauds practised in Indigo. 

I have said’^ that the natives withdraw the paste 
from the baskets containing the indigo, and mould it, 
with the fingers steeped in oil, into pieces, which 
are then exposed in the sun to dry. The Indians 
who wish to cheat the merchants place the pieces 
on the sand to dry, so that the sand attaches itself 
and the indigo then weighs more. They also some- 
times place the paste in damp ground, which makes it 
moist and consequently heavier. But when the 
Governor of the place discovers these frauds, he 
inflicts a heavy fine. Such frauds are easily dis- 
covered by a Broker and Commander experienced in 
the trade in this kind of merchandise by burning some 
morsels of indigo, after which the sand which remains 
becomes visible. 

I have still to make a somewhat curious remark 
touching the brokers of India. These brokers are 
commonly, as it were, chiefs of their families, for whom 
they hold all the property in trust to turn it to 

1 See p. 1 1. 



32 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK n 


account. For that reason those who have both the 
most years and experience are selected, so that they 
may be able to obtain benefits for all the kinsmen, 
being both the depositaries and the guardians of their 
goods. Every evening, after they have returned from 
their business, and, according to the custom of the 
Indians, who do not sup, have eaten some sweetmeats 
and drunk a cup of water, the oldest of the kinsmen 
assemble at the house of the broker, who renders an 
account of what he has done during the day, and they 
hold counsel together as to what should be done in the 
future. He is especially exhorted to take care of 
their business, and if possible to defraud rather than be 
defrauded. 


A 



CHAPTER XIV 


Concerning the Methods to be observed for establishing 

a new Commercial Company in the East Indies.^ 

Should any nation desire to establish a Commercial 
Company in the East Indies, before all things it 
ought to secure a good station in the country in order 
to be in a position to refit its ships, and to lay them 
by during the seasons when one is unable to go to 
sea. This want of a good harbour is the reason why 
the English Company has not progressed so well as 
it might have done, because it is impossible that a 
vessel can last for two years without being refitted, 
being subject to be eaten by worms. 

But since the journey from Europe to the East 
Indies is long, it is desirable that the Company should 
have some place at the Cape of Good Hope for water- 
ing and obtaining supplies of food, both when going 
and returning from the Indies, but especially when 
returning, because, as the vessels are then loaded, they 
are unable to carry a supply of water sufficient for a 
long time. In the meantime the Dutch have removed 
this advantage from the [reach of] other nations, by 
means of the fort which they have built at the Cape, 
and the English have done the same thing at St. 

1 This chapter is also introduced into the supplementary volume of 
Tavernier’s travels entitled Recueil de plusieurs relations et traitez 
singuliers et curieux^ etc., where it is somewhat modified in details. 


VOL. II 


D 



34 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK U 


Helena, although, by the law of nations and the 
general consent of the people of Europe, liberty to 
use these two places of refreshment has been for 
many years equally free to the whole world. Never- 
theless, there may still be some mouth of a river near 
the Cape where another fort might be constructed, and 
this position would be worth more than all that can be 
made in the island of Daufine,^ where there is no trade 
except in the purchase of cattle for the sake of their 
hides. But this trade is so insignificant that it would 
quickly ruin any company, and the French have hitherto 
engaged in it without any advantage to themselves. 

The conjecture which causes me to make the above 
suggestion is founded on the fact that in the year 
1648 two Portuguese vessels coming from Lisbon to 
India, desiring to touch at the Cape to take in water, 
and not taking their observations correctly, the sea 
being very high, entered a bay 18 or 20 leagues from 
the Cape on the western side. They found in this 
bay a river, the water of which is very good, and the 
negroes of the country brought them supplies of all 
kinds of river-birds, fish, and beef. They remained 
there about fifteen days, and before leaving took 
two of the inhabitants to convey them to Goa, in 
order to teach them Portuguese, and endeavour to 
draw from them some information as to the trade 
which could be carried on there.^ The Dutch Com- 

^ The island of Daufine of the original stands doubtless for the 
Fort of Dauphin, on the south-east coast of Madagascar. It was held 
by the French for some years, but was afterwards abandoned. 

2 The details in vol. i, p. 216, differ from those here given. The 
distance is there stated to be 30 leagues from the Cape ; the only 
conclusion which can be drawn is that this bay was a part of, or in the 
vicinity of, Table Bay. 



CHAP. XIV 


DIU 


35 


mander at Surat asked me to go to Goa, in order to 
ascertain what the Portuguese had learnt from these two 
negroes ; but a French engineer named Saint Amand,^ 
who had the supervision of the forts at Goa, told me 
that they had not been able to teach them a single 
word of the language, and had only guessed from their 
signs that they knew ambergris and elephant’s tusks. 
The Portuguese, nevertheless, did not doubt that they 
would find gold if they were able to trade with the 
interior. The revolution in Portugal and the wars 
with Spain have prevented them from examining this 
coast more particularly, and it is to be desired that the 
Company should examine it carefully without giving 
offence to the Dutch, or allowing them to suspect its 
object. 

It is, moreover, necessary that the Company should 
have a port near Surat to withdraw and refit its 
vessels, in case they are delayed by the rainy season. 
The reason is, that during this bad weather, when it 
is almost impossible to withstand (the violence of) the 
sea, the Mogul, for fear of danger to his fortress at 
Surat, does not allow any foreign vessel into the 
river, where otherwise, when unladen, they might 
remain protected from the destructive storms which 
last for nearly five months. 

The only place suitable for the withdrawal of the 
vessels of the Company is the town of Diu,^ which 
belongs to the Portuguese. The advantages of its 
position are considerable for many reasons. The area 
of the town includes nearly 400 houses, and is capable 
of affording dwellings sufficiently numerous, and where 


1 Called St. Amant in voL i, p. 204, and elsewhere. 
2 Diu, see vol. i, p. 6. 



36 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK n 


the (crews of the) vessels would find all they required 
during their sojourn. It is situated on the coast of 
GujarAt, at the point of the Gulf of Cambay, and 
faces towards the south-east. Its shape is nearly 
circular, and more than half the circle is surrounded 
by the sea. It is not commanded by any elevation, 
and the Portuguese have built some fortifications on 
the land side which might be easily completed. It has 
numerous wells of good water, and also a river which 
falls into the sea near the town, the water of which is 
better than that of Surat and of SuwAli,^ and the 
shelter is very commodious for vessels. 

The Portuguese, on their first establishment in 
India, kept a fleet at Diu composed of galleys, brigan- 
tines, and smaller vessels, with which they made 
themselves, for a very long time, masters of all the 
commerce of the places which are about to be enume- 
rated, so that no one was able to trade without taking 
out a passport from the Governor of Diu, who franked 
it in the name of the Viceroy of Portugal at Goa. 
The revenue which he obtained from these passports 
sufficed to support the fleet and garrison, and the 
Governor, who was only appointed for three years, did 
not omit to accumulate wealth for himself during that 
time. 

Thus, according to the forces that one might 
establish in this place, one would derive great benefit. 
The Portuguese, feeble as they are at present, do not 
fail to profit from not having to pay duty for the 
money which they carry into the Kingdoms of the 
Great Mogul and the King of Bijapur, nor for the 
goods which they take there. 

1 Suwali or Swally, see vol. i, p. 6. 



CHAP. XIV 


DIU 


37 


When the rainy season is over, the wind being 
nearly always north or north-east, you can go from 
Diu to Surat in light boats in three or four tides, 
but if large vessels are laden, it is necessary for them 
to coast all round. 

A man on foot going by land to a small village 
named the Gauges,^ and from thence crossing the end 
of the Gulf, can go from Diu to Surat in four or five 
days, but if the season prevents him from making this 
passage, he cannot go from Diu to Surat in less than 
seven to eight days, because he must then make the 
circuit of the Gulf. 

The town does not possess any territory outside 
the boundaries, but it would not be difficult to arrange 
with the Raja, or Governor of the Province, and 
obtain from him as much as may be required for the 
convenience of the inhabitants. The soil of the neigh- 
bourhood is not fertile, and the population around is 
the poorest in all the Empire of the Mogul. Never- 
theless, there is an abundance of cattle in the jungles, 
with which the country is covered, so that a buffalo 
or a cow does not cost more than 2 piastres,^ The 
English and the Dutch use these cattle to feed their 
people, and to save the provision of their vessels during 
their sojourn at Suwali. 

It is well to remark that experience has shown that 
the flesh of buffaloes® often causes dysentery, which is 

1 Probably Gogo or Goga on the western side of the Gulf of 
Cambay. There is another locality of somewhat similar name too, 
namely Gajna, near the point where the Narbadi. joins the M^hi S^gar, 
about 20 miles west of Baroda (A.S. 22 S.E.) ^ I.e. about 9s. 

3 I believe it to be the case that both the flesh and milk of buffaloes 
are at times, if not always, unwholesome. In most parts of India there 
is a strong dislike among Europeans against using either. 



38 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


calculated to be most injurious to crews, but the flesh 
of cows never gives rise to it- 

The Raja who rules the country bears the title of 
Governor for life ; and this is the case with nearly all 
the Rajas in the Empire of the Mogul, who were the 
nobles of the Provinces where their descendants only 
have the title of Governors. He treats the Portuguese 
well, because their position as neighbours brings him 
in money by the sale of his corn, rice, and vegetables, 
and for the same reason he treats the French still 
better. 

After the establishment of such a position, which 
should be the principal basis of the trade of the 
Company, there is nothing more important than to 
select two men, marked by their wisdom, rectitude, 
and intelligence in trade, and there should be no regard 
for economy in their appointments. These two men are 
for the service of the Company, one in the position of 
Commandant or Commander, as the Dutch entitle them, 
with a council of a certain number of persons to be given 
him for his assistance ; the other for the office of broker 
or merchant, who should be a native of the country, 
an idolater and not a Muhammadan, because all the 
workmen with whom he will have to do are idolaters. 
Good manners and probity are above all things neces- 
sary in order to acquire confidence at first among these 
people. It is necessary to seek to obtain the same 
qualities in the private brokers, who are under the 
direction of the Broker-general, in the provinces where 
the offices of correspondents are established. 

I ntelligence is not less necessary for these two men, 
in order that they may detect any adulteration in the 
manufacture of the goods. It arises, as I have said. 



CHAP. XIV FRAUDS BY THE COMPANY’S OFFICERS i 


39 


eitherfrom the wickedness of the workmen and merchants 
or from the connivance of the sub-brokers with them. 
This adulteration may cause so much injury to the 
Company that private brokers profit by it sometimes 
from lo to 12 per cent. If the Commander and the 
Broker-general connive together it is very difficult for 
the Company to guard against this fraud, but if they 
are both faithful and wise it will be easy to remedy it 
by changing the private brokers. 

The unfaithfulness which these officers are able to 
commit against the Company is this. When a vessel 
arrives in port, the letters of the Company and the bills 
of lading are handed to him who commands on shore 
for the particular nation. This Commander assembles 
his Council, and sends for the broker and gives him 
a copy of the bill of lading. 

The broker communicates it to two or three of the 
merchants who are in the habit of buying wholesale. 
If the broker and the Commander connive together 
to profit, the broker, instead of expediting the sale as 
he ought, tells these merchants privately that they have 
only to keep firm and offer such a price. 

Then the Commander sends for the broker and 
these two or three merchants. He asks them in the 
presence of his Council what they offer for the goods 
mentioned in the bills of lading which have been com- 
municated to them. If the merchants persist in saying 
that they will only give so much, the Commander post- 
pones the sale for fifteen days, more or less, according 
as he has reason for being pressed to sell. He causes 
these merchants to come many times, merely for the 
look of the thing, and he then takes the advice of 
the Council in order to save appearances, and for his 



40 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


own protection ; after which he orders the goods to 
be sold at the merchant’s prices. 

But although the temptation is great for these two 
officers, on account of their power, the frequent oppor- 
tunities, and the absence of their superiors from whom 
it is easy to conceal the truth, the Company is able, 
besides, by making a careful selection of these two 
persons, to remedy this disorder by removing the pre- 
text which the Dutch Commanders and brokers urge, 
which is that they are constrained to sell quickly to the 
merchants, wholesale, to avoid the costs of delay. 

The fault which the Dutch make is, that their 
officers order to be made on credit from year to year 
all the goods which they wish to export from the 
Mogul Empire, according to the instructions they 
have received from Batavia. The credit for this 
advance costs them sometimes 1 2, sometimes 1 5 percent, 
so that as soon as their vessels, laden with merchandise, 
have arrived at the port where they are due, they are 
obliged to sell promptly at the price which the whole- 
sale merchants offer to the brokers in order to obtain 
immediate funds to repay the advances which have 
been made for the preparation of the goods which their 
vessels carry away, and to obtain credit for the manu- 
facture of the following year. 

It is this which gives opportunity for the under- 
standing between the Commanders and their brokers 
with the merchants, who profit by the necessity which 
forces the sales, and besides, this private profit diminishes 
that of the Company, and a part of the clearest gain is 
expended in paying the interest of this loan of which 
we are about to speak. For this interest mounts, from 
time to time, more or less, according as the Commander 



CHAP. XIV FRAUDS BY THE COMPANY’S OFFICERS 


41 


and the broker agree to make it increase. In the 
event of French vessels carrying the same goods as 
the Dutch, they should carry in addition money for 
the advances to the artisans who work in the provinces, 
and for a part of the price of the goods which are being 
made for the following year. 

The Company by making this advance will not pay 
the high interest on the loan, namely 1 2 to 15 per cent, 
which the Dutch pay ; it will have the very best goods 
and at the best price. All the artisans will work more 
willingly for it on account of this ready money. 

The cargo of the vessels will be in readiness before 
they arrive in port. Being quickly laden they will be 
able to seize the good season for their return. The 
Company will not be compelled by necessity to sell at 
a bad price to three or four local wholesale merchants 
who have made themselves masters of the trade, 
whereas its brokers will be enabled to await the arrival 
of foreign merchants who will come to carry away its 
goods, or rather, because they will have the means 
to have them exported to the places where they will 
themselves be able to dispose of them. 

It should be remarked, besides, that it is profitable 
to carry gold and silver to India in bullion rather than 
in coin, because gold and silver are not valued in 
India except by their standard, and because there is 
always a deduction on coined money on account of the 
cost of minting.^ 

Should the broker be unfaithful, he is, moreover, 
able to come to an understanding with the master of 
the Mogul’s mint, established in every port in the 
Empire, and to value the gold or silver, coined or in 
1 See Book I, chap. ii. 



42 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK U 


bars, at a lower standard than it really is, by telling 
the Commander and his Council that in the assay 
which has been made at the mint it is found to be 
only of such a standard. 

But it is easy to prevent this fraud, provided that 
the Commander is upright and intelligent, if he sends 
for one of the native refiners of gold and silver, 
who can easily be found, and who understand how to 
assay metals perfectly, and if he has it done in his 
own presence. 

This is what the Sieur Waikenton did for the 
Dutch Company, in whose name he held a factory at 
KasimbazAr, where he received each year from 6000 
to 7000 bales of silk. He ascertained by this test that 
his broker, having an understanding with the master 
of the mint, cheated him of i-^ or 2 per cent on the 
quality of the gold and silver which was brought to 
him from Japan, whether it was in bar or in coin, and 
that the Company had been defrauded of considerable 
sums. 

The broker is able to defraud also by having an 
understanding with the master of the mint, or with 
him who weighs the gold and silver in bars, coin, or 

1 I am indebted to Mr. J. Twigg of the N. W. P. Civil Service, 
for the following account of the operations of one of these native 
assayers, as witnessed by himself. The object assayed was an 
ornament consisting of an alloy of gold and silver, which was first 
hammered out thin ; it was then heated in nitric acid, the vessel used 
being a broken glazed English tea-cup ; after some time, the silver being 
then dissolved out, the thin plate of gold was removed and fused with 
borax, the furnace being an old clay potsherd, and the fuel charcoal 
burnt under a mouth blow-pipe. The resulting gold button was then 
weighed, and the silver was precipitated by means of a piece of copper 
thrown into the solution. The nitric acid had been prepared by distilla- 
tion of a mixture of saltpetre and iron sulphide (Pyrites). 



CHAP. XIV FRAUDS BY THE COMPANY’S OFFICERS 


43 


dust, by employing too heavy weights, or scales which 
are not true. 

It is easy to prevent this fraud if the Commander, 
assisted by his Council, has them weighed in his 
presence with a scale and weights proved and stamped, 
which he keeps by him for the purpose. 

One of the most important observations that is to 
be made on the commerce of the proposed Company 
and the discipline of its factors is this : — 

It should forbid the merchants, sub-merchants, the 
scribes, and sub -scribes, who serve under the Com- 
manders, and the brokers, and also these superior 
officers, from doing any trade on their own private 
accounts, because having communication with all the 
artisans, and obtaining by the correspondence from 
the other factories information as to the articles of 
merchandise which will be good for sale in the follow- 
ing year, they do not fail to purchase them on their 
own account, and ship them on the vessels of the 
Company to the address of their correspondents, 
who share the gain therefrom. 

The Commander being himself interested, either by 
closing his eyes, or by a too great laxity, permits them 
to make this profit on account of their poor salaries.^ 
The captain of the vessel is in league with them, be- 
cause he secretly derives some advantage for allowing 
them to load and unload. And inasmuch as these 
officers have but little capital, and desire to receive 
the price on the return of the vessel, they direct their 
correspondents to sell at from 8 to lo per cent below 
market price, which they can easily do, because, as I 
shall say further on, they do not pay custom dues 

^ See p. 48. 



44 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


either at Surat or at Gombroon, and because they gain 
by this means about 26 per cent ; and so this causes 
a considerable injury to the Company, and particularly 
to foreign merchants. 

To remedy this disorder it is requisite to profit by 
the mistake of the Dutch, and to do that which they 
now practise, having realised the extent of this injury 
after an experience of many years. For, in fine, the 
Commander is not ignorant of the profit which there 
is for officials of the house when they load the goods 
of foreigners on the vessels of the Company, be it for 
Hormuz, for Bassora, for Mocha, or other places. 
With respect to Mocha on the Red Sea, the mer- 
chants who trade there are allowed one bale free of 
customs; it is for this reason that among their bales they 
have always one five or six times larger than the others, 
which ten or twelve men have difficulty in carrying. 

The freight of some vessels amounts to 60,000 
rupees, and when the Commander and broker are in 
league, they sometimes make a third, and even as 
much as a half, as their profits, over and above which 
a vessel never leaves without the Commander and his 
wife presenting some rewards to their most faithful 
servants and slaves of both sexes. To one they give 
permission to ship six bales, to another eight, and to 
another ten, more or less, and as the bales in these 
countries pay freight according to the value of the 
goods, when a merchant has any bale of great value, 
amounting sometimes to 20,000 rupees, he agrees for 
the freight at the best price he is able, and abates 
one half, at least, with one of these servants or slaves 
who has received this free permission from his master 
or mistress. 



CHAP. XIV FRAUDS BY THE COMPANY’S OFFICERS 


45 


The pursers also take part in it, but as for the 
merchants and sub -merchants, they disdain for the 
most part these small profits, and content themselves 
with their own shipments. Otherwise, by another 
artifice, when a merchant has some bales of rich goods, 
as of those Deccan caps, which are sometimes worth 
as much as 400 ^cus, or of these ornis ^ of Burhanpur, of 
which I have spoken above, which serve to make veils 
for the ladies of Persia, Constantinople, and other 
places in Asia and Europe — when, I say, a merchant 
has some bales of valuable goods which should pay 
high duty to the Prince of the place where they are 
to be loaded, as soon as they are on board, the 
purser and captain, who are in league with the 
merchant, place on each the Company’s mark, and 
after reaching the store of the place where they have 
been landed with the goods of the Company, they 
are removed at night in secret to the house of the 
merchant. 

These people are able, moreover, to make use of 
still another artifice. If the merchant is a friend of 
the Commander he settles with him, and pretending 
to have bought the bales of merchandise from the 
Company, which is free from all custom, he is 
released by paying the 2 per cent, the same as all 
those who have bought goods from the Company.® 

The following is the remedy which can be brought 
to bear on this irregularity. It is necessary to establish 
in the principal factory a fiscal counsellor to act in the 
name of the King and by his authority. He should be 

1 Omis (see vol. i, p. 52). 

2 The preceding four paragraphs are omitted in the reprint in the 
Recueil. 



46 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


liooK n 


independent of the General of the Company, in order 
that he may have the right to keep an eye upon his 
actions as upon those of the least of the officers. 

A man of position is required for this post, who 
will be resolute and watchful, and who has under him 
a representative at each factory. Each of these repre- 
sentatives, in the exercise of his duties, should observe 
what is indicated in the following articles : — 

As soon as he sees a vessel belonging to the Com- 
pany in the offing, he should go at once, or sometimes, 
according to the season, he should await till it has cast 
anchor. 

Then the captain of the vessel should deliver no 
letter to any other person, but should place all in the 
hands of the representative, who will deliver those of 
the Company to the Commander. 

He should take two or three persons with him, 
who will remain on the vessel until it is unloaded, to 
see that all that is landed belongs to the Company. 
It is especially necessary that he should take care that 
the people whom he takes with him do not get drunk, 
for it often happens on these occasions that the officers 
of the vessel purposely intoxicate them when they have 
some contraband goods to send off the vessel, which 
they cleverly give to the fishing boats which bring 
them fish and other supplies ; this is done generally at 
night. 

If it is a place where there are neighbouring 
islands, as the time is approximately known when the 
vessels ought to arrive, the representative of the Fiscal 
Counsellor should send beforehand, as far off as he 
can, two or three small boats, to be on the look-out 
round these islands, and as soon as they have dis- 



:hap. XIV FRAUDS BY THE COMPANY’S OFFICERS 


47 


covered the vessel, they should join her, to prevent 
iny contraband goods being landed in the islands, to 
ivhich the bribed persons might come to carry them 
secretly to whomsoever they are addressed. 

He should confiscate all that he discovers in the 
iressel not bearing the mark of the Company, or 
which does not belong to foreign merchants. 

He should be able to dismiss from his post the 
officer to whom the goods belong, if a subaltern ; but 
if it is one of the superiors he should give notice of 
it to the Chief of the Factory, who, with his Council, 
will be able to degrade him from his office and confis- 
cate his salary. 

He may order all letters of private persons to be 
opened to detect this contraband trade and the parties 
to it. This is why the captain of the vessel is obliged 
to hand them over to him ; but he may not open the 
Company’s letters. 

The (proceeds of this) confiscation of goods 
should be applied, one third to the poor of the nation, 
another third to the Company, and the remainder to 
the Fiscal and his officers, and this it is which the 
Dutch do. 

He will also represent the King in all criminal and 
civil processes which come before the Commander and 
his Council, and he will be able to requisition and take 
part in the name of his Majesty in all kinds of actions. 

Provided always that this officer is vigilant and a 
man of integrity, he will be able to render considerable 
service to the Company. 

If the English had established such an one in their 
factories, they would have had greater profit ; but the 
officers of that nation pretend that there is no superior 



48 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


power capable of withdrawing the privilege from them 
after they have once completed their apprenticeship in 
London, and hold the certificate of their master of 
having served him well for seven yearsd 

This injunction against private trade cannot be too 
strictly imposed. It is observed to-day with so much 
strictness amongst the Dutch that when a vessel of 
that Company is ready to leave Amsterdam, a Burgo- 
master administers to the captain and all on board a 
solemn oath that they will content themselves with 
their wages, two months’ of which are given in 
advance, and that they will not trade on their own 
account ; but the conduct of the Company in respect 
to their wages compels them, in spite of their oaths, to 
aid themselves by secret traffic to subsist while in their 
employment. 

This is the artifice which they make use of to 
satisfy their consciences. When they have arrived in 
India, and see themselves in the way of obtaining 
some good employment, they marry as quickly as pos- 
sible, and trade secretly in their wives’ names ; this is 
not always permitted. And they imagine that in this 
way their conscience is relieved. But they are some- 
times caught, and I shall give a somewhat amusing 
example of it, from among many others which I could 
recount. 

1 The salaries of the English Company’s officials at this period, as 
Stated by Dr. John Fryer, were so small that one would suppose that 
they could have hardly subsisted without having some private oppor- 
tunities for trade. The writers had to serve five years for £io per 
annum, factors had £20 for three years, merchants £^o during their 
stay in the service, besides free food and •lodging. The President 
received £soo a. year, of which half was reserved at home to be con- 
fiscated in case of misdemeanour, in addition to his bond of ;!^^5ooo. 
(New Account^ Calcutta Ed., p. 70.) 



CHAP. XIV 


CONTRABAND TRADE BY LADIES 


49 


The captain of a vessel,^ a rich man, who troubled 
himself little about making court to the wives of the 
Chiefs of the Company, became a butt for their 
attacks, and was one day stung by some remarks 
made by Madame la G6n6rale, who was talking to 
him at Batavia in the presence of many ladies, for 
which, without saying a word then, and well knowing 
all their intrigues, he resolved to avenge himself on 
the first occasion, which offered itself in this manner. 

When this captain was about to return from 
PuLiCAT to Batavia, the wife of the Governor of the 
former place, who was in league with Madame la 
Generale in some private trade, believing that the 
captain was one of her friends, begged him to ship 
secretly eight bales of very valuable goods, and to 
have particular care that they were not wetted, in order 
to take them to Batavia ; this the captain promised 
to do, and he placed the bales in a separate place. 

Having arrived at Batavia, he went first, according 
to custom, to salute the General and to hand him the 
letters belonging to the Company. The General is in 
the habit of keeping the captains to dinner or to supper, 
according to the hour of their arrival. There are always 
present on these occasions some Councillors of India, to 
hear the news, who remain to dine with the General. 

At the close of the repast the General asked the 
captain what news he had from Pulicat, and if the 
Governor and his wife had not asked for anything to 
be done for them. “Nothing,” replied the captain 
coldly, “except that Madame, the Governor’s wife, 

1 This story is also told in the Histoire de la Conduite des Hollandois 
en Asze^ chap, vi, where the General is called Matsuker and the captain 
Lucifer ! 

K 


VOL. II 



60 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Specially charged me with eight bales of goods, and to 
keep a good eye on them, so that they should not get 
damp, being articles of great value, and to deliver 
them on my arrival into the hands of Madame la 
Gdndrale.” This little-expected reply much surprised 
the General and those of the Council who were dining 
with him, and still more Madame la General e, to 
whom the husband, turning, asked somewhat rudely if 
she carried on trade with the wife of the Governor of 
PuLiCAT, which, according to the laws of the Company, 
would have been criminal. Madame la Generale 
having stoutly defended herself, protesting that she 
knew nothing of what the captain had said, the 
General then told the latter that he must be mistaken, 
and there and then ordered the Fiscal to go and seize 
the bales, and expose them on the quay to see if they 
would be claimed by any merchant. After they had 
remained there for some days without any one present- 
ing himself to ask for them, they were confiscated ; 
and thus, without great noise, the captain had his 
revenge for the displeasure he had received at the 
hands of Madame la Generale.^ 

All the subaltern officers of the Factories should be 
promoted by steps, from that of the post of sub-writer 
to that of Commander, so that the expectation of 
this promotion should encourage them to live well, 
and acquire all the niceties and details of the Indian 
trade in order to qualify for the highest posts. 

It is of the greatest importance not to show any 
favour in this, and that interest should not give advance- 
ment to any one without his having passed through all 
the steps ; for one of the things which does most injury 
1 The previous four paragraphs are omitted in the Reciieil. 



CHAP. XIV 


PATRONAGE IN APPOINTMENTS 


61 


to the Dutch trade is that for some years back the 
higher classes in Holland have sent their sons to 
India to seek for the posts which secret trade makes so 
profitable. The access which they obtain, be it to the 
principal officers or to their wives, whose power is great 
in this country, causes them to be preferred, when any 
post becomes vacant, to those who have no other 
recommendation than that of their long services. 

It is true that some years ago the General at 
Batavia and his Council, seeing the injury this did to 
the Company, wrote to the Directors that they may 
send people to India of whatever quality they please, 
but that they should not send any more with re- 
commendations ; that in the future they would be of 
no avail, but would rather injure the advancement of 
their friends, it not being fair that favour should 
precede merit ; that the General and his Council had 
sufficiently good eyes to recognise the fitness of those 
sent, and would employ them according as they were 
worthy and as it was considered proper. 

These are all the remarks which I have been able 
to make in reference to the discipline of the Factories 
and the methods that a new Company ought to observe 
for its establishment in the East Indies. 

But I was forgetting one thing, which is of import- 
ance for a commercial Company, and to which it should 
pay attention. Up to this hour the Dutch observe 
this precaution, that they send to India neither captain 
nor pilot who has not passed through all degrees, from 
a simple ship’s boy up to the most important charge, 
and does not know how to take observations, and is 
not thoroughly acquainted with the coasts. Moreover 
these captains are not of delicate constitutions, and 



52 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


content themselves for food with a piece of cheese or a 
slice of beef which has been in pickle for two or three 
years; And truly they are to be imitated in that 
respect. It is altogether different with some other 
nations, who often place on vessels captains who have 
never seen the sea, and whom favour alone immediately 
elevates to this post. In addition to which, when 
they embark they generally require elaborate cuisine 
appliances, plenty of sheep, calves, fowl, and turkeys, 
which consume much water, and soil the vessel with 
their droppings. Economy is the great support of 
commercial Companies, and it is an article to which 
those who are Directors should give their particular 
attention. 


A 



CHAPTER XV 


Concerning diamonds, and the mines and rivers where 

they are found; and especially of the Author's 

Journey to the Mine of Ramulkota.^ 

The diamond is the most precious of all stones, and it 
is the article of trade to which I am most devoted. 
In order to acquire a thorough knowledge of it I 
resolved to visit all the mines, and one of the two 
rivers where it is found ; and as the fear of dangers 
has never restrained me in any of my journeys, the 
terrible picture that was drawn of these mines, as 
being in barbarous countries to which one could not 
travel except by the most dangerous routes, served 
neither to terrify me nor to turn me from my intention. 
I have accordingly been at four mines,^ of which I am 

1 This is Raolconda in the original ; for its identification with the 
modern Ramulkota, properly Rdmallakota, see Book 11 , chap, xviii, p. 94. 

2 The four mines appear to have been — i, Ramulkota (Raolconda) ; 
2, Kollur (Coulour or Gani ) ; 3, Soumelpour; and 4, the locality on 
the Kistna between Ramulkota and Kollur, which, as pointed out in 
chap, xvi, p. 78, may have been a deserted mine near Damdrapid and 
Malawaram. The point is not quite clear, as in chap, xviii two mines 
near Ramulkota are mentioned, but there cannot be said to be descrip- 
tions of more than three mines in the text. There is ample reason for 
believing that the diamond mines existing in India in Tavernier’s time 
were far more numerous than he had any conception of (see Economic 
Geology of India^ pp. 1-50, and Afpendix to this volume). The two 
rivers he mentions seem to be — i, the Pennair River, below Gandikot^ 
probably in the neighbourhood of Chenur (see vol. i, p. 288) ; and 2, 
the river he did not visit, which was in Borneo (see chap. xvii). 



54 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


about to give descriptions, and at one of the two 
rivers whence diamonds are obtained, and I have 
encountered there neither the difficulties nor the bar- 
barities with which those imperfectly acquainted with 
the country had sought to terrify me. Thus I am 
able to claim that I have cleared the way for others, 
and that I am the first European who has opened 
the route for the Franks^ to these mines, which are 

1 Tavernier was not aware that he had been preceded by other 
European visitors to the mines, e.g, Caesar Frederick and Methold (see 
p. 72 and, as stated in the previous note, he was probably mistaken 
as to these being the only mines in India which were known in his time ; 
besides many in Southern India, those at Panna in Bundelkhand, Sambal- 
pur on the Mahdnadi, and Wairdgarh — the Beiragarh of the Ahi-t-Akbari 
— were almost certainly open then. We have, too, evidence of the work- 
ing of a mine by a European at an earlier date. A paper presented by 
the Earl Marshal of England to the Royal Society {Phil. Trans. ^ vol. 
xii, 1677, p. 907) states that about the commencement of the seven- 
teenth century (say 1610) a Portuguese gentleman went to Currure, 
i.e. Wajra Karur in the Bellary District, and expended a large sum 
of money, namely 100,000 pagodas, in searching for diamonds without 
success. He then sold everything he had with him, even to his clothes, 
and on the last day upon which he could pay the wages of the workmen 
he had prepared a cup of poison which he intended to take that night if no 
diamonds were found. In the evening a fine stone of 26 pagodad weight 
was brought to him by the workmen. The figures given in the paper 
indicate a value of 53 troy grains for the pagoda; at that rate 2.6 pagodas 
would be equal to 1378 troy grains, or 434.7 carats. The recognised 
equivalent of the pagoda is something less, namely 52.56 troy grains 
(Kelly, Universal Cambisf). In the same mine, we are told, diamonds of 
a seize {? Seer) weight, namely 9 ounces troy, or 8i|- pagodas, i.e. 1362.6 
carats, had been found ; and as Mir Jumla took possession of this mine, 
together with the Carnatic, one cannot help suggesting that it may have 
been here that the Great Mogul’s diamond was found, although Kollur 
is particularly mentioned by Tavernier as the mine which produced it. 
To return to the above-mentioned Portuguese, he took the stone with 
him to Goa, and to commemorate its discovery put up a stone tablet, 
on which the following lines were engraved in the Telegu language : — 

‘ ‘ Your wife and children sell, sell what you have, 

Spare not your clothes, nay, make yourself a slave. 

But money get, then to CuRRURE make haste. 

There search the mines, a prize you’ll find at last. ’* 



CHAP. XV 


DIAMOND MINE AT RAMULKOTA 


55 


the only places in the world where the diamond is 
found. ^ 

The first of the mines which I visited is situated in 
the territory of the King of Bijapur in the Province of 
Carnatic, and the locality is called Ramulkota,^ situ- 
ated five days’ journey from Golconda,® and eight or 
nine from Bijapur. The fact that the two Kings of 
Golconda and Bijapur were formerly subject to the 
Mogul, and were then only Governors of the Provinces 
which they acquired by their revolt, caused it to be 
said, and makes it said still by some people, that 
the diamonds come from the Kingdom of the Great 
Mogul. It is only about 200 years since this mine of 
Ramulkota was discovered, at least so far as I have 
been able to ascertain from the people of the country.'* 

All round the place where the diamonds are found 
the soil is sandy, and full of rocks and jungle, somewhat 
comparable to the neighbourhood of Fontainebleau. 
There are in these rocks many veins, some of half a 
finger in width and some of a whole finger ; and the 

1 He here forgets Borneo (see chap. xvii). 

2 Raolconda in the original. By means of the route given on p. 
94 this locality has been identified with Ramulkota, about 20 miles south 
of Karnul (Kurnool), where excavations are to be seen to this day {vide 
Economic Geology of India^ p. 15). The position is fairly indicated on 
the small map of India which accompanies the Revised French Edition 
of Taverniei^s Travels, published at Rouen in 1713- The identification 
both of it and Coulour have foiled many investigators both in this and 
the last century. But it is needless to refer here to the various sugges- 
tions as to their identification, as the question is now fully set at rest 
by the identification of the stages on the routes to these mines. 

3 On p. 94 the distance is given as being 17 gos or 68 French 
leagues. The true distance by the direct route is about 120 English 
miles. 

4 This evidence for the antiquity of the mine is of but little value, 
and cannot be relied on. 



56 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


miners have small irons, crooked at the ends, which 
they thrust into the veins in order to draw from them 
the sand or earth, ^ which they place in vessels ; and it 
is in this earth that they afterwards find the diamonds. 
But as the veins do not always run straight, and some 
ascend, while others descend, they are obliged to break 
the rocks, always following the direction of the veins. 
After they have opened them out, and have removed 
the earth or sand which may be there, they then com- 
mence to wash it two or three times, and search in it 
for whatever diamonds it may contain. It is in this 
mine that the cleanest and whitest watered diamonds 
are found ; but the evil is that in order to extract the 
sand more easily from the rocks they strike such blows 
with a heavy iron crowbar that it fractures the diamonds, 
and gives rise to flaws. It is for this reason that so many 
thin stones come from this mine, for when the miners 
see a stone in which the flaw is of some size, they 
immediately cleave it, that is to say split it, at which 
they are much more accomplished than we are. These 
are the stones which we call thin {‘'foible"), which 
make a great show. If the stone is clean they do not 
do more than just touch it with the wheel above and 
below, and do not venture to give it any form, for fear 
of reducing the weight. But if it has a small flaw, or 
any spots, or small black or red grit, they cover the 
whole of the stone with facettes in order that its defects 
may not be seen, and if it has a very small flaw they 
conceal it by the edge of one of the facettes. But it 

^ This description and what follows indicate that the mining was 
carried on in the rock, not in detrital beds. It is, indeed, now known 
that the matrix at Ramulkota is an old pebble conglomerate belonging 
to the “ Karnul ’’ series. 



CHAP. XV 


DIAMOND POLISHING 


57 


should be remarked that the merchant prefers a black 
point in a stone to a red one. When there is a red 
one the stone is roasted, and the point becomes black. 
This trick was at length so well understood by me 
that when I examined a parcel of stones which came 
from this mine, and saw that there were facettes on 
any of them, especially small facettes, I was certain 
that there was some speck or flaw in the stone. 

There are at this mine numerous diamond-cutters, 
and each has only a steel wheel of about the size of 
our plates. They place but one stone on each wheel, 
and pour water incessantly on the wheel until they 
have found the '‘grain*’ of the stone.^ The "grain” 
being found, they pour on oil and do not spare diamond 
dust, although it is expensive, in order to make the 
stone run faster, and they weight it much more heavily 
than we do. 

I have known them to weight a stone with 150 
livres of lead. It is true that it was a large stone, 
which still weighed 103 carats after it had been cut, 
and that the mill was like ours, the large wheel of 
which was turned by four blacks. The Indians are 
not of the same opinion as we are, in that they do not 
believe that weighting them causes flaws in the stones. 
If theirs do not receive any it is because they always 
have a small boy who, holding in his hand a very 
thin wooden spoon, anoints the wheel incessantly with 
oil and diamond powder. Added to which their wheel 
does not go so fast as ours, because the wooden wheel 
which causes the steel one to revolve is seldom more 
than 3 feet in diameter. 

^ The word in the original is chemin^ or “way” of the stone. It 
refers to the discovery of the position of the lines of cleavage, which 
determines the method to be adopted in the treatment of the stone. 



68 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


The Indians are unable to give the stones so lively 
a polish as we give them in Europe ; and this, I 
believe, is due to the fact that their wheel does not 
run so smoothly as ours. For, being made of steel, in 
order to grind it on the emery, of which it has need 
every twenty-four hours, it has to be taken off the tree, 
and it cannot be replaced so as to run as evenly as it 
should do. If they possessed the iron wheel as we do, 
for which one does not require emery but the file, it not 
being necessary to remove it from the tree in order to 
file it, they could give the stones a better polish than 
they do. 

I have stated that it is necessary to rub the wheel 
with emery or to file it every twenty-four hours, and it 
is desirable that it should be’ done every twelve hours 
if the workman is not lazy. For when the stone has 
run a certain time the part of the wheel where it has 
pressed becomes polished like a mirror, and if the place 
be not roughened by emery or the file, the powder 
does not stick to it. When it remains one does more 
work in one hour than in two when there is not 
any on the wheel. 

Although a particular diamond may be by nature 
hard, having, so to speak, a kind of knot,^ such as is 
seen in wood, the Indian diamond-cutters would not 
hesitate to cut such a stone, although our diamond- 
cutters in Europe would experience great difficulty in 

1 Certain points of a stone are often found to be exceptionally hard, 
as, for instance, when a facet is cut on the ang^le where two cleavage 
planes meet, or, so to speak, across the grain of the stone. (See p. 57 n.) 
A difficulty of this nature is mentioned by Messrs. Garrard as 
having been experienced when the Koh-i-nur was recut. (See Professor 
Tennants lecture Oti Gsths ctnd Pfsciotts SiOTzss^ Society of Arts 18^2 

p. 86.) 



CHAP. XV 


PAY OF DIAMOND MINERS 


59 


doing so, and as a general rule would be unwilling to 
undertake it ; but one pays the Indians something 
extra for their trouble. 

1 come to the government at the mines. Business 
is conducted with freedom and fidelity. Two per cent 
on all purchases is paid to the King, who receives also 
a royalty from the merchants for permission to mine. 
These merchants having prospected with the aid of the 
miners, who know the spots where the diamonds are to 
be found, take an area of about 200 paces in circumfer- 
ence, where they employ fifty miners, and sometimes a 
hundred if they wish the work to proceed rapidly. From 
the day that they commence mining till they finish the 
merchants pay a duty of 2 pagodas ^ per diem for fifty 
men, and 4 pagodas when they employ a hundred men. 

These poor people only earn 3 pagodas‘‘‘ per annum, 
although they must be men who thoroughly understand 
their work. As their wages are so small they do not 
manifest any scruple, when searching in the sand, about 
concealing a stone for themselves when they can, and 
being naked, save for a small cloth which covers their 
private parts, they adroitly contrive to swallow it.® 
The chief of all the merchants who embark in mining 

^ Say 1 6s. 

2 Equal to about one rupee or 27 pence per mensem, or less than a 
penny a day. In some remote parts of India labour can still be obtained 
at about that rate, or from 3 pice to an anna^ i.e. i-|-d. to i|-d. 

^ Owing to the belief which exists in India that diamond dust 
is a poison, it is thought by some persons that native miners would 
not swallow diamonds. I have seen several authentic records of 
their having done so. Garcia de Orta, for instance, refers to 
cases as evidence that the diamond is not poisonous. Once a 
diamond had been smuggled away from the mines, its possessor 
was not only safe, but if it was of large size, and he offered it to 
either the King of Golconda or the King of Bijapur, he had every 



60 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


one day pointed out to me one of these miners, who 
had worked for him for many years, and who had 
stolen a stone from him which weighed a mangelin, 
i.e. nearly two of our carats.^ He had concealed it 
in the corner of his eye, but it was taken from him as 
soon as the theft was discovered. In order to prevent 
these knavish tricks there are always twelve to fifteen 
watchmen employed by the merchants to see that they 
are not defrauded of anything. 

If by chance a stone is found which weighs above 
7 to 8 mangelins, it is taken to the master of the mine, 
who by way of recompence gives a sarpo,^ which is 
a piece of cotton cloth to make a turban, of the value 
of 25 to 30 sols,^ and generally with it half pagoda in 
silver, or otherwise a pagoda,^ when rice and a plate 
of sugar are not given. 

The merchants who go to the mine to buy, remain 
in their dwellings, and every morning at from 10 to 
1 1 o’clock the masters of the miners, after they have 
dined (for the Banians never leave their houses till 
they have washed and eaten), take their diamonds to 
show to them. If the parcels are large, and contain 
many stones of the value of from 2000 up to 15,000 or 
16,000 Scus,^ they leave them, confiding them to the 
foreign merchant for seven or eight days or more in 
order that he may examine them with care. When the 

chance of selling it well, and being presented with a robe of honour. 
(See the Account of the Diamonds^ etc,^ presented to the Royal Society 
by the Earl Marshal of England, Phil. Trans.^ vol. xii, 1677, P- 907.) 

1 See Appendix, vol. i. 

2 This is Sirfdo^ or more properly Sar-o-pd^ a complete dress of 
honour, from head to foot. (See Yule in Hedge's Diary ^ vol. i, p. 136 n.) 

2 IS. lojd. to 2S. 3d. 

^ About 8s., if pagodas. 


^ £430 to £3600. 



CHAP. XV 


YOUTHFUL DIAMOND MERCHANTS 


61 


stones have been examined, and are returned by the 
merchant, if they suit him he should conclude the 
transaction at once, otherwise the owner of the stones 
wraps them in a corner of his waistband, his turban, 
or his shirt, and departs, so that one never sees the 
same stones again, or at least they are mixed with 
others, should the miner return in order to bring 
another parcel. When the transaction is concluded 
the purchaser gives an order for payment on the Shroff 
or person who issues and receives bills of exchange. 
If you have agreed to pay in three or four days, and. 
delay longer, you have to pay interest at the rate of 
per cent per month. Most frequently, when the 
merchant is known to be solvent, a bill of exchange on 
Agra, Golconda, or Bijapur is preferred, but more 
especially one upon Surat, where, as it is the most 
famous port in India, the dealers desire to purchase 
the commodities which come in vessels from foreign 
countries, and which are suitable for their wants. 

It is very pleasant to see the young children of these 
merchants and of other people of the country, from 
the age of ten years up to the age of fifteen or sixteen, 
assemble every morning under a large tree which is in 
the square of the town. Each has his diamond weights 
in a little bag suspended on one side, and on the other 
a purse attached to his waistband, which contains as 
much as 500 or 600 gold pagodas. They seat them- 
selves there awaiting the arrival of any one who wishes 
to sell diamonds, either of the place itself or of some 
other mine. When any one brings a stone he places 
it in the hands of the eldest of these children, who is, 
so to speak, the chief of the band ; he looks at it and 
places it in the hand of him who sits next. Thus it 



62 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


goes from hand to hand till it returns to the first one 
without any one saying a word. 

He then asks the price of the article, in order to 
purchase, if possible ; and if by chance he buys at too 
high a price he is responsible. In the evening these 
children count up what they have purchased, and 
after examining the stones separate them according 
to their water, weight, and cleanness. Next they 
price each as they expect to dispose of them to 
strangers, and by this they see how far the value 
exceeds the cost of purchase. They then carry them 
to the great merchants who always have a number of 
parcels to match, and all the profit is divided among 
the children, save only that their chief receives a 
quarter per cent more than the others. 

Young as they are, they know the value of all the 
stones so well that if one of them has bought a stone 
and is willing to lose a half per cent, another gives 
him cash for it. Seldom can you show them a 
parcel of stones, containing a dozen, where they 
will not discover among them four or five having 
some flaw or some point or some defect at the 
angles. 

It remains to be said that these Indians have much 
regard for strangers, and especially for those whom 
they call Franks} Immediately on my arrival at the 
mine I went to call upon the Governor of the place, 
who also rules the Province on behalf of the King of 
Bijapur. He is a Muhammadan, who having embraced 
me, assured me I was welcome — not doubting that I 
had brought gold with me (for at all the mines of Gol- 

1 Fringuis for Franguis in the original, for Franks, i.e. Europeans. 
(See vol. i, p, 6.) 



CHAP. XV 


THE GOVERNOR OF THE MINES 


63 


CONDA and Bijapur they speak but of new pagodas^ 
which are golden coins), and that I had only to place it 
in my lodging, where it would be safe, and he would 
be responsible for all I had. Besides the servants 
whom I brought with me he allotted me four others, 
and commanded them to keep a watch on my gold by 
day and night, and to obey all my orders. Shortly 
after I had left him he sent to recall me, and on my 
return: “I sent to seek you,” he said, “in order to 
assure you again that you have nothing to fear — eat, 
drink, and sleep, and have a care for your health. 
I have forgotten to tell you to be careful not to 
defraud the King, to whom 2 per cent is due on all 
your purchases. Do not attempt,” he continued, “to 
do as some Muhammadans did who came to the mine, 
and combined with the merchants and some brokers 
to withhold the royalties of the King — saying that they 
had only purchased to the value of 10,000 pagodas, 
while they had invested more than 50,000.” I then 
commenced to purchase, and saw that there was a 
sufficiently large profit to be made, all being 20 
per cent cheaper than at Golconda, in addition to 
which, one sometimes, by chance, met with large 
stones. 

One day towards evening a Banian, poorly clothed, 
having indeed only a band round his body and a 
miserable handkerchief on his head, came towards me 
politely and seated himself by my side. In this country 
one pays no attention to dress, and a person who has 
but a miserable ell of calico about his loins may some- 
times have a good parcel of diamonds concealed. I, 
on my part, treated the Banian with civility, and after 

1 They were worth about 8s., more exactly 3 J rupees. (See vol. i, p. 413.) 



64 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


he had been for some time seated by me he asked me 
through my interpreter ^ if I wished to buy some rubies. 
The interpreter told him to show them to me, upon 
which he drew a number of small rags from his waist- 
band, in which he had about a score of rings mounted 
with rubies. After I had examined them I said that 
they were too small for me and that I sought large 
stones. Nevertheless, remembering that I had been 
asked by a lady at Ispahan to bring her a ruby ring of 
the value of about loo dcus, I bought one of his rings 
which cost me nearly 400 francs. I knew well that 
he did not value it at more than 300 francs, but 
willingly risked the additional 100 francs in the belief 
that he had not sought me to sell the rubies only, and 
because I understood from his manner that he desired 
to be alone with me and my interpeter in order to show 
me something better. As the time of prayer of the 
Muhammadans approached, three of the servants 
appointed by the Governor left, and the fourth re- 
maining to wait upon me, I found an excuse for 
getting rid of him by sending him to buy bread, where 
he remained a sufficiently long time. For all the 
people of this country being idolaters, content them- 
selves with rice, not eating bread, and when a person 
wishes for it it is necessary to have it brought from a 
distance, from the fortress of the King of Bijapur, 
where the Muhammadans reside. The Banian, seeing 
that he was alone with me and the interpreter, after 
having, with a good deal of mystery, removed his 
headdress, untwisted his locks, which, according to the 

^ From this and other similar references we learn that Tavernier 
did not acquire a knowledge of the native languages. The fact is indeed 
referred to contemptuously by some of his critics, especially Chardin. 



CHAP. XV 


A SECRET PURCHASE 


65 


usual custom, were bound round his head. Then I 
observed a small rag appearing amongst these locks, 
in which there was concealed a diamond, weighing 48^ 
of our carats, of beautiful water and of cabuchon shape, 
three-quarters of the stone clear, save for a small flaw 
which was on one side and appeared to penetrate some 
distance into the stone. The remaining quarter was 
full of flaws and red spots. 

While I examined the stone, the Banian, seeing 
the attention which I gave to it, said, “ Do not trouble 
yourself now, you will see it to-morrow morning at 
your leisure when you are alone. When a fourth of 
the day has passed,” it is thus that they speak, ^ “you 
will find me outside the town, and if you wish for the 
stone you will bring the price of it with you,” and he 
then stated the amount he wanted for it. For it should 
be stated en passant that after this fourth of the day 
the Banians, both male and female, disappear into the 
city or town where they dwell, both for the purpose 
of satisfying the ordinary necessities of nature and for 
the purpose of bathing, as well as for the prayers which 
their priests require them to repeat. The Banian 
having named this hour — because he did not wish any 
one to see us together — I did not fail to go in search 
of him, and carried with me the price he had asked, 
less by 200 pagodas, which I kept apart, in reserve. 
But in the end, after we had bargained for a short 
time, I gave him 100 pagodas extra. On my return 
to Surat I sold the stone to a Dutch captain, from 
which transaction I earned a fair profit. 

Three days after I had bought this stone a 

1 The day is divided into four paJiars which terminate at 9 a.m., 
12 M., 3 p.M. and 6 p.m. 


VOL. II 


F 



66 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


messenger arrived from Golconda who had been sent 
by an Apothecary, named Boete, whom I had left at 
Golconda to receive and take care of a part of my 
money, and in the event of the paying in rupees, 

he was to change them into golden pagodas. The 
day following that upon which he had received pay- 
ment, he was seized by so serious a disorder in the 
stomach that he died in a few days. By the letter 
which he wrote to me he informed me of his sickness, 
and that he had received my money, which was all in 
my chamber in sealed bags ; but, as he did not believe 
that he would survive two days, he exhorted me to 
hasten my return, because he did not think that my 
money would be safe in the hands of the servants 
whom I had left with him. Immediately on receipt of 
this letter I waited on the Governor in order to take 
leave of him, at which he was astonished, and inquired 
if I had expended all my money. I replied that I 
had not spent half of it, and that I had still upwards 
of 20,000 pagodas.^ He then said that if I wished 
he would afford me an opportunity of investing it, and 
that I should certainly not lose upon what he would 
enable me to buy. He further asked if I was willing to 
show him my purchases, although he was not ignorant 
of their extent, since those who sold were obliged to 
make a return of all to him, on account of the charge 
of 2 per cent duty which is due to the King by those 
who buy. I showed him then what I had bought, and 
told him what they had cost me. This agreed with 
the book of the Banian who received the King’s dues. 

^ I.e, about ^,^8000, which shows the extent of our author*s transac- 
tions. At the same time we know that he bought largely on commis- 
sion for the Dutch ofiScials. 



CHAP. XV 


TAVERNIER’S HONESTY 


67 


At the same time I paid him the 2 per cent for the 
King’s dues, having received which he remarked that 
he perceived that the Franks were persons of good 
faith. He was the more persuaded of this, however, 
when, drawing forth the stone of 48^ carats, I said, 
“ Sir, this is not in the Baniayis book, and there is no 
one in the town who knows that I have bought it, nor 
would you yourself had I not told you. I do not wish 
to defraud the King of his rights — here is what is due 
to him on account of the price paid by me for this 
stone.” ^ The Governor appeared altogether surprised 
and much edified by my proceeding ; he praised me 
much, and said that this was an action worthy of an 
honest man, and that there was not another merchant 
in the country, whether Muhammadan or Hindu, who 
would act in the same manner if he believed that no 
one was aware of what he had purchased. Upon 
this he summoned the richest merchants of the place, 
and having told them the facts, ordered them to bring 
with them the best stones they possessed. This was 
done by three or four of them, and thus I expended my 
20,000 pagodas in one or two hours. The transaction 
having been completed and the money paid, he told 
the merchants that as they had dealings with an honest 
man they ought to present me with a souvenir. This 
they did with a good grace, giving me a diamond 
worth nearly 100 Scus.^ As for the Governor himself, 
he gave me a turban and waistband. 

I have to record a rather singular and curious 
account of the manner in which the Indians, whether 

1 Unlike his usual habit of giving prices, Tavernier carefully omits 
all mention of what he paid for this stone. 

2 : los. 



68 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


they are idolaters or Muhammadans, make their sales 
of all kinds of commodities. All passes in complete 
silence and without any one speaking.^ The seller and 
the buyer are seated facing one another, like two 
tailors, and one of the two opening his waistband the 
seller takes the right hand of the buyer and covers his 
own with the waistband, under which, in the presence 
of many other merchants, who occupy themselves 
sometimes in the same manner, the sale is accomplished 
secretly without any one having cognisance of it. F or 
the seller and buyer talk neither by means of their lips 
nor their eyes, but only by the hand, which they manage 
to do in the following manner ; — When the seller takes 
the whole hand of the buyer that means looo, and as 
many times as he presses it so many thousands of 
pagodas or rupees, according to the coin which may be 
in question. When he takes only five fingers that 
means 500, and when he takes only one it means 100. 
In taking only the half up to the middle joint, 50 is 
meant, and the end of the finger up to the first signifies 
10. This is the whole of the mystery employed by 
the Indians in their sales, and it often happens that in 
the same place, where there are many people, a single 
parcel will change hands five or six times without those 
present knowing for how much it has been sold on 
each occasion. As for the weight of the stones, one 
need not be deceived if he does not buy in secret. 
For when one buys them in public there is a man 
specially employed by the King to weigh diamonds, 

1 This system of selling by means of secret signs has often been 
described by Indian travellers. For a recent account of it reference 
may be made to the St. Jame^ Gazette, January 20, 1887 ; and for 
early notices see Anglo-Indian Glossary, Art. “Sofala,” p, 645. 



CHAP. XV 


TAVERNIER CROSSES THE KISTNA 


69 


who receives no fees from private persons. When he 
names the weight, both buyer and seller accept his 
statement, since he has no interest in favouring either 
party. 

Having completed my business at the mine, the 
Governor gave me six horsemen, in order that I might 
traverse, with greater security, the tract under his 
authority, which extends up to a river ^ separating the 
Kingdom of Bijapur from that of Golconda. The 
transit of this river is very difficult, because it is wide, 
deep, and rapid, and there is neither bridge nor boat. 
In order to cross it the same contrivances are used as 
those of which I have elsewhere spoken for the 
passage of certain Indian rivers, alike for men as for 
their goods, carriages, cattle, and horses. 

A round vessel of lo or 12 feet in diameter made 
of branches of osier, like our hampers, and covered 
outside with ox hides, serves in place of a boat,® and 
I have described in the same place how the passengers 
adjust themselves. Good boats or a bridge over this 
river might be provided, but the Kings of Golconda 
and Bijapur do not allow them, because the river 
serves to separate the two Kingdoms. 

Every evening the boatmen on both banks are 
obliged to report to the two sub-governors, who reside 
on either side, at about a quarter of a league from 
the river, an exact statement of the people, beasts of 
burden, and merchandise which have crossed during 
the day. 

1 I,e, the Kistnd with its tributary the Bhirn^ which separated the 
ancient Kingdoms. 

2 Coracles (see vol. i, pp. 294 and 299). Tavernier is probably 
not correct in saying that they were made of osiers or willow ; more 
probably they were made of bamboo. 



70 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


When I arrived at Golconda, three days had 
elapsed since the death of Boete, the apothecary, and 
the room where I had left him had been sealed with two 
seals — one being of the Kdzi, who corresponds to the 
Chief Justice, and the other of the Shah-Bandar, who is 
the Provost of the merchants. An officer of justice 
watched the door of the chamber together with the 
servants whom I had left with the defunct. Imme- 
diately on my arrival the fact was announced to the 
Kdzi and the Shdh-Bandar, and forthwith they sent 
to seek for me. 

After I had saluted them, the Kdzi asked me 
whether the money which was in the chamber of the 
defunct was mine, and how I could prove it. I said 
I had not any better proof to give him than the letters 
of exchange which I had given to the Shroff, and that 
since my departure he had by my orders paid the 
sum to the defunct ; that I had instructed the latter 
in case the Shroff paid in silver to change it into 
pagodas, and forward them to me. Upon this 
reply which I made to them, they sent to call the two 
Shroffs who had paid my bills, to know if it was true, 
and as they averred that it was, the Kdzi forthwith 
ordered his lieutenant to go and open the door of the 
room, and see if the seals were intact on all the bags. 
He did not leave till he had my assurance that I had 
found the full sum, and nothing was wanting. 

I returned with him to make the same declaration 
to the Kdzi and the Shdh Bandar, and to thank them 
for their trouble, and it ended by my signing a docu- 
ment which they had written in Persian, in which I 
testified my satisfaction. 

The lieutenant told me that I must pay the 



CHAP. XV 


BURIAL CHARGES 


71 


charges of the burial of Boete, and those due to the 
persons who had placed the seals, as well as those of 
the officer who had kept guard at the door of the 
chamber. These all amounted to but 9 rupees, or 4^ 
dcus of our money.^ One would not have got off so 
easily in most places in Europe. 

1 I.e. 


4 




CHAPTER XVI 


Journey of the Author to the other Mines, and concern- 
ing the method of searching for Diamonds. 

At seven days’ journey eastwards from Golconda there 
is another diamond mine, called Gani in the language 
of the country, and Coulour in the Persian tongue.^ 

1 This mine has been identified in the Economic Geology of India, 
by the routes in vol. i, p. 173, and vol. ii, p. 94, with Kollur on the 
Kistnd, where, according to a MS. map by Col. Mackenzie, there was a 
mine in 1798. The word Gani is equivalent to the Persian Kdn-i, 
signifying “ mine of.” It is found in use by writers of the present century 
in connection with another mine, namely (Jawz-Partidl. It is the title 
for this mine most commonly used in works on mineralogy and precious 
stones, sometimes considerably modified in spelling, as Garee, etc. But 
it cannot be correctly used as the name of the mine where the Great 
Mogul or any other diamond was found. The date assigned to the 
discovery of this mine by Tavernier, namely about the middle of the 
sixteenth century, is of no value any more than the period assigned for 
the discovery of the Ramulkota mine. One hundred years, the native 
estimate, means a long time, that is all. 

Somewhere about the year 1622, William Methold, together with 
Sir Andreas Socory and Sir Adolf Thomason, visited from Masuli- 
patam certain diamond mines, which the first-named describes as being 
situated “ ai the foot of a gneat mountayne, not far from a river called 
Christena,” the mining town being 2 miles off, and distant 108 English 
miles, or 12 Gentine leagues {gows, or gosf) from Masulipatam. In 
all respects, save as regards the distance, the description of the mines 
and the methods of working correspond with Tavernier’s account of 
Coulour Qx Gam, i.e, Kollur. The distance given by Tavernier is 36 coss, 
or 72 miles from Masulipatam— the true distance is about 100 miles. 

In the Histoire Generate des Voyages, vol. xiii, p. 20, Methold is 



CHAP. XVI DISCOVERY OF THE KOLLUR MINE 


73 


It is close to a large town on the same river which 
I crossed when coming from the other mine/ and at 
a league and a half from the town there are high 
mountains which are in the form of a cross. The 
space which intervenes between the town and the 
mountains is a plain where the mine is situated and the 
diamonds are found. The nearer one searches towards 
the mountains the larger the stones which are found, 
but when one ascends too high nothing is found.® 

It is only about loo years since this mine was 
discovered, and it was by means of a poor man, who, 
digging a piece of ground where he purposed to sow 
millet, found ^ point naive^ weighing nearly 25 carats. 
This kind of stone being unknown to him, and appear- 
ing to him something special, he carried it to Golconda, 
and by good luck addressed himself to one who traded 
in diamonds. This trader having ascertained from the 
peasant the place where he had found the stone, was 
much surprised to see a diamond of such a weight, 

misquoted as though he said the mines were but 2 leagues from Gol- 
conda, whereas he says 2 miles from the temporary town, containing 
100,000 persons, which had grown up in connection with the mines. 
He says that they were closed for a time, in consequence of a demand 
made by the Mogul for a vyse (z,e. 3 lbs. English) of the finest diamonds. 
The farmer paid the King 300,000 pagodcts^ say 120,000, per annum 
for the mine, the King retaining all stones above 10 carats. This sum 
is possibly an exaggeration — vide Purchases Pilgrims^ 1626, vol. v, p. 
1002. There is, as already stated, an account of the diamond mines of 
Golconda and Bijapur in the Phil. Trans. ^ vol. xii. No. 136, 1677. 
Ruins of houses, etc., and old mines are still to be seen at Kollur. (See 
Kistna Manual^ pp. 170 and 244.) 

^ I.e. the Kistna, crossed on the route from Raolconda (i.e. 
Ramulkota) to Golconda (see p. 69). 

2 The probable explanation of this is that the diamond-bearing 
strata do not extend far up the slope. 

3 This term was applied to natural octahedra and other modifica- 
tions of the cube which the diamond assumes. 



74 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


especially because, before that, the largest that had 
been seen did not exceed lo or 12 carats.^ 

The noise of this new discovery quickly spread 
abroad throughout all the country, and some persons 
of wealth in the town commenced to mine in this land, 
where they found, and where they still find, large stones 
in greater abundance than in any other mine.^ There 
are found here at present, I say, a quantity of stones 
from 10 up to 40 carats, and sometimes indeed much 
larger ; but among others the great diamond which 
weighed 900 carats before cutting, which Mir Jumla 
presented to Aurangzeb,^ as I have elsewhere related, 
was obtained from the mine. 

But if this mine of Kollur is of importance on 
account of the number of large stones which are found 
there, it is a misfortune that, as a rule, these stones 
are not clear, and that their water contains indications 

1 This statement is quite incorrect, as will be seen in Appendix I. 

2 In the paper in the Phil, Prans,^ which has just been referred to, the 
largest diamonds are said to have been obtained at the mine of Currure, 
i,e, Wajra Kurur in Bellary, where some of a seize {seer?) weight = 
9 ounces troy, or 81 J pagodas^ were reported to have been discovered. 
This mine, though unknown to Tavernier, had been taken possession 
of by Mir Jumla about the year 1640 ? Probably there is some mistake 
in the weight. 

In the same paper this Kollur mine is called Quolure, it is said to have 
been the first mine used in the Kingdom, but was then nearly exhausted. 
Many of the diamonds found there were well formed and pointed, and 
of good lively white water, others were yellow, brown, etc., and had a 
greenish transparent skin. The weights ranged from 6 to a mangelin 
up to 5 or 6, and even rarely lo, 15 or 20 mangelins each. In conse- 
quence of its exhaustion, the King permitted the mine at Melwillee, i,e, 
Mulavilly or Muleli, to be regularly worked in the year 1673. 

^ This statement contains two mistakes. The stone was presented 
by Mir Jumla to Shdh Jahdn, not to Aurangzeb, and in three other 
places Tavernier gives its weight as 900 ratis or upwards, not carats ; the 
latter misprint has unfortunately often been quoted. (See Appendix I.) 



CHAP. XVI 


COLOURS OF DIAMONDS 


75 


of the quality of the soil where they are found. If 
the soil is marshy and humid, the stone tends to black- 
ness ; if it is reddish, it tends to red, and so with the 
other conditions, sometimes towards green, sometimes 
towards yellow, just as there is diversity of soil in the 
area between the town and the mountain. Upon the 
majority of these stones, after they are cut, there 
always appears a kind of grease which necessitates 
one always carrying a handkerchief in the hand in 
order to wipe them. 

As regards the water of the stones, it is to be 
remarked that instead of, as in Europe, where we 
employ daylight for the examination of stones in the 
rough {brutes), and, so, carefully judge of their water 
and any flaws which they may contain, the I ndians use 
the night ; and in a hole which they excavate in a wall, 
one foot square, they place a lamp with a large wick, 
by the light of which they judge of the water and the 
cleanness of the stone, holding it between their fingers. 
The water which they term “ celestial ” is the worst of 
all, and it is impossible to ascertain whether it is 
present while the stone is in the rough. But little 
though it may be apparent on the mill, the never-failing 
test for correctly ascertaining the water is afforded by 
conveying the stone under a leafy tree, and in the 
green shadow one can easily detect if it is blue. 

The first time I was at this mine there were close 
upon 60,000 persons who worked there, including men, 
women, and children, who are employed in diverse 
ways, the men in digging, the women and children in 
carrying earth, for they search for the stones at this 
mine in an altogether different manner from that 
practised at Ramulkota. 



7G 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


After the miners have selected the place where 
they desire to work, they smooth down another spot 
close by, and of equal or rather greater extent, around 
which they erect an enclosing wall of two feet in 
height. 

At the base of this little wall they make openings, at 
every two feet, for the escape of the water, which they 
close till it is time for the water to be drawn off. This 
place being thus prepared, all who are about to engage 
in the search assemble, men, women, and children, 
together with their employer and a party of his relatives 
and friends. He brings with him a figure in stone of 
the god whom they worship, which being placed 
standing on the ground, each prostrates himself three 
times before it, their priest, however, offering up the 
prayer. This prayer being finished, he makes a 
particular kind of mark upon the forehead of each one 
with a paste composed of saffron and gum, in order 
that it may sustain seven or eight grains of rice, which 
he places upon it. Next, having washed their bodies 
with the water which each of them carries in a vessel, 
they place themselves in ranks to eat that which is 
presented at the feast given by their employer at the 
beginning of their work, in order to give them courage 
and induce them to acquit themselves faithfully. This 
feast merely consists of a portion of rice to each, which 
is distributed by the Brahmin, because every idolater 
can eat what is served to him by the hands of the 
priests. There are among them some so superstitious 
that they will not even eat what is prepared by their 
own wives, and prefer to cook for themselves.^ The 
plate upon which the rice is placed is made of the 
^ This is, I believe, still true of some castes. 



CHAP. XVI 


DIAMOND MINING 


77 


leaves of a tree attached together ; to some extent they 
resemble our walnut leaves/ To each there is also 
given about a quarter of a pound of melted butter in 
a little cup of copper, with some sugar. 

The repast being finished, each commences to 
work, the men to excavate the earth, and the women 
and children to carry it to the place which has been 
prepared as I have above said. They excavate to lo, 
12, or 14 feet in depth, but when they reach water 
there is nothing more to hope for. All the earth being 
carried to this place, men, women, and children raise 
the water with pitchers from the hole which they have 
excavated, and throw it upon the earth which they 
have placed there, in order to soften it, leaving it thus 
for one or two days, according to the tenacity of the 
clay, until it assumes the condition of soup. This 
being done, they open the holes which they made in 
the wall to let off the water, then they throw on more, 
so that all the slime may be removed, and nothing 
remain but sand. It is a kind of clay which requires 
to be washed two or three times. They then leave all 
to be dried by the sun, which is quickly effected on 
account of the great heat. They have a particular 
kind of basket made something like a winnowing fan, 
in which they place the earth, which they agitate as 
we do when winnowing grain. The fine part is blown 
away, and the coarse stuff which remains is subse- 
quently replaced on the ground. 

All the earth having been thus winnowed, they 


^ In Western Bengal these would be the leaves of the Sdl, Shorea 
robusta^ Gsertn, the giant creeper, Bauhinta •vahlii^ W. and A., or the 
Dhdk or PulaSj Butea frondosa Roxb. I cannot say what species would 
be used in the region referred to by Tavernier. 



78 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Spread it with a rake and make it as level as possible. 
They then all stand together on the earth, each with a 
large baton of wood like a huge pestle, half a foot wide 
at the base, and they pound the earth, going from one 
end to the other, always pounding each part two or 
three times ; they then again place it in the baskets 
and winnow, as they did on the first occasion, after 
which they spread it out again and range themselves 
on one side to handle the earth and search for 
the diamonds, in which process they adopt the same 
method as at Ramulkota. Formerly, instead of using 
wooden pestles for pounding the earth, they pounded 
it with stones, and it was that method which produced 
so many flaws in the diamonds. 

As for the royalties which are paid to the King, 
the annual wages to the miners for their work, and the 
presents which are given to them when they find any 
large stone which they carry to the master whom they 
serve, all are the same as at the Ramulkota mine.’- 
N o one hesitated formerly to purchase diamonds which 
had a green crust on the surface, because when cut 
they proved to be white and of very beautiful water. 

About thirty or forty years ago a mine situated 
between Kollur and Ramulkota® was discovered, but 
the King ordered it to be closed on account of fraud, as 
I shall explain in a few words. Stones were found in 
it which had this green crust, beautiful and transparent, 
they were even more beautiful than the others, but 
when one attempted to grind them they broke in pieces. 

1 Vide ante^ p, 59. 

2 I have elsewhere suggested (see Geology of India, P- 16) 

that this mine was situated near Dam^rapdd and Malawaram on the 
Kistna in Lat 16° 35', Long. 79® 30', where old excavations are still to 
be seen. 



CHAP. XVI SPECULATIONS BY ENGLISH OFFICIALS 


79 


Whenever they were ground by another stone of 
the same quality which had been found in the same 
mine they submitted to the grinding without breaking, 
but were unable to bear the wheel, upon which they 
immediately flew into pieces. It is on this account 
that one is careful not to buy those which have been 
ground in this way, through fear of their breaking, and 
it is, as I said, on account of the deceptions which have 
been practised with these stones that the King ordered 
the mine to be closed.^ 

While the Messrs. Fremlin and Fiiancis Breton 
were Presidents at Surat on behalf of the English 
Company, a Jew named Edward Ferdinand, a free 
merchant, that is to say not subject to any Company, 
combined with these two gentlemen to purchase a 
stone, a short time after the mine was discovered. 
This stone was clean and of good form, and weighed 
42 carats.^ Edward went to Europe, and Messrs. 
Fremlin and Breton placed the stone in his hands 
to sell to the best advantage, and render an account to 
them. On his arrival at Leghorn ® he showed it to 

1 A little known but very important paper on the diamond mines of 
Golconda, of which twenty-three are named, and of Visapore, i.e, Bijapur, 
of which fifteen are named, is to be found in the PhiL Trafis.^ No. 136, 
June 25, 1677, vol. xii, p. 907. The anonymous author must have been 
in that part of India within ten or fifteen years of Tavernier’s last visit. 
It is but quite recently that I found this paper, unfortunately too late 
to make the full use to which it might have been put in these footnotes. 
It contains names which have long puzzled me owing to the confused 
way in which they have been introduced into the literature of the sub- 
ject. It has been referred to already on pp. 54 and 74, and will be 
quoted again in Appendix II. 

2 The extent to which investments in diamonds for themselves and 
their friends in England were made by English officials at a later period 
is very fully brought out in the letters recently published by Colonel Yule 
in his account of the Pitt diamond (See Hedge's Diary, Hakluyt Society'), 

2 Ligorne in the original. 



80 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


some Jew friends, who offered him 2^,000 piastres'^ for 
it. But as he asked 30,000 he was unable to let 
them have it, and took it to Venice to get it cut. It 
was well cut, without any injury, but upon being put 
upon the wheel it was immediately broken into nine 
pieces. I myself was on one occasion deceived by one 
of these stones, which weighed 2 carats ; it broke into 
small pieces on the wheel when it was only half 
finished. 

^ Say ;£s62S. 


A 



CHAPTER XVII 


A continuation of the Authors Journeys to the 
Diamond Mines 

I COME to the third mine, which is the most ancient of 
all, and is situated in the Kingdom of Bengal. You 
may call it by the name of Soumelpour,^ which is a 
large town near to which the diamonds are found, or 
rather by the name Koel, which is that of the river in 
the sand of which they are found. The country 
through which this river has its course belongs to a 
Raja who was formerly a tributary of the Great 
Mogul, having withdrawn from his allegiance during 
the wars between ShAh Jahan and Jahangir his 
father. Immediately on his coming to the throne 

Among a host of writers of this century, so far as I know, Karl 
Ritter {Erdkunde Aszen) and Francis Buchanan (in Martin’s Eastern 
India^ voL i, p. 535) alone suggested that this locality was not to be 
identified with another diamond locality, Sambalpur on the Mahdnadi, 
in the Central Provinces. I have been able to show that it was situated 
in the District of Lohdrdagd and subdivision of PaUmau in Chutid 
Nagpur, and that the Gouel river is identical with the Koel, which 
traverses that District. It joins the Sone not far from the fortress of 
Rohtds, and so its waters find their way northwards to the Ganges. It 
is probable that both Sambalpur and Soumelpour derive their names 
from the Semul tree {Bontbax\ and about the site which I assign to 
the latter there are the remains of an old town called Semah — Lat. 23® 
35' N., and Long. 84" 21' E. As the available details regarding these 
long-forgotten mines are too long for a footnote, they will be found in 
an Appendix at the end of this volume. 


VOL. II 


G 



82 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


ShAh Jahan sent to demand tribute from this Raja, 
both for the present and the past ; and the Raja, as 
his property was not sufficient to discharge the whole, 
quitted the country and fortified himself together with 
his subjects in the mountains. Upon the news of the 
refusal which the Raja first made, ShAh JahAn, who 
did not know that he purposed to hide, but believed 
that he intended to defend himself, sent an army into 
his country, where he was persuaded that he would 
find an abundance of diamonds. It happened other- 
wise, however, for those who were sent into the country 
of the Raja found neither diamonds, inhabitants, nor 
food, the Raja having ordered all the grain which his 
subjects could not carry with them to be burnt, and 
this was so effectually done that the greater portion 
of ShAh JahAn’s army perished of famine. The final 
result of the matter was, that the Raja returned to his 
country on agreeing to pay a light annual tribute to 
the Great Mogul. 

The following is the route to be followed from 
Agra to this mine : — 

From Agra to Halabas (AllahAbAd) . 130 coss. 

„ Halabas to Banarous (Benares) . 33 ,, 

„ Banarous to Saseron (Sasseram) . 4 

From Agra to Sasseram ^ you travel eastwards, 

^ This route is also given in Book I, chap, viii, pp. 1 1 3 to 1 20, but 
the details are very different. In the first place Sasseram and the large 
town are here misplaced. The latter is probably the Gourmabad, i.e. 
the Khurm^bdd, of p. 120, but the distance, which there amounts to 27 
coss, is here stated to be only 21 coss. The true distance is about 58 
miles. After Khurmdbdd, not before it, Sasseram comes as the next 
stage, distant 4 coss, the true distance being 1 2 miles 5 but after it again 
the distance to Rohtds is understated at 4 coss, it being really about 24 
miles. These discrepancies may be explained by the fact that Tavernier 
does not appear to have gone to Rohtds from Sasseram. If he visited 



CHAP. XVII 


ROHTAS FORT 


83 


but between Sasseram and the mine you turn to the 
south and come first to a large town — 21 coss. This 
town belongs to the JR.aja of whom I have just spoken, 
to whom the country belongs which is traversed by the 
river in which the diamonds are found. 

After this town one reaches a fortress called Rohtas^ 
— 4 coss. It is one of the strongest places in Asia, 
situated upon a mountain having six great bastions and 
twenty-seven pieces of cannon, with three trenches full 
of water where there are good fish. There is but a 
single path by which to ascend the mountain, where 
there is a plain of half a league or so in area, where 
corn and rice are cultivated. There are more than 
twenty springs which irrigate the soil, and all about 
the mountain from the base to the top there are preci- 
pices covered for the most part with forests. The Rajas 
ordinarily held this fortress with from 700 to 800 men, 
but it at present belongs to the Great Mogul, who ac- 
quired it by the skill of that great Captain Mir Jumla 
of whom I have so often had occasion to speak. The 
last Raja left three sons who betrayed each other ; the 
eldest was poisoned, the second attached himself to 
the court of the Great Mogul, who gave him the 
command of 4000 horse, and the youngest maintains 
his position in the country by paying tribute like his 
father. All the Kings of India, successors of Tamer- 
lane, have besieged this place without being able to 

it and the diamond mine, as is probable, he almost certainly did so 
from Patna, in which neighbourhood he was for some time in 1640 and 
again in 1665-6. (See Index.) 

1 Rodas in the original — Rohtdsgarh, Lat 24° 27' 30", Long. 83° 
55' 50" (See Sir W. W. Hunter’s Statistical Account of Bengal, vol. 
xii, pp. 209-213.) There are also detailed descriptions and plans in 
Montgomery Martin’s Eastern Asia, vol. i, p. 432. 



84 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


take it, and indeed two of these Kings died in the city 
of Sasseram. 

From the Fortress of Rohtas to Soumelpour it is 
30 coss. 

Soumelpour ^ is a large town with houses built of 
clay only, and thatched with the branches of the 
cocoa-nut tree.^ These thirty coss traverse forests 
which are dangerous, because the thieves, who know 
that merchants do not visit the mine without carrying 
money, attack them sometimes for the purpose of 
murdering them.® The Raja lives at half a coss dis- 
tance from the town, and his dwelling is in tents placed 
on an eminence. The Koel passes the fort, and it is 
in this river that the diamonds are found. It comes 
from the high mountains to the south and loses its 
name in the Ganges.* 

This is the manner in which diamonds are sought 
for in this river. After the great rains are over, that is 
to say usually in the month of December, the diamond 
seekers await the conclusion of the month of January, 
when the river becomes low, because at that time, in 
many parts, it is not more than two feet deep, and 
much of the sand is left uncovered. Towards the 

^ This na.in6 is l6ft in its orig'inai form in the text, as its identification 
with Semah, although most probable, has not been absolutely proved. 

2 Although the cocoa-nut has been observed nearly as far inland as 
this locality, I do not think there are any in that part of the country 
now. It is possible that the leaves of the Tal palm {Borassus flabilli- 
formis, Linn.) are meant. 

® Descendants of the thieves belonging to the Dom tribe still roam 
about Paldmau. Out of three occasions when my camp was robbed dur- 
ing seventeen years’ travelling in India, two were in this district and 
the third not very far from its limits. 

* It joins the Sone, which flows into the Ganges. It is possible 
that Pliny s mention of the Ganges as yielding precious stones may be 
connected with this fact. 



CHAP.' XVII 


DIAMOND MINES IN BENGAL 


85 


end of January or commencement of February, from 
the town of Soumelpour and also from another town 
which is 20 coss higher up the same river, and 
from some small villages on the plain, about 8000 
persons of both sexes and of all ages capable of 
working assemble. 

Those who are expert know that the sand contains 
diamonds beneath, when they find small stones in 
it which resemble those we call “thunder stones.”^ 
They commence to search in the river at the town of 
Soumelpour and proceed up-stream to the mountains 
where it takes its rise, which are situated about 
50 coss from the town.^ In the places where they 
believe there are diamonds they excavate the sand 
in the following manner. They encircle these places 
with stakes, fascines, and clay, in order to remove 
the water and dry the spot, as is done when it is 
intended to build the pier of a bridge. They then 
take out the sand, but do not excavate below the depth 

1 It is to be noted in reference to these ^^pierres de tonnerre^'^^ which 
I take to be ferruginous concretions, that in the Tuzuk-i-Jahdngiri as 
translated by Blochman (J. A. S. B., vol. xl, p. n 4) there occurs 
the following passage ; “ When the river contains little water, tumuli and 
hollows are formed. The diamond diggers know from experience that 
those tumuli contain diamonds over which insects (?), called by the Hindus 

It seems just possible that the term ^^jhznga^^ (shrimps?) 
may in this instance have been applied technically to the particular kind 
of pebbles which Tavernier denominated as above, and that the late Mr. 
Blochman was unaware of the technical application of the term. 

2 The distance of the source of the river is here very much over- 
stated, but by crossing the watershed, the Sank river is met with, and in it 
diamonds used to be found. {VzdemdLp in Appendix III.) The sources 
of these rivers are close to one another, and there the diamond stratum 
should be looked for. Unfortunately I had not made this identification 
of Tavernier’s site when traversing that part of the country, and there 
is, so far as I know, no local tradition of diamonds having been found 
in the Koel. 



86 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


of two feet. All this sand is carried and spread upon 
a large place prepared on the banks of the river and 
surrounded by a low wall of a foot and a half high, or 
thereabouts. They make holes at the base, and when 
they have filled the enclosure with as much sand as 
they think proper, they throw water upon it, wash it 
and break it, and afterwards follow the same method as 
is adopted at the mine which I have above described. 

It is from this river that all the beautiful points 
come which are called points naives ^ (natural points), 
but a large stone is rarely found there. It is now 
many years since these stones have been seen in 
•Europe, in consequence of which many merchants 
have supposed that the mine has been lost, but it is 
not so ; it is true, however, that a long time has elapsed 
since anything has been obtained in this river on 
account of the wars.® 

I have spoken elsewhere of another mine of 
diamonds in the Province of Carnatic, which Mir 
JuMLA, General-in-Chief and Prime Minister of State 
of the King of Golconda, commanded to be closed,® 
not wishing that it should be worked further, because 
the stones from it, or rather from these six mines (for 

1 Le, diamonds having crystalline facets and angles. (See p. 73,) 

2 From this circumstantial account it would seem probable that 
Tavernier visited this locality himself during his stay at Patna in 1640 
or in 1666. The statement on p. 53 that he had visited the four 
mines which he describes and one of the two river washings is puzzling, 
because, if Gandikot is to be classed as one of the mines, then he 
describes none of the river washings, as he calls Soumelpour the third 
“mine” on p. 81. 

^ See Book I, chap, xviii. This appears to be a different case from 
that mentioned on p. 78, where the green crust and friability of the 
diamonds caused the mines to be closed. It is probably the one which 
Mir JumU told Tavernier of at Gandikot. (See vol. i, p. 288.) 



CHAP. XVII 


DIAMONDS OF BORNEO 


87 


there are six of them, close to one another) were all 
black or yellow, and not one of good water. 

There is, finally, in the Island of Borneo,^ the 
largest of all the islands in the world, a river called 
SuccADAN, in the sand of which beautiful stones are 
found, which have the same hardness as those of the 
river Koel, or of the other mines of which I have 
made mention. 

General Vandime once sent six of them, of 3 to 4 
carats each, from Batavia to me at Surat, and he 
believed that they were not so hard as those from other 
mines, in which he was mistaken, because there is no 
difference in that respect ; it was in order to ascertain 
the fact that he sent them to me. When I was at Batavia 
one of the chief officers of the Company showed me 
a point naive of 25^ carats, a perfect stone, obtained 
in this river of Succadan. But at the price which he 
told me it had cost him he had paid more than 50 
per cent more than I should have been willing to buy 

^ In 1609 Captain John Saris found a considerable trade being 
carried on at Soekadana in the diamonds which he says were found in 
great abundance there and in the river Lave. He says they were 
obtained, as pearls are, by diving. I think it well to refer here to a 
footnote to Linschotens’ Travels (Hakluyt Society^ vol. ii, p. 134), where 
Mr. Tiele gives an explanation of a statement, first made, I believe, 
by Garcia de Orta, that diamonds were found at Taniapura in Malacca. 
Here Malacca, it seems, means Borneo, and Taniapura stands for Tand- 
jongpura. There is hardly a work on precious stones which does not 
erroneously cite Malacca as a diamond locality. I have been informed 
by Mr. D. F. A. Hervey that Tanjongpura is situated about 30 miles 
up the river Pd.wan in the northern portion of the Mdtan District, 
adjoining Soekadana, according to De Carubee’s Netherlands India 
Maps. The question of the distribution and mode of occurrence of 
diamonds in Borneo, though now well understood, is too large to enter 
upon here. Probably the best account is by Dr. Theodor Posewitz. 
(Vide Mzth a, d. Jahrb, d KgL Ung. Geolog, Anst,, Bd. vii, 1885 ; see 
Appendix.) 


88 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


it for. It is true that I have always heard that these 
stones are very dear. The principal reason which has 
prevented me from going to this river of Borneo is 
that the Queen of the Island does not allow foreigners 
to carry away the stones, and there are great difficulties 
in conveying them thence — the insignificant number 
which are carried away secretly are sold at Batavia. 
I shall be asked, without doubt, why I only mention 
the Queen of Borneo, and not the King. The 
reason is that in this Kingdom it is the women who 
govern and not the men, because the people are so 
particular about having for their sovereign a legiti- 
mate heir to the throne that the husband not being 
certain that the children which he believes to have had 
by his wife are his very own, and the wife being, on 
the contrary, quite certain that the children are hers, 
they prefer to have a woman for their ruler, to whom 
they give the title of Queen, her husband being her 
subject, and not having more power than that which 
she chooses to confer upon him.^ 

1 Descent by the mother’s side obtains in some other Oriental 
countries, and is observed among the Nairs of Malabar. 



CHAPTER XVIII 


The different kinds of Weights for weighing Diamonds 
at the Mines ; the kinds of Gold and Silver in circu- 
lation; the routes by which one is able to travel; 
and the rule in use for the estimation of the Pnces 
of Diamonds. 

I COME now to some details as to the traffic in 
diamonds, and in order that the reader may under- 
stand easily — believing that no one has' previously 
written of this matter^ — I shall speak in the first 
instance of the different kinds of weights which are in 
use, both at the mines and in other places in Asia. 

At the mine of Ramulkota they weigh by man- 
gelins, and the mangelin is equal to if carats, that is 
to say, 7 grains.^ 

At the mine of (Gani® or) Kollur the same 
weights are used. 

At the mine of Soumelpour in Bengal they weigh 
by ratis, and the rati is'|-ths of a carat, or grains.^ 

1 In this Tavernier was mistaken, several Portuguese writers having 
treated of this subject before his time. 

2 Seven modem diamond grains = 5.55 grains troy, the proportion 
being 3. 1 7 troy grains to the carat of 4 diamond grains. 

* See p. 72 for meaning of Gam. 

* This ( = 2.77 troy grains) was the pearl raii, much greater than the 
ordinary rati, which varied from 1.75 to 1.84 grains troy, or even more. 
(See on this point vol. i, Appendix, and Preface, vol. ii for correction.) 



90 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


This last weight is used throughout the whole of the 
Empire of the Great Mogul. 

In the Kingdoms of Golconda and Bijapur man- 
gelins are also used, but the mangelin in these places is 
only if carats.^ The Portuguese use the same weight 
name in Goa, but it is then equal to only 5 grains.® 

1 come now to the kinds of money with which 
diamonds are purchased in India. 

Firstly, in the Kingdom of Bengal, in the terri- 
tories of the Raja of whom I have spoken, as they are 
included in the dominion of the Great Mogul, pay- 
ment is made in rupees. 

At the two mines® which are in the Kingdom of 
Bijapur, in the neighbourhood of Ramulicota, pay- 
ment is made in the new pagodas which the King 
coins in his own name, being entirely independent 
of the Great Mogul. The new pagoda does not 
always bear the same value, for sometimes it is valued 
at rupees,^ sometimes more and sometimes less, 
according as it is elevated or depressed by the state of 
trade, and according as the money-changers arrange 
matters with the Princes and Governors. 

At the mine of Kollur (or Gani), which belongs to 
the King of Golconda, payment is made in new pagodas 
of equal value with those of the King of Bijapur. But 
one has to buy them sometimes at from i to 4 per cent 
premium, because they are of better gold, and because 
the merchants do not accept others at this mine. 

^ I.e. 4.36 troy grains. These weights and their modern equiva- 
lents are discussed, in vol. i. Appendix. Klse where Tavernier seems to 
imply that Ramulkota being in Bijapur, this mangelin was used there. 

2 I.e, 3.962 troy grains. 

3 The second mine here referred to was possibly the one mentioned 

as having been closed (see p. 78 «.) 4 lojd. 



CHAP. XVIII 


NEW AND OLD PAGODAS 


91 


These pagodas are made by the English and Dutch, 
who have obtained from the King, either by agreement 
or by force, permission to manufacture them, each in 
their own fortress. And those of the Dutch cost i or 
2 per cent more than those of the English, because 
they are of better quality, and the miners also much 
prefer them. But as the majority of the merchants 
are influenced by the false reports that the people at 
the mine are unsophisticated and almost savages, and 
that, moreover, the routes from Golconda to the mines 
are very dangerous, they generally remain at Gol- 
conda, where those who work the mines have their 
correspondents to whom they send the diamonds. 
Payments are made there with old pagodas, well worn, 
and coined many centuries ago by different Princes, who 
reigned in India before the Muhammadans gained a 
footing in the country. These old pagodas are worth 
rupees,^ i.e. i rupee more than the new, although 
they do not contain more gold, and consequently do 
not weigh more ; this will be a cause of astonishment 
if I do not explain the reason. It is that the Shroffs 
or Changers, in order to induce the King not to have 
them recoined, pay him annually a large sum, because 
they themselves thereby derive a considerable profit.; 
for the merchants never receive these pagodas with- 
out the aid of one of these Changers to examine them, 
some being defaced, others of low standard, others of 
short weight, so that if one accepted them without this 
examination he would lose much, and would have the 
trouble to return them, or perhaps lose from i to even 
5 or 6 per cent, in addition to which he must pay the 
Shroffs ith per cent for their trouble. When you pay 

1 I.e. I os. ijd. 



92 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


the miners, they will also only receive pagodas in 

presence of the Changer, who points out to them the 
good and bad, and again takes his ;Jth per cent. But 
to save time, when you desire to make a payment of 
looo or 2000 pagodas, the Changer, when receiving 
his dues, encloses them in a little bag, on which he 
places his seal, and when you wish to pay a merchant 
for his diamonds you take him, with the bag, to the 
Changer, who, seeing his own seal intact, assures him 
that he has examined all the coins, and will be respon- 
sible if any do not prove good. 

As for rupees, the miners take indifferently those 
of the Great Mogul and those of the King of Gol- 
CONDA, because those coined by this King would have 
been the coinage of the Great Mogul if these 
monarchs had remained on good terms. 

The natives of India have more intelligence and 
subtlety than one thinks. As the pagodas are small, 
thick pieces of gold of the size of the nail of the little 
finger, and as it is impossible to clip them without it 
being apparent, they bore small holes in them all 
round, from whence they extract 3 or 4 sols value of 
gold dust, and they close them with such skill that 
there is no appearance of the coins having been touched. 
Moreover, if you buy anything in a village, or when 
you cross a river, if you give the boatmen a rupee, 
they immediately kindle a fire and throw the rupee 
into it, from whence if it comes out white they accept 
it, but if black they return it ; for all the silver in 
India is of the highest quality, and that which is 
brought from Europe has to be taken to the mint to 
be recoined. I say also that those are very much 
deceived (as a merchant tried to make me believe in 



CHAP. XVIII ROUTE FROM GOLCONDA TO RAMULKOTA 93 


my first journey) who imagine that it answers to take 
to the mines spices, tobacco, mirrors, and other trifles 
of that kind to barter for diamonds ; for I have fully 
proved the contrary, and am able to assert that the 
merchants at the mine who sell the diamonds require 
good gold, and the best too. 

Now let us say something as to the routes to be 
followed to the mines. Some modern rather fabulous 
accounts represent them to be, as I have said, danger- 
ous and difficult, and frequented by tigers, lions/ and 
barbarous people ; but I have found them altogether 
different from what they were represented to be — 
without wild beasts, and the people full of good will 
and courtesy to strangers. 

As for Golconda, one need know but little of the 
map to be cognisant of its position ; but from Golconda 
to Ramulkota, where the principal mine is, the route 
is less known, and this is the one which I followed. 
The measure of distance in this country is the £-os, and 
sig-os is equal to 4 French leagues.^ 

From Golconda to Canapour® . . . . i 

,, Canapour to Parquel (Boorgul) . .2^ 

,, Parquel to Cakenol (Koadgul*) . . i 

„ Cakenol to Canol-Candanor (Kundanool) 3 
„ Canol-Candanor to Set APOUR® . . i 

,, Setapour to the river {t.e. KistnA) . . 2 

1 Lions are not likely to have occurred so far south in India in 
Tavernier’s time. 

2 Le, to say about 8 miles. (See vol. i, Appendix, p. 420.) 

3 Canapour has not been identified ; it was probably near Narkodd 
of the Atlas Sheet. The identifications of some of the localities on this 
route published in Jour. As. Soc., 1881, vol. i, part ii, p. 219, as my 
informant included places off the true route, prove to be incorrect. 

4 Koadgul is 10 miles from Boorgul and 24 from Kundanool. 

^ Setapour does not appear on the Atlas Sheet. 



94 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


This river is the boundary between the Kingdoms 
of Golconda and Bijapur. 

From River to Alpour (Alumpur) . . . f 

,, Alpour to Canol (Karnul) . . . f 

,, Canol to Raolconda (Ramulkota) where 
the mine is . . . . . ■ 

Thus in all it is ly gos, or 68 French leagues from 
Golconda to the mine.^ 

From Golconda to the mine of Colour, or Gani,® 
it is which amounts to 55 of our leagues. 

From Golconda to Almaspinde (Almasgooda ?) . 3-^ 

,, Almaspinde to Kaper (?) . . . .2 

,, Kaper to Montecour (Moonoogodoo) . 2^ 

,, Montecour to Nazelpar (Nagoolpad) . 2 

„ Nazelpar to Eligada (Lingalla ?) . • li 

,, Eligada to Sarvaron (Surrawaram) . i 

,, Sarvaron to Mellaserou (Mailacheroo) i 
,, Mellaserou to Ponocour (?) ^ . . . if 

Between Ponocour and Coulour or Gani (Kol- 
lur) there is only the river ^ to cross. 

^ This route crossed two rivers, namely the main stream of the 
Kistnd. and its tributary the Tungabhadra, Alumpur being situated in 
the fork between, and Karnul being on the south bank of the Tunga- 
bhadra. The total of these distances, as printed, is 1 4^- which at 
4 leagues to the gos would be equal to 5 8 leagues. The true distance 
by this route would be about 135 miles, which is equal to the 1 7 gos^ 
or 68 leagues. Hence some of the stages must be understated. 

2 See p. 72, where it is shown that Gani (Kdn-i) is only a Persian 
prefix signifying “ mine of,” and that Coulour is identified with Kollur 
on the Kistnd. 

® The total of these distances is 15^ (not ^3^ gos, which, as above, 
would be equal to 61 leagues. The distance of the first stage is 
evidently wrong, being in reality only about 10 miles. The distance by 
the route given in Book I, chap, xi, is 76 

^ The river here mentioned is the Kistnd, and Ponocour must have 
been in the position of Vellutar. Vellatoor, lower down the Kistna, is 
quite distinct. 



CHAP. XVIII 


THE PRICE OF DIAMONDS 


95 


I come now to an important subject which is little 
understood in Europe. 


Rule for ascertaining the proper price of a Diamond of 
whatsoever weight it may be, from 3 up to and 
above 100 carats. 

I do not mention diamonds below 3 carats, their 
price being sufficiently well known. 

It is first necessary to know what the diamond 
weighs, and next to see if it is perfect, whether it is 
a thick stone, square-shaped, and having all its angles 
perfect ; whether it is of a beautiful white water, and 
lively, without points, and without flaws. If it is a 
stone cut into facettes, which is ordinarily called “a 
rose,” It is necessary to observe whether the form is 
truly round or oval ; ■whether the stone is well-spread, 
and whether it Is not one of those lumpy stones ; and, 
moreover, whether it is of uniform water, and is without 
points and flaws, as I described the thick stone. 

A stone of this quality, weighing i carat, is worth 
150 livres'^ or more, and supposing it is required to 
know the value of a stone of 12 carats of the same 
degree of perfection, this is how it is to be ascer- 
tained : — 

Square the 12, this amounts to 144 ; next multiply 

^ Say £11: Ss., at is. 6d. to the livre. Thevenot gives 15 to 16 
dctcs as the price of stones of i or 2 mangeUns,^ but those of 3 fnangelins 
were worth at the rate of 30 ecus the 7 nangelin. {Voyage des Iftdes^ 
Paris Ed., 1684, p. 289.) As Thevenot gives the value of a fnangelin 
at 1.6 carats, 3 would be equal to 4.8 carats, and the price 90 ^cus^ or 
;^20 : 5s., while Tavernier’s valuation for a stone of 4.8 carats would be 
4.8x4.8x150 = 3456 l 2 vres=£ 2 S 9 : 4 ^, This enormous discrepancy 
must be due to a mistake by Thevenot. 



96 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


144 by 150, i.e. the price of i carat, and it amounts 
to 21,600 livres — 

12 X 12 X 150 = 21,600.^ 

This is the price of a diamond of 1 2 carats. 

But it is not enough to know the price of perfect 
diamonds only, one must know also the price of those 
which are not so ; this is ascertained by the same rule, 
and on the basis of the price of a stone of i carat. 
This is an example — 

Suppose a diamond of 15 carats which is not 
perfect, the water being not good, or the stone badly 
shaped, or full of spots or flaws. A diamond of 
the same nature, of the weight of i carat, would not 
be worth more than 60 or 80 or 100 livres at the most, 
according to the beauty of the diamond. You must 
then square the weight of the diamond, i.e. 15 carats, 
and next multiply the product 125 by the value of the 
stone of I carat, which may for example be 80 livres, 
and the product, which is 10,000® livres, is the price of 
the diamond of 1 5 carats. 

It is easy to see from this the great difference in 

1 I.e, j£i62o. Whatever may have been the case, it is now 
apparent that no hard and fast rule can be given to determine the 
selling value of diamonds, as it is subject to very great variations. 

Among other formulae, however, the following may be mentioned : — 

— {m + 2) a where ?n == the number of carats, and a the value of i . 

This is given in Uandbuch der Kdelstein.^ A. Schrauf, Vienna. A stone 
of 1 2 carats, similar in quality to that above given, so calculated, would 
be worth £945. 

^ £ 7 S^- But this calculation, though represented graphically as a 
sum in figures, in the original, is wholly incorrect, as 15X 15 = 225, 
not 125, and the product of its multiplication by 80 is 18,000 instead 
of 10,000 livresy the value of the diamond consequently would be ;£i35o. 
In the edition of Tavernier of 1679, I find that this sum is correctly 
calculated as above. 



CHAP. XVIII VALUE OF THE GREAT MOGUL’S DIAMOND 97 


value between a perfect stone and one which is not so. 
For if this stone of 15 carats had been perfect, the 
second multiplication would be by 150, which is the 
price of a perfect stone of i carat, and then it would 
amount not to 10,000 livres, but to 33,750 livres, i.e. to 
23,750^ livres more than an imperfect diamond of the 
same weight. 

According to this rule, the following is the value 
of the two largest among the cut stones in the world — 
one of them in Asia belonging to the Great Mogul, 
the other in Europe belonging to the Grand Duke of 
Tuscany — as will be seen by the subjoined figures. 

The Great Mogul’s diamond weighs 2 79^5- carats, 
is of perfect water, good form, and has only a small 
flaw which is in the edge of the basal circumference 
of the stone. 

Except for this flaw the first carat would be placed 
at 160 livres, but on that account I do not estimate it 
at more than 150, and so calculated according to the 
above given rule it reaches the sum of 11,723,278 
livres, 14 sols, and 3 Hards. If this diamond only 
weighed 2 79carats, it would have been worth 11,676,150 
livres only, and thus these -j^^ths are worth 47,128 
livres, 14 sols, 3 liards.^ 

The Grand Duke of Tuscany’s diamond weighs 
139^ carats, is clear, and of good form, cut on all sides 
into facettes, and as the water tends somewhat to a 
citron colour,® I estimate the first carat at only 135 

1 I.e. ;^2S3I : ss., and ;£i78l : 5s. The former is correctly cal- 
culated, but the latter should be 33,75° - 18,000 livres = 15 , 75 ° 
livres =;£ii8i :5s. 

2 These amounts are equivalent to ;£879,245 : 18 : i^, • 5 s., 

and 13 • livre being is. 6 d., and the sol qd. 

^ This description and that in chap, xxii, as also the figure of 

w 


VOL. II 



98 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


livres, from which the value of the diamond ought to 
be 2,608,335 — that is to say, two million six hundred 
and eight thousand three hundred and thirty -five 
livres} 

In concluding the remarks which I have made in 
this chapter, I should say that in the language of the 
miners the diamond is called iri;'^ that in Turkish, 
Persian, and Arabic it is called almas, ^ and that in 
all the languages of Europe it has no other name than 
diamond. 

This, then, in a few words is all that I have been 
able to discover with my own eyes in regard to this 
subject during the several journeys which I made to 
the mines ; and if by chance some other has written 
or spoken of them before me, it can only have been 
from the reports which I have made of them.'* 

the stone, correspond in all important respects with the “ Austrian 
yellow/’ now in the possession of the Emperor of Austria. Its weight 
is 1 33 J Vienna carats according to Schrauf, w’hich would amount to 
134 French carats, the proportion in milligrams being 206.13 • 205.5, 
and not to 1 39 ^ as stated in the work quoted below. The value of the 
stone has been variously estimated at ;^4o,ooo, £^0,000, and even 
55,682. (See The Great Diamonds of the Worlds by E. Streeter, 
London, 1882, and Murray on the Diamond^ Second Edition, London, 
1^390 The figure which the latter gives of the Matan diamond is really 
of Tavernier’s “ Grand Duke,” not so the figure purporting to be of itself. 

1 The equivalent of 2,608,335 litres is ;£i95,62 5 12:6. 

2 Linschoten has iraa^ both are from the Sanskrit hira^ the term 
now used in Hindustani, and some other languages in India. 

® Almas is believed to be closely related with the adamas of the 
Greeks and Romans — the latter term, however, does not appear to have 
been originally applied to the diamond but to corundum. 

^ It has already been shown that Methold had actually visited the 
mines before Tavernier. (See p. 72, n.) And it is probable that 
Caesar Frederick had been at Ramulkota, which he describes, about the 
year 1570. (See Hakluyt’s Voyages,) 



CHAPTER XIX 


Concerning Coloured Stones and the places where they 

are obtained. 

There are only two places in the East where coloured 
stones are obtained, namely in the Kingdom of Pegu 
and in the island of Ceylon. The first is a mountain 
twelve days or thereabouts from Siren ^ in a north- 
east direction, and it is called Capelan.^ It is the 
mine from whence is obtained the greatest quantity of 
rubies, spinelles or mothers of rubies, yellow topazes, 
blue and white sapphires, hyacinths, amethysts, and 
other stones of different colours. Among these hard 
stones others which are soft are found, and are called 
bacan^ in the language of the country. These are 
not considered to be valuable. 

Siren is the name of the city where the King of 
Pegu resides, and Ava is the port of the Kingdom. 
From Ava to Siren you ascend the river in large flat 

1 Siren here is a mistake for Ava. Siriam or Syriam is a port 
on the Pegu river 6 miles E. of Rangoon. It was famous in con- 
nection with Portuguese dealings with Pegu, and was the site of an 
English factory in the seventeenth century. {Stt Anglo-Indian Glossary.) 
In the second reference below it would seem that the names Siren and 
Ava are transposed, as Ava was the capital and Syriam the port. 

2 le. Kyatpyen. Its distance from Ava is about 70 miles. (See 
Map in voL i, and Appendix on Burmah ruby mines.) 

s Bacan. This is possibly the Persian pdkand or bdkand, which 
signifies ruby. 



100 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


boats, and it is a voyage lasting about sixty days. You 
cannot travel by land on account of the forests, which 
abound with lions,^ tigers, and elephants. It is one of 
the poorest countries in the world ; nothing comes 
from it but rubies, and even they are not so abundant 
as is generally believed, seeing that the value does not 
amount to 100,000 dcus‘‘‘ per annum. 

Among all these stones yoja would find it difficult 
to meet with one of good quality, weighing 3 or 4 
carats, because of the strict injunctions against allowing 
the removal of any which the King has not seen ; 
and he retains all the good ones which he finds among 
them. This is the reason why in all my journeys I 
have earned a sufficiently large profit by bringing 
rubies from Europe into Asia ; and I very much 
doubt the story of Vincent le Blanc when he says 
that he has seen rubies in the King’s palace as large 
as eggs.® 

The following is the price of some rubies which 
might pass as of good quality. During my several 
journeys I saw them sold by merchants who came 
from the mine, while I was at Masulipatam and Gol- 
CONDA. All rubies are sold by the weight called rati, 

1 Lions here, as elsewhere, must be understood as a figure of speech, 
since there are none in Burmah. 

2 ^^22,500. In the year 1855 the revenue from the mines was 

estimated at from £12,^00 to Since the conquest of Upper 

Burmah these mines have, as is well known, been let for a term of years 
to an English Company. Further information will be found in an 
Appendix to this volume. 

3 I cannot find this statement in the copy of Le Blanc’s Vqya£-es 
which I possess, namely, the Paris Edition of 1648. Sir T. Roe speaks 
of a ruby weighing 13 Ulas, or about $1 02., which was offered to 
Jahdngir for 5 lakks of rupees by the Portuguese, but he offered only 
one lakh for it. (Ste /ourna/, Calcutta Edition, p. 32.) 



CHAP. XIX 


PRICE OF RUBIES 


101 


which is 3^ grains or ^th of a carat and payment 
is made in the old pagodas, of which I have spoken 
in the preceding chapter : — 

A ruby of i rati was sold for 20 pagodas. 


> J 

2 -I- ratis 

33 

85 

J> 

si >> 

3 3 

185 

3 3 

4*1 

3 3 

450 

33 

5 

33 

525 

33 

,, 

3 5 

920 


When a ruby exceeds 6 ratis, and is perfect, it is sold 
for whatever is asked for it. 

All the other coloured stones in this country are 
called by the name ruby, and are only distinguished by 
colour.® Thus in the language of Pegu the sapphire 
is a blue ruby, the amethyst a violet ruby, the topaz a 
yellow ruby, and so with the other stones. 

The dealers are so particular about their profit in 
trade that they will not show you a parcel of rubies, al- 
though they may be fine, unless you promise beforehand 
that in case you do not buy you will make them a small 
present — as a turban or a waistband ; and when one 
acts somewhat liberally to them they show all their stock, 
and one can then transact some business with them. 

The other place in the East whence rubies and 
other coloured stones are obtained is a river in the 

1 Namely the pearl rati =2.77 grs. troy (see Appendix to vol. i, and 
Preface, vol. ii.) 

2 In other words, a ruby of i8 grains troy was sold for about 

^^465 : 15s. — ^the being equal to 2.77 grains troy, and pagoda 

to I os. i^d. (See vol. i. Appendix.) According to Mr. Streeter 
ctous Stones) rubies over a carat in weight vary in value from ;£2o to 
;^ioo per carat at present, but he adds that no definite price can be 
given to aid the purchaser. 

^ A very legitimate system of nomenclature, as they are all of the 
same chemical composition, viz. alumina or corundum. 



102 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


island of Ceylond It comes from high mountains which 
are in the middle of the island, and as the rains greatly 
increase its size — three or four months after they have 
fallen, and when the water is lowered, the poor people 
go to search amongst the sand, where they find rubies, 
sapphires, and topazes. The stones from this river are 
generally more beautiful and cleaner than those of Pegu. 

1 forgot to remark that in the mountains which run 
from Pegu towards the Kingdom of Camboya^ some 
rubies are found in certain places, but more balass 
rubies® than others, many spinelles, sapphires, and 
topazes. There are gold mines in these mountains, 
and rhubarb* also comes from these places, which is 

^ In Ceylon sapphire is the variety of corundum most commonly 
found, but rubies are also sometimes met with. The annual average 
value of precious stones found in Ceylon is said to be about ;£ 10,000 at 
present. ‘‘ Stones of inferior kinds are found in the beds of streams 
about Kandy, Nuwara-Eliya, Badulla, and some of the small rivers in 
the south ; but the more precious stones, such as the ruby, sapphire, 
topaz, alexandrite, and catseye, must be sought within a radius of 30 
or 40 miles from Ratnapura (the City of Gems), the capital of Saffragam, 
a district of the Western Province, though occasionally rubies are found 
in Uva.” (See Ceylon Colonial Guide i) 

2 The mode of occurrence of rubies in Cambodia and Siam is not 
very well understood, but I have met with some references to the fact, 
which appears to be undoubted. Thus Crawfurd says they are found 
in hills at Chan-ta-bun in Lat. 12® on the east side of the Gulf. They 
constitute a rigidly-guarded royal monopoly, but are much inferior in 
quality to the Ava stones. {Embassy^ 4to., London, 1828, p. 419.) 

3 The distinction made by our author between “ balass ” rubies, and 
spinelles indicates that already in his time the name had been transferred 
from its true original application to spinelles — to rubies of a particular 
shade of colour, probably light, and resembling the spinelle. (See vol. 
i, p. 382 ni) 

^ This was probably China rhubarb, which thus found an outlet to 
Europe. Afterwards it mainly came through Russia. A very interesting 
account of the rhubarb trade from the earliest times, though Cambodia 
is not mentioned there, will be found in Fluckiger and Hanbury’s 
Pharmacographia^ Art. “ Rhubarb.” 




CHAP. XIX 


RUBIES? IN EUROPE 


103 


highly esteemed, because it does not spoil so quickly 
as that which grows in other parts of Asia. 

There are also in Europe two places from whence 
coloured stones are obtained, viz. in Bohemia and 
Hungary. In Bohemia there is a mine where flints 
of different sizes are found, some being as large as an 
egg, others the size of the fist, and on breaking them 
one finds in some of them rubies^ as hard and as 
beautiful as those of Pegu. I remember being one 
day at Prague with the Viceroy of Hungary, in whose 
service I then was, as he washed his hands with 
General Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, before 
sitting at table, he saw on the General’s hand a ruby 
which he admired for its beauty. But he admired it 
much more when Wallenstein told him that the mine 
of these stones was in Bohemia ; and, in fact, at the 
Viceroy’s departure he presented him with about lOO 
of these flints in a basket. When we returned to 
Hungary the Viceroy had them all broken, and out of 
the whole of the flints there were only two in which 
rubies were found, one weighing about 5 carats and 
the other about i carat. 

As for Hungary, it has a mine from whence opals* 
are obtained ; they are not found in any other place in 
the world. 

Turquoise is only found in Persia, and is obtained 
in two mines. The one which is called “ the old rock ” 
is three days’ journey from Meshed towards the 
north-west and near to a large town called Nicha- 

^ These rubies, so called, were doubtless only garnets. 

2 There are early references to the occurrence of opal in India, but 
I have never been able to identify any local source there. Hungary 
still retains pre-eminence in this respect, but very beautiful opals are 
now found in Australia. 



104 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


BOURG;^ the other, which is called ‘the new,’ is five days’ 
journey from it. Those of the new are of an inferior 
blue, tending to white, and are little esteemed, and one 
may purchase as many of them as he likes at small cost. 
But for many years the King of Persia has prohibited 
mining in the “old rock” for any one but himself, 
because having no gold workers in the country besides 
those who work in thread, who are ignorant of the art 
of enamelling on gold, and without knowledge of 
design and engraving, he uses for the decoration of 
swords, daggers, and other work, these turquoises of 
the old rock instead of enamel, which are cut and 
arranged in patterns like flowers and other figures 
which the (jewellers) make. This catches the eye and 
passes as a laborious work, but it is wanting in design. 

As for the emerald, it is an ancient error of many 
people to suppose that it was originally found in the 
East^ \because before the discovery of America they 

1 Nishapur in Meshed is the classic locality for the true Turquoise. 
Its mode of occurrence there will be found described in a paper by Mr. 
A. H. Schindler published in the Records of the Geol. Survey of India^ 
vol. xvii, 1884, p. 132. Vambery in his “Life,” p. 290, also describes 
these mines. Turquoise has been found in some other places, as for 
instance in the Province of Ferghana at Mount Karumagar, 24 miles 
N.E. of Khojend. It occurs there in veins in a decomposed felspar 
porphyry. {Russian Central-Asia, by Henry Lansdell, D.D., p. 515.) 

2 Tavernier appears to have been wholly unaware of the true source 
of the emerald in early times. Although common beryl is abundant in 
India the emerald does not appear to have been found there, though 
highly esteemed and well known at a very remote epoch. All records, 
and indeed many might be quoted since the times of the Ptolemies, 
point to certain mines in Egypt, especially at Mount Zabara on the Red 
Sea, as having afforded the supply. Prof. Maskelyn, Edb, Rev. 1866, 
p. 244, records that when this locality was visited by Sir G. Wilkinson 
he found several emeralds of pale and poor quality. The matrix was 
mica schist. Among other authors who have mentioned Egypt as 
supplying emeralds to India, the following are the principal : — Pliny, the 
Monk Cosmas, circa A.D. 545, Masudi, and the Muhammadan travellers 



CHAP. XIX 


EMERALDS 


lb5 


were unable to thtnk otherwise\, and likewise still the 
majority of jewellers and artisans, when they see an 
emerald of high colour inclining to black, are accustomed 
to call it an Oriental emerald, in which they are mis- 
taken \sznce the East has never produced thenPp^ I 
confess I have not been able to find the places in our 
Continent from whence these kinds of stones are 
obtained. But I am assured that the East has never 
produced them, neither on the mainland nor on the 
islands ; and having made a strict inquiry during all 
my journeys, no one has been able to indicate any place 
in Asia where they are found. It is true that since 
the discovery of America some few rough stones have 
often been carried by the Southern Sea from Peru to 
the Philippine Islands, from whence they have been 
exported in due course to Europe ; but that does 
not justify these being called “Oriental,” nor support 
the view that their source is situated in the East, 
since both before this discovery and this passage there 
was no want of emeralds for disposal throughout the 
whole of Europe, and because at present, having 
left this route, they are all conveyed by the North 
Sea (Atlantic) to Spain.® In the year 1660 I saw 20 

of the ninth century. The emeralds of Siberia do not appear to have 
been discovered before the present century. 

^ The above passages in italics do not occur in the 1676 Edition 
of Tavernier, but are in that of 1713. 

2 The foregoing passage is thus rendered in the Edition of 1713 : — 
“ I believe that long before that part of the vjorld vuhich is called the 
West Indies had been discovered^ e?neralds were carried from Asia into 
Europe j but they came from ?nines in the Kingdom of Peru, For the 
Americans^ before we had knowledge of them ^ trafficked in the Philippine 
Islands^ where they carried gold and silver j but more silver than gold^ 
as there was more profit on the one than the other^ on account of the 
abundance of gold mines in the East. To-day this trade still continues, 
and the people of Peru go annually to the Philippines with two or three 



106 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


per cent less price given in India for emeralds than 
they would be sold for in France. 

But concerning this navigation and commerce 
between America and the Philippine Islands, it 
should be remarked that the Americans having 
arrived at these islands,^ the people of Bengal 
Arakan, Pegu, Goa, and other places, carry thither 
all sorts of cloths, and a quantity of worked stones, as 
diamonds and rubies, with many manufactured articles 
of gold and silver, silken stuffs and Persian carpets. 
But it should be added that they are unable to sell 
anything directly to these Americans, but only to those 
who reside in the Manillas, and that they resell them 
again when the former have left. Similarly, if any one 
obtained permission to return from Goa to Spain by 
the Southern Sea he would be obliged to pay 8o or loo 
per cent for transmitting money as far as the Philip- 
pines, without being allowed to buy anything, and to 
do the same from the Philippines as far as New Spain. 

\This it is then which was done with the emeralds 
before the West Indies were discovered, for they only 
came to Europe by this long way and tedious jourTtey. 
All that were not fine remained in this country, and 
all those that were passed on into Europe.'\ ® 

vessels^ whither they only carry silver and a small quantity of rough 
emeralds^ and indeed for some years they have ceased to carry the emeralds,^ 
sending them all to Europe by the Northern Sea" 

^ This early traffic between Peru and the Philippine Islands, by 
which our author strives to explain the source of the emeralds, is some- 
what mythical I should suppose. It is curious to note that the agree- 
ment between the Spaniards and the Portuguese, that the former should 
extend their conquests only to the west and the latter to the east of 
Europe, was disturbed when vessels first crossed the Pacific from South 
America to Manilla. The Spaniards probably first carried Peruvian 
emeralds to the Eastern nations. 2 Interpolated in Edition of 1713. 



CHAPTER XX 


Concerning Pearls and the places where they are 
fished for. 

Pearls are found in the eastern and western seas, 
and both for the satisfaction of the reader and for the 
purpose of not omitting anything upon this matter, 
although I have not been in America, I shall mention 
nevertheless all the places where there are pearl- 
fisheries, commencing with those in the East. 

In the first place, there is a pearl-fishery round the 
island of Bahren,’^ in the Persian Gulf. It belongs to 
the King of Persia, and there is a good fortress there, 
where a garrison of 300 men is kept. The water 
which is drunk in this island and that used on the 
coast of Persia is salt, and has an unpleasant taste, 
and it is only the people of the country who can drink 
it. As for strangers, it costs them not a little to 
obtain good^ water, for they have to get it out at sea 
from half a league distance from the island up to 
nearly two leagues. Those who go in boats for it 
should number five or six, one or two of whom dive 
to the bottom of the sea, having suspended from their 
waistbands a bottle or two, which they fill with water 
and then cork them well. For at the bottom of the 

1 Bahren Island, the well-known centre of the pearl-fishery in the 
Persian Gulf. ^ See vol. i, p. 268. 



108 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


sea there, for about two or three feet in depth, the 
water is fresh, and the best that can be drunk. When 
those who have dived to the bottom of the sea to 
get this water, pull a small cord which is attached to 
one of those who remain in the boat, it is the signal 
to their comrades to haul them up. 

While the Portuguese held Hormuz and Muscat, 
each ierate^ or boat which went to fish was obliged to 
take out a licence from them, which cost 15 abassis? 
and many brigantines were maintained there, to sink 
those who were unwilling to take out licences. But 
since the Arabs have retaken Muscat, and the Portu- 
guese are no longer supreme in the Gulf, every man 
who fishes pays to the King of Persia only 5 abassis,^ 
whether his fishing is successful or not. The merchant 
also pays the King something small for every 1000 
oysters. 

The second pearl-fishery is opposite Bahren, on 
the coast of Arabia-Felix, close to the town of El 
Katie, ^ which, with all the neighbouring country, 
belongs to an Arab Prince. 

The pearls fished in these places are for the most 
part sold in India, because the Indians are not so 
particular as we are. All pass easily, the baroques^ as 

^ Spelt terrade in Persian Travels^ p. 232, Paris Edition, 1676. 
Various forms of the word, which means a galley or a small ship of war, 
occur in Portuguese, Spanish, and Arabic. Colonel Yule informs me 
that its etymology is uncertain. 

2 Or, allowing is. 6d. for the abassz, £1 : 2 : 6. 

2 3s. 9d. 

^ This is Catifa in the original. El Katif, on the Persian Gulf, is a 
considerable Arabian town, with a district of some extent. 

® The term baroques^ which is sometimes written barocche^ is from 
the French baroque^ signifying irregular or uncouth : it is applied to 
irregularly-shaped pearls. They are much used for grotesque figures. 



CHAP. XX 


A MATCHLESS PEARL 


109 


well as the round ; each has its price, all being saleable. 
Some of them are taken also to Bassora. Those 
which go to Persia and Russia are sold at Bandar- 
CoNGO,^ two days’ distance from Hormuz. In all the 
places which I have named, and in other parts of Asia, 
the water tending slightly to yellow is preferred ■ to 
the white,® because it is said that pearls the water of 
which is slightly golden retain their vivacity and never 
change, but that when they are white they do not last 
for thirty years without losing their vivacity, and, both 
on account of the heat of the country and the per- 
spiration of the body, they assume a vile yellow colour. 

Before leaving the Gulf of Hormuz I shall speak a 
little more fully than I have done in my account of 
Persia® of that splendid pearl which is possessed by 
the Arab Prince who took Muscat from the Portu- 
guese. He then assumed the name of Imenhect, 
Prince of Muscat, having been previously called Asaf 
Bin Ali,^ Prince of Norenu^. This is but a petty 
Province, but the best in Arabia-Felix. All that is 

Castellani says they are specially esteemed in Spain and Poland. 
{History of Gems ^ p. 172.) 

1 Kongoon, on the Persian Gulf, south-west of Shiraz. Bandar- 
Congo is mentioned as a port for Lar in the Persian Travels^ pp. 232- 

234. 

2 A statement at the end of chap, xx contradicts this. 

3 The account in the Persian Travels is that the pearl belonged to 
the Emir of Vodana, who showed it to M. Constant and our author at 
Hormuz ; it was perfectly round and transparent, and weighed 1 7 abds^ 
or 14I- carats, the abas being equal to of a carat. On behalf of the 
Governor of Surat, the latter, on a subsequent occasion, offered 60,000 
rupees, say ;£675o, to the owner for it, but he refused to sell it. 
(Persian Travels^ Book II, chap, ix.) 

4 Aseph Ben Ali in the original. I have not identified Norenuce^ 
nor can I say whether it is to be regarded as a synonym of Vodana in 
the previous note, hnenkect is possibly compounded of Imam or I bn 
and some other word. 



110 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


necessary for the life of man grows there, and more 
especially splendid fruits, and in particular excellent 
grapes, from which very good wine can be made. 
This is the Prince who possesses the most beautiful 
pearl in the world, not by reason of its size, for it only 
weighs 1 2^ carats, nor on account of its perfect round- 
ness ; but because it is so clear and so transparent that 
you can almost see the light through it. As the Gulf 
opposite Hormuz is scarcely 12 leagues wide from 
Arabia-Felix to the coast of Persia, and the Arabs 
were at peace with the Persians, the Prince of Muscat 
came to visit the Kkdn of Hormuz, who entertained 
him with magnificence, and invited the English, 
Dutch, and some other Franks, in which number I 
was included, to the festival. At the close of the feast 
the Prince took this pearl out of a small purse which 
he carried suspended from his neck and showed it to 
the Khdn and the rest of the company. The Khdn 
wished to buy it, to present to the King of Persia, 
and offered up to 2000 tomans^ but the Prince was 
unwilling to part with it. Since then I crossed the 
sea with a Banian merchant whom the Great 
Mogul was sending to this Prince to offer him 40,000 
dcus^ for his pearl; but he refused to accept that 
sum. 

This account makes it apparent, with reference to 
jewels, that fine jewels ought not always to be taken 
to Europe,® but rather from Europe to Asia, as I have 

^ About j[fi9oo. 

^ £9000, Its value is stated to have been (See 

Streeter, Precious Stones and GemSy Third Edition, part iii, p. 14.) 

s I remember a case in India some few years ago illustrative of 
this, which gave rise to a trial. One or two persons residing at Simla 
bought some stones as a speculation and sent them to England, where 



CHAP. XX 


PEARL-FISHERIES 


111 


done, because both precious stones and pearls are 
esteemed there very highly when they have unusual 
beauty ; but China and J apan must be excepted, where 
they are not valued.^ 

The other locality in the East where there is a 
pearl-fishery is in the sea near a large town called 
Manar, in the island of Ceylon.® The pearls found 
there are the most beautiful, both as regards water and 
roundness, of all the fisheries ; but one is rarely found 
there which exceeds 3 or 4 carats in weight. 

There are, moreover, on the coast of Japan pearls 
of very beautiful water and good size, but they are 
very imperfect ; nevertheless they are not fished for, 
because, as I have said, the Japanese do not esteem 
jewels. 

Although the pearls which are found at Barren 
and at El Katie tend somewhat to yellow, they are 
esteemed as highly as those of Manar, as I have 


they were valued at a lower price than had been given for them. 
The purchasers thereupon sought by an action to recover their money 
from the native jewel merchant, but lost their suit. 

1 The Chinese prefer to invest their money in porcelain, lacquer, and 
other works of art, and ridicule the craze for precious stones. 

2 I am indebted to Mr. S. Haughton of the Ceylon Civil Service for 
a copy of The Overland Ceylon Observer for iith April 1888, which 
contains details of the results of the Ceylon pearl-fisheries from the year 
1796 to 1888. In the first period, namely from 1796 to 1S37, the 
total receipts amounted to ;i^946,8o3 : 8 : 3f , and the expenditure to 

1,752 : 6 : 8-|-. An estimate by Captain Stewart, however, makes the 
total net revenue for the same period only ^^524,52 1 : 14 : 2|. In the 
second period, from 1838 to 1888, the total revenue was ;^437,i 10 : 4s., 
and the expenditure ^105,656 : i : 9-J, or a net average annual profit, 
inclusive of many years when there was no fishing, of upwards of £6600. 
The average number of oysters annually fished for the same period 
amounted to about 3,5753630. In the year iSSo, according to the 
Colonial Exhibition Handbook of Ceylon^ 25,000,000 oysters sold for 
only £20,000, whereas in 1881 18,000,000 sold for;^59,ooo. 



112 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


remarked, and throughout the East it is said that 
they are mature or ripe, and that they never change 
colour. 

1 come now to the fisheries of the West, which are 
all situated on the great Gulf of Mexico, along the 
coast of New Spain, and there are five of them which 
succeed one another from east to west. 

The first is near the island of Cubagua,^ which is 
only 3 leagues in circuit, and is* distant about 5 
from the mainland. It is in 10° 30' of N. Lat., and 
160 leagues from S. Dominique^ in the Isle of Spain. 
It is a very infertile land, wanting in all things, and 
especially water, which the inhabitants are obliged to 
obtain from the mainland. This island is renowned 
throughout the west, because it is where the most con- 
siderable pearl-fishery is situated, although the largest 
pearls do not exceed 5 carats. The second fishery 
is in the island of Marguerite, that is to say, the island 
of pearls, at i league from Cubagua, which it sur- 
passes much in size. It produces all that is necessary 
to life except that, like Cubagua, it lacks water, which 
has to be sent for to the river Cumana, near New 
Cadiz.® This fishery is not the most abundant of all 
the five in America ; but it is considered the principal, 
because the pearls which are found there surpass the 
others in perfection, both as regards water and size. 
One of the latter which I possessed, of well-formed 
pear shape, and of fine water, weighed 55 carats, and 

^ Cubagua is one of the Antilles group. It lies between the isle 
of Marguerite and the coast of Cumana, and belongs to Venezuela. It 
was formerly a centre of the pearl-fisheries. 

2 San Dominique, also one of the Antilles. 

3 The positions of Marguerite and Cumana are indicated in the pre- 
vious note. 



CHAP. XX PEARL-FISHERIES IN THE WEST INDIES 


113 


I sold it to Shaista KhAn, uncle of the Great 
Mogul.^ 

Many are astonished to learn that pearls are taken 
from Europe to the East, from whence they come in 
abundance, but it should be remarked that in the 
Oriental fisheries they are not found of as great weights 
as in those of the West, added to which alLthe kings 
and great nobles of Asia pay much better than do 
people in Europe, not only for pearls, but for all kinds 
of jewels — when they are out of the common run — 
excepting only the diamond. 

The third fishery is at Comogote,^ near the main- 
land. 

The fourth is at Rio de la Hacha,® along the same 
coast. 

The fifth, and last, is at Sainte Marthe, 6o leagues 
from Rio de la Hacha. 

All these three fisheries produce pearls of good 
weight ; but generally they are ill-formed and are of a 
leaden-coloured water. 

Finally, as for the pearls of Scotland, and those 
which are found in the rivers of Bavaria,^ although 
necklaces are made of them which are worth up to 
looo ^cus^ and beyond, they cannot enter into com- 
parison with those of the East and West Indies. 

It is possible that of those who have written before 
me concerning pearls none have recorded that some 

1 See Book I, chap, viii, for details of the sale, and the quarrel it 
g-ave rise to. See also p. 130. 

2 Como^ote not identified. 

® Rio de la Hacha is in Columbia, being the name of a Province 
and its chief town. 

4 Obtained from the Unios and Anodons^ fresh- water mussels. 

5 ;£ 225 . 


VOL. II 


I 



114 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


years back a fishery .was discovered in a certain part of 
the coasts of Japan, and I have seen some of the pearls 
which the Dutch brought from thence. They were 
of very beautiful water, and some of them of large 
size, but all baroques. The Japanese, as I have above 
said, do not esteem pearls. If they cared about them 
it is possible that by their means some banks might be 
discovered where finer ones would be obtained. 

Before concluding this chapter I shall make a very 
important remark in reference to pearls and the differ- 
ences in their waters, some being very white, others 
tending to yellow, and others to black, and some which 
are, so to speak, lead-coloured. As for the last, they 
are only found in America, and this colour is caused 
by the nature of the bottom, which is muddier than in 
the East. In a return cargo which the late M. du 
Jardin,’- the well-known jeweller, had in the Spanish 
gallions, there were included six perfectly round pearls, 
but black as jet, which weighed altogether 12 carats. 
He gave them to me with some other things to 
take to the East, to see if they could be disposed 
of, but I brought them back again, as I found no one 
who would look at them.^ As for the pearls tending 
to yellow, the colour is due to the fact that the fisher- 
men sell the oysters in heaps, and the merchants 
awaiting sometimes up to fourteen or fifteen days 
till the shells open of themselves, in order to extract 
the pearls, some of these oysters lose their water dur- 
ing this time, decay, and become putrid, and the pearls 
become yellow by contact. This is so true that in all 

^ See p. 159. 

2 Black pearls do not suit dark complexions so well as the lighter 
kinds. 



CHAP. XX PREFERENCE FOR WHITENESS BY ORIENTALS 115 


oysters which have retained their water the pearls 
are always white. They are allowed to open of them- 
selves, because if they are opened by force, as we open 
our oysters in the shell, the pearl may be damaged 
and broken. The oysters of the Manar Strait open of 
themselves, spontaneously, five or six days sooner than 
those of the Gulf of Persia, because the heat is much 
greater at Manar, which is at the loth degree of North 
Latitude,^ while the island of Barren is at about the 
27th. And consequently among the pearls which come 
from Manar there are few yellow ones found. Finally, 
all the Orientals are very much of our taste in matters 
of whiteness, and I have always remarked that they 
prefer the whitest pearls,^ the whitest diamonds, the 
whitest bread, and the whitest women. 

1 The true Latitude of Manar, a gulf or arm of the sea between 
Ceylon and Southern India, is about 8° to 9° N. Lat., and of Bahren 
about 27° as stated. 

2 On p. 109 it was stated that slightly yellow pearls have the 
preference. 



CHAPTER XXI 


Concerning the manner in which Pearls originate in 
Oysters^ how they are fished for and at what 
Seasons. 

I AM aware that according to the testimony of some 
ancient authors, who were not well instructed in these 
matters, it was commonly believed that the pearl origi- 
nates from the dew of heaven, and that but one is 
found in each oyster ; but experience proves the con- 
trary. For, as regards the first, the oyster does not stir 
from the bottom of the sea, where the dew cannot pene- 
trate, and sometimes it is necessary to dive for them to 
a depth of 1 2 cudits, as we shall see presently ; and as 
for the other, it is common to find up to six or seven 
pearls in a single oyster, and I have seen one in which 
there were up to ten in process of formation. It is 
true that they are not all of the same size, because 
they are produced in the oyster in the same manner as 
eggs are in the interior of a fowl ; as the largest egg 
advances towards the orifice and goes out first, while 
the small eggs remain inside to complete their forma- 
tion ; so the largest pearl advances first, and the other, 
smaller ones, not having arrived at their full perfec- 
tion, remain under the oyster at the bottom of the 
shell until they have attained the size which nature 



CHAP. XXI 


SEASONS FOR PEARL-FISHING 


117 


gives them.^ But it cannot be said that there are 
pearls in all oysters, and one may open many in which 
none are found. 

Moreover, it should not be supposed that a great 
profit is earned by those who fish for pearls ; for if the 
poor people who engage in it had anything else to do 
they would leave the fishing, which merely saves them 
from dying of hunger.^ I have remarked in my 
account of Persia, that from Bassora up to Cape 
Jasque,® on both coasts of the Gulf of Persia, the land 
produces nothing. The people there are so poor, and 
live in so miserable a manner, that they never have 
any bread or rice, and have only dates and salt fish 
for their food, and you must travel nearly 20 leagues 
inland before finding grass. 

This fishing in the Eastern seas takes place twice 
in the year, the first being in March and April, and 
the second in August and September, and the sale 
lasts from the month of June till November, but this 
fishing does not take place every year. For those 
who fish like to know beforehand whether it will pay. 
In order not to be deceived they send to the fisheries 
seven or eight boats, each of which brings back about 
1000 oysters, which are opened, and if there is not 

1 This physiological explanation will hardly receive acceptance at 
the present time. (Comp. Pliny^ Book IX, chap, 57 .) 

2 Diamond and gold washing have always, likewise, been the most 
miserably requited trades in India. 

3 Cape Jask, or the Rds Jdshak of the Arabs, is “ a point on the 
eastern side of the Gulf of Oman near the entrance to the Persian 
Gulf, and 6 miles south of a port of the same name. The latter was 
frequented by the vessels of the English Company whilst the Portuguese 
held Hormuz. After the Portuguese were driven out of Hormuz ( 1622 ) 
the English trade was moved to Gombroon.” (Yule- Burnell, A7tglo~ 
Indzafi Glossary^ p. 345*) 



H8 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


found in every thousand oysters the value of 5 fanos 
of pearls — that is to say a half dcu of our money/ — it 
is accepted as a proof that the fishing will not be good, 
and that these poor people would not recover the out- 
lay which they would have to incur. For both on 
account of their outfit and for their food during the 
time of the fishing they borrow money at the rate of 
from 3 to 4 per cent per month. Accordingly, if, at 
the least, 1000 oysters do not yield 5 fanos worth 
of pearls, they do not fish during that year. The 
merchants buy the oysters on chance, and content 
themselves with what they find inside. It is a great 
piece of good fortune when large pearls are found, 
but it rarely occurs, especially at the Manar fishery, 
which produces no large ones, as I have said, the 
majority being only pearls to be sold by the ounce 
and ground into powder.^ Only a few among them 
weigh half a grain or a grain, and it is a great event 
when any of 2 or 3 carats are found. In some years 
the 1000 oysters contain up to 7 fanos worth, and the 
whole fishing yields 100,000 piastres and over.® While 
the Portuguese were masters of Manar they levied 
toll from every boat, and the Dutch, who have taken 
possession of it from them, now levy 8 piastres from 
each diver, and sometimes up to 9 ; this yields them 
a revenue in the best years amounting to 1 7, 200 reals. 
The reason why the Portuguese took this revenue from 
these poor people, and why the Dutch take it still, 
being that they are obliged to protect them against 

^ Or 2s. 3d. The ecu being worth 2 rupees, or 4s, 6d., therefore 
these fanos were worth 5.4d. each, 

2 The term aljofar was applied by the Portuguese to seed pearls, 
said to be from aVjauhar.^ Arab., a jewel. (See Anglo-Indian Glossary,) 

3 With the piastre at 4s. 6d. this would be equal to ;^2 2,5oo. 



CHAP. XXI 


PEARL-FISHERIES 


119 


their enemies, the Malabaris, who come with armed 
boats to capture these fishers in order to make slaves 
of them. 

Whilst the fishing lasts the Dutch always keep, at 
sea, two or three armed boats on the quarter whence 
the Malabaris come, these precautions being taken so 
that the work may proceed in safety. The fishermen 
are for the most part idolaters, but there are also 
Muhammadans who have separate boats. They never 
mingle with one another, and the Dutch levy more 
from the latter than from the others. For the Mu- 
hammadans, besides having to pay as much as the 
idolaters, have also to give one day’s take, the 
particular day being left to the choice of the Dutch. 

The heavier the rainfall in the year, the better is 
the pearl-fishery. But since many think that at the 
greatest depths at which the oyster is found, the pearl 
is whitest, because the water is not so hot there, 
and the sun has more difficulty in penetrating to the 
bottom, it is necessary to correct this error. The 
fishing is carried on in from 4 to 12 cubits depth on 
the banks, where there are sometimes up to 250 boats. 
In the majority (of the boats) there is but one diver, 
and in the largest only two. These boats sail from 
the coast every day before sunrise, with a land wind 
which never fails and lasts till 10 a. m. In the after- 
noon they return with a wind from the sea, which 
succeeds the land-wind, and does not fail to blow at 
II or 12 o’clock, as soon as the other has ceased. 
The banks are at 5 or 6 leagues out to sea, and when 
the boats have arrived there the oysters are fished for 
in the following manner ; — 

A cord is tied under the arms of those who dive, 



120 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


which those who remain in the boats hold by the end. 
Attached to the diver’s great toe is a stone of i 8 to 
20 pounds weight, which those who remain in the 
boat also hold by a rope. They have also a net made 
like a sack, the mouth of which is surrounded by a 
hoop to keep it open, and this net is attached like the 
rest. Then the diver plunges into the sea, and as 
soon as he reaches the bottom, which he does quickly, 
on account of the weight of the stone attached to his 
great toe, he removes the stone, and those who are 
in the barque draw it up. For as long as the diver 
is able to hold his breath he puts oysters into the net, 
and as soon as he feels that he is unable to hold out 
longer, he pulls the cord which is tied under his arms ; 
this is the signal for him to be drawn up, which those 
who are in the boat do as quickly as they can. The 
people of Manar are better fishers, and remain for 
a longer time under the water than those of Barren 
and El’ Katie, for they do not place any clips on their 
noses nor cotton in their ears to keep the water from 
entering, as is done in the Persian Gulf. 

After the diver has been drawn into the boat the 
nets containing the oysters are hauled up, and it requires 
about seven or eight minutes to lift the oysters and to 
give the diver time to regain breath, after which he 
returns to the bottom as before ; this he does many 
times during ten or twelve hours, and then returns to 
land. Those who are in want of money sell what they 
have taken, at once, but those who have what they 
require to live on, keep the oysters until the whole fish- 
ing is finished. The oysters are left unopened, and as 
they decay open of themselves. There are some of 
these shells which are four times as large as those of 



CHAP. XXI 


THE JEWEL TRADE IN GOA 


121 


our Rouen oysters, but as the flesh of this kind of 
oyster, of which we speak, is poor and of bad flavour, 
it is not eaten but is thrown away. 

To conclude the discourse on pearls, it should be 
remarked that throughout Europe they are sold by 
carat weight, which is equal to 4 grains, the same as 
the diamond weight, but in Asia the weight is different. 
In Persia the pearls are weighed by the abds, and an 
abds is an eighth less than our carat. In India, and 
in all the territories of the Great Mogul and the 
Kings of Golconda and Bijapur, they are weighed by 
ratis, and the rati is also an eighth less than the carat.^ 

Goa was formerly the place where there was the 
largest trade in all Asia in diamonds, rubies, sapphires, 
topazes, and other stones. All the miners and mer- 
chants went there to sell the best which they had 
obtained at the mines, because they had there full 
liberty to sell, whereas, in their own country, if they 
showed anything to the Kings or Princes, they were 
compelled to sell at whatever price they pleased to fix. 
There was also at Goa a large trade in pearls, both of 
those which came from the island of Barren in the 
Persian Gulf, and those fished for in the straits of 
Manar on the coast of the island of Ceylon, as also 
of those which were brought from America. It should 
be known then, that in Goa and in all the other places 
which the Portuguese hold in India, they have a par- 
ticular weight for pearls which is not used in the other 
places where there is a trade in pearls, neither in 

^ Kelly in the Universal Ca?nbisi, i, p. 278, gives the value of the 
Persian abds as 3.66 diamond grains = 2. 2 5 (2.9 ?) troy grains. But it 
has been shown that the pearl rati of our author was equal to 2.77 troy 
grains. (See vol. i, Appendix, p. 417, and Preface, vol. ii, for correction.) 



122 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Europe, Asia, nor America. I do not include Africa, 
because this trade is unknown there, and because in 
that part of the world the women content themselves, 
in lieu of jewels, with pieces of crystal, beads of false 
coral or yellow amber, of which they make necklaces 
and bracelets to wear on their arms and legs. 

The Portuguese, then, in all the places in India 
where they are in authority, sell pearls by a weight 
which they call chegos, but buy them of the merchants, 
according to the places from whence they bring them, 
by carats, abds, or ratis. The table which follows 
shows the ratio between these chegos and carats. 


Carats. Chegos. 

1 5 

2 8 

3 iii 

4 i6 

5 21 

6 27 

7 34 

8 44 

9 56 

10 69 


Carats. Chegos. 


1 1 

84 

I 2 

100 

13 

II7 

14 

136 

15 

156 

16 

i 77 f 

17 

200 ^ 

18 

225 

19 

250^- 

20 

277 f 


Carats. 

Chegos. 

2 I 

306 

22 

336 

23 

3^7i 

24 

400 

25 

430 

26 

4691 

27 

50 H 

28 

544i 

29 

584 

30 

625 


Carats. 

Chegos. 

31 

667 i 

32 

711 

33 

756 i 

34 

802-f 

35 

8504- 

36 

900 

37 

9504- 

38 

I002-I- 

39 

1056 

40 



1 With such an extraordinary table of equivalents one may easily 
understand the difficulty that is experienced in reconciling statements 
about weights and measures. If i carat equals 5 chegos^ it might be 
supposed that 20 carats would equal 100 chegos^ and 40 carats 200 ; 
but it will be seen that the equivalents above given are 27 7f and 1 1 J 
respectively. (See Preface for explanation.) 

The relationship between the real weight called the 7 nangelzn in 
Madras, and the nominal weight called chow^ though it does not eluci. 
date this table, throws some light on the subject. Rule — Square the 
number of znangelzns, and divide three-fourths of this product by the 
number of pearls. The quotient is the number of chows. Example — 
To find value of 21 pearls weighing 16 mangelins at 12 pagodas per 
chow, i6xi6xf=i92, 1 92-=- 21 = 9 chows 9^ parts, which at 96s. 
per chow = ;£43 : 17 : 8-^. (See Kelly, Universal Cambist, p. 92.) 



CHAPTER XXII 


Remarks upon the largest and most beautif^d Diamonds 
and Rubies which the Author has seen in Europe 
and Asia, the figures of which are here given, 
together with those of large Stones which he sold to 
■ the King on his return from his last Journey to 
\^Viik,with a representation of a magiiificent Topaz, 
and the largest Pearls in the World. 

I SHALL follow the order of the figures as they are 
arranged by their numbers, and I shall commence 
with the heaviest diamond of which I have any know- 
ledge ; — 

No. I, This diamond^ belongs to the Great 
Mogul, who did me the honour to have it shown to me 
with all his other jewels. You see represented here 
its form after having been cut, and, as I was allowed 
to weigh it, I ascertained that it weighed 319^ ratis, 
which are equal to 279^^ of our carats. When in the 
rough it weighed, as I have elsewhere said, 907 ratis, 
or 793|- carats. This stone is of the same form as 
if one cut an egg through the middle.® 

^ For full discussion of all the facts connected with the Great 
Mogul’s diamond, see Appendix I, and Index. 

2 This operation may be performed in either of two ways ; from the 
figure given by Tavernier he evidently means transversely. The 
Koh-i-niir as it was when brought to England might be described as of 



124 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


No. 2 represents the form of the Grand Duke of 
Tuscany’s diamond, which he has had the goodness 
to show me upon more than one occasion. It weighs 
139-^ carats, but it is unfortunate that its water tends 
towards the colour of citron.^ 


No. 3 is of a stone^ weighing 1 76-|- mangelins, which 
amount to 242-5^ of our carats. The mangelin, as I 
have said, is the weight used in the Kingdoms of Gol- 
CONDA and Bijapur, and it amounts to i-f of our carats. 
When at Golconda in the year 1642, I was shown 
this stone, and it is the largest diamond I have seen 
in India in the possession of merchants. The owner 
allowed me to make a model of it in lead, which I 
sent to Surat to two of my friends, telling them of 
its beauty and the price, namely 500,000 rupees, which 
amount to 750,000 livres of our money.® I received 
an order from them, that, if it was clean and of fine 
water, to offer 400,000 rupees, but it was impossible 
to purchase it at that price. Nevertheless, I believe 


the shape of half an egg, cut longitudinally, but this difference of form, 
as I shall explain, was the result of the mutilation to which it was sub- 
jected. (See Appendix I.) 

^ For identification of this stone with the Austrian yellow, now the 
property of the Emperor of Austria, and known as the Florentine, 
see Index, Its weight, as recently determined by Schrauf, is 133^ 
Vienna carats, or 27.454 gramms. His figure of it corresponds with 
that given by our Author, The figures of the Austrian yellow by 
Murray, and following him by Emanuel, represent a distinct stone. 

2 It is not known whether this stone still exists in the form it had 
when seen by Tavernier. Mr. Streeter {Great Diamonds) devotes a 
chapter to it under the title “ The Great Table.” I do not know the 
source from whence the story which he gives as to its discovery by a 
Bheel Chief is derived. What has become of it is not known ; it has 
most probably been broken up. 

® ;!fS6,2So. 





CHAP. XXH 


LARGE DIAMONDS 


125 


that it could have been obtained if they would have 
advanced their offer to 450,000 rupees. 

No. 4 represents a diamond which I bought at 
Ahmadabad for one of my friends. It weighed 178 
ratis, or 157:5, of our carats.^ 

N o. 5 represents the shape of the above mentioned 
diamond after it had been cut on both sides. Its 
weight was then 94-|- carats, the water being perfect. 
The flat side, where there were two flaws at the base, 
was as thin as a sheet of thick paper. When having 
the stone cut I had all this thin portion removed, 
together with a part of the point above, where a small 
speck of flaw still remains.® 

No. 6 represents another diamond which I bought 
in the year 1653 at the Kollur mine. It is beautiful 
and pure, cut at the mine. It is a thick stone, and 
weighs 36 mangelins, which are equal to 63 f of our 
carats.® 

Nos. 7 and 8. The two pieces represented are 
from a cleaved stone, which, when whole, weighed 
75-| mangelins, or 104 carats.* Although of good 
water, there appeared so much impurity inside it, that, 

1 The equivalent should be I5 5f carats. 

2 Mr. Streeter (Great Dia 7 nonds) heads a chapter with this, the 
‘‘ Ahmaddbdd Diamond,” but so far as the stone is concerned, all that 
can be said is, that nothing is certainly known of its subsequent history. 
It may have been disposed of in Persia. 

^ The equivalent of 36 Kollur or Golconda ^nangelhis in carats at i§, 
is 49^ carats, and in Ramulkota 77 iangelins 2X if (see p. 89) = 63 carats. 
Nothing further is known of this stone, 

^ Strictly I03|-|- carats, in round numbers therefore 104, the 
7 nangelins being those of Golconda at if carats in this case. 



126 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


as it was large and high-priced there was no one 
among the Banians who dared to purchase it. At 
length a Dutchman named Bazu ventured to do so, 
and, having had it cleaved, he found inside it about 
8 carats weight of impurity like decomposed vegetable 
matter.^ The small piece was clean, save for a nearly 
imperceptible flaw ; but as for the other, where the 
flaws traversed right through, it had to be divided into 
seven or eight pieces. The Dutchman risked much 
in cleaving this stone, and it was a great piece of good 
luck for him that it did not break into a hundred 
fragments. Still, for all that, it did not repay him ; 
this makes it sufficiently plain that where the Banians 
refuse to bite there is nothing to be hoped for by the 
Franks. 


Figures of twenty Diamonds which the Author sold to 
the King on his return from his last Voyage to 
India. Fhe figures before the Header show the 
weight, the extent, and thickness of each Stone.^ 

These are the figures of the most beautiful rubies 
in the world, and of the topaz of the Great Mogul, in 
the order in which they are arranged here by numbers. 

^ This case has been quoted in connection with investigations into 
the nature and origin of the diamond. Mr. Streeter devotes a chapter 
to this diamond. (See Great Diamonds^ chap, xxx, p. 218.) 

2 The violet-blue diamond A, and the two rose-coloured diamonds 
B and C, which are here figured, are referred to in ‘‘ A Note about some 
unusual Diamonds,” published in the PhiL Trans, for 27th April 1674, 
No. 102, p. 26, as being in a representation of a considerable number 
of diamonds, which were sold by Tavernier to the King of France. 
Hence it would seem that this plate reached the Royal Society in 
London before the publication of the travels in 1676. The adamantine 
hardness of the stones, in spite of their unusual colours, caused them to 
be admitted to be diamonds. The history of the blue diamond is well 







CHAP. XXII 


LARGE RUBIES 


127 


No. I. Figure of a ruby which belongs to the King 
of Persia. It is of the thickness and shape of an egg, 
is bored through and of very high colour, beautiful 
and clean, with the exception of a small flaw at the 
side. The custodians are unwilling to say what it cost, 
as is also the case with the pearl belonging to the 
same King, which is represented further on ; they are 
likewise unwilling that any one should know what 
either of them weighs. Those who keep the registers 
of the King of Persia’s jewels merely say that this 
ruby has been in the possession of the King for many 
years. 

No. 2 represents a large stone believed to be a 
mby, and sold as such to Zafar Khan, the Great 
Mogul’s uncle, who bought it for the sum of 95,000 
rupees, which amount to 1,425,000 livres} He 
presented it to the Great Mogul, with many other 
precious things, on the King’s festival, that is to 
say, the day whereon he is weighed, as I have else- 
where said. This stone having been priced at a little 
less than it cost, there happened to be present at that 
time an old Indian who had previously been chief 
jeweller to the King, but had been dismissed from his 
charge through jealousy. Having taken this stone in 

told in Mr. Streeter’s work on The Great Diamonds. The blue diamond 
which belonged to Mr. Hope, weighing 44J carats, is believed to be 
a fragment of this stone, which was stolen from the Garde Meuble in 

1792. 

1 There is here a mistake on one side or the other ; a cipher should 
either be added to the rupees or subtracted from the livres. See vol. i, 
p. 389, where the total value of a present made by Zafar Khan is put at 
1,050,000, hence perhaps it may be concluded that the figure here 
should be 142,500 livres^ but it is not certain that the occasions referred 
to were identical. 



128 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


his hands, he maintained that it was not a balass^ ruby, 
that Zafar KhAn had been cheated, and that the 
stone w'as not worth more than 500 rupees. The 
King having been informed of the discussion, sum- 
moned the old Indian, with all the other jewellers, who 
maintained on their side that the stone was a balass 
ruby. As in the whole Empire of the Great Mogul 
there was no one more proficient in the knowledge of 
stones than ShAh JahAn, who was kept as a prisoner 
at Agra by Aurangzeb, his son, the latter .sent the 
stone to the King, his father, asking for his opinion. 
After full consideration he confirmed the verdict of the 
old jeweller, and said that it was not a balass ruby, 
and that its value did not exceed 500 rupees. The 
stone having been returned to Aurangzeb, he com- 
pelled the merchant who had sold it to take it back 
and return the money he had received. 

Nos. 3 and 4 are figures of a ruby which belongs 
to the King of Bijapur. No. 4 shows the height of 
the stone above the ring, and No. 3 the circuit of the 
chaton? It weighs mangelins, equal 17^ of 

our carats, the mangelin at Bijapur being 5 grains.® 
It is hollowed from beneath {i.e. cut en cabuckon), 
clean, and of the first quality. The King of Bijapur 
bought it in the year 1653 for the sum of 14,200 
new pagodas, the pagoda being then worth 3-|- 
rupees, this, in our money, would be equal to 74,550 
livresJ^ 

^ Ballet in the original, for balass. (See vol. i, p. 382 n.) 

2 The chaton is the bezel of a ring which holds a jewel in position. 

3 On p. 124 the Bijapur mangelin is said to be equal to if carats 

{i.e. 51 diamond grains), and 14 mangelins should therefore be equal to 
I9 t carats. ZSS 9 I : Ss. 





CHAP. XXII 


LARGE RUBIES 


129 


No. 5 is the figure of a ruby which a Banian 
merchant showed me at Benares on the occasion of 
my' last visit to India. It weighs 58 ratis, or 
carats, and is of the second quality. Its form is of 
an almond cabttchon somewhat hollowed beneath, and 
bored near the point. I was willing to give 40,000 
rupees for it, which make 60,000 livres^ but the mer- 
chant to whom it belonged asked 55,000 rupees. I 
believe I could have got it for 50,000 rupees.® 


No. 6 is the figure of the large topaz of the Great 
Mogul. I did not see him wear any other jewel 
during the time I remained at his Court on my last 
visit to India. This topaz weighs 181^ ratis, or 
1575- carats.^ It was bought at Goa for the Great 
Mogul, for the sum of 181,000 rupees, or 271,500 
livres of our money.® 

-No. 7. These grand monarchs of Asia are not 
the only ones in the world who are in possession of 
beautiful stones. I have not seen as large rubies in 
any of the thrones of the Great Mogul as are those 
represented in the plate Nos. 7, 8, and 9, which 
belong to our great King, the most powerful and 
magnificent, in all respects, among the Monarchs of 
the earth ! 

1 At the rate of one rati — l-th of a carat. 

2 ^4500. _ ® i:5 7So. 

^ i8i-| ratis =158^ carats nearly. In vol. i, p. 400, it was said to 
weigh 6 melscals = i Fr. Ofice, It was probably the stone referred to 
in vol. i, p- 372. Bernier, already quoted, alludes to it as ‘‘a beautiful 
oriental topaz of matchless size and splendour, shining like a little 
sun.” {Travels in the Mogul JEmpire^ p. 179 ? Calcutta, 1826.) 

5 ^20,412 : los. 


VOL. II 


K 



130 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Here again are Jigtires of the largest pearls of 
which we have k 7 towledgey in the order of their 
numbers. 

No. I is the figure of a pearl which the King of 
Persia bought in the year 1633 from an Arab who 
had just received it from the fisheries at El Katif. 
It cost him 32,000 tomanSy or 1,400,000 livres of our 
money, at the rate of 46 livres and 6 deniers per 
tomani^ It is the largest and most perfect pearl ever 
discovered, and it has not the least defect. 

No. 2 is the figure of the largest pearl which I saw 
at the Court of the Great Mogul. It is suspended 
from the neck of a peacock made of precious stones, 
and rests on the breast, and this peacock surmounts 
the throne. 

No. 3 is the figure of a pearl which I sold, on my 
last journey, to Shaista KhAn,^ uncle of the Great 
Mogul and Governor of Bengal. It weighs 55 carats, 
but the water is somewhat dead ; it is the largest pearl 
which has ever been taken from Europe to Asia. 

1 32,000 X 46/. 6d. = 1,472,800 Uvres — £110,460, and 32,000 
to77ians at £2, : 9s. = ;£i 10,400. Ainslie, referring to this in his chapter 
on pearls as a drug, erroneously states that Tavernier himself paid the 
enormous sum of 110,000 for this pearl. {Materia Medica, vol. i, p. 
294.) A value of £64,000 for this pearl is mentioned by Streeter 
{Precious Sto7tes a7id Geiiis, 3d Edition, part iii, p. 14), but that sum 
appears to have been derived from an under-estimate of the equivalent 
values of the livre and t 077 ia 7 t, as known to Tavernier. 

2 See for the incidents connected with the sale of this pearl Book I, 
chap. viii. It was the cause of serious disagreement between Tavernier 
and Shdistd Khdn. On p. 1 1 2 Tavernier states that it came from the 
American pearl fishery. 





CHAP. XXII 


LARGE PEARLS 


131 


No. 4 is the figure of a large pearl perfect both as 
regards its water and its form which is like that of an 
olive. It is in the middle of a chain of emeralds and 
rubies that the Great Mogul sometimes wears round 
his neck, and it hangs down to his waist. 

No. 5. As a round pearl of perfect form, this 
is the largest I know of, and it belongs to the Great 
Mogul. Its equal has never been found, for which 
reason the Great Mogul has not worn it, but has 
left it with other jewels which are unmounted. For 
if a match for it had been found, the pair might 
have been used as ear pendants, and each of the two 
pearls would have been placed between two rubies 
or two emeralds, in conformity with the custom of 
the country, there being no one, whether small or 
great, who, in proportion to his means, does not carry 
in each ear a pearl set between two coloured stones. 


A 



CHAPTER XXIII 

Concerning Coral and Yellow Amber and the places 
where they are found. 

Although coral does not rank among precious stones 
in Europe, it is nevertheless held in high esteem in 
the other quarters of the globe, and it is one of the 
most beautiful of nature’s productions, so that there are 
some nations who prefer it to precious stones. I shall 
set down here, in a few words what I have been able 
to ascertain about the places where it is fished for, and 
of the manner in which it is obtained, 

I shall say in the first place that there are three 
fisheries on the coast of Sardinia. That obtained at 
Arguerrel^ is the best and the most beautiful of all, • 
the second locality is called Boza,^ and the third is 
close to the island of St. Pierre.® There is another 
fishery on the coasts of the island of Corse, ^ and the 
coral found there is slender but beautiful in colour. It 
is found at two other places on the coast of Africa — 
one near the Bastion de France,® and the other at 

1 Arguerrel not identified. 

2 Boza^ on the west coast of Sardinia, about S miles from Cagliari. 

3 St Pierre is probably some small islet not on ordinary maps. 

^ Corsica. 

s The Bastion de Fra?ice was one of the forts belonging to France on 
the coast of Algiers before the nineteenth century. It was near La 
Calle, which in 1594 belonged to France, and was the centre of a coral 
fishery. It is now destroyed. 



CHAP. XXIII 


RED CORAL 


133 


Tabarque^ ; the coral from this locality is fairly thick 
and long, but the colours are pale. There is a seventh 
fishery on the coast of Sicily, near Trapano^; the 
coral there is slender, but of good colour. There is 
still another locality on the coast of Catalogne, 
towards Cape de Quiers® ; the coral there is of 
excellent colour and thick, but the branches are very 
short. There is, moreover, a ninth fishery in the 
island of Majorque,* of the same nature as that of the 
island of Corse ; and these are all the places in the 
Mediterranean where there are coral fisheries,® for 
there are none in the Ocean.® The following is the 
method of fishing for it. 

As coral grows under hollowed rocks where the sea 
is deep, the following device is used in order to obtain 
it. The fishers bind two rafters together in the form of 
a cross, and place a large lump of lead in the centre to 
make them sink to the bottom. They then bind tufts of 
hemp about the rafters, and twist them irregularly to 
the size of the thumb, and attach the wood by two 

1 Tabarka, a rocky islet on north coast of Tunis, near La Calle. 

2 Trepani, the Drepanum of the ancients, 1 8 miles north of Marsala. 

^ Catalonia, in Spain. Cape de Quicrs has not been identified. 

^ Majorca. The fact of there being so much variation in the 
characters of the coral from these different localities should be of some 
interest to naturalists. 

5 “The most important fisheries extend along the coasts of Tunis, 
Algeria, and Morocco, but red coral is also obtained in the vicinity of 
Naples, near Leghorn and Genoa, and on the coasts of Sardinia, 
Corsica, Catalonia, and Provence. It is said that it attains greater per- 
fection in the East than in the South, and that it is rarely found in a 
western, and never in a northern aspect.” {Eficyclopcedia Britattnica^ 
Art. “Coral.”) 

^ This is now known to be not correct, since “ red or precious coral 
occurs at San Jago and also at St. Vincent. ... It occurs in about loo 
or 120 fathoms, and is dragged for with swabs as in the Mediterranean.” 
(Prof. Moseley, Notes of a Naturalist on the Challenger^ p. 65.) 



134 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


ropes, one of which hangs from the bow and the others 
from the stern of the boat. They then allow the wood 
to drift with the current across the rocks, and the 
hemp becoming entangled about the coral, it sometimes 
requires five or six boats to hoist the rafters ; and when 
exerting the great strain necessary, if one of the cables 
breaks all the rowers are in danger of perishing ; it is 
a very dangerous trade. When dragging up the coral 
thus, by force, for as much as is drawn out an equal 
quantity falls back into the sea, and the bottom being 
generally very muddy, the coral is injured from day to 
day, as our fruits on the earth are, by worms, so that 
the sooner it is extracted from the mud the less is it 
deteriorated. In reference to this I may say that I have 
seen, at Marseilles, something wonderful in a shop 
where coral was worked. There was a piece as big as 
the thumb, and as it was somewhat glassy it was cut in 
two, and a worm was found inside, which I saw wriggle, 
it had been kept alive for some months by shutting it 
up in its hole. For it should be remarked that among 
some branches of coral there grows a sort of sponge 
similar to our honeycombs, where small worms ensconce 
themselves like bees — in such ways does nature delight 
to diversify her works. Some persons believe that coral 
is soft in the sea, but, as a matter of fact, it is hard. It 
is, however, true that in certain months of the year 
one can express from the ends of the branches a kind 
of milk as from the breast of a woman.^ This may be 
the seed which, falling upon whatsoever it meets with 
in the sea, produces another branch of coral, — thus, for 
instance, it has been found on a human skull, upon the 
blade of a sword, and upon a grenade which had fallen 
1 This refers to the ova of the coral polypes. 



CHAP. XXI 11 


RED CORAI. 


135 


into the sea, where it was interlaced in the branches of 
coral to the height of six inches ; and I have had the 
grenade in my hands. 

The coral fishery lasts from the commencement of 
April to the end of July, and generally 200 boats are 
engaged in it, some years more and some less They 
are built beside the Gekoa river, and are very lio-ht 
They carry much sail in order to sail fast, there beino- 
no other part of the Mediterranean where boats carry 
so much, and there are no galleys able to outstrip 
them. There are seven men to each boat, with a boy 
to attend on them. The fishing is carried on at from 
25 to 40 miles from the land, where it is believed there 
are rocks, the boats not advancing farther to sea for 
fear of pirates, from whom they escape, w’hen they 
meet them, by swift sailing. 

I have to make a remark here about coral in refer 
ence to certain nations of the East. The Japanese, as 
I have said, neither esteem pearls nor precious stones 
but they value beautiful beads of coral, which serves 
to close their bags ; these bags are made, as they were 
formerly, in France. It is for this purpose that thev 
use the largest beads of coral, to run on a silken cord 
which closes the bag, so that in order that they may 
be able to possess one of the size of an ego-, beautiful 
and clean, without any spot upon it, they will pay 
whatever you ask. The Portuguese, who formerly did 
a large trade in Japan, have often assured me that 
they could obtain for one as much as 20,000 dcus} 
It is much to be wondered that the Japanese give so 
much money for a fine piece of coral, since they have 
a contempt for jewels, caring only for things which are 

^ ;£4SOO- 



136 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


little thought of elsewhere. They attach great value 
to the skin of a particular fish, which is rougher than 
shagreen ; this fish has on the back,’ as it were, six 
small bones, and sometimes eight, which are elevated 
and form a circle, with another in the middle, resem- 
bling a rose of diamdFnds.^ They make sword scab- 
bards of these fish-skins, and the more symmetrically 
these small bones form the rose and are arranged, the 
more money is given for them — sometimes up to 10,000 
/cus,^ as the Dutch have assured me. To return to 
coral and to finish the discourse about it, it should 
be added that the common people wear it and use it as 
an ornament for the neck and arms throughout Asia, 
but principally towards the north in the territories 
of the Great Mogul, and beyond them, in the moun- 
tains, of the Kingdoms of Assam and BhutAn.® 

Yellow amber is not found except on a particular 
coast of Ducal Prussia, in the Baltic Sea,^ where 
the sea during certain winds throws it from time to 
time on the sand. The Elector of Brandenburg, who 

1 This appears to have been the skin of some kind of shark or ray. 
I have seen, but cannot now refer to figures of it in some of the old 
Dutch and Portuguese travels. A common kind of it is still to be seen 
on the handles of the Japanese swords, of which such large numbers 
have been recently imported. In his chapter on the Conduite des Hoi- 
landois en Asze, published in iho J^ecuet’l, 1679 Ed., p. 17, Tavernier 
gives a further account of it. He says a perfect skin was worth up to 
10,000 ecus^ an ordinary one being obtainable for i ecu. The fish, he 
adds, occurred in the Persian Gulf. 

2 The French editions of 1679 and 1713 have 1000 ecus. 

3 The reason for the preference shown for coral is probably to be 
attributed to the way its tints adapt themselves to set off a dark skin, 
and also look well with a white garment. 

4 The source of amber in Upper Burmah in the Hukung valley was 
not known to Tavernier. (See Economic Geology of India, p. 57, for a 
description of the mines there.) 



CHAP, xxni 


AMBER 


137 


is the proprietor of it, farms out all this coast for from 

18.000 to 20,000 Sms a year, and sometimes up to 

22.000 Sms ; and the farmers employ watchmen, who 
traverse the length of the shore, the sea throwing 
the amber sometimes on one side and sometimes on 
the other, so that no one can steal it ; and whoever 
ventures to do so receives corporal chastisement. 

Amber is nothing more than a congelation of a 
species of gum which forms in the sea. This experi- 
ence sufficiently proves, because numerous pieces are 
to be seen which contain flies and other insects 
congealed in them.^ I have had many such pieces, 
and one, among others, which had four or five small 
flies inside it. 

As I have made a remark about coral in reference 
to Japan, I shall make another about amber in reference 
to China. It is a custom among the Chinese that 
when any great noble gives a feast, his reputation for 
grandeur and magnificence depends upon his having 
brought in, at the close of the repast, three or four 
perfume-pans and his having thrown into each of them 
a large quantity of amber, sometimes to the value of 
1000 Sms and upwards, in consideration of the fact that 
the more he burns,- and the larger the pieces, the more 
magnificent is the entertainment regarded, for a piece 
weighing one livre is worth 200 to 300 Sms? They 
use amber for this purpose because they adore fire, 
and because amber, thrown in the fire, yields a certain 
odour which is not unpleasing to the Chinese ; as it 
contains a kind of oil it gives out a flame exceeding 

1 Tavernier had therefore an approximately correct idea as to the 
true nature and origin of amber as a fossilised vegetable production. 

2 I.e, ^45 to £6y : los. per Hvre, 



138 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


most other flames. This profusion and waste explain 
the reason why amber is one of the best articles of 
merchandise that one could carry to China if trade 
had been open to foreigners, but the Dutch Company 
strictly reserve to themselves the trade in it — the 
Chinese coming to buy it from them at Batavia. 

I am unwilling to finish this chapter without making 
some remarks on ambergris also. We do not very 
well know either how it is formed or where it is found ; 
but it would appear as though it can only be in the 
seas of the East, although it has sometimes been found 
on the English and other European coasts.^ The 
largest quantity of it is found on the coast of Melinda, 
principally towards the mouths of the rivers, and 
especially at the mouth of that which is called Rio di 
Sena.^ When the Governor of Mozambique returns 

1 Ambergris, as is now well known, consists of the fcsces of the 
Cachelot or Sperm w'hale, Physeter 7 nacrocephalus , which inhabits the 
Indian Ocean. Garcia de Orta in his chapter on ambergris speaks of 
ambergris containing beaks of birds. These were no doubt the beaks 
of the cuttlefish upon which these whales feed. A form of this story 
is told by Barbosa (“ The East African Malabar Coasts,’’ in Hak, Soc., 
1866), who says ambergris is the guano of birds which has been 
swallowed and voided by whales. Chardin (voL iv, p. 47) doubts the 
connection with birds, but mentions a number of alternative myths as 
to its origin. Ainslie {Materia Medica^ vol. i, pp. 15-17) gives an interesting 
account of it, and refers to a vegetable ambergris yielded by a tree in 
Guiana. He says, like many other authors, that the best ambergris 
was obtained on the coast of Madagascar. In the Daily Press there 
recently appeared a paragraph headed “ An Ambergris King,” in which 
one William A. Atkins, the owner of a fleet of Cape Cod whalers, is 
described as having the monopoly of the ambergris trade of America 
— the ambergris being for equal weights worth more than gold. Owing 
to ambergris being called ajjzbra by some nations, very erroneous state- 
ments occur in many authorities as to the distribution in the East of 
true amber, for which it has been mistaken. (See Bconoznic Geology 
of Indiai) 

2 See p. 157. 



CHAP, xxm 


AMBERGRIS 


139 


to Goa at the close of three years, when the term of 
his government is ended, he generally brings with him 
about 300,000 pardos^Hox^ of ambergris, and ^^pa 7 'do, 
as I have elsewhere said, amounts to 27 sols of our 
money. ^ Sometimes pieces of ambergris of consider- 
able size and weight are found. In the year 1627 
a Portuguese vessel sailing from Goa to the Manillas, 
after it had passed the Straits of Malacca was overtaken 
by a tempest which lasted many days and nights, the 
sky being always concealed, and it being impossible for 
the pilot to take observations. Meanwhile the rice 
and other articles of food began to be exhausted, and 
the crew began to discuss whether they should not 
throw the blacks who were in the vessel into the sea in 
order to preserve the food for the white men. They 
were about to carry this into execution, when one 
morning the sun showing itself, disclosed to them an 
island to which they were tolerably near, but were, 
however, unable to anchor till the following day, the 
sea being high and the wind unfavourable. There 
were in the vessel a Frenchman, named Marin 
Renaud, of Orleans, and his brother, who on going 
on shore found a river and went to bathe at its mouth, 
together with two Portuguese corporals and a sergeant. 
One of the corporals when bathing perceived in the 
water a large mass which floated near the shore, and 
which he concluded, on going near it, was a sort of 
spongy stone, and left it without another thought, as 
did the four others, who also went to look at it and 
handled it without being able to make out what it was. 
Having returned to the vessel this same corporal 
reflected during the night as to what this object, of 

^ 37 so/s = 2 s, '03d,, or say 2 s. 300,000 ^art/os therefore = ;£ 30,000, 



140 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


which he had been unable to ascertain the nature, could 
be, and having heard ambergris spoken of, began to 
think that it might be it, in which he was not mistaken. 
The following day, without saying anything to his 
comrades, he took a sack and got himself put on shore, 
and going to the river as though he wished to bathe 
again, found the piece of ambergris and carried it 
secretly to the vessel, where he placed it in his box. 
He was unable to restrain himself from communicating 
the fact the same evening to Marin Renaud, who 
was unwilling to believe at first that it was really 
ambergris, but having well considered it thought at 
length that the corporal was right. He, taking all 
chances, offered the piece to Marin for two pains of 
Chinese gold, and the golden pain is equal to 600 
livres'^ of our money ; but Marin was only willing to 
give one ; the other held out on his side and kept the 
piece in his box. A few days afterwards, either 
spite at not being able to get the piece of amber- 
gris for what he had offered caused Marin to 
speak, or the matter was discovered by some other 
way, the report, however, was spread throughout the 
vessel that the corporal had a considerable piece of 
ambergris in his box, which he had found by chance 
on the shore of this island near to which the Portuguese 
were at anchor, and the sailors and soldiers then insisted 
on having their share. Marin Renaud out of petty 
revenge set the ball a-rolling and taught them their 
lesson. They told the corporal that being all comrades, 
and all running the same risks,- it was just that they 

^ Literally “loaves.” The English name for the ingots of gold used 
in currency by the Chinese was “shoes”; the equivalent value here 
would be £4S- See vol. i, Appendix. 



CHAP. XXIII 


AMBERGRIS 


141 


should all share the benefits which fortune offered them 
in common ; and, moreover, that he w'as not the only 
one to whom she had disclosed this piece of ambergris, 
which should consequently be divided between all the 
crew. The corporal defended himself on his side as 
well as he could, and as there were some who took his 
part, in the hope of having a better share of the piece if 
there were few pretenders to it, the dispute became so 
hot that at length it gave rise to a disturbance, which 
the captain of the vessel immediately sought to allay 
by his prudence. He represented to the sailors 
and soldiers that this large piece of ambergris, which, 
on his weighing it in their presence, proved to be 33 
livres in weight, being a rare piece and worthy of being 
presented to the King, it was a pity to break it into 
so many small pieces ; that they would find it pay them 
better to keep it till their return to Goa, where, on 
presenting it to the Viceroy, he would not fail to pay 
well for it, and by this means they would each receive 
much more. This suggestion of the captain’s was 
generally approved. They pursued their route to the 
Manillas, and on their return the piece of amber- 
gris was taken to the Viceroy. The captain told him 
beforehand how the matter stood, and they concerted 
together as to the means whereby they could secure 
the ambergris without it costing the Viceroy anything. 
Those who presented it to him on the part of the 
sailors and soldiers were thanked for it, and the Viceroy 
told them that he recognised their goodwill by so 
splendid a present which he would send to the King, 
who at that time was Philippe the Fourth, to whom 
Portugal was still subject. Thus all the pretenders 
to the piece of ambergris were defrauded of their 



142 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


expectations, and neither from the Viceroy noi the 
Kino- himself, to whom the ambergris was sent, did 
they receive any gift. 

I shall say one other word concerning a piece of 
ambergris weighing 42 ItvTes. In the year 1646 or 
1647 a Zealander, of one of the best families of 
Middlebourg, who commanded for the Dutch Com- 
pany in the Island of Maurice, which is to the east of 
that of St. Laurens,^ found this piece on the shore and 
sent it to the Company. As these people always have 
enemies, and there being a mark on the piece as if 
some one had broken a portion off, the Commander 
was accused of having stolen half, of which charge he 
cleared himself at Batavia. But the suspicion having 
always dwelt in the minds of many persons, and the 
Commander seeing that they would not give him 
another appointment, returned to Zealand on the 
same vessel upon which I then was. 

1 Mauritius and Madagascar, the latter having been known to 
the Portuguese as St. Lorenzo. Some say the Portuguese landed there 
first on the festival of the Saint, others that it was discovered by Lorenzo 
de Almeyda in 1506. {Varthema in Hak, Soc., p. 296.) 



CHAPTER XXIV 


Concerning Musk and Bczoar and some other medicinal 

stones. 

Musk and bezoar beins: included amon^ the rarest 
articles of trade, and the most precious which Asia 
furnishes us with, I have considered it appropriate to 
devote a chapter to them, and present the reader with 
some remarks about these two articles. 

The best kind and the greatest quantity of musk 
comes from the Kingdom of Bhutan, from whence it 
is conveyed to Patna, the principal town of Bengal, 
to be sold to the people of that country. All the musk 
which is sold in Persia comes from thence, and the 
merchants who sell musk prefer that you give them 
in exchange yellow amber and coral, rather than gold 
and silver, because they make great profits out of these 
two commodities. I had the curiosity to take a skin 
of this animal, which is here represented, to Paris.^ 

After this animal has been killed, the bladder, 
which is situated under the belly, is cut off — it is of 
the size of an egg, and is closer to the genital parts 
than to the navel. The musk is then extracted from 
the bladder which contains it — it is then like coagu- 

^ The figure in the original, which it is needless to reproduce here, 
is a tolerable representation of the musk deer, Moschits nioschifcrus 
(Linn.) 



144 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


lated blood. When the peasants wish to adulterate it, 
they insert some of the liver and the blood of the 
slaughtered animal mixed together, instead of the 
musk which they have withdrawn. This mixture 
o-enerates in the bladders certain small worms which 

is 

eat the good musk, so that when one opens them 
he finds that much has gone bad. Other peasants, 
when they have cut the bladder and have drawn as 
much musk as they can without its appearing to be 
too much, put in its place small pieces of lead to 
make it heavier. The merchants who buy it and 
transport it into foreign countries prefer this fraud to 
the other, because it does not generate these little 
worms. But the fraud is still more difficult to be dis- 
covered when they make small purses of the skin of 
the animal’s stomach, which they sew up with threads 
of the same skin, so as to resemble the true bladders ; 
these purses are filled with what has been removed 
from the good bladders, together with the fraudulent 
mixture which is added to it, so that it is difficult for 
the merchants to discover anything.^ It is true that 
if they bind the bladder directly they cut it, without 
letting the air get to it, and without giving time to the 
odour to lose some of its strength by evaporation (while 
they take out what they want to remove), if this 
bladder should be held to the nose of any one, blood 
would immediately issue from it in consequence of the 

1 A still more remarkable method of adulteration is that mentioned by 
Barbosa, which consists, in short, of putting leeches on the living animal, 
after the musk has been removed, and then allowing them to gorge 
themselves with the blood, after which they are dried in the sun and 
pounded, and the substance so prepared is placed in counterfeit pods 
made of the skin of the animal. (See The Kast A frica 7 i and Malabar 
CoasfSy Hakluyt Society^ p. 187.) 



pungency of the odour, which for this reason must be 
tempered to render it agreeable and prevent it from 
injuring the brain. The odour from the skin of this 
animal, which I took to Paris, was so strong that it 
was impossible to keep the skin in my rooms, as it 
caused headache to all the people in the house, and it 
was necessary to put it in a garret, where at length 
my servants cut off the bladder — this did not prevent 
its always retaining something of the odour. You 
do not begin to meet with this animal till about the 
56*" of latitude ,* but at 60"" it is in great abundance, the 
country there being well wooded. It is true that in the 
months of February and March, after these animals 
have suffered from famine in their own country on 
account of the snow, which falls in abundance to 
depths of 10 or 12 feet, they come south to 44^" and 45°, 
to eat the corn and new rice, and it is at this time that 
the peasants entrap them, in snares which they set, 
and kill them with arrows and blows of sticks. Some 
persons have told me that the deer are so thin and 
feeble in consequence of the hunger from which they 
have suffered, that many allow themselves to be 
captured by coursing. There must be an enormous 
number of these animals, as each has but one bladder, 
the largest of which is ordinarily of the size of a hen's 
egg, and only yields half an ounce of musk. It some- 
times requires even three or four of these bladders to 
make an ounce.^ 

1 “ The musk deer is found throughout the Himalayas, always at 
great elevations, and in summer rarely below 8000 feet, and as high as 
the limits of forest. It extends through the Himalayas to Central and 
Northern Asia as far as Siberia. A good musk pod is valued at from 10 
to I 5 rupees. One ounce is about the average produce of the pod.” 
(Jerdon, Ma 7 n 7 nals of India^ p. 268.) Adulteration, as it is described by 
Tavernier, appears to be still practised. 

n 


VOL. II 



• 146 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


The King of Bhutan, of whom I shall speak in 
the following Book, in the description which I shall 
o-ive of his Kingdom, fearing that the fraud done 
in musk might stop the trade, especially as musk is 
also obtained in Tonquin or Cochin-China, but is 
much dearer because it is not so abundant there — 
this King, I say, fearing lest this falsification of goods 
would divert the trade from his territories, some time 
aeo ordered that the bladderg should not be stitched, 
but should be brought open to BhutAn, which is the 
place of his residence, to be examined and sealed with 
his seal. Those which I bought were of this kind ; 
but notwithstanding all the King’s precautions, the 
peasants open them secretly, and place small pieces of 
lead in them, as I have said ; this the merchants 
tolerate, because the lead does not spoil the musk, and 
causes no injury, save in the weight. On one of my 
journeys to Patna I bought 7673 bladders, which 
weighed 2557^ ounces, and 452 ounces without the 
bladders.^ 

Bezoar ^ comes from a Province of the Kingdom of 
Golconda, towards the north-east. It is found in the 

^ From this, with similar statements about other commodities, we 
see that Tavernier did not limit his mercantile transactions to precious 
stones. In Book III, chap, xv, he again refers to this purchase (?), and 
sa3"s he bought 26,000 rupees worth — a Fr. ounce in the capsule costing 
4 hvres a:id 4 sols^ i.e. about 6s. 3^, and out of the capsule 8 francs^ 
or say 6s. 8d., or if Hures are intended, 12s. But at these prices the 
quantity here mentioned falls fair short of making the total sum of 26,000 
rupees. This, supposing the occasions to be identical, as appears to be 
the case, is a characteristic Tavernier discrepancy. 

- Bezoar is from padsar^ Persian, the name given to intestinal 
calculi. It was formerly so highly esteemed in the East as a drug 
that the early European travellers all seemed to believe in its efficacy, 
and accounts of it are to be found in the writings by many of them. 
(See 7 toie i, on p. 151.) 



CHAP. X.'ClV 


BEZOAR 


147 


fodder in the paunches of goats which brouse on a 
tree, the name of which I have forgotten. This plant 
bears little buds, about which, and also on the tips 
of the branches, which the goats eat, the bezoar con- 
cretes in the bellies of these animals. It assumes a 
form according to the shape of the buds and the ends 
of the branches, and this is why one finds it in so many 
different shapes. The peasants, by feeling the belly of 
the goat, know how many bezoars it contains, and they 
sell the goat for a price in proportion to the number 
which are therein. In order to ascertain this, they run 
both hands under the belly of the goat and beat the 
paunch along both sides, so that all the stones fall to 
the middle thereof, and they then estimate exactly, 
by touch, how many bezoai's are in it. The value of 
bezoar depends on the size, although the small possess 
no less virtue than the large. But in this respect one 
is often deceived by the fact that there are people who 
enlarge the bezoar with a kind of paste made of gum 
and other materials of the same colour as the bczoai'. 
They understand, even, how to give as many coats 
as the natural bezoar ought to have. One can detect 
this fraud easily by two methods. The first by weigh- 
ing the bezoar and placing it to steep for some time 
in lukewarm water ; if the water does not change its 
colour, and if the bezoar does not lose weight, it has 
not been adulterated. The other means is to touch 
the bezoar with a pointed hot iron ; if the iron enters 
it and makes it fry, it is a sign that it is a mixture, and 
that it is not genuine. For the rest, the larger the 
bezoar the higher the price, which rises in propor- 
tion like that of the diamond. For if 5 or 6 bezoars 
weigh an ounce, the ounce will be worth from 15 to 18 



148 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


francs, but if it is a bezoar of one ounce, the ounce 
will be worth fully loo francs. I have sold one of 
4:J- ounces for as much as 2000 livres} 

I had the curiosity to investigate all that can be ascer- 
tained regarding bezoar, having already made several 
visits to Golconda, which is the place where there is 
the most considerable sale of it, without being able to as- 
certain in what part of the body of the goat it is found. 
On my fifth journey some individuals who were in the 
services of the English and Dutch Companies, and who 
dared not trade on their own account, were indebted to 
me because I purchased about 60,000 rupees worth of 
bezoar for them. The merchants who sold it, wishing 
to show their acknowledgment, and to make me some 
present, I refused, and told them I had never taken 
anything from any one for a service which I was able 
to render. But I let them know that I would again be 
able to serve them in the approaching monsoon, and 
that they would oblige me also, on their part, if they 
would get three or four of these goats which produce 
the bezoar for me, promising to pay them for them 
whatsoever they were worth. The merchants appeared 
much surprised at this demand, and replied that the 
prohibition was so strict that if any one was found 
who dared to remove the goats out of the Province 
he would be executed without fail. I saw plainly 
that this request troubled them, for on the one side 
they feared punishment and on the other they were 
afraid lest I might prevent them from making another 
sale : this would have been a great loss to these poor 
people, who, whether they do or do not sell, are obliged 
to pay the King, for the farm, 6000 old pagodas, which 

^ £150- 



CHAP. XXIV 


BEZOAR 


149 


amount to 45,000 Uvres of our money.^ Fifteen days 
afterwards or thereabouts, not having thought anything 
further about them, three of them knocked at my door 
before daylight. As soon as they had entered my 
chamber, where I was still in bed, they asked me if all 
my servants were foreigners. As I had none from the 
town, and they were all either Persians or from Surat, 
I told them they were all foreigners, upon which they 
withdrew without replying to me. Half an hour after- 
wards they returned with six of these goats, which I 
examined at my leisure. It should be said that they 
are beautiful animals, very tall, and having fine hair, 
like silk. As soon as the goats were safely in my hall, 
the eldest of the three merchants who had brought 
them, beginning to speak by paying me a compliment, 
told me that since I had not been willing to take the 
present which they wished to make me, for having 
procured the sale of so large a parcel of bezoar, at 
the least I would not refuse these six goats which 
they gave me with their whole hearts ; but as I did not 
wish to take them entirely as a gift, as they desired, 
I asked what the value of them was ; and, after having 
made great difficulty about telling me, I was at length 
much surprised and thought they were joking when 
they said that one of the goats which they pointed out 
was worth three rupees, that each of the two next 
were worth four rupees, and each of the three which 
remained four and a quarter rupees. Upon which I 
asked them why some of the goats were dearer than 


^ There may be some mistake here, as 6000 old pagodas are only 
equal to 45,000 livres when pagoda is taken at 5 rupees, whereas 
Tavernier in general gives the old pagoda the value of only 4^- rupees, 
45,000 livres = ;£3375* 



160 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Others, and I learnt that it was because one had only- 
one bezoar in the stomach, and the others had two or 
three or four of them ; this they made me see for 
myself, forthwith, by tapping the belly, as I have above 
described. These six goats had 1 7 bezoars, and a half 
one, like the half of a nut. The inside was like the 
soft dropping of a goat, as these bezoars grow amongst 
the food in the belly of the goat. Some have told me 
that bezoars originate close to the liver, others main- 
tain that it is close to the heart, but I was never able 
to ascertain the truth.^ 

Both in the East and West there are an abundance of 
bezoars obtained from cows, and there are some which 
weigh up to 1 7 or 18 ounces, such an one having been 
given to the Grand Duke of Tuscany. But nothing 
is thought of this kind of bezoar, six grains of the other 
having a greater effect than thirty of it. 

As for the bezoar obtained from monkeys, as some 
believe, it is so strong that two grains of it do as much 
as six from that of the goat ; but it is very rare, and it 
is found particularly in the species of monkeys which 
live in the Island of Macassar. This kind of bezoar is 
round, while the other is of diverse forms, according to 
the forms of the buds and ends of branches which the 
goats have eaten. As these stones, which it is believed 
come from monkeys, are much rarer than the others, 
they are also much dearer and much more sought after ; 
and when one is found of the size of a nut it is valued 
at more than 100 dcus. The Portuguese, more than 

That Tavernier was not well versed in anatomy is sufficiently 
apparent from this passage, but at the period at which he wrote it, more 
than two centuries ago, such references to the heart and liver, and their 
communication with the stomach, would probably have passed without 
criticism. 



CHAP. XXIV 


BEZOAR 


161 


Other nations, attach great value to bezoar, because 
they are always on their guard, one against the 
other, fearing that an enemy may wish to poison 
them.^ 

There is still another much esteemed stone which 
is called the porcupine stone, which this animal has in 
its head, and is more efficacious against poison than 
bezoar. When one has placed it to steep in water for 
a quarter of an hour, the water becomes so bitter that 
there is nothing in the world to equal it in bitterness.® 
This animal has also sometimes, in its belly, a stone 
which is of the same nature and equally good as that 
which comes from the head, except with this difference, 
that it loses nothing of its weight or size by steeping 
in water, while there is diminution of the other. During 
my life I have bought three of these stones. One cost 
me 500 dcus, and I disposed of it subsequently with 
advantage to the Ambassador Dominico de SxVntis," 
of whom I have spoken in my accounts of Persia. I 
paid 400 dcus for another, which I still keep ; and the 

^ Garcia de Orta, who devotes a chapter to benoa?’^ highly extols 
its merits as a medicine in cases of ague, measles, as an antidote to 
poison, and in the treatment of abscesses ; he mentions that it was sup- 
posed, moreover, to possess aphrodisiac properties. It is not now 
believed to have any therapeutic value — to be, in fact, neutral. 

It seems probable that the substance supposed to be obtained in 
the head of the porcupine was a vegetable drug, to which that mythical 
origin was ascribed. Castanheda mentions a stone obtained in the head 
of an animal called bidgoldorf^ which was exceedingly rare, and was said 
to be an antidote against all kinds of poison {Kerds Voyages and 
Travels, vol. ii, p. 439). To test a bes^oar, according to Fryer — (i) 
rub it on chalk, if it leave an olive colour it is good ; (3) touch them 
with a hot iron, “ and if they fry like wax they are naught (3) put 
them in water, if small white bubbles rise they are good, if not they 
are doubtful. {Accoutti, Calcutta Edition, p. 4^9*) 

2 See Persian Travels^ Book II, chap, v, p. iSi, He was an 
ambassador from the Venetian Republic. 



162 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


third was sold to me for 300 ^cus, and I made a present 
of it to a friend. 

I shall finally make mention of the snake -stone, 
which is nearly of the size of a double^ some of them 
tending to an oval shape, being thick in the middle 
and becoming thin towards the edges. The Indians 
say that it grows on the heads of certain snakes, but I 
should rather believe that it is the priests of the idolaters 
who make them think so, and that this stone is a com- 
position which is made of certain drugs.^ Whatever 
it may be, it has an excellent virtue in extracting all 
the poison when one has been bitten by a poisonous 
animal. If the part bitten is not punctured it is neces- 
sary to make an incision so that the blood may flow ; 
and when the stone has been applied to it, it does not 
fall off till it has extracted all the venom which is drawn 
to it. In order to clean it it is steeped in woman’s milk, 
or, in default of it, in that of a cow ; and after having 
been steeped for ten or twelve hours, the milk, which 
has absorbed all the venom, assumes the colour of 
matter. One day, when I dined with the Archbishop 
of Goa, he took me into his museum, where he had 
many curiosities. Among other things he showed me 
one of these stones, and in telling me of its properties 
assured me that it was but three days since he had 
made trial of it, after which he presented it to me. As 

1 Doubloon ? A Spanish gold coin. 

" says that they were made of the ashes of the root of a 

certain plant, mixed with a particular kind of clay {Voyage, p. 94). 
Some snake-stones appear to have been made of charred bone. (See for 
for an exhaustive account of this subject Yule -Burnell, Anglo-Indian 
Glossary. ) The belief in their efficacy is still very general in India ; by 
some they are supposed to be found in the head of the adjutant bird 

Jungle Life in Lidia^ p. 82). 



CHAP. XXIV 


SNAKE STONES 


153 


he traversed a marsh on the island of Salsette, upon 
which Goa is situated, on his way to a house in the 
country, one of his pallankeen bearers, who was 
almost naked, was bitten by a serpent and was at 
once cured by this stone. I have bought many of 
them ; it is only the Brahmins who sell them, and it 
is that which makes me think that they make them. 
You employ two methods to ascertain if the snake- 
stone is good, and that there is no fraud. The first is 
by placing the stone in the mouth, for then, if good, it 
leaps and attaches itself immediately to the palate. 
The other is to place it in a glass full of water, and 
immediately, if it is genuine, the water begins to boil, 
small bubbles ascending from the stone, which is at 
the bottom, to the top of the water. 

There is still another stone which is called “ stone 
of the hooded snake.”^ It is a kind of snake which 
has, as it were, a hood which hangs behind the head, 
and it is behind this hood that the stone is found, the 
smallest being of the size of a hen’s egg. There are 
snakes in Africa and in Asia of an enormous size," 
and up to 25 feet in length, as was that one whose 
skin is preserved at Batavia. This snake had swal- 
lowed a girl of eighteen years, of which fact I have 
elsewhere given an account.® You only find these 
stones in snakes which are, at the least, two feet in 
length. The stone, which is not hard, when rubbed 
against another stone yields a kind of slime which, 
when dissolved in water and drunk by a person who 

1 Cobra di capello — Naja triptcdians. The figure referred to is a 
spirited one of a cobra, but is not reproduced here. 

2 Pythons. 

2 I have not met this account to which the author refers, and don^t 
know whex'e he has related it 



154 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


has some poison in his body, has the property of driv- 
ing it out at once. These snakes are only to be found 
on the coasts of Melinda, and you can obtain the 
stones from Portuguese sailors and soldiers on their 
return from Mozambique. 



CHAPTER XXV 


Conceniing the places from whence gold is obiaimd in 
Asia and Africa. 

Japan consists of many islands to the east of China 
trending northwards, some even believing that Niphon, 
which is the largest of them, is, as it were, in contact 
with the mainland ; it is the region of all Asia which 
furnishes the greatest quantity of gold, but it is 
thought that the principal part of it comes from the 
island of Formosa, from whence it is carried to Japan. 
Since the Dutch have held Formosa they have been 
unable to develop the trade of the particular locality 
where they believe the gold to occur. ^ 

Gold also comes from China, and the Chinese 
exchange it for the silver taken to them, for, price for 
price, they prefer silver to gold, because they have no 
mines of silver. This gold is of one of the lowest 
standards of any found in Asia. 


^ The occurrence of gold in China, Japan, and Formosa is not a 
subject that can be treated of exhaustively in these notes. That mines 
occur in China and Japan is well known, but I have not been able to 
find conclusive evidence with reference to Formosa. Ainslie {Matena 
Medica^ vol. i, p. 516) quotes the for December 1824 in 
support of the statement that the island abounds in gold. From a 
cursory examination of Mr. Locke’s great work on gold, it seems to 
contain no reference to Formosa. 



15 G 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


The island of Celebes or Macassar ^ also produces 
gold, which is obtained from the rivers, where it occurs 
mingled with the sand. 

In the island of Achin or Sumatra,® after the rainy 
season, and when the waters in the streams have sub- 
sided, veins of gold are found in the pebbles of dif- 
ferent sizes which the rains have carried down from 
the mountains facing the north-east. On the west 
coast of the same island, where the Dutch go to ship 
pepper, the peasants bring an abundance of gold, but 
it is of very low standard, even inferior to the gold 
of China. 

Towards Thibet, which is identical with the 
Caucasus of the Ancients, in the territories of a Raja 
beyond the Kingdom of Kashmir, there are three 
mountains close to one another, one of which produces 
gold of excellent quality, another gvenat, and another 
lapis. ® 

^ Gold occurs in the rivers of the northern and south-western 
peninsulas of Celebes. (Crawfurd, Dictionary,') 

2 According to Crawfurd a small gold coin called mas (worth is. 2d.) 
from the Malay name of the metal, has been coined at Achin. Gold 
dust, however, was the common medium of exchange. The Achinese 
have learnt the use of the touchstone from Telugu settlers. The gold 
filigree work of the Malays of Sumatra is very beautiful. A total of 
^1,000,000 worth of gold was considered by Crawfurd to cover the 
annual yield of all the Malayan islands in 1856. 

3 This indication as to the three mountains is somewhat vague. 
In all probability the grenai mine may be identified with the ruby, or 
rather spinelle mine, which is situated on the banks of the Shignd^ a 
tributary of the Oxus m Badakshdn. As pointed out in vol. i, p. 382 n 
the name balas was derived from this locality. The lapis mine is near 
Firgdmu, also m Badakshdn, Lat. 36° 10' Long. 71°. The Thibet gold 
mines, famous since the days of Herodotus, are somewhat numerous. 
Each of these localities will be found described in the Economic Geology 
of India, pp. 213, 430, 529, where, also, an explanation of the myth of 
the gold-digging ants is suggested. 



CHAP. XXV 


GOLD IN ASIA AND AFRICA 


157 


Finally, gold comes from the kingdom of Tipperah,^ 
of which I shall give a description in the following 
Book, but this gold is of bad quality, being of about 
the same standard as the gold of China. 

These are all the places in Asia ^ from whence gold 
comes, and I shall now say something of the gold of 
Africa, and of the region where it is obtained in 
greatest abundance.® 

It should be remarked, under this head, that the 
governor of Mozambique has subject to him the com- 
manders of SoFALA^ and of Shupanga.® The first of 
these two small governments is on the river Sena 
6o leagues from its mouth, and the other is lo leagues 
higher up. From the mouth of the river up to these 
places on both sides there are many settlements of 
negroes, each of which is commanded by a Portuguese. 
These Portuguese have for a long time been masters 

1 Tipra in the original. I do not know of any evidence for the 
occurrence of gold in Tipperah ; possibly what was brought from thence 
in Tavernier’s time was received from Assam, China, or Burmah, in 
exchange for other commodities. Our Author devotes chap, xvi of 
Book III to a description of the Kingdom, which see. 

2 It is strange that Tavernier should have been unaware of the 
occurrence of gold in any part of the Indian Peninsula, there being so 
many localities where it is obtained, some of which were most probably 
worked in his time. ( Vide for distribution of gold J£cono7nic Geology of 
India^ chap. “ Gold.”) 

2 Of the existence of gold in Eastern Africa there is abundant 
evidence. Of that which reaches the coast, however, a large proportion 
probably comes from far off in the interior. 

^ The position ascribed to Sofala is incorrect, as it was not on the 
river named, but some two degrees, or say 70 leagues, to the south of 
the Delta of the Zambesi, on which the town of Sena is situated. A 
very interesting collection of notices referring to Sofala and its gold is 
given in Yule-Burnell’s Anglo-Indian Glossary, 

5 Chepongoura in the original. The modem Shupanga on the 
Zambesi is probably Tavernier’s Chepongoura ; it is between Sena and 
the coast. 



158 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


of the country, and act like petty princes, making war 
against one another on the smallest pretext, there 
being some among them who have as many as 5000 
Cafres, who are their slaves. The Governor of 
Mozambique, to whom these petty princes are sub- 
ject, furnishes them with cloth and other necessary 
goods, each of which he sells according to its market 
value. When the Governor of Mozambique^ leaves 
Goa to assume possession of his government, which is 
the best of those subject to the Viceroy, he takes with 
him a great quantity of goods, and especially calicoes 
dyed black. His correspondents at Goa also send 
him every year two vessels laden with the same goods, 
which he forwards to Sofala and Shupanga, and up 
to the town of Monomotapa,^ capital of a Kingdom 
of the same name, otherwise called Voubebaran — the 
town being about 150 leagues distant from Shupanga. 
The ruler of all this country takes the name of Emperor 
of Monomotapa, and his authority extends up to the 
confines of Preste Jan.® It is from these territories of 
Monomotapa whence the purest and finest African 
gold comes, and it is extracted without great diffi- 
culty by excavating in the ground to a depth of only 2 
or 3 feet. In certain places in this country which are 
not inhabited, because there is no ivater there, gold is 

Cs-Stanhcda. says that the Moors took from India to Mozambique 
“ silver, linen cloth, pepper, ginger, silver rings, many pearls and rubies, 
and from a country inland they procured gold. He also states that 
much gold was brought from the interior to Sofala. (See Kerr’s 
Voyages a?ici Travels, vol. ii, pp. 317 and 427.) 

2 Matabele? The name is spelt Monomopata and Monomotapa 
in the original. 

3 I.e. Abyssinia. The name Prester John was given to the ruling 
monarch by the Portuguese. (See note by Rev. Percy Badger in 

Varthema^ Hakluyt Society,, P» 63.) 



CHAP. XXV 


M. DU JARDIN 


159 


found on the surface of the ground in nuggets of all 
kinds of shapes and weights, and there are some 
of these nuggets which weigh an ounce. I have had, 
as curiosities, some pieces which I have presented 
to my friends, and some of them weighed as much 
as 2 ounces. I still have one weighing an ounce 
and a half or thereabouts. When at Surat with 
M. d’Ardili^re,’- son of M. du Jardin, of whom 
I have made mention in my account of Persia, 
an Ambassador from the King of Abyssinia arrived, 
whom we went to salute. I presented him with 
a pair of pocket pistols decorated with silver, and 
having invited us to dine with him he showed us 
the presents which he was carrying to the Great 
Mogul on behalf of the King, his master. They 
consisted of fourteen beautiful horses, which were 
all that remained out of thirty he had taken from 
his country, the others having died in the vessel 

1 The references to M. du Jardin and his son are very perplexing. 
In the Persian Ti^avels, Book II, chap, vi, Tavernier says he started 
on his fourth journey from Paris with M. Ardiliere, son of ISI. du Jardin. 
\Vhen landing at Masulipatam he refers to his companion as M. Louis 
du Jardin (Book I, chap. xvii). He again mentions him as being with 
him at Madras (Book I, chap, xviii), and in chap, xix he records his death 
in the year 1852. In Book III, chap, xiv, he speaks of being in M. 
d’Ardiliere’s company on the road from Golconda to Surat in the year 
1653. From all of which it would seem to be the legitimate conclusion 
that both father and son travelled with him in India, as is suggested 
on pp. 336 and 690. However, it is due to M. Joret to say that he 
may be right in treating these notices as all referring to the same 
person, and consequently the date 1653 must be wrong, if he died in 
1652. But it should be added that this present notice seems to con- 
tradict that view, as M. du Jardin died within a few days of their 
arrival at Surat. Fryer in 1671 mentions M. Jordan (? Jardin) as 
having, with M. Rezin, succeeded Tavernier in the trade of carrying 
diamonds to and from Europe. (See his Account^ Calcutta Edition, 
p. 276.) 



160 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


when, crossing the sea from Mocha to Surat. Also 
a number of young slaves of both sexes ; and finally, 
this being the most important and worthy to be 
admired, there was a tree of gold 2 feet 4 inches 
high, and about 5 or 6 inches round the stem.’^ It 
had ten or twelve branches, some of which were nearly 
half a foot long and an inch broad, others being smaller. 
In some parts of the large branches there was to be 
seen some roughness, which in a manner resembled 
buds. The roots of this tree which had been thus 
naturally formed, were small and short, the longest 
not being more than 4 or 5 inches. 

The people of this Kingdom of Monomotapa, 
knowing the time that the calicoes and other goods 
arrive at Sofala and Shupanga, come punctually to 
provide themselves with what they require. Numerous 
Cafres from other Kingdoms and Provinces also 
come, and the Governors of these two towns sell them 
calicoes and other things of which they have need, 
trusting for the payment which they undertake to make 
the following year by bringing gold, to the amount 
agreed upon, for if the Governor did not trust them thus 
there would be no trade between the Portuguese and 
the Cafres. It is almost the same with the Ethiopians 
who every year carry gold to Cairo, of which I have 
spoken in my account of the Seraglio of the Grand 
Seigneur. These people of Monomotapa do not live a 
long time on account of the bad water in their country. 
At the age of twenty-five years they begin to be dropsical, 
so that it is considered a marvel when they exceed forty 
years in age. The Province where the river Sena 

1 This descnption suggests a manufactured article, but it is possible 
that it was really, as Tavernier supposed, a natural arborescent nugget. 



CHAP. XXV 


AFRICAN ELEPHANTS 


161 


rises is called Moukaran,^ and belongs to another 
King, commencing at loo leagues or thereabouts 
above Shupanga. The people of this Province find 
much gold dust in several rivers which join the Sena ; 
but this gold is inferior to the other kind, and it is 
also taken to Shupanga and Sofala. The country is 
very healthy, and the inhabitants live as long as those 
of Europe. In certain years Cafres arrive there from 
much farther than the Province of Moukaran, and 
even from the neighbourhood of the Cape of Good 
Hope. The Portuguese know of the country and its 
name, but have not induced the Cafres to reveal more 
than that their country, called Sabia,^ is governed by a 
King, and that they generally spend four months on 
the road to Sofala. The gold which thev bring is 
excellent, and is in nuggets, like that of ivIonomotapa ; 
they say that they find it on high mountains, where 
they only have to excavate the ground for it to the 
depth of I o or 12 feet. They also bring an abundance 
of elephants' tusks, and say that there are so many 
elephants in the country that they are to be seen in 
troops in the fields, and that all the palisades of the 
fortresses and parks are made of elephants' tusks ; this 
I have also observed elsewhere.^ The ordinary food 
of these Cafres is the flesh of this animal, and four of 
them, with their assegais,*^ which are a kind of short 

1 jMoukaran — not identified. 

2 Perhaps some mistake here. There is a Sabia river marked on 
the map as coming next to Sofala on the south. 

^ See vol. i, p. 277. 

^ Ageagayes in the original, for Assegais, the well-known hurling 
spears used in Africa. The word is from the Berber sag/aiya, with the 
Arabic article prefixed. It occurs commonly in travellers’ accounts of 
other countries besides those included in Africa. (See Yule-Burnell, 
Ang/o-Indzan Glossary ^ p. 28.) 



162 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


pike, are able to bring an elephant to the ground and 
kill it. All the water in their country is very bad, 
which is the reason why they have swollen legs, and it 
is a marvel when any one is exempt. 

Above SoFALA there is a country commanded by a 
King called the King of Baro:^. In some part of his 
country there grows a root which is an inch thick, and 
of a yellow colour. It cures all kinds of fever by 
causing vomiting ; but as very little of it is found the 
King forbids, under severe penalty, any of it to be 
carried out of his Kingdom. While Dom Philippe de 
Mascarehnas was Viceroy of Goa the King of Baro]£ 
sent him a piece of this root’- about 3 feet long, 
garnished with gold at both ends, and with rings of 
gold in the middle. The Viceroy having received it 
made great account of it, and causing it to be cut up 
into several pieces presented them to certain of his 
friends. He sent two to Surat to Mr. Fremlin, the 
Knglish President, who showed them to me, and having 
placed a piece of the root on my tongue I found the 
taste very bitter. 

As for silver mines, there are none in the whole 
of Asia,^ save only in the Kingdom of Japan. Some 
years ago very rich mines of tin were discovered 
at Delegore, Sangore, Bordelon, and Bata ; ® 

^ I have not been able to identify with certainty either Baroe or the 
bitter root which, it produces. 

2 Tavernier is here in error, as there are undoubted sources of silver 
in India and on the confines of Assam and Burma, which have been 
largely -worked. This common mistake is repeated in the Imperial 
Ga::ettee7'^ vol. vi, p. 624. (See Economic Geology of Eidia^ chap, iv, 
Silver.”) Silver certainly occurs also in other parts of Asia. (See 
Book III, chap, xv.) 

Delli (.''), Salangor, Billiton, and Banka (?). The three last are well- 
known centres of the tin industry. 



CHAP. XXV 


TIN 


163 


this has done some injury to the English, because 
there is no longer need of their tin as formerly, 
sufficient being now produced in Asia. Tin is only 
used in this country to tin cooking-pots, kettles, and 
other copper utensils. 


A 



CHAPTER XXVI 


Account of a notable act of perfidy done to the author 
when he was about to embark at Gombroon for 
Surat. 

In the month of April 1665, being about to leave 
Gombroon, and when on the point of embarkation for 
Surat in a vessel which belonged to the broker of the 
Dutch Company, and was commanded by Captain 
Hans — the Agent of the English gave me a packet of 
letters, which had arrived by express from England, 
to deliver to the President of Surat. This packet was 
very large, because, besides the Company’s letters, he 
had included in it those which were for private persons 
in Surat and other parts of India. I received the 
packet from him, on the evening of my embarkation, 
in presence of M. Casembrot, a Dutchman, who had 
come to Persia by land, and was related to M. Henry 
Van WtiCK, Commander at Gombroon. Casembrot 
managed to accompany me on all occasions when I 
went to see the English Agent, and Van WtiCK asked 
me at each visit which I paid him, whether the Agent 
had not entrusted me with letters for Surat. I replied 
ingenuously that he had told me that he would give 
me some, without suspecting anything of the evil 
intention of both of these two men. Their object, as 



CHAP. XXVI 


PERFIDY OF THE DUTCH 


165 


appeared subsequently, was to obtain possession of this 
packet in consequence of the rumour which was in cir- 
culation of a rupture between England and Holland, 
and because they thought that the English had re- 
ceived definite news of it, as some days previously an 
Arab had arrived by the desert route and had brought 
a packet to the English Agent ; this caused the Com- 
mander Van Wuck much anxiety. 

As soon as I had received the packet from the 
Agent, Casembrot, who was always on the watch, and 
looked on, as it was put into my hands, reported it to 
Van Wuck, and told him of its form and size ; and I, 
after having pledged the Agent in a glass of wine 
which he offered me when wishing me a good passage, 
went to take leave of Van Wuck, who would not 
allow me to go till after I had supped with him. He 
kept me, as it were by force, in order to hav'e more 
time to accomplish his coup ; and excusing himself for 
being unable to accompany me on account of the 
arrival of three vessels which cast anchor while we 
were at table, he lent me his own boat to go on board, 
together with four or five of the principal officers of 
his staff, whom he sent with me, under pretext of 
escorting me, and with them the captain of the vessel 
also, to whom he gave the w’ord. As soon as we were 
on board the captain offered me his own cabin, where 
he had already directed my bed to be placed by my 
servants, who had been on board for two days before, 
and on my making a difficulty about accepting it, he 
told me that the Commander had ordered him to do so, 
to which I replied that I would not accept his cabin, 
except on the condition that I should only occupy half 
of it, while he took the other. This having been 



16C 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


arranged, I drew the packet of English letters from 
the pocket of my greatcoat, and giving it to one of my 
servants to place in my bouccha^ which is the valise of 
these countries, he put the bouccha between the side of 
the vessel and the head of my bed. There had come 
with us to the ship two small boats, which contained 
more than sixty bags of silver, some of 50 and others 
of 100 tomans,^ all the bags being made in Persia in 
that manner. Immediately the boats were alongside, 
[the crew] commenced to hoist the bags, one after the 
other, into the vessel, but did so very slowly, with the 
object of delaying us the whole night, and to compel 
me to go to bed. But as they observed that I was 
unwilling to retire, the captain, the pilot, and the Com- 
pany’s Broker, to whom, as I have said, the vessel 
belonged, consulted with the Dutch, and all together 
conspired to let a bag of 100 tomans fall into the 
sea when hoisting it into the vessel ; this was done 
in order to have time to accomplish their design. 
As soon as the bag fell into the sea they sent a boat 
to Gombroon to fetch a diver, who reached the vessel 
by daybreak, in order to dive for the sack. Seeing 
then that the vessel could not leave before the follow- 
ing day at two or three o’clock, I went to lie down, 
my boticcha being all the time in the same place, half 
under the head of my bed and half outside. My 
servants went to rest in the gunner’s cabin, and while 
I slept alone in that of the captain my bouccha was 
quietly drawn out, and from it the packet of letters 

^ I must relinquish it to some one else to discuss the etymology 
of this word. It has been suggested to me that it may be connected 
with the Persian a covering. 

2 Tcma 7 t (see vol. i. Appendix). 



CHAP. XXVI 


PERFIDY OF THE DUTCH 


167 


was taken, another well sealed and of similar foi'm and 
size, which only contained white paper, being put in 
its place. The bag which they had purposely allowed 
to fall into the sea in order to accomplish this wicked 
coup, having been pulled up, we made sail, and arrived 
at the port of Surat on the 5th of IMay of the same 
year. The Dutch Commander having done me the 
honour to send a barque 2 or 3 leagues out to sea to 
fetch me, immediately when I landed, which was about 
midnight, I desired before all things to pay my respects 
to him, asking two Capuchin Fathers, who were at the 
port at our debarkation, to deliver to the English 
President the packet which I had taken out of my 
bouccha, this service they willingly undertook. But 
they told me that, as it was an unseasonable hour, and 
that the President, who was gouty, might be then 
asleep, they, not considering it proper to awake him, 
would wait till the morrow to accompany me, when 
I should be able to deliver the packet to the President 
myself. But the gout from w'hich he suffered not 
permitting him to sleep much, it was delivered to 
him the same hour. The President having opened 
the packet in presence of the chief officers of his 
staff, they only found white paper folded like letters 
inside it. This having been reported to me, I realised 
at once the bad turn which V.vn Wiicic and his 
accomplices had played me. What confirmed me 
further as to this perfidy was, that on going to 
examine my bouccha I found that a jewel which I had 
tried to sell to the Governor of Gombroon had also 
disappeared. Not having been able to agree with 
him as to the price, he returned it to me some hours 
before I embarked for Surat, and I had placed it in 



168 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


haste with the packet of letters in my bouccha, where 
I did not find it on arrival at Surat. 

Nevertheless the theft of this packet of letters, 
which had been thus accomplished, incensed the 
President against me so much that he refused to 
allow me to justify myself, and I was moreover an 
object for the rage of many private Englishmen 
affected by the loss of the letters in the packet, which 
were addressed to them. They went so far on different 
occasions as to attempt my life, as I am able to prove 
by the evidence and affidavits of many men of honour, 
and particularly of M. Hartman, who was then the 
second officer in the factory at Surat. So, to protect 
myself from snares which were set for me, I was 
obliged to be constantly accompanied by many people, 
and I was even unable to go to Golconda, where there 
is a great trade in diamonds, having been warned by 
my friends that ten or twelve English awaited me in 
that part of the world in order to do me some injury. 
The treachery which was thus done to me disturbed 
all my plans and caused me considerable loss ; besides 
which I was obliged to carry back to Persia a large 
sum of money, in consequence of my not being able to 
invest it in India. 

This is a copy of the letter which I sent on this 
subject to Batavia, to the General of the Dutch Com- 
pany and the members of his Council, dated Surat, 
the i6th May 1665. 

“Gentlemen — I take the liberty to write to you 
these lines in order to testify the displeasure I have 
experienced at the affront done me by Commander 
Henri Van Wuck at Gombroon, who, notwithstanding 
the letters of recommendation which I had from the 



CHAP. XXVI 


PERFIDY OF THE DUTCH 


160 


Ambassador to the States, an Officer of my King, 
addressed, one to the Chief Officer of the Company at 
Ispahan, another to the Commander at Gombroon, 
and a third to the Commander in this town of Surat, 
asking all three to assist me as much as possible, except 
in so far as the Company was interested. But M. 
Henri Van Wticic has disregarded his, and has done 
me the most signal affront that a man of honour, as 
I am, who am an Officer of his Royal Highness, the 
brother of my King, could ev^er receive, which was to 
have my baggage opened, where there were many 
jewels, some of which have been lost, and to have 
ordered a large packet of letters to be taken wffiich 
the Agent of the English at Gombroon entrusted 
to me to deliver to the President of the English in 
this town of Surat, having had another packet con- 
taining blank paper placed in its stead. I leave you 
to reflect as to what kind of esteem the President and 
all the English hold me in at present, and w'hether 
I have not good cause for making my complaints 
and asking justice from you. And, if it should 
please you gentlemen to send me permission to wait 
upon you at Batavia, in order to testify, by word 
of mouth, the displeasure which I feel on account 
of this which M. Van Wuck has done me in order to 
accomplish a crime of this nature, and to inform you 
in detail of the manner in which all this affair has 
happened, you would oblige me much. At the least, 
I ask you to give me some satisfaction in respect to 
the author of the theft, in default of which I shall not 
fail, as soon as I have, by the grace of God, returned 
to France, to make my complaints through the King 
my master, who has honoured me with his protection. 



170 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


and through his Royal Highness, his only brother, 
to MM. the States, and from their Ambassador, to 
obtain satisfaction, at whatever cost, of the said Van 
WticK, and by this means establish my honour. 
Moreover, if I return by Ispahan, I shall not omit to 
inform the King of Persia of it, and shall tell him, 
after so much honour as his Majesty has done me, 
and notwithstanding all the passports which I have 
held from him, that the said M. Van WtiCK has treated 
me in this fashion. I believe also that his Majesty 
will not be pleased to hear that all the patterns of 
jewels, which I was to buy and have made for him 
both in India and Europe, were lost when the packet 
of letters was stolen. I can also advise him of the 
plots and conspiracies which M. Van WtiCK has had 
at Gombroon with a Prince, an enemy of Persia, who 
came to the said place in disguise. Finally, I know 
enough to make him receive an equal or greater affront 
than he has done me ; and by his receiving it the 
Company will receive it also. This, gentlemen, is 
what I am resolved upon if you do not decide to give 
me complete satisfaction, though I believe I shall not 
have that trouble. Hoping that you will not omit to 
do me justice before I leave this country to return to 
Europe, where as in all other places I shall always 
be. Gentlemen, your very humble, etc.” 

It is rare to see treason unpunished, and the 
principal actors in this plot all had miserable ends. 

In the following monsoon the vessels which arrived 
from Surat at Gombroon spread in that region the 
tidings of the black villany which had been done me ; 
and a short time after, M. Van WtiCK having been 
attacked by a kind of fever, and the Rev. Father 



CHAP. XXVI 


PERFIDY OF THE DUTCH 


171 


Balthasar, Carmelite Monk, going to see him, sought 
to get him to speak of this affair with which he was so 
prominently mixed up. But he defended himself of 
the charge strongly, and making use of an equivoca- 
tion, said, that if it was true that he had taken the 
letters, he wished to die without speaking, and not to 
live three days. He had not in truth committed the 
theft, but he had arranged for its being done ; and he 
died at the end of three days, and without speaking. 
His Lieutenant, named Bozan, one of those whom he 
had sent to escort me to the vessel, and who apparently 
had opened the bouccha and committed the theft, 
after a great debauch, having lain down on the terrace 
of the house to sleep in the fresh air, as these terraces 
have neither parapet nor anything to prevent a fall, on 
moving and rolling in his sleep, fell over, and on the 
following day was found dead on the seashore. As 
for the Captain of the vessel, who was also in the plot, 
four or five days after his arrival at Surat, as he 
pursued his way, a Muhammadan, jealous of his wife, 
whom he had beaten, and excited to rage against some 
Franks who separated them, believing this Captain, 
whom he found alone, was of the band, stabbed him 
five or six times with a dagger, upon which he fell 
dead on the ground. Such were the miserable ends 
of all these people. 





A 


BOOK III 

Concerning the religion of the Muhammadans and that of 
the Idolaters of India : the voyage of the Author by 
sea from SuRAT to Batavia, and from Batavia to 
Holland ; and of many peculiarities in different 
Kingdoms of the East. 


A 




CHAPTER I 


Conce7'ning the religion of the Mtihammadans in the 
East Indies. 

The diversity which is found among the Jvluham- 
madans does not only consist in the different explana- 
tions which they give to their Koran} but also in the 
different opinions which they have of the first suc- 
cessors of jMuhammad. It is from this that two sects, 
entirely opposed to one another, have sprung ; the one 
calling itself the Sunnis is followed by the Turks, the 
other the Shias} which is the sect of the Persians, I 
shall not delay here to say more as to the difference 
between these two sects, which divide the Muhammadan 
world, having spoken sufficiently of them in my accounts 
of Persia, and I shall only describe the present con- 
dition of this false religion, both in the Empire of the 
Great Mogul and in the Kingdoms of Golconda and 
Bijapur. 

At the first establishment of Muhammadanism in 


1 Alcoran in the original. 

- Soiimm and Ckias in the original, and Sunnis and Sekiais in the 
Persian Travels, Book IV, chap. vii. The foi-mer revere the direct 
successors of iMuhammad, and the latter maintain that Ali and his sons 
Hosen and Hosain are the true successors to the caliphate. Sunnis pre- 
dominate in the Muhammadan population of India, but there are also many 
Shias there, some of them being descendants of Persian immigrants. 



17 C 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


India the Christians^ of the East were very ostenta- 
tious but not very devout, and the Idolaters were 
effeminate people who were unable to make much 
resistance. Thus it was easy for the Muhammadans 
to subject both by force of arms. This they did with 
so much success that many Christians and Idolaters 
embraced the law of Muhammad. 

The Great Mogul with all his Court followed the 
sect of the Stmnis, the King of Golconda that of the 
Shias, and the King of Bijapur had in his territories 
both Stmnis and Shias. The same might also be said 
of the Court of the Great Mogul, on account of the 
number of Persians who came to serve in his armies. 
It is true that although they regarded the Sunnis with 
horror they nevertheless follow, in outward show, the 
religion of the Monarch, believing that to make or 
secure their fortune they might conceal their true belief, 
and that it sufficed for them to cherish it in their hearts. 

As for the Kingdom of Golconda, Kutab Shah, 
who reigns at present, maintains with great zeal the 
law of the Shias, and as the nobles of his Court are 
nearly all Persians, they observe the customs of the 
sect of the Shias with the same strictness and the 
same freedom from restraint as in Persia. 

I have elsewhere remarked that of the native 
Muhammadan subjects of the Great Mogul there are 
but few in positions of command ; this is the cause 
why many Persians, oppressed by want, or ambitious of 
better fortune than that which they can hope for in 

^ M. Thevenot states that about the year 1665 some believed that 
there were 25,000 families of Christians in Agra, but all were not agreed 
as to this estimate {Vojya£;e des Indes^ p. 102). Colonel Sleeman, who 
refers to this, adds that he himself came upon a colony of 2000 in the year 
1814 in Betiah in Tirhut (Ra^nbles and Recollecdo?is^ etc., 1844, p. 15). 



CHAP. I 


AURANGZEB’S RELIGION 


177 


their own country, go to seek for it in India. Being 
clever they are successful in finding means to advance 
themselves in (the profession of) arms, so that in the 
Empire of the Great ISIogul, as well as in the 
Kingdoms of Golconda and Bijapur, the Persians are 
in possession of the highest posts. 

Aurangzeb, especially, shows great zeal for the 
Sunni sect, of which he is so faithful a follower that 
he surpasses all his predecessors in external observa- 
tion of the law, which has been the veil by means of 
which he has concealed his usurpation of the kingdom. 
When he took possession of the throne he proclaimed 
that it was with the design of insisting upon the law of 
]\IuHAMH-\D being observed in all its strictness, as it 
had been relaxed during the reigns of Sh.4h Jah.4n 
his father and Jahangir his grandfather. To show 
himself still more zealous for the law he became a 
Dervish or Dakit', i.e. a professional beggar, and under 
this false mantle of piety made his way cleverly to the 
Empire. Although he had, as I have said, numerous 
Persians in his service, he did not allow them to 
celebrate the festival of Hosen and Hosain,^ sons 
of Ali, who were killed by the Smmis, as I have 
mentioned in my accounts of Persia ; and they them- 
selves, to please the King and advance their own 
fortunes, made no scruple about conforming themselves 
externally to the cult and customs of the Siinnis. 

^ Hosen and Heussln in the original. 


VOL. II 


N 



CHAPTER II 


Concerning Fakirs or Muhammadan beggars in the 
East Indies. 

It is estimated that there are in India 800,000 Muhan" 
madan Fakirs, and 1,200,000 among the idolaters 
which is an enormous number. They are all vagc 
bonds and idlers, who blind the eyes of the people b 
a false zeal, and lead them to believe that all tha 
escapes frohi their own mouths is oracular. 

There are different kinds of these Muhammada 
Fakirs ; some are almost naked, like the Fakirs c 
the idolaters, who have no regular dwellings, an 
abandon themselves to all kinds of impurity withoi 
any shame. They persuade simple souls that the 
possess a privilege to do all kinds of evil without sin. 

There are other Fakirs who are clad in garmen 
of so many pieces of different colours that one 
unable to say what they are. These robes exter 
half way down their legs and conceal the miserab 
rags which are beneath. These Fakirs generally trav 
in company, and have a chief or superior over the 
who is distinguished by his garment, which is poor 
and made up of more pieces than those of the other 
He, moreover, drags a heavy iron chain which he h. 
attached to one leg ; it is 2 cubits long and thick 



CHAP. II 


FAKIRS OR DERVISHES 


179 


proportion. When he prays it is with great noise, 
which he makes with this chain and a loud voice ; this 
is accompanied by an affected gravity, which attracts the 
veneration of the people. However, the people bring 
him and his followers food to eat, which they serve 
him in the place where he stops, generally some street 
or public place. He has carpets spread by his disciples, 
and seats himself on them in order to give audience to 
those who wish to consult him. On the other hand, 
his disciples proclaim throughout the country the great 
virtues of their master and the favours which he 
receives from God, who reveals to him the most 
important secrets, and confers upon him the power to 
aid afflicted persons with good advice. The people 
give him easy credence, and regard him as a holy man, 
and come to him with great devotion, and when one of 
them approaches close to him, he takes the shoes from 
off his feet and prostrates himself before the Fakir in 
order to kiss his feet. Then the Fakir, in order to 
appear humble, extends his arm and gives his hand to 
be kissed, after which he makes those who come to 
consult him, sit near him, and he listens to each in turn. 
He boasts of possessing a prophetic spirit, especially 
for indicating to women who are sterile the way in 
which they may obtain children, and how to constrain 
any one they wish to manifest love for them. 

There are Fakirs who have more than 200 
disciples, whom they assemble by the sound of 
the drum and a horn similar to the horns of our 
huntsmen. When marching, the disciples carry their 
standard, lances, and other arms, which they stick in 
the ground near their master when he halts to rest 
anywhere. 



180 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


The third kind of these Fakirs of the East Indies 
consists of those who, being born of poor parents, and 
wishing to know the law thoroughly, in order to become 
Mulldsox doctors, take up their abode in mosques, where 
they live on whatever charity is bestowed upon them. 
They occupy their time in reading the Koran, which 
they learn by heart, and when they are able to add to 
this study some little knowledge of natural things, with 
the example of a good life, according to their ideas, 
they become heads of mosques, and reach the dignity 
of Mullds and judges of the law. These Fakirs have 
wives, and some, through piety and the great desire 
they have to imitate Muhammad, have three or four of 
them, believing that thereby they do God a great 
service, by being fathers of many children who will 
follow the law of their Prophet. 


A 



CHAPTER III 


Of the Religion of the Gentiles or Idolaters of India. 

The idolaters of India are so numerous that for one 
Muhammadan there are five or six Gentiles. It is 
astonishing to see how this enormous multitude of men 
has allowed itself to be subjected by so small a number 
of persons, and has bent readily under the yoke of the 
Muhammadan Princes. But the astonishment ceases 
when one considers that these idolaters have no 
union among themselves, and that superstition has 
introduced so strange a diversity of opinions and 
customs that they never agree with one another.^ 
An idolater will not eat bread nor drink water in a 
house belonging to any one of a different caste from 
his own, unless it is more noble and more exalted 
than his own; thus they can all eat and drink in 
the houses of the Brahmins," which are open to all the 
world. A caste is, so to speak, among these idolaters 
that which formerly a tribe was among the Jews, and 

1 This has ever been the strength of those who have conquered 
India. 

- Bramines in the original Brahmins’ houses are certainly not 
now open to all the world, the very reverse is the case. The accuracy 
of this statement, even in Tavernier’s time, may be doubted. True as 
it is that a man of lower caste may eat from the hand of a Brahmin, a 
Brahmin has, himself, to guard against defilement by contact with men 
of lower caste. 



182 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


although it is commonly believed that there are seventy- 
two of these castes, I have ascertained from the most 
accomplished of their priests that they are able to 
reduce them to four principal (castes), from which all 
others derive their origin. 

The first caste is that of the Brahmins^ who are the 
successors of the ancient Brachmanes or philosophers 
of India, who specially studied astrology. There are 
still to be found their ancient books, in the reading 
of which the Brahmins generally occupy themselves, 
and they are so skilled in their observations that they 
do not make a mistake of a minute in foretelling the 
eclipses of the sun and moon. And in order that they 
may preserve this science among them, they have a kind 
of university in a town called Benares,^ where they 
principally study astrology, and where they also have 
doctors who teach the law, which is followed with very 
great strictness. This caste is the most noble of all, 
because it is from among the Brahmins that the priests 
and ministers of the law are selected. But as they are 
very numerous and cannot all study in their university, 
the majority are ignorant and consequently very super- 
stitious, those among them who pass as the most intel- 
lectual being the most arrant sorcerers. 

The second caste is that of the Rajputs or Ketris^ 

warriors and soldiers. These are the only idolaters 
who are brave, and distinguish themselves in the pro- 
fession of arms. All the Rajas, of whom I have often 
spoken, are of this caste. They are like so many 
petty kings, whose disunion has made them tributaries 
to the Great Mogul ; but as the majority are in his 
service, they are highly recompensed for the small 

Sejiares in the orig’inal, elsewhere written jBefictro'w or JBancirous. 



CHAP. HI 


BANIAN'S 


183 


tribute which they pay him by the large and honour- 
able salaries which they receive from him. These 
Rajas, and the Rajptds their subjects, are the most 
firm supports of the Great Mogul’s kingdom ; and it 
was the Rajas Jaisingh and Jeswantsingh who placed 
Aurangzeb on the throne. But it should be remarked 
that this second caste does not altogether consist of 
people who follow arms (as a profession). It is the 
Rajputs, alone, who go to war, and who are all cavaliers ; 
but as for the Kctris they have degenerated from the 
bravery of their ancestors, and have quitted arms for 
merchandise. 

The third caste is that of the JBanians,^ who 
attach themselves to trade, some being Shroffs, i,e. 
money-changers or bankers, and the others brokers, 
by whose agency the merchants buy and sell. The 
members of this caste are so subtle and skilful in trade 
that, as I have elsewhere said,- they could give lessons 
to the most cunning Jews. They accustom their 
children at an early age to shun slothfulness, and 
instead of letting them go into the streets to lose 
their time at play, as we generally allow ours, teach 
them arithmetic, which they learn perfectly, using for 

^ Tavernier spells this word Bama/ze^ which has been altered in the 
text to Banian. It is otherwise, and perhaps more properly, spelt 
Banyan. It signifies a trader or merchant, especially in Gujardt. In 
Calcutta it is a title still used for the native brokers attached to houses 
of business. It is derived from Vdmya. (Gujardti luuizyo)^ and that 
from the Sanskrit a trader. Our author^s testimony as to the 

astuteness of the men of this caste is borne out by many authors, not- 
ably P. F. Vincenzo de Ivlaria, who says to make one it takes three 
Chinese, and three Hebrews to make a Chinese, therefore a Banian 
ought to possess the subtlety of nine Jews. (See Banyan ” in Yule 
and BurnelPs Anglo-Indz'an Glossary ^ p, 48.) 

- See Book I, chap, ii, p. 29, 



1S4 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


it neither pen nor counters, but the memory alone, so 
that in a moment they will do a sum, however difficult 
it may be. They are always with their fathers, who 
instruct them in trade, and do nothing without explain- 
ing it to them at the same time. These are the figures 
which they use in their books, both in the Empire of 
the Great ]\Iogul, as well as in other parts of India,^ 
although the language may be different. If any one 
gets in a rage with them they listen with patience, 
without replying anything, and they withdraw coldly, 
not returning to see him for four or five days, when 
they believe his rage to be over. They never eat any- 
thing which has had sentient life, and they would 
rather die than slay the least animal, not even except- 
ing an insect or vermin, being in this respect very 
zealous observers of their law. It is sufficient to add 
that they never strike one another, and that they 
never go to war, and cannot eat or drink in the houses 
of the Rajputs, because they slay animals and eat 
meat, with the exception of that of the cow, which is 
never eaten. 

The fourth caste is called Charados or Soudra.^ 
Like that of the Rajputs, it occupies itself with war ; 
but with this difference, that the Rajptits serve on 
horse, and the Sndras on foot. Both glory in dying 
in battle, and a soldier, whether of the cavalry or foot, 
is esteemed for ever infamous if, in the moment of 
combat, he runs away. It is an eternal disgrace in his 
family, and in this connection I shall relate a story 
which was told me in the country. A soldier who 
loved his wife passionately, and by whom he 

^ These figures are not reproduced here. 

- More properly Sudras, from the Sanskrit Sudr, 


was 



CHAP. Ill 


PHAXSIGARS ? 


li^S 


equally beloved in return, fled from combat, not out 
of fear of death, but simply on account of his wife’s 
sorrow should she find herself a widow. When she 
heard the cause of his flight, as she saw him approach 
the house she closed the door, and told him she was 
unable to recognise as a husband a man w’ho had pre- 
ferred the love of a woman to honour ; that she did 
not wish to see him any more, in order not to leave a 
blot on the reputation of her familjy and to teach her 
children to have more courage than their father. This 
woman remained firm in her resolution. The hus- 
band, to regain his reputation and his love, returned 
to the army, where he performed noble actions which 
redounded to his credit, and having splendidly repaired 
his fault, the door of his house was opened to him, and 
his wife received him with pleasure.^ 

The remainder of the people, who do not belong 
to either of these four castes, are called Pauzccour.- 
They all occupy themselves with mechanical arts, and 
do not differ from one another except by the different 
trades which they follow from father to son ; so that a 
tailor, although he may be rich, is unable to push his 
children, except in his own calling, nor to marry them, 
be it a son or a daughter, to others than those of his 
trade. So also w'hen a tailor dies all those of his 
calling go to the place where his body is burnt, 

^ Sleeman tells a similar story about Jeswantsingh, who was so 
treated by his wife on his return from the battle of the i 7th April 165S. 
{Rciffidles and Recolicctions^ vol. i.) 

- Pauaccoier^ as here used, appears to be a synonym of Pariah^ a 
name applied to people of the lowest caste of Hindus in Southern 
India. It is pointed out in the A?tgio-I?idian Ghssary that the Pariahs 
are not outcasts, as is commonly supposed. Possibly, however, the 
word Tavernier got hold of was Pkansrgar, a synonym for Thi/g/ if so, 
he defines it incorrectly. 



18G 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


EOOK III 


and the same custom is observed among all the other 
artisans. 

Among the particular castes there is one that is 
called Haldlkhoi's} who only engage in cleaning 
houses, each house paying them something monthly, 
according to its size- If a man of quality in India, 
whether a IMuhammadan or an idolater, has fifty 
servants, not one of them will be willing to use a 
broom to clean the house, for he would consider him- 
self contaminated by it, and one of the greatest insults 
that one can do to a man in India is to call him 
Haldrkkor. It is proper to remark here that each of 
these servants having his own special duty, the one to 
carry the vessel of water for drinking by the way, 
another to have the pipe of tobacco ready — if the 
master asks one to perform the service for which the 
other is employed, that service will not be performed, 
and the servant remains as though he were immovable. 
As for slaves, they have to do whatever their master 
orders them. As this caste of Haldkkhors is only 
occupied in removing the refuse from houses, it gets the 
remains of what the others eat, of whatever caste they 
may be, and it does not make any scruple about eating 
indifferently of all things. It is the people belong- 
ing to this caste, alone, who make use of asses, to 
carr)' the sweepings from the houses to the fields ; 
while all other Indians will not touch this animal. It 
is otherwise in Persia, where asses are used both for 
baggage and for riding. It is also the Haldl khors in 
India who alone feed pigs and use them for food. 

^ Aiacors in the original. The name HaldVkhor signifies an eater of 
lawful food, euphemistically applied to the Sweepers, to whom all things 
are lawful. (Yule-Burn ell, Anglo-Liduni Glossary,') 



CHAPTER IV 


Concerning the idolatrous Kings and Asia. 

It is necessary to place in the 
idolatrous Kings of Asia, the King Arakan, the 
King of Pegu, the King of Siam, the Cociiik- 

china, the King of Tonquin, and, as for King o 
China, we know that he was an idolater before t e 
irruption of the Tartars into his territories, but since 
that time one can say nothing certain about im,^ 
because these Tartars, who are now the masters ot 
the country, are neither idolaters nor Muhanimadans, 
being, rather, both combined. In the principa is an s, 

firstly, the King of ].\pan, next the 
and some small Kings of the islands of the i' olucc.\j, 
and, finally, all the Rajas, both of the Empire o t e 
Great Mogul and of the neighbourhoo s o t e 
Kingdoms of Bijapur and Golconda, ^re a i o 
In general, all the common people, whether ^ 
territories subject to the Great Mogul, or t e in^jS 
of Golconda and Bijapur, and the islands of Acmiin, 
Java, and Macassar, the Kings of which, as ave 
elsewhere said, are IMuhammadans, — nil t e common 
people, I say, of these countries are idolaters. 

I have stated that the King of Ceylon is an 
idolater, and it is true. But it is true also t lat a out 



18 S 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


fifty years ago a King- of Cevlon became a Christian, 
and received at his baptism the name of Jean, having 
been previously called the Emperor Priapender.^ As 
soon as he embraced Christianity, the Princes and 
priests of the country established another King in his 
stead. He did what he could to induce all his people 
to imitate him, and for this purpose assigned to the 
Jesuit Fathers twelve of the largest villages which 
were around Colombo, so that from the revenue of 
these places they might support the children of the 
country in colleges, where, being well instructed, they 
would afterwards be able to teach others. For the 
King represented to these Fathers that it was im- 
possible for them to learn the language of the country 
well enough to preach to the people, and in effect they 
found that the youth of Ceylon were so quick and 
intelligent that they learnt, in six months, more Latin, 
philosophy and other sciences, than Europeans acquire 
in a year, and they questioned the Fathers with such 
subtlety, and so deeply, that they were amazed. 

Some years after the King had become a Christian, 
a very accomplished man and good native philosopher, 
named Alegamma Motiar,^ as one might say master 
of the philosophers, after having conversed some time 
with the Jesuit Fathers and other priests at Colombo, 
was inspired to become a Christian. With this object 

^ Although the period of his reign was somewhat more remote than 
Tavernier states, it seems probable that this Emperor JPriapcnder was 
Don Juan Dharmdpdla, who was raised to the throne in 1542 hy the 
Portuguese, and reigned thirty-nine years. He was baptized by Wilponte 
.\lphonso Perera, tvho W’ent to Ceylon from Goa for the purpose. A 
number of his chiefs and people also became Christians at the same time. 
He was opposed throughout his reign by Rdjd Singhd, who ultimately 
superseded him (Forbes, JBieven Veavs in Ccyion^ vol. ii, p. 31 5). 

^iudtxiiyix 7 '^ a Cingalese title. I cannot identify A,legaj?i7na. 



CHAP. IV 


A CHRISTIAN CONVERT 


189 


he went to see the Jesuit Fathers, and told them that 
he desired to be instructed in the Christian faith, but 
he inquired what Jesus Christ had done and left in 
writing. He set himself then to read the New Testa- 
ment with so much attention and ardour that in less 
than six months there was not a passage which he 
could not recite, for he had acquired Latin very 
thoroughly. After having been well instructed, he 
told the Fathers that he wished to receive holy baptism, 
that he saw that their religion was the only good and 
true one, and such as Jesus Christ had taught, but 
what astonished him was, that they did not follow 
Christ’s example, because, according to the Gospel, he 
never took money from any one, while they on 
the contrary took it from every one, and neither 
baptized nor buried any one without it. This did not 
prevent him from being baptized, and from working 
for the conversion of the idolaters afterwards. 

Such is the present condition of the idolaters 
throughout Asia. I come now to those of India in 
detail and to their gross errors, after which I shall 
speak of their customs and of the penances of their 
Fakirs. 



CHAPTER V 


Concerning the belief of the Idolaters with respect to 

the Deity 

The idolaters of India yield to creatures as the cow, 
the ape, and different monsters, the honours which 
are only due to the true Deity, although it is certain 
that they acknowledge one infinite God, all-powerful 
and all-wise. Creator of the heavens and the earth, who 
is omnipresent. They call him in some places Per- 
MESSER, in others Peremael,^ as, for example, towards 
the coast of Malabar; and Vvistnou^ in the language 
of the Brahmins who inhabit the coast of Coromandel. 
As the idolaters have perhaps heard that the circle is 
the most perfect of all figures, they have thought to 
improve upon it by saying God is of an oval figure, and 
it is for this reason that they generally keep in their 
pagodas an oval pebble, which they obtain from the 
G.\.nges,“ and adore as god. They are so strongly fixed 

1 ParamerMra or Bramha, the one true and omnipotent God, to 
whom, as Ward remarks, there is not a single temple in the whole of 
India. Educated Hindus maintain, however, that although they may 
select special gods as the objects of their homage, their worship is ad- 
dressed really to the Supreme Deity; of uneducated Hindus the same 
can scarcely be said. 

- Vhhnu, the presen’cr, one of the Hindu triad. He is represented 
as a black man with four arms— one hand holds a club, another a shell, 
the third a cJiukra (or metal quoit), and the fourth the lotus. 

This is the so-called s&bgTani stone. The Sone river supplies 



CHAP. V 


RAMA 


191 


in this foolish idea that the wisest among the Bra/miins 
will not listen to any argument against it, and thus it 
is not to be wondered at if a people who have such 
evil guides fall into this gross and monstrous idolatry. 
There is a caste so superstitious about this, that those 
who belong to it keep these oval stones suspended 
from their necks, and press them against their bodies 
while they pray. 

In this gross and pitiable ignorance the idolaters, 
like the ancient pagans, regard their gods as men, and 
even bestow wives upon them, thinking that they love 
the same things as those in which men take pleasure. 
Thus they regard their Rama as a great deity on 
account of the wonders which they believe that he 
performed during his life. The following are the 
fables which they relate regarding him, as I have 
learnt from the most accomplished among their 
Brahmhis : — 

Ram.4 was the son of a powerful Raja, who called 
himself Deseret,^ and the most virtuous of many 
children which he had by two legitimate wives. He 
was particularly beloved by his father, who had destined 
him to be his successor. The mother of RAma having 

some which are, I believe, silicious pebbles derived from the basalt ; 
others are obtained from the Himalayas, and these are said to include 
fossils, a7}Wtonltes. The saligraui is connected with the worship of 
Vts/mzij but it may be worshipped as representing for the time being 
any god. According to Ward {Histozy of the Hhidus^ chap, xvi) the 
saligt'am is black, hollow, and nearly round, and is obtained from 
Gundukee (? a sulphur spring) in Nepal. As much as 2000 rupees was 
given for one of the first class. Vast sums of money aie expended on 
the festivities connected with the marriage of the saligram to the tuhz 
plant {Occyjtium safictuni). (See Sleeman, Razzibies and RccoUcciions,) 
vol. i, p. 158.) 

1 Rdind^ son of Das'aratha^ King of Ajodhya. What follows is a 
tolerably correct version of the Ramdyana. 



192 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK m 


died, the other wife of the Raja, who possessed 
entire control over her husband, induced him to drive 
Rama and his brother Lakshman^ from his house 
and territories ; this was done, and by the exclusion 
of these two brothers, the son of this other wife was 
declared to be heir to the Raja. Rama and his brother 
having then received an order to depart, obeyed the 
command of their father, and as they were about to 
leave, Rama went to bid farewell to his wife Sita, 
whom these idolaters regard as a goddess. She was un- 
willing to part from him, and protested that she would 
follow him everyv'here, and so they all three left the 
house of the Raja, to seek their fortunes. They were 
unlucky at first, for while passing through a forest, Rama 
having gone in pursuit of a bird, where he remained a 
long time, Sita, fearing that some disaster had happened 
to her husband, by force of her entreaties obliged 
L.\ksiim.4n to go in search of him. He strongly 
objected, R.\.m.\ having told him not to leave Sita, 
having foreseen by a spirit of prophecy what would 
happen if she remained alone. Nevertheless Laksh- 
MAX, moved by the earnest prayers of his sister-in-law, 
went to seek for Rama his brother. In the mean- 
time Rav.vxa,- another god of the idolaters, appeared 
to SiT.v in the garb of a Fakir and asked alms of her. 
R.vm.v had told Sit.a not to go outside the place where 
he had left her, — this being well known to RAvana he 
refused to receive the alms which SitA offered him 
unless she moved from her position. SitA, either by 
mistake or forgetting the command of RAmA, passed 
beyond the limits which he had indicated, and then 

^ Lokeman in the original. 

“ Rhez>a?i in the original. 



CHAP. V 


THE RAMAYAXA 


393 


Ravaxa seized her and took her into the depths of the 
forest where his followers awaited him, with whom he 
departed to his territories. When Ra:ma returned 
from the chase, not finding Sita, he fell senseless from 
grief, but LakshmAn his brother having brought him 
round, they went together to search for Sita, who was 
tenderly beloved by her husband. 

When t\iQ.J3ra/i?nins recount this ravishment of their 
goddess Sita they do so with tears and demonstrations 
of excessive grief, and they add to the story" a multi- 
tude of ridiculous fables, extolling the great bravery 
of Rama in the pursuit of the ravisher of Sita. All 
the animals were employed in order to discover her, 
among which the monkey Haxumax,^ alone had the 
good fortune to be successful. He crossed the sea 
with a bound, and arrived in the gardens of Ravana, 
where he found Sita in the deepest affliction, and she 
was much surprised on beholding a monkey, who 
spoke on behalf of her husband. At first she was not 
willing to give credence to what was said to her by 
such an ambassador, but the monkey in order to 
authenticate his mission handed her a ring which her 
husband had given her, but w’hich she had left in 
her baggage. She had much difficulty in believing 
such a miracle, and that Rama her husband had been 
able to make a beast speak to give her news of him, 
and such certain indications of his love. The monkey 
Hanuman did wonders at this interview, and having 
been recognised as a spy by the servants of Ravaxa, 
who wished to burn him, he made use of the fire which 
they had prepared for him to kindle the palace of 
Ravana, which was consumed almost entirely, by 

^ Harman in the original. 


VOL. II 


O 



194 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


means of the rags which they tied to his tail and 
body and set on fire. He threw himself immediately 
among the straw and other combustible matter, which 
caused a great conflagration in the palace. The 
monkey realising that he w’ould not escape the hands 
of Ravana if he again fell into them, promptly retook 
the same road as that by w'hich he had come, and 
havinp" bathed himself in the sea, which he recrossed 

o 

at a single bound, he went to give Rama an account 
of his adventures, and told him of the affliction in 
which he had found Sita, who was in despair at 
findinof herself so far removed from her husband. 
Rama, touched by the affection of his wife, resolved to 
deliver her from the hands of RAvana at whatever 
cost it might be. This was accomplished, the same 
monkey serving him as guide, and with the aid of 
some forces which RamA had collected from different 
places. With much difficulty he approached the palace 
of RAv.vna, which was still smoking, so great had 
been the fire ; and the subjects of this Prince having 
been dispersed in divers places, it was easy for 
RAma to again see his beloved SitA, whom RAvana 
abandoned and fled in fear to the mountains. RAmA 
and SitA experienced infinite joy at seeing one 
another again, and did much honour to the monkey 
Hanum.Ax, who had rendered them so great a 
service. 

As for RAvana, he passed the remainder of his 
days as a poor Fakir, his country being altogether 
ruined by the troops of RAmA, who avenged the injury 
he had received, and it is from this RAvana that 
this incredible number of Fakirs, whom one sees 
in peregrination throughout India, have taken their 



CHAP. V 


FAKIRS 


195 


origin. These Fakirs lead a life of such austerity 
that their penances amount to prodigies, and I have 
had the curiosity to collect several pictures of them, 
some of which I shall show to the reader in the follow- 
ing chapter. 



CHAPTER VI 


Co7icermng Fakirs, or the professional Mendicants of 
India, and their penances. 

The Fakirs, as I have just said, take their origin from 
Ravana, whom RamA despoiled of his kingdom, who 
on that account felt so much annoyance that he re- 
solved to wander like a vagabond throughout the 
world, poor and bereft of all property, and likewise 
completely nude. He at once found many people who 
followed him in this kind of life, which afforded them 
all kinds of liberty. For being reverenced as saints, 
they had abundant opportunities of doing whatsoever 
evil they wished. 

These Fakh's ordinarily travel in troops, each of 
which has its Chief or Superior. As they go perfectly 
nude, winter and summer, always lying on the ground, 
and since it is sometimes cold, the young Fakirs and 
other idolaters who have most devotion, go in the 
afternoon to search for the droppings of cows and 
other animals, which are dried by the sun, with which 
they kindle fires. They seldom use wood through 
fear lest it may contain some living animal which 
would be killed — that which is used to burn the 
dead is a kind of drift-wood which does not engender 
worms. These young Fakirs, having collected a 



CHAP. VI 


FAKIRS 


197 


quantity of these droppings mingled with drj^ earth, 
make many large fires according to the size of the 
troop, and ten or twelve Fakirs seat themselves around 
each fire. When sleep overtakes them, they allow 
themselves to fall on the ground, upon which they 
spread ashes to serve as a mattress, and they have 
only the heavens for a covering. As for those who 
perform the penances, of which I shall presently speak, 
when they lie during the night in the same position 
as one sees them during the day, fires are kindled 
for them on each side, without which they would be 
unable to withstand the cold ; this will be seen at the 
end of this chapter in the illustrations which I give 
of the penances. Wealthy idolaters consider them- 
selves happy, and believe that their houses receive the 
blessings of heaven, when they have as guests some 
of these Fakirs, whom they honour in proportion to 
their austerity ; and the glory of a troop is to have 
some one in it who performs a notable penance, like 
those of which I shall hereafter speak. 

These troops of Fakirs ]om together in numbers 
to go on pilgrimage to the principal pagodas, and to 
the public bathings which are held on certain days 
of the year, both in the river Ganges, which they 
specially esteem, as also in that which separates the 
territories of the Portuguese at Goa from those of the 
King of Bijapur.^ Some of the most austere Fakirs 
dwell in miserable huts near their pagodas, where they 
are given food, for the love of God, once in every 
twenty-four hours. 

The tree, of which a picture will be seen at the 

1 This, I suppose, means the Kistnd, though I believe the authority 
of Portugal did not extend so far to the east and north-east. 



198 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


end of this chapter, is of the same kind as that near 
Gombroon, and I have given a description of it also 
in the accounts of Persia.^ The Franks call it the 
tree of the Banza^is^ because, in places where there 
are any of these trees, the idolaters sit under them and 
cook their food there. They reverence them specially, 
and generally build their pagodas either under or close 
to one of these great trees. The one which the reader 
will see depicted further on is at Surat, and in its trunk, 
which is hollow, a monster is represented like the head 
of a deformed woman, which is said to be the represen- 
tation of the first woman, whom they call Mamanivar 
Every day a large number of idolaters assemble there 
to adore this monster, near to which there is constantly 
some jBrahniizi detailed for its service, and to receive 
the offerings made to it of rice, millet, and other grains. 
On all those who have prayed in the pagoda, both men 
and women, the JBrahmizi makes a mark on the middle 
of the forehead with a kind of vermilion, with which 
the idol is also painted. With this mark on them they 
do not fear that the devil will injure them, because 

^ Namely the Banyan, I^icus Indica^ Linn. The reference is to 
Book chap, xxiii, of the Persian Tra^uels. 

Another example with its numerous stems is the famous Kabir bar 
on an island in the Narbada 12 miles above Broach. At one time it 
covered an area of 2000 feet in circumference, and had upwards of 
3250 separate stems. It has afforded shelter to 7000 men at a time, 
but is now much reduced in size. The particular tree at Gombroon 
referred to by our author is also mentioned by Mandelslo, Valentjin, and 
Della \'aUe. The Persian name for the tree is litL 

This is a distinct species from the famous JBo tree (^F. religiosa) of 
Ceylon, one of which, having a known history, recorded in full detail by 
Sir Einerr-on Fennent {Ceylon^ voL ii, p. 613), was planted B.c. 28S. 

This is a corrupt form of one of the names of Durga^ the wife of 
Shiva, perhaps Muhishuamirdinee, (See Ward, History of the Hindoos, 
vol. i, p. 129.) 



CHAP. VI 


F'AKIRS 


199 


they are, as they say, under the protection of their 
God. 

I give here the e.xplanation of the figures repre- 
sented under the tree of the Baniaiis, marked by the 
numbers i, 2, 3, etc.^ 

1. Is the place where the Bralmiins dress up a 
representation of some one of their idols, as hlAM.vxiVA, 
SiTA, Madedixa,- and other similar ones which are 
very numerous. 

2. Is the figure of IM.virAXiVA which is in the 
pagoda. 

3. Is another pagoda close to the preceding. It 
has a cow at the door, and inside a representation of 
the god Rama. 

4. Is another pagoda, where Fakii's betake them- 
selves for penance. 

5. Is a fourth pagoda dedicated to Rama. 

6. Is the form of a grave, where several times 
during the year a Fakir withdraws, where he gets no 
light except through a very small hole. He sometimes 
remains there nine or ten daj’s without drinking or 
eating, according to his devotion — a thing which I 
could not easily have believed if I had not seen it. 
Curiosity led me to go to see this penitent in company 
with the Dutch Commander of Surat, who ordered a 
watch to be set in order to see whether he did not 
receive anything to eat by day or night. The watch 
were unable to discover that he received any nourish- 
ment, and he remained seated like our tailors without 
changing his position either by day or night. He 

^ This plate has not been reproduced, being rudely drav, n and of 
no great interest or importance. 

- Mahddcva ? another name for S/dz’a. 



200 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK ni 


whom I saw was not able to remain more than seven 
days out of the ten which he had vowed to spend, 
because the heat stifled him on account of the lamp in 
the grave.' The other kinds of penance, of which I 
am about to speak, would still further exceed human 
belief if thousands of men were not witnesses of 
them. 

7. Is the position of a penitent who has passed 
many j’ears without ever lying down either by day or 
night. When he wishes to sleep he leans on a sus- 
pended cord, and in that position, which is very 
strange and inconvenient, the humours descend to the 
legs, which become thereby swollen. 

8. These are the positions of two penitents who, 
till death, keep their arms elevated in the air, so that 
the joints become so stiff that they are never able to 
lower them again. Their hair grows down below the 
waist, and their nails equal their fingers in length. 
Night and day, winter and summer, they remain quite 
naked in this position, exposed to the rain and heat, 
and to the stings of mosquitoes, without being able to 
use their hands to drive them away. With regard to 
the other necessities of life, as drinking and eating, 
they have Fakirs in their company who wait on them 
as required. 

9. Is the position of another penitent, who stands 


Ibn Batuta speaks oi Jogis who used to allow themselves to be 
uried for months, or even for a twelvemonth together, and were afterwards 
revived, upon which Col. Yule remarks, “This art, or the profession of 
It, IS not yet e.xtinct in India.” A very curious account of one of its pro- 
essors will be found m a Personal Narrative of a Tour through the 
"T Z (Calcutta, 1S37, pp. 41-44), by Major-General A. 

chap^ir' P- 4 '3.) (See 



CHAP. VI 


FAKIRS 


201 


for several hours daily on one foot, holding in his 
hands a chafing-dish full of fire, upon which he throws 
the incense which he offers to his god, having his eyes 
at the same time turned towards the sun. 

lo and II. These are the postures of two other 
penitents, seated, who have their hands elevated in 
the air. 

12. Is the position in which the penitents sleep 
without ever lowering their arms ; this without doubt 
is one of the greatest torments which the human body 
can suffer. 

13. Is the position of another penitent, whose 
weakness has caused his hands to fall behind his 
back, not being able to lower his arms, which are 
dried up from lack of nutrition. 

There are an infinity of other penitents, some of 
whom assume positions altogether contrary to the 
natural attitude of the human body, having their eyes 
always turned to the sun ; others who have their eyes 
directed to the ground, without ever looking at any 
one in the face, nor saying a single word ; and the 
diversity is so great that it would be sufficient to form 
the subject of a long discourse. 

In order to give more satisfaction to the curious, 
and to enable them to understand matters more dis- 
tinctly, I shall add here other pictures of these same 
penitents, which I have had drawn, on the spot, after 
nature. hlodesty has compelled me to conceal the 
parts which they have no shame about exposing to 
view, for at all times, both in the country and in the 
towns, they go about altogether as naked as they 
came out of their mothers’ wombs ; and although the 
women approach them out of devotion in order to 



202 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


do what cannot be named for shame, you do not 
see in them any sign of sensuality ; but on the con- 
trary, without regarding any one, and rolling the 
eyes terribly, you would say they are absorbed in 
abstraction. 


A 



CHAPTER VH 


Concerning the belief of the Idolaters tonching the 
condition of the soul of man after death. 

It is one of the articles of the belief of the idolaters 
that the souls of men on leaving their bodies after death 
are presented to God, who, according to the life the 
owners have led, allots them other bodies to inhabit, so 
that the same person is several times reborn into the 
world. And of men of evil life, degraded in their 
habits and plunged in all kinds of vices, God sends the 
souls, after being separated from the bodies, into the 
bodies of inferior animals, such as asses, dogs, cats, and 
others, in order that they may perform penance for 
their crimes in these infamous prisons. But it is 
believed that the souls which enter the bodies of cows 
are supremely happy, because these animals are 
regarded as divinities. If a man dies with a cow’s 
tail in his hand, that will suffice, it is said, to render 
him altogether happy in a future life. 

As the idolaters believe in this passage of human 
souls into the bodies of animals, they abhor the 
slaughter of any animal, of whatsoever kind it may be, 
through fear of being guilty of the death of some one 
of their relations or friends who may be doing penance 
in one of these bodies. 



204 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


If these men, during their lives, perform virtuous 
actions, such as pilgrimages and the giving of alms, 
they hold that after death their souls pass into the 
bodies of some powerful Rajas or other rich persons, 
who enjoy the pleasures of life as a reward for the 
good deeds they had done in other bodies. 

This is the reason why the Fakirs, of whom I have 
spoken in the preceding chapter, perform such horrible 
penances ; and as all men are not able to bring them- 
selves to suffer so much in this world, they seek during 
their lives to make up by good works for the want of 
these penances, and further direct their inheritors by 
their wills to give alms to the Brahmins, to the end 
that, by the power of the prayers which they cause 
them to say, God may assign them the body of some 
grand personage. In the month of January of the 
year 1 66 1 the Shroff or money-changer of the Dutch 
Company, named Mondas Parek, died at Surat. He 
was a rich man and very charitable, having bestowed 
much alms during his life on the Christians as well as 
on the idolaters ; the Rev. Capuchin Fathers of Surat 
living for a part of the year on the rice, butter, and 
vegetables which he sent to them. This Banian was 
only ill for four or five days, and in that time, as also 
during eight or ten days after his death, his brothers 
distributed 9000 or 10,000 rupees, and burnt his body, 
adding to the ordinary wood much sandal and aloes, 
believing that by this means the soul of their brother,” 
on passing into another body, would become a great 
noble in some other country. There are some among 
them who are foolish enough to bury their treasures 
during their lifetime, as, for instance, nearly all the 
rich men of the Kingdom of Assam, so that if they 



CHAP. VII 


BURIED TREASURE 


205 


enter, after death, the body of any poor and miserable 
mendicant, they can have recourse to the money which 
they have buried in order to draw from it at necessity. 
This is the reason why so much gold and silver and 
so many precious stones are buried in India,^ and an 
idolater must be poor indeed if he has no money buried 
in the earth. I remember that I one day bought in 
India, for 600 rupees, an agate cup 6 inches high and 
of the size of one of our silver plates.- The seller 
assured me that more than forty years had elapsed since 
it was buried in the earth, and that he preserved it to 
serve his need after death, it being a matter of indiffer- 
ence to him whether he buried the cup or the money. 
On my last voyage I bought from one of these idolaters 
sixty-two diamonds weighing about 6 grains apiece, 
and on telling him of my astonishment at seeing so 
fine a parcel, he replied that I need not be astonished, 
seeing that it took nearly fifty years to accumulate 
them for his wants after death ; but his affairs having 
changed, and having need of money, he had been 
obliged to dispose of them. These buried treasures 
were one day of great service to the Haja Siv.aji, who 
took up arms against the Great Mogul and the King 

^ The enormous absorption of gold by India and its disappearance, 
is explained by many writers in the same way. Bernier, among others, 
may be mentioned, but the subject is too extensive to be entered on 
here. Quite recently about 5, 000,000 of horded treasure, including 
precious stones, was taken from pits and wells sunk in the palace 
zenana at Gwalior. 

- This was probably of the kind known to* the Romans as the IMurr- 
hine cups. The custom of roasting the agates to develop the colours 
doubtless gave rise to the idea that the material was some form of 
porcelain ; while the suggestion that they were made of fluor spar may 
be rejected, as that mineral is not known in India, and there is no trace 
of its ever having been imported or worked by the lapidaries of 
Western India. 



20 S 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


of Bijapur. This Raja having taken Callian Bondi, ^ 
a small town of the Kingdom of Bijapur, by the advice 
of the B7'akmms, who assured him that he would find 
a considerable amount of buried treasure, he ordered 
it to be partly demolished, and found in fact great 
riches, with which he supported his army, consisting 
of more than 30,000 men. It is impossible to disabuse 
these idolaters of their errors, because they will not 
listen to reason, and they entirely subordinate their 
own judgment to their ancient customs, the principal 
of which is to burn the bodies of the deceased. 

^ Probably Kullidni, in District of same name, Long. 77°, Lat. 17® 
53' 30"? A. S. No. 57. 


A 



CHAPTER VUI 


Concerning the idolaters custom of burning the bodies 
of the deceased. 

The custom among the Gentiles of burning bodies 
after death is very ancient ; they generally burn them 
on the banks of rivers, where they wash the bodies of 
the deceased to complete the cleansing of those sins 
from which they have not been purified during life. 
This superstition goes to such extremes that very often 
sick persons, when on the point of death, are carried to 
the margin of a river or tank, and their feet are placed 
in the water. According as nature fails the body is 
pushed forwards, and at last it is held by the chin 
only, so that at the moment when the spirit departs 
and leaves the body, both the one and the other can be 
purged of all defilement by plunging the body wholly 
into the water, after which it is burned in the same 
place, which is always close to some pagoda. There 
are people who make it their business to collect wood, 
and there is a fixed rate of payment for their trouble. 
When an idolater is dead, all those of his caste or 
tribe who are in the place assemble at the house of 
the deceased, and the body having been placed on a 
litter covered by some fine cloth, according to the 
station of the defunct and the property which he has 



208 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


left, they accompany it to the place where it is to be 
burnt, following the litter, which is carried on the 
shoulders of those appointed for that duty. They 
always proceed chanting some prayers to their god, 
and calling out Ram, Ram, and, Avhile carrying the 
body, there is some one who sounds a small bell to 
give notice to the living to pray for the deceased. 
The body having arrived at the margin of the river 
or tank, it is plunged into the water, and afterwards 
burnt. This is done in three different ways, as I 
shall describe in the following chapter. According 
to the wealth of the deceased, there is mingled with 
the ordinary wood which is collected for burning, more 
or less sandal-wood or other scented wood. 

But the idolaters not only burn dead bodies ; their 
cruel superstition goes further, for they also burn the 
bodies of the living. They make scruple about killing 
a serpent, and even a bug, yet they regard it as a 
highly meritorious action to cause a living woman to 
be burnt in the fire together with the body of her 
deceased husband. 


A 



CHAPTER IX 


How the women burn themselves with the bodies of 
their deecased husbands in India. 

It is also an ancient custom among the idolaters of 
India that on a man dying his widow can never 
remarry ; as soon, therefore, as he is dead she with- 
draws to weep for her husband, and some days after- 
wards her hair is shaved off, and she despoils herself 
of all the ornaments with which her person was 
adorned, she removes from her arms and legs the 
bracelets which her husband had given her, when 
espousing her, as a sign that she was to be submissive 
and bound to him, and she remains for the rest of 
her life without being of any consideration, and worse 
than a slave, in the place where previously she was 
mistress. This miserable condition causes her to 
detest life, and prefer to ascend a funeral pile to be 
consumed alive with the body of her defunct husband, 
rather than be regarded for the remainder of her days 
with opprobrium and infamy by all the world. Joined 
to which the Brahmins induce the women to hope that 
by dying in this way, wnth their husbands, they will live 
again with them in some other part of the world with 
more glory and more comfort than they have pre- 
viously enjoyed. These are the two reasons which 

VOL. II 


p 



210 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


make these unhappy women resolve to burn them- 
selves with the bodies of their husbands ; to which it 
should be added that the priests buoy them up with the 
hope that at the moment when they are in the fire, 
before they yield up their souls, will reveal wonder- 
ful things to them, and that after the soul has passed 
through several bodies it will attain to an exalted 

o 

degree of glory for all eternity. 

But it should be remarked that a woman cannot 
burn herself with the body of her husband without 
having received permission from the Governor of the 
place where she dwells, and those Governors who are 
iMuhammadans, hold this dreadful custom of self-de- 
struction in horror, and do not readily give permission. 
On the other hand, it is only the women who become 
widows, without children, who can be reproached for 
not having loved their husbands if they have not had 
courage to burn themselves after their death, and to 
whom this want of courage will be for the remainder 
of their lives a cause of reproach. For, as for the 
widows who have children, they are not permitted 
under any circumstances to burn themselves with the 
bodies of their husbands ; and very far from custom 
obliging them, it is ordained that they shall live in 
order to watch over the education of their children. 
Those whom the Governors peremptorily refuse to 
grant permission to burn themselves pass the re- 
mainder of their lives in severe penances and in doing 
charitable deeds. There are some who frequent the 
great highways either to boil water with vegetables, in 
order to give it as a drink to passers by, or to keep 
fire always ready to light the pipes of those who desire 
to smoke tobacco. There are others among them who 



CHAP. IX 


THE BURNING OF WIDOWS 


211 


make a vow to eat nothing but what they find un- 
digested in the droppings of oxen, cows, and buffaloes,* 
and who do still more absurd things. 

The Governor, seeing that all the remonstrances 
he makes to these women, who are urged to burn 
themselves even by their relatives and by the 
Brahjuins, are ineffectual to turn them from the 
damnable resolution which they have taken to die in 
so cruel a fashion, when his secretary indicates by a 
sign that he has receiv'ed a bribe, at length allows 
them to do what they wish, and in a rage tells all the 
idolaters who accompany them that they may “go to 
the devil.” 

Immediately on this permission being obtained, all 
the music commences to make itself heard, and with 
the sound of drums, flutes, and other instruments of 
that kind, all go to the house of the deceased, and 
from thence, as I have said, accompany the bodj’ to 
the margin of a river or tank, where it is to be burned. 

All the relatives and friends of the widow who 
desires to die after her husband, congratulate her 
beforehand on the good fortune which she is about to 
acquire in the other world, and on the glory which 
all the members of the caste deriv^e from her noble 
resolution. She dresses herself as for her wedding- 
day, and is conducted in triumph to the place where 
she is to be burnt. A great noise is made with 
the instruments of music and the voices of the women 
who follow, singing hymns to the glory of the 
unhappy one who is about to die. The Brahmins 
accompanying her exhort her to show resolution and 
courage, and many Europeans believe that in order to 
1 This fonn of penance is, I believe, not extinct. 



212 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


remove the fear of that death which man naturally ab- 
hors, she is given some kind of drink that takes away 
her senses and removes all apprehension which the 
preparations for her death might give rise tod It is for 
the interest of the Brahmins that these unhappy 
women maintain the resolution they have taken to 
burn themselves, for all the bracelets which they wear, 
both on arms and legs, with their earrings and rings, 
belong of right to these Brahmins, and they are 
searched for in the ashes after the women are burnt. 
According to the station and wealth of the women, the 
bracelets, earrings, and rings are either of gold or 
silver ; the poorest have them of copper and tin ; but 
as for precious stones, they do not wear them at all 
when going to be burnt. 

I have seen women burnt in three different ways, 
according to the customs of different countries. In the 
Kingdom of GujarAt, and as far as Agra and Delhi, 
this is how it takes place : On the margin of a river or 
tank, a kind of small hut, about 1 2 feet square, is built 
of reeds and all kinds of faggots, with which some 
pots of oil and other drugs are placed in order to make 
it burn quickly. The woman being seated in a half- 
reclining position in the middle of the hut, her head 
reposing on a kind of pillow of wood, and resting her 
back against a post, to which she is tied by her waist 
by one of the Brahmins, for fear lest she should 
escape on feeling the flame. In this position she holds 
the dead body of her husband on her knees, chew- 
ing betel all the time ; and after having been about half 

1 Preparations of ihdng, or Indian hemp, used to be given for this 
purpose, but in many cases the excitement alone, in all probability, 
produced an insensibility to pain. 



CHAP. IX 


THE BURNING OF WIDOWS 


213 


an hour in this condition, the Brahmin who has been 
by her side in the hut goes outside, and she calls out to 
the priests to apply the fire ; this the Brahmins, and the 
relatives and friends of the woman who are present, 
immediately do, throwing into the fire some pots of oil, 
so that the woman may suffer less by being quickly 
consumed. After the bodies have been reduced to 
ashes, the Brahmins take whatever is found in the 
way of melted gold, silver, tin, or copper, derived from 
the bracelets, earrings, and rings which the woman 
had on ; this belongs to them by right, as I have said. 

In the Kingdom of Bengal women are burnt in 
another manner. A woman in that country must be 
very poor if she does not come with the body of her 
husband to the margin of the Ganges in order to wash 
it after he is dead, and to bathe herself before being 
burnt. I have seen them come to the Ganges more 
than twenty days’ journey, the bodies being by that time 
altogether putrid, and emitting an unbearable odour. 
There was one of them who, coming from the north, 
near the frontiers of the Kingdom of Bhutan, with the 
body of her husband which she had conveyed in a car- 
riage, travelled all the way on foot herself, without eating 
for fifteen or sixteen days, till she arrived at the Ganges, 
where after having washed the body of her husband, 
which stank horribly, and having bathed herself also, she 
had herself burnt with him with a determination which 
surprised those who saw it. I was there at the time. 
As throughout the length of the Ganges, and also in 
all Bengal, there is but little fuel,^ these poor women 
send to beg for wood out of charity to burn themselves 

1 This remark is of interest as showing that the scarcity of fuel, 
which is now so much felt, had already been experienced in these regions. 



214 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


with the dead bodies of their husbands. There is pre- 
pared for them a funeral pile, which is like a kind of 
bed, with its pillow of small wood and reeds, in which 
pots of oil and other drugs are placed in order to 
consume the body quickly. The woman who intends 
to burn herself, preceded by some drums, flutes, and 
hautboys, and dressed in her most beautiful orna- 
ments, comes dancing to the funeral pile, and having 
ascended it she places herself, half-lying, half-seated. 
Then the body of her husband is laid across her, and 
all the relatives and friends bring her, one a letter, 
another a piece of cloth, this one flowers, that one 
pieces of silver or copper, saying to her, give this from 
me to my mother, or to my brother, or to some relative 
or friend, whoever the dead person may be whom they 
have most loved while alive. When the woman sees 
that they bring her nothing more, she asks those 
present three times whether they have any more com- 
missions for her, and if they do not reply she wraps 
all they have brought in a taffeta, which she places 
between her lap and the back of the body of her 
defunct husband, calling upon the priests to apply 
fire to the funeral pile. This the Bvahmins and the 
relatives do simultaneously. As there is, as I have 
remarked, but little wood in the Kingdom of Bengal, 
as soon as these miserable women are dead and half 
burnt, their bodies are thrown into the Ganges with 
those of their husbands, where they are eaten by the 
crocodiles. 

I should not forget here an evil custom which is 
practised among the idolaters of the same Kingdom of 
Bengal. When a woman is delivered, and the infant, 
as often happens, is unwilling to take to its mother’s 



CHAP. -IX 


THE BURNING OF WIDOWS 


215 


breast in order to suckle, it is carried outside the 
village and placed in a cloth, which is tied by the four 
corners to the branches of a tree, and is thus left from 
morning to evening. In this way the poor infant is 
exposed to the crows, which come to torment it, and 
some have been found whose eyes have been torn out 
of their heads, which is the reason why many idolaters 
are seen in Bengal who have but one eye, and others 
who have both injured or altogether gone. In the even- 
ing the infant is taken to see whether it is willing to 
suckle during the following night, and should it happen 
that it still refuses the breast, it is taken back on the 
following day to the same place ; this is done for three 
days in sequence, after which, if the infant is altogether 
unwilling to take the breast, in the belief that it is a 
demon, it is cast into the Ganges, or into some other 
river or tank which is closer at hand. In the places 
where there are many monkeys these poor children are 
not so exposed to the attacks of crows, for this reason, 
that as soon as a monkey discovers a nest of these 
birds he climbs the tree, and throws the nest on one 
side and the eggs on the other. On the other hand, 
there are among the English, Dutch, and Portuguese 
charitable persons who, moved to compassion for the 
misfortune of these infants, remove them when they 
are thus exposed and hung in a tree, and take care to 
have them brought up as I have one day seen an 
example of at Hugly ; this is done in the places near 
their factories. ~ 

Let us see now what is the practice along the coast 
of Coromandel when women are going to be burnt 
with the bodies of their deceased husbands. A large 
hole of 9 or lo feet deep, and 25 or 30 feet square, is 



216 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


dug, into which an abundance of wood is thrown, 
with many drugs to make it burn fast. When this 
hole is well heated, the body of the husband is 
placed on the edge, and then his wife comes dancing, 
and chewing betel, accompanied by all her relatives 
and friends, and with the sound of drums and cymbals. 
The woman then takes three turns round the hole, 
and at each time she kisses all her relatives and 
friends. When she completes the third turn the 
Brahmins throw the. body of the deceased into the fire, 
and the woman, having her back turned to the hole, is 
also pushed by the same Brahmins, and falls in back- 
wards. Then all the relatives throw pots of oil and 
other drugs of that kind, as I have said is elsewhere 
done, so that the bodies may be the sooner consumed. 
In the greater part of the same Coromandel coast the 
woman does not burn herself with the body of her 
deceased husband, but allows herself to be interred, while 
alive, with him in a hole which the Brahmins dig in the 
ground, about i foot deeper than the height of the man 
or woman. They generally select a sandy spot, and 
when they have placed the man and woman in this 
hole, each of those who have accompanied them, having 
filled a basket of sand, throw it on the bodies until the 
hole is full and heaped over, half a foot higher than 
the ground, after which they jump and dance upon it 
till they conclude that the woman is smothered.^ 

When any of the idolaters of this Coromandel 

1 Thevenot alludes to the custom of burying widows alive, but says 
that when they were covered with clay up to the neck, they were 
strangled by the Brahmins {Voyage, p. 253). Numerous other writers 
also refer to the custom. As is the case with Suttee, this practice is 
now extinct, but were the restraint removed it is most probable that 
there would be reversion to both in some parts of India. 



CHAP. IX 


FINES ON THE DEATH OF COWS 


217 


country are on the point of death, their friends do not 
act like those elsewhere, who carry them to die at the 
margin of a river or tank, so that their souls when 
leaving the body may be cleansed of their impurity. 
They simply carry them into the vicinity of the fattest 
cow which they are able to find.^ 

If a cow happens to be sick the owner must convey 
it to the margin of a tank or river, for should it die in 
his house the Brahmins inflict a fine upon him.^ 

^ The remainder of this passage has been omitted, as the ceremony 
described is too disgusting for reproduction. 

2 These fines, as described by Ward, were very heavy, sufficient in 
some cases to cripple a man^s resources for the remainder of his life. 
(See History of the Hindoos, ') 


A 



CHAPTER X 


Remarkable histories of several women who have been 
burnt after the death of their husbands. 

Among several examples of this more than barbarous 
custom of the women of the idolaters of India of 
burning themselves with the corpses of their husbands, 
I will relate three remarkable cases, of two of which 
I was a witness. 

The Raja of Vellore, of whom I have spoken in 
the first book of this account of India,^ having at the 
same time lost both this town and his life by the victory 
which the General of the King of Bijapur gained 
over him, there was great mourning in all his Court. 
Eleven of the women of his household were keenly 
affected by his death, and all resolved to burn them- 
selves when his body was burnt. The General of the 
Bijapur army having heard of this resolve, thought 
that he would be able to dissuade these desperate 
women by flattering them, and by promising them all 
kinds of good treatment. But seeing that that was of 
no effect, and that they wished absolutely to be burnt 
with the body of the deceased, he directed that they 
should be kept shut up in a room. He who received 
this order, on going to execute it, was told by these 

1 Velou in the original (see vol. i, p. i6i). 



CHAP. X 


A TRAGIC SCENE AT COURT 


219 


infuriated women that it was in vain, that he might do 
his best, but that it was useless to keep them prisoners, 
and that if they were not allowed to do what they 
wished, they had resolved that in three hours there 
would not be one of them alive. This threat was 
jeered at, and it was not believed that it would be 
carried into effect. But he who had these women in 
charge, on opening the door of the room at the end 
of three hours, found the eleven all dead and stretched 
on the ground, without any indication being apparent 
that they had hastened their deaths, either by steel, 
rope, or poison, nor could any one see how they had 
been able to make away with themselves. It was 
assuredly the case on this occasion that the evil spirit 
had played his game. Let us pass to another history. 

Two of the most powerful Rajas of India, who 
were brothers, having come to Agra in the year 1642 
to pay their respects to ShAii JahAn, who then reigned, 
not having properly acquitted themselves therein, 
in the opinion of the Grand Master of the King’s 
house, he one day said to one of the two Rajas, who 
were together under the gallery of the palace, in the 
presence of the King, that this was not the sort of 
demeanour that should be observed towards so great 
a monarch as the King his master. This Raja re- 
garding himself as a King and a great Prince, and 
having brought 15,000 or 16,000 horse in his suite 
with the other Raja, his brother, was offended by the 
boldness the Grand Master showed in reprimanding 
him in that fashion, and drawing his dagger slew him 
on the spot, in the presence of the King, who wit- 
nessed the deed from an elevated position, where, 
as I have elsewhere said, he generally administers 



220 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


justice. The Grand Master having fallen at the feet of 
his brother, who was close to him, the latter immediately- 
set himself to avenge his death, but was anticipated 
by the brother of the Raja, who stabbed him in the 
breast with his dagger and flung his dead body on 
that of the Grand Master. The King, who beheld 
these two murders, one after the other, was frightened 
and withdrew into his harem; but forthwith all the 
Omrahs and other people who were present under the 
gallery, threw themselves on the two Rajas and cut 
them to pieces. The King, indignant at such an action 
being committed in his house and in his presence, 
ordered the bodies of the Rajas to be thrown into the 
river ; but as soon as the troops they had left near 
Agra heard of the affront which was intended to be 
done to the memory of their Princes, they threatened 
to enter the city and pillage it ; this caused the King, 
rather than expose the city to this danger, to order 
tha.t the bodies should be handed over to them. This 
wa^ done, and the Rajputs were appeased by this 
means. As they went to burn them they beheld 
thirteen women of the households of these two Rajas 
approaching, dancing and leaping, who forthwith 
ascended the funeral pile, which they encircled, holding 
one another by the hand, and being immediately en- 
veloped by the smoke, which suffocated them, they all 
fell together into the fire. The Brahmins then threw 
upon them a quantity of wood, pots of oil, and other 
drugs, according to custom, in order that the bodies 
should be quickly consumed. 

I remember another strange occurrence which 
happened one day in my presence at Patna, a town of 
Bengal. I was with the Dutch at the house of the 



CHAP. X 


A COURAGEOUS WOMAN 


221 


Governor of the town, a venerable noble, nearly eighty 
years old, who commanded 5000 or 6000 horse, when 
there entered the reception room where we were seated 
a young and very beautiful woman, who was scarcely 
more than twenty-two years of age. This woman, 
with a firm and resolute voice, came to ask the 
Governor’s permission to burn herself with the body 
of her deceased husband. This Governor, touched 
by the youth and beauty of the woman, sought to 
turn her from her resolution, but seeing that all that 
he could say was useless, and that she only became 
more obstinate, asking him with a bold and courageous 
voice if he believed that she feared fire ; he asked 
if she knew any torment equal to fire, and if it had 
never happened to her to burn her hand. “No, no,” 
this woman then replied to him with more courage 
than before ; “I do not fear fire in any way, and in 
order to make you see that it is so, you have only to 
order a well-lighted torch to be brought here.” The 
Governor, being horrified with the conversation of the 
woman, did not wish to hear more from her, and dis- 
missing her told her in a rage that she might go to the 
devil. Some young nobles who were by him asked 
him to allow them to test the woman and to order 
a torch to be brought, persuading him that she would 
not have the courage to burn herself with it. At first 
he was unwilling to consent, but they continued to 
urge him with so much pressure that at length, by his 
order, a torch was brought, which, in India, is nothing 
else than a cloth twisted and steeped in oil, and put 
on the end of a stick after the manner of a chafing 
dish ; this, which we call a lamp (/al/oi), serves us 
at need in the crossways of towns. As soon as the 



222 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


woman saw the torch, which was well kindled, she ran 
in front of it, and holding her hand firmly in the flame 
without the least grimace, and advancing the arm like- 
wise up to the elbow, it was all immediately scorched ; 
this caused horror to all who witnessed the deed, and 
the Governor commanded the woman to be removed 
from his presence. 

Since we are at Patna I shall relate yet another 
strange thing which happened there one day, and of 
which I was a witness. A Brahmin, coming from 
outside, entered the town, and summoning all of his 
own tribe, told them that they must give him 2000 
rupees and 27 cubits of cloth, which are, as I have 
said, the ells of this country. The principal among 
them having told him that it was impossible, and that 
they were poor, he persisted in his demand to have 
what he asked for, and declared that he would remain 
there without drinking or eating till they had brought 
the cloth and the 2000 rupees. With this resolution 
he mounted on a tree which was in the square, and 
seated himself on a forked branch, remaining in this 
position without eating or drinking during several 
days. The report of this extravagance having reached 
the ears of the Dutch, with whom I then was, they 
and I gave money to keep men on the watch all the 
night close to the tree, in order to see if it was true 
that this man was able to remain for so long a time 
without eating or drinking, which he did indeed during 
thirty days, of which, besides the people whom we 
had engaged for the purpose, there were more than 
100 other witnesses whom those of the tribe had 
sent, and who never moved by day or night from the 
vicinity of the tree. At length, on the thirty-first day 



CHAP. X 


A PROLONGED FAST 


223 


of SO surprising and extraordinary a fast, the idolaters, 
fearing that the Brahmin would not be able to hold 
out longer against hunger, and having a scruple about 
allowing one of their priests to die for want of giving 
him that which he asked for, taxed themselves all 
round and took him the 27 .ells of cloth and the 2000 
rupees. As soon as the Brahmin saw the money 
and cloth he descended from the tree, and after having 
reproached all those of the tribe who were present at 
this spectacle with their want of charity to the poor, 
he distributed to the poorest the whole sum, only 
reserving 5 or 6 rupees for himself. He did the same 
with the cloth, which he cut up into many pieces, only 
keeping for himself what was sufficient to cover the 
middle of his body, and this distribution having been 
made he disappeared before all the crowd, who have 
never since heard what had become of him, notwith- 
standing all the research that they could make ; this 
ought to show sufficiently that in these matters the 
work of the devil is manifested. 

As there are many Chinese at Batavia, I shall give 
here an account of a custom which I have , observed 
among that kind of idolaters. When a Chinaman is 
at the point of death, all the relatives and friends who 
come to see him range themselves about him, and ask 
him, while crying, where he wishes to go, that if he 
wants anything he has only to say it and that they will 
give it to him, be it gold, silver, or women. When dead 

^ This is what is known in India as sitting dharnd — to enforce 
payment of a demand ; it is now an offence under the Indian penal code. 
As to the possibility of a man remaining for so long a period without 
food, India furnishes numerous apparently well authenticated instances. 
Besides which we have Dr. Tanner’s case in America, and many in 
different countries of Europe. (See p. 200). 



224 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


many ceremonies are performed at their funerals ; these 
consist principally in displays of fireworks, in which 
the Chinese excel all the other nations of the world, 
and a man must be very poor if something is not ex- 
pended on them at his death. Moreover, some silver is 
placed in a small box, which is buried near the deceased, 
and a quantity of food is placed near the grave in the 
belief that he will come to eat it. As some soldiers of 
the garrison are sent out of Batavia every evening to 
make the circuit of the town during the night, they 
on one occasion took it into their heads to go to these 
graves, where they ate up what had been left ; this they 
continued to do for some nights consecutively. But 
the Chinese were no sooner aware of it than, in order 
to deter them from returning, they on three or four 
occasions poisoned the food which they placed on the 
graves of their dead ; this caused a great disturbance 
in Batavia. The Chinese occupy a leading position 
in commerce, and are more cunning than the Dutch, 
but not being liked by the people of the town, the 
latter took the part of the soldiers, and accused the 
Chinese of having poisoned some of them. But they 
defended themselves from this accusation very cleverly, 
saying, that if greed had caused these soldiers to die 
from eating the food which had been left on the graves 
of their dead, they were not the cause, as it was 
not for the soldiers that they had left it, and that 
till then among the great number whom they had 
interred not one of the dead persons had ever com- 
plained of such a thing ; thus nothing more was said 
about it, and the soldiers dared not meddle with them 
any further. 



CHAPTER XI 


Concerning the most celebrated Pagodas of the 
Idolaters of India 

The idolaters of India have, both in the towns and 
country parts, a great number of temples, large as 
well as small, which they call pagodas, where they go 
to pray to their gods and make offerings ; but many of 
the poor people who dwell in the forests and mountains, 
far removed from villages, take a stone, and rudely 
trace a nose and eyes with yellow or red colour upon 
it, and all the family then worship it. 

The four most celebrated pagodas are, JagannAth, 
Benares, Muttra, and Tirupati (Tripatty), ^ of each 
of which I shall give a separate description. 

JagannAth is the name of one of the mouths of the 
Ganges,® upon which the great pagoda is built, where 
the Great Brahmin, that is to say the High Priest 
of the idolaters, resides. The form of the choir or 
interior of this pagoda is as follows ; and it is similar, in 
proportion, in all the others, which are built upon the 
same model, in the form of a cross. The great idol on 

1 Jagrenaie, Banarous, Matura, and Tri-peti in the original. 

2 The position of Jaganndth is on the sea coast of Orissa, at Puri, 
which is many miles from the nearest mouth of the Ganges. Bernier, 
Tavernier’s contemporary, was better informed, as in a letter to M. 
Chapelain he states it was situated on the Gulf of Bengal. 


VOL. II 


Q 



226 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


the altar of the choir ^ has two diamonds for his eyes 
and a pendant from his neck which reaches to the 
waist, and the smallest of these diamonds weighs about 
40 carats ; he has bracelets on his arms, some being of 
pearls and some of rubies, and this magnificent idol is 
called Kesora? The revenues of this great pagoda are 
sufficient to feed 1 5,000 or 20,000 pilgrims daily, and 
these numbers are often to be found there, the pagoda 
being the object of the highest devotion by the Indians, 
who visit it from all quarters. It should be remarked 
that jewellers, who come like others, are not now per- 
mitted to enter the pagoda, since one of them, who 
allowed himself to be shut up during the night, extracted 
a diamond from one of the eyes of the idol, intending 
to steal it. As he was about to leave in the morning, 
when the pagoda was opened, this thief, they say, died 
at the door, and the idol performed this miracle as a 
punishment for sacrilege. What makes this pagoda, 
which is a grand building, the principal one in India, 
is, that it is situated on the Ganges, the idolaters 
believing that the waters of that river have a special 
virtue, which cleanses them from defilement when 
they bathe in it. That which causes this pagoda to 


1 Of late years no European has been allowed to enter Jaganndth. 
On the occasion of the late Lord Mayo’s last journey, which was cut 
short by his murder in the Andaman Islands, he had it in contemplation 
to visit Puri on his return to Calcutta, and a rumour was then abroad 
that a special concession about entering the temple was to be made in 
his favour. The temple has been described by Hindus, and in especial 
detail by Dr. Rajendra, L^l Mittra, in his Orissa, 

2 Krishna. The bones of Krishna, who had been killed by a hunter, 
were placed inside an image, which was never completed owing to the 
impatience of King Indra, who, however, obtained from Bramha a con- 
cession that the idol should become famous as Jaganndth. (Ward, 
History of the Hindoos^ vol. i, p. 206.) 



CHAP. XI 


JAGANNATH 


227 


be Otherwise so rich (for it supports up to 20,000 cows) 
is the great amount of the offerings made every day 
by the incredible multitude of people who arrive from 
all parts. But these alms are not altogether at the 
discretion of those who give them, as they are fixed 
by the High Priest, who before granting permission to 
the pilgrims to shave themselves, to wash themselves 
in the Ganges, and to do the other things necessary 
to fulfil their vows, taxes each one according to his 
means, of which he is very exactly informed. Thus 
he receives enormous sums, from which he himself 
derives no profit, all being expended on the feeding of 
the poor and the support of the pagoda. The Grand 
Brahmin, then, distributes to the pilgrims whatever 
food is required, each day, as butter, milk, rice, and 
flour ; but to the poor, who are in want of utensils to 
cook their food with, it is given ready cooked. It is 
a surprising thing, and well worthy of notice, to observe 
how the food is distributed to the poor people who 
have no pots. In the morning the rice is cooked in 
earthen pots of different sizes, and when the hour has 
come when these poor pilgrims arrive to ask for food, 
if, for example, there are five, the Chief Brahmin 
orders another Brahmin to take a pot full of cooked 
rice, which he lets fall, and the pot breaks itself equally 
into five parts, of which each pilgrim takes one, and 
likewise in proportion, more or less, according to the 
number of people who present themselves to whom the 
rice is to be distributed. The Brahmins never cook 
twice in the same earthen pot, but use copper pots 
frequently, and they have for plates certain leaves 
larger than our walnut leaves,^ which are stitched 
1 Probably the leaves of the tree, Shorea robusta (Roxb.) 



228 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


together. They have, however, a kind of dish about 
a foot in diameter, which is used to melt butter, in 
which they dip the rice with their fingers when eating, 
and a small ladle for the melted butter, which is drunk 
as we drink a glass of Spanish wine after a repast. 

1 come now to a more detailed description of the 
idol on the altar of the pagoda of JagannAth. It is 
covered from the neck to the base with a grand 
mantle which hangs on the altar, and this mantle is of 
gold or silver brocade according to the nature of the 
ceremonies. From the first this idol had neither 
feet nor hands, and this is how this fact is explained. 
After one of their prophets was taken up into heaven, 
when they were all plunged in tears and laments at 
losing him, God sent to them from heaven an angel 
who was like the prophet, so they treated him with 
great honour and respect. But while the angel was 
afterwards engaged in making the idol, impatience 
seized upon them, and they removed it to place it in 
the pagoda, although, as yet, it was unprovided with 
feet and hands. But as it was too deformed, they 
made hands for it of the small pearls which we call 
“pearls by the ounce.” ^ As for the feet, they cannot 
be seen, being concealed under the mantle. There is 
nothing left uncovered save the hands and face ; the 
head and body are made of sandal wood.® Around 
the elevated dome in which the idol is seated, from 
the base up to the top, there are numerous niches con- 
taining other images, the majority of which represent 

^ Seed pearls, aljofar of the Portuguese. (See p. 1 1 8.) 

2 Jaganndth was a centre of Buddhism before it fell into Brahminical 
hands, and it has been suggested that the shapeless idol was some 
symbol belonging to the former which was adopted by the latter. ' (See 
Anglo-Indian Glossary^ p. 355.) 



CHAP. XI JAGANNATH 229 

hideous monsters, and they are made of stone of 
various colours. On each side of this great pagoda 
there are other much smaller ones where the pilgrims 
make their smallest offerings, and those who, on 
account of sickness or in their business, have made a 
vow to some god, take there an image or semblance 
of the object in memory of the benefit which they 
believe they have received.^ This idol is anointed 
every day with scented oils which make him quite black. 
He has on his right hand his sister who is called 
Sotora, who is also represented standing and clothed ; 
and on his left his brother, also clothed, who is called 
Balbader.^ In front of the great idol, somewhat to 
the left, his wife is to be seen, who is called Kemm^ 
she is of massive gold, and represented standing, the 
three others are made of sandal wood. 

The two other pagodas are intended for the resi- 
dence of the chief Brahmin, or High Priest, and the 
other priests who serve in the great pagoda. All these 
Brahmins go about with bare heads, and the majority 
are shaved, having for sole garment a piece of cloth, 
a part of which wraps round the body, and the re- 
mainder is worn like a scarf. Near the pagoda the 
tomb of one of their prophets, named Cabir,^ to whom 
they do great honour, is to be seen. It should be re- 
marked that all these idols are on a kind of altar sur- 
rounded by gratings, for no one is allowed to touch 

1 A similar custom is followed in some Catholic countries of Europe. 

2 The names are Subhadrd and BalardmA- 

3 1 don’t know who this stands for. Rukmini was one of Krishnds 
wives, but her image, according to Ward, was never represented with her 
spouse, nor indeed were those of any of his lawful wives. 

4 Possibly for Kabir, a Fakir or Saint, who flourished about the 
close of the fifteenth century. (See Forbes’s Hindustani Dictionary, s.v. 
Kabir.) 



230 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


them, with the exception of certain Brah^nins appointed 
by the High Priest for that purpose. 

I come to the pagoda of Benares, which, after that 
of JagannAth, is the most famous in all India, with 
which it is even, as it were, on a par, being also built 
on the margin of the Ganges,^ and in the town of which 
it bears the name. The most remarkable thing about 
it is that from the door of the pagoda to the river there 
is a descent by stone steps, where there are at intervals 
platforms and small, rather dark, chambers, some of 
which serve as dwellings for the Brahmins, and others 
as kitchens where they prepare their food. For after 
the idolaters have bathed, and have gone to pray and 
make their offerings in the pagoda, they prepare their 
food without any one but themselves touching it, 
through the fear they have lest any one who ap- 
proached it might be unclean. But above all things, 
they ardently desire to drink the water of the Ganges, 
because, as soon as they have drunk it, they believe, 
as I have said, that they are cleansed from all their 
sins. Every day large numbers of these Brahmins 
are to be seen going to the clearest part of the 
river to fill this water into round, small - mouthed, 
earthen pots, which hold about a bucketful. When 
they are full they are taken to the chief priest, who 
directs the mouth to be covered with a very fine cloth 
of fire-colour, in three or four folds, upon which he 
applies his seal. The Brahmzns carry this water at the 
end of a stick, which is flat like a lath, from which hang 
six small cords, and to each of them one of these pots 
is attached. They rest themselves by changing the 

1 Here the mistake about Jaganndth being on the Ganges (see 
p. 225, ^.) is repeated, as it is also elsewhere in following" pages. 



CHAP. XI 


BENARES 


231 


shoulder frequently, and they sometimes travel three or 
four hundred leagues of country with this load,^ and 
then sell it, or make a present of it, but only to the 
richest persons, from whom they expect a liberal re- 
ward. There are some of these Idolaters who, when 
they celebrate any festival — especially when their 
children are married — drink this water at a cost of 
400 or 500 dcus. It is only drunk at the end of the 
repast, as we drink hypocras or muscat in Europe, 
each (guest) receiving a cup, or two, according to the 
liberality of the host. The principal reason why this 
water of the Ganges is so highly esteemed, is, that it 
never becomes bad, and engenders no vermin ; but I 
do not know whether we should believe what is said 
about this, taking into consideration the number of 
bodies which are constantly being thrown into the 
Ganges.^ 

Returning to the pagoda at Benares.^ The build- 
ing is in the figure of a cross, like all the other pagodas, 
having its four arms equal. In the middle a lofty 
dome rises like a kind of tower with many sides, which 
terminates in a point, and at the end of each arm of the 

1 This is what is known as a banghy in India. I have seen men 
accustomed to carrying weights in this way, when on occasion they have 
only a load for one end, make up an equipoise of a stone or clod of earth 
for the other. A similar carrying-stick is used in China. Formerly, if not 
still, troops of these water-carriers were to be seen on the Grand Trunk 
road, which, when I saw it first in the year 1864, afforded a scene of 
much animation and interest. 

2 The reader will do well not to believe this story, but rather to con- 
clude that much of the water when drunk is in a very unwholesome 
condition, and is the cause of disease. 

3 Probably the indications given of this temple may be sufficient to 
those with local knowledge to identify it. I can only suggest doubtfully 
that it is either the Bisheswar (or Golden temple of Siva), or the temple 
of Bhairondth. See Sherringf’s Sacred Ciiy of the Hindus^ p. 61. 



232 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


cross another tower rises, which can be ascended from 
outside. Before reaching the top you meet several 
balconies and many niches, which project to intercept 
the fresh air ; and all over the tower there are figures 
in relief of various kinds of animals, which are rudely 
executed. Under this great dome, and exactly in the 
middle of the pagoda, there is an altar like a kind of 
table, of 7 to 8 feet in length, and 5 to 6 wide, 
with two steps in front, which serve as a footstool, 
and this footstool is covered by a beautiful tapestry, 
sometimes of silk and sometimes of gold and silk, 
according to the solemnity of the ceremony which is 
being celebrated. The altar is covered with gold or 
silver brocade, or some beautiful painted cloth. From 
outside the pagoda this altar faces you with the idols 
which are upon it ,• for the women and girls must salute 
it from the outside, as they are not allowed to enter 
the pagoda, save only those of a certain tribe. Among 
the idols on the great altar there is one standing which 
is 5 or 6 feet in height ; neither the arms, legs, nor 
trunk are seen, the head and neck only being visible ; 
all the remainder of the body, down to the altar, is 
covered by a robe which increases in width below. 
Sometimes on its neck there is to be seen a rich chain 
of gold, rubies, pearls, or emeralds. This idol has been 
made in honour and after the likeness of Bainmadou,^ 
who was formerly a great and holy personage among 
them, whose name they often have on their lips. On 
the right side of the altar there is also to be seen the 
figure of an animal, or rather of a chimera, seeing that 
it represents in part an elephant, in part a horse, and in 

1 This looks like Bhim Mahddeba — a combination of names for 
Siva. 



CHAP. XI 


BENARES 


233 


part a mule. It is of massive gold, and is called 
Garou^ no person being allowed to approach it but the 
Brahmins. It is said to be the resemblance of the 
animal which this holy personage rode upon when he 
was in the world, and that he made long journeys on it, 
going about to see if the people were doing their duty 
and not injuring any one. At the entrance of the 
pagoda, between the principal door and the great altar, 
there is to the left a small altar, upon which an idol 
made of black marble is to be seen, seated, with the legs 
crossed, and about two feet high. When I was there 
it had near it, on the left, a small boy, who was son of 
the chief priest, and all the people who came there 
threw him pieces of taffeta, or brocaded cloth like 
handkerchiefs, with which he wiped the idol and then 
returned them to their owners. Others threw him 
chains made of beads like small nuts, which have a 
naturally sweet scent, which these idolaters wear on 
their necks and use to repeat their prayers over each 
bead. Others also throw chains of coral, others of 
yellow amber, others fruits and flowers. Finally, with 
everything which is thrown to the chief Brahmins 
child he wipes the idol and makes him kiss it, and after- 
wards, as I have just said, returns it to the people. 
This idol is called Morli Ram,^ that is to say, the God 
Morli, brother of the idol on the great altar. 

Under the principal entrance of the pagoda one of 
the chief Brahmins is to be seen seated, close to whom 
is a large dish full of yellow pigment mixed with water. 

^ Siva’s Bull ? The garou is possibly gdo^ a cow, nor gdo being 
a bull. Perhaps, however, the chimera was a representation of the 
sacred bird Garuda. 

2 Morli Ram has not been identified. 



234 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK HI 


All the poor idolaters come one after the other to pre- 
sent themselves to him, and he anoints their foreheads 
with some of this colour, which is continued down be- 
tween the eyes and on to the end of the nose, then on 
the arms and in front of the chest ; and it is by these 
marks that those who have bathed in the Ganges are 
distinguished. Those who only bathe in their dwellings 
(for they are all obliged to bathe before eating, and 
even before cooking), those, I say, who have only 
bathed in well-water, or in water brought from the 
river, are not properly purified, and in consequence 
cannot be anointed with this colour. It may be re- 
marked that the idolaters, according to their castes, are 
anointed with different colours ; and in the Empire of 
the Great Mogul, those who are anointed with yellow 
belong to the most important tribe, and are the least 
impure. For, when attending to the ordinary neces- 
sities of nature, the others content themselves with 
carrying a pot of water to wash themselves with, but 
these always use a handful of sand, with which having 
first rubbed themselves, they afterwards wash. So that 
they can say their bodies are clean, that no impurity re- 
mains, and they may then take their food without fear. 

Adjoining this great pagoda, on the side which 
faces the setting sun at midsummer, there is a house 
which serves as a college, which the Raja Jai Singh,^ 
the most powerful of the idolatrous princes, who was 
then in the Empire of the Great Mogul, has founded 
for the education of the youth of good families. I saw 
the children of this Prince, who were being educated 
there, and had as teachers several Brahmins, who 

1 At a later period than this, namely 1693, Jai Singh erected the 
famous observatory at Benares. 



CHAP. XI BENARES , 235 

taught them to read and write in a language which is 
reserved to the priests of the idols/ and is very different 
from that spoken by the people. Having entered the 
court of this college, being curious to see it, and throw- 
ing my eyes upwards, I perceived a double gallery 
which ran all round it, and in the lower one these two 
Princes were seated, accompanied by many young 
nobles and numerous Brahmins, who were making 
different figures, like those of mathematics, on the 
ground with chalk. As soon as I entered, these 
Princes sent to inquire who I was, and having learnt 
that I was a Frenchman they invited me to ascend, 
when they asked me many things about Europe, and 
especially about France. One of the Brahmins had 
two globes, which the Dutch had given him, and I 
pointed out the position of France upon them. After 
some conversation of this kind they presented me with 
betel ; and before I took leave I asked the Brahmins 
at what hour I should be able to see the pagoda open. 
Having told me to come on the following morning a little 
before sunrise, I did not fail to be at the same house by 
that time, where the Raja had caused a pagoda to be built 
on the left of the entrance. In front of the door there 
is to be seen, as it were, a gallery sustained by pillars, 
where many people were already assembled — men, 
women, and children — awaiting the opening of the door. 
When the gallery and a part of the court are full of 
people, eight Brahmins approach, four on each side of 
the door of the pagoda, each carrying a censer ; and 
there are many other Brahmins who make a great noise 
with drums and other instruments. The two oldest of 
the Brahmins chant a canticle, and all the people, after 


1 Sanskrit. 



236 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 111 


they have intoned it, repeat the same while singing 
and playing instruments, each one waving a peacock’s 
tail, or other kind of fan, to drive away the flies ; so 
that when the door of the pagoda is opened the idol 
may not be inconvenienced by them. All this fanning 
and music lasted a good half - hour, then the two 
principal Brahmins began to sound two large bells 
three times, and, with a kind of small mallet, they then 
knocked at the door. At the same moment it was 
opened by six Brahmins, who were inside the pagoda, 
and 7 or 8 paces from the door an altar was to 
be seen with an idol upon it, which is called Ram Kam, 
who is the sister of Morli Ram. She has on her right 
a child in the form of Cupid, who is known as the god 
Lakshmi, and on her left arm she carries a small girl 
called the goddess Sita. As soon as the door of the 
pagoda was opened, and after a large curtain had been 
drawn, and the people present had seen the idol, all 
threw themselves on the ground, placing their hands 
upon their heads and prostrating themselves three times ; 
then having risen they threw a quantity of bouquets and 
chains in form of chaplets, which the Brahmins placed 
in contact with the idol, and then returned to the people. 
An old Brahmin who was in front of the altar, held 
in his hand a lamp with nine lighted wicks, upon which, 
from time to time, he threw a kind of incense when 
approaching the lamp towards the idol. All these 
ceremonies lasted about an hour, after which the people 
retired, and the pagoda was closed. The people pre- 
sented the idol with a quantity of rice, flour, butter, oil, 
and milk, of which the Brahmins let nothing be lost. 
As this idol has the form of a woman, all the women 
invoke her, and regard her as their patron ; this is the 



CHAP. XI 


BENARES 


237 


reason why (the temple) is always crowded with women 
and children. 

The Raja, in order to have this idol in the pagoda 
of his house and to get it from the great pagoda, has 
expended in gifts to the Brahmins and in alms to the 
poor more than five lakhs (500,000) of rupees, which 
make 750,000 livres^ of our money. 

On the other side of the street in which this College 
is situated, there is another pagoda called Richourdas, 
from the name of the idol on the altar inside, and 
lower down on another small altar is the idol whom 
they call Goupaldas/ brother of this Richourdas. 
Only the faces of these idols, which are made of stone 
or wood, are exposed to view. They are black as jet, 
with the exception of the image of Morli Ram, which 
is in the great pagoda and is uncovered. As for the 
idol Ram Kam, which is in the pagoda of the Raja, it 
has two diamonds in the eyes which this Prince has 
had placed there, together with a large necklace of 
pearls, and a canopy sustained by four silver pillars 
over its head. 

At eight days’ journey from Benares, due north- 
wards, a mountainous country® is entered, which in 
the intervals has beautiful plains sometimes 2 to 3 
leagues wide. They are very fertile, producing corn, 
rice, and vegetables, but that which injures and ruins 
the people of this country is the abundance of ele- 
phants* which eat a considerable proportion of the 
vegetables and grain. If a caravan of travellers 
passes through this country where there are no cara- 
■vansardis, as they are compelled to camp in the open 

2 Gopala. 

^ See p. 262. 


^ ;£s6,250- 

s The Sivalik ranges. 



238 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


fields, they have much trouble in defending themselves 
during the night from the elephants which often come 
to carry away the food. In order to prevent them the 
travellers light fires, fire numerous musket-shots, and 
from time to time some of them cry with all their 
might, and make a great noise to frighten these 
animals. 

In this country there is another pagoda, well-built 
and very ancient, and ornamented within and without 
with many figures, which are representations of girls 
and women only. Men never go there to worship, 
and on that account it is called the girls’ pagoda. It 
has an altar in the middle like the other pagodas, and 
upon this altar there is an idol of massive gold about 
4 feet high, which represents a girl, standing, whom 
they call Ram Marion.^ She has on her right a child, 
standing, made of massive silver, and nearly 2 feet 
in height, and it is said that this girl living a holy life, 
the infant was taken to her by the Brahmins to learn 
her creed and how to live well ; but at the end of three 
or four years, during which the child had dwelt with 
the girl, it became so clever and accomplished that all 
the Rajas and Princes of the country wished for it, 
and, at last, one of them carried it off one night and it 
has not since been seen. This idol has on her left, at 
the base of the altar, another idol representing an old 
man, whom they say had been the servant of Ram 
Marion and the child, and the Brahmins pay great 
reverence to this idol. They come to it but once 
a year for worship, and it is necessary for them to 
arrive on a prescribed day, which is the first day of 
the moon in November, because the pagoda is only 
^ Marana, goddess of death, a form of Kali. 



CHAP. XI 


A WOMAN’S PAGODA 


239 


Opened at full moon. During the fifteen days which 
intervene all the pilgrims, both men and women, must 
fast from time to time, wash their bodies three times 
every day, without leaving a single hair in whatever 
place it may be, all being easily removed by the use of 
a certain earth with which they rub themselves.^ 


1 A preparation of lime is sometimes used for this purpose. 



CHAPTER XII 


Continuation of the description of the principal Pagodas 
of the Idolaters of India 

After the pagodas of Jagannath and Benares, the 
most considerable used to be that of Muttra,^ at about 
1 8 coss from Agra, on the road to Delhi. It is one 
of the most sumptuous buildings in all India, and was 
the place where there was formerly the greatest con- 
course of pilgrims ; but at present scarcely any are to 
be seen there, the idolaters having gradually lost the 
devotion which they had for this pagoda, since the 
river Jumna, which used to pass close to it, has changed 
its course, and now flows half a league away. For when 
pilgrims have bathed in the river it takes them too 
much time to return to the pagoda, and during that 
time they may encounter something which renders 
them impure and unclean. Although this pagoda, 
which is very large, is in a hollow, one sees it from 
more than 5 or 6 coss distance, the building being very 
elevated and very magnificent. The stones which 

1 Matura in the original (see Book I, chap, vii, and Book III, chap, 
xi.) The Antiquities of Muttra, or, as it is also called, Mathurd, have 
been very fully described by Mr. Growse. The temple on the platform 
described by Tavernier was probably what is known as the Idgah or 
Katra, “ It has been identified with the site of the ancient Buddhist 
monastery of Upagupta, and marks one of the oldest religious spots in 
India.” (Imperial Gazetteer, Art. “Muttra,” vol. x, p. 53.) 



CHAP. XII 


MUTTRA 


241 


were used in its construction are of a red colour, and are 
obtained from a large quarry near Agra. They split 
like our slates, and some of them, which are 15 feet 
long and 9 or 10 feet wide, are not six fingers in thick- 
ness, that is to say, they split according to wish, and 
as may be required ; beautiful columns are made of 
them also. The fortress of Agra, the walls of JahAnA- 
bAd, the house of the King, the two mosques, and some 
houses of the great nobles are built of the same stone. ^ 

Returning to the pagoda, it is seated on a great 
platform of octagonal shape faced over with cut stone, 
around which there are two courses of animals, chiefly 
monkeys, carved in relief. One of the courses is only 
2 feet from the ground floor, and the other 2 feet from 
the level of the platform. It is ascended by two stair- 
cases of fifteen or sixteen steps each, the steps being 
only 2 feet long, so that two persons are unable to 
ascend side by side. One of these staircases leads to 
the great gate of the pagoda, and the other behind 
the choir. But the pagoda occupies scarcely half the 
platform, the other half serving as a grand area in 
front. Its form is that of a cross, like those of the 
other pagodas, and in the middle there rises a lofty 
dome, with two others a little smaller which are at the 
sides. On the exterior of the building, from base to 
summit, numerous figures of animals are to be seen, 
such as rams, monkeys, and elephants, carved in stone, 

1 For an account of these sandstones, which are derived from the 
Vindhyan formation, reference may be made to the chapter on Building 
Stones in the Economic Geology of India. Tavernier’s statements as to 
the fissile character and the large size of the pieces which can be 
obtained, are quite accurate. One of the most remarkable, though not 
the most successful uses to which they have been put in modern times 
is in the manufacture of telegraph-wire posts. Latterly these have, I 
think, been replaced by metal posts. 

VOL. II R 



242 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK m 


and all round are niches where there are different 
monsters. From the foot of each of the three domes up 
to the summits, at intervals, there are windows from 5 
to 6 feet high, and at each a kind of balcony where four 
persons can sit. Each balcony is covered by a small 
canopy, and some are sustained by four columns, others 
by eight, but then they are in pairs and in contact with 
one another. Around these domes there are also 
niches full of figures which represent demons, one having 
four arms, another four legs ; some of them have the 
heads of men on the bodies of beasts, with horns and 
long tails which twine round their legs. There are, 
finally, numerous images of monkeys, and it is a 
terrible thing to have before the eyes so many ugly 
representations. The pagoda has but one door, which 
is very high, and on both sides there are many columns 
and images of men and monsters. The choir is 
enclosed by a barricade made of stone columns of 5 to 
6 inches in diameter, and no one may enter these 
except the principal Brahmins, who have access by a 
small secret door which I could not see. When at this 
pagoda I asked some Brahmins who were there if I 
might see the great RAm RAm, that is to say the great 
idol. They replied that if I gave them something they 
would go to ask leave of their Superior ; this they did 
as soon as I had placed two rupees in their hands. I 
had not waited half an hour till the Brahmins opened 
a door which is inside the middle of the barricade (for 
on the outside there is none, the barricade itself being 
closed). I saw across it, at about 15 or 16 feet from 
the door, as it were a square altar covered with an old 
brocade of gold and silver, and on it the great idol 
which they call RAm RAm. Only the head, which is of 



CHAP. XII 


TIRUPATI OR TRIPATTY 


243 


black marble, can be seen, and he has for eyes what 
appear to be two rubies. All the body from the 
neck to the feet is covered by a robe of red velvet 
with some embroidery, and the arms cannot be seen. 
There are two other idols beside him of 2 feet in 
height or thereabouts ; they are arranged in the same 
manner, save that they have the faces white, and 
they are called Becchor.^ I also saw in this pagoda 
a machine of 15 to 16 feet square and about 12 
to 15 feet high, covered with painted calicoes which 
represent all kinds of demons. This machine was 
supported on four small wheels, and I was told that it 
was the portable altar, whereon their great god is 
placed on the solemn days when he goes to visit the 
other gods, and is taken to the river by the people on 
the occasion of their principal festival. 

The fourth pagoda is that of Tirupati,® in the 
province of Carnatic, towards the Coromandel coast 
and Cape Comorin. I went to see it when going 
from Masulipatam to Gandikot ® to join the JSFawdd 
Mir Jumla. It is a large pagoda, surrounded by 
numerous small ones, and by many dwellings for the 
Brahmins ; this makes it appear like a town. It has 
around it many tanks, and the superstition is so great 
that a passer-by dare not take water from them unless 
a Brahmin give it to him. 

^ I don’t know what this stands for, perhaps beta^ a son. 

2 Tripeti in the orig-inal, more correctly it is Tirupati, and is 
commonly called Tripatty, situated in the District of North Arcot. In 
some respects it is regarded as the most sacred temple in Madras. The 
principal temple is at Tirumala, 6 miles distant. From all parts of India 
pilgrims flock there, bearing large offerings with them. 

3 Indecote in the original. In Book I, chap, xviii, p. 272 of vol. i, 
Tavernier gives his route between Madras and Gandikot, when he saw 
this temple. There he calls it, however, Courua, 



CHAPTER XIII 


Concerning the pilgrimages of the Idolaters to 
their pagodas 

All the idolaters who are subjects of the Great 
Mogul and other Princes on either side of the 
Ganges, at least once in their lives make a pilgrimage 
to perform their devotion at one of the four pagodas 
which I have named, and most commonly to that of 
JagannAth, it being the principal and most consider- 
able of all. The Brahmins and rich people make this 
pilgrimage oftener than once, some making it every 
four years, others every six or every eight years, when, 
placing the idols of their pagodas in litters they 
accompany their Brahmins in procession to the pagoda 
for which they have most reverence; but it is most 
frequently, as I have said, to that of JagannAth, and 
also to that of Benares, because both are on the 
Ganges, the water of which is held in special venera- 
tion by them. 

These pilgrimages are not made, as in Europe, one 
by one, or two by two, but the population of a town or of 
several villages assemble in order to travel together in 
company. The poor who come from afar, sometimes 
300 or 400 leagues, and who, with all the savings which 
they have accumulated for that purpose during their 



CHAP, xm 


PILGRIMAGES 


246 


lives are unable to sustain the expenses of the journey, 
are assisted by the rich, who expend very great sums 
in such alms. Each one travels according to his station 
and means, some in pallankeens or litters, others in 
carriages ; and the poor, some on foot and others on 
oxen, the mother carrying her child, and the father the 
cooking utensils. 

The god whom they carry in procession from the 
place they are leaving, in order that he may visit and 
pay the respect which he owes to the great RAm Ram, 
reposes at full length in a rich pallankeen covered with 
gold brocade with silver fringes, the mattress and 
cushion of the same material being under the head, 
feet, and elbows, as we see in the effigies on our tombs. 
The Brahmins distribute among the most important 
persons in the troop fans with handles 7 or 8 feet 
long, and covered with plates of gold and silver, the 
fan being at the end in the form of a kiln-shovel of 2 to 
3 feet in diameter, and covered with the same brocade 
as the pallankeens. It is surrounded with peacock 
feathers, and makes a great current of air ; to it bells 
are sometimes attached to give a kind of music, and 
there are generally five or six of these fans for driving 
away the flies from the face of the idol ; those who 
carry them take turns from time to time, like those 
who carry pallankeens, so that many may share in 
this honourable task. This custom should not appear 
more strange to us than that which I have seen 
practised in Saxony, and in many other parts of Ger- 
many, where, while a funeral oration for a man or a 
woman is delivered in the church, the body reposes 
at full length on a bier which is uncovered, and the 
people on both sides fan it constantly, when it is 



246 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


summer time, to drive away the flies attracted to the 
face of the defunct, who has then no more power of 
feeling than an idol. 

In the year 1653, being on the road from Golconda 
to Surat with M. d’Ardilli^re, of whom I have 
elsewhere spoken, we met near DaulatAbAd more 
than 2000 persons, including men, women, and children, 
who came from the direction of Tatta^ with their 
idol, which they carried in a rich pallankeen, on their 
way to visit the great idol of the pagoda at Tirupati. 
This idol was laid on a mattress of red crimson velvet, 
and the covering and cushions were of the same stuff. 
The bamboo or stick which served to carry ^^pallan- 
keen was covered with gold and silver brocade, and 
no one except the Brahmins had permission to approach' 
it. We saw this long procession pass, and it was not 
without feeling much compassion for the blindness of 
these poor people. 

[Here are the figures of the most famous idols, 
which I had the curiosity to have drawn on the spot.^] 

1 M. Joret {t.c. p. 131) is I think mistaken in assuming that this 
occasion of meeting pilgrims is identical with one described in voL i, p. 
296, it having taken place in the year 1652 at Emelipata^ i,e, Vamul- 
petta, a stage between Gandikot and Golconda. He adds as a further 
mistake of Tavernier’s that M. d’Ardilliere had died before 1653. (See 
Preface.) As we know that Tavernier went back to Golconda in 1653, 
and was in Surat in 1654, he may very possibly have met the pilgrims 
exactly as he says, when on his return towards the end of 1653. 

2 These figures are not given in any of the editions which I have 
seen. Probably they were never reproduced. 


CHAPTER XIV 


Concerning various customs of the Idolaters ^ India 

The Brahmins possess much knowledge of astrology, 
and know how to predict eclipses of the sun and moon 
for the people. On the 2d of July 1666 at one o’clock 
p.M. an eclipse of the sun was visible at Patna, a town 
of the Kingdom of Bengal. It was a wonderful 
thing to see the multitude of people, men, women, and 
children, who came from all quarters to bathe in the 
Ganges. But they must begin this bathing three days 
before they see the eclipse, during which time they re- 
main day and night on the banks of the river in order 
to prepare all kinds of rice, milk, and sweetmeats to 
throw to the fishes and crocodiles which are in the 
river. Immediately on the Brahmins giving the word, 
when they know it is the fortunate hour, whatever kind 
of eclipse it may be, whether of the sun or moon, the 
idolaters are accustomed to break all the earthen vessels 
used in their households, and not to leave one piece 
whole — this causes a terrible noise in a town. 

Every Brahmin has his book of magic, in which 
there are a number of circles and semicircles, of squares 
and triangles, and many other kinds of figures. They 
draw divers figures on the ground, and when they 
perceive that the fortunate hour has arrived they all 



248 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


unite in crying aloud to the people to throw food into 
the Ganges. A terrible noise is then made with drums, 
bells, and large disks made of similar metal to that of 
our cymbals, which they strike one against the other ; 
and as soon as the food is thrown into the river all 
the people should enter and continue rubbing them- 
selves, and bathing their bodies until the eclipse is 
over. As this eclipse appeared at a time when the 
Ganges is usually very low, after the end of the rains, 
which last from the month of July to the end of 
October, for more than 3 leagues above and below 
the town, and as many as the river extends in width, 
nothing was to be seen but heads on the water. As 
for the Brahmins, they remain on land to receive the 
richest and those who give them most, to dry their 
bodies, and give them dry clothes to cover the middle 
of their bodies. Then they make them sit in chairs, 
where the richest of the idolaters have brought an 
abundance of Indian corn, rice, and all kinds of vege- 
tables, with milk, butter, sugar, flour, and wood. Before 
each chair the Brahmin makes a very clean place of 
about 5 or 6 feet square, after which he takes cattle 
droppings steeped in a great dish of yellow pigment, 
in order to rub over all the place, through fear lest 
some ant might come there and be burnt. If possible, 
their ceremonies are conducted without burning wood, 
and in order to cook their food they generally use 
cattle droppings. When they are obliged to use wood 
they take care that it has no maggots nor other insects 
inside it, through fear, as I have elsewhere remarked, 
because of their belief in the transmigration of souls 
into different bodies, that there may be the soul of a re- 
lative or friend burnt with this small animal. In this 



CHAP. XIV 


SNAKE WORSHIP 


249 


place which they have cleaned so well, they trace many 
kinds of figures, as triangles and half triangles, ovals 
and half ovals, these they make with powdered chalk. 
On each figure they place a little cow-dung, with two 
or three small branches of wood, which they rub well 
for fear any insect should be contained in them ; and 
on these branches they place on one wheat, another 
rice, on the others vegetables, and all the kinds of food 
which they have. Then, having thrown on each heap 
a quantity of butter, and having set fire to them, 
according to the appearance of the flames they conclude 
whether there will be in that year an abundant harvest 
of corn, rice, and so with the rest. 

At the March full moon there is a solemn festival 
for the idol which has the form of a serpent, of which 
I have spoken in the first Book of this account of 
India.^ This festival lasts nine days, and while it lasts 
both men and beasts remain idle ; the majority of the 
latter are ornamented with circles of vermilion around 
the eyes, with which the horns are also painted, and 
when there is any special love for the animal leaves 
of tinsel are added. Each morning the idol is wor- 
shipped, the girls dancing round it for an hour to the 
sound of flutes and drums, after which all eat together 
and enjoy themselves till the evening, when they again 
worship the idol and dance round it a second time. 

Although it is not the usual custom of the idolaters 
to use any kind of drink, nevertheless during this 
festival they drink palm wine, and, in villages far re- 
moved from the great routes, a spirit made from the 
same wine, because the Muhammadan governors do not 
allow them to make it, nor to sell wine brought from 

^ Snake worship. See Book I, chap, iii, p. 42. 




250 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


Persia or elsewhere. The spirit is made in this way — 
In large earthen vessels, glazed inside, which are called 
martabans^ and are of different sizes, and hold as much 
as 300 Paris pints of palm wine, they place 50 or 
60 pounds of black sugar — which is unrefined, and 
looks like yellow wax — with about 20 pounds of a 
thick black bark of a kind of thorn, ^ very like that 
which our tanners use in Europe to tan their leather. 
This bark serves to make the palm wine ferment ; this 
it does in four or five days like our new wine, so that 
the sweetness changes into sourness equal to that of our 
wild pears. The whole is then distilled, and, accord- 
ing to the flavour which is wished for, there is thrown 
into a kettleful either a small bag of cloves, or three 
or four handfuls of aniseed or mace, large chaldrons 
serving for the distillation. This spirit can be made of 
whatever strength is desired. One day, having taken 
the fancy to distil some for myself, I filled ten of those 
bottles which come from England, the glass of which is 
of the thickness of a white crown (6cu blanc) ; they hold 
about 4 pints, Paris measure, each, and are used for 
wines which it is desired to keep. But during the night 
the spirit having effervesced in the bottles I found them 
all cracked in the morning by the strength of the liquor. 

W^hen I was at Agra in the year 1642 a somewhat 
strange thing happened. An idolater called Voldas, 
who was broker to the Dutch, and was about seventy 
years old, received news that the chief priest of the 
pagoda of Muttra was dead. Immediately he went to 

^ J^^cLTtavcine ia th.6 oiiginal. This name was given to large vessels 
of glazed pottery, which were made in Martaban, and thence largely ex- 
ported. A number of examples- of its use w 21 be found, ia the Anglo- 
Indian Glossary, p. 428. 

2 Kutch f Acacia cat£chu (Willd.) 



CHAP. XIV 


A RAJPUT SOLDIER 


251 


see the Chief of the Dutch factory to ask him to ex- 
amine his accounts and close them, because, as he said, 
their Chief Priest being dead he also wished to die, to 
serve that holy man in the other world. As soon as 
his accounts had been examined he entered his carriage 
accompanied by some relatives who followed him, and 
as he had neither eaten nor drunk since he had received 
the news, he died on the road, having refused to take 
any food. 

The idolaters of India observe this custom, that 
when any one yawns they crack their fingers, while 
crying out many times Ginarami^ that is to say, 
remember Narami, who passes among the idolaters 
as a great saint. This cracking of the fingers is done, 
it is said, to prevent any evil spirit entering into the 
body of the yawner. 

When I was at Surat in the year 1653 one of the 
soldiers called Rdjputs, who had upon his horse two 
or three pieces of cloth, was brought before the 
Governor to be made pay duty on them. The Raj- 
put in a firm tone of voice asked the Governor boldly, 
if a soldier who had served the King all his life 
ought to pay duty on two or three miserable pieces of 
calico which were not worth more than 4 or 5 rupees, 
and said they were to clothe his wife and children. 
The Governor, stung by this discourse, called him 
bethico, that is to say, son of a strumpet,® adding that 

1 Jdi! Ndrdin, a name of Vishnu, with the exclamatory 'prt&x.Jdi/ 
signifying’ ‘ victory to.* Though the custom referred to is well known, its 
object being, as stated, to prevent evil spirits taking advantage of the 
involuntarily open mouth in order to obtain an entrance into the body 
of the yawner, I cannot find any reference to a detailed account of it. 

2 This is not art escact translation oT the term, but may be allowed 
to pass as such here. 




262 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 111 


even if he were a Prince he would make him pay the 
King’s due. Then the soldier, exasperated by this 
abuse, made as though to take out the money to pay 
what was demanded, and advancing towards the 
Governor gave him seven or eight stabs of his dagger 
in the stomach, from which he died, and the soldier 
was at once hacked to pieces by the attendants. 

Although these idolaters are in the depths of 
blindness as to a knowledge of the true God, that does 
not prevent them from living in many respects, accord- 
ing to nature, morally well. When married they are 
rarely unfaithful to their wives, adultery is very rare 
among them, and one never hears unnatural crime 
spoken of.’^ They marry their children at the age of 
seven or eight years, through fear lest they should 
abandon themselves to this crime. And, in a few words, 
these are the ceremonies which are observed at their 
marriages. On the eve of the nuptials the bridegroom, 
accompanied by all his relatives, goes to the house 
of the bride with a pair of large bracelets two fingers 
in thickness, but hollow inside, and in two pieces, with 
a hinge in the middle to open them by. According to 
the wealth of the bridegroom these bracelets are more 
or less costly, being of gold, silver, brass or tin,® those 
of the poorest being of lead only. The bridegroom 
having arrived, places one of these bracelets on each 
leg of his bride, to indicate that he holds her thence- 
forward enchained, and that she can never leave him. 
On the morrow the feast is prepared in the house of 
the bridegroom, where all the relatives on either side 

1 This testimony is very different from that given by some other 
writers of the same period as Tavernier. 

2 Leton and estain in the original. 



CHAP. XIV 


MARRIAGE CEREMONIES 


253 


are present, and at 3 p.m. the bride is brought. Several 
Brahmtns are there too, and their Chief, making the 
head of the bridegroom approach that of the bride, 
pronounces several words while sprinkling water on 
both their heads and bodies. Then on plates or on large 
leaves of the fig tree ^ many kinds of food and pieces 
of stuff and calico are brought. The Brahmin asks 
the bridegroom if in proportion as God gives to him 
whether he will share with his wife, and if he will 
strive to support her by his labour. When he has 
said yes, all the guests seat themselves at the feast 
which has been prepared for them, and where each one 
eats apart. According to the wealth of the bride- 
groom and the credit he enjoys with great persons, the 
nuptials are celebrated with pomp and great expendi- 
ture. He is seated on an elephant and his bride in a 
carriage, all who accompany them having torches in 
their hands. He borrows, moreover, for this ceremony 
from the Governor of the place and from other great 
nobles among his friends as many elephants as he can, 
together with show horses, and they march about thus 
for a part of the night with fireworks, which are thrown 
in the streets and open spaces. But one of the prin- 
cipal outlays is in the Ganges water,® for those who are 
sometimes 300 or 400 leagues distant from the river ; 
for as this water is considered sacred, and is drunk 
from religious motives, it has to be brought from a 
great distance by the Brahmins in earthen vessels 
glazed inside, which the Grand Brahmin of JagannAth 
has himself filled with the cleanest water in the river,® 
and has subsequently placed his seal upon it. This 

1 That is to say, the plantain (see vol. i, p. 247, and vol. ii, p. 4). 

2 See p. 231. ^ See p. 230. 



254 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK m 


water is not given except at the end of the repast, as I 
have before said ; for each of the guests three or four 
cupfuls are poured out, and the more of it the bride- 
groom gives them to drink so is he esteemed the more 
generous and magnificent. As this water comes from 
so far, and the Chief Brahmin charges a certain tax on 
each pot, which is round and holds about as much as 
one of our buckets, there is sometimes 2000 or 3000 
rupees worth of it consumed at a wedding. 

On the 8th of April, when I was in Bengal at a 
town called Maldah,^ the idolaters made a great feast 
which is peculiar to the inhabitants of that place. 
They all leave the town and attach hooks of iron to 
the branches of trees, to which many of these poor 
people hook themselves, some by the sides and others 
by the middle of the back. These hooks enter their 
bodies, and they remain suspended, some for an hour 
and others for two, till the weight of the body drags 
the flesh, when they are compelled to retire.® It is a 
surprising thing not to see a drop of blood come from 
this cut flesh, and not to see a sign of it even on the 
hook, and in two days they are entirely cured by the 
drugs which the Brahmins give them. There are 
others at this festival who make beds for themselves 
with points of iron and lie upon them ; these points enter 

1 Malde in the original. See Book I, chap, viii, p. 134. Maldah is 
a well-known town at the junction of the Kalindri and Mahanadi rivers 
in the District of the same name in Bengal. Formerly it was a port and 
centre of manufactures, but is not now important. 

This is the so-called CJiccKak or swinging festival, now for- 

bidden in British India. On one occasion, in the Rdjmahal hills, a 
deputation of Sonthdls waited on me to ask for my intercession with 
the Government to permit its resumption, on the ground that their 
neglected deities, out of revenge,' caused injury to their families and 
flocks. 



CHAP. XIV 


PENANCES 


265 


very far into the flesh, and while both are doing these 
penances their relatives and friends bring them 
presents, as betel, money, or pieces of calico. When 
the penance is accomplished the penitent takes all 
these presents and distributes them to the poor, not 
wishing to profit by them himself. I asked some of 
these people wherefore they made this feast and these 
penances, and they said it was in memory of the first 
man, whom they called Adam like us. 

I shall relate also an example of a strange kind of 
penance which I saw when ascending the Ganges on 
the 1 2th of May 1666. A very clean place on the 
margin of the river had been prepared, in which one of 
these poor idolaters was condemned to place himself 
on the ground many times during the day, supported 
only on two hands and two feet, and kissing the 
ground three times before rising, without daring to 
touch it with the rest of his body. When he rose it 
was necessary for him to do so on the left foot, with the 
right foot in the air, and every morning during a 
whole moon, before drinking or eating, he was obliged 
to place himself in this position fifty times in succession, 
and consequently to kiss the ground one hundred and 
fifty times. I was told that the Brahmins had inflicted 
this penance on him for having allowed a cow to die 
in his house, not having taken it to the margin of the 
water according to custom, in order that it might be 
bathed while dying. ^ 

Here is yet another somewhat curious custom. 
When an idolater loses a coin or a sum of gold, be it 
by mistake or that he has been robbed, he is bound to 
take as much as he has lost to the Chief Brahmin, and 

1 See p. 217. 



256 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK HI 


if he does not do so and it gets known he is driven 
with ignominy out of his caste, through policy, to 
make people careful. 

Beyond the Ganges, northwards, towards the 
mountains of Nagarkot,^ there are two or three Rajas 
who like their people believe neither in God nor devil. 
Their Brahmins have a certain book which contains 
their creed, and which is only filled with rubbish for 
which the author, who is called Baudou, gives no 
reason.® These Princes are vassals of the Great 
Mogul and pay tribute to him. 

Finally, for a last remark and to finish this chapter, 

I may say that the Malabaris in general carefully 
preserve the nails of their left hands, and allow their 
hair to grow like that of a woman. These nails, 
which are sometimes half a finger long, serve them 
as combs, indeed they have no others, and it is with 
this left hand also that they perform all impure 
duties, never touching their faces nor that which they 
eat save only with the right hand.® I now come 
to some remarks which I have made in my journeys 
regarding kingdoms which lie to the north-east of the 
territories of the Great Mogul, as those of Bhutan, 
Tipperah, Assam, and Siam, of which I believe that we 

1 Naugrocot in the original. Nagarkot is to a certain extent synony- 
mous with Kangra, the capital of which is situated on the Ravi 
Bangangd Torrent. The name occurs in many early travels to indicate 
the mountainous region of the N.W. Himalayas. 

2 This is rather an unceremonious way of discussing the tenets of 
Buddhism. The Buddhists form a comparatively small part of the popu- 
lation of Kangra at present (See Imperial Gazetteer, Art. “ Kangra.”) 

® The Nairs of Malabar let their nails grow, according to Linschoten, 
to show that they are “ gentlemen ” and do not engage in manual labour. 
As is well known, the Chinese do so likewise, for the same reason. 
(See Voyage of Van Linschoten, in Hak. Society, vol. i, p. 282.) 



CHAP. XIV 


TONQUIN 


257 


Europeans have not much knowledge ; and I would also 
speak of the Kingdom of Tonquin, if I did not know 
that two different authors have filled two volumes 
with it. 

1 In his third volume Tavernier gives an account of Tonquin, or 
Tunquin as he calls it. I have not tested it, but in the opinion of 
some critics it is very inaccurate. Our author’s reputation would stand 
higher if he had limited his descriptions to places of which he had 
personal knowledge. 


VOL. II 


S 



CHAPTER XV 


Concerning the Kingdom of Bhutan, from whence 
comes musk, good rhubarb, and some furs 

The Kingdom of BhutAn is of very wide extent, but 
we have not been able to acquire an exact knowledge 
of it as yet. This is what I have ascertained during 
several journeys which I have made in India, from people 
of the country who come from it to trade ; but I was 
better informed regarding it on the last occasion than I 
had been previously, as I was at Patna, the largest town 
in Bengal and the most famous for trade — at the time 
that the merchants of BhutAn arrive to sell their musk. 
During the two months I spent there I bought to the 
extent of 26,000 rupees worth of musk, an once (Fr.) in 
the capsule costing me 4 livres and 4 sols of our money, 
and out of the capsule at the rate of 8 francsi^ and 
were it not for the custom duties which have to be 
paid in India, as well as in Europe, there would be 
a great profit to be made on it. The best kind of 
rhubarb ^ also comes from the Kingdom of BhutAn ; 
the same country produces also the seed which yields 

1 See Book II, chap, xxiv, p. 146, for another account of this pur- 
chase, and a comparison showing the discrepancy. Here for francs we 
should probably read livres, 

2 See p. 260. 



CHAP. XV 


MUSK 


259 


worm powder,^ and other kinds of drugs, and from 
thence also beautiful furs are brought. But as for 
rhubarb, you risk much in its carriage, by whatever 
road you take it ; for if you go by the north towards 
Kabul the damp spoils it, and if you take the southern 
direction, as the way is long, the rains which may 
supervene are still more to be feared, so that there is 
no kind of merchandise which is more subject to be 
spoilt, and requires more care than it does. 

As for musk, during the hot season the merchant 
does not make any profit by it, because it becomes dry 
and loses weight. U pon this article 2 5 per cent duty 
has generally to be paid at Gorakhpur,® the frontier 
town of the territories of the Great Mogul in the 
direction of the Kingdom of BhutAn,® although they 
extend 5 or 6 leagues farther. When Indian merchants 
arrive in that town they call on the customs officer, 
and tell him that they are going to the Kingdom 
of BhutAn, one to buy musk, another rhubarb, and 
they make declarations of the sums which they intend 
to expend, these the customs officer enters in his register 
with the names of the merchants. Then the merchants, 

^ This is probably a species of Artemisia — A. maritima (Var) ? It 
is the Flores cince^ or Semen cince^ or Santonica of the pharmacopoeias. 
Most of it which reaches Europe comes through Russia, but the drug 
now to be found in Indian bazaars is similar, consisting of the small 
unopened flower heads. It is found in great abundance on the steppes 
of the Kirghiz, in the northern part of Turkestan. (See Pharjnaco- 
graphia^ by Fluckiger and H anbury. London, 1874.) 

2 Goorochej)our in the original. Gorakhpur is the chief town of the 
District of the same name in the North-West Provinces. It adjoins 
Nepal on the north, through which territory the merchants travelled 
to Bhutdn. 

s This geographical indication is not correct, as Northern Bengal 
lies nearer to Bhutdn ; but it is evident from other references that 
Tavernier’s knowledge of the extent and position of Bhutdn was vague. 



260 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


instead of 25 per cent, which they ought to pay, agree 
for 7 or 8 per cent, and take a certificate from the 
customs officer or the Kazi, so that on their return they 
may not be asked for any more. If it should happen 
that they are unable to obtain a fair composition from 
the customs officer, they take a different road, which is 
both very long and very difficult, on account of the 
mountains being nearly always covered with snow, and 
because in the level country there are vast deserts to be 
traversed. They have to go up to the 60th degree of 
latitude, and then they turn towards the west to 
Ki.BUL,^ which is at the 40th, and it is in that town 
that the caravan divides, one portion going to Balkh,® 
and the other to Great Tartary. It is where those 
who come from BhutAn barter their goods for horses, 
mules, and camels, for there is little money in these 
countries. Then these Tartars carry their goods into 
Persia, to Ardabil,® and Tabriz ; this it is which 
makes Europeans believe that rhubarb and the seeds 
{semencineY come from Tartary. It is quite true that 
rhubarb comes from thence, but it is not nearly so good 
as that which comes from the Kingdom of BhutAn, as it 
is much more tainted, rhubarb being subject to decay 
at the heart. The Tartars carry away from Persia 
silken stuffs of small value which are made at Tabriz 
and Ardabil, and some English and Dutch cloths 

1 That they travelled so far north as the 60th degree is most 
improbable. That there was a northern route is well known, however. 
The true latitude of Kdbul (Cabool) is only 34° 30'. 

2 Balch in the original. Balkh is an ancient city of Turkestan, 
south of the Oxus. (See vol. i, pp. 92, and 382, 71.) 

3 Arduiel in the original. Ardabil is near the Caspian, in the rugged 
northern province of Persia called Azerbijaun, wherein Tabriz is also 
included, 

^ See ante^ p. 259. 



CHAP. XV 


ARMENIAN MERCHANTS 


261 


which the Armenians bring from Constantinople and 
Smyrna, whither they are brought from Europe. 
Those of the merchants who come from BhutAn and 
Kabul go to Kandahar and on to Ispahan, and they 
generally take back coral beads, yellow amber, and 
lapis wrought into beads when they can obtain them. 
The other merchants, returning from the regions about 
Multan, Lahore, and Agra, take calicoes, indigo, 
and an abundance of carnelian and crystal beads. 
Finally, those who return by Gorakhpur, and have 
an understanding with the customs officer, take from 
Patna and Dacca coral, yellow amber, tortoise-shell 
bracelets, and others of sea shells, with numerous 
round and square pieces of the size of our 1 5 sol 
coins, which are also of the same tortoise-shell and sea 
shells. When I was at Patna four Armenians, who 
had previously made a journey to the Kingdom of 
Bhutan, came from Dantzic, where they had had 
made numerous images of yellow amber, which repre- 
sented all kinds of animals and monsters, these they 
were taking to the King of BhutAn to place in his 
pagodas, he being, like his people, exceedingly idolatrous. 
Wherever the Armenians see that money is to be made 
they have no scruple about supplying materials for the 
purposes of idolatry,^ and they told me that if they 
had been able to get an idol made which the King 
had ordered from them they would have been enriched. 
It was a head in the form of a monster, which had six 
horns, four ears, and four arms, with six fingers on 
each hand, the whole to be of yellow amber,^ but the 

^ Bohemia, it is said, at present sends idols made of cast glass to 
India, which undersell the marble images of Agra. 

2 Huge pieces of amber were employed in the manufacture of the 



262 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


Armenians could not find sufficiently large pieces for 
the purpose. I was inclined to believe that money 
lacked them, for it did not appear that they had much 
of it ; it is, however, an infamous trade to furnish the 
instruments of idolatry to these poor people. 

Coming now to the road which must be followed 
from Patna to the Kingdom of Bhutan, upon which 
the caravan spends three months.^ It leaves Patna 
generally at the end of December and arrives on the 
eighth day at Gorakhpur, which, as I have said, is 
the last town in this direction in the territories of the 
Great Mogul, where the merchants obtain their 
supplies for a portion of the journey. F rom Gorakhpur 
to the foot of the high mountains there are still eight 
or nine days’ marching, during which the caravan 
suffers much, because the whole country is full of 
forests, where there are numerous wild elephants,^ and 
the merchants instead of sleeping at night must remain 
on the watch, making large fires and firing their 
muskets to frighten these animals. As the elephant 
moves without noise, he takes the people by surprise, 
and is dose to the caravan before they are aware of it. 
It is not that he comes to do injury to man, for he 

boxes made in the shape of geese included in the King of Burmah’s 
treasure, which is in the South Kensington Museum. 

It has been stated that the largest piece of amber ever known was 
recently discovered near the Nobis Gate at Altona. It weighed 850 
grammes. Dr. Meyer of Dresden {Nature^ 29th November 1888), 
commenting on this, says that besides smaller pieces, elsewhere, there are 
specimens in the Berlin Mineralogical Museum weighing 6.5 and 9.5 
kilogrammes j they were obtained on the sea-coast of North Germany. 

^ Three months is a long time for the journey to have lasted 
between Patna and any portion of Bhutdn territory, as now known. 

^ The Tardi. It was in a part of this region that the Prince of 
Wales took part in the elephant captures arranged for him by Sir Jang 
Bahddur. . 



CHAP. XV 


NEPAL 


263 


contents himself with carrying off whatever food he 
can seize, as a sack of rice or flour, or a pot of butter, of 
which there is always a large supply. One can go from 
Patna to the foot of these mountains in Indian carriages 
ox pallankeens, but oxen, camels, or the horses of the 
country are generally used. These horses are by 
nature so small that when a man is upon them his feet 
nearly touch the ground, but they are otherwise strong, 
and all go at an amble, doing up to 20 leagues at a 
stretch, and eating and drinking but little. There are 
some of them which cost as much as 200 dcus^ and 
when you enter the mountains you can only use that 
means of carriage, it being necessary to leave behind 
all the others, which become useless on account of the 
numerous passes, which are very narrow. The horses 
even, though strong and small, often have difficulty in 
getting through, and it is for this reason, as I shall 
presently say, that one has recourse to other expedients 
for traversing these lofty mountains. 

At 5 or 6 leagues beyond Gorakhpur you enter 
the territories of the Raja of Nepal,® which extend to 
the frontiers of the Kingdom of BhutAn. This Prince 
is a vassal of the Great Mogul, and sends him an 
elephant every year as tribute.® He resides in the 
town of N EPAL, of which he bears the name, and there 
is very little trade or money in his country, as it 
consists of forests and mountains. 

The caravan having arrived at the foot of the high 
mountains, known to-day by the name of Nagar- 

1 j£4S, a very high price indeed for a country pony nowadays. 

2 See p. 259 It is Nupalxn. the original. 

3 The finest elephant I ever saw I met on its way down the Grand 
Trunk Road to Calcutta from Nepal. It was a gift from Sir Jang 
Bahddur to Lord Mayo. 



264 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


kot/ which one cannot cross in less than nine or ten 
days, as they are very high and narrow, with great 
precipices, — numerous people descend from diverse 
places, the majority being women and girls, who come 
to strike a bargain with the people of the caravan, to 
carry the men, goods, and provisions to the other side 
of the mountains. This is the method by which they 
carry them. The women have a strap on the shoulders 
to which a large cushion hanging on the back is 
attached; upon it the man seats himself.^ It takes 
three women, who change in turns, to carry a man ; and 
as for the baggage and provisions, they are loaded on 
goats which carry up to 1 50 livres weight each. Those 
who desire to take horses into these mountains are 
often obliged, in the narrow and difficult passes, to 
haul them up with ropes ; and it is, as I have said, on 
account of this difficulty that but little use is made of 
horses in this country. They are fed only in the 
morning and evening. In the morning a pound of 
flour, half a pound of black sugar and half a pound of 
butter, are mixed together with water to give to the 
horse. In the evening it must be contented with a 
few horn peas, crushed and steeped in water for half 
an hour ; in this consists all their food during the 
space of twenty-four hours. The women who carry 
the men only receive 2 rupees each, for the ten days of 
traverse, and as much is paid for every quintal that 
the goats or sheep carry, and for every led horse. 

After passing these mountains there are to be had, 
for carriage to BhutAn, oxen, camels, and horses, and 

^ See p. 2 56, n. 

In some parts of the Himalayas women still offer themselves for 
carrying travellers on their backs. 



CHAP. XV DRESS AND CUSTOMS OF THE HILLMEN 


265 


even pallankeens^ for those who wish to travel more 
at their ease. The country is good, and produces 
corn, rice, vegetables, and wine in abundance. All 
the people, both men and women, are clad during the 
summer in coarse cotton or hempen cloth, and during 
the winter in a thick cloth which is like felt. The 
headdress for both sexes is a cap made very like those 
English caps which they call bouquin- kans,^ and it 
has pigs’ teeth around it for ornament, with round and 
square pieces of tortoiseshell of the size of one of 
our 15 sol coins ; the richest persons add to them 
beads of coral or yellow amber, of which the women 
also make necklaces. The men, like the women, wear 
bracelets on the left arms only, and from the wrist to 
the elbow. Those worn by the women are very 
narrow, but those worn by the men are two fingers 
wide. They wear a silken cord on the neck, to which 
a bead of coral or yellow amber is suspended, or a 
pig’s tooth, which hangs down to the waist ; and on their 
left side they have bands from whence more of these 
same beads of coral, amber, or pigs’ teeth hang in strings. 
Although they are great idolaters they eat all kinds of 
meat, except that of the cow, which they worship as the 
mother and nurse of all men, and they are very fond 
of spirits. They also observe some of the Chinese 
ceremonies ; for, after having fed their friends, when 
the repast is finished they burn yellow amber, although 
they do not worship fire like the Chinese. I have 
elsewhere given the reason why the Chinese burn 

1 Probably a modified form of pallankeen^ suitable for hill travelling. 

2 I have not found a full explanation of the term. Bouquin means 
an old book-cover. The caps of felt worn in these regions are somewhat 
similar to what used to be called “ pork pie ’’ hats a few years ago in 
England. 



266 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


amber at the conclusion of their feasts this causes 
this article to have a good sale in China. In Patna, 
even, pieces of yellow amber which are not worked, of 
the size of a good nut, clear and of good colour, are 
bought by these BhutAn merchants at 35 and 40 
rupees the seer, and the seer, both for amber, as also 
for ambergris, musk, coral, rhubarb, and other drugs, is 
equal to 9 onces (Fr.) of our weight. Saltpetre, corn, rice, 
sugar, and other articles of food, are also sold by seers 
in Bengal ; but this seer is 72 of our livres at 16 onces 
to the livre, and 40 seers make a maund, which would 
amount to 2880 livres weight of Paris. ^ When I left 
that country the maund of rice was selling for 2 rupees. 

To return to the yellow amber, for a piece of a seer 
or 9 onces (Fr.) weight, according to its colour and 
beauty, from 250 to 300 rupees is paid, and the other 
pieces cost the same in proportion to their size and 
beauty.® Coral in the rough or worked into beads is 
saleable with sufficient profit, but the rough is much 
preferred, for this reason, that it can be cut according 
to their own fashion ; and most frequently women and 
girls are employed at this work. They also make 
beads of crystal and agate, and the men make the 
bracelets of tortoiseshell and sea shells, as also those 
small pieces of the same shell, both round and square, 
of which I have spoken above.^ All the people of the 

^ See Book II, chap, xxiii, p. 137. 

2 This is an extraordinary jumble of figures. A seer of 72 li'vres^ 
40 of which went to the maund^ making a maund of 2880 livres^ is 
surely due to a copyist’s mistake. It is possible that a Bengal maund 
of 40 seers may have been equal to 72 livres^ or more than double the 
Surat maund of 40 smaller seers = 7^/^ livres (see vol. i, p. 418), but 
the statement as it stands is clearly wrong. 

s See p. 137. 


^ See p. 261. 



CHAP. XV 


SEMENCINE OR WORM POWDER 


267 


north, men, women, girls, and boys, suspend them 
from their hair and ears. There are in Patna and 
Dacca more than 2000 persons who occupy themselves 
with these trades, all that is produced by them being 
exported to the Kingdoms of BhutAn, Assam, Siam, 
and other countries to the north and east of the 
territories of the Great Mogul. 

As for the semencine^ or worm powder, it cannot 
be harvested like other grains. It is a herb which 
grows in the fields, and must be allowed to die, and 
the evil is that when it approaches maturity the wind 
causes a great part to fall among the herbage, where 
it is lost, and this it is which makes it so dear. As 
it cannot be touched by the hand, because it would 
thereby be sooner spoilt, and even when making a 
sample, it is collected in a porringer ; when it is wished 
to gather what remains in the ear, the following is the 
method adopted : The people who collect it have two 
baskets with handles, and when walking in the fields 
they wave one of these baskets from right to left, and 
the other from left to right, as though they cut the 
herb, which nevertheless they only touch the upper 
part of — that is to say, the ear, and all the grain thus 
falls into the baskets. Semencine also grows in the 
Province of Kerman,^ but it is not so good as that of 
Bhutan, and there is not more of it than is required 
in the country itself. This grain not only serves for 
driving worms from the bodies of children, but the 
Persians and all the people who live towards the north, 
and even the English and Dutch, use it as aniseed to 
put in comfits. 

As for rhubarb, it is known to be a root which is cut 

1 Seep. 259. 2 Kumaon? 



268 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


in pieces, ten or twelve of them being strung together 
and then dried. 

If the people of Bhutan had as much skill as the 
Muscovites in slaying the martin one might obtain from 
this country an abundance of rich furs, since there are 
numbers of these animals. As soon as the animal 
shows As head outside its hole the Muscovites, who are 
on the watch, shoot it without fail, generally in the nose 
or the eyes, for if it is shot in the body the skin will 
be worth nothing on account of the blood which flows 
from the wound, and causes the hair moistened by it to 
fall out. 

The King of BhutAn always employs 7000 or 
8000 men as his guard. These people are armed with 
the bow and arrow, and the majority also carry the 
axe and shield, the former having a point on one side 
like a war mace. It is a long time since the Bhutdnese 
first acquired the use of the musket, iron cannon, 
and gunpowder,^ which is of long grain, and is very 
strong. I have been assured that there is to be seen 
on their guns figures and letters which are more than 

^ In his paper on Early Asiatic Fire Weapo?ts General Maclagan 
says, “ While there appears to be no good evidence in support of the 
idea that Asia had a knowledge of gunpowder and used firearms before 
Europe, there are plain indications that the knowledge of the most im- 
proved weapons of war, both before and since the introduction of gun- 
powder, and the skill to make and use them, came from Europe to India 
and other Asiatic countries.” Jour. Asiatic Society of Bengal.^ vol. xlv, 
p. 64. He concludes, too, that there is not good evidence of the sup- 
position that the Arabs were the first to use powder. He considers 
the European nations were the first to discover its most important form 
and application (p. 70). Were space available, much interesting infor- 
mation might be given here of the huge size of the guns which were 
used in India. One at B'ijapur was 4 feet 8 in. diameter at the muzzle, 
and had a calibre of 2 feet 4 inches. It was cast at Ahmadnagar in 
1549. Asiatic Jour. 1827, p. 65. 



CHAP. XV 


THE KING OF BHUTAN 


269 


500 years old.^ They cannot be taken out of the king- 
dom without the express permission of the Governor, 
and no one dare carry away a musket unless his nearest 
relatives go bail that it will be faithfully returned. 
Except for this difficulty I would have brought one 
away with me. By the characters which were on the gun, 
as those who were able to read assured me, it had been 
made 180 years. It was very thick, the mouth shaped 
like a tulip, and the interior polished like a mirror. On 
two-thirds of the gun there were bands in relief, and 
some gilt and silvered flowers between two of them, 
and the ball which it carried was an once (Fr.) in weight. 
The merchant of BhutAn being so particular about the 
return of the musket, no matter what offer I made I 
could never persuade him to sell it to me, and he even 
refused to give me a sample of his powder. But I 
have brought to France two guns of nearly the same 
kind, one of which was made in the island of Ceylon, 
and the other in Bengal. 

There are always fifty elephants about the house of 
the King of BhutAn for his guard, and twenty or twenty- 
five camels, which carry on the saddle a small piece 
of artillery, with a ball of about half a pound in weight. 
There is a man seated on the crupper of the camel, as 
I have elsewhere described, and he manipulates this 
piece as he pleases, high or low, to the right or to the left, 
it being fixed on a fork which is attached to the saddle. 

There is no king in the world who is more feared 
and more respected by his subjects than the King of 
Bhutan, and he is even worshipped by them. When 
on the seat of justice, or when he gives an audience, 
all those who present themselves before him have their 
1 This carries back to the year a.d. 1150 or thereabouts. See p. 277. 



270 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


joined hands elevated to their foreheads, and holding 
themselves aloof from the throne, prostrate themselves 
to the ground without daring to raise the head. It is 
in this humble posture that they make their supplica- 
tions to the King, and when they withdraw they walk 
backwards till they are out of his presence. The 
Brahmins make these poor people believe that the 
King is a god upon earth, and principally those who 
come from the north. ^ . . . 

These people of BhutAn are robust men and of fine 
stature, but have somewhat flat faces and noses. I am 
informed that the women are taller and more vigorous 
than the men, but that they are more subject than them 
to goitre, from which few of them escape. They know 
nothing of war, and have no one to fear but the Great 
Mogul. But on his side, which lies to the south of 
them, it is, as I have said, a country of high mountains 
and narrow passes ; on the north there is nothing but 
forests and almost perpetual snow, and both on the 
east and west there are vast deserts where one finds 
nothing but bitter waters ; and whatever there is of in- 
habited country belongs to Rajas who have not much 
power. 

There is apparently some mine of silver in the 
Kingdom of BhutAn,^ for the King coins pieces which 

1 It seems probable that this so-called King of Bhutdn, who was 
described to Tavernier, was really the Grand Lama of Thibet, and this 
is the more likely from the statement as to his sanctity in the passage 
which is not reproduced, being unsuitable for publication. A similar 
statement occurs, I am informed, in other early but quite independent 
accounts of the Grand Lama. The armaments and elephants mentioned 
above seem, however, to be scarcely compatible with the surroundings 
of the Grand Lama. 

^ This is extremely probable ; but it is inconsistent with our author’s 
own statement on p. 162 that there are no silver mines in Asia except 



CHAP. XV 


RUSSIAN EMBASSY TO CHINA 


271 


are of the value of rupees. These pieces are not round 
but octagonal, and there are characters on them which 
are neither Indian nor Chinese. Nevertheless, the 
merchants of BhutAn, who told me at Patna of all 
these things, could not tell me where the mine was, 
and as for gold the little they have of it is brought to 
them by the merchants who come from the east. 

This is all that I have been able to learn concern- 
ing the Kingdom of BhutAn, beyond which the ambas- 
sadors passed whom the Duke of Moscovie sent to 
China in the year 1659. They took their route through 
the length of Great Tart ary to, the north of BhutAn, 
and arrived at the court of the King of China with 
considerable presents. They were some of the most 
distinguished nobles of Moscovie, and were at first 
very well received. But when it became necessary for 
them to salute the King — the custom being to prostrate 
oneself three times on the ground — they would not 
consent to do so, saying that they would salute accord- 
ing to their own method, and in the manner that they 
saluted their own Emperor, who was as great and 
as powerful as he of China. As they remained firm in 
this resolution they had no audience, and returned with 
their presents without having seen the King.^ It 
would have answered better if the Grand Duke had 


in Japan. Ainslie {Materia Medica, vol. i, 563) gives a number of refer- 
ences to authorities on the subject. Silver mines in the Patkii country, 
between Assam and Upper Burmah, have been recently described by 
Colonel Woodthorpe. (See Pro. Geogl. Socy., January 1887.) A number 
of mines where argentiferous ores occur in India will be found enume- 
rated in the chapter on silver in the Economic Geology of India. 

1 Envoys to the Emperor of China about the year 713, who refused 
to kotow, were tried and pronounced worthy of death, but were subse- 
quently pardoned. See Cathay and the VPay Ilather , vol. i, p. Ixxxi. 



272 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


chosen for this embassy some persons of lower rank 
than these three nobles, who would have shown them- 
selves less scrupulous about formalities, which are often 
the cause of one’s being unable to accomplish great 
designs. If these Moscovite ambassadors had con- 
sented to conform to the customs of China (which they 
might have done without compromising the honour of 
their master), we should have, without doubt, at this 
time, a road opened by land from Moscovie to China, 
through the north of Great Tartary, and a greater 
knowledge of the Kingdom of BhutAn, which is in its 
vicinity, and of some others of which we scarce know 
the names ; this would have been a great advantage 
for all Europe.’- 

n 

As I have just spoken of the Moscovites, I re- 
member that in my journeys, and particularly on the 
road from Tabriz to Ispahan, where you generally 
meet Moscovite merchants, several of them have 
assured me that in the year 1654, in one of the towns 
of JVfcoscoviE, a woman aged eighty-two gave birth to 
a' male child, which was taken to the Grand Duke, 
who wished to see it, and had it brought up at his own 
court. ^ 

^ This passage is of considerable interest when regarded in connec- 
tion with the subsequent extension of Russia’s influence in this direction, 
and our own hitherto futile attempts to establish a regular trade route 
through Thibet. 

^ This tale, thro-wn in as an extra, may have an interest for the 
curious. There are undoubtedly cases on authentic record of the ordi- 
nary period of child-bearing having been abnormally prolonged, but 
whether to so advanced an age as eighty-two I cannot say. 




CHAPTER XVI 


Concer'yi'^^i Kingdom of Tipperah 

Some persons believe up to this hour that the Kingdom 
of Pegu bounds China, and I myself shared this error 
until three mefch3,nts of the Kingdom of Tipperah 
drew me out oi it. They made themselves pass as 
Brahmins in be treated with 

special respect, but they were in truth only merchants 
who came to Dacca, where I saw them, 

to buy coral, yellow amber, tortoise-shell, and sea-shell 
bracelets and other toys which, as I have said in the 
preceding cbaptor, are made in these two towns of 
Bengal I saw one of them at Dacca, and met the 
two others at Patna, and had them to dine with me. 
They were people who • spoke but little, whether 
because it was their own particular nature, or was the 
usual custom of their country ; one of them knew the 
Indian language- When they bought anything they 
made their calculations with small stones resembling 
agates, and of the size of the finger nail, upon which 
there were figotes- They each had scales made like 

steelyards. ^^it of a 

kind of wood as hard as bresil} and the ring which 

j Tlie Brazil wood of commerce is at present derived from Casalj)ina 
Branlielsilz. native of Pernambuco. (See Lindley, Vegetable Kingdom, 

T 


VOL. II 



274 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK HI 


held the weights, when put in the arm to mark the 
livres, was a strong loop of silk. By this means they 
weighed from a dram up to ten of our livres. If all the 
inhabitants of the Kingdom of Tipperah resemble 
these two merchants whom I met at Patna, one might 
conclude that this nation loves drinking very much ; 
and I experienced a pleasure in giving them some- 
times spirits, sometimes Spanish wine, and other kinds 
of wines, as those of Shiraz, Rheims, and Mantua, 
never having been without a supply in all my journeys, 
except during the last, in the deserts of Arabia, which 
I was unable to traverse in less than sixty-five days, 
for the reasons I have elsewhere stated. I should 
have been able to learn many things from these 
merchants of Tipperah in reference to the nature 
and extent of their country if they had known how 
to give me as good an account of it as they did of 
my good wine when I proposed a health. For my 
interpreter had scarce finished paying them a compli- 
ment, on my behalf, before the wine was drunk, and 
they gazed at one another while smacking their lips, 
and striking their hands two or three times on their 
stomachs with a sigh. These merchants had, all three, 
come by way of the Kingdom of Arakan, which lies 
to the south and west of that of Tipperah, which is 
partly bounded by Pegu in the direction of winter 
sunset, and they told me that they were about fifteen 
days in traversing their country, from which one 
cannot very well estimate its extent, because the 

p. 55®*) But according" to Col. Yule this liame was originally applied 
to a dye-wood obtained from a tree of the same genus indigenous to 
India, and the name was simply transferred to the American product. 
(See Anglo-Indian Glossary^ p, 86.) 



CHAP. XVI 


TIPPERAH 


276 


stages are unequal, being sometimes longer and some- 
times shorter, according as water is to be found. 

For the conveyance of goods they use, as in India, 
oxen and horses, which are similar to those I have 
described above, low in stature, but otherwise excellent. 
As for the King and the great nobles, they travel 
in pallankeens, and have elephants which have been 
trained for war. The inhabitants of Tipperah are not 
less troubled by goitre than are those of Bhutan. I 
was told that it attacked some of the women on the 
breasts. Of the three men from Tipperah whom I 
saw in Bengal, the one who was at Dacca had two 
goitres, each of the size of the fist ; they are caused 
by the bad water, as in many other countries of Asia 
and Europe. 

Nothing is produced in Tipperah which is of 
use to foreigners. There is, however, a gold mine, 
which yields gold of veiy low standard ; and silk, which 
is very coarse.^ It is from these two articles that the 
King’s revenue is derived. He levies no revenue 
from his subjects, save that those below the rank, 
corresponding to that of the nobility of Europe, have 
to work for him for six days every year either in the 
gold mine or at the silk. He sends both the gold 
and silk to be sold in China, and receives silver in 
return, with which he coins money of the value of lo 
so/s.^ He also coins small gold money like the aspres ® 

^ Tipperah, as now understood, does not produce gold — the gold 
brought from thence may have been originally obtained elsewhere 
(see p. 1 57 ^). In Assam, I believe, it was once the custom for the Rajas 
to require their subjects to wash for gold for a certain number of days 
every year. Regular gold washers were taxed. 

2 These coins were therefore worth gd. 

3 The Turkish asper was both a small coin, and a money of account. 



276 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


of Turkey, and has two kinds of them, of one of which 
it takes four to make an hu, and of the other it takes 
a dozen. This is all I have been able to ascertain 
concerning a country which has been unknown to us 
up to the present, but about which we shall hereafter 
have more information, as also of others which the 
accounts of travellers have made known to us, all not 
having been discovered in a day. 

Its value varied with that of the piastre. It therefore represented 
about a halfpenny in value, if there were 8o to loo in a piastre. 
The coins here mentioned by Tavernier were worth is. i|-d. and 4|d. 
respectively. 


A 


CHAPTER XVII 


Concerning the Kingdom of Assam 

It was never properly known what the Kingdom of 
Assam was till after that great Captain Mir Jumla, to 
whom I have often referred in the history of the 
Moguls, had assured the Empire to Aurangzeb by 
the death of all his brothers and the imprisonment of 
his son. He concluded, that, the war being finished, 
he would be no longer esteemed at Court as highly 
as he had been when Commander -in -Chief of the 
armies of Aurangzeb, and all powerful in the Kingdom 
where he had a great number of supporters. In order, 
therefore, to retain for himself the command of the 
troops, he resolved to undertake the conquest of the 
Kingdom of Assam, where he knew he would not 
meet with much resistance, the country having had 
no war for 500 or 600 years, and the people being 
without experience in arms. It is believed that it is 
this same people who, in ancient times, first discovered 
gunpowder and guns, which passed from Assam to 
Pegu, and from Pegu to China ; this is the reason why 
the discovery is generally ascribed to the Chinese. 
Mir JumlA brought back from this war numerous 
iron guns, and the gunpowder made in that country is 
excellent. Its grain is not long as in the Kingdom 



278 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK HI 


of BhutAn, but is round and small like ours, and is 
much more effective than the other powder. 

Mir Jumla left Dacca then with a powerful army 
for the conquest of the Kingdom of Assam. ^ At 
5 leagues from Dacca one of the rivers which comes 
from the lake of Chiamay,® which like other rivers of 
India takes different names according to the places it 
passes, joins an arm of the Ganges, and at the place 
where these two rivers meet there are forts on each 
side, both being armed with good pieces of bronze 
cannon, which shoot at a level with the water. This 
is where Mir JumlA embarked,® his army ascending 
the river to the 29th or 30th degree, where the frontier 
of Assam is situated, and thence he led it by land 
through a country abounding with all the necessaries 
of life, and with but little means of defence, especially 
as the people were taken by surprise. As they are 
all idolaters, the army, which consisted wholly of 
Muhammadans, did not spare their pagodas, but 
destroyed them wherever they met with them, burning 
and sacking all, up to the 35th degree.^ Mir JumlA 
then heard that the King of Assam was in the field 
with a larger number of forces than had been expected ; 


1 An account of Assam at the time of its conquest by Mir JumM 
in 1663, based on the Alamgtr ndmah of Muhammad Kazim-ibn- 
Muhammad Amin Munshi, by Kavir^j Sydmal Dds, translated by 
Bdbu Rdmd Prasddd, has recently been published in the Indian 
Antiquary for July 1887, pp. 222-226. 

2 Lake Chiamay was a myth believed in by early travellers, 

^ Gordghdt on the west bank of the Karatoyd river in the District 
of Dindjpur, an ancient city now marked by ruins, according to 
Muhammad Kazim, was the starting point of Mir Jumld on the 21st 
November 1662. This was after he had conquered Kuch Bihdr. 

^ The Mogul forces can scarcely have gone beyond Garhgdon, or 
about the 28th degree of latitude, at the farthest. 



CHAP, XVII 


ASSAM 


279 


that he had many guns, and an abundance of fireworks, 
similar to our grenades or nearly so, which are fixed 
at the end of a stick of the length of a short pike, as 
I have elsewhere represented, and carry more than 
500 paces.^ Mir JumlA, having received this intelli- 
gence, did not consider it prudent to advance farther, 
but the principal cause of his return was that the cold 
season had commenced, and in order to conquer all 
that country it would have been necessary to go as 
far as the 45th degree of latitude ; this would have 
involved the loss of his army. For the Indians are 
so susceptible to cold, and fear it so much, that it is 
impossible to make them pass the 30th, or at the most 
the 35 th degree, except at the risk of their lives, and 
of all the servants whom I took from India to Persia, 
it was a great thing for them to come as far as Kasvin,* 
and I never succeeded in taking any of them to Tabriz. 
As soon as they saw the mountains of Medea covered 
with snow I had to allow them to return home. 

As Mir JumlA was unable to go farther north, he 
resolved to turn to the south-west, and laid siege to a 
town called Azoo,® which he took in a short time, and 
found great riches there. Many are of opinion that 
his original design was merely to take this town and 
to pillage it, and afterwards return, as he in fact did.^ 

1 Rockets (see vol. i, p. 390 -) 

2 Cash in in the original. 

3 A zoo or Koch H£’jo, a kingdom on the left bank of the Brahmd- 
putrd river, extending up to Kdmrup. The town of Hd’jo was on the 
frontier of Assam. A full account of it will be found in the PddisJidh- 
7tdmah, (See Blochmann in Jour. A. S. Soc, Bengal^ vol. xli, p. 53.) 

4 Muhammad Kazim says that Mir Jumld, finding his army tired of 
the difficulties with which they were surrounded, “ Came to terms with 
the Assamis (on the 17th January 1663), who, besides surrendering two 
districts, which were added to the crown lands, gave 20,000 tolas of 



280 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK. Ill 


It is in this town of Azoo that the tombs of the Kings 
of Assam and of all the members of the royal family 
are situated. Although the Assamese are idolaters, 
they do not burn the bodies of the defunct, but bury 
them. They believe that after death they go to 
another world, where those who have lived well in this 
world lack nothing, and enjoy all kinds of pleasure ; 
while, on the contrary, those who have lived badly, and 
have taken the property of others, suffer much, prin- 
cipally hunger and thirst, and that, accordingly, it is 
prudent to bury something with them to serve them 
at need. Thus it was that Mir JumlA found such a 
quantity of riches at Azoo,^ since for many centuries 
every King has had built for himself in the great 
pagoda a sort of chapel where he was to be buried, 
and during their lifetime, each of them sent, to be 
placed in the grave where he was to be buried, a 
quantity of gold and silver, carpets and other articles. 
When the body of a dead king is buried in his grave 
all his most precious possessions are also placed there, 
as a private idol of gold or silver which he worshipped 
during life, and all things which it is believed will be 
required by him in the other world. But that which 
is most strange, and which savours much of barbarism 
is, that as soon as the King is dead, some of his most 
beloved wives and the principal officers of his house 
kill themselves by means of a poisoned decoction, in 

gold, 128,000 rupees in hard cash, 120 elephants, and the King’s 
daughter to the conqueror. He then returned to Bengal via Lakhughar 
and Kajli, and reached Khizarpur on the 8th April 1663 A.D., where he 
paid the debt of nature after suffering for a time from consumption 
{lx., p. 223). 

1 Muhammad Kazim says 90,000 rupees worth of gold and silver 
was obtained by Mir Jumld’s soldiers from these graves {Lc, 225). 



CHAP. XVII 


ASSAM 


281 


order to be interred with him, so that they may serve 
him in the other world. Besides which an elephant, 
twelve camels,^ six horses, and numerous sporting dogs 
are buried with him, it being believed that all these 
animals will come to life again, after they are dead, in 
order to serve the King. 

This Kingdom of Assam is one of the best countries 
in Asia, for it produces all that is necessary to the life 
of man, without there being need to go for anything 
to the neighbouring States. There are mines of gold, 
silver, steel, lead, and iron,® and much silk, but it is 
coarse. There is a kind of silk which is produced on 
trees, and is made by an animal having the form of 
our silkworm, but it is rounder and remains for a whole 
year on the trees.® The stuffs which are made of 
this silk are very brilliant, but soon fray and do not 
last long. It is in the southern direction where these 
silks are produced, and that the gold and silver mines 
are situated. The country also produces an abundance 
of shellac, there are two kinds of it. That which is 
formed on trees is of a red colour, and is what they dye 
their calicoes and other stuffs with, and when they 
have extracted this red colour they use the lac to 
lacquer cabinets and other objects of that kind, and to 

^ Muhammad Kazim gives a similar account, but does not mention 
camels. Elsewhere he states camels were unknown in Assam (/,c. 
p. 224). The climate of Assam does not suit camels. 

2 Muhammad Kazim says, “ Gold and silver are got from the sand 
of the rivers draining the Gol (z.e. northern circle). About 12,000 
Assamis according to some people, 20,000 as others state, are generally 
engaged in washing these noble metals, and have to pay one jfola of gold 
per head per annum to the Chief’ (l.c, 224). See Economic Geology of 
India^ p. 231, for details as to the gold of Assam. See also ante^ p. 162, 
where it is stated incorrectly that there are no silver mines in India. 

^ Tusser silkworms ? but their silk is remarkably durable. 




282 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


make Spanish wax.^ A large quantity of it is ex- 
ported to China and Japan, to be used in the manu- 
facture of cabinets ; it is the best lac in the whole of 
Asia for these purposes. As for the gold, no one is 
permitted to remove it out of the Kingdom, and it is 
not coined into money, but is kept in large and small 
ingots, which the people make use of in local, trade, 
not taking it elsewhere ; but as for silver, the King 
coins it into money of the size and weight of rupees, 
and of an octagonal shape, and they may be taken 
outside the Kingdom. Although the country abounds, 
as I have said, with all things necessary to life, among 
all articles of food the flesh of the dog^ is espe- 
cially esteemed, it is the favourite dish at feasts, and 
every month, in each town in the Kingdom, the 
people hold markets where they only sell dogs, which 
are brought thither from all directions. There are 
also quantities of vines and good grapes, but no wine, 
the grapes being merely dried to distil spirits from. 
Finally, as regards salt, there is none in the Kingdom 
but what is manufactured, which is done in two ways.® 
The first is to collect vegetable matter which is found 
in stagnant water, such as ducks and frogs eat. It is 
dried and burnt, and the ashes derived from it being 
boiled and strained as is described below, serve as salt. 

1 See p. 21 for account of shellac and lac dye. 

2 Muhammad Kazim says the Nanaks (Nagas ?) eat the flesh of dogs, 
cats, serpents, etc. (l.c. p. 224). The Nagas, I think, still eat dog’s 
flesh. 

® The chief sources of supply of salt in Asia were formerly the brine 
springs at Borhdt and Sadiyd in Lakhimpur. The vessels used in the 
manufacture for boiling the brine were simply sections of bamboos, 
which were pared so thin that the percolating moisture prevented their 
burning. Imported salt is now largely used in Assam. (See Econornic 
Geology of India, p. 491.) 



CHAP. XVII 


ASSAM 


283 


The other method, which is that most commonly- 
followed, is to take some of those large leaves of the 
kind of fig tree which we call Adam’s fig,^ they are 
dried in the same manner and burnt, and the ashes 
from them consist of a kind of salt which is so pungent 
that it is impossible to eat it unless it is softened, this 
is done in the following way. The ashes are put into 
water, where they are stirred about for ten or twelve 
hours, then this water is strained three times through 
a cloth and then boiled. As it boils the sediment 
thickens, and when the water is all consumed, the salt, 
which is white and fairly good, is found at the bottom 
of the pot. 

It is from these ashes of fig leaves that in this 
country the lye is made to boil silk, which becomes as 
white as snow, and if the people of Assam had more 
figs than they have, they would make all their silks 
white, because white silk is much more valuable than 
the other, but they have not sufficient to bleach half 
the silks which are produced in the country. 

Kemmerouf® is the name of the town where the 
King of Assam resides, it is twenty-five or thirty days’ 
journey from that which was formerly the capital of 
the Kingdom and bore the same name. The King 
takes no tribute from his people, but all the mines of 

1 This manufacture of salt from the leaves of the plantain is men- 
tioned by Muhammad Kazim, lx, p. 224. (See ante^ p. 4.) The 
pungency is probably due to the presence of potash salts. 

2 Kdmrup, now known as the name of a District in Assam of which 
Gauhdti is the chief town. It is certain that Mir Jumld was defeated 
by the Ahdms here, and this was the seat of the Ahdm Viceroy, but 
the King of Assam’s capital was at Garhgdon (Kargdnv) in the Sibsdgdr 
District. The palace is described in Robinson’s Descriptive Account of 
Assam, According to Muhammad Kazim, who also describes it, its 
circuit was i kos and 14 chains ( = 840 yards.) 




284 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK m 


gold, silver, lead, steel, and iron belong to him, and 
in order not to oppress his subjects, he only employs 
the slaves whom he buys from his neighbours for work- 
ing in the mines.^ Thus all the peasants of Assam 
are at their ease, and there is scarcely any one who has 
not a separate house in the middle of his land, a 
fountain surrounded by trees, and even the majority 
keep elephants for their wives. These idolaters, 
unlike those of India, who have but one wife, have 
four, and when a man marries one, in order that there 
may be no dispute among them, he says to her, “ I 
take you to serve me in my household for this pur- 
pose,” and to another, “ I destine you for another,” and 
thus each of these women knows what she has to do 
in the house. The men and women are of fine build, 
and of very good blood ; but the people dwelling on 
the southern frontier are somewhat olive coloured, and 
are not subject to goitre like those of the north. The 
latter are not of so fine a build, and the majority of 
their women have somewhat flat noses. These people 
of the southern part go about naked, having only a 
piece of calico with which they cover that which 
modesty requires them to conceal, with a cap like those 
English caps, around which they hang an abundance 
of pigs teeth.^ They have their ears pierced so that 
one might easily pass the thumb through the holes, 
some carry ornaments of gold in them and others of 
silver. The men wear their hair down to their 
shoulders, and the women leave it as long as it can 

^ This may have been true of the silver mines, but as above stated 
subjects had to wash for gold. 

^ Muhammad Kazim says : “ A head-piece of gunny {goni), a cloth 
round the loins, and a sheet over the shoulders, form all the articles of 
their dress” (J.c., p. 225). 



CHAP. XVII 


ASSAM 


285 


grow. There is in the Kingdom of Assam, as well as 
in the Kingdom of BhutAn, a large trade in tortoise- 
shell bracelets, and sea shells as large as an egg, which 
are sawn into small circles, but the rich wear bracelets 
of coral and yellow amber. When a man dies all his 
relatives and friends should come to the interment, and 
when they place the body in the ground they take off 
all the bracelets which are on their arms and legs and 
bury them with the defunct. 




CHAPTER XVIII 


Concerning the Kingdom of Sim. 

The greater part of the Kingdom of Siam is situated 
between the Gulf of the same name and the Gulf of 
Bengal, adjoining Pegu on the north and the peninsula 
of Malacca on the south. The shortest road and the 
best which Europeans can take to reach this Kingdom 
is to go from Ispahan to Hormuz, from Hormuz to 
Surat, from Surat to Golconda, and from Golconda 
to Masulipatam, where they should embark for 
Denouserin,^ which is one of the ports of the Kingdom 
of Siam. From Denouserin to the capital town, which 
bears the name of the Kingdom, there are about thirty- 
five days’ journey; one part is traversed by ascending a 
river, and the remainder in a cart or upon elephants. 
The road both by land and water is uncomfortable, 
because on the land portion one must always be on 
guard against lions ^ and tigers ; and by water, as the 
river makes rapids in many places, it is difficult to 
make the boats ascend, which is nevertheless accom- 
plished by' the aid of machinery. It is the route 

^ This appears to be Tenasserim, which, however, was included in 
the Kingdom of Pegu, though at times conquered and held by Siam. 
(See Anglo-Indian Glossary, Art “ Tenasserim.”) 

® There are no lions in Siam. 



CHAP. XVIII 


SIAM 


287 


which I recommended, on the return from one of my 
voyages to India, to three bishops whom I met on the 
road. The first was the Bishop of Beryte,^ whom I 
met at Ispahan ; the second the Bishop of Mega- 
lopolis,^ when crossing the Euphrates ; the third the 
Bishop of Heliopolis,® who arrived at Alexandretta 
as I was leaving it for Europe. The whole of Siam 
abounds with rice and fruits, the principal of which 
are called mangues, durions, and mangoustans} The 
forests are full of deer, elephants, tigers, rhinoceros, 
and monkeys, and everywhere is to be seen an 
abundance of bamboos, which are large and very tall 
canes, hollow throughout, and as hard as iron. 

At the ends of these canes you find nests, of the 
size of a man’s head, suspended ; they are made by ants 
from a fat earth which they carry up. There is but a 
small hole at the base of these nests, by which the ants 
enter, and in these nests each ant has his separate 
chamber, like honey bees. They build their nests on 
the canes, because if they made them on the ground, 
during the rainy season, which lasts four or five months, 
they would be exterminated, all the country being then 
inundated. One must take precautions after night-fall 
against snakes. There are there some snakes which 
are 22 feet long and have two heads,® but the head at 

1 Beyrout, in Syria. 

2 Metellopolis of Finlay son, Mission to Siam, p. 257. 

^ 3 Heliopolis or Bambyke, near Carchermish on the Euphrates. 
Le Blanc identifies Hieropolis with Aleppo {Voyages, Paris Edition, 
1648, p. 8). 

^ Mangoes, Durians, and Mangosteens. 

5 This fable of two-headed snakes is common in India ; sometimes 
it is said of the Daman snake — Ptyas mucostts. The statement that 
the head, at the tail end, has no movement, and that the mouth does not 
open, is a charmingly ingenuous admission. Like the case of the birds- 



288 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK HI 


the extremity which answers to the tail, and where 
the snake ends, does not open the mouth and has no 
movement. 

There is also in Siam a very venomous animal 
which is not more than a foot long. Its tail is forked 
and has two points, and its form is somewhat like what 
we picture the salamander.^ 

The rivers of this Kingdom are very beautiful, and 
the one at Siam is of nearly uniform size throughout.^ 
The water in it is very wholesome, but it is full of 
crocodiles of enormous size, which often devour men 
who are not on their guard.® The rivers are in flood 
during the time that the sun traverses the northern 
signs ; this contributes much to the fertility of the 
land where the waters spread themselves, and where, 
by a wonderful provision of nature, the ear of rice 
ascends to the surface as the waters rise.^ 

Siam,® the capital town of the Kingdom, and the 
ordinary residence of the King, is surrounded by walls, 
and is more than 3 of our leagues in circuit. It is on 


of-paradise, referred to on p. 15, the description illustrates the persistency 
of myths. 

1 This poisonous, forked-tailed reptile was certainly mythical. A 
species of Eublepharis ? is called bishkhuprd by the natives of India, and 
though unprovided with fangs is believed to be very poisonous. 

2 The principal rivers of Siam are the Menam, Mekong, Meklong, 
Petriii, Tachin, and the Chantibun (Crawfurd, Dictionary). 

3 The Siamese take their revenge by eating crocodiles^ eggs. 

^ The period of floods is during the south-west monsoon, from June 
to November, and the plain fertilised by them has an area of 6750 
geographical square miles. 

5 Bankok, on both banks of the Menam river, 24 miles from the 
sea, is the present capital of Siam. The old capital, called Siam or 
Yuthia, or Ayuthia, from Sanskrit Ajudya^ is 54 miles farther to the 
north; it was destroyed by the Burmese in 1768, and Bankok was 
founded in 1769 (Crawfurd, Dictionary). 



CHAP. XVIII 


SIAM 


289 


an island, the river surrounding it on all sides ; canals 
might easily be made through all the streets if the 
King were willing to expend on that work a part of 
the vast amount of gold which he lavishes on the 
temples of his idols. 

The Siamese have thirty-three letters in their 
alphabet they write as we do, from left to right, or 
contrary to the people of Japan, China, Cochin-China, 
and Tonquin, who write from the right hand to the 
left, and from the top of the page to the bottom. 

All the common people of this Kingdom are in 
slavery either to the King or to the nobles. The 
women cut their hair- like the men, and their garments 
are not very copious. • Among the civilities which the 
Siamese observe towards one another, one of the prin- 
cipal is never to pass any one to whom respect is due, 
without previously asking permission ; this is done by 
elevating both hands. The richest have many wives, 
as is the case in the Kingdom of Assam. 

The money of the country is of silver and nearly of 
the shape of a musket bullet.® The lowest denomina- 
tion consists of small shells, which are brought from 
the Manillas. There are good tin mines in Siam.® 

1 The Siamese alphabet contains 20 vowels and 43 consonants — in 
all, 63 distinct characters. The language consists of two dialects — the 
court and the vulgar. The sacred language is distinct, being Pali or 
Prakrit (Crawfurd, Dictionary). 

2 The coins here referred to are probably those which our author 
figures in his chapter on coins (p. 22 of the original Paris edition of 
1676). Whether this peculiar form has ever been explained I am 
unable to say, but it most undoubtedly imitates the curious-shaped 
coco-de-mer^ or double cocoanut of the Seychelles islands, for which 
fabulous prices were given in the Malayan countries and India. (See 
Anglo-Dtdian Glossary for an account of this cocoanut.) 

3 Tin is obtained in four of the provinces, which extend from Lat. 
8® to Lat. 13®; and it is also obtained in the tributary Malay States. 

VOL. II U 



290 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


The King of Siam is one of the wealthiest monarchs 
in the East, and he calls himself in his edicts King of 
heaven and earth, although he is a tributary to the 
Kings of China. He shows himself but rarely to his 
subjects, and only gives audience to the principal 
persons of his court, strangers having no admission 
to his palace. He confides the government to his 
ministers, who very often make ill use of the authority 
with which they are invested. He only shows himself 
in public twice in the year ; this he does with much 
splendour. The first time is in order to go in state to a 
pagoda which is in the town,^ the tower of which is gilt 
throughout, both inside and outside. It contains three 
idols, which are from 6 to 7 feet high, and are made of 
massive gold ; and by means of liberal alms to the poor, 
and presents to the priests of these false gods, he 
believes that he makes himself pleasing to them. He 
goes there accompanied by all his court, and displays 
all his richest possessions. Among other indications 
of magnificence there are 200 elephants in Siam, one 
of them being white ; and it is so highly esteemed 
by the King that he glories in calling himself 
“the King of the white elephant.” ^ These elephants 
live for several centuries, as I have elsewhere remarked.® 
The second time that the King goes forth in public 
is for the purpose of visiting another pagoda, which is 


1 This pagoda, or the one next referred to, is probably the one 
still standing, though much ruined, near Yuthia ; it is 400 feet high, 
and has a gigantic gilt bronze statue of Buddha. It is said to have 
been built in the year 1387 A.D. (Crawfurd, Dictionary). 

2 In the year 1821-22 the envoys from the Governor-General of 
India found five white elephants in the possession of the King. Finlay- 
son gives an interesting account of them {Mission to Siam^ P- i S 4)« 

^ See vol. i, p. 279. 



CHAP. XVIII 


SIAM 


291 


5 or 6 leagues from the town up the river. No one 
can enter this pagoda save the King and his priests. 
As for the people, as soon as they see the door of it 
each one must throw himself with his face to the 
ground. On this occasion the King appears on the 
river with 200 richly gilt and decorated galleys of an 
enormous length, each having 400 rowers. As this 
second sortie of the King happens in the month of 
November, when the river begins to fall, the priests 
make the people believe that it is the King alone 
who is able to arrest the course of the waters by the 
prayers and offerings which he makes in this pagoda ; 
and these poor people persuade themselves that the 
King goes to cut the waters with his sword, to dismiss 
them and order them to retire into the sea. 

The King goes, moreover, but on this occasion 
without any state, to a pagoda which is in the island 
where the Dutch have their factory. There is, at the 
entrance, an idol seated after the manner of our tailors, 
having one hand on one of his knees and the other at 
his side. It is more than 60 feet high,^ and around 
this large idol there are more than 300 others of 
different sizes, which represent all kinds of attitudes of 
men and women. ^ All these idols are gilt, and there 
is a prodigious quantity of these pagodas in all the 
country. This results from the fact that there is no 
rich Siamese who does not have one built to perpetuate 
his memory. These pagodas have towers and bells, 

1 This was one of the famous images of Buddha. Perhaps it is 
that which is referred to in a previous note, which ought, therefore, to 
refer to this second pagoda, which the King was in the habit of visiting. 

2 It is possible that this is a mistake, as images of women are, I 
think, not to be found in these pagodas. But some of those of Buddha 
have an effeminate appearance. 



292 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK m 


and the walls inside are painted and gilt, but the win- 
dows are so narrow that they afford but little light. 
The altars are laden with costly idols, among which 
there are generally three of different sizes close to one 
another.’- The two pagodas to which, as I have 
said, the King goes in state, are surrounded by many 
beautiful pyramids, all well gilt ; and that which is in 
the island where the Dutch have their house has asso- 
ciated with it a cloister, the fa9ade of which is very 
fine. In the middle there is, as it were, a great chapel 
all gilded within, where a lamp and three wax candles 
are kept alight in front of the altar, which is covered 
with idols, some being of fine gold and the others of 
gilt copper. The pagoda, which is in the middle of 
the town, and is one of the two which the King visits 
once in the year, as I have related, contains nearly 
4000 idols, and it has around it, as has that which is at 
6 leagues from Siam, a quantity of pyramids, the beauty 
of which causes one to wonder at the industry of this 
nation. 

When the King appears all the doors and windows 
of the houses have to be closed, and all the people 
prostrate themselves on the ground without daring to 
raise their eyes towards him. As no one should be in 
a place more elevated than the King when he is passing 
through the streets, all those who are in their houses 
must descend. W^hen his hair is cut one of his wives 
is employed on that duty, as he does not allow a barber 
to place a hand upon him. This prince is passionately 

’ Vast accumulations of figures of Buddha characterise these 
temples, even those which are deserted. The well-known seated and 
recumbent figures of Buddha, made of marble or lacquered wood, which 
are brought to Europe, have generally been obtained from deserted 
pagodas in Burmah or Siam. 



CHAP. XVIII 


SIAM 


293 


attached to certain elephants, which he supports as the 
favourites and ornaments of his kingdom. When they 
are sick the greatest nobles of the court show the 
utmost care for them in order to please their sovereign ; 
and when the elephants die, as much magnificence is 
displayed for them as at the funerals of the nobles of 
the Kingdom. These funerals of the nobles are con- 
ducted in the following manner : — A kind of mausoleum 
is adorned with reeds covered on both sides with paper 
of many colours. As all kinds of scented wood are 
sold by weight, as much as the body weighs is placed 
in the middle of the mausoleum, and after the priests 
have finished pronouncing some benedictions they burn 
the whole to ashes. Those of the rich are preserved 
in urns of gold or silver, but as for those of the poor 
they are cast to the winds. As for criminals who have 
finished their lives with a disgraceful death, the 
Siamese do not burn their bodies, but bury them. 

The King authorises public women, but they have 
to live in their own separate quarter, under a chief who 
protects them from insult from any one. When one 
of them dies her body is not burnt as is that of a re- 
spectable woman, but is thrown into a place where it 
becomes the food of dogs and crows. 

It is estimated that there are in this Kingdom more 
than 200,000 priests called Bonzes^ who are held in 
great veneration both by the court and by the people. 
The King himself regards some of them with such awe 
as to humiliate himself in their presence. The extra- 
ordinary respect which every one shows them has in- 

1 This is the ordinary term to denote the priests of Buddha in Siam. 
Its origin is said to be somewhat obscure. (See A7tglo-Indian Glossary^ 
Art. “Bonze.”) 



294 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


Spired in them, sometimes, so much pride, that some of 
them have pushed their desires as far as the throne. 
But when the King discovers anything of the kind he 
takes their lives, as was the case some time ago in a 
rebellion, the author of which was a Bonze, whom the 
King executed. 

These Bonzes are clad in yellow, and wear on their 
loins a small red cloth as a waistband. They make 
an outward show of great modesty, and one never sees 
them manifest the smallest degree of passion. At four 
o’clock in the morning they rise at the sound of bells 
to say their prayers, and they do the same towards 
evening. There are certain days of the year when 
they withdraw from the conversation of men to live in 
retreat. Some live on charity, and others have well- 
endowed dwellings. As long as they wear the garb of 
Bonzes they cannot possess wives, and they must re- 
linquish it if they desire to marry. They are for the 
most part very ignorant, and know not what they be- 
lieve. It appears, however, that like the idolaters ol 
India they believe in the transmigration of the soul 
into many bodies. It is forbidden to them to take the ' 
lives of animals ; nevertheless, they make no scruple 
about eating animals which others have slain, or have 
died naturally.^ The god whom they worship is a 
phantom, of whom they speak blindly, and they are so 

^ I have heard a story, which, may be a libel, of Burmese chasing 
fowls till they died of exhaustion, by which kind of “ killing no murder ” 
they believed they had not done wrong, though they ate the fowls. 
The Burmese are always glad to dispose of any animal a sportsman 
may shoot, and will even eat snakes if he kills them. 

The King of Burmah (Ava), it is said, used to keep sheep, one of 
which would conveniently die whenever meat was required at the palace. 
(See The Prisoner in Burmah^ H. Gouger, London, i860, p. 52.) 



CHAP. XVIII 


SIAM 


295 


obstinate in maintaining their gross errors that it is 
difficult to cure them of them. They say that the God 
of the Christians and theirs are brothers, but that 
theirs is the elder. If any one asks them where their 
god is they reply that he has disappeared, and that 
they know not where he is. 

As for the standing army of the kingdom, it consists 
mainly of infantry, which is fairly good. The soldiers 
are inured to fatigue, and have for sole garment a piece 
of calico to cover the middle of the body. All the re- 
mainder of the body — the chest, back, arms, and thighs 
— are uncovered, and the skin, which is all cut (tattooed),^ 
as when one applies cupping-glasses, represents many 
kinds of flowers and animals. After the skin is cut and 
the blood has flowed from it, these figures of flowers 
and animals are rubbed in with whatever colours are 
wished for ; and one would say, on seeing these soldiers 
from a distance, that they were clad with some flowered 
silken stuff or painted calico, for the colours once 
applied never fade. They have for arms bow and 
arrow, musket and pike, and an azagaye^ which is a 
stick of 5 or 6 feet long, tipped with iron at the end, 
which can be hurled with skill against an enemy. 

In the year 1665 there was in the town of Siam 
a Neapolitan Jesuit called Father Thomas. He forti- 
fied the town and the King’s palace, which is on the 
margin of the river, and he had previously erected good 
bastions on both sides. It was on account of this that 
the King allowed him to dwell in the town, where he 
had a small church with a house where M. Lambert, 
Bishop of Beyrout, went to lodge on arriving in Siam. 

1 As is well known, tattooing is a fine art in Siam. 

2 Assegai, (See p. i6i, for etymology of the word.) 



296 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


But these two did not long remain on good terms 
together, and the Bishop found it advisable to have a 
separate chapel. 

The port where vessels arrive from Cochin-China 
and other places is only half a league from the town, 
and as there are always some Christian sailors there, 
the Bishop built a small house and a chapel there in 
order to perform mass.^ 

1 On the whole, this must be allowed to be an excellent account of 
Siam. Very probably Tavernier obtained his information from the 
bishops and Jesuit priests. The reader is referred to Crawfurd’s 
Dictionary of the Malayan Islands for a valuable epitome of information 
on this subject. Finlayson’s Account of the Mission to Siam^ London, 
1826, contains an interesting account referring to a period when Siam 
had scarcely been affected by European nations. On Siam as it now is, 
there are numerous authorities. 




CHAPTER XIX 


Concerning the Kingdom of Macassar and the Dutch 
Embassy to China 

The Kingdom of Macassar, otherwise called the 
Island of Celebes,^ commences at the 5th degree of 
south latitude. The heat is excessive during the day, 
but the nights are fairly temperate, and as for the land 
it is beautiful and very fertile ; but the people of this 
island do not know how to build well. The capital 
town bears the same name as the kingdom, and is 
situated close to the sea. The port is free ; and the 
vessels which carry thither a quantity of merchandise 
from the neighbouring islands do not pay any custom 
dues. The inhabitants poison their weapons, and the 
most dangerous poison which they use is made of the 
juice of certain trees which grow in the island of 
Borneo ; they temper it according to the effect, 
whether slow or quick, which they wish the poison to 
produce. It is said that the King alone knows the 
secret of weakening its effect, and he boasts of having 
some of it so quick that there is no remedy in the 
world capable of neutralising it. One of my brothers,^ 
whom I had taken to India, and who died there, one 

1 The Island of Celebes extends from Lat. i° 45 ' north to 5° 45' 
south. 

2 This was his brother Daniel. (See Introduction, vol. i, p. xii.) 



298 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


day witnessed a remarkable proof of the quickness 
with which this poison takes effect. An Englishman, 
when in a rage, having killed one of the subjects of 
the King of Macassar, and this Prince having forgiven 
him, all the Franks, English as well as Dutch and 
Portuguese, who were in Macassar, fearing if this 
murder was left unpunished the islanders would take 
their revenge by attacking some of them, besought the 
King to execute the Englishman, and urged him so 
strongly that at length he consented. My brother was 
much beloved by the King, who invited him to take 
part in all his amusements, and especially when drinking 
was in question. The death of the Englishman having 
been decided on, the King told my brother that he 
would not allow the victim to languish long, and in 
order to prove at the same time the extraordinary 
power of his poison, he would wound the criminal 
himself with one of his arrows. These are small 
poisoned arrows which are fired with a sampita7i^ and 
the King, in order to show his skill, asked my brother 
in what part of the body he wished him to strike the 
criminal. My brother, who was anxious to see if what 
the King had told him of the rapid effect of his poison 
were true, asked him to strike him on the great toe of 
the right foot, this the King did exactly and with 
wonderful skill. Two surgeons, one English and the 
other Dutch, were ready to cut the toe well below the 

^ The word is sarbatane in the original ; it means a blow-tube, or 
rather the object blown through. Owing to the virulence of the poison 
on the darts it is a terrible instrument of offence. Though frequently 
mentioned by writers, I know of no stronger testimony of its powers 
than that given by our author. As an alleged antidote stercus 
humanum,^ diluted with water, is mentioned by Friar Odoric (see Yule’s 
Cathay p. 91). 



CHAP. XIX 


MACASSAR 


299 


wound, but they were unable to accomplish it so ' 
skilfully but that the poison, more rapid, had reached 
the heart, and the Englishman died at the same 
moment. All the kings and princes of the East 
similarly cherish with care the strongest poisons, and 
the King of Achin one day made a present of fifteen 
or twenty of these poisoned arrows to M. Croke, 
Envoy -General of Batavia, who was subsequently 
Chief of the factory at Surat. It was already some 
years since he had received these arrows without 
having thought of trying them, and one day when I 
was with him we shot many squirrels which fell dead 
immediately on being struck. 

The King of Macassar is a Muhammadan, and he 
allows none of his subjects to become Christians. The 
Jesuit fathers in the year 1656 had found means to build 
a fairly good church at Macassar, but in the follow- 
ing year the King ordered it to be thrown down, as 
also that of the Dominican fathers, who performed 
mass for the Portuguese traders in the kingdom. 
The parochial church, which was conducted by some 
secular priests, remained standing until the Dutch 
attacked Macassar with a powerful fleet, and by force 
of arms they compelled the King to drive all the 
Portuguese out of his territories. The bad conduct of 
this Prince was partly the cause of this war, to which 
the Dutch were also driven by the resentment they 
felt in consequence of the Portuguese Jesuits having 
crossed their embassy to China. Besides which they 
had committed serious outrages against the Dutch at 
Macassar, having even flung on the ground the hat of 
one of the envoys who had come to conclude a treaty 
with the King. Thus the Dutch, unable to avoid. 



300 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


resenting this affront, resolved to unite their forces 
with the Bugis^ who were in rebellion against their 
King, and to avenge, at whatever cost, so gross an 
insult. On the other hand, as I have said, the Dutch 
had been much ill-used by the Portuguese Jesuits, who 
by their intrigues prevented the Deputy whom the 
former sent to the King of China from accomplishing 
what he desired, and it happened in this way : — 

Towards the end of the year 1658 the General of 
Batavia and his Council sent one of the chiefs of 
the Dutch Company to the King of China. Having 
arrived at the Court with splendid presents, he sought 
to obtain access to the Mandarins, who are the great 
nobles of the kingdom, so that by their credit he might 
obtain permission to trade in China. But the Jesuits, 
who knew the language and were acquainted with the 
nobles of the Court, in consequence of the long so- 
journ they had made in the country, in order to 
prevent the Dutch Company from gaining a footing, 
to the prejudice of the Portuguese nation, represented 
many things to the King’s Council to the disadvantage 
of the Dutch. They told them that in Ceylon they 
had broken the promise they had given to the King 
of that island to make over to him the places which 
they jointly captured from the Portuguese ; that they 
were not people of good faith ; and that they had like- 
wise fooled the King of Achin after the capture of 
Malacca, and many other Princes in the Molucca 
islands ; that after having taken, by terms of capitula- 
tion, the country of ^ some of them together with their 
persons, promising to maintain them all their lives 

1 Bouquins in the original. The Bugis are so called by the Malays, 
their proper name is Wugi. They ^e the dominant race in Celebes. 



CHAP. XIX 


MACASSAR 


301 


according to their dignity, they had not treated them 
with any further consideration once they got them into 
their power, but had transported them as slaves to the 
Island of Maurice^ to cut ebony wobd. All these 
things and many others of the same kind having been 
represented to the King’s Council, the Dutch deputy 
was immediately dismissed, and left China without 
having accomplished anything. Having learnt from 
a letter which a spy had written to him after his 
departure, the bad turn which the Portuguese Jesuits 
had played him, on his return to Batavia he reported 
it to the General and his Council, who were much 
annoyed, and resolved to take strong vengeance. 
According to the accounts which the Deputy handed 
in, the cost of the voyage amounted to 50,000 dcus 
and the Council reflected on the means whereby they 
could reimburse themselves with double that amount 
from the Portuguese. They were aware of the trade 
which the Jesuit fathers engaged in annually in the 
island of Macao and the Kingdom of Macassar, and 
that they fitted out on their own account as many as 
six or seven vessels laden with all kinds of Indian as 
well as Chinese goods. The Dutch calculated the 
time when these vessels should arrive at Macassar, 
and on the 7th of June 1660 there appeared at that 
port two of the Company’s vessels, which came in 
advance to facilitate the withdrawal of the Dutch who 
were on land. The Dutch fleet was composed of more 
than thirty sail, and anchored at the island of Tana- 
KEiCE,® at 7 leagues from Butagne.^ 

1 Mauritius. ^ 11,250. 

^ Tanahkeke, or the “ Island of Sorcerers,” in S. Lat. 5“ 30' towards 
the extreme end of the south-western peninsula of Celebes. 

^ Bontaing on S. coast of Celebes. 



302 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


The King felt compelled to defend himself against 
these enemies whose power he feared, and with the 
vessels of Macao, which were in the roads, sought for 
some time to resist the Dutch attack. The combat 
being obstinate on both sides, the Dutch divided their 
fleet, and while thirteen vessels devoted themselves 
to the Portuguese, the remainder incessantly battered 
the fortress, which was carried without much resistance. 
It is said that on this day the Dutch fired more than 
7000 cannon shots, and that the King was so much 
terrified that he ordered the Portuguese not to fire 
any more, so as not to further irritate the enemy. 
The Prince Patinsaloa died during this engagement, 
and this was a great loss to the King of Macassar, 
who had become formidable to his neighbours by the 
diplomacy of this minister, upon whom he entirely 
relied. As the vessels of Macao found themselves sur- 
prised and unprepared for defence, it was not difficult for 
the Dutch fleet to destroy the Portuguese ; they burnt 
three of their vessels, sent two to the bottom, and took 
from them a quantity of costly goods ; thus it was 
that the Dutch reimbursed themselves profitably for 
the cost of the deputation to China. 

On the 13th of June the King of Macassar, named 
SuMBACO, through fear of seeing himself reduced to 
the last extremity, ordered a white flag to be hoisted 
on another fortress, from whence, surrounded by his 
wives, he watched the fight. During the truce which 
they granted him, he sent one of the highest of the 
nobles of his court to the General of the Dutch fleet 
to ask for peace, which was only granted to him on 
condition that he would send an ambassador to 
Batavia, that he would drive all the Portuguese from 



CHAP. XIX 


MACAO 


303 


the island, and that his subjects should no longer 
trade with them. 

As the articles of the treaty were to be ratified 
at Batavia by the General and his Council, the King 
of Macassar equipped his galleys and sent there 
eleven of the grandest nobles of his court with a 
following of 700 men, and the chief of this embassy 
was the brother of the late Prince Patinsaloa. They 
were to present to the General of Batavia 200 loaves 
{painsY of gold to redeem the royal fortress, and had 
orders to submit to all the conditions which the Dutch 
proposed to them, provided that they did not affect 
the law of Muhammad. The General having received 
this embassy, which was a great honour for him, and 
profiting by the opportunity, and the good fortune of 
his arms, he himself prepared the terms of the capitu- 
lation, which were signed by the ambassadors of 
Macassar and were strictly observed. For imme- 
diately all the Portuguese left the country, some passing 
to the Kingdoms of Siam and Cambodia,® and the 
remainder withdrawing to Macao and Goa. Macao, 
which was some years ago regarded as one of the 
most famous and richest towns of the East, was the 
principal object of the Dutch embassy to China, and 
as it was the best port which the Portuguese then had 
in these regions, the design of the Dutch was to ruin 
it completely. To-day this town, which is at the 22“ 
of north latitude, in a small peninsula of the Province 
of Canton,® which is a part of China, has lost much 
of its former renown. 


“ Loaves of gold. (See Appendix, vol. i, p. 416. 200 =;^9ooo.) 

2 Camboye in the original. 

3 Xanton in the original. Macao is near the mouth of the Canton 



304 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK HI 


The Jesuit fathers and the Portuguese merchants 
were not recompensed by it for the disgrace which they 
had experienced at Macassar, and they sustained still 
another blow close to Goa. The Chief of the Dutch 
factory at Vengurla, which is only 8 leagues from that 
town, having heard of the ill-success of Dutch affairs 
in China, thought on his side of a means to avenge 
it. He was not ignorant of the fact that the Jesuit 
fathers of Goa and other places in India did a large 
trade in rough diamonds which they sent to Europe, 
whither they carried them when returning to Portugal. 
And in order to conceal this trade they used to send one 
or two from among their number in the garb of Fakirs 
or I ndian pilgrims ; this was easy for them to do, 
because there are fathers among them who are born 
in the country, and know the Indian language perfectly. 
This garb of the Fakirs consists of the skin of a 
tiger, which is worn on the back, and one of a goat 
which covers the waist and hangs down to the knees. 
For cap they have the skin of a lamb or of a kid, the 
four feet of which hang on the forehead, neck, and ears 
which are pierced, and in which they insert large rings 
of crystal. Their legs are naked, and they have large 
wooden sandals on the feet, and carry a bundle of pea- 
cocks’ feathers to fan themselves with, and drive away 
the flies. One day as I was dining with the Augustine 
fathers who reside at the Court of the King of Gol- 
CONDA in company with M.M. Lescot and Raisin, one 
of these Jesuit fathers who had come from Goa entered 
the chamber clothed in the manner I have described. 
He told us that he was going to St. Thome on the 

river and belongs to the Portuguese, while Hong Kong, similarly 
situated, belongs to the British. 



CHAP. XIX 


DIAMOND TRAFFIC BY JESUITS 


305 


business of the Viceroy of Goa; upon which I remarked 
that to travel throughout India it was not necessary 
to disguise himself, and that other religious persons, 
to whatever order they belonged, did not disguise 
themselves in that manner. 

The Chief of the Vengurla factory seized his 
opportunity then to revenge himself on the Jesuit 
fathers, and having learnt that there were two of them 
going to the mines to buy 400,000 pardos^ worth of 
diamonds, he gave orders to two men who purchased 
some for him, that as soon as the fathers had com- 
pleted their purchase they should give notice of it 
to the master of the customs at Bicholim.^ Bichodim 
is a large town on the frontier, which separates the 
territories of the King of Bijapur from those of the 
Portuguese, and there is no other road but by this 
place, because one cannot elsewhere pass the river 
which forms the island of Salsette where the town 
of Goa is built. The Jesuit fathers, believing that the 
officer of customs knew nothing of the purchase which 
they had made, went into the boat to cross the water, 
and they had no sooner entered it, than they were 
searched, and all the diamonds found on them were 
confiscated. 

I return to the King of Macassar, whom the 
reverend Jesuit fathers strove to convert, and they 
would possibly have accomplished their design, except 
for a condition which he imposed on them, and which 
they neglected to fulfil. For at the same time that 

This, with the pardao at 2S., would represent a sum of ^^40,000. 

2 Bicholi in the original, and called Bicholly in vol. i, p. 181, it 
is now known as Bicholim, and the District hearing the name is 
included judicially in Burdez in the “ old conquests.” 

VOL. 11 X 



306 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


the Jesuits laboured to draw him to Christianity, the 
Muhammadans on their side made equal efforts to 
induce him to embrace their law ; and this Prince, who 
wished to relinquish idolatry, not knowing well which 
side he should take, told the Muhammadans to summon 
two or three of their most accomplished Mullas from 
Mecca, and the Jesuits also, that they should send 
him an equal number of their ablest men, that he 
might hear them and instruct himself thoroughly in 
the respective religions ; both promised to do so. But 
the Muhammadans made more haste than the Chris- 
tians, and eight months afterwards, having brought two 
skilled Mullas from Mecca, the King, as the Jesuits 
sent no one, embraced the law of Muhammad.'^ It is 
true that three years afterwards two Portuguese Jesuits 
arrived at Macassar, but it was too late, and the King 
was no longer inclined to become a Christian. 

The King of Macassar having been made a 
Muhammadan, the Prince, his brother, was so annoyed 
that he was unable to restrain himself from giving 
signs of it by the committal of a deed which resulted in 
his disgrace. As he knew that the Muhammadans had 
a horror of pork, which is one of the common articles 
of food of the idolaters of Macassar, as soon as the 
mosque which the King built was finished, he entered 
it one night, and having ten or twelve pigs slaughtered 
in his presence, he had the blood sprinkled in all 
directions, and both the walls and the niche where the 
Mulla places himself to offer up prayers were soiled 

1 This, according to Crawfurd (fiiaionary), took place in the year 
1603; but the people generally did not follow his example till 1616, 
or a century after the Portuguese had been in occupation of Malacca 
and the Moluccas. 



CHAP. XIX CONVERSION OF THE KING OF MACASSAR 307 


with it. The King, by the laws of the religion which 
he had embraced, was obliged to demolish the mosque 
and to build a new one ; and the Prince, his brother, 
withdrawing with some other idolatrous nobles, has 
never again appeared at Court since that time. 

This is all that I have been able to collect of the 
most singular facts regarding the Kingdoms of the East 
included in the territories of the Great Mogul and 
the Empire of China, of which I also have good 
memoirs ; but as I know that several persons have 
written fully regarding them, I think the reader would 
prefer that I should give him the result of my voyages, 
and that I should only amuse him with things which 
1 have seen with my own eyes. 


A 



CHAPTER XX 


The Author pursues his journey in the East and em- 
barks at Vengurla for Batavia ; the danger which 
he runs on the sea, and his arrival in the Island 
of Ceylon 

I LEFT Vengurla, a large town of the Kingdom of 
Bijapur, 8 leagues from Goa, on the 14th of April 1648, 
and embarked on a Dutch vessel which had just 
brought silks from Persia and was going to Batavia. 
It had orders to stop at Bakanor ^ en route, in order 
to take in rice, and we arrived there on the i8th of 
the same month. I landed with the captain, who 
went to see the King to ask his permission to take 
the rice ; this he gave willingly. It was necessary for’ 
us to ascend by the river nearly 3 leagues, and we found 
the King close to the water, where there were only 
ten or twelve huts made of palm leaves. He had, 
in his own, a Persian carpet spread underneath him, 
and we saw there five or six women, some of whom 
fanned him with fans made of peacocks’ tails, and the 

1 Barcoor of A.S, Barkur is an old port on an estuary on the west 
coast of India, Lat. 13° 28^'. According to the Imperial Gazetteer it 
was “the capital of the Jain Kings of Tulava ... and subsequently a 
stronghold of the Vijdyanagar Rajas. It is often mentioned by the 
older travellers (see Anglo-Indian Gazetteer, p. 33). 



CHAl*. XX 


BARKUR 


309 


Others gave him betel and filled his pipe with tobacco. 
The most important persons of the country were in 
the other huts, and we counted about 200 men, the 
majority of whom were armed with bows and arrows. 
They also had with them two elephants. It appeared 
as if they had some retreat elsewhere, and that they had 
merely come to this place to enjoy the coolness afforded 
by the trees and some streams. Having left the King 
and re-embarked on our boat, he sent us, as a present, 
a dozen fowl and five or six pots of palm wine. We 
slept the same evening, after having made a league of 
way, in a hamlet where there were but three or four 
houses, but we had taken with us ample provisions from 
our vessel. In the morning when we were ready to 
leave we saw on the river one of our pilots with three 
or four young men, who came up to us and brought 
the necessaries for breakfast. When they were landed 
and we had commenced to eat they asked for some 
or palm wine, and the owner of the hut where 
we had slept offered to bring us some, which was very 
good, but he told us that it was strong, and that it 
might send fumes to the head. Our sailors jeered at 
that because they drank it often, and some of them 
had even drunk much of it without being incon- 
venienced. But since you drink it as soon as it is 
drawn from the tree, and do not allow it to ferment, if 
you take too much you feel it ferment in the stomach. 
This peasant having then brought a pot of his palm 
wine, each drank of it as he felt inclined, one three 
glasses, another four or five, and for myself I was con- 
tented with only one, which might contain nearly half 
a pint. But to tell the truth, we all suffered such 

1 See vol. i, p. 158. 



310 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


KOOK nt 


severe headaches from it that we were two days before 
we were able to cure ourselves. We asked the natives 
of the country why this wine had thus troubled us, and 
they said that it was caused by the fact that pepper 
was planted around the palms, and that it was that 
which gave so much strength to this wine. We were 
still somewhat giddy from it when we returned on 
board, where a governor of the country immediately 
arrived to meet us and settle the price of the rice and 
know the quantity of it which was required. It had 
to be brought from some distance ; this troubled us 
much, because the wind commenced to change, and the 
captain was unwilling to leave, as he had not all the 
cargo which he required. 

During the night, between the 28th and 29th, the 
wind began to change, and the pilots told the captain, 
who had never before sailed along the coasts of India, 
that he ought to hoist the anchor and set sail, although 
we had not received our full cargo ; but the captain 
would not consent, replying that we wanted water. 
The wind having been strong throughout the night, 
on the following day it calmed a little, and loading up 
with the rice was continued. On the day after we 
strongly urged the captain to leave, and as he saw 
that all murmured he sent two boats to get water. 
But they had scarcely reached the mouth of the river 
when the wind became so furious that the sailors 
hastened to return without water, this they accom- 
plished with much trouble and danger of being lost. 
When they came on board the two boats were tied 
astern of the vessel, according to custom, and fourteen 
men were put in the larger one in order to take care 
of her and to prevent the waves breaking her against 



CHAP. XX 


A VIOLENT STORM 


311 


the vessel. We desired then to begin to hoist the 
anchor, but the wind became still stronger and more 
adverse ; of thirty or forty men who were about the 
winch more than twelve were injured by the bars, the 
violence of the wind driving them backwards. The 
captain, wishing also to assist in the work in order to 
ease the cable, had his hand badly crushed. At length 
the sea became so rough that instead of hoisting the 
anchor it became necessary to put out others, as the wind 
was driving us on shore. Every one then commenced 
to examine his conscience, and prayed thrice in two 
hours’ time. By midnight we had lost all our anchors, 
to the number of seven, so that not having more and 
not knowing what to do further, our pilots called out 
that each one should strive to save himself as soon as 
the vessel touched the land, and being exhausted they 
went to lie down on their beds. It was already a long 
time since the captain had taken to his, on account of 
the great pain which his hand gave him, as it was in a 
dreadful condition. As for me, as the moon was 
shining, I leant against the bulwarks of the vessel 
watching how the billows urged it towards the shore. 
Whild I was in this position the vessel touched land, 
and each one believed then that it would go to pieces. 
At this moment two sailors came to me to say that I 
need fear nothing, and they would take precautions 
to ensure our safety, but if God permitted us by His 
grace to reach the land I should reward them for their 
trouble. I exhorted them to do their best to save us, 
and told them there would be 500 dcus ready for them 
as soon as we reached the land. They were two Ham- 
burghers, who had seen me previously at Bandar- 
Abbas and Surat, and they well knew that I carried 



312 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOH m 


all my goods on my person, without having need of 
camels or mules to carry them. As soon as I pro- 
mised them this sum they took a spar of wood of the 
thickness of a. rnan’s thigh and 8 or lo feet long, 
attaching to it thick ropes in five or six places, to each 
of which they allowed a length of only 3 or 4 feet. 
As they worked at it I kept my eyes constantly fixed 
in the direction of the land, and I observed that the 
vessel did not go straight as it had done previously. 
I feared that it was only the darkness which made me 
think so, for the moon began to set. I hastened at 
once to the compass to assure myself, and I saw as a 
matter of fact that the wind had altogether changed 
and came from the land. Immediately I cried out to 
the sailors that the wind had become favourable, and 
at the same moment the boatswain, who directs all that 
appertains to the vessel, made a great noise and called 
all the sailors. He also hailed the fourteen men whom 
they had placed in the large boat, believing that they 
were there still ; but no one replied, and we saw at 
daybreak that the cable had parted, and we were never 
able to ascertain what had become of them. As for 
the captain, he was unable to rise on account of a 
severe attack of fever which the pain in his hand had 
caused him. At first every one took courage, although 
they were in difficulty as to how they should steer the 
vessel, the top of the rudder being broken. In order 
to remedy this evil the pilot set a small sail, which was 
set first on one side and then on the other as he 
directed, and a rope was tied to the rudder to make it 
work, for it was only the socket above which was 
broken, where they were consequently unable to fix 
the piece (tiller) which comes on board for the steers- 



CHAP. XX 


ESCAPE FROM SHIPWRECK 


313 


man. At length the wind blew from the north-east, 
and the darker night became, on account of the setting 
of the moon, the more the wind freshened and each 
one gave thanks to God. We were nevertheless not 
beyond all danger, because it was necessary for us to 
pass three great rocks which projected above the water, 
but which we were unable to see, the night being so 
dark. When ships come to this port where we had 
taken the rice, they do not generally pass (inside) these 
rocks ; but our captain, as he had but little time to 
spare for loading, brought his vessel as closely as 
possible to the mouth of the river for the convenience 
of those who carried the rice, who were in consequence 
able to make more frequent trips. At length by God’s 
grace we were, at daybreak, some 3 or 4 leagues from 
the land. Then we held a consultation in order to 
settle what direction we should take, because we had 
no anchors left. Some advised that we should return 
to Goa to winter there, others that we should go to 
Point de Galle, which is the first town which the 
Dutch took from the Portuguese in the Island of 
Ceylon, for we were about equidistant from both, and 
the wind was equally favourable for both places. My 
opinion was that we should not take the route to Goa, 
but that for Point de Galle ; because it was to be 
feared that by going to Goa the sailors, who are much 
addicted to drink, would say or commit some folly 
which would give an occasion to the Inquisition for 
arresting them, joined to which there are in that town 
many facilities for dissipation, so that when it would be 
time to put to sea again, the captain would not find, 
it may be, a single man in his vessel. But by going 
to Point de Galle there would be no danger, it 



314 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK rn 


would be to go to friends, and we should be able to 
change to another vessel in order to continue the 
voyage ; this in fact happened. However we w'ere 
always . in terror lest some tempest might not come 
and throw us on land, not having a single anchor 
left to moor the vessel with. 

Among our sailors there was, by chance, one who 
had served for many years in the same vessel, who 
said that certainly there was at the bottom of the hold 
a very heavy anchor, but that it had only one arm. 
Although we desired to get it, we foresaw great difficulty 
on account of the quantity of goods which were in the 
vessel. Nevertheless it was resolved to move the 
whole, and four or five very skilful carpenters, who had 
worked at the house at Gombroon for the Company, 
and were returning to Batavia, said that if they could 
only get up the anchor they would fix it so as to work 
as well as if it had two arms. This they did, and in 
two days both the anchor and the rudder were in a 
condition to serve us. It cost three or four cases of 
Shiraz wine, which were distributed to all those who 
assisted in removing the goods and getting out the 
anchor — for the purpose of inciting them to work well. 

Eight days afterwards we found that we were off 
Point de Galle, and we took in some of our sails in 
order to gain the port, one of the worst in all India, 
on account of the rocks, which are at a level with the 
water in many places. It is for this reason that as 
soon as a vessel is sighted at sea the Governor-General 
sends two pilots to direct and bring her into port. 
But as we had both weather and sea sufficiently 
favourable, the captain and pilots, who had never 
been there before, not realising that we had passed 



CHAP. X-K 


POINT DE GALLE 


316 


the reefs, which they thought were nearer to land, and 
seeing that no pilot came to bring the vessel into port, 
turned to sea again ; this caused much surprise to the 
Governor and the pilots, who did not come out because 
they saw that we had passed the danger. The wind then 
commencing to change, drove us 9 or 10 leagues out to 
sea, and consequently we were two or three days beat- 
ing about before we could remake the port. If the 
wind had driven us a little farther to sea we should 
have been obliged to go to winter at Masulipatam, in 
the Gulf of Bengal. At length the pilots of Point de 
Galle having come out for us, we entered the port 
and landed on the 12th of May. I immediately went 
to visit the Governor Madsuere,^ who is at present 
General at Batavia, and he did me the honour to 
invite me to eat always with him during the sojourn 
which I made there. 

I did not find anything remarkable in this town, 
and there remains scarcely anything but the ruins, 
and mines, and the marks which the cannons made 
when the Dutch besieged it and drove away the 
Portuguese. The Company gave land and sites for 
building to those who wished to dwell there, and had 
already erected two good bastions, which command 
the port. If it had accomplished the design which 
it then formed, it would have made of this town a fine 
place. 

The Dutch, before they had captured all the settle- 
ments which the Portuguese had in the Island of 
Ceylon, from whence they have been entirely driven, 
persuaded themselves that the trade of this island 
would yield them enormous sums if they were sole 
1 In the edition of 1713 he is called Masudere. 



316 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


masters. This might have happened if they had kept 
to the agreement which they had made with the King 
of Kandy — who is the King of the country — when 
they began to make war with the Portuguese. But 
they broke faith with him, and that gave them a very 
bad character in these parts. 

The treaty with the King of Kandy was so drawn 
that this King was always to be in charge of the passes, 
with 18,000 or 20,000 men, to prevent the reinforce- 
ments which might come from Colombo, Negombo, 
Manar, and many other places which the Portuguese 
held along the coast. And the Dutch were to bring 
in their large vessels as many troops as were sufficient 
to besiege Point de Galle both by sea and land. 
They agreed, also, with the King of Achin that he 
should hold the coast with a sufficient number of small 
armed frigates, as he always maintained a good number 
of them. 

The Dutch, having taken the town, began to repair 
some breaches, seeing which the King of Kandy sent 
to know when he might come there to receive pos- 
session of it. For it had been agreed in the event 
of the Dutch taking the town that they would give it 
back to the King, who by way of recompense was to 
give them a certain quantity of cinnamon every year, 
and, in case of necessity, to aid them as far as he was 
able. The Dutch replied to what the King had com- 
municated to them, that they were willing to hand 
over the town to him provided he paid them the costs 
of the war, which they said amounted to many millions ; 
but if he had possessed three kingdoms like his own 
he could not have paid half the sum. In truth money 
is scarce in that country, and I do not believe that the 



CHAP. XX 


CEYLON ELEPHANTS 


317 


King has ever seen a sum equal to 50,000 dczts ^ at one 
time. His whole trade consisted in cinnamon and 
elephants ; but since the Portuguese have been in 
India he has derived no profit from either. As for the 
elephants, that is a small matter, for only five or six 
are captured in a year ; but at the same time those of 
Ceylon are more highly esteemed than all the elephants 
of other countries, because they are more courageous 
in war ; and there is not a King in India who does 
not desire to have one. There should be related here 
a thing which it is possible one may have a difficulty 
in believing, but it is nevertheless quite true ; it is that 
when any king or noble possesses one of these Ceylon 
elephants, and when there is brought into its presence 
some other one from the places where the merchants 
obtain them, as Achin, Siam, Arakan, Pegu, the 
Kingdom of BhutAn, the Kingdom of Assam, the 
territories of Cochin and the coast of Melinda,® as 
soon as these latter elephants see one of Ceylon, by a 
natural instinct they pay it reverence by placing the ends 
of their trunks on the ground, and then elevating them.® 

1 ;£iI,250. 

- This reference to Melinda would seem to imply that the African 
elephant was domesticated in Tavernier’s time (see vol. i, p. 277). 

3 Sir Emerson Tennent, alluding to the common belief that Tavernier 
had made a statement to this effect, adds that a reference to the 
original shows that Tavernier’s observations are not only fanciful in 
themselves but are restricted to the supposed excellence of the Ceylon 
animal in This statement is simply incomprehensible, since 

Tavernier’s original passage, which is here translated, is quoted in full in 
a footnote on the same page {Nat. Hist. Ceylon, pp. 209, 2 1 o.) (See ante^ 
Book I, chap, xviii, p. 278.) Fryer also says that the Ceylon elephants 
exact homage from all others, which prostrate themselves submissively 
before them {Account, Calcutta Edition, p. 169). In reference to the 
fact that the elephants of Sumatra have points of affinity with the Ceylon 
variety, it has been suggested that the original stock of the Sumatra ele- 



318 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


It is true that the elephants which the great nobles 
keep, when brought before them to be examined 
whether they are in good condition, make a sort of 
salute thrice with their trunk. This I have often seen ; 
but they are trained to it, and their masters teach them 
to do so when young. 

The King of Achin, with whom the Dutch failed 
to keep their promise, had other means for revenging 
himself than the King of Kandy, because the Dutch 
were not allowed to ship the pepper which comes from 
his territories ; for a long time he refused them permis- 
sion, and even declared war upon them ; and without 
this pepper their trade could not prosper. 

It is the kind of pepper which we call “ small,” and 
all Orientals prefer it, because without skinning or 
crushing they place it whole on their plates of rice, as I 
have elsewhere said.^ At length the Dutch were com- 
pelled to agree with the King of Achin, and ambas- 
sadors were sent from one side and the other for this 
purpose. He who arrived on behalf of the King at 
Batavia, was treated with much magnificence. When 
he was about to depart the General and all his Council 
entertained him splendidly, and the ladies sat at table 
— this surprised this Muhammadan ambassador very 
much, who was not accustomed to see women drink 
and eat with men. But that which astonished him still 
more was that at the end of the repast, after having 
drunk many healths, they drank that of the Queen of 

phants was introduced in the domesticated condition from Ceylon. It is 
on record that some elephants sent as a present to the Sultan of Sulu (or 
Soolo) by the East Indian Company, as he was unable to maintain 
them, were let loose on Cape Unsang in Borneo. (See Homaday, Two 
Years in the Jungle, p. 220.) 

1 See p. 14. 



CHAV. XX 


THE KING OF ACHIN 


319 


Achin, who ruled the state during the minority of the 
King, her son. And in order to honour him still more, 
the General desired Madame la Generale to kiss the 
ambassador. The King and Queen of Achin did not 
receive the ambassador who was sent to them from 
Batavia less well. He was M. Croc, who for fifteen 
years suffered from a languishing sickness ; and it was be- 
lieved that some one had administered to him some kind 
of slow poison. On the occasion of the third audience 
which he had with the King, who knew that he had lived 
for so long a time in languor and without appetite, he 
asked him if he had ever formerly kept any girl of the 
country, and how he had left her, if by mutual agree- 
ment or whether he had sent her away by force. He 
admitted that he had left one in order to get married 
in his own country, and that since that time he had 
always been languishing and indisposed, upon which 
the King said to three of his physicians, who were by 
his side, that having heard the cause of the ambas- 
sador’s sickness he would give them fifteen days to cure 
him, and that if they did not accomplish it in that time 
he would cause them all to be executed. These 
physicians having replied that they would answer to 
him for the cure of the ambassador, provided he con- 
sented to take the remedies which they would give 
him, M. Croc resolved to consent. They gave him in 
the morning a decoction, and in the evening a small 
pill, and at the end of nine days a great fit of vomiting 
seized him. It was thought he would die of the strange 
efforts which he made ; and at length he vomited a 
bundle of hair as large as a small nut, after which he 
was at once healed. Subsequently the King took him 
to a rhinoceros hunt, and invited him to give the 



320 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


mortal shot to the animal. As soon as it was killed they 
cut off the horn, which the King also presented to the 
ambassador ; and at the conclusion of the hunt there 
was a great feast. At the end of it the King drank to 
the health of the General of Batavia and his wife, and 
ordered one of his own wives to kiss the ambassador. 
On his departure he presented him with a pebble of 
the size of a goose’s egg, in which large veins of gold 
were to be seen as you see the tendons in the hand of 
a man, and it is thus that gold occurs in this country. 

M. Croc, when at Surat as chief of the factory, 
broke the pebble in two, and gave half to M. Con- 
stant, who, subordinate to him, held the highest 
authority there, to whom, when he was returning to 
Holland, I offered i^o pistoles for it in order to present 
it to the late Monseigneur le Due d’ Orleans, but he 
would not consent to part with it. 



CHAPTER XXI 


Departure of the Author from the Island ^Ceylon, 
and his arrival at Batavia 

On the 25th of July^ we left Point de Galle on a 
different vessel from that upon which we had arrived, 
because, on its being examined, it was found that it 
could not make the journey without danger. Accord- 
ingly, all the goods were discharged from it and tran- 
shipped to that in which we embarked for Batavia. 

On the 2d of June^ we crossed the line, and on 
the 6th reached the island called Nazacos.® On the 
17th we sightednthe coast of Sumatra, on the i8th 
the island of Ingagne,^ and on the 19th the island of 
Fortune. On the 20th we saw several other small 
islands, and the coast of Java, and among these 
islands there are three which are called Prince’s 
Islands. On the 21st we saw the island of Bantam, 
and on the 22d we anchored in the roads at Batavia. 

1 The July of the original and the June of the edition of 1713 
appear to be both wrong, as the month must, I think, have been May. 

2 In the 1713 edition this is given, I think incorrectly, as July — 
June appears to be correct. 

^ Not identified, but it may be remarked that nusa is Javanese for 
a small island, and like pulo is used as a prefix to the true name. 
(Crawfurd, Dictionary). 

^ Not identified ; perhaps it may be for Indragiri, a Malay State on 
the coast of Sumatra, 


VOL. II 


Y 



322 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


On the following day I landed, and went to salute 
General Vanderlin and M. Caron ^ the Director- 
General, who was the second person in the council. 

On the 25 th, two days after my arrival, the General 
sent one of his guards to invite me to dinner, where 
there were assembled, M. Caron, two other coun- 
cillors, the Avocat-Fiscal, the Major, and their wives. 
Whilst we were at table they conversed about the 
news from foreign countries, and principally of the 
court of the King of Persia, and after dinner some 
began to play at backgammon, while awaiting the cool- 
ness in order to take exercise outside the town by the 
river’s bank, where there are very fine places for bath- 
ing. As for the General, he went to his office, where 
he asked me to accompany him. After some conver- 
sation on indifferent matters he asked me for what 
purpose I had come to Batavia. I told him that I had 
principally come to see so renowned a place ; and 
having had an opportunity of doing service to the 
Company at the request of the Chief of the factory at 
Vengurla, I had been led to undertake the voyage, 
as he might see for himself by the letter which he 
had written to him. I told him, at the same time, 
as the Commander of Vengurla had requested me, of 
the discovery which had been made by a caravel of 
Portugal, which a storm had driven into a bay situ- 
ated 30 leagues from the Cape of Good Hope, as I 
have related at length in the description of the town 
of Goa.^ The Commander thought that the General 

^ M. Caron was afterwards appointed Chief of the French Company 
at Surat. (See Imperial Gazetteer^ vol. iv, p. 451.) 

^ See Book I, chap, xiv, p. 216, for accounts of this discovery. The 
details there given are somewhat different. 



CHAP. XXI 


THE GENERAL AT BATAVIA 


323 


would be able to send a small vessel there from Batavia, 
and that by conveying the news I would do a service to 
the Company ; and it was also with this in view that he 
offered me a passage in the vessel which was in the roads 
at Vengurla. After I had finished my account of the 
matter to the General, he thanked me somewhat coldly, 
as being a thing of small importance, although I have 
since learnt that he sent to seek for the bay, but the 
vessel was unable to find it. After about half an hour’s 
interview I left him in his office, into which three 
councillors entered at the same moment, and as I 
left he said that if I would wait for a little we 
should go together to promenade outside the town. I 
then joined Madame la Gen^rale, and the other ladies 
who were keeping her company, and one hour after- 
wards two trumpets commenced to sound. The 
General and Madame, with four of the wives of the 
councillors, entered a carriage with six horses, and 
the councillors rode on horseback. I was allotted a 
horse with Persian saddle and bridle, the furniture of 
which was very beautiful. There are always forty or 
fifty saddle-horses in the stables of the General, for 
there is not a vessel that does not bring him some, 
either from Arabia or Persia or other places. A com- 
pany of cavalry marched in front of the General’s 
carriage, each dragoon having a collar of buffalo skin 
and long scarlet hose with silver lace, the hat with a 
bundle of plumes, the great scarf with a fringe of silver, 
the sword-guard and spurs of massive silver, and all 
the horses had very beautiful trappings. Three 
bodyguards marched at each door carrying halberds, 
and being well clad. Each had a doublet of yellow 
satin, and the upper part of the hose of scarlet covered 



324 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


with silver lace, and below with yellow silk, and very 
fine linen. Behind the carriage there marched a com- 
pany of infantry, besides another which went an hour 
or two in advance to clear the way. As for the coun- 
cillors, when they move about, as well as when they 
are in their houses, they have each two musketeers 
for their guard, and when they wish for horses the 
General’s equerry sends them what they require. They 
have also their small boats in order to row about either 
on the sea, the river, or on the canals, where each 
of them has his garden. Our promenade was not 
long, the reason being that when leaving the fort two 
vessels were seen approaching, no one being able to 
say what they were. As the General and councillors 
were impatient to hear the news, they returned to the 
fort sooner than they had intended ; and as soon as we 
had re-entered I took leave of the General, the coun- 
cillors, and the ladies, and withdrew to my lodging. 

During three or four days I received numerous 
visits, this caused me no small expenditure, because 
custom requires that when any one comes to see you 
you offer him wine. One hundred ^czis are soon spent ; 
for a pint of wine, of about Paris measure, holds but 
four glasses. Spanish wine, when cheap, costs an dcu 
at Batavia, Rhine and French wine cost two, and one 
must pay 40 sols for a pint of beer, whether English or 
of Broncevimont.^ 

The greatest joy known to the people of Batavia 
is experienced when vessels come from Holland, for 
they bring all kinds of drinks, which the publicans buy 
from the Company, it being permitted also to every 

^ These prices in English money were, for Spanish wine, 4s. 6d. ; 
for Rhine and French wine, 9s. ; and for a pint of beer, 3s. 



CHAP. XXI 


DRINKING HABITS AT BATAVIA 


326 


private person to buy them. But be it that they find 
more pleasure in drinking at the publichouses than in 
their own houses, be it that it is more convenient to 
them, when they wish to amuse themselves together, they 
generally make all their rejoicings in these places. It 
is a time of great festival when these new drinks arrive, 
and you meet women and girls in the streets who 
wager you for a pint or two of wine or beer. Whether 
one loses or gains, out of honour one never allows the 
women to pay, and there come others in addition at 
the same time to whom the occasion demands you 
should drink their healths. This often empties the 
purses of young people. 


A 



CHAPTER XXIP 


Concerning an affair which was raised unseasonably 
for the Author in the Cotmcil at Batavia 

There are two Councils in Batavia, the Council of 
the fort, at which the General presides, where the affairs 
of the Company are discussed ; and the Council that 
sits in the Town Hall, and deals with the police and the 
minor disputes which arise among the citizens. M. 
Faure, one of the members of this Town Council, was 
among the number of those who came to visit me on 
my arrival, and during the space of nine or ten days 
he, together with one of his friends, was with me four 
times. Both spoke frequently of M. Constant, who 
had been commander at Gombroon, and was for 
many years the second person of the factory at Surat, 
where he had amassed much wealth. He had often 
trusted me with a part of it, and we had always been 
good friends. One day, as I was about leaving Surat 
in order to go to the diamond mine, he asked me to 
purchase (diamonds) on his account to the extent of 
16,000^ rupees worth, giving me a letter of credit for 

1 This chapter is omitted in the English Translation by John 
Phillips, but an abstract of its contents is included in chapter xxi. 

^ 800. (See Index for further accounts of this traffic carried on 

by Tavernier on behalf of the Dutch officials.) 

At a later period we find English officials engaging in the same trade. 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT’S DIAMONDS 


327 


that sum at Golconda, where it was paid to me, and I 
invested it as he desired. I expected on my return to 
find him at Surat ; but during my journey he had 
received orders to start for Batavia at once, and as 
soon as he got there he married the widow of General 
Vandime and went with her to Holland. I was 
much surprised on my return to Surat to find that he 
had left without giving orders to any of his friends, 
whether Dutch or English, to receive what I had for 
him, and send it to him by one of the vessels which 
go to England. Having remained at Surat about 
two months, and wishing to travel, in order not to risk 
what M. Constant had entrusted to me I placed the 
whole in the hands of Sir Francis Breton, who was 
the second person in the factory of the English 
Company at Surat, who, at M. Constant’s request, 
afterwards forwarded it to him in Holland, I 
had previously asked the Dutch Commander, named 
Arnebar, to be good enough to take charge of this 
parcel, he being a friend of M. Constant ; but he 
excused himself altogether, telling me that if the 
General or Council at Batavia came to know that he 
had such a thing in his hands they would treat him as 
a receiver who had not declared, in other words, he 
would be deposed from his office and all his property 
confiscated. 

One day, then, while I was at Batavia, M. Faure, 
whom I have just mentioned, came to see me with 

(See Colonel Yule’s recently published account of the Pitt diamond in 
Hedge's Diary ^ Hakluyt Society,) Another Pitt, who was Governor of 
Madras from 1698 to 1709? namely, George Morton Pitt, appears to 
have been somewhat notable, also, for his private trade in diamonds. 
(See Kistna Manual^ p. 106 and Wheeler’s Madras in the Olden 
Time^ p, 505.) 



328 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


KOOK III 


three others, bringing a large bottle of Rheims wine 
and another of English beer. For my part I had 
contributed a collation, and as we began to drink they 
asked me if I had not heard the news of M. Constant 
which had come by land while I was at Sukat ; to 
which I replied that I had not received any, neither 
by sea nor land, since he had left Batavia. They 
expressed surprise at this reply, and told me that 
they were much astonished, that having been such 
great friends, and having done such considerable trade 
together which lasted still, he had not made me 
acquainted with his news. I saw from the first that 
they were come with no other design than to seek to 
discover whether I had with me the parcel of diamonds 
which I had bought at the mine for M. Constant, or 
whether I had left it with some Dutchman to send 
to him. I thought it advisable to remove this doubt 
from their minds, and that unless I did so they would 
be unable to drink the wine they had brought, 
with comfort. Without keeping them longer in 
suspense, therefore, I told them that I was astonished 
that they had not spoken to me of this matter on the 
first occasion when they had done me the honour to 
visit me, and I perceived clearly that they wished to 
know if the last time I had been at the diamond mine 
M. Constant had not given me a commission to buy 
for him ; that they need not have brought wine for that 
purpose to make me drink, because I was altogether 
different from the majority of men, who speak much 
and say more than they know when they have drunk, 
but, as for me, it is then I talk least ; nevertheless, 
since I desired to satisfy them, so that they might not 
have any regret forj^their good wine, I would tell them 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT’S DIAMONDS 


329 


the truth frankly. It is true, then, I told them, that M. 
Constant not only gave me a commission to buy him 
a parcel of diamonds, but he has also given me money 
to pay for them, and I purchased them for 16,000 
rupees. I had no sooner finished speaking than M. 
Faure, turning to the three others, “ Gentlemen,” said 
he, “you will bear me witness that M. Tavernier has 
16,000 rupees worth of diamonds for M. Constant, 
which he left me an order to receive when he parted for 
Holland.” I replied to him without disturbing my- 
self, that if he wished for them he would have to run 
after them, but that I did not believe he would over- 
take them ; that it was more than six months since I 
had dispatched them by land, and that I was much 
surprised at his having taken this commission, and 
wondered how M. Constant and he could have known 
that I would go to Batavia. I saw that it annoyed 
him to find that he had not got what he expected, and 
as they did not wish to drink any more they all four 
departed. 

On the following day, early in the morning, an 
officer of the Company handed me a summons, which 
cited me to appear at 1 1 o’clock before the council of 
the town, where the Avocat Fiscal was present to take 
the case in hands on behalf of the Company. I did 
not fail to be present at the Town Hall at the hour 
indicated, when, immediately, these gentlemen made 
me enter, and with great compliments asked me if it 
was true that M. Constant had asked me to make 
an investment in diamonds to the amount of 16,000 
rupees, and also where they were. I said that as 
regards the purchase of the diamonds I had indeed 
made it, but that I knew not where they were, because 



330 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


more than six months had elapsed since I had for- 
warded them to him from Surat by land. Upon that 
these gentlemen of the law delivered sentence, by 
which it was affirmed that it was not for M. Faure to 
mix in the matter, but it was for the Avocat Fiscal to 
follow it up • that at that time M. Constant was in 
the Company’s service, and that, without having de- 
frauded, he could not out of his wages have amassed 
so large a sum. At this mention of his having de- 
frauded the Company I was unable to prevent myself 
from laughing ; this astonished them, and the President 
of the Council asked me why I laughed. I told him 
that it was at seeing that he was astonished at the 
fact that M. Constant had defrauded the Company 
of 16,000 rupees, and that if he had only carried off 
so much, it would have been a small matter, adding 
that there was scarcely a servant of the Company who 
had held the offices which M. Constant had held, 
and had enjoyed the opportunity of trading, as he 
had, without fear of the Fiscal, who had not at least 
made 100,000 dcus} There were two or three in the 
Council, then present, who were uneasy at hearing me 
talk in this way, as these remarks particularly affected 
them. For to say the truth, the commanders and 
those subordinate to them in authority in the factories 
know well how to appropriate large sums for their 
own benefit, to the great detriment of the Company ; 
and as they cannot do so without having an under- 
standing with the broker, he does the same on his 
own account, those below him also taking what they 
can. I made an estimate once of all the money of 
which the Company is defrauded on the trade in each 

1 ,£22,500. 



CHAP. XXII 


FRAUDS BY DUTCH OFFICIALS 


331 


factory, and I ascertained that as they annually defraud 
it in all the factories taken together to the extent of 
1,500,000 or 1,600,000 livres^ they have abundant 
opportunity for consoling themselves. For to speak 
but of Persia alone, I have known commanders who, 
both by the sale of spices and on the purchase of silks, 
have placed apart for themselves in one year more 
than 100,000 piastres? They practice marvellous 
artifices which it is difficult for the Company, especially 
the directors and shareholders of the Company, who 
are in Holland, to discover. For, as regards the 
commanders in India, the fact must become very 
patent before the General of Batavia and his council 
have recourse to law, and most frequently the com- 
manders close the mouth of the Avocat Fiscal, to 
whom they make a present which amounts to more 
than the third part which would come to him if 
all were confiscated, another third belongs to the 
Company, and the other to the Hospital. Thus all 
passes in silence, for there is not one of these com- 
manders who has not his patron at Batavia, to whom 
he sends valuable presents yearly, joined to which 
there, is not one of these gentlemen of the council 
who has not done the same himself. Moreover, if 
any one who is cognisant of an injury done by a 
commander to the Company reports it to the General, 
he is certain never to be appointed to any factory, 
and sooner or later an opportunity is found for remov- 
ing him from the office which he holds, and he is sent 
as a soldier to some island to end his life miserably. 

As for the trade which these commanders do on 
their own account, there is no one w'ho knows better 

1 ;£ I 12,500 to 1 20,000. 2 ;£ 22 , 500 . 



332 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK m 


about it than the poor sailors, who being sometimes very 
badly treated by the commanders themselves, or the 
officers of the vessels, when they go on shore re- 
port to the chief of the factory that such an one has 
so many bales of goods on his private account. Most 
frequently the chief of the factory, who knows his part, 
sends to advise the person to whom the goods belong 
to have them removed, and to arrange to have them 
carried on shore by night. In order to give him time 
to discharge all, the informer is so well supplied with 
drink that he is drunk for one or two days, and when 
all has been removed the commander goes to the 
vessel to make an examination, well assured that he 
will find nothing. Then the poor sailor or soldier, for 
the falsehood which they force him to believe he has 
told, is severely punished, his wages are confiscated, 
and in most cases he is sent for three or four years to 
work on the galley which goes to load up with stones. 
There are, then, some of these commanders who have 
defrauded the Company, and have returned to Holland 
with great booty, having 400,000 or 500,000 livres'^ 
worth of diamonds, pearls, ambergris, and other goods 
which occupy but small space. For if all is not well 
concealed, and if the Company is able to discover it, 
it is lost for them, and their wages are confiscated. 
But they have wonderful ways for escaping, even 
when they have bulky goods, as calicoes and other 
things which occupy much space, for all cannot go 
to the places where diamonds are to be purchased, and 
moreover they more frequently experience loss than 
gain by carrying them, while on coarse goods there 
is always much profit to be made. 

;£30,ooo to ;£37 ,Soo- 



CHAP. XXII 


FRAUDS BY DUTCH OFFICIALS 


333 


As the captain and other officers of the vessel 
strive to do private trade as well as the commanders, 
knowing that it will be difficult to take their goods 
out of the vessels without being discovered, they some- 
times discharge them on the coast of Norway, making 
believe that it is bad weather which has driven them 
thither. Moreover, when the Dutch are at war with 
the English, they send vessels of war to meet those 
coming from India, and into these vessels those who 
wish to defraud the Company tranship their bales of 
goods, before arriving in Holland. They also have 
recourse, for the same purpose, to the fleet of herring 
fishers when they meet them. In short, there is no 
kind of artifice of which they do not make use. 
But when the Company entertains a suspicion that 
any one has exceeded, it orders the commanders to 
undress and put on other clothes, and more than once 
diamonds have been found in those which were taken 
off. In conclusion, it has been remarked that the 
majority of those who have defrauded the Company 
and have returned to Holland with great wealth have 
not left their heirs any the richer ; all this wealth 
being, as it were, evaporated in a few years. This 
proves that wealth ill-acquired does not profit. 

Returning to the affair which had been stirred up 
against me at Batavia. On the sentence which the 
members of the Council had given, that the Avocat 
Fiscal should take the cause in hand on the Company’s 
behalf, three days afterwards he sent me many pages 
of paper containing written charges, so that I might 
reply to each. The first demanded that^ I should 
declare to what extent M. Constant and I had traded 
together since we had known one another. The others 



334 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


were only nonsense, and among others thatwhich ordered 
me to reply to them at all, I, who was in no wise respon- 
sible to the Company, and had only come to Batavia 
to render it a service, and consequently need trouble 
myself very little about the FiscaVs order. There was 
a special query which stated that the General and his 
council wished to know what M. Constant had done 
at Bandar AbbAs, where he had been sent as com- 
mander ; that they were aware of the fact that we 
were together day and night, and that consequently I 
must be well acquainted with his affairs. They were right 
in this, but I was not bound to render an account to them. 
This lasted fully four or five weeks, during which an 
officer came to summon me several times to accompany 
him to the Town Hall to give a reply. That which I 
gave was always the same, that I knew nothing of M. 
Constant’s affairs, and that when he did anything he 
did not call me in to give him advice. As they saw 
they could get nothing from me by sweetness, they 
commenced to threaten me, saying they would arrest 
me. I replied boldly that I did not fear them, and 
that if they arrested me I had the honour to serve 
a Prince who was the late Monseigneur le Due 
d’ Orleans, who would get me in safety out of their 
hands, and would himself resent the affront they had 
done me. At the same time I departed from their 
presence without saying another word, and they also 
said nothing to me. Fifteen days passed without their 
speaking of this affair, and during this time I went to 
take exercise and even to dine with some of these 
gentlemen. One day the Avocat Fiscal, who had 
read much and liked to hear about foreign countries, 
asked me to supper ; when we had left the table he 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT 


335 


took me apart and told me that he had to summon 
me on the following day, having received an order 
from the General, who wished to know, absolutely, what 
I had seen M. Constant do at Gombroon. “ If it is 
to say what I have seen,” I replied, “ I shall do so 
willingly, but I desire to be in the presence of the 
judges.” Morning having come, the officer did not 
fail to summon me. I followed him forthwith, and 
having entered the chamber, the President asked 
me at first if I would tell them something of what I 
had seen of M. Constant. I said, “ I would satisfy 
him, and that I desired to give the account at full 
length,” with which the President and the Council told 
me they were quite content. As they had ordered 
silence for me, and I saw they awaited what I had to 
say to them with impatience, I spoke to them in the 
following manner : — 

“ The day on which M. Constant disembarked at 
Gombroon the Khdn or Governor of the town and 
country made much of him, and kept him to supper, 
together with those who had accompanied him. The 
repast was magnificent, and the dishes were much 
better prepared than usual ; I have been at many 
feasts of Khdns or Governors of Provinces in Persia, 
where they know of nothing but ragouts, not even 
understanding how to roast a fowl properly. But at 
this repast all was well arranged, and it had the 
appearance as if a Frank cook had a hand in it. All 
the baladines of Gombroon were present, to dance in 
their own manner according to custom, and the repast 
was accomplished with much gaiety. On the following 
day M. Constant had at dinner several Franks, and 
at the close of the repast the Khdn sent one of his 



336 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK III 


officers to present his compliments to Commander Con- 
stant, and to tell him that he would come to supper 
with him ; this he received very well, in consequence 
of his appreciation of the honour which the Khdn 
wished to do him. Compliments being finished, the 
Commander took a large glass and drank to the health 
of the Khdn, and all those who were at table did like- 
wise. As soon as the officer had left, the Commander 
asked some of those who were dining with him, in 
what manner a governor should be treated when he 
did the honour to a commander of coming to see him 
at home ; there was one who told him that the first 
care he should have would be that as soon as night 
had come he should light numbers of lamps, both out 
and inside the house. In that country these consist 
of little saucers full of oil attached to the walls of the 
house, and at a distance of about one foot from each 
other. But the Commander desiring to do more 
honour than that to the Khdn and to the Company, in- 
stead of these lamps ordered white wax candles to be 
placed throughout, and both within and without the 
house there was light everywhere. The Khdn declared 
himself to be highly pleased with this liberal expendi- 
ture, which was done to specially honour him ; and all 
the merchants, both Christians and Muhammadans, 
were also surprised at it. It is true,” said I to these 
members of the Council, “that you know that this 
wax does not cost so much to the Company as it does 
to private persons, because all the Dutch vessels which 
come from Mocha carry much of it, as it is very cheap 
there. 

“ The baladines were present in large numbers at 
this repast, in order to amuse the company with their 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT’S PROCEEDINGS 


337 


dances and their graceful attitudes, for there was 
money to be earned, as they know that the com- 
manders pay them well, and that it is not with them 
as with the Khdn, who generally considers he has paid 
liberally when he gives them supper. 

“ On the following day those who were in charge 
of these baladines (for each troupe had an old woman 
as guardian and directress, whom the baladines call 
their mother) came to pay their respects to M. Con- 
stant, who showed himself so liberal toward them that 
there was not one who asked for anything from the 
guests — this is very contrary to their usual custom. 
Some of those who had slept there, and had passed 
all the night in making these women dance, were much 
surprised, on leaving in the morning, at not being 
compelled to put their hands in their purses, and took 
occasion to extol the generosity of the Commander 
who had so liberally paid for all. Throughout the 
night the signals which were on the terrace of the 
lodge were fired, and at each health a dozen were fired 
to warn the vessels to make a salute. 

“ Two hours before sunrise the Khdn rose from the 
place where he had seated himself on arrival, which 
was where they had drunk and eaten, and his officers 
bore him away, observing that the wine began to heat 
him. As soon as he had left, a part of the company 
returned to eat and drink and the others to see the 
baladines dance, and the debauch lasted till ten o’clock 
in the morning. Each one, when leaving, remarked to 
another, ‘ It must be admitted that this new Com- 
mander is honourable, and does all things with a good 
grace.’ 

“When M. Constant,” I continued to these 


VOL. II 


z 



338 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


gentlemen of the Council, “arrived at Gombroon, and 
had to go to the dwelling of the Khdn, the finest 
horses in the Company’s stable were brought to him. 
That which was for the Commander had rich brocaded 
trappings, but as the bridle was only of silver he 
appeared to be surprised at it, and asked why there 
was not a golden bridle on his horse, considering that 
he was not inferior to the other commanders who had 
preceded him at Gombroon. They told him that, by 
order of the Company, the Commander Vanderlin 
had sent the two golden bridles which were at Gom- 
broon to Batavia, the gold of one of which weighed 
600, and of the other 450 ducats, and that it had been 
ordered that, for the future, no commander should use 
one of gold on his horse, but must content himself 
with one of silver. As I saw that this annoyed M. 
Constant, I told him privately that it would be easy 
for him to have a golden bridle on his horse without 
the Company being able to reproach him. That he 
had only to send to the Khdn the present which he 
had to make him on behalf of the Company on a little 
more liberal scale than had the other commanders, his 
predecessors, and he should see that he would soon 
have a golden bridle. M. Constant believed me, and 
made a very handsome present to the Khdn. 

“ These presents consist generally of all kinds of 
spices, porcelain, Japanese cabinets, Dutch cloths, and 
other things of that kind. But the best part of the 
present was a ring of diamonds for which he had paid 
me 1500 dcus/'^ and 1000 ducats of gold with which the 
King caused a golden bridle to be made, which he 
sent as a present to the Commander ; it weighed but 

‘ £337 : los. 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT’S PROCEEDINGS 


339 


643 ducats of gold, the balance having remained in the 
Khan's purse. It is the custom in Persia, when a 
stranger makes a present to a great person, that he 
gives another in return, but certainly when one makes 
one to a King he does not ever receive in return nearly 
the value of that which he has given. The Khdn was 
altogether amazed with so magnificent a present, and 
although, according to custom, he should have sent 
his, on the following day, which is usually a valuable 
horse, and sometimes two, he waited for five or six 
days, because it required that time to make the bridle. 
As soon as it was finished the Khdn sent two fine 
horses to the Commander, one with the bridle of gold, 
and the other with a bridle of silver, the saddles being 
of the Turkish pattern with brocade of gold and silver. 
Out of politeness it was necessary that the Commander 
when mounting his horse had the golden bridle put 
on, and thus the Company was not able to say any- 
thing.” 

This was the account which I gave to the Council 
of Batavia of what I had seen at Gombroon in refer- 
ence to M. Constant, and it should be remarked, 
before going further, that all the presents which the 
kings and great nobles make to the commanders and 
the other principal officers of the Company ought to 
be handed over, w’hen they go to Batavia, to the 
charge of the General of the Council as property 
belonging to the Company, but they are sometimes 
allowed to retain them. 

After having spoken in this way to these gentle- 
men of the Council of Batavia, and having told them 
ingenuously what M. Constant had done during the 
first days after his arrival at Gombroon, they wished 



340 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK III 


to know what had happened subscciuently, and told 
me that they had already been sufficicmtly informed of 
what I had just told them, but wished that I should let 
them know what trade M. Constant had done. It was 
then I began to speak to them in a different way, and 
told them I was not dependent on them and was not 
their spy. That if they wished to know so much they 
should have ascertained it when he was at Batavia, 
or they might write to him in Holland, and would be 
able by that means to satisfy themselves. The Presi- 
dent, who saw that I mocked them, rose from his place 
to talk with some of the councillors, and then told me 
that they would give me four days to reflect on my 
reply to the Council, both in reference to the trade 
which I had done with M. Constant, and that which 
I knew of his having done with other persons. Upon 
this I retired, without replying, and went to dine with 
one of the councillors without speaking further of the 
matter. 

The four days having expired, I waited for them 
to send for me, but they delayed eight days longer, 
after which they sent an officer, who told me that 
the President would expect me at the Council at 
II o’clock. Having entered the chamber, th.e. Avocat 
Fiscal delivered a long discourse, referring to my 
refusal to reply to the questions which had been given 
me in writing, and as for himself he required that I 
should be placed in gesselin, i.e. under arrest, until I 
had replied. I replied to that “ that I was not the 
least astonished at what he said, and that I believed 
the gentlemen of the Council would think more than 
once before they carried it into execution ; that if he 
wished me to reply to what he asked, it was necessary 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT’S PROCEEDINGS 


341 


to convey it to me in a language which I understood, 
and not in Dutch.” He replied to this “ that he had 
often heard me speak Dutch,” to which I responded 
“that in truth I did know something of the language, 
but did not know enough to enable me to read and 
understand chicanery.” As I perceived that he was 
offended by the use of the word chicanery, I said to 
him again in a firmer tone than before, “that I was 
not in receipt of wages from the Company, and that 
I had not been appointed to observe the conduct and 
actions of M. Constant.” The Council at length 
ordered the Fiscal to give me his questions in French ; 
this he did, and fixed the period for replying at eight 
days. I laughed at all these questions, being well 
assured that I was able to put an end to the proceed- 
ings whenever I pleased. I deferred replying for 
another eight days beyond the eight which they had 
given me ; but seeing that the Council began to be 
annoyed, I thought that it was time to put an end to 
the affair. 

As soon as the Fiscal had given me his questions 
in French, I communicated them to M. Potre, the 
ablest counsel in Batavia, who told me that, not being 
employed by the Company, I was not obliged to reply 
to any of these articles, nevertheless, being desirous 
of putting an end to the affair, I went to the President’s 
house shortly after sunrise, and he came to receive 
me in his sleeping garment, “preferring,” he said, “to 
come to me in that condition rather than make me 
wait while he dressed.” The reply which I made to 
this compliment was “that since he wished me absolutely 
to tell him all that I knew of M. Constant, I would 
conceal nothing that had come to my knowledge, even 



342 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


were it to the disadvantage of the General himself and 
many members of the Council, and of you yourself who 
urge me to speak,” I added, after he had made his 
guard withdraw, and he and I remained alone. I told 
him, then, that “ when leaving Surat to go to the 
diamond mine, M. Constant entrusted me with 
44,000^ rupees, asking me to expend it on diamonds, 
and especially on large stones, that my services would 
be well rewarded, and that as this sum belonged to 
the General he would be glad to have an opportunity 
of obliging him. Moreover, that the General himself 
had purchased from M. Constant, when he visited 
Batavia, all the parcels I had sold him while he was 
the second in authority at the factory of Surat. They 
were all stones which I had had cut, their value being 
more than 40,000 dcus?' As for the pearls which the 
said M. Constant had bought for the General during 
the time he was at Hormuz, I did not exactly know 
the value, but I so far knew that they included two 
pear-shaped pearls which cost 1 70 tomans? That I had 
also received somewhat considerable sums to invest 
for M. Carles Renal, M. Cam, and some others, and 
that he himself could not have forgotten that when 
M. Constant left Batavia to go to be Commander in 
Persia, he entrusted to him 36,000 rupees,^ asking 
him to give it to some of his friends to invest it in a 
parcel of diamonds. That the said M. Constant 
expected to find me at Surat in order to place this 
sum in my hands, but as I had left for Hormuz some 
days previously on an English vessel, he thought to 

^ £4950- 2 £9000. 

® ;5S86 : los., the toman being' equal to ; 9s. 

;£40So. 



CHAP. XXII 


M. CONSTANT’S PROCEEDINGS 


343 


find me there, where he would place the sum in my 
hands, supposing that during the same season I should 
return to India, and to the diamond mine. And in 
order to make you see,” I further said to the President, 
“how M. Constant was devoted to your interest, he 
purchased with the greater part of your money goods 
of SiRONj and Burhanpur, and as soon as he arrived 
at Gombroon he was offered 30 per cent profit on 
them. It is true, I added, that to calculate it at the 
rate which the other merchants have to pay it would 
only amount to 5 per cent, but he made all pass as 
if on the account of the Company, which neither 
pays the freight of the vessel nor the customs at 
Gombroon, these two items amounting, in the case of 
the merchants, to 25 per cent. That when the vessel 
which had carried him, returned to Batavia, although 
the goods were not sold, he did not omit to write to 
you that he had refused 30 per cent profit in the hope 
of receiving more. That, however, three vessels 
arrived at Gombroon laden with the same kinds of 
goods, so that he had difficulty in getting for them 
what they had cost in India ; this compelled him to 
give those which he had bought for you at the current 
price. That, nevertheless, M. Constant had been so 
generous that he never asked anything from you, but 
that he had told me in private that he had lost more 
than 15 per cent by the transaction.” 

Having given all this detail to the President, he 
appeared to be very much alarmed, and besought me 
to make no noise about it, in which he did wisely, for 
I could have named others, all the addresses of the 
chiefs of the Company having come to my knowledge, 
and the principal part of the large sums which they 



344 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


had invested in diamonds having passed through my 
hands. Observing then that the President did not 
wish to hear more, I took leave of him and went to 
tell my counsel all that had passed. His dwelling 
being near that of the President, I observed that the 
latter went to the fort, apparently to see the General. 
Between 1 1 o’clock and noon I was about to go the 
Town Hall to know what the Avocat Fiscal would say 
to me, because I knew that the President had gone 
there when leaving the fort, and that they had con- 
versed together. But I met him half way, and 
approaching me with a laughing face he asked me 
where I was going. I replied that I was going to the 
Town Hall to reply to some of his questions. “ I beg 
you,” he replied quickly, “let us leave that affair to 
go and have dinner together. I was presented yester- 
day with two cases, one of French wine and the other 
of Rhine wine, we shall see which is the best. All I 
ask from you is a word written with your own hand, 
that you have nothing belonging to M. Constant.” 
This I gave very willingly, and in this way the whole 
process came to an end. 


CHAPTER XXIII 


The Author goes to see the King of Bantam/ and 
describes several adventures in connection therewith 

Having freed myself of an affair which had been raised 
so inconveniently for me, I forthwith formed a resolu- 
tion to visit the King of Bantam, having often heard 
that he was very fond of men of our nation ; this 
it is easy for me to acknowledge on account of the 
good treatment which I received from him. As soon 
as one passes beyond the Kingdoms which yield obedi- 
ence to the Great Mogul, the language which is 
called Malay is, among Orientals, what the Latin 
language is in Europe.® On the voyage which I 
made to India in the year 1638 I took with me one of 
my brothers ® who was my junior, and who had a special 
talent for foreign languages. He required but five or 
six months in order to learn one, and he spoke eight 

1 In the native language, Bantan. It forms the western end of 

Java and has an area of 2568 geographical square miles. It is a 
mountainous country of volcanic formation. An English station was 
established there as early as 1602, but the Dutch ultimately proved the 
superior in this region. It is now a Dutch Province, having been taken 
possession of in 1643. Dictionary.) 

2 This is still the case, Malay being the lingua franca in these 
regions. 

3 This was his brother Daniel (see Introduction, pp. xii and xvi). 



346 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


of them perfectly well. Moreover he was well made 
in person and was considered brave, of which he gave 
many proofs. Having one day fought a duel at 
Batavia with an infantry captain, over whom he 
obtained considerable advantage. General Vandime, 
who liked men of spirit, and the principals of the 
council, who had much esteem for him, permitted the 
matter to pass in silence, and as a mark of the affec- 
tion with which they regarded him they gave him 
permission to equip a vessel on his own private account 
and to trade in such goods as he pleased, with the 
exception of spices. Accordingly my brother bought 
a vessel of fourteen guns, with which he made many 
voyages. The first was to Siam, where he made a 
sufficiently large profit, but he lost 5000 or 6000 dcus 
of it to the King, who invited him to gamble with 
him and five of the principal nobles of his court, being 
much pleased at meeting a European who spoke the 
Malay language so well. It cannot be doubted that 
the profits are great in this kind of trade, since those 
who advance the money to traders, on loan, obtain for it 
cent per cent. But it is also true that they risk much, 
because if the vessel is lost the money is lost to them 
also, and this is called “the great speculation.” He 
also made some voyages to the King of Macassar, 
but they did not yield so much profit as those to the 
Kingdoms of Siam, Tonquin, and Cochinchina. 

Having, then, resolved to go to Bantam, and not 
knowing the Malayan language, I took with me my 
brother, who was then at Batavia. It was necessary 
for me to have the permission of the General, accord- 
ing to custom, and he refused because he was not on 
good terms with the King of Bantam. But two hours 



CHAP. XXIII 


BANTAM 


847 


afterwards M. Caron, who was at that time Director- 
General, sent to me to say that I might leave on my 
voyage for Bantam in all safety, as soon as I wished. 
Accordingly I set out with my brother in a small 
barque which we hired to carry us to Bantam, where, 
on arrival, our first visit was to the English Presi- 
dent, who gave us a grand reception, and desired that 
we should not take other quarters but stay with him. 
He had still about fifty pots of Mantua wine with 
which he desired to regale us. This wine is not ex- 
ported in glass bottles, in which it goes bad, but in 
earthen pots, in which it always keeps good. 

On the following morning my brother went to the 
King’s palace, where he was well known and welcome, 
in order to ascertain when his majesty would be able to 
receive us. But as soon as the King knew that he 
was there, he would not allow him to return to fetch 
me, but ordered a messenger to be sent to seek me, 
and tell me that if I had any rare jewels I should 
please him by bringing them. 

When the King’s people came to conduct me to 
the palace, not seeing my brother with them, I was 
on the point of refusing to follow them, and I recalled 
before my eyes the manner in which the King of 
Achin had treated M. Renaud, who had left Nantes 
with his brother on the vessels which M. de Mont- 
morency sent to India. I shall record the history of 
it in a few words, and this short digression will pos- 
sibly not be displeasing to the reader. A French 
Company of Commerce was established for India, 
whither it sent four vessels, three large and one small 
one of eight guns, upon which among others the two 
brothers Renaud, who entered the service of the Com- 



348 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK in 


pany, embarked. Their journey was the shortest and 
the most fortunate of any ever heard of, as they arrived 
before Bantam in less than four months. The King 
received them with great joy, and in eight or ten days' 
time he gave them as much pepper as they asked for, 
and at a very fair price, they having received it at 
more than 20 per cent cheaper than the Dutch do. But 
as our Frenchmen had not come for pepper only, but 
wished also to obtain information as to the trade in 
cloves, nutmegs, and mace, they sent the smaller vessel 
with the greater part of their money to Macassar, 
where the King’s stores are generally full, as I have 
elsewhere said, the Dutch, with all their skill, not 
being able to prevent the people of this island trading 
with the other islands where the spices grow,^ this 
annoys them much, since they desire to compel [the 
trade of] all other nations to pass through their hands. 

Our Frenchmen having obtained their cargo of 
pepper so quickly at Bantam, had not patience to 
await the return of the small vessel which they had 
sent to Macassar, and, in order to amuse themselves, 
decided to go to Batavia, that town not being more 
than 14 leagues distant from Bantam. When the 
wind is favourable one can go there in a single tide, 
and they reached the roads at 8 o'clock in the morning. 
As soon as they had cast anchor the General of the 
French fleet sent to pay his compliments to the 
General of Batavia, who did not fail to reply to this 
civility by asking the General to come on shore that he 
might entertain him. He sent at the same time to 
those who remained in the vessel a quantity of refresh- 
ments, and especially Spanish and Rhine wine, with 

^ See p. 16. 



CHAP, xxm 


FRENCH VESSELS BURNT 


349 


instructions to those who carried it to make them drink 
well in order to intoxicate them. This order was so 
well followed that it was easy for the Dutch afterwards 
to set fire to the vessels according to the orders which 
they had received, and as, from the saloon of the fort 
where the General of Batavia receives strangers, all 
the roads are visible, one of the Indian Councillors 
who was at the table, seeing the flame, cried out say- 
ing that he believed the French vessels were on fire. 
The General of Batavia appeared to be much aston- 
ished, and the French General, who rightly concluded 
how it had come about, looking unmoved at the com- 
pany : “ But that,” said he, “ need not prevent us from 
continuing to drink — those who have lighted the fire 
shall pay for it.” But he did not remember then that 
time was worth money, and the Dutch did not pay for 
a quarter of the damage. The French vessels were 
all burnt and the crews were saved on the frigates 
which were despatched for them in haste. The 
General of Batavia made the men liberal offers, which 
they refused, and they returned to Bantam to await 
their small vessel. When it arrived they could find no 
better plan than to sell their goods and the vessel 
itself to the English, and the money was divided 
among all according to the rank of each. The English 
offered them a passage to Europe, but the General 
and some of the principal officers alone accepted it. 
The greater part of the French remained in India and 
took service with the Portuguese, with whom there 
was some advantage to be gained at that time. 

The Dutch did not ill-treat the French, alone, after 
this fashion, as they did a still more serious injury to 
the English. The English were the first to realise that 



350 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK HI 


the voyage to Japan from Surat, Masulipatam, and 
other places, was too dangerous to attempt in one stretch, 
without having some place in which to rest when the 
winds were contrary. They found it desirable to build 
a fort in the island of Formosa; and this has spared 
the loss of many vessels, in addition to the great profit 
which it brought them. The Dutch being jealous that 
the English should have seized so good a position as 
that, being the sole place in all the island where 
vessels could lie in safety, and as they were unable 
to take it by force, decided on treachery to accomplish 
their design. They sent two of their vessels, upon 
which they put their best soldiers, who feigned to have 
been very badly injured by a storm, making their vessels 
appear dismasted and broken in many directions, and 
all the soldiers pretending sickness. The English, 
touched by this misery, which was only a sham, invited 
the chief ofificers to come on shore in order to refresh 
themselves ; this invitation they immediately accepted, 
ordering as many of their people as possible to leave 
the vessel, under pretext that they were ill, and could 
be treated better on shore than on board. While the 
principal officers were at table with the English, who 
had civilly invited them to dinner, and where, to 
accomplish their object, they took with them more per- 
sons than politeness permitted, and, in order to make 
more come on shore they ordered them to bring from 
the vessels, from time to time, many kinds of wine, and 
those who brought them had the word to remain there, 
of which the English, who were not on their defence, took 
no notice. The Dutch, seeing that they had drunk well, 
and that it was time to execute their design, started a 
quarrel with the English chief ; and drawing their arms 



CHAP. XXIII 


FRENCH TRADERS 


351 


which they had concealed, threw themselves upon the 
English garrison, whom they murdered without meet- 
ing with much resistance. It was thus they made 
themselves masters of the fort, which they possessed 
till they were driven from it by the Chinese. I could 
tell of many other treacheries by the Dutch,^ but it is 
time to return to that which followed the burning of 
the French vessels in the Batavia roads. 

The two brothers Renaud, of whom I have above 
spoken, having received at Bantam a small amount of 
money from the distribution which was made of the 
proceeds of the sale of the small vessel, and the goods 
which it had brought from Macassar, found means to 
go to Goa, and knew so well how to gain the good 
opinion of the Portuguese, that they were permitted to 
trade in all places where the Portuguese were in 
authority. In five or six years they had each earned 
to the value of 10,000 dcus} The elder one dealt in 
cottons and other coarse goods, and the younger in 
precious stones. The Portuguese had been accustomed 
to send three or four vessels to Achin every year to 
obtain pepper, elephants,® and gold, and they took there 
all kinds of white and coloured calicoes, especially blue 
and black. They also sent jewels to the King, because 
he loved and highly valued them. The two brothers 
Renaud decided to go there, each for his own particular 
trade, the elder one carrying cottons, and the younger 

^ Tavernier subsequently resolved to do so, and in his third volume 
we have his accumulated charges against the Dutch, under the title, 
Conduite des Hollandois en Asze. 

3 This statement as to the importation of Sumatran elephants is of 
interest, but requires confirmation. See p. 3 1 7 for suggested origin of 
elephants in Sumatra. 



352 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK lit 


jewels, amongst which he had four rings of the value of 
about 18,000 dcus. Having arrived at Achin, they 
went with the other Portuguese to the King’s palace, 
which is at 2 leagues from the sea, and each of them 
showed the King and the nobles who were with him 
whatever he had brought. As for the jewels, as soon 
as the King had cast his eyes on the four rings he 
desired to have them, but refused to pay more than 

15.000 dcus for them, but the younger Renaud asked 

18.000 4 cus. Not having been able to agree, he took 
them away, which much displeased the King, who 
sent for him on the following day. Renaud, who had 
returned to the vessel, was a long time in doubt whether 
he should go to the King again or not ; but the officers 
of the vessel advising him to go, he at length resolved 
to do so, and the King took the four rings for the 

18.000 dcus, which he paid him forthwith. But after 
Renaud left the presence of the King no one ever 
knew what became of him ; apparently he was secretly 
murdered in the palace. 

This adventure came to my memory when I saw 
that the King of Bantam sent to ask for me, and that 
my brother was not with those who came to summon 
me. N evertheless, I resolved to go, and took with me 

12.000 or 13,000 rupees worth of jewels, the largest 
part consisting of rings with diamonds arranged in 
roses, some of seven stones, others of nine, and others 
of eleven, with some bracelets of diamonds and rubies. 
I found the King with three of his captains and my 
brother seated in the Oriental fashion, and they had 
before them five large plates of rice of different colours. 
For their drink they had Spanish wine and brandy, 
wdth many kinds of sherbets. After I had saluted the 



CHAP. XXIII 


THE KING OF BANTAM 


353 


King, and had presented him with a diamond ring, 
and another of blue sapphires, and a small bracelet of 
diamonds, rubies, and blue sapphires, he invited me to 
be seated, and told the attendants to give me a cup of 
brandy to excite my appetite. This cup held about 
half a septier of Paris, ^ but I refused the officer who pre- 
sented it to me ; this astonished the King. My brother 
then asked him to excuse me, saying that I never 
drank brandy ; but that as for Spanish wine I could 
drink a little of it, upon which the King ordered me to 
be given some. 

Whether because the repast had already lasted a 
long time, or that the King was impatient to see what 
I had brought, he did not delay about finishing, and 
seated himself in a kind of armchair, the woodwork of 
which was gilt with gold and moulded like the frames 
of our pictures. His feet and legs were uncovered, 
and underneath him there was a small Persian carpet of 
gold and silk. His garment was a piece of calico, a 
part of which covered the body from the waist to the 
knees, the remainder being on his back and about his 
neck like a scarf. He wore as a head-band a kind of 
handkerchief, having three ends ; and his hair, which 
was very long, was twisted and bound together on the 
top of his head. In place of slippers he had placed by 
the side of his chair sandles with leather straps to go 
over the feet, like those attached to a spur, which were 
embroidered with gold and small pearls. Two of his 
officers stood behind him with large fans, the handles 
of which were 5 or 6 feet long, and at the ends there 
were bundles of peacocks’ plumes, which equalled in 

1 Equal to one-fourth of an English pint. It is apparently the one- 
seventh of a /zVr^, whence the name. 


VOL. II 


2 A 



354 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


size the bottom of one of our barrels. On his right 
side there was an old black woman, who held in her 
hands a small mortar and a pestle of gold, in which 
she crushed the betel leaves, with which she mixed 
areca^ nuts and dissolved seed pearls. When she 
saw that the whole was well pounded she placed her 
hand on the King’s back, who at once opened his 
mouth, and she put the betel in with her fingers as 
women do who give pap to their infants,- because the 
King had no teeth ; for he had eaten so much of 
these betel leaves, and smoked so much tobacco, that 
his teeth had fallen out. 

The palace of the King of Bantam has not had 
need of a very skilful architect. It is a square build- 
ing surrounded by small lacquered pillars of different 
colours, 2 feet in height, against which one leans 
when seated. There are at the four corners four large 
pillars planted in the earth at 40 feet distance from 
each other, and the floor is covered by a mat woven 
of the bark of a kind of tree, as if it were a piece of 
cloth, and neither fleas nor bugs will approach it. 
The roof is of cocoanut fronds. Close by under 
another roof, sustained also by four large pillars, there 
were sixteen elephants, the most courageous of those 
which the King keeps (for he has a large number of 
them), which are destined for war and do not fear 
fireworks. For his guard he has about 2000 men, 
who were seated in squads under the shade of some 
trees. They are good soldiers both on sea and 

^ Araque in the original. 

2 I recently saw the famous hairy woman of Mandalay being supplied 
with betel by her Burmese attendant in much the same way ; being blind, 
the packet had to be prepared for her and placed in her mouth. 



CHAP. XXIII 


THE KING OF BANTAM 


355 


land, strict Muhammadans who do not fear death. 
His harem, where his women dwell, must be a small 
affair, for when he had seen what I had brought 
he summoned two old black women, to whom he 
gave some of the jewels in order that they should 
go to show them. These two old women entered by 
a miserable door, and it had for enclosure only a kind 
of palisade, with earth mixed with cow dung between 
the posts. I observed that nothing was brought back 
of what he sent by these women, this made me con- 
clude that I should stick to the price. Thus I sold 
him profitably what he took from me, and I was paid 
at once. After having drunk a cup of sherbet (while 
my brother drank spirits with the King) we took leave 
of him, and he made us promise that, on the following 
day towards evening, we should return to see him, 
because he wished to show me a dagger which he was 
having made after the Turkish fashion, but he had 
not got sufficient diamonds to cover the handle, and he 
desired that I should procure enough to finish it. We 
withdrew then with our money to the dwelling of the 
English, who were much astonished that the King 
had disbursed 20,000 rupees, saying that they believed 
it was the greatest part of his treasure.^ 

On the following day my brother and I went to 
see the King again at the hour which he had fixed 
for us, and we found him seated in the same place 
where he had been on the preceding day. A Mulla 
read and interpreted to him something from the Koran, 
which was in Arabic. The reading being finished, the 

^ As the value of the jewels is stated on page 352 to have been 
only 12,000 to 13,000 rupees, the transaction was a profitable one for 
Tavernier. 



356 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


King and the Mulla rose to pray, which having been 
concluded, the King sent for the dagger, the handle 
and sheath of which were of gold. The upper part 
of the handle was already covered with diamonds, 
and in plaque which was at the end there was a 
large one cut into facettes, which, as far as I could 
judge, was worth at the least 15,000 or 16,000 dctts} 
The King told me that he had received it as a present 
from the Queen of Borneo, and that he had sent it 
to be cut at Goa, but he valued it much higher than 
what I considered it to be worth. All the handle and 
likewise all the sheath were covered with bezels applied 
without order, this proved to me that he did not under- 
stand design. The King had no other stones, neither 
diamonds nor rubies, nor anything to place in these 
bezels, and he wished to induce me to obtain for him 
some that would fit. I made him understand that that 
would be impossible, and that he ought not to limit 
himself to these bezels. That when he had acquired the 
quantity of stones which were required to cover the 
dagger, other bezels of the shapes of the stones should 
be made, and that in Europe when we begin a work 
of this kind we first arrange all the available stones on 
wax ; this I exemplified to him at the same time, but 
that was beyond his understanding, and he told me 
that he did not care to destroy a design which he had 
himself taken the trouble to arrange, and to have 
made for his own use. In spite of any reasons which 
I could give for the purpose of escaping from a com- 
mission which I was not able to execute, the King 
wished positively that I should take the dagger with 


^ j £3375 to £3600. 

2 Bezels (chatons in the original), mountings for individual stones. 



CHAP, xxni 


AN IMPOSSIBLE COMMISSION 


357 


me to Batavia. I represented to him then that as I 
was a stranger he risked much, and that I might go 
off with the dagger without again returning, but he 
said to me smiling that he feared nothing on that 
account, and that he well knew that Frenchmen were 
incapable of so disgraceful an action. At length, being 
unable to excuse myself further, I took charge of the 
dagger, and having taken leave of the King, my 
brother and I went to bid farewell to the English 
President, and to thank him for the civilities which we 
had received from him. 


A 



CHAPTER XXIV 


The Author returns to Batavia, and some days after- 
wards goes again to visit the King of Bantam, 
giving an account^ in connection therewith^ of the 
dangerous extravagances of some Fakirs, or pilgrims, 
on their return from Mecca 

My brother and I, after having supped this evening 
with the English President, went on board a barque 
between ii o’clock and midnight, for the land-wind 
that we required generally blows at night, and on the 
following day between lo and 1 1 o’clock in the morning 
we arrived at Batavia. I remained there twenty days, 
merely to make the King of Bantam believe that I 
had not misrepresented the matter, and that during 
that time I had been looking for what it was impossible 
to find. As I had nothing to do then, these twenty 
days appeared very long to me ; for at Batavia there 
is scarcely any other amusement but gambling, and all 
the gain goes in drink ; this did not suit me. During 
the day, on account of the great heat, one cannot even 
think of taking exercise, this can only be done towards 
the cool of the evening, and it is moreover necessary 
to make it very short, because as soon as the sun sets 
they close the gates, unless the General or Madame or 
some of the Councillors of India are outside the town 



CHAP. XXIV 


BATAVIA 


369 


in their gardens. During these twenty days M. Cant, 
one of the Councillors of India, died, and was buried 
with great honour. A company of infantry attended 
and bore a large standard, upon which were the arms 
of the defunct, although when he first came to India 
he held the most degraded office in the vessel. A 
stick, at the end of which there were attached spurs, 
was borne behind, though, to say the truth, I do not 
believe he had ever mounted a horse save to go for 
exercise outside the town. One of the captains carried 
his sword, another his helmet, and his body was borne 
by eight military officers. The son-in-law of the 
defunct followed with the General, after whom walked 
the gentlemen of the Council ; a number of people 
followed from the fort and town. The four corners of 
the pall with which the bier was covered were carried 
by four captains, and all these honours were rendered 
to him in consideration of the good services which the 
Company had received from him — as the General and 
members of the Council proclaimed ; but the people 
used a very different language, and complained bitterly 
of the great injustice which he had done, both to sailors 
and soldiers. 

Having passed these twenty days at Batavia, I 
resolved to carry back the dagger to the King of 
Bantam, without having looked for the diamonds or 
other stones, for if I had remained years I should not 
have found any suitable for these bezels. My brother 
accompanied me again, and I took with me some 
jewels which the King had not yet seen. Having 
arrived at Bantam we intended to go first to visit the 
English President, but, before we had done so, there 
came to us one of the King’s officers, who told us that 



360 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


nooK III 


he had been instructed that we should be lodged in one 
of the houses which the King has in the town. These 
houses are made of bamboos, which are, as I have else- 
where said, hollow canes, and which, though they are as 
hard as iron, nevertheless split like our osiers, and it is 
of them that the Indians make nearly everything. We 
had not spent more than half an hour in this house 
when the King sent us some palechcs,'^ which are very 
sweet water-melons, and are red as scarlet inside. 
There were also mangoes, of which I have elsewhere 
spoken, and another large fruit called pompone^ which 
is also red inside, and the flesh is soft resembling a 
sponge, and is very good. He who brought these 
fruits told us that as soon as we had taken our repast 
we were to go to see the King ; this we did, and we 
found him again in the same place with the old betel 
pounder, who from time to time made him open his 
mouth and then gave him some with her fingers in the 
way I have described. There were five or six captains 
seated round the room, who were looking at some fire- 
works which the Chinese had brought, such as grenades, 
fusees, and other things of that kind to run on the 
water ; for the Chinese surpass all the nations of the 
world in this respect. As soon as I saw the King in 
a condition to speak to me, I presented to him his 
dagger in the same condition as he had given it to me, 
and told him that Batavia was not a place where one 
could obtain precious stones, and when I did find some 

1 More properly a water-melon, CitruUus vulgaris (Schrader). 
The name is from the Arabic al-battikh. (See Yule-Burnell, Anglo- 
Indian Glossary, art. ^'Pateca.”) 

2 More properly ^oinmelo. Citrus decumana (L.), the same as the 
shaddock of the West Indies. (See Yule-Burnell, Anglo-Indian Glos- 
sary, art. “Pommelo.”) 



CHAP. XXIV 


THE KING OF BANTAM 


361 


they wanted double their value for them. That this 
commission could not be fulfilled except by some one 
who went to Goa, and that I could have accomplished 
it when at Goa, or at Golconda, or, better still, at 
the diamond mine, where one meets with parcels of 
stones of all shapes and sizes, which one might cut 
with but little loss to suit the bezels. Upon this the 
old woman took the dagger and conveyed it into the 
harem, the King never having spoken to me of it 
since. I showed him subsequently what jewels I had 
brought, and I sold a parcel of them as advantageously 
as on the first journey. As the sun was setting, which 
is the time when the Muhammadans go to say their 
prayers, the King told us to return on the following 
day, and said that he would arrange for our payment 
being made. On arriving at our lodging we found 
one of the servants of the English President, who 
came to invite us to go to have supper with him, and 
taste some new liquors which had arrived from Eng- 
land on the Company’s account. For during the 
twenty days which we had been at Batavia two 
vessels had arrived, which had brought French and 
Spanish wine, and especially a large quantity of beer. 
We remained till midnight with the President, who 
manifested much joy at seeing us again. 

On the following day at lo o’clock a.m., when going 
to the palace, together with my brother and a Dutch 
surgeon, who was prescribing for one of the King’s 
wives, we passed along a road where one has the 
river on one side and on the other a large garden 
enclosed by a palisade, and there were intervals 
between each pair of posts. Behind the palisade 
there was concealed a rascal of a Bantamese who had 



3G2 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


returned from MeccxV and was runningf a which 

means in their language, that when some one of the 
lower class of Muhammadans, who has returned from 
Mecca, takes it into his head to seize his crease ^ in 
hand, which is a kind of dagger with generally half of 
the blade poisoned, he runs through the streets and 
kills all whom he meets who are not of the Muham- 
madan faith, until he is himself killed. These enraged 
persons think they do a service to God and to 
Muhammad by killing the enemies of his law, and that 
in consequence they will be saved. As soon as they 
are killed the Muhammadan mob inter them as though 
they were saints, and every one contributes to give 
them splendid tombs. Often some great mendicant 
who dresses himself as a Dervish makes a hut close to 
the tomb, which he is careful to keep tidy and on 
which he places flowers. Accoi'ding as donations are 
given he adds some ornament, because the more beau- 
tiful the grave is, so much the more worship and 
sanctity does it acquire, and by so much the more do the 
donations increase. I remember that in the year 1 642 
there arrived at Suwali,^ which is the port of Surat, 
a vessel of the Great Mogul which returned from 

^ A Moqtia in the original. The F rench edition of 1 7 1 3 has it 
‘jiioit, a Mocca? This is what is more commonly known as running 
a 7nuck, See Yule-Burnell, A7zglo-l7idia7i Glossary^ Art. ‘‘A Muck/’ 
for etymology and examples of the use of the term. 

2 Cric in the original. The term crease or cris, signifying a dagger, 
is adopted in the Malay from the Javanese Kris or Kiris. I have seen 
an ingenious explanation for the waved form of these blades, it is that 
it is a survival of the outlines of the knives and spears made of obsid- 
ian by flaking, and indeed the resemblance is somewhat striking. (See 
Romilly, West Pacific uTtd New GuiTtea. (See Yule-Burnell, A 7 tglo-l 7 tdia 7 i 
Glossary^ for examples of the use of the term. 

^ Souali in the original (see vol. i, p. 6). 



CHAP. XXIV 


RUNNING A MUCK 


363 


Mecca, where there were a number of these Fakirs or 
Dervishes. For every year the Great Mogul sends 
two large vessels there to carry pilgrims, who thus 
get a free passage. At the time when these vessels 
are ready to depart the Fakirs come from all parts of 
India in order to embark. The vessels are laden with 
good articles of trade, which are disposed of at Mecca, 
and all the profit which is made is given in charity to 
the poor pilgrims. The principal only is retained, and 
it serves for another year, and this principal is, at the 
least, 600,000 rupees.’- It is considered a small matter 
when 30 or 40 per cent only is made on these goods, for 
some yield cent per cent. Added to which all the 
principal persons of the Great Mogul’s harem, and 
other private persons, send considerable donations to 
Mecca. I have mentioned at the end of my account 
of the seraglio of the Grand Seigneur the rich and 
magnificent present which the Great Mogul sent to 
Mecca in the year 1644, over and above the ordinary 
presents which he makes annually. 

There was one of these Fakirs who returned from 
Mecca in the year 1642, and having landed at Suwali 
he forthwith showed signs of diabolical fury. He 
had no sooner said his prayers than he took his dagger 
and ran to attack some Dutch sailors, who were on 
shore discharging goods from four vessels which were 
in the port. Before they saw him and were able to 
put themselves on their defence, this maddened Faktr 
wounded seventeen, of whom thirteen died. The 
khanjar'^ which he had was a kind of dagger, the 

^ ;£67,50 o . 

^ Canjare in the original (see vol. i, pp. loo and 308). It is not 
necessary to reproduce the figure here. 



364 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


i:ooK III 


upper part of the blade of which was three fingers 
wide, and as it is a very dangerous weapon I give the 
figure of it here. At length the Dutch soldier who 
was on guard at the entrance to the tent where the 
Commander and the merchants were, gave this mad- 
man a shot from a gun through the body, of which he 
fell dead. Forthwith all the other Fakirs who were 
in the place, and even the other Muhammadans, carried 
off the body and interred it, and at the end of fifteen 
days a handsome tomb had been built (over it). 
It is broken each year by the English and Dutch 
sailors when their vessels are in port, because they 
are then strong ; but as soon as they have de- 
parted the Muhammadans have it rebuilt and place 
about It many standards. Some also say their prayers 
at it. 

Returning to the Fakir of Bantam. This rascal 
was concealed, as I have said, behind the palisades, and 
as my brother and I and the Dutch surgeon went 
along, all three, side by side, having come opposite to 
him, he thrust out his spear, thinking to transfix one 
of the three in the body. By God’s grace he was too 
quick, and the point passed in front of all three of us. 
The Dutchman being on my left on the river side, and 
slightly in advance of my brother and me, the point of 
the spear cut his high hose and immediately he 
and I caught hold of the handle, the Fakir pulling 
with all his might to recover his spear. My brother, 
who was on my right on the palisade side, being young 
and strong, leaped over it, gave him three sword cuts 
in the body of which he died on the spot. Immedi- 
ately a number of Chinese and other idolaters who 
were close by came to kiss my brother’s hands and to 



CHAP. XXIV 


THE KING OF BANTAM 


365 


thank him for having slain this enraged Fakir. From 
thence we went to see the King, who had already- 
heard of what my brother had done, and testified his 
approval by making him a present of a waistband. 
For the Kings and Governors, although they are 
Muhammadans, are very well contented at some one’s 
slaying these wicked men, knowing well that they are 
desperadoes of whom it is well to be rid. 

The King paid me for what he had purchased on 
the preceding day ; but he was unwilling that my 
brother should return with me, because of a great re- 
joicing which he was going to make, and at which he 
wished him to be present. It was on account of four 
large vessels which he had had built and intended to 
launch. Never had any King of Bantam built such 
large ones, and for five or six days there was to be 
nothing but feasts, dances, and fireworks. Thus I took 
leave of the King, who presented me with a beautiful 
embroidered waistband, and we went to take supper 
and sleep at the Dutch surgeon’s house. 

On the following day I went to bid farewell to the 
English President, who kept me for dinner. While 
waiting for it to be served, he showed me two strings 
of diamonds which had come to him from England, 
and two services of silver, the whole being worth, per- 
haps, 25,000 Sens. He wanted to sell me all, but I only 
bought one of the strings of diamonds for 2600 reales, 
for the stones on the other string were too foul ; and as 
for the vessels of silver, if money had still been coined at 
Batavia I would have certainly been able to buy them. 
They coined there formerly, but all contained more than 
ten per cent of alloy. This was done on account of 
the Chinese, who preferring silver to gold, as I have 



TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


nooK III 


3GG 

elsewhere remarked/ because having no silver mines 
in their own country/ they used to carry into China 
as much as they could of the silver money which was 
coined at Batavia. These were rcalvs, half realcs, and 
quarter rcales, which have no other mark than that of 
the Company, as is to be seen in the figure which I 
give here.® On one side was a vessel, and on the other 
a V, an O, and a C, interlaced, these three letters 
signifying in Dutch Vor Ost IndicJi Compa^nic, i.e. for 
the Company of the East Indies. 

This lasted for some years ; but in the end all the 
nations of the East, who had trade with the Dutch, 
commenced to weary of it, especially the people whose 
sovereigns did not coin silver money ; for in fact there 
are very few who coin after one passes beyond the 
Empire of the Great Mogul, and it is still bar silver 
only which comes from Japan. As for gold, there 
are many Kings who coin it, as the King of Pegu, the 
King of Aciiin, and the King of Macassar ; and be- 
sides their golden money, they have also copper and tin 
money. The Chinese — who are careful in all things — 
in selling their goods calculate according to the stan- 
dard of the silver ; for all that they receive in foreign 
countries, when they have arrived in their own, they 
reduce to their own standard, and make it into ingots. 

The principal part of the profit derived from these 
reales which are coined at Batavia, went into the 
purses of the General, the Councillors, and the Master 
of the Mint. The “ States-General ” having had notice 
of it, considered it very singular that the gentlemen of 

^ See p. 155. 

2 It is probable that there are silver mines in China. 

^ This figure is not reproduced here. 



CHAP. XXIV 


SPURIOUS COINAGE 


367 


the Company had assumed authority to coin money 
without having asked permission, and forbade the 
Company to continue to do so. They condemned them 
likewise to a large fine, and to make a careful search for 
all these reales, in order to give an equal number of 
good ones to those who had received the bad ones. 
On this voyage which I made to Batavia, when in the 
island of Ceylon, I sold some jewels to a lady of Point 
DE Galle, who paid me with these reales. When 
about to depart, an officer of the Company came on 
board to ask if I had not received some of these reales, 
and added that if I had he would give me good ones, 
piece for piece, without my losing anything ; this he did 
forthwith. 


A 



CHAPTER XXV 


Concerning the D^Uch war with the Emperor of J ava ^ 

Before leaving the English President, with whom I 
dined on the day I left Bantam, he discussed with me 
the reasons why the General of Batavia and his 
Council had refused me a passage to enable me to 
return to Surat or the coast of Bengal, where they 
often send vessels. The President, to compensate me 
for this refusal, kindly offered me a passage to England ; 
for the season was then past for returning to India. 
Being attracted by his offer, I accepted without cere- 
mony ; and he told me he would be much gratified at 
having my company, because he himself intended to go 
home, the period of his service having expired. But 
the vessels, whether English or Dutch, could not leave 
for Europe for more than three months ; and I thought 
I should do best to pass that time at Batavia, where I 
should be able to buy something to make my money 
yield a profit during the voyage. Accordingly, I took 
leave of the President till the time when the vessels 
should sail ; and he presented me with a large cask of 
English beer to take with me to Batavia, where he 
said I should find scarcely any, because the General 
had made it contraband, knowing that it had come to 

^ lave in the original. 



CHAP. XXV 


ENGLISH BEER 


369 


the English Company. “ But if he only does us this 
injury,” continued the President, “the Company will 
not trouble itself, and will not be the poorer because 
its beer remains unsold,” It is not really the case that 
if this prohibition of the Dutch General and his Council 
had continued it would not have been injurious to the 
English, for they make a considerable profit on beer, 
and it yields them a large sum of money annually. I 
have above said that it is the principal delight of the 
people of Batavia to see new drinks arrive, especially 
English beer, and that which they call mom, which 
comes from Brunswick. It is thought that they con- 
tribute to health ; and the majority fear that they will 
not survive for the remainder of the year if they do not 
receive these supplies. Accordingly all the people 
murmured loudly against the General and his Council ; 
and even the publicans risked going to buy the beer 
from the English, the General closing his eyes, and the 
wives of the Councillors being very glad to drink it. 

As soon as I had landed at Batavia one of the 
guards ran to the entry office to give notice that I had 
arrived with a cask of beer ; which, however, I landed 
from the barque and placed near the guard. The 
chief of the office having come to me, said that he 
could not give permission for the cask to be carried to 
my lodging ; that I must be aware of the order of 
Council ; and that it would be best to reship it on the 
barque, and send it back to Bantam. Seeing that 
there was no favour to be hoped for, and as there are 
close to the guard-house cannons, in position, for the 
defence of the port, and an abundance of cannon balls, I 
took one of these balls and with it stove in one end of 
the cask. That being done, I cried out to the soldiers 

2 B 


VOL. II 



370 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


and passers-by : — “ Children, come to empty this cask, 
and drink thejiealth of the King of France, my sovereign 
lord, and that of the Prince of Orange," after which I 
mentioned the General and the members of the Council. 
As no one refused to drink, the cask was already 
half emptied when an officer on the part of the General 
came to tell^me that I might carry my cask of beer to 
my lodging. Immediately I replaced the end (of the 
cask) and had it carried away, after which I filled a 
canteen of six bottles, which I sent as a present to the 
General, knowing well that it would be the first he had 
to drink that year, and with the rest I regaled my 
friends. 

I had designed, as I have said, to spend at Batavia 
the three months which remained till the departure of 
the vessels for Christendom, but the life which is led 
in that place being one of idleness is tiresome, and not 
having any other amusement than gambling and 
drinking, I resolved to employ a part of the time in 
going to see the King of Japara,^ who is otherwise 
called the Emperor of Java. He it is who was 
formerly King of all the island, before the King of Ban- 
tam, who was only governor of a province, rebelled 
against him, the Dutch being maintained in this 
country by the division of these two powers. F or when- 
ever the King of Japara wished to besiege Batavia, 
the King of Bantam immediately aided the Dutch, 
and when they have been attacked by the King of 
Bantam, which has happened many times, the King of 

^ Jcti>ar in the origrinal. Japara is the name of a province of Java, 
comprehending’ Juwana, situated in the country of the proper Javanese. 
Its area is 672 square miles, and the population amounts to 671 per 
square mile, it being the most thickly inhabited region of- Java. (See 
Crawfurd, Dictionary,') 



CHAP. XXV 


THE KING OF JAPARA 


371 


Japara has come to their aid. In the same way, when 
these two Kings make war upon one another, the 
Dutch assist whichever of them is the weakest. 

The King of Japara resides in a town of which he 
bears the name. It is about 30 leagues distance from 
Batavia, and is only accessible by sea from the coast, 
but lies nearly 8 leagues inland. From the town you 
pass down a fine river to the sea, where there is a 
good port and finer houses than there are in the town. 
The King would prefer to make his ordinary residence 
at this place, but thinks he would not be safe there. 

On the eve of the day upon which I had intended 
to start, I went to take leave of one of the Councillors 
of India, and having mentioned to him that I was 
going to the King of Japara, he was much astonished, 
because this King and the Dutch were then mortal 
enemies. He explained the matter to me in this way. 
The deceased King, he said, father of the King who 
reigns at present, ever since the Dutch Company had 
built the fort at Batavia in his territories, has never 
been willing to make peace with it. That during the 
war the King had taken some Dutchmen prisoners, 
and the Dutch, on their side, had taken twenty times 
as many of his subjects, offering to give in exchange ten 
of his for one of theirs ; but he would not give up one, 
either on that condition, or for money, and on his death- 
bed he advised his son, who succeeded him, never to 
give liberty to one of them. This obstinacy troubled 
the General and all the people of Batavia very much, 
and obliged them to think of some means to bring him 
to reason. It is the custom that as soon as a Muham- 
madan King is dead, his successor sends some of the 
principal nobles of his court to Mecca with presents in 



372 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


orderto make the priests pray for the soul of the deceased, 
and also to give thanks to God and to IMuiiammad 
because the new King has come to the throne without 
any obstruction, and to pray that he may always be 
victorious over his enemies. This new King and his 
Council were in much difficulty as to how they should 
make this voyage for two reasons, one because the 
King had only small vessels, and to undertake so long 
a journey on such vessels was risking much, joined to 
which the native pilots and sailors arc only fit for 
going along the coasts, sighting from point to point, 
because they do not understand how to take observa- 
tions. The other difficulty was that the King of 
Japara could not ignore the fact that the Dutch were 
always (cruising) about his harbours to capture his 
subjects if they went outside them. In order, then, to 
secure that those who went on the pilgrimage should 
be in safety, he bethought him that it would be best to 
come to an understanding with the English, believing 
that the Dutch would not dare to do anything to the 
pilgrims if they were in English vessels. With this 
object, an envoy was despatched to Bantam to the 
English President and his Council, who promised 
to give the King one of the largest and best ap- 
pointed vessels of all those which the Company sent 
to India. They stipulated as a recompense that on the 
trade which the English might do in the future in the 
Kingdom of the King of Japara, they should not have 
to pay more than half the custom dues which they had 
hitherto paid, and that this privilege should continue 
to them always. This treaty being made, the English 
equipped a very fine vessel and placed a larger crew 
on her and more guns than usual. The King of 



CHAP. XXV AN ENGLISH SHIP CAPTURED BY THE DUTCH 373 


Japara’s Envoy and two English merchants embarked 
on the vessel in order to ratify the treaty with the 
King, who at once signed it, being very well satisfied, 
on seeing so fine a vessel, and concluded that both in 
going and coming the voyage would be accomplished 
in all safety. Nine of the principal persons of his 
court, and the majority of his relatives, with eighty or 
a hundred servants, and some other private persons, 
who were delighted to find so good an opportunity of 
accomplishing their pilgrimage, embarked with much joy 
on this large vessel. All this was not done without the 
Dutch being aware of it, as they had their spies every- 
where, like the English. As it was necessary to pass in 
front of Bantam in order to get out of the Straits, there 
being no other route but that, the General of Batavia, 
who had notice of the time of departure, kept three 
large war-vessels ready, on which M. Chevres, a 
Councillor of India, and the Major were placed in 
command. They met the English vessel off Bantam, 
and as it was about to enter the Straits sent a cannon- 
shot as a signal to her to bring to ; this the English 
were unwilling to do, on seeing which the Dutch com- 
menced to fire their guns from all three vessels. The 
English, who well knew that if this continued they 
would be sent to the bottom, lowered sails and prepared 
to yield ; but all the Javanese nobles, and those who 
accompanied them, cried out to the English that they 
were traitors, and that the agreement which had been 
made was merely to sell them and deliver them over 
to the mercy of the Dutch. The Javanese at length 
seeing that no hope of safety was left to them, and 
that the Dutch commenced to board the vessel, seized 
their creases, or poisoned daggers, and began to run 



374 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


a muck^ against the English, of whom they killed a 
large number before the latter had time to place them- 
selves on the defence. It is possible that not one 
would have escaped if the Dutch had not speedily 
come on board, and some of the Javanese nobles, 
and twenty or thirty of their servants, and the 
passengers refused to accept quarter. The combat 
was bloody, and seven or eight Dutchmen succumbed. 
The English vessel having been taken to Batavia, the 
General treated the crew with much civility, and sent 
them back with their vessel, and afterwards gave 
notice to the King of Japara that if he consented to 
make an exchange of the Dutch prisoners, he would 
give him all kinds of satisfaction. But the King 
would not listen to it, and replied that if the General 
had taken three times as many of his subjects 
he would not give up the Dutch prisoners whom he 
had in his power. Thus the poor Dutch always 
remained as slaves, and the Javanese died of poverty 
at Batavia, although, through policy, they were as- 
sisted sometimes stealthily, so that the King of 
Japara coming to know of it, through his spies, it 
might cause him to treat the Dutch prisoners less 
harshly. 

The Javanese are very good soldiers. While 
Batavia was besieged by the King of Bantam in the 
year 1659, a Dutch soldier being in ambuscade in a 
marsh, aL Javanese advanced to see what the enemy 
were doing, not thinking any of them were so close. 
The Dutchman thrust a pike into his body, and the 
Javanese feeling himself wounded, instead of with- 

^ A Mocca in the original. The French edition of 1713 has it ‘‘to 
cry Mocca” (See p. 362, n.) 


CHAP. XXV 


A JAVANESE SOLDIER 


375 


drawing the pike, pushed it into his body up to 
the hilt, where the Dutchman held it, in order to 
be able to get near him, and give him two stabs 
with his dagger in the stomach, of which the Dutch- 
man died. 


A 




CHAPTER XXVI 


The Author renders tJie last duties to his brother, who 
died at Batavia, and has fresh difficulties with 
the General and his Council 

Finding myself without hope of being able to go to 
visit the King of Japara, I resolved to. embark in a 
small vessel which belonged to one of the citizens of 
Batavia, and traded along the whole length of the 
western coast of Sumatra. It is where the principal 
part of the trade of this island, which consists of very 
poor gold and pepper, is carried on. What induced me 
to go was the opportunity it afforded of disposing of 
some diamond rings made according to the custom of 
the country. For although these people have for 
sole garment only two or three ells of calico, they, 
nevertheless, always like to have some diamond rings 
or earrings, and they pay well for them. When at 
the port, about to embark, a small barque arrived from 
Bantam with my brother, who was very ill with a 
bloody flux, which arose from the debauches he had 
indulged in with the King of Bantam. The sight of 
him in this condition caused me to give up my voyage 
in order to do what I could for his cure, but all my 
cares and all the remedies which could be applied 
availed nothing, and at the end of thirty days God 



CHAP. XXVI 


DEATH OF DANIEL TAVERNIER 


377 


took him from this world. In order to bury him I 
was obliged to follow the somewhat strange customs, 
which the Dutch have invented to cause an expendi- 
ture of money by the heirs of a defunct ^ person. The 
first is to those who go to pray at the interment, for 
the more prayers one employs the more honourable 
is the interment. If one engages only one he pays 
him but 2 Scus, but if he takes two he must pay 4 dcus 
to each ; if he takes three, each ought to receive 6 ; 
and if he employs twelve, the payment goes on increas- 
ing in the same ratio. As I wished that the thing 
should be done in an honourable manner, and was 
ignorant of this pleasant custom, I engaged six of 
these persons, and when it came to paying them I 
was astonished to find that each one asked for 1 2 dms, 
and that I had to pay 72 for this single item. As for 
the pall which is placed on the bier, it has to be hired 
at the hospital, and it is a right which the poor enjoy 
who derive profit therefrom. The commonest is of 
cloth, and the three others of velvet, one without 
fringe, another with fringe, and a third with fringe 
and large tassels at the four corners. This causes an 
expenditure of from 5 to 30 ^cus, and I paid 20 for 
the one which was placed on my brother’s bier. A 
cask of Spanish wine, which was drunk at the inter- 
ment, cost me 200 piastres.^ I gave 26 for three hams 
and some ox tongues, and 22 for some pastry. It is 
also the custom to send on the following day some 
money to enable those who have carried the body to 

1 The foregoing lines of this chapter are in the English translation 
by John Phillips, compressed into the following quaintly expressed 
sentence : — “ While I stayed at Batavia my brother dy’d ; and it was 
pretty to consider what the Dutch made me pay for his funeral.” 

2 ^45. 




378 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


the ground to rejoice, and as there were eight of them 
I paid them 20 dcus. It cost 16 for the place in the 
cemetery where the body was interred — 100 dcus being 
asked for interment in the church. Thus the whole 
funeral cost me 1223 livres^ of French money, and 
after I had paid this sum it made me resolve, for my 
own part, not to die in a country where it cost so much 
to be interred. I praised God that notwithstanding the 
troubles which I had experienced in Batavia, and of 
which I have only as yet told a part, and the small 
dissipations which one cannot altogether avoid in this 
country, I have taken such good care of myself that I 
have never been inconvenienced by the least headache, 
nor a bloody flux, which is the ailment that carries 
away many people. That which in my opinion has 
contributed most to my health is, that I do not think 
I have ever suffered from sorrow on account of any 
misfortune which has happened to me. I have some- 
times made great profits, and I have sometimes also 
experienced severe losses ; but when in unpleasant 
circumstances I have never been more than half an 
hour in deciding what course I should adopt in the 
future, without thinking more of the past, having 
always in my mind the thought of Job, that God gives 
and takes away as it pleases him, a,nd that one should 
render thanks for all that happens to us, whether it be 
good or evil. 

Seeing that the two voyages which I had proposed 
to myself to make, one to Japara and the other to the 
coast of Sumatra, in order to dispose of some jewels 
which remained in my hands, had been prevented, I 
at length resolved to sell the jewels at Batavia with 

^ ;£9I : 14 :6. 



CHAP. XXVI 


DUTCH PAY-BILLS 


379 


the least possible loss, and then seek to invest the 
money in something which would yield me a profit in 
Holland. My jewels having been sold, three or 
four of my friends told me that as I had ready money 
I could not invest it better than by buying rekenings 
from the Company’s servants. These rekenings'^ are 
their accounts of the balance the Company owes them, 
which are paid when they return to Holland. But 
as there are many of them who, after their term of 
service is completed, remain at Batavia and become 
citizens there, or in other places where the Company 
has settlements, as Malacca, the island of Ceylon, 
the coast of Coromandel, and other places, each has 
his account closed with what balance the Company 
owes him. In order to obtain this money, since they 
are habituated there, and do not think of ever return- 
ing to Europe, they sell these statements of account 
to those who have money and are returning home, 
and the Company pays them in Holland. Those 
who buy these accounts get them as cheaply as they 
can — thus, for loo piastres they generally give but 
6o or 70, or at the most 80, being allowed by the 
notary to sign a declaration that the seller is content, 
and had received his payment. Whenever these poor 
people sold their statements of account thus, to reason- 
able persons, it was a convenience to them ; but most 
frequently they sold them to hotel keepers and publi- 
cans, from whom they did not obtain more than 40 
or 50 per cent at the most. When the latter had thus 
purchased up to 2000 or 3000 ^cus, they placed the 
“statements” in the hands of a notary to resell them 

1 Requenings (for rekenings) in the original, meaning statements 
of account or pay certificates. 


380 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


to the commanders who were returning to Holland, 
and who generally gave for them 85 or 90 per cent, 
contenting themselves with being thus able to conceal 
what they have taken from the Company, while they 
have been chiefs of the factories. 

The Company freely borrows all the money of 
those who are willing to lend it, and gives them 25 
per cent interest, but the commanders and other officers 
take care not to lend it the full amount which they 
have amassed, because they may be asked by what 
means they have gained so much money, and be obliged 
to render an account; for some of them, as I have 
said, on their return to Holland take with them from 
400,000 up to 500,000 livres} I dealt then with one 
of these notaries of Batavia who had about the value 
of 11,000 guilders^ of these “statements” at 82 per 
cent, and on the following day, the transfer having 
been completed, I paid for them. As I was taking 
these papers to my lodging I met the Avocat Fiscal, 
who asked me what papers they were which my 
servant carried. I told him they were “statements” 
which I had just purchased at a certain price, to which 
he replied that it was a little too dear, and that he 
knew of some amounting to 6000 guilders, at a cheaper 
rate ; these I obtained with his assistance at 79 per 
cent. I sought to buy more, but more were not to be 
found, for a ship’s captain who was returning had bought 

^ ;£30jOOO to ;£37 ,Soo. (See p. 417). 

2 Guides in the original. The Jiorin or guildei^ of Hatavia is given 
by Kelly as being of the intrinsic value of is. 7.77d., and the Dutch coin 
of the same denomination at is. 8.49d. The currency value was about 
IS. 8d. and is. pd. respectively in round numbers. Perhaps the true 
exchange value of the latter was about is. gjd. At is. gd. the 1 1,000 
guilders represented a sum of ;£962S. 



CHAP. XXVI 


DUTCH PAY-BILLS 


381 


for himself alone some to the amount of upwards of 

100.000 guilders-, many other persons had also done 
so, and the whole amounted in value to more than 

400.000 livres. 

Five or six days afterwards, while I was still seek- 
ing for something in which to invest the remainder of 
my money, I met the Avocat Fiscal, who asked me if 
I had bought many of those rekenings. I told him 
that I had not found any more, and that I had only 
the two parcels of which he knew, amounting to about 
iy,SOO guilders ; upon which he told me with a great 
compliment that he was much distressed for those who 
had bought them, because the General and his Council 
had ordered him to make them give back all these 
rekenings, as it had been decided that it was not just 
that a poor man should lose so much of his wages. I 
told him that I would willingly give them back into 
the hands of the parties from whom I had purchased 
them, provided that I was repaid my money at the 
same time, and that I would get them over from 
Bantam, where I had sent them with my baggage, 
where I intended to return in a few days in order to 
go to England with the English President, who had 
civilly offered me a passage. At 6 p.m. one of the 
General’s halberdiers came to tell me that the General 
wished to speak to me. I immediately went to him 
and he asked me forthwith wherefore I had not given 
these rekenings to the Avocat Fiscal when he had 
asked for them in the names of himself and his Council. 

I replied to him coldly that I was unable to give him 
that which I had not got, and that they were in 
Bantam. “ You intend then” he said, go to 

Europe?” “ Yes," I replied, ''and the President of 



382 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK ni 


the English has done me the hotiour to give me a passage 
and the use of his table." I added that it was very true 
that the long journey which I was about to make in 
order to reach Surat, and from thence the diamond 
mine, where my usual trade was, would cause me much 
loss, and that if he had so willed it he might have 
enabled me to save all this time and avoid the dangers 
insep.arable from these long journeys, by allowing me 
to embark, as I had asked, on one of the vessels which 
sailed for Bengal, Surat, or Hormuz ; that it would 
have caused no injury to the Company, and that I 
believed such courtesy was a thing which the General 
and his Council should not have refused me, since I 
had only come to Batavia in their service. When 
I had finished speaking all the members of the Council 
looked at one another, and the General having 
whispered to M. Caron, told me that as I was 
resolved to go by sea, their vessels were as good as 
those of the English, and that I should enjoy equally 
good treatment, and he offered me a passage by one of 
them. This offer, which I did not expect, amazed me 
a little, and I did not at first know whether I ought to 
accept it or not. But at length I accepted, fearing that 
by refusing it they might detain me for another year 
without my having power to leave in any direction, a 
friend having told me in confidence that the design of 
the General and his Council was to so manage it, that, 
whether from Batavia or from Europe, I should not 
return to India any more, and that by this means they 
hoped to prevent the commanders or chiefs of the 
factories, which they have both in India and Persia, 
from making further use of me to invest for them in 
diamonds the money of which the Company was de- 



CHAP. XXVI 


DUTCH PAY-BILLS 


383 


frauded.^ It was this which led me to accept the 
passage, for which I thanked the General and his 
Council. Subsequently the General told me to select 
the particular vessel I preferred to go by, and that 
when I informed him he would order a cabin to be 
prepared for my own special convenience, but if I 
would take his advice I should go on the Vice- 
Admiral,^ because of the good company which would 
be on board, and that I should find old friends whom 
I had known in Persia and in the territories of the 
Great Mogul. I tendered him my thanks for hav- 
ing placed me in such good company ; but after he 
had made this obliging offer he added that it was 
absolutely necessary that I should place all the reken- 
ings which I had bought, in the hands of the Avocat 
Fiscal, and that without having done so I should not 
be permitted to leave Batavia. He received no 
further reply from me than that which I had already 
given, that the rekenings were at Bantam, and that 
I should have them sent for, provided he returned my 
money, on which he told me that for what I had dis- 
bursed, when I was about to leave, he would give me 
an order from himself and the Council to be paid in 
Holland by the Company. Some days passed with- 
out the matter being mentioned to me, save that once 
or twice I met the Fiscal, who asked me whether I had 
not yet obtained the rekenings from Bantam. My 
last reply was that I had written about them to the 
English President, who had my box in his house, and 
that I had asked him to send them to me ; but that he 

1 The object of the Dutch was in short to deport Tavernier, whom 
they regarded as a dangerous interloper. 

2 The second ship of the fleet. 



384 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


liOOK lU 


had replied that I must go for them in person, or at 
the least should send a man with an order in my own 
hand, and without that he could not send back 
my box. The truth was that it would have been 
difficult for him to send them, for the whole were with 
me, and I wished to see whether the time would not 
come when I should be asked no more about them. 
However, all those who had purchased these rckcnings, 
merchants as well as captains and other pensons who 
were returning this year, were put in prison, and the 
Council took from them, by force, all their papers, 
deposed them from their offices, and they were sent to 
Holland as common soldiers. 

Four or five days before the fleet left, the Avocat 
Fiscal came to tell me that he had the General’s com- 
mand to arrest me if I was still unwilling to place in 
his hands the rekenings which he had already so often 
asked me for. Having replied that I had nothing to 
give him, he said, so good then as to follow me^' 
this I did willingly. He conducted me to a beautiful 
place on one of the bastions, called “ sapphire,” 
where there is a pleasant house devoted to the amuse- 
ment of the officers, and where the majority of the 
respectable people of the town came to visit me, and 
sent me presents of the best wines. On the following 
day two Councillors came to see me, and told me that 
they knew not to what to attribute the objection which 
I had to place in their hands that which they asked for, 
especially as they, with good grace, offered me an order 
for payment on the Company in Holland. I replied 
that it was not with a sufficiently good grace, and that 
when I saw the order I should make it my business to 
get back the rekenings. Two or three days more 



CHAP. XXVI 


DUTCH PAY-BILLS 


385 


passed, during which the vessels commenced to set 
sail, this caused these gentlemen, both those of the 
Council of India and those of the town, to come to 
see me, to the number of eight or ten. The Major, a 
very respectable man, was in their company, and he 
promised me that as soon as I had got the papers and 
handed them to the members of the Council to calcu- 
late the amount, he would so arrange it that the Gen- 
eral would give me the order to be paid in Holland 
on my arrival there. Seeing that the vessels were 
about to leave and that I could not do otherwise, I 
told them that they must allow me to go to Bantam ; 
this they were unwilling to agree to, preferring to send 
some one on my behalf to bring them. Having given 
my word, they told me that I might go out on parole, 
and that they were much distressed by what had 
happened. I replied that they had reason to be dis- 
tressed, because that having the honour to belong to a 
great Prince, who was the late M. le Due D’Orleans, 
who did me the honour to love me, he would be able 
to resent fully the injustice which they had done me, 
and complain of it to the “ States.” At length, forced 
by their unjust pressure, and by the necessity of leav- 
ing with the fleet, of which I did not wish to lose the 
opportunity, I gave them my rekenings, and from 
day to day I went to see if they had counted them, so 
as to give me the order which they had promised. 
For the Vice-Admiral on which I was to embark re- 
mained more than fifteen days after the other vessels, 
because it was desired to send news by it, to Holland, 
of what had been accomplished by a fleet which the 
General had sent to take possession of the Philippines 
by capturing them from the Spanish. The bad 
VOL. II 2 c 



386 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOtlK III 


weather experienced by these vessels when going there 
was the reason that three or four were lost; and 
they were obliged to return without accomplishing 
anything. 

It is the custom, when the vessels are about re- 
turning to Holland, that the General entertains all the 
principal officers of the fleet with the Council and the 
most important personages of the town, and he did me 
the honour to send to invite me also. The repast 
commenced at 2 p.m., and at four tables there were 
fully sixty persons of both sexes. I was seated between 
the Major and the Secretary of the Grand Council ; 
they were both men of worth, whose conversation 
was agreeable. We had been seven or eight hours at 
table, and they had already asked the General if it 
pleased him that the comedy should commence, which 
the youth of the town were to enact ; whereupon I 
reminded the Major that he had promised me that as 
soon as I had delivered my papers to the Council they 
would give me an order to be paid on my arrival in 
Holland. I told him that the Secretary, to whom I 
had spoken in the morning, had given me reason to 
hope that I should have it before dinner ; but the same 
Secretary then said in my ear that I need not expect 
it, and having finished speaking he rose from the table 
in order to go to the comedy. I then asked our Vice- 
Admiral and three or four merchants who were return- 
ing to Holland to bear in mind what I should say to 
the General and his reply to me, to serve me as wit- 
nesses before the Directors of the Company when we 
arrived in Holland. In the entre-acts of the comedy 
every one took a glass and drank healths, and the 
General having a glass in his hand, and addressing our 



CHAP, XXVI 


DUTCH PAY-BILLS 


387 


Vice-Admiral, “ it is to your health,” said he, “ and that 
of M. Tavernier, whom may God vouchsafe to bless 
and protect on sea during this journey, as he has done 
in all the others which he has made by land.” I replied 
that I thanked him, and that I sincerely hoped that 
God would bless our journey, but that I should not 
make it without displeasure and without resentment for 
their failure to keep their promise — neither he nor his 
Council having kept the promise which they had made 
me to give an order on my handing them my rekenings, 
which amounted to guilders. That now, when 
they had the papers which they asked for, they mocked 
me ; but that I assured them I would publish their pro- 
ceedings throughout the world. The General replied to 
this that I should not trouble myself, and that I might 
be cheerful during the voyage, as the order which he 
had promised me would be in Holland as soon as 
myself, and that I should have no cause to complain of 
them. Though but ill satisfied with the General, I 
took leave of him, and did not await the remainder of 
the comedy, being anxious, amongst other things, to 
prepare for my departure. 


CHAPTER XXVIl 


The Author embarks on a Dutch Vessel in order to 
return to Europk 

On the day following, at a very early hour, I took a 
small Chinese boat to go on board, where, having 
arrived, I found one of the General’s bodyguards, who 
came to convey to me once more his good wishes for 
my voyage, and to tell me that Madame la Generale 
begged me to accept a cask of RniNt; wine, and some 
pots of fruits preserved in vinegar, which she sent me. 
There were cucumbers, mangos, citrons, and eggs with 
their shells, which prevent them from becoming salt. 
I had taken no provisions with me, because some days 
before our departure the captain of the vessel told me 
that if I brought any they would not be received on 
board, he having been forbidden by the General It 
is the custom that the General gives 200 dcus to each 
captain of a vessel in order to furnish himself with all 
kinds of stores, and as I embarked by his advice on 
the Vice-Admiral, he caused double the sum to be 
given to the captain on my account, in order to have 
the honour to cause no expenditure to a stranger to 
whom he had offered a passage. Madame la Generale, 
when sending this present, bethought herself, possibly, 
of that which I had done some days previously for her 



CHAI>. XXVI 


EXAMINATION OF PASSENGERS 


389 


daughter. Some friends seeing that I had easy access 
to the principal ladies of Batavia, begged me to intercede 
for a young man, a native of Paris, who in consequence 
of dissipation had come out to India as a soldier, and was 
in danger of the surgeons cutting off his leg, where he 
had an ulcer. To accomplish it I made a present to the 
General’s daughter, in order that she might ask the 
Major and the Avoca£ Fiscal not to appear to see this 
young man when he was leaving. 

We were still three days in the roads before setting 
sail. On the first day the principal merchant of the fort, 
who kept a record of all the goods which had been em- 
barked, both for Holland and other places, came to the 
vessel according to custom to examine the bill of lading, 
and have it read over by the captain of the vessel and 
the merchants who came with him, whom he made 
.sign it. This bill of lading was placed in the same 
box where they shut ui> all the account books and 
records of all that had passed in the factories of India, 
both concc;rning trade and as regards civil and criminal 
justice, and the covering over all the goods was then 
sealed. 

On the second day the Major with the Avocat 
Fiscal and the chief surgeon also came, according to 
custom, to examine all tho.se who were in the vessel 
returning to I-Ioll.\nd — the hlajor in order to see 
whether there were any soldiers who were going with- 
out leave, for every one must have his passport with 
him ; the Avocai Fiscal to ascertain if any of the writers 
were concealed who wished to e.scape before their term 
was accomplished. The Chief Surgeon of the fort 
comes to see that all the sick persons who are being sent 
home have ailments w’hich are incurable in the country, 



390 


TRAVELS IK INDIA 


HOOK m 


because some soldiers may obtain lea\’c from the 
Major by means of friends, as he did, whom as I have 
said, I carried off ; for the surgeon is obliged by oath 
not to allow any one to go unless he considers that he 
cannot be cured but by going to Euroi>k. The Major 
is bound to give the roll of all the soldiers, both of 
those who are well and those who are ill, to t\w. ylvocat 
Fiscal, who makes them come on the vessel one after 
the other ; and it is then that the sick ones are ex- 
amined by the surgeon. It was perhaps not impossible 
that he whom I took might have been healed of his ill- 
ness in the country ; but by the favour of the Fiscal he 
was not called with the othens, and escaped in that way. 

On the third day the principal persons of the town 
and many ladies came to bid adieu to their friends 
who were leaving, and brought with them wine and 
food to entertain them, music accompanying the good 
cheer, and at 6 p.m. all of them returned home. 

On the following day at daybreak we set sail, and 
were clear of the Straits sooner than we expected, 
because generally the wind is contrary, and besides we 
were leaving twenty-four days after all the others, the 
season for going to sea being nearly over. As soon 
as we had left the Straits we saw Prince’s Island.' 
From thence our direction was to make for the Cocos 
Islands,^ and when in the latitude of these islands we 

1 Prince’s Island is at the western end of the Straits of Sunda. 

2 There are several groups of islands called Cocos : first, there is 
one in the Bay of Bengal between the Andamans and the mainland ; 
second, a group of four coral-girt islands, in Lat. 3° N., near Hog (or 
Sinalu) Island on the W. coast of Sumatra ; and third, the Cocos or 
Keeling Islands, from 700 to 800 miles S. W. of Sumatra, in Lat. 1 2° 
10' S. and Long. 97° E. It was probably the last which Tavernier 
refers to. They produce cocoanuts in abundance, and have for many 



CHAI’. XXVII 


A COLLISION AT SEA 


391 


Spent two or three days scouring the sea, expecting to 
sight them, but were unable to do so, this caused 
us to direct our course straight for the Cape op' Good 
Hope. 

On the forty-fifth day after our departure from 
Batavia (for I do not wish to weary the reader with a 
journal of our voyage), our Vice-Admiral neglected to 
order the ship’s lantern to be lighted, in the belief that 
the whole, fleet had already arrived at the Cape ov 
Goon Hope. It happened that a vessel of the same 
fleet called the “ hi akstru'iit ” also omitted to light its 
lantern on the same night, and as it was very dark 
anti the sea was high, it came into collison with our 
vessel, this threw every one on either side into great 
consternation. Itach <me set himself to pray to God, 
believing that one or other of the vessels would be 
lost. Ours, which was called “ les Provinces,” was 
considered to be the largest and the best of the vessels 
which sailed to I.N'Dia, this was apparent from this 
collision, it having received so severe a shock. Every 
one realising the. danger we were; in, laboured to dis- 
engage the other vessel from cnirs, and good fortune 
willed that the yards of the “ IMaJ'STkicht,” which 
were c;ntangled in our rigging, broke away, and in 
order t<J help matters we cut some of them with an 
axe. 'Phus, with gr<;at trouble, the “ Mae.stricut ” was 
di.sengagexl, and drifting all along the length of our 
vessel, when she was pa.ssing the prow she broke off 
the “ b(;ak-head.” 


years been in the possession of an En^lisli family, several of whose 
members reside there, and there .me a few M.-days there too. A recent 
account of this group will be found in i\u/unrits/'s lU by 
A. I). iMU'hes. 



392 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


KOOK in 


On the fifty-fifth day of our voyage wc came in 
view of the Cape of Good Hope, where we remained at 
sea five or six days, because the waves being very high 
we did not venture to enter the roads to cast anchor. 
This was not because there was much wind then, but 
because the south wind had blown so long that it had 
driven the sea on the coast. The sea having calmed 
down, we cast anchor, and this is what I have been 
able to observe there. 

Of all the races of men I have se<.;n in my travels 
I have found none so hideous nor so brutal as the 
Comoziks,^ whom I have mentioned in my account of 
Persia, and as the inhabitants of the C.M’K ok Good 
Hope, whom they call Cafres or Ilottczitois. When 
the latter speak they make the tongue click {pcicj') in 
the mouth, and although their voice is scarcely articu- 
late they easily understand one another. They have 
for sole garments the skins of wild beasts which they 
kill in the forests, and when it becomes cold in the 
winter in this place, which is in 35° and some minutes 
of latitude, they turn the fur inside, and when it is 
warm they turn it outside. But it is only the more 
well-to-do among them who are thus clothed, the 
others having only some miserable scrap of cloth to 
cover their nakedness. Both men and women are of 
spare habit and small stature, and as soon as a male is 
born his mother partially castrates him, and gives him 

1 Coinouks in the original, and Co7nouchs in the Persian Travels^ 
Book III, chap, xi, where Tavernier describes them as robbers livings at 
the foot of the mountains of Coinanie (i.e, the region between the Cau- 
casus and the north-western shores of the Caspian Sea, bounded on the 
north by the Terek river). He distinguishes them from another people, 
the Kahnouchs (Kalmucks), who, he says, inhabit the coast of the 
Caspian between Moscovie and Great Tartary. 



cuAP. xxvn 


THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE 


393 


sea- water to drink, and tobacco to eat. They perform 
this partial castration because it makes them swifter in 
running, so they say. It is true that there are some of 
them who can capture roebucks by running them down. 

I have had the curiosity to examine many of these 
Cafres, and I found they had all been castrated on the 
right side. They have no knowledge of gold, silver, 
nor any kind of money, and have not, so to speak, 
any religion. 

On our arrival in this place after we had cast 
anchor, four women came on board bringing with them 
four young ostriches, which were cooked for some of 
our sick men. Subsequently they brought us numerous 
turtles and ostrich eggs, and another kind of eggs as 
large as the eggs of a goose. The birds which lay 
these eggs are a kind of goose, and have so much fat 
that it is impossible to eat them, they taste rather of fish 
than of flcsh.^ These women, observing that our cook 
threw into a wooden bucket the entrails of two fowls 
and a goose which were for our supper, took them, and 
having sejueezed them from one end to the other in order 
to express the contents, of which only half was ejected, 
they eat them in that condition, being much pleased 

1 These birds were in all probability pen'^uins. (See vol. i, p. 216, 
?i., and p. 399*) I'hey are mentioned by Castanlicda as occurring at St. 
lilazc, 60 leagues to the eabt of the Cape of Good Hope : — “ On the 
rock also there are great numbers of birds as large as ducks, which do 
not fly, having no feathers in their wings, and which bray like so many 
asses.'* Note , — Lichfield calls them stares, as large as ducks. Osorius 
says that the natives called them satitario, and that they were as big as 
geese. (See Kerr’s Vojaifcs and Travels, vol. ii, pp. 309 and 393 *) 
Sir T. Roe says, “ They arc a strange fowle, or rather a miscellaneous 
creature of Beast, Bird, and Fish, but most of Bird. Confuting that 
definition of man to be Anunal btps i 7 nplu?nc, which is nearer to a 
description of this creature.” {/onrnai, Calcutta edition, p. 2.) 



394 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


HOOK in 


also because our captain gave each of them two cups 
of spirits to drink. Neither men nor women have the 
slightest shame about exposing their nudity, and they 
live almost like beasts. 

When they see vessels arriving they drive cattle 
to the shore and bring what they have to barter 
for tobacco, spirits, and bead.s of crystal and agate, 
which are cheap at Surat, and for some hardware. 
When they are not content with what is offered them 
they immediately take to flight, and at the sound of a 
whistle from their mouths all their animals follow them, 
and you see no more of them. Some persons on one 
occasion, seeing them fly, fired musket-shots in order 
to slay the cattle, but since then, for some years, these 
Cafres have not brought their beasts, and there has 
been much trouble experienced in inducing them to 
return. It is a great convenience for the vessels 
which touch there to obtain supplies, and the Dutch 
have had good reason for building a fort there. There 
is now a fine village inhabited by people of all nation- 
alities who live with the Dutch, and all kinds of grains 
which are brought thither, both from Euhopic and 
Asia, on being sown, grow much better than in the 
places from whence they have been brought. It is a 
very good country which is, as I have said, at the 
35th degree and some minutes of latitude, and it is 
neither the air nor the heat which makes these Cafj'cs 
so black as they are. Desiring to know the explana- 
tion of it, and wherefore they smell so strongly, I in- 
quired from a young girl who was taken as soon as her 
mother had brought her forth, and was nursed and 
reared in the fort, being as white as one of our 
European women. She told me that the reason that 



citAi'. xxvn 


CAFRES AT THE CAPE 


395 


the Cafrcs are so black, is that they rub themselves 
with an ointment which they make of different simples 
known to them, and that if they do not rub themselves 
often, and as soon as they are born, they become 
dropsical like other blacks of Africa, and like the 
Abyssinians, and the inhabitants of Saba, who have 
one leg twice the size of the other d few of these 
people ever living more than forty years. It is true 
that these Cafrcs, brutal as they are, have nevertheless 
a special knowledge of simples, and know how to apply 
them to the maladies for which they are specifics ; this 
the Dutch have very often proved. Be it that the 
Cafres are bitten by a venomous animal, or that an 
ulcer or other disease appears, by means of these 
simples, which they know how to select, they accomplish 
the healing in a short time. Of nineteen sick men 
who were in our vessel, fifteen were placed in the 
hands of the Cafres, the maladies consisted of ulcers 
in the legs or arose from wounds received in war, and 
in less than fifteen days all were perfectly cured. Each 
sick man had two of these Cafres to attend upon him, 
and as soon as they saw what the condition of the 
wound or ulcer was, they sought for the drugs, and 
crushing them between two pebbles applied them to 
the sore. As for the four others they were not given 
into their hands, being so permeated with the ailments 
which accompany venereal disease that they could not 
be cured at Batavia. They all four died between the 
Cape and the Island of Saint Helena. 

In the year i66i there returned from Batavia on 
a vessel named the “West Frisland,” a young 
Brp:ton gentleman, who, after having squandered all 

^ The disease known as elephantiasis. 



396 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


ruioK III 


his money in Holland, entered the Company’s service. 
Having arrived at Batavia a miiltitucki of mosquitos 
bit him on one leg during the night, and an ulcer 
appeared on which all the surgeons of Bat.\via had 
expended their skill and remedies ; and if the General 
had not given him permission to go home it would 
have been necessary to amputate his leg. When the 
ship arrived at the Caiuc, the captain having sent the 
Breton on shore to give him some ease, these Caf7'cs 
began to examine him, and said that if they were 
allowed to treat him they would cure him in a short 
time. The captain placed him in their hands, and in 
less than fifteen days his leg was rendered as sound as 
the other which had never had anything the matter 
with it. 

As soon as a ves.sel has anchored at th<; C.m’K, the 
commander gives some of the soldiers and .sailors 
permission to go on shore to refresh themselvc:s. 
Those who during the voyage hav’e been most indis- 
posed go first, each in his turn, and they go t<j the town, 
where they are fed for 7 or 8 sols a-day, and enjoy 
good cheer. 

It is the custom of the Dutch to send parties from 
time to time to explore the country, and those who 
go furthest are best rewarded. A number of soldiers 
having gone in a party with a sergeant who commanded 
them, and having advanced far into the country, they 
made a large fire at midnight, both to protect them- 
selves from lions and for warmth, and they lay round 
it to rest. Having gone to sleep, a lion seized one of 
the soldiers by the arm, and immediately the sergeant, 
firing a. shot from his gun, slew the animal. When it 
was dead its jaws had to be forced open, with great 



CHAP. XXVII DUTCH COLONISTS AT THE CAPE 


397 


effort, in order to release the soldier’s arm, which was 
pierced from side to side. It is apparent from this 
story that it is an error to suppose that lions do not 
approach a fire.^ These Cafres healed the soldier’s 
arm in twelve days. You see in the fort an abundance 
of skins of lions and tigers.^ Among others there is 
the skin of a horse which these Cafres killed. It is 
white barred with black stripes pricked out like a 
leopard, and without a tail.^ At a distance of 2 or 
3 leagues from the fort the Dutch found a dead lion 
which had four porcupine’s quills in its body, which 
had penetrated the flesh three-fourths of their length. 
It was accordingly concluded that the porcupine had 
killed the lion. The skin is still kept with the spines 
.sticking in the foot. ' 

At one league’s distance from the fort there is a 
fine village which grows from day to day. When the 
vessels of the Dutch Company arrive, if any soldier 
or sailor wishes to remain there he is welcomed. He 
takes as much land as he can manage,'' and, as I have 
above said, all kinds of vegetables and pulse, and even 
grapes grow readily, and rice also is cultivated. These 
peo[)le have young ostriches, beef, and sea and fresh 

^ I think some African travellers have been of opinion that a fire 
attracts lions, and that a substantial fence is requisite for the protection 
of a camp. 

- ily tij^ers here we must understand leopards, as tigers do not 
occur in Africa any more than lions do in the eastern and southern parts 
of India, where Tavernier has so often referred to their presence in 
previous pa^ejes. 

Zebra ; it should have had a tail. 

4 Numerous cases are recorded of tigers having died in India from 
this cause, and also of occasionally having been found, when shot, to 
have porcupine quills sticking in them. 

Here we have an early reference to the establishment of the 
Dutch Boer colony at the Cape. 



398 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


nnoK HI 


water fish in abundance. In order to obtain the yountj 
ostriches when they wish, as soon as the birds are 
seven or eight days old they go to the nests, and 
driving a stake into the ground tie the young birds by 
one of their feet in the nest, so that they cannot c:scape, 
leaving them to be fed by their parents till the}- are 
of good size, afterwards they are taken to be soUl un- 
eaten. 

When the Dutch began to inhabit the Calk ok 
Good Hoke, they took, as I have said, the daughu;r 
of one of these Ca/i-cs as soon as she was born. She 
is white and beautiful, save that she has a slightly 
depressed nose, and she servc;s as interpreter to the 
Dutch. She had a child by a bh-enchman, but the 
Company would not allow him to marry lam. On the 
contrary, they confiscated 800 livres of his wages ; this 
was somewhat severe on him. 

There are in this country quantities of lions and 
tiorers, and the Dutch have discovered a contrivance 
which answers well for killing them. They bind a 
gun to a stake driven into the ground, and place some 
meat at the end of the gun, which is bound to a cord 
attached to the trigger. When the animal comes to 
take this meat the cord draws the trigger, and the 
gun discharging the balls lodge in the mouth or body 
of the animal. The Cafres eat a root which resembles 
our root of cherily^ which they roast, and it serves 
them as bread. Sometimes they make it into flour, 
and it tastes like chestnuts. As for flesh, they eat it 
raw, and fish also in the same condition ; and as for 
the entrails of animals, as I have already said," they 
merely squeeze them to exclude the digested matter 

^ This was apparently a kind of yam. ^ See p. 393. 



ClIAi'. XXVII 


A RELAPSE INTO SAVAC'.ERY 


399 


and then eat them. The majority of the women bind 
these entrails, when dried, round their legs, especially 
tlrose of wild beasts which their husbands slay in the 
woods, and they wear them as ornaments. They also 
eat turtles after they have roasted them for a short 
time, so that the shells can be removed. They are 
very skilful in hurling the assegai, which is a kind of 
dart, and those who have not got any, use a stick an 
inch thick, of a very hard wood, and of the same length 
as the dart. They make a point on it and hurl it to a 
considerable distance with their hand.s. They take 
these sticks with them to the margin of the sea, and 
as soon as a fish comes to the surface they do not fail 
to transfix it. 

As for tho.se birds which arc like our ducks, their 
eggs contain no yolk ; there are a great number in 
the country, and in a bay which is i8 miles from the 
C.vi'ic they are killed with blows of a stick.’ 

During the time while M. VANDI^rK was Genei'al, 
the Dutch captured a young Cafrc boy at the Cape 
and sent him to B.vtavi.\. The General took great 
pains to have him instructed in languages, so that in 
seven or eight yctars he learned Dutch and Portuguese 
in perfection. He then wished to return to his country, 
and the Cieneral iiot desiring to constrain him to 
remain, equipped him with linen and clothes, thinking 
that when he arrived at the Cape he would live like the 
Dutchmen, and would aid them in obtaining supplies 
for their vessels whenever they arrived. But he was 
no sooner at the Cape than he threw his garments 
into the sea and fled with the other blacks, eating 
1 See voL i. p. 216, n.y and p, 393. 



400 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


raw flesh as before, and since then he has remained 
with them without having any intercourse with the 
Dutch.^ 

When these Cafres go to hunt in the forest 
they assemble in large numbers, and have certain 
terrific cries and shouts, so that the beasts are all 
frightened by them, and it is then easy to slaughter 
large numbers of them when thus terrified. I have 
even been told that these cries frighten the Hon. 

^ Some curious examples of this kind of speedy relapse into 
savagery, after a long course of education from infancy, have occurred 
among the inhabitants of the Andaman islands. 


A 



CHAPTER XXVIII 


The Dutch fleet arrives at St. Helena, and the Author 
gives a description of that Island 

After having been twenty-two days at the Cape of 
Good Hope, seeing that the wind was very favourable 
to us, our Vice-Admiral ordered the anchor to be 
hoisted, and we directed our course for the Island of 
St. Helena. As soon as the sails were set and 
prayers had been said, all the sailors and soldiers de- 
clared they would go to rest and sleep till they got to 
St. Helena. For one steady wind always prevails 
and bears you, generally in sixteen or eighteen days, to 
the anchorage at that island. During the whole course 
the sails were not touched, because the wind was 
always astern, and the only trouble which the sailors 
had was that fourteen days after our departure two of 
them were sent to the mainmast top to watch, in 
order to sight the island ; for as soon as it is sighted 
the pilots should take good care to be ready to cast 
anchor on the side facing northwards, and it is neces- 
sary to approach the land in order to cast it, otherwise 
there is no bottom found. If these precautions are 
not properly taken, and if the anchors do not find 
bottom, the currents in the air and ocean quickly carry 
the vessel past the anchorage and there is then no 


VOL. II 


2 D 



402 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK ni 


hope of returning, because the wind is always contrary 
and never changes. 

As soon as two of our anchors were cast into the 
sea the soldiers and sailors were summoned, and the 
crew made the vessel as tight as they could. They 
also fixed stages outside to scrape the hull and 
grease it ; this was accomplished in two days. Then 
all the persons on board were divided into two parties, 
and the Vice-Admiral addressed them from the quarter- 
deck as follows : “ Gentlemen, we shall remain here 
twenty-two days, arrange which of you desire to go 
first on shore to refresh yourselves and hunt, and let 
all return here on the eleventh day so that the others 
may also go (in turn).” Each of the men who went 
on shore was given a pair of shoes, and they carried 
large chaldrons, and supplies of rice, biscuit, spirits, and 
salt. On reaching land they ascended the mountain, 
but three or four remained below to collect sorrel, 
which grows to 2 or 3 feet in height and is very 
good. When they had collected a load of it they went 
to find the others, who were in pursuit of wild pigs, 
which abound in the island. When they had killed 
some they cooked the flesh with the rice and sorrel, 
which make a fairly good kind of soup, and purges 
insensibly without one’s knowing it. While on shore 
they did nothing but sing, drink, and eat, and they had 
to send some of the pigs to the vessel every day. For 
each pig an dcu and a pair of shoes were given them, 
because, on account of the mountain being high and 
steep, this chase gave the men much trouble. I have 
elsewhere spoken of the Persian greyhounds which 
are taken to St. Helena for hunting wild pigs, and 
after having been used they are thrown into the sea. 



CHAP. XXVIII 


ST HELENA 


403 


not being carried farther for the reason I have pointed 
out in the same place. 

While those who are on land occupy themselves 
with this sport, those who remain in the vessel employ 
the time in fishing ; for there is a great abundance of 
fish around this island, especially mackerel. Each 
sailor and soldier is given a measure of salt, with which 
they salt the fish, and then hang them to dry in the 
wind. They feed themselves upon this dried fish after 
leaving the island, and generally have sufficient for 
thirty or forty days, and each receives only a little 
oil and rice cooked in water ; this saves the Company 
a quantity of food. 

All the pigs, sheep, geese, ducks, and hens which 
were on board were sent on shore, and as soon as 
these animals had eaten the sorrel, which purges 
them as well as it does men, in a few days they became 
so fat that when we approached Holland it was 
almost impossible to eat them, especially the geese and 
ducks, on account of the fat. 

There are two places off the coast of St. Helena 
where one can anchor. The best of them is the one 
where we were, because the bottom is very good for 
anchorage there, and the (drinking) water which comes 
from the top of the mountain is the best on the island. 
In this part of the island there is no level ground, the 
mountain rising from the very shore. There is but a 
small place close to the sea, where formerly there was 
a chapel where a Portuguese priest of the sect of 
St. Francis lived for fourteen years; but at present 
this chapel is half ruined. While this priest lived there 
he made presents to the vessels which touched there, 
furnishing them with fish, which he caught and dried. 



404 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


and they gave him in exchange rice, biscuit, and 
Spanish wine. After he had dwelt there for the time 
I have said, and had lived a very austere life, he fell ill, 
and by good fortune it happened that a Portuguese 
vessel arrived just then. All that could be was done 
to relieve him, but he died five days after the vessel 
had anchored, and was interred by people of his own 
nationality. 

The anchorage is less good at the other roads, but 
on shore there is a beautiful plain where all that is 
sown arrives at maturity. The orders of the Dutch 
Company are at present, that, if a vessel takes 
cabbages, salad, or other vegetables, seeds must be 
sown for the benefit of those who may come after- 
wards. There are an abundance of lemon and some 
orange trees, which the Portuguese formerly planted. 
For this nationality has that much good about it, that 
wherever it goes it seeks to do something for the 
benefit of whoever visits the same place subsequently. 
The Dutch act altogether otherwise and seek to de- 
stroy all, to the end that those who come afterwards 
shall find nothing. It is true that it is not the superior 
officers who act in this way, but the majority of the 
sailors and soldiers, who say to one another, “ We shall 
not return any more,” and in order to obtain the fruit 
from the tree more quickly, they cut it down to the 
ground instead of plucking (the fruit itself). 

A serious disturbance in the fleet was on the point 
of breaking out. Although our vessel left Batavia the 
last of all, since she was a good sailer, she was the 
second to arrive at St. Helena. One day the Vice- 
Admiral, the captain, and other officers of the vessel 
determined to go in the skiff towards this plain, in 



CHAP. XXVIII 


ST HELENA 


405 


order to obtain some vegetables and lemons. When 
we arrived there (for I was with the party) we were 
much surprised to find nothing on the trees, and only 
some remains of cabbages and radishes on the ground. 
We did not doubt that the crew of the vessel called 
the Encuse, which had arrived some days before us, 
had done all this damage, and our Vice-Admiral 
resolved to go on board to inquire into the matter. 
When we got there we found quantities of lemons and 
vegetables in the cabins of the captain and pilot, 
and all the sailors presented lemons, with which they 
were well provided, to our men. The captain of the 
vessel offered a present of some to the Vice-Admiral, 
which he refused to accept, saying that it was treason 
to all the fleet, and that all these refreshments must 
be collected and put together in one place until all the 
vessels had arrived, so that each poor invalid might 
have some of them. The sailors and soldiers who had 
filled their chests with them were very unwilling 
to consent ; but the Vice-Admiral, making use of his 
authority, said that if they did not bring all the lemons 
which were still remaining, he would hang a number 
of them, when the Admiral and the remainder of the 
fleet, which consisted of eleven vessels, arrived. 
The captain, fearing this threat, used so much com- 
pulsion with his crew that the whole were brought into 
his cabin and properly shut up until the fleet had 
arrived, so that each vessel had its share of this small 
refreshment. 

When all the fleet had anchored in the roads of St. 
Helena, there was nothing but feasting and rejoicing, 
sometimes on one vessel and sometimes on another ; 
and the English fleet, which consisted of nine vessels. 



406 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


arrived soon afterwards.^ There arrived, moreover, 
two Portuguese vessels laden with slaves of both sexes, 
which came from the Guinea coast, and was taking 
them to the mines of Peru. There were some Dutch- 
men in our fleet who had dwelt at Castel de Mine, 
and knew the language of these poor people. They 
went on board, both to see them, and also to see some 
Dutch sailors who were in the Portuguese service ; 
and on the following night about 250 of these poor 
blacks threw themselves into the sea. It was believed 
that the Dutch, who knew their language, had told 
them that they would be miserably treated when they 
reached the mines, and that it was that which had 
driven them to this action in despair. It is true that 
it is a very hard and miserable slavery ; for frequently, 
after having mined for some days, there are parts of 
the ground more movable or softer than others, and 
this ground collapsing it suddenly buries 400 or 500 of 
these poor people. As soon as they are put to mine, 
their faces, eyes, and skin entirely change in colour ; 
this is caused by the vapours of these hollows, and the 
slaves only exist in these places by the quantity of spirits 
which both the men and women are given to drink. 

Some of these people are no longer slaves, their 
masters having given them liberty, but they do not 
cease to work in the mines and earn large wages. 
But as they leave the mines on Saturday evening 
to return on Monday morning, during the interval 
they drink so much spirit, which is very dear, 
that they spend all they earn during the week, 

^ It may be mentioned here that the first English vessels to visit 
India were despatched in I59ij the object then in view being rather to 
attack the Portuguese than to open up trade with the natives. 



CHAP. XXVIH 


ST HELENA 


407 


and thus they are always in a miserable condition 
of poverty. 

While the two fleets were in the roads at St. 
Helena the English and the Dutch entertained each 
other in turns, and there was continual festivity. The 
day our Vice-Admiral entertained our Admiral and 
some of the chiefs of the English fleet, it was not on 
board our vessel, for as soon as he told me of his in- 
tention, I advised him to give his feast on land ; this 
he did with greater credit and more freedom than the 
others had done. I offered him for the purpose my 
tent, and the carpet and cushions which I had still with 
me, and had used in my journeys by land ; and I 
further promised to open, on his account, my cask of 
Rhine wine, which Madame la Gdn6rale had presented 
me with, and even to contribute to the collation half 
a dozen bottles of Mantua wine, and a similar quantity 
of that of Shiraz. He was delighted with the offer I 
made him, and immediately we went on shore to pitch 
the tent ; this gave us some trouble, because we could 
not find any level spot even of the size of the tent ; 
but our sailors made one near the river, from whence, 
while eating, we might contemplate the high mountains 
and the pointed rocks, where we saw the male and 
female goats leaping from one side to the other. 

On the following day, between 9 and 10 A.M., he 
had the pleasure of seeing all the guests in their boats, 
some with trumpets and drums, others with violins and 
other musical instruments ; this could not have been 
if the Vice-Admiral had given his entertainment in the 
vessel, where all these different classes of people could 
not have come. As the feast, then, was on land, the 
majority of the ladies, both English and Dutch, who 



408 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 111 


were in the fleet also came, without being invited ; and 
so instead of one table three were required, and those 
who expected to eat in the tent, under shade, were 
obliged to yield their places out of politeness to the 
ladies. During the repast there was a great noise of 
trumpets and other musical instruments, and at each 
health all the guns of the vessels fired a discharge. 
The first health which was drunk was that of the King 
of England, after which followed those of the States 
General, of the Prince of Orange, and of the Com- 
panies, and then came the healths of the chief officers 
of the fleet and of some private persons. At the close 
of the repast, when we were ready to return on board, 
a disaster happened which somewhat marred the enjoy- 
ment of the company. The Admiral’s trumpeter hav- 
ing drunk a little more than he ought to have done, 
mounted on a high rock in order to blow his trumpet, 
and from time to time he rolled down large stones. 
Although ordered to stop, because it was seen that some 
injury might happen, he did not cease, however, find- 
ing some amusement in it ; and at length he let go a 
very large one, which, jumping from rock to rock, went 
through the tent, where it broke a case of wine and 
killed a small boy born at Batavia of Dutch parentage. 
He was being sent to Holland to learn the language 
properly, and to be taught to read and write. For 
these children, though born of parents who have come 
from Holland, never learn Dutch properly while they 
remain at Batavia, being brought up among servants 
and slaves, who addict themselves more to the Portu- 
guese language than to Dutch. These children also 
learn from them a thousand wickednesses, and at the 
age of nine years they know more lechery than do 



CHAP. XXVIII 


DEPARTURE FROM ST HELENA 


409 


youths of twenty years in Europe.^ After having 
buried the child the company returned on board sooner 
than they would otherwise have done, and they were 
distressed that a day which had been so joyful had so 
sad a termination. 

On the two following days we had numerous visits, 
and there was not a lady who did not come to our 
vessel ; I believe it was less on our own account than to 
ascertain if we had still any Rhine wine, which they 
had found to be excellent at our Vice-Admiral’s feast. 

After our vessel had been twenty days at anchor 
(for the others which arrived later had less time to re- 
fresh themselves) the Admiral fired three cannon shots, 
and hoisted a large flag on the poop of his vessel, as a 
signal to all the captains and pilots to come on board, 
where, having arrived, they held council in order to 
settle what route should be taken for Holland. The 
majority maintained that they should go to the west 
rather than to the south, because the season for navi- 
gation was much advanced, and by sailing towards the 
West Indies we should find the proper winds for 
Holland. But it happened altogether otherwise ; for 
as soon as we had passed the line we found the winds 
contrary to what our pilots had expected ; this was the 
reason why we were afterwards obliged to go to the 
64th degree in the latitude of Iceland, and return to 
Holland from the north. 

^ There is, it is to be feared, some applicability in these remarks 
to the case of children reared in India at the present time. 



CHAPTER XXIX 


TJu Dutch fleet leaves the Island of St. Helena, and 

the Author arrives safely with it in Holland 

On the day after the council had been held, the 
Admiral ordered the three signal shots for parting, to 
be fired, and at ten o’clock p.m. all the fleet set sail. 
The English still remained there and we did not know 
why, unless it was to try to catch one of their sailors, 
who, having been ill-treated by his pilot, and having 
one day gone on shore with him to get water, slew 
him with two stabs of his dagger, after which he 
escaped into the mountain. If he remained there he 
must have passed a bad time, there being no house 
in the island. Three days after our departure from 
St. Helena the crew commenced to pray every morn- 
ing and evening, but I remarked that they had not 
done so during the twenty -two days we spent in 
the roads; this I thought strange, as if one should 
not pray to God when out of danger as well as while 
in danger. 

On the eleventh day after our departure we crossed 
the line with a favourable wind. I know that many 
have written that the heat is insupportable under the 
line, and that the water and some of the provisions 
become decomposed, but we experienced nothing of 



CHAP. XXIX 


THE FLEET MEETS ITS CONVOY 


4H 


the kind ; elsewhere in the voyage we felt much 
greater heat. I am quite ready to admit that if a 
calm had caught us under the line, instead of the 
propitious wind which we experienced, we should have 
felt the heat more than we did. 

After some days’ sailing we spent three in passing 
a bank where the sea is full of a plant, the leaf of 
which resembles the leaves of the olive.^ This plant 
has fruits like large white gooseberries, but they con- 
tain nothing inside. At length, after many more days’ 
sailing, we sighted the coasts of Iceland, and after- 
wards the Island of Ferelle,® where the Dutch fleet 
already awaited us, constantly firing cannon shots to 
intimate to us its position. As soon as the two fleets 
sighted one another, each vessel fired all its guns, and 
took up position by its patron, that of the Admiral by 
the Admiral, that of the Vice-Admiral by the Vice- 
Admiral, and so of all the others. We numbered 
eleven vessels, there came also eleven other vessels to 
meet us, and after each had recognised its mate, the first 
thing that was done was to send on board the vessels 
from India a quantity of supplies, as casks of beer, 
smoked meat, butter, cheese, good white biscuit, and 
for every vessel one cask each of Rhine, French, and 
Spanish wines. As soon as the supplies were on 
board our vessel, the soldiers and sailors took three 
or four of the casks of beer, which they placed on 
end close to the mainmast, breaking them open with a 
cannon-ball, and they were then free to whoever wished 
to drink. It was the same with the food, for both drink 

1 This was the sargossa weed, Fucus natans, which is found in 
the Pacific. The so-called fruits are the floats. 

2 Faroe islands. 



412 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


and food were at the discretion of the crew during the 
remainder of the voyage. On the following day each 
pilot resigned his charge, giving over the direction to 
the pilots brought by the convoy. There were three 
of them for each vessel, and for that purpose pilots 
of from sixty to eighty years of age, who knew these 
seas perfectly, and how the sand-banks had changed 
during the current year, were selected. 

On the following day the Admiral of the convoy 
fired three cannon shots, and hoisted his flag on the 
poop, to give notice to all the officers of both fleets 
to assemble in council. All the reports and pro- 
cesses which have been made against those who have 
misbehaved during the voyage are taken to it, and 
the whole being examined, according as the council 
adjudicates the accused are brought from each vessel 
on the following day, and judgment is pronounced. 
Formerly they took them to Holland, but when it 
was so, they found friends who obtained their pardon, 
and they all got off. But at present all are afraid, as 
there is no longer chance of pardon. This is the 
reason why the soldiers and sailors are not guilty of 
insolence and mutiny during the voyage as they were 
formerly. There were two of our fleet hung for having 
stabbed officers ; many were sentenced to the stocks 
and whipping before the mainmast, and the wages 
of others were confiscated. 

We passed through a fleet of herring fishers, and 
they did not fail to bring casksful to each vessel. 
The captains presented them with rice, pepper, and 
other spices. 

As soon as we had sighted the coasts of Holland, 
all the soldiers of our fleet who had been with those 



CHAP. XXIX 


ARRIVAL IN HOLLAND 


413 


who went to beseige the Manillas, from joy at behold- 
ing their country again, fixed a quantity of large and 
small wax tapers about the poop and bow of the vessel, 
where the wind, when they were lit, could not extin- 
guish them. The same was done in five or six of the 
vessels ; this gave out such an extraordinary light that 
the whole fleet was alarmed. On our vessel alone, there 
were more than 1 700 of these wax tapers, both large 
and small. The sailors had kept them since they 
were at the Manillas, from whence they had brought 
a large quantity, as also from Point de Galle in the 
Island of Ceylon. For when on shore they pillaged 
and burnt some convents which were in the country, 
and as wax is cheap throughout India, and is easily 
bleached, every religious house always has a large 
supply of wax tapers on account of the festivals, when 
numbers are lighted before the grand altar and in all 
the chapels. Thus the least of the Dutch sailors had 
thirty or forty of these tapers for his share, and some 
of them had some as thick as the thigh. 

The command was, according to custom, that our 
vessel, as Vice-Admiral, should go to Zealand. We 
were on the coast seven whole days without being able 
to enter Flushing,^ on account of the sand which 
frequently changes its position. As soon as we had 
cast anchor, more than fifty small boats came about 
our vessel, but keeping a short distance off, being for- 
bidden to come alongside. Each then began to call 
out and ask the names of persons in order to carry 
the news of their arrival to their relatives and friends. 

On the day following that on which we anchored 
. off Flushing, two of the members of the Company 

1 Flessingue in the original. 



414 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 111 


came on board to give welcome to all, and to 
tell them to close their chests and place their marks 
thereon. They were then carried into a hall of the 
India House, and the day was fixed upon which each 
should return to claim what belonged to him. It 
is the custom that before the chests are given up they 
are opened in order to be examined, through fear lest 
they should contain anything contraband. 

These two gentlemen summoned the crew on deck 
between the poop and the mainmast, and taking the 
captain, whom they placed at their side in front of all, 
“ Gentlemen,” they said to all on board, “ on behalf of 
the Directors we order you to tell us whether the 
captain has ill-treated you during this voyage.” The 
crew, who wanted to be on shore, where the majority 
saw father or mother, brothers or sisters, or friends 
who awaited them, began to cry out that the captain 
was a good man, that he knew how to act for the 
interests of the Company, and his own also, and that if 
when leaving Batavia God had delivered them from 
him, they would have been much more happy during 
the voyage. At once, without another word, they all 
jumped into the boats and went on shore, where they 
received many kisses and embraces, and immediately 
all hastened to the publichouse. It is where most of 
the soldiers and sailors first go on the occasion of their 
debarkations, and generally they do not leave it save 
to claim their baggage or receive their pay, or to 
join a party. Some of these soldiers and sailors 
returning from India have been known to expend, 
in two months’ continual debauch, nearly looo dcus, 
which they had had much trouble in earning in fifteen 
or twenty years’ service to the Company. I have 



CHAP. XXIX 


MIDDELBURG 


415 


known a sailor at Middelburg, who in a debauch 
broke glass to the value of 250 livres, when drinking 
to the health of his friends. But the publicans do not 
receive all the money of these people, as the women of 
pleasure get their share of it too. 

The two Directors of the Company, who came on 
board as soon as the anchor was cast, to give permission 
to the crew to go on shore, and appoint persons for 
the protection of the vessel, did me the honour to 
salute me at once, and I received many expressions of 
kindness from them. They ordered a collation to be 
served at the same time, and, drinking to my health, 
asked me if I had anything to complain of with regard 
to any of the officers of the vessel. I replied that on 
the contrary I had every reason to praise them, that 
they had all treated me with great civility, and that I 
gave thanks to the Vice-Admiral, to the captain, and 
to all the merchants of the vessel for the good friend- 
ship they had shown me during the voyage. For it 
should be stated that besides the Vice-Admiral we had 
a captain under him. The Directors told me that they 
were much pleased that I was satisfied with the treat- 
ment I had received, telling me that if I had any 
chests I had only to place my mark on them, and that 
they would take care to have them carried to the 
Company’s House at Middelburg, where I might come 
to claim them in four days. It required fully this time 
for them to discharge a part of what was in the vessel, 
which could not reach Middelburg with a full cargo. 
I thanked them for their goodwill, and, having placed 
my mark on my chests, left the vessel and went by 
land to Middelburg. 

It was the year that the Chamber General was 



416 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK ni 


held there, for it is held for four years in sequence at 
Amsterdam, and two years at Middelburg. The 
reason of which is, that Amsterdam owns half the 
Company ; Middelburg a quarter ; and Rotterdam, 
Delft, Horne, and Encuse each a sixteenth ; the 
Company not being bound to hold the Chamber in 
either of these four last, which only make up one- 
fourth, and have only the right to have a vessel each 
year between the four, one year at Rotterdam, one 
year at Delft, and similarly the others. For the same 
reason Amsterdam has eight Directors, Middelburg 
four, and the other four towns each his own one ; this 
makes the number' sixteen, though they always speak 
of seventeen Directors, because the President has two 
votes. 

On the fourth day of my arrival at Middelburg I 
went to the India House, where I found two of the 
Directors, who were already engaged in delivering the 
chests to those to whom they belonged, and as soon as 
they saw me they told me to claim mine ; this I did, at 
the same time handing them the keys of my boxes, so 
that they might see for themselves whether I carried 
anything which was contraband. Of these two gentle- 
men one was from Zealand, and the other from 
Horne, and the latter took the keys to open my boxes. 
But the Zealand Director, more civil than he of North 
Holland, told him I was free, that I was not subject 
to the Company, and that it had afforded me a free 
passage. My keys were at once returned to me, and 
one of the people of the store was ordered to summon 
some sledges, which are used in Holland instead of 
waggons, in order to convey my chests. I may say in 
passing, that it is not only on this occasion that I have 



CHAP. XXIX PRIVATE TRADE OF THE DUTCH 


417 


remarked that the more one approaches the north 
the less one meets with civility and honesty among 
the inhabitants, and that manners follow the harshness 
and roughness of the climate. 

The very same evening the Directors did me the 
honour to send one of their officers to invite me to 
dine with them on the following day. Many persons 
interested in the Company were at the repast, and I 
believe that they were there less for the good cheer 
than to hear me talk, thinking that I might know 
many things in regard to the private trade which the 
representatives of the Com'pany engage in, in India. 
They were not mistaken ; and I may say that no one 
could be better informed than I was of the methods 
which these agents, who have the management of the 
factories in Persia and India, practise in order to 
enrich themselves. For they never return to Holland 
empty-handed, and when they take but 100,000 or 
150,000 Jlorins they count it a poor thing. I have 
known many of them who have amassed up to 600,000 
and 700,000 fiorins ; as, for instance, among others the 
Sieur Nicolas Obrechit, who was chief of the Dutch 
factories both at Ispahan and Hormuz and other 
places in Persia, during the years from 1635 to 1640. 
Those who were his friends and had done trade with 
him estimated that he carried away more than 15,000 
tomans, which are equal to about 690,000 livres,'^ 
without estimating what he had expended on the gout 
with which he was afflicted, and the other ailments 
which oftener arise from relationships with the courte- 
sans of Persia, than from the trouble expended in 
packing silk, weighing it, examining its quality, and 
^ Equal to ^5i,75o* 


VOL. II 


2 E 



418 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK in 


seeing whether it has any bad skeins mixed with the 
good. The Sieur Obrechit was well able to spend 
freely, for his profits were large, but such as are rarely 
permitted or approved of by honest people. All the 
spices, sugar, and other goods of the Company are sold 
wholesale, generally at Hormuz or Gombroon, and 
amount in value, annually, to 15 or 16 tonnes of gold, 
each tonne being equal to 100,000 gttilders, which are 
equivalent in our money to 120,000 livres, and the 16 
tonnes of gold to 1,920,000 livres. The Sieztr Obrechit 
did not sell all these goods without receiving annually 
for himself, 80,000 or 100,000 guilders^- which the 
Persian merchants presented to him, underhand, 
through the broker, so that he might allow the goods 
to be sold at a low price. But he was not the inventor 
of this fine means of enriching himself, others practised 
it before him, and since his time others have employed 
it, especially the Sieurs Constant and Van WtiCK. 

Moroever, there is also the profit that these gentry 
make on silk. It is true that for some years past the 
Company has not esteemed Persian silk so highly as it 
did formerly, because it has not so great a sale in Japan 
as it would have had if the trade had continued as it 
was in the years 1636 and 1637. All the chiefs of the 
factory who succeeded Obrechit could (not?) have made 
as much as he did ; for in the two above-named years silk 
was dear in Japan, because the people of China and 
Tonquin being then at war with the Dutch, the latter 
prevented them from trading with Japan ; and the 

1 Taking the Dutch guilder or florin at i s. g^d. (see vol. i, p. 413) the 
value of the tonne would be about ;£9ooo. Perhaps the guilder ought to 
be a fraction more, but it is important to have here independent testi- 
mony that the livre as understood by Tavernier was about .is. 6d. 
— the proportion being 5 guilders = 6 livres, or 9s. 



CHAP. XXIX 


THE SIEUR OBRECHIT 


419 


Chinese and Tonquinese could not obtain silk except 
through the hands of the Dutch. Whatever it may cost 
they must have it to clothe themselves with, as they use 
no other materials for their garments. It was in these 
two years, 1636 and 1637, that the Sieur Obrechit filled 
his purse ; for instead of 500 or 600 bales of silk, which 
is the most they receive from the King of Persia, the 
General of Batavia and his Council wrote to him that 
whatever the price he must send them 2000 loads. 
I have alluded, in the first volume of my history, to the 
agreement made between the King of Persia and the 
Dutch Company ; and I have also made mention, in 
connection with this subject, of the small success of the 
negotiation of the Ambassadors of Holstein, of which 
the Secretary of that embassy has without doubt not 
boasted in the account which he has given to the public. 
Therefore, for fear of wearying the reader, I shall not 
repeat it here, and I shall only ask him to remember 
that the arrival of these Ambassadors, which caused 
apprehension and jealousy among the Dutch, was the 
cause that the latter raised the price of silk so much that 
they removed all desire in other nations to outbid them. 

Thus Obrechit, having then received an order 
from Batavia for 2000 loads of silk, irrespective of 
cost, and this quantity being all that Persia could 
supply, as he was shrewd and loved profit beyond all 
things, he succeeded so well in intriguing with the 
Armenians and other merchants in Persia that he ob- 
tained the 2000 loads of silk which had been ordered. 
It is true that beyond the 500 or 600 loads which 
the Dutch receive from the King, according to the 
agreement made between his Majesty and the Com- 
pany, Obrechit was obliged to pay at a high rate for 



420 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


the others ; and he bought them from the Armenians, 
who sold them to him at the same rate as those they 
had sold to Aleppo and Smyrna. During these two 
years there was not a single load of silk for which he 
did not place 4 tomans in his purse, and he said some 
loads cost him 60 tomans. It was represented to him 
that it would be better not to send so large a quantity 
of silk, as it was so dear, and that the merchants of the 
country, both Christians and Muhammadans, were 
laughing at him ; but he only replied that he must obey 
the Company’s order. One day when I was alone with 
him we were talking together about my travels, and he 
told me how astonished he was, seeing that I under- 
stood the greater part of the trade of Asia, that I took 
so much trouble in my long journeys ; that I should do 
much better by serving the Company, and that if I 
wished he would send me to the diamond mines on its 
account ; but I believe it would have been on his own. 
When I had thanked him for his goodwill, and told 
him I had no such intention, he replied that I did not 
know what I was refusing, that I would derive great 
profit, and that in his factory, with a scratch of the pen, 
or by changing a figure, he obtained what he wished. 
I replied to him that on three or four occasions my 
horoscope had been cast, and on all occasions it had 
been agreed that I should live to a good age ; and so, 
if I was able to acquire wealth, I desired to acquire it 
honestly and by my labour, as God had ordained for 
me, in order to be able to possess it with greater 
security and comfort to my soul for the remainder 
of my days, and that my heirs might enjoy it peaceably. 
If we were not to act in this way, replied he, we should 
be miserable ; for the wages the Company gives us 



CHAP. XXIX THE DIRECTORS AT MIDDELBURG 


421 


would not suffice to clothe us. On my return from 
one of my voyages I went to see him at a village 
bearing his name, situated one league from the Hague. 
I saw him ill in bed, and suffering from several diseases, 
and I believe that he often then recalled to mind what I 
had said to him at Ispahan. 

I must now return to the Directors and the members 
of the Company with whom I dined at Middelburg. 
Most of them desired that I should inform them of the 
manner in which the agents of the Company behaved 
in Persia and India, and the others asked me to speak 
of my travels. I preferred to satisfy the latter, and 
avoided all reference to trade. It is true that 
if I had not had some suspicion of the deception 
which they played me subsequently, I would pos- 
sibly have told them many things from which they 
might have derived benefit. For in the space of the 
forty years during which I have often visited Persia 
and India, there have been few persons in the service 
of the Company who have not told me of all the tricks 
they made use of in order to acquire money. In return 
for this confidence, when they were about to return 
home, I endeavoured to furnish them with a good 
parcel of diamonds, which occupy but little space. 
If then I had declared to these gentlemen what I knew 
of this matter, they would have gained much in study- 
ing the record I should have given, and by discovering 
the knavery of their servants, and by doing rightly 
by me, their conscience would not be charged as 
it is, concerning the 17,500 florins which General 
Vanderlin and his Council seized from me at 
Batavia. That which astonishes me most is, as I 
have elsewhere remarked, that when the General and 



422 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


his Council took from me the value of these 17,500 
florins, they made a hundred promises that I should 
be paid immediately I set foot in Holland, but this 
was not done in spite of all the steps I could take for 
its accomplishment. For when leaving the feast that 
was given at Batavia on the departure of the fleet, I . 
took four witnesses of the fact, namely, our Vice- 
Admiral and three merchants, to whom, when taking 
leave of the General and Council, I said aloud in their 
presence that they would be my witnesses if God 
permitted us to arrive in Holland or Zealand, and 
would remember that the General and his Council did 
not give me on my departure that which they had 
promised, namely, an order which I could show to the 
Directors of the Company, by which they would see 
that 17,500 florins were due and payable to me on 
my arrival. The General’s response was to take a 
glass of wine and wish me a pleasant journey, assuring 
me that the order would arrive in Holland before me. 
The Directors, to justify their refusal to pay me, told 
me that the General and his Council had written 
nothing to them concerning the matter, and that when 
they received an advice of it they would at once pay 
it. I was at length obliged to bring an action against 
them which lasted two years, before I was able to find, 
either at Amsterdam or the Hague, a notary who 
would serve a summons, every one fearing them, as 
they were both judges and parties to the suit. During 
these two years I often entered their assembly, where 
they always gave me some hope, but in reality they 
were laughing at me. I have hardly ever been de- 
ceived when looking a man in the face, as I know 
almost exactly what is in his mind. I remarked that 



CHAP. XXIX 


TAVERNIER’S CLAIM 


423 


many of these men had the appearance of loving their 
own interests and caring little for those of others, and 
among others there was a young man who represented 
Encuse, who gazed earnestly at me. After having 
looked at me for some time he asked why I had been 
at Batavia, where strangers have no business. I re- 
plied to him that all these gentlemen were sufficiently 
acquainted with it, and that as he was the only one 
who did not know, his beard was too young to oblige 
me to explain to him. As their procedure annoyed 
me, and I was enraged at seeing myself treated so 
unjustly, I added in speaking to this young man that 
he would do better at Encuse selling his butter and 
cheese than where he was. The President interrupted 
me gently, and told me that I must offend no one, to 
which I replied that I had seen too much to render an 
account of my doings in this manner, and that what 
I did at Goa and Batavia was at the request of the 
Chief of the factory at Vengurla, and solely for the 
purpose of rendering a service to the Company. This 
discourse being finished, the President asked me to go 
outside for a short time, which I did. Afterwards, 
having returned, he told me that he still knew nothing 
about the matter, and that all these gentlemen believed 
that I would not remain there, but would still make 
another journey to Asia, and as I praised the good 
treatment I had received on their vessels on my return 
voyage, they again offered me a passage, and would 
give orders that I should be treated even still better 
than before ; that as soon as I arrived at Batavia I 
should be paid ; that they would send an order to that 
effect to the General and his Council, and that I might 
embark on the first vessel which left for Surat or 



424 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK III 


Hormuz. I thanked these gentlemen for all their fine 
offers, and told them that I preferred to make three 
journeys by land rather than one voyage by sea. In 
conclusion, at the end of five years the Directors wrote 
to my brother (for I had then returned to India) that if 
he was willing to take 10,000 livres in satisfaction of 
my claim, he might come to receive them. This my 
brother did, and he gave them a receipt in full. I 
leave the reader to judge of the equity and conscience 
of these gentry. For either they owed me 17,500 
florins or they did not. If they did not, why pay me 
10,000 livres? And if they did owe me, why not pay 
me fully. I am not the only person to whom they 
have done injustice of this kind. I know many other 
more serious cases, the recital of which would not be 
to their advantage.^ 

Such was my return from India in the year 1649, 
the only time I returned by sea, having made, as I 
have said, all my Asiatic journeys by land, both when 
going and returning, counting as nothing the short pas- 
sage in the Mediterranean ; and my first journey was 
wholly by land, from Paris by Germany and Hungary 
to Constantinople, where I also went on the return 
from my last journey in the year 1669. From Con- 
stantinople I went to Smyrna, where I embarked for 
Leghorn, and from Leghorn I travelled by land to 
Genoa, from Genoa to Turin, and from Turin to 
Paris, where I took the King that beautiful parcel of 
diamonds of which I have spoken in the discourse on 

1 As to the merits of this case, without the other side of the question 
before us, we cannot venture to decide. But, on the whole, Tavernier 
got off much easier than did the Dutch subjects, who also bought reken- 
titg's at the same time, for they not only had to give them up but were 
imprisoned and sent to Holland as common soldiers (see p. 384). 



CHAP. XXIX 


THE KING OF FRANCE 


425 


precious stones.^ His Majesty had the goodness to 
give me a very favourable reception, which was a 
glorious conclusion to my long journeys, in which I 
have always had for my primary object to spare no- 
thing in order to make known to the great monarchs 
of Asia, that there is one grander than them all, in 
Europe, and that our King infinitely surpasses them 
both in power and glory. 

My first thoughts on finding myself in Paris, on the 
return from my sixth journey, were to return thanks 
to God for having preserved me, during the space of 
forty years, among so many perils which I had run, by 
sea and land, in regions so far distant. 

1 See p. 126. 


A 



THE KING’S LICENCE 


LouiSj by the grace of God, King of France and of Navarre, to our be- 
loved and liege Councillors, the Members of our Courts of Parliament, 
Masters of the Requests ordinary of our House, Bailiffs, Seneschals, 
or their Lieutenants, and to all others whom it may concern, greeting : 
our well beloved Jean Baptiste Tavernier, Esq., Baron of Aubonne, 
having informed us that he has written a book which has for title, 
Six Voyages ?nade in Ticrkey\ Persia^ and India^ during the space of 
forty years^ and hy all the routes that can be take?i, which he desires 
to print and sell, if it pleases us to grant our letters, necessary to 
him who humbly seeks them. For these reasons we have permitted 
and shall permit the Petitioner to have the said Book printed in such 
volume, margin, or type, as he may be advised, and to sell and dis- 
pose of it throughout our Kingdom and the territories subject to us, 
during the space of fifteen years, to date from the date on which the 
said impression may be completed \ during which time we expressly 
inhibit all Booksellers and Printers from printing, selling, or disposing 
of the said Book, and also of reprinting it, except with the consent 
of the Petitioner or of those who hold the right to do so from him, 
on pain, to those acting otherwise, of a penalty of three thousand 
livres fine, one-third to us, one-third to the Hotel Dieu of our City 
of Paris, and the remaining third to the said Petitioner; also of 
confiscation of the counterfeit copies, and of all expenditure, damages, 
and interest ; on condition of placing two copies of the said Book in 
our Public Library, one in that of our Chamber in the Palace of the 
Louvre, and one in that of our beloved and loyal Chevalier and 
Chancellor of France, the Sieur Daligre, before offering it for sale, 
on pain of nullifying these presents, which will be registered in the 
proper place ; and in placing at the beginning and end of them a 
statement acknowledging that they are bound by the terms agreed 
upon, and of their willingness to allow the Petitioner to enjoy them 
quietly and peaceably. 

We command in the first place our Usher or Sergeant, on this 



THE KING'S LICENCE 


427 


requisition, to undertake for the execution of these presents all neces- 
sary deeds and actions without further permission, notwithstanding 
Clameur de Haro^^ “ Charte Normande^^ and all else to the contrary. 
For such is our pleasure. Given at Versailles the 7th day of 
October, in the year of Grace one thousand six hundred and seventy- 
five, and of our reign the thirty-third. By the King in Council. 

Desvieux. 

Registered on the Book of the Society of Booksellers and Printers 
of Paris, the 14th November 1675, according to the resolution of 
Parliament of the 8th April 1653, and that of the King's Privy 
Council of the 27th February 1665. 

(Signed) Thierry, Syndic. 

And the said Jean Baptiste Tavernier, Esq., Baron of Aubonne, 
has ceded and transferred his rights to Gervais Clouzier and Claude 
Barbin, Merchant Booksellers, in accordance with the agreement 
made between them. 

Printed for the first time the ist of October 16/6. 


A 




A 


APPENDICES 


A 



APPENDIX I 


1. The Great Mogul’s Diamond, and the true histoiy of the Ko}U-nu 7 \ 

2 . Summary history of the Koh-i-nur. 

3. The Grand Duke of Tuscany’s Diamond, otherwise known as the 

Austrian Yellow, or the Florentine j and some further notes on 
the absolute weights of the carat and rati as they were used by 
Tavernier. 

4. On the Weights of the Diamonds, other precious stones and Pearls, 

mentioned by Tavernier. 

APPENDIX II 

List of all the Diamond Mines in India of which there are authentic 
records ; and extracts from an Early Account of the Diamond 
Mines of Southern India. 

APPENDIX III 
The Diamond Mines of Bengal. 

APPENDIX IV 
The Diamond Mines of Borneo. 

APPENDIX V 

1 . The Ruby Mines of Burmah. 

2. The Sapphire Washings of Ceylon. 

APPENDIX VI 

A Review in the Philosophical Transactions of Chapuzeau’s {sic') work, 
entitled Histoire des Joyaux, published in 1665 or 1666. 



APPENDIX I 


I. The Great MoguVs Diamond and the true History 
of the Koh-i-nur 

Although the writers on this subject are very numerous, still it is 
believed that almost every one of them who has contributed to its 
elucidation has been consulted in the preparation of this account \ 
and it is certain that many, whose writings have also been consulted, 
are chiefly noteworthy for the amount of confusion which they have 
unfortunately introduced into it The principal authorities are 
enumerated in the note below.^ It would only prove puzzling to 
the reader and cloud the main issue were any considerable space 


1 It will be convenient to classify the principal authorities according to the 
theories which they have respectively adopted, as follows : — 

First, Those who maintain the identity of the Koh-i-nur with 
BIbar’s Diamond : — 

Erskine, Life of Bdber^ p. 308 ; Rev. C. W. King, Natural History of 
Precious Stones^ Bohn’s Ed., 1870, p. 70; E, W. Streeter, The Great Diamonds 
of the World, p, 1 16. 

Second, Those who maintain the identity of the Koh-i-nur with the 
Great Mogul’s Diamond, and who either treat BAbar’s Diamond 
as distinct or make no special reference to it 
James Forbes, Oriental Memoirs, 1834, vol. ii, p. 175,- Major-General 
Sleeman, Rambles and Recollections, 1844, vol. i, p. 361 ; James Tennant, 
Lecture on Gems and Precious Stones, 1852, p. 84; V. Ball, As, Socy, of 
Bengal, 1880, vol. 1 , Pt. ii, p. 31, and Economic Geology of India, 1881, p. 19. 

Third, Those who maintain the identity of the Koh-i-nur with both 
Babar’s and the Great Mogul’s Diamonds : — 

Official descriptive Catalogue of the Great Exhibition <^1851, Pt. iii, p. 695 ; 
Kluge, Handbuch der Edelsteinkunde, Leipzig, i860, p. 240; Professor N. 
S. Maskelyne, Roy. Inst, of Great Britain, March i860, and Edb, Rev,, i866, 
pp. 247-8 ; Genl. Cunningham, Arch, Reports, vol. ii, p. 390 ; Professor Nicol, 
Encyclopedia Britannica, Art. ‘‘Diamond.” 

It would not be difficult to add to the above a score of names of writers who 
have supported one or other of these theories. 



432 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


devoted to refuting the errors and correcting the misquotations 
regarding it, which are so common in works on precious stones. It 
seems to be a better course to endeavour to secure close attention 
to the facts of the case, supported by well -verified references, so 
that the reader may be in a position to pronounce for himself a 
verdict on definite evidence alone, and accept or reject the conclu- 
sions which are here suggested. 

In order, so to speak, to clear the way for the discussion, it will 
be necessary, as a preliminary, to give short accounts of all the large 
diamonds with which authors have sought to identify the Koh 4 -?iur. 

Firstly, there is the diamond of Sultan Babar, which his son 
Humayun received in the year a.d. 1526 from the family of Rdja 
Bikermajit, when he took possession of Agra. It had already then 
a recorded history, having been acquired from the Raja of Malwd 
by Ala-ud-din in the year 1304.^ Regarding its traditional history, 
which extends 5000 years further back, nothing need be said here; 
though it has afforded sundry imaginative writers a subject for 
highly characteristic paragraphs. 

According to Sultan Babar the diamond was equal in value to 
one day's food of all the people in the world. Its estimated weight 
was about 8 mishkals^ and as he gives a value of 40 ratis to the 
mishkal — it weighed, in other words, about 320 ratis. Ferishta^ 
states that Babar accepted the diamond in lieu of any other ransom, 
for the private property of individuals, and that it weighed 8 
mishkals or 224 ratis. Hence i mishkal =28 ratis ^ from which we may 
deduce that the ratis Ferishta referred to were to those of Babar, of 
which 40 went to the mishkal^ as 28:40 ; and this, on the supposition 
that the smaller rati was equal to 1.842 troy grs., gives a value of 2.63 
troy grs. for the larger, which closely approximates to the value of the 
pearl rati of Tavernier. If on the other hand we deduce the smaller 
from the larger (at 2.66 grs. for the pearl rati) we obtain for it a 
value of 1.86. So far as I am aware, this explanation of Ferishta's 
figures ® has not been published before. The value of the mishkal 
in Babar’s time, as being a more tangible weight than the variable 
rati, has been investigated by Prof. Maskelyne,^ and he concludes 
that it was equal to about 74 grs. troy, and that if taken at 73.69 


1 See Erskine’s Memoirs of Sultan Bdber, p. 308. 

2 History of the Rise of the Mahomedan Power hi India, etc., trans. by J. 
Briggs, London, 1829, vol. ii, p. 46. 

^ See also Dow, History of Hindostan, 1812, vol. ii, p. 105. 

^ Lecture at the Royal Listitution, March i860. 



THE GREAT MOGUL’S DIAMOND 


433 


grs. troy, and multiplied by 8, it would yield a weight exactly 
corresponding to that of the Koh-i-nur when brought to England, 
namely 186.06 carats. Accepting the second estimate for the value of 
the mishkal^ that of Babar’s rati would be 1.842 gr. troy, and the value 
of his diamond in carats might be expressed by the following equation. 

320 X 1.842 ^ 

> 0 7^ : 1\= 186.06 carats. 

3.168 (troy grs. m a carat) 

In such a calculation it is well to bear in mind that a very slight 
variation in the rati^ as a unit, would, when multiplied, produce a 
considerable difference in the result. Thus, if 1.86 were put instead 
of 1.842, the resultant would be enhanced above the desired figure, 
namely the weight of the Koh 4 -nur, 

Here I must leave Babar’s diamond for the present, without ex- 
pressing any more decided opinion as to the absolute accuracy of the 
data which make its weight appear to be actually identical with that 
of the Koh-i-nur^ being, however, as will be seen in the sequel, quite 
content not to dispute their general correctness, though my deduction 
therefrom does not accord with Professor Maskelyne’s. 

In the year 1563 Garcia de Orta, in his famous work on the 
Simples and Drugs of India, ^ mentioned four large diamonds, one of 
which he was told had been seen at Bisnager, i,e. Vyayanagar, and 
was the size of a small hen's egg. The others weighed respectively — 
120 mangelis = 200 ratis = 150 carats.^ 

148 „ = 233i = 175 » 

250 „ = 4i6f „ = 312J „ 

None of these three last can be identified with the Great Mogul's 
diamond, because, even supposing it ,had been already discovered at 
so early a date as 1563, it must then, as will be seen hereafter, have 
been uncut, and had a weight of 78 7|- carats, or more than double 
the weight of the largest of them ; but it might have been the one 
spoken of as being of the size of a small hen's egg, as that was 
probably its form in its early condition when acquired by Mir Jumla. 
As to whether any of the stones mentioned by Garcia could have 
been the same as Babar's diamond, it is quite useless to speculate ; 
but, as none of them are said to have belonged to the Mogul, it 
seems to be most improbable. 

In the year 1 609, De Boot, in his work on gems, etc., referred to 

1 CoUoquios dos Simples e drogas e cousas medicinaes da India^ p. 159. 

2 He says the mangeli = 5 grs., the carat 4 grs., and the rati 3 grs. (of 
wheat). 

VOL. ir 


2 F 



434 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


all these diamonds mentioned by Garcia, but when doing so, was 
guilty of three serious blunders, which have hitherto been undetected, 
except by his editor, Adrian Toll ; they have misled many subsequent 
authors, who have overlooked the editorial comments, including the 
Rev. Mr. King and Professor Maskelyne. The first was in giving 
Monardes instead of Garcia as his authority ; the second in treating 
the mangeli as though it were the equivalent of the carat j and thirdly, 
in making, on the supposed authority of Monardes, a statement to 
the effect that the largest known diamond weighed carats.^ 

The explanation of De Boot's confusion between the names of 
Monardes and Garcia is that Ecluze (Clusius), published a work in 
1574, in which he incorporated in the same volume the writings of 
these two authors j and, as pointed out by Adrian Toll, Monardes 
does not even allude to diamonds, his work being on the drugs of the 
West Indies.^ 

The question remains — Where did De Boot obtain the figure 
1 87 1 , which approximates to the weight of the ICoh-t-nur, when 
brought to England, and the weight of Bdbar's diamond as estimated 
above ? It has been seized upon by Professor Maskelyne, who quotes 
it from King, as a link in the chain connecting the two first-mentioned 
diamonds. It is a worthless link, however. It originated in a further 
manifestation of De Boot's carelessness.^ What he really quoted 
from was not a passage in Monardes's work, as he says, nor in that of 
Garcia this time, but it was a commentary or note on the latter's 
statement about Indian diamonds, by the editor Ecluze ; and, as will 
be seen in the note itself, which is of sufficient importance to be 
given in the original Latin, it refers to the largest diamond ever seen 
in Belgium its weight being 4.^^ carats, or 190 grs. There can be 
no doubt that the statement by De Boot regarding a diamond weigh- 
ing i87j- carats was, as pointed out by Adrian Toll and De Laet, 
utterly spurious. It was therefore quite unworthy of the notice it has 
received from the above-named authors, and is of no value whatever 
for the purposes of this history. 

1 Gemmarum et La^idum Hisioria, 3d ed., by De Laet, 1647, p. 29. 

2 It was first printed at Seville in 1565. 

® Rosnel, in Le Mercure Indien, Paris 1667, evidently quoting from De 
Boot, makes the same mistake. 

^ Majorem vero Adamantem in Belgio conspectum baud puto, quam Philippus 
II. H'ispaniarum Rex ducturus Elizabetham, Henr. II. Gall, Regis filiam majorem 
natu emit de Carolo Assetato Antwerpia, Anno 15593 Octogies Millenis Cronatis ; 
pen debat autem Car. xlvii, cum semine (= 47^-), id est grana 190 . — De Gemmis 
et Lapidibus, Lib. II., J. de Laet, Lttg. Bat, 1647, p. 9.. 



THE GREAT MOGUL^S DIAMOND 


435 


No attention has hitherto been given by writers to a large diamond 
which, as pointed out in a footnote,^ was obtained by a Portuguese 
who worked the mine at Wajra Karur in Bellary about the beginning 
of the seventeenth century. It weighed, apparently, 434.7 carats. 
Nothing of its subsequent history is known ; but it cannot have been 
the one presented by Mir Jumla to Shah Jahan. It may, however, 
have been the Pitt diamond, which, when offered to Pitt in 1701, 
weighed 426 carats ; but if so, it remained uncut for nearly a cen- 
tury, and the generally accepted story of the Pitt diamond is that it 
was obtained at the mine at Partial. 

We may now pass to a brief summary of the facts contained in 
Tavernier’s several independent references to the Great Mogul’s 
diamond — 

In order of sequence, after describing the Mogul’s jewels, 
he mentions (vol. i, Book II, chap, x, p. 395) its weight as being 
3191 ratis^ or 280 carats, the being fth of a carat. When first 
presented to Shdh Jahan by Mir Jumla it weighed, he says, goo ratis 
or 78 7 J carats, and had several flaws, but when he saw it it was 
round, rose cut, very steep at one side, with a notch on the basal 
margin, and an internal flaw ; its water was beautiful. 

Secondly^ When describing (vol. ii. Book II, chap, xvi, p. 74) the 
mine of KolMr (Gani or Coulour) he says that there was found in it 
the great diamond which weighed 900 carats (?) before cutting, and 
was presented to Aurangzeb (?) by Mir Jumld. This account,- as 
already pointed out, contains several mistakes. Tavernier adds that 
the mine had been opened 100 years previously. 

Thirdly (vol. ii, Book II, chap, xviii, p. 97), he states that the 
Great Mogul’s diamond was of perfect water and good form, and 
weighed 2 79 i^V carats. Its value he estimated as amounting to 
11,723,278 livres, 14 sols, 3 Hards, or ^879,245 : 18 : ij. If it had 
weighed 279 carats only it would have been worth 11,676,150 livres, 
and consequently the value of the i^th of a carat, owing to the 
geometrical method of calculation, amounted to 47,128 livres, 14 sols, 
3 Hards, or s£ 35 S 4 • I3 ^ 

Foitrthly (vol. ii, Book II, chap, xxii, p. 123), he states that he was 
permitted to weigh the diamond, and ascertained its weight to be 
319 J ratis, or 279irV carats, and adds, “when in the rough it weighed, 
as I have elsewhere said, 907 ratis, or 793! carats.” Its form was as 
of an egg cut in two*. 


3 See p. 54. 



436 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Tavernier’s figure of the diamond (see Plate II) has been referred 
to by Mr. King as being carefully drawn. It is true that very neat 
representations of it have appeared in works on mineralogy and 
precious stones, and glass models have been made on the same lines, 
but the original figure can only be correctly described as a very rude 
unprojected diagram, in which the facets are bounded by three trans- 
verse series of parallel lines which intersect one another irregularly. 

The only other early mention of this diamond is by Bernier, who 
calls it ‘‘matchless,” and states that it was presented to Shdh Jahan 
by Mir Jumld when he advised him to despatch an army for the 
conquest of Golconda.^ 

Let us now endeavour to reduce these statements to a common 
denomination. First, it must be stated that Tavernier and Bernier, 
both of whom refer expressly to the famous topaz belonging to 
Aurangzeb, are not likely to have been mistaken as to the nature of the 
stone examined ; that it was a diamond may be safely accepted, in spite 
of any suggestions which have been made by authors to the contrary. 

With regard to Tavernier’s second statement, it is clearly wrong 
in two particulars, both of which may be attributed to the errors of 
a copyist, who wrote Aurangzeb for Shdh Jahan, and 900 carats in 
mistake for 900 raifzs. This statement, therefore, being put aside 
from consideration, we have then left for comparison the following. 

Original weight 900 rafzs= carats; after cutting 319-J- ratzs 

= 280 carats. 

Original weight 907 ratzs carats; after cutting 3i9-|- ratzs 
= 2793^ carats. 

Calculated according to Tavernier’s own statement that the ratz was 
equal to ^ of the carat, the equivalents would more correctly be stated 
as follows : — 


900 rails ^ 788-J- carats 
907 5, = 793i ,, 


I 3 1 9 i- =27 93^ carats. 


We have then, at first sight, the remarkable apparent coincidence 
in weights between this diamond, when cut, of 319-^- rails, and Babar’s 
of about 8 mishkals (/,<?. about 320 rails ') ; but the rails were of very 


1 History of the late Revolution, Eng. Trans., vol. i, p. 44. 

2 The discrepancy between these two accounts of the original weight of the 
stone, which Tavernier probably obtained. from native reports, one being 900 
ratis and the other 907 ratis, does not in the least affect the question here dis- 
cussed, as it is only the weight of the stone after cutting that we have to do with. 



THE GREAT MOGUL’S DIAMOND 


437 


different values, the former being equal to 2.66 ^ troy grs., and the 
latter to about 1.842 (or 1.86?) grs., hence the respective weights, in 
carats, as already shown, are 186^ and the difference in 

weights of the two stones being therefore, apparently, 93|- carats. But 
in anticipation of the discussion to be found on page 447 as to the 
reasons which have led to the conclusion that Tavernier used the 
light Florentine carat, it should be stated here that the weight of 
the Mogufs diamond, in English carats, was 4 per cent less than 
Tavernier’s figures, in terms of Florentine carats ; hence its weight, in 
order to be compared with other diamonds given in terms of English 
carats, should be 268^, from which, if we subtract i86j\-, the differ- 
ence would be 82J carats, nearly. The similarity between the weight 
of Bdbar’s diamond at 320 ra//s, and the Mogul’s at 319J ra/zs, is 
delusive, as in ra//s of the same denomination the former figure 
should be given at about 224 ratis^ which is Ferishta’s equivalent for 
8 mishkals. So that the real difference amounts to 319^ — 224 = 
95 J ratis^ or, expressed in carats, at fths of a carat = i ratz^ carats. 
This is sufficiently close to the 82^ carats, independently deduced, 
to justify the conclusion that the weight of Bdbar’s diamond was 
about 83 carats less than that of the Mogul’s. 

There is, I believe, no direct record of the size and weights of the 
diamonds carried away from Delhi by Nadir Shah, but before dealing 
with that portion of the history, it will be convenient to refer here to 
an interesting statement by Forbes ^ which has been overlooked by 
most writers on the subject. He states that a Persian nobleman, 
who possessed a diamond weighing 117 carats, which was subsequently 
lost at sea, informed him when at Cambay in the year 1781, that 
there had been two diamonds in the Royal Treasury at Ispahan, one 
of which, called J^/paz toor {Koh 4 -nur 2 \ “The Hill of Lustre,” weighed 
264 carats, and its value was estimated at ^00,000, The other, 
called Dorriainoor {JDarzya-z-nuf^^ “ The Ocean of Lustre,” was of a 
fiat surface- Both formed a portion of the treasure, amounting in 
value to from 70 to 80 millions sterling, which Nadir Shah carried 
away from Delhi in 1739. 

Forbes suggests that the first was the Mogul’s diamond, described 
by Tavernier, remarking that the difference between the weights 264 
and 2 79yV carats may easily be allowed between the accounts given 


1 On page 448 my reasons for modifying the first conclusion, stated in vol. 
i, Appendix, as to the value of the pearl rati will be explained. 

2 Oriental Mei 7 ioir Si vol. ii, p. I 75 - 



438 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


by a Persian and a European traveller. (If^ as above suggested, the 
weight of the latter was 268-^ English carats, the approximation is 
still closer.) The Dariyd-i-nur^ as we shall presently see, still belongs 
to Persia, and as it weighs 186 carats, there is no known fact which 
in the slightest degree affects the possibility of its being identical 
with Babar’s diamond. 

Several writers, among them Professor Schrauf of Vienna,^ have 
suggested that the Mogul’s diamond is to be identified with the 
similarly shaped Orloff, now belonging to Russia. Apart from the 
discrepancy in the weights and in the size, as shown by Tavernier’s 
drawing, which was intended to represent the natural size of the 
former, it is tolerably certain that the Orloff was obtained from the 
temple of Sri ranga^ on an island in the Cauvery river, in Mysore. It 
was therefore a possession of the Hindus, and it is most improbable 
that it ever belonged to the Moguls. 

Reference has been made by some authors to the long historical 
chain which, they say, connects Babar’s diamond with the Koh-i-nur. 
As to the length of the supposed chain, it would extend over a period 
of 500 years at the least; but as to the links composing it, there is 
this to be said — they are all utterly unsound. In making so emphatic 
a statement I feel the necessity of being very sure of the grounds of 
my argument, especially as it is opposed to the views of many authori- 
ties, who, however, do not agree with one another as to details. 

In deference to the opinions of Erskine, Professor Maskelyne, 
and General Cunningham, it may no doubt with perfect safety be 
admitted that the weight of Babar’s diamond in 1526 was, as stated 
above, about 8 7 nishkals or 320 ratis, and that these were equivalent 
to about 186 or 187 modern English carats. But it must*be at once 
plainly stated that there is no direct evidence that any diamond of 
that weight was in the possession of the Mogul emperors at any sub- 
sequent period, up to the time of Nadir Shd^h’s invasion. We know 
nothing as to the weight of the Koh-i-nur^ as such, till about the time 
it was brought to England, namely, the year 1850 ; and then, although 
its weight was i86|- carats, the evidence, as will be seen, is to the 
effect that it was not identical with Babar’s diamond. 

In order to put this clearly it is necessary to summarise what 
has already been stated about other diamonds. Those mentioned 
by Garcia de Orta were not apparently in the possession of the 
Mogul, and their weights do not correspond to those of either the 


^ Handhuch der Edelsteinkunde, Vienna, 1869, p. 103. 




THE GREAT MOGUL’S DIAMOND 


439 


Mogul’s or Babar’s diamonds. The diamond of 187 J carats referred 
to by De Boot has been shown to be mythical. Again, Tavernier 
did not see any stone of the weight above attributed to Babar’s 
diamond in the possession of the Great Mogul, Aurangzeb, nor 
can we suppose that he heard of any such diamond being in the 
possession of Shah Jahdn, who was then confined in prison, where he 
retained a number of jewels in his own possession.^ If either he 
or Bernier had heard of such a stone he would surely have men- 
tioned it. It is probable, however, that Bdbar’s diamond was really 
in Shih Jahan’s possession when Tavernier saw Aurangzeb’s jewels, 
and that the latter obtained possession of it when Shah Jah^n died.^ 
Tavernier’s statements, in so far as they relate to this history, 
are — I. That the Great Mogul’s diamond was found in the mine at 
KolMr, when, we cannot say, though Murray, Streeter, and other 
writers have ventured to assign precise dates. II. It was acquired 
by Mir JumM, and presented by him to Shah Jahan about the year 
1656. III. It originally weighed 900 ratis or 787 J carats; but 
having been placed in the hands of Hortensio Borgio, it was so 
much reduced by grinding, distinctly not by cleavage, that, when 
seen by Tavernier, he personally ascertained that it only weighed 
319 J ratis or 279^^ carats. IV. The figure given by Tavernier, 
though very rudely drawn, is of a stone which must have weighed 
full 2 79 y^ carats (Florentine), and it corresponds fairly with his 
description. V. This description mentions a steepness on one side 
and certain flaws, etc. 

In order to identify the Mogul's diamond with Babar’s, certain 
authorities, notably Professor Maskelyne, have suggested that 
Tavernier's description did not really apply to the diamond presented 
by Mir Jumla to Shah Jahan ; that the stone he describes had 
therefore not been found at KolMr ; that he was mistaken as to the 
particular kind of ratis which he mentions, and that consequently 
his equivalent in carats — calculated on the supposition that they 
were pearl ratis — was incorrect; finally, Professor Maskelyne 
maintains that Tavernier's drawing of the stone differs from his 
description of it, and was wholly incorrect and exaggerated in size. 

Thus, in order to establish this supposed link of the chain, we are 
invited to whittle down Tavernier’s account until it amounts to a 
bare statement that he saw a large diamond, about which all that 
he records as *to its weight and history is incorrect. 


1 See vol. i, p. 371. 


2 See vol. i, p. 344. 




440 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


If I were not prepared to maintain that a jeweller of Tavernier’s 
large experience could not possibly have made the mistakes which 
have thus been suggested, I should feel that I had rendered a very 
ill service in editing these volumes. It is incredible that having 
actually handled and weighed the stone, at his leisure, he could 
have made so great a mistake as to believe that it weighed 279^^, or 
in round numbers 280 carats (Florentine), while it was really one of 
only 186 carats (English). 

The custom, which has been followed by many authors, of adopt- 
ing or rejecting Tavernier’s statements according as they agree or dis- 
agree with their independently conceived hypotheses, is one against 
which we are bound to protest. It is a kind of treatment which no 
author should receive. If supposed to be guilty of so many blunders 
and inaccuracies of statement, the proper course would be to leave 
all that such an author states severely alone. 

Judging from Tavernier’s drawing and description, the stone had 
been ground by Hortensio Borgio to a fairly symmetrical shape as a 
round rose, one side being, however, steeper than the other, which 
feature, though indicated to some extent in the original drawing, is 
not generally faithfully reproduced in the copies in various works on 
diamonds, and some of the glass models which have been made are 
not only defective in this respect, but are altogether too small. This 
is mentioned here because these models are sometimes referred to 
as though they afforded authentic evidence of the true form of the 
stone. 

We have now arrived at a stage when we can agree with those 
authorities who have maintained that Babar’s diamond and the 
Mogul’s were distinct ; but with most, if not all of them, we must 
part company, as they maintain that the Mogul’s diamond no longer 
exists, and that it was upon Babar’s diamond that Nadir Shah 
conferred the title Koh-z-nur in the year 1739. But the Mogul’s 
diamond has a stronger and more immediate claim to be regarded 
as the diamond, so denominated, which was taken from Muhammad 
Shah, Aurangzeb’s feeble descendant. The name was an eminently 
suitable one to apply to the Mogul’s stone as it was when seen 
by Tavernier, but by no means so applicable to it in its subsequent 
mutilated condition, in which it has been so confidently recognised 
as Babar’s diamond. 

The stone which now bears the title- Koh-i~nur was taken by 
Nadir to Persia, and from thence we have rumours of its having been 
cleaved into several pieces, when or by whom is doubtful. Accept- 



THE GREAT MOGUL’S DIAMOND 


441 


ance of these stories has been rendered difficult by some authors 
having attempted to assign names and weights to these pieces, the 
sum of the latter being greater than the total weight of the Mogul's 
stone, as it was when seen by Tavernier. Thus the Orloff, the Great 
Mogul itself, and the Koh-i-nur have been spoken of as having 
formed parts of the same stone.^ This hypothesis is in opposition 
to everything connected with the histories of these stones which can 
be relied on ; but as regards the possibility of the Koh-i-nur alone 
having been carved out of the Great Mogul’s diamond, it is not 
argument — but is simply begging the whole question — to assert that 
the Koh-t-nur existed 120 years before Borgio handled the Mogul's 
diamond. This Mr. Streeter has done,^ and in his accounts of these 
diamonds he several times repeats that all are agreed " that Bdbar's 
diamond and the Koh-i-nur are identical, and the Mogul’s distinct, 
which are precisely the points at issue. Indeed he might be reminded 
that in his own previously published work^ he states that “any 
doubt as to the Mogul and Koh 4 -nur being identical is but rarely 
entertained” 3 this, I venture to believe, was the sounder opinion 
than the one more recently advocated by him. 

At the meeting of the British Association in 1851^ Dr. Beke 
referred to a diamond found among the jewels of Reeza Kuli Khan 
at the conquest of Khorassan by Abbas Mirza in 1832. It weighed 
130 carats, and showed marks of cutting on the flat or largest face. 
It was presented to the Shah, and the jewellers of Teheran asked 
^16,000 for recutting it. Dr. Beke suggests that it was a part of the 
Koh 4 -nur^ meaning thereby the Mogul's diamond. This could not 
have been the case, because, as we have seen, the Mogul’s diamond, 
if identical with the Koh-t-nur^ had only a margin of about SaJ- carats 
to lose, while if the latter be identical with Bdbar's diamond it could 
have lost nothing. At the subsequent meeting of the Association^ 
Professor Tennant improved on this by suggesting that the Russian 
diamond, i,e. the Orloff, formed a part of the same. Another sug- 
gestion about the Orloff has already been dealt with on a previous 
page. 

A host of other writers have taken up this story, and lastly. Pro- 
fessor Nicol in his article on the diamond in the Encyclojxzdia 
Britannica has unfortunately suggested that these three stones formed 


1 Quenstedt, Klar and Wahr, Tubingen, p. 79. 

2 Great IDiatnonds of the World, ^ Precious Stones^ Ed. p. 126. 

^ See Aihenceum, July 5, 1851. ^ Ibid. September 25, 1852. 



442 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


portions of the Mogul’s stone seen by Tavernier, which amounts to 
saying that these three, weighing respectively 193, i86j-V and 130 
carats,^ or in all carats, were portions of one which weighed 

only between 279 and 280 (Florentine) carats. His statement that 
“the three united would have nearly the form and size given by 
Tavernier” is simply incomprehensible. 

If, however, we merely suppose that the Mogul’s stone, while in 
the hands of one or other of its necessitous owners, after it was taken 
to Persia by Nadir, had pieces removed from it by cleavage, which 
altogether (there were at least three of them) amounted to the differ- 
ence between its weight and that of the Koh 4 - 7 iur as it was when 
brought from India, namely, 279^%- Florentine carats = 268-^-^- English 
carats — i86yV= carats, we at once arrive at a simple explanation 
of the cause of the difference in weight between the stones, and are, 
moreover, thus enabled to show that Tavernier’s account requires no 
whittling down, though the stone itself, after he saw it, appears to have 
been subjected to that process. 

This would be but an h5rpothesis based on the rumours above 
referred to, were it not so strongly corroborated by the appearance 
presented by the Koh-t-nur itself when taken by the British from the 
Treasury at Lahore. Mr. Tennant ^ describes it as exhibiting, when 
brought to England, two large cleavage planes, one of which had not 
even been polished^ and had been distinctly produced by fracture. 

No one can examine the authentic sketches and models of the 
Koh-i-nur without feeling a strong presumption that it must have 
been mutilated, after cutting, and that it cannot have been left in 
such an incomplete condition by the jeweller who cut and polished 
it. In addition to its possessing defects similar to some of those 
described by Tavernier as having been in the Mogul’s diamond, Mr. 
Tennant records that the Koh-i-nur had a flaw near the summit 
which, being on a line of cleavage parallel to the upper surface, 
may very possibly have been produced when the upper portion was 
removed — the weight of which, together with that of two portions 
removed from the sides, and the loss occasioned by the regrinding 
of four facets on the upper surface, may very easily have represented 
the difference in the weights of the two stones, namely 82J carats. 

This too, in a measure, explains the discrepancies between 


^ Professor Nicol gives the weights at I 94 i> 186^, and 132, the sum being 
5I2H- 

2 Lecture on Gents and Precious Stones^ London 1852, p. 83. 



Plate VI. 


THE MOGUL’S DIAMOND 
(of Tavernier), 

Named Kok 4 -nur by Nadir Shah in 1739. 


Figures illustrating its mutilated condition when brought to England in 1850. 



Fig. I. The circle is of the same diameter as the Mogul’s Diamond, figured 
by Tavernier (see Book II, chap, xxii, Plate II). ^ The shaded portion represents 
the basal surface of the Koh-i^nur, 

Fig. IL The Koh 4 ~nur^ showing the surfaces from whence portions had 
been removed by cleavage. A, Flaw parallel to cleavage plane H ; B and C, 
Notches cut to hold the stone in its setting ; D, Flaw parallel to plane G, pro- 
duced by fracture at E ; F, Fracture produced by a blow ; G, Unpolished cleav- 
age plane produced by fracture — it was inclined at an angle of 109° 28' to the 
basal plane H, From Mr. Tennant’s figure. 

Fig. III. The opposite aspect of the Koh-i^nur from a glass model. 



THE GREAT MOGUL’S DIAMOND 


443 


Tavernier^s description, which, as Prof. Maskelyne ^ admits, very fairly 
characterises the Koh-i-nur (/.<?. certain flaws and defects in it, which 
happened to be in the portion preserved), and the figure, which, as it 
represents the whole stone, does not, at first sight, seem to resemble 
the Koh-t-nur. The accompanying illustration (Plate VI) and 
descriptive notes prove not only the possibility of the Koh-i-nur having 
been thus carved out of the Mogul's diamond, but they represent 
graphically the extreme probability of the truth of that suggestion. 

Tavernier's account of the Mogul’s diamond has, I think, been 
fully proved in the preceding pages to be quite inapplicable to Babar's 
diamond, while all his facts and the balance of probability favour the 
view that in the Koh-i-nur we are justified in recognising the muti- 
lated Mogul's diamond. Thus, while this theory, which has been 
built up on the basis of Tavernier's statements, is consistent with the 
literal acceptance of all of them, and with the physical condition of 
the Koh-i-nur when it came to Europe, of none of the other theories 
can the same be said ; but, on the contrary, to suit their respective 
exigencies, they require the total rejection of one or more of the 
carefully recorded observations on the condition of the Mogul's stone 
when placed in the hands of this experienced jeweller for examination.^ 

The necessary conclusion is that it is not the Mogul's diamond 
which, through failure of being historically traced, as some authors 
assert, has disappeared, but it is Bdbar’s diamond of the history of 
which we are really left in doubt. The fixing of the weight of 
Babar's diamond at a figure identical, or nearly so, with that of the 
Koh-i-nur when brought to England, though used as a link in the 
chain, has, as I think I have shown, effectively disposed of its claim 
to be identified with the Mogul’s diamond in the first place, and 
secondly with the Koh-i-nur. 

It* has already been intimated that the Dariyd-i-nur^ a flat stone, 
which weighs i86 carats, and is now in the Shah’s treasury,^ may very 
possibly be Babar's diamond, with regard to which I can only say that 
I have in vain sought for any well authenticated fact which in the 
slightest degree controverts or even throws doubt upon that suggestion. 


^ Proceedings of the Royal Institution of Great Britain, March i860. 

2 Among other difficulties introduced into the subject are such as follow from 
misquotation. Thus Kluge says that Tavernier himself described the stone as 
weighing 319J m^zV=i86 carats ! For this unfortunate and mischievous error 
there can be no excuse, as he goes on to say quite correctly that the earlier 
weight was 793-| carats. Handbuch der Edelsteinkunde, Leipsig, i860, p. 341. 

3 See Benjamin, Persia, p. 74. 



444 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


2 . Stimnzary History of the Koh-^i-nnr 

This diamond, as related by Tavernier, was obtained in the mine 
of Kollilr on the Kistna (see voL ii, p. 74). The precise date of its 
discovery is mere matter of conjecture; but about the year 1656 or 
1657 it was presented, while still uncut, to Shah Jahan by Mir 
Jumla, who had previously farmed the mines at Kolhir and else- 
where. The stone then weighed 900 7 ‘atis or 78 7 1 carats (these, if 
Florentine carats, -were equal to about 756 English carats). 

In the year 1665 this diamond was seen by Tavernier in 
Aurangzeb’s treasury, and it then weighed, as ascertained by him- 
self, only 319 ratis^ or 279-1% carats (which, if Florentine carats, 
equalled 2 English carats). It had been reduced to this size by 
the wasteful grinding treatment to which it had been subjected by 
a Venetian named Hortensio Borgio. 

In the year 1739 it was taken from Aurangzeb's feeble descend- 
ant, Muhammad Shah, by Nadir Shah, when he sacked Delhi and 
carried away to Persia, it is said, ^70,000,000 or ^80,000,000 worth 
of treasure.^ On first beholding it he is reported to have conferred 
upon it the title Koh-t-nur or Mountain of Light, a most suitable 
name for the stone described by Tavernier. 

On the murder of Nadir Shah at Kelat, in Khorassan, in 1747, it 
passed with the throne to his grandson Shah Rukh, who resided at 
Meshed, where he was made a prisoner and cruelly tortured by Aga 
Muhammad (Mir Allum Khan), who in vain sought to obtain the 
Koh-t-nur from him. In the year 1751 Shah Rukh gave it, as a 
reward for his assistance, to Ahmad Shdh, the founder of the Durdni 
dynasty at Kabul, and by him it was bequeathed to his son Taimur, 
who went to reside at Kabul. From him, in 1793, it passed by 
descent to his eldest son Shdh Zaman, who, when deposed by his 
brother Muhammad, and deprived of his eyes, still contrived to keep 
possession of the diamond in his prison, and two years afterwards it 
passed into the hands of his third brother Sultan Shuja. According 
to Elphinstone,^ it was found secreted, together with some other jewels, 
in the walls of the cell which Shdh Zamdn had occupied. After Shuja’s 
accession to the throne of Kdbul, on the dethronement and imprison- 
ment of Muhammad, he was visited at Peshawar by Elphinstone in 
1809, who describes how he saw the diamond in a bracelet worn by 


^ According to Imperial Gazetteer only ^^32, 000,000. See vol. vi, p. 314. 
2 Account of the Kingdom of Catthul^ vol. ii, p. 325 n. 



SUMMARY HISTORY OF THE KOH-I-NUR 


445 


Shujdj and he refers to it in a footnote as the diamond figured by 
Tavernier. Shuja was subsequently dethroned by his eldest brother 
Muhammad, who had escaped from the prison where he had been 
confined. 

In 1812 the families of Zaman and Shuja went to Lahore, and 
Ranjit Singh, the ruler of the Punjab, promised the wife of the latter 
that he would release her husband and confer upon him the kingdom 
of Kashmir, for which service he expected to receive the Kohr-i-nur} 

When Shdh Shuja reached Lahore, soon afterwards, he was 
detained there by Ranjit, who wished to secure both his person and 
the diamond ; but the Shah for a time evaded compliance with his 
demand for the stone, and refused offers of moderate sums of money 
for it. At length “ the Maharaja visited the Shah in person, mutual 
friendship was declared, an exchange of turbans took place, the 
diamond was surrendered, and the Shah received the assignment of 
a jaghir in the Punjab for his maintenance, and a promise of aid 
in recovering Kabul.^'^ This was in 1813: the Shah then escaped 
from Lahore to Rajauri, in the hills, and from thence to Ludiana, 
after suffering great privations.^ Here he and his brother Shah 
Zaman were well received by the Honourable East India Company, 
and a liberal pension was assigned by the Government for their 
maintenance. The above statements, except where other authorities 
are quoted, are taken from General Sleeman’s ^ account, which was 
founded on a narrative by Shah Zaman, the blind old king himself, 
who communicated it to General Smith, he being at the time in com- 
mand of the troops at Ludiana. 

In the year 1839 Shah Shuja, under Lord Auckland’s Govern- 
ment, was set up on the throne of Kabul by a British force, which 
two years later was annihilated during its retreat. 

The testimony of all the writers up to this period, and, it is said, 
the opinions of the jewellers of Delhi and Kabul also, concur in the 
view that the diamond which Ranjit thus acquired was the Mogul’s, 
Le, the one described by Tavernier. It seems probable that the 
mutilation and diminution in weight by about 83 carats, to which, 
as we have shown, it was subjected (see p. 442), took place while it was 


1 History of the Sikhs^lLiOTi^oVi^ 1849, p. 161. 

2 Ibid, p. 163. The Shah’s own account {^Autobiography, chap, xxv) of 
Ranjit’s methods to get possession of the diamond is more favourable to the latter 
than Captain Murray’s. (See his Rangeet Singh, p. 96.) 

3 Dr. W. L. McGregor, History of the Sikhs, London, 1847, vol. i, p. 170. 

^ Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Official, vol. i, p. 473. 




446 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


in the possession of Shah Rukh, Shah Zaman, or Shah Shuja, whose 
necessities may have caused one of them to have pieces removed to 
furnish him with money. 

Ranjit during his lifetime often wore the diamond on state 
occasions, and it is referred to by many English visitors to Lahore, 
who saw it during this period/ and is said to have then been dull 
and deficient in lustre. 

In 1839 Ranjit died, and on his deathbed expressed a wish that 
the diamond, then valued at one million sterling, should be sent to 
Juggannath,^ but this intention was not carried out,^ and the stone 
was placed in the jewel chamber till the infant Rdjd Dhulip Singh 
was acknowledged as Ranjit’s successor. 

When the Punjab was annexed, in the year 1849, the diamond 
was formally handed to the new Board of Government at one of its 
earliest meetings — and it was then personally entrusted by his 
colleagues to the care of John Lawrence, afterwards Lord Lawrence, 
who, on receiving it, placed the small tin box containing it in his 
waistcoat pocket, and then forgot all about it till he was called upon 
to produce it six weeks later, in order that it might be sent to Her 
Majesty the Queen. 

Recalling the circumstances when thus reminded of them, he 
hurried home and, with his heart in his mouth, asked his bearer 
whether he had got the box which had been in his pocket some time 
previously. Careful about trifles, like most Indian servants, the bearer 
had preserved it, though he thought it only contained a useless piece 
of glass. This strange vicissitude in the history of the stone is 
related by Bosworth Smith in his life of Lord Lawrence.'^ He adds 
that he had been told on good authority that it had passed through 
other dangers, on the way home, before it was safe in the possession 
of the Queen. 

In 1851 the ICok-z-nur was exhibited in the first great Exhibition, 
and in 1852 the recutting of the stone was entrusted by Her 
Majesty to Messrs. Garrards, who employed Voorsanger, a diamond 
cutter from M. Coster’s atelzer at Amsterdam, The actual cutting 
lasted thirty-eight days, and by it the weight was reduced to 106-5^^ 
carats. The cost of the cutting amounted to .^£*8000. 

^ Dr. McGregor, History of the Sikhs, London, 1847, vol. i, p. 216. 

2 Lieut. -Colonel Steinbach, The Punjab, London, 1846, p, 16. 

3 Miss Eden, Up the Country, vol. ii, p. 130, says that the Mahardja ulti- 
mately consented to its not being sent. 

^ Life of Lord Lawrence, vol. i, p. 327. 



THE GRAND DUKE’S DIAMOND 


447 


3 . On the Grand Duke of Tuscanfs Diamond^ otherwise 
known as the Austrian Yellow or the Florefttine ; and on 
the absolute weights of the carat and rati as known to 
Tavernier 

When writing of the carat (see vol. i. Appendix, p. 416), and 
when making the several references to the Grand Duke of Tuscany's 
diamond, I had not seen Dr. Schrauf's original paper ^ on the 
weighment of the stone, and, having obtained my information of 
it indirectly, I was misled as to its precise purport, which does not 
prove that the absolute weight of the stone is less than Tavernier 
gave it, but demonstrates that the difference in weight is only 
apparent. The absolute weight is 27.454 grams, which, converted 
into carats, gives 

Florentine (=197.2 milligrams) . . -^ 39 ^ carats. 

Paris (=205.5 » ) • • • 133-1 .. 

Vienna (= 206.13 „ ) . . . 133^ „ 

In English carats (= 205.4 milligrams) the -weight would be i33f 
carats nearly. The conclusions to be drawn, therefore, are, that, in 
the first place, the stone has not had any additional facets cut upon 
it, and that it is, in fact, in the same condition as when Tavernier 
gave its weight at 139-i carats; the difference between that weight 
and the i39i- Florentine carats is so small, amounting to only ^^ths 
of a carat, that it may be fairly attributed to difference in the accuracy 
of the methods of weighment employed by Tavernier and Schrauf 
respectively. 

Hence we may fairly conclude that in this instance, at least, the 
carat used by Tavernier was the “ Florentine and that being so, it 
is hardly conceivable that, when mentioning Indian stones on the 
very same pages as those where he describes the Grand Duke of 
Tuscany's diamond, he had other carats in view. Consequently, 
with greater confidence than I could venture to assume when 
the Appendix of vol. i. was written, I. now suggest the hypothesis 
that Tavernier’s carats were the light Florentine carats, which are 
exactly 4 per cent lighter than modern English carats. Thus the 
English carat of .2054 grams less 4 per cent (.0082) = .1972 grams, 
which is the precise value of the Florentine carat. 

1 Sz^z, der K, Akad der Wissen, Wien, Math. -Nat. Classe. Bd. liv. Abth. i. 
p. 479, 1866. 



448 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


The conclusion thus arrived at as to the carat of Tavernier 
having been the light Florentine, involves a reduction in the value 
of the rati^ which has been calculated in the earlier part of this 
work on the supposition that it was equal to |ths of the modern 
French and English carat. It must therefore be reduced by 4 per 
cent likewise, so that instead of 2.77 troy grs., it must stand at 2.66 
troy grs. This value, it should be added, is identical with that 
derived from Tavernier’s own statement, that 6 ??teiscal$ or 
i8i|- rails ^ i French ounce (/.<?. 482.312 grs. troy), since 482.312 — 
181^ = 2.66. I am accordingly compelled to accept this value 
finally as being that of Tavernier’s pearl rati ; and I must ask 
readers to accept this conclusion, which was given as an alternative 
to 2.77, in the Appendix to vol. i,^ instead of the latter, which was 
adopted in the text. 

In the following table the weights in carats of the principal 
stones mentioned by Tavernier are enumerated, and in the last 
column these weights, reduced by 4 per cent, show the equivalent 
values in English carats. 


4. On the weights of some of the Diamonds, other Precious 
Stones, and Pearls, mentioned and figured by Tavernier 

Assuming that our argument is well founded as to the carats 
mentioned in the text having been Florentine carats, it is necessary, 
in order to reduce them to English carats, to subtract 4 per cent 
from them, as in the following table : — 


Diamonds. 


\a. Great Mogul’s (uncut) 
lb. Great Mogul’s (cut) . 

2. Golconda 

3^. Ahmadabad (uncut) . 

3 < 5 . Ahmadabad (cut) 

4. Grand Duke of Tuscany’s 

5. Blue 

6. Bazu 

7. Mascarenha 

8. KoMr . 


(i 39 i) 


Tavernier’s Carats 
(Florentine). 

• 787^ 

• 279^0^ 

• 242^ 

• i 57 i 

94J 

• I39-I- 

• ii2^V 
104 

• 671 - 

• 631 


English Carats. 

756 

268^® 

232ff 

^ So|| 
9 °^ 
133-11 
107^^ 

99 ti 

64^ 

eofi. 


1 See vol. i, pp. 416, 417, and 41S. 



WEIGHTS OF STONES MENTIONED BY TAVERNIER 449 


Rubies. 


1. King of Persia’s (192 ratis ?) 

2. Banian ..... 

3. Bijapur (Visapour) 

Tavernier’s Carats 
(Florentine). 

. 168 

5o| 

English Carats. 

48|f 

l6| 


Topaz. 



I . Aurangzeb’s 

1 57|- should be 1 58 J 



Pearl. 



I. American, sold to 

SMistd Khini 

55 

S3| 


^ Several other pearls of about this size and smaller, were in the Mogul’s 
Treasury. See vol. i, p. 397- 


VOL. II 


2 G 



APPENDIX II 


List of all the Diamond Mines in India of which there are 
authentic Records, arranged in Districts 

Since this list was first published ^ it has been repeatedly checked, 
and it contains several additions. Although in various works on 
precious stones, etc., names are given as being those of diamond 
mines in India which are not to be found here, they are for the 
most part either synonymes of names that are, or are spurious. 
Want of space prevents such synonymes being dealt with, which is 
to be regretted, as the confusion in the nomenclature cannot be 
easily described without recourse to details. Names of villages, towns, 
rivers, provinces, etc., are misplaced and jumbled together in almost 
inextricable confusion. One author gives Pegu as a diamond mine 
in Southern India ; in the Mount Catti of another we trace a refer- 
ence to the Ghats of Southern India ; and in the Malacca of many 
authors we must recognise, not as they do, either a place supposed to 
be in Southern India or the true Malacca, but Borneo, which hsed 
to be so called by the Portuguese in the fifteenth century. (See 
Appendix IV.) For some time I was unable to identify a certain 
Mr. Cullinger, who was quoted by one writer in connection with 
diamonds. Will it be believed that this gentleman ultimately proved 
on investigation to be the fort of Kd,linjar ? 

MADRAS 

Kaoapa (or Cuddapah) District 

Chennur on the Pennair River, Lat 14° 34'; Long. 78° 51' 30". 

Condapetta (or Kanuparti), opposite Chennur. 

Gandikot? mentioned by some authors. Lat. 14® 49'; Long. 78° 
20' 30". 

Goorapur ? close to Chennur. Not identified. 

Goulagoonta (close to Jamalmadugu), Lat. 14° 51'; Long. 78“ 26'. 


^ See Economic Geology of India, chap. i. The Madras lists were founded 
originally on Dr. King’s in Mem, Geol, Surv, India, vol. viii. 



DIAMOND MINES IN MADRAS 


451 


(^malmadugu close to Goulagoonta, which see.) 

(Kanuparti or Condapetta, which see.) 

Lamdur? Not identified, mentioned by Heyne. 

Ovalumpally (or Woblapully), Lat. 14° 34'; Long. 78° 51' 35- 
Pinchetgapadu ? Not identified, mentioned by Heyne. 
(Woblapully or Ovalumpally, which see.) 


Bellary District ^ 

Gunjeegoonta, 2 miles south of Wajra Karur 
Gutidrug? Lat. 15° 7'; Long. 77° 42'. 
Hotoor ? 6 miles W.S.W. of Wajra Karior. 
Wajra Karur, Lat. 15° 2'; Long. 77° 27'." 


Karnul (or Kurnool) District 

Ba^nganapalle, Lat 15° 18'; Long. 78° 16'; miles S.E. of 
Karnul (see A.S. No. 76). Mines. 

Bannur, close to Gudipaud ; in Nandikotkur Taluk 

Baswapur, Lat 15“ 25'; Long. 78° 43' 3 °''; in Nallamullay HiUs ; 
mines and alluvial washings. 

Byanpalle, Lat 15° 32'; Long. 78° 14' 15"; 24 miles S.S.E of 
Karnul, 


Coomroly (close to Gooramankonda, which see) ; Nandial Taluk 

Deomurru, Lat 15' 49' 30"; Long. 78° ii'. Left bank of Tung- 
habhadra. ® 

^5 44 ^; Long. 78° 19'. Diamonds found in banks of 
Kundur river ; m Nandikotkur Taluk. 

Dhone, Lat. is'’ 23' 30"; Long. 77° 56'. 

(Gazerpalle close to Baswapur, which see.) 

Gooramankonda, Lat. 15" 32'; Long. 78“ 14' 15"; 24 miles S.S.E. 
of Karnul. Rock workings. 

Gudipaud, 2 miles AV. of Devanur , in Nandikotkur Taluk. 

Hassanapur in Doopaud. Not identified. 

Jorapur. A diamond of 44 carats found in debris of irrigation works 
near Karnul. ’ 

Kannamadakalu, Lat 15° 42'; Long. 78° 14' 30". Alluvial 

Lanjapoleur, Lat 1 5° 45' 30" Long. 78° 4' ; 7 miles S.S.W. of 
Karnul ; Ramulkota Taluk. 

Muddavaram, Lat. 78° 9' 30"; Long. 78° 30'. 7 miles E.S.E. of 

Ramulkota ; Nandial Taluk. 

Munimadagu, Lat 15° 15'; Long. 78° 2' 10"; in Pattikonda Taluk, 
16 miles W. by S. of Banaganapalle (formerly included in Bellarv 
District). 

Muravakonda, Lat 16° i'; Long. 78° 19'; on the Kis tn4. Dia- 
monds found below the ford, according to Ferishta and Newbold. 

Oruvakal (or Woraykal of A.S.), Lat 15° 41'; Long. 78° i \' ; 14 
miles S.E. of Karnul ; Nandial Taluk. 

Panchalingala, left bank of Tunghabhadra ; Ramulkota Taluk. 


1 A locality called Nizam in Bellary is mentioned by M. Chaper. See 
Engineering, 18S4, 29th February. 



452 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Pendekallu, 5 miles S.E. of Ramulkota ; Ramulkota Taluk. 

PoWr? Lat. 15° 31' 30" ; Long. 78° 19' ; 4 miles N.W. of Nandial ; 
in Nandial Taluk. 

Pyapali ; Palikonda Taluk. 

Ramulkota, Lat. 15° 34 ' ; Long. 78° 3' IS"; 18 miles W. by S. of 
Karnul. Rock and alluvial. 

Saitankota, right bank of Tunghabhadra, E.N.E. of Kamul. 

Tandrapad, Lat. 15° Si'i Long- 78 ° 71'; left bank of Tunghab- 
hadra, opposite Kamul. Alluvial. 

Timmapuram; Lat. 15° 32' 30" ; Long. 78° 6' 30"; 6 miles E.S.E. 
of Ramulkota. Rock workings. 

Yembye, Lat 15° 32'; Long. 78° 14' IS"; 24 miles E.S.E. of 
Karnul, 

KistnA and Godavari Districts 

Atkur, Lat. i6° 38' ; Long. 80** 23' 30''. 

Barthenypadu, Lat. 16® 38'; Long. 80® 23' 30". 

Bhadrachalum (doubtful ; a diamond said by Nevi^bold to have been 
found there), on the Godavari. 

Damarapad, Lat. 16® 35' 3"; Long. 79® 30'. 

Golapalle (or Golapilly), Lat. 16® 43' 30"; Long. 80® 57'. 

*Kodavatakullu, Lat. 16° 40'; Long. 80® 23' 30" (A.S. 75 )- 

KoMr (the Gani or Coulour of Tavernier), Lat. 16° 42' 30" J Long. 
80® 5' ; right bank of Kistnd. 

Madagalu ? (in Palnad Tahik\ 8 miles from the Kistnd. 

Malawaram, Lat. 16^ 35' 3"; Long. 79® 30'. 

Moonaloor (or Moogaloor), Lat. 16“ 38'; Long. 8o‘’ 23' 20". 

Mul^le (or Mullavilly), Lat. 16® 41'; Long. 80® 56'. 

■^Oostapully (or Ustapalle), Lat. 16“ 40' ; Long. 80“ 23' 30". 

•^Partial, Lat. 16° 39' ; Long. 80“ 27' (A.S. 75 )* 

(Ustapalle or Oostapully, which see.) 

CENTRAL PROVINCES 
Sambalpur District 

Sambalpur, town on the Mahdnadi River, and some of the tribu- 
taries above the town. (The country of the Sabarai of Ptolemy.) 

Chanda District 

Wairdgarh (the Beiragurh of the Ain-i-Akbdri), Lat. 20* 26' ; Long. 
80" 10' (A.S. 73). Probably the Kossala of the Chinese pilgrims. 


WESTERN BENGAL 
Lohardugga District 
Sank River, a tributary of the Brdhmini. 


* The three villages, so marked, were reserved by the Nizam on account of 
their diamond mines when the Kondupalle Circar was ceded to the East India 
Company in 1766. 




DIAMOND MINES IN BANDELKHAND 


453 


Semah, on the Koel (the Soumelpour on the Gouel of Tavernier), 
Lat. 23® 35'; Long. 84® 21'. This was probably the Sambalaka, in the 
country of the Mandalai, of Ptolomey. 

BANDELKHAND 

Panna 

Baghin, Bargari, Brijpur, Etwa, Kamariya, Majgoha, Myra, Panna, 
Sakeriya, Saya-Luchmanpur, Udesna, and many others around Panna 
town. It is not known when these mines were first discovered. So 
far as I can ascertain, Tieffenthaler was the earliest European visitor to 
them who has left any record of them ; he appears to have been at 
Panna in 1765. He says the diamonds found there could not com- 
pare either in hardness or fire with those of Orissa (Soumelpour ?) or 
of Raoulcound (/.^. Ramulkota). There is no record of any excep- 
tionally large diamonds having been found at Panna. Though it is 
believed by some that the mines are of very great antiquity, the 
history of them is defective. However, the Ain-i-Akbari, by Abdul 
Fazl (1590),^ refers to diamonds having been found at 20 coss distance 
from the fort of Kalinjar, and that Raja Keerut Singh, a former 
Governor of that fort, had six valuable stones. It seems probable 
that these mines were worked in Tavernier’s time, though he was not 
aware of the fact. 


NORTH-WEST PROVINCES 

Simla? This is a very doubtful locality, but there are several 
diamonds in the Calcutta Museum which were said to have been 
found in a stream near Simla. 

Note on the Golconda and Bijapur Diamond Mines 

There is a very important early description of the diamond mines 
of these regions, which is of special interest, as it gives a clue to the 
original source of many names of diamond sites which are to be 
found in the modern literature of the subject. It was published in the 
Philosophical Transactions^ vol. xii, 1677, p. 907, having been pre- 
sented to the Royal Society by the Earl Marshal of England, who was 
then Henry Howard, afterwards Duke of • Norfolk. His term of 
office as Earl Marshal lasted from 1672-1683. I am inclined to 
think it may have been written by Mr. Cholmley, who is described 
by Mr. Streynsham Master ^ as having been engaged for several years 


^ Gladwin’s Ed., vol. i, p. 29. 


2 Kistnd Manual^ p. 147. 



454 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


before 1679 in making the annual purchases of diamonds for the 
Company, especially at the mines of Gollapalle (or Golapilly) and 
Malavalle (Muleli or Mullavilly). 

The diamond mines of the Kistna District belonged to the 
Kings of Golconda, Kutab Shah dynasty, from the downfall of the 
Bahmani Kings of Deccan {area 1 500) until their defeat and extinc- 
tion in 1686. The mines in the Karnul District also belonged to 
them after the Rajas of Vijayanagar were driven to the south in 1564. 
(See Kistna Ma 7 iual^ p. 244.) 

It is curious to note that while Tavernier only mentions three 
localities in these regions by name, namely, Ramulkota (his Raol- 
conda), Kolliir (his Coulour), and Gandikot, together with another 
unnamed locality (which was Gazerpalle, see p. 476), this paper, pub- 
lished only a year after Tavernier’s first edition appeared, enumerates 
23 mines in the Kingdom of Golconda, and 15 in the Kingdom of 
Bijapur — in all 38, 

As will be seen, some of these names correspond with names in 
the preceding list, others seem to be identical with names of villages 
in the region, about which there is no independent evidence of 
their having been diamond producing. The remaining names I 
have failed to identify. As I hope on some future occasion to 
republish this paper of the Earl Marshal’s, in extenso, with annota- 
tions, I shall at present limit myself to a brief enumeration of the 
localities, their proper modern names being given in brackets. 

The Golconda Mines are — i. Qiiolure ; this is Tavernier’s 
Coulour or Gani [KoLLtjR]. This is said to have been the first 
mine worked in Golconda, but was then, 1677, almost exhausted. 2. 
Cd?^f^z2e////zVz^/[KoDAVATAKULLu], 3. [Malawaram], 4. Butte- 

phakfn [Barthenypadu, near Partial], 5. Ra 7 niah [?], 6. Gurefn [?], 
7. Muttanipellee [near Kururf^. These five (? six) were under the 
same government as that of Melwillee [Malavalle or Muleli], see 
below. 8. Currure [Wajra- or Vajra-Karur, in the Guty Taluk 
of the Bellary District]. This identification is confirmed by the 
statement that it, the most famous and most ancient of all the 
mines, was taken some years previously, with the Carnatic, by Mir 
Jumla from the Hindu Rajas. It is said that diamonds up to ‘‘a 
seize (? seer) weight, which was equal to about 9 ounces troy, or Si-J- 
J)agodas^ had been found there ; the mine was privately worked by the 
King, and the stones produced from it were large and well spread,” 
etc. I have elsewhere quoted, see vol. ii, p, 54, the account .of this 
mine having been worked by a Portuguese gentleman. 9. Ganjee-^ 




THE GOLCONDA AND BIJAPUR DIAMOND MINES 455 


conta [Gunjeegonta], io. Lattawar^ [Lattwara]. These two last 
are respectively i and lo miles S.W. of Wajra-Karur. ii. Jona- 
gerre\f\, 12. Ptrai\f\, 13. JDugulle [?], 14. Purwillee [?]. These 
four last I cannot identify. 15. Anuntapellee [Anantapur? is 20 
miles from Wajra-Karur. Dr. King {Mem. Geol. Surv. India, vol. 
viii, p. 1 01) alludes to a diamond being found there]. 16. Girregeta 
[Goulagoonta], Maarmood\f\, 18. Wazzergerre \y^ 

19. [Munimadagu in Karnul]. The two last are said 

to have been the deepest mines ; they were carried to depths of 40 to 
50 fathoms. Some interesting details are giyen as to the process of 
mining. 20. Iangumboot]J\ ; process of mining as in the preceding. 
2 1. Whootoor [Hotoor ?] near KIarur. 22. Muddemurg [Madagula ? 
in centre of Palnad Taluk, Kistnd District. This identification is 
founded on the statement that the locality was about 9 miles from the 
Kistnd river]. 23. Melwillee, or new mine [Malavalle or Muleli], 
worked first from 1670-71, then closed, but reopened in 1673 by the 
King's licence, owing to the KolMr mine becoming exhausted. 

In Bijapur there were 1 5 mines, of which only those yielding 
the smallest stones were allowed by the King to be worked, partly to 
prevent large stones becoming too common, and partly to avoid 
exciting Aurangzeb's cupidity. The mines were — i. Ramulconeta 
[Ramulkota, i,e. Tavernier's Raolconda] \ diamonds of a mangelin 
weight were seldom found there, generally they were much smaller. 
Broken diamonds, called shemboes, were found there. 2. J 5 anugun~ 
napellee [Banaganapalle, 37 miles S.E. of Karnul], 3. FendekuU 
[Pendekallu], 4. Moodawaram [? Muddavaram, 7 miles E.S.E. of 
Ramulkota], 5. Cumerwille [Coomroly of A.S. close to Gooraman- 
konda], 6. PaulkuU [?], 7. Workull [? Oruvakal], 8. Lungeepoleur 
[Langapoleur, 5 miles S. of Karnul], 9. Poo floor [Polur], io. 
Punchelingull [Panchalingala, left bank of Tunghabhadra], ii. 
Shingarrampent [?], 12. Tondarpaar [Tandrapau, left bank of 
Tunghabhadra], 13. Gundepelle [?], 14. Donee [Dhone], 15. Gazer- 
pellee [this is close to Baswapur]. 

I would venture to commend the identification of those mines 
which are unplaced in the above list to some one with local 
knowledge. 

We are told in the Earl Marshal's paper that in Golconda the 


^ This, as also some of the other localities, are given by Dutens and Castellani 
as being in Asia ! — a rather wide geographical expression ; they have long been 
objects of search to me, till traced by means of this paper. 




466 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


jminers and merchants were much oppressed, and in a miserable state 
Of poverty, from having to submit to tyrannical squeezing and heavy 
duties on provisions, tobacco, and beteL With extraordinary incon- 
sistency, although the King of Golconda, Abdul Kutab Shah, and the 
King of Bijapur, Adil Shah, had agreements with the miners that all 
diamonds above a certain weight were to be reserved for them, still 
they would not only pay highly for large stones conveyed to their 
capitals secretly by the merchants, but would bestow dresses of honour 
upon the merchants who brought such stones to them for sale. 


A 




APPENDIX III 


The Diamond Mines of Bengal 

Although it is possible that many persons in India may be surprised 
at the statement that there were formerly diamond mines of consider- 
able importance and value in the region of Bengal, which is about to 
be described j and although it is probably the case that many who have 
resided for long periods in the very District itself have never heard 
of the fact, all local traces of the industry being now extinct, still the 
cumulative evidence which can be brought forward is such that I do 
not anticipate that any serious objections can be urged to the natural 
conclusions derivable from that evidence. 

Gibbon, in the Dedine and Fall of the Roman Empire, for some 
reason which he does not give, arrived at the conclusion that it was 
the mines described by Tavernier at Soumelpour^ on the Gouel 
ii.e. Semah or Semulpur on the Koel, in the Sub-Division of Palamau), 
rather than any of the localities in Southern India, which supplied 
Rome with diamonds. 

Ptolomey mentions Sambalaka ^ as a city in the country of the 
Mandalai which produced the finest diamonds in the world. Now, 
although it is possible that he may have referred to Sambalpur on 
the Mahdnadi, where diamonds are known to occur, I prefer to 
identify it with Tavernier’s Soumelpour, as above, because it was 
situated in the country generally recognised as that of the Mandali 
or Mundas, while Sambalpur is beyond its limits. 

Further, it may be conveniently remarked here that Ptolomey’s 
Adamas river, although he clearly indicates its origin in Chutia 
Nagpur (Kokkonage or Kokrah), has by some authors been identi- 
fied with the Mahdnadi, while others have with greater probability 


^ By a misprint given as Jumelpur, in Bengal, Declvnt cmd Fall, vol. ii, p. 
281, note. 

2 See Indian Antiquary, vol. xiii, 1884, p. 3 ^ 4 > where it is identified with 
Sambalpur. 



458 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


identified it with one or other of the rivers rising in Chutia Nagpur, 
namely, the Damuda, Subanrikhd or Brdhmani, with its tributaries 
the Sank and Southern Koel, to which we shall presently again 
refer. The Mahanadi is probably Ptolomey’s Manada, rising in 
the country of the Sabarse or Savaras, where diamonds were also 
obtained. 

Our next reference to this locality is a very definite and explicit 
one ; it is separated by a long period of time from Ptolomey. In Prof. 
Blochman’s translation ^ of the Tuzuk-i-Jahdngiri^ we find that “ On 
the 3d Isfandidrmuz of the loth year of my reign (a.d. 1616) it was 
reported to me (Jahangir) that Ibrahim Khdn (governor of Bihar) 
had overrun Kokrah and taken possession of its diamond washings. 
This District belongs to Subah Bihar, and the river which flows 
through it yields the diamonds.” Then follow accounts of the 
mines and Ibrahim Khan’s operations, all of which will be found 
quoted in the E,co 7 ioniic Geology of India^ p. 25. The account goes 
on to say, “ The District is now subject to me. All diamonds found 
in the river are forwarded to court. Only a few days ago a diamond 
arrived which had a value of Rs. 5 0,000, and I hope many more 
will be added to my store of jewels.” Among those received from 
Ibrahim Khan was one which was coloured like a sapphire, it 
weighed several ratis^ and the lapidaries valued it at Rs.3000, 
though they would have given 20,000 had it been white and stood 
the test. Prof. Blochman gives a quotation from a MS. history of 
the Mahardjas of Chutia Nagpur, in which a method of testing 
diamonds for flaws is described as consisting in fixing them on the 
horns of fighting rams. 

General Dalton recorded that the family of the Raja of Chutia 
Nagpur possessed a diamond from these mines valued at Rs.40,000.^ 
A large picture, representing the attack on the Palimau fort in 1660 
by Daud Khdn, contains a figure of the Za 7 ninddr-i-kdn~i~dbnds or 
Lord of the Diamond Mine. General Dalton was, I believe, rather 
inclined to think these mines somewhat mythical, while Prof. Bloch- 
man ^ identified the river with the Sank. As I had conversations with 
both of them on the subject, I am satisfied that neither of them 
knew of Tavernier’s references to this region, nor did I know of 
them then, and it was not till some time after I became aware of 
them, that I was able to show that his Soumelpour was quite a 

^ Jott 7 \ As, Socy, Bevzgal, vol. xl, p. 113. 

2 Bthnology of Bengal, 163, 

® Jour. As. Socy. Bengal, vol. xliii, pt. i, p, 240. 



map SjenETPOTG TJBCE PQSTTIOiy OP 
THE HIAMOKD JOVBJEiS OE EEl^GAIi 

X Soiairielptita* ort thA GcfilbLi SemaJv cerL>'Qrj& JSheL irv th& JPctZccrnow S\ihcU\nsian> , 
JLArt TJLtennediatef 'locaUJ^ oru -Qia Sixnk 'rwer -ixv 3zj:rw€b, jPcHkot/ & JkLshpwr 
mPosztion/ of ihj&'washmgs cfwthjS/Jldhjcmafbj near Samhabfmr xru the/ CfntrdLTrcmiuxs . 


*ff»**I)i£arumj3j risers 





THE DIAMOND MINES OF BENGAL 


459 


different locality from Sambalpur on the Mahanadi, with which most 
writers had identified it. 

In addition to Tavernier's own direct account of this locality, 
there is another somewhat earlier in date, but which there is reason 
to believe was derived from information obtained from him. 
Reference will be found in Appendix VI to a work by Chappuzeau. 
In it there appears to be reference to the locality in Bengal which 
produced diamonds under the name Nage {t,e. Klokkonage or Chutia 
Nagpur). In the year 1657 L'Escot of Orleans (see p. 304) went 
there to purchase a diamond of 42 carats, but he failed to get it. 

Although Tavernier’s locality was on the Gouel River, Le. the 
Kloel, which runs northwards to join the Sone, and so reaches the 
Ganges — ^the Sank and another Koel also take their rise close by, 
and running southwards they form the Brdhmani, which joins the 
delta of the Mahanadi, near the coast of the Bay of Bengal. The 
Ebe River, a tributary of the Mahanadi also, rises in the same 
neighbourhood, and it is locally called the Uira or diamond river, 
and its bed is said to have yielded diamonds. Hence it is a natural 
deduction that the source of the diamonds found in the beds of 
these rivers, which pursue such different courses, is common to 
all, and that the diamond- bearing rocks will be found there. 
Unfortunately before leaving India I had no opportunity of putting 
this theory to the test, and I am not aware that the area has been as 
yet fully explored. 

The accompanying map will convey a clear idea of the relative 
positions of the three localities, which have hitherto been much 
confused in the accounts by different authors. In the south there is 
Sambalpur, on the Mahanadi, of which I have elsewhere^ published 
detailed accounts of the geology, and of the records of the yield of 
diamonds there in former times ; farther north is the locality on the 
Sank river, which, as stated above, is one of the tributaries of the 
Brdhmani ; and lastly, on the other side of the watershed, is the site 
of the locality, Semah on the Koel, a tributary of the Sone, which 
I identify with the Soumelpour of Tavernier, 

As Sambalpur is in the Central Provinces, and is therefore beyond 
the region of the present discussion, not being included in Bengal, 
we may now pass to the mention of the other two localities, as they are 
referred to by various authorities since Tavernier’s time. 

Sumelpur {Mine de diamans\ near a tributary of the Solon {i,e. 


^ £lco 7 tomic Geology of India^ p. 30. 




460 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Sone, called in its upper portion Riverere d’Andi, see afite, vol. i, 
p. 55)5 is represented on the Carte de Flndoustan by M. Beilin, which 
was published in 1752 in the Histoire Genkrale des Voyages. 

Tiefifenthaler,^ somewhere about the year 1766, wrote of Sommel- 
pour as a place producing an abundance of diamonds of good quality 
in the river Gouel, 30 milles S.E. from Rohtas. He did not visit it 
himself, and perhaps he quoted from Tavernier. 

Pennant,^ in the year 1798, mentions that a diamond mine was 
then being worked on the Sank river, but he does not name his 
authority. He also states that" Soumelpour on the Gouel was the 
most noted and most ancient locality for diamonds.^ Here he evi- 
dently quotes from Tavernier, as also did Buffon,^ who calls the locality 
Soonelpour on the Gouil, which Buchanan Hamilton in 1838^ 
refers to as being probably identical with a diamond mine which he 
had heard of on the southern Koel. Karl Ritter in 1836 detected the 
incompatibility of Tavernier’s statements as to the position of his 
Soumelpour with that of Sambalpur on the Mahdnadi ; but his correc 
tion did not serve to mitigate the confusion which is to be found even 
in the most recent authors upon the subject. I may add that I was 
pointed out on the map a locality on the Sank by a resident in Chutid 
Ndgpur, where local tradition asserts that diamonds used to be found. 

Having referred above to Sambalpur in the Central Provinces, it 
may be of interest to add that this Indian Province includes another 
locality which, though of importance in early times, was so forgotten 
even a century ago, that Rennell, and after him Karl Ritter, alto- 
gether failed to identify it. It was mentioned as being in the country 
conquered by Ahmed Shah Walli Bhamini, both by Garcia de Orta 
and Ferishta. In the Ain-i-Akbari the locality is spoken of as at 
Beiiagurh which is now identified with Wairdgarh in the Chanda 
District, about 80 miles from Nagpur. It was probably the Kossala 
of the Chinese pilgrims and perhaps the Kossa of Ptolomey. 

It is just possible that a locality mentioned by Nicol Conti in the 
fifteenth century as a diamond mine called Albenigaras, may have 
also been Wairagarh. He mentions that the diamonds were obtained 
then by means of pieces of meat, which were flung on to the mountain, 
where the diamonds could not be collected owing to the number of 
serpents. The pieces of meat with diamonds sticking to them were 

^ Bernoulli, Descr. de VInde, Berlin, 179 1, vol. i, p. 433. 

2 View of Hindoostait, vol. ii, p. 140. 3 

^ Hist, JVat., Minerauxy Paris, 1786, vol. iv, p. 280. 

® Montgomery Martin, Eastern India, vol. i, p. 535. 



THE DIAMOND MINES OF BENGAL 


461 


then carried to their nests by birds of prey, from whence they were 
recovered by the diamond seekers. This, with variations, is the story 
told by Marco Polo, and in the travels of Sindbad the Sailor. Else- 
where I have described the probable origin of this myth. It appears 
to be founded on the very common practice in India on the opening 
of a mine, to offer up cattle to propitiate the evil spirits who are sup- 
posed to guard treasures — ^these being represented by the serpents 
in the myth. At such sacrifices in India, birds of prey invariably 
assemble to pick up what they can, and in that fact we probably have 
the remainder of the foundation of the story. 

It is probable, also, that the story by Pliny and other early writers 
of the diamond being softened by the blood of a he-goat, had its 
origin in such sacrifices. 

As to whether these or other diamond mines in India could be 
profitably worked again I cannot now discuss here ; but I may say 
that I do not believe that they can be truly described as being 
exhausted. 


A 



APPENDIX IV 


The Diamond Mines of Borneo 

In the Colloquies of Garcia de Orta, in the Travels of Linschoten, in 
the works of De Boot^ and De Laet,^ and in many treatises on 
precious stones, up to some of those most recently published, we find, 
as has already been stated in the note on p. 87, that Malacca is 
mentioned as a locality where diamonds occur. This was for a long 
time a sore puzzle to me, especially as among modern writers on 
Malacca, with the exception of Miss Bird,® none claimed that Malacca 
was known to be a diamond producing country, while some local 
inquiries which I made through the late Mr. W. Wynne of the Straits 
Civil Service confirmed an opinion, founded on the character of the 
geological structure, that probably none had ever been found there. 

The solution of the difficulty is afforded by the fact that the name 
Malacca was applied by the early Portuguese writers to Borneo, and 
that the Taniapura which they mention was Tanjongpura in Borneo. 

I am indebted to Mr. D. F. A. Hervey for the information that 
Tanjong pfira (the Tandjong Poera of the Dutch) is situated about 
30 miles up the river Pawan in the northern part of the Matan Dis- 
trict, adjoining Sukadana. The name, he states, is a hybrid, Tanjong 
being the Malay for a point (of land), and pura a Malayan version of 
the Sanskrit pfir, a town. 

Such is the true explanation, and not that Malacca was a place 
situated in the Eastern Ghdts ! as stated by Castellani ; nor that the 


^ De LapML et Gemm., 3d ed., by De Laet, Lug. Bat. 1647, p. 121. When 
enumerating the localities where the diamond is obtained, he says, “Alia est 
rupes ad fretum Tanian in Malacca que etiam profert, adamantes qui de rupe 
veteri vocantur.” De Boot’s original work was published in 1609. 

2 De Gemm. et Lafidi., Lug. Bat. 1647, P- 2, “Jnxta fretum Taniapune baud 
longe ab Emporio celeberrimo Malacca alia earumdem gemmarum fodina est 
unde vulgo Malacenses appellantur.” 

® The Golden Chersonese, p. 261. 


THE DIAMOND MINES OF BORNEO 


463 


idea originated in some jumble about malachite, as has I think been 
suggested by one writer. 

As it was with Pliny, so it has been with a host of other com- 
pilers ; we find in the literature of precious stones the same places or 
the same objects called by different names, and treated as though 
they were distinct. It has been shown on p. 72 that Gani was a pre- 
fix signifying ‘‘ mine of” to the name KolMr, a diamond locality on the 
Kistnd, though it is commonly treated as though it were a name itself j 
and when we find Malacca mentioned side by side with Borneo, as a 
diamond-producing region, we should not suspect that its appearance 
in the lists is simply due to a survival of an old name for Borneo, 
It is perhaps needless to add, therefore, that it should be expunged 
from all future lists. 

The following facts with regard to the occurrence of the diamond 
in Borneo are chiefly extracted from Crawfurd’s Dictionary and a 
paper by Dr. Posewitz.^ The original matrix of the diamonds of 
Borneo is, as yet, unknown ; but, as they are found in alluvial deposits 
in the beds of certain rivers, and in older alluvial or diluvial deposits, 
together with gold and platinum, it may be concluded with some 
probability that all come from the same sources. The platinum is 
not known to have been met with in the original matrix, but gold has 
been found in situ in Palaeozoic rocks. 

The most famous and apparently the earliest known diamond 
mines were situated in West Borneo, in the Districts of Landak and 
Sangau, while some diamonds are reported to have been obtained in 
Sarawak. Dr. Posewitz does not refer to their occurrence at Tan- 
jongpura, on the Pawdn river, nor in Sukadana, where earlier writers 
state they were found. 

In Southern Borneo the most abundant mines and washings are 
in the neighbourhood of the Tanahlaut hills, which form the boundary 
between Southern and Eastern Borneo, near Martapura and Tjem- 
paka ? The produce of these localities is best known in connection 
with the name Banjarmasin, a territory and seaport now held by the 
Dutch. 

It should be added that there are some minor localities in the 
region between Banjarmasin and Sukadana. 

In Eastern Borneo the territory of Kusan, to the east of the 
Tanahlaut range, also includes some mines. 

In British North Borneo there are believed to be some diamond 


1 Das Diamantvorkonwien in Borneo Mith a. d. Jahrb d. JC, Geol, Anst., 
Bd. vii, Budapesth, 1885. 


464 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


bearing localities, but as yet they have not been proved to be of any 
very great promise. 

In connection with the subject of Borneo diamonds, mention is 
frequently made of a supposed diamond in the possession of the 
Rdjd of Mdtan. Its great size, 367 carats, and its reputed value, 
£ 261 ),^*}^, as estimated by Crawfurd, have for many years caused it 
to be an object of Dutch cupidity, and many stories are told of the 
efforts made by them to induce the Rdja to part with it. It is stated 
that early in the century the Rajd was offered 150,000 dollars, two 
large war brigs fully equipped, besides other war material, in exchange 
for the diamond; but from superstitious or other reasons he refused 
to part with this emblem of royalty, and it has never been cut 
Hugh Low states that the real diamond was not shown to visitors, 
but that a rock crystal was kept for the purpose. Dr. Posewitz, how- 
ever, records that in 1868 the so-called diamond was itself definitely 
proved to be merely a piece of rock crystal, thus proving the accuracy 
of Von Gaffron’s previous assertion that it could be scratched by 
corundum, and had a specific gravity of only 2.63 (namely, that of 
quartz). 

Although diamonds weighing up to 70 and even 80 carats have 
been found in Borneo, for many years past stones of even 4 or 5 
carats have been but rarely met with. 


APPENDIX V 


The Ruby Mims of Upper Burmah and the Sapphire 
Waslmigs of Ceylon 

Position . — The principal ruby mines of Burmah are situated in three 
valleys, which are known by the names of their chief villages respect- 
ively, namely Mogok (or Mogout), Kathd, and Kyatpyen. The 
elevated tract including these valleys is situated at a distance of 
about 90 miles N.N.W. from Mandalay, and is at elevations of from 
4000 to 5500 feet above the sea. The mountains surrounding the 
Mogok valley culminate in the peaks of Chenedoung, 7362 feet, 
and Toungee, 7775 feet. The ruby tract, as now defined by the 
most recent scientific examination, occupies an area of 66 square 
miles, but mining is at present limited to an area of about 45 square 
miles. The region is described as being very beautiful, and present- 
ing a thriving appearance ; but the climate is somewhat malarious, 
and Europeans, although the country is so elevated, are subject to 
attacks of fever on first arrival there. 

A totally distinct ruby tract is situated in the marble hills at 
Sagyin, which is only 16 miles from Mandalay. So far as is known, 
it is comparatively of little importance, the rubies and other gems 
which are found there being of inferior qualities. -Other localities 
about 15 miles to the north and north-east of Sagyin are reported to 
produce rubies, but nothing certain is known about them. 

History . — The ruby mines of Burmah were first made known by 
European writers towards the end of the fifteenth century. In the 
sixteenth century there are more definite references by Portuguese 
travellers, but they are not of much practical importance. Tavernier,^ 
as we have seen, gives an account of the mines and their produce 
from hearsay ; from which it would appear that the reputation they 
then bore was not very high, or he would probably have made 


1 Book II, chap, xix, vol. ii, p. too. 

VOL. II 


2 II 




466 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


an effort to visit them. The yield, he says, did not exceed ioo,qoo 
kus (say £^22^^06) per annum, and he found it profitable to carry 
rubies from Europe to Asia for sale. 

The principal authorities of the present century previous to the 
conquest of Upper Burmah are Mr. Crawfurd^; the PtTe Guiseppe 
d’ Amato, ^ who visited the mines about the year 1833 ; Dr. Oldham,^ 
who visited Ava and collected information about the mines in the 
year 1855, when with Sir Arthur Phayre’s mission; Mr. Bredmeyer, 
who was in the service of the King and visited the mines in the year 
1868; and Mr. Spears and Capt. Strover of the British Burmah 
Commission, both of whom have placed on record their observations. 
From these authorities we learn that the rubies which were found 
were generally small, not averaging more than a quarter of a rati^ and 
that the large stones were generally smuggled away, but few of them 
reaching the King. It was supposed that the Chinese and Tartar 
merchants who visited Mogok and Kyatpyen conveyed most of them 
out of Burmah. The large rubies were generally flawed, and Mr. 
Spears states that he never saw one exceeding half a rupee in weight, 
Le, about 22 carats. 

The King’s revenue derivable from the monopoly was variously 
estimated by these authorities at from;^i2,5oo to ;^i5,ooo. The 
more recent information now available confirms these estimates. 
The figures stated on official authority are 90,000 to 100,000 rupees, 
the highest sum being 150,000 rupees paid in one year. Besides 
which, however, was the reservation of stones above a certain size ; 
but it seems to be generally admitted that few large stones were 
found, and of these a proportion, in spite of severe punishments for 
concealment, never reached the King ; there is no basis then for an 
estimate of the total revenue which he received from the mines. 

If one may judge from the appearance of the rubies forming part 
of the treasure taken at Mandalay, and which are now exhibited at 
the South Kensington Museum, valuable stones were rare, as, except 
a few of the smaller ones, none seem to be perfect. 

As is well known, recent accounts by experts have represented 
the prospects of the mines in a much more favourable light, and the 
true value will probably be ere long ascertained by the energetic 
operations of a Company conducted on scientific principles. 

The different kinds of precious stones found in the mines . — Although 

1 ‘‘Mission to Ava,” Edinh. New Phil four. ^ 1827, p. 366. 

2 Jour. As. Socy. Bengal, vol. ii, p. 75. 

® Yule’s Mission to Ava, p. 347. 



THE RUBY MINES OF UPPER BURMAH 


467 


the rubies have given their name to the mines, several other varieties 
of corundum are also found, such as sapphires, oriental emeralds, 
oriental amethyst, oriental topaz, and white sapphires ; and besides 
these there are to be found spinels of various colours, hyacinth (or 
zircon), iolite (or dichroite, a stone resembling sapphire), and lastly 
the semi-precious rubellite, which is a variety of the mineral called 
tourmaline, of which some exceptionally fine examples have been 
brought from Ava, one of which has long held an honoured position 
in the mineral collection of the British Museum. 

According to Mr. Spears, the proportion of sapphires to rubies 
was as I to loo, but the former are often of large size and fine 
quality. 

Pegu has been mentioned by some early writers ^ as producing 
diamonds, but there are no real grounds for supposing that either 
the diamond or true emerald occur in any part of Burmah. 

Mode of occiirre?ice and source of the gems . — Although it has for 
some time been known that the rubies of Sagyin were derived from 
ciystalline limestones or marble, the source of the gems in the prin- 
cipal region at Mogok, Kyatpyen, and Kath^ was not actually ascer- 
tained till recently, when these localities were visited by Mr. 
Barrington Brown. It was known that they were for the most part 
actually obtained in derivative gravels, and it had been inferred that 
the so-called clefts and lodes, of a report which appeared before his 
examination, were really fissures in limestones, where the stones had 
accumulated as the result of the solution of limestone, and by 
gravitation into these recesses. 

Mr. Brown has shown that the geological formation consists of 
recent deposits of hill wash and alluvium and old crystalline lime- 
stones, schists, pegmatite, and other metamorphic rocks. In order 
to explain the relationship which exists between these formations and 
the rubies, it will be convenient to describe the various systems of 
mining, by which the mode of occurrence will be made apparent. 
The mines, as worked by the natives, may be divided into four 
classes, as follows : — 

I. Twinlones^ or pits sunk in the alluvium of the valleys. 

II, MewdwznSy or open cuttings in the hill-wash over which water is 
led. 

III. Loodwins^ or workings in caves and fissures. 


1 Description of the Diamond Mines of hidia^ Phil. Trans. ^ vol. xii, 
p. 907- 





468 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


IV, Quarries in a bed of coarse calcspar in the limestone, which 
appears to be the true original matrix of the gems. 

The Twinlones are square pits which are sunk in the alluvium 
of the valleys down to the gem -bearing gravels, which occur at 
varying depths. These pits have to be timbered to support the 
sides and, as far as possible, exclude water, which, however, finds 
access, and the first operation, every day, is to bale out the water 
which has accumulated during the night. The gravel is hoisted out 
in baskets by means of balance poles similar to those which are 
used in India for raising water from wells. The gravel is then 
washed in shallow baskets made of closely-woven bamboo, and the 
rubies, as they are picked out, are placed in a bamboo tube full of 
water and are sorted at the close of the day^s work. The larger pits 
are generally cleared out in about ten days and the smaller in half 
that time ; when working in one is finished, the timber is removed 
and another pit is started. 

Mewdwins . — These are open cuttings on the slopes of the hills 
to which water is conducted, often from a considerable distance, and 
discharged with as great a head as possible on the ruby clay and 
sand, which is shovelled under it by the miners. The lighter 
portions are carried down by the stream, the boulders removed by 
hand, and the residue placed in the sluice and washed, where it is 
caught by riffles, from whence it is removed and washed in baskets 
as in the preceding process. The circumstances appear to be such 
as would suit a more scientific application of hydraulic methods than 
are known to the natives. 

Loodwins , — These are natural caves and fissures in the limestone 
rock, in the floors and crevices of which the rubies have accumu- 
lated in consequence of the solution by water of the limestone 
matrix. In the ordinary sense of the term these are not mines, i.e, 
the miners do not excavate the rock, but merely scramble through 
the natural passages and tunnels to the spots where the loam 
containing the rubies is found — this they either carry to the surface 
in baskets or it is hoisted up by means of balance poles — and it is 
then washed at the surface at the nearest watercourse. 

From such caves the finest rubies ever found have been 
obtained, and from one in the Pingu Hill, near Kyatpyen, Mr. 
Brown states that, after the detritus had been passed, of every 
basketful of the ruby clay which was raised half consisted of rubies. 

A certain Royal mine of this character is said to have produced 
a ruby as large as a walnut, and in another the rubies were found 



THE RUBY MINES OF UPPER BURMAH 


469 


in association with the bones of some extinct animal of very large 
size} 

This description opens up a somewhat wide vista of speculation, 
and one can hardly resist the temptation of prophesying as to the 
wonderful discoveries which may be made w^hen adits and shafts 
are driven to afford access to these natural caves and fissures in the 
mass of the marble hills. In such safe receptacles it is not unreason- 
able to suppose that stones which have suffered but little from 
attrition and fracture may be found, and that there the greatest 
jprizes will be obtained. 

Qiiarries . — To the north of Mogok village, at a distance of about 
three-quarters of a mile, a bed of calcspar in the limestone, which is 
20 feet wide, produces rubies, but in order to obtain them the use of 
powder has to be employed as well as the hammer, and when chipped 
out the gems are generally more or less fractured ; but good stones 
have been obtained. Whether any method can be devised of avoid- 
ing the injury resulting from the use of explosives is at present doubt- 
ful. It is not easy to suggest how a firm rock, such as this calcspar, 
could be mined without recourse being had to violent methods of 
some kind. 

The rose pink rubellite (a variety of tourmaline) is obtained on 
the margin of the Meobychoung river, 15 miles S. of Mogok and 
3 miles from Mamlong. The mines in the alluvium are worked by a 
rude hydraulic system, and the produce is sent to China, large pieces 
obtaining a good price. 

Under the arrangements which have been made with the New 
Burmah Ruby Mine Company, the rights and interests of the miners 
have apparently been very fully safeguarded, but whether the miners 
on their part will refrain from smuggling and comply with the 
regulations, and disclose their more valuable finds and submit them 
to taxation, remains to be seen. The total production of rubies in 
1887, when the country was disturbed, amounted to only 42,486 
rupees worth, but in the first two months of 1888 21,883 rupees 
worth had been obtained. Stones of from 5 to 20 carats’ weight 
were sold during this period, and the highest price obtained for one 
was 500 rupees. 

The mode of occurrence of the rubies in calcspar is, I believe, 
somewhat unusual, though spinel is known to be found in calcareous 
rocks. It is generally the case that the corundum minerals are 

1 The fossil remains of Mastodons and other large mammalia, allied to those 
found in the Sivalik hills of India, have long been known to occur in Burmah. 




470 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


found in mica schists, such is stated to be the case in Zanskar in 
the Himalayas, and also in Ceylon ; with reference to the latter it 
may be of interest, in addition to the remarks on p. 102, to add here 
some particulars as to the sapphire washings of that island. 

The Sapphires of Ceylon. — Under British rule the monopoly 
in precious stones, which existed under the Kandyan sovereigns, was 
early abolished as a source of revenue, and no licence is now 
required by jewel hunters. Great numbers of people are attracted 
annually to the washings, to the great detriment of agriculture and 
the demoralisation of the villagers, who are brought into contact 
with dissolute adventurers. Sir Emerson Tennent, from whom the 
above facts are quoted, estimated the annual total value of the 
precious stones which were found as not exceeding 0,000 per 
annum. 

According to the Handbook for Ceylon^ recently published in 
connection with the Colonial and Indian Exhibition, the search is 
conducted in a rude fashion, and, despite the advice and reports by 
experts, there has been no improvement in the method. It is stated 
in the same work that, though some returns are attempted by the 
Government, it is impossible to estimate the annual yield at present, 
and the mines have never, I believe, been successfully worked by 
Europeans. 


A 



APPENDIX VI 


A Review or Abstract in tJie ^^Philosophical Transactions" of 
Chapmeaiis {sic) work, entitled “Histoire des JoyauxP 
published in 1665; and Note on the English edition of 
the same work. 

The following is a contemporary abstract published in the Philoso- 
phical Transactions ^ of a book which seems to be of extraordinary 
rarity — there being no copy of it, I believe, in any of the great libraries 
in Great Britain, nor even in the Biblioth^que Nationale — it is there- 
fore of sufficient interest to justify its republication in its original 
quaint form. But it has in connection with Tavernier a special in- 
terest, because from the glimpse of the contents of the book which it 
afibrds, we can see that Chapuzeau (or rather Chappuzeau), by what- 
ever means he acquired them, was in possession of many of the facts 
recorded in Tavernier’s Travels at least ten years before the Travels 
were published, and while Tavernier was absent on his last journey. 
None of the biographies of Chappuzeau mention this work; and 
although I have not failed to make inquiries I have been unable 
as yet to find any explanation of the mystery. 

In Emanuel’s bibliography of works on precious stones,^ the book 
is mentioned with its full title, and the place and date of publication 
are given as Geneva 1665. 

An Account 

Of a small Book in French, entituled 
HISTOIRE DES JOYAUX 

ET 

Des Principales Richesses de /’Orient et de /’Occident, 
par le Sr. Chapuzeau. 

This History treats of Diamonds, Rubies, Emeraulds, Pearls, 
Coral, Bezoar, Yellow Amber, Ambergris, Indigo, &c. 


1 Vol. ii, 1667, pp. 429-436. 

2 Diamonds and Precious Stones, second ed., London, 1867, p. 246. 




472 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Of JDiamonds^ the Author shews : 

I. The Places whence they are taken ; of which he finds but five 
in all the East-Indies^ whereof two are Rivers, vid. Saccadan in Borneo 
and Hage in the Kingdom of Eengala at the bottom of both 
which, he saith, the Diamonds are found among the sand, after the 
waters, that fall as great Torrents from the Mountains, are run off ; 
and the three others are Mines, in the Kingdoms of Decan, Cimcan, 
and Golconda. In this Relation he observes, that the Diamonds 
which are found at the bottom of those Rivers, have the best Water ; 
but those in Mines have often Flaws (which he imputes to the violent 
knockings of the Rock) and Plebs, ascribed to the condition of the 
Earth or Sand they are found in, vid, when that is not pure, but 
fattish or black. He takes also notice, that Diamonds are the 
heaviest of precious Stones, as Gold is of Mettals. 

II. The Manner, how they are found and separated ; which is the 
same in substance with that described Nunu i8. p. 328.^ 

III. The Price of them, according to the proportion of their 
weight j for which he gives this Rule. Take, saith he, a Diamond of 
10 Carats: this number is to be squared (which makes 100). Then, 
if the Stone be clean, each Carat, according to its perfection, may be 
worth 40 to 60 Crowns : if it have no good water, or have a Bleb or 
Flaw, the Carat will not be worth but from 10 to 30 Crowns. So 
multiplying the said 100 by the number, which each Carat of such 
or such a Stone may be worth, the product is the price of the Stone. 

For Rubies, he discourses also of the Places where they are found, 
and of their Price? The Places are, the Kingdom of Pegu, and the 
Isle of Ceylon ; whence very few are suffered to be carried away. 
The Price is, that a good Rubi of the weight of i Rati (which is 
of a Carat) is esteemed at 20 old Pagodes in India, each Pagode 
being about ten shillings English, 

(A Rubi) of 2 Ratis is valued at 100 Pagodes, 



99 

3 

99 

99 

250 

99 


99 

4 

99 

99 

500 

99 


99 

5 

99 

99 

900 

99 


9 

6 

99 

99 

1500 

99 

9 } 

99 

7 

99 

99 

2300 

99 

99 

99 

12 

99 

99 

12,000 

99 


^ See ante, p. 53 sq. of Travels, and Appendix III, p, 459. 

2 This is a reference to another Review, on the Voyage de PEveque de BeTyte, 
etc., it is in Phil, Trans,, vol. i, pp. 327-328. 

® See ante, p. 10 1 of Travels, 



HISTOIRE DES JOYAUX 


473 


Concerning Turqiwis^ they are found in Persia^ in the Province 
Chainaqttay^ north of Ispahan^ in two Mines, called the Old and 
the New Rock. These of the New^ are of an ill, whitish Blew ; but 
those of the Old are not suffered to be digged out, but by the King 
of Persia himself.^ 

Emeraulds are affirmed by him, never to be found in the Past- 
Indies but in Perou^^ whence they were carried by that trading people 
to the Moluccas^ even before Atnerka was discovered by the Euro- 
peans ; and so they come from the Orient ; of much less value than 
they were formerly, by reason of their commonness. The Author 
notes, that ICmeraulds grow in stones, just as Chrystals, forming a Vein, 
in which they are by little and little refined and thickened : and that 
some of them are seen, half white and half green : others, all white : 
and others all green and perfect. 

I'o Pearls he assigns in the Orient four places where they are 
fished : The Isle of ISa/iareni, in the Persian Gulf: the Coast of 
Arabia Pelix, near the Town of Catif over against / the 

Isle of Ceylon about Manar : the Isle of Japan. The best at Ceylon, 
but small : the biggest at Japan, but uneven. In the West- Indies 
they are fished in the North-Sca, in the Isles of Marguerite, Cubagua, 
St Marthe : and at Comana, Comanagote, near the Continent : and 
in the Sout/i-Sea, near Panama : which Anmiean sort, though they 
are much inferiour to the Oriental, in Lustre, yet they far excel them 
in bigness, amounting sometimes (saith this Author) to 42 Carats? 

In this Relation 'tis mentioned, that sometimes 5, or 6 Pearls 
are found in one Oyster : That Pearl-fishers are fed with dry and 
roasted meat, to give them better breathing : That Pearl-bearing 
Oysters are not good to eat, being flat and hard of digestion, &c. 

As to the Price of good Pearls, well fashioned, he marketh it, as 
follows : 

Such a Pearl of 


Grain i 

Crowns x 

Carats 

2 

CroiJons 64 


» 4 

39 

2i 

„ 8x 

5 > 3 

» 9 

39 


„ 100 

Carats i 

» 16 

33 

2f 

„ 121 


» 25 

33 

3 

» 144 

» 4 

» 36 1 

33 

si 

„ 160 

5 J 

» 49 ' 

33 

si 

„ 196 


1 See ante, p. 103 of Travels, ^ See a/zte, p. 104 of Travels, 

^ See ante, pp. 107 and 116 of Travels, 



474 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Carats 

3i 

Crowns 225 

1 Carats 6 

Croziw 5 ’j6 

3J 

4 

55 

256 

53 


„ 625 

JJ 


53 

289 

33 

6} 

» 675 

55 

4i 

53 

324 

33 

61 

» 729 

35 

4| 

53 

361 

33 

7 

,, 784 

55 

S 

>3 

400 

33 

li 

„ 841 

35 

Si 

33 

441 

33 


„ 900 

35 

si 

53 

484 

53 

7l 

„ 960 

33 

S-i 

55 

529 

33 

8 

„ 1024 


Of Corals^ he taketh notice where they are fished, and in what 
manner} The Places^ he saith^ to be Eight: Three upon the Coasts 
of Corsica and Sardinia, vid. at Argneil (where is the best) Baza, and 
near the Isle of St, Peter: one upon the Coast of Sicily, near Dre- 
panum : Two upon the coast of Africa, near the Bastion of France, 
and at Tabarca: One more, upon the Coast of Catalo?ua, at the 
Cape of Qtiiers : And the last, about Majorca, Observing, that red 
Coral is not found, but in the Mediterranean alone, where 'tis fished 
from the beginning of April till the end of Jtdy, employing commonly 
about 200 Boats. The manner of fishing them, is with two big beams 
of wood, laid crosswise, with a good piece of Lead on the middle, to 
make it sink, casting about it coarse Hemp, carelessly twisted, and 
tying this Wood to two Ropes, whereof one hangs at the Sterne, the 
other at the fore-part of the Boat : and so letting this contrivance fall 
into the Current, along the Rocks, where the Hemp being turned about, 
and engaged in the Coral, there need sometimes many Boats to draw 
away the Instrument. 

Bezoar, he saith, is not only found in Golconda, in the Province 
of Renquery, in the Maw of Goats, whereof some are at times furnisht 
with a dozen a piece : but also at Macassar, in the Isle of Celebes, in 
the body of Apes : bigger than those found in Golconda, He men- 
tions, that the people in those parts, to find whether a Goat hath any 
of those Bezoar-stones in its body, do beat his belly with their hands 
and rub it, till all the stones in the Animal come together, and tell 
them as you do stones in a bag, &c.^ 


^ See anU, p, 132 of Travels, 

2 For account of Bezoar, see ante p. 146 of Travels, 



HISTOIRE DES JOYAUX 


475 


The English Edition of the Histoire des Joyaux 

Since the foregoing pages were printed I have had the good 
fortune to obtain a copy of a small volume entitled The History of 
Jewels^ and of the Prmcipal Eiches of the East and West, Taken from 
the Relation of Divers of the most Eamous Travellers of our Age ; 
Attended with Pair Discoveries conducmg to the Knowledge of the 
Universe and Traded Although not stated to be a translation, 
the identity of its contents with those of Chappuzeau^s Histoire des 
foyaux, as shown by the above abstract, admit of no doubt that it 
is the same work in an English dress. 

Neither Chappuzeau nor Tavernier are mentioned in it ; but the 
internal evidence conclusively proves that it must have been largely 
founded on Tavernier’s original memoirs. If it be the case that 
Chappuzcau appropriated these without acknowledgment, it would 
also appear that the English editor pirated Chappuzeau’s book. 

A general resemblance of facts alone would not prove Tavernier 
to have been the original author, but the History casually refers to 
certain dates in connection with places where we know Tavernier to 
have been in the same years. Thus on p. 26 reference is made to 
Mir Jumid and his occuimtion at Gandikot in the year 1652, 
when Tavernier visited him (see vol. i, p. 284). On p. 23 the 
depreciated condition of the diamond mines at Kollur in the year 
1660 is referred to, and Tavernier alludes (see ante, p. 75) to a falling 
off in the number of miners since his first visit, and we have otherwise 
seen that he had visited the mines in 1660 (see vol. i, Introduction, 
p. xxiii. On p. 123 the facts stated in reference to bezoar are 
substantially the same as Tavernier’s own personal record (see p. 148 
ante), Tavernier’s personal stories about Bohemian rubies (see p. 
103 ante) and a living worm in dead coral (see p. 134 ante) are both 
in the History, pp. 60 and 106. 

Short as it is, the History contains some facts not given in the 
Travels, but they, for the most part, do not refer to India. 

Of facts given in the History which are omitted accidentally or 
are misprinted in the Travels, some, as will be seen, confirm correc- 
tions and additions already made in the footnotes on preceding 
pages. On p. 24 of the History we find the name of the diamond 


1 London, printed by T. N. for Hobart Kemp, etc., i 67 i> small 8vo, 
pp. 128. 


476 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


mine which Tavernier omitted to mention {ante^ pp. 53 n. and 78), it 
was Gazerpoli (ie. Gazerpalle or Baswapur, see p. 451 ante) two days’ 
journey from Raolconda (u. Ramulkota). It is said to have been 
discovered in 1448, which is not recorded in the Travtls. On 
p. 54 Ava is correctly given instead of Siren, where a mistake occurs 
in the Travds (see p. 99 n) On p. 20 there is the same mistake as 
occurs once in the Travels (see p, 74) in reference to the weight of 
the Mogul’s diamond— it being given as 900 carats instead of 900 
ratis. 

The History also contains some important facts about the Bengal 
diamond mines; these have been already noticed (see p. 459). 

The value of the rupee is stated in the History to be 28 pence, 
but I venture to think that 27 pence, which has been adopted in the 
footnotes and in Appendix I, vol. i, is a closer approximation to 
the value. 

The principal discrepancy to be found between the History and 
the Travels is in the tables of values of rubies; they are quite 
discordant 

The concluding paragraph of the History--mi in the light of 
this identification of Tavernier as the original author of the work— is 
of interest. The writer says : “ This is all I have at present collected 
of what is remarkable in the modern and faithful Relations of our 
Travellers upon the subject of Jewels, and other rich productions of 
which I have given a short Account as a platform for a greater work.” 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


Ahds^ a weight for pearls (2.66 troy 
grs.), i, 417; ii, xii, 121 
AbAsi {A bass/), Persian coin (worth 
IS. 6 il) and money of account, i, 23, 
414 

Abbas II, Shah of Persia, i, 350 
Abder-Razzak, quoted, i, 255 n, 

Abdul Kutab Shih {Abdoul CoittouCha), 

i, 159; ii, 176 

Abdul Zabar Beg (the King of Gol- 
conda’s general), i, 167, 170 
Abdulla Khan (Aurangzeb’s general), 

b 352 

Ab-i-tazi [Betazy), in Afghanistan, i, 91 
Abu Sayyid Mirza, Sultan, i, 323 
Abyssina, ii, 6, 158 
Achin or Acheen (for Sumatra), i, 279 
n, \ king of, ii, 187, 299, 316, 318, 

352 

Adam’s fig (the plantain fruit, Mim 
sapientim vel paradisiaca), i, 247 ; 

ii, 4 253, 283 

Addanki (Adanqtdge), i, 266 
Adjaib-al-tlind, quoted, i, 73 
“Admiral,” for leading ship, i, 313 
Adrican, the Sieur (D.), i, 373 
Adulteration of musk, ii, 144 
Afghans [Augans), i, 92 

Africa, gold in, ii, ISS, 158 
African Coast, coral from the, ii, 133 n, 
Aga-seral t,i, 121 
Agates of Cambay, i, 69 
Ag/ia, Pers., lord or master, i, 83 
Agra from Delhi, i, 104; to Golconda, 
i, 149; matmd, value of, i, 419; 
palace at, i, 107 ; to Patna, i, 113; 
from Surat, i, 66, 89 ; tombs at, i, 
109 

Ahmadabad, i, 72 ; diamond, the, ii, 
125 ; sale of jewels at, i, 18 n,, 308; 
hospital for sick animals at, i, 78; 
monkeys at, i, 79 ; silks at, ii, 27 
Aind-Akhari, the, quoted, i, 9 28 

n., 34 157 280 n, ; ii, 54 n. 


Ainslie, Dr. [Materia Medica), quoted, 
ii, 20 130 n., 138 w., 155 

271 71 . 

Ajmir [E 7 nir), i, 348 
Akai? [Ahnate), i, 58 
Akbar, i, 323 ; tomb of, i, in 
Akbarpur [Ekberhotirg], i, 121 
Akil Khan [Akel Kaii), i, 133, 393 
Alacors, sweepers. See Halalkhors 
Albertus (a coin), i, 13 
Alegamma Mudaliyar [Motiar), of 
Ceylon, ii, 188 
Aleppo [Alep), i, 7, 200 
Ali [Haly), the prophet, i, 373; Sect 
of, i, 160, 171 
Alibaghan [Alybotia), i, 93 
Aljofar [aVjauhar, Ar.), seed pearls, 
ii, 1 18 n., 228 71 . 

Allahabdd [Halabas), i, 17, 116 
Ahnadier [EVinaadiah, Ar.), a ferry 
boat, i, 176 71 , 

Almasgooda ? [Ahiiaspmde), ii, 94 
Almonds, bitter, used as money. See 
Badain 

Aloes, Socotrian, ii, 2i 
Aloe-wood ( = Iig 7 iu 7 ti aloes), ii, 21 
Alphabet of the Siamese language, ii, 
289 

AlurmChand [Almcha 7 i), i. 113 
Alumpur [Alpoitr), ii, 94 
Amanat Khan [Me 7 iat Kan), i, 95 
Ambad [Auhar d.Tid E? 7 iber), i, 146, 148 
Ambassadors. See Embassies 
Amber, ii, 132, 136, 137, 261, 266 
Ambergris at Mozambique, i, 190 ; ii, 

138 

Amboyna Is., in Molucca Sea, i, 235 
America, cowries sent to, i, 28 ; early 
trade with Asia, ii, 103 «. ; pearls 
found in, ii, 12 

Amethyst, oriental, i, 399 ; ii, 99 
Amsterdam, ii, 416 
A~muck, running, ii, 362, 374 
Andaman Islands, ii, 400 71. 



478 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Aftdy (for Chandia on Sone, which see ; 

also for H India, which see) 
Anglo-Indian Glossary^ quoted, i, 66, 
87. 98, 159. 189, 191, 192, 193, 
237 j 259; ii, 3, 6, 21, 24, 68, 99, 
117, 118, 157, 161, 183, 186, 22S, 
250, 274, 286, 289, 293, 308 
Animals, wild, at the Cape, ii, 397 
Aniseed {Fenouil), ii, 20 
Antelope, i, 2i*j n. 

Antidote to leeches, i, 250 
Antivary for Da7itivar (see Dantawara), 
h 37 

Antri {Trie), i, 62 
Ants in Siam, ii, 287 
AnzertU ( = sarcocolla), a gum resin 
obtained from PencBa mucronatay ii, 

20 71. 

Apes. See Monkeys 
Appendices, i, 41 1 ; ii, 429-476 
Arabia, Prince of, i, 399 ; ii, 109 
Arabia Felix, i, 373 
Arakan, King of, i, 129, 367 ; ii, 187 
Archaeological Reports, quoted, i, 89, 105 
Ardabil {A7‘deuil) in Persia, ii, 260 
Ardilliere, M. d’, ii, 159, 246 
Areca nuts, ii, 354 
Arguerrel, coral found at, ii, 132 
Ariel 1 a drug, ii, 20 
Armenian, an, i, 1 1 2 j merchants, ii, 
261 

Arnebar, the Sieur (D.), ii, 327 
Af^emisia ma-Htmiay var., ii, 259 7 t, 
Artillery of the Great Mogul, i, 58 
Arwal on Sone {IIalva-sera)y i, 121 
Asaf Bin Ali, an Arabian Prince, ii, 109 
Asaf Khan (brother of Nur Jahan), i, 
332, 337> 338 
Ashta {Asti)y t, i, 146 
Asia, gold in, ii, 155 
Asiatic Jotirnaly quoted, ii, 155, 268 
Asirgarh {Asser) in Khandesh, i, 352 
Asoka pillar [^Ldt Bhdiro), i, iig n. 
Assam {Ase7t and Asem), i, 16 ; ii, 277 
Assassination by Portuguese, i, 188 
Assayers of gold, ii, 42 
Assegais (Ageagayes), ii, i6l, 295, 399 
Ast Kan. See Azam Khan 
Astrologers, Brahmin, ii, 247 
Asutinatl a grain, ii, 20 
Atenara. See Tenara 
Attock {Atek), i, 93, 94 
Augustin Fathers, i, 128, 196, 202, 203 
Aurangdbad (Aurenabat) in Deccan, i, 
33» I45> 146, 148; to Surat, i, 181 5 
in Bengal, where Aurangzeb de- 
feated Shuja, i, 115 

Aurangzeb attacks Golconda, i, 167 ; 
besieges Daman, i, 179 ; deception 


practised by, i, 330 ; defeats Shuja, 
35S; descent of, i, 322; enters Agra, 
i, 341 ; embassies to, i, 373 j evasion 
of customary bounty, i, 379 w. ; 
Governor of the Deccan, i, 326 ; 
penance by, i, 38S ; is proclaimed 
king, i, 355 ; commencement of 
reign, i, 371 ; religion of, ii, 177; 
seizes Shah Jahan’s jewels, i, 344 ; 
seizes Dard’s treasure, i, 342, 398 n. 
Austrian Yellow diamond, i, 416 ; ii, 
97, 124, 447 
Ava, ii, 99, 476 

Avocat Fiscal, the, at Batavia, ii, 322, 
330, 344, 381, 384, 389 
Azam Khdn {Ast Ka7t), i, 143 
Azoo {Koc/i Ila^jo), ii, 279 

Babar, Sultan, i, 159 71., 323 ; quoted, 
91 7t.y 417 

Baboo Sarai {Bouraky-sera), i, 118 
Baca7t (from Pers. bdkatid), a ruby, ii, 
99 

Bac/ia (Pasha), in Turkey, i, 98 
Baddm {haden), nut of almond 
{Amygdalus cotfmmnis, var. ), used 
as money, i, 27 w., 413 
Badger, Rev. Percy, quoted, ii, 15S 
Baft as and Bast as (cotton cloths), i, 
66 ; ii, 5 

Bagamara? t, i, 127 
Bahadurpur {Batef-ponr), i, 120 
Bahren (pearl fishery), in Persian Gulf, 

i, 191; ii, 107, 120 

Baladmes {Baladeira, Port.), dancing 
girls, i, 87, 91, 259, 289, 385; ii, 
335, 33^, 337 

Balass {balet), rubies, i, 382 w., 399 ; 

ii, 102, 128 

Baldelpou7'a. See Balleda 
Balkh {Batch), in Turkestan, i, 92 ; ii, 
260 

Balleda {Baldelloura), i, 50 
Bailor {Balo}'), i, 49 
Balsara. See Bassora 
Balthasar (a Carmelite monk), ii, 171 
Baltic Sea, amber found in the, ii, 136 
Balwara {Balki-sera), i, 55 
Bamboo {Baftibouc), stem of Bafnbtisa 
arundifiacea, i, 45, 271 
Bafid (an embankment), i, 150 71. 

Banda Is., ii, 17 
Bandar Abbas. See Gombroon 
Bandar-Sindri {Ba7zder-So7Z77ery), i, 89 
Bandelkhand, diamond mines in, ii, 
453 

Bander, for Shah Bandar, which see 
Ba7zghy or carrying stick, ii, 23 1 «. 
Bangue, Sultan, i, 368, 369 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


479 


Banmti or Banyafi^ a, dealer in dia- 
monds, ii, 63 

Banians or Banyans {Bania 7 ies)i i, 6, 
59, 60, 74, 75, 77, 91, 104, 136; 
ii, 183 

Banka? (Baia), tin mines, ii, 162 
Bankok, in Siam, ii, 288 n. 

Bantam, in Java, King of, ii, 345, 352, 
36x-3<^5 

Banyan tree {Fictis Indica)^ ii, 198 
Baobhak Khan (for Batibec Kan in 
text, but probably incorrect), i, 375, 
376 

Baqneljbottr. See Bhagulpiir 
Barbosa, quoted, ii, 138, 144 
Bardoli or Panoli {Barnoly), t., i, 48, 
142 

Barefoot Carmelites, i, 196, 202 
Barikab {BariahS)^ in Afghanistan, i, 
93 

Barki sarai {Bar^z^i-sera), in Gwalior, 

i, 62 

Barkur {Balcanoor)^ on west coast of 
India, ii, 30S 

Barna river, near Benares, i, 118 n. 
liaroda {Bnozedra), i, 71 
Baz'oc} King of, in Africa, ii, 162 
Baroqzte (an irregularly shaped pearl), 

ii, 108, 1 14 

Barunda {Boronda), i, 88 
Bassein {Bassain)^ i, 176 
Bassora or Basra {Baisara), i, 5 ; ii, 
ti7 

Bastion de P'rance, the (N. coast of 
Africa), ii, 132 

Batavia, ii, 358 ; councils at, ii, 326 ; 
funeral expenses at, ii, 377; Tavernier 
arrives at, ii, 321 

Bathing in the Ganges during an eclipse, 
ii, 247 

Battle between the sons of Shah Jahan, 

h 33 X 

Baubcc Kan ? See Baobhak Khan 
Bavarian pearls, ii, 113 
Bayadh^es, See Baladines 
Bazu (a Dutchman), ii, 126 
Beauce, "hix^Bcausse)^ in France, i, 57 n. 
Bcconconr’i in Patna, i, 123 
Beer, English, ii, 36S 
Begum Sahib (Jahanara), i, 17, 326; 
death of, i, 345 ; imprisonment of, 

i, 342 ; is restored to favour, i, 376 ; 
saves her father’s jewels from destruc- 
tion, i, 372, 398 71 . 

Behar or Bihar, prov., i, 330 336 n . ; 

ii. 4 SS 

Behara {Bsaz'a), i, 142 

Beke, Dr., quoted, Mi, 441 

Bellary District, diamond mines, ii, 45 X 


Belle Apizze. See Vyepu 
BellipOTdo. See Beypur 
Belloy, M. du (F.), i, 203, 205, 206, 
207, 208, 210 

Benares {Bmaz'on, Banarozts^ and Befi-- 
ares)y i, ii8, 119; ii, 1S2, 225, 230 
Bengal, diamond mines of, ii, 81, 84, 
452, 457 5 revenue of, i, 1 14 ; shellac 
from, ii, 23 

Benjamin, Mr., quoted, ii, 443 n. 
Bergazzi or Burgazzt. See Wungaon 
Bernier, M. , French physician and 
author, i, 115, 122, 125, 349; 

quoted, i, 321 zi., 331 zz., 332 zz., 

372 373 3S4 395 

396 398 zz., 400 zz., 410 zz., 

414 zz. ; ii, 129 zz., 203 zz., 225 zz,, 
436 zi. 

Bernoulli, quoted, i, 92, 93, 121 ; ii, 
460 zz. 

Beriizabad. See Firozabad 
Betel (the leaf of Chavica betel), i, 265, 
286 ; ii, 354 

Beypur {^Belliportd), i, 235 
Bezoar, ii, 143, 146, 151 
Bezwada {Bezoztar and Bezonart), on 
the Kistna river, i, 174, 261 
Bhagnagar or Haidardbad, capital of 
Golconda, i, 150, 15 1, 156, 162, 
167 

Bhagulpur {Baqzielponr), in Bengal, i, 
124 

Bhdng or Indian hemp, ii, 212 
Bhaumal? or Bheenmal {Bimat), i, 87 
Bhizzi Idt, a stone pillar at Biana, i, 89 n. 
Bhutan {Boutan), i, 16 ; ii, 258, 268 ; 
King of, ii, 146 

Biana {Bazziazza), in Bhurtpur, i, 89 
Bible, Tavernier’s, not taken to Goa,' 
i, 202 

Bibliography of the editions of Taver- 
nier’s works, i, xxxix ; ii, xiii 
Bichola {Bich-ola), i, 55 
Bicholim {Bicholly), i, 18 1 ; ii, 305 
Bijapur (Visapour), properly Vijayapura, 

! i, I, 181 ; conquered by Aurangzeb, 
i, i6i ; diamond mines, ii, 453 ; to 
Golconda, i, iSi ; King of, i, 160, 
182 ; ii, 176, 187 ; Queen of, i, 183, 
213 

Billiton {Bordelozi) tin mines, ii, 162 
Bird, Miss, quoted, ii, 462 
Bird, a, that eats nutmegs, ii, 15 
Birds of Paradise, the myth about, ii, 1 5 
Bishkhzipj'a, a lizard, ii, 288 zz. 

Bishop of Beyrout (Beryte), ii, 287, 295 
Bishop of Heliopolis, ii, 287 
Bishop of Megalopolis, ii, 287 
Bishop of Myra, in Lycia, i, 208 



480 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Blackic, Mr,, <j\ioted, i, 417 
Blanc, Vincent Ic, ciuoted, ii, 100 
Bleeding a king and queen, i, 302 
Blindness of princes, how causetl, i, 334 
Blochman, Prof., quoted, ii, 85 
279 w-9 45^5 

Bodies, the burning of deati, ii, 207 
lioete, M,, an apothecary, ii, 66, 70 
Bohemian rubies, ii, X03 
Boileau, Major-General, quoted, ii, 200 
Bolaki, IMnce, i, 81, 334, 335, 337 
Bontaing {Biftagne) Is., ii, 301 
Bonzes (Siamese priests), ii, 293 
Boorgul {Pa?‘quel)t h, 93 
Borax, ii, 19 

Bordeaux, Augustin de (F.), i, 108 
Borgio, Hortensio (a jeweller, I.), i, 
396 5 ii, 440 

Borneo, diamond mines in, ii, 87, 462 ; 
Queen of, ii, 88 

Boswell, Mr. J. A. C., quoted, i, 265 
Boiiccha’i (a box), ii, 166, 171 
BouHaye le Gouz, M. de la (F.), i, 
210 224 

Bouquin-kans (English hats), ii, 265 
Boza, coral at, in the Mediterranean, ii, 
132 

Bozan (a Dutch lieutenant), ii, 171 
Brahmins, i, 249 ; ii, 181, 235 ; pseudo, 
ii, 273 

Brampour. See Burhanpur 
Brandenburg, Elector of, ii, 136 
Bredmeyer, Mr,, quoted, ii, 466 
Breton, Sir F., ii, 79, 327 
Bridge over the Jajou, i, 65 
Brinjdras (a carrier tribe), i, 40 n. 
Broach {Baroche), i, 66, 71 
Brokers. See Shroff 
Brown, Mr. Barrington, quoted, ii, 467 
Buchanan-Hamilton, Dr, F., quoted, 
ii, 81, 460 

Buddha, images of, ii, 228 291 

Buddhism, ii, 256 «. 

Budurpur {Badelpurd), i, 104 
Buffaloes, flesh of, ii, 37 
Buffon, quoted, ii, 460 
Bukkur or Bakhar, on the Indus, i, 347 
Burhanpur {Brampou?'), i, 37, 50, 51, 
57, 160, 296, 298 
Burial charges at Golconda, ii, 71 
Burmah ruby mines, ii, 465 
Burmese amber, ii, 136 n. 

Burning of dead bodies, ii, 207 
Burning of living persons, ii, 20S 
Burning of widows, ii, 209 
Bykatpur, i, 123 n, 

Cabaye. See Kabd-e-Shdhi 
Caboul. See Kabul 


Cufres, i, 190, 216, 217, 218; ii^ 158, 
160, 392-400 

Cairo i^Catre), i, 14 ; ii, 160 
Calico. See Cotton, Baft as, etc. 
Calvctli (Ca/ive/e), a qiuuter of Cochin, 

i, 238, 242 

Cam, the Si'enr (D.), ii, 342 
Ctvnbari} i, 142 

Cambay {Cambaya), i, 68 ; Gulf of, ii, 
36 

Cambodia {Camboya), ii, 102, 303 
Camels not known in Assam, ii, 281 w. 
Canaponr'^ ii, 93 

Candahar or Kandahar, in Afghani- 
stan, which see 

Candear or Kandahar, in Deccan, 
which see 
Cannanore, i, 241 

Cannon, casting of, i, 290. See Guns 
Cant, the Sieztr (U.), death of, ii, 359 
Canton {Xanton), ii, 303 
Cape of Good Hope, the, ii, 322, 392 ; 
discovery of a bay near the, i, 2X6 ; 
ib 34 

Cape de Quiers? ii, 133 
Capelan, See Kyatpyen, in Burmah 
Capuchin Fathers at Goa, i, 196, 232 ; 
at Surat, i, 7 

Carat (the Florentine, as used by 
Tavernier, 3.04 troy grs.), i, 416; 

ii, xii, 447 

Caravans of waggons, i, 42 
Caravatisdris, i, 88, 152 
Caravel, Port, (a vessel), i, 216; ii, 
322 

Cardamom {Eletlarza cardazfiofnzim), i, 
184 ; ii, 13 

Careri, Gemelli, quoted, i, xxxiii 
Carnatic or Karnatik, i, 259, 2S4 
Caron, the Siezir {!),), ii, 322, 347, 382 
Carpets made at Fatehpur Sikri, ii, 3 
Carriages in India, i, 39 
Carrier tribes, i, 41 
Casbz/z. See Kasvin (in Persia) 
Casembrot, the Sleiir, ii, 165 
Casenbazar. See Kasimbazaar 
Cassia fistnla, i, 1 74 «. ; ii, 20 
Castanheda, quoted, ii, 151 w., 158 ?z., 
393 ”• 

Castellani, quoted, ii, 109 71., 455 w. 
Castes in India, ii, 182, 234 
Catalonia {Calalogzze), in Spain, ii, 133 
Cathay {Chegalhay), i, 322 
Cathay and the way thither, quoted, 
i, 322 ; ii, 271 71 . 

Cattle, draught, i, 44 
Caucasus, Mount, i, 3, 4 
Celebes. See Macassar Is. 

Cesi, M. de (F.), i, 2x1 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


481 


Ceylon Colonial Guide ^ quoted, ii, 102 

w. ; HI w. 

Ceylon elephants, i, 278; ii, 317 
Ceylon, Governor of, i, 192 
Ceylon, King of, ii, 187 
Ceylon Obsei'ver^ the Overland^ quoted, 
ii, III n. 

Ceylon precious stones, ii, 99 
Ceylon sapphire washings, ii, 102, 
470 

Ceylon, Tavernier leaves, ii, 321 
Cha, See Shdh 

Cha Bandar^ See Shah Bandar 
Cha JCst JCan. See Shaista Khan 
Cha Gehan, See Shah Jahan 
Chaez. See Shdhi 
Chainpur {CheniJ>onr), i, 55 
Chakras, metal quoits, i, 82 
Chaksu {Chasou), i, 89 
Chambal river (Chammel-nadi), i, 64 
Chanda District, diamond mines in, ii, 

452^ 

Chandia on Sone {Andy), i, 55 n. 
Chappuzeau, M., quoted, i, xxx ; ii, 
459, 471 

Chapra {Choupar), near Patna, i, 122 ; 
ii, 12 

Charados. See Sudras 
Charahpujd (swinging festival), ii, 254 
Chardin, quoted, i, xxvi, 98 115 

268 n,, 335 n., 373 n., 374 n., 382 
388 f 7 ., 415 n, } ii, 64, 138 
Charwa {Charoua), i, 55 
Chateau des Bois, M. de, i, 221, 228 
Chativor river, i, 127 
Chaul {Chaoul), i, 176 
Chegathay, See Cathay 
Chegos, an arbitrary weight for pearls, 
ii, xi, 122 
Chek, See Sheikh 
Chekaipour. See Sheikhpura 
Chela, fish, i, 150 n. 

Cheraf, See Shroff 
Cheronrabad ? i, 1 1 4 
Cheteur, the Sieur (D.), i, 289, 301 
Chevres, the Sieur (D.), ii, 373 
Chiamay lake (a myth), ii, 278 
Chidabad {Sayyiddbdd), i, 71 
Children dealing in diamonds, ii, 61 
China, Dutch embassy to, ii, 297, 300 ; 
gold in, ii, 155 ; King of, ii, 187 ; 
Russian embassy to, ii, 271 
Chinese at Batavia, ii, 223 ; money, i, 
416; navigators, i, 255 n. 

Chintzes {Chiles), i, 56, 80; ii, 4, 5 
Choupart and Choupar. See Sholapur 
Christian, convert. King of Ceylon, a, 
ii, 1 88 ; princes, sons of Shah Danial, 
i. 337 


Christians in the east, ii, 176 ; native, at 
Madras, i, 270 

Christofle (a French soldier), i, 236 
Chutia Nagpur, diamonds of, ii, 81 n. 
Cinnamon {canelle), i, 234; ii, 14, iS, 
317; bastard, i, 234 
Clerc, Captain (E.), i, 177 
Cloves, ii, 14, 17 
Cobra snake, ii, 1 53 
Cochin, Dutch Governor of, i, 243 ; King 
of, i, 242 ; siege of, i, 235 el seq. 
Cochinchina, King of, ii, 187 
Cocoanut palm, ii, 84 n. 

Coco-de-mer, ii, 289 n. 

Cocos (or Keeling) Is., ii, 390 
Coelc/iiel? t., i, 88 
Coffee, ii, 23, 24 

Coins current in India, i, 13 ; of Siam, 
ii, 289 ; value of, i, 411-416 
Coinlre ? a drug, ii, 20 
Collision at sea, a, ii, 391 
Coloured stones (precious), ii, 99 
Comets of 16 1 8 and 1665, i, 388 n. 
Commercial company, establishment of 
a, in India, ii, 33 
Comogolel in West Indies, ii, 113 
Comorin, Cape, i, 205 
Comouks (a Tartar tribe), ii, 392 
Company for commerce, how to estab- 
lish a, ii, 33 

Constant, the Sieur (D.), ii, 326 el seq, 
Constantinople, i, 20S 
Conduite des Idollandois, quoted, ii, 
136 n, 

Conti, Nicolo, quoted, ii, 460 
Contour, M., a French merchant, ii, 16 
Contraband trading by wives of Dutch 
officials, ii, 49 

Conversion of King of Macassar, ii, 306 
Conveyances in India, i, 39 
Copenourl t., i, 266 
Copper coins of India, i, 27 
Copper mines (at Singhana ?), i, 27 n. 
Coracles on the Kistna, i, 10, 294, 299 ; 
ii, 69 n. 

Coral, red, ii, 132, 265 
Cordeliers (monastic order), i, 196 
Gorge (for ICori = a score), ii, 5 
Coromandel, ii, 215 
Corsa ? near Agra, ii, 9 
Cosing, for Hassan (see Mirza Abdul 
H.) i, 170 

Cosmas, the monk, quoted, ii, 104 n. 
Coss (an Indian measure of distance 
about 2 miles), i, 47, 420 ; short, 
i. 52, 57 

Coslus {Oupelole), a drug, ii, 20 
Cotapilly {Colepali), i, 294 
Coteen, t., i, 294 


VOL. II 


2 I 



482 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Cofgia^ for Khojehi an Armenian title, i, 

I 12 

Cotton, cloths, ii, 4, 6 ; frauds in, ii, 
27> 30; spun, ii, 8 

Cotdour^ a diamond mine. See KoUur 
Court of Justice, at Golconda, i, 155 ; 

the Mogul’s, i, 10 1 
Courtesans, i, 71, 156, 157 
Courua, pagoda, near .Tripatty, i, 272 
Cousembal t., i, 55 

Cowries {cor/), shells, Cyprosa monejfa, 
used as money, i, 27-29, 413 
Cows, fines on death of, ii, 217 ; yield- 
ing bezoar, ii, 150 
Cranganore. See Kranganur 
Craputen. See Kareputtun 
Crawfurd, J., Embassy, quoted, ii, 1 02 
n, ; Dictio 7 iary, quoted, ii, 17 n., 
156 n., 288 n., 289 n., 290 296 

71 ,, 306 71 ., 321 7 z., 463 ; Missi 07 i to 
Ava, quoted, ii, 466 
Crease {eric), a dagger, ii, 362 
Crime on Dutch fleet, ii, 412 
Criminals tried summarily, i, 290, 292 
Croc, the Sleu 7 % ii, 319 
Crocodiles in the Ganges, i, 126 
Croisart (a Genoese coin worth 6s. 6d. ), 

i, 194 n., 412 

Croke, ih& Sieur (D,), Batavian Envoy, 

ii, 299 

Crore or karor {kraur) = 100 lakhs, i, 
28 

Cr^sado (a Portuguese coin), i, 412 
Crystal, rock, vessels of, i, 389 
Cubagua, in the Antilles, ii, 1 1 2 
Cubit (a measure of length), i, 38, 

419 ; ii, 2 

Culveidn, a gun, i, 156 
Cumana, in the Antilles, ii, 1 12 
Cumbum {J^aman), t., i, 295 
Cumin (seed), ii, 20 
Cunningham, General A., quoted, i, 89 
71 ., 417; ii, 431 n., 445 
Cure, a marvellous, ii, 319 
Custom dues in India, i, 8 
Cutch or Kachchh prov., i, 347 

Dabir-pintal t., i, 300 
Dabul or Dabhol {JDaboul) t., i, 176, 
182 

Dacca, i, 128, 131 
Dakijel t., i, 267 
Dakica {Taka), in Afghanistan, i, 93 
Dalton, General, quoted, ii, 458 
Daman, besieged by Aurangzeb, i, 179 ; 
Governor of, i, 79 ; to Rajapur, 
i, 176 ^ 

Damarapad diamond mine, ii, 78 
Damascus blades, i, 157 


D’ Amato, Le Pere Guiseppe, quoted, ii, 
466 

Damne Is., ii, 17 
Dampourl t., i, 127 
Dantawara {Da 7 itiiia 7 ' or Eazitivar), i, 
37, 10, 84, 88 

Dara Shah, capture of, i, 351 ; death 
of, i, 353 ; defeat of, i, 332 ; flight 
of, i, 346, 349 5 government of, i, 
326 

Darogha {Derogd), prefect or superin- 
tendent of police, etc., i, 8, 54, 117, 
I54> 158 

Darydd- 7 itir, the, diamond, ii, 443 
Daryapur? {D^E 7 dta), i, 123 
Das, Kaviraj Syamal, quoted, ii, 278 7 z. 
Daulatabad {Dzdtabai), i, 33, 143, 145, 
160, 410 

Dauphine {Datzfme), in Madagascar, 
ii, 34 

Day, Dr. F., quoted, i, 150 n. 

De Boot, quoted, ii, 434 w., 462 
Dedication to the King, i, xlix 
De Graaf, quoted, i, 124 n. 

Deity, Idolater’s belief in the, ii, 190 

Dekhan (Sera Dakan), i, 95 

De Laet, quoted, ii, 434 7 z., 462 ft. 

Delft, in Holland, ii, 416 

Delhi {Dehly), i, i, 96 

Della Valle, quoted, ii, 198 7 z. 

Delli {Delegore) tin mines, ii, 162 
Denier, a French money of account, i, 
411 

Deziier, a French weight, i, 416 
Defiousei-uz. See Tenasserim 
Deoga 7 z'l t., i, 148 
Deogaon [Dtsgaoiz), i, 143 
Dervishes {Dervicks and Dei'ttichs), i, 
53, 81, 82 ; ii, 362 
“ Design of the Author,” i, li 
Dhanakaketa of Hwen Thsang, i, 261 
Dharizd, sitting, ii, 223 
Dholpur {Dolpow'o), i, 64 
Diamond, “Abbas Mirza,” ii, 441 ; 
“ Austrian yellow,” i, 416 ; ii, 97, 
124, 447 ; “Babar’s,” ii, 432 ; river 
in Bengal, ii, 84; “Blue,” ii, 126 
n.', cutting, ii, 57; Florentine, ii, 
97, 124, 447; Jto/i-umif', ii, 431- 
446 ; “ Matan,” ii, 464 ; merchants, 
ii, 60, 61 ; mines of, ii, $3 ; in Ben- 
gal, ii, 81, 457 ; in Borneo, ii, 462 ; 
in India, list of, ii, 450 ; in Kadapa 
(Cuddapah) District, ii, 450 ; of Kol- 
lur, ii, 72, 89, 125 ; revisited in 1653, 
i> _3<^9 ; worked by Mir Jumla, i, 288 ; 
miners, pay of, ii, 59 ; mining, ii, 
76, 77; “Mogul’s,” i, 395; ii, 74, 
97> 123, 431-446; names of the. 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


483 


ii, 98 ; the Grand Duke of Tuscany’s, 
ii> 97» 124, 447 ; weights, ii, 89 
Diamonds, in Borneo,' ii, 87, 462; 
brittle, ii, 79 ; coloured, ii, 75 ; 
nnest, seen by Tavernier, ii, 123 ; 
described by Garcia de Orta, ii, 433 ; 
with green crust, ii, 78; Jesuits 
teade in, ii, 304; sold to King of 
France, ii, 126; belonging to Dom 
Phil, de Mascarehnas, i, 228; Mir 
Jumla’s, i, 2S7 ; price of, ii, 95 5 
private trade in, i, 311 ; swallowing, 
n, 59; weights of, mentioned by 
Tavernier, ii, 448 
Dilod (7>/(9r), i, 55 

Directors of the Dutch Company, ii, 

415, 421 

Distance, measures of, i, 47, 410 
Diu, i. 6, 312; ii, 35, 36737 
Divmi, the, i, 98, 100 
Diving for pearls, ii, 119 
Dog’s flesh eaten in Assam, ii, 282 
Dol Medan ? i, 50 
Do 7 }i tribe, ii, 84 7t. 

Dominicans, ii, 196, 202 
Dofiapotir'i t., i, 125 
Dongri or Dungri {Do 7 ig 7 y), near Nar- 
war, i, 59 

D’Orleans, M, le Due (F.), ii, 334 
Doudnagar {Daozid-tm^ar sera), i, 12 1 
JOotdoudial i, 126 
Dourahai {Sera JDoitrai), i, 95 
Dow, quoted, i, 363 ; ii, 432 zi. 

Drinking at Batavia, ii, 325 
Drugs, African, ii, 162 ; Indian, ii, 19 
Ducat (a coin), i, 14, 4x2 
Duff; Grant, quoted, i, 182 zt, 

Dupad {Doupar), i, 298 
Duraha {Dotir-ay), i, 55 
Durgouti river {Saode-sou), i, 120 
Duriazt fruit, ii, 287 
Dutch, the, capture of an English ship, 
jh 373 ; at Chapra, i, 122 ; colon- 
ists at the Cape, ii, 397 ; commander 
in Ceylon, i, 258 ; blockade of Goa, 
i, 185; at Dacca, i, 128; embassy 
to China, ii, 297 ; pay bills, ii, 379, 
424; perfidy of, ii, 316; prisoners 
to Javanese, ii, 374 ; treachery of, 
iij 35* ; vessels of war, i, 312; war 
with Java, ii, 368 
Dymock, Dr., quoted, ii, 2.1 n. 

Earl Marshal’s paper on diamonds, the, 
quoted, ii, 54 60 73 w., 79 tz., 

455 467 71 . 

Ecclesiastics at Goa, i, 196 
Eclipse in 1666, an, ii, 247 
Ecoziomic Geology of l 7 idia, quoted, i. 


27 w., 69 7 z., 122 71 ., 157 71., 172 n., 
28S n. ; ii, 19 n., 55 71., 72 7z., 78 71., 
136 7 t., 138 7 Z., 156 n., 157 n., 241 
n., 271 71 ., 281 7 t., 282 7 t., 450 n., 
, 459 «- 

Ecu (or white crown = 4s. 6d.), i, 26, 
411 

Eden, Miss E,, quoted, ii, 446 
Elektron (shellac), ii, 21 w. 

Elephants, African, i, 217, 277; ii, 
317; age of, i, 279; bathing of, i, 
304 ; Qeylon, i, 278 ; ii, 317 ; hunt- 
ing of, i, 274 ; iconoclastic, i, 59 ; 
mischief done by, i, 88 ; the Mogul’s, 

i, 280, 386; Sumatran, ii, 317 n., 
351 tusks used for palisades, i, 277 j 

ii, i6r ; in war, use of, i, 179 ; where 
obtained, i, 276 ; white, ii, 290 ; 
wild, ii, 262 


iLi ivatir {Catifa), m Persian Gulf, ii, 
108, III, 120 

Ell (cubit), the, of Agra, i, 38; of 
Surat, ii, 2 

Ellora or Elura, temples at, i, 148 
Elphinstone {MistoTy of Izidia), quoted, 

i, 169 336 337 n., 349 ; 

{Cauozil) ii, 444 

Emanuel, H., quoted, ii, 124 it., 471 
Embassies, to Aurangzeb, i, 373 (see 
China) ; from Aurangzeb to Persia, 
374; frony Achin to Batavia, ii, 
318; Dutch to China, ii, 300^ Ma- 
cassar to Batavia, ii, 302 
Emeralds, Egyptian, ii, 104 ; Peruvian, 

ii, 105 ; Siberian, ii, 105 71. 
Eminabad (Imiabad), i, 94 

Encuse (Enkhuizen), in Plolland, ii, 416 
English, beer at Batavia, ii, 36S ; at 
Broach, i, 66 ; in Ceylon, i, 259 ; 
Dutch naval engagement with, i, 
313; frauds by the, i, 12 ; injured 
by the Dutch, ii, 349; officials’ 
salaries, ii, 48 71. ; President at 
Madras, i, 269, 270 ; ship captured by 
the Dutch, ii, 373 ; in Surat, ii, 168 
Englishman executed in Macassar, ii, 
298 


Englishman’s revenge, an, i, x i 
Ephraim, Father, Capuchin, i, 163, 
164, 209, 220 etseq., 253, 269 
Ei'engdbddl i, 152 
Ei'gnga river, i, 123 
Errgaum? {Birgam), i, 147 
Erskine {Bdbai^s Mentoti's), quoted, 
ii. 43 1 j 432 

Etawah {Estanja), i, 113 
Etawah? {Eiadzoue), i, 96, 115 7t, 
Examination of passengers from Batavia, 

ii, 389 



484 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


“Exchange” in India, i, S, 36 

Fakir, a, running a-?mtck^ ii, 3^3 
Fakirs (devotees and professional beg- 
gars), i, 81, 391 ; ii, 178, I95» 19^ 
Fanam and Fa^io (an Indian coin), i, 
413 ; ii, 1 18 

Fatehpur {Faty’dbdd), i, 95 ^ 

Fatehpur Sikri {Veitaytozir), i, 89 ; car- 
pets made at, ii, 3 
Fatwa river, i, 123 
Faure, the Sieur (D.)> 3^7 

Fazl Khan, i, 34 1, 

Ferdinand, E. (a Jew), ii, 79 
Fergusson, J., quoted, i, 18 1 zz, 

Ferishta, quoted, i, 284 zt , ; ii, 432} 
460 

Festival of the Great Mogul, i, 380 
Fidalgos of the Cape of Good Hope, i, 
18S 

Fig. See Adam’s 6g 
Fines on death of cows, ii, 217, 255 
Finlayson {Embassy io Siam), quoted, 
ii, 290 296 w. 

Fire-pots used by pirates, i, 177 
Fish diet, i, 75 

Fish’s skin, a, valued in Japan, ii, 136 
Florentine, diamond ( = Austiian yellow 
and Grand Duke of Tuscany’s), ii, 
97, 124, 447; carat, ii, 447 
Fluckiger and Hanbury, quoted, ii, 

20 Zt ., 23 102 259 72 . 

Flushing {Flessingiu), ii, 413 
Fontainebleau, i, 15 1 ; ii, 55 
Forbes, A. D., quoted, ii, 391 
Forbes, D. {Dictioziazy), quoted, ii, 
229 n. 

Forbes, James {Oriezttal Mezzioirs), ii, 
431 437 

Formalities at departure of ships from 
Batavia, ii, 389 

Formosa, English fort at, ii, 350 ; gold 
in, ii, 155 

Franks {Frazics and Frazigids, etc.), 
i,e, Europeans, i, 6, 7, 59, 86, 106, 
107, I3i» 213, 223, 285, 288; ii, 
54, 62, 67, 171, 298, 335 
Frauds by companies’ officers, ii, 39 ; 
on the customs, i, 12 ; by Dutch 
officials, ii, 331, 343; in manufac- 
tures, ii, 26 ; in musk trade, ii, 146 
Frederick, Csesar, quoted, ii, 98 zi, 
Fremlin (or Fremling), Mr. E., an 
English President, i, 178 ; ii, 79, 162 
French, company of commerce, a, ii, 
347 ; measures of length, i, 419 ; 
money, i, 41 1 ; traders, ii, 347; 
vessels burnt by the Dutch, ii, 349 ; 
weights, i, 416 


Fruits, Indian, i, 186 
In-ycr, Dr. J., quoted, i, 4J4 72. ; ii, 48 
7/., 151 7/., 159 w., 317 
Funeral ceremonies in Assam, ii, 280 ; 
expenses at Batavia, ii, 377 ; ccre- 
monic.s in .Siam, ii, 293. See Burn- 
ing of the dead, Suttee, etc. 

Furs from Bhutan, ii, 259 

Galata, Franciscans of, i, 20S 
Galeass (a kind of galley, an armed 
boat), i, 19 1 

Gatiote {gakota. Port. ; jollyboat, Eng- 
lish), i, 193 

Gandak river (Gandct), i, 124 
Gazidm^ozi ? i, 267 

Gandikot {Izidecoie), i, 259, 284, 285, 
289, 294 ; ii, 243 

Ganges canal, ii, 4; river, i, 115, 119, 
124; water, ii, 231, 253 
Gazii for Kthid, used as a name. See 
Kollur, i, 265 ; ii, 89, 94 
Gannatir or Gimour {Gmezuwnz^, i, 96 
Gardens, elevated, at Golcon<la, i, 153 
Gargazi^ i, 148 

Cazi (an Indian measure of distance), i, 
420 

Gauges ( Cogo ?), ii, 37 
Gazellymundum {Gazd), i, 272 
Geznma See Jumna 

Gentiles or Idolaters, religion of, ii, 18 1 
Ghat {gate), a pass, i, 59 
Ghuztc/ti (seed of Abus precatozdus), the 
z'ati, i, 416 

Giaziabad (Jahanabdd ?), west of Kora, 
i, 1 14 

Gibbings, Rev. R., quoted, i, 229 77. 
Gibbon {Dedizte azid Fall), quoted, ii, 
457 

Ginger (the root), ii, 13 

Gingi {Guiztdiy) fort, in Madras, i, 252 

Girballil i, 147 

Goa, the Archbishop of, ii, 152 ; the 
author’s residence at, i, 200 ; bar at, 
i, 186 ; to Bijapur, i, 181 ; blockade 
of, by the Dutch, i, 185 ; to Gol- 
conda vid Bijajjur, i, 176; Inquisi- 
tion at, i, 201, 208 ; magnificence at, 
i, 187 ; to Masulipatam, i, 234 ; 
offices in, i, 192 ; Tavernier’s visits 
to, i, 180 ; trade in precious stones, 
etc., ii, 12 1 

Goats yielding bezoar, ii, 148, 474 
Godavari District diamond mines, ii, 

452 

Godorme. See Kotayam 
Gogerozi? i, 283 
Gogo {Ganges), ii, 37 
Goitre, in Tipperah, ii, 275 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


485 


Golconda, to Aurangabad, i, i8i ; a 
large diamond at, ii, 124 ; diamond 
mines, ii, 453 ; King of, i, 161, 169, 
229, 233, 256 j ii, 176, 187; king- 
dom of, i, 150 ; to Kollur, ii, 94 ; to 
Masulipatam, i, 172; peace with, 
celebrated, i, 169 ; people of, i, 158 ; 
to Ramulkota, ii, 93 ; revisited in 
h 309 7 Tavernier’s arrival at, 

h 301 

Gold, absorption of, in India, ii, 205 ; 
in Africa, ii, 155 ; in Asia, ii, 155 ; 
in Assam, ii, 275 281, 284; as- 

sayers of, ii, 42 n. ; in China, ii, 
155; on, i, 8 ; ii, 25 ; in For- 
mosa, ii, 155 ; abundant in Goa, i, 
189; ii, 255 in JaiDan, ii, 155; 
nugget, ii, 320 ; in Tipperah, ii, 
275 ; a tree of, ii, 160 ; how weighed, 

i, 15 

Golden rupees {mo/i2irs), i, 15 ; value 
of, i, 19 ; virtue of, i, 17 
Gombroon {Bandar Abbas), i, 3, 214^., 
234 ; ii, 164, 335 

Good Hope. See Cape of Good Hope 
Goodymetta (Garemeda), i, 295 
Gorakhpur, ii, 259 

C(?s ov = 8 miles, i, 47, 176, 419 
Gouger, H., quoted, ii, 294 
Gonlapali'i i, 283 

Grand Mosque at Jahanabad, i, 10 1 
Grand Seigneur, the (of Turkey), i, 211 
Grandpre, quoted, i, 153 n. 

Grapes and vines in Assam, ii, 282 
Great Mogul, the, i, 394. See under 
special subjects 

Great Mogul’s diamond (see Diamonds) ; 

elephants (see Elephants) ; etc. etc. 
Gras, French weight = 60.285 grs. 
troy, i, 24, 416 

Growse, Mr. (^MathurA), quoted, ii, 
240 n. 

Guard of honour at Golconda, i, 155 
Guilder (a Dutch coin), i, 413 ; ii, 380, 
418 

Gtiisemnerl i, 146 
Gujaidt {Giiserate), i, 26, 27 
Gulden (German coins), i, 412 
Gunners, Frank, i, 144, 1 45 
Gunpowder, ii, 268 ; invention of, ii, 
277 

Guns, invention of, ii, 277 ; in Bhutan, 

ii, 26S 

Gwalior, fort and town, i, 62, 63 ; 
prison, i, 63, 333 

Hadjrapur {Acerat), i, 126, 131 
Haidardbad. See Bhdgnagar 
Haldlkhors {Alacors), outcasts, ii, 186 


Hamadan, in Persia, i, 160 
Hans, Captain (D.), ii, 164 
Hanuman (the monkey god), ii, 193 
Hartman, the Sieur (D.), ii, 168 
Hd£h or cubit of India, ii, 2 n, 
Hatiakherd {Ater-kaira), i, 55 
Heat, greatest in the world, i, 5 ; at 
Agra, i, 105 
Herbs, medicinal, i, 301 
Hercules, M. (a Swede), i, 258 
Herring fishers, Dutch, ii, 412 
Hervey, Mr. D. F. A., quoted, ii, 87 
n», 462 

Highroads in India, i, 292 
Hillmen, dress and costume of, ii, 265 
Hindaun {Hindoo), i, 89 
Hindia (Andy), i, 55 
Hindustan, extent of, i, 321 ; western 
frontier of, i, i ; wars of, i, 321 
Hingani {Nagouni), i, 148 
Histoire de la Co7tduite des HoUandois, 
etc., quoted, i, xviii \ ii, 49 ?z. 
Histoire Generate des Voyages, quoted, 
i, 250 n.; ii, 72 71. 

Histoh'e des Joyattx, quoted, ii, 471 
History of Jewels, quoted, ii, 475 
Holeora? in Golconda, i, 300 
Holland, Tavernier’s arrival in, ii, 413 
Hookei', Sir J. D., quoted, i, 250 ;z. 
Hormuz {0r7m£s), Dutch factory at, ii, 
417; Governor of, i, 19 1 ; a pearl 
at, ii, 109 ; occupied by Portuguese, 
i, 193 ; to Masulipatam, i, 255 ; to 
Surat, i, 3 

Hornaday, Mr., quoted, ii, 318 n. 
Horne (or Ploorn), in Holland, ii, 416 
Horse, a, presented to Tavernier, i, 20, 
308 ; the wooden, an instrument of 
torture, i, 243 

Horses, the food of, in India, i, 102, 
i, 283 ; Indian, ii, 263 ; the Mogul’s, 
97> 3S5 ? present of, from Persia, 
i, 256 ; prices of, i, 385 
Hosen and Hosain, ii, 177 
Hospital, at Goa, i, 197 ; for sick 
animals, i, 78 
Hottentots, ii, 392 

Hughes, Mr. T. W. H., quoted, i, 271 
Hugh {Ogouli), i, 125, 133 
Humayun (son of Babar), i, 323 
Hunter, Sir W, W. See Ii7iperial 
Gazetteer 

Hungary, rubies? and opals in, ii, 103 
Hyatnagar (Jatenagar), in Golconda, i, 

173 

Ibn Batuta, quoted, ii, 200 n, 

Ibrahim Lodi, i, 105 7i. 

Iceland, ii, 409 



486 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Ichawar {Ttkaour)^ 55 
Idols, Indian, ii, 190 ; made in Bo- 
hemia, ii, 261 n, ; at Jagganath, ii, 
225 ; in Siam, ii, 291 ; of unmelt- 
able metal, i, 290 

Idolaters, the, belief, ii, 203 ; customs 
of the, ii, 247 

Indians, religion of the, ii, iSi, 190 
Imenhectl Prince of Muscat, ii, 109 
Imperial Gazetteer of India, quoted, i, 62 
l82?i., 186 W., 220?^.,237«.,240 
245 259 n., 261 266 

269 n,, 281 ?7., 347 13 «•> 

162 M., 240 w., 256 71 ,, 322 71 ,, 

444 «- 

Incense, ii, 20 

India House, the, at Middelbourg, ii, 
414 

Indian coins, i, 413; measures of 

length, i, 419; weights, i, 416 
Indigo, i, 69; ii, 8, 9, 10, ii 
Indus river {Ifidon), i, 10, 93 «. 

Infants, exposure of, ii, 214 
I 7 igag 7 ie Is., ii, 321 

Inquisition at Goa, the, i, 201, 20S, 
230 

Inquisitor, the, i, 201, 223 
Irish captain, an, i, 225 
Iron at Haidarabad, i, 157 mines in 
Assam, ii, 281, 284 
Ispahan, i, 212 ; to Agra, i, 3, 90 
Italian coins, i, 412 
Ivory from West Indies? i, 279 

Jacobus (a coin worth 25s.), i, 13 

Jagannath, ii, 225 

Jagdis Sarai {Yakedilsera'), i, 118 

Jahanabad, i, 96, 97, 1 39, 343 

Jai Singh, R£ja i/essemg), i, 145, 34$ ; 

his college at Benares, ii, 234 
Jajou, on the Utahgan river {lagou), i, 

65 

Jalor {Chalonr), i, 87 

Jama Masjid at Golconda, i, 153 

Jang Bahadur, ii, 262 w., 263 71. 

Japan, gold in, ii, 155 ; Ring of, ii, 
187 ; pearls, ii, ii i, 114 
Japanese esteem for coral, ii, 135 
Japara {fapar). King of, ii, 370 
Jardin, M. Louis du (F.), i, 258, 269, 
306, 307 ; ii, 1 14, 159 71 , 

Jask [fasque). Cape, ii, 117 
Jatrapozirl i, 127 

Java, Dutch war with, ii, 368 ; King of, 
ii, 187 

Javanese captured by the Dutch, ii, 
373 ; soldiers, ii, 374 
Jerdon, Dr., quoted, ii, 145 n, 

Jesuit Fathers, i, iii, 196, 197; plots 


against I>utch, ii, 300 ; tratle in 
diamonds, ii, 304 

Jeswant Singh, i, 34S, 352, 365, 366 ; 
ii, 185 7 i, 

Jewels, the Great MoguPs. 1, ^35^ ^37» 
394, 397 ; sale of, to Shdista Klnin, 
h 3L 130, 307» 409; U> Zafar 
Khan, i, 137 

feweis, the History of (luote<l, ii, 475 
Joret, Ihofessor, quotetl, ;i, xi, xxxiv, 
xxxix, 4 M., 20 32 w., 52 ?/., 73 

W., 76W., 1 13?/., 77 ,,$QS 

71 ,, 307 407 7 i. ; ii, X 59 246 7 t, 

Joyaitx, Ilhioh'e des, ciuotetl, ii, 47 1 
Jugglers at Broach, i, 67 
Juin Khan {Gio7i Kan), i, 350, 353 
Jumna river {Gemena and Ge77iefu% i, 
96, X03, 106, 1x6 

Jungle life in India, quoted, i, 12 x n, ; 

ii, 2X 152 n, 

Jiirieau, quoted, i, xxxiv 

Kaha-e^Shahi (a royal robe), i, 163 
Kabir (a saint of the end of the 
6fteenth century), ii, 229 
Kabul (capital of Afghanistan), x, 90, 
92 ; ii, 260, 261 
Kae/magana, See Cutch 
Kachner {Kasai-hi sera), i, $7 
Kadapa (Cuddapah) District diamond 
mines, ii, 450 

AW/iJm* (Ktawah?), i, 96, 1 13 1 xs//. 

Kajtkmi {cajavas), caxnel panniers, i, 
144 

Kakani {Kah Kaly), i, 174, 265 
Kdkeril i, 1 47 

Kalabdgh {^Callabas), i, 57, 58 
Kala ki sarai {Calapafid), i, 94 
Kalat-i-Ghilzai {Zeiate), i, 91 
Kdlindry? r. {Mart ?tadi), i, 125 
Kdmrup {Kemmerouf), ii, 283 
Kdnarese {Canarms), i, 189 
Kandahar {Candahar), in Afghanistan, 
i, 4 ; to Agra, 90 ; to Kabul, i, 92 
Kandahar {Candeai*), in the Deccan, i, 
148 

Kandukur {Condccour), i, 266 
Kandy, King of, ii, 316 
Kaoa river, i, 123 
Kdrdbdgh {Carahat), i, 91 
Karamndsd river {Carnasar sou), i, 120 
Kareputtun {Crapaten), i, 182, 183 
Karor = 10,000,000, i, 28 

Kariala or Sarai Alamgir {Keraly), i, 
94 

Karnul or Kurnool {Canal), ii, 94 ; 

diamond mines of, ii, 451 
Kashmir {KaeJmnir), i, 22 
Kasiatat t, i, 127 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


487 


Kusimbdzar (Casenbazai'), i, 125, 130, 
13L 133? ii) 2, 4 
Kasvin {Otslnu), in Persia, ii, 279 
JCatarel river, i, 124 
Katif (for Catifa). See EPKatif 
Kazi {Cadi)^ the Grand, i, 355, 356 
Kazim Muhammad, quoted, ii, 278 n., 
279 2S0 281 282 n,, 

2S3 «. 

Keene, Mr. PI. G., quoted, i, 105 n., 
414 n* 

Kelly, U' 7 iiversal Ca 7 ?ibist, quoted, i, 
417 ; ii, 54 H. 

/Cerkoa, or the Begum’s Caravansarai, 

1, 49 

Kerr, quoted, ii, 15 1 w., 158 71., 393 n, 
Khaibari {Kiet/iry)^ i, 93 
Khan of Gombroon, the, ii, 335 5 of 
Hormuz, ii, no 
Khandup {Cantap), i, 87 
Khdftja}* \ca 7 tjare), a dagger, i, 100, 
308 ; ii, 363 

Khich^d {Qtticheid), rice and si^ices, i, 
282, 391 

KhiPat or Killut {Calaat), a robe of 
honour, i, 20, 98, 141, 163, 308 
Khurniabad? of A.S. {Gourmahad), i, 
120 

Khurram (erroneously Kurum, on p. 
143 in te.xt), Sultan, i, 143, 324, 
335 

Khusru (son of Jahangir), i, 324, 334 n. 
King, Rev. C. W., quoted, i, 396 n. ; 

u, 431 «• 

King, Dr. Wm., quoted, ii, 450 n. 

King, the, of Bhutan, ii, 268 ; of 
PYance, ii, 425 ; of Golconda, i, 159 ; 
ii, 176 

King’s (Mogul’s), the, court, i, loi ; | 
palace, i, 97 ; throne, i, 99, 381, 
387. See Mogul 

Kings, the idolatrous, of Asia, ii, 187 
Kistna District, diamond mines, ii, 452 
Kistiia Manual^ quoted, ii, 73 w., 454 
Kistna river, i, 174 ii, 93 94^^* 

Kluge, quoted, ii, 431 w., 443 
Koadgul {Ca/jcno/), ii, 93 
Koch Plajo {Azoo), ii, 279 
Koel {Co2iei) river, in Bengal, ii, 84, 
457 

Koh-i-nur, the, ii, 58 431-440 

Kolaras or Kailaras {Coliasa?'), i, 5^ 
Kollur (^Coiilozir), diamond mine, i, 
172 7/., I73» I74 j 265; ii, 72, 745 

89, 9O5 94» 125 

Konavaklu or Kondavir {Condevir\ 1, 
265 

Kongoon {Ba 7 idar Co^zgo), in Persian 
Gulf, ii, 109 


Koodx*a river {Goudera-sou)y i, 120 
Koran, the, ii, 175, 355 
Kotayam? (^Godorfne), i, 245 
Kotwal {CoutevaJ)y Provost, i, 112 
Kotwan {CoBd-sera), i, 104 
Kranganur or Kodangalur, i, 235, 241 
Kudri river, i, 64 
Kuari sarai {Qtiariqzii-sera), i, 64 
Kulliani? in text, more probably Cal- 
lian bandar (for CalUa 7 t Bo 7 idi)y ii, 
206 

Kumaon {Kerznan)^ ii, 267 
Kundanool {Canol Cafidazzor), ii, 93 
Kurnal [Sera-C^ditdal), i, 95 
Kutab Shah, King of Golconda, i, 159 ; 
ii, 176 

Kidch, resin of Acacia catechu y ii, 250 
Kyatpyen {Capela 7 z), ii, 99, 465 

Lac. See Shellac 

Ladies, the, bath at Ispahan, i, 213 ; 
contraband trading by, ii, 49 ; 
Dutch, entertained by Tavernier, i, 

311 

Lahore, i, 94, 146, 336, 340, 346 
Laidlay, Mr., quoted, i, 417 w. 

Zahh ox Lack\Lekke)-=. 100,000 rupees, 
i, 28, 41 

Lakia river [Laquia)^ i, 127 
Lakkawurrum {Lakahai‘ 07 i)y i, 173 
Lama, the Grand, ii, 270 72. 

Lambert, M., Bishop of Beyrut, ii, 295 

Lan, Pitre de, a Dutch surgeon, i, 301 

Lansdell, Dr. H., quoted, ii, 104 fi. 

Lapis Lazuli, in Badakshan, ii, 156 it. 

Lasona {Lesojza), i, 147 

Lasoor {Lazour), i, 148 

Lasques (flat diamonds), i, 287 

Lat Bhairo (pillar at Benares), i, 119 

Laval, Pyrad de, quoted, i, 1 86 

Lawali {JVieali)f i, 89 

Lead mines in Assam, ii, 281, 284 

Lead pencils, i, 230 

Leagues (Fr. lieue)y i, 57, 68, 419, 420 

Le Blanc, quoted, ii, 100 n. 

Leeches, i, 248 et seq, 

LejDer, a, at Goa, i, 203 
Lescot, M. (F.), ii, 304, 459 
Les Provhices (a ship), ii, 391 
Letter-carriers, i, 291 ; from Tavernier 
to the General at Batavia, ii, 168 
Letters between Shaista Khan and 
Tavernier, i, 402 
Lime (coral or shell), i, 43 n, 
Linschoten, quoted, i, 186; ii, 87 n., 

98 n.y 256 72 . 

Lions, tame, i, 80 ; in Burmah ? ii, 100 ; 

in Siam? ii, 286 
Liquorice, ii, 21 



488 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Live jjersons interred, ii, 216 
Livre^ French weight, i, 416 ; money 
of account, i, 41 1 
Lizard, a poisonous, ii, 288 
Lodi, Ibrahin^ i, 105 
Lohardaga diamond mines, ii, 452 
Louis XIV, i, XXX 
Louis d’ox’, value of the, i, 22, 41 1 
Louys de Baf-sur-seine, M., i, 210 
Ludana {Ladona), i, 89 

Macao, a gambler’s resort, i, 206 ; 

attacked by the Dutch, ii, 302, 303 
Macassar in the Celebes, ii, 16, 297; 

King of, ii, 187, 299, 302, 303 
Mace, ii, 14, 18 

M* Gregor, Dr. W. L., quoted, ii, 445 
446 w. 

Macgregor, Sir C., central Asia, quoted, 

i, 91 

Machurla {Macheli)^ b 299 
Maclagan, General, quoted, i, 144 n. j ii, 
268 7/. 

Madagascar, ii, 1 42 
Madras, i, 220, 225, 227, 247, 253, 
268; diamond mines, ii, 450 
Madsuerjs or Masudere (D.), Governor 
of Galle, ii, 315 
Madura, i, 248 n. 

Mcsstricht, the (a ship), i, 184 ; ii, 391 
Magic, the Brahmins’, ii, 247 
Mahmtldi {mmnottdi)^ Pei'sian coin, 
worth from gd. to is., i, 25, 26, 414 
Mailacheroo {Mellaserou), ii, 94 
Maille, M. Claude, of Bourges, i, 116, 
1 1 7, 286, 2S9, 301 n. 

Majorca {Majorque)^ ii, 133 
Makrana marble quarries, i, 146 n, 
Malabaris (chiefly pix-ates), i, 38, 176, 
177, 194, 200, 205, 224, 236, 247 ; 

ii, 1 19, 256 

Malacca, Governor of, i, igi 
Malawaram, diamond mines at, ii, 78 n. 
Malay language, ii, 345 
Maldah, in Bengal, i, 134 w. ; ii, 254 
Maidive Is., i, 28, 256 
Man who never lied, a, i, 77 
Manar pearl fishery in Ceylon, ii, iii, 
115, 118, 119 

Manaris (Mundds ?), an Indian tribe, 

i, 41 n. 

Man or Mdnd^ a weight. See Mdund 
Mandavi river i^Mandoua)^ i, 186 
Mandelslo, quoted, i, 178 182 n,^ 

239 w., 413 ; ii, 198 

Mandwa {Pander), i, 54 
Mangeli or Ma7igelin, a diamond weight, 
seed of A denanther a pa^vonina, i, 148 ; 

ii. 89, 90, 124, 125, 128, 433 


Mango fruit {Mangues), i, $8, 79, 186; 

ii, 287, 360 
Mango tiick, i, 67 «. 

Mangosteen fruit, ii, 287 
Mania {M/nasqm'-sera), i, 64, 65 
Mansur {Mezour), i, 91 
Mantua wine, ii, 347 
Marble, from Lahore ? i, 146 «. 

Marests, M. des, i, 205, 210, 212, 215 
Marguerite I.s. (in the Antilles), ii, 112 
Marriage ceremonies of the iclolater.s, 
ii, 252 

Mariavane (an earthenwai*e vessel), ii, 
250 

Martin, Montgomery, quoted, ii, 8l 
83 ??., 460 «. 

Martin, M. St. (F.), i, 239 
Marseilles, ii, 134 

Mascarehnas, Dom Philippe de, i, 200, 
205, 215, 228 ; ii, 162 
Maskelyne, Prof., quoted, i, 417 n. ; 

ii, 104 431 W., 432 77., 439 71 ., 

443 

Mastodons, ii, 469 71, 

Masudi, quoted, ii, 104 n. 

Masulipatam {Maslipata7t), i, 162, 174, 
175, 258 ; cottons, ii, 4; to Gandx- 
kot, i, 260 

Matan diamond, the, ii, 464 
Mathura or Muttra {Matnra), i, IO4 ; 
ii, 225, 240 

Mdimd (an Indian weight), i, 38, 419 ; 
ii, 2, 9, 266 

Mauritius Is. {Maurice), ii, 142, 301 
Measures and weights in India, i, 8, 
411, 419 

Mecca, Sharif (Shcreef) of, i, 373 ; 

sheikh of, i, l6i 
Mediterranean coral, ii, 133 
Megalithic structures, i, 153 n. 

Melinda {Melinde), on east coast of 
Africa, i, 190 ; ii, 6, 13S, 154 
Melscal. See Mishkal 
Meluaril i, 147 

Merchandise yielded by the Mogul’s 
Empire, ii, i 

Merchants, risks, i, 37 ; of Tipperah, 
ii, 273 

Mesana {Masa>ia), i, 80 
Mesiif{z. half-caste), i, 198, 206, 253, 
393 

Merta {Mirda), i, 87, 88 
Methold, Mr., quoted, i, 178 71. ; ii, 
54 n., 72 n., 98 ft. 

Mexico, Gulf of, ii, 112 
Meyer, Dx*. A., quoted, ii, 262 n. 
Middlebui’g, ii, 415 
Milmol {Nedufftulu), i, 174, 180 
Mifighashi {MwibacM), i, 122 




INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


489 


Mingrela. See Vengurla. 

IVIints, the Great Mogul’s, i, 9 
Mintmaster, i, 9 

Mir Jumla {Afir Gimola^ Mirza Afola, 
A/ir^’mo/a, Amir Jefnla^ and Aiir 
Je 7 nht), conquest of Assam, ii, 277 ; 
as a man of business, i, 170, 291 ; 
at Dacca, i, 128 ; presents great 
diamond to Shah Jahan, i, 395, and 
App. I, vol. ii ; his diamond mines, 
i, 170 287 ; ii, 86 ; siege of 

Gandikot, i, 259, 261, 286 et seq.; 
dispute with Golconda, i, 165 ; quits 
Golconda, i, 169 ; life attemiDted, 
i, 165 ; honoured by Shah Jahdn, 
i, 170 ; sent in charge of Sultan 
Muhammad, i, 360 ; power and in- 
lluence, i, 357 

Alirabolans^ fruit of Termhialia chehula^ 
which see 

Miraculous, distribution of food at 
Jaganndth, ii, 227 ; feeding of a 
multitude, i, 298 
Milan Shah, i, 323 
Mirza Abdul Hasan {Cosmg)^ i, 170 
Mirza Muhammad, i, 16 1 ?/., 168 
Mirza Mauzim {Ahvza A’Xouson)^ i, 135 
Miscarriages, i, 393 
A/iMal (a Persian weight), i, 418 
Mittra, Dr. Rajendra Lai, quoted, ii, 
226 n. 

Mocha i, 32, 38 

Modrd {A/oiinr), i. 87 
A/og&r for Mogul, i, 14 1 
Mogul Emperors, the, i, 323 
Mogul, the Great, diamond, ii, 97, 123, 
43 435 ; elephants, i, 3S6; festival, 
i, 379 ; horses, i, 385 ; jewels of, i, 
394 ; mints, i, 9 ; presents to, i, 3S0 ; 
thrones, i, 99, 381, 383; weighing 
of, i, 380, See also under respective 
subjects 

Moguls, the, i, 322 

Mogulsardi {Sera Afogml), in Punjab, 


b 95 

Mogulsardi {Afagai/a-sera), in Tonk 
Stale, i, 57 

Mohania ki sardi {AXo 7 ?iar^y - sej'o)^ i, 


120 

AMih?'S, See Golden rupees. 

Moluccas i, 189; ii, 14, 17 

ATaffi or A/u 7 ft (Brunswick beer), ii, 369 
Money in India, i, 8 ; spurious, i, 29 
Mongir {A/mger)., i, 124 
Monkeys, yielding bezoar, ii, 1 50 ; 
combats of, i, 271 ; veneration foi, 
h 77» 79; worship of, i, 19S 
Alonofnotapal ii, 158, 160 
Monsoons, i, 4 


Moonoogodoo {AXontecour)^ ii, 94 
Morality of the Indians, ii, 252 
AXo-rif 7 ion i, 295 
Moscovites, ii, 272 ^ 

Moseley, Prof., quoted, ii, 133 n. 
Mosque at Ahmadabad, i, 72 ; at Au- 
rangabad, i, 146; at Benares, i, 118 
Mosul {AXoussu/), i, 92 , „ 

AXoiikaraTz ? in Africa, ii,** 1 6 1 
Mozambique, Governor "of, i, 190; ii, 

6, 138, 158 
AXufti {AXottfti)y i, no 
Muhammad Amin, Mir Jumla’s son, i, 
164, 357 «. 

Muhammad, Sultan, son of Miran Shah, 
b 323 ; son of Aurangzeb, i, 164, 

169, 357, 360 

Muhammadan travellers, the, quoted, 
ii, 104 7 Z. 

Muhammadans, i, 1 1 ; their religion, ii, 

175 

I^Xtdld {AXoda/is)y i, non. 

Multan, on the Chenab river, i, 90 
Mullanipet (Mirel-Mola-Kipet), i, 148 
Mumtaz-i-Muhal (Arjamund Begum), i, 

109 7Z. 

Murad Baksh [AXarat Bakche), Sultan, i, 
63» 326-333 

Murder at Burhanpur, i, 53 ; by a Per- 
sian physician, i, 1 1 7 ^ in Mogul’s 
presence, ii, 219 n. 

Murders by Portuguese, i, 1 89 
Murray, Captain, quoted, ii, 445 
Murray, John (on the diamond), quoted, 
ii, 98 124 7 z. 

Murray vamla {Ma 77 zH), i, 299 
Murrhme vases, ii, 205 7 i. 

Murshiddbad {AXadesou Bazarki)^ i> 132 
Muscat or Maskat {AXascate), i, 5, 19 1 ; 
ii, 109 

Music in the palace, i, 99 
Musi river, at Haidarabad, i, 15 1 
Musk, ii, 143, 258 ; deer, ii, 145 
Muslins, i, 56 ; ii, 7 
Mussuck {AXas/iak, Hind.), the inflated 
skin of a goat, i, 73 
Muttra. See Mathura 
Myra, in Lycia, Bishop of, i, 208 
Myrrh, ii, 20 

Nabir. See Raver 
Nadiad {Neriade), i, 72 
Nadir Shah, ii, 440, 444 
Nadiya {N’afzdi), i, 133 
AXdg (snake), i, 42 ?2. 

Nagarkot {Nazigrocot), Kangra, ii, 256, 
263 

Nagzs (? for Najaz), i, 376 
Nagulpad {AXageipaz^), i, 173 ; ii, 94 


490 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


iSTaif Naives). See Point -7iaive 
Nakti Rani, Raja of Srinagai*, i, 347, 

363. 364. 365. 366 

Nander {Madonr), on Godavari nver, i, 
147 

Nandurbar {JVasarbar)^ i, 50 
Narbadd river, i, 53 ??., 159 
Narnaverum {I^aravero7i), i, 272 
Narsingha {Na7‘st77^tta\ Raja, i, 159, 
161 

Narwar {JVade7'), i, 147 
Naunpour {N'hnponr), i, 142 
Naval engagement, a, i, 313 
Navigation in the Indian Seas, i, 4, 5 
Nawab {ATadad), a title, Prime Minister, 
i, 100 

Nawapura (JVaz/apozira), i, 49, 142 
Nawaz {Cketnavas) Khan, Shah (father- 
in-law of Aurangzeb), i, 348 
Nazacos Is., ii, 321 

Nedumulu {Mihnol and JVi/moi), i, 174, 
260 

Negumbo, in Ceylon, i, 204, 215 
Nell ore {^Nelonr)^ i» 267 
Nepal {Jpnpal), ii, 263 
Nevelki’‘Se7^a‘t i, 55 
Newton, Sir Isaac, quoted, i, 412 
Nicol, Professor, quoted, ii, 431, 442 
JSfil {= 100,000 pad2t77iSy i, 28 

Nilmtor'i i, 174 
Nimlabagh {Nmiela)^ b 93 
Nishapur {N'ichabonrg)^ turquoise 
mines, ii, 103 

Nootalapaud {JVbsdrepnr), i, 266 
Nosari {Pe7to7zsa7d)f ii, 6 7z, 

A7ova-se7'a'i i, 55 
Noviciate at Goa, i, 197 
Nowshera i^d/ovickaaf')^ 93 
Nutmeg, ii, 14, 15, 18 
Nyalchand? {Nali Kan)^ i, 135 

Obrechit, the Sieitr Nicolas, ii, 417 
Odoric, Friar, quoted, i, 250 «. ; ii, 

298 71, 

Officers of the Company, frauds by the, 
39, 48 

Official Catalogue of ike Gi'cat Exhibi- 
tio7i of quoted, ii, 431 n. 

Oldham, Dr. T., quoted, ii, 466 
Olearius, quoted, i, 340 71. 

Omrahs {^077ieraks), properly U77ia7'a^ i, 
98, 106, 381, 387 ; ii, 220 
Once^ Fr. ounce, i, 416 
Onqueitast i, 55 
Oodcoor {Oudecour\ i, 281 
Oomapuranah {Omberai), i, 147 
Opals in Hungary, ii, 103 
Opium, ii, 23 

Or 7 Persian money of account, i, 414 


Otdmi {pi'tnis and or7iis\ a ■woman’s 

rk 52 ; ii, 5, 45 

Orloff diamond, the, ii, 43$, 441 
Orme, quoted, i, 267 7t, 

(gmm.^ See Hormuz 
Orta Garcia de, quoted, ii, 151 7/., 433, 
438, 462 

Osorius, quoted, ii, 393 11, 

393, 397 «• 

Onffilote (Costus), root, ii, 20 
Ovington, quoted, i, 171 7i. 

Pack cattle, i, 39 

ladam {Pada7i) = 100,000 cro7'cs or 
karors, q,v,\ i, 28 
Pagla, river {Pagalu), i, 127 
Pagoda (an Indian coin), i, 161, 413 ; 
lb 90, 91, 128 

Pagoda at Benares, ii, 230; at Bezwada, 
h 262; at Bhagnagar, i, 152, 163; 
courtesans’, i, 71 j girls’, ii, 238; 
at Jagannath, ii, 225 ; at Muttra, 
n, 240; in Siam, ii, 290 
Pagodas of the idolaters, the principal, 
n, 225 

^tn (loaf of gold), i, 416 ; ii, 140, 303 
I aisa {pec/ia) = o.54d., i, 25, 27, 34 

7t,f 413 

Palace at Agra, the, i, 105 ; at Bliag- 
nagar, i, 152 ; at Delhi, i, 97 

Faldo at PiUdu (fiulau), dish of rice 
and spices, etc., i, 154, 335, 274, 
308; 11, 14 

Paiwfp’/”’ J 75 . 390. 392 
Palling {Pala77t), i, 148 

Palm wine. See Tdri and Su7 l 
Pander. See Mandwa 
Panjab (Fenjab), i, 94 
Panna diamond mines, ii, 453 
Pardao {q. Portuguese and Indian coin, 
worth 2s. to 2s. 6d.), i, 192, 413 ; 
11, 139 * ^ ^ ^ -T 7 

Pariah, ii, 185 n. 

Paris, Tavernier’s return to, in 1649, ii, 
425 

Parsimony of the shroffs, i, 35 
Parwez, Sultan, i, 324 
Passports, i, 401 

Patamata {Pate77zet), i, 175 7^., 260 
atecas [pateches), water melons, ii, 360 
J^teiip,. See Puntangi 
Pate7'ki-sera7 i, 64 
Pathans, i, 350 

Patna, in Bengal, i, 113, 12 1, 122, 123 ; 

11, 222, 247, 262, 273 
Patna {Patane), in the Deccan, i, 142 
l^toles {patiuda)^ silken fabrics, ii, 3 n, 
Paio7ita7 i, 147 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


491 


Patri {Patris), i, 14S 
Patronage, Dutch, in appointments, ii, 
$1 ; of oftices in Goa, i, 190, 192 
PauHsts, the, at Goa, i, 197 
Paiiil'i sera} i, 57 
Paungree? {Bargafz), i, 148 
}.*aunsir {Pafiser)^ i, 80 
l^ay-bills at Batavia, ii, 379 
Pea-fowl, how caught, i, 69 
Peacock throne, i, 384 
IVarl, fisheries, ii, 107 ; a matchless, ii, 
109 ; the Mogul’s, ii, 130 ; a perfect, 
; King of Persia’s, ♦ ii, 130; 
the (the value appears to be 
2,66 troy grs., not 2.77 troy grs., as 
stated in earlier part of this work), i, 
417; n, xii, 449; sold to Shaista 
Khan, i, 138 ; ii, 130 
Pearls, figures of, ii, 130 ; large, i, 137, 
2 S 9 > 287 ; in Mogul’s treasury, i, 
397 ; offered to King of Golconda, i, 
305 j origin of, ii, ii6; season for 
fishing, ii, 117; where obtained, ii, 
107 

Peasants, oiipression of the, i, 391 
Pegu, deficient in the aits, ii, 22 ; King 
of, ii, 187 ; precious stones of, ii, 99, 
4^5 

Penances, «, 255 ; Aurangzeb’s, i, 373, 
3S8 ; by widows, ii, 210 
Penguins, i, 216 w. ; ii. 393 399 

I’ennair river, in Madras, i, 284 
285 n* 

Pennant, cpioted, ii, 460 

Pi^on {pwn), a foot-soldier, i, 85 

Pepper, two kinds, ii, 13; small, ii, 

Pepper-House, the, at Cochin, i, 238 
I’ersia, Aurangzeb’s embassy to, i, 374 ; 

the Shah of, i, 375 ; ii, 7 
Persian, adventures in India, i, 17 1 ; 
ii, 176, 177; coins, i, 414; The, 
Travels, quoted, i, 7 w., 23 90 

n., 176 n,, 251 n,, 26S w., 307 n., 
373 417; n, 7 109 w., 159 

n., 175 1 98 71 ., 392 71 , 

Persian jewellers at Court, i, 135 
I’eshawar {Ckaour), i, 93 
Phafis/j^-drs (Thugs), ii, 185 //. 

Phayre, Sir A., ii, 466 
Philippe the Fourth, ii, 14 1 
Philippine Is., ii, 105, 106 
I^hillips, John, quoted, i, xliii, 121, 

232 7 Z ., 261 7 Z ., 394 W., 401 71 ,, 

412 71 , ; ii, I, 377 

Philasophical Tra7isactio7is, April 1674, 
quoted, ii, xiii, 126, 471 
Physician, a Persian, i, 1 1 7 
Physicians, Indian, i, 300, 303 


Piastre, or Seville piece of eight =: 4s. 

6d., i, 26, 179, 412 
^Z^OTi^ {Carpophaga), fruit-eating, ii, 15 
Pigs, wild, on St. Helena, ii, 402 
Pilgrimages of the idolaters, i, 296 ; ii, 

244, 363 

Pilldu, See Palao 
Pimpalner {Pipehiar), i, 142 
Piofnbi sera} i, 54 

Pipal tree {Ficus religiosa, Lin.), ii, 

198 7t , 

Pipar (Pipars), i, 87 
Pipri {Pipeli and Piply), i, 146, 148 
Pirates. See Malabar is 
Pistoles, i, 22, 412 
Pite or Pitre, a German, i, 268 
Place Royale, in Paris, i, 107, 173 
Plantain fruit. See Adam’s £g 
Pliny, quoted, ii, 104 71,, 11771,, 463 7i, 
Point de Galle, i, 258 ; ii, 314, 367 
Pohit 7taive (a diamond crystal), li, 73, 
86 

Poison in Macassar, ii, 297 
Poisonous reptiles in Siam, ii, 288 
PoUce of Golconda, i, 154; in Shih 
Jahan’s time, i, 325 
Polish prisoners in Turkey, i, 2 1 1 
Po7tga7igel} (Sikiigalli) i, 124 
Pofiocour} ii, 94 
Pont Neuf, at Paris, i, 152 
Pope, the, i, 228 
Poraigoda? {Peridera), i, 300 
Porakad {Po7'ca), i, 241, 244 
Porcupine stone, the, ii, 1 5 1 
Porenaumla? {Morwiol), i, 295 
Portuguese, bandits, i, 125, 129 ; 

character of, i, 188 ; at Goa, wealth 
oj, i, 193 5 nioney, i, 412; posses- 
sions in India, i, 186 7i , ; priest, a, ii, 

403 


Posewitz, Dr. T., quoted, ii, 87 46^ 

Potre, Mr. (D.), ii, 341 
I’rat (Pratt?), Mr., at Dacca, i, 13 1 
I’recious stones, Begum Sahib’s, i, 344 ; 
of Ceylon, ii, 102, 470; Shah 
Jahan’s, i, 344, 371 
Presents made by Tavernier, i, 1 39 
Prester John {Preste Ja7t), ii, 158 
Priapender, the Emperor, ii, 188 7t, 
Prices of diamonds, ii, 95 ; of rubies. 


11, lOI 

Prince’s Island, ii, 390 
Princesses, the Royal, i, 393 
Private trade of the Dutch, ii, 417 
Ptolomey, quoted, ii, 457 
Pulicat, i, 267 

Pulwal {Peluel-ki-sera), i, 104 
Pundi {Poo7tte7'), i, 267 
Pungul {Peitguel), i, 173 



492 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Punpun {Ponpo 7 t sou) river, i, 123 n. 
Puntangi {JPatengy)^ ij 173 
Purchas’s Pilgrims, quoted, ii, 73 
Pythons, ii, 153 

Queen, of Bijapur, i, 183, 213 ; of 
Borneo, ii, 88 ; of Golconda’s house, 

i, 173 

Quellenburgh, H. von, quoted, i, xxxiv^ 
Quenstedt, quoted, ii, 441 

Rachepot, a French soldiei", i, 1 15, 243, 
245, 247 et seq. 

Ragiapeta'^ i, 281 
Raibagh {Rabaqtie), i, 182 
Raisin, M. (F.)j h, 304 
Rajapur (Regapour), in the Ralungiri 
Disti-ict, i, 176, 18 1 183; ii, 13 

Rajmahal {Rage mehale), i, 125 
Rajputs, i, 60, 144 ; ii, 25 1 
Rakshasagudda {Rasigar), i, 183 
Rama, ii, 19 1 

Ramdyana, i, ig 6 n. ; ii, 193 
Ramulkota or Ramallakota {Raolconda) 
diamond mine, ii, 53, 55, 89, 90, 94 
Rati, an Indian weight (Tavernier’s = 
2.66 grs. troy), i, 417 ; ii, xii, 89, 
437 

Raushendra Begum, i, 326, 377 
Ravana, ii, 19 2- 194 
Raver {Nabir), i, 50 
Rawat {Roupate), i, 94 
Reale or real, a Spanish coin, worth 
4s. to 4s. lod., i, 23, 412 ; of 
Batavia, ii, 365 

Rebellion by Shah Jahan’s sons, i, 325 
Recollects (an order of monks), i, 196 
Recueil of Tavernier, quoted, ii, 33, 45, 
SO 

Red coral, value of, ii, 135 
Reddypullay (Regivalai), i, 148 
Refiners of gold and silver, ii, 42 
Rekenhigs (pay bills), ii, 379 
Religion of the idolaters of India, ii, 
1 8 1 ; of the Muhammadans of India, 

ii, 175 

Renal, the Sieur C. (D.)j ii, 342 
Renaud (Fr.), ii, 139, 347, 352 
Rennell, Colonel, quoted, ii, 460 
Revenue of Bengal, i, 114 
Rhinoceros, a tame, i, 114; a, hunt at 
Achin, ii, 319 
Rhubarb, ii, 102, 258, 267 
Rice, scented, i, 50, 142 
Rio de la Hacha, in Columbia, ii, 1 1 3 
Ritter, Karl, quoted, ii, 81 460 

Rivers in Siam, ii. 288 
Rixdollars {Richedales), worth about 
4S. 7d- ; i, 23, 412 


Robinson {Assaifi), quoted, ii, 283 n. 
Roboli (a French merchant), i, 227 
Rock crystal, vessels of, i, 389 
Rockets, i, 390 ; ii, 279 
Roe, Sir T., quoted, i, 379 n, *, ii, 
100 n., 393 n. 

Rohtas {RJiodas), fort of, i, 121 ; ii. 83 
Ronova river, i, 1 24 
Rose, M. Jean de (F.)» h 205 
Rose noble (a coin worth 6s. 8d. ), i, 13 
Rosnel, quoted, ii, 434 
Rotterdam, ii, 416 
Roux, Rev. Father, i, 94 
Rubellite (a mineral), ii, 467, 469 
Rubies, in Cambodia, ii, 102 ; in Europe, 
ii, 103 ; finest seen by Tavernier, ii, 
123 ; of King of France, ii, 129 ; 
the Mogul’s, i, 399 ; value of, i, 
383 ?i . ; ii, 472 ; weights of, ii, 449 
Ruby, the Banian, ii, 129 ; King of 
Bijapur’s, ii, 128 ; mines of Burmah, 
ii, 1 00, 465 ; Zafar Khdn’s false, ii, 
127 

Riip {Roup), Raja, of Lahore, i, 346, 

363 

Rupee ( = 2s. 3d.), i, 26, 413 ; ii. 92 
Ru 7 'ki Professio7ial Papers, quoted, 

i. 154 

Russian embassy to China, ii, 271 

Saba, in Arabia, ii, 6 
Sabarmati river, i, 72 
Sabial in Africa, ii, 161 
Sadoul se 7 'ain i, 118 
Sadraza-ki-sarai {Satragy-serd), i, 120 
Saffron, ii, 20 
Saif Khan, i, 353, 3S4 
St. Amant, M. (F.), i, 200, 204, 206, 
208, 218; ii, 35 

St. Andre (a church at Cochin), i, 236 
St. George, fort at Madras, i, 268 
St. Helena, description of, ii, 401 
St. Jean, a church at Cochin, i, 236, 
242 

St. Jean, Point {Saja 7 i, etc.), i, 6 
St. John, Christians of, i, 251 
St. Laurens (in Madagascar), ii, 142 
St. Paul, a church at Cochin, i, 242 
St. Paul’s College at Goa, i, 197 
St. Pierre, coral at, ii, 132 
St. Thomas, a church at Cochin, i, 
238 ; the apostle, i, 269 
St. Thome (near Madras), i, 221, 225, 
227, 229, 269 ; ii, 304 
St. Vincent, coral at, ii, 133 w, 

Sakora {Secou 7 'a), i, 143 
Sal ammoniac, ii, 19 
Salangor {Sa 7 tg 07 'e) tin, ii, 162 
Salaries of English officials, ii, 48 n. 


INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


493 


Sale of jewels to Shaista Khan, i, iS, 
UO, 307 

Salee or Sala {SaU), in East Africa, i, 
the, ii, 1 90 n* 

Salim, Sultan, afterwards Jahdngir, i, 

323 

Salsette, near Goa, i, 195 ; ii, 153 
Salt in Assam, ii, 2S2 
Saltpetre at Chapra, i, 122 
Sambalpur District, diamond mines, ii, 

4S2 

Samoghdr {Samongtiir), near Agra, i, 
340 n. 

Samorin. See Zamorin 
Safnpitan {sarbatmie\ a blow tube, ii, 
29S 

San Dominique (in the Antilles), ii, 
I12 

San Jago, coral, ii, 133 n, 

Sanctissima Casa, la, i, 232 
Sanderson, Mr. G. P., quoted, i, 280 
386 n. 

Sandstones at Agra, ii, 241 
Sank river, in Gwalior {Sanike)^ i, 64 
Sank river, in Bengal, ii, 85, 460 
Sankli i^Sanqitelis), i, 50 
Sa 7 iqnan i, 113, 114 
Sdntdpur {Satapour), i, 147 
Santesda'i i> 295 

Santis, Dominico de (Venetian), ii, 151 

Saoli? (Saruer), i, 146 

Sapphire washings of Ceylon, ii, 102, 

4^5> 470 

Sardinia coral fisheries, ii, 132 
Sargossa weed {Fticus natans)^ ii, 41 1 n, 
Sa7’qHet for Sarkar'i i, 30 
Sarvapali? [SerepeU\ i, 267 
Sdsserdm {Sase 7 ' 07 t\ i, 120 ; ii, 82 
Satuldnagar i, 147 

Savagery, a relapse into, ii, 399 
Schindler, A. PI., quoted, ii, 104 
Schrauf, Dr. A., quoted, ii, 96 w., 98 «., 
124, 438, 447 
Scu7idi. See Sindi 
Scotch pearls, ii, 113 
Secret, purchase, a, ii, 65 ; signs, sales 
by, ii, 68 ; trade by officials, ii, 48 
Sects, Muhammadan, ii, 175 
Seer (a weight), i, 418 ; ii, 2, 266 
Sehore {Stator), i, 55 
Seine river at Paris, i, 1 1 5 
Selim Khan or Islam Shah, i, 120 
Seme7icme (worm powder), ii, 259, 260, 
267 

Sena river (in Africa), ii, 160, 16 1 
Senepg 07 zd? i* 267 
Seng&r viver {Sam^eur), i, 114 
Sepehr Sheko, i, 351, 353» 354 


Sequin (a Venetian coin), i, 412 
Serail JlforhWes ? i, 113 
Seravarumbode {Serravarofi)^ i, 270 
Serpent worship, i, 42 ; ii, 249 
Se^apour 7 ii, 93 
Shabdsh Khan, i, 328, 333 
Shad ora [Chadolkt'sera), i, 57 
Shah Abbas II, i, 350 
^Shah Bandar {Cha i, 7, 1 1 

*Shah Danial, i, 324 
Shah Jahan (^Cha Geha7t\ bribery of, 
i, 17 ; his children, i, 326 ; death of, 
b 343? 371? 376 ; descent of, i, 324; 
his jewels, i, 371 ; life endangered, 
i, 276 ; his prison, i, 334 ; a refugee 
at Golconda, i, 168 ; seizes the 
throne, i, 339, 340 ; his sickness, i, 
325? 327 ; his tomb, i, 109 ; his 
treasure, i, 332 
Shah Jahdngir, i, 323, 334 
Shah Jahani {Cha Je7i7ii) rupees, i, 29 
Shah of Persia, the, i, 374 
Shah Safvi II of Persia, i, 339 ; ii, 7 
Shdhdbad {Sera Chabas)^ i? 95 
Shdhis (C/iaez), Persian coin worth 
4jd., i, 23, 414 

Shahji (a Maratha chief), i, 182 «. 
Shahr-i-safa {Charzsafar), i, 91 
Shahzadd Sardi {Serrail Chageada'), i, 

I15 

Shd.ista Khdn {Cha Mst JCazi), i, 18, 
21, 31, 129, 138, 307, 332, 393, 
401 ; ii, 1 13 

Shamiyand, an awning, i, 256 
Sharkej {Sarquesse), i, 69, 72 ; ii, 9 
Sheikh of Mecca, a, i, 1 6 1 
Sheikh Mirza,, Umr, i, 323 
Sheikh-i-sarai {Chehi-sera), i, 104 
Sheikhpura {Chekaipouz-), i, 55 
Shell bracelets, ii, 273, 285 
Shellac, ii, 20, 2i ; in Assam, ii, 282 
Sher Shah, the Afghan, i, 120 n. 
Sherring, Rev. M. A., quoted, ii, 231 
Shias {Chias), ii, 175 
Shiganu? {ChakeTzicouzS), i, 91 
Shipwreck, escape from, ii, 3 1 1 
Shoe question, the, i, 195 ?z. 

Sholapur? {Chozipart), i, 31, 409 
Shroff {cheraff)y a broker, i, 28, 34, 
35 ; ii, 91, 183, 204 
Shuja, Sultan, i, 166, 326, 330; in 
Arakan, i, 355, 358, 367 
Shupanga {Chepozzgozira), ii, 157, 158, 
161 

Siam, ii, 102 n,, 286, 288, 346 ; King 
of, ii, 187 

Sidhpur? {Chitpour), i, 80 
Sight of Father Ephraim improved by 
imprisonment, i, 231-232 



494 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Sikandra {Sekandera\ i, III 
Sikrigalli? {Pongangel)^ i, 124 
Silk, Assam, ii, 281, 284; Persian, ii, 
4X S 

Silks, ii, 2, 3 ; frauds in, ii, 26 
Silver, duty on, i, 8 ; ii, 25 ; mines in 
Asia, ii, 162 ; Assam, ii, 28 1 ; 
Bhutan, ii, 270; Japan, ii, 162; 
standards of, i, 34 
Simzane, a kind of sail, i, 256 
Simla diamonds ? ii, 453 
Sind or Sindi {Scizndi)^ i, 10, 17, 312, 

317 

Sindkeir {JSenquera\ i, 50 
Singalese {Chinglas)^ i, 235 
Singatoria {San-ICaira), i, 56 
Singhina copper mines, i, 27 n. 

Sipri {Sansele)^ ij 59 
Sirhind {Serznde), i, 95 
Sironj {Seronge), i, 37, 56, 65 
Sita, the goddess, ii, 192 
Szianga? i, 147 
Sivaji, Raja, i, 131, 145, 182 
Sleeman, General, quoted, i, 298 n. ; 
ii, 176 185 191 n., 431 n., 

445 n. 

Smith, Bosworth, quoted, ii, 446 
Smith, V. A., quoted, i, 417 
Snake, bite, i, 60 ; with two heads, ii, 
287 ; stone, ii, 152, 153 ; worship, 
i, 42 ; ii, 249 

Sofala (Africa), ii, 158, 160 
Sol (Fr. coin = o.9d.)> h 34 4ii 
Soldiers, Dutch, i, 242 ; ii, 414 ; at 
Golconda, i, 156; Indian, i, 391 
Sorrel at St. Helena, ii, 402 
Soufnelpour^ in Bengal, a diamond mine, 

i, 121 ; ii, 81, 84, 89, 453, 457 
Spanish money, i, 412 

Spears, Mr., ii, 466 
Sperm whale, ii, 138 
Spices, ii, 12 

Spinel rubies, ii, 156 467 

Spirits, palm, ii, 250 
Spurious coins, ii, 367 
Srinagar, in Kashmir, i, 347 
Stables, the King’s, i, 102 
Steel, Mr. J. H., quoted, i, 276 
Steel mines in Assam, ii, 281, 284 
Steinbach, Lieutenant- Colonel, quoted, 

ii, 446 

Story, a strange, i, 73 
Streeter, E., quoted, ii, 98, 10 1, no, 
124, 125, 126, 130, 431, 441 
Strover, Captain, quoted, ii, 466 
SudraSf ii, 184 n. 

Szcfra (table-cloth), i, 273 ; ii, 5 
Sugar, ii, 23 ; candy, ii, 20 ; becoming 
poison, ii, 23 


Sukkadana or Soekadana, in Borneo, 
ii, 462 

Suliman Sheko, Sultan, i, 330, 360, 

363. 364. 36s. 367 

Sumatra, west coast of, ii, 376 
Sunda {Sonde) Archipelago, ii, 8 
Sunnis {Sotthzzis)^ ii, 175 
Surat {Snz-ate), i» 6 ; to Agra, i, 48, 66, 
89 ; to Broach, i, 66 ; to Goa, i, 
176 ; to Golconda, i, 142, 147, 149 ; 
to Hormuz, i, 5 ; captured by 
Murad, i, 328 ; Tavernier’s return to, 

b 309 

Stiri (palm wine), i, 243. See Tari 
Surrawaram {Sarz/az'on), ii, 94 
Suti {Soutique), i, 126 
Suttee, a, i, 219 ; ii, 209, 220 
Sutuldna {Sellana)^^ 87 
Suwali {Soziali)^ a port in Gujarat, i, 6 ; 
ii, 36, 37 > 362 

Tabarka (Takarqne)^ ii, 133 

Tabriz, ii, 260, 272 

Tae? river, i, 124 

Taffetas, ii, 3 

Talneir (Ta/lener), i, 50 

Tamerlane {Teznurdeng), i, 159, 322, 

333 

Tanahkeke (or Island of Sorcerers), off 
Celebes, ii, 301 

Tapis y carpets and table covers, ii, 27 

Tapti river, i, 49, 50, 52 

Tarai, the, ii, 262 

Tarawari {Dirauil), i, 95 

Tari (toddy), the sap of Pfmnixsylvesirisy 

i, 158; ii, 309, See 
Tartary, i, 16, 92 

Tasiinacanl (Taj-i-mukam), i, 109, in 
Tasman, Abel, a Dutch commander, ii, 

17 

Tassu {tassot, an Indian inch), i, 419 ; 

ii, 2 

Tdi or Idzit {toti), fibre of Corchoris 
capsularisy i, 1 84 
Tatooing in Siam, ii, 295 
Tatta {Tatd)y in Sind, i, 10, 17 
Taurus, Mount, i, 3 
Tavernier, Daniel, i, xii ; ii, 297, 359, 
376 

Tavernier, Life of J. B., i, xi-xxxvii, 
and Preface, vol. ii ; his claim against 
the Dutch, ii, 422; visits Bantam, 
ii, 345 ; arrives at Batavia, ii, 321 ; 
leaves Batavia, ii, 388 ; leaves Ceylon, 
ii, 321 ; leaves Dacca, i, 13 1 ; leaves 
Gandikot, i, 293 ; visits Goa, i, 180 ; 
visits Golconda in 1652, i, 301-305 ; 
his honesty, ii, 67; his journeys by 
land to the east, ii, 424 ; his ignorance 



INDEX AND GLOSSARY 


495 


of native languages, ii, 64 ; his 

letters to and from Shaista Khan, i, 
402; life in dangei*, i, 317; life 
threatened, ii, 168 ; etc. 

Temple explored by Tavernier, i, 264 
Tenara or Atenara, i, 172, 300 
Tenasserim (Denouserin), ii, 286 
Tennant, Professor, quoted, ii, 58 
431 n,, 442 n. 

Tennent, Sir E., quoted, i, 250 
278 280 n. ; ii, 198 7z., 317 

470 

Terate (a galley), ii, 108 
Terminalia chelmla {mirabolans), i, 72 
Terry, Rev. E,, i, 379 n., 388 414 

?i, ; ii, 3 24 n, 

Thevenot, quoted, i, 27 146 n.^ 149 

157 170 w., 172 n,y 372 #2., 

384 413 418 5 ii, 152 ??., 

176 7/., 216 n, 

Thibet gold, etc., ii, 156 
Thomas, E., quoted, i, 417 n. 

Thomas, Father, in Siam, ii, 295 
Thrones of the Mogul, i, 99, 381, 387 
Thunderbolts, i, 257 ; ii, 85 
Tieffenthaler, quoted, i, 92 7z., 93 n., 
1 14 n., 120 121 7i., 125 w., 126 

n. ; ii, 460 

Tin mines in Siam, ii, 289; in the 
Straits, ii, 163 

Tin trade, English, injury to, ii, 163 
Tipperah, the Kingdom of, ii, 273 
Tiqitczy’i i, 55 

Tiiupati {Tripeiti)y pagoda, i, 272 n, ; 

ii, 225, 243 
Tobacco, ii, 23 
Tokens, the Mogul’s, i, 324 
Tb/a (an Indian weight), i, 14, 418 
Toman (I’ersian money of account = 
;^3 :9s.), i, 24, 214, 414; ii, 166 
Tomb, of Akbar, i, 1 1 1 ; of Aurang- 
zeb’s wife, at Aurangabad, i, 146 ; 
of Jahangir, i, iii 

Tombs, at Agra, i, 109 ; of Golconda 
Kings, i, 154 

Tonga, a conveyance, i, 44 n. 

Tonne (of gold), i, 415 ; ii, 4x8 
Toolmedenl i, 55 

Topaz, the Mogul’s, i, 400; ii, 129, 449 
Tortoiseshell bracelets, ii, 273, 285 
Touchstones, i, 34 
Toutipour'i i, 126 
Tragic scene at Court, a, ii, 219 
Transmigration of souls, ii, 203 
Travelling in India, i, 39, 43 
Treasure, buried, ii, 205 
TrejDani {Trapano), ii, 133 
Trichmopoli, i, 248 «. 

Tripatty. See Tirupati 


Tripurantakhan {Tripanfe) pagoda, i, 
299 

Tuban, in Java, i, 239 
Tulpuri {Tozilapeca), i, 94 
7 tm of gold. See Tonne 
Tungabliadra river, ii, 94 n. 

Turquoise, Persian, ii, 103 
Tuscany diamond, ii, 97, 124, 447 
Twigg, Mr. J., quoted, ii, 42 ;z. 

Umara. See Omrahs 

Umr Shekh Mirza, i, 323 

Unkie and Tunkie {Ezzzieque Tenque)^ i, 

147 

Usbeg or Usbek Tartars, i, 92, 102, 

373 

Utangan river, i, 65 

Vdl (an Indian weight), i, 25, 418 
Valentjin, quoted, ii, 198 «. 

Vambery, quoted, ii, 104 n. 

Vamulpetta {Emelipata)^ i, 296 
Van Rez (Dutch soldier), i, 237 
Van Twist (D.), quoted, ii, 6 it. 

Van Wiick, the Sieur H. (D.), ii, 164, 
169, 170 

Vanderlin or Vanderling, General (D.), 
ii, 322, 338, 421 

Vandime, General (D.), ii, 87, 327, 346, 

399 

Varthema, quoted, i, 241 n.\ ii, 142 
158 n. 

Velant, the Sietir (D.), i, 106, 107 
Vellore {Veloixj), Raja of, i, 16 1 ; ii, 
218 

Vellutar, on the Kistna, ii, 94 n. 
Vengurla {Mingrela)^ ii, 176, 184, 200, 
209, 219 

Vessels, Indian, i, 6 ; Dutch, of war, i, 
312 

Vetiapiir. See Fatehpur Sikri 
Vez CaboziU {Aconzife}), ii, 21 
Vice-Admiral (second ship of fleet), ii, 

38s 

Viceroys of Goa, i, 190 
Vtsapour. See Bijapur 
Volcano in Banda, ii, 17 
Voubebaranl ii, 158 
Vouchir. See Weeyur 
Voyages, Tavernier’s, first, i, xiii ; 
second, i, xiii \ third, i, xiv ; fourth, 
i, xviii ; fifth, i, xxi ; sixth, i, xxiii 
Vyepu {Belle Epiiie), i, 235, 238 

Wachttendonk, the Sietir Arnoul van 
(D.), i, 131, 132 
Waggons, i, 43 

Waikenton, the Sieur (D.), ii, 42 
Wairagarh {Beiragurh)^ ii, 452, 460 



496 


TRAVELS IN -INDIA- 




Wajr> Karur [Czir?'idre) diamond mine, 
ii, 54 n., 74 «•> 435> 4SI 
Wakla {BaqudcC), i, 143 
^ Ward, History of the H^ndoos^ <|uoted, 
ii, 191 198 217 7z., 226 n. 

Wars, in Golconda, i, 150 ^ Macassar, 
ii, 299 

Water, f|:esh, from under the sea, 1, 
268 ; ii, 107 ; of the Ganges, i, 

1 16; ii, 231, 253 

Wax, candles, ii, 413 5 i^^'^ade from 
cinnamon, ii, 18 

Weeyur {Vouckir and Wouhir), i, I74> | 
260 

Weights, of diamonds, etc., ii, 89, 44S ; 

in India, i, 8, 416 
West Indies, ii, 105 
Wheeler, Talboys, quoted, i, 220 , 2 3 3 w. 

White, Cafre, ii, 398 ; elephant, ii, 290 
Whiteness, Orientals^ preference for, ii, 

115 

Widow burning, ii, 209 
Wine at Lahore, i, 95 
Winter in India, i, 6 
Woman, a courageous, ii, 221 ; an 
aged, becomes a mother, ii, 272 
Women, of Goa, i, 187 ; hairless, i, 
95 ; 2, pagoda for, ii, 239 ; porters 


■ in the Himalayas, ii, 264 j in Siam, 
iij 293 

Woodecotah [Oudecoi), i, 270 
Woodthorpe, Colonel, quoted, ii, 271 ?/. 
Worm powder. See Senicftdm 
Wungaon [Bergant), i, 37 84 

Wuntimitta {Oiitemeda) pagoda, i, 281 

Yams at the Cape of Good Hope, ii, 

398 

Yawning, ii, 251 
Yedalvoi {Indelvai)y x, 148 
Yellow amber, ii, 132, 136 
Yellow diamond, ii, 447 
Yule, Colonel (now Sir Henry), quoted, 
i, 91 w., 93 n.y 98 n,y 23s n,y 322 
n,% ii, 60 n.y 79 108 200 7/., 

271 //., 298 ?/. , 327 7/., 466 77. 
Yuthia, ancient capital of Siam, ii, 
288 ru 

Zafar Khan [Giafer Han)y i, 1x3, 137, 
389, 392, 40 X j ii, 127 
Zamorin, the, i, 237, 241 
Zealand, ii, 413 
Zebra, skin of a, ii, 397 
Zenon, Father, i, 209, 224, 225 et seq.y 
253» 269 


THE END 


Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh 





A 


AIDE-de-CAMP’S LIBRARY 

Accn. No — 

1. Books may be retained for a period not 
exceeding fifteen days. 


A 
