Travels in India, Vol. I (Jean-Baptiste Tavernier (Valentine Ball, trans.), 1889)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1889 Macmillan edition, Valentine Ball translation (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.208414). The great 17th-century French gem merchant's six voyages to Persia and India — firsthand source on Mughal courts, diamond mines and Asian trade routes.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PRESIDENT’S SECRETARIAT 
(LIBRARY) 


Accn. No Class No 

The book should be returned on or before the date 
last stamped below. 






TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BY 

JEAN BAPTISTE TAVERNIER 

BARON OF AUBONNE 


TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL FRENCH EDITION OF 1676 

WITH A 

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR, 

NOTES, APPENDICES, ETC. 


BY 

V. BALL, LLD., F.R.S., RG.S. 

DIRECTOR OF THE SCIENCE AND ART MUSEtTM, DUBLIN 
AUTHOR OF ‘jungle LIFE IN INDIA,’ ‘THE ECONOMIC GEOLOGY OP INDIA,’ ETC. 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. I 


IL0nti0tt 

MACMILLAN AND CO. 

AND NEW YORK 

1889 



Printed by R. & R Clark, Edinburgh 



PREFACE 


Tavernier’s name, owing to its frequent mention in 
histories and in works on precious stones, has long 
been known as that of one of the most renowned 
travellers of the seventeenth century. Possibly it 
would not be incorrect to speak of Tavernier as in 
some respects the most renowned traveller during that 
period when so much was done to bring home to the 
people of Europe information about countries which 
had previously been but little known. 

Such being the case, it is not only somewhat sur- 
prising that there should be so much error in the 
published accounts of his life, but also that his Travels, 
although they have been frequently issued in various 
languages, have not, as a whole, been subjected to 
critical examination and elucidation with the aid of our 
modern knowledge of the countries which they describe. 

Of Tavernier’s life and work Prof. Charles Joret 
has given an exhaustive survey in a recently-published 
monograph. In the present volumes it is sought to pre- 
sent an approximately literal translation of the portion 
of the Travels which refer to India, accompanying it 
by such identifications of localities with modern sites. 



PREFACE 


viii 

and such elucidation of obscure points, as have been 
possible under the circumstances. 

As will be explained more particularly in the 
biographical sketch, the chief faults in Tavernier’s 
encyclopaedic volumes consist in a want of systematic 
arrangement of the subjects, a fuller and more care- 
fully correlated chronology, and a reconciliation of 
really or apparently contradictory statements ; such 
work, in short, as should have been done by the 
editors whom he employed, but which they appear to 
have either wilfully shirked or omitted to recognise as 
a part of their duty. 

Upwards of two hundred years have elapsed since 
an English translation, that by John Phillips, has 
appeared ; but owing to that translator’s' misconception 
of the author’s meaning, through want of local know- 
ledge, and to serious abridgment, it gives a very 
inadequate idea of the true merits of the work, which, 
except to those who have read it in the original, have 
therefore been practically unknown to English readers. 

A word of explanation is due to the readers of 
these volumes as to how it has happened that the 
present editor came to undertake the onerous task 
of translation and annotation. 

For a long time I have been well acquainted with 
the portions of Tavernier’s works which deal with the 
economic mineral resources of India, and although I 
have published some accounts of these, having suc- 
ceeded in identifying the sites of the diamond mines 
described by him, which were for a long time supposed 



PREFACE 


IX 


by authors to be beyond the reach of recognition, I 
have felt that in order to truly represent him a new 
English edition, at least of the Indian travels, was 
much wanted, which would give his facts in their own 
setting and substantiate, by means of modern illustra- 
tion, the strong claim which he has to be regarded as a 
veracious and original author. 

Being fully mindful of my deficiencies as a philo- 
logical and historical critic, I had, when further 
acquainted with the work, determined not to under- 
take the task myself, as I felt that such qualifications 
as I possessed, which were mainly derived from a long 
experience of travelling in India in connection with the 
Geological Survey of that country, would not make up 
for the lack of special knowledge in the subjects just 
alluded to. 

Acting, however, under the advice of Colonel Yule, 
I commenced the translation and annotation in the 
year 1886, and have devoted the greater portion of 
my spare time since then to this work. 

In speaking of the aid which Colonel Yule has ever 
been most ready to afford, I must guard against imply- 
ing that the work has been completed in any way 
under his supervision ; that for various reasons has 
not been possible, and it would be an ill return for 
so much assistance as I have received to lay upon 
him any responsibility for opinions which he has not 
had an opportunity of considering. At the same time 
the direct acknowledgments of his advice which are 
made in the footnotes by no means cover the extent of 



X 


PREFACE 


my indebtedness, and I regret the impossibility of 
doing more now than to give expression to my grati- 
tude to him for his labour and advice in these some- 
what general terms. 

To Mr. V. A. Smith of the Bengal Civil Service I 
am indebted for much assistance and advice while 
passing this first volume through the press. His 
departure for India has deprived me of a continuation 
of his valuable aid in connection with the second 
volume. 



INTRODUCTION^ 


LIFE OF J. B. TAVERNIER 

Jean Baptiste Tavernier was born in Paris in the 
year 1605. This has been ascertained from the state- 
ment in the volume of his Relations, namely that in 
1679 he was seventy-four years old. But there is no 
direct evidence as to the exact month or day of his 
birth, and they cannot now be ascertained owing to 
the disappearance of the registers of the Church at 
Charenton, where he was baptized. 

Not very much is known of the family of his father 
Gabriel, of whom, however, it is recorded that he fled 
from Antwerp to Paris in 1575, together with his 
brothers Melchior and Nicolas, in order to avoid 
religious persecution, they being Protestants. They 
readily accepted French nationality, and it is suggested 
by M. Joret that their ancestors may have originally 
migrated from France to Belgium. Melchior became 
famous as an engraver and printer to the King ; he 
was born in 1544, and died in 1641-, at the age of 
ninety-seven years. Of Nicolas the record is more 
scanty, it being only known that he was married to 
Claudine le Bert, by whom he had a son named 

^ Largely based on the excellent life of J. B. Tavernier by Prof. 
Charles Joret, Paris, Plon, 1886. 



INTRODUCTION 


xii 

Jacques. Of Gabriel it is known that like Melchior 
he was a geographer, but he appears to have been 
rather a merchant than an artist. He married Suzanne 
Tonnelier, by whom he had three sons — Melchior, 
baptized in 1594; Jean-Baptiste, who, as already 
stated, was born in 1605 ; and Gabriel, born in 1613. 
As will be seen hereafter, Tavernier mentions a brother 
DanieP who died at Batavia in the year 1648, and there 
also appears to have been a brother named Maurice, 
whose son accompanied Tavernier on his sixth voyage. 
The possibility of Gabriel being identical with either 
Daniel or Maurice has been discussed, but there would 
be no advantage in retailing the various opinions here, 
as none of them are conclusive. Melchior, like his 
uncle, became distinguished as a chartographer ; he 
died in 1665, during the last of Jean Baptiste’s voyages 
to the East. 

The geographical surroundings of Jean Baptiste, 
and the discussions which learned men held with his 
father, and to which he listened with avidity, served 
to inflame in his mind from his earliest years a strong 
desire to see foreign countries ; but minute as are his 
descriptions of his travels, he, so far as his own auto- 
biographical account is concerned, ignores the events 
of his early youth ; and indeed it may be said that 
throughout he sinks his personality to such an extent 
that the actual period at which some of his adventures 
took place can only be arrived at by the casual mention 
of incidents and dates which are scattered about 
through his works, while with regard to others there 
are no indications whatever, and in reference to some 

^ See Book III, chap. xxvi. The name Daniel is printed on the 
map of Tonquin in Tavernier’s account of that Kingdom. 




INTRODUCTION 


xiii 


periods of his life we are left in complete darkness as 
to where and how they were spent. 

By the age of twenty-two he had, he states in his 
“ Design,” seen the best parts of France, England, 
Holland, Germany, Switzerland, Poland?^ Hungary, 
and Italy, and had acquired a fair knowledge of the 
most useful European languages. It would appear 
from M. Joret’s estimate that these rambles must have 
commenced when he was only fifteen years old. It is 
not necessary to follow the details of these European 
travels here, as they are fully set forth on following 
pages in “ The Design of the Author.” 

First Voyage. — Contrary to those writers who 
have stated that Tavernier started on his first voyage 
to the East in 1-636, M. Joret has, I think, very clearly 
proved, by reference to the easily ascertained dates of 
historical events which took place while he was in 
Constantinople, that his departure cannot have been 
later than January or February 1631 ; and that, in 
1633, after visiting Persia, he returned to Europe by 
Aleppo and Alexandretta to Malta, from whence he 
made his way to Italy, bringing with him some Persian 
turquoises as articles of trade. During the next five 
years his occupation is unknown, the record being 
almost blank. 

Second Voyage. — On the 13th of September 1638 
we find him again starting from Paris for the East, 
taking ship at Marseilles for Alexandretta, with a 
following consisting of a young Artist, a Surgeon, 
and his brother Daniel. He was, moreover, on this 
occasion well equipped as a merchant. After spending 

1 Poland, as pointed out by M. Joret, does not appear to have been 
visited till he was twenty-five years old. 



XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


six weeks at Aleppo he left it on the 27th December^ 
with a caravan, and passing through Meshed, Bassora, 
and Shiraz, reached Ispahan at the end of April or 
beginning of May 1639. Here he visited the King, 
Shdh Safvi, grandson of Shdh Abbds. Our next 
record of him shows him to have been in Hindustan 
early in 1641, but as to the route which he followed, 
whether by sea or by land, and at what date he tra- 
versed it, there is no direct evidence. M. Joret 
suggests that he left Ispahan at the end of 1639, that 
he paid his first visit to Dacca in 1640, and that he 
remained in Agra during the winter of 1640-41, In 
1641 he tells us that he was at Burhdnpur on the 
journey from Agra to Surat, and elsewhere that he 
was at Goa at the close of the same year. His journey 
up from Surat to Agra in 1640, unlike the journey back 
via Burhdnpur, was probably made by the Ahmaddbdd 
route which is described on pp. 66-89. Agra he 
found Shdh Jahdn enjoying a peaceable reign. _ From 
Goa he appears to have visited Golconda and made full 
inquiries and perhaps visited the diamond mines — 
returning to Surat by the land journey throughout, in 
the spring of 1642. How he occupied himself during 
the remainder of this year is uncertain ; but he states 
that he paid a visit to Ahmaddbdd, probably while 
awaiting the season for sailing towards the end of the 
year 1642 or the beginning of 1643, when he states 
he was in Bandar Abbds. 

Third Voyage. — We do not know when he 
reached Paris nor what route he followed ; but we find 

1 I do not think it necessary to enter into any discussion here as to 
the enigmas presented by the incompatibility of some of his statements 
with these dates. (See Joret, p. 48.) 



INTRODUCTION 


XV 


him towards the close of 1643, namely on the 6th of 
December, starting thence on his third voyage to the 
East, arriving as before at Alexandretta. On the 6th 
of March 1644 he started from Aleppo in the 
company of two Capuchin monks, arriving at Ispahan 
on the 3d of May, where M. Joret considers he must 
have remained for some months, reaching Surat in 
January 1645, most probably by the Bandar Abbds 
route. On the 19th of January he started via Dau- 
latdbdd and Ndnder for Golconda, whence he visited 
the diamond mines, regarding which he had ascertained 
particulars, if he had not actually seen them, on the 
occasion of his previous journey. After visiting the 
mine of Raolconda, i.e. the modern Ramulkota, 18 
miles south of Karniil, he appears to have returned 
to Golconda and afterwards proceeded to the mine 
which he called Gani or Coulour ; this, it will be seen, 
stands for Kdn-i-Kollur on the Kistna, at seven days’ 
journey eastwards, or more correctly south-eastwards, 
from Golconda. (See p. 172.) How the remainder of 
this year and the whole of 1646 were employed we 
cannot say. In connection with the descriptions of the 
above-named mines he also describes one at Soumel- 
pour (see Book II, chap, xvii), which was situated on 
the Koel river, an affluent of the Sone, in the District 
of Lohirdag^i in Western Bengal, but as to when 
he visited it, if ever, he gives no certain indication. 
There are some grounds for supposing that in 1647 
he visited Persia, indeed he actually states (Book I, 
chap, viii) that he was in Ispahan towards the end of 
that year. Be this as it may, we find him on the nth 
‘of January 1648 at Mingrela, that is to say Vengurla, 
on the west coast of India, where he had arrived from 



XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


Surat in the Dutch vessel called Mcestricht. After 
nine days spent there, during which time he enjoyed 
the hospitality of the Dutch, who had a factory there, 
he embarked on an armed vessel for Goa, where he 
arrived on the following day, and was much struck 
with its decadence since his previous visit in 1641. 
During the two months which he spent in Goa he was 
on the most friendly terms with the Viceroy — the 
wealthy Dom Philippe de Mascarenhas, — the Arch- 
bishop, and the Inquisitor-General, by all of whom 
he was treated with much kindness, the latter having 
first satisfied himself that he had left his Bible behind 
him at Vengurla. On the iith of March he returned 
to Vengurla, where he remained for more than a 
month, or till the 14th of April, when he embarked for 
Batavia, for the ostensible reasons of seeing so famous 
a place, and of rendering a service to the Dutch by 
conveying to them information about the discovery 
of a new port in Africa which had been made by the 
Portuguese. M. Joret probably rightly concludes that 
he was anxious to seek, for and meet with his brother 
Daniel, whom he had not seen for ten years. 

On this voyage Tavernier narrowly escaped ship- 
wreck off the coast of Malabar, but at length suc- 
ceeded in reaching the harbour of Point de Galle, in 
Ceylon, where, as usual, he was well received by the 
Dutch authorities. On the 25th of June, the mer- 
chandise having been transhipped to another vessel, 
the voyage was continued, and on the 17th of July the 
coast of Sumatra was sighted, and on the 2 2d Taver- 
nier reached Batavia. On the following day he went 
to pay his respects to the General, Vanderling, and 
the Director-General, Caron, by whom he was at first 



INTRODUCTION 


xvii 


well treated. Subsequently, however, he was involved 
in tedious investigations in reference to his relations 
with M. Constant, the Commander at Bandar Abbas, 
for whom he had purchased diamonds at the mines. 
These inquiries suddenly collapsed when Tavernier 
disclosed the fact that he possessed a very consider- 
able amount of compromising information concerning 
the illicit transactions of the very members of the 
Council at Batavia who proposed to try him. 

His stay at Batavia was interrupted by two short 
visits to Bantam, where he was well received by the 
King, of whom his brother was a boon companion ; and 
he also experienced much kindness from the English 
Resident, who offered him a free passage to England, 
which he at first accepted, but subsequently declined in 
favour of a similar offer made by the Dutch. There- 
upon followed a serious contention about certain Dutch 
pay-bills which he had purchased at a considerable dis- 
count, intending to sell them at par in Holland, and so 
employ his capital during the voyage. This traffic 
having been prohibited, those who had bought bills 
were all, with the exception of Tavernier, both com- 
pelled to give up what they had purchased, and other- 
wise severely mulcted and punished. Tavernier held 
out to the last moment, but finally handed up the bills 
on promise of an order for payment of his outlay in 
Holland. Ultimately he sailed without this promise 
being fulfilled, and it was only after several years 
and the institution of an action against the Com- 
pany in Holland that he, or rather his brother 
for him, received part of the sum due. From all 
these circumstances he, perhaps naturally enough, 
became a bitter enemy of the Dutch, and availed 
VOL. I b 




INTRODUCTION 


xviii 

himself of every opportunity for manifesting his 
hostility.^ 

After his second return to Batavia from Bantam he 
was about to visit certain Kings in Sumatra, when his 
brother Daniel arrived in a dying state from Bantam ; 
and shortly afterwards died, in spite of all that could 
be done to cure him. 

Somewhere about the month of October, according 
to M. Joret’s estimate, Tavernier sailed for Holland in 
a ship called the Provinces^ which having passed the 
Sunda Straits, and failed to make the Cocos Islands, 
steered for the Cape of Good Hope, where it arrived 
in fifty-five days ; and the fleet, after remaining there 
twenty-two days for the recovery of the sick, etc., pro- 
ceeded to St. Helena, which was reached in eighteen 
days ; and then halted for a further twenty- two days, 
when the crews and passengers of the several vessels 
in the port entertained one another. Ultimately, after 
some delays on account of contrary winds, the fleet 
reached Holland, where the Directors treated Tavernier 
with much politeness and hospitality ; as regards his 
claim against them, they denied all knowledge of it at 
first, but finally offered to give him a free passage back 
to Batavia in order that he might get it paid there : 
this offer he declined to accept. 

There is no precise intimation in the text as to 
when he arrived in Holland. M. Joret concludes that 
the voyage must have taken six months, and that, 
allowing for delays in Holland, he could not have 
reached Paris till the spring of 1 649. 

Fourth Voyage. — Two years having been spent in 
Europe, which were occupied in the sale of the precious 

1 See his Histoire da la Conduite des Hollandois in Asia, 




INTRODUCTION 


XIX 


stones brought by Tavernier from India, and in repeated 
efforts to recover his debt from the Dutch Company, 
he again started for the East, leaving Paris on the 
1 8th June 1651. It was not till the 25th of August, 
however, that he sailed in the St. Crispine from Mar- 
seilles ; and after touching at Malta and Larnaca in 
Cyprus, reached Alexandretta on the 4th of October, 
and Aleppo on the 7th. Owing to disturbances in the 
country he was unable to resume his journey eastwards 
till the last day of the year. It is needless here to 
detail his adventures in Persia from this time forwards 
till the nth of May, when he embarked at Bandar 
Abbds on a ship belonging to the King of Golconda, 
which was bound for the port of Masulipatam, on the 
east coast of India. After narrowly escaping shipwreck 
he reached Masulipatam on the 2d of July — or perhaps 
for 2d we should read I2th, and on the 21st of July, 
together with M. du Jardin, he set out to march to 
Gandikot via Madras, which latter place he reached on 
the 13th of August. The description of this march 
will be found in Book I, chap, xviii. Here it need 
only be pointed out that conformably to his custom 
he made friends with the English who were residing 
in Fort St. George, and visited the Portuguese 
Governor and Catholic brotherhoods at St. Thome. 
On the 2 2d of the same month he started by the valley 
of the Pennair River for Gandikot, which he might 
have reached from Masulipatam by a more direct and 
shorter route had he not desired to visit Madras. On 
the I St of September he reached Gandikot, which Mir 
Jumld, on behalf of the King of Golconda, had just 
taken possession of. As Mir Juml^ was not only the 
General of the troops but also Prime Minister, Tavernier 



XX 


INTRODUCTION 


had gone to him in order to show him — as he was bound 
to do, not merely as an act of courtesy but because it 
was the custom — the pearls and precious stones which 
he proposed to sell to the King. Several interviews 
which he had with Mir Jumld served to impress him 
with a high opinion of that General’s abilities. On the 
15th Tavernier took leave after receiving his assurance 
that he had recommended him to his son at the Gol- 
conda court. His march northwards lasted till the 2d 
of October, when he reached Golconda. After some 
delay negotiations were opened with reference to the 
sale of the precious stones, but in consequence of a 
remark by a eunuch that the prices asked by Tavernier 
were too high, he took offence, and, together with M. 
du Jardin, left at once for Surat, following the same 
route as he had come by to Golconda in 1643. 

In some of the editions the date of his showing the 
precious stones is given as the 25th (of October), but 
in the 1676 edition the 15th is mentioned; and as he 
started on the following day, and the distance was 
twenty-one^ days or five days journey less than by 
the Aurangdbdd route, which was twenty -six days, he 
reached Surat either on the 5th or the 15th of Nov- 
ember. Shortly afterwards his companion, M. du 
Jardin,® died, and Tavernier then set out for Ahmadd- 
bdd, where he had been invited to bring his jewels by 
Shdistd Khdn, who was then Governor of Gujardt. 
Thence he returned to Surat, and set out for Gol- 
conda on the 6th of March 1653 by the Aurangdbdd 
route, arriving at Golconda on the ist of April. 

^ In Book I, chapter ix, p. 147, he says, however, twenty-seven days. 

2 As will be seen there is some uncertainty about the identification 
of this M. du Jardin. (See Index for references.) 



INTRODUCTION 


XXI 


He then paid another visit to the mines, regarding 
which, as he gives no details, we must only conclude 
that any observations of importance made by him on 
this occasion are incorporated in the account of his 
previous visit in 1645, which has been above alluded to. 
He appears to have returned to Surat during the same 
year, as in Book III, chap, xiii, he refers to having, in 
the year 1653, when on the return journey from Gol- 
conda to Surat, encountered a troop of pilgrims. H e says 
M. d’Ardilliere was with him, to which M. Joret objects 
that he had died in 1652. But had he ? We know his 
father, M. du Jardin, had, but of himself there is, so far 
as I know, no such record. Tavernier next refers to 
being back at Surat, where he heard that war had been 
declared between the English and Dutch. On the 8th 
of January 1654 he sailed in one of a fleet of five 
Dutch vessels of war which were despatched from 
Surat to intercept the English fleet, which was then 
expected to be on its way back from Hormuz. After a 
naval engagement, in which the English were beaten, 
and various delays, the Dutch fleet proceeded to 
Bandar Abbds, arriving there on the 7th of March. 
Tavernier then started for Ispahan, visiting Kerman 
en route, where he purchased a large quantity of the 
beautiful wool of that country for transport to France. 
After a protracted stay in Persia, where he visited 
many places which he had not previously seen, he 
returned to Paris apparently in the autumn of the year 
1655, but the information he gives on this point is very 
vague. 

Fifth Voyage. — In February 1657 Tavernier 
started from Paris on his fifth voyage. Shortly after 
leaving Marseilles, the vessel in which he had 



XXll 


INTRODUCTION 


embarked was chased by pirates, and was com- 
pelled to take refuge in a port near Toulon, from 
whence he returned by land, carrying on his person 
the jewels which he was taking with him to sell in 
the East, but allowing his heavier merchandise to 
proceed in the same vessel. At Marseilles he again 
took ship in an English vessel for Italy. In Italy 
he spent a short time, and visited Ferdinand II of 
Tuscany, who treated him with kindness and distinc- 
tion. He then sailed for Smyrna in a Dutch ship, 
and, while awaiting the departure of the caravan, sent 
one of his servants to buy some pearls in Constanti- 
nople, which he heard that a Jew residing there had 
for sale, because, he remarks, pearls were the best 
articles of trade which could be taken to India. At 
this time, according to him, Smyrna was the principal 
entrepot for all kinds of goods which passed from 
Europe to Asia, and from Asia to Europe. From the 
vague indications given by Tavernier Prof. Joret con- 
cludes that he started with the caravan from Smyrna 
in June 1657. The journey was made by Erivan 
311 -d Tabriz to Ispahan, without any event happening 
worthy of particular record. Owing to the accounts 
which reached him of the disturbed condition of India, 
in connection with the usurpation by Aurangzeb of his 
father’s throne, Tavernier appears to have prolonged his 
stay in Ispahan till the beginning of 1659 ; but before 
starting for Surat, which his letter addressed to Shdistd 
Khdn proves him to have reached in May of that year, 
he despatched to Masulipatam, in charge of one of his 
servants for safety, and perhaps to evade dues, the 
bulk of the beautiful objects and rare curiosities which 
he had collected for Shdistd Khdn in Europe. Shdistd 



INTRODUCTION 


xxiii 


Khdn’s reply to his letter was an invitation to visit him 
at Jahdnibad, sending him a passport to enable him 
to do so with ease and safety. Delayed by the rains, 
Tavernier had not started before he received other 
letters, first asking him to come to Burhdnpur, and 
then to Aurangdbid. When he went to take leave of 
the Governor of Surat, named Mirza Arab, he was in- 
formed by him that until instructions came from Aurang- 
zeb, who had been informed of his arrival, he would 
not be allowed to depart. He then wrote to Shdista 
Khdn, asking him to send an order to the Governor 
to let him go ; this was done, and at length, after six 
months’ delay at Surat, he set out and found Shiista 
Khkn laying siege to Shol&.pur (Choupar) in the Deccan. 
As will be seen on pp. 31 and 409, there are some dis- 
crepancies in Tavernier’s two accounts of the sale of 
and payment for his goods. It is inferred from a casual 
statement that, having concluded this transaction, he 
pursued his course farther southwards in order to visit 
the diamond mines at Golconda again, from whence 
probably he returned to Surat about the end of 1660 or 
beginning of i66i. In his Persian Travels he says 
(Book V, chap, ii) that he was in Persia in 1662, and 
during the same year he returned to Paris, his age be- 
ing then fifty-six years. It was thought that, as he had 
by this time amassed a considerable fortune, and was 
married in the same year for the first time in his life, 
he would settle down and rest from his travels, which, 
as we have seen, commenced when he was only fifteen 
years of age. His wife was named Madeline Goisse, 
a daughter of Jean Goisse, a jeweller, with whom he 
had had some business transactions, and who was a 
connection by marriage of his brother Melchior. 



XXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


Sixth Voyage. — Tavernier’s original intention, ex- 
pressed shortly after his marriage in 1662, was, how- 
ever, to make a short journey to the East in order to 
close up his affairs there. As months passed in pre- 
paration, this intention expanded, and on the 27 th of 
November 1663 he started from Paris, and did not 
return again for five years. On this occasion he took 
with him a young nephew, son of Maurice Tavernier, 
and four attendants of different professions, including a 
surgeon. His stock of precious stones, goldsmith’s 
work, etc., was valued at 400,000 livres, which at 
IS. 6d. would be equal to ;^30,ooo. On the loth of 
January 1664 he embarked at Marseilles for Leghorn, 
and after passing through many misadventures, includ- 
ing a narrow escape of being drowned, he ultimately 
reached .Smyrna on the 25th of April, where he 
remained till the 9th of June, when he left with’ the 
caravan for Tabriz. After three months’ marching 
the caravan reached Erivan on the 14th of Septem- 
ber, and Tabriz on the 9th of November, where two 
of the attendants, one a watchmaker and the other 
a goldsmith, died of sickness brought on by the 
fatigues of the journey. Here also Tavernier left 
his nephew Pierre in the charge of the Superior of the 
Capuchin Convent. On the 2 2d of November, having 
beforehand despatched his principal goods, he left with 
a small party for Ispahan, and arrived there on the 
14th of December. Three days afterwards the King, 
Shdh Abbds II, who in 1657 had bought a quantity 
of jewels from him, summoned him to his palace, where 
he went in state accompanied by all the Franks, and 
bearing with him his most precious treasures. Father 
Raphael acting as interpreter. The Shdh first in- 



INTRODUCTION 


x±v 


quired to whom he had sold the jewels which he had 
with ’him on the occasion of his last voyage, and he 
informed him that it was to Shaistd Khdn, and that 
the price he received was 120,000 rupees, though he 
mentions no sum in the account of the transaction itself. 

His present to the Shdh consisted of a large 
metallic mirror, which distorted the face of any one 
looking into it. All the jewels, with the exception of 
the pearls, were bought, after prolonged negotiation, 
at the high prices which Tavernier demanded. The 
Shah being well pleased, however, T avernier besought 
his protection for his nephew, and that he himself 
should be allowed to sell his goods in Persia, free of 
duty, both of which requests were granted, and he was 
further complimented by the bestowal of a robe of 
honour, and by being appointed jeweller in ordinary. 
Further, out of regard for him a good reception was 
promised to all Franks arriving in Persia. A portrait 
of Tavernier prefixed to ^&Recueil, published in 1679, 
and reproduced in Vol. ii, represents him clothed in 
this robe, with the addition of the mantle which was 
further conferred upon him by the express order of 
the Shdh. The total value of the sales made on this 
occasion was 3900 tomans, or 13,45 5, allowing 
£ 2 ) • 9s. for the toman. The Shdh gave him several 
designs for ornaments, made by himself, which he 
desired to have executed in gold, enamel, and precious 
stones. Curiously enough, Chardin relates that a 
similar order was given to himself in 1666. 

At length Tavernier left Ispahan for India on the 
24th of February 1665, and reached Bandar Abbds 
about the end of the first week of April, having made 
several halts on the road. On the 5th of May we find 



XXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


him once more at Surat. On the occasion of this 
voyage an injury happened to him at the, hands of 
the Dutch, which, added to what had previously 
been done to him in Batavia, served to perpetuate his 
enmity and contempt. Having been entrusted by the 
English Resident with an important packet of letters 
for Surat, which it was believed contained information 
of the outbreak of war in Europe, it was stolen by the 
Dutch, a parcel of blanks being put in its place. The 
English in Surat were naturally indignant when, 
instead of their letters, they received these blanks, and 
it is said that Tavernier was threatened with assassina- 
tion, in consequence of which all the plans he had 
made for his Indian tour were thrown into confusion. 
He sent a strong protest against this scandalous 
treachery to the General at Batavia, and stated that 
if satisfaction were not rendered, he would, on his 
return to France, carry the matter further, and 
would also inform the Shdh of Persia. He does not 
appear to have received any direct satisfaction, 
and this probably led him to write his exposures 
contained in The History of the Conduct of the Dutch 
in Asia} 

On arrival at Surat the Governor told him that 
Aurangzeb wished to be the first to see his jewels ; 
and he further learnt that Shdistd Khdn was in 
Bengal, so that although, in pursuance of his promise 
given on the last occasion, he desired to visit him first, 
he was compelled to go to Jahdndbdd, travelling prob- 

1 Described by Chardin, Amsterdam Ed., 1711, vol. iii, p. 154, as 
“ a collection of the adventures of insignificant people, mostly Dutch ; 
published out of a spirit of flattery, or on account of French animosity 
at the time.” 



INTRODUCTION 


XXVll 


ably by Burhdnpur, Sironj, Gwalior, and Agra, and 
arriving at Jahdndbdd in September. On the 12th of 
the same month he went to salute the Great Mogul, 
to whom, as well as to the nobles of the Court and 
others, he made presents amounting in all to the value 
of 23,187 livres. He then sold to the Mogul Aurang- 
zeb a number of his most precious stones ; and Zafar 
Khan, the Mogul’s uncle, also bought several, but dis- 
puted the price of a large pearl, which he sought to 
buy at 10,000 rupees less than Tavernier demanded. 
Subsequently, it was bought by Shaistd Khin, who 
was then in Dacca, but with him too it became the 
subject of a serious dispute. 

Tavernier remained two months at Jahdnabid, and 
on the 1st of November, when he went to take leave, 
Aurangzeb pressed him to remain in order to witness 
his annual festival, which was then close at hand, 
promising him, if he would do so, that he would allow 
him to see all his jewels after it was over. So tempt- 
ing an offer was at once accepted by Tavernier, and to 
this we owe some of the most interesting chapters in 
the whole of his travels. 

The fite having concluded on the 9th of Novem- 
ber, he was on the following day shown the jewels, 
including the great Mogul diamond. Shortly after- 
wards he left for Agra, and on the 25th (not the 15th, 
as an obvious though frequently repeated misprint has 
it in various editions) he started for Bengal, being 
accompanied by the celebrated French physician 
named Bernier and another friend named Rachepot. 
They reached Allahabad on the 7th of December, 
where they found Claude Mailld of Bourges installed 
as physician and surgeon to the Governor, but no bint 



XXVlll 


INTRODUCTION 


is given as to whether he was the same person or not 
whom Tavernier mentions under the same name in 
the capacity of gun -founder at Gandikot for Mir Jumld. 
Having obtained permission to cross the Ganges, they 
followed its left bank and arrived at Benares on the 
iith, where they remained for two days, and then pro- 
ceeded along the right bank to Patna, which they 
reached on the 20th. It is clear that on this occasion 
Tavernier did not turn down the valley of the Sone to 
Rohtas and the diamond mine at Soumelpur, and it is 
uncertain whether he ever went there ; but he may 
have done so on his return and prolonged stay at 
Patna, or during his first journey to Dacca in 1640. 
After eight days spent at Patna he embarked on the 
29th December (not January, as by an obvious mis- 
print it is given in several of the editions), and passed 
down the Ganges, reaching Rajmahdl on the 4th of 
January 1666. On the 6th M. Bernier left him to go 
to Kasimbdzar, while he proceeded to Dacca, which 
he reached on the 13th, and on the following day went 
to visit the Nawdb, Shaistd Khdn, to whom he made a 
valuable present. After selling him the goods which 
he had brought for him, and having received an order 
for payment on Kisimbdzdr, he started for that place 
on the 29th, and reached it on the 12 th of February, 
being well received by Van Wachtendonk, the Direc- 
tor of all the Dutch factories in Bengal. On present- 
ing his order for payment to the Mogul’s Treasurer, 
he was informed by him that three days previously 
he had received an order not to pay it. Subse- 
quently this Treasurer, acting under Shdisti Khan’s 
instructions, offered to pay him the debt, less by 20,000 
rupees. Tavernier enlarges on the causes which led 




INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


to this treatment, attributing it to the machinations of 
Aurangzeb’s officers to spite him for not having sold 
the jewels to them, in order that they might resell them 
to their master at an enhanced rate. There is no 
direct record of his subsequent movements, but he 
appears to have spent June and July in Patna, where, 
on the second day of the last-named month, he wit- 
nessed an eclipse of the sun. In August he probably 
reached Agra, where he seems to have met the repre- 
sentatives of the French company “for establishing 
commerce in Persia and India.” He ultimately 
reached Surat on the ist of November, and met 
there M. Thevenot, who was returning from Madras 
and Golconda, and of whose travels the published 
account serves to elucidate some points in Tavernier’s 
narratives. Early in the year 1667 Tavernier left 
Surat — probably, as ingeniously calculated by M. 
Joret, in the month of February — for Bandar Abbas, 
where he met, among other Europeans, the famous 
traveller Chardin. At Ispahan he remained for some 
months, probably till the end of 1667. In the early 
part of the year 1668 he reached Constantinople, and 
made a prolonged stay there, finally reaching Paris on 
the 6th of December ; and being then sixty-three years 
old, he resolved to enjoy the riches he had acquired 
and rest from his labours. His first care, he tells us, 
was to render thanks to God, who had protected him 
through all perils by sea and land during the space of 
forty years. His life after this period for sixteen 
years cannot be followed out in detail here from want 
of space. Those who desire details are referred to M. 
Joret’s excellent volume. It is only possible to mention 
here a few of the principal events. 



XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


Soon after his arrival in France he had an inter- 
view with Louis XIV, who was anxious to see so 
famous a traveller ; and the distinguished traveller 
did not forget his business as a merchant, for he 
sold the King a large number of diamonds and other 
precious stones, and in February 1669, in consideration 
of his eminent services to France, he was granted 
letters, which conferred upon him a title of nobility ; 
this was the full complement of his success. In 
April 1670 he purchased the barony of Aubonne, near 
Geneva, and in the following month he took the 
oaths, and was received by their Excellencies of Berne 
as “Seigneur Baron d’ Aubonne.” He restored the 
Castle, and orientalised its decorations, and it was here 
he prepared his notes for publication. It is commonly 
said that the Voyages were written from Tavernier’s 
dictation by a French Protestant named Samuel Chap- 
puzeau, but it is evident from many remarks scattered 
through the volumes, and, indeed, is sufficiently proved 
from the nature of the facts recorded, that many 
pages must have been written at or shortly after the 
time when the events took place, and by Tavernier 
himself. Chappuzeau, who had obtained considerable 
reputation as an historian and writer of theatrical plays, 
was prevailed on to edit Tavernier’s notes, or, as he 
afterwards described it, to give form to the chaos, as 
the confused memoirs of the six voyages might be 
called. The statement attributed to Chappuzeau by 
Bayle, that the only written portions were by Father 
Gabriel, Capuchin, seems to be somewhat inconsistent 
with this. Chappuzeau states that it was with the 
greatest repugnance he undertook the work, and then 
only in consequence of Tavernier’s having used his 



INTRODUCTION 


SXXl 


interest to get the King to prevail upon him to do so. 
His friendship for Tavernier was completely broken 
under the “mortification if not martyrdom ” which he 
suffered, as he says, for the space of a year, while 
exposed to the rough humour of Tavernier and the 
ridicule of his wife. I agree completely with M. 
Joret in the opinion that the internal evidence is too 
strong to admit of the supposition that Tavernier was 
not personally the author of the larger part of the 
memoirs, and that from their very nature they could 
not have been written from mere verbal dictation. 
Chappuzeau doubtless edited them, and did his work 
very badly, as the numerous omissions and contra- 
dictions prove. 

In the year 1675 Tavernier’s first publication 
appeared under the title, “Nouvelle Relation du Serrail 
du Grand Signior” His magnum opus, the Six 
Voyages, appeared in the following year ; ^ and the 
“ Design of the Author ” which is prefixed conveys 
the idea that the whole was his own handiwork. The 
interest aroused in these works was considerable, and 
the number of editions which appeared in rapid succes- 
sion (see Bibliography) amply attest the popularity of 
the work. In 1679 he published another volume, the 
Recueil de plusieurs Relations. In the preparation of 
this work he received the assistance of M. de la 
Chapelle, Secretary to M. de Lamoignon, M. Chap- 
puzeau having refused to aid him further ; but to what 
extent this assistance went it is impossible to say. 
This latter volume contains two portraits of Tavernier, 
one a bust, which is a work of high art, and is here 
reproduced, as also are the dedicatory verses by 

1 Paris, Gervais Clouzier, 1676, 2 vols. 4to. 



xxxii 


INTRODUCTION 


Boileau printed underneath it. The other is a full 
figure representing Tavernier in the robe of honour 
given him by the Shdh of Persia, to which reference 
has already been made on a previous page. Transla- 
tions of these works soon appeared in English, German, 
and Italian, as will be seen in the Bibliography. 

Some who were jealous of Tavernier’s success 
did not hesitate to contrast his works with those of 
Thevenot, Bernier, and Chardin — who were perhaps 
better educated men and of a more philosophical turn 
of mind than he was,' but it cannot be maintained that 
their works met with equal success ; and it is apparent 
that the reading public preferred his facts and personal 
observations to the philosophic speculations which were 
added to the facts recorded by his rivals. Voltaire 
and others, though they wrote somewhat contemptu- 
ously of the value of Tavernier’s work, did not "influ- 
ence the tide of opinion which had set strongly in his 
favour. 

It is noteworthy, however, that Tavernier, in his 
references to the above-named travellers, speaks of 
them all with the utmost courtesy, when referring 
to his having met them, while they are either silent 
about him, or, like Chardin, mention him only to 
abuse him. 

In the footnotes to the present work it will be seen 
that while obscurity and contradiction are not absent 
from the text, and the effects of ' careless editing of the 
original are much to be deplored, the general accuracy of 
the recorded facts, when submitted to critical examina- 
tion in the light of our modern knowledge of India, is 
much greater than it was ever believed to be, even by 
his greatest admirers, who supposed them to be beyond 



INTRODUCTION 


xxxiii 


the reach of elucidation or confirmation. Gemelli 
Careri^ speaks of Tavernier as a dupe rather than a 
liar ; but as I have met with no indications of either 
of these characteristics, I have not troubled to follow 
up his charges of error, as they refer chiefly to Persia, 
and M. Joret affirms that they have for the most part 
no foundation. 

In a certain sense, to a limited degree, Tavernier 
may have been a plagiarist, but he openly avowed his 
endeavours to obtain information wherever he could. 
His historical chapters, for instance, may have been 
derived from Bernier’s writings, or, what is more prob- 
able, from conversations with him when they travelled 
together down the Ganges ; while the chapters on 
places he had not himself visited were, of course, 
founded on information collected from various sources, 
but principally from persons who gave him their own 
personal experiences of the countries. Thus, probably, 
is to be explained the resemblance noted by Dr. Hyde^ 
between a passage by Tavernier and one by Louis 
Morera in a work published at Lyons in 1671, which 
was founded on papers by Father Gabriel de Chinon. 
We know that Tavernier saw much of Father Gabriel 
in Persia, and he may have learned the facts from him 
if he did not himself observe them. 

M. Joret gives an interesting account of the 
controversies and polemical literature which were 
roused in the seventeenth century by the publica- 
' tion of Tavernier’s volumes ; and in discussing the 
published biographies of Tavernier he points out that 

1 Voyage AtUour du Monde, translated from the Italian. Paris, 
1727. i2mo. 

2 See Rose’s Biogra;phical Dictionary, Art. Tavernier.” 

VOL. I C 



XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


they are all founded on the erroneous and amplified 
statements of Henrick van Quellenburgh/ Jurieau,^ 
Chappuzeau,® Bayle, and others. M. Joret asserts that 
the article on Tavernier in theEngliskCyclopcBdia, alone, 
of all the biographies, does full justice to his character. 

During the period which elapsed from the publica- 
tion in 1679 of his last volume up to 1684, there is 
reason for believing that Tavernier lived an active, 
commercial, though somewhat retired life. In 1684 
he started from Paris for Berlin, being called thither 
by Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, to 
advise with him on his projects of colonisation and 
commercial enterprise in the East, and to undertake to 
open up negotiations on his behalf with the Great 
Mogul. M. Joret maintains that there is no foundation 
for the view that Tavernier had been ruined at this 
time by the misconduct of his nephew, to whom he en- 
trusted a valuable cargo for the East. On the contrary, 
he went to Berlin, en veritable grand seigneur, at the age 
of seventy-nine years, attracted by the offer of becom- 
ing the Elector’s ambassador to India, being still full of 
bodily energy and possessing an enterprising spirit. M. 
Joret, by means of an unpublished manuscript, has been 
enabled to trace his circuitous journey through the 
principal countries of Europe. Many interviews took 
place with the Elector, at which the arrangements for 
the Embassy and the formation of the trading company 
were discussed. Three armed vessels were to convey 

1 Vindida Batavica ofte Refutatie van het Tractact van J. B. 
Tavernier, etc. Amsterdam, 1684. 4to. 

® BBsprit de M, Arnaud tiri de sa conduite et des Merits de lui et 
de ses disdples,^\s.. Deventer, 1684. i2mo. 

® Defense du Sr. Samuel Chappuzeau contre un satire mtitulie V Esprit 
de M. Amaud. 



INTRODUCTION 


XXXV 


it, and Tavernier, besides being nominated Ambas- 
sador, was appointed to the honorary offices of Cham- 
berlain to the Elector and Counsellor of Marine. Soon 
afterwards he resolved to sell his estate at Aubonne, 
probably to obtain capital for his own speculations. 

After six weeks spent in Berlin, he left on the 1 5th 
of August for Hamburg, and then paid a number of 
visits to different towns in Germany, Holland, etc., 
finally returning to Aubonne in November. In January 
1685 he was again in Paris, when he sold the land and 
barony of Aubonne to the Marquis Henri du Quesne 
for 138,000 livres of French money, with 3000 livres 
more for the horses and carriages, the actual transfer 
being made by his wife Madeline Goisse, as he himself 
was at the time still in Paris. This sale completed, he 
would have been free to go to Brandenburg, but was 
delayed, as M. Joret suggests, in order to realise the 
46,000 4 cus provided for in the letters patent constitut- 
ing the Company, and which were to cover the costs of 
equipment of the vessels required for the first voyage. 
The prejudice which existed against Protestants before 
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes accounts for some 
of the difficulties he experienced in settling his affairs. 
M. Joret is disposed to treat as unfounded the story that 
Tavernier was at this time imprisoned in the Bastille as 
one of those who suffered from the oppression practised 
on the Protestants. It is proved, however, by the 
manuscript archives of the Bastille, which M. Joret 
quotes, that some one of the name of Tavernier was 
incarcerated there on the 13th of January 1686. If he 
was not there he was probably somewhere in Paris, 
for by that time the projected company of the Elector 
had come to naught, and Tavernier’s home at Aubonne 



XXXVl 


INTRODUCTION 


in Switzerland had been sold. At upwards of eighty 
years of age his commercial instincts had led him to 
intrust a valuable cargo for India, worth 222,000 francs, 
to his nephew, Pierre Tavernier, son of the goldsmith 
of Uzes, who we have seen was left by him at Tabriz 
in the year 1664 in the charge of the Superior of the 
Capuchin Convent in order to learn the Persian language. 
It is commonly said that this nephew settled in Persia 
and defrauded him of his profits, which should have 
amounted to a million of livres. On the 9th of July 
1687 we hear of Tavernier again, as obtaining a passport 
to Switzerland for three or four months, subject to a bail 
of 30,000 livres. At this time he set out on his seventh 
journey to the East in order to recover his losses, as it 
is believed by some ; but be this as it may, to M. Joret 
belongs the honour of having effectively followed up 
the question as to where the famous traveller ended 
his days. Traces of his having been in Copenhagen in 
1689 (or more probably in 1688) were discovered by 
Prof. Steenstrup, to whom inquiries were addressed 
by M. Joret. In the Russian review, “ Ze Biblio- 
graphies' for the month of February 1885, M. T. 
Tokmakof has described how, in the year 1876, when 
visiting an old Protestant cemetery near Moscow, he 
discovered the tomb of Tavernier, as M. Guerrier 
described it in a letter to M. Joret, with the name still 
preserved in full, and a fragment of the obliterated date, 
16 — . Moreover, M. Tokmakof discovered documents 
proving that Tavernier, carrying with him the passport 
of the King of Sweden, arrived in Russia early in 
February 1689, and that instructions were sent to the 
frontier to facilitate the journey of the illustrious visitor 
to Moscow. 



INTRODUCTION 


XXXVll 


M. Joret concludes with a well merited panegyric 
on the subject of his biography — the merchant-travel- 
ler whose reputation no French writer has previously 
attempted to protect from hostile critics, although 
the anonymous writer of the article in the English 
Cyclop(sdict has written in strong terms of his peculiar 
and unrivalled merits. 

To the testimony thus given, and to that which is 
afforded by the popularity of Tavernier’s works in 
the last century, the present writer confidently expects 
that readers of the following pages will accord a liberal 
and hearty confirmation. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


As I cannot find in any of the Bibliographical Dictionaries an ex- 
haustive treatment of the numerous editions of Tavernier’s works, I 
have felt it necessary to go into fuller detail here than would have 
otherwise been advisable, owing to the amount of space required 
for proving the distinction between various issues, which can only 
be done by quoting titles. Such an analysis as that given below 
should prove of use, as I have had occasion to observe that copies 
have sometimes been incorrectly bound up, Tavernier’s works being 
in consequence not readily distinguishable from those of other 
authors with which they have been mingled. 

Primarily this list is based upon one by Professor Joret,^ but, 
as will be seen on comparison, his catalogue has been much 
modified and amplified, the number of editions and translations 
being raised from twenty-six to thirty-eight. 

‘ My work having been done in Dublin, I have been interested 
to find what a number of the editions of Tavernier’s volumes there 
are in the libraries of that city. In one which is seldom resorted 
to, namely that of Archbishop Marsh, there are six, though the 
library has been generally supposed to contain only ecclesiastical 
literature. 

My thanks are due to the Bishop of Down and Connor for in- 
formation regarding the copies in Armagh Library, and to the 
.Librarians of the Bodleian and University College libraries for in- 
formation about editions mentioned in their catalogues regarding 
which there were some statements which did not agree with other 
information available to me. 


^ Jean Baptiste Tavernier^ Paris, Plon, 1886. 



xl 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


I 

The French Editions of the “ Voyages ” and “ Relations ” 

OF Tavernier. 

French. 

T. 1675. — Nouvelle | Relation | De IHnterieur | Du Serrail | du | 
grafid Seigneur | contenant plusieurs singularitez | qui jusqiiici 
7 tont pas esfe mises en Imniere | Far J. B, Tavernier ecuyer 
Baron | dAubonne | A Paris | chez Olivier de Va7'ennes | 
:mdclxxv 1 4to. 

There is a copy of this in Marsh’s Library, Dublin. 

2 . 1676. — LesSix [ Voyages | de Jean Baptiste [ Taverfiier, | Ecuyer 

Baron D'Aubonne^ | QiHl A Fait | en Turquie^ en Fei^se^ | Et 
Aux Indes^ | Pendant Vespace de quarante a7i$, 6^ par toutes les 
[ routes que V on peut tenir : accoTfipagnez dobser- | vatio7is par- 
ticulieres sur la qualife^ la religion^ \ le gouvern77ie7it^ les coMumes 
6^ le C077i7nerce | de chaque pais ; avec les figU7'es^ le poids, 6^ 
la I valeur des 7nonnoyes qui y ont cours | Pre7nier Partie | Ou 
il fiest parVe que de la Turquie^ 6^ de la Pei'se | Volume II 
has the same general title, save for the last two lines, which 
run Seconde Partie | Ou il est parlt des Bides, 6 ^ des Isles voisines 
] — A Paris, | Chez Gervais Clouzier 6rc, | et | Claude Barbin, 

I au Palais mdclxxvi. 2 vols. 4to. 

It is from this, the best edition, that the present translation 
has been made. For the most part the misprints which it 
contains are repeated in the subsequent editions. 

3 . 1677. — A reprint of the above, but the pages are, I think, smaller. 

I have seen two copies. 

4. 1678. — Nouvelle relatmi deVinterieur du serrail du Gra 7 id Seigiieur, 

etc. Amsterdam. J. Van Someren. i 2 mo. (Brunet and 
M. Joret.) 

5 . 1678. — LesSix | Voyages [ de \ Jean Baptiste Taver 7 iier | Ecuyer 

baron dAubo7ine | en Turquie, en Pei'se | et aux Bides, etc. 
[Suivant la copie \ Imprimk | a Paris \ Ainsterda 7 n. on the 
engraved title] chez Johannes Van Sofnere 7 i Van 1678 . 2 vols. 

i 2 mo. 

I have seen two copies of Vol. I and one of Vol. II of this 
edition. The page and type are smaller than in No. 9 below. 
There are copies in Marsh’s and University College (London) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


xli 


Libraries, and I am informed by the Librarian of the latter 
that it is incorrectly described in the catalogue as i8mo. 
Brunet says the edition is rare, but neither fine nor complete. 

6. 1679 . — Reprint of No. 2 (according to Brunet). 

7. 1679 . — Recueil | de Flusieurs | Relations | et | Traitez singuliers 

et curieux | De | J, B, Tavernier | Escuyer Baro 7 i d*Auhonne | 
Qid dont point este mis dans ses six premiers Voyages | Divise 
en cinq Parties^ etc. A Paris chez Gervaise Clouzier 
MDCLXXIX, 4to. 

Contains two fine portraits of Tavernier. It makes a uniform 
third volume to No. 2. Facsimiles of these portraits are given 
in the present edition. 

8. 1681 . — A reprint of No. 7 (according to Brunet). 

9. 1679 (I and II), 1681 (III). — Les Six Voyages, etc. Same title 
as No. 5. Suivant la copie imprbnke a Paris. Engraved title in 
some copies as in No. 5, therefore probably by Van Someren 
of Amsterdam. 3 vols. in i2mo. Vols. I and II are in 
Trinity College Library, Dublin, and I have Vols. II and III, 
but they contain no indication of printer, publisher, nor place 
of publication. Brundt says there were two issues of Vols. 

1 and II, and I find that the two above-mentioned copies of 
Vol. II vary slightly in the ornament on the title. Vol. I 
contains the Persian Travels, Vol. II the Indian Travels, and 
Vol. Ill the Recueil and Seraglio. 

10. 1692 . — Reprint of No. 9. 3 vols. i2mo. 

Ti. 1702 and 1703 . — This edition is mentioned in the references 
below. I know no more about it. Probably it was a small 8vo. 

12. 1712 . — Les Six Voyages de J B. Tavernier, etc. Utrecht. 

2 vols. i2mo. 

Recueil de plusieurs relations et traitez, etc. Utrecht 1702 
(should be 171^ ?). i vol. i2mo. 

There is possibly a mistake in describing these two last as 
being 1 2mo, for I am informed that the Bodleian contains an 
edition as follows : — Les six Voyages, etc. Part I. Utrecht, 
1712. Small 8 VO. Leaves only 6|- in. high, with engraved 
title 1702. Do. do. Part II, Suivant la copie imp. a Paris, 
1703. Small 8 VO, as Part I. Part (Vol.) Ill, Recueil de plu- 
sieurs . . . avec la relation de Vinterieur du serail suivant la 
copie imp. a Paris, 1702. Small 8vo. 



xlii 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


13. 1713 . — Les Six Voyages de J, B. Tavernier^ etc. Nouvelle ed, 
Paris. Ribou. 5 vols. lamo. 

Brunet says it is badly printed. 

14. 1713 . — Les Six Voyages de J B, Tavernier^ etc. Rouen, Machuel 

(according to Joret). 6 vols. 12 mo. 

15. 1713 . — An edition similar to the last, but differs in having the 
name Eustache Herault on the title page. There is a copy 
in the India OfSce Library. 

16. 1715 . — Les Six Voyages, etc. La Haye. 3 vols. i2mo. 

This is on the authority of M. Joret. Perhaps identical 
with next. 

17. 1718 . — Les Six Voyages, etc. La Haye, H. Schwendler. 3 
vols. (in 6 parts). Small 8vo ; pages barely exceeding 6 inches. 
Utrecht 1702 on engraved title. There is a copy in the 
Bodleian. 

18. 1718 . — Les Six Voyages, etc, Amsterdam (Rouen). 3 vols (in 
6 parts). i2mo (according to M. Joret). 

19. 1724 . — Les Six Voyages, ttc, Rouen, Machuel le Pbre. 6 vols. 
1 2 mo (according to M. Joret). 

20. 1724 .— Z«r Six Voyages, etc. Rouen, Machuel le Jeune. 6 
vols. 12 mo (according to M. Joret). 

The Bodleian contains two vols. of one of the two last edi- 
tions or separate issues. They are described as follows :—Zes 
Six Voyages, etc., Nouv. Ed. Tome I. Rouen, 1724. lamo 
(leaves 6 J in. long) . . . Suiie des Voyages, etc., Nouv. Ed. Tome 
II. Rouen, 1724. Tome I has the engraved title, dated 1712. 

21. 1755 . Considerable extracts from Tavernier’s travels are given 
in the Bistoire Generale des Voyages, by M. I’Abbe Prdvost, 
which was republished with additional notes in Holland (La 
Haye) in 1755. Most of these extracts are included in Vol. 
XIII of the latter edition. 

22. 1810. Les SIX Voyages de J B. Tavernier, &^c. Edition entilre- 

mentrefondu corrigk accompagnk d eclair cissements, historiques 
et critiques etc.fiarj. B. J. Breton, Paris, Veuve Letetit 7 vols 
i8mo. 

I regret not having had an opportunity of seeing a copy of 

this edition, which may contain some useful critical infor- 
mation. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


xliii 


23. 1882 . — Zes six Voyages de J B. Tavernier en Perse ef dans les 
Indes pendant quarante annes. Et par toutes les routes que Von 
peid tenir^ Racontes par lui meme^ Reduits et arinotes par Maxhne 
Petit Dreyfus, Paris. 12 mo. 

This edition is in a popular and abridged form ; it contains 
no critical information of importance. 

II 

Translations of Tavernier’s Travels into 
Different Languages. 

A. — English. 

1. 1677 . — A New | Relation | of\ the Inner Part \ of the \ Grand 
Seignors | Seraglio | containing | Seim^al Remarkable Particu- 
lars never before ex | pos d to publick View | by f B. Tavernier 
Baron of Aubonne | London | Printed and Sold by R(pbert) 
Lipttlebury) and Moses Pitt | 1677 | 

2. 1677 . — The Six | Voyages | of \ John Baptiste Tavernier Baron 
of Aubonne | through | Turky into Persia | and the | East 
Indies | for the Space of Forty Years [ giving an | Account of the 
Present State of those countries^ viz, of the Religion^ Government 

1 Customs and Commerce of every country; and | the figures weight 
and value of the money | currant all <yver Asia | To which is 
added \ The Description of the Seraglio | made English by \f{phn) 
PQiillips) I Added likewise | A voyage into the Indies &^c. By 
an English Traveller never before printed | London j Published 
by Dr, Daniel Cox | London | Printed by William Goodbidfor 
Robert Littlebury at the Kinfs Arms in Little Britain 6^ Moses 
Pitt at the Angel in St PauVs Churchyard 1677. i vol. fol. 

There is a copy of this in Marsh’s Library, Dublin. 

3. 1678 .— This edition differs from the preceding in the title and 
date having after the word London — Printed and sold by 
Robert Littlebury at the King's Arms in Little Britain and 
Moses Pit^ at the Angel in St PauVs Church Yard 1678. 
I vol. fol. 

There is a copy of this edition in the India Office Library. 

1 The J is printed like an F, and is sometimes erroneously quoted as such 
(see Professor Joret’s list). I can find no confirmation of the existence of an 
edition by Phillips dated 1676, which is given by Professor Joret. 

2 M. P., or Moses Pitt, was not particular as to the spelling of his name, as 
we have Pitt, Pit, and Pytt. 



xliv 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Both titles contain a blunder about the “ Voyage into the 
Indies by an English Traveller,” as the paper referred to, itself 
bears the title a “ Description of all the Kingdoms which en- 
compass the Euxine and Caspian seas,” and contains no men- 
tion of India ; it is signed ‘ Astrachan,’ and the writer says he 
was an Irishman. It is dated 1677 on its own title. 

4. 1678 . — The Six [ Voyages | of | John Baptista | Tavernier | A 
nolle 77 ian of France now living | through | Turky into Persia | 
afid the j East- Indies | Finished m the year 1670 | Giving 
etc. etc. I vol. Fol. 

The blunder just referred to is corrected in this title, and 
there is some variation in the names of the printers, etc. 

Both the last editions contain a letter to Sir Thomas Davies, 
Lord Mayor of London, and in the last there is also a dedica- 
tion by J. Phillips to Dr. Daniel Cox. There are two copies of 
this edition in Trinity College Library, Dublin. 

5. 1680 . — A I Collection | of Several | Relatmis and Treatises | 
singular and cmious | of | John Baptista Tavernier | Baron of 
Auhonne | not printed among his first six voyages^ | etc. etc. 
Published by Ed^nund Everard Esq, | Bnp, etc. | Lo7tdo7i [ 
Printed by A. Goodbid, and J. Playford for Moses Pitt at the 

I Angel in St. PatTs Chu7'chya7‘d. 1680. Folio. 

This contains a dedication to Sir Robert Clayton, Lord 
Mayor elect, and it consists of five parts. 

There are copies in Trinity College, Dublin (2), the Bod- 
leian, Marsh’s, and the Armagh Libraries. 

6 . 1684 . — CollectioTU | of\ Travels [ Through | Turkey into Persia 

the East Indies | Givitig a7i account of the | Present State of 
these cou7itries ] as also | A full relatiofi of the Five years wars be- 
tween I Aurengzebe dr his Brothers, etc. . . . | Being | the Travels 
of Monsieur Taveriiier, Berniez | a7id other great 7 nen, Adorned 
with 7tiany copper Plates [ The First Volume | Loiidon | Printed 
for Moses Pitt at the Angel m St. Pauls Chu 7 xhyard | mdclxxxiv. 

Ihis contains a preface by Edmund Everard, who says that 

In this work was eTnployed the Help of another Worthy Ge 7 itle- 
77ian}- who labour d in the fii'st Voluin of Tavernie'd s T 7 ‘‘anslation y 

^ The worthy gentleman was presumably John Phillips, the translator of the 

previous editions. Whether his character justified this description is doubtful. 

He was a nephew of John Milton, his mother having been Milton’s sister. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


xlv 


hut it was bi'ought to an end 6^ perfection hy me^ who had the 
occasion to he more partmdarly acquainted with MoJisieur 
Taver 7 iier hmiself his Native Tongue^ and other Farticula^dties 
ah7'oadi'‘ 

Vol. II contains the same general title, it includes, together 
with Tavernier’s Relations, etc., the paper on the Euxine, 
etc., referred to above, which is prefixed by a special ‘‘ Publisher 
unto the Reader,” pp. 95-100, but the writer’s name is not 
given : perhaps he was John Phillips or Dr. Cox. The latter 
part of the Volume consists principally of translations of 
Bernier’s books and letters. 

There are copies of this edition in the India Office and 
Marsh’s Libraries, and I possess one which was obtained a few 
years ago from Mr. Quaritch. 

7. 1688 . — An issue of this year has the same general title-page as 
the preceding, and the pagination is identical throughout, but 
the following is different : — The first Pa 7 't [ London Printed for 
M(oses) P{itt) and are to he sold hy Geo 7 ge Monke at the White 
Horse | without Temple Bar a 7 td Williafn Elevey at the Golden 
Lyo 7 i a 7 id La 7 nh | over against the Middle Tefnple Gate 

MDCLXXXVIIT. 

There is a copy of this in the King’s Inns Library, Dublin. 
It contains no dedication. 

8. 1764 . — Harris, in his Voyages and Travels, gives large extracts 
from Tavernier. 

9. 1811 . — Pinkerton {T 7 'avels, Vol. VIII, pp. 235-257), gives 
Tavernier’s Book II, chaps, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii, xix, xx, xxi, 
and Baron’s animadversion on Tavernier’s account of Tonquin 
is in Vol. IX, pp. 656 and 692. 


B. — German. 

1. Tavernier f B. Beschreihung der sechs Reisen in Turkey Persien 

und Indien nehenst der Besch 7 'eihung des Turkischen serails und 
der K7'onu7ig des Kcenigs Soliman in Persie 7 i^ herausgegehen von 
f H Widerhold^ 3 Theile mit Portraits, Karten, und Abbildun- 
gen. Genf. 1681. Folio. 

2. Kurtzer Beg7'iff^ ttc. Genf, J. H. Widerhold. 1681. Folio. 



xlvi 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


3. The Nouv. Biog. GenkraU mentions a German edition of 1684, 

perhaps a mistake for the English Ed. of that year. 

4. John B. Tavernier 'imyl Ritters und Freyherrn vo?i Aubo?ine in der 

Schweiz^ Beobachtungen iiber das Serrail des Grossherrn, Auf 
seiner sechsmaligen Reise nach der Turkey gesammelt. Nebst 
vielen eingestreuten Bemerkungen iiber die Sitten und Ge- 
wohnheiten der Tiirken. Memmingen 1789 bei Andreas 
Seiler. In i2mo. 179 pages, (According to Joret.) 

C. — Dutch. 

I. An edition in Dutch in 1682. 4to. According to Nouv. Biog. 
Generate. 


D. — Italian. 

I. Tavernier J. B. Viaggi nella Ttirchia nella Persia e nell India 
stampati in lingua francese ed ora tradotti da Gioimtni Luetti^ 
Roma 1682. 2 vols. in 4to. 



LES SIX 

VOYAGES 

DE JEAN BAPTISTE 

TAVERNIER. 

ECUYER BARON D AUBONNE. 

QJJ'IL A FAIT 

EN TURQUIE, EN PERSE, 

ET AUX INDES. 

Pendant I’efpace de quarante ans , par toutes le? 
routes que Ton peut tenir : accompagnez d’obfer, 
vations particulicres fur la qualite , la religion , 
le gouverncment .. les coutumes Sc le commerce 
de chaque pais 5 avec les figures, le poids, &:'ia 
valeur des monnoyes qui y out cours. 

SECONDE PAKTIE, 

Oii il efi parle des Indes, ^ des IJles 'uoijines. 


A PARIS, 

'Gervais CLouziERjlurles degrezy 
en montant pour aller a la S" Chapelle, 
a I’Enfeigne du Voyageur. 

Chcz<; 

I Claude BARBiN,fiir le fecond Perron [ 
I de la fainte Chapelle. J 

■ M. D. 0. LXXVI. 

j4FEC privilege BV ROY. 


au 
f’Palais 




DEDICATION 


TO THE KING 


SIRE— 

The zeal which I have for the service of your Majesty, and 
for the honour of France, does not permit me to enjoy the repose 
which I believed had come to me after such prolonged labours. 
My age not permitting me to undertake new voyages, I have experi- 
enced a kind of shame at finding myself of no use to my countr}’^, 
and at not acquitting myself of all which it expects from me. I 
have thought it to be my duty to it to render an account of my 
observations upon that which I have seen, and have not been 
able to excuse myself from making public. I hope. Sire, 
that these exact and faithful accounts which I have written, since 
my return, from the notes which I have collected, will not be less 
useful to my country than the valuable articles of merchandise which 
I have brought back from my travels. For my object in this work 
is not merely to assuage public curiosity. I have proposed for 
myself a more noble and more elevated aim in all my deeds. As the 
hope of legitimate gain alone has not made me traverse these regions, 
so the sole desire of placing my name in this book has not caused 
me to-day to have it printed. In all the countries which I have 
traversed, my strongest desire has always been to make known the 
heroic qualities of Your Majesty, and the wonders of your reign, 
and to show how your subjects excel by their industry and by their 
courage all other nations of the earth. I venture to say to Your 
Majesty that I have done so with more boldness, and even more- 
success, than those who had a title and an authority to speak. My 
method of action, hostile to deception, and possibly somewhat too free, 
has exposed me to many risks among the nations jealous of our 
prosperity, who defame us as far as they can in order to exclude us 
from trade. I have often risked both my fortune and my life by 
VOL. I d 



1 


DEDICATION TO THE KING 


exalting Your Majesty by my words above all the monarchs of Europe 
and these Kings of the East — even in their very presence. I have 
emerged with honour from all these dangers by impressing a respect 
for your name in the hearts of these barbarians. Under the shadow 
of this august name, respected throughout the world, I have travelled 
more than 60,000 leagues by land in perfect safety. I have six 
times traversed Turkey, Persia, and the better part of India, and 
was the first to attempt to go to the famous diamond mines. Too 
happy to have brought precious stones which Your Majesty has 
condescended to join to the jewels of your throne, but still more 
happy to have made observations in all these places, to which Your 
Majesty will possibly not deem it unworthy to devote some moments, 
as you will find there many details of three of the most powerful 
Empires of Asia. You will see the manners and customs of the 
people dwelling there at present. I have interposed in certain 
places stories, which may relieve the mind after a tedious march 
of caravans, imitating in that the Orientals, who establish caravan- 
sardis at intervals in their deserts for the relief of travellers. I am 
principally devoted to the description of the territories of Turkey, 
Persia, and the Mogul, in order to point out on the five different 
routes which one may take to go to them certain common errors with 
reference to the positions of the places. Although these accounts 
may be wanting in grace and in politeness of language, I hope that 
the diversity of the curious and important matters which they con- 
tain, and more particularly the veracity which I have scrupulously 
observed, will nevertheless cause them to be read, and possibly to 
be esteemed. I shall consider myself well repaid for my work if 
it has the good fortune to please Your Majesty, and if you accept 
this evidence of profound respect. 

With which I am. 

Sire, 

Your Majesty's 

Very humble, very obedient, and very faithful 
Servant and Subject, 


J. B. TAVERNIER. 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR' 

Wherein he gives a brief accoimt of his first travels in the fairest farts 
of Europe uf to Constantinople. 

If the first education is, as it were, a second birth, I am able to say 
that I came into the world with a desire to travel. The interviews 
which many learned men had daily with my father upon geographical 
matters, which he had the reputation of understanding well, and to 
which, young as I was, I listened with pleasure, inspired me at an 
early age with the desire to go to see some of the countries shown 
to me in the maps, which I could not then tire of gazing at. 

At the age of twenty-two years I had seen the best parts of 
Europe, France, England, Holland, Germany, Switzerland, Poland, 
Hungary, and Italy, and I spoke fairly the languages which are the 
most necessary, and which have the greatest currency. 

My first sortie from the Kingdom was to go to England, where 
the reigning monarch was James I., Sixth King of Scotland, who 
caused himself to be called King of Great Britain, to satisfy both the 
English and Scotch by a name common to these two nations. From 
England I passed into Flanders, to see Antwerp, my father's native 
land. From Flanders I continued my journey to the United 
Provinces, where my inclination to travel increased on account of 
the concourse of so many strangers, who came to Amsterdam from 
all parts of the world. 

After having seen all that was most important throughout the 
Seventeen Provinces, I entered Germany, and having arrived at 
Nuremburg by Frankfort and Augsburg, the noise of the armies 
which were marching to Bohemia to retake Prague made me desire 
to go to the seat of war, and acquire something of the art, which 
would be of service to me in the course of my travels. I was but 


^ From Vol. I, Persian Travels. Paris 1676. 




lii 


DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


one day’s distance from Nuremburg when I met a colonel of cavalry, 
named Hans Brener, son of Philip Brener, Governor of Vienna, who 
engaged me to follow him into Bohemia, being glad to have a young 
Frenchman with him. My intention is not to speak here of what 
happened at the battle of Prague ; the discourse would be long, and 
the history of this century speaks sufficiently of it. Some years after- 
wards I followed this colonel to Vienna. He presented me to the 
Governor of Raab, his uncle, to whom belonged the title of Viceroy 
of Hungary. This Governor received me into his house to be one 
of his pages. It is usual to serve in this position in Germany up to 
the age of twenty-five years, and one never quits the service without 
being prepared to carry arms, and without obtaining a Cornetcy 
or an Ensign’s Commission. I had been four and a half years 
with the Viceroy when the Prince of Mantua arrived at Vienna to 
urge the Emperor to the designs which the Duke his father desired, 
but he was unable to accomplish anything; and even the negotia- 
tion of M. de Sabran, Ambassador of the King to his Imperial 
Majesty, for the arrangement of the investiture which was the sub- 
ject of his mission, was also fruitless. During the years I spent in 
Hungary I had time to learn something of war, having been with 
the master whom I served on many noteworthy occasions. But I 
shall say nothing of the affairs which we had with the Turks, because 
so many have treated of the subject, and because they have nothing 
to do with the subject of my travels. The Viceroy had espoused, 
on his second marriage, a sister of Count d’Arc, Prime Minister of 
State of the Duke of Mantua, and Envoy at Vienna with the Prince 
his son, and this Count was a relative of the Empress, who was of the 
House of Gonzague. The Count having come to see the Viceroy, I 
was ordered to attend on him during his sojourn at Javarin, and 
when about to depart he told the Viceroy that the Prince of Mantua 
having no one with him who knew the language, he would please 
him by permitting me to attend on him while he remained at the 
Emperor’s court. The thing was readily granted to the Count d’Arc, 
who took me to Vienna, and as I had the good fortune to be not 
unpleasing to the Prince, he assured me on his departure that he 
would be much pleased to see me at Mantua, where, as he believed 
the war would end satisfactorily, he would remember the service 
which I had done him. This was sufficient to arouse in me straight- 
way a desire to pass into Italy, and continue the travels which I 
meditated. 

I sought to obtain the Viceroy’s approval of my design, who at 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


liii 


first consented with reluctance, but at length, pleased with my ser- 
vice, granted me permission with a good grace, and presented me, 
according to custom, with a sword, a horse, and a pair of pistols, add- 
ing to them a very handsome gift of a purse full of ducats. M. de 
Sabran then left for Venice, and as he wished to have in his company 
a Frenchman who knew how to speak German, I availed myself of 
the opportunity, and we reached Venice in eight days. M. le Comte 
d’Avaux was then Ambassador of France to the Most Serene Re- 
public, and he gave a grand reception to M. de Sabran, who visited 
him by order of the King. As the Venetians had no less an interest 
in the war of Mantua than the House of Gonzague, the Republic 
received M. de Sabran very well, and presented him with eight 
great basins of confections, upon one of which there was a heav}’ 
golden chain, which he placed on his neck for a moment, and then 
in his pocket. M. le Due de Rohan was then in Venice with his 
family, and two of these basins having been distributed to those 
present in the hall, M. de Sabran directed me to convey the six 
others, on his account, to Mademoiselle de Rohan, who received 
them with a very good grace. During some days which 'we remained 
at Venice I studied with pleasure this town, so celebrated and so 
unique among all others in the universe ; and as it has many things 
in common with Amsterdam — the site, the size, the splendour, the 
commerce, and the concourse of strangers — it contributed no less to 
increase the desire which I had of becoming thoroughly acquainted 
with Europe and Asia. 

From Venice I went to Mantua with M. de Sabran, and the 
Prince, who testified his joy at beholding me again, gave me at first 
the choice of an Ensigney or a commissson in the Artillery Regi- 
ment of the Duke his father. I accepted the latter offer, and was 
well pleased to be under the command of M. le Comte de Guiske, 
who was its Captain, and is at present Mareschal de Grammont. 
A long sojourn at Mantua did not agree with the desire which I 
had for travelling, but the Imperial army having laid siege to the 
town, before thinking of my departure I wished to see what would 
be the issue of the war. We at length compelled the Imperialists 
to raise the siege. This they did one Christmas Eve, and on the 
following day some troops were sent out to see if it was not a feint, 
and whether they had entirely withdrawn. 

The siege did not last long, and no considerable action took 
place — nothing which could instruct young soldiers. I shall only 
say that one day eighteen men having been commanded to go to 



liv 


DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


reconnoitre the width and depth of the ditch which the enemy had 
made by cutting a dyke for the defence of a small fort from whence 
he had driven us 3 and eight troopers of our company being of this 
number, I obtained from the Prince, with great trouble, permission 
to be one of these eight, he having had the goodness to say to me 
privately that a heavy fire would have to be faced. In short, of the 
eighteen of us who went out but four returned, and we having gone 
the length of the dyke among the reeds, as soon as we appeared on 
the border of the ditch the enemy fired so furious a discharge that 
they did not give us time to make observations. I selected in the 
magazine a very light cuirass, but of good material. This saved my 
life, having been struck by two bullets, one of which struck the left 
breast and the other below, the iron being indented in both places. 

I suffered some pain from the blow which had struck the breast, and 
when we went to make our report, M. le Comte de Guiske, who 
perceived the good quality of my cuirass, had it decorated, and 
retained it, so that I have not seen it since. 

Some time after I obtained my discharge from the Prince, who 
had promised to give it to me whenever I desired, and he accom- 
panied it with an honourable passport, by reason of which six 
troopers came with me to Venice, where I left them. From Venice 
I went to Loretto, from thence to Rome, and from Rome to 
Naples, from whence, retracing my steps, I spent ten or twelve days 
more at Rome. Afterwards I went to see Florence, Pisa, Leghorn, 
and Genoa, where I embarked for Marseilles. As for the remainder 
of Italy, I have had opportunities of seeing it on other journeys 
which I have made 3 and I say nothing of this beautiful country, 
nor of its fine towns, because there are plenty of people who have 
written about them. 

From Marseilles I came to Paris, where I did not remain long, 
and wishing to see Poland, I entered Germany by Switzerland. After 
having traversed the principal cantons, I descended the Rhine in 
order to reach Brisac and Strasburg, then ascending by the Swabe 
I passed to Ulm and Augsburg to go to Munich. I saw the mag- 
nificent palace of the Dukes of Bavaria, which William V had 
commenced and Maximilian his son accomplished during the heat 
of the wars which troubled the Empire, From thence I went, for 
the second time, to Nuremburg and to Prague, and going from 
Bohemia, I entered Silesia and crossed the Oder to Breslau. From 
Breslau I went to Cracow, one of the largest towns of Europe, or 
rather one composed of three towns, and the ancient abode of the 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


Iv 


Kings of Poland. I then went to Warsaw, on the left bank of the 
Vistula, and saw the tomb of King Sigismund, which was beautiful 
and magnificent 

From Warsaw I returned to Breslau, and took the route to 
Lower Silesia, to visit one of the principal ofiScers of the Emperor’s 
household whom I knew very well. But at two leagues from 
Glogau I was turned from my intention by meeting, and the press- 
ing invitation of, Colonel Butler, a Scotchman, who commanded 
a regiment of cavalry for the Emperor, and who since killed 
Wallenstein on account of the order which he received. His 
wife, who was with him, was fond of the French, and both of them 
having treated me with much kindness, accompanied by some pre- 
sents, to induce me to remain with them, I was unable to resist 
such evidences of kindness. The King of Sweden at that time was 
invading Pomerania, and the army of the Emperor marched towards 
Stettin to prevent his entry. We were not more than four leagues 
off when we heard that the Swedes were in it. This news caused 
great disorders in the Imperial army, of which Tureste-Conte was 
the General, and out of 40,000 men, of which it was composed, he 
disbanded 9000 or 10,000, which compelled the remainder to with- 
draw themselves to Frankfort-on-the-Oder and its environs. 

It was then that I heard that the Emperor was going to Ratis- 
bone with his son, Ferdinand III, in order to have him crowned 
King of the Romans. I had witnessed the crowning of the 
Kings of Hungary and of Bohemia, and being desirous to witness 
this third ceremony, which should be finer than the others, I 
took leave of my Colonel and came quickly to Ratisbone. All 
took place with much magnificence, and many young gentlemen 
showed their skill in the tournaments. In front of the course 
where they tilted the ring there were two platforms. The 
grandest was for the Emperor and the Empress, and all the ladies 
of the Court ; the other resembled a large shop, where were sus- 
pended many jewels of great price. They made parties of seven or 
eight cavaliers, who with a lance touched the object for which they 
wished to run ; and there were some of the jewels worth 10,000 kus 
and more. He who had the good fortune to win had nothing to 
pay, it was the others who had competed with him who had to 
pay the merchant for it. The conqueror received it from the hands 
of the Prince of Ekemberg, First Minister of State of the Emperor, 
and having placed it at the end of his lance went to present it to 
the Empress, who would not receive it ; this allowed him to offer 



Ivi 


DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


it to that one of the ladies of the Court for whom he had the most 
esteem. 

There came then to Ratisbone jewellers from different places, 
and one of them perished unfortunately on his arrival by an adven- 
venture so tragic that all the Court was moved to compassion. He 
was the only son of the richest merchant in Europe, who dwelt at 
Frankfort, and his father had sent him to the coronation to sell 
precious stones. Through fear of his being robbed on the way his 
father sent them by a safe means to a Jew at Ratisbone, who was his 
correspondent, with an order to place them in the hands of his son. 
This young man on his arrival at Ratisbone went to find the Jew, 
who told him that he had received a small box full of precious 
stones, and that he might take possession of them whenever he 
wished. At the same time he invited him to drink, and took him 
to the house of the Dauphin on the quay at Ratisbone, where they 
enjoyed themselves till one o’clock at night, when the Jew, taking the 
young man by a street where there were no shops, and where there 
were no passers, stabbed him in the stomach eight or ten times 
with a knife, and left him lying on the pavement. The miserable 
Jew thought that he would escape by writing to the jeweller in 
Frankfort that he had handed over the small box to his son, and 
'that no one would suspect him of the murder. But by God’s will, 
on the very same evening the crime was discovered, the guilty one 
was in the hands of justice. 

The matter was discovered thus. Immediately after this cruel 
murder a herald of the Emperor, named Jean Marie, passing through 
this obscure street, struck his feet against the body of this young man, 
who still breathed, and fell on top of him. Feeling some moisture on 
his hand, he at first thought that he was a drunken man who had been 
ill and was unable to stand. But on second thoughts it occurred 
to him that it might be a wounded man. He ran for a light to an 
office of the Marshal at the corner of the street. The Marshal and 
his companions took a lantern, and on arriving at the place with the 
herald saw the melancholy spectacle of a young man bathed in his 
own blood, who had but few moments to live. The Marshal would 
not allow them to carry him to his office, in order not to embarrass 
justice, and they found nowhere more suitable for prompt aid than 
the house of the Dauphin, which was not far off. He was at once 
taken there, and as soon as they had washed his face, which was 
covered with blood and dust, the mother and daughter of the house 
at once recognised him as the person who came to drink there with 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


Ivii 


the Jew. He expired a moment afterwards, without having been 
able to speak or to give any sign of consciousness, and it was in this 
way that they discovered the murderer, who was taken in his own 
house the same evening, and straightway confessed his crime. The 
enormity of the deed justified that the guilty one should be con- 
demned to a very severe sentence, and the judgment provided that 
he should be hung to a gallows, head downwards, between two 
large dogs, suspended close to him, so that in their rage they should 
eat out his vitals, and so make him suffer more than one death by 
the protraction of the torment. It is the sentence provided by the 
Imperial law for a Jew who has killed a Christian, and the method 
of this assassination had about it something more horrible than 
ordinary murders. However, the Jews of Ratisbone made such large 
presents to the Empress and to the two Princesses that they ob- 
tained an alteration in the sentence, and the culprit was condemned 
to a shorter execution, but which was not less rigorous. He was 
torn with hot irons in various parts of the body and in different 
quarters of the town, and as the pincers tore out the flesh molten 
lead was poured into the openings, after which he was taken outside 
Ratisbone and broken on the wheel at the place destined for the 
execution. 

The coronation ceremony having been accomplished, I heard that 
the Empress was sending the Sieur Smit as Resident to the Porte of 
the Grand Seigneur. From the information which my friends gave 
me I hoped that he would be gracious enough to allow me to accom- 
pany him. I was unwilling to be a cause of expense to him, and I 
had, in order to make the voyage, a sufficient number of ducats, 
which I had saved while I served under Colonel Butler, who showed 
me much affection. I was about to leave Ratisbone when Father 
Joseph, who was in the service of the King, and who had known 
me at Paris, proposed to me to accompany M. Bachelier, whom his 
Majesty was sending to the Duke of Mantua, or to accompany M. 
FAbbe de Chapes, brother of the late M. le Mareschal d’Aumont, 
and M. de St. Liebau in the voyage which they had designed to 
make to Constantinople and even to Palestine. I liked this latter 
proposition, having no intention to return to Italy, and wishing to 
see new countries. Without hesitating about the selection, I told 
F'ather Joseph how indebted I was to him for the offer which he made 
me, and I joined these two latter gentlemen, from whom I did not 
part till they were about to leave Constantinople for Syria. Before 
quitting Germany these gentlemen desired to see the court of 



Iviii 


DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


Saxony, where we arrived in a short time. You pass through Frei- 
burg on this route, a small town, but well worthy of being seen, 
because it contains the tombs of the Electors, which, whether as 
regards material or form, are the finest in Europe. From thence 
we went to see the splendid Castle of Augustburg, which is on a 
high mountain, wherein there are many remarkable things. There 
is a hall which, for sole decoration from top to bottom, has a 
multitude of horns of all kinds of animals hung on the walls, and you 
see the head of a hare with two small horns, which was sent to the 
Elector as a great curiosity by the King of Denmark. There is in 
one of the courts of this castle a tree of such enormous size, and the 
branches of which are so extended, that one can place underneath 
it a great number of tables. I did not count them, but the con- 
cierge told us that there were as many as there are days in the year. 
That which makes this tree more wonderful is that it is a birch, 
which it is rare to see attain to such a size. There is also in this 
castle a well so deep that one cannot draw water from it in less 
than half an hour, and considering the altitude of the place, one 
cannot sufficiently admire the boldness of the designer. 

All Germany is so well known that I shall not delay to describe 
Dresden, which is the residence of the Elector. I shall merely say 
that the town is not large, but that it is very beautiful and well forti- 
fied, and that the Elbe, over which there is a fine stone bridge, 
separates the old and the new towns. The palace of the Elector is 
one of the largest and most beautiful in Germany, but it lacks an 
open space in front, and its principal gate is at the bottom of a ml 
de sac. The treasure-rooms,^ to the number of sixteen, are open to 
all strangers of distinction; and there are catalogues, both in 
German and in other languages, of all that is beautiful and rare 
in each. MM. TAbbe de Chapes and de Saint Liebau were very 
well received by the Elector — father of him who reigns to-day ; he 
kept them to supper, and treated them with much kindness. A grand 
buffet had been arranged this evening, upon which all the pieces 
were of a perfectly beautiful and shining stone, which was obtained 
in the silver mines of Saxony, and on a lower shelf there were several 
goblets of silver gilt of different sizes. The Elector, wishing to give 
the health of the King to these gentlemen, allowed them to select 
of these goblets the one from which they wished to drink, on condi- 
tion of drinking it full, according to the custom of the country. M. 
1 Abbe de Chapes caused one to be brought which did not appear to 


^ The famous green vaults. 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


lix 


be large, and M. de Saint Liebau asked for another which held a 
little more. But FAbbe de Chapes was much surprised when, having 
taken the goblet which he had chosen, it expanded in his hands 
when he touched a spring, like a tulip which opens to the sun, and 
it became forthwith a large cup capable of containing nearly a pint. 
He was not forced to drink it full, and the Elector forgave him, con- 
tenting himself with a laugh at his surprise. 

From Dresden we went to Prague, and it was for the third time 
that I saw this grand and beautiful town, or, if you wish it, these 
three towns, separated by the Molde, which falls into the Elbe 5 or 
6 leagues below. Having traversed Bohemia through the middle, 
and touched an angle of Moravia, we entered Austria, and came to 
Vienna, intending to embark at once, the cold beginning to make 
itself already felt. These gentlemen confiding on me the arrange- 
ments of the journey, I went to ask the Governor of Vienna to write 
in their favour to the Viceroy of Hungary, his brother, to give us 
necessary passports j this he granted with a good grace, and he also 
gave two boats to these gentlemen, one for themselves, which had 
a good room, and the other for the kitchen. We remained one 
day at Presburg, to see the great church and a quantity of relics 
which they had to show there, and from thence we descended to 
Altemburg. 

Altemburg is a town and county which belong to Comte d’Arach. 
It was the property of a Queen of Hungary, who presented it when 
dying to a noble of her court, on condition that he and his successors 
should always keep in this castle a certain number of peacocks, 
which this Queen was very fond of ; and that if any one omitted to 
do so the county should revert to the throne. 

We arrived at Szghet after midday, and immediately I took a small 
boat and went quickly to Raab, formerly called Javarin, which is only 
two hours distant. I gave the Viceroy the letter which his brother 
had given me, and I informed him of the arrival of MM. le Chapes 
and de Saint Liebau. As I had had the honour of being some years 
in his service, he told me he was glad to see me again, and that he 
would do everything to satisfy those whom his brother recommended. 
On the following day he ordered 300 cavalry and two carriages to 
go and bring them to Javarin. He received them very politely, and 
during the sojourn which they made the principal officers sought to 
make them pass the time agreeably. It was necessary to wait eight or 
ten days to receive the reply of the Bacha of Buda, a message having 
been sent to the Governor of Cozziorre to ascertain if he would grant 



lx 


DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


a passage to two French gentlemen and their suite. In order to 
facilitate the matter they were represented to be relatives of M. de 
Cessy, Ambassador of France at the Porte, and the reply of the 
Bacha having come in the affirmative, we descended to Comorre, 
where the Governor gave us other boats. They conveyed us half 
way to Buda, where we found others, which, on the receipt of the 
notice of our departure, came from Buda to meet us. These 
boats are a kind of brigantines well armed and very convenient, and 
they make, by force of oars, much way in little time, because they 
are very light. It is between Comorre and Buda on the frontiers of 
the two Empires, where the Ambassadors relieve one another, which 
happens on both sides every six years, and in the same time the 
alliance is renewed, and it is necessary that the number of persons 
on each side shall be equal. 

From Vienna to Javarin we were three days on the water, because 
the Danube makes a great circuit, though one can make the land 
journey in two hours. From Javarin one goes to Comorre^ and 
from Comorre we descended to Buda in less than two days. The 
journey from Raab to Buda is seldom taken by land, because the 
country being on the frontier there are brigands on both sides whom it 
is dangerous to meet. In the fine season one can go from Buda to 
Belgrade in less than eight days ; but we took eight, the cold and snow 
delaying our progress. We took an equal time up to Constantinople, 
where we did not arrive till the 29th day after our departure from 
Belgrade, because the days were short and the way bad. 

It is the custom in Hungary, especially on routes little frequented 
by strangers, to take no money from travellers ; a householder lodges 
them and treats them well, and the mayor of the place repays him 
at the end of the year out of the public revenue for the. expense 
which he has incurred. But it should be remembered that they are 
not charged with a great number of travellers, and that in Hungary, 
which is one of the best countries in Europe, food is so cheap that 
we did not expend at Belgrade for fourteen mouths as much as two 
crowns a day. 

Buda is on the right of the Danube, distant from the river about 
half an hour. As soon as the Bacha had news of our arrival he sent 
his equerry with horses led by well-dressed slaves for our conduct to 
the town. Among these slaves were two Parisians, and our gentle- 
men knowing their families, offered unavailingly up to 800 crowns 
for their ransom. 

We remained twelve days at Buda before we could have audience 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


Ixi 


of the Baclia^ who was unwell. He sent us our food daily — a sheep, 
fowl, butter, rice, and bread, with two sequms for other fresh supplies ; 
and on the day upon which he granted an audience to MM. de Chapes 
and de Saint Liebau, they presented him with a watch, the case of 
which was covered with diamonds. The Bacha is a man of good 
figure and pleasing countenance \ he received them with much 
civility, and on their departure for Belgrade, which was on the 
fourteenth day of their arrival at Buda, he sent them six chariots 
with two soldiers to conduct them, and an order to defray their 
expenditure for food throughout, of which they did not wish to avail 
themselves. 

On our arrival at Belgrade we entered an old caravansardi^ but 
four of the principal merchants of Ragusa, who do a large trade in 
this place, took us from this poor inn to convey us to the house of 
a good citizen. The Ragusans carry cloth to Belgrade, and take 
wax in exchange, and quicksilver, which they obtain from Upper 
Hungary and from Transylvania. 

If we had reason to congratulate ourselves on the good reception 
of the Bacha of Buda, we had also reason to complain of the rude 
manner which the Sangiac of Belgrade displayed towards us, as he 
compelled us to contest for fifteen or sixteen days the ridiculous 
demand that he at first made of 200 ducats per head. The mer- 
chants of Ragusa went to speak to him, and all they could obtain 
was that we should each give him fifty ducats. The Sangiac con- 
tinuing to act badly, I went to see him with our interpreter, and at 
first spoke to him with civility. But seeing that he paid no attention 
to me, and that it was necessary to address him otherwise, I intimated 
so well by threats that I would send an express to the Porte to com- 
plain of his rude conduct towards two gentlemen, relatives of the 
French Ambassador, that notwithstanding the 200 ducats which he 
demanded head, he contented himself with fifty for all, which 
were forthwith given to him. During this fifteen days’ detention we 
had the small consolation of enjoying good fare. The bread, the 
wine, and the meat are all excellent and cheap in this place ; and 
Belgrade being built on a point of land where two great rivers — the 
Danube and Save — ^join, so large a quantity of large pike and fine 
carp were caught that we only used the livers and milts, giving the 
fish to the poor. Two Jesuit Fathers, chaplains of the merchants of 
Ragusa, contributed much to dissipate the annoyance which these 
gentlemen experienced from the delay of their journey, caused by 
the injustice of the Sangiac. The merchants, too, did not limit 



Ixii DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


themselves to the good services which they rendered on several 
occasions, they added a magnificent banquet to which they invited 
them on Christmas Eve, after which they went to the midnight mass, 
accompanied by music and instruments, with which they were 
pleased. 

We took saddle horses and chariots at Belgrade for Adrianople, 
each selecting the mode of conveyance he considered most comfort- 
able. As for me, I preferred a chariot, wherein, covering myself with 
straw, my body being clad in a good sheep skin, I did not feel the 
cold. We came to Sophia, a large and populous town, the capital of 
the old Bulgarians, and the residence of the Bacha de Ro7mli?‘ You 
see there a beautiful mosque, which was once a Christian church, 
with a tower so artfully made that three persons can ascend it at the 
same time without seeing one another. 

From Sophia we came to Philippopolis, and between this last 
town and Adrianople we met two well -mounted companies of 
Tartars. They come to make raids on this side of the Danube, 
and indeed farther into the portion of Hungary which belongs to the 
house of Austria. As soon as they saw us they hastily ranged them- 
selves in two lines on either side, to allow us to pass through 
them, designing, doubtless, to attack us, being without hope of van- 
quishing us except by numbers and surprise. They had for sole 
arms a poor sort of sabre, and we on our side had wherewithal to 
prevent their approach, each having a musket and a pair of pistols, and 
the majority good sporting guns also. For fear they should come to 
attack us if we neglected to defend ourselves, we stood our ground 
and made a barricade of our chariots. However, our two guards 
with our interpreter were sent to the chief of these Tartars to tell 
him that we should not move till they decamped, and that being 
soldiers like them, they would obtain nothing from us. The chief 
replied that he had only drawn up his men in order to honour us, 
and that, as we wished it, they would pass on if we gave them some- 
thing to buy tobacco. We speedily satisfied them ; and our inter- 
preter having taken them four sequins, they drew off and left our 
passage open. 

We reached Adrianople on the twenty-third day after our depar- 
ture from Belgrade, and we hired other horses and chariots for 
Constantinople. Adrianople derives its name from the Emperor 
Adrian, who enlarged and embellished it ; it was previously called 
Ores^e, It is pleasantly situated at the mouths of three rivers 


^ Pasha of Roumelia. 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


Ixiii 


which debouch together in the Archipelago. The old town is not 
very large, but the Turks have added splendid suburbs, and it is 
one of the residences of the Ottoman Emperors, who often come 
there, whether called by business or for the pleasure of the chase, 
especially of ducks and herons. When these three rivers overflow 
the marshes and neighbouring fields they make, as it were, a sea, 
which one sees covered by a multitude of these birds, as also cranes 
and wild geese, and the Grand Seigneur takes them with the eagle 
and the falcon, which are very well trained to this kind of sport. 

On the fifth day after our departure from Adrianople, and the 
fifty-second after we left Vienna, we arrived happily at Constanti- 
nople, at eight o’clock in the morning. Having traversed the town 
and passed to Galata, they led us to the house of the French 
Ambassador, which we did not leave till after dinner, and in the 
evening we went to take possession of a house belonging to a Greek 
close to that of the Ambassador. hlM. de Chapes and de St. 
Liebau remained two months at Constantinople, where they ex- 
pended a large sum, always keeping open house. We made during 
the winter a small trip to the Dardanelles and the ruins of Troy, 
where we only saw stones, which was assuredly not worth the 
trouble of going there. 

Curiosity to see a room furnished in the French fashion, of 
which they gave us a great account, led us to go to the serrail at 
Scutari. Two eunuchs who guarded it made much fuss about 
permitting us to enter, for which we had to pay well, and we saw 
nothing but a bed after our pattern, of rich material, with the chairs 
and carpets, which constituted the whole lot. On another day we 
took boats with our friends to go to Chalcedonia, which is on the 
margin of the sea. There is a very ancient church there, in which 
one sees the council hall, with the original chairs still preserved. 
It is to-day a monastery, and two bishops who were there, after 
having conducted us all through, civilly presented us with a 
collation. 

We then went to see Pompey’s Pillar, at the mouth of the Black 
Sea, and going from serrail to ser?ml, which are the royal houses 
of the Grand Seigneur, we occupied eight days upon this pleasant 
outing. But one might do it in two, if content to see the pillar 
without stopping anywhere. We met in one of these serrails an 
old French eunuch, who was delighted to see us, and gave us all 
possible good cheer. 

I shall make here a remark about the Black Sea canal. There 



Ixiv 


DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


is no strait of the sea without a current, and this has two opposite 
ones. That from the European side carries vessels towards the 
Black Sea, and that which is from the Asiatic side brings them back 
towards the Mediterranean. Thus in the trip which one often 
makes from Constantinople to the mouth of the canal, both in going 
and returning you find the stream favourable, and you have but to 
cross from one bank to the other. 

The rigour of winter being over, MM. de Chapes and de St. 
Liebau continued their journey, and accompanied by two guards, 
engaged two brigantines for the journey to Alexandretta. I have since 
heard that they saw all that is most remarkable in the Archipelago 
and along the coasts of Natalie ; that from Alexandretta they went 
to Aleppo, from thence to the Euphrates, and that, retracing their steps 
to Aleppo, they went to Damascus, and from thence to Jerusalem. 

As for me, having another journey in view, and wishing to see 
Persia, I remained at Constantinople, awaiting a caravan which I was 
encouraged to hope for from one month to another. But without 
that it often happened that eight or ten merchants, joining together, 
made the journey in safety to Ispahan. My ignorance was the 
reason for my making a much longer stay at Constantinople than 
I had contemplated. I remained eleven months, during which 
time I saw M. de Marcheville arrive, who came to relieve M. de 
Cesi. He had an audience of the Grand Seigneur as Ambassador 
of France, but M. de Cesi, who did not wish to retire, intrigued so 
well with the grand Fmr that he remained Ambassador at the 
Porte, \5rhile M. de Marcheville was compelled to return to France. 
I was in his cortege on the day when he had audience with his 
Highness, as I have stated in my account of the Serraglio, 

At length, after eleven months delay, a well-equipped and 
numerous caravan left Constantinople for Ispahan, and I joined it 
on the road, for my first journey to Asia.^ It has been followed by 
five others, and I have thus had time to observe the nature of the 
country well, and the genius of the populations. I have pushed 
the three last beyond the Ganges and to the island of Java; and 
during the space of forty years I have traversed more than 60,000 
leagues by land, only having once returned from Asia to Europe by 
sea. Thus I have seen at my leisure in my six journeys, and by 


1 M. Joret, by means of the incident about the Ambassadors just referred to, 
has fixed this date as January or February 1631. Those who give it as 1636 are 
therefore clearly in the wrong. 



DESIGN OF THE AUTHOR 


Ixy 


different routes, the whole of Turkey, all Persia, and all India, and 
especially the famous mines of diamonds, where no European had 
been before me.^ It is of these three grand Empires that I propose 
to give a full and exact account, and I shall commence with the 
different routes which one may take to go from Paris to Persia. 


^ As elsewhere pointed out in the following pages, there were European 
visitors before Tavernier’s time, as Caesar Frederick before 1570, Methold before 
1622, and also some others. 


VOL. I 


e 




TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


BOOK I 

Concerning routes which one may take to go from Ispahan to 
Agra, and from Agra to Delhi and Jahanabad, where the 
court of the Great Mogul is at present ; as also to the court 
of the King of Golconda and to that of the King of Bijapur, 
and to several other places in India . . . Page i 

Chapter I. — Route from Ispahan to Agra by (way of) Gombroon 
(Bandar Abbas), where particular mention is made of the 
navigation from Hormuz to Surat .... 3 

Chapter II. — Concerning the customs, the money, the exchange, 
the weights, and the measures of India ... 8 

Chapter III. — Concerning carriages and the manner of travelling 
in India 39 

Chapter IV. — Route from Surat to Agra by Burhanpur and 
SironJ 4S 

Chapter V. — Route from Surat to Agra by AhmadAbad . 66 

Chapter VI. — Route from Ispahan to Agra by KandahAr 90 

Chapter VII. — Sequence of the same route from Delhi up to 
Agra 104 

Chapter VIII. — Route from Agra to Patna and Dacca, towns of 
the Province of Bengal ; and the quarrel which the Author 
had with ShAistA Khan, uncle of the King . . 113 

Chapter IX. — Route from Surat to Golconda . . 142 



Ixviii 


TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


Chapter X. — Of the Kingdom of Golconda, and the wars which 
it has carried on during the last few years . . Page 150 

Chapter XL— Route from Golconda to Masulipatam . 172 

Chapter XII. — Route from Surat to Goa, and from Goa to 
Golconda by Bijapur 176 

Chapter XIII. — Remarks upon the present condition of the town 
of Goa . . . . . . • • .186 

Chapter XIV. — Concerning what the Author did during his sojourn 
at Goa on his last journey in 1648 . . . .200 

Chapter XV. — History of Father Ephraim, Capuchin, and how 
he was cast into the Inquisition at Goa . . .220 

Chapter XVI. — Route from Goa to Masulipatam by Cochin, 
described in the history of the capture of that town by the 
Dutch . . . . . . . . -234 

Chapter XVIL — Route by sea from Hormuz to Masuli- 
patam . . . . . . . . *255 

Chapter XVIII. — Route from Masulipatam to Gandikot, a town 
and fortress in the Province of Carnatic, and the Author’s 
transactions with Mir Jumla, who commanded the army of 
the King of Golconda ; in which also there is a full descrip- 
tion of Elephants . . . . . . .260 

Chapter XIX. — Route from Gandikot to Golconda . 294 

Chapter XX. — Return from Surat to Hormuz, and how the 
Author found himself engaged in a very rough and dangerous 
naval combat, from which he escaped without accident . 310 


BOOK II 

Historical and political description of the Empire of the Great 
Mogul 

Chapter I. — Account of the last wars in Hindustan, in which 
is set forth the present condition of the Empire and the Court 
of the Great Mogul , o i 



TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


bdx 


Chapter II. — Concerning the sickness and supposed death of 
Shah Jahan, King of India, and the rebellion of the Princes, 
his sons Page 325 

Chapter III. — Concerning ShIh Jahan's prison, and how he was 
punished by Aurangzeb, his third son, for the injustice he had 
done to Prince Bolaki his nephew, grandson of JahIngir, 
to whom, since he was the son of the firstborn, the Empire of 
the Moguls belonged 334 

Chapter IV. — Concerning the flight of BAra Shah to the Kingdoms 
of Sind and Gujarat ; his second battle with Aurangzeb ; his 
capture and death ....... 346 

Chapter V. — How Aurangzeb seated himself upon the throne and 
had himself declared King; and concerning the flight of 
Sultan ShujA 355 

Chapter VI. — Concerning the prison of Sultan Muhammad, son 
of Aurangzeb, and of Sultan Suliman Sheko, eldest son of 
DArA ShAh 3^0 

Chapter VII. — Concerning the beginning of Aurangzeb’s reign, 
and the death of ShAh JahAn, his father . . - 37 ^ 

Chapter VIII. — Concerning the preparations which are made for 
the festival of the Great Mogul, when he is solemnly weighed 
every year ; of the splendour of his thrones and the magnifi- 
cence of his Court 379 

Chapter IX. — Concerning other details of the Great Mogul’s 
Court 3S8 

Chapter X. — The Great Mogul orders all his jewels to be shown 
to the Author 394 

Chapter XI. — ^Terms of the passport which the Nawab ShAistA 
KhAn sent to the Author, with some letters which he wrote 
to him and the replies to them, in which the style of these 
countries manifests itself . . • • • .401 


Appendix.— On the values of Coins, Weights, and Measures referred 
to by Tavernier .411 



Ixx 


TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS 


TABLE 

Illustrations contained in the portion of the original work 
included in this volume I, but not reproduced here — 
Numerical figures — French and 'Indian 
Touchstones of the money changers for testing silver 
Seals or monograms of the Kings who have reigned 


AVIS 


TO THE READER 


It is almost impossible in a work of this sort, containing so many- 
proper names of officers, Princes, towns, mountains, and rivers, that 
many faults should not occur; because these names being entirely 
unknown to us, and little conformable to our pronunciation and 
manner of writing, it need not be wondered at if the printer has 
often erred. But among other faults one important one has been 
detected, which it is desirable to remove and to notify, that in place 
of coste^ which means nothing, cosse should be read throughout, which 
in the language of the country means league {lieue) in India. 



ERRATA ET CORRIGENDA. 


Page 1 6, note Assen read Asen. 

„ 92^ omit note 3. 

,, 143 and 144 for Kuram read Khurram. 

„ 184, note for Cardamons read Cardamoms. 

„ 203 and 26% for Augustines read Augustins. 

5, 205, headline, Mascaregnas read Mascarehnas. 

„ 217, for elephants’ teeth read tusks. 

„ 250 n and 280 for Tennant read Tennent. 

„ 251, line 2, for which read whom. 

„ 288 for Jalmudugu read Jamalmudugu. 

5, 326, line 6, for Roushenird read Raushenara. 

,, 400 n,for p. 372 nj read Yol. ii, p. 129. 

„ 415, last paragraph, for read Tonne, 

„ 416, line 26, for 133^ read 133:^. 

„ 416 and 417, for corrected values of carat and rati^ see Index. 

„ 417, note i^for 1.27 read 0.127. 



BOOK I 


Concerning routes which one may take to go from 
Ispahan to Agra, and from Agra to Delhi and 
Jahanabad,^ where the Court of the Great 
Mogul is at present ; as also to the Court of the 
King of Golconda and to that of the King of 
Bijapur,^ and to several other places in India. 


1 Dehly and Gehanabat in the original. Shdh Jahdn rebuilt Delhi, 
and called the new city Shdhjahdn^bd^d, which retains its form and 
fortifications to the present time, and is the Delhi of to-day. 

2 Visapour, in the original, was an early corruption of the name 
Bijapur (Vijdyapura). It is the principal town of what is now the 
KaMdgi District of the Bombay Presidency. An account of its buildings 
is given in Fergusson’s History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 


? VOL. I 


B 




TRAVELS IN INDIA 


CHAPTER I 

Route from Ispahan to Agra by {way of) Gombroon/ 

where particular mention is made of the navigation 

from Hormuz ^ to Surat.® 

I SHALL follow in this account of my Indian travels the 
same order as I have observed in that of my Persian 
travels, and I shall commence with the description of 
the routes by which one can go from Ispahan to 
Delhi and JahanAbAd, where the Great Mogul at 
present resides. 

Although India presents a frontier towards Persia 
of more than 400 leagues, extending from the ocean 
up to that long chain of mountains which traverses the 
centre of Asia from west to east, and has been known 
to antiquity under the name of Mount Taurus or 
Mount Caucasus,^ there are, notwithstanding, not so 

1 Gomron in the original, for Gombroon, the modern Bandar Abbds, 
in the Persian Gulf. 

2 Ormus in the original, the modem, Hormuz, more properly Hur- 
mdz, formerly a city and kingdom near the mouth of the Persian Gulf. 

2 Surate in the original, the modem Surat, spelt Suratte in the 
French edition of 1713. 

^ Mount Taurus or - Mount Caucasus. The former name was used 
by some of the ancient geographers for a supposed continuous range 
from west to east, through the whole of Asia, and embracing the real 



4 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


many ways for passing from Persia into India as 
there are for passing from Turkey into Persia, because 
between Persia and India there are only sands and 
vast deserts where one finds no water at all. Thus, 
in order to go from Ispahan to Agra there are but two 
routes to select from — one partly by land and partly 
by sea, by taking ship at Hormuz; and the other 
altogether by land, passing through Candahar. The 
first of these routes has been fully described up to 
Hormuz towards the end of the last book of my 
travels in Persia,’- and I have now to speak of the 
navigation from Hormuz to Surat. 

Navigation in the Indian seas is not carried on at 
all seasons, as it is in our European seas, and it is 
necessary to take the proper season, outside the limits 
of which no one ventures to put to sea. The months 
of November, December, January, February, and 
March, are the only months in the year in which one 
embarks at Hormuz for Surat, and at Surat for 
Hormuz : with this difference, however, that one rarely 
leaves Surat later than the end of February,^ but for 
leaving Hormuz one may wait till the end of March, 

Taurus of Asia Minor, the Persian Elbruz, the Hindu Kush, and the 
Himalayas. “The boundaries of India on the north, from Ariana to 
the Eastern Sea, are the extremities of Taurus, to the several parts of 
which the natives give, besides others, the names of Paropamisus, 
Emodus, and Imaus (Himalaya) ; but the Macedonians call them 
Caucasus,” etc. (Strabo, Bk. xv, c. i, § 1 1 ; Bohn’s ed., trans. by 
Falconer and Hamilton, vol. iii, p. 78.) 

1 Book V, chaps, xx, xxi, xxii, p. 653 et seq. The second route up 
to Candahar is described in Book V, chap, xxiv, p. 693, Persian Travels^ 
Paris edition of 1676. 

2 This indication of the periods of the monsoons is of interest. It 
is availed of by M. Joret, in his/. B, Tavernier, Paris, 1886, p. 64, as 
a factor in determining the dates of Tavernier’s journeys, regarding 
which his direct statements are so few, vague, or even contradictory. 



CHAP. I 


NAVIGATION IN THE INDIAN SEAS 


5 


and even till the 15th of April, because then the west- 
ern wind which brings the rains to India begins to 
blow. During the first four months a wind from the 
north-east prevails with which one may sail from 
Surat to Hormuz in fifteen or twenty days ; after- 
wards, veering by degrees to the north, it serves equally 
the vessels which go to Surat and those which are 
coming from it, and during this period the merchants 
generally reckon on spending thirty or thirty-five days 
at sea ; but when you wish to go from Hormuz to 
Surat in fourteen or fifteen days, you must embark in 
the month of March or at the beginning of April, because 
then you have the western wind astern all the way. 

Vessels leaving Hormuz steer for Muscat,^ on the 
coast of Arabia, in order not to approach too near to 
that of Persia, and to give it a wide berth. Those 
which are coming from Surat do the same, in order 
to find the entrance to the gulf, but neither the one nor 
the other ever touch at Muscat, because custom dues 
have to be paid to the Arabian Prince who took this 
place from the Portuguese. 

Muscat is a town on the sea-coast, opposite to 
three rocks, which render the approach to it very 
difficult, and it lies at the foot of a mountain upon 
which the Portuguese had three or four forts. It may 
be remarked that Muscat, Hormuz, and BASsoRA^are 
the three places in the East where the heat 'is most 
unbearable. Formerly the English and Dutch mono- 
polised this navigation ; but for some years past the 

1 Mascat^ in the original, the modern Muscat, or more properly 
Maskat, the capital of Oman, in North-East Arabia. 

Balsara in the original, Balsora of the Arabian Nights^ the 
modern Bassora {Basra), in the Persian Gulf. 



6 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Armenians, Muhammadans of India, and Ba,nmns^ also 
have vessels, upon which, however, one does not feel 
so safe as on those of the Franks^ because necessarily 
the Indians do not understand the sea so well, and have 
not such good pilots. 

Vessels sailing for Surat, which is the only port in 
the whole empire of the Great Mogul, steer for Diu 
and Point St. Jean,® and then anchor in the roads at 
SuwAli,^ which is only four leagues distant from Surat, 
and but two from the mouth of the river, bearing from 
it northwards. They carry the merchandise from one 
place to the other either by cart or by boat, because 
large vessels cannot enter the river at Surat, until after 
they are unloaded, on account of the sandbanks which 
are at the mouth. The Dutch return after having 
landed their goods at SuwAuf, and the English did the 
same, neither being permitted to enter into the Surat 
river ; but since, some time back, the King has granted 
to the latter a place to winter ® in during the rainy season. 

Surat is a city of moderate size, with a poor 
fortress, which you must pass, whether approaching it 
by water or by land. It has four towers at its four 

^ Banianes in the original, see Book III, chap, iii, and Index. 

2 Francs in the original, and Franguis on p. 59, names in the East 
for all Europeans except Greeks ; Pers. Farangi, 

^ Diu and Point St. Jean. Diu is on an island (from which fact 
the name is derived — dvipa^ Sanskrit for an island) off the southern 
extremity of Gujardt. It occupies an important position in the history 
of the Portuguese, and still belongs to them. St. Jean is the port in 
Gujardt called Sajdn or Sanjdn, the Sinddn of Arab writers, corrupted 
by the Portuguese into San Gens and the English into St. John’s. (See 
Yule and Burnell, Anglo-Indian Glossary^ s. v. St. John’s, p. 591.) 

4 Souali in original, a roadstead near the mouth of the Tdpti (pp, 

p. 671). 

^ The term winter {hiver) is used by several early writers on India 
to indicate the rainy season, viz. June to October. 



CHAP. I 


THE CITY OF SURAT 


7 


angles ; and as the walls are not terraced, the guns are 
placed upon scaffoldings. The Governor of the fortress 
merely commands the soldiers of the garrison, and 
possesses no authority in the city, which has its own 
separate Governor to receive the customs and the other 
revenues of the King throughout the extent of his 
Province. The walls of the city are of earth, and the 
houses of private persons are merely barns, being built 
of nothing but reeds, covered with cow-dung mixed with 
clay to fill the interstices, and to prevent those outside 
from seeing between the reeds that which is done inside. 
In the whole of Surat there are only nine or ten well- 
built houses, and the Shdk-bandar^ or chief of the 
merchants, has two or three of them. The others be- 
long to the Muhammadan merchants, and those of the 
English and Dutch are not the least fine, every presi- 
dent and commander taking care to keep them in repair, 
the cost of which they charge against the accounts of 
their companies. These dwellings are, nevertheless, 
only hired houses, the King not permitting any Frank 
to possess a house of his own, fearing that he would 
have that of which he might make a fortress. The 
Reverend Capuchin Fathers have built a very com- 
modious one upon the model of the houses of Europe, 
with a beautiful church, and I myself furnished a large 
portion of the money which it cost ; but the purchase 
had to be made under the name of a Maronite merchant 
of Aleppo ^ named Chelebi, of whom I have spoken in 
my account of Persia. 

^ Cha- bander in original, Shdh-bandar^ i.e. Governor of the port 
or harbour and customs master. 

2 Alep in original, for Aleppo, described Book II, cap. ii, p. 134, of 
the Persian Travels^ Paris, 1876. 




CHAPTER II 


Concerning the Customs, the Money, the Exchange, the 
Weights, and the Measures of India. 

In order to avoid repetition, which one cannot escape 
in the course of a long journey, it is desirable to make 
the reader acquainted from the first with the practice 
in India in reference to customs, money, exchange, 
measures, and weights. 

As soon as merchandise is landed at Surat it 
has to be taken to the custom-house, which adjoins 
the fort. They are very strict and search persons 
with great care. Private individuals pay as much as 4 
and 5 per cent duty on all their goods ; but as for 
the English Company and the Dutch Company, they 
pay less. But I believe likewise that, taking into 
account what it costs them in deputations and in 
presents, which they are obliged to make every year 
at court, the goods cost them scarcely less than they do 
private persons. 

Gold and silver pay 2 per cent, and as soon as they 
have been counted at the custom-house the Mintmaster ^ 
comes to take them, and coins them into money of the 

1 The Mintmaster was called Darogha (of the mint) ; the assays 
were made by the Sairafi; other officials in the mints were the Amin, 
who was a kind of spy on the others ; the Mushrif, to keep the accounts, 
etc. (See Ai?i-i-Akbd}i, Blochmann’s transl., vol. i, p. i8.) 



CHAP. II 


THE GREAT MOGUL’S MINTS 


9 


country, which he hands over to you, in proportion to 
the amount and standard of your silver. You settle 
with him, according to the nature of the amount, a day 
when he is to give the new coins, and for as many 
days as he delays to do so beyond the term agreed 
upon he pays interest in proportion to the silver which 
he has received. The Indians are cunning and exact- 
ing in reference to coin and payments ; for when 
money has been coined for three or four years it has 
to lose ^ per cent, and it continues in the same 
proportion according to age, not being able, they 
say, to pass through so many hands without some 
diminution. 

You may carry all sorts of silver into the Empire of 
the Great Mogul, because there is a mint in each of 
the frontier towns, where it has to be refined to the 
highest standard,^ as is all the gold and silver in India, 
by order of the King, and it is coined into money of 
the country. Bar silver, or old silver plate which has 
been bought without payment for the workmanship, is 
that which has the least to lose, for on coined silver 
one cannot avoid the loss on coinage. Sales are in 
general conditional on payment being made in money 
coined during the current year ; and if one pays in old 
pieces it is necessary to submit to loss, according to 
the time they have been coined, as I have said above. 
In all places at a distance from towns, where the 
common people do not understand silver well, and 
where there are no Changers, they will not receive a 
piece of silver till they put it into the fire to ascertain 

^ The method of assaying which was practised in India is described 
in the Ain-i-Akbdri^ and upon it there are some important remarks and 
explanatory notes to be found in Percy’s Metallurgy of Gold and Silver 



10 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


if it is good ; and this is practised especially at the 
river crossings.^ As their boats are made of osiers, 
covered only with oxhide, and are consequently very 
light,^ they keep them in the woods, and will not take 
them on their shoulders for crossing the water before 
they have received their payment. 

In so far as regards gold, the merchants who import 
it use so much cunning in order to conceal it, that but 
little of it comes to the knowledge of the customs’ 
officers. They do all they can to evade paying the 
customs, especially as they have not so much risk to 
run as in the custom-houses of Europe. For in those 
of India, when any one is detected in fraud, he is let 
off with paying double, lo per cent instead of 5, the 
King comparing the venture of the merchant to a 
game of hazard, where one plays double or quits. 
However, for some time back this is somewhat 
changed, and it is to-day difficult to settle with the 
customs’ officers on that condition. The King has 
conceded to the English Captains that they shall not be 
searched when they leave their vessels to come on 
shore; but one day an English Captain, going to 
Tatta,® one of the largest towns of India, a little above 
SiNDi,^ which is at the mouth of the river Indus,® when 

1 Only a few years ago I found the people in a remote part of the 
District of Raiprur, in the Central Provinces, most unwilling to accept 
any payment in silver ; they would take copper, but preferred cowries. 

^ Coracles. See Book I, chap, xviii, and Index for further references 
to them. 

3 Tata in the original, the modem Tatta, in Sind (see p. 17), a 
taluk in the Karachi District. 

4 Scimdi in the original, sometimes written Simdi by Tavernier — 
e,g. p. 17— for Sindi, the Province of Sind, derived from the River 
Sind, i.e. Indus. 

^ River of Indou in the original, Hindi^ or Sindu — the Indus river. 



CHAP. II 


AN ENGLISHMAN’S REVENGE 


11 


about to pass, was arrested by the customs’ guards, 
from whom he could not defend himself, and who 
searched him in spite of anything he could say. They 
found gold on him, he having already conveyed some 
in sundry journeys between his vessel and the town ; 
he was let off on payment of the ordinary duty. The 
Englishman, vexed by this affront, resolved to have 
his revenge for it, and he took it in a jocose manner. 
He caused a sucking-pig to be roasted, and to be 
placed with the grease in a china plate, covered with a 
napkin, and gave it to a slave to carry it with him 
to the town, anticipating exactly that which would 
happen. As he passed in front of the custom-house, 
where the Governor of the town, the Skdh-bandar, 
and the Master of the mint were seated in a divan, 
they did not fail to stop him, and, the slave still 
advancing with his covered plate, they said to the 
master that he must needs go to the custom-house, and 
that they should see what he carried. The more the 
Englishman protested that the slave carried nothing 
which should pay duty, the less was he believed ; and 
after a long discussion he himself took the plate from 
the hands of the slave, and proceeded to carry it to the 
custom-house. The Governor and the Shdk-bandar 
asked him forthwith, in a sharp tone, why he was 
unwilling to obey orders, and the Englishman, on his 
part, replying in a rage that what he carried was not 
liable to duty, rudely threw the plate in front of them, 
so that the sucking-pig and the grease soiled the whole 
place, and splashed on their garments. As the pig is an 
abomination to the Muhammadans, and since by their 
law they regard as defiled whatever is touched by it, 
it became necessary for them to change their garments. 



12 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


to remove the carpet from the divan, and to make a 
new structure, without daring to say anything to the 
Englishman, because the Skdh-bandar and the Master 
of the mint have to be particular with the Company, 
from which the country derives so much profit. As 
for the Chiefs of the Companies, both English and 
Dutch, and their associates, they have so much respect 
for them that they never search them when they come 
from the vessels; but they, for their part, do not 
attempt to convey gold in secret as the private mer- 
chants do, considering it beneath them to do so. The 
commerce of Tatta, which was formerly considerable, 
is beginning to decrease rapidly, because the entrance 
to the river becomes worse from day to day, and the 
sands which accumulate almost close the passage. 

The English; seeing that they had adopted the 
custom of searching them, had recourse to little strata- 
gems in order to pass the gold, and the fashion of 
wearing wigs having come to them from Europe, they 
bethought themselves of concealing the Jacobuses, rose 
nobles, and ducats in the nets of their wigs every time 
that they left their vessels in order to go on shore. ^ 
There was a merchant who desired to take into Surat 
some boxes of coral without its coming to the knowledge 
of the customs’ officers. The vessel being ready to 
enter the river, he had the boxes tied to the stern, and 
being two or three feet under the water, those who 
came to examine the goods on the v-essel were unable 
to see them. Several days passed before the goods 

1 Frauds were committed on the customs regarding exports, too, as 
will be seen on subsequent pages. M. Thevenot also mentions that he 
knew people who had conveyed away, with the aid of the Dutch com- 
mander, numerous precious stones and other costly articles without 
paying any custom dues. {Voyage des Indes, Paris, 1684, p. 5.) 



CHAP. II 


COINS CURRENT IN INDIA 


13 


were unladen, and before it became possible to convey 
the boxes in safety into the town without the customs’ 
officers having wind of it. The thing was at length 
cleverly accomplished, but the merchant had cause to 
repent of it, and he found himself on the wrong side of 
the account ; for, since the river at Surat is always 
disturbed and thick, there attached itself to the coral, 
which had been a long time in the water, a sort of 
slime like a crust, and a white skin, which they had 
much trouble to remove, and after it was cleaned the 
loss to the merchant exceeded 1 2 per cent. 

I now come to the coins which are current in India 
throughout the territories of the Great Mogul, and to 
all the kinds of gold and silver, which should be carried 
in ingots, rather than in coin, in order to secure most 
profit there. 

In the first place it should be remarked that it is 
advantageous to purchase gold or silver which has 
been worked, in order to make it into ingots, and to 
cause it to be refined up to the highest standard ; for, 
being refined, you do not pay for the carriage of the 
alloy which was mixed with it before, and not carrying 
the gold or silver in coin, you do not pay what the 
prince and the mint have taken for their coinage dues. 

If you take coined gold, the best pieces are rose 
nobles,^ old Jacobuses,^ Albertuses,® and other ancient 
pieces, both of Portugal and other countries, and all 
sorts of gold coins which have been coined in the last 
century. On all these old pieces there is always some 

1 Rose nobles : a noble was an English coin, worth 6 s. 8 d. 

2 Jacobus, an English coin of James I, worth about 25 s. 

3 Albertuses. The Alberts Dutch dollar, a silver coin, was worth 
in exchange something less than the rix-dollar, or 4 s. 6d. ; I have failed 
to identify any gold coin with the above name. 



14 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


profit for the merchant. Among the good gold coins 
which one may carry to India all the ducats of Germany, 
both those of princes and those of imperial towns, as 
also the ducats of Poland, Hungary, Sweden, and 
Denmark must be included; and all these kinds of ducats 
are taken at the same standard. The golden ducats of 
Venice formerly passed as the best, and were each 
valued at four or five of our sols'^ more than all the 
others ; but, since twelve years or thereabouts, it seems 
that they altered them, so that they are not valued now 
save at the same price as the others. There are still 
the ducats which the Grand Seigneur coins at Cairo,^ 
and those of Salee® and Morocco,^ but these three 
coins are the least valuable of all, and are generally 
worth four sols less than the others. 

Throughout the Empire of the Great Mogul all 
the gold and silver is weighed by a weight called tola, 
which amounts to 9 deniers 8 grains of our weight.® 
When one has a quantity of gold or silver to sell, the 
Indians have brass weights, with the King’s stamp, to 
avoid fraud ; and with these weights they weigh all the 
gold or silver at a time, provided it does not exceed 
one hundred tolas. For all the weights of the Changers 
only range from one tola up to one hundred, and these 
hundred tolas are equivalent in our weight to 38 onces 
21 deniers 8 grains. As for the gold or silver which 

1 5 sols = 4jd. (See Appendix.) 

2 Caire in the original. 

3 Sal^ in the original, the ancient Sala and modern Salee, on the 
north-west coast of Africa. 

^ Maroc in the original. 

^ Tolla in the original. Tola therefore = 224 French grs. = 187.5 
grains Troy. The present British tola= 180 grains Troy, i.e, the weight 
of the rupee. 



CHAP. II 


METHOD OF WEIGHING GOLD 


16 


is not coined, if there is much, they put it to the test, 
and the test having been applied, they bid for it as 
highly as they can, out of jealousy of one another. 

As there are merchants who have sometimes up to 
forty and fifty thousand ducats^ and more, the Indians 
weigh them with a weight which is exactly that of one 
hundred ducats, and also bears the King’s stamp. And 
should it happen that the hundred ducats weigh less 
than this weight, they add small stones till the weights 
are equal, and when the whole amount is weighed you 
make good to the Changer the value of the weights 
of these same stones. But before weighing these 
golden coins, be they ducats or be they other coins, 
they place the whole in a large charcoal fire, where the 
pieces become red-hot, after which they put out the 
fire by throwing on water, and then they withdraw 
them. This is done for the purpose of ascertaining 
which of them are false, and in order to burn the wax 
or gum which they sometimes attach adroitly, in order 
that they may weigh more. But since some of the 
pieces are so well forged that they cannot detect them 
even after they have been in the fire, in order to dis- 
cover such the Changers take them one after the other, 
to bend them, and by bending them they know if the 
coin is good, and they cut all those which are not. 
After having seen all, they cause to be refined those 
which they believe to be not good ; and for so much 
of good that they have found in this refining they pay 
as for good ducats. Of all this gold they make coins, 
which they call golden rupees,^ with the exception of 

1 50,000 ducats at 9s. =;£23,5oo. 

2 Golden rupees {mohur Hin), These were of different values ; but 
those with which Tavernier had to do averaged, as will be seen further 



16 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


the ducats which have a face on one side ; these they 
seldom melt, because they sell them to the merchants 
who come from Tartary and the other countries of 
the North, as the kingdoms of BhutAn,^ Assam,^ and 
others more distant. It is of this kind of ducat that 
the women in these countries make their principal 
ornament : they hang them in their hair, and they rest 
on their foreheads. As for the other ducats which are 
without faces, they are not esteemed by the merchants 
of the North. 

With reference to all the other gold coins, they 
sell many to the goldsmiths, to the gold-drawers, and 
in general to all those who employ gold in their work. 
For if they can dispose of them without making them 
into rupees, they do not coin them ; this indeed they 
seldom do, except when they place the kings on the 
throne, in order to make largesse of them to the people, 
together with silver rupees, and in order to sell them 
to the Governors of Provinces who require quantities, 
as also to the other nobles of the kingdom, to present 
to the King on the day when he enters into possession 
of his territories. For they do not always find jewels 
or other things worthy to be presented to him, not 
only on this day, but also at the grand ceremonial, of 
which I shall speak elsewhere, when they weigh the 
King every year. They are, I say, very glad to obtain 
golden rupees on these occasions, and they require 

on, from 14 to 14^ silver rupees in value, say 31s. 6d. to 32s. (See 
p. 19 ;?.) 

1 Boutan in the original. But the limits of the region referred to 
by Tavernier, extended far beyond those of the modern Bhutdn. (See 
Index for further references.) 

2 Assam. Assen in the original appears to be an unusual spelling 
of Assam. (See Index for further references.) 



CHAP. 11 


THE VIRTUE OF GOLDEN RUPEES 


17 


them also in order to make presents to the courtiers, 
by whose interest they hope to obtain higher appoint- 
ments and more considerable offices of government. 

In one of my journeys I saw by an example, which 
I had before my eyes, wherein the virtue of these golden 
rupees lay. Sh1h-Jah.4x,^ the father of Aurangzeb, 
who reigns at present, had given to one of the nobles 
of his court the government of the province of Tatta, 
of which SiXDi is the capital town.^ Although from the 
very first year of his government there were serious 
complaints against him of the tyranny with which he 
treated the people, and of his great extortions, the King 
allowed him to govern the Province for close on four 
years, after which he recalled him. All the people of 
Tatta rejoiced, supposing that the King had only re- 
called him to put him to death. But it happened quite 
otherwise, for he was well received by the King, who 
conferred upon him the government of Allahabad,^ 
much more considerable than that of Tatta which he 
had just quitted. This good reception which he re- 
ceived from the King arose from this, that before he 
arrived at Agra he sent to him secretly as a present 
50,000 golden rupees, which amount to 105,000^ of our 
livres, and about 20,000 more golden rupees, both for 
the Begum Sahib, who then governed the whole king- 
dom, and for other ladies, and for some courtiers who 
were able to aid him with their support. All these 

1 Cha Gehan in the original. 

2 Tatta and Sindi (see p. lo n,\ The chief town was known as 
Dewal or Diul Sindi, a name sometimes transferred in later days to 
Larry Bunder (Ldri bandar), etc. (See Anglo-Indian Glossary.) 

3 Halabas in the original, elsewhere spelt Hallabas. 

^ This is wrong, as, at 21 livres to the golden rupee, the figure 
should be 1,050,000. 


VOL. I 


C 



18 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


courtiers are very glad to obtain in that way plenty of 
gold, not only because it occupies small space, and they 
are able to conceal it easily, but also because they hold 
it honourable to leave to their wives and children, at 
their deaths, large sums, of which the King could not 
have any knowledge : for, as I shall say further on, 
when a great noble dies the King inherits his property, 
and his wife only remains mistress of her jewels. 

To return to the golden rupees. It should be 
stated that they are not current among the merchants ; 
for although one is not worth more than 14 silver 
rupees, which are equal to 21 livres of our money, at 
30 sols to the rupee,’- and that these golden rupees are 
scarcely ever to be met with save in the houses of the 
nobles, still when it happens that they make any pay- 
ment with them they always desire to estimate them at 
a silver rupee, or at least at a quarter more than they 
are worth, by which the merchant cannot make his 
profit. Shaista Khan,^ uncle of the King, to whom I 
sold commodities for 96,000 rupees,® when it came to 
the question of payment, asked me in what money I 
wished that he should make it to me, whether in gold 
or silver coin. Before I replied, he added that if I 
would believe him I would take it in golden rupees, 
and that he did not give this advice but under the 
belief that it would turn to his own advantage. I told 

1 30 sols = 3 s. 3d. = one rupee, and the livre therefore = is. 6d. 
(See Appendix to this volume.) 

^ Cha Est Kan in the original, Shdistd Khdn, for a long time 
Subaddr of Bengal. 

3 This was at Ahmaddbdd, at the end of 1652. (See Book I, chap, 
xix.) A second sale to Shdistd Khdn took place in 1660, at Choupar 
(Sholdpiir) in the Deccan (see p. 31); and a third at Dacca in 1666. 
(See Book I, chap, viii.) 



CHAP. II 


THE VALUE OF GOLDEN RUPEES 


19 


him that I would follow his advice, and he immediately 
ordered them to count out golden rupees to the amount 
which was due to me; but he claimed to give the 
golden rupee for 14^ of silver,^ although among the 
merchants they only pass for fourteen. I was not 
ignorant of that, but I thought it would answer better 
to receive my payment as this Prince wished to make 
it to me, in the hope of recompensing myself otherwise 
to the extent of what he wished to make me to lose, or 
at least of a part of it. I allowed two days to pass, 
after which I went to see him in order to say that I 
had endeavoured to dispose of these rupees for the 
price at which I had received them, but that I had 
done so unavailingly ; and that accordingly, upon the 
payment which he had made me of 96,000 rupees, I 
should lose 34283;^, the golden rupee which he wished 
me to take at 14 ^ rupees not being worth more than 
fourteen ; whereupon he flew into a passion, and told 
me that he would give so many strokes of the slipper 
to the Dutch Changer or Broker, which he would 
remember (for in India they never speak of blows with 
a stick), believing that he was the cause of what I had 
come to say to him, for not having been willing to take 
the golden rupees at the price which he had given 
them to me, and that he would teach these people to 
understand money, and that these were all old rupees, 
and that they were worth -j^g-th of a silver rupee more 
than those that were made then. As I knew the 
humour of Asiatic princes, with whom it is useless to 
excite oneself, I allowed him to say all he wished, and 
observing that he became quieter and began to smile, 

^ If we take the gold mohur at 31s. 6d., the value of the rupee at 14 
would be 2S. 3d., and at I4|- would be 2s. 2d. (Seepp. iS^z. and 18 n,) 



20 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


I asked him to permit me to bring back on the follow- 
ing day the amount which he had caused to be counted 
out to me, or that he would give me the balance of my 
payment which was still due, and that I would take the 
golden rupee at 14.-^ rupees, as he had told me that it 
was value for so much.^ The Prince then regarded 
me askance for some time without saying a word to 
me, and then he asked me whether I had with me that 
pearl which he had not been willing to buy. I replied 
that I had, and thereupon drew it from my bosom and 
gave it to him. It was a large pearl of good water, 
but badly shaped ; this had prevented him from taking 
it before. 

After I had given it to him, “ Say no more about 
it,” said he. “ In a word, how much do you want for 
this pearl.” I asked him 7000 rupees for it, and it is 
true that rather than carry it back to Finance I would 
have taken 3000. “ If I give you,” he replied, “ 5000 ® 

rupees for this pearl, you will be well repaid for the 
loss which you say you have sustained on the golden 
rupees. Come to-morrow and I shall pay you 5000 
rupees. I desire that you should leave contented, and 
you shall have in addition a khiV at^ and a horse.” I 
then made him a bow, and besought him to give me a 
young horse, fit for work, as I had a long journey to 
make. I accordingly received, on the following day, 

1 In Book I, chap, xix, alluding to the same transaction, he says he 
received them at I4|-th rupees. M. Joret,p. 158 has, I think, mixed 
Up this transaction with the one which took place at ShoMpiar, as 
mentioned on p. i8 in the year 1660. (See also p. 31.) 

2 In the earliest edition this figure is by an obvious misprint given 
as 7000. In the 1679 edition it is 5000, which is adopted here. 

3 Calaaf in the original, for killut^ ^ro-^txiy khiPat^ Hin., a robe 
of honour. 



CHAP. II 


A GIFT HORSE 


21 


as he had promised, the robe, mantle, two waistbands, 
and the turban, which constitute, as I have elsewhere 
remarked, the complete suit which these princes are 
accustomed to give to those whom they desire to 
honour. The mantle and the robe were of gold 
brocade, the two waistbands striped with gold and 
silver, the turban of cotton cloth was of fire colour 
striped with gold, and the horse, without a saddle, was 
covered by a housing of green velvet, with a small 
fringe of silver round it. The bridle was very narrow, 
and it had silver coins attached in some parts. I 
believe the horse had never been mounted, for as soon 
as it had arrived at the house of the Dutch, where I 
lodged on this occasion, a young man having mounted 
it, it began to jump in so strange a manner and to 
shake him so that having fallen in jumping over the 
roof of a hut which was in the court, the Dutchman 
barely escaped being killed. Having seen that this 
impetuous steed was not suitable for me, I returned it 
to SnAlSTi. Khan, and telling him what had happened, 
I added that I believed that he did not wish me to 
return to my country, as he had asked me to do, in 
order to bring him some rarity. During my discourse 
he only laughed, and having ceased, he ordered them 
to bring the horse which his father used to ride. It 
was a large Persian horse, which had formerly cost 
5000 icus'^ when young, but it was then more than 
twenty-eight years old.® They brought it, ready saddled 

1 ;^II25, at 4s. 6d. the ecu, 

2 Here there are irreconcilable discrepancies between this account 
of the transaction and that in Book I, chap, xix, as our author gives the 
original cost of the horse there at upwards of 3000 ecus^ and states that 
he sold it for 400 rupees, as he did not require it for his journey, to a 
Frenchman, whom he at the same time placed in Shdisti Khan’s service. 



22 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


and bridled, and the Prince desired me to mount it in 
his presence. It still had as good paces as any horse 
I had ever seen, and when I was mounted, he said, 
“ Well, are you content ? He will not give you a fall.” 
I thanked him, and at the same time took my leave of 
him ; and the following day, before my departure, he 
sent me a large basketful of apples. It was one of six 
which ShAh Jahan had sent him, and which had come 
from the kingdom of Kashmir,^ and there was also in 
the basket a large Persian melon. All taken together 
might be value for lOO rupees, and I presented it 
to the wife of the Dutch Commander. As for the 
horse, I took it to Golconda, where I sold it for 500 
rupees, old as it was, because it was still able to render 
good service. 

To return to the discourse on coins, I shall add to 
what I have already said of the gold pieces, that it 
does not do to carry to India neither Louis d’or, Span- 
ish nor Italian pistoles, nor other gold pieces coined 
of late years, because there is too much to be lost by 
them. The Indians, who have no knowledge of them 
as yet, refine all, and it is upon this refining that they 
make their profit. For the rest, each strives to pass 
his gold without the master of the customs knowing it ; 
and when the merchant has skill sufficient to conceal 
it, it gains for him the value of five or six of our so/s 
on every ducat. 

I come to the silver coins, which it is necessary to 
distinguish as coins of the country and foreign coins, 
and I shall speak first of the latter. 

The foreign silver coins which they take to India 

^ Kachemir in the original. 



CHAP. II 


RIX DALERS AND REALS 


23 


are German rix dalers^ and Spanish reals? The 
first are brought by the merchants who come from 
Poland, from little Tartary, and from the direction of 
Moscovie ; the others by those who come from Con- 
stantinople, Smyrna, and Aleppo, and the principal 
part by the Armenians who have sold their silks in 
Europe. All the merchants strive to pass their silver 
through Persia without being discovered, because, if 
the customs’ officers have wind of it, it would be neces- 
sary that the silver should be carried to the masters of 
the mint to be coined into abdsis^ which is the coinage 
of the King, and these abdsis on arrival in India are 
again coined into rupees, in which there is a loss to 
the merchant of 105 per cent, both on account of the 
coinage and on account of the King’s dues, which he 
must pay in Persia. 

In order to know in a few words how one loses 
this 10^ per cent between Persia and India, and 
sometimes more, according to the nature of the reals 
which are generally taken to Persia, it is necessary to 
remember what I have said of the coins and exchange 
of Persia in the preceding volume.^ I have remarked 
that the real in Persia passes for 13 shdhis,^ which 

^ Richedales in the original, for rix daler^ properly reichs thaler ; 
according to Sir Isaac Newton’s tables, most of the varieties were worth 
in sterling 4s. yd. Tavernier’s equivalent of 100 = 216 rupees gives, 
with the rupee at 2s. 3d., a value of 4s. lo^d. As in other cases, the 
sterling value may have been somewhat less than the exchange value ; 
hence the diiference. 

2 Reale in the original, for real^ or “piece of 8 reals” of Seville, 
varied from about 4s. to 4s. lod., the rupee being taken at 2s. 3d., and 
the ku at 4s. 6d., to which latter it was on the average equal. 

^ Abassis in the original, for ^ abdsis = is. 5d. to is. 6d, 

^ Persian Travels^ Paris edition, 1676, p. 120. 

^ Chaez in the original, for sMJii^ Pers. = 4d. to 4|-d. At present 
about 2-^d. only. 


24 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


are equal to 3:^ abdszs, and that sometimes, when silver 
is scarce, they give half a shAhi more ; that the abAsi 
is worth 4 shAhis, and the toman ^ 50 abAsis or 200 
sJiAhis. Thus, the real passing for 13 shAhis, you 
receive 6^ tomans for 100 reals. If you take 6-J tomans 
to India you receive for each toman 29-^ rupees, and, 
consequently, for 6 ^ tomans iqi-f rupees. But if you 
take to India Sevillian reals, of which I shall speak 
further on, for 100 you receive from 213 to 215 rupees ; 
and for Mexicans for 100 you receive only 212. 
When, then, for the 100 reals you receive only 212 
rupees, you gain on these 100 reals 10^ reals, and on 
the Sevillians you make a profit up to 1 1 per cent. 

It should then be remarked that there are three or 
four kinds of Spanish real, and that they give for 100, 
according to their standard, from 208 up to 214 and 
215 rupees. The best of all are the Sevillians, and 
when they are good weight you receive for 100, 213 
rupees, and at certain times up to 215, according to 
whether silver is scarce or plentiful. 

The Spanish real should weigh 3 gros^ and 7-|- 

1 Toman. In Fryer’s time (1677) = ;£3 ; 6 : 8. P. Della Valle’s 
estimate, sixty years earlier, was about ;^4:ios. ; Sir T. Herbert’s 
valuation, ^3:8:4; at present only worth 7's. 6d. (Yule and Burnell, 
Anglo-Indian Glossary.) Fifty abdsis, as above, equal £2 , : los. to 
;^3:iSs. "Forty-sfac livres and li denier (at is. 6d.), the equivalent 
given by Tavernier in Book III, chap, xxix = ;i{j3 ; 9s., while 29^ rupees 
at 2S. 3<I.=;if3:6:6J only, and 15 eats at 4s. 6d. = ;£3:7;6. But 
Tavernier, in his account of Persian coins, expressly says that the value 
given in livres is the most exact. (See Persian Travels, p. 122, Paris 
edition of 1676.) 

2 The ^0^=60.285 grains Troy, and the French grain = .S 27 grs. 
Troy .-. 3 gros 7j^j.= 187 grains Troy. The weight of the jnastre, 
or Seville piece of eight, was 17 dw. 12 grs., and that of two rupees, 
both, according to Sir Isaac Newton, = 14 dw. 20 grs., the difference 
being, therefore, 2 dw. 1 6 grs. or 64 grs. ; I therefore conclude that the 



CHAP. II 


GERMAN RIX DALERS 


25 


grains more than 2 rupees, but the silver of the rupees 
is much better, for the rupee is of the standard of 1 1 
deniers grams, and the Sevillian real, like our 
white dm, is of the standard of only 1 1 deniers. The 
Mexican real is of but 10 deniers and 21 grains. For 
the Spanish real which weighs 73 vals you receive 4.^ 
mahmUdis, and a mahmUdi is worth 20 paisd, and thus 
for the Spanish real you receive 90 paisd, but they 
must be good,^ and, as I have said, weighing 73 vals ; 
81 vals”- making an ounce, and the val being of 7 
deniers (standard). 

As for the German rix dalers, as they are heavier 
than the reals, you give for 100 up to 116^ rupees; 
upon which it should be remarked that, in giving for 
the 100 reals and the 100 rix dalers to 215 and 216 
rupees, it appears as if every rupee should consequently 
be worth less than 30 sols. But, on the other hand, if 
the merchant counts the cost of carriage of the silver 


3 gros above must either be a misprint for i, or that the value given to 
the gros is three times too great ; however the 62 J grs. so deduced as 
the difference is slightly less than the 64 grs. deduced from Sir Isaac 
Newton. The absolute weight of the real is given by Tavernier at 73 
vals^ or say 438 grs. Troy ; and the weight of two rupees, according to 
him also, was 18 deniers 2 =.454 French grs, = 380 Troy grs., and 

the difference =58 grs., also too little. 

^ Pecha in the original, for paisd. Taking the paisd at .54 of a 
penny (see Appendix), 90 of them would be equal to 4s. ojd, i,e. the 
value of a Spanish real; but this is too low, and therefore these paisds 
must have been worth .6 of a penny, or '‘^goodP^ as Tavernier 
remarks. 

2 Val, The French once^^^ being equal to 482.312 grs. Troy, 
would give a value of nearly 5.95 grs. to the val. The tola is said, on 
p. 34, to be = 32 vals^ and therefore the val = 7 French grs. — 5.86 
grs. Troy. Thevenot gives the value at 3 gongy {ghincki\ and this 
with the gMmchi at 1.79 grs. = 5.37 grs. Troy. See Appendix to this 
volume. 

^ This must be a misprint for 216. 



26 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


and the duties, he will find that each rupee costs him 
more. All these reals and rix dalers are weighed by 
the lOO, and when the weight is short they add small 
stones as when they weigh gold, as I shall presently 
relate. But, in order that the merchant obtains value 
he must take care that all the reals of Mexico and the 
Sevillians^ weigh 21 deniers and 8 grains, i.e. 512 
grains ; and as for our white 4 cu^ it ought to weigh 
21 deniers and 3 grains, which are equal to grains.^ 
I pass on to the coins of the country. The Indians 
have for their silver money the rupee, the half, the 
quarter, the eighth, and the sixteenth. The weight of 
the rupee is 9 deniers and i grain, and the standard of 
the silver ii deniers and 14 grains. They have also 
a silver coin which they call mahmiUdi,^ but it is only 
current in Surat and in the province of GujarAt.® 

The small coin of India is of copper, and is called 
paisd, which is worth about two of our Hards. There 


1 The piastre^ or Seville piece of eight, weighed, according to Sir 
Isaac Newton, 17 dw. 12 gr. = 420 grs. Troy, and its sterling value in 
silver was 54d. = 4s. 6d. 

2 The old ecu of France, of 60 sols Tournois^ weighed also, according 
to Sir Isaac Newton, 17 dw. 12 gr. = 420 grs. Troy, and its sterling 
value was also 4s. 6d. 

® The 509 grs. of Tavernier is a misprint for 507 ; it is repeated in 
the edition of 1713. The equivalent of 507 French grains is 424.5 
Troy grains, or 4.5 grs. more than Sir Isaac Newton’s figure in pre- 
ceding note. 

^ Mamoudi in the original, for mahnii'cdi =20 paisd^ or two-fifths 
of a rupee .*. = 10. 8d., the rupee being 2s. 3d. Other relations 
given by our author in his account of Persian money give a less value 
for the 7 nahmudi^ namely, one-sixteenth of the Venetian sequin,, and one- 
eighth of the Spanish dollar, or yd. and 6Jd. The value as deduced 
from the abdsi would seem, however, to be the mean of these, or from 
8|d. to 9d. nearly. Several writers give to the Surat mahmMi a value 
of one shilling. It was subject to constant variation. 

5 Guzerate in the original. 



CHAP, n 


INDIAN COINS 


27 


are some of them of a half paisd, of two paisA, and of 
four. According to the province you are in, you 
receive for the silver rupee more or fewer of these 
pais A. On my last journey the rupee at Surat was 
at 49 paisA, but there are times when it is worth 50, 
and others when it falls to 46.^ At Agra and at 
JahAnAbAd it is worth 55 and paisA, and the reason 
of that is, that the nearer you approach to the copper 
mines ^ the more paisA you receive for the rupee. As 
for the mahmAdi, it is always at 20 paisd. There are still 
two other kinds of small money in the empire of the 
Great Mogul: these are small bitter almonds and 
shells. In the province of GujarAt alone they use as 
small change these bitter almonds, which they bring from 
’Persia, as I have remarked in the first part of my 
history. They grow in dry and arid places between 
rocks, and the tree which produces them closely 
resembles our broom. They call these almonds 
baddm^ and they are so bitter that colocynth is not 
more so, and there is no need for fearing that children 
will amuse themselves by eating them. They some- 
times give 35, sometimes 40, of them for xh^paisAi^ 
The other small money consists of shells called 
cowries, which have the edges inverted, and they are 

1 Fifty paisa at .54d. (see p. 25) = 2S. 3d. Thevenot, although 
he says that the rupee = 29-30 sols, adds that it equalled 32|- to 33J 
paisd only. {Voyages, Paris, 1684, p. 52.) 

2 There is no further indication as to the position of these copper 
mines ; probably they were those now known at Singhdna and other 
localities in Rajputana. Full accounts of the ancient mines there will 
be found in the Econo 7 nic Geology of India, p. 259. 

® Baden in the original, for iaddtn (Pers. and Hin.), fruit of Ainyg- 
dalus communis, L., var. canara, D.C. 

^ Thevenot says 68 ; perhaps he meant a double paisd. ( Vtyages, 

P- S3-) 



28 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


not found in any other part of the world save only in 
the Maldive Islands.^ It is the principal source of 
revenue of the King of these Islands, for they export 
them to all the States of the Great Mogul, to the 
kingdoms of Bijapur and Golconda, and even to the 
islands of America,® to serve as money. Close to the 
sea they give up to 8o for the/aA^ and that diminishes 
as you leave the sea, on account of carriage ; so that at 
Agra you receive but 50 or 55 for ^^paisd. Finally, 
according to the manner of counting by the Indians — 

100,000 rupees make a lekke,^ 

100,000 lekkes „ . kra^lr,^ 

100,000 kraurs ,, padan^ 

100, OQQ padans „ nil. 

In India a village must be very small if it has not 
a money-changer, whom they call Shroff,^ who acts as 
banker to make remittances of money and issue letters 
of exchange. As, in general, these Changers have an 
understanding with the Governors of Provinces, they 
enhance the rupee at their will for paisd and the paisd 

1 This is incorrect, as money cowries {Cypraa monetd) have a much 
wider distribution, though the Maldives have furnished a large proportion 
of the supply for currency. The name is cori in the original. 

® A trade in these cowries to the West Coast of Africa and the 
West Indies still exists, I believe. 

3 Lack or Ldkh^ Hin. 

^ hcrore, or ^orfgxa^tx\ykaror{msi..), is ioo.lakhs, or 10,000,000 
(ten millions). Tavernier is wrong, in stating it to be one thousand 
times more. However, Thevenot makes a similar statement ( Voyage, 
p. 52); and it maybe remarked that there are to be found similar 
contradictory statements, by different authorities, as to the values of 

Millions, trillions, etc. Comp, .A.i?Tr-i-Ahbd.Ti, Gladwin, ed, 1800, vol. 
ii, p. 391. 

5 The value of tho padatn is variously given as 10 to 1000 billions. 

For Cheyaf 'ro. the original. Shroff, from Ar. SaTrdf, a money-chansfer 
or banker. 




CHAP, n 


SPURIOUS MONEY 


29 


for these shells. All the Jews who occupy themselves 
with money and exchange in the empire of the Grand 
Seigneur pass for being very sharp ; but in India they 
would scarcely be apprentices to these Changersd 

\Here follows, in the original, a table giving the 
letters used as numbers, which need not be reproduced.~\ 

They have a very inconvenient custom for 
payments, and I have already remarked upon it in 
reference to golden rupees when one makes a payment 
in that coin. They say that the longer time that a 
rupee of silver has been coined the less is it worth than 
those coined at the time, or which have been coined a 
short time, because the old ones having often passed 
by hand, it wears them, and they are in consequence 
lighter. Thus, when you make a sale, it is necessary 
to say that you require to be paid in Shah-JahAni® 
rupees, i.e. in new silver, otherwise they will pay you 
in rupees coined fifteen or twenty years or more, in 
which there may be up to 4 per cent of loss. For, for 
those which have not been coined within two years 
they already demand ^ per cent, or at least -g-th ; and 
the poor people who do not know how to read the year 
when they coined these rupees or paisd, are subject to 
be cheated, because they always deduct something 
from them, one paisd or half a paisd on a rupee, and 
on paisd three or four cowries. 

As for false silver, but little is met with. If by 
chance there should be a false rupee in a bag given by 
a private merchant, it pays better to cut it and to lose 
it than to say anything about it, because if they hear 

1 This remarkable testimony to the sharpness of the natives is 
applicable also at the present day. 

2 Cha Jenni in the original, i,e. coined in the reign of Shdh Jahdn. 



30 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


of it one has to run some risk, the order of the King 
being that you must return the bag to him who has 
grjYgQ and it goes thence from one to another until 
they are able to discover the false coiner, and when 
one is detected, for sole punishment they merely lop 
off a finger. If it happens that they are unable to find 
the false coiner, and that they pronounce him who has 
given the silver to be not guilty, he is freed on payment 
of some fine. It is this which yields such large profits 
to the Changers, for when one receives or when one 
makes any payment he shows them the silver, and they 
receive for their commission ^ rupee per cent. 

As for the silver which goes out from the sarqwt ^ or 
treasury of the King, there is never anything base in 
it, for all that goes into it is carefully examined by the 
Changers of the King, and the great nobles also have 
their own. Before the silver goes into the treasury 
they throw it into a large charcoal fire, and when the 
rupees are red they extinguish the fire by means of 
water, after which they withdraw them. If any one is 
found which is not perfectly white, and has the slightest 
trace of alloy, it is immediately cut. Whenever these 
rupees enter the treasury they strike them with a punch, 
which makes a small hole without piercing ; and there 
are some of them which have seven or eight holes of this 
kind, i.e. which have entered the treasury seven or 
eight times. They are all placed by the thousand in 
sacks with the seal of the grand treasurer, to which is 
added the number of years since they have been coined. 
It is in this that the profit consists which the treasurers 

^ Sarquet^ possibly for sakhira^ Hin., z>. treasure or treasury, but 
ii more probably represents sarkdr, an abbreviation for mdUUsarkar^ 
or khazdna-i-say'kdr^ i,e, the Government Treasury. 



CHAP. 11 


SHAISTA KHAN 


31 


make, both those of the King and those of the nobles 
of the kingdom. When one makes a sale it is in new 
rupees, coined in the same year ; but when one comes 
to receive payment the treasurers desire to make it in 
old rupees, by which one stands to lose up to 6 per 
cent ; and if one wishes to have new silver, he must 
resolve to compound with them. On my fifth journey 
I went to see ShAistA KhAn,^ as I had promised him 
to do so on the preceding occasion, having pledged 
myself that he would be the first who should see what 
I had brought. Immediately on my arrival at Surat I 
let him know, and I received a command to go to meet 
him at Choupart, a town of the Deccan ^ to which he 
had laid siege. Having reached him in a short time, 
I sold him with but few words the greater part of what 
I had brought from Europe, and he told me that he 
awaited from day to day the money which they should 
send him from Surat to pay the army and to pay me 
at the same time for that which he had bought from me. 
I was unable to believe, however, that this Prince was 
with so large an army without having much money with 
him, and I rather thought that he desired to make me 
lose something on the gold or silver pieces which I 
should receive for my payment, as he had done on my 
previous journey. The thing happened as I had fore- 
seen ; but for my sustenance and that of my people 
and cattle, he ordered that they should bring me food 

1 SMistd KMn. See p. 18/2. 

2 In Book II, chap, xi, this place is spelt Choupar. It was probably 
Sholdpur, in the Deccan. The sale was made in 1660, during Tavernier's 
fifth visit to India. In his Persian Travels^ he states (Book IV, p. 467) 
that on his sixth journey, when at Ispahan, in 1664, he told the King 
that he had sold the jewels, which he had shown to him on the previous 
occasion, to Shdisti Khdn for 120,000 rupees. 



32 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


in abundance, both evening and morning, and on most 
days he sent to invite me to eat with him. Ten or 
twelve days passed, during which I heard no mention 
of the money for which he waited, and being resolved 
to take leave of him, I went to his tent. He appeared 
somewhat surprised, and, regarding me with a sullen 
countenance, “Wherefore,” said he to me, “do you 
wish to leave without being paid ? and who would pay 
you afterwards if you went away without receiving your 
money ? ” At these words, assuming a look as proud 
as his: “My King,” I replied, “will cause me to be 
paid ; for he is so generous that he will pay all his 
subjects when they have not had satisfaction for what 
they have sold in foreign countries.” “ And in what 
manner would thy King recoup himself ? ” replied 
he, as in a rage. “With two or three good vessels of 
war,” I replied, “which he will send to the port of 
Surat or towards its coasts, to await those coming 
from Mocha.” He appeared stung by this reply, and, 
not daring to carry his ill-humour further, he at once 
commanded his treasurer to give me a letter of exchange 
on AurangabAd. At which I was very glad, because 
it was a place through which I had to pass in order to 
go to Golconda,^ and which, moreover, spared me 
carriage and the risk to my money. The following 
day I received my letter of exchange, and took my 
leave of the Prince, who was no longer angry, and he 
requested me if I returned to India npt to omit to go 


^ There appears to be no other indication of Tavernier’s destination 
at this time ; he probably spent, according to M. Joret, the latter part 
of this year (1660) in this journey to Golconda and the return to Surat, 
embarking for Bandar Abbas at the end of the same year or the 
beginning of 1661. 



CHAP. II 


TAVERNIER’S PAYMENT 


33 


and see him ; which I did on my sixth and last journey.^ 
When I arrived at Surat he was in Bengal, where I 
went to seek him, and he bought from me the residue 
of my goods which I had not been able to sell either to 
the King of Persia or to the Great Mogul. 

To return to my payment, having arrived at 
AurangabAd, I went to seek the Grand Treasurer, 
who had never previously seen me, but he told me 
that he knew wherefore I had come to see him, that 
three days previously he had received notice, and that 
he had already drawn from the treasury the money 
which he was to pay me.^ When all the bags 
required for my payment had been brought, I caused 
one of them to be opened by my Changer, who saw 
that it contained rupees on which 2 per cent would 
be lost. Upon which I thanked the Treasurer, and told 
him that I did not understand that sort of thing, that I 
would send one of my people to complain to ShAistA 
KhAn and ask him to order that I should be paid in 
new silver, or I would go to reclaim my goods : this I 
straightway did. But having sent a man to him, and 
getting no reply by the time that I might have received 
one, I went to tell the Treasurer that since I had no 
news from the Prince I was going myself to take back 
what I had sold. I believe that he had already received 
instructions as to what he should do, for seeing that I 
was resolved to start he said he would be grieved by 
the trouble I was taking, and it would be better that 

^ In 1666. (See Book I, chap, viii.) 

2 Elsewhere (Book 1 1 , chap, xi) he says the payment was made at 
Dultabat (Daulatdbdd) by the Treasurer, who, four days previously, had 
received an advice of his coming. In that passage, so far from alluding 
to difficulties, he praises the exactitude of the Indians in reference to 
matters of trade. 


VOL. I 


D 



34 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


we should agree with one another. In short, after 
several discussions concerning the 2 per cent which 
they desired I should lose, I obtained i per cent of 
it; and I would have lost the other except for the 
fortunate meeting with a Shroff who had to receive 
payment of a letter of exchange on Golconda ; for this 
Shroff, not having money at hand, was very glad to 
accommodate himself with mine, causing me to receive 
the same sum in new silver at Golconda at fifteen 
days’ sight. 

Finally, these Changers, in order to test silver, make 
use of thirteen small pieces, one half of copper and the 
other of silver, which are the “touches.”^ 

These thirteen pieces, being all of different stand- 
ards, are not used by them except when a small 
quantity of silver or some worked silver is in question ; 
for in the case of a large amount they carry it to the 
refiner. All this silver is bought by the weight called 
tola, which weighs 9 deniers and 8 grains, or 32 vals, 
and 81 vals make, as I have said, one once so that 100 
tolas makes 38 onces 21 deniers and Z grains. 

The following are the different valties of the 13 
standards of silver. 

The first and lowest standard they take at 1 5 paisd 
the tola, which make of our money . . 9 sols 2 deniers.^ 
The 2d at 18 paisd, which are equal to 10 „ 2 „ 

3^ .. 20 „ „ „ 12 „ 6 

4th „ 23 ,, ,, ,, 14 ,, 6 ,, 

1 The French original contains a figure of the touchstones. A 
description of them will be also found in the Ain-i-Akbdri. 

^ See p. 35. 

® As the sol was the sixtieth part of the dcu of 4s. 6d., its value was 
.9 of a penny, and the ordinary pcdsd of Tavernier was consequently 
worth .54 of a penny. See p. 35 «. and Appendix. 



CHAP. II 


PARSIMONY OF THE SHROFFS 


35 


The 5th at 26 paisd, which 
6th „ 29 „ 

7th )) 33 >> >( 

8th „ 35 „ 

9t^ >• 38 )» )) 

loth „ 40 „ 

nth „ 43 „ 

nth „ 46 
13th „ 49 


are equal to 1 5 sols 10 denier s. 

17 >. 6 

}j ^9 >> ^ )y 

,, 20 ,, 10 ,, 

-> 22 „ 6 „ 

t1 24 )J 2 ^3, 

2^ 3) 10 33 

J> 27 33 6 33 

.. 29 ,3 2 


I must not forget to remark here on the extreme 
parsimony both of these Shroffs, or Changers, and of 
all Indians in general ; and it will suffice to give an 
example of it which is very special3 and of which 
Europeans are not as yet aware. It is3 that of all the 
gold which remains on the touchstone when an assay 
has been made3 and of which we here make no account3 
far from allowing so small a thing to be lost, they 
collect it all by means of a ball, made half of black 
pitch, and half of wax, with which they rub the stone 
which carries the gold, and at the end of some years 
they burn the ball and find the gold which it has 
accumulated. This ball is about the size of our tennis- 
court balls, and the stone is like those which our 
goldsmiths commonly use. 

'This is all that I have been able to remark of 
special importance with regard to the customs and 
coins of India, and there only remains for me to speak 
of the exchange. 

As all goods produced in the Empire of the Great 
Mogul, and a portion of those of the Kingdom of 
Golconda and the Kingdom of Bijapur, reach 
Surat to be exported by sea to different places of 



36 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Asia and Europe, when one leaves Surat to go for 
the purchase of these goods in the towns from whence 
they are obtained, as at Lahor, Agra, Amadabat, 
Seronge, Brampour, Daca, Patna, Banarou, Gol- 
CONDA, Decan, Visapour, and Dultabad,^ one takes 
silver from Surat and disposes of it at the places 
where one goes, giving coin for coin at par. But 
when it happens that the merchant finds himself short 
of money in these same places, and that he has need 
of it to enable him to pay for the goods which he has 
bought, it is necessary for him to meet it at Surat, 
when the bill is due, which is at two months, and by 
paying a high rate of exchange. 

At Lahore on Surat the exchange goes up to 6| 
per cent. 

At Agra from 4^ to 5. 

At Ahmad abAd from i to i|. 

At SiRONJ to 3. 

At Burhanpur from 2|- to 3. 

At Dacca to 10. 

At Patna from 7 to 8. 

At Benares to 6. 

At these three last places they only give letters of ex- 
change on Agra, and at Agra they give others on Surat, 
the whole only amounting to the sum I have stated. 

At Golconda from 4 to 5. 

And on Goa the same. 

At Deccan to 3. 

At.BlJAPUR to 3. 

At Daulatabad from i to i-^. 

1 Lahore, Agra, Ahmaddbdd, Sironj, Berhdmpur or Burhdnpur, 
Dacca, Benares, Golconda, Deccan, Bijapur, and Daulatdbdd. These 
spellings will be used on subsequent pages. 



CHAP. II 


MERCHANTS’ RISKS 


37 


In some years the exchange rises from i to 2 per 
cent, when there are Rajas, or petty tributary Princes, 
who interfere with trade, each claiming that the 
goods ought to traverse his territory and pay him 
custom. There are two in particular between Agra 
and AhmadAbAd, one of whom is the Raja of Antivar,^ 
and the other the Raja of Bergam,^ who disturb the 
merchants much in reference to this matter. One 
may, however, avoid passing the territories of these 
two Princes by taking another route from Agra to 
Surat by way of Sironj and BurhAnpur ® ; but these 
are fertile lands intersected by several rivers, the 
greater number of which are without bridges and with- 
out boats, and it is impossible to pass until two months 
after the rainy season. It is for this reason that the 
merchants who have to be at Surat in the season for 
going to sea, generally take their way through the 
country of these two Rajas, because they are able to 
traverse it at all seasons, even in the time of the rains, 
which consolidate the sand with which nearly the 
whole country is covered. 

Besides, it is not to be wondered at that the ex- 
change is so high, for those who lend the money run, 
for their part, the risk that if the goods are stolen the 
money is lost to them. 

When you arrive at Surat, to embark, you find 
there also plenty of money. For it is the principal 
trade of the nobles of India to place their money 
in vessels in speculations for Hormuz, Bassora, and 

1 A misprint, probably, for Dantivar (see Book I, chap, v), i.e, 
Danta, or Dantawdr, a State in Gujardt. 

2 Probably the Bargant of Book I, chap. v. In the edition of 1713 
it is given as Bergant. The proper name is possibly Wungdon. 

3 For description of Sironj and Burhdnpur see chap. iv. 



38 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Mocha, and even for Bantam, Achin, and the 
Philippines. For Mocha and Bassora the exchange 
ranges from 22 to 24 per cent, and for Hormuz from 
16 to 20 ; and for the other places which I have 
named the exchange varies in proportion to the dis- 
tance. But if the goods happen to be lost by tempest, 
or to fall into the hands of the Malabaris,^ who are the 
pirates of the Indian seas, the money is lost to 
those who have risked lending it. 

I have but one word to say, in addition, regarding 
the weights and measures. Here, in the margin, is 
the 5th part of the ell of Agra, and the 4th of the ell 
of Ahmad abAd and Surat. As for the weights, the 
ordinary mand is 69 livres, and the livre is of 16 onces; 
but the mand, which is used to weigh indigo, is only 
53 livres. At Surat you speak of a seer, which is 
\\ livres^ and the livre is 16 onces, 

1 Malavares in the original. 

2 This must mean one |ths of a livre^ as elsewhere in this volume ; 
that is about the relation, roughly speaking, namely, 12 French onces. 
The present authorised British weights are — 

80 tolas (or rupee’s weight) = i seer = lbs. Troy. 

40 seers = i mand or maund = . 100 „ „ 



CHAPTER III 


Concerning carriages and the manner of travelling hi 

India. 

Before setting out for Agra, it is appropriate to 
speak of the carriages and of the manner of travelling 
in India, which, in my opinion, is not less convenient 
than all that they have been able to invent in order that 
one may be carried in comfort either in France or in 
Italy. Different from (the custom in) Persia, one 
does not employ in India in caravans or journeys 
either asses, mules, or horses, all being carried there 
on oxen or by waggon, as the country is sufficiently 
level.^ If any merchant takes a horse from Persia he 
only does it for show, and to have him led by hand, 
or in order to sell him advantageously to some noble. 

They give an ox a load weighing 300 or 350 
livres, and it is an astonishing sight to behold caravans 
numbering 10,000 or 1 2,000 oxen together, for the trans- 
port of rice, corn, and salt — in the places where they 
exchange these commodities — carrying rice to where 
corn only grows, and corn to where rice only grows, 

1 The English translation of this passage by John Phillips, in 1677 
and 1684, is, like many others, curiously inaccurate, and, as a sample, 
it may be given here : “ Quite otherwise it is in Persia, where they 
neither make use of asses, mules, nor horses, but transport all their wares 
to the Indies upon oxen or in wains, their countries being so near to 
one another 1” 



40 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


and salt to the places where there is none. They use 
camels also for caravans, but rarely, and they are 
specially reserved to carry the baggage of the nobles. 
When the season presses, and they wish to have the 
goods quickly at Surat, in order to ship them, they 
load them on oxen, and not on carts. As all the 
territories of the Great Mogul are well cultivated, the 
fields are enclosed by good ditches, and each has its 
tank or reservoir for irrigation. This it is which is so 
inconvenient for travellers, because, when they meet 
caravans of this description in narrow roads, they are 
sometimes obliged to wait two or three days till all 
have passed. Those who drive these oxen follow no 
other trade all their lives ; they never dwell in houses, 
and they take with them their women and children.^ 
Some among them possess loo oxen, others have 
more or fewer, and they all have a Chief, who acts as a 
prince, and who always has a chain of pearls suspended 
from his neck. When the caravan which carries corn 
and that which carries rice meet, rather than give way 
one to the other, they often engage in very sanguinary 
encounters. The Great Mogul, considering one day 
that these quarrels were prejudicial to commerce and 
to the transport of food in his kingdom, arranged that 
the Chiefs of the two caravans should come to see 
him. When they had arrived, the King, after he had 
advised them for their mutual benefit to live for the 
future in harmony with each other, and not to fight 

1 The well-known Brinjards perform most of this carrying trade in 
India at present. In the Central Provinces, South-Western Bengal, and 
the northern districts of Madras, I have met with large numbers of 
them ; and in Sambalpur I have seen their fixed depSts, where the infirm 
are left while the others are on their journeys. Railways have driven 
them from many of the routes which they used to follow. 



CHAP. Ill 


CARRIER TRIBES 


41 


any more when they met, presented each of them 
with a lakh, or 100,000 rupees,^ and a chain of 
pearls. 

In order to enable the reader to understand this 
manner of carrying in India, it should be remarked that 
among the idolaters of this country there are four tribes, 
whom they call Manaris^ of which each numbers 
about one hundred thousand souls. These people 
dwell in tents, as I have said, and have no other trade 
but to transport provisions from one country to another. 
The first of these tribes has to do with corn only, the 
second with rice, the third with pulse, and the fourth 
with salt, which it obtains from Surat, and even from 
as far as Cape Comorin. You can also distinguish 
these tribes in this manner — their priests, of whom I 
shall elsewhere speak, mark those of the first with a 
red gum, of the size of a crown, on the middle of the 
forehead, and make a streak along the nose, attaching 
to it above some grains of corn, sometimes nine, some- 
times twelve, in the form of a rose. Those of the 
second are marked with a yellow gum, in the same 
places, but with grains of rice ; those of the third with 
a gray gum, with grains of millet, and also on the 
shoulders, but without placing grains there. As for 
those of the fourth, they carry a lump of salt, suspended 
from the neck in a bag, which weighs sometimes from 
8 to 10 livres (for the heavier it is the more honour 
they have in carrying it), with which, by way of penance 
before praying, they beat their stomachs every morning. 

1 See p. 28 n. 

2 Manarisj PMundaris or Mundas, with whom, however, the Brin- 
jdras or Lubhdnds cannot be identified. See Anglo-Indian Glosiary^ 

P- 333. 



42 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


All have in general a string, or tress, round the 
shoulders, from which hangs a small box of silver in 
the form of a reliquary, of the size of a good hazel nut, 
in which they keep a superstitious writing which their 
priests have enclosed in it. They place them also on 
their oxen, and on the other animals born in their 
herds, for which they entertain a special affection, 
loving them as dearly as they do their children, 
especially when they have none of the latter.^ 

The dress of the women is but a simple cloth, white 
or coloured, which makes five or six turns like a 
petticoat from the waist downwards, as if they had 
three or four one above the other. From the waist 
upwards they tatoo their skin with flowers, like as 
when one applies cupping glasses, and they paint these 
flowers divers colours with the juice of roots,^ in such 
a manner that it seems as though their skin was a 
flowered fabric. 

While the men load their animals in the morning 
and the women fold up their tents, the priests who 
follow them elevate, in the most beautiful parts of the 
p lain where they are encamped, an idol in the form of 
a serpent, entwined about a staff of six or seven feet 
in height,® and each one in file goes to make reverence 
to it, the girls turning round it three times. After all 
have passed, the priests take 'care to remove the idol 
and to load it on an ox allocated for that purpose. 

The caravans of waggons do not ordinarily consist 
of more than one hundred or two hundred at the most. 

1 Tavernier here seems to perpetrate something very like a “ bull.” 

2 The English translation of John Phillips has it juice of “ grapes 
but the original word is racines^ not raisins. 

3 This cannot fail to suggest the brazen serpent which Moses lifted 
up in the wilderness. Here the allusion is to ndg^ or snake worship. 



CHAP. Ill 


TRAVELLING IN INDIA 


43 


Each waggon is drawn by ten or twelve oxen, and 
accompanied by four soldiers, whom the owner of the 
merchandise is obliged to pay. Two of them walk on 
each side of the waggon, over which there are two cords 
passed, and the four ends are held by the soldiers, so 
that if the waggon threatens to upset in a bad place, 
the two soldiers who are on the opposite side hold the 
cords tight, and prevent it turning over. 

All the waggons which come to Surat from Agra 
or from other places in the Empire, and which return 
by Agra and JahAnAbad,^ are compelled to carry lime, 
which comes from Broach, and which, as soon as it is 
used, becomes as hard as marble.® It is a great source 
of profit to the King, who sends this lime where he 
pleases ; but, on the other hand, he takes no dues from 
the waggons. 

1 come to the manner of travelling in India, where 
oxen take the place of horses, and there are some 
of them whose paces are as easy as those of our 
hacks. But you should take care when you buy or 
hire an ox for riding that he has not horns longer than 
a foot, because, if they are longer, when the flies sting 
him, he chafes and tosses back the head, and may 
plant a horn in your stomach, as has happened several 
times. These oxen allow themselves to be driven like 
our horses, and have for sole bridle a cord, which 
passes through the tendon of the muzzle or the nostrils. 
In level tracts, where there are no stones, they do not 
shoe these oxen, but they always do so in rough places, 
both on account of the pebbles and because of the 
heat, which may injure the hoof. Whereas in Europe 

1 Janabat in the original. 

2 Coral or shell lime probably, which make the best chundin^ 



44 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


we attach our oxen by the horns; those of India have 
a large hump on the neck,^ which keeps in position 
a leather collar about four fingers wide, which they 
have only to throw over the head when they harness 
them. 

They have also, for travelling, small, very light 
carriages, which can contain two persons ; ^ but usually 
one travels alone, in order to be more comfortable, 
being then able to have his clothes with him; the 
canteen of wine and some small requisites for the 
journey having their place under the carriage, to which 
they harness a pair of oxen only. These carriages, 
which are provided, like ours, with curtains and 
cushions, are not slung; but, on the occasion of my 
last journey, I had one made after our manner, and the 
two oxen by which it was drawn cost me very nearly 
600 rupees.® The reader need not be astonished at 
this price, for there are some of them which are strong, 
and make journeys lasting 60 days, at 12 or 15 leagues 
a day, and always at the trot. When they have ac- 
complished half the journey, they give to each two 
or three balls of the size of our penny rolls, made* of 
wheaten flour, kneaded with butter and black sugar, 
and in the evening they have a meal of chick-peas, 

1 The hump on the shoulders was unknown to John Phillips, the 
author of the English translation of 1677 and 1684, so he renders this 
passage, “ the Indians only put a thick truss upon their necks, that 
keeps,” etc. This is a good example of the kind of mistake many trans- 
lators have fallen into when, in ignorance of local facts, they have 
strained their author’s words in order to make sense, as they conceive it. 

2 The vehicle known as a tonga in India. 

® I believe as much as Rs.500, and perhaps more, is sometimes 
given now in Bombay and the Central Provinces for a good pair of 
trotting bullocks. The pace they can keep up has to be experienced 
in order to be properly realised. 



CHAP. Ill 


PALLANKEENS 


45 


crushed and steeped in water for half an hour. The 
hire of a carriage amounts to about a rupee a day. 
The journey from Surat to Agra occupies thirty-five 
or forty days’ journey by road, and you pay for the 
whole journey from 40 to 45 rupees. From Surat to 
Golconda it is nearly the same distance and the same 
price, and it is in the same proportion throughout the 
whole of India. 

Those who can afford to take their ease make use 
of a pallankeen^ in which they travel very comfortably. 
It is a kind of bed, of 6 or 7 feet long and 3 feet wide, 
with a small rail all round. A sort of cane, called 
bamboo,^ which they bend when young, in order to 
cause it to take the form of a bow in the middle, 
sustains the cover of the pallankeen, which is of satin 
or brocade ; and when the sun shines on one side, 
an attendant, who walks near the pallankeen, takes 
care to lower the covering. There is another, who 
carries at the end of a stick a kind of basket-work 
shield, covered with some kind of beautiful stuff, in 
order to promptly shelter the occupant of the pallan- 
keejt from the heat of the sun when it turns and strikes 
him on the face.® The two ends of the bamboo are 
attached on both sides to the body of the pallankeen 
between two poles, joined together in a saltier, or St. 
Andrew’s Cross, and each of these poles is 5 or 6 feet 

^ Pallanquin in the original. Palki and Pallankeen are the terms 
now used in India. 

2 Bambouc in the original. Bamboo {Bambusa arundinacea^ etc.) 
It is not necessary to grow bamboos to a particular shape, as by means 
of fire they can be made to bend into the required forms. Still, they 
are so trained sometimes during growth, I believe. 

^ The English translation of 1684 says, “when he turns and lies on 
his face.’’ 



46 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


long. Some of these bamboos cost as much as 200 
dcus, and I have paid 125 for one. Three men, at 
most, place themselves at each of these two ends, to 
carry the pallankeen on the shoulder, the one on the 
right and the other on the left, and they travel in this 
way faster than our chairmen in Paris, and with an 
easier pace, being trained to the trade from an early 
age. When you wish to make haste, and travel up to 
13 or 14 leagues a day, you take 12 men to carry the 
pallankeen, so that they may relieve one another from 
time to time. You pay each, for everything, only 4 
rupees a month, but you pay up to 5 rupees when the 
journey is long, and when it is required to travel for 
more than sixty days. 

Whether by carriage or pallankeen he who desires 
to travel with honour in India ought to take with him 
20 or 30 armed men, some with bows and arrows and 
others with muskets, and you pay them as much per 
month as to those who carry the pallankeen. Some- 
times, for greater show, you carry a flag. This is 
always done by the English and Dutch, for the honour 
of their Companies. These attendants not only con- 
duce to your honour, but they watch also for your 
protection, and act as sentinels in the night, relieving 
one another, and striving to give you no cause of 
complaint against them. For it should be mentioned 
that in the towns where you hire them they have a 
head man who answers for their honesty, and when 
you employ them, each one gives him a rupee. ^ 

In the large villages there is generally a Muham- 
madan Governor, and there you find sheep, fowl, 
and pigeons for sale ; but in the places where there 

1 A custom still common in India. 



CHAP. Ill 


MEASURES OF DISTANCE 


47 


are only Banians, you only find flour, rice, vegetables, 
and milk. 

The great heats of India compel travellers who are 
not accustomed to it to travel by night, in order to rest 
by day. When they enter towns which are closed 
they must leave by sunset, if they wish to take the 
road. For night being come, and the gates closed, 
the Governor of the place, who has to answer for 
thefts which occur within his jurisdiction, does not 
allow any one to go out, and says that it is the King’s 
order, which he must obey. When I entered such 
places I took provisions, and left early, in order to 
camp outside under some tree in the shade, waiting till 
it was the hour to march. 

They measure the distances of places in India by 
gos and by coss. A gos ^ is about four of our common 
leagues, and a coss ^ about one league. 

It is time now to leave Surat for Agra and 
Jahanabad, in order to see what is remarkable on that 
route. 

^ The gos, or gau, is equal to about 8 miles in Southern India, but 
in Ceylon, according to Sir Emerson Tennent, it is only from 3^ to 
4 miles. 

2 In the original edition this word is spelt coste by mistake, as 
explained in the Avis in subsequent editions it is cosse. It has 
been thought better to substitute the ordinary Anglo-Indian term coss 
throughout in this translation. While here definitely, and elsewhere 
inferentially, Tavernier gives the coss an equal value with the league, 
Thevenot says the coss was only half a league. The old French ^Hiem 
de poste^'^ ^2, miles 743 yards, and Akbar's coss ==2. miles 1038 yards. 
But the coss was and is a most variable unit, as, indeed, Tavernier 
himself remarks. In some parts of India it exceeds 3 miles, and the 
Bengal coss of 4000 cubits or 2000 yards = i m. i f. 3 p. 3^ y. (See 
Appendix to this volume.) 




CHAPTER IV 


Route from Surat to Agra by Burhanpur and Sironj 

All the routes by which one can travel to the principal 
towns of India are not less well known to me than are 
those of Turkey and of Persia, and, for six journeys 
which I have made from Paris- to Ispahan, I have 
made double the number from Ispahan to Agra, and 
to several other places in the Empire of the Great 
Mogul. But it would weary the reader to cause him 
to pass more than once by the same roads while giving 
him an account of these different journeys, and of 
sundry small adventures with which they have been 
accompanied ; therefore it is that, without indicating 
for him the times at which I have made them, it will 
suffice to give him an exact description of each route. 

There are but two roads from Surat to Agra, one 
by Burhanpur and Sironj, and the other by Ahmad- 
ABAD, and the first will form the subject of this chapter. 

From Surat to Barnoly (Bardoli^), 14 coss. 

Bardoli is a large town where you cross a river 
by a ford, and traverse in this first march a country of 
mixed character, sometimes meeting woods, and some- 
times fields of wheat and rice. 

1 Bardoli, or Panoli of some maps. The distance from Surat as 
the crow flies is only about i 8 miles. In chap. ix. it is said to be 12 
coss only. 



CHAP. IV 


THE BEGUM’S CARAV.-\XSARAi 


49 


From Barxoly to Balor (Ballor), io coss. 

Ballor is also a large village, and is situated on a 
tank which has about a league in circuit, upon the edge 
of which you see a good fort, which, however, they 
neglect to keep in repair. Three-quarters of a league on 
this side of the village you pass a rivulet by a ford, but 
with much difficulty, because there are many rocks and 
stones under the water which are liable to overturn a 
carriage. You travel this second day nearly altogether 
in woods. 

From Balor to Kerkoa,^ or, as they now call it, the 
Begum’s caravansctrdi, 5 coss. 

This caj'avansardi is large and spacious, and it is 
Begum-Sahib, the daughter of Shah Jahan, who 
caused it to be built as a work of charity. For for- 
merly the stage from Ballor to NawapurA was too 
long, and this place being on the frontier of the 
country of those Rajas who are generally unwilling to 
recognise the Great Mogul, whose vassals they are, 
scarcely a caravan passed there which was not ill- 
treated ; moreover, it is a forest country. Between 
the caravansardi and NawapurA you pass a river by 
a ford, and another close to NawapurA. ^ 

From Kerkoa to Navapoura (Na-wapurA), 15 coss^ 

NawapurA is a large village full of weavers, but 
rice constitutes the principal article of commerce in the 
place. A river passes by it, which makes the soil excel- 

1 The site of Kerkoa, or the Begum’s ca7vansera {sic in orig.), is 
probably near Behdna. (See Book I, chap, ix.) 

2 These rivers are tributaries of the Tapti. 

s From Bardoli (Panoli) to Nawapurd the distance as the crow 
flies is 42 miles ; here it is given as 30 coss^ and in chap. ix. as 28 coss. 
This and the preceding stage indicate a value of something less than 

mile for the coss. (See Book I, chap, ix.) 

VOL. I E 




50 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


lent, and irrigates the rice, which requires water. All 
the rice which grows in this country possesses a 
particular quality, causing it to be much esteemed. 
Its grain is half as small again as that of common rice, 
and, when it is cooked, snow is not whiter than it is, 
besides which, it smells like musk, and all the nobles 
of Indi.4. eat no other. When you wish to make an 
acceptable present to any one in Persia, you take him 
a sack of this rice. It is the river which passes 
Kerkoa, and the others of w’^hich I have spoken, 
which combine to form the Surat river.^ 

From NAVAPOURAto Nasarbar(Nandurbar) gcoss. 
„ Nasarbar to Dol-Medan (?) . • 14 „ 

„ Dol-Medan to Senquera (Sindkeir) 7 „ 

„ Senquera to Tallener (Talneir) . 10 „ 

At TAlneir you cross the river which goes to 
Broach, where it is very wide, and from thence it flows 
into the Gulf of Cambay.^ 

From Tallener to Choupre (Chopra) . 15 coss. 

„ Choupre to Senquelis (Sankli) . 13 „ 

„ Senquelis to Nabir (Raver?) . 10 „ 

„ Nabir to Baldelpoura (BalledA) 9 ® „ 

It is at BalledA that loaded carts pay the BurhAn- 
PUR customs dues, but the carts which only carry pas- 
sengers paynothing. Between NawapurA and BurhAn- 
PUR it is all a good country for wheat, rice, and indigo. 

From Baldelpoura to Brampour^ (BurhAnpur), 

5 coss. 

1 The Tkpti. 

2 This is a mistake, as the river at Titoeir is the Tdpti. It is the 
Narbada which goes to Broach. 

^ These distances appear to be too great. 

4 Burh£npur or Berhampur, now a station on the Great Indian Penin- 
sular Railway. 



CHAP. IV 


BURHANPUR 


51 


Burhanpur is a large, much-ruined town, of which 
the houses are for the most part covered with thatch. 
It has a large castle still standing in the middle of the 
town, and it is there that the Governor resides. The 
government of this province is so important that it is 
conferred only upon a son or an uncle of the King, and 
Aurangzeb, who now reigns, was for a long time 
Governor of Burhanpur during the reign of his father. 
But since they have realised what can be yielded by 
the province of Bengal, which formerly bore the title 
of kingdom, as I shall elsewhere indicate, its govern- 
ment is now the most considerable in the Empire of 
the Great Mogul. There is a large trade in this 
town, and both at BurhAnpur itself and in all the 
province an enormous quantity of very transparent 
muslins are made, which are exported to Persia, 
Turkey, Muscovie, Poland, Arabia, Grand Cairo, 
and other places. Some of these are dyed various 
colours and with flowers, and women make veils and 
scarfs of them ; they also serve for the covers of beds, 
and for handkerchiefs, such as we see in Europe with 
those who take snuff. There are other fabrics, which 
they allow to remain white, with a stripe or two of 
gold or silver the whole length of the piece, and at 
each of the ends, from the breadth of one inch up to 
twelve or fifteen — in some more, and in others less — 
it is a tissue of gold, silver, and of silk with flowers, 
whereof there is no reverse, one side being as beau- 
tiful as the other. If those which they export to 
Poland, where they are in great demand, have 
not at both ends, at the least, three or four inches 
of gold or silver, or if this gold and silver become 
black when crossing the ocean between Surat and 



52 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


Hormuz, and from Trebizonde to Mangalia,^ or other 
ports of the Black Sea, the merchant cannot dispose 
of them except at great loss. He ought to take great 
care that the goods are well packed, and that damp 
cannot enter : this, for so long a voyage, requires much 
care and trouble. Some of these fabrics are all 
banded, half cotton and half gold or silver, and such 
pieces are called ornis?' They contain from fifteen to 
twenty ells, and cost from one hundred to one hundred 
and fifty rupees, the cheapest being not under ten or 
twelve. Those which are only about two ells long 
serve ladies of rank for the purpose of making scarfs 
and the veils which they wear on their heads, and they 
are sold in abundance in Persia and in Turkey. They 
make, besides, at BurhAnpur other kinds of fabrics, 
and there is hardly another province in the whole of 
India which has a greater abundance of cotton. 

In leaving the town of BurhAnpur there is another 
river to be crossed besides the large one ® of which I 
have above spoken ; as it has no bridge, when the 
water is low you cross by a ford, and by boat in the 
rainy season. 

The distance from Surat to BurhAnpur is 132 coss, 
and these coss are the smallest in India, a cart being 
able to traverse one in less than an hour. 

I remember here a strange commotion which arose 
at BurhAnpur in the year 1641,* when I was returning 

^ Mingrelia ? in Transcaucasia, now Russian territory. 

2 Ornis. This word may perhaps represent orhni. Hind., a 
woman’s mantle. In Book II, chaps, xii and xiv, it is spelt ormzs, and 
in the 1679 edition onnus. 

3 The larger river is the Tdpti, and the other, one of its tributaries. 

^ In reference to this casual mention of a date, M. Joret remarks 

that Tavernier has been lost sight of from the spring of 1639, when he 



CHAP. IV 


A MURDER AT BURHAXPUR 


5.S 


from Agra to Surat. In a few words, the origin of it 
was as follows. The Governor of the Province, who 
was the nephew of the King on his mother’s side, had 
among his pages a young man of handsome appearance 
and fairly good family, who had a brother who lived as 
a Dervish^ and for whom cJl the town entertained much 
veneration. One day . . . the page, observing that 
he was about to commit an offence, stabbed him three 
times in the stomach, and slew him before he could 
open his lips to cry aloud. This being done, the page 
left the palace without allowing any sign of emotion to 
appear on his face, and the guards at the gate thought 
that the Governor had sent him on some message. 
The Dervish having learnt from his brother how the 
affair had passed, in order to preserve him from the- 
fury of the people, and to disclose at the same time the 
infamy of the Governor, caused all the other Dervishes, 
his comrades, to seize the banners of Muhaimmad which 
were planted about the mosque, and at the same time 
they cried out that all the Dervishes and Fakirs and 
others, who were good Muhammadans, should follow 
them. In less than an hour a multitude of rabble 
assembled, and the Dervish, taking the lead with his 
brother, went straight to the palace, crying out with all 
their might, '‘Let us die for Muhammad, or let them give 
to us that infamous person in order that dogs may eat 

was at Ispahan, till he turns up thus in India in 1641. Towards the 
end of the same year he says he went to Goa (Book I, ch. xii). It is 
probable, M. Joret adds, that he spent the winter of 1640-41 at Agra, 
and in the same journey paid his first visit to Dacca in Bengal, which 
he revisited in 1666-67. In Book III, ch. xiv, he says, however, he was 
in Agra in 1642, which M. Joret thinks maybe a misprint for 1641. 
{Jean Baptiste 'Tavernier^ par C. Joret, Paris, 1886, pp. 54"^o ; see also 
the Introduction to this volume.) 

1 Deruich in original, for Dervish. 



64 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


him after his death, as he is not worthy to be interred 
amongst Mussulmans^' The guard of the palace was 
not in a condition to resist such a multitude, and would 
have yielded to them, if the Darogha ^ of the town with 
five or six nobles had not found an opportunity of 
making themselves heard, and of appeasing them, by 
representing to them that they should have some 
respect for a nephew of the King, and by obliging 
them to withdraw. The same night the body of the 
Governor was carried to Agra, together with his harem, 
and Shah JahAn, who reigned then, having heard the 
news, was not in the least distressed, because he in- 
herited the property of all his subjects, and he even 
bestowed on the page a small appointment in Bengal. 

From Brampour to Piombi-sera (?), 5 coss. 

Before proceeding further, it should be remarked 
that throughout, wherever the word sera occurs, it 
means that it is a great enclosure of walls or hedges, 
within which are arranged all round 50 or 60 huts 
covered with thatch. There are some men and women 
there who sell flour, rice, butter, and vegetables, and 
who take care to prepare bread and cook rice. If by 
chance any Muhammadan should come there, he goes 
to the village to seek for a piece of mutton or a fowl, 
and those who supply the food to the traveller clean 
out for him the house that he wishes to take, and place 
in it a small bed of girths,^ upon which he spreads the 
mattress that he carries on the road. 

From Piombi-sera to Pander (Mandwa) . 3 coss. 

^ Deroga in original. 

^ A charpoy {cliarpai,^ Hind.), with plaited tape {newdr) stretched 
across the frame. Such beds are still to be found in the Government 
Rest Houses or Dawk Bungalows. 



CHAP. IV 


HINDIA 


55 


From Pander to Balki-sera (BalwarA ?) . 6 coss. 

„ Balki-seri to Nevelki-sera (?) . 5 „ 

„ Nevelki-sera to Cousemba (?) . 5 „ 

„ Cousemba to Chenipour (Chainpur) 3 „ 

„ Chenipour to Charoua (Charwa) . 8 ,, 

„ Charoua to Bich-ola (BicholA) . 8 „ 

„ Bich-ola to Andy (HindiA) . . 4 „ 

At HindiA^ you cross a river which discharges it- 
self into the Ganges between Benares and Patna. 

From Andy to Onquenas (?) . . .4 coss. 

„ Onquenas to Tiquery (?) . • 5 

„ Tiquery to Toolmeden (?) . .4 „ 

„ Toolmeden to Nova-sera (?) . . 4 „ 

„ Nova-sera to I cHAvouR (I chAwar) . 4 „ 

„ IcHAvouR to Signor (Sehore) . 5 ,, 

„ Signor to Chekaipour® (SheikhpurA) 3 „ 

„ Chekaipour to Dour-ay (DurAhA) . 3 „ 

„ DouR-AYto Ater-kaira(HatiAkherA) 3 „ 

„ Ater-kaira to Telor (Dilod) . 4 „ 

1 Andy. Owing to the position of this place being given as on a 
river which joined the Ganges, I endeavoured to see if it could possibly 
be identified with Chdndid on the Sone, but its position is quite off the 
route, and the distance is too great, while the distance to Hindid, or 
Handid, on the Narbada, in the Hoshangdbdd District, is right ; and as I 
find Rennell has suggested the same conclusion, we must accept the 
consequence that Tavernier was thinking of the course of the Sone when 
he was writing of the Narbadd, as the latter was often crossed by him, 
and he must have known its course well. Under the rule of Akbar, 
Hindid, as a fortified position on the route from Agra to Surat and Gol- 
conda, was of considerable importance ; to some extent this is testified 
by the ruins. In confirmation of the above, I have just observed on a 
map dated 1752, in the Histoire Generale des Voyages.^ that both Chandid 
on the Sone and Hindid on the Narbadd are called Andi, which, there- 
fore, explains the confusion and mistake of Tavernier. 

2 Chekaipour can scarcely have been Shikdrpur, as it lies to the 
south of Sihore and to the east of Ichdwar. It appears to have been an 
unimportant village called Sheikhpurd, which is on the line of route. 


56 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


From Telor to San-kaijra (Singatoria ?) 3 coss. 

„ SaN-KAIRA to SeRONGE (SiRONj) ^ .12 „ 

SIR0^7 is a large town, of which the majority of the 
inhabitants are Banian merchants and artisans, who 
have dwelt there from father to son, which is the reason 
why it contains some houses of stone and brick. There 
is a large trade there in all kinds of coloured calicoes, 
which they call chites, with which all the common people 
of Persia and Turkey are clad, and which are used in 
several other countries for bedcovers and tablecloths. 
They make similar calicoes in other places besides 
SiRONj, but the colours are not so lively, and they dis- 
appear when washed several times. It is different with 
those of SiRONj ; the more they are washed the more 
beautiful they become. A river ^ passes here, of which 
the water possesses the property of giving this vivacity 
to the colours ; and during the rainy season, which lasts 
four months, the workers print their calicoes according 
as the foreign merchants have given them patterns, 
because, as soon as the rains have ceased, the water of 
the river is more disturbed, and the sooner the calicoes 
are washed the better the colours hold, and become 
more lively.® 

There is also made at Sironj a description of muslin 
which is so fine that when it is on the person you see 
all the skin as though it were uncovered. The mer- 
chants are not allowed to export it, and the Governor 

1 Sironj is a town in the State of Tonk, Rajputana. It is now much 
diminished from its former importance, which was largely due to the 
muslins and chiles or chintzes which were produced there. Whether 
San-Kaira be rightly identified with Singatorid or not, the distance 
from Dilod to Sironj is understated at 3 + 12 = 15 coss, as it amounts 
to upwards of 5 1 miles. 

2 A tributary of the Betwah river. 3 see Book II, chap. xiii. 




CHAP. IV 


BURHANPUR TO SIROXJ 


57 


sends all of it for the Great Mogul’s seraglio, and for 
the principal courtiers. This it is of which the sultanas 
and the wives of the great nobles make themselves 
shifts and garments for the hot weather, and the King 
and the nobles enjoy seeing them wearing these fine 
shifts, and cause them to dance in them. 

From Burhanpur to Siroxj there are loi ct ? ss , 
which are greater than those between Surat and 
BurhAnpur, for a cart takes an hour, and sometimes 
up to five quarters of an hour, to travel one of these 
coss . In these loo leagues^ of country you march for 
whole days among fertile fields of wheat and rice, which 
strongly resemble our fields at Beausse,^ for one rarely 
meets with woods, and between Sironj and Agra 
the country is of much the same character. As the 
villages are very close to one another you travel in 
comfort, and make the day’s journey as you please. 

From Seronge to Magalki-sera (Mogul- 

sarai) ® 6 eass . 

„ Magalki-sera to Paulki-sera(?) . 2 „ 

,, PaULKI - SERA to KaSARIKI - SERA 

(Kachner) . . . • 3 n 

,, Kasariki-sera to Chadolki-sera 

(Sh.4dora) 6 „ 

„ Chadolki-sera to Callabas (Kal.a- 

bagh) 6 „ 

1 Here, as elsewhere, the league is used as the equivalent of the 
C 6 ?ss, and the fact pointed out on p. 52 and in the Appendix that the 

near Surat is a short one is referred to. 

2 La Beauce or Beausse, an ancient division of F ranee in Orleanais. 
Its capital town was Chartres ; it formed an extensive and very fertile 
plain ; it is now comprised in the Department of Eure et Loire. 

^ Mogulsardi, or Moghal Sardi, in Tonk State, about 14 miles from 
Sironj, is not to be mistaken for a place of the same name on the E. I. 
Railway, near Benares. 



58 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Kalabagh is a large town, where formerly a great 
Raja resided who paid tribute to the Great Mogul. 
Generally, when caravans passed it, the merchants were 
robbed, and he exacted from them excessive dues. 
But since Aurangzeb came to the throne he cut off 
his head, and those of a large number of his subjects. 
They have set up towers near the town on the high- 
road, and these towers are pierced all round by several 
windows, where they have placed in each one the head 
of a man at every two feet. On my last journey, in 
1665, it was not long since this execution had taken 
place when I passed by KalAbagh ; for all the heads 
were still entire, and gave out an unpleasant odour. 

From Callabas to Akmate (Akai ?) . 2 coss. 

„ Akmate to Collasar (KolAras ^) . 9 „ 

KolAras is a small town, of which all the inhabit- 
ants are idolaters. As I was entering it, on this final 
journey, there arrived there also eight large pieces of 
artillery, some forty-eight pounders, the others thirty- 
six pounders, each gun being drawn by twenty -four 
pairs of oxen. A strong and powerful elephant was 
following this artillery, and whenever there was a bad 
spot from which the oxen had difficulty in drawing it, 
they made the elephant advance, and push the gun 
with his trunk. 

Outside the town, for the whole length of the high- 
road, there are a number of large trees which they call 
mengues^ and in several places near these trees you 
see small pagodas, each of which has its idol at the 

^ Roldras, or KailAras, a well-known town in Gwalior, though not 
mentioned in the Guzsifesr of Jjidtu, The total distance from 

Mogulserai to KoMras, measured on the map, is about 62 miles. 

3 Mangoes, the fruit of Mangifera Indica. 



CHAP. IV 


AN ICONOCLASTIC ELEPHANT 


59 


entrance. This elephant, passing in front of one of 
these pagodas, near to which I was encamped, and 
where there were at the door three idols of about five 
feet in height, when he was close by took one with 
his trunk and broke it in two ; he then took the next, 
and threw it so high and so far that it was broken in 
four pieces ; while as for the third, he knocked off the 
head with a blow of his trunk. Some thought that the 
driver of the elephant had ordered him to do so, and 
had given him the signal ; this I did not observe. 
Nevertheless, the Banians regarded it with an evil eye, 
without daring to say aught, for there were more than 
2000 men to conduct the guns, all of them in the king’s 
service, and Muhammadans, with the exception of the 
chief gunners, who were Franks, — French, English, 
and Dutch. The King was sending this artillery to 
the province of Deccan, where his army was opposed 
to the Raja Siva-ji, who had pillaged Surat the 
previous year, as I shall have occasion for describing 
elsewhere. 

From CoLLASAR to Sansele (Sipri) . . 6 coss. 

,, Sansele to Dongry (Dongri)^ . 4 „ 

„ Dongry to Gate . . . • 3 .. 

Gate^ is a pass in the mountains, which is half a 
quarter of a league long, and which you descend when 
going from Surat to Agra. You can still see at the 
entrance the ruins of two or three castles, and the road 
is so narrow that chariots can only pass one another 
with the greatest difficulty. 

^ Dongri of Atlas Sheet, 8 miles from Sipri, which is 1 5 miles from 
KoMras ; Dungri-Ghdt is represented on some maps near Narwdr. 

2 Gate stands perhaps for some separate ghat or pass, probably near 
Gopalpur on the Sind river, about 6|- miles from Dongri. 



60 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Those who come from the south, eii route to Agra, 
as from Surat, Goa, Bijapur, Golconda, and Masu- 
lipatam, and other places, cannot avoid traversing this 
pass, not having any other road except by taking that 
through Ahmadabad. There were formerly gates at 
each end of the pass, and at that which was on the 
Agra side there are five or six shops of Banians, who 
sell flour, butter, rice, herbs, and vegetables. On my 
last journey I halted at one of these shops while await- 
ing the coaches and carts, all having descended from 
them for this transit. Close by them was a large store 
full of sacks of rice and corn, and behind these sacks 
there was concealed a snake of thirteen or fourteen feet 
in length, and of proportionate girth. A woman while 
taking some grain from the sacks was bitten on the 
arm by this snake, and, feeling herself wounded, left 
the shop, crying “Ram, Ram !” thal is to say, “Oh 
God ! Oh God ! ” Immediately several Banians, both 
men and women, ran to her aid, and they tied the arm 
above the wound, thinking that that would prevent the 
poison from ascending higher. But it was unavailing, 
for immediately her face swelled, and then became blue, 
and she died in less than an hour. The Rdjputsi^ who 
are considered to be the best soldiers in India, consti- 
tute the heathen soldiery, and make no scruple of 
killing when it is a question of attacking or defending. 
As this woman was on the point of death, four of these 
cavaliers arrived, and, having learnt what had happened, 
entered the store each with a sword and a short pike in 
his hand, and slew the serpent. The people of the 
place then took it and threw it outside the village, and 
immediately a great number of birds of prey pitched on 

1 Ragipous in the original, Rdjputs, the warrior caste. 



CHAP. IV 


NARWAR 


61 


the carcase, which was devoured in less than an hour. 
The relatives of the woman took her body and carried 
it to the river to wash it, after which they burnt it. I 
was compelled to remain two days in this place, because 
there is a river ^ to cross, which, instead of lowering 
itself, increased from hour to hour on account of the 
rains which had fallen during three or four days, so that 
I had to cross it half a league lower down. One always 
strives to cross this river by ford, because in order to 
reach the boats it is necessary to unload the carts and 
coaches, and even to take them to pieces, so that they 
may be carried by hand for the whole of this half-league 
of road, which is the worst that it is possible to con- 
ceive. It is all covered with great rocks, and confined 
between the mountain and the river, so that when the 
waters are in flood they cover the whole road, there 
being none but the people of the country who are able 
to traverse it. They obtain their livelihood from the 
passengers, from whom they take the most that they 
can; but for that it were easy to facilitate the passage 
by making a bridge, since there is no lack of either 
wood or stone. 

From Gate to Nader (Narwar^), 4 coss. 

Narwar is a large town on the slope of a mountain, 

^ The Sind river, a tributary of the Jumna. 

2 Narwdr or Ladara, in Gwalior, on right bank of Sind river, Lat. 
25® 39' 2" N., Long. 77“ 56' 57" E., 44 miles S. of Gwalior. According to 
Ferishta, Narwdr was founded in the middle of the thirteenth century. 
(See Imperial Gazetteer of India for history, etc.) It is called Nurwur 
on the Atlas Sheet. 

The distance is given as 17 from Kol^ras to Narwdr, and the 
true distance is 3 5 miles, and the stages given between Mogulserai and 
KoMras amount to 28 coss^ while the true distance is about 63 miles. 
Taken together, 45 coss^<^Z miles, would give nearly the usual average 
of 2 miles = i coss. 



62 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


above which there is a kind of fortress, and the whole 
mountain is surrounded by walls. The majority of 
the houses, as is the case in the other towns of India, 
are covered with thatch, and have only one storey; 
and those of the wealthy have but two, and are 
terraced. You see around the town several large 
tanks, which w'ere formerly lined with cut stone, and 
which they have neglected to maintain ; but at about 
one league off there are still some beautiful tombs. 
The same river which one has crossed the day before, 
and which one re-crosses four or five coss beyond 
NarwAr, surrounds the three sides of the town and of 
the mountain, of which it makes a sort of peninsula, 
and after a long and tortuous course it discharges 
itself in the Ganges. They make at NarwAr a 
quantity of quilted coverlets, some white, others 
embroidered with flowers in gold, silver, and silk. 

From Nader to Barqui-sera (BArki SarAi) . 9 coss. 

„ Barqui-sera to Trie (Antri) . • 3 „ 

„ Trie to Goualeor (Gwalior^) . . 6 „ 

Gwalior is a large town, ill-built like others, after 
the manner of India, and it is passed by a small river. 
It is built along the side of a mountain which lies to 
the west, and towards the top it is surrounded by walls 
with towers. There are in this enclosure several ponds 
formed by the rains, and what they cultivate there is 

^ Gwalior. The chief town of the State of the same name, and the 
residence of Maharaja Sindhia, situated in Lat. 26“ N., and Long, 78® 
12' E., 65 miles south of Agra. The fort stands on an isolated hill of 
sandstone 342 feet high, ij mile long, and 300 yards wide. On its 
eastern side there are several colossal figures, sculptured in bold relief, 
as is mentioned by our author. The Jain and Hindu antiquities have 
been described by Mr. Fergusson. (See Im^perial Gazetteer of India.) 
The distance from Narwdr to Gwalior is nearly 50 miles, here it is given 
as 1 8 coss., hence the coss would exceed 2 J miles. 



CHAP. IV 


GWALIOR 


63 


sufficient to support the garrison ; this it is which causes 
this place to be esteemed one of the best in India. 
On the slope of the mountain which faces the north- 
west, Shah JAhan caused a pleasure-house to be built, 
from whence one sees all the town, and it is fit to serve 
as a fortress. Below this house there are to be seen 
several images in bas-relief, sculptured in the rock, all 
of which have the forms of demons, and there is one, 
among others, of an extraordinary height. 

Since the Muhammadan kings have taken possession 
of these countries, the fortress of Gwalior has become 
the place where they send princes and great nobles 
when they wish to be sure of their persons. Shah 
JAhAn having ascended the throne by treachery, as I 
shall relate ^ in the course of my narrative, caused to 
be arrested, one after the other, all the princes and 
nobles whom he believed to be able to injure him, and 
sent them to Gwalior, but he allowed them all to live 
and to enjoy the revenues of their property. Aurang- 
ZEB, his son, does just the contrary ; for when he sends 
any great noble there, at the end of nine or ten days 
he causes him to be poisoned, and he makes this use 
of it so that the people may not say that he is a 
sanguinary monarch. As soon as he had in his power 
Prince MurAd Baksh,^ his younger brother — who was 
the one whom he encouraged to take arms against his 
father, ShAh JAhAn, and who, being Governor of the 
Province of GujarAt, had caused himself to be called 
King — he had him placed in this fortress, where he 
died. They have made him in the town an appro- 
priately magnificent tomb, in a mosque which they built 
for the purpose, with a great court in front, all sur- 

1 See Book II, ckap. ii. ^ Moral Bakche in original. 



64 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


rounded by vaults under which there are several shops. 
It is the custom in India, when they build a public 
edifice, to make around it a large place for holding 
markets, with an endow'ment for the poor, to whom 
they give alms daily, and who pmy to God for him 
who has caused the work to be done. 

At 5 coss from Gwalior you cross, by ford, a river 
which is called Lanike.^ 

From GoiiALEOR to Paterki-sera(?) . 3 coss. 

„ Paterki-sera to Quariqui-sera 

(Ku-ari-sarai) . . . . 10 ,, 

There is a bridge at Paterki-sera,^ with six large 
arches, and the river which flows under it is called 
Quarinadi. ® 

From Quariqui-sera to Dolpoura (Dholpur^), 6 

coss. 

At Dholpur there is a great river called Chammel- 
N.ADi ® — you cross it in a boat, and it discharges itself 
in the Jumna,® between Agra and Allahabad. 

From Dolpoura to Minasqui-sera (ManiA), 6 
coss. 

At (? Beyond) Mania (-ki-sarai) there is a river 


1 This probably stands for Sanike, i,e. Sank river, a tributary of the 
Kudri river. 

2 This is an obvious misprint for Ouariqui-sera, where the bridge 
really was, namely, over the Kudri river. 

3 Kiidri river, it joins the Sind river near its junction with the 
Jumna. 

^ Dholpur, the chief town of the State of the same name. It is 34 
miles south of Agra, and 37 miles north-west of Gwalior. The value of 
the coss as deduced from this would be very nearly two miles, 37 coss=. 
7 1 miles. The Chambal river lies three miles to the south of this town, 
which was built by Rajah Dholan Deo, in the eleventh century, and 
surrendered to the Emperor Bdbar in 1526. 

^ Chambal river. 6 Gemena in the original. 



CHAP. IV 


BRIDGE OVER THE JAJOU 


65 


called Iagou-nadi ^ — you cross it by a very long bridge 
built of cut stone, and called Iaoulcapoul." 

From Minasqui-sera to this bridge, 8 coss. 

It is not far from this bridge that they examine 
goods, so that when you reach Agra® you are not 
able to evade the dues ; but it is particularly to see if 
among the number of cases full of fruits preserved in 
vinegar, in glass pots, there are not any cases of wine. 
From the bridge of Iaoulcapoul to Agra, 4 coss.* 
Thus from SIRO^■J to Agra is 106 coss, which are 
common coss, and from Surat to Agra 339. 

1 Jajou on the Utangan river, a tributary of the Jumna. 

2 Iaoulcapoul, for Jajou k£ pul, or the bridge of the Jajou. 

3 For description of Agra, see Book I, chap. vii. 

^ There is a good deal of error in the distances as above stated. 
From Dholpur to Manid it is 9 miles, from Manid to Jajou on the 
Utangan river 6 miles, from Jajou to Agra about 20 miles ; total, say 
35 miles, as against 16 coss wrongly divided. 


VOL. I 


F 




CHAPTER V 


Rotite from Surat to Agra by AhmadAbAd 

From Surat to Baroche (Broach),^ 22 coss. 

All the country between these two towns is one 
of corn, rice, millet, and sugar-canes. Before entering 
Broach, you cross, by ferry, a river which runs to 
Cambay and discharges itself afterwards into the gulf 
of the same name. 

Broach is a large town, containing an ancient for- 
tress which they have neglected to maintain ; but it has 
been widely renowned from all time on account of its 
river, which possesses a peculiar property for bleaching 
calicoes, and they bring them for this reason , from all 
quarters of the empire of the Great Mogul, where 
there is not the same abundance of water. In thiQ 
place there is made a quantity of baftas^ or pieces 
of long and narrow calico ; these are very beautiful 
and closely woven cloths, and the price of them ranges 
from 4 up to 100 rupees. Custom dues have to be 
paid at Broach on all goods, whether imported or ex- 
ported. The English have a very fine dwelling there ; 
and I remember that, on arrival one day when return- 

1 Broach, chief town of district of same name in Gujarit, situated 
on the right bank of the Narbada, 30 miles from its mouth. 

Bafttxs^ one of the numerous varieties of fine calico, which were 
formerly largely exported to Europe from India. (See Anglo-Indian 
Glossary^ p. 35.) 



CHAP. V 


JUGGLERS AT BROACH 


67 


ing from Agra to Surat ^ with the President of the 
English, some jugglers immediately came to ask 
him if he desired that they should show him some 
examples of their art, these he was curious to see. 
The first thing they did was to kindle a large fire, and 
heat iron chains to redness ; these they wound round 
their bodies, making believe that they experienced some 
pain, but not really receiving any injury. Next, having 
taken a small piece of stick, and having planted it in 
the ground, they asked one of the company what fruit 
he wished to have. He replied that he desired 
mangoes^' and then one of the conjurers, covering him- 
self with a sheet, stooped to the ground five or six 
times. I had the curiosity to ascend to a room in 
order to see from above, through an opening of the 
sheet, what this man did, and I saw that he cut him- 
self under his arm-pits with a razor, and anointed the 
piece of wood with his blood. At each time that he 
raised himself, the stick increased under the eye, and 
at the third time it put forth branches and buds. At 
the fourth time the tree was covered with leaves, and 
at the fifth we saw the flowers themselves. The 
President of the English had his clergyman with him, 
having taken him to AhmadAbad to baptize a child of 

1 In the English translation of 1684, by John Philips, these names 
are transposed. 

2 Mango trick Also described by Bernier, who, however, did not 
personally witness the performance. See Yule and Burnell, Afiglo- 
Indian Glossary^ for other early accounts of this famous trick. On the 
only occasion I myself witnessed it, I was not much impressed with 
it as an example of sleight of hand ; but the juggler was not of the first 
class. It seems probable that the above-mentioned juggler knew he was 
being watched by Tavernier, and therefore distracted his attention by 
means of the razor. Chardin speaks of the incident contemptuously, 
and also of Tavernier for being deceived by it. ( Voyages^ Amsterdam, 
ed. 1 71 1, vol. iv, p, 133.) 




68 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


the Dutch Commander, of whom he had been asked to 
be the godfather, for it should be remarked that the 
Dutch have no clergymen save in those places where 
they have both merchants and soldiers together. The 
English clergyman had at first protested that he was 
unable to consent that Christians should be present at 
such spectacles, and when he beheld that from a piece 
of dry wood these people in less than half an hour had 
caused a tree of four or five feet in height to appear, 
with leaves and flowers, as in springtime, he made it 
his duty to break it, and proclaimed loudly that he 
would never administer the communion to any one of 
those who remained longer to witness such things. 
This compelled the President to dismiss the jugglers, 
who travel from place to place with their wives and 
children, like those whom we in Europe commonly call 
Egyptians or Bohemians ; and having given them the 
equivalent of ten or twelve ^cus^ they withdrew very 
well satisfied. 

Those who wish to see Cambay, in order to reach 
it, do not go out of their way for more than about five 
or six coss, or thereabouts ; and when you are at 
Broach, instead of going to Baroda, which is the 
ordinary route, you make directly for Cambay, from 
whence afterwards you reach AhmadabAd. Except for 
business, or out of curiosity, you do not take this route, 
not only because it is longer, as I have said, by five or 
six leagues,® but principally on account of the danger 
which there is in passing the end of the gulf. 

Cambay® is a large town at the end of the gpalf 

^ ~£r‘ • Ss- to £^2 : 14s., at 4s. 6A per icu. 

Here again leagues and coss are treated as synonymous terms. 

Cambaya in the original. Cambay, chief town of the State of Cambay, 
Province of GujarSt, Bombay Presidency, 52 miles south of Ahmaddbdd. 



CHAP. V 


CAMBAY 


69 


which bears its name. It is where they cut those 
beautifial agates which come from I^'DIA as cups, 
handles of knives, beads, and other objects of work- 
manship.^ There is made, also, in the vicinity of the 
town, indigo ^ of the same kind as that of Sharkej ® ; 
and it was celebrated for its traffic at the time when 
the Portuguese flourished in India. You still see 
to-day, in the quarter close to the sea, many fine 
houses, which they built and furnished richly, after 
the manner of Portugal; but at present they are 
uninhabited, and they decay from day to day. They 
maintained at that time such good order in Cambay, 
that at two hours after dark every street was closed by 
two gates, which are still to be seen, and they even now 
close some of the principal of them, especially those 
of the approaches to the market-places. One of the 
principal reasons why this town has lost a part of her 
commerce is, that formerly the sea came close to 
Cambay, and small vessels were able to approach it 
easily ; but for some years past the sea has been reced- 
ing day by day, so that vessels are unable to come 
nearer than four or five leaigues to the town. 

There is an abundance of pea-fowl in India, and 
especially in the territories of Broach, Cambay, and 
Baroda. The flesh of the young bird is white and of 
good flavour, like that of our turkeys, and you see them 

1 A full account of this industry will be found in the Economic 
Geology of India^ p. 506. 

2 The cultivation of indigo has much diminished of late in that part 
of India. 

^ Sarquesse in the original, this is Sharkej, the Surkeja of Major 
Scott’s Madras route map, to south-west of Ahmaddb^d. Tieffenthaler 
calls it Sarkis, Geog. de PInd,, par Bernoulli, Berlin, I79ij P* 377* 
See for further information Anglo-Indian Glossary^ p. 22, n. (See p. 72.) 




70 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


throughout the day in flocks in the fields ; for during 
the night they perch in the trees. It is difficult to 
approach them by day, because if they see the sports- 
man they fly before him more rapidly than a partridge, 
and enter the jungle, where it is impossible to follow 
them, one’s garment being torn at every step. Hence, 
you are only able to capture them easily at night ; and 
this, in a few words, is the method. You approach 
the tree with a kind of banner, on which are painted 
life-like peacocks, on each side.^ On the top of the 
stick there are two lighted candles, the light of which 
alarming the peacock, causes him to stretch out his 
neck almost to the end of the stick, where there is a cord 
with a running noose, which he who holds the banner 
draws when he sees that the peacock has placed his 
neck in it. However, you must be careful not to 
kill a bird, or any other animal, in the countries of 
Rajas, where the idolaters are the masters ; it is not 
dangerous in the parts of India where the rulers of 
the country are Muhammadans, and permit sport to be 
free. It happened one day that a rich merchant of 
Persia, passing by the territory of the Raja of 
Dantivar,® slew a peacock on the road by a shot from 
his gun, either out of bravado or from not knowing 
the customs of the country. The Banians, enraged 
by an act which is regarded among them as a horrible 

^ I have seen peacocks successfully approached by day by a native 
sportsman, who carried before him a cloth screen, on which a rude 
representation of a peacock was painted. One bird actually made a 
charge towards the screen. 

2 Ddnta, or Ddntawdra, a State under the Political Agency of Mahi 
Kdntha, in the Province of Gujardt, Bombay. The Chief is a Hindu. 
It has been pointed out already that the Antivar of p. 37 is probably a 
misprint for D antivar. 



CHAP. V 


WOMEN’S PAGODA 


71 


sacrilege, seized the merchant themselves, and also the 
money he had with him, which amounted to 300,000 
rupees, and having tied him to a tree, whipped him 
for three days so severely that the poor man died 
of it. 

From Cambay you come to a village which is only 
three coss distant, where there is a pagoda to which 
the majority of the courtesans of India come to make 
their offerings. This pagoda contains numerous nude 
figures, and among others a large figure like an Apollo, 
which has the private parts all uncovered. When the 
old courtesans have amassed a sum of money in their 
youth, they buy with it young slaves, to whom they 
teach dances and lascivious songs, and all the tricks 
of their infamous trade. When these young girls 
have reached the age of eleven or twelve years their 
mistresses take them to this pagoda, and they believe 
that it will be good fortune to them to be offered and 
abandoned to this idol. 

From this pagoda to Chiidabad^ it is 6 coss. 

It is one of the most beautiful houses of the Great 
Mogul, and a vast enclosure, where there are extensive 
gardens and large tanks, with all the embellishments 
of which the genius of the Indians is capable. 

From Chiidabad to Ahmadabad it is but 5 coss. 

I return to Baroche and the ordinary route. 

From Baroche to Broudra (Baroda)® . 22 coss. 

Baroda is a large town on a good soil, where there 
is a considerable trade in calicoes. 

1 Sayyiddbdd ? I have not found this place on any of the maps 
available to me. 

2 Baroda, the chief town of the territory of the Gdekwdr. From 
Broach to Baroda, the distance measured on the map is about 48 miles. 


72 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


From Broudra to Neriade (Nadiad) . iSeoss . 

„ NSRIADEtO AmADABAt(AhMADAbAd)^ 20 ,, 

AhmadAbAd is one of the largest towns in India, 
and one where there is a considerable trade in silken 
stuffs, gold and silver tapestries, and others mixed with 
silk ; saltpetre, sugar, ginger, both candied and plain, 
tamarinds, mirabolans^ and indigo cakes, which are 
made at three leagues from AhmadAbAd, at a large 
town called Sharkej. 

There was a pagoda in this place, which the Muham- 
madans took possession of in order to turn it into a 
mosque. Before entering it you traverse three great 
courts paved with marble, and surrounded by galleries, 
and you are not allowed to place foot in the third 
without removing your shoes. The exterior of the 
mosque is ornamented with mosaic, the greater part of 
which consists of agates of different colours, obtained 
from the mountains of Cambay, only two days’ journey 
from thence. You see many tombs of ancient idol- 
atrous kings, which are like so many 'small chapels of 
mosaic, with columns of marble sustaining a small 
vault by which the tomb is covered. A river® flows 
past AhmadAbAd on the north-west, and during 
the rainy season, which lasts in India three or four 
months, it becomes very wide and rapid, and does 
great injury every year. It is the same with all the 
rivers of India, and when the rains have ceased, one 
must generally wait six weeks or two months before it 
is possible to ford that at AhmadAbAd, where there is 

^ Ahmaddbdd, the chief town in the District of the same name, in 
the Province of Gujardt, Bombay Presidency. Tieffenthaler calls the 
town itself Guzarat. 

2 The dried unripe fruit of Terminalia chehula, Retz. 

^ The Sabarmati. 



CHAP. V 


A STRANGE STORY 


73 


no bridge. There are two or three boats, but one 
cannot make use of them, save when the water ceases 
to be so rapid, and it takes much time to cross. The 
peasants do not stand on ceremony, and in order to 
go from one bank to the other only make use of the 
skin of a goat,^ which they fill with air and tie on 
between the chest and the abdomen. It is thus, by 
swimming this river, that the poor, both the men 
and women, cross, and when they wish to take their 
children across also they employ certain round earthen 
pots, which have mouths four fingers in width, and 
having placed their child in one of these pots they 
push it before them while swimming. This brings to 
mind a circumstance which happened at AhmadAbad, 
while I was there in the year 1642,^ which is too 
remarkable to pass by in silence. 

A peasant and his wife were crossing the river one 
day in the manner I have just described, and having 
an infant of about two years, they placed him in one 
of these pots, so that only his head, which was outside, 
could be seen. Having reached the middle of the river, 
they encountered a small bank of sand where there 
was a large tree, which the water had carried down, 
and the father pushed the pot containing the infant on 
to this place, to rest himself a little. As he approached 
the foot of the tree, the trunk of which was somewhat 
elevated above the water, a snake came out from be- 
tween the roots, and jumped into the pot where the 

1 This is the so-called mussuck {mashak^ Hind.) or deri^ consisting 
of the inflated skin of a goat ; sometimes, as on the Sutlej, in the 
Himalayan regions, the skin of a buffalo is used for the same purpose. 

2 This casual reference to a date is of use as confirmation of 
Tavernier having been in this part of India in that year. (See Joret, 
J. B. Tavernier y Paris, 1886, p. 64.) 



74 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


infant was. The father and mother, startled by tbit; 
occurrence, and having lost their wits, let the pot go, 
which the river carried away, and they remained some 
time half dead at the foot of the tree. About two 
leagues lower down a Banian and his wife, with a 
little child, were washing themselves in the river 
before going to take their meal. They beheld from 
afar the pot upon the water, and half the head of a 
child, which appeared outside the mouth. The Banian 
immediately went to rescue it, and having reached it, 
pushed it ashore. The woman, followed by her child, 
came presently to take the other which was in the pot, 
in order to withdraw it. And at the same moment the 
snake, which had done no injury to the first child, left 
the pot, and entwined itself about the body of the 
other child which was close to its mother, bit it, and 
injected its poison, which caused its immediate death. 

This extraordinary adventure did not much dis- 
tress these poor people, as they believed that it had 
happened by a secret dispensation of their god, who had 
taken from them one child in order to give another, 
by which they were soon consoled. Some time after, 
the report of this adventure having come to the ears 
of the first peasant, he came to the other in order to 
tell him how it had happened, and to demand from him 
his child. This caused a considerable dispute between 
them, the second peasant maintaining that the child 
was his, and that his god had given it to him in the 
place of the one who was dead. In a word, the matter 
made a great noise, and was at length laid before the 
King, who ordered that the infant should be returned 
to its father. 

About the same time there happened a somewhat 



CHAP. V 


FISH DIET 


75 


amusing matter in the same town of AhmadabAd. The 
wife of a rich Banian merchant, named Saixtidas, not 
having any children, and causing it to be well known 
that she wished for some, an attendant of the house 
one day took her apart, and said to her that if she was 
willing to eat what he would give her, she might feel 
certain that she would have a child. The woman 
desiring to know what she ought to eat, the attendant 
added that it was a little fish, and that she need only eat 
three or four.^ The religion of the Banians forbidding 
them, as I have elsewhere said, to eat anything which 
has had life, the woman was at first unable to bring 
herself to do that which he suggested ; but the attend- 
ant having said that he knew how to disguise it so well 
that she would not know that what she was eating 
was fish, she resolved at length to try the remedy, 
and she lay the night following with her husband, 
according to the instruction she had received from the 
attendant. Some time after, the woman perceiving 
that she was enceinte, her husband died, and the rela- 
tives of the defunct wished to take possession of his 
effects. The widow objected, and told them that they 
should have patience till they knew if the infant which 
she carried would arrive safely. 

The relatives, surprised by this news, which they 
had not expected, treated it as a lie and a joke, the 
woman having been fifteen or sixteen years with her 
husband without bearing. When she found that these 
people tormented her, she threw herself at the 
feet of the Governor, to whom she related what had 

^ In the East surprising effects are often attributed to a fish diet. 
See Adjaib Al-Hind. (Les Merveilles de J?Inda) for a remarkable in- 
stance. Paris, Lemere, 1878. 



76 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


happened, and he ordered that the relatives should 
wait till the woman was delivered of her offspring. 
Some days after her confinement the relatives of the 
defunct, who were persons of position, and who 
desired to have so considerable a succession, main- 
tained that the infant was not legitimate, and that this 
woman had not had it by her husband. The Governor, 
in order to know the truth, assembled the doctors, who 
decided that it was necessary to take the infant to the 
bath, and that if the remedy which the mother had 
adopted was genuine, the infant would smell of fish ; this 
was done and the thing happened accordingly. After 
this experiment the Governor ordered that the effects of 
the defunct should be reserved for the infant, since he 
had been proved by this to be the father ; but the 
relatives, being annoyed that so good a morsel was 
escaping from them, appealed from this judgment, and 
went to Agra to tell the King. In consequence of 
what they stated, his majesty caused an order to be 
written to the Governor that he should send the 
mother and the infant, to make the same experiment 
in his presence ; this having turned out as on the first 
occasion, the relatives of the defunct withdrew, and the 
effects were kept for the mother and infant. 

I remember also another amusing thing which was 
told me at AhmadAbAd — where I have been tenor twelve 
times— during the sojourn which I made there on one of 
my journeys, on my return from Delhi.^ A merchant 
with whom I often dealt, and who was much loved by 
ShAistA KhAn, Governor of the Province and uncle of 

1 Joret (/. B. Tavernier, Paris, i886, p. 47) supposes that this 
was in the early part of 1667, but says the passage is too obscure 
to admit of any definite conclusion. 



CHAP. V 


A MAN WHO NEVER LIED 


77 


the King, had the reputation of never having lied. 
Shaista KhAn having completed the three years of 
his government, according to the custom of the Empire 
of the Great Mogul, and Aurangzeb, son of Shah 
Jahan, having succeeded him, he withdrew to Agra, 
where the court then was. One day, when he con- 
versed with the King, he said that he had seen many 
uncommon things in all the governments with which 
his majesty had honoured him, but one thing alone 
surprised him, which was to have discovered a rich 
merchant who had never told a lie, and who was up- 
wards of seventy years old. The King, surprised on 
his own part with so extraordinary a fact, told Shaista 
Khan that he desired to see the man of whom he had 
told him, and ordered him to send him forthwith to 
Agra, which was done. This much distressed the old 
man, both on account of the length of the road, which 
is from twenty-five to thirty days, and because it was 
necessary for him to make a present to the King. 
In fact, he made him one valued at 40,000 rupees, and 
it was a gold box for keeping betel, ornamented with 
diamonds, rubies, and emeralds. After he had saluted 
the King, and had made his present to him, the King 
merely asked his name, to which he replied that he 
called himself the man who had never lied. The King 
asking him further what his father’s name was : “ Sire,” 
replied he, “ I know not.” His majesty, satisfied with 
this reply, stopped there, and, not desiring to know 
more, ordered them to give him an elephant, which is 
a great honour, and 10,000 rupees for his journey. 

The Banians have a great veneration for monkeys, 
and they even feed them in some pagodas where they 
go to worship. There are in AhmadAbad two or three 



78 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


houses which serve as hospitals,^ especially for cows 
and oxen, for monkeys, and other sick and disabled 
animals, and they convey there all that they are able to 
find, in order to feed them. It should be stated that 
on every Tuesday and Friday all the monkeys in the 
neighbourhood of AhmadabAd, of their own instinct, 
come together to the town, and ascend the houses, each 
of which has a small terrace where the occupants sleep 
during the great heat. On each of these days they do 
not fail to place upon these little terraces rice, millet, 
sugar-canes in their season, and other similar things ; 
for if by chance the monkeys did not find their food on 
the terraces, they would break the tiles with which the 
rest of the house is covered, and cause great damage. 
It should be remarked that the monkey eats nothing 
which he has not first well smelt, and before swallowing 
anything he makes his store for future hunger, filling 
his two cheeks with provisions, which he keeps for the 
following day.® 

I have said that the Banians have an especial 
veneration for the monkey, and this is an example 
in point among several others which I could quote. 
Being one day at AhmadAbAd, at the dwelling of the 
Dutch, a young man of that nation, who had arrived 
but a few days to serve in the office, and who was 
ignorant of the customs of the country, having per- 
ceived a large monkey upon a tree which was in the 
courtyard, wished to give an example of his skill, or 
rather of his youth, by slaying it with a shot from his gun. 
I was at the time at table with the Dutch Commander, 

1 Hospitals for sick animals are still to be found in some of the 
towns of Western India. 

2 The retention of food in the pouch only lasts for a short time, I 
believe. 



CHAP. V 


MONKEYS AT AHMADABAD 


79 


and we had scarcely heard the shot before we heard a 
great uproar among the Banians in the service of the 
Dutch Company, who came to complain bitterly of him 
who had slain the monkey. They all wished to resign, 
and it was with much trouble and many apologies that 
they appeased them and induced them to remain. 

In the neighbourhood of Ahmad ab ad there are a 
great number of monkeys, and it may be said that in 
the places where there are many of these animals there 
are few crows. For when the latter have built their 
nests and laid their eggs, the monkeys climb the trees 
and throw the eggs down on the ground. One day, 
returning from Agra, and having left Ahmadabad with 
the Chief or President of the English, who had come 
there for some business, and was returning to SuiutT, 
we passed, at four or five leagues from Ahmadabad, a 
small grove of those trees which they call mangoes. 
We saw overhead numbers of large monkeys, male and 
female, and several of the latter carried their young 
ones in their arms. We each had our carriage, and the 
English President stopped his in order to tell me 
that he had an excellent and curious gun which the 
Governor of Daman had presented to him, and, know- 
ing that I was a good shot, he asked me to prove it 
upon one of these monkeys. One of my attendants, 
who was of the country, having signed to me not to 
risk it, I sought to dissuade the President from his 
intention, but it was impossible, and taking his gun he 
slew a female monkey, which remained extended 
between two branches, letting her young ones fall 
to the ground. There followed at once what my 
attendant, who had signed to me, had foreseen. All 
the monkeys which were on the trees, to the number 


80 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


of more than sixty, descended immediately, in a rage, 
and jumped on the carriage of the President, and would 
have strangled him, but for the prompt assistance that 
some gave by closing the windows, and the crowd 
of attendants who were present drove them off. 
Although they did not come to my carriage, which 
followed at some paces distant from that of the Presi- 
dent, I nevertheless feared for myself the fury of these 
monkeys, which were both large and powerful, and they 
pursued the carriage of the President for nearly a 
league, so much were they enraged. 

Continuing our route from Surat to Agra. 

From Amadabat to Panser (Paunsir) . 13 coss. 

„ Panser to Masana (MesAna) . . 14 „ 

„ Masana to Chitpour (Sidhpur) ^ . 14 „ 

SiDHPUR is a fairly good town, so named on account of 
the great trade which it does in those coloured cottons 
which they call chites^ and at four or five hundred 
paces on the south side there flows a small river. 
Arriving at Sidhpur, on one of my journeys, I was 
encamped under two or three trees at one of the ends 
of a great open space which is near the town. A short 
time afterwards I saw four or five lions® appearing, 
which they brought to train, and they told me it 
generally took five or six months, and they do it in 
this way. They tie the lions, at twelve paces distance 

1 Sidhpur. Chitpour is given on the map in Bernier’s History. 

2 Chites (see p. 56 and Index), from Mahr. chit and Port, chita^ 
chintz. 

3 It is very probable that these were true lions, and not chetahs, or 
hunting leopards, as lions are known to have been so tamed, and 
the region is one in which they may very possibly have been obtained. 
In a recent number of the Graphic there was a representation of a 
tamed lion being led by hand through the crowded bazaar of a Moorish 
town. 



CHAP. V 


LIOX-TAMIXG AT SIDHPUR 


81 


from each other, by their hind feet, to a cord attached 
to a large wooden post firmly planted in the ground, and 
they have another about the neck which the lion-master 
holds in his hand. These posts are planted in a straight 
line, and upon another parallel one, from fifteen to twenty 
paces distant, they stretch another cord of the length 
of the space which the lions occupy, when arranged as 
above. These two cords which hold the lion fastened 
by his two hind feet, permit him to rush up to this long 
cord, which serves as a limit to those outside it, beyond 
which they ought not to venture to pass when harassing 
and irritating the lions by throwing small stones or little 
bits of wood at them. A number of people come to 
this spectacle, and when the provoked lion jumps to- 
wards the cord, he has another round his neck which 
the master holds in his hand, and with which he pulls 
him back. It is by this means that they accustom the 
lion by degrees to become tame with people, and on 
my arrival at Sidhpur I witnessed this spectacle with- 
out leaving my carriage. 

The following day I had another experience, which 
was a meeting I had with a party of Fakirs, or Muham- 
madan Dervishes} I counted fifty-seven of them, of 
whom he who was their Chief or Superior had been 
master of the horse to Shah Jahangir,® having left 
the court when Sultan Bolaki, his grandson, was 
strangled by order of ShAh JahAn, his uncle, as I shall 
relate elsewhere. There were four others who, under 
the Superior, were Chiefs of the band, and had been the 
first nobles of the court of the same ShAh JahAn. The 
only garment of these five Dervishes consisted of three 

1 Dervichs in original, for Dervishes. 

2 Cha Gehan guir in original, for Shah Jahdngir. 

VOL. I G 



82 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


or four ells of orange-coloured cotton cloth, of which 
they made waistbands, one of the ends passing between 
the thighs and being tucked between the top of the 
waistband and the body of the Dervish, in order to 
cover what modesty requires should be concealed, 
both in front and behind. Each of them had also a 
skin of a tiger upon the shoulders, which was tied under 
the chin. They had eight fine horses, saddled and 
bridled, led by hand before them, three of which had 
bridles of gold and saddles covered with plates of gold; 
and the five others had bridles of silver, and the saddles 
also covered with plates of silver, and a leopard’s skin 
on each. The other Dervishes had for their sole gar- 
ment a cord, which served as a waistband, to which 
there was attached a small scrap of calico to cover, as 
in the case of the others, the parts which should be 
concealed. Their hair was bound in a tress about their 
heads, and made a kind of turban. They were all well 
armed, the majority with bows and arrows, some with 
muskets, and the remainder with short pikes, and a 
kind of weapon which we have not got in Europe. It 
is a sharp iron, made like the border of a plate which 
has no centre, and they pass eight or ten over the 
head, carrying them on the neck like a ruff.^ They 
withdraw these circles as they require to use them, and 
when they throw them with force at a man, as we make 
a plate to fly, they almost cut him in two. Each of them 
had also a sort of hunting horn, which he sounds, and 
makes a great noise with when he arrives anywhere, and 
also when he departs, and also a rake, or instrument of 

1 These are the chakars, thin sharp-edged metal quoits, which can 
be flung mth marvellous accuracy and effect against an enemy. The 
Sikhs are especially proficient in their use. 



CHAP. V 


MUHAMMADAN’ DERVISHES 


83 


iron, made something like a trowel. It is with this 
instrument, which the Indians generally carry in their 
journeys, that they rake and level the places where they 
wish to halt, and some, having collected the dust in a 
heap, make use of it as a mattress and bolster in order 
to lie more comfortably. There were three of these Der- 
vis/ies armed w’ith long rapiers, which they had received, 
apparently, from some Englishman or Portuguese. 
Their baggage consisted of four bo.xes full of Arabian 
and Persian books and some cooking utensils, and they 
had ten or twelve oxen to carry those among the troop 
who were invalids. When these Dervishes arrived at 
the place where I was encamped with my carriage, hav- 
ing then with me fifty persons, both people of the coun- 
try, whom one engages, as I have said, for travelling, 
as also my ordinary servants, the Chief or Superior of 
the troop, seeing me well accompanied, inquired who 
that Aga^ was ; and asked me subsequently to give up to 
him the position I occupied, it being more commodious 
than any other about the place for camping with his 
Dervishes. As they informed me of the quality of this 
Chief and the four Dervishes who followed him, I was 
willing to do them a civility, and to yield that which 
they asked with a good grace; and so I ceded the 
place to them, and took another which suited me as 
well as it. Immediately the place was watered with a 
quantity of water, and made smooth and level, and, as 
it was winter and was somewhat cold, they lighted two 
fires for the five principal Dervishes, who placed them- 
selves between them in order to warm themselves both 
before and behind. During the same evening, after 
they had supped, the Governor of the town came 
1 Agha^ Hind, and Pers., means lord or master. 



84 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


to pay his respects to these principal Dervishes, and 
during their sojourn in the place sent them rice and 
other things which they were accustomed to eat. 
When they arrive in any place the Superior sends some 
of them to beg in the towns and villages, and whatever 
food they bring, which is given them out of charity, is 
immediately distributed to all in equal portions, each 
being particular to cook his own rice for himself. 
Whatever they have over is given every evening to the 
poor, and they reserve nothing for the following day. 
From Chitpour to Balambour (PAlanpur) . 12 coss. 

„ Balambour to Dantiuar(DAntawara)^ II „ 

„ Dantiuar to Bargant (WungAon ?) . 17 „ 

Bargant ^ is the territory of a Raja, where one has 
to pay customs. On one of my journeys to Agra, when 
passing by Bargant, I did not see the Raja, but only 
his lieutenant, who treated me with great civility, and 
presented me with rice, butter, and fruits of the season. 
In return I gave him three waistbands of calico, gold, 
and silk, and four handkerchiefs of coloured cotton, 
and two bottles, one of brandy and the other of Spanish 
wine. On my departure he ordered me to be escorted 
for 4 or 5 coss by twenty horsemen. 

When returning from the same journey I sent 
before me my heavier goods by waggon, and to shorten 
the road I purposed to repass by the same route. I 
had with me sixty Peons or people of the country, and 
seven or eight attendants who ordinarily waited on 
me. One evening, being encamped on the frontiers of 

^ Ddnta, or Ddnta\^' 4 ra, the chief town of the State of the same 
name (see p. 70, ».) It is 136 miles north of Baroda. The Antivar of 
p. 37 is apparently the same place. 

Probably the same as Bergam, on p. 37, n., the proper name may 
perhaps be Wungdon, in Jodhpur. 



CHAP. V 


REFRACTORY PEOXS 


85 


the territory of the Raja of Bargaxt, all my Peons'^ 
assembled about me in order to tell me that by taking 
the route through Bargaxt we should run the risk of 
being all strangled, and that the Prince of that country 
spared no one, and lived by robbery alone. That at 
the least, if I did not engage one hundred other Peons, 
there was no possibility of escaping the hands of the 
runners, whom he would send from both sides, and 
that they were obliged, as much for my safety as 
their own, to give me this advice. I spent some 
time disputing with them, and reproaching them with 
their cowardice ; but from fear lest they should not also 
reproach me for my temerity, I resolved to employ 
fifty more, and they went to search for them in the 
neighbouring villages. For traversing the territories 
of the Raja during three days, only, they asked four 
rupees each, which is as much as one gives them for a 
month. On the following day, when I wished to start, 
my Peons, showing themselves to be obstructive and irre- 
solute, came to tell me that they would leave me, and 
that they did not wish to risk their lives, asking me not 
to write to their Chief at Agra, who was answerable 
for their not leaving me against my wish. There were 
three of my personal servants who also treated me 
as the others had done, and there remained with me 
he who led my horse, my coachman, and three other 
attendants only, with whom I started under the pro- 
tection of God, who has always particularly aided me 
in my journeys. At about a coss from the place from 
whence I started I perceived, on turning round, some 
of these Peons, who followed me at a distance. Having 

1 Pion in the original for Peon^ Port., a foot soldier ; whence the 
name ‘‘pawn” in chess. 


86 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


ordered my carriage to stop to await them, I told the 
first who advanced that if they wished to come with 
me they should march around my carriage and not 
follow at a distance ; and seeing them to be still timid 
and irresolute, I said that I did not require cowards 
in my service, and dismissed them for the last time. 
When I had travelled another coss, I perceived on the 
side of a mountain about fifty horsemen, of whom four 
separated to advance towards me. Immediately when 
I saw them I got out of the carriage, and having thir- 
teen firearms, I gave a gun to each of my people. The 
horsemen approaching, I placed the carriage between 
them and me, and got ready to fire, in case they pre- 
pared to attack me. But they at once made me a sign 
that I had nothing to fear, and one of them having said 
that it was the Prince who was hunting, and who had sent 
them to ask what stranger passed through his territory, 
I replied I was the same Frank ^ who had passed five or 
six weeks previously. By good fortune, the same lieu- 
tenant of the jRaja, to whom I had presented the brandy 
and Spanish wine, followed close behind these four horse- 
men, and after having assured me how rejoiced he was 
to see me again, asked me forthwith if I had any wdne. 
I told him that I never travelled without it ; and in fact 
I was provided, the English and Dutch having pre- 
sented me at Agra with several bottles. Immediately 
on the lieutenant returning to the Fq/a, he himself 
came to meet me, and assuring me that I was welcome, 
told me that he wished me to halt at a place which he 
indicated under certain trees, a coss and a half from 
where we were, and that he would not fail to come to 
drink with me. He came towards evening, and we 

^ Franguy in the original. 



CHAP. V 


JALOR 


8' 


remained there two days together to amuse ourselves ; 
the jRaja having caused the Baladmes ^ to come, with- 
out whom the Persians and Indians do not think they 
can enjoy themselves properly. On my departure, the 
Raja gave me two hundred horsemen to accompany 
me for three whole days to the frontiers of his country, 
and I was quitted for three or four pounds of tobacco, 
which was all the present I made them. When I 
arrived at AhmadabAd it was scarcely believed that I 
had received such good treatment from a Prince who 
had the reputation of ill-treating all strangers who 
passed through his country. 

From Bargant to Bimal (Bheenm. 4 l) i 5 coss. 

,, Bimal to Modra (Modra) . 15 „ 

„ Modra to CH.4.LAOUR (Jalor) . 10 „ 
Jalor" is an ancient town upon a mountain sur- 
rounded with walls, and difficult of access; formerly 
it was a strong place. There is a tank on the top 
of the mountain, and another below, between which 
and the foot of the mountain is the road to the 
town. 

From Chalaour to Cantap (Khandap) i 2 coss. 

„ Cantap to Setlana(Sutulana) . 15 „ 

„ Setlana to Palavaseny (?) . . 14 „ 

„ Palavaseny to PiPARS (Pip Ar) . ii „ 

„ PiPARS to Mirda (MertA) . . 16 „ 

^ Baladines^ from the Portuguese Baladeira; the more usual form is 
Bayadere among authors ; but it is never heard, and is practically un- 
known in India, as a name for NdcJmis or dancing girls. (See Yule and 
Burnell, A 7 tglo-India 7 i Glossary^ s.v. Bayadere y for examples of its 
use.) 

2 Jdlor, a town in the State of Jodhpur or Marwar in Rdjputdna. 
The fort, 800 yards long by 400 yards wide, is on an eminence 1200 
feet high, and commands the town. It is of considerable strength, and 
still contains two tanks. 


88 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


From Dantawara to Merta it is three days’ 
journey/ and it is a mountainous country belonging 
to semi-independent Rajas or Princes, who pay some 
tribute to the Great Mogul. But in return, the 
Great Mogul appoints them to important posts in 
his armies, from which they derive much more than 
the tribute which they are obliged to pay him. 

MertA ^ is a large town, but badly built. When I 
arrived there, during one of my journeys in India, all 
the caravansardis were full of people, because the aunt 
of ShAh JahAn, wife of ShAistA KhAn, was then on 
her way, taking her daughter to marry her to Sultan 
ShujA, second son of ShAh JahAn. I was obliged to 
order my tent ® to be pitched upon a bank where there 
were large trees on both sides, and two hours after- 
wards I was much surprised to see fifteen or twenty 
elephants, which came to break off as much as they 
could of these great trees. It was a strange thing to 
see them break large branches with their trunks, as 
we break a piece of faggot.* This injury was done by 
order of the Begum to avenge herself of an affront by 
the inhabitants of MertA, who had not received her, 
and had not made a present as they ought to have 
done. 

From Mirda to Boronda (BarundA) . 12 coss. 

„ Boronda to CoETCHiEL (?) . . 18 „ 

^ This statement is somewhat inconsistent with the route given, which 
represents 9 stages and 125 coss. 

2 Mertd or Mirtd in Jodhpur, is situated on high ground, and is 
surrounded by a wall, partly of masonry and partly of clay. It contains 
numerous temples and a mosque. 

^ This is the obvious meaning, tmite being in the original a misprint 
for te 7 ite. 

^ The 7 nakouts of the present day sometimes, for similar reasons, 
make their elephants do injuries of this kind. (See p. 59.) 



CHAP. V 


FATEHPUR SIKRI 


89 


From CoETCHiEL to Bander- S oNNERY 

(Bandar-Sindri) . . -14 coss. 

, , B ANDER-SONNERY tO LaDONA ( LuDAXa) ^ 1 6 „ 

,, LaDONA TOWN to ChASOU (ChAKSU) 12 „ 

,, Chasou to Nuali (Lawali?) . . 17 „ 

„ Nuali to Hindoo (Hixdaun)® . 19 ,, 

„ Hindoo to Baniana (Biana)® . 10 „ 

These two last places are towns where, as in all the 
surrounding country, round indigo cake is made, and 
being the best of all the varieties of indigo it is also 
twice as dear. 

From Baniana to Vettapour (Fatehpur Sikri),^ 
14 coss. 

Fatehpur Sikri is a very old town where they 
make woollen carpets. 

From Vettapour to Agra . . . 12 coss. 

„ Surat to Agra there are in all 415 „ 

If one were able to make regular stages of 13 coss 
each, he would accomplish the journey in thirty-three 
days; but, since one rests and halts in certain places, the 
journey lasts generally from thirty-five to forty days. 

1 Luddnd, or Ladond on Bandi river in Jaipur, Rdjputdna. 

2 Hindaun, in Jaipur State, 71 miles from Agra. Once an extensive 
city, but the ramparts are now in ruins. 

3 Bidnd, in Bhartpur State, Rdjputana. It is 50 miles south-west of 
Agra, It is of great antiquity, and among remains of large buildings 
there is a stone pillar, Bhim lat The Emperor Bdbar described it 
in 1526 as being one of the most famous forts in India. It is a place 
of great sanctity in the eyes of Muhammadans. See Cunningham, 
ArchcsoL Reports^ vol ii, p. 54 ; vi, p. 50 ; xx, p. 61. 

^ Vettapour, z>., Fatehpur Sikri, 23 miles from Agra and 26 from 
Bidnd. See Book II, chap. xii. 




CHAPTER VI 

Route from Ispahan to Agra by KandahAr.^ 

I HAVE given an exact description of a part of this route, 
and I have conducted the reader as far as KandahAr.® 
It remains for me now to take him from KandahAr to 
Agra, to which one can go by two routes only, either 
by KABUL or by MultAn. This last is shorter than 
the other by ten days, but the caravan scarcely ever 
takes it, because from KandahAr to Multan there is 
nothing but deserts almost all the way, and because 
one marches sometimes for three or four days without 
finding water. Hence the most common and the most 
beaten track is by KAbul. From KandahAr to 
Kabul they count it 24 stages ; from KAbul to 
Lahore, 22 ; from Lahore to Delhi or JahAnAbAd, i 8 ; 
and from Delhi to Agra, 6 : this, with the 60 stages 
from Ispahan to Farah,® and the 20 from Farah to 
KandahAr, make in all, from Ispahan to Agra, 150 
stages. But those merchants who have urgent business 
sometimes join in parties of three or four on horseback, 
and accomplish the journey in half the time, that is to 
say in 60 or 75 days. 

MultAn ^ is a town where quantities of calicoes are 
made, and they used to carry them all to Tatta before 

^ Candahar in original. See p. 4. 

2 Persian Travels^ Bk. V, chap, xxiv, p. 693, Fr. ed., 4to. 1676. 

3 Farat in the original. ^ Multan, on the Chen^b river. 



CHAP. VI 


MULTAN 


91 


the sands had obstructed the mouth of the river ; but 
since the passage has been closed for large vessels they 
carry them to Agra, and from Agra to Surat, as well 
as a portion of the goods which are made at Lahore. 
As this carriage is very expensive, but few merchants 
go to make investments either at IMultan or Lahore, 
and indeed many of the artisans have deserted ; this 
also causes the revenues of the King to be much 
diminished in these provinces. hluLTAN is the place 
from whence migrate all the Banians who come to 
trade in Persia, where they follow the same occupation 
as the Jews, as I have elsewhere said, and they surpass 
them in their usury. They have a special law which 
permits them on certain days to eat fowls, and to take 
only one wife between two or three brothers, of whom 
the eldest is regarded as the father of the children. 

Numerous Baladins and Baladmes, who hail from 
this town, spread themselves in divers parts of Persia. 

I come to the route from Kandahar to Agra by 
Kabul and Lahore. 

From CaNDAHAR toCHARISAFAR(SHAHR-I-SAFA)^ \OCOSS. 
„ ChARISAFAR to ZeLAT£ (KaLAT-I-GhILZAI) 12 „ 

„ Zelat^ to Betazy (Ab-i-tAzi) . . 8 „ 

„ Betazy to Mezour (Mansur) . . 6 „ 

,, Mezour to Carabat (Karabagh) . . 17 „ 

„ Carabat to Chakenicouz^ (Shiganu ?) . 17 „ 

Between Kandahar and Chakenicouz^,® on the 

1 Shahr-i-saf£ = city of purity. (See Macgregor’s Central Asza^ p. 
672, and Baber’s Memoirs by Erskine^ p. 226.) 

2 Colonel Yule suggests that this may have been the Shigdnu of 
Broadfoot and Sekaneh of Baber’s Memoirs by Erskine^ p. 220. If 
not identical with Ghazni, it was probably in or near its latitude. 
Ghazni is 85 miles south-west of Kdbul, and 145 miles north-east of 
Kaldt-i-Ghilzdi. 



92 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


frontier of India, there is a country where many small 
Chiefs rule and render some allegiance to the King of 
Persia. 

From Chakenicouz^ to C about (Kabul) 40 coss} 

In these forty of road you only find three poor 
villages, where they have seldom got bread and barley 
for the horses, and the safest plan is to carry a supply 
with you. In the months of July and August a hot 
wind prevails in these quarters, which suffocates and 
kills suddenly, being of the same kind as the wind of 
which I have spoken in my accounts of Persia, which 
prevails also in certain seasons near Babylon and 
Mosul. ■ 

Kabul is a large town, fairly well fortified, and it 
is there the people of Usbek^ come every year to sell 
their horses; they estimate that the trade in them 
amounts annually to more than 60,000.® They take 
there from Persia also, many sheep and other cattle, 
and it is the great meeting-place for Tartary, India, 
and Persia. You can obtain wine there, and articles 
of food are very cheap. 

Before passing further it is necessary to note here 
a curious fact concerning the people called Augans,^ 
who inhabit (the country) from KandahAr to KAbul, 
towards the mountains of Balch,® and are powerful 
men, and great thieves at night. It is the custom 

^ The total distance here given from Kandahar to Kdbul is no coss. 
The distance in miles is 318, which would indicate a coss of 3 miles 
nearly. Tiefienthaler gives the stages from Kdbul to Ghazni as follows i 
—Kabul to Argandi (Urghandi) 12 milles, thence to Jadussia 13 milles, 
thence to Scheschgaon (Shashgdo) 12 milles, thence to Gasni (Ghazni) 
10 milles, total 46 milles. {Geog. de VInd., Bernoulli, Berlin 1791, 
P. 69.) 

2 For Tartars of Turkestan. ® Rupees ? ^ Afghdns. 

® Balkh, an ancient city of Turkestan, south of the Oxus. 



CHAP. VI 


HABITS OF THE AFGHANS 


93 


of these Indians to clean and scrape the tongue every 
morning with a small curved piece of a particular root. 
This causes them to throw up a quantity of foul matter, 
and excites them to vomit. And those who inhabit the 
country on these frontiers of Persia and India practice 
the same thing, nevertheless they vomit but little in the 
morning ; but instead, when they take their meals, as 
soon as they have eaten two or three mouthfuls, their 
heart is disturbed, and they are obliged to vomit, 
after which they return to eat with appetite. If they 
do not do so they only live to the age of thirty years, 
and they become dropsical. 

From Caeoul to Bariab£ (Barikab)i . 19 coss. 

,, Bariab]£ to NiMfiLA (Nimlabagh) . 17 „ 

, , N iM^ la to Alyboua ( Alibaghan and 

Il. 4 hibagh. 4 , in Akbar’s time) . 19 ,, 

„ Alyboua to Taka (Dakka) . . 17 „ 

„ Taka to Kiemry (Khaibari ?) . 6 „ 

,, Kiemry to Chaour (Peshawur)^ . 14 „ 

„ Chaour to Novichaar (Nowshera) 14 „ 

„ Novichaar to Atek (Attock)^ . 19 „ 

^ I am informed by Col. Yule that Barikdb is often mentioned by 
writers (Baber’s Memot'rs by Erskine^ pp. 275, 2 7 8, 290, and ]Moorcroft, 
ii, p. 373). There are caves hollowed in a bank there for the accommo- 
dation of travellers (Vigne, Narrative of a Visit to Ghusni^ etc.^ 1840, 
pp. 239-240). 

2 Tieffenthaler mentions two three-day itineraries between Peshawur 
and Attock as follows, the total distance being 30 so-called Indian milles 
— Peschaver to Schahabad 6 7 niiles, to Akora 12 miles, to Attak 12 
milles. The second is more detailed : Peschaver to Djouigousar 3 
miles, Djouigousar to Schahabad 4 7 nilles^ Schahabad to Noschera 
(Nowshera) 8 miles, Noschera to Girdab 4 7 m 7 les, Girdab to Akora 4 
milles^ Akora to Neri 4 7 niUes^ Neri to Kherabad 3 7 ?iilles^ thence 
across the Indus to Attak. (Geog. de tV 7 zdousta 7 i, par J. Bernoulli, 
Berlin, 1791*) 

2 Attock is situated near the junction of the Indus and Kdbul rivers. 



94 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Attock is a town situated on a promontory where 
two great rivers meet. It is one of the best fortresses 
of the Great Mogul, and they do not permit any 
stranger to enter it if he does not hold a passport from 
the King. The Reverend Jesuit Father Roux, and 
his companion, wishing to go by this route to Ispahan, 
and not having obtained a passport from the King, were 
sent back from thence, and returned to Lahore; where 
they embarked upon the river to go to Sind, from 
whence they passed into Persia. 

From Atek to CalapanE (Kala ki sarai?) i6 coss. 
„ Calapan^ to RoupatE (Rawat) ^ . i6 „ 

„ RoupatE to ToulapEca (Tulpuri) . i6 ,, 

„ ToulapEca to Keraly (KariAla or 

SarAi alamgir) . . . . 19 ,, 

„ Keraly to Zerabad (WazirAbAd) . 16 „ 

„ Zerabad to Imiabad (EminAbAd) ^ . 18 „ 

„ Imiabad to Lahor (Lahore) . . 18 „ 

Lahore is the capital of a kingdom, and is built on 
one of the five rivers ® which descend from the moun- 
tains of the north to go to swell the Indus, and give 
the name of Penjab ^ to all the region which they water. 
This river at the present day flows at a quarter of a 
league distant from the town, being liable to change 
its bed, and the neighbouring flelds often sustain much 
damage from its great overflowings. The town is 

^ It has been suggested to me by Mr. A. B. Wynne, who knows this 
country well, that Roupate should be identified with Rawdt, near the 
Manikyald tope, i6 miles south of Rawalpindi. It is the Seraie Roobat 
of Elphinstone’s map, probably derived from the Arabic ribdt or robdt 
a caravansardi. 

3 Emindbdd is 32 miles south of Lahore. 

® Lahore on the Rdvi. 

^ Penj-ab = &b, Pers., 5 waters or rivers — the Panjdb. 


CHAP. VI 


LAHORE 


95 


large, and extends more than a coss in length, but the 
greater part of the houses, which are higher than those 
of Agra and Delhi, are falling into ruins^ the excessive 
rains having overthrown a large number. The palace 
of the King is rather fine, and is no longer, as it was 
formerly, on the margin of the river, which has with- 
drawn, as I have said, about a quarter of a league. 
One can obtain wine at Lahore.^ 

I shall remark, en passant, that after leaving 
Lahore, and the kingdom of Kashmir which adjoins 
it on the north, all the women are naturally unprovided 
with hair on any part of the body,- and the men have 
very little of it on the chin. 

From Lahor to Menat-Kan (AmAnat Khan) i 2 coss. 
„ Menat-Kan to Faty-abad (Fateh- 

pur) 15 „ 

„ Faty-abad to Sera-dakan (Dekhan) . 15 „ 

„ Sera-dakan to Sera-balour (Phil- 

laur) 15 „ 

„ Sera-balour to Sera-dourai (Dour- 

Ahai) 12 „ 

„ Sera-dourai to Serinde (Sirhind) . 17 „ 

„ Serinde town to Sera Mogoul (Mo- 

gulsarAi) 1 5 » 

„ Sera Mogoul to Sera Chabas (ShAh- 

AbAd) . . . . . . 14 „ 

„ Sera Chabas to Dirauril (Tarawari) 17 „ 

„ Dirauril to Sera-Crindal (KurnAl) 14 „ 


^ No inconsiderable recommendation in the eyes of Tavernier, who 
makes frequent references to the wine which he carried with him on his 
journeys, and with which he delighted to entertain his friends. 

2 Our author does not intend, I suppose, to convey that they have 
none on their heads. 



96 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


From Sera-Crindal to Ginenaour (Gannaur) 21 coss. 

„ Ginenaour to Dehly (Delhi) . . 24 „ 

Before proceeding further it should be remarked 
that nearly all the way from Lahore to Delhi, and from 
Delhi to Agra, is like a continuous avenue planted 
throughout with beautiful trees on both sides, which is 
very pleasant to the view;^ but in some places they 
have been allowed to perish, and the people have not 
taken care to plant others. 

Delhi is a large town, near the river Jumna,^ which 
runs from north to south, then from west to east, and 
after having passed Agra and Kadioue,® loses itself in 
the Ganges. Since ShAh JahAn has caused the new 
town of JahAnAbAd to be built, to which he has given 
his name, and where he preferred to reside rather than 
at Agra, because the climate is more temperate, Delhi 
has become much broken down and is nearly all in ruins, 
only sufficient of it remaining standing to afford a habita- 
tion to the poor. There are narrow streets and houses 
of bamboo as in all India, and there are but three or 
four nobles of the court who reside at Delhi, in great 
enclosures, in which they have their tents pitched. 
It is also where the Reverend Jesuit Father who was 
at the court had his dwelling. 

JahAnAbAd, like Delhi, is a great straggling town, 
and a simple wall separates them. All the houses of 

^ On the map which accompanies the French edition of 1713 this 
avenue is represented. 

2 Delhi, on the Jumna, here Gemna, and elsewhere spelt Gemen^. 
The distance from Gannaur, or Gunour of the Atlas Sheet, is only about 
36 miles. ^ 

2 Kadioue. Can this mean Etlwah ? I am not aware whether any 
other author has mentioned this name, and think it probable that it was 
due to some mistake in catching the true sound. In chap. VIII, p. 1 13, 
Estanja appears, however, to represent Etowah. 



CHAP. VI 


jahaxabAd 


97 


private persons are large enclosures, in the middle of 
which is the dwelling, so that no one can approach the 
place where the women are shut up. The greater part 
of the nobles do not live in the town, but have their 
houses outside, so as to be near the water. When enter- 
ing Jahanabad from the Delhi side, a long and w'ide 
street is to be seen, where, on both sides, there are 
arches under which the merchants carry on their busi- 
ness, and overhead there is a kind of platform. This 
street leads to the great square, where the King’s palace 
is ; and there is another very straight and wide one, 
which leads to the same square near another gate of 
the palace, in which there are the houses of the principal 
merchants who keep no shops. 

The King’s palace is a good half league in circuit. 
The walls are of fine cut stone, with battlements, and 
at every tenth battlement there is a tower. The fosses 
are full of water and are lined with cut stone. The 
principal gate of the palace has nothing magnificent 
about it, nor has the first court, where the nobles are 
permitted to enter on their elephants. 

From this court one enters a long and wide passage 
which has on both sides handsome porticoes, under 
which there are many small chambers where some of 
the horse-guards lodge. These porticoes are elevated 
about two feet from the ground, and the horses, which 
are fastened to rings outside, take their feed on the edge. 
In certain places there are large doors which lead to 
different apartments, as to that of the women, and to 
the • quarter where justice is administered. In the 
middle of this passage there is a channel full of water, 
which leaves a good roadway on either side, and forms 
little basins at equal distances. This long passage 
VOL. I H 


98 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


leads to a large court where the Omrahs^ i.e. the great 
nobles of the kingdom, like the Backus^ in Turkey, 
and the Khdns in Persia, constitute the bodyguard. 
There are low chambers around this court for their 
use, and their horses are tethered outside their doors. 

From this second court a third is entered by a 
large gate, by the side of which there is, as it were, a 
small room raised two or three feet from the ground. It 
is where the royal wardrobe is kept, and from whence 
the khU'at ® is obtained whenever the King wishes to 
honour a stranger or one of his subj ects. A little further 
on, over the same gate, is the place where the drums, 
trumpets, and hautboys are kept, which are heard some 
moments before the King enters his throne of justice, 
to give notice to the Omraks, and again when the 
King is about to rise. When entering this third court 
you face the divan where the King gives audience. It 
is a grand hall elevated some four feet above the ground 
floor, and open on three sides. Thirty -two marble 
columns sustain as many arches, and these columns 
are about four feet square with their pedestals and some 
mouldings. When ShAh JahAn commenced the build- 
ing of this hall he intended that it should be enriched 
throughout by wonderful works in mosaic, like those in 
the chapel of the Grand Duke in Italy; but having 
made a trial upon two or three pillars to the height of 

^ Omeraks and Otnrahs in the original for Ufnara^ Arb. PL of Amir. 
(See Yule and Burnell, Anglo-Indian Glossary.^ s.v.) 

2 BacJias for Pachas. Chardin quaintly says of the two modes of 
spelling that bacha means Head of the King; ^TApacha^ Feet of the 
King. ( Voyages, Amsterdam, ed. 17 1 1, voL i, p. 35.) The true explana- 
tion being, as Colonel Yule informs me, that as Arabic has no p, they 
have substituted b, which the Turks have adopted. 

® Khil^at (See p. 20.) 



CHAP. VI 


THE MOGUL'S THRONE 


90 


two or three feet, he considered that it would be im- 
possible to find enough stones for so considerable a 
design, and that moreover it would cost an enormous 
sum of money ; this compelled him to stop the work, 
contenting himself with a representation of different 
flowers. 

In the middle of this hall, and near the side over- 
looking the court, as in a theatre, they place the throne 
when the King comes to give audience and to render 
justice. It is a small bed of the size of our camp 
beds, with its four columns, the canopy, the back, a 
bolster, and counterpane ; all of which are covered with 
diamonds. 

When the King takes his seat, however, they spread 
on the bed a cover of gold brocade, or of some other 
rich quilted stuff, and he ascends it by three small steps 
of two feet in length. On one side of the bed there 
is a parasol elevated on a handle of the length of a 
short pike,^ and to each column of the bed is attached 
one of the King’s weapons, to one his shield, to another 
his sword, next his bow, his quiver, and his arrows, 
and other things of that nature. 

There is in the court below the throne a space 
twenty feet square, surrounded by balustrades, which at 
certain times are covered with plates of silver, and at 
others with plates of gold. It is at the four corners of 
this space that the four Secretaries of State are seated, 
who for civil as well as criminal matters also fulfil the 
r$les of advocates. Several nobles place themselves 
around the balustrade, and here also the music is 
located, which is heard while the King is in the divan. 
This music is sweet and pleasant, and makes so little 
1 Demi ^ique in the original. 



100 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


noise that it does not disturb the thoughts from the 
serious occupations with which they are engaged. 
When the King is seated on his throne, some great 
noble stands by him, most frequently his own children. 
Between eleven o’clock and noon the Nawdb^ who is the 
first Minister of State, like the Grand Vizir va. Turkey, 
comes to make a report of whatever has passed in the 
chamber where he presides, which is at the entry of 
the first court, and when he has finished speaking, the 
King rises. But it must be remarked that from the 
time the King seats himself on his throne till he rises, 
no one, whosoever he may be, is allowed to leave the 
palace ; though I am bound to say that the King was 
pleased to exempt me from this njlei, “which is general 
for every one — and here, in a few., words, is how it 
occurred. ' ' . . , 

Wishing one day, while the King was in the divan, 
to leave the palace on urgent business, which could not 
by any means be deferred, the Captain of the guard 
caught me by the arm, and told me roughly that I should 
not pass out. I argued with him some time, but at 
length, seeing that he would treat me with violence, I 
put my hand to my canjare^ and would have struck him 
in the rage I was in if three or four guards, who saw 
my action, had not restrained me. Happily for me the 
Nawdb, who was uncle of the King, passed at the 
moment, and being informed of the subject of our 
quarrel, ordered the Captain of the guards to let me 
go out. He reported to the King in due course how 
the matter had occurred, and in the evening the Nawdb 

1 Nabab in original, for Nawd.b. 

2 Canjare for Khanjar^ Hind., a kind of dagger. (See Book II, 
chap, xxiv.) 



CHAP. VI 


THE DIV.\X 


101 


sent one of his people to tell me that his majesty had 
notified that I might enter and leave the palace as I 
pleased while he was in the divan, for which I went 
on the following day to thank the Nawab. 

Towards the middle of the same court there is a 
small channel which is about six inches wide, where, 
while the King is on his seat of justice, all strangers 
who come to the audience must stop. They are not 
allowed to pass it without being called, and even am- 
bassadors themselves are not exempted from this rule. 
When an ambassador has arrived at the channel, the 
officer in charge of the introductions calls out towards 
the divan, where the King is seated, that such an 
ambassador wishes to speak to his majesty'. Then a 
Secretary of State repeats it to the King, who very 
often does not appear to hear, but some time after he 
lifts his eyes, and throwing them upon the ambassador, 
makes through the same Secretary a sign that he may 
approach. 

From the hall of the divan y'ou pass on the left to a 
terrace from whence you see the river, and from thence 
the King enters a small chamber from which he passes 
into his harem. It was in this little chamber where I 
had my first audience with his majesty, as I shall else- 
where relate. 

To the left of this same court where the divan is, 
there is a small well-built mosque, the dome of which 
is entirely covered by lead, and so thoroughly well gilt 
that some indeed believe that the whole is of massive 
gold. This is where the King goes daily to pray, 
save on Friday, when he goes to the Grand Mosque, 
which is very magnificent, and is situate on a lofty 
platform higher than the houses of the town, and it is 

VOL. I H 




102 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK I 


ascended by many grand flights of stairs. On the day 
upon which the King goes to the mosque, a large net 
of five or si.\; feet in height is stretched round these 
stairs from fear lest the elephants might approach 
them, and out of the respect with which the mosque is 
regarded. 

The right side of the court is occupied by porticoes 
which form a long galler}-, elevated about half a foot 
above the ground, and it is the whole extent of these 
porticoes which constitute the King’s stables, which 
one may enter by several doors. They are always full 
of very fine horses, the least valuable of which has cost 
3000 dctis, and there are some which are worth up to 
10,000 ^cus. In front of each door of the stables there 
is hung a kind of screen made of bamboos split like our 
osiers; but, unlike the way in which we weave our 
little twigs of osier with osier itself, the bamboo is 
woven with twisted silk which represents flowers, and 
the w'ork is very tedious and requires much patience. 
These screens serve to prevent the flies from torment- 
ing the horses, but that is not considered sufficient, 
for two grooms are appointed to each horse, one of 
whom is generally occupied in fanning it. There are 
also screens stretched before the porticoes, as before 
the doors of the stables, and they are lowered and 
elevated according to necessity ; and the floor of the 
gallery is covered with beautiful carpets, which are 
taken up in the evening in order to spread the bedding 
of the horses. This bedding is made of the horse’s 
own droppings dried in the sun, and afterwards some- 
what crushed. The horses imported into India, 
whether from Persia or Arabia, or the country of the 
Usbeks, have a complete change of food, for in India 



CHAP. VI 


THE JUMNA 


loa 


they are given neither hay nor oats. Each horse 
receives for its portion in the morning two or three 
balls made of wheaten flour and butter, of the size of 
our penny rolls. There is much difficulty in accus- 
toming them to this kind of food, and often four or 
five months pass before it can be accomplished. The 
groom is obliged to hold the horse’s tongue in one 
hand, and with the other he has to force the ball down 
the throat. In the sugar-cane or millet season they 
are given some of them at mid-day ; and in the even- 
ing, an hour or two before sunset, they receive a 
measure of chick-peas which the groom has crushed 
between two stones and steeped in water. It is these 
which take the place of hay and oats. As for the 
other stables of the King, where he has also some fine 
horses, they are poor places, badly built, and do not 
deserve to be mentioned. 

The Jumna is a fine river which has large boats 
upon it, and, after having passed Agr.a., it loses its 
name in the Ganges at Allahabad. The King keeps 
many small brigantines at Jah.4.n.4bAd for pleasure, and 
they are highly decorated after the manner of the 
country. 


CHAPTER VII 


Sequence of the same Route, fro 7 Ji Delhi up to Agra 

From Dehly to Badelpoura (Budurpur) . 8 coss. 

„ Badelpoura to Peluel-ki-sera 

(Pulwal) i8 „ 

„ Peluel-ki-sera to Cotki-sera 

(Kotwan?) 15 „ 

, , Cotki-sera to Cheki-sera^ (Sheikh-i- 

SARAI?) 16 „ 

At Cheki-sera there is one of the grandest pagodas 
in India with an asylum for apes, both for those com- 
monly in the place and for those which come from the 
neighbouring country, where the Banians provide 
them with food. This pagoda is called Mathura;^ 
formerly it was held in much greater veneration by the 
idolaters than it is at present. That was because the 
Jumna then flowed at the foot of the pagoda, and 
because the Banians, both those of the place and 
those who came from afar in pilgrimage to perform 
their devotions there, were able to wash themselves in 
the river before entering the pagoda, and on coming 

1 This probably stands for Sheikh-i-sar^, the name of some halting- 
place near Matura of the original (z.e. Mathura). 

Mathura, or Muttra, on the right bank of the Jumna, about 30 
miles above Agra. It was a centre of the Buddhist faith about the year 
A.D. 400, when visited by the Chinese pilgrim, Fa-Hian. Its antiquities 
have been fiilly described by Mr. Growse. Monkeys stiU swarm in the 
city, where they are fed by the inhabitants. In 1669-70 Aurangzeb 
visited the city, and destroyed many of its temples and shrines. 



CHAP, vn 


AGRA 


105 


out of it before preparing to eat, which they must not 
do without being washed ; besides, they believe that 
by washing themselves in running water their sins are 
more effectually removed. But for some years back 
the river has taken its course to the north, and flows 
at a good coss distance from the pagoda ; this is the 
reason why so many pilgrims do not visit it now. 

From Cheki-sera to Goodki-sera (?) . 5 coss. 

„ Goodki-sera to Agra . . . 6 „ 

Agra is in 27° 31' latitude,^ in a sandy soil ; which 
is the cause of excessive heat in summer. It is the 
largest town in India, and was formerly the residence 
of the Kings. The houses of the nobles are beautiful 
and well built, but those of private persons have nothing 
fine about them, no more than in all the other towns of 
India. They are separated from one another, and are 
concealed by the height of the walls, from fear lest 
any one should see the women ; so it is easy to under- 
stand that all these towns have nothing cheerful about 
them like our towns in Europe. It should be added 
to this that, Agra being surrounded by sands, the heat 
in summer is excessive, and it is, in part, this which 
induced Shah JahAn not to make his ordinary dwelling 
there any more, and to remove his court to Jahanabad. 

All then that is remarkable at Agra is the palace 
of the King,® and some beautiful tombs both near the 
town and in the environs. The palace of the King is 
a considerable enclosure with a double wall, which is 

^ The true latitude of Agra is 27° 10' 6". The Handbook to Agra^ 
by Mr. H. G. Keene, may be referred to for an account of this city by 
those who desire to learn of its present condition and past history, 

2 The palace was commenced during the reign of Ibrahim Lodi ; 
but the chief architectural monuments are due to Shdh Jahdn. {Arch. 
Reports.^ voL iv, p. 12.) 



lOG 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


terraced in some places, and above the wall small dwell- 
ings have been built for certain officers of the court. 
The Jumna flows in front of the palace ; but between 
the wall and the river there is a large square where the 
King makes his elephants fight. They have purposely 
selected this spot near the water, because the elephant 
which has been victorious being enraged, they would 
not be able to pacify him for a long time if they did 
not urge him into the river, to effect which it is neces- 
sary to use artifice, by attaching to the end of a hand- 
pike fuses and petards, which are set on fire to drive 
him into the water ; and when he is two or three feet 
deep in it he forthwith becomes appeased. 

There is a large square on the side of the town in 
front of the palace, and the first gate, which has nothing 
magnificent about it, is guarded by some soldiers. 
Before the King had given up his residence at Agra 
for that at Jahanabad, whenever he went to the coun- 
try on a visit he entrusted the custody of the palace, 
where his treasure was, to one of the principal and 
most trustworthy of his Omrahs, who, until the return 
of the King, never moved, neither day nor night, from 
this gate where his lodging was. It was during such 
an absence that I was permitted to see the palace at 
Agra. The King having left for JahAnAbad, where 
all the court followed, and even the women too, the 
government of the palace was conferred on a noble 
who was a. great friend of the Dutch, and, in general, 
of all the Franks} 

M. Velant, chief of the Dutch factory at Agra, as 
soon as the King had left, went to salute this noble 
and to make him a present, according to the custom. 

1 Franguis in the original, Franks, z>. Europeans. (See pp. 6 and 86.) 



CHAP. VII 


THE PAL.\CE AT AGRA 


107 


It was worth about 6000^ (fais, and consisted of spices, 
Japanese cabinets, and beautiful Dutch cloths. He 
invited me to go with him when he went to pay his 
compliments to the Governor ; but this noble was 
offended at being offered a present, and obliged him to 
take it back, telling him that, in consideration of the 
friendship he had for the Franks, he would only take 
one small cane out of six which formed a part of the 
gift. They were those Japanese canes which grow in 
short nodes ; it was even necessarj' to remove the gold 
with which it had been embellished, as he would not 
receive it except in its unadorned condition. Compli- 
ments having passed on both sides, the Governor asked 
M. Velant what he desired him to do to serve him ; 
and he having prayed him to have the goodness, as 
the court was absent, to permit him to see the interior 
of the palace, it was granted him, and six men were 
given to accompany us. 

The first gate, where, as I have said, the dwelling of 
the Governor of the palace is situated, is a long and dark 
arch, after which you enter a large court surrounded with 
porticoes, like the Place Royale or Luxembourg at 
Paris. The gallery which is opposite is larger and 
higher than the others, and is sustained by three rows 
of columns, and under those, on the three other sides 
of the court, which are narrower and lower, there are 
several small chambers for the soldiers of the guard. 
In the middle of the great gallery you see a niche in 
the wall to which the King obtains access from his 
harem by a small concealed staircase, and when seated 
there he looks like a statue. He has no guards about 
him then, because he has nothing to fear ; and because 

1 About ;£i35o. 



108 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK I 


neither before nor behind, from the right nor from the 
left, can any one approach him. During the great 
heat he keeps only one eunuch by him, and most fre- 
quently one of his children, to fan him. The nobles of 
the court remain below in the gallery under this niche. 

At the end of the court there is, on the left hand, 
a second gateway which gives entrance to another 
great court, which is also surrounded by galleries, 
under which there are also small rooms for some 
officers of the palace. From this second court you 
pass into a third, where the King’s apartments are 
situated. Shah Jahax had intended to cover the arch 
of a great gallery^ which is on the right hand with 
silver, and a Frenchman, named Augustin de Bor- 
deaux, was to have done the work. But the Great 
jMogul seeing there was no one in his kingdom who 
was more capable to send to Goa to negotiate an 
affair with the Portuguese, the work was not done, 
for, as the ability of Augustin was feared, he was 
poisoned on his return from Cochin. This gallery 
is painted with foliage of gold and azure, and the floor 
is covered over with a carpet. There are doors under 
the gallery giving entrance into very small square 
chambers. I saw two or three of them which were 
opened for us, and we were told that the others were 
similar. The three other sides of the court are alto- 
gether open, and there is but a simple wall to the height 
of the support On the side overlooking the river 
there is a projecting divan or belvedere, where the King 
comes to sit when he wishes to enjoy the pleasure of 
seeing his brigantines, and making his elephants fight 
In front of this divan there is a gallery which serves as 
a vestibule, and the design of Shah JahAn was to cover 


CHAP, vn 


TOMBS AT AGRA 


109 


it throughout by a trellis of rubies and emeralds, which 
would represent, after nature, green grapes and those 
commencing to become red ; but this design, which 
made a great noise throughout the world, and which 
required more wealth than he had been able to furnish, 
remains unfinished, only having two or three wreaths 
of gold with their leaves, as all the rest ought to be, 
and enamelled in their natural colours, emeralds, rubies, 
and garnets making the grapes. About the middle of 
the court you see a great tank for bathing, of forty feet 
in diameter, and of a single piece of sandstone, with 
steps cut in the stone itself, both within and without.^ 

As for the tombs which are in Agra and its environs, 
there are some which are very beautiful, and there is 
not one of the eunuchs in the King’s harem who is not 
ambitious to have a magnificent tomb built for himself. 
When they have amassed large sums they earnestly 
desire to go to Mecca, and to take with them rich 
presents ; but the Great Mogul, who does not wish 
the money to leave his country, very seldom grants 
them permission, and consequently, not knowing what 
to do with their wealth, they expend the greater part 
of it in these burying-places, in order to leave some 
monument to their names. 

Of all the tombs which one sees at Agra, that of 
the wife of Shah Jahan ^ is the most splendid. He pur- 
posely made it near the Tasimacan,® where all foreigners 
come, so that the whole world should see and admire 
its magnificence. The Tasimacan is a large bazaar, 

- 1 This should take rank as one of the most remarkable monoliths ever 
extracted from a quarry and dressed by stone-cutters’ chisels. See p. 1 5 3. 

2 The Tdj Mahal was erected by Shdh Jahdn in memory of his 
queen, Mumtdz-i-Mahal. His own remains lie there too. 

2 Probably Tdj-i-mukd 7 n ; i.e. The camp of the Tdj. 




110 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK 1 


consisting of six large courts all surrounded with porti- 
coes, under which there are chambers for the use of 
merchants, and an enormous quantity of cottons is sold 
there. The tomb of this Begum, or sultan queen, is at 
the east end of the town by the side of the river in 
a great square surrounded by walls, upon which there 
is a small gallerj-, as on the walls of many towns in 
Europe. This square is a kind of garden divided into 
compartments like our parterres, but in the places where 
we put gravel there is white and black marble. You 
enter this square by a large gate, and at first you see, 
on the left hand, a beautiful gallery which faces in the 
direction of Mecca, where there are three or four niches 
where the Moufti'^ comes at fixed times to pray. A 
little farther than the middle of the square, on the side 
of the water, you see three great platforms elevated, 
one upon the other, with four towers at the four 
corners of each, and a staircase inside, for proclaiming 
the hour of prayer. There is a dome above, which is 
scarcely less magnificent than that of Val de Grace at 
Paris. It is covered within and without with white 
marble, the middle being of brick. Under this dome 
there is an empty tomb, for the Begum is interred under 
a vault which is beneath the first platform. The same 
changes which are made below in this subterranean 
place are made above around the tomb, for from time 
to time they change the carpet, chandeliers, and other 
ornaments of that kind, and there are always there 
some Mollahs^ to pray. I witnessed the commence- 
ment and accomplishment of this great work, on 
which they have expended twenty-two years, during 

1 Mufti, a Turkish title applied to the supreme exponent of the 
law. 3 More correctly Mulla. 



CHAP, vn 


TOMB OF JAHANGIR 


111 


which twenty thousand men worked incessantly ; this 
is sufficient to enable one to realise that the cost of it 
has been enormous. It is said that the scaffoldings 
alone cost more than the entire work, because, from 
want of wood, they had all to be made of brick, 
as well as the supports of the arches ; this has en- 
tailed much labour and a heavy expenditure. Shah 
Jahan began to build his own tomb on the other 
side of the river, but the war which he had with 
his sons interrupted his plan, and Aur-vngzeb, who 
reigns at present, is not disposed to complete it. An 
eunuch in command of 2000 men guards both the 
tomb of the Begum and the Tasimacan, to which it is 
near at hand. 

On one side of the town the tomb of King Akbar ^ 
is to be seen ; as for those of the eunuchs they have 
but a single platform with small chambers at each of 
the four corners. 

When you reach Agra from the Delhi side you 
meet a large bazaar, close to which there is a garden 
where the king Jahangir, father of Shah Jahan, is 
interred. Over the gate of this garden you see a 
painting which represents his tomb covered by a great 
black pall with many torches of white wax, and two 
Jesuit Fathers at the ends. One is much astounded 
at seeing that Shah JahAn, contrary to the practice of 
the Muhammadans, who hold images in abhorrence, 
has allowed this painting to remain, and it can only be 
in consequence of the fact that the King his father and 
he himself had learnt from the Jesuits some principles of 
mathematics and astrology. But he had not the same 
indulgence for them in another matter, for on going 
1 This was built by Shdh Jahdngir at Sikandri. 




112 


TRAVELS IN' INDIA 


BOOK H 


one day to see a sick Armenian, named Cotgia,^ . . . 
whom he much loved, and whom he had honoured with 
splendid appointments, and the Jesuits, who had their 
house close to that of the Armenian, happening to ring 
their bell just then, the noise proved displeasing to the 
King, and as he thought it might inconvenience the sick 
man, in a rage he commanded it to be removed and 
hung on the neck of his elephant ; this was promptly 
done. Some days after, the King seeing the elephant 
with this heavy bell suspended from its neck, he thought 
that so great a weight might injure it, and he therefore 
ordered it to be carried into the office of the Couteval^ 
which is a sort of barrier where a provost administers 
justice to those of the quarter, and it has remained there 
ever since. This Armenian had been brought up with 
Sh.4h Jah.4n, and, as he was very clever and was an 
excellent poet, he was high in the good graces of the 
King, who had given him valuable governorships, but 
had never been able, either by promises or threats, to 
induce him to become a Muhammadan. 

1 There is a hiatus here in the original, probably Tavernier was 
uncertain as to the name, Cotgia (for KJiojeJi) being a title. 

2 Koiwdi^ i.e. police-magistrate or provost 



CHAPTER VUI 


Route froyn Agra to Patxa and Dacca, towns of the 
Province of Bengal ; and the qiiaj'rel which the 
author had with Shaista Khan, uncle of the King. 

I PARTED from Agra for Bengal on the 25th of 
November 1665 ^ and lay the same day at a poor cara- 
vansardi distant from Agra 3 coss. 

The 26th [Nov.] I reached Beruzabad (Fero- 
zabad), 9 coss. 

It is a small town, where, on my return, I received 
8000 rupees of the balance of the money which Zafar 
Khan owed me for the goods which he had bought 
from me at Jahanabad.® 

The 27th [Nov.] to Serail Morlides (?) . 9 coss. 

28th „ „ Estanja (Etawah .14 „ 

29th „ „ Haii-Mal (Ajit-MAl) .12 „ 

30th „ „ Sekandera (Sikandra) .13 

1st of Dec. to Sanqual (near Musanagar) 14 ,, 

I met on this day no waggons, each drawn by 6 
oxen, and there was upon each waggon 50,000 rupees. 

^ Tavernier, in Book I, chap, x, describes how he witnessed the 
Mogul’s festival on the 4th to the 9th of November, and then saw the 
jewels. Soon afterwards he must have left Delhi so as to reach Agra 
for this start. (See Joret^ op, p. 193.) 

- See for account of this purchase, p. 137. 

® Elsewhere I have suggested that by Kadioue, Etowah was also 
intended. (See pp. 96, 1 1 5.) The name is, I find, mentioned by Bernier. 

VOL. I I 



114 


TR-WELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


It was the revenue of the Province of Bengal, of which 
all charges being paid and the purse of the Governor 
well filled, amounted to 5,500,000 rupees/ At one 
league on this side of Sanqital you cross a river called 
Sengar," which flows into the Jumna, which is only 
half a league distant. You cross this river Sengar by 
a stone bridge, and when you arrive from the Bengal 
side, to go to Sironj and Surat, if you wish to shorten 
the journey by ten days, when quitting the road to 
Agra you must come as far as this bridge, and cross 
the river Jumna by boat. Nevertheless the route 
by Agra is generally taken, because by the other 
there are five or six days’ stony marches, and because 
one must pass through the territories of Rajas where 
there is danger of being robbed. 

The 2d [December] I came to a caravansardi called 
Cherour-abad,® 12 coss. 

Halfway you pass Jahanabad,^{?) a small town 
near which, about a quarter of a league on this side, 
you pass a field of millet, where I saw a rhinoceros 
eating stalks of this millet, which a small boy of nine 
or ten years ® presented to him. On my approaching 

^ TiefFenthaler places the revenue of Bengal at 13,006,590 rupees 
in Ahbar’s time, and he says that it was 40,000,000 rupees according 
to Manou2zi,” Manouchi, in the time of Shdh Jahdn, subsequently 
it fell to 8,621,200 rupees. {Geog, de. Vlnd,^ p. 443.) 

^ Saingour in the original. 3 js^ot identified. 

^ Gianabad in the original, to west of Kord. 

5 Tame rhinoceroses, to which a good deal of freedom was allowed, 
were formerly not uncommonly kept by the Rajas, Sometimes, as at 
Baroda, they were performers in the fighting arena, and on such occa- 
sions were commonly painted with divers bright colours. Elsewhere I 
have shown that the Kartazonon of Megasthenes and the “Homed 
Ass” of Ktesias were probably this animal; in the latter case the 
colours which have puzzled so many commentators were, I believe, 
artificial pigments applied to the hide of the rhinoceros seen by Ktesias, 



CHAP. VIII 


M. BERXIER 


llj 


he gave me some stalks of millet, and immediately the 
rhinoceros came to me, opening his mouth four or five 
times ; I placed some in it, and when he had eaten 
them he continued to open his mouth so that I might 
give him more. 

The 3d [December] I came to Serrail Chageada 
(SarAi Sh.Ahz-Ada), 10 coss. 

The 4th, to Serrail Atakax (Hutg. 4 ox), 13 coss. 

The 5th, to Auraxgae.\d,^ a large town, 9 coss. 

Formerly this town had another name, and it is the 
place where Auraxgzee, who reigns at present, gave 
battle to his brother Sultan Shuja, who held the 
government of the whole of Bexgal. Auraxgzee 
having been victorious gave his name to the town, 
and he built there a handsome house with a garden and 
a small mosque. 

The 6th [December] to Alixchan (Alum Chaxd), 
9 coss. 

About two leagues on this side of Alum Chaxd 
you meet the Gaxges. Monsieur Bernier,^ Physician 
to the King, and a man named Rachepot, with whom 
I was, were surprised to see that this river, of which 
they make so much talk, is not larger than the Seine 

as they are on elephants at the present day. {Proceed. Roy. Irish 
Academy, 2d Sen, vol. ii, No. 6, 1885.) Chardin describes and figures 
a rhinoceros from Ethiopia which he saw at Ispahan. He says he did 
not know whether the animal was found in India. {Voyages, Amsterdam 
ed., 1 71 1, vol. viii, p. 133.) 

1 Aurangibdd, not now on the maps. Perhaps same as Kadioue. 
See pp. 96 and 113. 

2 M. Bernier, the well-known historian of the Mogul Empire, was 
bom at Joue-Etian, in Angers, in September 1620. In 1654 he went 
to Syria and Egypt, and from Cairo, where he remained for a year, he 
went to Suez and embarked for India, where he took service as physician 
to the Great Mogul {Voyages, t. i, p. 9), In 1668 he returned to France, 
and died in 1688. 



116 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


in front of the Louvre, it being perhaps thought that 
it equalled in width, at the least, the Danube below 
Belgrade. There is actually so little water from the 
month of March to the month of June or July, when 
the rains commence, that boats are not able to ascend 
it. On arrival at the Ganges, we each drank a glass 
of wine which -we mixed with water — this caused 
some internal disturbance ; but our attendants who 
drank it alone were much more tormented than we 
were. The Dutch, who have a house on the banks 
of the Ganges, never drink the water of the river, 
except after it has been boiled ; as for the native in- 
habitants, they have been accustomed to it from their 
youth ; the King even and all his court drink no other. 
You see every day a large number of camels which do 
nothing else but fetch water from the Ganges. 

The 7th [Dec.] we came to Halabas ^ (AllAhAbAd), 
S coss. 

AllAhAbAd is a large town built on a point of land 
where the Ganges and the Jumna meet one another. 
It has a fine castle built of cut stone, with a double ditch, 
and it is the dwelling of the Governor. He is one of the 
greatest nobles in India, and as he is troubled with 
bad health he employs some Persian Physicians, and 
he then also had in his service M. Claude Maille of 
Bourges,® who practised both surgery and medicine. 
It was he who advised us not to drink any of the 
Ganges water, which would produce disturbance of the 

^ Alldhdbddj Ilahdbds of Akbar, at the junction of the Jumna and 
Ganges. 

2 M. Claude IMaille of Bourges. As we shall see in Book I, chap, 
xviii, a man of this name, who had escaped from the Dutch service Tvas, 
in the year 1652, a not very successful amateur gun-founder for Mir 
Jumla; he had after his escape set up as a surgeon to the Nawdb^ with 



CHAP, vni 


A PERSIAN PHYSICIAN 


117 


Stomach, but to drink rather the water from wells. 
The chief of these Persian Physicians whom this 
Governor had in his pay, one day threw his wife down 
from the top of a terrace to the ground, impelled 
apparently to this cruel action by a freak of jealousy. 
He thought that she was killed, but she had only two 
or three ribs broken, and the relations of the woman 
threw themselves at the feet of the Governor to 
demand justice. The Governor summoned the Physi- 
cian, and commanded him to withdraw, not wishing to 
keep him any longer in his service. He obeyed this 
order, and, having placed his disabled wife in a pal- 
lankeen, he departed with all his family. He was 
not more than three or four marches from the town 
when the Governor, finding himself unusually ill, sent 
to recall him, upon which the Physician stabbed his wife, 
four of his children, and thirteen female slaves, after 
which he returned to the Governor, who said nothing 
to him about it, and took him again into his service. 

On the 8th I crossed the Ganges in a large boat, 
having waited from the morning till mid-day on the 
bank of the river, till M. Maille brought a letter from 
the Governor giving us permission to cross. For on 
each side there is a Darogah, who allows no one to pass 
without an order ; and he takes note also of the kind 
of merchandise carried, each waggon being charged 
four rupees, and a chariot paying but one, without 
counting the boat, for which it is necessary to pay 
separately. 

an equipment consisting of a case of instruments and a box of ointments 
which he had stolen from M. Cheteur, the Dutch Ambassador to 
Golconda. Tavernier throws no light upon his identity with this 
physician. He mentions that M. Cheteur left a surgeon named Pitre 
de Lan with the king of Golconda. (See Book I, chap, xix.) 



118 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


This day the halt was at Sadoul Serail ^ (?) 1 6 coss. 

The 9th at Yakedil-sera (Jagdis Sarai) . 10 „ 

loth at Bouraky-sera (Baboo SarAi) . 10 „ 

iith at Banarou (Benares) . . 10 „ 

Benares ^ is a large and very well-built town, the 
majority of the houses being of brick and cut stone, 
and more lofty than those of other towns of India ; 
but it is very inconvenient that the streets are 
so narrow. It has several caravansardis, and, among 
others, one very large and well built. In the middle 
of the court there are two galleries where they sell 
cottons, silken stuffs, and other kinds of merchandise. 
The majority of those who vend the goods are the 
workers who have made the pieces, and in this manner 
foreigners obtain them at first hand. These workers, 
before exposing anything for sale, have to go to him 
who holds the contract, in order to get the King’s 
stamp impressed on the pieces of calico or silk, other- 
wise they are fined and flogged. The town is situated 
to the north of the Ganges, which runs the whole length 
of the walls, and two leagues farther down a large river ® 
joins it from the west. The idolaters have one of their 
principal pagodas in Benares, and I shall describe it in 
Book 1 1 , where I shall speak of the religion of iki&Banians, 

About 500 paces from the town, in a north-western 
direction, there is a mosque where you see several 
Muhammadan tombs, of which some are of a very beauti- 

1 Possibly Syd£b£d, which, however, is only about 17 miles from 
AlMhabdd ; in any case the 1 6 coss is too much. The subsequent stages 
to Benares are i8, i8, and 22 miles. 

2 Benares is 74 miles distance to the east of Alldhdbdd, and 466 
south-east of Delhi. 

2 This must be the Barna, as the Gumti is 16 miles off. The Barnd 
is not now a large river, but rather a small stream. 



CHAP. VIII 


BENARES 


119 


ful design. The most beautiful are placed each in the 
middle of a garden enclosed by walls which have open- 
ings of half a foot square, through which the passers- 
by can see them. The most considerable of all is like 
a great square pedestal, each face of which is about 
forty paces long. In the middle of this platform 
you see a column of 32 to 35 feet in height, all of a 
piece, and which three men could with difficulty 
embrace.^ It is of sandstone, so hard that I could not 
scratch it with my knife. It terminates in a pyramid, 
and has a great ball on the point, and below the ball it 
is encircled by large beads. All the sides of this tomb 
are covered with figures of animals cut in relief in the 
stone, and it has been higher above the ground than 
it now appears ; several of the old men who guard 
some of these tombs having assured me that since fifty 
years it has subsided more than 30 feet. They add that 
it is the tomb of one of the kings of Bhutan, who was 
interred there after he had left his country to conquer 
this kingdom, from which he was subsequently driven 
by the descendants of Tamerlane. It is from this 
kingdom of Bhutan that they bring musk, and I shall 
give a description of it in Book III. 

I remained at Benares on the 12th and 13th, and 
during these two days there was continual rain ; but it 
did not prevent me from resuming my journey, and on 
the evening of the 1 3th I crossed the Ganges with the 
passport of the Governor. They examine all travellers’ 
baggage before embarking in the boat, personal pro- 
perty pays nothing, and it is only on merchandise that 
one must pay duty. 

^ This was probably the Asoka pillar, known as the Ldt Bhairo^ 
which is believed to have been erected in the third century B.c. 



120 


RAVELS IN IXDIA 


BOOK I 


The 13th [December] I halted at Baterpour 

(Bakadurpur) .... 2 coss. 

14th at S.\TRAGY-SER.\ (S.\DRAZ.4-KI- 

s.\r. 4 i on old map) ^ . . . 8 ,, 

15th at ]Moxi.a.rky-ser.a (Mohani. 4 - 

ki-s.\R- 4 i)“ 6 ,, 

During the morning of this day, after having 
travelled two coss, I crossed a river called Carn- 
-AS.A.R sou," and at three ^oss from thence one crosses 
another named Saode-sou,'* and both are crossed by 
fords. 

The 1 6th at Gourmab.ad (Khurmabab) . 8 ^ oss . 

It is a town on a river called Goudera-sou,® and 
you cross it by a stone bridge. 

The 1 7th at Saseron (S. 4 sseram) . .4 coss. 

S. 4 sser. 4 m is a town at the foot of the mountains, 
near to which there is a large tank. You see a small 
island in the middle, where there is a very beautiful 
mosque, in w’hich there is the tomb of a Nawdb named 
Selim- Kh. 4 n, who had it built during the time he 
was Governor of the Province. There is a fine stone 
bridge to cross into the island, which is all flanked 
and paved with large cut stones. On one of the sides 
of the tank there is a large garden, in the middle 
of which is another beautiful tomb of the son of 
the same Nawdb, Selim-Khan, who succeeded his 

^ Sedradje of Tieffenthaler. 2 Mohonia of TieiFenthaler. 

2 Sou for su^ Turkish for river. This appears to have been the 
Karamnasar river. 

^ The Durgouti river ? s Koodra river. 

^ Sasserdm, in Behar. Tieffenthaler gives the distance as thirty- 
five nn7Ies from Benares to Sasseram. The tomb of the Afghan, Sher 
Shdh, who became Emperor after his conquest of Humdyun, rightly so 
named by Tieffenthaler, is in the middle of the tank with that of his son 
Selim, otherwise known as Islam Shah. 



CHAP, vni 


PATXA 


121 


father in the government of the Province. When you 
wish to go to the mine of Soulmelpour/ of which I 
shall speak in the last book of this narrative, you leave 
the main road to Patxa, and turn straight southwards 
by Ekberbourg® and the famous fort of Rhodas 
(Rohtas), as I shall say in the same place. 

The 1 8th [December] I crossed, in a boat, the river 
Soxsou,® which comes from the mountains of the south ; 
and, after crossing it, those who have goods have to 
pay a certain duty. 

This day my halt was at D.\oud-Nagar-Ser.a. 
(Doudxagar), where there is a fine tomb . 9 coss. 

The 19th to Halv.\-sera (Arwal)^ . 10 ,, 

20th to Aga-sera (?) . . . 9 

In the morning I met 130 elephants, both large and 
small, which they were taking to Delhi to the Gre.\t 
INIogcl. 

The 2ist to Patxa. .... 10 coss. 

Patna is one of the largest towns in India, on the 
margin of the Ganges, on its western side, and it is 

1 Soulmelpour, a misprint for Soumelpour (see Book 1 1, chap, xvii, 
where it is shown to have been situated in Palamow). It is also men- 
tioned by Tieffenthaler as Sommelpour, thirty milles S.S.E. of Rohtas. 
{Geog. de rind.^ tradidt par Bernoidli^ Berlin 1791? P* 433-) 

- Ekberbourg, which is misprinted in the puzzling-looking form of 
Exberbourg in the English translation by John Phillips (1684), is un- 
doubtedly identical with Akbarpur, a \’illage at the foot of the hill upon 
which the remains of the old fort of Rohtas are still to be seen. A 
small portion has been restored and made habitable. I have described 
this neighbourhood in Jtmgle Life in India, p. 349. Of the substitution 
of the French bourg for the Indian piir these pages furnish several 
examples. 

^ The river Sone or Son. It rises in the w’est, near Amarkantak. 

^ Arwal on Sone, formerly, as stated by Tieffenthaler, famous for 
its paper factor}^ The original village has been swept away by the 
river, and a new one bears the name. It is forty-one miles distant from 
Patna, so that the value of the coss is here also about two miles. 



122 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


not less than two coss in length. The houses are not 
better than in the majority of the other towns of India, 
and they are nearly all roofed with thatch or bamboo. 
The Dutch company has an establishment there on 
account of the trade in saltpetre,^ which it refines at a 
large village called Chapra, situated on the right bank 
of the Ganges, io coss above Patna. 

Arriving at Patna with M. Bernier, we encountered 
some Dutchmen in the street who were returning to 
ChaprA,^ but who halted their carriages in order to 
salute us. We did not separate before we had emptied 
together two bottles of ShirAz wine in the open street, 
regarding which there is nothing to remark upon in 
this country, where one lives without ceremony, and 
with perfect liberty. 

I remained eight days in Patna, during which time 
an occurrence happened which will show the reader 
that unnatural crime does not rest unpunished by the 
Muhammadans. A Mimbachi^ who commanded looo 
foot disgraced a young boy who was in his service ; 
. . . the boy, overwhelmed with grief, chose his time 
to avenge himself, and being one day out hunting with 
his master, and removed from the other attendants by 
about a quarter of a league, he came behind him and 
cut off his head with his sword. He then rode im- 

1 An account of the manufacture of saltpetre and the decadence of 
this once valuable trade will be found in the Economic Geology of 
India, p. 499, 

2 Choupar in the original, Chuprah, or Chaprd (Soepra of Dutch 
writers), headquarters of Sdran District, Bengal ; owing to the recession 
of the Ganges from it its importance has diminished. At the end of the 
last century the French, Dutch, and Portuguese had factories there, and 
the saltpetre of the district was specially famous. 

3 Mimbachi. Here Mim stands for Ming, Turkish for looo. 



CHAP. VIII 


PATNA TO DACCA 


123 


mediately to the town at full speed, crying aloud that 
he had slain his master for such a reason, and came at 
once to the house of the Governor, who placed him in 
prison. But he left it at the end of six months, and 
although all the relatives of the defunct did what they 
could to procure his execution, the Governor did not 
dare to condemn him, as he feared the people, who 
protested that the young man had acted rightly. 

I left Patna in a boat to descend to Dacca on the 
29th of January (?),^ between ii o’clock and noon. If 
the river had been strong, as it is after the rains, I 
should have embarked at Allahabad, or at the least at 
Benares. 

The same day I slept at Sera Beconcour,^ 15 coss. 

Five coss on this side of Beconcour you meet a 
river called Pompon sou,® which comes from the south 
and flows into the Ganges. 

The 30th [December] to Sera D’Eriia (Daria- 
PUR ?),^ 1 7 coss. 

On the 31st, after having gone 4 coss or there- 
abouts, you meet the river Kaoa, which comes from 
the south ; 3 coss lower you see another called 
Chanon, which falls from the north ; 4 coss farther you 
discover that called Erguga, which comes from the 

^ This is a mistake for December, see below. 

2 Bykatpur perhaps, but it is only 13 miles from Patna. On the 
whole Bar seems to correspond best. 

^ Punpun or Fatwa nala^ a river of South Behdr, which rises in 
the south of the Gayd district. It joins the Ganges at Fatwa, and is 
crossed by the road from Bankipur at i o miles from that town and 
5 from Bykatpur. 

^ There is some uncertainty about this identification, as the distances 
given are but little guide. On the Atlas Sheet the name is printed 
Durgapur. Perhaps if Beconcur stands for Bar it should be Deeareh, 
halfway to Mongir. 



124 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


south ; and again, 6 coss below that of Aquera, which 
conies from the same quarter, and these four rivers lose 
their names in the Ganges.^ All that day I beheld 
lofty mountains ^ on the south side, and at a distance 
from the Ganges some lo coss and some 15 coss, and 
I came to a halt at Monger (Mongir) town, 18 coss. 

The first day of January 1666, after having sailed 
two hours I saw the Gandak ® enter the Ganges from 
the north. It is a large navigable river. 

This evening the halt was at Zangira (Janjira,)^ 
8 coss. 

But as the Ganges twisted much during the day it 
is by water fully 22 coss. 

During the 2d, between 6 o’clock in the morning 
and about ii o’clock, I saw three rivers enter the 
Ganges, and they all three come from the north side. 
The first is called Ronova, the second Ta^, and the 
third Chanan.® 

I slept at Baquelpour (Bhagalpur),® 18 coss. 

The 3d, after four hours’ travelling on the Ganges, 
I encountered the river Katare,'^ which comes from 
the north, and slept this day at a village called PoN- 
GANGEL,® at the end of the mountains which abut on the 
Ganges, i 3 coss.^ 

1 Compare Keul and Tiljuga rivers, and Kargarid, Bhdgmati and 
Chandii Mdls, ^ Kharakpiir hills and adjoining ranges. 

s Gandet in the original. This was the Boor or Burh Gandak 
river. ^ For Jahdngirha of map, near Sultdnganj. 

5 These names probably represent sundry khdls, 

6 Bhdgalpur in Behdr. ^ Probably the Kosi. 

s Called Borregangel by De Graaf in 1669 (see Histoire Generale 
des Voyages La Haye.^ 1755, vol. xiii, p. 50, and Popangel in a map of 
“ Indostan ” in the same volume). Its position corresponds with that of 
the modem Sikrigalli ghdt. 

9 This distance is much understated, being about 50 miles by land. 



CHAP. VIII 


RAJMAHAL 


125 


On the 4th [January], one hour below Pongangel, 
I met a great river called Mart-nadi (Kalindry?), 
which comes from the north, and I slept at Rage- 
MEHALE (RaJMAHAL^), 6 COSS. 

RAjmahal is a town on the right bank of the Ganges, 
and when you approach it by land you find that for one 
or two COSS the roads are paved with brick up to the 
town. It was formerly the residence of the Governors 
of Bengal, because it is a splendid hunting country,^ 
and, moreover, the trade there was considerable. But 
the river having taken another course, and passing only 
at a distance of a full half league from the town, as 
much for this reason as for the purpose of restraining 
the King of Arakan, and many Portuguese bandits® 
who have settled at the mouths of the Ganges, 
and by whom the inhabitants of Dacca, up to which 
place they made incursions, were molested, — the 
Governor and the merchants who dwelt at Rajmah.4l 
removed to Dacca, which is to-day a place of consider- 
able trade.* 

On the 6th, having arrived at a great town called 
Donapour,® at 6 coss from RAjmahAl, I left M. 
Bernier, who went to Kasimbazar,® and from thence 
to Hugli’^ by land, because when the river is low one 


1 Rdjmahdl, a well-known town on the Ganges. Made the capital 
in 1592. 

2 There is still a considerable amount of sport to be had in this 
neighbourhood, though the rhinoceros has become extinct since 1843. 

® Portuguese at Nodkhdli. (See Imp. Gaz. of India.^ voL x, p. 341.) 

^ This change was made in the time of Jahdngir, according to 
TiefFenthaler. 

^ Donapour, situated on the farther bank of the Ganges at six milles 
east of Bakarpour, according to TiefFenthaler. 

^ Casenbazar in the original. Kdsimbdzdr (Cossimbazar). (See p. 
130 n.) ^ Ogouli in the original. Hugh. (See p. 132.) 



126 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


is unable to pass on account of a great bank of sand 
which is before a town called SouxiQUid 

I lay this evening at Toutipour,^ distant from Raj- 

MAHAL 12 COSS. 

At sunrise I beheld a number of crocodiles asleep 
on the sand. 

The 7th I reached Acerat (HADjRAPdR),® 25 coss. 

From Acerat to Dacca, by land, there are still 45 
coss. All this day I beheld so large a number of 
crocodiles that, at length, I became desirous to shoot 
one in order to ascertain if what is commonly said is 
true, namely, that a shot from a gun does not affect 
them. The shot struck him in the jaw and the blood 
flowed, but he did not remain where he was, but went 
into the river. 

On the 8th I again saw a great number of these 
crocodiles lying on the bank of the river, and I fired at 
two with two shots, each charge having three balls. 
Immediately they were wounded they turned over on 
the back, opening the mouth and dying on the spot. 

This day I slept at Douloudia (?), 17 coss. 

The crows were the cause of our finding a fine fish 
which the fishermen had concealed on the bank of the 
river in the reeds. For when our boatmen observed 
that there were a great number of crows which cawed 
and entered the reeds, they concluded that they must 

1 Siiti or Sooty ia Murshiddbdd district, where the Bhdgirathi leaves 
the Ganges. 

2 Not identified. TiefFenthaler says two milles^ probably a misprint, 
as his other distances correspond with those of Tavernier. Crocodiles 
of enormous size abound in this part of the Ganges. 

3 Acerat appears to be Hadjrdpur, or the Hadjrapour of Tieffenthaler, 
twenty-five milles from Totipour ; unlike as the two names appear when 
written, the resemblance will be seen when they are pronounced. It is 
called Hujrygotta on a map engraved by Whitechurch in 1776. 



CHAP. VIII 


JOURNEY TO DACCA 


127 


contain something unusual, and they searched so well 
that they found sufficient to make a good meal. 

On the 9th [January], at 2 p.m., we encountered a 
river called Chativor (?) which comes from the north, 
and our halt was at Dampour (?), 16 coss. 

The loth we slept on the margin of the river in a 
place far removed from houses, and made this day 15 
coss. 

On the iith, having arrived towards evening at 
the spot where the Ganges divides into three branches, 
one of which goes to Dacca, we slept at the entrance 
of this channel, at a large village called Jatrapour (?), 
20 coss. 

Those who have no baggage can proceed by land 
from Jatrapour to Dacca, and they shorten their 
journey very much, because the river winds about 
considerably. 

On the 1 2th, at noon, we passed before a large 
town called Bagamara(?), and slept at Kasiata(?), 
another large town,^ 1 1 coss. 

On the 13th, at noon, we met a river at 2 coss from 
Dacca called Laquia,^ which comes from the north-east. 
Opposite the point where the two rivers join, there is 
a fortress with several guns on each side. Half a coss 
lower down you see another river called Pagalu,® over 

1 So many changes in the courses of the rivers and the positions of 
the towns have taken place in this region, that it would require closer 
knowledge of the locality than I possess, and more detailed maps than I 
have had access to, to identify closely this portion of Tavernier’s route. 

2 The Lakia river is remarkable among Bengal rivers for its swift 
current. 

3 Pagla. This term, meaning “fool,” is applied in deltaic regions 
in Bengal to branches or loops from rivers which derive their water 
not from an independent source, but from the river which they again 
rejoin. 



128 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


which there is a fine brick bridge, which Mir Jumla^ 
ordered to be built. This river comes from the north- 
east, and half a coss below you find another called 
Cadamtali(?), which comes from the north, and which 
you also cross by a brick bridge ; on both sides of the 
river you see several towers, where there are as it were 
enshrined many heads of men who have robbed on the 
high roads. 

We arrived at Dacca^ towards evening, and accom- 
plished this day 9 coss. 

Dacca is a large town, which is only of extent as 
regards length, each person being anxious to have his 
house close to the Ganges. This length exceeds 2 
coss; and from the last brick bridge, which I have 
mentioned above, up to Dacca, there is a succession of 
houses, separated one from the other, and inhabited for 
the most part by the carpenters who build galleys and 
other vessels. These houses are, properly speaking, 
only miserable huts made of bamboo, and mud which 
is spread over them. Those of Dacca are scarcely 
better built, and that which is the residence of the 
Governor is an enclosure of high walls, in the middle 
of which is a poor house merely built of wood. He 
ordinarily resides under tents, which he pitches in a 
large court in this enclosure. The Dutch, finding that 
their goods were not sufficiently safe in the common 
houses of Dacca, have built a very fine house, and 
the English have also got one which is fairly good. 
The church of the Rev. Augustin Ethers is all of brick, 
and the workmanship of it is rather beautiful. 

1 Mirza Mola in the original. Mir Jumld. For other forms of his 
name see Index. 

2 Dacca in E. Bengal. 



CHAP. VIII 


PORTUGUESE BANDITS 


129 


On the occasion of my last visit to Dacca, the 
Nawdb Shaista Khan, who was then Governor of 
Bengal, was at war with the King of Abakan, whose 
navy generally consists of 200 galleys together with 
several other small boats. These galleys traverse the 
Gulf of Bengal and enter the Ganges, the tide ascend- 
ing even beyond Dacca. 

Shaista Khan, uncle of the King Aurangzeb, 
who reigns at present, and the cleverest man in all his 
kingdom, found means for bribing many of the officers 
of the navy of the King of Arakan, and of a sudden 
forty galleys, which were commanded by Portuguese, 
joined him. In order to secure these new allies 
firmly in his service, he gave large pay to each of 
the Portuguese officers and to the soldiers in propor- 
tion, but the natives only received double the ordinary 
pay. It is a most surprising thing to see with what 
speed these galleys are propelled by oars. There are 
some so long that they have up to fifty oars on each 
side, but there are not more than two men to each oar. 
You see some which are much decorated, where the 
gold and azure have not been spared.^ 

The Dutch have some of them in their service in 
which they carry their merchandise, and they also some- 
times require to hire some from others, thus affording 
a means of livelihood to many people. 

The day following my arrival in Dacca, which was 
the 14th of January, I went to salute the Nawdb, and 
presented him with a mantle of gold brocade, with a 
grand golden lace of “point d’Espagne ” round it, and a 
fine scarf of gold and silver of the same “ point,” and a 

1 With the aid of the Dutch and the partly enforced assistance of the 
Portuguese bandits, Shdistd Khdn captured Chittagong in 1666. 

VOL. I K 



130 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


jewel consisting of a very beautiful emerald. During the 
evening, after I had returned to the Dutch with whom 
I lodged, the Nawdb sent me pomegranates, China 
oranges, two Persian melons, and three kinds of apples. 

On the 15th [January] I showed him my goods, and 
presented to the Prince, his son, a watch having a case 
of enamelled gold, a pair of pistols inlaid with silver, 
and a telescope. All this which I gave, both to the 
father and to the young lord of about ten years of age, 
cost me more than 5000 livres. 

On the 1 6th I agreed with him as to the price of 
my goods, and afterwards I went to his Vizir to receive 
my bill of exchange payable at Kasimbazar.^ Not 
that he was unwilling to pay me at Dacca, but the 
Dutch, who were more experienced than I, warned me 
that there was risk in carrying silver to KIsimbazAr, 
where one cannot go except by reascending the 
Ganges, because the land route is very bad and full of 
jungle and swamps. The danger consists in this, that 
the small vessels which one employs are very subject 
to be upset by the least wind, and when the sailors 
discover that one carries money, it is not difficult for 
them to make the boat upset, and to recover the silver 
afterwards, at the bottom of the river, for the purpose 
of appropriating it. 

On the 20th I took leave of the Nawdb, who in- 
vited me to return to see him, and gave me a passport 


1 Kdsimbdz^r, a town in the Murshid^b^d District, was of great 
commercial importance before Calcutta was founded. It was situated 
on the Bhdgirathi river, which has changed its course, and now flows 
three miles from the town. In succession the different European nations 
monopolised the trade. The first English commercial agent was appointed 
in 1658. Its proximity to Murshidabdd was a cause of constant danger 
to it, and it was often attacked by the Nawdbs of Bengal. 



CHAP. VIII 


TAVERNIER LEAVES DACCA 


131 


in which he described me as a gendeman of his house- 
hold ; this he had already previously done during the 
time that he was Governor of Ahmadabad, when I 
went to the army to meet him in the Province of 
Deccan, which the Raja Sivaji^ had entered, as I 
shall relate elsewhere. In virtue of these passports I 
was able to go and come throughout all the territories 
of the Great Mogul as one of his household, and I 
shall explain their tenor in Book II. 

On the 2 1 St [January] the Dutch gave a great 
banquet out of regard for me, to which they invited 
the English and some Portuguese, with an Augustin 
friar of the same nation. 

On the 2 2d I went to visit the English, who had for 
Chief or President Mr. Prat (? Pratt), and after that the 
Reverend Portuguese Father, and some other F?'anks. 

Between the 23d and the 29th I made some pur- 
chases for 11,000 rupees, and all being embarked I 
went to bid farewell. 

On the 29th, in the evening, I parted from Dacca, 
and all the Dutch accompanied me for two leagues 
with their small armed boats, and the Spanish wine 
was not spared on this occasion. Having remained 
on the river from the 29th of January to the iith of 
February, I left my servants and goods in the boat 
at Hadjrapur, where I hired a boat which carried me 
to a large village called Mirdapour.(?) 

On the 1 2th [February] I hired a horse to carry 
myself, and not finding another for my baggage, I was 
obliged to employ two women, who took charge of it. 
I arrived the same evening at KasimbAzAr, where I 
was well received by M. Arnoul Van Wachttendonk, 

^ Seva-gi in the original, see Book I, chap. xii. 



132 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Director of a.11 the settlements of the Dutch in Bengal, 
who invited me to lodge with him. 

On the 13th I passed the day agreeably with the 
Dutch gentlemen, who wished to enjoy themselves in 
honour of my arrival. 

On the 14th [February] M. Wachttendonk re- 
turned to Hugli, where the principal settlement is, 
and on the same day one of my servants, who had pre- 
ceded me, came to give me notice tbat the people whom 
I had left in the boat with my goods had been in great 
danger on account of the strong wind, which had lasted 
two days, and which became stronger during the 
night. 

On the 15th [February] the Dutch gave me a 
pallankeen to go to Murshidabad.^ It is a great town, 
3 coss from KAsimbAzar, where the Receiver-general of 
ShAistA KhAn resided, to whom I presented my bill of 
exchange. After having read it he told me that it was 
good, and that he would have paid me if he had not 
on the previous evening received an order from the 
Nawdb not to pay me in case he had not already done 
so. He did not tell me the reason which caused 
ShAistA KhAn to act in this manner, and I returned 
to my lodging not a little surprised at this proceeding. 

On the 1 6th I wrote to the Nawdb to know what 
reason he had for ordering his Receiver not to pay 
me. 

On the 17th, in the evening, I left for Hugli in a 
boat with fourteen oars, which the Dutch lent me, and 
that night and the following I slept on the river. 

On the 19th, towards evening, I passed a large 

^ Madesou Bazarki in the original. Murshiddbdd, then also called 
Maksudabad, and by the English Muxoodabad. 



CHAP. VIII 


HUGLI 


133 


town called Nadiya,^ and it is the farthest point to 
which the tide reaches. There arose so furious a wind, 
and the water was so high, that we were compelled to 
stop for three or four hours and draw our boat ashore. 

On the 20th I arrived at Hugli, where I remained 
till the 2d of March, during which time the Dutch 
made me welcome, and sought to give me all the 
amusement which the country could afford. We made 
several excursions on the river, and we had for food all 
the delicacies which are found in our European gardens, 
salads of several kinds, cabbages, asparagus, peas, and 
principally beans, of which the seed comes from Japan, 
the Dutch desiring to have all kinds of herbs and 
pulses in their gardens, which they are most careful to 
cultivate, without having been able, however, to get 
artichokes to grow. 

On the 2d of March I left Hugli and arrived on 
the 5 th at KasimbAzAr. 

The following day I went to MurshidAbAd to 
know if the Receiver who had refused to pay me had 
received another order from the Nawdb. For I have 
above said that I immediately wrote to ShAistA KhAn 
to complain of his action and to know for what reason 
he did not wish my bill of exchange to be paid. The 
Director of the Dutch factories added a letter to mine, 
and pointed out to the Nawdb that I was too well 
known to him — having, formerly at AhmadAbAd, at 
the army of the Deccan, and in other places, had many 
transactions with him — not to deserve favourable treat- 
ment; that he ought to remember that I, being the 
only person who often brought to India the choicest 

1 Nandi in the original. Nadiyd, capital town of Nadiya District, 
situated on the west bank of Bhdgirathi. 



134 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


rarities of Europe, it was not the way to make me wish 
to return as he had invited me, if I should leave dis- 
contented ; besides which, owing to the credit which I 
enjoyed, I should be easily able to dissuade those who 
intended to come to India with rare objects, by making 
them fear the same treatment as I had received. 
Neither my letter nor that of the Director produced 
the effect we had hoped, and I was in no wise satisfied 
with the new order which the Nawdb had sent to the 
Receiver, by which he ordered him to pay me with a 
rebate of 20,000 rupees from the sum which I ought to 
receive, and was carried by my bill of exchange, accord- 
ing to the price upon which we had agreed. The Nawdb 
added that if I was unwilling to content myself with 
this payment I might come to take back my goods. 
This action of the Nawdb had its origin in an evil turn 
played me by three rogues at the court of the Great 
Mogul. And this is the history of it in a few words.^ 
Aurangzeb, who reigns at present, at the solicita- 

^ In turning aside to relate what follows, Tavernier drops the thread 
of his narrative, and we are left to casual remarks from which to trace 
his route and his occupation from this time, namely, the beginning of 
March 1666 till his return to France in December 1668. Thus, on 
the 8th of April, he states he was at Maldah, and on the 1 2th of May 
he reascended the Ganges (Book III, chap, xiv) ; on the 2d of Jul)^ he 
witnessed an eclipse of the sun at Patna, where he had probably re- 
mained during the month of June (Book III, chap. xiv). Towards the 
end of this month, or beginning of August, we have casual mention of 
his having met the deputies of the French Company for Commerce in 
Agra (see Joret, op. cit., p. 201). He arrived at Surat by way of Sironj 
and Burhanpur on the ist November {Recueil, p. 117), and met there 
M. Thevenot, who returned then from Golconda and Madras {Recueil^ 
p. 1 1 8). He makes two references to his having been in Surat in 
January, or the beginning of 1667 (see Book I, chap, ix ; and vol. iii, 
Recueil, p. 118), where he relates an act of brutality by M. Berber. 
Shortly afterwards, or in Februaiy, i.e. within the sailing season, he 
probably embarked from Surat for Bandar Abbas (Gomdroon). The 
above facts are partly derived from M. Joret’s work, pp. 198-202. 



CHAP. VIII 


AN INJURIOUS CUSTOM 


135 


tion of two Persians and a Banian, had established a 
short time ago a custom very injurious to merchants 
who come from Europe and other places to sell jewels 
to the court. When they arrive, whether by sea or by 
land, the governors of the places where they arrive 
have orders to send them to the King with their goods, 
either with their consent or by force ; this the Governor 
of Surat did to me in the year 1665, sending me to 
Delhi or Jahanabad where the King was. There 
are in the employment of his majesty two Persians 
and a Banian, whose duty it is to see and examine all 
the jewels which one wishes to sell to the King. One 
of these two Persians is named Nawdb Akil Khan, 
i.e. the prince of wit, and it is he who has charge of 
all the precious stones of the King. The other is 
named Mirza-Mauzim(?), whose duty is to tax each 
piece. The Banian, called Nyalchand,^ has to see 
whether the stones are false and if they have any flaw. 

These three men have obtained permission from 
the King that they shall see, before he does, all which 
the foreign merchants bring to sell to him, and that 
afterwards they shall present them to him themselves ; 
and although they have sworn to take nothing from the 
merchant, they do not neglect to extort all they can 
in order to ruin him. When they see anything beautiful 
from which there is reason to hope for a large profit, 
they desire him to sell it to them for half its value, and 
if he refuses to let them have it, they are malicious 
enough to estimate the jewels when they are before 
the King at half their value, besides which the King 
Aurangzeb cares but little for stones, and loves gold 

1 Akel Kan, Mirza-Mouson, and Nali Kan, in the original. (See Book 
II, chap. X.) 



136 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


and silver much better. On the day of the King’s 
festival, of which I shall elsewhere speak, all the princes 
and nobles of the court make him magnificent presents, 
and when they are unable to find jewels to buy, they 
present him with golden rupees, of which the King, as 
I have said, makes more count than of the precious 
stones, although precious stones constitute a more 
honourable present than golden coins. It is at the 
approach of this festival that he sends out of his 
treasury numerous diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and 
pearls, which he who values the jewels entrusts in the 
hands of several merchants, to sell them to the nobles, 
who are bound to make presents to the King, and in 
this manner the King receives back both the money 
and his jewels together. 

There is still another disadvantage for the merchant 
jeweller. It is that after the King has seen any stones, 
a prince or other noble who knows of it will never buy 
them, and besides, while these three men appointed to 
view the jewels are considering and examining them in 
their dwellings, where he is obliged to carry them, he 
meets several Banians who are experts, some for 
diamonds, others for rubies, for emeralds, and for 
pearls, who write down the weight, quality, perfection, 
and colour of each piece. And if the merchant after- 
wards goes to the Princes and Governors of Provinces, 
these people send them a memorandum of all that he 
carries, with the price, which they maliciously place at 
half the true value of the things. These Banians are 
in business a thousand times worse than the Jews, and 
more cunning than they are in all kinds of dodges and 
in malice when they wish for revenge. Observe then 
the bad turn which these three personages played me. 



CHAP. VIII 


A LARGE PEARL 


137 


When I arrived at Jahanabad, one of them came 
to me and told me that he had the King’s order to see 
what I brought, before being permitted to exhibit it in 
his presence. They wished very sincerely that the King 
was not at JahAnabad, because they would have sought 
to buy for themselves all that I had, in order to profit 
by reselling it to the King, and to the Princes when the 
opportunity should occur — this, nevertheless, they had 
never been able to obtain from me. 

On the following day they all three came to see 
me, one after the other, and they wished to get from 
me amongst other things a grand bouquet of nine large 
pear-shaped pearls, of which the largest was thirty carats 
and the least sixteen, with another single pear-shaped 
pearl of fifty-five carats. As for the bouquet, the King 
took it ; but with regard to the pearl, seeing that, not- 
withstanding all that they could say, I was unwilling to 
sell them anything, they so managed that before I had 
shown my jewels to the King, Zafar Khan, uncle of 
the King, saw it, after which he did not wish to return 
it, saying that he would pay me as highly for it as the 
King, asking me not to mention it ; for in fact he 
desired to present it to the King. 

After the King had selected from among my jewels 
those which he desired, Zafar-Khan bought several 
pieces from me, and at the same time purchased the 
great pearl. Some days afterwards he caused my pay- 
ment to be made according to what had been agreed 
upon, with the exception of the pearl, upon which he 
desired me to rebate 10,000 rupees. The two Persians 
and the Banian had maliciously informed him that on 
my arrival they might, if they had wished, have had the 
pearl for 8,000 or 10,000 less than I had sold it to him 



138 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


for ; this was wholly untrue, and Zafar Khan having 
told me that if I would not accept the money which he 
ofiFered me I might take it back, I took him at his 
word, assuring him that during his life he would never 
see it again. I kept to my word, and remained firm 
in my resolve. That which made me so fixed was in 
part because I desired to carry, if I could, something 
considerable to ShaistI Khan, and if it had been' per- 
mitted to me on my arrival at Surat to go to him 
first, I would not have gone to see the King at 
J AHAN ABAD, regarding which I had a great dispute with 
the Governor of Surat. For when I went to salute 
him, he immediately told me that it would not be as on 
my other journeys, and that the King wished, absolutely, 
to be the first to see all that was curious which was 
brought into his kingdom.^ I was more than four 
months disputing in vain with this Governor ; at last 
I was obliged to go to visit the King, and from fear 
lest I should take another route they gave me fifteen 
horsemen to accompany me to Jalor.^ 

Having then started for Bengal, these three inspect- 
ors of jewels, incensed with spite, and urged on, no 
doubt, by Zafar Khan, who was anxious to take his 
revenge for my refusal, wrote to Shaista KhAn that I 
was taking some jewels to show to him, and among 
others a very beautiful pearl which I had sold to Zafar 
KhAn ; but that he had returned it to me subsequently, 
having ascertained that I wished to make him pay 
10,000 rupees more than it was worth. They wrote 
similarly regarding the other jewels which I carried, 
and it was upon these false and malicious advices, 
which ShAistA KhAn did not receive till after he had 

1 See Book II, chap. xi. 2 5^0 



CHAP. VIII 


PRESENTS MADE BY TAVERNIER 


139 


delivered to me my bill of exchange, that this Prince 
wished to deduct 20,000 rupees from the total sum ; 
this was reduced finally to a rebate ’of 10,000 rupees, 
with which I was obliged to content myself. 

Since I have above spoken of the present which I 
made to Shaista Khan, I ought not to be silent 
regarding those which I was also obliged to make to 
the King, to the Nawdb Zafar Khan, to the eunuch 
of' the Grand Begum, sister of Aurangzeb, to the 
Grand Treasurer, and to the attendants of the treasury. 
For it should be stated that whoever it may be who 
desires to have audience of the King, they ask, before 
everything else, where the present is that he has to 
offer to him, and they examine it to see if it is worthy 
of being offered to his majesty. No one ever ven- 
tures to show himself with empty hands, and it is an 
honour obtained at no little cost. Having arrived at 
JahAnAbad I went to make my reverence to the King 
on the 1 2th September 1665, and this is the present 
which I made him. Firstly, a shield of bronze in high 
relief thoroughly well gilt, the gilding alone costing 
300 ducats of gold, which amount to 1800 livres^ and 
the whole piece to 4378 Hvres? In the middle was 
represented the history of Curtius, who threw himself, 
on horseback and fully, armed, into the gulf which 
opened in Rome, and from whence a mephitic vapour 
emanated. On the circuit of the shield was a clever 
representation of the siege of Rochelle. It was the 
chef dcBuvre of one of the most excellent workmen in 
France, and it had been ordered by M. le Cardinal 
Richelieu. All the great nobles who were then with 
the King Aurangzeb were charmed with the beauty of 

^ ;^I3S. 2;^328:7s. 



140 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


this work of art, and they told him that he should place 
this rich piece on the grand elephant which carried the 
standard before his majesty when marching. 

I also presented the King with a battle mace of 
rock crystal, all the sides of which were covered with 
rubies and emeralds inlaid in gold in the crystal. This 
piece cost 3119 livres} 

Also a Turkish saddle embroidered with small 
rubies, pearls, and emeralds, which had cost 2892 
livres?’ 

Also another horse’s saddle with the housing, the 
whole covered with an embroidery of gold and silver, 
costing 1730 livres? The entire present which I 
made to the King amounted to 12,119 livres. 

Present made to Nawdb Zafar KhAn, uncle of the 
Great Mogul. Firstly, a table, with nineteen pieces 
to make a cabinet, the whole of precious stones of 
diverse colours representing all kinds of flowers and 
birds. The work had been done at Florence, and 
had cost 2150 livres.^ 

Also a ring with a perfect ruby which cost 1300 
livres? 

To the Grand Treasurer a watch having a golden 
case covered with small emeralds, 720 livres? 

To the attendants of the treasury of the King, and 
to those who drew the money from the treasury, 200 
rupees, which make 300 livres? 

To the eunuch of the Grand Begum, sister of the 
King, Aurangzeb, a watch with a painted case which 
cost 260 livres? 

s ;£i29 : iss. 
«Z54. 

s ^19: lOS. 


1 Z233:i8s:6d. 

* Z161 :5s. 

^ £22 : los. 


2 ;^2i6;i8s. 
® Z97 : I os. 



CHAP, vni 


PRESENTS MADE BY TAVERNIER 


141 


All the presents which I made, to the Great Mogul, ^ 
to Shaista KhAn, and to Zafar Khan, uncles of his 
majesty, as also to the Grand Treasurers of the King, 
to the stewards of the Khdns houses, to the Captains 
of the palace gates, and further to those who on two 
occasions brought me the khildt^ or robe of honour, 
on the part of the King, and as often on the part of 
the Begum, his sister, and once on the part of Zafar 
Khan — all these presents, I say, amounted to the sum 
of 23,187 livres.^ 

So true is it that those who desire to do business 
at the courts of the Princes, in Turkey as well as in 
Persia and India, should not attempt to commence 
anything unless they have considerable presents ready 
prepared, and almost always an open purse for divers 
officers of trust of whose services they have need. 

I have said nothing in the first volume of the 
present which I also made to him who brought the 
khil’dt on the part of the King of Persia, to whom I 
presented 200 

1 Mogor in the original. ^ Khilat^ see p. 20. 

3 23,187 livres at is. 6d. =;^I739 : o : 6. Trade must have been 
profitable to have allowed such presents to be made. 

^Z4S- 



CHAPTER IX 


Route from Surat to Golconda 

I HAVE made several journeys to Golconda, and by 
different routes, sometimes by sea, from Hormuz to 
Masulipatam, sometimes from Agra, and most fre- 
quently from Surat, which is the great threshold of 
Hindustan. I shall not speak in this chapter save of 
the ordinary route from Surat to Golconda, in which 
I include that from Agra, which leads to DaulatabAd, 
as I shall describe in due course, only making mention, 
in order not to weary the reader, of two journeys which 
I made in 1645 and 1653. 

I left Surat ^ on the 19th of January of the year 
1645 camped at Cambari(?) ... 3 coss. 

From Cambari to Barnoli (BArdoli) . 9 „ 

„ Barnoli to Beara (BehArA). . 12 ,, 

„ Beara to Navapour (NawApurA) . 16 „ 

This is the place where, as I have said, the best 
musk-scented^ rice in the world grows. 

From Navapour to Rinkula (?) . . 18 coss. 

„ Rinkula to Pipelnar (Pimpalnar, or 

PiMPULNl) . . . . 8 „ 

,, Pipelnar to Nimpour (Naunpur) . 17 „ 

,, Nimpour to Patane (PatnA). . 14 „ 

^ See for this part of the route, p. 49. 

2 Scented rice, see p. 50. 



CHAP. IX 


DAULATABAD 


143 


From Patane to Secoura (Sakora ?) . 14 coss . 

„ Secoura to Baquela (Wakla) . 10 „ 

,, Baquela to Disgaor (Deogaox) . 10 „ 

„ Disgaon to Dultabat (Daulat- 

abad) ^ . . . . . 10 „ 

Daulatabad is one of the best forts in the kingdom 
of the Great Mogul : it is on a mountain, scarped on 
all sides, the road which they have made to it being so 
narrow that only one horse or one camel can pass at a 
time. The town is at the foot of the mountain and has 
good walls, and this imiDortant place, which the Moguls 
lost when the Kings of Bijapur and Golconda revolted 
and threw off the yoke, was retaken under the reign of 
Jahangir by a subtle stratagem. Sultan Kurum," who 
was afterwards called Shah Jahan, commanded the army 
of the King his father in the Deccan, and Azam Khan,® 
father-in-law of Shaista Khan, who was one of the 
generals, said something to the Prince, who was so 
enraged that, sending at once for one oi his paposhes or 
slippers, which they leave at the door, had him given 
five or six strokes with it on the head ; this in India is 
the highest affront, after which it is impossible for a 
man to show himself. All this was done through an 
understanding between the Sultan and the general, in 

1 Daulatdbdd. A town and fort in the Deccan, ten miles N.W. of 
AurungdbM, 170 miles N.E. of Bombay, and 28 miles N.W. of 
Haidarabdd. Also known by the name of Deogiri or Deogar. “ The 
hill on which the fort stands rises almost perpendicularly from the plain 
to a height of about 600 feet, and it is entirely isolated, though com- 
manded by several hills to the south.” The history of the changes of 
masters of this fort is too long for insertion here, but reference may be 
made to the Gazetteer of India for information. The distance to 
Daulatabad from Naunpur by these stages, measured on the map, is 
94 miles — as against the 58 coss above. 

2 Sultdn Kurum, afterwards Shdh Jahan. ^ Ast-Kan in the original. 



144 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


order better to deceive the world, and especially the 
spies which the King of Bijapur might have in the 
army of the Prince. The rumour of the disgrace of 
Azaii Khan being quickly spread, and he himself hav- 
ing gone to seek refuge with the King of Bijapur, the 
latter, not having sharp enough eyes to perceive the 
ruse, gave him a good reception and promised him his 
protection. Azam Khan, finding himself so well re- 
ceived, asked the King to allow him for greater safety 
to take with him ten or twelve of his wives, and about 
as many servants, into the fortress of Daulatabad ; 
this was granted to him. 

He entered with eight or ten camels, the two ka- 
jaivas^ which are carried on either side of the camels 
being well closed, according to custom, so that one 
cannot see the women who are inside. But instead of 
women they had put in them good soldiers, two in each 
kajawa, all men of action of the same sort was each 
Chatri^ who led his camel, so that it was easy for them 
to slaughter the garrison, who were not on their guard, 
and to make themselves masters of the place, which 
has ever since remained under the authority of the 
Great Mogul. There are, moreover, in this place 
numerous fine cannons,^ and the gunners are generally 
English or Dutch. It is true that there is a small 
mountain higher than the fortress, but it is difficult of 

1 Cajavas in original, for kajawas ^ — panniers used for the con- 
veyance of women on camels. 

2 Sultdn Kurum {i.e, Shdh Jahdn) imitated, if he did not take a hint, 
from the tactics of the siege of Troy. 

3 Chatre in original, for Chatf'i 

^ With reference to the early use of fire-arms. General Maclagan’s 
article on Early Asiatic Fire Weapons is full of information. (See J. 
A. S, vol. xlv, 1876, p. 30.) 



CHAP. IX 


A DUTCH GUXXER 


145 


approach except by passing the fortress. There was 
a Dutch gunner there, who after serving the King 
for fifteen or sixteen years asked for his dismissal from 
him, and even the Dutch Company, which had placed 
him at the service of the Great ]\Iogul, did all that it 
could to help him to obtain it ; but it was never able 
to achieve this desire, because he was a very good 
gunner, and succeeded admirably with fireworks. The 
Raja Jai Singh,^ who is the most powerful of all the 
idolatrous princes of India, and who had most effect- 
ively aided Aurangzeb to ascend the throne, was sent as 
Commander-in-Chief of the armies of that King against 
the Raja Sivaji, and when passing near the fortress of 
Daul.a.tabad^ this Dutch gunner went to salute him, and 
all the gunners of the army were Franks like himself. 
The Dutchman, taking advantage of the opportunity, 
told the Raja that if he agreed to give him his dismis- 
sal he would promise to find him a means for mounting 
cannon on the mountain which commanded the fortress, 
and they had already surrounded the mountain' with a 
wall, some soldiers having been placed within the en- 
closure to prevent any one taking possession of it. The 
Raja, approving of the scheme, promised him that if he 
should be able to accomplish it he would obtain for him 
his dismissal from the King with a liberal present. The 
matter having turned out successfully, to the Prince’s 
content, he kept his promise to the Dutch gunner, 
and I saw the latter arrive at Surat at the beginning 
of the year 1667, whence he embarked for Batavia. 

From Dultabat to Aurengabat (Aurangabad),^ 
4 coss. 

1 Raja Jesseing in the original. ^ Daulatabdd, see Book II, chap. xi. 

3 Aurang4b4d, on the Kaum river, a tributaiy of the Godavari, is 


VOL. I 


L 



146 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 1 


Aurangabad was formerly only a village, of which 
Aurakgzeb has made a town which is not enclosed. 
He made this notable increase, both on account of 
a lake of about 2 coss in circuit, upon which the 
village was built, and in memory of his first wife, who 
died there, and who was mother of his children. She 
is buried at the end of the lake on the western side, 
where the King has built a mosque with a splendid 
tomb and a fine caravansardi. The mosque and the 
tomb cost a large sum, because they are covered with 
white marble, which was brought by waggon from the 
neighbourhood of Lahore,^ and was on the road nearly 
four months. One day, when going from Surat to 
Golconda, I met, at five marches from Aurangabad, 
more than 300 waggons laden with this marble, the 
smallest of which was drawn by 12 oxen. 

From Aurengabat to Pipeli (Pipri) . 8 coss. 

„ Pipeli to Aubar (Ambad) ^ . . 12 ,, 

„ Aubar to Guisemner (?) . . 10 „ 

„ Guisemner to Asti (Ashta) . 12 „ 

„ Asti to Saruer (SAoli ?) . . 16 „ 

situated in the dominions of Haidardbdd. It is 270 miles distant from 
the capital, and 68 miles from Ahmadnagar. The mausoleum resembles 
the Tdj at Agra, on a small scale. The caravansardi referred to is still 
to be seen, and is described as being a vast stone building. The distance 
between Daulatibid and Aurangdbad is 1 4 miles, so that the 4 coss is 
probably a misprint for 7. 

1 There must be a mistake as to the source of this white marble, as 
it could not have been obtained from the neighbourhood of Lahore. 

I have recently seen the statement repeated in an article in the Tunes, 
Probably it came from one of the known localities in Rdjputdna in the 
States of Alwar, Jaipur, or Jodhpur. The Makrdnd quarries in the 
last-named State furnished, it is said, the white marble of which the Tdj 
was built, 

2 {Voyage des Indes, p, 227) describes this route, and men- 
tions a magnificent tank at Amb^d. 



CHAP. IX 


SURAT TO GOLCONDA 


147 


From Saruer to Lesoxa (Lasoxa) . i6 coss. 

„ LeSOXA to NaDOUR (NaNDER) ^ . 12 „ 

You must cross a river at Nander which flows 
into the Ganges, and pay 4 rupees per waggon, 
besides which, in order to cross, it is necessary to have 


a written order from the Governor. 

From Nadour to Patonta(?) 

9 coss. 

„ Patonta to Kakeri (?) . 

10 „ 

,, Kakeri to Satapour (Santapur) . 

10 „ 

„ Satapour to Sitan.a.ga (?) 

12 „ 

,, SiTANAGA to SaTANAGAR (SaTULA- 

nagar) 

10 „ 

It is at Satul. 4 nagar that you first enter 

the terri- 

tories of the King of Golconda. 

From Satanagar to Meluari (?) . 

16 coss. 

„ Meluari to Girballi (?) 

12 „ 

„ Girballi to Golconda 

14 .. 


This route from Surat to Golconda amounts to 
324 coss. 

And I made the journey in 27 days. I took 5 more 
in my journey in the year 1653, having followed a 
different road from Pimpalnar,^ where I arrived on the 
nth of March, having parted from Surat on the 6th. 

The 1 2th at Birgam (PErrgaum of A.S.) 

13th at Omberat (OomapurAnah or Oomiana 
ofA.S.) 

„ 14th at Enneque-Tenque® — a good fortress 

1 Nander, or Nandair of A.S., is situated on the north bank of the 
Goddvari, which, flows into the Bay of Beng’al, and has no connection 
with the Ganges, but the name Guenga— Gange was sometimes formerly 
applied to the Goddvari itself. See p. 159. 

2 For Pimpalnar, see p. 142. 

3 Unkie and Tunkie, Unkaee and Tunkaee of A.S., are distinct 
villages, the former being now a station on the Ahmadnagar railway. 



148 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


which bears the names of two Indian Princesses. It is 
on a mountain scarped on all sides, and it has only a 
small path on the eastern side for the ascent. There 
is a tank inside the enclosure of this place, and they 
might sow sufficient to feed 500 or 600 men, but 
the King does not desire to keep it garrisoned, and 
they have allowed it to fall in ruins. 

The 15th [March], to Geroul. (.^) 

The 1 6th to Lazour (Lasoor), where there 
passes a river, upon which, at a cannon’s shot from 
the eastern bank, there is one of the largest pagodas ^ 
in the country, where a large number of pilgrims 


resort daily. 



The 17th 

[March] to Aurengabad (AurangAbad). 

„ 1 8th 

) > 

PiPELGAN or Piply (Pipri). 

„ 19th 

n 

Ember (Ambad). 

,, 20th 

3 ) 

Deogan (DeogAon ?). 

„ 2 ISt 

33 

Patris (Patri). 

,, 22d 

33 

Bargan (Paungree ?). 

„ 23d 

33 

Palam (Palling). 

„ 24th 

33 

Candear (KandahAr), a great 

fort, but commanded on one side by a mountain. 

The 25th [March] to Gargan. (?) 

,, 26th 

33 

Nagouni (HingAni ?). 

„ 27th 

33 

Indove (Indore). 

,, 28th 

33 

Indelvai (Yedalvoi). 

„ 29th 

33 

Regivali (Reddypullay). 


Between these two last places there is a small river 
which separates the territories of the Great Mogul 
from those of the King of Golconda. 

The 30th [March] to Masapkipet (Musaibpet). 

» 31st „ Mirel-mola-kipet(Mullanipet). 

^ The famous rock temples of Ellora ? 



CHAP. IX 


AGRA TO GOLCONDA 


149 


The I St [April] to Golcoxda.^ 

To go from Agra to Golconda it is necessary to 
go to Burhanpur by the route already described ; from 
Burhanpur to Daulatabad, which is not more than 
five or six marches, and from Daulatabad to the other 
places which I have mentioned. 

You may take still another route to go from Surat 
to Golcoxda, that is to say, by Goa and Bijapur, as 
I shall describe in the particular account of my journey 
to Goa. I come now to what I have been able to 
remark of greatest interest in the Kingdom of Gol- 
CONDA, and to the late wars which it has had to under- 
take against the neighbouring States, during the time 
that I was in India. 

^ Thevenot’s route between Aurangabdd and Golconda, which he 
traversed about the year 1666, corresponds in parts with this one of 
Tavernier, but he appears to have left the regular line occasionally, to 
visit Pagodas, etc. {Voyage des Indes^ pp. 235, 277.) 



CHAPTER X 


Of the kingdom ^Golconda and the wars which it has 
carried on during the last few years. 

The Kingdom of Golconda, speaking generally, is 
a rich country, abounding in corn, rice, cattle, sheep, 
fowl, and other commodities necessary to life. As there 
are numerous tanks, there is also an abundance of good 
fish, and you find more particularly a kind of smelt, 
which has but one bone in the middle, and is of very 
delicate flavour.^ N ature has contributed more than art 
to make these tanks, of which the country is full. They 
are generally situated in somewhat elevated positions, 
where it is only necessary to make a dam ^ on the side of 
the plain in order to retain the water. These dams are 
sometimes half a league long, and after the season of 
the rains is past they open the sluices from time to time 
in order to let the water run into the fields, where it is 
received in divers small canals to irrigate the lands of 
private individuals. 

BhAgnagar is the name of the capital town of this 
kingdom, but it is commonly called Golconda, from 

1 Probably the so-called chela fish, which are in reality, as I am 
informed by Dr. Francis Day, the fiy of several different species. They 
constitute the whitebait of India. 

2 Band is the native and Anglo-Indian term applied to these dams 
or embankments, which are thrown across valleys and hollows in order 
to form collecting areas for the drainage of the country. 



CHAP. X 


BHAGNAGAR AND GOLCONDA 


151 


the name of the fortress, which is only 2 coss distant 
from it, and is the residence of the King. This 
fortress is nearly 2 leagues in circuit, and maintains 
a large garrison. It is, in reality, a town where the 
King keeps his treasure, having left his residence in 
Bhagnagar since it was sacked by the army which 
Aurangzeb sent against it, as I shall relate in due 
course. 

Bhagnagar is then the town which they commonly 
call Golconda, and it was commenced by the great- 
grandfather of the King who reigns at present, at the 
request of one of his wives whom he loved passionately, 
and whose name was Nagar.^ It was previously only 
a pleasure resort where the King had beautiful gardens, 
and his wife often telling him that, on account of the 
river, the spot was suitable for building a palace and a 
town, he at length caused the foundations to be laid, 
and desired that it should bear the name of his wife, 
calling it Bhagnagar, z.e. the Garden of Nagar. 
This town is in 16° 58" of lat.^ The neighbouring- 
country is a flat plain, and near the town you see 
numerous rocks as at Fontainebleau. A large river® 
bathes the walls of the town on the south-west side, 
and flows into the Gulf of Bengal close to Masulipa- 
TAM. You cross it at Bhagnagar by a grand stone 

1 Bhlgnagar, or the Fortunate City, was so called by Kutab Sh£h 
Muhammad Kuli after a favourite mistress, whose name was, however, 
Bhdgmati, not, as stated by our author, Nagar, which merely signifies 
town. It was built close to the banks of the Musi river, and became the 
seat of Government instead of Golconda, which is 7 miles distant. 
By the Persians, according to Thevenot, it was already called Haidard* 
bad, and is so generally now. Bagh, a distinct word, means garden. 

2 The true latitude of Golconda is 17° 22' N., the longitude being 
78“ 26' 30" E. 

3 The Musi river. 



152 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 1 


bridge, which is scarcely less beautiful than the Pont 
Neuf at Paris. The town is nearly the size of 
Orleans, well built and well opened out, and there are 
many fine large streets in it, but not being paved — any 
more than are those of all the other towns of Persia 
and India — they are full of sand and dust ; this is very 
inconvenient in summer. 

Before reaching the bridge you traverse a large 
suburb called Aurangabad, a coss in length, where all 
the merchants, brokers, and artisans dwell, and, in 
general, all the common people ; the town being 
inhabited only by persons of quality, the officers of the 
King’s house, the ministers of justice, and military men. 
From lo or ii o’clock in the morning till 4 or 5 in the 
evening, the merchants and brokers come into the 
town to trade with foreign merchants, after which they 
return home to sleep. There are in these suburbs two 
or three beautiful mosques, which serve as caravansardis 
for strangers, and several pagodas are to be seen in the 
neighbourhood. It is through the same suburb that 
you go from the town to the fortress of Golconda. 

When you have crossed the bridge you straightway 
enter a wide street which leads to the King’s palace. 
You see on the right hand the houses of some nobles 
of the court, and four or five caravansardis, having two 
storeys, where there are large halls and chambers, 
which are cool. At the end of this street you find a 
large square, upon which stands one of the walls of the 
palace, in the middle of which is a balcony where the 
King seats himself when he wishes to give audience to 
the people. The principal door of the palace is not in 
this square, but in another which is close by ; and you 
enter at first into a large court surrounded by porticoes 



CHAP. X 


jamA masjid at golconda 


153 


under which the King’s guards are stationed. From 
this court you pass to another of the same construc- 
tion, around which there are several beautiful apart- 
ments, with a terraced roof ; upon which, as upon 
those of the quarter of the palace where they keep the 
elephants, there are beautiful gardens, and such large 
trees, that it is a matter for astonishment how these 
arches are able to carry such a weight and one may 
say in general terms that this house has all the appear- 
ance of a royal mansion. 

It is about fifty years since they began to build a 
splendid pagoda “ in the town ; it will be the grandest 
in all India if it should be completed. The size of the 
stones is a subject for special astonishment, and that 
of the niche, which is the place for prayer, is an entire 
rock, of so enormous a size that they spent five years 
in quarrying it, and they employed 500 or 600 men 
continually on this work. It required still more time 
to roll it upon the conveyance by which they brought 
it to the pagoda ; and they told me that it took 1400 
oxen to draw it.® I shall explain why the work is 

^ The idea of these elevated gardens was probably introduced by 
Persian immigrants. The gardens of Golconda with their pavilions 
are still famous. 

2 This is the Jamd Masjid, or Cathedral Mosque, built by Muhammad 
Kuli, who died in 1 6 1 1 . 

^ Grandpre describes how these Megalithic structures were erected 
in India, and there is reason to believe the same method was followed 
in Egypt. After the first course was laid a slope of earth was placed 
against it up which the stones for the second course were rolled ; when 
they were laid, more earth was added to raise the slope again, in order 
to roll up the stones for the third course, and so on. When completed 
the building was surrounded by a mountain of clay, which had then to 
be removed (Comp. Voyage hi the Indian Ocean^ etc., vol. i, p. 169, 
London, 1803). A very interesting account, with sketches and diagrams, 
of the means used by the natives for moving large masses of stone will 



154 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


incomplete.^ If it had been finished it would have 
justly passed for the noblest edifice in the whole of 
Asia. 

On the other side of the town, from whence one 
goes to Masulipatam, there are two large tanks, each 
of them being about a coss in circuit, upon which you 
see some decorated boats intended for the pleasure of 
the King, and along the banks many fine houses which 
belong to the principal officers of the court. 

At three coss from the town there is a very fine 
mosque where there are the tombs of the Kings of 
Golconda;^ and every day at 4 o’clock p.m. bread 
and paldo^ are given to all the poor who present 
themselves. When you wish to see something really 
beautiful, you should go to see these tombs on the day 
of a festival, for then, from morning to evening, they 
are covered with rich carpets. 

This is what I have been able to observe concern- 
ing the good order and the police which is maintained 
in this town. In the first place, when a stranger 
presents himself at the gates, they search him carefully 
to see if he has any salt or tobacco, because these 
yield the principal revenue of the king. Moreover, it 
is sometimes necessary that the stranger should wait 
for one or two days before receiving permission to 
enter. A soldier first gives notice to the officer who 
commands the guard, and he sends to the Darogha'^ to 

be found in the Rurki Profesdofial Papers 07i Indian Engineerings 2d 
Series, 1878, vol. iii, p. i ; and Selec. Rec., N. W. P. Govermnents New 
Series, vol. v, p. 316. 1 See p. 163. 

2 These massive ruins command the fort of Golconda ; they indicate 
an enormous expenditure, and some of the tombs are said to have cost 
^150,000. 3 Paldo or PilldUs Hin., a dish of rice, meat, and spices. 

^ The Prefect or Superintendent of Police. 



CHAP. X 


THE COURT OF JUSTICE 


155 


give him notice also. But as it often happens that the 
Darogha is engaged, or that he is taking exercise out- 
side the town, and sometimes also as the soldier whom 
they have sent pretends not to have found him, in 
order to have an excuse for returning, and being much 
better paid for his trouble — the stranger is obliged to 
await the termination of all this mystery, and sometimes, 
as I have said, for one or two days. 

When the King administers justice he comes, as I 
stated, into the balcony which overlooks the square, and 
all those who desire to be present stand below, opposite 
to where he is seated. Between the people and the wall 
of the palace they plant in the ground three rows of 
sticks of the length of a short-pike, at the ends of which 
they attach cords which cross one another, and no one 
is allowed, whosoever he may be, to pass these limits 
without being summoned. This barrier, which is not 
put up except when the King administers justice, 
extends the whole length of the square, and opposite 
the balcony there is an opening to allow those who are 
summoned to pass through. Then two men, who 
hold by the ends a cord stretched across this opening, 
have only to lower it to admit the person who is 
summoned. A Secretary of State remains in the 
square below the balcony to receive petitions, and when 
he has five or six in hand he places them in a bag, 
which a eunuch, who is on the balcony by the side of 
the King, lowers with a cord and draws up afterwards, 
in order to present them to his Majesty. 

It is the principal nobles who mount guard every 
Monday — each in his turn, and they are not relieved 
before the end of a week. There are some of 
these nobles who command 5000 or 6000 horse, and 




156 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


they encamp under their tents around the town. 
When they mount guard each goes from his home to 
the rendezvous, but when they leave it they march in 
good order across the bridge, and from thence by the 
main street they assemble in the square in front of the 
balcony. In the van you see ten or twelve elephants 
marching, more or fewer according to the rank of him 
who goes off guard. There are some among them 
bearing cages [kowdahs) which somewhat resemble the 
body of a small coach, and there are others which only 
carry their driver, and another man instead of the 
cage, who holds a sort of banner. 

After the elephants, the camels follow two by two, 
sometimes up to thirty or forty. Each camel has its 
saddle, upon which they place a small culverin^ which a 
man, clad in a skin from head to foot, like a sort of 
pantaloon, and seated on the crupper of the camel with 
a lighted match in hand, quickly turns from side to side 
before the balcony where the King is. 

You see coming after them the carriages, around 
which the servants walk on foot, after which the led- 
horses appear, and finally the noble to whom this 
whole equipment belongs, preceded by ten or twelve 
courtesans, who await him at the end of the bridge, 
leaping and dancing before him up to the square. 
After him the cavalry and infantry follow in good 
order. And as all that affords a spectacle, and has 
something of pomp about it, during three or four con- 
secutive months which I have sometimes spent at 
Bhagnagar, my lodging being in the main street, I 

1 Culverin, derived through Fr. Coulevritie, from Lat. Coluber, a 
serpent. It is a long slender gun which throws a ball to a considerable 
distance. 



CHAP. X 


TROOPS AT GOLCONDA 


157 


enjoyed the amusement every week of seeing these 
fine troops passing, which are more or less numerous 
according to the rank of the noble who has been on 
guard in his turn. 

The soldiers have for their sole garment but three 
or four ells of cloths, with which they clothe the middle 
of the body before and behind. They wear the hair 
long, and make a great knot of it on the head as 
women do, having for sole head-dress a scrap of cloth 
with three corners, one of which rests on the middle of 
the head, and the other two they tie together on the 
nape of the neck. They do not have a sabre like the 
Persians, but they carry a broadsword like the Swiss, 
with which they both cut and thrust, and they suspend it 
from a belt. The barrels of their muskets are stronger 
than ours, and the iron is better and purer ; this makes 
them not liable to burst.^ As for the cavalry, they 
have bow and arrow, shield and mace, with helmet and 
a coat of mail, which hangs behind from the helmet 
over the shoulders. 

There are so many public women in the town, the 
suburbs, and in the fortress, which is like another town, 
that it is estimated that there are generally more than 

^ The iron at Haidardbdd, at a very early period, obtained a wide 
renown, being, in fact, the material which, when made into steel, afforded 
the source of supply for the manufacture of Damascus blades — the raw 
material having been exported to Persia and the Panjab for that pur- 
pose (see Jour, As. Socy. Be?igal, vol. xvi, pp. 417, 666). Two villages, 
situated to the north of Golconda, namely, Nirmal and Indore, are 
specially mentioned in the Ain-i-Akbari as producing excellent iron and 
steel. In my Economic Geology I inadvertently identified the latter 
with Indore in Mdlwd in Central India, and the oversight was not dis- 
covered in time to be corrected in the proofs of the volume. According 
to Thevenot, at Indelvai, i.e. Yedalvoi, four leagues from Indore, quantities 
of swords, daggers, and lances were made and distributed thence through- 
out India (Voyages des hides ^ p. 235). 



15S 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


20,000 entered in the Daroghas register, without which 
it is not allowed to any woman to ply this trade. They 
pay no tribute to the King, but a certain number 
of them are obliged to go every Friday with their 
governess and their music to present themselves in the 
square in front of the balcony. If the King be there 
they dance before him, and if he is not, an eunuch 
signals to them with his hand that they may withdraw. 

In the cool of the evening you see them before the 
doors of their houses, which are for the most part 
small huts, and when the night comes they place at 
the doors a candle or a lighted lamp for a signal. It 
is then, also, that the shops where they sell tdri'^ are 
opened. It is a drink obtained from a tree, and it is 
as sweet as our new wines. It is brought from 5 or 6 
coss distant in leather bottles, upon horses which carry 
one on each side and go at a fast trot, and about 500 
or 600 of them enter the town daily. The King 
derives from the tax which he places on this idri a 
very considerable revenue, and it is principally on this 
account that they allow so many public women, because 
they are the cause of the consumption of much tdri, 
those who sell it having for this reason their shops in 
their neighbourhood. 

These women have so much suppleness and are so 
agile that when the King who reigns at present wished 
to visit Masulipatam, nine of them very cleverly 
represented the form of an elephant, four making the 
four feet, four others the body, and one the trunk, and 
the King, mounted above on a kind of throne, in that 
way made his entry into the town. 

All the people of Golconda, both men and women, 

^ Xari^ Anglici toddy — the sap of PhcBnix sylvsstris. 



CHAP. X 


ABDUL KUTAB SHAH 


159 


are well proportioned, of good stature, and of fair 
countenances, and it is only the peasantry who are 
somewhat dark in complexion. The King of Gol- 
CONDA who reigns at present is called Abdul Kutab 
Shah,^ and I will inform the reader, in a few words, 
whence he derives his origin. Under the rule of 
Akbar, King of India, father of Jahangir, the 
Moguls only extended their authority southwards 
to Narbeder, and the river which passes it and, 
coming from the south, flows into the Ganges, sepa- 
rated their lands' from those of the Raja of Nar- 
siNGHA,® which extended to Cape Comorin, the other 
Rajas being, as it were, his subjects, and deriving their 
power from him. It is this Raja and his predecessors 
who have always been at war with those who suc- 
ceeded Tamerlane* in India, and they were so power- 
ful that the last Raja who was at war with Akbar had 


^ Abdoul Coutou Cha in the original, for Abdul Kutab Shah ; he 
succeeded his father Muhammad Kuli on the throne of Golconda in A.D. 
i6ii. 

2 This passage is obscure, owing to some jumble between the 
names Beder or Bidar and Narbeder (for Narbada). The river of 
Beder which is referred to, and formed the boundary of the IMoguPs 
ancient territory, was in reality the Goddvari, which at one time was 
supposed to join the Ganges. Its real course, however, is to the Bay of 
Bengal, into which it flows below Coconada. See p. 147. 

3 The name of Narsingha (a prince of Telugu origin, who died 1508 
A.D.) was applied by the Portuguese to the old kingdom of Vijayana- 
gara. Its capital town, though it bore the same name, w^as called Bis- 
nagar by them. It was an enormously wealthy city, and the ruins still 
to be seen on its site near the small village of Hampi, in the Bellary 
District, testify to the magnificence of its buildings. See India in the 
Fifteefith Coitury^ Hak. Socy., pp. 25, 39, etc.; also Afiglo-Indian 
Glossary. 

^ Tamerlane or Timur-lang (Temur-leng in the original), the ancestor 
of the Mogul Emperors, invaded India in 1398; but Bdbar was the 
actual founder of the dynasty (1526-1530). 



160 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


on foot four armies, commanded by as many generals. 
The most powerful of the four had his quarters in the 
territories which to-day constitute the kingdom of Gol- 
CONDA,^ the second held his in the country of Bijapur, 
the third in the Province of Daulatabad, and the 
fourth in the region of Burhanpur.^ The Raja of 
Narsingha dying without children, these four generals 
established themselves each in the country which he 
held with his army, and caused themselves to be recog- 
nised as kings — one of Golconda, another of Bijapur, 
another of Burhanpur, and the other of DaulatAbad. 
Although the Raja was an idolater, these four generals 
were Muhammadans, and he of Golconda was of the 
sect of Ali,® descended from an ancient family of 
Turcomans, who inhabit the country of Hamadan in 
Persla.^ 

He was, as I have said, the most powerful of 
all ; and a few days after the death of the Raja of 
Narsingha they achieved a notable victory over the 
Mogul, after which there was nothing to prevent them 
from making themselves sovereigns. But since that 
time Jahangir, son of Akbar, conquered the kingdom 
of the new King of BurhAnpur ShAh JahAn, son of 
JahAngir, that of the King of DaulatAbAd;® and 

1 The Bahmani dynasty; it lasted from 1347-1525. 

2 Bijapur, Daulatdbad, and Burhdnpur. A full account of these 
dynasties will be found in Elphinstone’s India, vol. ii, p. 179 et seq. 

s Haly in original, for Ali, i.e. he was a Shia. 

He was the first of the Kutab Shdhi Kings. He reigned for 
thirty years, and was assassinated at the instigation of his sons. 

_ 5 Not quite corrert as regards Burhdnpur, as there were eleven 
Princes of the Farukhi dynasty, from its foundation by Nasir Khdn in 
1400 AD. till 1600 A.D., when it was taken possession of by Akbar. 

Daulatabdd, or Deogiri, was taken possession of in the year 1632 
by jMahdbat Kh^n, Shdh Jahan’s general. 



CHAP. X THE KIXG OF GOLCONDA’S DAUGHTERS 


161 


Auraxgzeb, son of Shah Jahan, a part of the territor}' 
of Bijapur.^ As for the King of Golcokda, neither 
Jahaxgir nor Shah Jahan made war upon him, and 
they left him undisturbed, on the condition that he 
should pay to the jMoguls an annual tribute of 200,000 
pagodas. These pagodas are gold pieces which are 
worth from 6 to 7^ francs'^ of our money, some- 
times more and sometimes less. To-day the most 
powerful of the Rajas of this great peninsula .south 
of the Ganges is the Raja of V blow,® who ex- 
tends his authority as far as Cape Comorin, and who 
has succeeded to a part of the states of the Raja of 
Narsingha ; but, as there is no trade in his country, 
this Prince makes but little noise, and strangers hardly 
ever go to it. The present King of Golconda has 
no son ; he has only three daughters, who are all 
married. 

The eldest is married to one of the relatives of 
the Grand Sheikh of Mecca,^ and the circumstances 
which preceded this marriage are sufficiently curious 
to occupy a place in my observations. The Sheikh 
having arrived at Golconda in the garb of a mendi- 
cant, remained for some months at the gate of the 

1 Bijapur was not finally taken possession of by Aurangzeb till 1686, 
or subsequently to the date at which our author wrote, but he had par- 
tially subdued it some thirty years before. 

2 Here we should read livres for francs, as in Book II, chap, xviii, 
the value of the new pagoda is stated to be 3^- rupees or 5I livres, i,e. 
7s. lo^d. ; and in Book II, chap, xxiv, the old pagoda is said to be 
equal to 7-|- livres, or iis. 3d. Independent testimony (see Appendix) 
gives about the same values ; so that 200,000 pagodas would be equal 
to about 1 00, 000, more or less, in exchange value. 

® Velow appears to have been identical with Vellore in North 
Arcot. 

^ CJiek of Mecque in the original ; called Mirza Muhammad on 
p. 16S. 


VOL. I 


M 



162 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


palace, refusing to reply to sundry people of the Court 
who inquired why he had come. At length the 
matter being reported to the King, he sent his senior 
physician, who spoke Arabic well, to ascertain from 
the Sheikh what he wanted, and the reason of his 
coming. The physician, and some nobles of the Court 
who also spoke to him, immediately saw that he was a 
man of intelligence, and took him to the King, who 
was much pleased with his appearance and his pre- 
liminary conversation. But at length the Sheikh 
having declared that he had come to marry the 
Princess, this proposition very much surprised the 
King, and was received by some of the Court as 
coming from a man who was not altogether in his 
senses. At first they merely laughed, but when they 
observed that he persisted in his demand, even 
threatening the country with a great calamity which 
would befall it if they did not give him the Princess in 
marriage, he was cast into prison, where he remained 
for a long time. 

The King, at length, considering that it would be 
better to send him back to his own country, made 
him embark at Masulipatam on one of the vessels 
which carry goods and pilgrims to Mocha, from whence 
they travel by land to Mecca. About two years after- 
wards the same Sheikh returned to Golconda, and 
managed so well on this occasion that he espoused the 
Princess and acquired great credit in the kingdom, 
which he now governs, and where he is all-powerful. 
It was he who prevented the King from yielding up 
the fortress of Golconda, where he had taken refuge 
when Aurangzeb and his son entered BhAgnagar, as 
I shall presently relate — throwing himself upon him. 



CHAP. X 


FATHER EPHRAIM 


163 


and threatening to kill him if he did not resolve to hold 
out without thinking more of delivering the keys to the 
enemy. This bold action was the reason why the 
King loved him the more thereafter, and made use of 
his counsel in all important affairs ; and thus, not only 
as son-in-law of the King, but as Prime Minister, he is 
now the principal personage in the Court of Gol- 
coNDA. He it is who is the cause why the Great 
Pagoda of BhIgnagar^ has remained unfinished, 
having threatened the kingdom with a great calamity 
if they persisted in completing it. 

This Prince passionately loves all those who are pro- 
ficient in mathematics, and he understands them fairly 
well ; it is the reason why, although a Muhammadan, he 
favours all Christians who are learned in this science, 
as he particularly showed with regard to the Rev. 
Father Ephraim, a Capuchin, when he was passing 
through Golconda to go to Pegu, whither he was sent 
by his Superiors. He did all he could to induce him 
to remain in his country, and offered to build for him, 
at his own cost, a house and a church, representing 
to him that he would lack neither occupation nor 
parishioners, since there were then some Christian 
Portuguese and many Armenians who came every year 
for trade. But Father Ephraim, who had his orders 
to proceed onwards to Pegu, was unable to accept his 
offer, and when he went to take leave of the Sheikh he 
bestowed upon him a khiHat of the most honourable 
kind possible, since it included the whole suit, namely, 
the cap, the cabaye or grand robe, the arcalou^ or 

1 Pagoda at Bhdgnagar; see p. 153. 

- Cabaye^ for Kaba {e-SMM)^ ix. Royal Robe. Arcalou, I cannot 
make any suggestion as to the derivation of this word. 



164 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK 1 


cassock, two pairs of drawers, two shirts, and two 
srirdles, with a scarf to be worn round the neck and 
upon the head for protection against the heat of the 
sun. The Reverend Father was astonished at this 
present, and made known to the Sheikh that he could 
not wear it, the latter nevertheless desired that he 
should take it, and told him that he might bestow 
it on one of his friends. Two months afterwards I 
received this present from Father Ephraim when I 
was at SuRVT, and I thanked him for it on the occasion 
of our first meeting. 

The Sheikh, seeing that he could not detain the 
“Father,” and not wishing to allow him to travel on 
foot from Golconda to Masulipatam, as he intended, 
compelled him to accept an ox which he gave him, 
with two attendants to conduct him ; and not being 
able to force him to accept pagodas'- in addition, he 
directed the two attendants that on arrival at Masu- 
LIPAT.4M they should leave with the Capuchin Father 
both the ox and the. pagodas. This order they did not 
fail to carry out in every particular, for otherwise on 
their return to Golconda it would have cost them 
their lives. I shall complete the history of Father 
Ephra.im, who afterwards experienced many misfor- 
tunes, when I describe Goa, which is the principal 
place which the Portuguese have in India. 

The second daughter of the King of Golconda was 
espoused to Sultan Muhammad, eldest son of Aurang- 
ZEB. What led to the marriage was this — Mir Jumla,^ 

1 Say ^ IS. 

- Mir Jumla. Tavernier writes this name in five different ways — 
Mir Gimola, Mirza Mola, Mirgimola, Amir Jemla, and Mir Jemla. See 
Index for references. His son’s name was Muhammad Amin. 



CHAP. X 


MIR JUMLA 


165 


Commander-in-Chief of the army of the King of Gol- 
co^■DA, who had received from him much good service 
towards the establishment of his throne, on going in the 
direction of Bengal to regulate some Raja's affairs, left 
in hostage with the King, according to custom, his wife 
and children as pledge of his fidelity. He had many 
daughters, but only one son, who had a considerable 
following and made a great figure at Court. The credit 
and the wealth which ISIiR Jumla had acquired made 
him enemies, who, jealous of such good fortune, sought 
to destroy it in his absence, and to injure him in the 
esteem of the ‘King. They told him that the power of 
]\IiR JuiiLA should cause him to be suspected ; that all 
his actions tended towards dethroning him and securing 
the kingdom of Golconda for his son ; that he ought 
not to wait till the evil was without remedy ; and that 
in order to rid himself of an enemy — the more danger- 
ous because he concealed himself — the shortest way 
was to poison him. The king, being easily persuaded, 
gave these same persons an order to accomplish 
the deed ; but having taken their measures clumsily 
three or four times in succession without being able 
to accomplish their object, the son of Mir Jumla at 
length heard of it, and at once gave notice of it to his 
father. It is not known exactly what command he got 
from his father ; but after he had received his reply he 
went to the King, to whom he spoke out with boldness, 
taxing him with the services which his father had ren- 
dered him, and with the fact that without his aid he 
would never have come to the throne. This was true ; 
but there was a court intrigue which would take too 
long to describe. This young noble, somewhat carried 
away from his ordinary demeanour, used such sharpness 



166 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


of expression to the King that his Majesty, offended by 
his insolence, rose in a rage, whilst the nobles of the 
Court, who were present, threw themselves on him and 
handled him roughly. At the same time, by order of 
the King, he was arrested and put in prison, with his 
mother and sisters ; and this affair, which made a great 
commotion at Court, so much enraged Mir Jumla, who 
soon had news of it, that, having forces at hand, and 
being beloved by the soldiers, he at once resolved to 
make use of these advantages to revenge himself for 
the injury. He was then, as I have said, in the direc- 
tion of Bengal, for the purpose of bringing to their 
allegiance some Rajas possessing territories on the 
Ganges ; and Sultan Shuja, the second son of Shah 
Jah.4n, who was then Governor of Bengal, was the 
one whom he considered it to be most suitable to ad- 
dress as the wisest Prince with whom he might join 
forces against the King of Golconda, whom he no 
longer regarded as his master, but as the greatest of 
his enemies. He accordingly wrote to this Prince that 
if he was willing to join him he would afford him the 
means of taking possession of the whole of the kingdom 
of Golconda, and that he ought not to lose so good 
an opportunity of increasing the Mogul Empire, the 
succession to which affected him as well as the other 
Princes, his brothers. But he did not receive a favour- 
able reply from Sultan Shuja, who let him know that 
he did not trust the word of a man who, being capable 
of betraying his King, might readily betray a strange 
Prince whom he had attracted to his interests in order 
to accomplish his own revenge, and consequently he 
need not expect him. On receipt of this refusal of 
Sultan Shuja, Mir Jumla wrote to Aurangzeb, who 



CHAP. X 


SIEGE OF GOLCOXDA 


167 


was then in his government of BuRHA^^PUR, who, not 
being so scrupulous as his brother, accepted the offer 
which was made to him. Whilst Mir Juiila advanced 
his troops towards Bhagnagar, Aurangzeb marched 
with his by long stages towards the Deccan, and the 
two armies being conjoined, they reached the gates of 
Bhagnagar before the King had had time to put his 
affairs in order. He only had time to take refuge in the 
fortress of Golconda, where Aurangzeb, after he had 
pillaged the town of Bhagnagar ^ and removed all that 
was of much value from the palace, came at once to 
lay siege. The King, seeing himself so hard pressed, 
believed that he would soon have to yield ; and in 
order to seek to turn this hurricane, which threatened 
his cofnplete ruin, sent to Mir Jumla both his wife and 
children with every honour. There is both virtue and 
generosity in India as in Europe ; and I shall give a 
noteworthy example of it in the person of the King of 
Golconda. Some days after the enemy had laid siege 
to the fortress, a gunner perceiving Aurangzeb upon 
his elephant visiting the outworks, whilst the King was 
on the bastion, he said to the latter that if his Majesty 
wished he could destroy the Prince with a shot of the 
cannon, and at the same moment he put himself in 
position to fire. But the King, seizing him by the arm, 
told him to do nothing of the sort, and that the lives of 
Princes should be respected. The gunner, who was 
skilful, obeyed the King, and instead of firing at 
Aurangzeb, he killed the General of his army, who 
was farther in advance, with a cannon shot. This 
stopped the attack which he was about to deliver, the 
whole camp being alarmed by his death. Abdul Zabar 

1 Bhagnagar, the modem Haidarabdd. See p. 1 5 1 . 



168 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK I 


Beg,^ general of the army of the King of Golcoxda, who 
was close by with a flying camp of 4000 horse, having 
heard that the enemy were somewhat disordered by the 
loss of their General which they had sustained, at once 
took advantage of so favourable an opportunity, and 
going at them full tilt, succeeded in overcoming them ; 
and having put them to flight he followed them vigor- 
ously for 4 or 5 leagues, till nightfall. A few days 
before the death of this General, the King of Golcoxda, 
who had been surprised, seeing himself pressed, and 
supplies being short in the fortress, was on the point of 
giving up the keys ; but, as I have above related,^ 
IMirza AIuhammad, his son-in-law, tore them from his 
hands, and threatened to slay him if he persisted any 
longer in such a resolution ; and this was the reason 
why the King, who previously had but little liking for 
him, thenceforward conceived a great affection for him, 
of which he daily gave him proofs. Aurangzeb having 
then been obliged to raise the siege, halted some days 
to rally his troops and receive reinforcements, with 
which he set himself to besiege Golcoxda. The 
fortress was as vigorously attacked as it was vigorously 
defended; but Mir Jumla, who still retained some 
regard for the King, and had it, as some persons say 
with good reason, without proclaiming it openly, did 
not wish to allow Auraxgzeb to proceed to extremities, 
and by his diplomacy secured a suspension of hostilities 
for some weeks. Shah Jahan, father of Auraxgzeb, 
had formerly received kind treatment from the King 
of Golconda, with whom he had taken refuge when he 
had lost the battle with his elder brother against the 
King Jahangir, their father, with whom they had gone 

1 xAbdul Jaber Beg in the original. 2 See p. 163. 



CHAP. X 


PEACE DECLARED 


169 


to war. J AH.iNGiR, having got the elder brother into his 
power, caused his eyes to be put out ; but Shah Jahan, 
the younger brother, being better advised, took to flight, 
and the King of GoLCO^'DA having received him with 
kindness, they bound themselves together in close 
friendship — Shah Jahax swearing to his host that he 
would never fight Avith him whatever cause might arise. 
hliR JuMLA, who knew that it would not be difficult to 
bring to an understanding two Kings who were friends, 
little as Aur.'A.xgzeb was inclined to give way, and wish- 
ing, moreover, that that Prince should find it advan- 
tageous to himself, communicated underhand to both 
one and the other what he planned in order to secure a 
lasting peace. He managed that the King of Golconda 
first wrote to Sh. 4 h Jahan in very civil terms, praying 
him to become arbitrator between himself and Aur- 
ANGZEB, placing his interests entirely in his hands, and 
promising to sign a treaty in whatever terms he pleased 
to frame it. By the same address of Mir Jumla, Shah 
Jahan, on his side, was advised, by way of reply to the 
letter of the King of Golconda, to propose to him the 
marriage of his second daughter with Sultan Muham- 
mad, son of Aurangzeb, on condition that after the 
death of the King, the father of the Princess, his son- 
in-law should inherit the kingdom of Golconda. This 
proposition having been accepted and the articles signed 
by the two Kings, both the peace and the marriage were 
celebrated at the same time with much magnificence.^ 
As for Mir Jumla, he quitted the service of the King 
of Golconda, and went to Burhanpur with Aurangzeb. 

1 The fine inflicted on the King of Golconda amounted, it is said, to 
;£i, 000,000 as a first instalment of an annual tribute, but was in part 
remitted by Shd.h Jahdn (Elphinstone’s hidia^ vol. ii, p* 412). 



170 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Soon afterwards Shah Jahan made him first Minister 
of State and Commander-in-Chief of his armies, and it 
was he who so powerfully aided Aurangzeb to ascend 
the throne by defeating Sultan Shuja. For Mir 
J uMLA was a man of great intelligence, who understood 
equally well both war and the affairs of Stated I have 
had occasion to speak to him several times, and I have 
admired the firmness and the promptitude with which 
he responded to requests presented to him, giving his 
orders in every direction, and signing several despatches 
as if he had but one sole matter to attend to. 

The third Princess of Golconda was promised to 
Sultan Said, another Sheikh of Mecca, ^ and the matter 
had so far advanced that the day was named for the 
marriage. But Abdul Zabar Beg, general of the army, 
went to the King of Golconda, with six other nobles, 
to turn him from his design ; and they so managed it 
that the marriage was broken off, and the Princess was 
given to Mirza Abdul Hasan,* a cousin of the King, 
by which marriage there are two sons. This has en- 
tirely destroyed the claims of the son of Aurangzeb, 

1 He understood other matters also, for Thevenot says he possessed 
20 7 nans^ or 408 Dutch livres^ weight of diamonds. He had acquired 
these riches when, at the head of the army of Golconda, he made war 
with the King of Bijapur against Bisnagar {Voyage des Indes^ p. 306). 
And Bernier states that he acquired wealth in many ways, and “ caused 
the diamond mines, w’hich he alone had farmed under many borrowed 
names, to be wTought w'ith extraordinary diligence, so that people dis- 
coursed of nothing but of the riches of Emir Jemla, and of the plenty of his 
diamonds, \vhich were not reckoned but by sacks ” {Hist of the Last 
Revolution, etc., vol. i, p. 33). 

- Sultan Said, or Saiyid. Meaning a descendant of Muhammad. 

2 Mirza Abdul Cosing in the original. Called Miersa Abou-il-Hassan 
by Havart, who makes him out to have been a lineal descendant of 
Ibrahim, the second King of the dynasty. Quoted in Hist. Gen. des 
Voyages, vol. xiii, p. 425 n. 



CHAP. X 


THE SECT OF ALI 


171 


whom the father now keeps in prison in the fortress of 
Gwalior, for having betrayed his side in favour of 
Sultan Shuja, his uncle.^ This Princess would have 
been given at first and with no difficulty to Mirza 
Abdul Hasan if he had not been a debauchee, the 
King not having then any regard for him, and making 
no account of him ; but since the marriage he has 
reformed.' 

At the present time the King of Golconda does 
not so much fear the Moguls, because, following their 
example, money does not leave his country, and he has 
amassed much to carry on war. Besides, he is greatly 
attached to the sect of Ali, to the extent of not wear- 
ing a cap (or turban?) like the other Muhammadans, 
because they say that Ali did not wear one, but 
another kind of head-dress ; and it is this fact which 
causes the Persians, who arrive in India in great 
numbers to seek their fortunes, to go by preference 
to the King of Golconda rather than to the Mogul. 
It is the same with the King of Bijapur, whom the 
Queen, sister of the King of Golconda, has been 
careful to bring up in the same sect of Ali, which also 
attracts many Persians to his service. 

1 See Book II, chap. vi. 

2 Ovington, on the authority of Sheldon, an English traveller, gives 
a different account of the marriages of these three Princesses. Quoted 
in Hist, GenL des Voyages, voL xiii, p. 425. 



CHAPTER XI 


Route from Golcoxda to Masulipatam^ 

From Golconda to IMasulipatam it is counted to be 
lOO coss by the straight road ; but when you wish to go 
by way of the diamond mine called Coulour in Persian, 
and Gani in the Indian language,® it is 1 1 2 coss, and 
this is the route which I have ordinarily taken. 

From Golconda to Tenara,® 4 coss. 

Tenara is a fine place, where there are four very 
beautiful houses, each having a large garden. That 
one of the four which is on the left of the high road is 
incomparably more beautiful that the three others. It 

1 Masulipatam. Thevenot gives the distance as 53 leagues. The 
true distance is about 210 miles, and from Madras 285 miles. 

2 Kollur is the modern name by which this famous site is known ; it 
is situated on the Kistna river in Lat. 16° 42' 30", Long. 80® 5'. The 
identification was first traced out by means of the routes to it given by 
Tavernier here and in Book II, chap, xviii. Although all memory was 
lost of the true position of this mine until it was recently rediscovered, 
and ver>" wild suggestions have been made on the subject, its position is 
correctly indicated on several maps of the beginning of the eighteenth 
and end of the seventeenth centuries. The question of this identification 
has been fully discussed in the Economic Geology of India^ p. 1 6. Gani 
is not a name, though so often quoted as such in works on precious 
stones. It is simply a Persian prefix, signifying ‘‘ Mine of” {Kdn-i)^ and 
is known to have been used in connection with other mines. {Vide 
Index for further references.) 

3 This place appears to be the same as Atenara, mentioned in Book 
I, chap. xix. It is not given on modem maps. It is also mentioned by 
Thevenot as Tenara. 



CHAP. XI 


THE QUEEN’S HOUSE 


173 


is all built of cut stone and in two storeys, containing 
large galleries, beautiful halls, and fine rooms. In front 
of the house there is a large courtyard, somewhat like 
the Place Royale in Paris. On each of the three 
other sides there is a large entrance, and from one side 
to the other a fine veranda, elevated about 4 or 5 feet 
above the ground and well arched over, and here 
travellers of the superior classes are accustomed to 
lodge. Above each entrance there is a grand balus- 
trade, and a small chamber for ladies. When persons 
of position do not wish to occupy these dwellings, they 
can have their tents pitched in the gardens ; and it 
should be remarked that only three of these houses 
may be occupied, for the grandest and most beautiful 
one is reserved for the Queen. When she is not there 
one may see it and walk through it, for the garden is very 
beautiful and contains many fine pieces of water. The 
whole area is laid out in this manner. There are 
small chambers destined for poor travellers, and every 
day towards evening they receive a dole of bread, rice, 
or vegetables already cooked ; and to the idolaters, who 
eat nothing which has been prepared by others, they 
give flour to make bread and a little butter, for, as soon 
as their bread is baked like a cake, they cover it on 
both sides with melted butter. 

From Tenara to J ATEN AGAR (Hyatnagar) . 12 coss. 

,, J ATEN AGAR tO PaTENGY (PuNTANGi) . 12 „ 

,, Patengy to Pengeul (Pungul) . 14 ,, 

,, Pengeul to Nagelpar (Nagulpad) . 12 ,, 

, , N AGELPARtO LaKABARON (LaEKAWURRUm) 1 1 „ 

,, Lakabaron to Coulour or Gani (Kol- 
lur) (of which I shall speak in the 
account of the mines) . . .11,, 



174 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


The greater part of the road from Lakkawurrum 
to Kollur, especially as you approach Kollur, is 
rocky, and in two or three places I was obliged to take 
my carriage to pieces ; this can be quickly done. 
Wherever there is a small quantity of good soil 
between the rocks you see cassia trees, ^ (the cassia 
produced by them) being the best and most laxative in 
all India, this I know from the effect produced on my 
servants, who ate it as they walked along. 

There passes along the whole length of the town 
of Kollur a great river ^ which flows into the Bay of 
Bengal near Masulipatam. 

Fr0mC0UL0UR0rGANIt0KAHKALY(K.4KANl) 12 coss. 

,, Kah Kaly to Bezouar (Bezwada®) . 6 „ 

Close to Bezouar you recross the river. 

From Bezouar to Vouchir (Weeyur) . . 4 ,, 

„ Vouchir to Nilimor (?) . . . 4 ,, 

Between Weeyur and Nilimor, about halfway, you 
cross a great river upon a raft,* there being no boat 
there. 

From Nilimor to Milmol® (Nedumulu) . (i coss. 

,, Milmol to Maslipatan (Masulipatam) 4 „ 

^ Cassia fistula (Hind. Amaltds) affords a valuable laxative, its long 
pods are familiar objects in Indian jungles ; one of the native names for 
them is Ba?idar lathi or monkey’s stick. 

2 The Kistna. 

3 Bezwdda on the Kistnd, in Lat. i6° 30' 50", Long. 80° 39', a place 
of much archaeological interest, owing to its Buddhist and Hindu remains 
(see Book I, chap, xviii). It is now the site of the chief works for the 
irrigation of the delta of the Kistna. 

^ One of the deltaic branches of the Kistna. 

° In Book I, chap, xviii, the distance of this place, which is there 
spelt Nilmol, from Masulipatam, is given as 3|- leagues, and from thence 
to Wouhir (Weeyur) 6 leagues, making 9I leagues as against the 14 coss. 
This would give a proportion of 2 : 3, though elsewhere the two measures 
of distance are treated as equivalents. But on the same page the distance 



CH x: 


MASULIPATA.M 


175 


Masulipataji is a straggling town (viliace), in which 
the houses are built of wood, and are detached from 
one another. This place, which is on the seashore, is 
only renowned on account of its anchorage, which is the 
best in the Bay of Bengal, and it is the only place 
from which vessels sail for Pegu, Siam, Arakan, Ben- 
gal, CocHiNCHiNA, Mecca, and Hormuz, as also for the 
islands of Madagascar, Sumatra, and the IManillas. 
It should be remarked that wheel carriages do not 
travel between Golconda and Masulipatam, the roads 
being too much interrupted by high mountains, tanks, 
and rivers, and there being many narrow and difficult 
passes. It is with the greatest trouble that one takes 
a small cart. This I have done to the diamond mines, 
and I was obliged to take mine to pieces frequently 
in order to pass bad places. It is the same between 
Golconda and Cape Comorin. There are no waggons 
in all these territories, and you only see oxen and 
pack-horses for the conveyance of men, and for the 
transport of goods and merchandise. But, in default 
of chariots, you have the convenience of much larger 
pallankeens than in the rest of India; for one is 
carried much more easily, more quickly, and at less 
cost. 

between the last-named place and Bezwada is given as 6 hours, to a poor 
village called Patemet (Patainata), and i-|- league on to Bezwdda, while 
here the distance is given at 4 coss. Thus if we add in both cases we 
find from Masulipatam to Bezwada is in the one case 1 1 leagues and 6 
hours, or say about 6 leagues =17 leagues in all ; and in the other 1 8 
coss. The true distance is 40 miles. 



CHAPTER XII 


Route from Surat to Goa, and from Goa to 
Golconda by Bijapur 

You may go from Surat to Goa partly by land and 
partly by sea, but the road is very bad by land, 
especially from Daman to Rajapur. Most travellers 
take the route by sea, and taking an ahnadier^ which 
is a row-boat, they go from point to point up to Goa, 
notwithstanding that the Malabaris, who are the 
pirates of India, are much to be feared along these 
coasts, as I shall presently say. 

The route from Surat to Goa is not counted by 
coss, but by gos, which are about equal to 4 of our 
common leagues. 

From Surat to Daman (Daman) . . 7 gos. 

„ Daman to Bassain (Bassein) . 10 „ 

„ Bassain to Chaoul (Chaul) . 9 ,, 

„ Chaoul to Daboul (Dabhol) . 12 ,, 

„ Daboul to Rejapour (Rajapur) . 10 ,, 

„ Rejapour to Mingrela (Vengurla) 9 ,, 

„ Mingrela to Goa . . . 4 ,, 

This makes in all from Surat to Goa . 61 gos. 

The great danger which has to be encountered on 

1 Abnadier — from Arab. EV inaadiah^ a ferry-boat. Tavernier in 
his Persian Travels defines it as a small vessel of war. 



CHAP. XII 


MALABAR PIRATES 


177 


these coasts is, as I have said, the risk of falling into the 
hands of the Malabaris, who are strict Muhammadans 
and very cruel towards Christians. I have seen a 
Barefoot Carmelite Father who had been captured by 
these pirates. In order to obtain his ransom speedily, 
they tortured him to such an extent that his right arm 
became half as short as the other, and it was the same 
with one leg. The commanders only pay wages to 
the value of two dczis to each soldier for the six months 
which they generally spend at sea, and do not share 
with them the prizes taken ; but they are allowed to 
keep the garments and the food of those whom they 
have captured. It is true that the soldiers are permitted 
to leave then, and if the commanders desire them to 
remain they are obliged to pay them afresh. They 
seldom venture farther to sea than from 20 to 25 
leagues, and whenever the Portuguese capture any of 
these pirates they either hang them straight off or they 
throw them into the sea. These Malabaris number 
200 and sometimes as many as 250 men in each vessel, 
and they go in squadrons of from ten to fifteen vessels 
to attack a big ship, and they do not fear cannon. 
They at once come alongside and throw numbers of 
fire-pots on the deck, which cause much injury if care 
is not taken to provide against them. For as they 
know the habits of the pirates, immediately they see 
them they close all the scuttles on deck, and cover it 
with water, so that these pots, which are full of fire- 
works, cannot take effect. 

An English Captain named Mr. Clerc, when 
coming from Bantam to Surat, met, in the latitude of 
Cochin, a squadron of Malabaris, consisting of twenty- 
five or thirty vessels, which came forthwith and attacked 

VOL. I N 



178 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK J 


him vigorously. Seeing that he could not withstand 
their first fury, he set fire to some barrels of gun- 
powder which he had had time to prepare, and the 
deck being blown up, he also blew into the sea a great 
number of pirates who were on it. Notwithstanding 
this, the others did not lose courage, and did not cease 
to come on board. The English Captain, seeing no 
other resource left, sent all his crew into two boats 
and remained alone in his cabin, where the pirates 
were unable to reach him ; he then set fire to a train 
which he had prepared, and which led to a magazine 
containing a large quantity of powder. At the same 
time he threw himself into the sea, where he was 
picked up by his crew, and the vessel being on fire, 
all the Malabaris who were on it jumped into the sea ; 
but that did not prevent the two boats, which con- 
tained about forty Englishmen, being taken by the 
Malabaris ; and I was at breakfast at Surat 
with the English President, named Fremelin,^ when he 
received a letter from Captain Clerc, which informed 
him that he was enslaved by the Zamorin^ who is the 
most powerful King on the Malabar coast. This 
Prince would not leave them in the possession of these 
savages, because they were in danger of their lives, on 
account of upwards of 1200 widows whose husbands 
were left behind on the two occasions that the ship 
was on fire. He was enabled to appease them by 

1 In the year 1639, according to Mandelslo, Mr. Metwold, who was 
probably the same as Mr. Methold, whose visit to the diamond mines 
preceded Tavernier’s (see Book II, chap, xvi), resigned the President- 
ship at Surat, and was succeeded by Mr. Fremling {sic) {Travels into 
the East Indies^ English Trans., London, 1669, p. 71). 

2 Samorin in the original. The title of the Hindu King of Calicut, 



CHAP. XII 


DAMAN 


179 


promising them two piastres each ^ on account of the 
death of their husbands ; this amounted to above 
2400 dais, besides 4000 more required for the 
ransom of the Captain and the other Englishmen. 
The President immediately sent the money, and I 
saw them return, some of them in good health, and 
others broken down by fever. The Malabaris are 
such superstitious people that they touch nothing dirty 
or unclean with the right hand ; this they reserve for 
the left, allowing the nails on it, which serve as a 
comb, to grow, because they have long hair like 
women, which they twist round the head with a small 
cloth having three points tied above. 

Since I have mentioned Daman,” I shall describe 
in a few words how this town was besieged by Aurang- 
ZEB, who reigns at present. Many believe that ele- 
phants have a great effect in war ; this is undoubtedly 
true, but not always in the way which is imagined, for 
it often happens that, instead of ravaging the ranks of 
the enemy, they turn upon those who drive them, and 
who are expecting an altogether different result, as 
Aurangzeb experienced at the siege of this city. He 
had been twenty days before Daman, and had arranged 
to make the assault on a Sunday, believing that Christ- 
ians, like Jews, would not defend themselves on their 
Sabbath. The Commandant in Daman was an old 
soldier who had served in France, with three of his 

1 Piastre — 4s. 6d. ; the compensation for a husband was therefore 
about 9s. 

2 Damdn is situated in Lat. 22° 25' N., Long. 72® 53' E., and is 
about 100 miles north of Bombay. It was sacked by the Portuguese 
first in the year 1531, but was rebuilt by the natives, and was sub- 
sequently retaken in 1558 by the Portuguese, since which time up to 
the present it has remained in their possession. 



180 


TRAVELS IX IX’DIA 


BOOK I 


sons whom he had with him then. There were in 
the place 800 men, both gentlemen and other brave 
soldiers, who had come from many places to take part 
in the defence and show their valour. For although 
the army of the Great Mogul consisted of more than 
40,000 men, he was unable to prevent relief entering 
Daiiax* from the sea, because he had no vessels and 
could not invest the place except by land. On the 
Sunday that he intended to make the assault, the 
Governor of Daman, in accordance with what had 
been settled at the council of war, caused mass to be 
said immediately after midnight, and then ordered a 
sortie to be made with all the cavalry and a part of the 
infantry, who were at first to attack on the side where 
there were 200 elephants. They threw a quantity of 
fireworks among them, which frightened them so 
much in the darkness of the night that, without know- 
ing whither they went, and their drivers not being able 
to restrain them, they turned against the besiegers 
with such fury that in two or three hours half the 
army of Aurangzeb was destroyed, and three days 
after the siege was raised. Since that time this Prince 
has not wished to have anything more to do with 
Christians.^ 

I have made two journeys to Goa — the first was at 
the end of the year 1641, the second at the beginning 
of the year 1648. The first time I only remained 
seven days, and I returned to Surat by land. From 

^ Orientals have been known to complain of the want of observance 
by Europeans of the methods in warfare practised by themselves ; thus, 

I remember to have read somewhere, I think in one of Sir Victor 
Brooke s books, of the indignation in Malayan countries at their 
stockades being carried by assault, instead of being gradually approached 
with due deliberation by means of other stockades. 



CHAP. X!I 


BIJAPUR 


181 


Goa I went to Bicholly/ which is upon the mainland ; 
from thence to Bijapur, then to Golconda, Auranga- 
bad, and Surat. I could have gone to Surat without 
passing through Golconda, but I was obliged to go 
there on business. 

From Goa to Visapour (Bijapur-), which one generally 
accomplishes in eight days . -85 coss. 

„ Visapour to Golconda, which I did in 

nine days ..... 100 „ 
From Golconda to Aurangabad the stages are 
not so definite, for sometimes it takes sixteen, some- 
times twenty, and up to twenty-five. 

From Aurangabad to Surat one does the journey 
sometimes in twelve days, but sometimes one is not 
able to accomplish it in less than fifteen or sixteen. 

Bijapur is a large town which has nothing re- 
markable about it, either as regards public edifices 
or trade. The palace of the King is large enough 
indeed, but badly built, and what causes the ap- 
proach to it to be difficult is, that in the moat 
which surrounds it, and which is full of water, there 
are many crocodiles. The King of Bijapur has three 
good ports in his kingdom ; these are Rajapur,® 

1 This is the same as the Bicholi of Book III, chap, ix, where it is 
stated to be on the Bijapur-Goa frontier. At present Bicholim is the 
name of a district or subdivision of Goa territory. 

2 Bijapur, in Lat i6° 49' 45" N., and Long. 75° 46' 5" E., is on the 
site of the ancient Vijayapura, which was called Visapour by early 
European travellers. Recently it has been made the headquarters of 
the KaMdgi District. It was taken possession of by Aurangzeb after 
Tavernier’s time, namely in 1686. A full description of the ancient 
buildings which abound in Bijapur will be found in Fergusson’s History 
of Indian and Eastern Architecture. 

3 R^jdpur, chief town in the subdivision of the same name in the 
Ratndgiri District of Bombay. As a port it has deteriorated, and 
vessels of any size cannot come within 3 miles of the quay {Vide 



182 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


Dabhol/ and Kareputtux.- This last is the best of 
all, and the sea washes the foot of the mountain, 
where, close to land, there is from 14 to 15 fathoms 
of water. On the top of the mountain there is a fort 
with a supply of water, and although it is commanded 
by nothing and is by nature impregnable, since the 
King has made peace with the Portuguese he has 
abandoned it. 

Kareputtux is only five days journey from Goa to 
the north, and Raibagh,® where the King of Bijapur 
disposes of his pepper, is distant from Kareputtux 
about the same to the east. The King of Bijapur, 
like the King of Golconda, was a tributary of the 
Great Mogul, but is so no longer. 

This kingdom has been in trouble for some time 
on account of the rebellion of Nair Sivaji,* who was, 
on the establishment of the King of Bijapur, what we 
call in France, Captain of the Guards. He had been 
guilty of misconduct, for which the King arrested him 
and put him in prison, where he remained for a long 
time till he died. The young SivAji, his son, there- 
upon conceived such a strong hatred against the King 
that he became a chief of bandits, and as he was 

Imp, Gas.) Mandelslo describes it as one of the chief maritime cities of 
the kingdom of Konkan. 

^ Dabhol or Dabul, a port in the Konkan, in Lat. 17° 34'. It is 
described by Mandelslo as being on the river Kalewacka (Travels mto 
the East Indies^ Eng. Trans., London, 1669, p. 74). See for early 
references, Afiglo-Indian Glossa?y. 

2 Crapaten in the original, Kareputtun of Map. 

s Rabaque in the original ; Rdibagh, in Belgaum District. 

^ The original founder of the Maratha Confederacy was Shahji ; he 
was succeeded by his son, Nair Sivaji ; bora in 1627, died in 1680. 
By his valour and treachery he won for the Marathas the suzerainty of 
Southern India. See for his life, Grant Duffys History of the Mara- 
thaSy etc. 



CHAP, xn 


BIJAPUR 


183 


both courteous and liberal he had as many supporters 
as he wished for, both cavalry and infantry, and in a 
short time he got together an army, the soldiers, on 
the report of his liberality, coming to seek him from 
all sides. He was in a position to undertake some 
enterprise, when the King of Bijapur died without 
children, and it was thus that, without any great diffi- 
culty, he became master of a portion of the Malabar 
coast, including Rajapur, Rasigar,^ Kareputtuk, 
Dabhol, and other places. It is said that during the 
demolition of the fortifications of Rasigar he found 
immense treasure, and that it was with this that he 
supported his forces, by whom he was well served 
because they were always very well paid. 

Some years before the death of the King, the 
Queen, as she had no children, adopted a young 
boy, upon whom she had bestowed all her affection, 
and whom she brought up, as I have already said, 
with the greatest care in the doctrines of the sect 
of All On the death of the King she caused this 
adopted son to be declared King, and Sivaji, as he 
then possessed an army, continued the war, and for 
some time caused trouble to the regency of this Queen. 
But at last he made the first proposals for peace, and 
the treaty was concluded on the condition that he 
should retain all the country which he had taken, as a 
vassal of the King, who should receive half the revenues ; 
and the young King, having been established on the 
throne by this peace, the Queen, his mother, undertook 
the pilgrimage to Mecca, and I was at Ispahan when 
she passed on her return. 

Returning now to the journey to Go.a. When I 

^ Probably Rakshasagudda in Kanara District. 



184 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK 1 


left Surat for my second visit to Goa I embarked 
on a Dutch vessel called the “ Maestricht,” which car- 
ried me to Vexgurla, where I arrived on the iith 
of Januarj’ 1648. 

Vengurla^ is a large town, half a league from the 
sea, in the' kingdom of Bijapur. It is one of the best 
anchorages in all India, and it is where the Dutch 
came to get supplies on all occasions when they 
blockaded Goa, and they take in supplies there still for 
the vessels which they employ to trade in many parts 
of India, for there is at Vengurla excellent water 
and very good rice. This town is also much renowned 
on account of its cardamons^ which the orientals 
esteem as the best of spices, and is only found in this 
country, which causes this commodity to be very scarce 
and dear. Coarse cotton cloths for home consumption 
are made there too, as also a sort of matting which 
they call toti^ which is only used for wrapping up 
merchandise. 

Thus it is not so much for commerce as for supplies 
which can be got at "Vengurla, that the Dutch Com- 


1 Mingrela in the original is Vengurla, a town and seaport, head- 
quarters of a subdivision of the same name in the Ratndgiri District of 
Bombay. The Dutch settlement was founded in 1638; in 1660 the 
town was garrisoned by Sivaji, and in 1664 it was burnt by him in 
consequence of a revolt; it was again burnt by Aurangzeb in 1675. A 
British settlement was established there in 1772, and in 1812 the town 
was ceded to the British. 

- Cardamons — the dried fruit of EUttaria cardafnomum (Maton), 
a shrub belonging to the ginger family, much esteemed in the East 
as a spice, and largely exported to Europe for medicinal and other 
purposes. Called Cargamon in the original. 

® Tat or Tant^ perhaps, ue. the fibre known as jute, with which 
gunny bags are made. It is produced by Corchorus capularis (Linn). 
Or it may be that this refers to the coarser kinds of cotton, or to hemp, 
such as the so-called Deccani hemp produced by Hibiscus camiabinus. 



CHAP. .XII 


BLOCKADE OF GOA 


185 


pany maintain an establishment there. For, as I have 
said, not only all the vessels which come from Batavia, 
Japan, Bengal, Ceylon, and other places, and those 
which sail for Surat, the Red Sea, Hormuz, Bassora, 
etc., both in going and returning, anchor in the roads 
at Vengurla, but also wFen the Dutch are at war with 
the Portuguese, and are blockading the bar at Goa, 
where they ordinarily keep eight or ten vessels, they 
send their small boats to Vengurla to obtain provisions. 
For they hold the mouth of the river during eight 
months of the year, and nothing can enter Goa by sea 
during that time. It should be remarked in connection 
with this subject that this bar at Goa is closed for a 
part of the year by sand, cast up here by the south and 
west winds which precede the great rains, and to such 
an extent that there is only from a foot to a foot and 
a half of water for the passage of very small boats. 
But when the great rains begin to fall, the waters, which 
increase every hour, remove the sands and open the 
passage to large vessels. 



CHAPTER XIII 


Remarks tipon the present condition of ike town of Goa 

Goa is situated in latitude 15° 32", in an island of six or 
seven leagues circuit, upon the river Mandavi,^ which 
two leagues farther down discharges itself into the sea. 
The island abounds in corn and rice, and produces 
numerous fruits, as mangttes, ananas, figues di Adam, 
and cocos f but certainly a good pippin is worth more 
than all these fruits. All those who have seen both 
Europe and Asia thoroughly agree with me that the 
port of Goa,® that of Constantinople, and that of 
Toulon, are the three finest ports of our great Con- 
tinent. The town is very large, and its walls are 
of fine stone. The houses, for the most part, are 
superbly built, and this is particularly the case with the 
palace of the Viceroy. It has numerous rooms, and 

1 jMandoua in the original. It rises in the Parvar Ghat, in the 
District of Satdri, and is 38|- miles long. It is the most important 
stream in the territory. 

2 Mangoes, pine-apples, plantains, and cocoanuts. Most persons 
acquainted with Indian fruits will agree \vith Tavernier, though some 
might make an exception in favour of the mango. 

^ It is not perhaps necessary to say here more than that Goa, 
Daman, and Diu, are the sole remaining possessions of the Portuguese in 
India. A very interesting account of Goa will be found in the recently 
published Imperial Gazetteer of India^ and accounts of Goa as it was 
at the end of the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth centuries 
will be found in the recent issues of the Hakluyt Society, viz. Li7ischote7i 
and Pyrard de Laval. 



CHAP, xin 


GOA 


187 


in some of the halls and chambers, which are very 
large, you see many pictures representing separately 
the vessels which come from Lisbon to Goa, and those 
which leave Goa for Lisbon, each with the name of the 
vessel and that of the captain, and the number of guns 
with which it is armed. If the town were not so shut 
in by the mountains which surround it, it would without 
doubt be more numerously inhabited, and residence 
there would be more healthy. But these mountains 
prevent the winds from refreshing it ; this is the cause 
of great heat. Beef and pork afford the ordinary food 
of the inhabitants of Goa. They have also fowls, but 
few pigeons, and although they are close to the sea 
fish is scarce. As for confectionery, they have many 
kinds, and eat a large quantity. Before the Dutch 
had beaten down the power of the Portuguese in 
India, one saw at Goa nothing but magnificence and 
wealth, but since these late comers have deprived them 
of their trade in all directions, they have lost the sources 
of their gold and silver, and are altogether come down 
from their former splendour. On my first journey to 
Goa I saw people who had property yielding up to 
2000 4c%ts of income, who on my second journey came 
secretly in the evening to ask alms of me without 
abating anything of their pride, especially the women, 
who, coming in pallankeens, remained at the door of the 
house, whilst a boy, who attended them, came to present 
their compliments. You sent them then what you 
wished, or you took it yourself when you were curious 
to see their faces ; this happened rarely, because they 
cover all the head with a veil. Otherwise when one 
goes in person to give them charity at the door, they 
generally offer a letter from some religious person who 



188 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


recommends them, and makes mention of the wealth 
which the person formerly had, and the poverty into 
which she has fallen. Thus you generally enter into 
conversation with the fair one, and in honour bound 
invite her in to partake of refreshment, which lasts 
sometimes till the following day. 

If the Portuguese had not been so much occupied 
with guarding so many fortresses on land, and if, in 
the contempt they had for the Dutch at first, they had 
not neglected their affairs, they would not be to-day 
reduced to so low a condition. 

The Portuguese who go to India have no sooner 
passed the Cape of Good Hope than they all become 
Fidalgos^ or gentlemen, and add Dom to the simple 
name of Pedro or Jeronimo which they carried when 
they embarked ; this is the reason why they are com- 
monly called In derision “ Fidalgos of the Cape of 
Good Hope.” As they change in their status so also 
they change in their nature, and it may be said that 
the Portuguese dwelling in India are the most vindict- 
ive and the most jealous of their women of all the 
people in the world. As soon as they entertain the 
least suspicion about their women they will, without 
scruple, make away with them by poison or the dagger. 
When they have an enemy they never forgive him. 
If they are of equal strength and dare not come to a 
struggle, they have black slaves, who will blindly obey 
their master’s order to go and kill any one ; and this is 
done generally with a stroke of a dagger, or the shot 
of a blunderbuss, or by felling the man with a large 
stick of the length of a short pike which they are accus- 
tomed to carry. If it should happen that they spend 
^ Fidalgues in the original. 



CHAP. XIII 


GOA 


189 


too long a time in finding the man whom they wish to 
murder, and are unable to meet with him in the fields 
or in the town, then without the slightest regard for 
sacred things they slay him at the altar ; and I have 
myself seen two examples of this — one at Damax, and 
the other at Goa. Three or four of these black slaves 
having perceived some persons whose lives they w’-anted 
to take, and who were attending mass in a church, dis- 
charged blunderbusses at them through the windows, 
without reflecting w’hether they might not wound 
others who had no part in the quarrel. It happened 
so at Goa, and there were seven men slain near the 
altar, the priest who was saying mass having been 
seriously wounded. The law takes no cognisance of 
these crimes, because generally their authors are the 
first in the land. As for trials, they never come to an 
end. They are in the hands of the Kanarins^ who are 
natives of the country, who practice the professions of 
solicitors and procurators, and there are no people in 
the world more cunning and subtle. 

To return to the ancient power of the Portuguese 
in India, it is certain that if the Dutch had never come 
to India you would not have found to-day a scrap of 
iron in the majority of the houses of the Portuguese ; 
all would have been gold or silver, for it required them 
to make but two or three voyages to Japan, to the 
Philippines, to the Moluccas,^ or to China, to acquire 
riches, and to gain on their return five or six fold, and 
even up to tenfold on the more important articles. 
Private soldiers as well as governors and captains 

^ Canarms in the original, sometimes called Kdnarese, the inhabit- 
ants of Kdnara. See A7tglo-India7t Glossary ^ Art. Canara. 

2 Moluques in the original. 



100 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


acquired great wealth by trade. It is only the Viceroy 
who does not trade, or if he does, it is under the name 
of another ; and, moreover, he has a sufficient income 
without it. It was formerly one of the most splendid 
posts in the world for a noble to be Viceroy of Goa, 
and there are few monarchs who are able to bestow 
governments worth so much as are those which depend 
upon this Viceroy. The first of these Governments is 
that of Mozambique, and the appointment is for three 
years. In these three years the Governor makes a 
profit of 400,000 or 500,000 crowns,^ and sometimes 
more, if during the time they have no losses with the 
Cafres.® These Cafres are the black people who come 
from many quarters of Africa to obtain cotton goods 
and hardware from the Commandant, who dwells on 
the Rio de Saixe, and who is merely the agent of the 
Governor of Mozambique. These Cafres bring gold 
for the goods which they carry away, but if one of them 
happens to die when going or returning, what has been 
entrusted to him is lost beyond remedy. The Governor 
of Mozambique trades also with the Negroes who 
inhabit the length of the coast of Melinda,® and they 
generally pay for the goods which they take with ivory 
or with ambergris. 

On my last voyage to India the Governor of 
Mozambique, who returned to Goa after having com- 
pleted the three years of his government, had a parcel 
of ambergris which was alone worth about 200,000 
4 cus,^ without counting the gold and ivory, which 
amounted to a larger sum. 

^ from ;^9o, 000 to 1 12,500. 2 Or Kaffir. 

2 Melinda. An Arab town and kingdom on the east coast of Africa, 
from whence Vasco da Gama, on the occasion of his first voyage, struck 
across the sea to India. ^ ;,r4 5,000. 



CHAP. XIII 


HORMUZ 


191 


The second Government was formerly that of 
Malacca, on account of the dues which had to be paid 
there. For it is a strait where all the vessels which 
leave Goa for Japax, China, Cochixchixa, Java, 
Macassar, the Philippines, and other places must 
pass. They are indeed able to pursue another route 
along the western coast of the island of Sumatra, and 
either traverse the Strait of Sonde,^ or leave the island 
of Java to the north ; but when the vessels return to 
Goa they are required to show the free pass of the 
Malacca custom-house — this compels them to follow 
that route. 

The third Government was that of Hormuz," on 
account of its great trade, and of the dues which all 
vessels had to pay, whether entering or leaving the 
Persian Gulf. The Governor of Hormuz also levied 
considerable dues from those who were going to the 
island of Bahren to the pearl fishery, and if they did 
not obtain a passport from him he sent their vessels 
to the bottom by means of his£'a/easses.^ The Persians 
receive this tax at present with the English, who share 
a small part of it, as I have said in my accounts 
of Persia ; but although they treat the merchants 
roughly, nevertheless they do not derive from this 
revenue nearly as much as the Portuguese did. It is 
the same with the Dutch at Malacca, who experience 
difficulty in raising sufficient to pay for the garrison 
which they keep there. 

The fourth Government was that of Muscat, which 

^ Sunda Strait, to which the attention of the world was especially 
directed, in the year 1883, by the violent explosive eruption of the 
volcano of Krakatau or Krakatoa. ^ Hormuz, see p. 3. 

3 Galeasses, a form of galley. See Yule- Burnell, Anglo-Indian 
Glossary^ Art. Gallevat ; see also Index for references. 



192 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 1 


was also one with a considerable income. For all the 
vessels coming to India from the Persian Gulf, the 
Red Sea, and the coasts of Melinda have to make 
the point of ^Muscat, and generally take in water there. 
If any vessels did not come to an anchor, the Governor 
sent to claim the custom, which was 4 per cent, and 
if they made any resistance they ran the risk of being 
sent to the bottom by his galeasses. 

The fifth Government was that of the island of 
Ceylon, to which were subject all the places which the 
Portuguese had both on the coast of Malabar and on 
the Gulf of Bengal and other parts of India, and the 
least of these petty Governments yielded 10,000 dcus 
per annum.^ 

Besides these five principal Governments which 
were at the disposition of the Viceroy, he had also the 
patronage of a number of offices in Goa and other 
towns of India. The day upon which he makes his 
entry into Goa, his Captain of the Guards receives 
nearly 4000 dcus^ of profit. The three offices of 
Engineer Major, of Inspector of the Fortresses, and of 
Grand Master of Artillery yielded 20,000 pardos^ per 
anmim, and the pardo is worth 27 sols of our money. 
The Portuguese were then all rich — the nobles on 
account of the governments and other offices, and the 

1 2 ^500. 

^ Pardao^ a Portuguese name for a gold coin originally, afterwards 
applied to silver coins. If the sol may be taken as representing *9 
of a penny (see p. 34), then the pardao of Tavernier’s time was 2s., 
being less in value than the rupee of 30 sols^ which has been shown to 
have been 2s. 3d. Kelly, in the U 7 iiversal Ca^nbist, gives the value of 
the pardao at 2s. 6d., and Colonel Yule estimates it at the same figure in 
1676, vide Anglo-Indian Glossary^ Supplement^ p. 840. This latter 
value would, however, proportionally raise the sol to upwards of a 
penny in value, and the rupee consequently to more than 2s. pd. 



CHA.?. X!:i 


MERCHANTS AT HORMUZ 


193 


merchants by the trade which they engaged in, before 
the English and Dutch came to cut the ground from 
under their feet. During the time they held Hormuz 
they did not allow any merchant to travel to India by 
sea, and all were therefore compelled to take the 
route by land through Kandahar. When the Turkish, 
Persian, Arab, INIoscovite, Polish, and other merchants 
arrived at Bandar-Abbas, they constituted but one united 
body, and from it four of the most experienced were 
deputed to go and see all the different kinds of mer- 
chandise, and to ascertain the quality and price. 

After having made their report to the others the 
price was settled and the goods removed, which were 
then distributed to each nation in proportion to the 
number of merchants who had come from these different 
countries. It is the custom throughout Asia that 
nothing is sold except in the presence of a broker, and 
each class of goods has its own separate one. These 
brokers pay the money to those who have sold, and 
receive it from those who have bought ; there are 
certain classes of goods for which the fee due to 
them is i per cent, others for which it amounts to 
i^ and even to 2 per cent. The Portuguese then 
in those times made great profits, and suffered no 
losses from bankruptcies. As to the pirates, the 
Viceroy took effectual steps, for when the rains were 
over and the season for embarkation had arrived, 
according to the number of vessels laden with goods, 
he gave a sufficient number of galiotes ^ to escort them 


^ This name is derived from Galeota of the Portuguese. In India 
it took the form Gallevaf, which has been Anglicised into Jolly-boat, 
as is explained by Colonel Yule and Mr. Burnell in the Anglo-Bzdzan 
Glossary . The Calcutta boatmen pronounce it Jallybote. See p. 1 9 1 . 


VOL. I 


G 



194 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


to sea for from 25 to 30 leagues — the Malabaris not 
going farther from the coast than 15 or 20. The 
captains of the galiotes and even the marines did 
some little trade during the voyage, and as they paid 
no customs, they were able to acquire something to 
maintain themselves in comfort during the rains, when 
they had to remain in quarters. There was also a good 
arrangement for the military, by which the soldiers 
were promoted, for all those who had come from 
Portugal, after nine years of service, received some 
appointment at sea or on land, and if they did not 
wish to accept of it they were permitted to travel as 
merchants. If there happened to be among them any 
one of intelligence, he did not fail to acquire a fortune, 
having all the credit he could desire, and he found numi- 
bers of people very willing to employ their money, giving 
it to him on the chance of 100 per cent profit on his 
return from a journey. If the vessel was lost, those 
who had lent lost their money or their goods, but, when 
it arrived safely, for one icu they received three or four. 

The people of the country called Kanarese do not 
hold any offices under the Portuguese save in reference 
to law as agents, solicitors, or scribes, and they are 
kept in subjection. If one of these Kanarese or black 
men struck a white or European, there was no pardon 
for him, and he had to have his hand cut off. Both 
Spaniards and Portuguese, especially the Spaniards, 
use them as receivers and men of business, and in 
the islands of Manilla or Philippines there are blacks 
so rich that some of them have offered the Viceroy 
up to 20,000 croisats ^ for permission to wear hose and 

^ Croisart (of Genoa), so called on account of the cross on it ; it 
was worth about 6 s. 6 d., and 20,000 =;^ 6 soo. 



CHAP. -Xin 


IDOLATERS AT GOA 


195 


shoes — this was not allowed them.^ You see certain 
of these blacks with bare feet, though followed by thirty 
slaves, and superbly clad ; and if the Portuguese had 
been pleased to allow them to equip vessels, and to 
appoint the captains and other officers according to 
their own wishes, the former would not have made so 
many conquests in India, or at least would not have 
made them so easily. 

These blacks have much intelligence and are good 
soldiers, and the clerics have assured me that they 
learn more in the colleges in six months than the 
Portuguese children do in a j^ear, whatever the science 
may be to which they apply themselves.® It is for 
this reason that the Portuguese keep them down. 

The natives of the country about Goa are idolaters, 
and do homage to many kinds of idols, of which I 
have given likenesses in this book,® saying that the idols 
resemble those who have done good works in former 
times, to whom they should offer homage by adoring 
their portraits. There are many of these idolaters who 
worship monkeys, and also, in many parts of India, as I 
have elsewhere said, they have built pagodas, which have 
been endowed in order to feed a certain number, besides 
others from outside, which come twice a week in order 
to obtain food.^ In a village of the island of Salsette,® 

^ The shoe question, we see, was in these early times as in latter 
days a burning one. 

2 The same may be said of the native youth of the present, who 
far outstrip those of European parentage in the acquirement of learning 
before man’s estate is reached. 

^ These portraits are not to be found in any of the editions of 
Tavernier with which I am acquainted. ^ See p. 104. 

^ This is apparently not the island north of Bombay called Salsette, 
famous for its caves in the trap rock, and for the possession of a tooth 
of Buddha, but a district of the same name in Goa territory. 



196 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


there was a pagoda in which the idolaters kept, in a 
kind of tomb made of silver, the bones and nails of a 
monkey which, they said, had rendered great services 
to their gods by the diligence with which he conveyed 
news and advice from one to the other,^ w'hen per- 
secuted by some hostile princes, even to the extent of 
traversing the sea by swimming. People came from 
many parts of India in procession to this idol to make 
offerings to this pagoda ; but the clergy of Goa, and 
especially the Inquisitor, went one day to carry away 
this tomb and brought it to Goa, where it remained 
some time on account of the dispute which it gave 
rise to between the ecclesiastics and the people. For 
when the idolaters offered to give a large sum to ransom 
their relics, the people were of opinion that it should 
be accepted, because they said it could be used to make 
war against their enemies or for assisting the poor ; 
but the clergy held a contrary opinion, and maintained 
that for no reason whatever should this idolatry be per- 
mitted. At length the Archbishop and the Inquisitor 
of their own authority removed the tomb, and, having 
put it on a vessel which went out about 20 leagues 
from land, it was thrown into the sea. They would 
have burned it, but that the idolaters would have been 
able to collect the ashes, which would have served as 
material for some new superstition. 

There are in Goa numbers of people connected 
with the Church, and besides the Archbishop and his 
clergy you see Dominicans, Augustins, Cordeliers, 
Barefoot Carmelites, Jesuits, and Capuchins, who are 
like the Recollects, with two houses of nuns, of which 
the Augustins are the Directors. The Carmelites, who 

1 This refers to Hammidn and the traditions of the Rdindyana, 



CHAP. XIII 


THE JESUITS AT GOA 


197 


are the last comers, are the best situated of all, and, if 
they are a little removed from the heart of the town, 
they have otherwise the advantages of enjoying fresh 
air, and of having the most healthy house in all Goa. 
It is on a fine elevation, where the wind blows about 
it, and is well built, with two galleries, one above the 
other. The Augustins, who were the first comers in 
Goa, were well situated at the base of a small elevation, 
'their church being on the main street with a handsome 
square in front. But the Jesuits, having built a house, 
begged the Augustins to sell them the elevated ground, 
which was then unoccupied, under pretext of wishing 
to make a garden for the recreation of their scholars ; 
and, having at length purchased it, they built a splendid 
college, which shut out the convent of the Augustins, 
and prevented it from receiving any fresh air. They 
have had great disputes with one another over this 
matter, but the Jesuits have at length gained their case. 

The Jesuit Fathers are known at Goa by the name 
of Paulists, on account of their grand church dedicated 
to St. Paul. They do not wear hats nor three-cornered 
caps as in Europe, but a kind of cap which resembles, 
in form, a hat from which the brim has been removed, 
and it is somewhat like the caps of the slaves of the 
Grand Seigneur, which I have described in my account 
of the Seraglio. They have five houses in Goa, which 
are, the College of St. Paul, the Seminary, the Monks’ 
House, the Noviciate, and the Bon Jesus. The 
paintings of the ceiling of this last church are admir- 
able. In the year 1663 the greater part of the College 
was burnt by an accident which happened in the night, 
and it cost them near 60,000 dcus to rebuild it. 

The hospital at Goa "was formerly renowned 



198 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


throughout India ; and, as it possessed a considerable 
income, sick persons were very well attended to. 
This was still the case when I first went to Goa ; 
but, since this hospital has changed its managers, 
patients are badly treated, and many Europeans who 
enter it do not leave it except to go to the tomb. It 
is but a short time since the secret of treating by 
frequent bleedings has been discovered ; and it is 
practiced according to need up to thirty or forty times, 
as long as bad blood comes, as was done to myself 
on one occasion when at Surat ; and as soon as the 
bad blood is removed, which is like an aposthume, the 
sick person is out of danger. Butter and meat are to 
him as poison, and if he eats of them he puts his life in 
danger. Formerly some small ragouts were made for 
the convalescent, but they must nowadays content 
themselves with beef-tea and a basin of rice. Gener- 
ally all the poor people who begin to recover their 
health cry out from thirst, and beg for a little water to 
drink ; but those who wait upon them, who are at present 
blacks or Mestifs ^ — avaricious persons, and without 
mercy — do not give a drop without receiving some- 
thing, that is to say, unless some money is placed in 
their hands, and to give colour to this wickedness they 
give it in secret, saying that the physician forbids it. 
Sweets and confectionery are not wanting, but this 
does not contribute much to the establishment of health, 
which in a hot country rather requires nourishing 
food. 

I forgot to make a remark upon the frequent bleed- 
ings in reference to Europeans — namely, that in order 
to recover their colour and get themselves into perfect 

^ For Mesticos = Half-castes (see p. 206). 



CHAP, SHI 


A DISAGREEABLE DOSE 


199 


health, it is prescribed for them to drink for twelve 
days three glasses of . . . — one in the morning, one 
at midday, and one in the evening ; but, as this drink 
cannot but be very disagreeable, the convalescent 
swallows as little of it as possible, however much he 
may desire to recover his health. This remedy has 
been learnt from the idolaters of the country, and 
whether the convalescent makes use of it or not, he 
is not allowed to leave the hospital till the twelve 
days have expired during which he is expected to take 
this drink. 


VOL. I 


O 



CHAPTER XIV 


Concerning what the Author did dttring his sojotirn at 
Goa on his last joiirney in 1648. 

Two days before my departure from Vengurla for Goa 
I wrote to M. de Saint Amant, the chief engineer, 
to beg him to arrange to have an armed boat sent 
for me, on account of the Malabaris who infest these 
coasts ; this he immediately did. I departed from 
Vengurla on the 20th of January 1648, and arrived at 
Goa on the 21st. As it was late, I postponed till the 
morrow going to pay my respects to the Viceroy Don 
Philippe de Mascarehnas, who had formerly been 
Governor of Ceylon. He received me well, and during 
nearly two months which I spent at Goa, on five or six 
occasions he sent a gentleman to conduct me to the 
PowDERHOusE, outside the town, where he very often 
resided. He took pleasure in showing me guns and 
other things of that nature, regarding which he asked my 
opinion ; and, among several presents which I made to 
him on my arrival, he was specially pleased with a pistol 
very curiously and richly decorated. When passing 
Aleppo, the French Consul had given it to me as a pre- 
sent, its fellow having been unfortunately lost. It was a 
present which the nation intended to make to the Pasha, 
who would have been able to boast the possession of a 
pair of the most beautiful and best made pistols in all 



CHAP. XIV 


THE INQUISITION AT GOA 


201 


Asia. The Viceroys of Goa do not permit any one, 
whoever he may be — not even their own children — to 
sit at their table ; but in the hall where they take their 
meals there is a small space partitioned off, where covers 
are laid for the principal officers, as is done in the Courts 
of the Princes of Germany. On the following day I went 
to pay a visit to the Archbishop, and I set apart the 
day after for that which I owed to the Inquisitor. But 
when I went to his house he sent one of his gentlemen 
to say that he much regretted that he was unable to 
see me upon that day on account of the despatches 
which he was preparing for Portugal, and which were 
waited for by two vessels that were about to sail. 
Nevertheless, if it was in reference to a matter of con- 
science, he would leave everything in order to speak to 
me. Having informed the gentleman that I had only 
come to pay my respects, and wishing to withdraw at 
once, he begged me to tarry a moment ; and after he 
had reported what I had said to him to the Inquisitor, 
he returned to assure me, on the part of his master, 
that the latter was much obliged to me, and that as 
soon as the vessels had started he would send to let me 
know, so that we might have our interview at leisure. 

As soon as the vessels had left, the same gentleman 
came, on the part of the Inquisitor, to tell me that the 
latter would expect me at about two or three p.m. in 
the house of the Inquisition, for he dwelt in another, 
and both houses are very magnificent. I did not fail 
to be at the place indicated at the prescribed hour ; and 
on my arrival a page appeared, who conducted me into 
the great hall, where, after I had walked up and down 
for about a quarter of an hour, an officer came to con- 
duct me into the room where the Inquisitor was. After 



202 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


having passed through two grand galleries and some 
suites of rooms, I entered a small chamber where the 
Inquisitor awaited me, seated at the end of a large 
table, made like a billiard table, and both the table 
and all the furniture of the room were covered with 
green cloth brought from England. 

As soon as I entered he told me that I was welcome, 
and after I had presented my compliments he asked 
me what my religion was. I replied that I professed 
the Protestant religion. He then asked me whether 
my father and mother were also of the same religion, 
and having replied that they were, he repeated that I 
was welcome, calling out to some persons who were 
close by that they might come in. At the same moment 
a corner of the curtain was lifted, and I caught sight of 
ten or twelve persons who were in a small chamber at the 
side. The first who entered were two Augustin friars, 
who were followed by two Dominicans, two Barefoot 
Carmelites, and some other ecclesiastics, to whom the 
Inquisitor straightway explained who I was, that I had 
no forbidden books with me, and that, being aware of 
the order to that effect, I had left my bible at Vengurla. 
We conversed together for more than two hours con- 
cerning many things, and particularly regarding my 
travels, all the company telling me that they enjoyed 
hearing the recital. Three days afterwards the Inqui- 
sitor sent to invite me to dine with him at a fine house 
which is situated at half a league from the town, and be- 
longs to the Barefoot Carmelites. It is one of the most 
beautiful buildings in India, and I shall relate in a few 
words how these monks acquired possession of it. There 
was in Goa a nobleman whose father and grandfather 
had made much by trade, who built this house, which 



CHAP. XIV 


A LEPER’S WILL 


203 


might be regarded as a splendid palace. He did not 
desire to marry, and, not caring for anything but religion, 
he was most frequently with the Augustines, for whom 
he manifested such affection that he made a will by 
which he bequeathed them all his wealth, provided that 
on his death they would inter him on the right side of the 
great altar, where they were to make him a splendid 
tomb. According to common report this gentleman 
was a leper — a report which some persons diligently 
spread, seeing that he had given all his goods to the 
Augustines. It was said that the place on the right 
side of the altar was for a Viceroy only, and that it was 
not proper to place a leper there, to which the public 
generally and some even of the Augustines assented. 
Some Fathers of the convent having gone to speak to 
him in order to beg him to select some other place in the 
Church, the gentleman was so annoyed by the sugges- 
tion that he never returned to the Augustines, and 
went to his devotions with the Barefoot Carmelites, 
who received him with open arms, and accepted the 
conditions which the others had refused. 

He did not live long after he had made friends 
with these monks, who buried him with magnificence, 
and succeeded to all his property, including this superb 
mansion, where we were splendidly entertained with 
music during the repast. 

I remained at Goa from the 21st of January to the 
nth of March, on the evening of which day I quitted 
it, after taking leave of the Viceroy. I also begged 
leave for the departure of a French gentleman named 
Du Belloy, which was granted me ; but by his im- 
prudence, this gentleman, who had not told me why 
he was at Goa, had a very narrow escape of being 



204 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK I 


brought back, and I of being carried along with him, 
before the Inquisition. The following is the way in 
which he came to India, and his history as he told it 
to me : He had left his father’s house in order to 
visit Holland, where, having spent more than he 
ought, and not meeting any one who would lend him 
money, he resolved to go to India. He enlisted under 
the Dutch Company as a common soldier, and arrived 
at Batavia at the time when the Dutch were fighting 
with the Portuguese in the island of Ceylon. As 
soon as he had arrived he was included among the 
recruits who were being sent to that island, and the 
General of the Dutch troops, seeing a reinforcement 
of brave soldiers commanded by a French captain 
named St. Amant, full of courage and experience, 
resolved to lay siege to Negumbo,^ one of the towns 
in the island of Ceylon. Three successive assaults 
were made upon it, in which all the Frenchmen bore 
themselves bravely, especially St. Amant and Jean de 
Rose, who were both wounded. 

The Dutch General, recognising in these two, men 
of courage, promised them as a reward that if Negumbo 
were taken one of them would be made Governor of it. 
The place having been taken the General kept his 
promise to St. Amant, but the news of it having 
been sent to Batavia, a young man who had only 
recently arrived from Holland, and who was a relative 
of the General, was appointed Governor of Negumbo, 
to the prejudice of St. Amant, and came, bringing 
orders from the Council at Batavia to displace him. 
St. Amant, finding himself thus treated, deserted with 

^ Negumbe in the original, it is Negumbo, a town and fort about 20 
miles north of Colombo in Ceylon. 



CHAP. XIV 


DOM PHILIPPE DE MASCAREGNAS 


205 


fifteen or twenty soldiers, the majority of whom 
were French, and among them MM. Belloy, Des 
Marests, and Jean de Rose, and went over with 
them to the Portuguese army. This small number 
of brave men gave courage to the Portuguese, who 
advanced to the attack of Negumbo, from whence 
they had been driven, and took it at the second 
assault. At this time Dom Philippe de Mascareh- 
NAS was Governor of the island of Ceylon, and of all 
the places dependent on Portugal. He lived in the 
town of Colombo, and having received letters from 
Goa which informed him of the death of the Viceroy, 
with an invitation from the Council and all the nobility 
to take the vacant place, before leaving he desired to 
see St. Amant and those whom he had brought over 
in order to reward them. Dom Philippe was a gallant 
gentleman, and when he had seen them he resolved to 
take them with him to Goa, either because he thought 
he would have there the best opportunity of promoting 
them, or because he liked to have with him a body 
of resolute men on account of the Malabaris, who 
were lying in wait for him with about forty vessels, 
whereas he had but twenty-two. When near Cape 
Comorin the wind became so contrary, and so violent 
a tempest arose, that the whole fleet was dispersed, and 
many vessels were unhappily lost. Those who were 
in that of Dom Philippe exercised all their skill to 
bring it to land, but seeing that they were unable to 
accomplish their object, and that it was breaking up, 
St. Amant, with five or six others of his companions, 
which number included Des Marests, Du Belloy, and 
Jean de Rose, threw themselves into the sea with 
cords and pieces of wood, and managed so well that 



20 G 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK I 


they saved Dom Philippe, and they themselves also 
escaped together with him. To shorten this long storj', 
on their arrival at Goa, Dom Philippe, as soon as he 
had made his entry as Viceroy, gave to St. Amaxt 
the post of Grand Master of Artillery and Inspector- 
General of all the fortresses belonging to the Portu- 
guese in India. He subsequently brought about his 
marriage to a young girl, with whom he received a 
fortune of 20,000 ^cus. Her father was an Englishman, 
who had quitted the service of the Company, and had 
married the illegitimate daughter of a Viceroy of Goa. 
As for Jean de Rose, he asked the Viceroy to send 
him back to Colombo, where, by his permission, he 
married a young Mestive'^ widow, who brought him 
a large fortune. Dom Philippe, who had a very high 
opinion of Des Marests, having witnessed the gallant 
acts which he performed, and the several wounds 
which he received at the siege of Negumbo, made him 
Captain of his bodyguard, which was the best office 
at the Court. It may be added that he was especially 
indebted for his own life to him, Des Marests being 
the one who saved him from the wreck by taking him 
on his shoulders. Du Belloy asked to be permitted 
to go to Macao, which was granted to him. He had 
heard that some of the nobility retired thither after 
having acquired fortunes by trade, that they received 
strangers well, and that they loved gambling, which 
was Du Belloy’s own strongest passion. He re- 
mained two years at Macao, greatly enjoying himself, 
and when his cash ran low these nobles lent him some 
willingly. One day, after winning about 6000 ^cus,^ and 
going back to play, he had the misfortune to lose all, 

1 Mestive, for Mestigos, half-castes, see p, 198. 2 ^1350. 



CHAP. XIV 


THE INQUISITION AT GOA 


207 


and a considerable sum besides, which his friends had 
lent him. When he realised his loss, and that no one 
was willing to lend him more, he began to swear at a 
picture which was in the room, and which represented 
some holy subject, saying, in the rage common to the 
majority of players, that this picture which was before 
his eyes was the cause of his loss, and that if it had 
not been there he would have won. Forthwith the 
Inquisitor was informed, for in all the towns in India 
which belong to the Portuguese there is one of these 
officials, whose power, however, is limited, for he has 
only authority to arrest the person who has said or done 
anything against religion, to examine the witnesses, 
and to send the offender with the informations by the 
first ship which starts for Goa. There the Inquisitor- 
General has the power to acquit him or to condemn 
him to death. Du Belloy was accordingly put on 
a small vessel of ten or twelve guns with his feet in 
irons, while the captain was warned that he should 
watch him well, and would be personally answerable 
for him. But as soon as they got to sea, the 
captain, who was a gallant man, and knew that Du 
Belloy was of good family, caused his irons to be 
removed, and even made him eat at his table, taking 
care to supply him with clean linen and the clothes 
necessary for the voyage, which lasted some forty 
days. 

They arrived at Goa on the 19th of February 
1649, and the vessel had scarcely reached port when 
St. Amant came on board on the part of the Viceroy, 
both to receive the letters and to get news of what was 
going on in China. His surprise was great on seeing 
Du Belloy in this condition, and learning that the 



208 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


captain would not allow him to land till he had made him 
over to the Inquisitor. Nevertheless, as St. Amaxt 
then possessed great authority, by force of his entreaties 
he obtained permission from the captain for Du Belloy 
to go with him to the town. Du Belloy purposely 
again put on his old clothes, which were all in rags 
and full of vermin, and St. Amant, who knew that it 
would not do to play with the Inquisition, went first 
to present him to the Inquisitor, who, seeing this 
gentleman in so poor a condition, took some pity on 
him, and allowed him the run of the town as his prison 
till he should see what had been written regarding him, 
on condition that he should return when required to do 
so. After these proceedings St. Am ant brought Du 
Belloy to my lodging, as I was on the point of going 
out to see the Bishop of Mire (i.e. Myra in Lycia), 
whom I had formerly known at Constantinople when 
he was guardian of the Franciscans of Gal.yta. I 
asked them to wait my return for a while, and to dine 
with me, which they did, after which I offered board 
and lodging to M. du Belloy, who stayed with me, 
and I ordered three suits of clothes and whatever linen 
was necessary for him. I remained eight or ten days 
longer at Goa, during which it was impossible for me 
to induce M. du Belloy to put on the new clothes. 
But he would never tell me why, whilst from day to 
day he promised me to put them on. Being on the 
point of departure I told him I was about to take leave 
of the Viceroy, and he besought me earnestly to try to 
obtain permission for him to go too. I did so willingly 
and successfully. We left the same evening in the 
vessel in which I had come, and immediately M. du 
Belloy began taking off his old clothes and putting 



CHAP. XIV 


THE INQUISITION AT GOA 


209 


on the new ones, threw his old ones into the sea, and 
continued swearing against the Inquisition without my 
knowing the reason, for I was still unaware of what had 
passed. In my amazement at hearing him swear in 
this manner, I told him that he was not yet out of the 
hands of the Portuguese, and that he and I, with my 
five or six servants, would never be able to defend 
ourselves against the forty men who rowed our 
boat. I asked him why he swore in this way against 
the Inquisition, and he replied that he would tell me 
the whole story from beginning to end ; this he did 
when we reached Vengurla, where we arrived at 
eight o’clock in the morning. Having landed, we found 
some Dutchmen with the Commander, who had come 
to the seashore to eat oysters and drink Spanish wine. 
They asked me at once who it was whom I had with 
me. I told them that he was a gentleman, who, having 
come with the French Ambassador to Portugal, had 
embarked for India with four or five others, who were 
still at Goa, and that, as neither his residence in the 
town nor the manners of the Portuguese were pleas- 
ing to him, he had asked me to help him to get back 
to Europe. Three or four days later I bought him 
a country mount, i.e. an ox, to enable him to go to 
Surat, and I gave him an attendant to serve him, with 
a letter to the Capuchin, Father Zenon, begging the 
Father to give him, through my broker, lo dcus a 
month for his expenditure, and to obtain from the 
English President permission for him to embark on 
the first opportunity. This, however, did not come 
about, for Father Zenon took him back to Goa when 
he went thither on the business of Father Ephraim 
his comrade, of which I shall speak in the next chapter, 

VOL. I P 



210 


TRAVELS IX IXDIA 


BOOK I 


Father Zexox thought, no doubt, that Du Bello Y,^ by 
showing himself to the Inquisition and asking pardon, 
would obtain it easily. It is true that he did obtain 
it, but only after being two years in the Inquisition, 
and coming out of it wearing a brimstone-coloured 
shirt with a great St. Andrew’s cross on the front 
of it. He had with him another Frenchman called 
iMaitre Louys de Bar -sur- Seine, w-ho was treated 
in the same fashion, and they both had to go in pro- 
cession with those who were led to torture. M. du 
Belloy had done ill in returning to Goa, and did 
much worse in showing himself at Vengurla, where 
the Dutch, who had learnt that he had previously 
escaped from their service, by the advices which they 
had received from the Commander at Surat, seized him 
immediately, and placed him on a vessel which was 
going to Batavia. They said that they had sent him 
to the General of the Company to be disposed of as 
that officer should think proper. But I know on good 
authority that when the vessel was a short distance 
from land they put this poor gentleman into a sack 
and threw it into the sea. This, then, was the end 
of M. DU Belloy, but that of M. des Marests had 
nothing tragical about it, as will be seen from his 
history, which I shall relate in a few Avords. 

M. DES Marests was a gentleman of Dauphin^, 
from the neighbourhood of Loriol, who, having fought 
a duel, and having killed his man, fled into Poland, 
where he did some gallant acts, which secured for him 
the esteem and affection of the General of the Polish 

1 M. de la Boullaye le Gouz is referred to on p. 224 as the person 
who accompanied Father Zenon to Goa, but the occasion was appar- 
ently different from this one. 



CHAP. XIV 


M. DES MARESTS 


211 


army. At this time the Grand Seigneur kept two 
Polish Princes as prisoners at Constantinople in the 
Castle of the Seven Towers, and this General, knowing 
the valour and skill of Des Marests, who was enter- 
prising, and a good engineer into the bargain, proposed 
to him to go to Constantinople to see if by any means 
he could manage to get the Princes out of prison. Des 
Marests accepted this commission very willingly, and 
he would no doubt have had the good fortune to 
succeed if he had not been discovered by certain Turks, 
who accused him of having been seen examining the 
Seven Towers with too much attention, and with pencil 
in hand making a plan in order to accomplish after- 
wards some evil design. It had been sufficient to 
cause the destruction of this gentleman if M. de Cesi, 
the Ambassador of France, had not so arranged that 
the matter was promptly stifled by a present (this is in 
Turkey the most sovereign remedy in such trouble- 
some matters), and by representing that he was a 
young gentleman who was travelling for his pleasure, 
and proposed going to Persia by the first opportunity 
he could meet with. It was not, however, the intention 
of the SiEUR DES Marests to go farther, and he was 
waiting his opportunity to return to Poland after 
having done all that was possible to get the Princes 
out of prison ; but to escape from the hands of the 
Turks it was necessary to say that he was going to 
Persia, and to act in such a manner that he did in 
fact go thither. 

The Grand Seigneur had resolved never to give 
liberty to these Princes, but they were lucky enough at 
length to find means of winning over a young Turk, 
son of the Captain of the Seven Towers, to whom the 



212 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


father generally entrusted the keys to open and close 
the doors of the prison. On the night destined for 
their flight this young man pretended to lock certain 
doors, but left their padlocks open, afterwards taking 
the keys to his father ; but he did not dare to do the 
same to the two principal doors — at one of which the 
captain with the main guard was stationed — for fear of 
being discovered. This young man, who was entirely 
devoted to these Princes, having well considered his 
plans, had made timely provision of rope-ladders in 
order to get over two of the walls. But for that pur- 
pose it was necessary to have some correspondence 
outside, and also some one inside who shared this 
important secret. As the severest rigour was not 
observed towards these Princes they were allowed to 
receive some dishes from the kitchen of the French 
Ambassador, and the groom of the kitchen, who was in 
the plot, having sent them on different occasions some 
pastry filled with ropes, they made ladders to aid them 
in their escape. The matter was so well planned and 
so well carried out that it succeeded, and the young 
Turk followed the Princes into Poland, where he 
became a .Christian, and received an ample reward 
in appointments and money. It was the same in 
proportion with the others who had aided in the escape 
of the Princes, and the latter, when they reached 
Poland, made ample acknowledgment of the services 
which had been rendered to them by each individual. 

In due course M. des Marests arrived at Ispahan, 
and having first addressed himself to the Rev. 
Capuchin Fathers, they brought him to my lodging, 
where I offered him a room, with a place at my table. 
He made some sojourn at Ispahan, during which he 



CHAP. XIV 


THE LADIES’ BATH 


213 


made acquaintance with the English and Dutch, who 
manifested a high regard for him, as he well deserved. 
But it happened one day that, his curiosity having made 
him undertake too rash an adventure, he nearly brought 
destruction on himself, and with himself on all the 
Franks at Ispahan. Near the caravansardi where we 
lodged is a large bath to which men and women go by 
turns on certain days, and where the Queen of Bijapur, 
during her sojourn at Ispahan on her return from 
Mecca,’- was very fond of going to talk with the wives 
of the Franks, because the garden of her house was 
in contact with the bath where they generally went. 
The SiEUR DES Marests, passionately desiring to see 
what passed there amongst these women, satisfied his 
curiosity by means of a crevice which he had observed 
in the roof of the bath, where he went sometimes ; and 
mounting from outside upon this roof, which was flat, 
and such as I have described in my accounts of the 
Seraglio and of Persia — by a hidden way which 
adjoined the caravansardi where we were dwelling, 
he lay down on his stomach and saw by this crevice, 
without being himself perceived, that which he so 
much desired to behold. He went in this way ten or 
twelve times, and not having been able to restrain 
himself from telling me one day, I warned him against 
returning, and told him that he was risking his own 
destruction, and with himself the destruction of all the 
Franks. But instead of profiting by my advice, he 
went again two or three times, and on the last occasion 
he was discovered by one of the women of the bath, 
who had charge of the sheets, and who in order to dry 
them upon the poles which project from the roof, had 

1 See p. 183. 




214 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK r 


ascended by a small ladder which led to the top. 
Seeing a man thus stretched out she seized his hat and 
began to cry aloud ; but the Sieur des Marests, to 
extricate himself from so dangerous a scrape, and to 
hinder the woman from making more noise, made a 
sign to her to be silent, and promptly placed in her 
hands two tomans^ which by good luck he had with 
him out of the money which I had given him for his 
expenses. When he returned to the caravansardi I saw 
he had a scared appearance, and concluding that some- 
thing unpleasant had happened to him, I pressed him 
to say what it was. He told me with some reluctance, 
and at length admitted that he had been discovered by 
this woman, but had sought to silence her with money. 
He had no sooner made this confession than I told 
him he must at once take flight, and that the danger 
■ was very much greater than he supposed. The Dutch 
Commander, whom it was desirable to inform how the 
matter had occurred, in order to Apply a quick remedy 
to an evil of which we feared the too prompt results, 
advised his immediate departure, and we gave him a 
mule and as much money as he required to enable him 
to reach Bandar,^ and to embark there on the first 
vessel which sailed for Surat. I gave him a letter of 
recommendation to the English President, who was a 
friend of mine, and whom I asked to advance him up 
to 200 dcus if he should require them. I spoke very 
well of him in my letter, and I made mention of the 
offer which the Dutch Commander had made him at 
Ispahan, to send him to Batavia with letters to the 

/ : 9s. ; see p. 24. The toman was not a coin, as might 

be inferred from this, but a money of account. 

2 I.e. Bandar Abbds, or Gombroon ; see p. 3. 



CHAP. XIV 


M. DES MARESTS 


215 


General, who would not fail to give him employment 
according to his merit ; and, as a matter of fact, at this 
time, the Dutch being at war with the Portuguese in 
the island of Ceylon, a man of courage and intelli- 
gence like M. DES Marests would be very useful 
to them. He was therefore strongly pressed to 
accept employment from them, and they showed him 
great kindness, caressed him much, and made him 
presents during his sojourn at Ispahan. But at length 
he told them that, not being of their religion, he felt 
some scruple in serving them against the Portuguese, 
and that it was the only reason that prevented him 
from accepting the offers which they so kindly made 
him. The letters which I gave him for the English 
President contained all this account ; and the Sieur 
DES Marests wishing to go to serve the Portuguese, 
the President, who wrote in his favour to the Viceroy, 
by whom he was much liked, laid stress to him upon 
the offer of the Dutch, in order to render this gentle- 
man more acceptable. The Viceroy also gave him a 
good reception, and the Sieur des Marests making 
known to him that he desired to go to the island of 
Ceylon and take service in the Portuguese army, he 
left by the first opportunity with very favourable letters 
from the Viceroy for Dom Philippe de Mascarehnas, 
who was then still Governor of all the places which the 
Portuguese possessed in the island and its neighbour- 
hood. He arrived three days after they had lost 
Negumbo, and when the Portuguese retook the place, 
as I have above said, the Sieur des Marests was one 
of those who received most wounds and acquired most 
glory. It was he also who did most to save Dom 
Philippe from the shipwreck ; and Dom Philippe, 



216 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


having become Viceroy, thought that he deserved no 
less a recompense than the office of Captain of his 
Guards, in which he died three or four months after- 
wards. He was deeply regretted by the Viceroy, by 
whom he was much loved, and he left all his property 
to a priest with whom he had established a very close 
friendship, on condition that he paid me 250 ^cus 
which I had lent him ; this I had nevertheless much 
difficulty in obtaining from the hands of the priest. 

During my sojourn at Goa they told me the history 
of a caravel^ which had arrived a short time previ-' 
ously, having come from Lisbon. When she was about 
to make the Cape of Good Hope she was caught by a 
storm which lasted five or six days, and this so much 
upset the sailors that they knew not where they were. 
At length they entered a bay 30 leagues away from 
the Cape,^ where they found numerous dwellings, and 
as soon as they had anchored they beheld all the beach 
lined with men, women, and children, who showed 
their astonishment at seeing white people, and a vessel 
like the caravel. The difficulty was that they could 
only understand one another by signs, and after the 
Portuguese had given to these Cafres tobacco, biscuits, 
and spirits, they brought on the following day numerous 
ostriches and other birds which resembled large geese, 
but which were so fat that they had scarcely any lean 
upon them.® The feathers of these birds are very 

^ “ The Portuguese caravel is described by Bluteau as a round vessel 
(z.£. not long and sharp like a galley) with lateen sails, ordinarily of 200 
tons burthen” (Yule-Bumell, A 7 iglo-Ittdian Glossary). 

® In Book II, chap, xiv, it is stated that this voyage was made in 1 648, 
and that the distance was 18 or 30 leagues from the Cape ! 

® It seems probable that these were penguins, of which one if not 
two species are still found near the Cape of Good Hope. See Book III, 
chap, xxvii. 



CHAP. XIV 


AFRICAN GOLD 


217 


handsome, and those of the belly good for stuffing 
beds. One of the Portuguese sailors who was in 
this vessel sold me a large cushion of these feathers, 
and told me all that had happened in the bay, where 
they remained twenty-seven days. They made some 
presents to the Cafres from time to time, such as knives, 
hatchets, false coral, and false pearls, in the hope of 
finding if any trade could be established, and particularly 
if gold was to be obtained, — for they saw some among 
these people who had pieces of it in their ears, hammered 
on both sides, like nails (rivets) of a lock. They took 
two of these Cafres to Goa, as I shall presently relate, 
and I saw one who had these pieces of gold in each ear in 
five or six places. This sailor told me that there were 
also some of the women who wore them at the tip of 
the chin and in the nostrils. Eight or nine days after 
the Portuguese had arrived in the bay the Cafres brought 
them small pieces of ambergris, a little gold, and some 
elephants’ teeth — but very small — ostriches and other 
birds, and some deer.^ As for fish, they had a great 
quantity. They did all that they could by signs to ascer- 
tain where they obtained this ambergris, which was very 
choice. The Viceroy showed me a small piece which 
did not weigh half an ounce, but he told me he had 
never seen any so good. They also tried hard to dis- 
cover from whence the gold was obtained, — for as 
regards the elephants’ teeth they had no difficulty, 
seeing, as they did every morning, numerous elephants 
which came to drink at a river that discharged itself 
into this bay. At length the Portuguese, after a sojourn 
of three weeks,^ seeing that through inability to under- 

1 Cerfs, These must have been antelope, as there are no deer in 
that part of Africa. 2 jn Book II, chap, xiv, fifteen days. 



218 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Stand one another it was impossible for them to dis- 
cover anything, resolved to make sail with the first 
favourable wind. There being always some of these 
Cafres on the vessel, because the crew were liberal to 
them with tobacco, biscuit, and spirits, two were carried 
off to Goa, in the hope that they would be able to 
learn Portuguese, or that some child who might be 
placed with them would acquire their language. The 
sailor told me that when they had set sail, the Cafres, 
observing that they carried off two of their people, 
who apparently were persons of consequence, tore their 
hair, striking themselves on the stomach like people in a 
frenzy, yelling and howling in a horrible manner. But, 
having arrived at Goa, they were never able to learn 
the Portuguese language, and thus nothing was ever 
ascertained from them regarding the special knowledge 
which it was hoped would be obtained of the country 
from whence the Portuguese carried away only about 
two pounds of gold and three pounds of ambergris, 
with thirty-five or forty elephants’ teeth. One of these 
Cafres survived only six months, and the other but 
fifteen, both having died of sorrow and pining. All 
that I have ascertained of this history was by means 
of M. DE St. Amant, Engineer and Inspector-General 
of all the Portuguese fortresses in India, who had in 
his service this same sailor who told me of this new 
discovery. 

From Goa I returned to Vengurla, from whence 
I went to Batavia, as I shall elsewhere relate,^ wish- 
ing to give a full account of all that occurred to me 
during the voyage, and on my return by sea from 
Batavia to Europe. But I should not forget one 

^ See Book III, chaps, xxvii. and xxviii. 



CHAP. XIV 


A SUTTEE 


219 


thing which happened at Vengurla during the nine 
days I spent there, before I departed for Goa in the 
vessel which was sent to me by M. de Saint Amant. 

An Idolater having died, and the fire being ready in 
the pit to burn the body according to their custom, 
his wife, who had no children, having obtained the 
permission of the Governor, went to the pit with the 
priests and her relatives in order to be burnt with the 
body of her husband. While they made the three 
circuits which they are accustomed to make round the 
pit, there fell suddenly such heavy rain that the priests, 
wishing to withdraw, threw the woman into the pit. 
But the rain was so heavy and of such long duration 
that it put out the fire, and the woman was not burnt. 
Having risen at midnight, she knocked at the house 
of one of her relatives, where several Dutchmen 
and the Capuchin Father Zenon went to see her. 
She was in a frightful condition, hideous and dis- 
figured, but the pain she had already suffered did not 
prevent her from going, attended by her relations, to 
be burnt two days later. I shall speak fully of this 
barbarous superstition in the discourse on the religion 
and the ceremonies of the Idolaters.^ 


1 See Book III, chap. ix. 



CHAPTER XV 


History of Father Ephraim, Capuchin, and how he 
was cast into the Inquisition at Goa 

The Sheikh^ who had married the eldest of the Prin- 
cesses of Golconda not having been able, as I have 
said, to induce the Rev. Father Ephraim to stay at 
Bhagnagar, where he offered to build him a house and 
church, gave him an ox and two servants to convey 
him to Masulipatam, where he expected to embark 
for Pegu, according to the order which he had received 
from his Superiors. But not finding any vessel by 
which he could go, the English managed so well that 
they attracted him to Madras, where they have a fort 
named Fort St. George,^ and a general office for all 
dependencies on the kingdom of Golconda and the 
countries of Bengal and Pegu. They represented to 
him that he would have a greater harvest to reap there 
than in any other part of India to which he could pro- 
ceed, and they built him a good house and a church. 
But in reality the English were not so much seeking 

1 See pp. 161-164. 

2 Madraspatan in original, Madras and Fort St. George. The first 
British settlement dates from 1639, when a site for a factory was granted 
to Mr. Francis Day by Sri Ranga Rayal, Raja of Chandagiri. Up to 
1653 the settlement was subordinate to the Chief of Bantam in Java; 
but it was then raised to the rank of a Presidency. For its subsequent 
growth and development reference may be made to the Imperial Gazetteer 
and Madras in the Olden Times^^ by Talboys Wheeler, Madras, 1883. 



CHAP. XV 


FATHER EPHRAIM, CAPUCHIN 


221 


the good of Father Ephraim as their own ; and you 
must know why they wished to keep him among them. 
Madras is only half a league from St. Thom^,^ a small 
maritime town on the Coromandel coast, fairly well 
built, and belonging at that time to the Portuguese. 

Its trade was considerable, especially in cottons, 
and it possessed many artisans and merchants, the 
majority of whom would have been very glad to dwell 
with the English at Madras, but for the fact that they 
had no opportunities at that time for the exercise of their 
religion in that place. But since the English built this 
church and kept Father Ephraim, there were many of 
these Portuguese who left St. ThomiS, attracted princi- 
pally by the great care which this devout man took to 
instruct the people, preaching to them every Sunday 
and on all festivals, both in Portuguese and in the 
language of the country — a thing which was very un- 
usual to them when they dwelt at St. Thom:^. Father 
Ephraim came from Auxerre,^ and was a brother of 
M. DE Chateau des Bois, Counsellor of the Parliament 
of Paris, and he had a happy genius for all kinds of 
languages, so that in a short time he acquired both 
English and Portuguese in perfection. The Eccle- 
siastics of St. Thom^, seeing that Father Ephraim 
enjoyed a high reputation, and that he attracted by 
his teaching a large number of their flock away to 
Madras, conceived so much jealousy towards him that 

1 Saint Thomd now forms a part or suburb of Madras city, and is 
known as Little Mount by the English, and Mylapore, or the city of 
peacocks, by the natives. It is about three miles from the fort ; pro- 
bably Tavernier meant to say a league and a half instead of half a 
league. 

2 Auxerre, in the northern part of the province of Burgundy, on the 
banks of the Yonne. 



222 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


they resolved to ruin him ; and the following is the 
means which they made use of to accomplish their 
object : — The English and Portuguese being such close 
neighbours, they naturally had occasional differences, 
and generally both nations employed Father Ephraim to 
settle these, because he was a man of peace and of good 
sense, and knew both languages perfectly. One day 
the Portuguese purposely picked a quarrel with some 
English sailors, whose ship was in the St. Thom^ roads, 
and who were well beaten. The English President 
demanding satisfaction for this insult, strife began to 
kindle between the two nations, and would have 
ruined all the trade of the country if the merchants on 
both sides had not set themselves to arrange the affair, 
knowing nothing of the vile plot which some individuals 
were weaving to catch Father Ephraim. But all the 
goings and comings of these merchants availed nothing, 
and by the intrigues of the Portuguese ecclesiastics, it 
was so managed that the Father got mixed up in the 
matter, became the mediator, and undertook to con- 
duct the negotiations between both sides — a part which 
he very readily undertook. But he had no sooner 
entered St. Thom£ than he was seized by ten or twelve 
officers of the Inquisition, who placed him in a small 
armed frigate, which at once set sail for Goa. They put 
irons on his feet and hands, and they were twenty-two 
days at sea without once permitting him to land, although 
the majority of those on the frigate slept on shore 
nearly every night, because they sail from place to 
place along these coasts. When they arrived at Goa, 
they waited till dark to land Father Ephraim and con- 
duct him to the house of the Inquisition, for they 
feared lest by landing him in the daytime the people 



CHAP. XV 


FATHER EPHRAIM, CAPUCHIN 


223 


might have wind of it, and might come to release a 
person so venerated in all that part of India. The 
report spread in many directions that Father Ephraim 
the Capuchin was in the hands of the Inquisition, 
and as there arrived daily at Surat many people 
from the Portuguese territories, we were among the 
first to receive this news, which astonished all the 
Fraiiks who were there. He who was most surprised 
and most annoyed of all was Father Zenon the Capu- 
chin, who had formerly been a companion of Father 
Ephraim ; and after having consulted regarding the 
affair with his friends, he resolved to go to Goa at the 
risk of himself falling into the hands of the Inquisition. 
It was in truth to risk it ; for after a man is shut up in 
the Inquisition, if any one has the hardihood to speak 
for him to the Inquisitor, or to any member of his 
Council, he is himself immediately placed in the Inqui- 
sition, and is regarded as more criminal than him for 
whom he wished to speak. Neither the Archbishop of 
Goa nor the Viceroy himself dare interpose, and these 
are the only two persons over whom the Inquisition 
has no power. But if it happens that they do anything 
which gives offence, the Inquisitor and his Council 
write to Portugal,^ and, if it be so ordered by the 
King and the Inquisitor-General, when the answers 
arrive, proceedings are taken against these dignitaries, 
and they are remanded to Portugal. 

Father Zenon was therefore not a little embarrassed, 
and knew not how to make the journey, having no 

1 This passage has been rendered intelligible by collation with the 
French edition of 1713. In that of 1676 it is evidently incomplete, in 
consequence of the omission of a word. “ LTnquisiteur et son Conseil 
en Portugal,” should be ‘‘Plnquisiteur et son Conseil ecrivent en 
Portugal,” etc. 



224 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


companion to leave in his place nor to take with him, 
for it was then the season of contrary winds, and the 
attacks of the Malabaris are always to be feared. He at 
length set out, having to go twenty-five or thirty days 
by land, and took as companion M. de la Boullaye le 
Gouz,^ of whom I have spoken in my account of Persia. 
The Father paid his expenses to Goa, for his purse 
had been empty for a long time, and he would never 
have reached Surat without the aid of the English 
and Dutch and other Franks, who gave him money at 
Ispahan. 

Having arrived at Goa, Father Zenon was at first 
visited by some friends whom he had there, who, know- 
ing of the object of his journey, advised him to be 
careful not to open his mouth on behalf of Father 
Ephraim, unless he wished to go to keep him company 
in the Inquisition. Every one knows the strictness of 
this tribunal, and not only is it not permitted, as I 
have said, to speak for one whom they hold prisoner, 
but moreover they never confront the accused with 
those who give evidence against him, nor even allow 
him to become acquainted with their names. Father 
Zenon perceiving that he was unable to accomplish 

^ On p. 210 Tavernier has mentioned M. du Belloy as the person 
whom Father Zenon took with him to Goa from Surat, when he went 
there to obtain the release of Father Ephraim. His visit to Goa, when 
he was accompanied by Francis de la Boullaye le Gouz, was a different 
occasion. From Goa they went to Rdjdpur, where they were im- 
prisoned, and it was only on their return to Surat, or rather to Souali 
(z>. Swally), that Father Zenon heard of the imprisonment of Father 
Ephraim. Tavernier writes the name Boulaye le Gout. 

Tavernier’s statement about the poverty of le Gouz is also possibly 
incorrect, as the latter records that he refused an offer of money from 
the Viceroy of Goa. See his Voyages^ Paris, 1653, and the Biographie 
Universelle,, s.v. Gous {Frangois de la Boullaye le). 



CHAP. XV 


FATHER ZENON 


225 


anything at Goa, advised M. de la Boullaye to return 
to Surat, and made over to him 50 dcus which he was 
to give at Paris to the widow of M. Forest who had 
died in India. Accordingly, he left for Surat by the 
first opportunity, and Father Zenon went straight to 
Madras to find out more exactly all that had passed 
in connection with the arrest of Father Ephraim, 
When he had ascertained the treachery which had 
been practised upon Father Ephraim at St. Thom^, 
he resolved to get to the bottom of it, and went 
without the knowledge of the English President to 
confide his plan to the captain who commanded in the 
fort, and who, like the soldiers, was much enraged at 
the outrage which had been perpetrated on Father 
Ephraim. Not only did the captain strongly approve 
of the plan of Father Zenon, but he promised to give 
it his support and to back him in its execution. The 
Father, by means of the spies whom he had placed in 
the country, ascertained that the Governor of St. 
ThomE went every Saturday, early in the morning, to 
say his prayers in a chapel half a league from the town, 
and situated on a small hill, which is dedicated to the 
holy Virgin. He caused three iron gratings to be placed 
on the window of a small room in the convent, with 
two good locks on the door and as many padlocks, 
and having taken all these precautions he went 
to the captain of the fort, an Irishman^ of great 
personal bravery, who kept the promise he had 
made him to aid in the ambuscade which had been 
laid for the Governor of St. ThomE. He himself 
headed thirty of his soldiers, and accompanying Father 

^ Possibly the name of this Irish captain appears in the records of 
the period, but to these I have not had access. 


VOL. I 


O 



226 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Zexon they all went out of the fort together towards 
midnight, and concealed themselves till daylight in a 
part of the mountain upon which this chapel of the 
holy Virgin was situated, where they could not be seen. 
The Governor of St. ThomE did not fail, according to 
his custom, to go to the chapel shortly after sunrise, 
and having got out of his palla7ikeen and ascended 
the hill, which was rough, on foot, he was imme- 
diately seized by the Irish captain and his soldiers, 
who emerged from the ambuscade with Father Zenon, 
and carried him off to Madras to the convent of the 
Capuchins, and put him in the chamber which had been 
prepared for him. The Governor, much surprised to 
find himself carried off in this manner, protested strongly 
against Father Zenon, and threatened him with the 
resentment which the King of Portugal would evince 
when he heard what he had dared to undertake against 
a Governor of one of his towns. This was his 
daily discourse during the time he was kept in the cell, 
and Father Zenon simply replied that he believed he 
was much more gently treated at Madras than Father 
Ephraim was in the Inquisition at Goa, whither he, the 
Governor, had sent him ; that he had only to cause the 
Father to be brought back, and they would replace him 
at the foot of the hill where he had been seized, with 
as much right as the others had little to carry off Father 
Ephraim. However, for five or six days the St. ThomE 
road was crowded with people who came to beseech 
the English President to exercise his authority and 
release the Governor. But the President would not 
make any other reply than that he was not in his hands, 
and that after their action towards Father Ephraim he 
was unable in common justice to compel Father Zenon 



CHAP. XV 


ESCAPE OF THE GOVERNOR 


227 


to release a person who was one of the authors of the 
injury which had been done to his companion. The 
President contented himself with asking the Father to 
have the goodness to permit his prisoner to come to eat 
at his table, with a promise to hand him over into his 
hands whenever he wished ; this request he obtained 
easily, but was unable afterwards to keep his promise. 
The drummer of the garrison, who was a Frenchman, 
and a merchant of Marseilles named Roboli, who 
was then in the fort, two days after the Governor of 
St. ThomE had entered it, offered him their services 
to aid him to escape, provided that they were well 
rewarded for it ; this he promised them, and also that 
they should have a free passage on the first vessel 
which went from Goa to Portugal. The agree- 
ment being made, on the following day the drummer 
beat the reveille at an earlier hour than usual, and 
with great noise, and at the same time the merchant 
Roboli and the Governor, with their sheets tied 
together, let themselves down by the corner of the 
bastion, which was not high. The drummer at the 
same time left his drum and followed them nimbly, so 
that St. ThomE being only a good half league^ from 
Madras, they were all three inside it before anything 
was known of their departure. The whole population 
of St. ThomE made great rejoicings at the return of 
the Governor, and immediately despatched a boat 
to Goa to convey the news. The drummer and the 
merchant Roboli set sail forthwith, and when they 
reached Goa bearing the letters of the Governor of 
St. ThomE in their favour, there was not a convent 
nor a wealthy house which did not make them presents, 

^ See p. 221 



228 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


and even the Viceroy himself, Dom Philippe de 
Mascarehnas, treated them kindly, and invited them 
to embark on his vessel in order to take them to 
Portugal with him ; but all three, namely, the Viceroy 
and the two Frenchmen, died at sea. 

I shall say in passing that there never was a 
Viceroy of Goa half so rich as Dom Philippe de 
Mascarehnas. He possessed a quantity of diamonds 
— all stones of great weight, from lo to 40 carats ; 
two notably, which he showed me when I was at Goa. 
One of them was a thick stone, weighing 57 and the 
other 6 ^^ carats, both being fairly clear, of good water, 
and Indian cut. The report was that this Viceroy 
was poisoned on the vessel, and it was added that 
it was a just punishment for his having made away 
with many persons in the same manner, especially 
while he was Governor in the island of Ceylon. He 
always kept some of the most subtle poison to use 
when he wished that his vengeance should be prompt ; 
and having on that account made many enemies, 
whom the fate of those he had murdered caused 
to fear for themselves a similar treatment, he was one 
morning hung in efifigy at Goa, when I was there 
in the year 1648. 

In the meantime the imprisonment of Father 
Ephraim made a great sensation in Europe. M. de 
Chateau des Bois, his brother, complained of it to the 
Portuguese Ambassador, who not feeling too sure of 
his position, wrote promptly about it to the King 
his master ; so that, by the first vessels which left 
for Goa, it was ordered that Father Ephraim should 
be released. The Pope also wrote saying that if he 
were not set free he would excommunicate all the 



CHAP. XV 


RELEASE OF FATHER EPHRAIM 


229 


clergy of Goa. But all these letters were of no avail/ 
and Father Ephraim had only the King of Golconda, 
who loved him and who had done all he could to 
induce him to remain at Bhagnagar, to thank for his 
liberty. The King had learnt from him some mathe- 
matics, like the Arab Prince, his son-in-law, who had 
offered to build a house and church for the Father at 
his own expense.^ This he had since done for two 
Augustin clerics who had come from Goa. The King 
was then at war with the Raja of the Province of Car- 
NATiCA, and had his army close to St. Thom^, and as 
soon as he had heard of the evil trick which the Por- 
tuguese had played on Father Ephraim he sent an 
order to Mir Jumla, the General of his troops, to lay 
siege to St. Thom^, and to kill and burn all if he 
could not obtain a definite promise from the Governor 
of the place that in two months Father Ephraim would 
be set at liberty. A copy of the order of the King 
was sent to the Governor, and the town was so alarmed 
that there was to be seen nothing but boat after boat 
setting forth for Goa in order to urge the Viceroy to 
take measures that Father Ephraim should be promptly 
released. He was accordingly, and messengers came 
to him to tell him, on the part of the Inquisitor, 
that he might leave. But although the door was open 
to him he refused to quit the prison till all the clerics 
of Goa came to bring him forth in procession. This 
they at once did, and after he had come out he went 
to pass fifteen days in the Convent of the Capuchins, 
who are a kind of Recollects. I have heard Father 

^ The Pope’s mandates were often disobeyed by Jesuits in the East. 
(See Memoirs of the Christian Church in China^ by Rev. R. Gibbings, 
B.D., Dublin 1862.) 2 Seep. 163. 



230 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Ephraim say many times that that which distressed 
him most during his imprisonment was to witness the 
ignorance of the Inquisitor and his council when they 
examined him, and he believed that not one of them 
had ever read the Holy Scriptures. They had placed 
him in a cell with a Maltese, who was one of the greatest 
criminals under heaven. He did not speak two words 
without scoffing at God, and he passed all the day and 
a part of the night in smoking tobacco, which could 
not have been otherwise than most unpleasant to 
Father Ephraim. 

When the Inquisition seizes any person he is at once 
searched, and all that is found in his house in the way of 
furniture and effects, belonging to him, is inventoried 
to be returned to him should he be found innocent. 
But as regards anything of the nature of gold, silver, 
or jewels, it is not written down, and is never seen 
again, being taken to the Inquisitor for the expenses of 
the trial. The Rev. Father Ephraim when entering the 
Inquisition was searched, but there were only found, in 
the pocket which these monks have sewn to their 
cloaks, and is situated in the middle of the back, a 
comb, an inkhorn, and some pocket handkerchiefs. 
It was not remembered that the Capuchins have also 
a small receptacle in the mantle under the armpit, 
where they place some small requisites, and Father 
Ephraim was not searched in that direction. This left 
him four or five lead pencils which are covered with 
wood, for fear lest they should be broken, and as 
the pencil is used you pare off the wood to uncover it.^ 

1 This description shows the rarity of lead pencils at the time. 
Possibly they were of metallic lead, not of graphite, the former having 
been first used, and haring bequeathed its name to the latter. 



CHAP. XV 


FATHER EPHRAIM’S PRISON 


231 


These pencils afforded a means whereby Father 
Ephraim was less wearied during his imprisonment 
than he otherwise would have been, and that, squint- 
eyed as he was, he went out with a vision in which 
there appeared to be scarcely any defect. It is the 
custom in the Inquisition to go every morning to ask 
the prisoners what they wish to eat that day, and it 
is then given to them. The Maltese cared for little 
besides tobacco, and he asked for it at morning, noon, 
and night, which were the times when their food was 
taken to them. This tobacco was all cut and packed in 
white paper nearly of the size of a quarter of a page, 
for throughout all the East tobacco in powder, and all 
drugs and other wares which can be so treated, are 
wrapped in white paper ; this tends to the profit of the 
seller, who weighs the paper and the goods together. 
It is for this reason that so much paper is used in Asia, 
and it is the principal article of trade of the people of 
the provinces,^ who send theirs even to Persia. I 
make these remarks in reference to Father Ephraim, 
who carefully collected all these pieces of white paper 
in which the tobacco was packed, which was brought 
to the Maltese, and it was upon them he wrote with his 
pencil his daily thoughts in the prison. This was partly 
the cause that his sight lost much of its natural defect, 
and when I beheld him again I had at first a difficulty 
in believing that he was the same Father Ephraim 
who had been much squint-eyed previously, as he 
appeared to be so no longer. The cell where he was 
confined had for sole window a hole of 6 inches square, 
with bars of iron, this hole was so placed that when 

1 The word in the original is provengaux, and is, accordingly, 
somewhat obscure. 



232 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Father Ephraim wished to write he could only have 
light on the side which was opposite to that where 
he ordinarily directed his sight; and so it was that 
by degrees it became right ; thus he derived by this 
fact some advantage from his imprisonment^ The 
Inquisitor was unwilling either to lend him a book or 
to give him the end of a candle, and treated him as 
sternly as he did a criminal who had already twice gone 
out of the Inquisition with a sulphur-coloured shirt and 
the cross of St. Andrew on the front in order to ac- 
company to execution those who were to die, but who 
had entered it for the third time. It may be said to 
the glory of Father Ephraim that much patience as 
he had in his prison so much had he of discretion 
and charity after he went out of it ; and whatever 
evil the Inquisition had done to him, he was never 
heard to speak ill of it, nor even to make the least 
complaint, much less had he ever thought of writing 
anything about it, which would have made public many 
things not tending to the glory of what the Portuguese 
call La Sanctissinia Casa, Moreover, as I have said, 
all those who leave the Inquisition are made to swear 
to say nothing of what they have seen, nor of what 
has been asked them, and, without breaking their 
oaths, they cannot speak or write of it. 

Father Ephraim having passed fifteen days at Goa 
in the Convent of the Capuchins, to regain some 
strength, after fifteen or twenty months spent in prison, 
then set out to return to Madras ; and, when passing 

1 The interesting point in this story is altogether lost by the 
inaccuracy of the English translation of 1684 by John Phillips, which 
says that “ he lost the sight of one of his eyes through the darkness of 
the chamber.” 



CHAP. XV FATHER EPHRAIM VISITS GOLCONDA 


233 


Golconda, went to thank the King and the Arabian 
Prince, his son-in-law, for the kindness they had shown 
in interesting themselves so much on account of his 
freedom. The King again begged him to stop alto- 
gether at BhIgnagar, but perceiving that he wished to 
return to his convent at Madras, he gave him, as on 
the first occasion, an ox, attendants, and money for his 
conduct thither.^ 

^ Ample testimony exists of the good repute in which these two 
French Capuchins, Fathers Ephraim and Zenon, lived in Madras- 
In the consultations of the Council, dated 4 th April 1678 , reference 
having been made to the troubles caused by Portuguese Popish priests, 
who meddled in the affairs of the town and were a cause of disturbance, 
it was resolved to remove some of them and to confirm the authority of 
Fathers Ephraim and Zenon, they being 7ne?i that have ever behaved 
tJmnselves with all due respect to the Govern7ne7it of the place and the 
E^iglish mterest, ’ ’ 

Again, on Monday the 12 th December 1715 , the President, Edward 
Harrison, Esq., published a categorical statement of charges made in 
France against these Capuchins and others, and to the first article 
charging them with misbehaviour, etc., he replies : — “ We are obliged 
to declare that the Capuchin Fathers cdove-nained^ who have had the 
care of this Mission in the city of Madras^ from the first establishment 
thereof to the present time, by per7nissio7t of our Right Honourable 
Masters, have always dejfieaned themselves in so humble a 77ianner, both 
in spiTdtual and te77iporal affairs, as to give no just cause of co77iplaint 
to us their representatives j their conduct has beeft regular and agreeable 
to their profession, nor have we ever heard of or re7}iarked any action 
of theirs that cotdd occasio7i the least scandal to their order, ” (See Madras 
i7i the Olden Twies, by Talboys Wheeler, pp. 59 and 338 .) 



CHAPTER XVI 


Route from Goa to Masulipatam by Cochin, described 
in the history of the capHtre of that town by the D ^ ltch . 

After the Dutch Company had despoiled the Portu- 
guese of all they possessed in the island of Ceylon, 
they cast their eyes on the town of Cochin, in the terri- 
tory of which the variety of cinnamon called bastard ^ 
grows, as it had injured the sale of that of Ceylon. 
The merchants, finding that the Dutch valued their cin- 
namon at so high a price, began to buy that of Cochin 
instead, which they obtained very cheaply; and this 
cinnamon, as it gained a reputation, was carried to 
Gombroon, where it was distributed among the mer- 
chants who came from Persia, Great Tart ary, Mos- 
coviE, Georgia, Mingrelia, and all the neighbourhood 
of the Black Sea. There was also a large quantity 
of it taken by the merchants of Bassora and Bagdad, 
which supplied Arabia, and by those of Mesopotamia, 
Anatolia, Constantinople, Roumania, Hungary, and 
Poland. In all the countries which I have named much 
cinnamon is consumed, for it is put either in pieces 
or in powder into the majority of dishes to heighten 
the flavour. ’When a dish of rice is served on the table, 

^ This is the wild cinnamon {Cinnamo7num iners), which is common 
in the forests of the Konkan and Travancore. 



CHAP. XVI 


SIEGE OF COCHIN 


235 


especially in Lent among the Christians, it is so covered 
with powdered cinnamon that one cannot recognise 
what it iS} and the Hungarians exceed in this respect 
all other nations. As for the Turks and other Asiatics, 
they place the cinnamon in small pieces in their pillaus. 

The army which was sent from Batavia to the 
siege of Cochin disembarked at a place called Belli- 
PoRTO,^ where there was a fort which the Dutch had 
made with palms. It is close to Kranganur,® a small 
town which the Dutch had taken the previous year, 
without having conquered Cochin, upon which they had 
made some attempt. When the army landed it advanced 
within range of the guns of Cochin, and there was a 
river between it and the town. The place where the 
Dutch encamped was called Belle Epine,® and having 
entrenched themselves as far as the nature of the place 
permitted, they put some batteries in position which 
could not injure the town, because they were too far 
from it. They remained in this position until reinforce- 
ments came, for three ships only had arrived, and he who 
commanded these first troops was one of the bravest 
captains of his time. A few days after the Governor 
of Amboyna^ arrived with two ships, and afterwards a 
Dutch captain brought a number of Chinglas^ who 
are the people of the island of Ceylon. For the forces 


1 This Col. Yule informs me is probably for Vaipur or Beypur. 

2 Cranganore in the original ; Kranganur or Kodungulur, see p. 
237. Both Cranganore and Kodungaloor are given on the A.S., as 
though they applied to different towms 2 or 3 miles apart. 

2 This Col. Yule identifies with the Vaypine of Baldseus. It is 
Vaipion, or Vyepu of A.S., an island close to Cochin. 

^ Amboina in the original, Amboyna, an island in the Molucca Sea, 
with, according to Dutch returns, a population of about 30,000. (See 
Crawfurd’s Dicti'onajy.) ^ Singalese. 



236 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


of the Dutch in India would not be so considerable as 
they are if they did not make use of the people of the 
country, with whom they augment the troops which 
are brought from Europe. Those of the island of 
Ceylon are good for the trenches, but for an attack 
they are useless. Those of Amboyna are good soldiers, 
and 400 of them who came were left at Belle 
^ipiNE. The bulk of the army re-embarked, and landed 
near Cochin in the vicinity of a church dedicated 
to St. Andr^, where the Portuguese with some 
Malabaris awaited the Dutch with resolution. When 
they saw that the enemy landed without any fear they 
fired a discharge and then fled, but as they only aimed 
at the boats the Dutch did not lose many men. The 
Dutch seeing some companies of Portuguese marching 
on the sea-coast, and others farther inland in the direc- 
tion of a church which was called St. Jean, ordered 
some horsemen to go to reconnoitre them, but the Por- 
tuguese had fled and had set fire to the church, aban- 
doning all to the Dutch. The latter then approached 
the town, and a French soldier named Christofle, 
who was in their pay, seeing a basket attached to a 
rope which was hung from a bastion, went boldly to 
see what it had inside, wdthout fearing musket shots. 
But he was much surprised when he found that it was 
a poor famished infant which the mother had placed 
there in order to escape the sorrow of seeing it die of 
hunger, — for already some time had elapsed since the 
Dutch had commenced the siege of Cochin, and since 
any food had entered the town. The soldier, smitten 
with compassion, took the infant and gave it of what- 
ever he had to eat, at which the General of the army 
was so indignant, saying that the soldier should have 



CHAP. XVI 


SIEGE OF COCHIN 


237 


left the infant to die, that he assembled the council of 
war, and proposed that he should be shot. This was 
very cruel, and the Council, moderating the sentence, 
only condemned him to the lash. 

The same day ten men of each company were 
ordered to go to one of the houses of the King of 
Cochin, but they found no one there, and the previous 
year it had been pillaged. The Dutch then slew four 
kings of the country and 1600 blacks, and there 
escaped only one old Queen, who was taken alive by a 
common soldier named Van Rez, whom the General 
of the army promoted to be a captain at once, as a 
reward. They left a company in this house, but the 
Queen remained there only six days, as she was given 
into the custody of the Zamorin,^ who is the most 
powerful of the petty Kings of this coast, to whom the 
Dutch had promised that if they took the town of 
Cochin they would give him that of Kranganur,^ 
provided he was faithful to them. 

The Dutch then began to entrench themselves 
and to erect batteries, taking shelter under small 
forts made of palms, one laid upon another together 
with earth. They made one of them in the direction 
of the Church of St. Jean, which is near the sea, with 

^ Samarin in the original ; Zamorin, or King of Calicut, see p. 178. 
It comes through a local vernacular rendering of Samundrz^ the Sea-king. 
(See Yule-Bumell, Anglo-Indian Glossary^ p. 745.) 

2 Kranganur, or, more properly, Kodungalur, occupied by the Por- 
tuguese in 1523. They were expelled by the Dutch in 1661-62. The 
place has a remarkable history. According to tradition it was here 
that St. Thomas commenced his labours, a.d. 52 ? The Jews claim to 
hold grants of land made to them there as early as a.d. 378, and the 
Syrian Church was firmly established there before the ninth century. 
The fort is now deserted. (See for further history hnperial Gazetteer^ 
Art. “ Kodungalur.”) 



238 


TRAVELS IX INDIA 


BOOK I 


a batter}’ of four pieces of cannon ; and another in the 
direction of St. Thomas, where there was the hospital 
for the wounded, and close by that for the sick. They 
also made a battery of seven pieces of cannon and two 
mortars in a quarter called Calvetti.^ Sometimes 
they threw bombs, sometimes stones, and the stones 
did by far the most injury to the besieged. This was 
the spot where the Dutch lost most men, especially at 
a small river where they tried to make a bridge with 
sacks full of clay, in order to be able to pass under 
cover, on account of a point of the bastion which 
impinged directly upon the river. The “ Pepper 
House” is a large store surrounded by the sea, and 
there was no one then inside it. But when the Portu- 
guese perceived that the enemy entertained the design 
of assaulting it they placed some men there with two 
guns ; this resulted in the bridge scheme being given up, 
and resort being had to other measures. Five weeks 
passed without anything important being accomplished, 
and the Dutch delivering an assault at night were 
vigorously repelled, and lost many soldiers through the 
fault of the Governor of Kranganur, who commanded 
them, and who was drunk when the attack was made. 

He was also among the prisoners taken by the 
Portuguese, and the Dutch General promptly caused 
the withdrawal in a boat of those soldiers who had 
survived the assault. Two months later he resolved 
to make another assault on the same place where 
the last attack had been made ; and in order to have 
more men he sent a large frigate to fetch those who 
were in the direction of Belle ^Ipine. But by 

1 Calivete in the original; Calvetti Bazaar, a quarter of Cochin 
inhabited by hloplas. 



CHAP. XVI 


SIEGE OF COCHIN 


239 


accident the frigate struck on a bank of sand and 
foundered, by which he lost many men. Those who 
knew how to swim landed near Cochin, not being able 
to land elsewhere ; they were only about ten men, both 
soldiers and sailors, and the Portuguese made prisoners 
of them all. The General did not on this account 
relinquish his desire to deliver an assault, and having 
disembarked all the sailors, he gave to some short 
pikes, to others hand grenades, and to some swords, 
with the intention of making an attack on the fol- 
lowing night. But a French lieutenant, named Sx. 
Martin, representing that if they made the assault by 
night they might in the darkness fall into the holes 
which the besieged might have made in the ramparts, 
and that by day they would run much less risk, his 
advice was followed and the General postponed the 
affair till the following day. As soon as the sun had 
risen he ranged his troops in battle order, and at about 
ten o’clock began the assault with four companies, 
each being of about 150 men. The Dutch lost many 
men in this last attack, and the Portuguese still more, 
for they defended themselves bravely, being aided by 
200 soldiers of the Dutch army who had joined their 
side in revenge for having been kept out of six and 
a half months’ pay, in consequence of the loss of 
Touan d this made them unwilling to serve the Dutch 
army longer. Without these soldiers, who constituted 
an important aid to the enemy, the town would not 
have held out for two months ; and he who defended it 
best was a Dutch engineer, who, on account of the bad 

1 Tuban, a town in Java, now included in the Netherlands Province 
of Rembang. It is described by Mandelslo {Travels^ Eng. Trans., 
London 1669). 



240 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


treatment which he had received on his own side, was 
constrained to pass over to that of the enemy. 

The Dutch, who had entered Cochin on the Cal- 
vETTi side, and were already masters of a rampart, 
remained all night under arms ; and on the following 
day the town capitulated, and was given up. The 
Portuguese came to carry off the bodies of some clerics 
who were dead ; but as for the others, the Dutch had 
them all dragged to the river by the Chinese who were 
in their service — both the bodies of the Dutch as well 
as those of the Portuguese. The wounded were taken 
to the hospital, and those who had yielded embarked 
during the night with the engineer, passing without 
much noise between the ships of the Dutch, replying 
to those who asked them whence they came that they 
were commanded by the Dutch, and that they had 
orders for the ships to maintain a good look-out. This 
ruse served them well, and though the ships fired some 
cannon shots after them that did not prevent them 
from making their escape. The Portuguese, according 
to the terms of the capitulation, left Cochin with arms 
and baggage, but as soon as they were outside the 
gate of the town, where the Dutch troops were in order 
of battle, they were obliged to give up their arms and 
to place them at the feet of the General, with the 
exception of the officers, who kept their swords.^ The 
General had promised the soldiers the loot of the town, 
but not being able to keep his promise for reasons 

^ The capture of Cochin by the Dutch took place in the year 1653. 
The English factors who resided there retired to Pondni. The Dutch 
subsequently improved the place by erecting quays, building houses, etc. 
The Portuguese cathedral was made into a warehouse, and their 
churches were used for Protestant worship {Ijnperial Gazetteer^ vol. 
iv, p. 12). 



CHAP. XVI 


PORAKAD 


241 


which he explained to them, he led them to hope that 
he would pay them six months’ wages ; this a few days 
afterwards was reduced to eight rupees each. The 
Zamorin asked for the .town of Kranganur, in accord- 
ance with the promise made to him, and it was given 
to him ; but first the General demolished all the fortifica- 
tions and left him only the walls, at which the Zamorin 
was much displeased. The majority of those who were 
well were commanded to go to one of the petty Kings 
of this coast known as the King of Porakad ^ to treat 
with him, and it was on this occasion that the Dutch 
General, who had formerly been, as I have said, a menial 
servant, showed himself to be of a cruel and barbarous 
nature. F our days had elapsed, during which the soldiers 
had been unable to obtain any food for money, and two 
of them having stolen a cow and slaughtered it, the 
General, as soon as he knew of it, hung one of them 
forthwith, and intended to shoot the other, but the 
King of Porakad saved his life. 

The treaty having been concluded with the King 
of Porakad, the Dutch General held a review of all 
the survivors both of the sailors and the soldiers, and 
the number amounted to about 6000 persons, all the 
rest having died of disease or having been slain. A 
few days after he commanded some companies to go 
to lay siege to the town of Cannanore, which yielded 
at once without any resistance. When they returned 

^ Porca in the original stands for Porakdd or Poracaud, formerly 
an important port in Travancore. The remains of a Portuguese fort 
and factory are now covered by the sea, being visible at low water. It 
is called Porcai by Varthema, who regarded it as an island, and the 
haunt of pirates in his time — 1503-1508. So also Barbosa. (See 
Travels of Ludovico de VartJmna^ edited by the Rev. Percy Badger, 
Hakluyt Society, p. 154.) 

VOL. I R 



242 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


the General had a crown made to place on the head of 
a new King of CocHI^r, the other having been driven 
away ; and on the day which he selected for this grand 
performance he seated himself on a kind of throne, at 
the foot of which a Malabari called Montaxi, con- 
ducted by two or three captains, placed himself on his 
knees to receive the crown from his hand and to take 
possession of a kingdom of very limited extent — that is 
to say, some small territories in the neighbourhood of 
Cochin. This General when coming from Holland 
had been ship’s cook, and this crowning of a miserable 
Malabari by the hands of a man who had more fre- 
quently brandished a pot -ladle than a sword, was 
without doubt a brilliant spectacle. 

In the meantime the ships which had carried to 
Goa the Portuguese who had surrendered Cochin, 
returned laden with spoil. This was contrary to the 
terms of the capitulation, which provided that they 
should leave the place with arms and baggage, and be 
conducted to Goa without anything being taken from 
them. But as soon as they were at sea the Dutch took 
all that these poor people had, and having strictly 
searched both men and women, without any respect for 
sex, returned laden with booty. 

The General of the Dutch troops which came to the 
siege of Cochin having returned to Batavia, every one 
withdrew, and there remained only a sufficient number 
of men for the protection of the town. A Governor 
was sent from Batavia who overworked the soldiers 
in order to fortify the place, and he cut off the town 
from the gate of St. John to the Church of St. Paul, 
as also the whole quarter named Calvetti, because it 
was too extensive to be guarded. A short time after the 



CHAP. XVI THE DUTCH GOVERNOR OF COCHIN 


243 


siege, food became very cheap in Cochin, but that did 
not last long, for the Governor at once placed a duty 
on tobacco and various comestibles, so that there was 
only one man who dealt in them, and he fixed the 
price as he pleased. This Governor exercised great 
severity towards the soldiers ; he kept them shut up 
in the town, where they were, so to speak, in a prison ; 
and they could drink neither wine nor surt^ nor 
brandy, because the duties were excessive. This suri 
is a drink obtained from palms. When the Portuguese 
held Cochin one could live better on 5 sols than under 
the Dutch with 10 sols, because the Portuguese did not 
burden the town with taxes. This Governor, I say, 
was so severe that for the least fault he banished a man 
to the island of Cevlon, to a certain place where bricks 
were made, sometimes for five or six years, and some- 
times for life. But most frequently, when one is sent 
to this place, although the committal is only for a few 
years, he never leaves it again. There was in the 
garrison of Cochin a soldier of Aix in Provence 
named Rachepot, who, for having failed to reply to 
his name at roll-call, and for having delayed half a 
quarter of an hour longer than he should, was sentenced 
to mount the wooden horse for three days. It is a 
common punishment for soldiers who are guilty of 
an offence, and is a very severe one. This horse is 
so sharp on the back that, with the great weight of the 
spurs which they place on the feet of the victim, at the 
end of three or four hours he is altogether torn and 
mutilated. The poor Provenfal, knowing that he had 
been sentenced to this punishment not for three hours 

^ From Sanskrit siira^ a synonym with tdri^ i.e. toddy, palm wine. 
(See p. 158.) 



244 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


but for three days, fearing that he would succumb, 
instead of giving himself up at the guard-house, con- 
cealed himself at the house of a Frenchman, one of 
his friends, who had been but a short time married. 
The married soldiers sleep three times a week at their 
own houses, but the others are obliged to sleep every 
night at the barracks. The Governor, seeing that the 
Provencal did not appear, ordered a drum to be beaten 
throughout the town, and proclamation to be made 
that whoever would disclose the place where he was 
concealed would receive loo piastres as his reward, 
and also that whoever kept him concealed without 
making a declaration would be certainly hung with 
him. The Provenfal having received intimation of this 
threat, not wishing to ruin the Frenchman with whom 
he lodged, and having found means to entice five or 
six of his companions, who were not able to stand any 
more than he the severity of the Dutch General, 
escaped successfully on the following night, which was 
dark and rainy. They passed very close to a sentry, 
by whom they were not seen, the darkness and the 
rain being very favourable to them, and if he had said 
a word they were resolved to kill him. Having 
travelled all the night, they came to. a small river near 
PorakAd, but when the tide ascends this river it is 
wide and deep ; this obliged these poor soldiers to throw 
away their clothes, and to retain only their drawers, 
in order to swim across quickly, as they feared pur- 
suit. Hunger beginning to oppress them, they realised 
at their leisure, which they had not done when taking 
flight, the danger they were in of dying ; for not only 
did they not know the language of the country, but 
what was more vexatious, they had always to stay in 



CHAP. XVI 


ADVENTURES OF RACHEPOT 


245 


the open, as the idolaters who inhabit all this part of 
India would not allow them even to touch the walls of 
their houses, through fear of being in consequence 
obliged to throw them down. The superstition of 
these idolaters goes so far that they dare not touch one 
another, except in time of war. When by accident 
they touch any one they are obliged to go at once and 
wash the body and dip three times in the water, other- 
wise they dare not eat, drink, nor enter their houses.^ 
The Provencal and his companions met a Portuguese 
Jesuit Father, who asked them whence they came, and 
they told him all their misfortunes. Rachepot was 
more inconvenienced than all the others, having 
received a musket-shot in the thigh on the occasion of 
the last assault on Cochin, and the wound, which 
had not fully healed, having reopened on the road, it 
was impossible for him to travel without being cured 
of this wound, which had been insufficiently dressed ; 
and the Jesuit Father could give him no other aid than 
to write a word on his behalf in the Malabar language 
to the King of Godorme,^ upon a piece of palm leaf. 


^ In my own experience I have met this dread of defilement in its most 
intense form in Orissa, where, as also in parts of the Madras Presidency, 
it exists to an extent hardly to be realised by those whose knowledge of 
the natives does not extend south of the valley of the Ganges. There 
are, however, few parts of India in which an European would be allowed 
to take shelter in an ordinary Hindu house. The dwellings of Rajas 
and wealthy men are sometimes provided with an antechamber to which 
an European may be invited ; and of course there are some, but rare, 
individual exceptions to the rule which makes travelling in India so 
different from what it is in Persia. 

2 I venture to suggest that this place, having been probably in 
Travancore, was Kotdyam, which was a town and State of some note, 
and the centre of the Syrian Christians. It is in Lat. 9° 36' N., Long. 
76° 34' E. A very full account of these Christians is given in the 
Imperial Gazetteer of htdia^ vol. vi, p. 230. 



246 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


whom the Dutch had driven from his country before 
they took Cochin. Rachepot, followed by his com- 
panions, went to him by the road which the Jesuit 
Father had indicated, and he was well received by 
him, and found there a Malabari who understood 
Portuguese. The King asked Rachepot if he would 
like to remain with him, and he replied that he was 
content to serve him, and that his companions, of 
whom he was, as it were, the chief, would serve him 
also, not wishing to be parted from one another. The 
King gave orders that the ProvengaP s wound should be 
carefully dressed, and a preparation of oil and butter 
was immediately applied, from which he experienced 
relief. The King made him come to him two or three 
times every day, sometimes to fire a musket, some- 
times to wield a hand-pike, asking him much regarding 
the way they make war in Europe. Sometimes he took 
pleasure in making him sing, but the unhappy Provengal 
could sing but sadly in consequence of the poor cheer 
which he received ; the King having ordered so little for 
the support of himself and his companions, that it scarce 
sufficed to buy rice, and that of the blackest kind. But 
he was obliged to be patient, both to await the healing 
of his wound and in order to learn something of the 
Malabar language, without which it would be very 
difficult for them to traverse the country in order to 
reach Madras. For from Cochin up to the place 
where they were, they had experienced much difficulty 
in making themselves understood by signs, and in their 
greatest hunger the people of the country offered them 
nothing to eat but cocoanuts, which were insufficient 
to satisfy them. On the day of one of the local festivals 
the King summoned Rachepot and his companions. 



CHAP. XVI 


ADVENTURES OF RACHEPOT 


247 


and in consequence of the festival presented them 
with four figs ^ each, which he desired them to eat in 
his presence. The Malabaris told them that the King 
did them a great honour ; but the poor people, who had 
so little for their subsistence, would have preferred a 
measure of rice instead of these four figs. The people of 
that country go about quite naked, only wearing a cloth 
which covers their private parts. The King himself 
is in that respect like the least of his subjects, save 
that he wears a little gold in his ears. Rachepot 
having been completely cured at the end of forty days, 
resolved to pass on with his companions, and they left 
'one night without saying farewell to any one. They 
took their road to the south-east for Madras,^ where 
they wished to go ; and it is easy to believe that, being 
without money and only knowing a few words of the 
language, they suffered much during their journey. 
They lived on the charity bestowed upon them, and 
often when they arrived in the villages some of the 
idolaters fled from fear, because in these mountains 
they are not accustomed to see white men ; others, who 
were less timid, came near them and gave them the 
wherewithal to drink and eat ; and those who were 
most friendly took them into the neighbourhood in 
order to let their relatives and friends see them. 
When they had passed these mountains ® and began to 
enter the plain, they travelled in the woods for two and 

^ Probably Plantains, or so-called Bananas. The fruit of Musa 
sapientu}}!^ commonly called Adam’s figs by the Portuguese (see Book 
II, chap, xii.) 

2 Their position was probably to the south-west of Madras, hence 
they should have directed their course rather to the north-east. Had 
they done so they would not have reached so far to the south as they 
appear to have done (see p. 2 50). 

2 Probably the hilly region between Travancore and Madura. 



248 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 1 


a half days without seeing any one ; and were con- 
vinced that they must die. To increase their misery 
they were attacked in these woods by great numbers 
of leeches which abound there, so that it became a 
necessity for them to run in order to give the leeches 
less time to attach themselves to their legs and thighs, 
where they assumed proportions sometimes larger 
than the hand. Thus they dared not rest in any place, 
but when they met a stream they plunged into the 
water, and removed the leeches which were attached 
to their bodies, from whence there flowed much blood 
in all directions ; this made them weak and feeble, 
added to which, as I have said, they found no one to 
give them food. The leeches of this country are small 
and slender, and do not take to the water, but live in 
the grass. These poor people having walked in the 
woods the first day till two or three hours after night- 
fall, found a small river which had in the middle a 
small dry island, where they went to rest till day, not 
having to fear the leeches then, because they were 
surrounded by water. On the following day they 
pursued their journey with the same persecution from 
leeches, and slept at night close to a tree, where 
they found a kind of platform,^ made of wood and 
elevated about 4 or 5 feet from the ground, which, 
without doubt, some one had made to protect himself 
from the attacks of the leeches. This platform served 
them as camp for this second night, and, day having 
come, they were again on the road, and at length 
arrived by midday at a Pagoda,^ where there were 

^ KnowTi in India as a machdn^ Hin. 

^ Possibly Trichinopoli, but more probably Madura, or some .place 
still farther south (see p. 250). 



CHAr. XVI 


ADVENTURES OF RACHEPOT 


249 


many Brahmins or Banian priests, who, pitying their 
miserable condition, and having learnt from them that 
they had found nothing to eat for three days, gave 
them rice, fruit, and vegetables dressed with butter. 
But they gave it all from a distance, making a sign to 
them not to approach, as we do in Europe with the 
plague-stricken, to whom one throws charity on a hand- 
kerchief spread on the road, from which they stand 
aloof. As the soldiers had been nearly three days with- 
out eating they forthwith took so much food that they 
all had fever on the following day, so that to cure them- 
selves they had to fast afterwards, dieting being in 
India the sovereign remedy for all kinds of ills. After 
they had eaten they wished to pursue their way, but 
the Brahmins made them understand that the forest 
extended very far, and that the leeches would take 
their lives if they did not find some place to protect 
themselves from these insects,^ and advised them to 
remain there the whole night, and that the following day 
they should start early. This they did, according to 
their advice. This night heavy rain fell, and one of the 
Banian priests made a sign to them to follow him to 
his house. Having arrived there he made them enter 
a hole under the house, which he besought them not 
to touch ; and though he brought them food, they were 
unwilling to eat it for fear of increasing the fever with 
which they were attacked. When it was quite dark 
these poor people came out of the hole, and went 
out upon the terrace of the house in order to sleep 
more at their ease. To avoid being caught there 
they did not fail to return to the hole at break of 

1 This was written long before naturalists had separated leeches 
from insects, and placed them in the class of the annelids. 



250 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


day, and the Brahmin, master of the house, took them 
again to the Pagoda, where he ordered them to be 
given food. He also made them rub their legs with a 
certain plant ^ the odour of which the leeches could not 
bear, and gave to each a cloth which contained a 
kind of chalk of the size of an egg, telling them that 
when the leeches attached themselves to their legs 
they need only touch them with this cloth, and that 
they would fall immediately. It has been proved that 
salt and fire have the same effect, and the natives of 
the country, when passing through the places where 
they know there are leeches, always have a lighted 
brand in their hands. The soldiers, with the pre- 
ventative which was thus given to them, travelled with 
more comfort, and were not tormented by leeches as 
before. They reached open country at 4 p.m., and 
passed close to a fortress which belonged to the Banians, 
who gave them vegetables to eat and whey to drink, 
— for no water is drunk in this country, as it is very 
unwholesome. The Banians directed them, as well as 
they could, on the road to Madras, which they had left 
in consequence of their having kept too much towards 
the south. By going more to the east they shortened 
their journey, and traversed a mountainous country, 

^ What this plant was I have not been able to discover — not 
improbably it is still used for the same purpose. Friar Odoric in 1320 
says the gem finders in Ceylon used lemon juice {Hakluyt Voyages^ 
vol. ii, p. 58). Sir Joseph Hooker, who says he repeatedly took a 
hundred leeches at a time from his legs, and that they even found their 
way to his eyelids, adds : “ Snuff and tobacco leaves are the best 
antidote, but when marching in the rain it is impossible to apply this 
simple remedy. The best plan I found to be rolling the leaves over 
the feet, inside the stockings, and powdering the legs with snuff’* 
{Himalayan Joimial, vol. ii, p. 42). Sir Emerson Tennant says the 
natives of Ceylon smear their bodies with oil, tobacco ashes, and lemon 
juice, to keep off the leeches {Natural History of Ceylon^ p. 481). 



CHAP. XVI 


CHRISTIANS OF ST. JOHN 


251 


inhabited by Christians of St, John/ of the religion of 
which I have spoken in my account of Persia when 
describing Bassora." In the year 1643 these Chris- 
tians, both those of these mountains and those of 
Bassora, sent ambassadors to the Viceroy of Goa to 
obtain permission from him to go to dwell in the 
island of Ceylon. They undertook to drive out the 
inhabitants of the country. But the Viceroy not pro- 
mising to grant what they asked except on condition 
that they became Catholics, and they being unwilling 
to agree, the arrangement which they proposed did 
not come to pass. A Jesuit Father was sent from 
Goa to these Christians to work for their conversion, 
but as he made no progress he preferred to devote his 
cares to the idolaters, whose language he acquired so 
perfectly that he spoke it as if he had been born in the 
country. From time to time he converted some of them, 
whom he sent to Goa. This he was never able to 
accomplish with the Christians of St. John, who are 
thoroughly fixed in their views ; and, having passed 
nearly forty years with the idolaters, who were un- 
willing that any one should touch either their persons 
or their houses, it is easy to conclude that he had 
suffered much during that time, and that no kind of 
life could be more austere than his. For he had to 
live like the idolaters, who eat nothing which has had 
life; and as he travelled from one place to another 
the food of these countries was insufficient to give him 
the strength necessary for the fatigues which he had 
to undergo. 

1 Syrian Church — probably colonies from the central headquarters 
in Malabar (see p. 245 n.) 

“ Perstajt Travels^ Book II, chap, viii, p. 222. 



252 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Rachepot and his companions had the good fortune 
to meet, on their road one evening, this Jesuit Father, 
who for his part was much pleased to see them, and 
having asked them whence they came, they told him 
all that had happened at the siege of Cochin, the cruel 
treatment which they had received from the Dutch, 
and the misadventures of their journey. The Father 
advised them to go back to Goa, where they might 
find opportunities to return to Europe by taking 
service on Portuguese vessels ; but seeing that they 
had resolved to go to Madras, he wrote down the 
route, not being able to indicate their stages beyond 
Gingi,^ a small town inhabited by Muhammadans, 
except by the miserable hamlets which exist on this 
route. 

On the following day, at their departure, he ex- 
horted them to be of good courage, and gave them 
24 measures of rice, which was sufficient for five or six 
days. Having arrived at Gingi, which is but two or 
three stages from the place where they left the Jesuit 
Father, they met four Portuguese who had escaped 
from Cochin, when they were about to make the 
capitulation, and to hand over the town to the Dutch. 
These four unfortunates, who had become renegades, 
invited the newcomers to join the Muhammadans of 
Gingi, who asked them if they would serve them, offering 
them each three pagodas a month. In the extremity of 
their misery necessity would have compelled them to 

^ Guinchy in the original, Gingi, Jinjee, or Chenjee, a ruined hill- 
fort and village 50 miles south of Arcot. It was taken by Sivaji in 
1677, from the Muhammadan Governor appointed from Bijapur. It 
was for a time garrisoned by the French, 1750 to 1761. The place 
is now deserted, and has the reputation of being one of the most 
unhealthy in the Karnatic. 



CHAP. XVI 


RACHEPOT REACHES MADRAS 


253 


accept this offer, if they had not spoken at the same time 
of their being circumcised, and denying their faith ; and 
from fear that they would be kept against their wills, 
they left quietly, and followed their journey bravely to 
Madras, which is ten days’ march from Gingi.^ They 
still suffered much during so long a journey, living on 
the charity bestowed upon them, and not being able 
to communicate save by signs. They were received 
hospitably at Madras by the Rev. Fathers Ephraim 
and Zenon, French Capuchins, and as their bodies 
were all black and burnt by the sun, after five or six 
days of rest all the skin peeled off them, from which 
they suffered much. 

The English had the kindness to offer them a 
passage upon one of their vessels which was returning 
to Europe, but Rachepot allowed his companions to 
go, and decided to return by land himself, after having 
rested nearly two months at Madras. During this 
time the Capuchin Fathers found a means to enable 
him to earn more than loo 4cus, and three suits of 
clothes with the necessary linen, by the sale of little 
rings of horse-hair, which he knew how to make very 
skilfully. He worked devices and letters on them, and 
these rings were much approved of by the Mestive^ 
Portuguese, who never see anything of great value, so 
that some of them gave a gold ducat for each ring. 

Rachepot having saved money, as I have said, 
went by land from Madras to Surat, from Surat to 
Agra, and from Agra to Delhi, where I arrived some 
time after on my last voyage to India. As I saw he 
was in want, I took him into my service, and I lent 

1 The distance from Gingi to Madras is 82 miles. 

2 See pp. 198 and 206. 



264 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


him, too, some money on my departure, which has 
never been repaid to me. It is from him that I learnt 
all the details of the voyage which I have recounted, 
but I have also known fifteen or twenty other persons 
who have taken the same route when going from Goa 
to Cochin, and from Cochin to Madras. 

It is fairly short, and there is no lack of food and good 
water, but it has otherwise, as I have said, many incon- 
veniences, which are, that it is very little frequented ; 
the almost inevitable persecution by the leeches is one 
of the principal, and the superstition of the Bania^is, 
not allowing any one to touch their persons nor their 
houses, is one of the most troublesome, and even if 
one takes water from their tanks they destroy them 
immediately, and do not use them any more; this is 
the reason why some of the priests always guard them. 



CHAPTER XVn 


Route by Sea from Hormuz to Masulipatam 

I LEFT Gombroon for Masulipatam on the i ith of 
May 1652, having embarked on a large vessel be- 
longing to the King of Golconda, which every year 
goes to Persia laden with muslins and chites or 
coloured calicoes, the flowered decoration of which is 
all done by hand, — which makes them more beautiful 
and more expensive than when it is printed. The 
Dutch Company is in the habit of supplying a pilot 
and a sub-pilot and two or three gunners to the vessels 
which belong to the Kings or Princes of India, neither 
the Indians nor the Persians having the least know- 
ledge of navigation.^ Upon the vessel upon which I 
embarked there were six Dutch, and about one hundred 
sailors of the country. We left the Persian Gulf with 
a soft and favourable wind ; but we made but little way 
before meeting a rough sea and south-west winds so 
violent, though good for our course, that it was impos- 
sible to carry more than a small sail. On the day 

1 The Chinese, who were better navigators, not only visited India 
in early times, but continued to visit Hormuz up to the middle of the 
fifteenth century. Ships of Tchin, Matchin (South China), and Khan- 
balik (Pekin) are specifically referred to by Abd-erj-Razzak {vide 
Hakluyt Society^ vol. i, p. 6). 



256 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


after, and those which followed it, the wind became 
more furious, and the sea more disturbed, so that, when 
we arrived at the i6th degree, which is the latitude of 
Goa,^ the rain, thunder, and lightning increased the 
hurricane, and we were unable to carry any sail except 
the simiam^- and that half furled, and thus we drove 
before the tempest for many days. We passed the Mal- 
DivE islands without being able to see them, and our 
vessel made much water. For it had remained nearly 
five months in the roads at Gombroon during the hot 
season, for if care is not then taken to wet the timbers 
which are exposed above water they open ; this is the 
reason why vessels make so much water when laden. 
The Dutch do not fail to throw water all over theirs 
both morning and evening in order to preserve them, 
because without this precaution one runs the risk of 
being lost in a tempest. We had in our vessel fifty-five 
horses which the King of Persia was sending as a 
present to the King of Golconda, and about loo mer- 
chants, both Persians and Armenians, who were going 
to India for trade. During the whole of a day and night 
a cross wind blew with such violence that our vessel took 
in water on all sides, and the worst was that our pumps 
were no good. It fortunately happened that there was 
a merchant on board who was taking to India two 
bales of cow-hides, which we call Russian leather ; 
these skins are much valued, because they are cool, 
for covering small beds on which one throws oneself 
during the day to sleep for an hour or two. There 

^ The latitude of Goa is 15° 30' N. 

2 Swiiane. This word may be connected with the Persian 
shdmzyaftd^ which, however, signifies an awning, or a kind of tent with- 
out walls. 



CHAP. XVII 


ADVENTURES AT SEA 


257 


were also on board four or five shoemakers or saddlers, 
who understood how to stitch these skins, and they 
did a good service to all in the vessel, and likewise to 
themselves, for we were in danger. They made great 
buckets, each consisting of four skins, and five large 
holes were cut in diverse parts of the lower deck, where 
some of the ship’s company filled the skins, which 
were then hauled up through the holes. These skins 
held about a pipe of water each, and, in order to hoist 
them, a thick cable was extended from the mainmast to 
the foremast, to which as many pulleys were attached 
as there were buckets. To each bucket a sufficient 
number of passengers were allotted to hoist it, and so 
in less than an hour or an hour and a half we baled all 
the water out of the vessel. On this same day while 
the storm was so severe a strange thing occurred. 
Three thunderbolts struck our vessel. The first fell 
on the foremast, which it split from top to bottom, then 
leaving the mast at the level of the deck, it ran along 
the length of the vessel, killing three men in its course. 
The second fell two hours later, and, running from 
stem to stern, killed two more men on the deck. The 
third followed soon after, the pilot, sub -pilot, and 
I being together near the mainmast ; and the cook 
coming to ask the pilot if he wished him to serve 
the supper, the thunderbolt made a small hole in 
the cook’s stomach, and burnt off all his hair, as one 
scalds a pig, without doing him any other injury. 
But it is true that when this small hole was anointed 
with cocoanut oil he cried aloud and experienced 
acute agony. 

On the 24th of June we perceived land in the 
morning, and when sufficiently near we recognised that 
VOL. I s 



268 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 1 


we were off Point de Galle/ the principal town of 
the island of Ceylon, which the Dutch took from the 
Portuguese. From this up to Masulipatam roads we 
had fairly good weather, and we arrived there on the 
2d of July, one or two hours after sunrise. Our pilot 
at once went on shore to salute the Dutch Commander, 
and having told him that I was in the vessel, with M. 
Louis du Jardin,^ of whom I have spoken in my 
Persian narrative, he sent two horses to the landing- 
place, in order that we should visit him, for from thence 
to the house of the Dutch it is a good half-league’s 
distance. The Commander and the Dutch merchants 
received us with much civility, and having prepared 
two rooms for us, strongly pressed us to remain with 
them, which we accepted for this first night only. The 
following day we went to lodge with M. Hercules, a 
Swede by nationality, who was in the service of the 
Dutch Company, and who, being married, had a house 
of his own in the town. In order to be free we lived en 
pension with him, and the Dutch Commander asked us 
often to go to dinner at his house, where he very much 
pressed us to stay. We went two or three times to 
amuse ourselves with him in a beautiful garden which 
the Dutch have at half a league from the town, and 
three of them being married, their wives generally took 
part in our amusements. We regaled them in our turn 
with many kinds of excellent fruits and good wine 
which we had brought from Persia ; and M. du 
Jardin, who danced well and played the lute, strove 
on his own account to give them some amusement. 

1 Ponte de Galle in the original. On another occasion Tavernier 
landed there (see Book II, chap, xx.) 

2 See Book II, chaps, xx and xxv. 



CHAP. XVII DEPARTURE FROM MASULIPATAM 


259 


The English also were present at our small parties. 
And they entertained us two or three times as 
pleasantly as they could, having baladmes^ of whom 
there is no lack in this country, always present after 
the repast. 

On the 1 8th and 19th of June” we bought a 
pallankeen, three horses, and six oxen, to carry us with 
our attendants and our baggage. We had settled to 
go straight to Golcond.v to the King, to sell him some 
of the pear-shaped pearls, of which the least weighed 
34,® and the largest 35 carats ; and some other jewels, 
the majority of which were emeralds. But the Dutch 
having told us that we should make a useless journey, 
and that the King would buy nothing rare nor of high 
price which Mir Jumla, who commanded his army 
and was the Prime Minister of his Court, had not first 
seen, and as he was then at the siege of Gandikot,'* 
in the Province of Carnatic,® we resolved to go in 
search of him, and the following is the route which 
we took in this journey. 

1 Dancing-girls (see p. 87 n.) 

3 As they arrived at Masulipatam on the 2d of July, it is clear that 
the inonth should be July both in this passage and also in the next 
chapter. 

® Probably a misprint for 24 (see p. 287). 

Gandicot in the original, for Gandikot (see p. 284). 

® Camatica in the original, for Carnatic or Kamatik. Its geographi- 
cal limits have varied, at one time it corresponded with the Kingdom of 
Vijayanagra, including Mysore and part of Telingana, it is now restricted 
to a region below the GJiats. (See Anglo-Indian Glossary and hnperial 
Gazetteer.') 



CHAPTER XVIII 


Rozite from Masulipatam to Gandikot, a town and 
fortress in the Province of Carnatic ; and the 
Atithors transactions with Mir Jumla, who com- 
manded the Ar77iy of the Kmg of Golconda; in 
which also thei'e is a full description of Elephants. 

We left Masulipatam on the 20th of June^ at 5 p.m., 
and slept at a garden — which is, as I have said, only- 
half a league from the town, and belongs to the Dutch, 
the chief of whom accompanied us, and we amused 
ourselves pretty well during a good part of the night. 

The following day being the 21st, after having 
taken leave of the Dutch we travelled 3 leagues, and 
slept at a place called Nilmol.^ 

On the 2 2d [July] we travelled 6 leagues to 
WouHiR,® another village, and before arriving there we 
crossed -a river ^ on a raft. 

On the 23d [July], after a march of six hours, we 
halted at Patemet,® which is but a poor village, and on 
account of the rains we were obliged to remain there 
on the 24th, 25th, and 26th. 

1 This should be July (see preceding note). On p. 265 the succeed- 
ing month is given as August, the year being 1652. 

2 Nedumulu (see p. 174 n.) ^ Weeyur (see p. 174 n,) 

^ One of the mouths of the Kistnd. 

^ Patamata (see p. 175 



CHAP. -Will 


BEZWADA 


261 


On the 27th [July] we arrived at a large village 
called Bezivada/ not having been able to accomplish 
this day more than a league and a half, on account of 
the quantity of water which flooded all the roads. We 
were obliged to halt till the 31st, as the rains had so 
much flooded the river that the boat could not hold 
its own against the swift current of the water, and they 
had not the intelligence to stretch ropes across the 
river. Besides which it required some time to enable 
the horses which the King of Persia was sending to 
the King of Golconda to cross over ; they were then 
reduced to fifty, because five had died at sea.^ 

They were being taken to Mir Jumla, who was the 
Nawab or Grand Vizir, because anything that he has 
not seen, or which has not been approved by him, is not 
shown to the King, who buys nothing and receives no 
present except with the advice of his Prime Minister, 
who consequently must have the first view ; and this, 
as I have said, was the reason which compelled us to 
go to the Nawab at Gandikot.® 

During the sojourn which we made at Bezwada* 
we went to see many pagodas, the country being full 
of them, and there are more there than in any other 

1 Bezouart in the original (see p. 1 74 ?z.) 

2 I have been told by a Calcutta horsedealer that the intelligent 
Arab horses adapt themselves much better to the sea-passage to India 
than do the rough and often unbroken Australian horses, which some- 
times arrive in a very wretched condition, while in rough weather many 
are lost owing to injuries inflicted on one another in their excitement. 

® The preceding paragraph is omitted in John Phillip’s translation 
of 1684. 

* Bezwdda is noted for its antiquities, both of the Buddhistic and 
Hindu periods, the former consisting of rock-cut temples, and the latter 
of pagodas. By some authorities it is identified with Dhanikaketa of 
Hwen Thsang, which others place at Amardvati ; see p. 174 n. (See 
Imperial Gazetteer of India, Art. “Bezwdda.”) 



262 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


part of India, because, with the exception of the 
Governors of the place and some of their servants, 
who are Muhammadans, all the people are idolaters. 
The pagoda of the town of Bezwada is very fine, and 
is not enclosed by walls. You see fifty-two columns of 
20 feet in height or thereabouts, which support a flat 
floor of large cut stones. They are ornamented by 
many figures in relief, which represent fearful demons 
and numerous animals — some of them being figures 
of demons having four horns, others with many legs 
and many tails, others which protrude their tongues, 
and others in more ridiculous attitudes. There are 
similar figures carved in the stones of the floor, and in 
the intervals between each pair of columns the statues 
of the gods are elevated on pedestals. The pagoda is 
in the middle of a large court, longer than it is wide, 
and the court is surrounded by walls which are enriched, 
inside and out, with the same figures as the pagoda. 
A gallery supported by sixty-six pillars, like a sort 
of cloister, runs all round the wall inside. You enter 
this court by a great gate, above which there are two 
large niches, one over the other, the first of which is 
supported by twelve pillars, and the second by eight. 
At the base of the columns of the pagoda there are 
old Indian inscriptions, which the priests of these 
idolaters have much difficulty in deciphering. 

We went to see another pagoda, built on an eleva- 
tion, and it is ascended by a staircase with 193 steps, 
each being i foot high. The pagoda is square, with 
a dome on top; there are figures in relief around 
the wall like those in the BezwAda pagoda. There is 
an idol seated in the middle, after the manner of the 
country, with crossed legs, and in this position it is 



CHAP, xvm 


BEZWADA 


263 


about 4 feet in height. Its head is covered by a 
triple crown, from whence proceed four horns, and it 
has the face of a man turned towards the east. The 
pilgrims who come for devotion to these pagodas, when 
entering, join their hands together and carry them to 
their foreheads, then they approach the idol waving 
them and repeating many times (the words) Ram, 
Ram, i.e. God, God. When they are close they sound 
a bell thrice, which is suspended from the idol itself, 
of which they have previously smeared different parts 
of the face and body with various colours. Some 
carry bottles of oil, with which they anoint the idol, and 
they offer it sugar, oil, and other articles of food — the 
richest adding money. There are sixty priests who 
attend this pagoda, and live with their wives and 
children on the offerings which are brought to the idol. 
But in order that the pilgrims may believe that the 
god takes them, the priests leave them before the 
image for two days, and on the evening of the third 
they appropriate them. When a pilgrim goes to the 
pagoda in order to be cured of some malady, he takes, 
according to his means, a representation in gold, 
silver, or copper, of the diseased member, which he 
presents to his god ; he then begins to sing, this all 
the others do also after their offerings. Before the 
door of the pagoda there is a flat roof supported by 
sixteen pillars, and opposite is to be seen another 
supported by four, where food is cooked for the priests 
of the pagoda. Towards the south a great platform 
has been cut in the mountain, where there is shade 
afforded by numerous beautiful trees, and you see also 
a very fine well. The pilgrims come there from great 
distances, and if there are any poor among them the 



261 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


priests feed them with the alms which they receive 
from the rich who come there out of devotion. The 
principal festival of this pagoda is in the month of 
October, at which time there is a great assemblage of 
people from all quarters. When we were there there 
was a woman who had been three days in the temple 
without once leaving it, asking the idol from time to 
time, since she had lost her husband, what she should 
do to bring up her children and feed them. Having 
inquired from one of the priests wherefore this woman 
had received no reply, and if she would receive one, 
he said that it was necessary that she should await the 
will of their god, and that he would then answer what 
she asked. I immediately suspected some deception, 
and, in order to discover what it was, resolved to enter 
the pagoda, especially as all the priests were absent, 
having gone to dinner, there being but one only at the 
door, of whom I freed myself by asking him to go to 
fetch me some water at a fountain, which was two or 
three musket shots away from the place. During this 
time I entered the temple, when the woman, on catch- 
ing a glimpse of me, redoubled her cries, for, as no 
light entered the pagoda except by the door, it was 
very dark. I entered, feeling my way in order to ascer- 
tain what took place behind the statue, where I found 
there was a hole through which a man could enter, 
and where, without doubt, the priest concealed himself 
and made the idol speak by his mouth. I was not 
able to accomplish this so quickly but that the priest 
whom I had begged to go to obtain water for me 
returned and found me still in the pagoda. He cursed 
me because I had profaned, as he said, his temple, but 
we soon became friends by means of two rupees which 



CHAP. XVIII 


PAGODA AT KAKANI 


265 


I placed in his hands, and he at the same time offered 
me betel?- 

On the 31st we left Bezwada and crossed the 
river, 2 which goes to the mine of Gani or Kollur.® It 
was then nearly half a league in width, on account of 
the heavy rains which had lasted during eight or nine 
days. After having travelled 3 leagues on the other 
side of the river, we found a great pagoda built on a 
platform to which one ascended by fifteen or twenty 
steps. There was an image there of a cow ^ in black 
marble, and numerous idols of 4 or 5 feet in height, 
which were all deformed, one having many heads, 
another many arms and many legs, another many 
horns, and the most hideous are the most adored and 
receive most offerings. At a quarter of a league from 
this pagoda there is a large village. On this day 
we marched 3 leagues farther, and slept at another 
village called Kah Kali,® near which there is a small 
pagoda where there are five or six idols of marble 
fairly well made. 

The first day of August, after a march of seven 
hours, we arrived at Condevir,® a large town with a 
double ditch, and the bottom of the trench lined with 

^ Betle in the original. — The leaf of Chavica betel, together with 
chopped areca nut and lime, constitutes what is here called betle, for 
chewing. (See p. 286.) 2 the Kistnd. 

^ See for explanation of Gani or Kollur, p. 172, also Book II, 
chap, xviii. Siva’s bull. 

^ This is Kdkdni, about 4 miles north of Guntur, and 16 from 
Bezwdda. It is also mentioned on p. 174, being on the route from 
Golconda to Masulipatam via the mine at Coulour {i.e. Kollur). 

<5 This is Konavaidu or Kondavir. The fort, which is at an eleva- 
tion of 1050 feet on a ridge of hills, is described by Mr. Boswell in the 
Bidian Antiqziary, vol. i. p. 182. The town was built in the twelfth 
century by the Orissa Rajas. 



266 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


cut stone. It is entered by a road which is enclosed 
on both sides by strong walls, where at intervals there 
are round towers which afford but small defence. This 
town touches on the east a mountain which is about a 
league in circuit, and is surrounded above by high walls. 
At every 1 50 paces there is, as it were, a half moon ; 
and within, in the walled enclosure, there are three 
fortresses, which they have neglected to keep in 
repair. 

On the 2d [August] we travelled only 6 leagues, 
and halted at a village called Copenour.^ 

On the 3d [August], after having made 8 leagues, 
we reached Adanquige,^ a fairly good village, where 
there is a very grand pagoda, with numerous chambers 
which were made for the priests of the Banians, but 
to-day it is all in ruins. There are still some idols in 
the pagoda, but all mutilated, and these poor people 
do not cease to adore them. 

On the 4th [August] we made 8 leagues, and 
slept at the village of Nosdrepar.® Half a league 
on this side there is a large river, which then 
contained but little water — the rains not having 
commenced. 

On the 5th [August], after 8 leagues of road, we 
slept at the village of Condecour.^ 

^ Not identified. 

2 This is Addanki (Ardinghy), a town in the Ongole taluk of the 
Nellore district, Lat. 1 5° 48' 42", Long. 80° o' 52" E. “ The temple of 
Singarikonda and the ruined fort of Hari Palakuda are in the neighbour- 
hood ” {Imperial Gazetteer). 

s Probably Nootalapaud, about 18 miles south of Addanki. The 
French edition of 1713 has Nodrespar. 

^ Kandukur— Cundacoor of A.S. — in the Nellore district. The 
French edition of 1713 has Gondecour. 



CHAP. XVIII 


PULICAT 


267 


On the 6th [August] we marched seven hours and 
halted at another village called Dakij^.^ 

On the 7th [August], after having travelled 3 
leagues, we came to a town called Nelour,^ where 
there are many pagodas, and having crossed a great 
river a quarter of a league farther on, we marched 
for 6 leagues and came to a village called Gandaron.® 

On the 8th [August], after a march of eight hours, 
we slept at SEREPELii,^ which is only a small village. 

On the 9th [August] we travelled 9 leagues, and 
slept at a good village called Ponter.® 

On the loth [August] we marched eleven hours and 
halted at Senepgond,® another good village. 

On the I ith [August] we only went as far as Pali- 
CATE,^ which is but 4 leagues from Senepgond, and of 
these 4 leagues we marched more than one in the sea, 
our horses in many places having the water nearly to 
the saddle. There is also another road, but it is longer 
by 2 or 3 leagues. Pulicat is a fort belonging to the 
Dutch, who occupy the whole length of the coast of 

1 Not identified on A.S. 

2 Nellore. There is a temple on a hill near the town called 
Narasinha Kondu. Nellore is on the south bank of the Penner or 
Pennair River, which, therefore' must have been crossed before the town 
was reached. 

3 Not identified, probably misplaced. 

^ Sarvapali probably, but if so the distance and time mentioned 
must be incorrect, as it is only 12 miles south of Nellore. 

5 Pundi — Poondy of A.S. — to W. of Pulicat Lake. 

^ I have failed to identify Senepgond. 

Pulicat, in the Chingleput District of Madras. The town is on an 
island which separates the sea from a considerable lagoon or salt lake. 
It was the site of the first Dutch settlement on the mainland of India. 
In 1609 the fort referred to by Tavernier was built. The town was 
subsequently transferred to the English and back to the Dutch several 
times in succession. Orme gives a plan of this as well as of many of 
the other forts and towns mentioned by Tavernier. 



268 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


Coromandel ; and it is where they have their factory, 
and where the Chief of all those living in the territory 
of the King of Golconda resides. There are gener- 
ally about 200 soldiers in garrison in this fort, besides 
many merchants who reside there for trade, and other 
persons who, after having served the Company for their 
full term, are in retirement in this place. There are 
also some natives of the country, who by degrees have 
congregated here, so that Pulicat is to-day like a 
small town. Between the town and the fort a large 
open space is left, so that the fort is not incon- 
venienced by the town. The bastions are furnished 
with good guns, and the sea washes at the foot, but 
there is no port, it being only a roadstead. We re- 
mained in the town till the evening of the following 
day, and the Governor would not allow us to eat else- 
where but at his table. He was the Sieur Pite,^ a 
German of the town of Bremen. We received all kinds 
of attention from him, and he took us three times round 
the fort on the walls, where one could easily walk. 
The manner in which the inhabitants procure the water 
which they drink is somewhat remarkable. When the 
tide is out they go on the sand as near to the sea as 
possible, and they make holes there, where they find 
sweet water, which is excellent.^ 

On the 1 2th [August] at sunset we left Pulicat, 
and on the following day, at lo o’clock a.m., we arrived 
at Madras, otherwise called Fort St. George, which 
belongs to the English, and of which I have elsewhere 

^ The French edition of 1713 has Pitre. 

2 This method of obtaining fresh water is still followed in certain 
parts of the coast of India, and in the Persian Gulf by diving down to a 
considerable depth and then filling corked bottles. (See Book II, chap. 
XX, and Chardin^ iv, p. 69 ; dnidi Persia?i Travels^ Ed. 1676, p. 233.) 



CHAP. XVIII 


ST. THOME 


269 


spoken^ — having travelled only 7 or 8 leagues this 
day. We went to stay at the Convent of the Capu- 
chins, where the Rev. Father Ephraim of Nevers and 
the Rev. Father Zenon of Bang^ were, of whom I 
have also spoken in preceding chapters.^ 

On the 14th [August] we went to the fort to visit 
the English President, and we dined with him. 

On the 15th [August] M. du Jardin® and I left in 
the morning to go to St. Thom^,^ which, as I have 
said, is only a good half league from Madras. We 
first went to see the Governor, who received us with 
much civility and kept us to dinner. The time after 
dinner was employed in going to see the Church of 
the Augustine Fathers and that of the Jesuit Fathers, 
in the first of which there is the head of a lance, which 
they regard as being that with which St. Thomas® was 
martyred ; and we also went to visit some Portuguese, 
who received us very well. In the cool of the evening 
we returned to Madras. 

On the 1 6th [August] the Governor of St. Thom:^ 
and the Portuguese whom we had been to see sent us a 
quantity of presents, such as hams, ox tongues, sausages, 
fish, water melons, and other fruits of the country. 
There were nine or ten men to carry these presents, 
and as we lodged with the Capuchins it was always 
believed that M. du Jardin was a bishop, and that. 


^ Madras, see p. 220, 22 miles from Pulicat. As will have been 
observed, several of the stages from Masulipatam 'have not been identified. 
2 See Book I, chap. xv. 

® See Book II, chaps, xx and xxv. 

^ St. Thome, now a suburb of Madras (see p. 221 where the 
distance has been shown to be about a league and a half). 

s For a full discussion of this tradition, see hnperial Gasetieer of 
India^ vol. vi, p. 230, et seq. 



270 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


not wishing to make himself known, he had come to 
see the country in disguise. What confirmed them in 
this belief was that they knew that the Governor of 
PuLiCAT had treated us with great civility, and that he 
of Madras had done no less. Moreover, six months 
after our departure, it was impossible for any one to 
remove this belief, so strongly w'as it engrafted. 

On the 17th and i8th [August] we went again to 
dine with the English President, and we passed the 
time with all the amusements which he was able to 
devise to remove from our bodies and minds the pains 
and fatigues which we had incurred during so trouble- 
some a journey. 

On the 19th [August] we went to visit some native 
Christians who dwell at Madras and live in tolerable 
comfort. They received us very well, and we heard 
that they are very generous to the Reverend Capuchin 
Fathers. 

On the 20th [August] the Christians whom we 
went to see also sent presents of some fruits of the 
country. 

• On the 2 1 St [August] we went to take leave of the 
English President and the chiefs of the nation, who 
had regaled us so well. 

On the 2 2d [August], in the morning, we left 
Madras, and, after having travelled 6 leagues, arrived 
at a large village called Serravaron.^ 

On the 23d [August], having travelled 7 leagues, 
we came to Oudecot.® This is a day’s march through a 

1 This appears to be Seravarumbode, near Arnee, 20 miles from 
Madras. 

2 Woodecotah, north of the Narnaveram river, about 15 miles 



CHAP, xvm 


MONKEY FIGHTS 


271 


flat and somewhat sandy country. On both sides there 
is nothing but groves of bamboo.^ It is a kind of cane 
which is very tall, sometimes equalling in height our 
loftiest forest trees. There are some of these forests 
so thick that it is impossible for a man to enter them, 
and there are an enormous number of monkeys in them. 
Those on one side of the road are so hostile to those 
on the other, that none can venture to pass from one 
side to the other without running the risk of being at 
once strangled. While at Pulicat, the Governor told 
us that when we passed through these woods we should 
enjoy the opportunity, as he had done, of making the 
monkeys fight, ^ and this is the way which is employed 
to bring it about. Throughout all this country at 
every league the road is closed by gates and barricades, 
where a strict watch is kept, and all passers by are 
questioned as to whence they come and whither they 
go, so that a traveller is able without danger and in 
all safety to carry his gold in his hand. In all these 
places you find rice to buy, and those who wish to 
enjoy the amusement of making the monkeys fight, 
place five or six baskets of rice in the road at forty or 
fifty paces distant the one from the- other, and close to 
each five or six sticks, two feet long and an inch thick. 
The baskets being thus placed and uncovered, every 
one withdraws a short distance, and immediately the 
monkeys are to be seen on both sides descending 
from the bamboos and leaving the woods to approach 
the baskets which are full of rice. They spend half 
an hour showing their teeth to one another before 

1 Bambou in the original. See Index for references. 

2 A remarkable account of a battle between two troops of monkeys, 
which was witnessed by Mr. T. W. H. Hughes, F.G.S., will be found in 
tne Proc. As. Society^ Bengal, for September 1884, p. 147. 



272 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


approaching the baskets, and sometimes they advance, 
sometimes they retire, all fearing to come to close 
quarters. At length the females, which are bolder 
than the males, particularly those having young ones, 
which they carry in their arms as a woman carries 
her child, approach the baskets, and when about to 
stretch forward their heads to eat, immediately the 
males of the other side of the wood advance to prevent 
them and to bite them. Those of the other side 
advance then, and both the one and the other becom- 
ing furious take the sticks which they find near the 
baskets, upon which a fierce combat ensues. The 
weakest being compelled to give way, withdraw into 
the wood, some with broken heads, others maimed in 
some member, while those who remain masters of the 
field eat their fill of rice. It is true, however, that when 
they begin to be replete they allow some of the females 
of the opposition to come to eat with them. 

On the 24th [August], after having accomplished 
9 leagues by a road similar to that of the preceding 
day, we arrived at Naraveron.^ 

On the 25th [August], after a march of eight hours 
in a country of the same kind, finding gates at every 
two leagues, we arrived in the evening at Gazel.^ 

On the 26th [August] we travelled 9 leagues, 
and halted at Courua,* and found nothing, neither for 

1 Narnavenim on the river of the same name. The stages from 
Madras above given amount to 22 leagues ; the distance measured on 
the map is about 56 miles; but the first stage is too short. 

2 Gazellymundum, 14 miles as the crow flies from Narnaverum. 

^ The pagoda was undoubtedly that of Tripatty or Tirupati, 80 
miles from Madras. In Book III, chap, xii, which see, Tavernier 
mentions that he visited it on this very journey. It is possible that a 
place called Ontimon Koorva, about 12 miles N.W. of Tripatty, may 
be our author’s Courua. 



CHAP. XVIII 


A CAPTAIN OF MIR JUMLA’S ARMY 


273 


the men nor the mounts, whether oxen or horses, and 
ours had to content themselves with a little grass which 
was cut for them. Courua is a somewhat renowned 
pagoda, and having arrived there we saw several 
companies of military passing, some with handpikes, 
others with guns, and others with sticks, who were 
going to join one of the principal captains of Mir 
Jumla’s army, on a hill near Courua, where he had 
pitched his tent. The place is very pleasant, and 
derives its coolness from numerous trees and fountains. 
As soon as we learnt that this captain was so near at 
hand, we set out in order to go to salute him, and we 
found him in his tent with many nobles who were chiefs 
of the country, all being idolaters. After we had 
saluted him and made a present of a pair of pocket 
pistols decorated with silver, and two yards of Dutch 
flame -coloured cloth, he asked why we had come into 
the country, and we replied that we came to see Mir 
JUMLA, Commander-in-Chief of the King of Golconda, 
on account pf some business which we had with him. 
At this reply he treated us kindly, and having observed 
that he regarded us as Dutchmen, we said we were 
not of their country, but were Frenchmen. The 
captain not having any previous knowledge of our 
nation, detained us a long time in order to acquaint him- 
self with our forms of government, and the greatness of 
our King. While he kept us in this way the sufra?- was 
spread, and then all the idolatrous nobles withdrew, as 
they do not eat anything cooked by Muhammadans. 
Having ascertained that we had not the same scruples, 
he invited us to supper, but we declined, because it was 
late, and we wished to rejoin our people. But we had 

^ Sofra in the original = tablecloth (see Book II, chap. xii). 



274 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


scarcely arrived at our tent when we saw three men, 
each with a large dish of pilldu'^ on his head, which 
the captain had sent us. Before we left him he 
begged us to remain for the following day to enjoy 
elephant-hunting, but as we did not wish to lose time we 
excused ourselves, and told him that our business com- 
pelled us to proceed. Six or seven days previously they 
had captured five elephants, three of which had escaped, 
and it was these which they were pursuing, and ten or 
twelve of the poor peasants who assisted in capturing 
them had been killed. We informed ourselves of the 
manner in which they hunt, and this is what we then 
ascertained. Certain passages are cut in the woods, 
which are hollowed out into holes, and covered with 
branches with a little earth on top. The hunters, by 
means of shouts and the noise of drums, to which they 
add fire-darts, drive the elephant into these passages, 
when meeting with the holes it falls into them and is 
unable to get out again. They then place ropes and 
chains on it, which they pass under the belly, and 
bind the trunk and the legs, afterwards they employ 
special machines to hoist it up. Nevertheless, out 
of five which they had taken three escaped, as I 
have said, although they had still some chains and 
cords about their bodies, and even on their legs. 
These people told us an astonishing thing, which is 
wonderful if one could only believe it. It is, that 
elephants which have once been caught and have 
escaped, if driven into the woods are always on their 
guard, and tear off a large branch of a tree with their 
trunks, with which they go along sounding everywhere 
before putting down their feet, to see if there are any 
^ Pilldu (see p. 154). 



CHAP. XVIII 


WILD ELEPHANTS 


275 


holes, SO as not to be caught a secohd time. It was 
this which made the hunters, who gave us this descrip- 
tion, despair of being able to recapture the three 
elephants which had escaped from them. If we had 
been certain of being witnesses of this wonderful pre- 
caution of the elephant, no matter how pressing our 
business, we should have willingly waited for two or 
three days. This captain who had received us so well 
was a sort of Brigadier, and commanded 3000 or 4000 
men who were stationed half a league off. 

On the 27th [August], after having marched two 
hours, we came to a large village, where we saw the 
two elephants which had been captured. Each of these 
wild elephants was between two tame ones, and around 
the wild ones there were six men with fire-darts, who 
spoke to the animals when feeding them, saying in 
their language, “Take that and eat it.” They were 
small wisps of hay, pieces of black sugar, of rice cooked 
in water, and pounded peppercorns. When the wild 
elephant would not do what was ordered, the men told 
the tame elephants to beat him ; this they immediately 
did, one striking him on the forehead and head with 
his trunk, and if he made as though to revenge him- 
self, the other struck him from his side, so that the 
poor elephant knew not where to turn ; this educated 
him to obey. 

As I have insensibly drifted into a history of 
elephants, I shall add here some other remarks which 
I have made on the nature of these animals. Although 
the elephant does not approach the female after having 
been captured,^ it happens nevertheless that he becomes 

1 This is still widely believed, but is not true ; not only are there 
well-authenticated instances of the birth of elephants in India, both the 



276 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


in season sometimes. One day when Shah JahAn was 
out hunting upon his elephant with one of his sons, 
who sat with him in order to fan him, the elephant 
became so much in heat that the driver, not being 
able to control it any longer, told the King that in 
order to arrest the rage of the elephant, which might 
crush them among the trees, it was necessary that 
one of the three who was on the elephant should offer 
himself up, and that with all his heart he sacrificed his 
life for the King and for his son, begging his majesty 
to take care of the three children whom he was leaving. 
Having said so, he threw himself under the elephant, 
and immediately the animal took him with his trunk, 
and having crushed him under his feet, became 
mild and tractable as before. The King, for this 
wonderful escape, gave 200,000 rupees to the poor, 
and promoted at court each of the sons of the man 
who had so generously given his life for the safety 
of his Prince. 

I have to remark still that, although the skin of the 
elephant is very hard during life, when dead it feels 
like bird-lime in the hands. 

Elephants come from many places in Asia — from 
the island of Ceylon, where they are the smallest, 
but the most courageous of all ; from the island of 
Sumatra, the Kingdom of Cochin, the Kingdom of 
Siam, and the frontiers of the Kingdom of Bhutan 

parents having been in captivity, but recently elephants appear to have 
been successfully bred in America. Some of the Indian instances just 
referred to are given in the Asian for the 5th of June 1883, and a case 
of congress was not only witnessed by a number of officers at Thaetmyo 
in Burmah, but was actually photographed. A lithograph taken from 
this photograph will be found in the manual of The Elephant, by Mr. J. 
H. Steel, V.S., Madras, 1885. 



CHAP. XVIII 


THE CAPTURE OF ELEPHANTS 


277 


towards Great Tartary. They come also from the 
coast of Melinda,^ on the East coast of Africa, where 
they must be very abundant, according to a report which 
was made to me at Goa by a Portuguese captain who 
came from that region to make some complaint against 
the Governor of Mozambique. He told me that 
throughout that coast there are many enclosures fenced 
with elephants’ tusks only,^ and that some of them are 
more than a league in circuit. He added that the 
blacks of the country hunt the elephants, and that they 
eat the flesh, but for each elephant which they slay 
they have to give one of the tusks to their Chief. I 
have described how elephants are captured in the 
territory of the King of Golconda ; the following is 
the method employed in the island of Ceylon in the 
capture of these animals. A long passage, enclosed 
on both sides, is prepared, so that when an elephant 
has entered he cannot turn either to the right or to the 
left. This passage is wide to begin with, but narrows 
gradually to the end, where there is only room for 
a female elephant, which is in season, to lie down. 
Although tame she is nevertheless bound with chains 
and strong cords, and by her cries she attracts the 
male, who comes to her along the passage up to 
where it becomes narrow, which, when he has passed, 
the men who are concealed close that portion of the 
passage by a strong barricade which they have in 
readiness ; and when the elephant is advanced a short 
distance farther, and is not far from the female, another 

1 This statement is of special interest if intended to mean that the 
African elephant was domesticated and exported to India. 

2 I think I have seen somewhere a statement by a comparatively 
recent African traveller that elephants’ tusks are known to have been 
formerly so used for fences. (See voL ii, p. i6i.) 

VOL. I T 



278 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


barricade closes the passage in that direction. It is 
then that, with chains and ropes, which they have 

thrown on the elephant, they bind his trunk and legs, 
and enclose him in the trap so that he is unable to 
escape from it. A nearly identical method is followed 
in the Kingdoms of Siam and Pegu, the only difference 
being that the peasants mount the female and go to 

the forests in search of the male. When they have 

found him, they tie up the female in the most con- 

venient place which they can find, after which they lay 
snares for the elephant, who approaches slowly on 
hearing her cries. 

It is especially remarkable of the female elephant 
that at certain seasons she collects all kinds of leaves 
and grass, with which she makes for herself a bed 
with a kind of bolster, elevated 4 or 5 feet from the 
ground, where, contrary to the nature of all other 
beasts, she lies to await the male, whom she calls by 
her cries. ^ 

It is, moreover, peculiar to the elephants of Ceylon 
that it is only the first male produced by the female 
which has tusks.^ It is to be remarked also that the 
ivory which comes from the islands of Ceylon and 

^ This is a fable, though there appears to be some foundation for 
the belief that natural inequalities in the ground are availed of during 
the act of congress. 

2 “While in Africa and India both sexes have tusks, with some 
slight disproportion in the size of those of the females, not one elephant 
in a hundred is found with tusks in Ceylon, and the few that possess 
them are exclusively males.” (Sir E. Tennent, Nat. Hist of Ceylon^ p. 
78.) The same authority states that the desire for ivory is so great in 
Ceylon that when a tusker is known to be in a herd he is hunted till shot. 
This may have been going on for a very long periojd, and may account 
for the tuskless character of the breed. Thus the action of man may 
have prevented the operation of the law of the survival of the fittest, as 
those having tusks would otherwise hold possession of the herds of females. 



CHAP. XVIII 


ELEPHANTS 


279 


Acheen^ has the peculiarity when it is worked that it 
never becomes yellow like that which comes from 
the Peninsula and the West {sic) Indies f this 
causes it to be more esteemed and dearer than the 
other. 

When merchants are taking elephants anywhere 
to sell, it is amusing to see them pass. As there 
are generally both old and young, when the former 
have passed the children run after the little ones which 
follow behind, playing with them and giving them 
something to eat. Whilst these young elephants, 
which are then alone, are occupied in taking what is 
given, the children jump upon them, and it is then that 
the fun begins. For the young elephants which have 
remained to eat, since their mothers have been all 
the time marching, being then some distance off, 
double their pace, and by flourishing the trunk 
throw on the ground the children who are upon them, 
without all the time doing them any harm. This does 
not in the least repel this little crowd, which continues 
to follow them for some time, offering them food as 
before. 

Notwithstanding all the researches which I have 
made with much care, I have never been able to 
ascertain very exactly how long an elephant lives, and 
this is all the information one can obtain from those 
who tend these animals. They cannot say more than 
that such an elephant has been in the charge of their 
father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, and by 
estimating the time that these people may have lived, 

1 Achen in the original, it here stands for Sumatra. 

2 Tavernier makes a slip if he alludes to ivory from elephants, as 
there are no elephants in the West Indies. 



280 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


it is found that an elephant’s age sometimes amounts 
to 120 or 130 years.^ 

I observe that the majority of those who have 
written accounts of India say boldly that the Great 
Mogul keeps 3000 or 4000 elephants. When at 
JahanabAd, where the King at present resides, I 
often inquired from the person who has charge ot 
them, and who shows much friendship for the Franks, 
in order to know what the number of elephants 
was which he feeds for the service of the King, 
and he assured me that he had but 500,^ which are 
called elephants of the household, because they are 
only employed to carry the women and the tents with 
all the rest of the baggage, and for war only 80 or at 
most 90. The most courageous of these last has to 
be supported by the eldest son of the King, and is 
allotted, both for food and for all other necessary ex- 
penses, 500 rupees a month, which amount to 750 livres. 
There are some that have only 50, others but 40, others 
30, others 20 rupees ; but the elephants which have 100 
or 200 or 300 or 400 rupees a month have under them 
their horsemen to support, who live on this pay, and 

1 Mr. Sanderson says, “ I think it by no means improbable, looking 
to their peculiar dentition and other circumstances, that elephants live 
to 150 or 200 years.” Sir Emerson Tennant gives evidence regarding 
a particular elephant, that it was found in the stables in Ceylon by the 
Dutch when they expelled the Portuguese in 1656, that it served the 
Dutch for upwards of 140 years, and passed into the hands of the 
British in 1799. The Atn-uAkb&ri gives the natural duration of an 
elephant’s life at 120 years. 

2 The Ain-i-Akbdri does not mention the number of elephants kept 
by the Great Mogul, but it gives a marvellous amount of details as to 
the classification, food, harness, capacities, and characteristics of the 
elephants in the establishment kept by Akbar. (See Gladwin’s trans- 
lation, vol. i, pp. 1 13-130.) 



CHAP. XVIII 


WUNTIMITTA PAGODA 


281 


also two, three, and up to six young elephants, who 
have to fan them during the great heat of the day. 
All these elephants do not remain in the town, as the 
majority go every morning to the country, where those 
who tend them take them into the jungles, where they 
eat branches of trees, sugar-canes, and millet, by which 
the poor peasants suffer much loss. This is profit- 
able to those who tend these animals, because the 
more they eat in the country, the less food they con- 
sume in the town — the saving goes into the purse of 
these persons. 

This same day, the 27th of August, we travelled 
6 leagues farther, and slept at a large town called 
Ragiapeta.^ 

On the 28th, after having made 8 leagues, we came 
to OUDECOUR.^ 

On the 29th, after a march of nine hours, we 
arrived at Outemeda,® where there is one of the 
grandest pagodas in the whole of India. It is all 
built of large cut stones, and it has three towers where 
there are many deformed figures cut in relief. It is 
surrounded by many small chambers for the dwelling 
of the priests of the pagoda, and 500 paces off there is 
a great tank, upon the borders of which there are many 

^ Ragiapeta — ^perhaps Rajalipully — must be near Codoor of A.S. 

2 Oodcoor or Ootkoor of A.S., is close to Rajumpett, a station on 
the Madras and Bombay railroad, not to be mistaken for a place of the 
same name near Cuddapah station. 

2 Wuntimitta, Vontimitta, or Wintemetta, in the Cuddapah District, 
is a station on the Madras and Bombay railroad, Lat. 14° 24' N., 
Long. 79® 5' E., 18 miles from Ootkoor. ‘‘The pagoda is dedicated to 
Kodandaramaswdmi, and is said to have been built by one of the 
Chitvail Rajas 300 years ago. If, however, the inscriptions of Gandi- 
kot are to be believed, it must have been built by a member of the 
Vijayanagar dynasty in the fourteenth century.” (ImpeHal Gazetteer,^ 



282 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


small pagodas of 8 or lo feet square, and in each an 
idol in the form of a demon, with a Brahmin^ who 
takes care that any stranger who is not of their faith 
does not come to wash or take water from the tank. 
If a stranger wishes for water they carry him some in 
earthen pots, and if by chance their pot touches the 
vessel of the stranger they break the pot. I am told, 
also, as I have elsewhere remarked, that if any one 
not being of their faith washes in the tank it becomes 
necessary for them to let out all the water which 
is then in it. As for charity, they are very liberal, for 
no one passes who is in want and who asks, to whom 
they do not give to eat and drink of whatever they 
may happen to have. You meet many women on 
these roads, some of whom always keep fire to light 
the tobacco of passers, and even to those who have 
not tobacco they give a pipe. The others go there to 
cook rice with qtucheri^ which is a grain like our 
hemp-seed ; others, too, cook beans, because the water 
in which they are cooked never causes pleurisy to 
those who are overheated. There are among these 
women some who have vowed to perform this charity 
for travellers during seven or eight years ; others for 
more or less time according to their convenience, and 
they give each traveller bean water and rice water to 
drink, and two or three handsful of this cooked rice to 
eat. Other women are to be seen on the highroads 
and in the fields following horses, oxen, and cows ; 
these have vowed to eat nothing but what they find 

1 Bramere in the original. Brahmin. 

2 For kMchri, Hind., a term applied to a dish of boUed rice and ddl, 
a kind of pulse {Cctjanus tndicus)^ flavoured with spices and onions ; it is 
therefore not the name of a seed itself. (See Book II, chap, ix.) 



CHAP. XVIII 


HORSES’ FOOD IN INDIA 


283 


undigested in these animals’ droppings. As neither 
barley^ nor oats are to be had in this country, the 
cattle are fed on certain large and hard peas,^ which 
are first crushed between two grindstones and then 
allowed to steep for half an hour, for they are ver}'’ 
hard and consequently difficult of digestion. The 
horses are given some of these peas every evening, 
and in the morning they receive about two pounds of 
coarse black sugar, which is almost like wax, kneaded 
with an equal weight of flour and a pound of butter, of 
which mixture the grooms make pellets or small balls, 
which are forced down the horses’ throats, otherwise 
they would not eat them. Afterwards their mouths 
are washed, especially the teeth, which are covered 
with the paste, this gives them a dislike to this kind of 
food. During the day the horses are given some grass 
which is torn up in the fields, roots and all, and is most 
carefully washed so that no earth remains.® 

On the 30th [August] we made 8 leagues, and 
halted at Goulapali.^ 

On the 31st, after a march of nine hours, we 
stopped at Gogeron.® 

On the first day of September we made only 6 

^ I do not know when barley was first introduced, but it is certainly 
now largely grown in India. 

2 Gra7n, the seed of Ctcer arietmum^ Linn., or of Dolichos uni- 
florus^ Lam. 

^ This is the kind of fodder still given to horses in India, but the 
clay is removed by beating not by washing. The daily preparation of 
this is the principal duty of the second attendant on a horse — the 
Ghasiydra or grasscutter. 

^ Goulapali is not given on the atlas sheet, it must have been near 
Chennur, close to a number of diamond mines (see vol. ii, p. [45o)* 
Possibly it may be identical with Ganganapally. 

^ Not identified. Must be near Moodanoor station if south of the 
Pennair, but if north of it, it may be Goriganoor. 



284 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


leagues, and we came to a halt at Gandikot.^ It was 
'only eight days since the Nawdb had taken this town 
after a three months’ siege, and he would not have 
taken it but for the aid of some Frenchmen who had 
quitted the Dutch service on account of the treatment 
which they had received. He also had as gunners 
many English and Dutch, with two or three Italians, 
who gave him great aid in the capture of the place. 

Gandikot is one of the fortified towns which are in 
the Kingdom of Carnatic.^ It is built on the summit 
of a high mountain, and the sole means of access to it 
is by a very difficult road, which is only 20 or 25 feet 
wide, and in certain parts only 7 or 8 ; the Nawdb was 
then commencing to improve it. On the right of the 
road, which is cut in the mountain, there is a fearful 
precipice, at the base of which runs a large river. 
When on the mountain you see a small plain about 
a quarter of a league wide and half a league long. 
It is sown with rice and millet, and is watered by 
many small springs. At the level of the plain to the 
south, where the town is built on a point, the limits 
are formed by precipices, with two rivers which bound 
the point at the base ; so that, in order to enter 
the town, there is but one gate on the plain side, 
and it is fortified in this direction with three good 

^ Gandikot, a fort at an elevation of 1670 feet above the sea in the 
Yerramalai Mountains of the Kadapa (Cuddupah) District, Lat. 14° 48' 
N., Long. 78 20' E. According to Ferishta it was built in 1589. 
It was captured by the British under Captain Little in the first war with 
Tipu in I 79 t, nnd was thus again proved not to have been impreg- 
nable, having first yielded, as here related, to Mir Jumll 

Carnatic or Kamatic embraced Mysore and parts of Telingana, 
and corresponded with the Kingdom of Vijdyanagar. (See p. 259 
and for use of the name at various periods, Yule-Burnell, Anglo-Indian 
Glossary.) 8 pennair river. 



CHAP. XVIII 


SIEGE OF GANDIKOT 


285 


walls of cut Stone, with the ditches at their bases faced 
with the same stone. Consequently, during the siege, 
the inhabitants had only to guard a space of 400 or 500 
paces wide. They had only two iron guns — one being 
a 1 2-pounder, the other 7 to 8 ; the first was placed on 
the gate, and the other on the point of a kind of 
bastion. Until the Nawdb found a means to mount 
guns above he lost many men from the frequent sorties 
made by the besieged. The Raja who was in the 
town was considered to be one of the best and bravest 
commanders among the idolaters, and the Nawdb, 
seeing at length that the place could not be taken 
unless guns were carried up to the heights, ordered all 
the Franks who were in the service of the King as gun- 
ners to come to him, and promised to each four months’ 
wages more than their ordinary pay if they could find 
some means of conveying guns to the heights. In 
this they were successful. They mounted four guns, 
with which they bombarded the place, and they were 
so fortunate as to direct them against the gun which 
was on the gate, which they rendered useless. When 
they had battered down half the gate of the town the 
besieged capitulated ; they evacuated the place under 
honourable conditions. On the day upon which we 
arrived the whole army was encamped at the base of 
the mountain in a plain, where there is a very fine 
river,^ and the Nawdb was just ending the review 
of the cavalry, which were very smart. An English 
gunner, with his comrade, an Italian, seeing M. DU 
Jardin^ and myself pass, and recognising us to be 
Franks, as it was late politely came to meet us, and 
invited us to spend the night with them. It was 

1 Pennair. 2 See p. 258 and Index. 



286 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


from them that we heard that there was a French 
gunner then in the town, named Claude Maill]^ of 
Bourges,^ and that he was engaged in casting some 
cannon which the Nawdb wished to leave in the place. 

On the following day, being the 2d of the month, 
we ascended to the town and stopped at the house of 
MaillE, whom I had known at Batavia, where he 
was in the service of the Dutch, serving them as 
gardener to the General. He received us with much 
joy, and having at first notified the Nawdb of our 
arrival, he ordered them to provide us lodging and 
necessary food immediately, not only for ourselves, but 
also for our horses and oxen, during the stay that we 
were going to make at Gandikot. 

On the 3d [September] we went to see the Nawdb, 
who had caused his tents to be pitched on the summit 
of the mountains, in the quarter bordering the road cut 
in the rock. He received us well, asking us if we were 
comfortably housed, and if we had been given the food 
which he had ordered for ourselves and horses. Sub- 
sequently he inquired the cause which had brought us 
thither, and we replied that we had brought some goods 
sufficiently choice for the King, but that we had not 
wished to go to his majesty before showing them to 
him — "well knowing that the King bought nothing of 
high price without his advice, and that, in any case, 
we considered such deference to be due to him. The 
Nawdb assured us that our compliment had not dis- 
pleased him, and after he had caused betle ^ to be pre- 

1 For further particulars regarding this gun founder and surgeon, 
see pp. 1 1 6, 289, and 301. 

2 Betel,^ Port. The leaf of Chavica betel^ used as a masticatory- 
together with areca nut and lime. In some parts of India, and by 
Europeans in India generally, it is pawn. (See p. 265.) 



CHAP, xvm 


MIR JUMLA 


287 


sented to us we took our leave and returned to the 
town. We found all the gunners awaiting us, and we 
all assembled at Maill^’s house for supper, where the 
Nawdb sent us two bottles of wine — one Spanish, the 
other of Shiraz — which is rare in this country. As 
for brandy, they have no lack of it, for they make it of 
rice and also of sugar, of which there is an abundance 
in all these parts of India. 

On the 4th we again visited the Nawdb, and showed 
him the jewels which we hoped to sell to the King. 
They consisted of some pear-shaped pearls^ of a weight, 
beauty, and size which were unusual — the least exceed- 
ing 24 carats. After having examined them well, and 
shown them to a number of nobles who were with him, 
he asked us the price; which having heard, he returned 
them to us, and at the same time said he would consider 
it. He made us dine with him, and after the repast 
we withdrew to the town, where we remained till the 
loth without seeing the Nawdb. 

On the morning of the loth [September] he sent 
to summon us, and as soon as we were seated in his 
tent, close to him, the attendants brought him five 
small bags full of diamonds, and each bag contained 
about as many as one could hold in the hand. They 
were all basques^ but of very dark water and very 
small, and for the most part were only i carat or half 
a carat in weight, but otherwise very clear. There 
were very few which amounted to 2 carats. The 
Nawdb, when showing us these stones, asked if such 
goods were saleable in our country. We replied that 

1 The principal pearl was afterwards sold to Shdist£ Khdn (see 
ante^ p. 20). 

2 Lasques, a term applied by jewellers to flat and oval stones, such 
as are used in Indian jewellery. 



288 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


one might sell them provided the water was white, 
because in Europe we do not esteem diamonds if they 
are not clear and white, and that we made no account 
of other kinds of water. When he first began to con- 
template the conquest of this Kingdom for the King of 
Golconda, he was told that it had diamond mines, and 
he sent 1 2,000 men to work them, who in the space of 
a year only found those which he had in the five bags. 
The Nawdb, seeing that they only found stones of very 
brown water, tending much more to black than white, 
rightly considered that it was loss of trouble, and for- 
bidding further mining, sent all these poor people 
back to tillage.^ After the Nawdb had closed up his 
diamonds again, and we had dined with him, he 
mounted his horse, accompanied by many nobles, to 
go hunting, and desired to take us with him ; but we 
begged him to excuse us, and we left without his 
speaking to us of our pearls. 

On the nth [September] all the Frank gunners 
went to the Nawdb' s tent, crying out that they had not 
been paid the four months’ wages which had been 
promised, and that if they were not paid they would 
go to take service elsewhere, upon which the Nawdb 
put them off till the following day. 

On the 1 2th, the gunners not having omitted to 
repair to the tent of the Nawdb, he ordered them to be 
paid for three months, and promised them at the close 

1 The exact position of these mines (or washings ?) is unknown, but 
they were probably situated in the neighbourhood of the Pennair river. 
The nearest of the Kadapa (Cuddapah) sites known in modem times was 
at Jalmudugu, which is only S or 6 miles E. of Gandikot. There are a 
number of mines near Kadapa (see Econo 7 mc Geology of India, p. 9). 
In Book II, chap, xvii, Tavernier says there were six of them. The 
mine at Wadjra-Karur, in Bellary, was also taken by Mir Jumla. 



CHAP, xviii M. CLAUDE MAILLE OF BOURGES 


289 


of the current month to pay the fourth. They had no 
sooner received this money than they treated one another, 
and the baladines''- carried off more than half of it. 

On the 13th the Nawdb went to the town to see 
the foundry which Maill^ had erected by his orders. 
Maill^, as I have said, was from Bourges, and enlisted 
at Amsterdam for India. Having reached Batavia, 
the General, perceiving that he was skilful and very 
intelligent, kept him in his personal service to make 
some grottoes and fountains in his garden. But 
MAiLLk, being neither satisfied with this employment 
nor with the rough treatment of the General, found 
means to place himself in the suite of M. Cheteur, 
who was sent from Batavia to the Nawdb, then 
engaged in the siege of Gandikot. This Envoy 
having accomplished his business with the Nawdb, 
and MAiLLk knowing that he would be leaving on the 
following day, took possession of the case and box of 
ointments belonging to the Ambassador’s surgeon, and 
concealed himself till such time as the Envoy departed, 
without being able to find Maill^, in spite of all the 
search he could make, which had obliged him to delay 
his departure for some days. As soon as MAiLuk 
heard that the Envoy was gone, he was appointed to 
the service of the Nawdb as surgeon ; and some time 
after, having informed him that he was a good gunner 
and founder, he entered his service in that capacity. 
The Nawdb having taken Gandikot, and desiring to 
have some cannon inside the fort, where it was very 
difficult to carry them, proposed to Maill:^^ to cast 

^ Dancing-girls (see p. 87). 

2 In 1665 Tavernier met a man with the same name installed as 
physician to the Governor at^Allahabad, but does not allude to him 
expressly as being the same person. (See p. 1 16.) 

VOL. I U 



290 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


twenty pieces — ten of 48 pounds, and ten others of 24 
pounds ; this Maill^ undertook to do. He was 
supplied with copper for this purpose from all quarters, 
and the Nawab collected a quantity of idols which had 
been removed from the pagodas which his army had 
visited. There is in Gandikot a pagoda which is 
considered to be one of the principal in India, where 
there are many idols, some being of gold and others of 
silver. Among these idols there were six of copper, 
three of which were seated on their heels, and the three 
others were about 10 feet high. After Maill:^ had 
made all preparations to melt these metals and the 
idols which had been brought from different places, he 
accomplished the melting of all except the six large 
idols of the famous pagoda of Gandikot.^ It was 
impossible for him to melt them, no matter how much 
the Naw&b expended ; and he even threatened the 
priests of the pagoda, whom he accused of having 
bewitched the idols. In short, MaillE never accom- 
plished making a single cannon, one being split, another 
incomplete ; and so he relinquished all the work he 
had undertaken, and sometime afterwards quitted the 
service of the Nawdb. 

On the 14th we went to the tent of the Nawdb 
to take leave of him, and to hear what he had to say 
regarding the goods which we had shown him. But 
we were told that he was engaged examining a 
number of criminals, who had been brousfht to him 
for immediate punishment. It’ is the custom in this 
country not to keep a man in prison ; but immediately 

1 Possibly these idols were made of iron and not of copper ; this 
would account for the difficulty in melting them. Cast-iron was known 
in India in early times. The story may, however, be mythical. 



CHAP. XVIII 


MIR JUMLA 


291 


the accused is taken he is examined and sentence is 
pronounced on him, which is then executed without any 
delay. If the person whom they have seized is found 
to be innocent he is released at once ; and whatever 
the nature of the case may be, it is promptly concluded. 
Moreover, we were told that it would be difficult for us 
to see the Nawdb on that day, because he intended 
to descend to the plain to review the greater part 
of his army. We did not omit, however, to meet him 
at the door of his tent in the evening, where, having 
dismounted, and M. du Jardin and I having saluted 
him, he invited us to come to see him early on the ' 
following day. 

On the 15th, at seven o’clock in the morning, we 
went to the Nawdb, and immediately we were announced 
he asked us to enter his tent, where he was seated 
with two of his secretaries by him. According to the 
custom of the country — where one goes with naked 
feet in slippers, without stockings, because wherever 
you enter you walk on a carpet, and sit in this country 
as in Turkey, and as our tailors do here, — the Nawdb 
had the intervals between his toes full of letters, 
and he also had many between the fingers of the left 
hand. He drew them sometimes from his feet, some- 
times from his hand, and sent his replies through his 
two secretaries, writing some also himself. After the 
secretaries had finished the letters, he made them read 
them ; and he then took them and himself affixed his 
seal, giving some to footmen, others to horsemen. For 
it should be remarked that in India all the letters which 
the Kings, Generals of Armies, and the Governors of 
Provinces send by footmen go much faster than by 
horsemen. The reason is that at every two leagues 



292 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


there are small huts, where two or three men employed 
for running live, and immediately when the carrier 
of a letter has arrived at one of these huts he 
throws it to the others at the entrance, and one of 
them takes it up and at once sets off to run. It is 
considered unlucky to give a letter into the hand 
of the messenger; it is therefore thrown at his feet, 
and he must lift it up. It is still to be remarked 
that throughout India the greater part of the roads are 
like avenues of trees, and those which have not trees 
planted, have at every 500 paces small pieces of stone 
which the inhabitants of the nearest villages are bound 
to whiten from time to time, so that the letter carriers 
can distinguish the road on dark and rainy nights. 
While we were with the Nawdb he was informed that 
four prisoners, who were then at the door of thfe tent, 
had arrived. He remained more than half an hour 
without replying, writing continually and making his 
secretaries write, but at length he suddenly ordered 
the criminals to be brought in ; and after having 
questioned them, and made them confess with their 
own mouths the crime of which they were accused, 
he remained nearly an hour without saying anything, 
continuing to write and to make his secretaries write. 
Then there entered into his tent many officers of the 
army who came to pay their respects with great 
humility, and to whose salute he replied only by an 
inclination of the head. 

Among these, four prisoners who were brought 
into his presence there was one who had entered a 
house and had slain a mother and her three infants. 
He was condemned forthwith to have his feet and 
hands cut off, and to be thrown into a field near the 



CHAP. XVIII 


MIR JUMLA 


293 


high road to end his days. Another had stolen on 
the high road, and the Nawdb ordered him to have his 
stomach slit open and to be flung in a drain. I could 
not ascertain what the others had done, but both their 
heads were cut off. While all this passed the dinner 
was served, for the Nawdb generally eats at ten o’clock, 
and he made us dine with him. The sufra^ being 
removed, we took leave of the majority of the nobles 
who had also eaten with the Nawdb ; and when only 
two or three persons remained with him, we inquired 
through his interpreter if he had any commands for 
us, and whether he thought that our goods should be 
shown to the King. He replied that we might go to 
Golconda, where he would communicate with his son, 
to whom he would write on our behalf, and that his 
letter would arrive before us. He ordered sixteen 
horsemen to conduct us, and provide for us on the 
road whatever we required, up to a river 1 3 leagues 
from Gandikot, where no one is allowed to cross 
without having the Nawdb' s passport, so that the 
soldiers may not be able to desert., 


1 Sufra^ Hin .5 tablecloth. 



CHAPTER XIX 


Route from Gandikot to Golconda 

On the morning of the i6th ^ [September 1652] we left 
Gandikot, accompanied by the majority of the gunners, 
who came with us to the first halt, carrying plenty of 
food with them ; and this day we only made 7 leagues, 
and slept at Cotepali.^ 

On the 17th, after having breakfasted with the 
gunners, who then returned to Gandikot, we pursued 
our way with the sixteen horsemen of the Nawdb, and 
having travelled 6 leagues we slept at a village named 
CoTEEN,® beyond the river, which was then very full. 
As soon as we had crossed it the sixteen horsemen took 
leave of us ; and having offered their chief some rupees 
to buy tobacco and betel, we could not induce him to 
accept anything. The boats employed in crossing this 
river are like large baskets,* covered outside with ox 
hides, at the bottom of which some faggots are placed, 
upon which carpets are spread to put the baggage 

1 M. Joret has been misled by a misprint of 26th for i6th, and is 
therefore wrong in his argument founded on the supposition that Taver- 
nier left Gandikot on the 26th (y. B. Tavernier^ p. 13 1). 

2 Cottapilly in A. S. No. 76 ; it is, however, 24 miles from Gandikot. 
Cotalpully and Gopalpilly are about 4 miles nearer. 

s Not identified on the map. The exact route followed by Tavernier 
from Gandikot up to Goodymetta is very uncertain. 

^ Coracles. (See p. 299, and Book II, chap, xv.) 



CHAP. XIX 


RIVER FERRIES 


•295 


and goods on, for fear they should get wet. As for 
the coaches and carts, they are tied by the pole and 
wheels between two of these baskets, but the horses 
are made to swim across, a man driving his horse from 
behind with a whip, and another in the basket holding 
it by the halter. As for the oxen, which, according 
to the custom of the country, carry the baggage, as 
soon as they reach the bank of the river and have been 
unloaded, they are driven in, and they cross the water 
without assistance. There are four men to each basket, 
one at each corner, who stand and row with paddles. 
Should one of them fail to keep equal stroke with the 
others, or that they do not all keep time, the basket 
turns three or four times round, and the current carry- 
ing it down, it descends much lower than the spot where 
it was intended to land. 

On the t8th [September], after a march of five 
hours, we arrived at Morimol.^ 

On the 19th we made 9 leagues, and halted at 
Santesela.^ 

On the 20th we made 9deagues more, and slept at 
Goremeda® (Goodymetta). 

On the 2 1st, after six hours of marching, we passed 
the night at Kaman.^ It was a frontier town of the 
kingdom of Golconda, before the conquest of that of 
Carnatic by the army of Mir J umla, of which I have 
spoken in the preceding chapter. 

1 Perhaps Porenaumla. 

^ Not identified. As Tavernier does not mention the diamond 
mines of Baswapur, close by, they had probably not been discovered then. 
(See Econo77iic Geology of India^ p. 13 .) 

3 Goodymetta, 8 miles N.E. of Giddaloor. 

^ Kammam, Cummum, or Cumbum. The distance from Goody- 
metta measured on the map is 12 miles. 



■296 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


On the 2 2d we travelled 7 leagues, and slept at 
EiiELiPATAd At about half way we met more than 
4000 persons, both men and women, and more than 
twenty pallankeens, each of which contained an idol. 
They were ornamented with gold, brocade of gold and 
velvet, with fringes of gold and silver, and some of 
these pallankeens were carried by four men, others 
by eight, and others by twelve, according to the size 
and weight of the idols. On each side of the pallan- 
keeiis was a man with a large round fan of about 5 feet 
in diameter, made of beautiful ostrich and peacock 
feathers of different colours. The handles of these 
fans were 5 or 6 feet long, and covered with gold and 
silver nearly of the thickness of a French crown {dcii). 
Each one strove to carry these fans in order to serve 
the idol by fanning it, to prevent the flies alighting on 
the face. Another fan, which is somewhat larger, and 
which had no handle, was carried like a shield. It 
was ornamented with feathers of different colours, 
ranged round little gold and silver bells. The person 
carrying it walked close to pallankeen, on the sunny 
side, in order to shade the idol, for to close the curtains 
of the pallankeen would have made it too hot. From 
time to time the bearer of the shield shook it in order 
to ring the bells, so that the idol might be amused. 
All these people with their idols came from BurhAn- 
PUR and the neighbourhood, and were going to visit 
their great Ram Ram, i.e. their great god, who is in a 
pagoda in the territory of King of Carnatic. They had 
been fully thirty days on the road, and had to march 
fourteen or fifteen more before reaching the pagoda.^ 

1 Vamulpetta, 14 miles from Cumbum. 

2 In Book II, chap, xiii, Tavernier describes meeting at Daulatdbad 



CHAP. XIX 


HINDU PILGRIMS 


297 


One of my attendants who was from BurhAnpur, and 
of the tribe of these very people, asked me to give 
him a holiday to go with them to accompany his gods, 
saying that a long time ago he had vowed to make this 
pilgrimage. I was obliged to give it, well knowing 
that if I did not give him the holiday he would himself 
take it, as he had many relatives in the troop. About 
two months later he rejoined me at Surat, and as he 
had served M. du Jardin and myself faithfully, I made 
no difficulty about re-employing him. On asking him 
some questions about the pilgrimage which he had just 
made, he related to me a thing difficult to believe, but 
which happened, as he said, in this manner. Six days 
after having left me, all the pilgrims had contemplated 
sleeping at a village ; and before reaching it they had 
to cross a river, which during the summer contains 
but little water and may be forded anywhere. But 
when it rains in India the water falls in such quantity 
that it appears like a deluge, and in less than an hour 
or two, small streams rise 2 or 3 feet in depth. The 
rain having sui'prised these pilgrims, this river in- 
creased so quickly that it was impossible to cross it that 
day. It is not necessary that those who travel in 
India should provide themselves with food beforehand, 
— especially is this the case with the idolaters, who do 
not eat anything which has had life — because even in the 
smallest villages they always find in abundance rice, 
flour, butter, milk, beans, and other vegetables, sugar 
and other sweetmeats, dry and liquid. This multitude 

a similar procession of 2000 persons on their way to Tripatty pagoda 
from Tatta, in Sind. All the details are different. I cannot agree 
with M. Joret {J, B. Tavernier^ p. 131) in his identification of the two 
occasions, and do not see any difficulty in taking both accounts as they 
stand as being distinct. 



298 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


of people, who had no food with them, were much 
astonished on arrival at the bank of this river to see 
it so high and swollen, and at not being able to cross 
in order to go to the village, which was on the other 
side, where they intended to make their halt. They 
had nothing to give their children to eat, and nothing 
was to be heard save lamentations among this crowd. 
In this extremity the chief of their priests sat down in 
the middle of them, and causing himself to be covered 
with a large sheet began to call those who wished 
for food to approach him. He asked each what he 
wanted, whether rice or flour, and for how many per- 
sons ; and with a large ladle which he held, lifting the 
corner of the sheet, he gave to all whatever they had 
asked for ; so that this large number of people of 4000 
souls was satisfied.^ 

It was not only my servant who related this history, 
but having subsequently made many journeys to 
Burhanpur, where I was known to the principal per- 
sons of the town, I made inquiry of many who had 
been on this pilgrimage, and all have sworn to me by 
their Ram Ram that it was true, which I nevertheless 
could not believe. 

On the 23d [September] we arrived at Doupar,® after 
having travelled 8 leagues, and crossed many torrents. 

1 It is perhaps not too much to say, that with natives of India the 
more prima facie incredibility there is in a story like this, the more 
likely is it to obtain credence from them. Its resemblance to a certain 
Christian miracle is remarkable. In this connection we may appropri- 
ately quote General Sleeman’s remarks {Rambles and Recollections, vol. 
•tj PP‘ St) 94) to the effect that — “The miracles of Christianity exercise 
no influence on the imaginations of the Hindus, who can always tell 
of greater ones.^’ We may call to mind also the alleged miracles per- 
formed by sundry modern theosophists, and believed in by their disciples. 

2 Dupad, called Dupar Fort on Major Scott’s Map. 



CHAP. XIX 


FERRY OVER THE KISTNA 


299 


On the 24th we made but 4 leagues, and came to 
Tripant^,^ where there is a grand pagoda on a hill, the 
whole circuit of which forms a staircase and is faced 
with cut stone. The smallest stone of this staircase 
is 10 feet long and 3 feet wide, and in the pagoda 
there are many figures of demons. There is one, 
among others, which resembles a Venus standing 
upright, with many demons who surround her in 
lascivious attitudes, and this Venus and demons are 
made of a single piece of marble, but the carving is 
very coarse. 

On the 25th we travelled 8 leagues, and halted at 
Mamli (Murrayvamla). 

On the 26th we also travelled 8 leagues, and slept 
at Macheli (Machurla). 

On the 27th we made only 3 leagues, because we 
had to cross a large river in baskets ; this generally 
occupies half a day.^ For when we reached the margin 
of the water we saw neither basket nor any other means 
of crossing. A man came, with whom we bargained 
for our passage ; and to prove if the money which we 
gave was good he made a large fire, and threw it 
into it.® He did the same with that of all persons 
whom he took across. If amongst the money which 
he received he found a rupee which became somewhat 
black, one had to give him another, which he also heated; 
then after he had proved that the money was good he 
called out to his comrades to bring the basket, which is 
generally concealed in some spot on the opposite side 

1 Tripurantakhan, ii or 12 miles N.E. of Dupad. It is the 
Tripparanticum of the Atlas Sheet. 

2 The Kistnd is, I believe, still crossed by means of coracles at the 
present day (see p. 294, and Book II, chap. xv). 

3 See p. 30. 



300 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


of the river. For these people are cunning, and seeing 
from afar off on which side the travellers are coming 
they send the basket to the other bank so as not to be 
compelled to take across any one without being paid. 
The money being counted, and the man who had 
received it having called his comrades, you see them 
carrying the basket on their shoulders to the edge 
of the water, and having launched it they come across 
to fetch those waiting on the other side. 

On the 28th, having made 5 leagues, we halted at 
a place called Dabir-pinta. 

On the 29th, after a march of 12 hours, we slept 
at Holcora.^ 

On the 30th we made 8 leagues, and passed the 
night at Peridera.^ 

On Monday, the ist day of October, after having 
made 10 leagues, we slept at Atenara.® It is one of 
the houses of pleasure built by the Queen, mother of 
the King who reigns at present. It has many rooms, 
opening on a grand square which is in front of the 
house, for the accommodation of travellers. 

It should be remarked that in all the countries 
which we have just passed through, both in the King- 
dom of Carnatic and the Kingdoms of Golconda and 
of Bijapur, there are hardly any physicians except 
for the Kings and Princes. As for the commonality, 
when the rains have fallen and it is the season to 

^ Dabir-Pinta and Holcora I have failed to identify. The former 
should be looked for between Davirkondah and the river Kistnd. 

2 Peridera is perhaps identical with Poraigoda of modem maps. It 
is about 26 miles from Golconda. 

® This appears to be the place elsewhere named Tenaia (see p. 172), 
where the distance from Golconda is given as being 4 coss. It is also 
called Tenara by^Thevenot. 



CHAP. XIX 


M. PITRE DE LAN 


301 


collect plants, in the mornings you see mothers of 
families going out from the towns and villages to 
collect the simples which they know to be proper for 
the diseases which occur in a family. It is true that in 
good towns there are generally one or two men who 
have some knowledge of medicine, who seat them- 
selves each morning in the market-place or at a 
corner of the street in order to administer remedies, 
either potions or plasters, to those who come to ask for 
them. They first feel the pulse, and when giving 
the medicine, for which they take only the value of 
two farthings, they mumble some words between 
their teeth. 

On the 2d of October we had only 4 leagues to 
make to Golconda. We went to stop at the house of 
a young Dutch surgeon of the King, named Pitre de 
Lan, whom M. Cheteur, the Batavian Envoy, had 
left at Golconda — the King having asked for him 
from him very earnestly.^ This Prince always suffered 
from a pain in the head, and the physicians had ordered 
him to be bled under the tongue in four places ; but 
he was unable to find any one willing to undertake 
it — for, regarding surgery, the people of the country 
understand nothing about it. 

Before De Lan entered the service of the King 
he was asked if he could bleed well, to which he 
replied that it was the least difficult part of surgery. 

1 Called Pieter de Lange in Histoire Ge 7 ieral des Voyages^ vol. xiii, 
p. 35. According to Valentyn he afforded good service to his country 
as their representative at the Court of Golconda till 1656. He was 
succeeded by another surgeon, who died in 1660, after which the Dutch 
established a factory at Golconda. On p. 289 we have been told that 
Claude Mailld of Bourges deserted M. Cheteur and set up as surgeon 
to Mir Juinla. * 



302 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


It was with great reluctance that the Batavian Envoy- 
consented to leave him. But he did not wish to dis- 
oblige the King, and De Lan received 800 pagodas 
as salary. Some days after the Envoy’s departure the 
King summoned this surgeon and told him that he 
wished him to bleed him on the following day in four 
places under the tongue, as his physicians had directed, 
but that he should take care not to draw more than 
eight ounces. De Lan returning to the Court on the 
following day, was conducted into a room by two or 
three eunuchs, and four old women came to conduct 
him to a bath where, having undressed and washed him 
well, especially his hands, they anointed him with drugs 
and aromatics ; and in place of his own clothes, which 
were of European make, they gave him a garment made 
according to the fashion of the country. They then 
took him to the King, where they brought basins of 
gold which the physicians who were present weighed ; 
these were to receive the blood. He then bled the 
King under the tongue in four places, and he did it so 
skilfully that, on weighing the blood with the basins, he 
found that he had drawn eight ounces exactly.^ The 
King was so satisfied with this operation that he gave 
him 300 pagodas, which are equal to nearly 700 dcus. 
The young Queen and the Queen -dowager having 
heard of it, desired that he would come to bleed them, 
but I bel^ve it was more from the curiosity they had to 
see him than for any need they had to be bled, for he 
was a young and well-made man, and probably in their 
lives they had not seen a stranger close — for from a 
distance the thing is not impossible, since from the 

^ He was, therefore, successful under conditions somewhat similar 
to those from which Shylock recoiled. 



CHAP. XIX THE FIRST PHYSICIAN OF THE KING 


303 


place where they stay they are able to see without being 
themselves seen. De Lan was then brought into a 
chamber, where the same women who had taken him 
to the bath before he had bled the King uncovered his 
arms, which they washed well, and especially his hands, 
after which they anointed him with scented oil, as they 
had done when he went to bleed the King. That 
being done, they drew a curtain, and the young Queen 
putting out an arm through a hole, the surgeon bled 
her, and he afterwards did the same for the Queen 
mother. The first bestowed on him 50, and the other 
30 pagodas} with some pieces of gold brocade. 

Two days after our arrival we went to salute the 
son of the Nawdb, and were told that we could not 
speak to him on that day. The following day we 
returned, and as the same thing was repeated, some 
one told us that we might amuse ourselves in that 
manner for a long time, and that he was a young noble 
who scarcely ever left the presence of the King, and 
that on leaving the palace he shut himself up in his 
harem with his women. The surgeon, De Lan, seeing 
that our business might become protracted, offered to 
speak of it to the first physician of the King, who was 
also in his confidence, who, having shown much friend- 
ship for the Batavian Envoy and for De Lan himself 
could easily find an opportunity for obliging us. In 
short, as soon as De Lan had spoken to hinS he sent 
for us, in order to inquire what service he could render 
us. After he had saluted us, he caressed us a thousand 
times, and, having invited us to be seated, ordered 
some fruits of the country to be brought. He then 
inquired whence we had come, and upon what subject 
1 About .1^25 and .£15. 



304 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


we desired to speak to the King ; and having told him 
that we had some choice pearls which we wished to 
show to his Majesty, he asked us to show them to him 
the following day — this we did. After he had seen 
them, he told us to replace them in their little bags, 
desiring' us to close them with our seal, because all 

o 

things presented to the King should be sealed with 
the seal of the merchant, and when the King has seen 
it he places his, in order that there may be no fraud. 
Thus we left the whole sealed packet in his hands, and 
he promised to show it to the King, and render us 
a good account of the service which he had undertaken 
in order to oblige us. 

The following morning, very early, we went to 
hunt with De Lan, and on returning, at eight or nine 
o’clock A.M., we went to the river’s bank to see how 
the elephants of the King and the great nobles are 
washed. The elephant enters the water up to the 
belly, and lying down on one side takes water from time 
to time in its trunk and throws it upon the uncovered 
portion of its body in order to wash it well. The 
keeper then takes a kind of pumicestone, and rubbing 
the skin cleans it of all the dirt which has accumulated 
upon it. Some believe that when this animal lies on the 
ground it cannot get up by itself d this is quite contrary 
to what I have seen, for as soon as the keeper has rubbed 
it well on one side he orders it to turn on the other, 
which the elephant does promptly, and after it is well 
washed on both sides it leaves the river and remains 
for some time on the bank in order to dry itself. Then 
the keeper brings a pot full of red or yellow paint, 

1 This old fable, though discountenanced by Pliny, has had a 
wonderfully persistent existence. 



CHAP. XIX 


TAVERNIER LEAVES GOLCONDA 


305 


and paints lines on its forehead, around the eyes, on 
the chest, and on the back, rubbing it then with 
cocoanut oil to strengthen the nerves, some keepers 
finally adding false tinsel on the forehead.^ 

On the I5th^ [October] the chief physician sent for 
us at two o’clock p.m., and returned us our pearls, care- 
fully sealed with the King’s seal, which his Majesty 
had ordered to be placed upon them after he had seen 
them. He asked us the price of each, this we told 
him, and, as he had a eunuch with him who noted all 
down, the latter, being astonished at seeing pearls of 
such a price, remarked that we took the people of the 
court of the King of Golconda for persons without 
judgment or knowledge, and that he saw daily other 
precious things which were brought to the King. I 
replied sharply to the eunuch that I could well believe 
that he knew the price of a female slave better than 
that of a jewel, and so saying we shut up our pearls, 
and taking leave of the physician, returned to our 
lodging. We had no sooner arrived there than we sent 
to hire two coaches, each of us having already a bridle 
horse, and, on the following day, in the morning, we left 
Golconda, and were not able to travel more than a 
league and a half that day, because the Portuguese, 
English, and Dutch gunners of the King escorted us, 
and we spent our time in enjoying ourselves. 

There is no need to repeat here what I have said at 

^ This sort of decoration, like the washing, is practised in India at 
the present day. 

2 Thus in the edition of 1676, but in other editions this date is 
given as the 25th. M. Joret {J. B. Tavernier^ p. 13 1) concludes from the 
latter that Tavernier left for Surat on the 26th. But it appears probable 
that the 25 th is a misprint, and that it was on the earlier date, i,e, the 1 5 th. 
Hence his departure for Surat would have been on the 1 6th of October. 


VOL. I 


X 



306 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


the beginning of this volume, and as we returned from 
Golconda to Surat by the same route as I took from 
Surat to Golconda, there being no other, — I have 
nothing to say except that, having left Golconda 
immediately after the reply which I made to the 
eunuch, the King, who did not hear of it for two days 
after our departure, sent four or five horsemen after us 
with orders to bring us back to court if they found us. 
VVe had already made five marches from Golconda, one 
of them being in the territories of the Great Mogul, 
when one of these horsemen came to us at sunset, his 
companions having remained on the frontier of the two 
kingdoms, rightly believing that as we had passed the 
boundary we would not be willing to return. This horse- 
man showed us the order to make us return which he 
had received from the King, his master, who had told 
him that he would buy our pearls, and that he thought it 
very strange that we had left without saying anything. 
As we were no longer in the territory of Golconda the 
horseman could only urge us to return with him, giving 
us all possible assurances that we should be satisfied, 
and M. du Jardin had almost yielded ; but I, knowing 
the atmosphere of the country better, told the horse- 
man frankly that it was impossible, and after he had 
left I made my companion comprehend my reasons 
for being unwilling to return to Golconda. 

Having arrived at Surat,^ where a few days after- 
wards M. DU Jardin died of an effusion of bile, as I 

^ As he left Golconda on the i6th of October, and the journey 
thither took from twenty-one to twenty-six days, according to the route 
travelled, he should have reached Surat either on the 7th or the 12th 
of November. As stated in the previous note, M. Joret has been 
misled by a misprint to the conclusion that Tavernier started for Surat 
on the 26th. Further, he seems to mistake this record of the death 



CHAP. XI.X 


NAWAB SHAISTA KHAN 


307 


have related in my account of Persia, I made arrange- 
ments to go to Agra to see Shah JAhan, who was 
then on the throne. But the Naw 6 ,b ShaistA KhAn, 
brother-in-law of the King, and Governor of the 
Province of GujarAt, of whom I have elsewhere 
spoken, sent to me from AhmadAbAd, where he resided, 
one of the principal officers of his household, in order 
to tell me that having heard I had some beautiful 
jewels to sell he would be much pleased if I went to 
him, assuring me that he would pay for them as 
liberally as the King. I received this message during 
the illness of M. du Jardin, who died on the ninth 
day ; and after we had rendered him our last duties at 
Surat, I went to AhmadAbAd, where I at once trans- 
acted some business with the Nawdb. As he under- 
stood all kinds of jewels perfectly well, we were at once 
agreed, and there was no difference between us save 
as to the nature of the payment. He gave me a 
choice of coins, and only stipulated that I should take 
golden or silver rupees, but this Prince giving me to 
understand that he did not wish that so large a sum 
should be seen leaving his house, suggested that I should 
take my payment in golden rupees, which would appear 
less. I agreed to what he advised, and he showed me 
some very fine gold, namely, old rupees which apparently 
had not seen the light for a long time. But as the current 
price of the golden rupee is only 14 silver rupees,^ and 

of M. du Jardin for that of M. Ardilli^re his son. Tavernier’s reference 
to the latter as being alive in 1653 is, therefore, not inconsistent, and 
further we have mention {Persian Travels^ Book II, chap, x) of a Baron 
d’Ardilli^re being in Marseilles with our author in 1657, but I cannot 
say that he was the same person. See Jean Baptiste Tavernier^ by 
Joret, pp, 1 14 and 131. 

1 From this proportion, with the rupee at 2s. 3d., the gold mohur 
was worth 31s. 6d. (See Appendix.) 



308 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


he wished to pass his for 14^, or at the least for 
14^, this almost ended the transaction, as I made 
him understand that upon so large a sum I could not 
consent to lose a quarter upon every golden rupee. 
Finally, in order to satisfy him, I was obliged to take 
them at iq-g- rupees of silver ; for this Prince, who was 
otherwise magnificent and generous, showed himself 
a stern economist in matters of purchase.^ 

During my residence at Ahmadabad he sent me 
every day, to the house of the Dutch where I lodged, 
four silver dishes from his table containing pillatt, and 
choice meats, and one day when the King sent him ten 
or twelve men bearing apples, which had been received 
from Persia by way of KandahAr, he presented me 
with two dishes of them, which would have been worth 
at Ahmadabad, on account of their scarcity, 300 or 400 
rupees. I gave a part of these fine fruits to the Dutch 
and to the ladies, and we amused ourselves well 
during my sojourn there. Moreover, ShAista KhAn 
gave me a khil'at^ complete, with sword and khaii- 
jar;^ this was worth more than 1000 rupees; and 
desiring to make me a further present of a horse, he 
asked me what kind I wished for. I replied that since 
he was pleased to give me my choice, I preferred a 
fresh and lively horse rather than an aged one. He 
gave me one from his stud, which I mounted forthwith 
and took to the house of the Dutch, but not without 
difficulty, for it only went by jumps, and was so 
fiery, that on my allowing a young Dutchman to 


1 This transaction has already been described, with considerable 
difference in the details, on pp. et seq, 

2 Khil’at (see pp. 20, 98, etc.) 

3 Khanjar^ i,e, dagger (see p. 100, and Book III, chap. xxiv). 



CHAP. XIX 


TAVERNIER REVISITS GOLCONDA 


309 


mount it, he, who thought he could ride it better 
than I, found himself promptly out of the saddle, 
being unable to manage the horse. Having com- 
municated to ShAista Khan that an older one would 
be more suitable for me, he ordered his master of the 
horse to give me one which, although it had belonged 
to his father, was still fit for service, and had cost 
formerly more than 3000 dcus} As I did not require 
it for my journeys I sold it for 400 rupees to a French- 
man, whom I was at the same time able to place in the 
service of this Prince, where he might have saved much 
money if he had not squandered it in debauchery. 

From AhmadabAd I returned to Surat, and from 
Surat I travelled ^ to Golconda, and from thence to 
the mine to make my purchase of diamonds. On 
returning to Surat I arranged to go to Persia, but 
experienced great difficulties, which were followed by 
a voyage where I was exposed to dangers which I 
might have foreseen, and which I did little to avoid, 
never having feared dangers which travellers have to 
run both on sea and land, when it has been actually 
necessary for me to proceed forward. 

^ 5* See p. 2 1 for another account of this transaction, which, as 

there pointed out in the footnote, varies the details. 

2 This was on the 6th March 1653. (See Introduction.) 



CHAPTER XX 


Re him from Surat to Hormuz, and how the aitthor 
found himself engaged in a very rough and dangeroits 
naval combat, from which he escaped without accident. 

While on my return to Surat from my journey to the 
diamond mine, I learned that war had been declared 
between the English and Dutch, and that the latter 
would not send any more vessels to Persia. The 
English also said the same, because they had sent four 
which they expected to return every hour, and conse- 
quently I found the sea closed as regards my passage 
to Hormuz. I might have taken the land journey by 
Agra and Kandahar ; but the road was very long, and 
it was impossible, or at the least very difficult, to travel 
by it on account of the Kandahar war, and because 
the armies of Persia and India were in the field. 
While afraid that I should be obliged to spend a long 
time in a place where I had no occupation, there 
arrived at Surat on the ad of January^ five large 
Dutch vessels from Batavia ; this rejoiced me exceed- 
ingly, being certain to obtain all I wanted from the 
Dutch Commander, who was a friend of mine. I may 
say, in passing, that in all my journeys there has never 
been one of these commanders (it is thus they call the 
chiefs of these settlements) who has not manifested 

^ This was in the year 1654. 



CHAP. XX 


PRIVATE TRADE IN DIAMONDS 


311 


consideration for me, and who has not been pleased 
to have an opportunity of showing me kindness. I 
have also sought on all occasions to serve them, and 
especially when I went to the mine, by purchasing 
diamonds for them with private money of which they 
did not wish the Company to know anything, because 
it is forbidden to them to embark in private trade, 
and moreover they understood but little about the 
purchase of precious stones. But although these small 
services which they asked me to render them had been 
without profit, that did not save me from being sub- 
jected one day, on account of one of them, to some 
unpleasantness at Batavia, from which I did not escape 
without trouble, as I shall hereafter describe in the 
sequel of my history.^ I have also been very careful 
in all the places where the Dutch have settlements, 
and where I made any sojourn, to contribute as far 
as possible to the amusement of their ladies.® As 
I never came from Persia to India without bringing 
good wine and fine fruits, and always had some one 
with me who understood cooking better than the 
Dutch in India, and knew how to make good 
soup and to bake, I entertained them often with 
collations, where pigeons in pyramids, flavoured with 
pistachios, were not lacking. All the amusements 
of the country, which I have sufficiently described, 
followed these small collations ; and the ladies gave me 
to understand that they were much pleased with these 
parties, to which I invited them with their husbands. 

The Commander of Surat being, as I have 

1 See Book III, chap. xxii. 

2 One might have supposed that this received its own reward at 
the time. 



312 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


said, a friend of mine, offered me a passage upon 
whichever I pleased of the five vessels which had 
arrived from Batavia ; but, on the other hand, pointed 
out the risk which I ran of meeting the English, 
and of being engaged, in that event, in a combat, which 
would be unavoidable. My friends also begged me to 
consider the great danger to which I exposed myself. 
But all that they could say to me was of no avail, and 
rather than lose the time uselessly at Surat, where I 
had nothing to do, I was firmly resolved to embark. 
As the Dutch vessels were men-of-war rather than 
merchant craft, the Commander ordered three to be un- 
loaded as quickly as possible, and sent them in advance 
with instructions to seek the four English vessels which 
he knew ought to be on their return from Persia, laden 
with goods, and consequently less in a condition to fight 
than vessels which were not. The two others followed 
three or four days afterwards, this’ interval being re- 
quired by them in order to ship supplies for all five. 

I embarked in one of these two vessels which left 
last, and having set sail on the 8th of January,^ we 
arrived on the 12th before Diu,^ where we found the 
three other vessels which had preceded us. Immedi- 
ately a council of war was held to consider what 
direction we should take to meet the English, whom 
we believed had already reached Persia ; but they had 
gone but a short distance, only having left Diu two 
days before the arrival of the three first Dutch vessels. 
It was settled that we should go to Sindi,® and that, 
with anchors up, each vessel approaching Diu as 
near as it could, should fire off all its cannon at 

^ This was in 1654. (See Introduction.) 2 ^see p. 6). 

^ Scimdi in the original for Sindi (see p. i o). 



CHAP. XX 


A NAVAL ENGAGEMENT 


313 


the town. As soon as the inhabitants perceived that 
we were sailing towards the town they took flight, only 
daring to fire two shots at us. After the discharge of 
all the guns, we set our course for Sindi, where we 
arrived on the 20th of the same month, and at once 
a boat was sent on shore, the English and Dutch each 
having a house there. Our Admiral was informed 
that they daily expected the four English vessels, 
which were to embark about 200 bales of goods then 
ready on the seashore ; and upon these tidings it was 
resolved to remain there at anchor till the loth of Feb- 
ruary ; but that, if by that time they did not appear, we 
should put to sea again and seek for them in Persia. 

On the 2d of February, at break of day, we per- 
ceived some sails, but owing to their great distance were 
unable to make them out, and still less to go to meet 
them, the wind being contrary. Some believed at first 
that they were fishing-boats, but little by little, accord- 
ing as they approached, having the wind astern, we 
recognised that they were the English vessels, which 
advanced to attack us, upon the information which they 
had received, as we subsequently learned, from some 
fishermen that the Dutch vessels were simple frigates, 
of which they expected to make an easy capture. It 
is true that they had not yet seen such small Dutch 
vessels, and having been built expressly for fighting, 
they had not high bulwarks, and so appeared small 
externally, but were otherwise of great strength. 
Our “ Admiral ” had forty-eight pieces of cannon, and 
in case of necessity was able to accommodate up 
to sixty, and had more than 120 men. Towards 
nine o’clock — the English, who advanced with all sails 
set, not being far off — in order not to lose time in raising 



314 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


the anchors, we cut cables and each one set himself 
to do his duty. But the wind, as I have said, being 
directly contrary, we were unable to approach them. 
As they had thereby all the advantage on their side 
with the aid of the wind, they came in good order, and 
always stem on ; and their Admiral and Vice-AdmiraP 
came at length so close to the side of the Dutch 
Admiral that the English Admiral was caught by an 
anchor on the side of our Admiral. Not to conceal 
the fact, our Admiral showed but little courage in this 
encounter, for instead of boarding then and there, the 
occasion being so favourable, he cut the cable in order 
to free his vessel. All the ports were so well closed 
that from outside one could not say how many cannon 
there were. But after the English had made their 
first discharge, and our Admiral had returned it, 
which was much more effective, the English, seeing 
the number of his guns and the crowd which appeared 
on the deck, began to lose heart, and the wind proving 
favourable, drew off. However, the English Vice- 
Admiral having reloaded his guns, came skilfully to the 
vessel on which I was. Our Captain reserved his fire 
until we were nearly alongside one another, notwith- 
standing the loss of ten men which we had sustained. 
When we were not more than a pistol-shot off we let 
him have a discharge from all our guns, which broke 
his foremast. The two vessels coming in contact, our 
Captain was the first to board, and, accompanied by 
many brave men with hatchets, they cut all the ropes. 
While the two vessels were close to one another the 
sub-pilot and I fired a cannon-shot so effectively into 

^ These terms are used both for the ships themselves and their 
commanders. 



CHAP. XX 


A NAVAL ENGAGEMENT 


315 


the cabin of the English Captain that the bullet set 
fire to some powder cartridges which had been placed 
there. This unforeseen fire caused the English to fear 
that the conflagration increasing would envelop all 
their vessel ; and our Captain, who feared the same 
thing, commanded his crew to return into our vessel, 
where he ordered the English to follow ten by ten, 
and then immediately drew off. The courage of the 
crew being revived, they found means to put out the 
fire of the English vessel, in which ten or twelve of 
our sailors were left; but our Captain, who had 
acquired much glory in this action, died at the end of 
two or three days of his wounds. 

In the meantime another of our vessels vigorously 
attacked a large English ship of about thirty guns 
which held aloof, and had already damaged it badly, 
when the vessel upon which I was went to assist in 
sending it to the bottom, by giving it a whole broad- 
side, which completely disabled it from further defence. 
The English Captain seeing himself lost, immediately 
ran up the white flag ^nd asked for quarter, which 
was granted him. The carpenters did their best to 
close up the holes made by the cannon, the vessel 
having been pierced in many places ; but seeing them- 
selves deserted by the sailors, who rather than aid 
them preferred to drink the Shiraz wine, of which they 
had a quantity in the bottom of the hold before being 
taken by the Dutch, they left their work and went to 
drink with them. The Dutch having descended into 
their boats to the number of thirty or forty, in order to 
take possession of the English vessel, and not seeing 
any one on deck, went below, where they found the 
sailors, who, not thinking of their death, which was 



316 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK I 


closer than they supposed, drank one another’s health. 
The Dutch being no wiser, and not knowing the con- 
dition of the vessel, which was on the point of founder- 
ing, began to drink with them, and some moments 
afterwards the vessel went to the bottom. All 
perished miserably together, both the victors and the 
vanquished, without any one being saved except the 
English Captain and two French Capuchins, who, 
seizing the opportunity while these brutes made them- 
selves drunk, descended into a boat, and cutting the 
rope by which it was attached to the vessel, came to 
the one in which I was, where they were well received. 
Our master pilot then took charge, the Captain, as I 
have said, being badly wounded, and he at once sent 
these persons to the Admiral, to dispose of them as 
might seem good to him. The following day the 
Admiral sent to invite me to his vessel, where all the 
Captains had to assemble to render their thanks to 
God for the victory which they had achieved over 
their enemies. We afterwards dined with him, and 
the Capuchin Fathers being of the company, he told 
me that, as they were of my country, they might, if 
they preferred it, go to the vessel in which I was, and 
he would issue orders that they should be well treated ; 
this was done, and I took them with me the same 
evening, giving them, as far as I was able, whatever 
was necessary for their comfort. 

The vessels which go from Persia to India are 
generally laden with wine and money, and that which 
went to the bottom carried more than the others ; this 
was the reason why it held aloof, not joining in 
the fray. This was a great loss, which might have 
been avoided if the Dutch had had more courage and 



CHAP. XX 


A NAVAL ENGAGEMENT 


317 


more prevision ; and the English Admiral, seeing the 
misfortune which had happened to one of his vessels, 
joined his own with another, and they took flight to- 
gether. For indeed, to say the truth, the want of en- 
terprise on the part of the Dutch Admiral and the other 
Captains caused them to miss the certain capture of 
these fugitives ; and it would have been an easy victory 
if they had known how to profit by their opportunities. 

This combat was not finished without my life 
having been in jeopardy, more particularly from a 
cannon-shot which struck two Dutchmen who were 
close to me, and a splinter of the vessel cut open 
the head of another and carried away a part of my 
coat, so that I was covered with the blood of these 
Dutchmen who were slain at my side. The combat 
being over, we returned to the anchorage at Sindi ; 
but a strong wind having arisen, and the sea being very 
high, we were obliged to go to moorings 6 leagues 
higher on the eastern coast, where we remained till 
the 20th of the same month^ ; we occupied this time 
in the care of the sick, and many of the English died 
of their wounds there. At length having reached the 
anchorage at Sindi, both in order to obtain water and 
some stores, and also for the purpose of raising the 
anchors which we had left behind, we remained there 
till the 28th, and after a pleasant cruise landed at 
Gombroon on the 7th of March. 

My first cares when I was out of the vessel were to 
return thanks to God for having delivered me from this 
danger, and from many others which I had undergone 
in my previous travels, and I still offer Him my daily 
thanksgivings for the same. 

1 February 1654. 




BOOK II 

Historical and Political description of the Empire of the 
Great Mogul. 




CHAPTER I 


Acco^mt of the last wars in Hindustan, in which the 

present condition of the Empire and of the Cotirt 

of the Moguls are set forth. 

I WRITE this history^ without any commentary, and 
without describing how I became aware that these 
things happened during the sojourn which I made 
in the country.^ I leave it to the reader, according 
to his pleasure, to make his own moral and political 
reflections. It is sufficient for me to give a faithful 
picture of the powerful Empire of the Moguls, in 
accordance with the sketch of it which I have taken 
on the spot, not wishing to increase this volume by 
any useless discussion. 

This great and vast Empire, which constitutes 
the larger part of Hindustan,® and extends from 
the mountains upon this side of the river Indus to 

1 With reference to the historical chapters contained in this Booh^ 
there can be no attempt to correct or criticise all the author’s statements, 
which are in conflict with those by other authorities. 

2 There is so much similarity between this account and that by 
Bernier in his Histoire de la dernier revohdion des Etats du Grand 
Moguls Paris, 1670, that it cannot but be supposed that that author 
supplied Tavernier with information, either when they were fellow- 
travellers or after Bernier had published his History. 

2 Here Hindustan, or rather Indostan^ is used in the European 
sense as synonymous with India, not as the natives of India use it, i.e, 
restricted to the valley of the Ganges. 

VOL. I Y 



322 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


the other side of the Ganges, touches on the east 
the Kingdoms of Arakan, Tipperah, and Assam ^ ; on 
the west Persia and Tartary of the Usbegs ; on the 
south the Kingdoms of Golconda and Bijapur ; and 
on the north it reaches to the Caucasus, having on the 
north-east the Kingdom of Bhutan, from whence comes 
musk, and to the north-west the country of Chegathay,^ 
or the Usbegs. 

Many persons having written about India itself, 
and of the genius of the Indians, I pass to sub- 
jects of more importance, but less well known, and I 
shall speak first of the family of the Kings of India, 
commonly known as the Moguls, that is to say 
whites, because the men who formerly conquered the 
country were white, the native born Indians being 
brown or olive-coloured. 

Aurangzeb, who reigns at present, is the eleventh 
in direct line of the descendants of the great Temur- 
LENG, commonly called Tamerlane, who by the extent 
and renown of his conquests from China to Poland 
surpassed the glory of the most renowned captains of 
previous ages. 

His successors succeeded in conquering the whole 
of India, between the two rivers,® thereby destroying 
many Kings, and Aurangzeb has to-day under his 
authority the Kingdoms of Gujarat, Deccan, Delhi, 

^ Aracaiij Tipra, and Assen in the original. 

2 Cathay originally meant Northern China; subsequently, in the 
sixteenth century, it came to be regarded as a separate country north of 
China (see Anglo-hidia7i Glossary). In the time of Kublai Khan “the 
Chagatai Khanate, or Middle Empire of the Tartars, with its capital at 
Almalik, included the modern Dsungaria, part of Chinese Turkestan, 
Transoxiana, and Afghanistan ” {Cathay and the way thither.^ by Colonel 
Yule, Introduction, p. cxxi.) 3 Indus and Ganges. 



CHAP. I 


THE MOGUL EMPERORS 


323 


Multan, Lahore, Kashmir, Bengal, and many other 
countries, without speaking of many Rajas, or Kinglets, 
who are his vassals, and pay him tribute. The follow- 
ing is the succession of these Kings from Tamerlane 
to Aurangzeb, who reigns at present : — 

I. Temur-leng,^ i.e. “ the cripple,” because he had 
one leg shorter than the other, is buried at Samarcand 
in the country of Chegathay or Tartary of the 
U SBEGS ; it is also the place where he was born. 

II. Miran-Shah,^ son of Temur-leng. 

III. Sultan Muhammad, son of Miran ShAh. 

IV. Sultan Abu Sayyid Mirza,® son of Muhammad. 

V. Umr Shekh Mirza,^ son of Sultan Abu Sayyid. 

VI. Sultan Babar,® i.e. “ the brave Prince,” son of 
Umr Shekh, and the first of the Moguls who made 
himself all powerful in India. He died in the year 

1532. 

VII. HumAyun, which means “happy,” son of 
Sultan BAbar, died in the year 1552.® 

VIII. Abdul Fateh Jalal-ud-din Muhammad, 
commonly called Akbar, that is to say “ the mighty,” 
son of HumAyun, reigned fifty -four years, and died 
a.h. 1014, A.D. 1605. 

IX. Sultan Salim, otherwise called JahAngir 
Padishah, i.e. Conqueror of the World, succeeded 
Akbar, his father, and died in the year 1627. He 

1 Commonly called Tamerlane, but Tavernier’s rendering is closer 
to the real name, viz. T^xram-lang^ z>. Taimur the lame. 

2 Miram Cha in the original. 

3 Abousaid in the original. 

4 Hameth Schek in the original. 

^ Mirza Zahir-ud-din Muhammad B£bar, born 15th February 1483. 
He invaded India in the winter of 1525, and died in ^ot 1532 as 

above stated. ^ Humdyan died in 15 5 ^* 



324 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


had four sons, the first named Sultan Khusru, the 
second Sultan Khurram, the third Sultan Parwez, 
fourth Shah DAnial. 

X. Sultan Khurram, the second of the four sons, 
succeeded JahAngir, his father, and was recognised 
as sovereign by the nobles of the Kingdom in the 
fortress of Agra, under the name of Sultan ShAh 
Bedin Muhammad, but he desired to be called ShAh- 
JahAn, i.e. King of the World. 

XI. Aurangzeb, i.e. the Ornament of the Throne, is 
the King who reigns at present. 

The accompanying figure ^ shows the form of the 
coins which the Kings cause to be thrown to the people 
when they ascend the throne. They bear the arms 
or seals of the Kings whom I have just named. The 
largest seal, in the middle, is that of ShAh-JahAn, the 
tenth King, for Aurangzeb, since he became King, 
has not had any of these pieces of bounty coined — 
these coins are nearly all of silver, only a small 
number being of gold. 

The Great Mogul is certainly the most powerful 
and the richest monarch of Asia; all the Kingdoms 
which he possesses constitute his domain, he being 
absolute master of all the country, of which he receives 
the whole revenue. In the territories of this Prince, the 
nobles are but Royal Receivers, who render account of 
the revenues to the Governors of Provinces, and they 
to the Treasurers General and Ministers of Finance, 
so that this grand King of India, whose territories are 
so rich, fertile, and populous, has no power near him 
equal to his own. 

1 Tavernier’s beautifully executed plate of these tokens is not 
reproduced. 



CHAPTER II 


Concerning the sichiess and supposed death of Shah 
Jahan, King of India, and the rebellion of the 
Princes, his sons. 

The revolutions which took place in the Empire of 
the Great Mogul on account of the supposed death 
of ShAh JahAn are full of so many important and 
memorable incidents, that they deserve to be known 
throughout the whole world. This great monarch 
reigned more than forty years, less as a King over his 
subjects than as a father of a family over his house 
and children ; to such an extent was this the case 
that, during his reign, the police was so strict in all 
things, and particularly with reference to the safety of 
the roads, that there was never any necessity for 
executing a man for having committed theft In his 
old age he committed an indiscretion ; and, moreover, 
used some drugs of so stringent a character that they 
brought on a malady which nearly brought him to the 
grave. This necessitated his shutting himself up for 
two or three months in his harem with his women, and 
during that time he showed himself to his people but 
rarely, and at long intervals ; this caused them to 
believe that he was dead. For custom requires these 
Kings to show themselves in public three times every 
week, or, at the very least, every fifteen days. 



326 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Shah Jahan had six children, four sons and two 
daughters. The eldest of the sons was called DarA 
Shah ; the second Sultan ShujA ; the third Aurang- 
ZEB, who reigns at- present ; and the last MurAd 
Baksh. The eldest of the two daughters was called 
Begum Sahib, and the younger RoushenArA Begum.^ 
All these names, in the language of the country, mean 
titles of honour, as the wise, the brave, the accom- 
plished, etc. ; and we practise nearly the same in 
Europe by the (use of the) surnames which we give to 
our Princes, of just, bold, and affable, with this differ- 
ence only, that these surnames are not given at birth, 
but after certain proof has been shown (of the posses- 
sion) of the virtues which merit that their memories 
should pass to posterity under such fine names. ShAh 
JahAn loved his four sons equally well, and had estab- 
lished them as Governors or Viceroys of four of his 
most considerable Provinces, or, if you prefer it, his 
four principal Kingdoms. DArA ShAh, the eldest, 
remained near the person of the King in the Kingdom 
of Delhi, and had the Government of Sindi,^ where he 
placed a lieutenant in his absence ; Sultan ShujA had 
for his district the Kingdom of Bengal ; Aurangzeb 
was sent to the Kingdom of Deccan ; and MurAd 
Baksh to that of GujarAt. But much as ShAh JahAn 
sought to give equal contentment to his four sons, 
their ambition was not satisfied by this allotment, and 
it overthrew all the projects that the good father had 
made to preserve peace between his children. 

ShAh JahAn being then sick, and having retired into 
the women’s quarter without showing himself for many 

1 Called Rauchenara Begum in the original. 

2 Sind or Scind (see p. lo n.) 



CHAP. II 


SICKNESS OF SHAH JAHAN 


327 


days, the rumour spread that he was dead, and that 
DarA Shah concealed his death in order to arrange 
his affairs and secure for himself the whole of the 
Empire. It is certain that the King, believing that 
he was about to die and was near his last hour, ordered 
DarA ShAh to assemble all the Omrahs^ or nobles of 
the Kingdom, and seat himself on the throne, which 
belonged to him, being the eldest of all the brothers. 
He also told him that if God prolonged his life for 
some days he desired to see him, before he died, in the 
peaceable possession of his Empire ; and this intention 
which he had for his eldest son was especially right, 
because he had observed for some time that the three 
other Princes manifested much less respect and affection 
for their father than DArA ShAh had. At this conver- 
sation which the King held with his son, DArA ShAh, 
who honoured him extremely and loved him tenderly, 
replied that he prayed to God for the life of his 
majesty, which he hoped would be long, and that 
while God preserved it he would never dream of 
mounting the throne, but would consider himself 
always happy in being his subject. Indeed, this 
Prince did not absent himself for a moment from the 
presence of his father, in order to be at hand to attend 
upon him during his sickness ; and, wishing to be 
present at all times, he slept at night close to the 
King’s bed on a carpet spread on the floor. 

However, upon the false report of the death of 
ShAh JahAn, his three other sons straightway stirred 
themselves, and each laid claim to their father’s 
throne. MurAd Baksh, the youngest, who held the 
Government of the Province of GujarAt, immediately 

1 See p. 9 S. 



328 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


sent troops to lay siege to Surat, the largest and most 
frequented port in all India. The city, which was 
without protection, made no resistance, for it has only 
bad walls, which are open in many places ; but the 
citadel, where the treasure was stored, was defended 
vigorously ; and this young, ambitious Prince, who had 
need of money, used all his powers to become master 
of it. ShahbAsh Khan,^ one of his eunuchs, was 
General of his army, an industrious and energetic man, 
who conducted the siege with all the skill of an old 
commander. 

Finding that he was unable to carry the place by 
main force, he had two mines made by an European, 
who succeeded completely, and having fired the first 
on the 29th of December 1659, it brought down a 
large portion of the walls, which filled the moat, and 
caused great alarm to the besieged. But they quickly 
plucked up courage, and, although they were few in 
number, defended themselves bravely for the space 
of more than forty days, during which time they did 
much injury to the army of MurAd Baksh, and slew 
many of his soldiers. Shahbash Khan, irritated by 
this vigorous resistance, caused search to be made for 
the women and children, and also the relatives and 
friends of the artillerymen in the fortress, in order to 
place them in front of his soldiers during the attacks 
which he made ; and he also sent one of the 
brothers of the Governor of the place to parley with 
him, and to make an advantageous offer to him, if he 
would deliver it up into his hands. But the Governor, 
a good servant of the King, not having received any 
certain tidings of his death, replied that he recognised 
^ Chabas Kan in the original. 



CHAP. II 


CAPTURE OF SURAT 


329 


no other master than ShAh JahAn, who had confided 
the place to him, which he would not relinquish but to 
the King himself, or to whoever he pleased to order ; 
that he honoured MurAd Baksh as Prince and son of 
the King his master, but not so much so as to hand the 
place over to him without receiving an express order 
to do so from the King. 

The eunuch seeing the resolution of the Governor, 
made the most stringent threats to the besieged, swear- 
ing that he would kill all their relatives, their women, 
and their children, if they did not deliver themselves 
up to him on the following day. But the considera- 
tion of blood was without effect upon the besieged, and 
would not have had any ; and it was only the breach, 
which they could not defend on account of the small- 
ness of their numbers, and the fear of the second mine, 
that at length obliged the Governor to give himself up 
with all the honourable conditions which he was able 
to demand ; these were faithfully kept by ShAhbAsh 
KhAn, who seized the treasure, which he carried off 
to AhmadAbAd, where MurAd Baksh was occupied in 
oppressing the people in order to raise money. 

The news of the capture of Surat having been 
conveyed to this Prince, he immediately had a throne 
prepared, and being seated upon it on the day appointed 
for the ceremony, proclaimed himself to be King, 
not only of GujarAt, but of all the Empire of ShAh 
JahAn, his father. At the same time he had money 
coined, and he despatched new Governors to all the 
towns. But as his throne is badly founded it will fall 
to the ground quickly ; and this Prince, the youngest of 
all, for having wished to usurp a sceptre which did not 
belong to him, will be confined in a close prison. 



330 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Prince DArA ShAh was anxious to succour Surat, 
but it was impossible for him (to do so), for not only was 
he occupied in assisting the King, his father, during his 
sickness, but he had to watch his second brother, Sultan 
ShujA, who was much more powerful than MurAd 
Baksh, and caused him far more trouble. He was 
already advanced into the Kingdom of Lahore,^ and 
had entirely subjected that of Bengal. All that DArA 
ShAh was able to do was to despatch with speed his 
eldest son, Suliman Sheko,^ with a powerful army 
against Sultan ShujA. In short, this young Prince 
defied his uncle, and having driven him into the Pro- 
vince of Bengal, the frontiers of which he secured by 
strong garrisons, returned to DArA ShAh his father. 
In the meantime MurAd Baksh, recognised as King in 
the Kingdom of GujarAt, carried all his thoughts to- 
wards the Empire of India, to the destruction of his 
brothers, and to the establishment of his throne either 
in Agra or JahAnAbAd. 

Meanwhile, Aurangzeb, as ambitious and more 
cunning than his brothers, let them expend their first 
fire, and concealed his designs from them, which he 
will spring upon them, however, before long to their 
great injury. He feigned to have no pretension to the 
Empire, as though he had renounced the world, and 
led the life of a Dervish, or solitary devotee.® In order 
to play this part with greater success he communicated 

1 Lahore is here a mistake for Behar. He could not have reached 
Lahoi6j and if he had, it would not have served his purpose. (See p. 336.) 

2 Soliman Cheko in the original. He was accompanied by Raja Jdi 
Singh. The engagement took place at Benares. 

3 As will be seen from the context, there are many striking points 
of resemblance between the conduct of Aurangzeb and that of Richard 
III of England. 



CHAP. 11 BATTLE BETWEEN SHAh JA HAN’S SONS 


331 


to his younger brother, Murad Baksh, that he per- 
ceived that he was desirous of reigning, and wished to 
aid him in his object, and that the throne being his 
desert on account of his bravery, he would aid him with 
his armies and money to vanquish DarA Shah, who was 
an obstacle in the way. This young Prince, having 
little judgment, and being blinded by the prospect 
of his good fortune, was only too ready to believe 
Aurangzeb, and having joined forces with him,^ 
agreed to advance with him on Agra to take posses- 
sion of it. DAra ShAh came to meet them, and the 
battle was commenced, as unfortunately for him as it 
was auspiciously for the two brothers. This Prince, 
trusting too much to the principal officers in his army, 
contrary to the advice of the General who commanded, 
who was his Prime Minister, and was faithful to him, 
believed himself to be able to secure a victory by 
attacking his brothers first, without giving them time 
to rest.^ The first shock was rough and bloody, and 
MurAd Baksh, full of fire and courage, fighting 
like a lion, received five arrows in his body, and the 
elephant upon which he was mounted was covered 
with them. Victory tending to the side of DArA 
ShAh, Aurangzeb retired ; but quickly turned his face 
when he saw coming to his aid the traitors in DArA 
ShAh’s army, who had basely abandoned him after he 
had lost his best officers and their General. Immedi- 
ately Aurangzeb took courage, and returning to the 
combat with DArA ShAh, the latter Prince, seeing that 

1 This junction took place near Ujain in Mdlwa, whither Aurangzeb 
had marched from Burhdnpur. 

2 The forces engaged, according to Bernier, were ioo,ooo horse, 

20.000 foot, and So pieces of artillery on Bird’s side, against 30,000 to 

35.000 horse on that of Aui'angzeb and Murdd. 



332 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


he was betrayed, and had no longer anything to hope 
from the few people remaining with him, immediately 
beat his retreat, and returned to Agra, where the 
King his father was, who had already begun to amend. 
He advised his son to withdraw into the fortress at 
Delhi, and carry with him the treasure which was 
in Agra;^ this he did without loss of time, being 
accompanied by his most faithful attendants. Thus 
the victory was complete on the side of Aurangzeb 
and Murad Baksh, who before the end of the battle, 
being weakened by the loss of blood, had retired to his 
tent to have his wounds dressed. It was easy for 
Aurangzeb to gain over these traitors, not only on 
account of the enormous treasure which he had acquired, 
but because the Indians are ever inconstant and un- 
grateful. Moreover, the chiefs are generally fugitives 
from Persia, people of no birth and of little heart, who 
attach themselves to those who give most. 

Shaista KhAn, son of Asaf KhAn,^ who had 
betrayed the King BolAki, as I shall relate, in order to 
obtain the throne for ShAh JahAn, his brother-in-law; 
ShAistA KhAn, I say, uncle of these four Princes whose 
mother was his own sister, ranged himself on Aurang- 
zeb’s side, with the greater number of the principal 
officers of DArA ShAh and of MurAd Baksh, who 
abandoned their masters. MurAd Baksh at last began 
to realise the mistake he had made in having trusted 
Aurangzeb, who, seeing himself favoured by fortune, 

^ According to Bernier, SMh Jahdn’s treasure never amounted to 
6 crores of rupees, which, at the rate of 2s. 3d., would be about 
;£6, 7 50,000. This was exclusive of the precious stones and throne. 
(Hzsif. of the late Revolution^ vol. ii, p. 63.) 

2 Asaf Khan was the brother of the famous Nur Jahdn, wife of 
Jahdngir. 



CHAP. 11 


murAd is taken prisoner 


333 


lost no time in carrying out his plans. Murad Baksh, 
who with reason entertained doubts as to his brother, 
sent to him to demand half the treasure which had 
been seized, in order that he might retire into Gujarat, 
and Aurangzeb, by way of reply, assured him that he 
desired to aid him in ascending the throne, and that 
on that account he wished to consult with him ; Murad 
Baksh, finding his wounds somewhat better, went to 
see Aurangzeb his brother, who received him well and 
praised his courage, which merited, he said, the first 
Empire in the world. 

The young Prince allowed himself to be charmed 
by these soft words ; but his eunuch, Shahbash Khan, 
who had acquired for him the best part of the Kingdom 
of GujarAt, tried to excite his distrust, and make 
him realise the trap which had been set for him. But 
when Murad Baksh wished to profit by the advice of his 
eunuch it was then too late, as Aurangzeb had already 
taken his measures to ruin him. He invited MurAd 
Baksh to a feast, and the more he excused himself the 
more he was pressed to come. The young Prince, 
unable to refuse any longer, resolved to go so that 
he might conceal his mistrust, although fearing that 
the day was to be the last of his life, and that some 
deadly poison had been prepared for him. He was 
mistaken, however, for Aurangzeb did not then aim at 
his life, contenting himself with securing his person ; 
so, in place of aiding him to ascend the throne, as he 
promised, he sent him under safe custody to the for- 
tress of Gwalior, to give him time to be cured of his 
wounds, and to take his own in order to accomplish his 
designs. 



CHAPTER III 


Concerning Shah Jahan’s prison, and how he was 
punished by Aurangzeb, his third son, for the 
injustice he had done to Prince Bolaki/ his 
nephew, grandson of JahAngir, to whom, since he 
was the son of the eldest son, the Empire of the 
Moguls belonged. 

Jahangir, King of India, son of Akbar, and grand- 
son of HumAyun, enjoyed a very peaceable reign for 
the space of twenty -three years, being equally 
beloved by his subjects and his neighbours. But his 
life was too long to suit the ambition of two of his 
sons, already advanced in years. The eldest^ raised a 
powerful army at Lahore, with the object of surprising 
his father JahAngir, and seating himself by violence 
on the throne. The King, becoming aware of the 
insolence of his son, resolved to chastise him, and 
going to meet him with a large army, took him 
prisoner, with many of the chief nobles who followed 
him. But JahAngir, being a generous Prince, who 
dearly loved his son, although he had him in his 
power was unwilling to cause him the death which he 
deserved ; and contented himself with destroying his 
sight, by ordering a hot iron to be passed over his 

1 Bolaki, also called Dawdr Baksh, son of Khusru. 

2 Namely, Khusru. 



CHAP. Ill 


SHAh JAHAN’S plots 


335 


eyes^ in the manner which, as I have described, is 
followed in Persia. The King resolved ever after to 
keep this blind son about his person, with the intention 
that his eldest' son, Sultan Bolaki, should some day 
reign ; this Prince had already several other sons, all 
being under age. But Sultan Khurram,^ who after- 
wards took the name of Shah Jahan, thinking that, as 
second son of Jahangir, he should be preferred to his 
nephew, resolved to use every effort to keep him from 
the throne, and to seat himself upon it, without wait- 
ing for the death of the King. He dissimulated, 
however, keeping his real purpose concealed, and 
appeared at first altogether submissive to the will of 
his father, who always kept the children of his eldest 
son beside him. It was by this submission that ShAh 
JahAn more easily arrived at the attainment of his ends ; 
and having in this manner gained the goodwill of his 
father, obtained permission from him to take with 
him the blind Prince his elder brother to his Govern- 
ment in the Kingdom of Deccan. He represented to 
the King that it was advisable to remove from before 
his eyes an object which had become distressing to 
him, and that this Prince, being deprived of his sight, 
would not in the future be other than a charge 
and trouble to him, and would pass the rest of his 
life with greater comfort in the Deccan. The King, 
not penetrating the designs of Khurram, consented 

^ Chardin relates how it came to pass, in the reign of Shah Abbds 
II, that the custom of destroying the sight of Princes by means of a red- 
hot blade of copper passed over the eyes was replaced by the actual 
removal of the eyeballs themselves, in consequence of some of the 
Princes who had been operated on having been found to possess partial 
sight. (Voyages^ Amsterdam Ed., 1711, vol. vi, p. 27.) 

2 Courum in the original. 



336 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


without difficulty to what he asked, and as soon as he 
had this poor Prince in his power he knew how to rid 
himself of him by the most secret means, and used the 
most plausible pretexts possible, in order to conceal his 
crime from the view of men, not considering that he 
was unable to conceal it from the eyes of God, who 
did not leave this action unpunished, as we shall 
shortly seed 

After the death of this blind Prince, Sultan 
Khurram caused himself to be called Shah Jahan, i.e. 
King of the World, and in order to uphold the title 
raised an army to finish the task which his brother had 
begun, namely the dethronement of his father JahAn- 
GIR and the taking possession of the Empire. The 
King, being much irritated by the death of his son and 
the outrage against his own person, sent considerable 
forces to chastise Khurram for so criminal an enter- 
prise, and this rebel Prince, feeling himself too weak 
to resist them, quitted the Kingdom of Deccan, 
wandering with some vagabonds who followed him, 
sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, until he 
arrived in Bengal, where he raised an army in order 
to give battle to the King. Having passed the 
Ganges, he directed his steps towards the Kingdom 
of Lahore, and the King in person confronted him 
with a more numerous and stronger army than his. 
But JahAngir, being old and distressed by the troubles 
which had been caused by his two sons, died on the 

1 Elphinstone throws some doubt upon this charge of murder 
against Shdh Jahan. {History of India^ vol. ii, p. 368.) 

2 As on p. 33O5 Lahore is here also a mistake for Behar. The only 
opposition Shdh Jahdn met with in Bengal was from the Governor of 
Rajmahalj whom he defeated in a pitched battle in 1624. (See 
Elphinstone’s India^ vol. ii, p. 332.) 



CHAP. Ill 


DEATH OF JAHANGIR 


337 


road/ and left ShAh Jahan free to pursue his designs. 
However, before he died this good King had time to 
commend the care of his grandson, Sultan Bolaki,® 
to Asaf Khan, Commander-in-Chief of his armies and 
Prime Minister of State, who governed the whole 
Empire. He ordered all his officers to recognise Bolaki 
as King and legitimate heir of his Kingdom after his 
death, declaring Sultan Khurram to be a rebel, and 
as such incapable of succeeding him on the throne. 

Moreover he made Asaf Khan swear in particular 
that he would never suffer BolAki to be killed, how- 
ever affairs might eventuate ; this oath Asaf KhAn 
swore upon his thigh, which bound him religiously in 
so far as that item, but not for his establishment on 
the throne, where he wished to place ShAh JahAn, to 
whom he had given in marriage his eldest daughter, 
mother of the four Princes and the two Princesses to 
whom I have referred in the preceding chapter. 

On the news of the King’s death being reported 
at Court, all appeared to be sorely afflicted, and imme- 
diately the nobles of the Kingdom proceeded to give 
effect to the will by recognising Sultan BolAici as 
King, he being still a youth. This Prince had two 
first cousins® who, with the King’s consent, had 
become Christians, and had made public profession of 
the same. These two young Princes, who were kind- 
hearted, observed that Asaf KhAn, father-in-law of 
ShAh JahAn, and father of ShAistA KhAn, of whom I 
have often spoken, had evil designs against the new 

1 JaMngir died on the 28th October 1627. Tavernier’s account is 
incorrect, as he died on his return journey from Cabul to Lahore 
(Elphinstone). 

2 Otherwise known as Prince Darwdr Baksh. 

3 These were' sons of Shdh Ddni£l. 

VOL. I ^ 



338 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


King, to whom they speedily gave warning, and 
this warning cost them their lives and the King the 
loss of his Kingdom. The young King, who did not 
yet possess that prudence which can alone be acquired 
by age, told Asaf Khan ingenuously what the two 
young Christian Princes, his cousins, had said to him in 
private, and asked him if it was true that he designed 
to make his uncle, Sultan Khurram, King, as they 
had assured him. Asaf Khan took care not to tell him 
the truth ; on the contrary, he accused those who had 
made the report of falseness and insolence, and pro- 
tested that he would be faithful to his King all his life, 
and that, in order to maintain him on the throne, he 
would shed his blood to the very last drop. Sultan 
Bolaki understood this to refer to himself, but Asaf 
Khan, when promising to be faithful to his King, 
really meant his own son-in-law ShAh Jahan, whom 
he desired to elevate to the throne — the considera- 
tion of affinity prevailing over that of justice. 
Seeing that his perfidy had been discovered, he 
averted the punishment which he began to appre- 
hend, and obtaining possession of the two Princes, 
had them forthwith murdered. As he was all- 
powerful both in the army and in the Empire, he had 
already secured, in the interests of ShAh JahAn, the 
greater number of the officers and nobility of the 
Court ; and the better to conceal his game and to lull 
the suspicion of the young King, who understood 
these affairs but imperfectly, he spread the report that 
ShAh JahAn was dead, and that, having desired to be 
interred near JahAngir, his father, his body was to be 
brought to Agra. The stratagem was adroitly con- 
ducted. Asaf KhAn himself told the King of this 



CHAP. Ill 


shAh jahAn seizes the throne 


339 


pretended death, and assured him that etiquette required 
that his majesty should go out of Agra to meet the 
body, when it came within a league or two, such 
honour being rightly due to a Prince of the blood of 
the Moguls who was the brother of his father, and son 
of JahAngir. Accordingly ShAh Jahan approached 
incognito, and when he was in sight of the army, near 
Agra, he got into a bier, where there was sufficient 
air for respiration. This bier having been carried 
into a tent, all the principal chiefs, who were in con- 
cert with Asaf KhAn, came as though to do honour to 
the dead Prince, the young King, on his side, having 
left Agra to be present at the meeting. It was then 
that Asaf KhAn saw that the time had arrived 
for the execution of his design ; he had the bier 
opened, and ShAh JahAn raised himself and appeared 
standing before the eyes of all the army; he was 
saluted as King by all the generals and other officers, 
who took their cue, and at the same moment the name 
of ShAh JahAn as King was passed from mouth to 
mouth ; the proclamation was made public, and the 
Empire of the Moguls was assured to him. The 
young King hearing this news on the road, was so 
upset by it that he thought of nothing but flight, as 
he saw himself deserted by almost every one ; and 
ShAh JahAn, not thinking it prudent to pursue him, 
allowed him to wander for a long time in India as a 
sort of Fakir. But at length, wearied with that kind 
of life, he took refuge in Persia, where he was magnifi- 
cently received by ShAh Safvi,^ who bestowed upon 
him a pension worthy of a great Prince. He enjoys it 
still, and I had an opportunity of conversing with him 
1 Cha Sefi in the original. 



340 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


during my travels in Persia, and drank and ate with 
himd 

Shah Jahan having usurped the throne in this 
way,® in order to secure himself and to stifle all the 
factions which might arise on behalf of the legitimate 
King, whom he had unjustly despoiled of his Kingdom, 
by degrees murdered all those who, from having shown 
affection for his nephew, had made themselves suspects, 
and the early years of his reign were marked by 
cruelties which have much tarnished his memory. 
The end of his reign was in like manner unhappy for 
him, and as he had unjustly stolen the Empire from 
the legitimate heir to whom it belonged, so he was, 
during his lifetime, deprived of it by his own son 
Aurangzeb, who kept him a prisoner in the fortress of 
Agra ; and this, in a few words, is how it came to pass. 

After DAra ShAh had lost the battle against his 
two brothers Aurangzeb and MurAd Baksh, in the 
plain of Samonguir,® and was basely deserted by the 
principal officers of his army, he retired to the King- 
dom of Lahore with whatever of the royal treasure 
he had been able to take in the confusion of his affairs. 
The King, in order to resist the impetuosity of his 
victorious sons, whose only thoughts were of reigning 
by depriving him of his throne, and possibly also of 
his life, shut himself up in the fortress at Agra so 
as not to be captured, and to see to what limits his 
sons would carry their insolence. Aurangzeb having 
secured the person of MurAd Baksh, as I have related 

1 He was seen also, according to Olearius {Voyages and Travels^ 
etc., Eng. Ed., p. 190), by the Holstein Ambassadors in 1633, and 
Dow’s statement as to his murder by Asaf Khdn is incorrect. 

2 Shdh Jahdn ascended the throne on the 4th February of 1628. 

3 Samoghdr, one march from Agra. 



CHAP. Ill 


AURANGZEB ENTERS AGRA 


341 


in the preceding chapter, entered Agra and pretended 
to believe that ShAh Jahan was dead, in order to have 
an excuse for entering the fortress, which, as he said, 
one of the Omrahs was in possession of. The more 
Aurangzeb published the report that Shah JahAn was 
dead, the more ShAh JahAn strove to make public the 
fact that he was alive ; but at length the King per- 
ceiving that he was no longer able to resist Aurangzeb, 
who had all the power and all the good luck on his 
side, and as the wells of the Agra fortress were dried 
up, he was compelled to provide himself with the river 
water by a small postern which was the weakest part 
of the whole place, and which Aurangzeb had already 
reconnoitred, he therefore sent Fazl KhAn, the Grand 
Chamberlain, to assure Aurangzeb that he was alive, 
so that he should no longer pretend to be ignorant 
of it. Fazl KhAn was instructed to tell the Prince 
that the King, his father, ordered him to return to 
the Kingdom of Deccan, the seat of his Govern- 
ment, without causing any more trouble, and that by- 
showing this sign of obedience he would enable him 
to forget all that had passed. Aurangzeb, being still 
firm in his resolve, replied to Fazl KhAn that he was 
convinced that the King, his father, was dead, and that 
upon that ground he had fought for the throne, which 
he believed he deserved equally with his brothers, who 
naturally had no more right to it than he had. That if 
the King was alive he had too much respect for him to 
have the smallest idea of doing anything which would 
displease him, but in order that he might be convinced 
that he was not dead he desired to see him, and to 
kiss his feet, after which he would retire to his 
own Government, and obey his orders implicitly. 



342 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Fazl KhAn conveyed this reply to the King, who 
answered that he was willing to see his son, and sent 
Fazl KhAn back to say he would be welcome. But 
Aurangzeb, more astute than ShAh JahAn, assured 
Fazl KhAn that he would not venture into the fortress 
till the garrison which was in it gave place to his own 
soldiers. This Prince feared, with good reason too, 
that if he entered except as master he might be served 
an evil turn and his person seized, and the King 
having heard of his resolution, not being able to do 
any better, consented to all that his son demanded of 
him. Accordingly the garrison of ShAh JahAn went 
out of the fortress, and that of Aurangzeb entered under 
command of Sultan Muhammad, the eldest of his sons, 
to whom he gave a command to secure the person of 
the King his father. However, he postponed the visit 
from day to day, awaiting an auspicious hour for this 
interview, and his astrologers not finding one, he 
withdrew to a country house 2 or 3 leagues distant 
from Agra ; this displeased the people much, as they 
awaited with impatience the fortunate hour, which, by 
the visit of the son to the father, would terminate their 
disputes. 

But Aurangzeb, who had no desire for this 
interview, on the contrary, took a strange resolution, 
which was to control his father’s personal expenditure, 
and assume possession of all the treasures which DArA 
ShAh had been unable to carry off on the occasion 
of his precipitate flight.^ He also caused Begum 
SAhib, his sister, to be confined in the fortress, 
that she might keep company with the King, whom 
she dearly loved.^ And he also took possession of 

^ See p. 344. 



CHAP. Ill 


SHAH JAHAN’S LAST DAYS 


343 


all the wealth which she had received from her 
father’s liberality. 

Shah JahIn, incensed at the insult of being 
treated in this manner by his own son, made some 
efforts to escape, and slew some of the guards who 
dared to oppose him ; this caused Aurangzeb to order 
closer confinement for him. It is a most surprising 
thing, however, that not one of the servants of ~ 
this grand King offered to assist him ; that all his 
subjects abandoned him, and that they turned their 
eyes to the rising sun, recognising no one as King 
but Aurangzeb — ShAh Jahan, although still living, 
having passed from their memories. If perchance 
there were any who felt touched by his misfortunes, 
fear made them silent, and made them basely abandon 
a King who had governed them like a father, and 
with a mildness which is not common with sovereigns. 
For although he was severe enough to the nobles when 
they failed to perform their duties, he arranged all 
things for the comfort of the people, by whom he was 
much beloved, but who gave no signs of it at this 
crisis. Thus this great King finished his days sadly 
in prison, and died in the Agra fort about the end of 
the year 1666, during the time of my last journey in 
India. As during his reign he had commenced build- 
ing the city of JahAnAbAd, which was not yet completed, 
he wished to see it once more before he died. But 
for this purpose it was necessary to obtain the consent 
of Aurangzeb, his son, who held him prisoner, and 
was quite willing to allow him to make the journey, 
and even to remain at JahAnAbAd as long as he wished, 
shut up in the castle, as he was in Agra, provided that 
he consented to travel by boat, ascending the river. 



344 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


and returning likewise in one of the small painted and 
ornamented frigates which are on the Jumna at the 
palace of JahanIbAd. For Aurangzeb was unwilling 
to permit him to travel by land on his elephant, 
as he feared lest his father’s showing himself to 
the people might immediately raise a party in his 
favour, and that placing himself at their head, as 
people are inconstant, he might find means to remount 
the throne. ShAh JahAn, perceiving the severity 
of his son, who wished to hurt him in this way, 
thought no more of the journey, and the great dis- 
pleasure he felt at such cruel treatment precipitated 
his death. As soon as Aurangzeb had news of it he 
came to Agra and seized all the jewels of the late King, 
his father, which he had not touched during his life. 
Begum SAhib also had a quantity of precious stones,^ 
which he had not taken from her when he placed her 
in the fortress, being at that time satisfied with secur- 
ing the gold and silver with which her chests were full. 
These jewels afforded certain evidence to Aurangzeb’s 
sense of propriety, as for other reasons the Princess, 
his sister, had already been suspected of having had 
improper relations with ShAh JahAn, and he found 
means to obtain them in a manner which appeared 
honest and far from criminal, by treating the Begum 
SAhib with much honour and attention ; but he 
removed her to JahAnAbAd,^ and I saw the elephant 
pass upon which she was mounted when she left Agra 
with the court, as I was entering it on my return from 

1 The delivery of the precious stones by Begum Sdhib to Aurangzeb 
is described in Book II, chap. vii. 

2 Here Jehanabad is in the original, though elsewhere generally 
Gehanabat. In the 1713 edition by a misprint it is Jehanabab. 



CHAP. Ill 


DEATH OF BEGUM SAHIB 


345 


Bengal. In a short time after news was spread of the 
death of this Princess, and all the world believed that 
it had been hastened by poison. Let us now see what 
has become of DarA Shah, and what has been the 
result of the war between the sons of the unfortunate 
Shah Jahan. 



CHAPTER IV 


Concerning the flighi of Dara Shah to the Kingdoms of 
Sind and Gujarat ; of his second battle with Aur- 
angzeb ; of his capture and death. 

DArA ShAh having carried off in haste, on the advice 
of his father, some of the gold and silver which 
was in the fortress of Agra, and having retired to 
the Kingdom of Lahore, hoped to be able to place on 
foot, in a short time, a second army, in order to attack 
Aurangzeb, his brother. His most faithful servants 
and friends had always accompanied him in his mis- 
fortune, and his eldest son Suliman Sheko was with 
Raja Rup^ in the territories of his Kingdom in order 
to raise troops, having with him five millions of 
rupees (5,000,000),^ which amount to seven million five 
hundred thousand (7,500,000) livres of our money, in 
order to attract soldiers more rapidly. But this large 
sum made Raja Rfip’s eyes open, and he seized it 
for himself by a base and infamous act of treason. 
Suliman Sheko fearing he w’ould go further and seize 
his person also, withdrew promptly to the Kingdom 

1 Roup in the original. Raja Riip Singh, a daughter of whom, 
although a Hindu, was married to Aurangzeb’s son, Mu’azzam, in the 
year i66i. 

2 ;,fS62,50O. 



CHAP. IV 


DARA SHAH 


347 


of Srinagar, under the protection of Raja Nakti 
Rani,^ who, by a still blacker act of treason, delivered 
him over to Aurangzeb some time afterwards. 

DarA Shah, having had notice of the treason of 
Raja RtJP, and seeing all his friends abandoning him 
to join the side of Aurangzeb, left Lahore in order 
to retire into the Kingdom of Sind. Before leaving 
the fortress he ordered all the gold, silver, and jewels 
which were in the treasury to be embarked on the river 
in the care of a strong escort, in order to send them 
to Bukkur,® which is in the middle of the river Indus, 
where he took possession of a fort. He left there, as 
governor and guardian of his wealth, a eunuch who was 
faithful to him, and six thousand soldiers, and all the 
munitions necessary to sustain a siege, after which he 
went to Sind, where he left many large cannons. 
He then went into the country of the King of Kachna- 
GANA,® who made him magnificent promises which 
proved of no effect ; next he entered the Kingdom of 
GujarAt, where he was received by the people with great 
acclamation as the legitimate King and heir of ShAh 
JahAn. He issued his commands in all the cities, and 
especially in Surat, where he established a Governor ; 
but the Governor of the fortress, who had been appointed 
by MurAd Baksh and was a Raja, would not sub- 
mit to DArA ShAh.'* He protested that he would 

1 Sereneguer in the original. In the French edition of 1713, Sere- 
nager — for Srinagar, capital of Kashmir. Nakti Rani I have not 
identified. 

2 Baker in the original, Bukkur or Bakhar. For the history of this 

island-fortress, which has always been a position of strategical importance, 
see hnperial Gazetteer. It was the principal British arsenal during the 
Sind and Afghan campaigns. s Cutch (or Kachchh). 

^ As already explained on page 7 the governorship of the fort at 
Surat was a distinct post from that of the governor of the town. 



348 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


not give over charge of the place into the hands of any- 
one except on the express order of Murad Baksh ; 
and as he continued firm in this resolve, he was 
allowed to remain peaceably in the fortress, without, 
on his part, causing any trouble to the Governor of the 
town. 

In the meantime, Dara ShAh got news at Ahma- 
dAbAd that Jeswant Singh,^ one of the most powerful 
Rajas in all India, had detached himself from Aur- 
ANGZEB, and wished to join him. He was even 
invited by this Raja to advance with his army, which 
was not large, and did not exceed 30,000 men 
when he arrived at AhmadAbAd. DArA ShAh, confid- 
ing in his promise, followed his counsel, and went to 
Ajmir,^ the appointed rendezvous, where he hoped to 
find him. But J eswant Singh, who had been won by 
the arguments of the Raja Jai Singh,® who was more 
powerful than he, and was wholly devoted to the 
interests of Aurangzeb, did not come to Ajmir on the 
day he had promised, and only got there at the last 
moment, when it was for the purpose of betraying 
this poor Prince. The armies of the two brothers 
being opposed to one another, the combat commenced, 
and the battle lasted for three days ; but during the 
course of the engagement Jeswant Singh, with mani- 
fest treachery, passed over to the side of Aurangzeb, 
which being seen by DArA ShAh’s soldiers, they lost 
courage and took to flight. There had been much 
bloodshed on both sides ; ShAh NawAz KhAn,^ father- 
in-law of Aurangzeb, remained on the field, and there 

1 Jeswant Singh — Jessomseing in the original. He was Raja of 
Jodhpur in Marwar, and died in 1678. 2 Emir jn the original. 

3 Jesseing in the original. 4 Chanavas Kan in the original. 



CHAP. IV 


DARA SHAH’S FLIGHT 


349 


were on both sides 8000 or 9000 men slain, without 
counting the wounded, the number of whom was still 
greater. DArA ShAh having no other resources, and 
fortune having been against him in all his enterprises, 
in order not to fall into the hands of his enemies, took 
flight with his wives, some of his children, and his 
most faithful followers, in a pitiable conveyance. As 
he approached AhmadAbAd, Monsieur Bernier,^ a 
French physician, who was on his way to Agra to visit 
the Court of the Great Mogul, and who is well known 
to all the world as much by his personal merit as by 
the charming accounts of his travels, was of great 
assistance to one of the wives of this Prince who was 
attacked with erysipelas in one leg. DArA ShAh, 
having learnt that an accomplished European physician 
was at hand, sent immediately for him, and Monsieur 
Bernier went to his tent, where he saw this lady 
and examined into her ailment, for which he gave a 
remedy and quick relief.^ This poor Prince being 
much pleased with Monsieur Bernier, strongly 
pressed him to remain in his service, and he might 
have accepted the offer if DArA ShAh had not received 
news the same night that the Governor whom he had 
left at AhmadAbAd had refused to allow his quarter- 
master to enter the town, and had declared for 
Aurangzeb. This compelled DArA ShAh to decamp 
quickly in the darkness of the night, and take the 
road to Sind, fearing some new treachery, which he 
could not defend himself from in the unhappy condition 
in which he found himself. 

1 M. Bernier. Seep. 115 . 

2 According to Elphinstone she had been wounded. {Hist, of 
India^ vol. ii, p. 444-) 



350 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Dara Shah arrived in Sind, intending to pass into 
Persia, where Shah Abbas II awaited him with a 
magnificent outfit, being resolved to aid him with men 
and money. But this Prince being unwilling to entrust 
himself to the sea, and fearing that its uncertainty 
would submit him to some new reverse of fortune, 
believed that by going by land he would secure greater 
safety to himself and his women and children. How- 
ever, he deceived himself, for when passing through 
the country of the Pathans,^ on the road to Kandahar, 
he was again shamefully betrayed by one of the 
chieftains of the country named Juin KhAn, who had 
been an officer of the King his father, and who, having 
been condemned to death for his crimes, by the mouth of 
the King, and sentenced to be thrown under the feet of an 
elephant, obtained forgiveness through the intercession 
of DArA ShAh, to whom, therefore, he owed his life. 
To augment his affliction DArA ShAh, before reaching 
the house of Juin KhAn, received by a foot messenger 
the sad intelligence of the death of that one of his wives 
whom he loved most, and who had accompanied him 
always during his misfortunes. He learnt that she had 
died of heat and thirst, not being able to find a drop of 
water in the country to assuage her thirst.^ The 
Prince was so affected by this news that he fell as 
though he were dead, and when, by the assistance of 
those who were with him, he came to himself, in the 
excess of his grief he rent his garments ; this is a 
custom of great antiquity in the East, as David himself 
rent his at the news of the death of Absalom, his son. 

^ Patanes in the original. This was the territory of Jun or Jttin on 
the eastern frontier of Sind (Elphinstone). 

2 According to Dow he was present at her death. 



CHAP. IV 


CAPTURE OF DARA SHAH 


351 


This unhappy Prince had always appeared to be un- 
moved on all the occasions of his evil fortune, but this one 
grief overwhelmed him, and he refused all the consola- 
tion offered by his friends. He clad himself in garments 
appropriate to his affliction, and in place of a sesse 
or turban wrapped round his head a piece of coarse 
cloth. It was in this miserable costume that he 
entered the house of the traitor Juin Khan, where, 
having laid himself down on a camp-bed to rest, a new 
subject of grief appeared on his awakening. Juin KhAn 
on attempting to seize Sepehr Sheko,^ the second son 
of DarA ShAh, the young Prince, though but a child, 
resisted the traitor with courage, and having taken up 
his bow and arrow laid three men low on the ground. 
But being alone he was unable to resist the number 
of traitors, who secured the doors of the house, and 
did not allow any one of those who might have aided 
him to enter. DArA ShAh, having been awakened 
by the noise which these cruel satellites made when 
seizing this little Prince, saw before his eyes his son, 
whom they brought in with his hands tied behind his 
back. The unhappy father, unable to doubt any longer 
the black treason of his host, could not restrain himself 
from launching these words against the traitor Juin 
KhAn : “ Finish, finish," said he, '' ungrateful and 
infamous wretch that thou art, finish that which thou 
hast commenced; we are the victims of evil fortune and the 
unjust passion of Aurangzeb, hit remember that I do not 
merit death except for having saved thy life, and remem- 
ber that a Prince of the royal blood never had his hands 
tied behind his back" J uiN KhAn being to some extent 
moved by these words, ordered the little Prince to be 

1 Sepehr Sheko ; Sepper Chekour in the original. 



352 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


released, and merely placed guards over DarA ShAh 
and his son. At the same time he sent an express to 
Jeswant Singh and to Abdulla KhAn to give 
them tidings that he had captured DArA ShAh and his 
followers. On receipt of this intelligence they hastened 
to take part in the spoliation of the Prince, but 
they could not arrive so quickly but that J uin KhAn 
had had time to seize DArA ShAh’s most precious 
possessions, and he also treated his wives and children 
with the greatest barbarity. The Raja and Abdulla 
KhAn having arrived, they made DArA ShAh and his 
son leave on an elephant, and his wives and children 
on others ; and with this equipage, very different from 
that with which they had before appeared at JahAnA- 
bAd, they travelled thither, and entered it on the 9th 
of September. All the people hastened to witness 
this spectacle, desiring to see the Prince whom 
they had wished to have as King ; and Aurangzeb 
ordered him to be taken through the principal streets, 
and all the bcizaars of JahAnAbAd, so that no one 
should entertain any doubt as to his capture, and 
as though he himself were glorified by the treachery 
he had shown towards his brother, to whom he 
allotted the fortress of Asser^ as a prison. But of all 
those who crowded to see this Prince, and were not 
ignorant of the fact that he was really their legitimate 
King, and even then desired to see him on the throne, 
there was not one who had the courage to aid him. 
There were only some generous soldiers who had 
served the Prince, who, as they had received many 
benefits, thought themselves bound on this occasion 
to give him some mark of their acknowledgment. 

1 Asser. Asirgarh, near Burhdnpur, in Khdndesh. 



CHAP. IV 


DARA SHAH’S death 


853 


Being unable to deliver their legitimate Prince from 
the hands of those who held him captive, they flung 
themselves with fury on the traitor JuiN KhAn, who 
was indeed delivered from them for the moment, but in 
a short time afterwards suffered the penalty due to his 
crime, having been slain while traversing a forest when 
on his return to his own country. 

However, Aurangzeb, being a good politician and 
extraordinary dissembler, caused it to be noised abroad 
that he had not ordered the seizure of the person of 
DArA ShAh, but only that he should be persuaded to 
depart out of the Kingdom. As DArA had been un- 
willing to do so, J UIN KhAn had, without authority, 
unworthily seized his person, and instead of honouring 
the royal blood, had shamefully tied the hands of the 
young Prince, Sepehr Sheko, son of DArA ShAh, 
behind his back. That this criminal action, which was 
an offence against his Majesty, deserved a severe 
punishment, and that it had in part been avenged by 
the death of Juin KhAn and his accomplices. But this 
story which Aurangzeb ordered to be spread among 
the people was only for the purpose of deception ; 
for if he truly had such consideration for the royal 
blood and any love for his elder brother, he would not 
at the same time have ordered his head to be cut off, 
as was immediately done in the following manner. 
DArA ShAh, having left JahAnAbAd with his guards to 
go t<J the place of his imprisonment, when he had 
reached a pleasant spot where he thought he was to 
sleep, his tent in which he was to lose his head was 
prepared. After he had eaten, SAif KhAn,^ who had 
been in his service, came to announce to him the order 

1 Seif Kan in the original. 



354 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


for his death. DArA ShAh, seeing him enter, wel- 
comed him and said that he was rejoiced to see one of 
his most faithful servants, SAif KhAn replied that it 
was true that he had formerly been in his service, but 
that he was now the slave of Aurangzeb, who had 
commanded him to return with his head, " Am I 
to die then,” said DArA ShAh. “It is the order of 
the King,” replied SAif KhAn; “and I am here to 
carry it out.” Sepehr Sheko, who was sleeping in an 
antechamber of the tent, awakened by this conversation, 
endeavoured to seize some weapons which had been 
removed from him, and made an effort to aid his father, 
but was prevented by those who accompanied SAif 
KhAn. DArA ShAh also wished to resist, but perceiv- 
ing it would be useless, merely asked time for prayer, 
which was granted. In the meantime Sepehr Sheko 
was drawn aside, and, whilst they amused him, a 
slave cut off DArA ShAh’s head; and SAif KhAn 
took it to Aurangzeb, who thought that by the 
blood and death of his brother he would establish his 
throne. After this bloody tragedy the afflicted Sepehr 
Sheko was conveyed to the fortress of Gwalior to 
keep company with his uncle, MurAd Baksh.^ As for 
the wives and daughters of DArA ShAh, they were 
given quarters in the harem of Aurangzeb, who, in 
order to fix himself firmly on the throne of the Moguls, 
now only thought of the destruction of his other brother, 
Sultan ShujA, who was in Bengal — where he was 
assembling forces in order to come to the release of 
the King his father, who still lived in the fortress at 
Agra, where Aurangzeb kept him a prisoner. 

^ This was in July 1659. 



CHAPTER V 


How Aurangzeb seated himself upon the throne and 
had himself declared King ; and concerning the 
flight of Sultan ShujA. 

It was not difficult for Aurangzeb, after the imprison- 
ment of his father ShAh JahAn and of his brother 
MurAd Baksh, and having cruelly decapitated his 
eldest brother, to whom by right the Kingdom 
belonged, to resolve to have himself declared King, 
especially as fortune favoured it and all the nobles 
of the Kingdom applauded him. As it is the 
custom, at this ceremony, to sit upon the throne, not 
much time was required to prepare it, as ShAh JahAn, 
before being imprisoned, had completed the throne 
which the great Tamerlane had commenced ; it is 
the richest and most superb throne which has ever been 
seen in the world. But as it was necessary that the 
Grand Kdzi^ or Chief of the Law should proclaim 
the new King, it was in this direction that Aurangzeb 
encountered the first obstacle. The Grand Kdzi 
openly opposed his design, and said that the law of 
Muhammad and the law of nature equally prevented him 
from proclaiming him King during the lifetime of his 
father ; added to which, in order to ascend the throne, he 


1 Cadi in the original. 



356 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


had murdered his eldest brother, to whom the Empire 
belonged after the death of ShAh JahAn, their father. 
This vigorous resistance of the Kdzi gave trouble to 
Aurangzeb, and in order not to appear unjust, he 
assembled the doctors of the law, to whom he 
represented that his father was incapable of reigning 
on account of his great age and the infirmities with 
which he had been overwhelmed ; and as for DArA 
ShAh, his brother, he had put him to death because 
he was not zealous in obeying the law ; that he 
drank wine, and favoured infidels. These reasons, 
mingled with menaces, caused his “Council of Con- 
science” to pronounce that he merited the Empire, 
and that he ought to be proclaimed King — which, 
nevertheless, the Grand K&zi persistently resisted. 
There was, in consequence, no other remedy therefore 
but to depose him from his office as a disturber of 
the public peace, and elect another zealous for the 
honour of the law and the good of the Kingdom. 
This was forthwith done. The person elected by the 
Council was afterwards confirmed by Aurangzeb, and 
in recognition for this act of grace, he proclaimed him 
King on the 20 th of October i66o.^ This proclama- 
tion having been made in the Mosque, Aurangzeb 
seated himself on the throne, where he received the 
homage of all the nobles of the Kingdom, and there 
were great rejoicings upon that day in JahAnAbAd. 
At the same time orders were sent throughout all 
the Kingdom to celebrate his coming to the throne. 

1 This date appears to be incorrect. Aurangzeb’s accession took 
place in August 1658, when he was first proclaimed Emperor ; but he did 
not put his name on the coin and was not crowned till the following year. 
This has caused some confusion in the dates of his reign, but it cannot 
be said to have commenced later than 1659. 



CHAP. V 


MIR JUMLA 


357 


This was effected with great splendour, and lasted for 
many days. 

Aurangzeb did not consider his throne assured 
nor his Empire well established so long as Sultan 
ShujA, his brother, was engaged in raising a power- 
ful army in Bengal with the design of setting 
Shah Jahan at liberty. He thought that it behoved 
him to anticipate him, and sent considerable forces 
against him under the command of Sultan Muham- 
mad, his eldest son, to whom he gave as lieutenant the 
Mir JuMLA,^one of the greatest captains who had ever 
migrated from Persia to India. His good judgment 
and courage would have caused him to be revered by 
posterity if he had only been faithful to the Princes 
whom he served. But he first betrayed the King 
of Golconda,^ with whom he made his fortune, and 
afterwards ShAh JahAn, under whose protection he 
maintained it at so high a pitch that there was scarcely 
another noble in the whole of India more powerful or 
richer than he was. 

Moreover, he was both feared and beloved by the 
army, and he understood the art of w^ar perfectly as it 
is carried on in this country. Having then abandoned 
the interests of ShAh JahAn, he attached himself to 
the side of Aurangzeb, and if Sultan ShujA had not 
had opposed to him so brave and able a commander 
he would, no doubt, have given more trouble to his 

^ Although previously called Mir Jimola or Mir Gimola, his name 
is here given in the nearly correct form of Emir Jemla, (See Index). 

2 His desertion'of the King of Golconda seems to have been justified 
by the action of that King, as described by Tavernier on page 165 
seq.^ but there is some ground for the supposition that his son, Muham- 
mad Amin, brought the family into disgrace by his imprudence and 
misconduct at the King’s Court. 



358 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


brother, and possibly might have conquered him. 
The two armies having encountered one another many 
times, victory was sometimes on one side, sometimes 
on the other, and Sultan Muhammad, assisted by the 
advice of his lieutenant, seeing that this war was pro- 
tracted, resolved to change the method and to combine 
ruse with force in order to accomplish the destruction of 
Sultan ShujA, He treated with the majority of the 
officers of his uncle’s army secretly, and made them 
magnificent promises, urging them so strongly to 
follow the side of Aurangzeb — whom he called the 
pillar and protector of the Muhammadan law — that he 
secured the principals, to whom he afterwards made 
considerable presents, to assure himself better of their 
support. This was a mortal stroke for Sultan Shuja, 
which he was unable to parry ; for those who followed 
him being mercenaries, and that kind of people who 
declare for those who give most, they concluded that 
they had nothing more to hope from this Prince, whose 
finances were expended, and would find it more profit- 
able to declare for Aurangzeb, whom fortune favoured 
in every way, and was master of all the treasures. 
Thus it was easy for Aurangzeb to bribe the whole 
army of his brother, who in the last battle which was 
fought found himself abandoned by all and compelled 
to fly with his wives and children. The traitors, 
ashamed of their baseness, did not purslie the unfor- 
tunate Prince, as they might have done ; and, like 
mean folk, as soon as he had taken flight busied 
themselves with the destruction of his tents and the 
pillage of his baggage. This was allowed them by 
Mir Jumla as a reward for their treachery. Sultan 
ShujA, having embarked with his family in some boats, 



CHAP. V 


SULTAN SHUJA FLIES TO ARAKAN 


359 


crossed the Ganges, and some time afterwards with- 
drew to the Kingdom of Arakan, on the confines 
of Bengal, where we must leave him to take breath, 
in order to ascertain tidings of Sultan Muhammad, 
eldest son of Aurangzeb, and Sultan Suliman Sheko, 
eldest son of DArA Shah, who still caused trouble to 
Aurangzeb. 



CHAPTER VI 


Concerning the prison of Sultan Muhammad, son of 
Aurangzeb, and of S ^ U ' LTA . 1 ^i Suliman Sheko, eldest 
son of Dara ShAh. 

Although Aurangzeb was considered a very great poli- 
tician, and was so in fact, still he allowed himself to 
be deceived in entrusting a powerful army to his son 
under the conduct of a great captain, but one who, 
having already, as I have said, betrayed two Kings, 
his masters,^ ought to have made Aurangzeb fear for 
himself a similar treatment. This Prince, who had 
mounted the throne by means of many crimes, and had 
supplanted his father, whom he held a prisoner, and 
also his two brothers, one of whom he had executed, 
and the other of whom he had put to flight, was always 
justly alarmed lest Heaven should inspire his own son 
to avenge his grandfather. As it had been reported 
to him that Sultan Muhammad was extraordinarily 
pensive and melancholy, he firmly believed that he was 
meditating means to ruin him, and in this belief he 
sought to draw some explanation from Mir Jumla. 
He wrote to him that having heard that Sultan 
Muhammad had had some secret communications with 
his uncle, Sultan Shuja, it was advisable that he 

1 Namely, the King of Golconda and Shdh Jahdn. 



CHAP. VI 


SULTAN MUHAMMAD 


361 


should arrest him and send him to court. The letter 
having been accidentally seized by Sultan Muhammad’s 
guards, and afterwards brought to that young Prince, 
who was a man of sense, he concealed the matter from 
Mir Jumla, fearing that he might have received 
other more precise orders from his father concern- 
ing his life, he resolved to cross the Ganges, and 
throw himself into the arms of his uncle Sultan 
ShujA, from whom he hoped for more kindness than 
from his father.^ With this resolve he pretended to go 
fishing, and, having speedily prepared some boats on 
the Ganges, crossed with many of his officers to the 
camp of Sultan Shuja, who was on the other side of 
the river, and who had found means for assembling 
some troops during the time he had been meditating 
his retreat to the King of Arakan. Sultan Mu- 
hammad having reached his uncle’s presence, threw 
himself at his feet, and asked his pardon for having 
taken up arms against him, to which he had been forced 
by his father, adding that he was not ignorant of the 
injustice with which he had seized the throne. Al- 
though Sultan ShujA might have thought that the 
arrival of Muhammad in his camp was only a ruse of 
Aurangzeb’s, who had sent him to spy out his condition 
and discover his weakness, nevertheless, as he was a 
good and generous Prince, seeing his nephew at his 
knees, he immediately raised him, and embracing him, 
assured him of his protection against Aurangzeb. 
Some days afterwards these two Princes made an 
attempt, and recrossing the Ganges, made a long 

^ The real object of his affection, and possibly the cause of his going 
over, was Sultan Shuja’s daughter, whom he desired to marry, and to 
whom he was in fact soon after married. 



362 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


detour to surprise the army of the enemy, who did not 
expect them. They attacked with vigour, and slew 
many ; but when they saw that the enemy began to re- 
cover from this sudden attack, they contented themselves 
with the advantage gained, and recrossed the Ganges, 
being afraid of being surrounded by the multitude, and 
of not being able to withdraw when they wished. 

Mir Jumla had already given notice to Aurangzeb 
of the flight of his son, at which the father experienced 
considerable displeasure, though he dared not show it 
to the Mir, for fear that it might cause him to do like- 
wise, and betray him as he had betrayed ShAh Jahan, 
his father, and the King of Golconda. Aurangzeb 
merely wrote to him that he confided entirely in his 
great prudence and delicate tact to restore Sultan 
Muhammad to his duty ; who was still young, and 
that this fit only proceeded from an age full of 
fire, which ordinarily loved change. The confidence 
which Aurangzeb showed in Mir Jumla induced that 
general to use all possible means to withdraw Muham- 
mad from the hands of Sultan ShujA. He informed 
the young Prince that the King, his father, had the 
best intentions regarding him, and that he was always 
ready to receive him with open arms, provided he would 
make good use of his retreat to Sultan ShujA, which 
he might make serviceable to Aurangzeb, who would 
love him the more, and would thus have an opportunity 
of praising his prudence and affection. The young 
Prince allowed himself to be easily persuaded ; and by 
the same way as he had gone to the camp of his uncle 
Sultan ShujA, he returned to that of his father Aur- 
angzeb, where Mir Jumla received him with honour, 
and with great demonstrations of joy. He advised 



CHAP. VI 


SULTAN SULIMAN SHEKO 


363 


him to say to his father as soon as he saw him, that 
he went to Sultan ShujA merely for the purpose of 
spying out his forces and the condition of his army, 
and that he should repair with speed to Aurangzeb, in 
order to tell him what he had done in his service, and 
to receive his reward. It was also the command of 
Aurangzeb that his son should be sent to him ; and 
Muhammad, whether willingly or by compulsion, set out 
for JahanAbAd, where he arrived accompanied by the 
guards which Mir Jumla had sent with him. Their 
commander having announced to the King the arrival of 
his son, his Majesty assigned a lodging for him outside 
his palace, and would not allow him to come to kiss 
his hands. He ordered him to be informed that he was 
indisposed ; and whilst this lodging served him as a 
prison until he was transferred to the fortress of 
Gwalior,^ let us see what was done to Sultan Sulim an 
Sheko, eldest son of the unfortunate DArA ShAh, 
whose head Aurangzeb had cut off. 

Sultan Suliman Sheko, after having been betrayed 
by Raja Rup, as I have above related,^ remained in 
the country of Srinagar,® under the protection of 
Nakti Rani,^ its ruler. This Prince, who was cour- 
ageous as well as unfortunate, was compelled to pass a 
wild life in the mountains in order not to fall into the 
hands of Aurangzeb, who with all his forces was un- 
able to harm him there. On the other hand, Nacti 
Rani assured him by an oath, accompanied by all the 

1 Sultan Muhammad died in 1677, in his 38th year. His wife, the 
daughter of Shuji, was with him in prison. 

2 See p. 346. 

3 Serenaguer in the original, Srinagar, the capital of Kashmir. 

4 Dow calls the Raja^ Pirti Singh. {History of Hindostan^ vol. 
hi, p. 246.) For Nakti Rani see p. 347. 



364 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


ceremonies which could render it solemn and inviolable, 
that he would lose his Kingdom rather than allow 
Aurangzeb to do him the least violence to the prejudice 
of that protection which he afforded him. He went 
for this purpose to a river which runs through his 
country, to bathe his body as testimony of the purity of 
his soul ; and being thus purified in the water, he made 
his promise to Suliman Sheko never to abandon him, 
took his gods as witnesses to the purity of his intentions, 
and gave the young Prince no ground for doubting his 
promises, Suliman Sheko, after that, thought only 
of amusing himself and his followers with the chase, 
and they, on their part, sought to amuse him to the 
utmost of their power, while he devoted himself en- 
tirely to pleasure. 

Aurangzeb ordered troops to advance towards the 
mountains of Srinagar in order to compel Raja Nakti 
Rani to put Suliman Sheko in his power. But the 
Raja being able with looo men to defend all the 
entrances to his country, which are narrow and difficult, 
against 100,000, rendered all Aurangzeb’s efforts futile, 
who thereupon had recourse to ruse, seeing that force 
availed nothing. 

He sought at first to treat with the Raja, but in 
vain, for the Raja would not violate his oath ; and 
moreover his priests assured him that Aurangzeb 
would be deprived of his Kingdom, and that Suliman 
Sheko would reign in a short time ; this made him 
treat the young Prince with all possible kindness. 

Aurangzeb seeing that his army was unable to 
advance into the country of the Raja, set himself to 
make another kind of war in order to obtain DAra 
ShAh’s son from his hands. He forbade commerce 



CHAP. VI 


SULIMAN SHEKO 


365 


between his subjects and those of the Raja; this was 
very prejudicial to the latter, who, inhabiting a country 
of mountains and rocks, are constrained to provide 
themselves from outside with whatever they want. 
They immediately commenced to murmur at the pro- 
tection which he had given to Sultan Suliman Sheko, 
and cried out that it was to the prejudice of the public 
welfare. Their priests also began to doubt the truth 
of their oracles, and to believe that it was desirable to 
interpret them otherwise. At last they began to 
arrange for the ruin of this poor Prince; and what 
completed it was that Raja Jeswant Singh, who had 
betrayed DArA ShAh, as I have above related, sent 
secretly to Raja Nakti Rani to advise him that it was 
for his own safety and that of his country to yield to 
the will of Aurangzeb, and give up his nephew into 
his hands. This advice of Jeswant Singh sorely em- 
barrassed the Raja, for on the one side he had made a 
solemn oath, and sworn by Ram Ram to protect Suli- 
man Sheko at the risk of his country and his life, on 
the other he feared a revolt in his Kingdom and the 
prospect of losing it. 

Uncertain what to do, he consulted the Brahmins, 
who pronounced that he was rather bound to protect 
his people and his faith, which would be destroyed if 
the country became subject to Aurangzeb, who was a 
Muhammadan, than to protect a Prince from whom he 
could never receive any benefit. These councils having 
been held without Suliman Sheko’s knowledge, his 
destruction was settled when he believed himself to be 
in the greatest safety. The Raja Nakti Rani think- 
ing to shield his honour and conscience, replied to 
Jeswant Singh’s messenger that he was unable to 



366 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


bring himself to betray the Prince, but that Aurangzeb 
might seize him, and so protect his reputation ; and 
that SuLiMAN Sheko was in the habit of going to hunt 
in certain mountains in his country, taking only a few 
people with him, and that it would be easy for Jeswant 
Singh to send a number of soldiers to take him prisoner, 
and hand him over to Aurangzeb. 

Immediately on receipt of this reply, Jeswant Singh 
gave orders to his son to go and execute the design as 
it had been arranged, so that when on a certain day 
SuLiMAN Sheko, on going to hunt at the usual place, 
was attacked by a strong party who were in am- 
buscade, he at once saw the treason, and put him- 
self in a position of defence with his followers, who 
were all slain on the spot. The Prince defended him- 
self bravely, and alone slew nine of the assailants ; but 
he was borne down by numbers, and was carried 
to Jahanabad. When he came into Aurangzeb’s 
presence, the King asked him how he felt. “ As your 
prisoner,” replied the Prince, “who does not expect 
from you different treatment from that which my father 
has received.” The King replied that he had nothing 
to fear, that he would not put him to death, but only 
assure himself of his person. Aurangzeb then in- 
quired what had become of the treasures which he 
had carried away ; he replied that he had employed a 
portion to raise troops to make war against him and 
destroy him, if good fortune had been on his side ; that 
another portion had been retained in the hands of Raja 
Rup, whose avarice and perfidy were sufficiently well 
known ; and that the traitor Raja Nakti Rani had 
seized the remainder when delivering him treacherously 
to his enemies, despite his promise and pledged honour. 



Aurangzeb was surprised and much moved by the 
noble courage of his nephew, but ambition closed his 
eyes and stifled in him all the sentiments of justice 
which a proper remorse of conscience might arouse ; 
and in order to secure his throne he directed that 
Sultan Muhammad, his son, and Suliman Sheko, 
his nephew, should be conducted to the fortress of 
Gwalior, to keep company with their uncle, Murad 
Baksh and some other Princes who were in prison. 
This was done on the 30th of January 1661. 

Sultan ShujA, who still lived, although in a miser- 
able condition, was the last thorn which remained in 
the foot of Aurangzeb, and he who extracted it, and 
relieved him of this unfortunate Prince whom he had 
still to fear, was the King of Abakan, with whom he 
had been compelled to take refuge. As ShujA saw that 
there was now no more hope of aid for him, he resolved 
to make a pilgrimage to Mecca, and from thence to 
pass into Persia to seek an asylum with the King. 
Having this intention he believed he would obtain a 
ship from the King of Abakan or from the King of 
Pegu to take him to Mocha, but he was unaware that 
neither of these Kings had other than long and narrow 
much decorated demi - galleys, which they use on 
their rivers, and that they had no vessels capable of 
traversing the great ocean. Consequently Sultan 
ShujA was obliged to remain with the King of Abakan, 
who is an idolater, and in order the better to secure 
his protection, asked for one of his daughters in mar- 
riage, which request was granted, and he had a son 
by her. But this, which should have been a strong 
bond of friendship between father and son-in-law, 
soon became a cause of division and hatred ; and some 



368 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


nobles of the country, who had already shown jealousy 
of Sultan Shuja, caused him to be regarded with 
suspicion by the King of Araican, as though he desired, 
in consequence of his marriage with his daughter, and 
of the son which he had by her, to depose him from his 
throne. This pagan King, in whose country several 
Muhammadans were settled, easily believed what was 
told him, namely, that this Muhammadan Prince might 
readily induce all who were in his country, under the 
pretext of zeal for religion, to form a conspiracy, and 
place himself on the throne of Araican, instead of that 
which his own younger brother had seized upon. These 
doubts were not altogether ill-founded, for in truth 
Sultan Shuja, who still had quantities of golden rupees 
and many jewels, easily bribed a number of these Mu- 
hammadans of the Kingdom of Arakan, and with about 
200 men who remained of those who had followed 
him from Bengal after the defeat of his army, he 
arranged an enterprise of much boldness, but which 
was at the same time less an indication of bravery 
than of despair. 

He appointed a day with those of his own party 
for forcing an entry into the palace, and after having 
put to death all the royal family, he intended to have 
himself at the same time proclaimed King of Araican. 
But this great plot having been discovered the day 
before it was to have been executed, Sultan ShujA and 
Sultan Bangue, his son, had no other resource left 
but to take flight, hoping to escape to the Kingdom of 
Pegu. But the high, nearly inaccessible mountains, 
and the thick forests full of tigers and lions ^ through 

1 There are no lions in these regions, nor is there the slightest 
reason for supposing that they ever ranged so far to the East as Arakan. 



CHAP. VI 


DEATH OF SULTAN SHUJA 


369 


which they had to travel, and where there was scarcely 
any road, made their flight useless, in addition to which 
the enemy gave them but little time to get away before 
they followed on their tracks. Sultan Bangue, who 
marched last, to resist those whom he believed the 
King would surely send to seize them, and to give 
his father, and his family who followed him, a chance to 
escape, defended himself bravely against the first who 
attacked, but, being at length overcome by numbers 
and thrown down, was carried off together with his 
two younger brothers, his mother, and sisters. All the 
members of this unhappy family were placed in prison, 
where they were at first treated with great harshness ; 
but some time afterwards, the King being inclined to 
marry the eldest sister of Sultan Bangue, they were 
given a little more liberty. They would have en- 
joyed it longer, but for the impatience of this young 
Prince, who, having an active and ambitious spirit, 
made a new plot against the King, which proved to be 
the cause of their total ruin. For the plot having been 
precipitated without success, the King, roused to anger, 
commanded that the whole family should be straight- 
way exterminated, even including the young Princess 
whom he had espoused, although she was enceinte. 

As for what became of Sultan ShujA, who was 
the most advanced of all in the flight, the accounts 
of his fate are so different that one does not know 
which to believe. But, if all vary in the circum- 
stances, they agree so far that he is no longer alive, 
and that he either died by the hands of soldiers who 
were sent to seize his person, or was torn to pieces 

it being beyond the limits of their ascertained geographical distribution 
in prehistorical, as well as in historical times. 


VOL. I 


2 B 



370 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


by the tigers or lions, which abound in the forests of 
these countries.^ 

This, then, is what I have been able to ascertain 
concerning this famous war which lasted six years, and 
I have not met with any other version of it at Surat, 
Agra, JahAnAbad, or in Bengal, where I was precisely 
informed by those who were present at its principal 
events, having been myself a witness of a portion of 
them, as I have related in this account. Let us now 
see what were the first acts of the reign of Aurangzeb, 
and what was the fate of ShAh JahAn, his father. 

1 He is said by some writers to have been taken out in the river in 
a canoe, which was scuttled ; his captors, escaping in another canoe, left 
him to drown. 



CHAPTER VII 


Concerning the beginning of Axs'B.A'^^iGZES.' s, reign, and 
the death i^Shah Jahan, his father. 

I HAVE mentioned in the fifth chapter that Aurangzeb 
ascended the throne as soon as he had disposed of his 
brother, DarA Shah,’- and I shall add here some details 
which preceded this ceremony, and are sufficiently 
worthy of record. Some days previously he boldly 
sent to present his compliments to ShAh JahAn, his 
father, which he well knew would be displeasing to 
him. He begged him, as he was about to ascend the 
throne in a few days, to have the. goodness to send 
some of his jewels to be used on that day, so that 
he might appear before his people with the same 
magnificence as the other Kings, his predecessors, had 
done. ShAh JahAn, at this demand of Aurangzeb, 
which he regarded as an insult levelled at him in his 
prison by his son, became so enraged, that for some 
days he was like a madman, and he even nearly died. 
In the excess of his annoyance he called frequently 
for a pestle and mortar, saying that he would 
pound up all his precious stones and pearls, so that 

^ Aurangzeb was proclaimed Emperor on the 26th of May 1659. 
But his administration of the Empire commenced on the 9th of June 
1658. (See p. 356 n.) 



372 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK n 


Aurangzeb might never possess them.^ But Begum 
Sahib, his eldest daughter, who had never left him, 
throwing herself at his feet, besought him not to pro- 
ceed to such an extremity, and having full power over 
him in consequence of the intimate relations which 
existed between them, appeased him, rather with the 
object of keeping the precious stones for herself than 
to give pleasure to her brother, who might one day 
become their possessor, he having always been her 
mortal enemy. Thus, when Aurangzeb ascended the 
throne he had only one jewel on his cap {toque) 
but if he had desired more he did not lack them, 
as I have elsewhere said, and he only asked for the 
stones from his father with the intention of retain- 
ing them permanently. This cap, as I have related 
in my account of Persia, cannot be called a crown, 

^ Shdh Jah^n appears to have subsequently relented, though it is 
not so stated by Tavernier ; but Bernier says, that of his own accord 
he sent some of those jewels, which before he had told him of, that 
hammers were ready to beat them to powder, the first time he should 
again ask for them.’’ {History of the late Revolution^ etc., vol. ii, p, loo, 
English translation.) Ultimately, on Shdh Jahdn’s death, when Aurang- 
zeb entered the Seraglio at Agra, Begum Sahib presented him with a 
large golden basin full of jewels, tom. cit. p. 174. {Vide ante^ p. 344, 
and Book II, chap, x, p. 398.) 

Thevenot relates the same story as Bernier, and adds that the 
Peacock throne was in Shdh Jahdn’s possession in prison, but this 
latter statement is incorrect. {Voyage des Indes, p. loi.) 

2 Possibly the topaz referred to in Book II, chaps, x and xxii, and 
also by Bernier, who says, “ The King appeared seated upon his throne 
at one extremity of the great hall of the Am khds splendidly attired, 
his garment being of white flowered satin embroidered, his turband of 
gold cloth having an egret worked upon it, the feet of which were 
studded with diamonds of extraordinary lustre and value, and in the 
centre was a beautiful Oriental topaz of matchless size and splendour, 
shining like a little sun.” {Travels in the Mogid Empire^ p. 179, 
Calcutta Edition, English translation, 1826.) 




CHAP. VII 


EMBASSIES TO AURANGZEB 


873 


neither, consequently, can the ceremony be called a 
coronation.^ 

From the moment that Aurangzeb took possession 
of the throne, he would eat neither wheaten bread, 
flesh, nor fish. He sustained himself with barley- 
bread, vegetables, and sweetmeats, and would not 
drink any strong liquor. This was a penance which 
he imposed on himself for the many crimes which he 
had committed ; but his ambition and the desire to 
reign are still strong, so much so that he is resolved 
not to renounce the throne during his life. 

When Aurangzeb was settled on the throne, and 
all Asia had heard the news, there arrived at different 
times at JahanAbAd many ambassadors, who came to 
salute the new King on the part of their masters, to 
offer him their service and ask for his friendship. 
The UsBEG Tartars were the first,® afterwards the 
Cherif^ of Mecca, the King of Hyeman,* or Arabia 
Felix, the Prince of Bassora, and the King of 
Ethiopia sent theirs. The Dutch also sent M. 
Adrican, Commander- in -Chief of the factory at 
Surat, who was very well treated, and was quickly 
received out of respect for the European nation. For 
these Kings of India consider that it enhances their 

1 This very trivial point as to whether the term coronation was strictly 
applicable or not, was the subject of some sharp controversy between 
Chardin and our author. (See Chardin, Voyages, Amsterdam Edition, 
17 1 1, vol. ix, p. 85, and Persian Travels, Book V, chap, i, p. 524*) 

2 A previous embassy from the Usbeg Tartars to Shdh Jah^n brought 
him boxes of choice lapis lazuli, camels, fruit, etc. Lapis lazuli is a 
product of Badakshdn. (See Bernier, History of the Last Revolutio 7 i, 
vol. ii, p. 4.) 

3 For Sharif, Arab., generally written Shereef, a descendant of 
Muhammad. 

^ The province of Oman, S.E. corner of Arabia. 



374 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


•BOOK n 


dignity for foreigners to remain at Court for a con- 
siderable time. All these Ambassadors made pre- 
sents to Aurangzeb, according to custom, of whatever 
was most rare in their respective countries, and this 
Prince, who desired from the first to spread a good 
reputation for himself throughout Asia, took care to 
send them back well satisfied. 

Some months before the death of ShAh JahAn, 
Aurangzeb sent an Ambassador to Persia, who was 
at first magnificently received,^ as I have alluded to in 
the first part of my travels. When he arrived the 
talk for a month was all of feasts and hunting parties, 
and every night he was entertained with fireworks. 
The day upon which he was to make the present on 
behalf of the Great Mogul, the King of Persia 
appeared upon his throne, superbly clad, and having 
accepted what the Ambassador had to give, distributed 
the whole of it contemptuously among the officers of his 
house, only retaining for himself a diamond weighing 
nearly 6o carats. Some days afterwards he sent for 
the Ambassador, from whom he inquired, after some 
conversation, whether he was a Sum ^ — that is to say, 
of the sect of the Turks ; the meaning of this has been 

^ Chardin says that Negef Coulibec (Najaf Kuli Beg) was sent by 
the King of Persia as Ambassador in the year 1664, in order simply 
to report the safe arrival of the Mogul’s Ambassador m Persia, and to 
convey a present of melons and other fruits. The Great Mogul received 
him well, and sent him back with presents ; but news having arrived, 
two days after his departure, of the bad treatment of the Mogul’s 
Ambassador by the King of Persia, the Mogul had Najaf brought back, 
and ordered all the fruit to be flung into the house where he lodged. 
(Chardin, Voyages, Amsterdam Edition, 17 ii, vol. viii, p. 213.) 

2 Sonnis in the original. The distinctive characteristics of the 
Sums and Skids are set forth in Book IV, chap, vii, of the Persian 
Travels. (See also vol. ii. Book III, chap, i.) 



CHAP. VII 


THE SHAH OF PERSIA 


375 


sufficiently explained elsewhere. The Ambassador in 
his reply having allowed some smart remark to escape 
him against the Prophet Ali, whom the Persians revere, 
the King again asked him his name. He replied that 
his Majesty ShAh JahAn had given him the name of 
BaobhAk(?) KhAn,^ i.e. lord of a free heart, that he 
had received great bounties from him, and had been 
honoured by one of the first offices in his Court. 
“Thou art then a villain,” said the King with an 
angry countenance, “to have abandoned thy King in 
his need after so many favours, and to serve a tyrant 
who keeps his father in prison, and has murdered his 
brothers and nephews. How is it,” continued the 
King, “that he dares to assume the stately titles of 
Alamgir, Aurang ShAh, of King who holds the 
universe in his hand, since he has as yet conquered 
nothing, and all he possesses is derived from murders 
and treason ? Is it possible,” added this Prince, “that 
thou art one of those who have counselled him to 
the shedding of so much blood, to be the executioner 
of his brothers, and to hold his father in prison ; thou 
who hast acknowledged to having received so much 
honour and so many benefits ? Thou art not worthy,” 
said the King, “ to possess the beard that thou wearest,” 
and straightway he ordered him to be shaved, which 
is the greatest affront that can be done to a man in 
that country. The Ambassador, who but little ex- 
pected to be so treated, at the same time received 
orders from the King of Persia to return, and the 
King gave him as a present for Aurangzeb, his master, 
150 beautiful horses, with a quantity of gold and silver 
carpets, pieces of gold brocade, rich sashes, and other 
1 Baubec Kan in th^ original. Its identity with Baobhdk is doubtful. 



376 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


beautiful stuffs ; this was worth much more than the 
present which Aurangzeb had sent him, although that 
was valued at near two millions.^ 

When BaobhAk Khan returned to Agra, where 
the King then was, Aurangzeb, enraged at the affront 
done to himself by the King of Persia, in the person 
of his Ambassador, ordered the 150 horses to be taken, 
some to the centre of the city, and others to the 
corners of the streets, and had it proclaimed throughout 
the city that the followers of Ali could not mount 
these horses without becoming Nagis^ i.e. unclean, 
since they came from a King who did not observe the 
true law, and one with whom they could have no 
communion. This done, he ordered the 150 horses to 
be slain, and all the rest of the present to be burned, 
while he used most abusive language towards the King 
of Persia, by whom he considered himself to be mortally 
insulted. 

At length Shah JahAn dying in the Agra fort 
towards the end of 1666,® Aurangzeb had no longer 
before his eyes a troublesome object which reproached 
him constantly with his tyranny, and he began to 
enjoy more fully the pleasure of reigning. He received 
Begum SAhib, his sister, into his favour soon after- 
wards, restoring all her governments to her, and 
commanding, moreover, that she should bear the title 
of Princess Queen. It is true that she has infinite 
qualities, and is capable of governing the whole 

^ The coin not being mentioned, whether rupees, Uvres^ or some 
Persian coin, the statement is vague. In the English translation of 
1684 the passage is judiciously rendered “to a vast value.” 

2 This is probably najdz^ Persian for unclean. (See Vambdrfs 

P* 57 ? example of its use.) 

3 Sh£h Jahdn died in December 1666. 



CHAP. VII 


RAUSHENARA BEGUM 


377 


Empire. If, at the commencement of the war, her 
father and her brothers had only believed her, 
Aurangzeb had never been King, and affairs would 
have had a totally different aspect. As for RaushenArA 
Begum, his sister, she had always taken Aurangzeb’s 
side, and when she heard that he had taken up 
arms immediately sent him all the gold and silver 
she could. He also promised her, in recognition of 
her good services, that when he became King he 
would give her the title of ShAh Begum, and would 
seat her on a throne.^ He kept his word, and they 
were always much attached. Nevertheless, the last 
time I was at JahAnAbAd I heard that their friendship 
had somewhat cooled. That arose, as I was assured, 
in consequence of the Princess having had conveyed 
into her apartments a handsome young man, and 
wishing to get rid of him at the end of fifteen or twenty 
days, when she was tired of him, the thing could not 
be accomplished so secretly but that the King heard 
of it. The Princess, in order to anticipate the disgrace 
and reproach which she feared, hastened with assumed 
terror to the King, saying that a man had entered the 
harem even to her chamber, that she was certain it 
was either to slay or rob her, that such a thing had 
never before been seen, that the safety of his royal 
person was involved, and that his Majesty should 
severely punish all the Eunuchs who were on guard 
that night. Immediately the King himself, with a 
number of Eunuchs, hastened to the spot, and in this 

1 Some writers consider that this amounted to a promise that he 
would marry her himself, although she was his sister. Whatever truth 
there may be in the reputed incest of Shdh Jahdn, it does not appear 
that Aurangzeb was guilty of that crime. 



378 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


extremity the poor young man could not do otherwise 
than leap from the window into the river which flows 
below. Thereupon a crowd assembled from all 
quarters to seize him, the King calling out to them to 
do him no injury, but take him to the Chief Judge. 
Since then no more has been heard of the matter, and 
it is not difficult to imagine that strange things take 
place in the enclosure where these women and girls 
are shut up. 



CHAPTER VIII 


Concerning the preparations which are made for the 
festival of the Great Mogul, when he is solemnly 
weighed every year. Of the splendour of his thrones 
and the magnificence of his Court. 

After having completed all my business with the 
King, as I have related in the first Book,^ and on going 
to take leave of his Majesty on the first of November 
1665, he told me that he was unwilling that I should 
depart without having witnessed his fHe, which was 
then at hand, and that afterwards he would give orders 
for me to be shown all his jewels.^ I accepted, as in 
duty bound, the honour he did me ; and thus I was a 
spectator of this grand festival, which commenced on 
the fourth of November and lasted five days. It is on 
the anniversary of the King’s birthday that they 
are in the habit of weighing him,® and if he should 

^ See Book I, chap, viii, p. 137. 

2 See p. 394. 

2 Aurangzeb evaded the custom of distributing his weight in money, 
and did not have tokens coined, like his predecessors, to celebrate 
the occasion of his coronation. Sir T. Roe describes the scramble for 
thin pieces of silver, made to resemble different fruits, in rather con- 
temptuous terms. The Mogul, Jahdngir, presented a basin full of them 
to him ; but while he held them in his cloak the nobles snatched most 
of them from him. He estimates that the amount distributed did 
not exceed ;£ioo in value. {Journal^ Calcutta Ed., p. 104.) Terry, his 
chaplain, also describes the scene. {Voyage^ London 1777 Ed., p. 376.) 



380 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK ir 


weigh more than in the preceding year, the rejoicing 
is much greater on that account. When he has been 
weighed, he seats himself on the richest of the thrones, 
of which I shall speak presently, and then all the 
nobility of the kingdom come to salute him and make 
him presents. The ladies of the court send some also, 
and he receives others from all the Governors of 
Provinces and other exalted personages. In diamonds, 
rubies, emeralds, pearls, gold and silver, as well as rich 
carpets, brocades of gold and silver, and other stuffs, 
elephants, camels, and horses, the King receives in 
presents on this day to the value of more than 
30,000,000 livres} 

Preparations for this festival are commenced on 
the 7th of September, about two months before the 
five days which it lasts ; and the reader should remem- 
ber here the description which I have given of the 
palace of JahanAbAd in the sixth chapter of Book 
The first thing done is to cover in two grand courts of 
the palace from the middle of each court up to the hall, 
which is open on three sides. The awnings covering 
this great space are of red velvet embroidered with 
gold, and so heavy that the poles which are erected to 
support them are of the size of a ship’s mast, and some 
of them are 35 to 40 feet in height; there are 
thirty-eight for the tent of the first court, and those 
near the hall are covered with plates of gold of the 
thickness of a ducat. The others are covered with 
silver of the same thickness, and the cords which 
sustain these poles are of cotton of different colours, 
and some of them of the thickness of a good cable. 

^ 30,000,000 livres^ at is. 6d. to the livre £2^2^0,000. 

2 See Book I, chap, vi, p. 97. 



CHAP, vin 


THE MOGUL’S THRONES 


381 


The first court is, as I have elsewhere said, surrounded 
by porticoes with small rooms connected with them, 
and here it is that the Omraks dwell while they are on 
guard. For it should be remarked that one of the 
Omrahs mounts guard every week. He disposes, both 
in the court as also about the palace or the tent of the 
King, when he is in the field, the cavalry under his 
command, besides many elephants. During this week 
the Omrah on guard receives his food from the King’s 
kitchen, and when he sees the food which is being 
brought to him afar off, he makes three obeisances in 
succession, which consist in placing the hand three 
times on the ground, and as often on the head, at the 
same time asking God to preserve the King’s health, 
and that He will give him long life and power to 
vanquish his enemies. All these Omrahs, who are 
the nobility of the kingdom and Princes of the 
blood, regard it as a great honour to guard the King ; 
and when they mount guard, or when they leave it, 
they don their best clothes, their horses, elephants, 
and camels being also richly clad, and some of these 
camels carry a swivel-gun with a man seated behind 
to fire it. The least of these Omrahs commands 2000 
horse, but, when a Prince of the blood is on guard, he 
commands up to 6000. 

It should be stated that the Great Mogul has 
seven magnificent thrones, one wholly covered with 
diamonds, the others with rubies, emeralds, or pearls. 

The principal throne, which is placed in the hall of 
the first court, is nearly of the form and size of our 
camp beds ; that is to say, it is about 6 feet long and 
4 wide. Upon the four feet, which are very massive, 
and from 20 to 25 inches high, are fixed the four bars 



382 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


which support the base of the throne, and upon these 
bars are ranged twelve columns, which sustain the 
canopy on three sides, there not being any on that 
which faces the court. Both the feet and the bars, 
which are more than i 8 inches long, are covered with 
gold inlaid and enriched with numerous diamonds, 
rubies, and emeralds. In the middle of each bar there is 
a large balass^ ruby, cut en cabttchon, with four emeralds 
round it, which form a square cross. Next in succes- 
sion, from one side to the other along the length of the 
bars there are similar crosses, arranged so that in one 
the ruby is in the middle of four emeralds, and in 
another the emerald is in the middle and four balass 
rubies surround it. The emeralds are table-cut, and 
the intervals between the rubies and emeralds are 
covered with diamonds, the largest of which do not 
exceed lo to 12 carats in weight, all being showy 
stones, but very flat. There are also in some parts 
pearls set in gold, and upon one of the longer sides of 
the throne there are four steps to ascend it. Of the 

1 Balet in the original, for balass, etc. I have elsewhere referred to 
this word as being probably derived from Balakshdn, a fonn of the name 
Badakshdn (see Eco 7 iomic Geology of India, p. 430). The A nglo-India 7 z 
Glossary, however, establishes this view beyond question of doubt by 
quotations from Ibn Batuta, iii, 59, 394, and Barbosa, etc. The stones 
from this locality, which is on the banks of the Shigndn, a tributary of 
the Oxus, are not, however, rubies, but spinelles ; at the same time it 
would appear that with some authorities the term balass has been trans- 
ferred to true rubies of a particular shade of colour — hence a consider- 
able degree of confusion has arisen in this branch of the nomenclature 
of precious stones. After Ibn Batuta’s testimony, derivations from 
Baluchistan and Baluchin — an old name for Pegu ? — need perhaps only 
be mentioned in order to be dismissed ; but with reference to the latter, 
Chardin, Voyages, tome iv, p. 70, Amsterdam Ed. of 1 7 1 1 , says : — 
“ On I afpelle aussi Balacchani, Pierre de Balacchan, qui est le Pegu, 
doii je juge qu^est venu le nom de Balays qiCon donne aux Rubis couleur 
de rose! 



CHAP. VIII 


THE MOGUL’S THRONES 


383 


three cushions or pillows which are upon the throne, 
that which is placed behind the King’s back is 
large and round like one of our bolsters, and the two 
others that are placed at his sides are flat. There is 
to be seen, moreover, a sword suspended from this 
throne, a mace, a round shield, a bow and quiver with 
arrows ; and all these weapons, as also the cushions 
and steps, both of this throne and the other six, are 
covered over with stones which match those with 
which each of the thrones is respectively enriched.^ 

I counted the large balass rubies on the great 
throne, and there are about io8, all cabuckons, 
the least of which weighs too carats,^ but there are 
some which weigh apparently 200 and more. As for 
the emeralds,® there are plenty of good colour, but they 
have many flaws ; the largest may weigh 60 carats, 
and the least 30 carats. I counted about one hundred 
and sixteen (116) ; thus there are more emeralds than 
rubies. 

The underside of the canopy is covered with 
diamonds and pearls, with a fringe of pearls all round, 
and above the canopy, which is a quadrangular-shaped 
dome, there is to be seen a peacock with elevated tail 
made of blue sapphires and other coloured stones, the 
body being of gold inlaid with precious stones, hav- 
ing a large ruby in front of the breast, from whence 
hangs a pear-shaped pearl of 50 carats or thereabouts, 
and of a somewhat yellow water. On both sides of 

1 See Book I, chap, vi, p. 99. 

2 Rubies of good quality weighing 100 carats would be worth more 
than diamonds of equal weight, but it is probable that these were not 
perfect in every respect. 

3 For the source whence the emeralds were obtained, see Book II, 
chap. xix. 



384 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


the peacock there is a large bouquet of the same 
height as the bird, and consisting of many kinds of 
flowers made of gold inlaid with precious stones. On 
the side of the throne which is opposite the court there 
is to be seen a jewel consisting of a diamond of from 8o 
to 90 carats weight, with rubies and emeralds round it, 
and when the King is seated he has this jewel in full 
view. But that which in my opinion is the most costly 
thing about this magnificent throne is that the twelve 
columns supporting the canopy are surrounded with 
beautiful rows of pearls, which are round and of fine 
water, and weigh from 6 to 10 carats each. At 4 
feet distance from the throne there are fixed, on either 
side, two umbrellas, the sticks of which for 7 or 8 feet 
in height are covered with diamonds, rubies, and 
pearls. These umbrellas are of red velvet, and are 
embroidered and fringed all round with pearls. 

This is what I have been able to observe regarding 
this famous throne, commenced by Tamerlane and 
completed by Shah JahAn ; and those who keep the 
accounts of the King’s jewels, and of what this great 
work has cost, have assured me that it amounts to 
one hundred and seven thousand lakhs of rupees,^ 

1 There is certainly some mistake here ; the figure should stand at 
107,000,000, namely, one thousand and seventy lakhs ^ which at two- 
thirds of the rupee to the livre would be equal to 160,500,000 livres^ 
or ;£i2,037,5oo, the rupee being 2s. 3d., and the livre is. 6d. Thevenot 
says that the throne was reported to be worth 20,000,000 in ^‘gold’^ 
(ynohurs .^), but he adds that a true estimate could only be arrived at by 
a careful examination of the precious stones with which it was adorned. 
{Voyages^ Paris Ed., 1684, p. 123.) Bernier says 4 crores of rupees, 
or about 60,000,000 French livres^ say ;£4, 500,000. {Travels m 
the Mogul Emj^ire^ Eng. Trans., Calcutta Ed., 1826, p. 179.) A recent 
estimate of the value of this throne as it stands in the Shdh’s palace at 
Teheran at present is 13,000,000 dollars, say ;£2, 600,000. (See Persia^ 
by S. G. W. Benjamin, p. 73.) 



CHAP, vm 


THE GREAT MOGUL’S HORSES 


385 


sic. (i.e. 10,700,000,000) which amount to one hundred 
and sixty millions five hundred thousand livres of our 
money {i.e. 160,500,000). 

Behind this grand and magnificent throne there is 
placed a smaller one, which has the form of a bathing- 
tub. It is of an oval shape of about 7 feet in length 
and 5 in breadth, and the outside is covered over with 
diamonds and pearls, but it has no canopy. 

When in the first court you see, on the right 
hand, a special tent under which, during the King’s 
festival, the principal baladines of the town are obliged 
to be present in order to sing and dance while the 
Kinsr is on his throne. To the left there is another 
place, also covered by a tent, where the principal 
officers of the army and other officers of the guard 
and of the King’s household are in attendance. 

In the same quarter, during the time that the King 
remains seated on his throne, there are thirty horses, 
all bridled, fifteen on one side and fifteen on the other, 
each held by two men. The bridles are very narrow, 
and for the most part enriched with diamonds, rubies, 
emeralds, and pearls, some having only small gold 
coins. Each horse has upon its head, between the 
ears, a bunch of beautiful feathers, and a small cushion 
on the back with the surcingle, the whole embroidered 
with gold ; and suspended from the neck there is a 
fine jewel, either a diamond, a ruby, or an emerald. 
The least valuable of these horses costs from 3000 to 
5000 /cus, and there are some worth 20,000 rupees, i.e. 
10,000 /cus.^ The young Prince, who was then only 
seven or eight years old, rode a small horse, the 

1 The being equal to 4s. 6d., the prices of the horses would be 
£875 to £ 112 $ and ;£225 o. 


VOL. I 


2 C 



386 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK n 


height of which did not exceed that of a large grey- 
hound, but it was a very well-made animal. 

Half an hour, or, at the most, one hour after the 
King is seated on his throne, seven of the bravest 
elephants, which are trained to war, are brought for 
inspection. One of the seven has its howdah ready on 
its back, in case the King wishes to mount ; the others 
are covered with housings of brocade, with chains of 
gold and silver about their necks, and there are four 
which carry the King’s standard upon their backs ; it 
is attached to a hand pike which a man holds erect. 
They are brought, one after the other, to within forty 
or fifty paces of the King, and when the elephant is 
opposite the throne it salutes his Majesty by placing 
its trunk on the ground and then elevating it above its 
head three times. On each occasion it trumpets aloud, 
and then, turning its back towards the King, one of the 
men who is riding upon it raises the housing in order 
that the King may see if the animal is in good condi- 
tion, and has been well fed. Each has its own silken 
cord, which is stretched round its body in order to show 
whether it has increased since the previous year. The 
principal of these elephants, which the King is very 
fond of, is a large and fierce animal which has 500 
rupees mensem for its expenses.^ It is fed with the 
best food and quantities of sugar, and is given 
spirits to drink. I have spoken elsewhere of the 
number of elephants kept by the King,^ to which I 

The ordinary Government allowance for all exi^cnscs con- 
nected with the keep of an elephant is, or was a few years ago, about 
30 rupees a month in Northern India. Saunderson gives it at only 24 
rupees in Bengal, and 48 rupees in Madras {Thirteen Years^ etc., p. 
100). 

2 See Book I, chap, xviii, p. 280. 



CHAP, vni 


THE GREAT MOGUL’S THRONES 


387 


add here that when he rides out on his elephant the 
Omrahs follow him on horseback, and when he rides a 
horse the Omrahs follow on foot. 

After the King has inspected his elephants he 
rises, and accompanied by three or four of his eunuchs 
enters his harem by a small door which is behind the 
oval-shaped throne. 

The other five thrones are arranged in a superb 
hall in another court, and are covered over with 
diamonds, without any coloured stones. I shall not 
give a minute description of them for fear of wearying 
the reader, not forgetting that one becomes disgusted 
with the most beautiful things when they are too often 
before the eyes. These five thrones are disposed in 
such a manner that they form a cross, four making a 
square, the fifth being in the middle, but somewhat 
nearer to the two which are furthest from the people. 

After the King has remained about half an hour in 
his harem, he comes out with three or four eunuchs in 
order to seat himself in that one of the five thrones 
which is in the middle, and during the five days that 
the festival lasts, sometimes his elephants are brought, 
sometimes his camels, and all the nobles of his Court 
come to make their accustomed presents. All this is not 
done without much magnificence, and with surroundings 
worthy of the greatest monarch in the East, the Great 
Mogul being in power and wealth in Asia, what the 
King of France is in Europe, but having nothing 
comparable with him in might if he waged war with a 
valiant and clever people like our Europeans. 



CHAPTER IX 


Concerning other details of the Great Mogul’s 
Court, 

Since Aurangzeb, who reigns at present, has occupied 
the throne of the Moguls, which he usurped from his 
father and brothers, he has imposed on himself, as I 
have said, a severe form of penance, and eats nothing 
which has enjoyed life. As he lives upon vegetables 
and sweetmeats only, he has become thin and meagre, 
to which the great fasts which he keeps have contri- 
buted. During the whole of the duration of the comet 

of the year which appeared very large in India, 

where I then was, Aurangzeb only drank a little water 
and ate a small quantity of millet bread ; this so much 
affected his health that he nearly died, for besides this 
he slept on the ground, with only a tiger’s skin over 
him, and since that time he has never had perfect 
health.^ 

1 This comet, if, as we may suppose, it appeared in 1665, was first 
seen in Europe at Aix, on the 27th of March of that year. It lasted 
four weeks, and had a tail 25° long. Its orbit was computed by Halley 
{vide Chambers’s Astronomy^ “ Catalogue of Comets,” No. 64). Terry 
refers to two great comets which appeared while he was at the Mogul’s 
Court in the month of November 1618. They were followed by drought 
and famine. (See A Voyage to East India^ London, 1777, p. 393.) T 

2 At one period this Emperor subsisted on the proceeds of the sale 
of caps which he had embroidered with his own hands. He also wrote 
and sold extracts from the Koran for his daily bread. (See Chardin, 



CHAP. IX 


ZAFAR KHAn and HIS WIFE 


389 


I remember having seen the King drink upon 
three different occasions while seated on his throne. 
He had brought to him upon a golden saucer, enriched 
with diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, a large cup of 
rock crystal,^ all round and smooth, the cover of which 
was of gold, with the same decoration as the saucer. 
As a rule no one sees the King eat except his women- 
kind and eunuchs, and it is very rarely that he goes to 
eat at the house of any of his subjects, whether of a 
Prince or even of his own relatives. While I was on my 
last journey, Zafar KhAn, who was his Grand Vizier, 
and besides that his uncle on his wife’s side, invited 
the King to visit him in order to see the new palace 
which he had had built for himself. This being the 
greatest honour his Majesty could do him, Zafar 
KhAn and his wife, in testimony of their gratitude, 
made him a present of jewels, elephants, camels, 
horses, and other things, to the value of seven lakhs of 
rupees (700,000), which amount to one million and 
fifty thousand (1,050,000) livres of our money.^ This 
wife of Zafar KhAn is the most magnificent and 
the most liberal woman in the whole of India, and she 
alone expends more than all the wives and daughters 
of the King put together ; it is on this account that 

Voyages^ Amsterdam Ed., 17 ii, vol. viii, p. Qi*) He is said on one 
occasion, when urged to found hospitals, to have replied that he would 
make the country so prosperous that there would be no more mendi- 
cants to be seen in it. (Chardin, Voyages, Amsterdam Ed., 1711, vol. 
viii, p. 86 .) 

1 Vessels made of rock-crystal were much esteemed by the Emperors. 

I remember to have seen some very fine examples of large size which were 
found in the palace at the capture of Delhi after the Mutiny. Possibly 
some of the specimens preserved in the Green Vaults at Dresden came 
from India. 

2 £7 8,7 so. See Book II, chap. xxii. 



390 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


her family is always in debt, although her husband is 
practically master of the whole Empire. She had 
ordered a grand banquet to be prepared for the King, 
but his Majesty, as he did not wish to eat at Zafar 
KhAn’s house, returned to the palace, and the Prin- 
cess sent after him the dishes she had destined for 
him. The King found all the dishes so much to his 
taste that he gave 500 rupees to the eunuch who 
brought them, and double that amount to the kitchen. 

When the King goes to the mosque in his pallan- 
keen one of his sons follows on horseback, and all the 
Princes and officers of the household on foot. Those 
who are Muhammadans wait for him upon the top of 
the steps to the mosque,.and when he is about 'to come 
out they precede him to the gate of the palace. Eight 
elephants march in front of him, four carrying two 
men each, one to guide the elephant, and the other, 
seated on its back, carries a standard attached to a 
hand pike. The four other elephants carry a seat or 
species of throne on their backs,’- one of which is square, 
another round, one covered and another closed with 
glass of many kinds. When the King goes out he has 
generally 500 or 600 men for his bodyguard, each man 
being armed with a kind of hand pike. They attach 
fireworks to the iron blade ; these consist of two rockets 
crossed, each of the thickness of the arm, and a foot in 
length ; when ignited these will carry the hand pike 
500 yards.^ The King is also followed by 300 or 400 

1 Howdah. 

2 Rockets were used, and often proved most effective, in battle. It 
is said that the cause of Ddrd Shdh’s descending from his elephant at 
the critical moment when engaged with Murdd and Aurangzeb (see 
Book II, chap, ii) was that the elephant had been struck by a rocket, 
which rendered it unmanageable. 



CHAP. IX 


INDIAN SOLDIERS 


391 


matchlock men, who are timid and unskilful in firing, and 
a number of cavalry of no greater merit. One hundred 
of our European soldiers would scarcely have any 
difficulty in vanquishing looo of these Indian soldiers ; 
but it is true, on the other hand, that they would have 
much difficulty in accustoming themselves to so abstem- 
ious a life as theirs. For the horseman as well as the 
infantry soldier supports himself with a little flour 
kneaded with water and black sugar, of which they 
make small balls ; and in the evening, whenever they 
have the necessaries, they make khichri^ which consists 
of rice cooked with a grain of the above name in water 
with a little salt. When eating it they first dip the 
ends of their fingers in melted butter, and such is the 
ordinary food of both soldiers and the poor people. 
To which it should be added that the heat would kill 
our soldiers, who would be unable to remain in the 
heat of the sun throughout the day as these Indians 
do. I should say en passant that the peasants have 
for their sole garment a scrap of cloth to cover those 
parts which natural modesty requires should be con- 
cealed ; and that they are reduced to great poverty, 
because if the Governors become aware that they pos- 
sess any property they seize it straightway by right or 
by force. You may see in India whole provinces like 
deserts, from whence the peasants have fled on account 
of the oppression of the Governors. Under cover of 
the fact that they are themselves Muhammadans, they 
persecute these poor idolaters to the utmost, and if any 
of the latter become Muhammadans it is in order not to 
work any more ; they become soldiers or Fakirs, who 
are people who make profession of having renounced 

1 See p. 282. 



392 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


the world, and live upon alms ; but in reality they are 
all great rascals. It is estimated that there are in 
India 800,000 Muhammadan Fakirs, and 1,200,000 
among the idolaters, of whom I shall speak farther on. 

Once a fortnight the King goes out to hunt, and 
while en roide he is always mounted on his elephant, 
as also while the chase lasts. All the beasts which he 
shoots are driven within musket range of his elephant. 
Ordinarily these are lions, tigers, deer, and gazelles — 
for, as for wild boars, he as a good Muhammadan does 
not wish to see them. On his return he uses ^pallan- 
keen, and there is the same guard and the same order 
as when he goes to the mosque, save that at the chase 
there are 200 or 300 horsemen who ride before him 
in confused ranks. 

As for the Princesses, whether they are the wives 
of the King, his daughters, or his sisters, they never 
leave the palace except when they go to the country 
for a few days’ change of air and scene. Some of them 
go, but rarely, to visit the ladies of the nobles, as for 
example the wife of Zafar KhAn, who is the King’s 
aunt. This is not done except by the special permis- 
sion of the King. It is not here as in Persia where the 
Princesses only make their visits at night, accompanied 
by a great number of eunuchs, who drive away all 
persons whom they meet on the road. But at the court 
of the Great Mogul the ladies generally go out at nine 
o’clock in the morning, and have only three or four 
eunuchs to accompany them, and ten or twelve female 
slaves who act as ladies of honour. The Princesses 
are carried in pallankeens covered with embroidered 
tapestries, and every pallankeen is followed by a small 
carriage which can only contain one person. It is 



CHAP. IX 


ROYAL PRINCESSES 


393 


drawn by two men, and the wheels are not more than 
a foot in diameter. The object in taking these carriages 
is, that when the Princesses arrive at the houses they 
are going to visit, the men who carry the pallankeens are 
only allowed to go to the first gate, where the eunuchs 
compel them to retire, the Princesses then change into 
the carriages, and are drawn by the ladies of honour 
to the women’s apartments. For, as I have elsewhere 
remarked, in the houses of the nobles the women’s 
apartments are in the centre, and it is generally neces- 
sary to traverse two or three large courts and a garden 
or two before reaching them. 

When these Princesses are married to nobles 
of the Court they become the rulers of their hus- 
bands, who, if they do not live as they desire, and 
do not act according to their commands, as they 
possess the power of approaching the King whenever 
they wish, they persuade him to do what they please, 
to the disadvantage of their husbands ; most frequently 
asking for them to be deprived of their offices. As 
it is the custom that the firstborn succeeds to the 
throne, although he be the son of a slave, immediately 
that the Princesses of the King’s harem become aware 
that there is one among them with child, they use all 
conceivable methods to make her have a miscarriage. 
When I was at Patna in the year 1666, ShaistA 
KhAn’s surgeon, who is a half-caste {mestiv) Portuguese, 
assured me that the Princess, wife of ShAistA KhAn, 
in one month had caused miscarriages to eight women 
of his harem, not permitting any children but her own 
to survive. 



CHAPTER X' 


The Great Mogul orders all his jewels to be slunon to 
the Atithor. 

On the first day of November 1665 I went to the 
palace for the purpose of taking leave of the King, but 
he said that he did not wish me to depart without 
having seen his jewels, and until I had witnessed the 
grandeur of his fbte? 

The day following the great morning five or six 
officers from the King, and others on behalf of Nazvdb 
Zafar KhAn, came to tell me that the King had sent 
for me. Immediately on my arrival at the Court the 
two custodians of the King’s jewels, of whom I have 
elsewhere spoken,® accompanied me into the presence 
of his Majesty ; and after I had made him the ordinary 
salutation, they conducted me into a small apartment, 
which is at one of the ends of the hall where the King 
was seated on his throne, and from whence he was 

1 This very important chapter and the next are altogether omitted 
in the English translation by John Phillips, 1684. 

Joret (y. B. Taverttter, p. 190) sees an inconsistency between this 
statement and that at the beginning of chap, viii, p. 379. The words 
as he quotes them support this view, but they are not Tavernier’s. To 
me the two, as I understand Tavernier, appear perfectly consistent with 
one another. Prof Joret quotes, it should be added, as from chap, ix, 
but that is a misprint for chap. x. 

® See Book I, chap, viii, p. 135. 



CHAP. X 


THE GREAT MOGUL’S JEWELS 


395 


able to see us. I found in this apartment Akil KhAn, 
chief of the jewel treasury, who, when he saw us, 
ordered four of the King’s eunuchs to go for the 
jewels, which were brought in two large wooden trays 
lacquered with gold leaf, and covered with small cloths 
made expressly for the purpose — one of red velvet and 
the other of green brocaded velvet. After these trays 
were uncovered, and all the pieces had been counted 
three times over, a list was prepared by three scribes 
who were present. For the Indians do everything 
with great circumspection and patience, and when they 
see any one who acts with precipitation, or becomes 
angry, they gaze at him without saying anything, and 
smile as at a madman. 

The first piece which Akil Khan placed in my 
hands was the great diamond, which is a round rose, 
very high at one side.^ At the basal margin it has a 
small notch and a little flaw inside. Its water is beau- 
tiful, and it weighs three hundred and nineteen and a 
half (319-a) ratis, which are equal to two hundred and 
eighty (280) of our carats — the rati being f-th of our 
carat. When Mir JumlA, who betrayed the King of 
Golconda, his master, presented this stone to ShAh 
JahAn, to whose side he attached himself,^ it was then 

^ A resumd of all the information regarding this important stone, 
the so-called “ Great Mogul,” will be found in an appendix. It may be 
mentioned here that this allusion to the form of the stone as a “ rose ” 
appears to have given rise to the erroneous idea with one author, and 
those who have followed him, that it had a roseate tinge. 

2 Bernier's reference to this incident is as follows : At first he (Mir 
JumM) presented to him (Shdh Jahdn) that great diamond which is 
esteemed matchless, giving him to understand that the precious stones 
of Golconda were quite other things than those rocks of Kandahdr ; 
that there it was where the war ought to be made, to get the possession 
of and to go as far as Cape Comorin.” {History of the LaU Revolution^ 
etc,, vol. i, p. 44.) 



396 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


in the rough, and weighed nine hundred (900) ratis, 
which are equivalent to seven hundred and eighty- 
seven and a half (787-2-) carats; and it had several 
flaws. 

If this stone had been in Europe it would have 
been treated in a different manner, for some good 
pieces would have been taken from it, and it would 
have weighed more than it does, instead of which it has 
been all ground down. It was the Sie^^r Hortensio 
Borgio,^ a Venetian, who cut it, for which he was 
badly rewarded ; for when it was cut he was reproached 
with having spoilt the stone, which ought to have 
retained a greater weight ; and instead of paying him 
for his work, the King fined him ten thousand (10,000) 
rupees, and would have taken more if he had possessed 
it. If the Sieur Hortensio had understood his trade 
well, he would have been able to take a large piece 
from this stone without doing injury to the King, and 
without having had so much trouble grinding it ; but 
he was not a very accomplished diamond cutter.® 

1 Bernier mentions but does not name a jeweller who took refuge at 
the Mogul’s Court after having cheated all the monarchs of Europe with 
his '■‘■doublets” He was, however, a Frenchman, while Hoilensio was 
an Italian, and therefore King is probably mistaken when he suggests 
their identity. 

2 I cannot understand this statement in the light that Mr. King 
seems to have done, namely, that Hortensio might have defrauded the 
Mogul by taking off a large piece. It simply means, I think, that 
Hortensio might with advantage have cleaved the stone instead of 
grinding it ; the pieces so cleaved would then have been the property of 
the Mogul, not the perquisite of Hortensio. (See Natural History of 
Precious Stones, Bohn’s Ed., 1870, p. 78 «.) In an appendix I have 
dealt with the stories which, to have any reasonable possibility, must 
have referred to the breaking up of the original large stone, as, after 
Tavernier’s time, the stone of 280 carats could not, as is often stated, 
have been made to break up into three whose united weights were equal 
to nearly twice that amount ; but the statement in the text here is 



CHAP. X 


THE GREAT MOGUL’S JEWELS 


397 


After I had fully examined this splendid stone, and 
returned it into the hands of Akil Khan, he showed 
me another stone, pear-shaped, of good form and fine 
water, and also three other table diamonds, two clear, 
and the other with little black spots. Each weighed 
fifty-five (55) to sixty (60) ratis, and the pear sixty-two 
and a half (62^). Subsequently he showed me a jewel 
of twelve diamonds, each stone of 15 to 16 ratis, and 
all roses. In the middle a heart-shaped rose of good 
water, but with three small flaws, and this rose weighed 
about 35 or 40 ratzs. 

Also a jewel with seventeen diamonds, half of them 
table and half rose, the largest of which could not 
weigh more than seven (7) or eight (8) ratis, with the 
exception of the one in the middle, which weighed about 
sixteen (16). All these stones are of first-class water, 
clean and of good form, and of the most beautiful kind 
ever found. 

Also two grand pear-shaped pearls, one (weighing) 
about seventy (70) ratis, a little flattened on both sides, 
and of beautiful water and good form. 

Also a pearl button, which might weigh from fifty- 
five (55) to sixty (60) ratis, of good form and good 
water. 

Also a round pearl of great perfection, a little flat 
on one side, which weighs fifty-six (56) ratis. I 
ascertained that to be the precise weight, and that 
Shah AbbAs II, King of Persia, sent it as a present 
to the Great Mogul. 


clearly against the supposition that the large stone was otherwise treated 
than by grinding down from 7^7^ 280 carats. That the natives 

knew how to cleave diamonds is abundantly proved in Book II, chap. 
XV, where Tavernier says they understood the art better than Europeans. 



398 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


Also three other round pearls, each of twenty-five 
(25) to twenty-eight (28) ratis, or thereabouts, but the 
water of which tends to yellow. 

Also a perfectly round pearl of thirty-six and a 
half (36^) ratis, of a lively white, and perfect in every 
respect. It is the only jewel which Aurangzeb, who 
reigns at present, has himself purchased on account 
of its beauty, for the rest either came to him from 
DAra Shah, his eldest brother, and which he had 
appropriated, after he had caused his head to be cut 
off,^ or they were presents made to him after he 
ascended the throne. I have elsewhere remarked 
that this King has no great regard for jewels, priding 
himself only on being the great zealot of the law of 
Muhammad. 

Akil KhAn also placed in my hands {for he allowed 
me to examine all at my ease) two other pearls, per- 
fectly round and equal, each of which weighed twenty - 
five and a quarter (25!) ratis. One is slightly yellow, 
but the other is of a very lively water, and the most 
beautiful that can be seen. It is true, as I have else- 

1 This statement is important, as we know that SlVih Jahdn, who 
was still alive at this time in prison, had with him a great number of 
his precious stones, which were not handed over to Aurangzeb till after 
his death, when Jahdndrd Begum presented him with a gold basin full 
of them (see pp. 342 and 344). According to Bernier, however, some had 
been previously given to Aurangzeb by Shdh Jahdn during his lifetime 
Moreover, Aurangzeb, in a letter written to Shdh Jahdn at the time when 
he arrested him, acknowledged the gift 1 of Ddrd’s jewels by letter. Ddrd 
was left about ;£4,ooo,ooo worth of gold and jewels by his grandfather, 
Asaf Khdn, who passed over his own sons Shdistd Khdn and Nawdz 
Khdn perhaps because the Mogul, according to custom, might have 
declared himself the heir, so that they would have derived no benefit. 
But Asaf consoled himself with the reflection that he left his sons in 
good and highly lucrative positions, which was a better provision for 
them. 



CHAP. X 


THE GREAT MOGUL’S JEWELS 


399 


where said, that the Prince of Arabia, who has taken 
Muscat from the Portuguese, has a pearl which sur- 
passes in beauty all others in the world ; for it is 
perfectly round, and so white and lively that it looks 
as though it was transparent, but it only weighs four- 
teen (14) carats. There is not a single monarch in 
Asia who has not asked this Prince of Arabia to sell 
him this pearl. ^ 

Also two chains, one of pearls and rubies of different 
shapes pierced like the pearls ; the other of pearls and 
emeralds, round and bored. All the pearls are round 
and of diverse waters, and from ten to twelve (10 to 
12) ratis each in weight. In the middle of the chain 
of rubies there is a large emerald of the “old rock,”^ 
cut into a rectangle, and of high colour, but with 
many flaws. It weighs about thirty (30) ratis. In the 
middle of the chain of emeralds there is an Oriental 
amethyst,® a long table, weighing about forty (40) ratis, 
and the perfection of beauty. 

Also a balass ^ ruby cut in cabttchon, of fine 
colour and clean, pierced at the apex, and weighing 
seventeen (17) tnelscals. Six melscals make one once 
(French).® 

Also another cabuchon ruby of perfect colour, but 
slightly flawed and pierced at the apex, which weighs 
twelve melscals. 

1 See Book II, chap. xx. 

2 Precious stones were denominated “ of the old rock {rocca velhci)^ 
when they exhibited more or less perfect crystalline forms, being con- 
sidered more developed than those with amorphous forms. 

3 The ‘‘ Oriental ” amethyst is a purple sapphire, and when perfect 
is of great beauty. 

' 4 Balet in the original. (See p. 382, 

5 Melscals — mishkals, (See Appendix, p. 418.) 



400 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK H 


Also an Oriental topaz ^ of very high colour cut in 
eight panels, which weighs six melscals, but on one 
side it has a small white fog within. 

These, then, are the jewels of the Great Mogul, 
which he ordered to be shown to me as a special favour 
which he has never manifested to any other Frank; 
and I have held them all in my hand, and examined 
them with sufficient attention and leisure to be enabled 
to assure the reader that the description which I have 
just given is very exact and faithful, as is that of the 
thrones, which I have also had sufficient time to con- 
template thoroughly. 

1 The Oriental topaz is a yellow sapphire (corundum). It was pro- 
bably this topaz which Aurangzeb wore at his coronation. (Sec p. 372, 
«.) It was also mentioned by Bernier. Its weight, as given on page 
372, was ratis, or 157^ carats (should be 158^ carats), hence 
these should = 6 melscals, and the melscal = falls, or 26 j[\r cai'ats. 
To the mishkal of Baber a weight of 40 ratis is attributed,” so that 
either Baber’s mishkal must have weighed absolutely one-third more 
than Tavernier’s, or Tavernier’s rati must have exceeded Baber’s by 
one-third. The latter will be shown to be the case. (See Appendix.) 



CHAPTER XP 


Terms of the passport which the Nawdb ShAista 
KhAn sent to the Author, with some letters which 
he wrote to him, and the replies to them, in which 
the style of these countries manifests itself 

I COME now to the passport which the Nawdb ShAistA 
KhAn gave me, and the letters which I wrote to him 
in reference to my affairs, and it is as much by these 
letters as by the replies which he made to me that 
the reader will be enabled to comprehend the style 
and manner of writing among the Indians. I also 
received a passport from the King himself, which 
his Majesty had already given me through Zafar 
KhAn,® his uncle, to whom I returned it after having 
read it, because it was not couched in the language 
which I wished. I desired it to be without restriction, 
equally full and in the same style as that which I had 
received from the King of Persia, in virtue of which 
I had been exempt "from all dues both in going and 
coming, whether I sold or did not sell ; because the 

^ This chapter is- omitted in the English tianslation by John 
Phillips, 1684. 

2 Giafer Kan in the original. He was brother of Arjamund Begum, 
afterwards called Mmntds-UMahal^ the lady for whom the Tdj was 
built by her husband, Shdh Jahdn. There is frequent mention of 
Zafar Khdn in these pages, though he is not often referred to in other 
histories of India. 


VOL. I 


2 D 



402 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


passport offered me on the part of the Great Mogul 
was limited, and in the event of sale it required that 
I should pay custom dues on whatever I had sold. 
Although Zafar Khan assured me that it was the most 
favourable passport of this kind which the King had 
ever given, and that according to custom it could not 
be otherwise, nevertheless I was unwilling to accept it, 
and contented myself with that which I had held for 
some years from ShaistA KhAn, which, sufficed for 
me, and was as much esteemed as that of the Kino-, 
or more so. It is true that the King did not require 
that I should pay any duty on account of what I 
had sold • to him, and that the matter was done, 
graciously. 


Copy of the letter which the AtUhor wj-ote to SiiAlstA 
KhAn, uncle of the Great Mogul, on the sgth of 
May i6yg. 

The least of the servants of your Highness, who 
prays to God for the prosperity of your Greatness, 
Jean Baptiste Tavernier, a Frenchman, presents 
a request to your liberal bounty. You who arc the 
Lieutenant of the King, who govern as his relative 
all the Kingdoms which are subject to the rule of his 
Majesty, who has placed under your direction the most 
important affairs of his Crown, the Prince invincible, 
ShAistA KhAn, whom may God keep in his care. 

It is now some years since I had the honour of 
presenting to your Highness, then Governor of the 
Kingdom of GujarAt, and residing in AhmadAbAd, 
some large pearls and other rarities, which were 
deemed worthy of your treasury, for which I received 



CHAP. XI LETTERS FROM AND TO SHAISTA KHAN 


403 


a just payment and magnificent liberality. At the 
same time I received your instructions to return to 
Europe, to search for other rarities and bring them to 
you : ^ this I have done during the five or six years 
which I have spent traversing many European countries, 
where I have met with many beautiful objects and rare 
curiosities, which are worthy of being presented to 
your Highness. And as I heard, when at the Court 
of the King of Persia, that there were wars going on 
in India, I sent by one of my servants the aforesaid 
effects and rarities by way of Masulipatam ; and when 
I reached Surat some days ago, I received intel- 
^ligence of the safe arrival of all.^ If his Highness 
is willing to buy the aforesaid rarities, and desires 
that I should bring them into his presence, I beg to 
be given an order by which I shall be able to travel 
to him without any one causing me trouble en route. 
But if your Highness does not wish me to go to you 
I shall go to some other place. However, I await your 
orders at Surat, praying God that He will keep you 
always in all kinds of prosperity. 

'Translation of the first letter which ShAistA KhAn 
wrote to the Atithor in reply to the above. 

Great God — 

To the beloved of fortune, support of virtue. 
Monsieur Tavernier, Frenchman, my dear friend, 
know that your letter has been delivered to me, by 

1 These commands were given in 1654. 

2 What the postal arrangements could have been between places 
so distant as Masulipatam and Surat we can only guess — probably letters 
between the factories were conveyed mainly by sea. Special runners 
were employed by the Native Princes. 



404 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK n 


which I have learnt of your return to Surat, and that 
you have brought with you what I asked. I have 
carefully considered all that you have written to me, 
with which I am much contented ; wherefore, on 
receiving this, you should arrange to come to me, 
together with those things which you have brought ; 
and be assured that I will render you all possible 
courtesy, and all the aid and profit that it is possible 
for you to wish for. Moreover, I send you the pass- 
port you have asked me for, recommending you to 
come quickly in order that I may see the things 
described in your letter. The quicker you are able to 
come the better, wherefore write more ? 

The nth of Ckouval, in the year of Muhammad 
1069. 

This which follows is written in ShAistA KhAn’s 
own hand — 

The chosen one among my most beloved, your 
request has been delivered to me. God bless you and 
reward you for having held to your word and kept your 
promise. Come quickly to me, and be assured that 
you will receive all sorts of contentment and profit 
from me. 

This which follows is contained round his seal — 

The Prince of Princes, the servant of the King, 
victorious Aurangzeb. 

Translation of tlie passport which ShAistA KhAn sent 
to the A uthor. 

Great God — 

To all the agents and officers of the customs and 
tolls, to all the guardians of the roads, both great and 



CHAP. XI LETTERS FROM AND TO SHAISTA KHAN 


405 


small, between the port of Surat and the Court of 
JahAnAbAd. As Monsieur Tavernier, Frenchman, the 
most exalted and beloved of us, who is a servant of 
my household, comes to me from the port of Surat, 
let no one, whomsoever he may be, and on whatsoever 
pretext, interrupt his way or his journey, or cause him 
inconvenience or trouble, but permit him to pass in all 
safety, so that he may be able to come into my presence 
with comfort ; and let each of the abovenamed see that 
he is accompanied through their respective jurisdictions, 
so as to facilitate his journey. I charge you specially 
with this matter, and let no one act otherwise. 

Done the i ith of Chouval, in the year of Muhammad 
1069. 

Translation of the second letter written by ShAistA 
KhAn to the Author. 

To the most expert of engineers and the cream of 
good fellows. Monsieur Tavernier, Frenchman, know 
that I regard you as one of my dearest favourites and 
well beloved. As I have before written to you to come 
to JahAnAbAd and to bring with you the rarities which 
you have for me, now, by the favour and grace of the 
King, I have been appointed his Viceroy and Governor 
in the Kingdom of Deccan. Immediately on the 
receipt of his Majesty’s orders I set out, on the 25th 
of the month of Chouval; for this reason it is no longer 
desirable that you should come to JahAnAbAd, but 
rather that you should make your way as soon as 
possible to BurhAnpur, where, with God’s assistance, 

I shall arrive in the course of two months or there- 
abouts. I trust you will act in accordance with that 
which I write to you. 



406 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


nooK II 


Reply of the AtUhor to this second letter. 

He who prays to God for your Highness, and for 
the increase of your greatness and .prosperity, Jean 
Baptiste Tavernier, Frenchman, etc., as in the first 
letter. 

I have received the honour of the commands which 
your Highness has deigned to bestow on the least of 
your servants. Salutation to the Nawdb, the Prince of 
Princes. I gave myself the honour some days past to 
write by the messenger of your Highness, that after 
the rains I should not fail to go unto your presence at 
JahAnabAd. Now that you direct that it is to be at 
BurhAnpur, I shall follow your orders and carry with 
me all the rarities which I have destined for your 
Highness’s service. 

Done the loth of the month Huge. 


Translation of the third letter written by ShAistA 
KhAn to the Author. 

The most beloved of my favourites. Monsieur 
Tavernier, Frenchman, know that I keep you fresh in 
my memory. The letter which you wrote me by my 
messenger has been received, and I have read it word 
by word. You write that the rains and bad roads have 
prevented your coming, and that after the winter you 
will come to seek me. Now that the rains are over,^ 
and that I hope that in twenty-five or twenty-six days 
I shall be at AurangAbAd, on receipt of this hasten to 
come to me. I believe you will not fail. 

^ l.e. the rainy season or south-east monsoon. 



:hap. XI LETTERS FROM AND TO SHAiSTA KHAN 


407 


Done the 5th of Sefer^ in the first year of the reign 
of Aurangzeb.® 

This which follows was in the hand of the Nawdb. 

Dear friend, you will not fail to act according as I 
have written. 

Reply of the Author to this third letter. 

The least of the servants of your Highness, Jean 
Baptiste Tavernier, Frenchman, prays God for the 
prosperity of your person, you who are the Lieutenant 
of the King, the channel by which his favours are 
distributed, of whom the title is venerable and full of 
respect, who are the near relative of the King, the 
Governor-General of his Kingdoms, to whom he refers 
the accomplishment of all matters of importance. You 
who are the Prince of Princes, I the servant of your 
Highness present this petition. Having arrived in this 
country in obedience to your orders, I have wholly trusted 
in your favour ; and when I believed myself to be most 
laden with your bounty, I fell into the nets of Mirza- 
Arab, Governor of Surat, for, having received the latest 
orders of your Highness, I went to take leave of him 
to go to make my salutation to you. He replied that 
he had written to the King in reference to my person, 
[and that in consequence he could not give me permis- 

^ The month Sefer or Safar^ as Chardin has it, is the second month 
of the Persian lunar year. 

2 Tavernier elsewhere (p. 356) says Aurangzeb ascended the throne 
1660, and hence Prof. Joret remarks that consequently he would have 
remained in Surat on this occasion more than fifteen months, which is 
inadmissible, as on p. 409 he says six months. This, adds Prof. Joret, is 
an almost insoluble difficulty. There is, however, a simple solution, 
namely, that Tavernier was in error in naming 1660 as the year of 
Aurangzeb’s coronation, it having in fact been 1659. (See p. 371 n.\ 
see also p. 31 



408 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK II 


sion to depart till he had received the reply of his 
Majesty. I represented to him that, having nothing 
with me, and that at my arrival in this port, not having 
been found possessed of any merchandise of import- 
ance passing through the customs, I was astonished that 
he had written to the King in reference to my person].^ 
Disregarding all my arguments he did not alter his 
decision, and refused to give me permission to leave 
Surat. Now all is in the hands of your Highness, to 
whom it is due that I should obey his commands, and 
that a person like Mirza-Arab should not be able to 
oppose his wishes with so formal a resistance. 

Besides, not having my effects with me, as I have 
written to your Highness, my delay in Surat causes 
me considerable loss, which fnust give you displeasure. 
Moreover, it will prevent merchants from coming to 
this port, and that will inflict considerable injury on the 
Kingdom. As for myself, I am resolved to burn my 
effects or throw them into the sea rather than allow 
any one but your Highness to see them. I trust that 
the great authority of your Highness will withdraw me 
speedily from the trouble I am in, and will enable me 
to go to pay you my respects. And I hope that the 
news of the favours which I have received from your 
Highness, when it shall reach France, will cause many 
great merchants to do business in this country, and 
then India will know that the rare goods of the French 
and their precious curiosities put to shame all that has 
hitherto appeared in the country. This is what I 
deemed it necessary to write to your Highness. Dated 
at Surat the 25th of the month Rabi and AucL 

1 The portion between brackets is omitted in the edition of 1713, 
hough given in those of 1676 and 1679. 



CHAP. XI 


TAVERNIER VISITS SHOLAPtlR 


409 


All these letters and replies explain the reason why 
I delayed nearly six months^ at Surat. At length 
there came an express order from the Nawdb to the 
Governor of the town to allow me to depart, or other- 
wise he would have to resign his office. The Governor 
of Surat was so much annoyed at being baffled that 
when I took leave of him he did not deign to look at 
me, of which I held him willingly quitted. 

In consequence of the news which I had received 
that the Nawdb had parted from AurangAbAd, I found 
him with the army in Deccan, where he had besieged 
SholApur,^ one of the towns of Raja Sivaji. I sold 
him what I had intended for him, and during the time 
that I was with him he gave orders that I should lack 
nothing, neither for my own mouth nor the feed of my 
horses. They brought me each day four trays of meat 
and two of fruit and sweetmeats ; these for the most 
part fell to the share of my servants, because I was 
seldom permitted to eat in my tent. 

The Nawdb gave orders that five or six Rajas or 
idolatrous Princes whom he had in his army should 
entertain me in their own manner. But their rice and 
vegetables, which constitute, as I have said, all their 
dishes, were so full of pepper, ginger, and other spices 
that it was impossible for me to eat them, and I left 
the repast with a very good appetite. 

During this time the Nawdb fired a mine, which so 
much alarmed the inhabitants of SholApur that they 

^ Tavernier’s account of this same visit on p. 30 seems somewhat 
inconsistent with this, as he implies there was no delay, while the con- 
tents of the letters bear out this specific statement of six months (see p. 
407 n.) 

2 Choupar in the original, on p. 31 written Choupart. It appears 
to be the same as the modern ShoMpur in the Deccan. 



410 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


BOOK 11 


yielded by agreement,- on which account the soldiers, 
who thought to take the town by assault, were much 
annoyed, seeing themselves deprived of the hope of 
the loot which they had anticipated. On my departure 
the Nawdb wanted to pay me, but having represented 
to him that I had to pass through a disturbed country, 
and had to fear the followers of both armies, I asked 
him to allow me to draw the money at Daulatabad^; 
this he granted willingly, and on an order which he 
gave me I was paid on the day following my arrival in 
that town. The treasurer who counted out the money 
to me said that he had received the advice four days 
previously by an express, and that the Nawdb had 
commanded him to pay me promply ; this shows the 
great precision of the Indians in matters of trade to 
satisfy debts without delay. 

^ Dultabaf in the original, for Daulatdbdd, also called Deogir (see 
p. i6o). Bernier describes this town as being fifteen or sixteen days’ 
journey from Golconda, and calls it the capital of Deccan. {History of 
the late Revolution^ etc., p. 37.) According to the statement on p. 33, 
this payment was made at Aurangdbdd, and by no means promptly, or 
with satisfaction to Tavernier. This is but another inconsistency in the 
narrative. 



APPENDIX 


On the values of Coins, Weights, and Measttres referred to by 

Tavernier. 

I LIMIT myself here mainly to an interpretation of the values given 
by our author, not having space for any wider discussion of the 
question. He has been quoted as an authority, not always correctly, 
as I believe, in support of particular views, especially as to the value 
of the rupee. I think it can be demonstrated from the numerous 
relations which he gives between Indian coins and various European 
ones that it cannot have had a less average value than 2s. 3d. 
Sometimes, however, the evidence tends in the direction of a greater 
and sometimes of a less value. 

The discrepancies are in part due to the varying values of coins 
bearing the same names in different provinces, and partly to the fact 
that European coins in Oriental countries, and Oriental coins in 
countries not their own, had two values — one the intrinsic, which 
was ascertained at the mints, and sometimes by actual conversion into 
the coin of the country, and the other the exchange value of the coins 
themselves when used as a means of purchasing in the marts. 

This Appendix is supplementary to the foot-notes, but is at the 
same time intended to give a general and connected view of the 
subject. 

French Money. 

12 Denier s (money of account) = i Sol {Sous Tow^noii). 

20 Sols = I Livre (money of account). 

60 „ or 3 Livres = i Feu. 

2 Louis dor, old= i6s. gd., new = ;^i : o : 6 ; both according to 
Sir Isaac Newton. (Assays, etc., of Coins at London Mint, before 
1717.) 

It is of the utmost importance to establish beyond question of 
doubt the value of the above as they were employed by Tavernier. 



412 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Sir Isaac Newton’s estimate of the value of the ecu in 1717 was 
4s. 6d., and the very frequent relations given between it and various 
other European coins by Tavernier clearly indicate, as will be 
apparent in speaking of them, and as has been shown already in the 
foot-notes, that a less value cannot be ascribed to it. Whence it 
follows that what Tavernier understood as the livre^ or ^Jd of an ccu^ 
had a value of is. 6d., and the same value is indicated by its rela- 
tions to other well-known coins — ^as, for instance, the Dutch guilder 
(florin). From this again we obtain the deduction that the sol^ as 
he uses it, which, from its small value, gives that of other coins with 
great nicety, was worth 0.9 of a penny \ in other words, 10 sols = pd.^ 

Spanish Money, 

The piastre and reale or real^ as determined by Sir Isaac Newton, 
and as valued by Tavernier, were of equal value with the ecu^ being 
therefore worth 4s. 6d. Tavernier states that the former was equal 
to two rupees {Persian Travels^ p. 238), i,e. 4s. 6d. also. 

The double pistole or Frederic d^or was worth from ;^i : 12 : 6^ 
to ;j^i : 13 :3, the latter being Sir Isaac Newton’s estimate. The 
single pistole he valued at i6s. pd. 

Portuguese Money, 

Crusado. — According to Sir Isaac Newton, in 1717, the crusado 
= 2s. lod. Other authors place its value as low as 2s. 3d., and 
there are various intermediate valuations. 

Italian Mo?iey. 

Croisart of Genoa and Sequin of Venice. 

The croisart once mentioned by Tavernier, Book I, chap, xiii ; 
its value seems to have been ,about 6s. 6d. The sequin^ according 
to Sir Isaac Newton, was worth 9s. S.7d., and according to Yule 
and Burnell, Anglo-Indian Glossary, iiid., or 9s. 3d. 

German Money, 

Gulden, Rixdollars^ properly Reichsthalers {Richedales of Taver- 
nier), and Ducats. 

1 The above computations, as well as those of the values of Indian and 
Persian coins, although made independently, agree exactly with those which are 
given in a table in the English translation of Tavernier, by J. Phillips, dated 
1684. 

^ The rixdollar was also a money of account in several different countries. 



APPENDIX— COINS 


413 


The gulden^ of which there were several different kinds, ranged 
from about 2s. 2d. to 2s. 4d., the double gulden being equal to about 
twice that amount. The rixdollars, of which there were many 
kinds, averaged, according to Sir Isaac Newton, about 4s. 7d. in 
intrinsic value \ being, therefore, worth slightly more than the ku^ 
or French crown. 

The ducats averaged about 4s. 9d. 

Dutch Money. 

Gulden {guilde?' of Tavernier) or florin. — Its value in currency 
seems to have been about is. 9d. to is. 9^d., and to the liv 7 'e it 
bore the proportion of 5 to 6, which gives a value for the latter of 
very nearly is. 6d. 

Indian Money. 

50-80 Cowrie (corie of Tavernier), shells {Cyj>rcea 7 nonetd)^ = i 
paisa. 

35-40 Bddd^n {paden of Tavernier), bitter almonds {Amygdalus 
conimunis^ var. a^nard) = i paisd, 

46-56 Paisd {pecha of Tavernier) = i rupee (p. 27). 

1 4-14 J Rupees = i gold rupee or gold mohur. 

Also 

Fanam {fano of Tavernier) = 4|d. ; but some, of which six only 
went to the Scu, were worth double, or 9d. 

Pardao =27 sols. 

Pagoda, new = 3^- rupees; old = 4^ rupees and 2-J kus. 

Passing the bitter almonds and cowries, we come to the paisd 
{ox pecha of Tavernier). He says that it was worth about 2 French 
Hards, but that there were coins of half a paisd, 2 and 4 paisd. 
At Surat 49 to 50, and sometimes only 46, paisd went to the rupee ; 
and at Agra, nearer the copper mines, 55 to 56. Taking it at the 
average of 50, therefore, this coin was worth the 50th part of the rupee, ^ 
and it was also worth the 20th part of the 7 ?iahm%idi. If the rupee, 
as shown below, was worth 2s. 3d., then Tavernier’s paisd was worth 
.54 of a penny ; but with the mahmtidi at 9d. its value would be 
only 0.45 d. The former appears to be the safer figure to adopt, 
owing to the various relations given by Tavernier from which we can 
determine the value of the rupee. 

The Rupee. — The simplest of these relations {vide Book I, 

Thevenot and Mandelslo make somewhat similar statements, but contradict 
themselves in other passages. 




414 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


chap. II, and p. 385) is 2 rupees = i eat, or 4s, 6d,^ i rupee = 2s. 
3d. Tavernier frequently repeats his calculations in rupees, separately 
also in Iwres ; these always indicate a ratio of 2 to 3, and, as we 
have shown his livre to have been equal to is. 6d., the rupee would 
again be 2 s. 3d.^ 

In terms of the Spanish rcale, 100 of which = 213 to 215 rupees, 
the latter must have had the intrinsic value of at least 2s. ijd., and 
in terms of the rixdollar or reichsthaler, 2s. ltd. These alone 
prove an absolute intrinsic value of upwards of 2s. id. The rela- 
tions with Persian coins, to which reference has been made in the 
foot-notes, and the values of which are discussed below, support the 
ascription of values of from 2s. id. to 2s. 3d. for the rupee. 

The gold rupee, or gold mohur, — All the evidence goes to show 
that this coin, as known to Tavernier, was worth at least from 31s. 6d. 
to 32 s. 3 its equivalent was 14 to 14^ rupees, hence we may again 
deduce a value of at least 2 s. 3d. for the rupee. 

The fanam is of no importance in so far as TaverniePs calcula- 
tions are concerned. 

Fardao. — In three places (Book I, chap, xiii, and Book II, 
chaps, xii and xxiii) Tavernier gives for the pardao the value of 2 7 
sols = 2s. 0.3d. ; this is less than what is ascribed to it about this 
period in the Anglo-Indian Glossary, namely, 2 s. 6d. 

Pagoda. — Tavernier gives a number of different values for this 
coin. Thus, New P. = 3|- rupees, say 7s. lojd. ; Old P. = 4J 
rupees (Book II, chap, xviii), say los. i^^d. ; also = 7'J- livres (Book 
II, chap. xxiv) = iis. gd., qr 2^ kus (Book I, chap. xix)= los. 6d. 
In the table in the English translation above referred to, pagoda = 
the denii-pistol, or 8s. 3d. The average value was therefore about 9s. 

Fef'sian Money. 

2 shdhis = I malwmdi. 

2 mahniMis = i ahdsi. 

5 ahdsis = i “ ? (money of account). 

50 dbdsis — I toma 7 i (money of account). 

Shdhi {chaez of Tavernier). — According to Tavernier (p. 24), 
200 shdhis = 29^ rupees, so that with the rupee at 2s. 3d. the value 

^ Bernier says the same. 

2 Terry gives the value of 2s. 30!. for ordinary rupees, and 2S. pd. for the 
best [Voyage, etc., London, 1777, pp. 67, 113, 167). Fryer and Mandelslo also 
give the value at 2s. 3d. Mr. Keene’s ascription of only is. 3d. to the rupee 
seems to be based on an incorrect valuation of the hvre, for which Tavernier 
cannot be held responsible. (See History of Hindustan, p. 21 1). 



APPENDIX— COINS 


415 


of one shdhi would be 3.98d., say 4d. As he elsewhere states the 
relation to French money to be lo shdIiis — 4.6 sols and i Hard, 

I shdhi - 4-2-d., and Mandelslo (Voyages, English translation, p. 8) 
gives the value of one shdhi to be nearly 5d., I conclude, although 
the value is given at only 2 -Id. by Kelly in the U7iiversal Cambist, 
that in Tavernier’s time its value was from 4d. to 5d., say 4|d. 

Malwn'idi (niamoudi of Tavernier). — Hence the mahnnidi would 
be worth between 8d. and gd. Both Tavernier and Fryer repre- 
sent it, however, as being worth fths of a rupee, so that with the 
latter at 2s. 3d. its value would be lofd. ; and Mandelslo (English 
ed., pp. 13 and 68) gives it the value of is., which would make the 
rupee 2s. 6d. Its range in value, therefore, was from 8d. to is. 

Abdsi — Tavernier, in his account of Persian money, says i abdsi 
= 18 sols 6 de7iie7's, which would be about is. 4.65d. Mandelslo 
(p. 8) says 3 = 1 ku, and as we must give a value of at least 4s. 6d. 
to the ku, the abdsi would be worth is. 6d. ; so confirming the 
intermediate values of the shdhi (chaez) (4|^d.) and of the ffiahmddi 
(gd,) above given. 

In his Pe7^sia7^ T7'avels, ist ed., 1676, p. 122, Tavernier states 
that I or—^ abdsis, or about 6s. ii-|d. with the abdsi at is. 4.656., 
or 7s. 6d. with the abdsi at is. 6d. The or may have been a name 
used by the Franks much as we use the slang term “tin”; it 
corresponded to the Persian zar, which simply means money, ^ but 
Tavernier here gives it a definite value. 

To77ia7i, — Though generally regarded as a money of account, it 
is sometimes spoken of as though it had actually been a coin. At 
50 abdsis, as above, its value was ^£*3 : 15s. ; but Tavernier states 
that in India its value was 29-J rupees, which at 2s. 3d. would be 
only 6 14^. Tavernier also states that the to77ia7i = 46 livres, 
which at is. 6d. — • 9S* Mandelslo gives it as = 5 pistoles, 

i.e. about ;£4 : 3 : 9. Fryer says : 6 : 8 ; and Tavernier, in his 

Pe7^sia7i Travels, p. 122, says it = 15 kus, which at 4s. 6d. = 

: 7 : 6. Probably about : 9s. would be a fair average esti- 
mate. In 1821, according to Kelly (Unive7^sal Cambist'), it only 
represented a value of i : 1 6s. 

“ Turd' of Gold. — According to Tavernier (Book III, chap, xxix), 
the tun was equal to 100,000 guldeii (or Dutch florins), or 120,000 
livres ; and as these were worth is. 96. and is. 6d. respectively, the 
value of the tun would be about £,gooo, I have not been able to 
find the term in any other work. 


^ Comp. Chardin, Voyages, Amsterdam, 1711, vol. iv, 277. 




416 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


It is unnecessary to describe other Persian coins here, as they 
are not mentioned by our author in the Indian portion of his travels. 

Chinese Money. 

A money of account = 600 Uvres^ (sec 33 ook II, chap, 

xxiii, and Persian Travels) is referred to by Tavernier as a pain, 
i.e. a loaf or cake; probably it was represented, in bullion by an 
ingot, to which the English applied the term “shoe.’’ 


Weights. 

French Weights. 

I grain = .837 of a grain troy. 

24 grains - i denier. 

72 3, (=3 deniers) = i gros. 

579 „ = I once =482.312 grs. troy. 

16 07ices = I livre = i lb. 4 oz. i dwt. 13 gr. troy, or i lb. 
I oz. lo-J- dr. av. 

Indiaji Weights. 

GMinchi {gongy). — The name of the seed of Ahrns precatorins. 
3 = I .*. I = 1.9s to 1.98 grs. troy (sec %ml)\ but this value is too 
high for the ordinary rati, and too low for Tavernier’s rati (sec rati). 

Carat . — In order to determine the value of Tavernier’s carat, 
we may have recourse to one particular diamond of which he makes 
mention, namely, that belonging to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, 
which he figures and states weighed 1392 carats. From the foot- 
notes in Book II, chap, xxii, it will be seen that it is practically 
certain that this stone is the same as the one now known as the 
‘‘Austrian Yellow,” which weighs, according to Schrauf, 133 A 
Vienna carats, or 134 modern French carats, the latter differing 
very slightly from English carats, tience we might deduce tliat 
Tavernier’s carats were about 4 per cent lighter than the modern 
French carat. But the stone may have been polished, and have 
lost weight, or the difference* of carats may be simply due to 
improved and more careful means of weighment. 

If we could be quite sure that the melscal of Tavernier was tlie 
orthodox Persian 77 iis}ikal, weighing about 74 grains troy, we should 
also have a means of testing the value of his carat, because he gives 
the weight of Aurangzeb’s celebrated topaz in one place as 6 melscals, 
and in another as 181^ ratis, or 157-4^ carats (more properly, at the 



APPENDIX— WEIGHTS 


417 


proportion of 8 to 7, it should be i58|- carats), the equivalent of 
which would be 444 grs. troy, and a rati consequently would be 
equal to 2.456 troy grains, and a carat to 2.8 troy grains, or .37 
less than the modern carat. Tavernier’s me/scalf however, seems to 
have been equal to from 80.38 to 83.7 grs. troy (see below), and 
the carat calculated from the latter equals 3.169 grs. troy — a very 
close approximation indeed to the modern French carat. From 
both the above we may conclude that Tavernier’s carat differed but 
slightly, if at all, from the French carat of to-day. (See Preface, vol. 
ii, for correction.) 

The jRa/i\ — Tavernier, however, further says that 6 melscals = 

I 07ice^ and, therefore, as the ^French once - 482.312 grs. troy, the 
rati would be 2.66 grs. troy,^ which is an approximation to its value, 
namely 2.77 grs. (see Book II, chap, xviii), when calculated at l-ths 
of the modern carat of 3.17 grs, troy; and a still closer approxi- 
mation, namely 2.74, if we regard, as above, Tavernier’s carat as 
being 4 per cent less than the modern carat. The average of these 
three gives a value of 2.72, which I conclude may have been 
about the value of the rati uniformly used by Tavernier, but I 
shall employ the 2.77 grs. as a more definitely arrived at sum in 
future calculations. This was the pearl rati^ equal, as he himself 
tells us, to the abds (see Book II, chap, xxi, and Persian Travels^ p. 
238), which was used in Persia for weighing pearls. The value of the 
ahis^ as given by Kelly in the Universal Cambist^ is 3.66 diamond, 
or 2.25 troy grains. This proportion is, I think, incorrect, as 3.66 
diamond grs. = 2.9 troy grains, or i diamond grain = >79^5 

The ordinary rati (the seed of the Abrus precatorius) varied 
from 1.75 up to 1.9375} the mean of which is 1.843 8^^* troy. Mr. 
Thomas 2 has finally adopted 1.75 in his calculations. The above mean 
is identical with the value derived from the tola of Bdbar of 1 7 7 = 

96 ratis. From the mishkal of Bdbar Prof. Maskelyne has deduced 
values of 1.8425 to 1.85 grs. troy for the ratL General Cunning- 
ham^ and Mr. Laidlay, by weighment of the seeds, obtained 1.823 
and 1.825 grs. troy,^ or only about -|ds of the ratz of Tavernier, 
Another weighment by Mr. Blackie in the Bellary District gave an 
average of 2.142 grs. — the seeds in the south being larger.^ 

1 The carat, calculated in the same way, would be similarly enhanced, and 
would amount to 3.043 troy grains, or within 1.27 of the modern value. 

^ Numismata Orientalia, New ed., Pt. I, pp. I 3 "^ 4 * 

3 Royal Institution of Great Britain, March i860. Cf. V. A. Smith, 

As, Soc. Bengal^ Part I, 1884, p. 147. 

4 Num, Chron,^ vol, xiii, N.S., 1873, pp. 196-197. 

® Proced. As, Soc, Bengal, 1887, p. 222. 



418 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


Mangelin. — Seed of Admanthera pavonina, L. : it varied as 
follows : — 

If carat If ordinary 

grains. French grains. 

In Ramulkota (Raolconda) = 7. grs. = 5.55 grs. troy 5.8 grs. troy. 

,, Golconda and Bijapiir = s| „ 4.36 „ 4.6 „ 

n Goa = 5 » 3-96 » 4.1SS „ 

The Anglo-Indian Glossary gives the average result of the 

weighment of 50 seeds of Adenanthera pavonina as 4.13 grs. troy; 
selected seeds gave 5.02 to 5.03 grs. troy. 

Val (from Sanskrit valid) = 3 seeds of Ahrus precatorius, 

32 vals = I tola (tole) i = 5.86 grs. troy nearly (see told). 

81 „ = I once Fr. i val = 5.95 grs. troy. 

Melscal of Tavernier. Arabic mithk&l (or mitskdl). 

I melscal = -^ of an once, or 80.38 grs. troy. 

6 „ = i8i|- rails, or 157 J (rather is8|) carats. 

.‘.I „ = 30y\ ratis, or 263^ carats. 

301W ^ 2.77 = 83.6 grs. troy; 26-^ x 3.17 = 83.8 grs. troy. 

The average of these, say 83.7 grs. troy, is considerably in excess 
of the ordinary Persian miskhdl of from 73.69 to 74 grs. troy; but 
it must nevertheless be accepted as representing approximately the 
melscal known to Tavernier. 

Tola (tole of Tavernier). — i tole = g deniers 8 grains = 224 
French grains =187.488 troy grains. 

The modern British Indian tola - 180 grs. troy. 

Seer or Ser (serre of Tavernier). 

In Surat 42 seei's = 34^ livres, Book II, chap. xii. 

4^ » = 34 »j jj 3j 

„ I seer = |th livre. Book I, chap. ii. 

Agra 60 seers = 5if livres. Book II, chap. xii. 

Bengali „ =72 „ ( Book III, 

„ I „ = for amber, etc. = 9 oz. ( chap. xv. 

From the above indications of the value of the Surat seer, we 
may conclude that it averaged nearly 13 French onces =■ 14.3 oz. 
av., and that the Agra seer was equal to 13.6 Fr. onces^ 15.2 oz. av. 
In reference to the Bengal seer, the value 72 livres is possibly a 
copyist's mistake, and is certainly a blunder (see notes in Book III, 
chap. xv). The small Patna seer of 9 onces is probably right. 

Thevenot, p. 52, gives the equivalent of the Surat seer at 14 
onces, or 35 tolas ; and Mandelslo, English ed., p. 67, says 40 seers 




APPENDIX-MEASURES 


419 


= 2 therefore i = 12.2 ^^nces. To the Agra seer Thevenot 

gives the value of 28 onces. 

Maund, man^ Hin. {tmin and men of Tavernier). 

Tavernier^s ordinary maund =69 Iwres, 

Indigo „ S3 ,, 

Surat „ 42 seers, 

5J J> 4 ^ >» 

„ (Mandelslo) 40 „ 

,, (Thevenot) 40 ,, 

„ (Fryer) 42 pounds. 

We may therefore conclude that the Surat maund contained 
about 40 seei's^ at about 13 French onces to the seei^^ or 35.5 English 
pounds avoirdupois. 

The maund of Agra contained 60 seers of 13.6 onces ^ or about 
57 lbs. av. English, which corresponds approximately with a value 
of SS lbs. given by Hawkins in 1610. 

Measures of Length. 

French 

The French lieue is generally given by Tavernier as the 
equivalent of the cosSy but as he recognises the variability of the 
latter, it must be considered that the adoption of the European 
term was determined rather by convenience than by any positive 
identity having been established by actual measurement The old 
lieue de paste of France was equal to 2 miles and 743 yards. 

Indian Measures, 

The Indian measures which we have to investigate are the tassu 
{tassot of Tavernier), cubit, cossy and gas. 

24 tassus (t assets) = i cubit {aune of Tavernier). 

(5000?) cubits = I coss (cosse’^ of Tavernier). 

4 coss = I gow {gas of Tavernier). 

The tassu (tassot) of Surat, as graphically represented in Book 
II, chap, xii, and in Observations sur le Commercey etc,, in the 
“Recueil,” is exactly equal to i-J- in. English. The cubit of Surat 
was equal to 24 times that amount, in other words to 27 in. In 
Book I, chap, ii (see p. 38), the Jth of a Surat cubit as represented 

^ Misprinted coste for cosse in Tavernier’s first edition of 1676, and repeated 
in other editions, but corrected in the errata. 




420 


TRAVELS IN INDIA 


would indicate a cubit of about J an inch less, but the same figure 
is said to be equal to only ^th of the Agra cubit, which would there- 
fore be about 32! in. This is very near the ildhi gaz of Akbar, 
namely 33 in. The tassu of Agra was, therefore, about in. 
English. 

The Coss, — As stated above, Tavernier regarded the coss and the 
Heue as equivalent values, frequent illustrations of which are pointed 
out in the foot-notes. In Book I, chap, iv, he speaks of the coss 
between Surat and Burh£npur as short, a cart being able to traverse 
one in an hour ; but between the latter and Sironj the coss were 
longer, a cart taking up to five quarters of an hour ; between Sironj 
and Agra they were common coss, of which there were 106; the 
true distance is about 220 miles. In general, I have found that 
the true distances indicate a value of 2 miles, approximately, for 
Tavernier^s coss. Thus, between Golconda and Masulipatam the 
distance is given as 100 coss, the true distance being about 210 
miles. Thevenot speaks of the coss as being equal to half a league ; 
but his Heue must have been a double one, since, in the particular 
instance just quoted, he represents the distance as being 5 3 Ueues, 

The Gos of Tavernier appears to have been the same as the gow 
(Hind, gau) of some other authors, and this term is at present in 
use locally both in parts of India and Ceylon; but in the latter 
country it represents a smaller value than it does in the Peninsula, 
as stated in the note on page 47. In three different places. 
Book II, chap, xii, and in Book II, chap, xviii, the value of the gos 
is stated to be 4 Ueues ; in other words, 4 coss, or say from 8 to 9 
miles, which is the value of the gau in S. India at present. Accord- 
ing to Tavernier it was the unit of measurement between Surat and 
Goa, and was also used between Golconda and the Diamond Mines. 


END OF VOL. I 


Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh. 








Accn. 

Class No .Bock No- .... 

Author. . 

Title 

Va-^ • 1 • 


Issued 

OB 

Borrower's Name 

Returned 

on 








AlDE-de-CAMFS LIBRARY 


Accn. No 




1. Book. n..y be ‘ 

exceeding fifteen days. 
