THE


MYSTICAL HYMNS


OF


ORPHEUS.


THE


MYSTICAL HYMNS


ORPHEUS.


TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK,
AND DEMONSTRATED TO BE THE


Enbocations tohich were used in the Gleusinian flysteries,
BY THOMAS TAYLOR.


Doeyiopat ors Depts core, Supas 8 ewGecGe BeBndou
Tlavres ops. ORPHEUS.


Peo Cvition.


LONDON:
BERTRAM DOBELL,
77? CHARING CROSS ROAD, W.C.
AND
REEVES AND TURNER,
WELLINGTON STREET, STRAND.
MDOOOXOVI.


WS 3K


® //°25 38 JA.


edition of Thomas Taylor’s translation of “ Iam-
blichus on the Mysteries of the Egyptians,” &c.,
it was promised that other of Taylor’s translations
should be reprinted if due encouragement were
given to the enterprise. That work having met
with a fair measure of success, the publishers, in
fulfilment of their promise, have undertaken the
present reprint, which they hope will not be less
welcome than the former.

“ The Mystical Initiations; or, Hymns of Or-
pheus,” as the work was originally called, was first
published in 1787. A second edition, “ with con-
siderable emendations, alterations, and additions,”
was published in 1824. Of this second edition
the present reprint (being the third issue of the
work) is an almost exact facsimile. The original
was printed at the Chiswick Press, and is a fine
specimen of the work of that excellent establish-
ment. It is hoped that the present edition will,


vi ADVERTISEMENT.


as regards its ‘get up,’ bear comparison with the
edition of 1824.

As in the case of “Iamblichus,” the present
work is a faithful reprint of the original text
without alteration or addition.

It is perhaps worth while to add that the second
edition of the book was dedicated to “ Prince
Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex, ... as a
testimony of the greatest respect for his private
and public virtues, and his very superior literary
attainments.”


INTRODUCTION.


——_—_—_—— TS


Tue Grecian theology, which originated from
Orpheus, was not only promulgated by him,
but also by Pythagoras and Plato; who, for
their transcendent genius, will always be
ranked by the intelligent among the prodi-
gies of the human race. By the first of these
illustrious men, however, it was promulgated
mystically and symbolically; by the second,
enigmatically, and through images; and sci-
entifically by the third. That this theology,
indeed, was derived from Orpheus is clearly
testified by those two preat philosophic lumi-
naries Iamblichus! and Proclus*. For by


1 srept Sewy [uSayopas 0 rw Mvnoapyw rovro efenador,
opy:acbes ev AtBnSpos ras OpgKiois AyNaopayw Tederas
peeradovros’ ws apa Opdevs o KadXtowas xara ro Ilayya:oy
opos viro Tas “ATpes Turvedes eda Tay apiIpw ovoray atdcov

ewat, Jamblicus de Vit. Pythag. p. 185,


3 TIuSayopesos o Tyacos ererae tars vSa-yopetwy apyas,
auras de cio at Opgdixar wapadocers’ a yap Opdevs Si atrop-


viii INTRODUCTION.


them we are informed, “that what Orpheus
delivered mystically through arcane narra-
tions, this Pythagoras learned when he cele-
brated orgies in the Thracian Libethra, being
initiated by Aglaophemus in the mystic wis-
dom which Orpheus derived from his mother
Calliope, in the mountain Pangzeus.”

This sublime theology, though it was scien-
tifically disseminated by Plato, yet conform-
ably to the custom of the most ancient philo-
sophers, was delivered by him synoptically,
and in such a way as to be inaccessible to
the vulgar; but when, in consequence of the
commencement of a degraded and barren pe-
riod, this theology became corrupted through
the negligence and confusion of its votaries,
then such of his disciples as happened to
live when it was thus degraded and deformed
found it necessary to unfold it more fully, in
order to prevent its becoming utterly extinct.
The men by whom this arduous task was
accomplished were the last of the disciples of
Plato; men who, though they lived in a base


pntuv Noywr pvorixws wapadedwxe, ravra IvSayopas efeua-
Ser opytacseas ev AtByXpos ros Opaxcois, AyNopapou Tede-
Tas peraddovros, nv wept Oewy codpiay wapa KadXcorns rns
pnrpos exweby. Proclus in Tim. lib, v. p. 291.


INTRODUCTION. ix


age, possessed a divine genius, and who
having happily fathomed the depth of their
great master’s works, luminously and copi-
ously developed their recondite meaning, and
benevolently communicated it in their writ-
ings for the general good.

From this golden chain of philosophers, as
they have been justly called, my elucidations
of the present mystic hymns are principally
derived: for I know of no other genuine
sources, if it be admitted (and it must by
every intelligent reader), that the theology of
Orpheus is the same as that of Pythagoras
and Plato. Hence I shall not take any notice
of the theories of Bryant and Faber and other
modern mythological writers; because these
theories, however ingenious they may be, are
so far from elucidating, that they darken,
confound, and pollute the Grecian theology,
by mingling with it other systems, to which it
is as perfectly foreign and hostile as wisdom
is to folly, and intellect to craft.

That the philosophic reader therefore may
be convinced of the truth of this observation,
the following epitome of this theology, de-
rived from the abovementioned sources, is
subjoined. In the first place, this theology
celebrates the immense principle of things as


x INTRODUCTION.


something superior even to being itself; as
exempt from the whole of things, of which it
is nevertheless ineffably the source; and does
not therefore think fit to connumerate it with
any triad, or order of beings. Indeed, it even
apologizes for attempting to give an appro-
priate name to this principle, which is in
reality ineffable, and ascribes the attempt to
the imbecility of human nature, which striv-
ing intently to behold it, gives the appella-
tion of the most simple of its conceptions
to that which is beyond all knowledge and
all conception. Hence Plato denominates it
the one and the good; by the former of these
names indicating its transcendent simplicity,
and by the latter its subsistence as the object
of desire to all beings. For all things desire
good. But Orpheus, as Proclus well ob-
serves®, “availing himself of the license of
fables, manifests every thing prior to Heaven
(or the intelligible and at the same time in-
tellectual order) by names, as far as to the
first cause. He also denominates the ineff-
able, who transcends the intelligible unities,
Time.” And this according to a wonderful
analogy, indicating the generation, i. e. the


3 In. Plat. Cratyl. p. 23.


INTRODUCTION. xi


ineffable evolution into light of all things,
from the immense principle of all. For, as
Proclus elsewhere observes, “where there is
generation there also time has a subsistence.”
And in this way the celebrated Theogony of
Orpheus and other Grecian theologists is to
be understood.

As the first cause then is the one, and this
is the same with the good, the universality of
things must form a whole, the best and the
most profoundly united in all its parts which
can possibly be conceived: for the first good
must be the cause of the greatest good, that
is, the whole of things; and as goodness is
union, the best production must be that which
is most united. But as there is a difference
in things, and some are more excellent than
others, and this in proportion to their proxi-
mity to the first cause, a profound union can
no otherwise take place than by the extremity
of a superior order coalescing through inti-
mate alliance with the summit of one proxi-
mately inferior. Hence the first of bodies,
though they are essentially corporeal, yet
Kata oyeow, through habitude or alhance, are
most vital, or lives. The highest of souls are
after this manner intellects, and the first of
beings are Gods. For as being is the highest


xii INTRODUCTION.
of things after the first cause, its first subsist-


ence must be according to a superessential
characteristic.

Now that which is superessential, consi-
dered as participated by the highest or true
bemg, constitutes that which is called inéelli-
gible. So that every true being depending on
the Gods is a divine intelligible. It is divime
indeed, as that which is deified ; but it is in-
telhgible, as the object of desire to intellect,
as perfective and connective of its nature,
and as the plenitude of beimg itself. But in
the first being life and intellect subsist accord-
ing to cause: for every thing subsists either
according to cause, or according to hyparzis,
or according to participation. 'That is, every
thing may be considered either as subsisting
occultly in its cause, or openly in its own
order (or according to what it is), or as par-
ticipated by something else. The first of
these is analogous to light when viewed sub-
sisting in its fountain the sun; the second to
the light immediately proceeding from the
sun; and the third to the splendour com-
municated to other natyres by this light.

The first procession therefore from the first
cause will be the intelligible triad, consisting
of being, life, and intellect, which are the three


INTRODUCTION. xili


highest things after the first God, and of
which bemg is prior to life, and life to intellect.
For whatever partakes of life partakes also of
being : but the contrary is not true, and there-
fore being is above life; since it is the char-
acteristic of higher natures to extend their
communications beyond such as are subordi-
nate. But fe is prior to intellect, because
_ all intellectual natures are vital, but all vital
natures are not intellectual. But in this
intelligible triad, on account of its superes-
sential characteristic, all things may be con-
sidered as subsisting according to cause:
and consequently number here has not a
proper subsistence, but is involved in unpro-
ceeding union, and absorbed in superessential
light. Hence, when it is called a triad, we
must not suppose that any essential distinction
takes place, but must consider this appella-
tion as expressive of its ineffable perfection.
For as it is the nearest of all things to the
one, its union must be transcendently pro-
found and ineffably occult.

All the Gods indeed, considered according
to their unities, are all in all, and are at the
same time united with the first God, like
rays to light, or the radii of a circle to the
centre. And hence they are all established


xiv INTRODUCTION.


in their ineffable principle (as Proclus in
Parmenid. beautifully observes), like the
roots of trees in the earth; so that they are
all as much as possible superessential, just
as trees are eminently of an earthly nature,
without at the same time being earth itself.
For the nature of the earth, as being a whole,
and. therefore having a perpetual subsistence,
is superior to the partial natures which it
produces. ‘The intelligible triad therefore,
from existing wholly according to the super-
essential, possesses an inconceivable profun-
dity of union both with itself and its cause;
and hence it appears to the eye of intellect
as one simple indivisible splendour, beaming
from an unknown and inaccessible fire.

The Orphic theology, however, concerning
the intelligible Gods, or the highest order of
divinities, is, as we are informed by Damas-
cius ‘, as follows: “ Time [as we have already
observed] is symbolically said to be the one
principle of the universe ; but ether and chaos ®
are celebrated as the two principles imme-
diately posterior to this one. And beimg,


* Vid. Wolfiii Anecdot. Grac. tom. iii. p. 252.


5 These two principles are called by Plato, in the Phile-
bus, downd and snfénity.


INTRODUCTION. XV


simply considered, is represented under the
symbol of an egg®. And this is the first triad
of the intelligible Gods. But for the perfec-
tion of the second triad they establish either
a conceiving and a conceived egg as a God,
or a white garment, or a cloud: because from
these. Phanes leaps forth into light. For
indeed they philosophize variously concerning
the middle triad. But Phanes here repre-
sents intellect. To conceive him however
besides this, as father and power, contributes
nothing to Orpheus. But they call the third
triad Metis as intellect’, Ericapseus as power,
and Phanes as father. But sometimes® the
middle triad is considered according to the
three-shaped God, while conceived in the
egg: for the middle always represents each
of the extremes; as in this instance, where
the egg and the three-shaped God subsist
together. And here you may perceive that
the egg is that which is united; but that the.


6. This Orphic egg is the same with the mixture from
bound and infinity, mentioned by Plato in the Philebus.
See the third book of my translation of Proclus on the
Theology of Plato.


7 ws vouv is omitted in the original.


8 unmwore is erroneously printed instead of ore.


xvi INTRODUCTION.
three-shaped and really multiform God is the


separating and discriminating cause of that
which is intelligible. Likewise the middle
triad subsists according to the egg, as yet
united; but the third® according to the God
who separates and distributes the whole in-
telligible order. And this is the common
and familiar Orphic theology. But that de-
livered by Hieronymus and Hellanicus is as
follows. According to them water and matter
were the first productions, from which earth
was secretly drawn forth: so that water and
earth are established as the two first prin-
ciples; the latter of these having a dispersed
subsistence; but the former conglutinating
and connecting the latter. They are silent
however concerning the principle prior to
these two, as being ineffable: for as there
are no illuminations about him, his arcane
and ineffable nature is from hence sufficiently
evinced. But the third principle posterior
to these two, water and earth, and which is
generated from them, is a dragon, naturally
endued with the heads of a bull and a lion,
but in the middle having the countenance of


® ro tpirov is I conceive erroneously omitted in the
original.


INTRODUCTION. Xvii


the God himself. They add likewise that he-
has wings on his shoulders, and that he is
called wndecaying Time, and Hercules ; that
Necessity resides with him, which is the same
as Nature, and incorporeal Adrastia, which
is extended throughout the universe, whose
limits she binds in amicable conjunction.
But as it appears to me, they denominate
this third principle as established according
to essence; and assert, besides this, that it
subsists as male and female, for the purpose
of exhibiting the generative causes of all
things. |

“J likewise find in the Orphic rhapsodies,
that neglecting the two first principles, toge-
ther with the one principle who is delivered
in silence, the third principle, posterior to the
two, is established by the theology as the
original ; because this first of all possesses
something effable and commensurate to hu-
man discourse. For in the former hypothesis,
the highly reverenced and undecaying Time,
the father of sether and chaos, was the prin-
ciple: but in this Time is neglected, and the
principle becomes a dragon. It likewise calls
triple sether, moist; and chaos, infinite ; and
Erebus, cloudy and dark; delivering this
second triad analogous to the first: this be-

b


Xvili INTRODUCTION.


ing potential, as that was paternal. Hence
the third procession of this triad is dark
Erebus: its paternal and summit ether, not
according to a simple but intellectual sub-
sistence: but its middle infinite chaos, con-
sidered as a progeny or procession, and among
these parturient, because from these the third
intelligible triad proceeds. What then is
the third intelligible triad? I answer, the
egg; the duad of the natures of male and
female which it contains, and the multitude
of all-various seeds, residing in the middle
of this triad: And the third among these is
an incorporeal God, bearing golden wings on
his shoulders ;. but in his inward parts natu-
rally possessing the heads of bulls, upon
which heads a mighty dragon appears, in-
vested with the all-various forms of wild
beasts. This last then must be considered
as the intellect of the triad; but the middle
progeny, which are many as well as two, cor-
respond to power, and the egg itself is the
paternal principle of the third triad: but the
third God of this third triad, this theology
celebrates as Protogonus, and calls him Jupi-
ter, the disposer of all things and of the
whole world; and on this account denomi-
nates him Pan. And such is the information


INTRODUCTION. xix


which this theology affords us, concerning
the genealogy of the intelligible principles of
things.

But in the writings of the Peripatetic Eu-
demus, containing the theology of Orpheus,
the whole intelligible order is passed over in
silence, as being every way ineffable and un-
known, and incapable of verbal enunciation.
Eudemus therefore commences his genealogy
from Night, from which also Homer begins:
though Eudemus is far from making the Ho-
meric genealogy consistent and connected,
for he asserts that Homer begins from Ocean
and Tethys. It is however apparent, that
Night is according to Homer the greatest
divinity, since she is reverenced even by Ju-
piter himself. For the poet says of Jupiter,
“that he feared lest he should act in a man-
ner displeasing to swift Night.” So that
Homer begins his genealogy of the Geds from
Night. But it appears to me that Hesiod,
when he asserts that Chaos was first gene-
rated, signifies by Chaos the incomprehen-
sible and perfectly united nature of that


10 dtero yap wh vuxri S07 awd0dua péfo. So Damas.
cius ; but instead of jéfor, all the printed editions of Homer
read &pdot.


xx INTRODUCTION.


which is intelligible: but that he produces
Earth" the first from thence, as a certain
principle of the whole procession of the Gods.
Unless perhaps Chaos is the second of the
two principles: but Earth, Tartarus, and
Love form the triple intelligible. So that
Love is to be placed for the third monad of


11 Ty» is printed instead of Ty».


13 As the whole of the Grecian theology is the progeny
of the mystic traditions of Orpheus, it is evident that the
Gods which Hesiod celebrates by the epithets of arth,
Heaven, &. cannot be the visible Heaven and Earth: for
Plato in the Cratylus, following the Orphic doctrine con-
cerning the Gods, as we have evinced in our notes on that
dialogue, plainly shows, in explaining the name of Jupiter,
that this divinity is the artificer of the sensible universe ;
and consequently Saturn, Heaven, Earth, &. are much
superior to the mundane deities. Indeed if this be not
admitted, the Theogony of Hesiod must be perfectly absurd
and inexplicable. For why does he call Jupiter, agree-
ably to Homer, (xarnp avdpwv re Sewv re), ‘father of gods
and men?" Shall we say that he means literally that Jupi-
ter is the father of all the Gods? But this is impossible ;
for he delivers the generation of Gods who are the parents
of Jupiter. He can therefore only mean that Jupiter is the
parent of all the mundane Gods : and his Theogony, when
considered according to this exposition, will be found to be
beautifully consistent and sublime ; whereas, according to
modern interpretations, the whole is a mere chaos, more
wild than the delirious visions of Swedenborg, and more
unconnected than any of the impious effusions of methodis-
ticalrant. Ionly add, that ryy is again erroneously printed
in the Excerpta of Wolfius for yy».


INTRODUCTION. Xxi


the intelligible order, considered according
to its convertive nature; for it is thus de-
nominated by Orpheus in his rhapsodies.
But Earth for the first, as being first esta-
blished in a certain firm and essential station.
But Vartarus for the middle, as in a certain
respect exciting and moving forms into dis-
tribution. But Acusilaus appears to me to
establish Chaos for the first principle, as en-
tirely unknown; and after this, two prin-
ciples, Erebus as male, and Night as female;
placing the latter for infinity, but the former
for bound. But from the mixture of these, he
says 18 that Ether, Love, and Counsel are gene-
rated, forming three intelligible hypostases.
And he places ther as the summit; but
Love in the middle, according to its naturally
middle subsistence; but Metis or Counsel as
the third, and the same as highly reverenced
intellect. And, according to the history of
Eudemus, from these he produces a great
number of other Gods.

Thus far Damascius, with whose very in-
teresting narration the doctrine of the Chal-
deans concerning the intelligible order accords,
as delivered by Johannes Picus in his Conclu-


18 dns in the original should doubtless be gas.


Ly
xxii INTRODUCTION.


sions according to the Opinion of the Chaldean
Theologists'*, “The intelligible coordination
(says he) is not in the intellectual coordina-
tion, as Amasis the Egyptian asserts, but
is above every intellectual hierarchy, im-
participably concealed in the abyss of the
first unity, and under the obscurity of the
first darkness.” Coordinatio intelligibilis non
est in intellectuali coordinatione, ut dixit
Amasis Afgyptius, sed est super omnem in-
tellectualem hierarchium, in abysso prime
unitatis, et sub caligine primarum tenebra-
rum imparticipaliter abscondita.

But from this triad it may be demonstrated,
that all the processions of the Gods may be
comprehended in six orders, viz. the inéelli-
gible order, the intelligible and at the same time
intellectual, the intellectual, the supermundane,
the liberated, and the mundane}. For the in-
telligible, as we have already observed, must
hold the first rank, and must consist of being,
life, and intellect ; i. e. must abide, proceed, and
return; at the same time that it is char-
acterized, or subsists principally according to


14 Vid. Pici Opera, tom. i. p. 54.


15 i, @. Peot vonTot, VONTOL Kat POEPOL, POEPOL, UTEPKOT[KLOL,
amroAuros Sive vrepoupayin, et eyKoopL01.


we ee. em eee le el


INTRODUCTION. Xxii


causally permanent being. But in the next
place, that which is both intelligible and in-
tellectual succeeds, which must likewise be
triple, but must principally subsist according
to life, or intelligence. And in the third place
the intellectual order must succeed, which is
triply convertive. But as in consequence of
the existence of the sensible world, it is
necessary that there should be some demi-
urgic cause of its existence, this cause can
only be found in éntellect, and in the last
hypostasis of the intellectual triad. For all
forms in this hypostasis subsist according
to all-various and perfect divisions; and
forms can only fabricate when they have
a perfect intellectual separation from each
other. But since fabrication is nothing more
than procession, the Demiurgus will be to the
posterior orders of Gods what the one is to
the orders prior to the Demiurgus ; and con-
sequently he will be that secondarily which
the first cause of all is primarily. Hence his
first production will be an order of Gods
analogous to the intelligible order, and which
is denominated swpermundane. After this he
must produce an order of Gods similar to
the intelligible and intellectual order, and which
are denominated liberated Gods. And in the


Xxiv INTRODUCTION.


last place, a procession correspondent to the
entellectual order, and which can be no other
than the mundane Gods.. For the Demiurgus
is chiefly characterized according to diversity,
and is allotted the boundary of all universal
hypostases.

All these orders are unfolded by Plato in
the conclusions which the second hypothesis
of his Parmenides contains; and this in a
manner so perfectly agreeable to the Orphic
and Chaldaic theology, that he who can read
and wnderstand the incomparable work of
Proclus on Plato’s theology will discover how
ignorantly the latter Platonists have been
abused by the moderns, as fanatics and cor-
rupters of the doctrine of Plato.

According to the theology of Orpheus there-
fore, all things originate from an immense
principle, to which through the imbecility
and poverty of human conception we give a
name, though it is perfectly ineffable, and in
the reverential language of the Egyptians, is
a thrice unknown darkness", in the contempla-


16 “Of the first principle (says Damascius, in MS. rep
apxwv) the Egyptians said nothing, but celebrated it as a
darkness bejond all intellectual conception, a thrice un-
known darkness,” xpwrny apxnv avuprynkacwr, oxoros vIrep
TACAY VONTL, TKOTOS AYYWOTOY, TpLS TOUTO Exipnuforres.


INTRODUCTION. XXV


tion of which all knowledge is refunded into
ignorance. Hence, as Plato says, in the
conclusion of his first hypothesis in the Par-
menides, “it can neither be named, nor
spoken of, nor conceived. by opinion, nor be
known or perceived by any being.” The
peculiarity also of this theology, and in which
its transcendency consists is this, that it does
not consider the highest God to be simply
the principle of beings, but the principle of
principles, i. e. of deiform processions from
itself, all which are eternally rooted in the
unfathomable depths of the immensely great
source of their existence, and of which they
may be called superessential ramifications, and
superluminous blossoms.

When the ineffable transcendency of the
first God, which was considered (as I have
‘elsewhere observed) to be the grand principle
in the Heathen theology, by its most ancient
promulgators, Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato,
was forgotten, this oblivion was doubtless
the cause of dead men being deified by the
Pagans. Had they properly disposed their
attention to this transcendency, they would
have perceived it to be so immense as to
surpass eternity, infinity, self-subsistence, and
even essence itself, and that these in reality


XXvi INTRODUCTION.


belong to those venerable natures which are
as it were first unfolded into light from the
arcane recessess of the truly mystic unknown
cause of all. For, as Simplicius !” beautifully
observes, “It is requisite that he who ascends
to the principle of things should investi-
gate whether it is possible there can be any
thing better than the supposed principle;
and if something more excellent is found,
the same inquiry should again be made re-
specting that, till we arrive at the highest
conceptions, than which we have no longer
any more venerable. Nor should we stop in
our ascent till we find this to be the case.
For there is no occasion to fear that our
progression will be through an unsubstantial
void, by conceiving something about the first
principles which is greater than and _ sur-
passes their nature. For i is not possible for
our conceptions to take such a mighty leap as to
equal, and much less to pass beyond the dignity
of the first principles of things.” He adds,
“This therefore is one and the best extension
[of the soul] to [the highest] God, and is as
much as possible irreprehensible ; viz. to know
firmly, that by ascribing to him the most


17 In Epictet.


INTRODUCTION. XXVli


venerable excellencies we can conceive, and
the most holy and primary names and things,
we ascribe nothing to him which is suitable
to his dignity. It is sufficient, however, to
procure our pardon [for the attempt] that we
can attribute to him nothing superior.” If it
is not possible, therefore, to form any ideas
equal to the dignity of the immediate progeny
of the ineffable, i.e. of the first principles of
things, how much less can our conceptions
reach the principle of these principles, who
is concealed in the superluminous darkness
of occultly initiating silence? Had the Hea-
thens therefore considered as they ought this
transcendency of the supreme God and his
immediate offspring, they never would have
presumed to equalize the human with the
divine nature, and consequently would never
have worshiped men as Gods. Their theo-
logy, however, is not to be accused as the
cause of this impiety, but their forgetfulness
of the sublimest of its dogmas, and the con-
fusion with which this oblivion was neces-
sarily attended.

The following additional information also
respecting the Orphic theology will greatly
contribute to an elucidation of these Mystic
Hymns: According to this theology, each of


XXvili INTRODUOTION.


the Gods is in all, and all are in each, being
ineffably united to each other and the highest
God, because each being a superessential
unity, their conjunction with each other is a
union of unities. And hence it is by no
means wonderful that each is celebrated as
all. But another and a still more appro-
priate cause may be assigned of each of the
celestial Gods being called by the appella-
tions of so many other deities, which is this,
that, according to the Orphic theology, each
of the planets is fixed in a luminous etherial
sphere called an odorns, or wholeness '*, be-
cause it is a part with a total subsistence,
and is analogous to the sphere of the fixed
stars. In consequence of this analogy, each
of these planetary spheres contains a multi-
tude of Gods, who are the satellites of the
leading divinity of the sphere, and subsist
conformably to his characteristics. This doc-
trine, which, as I have elsewhere observed,
is one of the grand keys to the mythology
and theology of the ancients, is not clearly
delivered by any other ancient writer than
Proclus, and has not, I believe, been noticed


18 Each of these spheres is called a wholeness, because it
contains a multitude of partial animals coordinate with it.


INTRODUCTION. Xxix


by any other modern author than myself.
But the following are the passages in which
this theory is unfolded by Proclus, in his
admirable commentaries on the Timeus of
Plato. “In each of the celestial spheres,
the whole sphere has the relation of a monad,
but the cosmocrators [or planets] are the -
leaders of the multitude in each. For in
each a number analogous to the choir of the
fixed stars subsists with appropriate circu-
lations.” (See vol. ii. book iv. p. 270, of my
translation of this work.) And in another
part of the same book (p. 280), “There are
other divine animals following the circula-
tions of the planets, the leaders of which are
the seven planets; all which Plato compre-
hends in what is here said. For these also
revolve and have a wandering of such a kind
as that which he a little before mentioned of
the seven planets. For they revolve in con-
junction with and make their apocatastases
together with their principals, just as the
fixed stars are governed by the whole circu-
lation [of the inerratic sphere].” And still
more fully in p. 281, “Each of the planets is
a whole world, comprehending in itself many
divine genera invisible to us. Of all these,
however, the visible star has the government.


Xxx INTRODUCTION.


And in this the fixed stars differ from those
in the planetary spheres, that the former
have one monad [viz. the inerratic sphere],
which is the wholeness of them; but that in
each of the latter there are invisible stars,
which revolve together with their spheres ;
so that in each there is both the wholeness
and a leader, which is allotted an exempt
transcendency. For the planets, being sec-
ondary to the fixed stars, require a twofold
prefecture, the one more total, but the other
more partial. But that in each of these there
is a multitude coordinate with each, you may
infer from the extremes. For if the inerratic
sphere has a multitude coordinate with itself,
and earth is the wholeness of terrestrial, in
the same manner as the inerratic sphere is of
celestial animals, it is necessary that each
intermediate wholeness should entirely pos-
sess certain partial animals coordinate with
itself ; through which, also, they are said to
be wholenesses. The intermediate natures,
however, are concealed from our sense, the
extremes being manifest ; one of them through
its transcendently luminous essence, and the
other through its alliance to us. If, like-
wise, partial souls [such as ours] are dis-
seminated about them, some about the sun,


INTRODUCTION. XXxi


others about the moon, and others about
each of the rest, and prior to souls, dsemons
give completion to the herds of which they
are the leaders, it is evidently well said, that
each of the spheres is a world; theologists
also teaching us these things when they say
that there are Gods in each prior to demons,
some of which are under the government
of others. Thus for instance, they assert con-
cerning our mistress the Moon, that the God-
dess Hecate is contained in her, and also
Diana. ‘Thus, too, in speaking of the sove-
reign Sun, and the Gods that are there, they
celebrate Bacchus as being there,


The Sun’s assessor, who with watchful eye surveys
The sacred pole.


They likewise celebrate the Jupiter who is
there, Osiris, the solar Pan, and others of
which the books of theologists and theurgists are
full; from all which it is evident, that each
of the planets is truly said to be the leader
of many Gods, who give completion to its
peculiar circulation.”

From this extraordinary passage (as I
have observed in a note on it in my Proclus,
p. 282) we may perceive at one view why the


xxxii INTRODUCTION.


Sun in the Orphic Hymns is called Jupiter,
why Apollo is called Pan, and Bacchus the
Sun; why the Moon seems to be the same
with Rhea, Ceres, Proserpine, Juno, Venus,
&c. and, in short, why any one divinity is
celebrated with the names and epithets of so
many of the rest. For from this sublime
theory it follows that every sphere contains
a Jupiter, Neptune, Vulcan, Vesta, Minerva, _
Mars, Ceres, Juno, Diana, Mercury, Venus,
Apollo, and in short every deity, each sphere
at the same time conferring on these Gods the
peculiar characteristic of its nature ; so that,
for instance, in the Sun they all possess a
solar property, in the Moon a lunar one, and
so of the rest. From this theory, too, we
may perceive the truth of that divine saying
of the ancients, that all things are full of
Gods; for more particular orders proceed
from such as are more general, the mundane
from the supermundane, and the sublunary
from the celestial; while earth becomes the
general receptacle of the illuminations of all
the Gods. “ Hence,” as Proclus shortly after
observes, “there is a terrestrial Ceres, Vesta,
and Isis, as likewise a terrestrial Jupiter and
a terrestrial Hermes, established about the
one divinity of the earth, just as a multitude


INTRODUCTION. XXXili
of celestial Gods proceeds about the one


divinity of the heavens. For there are pro-
gressions of all the celestial Gods into the
Earth: and Earth contains all things, in an
earthly manner, which Heaven. comprehends
celestially. Hence we speak of a terrestrial
Bacchus and a terrestrial Apollo, who be-
stows the all-various streams of water with
which the earth abounds, and openings pro-
phetic of futurity.” And if to all this we
only add, that all the other mundane Gods
subsist in the twelve abovementioned, and in
short, all the mundane in the supermundane
Gods, and that the first triad of these is
demiurgic or fabricative, viz. Jupiter, Neptune,
Vulcan; the second, Vesta, Minerva, Mars,
defensive ; the third, Ceres, Juno, Diana, vivi-
fie; and the fourth, Mercury, Venus, Apollo,
elevating ‘and harmonic; I say, if we unite
this with the preceding theory, there is no-
thing in the ancient theology that will not
appear admirably sublime and_ beautifully
connected, accurate in all its parts, scientific
and divine. |

In the next place, that the following Hymns
were written by Orpheus and that they were
used in the Eleusinian Mysteries, will, I think,

c


XXXiv INTRODUCTION.


be evident, from the following arguments, to
the intelligent reader. For that hymns were
written by Orpheus is testified by Plato in
the eighth book of his Laws, and by Pausa-
nias in his Boeotics, who also says that they
were few and short; from whence, as Fabri-
cius® justly observes, it appears that they
were no other than those which are now
extant”. But that they were used in the
Eleusinian Mysteries is evident from the
testimony of Lycomedes, who says that they
were sung in the sacred rites pertaining to
Ceres, which honour was not paid to the
Homeric hymns, though they were more ele-
gant than those of Orpheus; and the Eleusi-
nian were the mysteries of Ceres. And that
Lycomedes alludes, in what he here says, to
these hymns is manifest, first from Pausa-
nias, who in his Attics (cap. 37) observes,
“that it is not lawful to ascribe the inven-
tion of beans to Ceres.” He adds, “and he
who has been initiated in the Eleusinian


19 Vid, Biblioth. Greec. tom. i. p. 114.


* I omit the testimonies of Cyril contra Julian, lib. i.
p. 25, and of Suidas, because their authority is of little
value on this subject.


INTRODUCTION. XXXV


mysteries, or has read the poems called Orphic,
will know what I mean.” Now Porphyry De
Abstinentia, lib. iv. informs us, that beans
were forbidden in the Eleusinian mysteries * ;
and in the Orphic Hymn to Earth the sacri-
ficer is ordered to fumigate from every kind
of seed, except beans and aromatics. But
Earth is Vesta, and Vesta, as we are in-
formed by Proclus*, is comprehended to-
gether with Juno in Ceres. Again, Suidas
informs us, that teXern signifies a mystic sacri-
Jice, the greatest and most venerable of all others,
(Ovo.a pvaotnpiwdys, n MeytoTn Kat TYLLwTaTa).
And Proclus, whenever he speaks of the Eleu-
sinian mysteries, calls them the most holy
teletai, ayiwtratat TeXerat. Agreeably to this,
the Orphic Hymns are called in the Thrylli-
tian manuscript reAeras; and Scaliger justly
observes, that they contain nothing but such
invocations as were used in the mysteries.
Besides, many of the hymns are expressly
thus called by the author of them. Thus the


31 TlaparyyeAerar yap ac Edevowe awexerOat xat xaroet-
Swy oprdwy, Kat txOuwy, Kat KUAapLWwY, potas Te Kat pew. Pp.
353, Edit. Trajec.


2 See the Additional Notes.
3 In Plat. Theol. et in Comment. in Alcibiad.


XXXVI INTRODUOTION.


conclusion of the hymn to Protogonus in-
vokes that deity to be present at the holy
telete, es réeXerny aytav: of the hymn to the
Stars, to be present at the very learned labours
of the most holy telete :


EASer’ ex’ eviepou reXerns rodvicropas ad)ous.


And in the conclusion of the Hymn to Latona
the sacrifice is called an all-divine telete (Baw
ert wavOcov Téerernv), as likewise in that of the
Hymn to Amphietus Bacchus. And in short,
the greater part of the hymns will be found
to have either the word reXery in them, or to
invoke the respective divinities to bless the
mystics or imitiated persons. 'Thus the con-
clusion of the Hymn to Heaven entreats that
divinity to confer a blessed life on a recent
mystic: the conclusion of the Hymn to the
Sun, to wmpart by illumination a pleasant life
to the mystics :


nour de Biovy pvoryos mpwpaive.


And in a similar manner most of the other
hymns”,


% For a confirmation of this I refer the reader to the
conclusions of the following hymns, viz. hymn vi, xviii,


INTRODUCTION. xxxvii


Farther still, Demosthenes, in his first Ora-
tion against Aristogiton, has the following
remarkable passage: xat tTny amapatrnroy Kat
ceuvny Aeny, nv o Tas aywwratas nly TedeTAS
xaraderEas Opdeus rapa tov rov Avs Opovoy
dynos xabnuerny, travta Ta tev avOpwrev epo-
pov. i.e. “Let us reverence inexorable and
venerable Justice, who is said by Orpheus, our
instructor in the most holy ¢eletai, to be seated
by the throne of Jupiter, and to inspect all
the actions of men.” Here Demosthenes calls
the mysteries most holy, as well as Proclus:
and I think it may be concluded with the
greatest confidence from all that has been
said, that he alluded to the Hymn to Justice,
which is one of the Orphic hymns, and to the
following lines in that hymn :


Opupa Ackyns pedrw wadsdepxeos, ayNaopopdou,
"H xaz Znvos avaxros ere Spovov cepoy efet,
OvpavoSev xaSopwoa Brov Svyrwy rodvgudrwy.


xxiii, xxiv, xxv, xxxiv, xxxv, xli, xliii, xliv, xlviii, 1, lii, liii,
liv, lvi, lvii, lviii, lx, Lxi, lxxi, lxxiv, lxxvi, lxxvii, lxxviii,
Ixxix, lxxxiii, and Ixxxv. And what is asserted in the
eighty-fourth hymn, which is to Vesta, is particularly re-
markable: for in the third line the poet says :


Tous de ov ev reXeras ogtous pvoras avadectacs.
i.e. “ You have appointed these holy mystics in the telete.”


XXXVili INTRODUCTION.


i.e. “I sing the all-seeing eye of splendid
Justice, who sits by the throne of king Jupi-
ter, and from her celestial abode beholds the
life of multiform mortals.”

The Eleusinian mysteries also, as is well
known, were celebrated at night; the princi-
pal reason of which appears to be this, that
the greater mysteries pertained to Ceres, and
the less to Proserpine®, and the latter pre-
ceded the former. But the rape of Proser-
pine, which was exhibited in these mysteries,
signifies, as we are informed by Sallust®,
the descent of souls. And the descent of
souls into the realms of generation is said, by
Plato in the tenth book of his Republic, to
take place at midnight, indicating by this
the union of the soul with the darkness of a
corporeal nature. This too, I suppose, is
what Clemens Alexandrinus””’ means when


3 Hoav ra perv weyada rns Anuntpos* ra Se pixpa Iepce-
govns Tns autys Svyarpos. Interp. Grec, ad Plut. Aristo-
phanis.


26 De Diis et Mundo, cap. iv.


7 As reNerat yworrar vuxTos pantera, onuawovoa: THY EV
vuxre Tns Yvxns cvoTro\ny aro Tov cwuaros, Clem. Alex.
Stroma. lib, iv. p. 530, Sylburg.


INTRODUCTION. XXxix


he says, “that the mysteries were especially
performed by night, thus signifying that the
compression [i. e. confinement] of the soul
by the body was effected at night.” And
that the sacrifices enjoined in the Orphic
Hymns were performed by night, is evident
from the hymn to Silenus, Satyrus, &c. in
which Silenus, together with the Naiads,
Bacchic Nymphs, and Satyrs, are implored
to be present at the nocturnal orgies :


Opyia vuxrigan rederats ayias avadhawuy,


From all which I think it may be safely
concluded, that these Hymns not only per-
tain to mysteries, but that they were used
in the celebration of the Eleusinian, which
by way of eminence (xar’ e£oynv) were called
the mysteries, without any other note of dis-
tinction.

In the last place, it is requisite to speak
of the author of these Hymns, and in addi-
tion to the evidence already adduced of their
genuine antiquity, to vindicate them against
those who contend that they are spurious,
and were not written by Orpheus, but either
by Onomacritus, or some poet who lived in


x] INTRODUCTION.


the decline and fall of the Roman empire.
And first, with respect to the dialect of these
Hymns, Gesner observes, “that it ought to be
no objection to their antiquity. For though
according to Iamblichus™, the Thracian Or-
pheus, who is more ancient than those noble
poets Homer and Hesiod, used the Doric
dialect ; yet the Athenian Onomacritus, who
according to the general opinion of antiquity
is the author of all the works now extant
ascribed to Orpheus, might either, preserving
the sentences and a great part of the words,
only change the dialect, and teach the an-
cient Orpheus to speak Homerically, or as I
may say Solonically; or might arbitrarily
add or take away what he thought proper,
which, as we are informed by Herodotus,
was his practice with respect to the Oracles.”
Gesner adds, “that it does not appear pro-
bable to him, that Onomacritus would dare
to invent all that he wrote, since Orpheus
must necessarily, at that time, have been
much celebrated, and a great variety of his
verses must have been in circulation.” And
he concludes with observing, “that the ob-


% De Vit& Pythag. cap. xxxiv. p. 169, Kust.


INTRODUCTION. xli


jection of the Doric dialect ought to be
of no more weight against the antiquity of
the present works than the Pelasgic letters ™,
which Orpheus, according to Diodorous Sicu-
lus, used.

In this extract, Gesner is certainly right in
asserting that Onomacritus would hot dare
to invent all that he wrote, and afterwards
publish it as Orphic; but I add, that it is
unreasonable in the extreme to suppose that
he in the least interpolated or altered the
genuine works of Orpheus, though he might
change the dialect in which they were origi-
nally written. For is it to be supposed that
the Orphic Hymns would have been used in
the Eleusinian mysteries, as we have demon-
strated they were, if they had been spurious
productions; or that the fraud would not
have been long ago discovered by some of
the many learned and wise men that flourished
after Onomacritus; and that the detection of
this fraud would not have been transmitted
so as to reach even the present times? Or
indeed, is it probable that such a forgery


2 These letters are the old Etrurian or Evlian, and are
perhaps more ancient than the Cadmian or Tonic.


xlii INTRODUCTION.


could have existed at all, at a period when
other learned men, as well as Onomacritus,
had access to the genuine writings of Or-
pheus, and were equally capable with him-
self of changing them from one dialect into
another? Even at a late period of antiquity,
will any man who is at all familiar with the
writings of Proclus, Hermias, and Olympio-
dorus, for a moment believe that men of such
learning, profundity, and sagacity, would
have transmitted to us so many verses as
Orphic, though not in the Doric dialect,
when at the same time they were the pro-
ductions of Onomacritus? We may there-
fore, I think, confidently conclude, that though
Onomacritus altered the dialect, he did not
either add to or diminish, or in any respect
adulterate the works of Orpheus; for it is
impossible he should have committed such a
fraud without being ultimately, if not imme-
diately, detected.

With respect to those who contend that
the works which are at present extant under
the name of Orpheus were written during the
decline and fall of the Roman empire, I trust
every intelligent reader will deem it almost
needless to say, in confutation of such an


INTRODUCTION. xliii


opinion, that it is an insult to the under-
standing of all the celebrated men of that
period, by whom these writings have been
quoted as genuine productions, and particu-
larly to such among them as rank among the
most learned, the most sagacious, and wisest
of mankind. So infatuated, however, by this
stupid opinion was Tyrwhitt, that in his
edition of the Orphic poem ITeps Ai@wy (On
Stones), he says in a note (p. 22) “there is
nothing in the hymns peculiarly adapted to
the person of Orpheus, except his speech to
Muszeus .” ‘This speech or address to Mu-
seus is the exordium to the Hymns. But so
far is this from being true, that the author of
this work expressly calls himself in two of
the hymns the son of Calliope. ‘Thus in the
conclusion of the Hymn to the Nereids, the
poet says,


Tyas yap rpwrat rederny avedetare ceprny
Euepou Baxxoto kat ayvns Pepoepoverys,
KadXtory ovy pnrpt, kat Aro\Xwre avaxre.


ice. ‘* For you at first disclos’d the rites divine,
Of holy Bacchus, and of Proserpine,


% “Tn Hymnis nihil est ad personam Orphei peculiariter
accommodatum, nisi allocutio ad Museum.”


xliv INTRODUOTION.


Of fair Calliope, from whom I spring,
And of Apollo bright, the Muses’ king.”


And in the Hymn to the Muses, he celebrates
Calliope as his mother, in the very same
words as in the Hymn to the Nereids, Kaa-
lorry ouv wntpt. This blunder of Tyrwhitt
is certainly a most egregious specimen of the
folly of pervicacious adherence to an opinion
which had ignorance and prejudice only for
its source, and which calumniated writings
far beyond the little sphere of its knowledge
to comprehend.

As to Orpheus himself, the original author
of these Hymns, scarcely a vestige of his
life is to be found amongst the immense
ruins of time. For who has ever been able
to affirm any thing with certainty of his
origin, his age, his country, and condition?
This alone may be depended on, from general
assent, that there formerly lived a person
named Orpheus, who was the founder of
theology among the Greeks; the institutor
of their life and morals; the first of prophets,
and the prince of poets; himself the offspring
of a Muse; who taught the Greeks their sacred
rites and mysteries, and from whose wisdom,


INTRODUCTION. xlv


as from a perennial and abundant fountain,
the divine muse of Homer and the sublime
theology of Pythagoras and Plato flowed.

The following, however, is a summary of
what has been transmitted to us by the
ancients concerning the original Orpheus,
and the great men who have at different
periods flourished under this venerable name.
The first and genuine Orpheus is said to
have been a Thracian, and according to the
opinion of many was a disciple of Linus *,
who flourished at the time when the kingdom
of the Athenians was dissolved. Some assert
that he was prior to the Trojan war, and that
he lived eleven, or as others say nine, gene-
rations. But the Greek word yevea, or gene-
ration, signifies, according to Gyraldus ®, the
space of seven years: for unless this is
admitted, how is it possible that the period
of his life can have any foundation in the
nature of things? If this signification there-
fore of the word is adopted, Orpheus lived
either seventy-seven or sixty-three years, the
latter of which, if we may believe astro-
logers, is a fatal period, and especially to


31 Vid. Suid. 32 Syntag. Poet. p. 54.


xlvi INTRODUCTION.


great men, as it proved to be to Aristotle
and Cicero.

Our poet, according to fabulous tradition,
was torn in pieces by Ciconian women; on
which account Plutarch affirms the Thra-
cians were accustomed to beat their wives,
in order that they might revenge the death
of Orpheus. Hence in the vision of Herus
Pamphilius, in the tenth book of Plato’s Re-
public, the soul of Orpheus, being destined
to descend into another body, is said to have
chosen that of a swan, rather than to be
born again of a woman; having conceived
such a hatred of the sex, on account of his
violent death. ‘The cause of his destruction
is variously related by authors. Some re-
port that it arose from his being engaged in
puerile loves, after the death of Eurydice.
Others, that he was destroyed by women
intoxicated with wine, because he was the
cause of men relinquishing an association
with them. Others again assert, according
to Pausanias, that on the death of Eurydice,
wandering to Aornus, a place in Thesprotia,
where it was customary to evocate the souls
of the dead, having recalled Eurydice to life,
and not being able to detain her, he destroyed


INTRODUCTION. | xl vii


himself; nightingales bringing forth their
young on his tomb, whose melody exceeded
every other of this species. Others again,
ascribe his laceration to his having cele-
brated every divinity except Bacchus, which
is very improbable, as among the following
hymns there are nine to that deity, under
different appellations. Others report that he
was delivered by Venus herself into the
hands of the Ciconian women, because his
mother Calliope had not determined justly
between Venus and Proserpine concerning
the young Adonis. Many affirm, according
to Pausanias, that he was struck by light-
ning; and Diogenes confirms this by the fol-
lowing verses, composed, as he asserts, by
the Muses on his death :


Here by the Muses plac’d, with golden lyre,
Great Orpheus rests, destroy’d by heavenly fire.


Again, the sacred mysteries called Thres-
cian derived their appellation from the Thra-
cian bard, because he first introduced sacred
rites and religion into Greece ; and hence the
authors of initiation into these mysteries
were called Orpheotelestz. Besides, accord-


xl viii INTRODUCTION.


ing to Lucian, Orpheus brought astrology
and the magical arts into Greece; and as to
his drawing to him trees and wild beasts by
the melody of his lyre, Paleephatus * accounts
for it as follows: “The mad Bacchanalian
Nymphs, says he, having violently taken
away cattle and other necessaries of life,
retired for some days into the mountains.
But the citizens, having expected their re-
turn for a long time, and fearing the worst
for their wives and daughters, called Or-
pheus, and entreated him to invent some
method of drawing them from the mountains.
Orpheus, in consequence of this, tuning his
lyre conformably to the orgies of Bacchus,
drew the mad nymphs from their retreats;
who descended from the mountains, bearing
at first ferule, and branches of every kind of
trees. But to the men who were eyewitnesses
of these wonders, they appeared to bring
down the very woods, and from hence gave
rise to the fable *.


38 Vid. Opusc. Mythol. p. 45.


% The true meaning of the fable however, in my opinion,
is this, that Orpheus by his sacred doctrines tamed men
of rustic and savage dispositions. But the most careless


INTRODUCTION. xlix


So great indeed was the renown of Or-
pheus, that he was deified by the Greeks;
and Philostratus relates, that his head gave
oracles in Lesbos, which when separated
from his body by the Thracian women, was,
together with his lyre, carried down the river
Hebrus into the sea. In this manner, says
Lucian, singing as it were his funeral oration,
to which the chords of his lyre, impelled
by the winds, gave a responsive harmony, it
was brought to Lesbos and buried. But his
lyre was suspended in the temple of Apollo;
where it remained for a considerable space
of time. Afterwards, when Neanthus, the
son of Pittacus the tyrant, found that the
lyre drew trees and wild beasts by its har-
mony, he earnestly desired to possess it;


readers must be struck with the similitude of the latter part
of this fable to what took place at the wood of Birnam in
Shakspeare’s Macbeth ; and to which the following lines
allude :


‘* Macbeth shall never vanquished be, until
Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill
Shall come against him.”’


This coincidence, however, has not been noticed by any of
the commentators of Shakspeare.


d


l INTRODUCTION.


and having corrupted the priest privately
with money, he took the Orphic lyre, and
fixed another similar to it in the temple.
But Neanthus, considering that he was not
safe in the city in the day, departed from it
by night; having concealed the lyre in his
bosom, on which he began to play. As how-
ever he was a rude and unlearned youth, he
confounded the chords; yet pleasing himself
with the sound, and fancying he produced
a divine harmony, he thought himself to be
the blessed successor of Orpheus. But in the
midst of his transports, the neighbouring dogs,
roused by the sound, fell on the unhappy
harper and tore him in pieces.

The former part of this fable is thus admir-
ably explained by Proclus, in his Commen-
taries (or rather fragments of Commentaries)
on the Republic of Plato, “Orpheus (says
he), on account of his perfect erudition, is
reported to have been destroyed in various
ways; because, as it appears to me, men of
that age participated partially of the Orphic
harmony: for they were incapable of receiv-
ing a universal and perfect science. But the
principal part of his melody [i. e. of his
mystic doctrine] was received by the Les-


INTRODUCTION. li


bians; and on this account, perhaps, the
head of Orpheus, when separated from his
body, is said to have been carried to Lesbos.
Fables of this kind, therefore, are related of
Orpheus no otherwise than of Bacchus, of
whose mysteries he was the priest.”

The second Orpheus was an Arcadian, or,
according to others, a Ciconian, from the
Thracian Bisaltia, and is said to be more
ancient than Homer and the Trojan: war.
He composed fabulous figments (called ju-
Gorrouiat) and epigrams. ‘The third Orpheus
was of Odrysius, a city of Thrace, near the
river Hebrus; but Dionysius in Suidas de-
nies his existence. The fourth Orpheus was
of Crotonia; flourished in the time of Pisis-
tratus, about the fiftieth Olympiad, and is, I
have no doubt, the same with Onomacritus,
who changed the dialect of these hymns.
He wrote Decennalia (Sexaernpia), and in the
opinion of Gyraldus the Argonautics, which
are now extant under the name of Orpheus,
with other writings called Orphical, but
which according to Cicero® some ascribe to
Cecrops the Pythagorean. But the last


35 Tn lib. i. de Nat. Decr.


lii INTRODUCTION.


Orpheus was Camarinsus, a most excellent
versifier; and the same, according to Gyral-
dus, whose descent into Hades is so univer-
sally known.

I shall only add to this historical detail
respecting Orpheus, what Hermias_ excel-
lently remarks in his Scholia on the Phe-
drus of Plato. “You may see, says he, how
Orpheus appears to have applied himself to
all these [i. e. to the four kinds of mania *],
as being in want of, and adhering to, each
other. For we learn that he was most ¢elestic,
and most prophetic, and was excited by Apollo ;
and besides this, that he was most poetic, on
which account he is said to have been the
son of Calliope. He was likewise most
amatory, as he himself acknowledges to Mu-
seus, extending to him divine benefits, and
rendering him perfect. Hence he appears to
have been possessed by all the manias, and
this by a necessary consequence. For there
is an abundant union, conspiration, and alli-
ance with each other of the Gods who pre-
side over these manias, viz. of the Muses,
Bacchus, Apollo, and Love.”


36 ie, The ¢elestic, or pertaining to the mysteries, the
prophetic, the poetic, and the amatory.


INTRODUCTION. liii


With respect to the following translation,
it is requisite to observe, that I have adopted
rhyme, not because most agreeable to the
general taste, but because I conceiye it to be
necessary to the poetry of the English lan-
guage; which requires something as a sub-
stitute for the energetic cadence of the Greek
and Latin hexameters. Could this be ob-
tained by any other means, I should imme-
diately relinquish my partiality for rhyme,
which is certainly, when well executed, far
more difficult than blank verse, as_ these
Orphic Hymns must evince in an eminent
degree.

Indeed, where languages differ so much as
the ancient and modern, the most perfect
method perhaps of transferring the poetry of
the former tongue into that of the latter
is by a faithful and animated paraphrase ;
faithful, with regard to retaining the meaning
of the author; and animated, with respect to
preserving the fire of the original; calling
it forth when latent, and expanding it when
condensed. He who is anxious to effect
this will every where endeavour to diffuse the
light and fathom the depth of his author ;
to elucidate what is obscure, and to amplify


liv INTRODUCTION.


what in modern language would be unintel-
ligibly concise.

Thus, most of the compound epithets of
which the following hymns chiefly consist,
though extremely beautiful in the Greek lan-
guage, yet when literally translated into
ours lose much of their propriety and force.
In their native tongue, as in a prolific soil,
they diffuse their sweets with full blown ele-
gance ; and he who would preserve their theo-
logical beauties, and exhibit them to others
in a different language, must expand their
elegance by the supervening and enlivening
rays of a light derived from mystic lore;
and, by the powerful breath of genius, scatter
abroad their latent but copious sweets.

If it shall appear that the translator has
possessed some portion of this light, and has
diffused it in the following work, he will con-
sider himself to be well rewarded for his
laborious undertaking. The philosophy of
Plato, and the theology of the Greeks, have
been for the greater part of his life the only
study of his retired leisure; in which he has
found an inexhaustible treasure of intellec-
tual wealth, and a perpetual fountain of
wisdom and delight. Presuming, therefore,


a:


INTRODUCTION. lv


that such a pursuit must be a great advan-
tage to the present undertaking, and feeling
the most sovereign contempt for the sordid
drudgery of venal composition, he desires
no other reward, if he has succeeded, than
the praise of the liberal; and no other de-
fence, if he has failed, than the decision of
the candid and discerning few.


THE


MYSTICAL HYMNS


OF


ORPHEUS.


THE


w@ypstical Dpmns of Orpheus.


TO MUSAUS!.


Learn, O Muszus, from my sacred song

What rites most fit to sacrifice 2? belong.

Jove I invoke, the earth, and solar light,

The moon’s pure splendour, and the stars of night.


1 The Greek Scholiast on Aristophanes (in Ranis) ob-
serves, that Musseus was the offspring of the Moon and
Eumolpus ; that according to Sophocles he uttered ora-
cles; and that he composed mapaduces, redXerar and xa-
Sapuor. Of these works, which are unfortunately lost, the
wapaduoes or karaducers, taught both individuals and cities
how by religious ceremonies they might be liberated from
the punishment attendant on the crimes which they had
committed. His veXerat, or Mysteries, are mentioned by
Plato, Lucian, and others. And the xaSapuo: contained
the means of expiating and becoming purified from guilt.


2 For a copious developement of sacrifices, and of the
utility or power they possess in the universe, and also on
what account they were anciently performed, see Book the
Second of my translation of Porphyry’s excellent Treatise
on Abstinence from Animal Food; and Sect. V. of my
translation of Iamblichus on the Mysteries. Likewise, for
an account of Theurgy, or the art pertaining to divine
operations, see the latter of the abovementioned works,
and the accompanying notes.


4 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Thee, Neptune, ruler of the sea profound,
Dark-hair’d, whose power canshakethesolid ground;
Ceres abundant, and of lovely mien,

And thee, chaste Proserpine, great Pluto’s queen ;
The huntress Dian, and bright Phoebus’ rays,

Far darting God, the theme of Delphic praise ;
And Bacchus, honour’d by the heav’nly choir,
Impetuous Mars, and Vulcan, God of fire.

Th’ illustrious power who sprung from foam to light,
And Pluto, potent in the realms of night ;

With Hebe young, and Hercules the strong,

And you to whom the cares of births belong.
Justice and Piety august I call,

And much fam’d Nymphs, and Pan the God of all.
To Juno sacred, and to Mem’ry fair,

And the chaste Muses I address my pray'r ;

The various Year, the Graces, and the Hours,
Fair-hair'd Latona, and Dione’s pow’rs.

The Corybantes and Curetes armed I call 8,

And the great Saviours, sons of Jove, the king of all:
Th’ Idean Gods, the angel of the skies,
Prophetic Themis with sagacious eyes,

With ancient Night, and Daylight I implore,
And Faith and Dice source of blameless laws adore;


3 In the translation of many of these hymns, I have been
obliged to employ an Alexandrine line, as well as in this
and the following line, in order to preserve the meaning of
the author.


OF ORPHEUS. 5


Saturn and Rhea, and gréat Thetis too,

Hid in a veil of dark celestial blue.

I call great Ocean, and the beauteous train

Of Ocean’s daughters in the boundless main :

The strength of Atlas ever in its prime,

Vig’rous Eternity, and endless Time.

The splendid Stygian pool, and placid Gods beside,

And demons good and bad that o'er mankind
preside ;

Illustrious Providence, the noble train

Of deemon forms, who fill th’ etherial plain ;

Or live in air, in water, earth, or fire,

Or deep beneath the solid ground retire.

The white Leucothea of the sea I call,

And Semele, and Bacchus’s associates all ;

Paleemon bounteous, and Adrastia‘ great,

And sweet-tongu’d Victory, with success elate ;


* This divinity is one among others in this Exordium to
whom there is no hymn in these Orphic Teletsw. But the
following particulars respecting this Goddess, extracted
from the Scholia of Hermeas on the Phedrus of Plato, are
given on account of their great importance, and because
they illustrate a part of the Orphic theology. ‘‘ Adrastia
is a divinity seated in the vestibules of Night, and is the
offspring of Melissus and Amalthea. Melissus, therefore, is
to be assumed as a power providentially attending to secon-
dary natures ; but Amalthea must be considered according to
the unchanging and the uneffeminate. Hence Adrastia was
generated from unchangeable Providence, and she is the
sister of Ida.


The beauteous Ida and Adrastia sprung
From the same sire.


6 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Great Esculapius, skill’d to cure disease,

And dread Minerva, whom fierce battles please ;
Thunders, and Winds in mighty columns pent,
With dreadful roaring struggling hard for vent ;
Attis, the mother of the pow’rs on high,
Mensis, and pure Adonis, never doom’d to die,


This Goddess, therefore, comprehends in transcendent
union, and contains in herself at once the centres of all
laws, viz. of the mundane and the supermundane, of those
of Fate, and those of Jupiter: for there are Jovian and
Saturnian, divine, supermundane, and mundane laws. On
this account she is called Adrastia, because her legislative
decrees are inevitable. Hence she is said to be seated
with brazen drumsticks in her hands, before the cave of
Night, and through the sound produced by her cymbals to
render all things obedient to her laws. For Phanes indeed
is seated within the cave, in the Adytum of Night; but
Night sits in the middle of the cave, prophesying to the
Gods; and Adrastia sits in the vestibules, legislatively
promulgating the divine laws. She differs, however, from
the justice which is there, after the same manner as the
legislative differs from the judicial characteristic. And the
justice which is there is said to be the daughter of the Law
and Piety which are there. But Adrastia herself, who is
the offspring of Melissus and Amalthea, is likewise com-
prehensive of Law. These, therefore, are said to have
nurtured Jupiter in the cavern of Night; the theologist
[Orpheus] directly asserting that which Plato says about
Jupiter. For Plato represents him fabricating and promul-
gating laws. But divine law is imparted by Adrastia to
the Gods also: for the order which is in them is derived
from this Goddess. It is, however, likewise imparted to
the attendants of the Gods, and in common to all, and pecu-
liarly to each.”


OF ORPHEUS. 7


End and Beginning (greatest this to all),

These with propitious aid I suppliant call,

To this libation, and these sacred rites ;

For these t’ accede with joyful mind, my verse
invites.


I.
TO HECATE.


Exnopian Hecate 5, Trivia, lovely dame,

Of earthly, wat’ry, and celestial frame,

Sepulchral, in a saffron veil array’d,

Pleas'd with dark ghosts that wander thro’ the
shade ;

Persea 6, solitary goddess, hail !

The world’s key-bearer, never doom’d to fail ;

In stags rejoicing, huntress, nightly seen,

And drawn by bulls, unconquerable queen ;


5 Io. Diac, Allegor. ad Hesiodi Theog. p. 268, cites this
line, on which, and Hymn 71. 3, he observes : Evpioxw, tov
Opdea kar tHv Tuxnv Apreuey mpocayopevoryra, adda Kat THY
ZeAnvnyv Exarny. i.e. ‘SI find that Orpheus calls Fortune
Artemis or Diana, and also the Moon Hecate.”


6 Diodorus informs us, that Diana, who is to be under-
stood by this epithet, was ‘very much worshiped by the
Persians, and that this Goddess was called Persea in his
time. See more concerning this epithet in Gyrald. Syntag.
ii. p. 861.


8 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Leader, nymph, nurse, on mountains wand ring, hear

The suppliants who with holy rites thy power
_ revere,

And to the herdsman’ with a fav’ring mind draw


near 8,


Il.
TO THE GODDESS PROTHYRAA ®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


O vENERABLE Goddess, hear my pray’r,

For labour pains are thy peculiar care.

In thee, when stretch’d upon the bed of grief,
The sex, as in a mirror, view relief.


7 As Orpheus by his sacred doctrines tamed men of a rustic
and savage disposition ; which, as we have before observed,
appears to be the true meaning of the fable of his drawing
to him trees and wild beasts by the melody of his lyre;
hence, alluding to this circumstance, he calls himself here,
and in the hymn to the Curetes, the herdsman, indicating
the benefit which he conferred on the vulgar part or herd
of mankind.


8 In all the editions of these hymns, prior to that of
Hermann, this hymn forms a part of the exordium to Mu-
seous ; but it is certainly better to separate it from that
exordium, though I did not perceive the propriety of doing
so in the former edition of this translation.

® This is an epithet of Diana, alluding to her presiding
over gates, and being as it were the gate-keeper of life. In
a hymn which was first discovered by me among the Har-


OF ORPHEUS. 9


Guard of the race, endued with gentle mind,
To helpless youth benevolent and kind ;
Benignant nourisher; great Nature’s key
Belongs to no divinity but thee.

Thou dwell’st with all immanifest to sight,
And solemn festivals are thy delight.

Thine is the task to loose the virgin’s zone,
And thou in ev’ry work art seen and known.
With births you sympathise, tho’ pleas’d to see
The numerous offspring of fertility.

When rack’d with labour pangs, and sore distress’d,
The sex invoke thee, as the soul’s sure rest ;
For thou alone canst give relief to pain,
Which art attempts to ease, but tries in vain.
Assisting Goddess, venerable pow’r,

Who bring’st relief in labour’s dreadful hour ;
Hear, blessed Dian, and accept my pray’r,
And make the infant race thy constant care.


leian MSS. in the British Museum, and which, from the
manner of it, was, I have no doubt, written by Proclus,
Hecate is called Prothyrea. For the second line of this
hymn, which is entitled Tuvyos Kowos, or a Common Hymn, is


Xap’ Exary, IpoSupae, peyacGeves, addos eavros.


See the whole of this hymn in the original, and also a
translation of it at the end of my Collectanea.


10 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


IIL.
TO NIGHT.


THE FUMIGATION WITH TORCHES.


NieuT, parent Goddess, source of sweet repose,
From whom at first both Gods and men arose ?°.


1° The first subsistence of the Goddess Night is at the
summit of that divine order which is denominated by Chal-


Plato, m the Phzdrus, the supercelestial place, and in
which he says the plain of Truth is situated, which, as we
are informed by Hermeas (in Phzdr.) obscurely indicates
the whole order of the series of Night. What Hermeas
afterwards adds on this subject is too important to be
omitted, and is as follows :—‘“ Theologists likewise pecu-
liarly establish Truth in the supercelestial place.” For
Orpheus, speaking about Night, says, that “she possesses
the truth * of the Gods,” and


To her, prediction wholly true was giv'n.


She is also said to prophesy to the Gods. Homer, too, indi-
cates concerning this Goddess. For, speaking about Jupiter,
Sleep says,

Night, the great tamer both of Gods and men,

To whom I fled, preserv’d me from his wrath ;

For he swift t Night was fearful to offend.

* In the original aA»Oeer is omitted in this place, but evidently ought to

be inserted.


+ As Night, from her subsistence at the summit of the intelliigble and
at the same time intellectual order, is absorbed in the intelligible, hence
Homer divinely denominates Night swift. For the Chaldean Oracles
call the intelligible Gods swi/t.


OF ORPHEDS. 11


Hear, blessed Venus, deck’d with starry light,
In Sleep’s deep silence dwelling Ebon night !


But Plato says he shall dare to speak concerning it, because
he is going to assert something affirmatively about it. The
dread, however, is lest we should be led to something un-
appropriate and vile in such like doctrinal concerns. He
is also concordant in what he says about the supercelestial
place, with what he asserts in [the first hypothesis of] the
Parmenides, about the first principle of things. For he
there indicates this principle by negations ; except that he
absolutely denies all things of the first principle: but of the
supercelestial place he denies some things, and affirms others.
For the Goddess Night is superior to certain orders, but
inferior to others; and as the first principle of things is
superessential, so Night is supercelestial [i e. is above that
intellectual order which is denominated Heaven]. Why,
however, are souls not said to see Heaven, but to become
situated in, and be conjoined with it, yet are not conjoined
with the natures above Heaven, but perceive them only?
In answer to this it may be said, that it is necessary contact
should exist, as far as to a certain thing. Why, therefore, as
far as to this? Because neither are the Gods under Jupiter
said to be united to Phanes; but this is alone asserted of
Jupiter, and he is said to be united through Night as a
medium.

But how does Plato say, that the supercelestial place is
without colour? Is it in the same manner as we say, that


11 Hermann is of opinion that the line Nut yeveots ra»
Tw, nv kat Kumpw Kadeowper, i, e, *‘ Night, the source of
all things, whom we also call Venus,” is an interpolation.
But there is no reason whatever for this supposition: for
Venus in the hymn to her is called vuxrepia, and ¢tdorap-


vuxe cern.


12 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Dreams and soft ease attend thy dusky train,
Pleas’'d with the length’ned gloom and feastful
strain,


nature and soul are colourless? But what is there admirable
in asserting this? And if we admit this, what* will there
be transcendent in the supercelestial place, since the same
thing is possessed both by nature and soul? May we not
say that Plato, in what is here asserted, very much fol-
lows the beforementioned theologists [viz, Homer, Orpheus,
Hesiod, and Muszus], and disposes what he says con-
formably to them? For after the order of Nights there are
three orders of Gods, viz. of Heaven, the Cyclops, and the
Centimani [or Gods with a hundred hands], the proper
names of whom Plato denies of the supercelestial place.
For of the Gods which abide within Phanes, Heaven is
the first that becomes visible from him ; for Heaven and
Earth first proceeded out of Phanes; and Heaven is first
illuminated by the divine light of Phanes; since Orpheus
says that Night is united to him:


No eye but that of sacred Night alone
Beheld Protogonus ; for all the rest
Were lost in wonder at th’ unhop’d for light,
Which glitter’d from th’ immortal Phanes’ skin.


But that which is visible and illuminated is coloured, since
colours are certain illuminations. Hence Night and all the
supercelestial place, being above Heaven, which is visible,
they are very properly said to be without colour. For
night also is opposed to day, because the latter is illumi-
nated and coloured. And through the privation of colour,
indeed, Plato manifests that the place of the Nights is
above the kingdom of the Heaven ; but through the privation
of figure, that it is above the order of the Cyclops. For theo-
logy says, that figure is first unfolded into light in these,


* For vac here, it is necessary to read 7:, and to make the sentence in-
terrogatory.


OF ORPHEUS. 13


Dissolving anxious care, the friend of mirth,
With darkling coursers riding round the earth.


and that the divinities, the Cyclops, are the first principles
and causes of the figures which subsist every where. Hence
theology says, that they are manual artificere. For this
triad * is perfective of figures.


And in their forehead one round eye was fix’d.t


In the Parmenides, likewise, Plato, when he speaks of the
straight, the circular, and that which is mixed ¢ [from both
these], obscurely indicates this order. But these Cylops,
as being the first causes of figures, taught Minerva and
Vulcan the various species of figures.


These the first manual artists were, who taught
Pallas and Vulcan all things :


[says Orpheus]. We must not therefore wonder on hearing
that Vulcan and Minerva are the causes of figures. For
Vulcan is the cause of corporeal figures, and of every mun-
dane figure; but Minerva, of the psychical and intellectual
figure ; and the Cyclops of divine, and the every where exist-
ing figure. Hence it is evident, that the supercelestial place
is above the order of the Cyclops.

But by the privation of contact Plato manifests that this
place is above the Centumant ; for these first come into con-
tact, as it were, with all the fabrication of things. Hence
theology denominates them hundred-handed ; for through the
hands we touch, make, and distinguish all things. Farther
still, the touch pervades through the whole body. Theology


* The triad of the Cyclops consists of Brontes, Steropes, and Arges.
+ Hesiod Theog. 145.


t The words xaz vo puxroy are omitted in the original, but ought to be
inserted, as will be evident from a perusal of the first hypothesis of the
Parmenides,


14 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Goddess of phantoms and of shadowy play,
Whose drowsy pow’r divides the nat’ral day ;


therefore, symbolically, calls these hundred-handed, as touch-
ing all the fabrication of things, and being the causes of it.
The triad *, however, of the Centimani is of a guardian
nature. But Plato adduces negatively what he found cele-
brated affirmatively by the theologist. For what Orpheus
calls Night, that Plato denominates without colour. And
what the former says negatively is without falsehood,


Prediction without falsehood was to Night
Of allthings giv’n. [says Orpheus. ]


that the latter celebrates, as having about tt the genus of true
science, and as being truly existing essence. Plato also, having
celebrated the supercelestial place by three negations, again
adduces three affirmations, introducing three of them from
being. For, since this order is a triadic one, Plato very
properly preserves the triadic, both in the negative and
affirmative conclusions. Or it may be said that, since it is
both one and being, and is triadic according to each of
these, he indicates the negative conclusions according to
the superessential one, but the affirmative according to
being. Here likewise the first number is unfolded into
light.

In the next place Hermeas enumerates the different kinds
of Truth, as follows: ‘‘ Superior illuminate subordinate
natures with the light of Truth. We must extend the eye
of intellect therefore to these four; viz. the one, which is
the first principle of things ; Phanes, who is the boundary
of the intelligible, but the exempt principle of the intellec-
tual Gods (for the Nights are principles with which prin-
ciple is co-ordinate) ; Jupiter, who is the king of the super-
mundane, but the boundary of what are properly called the


* This triad consists of Cottus, Gyges, and Briareus.


OF ORPHEUS. 15


By Fate’s decree you constant send the light
To deepest hell, remote from mortal sight ;
For dire Necessity, which nought withstands,
Invests the world with adamantine bands.

Be present, Goddess, to thy suppliant’s pray’r,
Desir’d by all, whom all alike revere,

Blessed, benevolent, with friendly aid

Dispel the fears of twilight’s dreadful shade.


intellectual Gods ; and the Sun, who is the king of sensible
natures. But each of these illuminates the beings that are
under * it with the truth, which it possesses from an order
placed above that which it illuminates. Thus the Sun
imparts supermundane light to sensibles; and hence the
essence of it is said to be from supermundane natures.
Again, Jupiter illuminates supermundane essences with
intellectual light. Phanes illuminates the intellectual Gods
with intelligible light; and the principle of all things fills
the intelligible Gods, and all things, with the divine light
proceeding from himself” +.


* For vrep here, it is obviously necessary to read v7o.
t Instead of an’ avrwy in this place, it is requisite to read am’ avtov.


16 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


IV.
TO HEAVEN.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Great Heav’n, whose mighty frame no respite
knows, :

Father of all, from whom the world arose ;

Hear, bounteous parent, source and end of all,

For ever whirling round this earthly ball ;

Abode of Gods, whose guardian pow’r surrounds

Th’ eternal world with ever during bounds !2;

Whose ample bosom, and encircling folds

The dire necessity of nature holds.

Etherial, earthly 48, whose all-various frame,

Azure and full of forms, no power can tame.

All-seeing, source of Saturn and of time,

For ever blessed, deity sublime,

Propttious on a novel mystic shine,

And crown his wishes with a life divine.


13 According to Orpheus, as we are informed by Damas-
cius wept apxwy, * Heaven is the boundary and guardian of
all things,” o rou Opqeos Oupavos ovpos xat xayruw gpudat
ewats Bouderas.


18 The dogma that subordinate natures are causally con-
tained in such as are supreme, and such as are supreme in


OF ORPHEUS. 17


V.
TO ETHER.
THE FUMIGATION FROM SAFFRON.


O Ever untam’d Ether, rais’d on high

In Jove’s dominions, ruler of the sky ;

Great portion of the Stars and lunar light,

And of the Sun, with dazzling lustre bright ;
All-taming pow’r, ethereal shining fire,

Whose vivid blasts the heat of life inspire ;

The world’s best element, light-bearing pow’r,
With starry radiance shining, splendid flow’r ;
O hear my suppliant pray’r, and may thy frame
Be ever innocent, serene, and tame.


the subordinate by participation, is originally Egyptian,
but is also said by Proclus, in Tim. p. 292, to be Orphical.
For in enumerating the Orphic traditions concerning Phanes,
Night, Heaven, Saturn, Jupiter, and Bacchus, he observes,
eoTt yap kat ev I'n Oupavos, cat ev Oupary Ty (lege I'n)° xac
évrav0a pev o Oupavos xPovwws, exee dé ovpaywws 7 I'n* Kae
yap ovpaviay kat tyv (lege ynv rnv) Lednvnv Opdevs rpocn-
yopevoev. i. e. “For Heaven is in Earth, and Earth in
Heaven. And here indeed [i. e. in the Earth] Heaven
subsists terrestrially ; but there [in the heavens] Earth sub-
sists celestially. For Orpheus also calls the Moon celestial
earth,”


18 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


VI.
TO PROTOGONUS“.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MYRRH.


O micuty first-begotten, hear my pray’r,
Twofold, egg-born, and wand ring thro’ the air ;
Bull-roarer }5, glorying in thy golden wings,
From whom the race of Gods and mortal springs.


4 According to Orpheus, as related by Syrianus, in Me-
taph. Arist. p. 114, the first principle of all things is the one,
or the good itself ; and after this, conformably to the doctrine
of Pythagoras, the two principles, ether and chaos, subsist.
And of these principles, the first, or ether, is analogous to
bound ; and the second, or chaos, to infinity. Afterwards,
says Syrianus, the first and occult genera of the Gods sub-
sist, among which the first apparent God is the king and
father of the universe, who, because he is the first visible
deity, is denominated Phanes. The whole of this first and
occult genera of the Gods, which is called by the Chaldean
theologists the intelligible triad, was represented by Orpheus
under the symbol of an egg, on the exclusion of which by
the Goddess Night, the God Phanes came forth, who is
hence denominated Protogonus.


15 Phanes, or Protogonus, who subsists at the extremity
of the intelligible triad, and is therefore vous vonros, or
intelligible intellect, and the exemplar of the universe, is
denominated by Plato in the Timeus 7o avrofwor, animal
itself, as being the primordial cause of all animal life, and was
symbolically represented by Orpheus as adorned with the
heads of a ram, a bull, a serpent, and a lion. But Jupiter,


OF ORPHEUS. 19


Ericapeeus, celebrated pow’r,

Ineffable, occult, all-shining flow’r.

*Tis thine from darksome mists to purge the sight’¢,
All-spreading splendour, pure and holy light ;


or the demiurgus of the universe, is in the intellectual what
Phanes is in the intelligible order of Gods ; and hence he
is said by Orpheus to have absorbed Phanes prior to his
fabrication of the world; the theologist indicating by this
his participation of all the primary paradigmatic causes of
things which subsist in Phanes. As Porphyry, therefore, in
his treatise De Antro Nympharum, informs us, ‘‘ that the
Persian deity Mithra, as well as the dull, is the demiurgus
and lord of generation, the reason is obvious why Proto-
gonus is called in this hymn bwll-roarer, the roaring signify-
ing the procession of ideas to the formation of the world.
And this is conformable to what is asserted respecting
ideas in the Chaldean oracles, viz.


Novus xarpos epportnoe vonoas axpad: BovAy
Tlappopdovs cdeas.


i. e. “ The intellect of the father made a crashing noise, un-
derstanding with unwearied counsel omniform ideas.” For
the crashing noise indicates the same thing as the roaring
of Protogonus.


6 This line in the original is,
Ocaowy os cxoroeccay arnuaupwoas outxrnp.


And Proclus, in the Fifth Book of his MS. Commentary on
the Parmenides of Plato, evidently, as it appears to me,
alludes to this verse. For, speaking of the intelligible
monad, or the summit of the intelligible order, at the ex-
tremity of which Protogonus subsists, he says, ‘‘It is by
no means wonderful if this monad comprehends the whole
intellectual pentad, viz. essence, motion, permanency, same-


20 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Hence, Phanes, call’d the glory of the sky,
On waving pinions thro’ the world you fly.
Priapus, dark-eyed splendour )’, thee I sing,
Genial, all-prudent, ever blessed king.

With joyful aspect on these rites divine

And holy Telste propitious shine.


ness, and difference, without division, and in the most pro-
found union ; since through this union all these are after a
manner one. For all things are there without separation,
according to a dark mist, as the theologist asserts.” Adia-
KPITWY KaYTWY OVTWY KATA OKOTOETCAY optxAny. In which
passage the two last words form a part of the above Orphic
line.

But the reason why Protogonus, or Phanes, is said to
purge the sight from dark mists, is because the primary
causes of things which in the deities prior to him subsist in
ineffable union, all being in all, are by him first unfolded
into intelligible light.


17 Protogonus, who is intelligible intellect, is very properly
called dark-eyed splendour ; the intelligible, from its occult
subsistence, being indicated by darkness, but intellect by the
eye and splendour : for it is the province of intellect to see and
unfold into light.


OF ORPHEUS. 21


VIL
TO THE STARS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Wit# holy voice I call the stars on high,

Pure sacred lights, and demons of the sky.

Celestial stars, dear progeny of Night,

In whirling circles beaming far your light ;

Refulgent rays around the heav’ns ye throw,

Eternal fires, the source of all below.

With flames significant of Fate ye shine,

And aptly rule for men a path divine.

In seven bright zones ye run with wand ring
flames, .

And heaven and earth!®§ compose your lucid frames :

With course unwearied, pure and fiery bright,

For ever shining thro’ the veil of Night.

Hail, glittering, joyful, ever wakeful fires !

Propitious shine on all my just desires,

These sacred rites regard with conscious rays,

And end our works devoted to your praise.


18 As Heaven, in the hymn to that divinity, is said to be
both etherial and earthly, the reason of which I have ex-
plained in the note to that hymn, it is obvious why the Stars,
being celestial, are here said to consist of heaven and earth.


lll tists


22 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


VIII
TO THE SUN.


THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE
AND MANNA.


Hear, golden Titan, whose eternal eye

With matchless sight illumines all the sky.
Native, unwearied in diffusing light,

And to all eyes the object of delight :

Lord of the Seasons, beaming light from far,
Sonorous, dancing” in thy four-yok'd car.

With thy right hand the source of morning light,
And with thy left the father of the night.”


19 Proclys, in his most elegant hymn to the Sun, says of
this divinity :
Zs Taro pecdcxodwpos adetixaxou Sracecns
Tlacqwv Bracrnoer, env d'ereraccev vyecny,
TlAnoas appovins rayarnpovos evpea Koopor, i. e.


‘From thy bland dance repelling deadly ill,
Salubrious Pseon blossoms into light,

Health far diffusing, and th’ extended world
With streams of harmony innoxious fills,”


*® The hand is a symbol of power. Hence Proclus, in
Theol, Plat. lib. 6, p. 380, says that those who are skilled in
divine concerns attribute two hands to the Sun; denomi-
nating one the right hand, the other the left.


OF ORPHEUS. 23


Agile and vig’rous, venerable Sun,

Fiery and bright around the heav’ns you run,
Foe to the wicked, but the good man’s guide,
O’er all his steps propitious you preside.

With various-sounding golden lyre ’tis thine
To fill the world with harmony divine.

Father of ages, guide of prosp’rous deeds,

The world’s commander, borne by lucid steeds.
Immortal Jove”, flute-playing, bearing light,
Source of existence, pure and fiery bright ;
Bearer of fruit, almighty lord of years,

Agile and warm, whom ev'ry power reveres.
Bright eye, that round the world incessant flies,
Doom’d with fair fulgid rays to set and rise ;
Dispensing justice, lover of the stream,

The world’s great master, and o’er all supreme.
Faithful defender®, and the eye of right,

Of steeds the ruler, and of life the light :


21 As all the celestial spheres are replete with proces-
sions from all the supermundane deities, which processions
are the satellites of the leading divinities of these spheres,
as we have shown in the Introduction, the reason is obvious
why the sun is called Jupiter, a solar Jupiter being one of
his attendants. But there is also another reason for this
appellation, For what Jupiter is in the intellectual that
the Sun is in the sensible order of things. Hence Proclus,
in Theol. Plat. p, 289, calls the sun Bacireus rou ravros,
the king of the universe. |


22 Proclus, in Tim. lib. 5, informs us, in the words of
Orpheus, or: nAvoy pev exerryce rots odots o Snusoupyos, Kae


24 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


With sounding whip four fiery steeds you guide,
When in the glittering car of day you ride,
Propitious on these mystic labours shine,

And bless thy suppliants with a life divine.


IX.
TO THE MOON *,


THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Hear, Goddess queen, diffusing silver light,
Bull-horn’d*4, and wand’ring thro’ the gloom of
Night.


guAaca autoyv erevie, xedXevoce Te Taow avaccew, “That the
Demiurgus established the Sun over the whole of the uni-
verse, and fashioned him as its guardian, commanding him
to govern all things.”


%3 The Moon is called in this hymn both ceAnvn and pnvn,
the former of which words signify the Moon in the language


%4 ‘We are informed by Porphyry, in his treatise De Antro
Nymph. that the ancient priests of Ceres, called the Moon,
who is the queen of generation, i, e. of the sublunary regions,
a bull. He adds, “And Taurus is the exaltation of the
Moon.” And Olympiodorus, in his MS. Commentary on
the Gorgias of Plato, says that the Moon, according to
ancient theologists, is drawn by two bulls; by two, on
account of her increase and diminution; but by bulls, be-
cause as these till the ground, so the Moon governs all
those parts which surround the earth.


OF ORPHEUS. 25


With stars surrounded, and with circuit wide
Night’s torch extending, through the heav’ns you
ride : :


of the Gods ; and the latter is the appellation given to her
by men, as is evident from the following Orphic fragment :


Mycaro 8 addnv yore awreiptrov, nvre LeAnvnv
Adavaror kAnfovew, ertxGovo. Se re Mnvyp.
H wodN’ oupe exet, WOAN’ acrea wodXa peAaOpa.


ie. “But he (Jupiter) fabricated another boundless earth,
which the Immortals call Selene, but men Mene; which has
many mountains, many cities, many houses.” This differ-
ence of names arises from the difference between divine
and human knowledge. For, as it is well observed by the
Platonic philosophers, as the knowledge of divine natures
is different from that of partial souls like ours; so with
respect to names, some are divine, exhibiting the whole
essence of that which is named ; but others are human, which
only partially unfold their signification. On this difference
of names, Proclus, in the last chapter of his first book on the
Theology of Plato, admirably remarks as follows: ‘The
first, most principal, and truly divine names are established
in the Gods themselves. But the second names, which are
imitations of the first, and which subsist intellectually, are
of an allotment pertaining to demons. And again, we may
say that those names which are the third from the truth,
which are logically devised, and which receive the ultimate
resemblance of divine natures, are unfolded by scientific
men, at one time energizing divinely, and at another intel-
lectually, and generating moving images of their inward
spectacles. For as the demiurgic intellect establishes re-
semblances about matter of the first forms contained in
himself, and produces temporal images of things eternal,
divisible images of things indivisible, and adumbrated
images as it were of true beings, after the same manner I
think the science that is with us representing intellectual
production fabricates resemblances of other things, and also


26 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Female and male ®, with silv’ry rays you shine,
And now full-orb’d, now tending to decline.


of the Gods themselves, representing that which is void of
composition in them, through composition; that which is
simple, through variety ; and that which is united, through
multitude ; and thus fashioning names ultimately exhibits
images of divine natures, For it generates every where
name as if it were a statue of the Gods. And as the
theurgic art through certain symbols calls forth the exube-
rant and unenvying goodness of the Gods into the illumi-
nation of artificial statues; thus also the intellectual science
of divine concerns, by the compositions and divisions of
sounds, unfolds the occult essence of the Gods.” See more
on this subject in the additional notes to my translation of
the Cratylus of Plato.


25 Ficinus, on the Theology of Plato (lib. 4, p. 128), has
the following remarkable passage, most probably derived
from some MS. Commentary of Proclus, or some other of
the latter Platonists ; for unfortunately he does not acquaint
us with the source of hisinformation. ‘‘ The professors (says
he) of the Orphic theology consider a twofold power in souls,
and in the celestial orbs; the one consisting in knowledge,
the other in vivifying and governing the orb with which that
power is connected. Thus, in the orb of the earth, they call
the gnostic power Pluto, but the other Proserpine. In water
they denominate the former power Ocean, and the latter
Tethys. In air, that thundering Jove, and this Juno, In
fire, that Phanes, and this Aurora. In the soul of the lunar
sphere, they call the gnostic power Liknitan Bacchus, the
other Thalia. In the sphere of Mercury, that Bacchus
Silenus, this Euterpe. In the orb of Venus, that Lysius
Bacchus, this Erato. In the sphere of the Sun, that Trie-
tericus Bacchus, this Melpomene. In the orb of Mars, that
Bassareus Bacchus, this Clio. In the sphere of Jupiter,
that Sebazius, this Terpsichore. In the orb of Saturn, that


OF ORPHEUS. Q7


Mother of ages, fruit-producing Moon, ~
Whose amber orb makes Night’s reflected noon: ‘|
Lover of horses, splendid queen of night, :
All-seeing pow’r, bedeck’d with starry light,
Lover of vigilance, the foe of strife,

In peace rejoicing, and a prudent life :

Fair lamp of Night, its ornament and friend,


Who giv’st to Nature’s works their destin’d end. ;


Amphietus, this Polymnia. In the eighth sphere, that
Pericionius, this Urania. But in the soul of the world they
call the gnostic power Bacchus Eribromus, but the animating
power Calliope. From all which the Orphic theologists
infer, that the particular epithets of Bacchus are compared
with those of the Muses, for the purpose of informing us
that the powers of the Muses are, as it were, intoxicated
with the nectar of divine knowledge ; and in order that we
may consider the nine Muses, and nine Bacchuses, as re-
volving round one Apollo, that is about the splendour of one
invisible Sun.” The greater part of this passage is pre-
served by Gyraldus in his Syntagma de Musis, and by
Natales Comes in his Mythology, but without mentioning
the original author. As in each of the celestial spheres,
therefore, the soul of the ruling deity is of the female, and
the intellect is of the male characteristic, it is by no means
wonderful that the Moon is called in this hymn “female
and male,”


8 Proclus, in Plat. Theol, p. 403, informs us respecting
Diana, who among the mundane divinities is the Moon,
‘‘That she excites all physical productive powers or forms
into energy, and that she gives perfection to the imperfec-
tion of matter. Hence both Theologists and Socrates, in
the Theztetus, call her Lucina, as the inspective guardian
of physical progression and generation.” mavyras xwovea


|


nd


28 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Queen of the stars 2’, all-wise Diana, hail !
Deck’d with a graceful robe and ample veil.
Come, blessed Goddess, prudent, starry, bright,
Come, moony-lamp, with chaste and splendid light,
Shine on these sacred rites with prosp’rous rays,
And pleas’d accept thy suppliants’ mystic praise.


Tous puotkous Noyous ets evepyetay, Kat To auroredes (lege 70
areXes) rns uAnS TeNEtovea’ Sto Kat Aoxcay aurny ore Seodoyot,
kato ev OearrnTy Dwxparns kadovow, ws THs puoikns wpoodou,
Kat yerynoews epopov. The epithet in the Orphic hymn is
TeNecpopos, i. e. bringing to a perfect end.


# In the original acrpapyy. This appellation was first
given to the Moon by the Phosnicians, as we are informed
by Herodian. This Goddess likewise was called by the
Africans Urania. Vide Selden. de Diis Syriis, p. 248.


OF ORPHEUS. 29


X.
TO NATURE®*.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Nature, all-parent, ancient and divine,
O much mechanic mother, art is thine;
Heav’nly, abundant, venerable queen,
In ev ry part of thy dominions seen.


8 Nature, as we are informed by Proclus, in Tim. p. 4,
is the last of the demiurgic causes of this sensible world,
and the boundary of the extent of incorporeal essences, and
is full of productive powers and forms, through which she \
directs and governs mundane beings. And she is a goddess
indeed in consequence of being deified ; but she has not
immediately the subsistence of a deity. For, says he, we
call divine bodies Gods, as being the statues of Gods. He
adds, ‘‘But she governs the whole world by her powers,
containing the heavens in the summit of herself, but ruling
over generation [or the sublunary realms] through the
heavens ; and every where weaving together partial natures
with wholes. Being however such, she proceeds from the
vivific Goddess [Rhea]. For [according to the Chaldean
Oracle] ‘Immense Nature is suspended from the back of
the Goddess ;’ from whom all life is derived, both that which
is intellectual, and that which is inseparable from the sub-
jects of its government. Hence, being suspended from
thence, she pervades without impediment through, and in-
spires all things; so that through her the most inanimate
beings participate of a certain soul, and such things as.


30 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Untam’d, all taming, ever splendid light,
All ruling, honour’d, and supremely bright.
Immortal, first-born, ever still the same,
Nocturnal, starry, shining, powerful dame.
Thy feet’s still traces in a circling course,
By thee are turn’d, with unremitting force.


are corruptible remain perpetually in the world, being held
together by the causes of forms which she contains.”

Hence Nature is represented in this hymn as turning the
stil traces of her feet with a swift whirling. For since she is
the last of the demiurgic causes, her operations amply sym-
bolize with the traces of feet. But the reason why the
epithets of much-mechanic, artist, connecting, all-wise provi-
dence, &c., are given to Nature, which evince her agreement
with Minerva, is because, as Proclus in the above extract
informs us, she every where weaves together partial natures
with wholes. Hence, according to the Orphic theology,
as we also learn from Proclus, Minerva fashioned the
variegated veil of Nature, from that wisdom and virtue
of which she is the presiding deity. Nature therefore, from
her connecting and uniting power, and from her plenitude
of seminal productive powers, has an evident agreement
with Minerva ; whose divine arts, according to the Orphic
theology, reduce whatever is discordant and different in the
universe into union and consent.

Again, it is well observed by Simplicius, in his Commen-
tary on the Second Book of Aristotle’s Physics, ‘‘ that one
of the conceptions which we form of Nature is, that it is the
character of every thing, and that in consequence of this,
we employ the name of it in all things, and do not refuse to
say the nature of soul, of intellect, and even of deity itself.”
Nature, therefore, as indicating the characteristic or hyparxis
of divinity, is in perfect conformity to the symbolical theo-
logy of Orpheus, said to be without a father, and at the


ee


eee


OF ORPHEUS. 31


Pure ornament of all the Pow’rs divine,

Finite and infinite alike you shine ® ;

To all things common, and in all things known,
Yet incommunicable and alone.

Without a father of thy wondrous frame,
Thyself the father whence thy essence came ;
Mingling, all-flourishing, supremely wise,

And bond connective of the earth and skies.
Leader, life-bearing queen, all various nam’d,
And for commanding grace and beauty fam’d.


same time the father of her own being. For all the Gods,
according to this theology, though they proceed by an
appnros expavors or ineffable unfolding into light from the
first principle of things, yet at the same time are avroredets
vrocrace:s, or self-perfect, and self-produced essences. And
when Nature in this hymn is said to be incommunicable and
alone, this must be considered as indicating the charac-
teristic of the great first principle of all. For so far as the
principle of all things he is incommunicable ; since it is im-
possible that there should be more than one principle of alJ
things.


2 Philolaus, as we are informed by Diogenes Laertius,
published a treatise on Nature, of which this was the be-
ginning: guvows de ev rw Koopy appoxOn e& ameipwy Tre Kat
wepatvovTwy, Kat oAos KOoMoSs, Kat TA ev aury warTa, i. e.
“Nature and the whole world, and whatever it contains,
are aptly connected together from things imyinite and finite.”
Hence Socrates, in the Philebus of Plato, says, ‘‘ that all
beings consist of bownd and injinity, and that these two
intelligible principles were produced the first of all things
by the highest God.” Proclus, in Plat. Theol. Lib, 3,
p. 182, cites the above passage of Philolaus.


32 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Justice, supreme in might, whose general sway
The waters of the restless deep obey.

Etherial, earthly, for the pious glad,

Sweet to the good, but bitter to the bad :
All-wise, all-bounteous, provident, divine,

A rich increase of nutriment is thine ;

And to maturity whate’er may spring,

.You to decay and dissolution bring.

Father of all, great nurse, and mother kind,
Abundant, blessed, all-spermatic mind :
Mature, impetuous, from whose fertile seeds
And plastic hand this changing scene proceeds.
All-parent pow’r, in vital impulse seen,
Eternal, moving, all-sagacious queen.

By thee the world, whose parts in rapid flow,
Like swift descending streams, no respite know ®,
On an eternal hinge, with steady course,

Is whirl’d with matchless, unremitting force.


30 As the world has an extended and composite essence,
and is on this account continually separated from itself, it
can alone be connected by a certain indivisible power im-
parted to it by divinity. Again, since from a natural appe-
tite, it is perpetually moved in an orderly manner towards
good, the nature of such an appetite and motion must
originate from a divine intellect and goodness. But since,
from its material imperfection, it cannot receive the whole
of divine infinity at once, but in a way adapted to its tem-
poral nature; hence it can only derive it gradually and
partially, as it were by drops, in a momentary succession.
So that the corporeal world is in a continual state of flowing


OF ORPHEUS. 33


Thron’d on a circling car, thy mighty hand
Holds and directs the reins of wide command :
Various thy essence, honour’d, and the best,
Of judgment too, the general end and test.
Intrepid, fatal, all-subduing dame,

Life everlasting, Parca, breathing flame.
Immortal Providence, the world is thine,

And thou art all things, architect divine.

O, blessed Goddess, hear thy suppliants’ pray’r,
And make their future life thy constant care ;
Give plenteous seasons and sufficient wealth,
And crown our days with lasting peace and health.


and formation, but never possess real being; and is like
the image of a lofty tree seen in a rapid torrent, which has
the appearance of a tree without the reality ; and which
seems to endure perpetually the same, yet is continually
renewed by the continual renovation of the stream.


o)


34 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XI.
TO PAN #®,
THE FUMIGATION FROM VARIOUS ODOURS.


Strone@ past’ral Pan, with suppliant voice I call,
Heav’n, sea, and earth, the mighty queen of all,
Immortal fire ; for all the world is thine,

And all are parts of thee, O pow’r divine.

Come, blessed Pan, whom rural haunts delight,
Come, leaping, agile, wand’ring, starry light.
Thron’d with the Seasons, Bacchanalian Pan,
Goat-footed, horn’d, from whom the world began ;
Whose various parts, by thee inspir’'d, combine
In endless dance and melody divine.

In thee a refuge from our fears we find,

Those fears peculiar to the humankind.


3! Pan, as we are informed by Damascius, first subsists
at the extremity of the intelligible order, being there no
other than the celebrated Protogonus or Phanes ; but, ac-
cording to his mundane subsistence, he is the monad or
summit of all the local Gods and demons, In the statues
of him his upper parts resemble those of a man, but his
lower parts those of a brute [viz. of a goat] indicating by
this, that in the universe rationality has dominion over
irrationality. As, therefore, according to his first subsist-
ence, he is the primary exemplar of the universe ; the reason
is obvious why in this hymn he is celebrated as all things.


OF ORPHEDS. 35


Thee, shepherds, streams of water, goats rejoice,
Thou lov’st the chase and Echo's secret voice :
The sportive Nymphs thy ev’ry step attend,

And all thy works fulfill their destin’d end.

O all-producing pow’r, much-fam’d, divine,

The world’s great ruler, rich increase is thine.
All-fertile Peean, heavenly splendour pure,

In fruits rejoicing, and in caves °2 obscure.

True serpent-horned Jove *®*, whose dreadful rage,
When rous’d, ’tis hard for mortals to assuage.


32 A cave, as we are informed by Porphyry De Antr.
Nymph. is an apt symbol of the material world ; since it is
agreeable at its first entrance on account of its participation
of form, but is involved in the deepest obscurity to the in-
tellectual eye, which endeavours to discern its dark foun-
dation. Hence, like a cave, its exterior and superficial
parts are pleasant, but its interior parts are obscure; and
its very bottom darkness itself.


38 Pan, as we have already observed, first subsists at the
extremity of the intelligible order, and is the same with
Protogonus or Phanes. This being the case, in the intel-
lectual order he is analogous to Jupiter the Demiurgis, by
whom, according to Orpheus, Phanes was absorbed. Hence,
as Jupiter is said to be the mingler of all things by Orpheus,
as we learn from Io. Diac, Allegor. in Hesiod, p. 305, horns
are an occult symbol of the mingling power of the Demi-
urgus of the world. For the literal meaning of the word
Kepaorns, used in this hymn, is horned serpent; and one
of the heads of Protogonus is that of a serpent. And the
word xepacrns is, as Gesner observes, derived from the
verb xepavyyuu, to mingle.


36 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


By thee the earth wide-bosom’d, deep and long,
Stands on a basis permanent and strong.

Th’ unwearied waters of the rolling sea,
Profoundly spreading, yield to thy decree.

Old Ocwan, too, reveres thy high command,
Whose ligyuid arms begird the solid land.

The spaciodys air, whose nutrimental fire

And vivid bl\gsts the heat of life inspire ;

The lighter frdgme of fire, whose sparkling eye
Shines on the si&mmit of the azure sky,

Submit alike to th&ze, whose gen’ral sway

All parts of matter, VA2rious form’d, obey.

All natures change thro™:. thy protecting care,
And all mankind thy lib’ral W.runties share ;

For these, where’er dispers’d thro.,”, boundless space,
Still find thy providence support t * -eir race.
Come, Bacchanalian, blessed pow’r, draw near,
Enthusiastic Pan, thy suppliants hear, ‘
Propitious to these holy rites attend,

And grant our lives may meet a prosp’rol., \s end ;


Drive panic fury too, wherever found, the
From humankind to earth’s remotest bound.
tt.
bi
\by


,


\


OF ORPHEUS. 37


XIT.
TO HERCULES.


Hear, strenuous Hercules, untam’d and strong,
To whom grand works and powerful hands belong,
Titan untam’d, rejoicing and benign,

Of various forms, eternal and divine.

Father of Time, the theme of gen’ral praise,
Ineffable, adored in various ways,

Magnanimous, in divination skill’d,

And in th’ athletic labours of the field.

’Tis thine, strong archer, all things to devour,
Supreme, all-helping, all-producing pow’r.

To thee mankind as their deliv’rer pray,

Whose arm can chase the savage tribes away.
Unweary'd, earth’s best blossom *, offspring fair,
To whom calm peace and peaceful works are dear.


34 Since, according to Orpheus, there is an intellectual
which is the source of the sensible world ; the former con-
taining in a primary and causal manner what the latter
comprehends secondarily and sensibly ; hence the former
contains an intellectual heaven and earth, not like the ma-
terial existing in place, and conversant with the circulations
of time; but subsisting immaterially in the stable essence
of eternity. In this divine world another sun and moon
and stars shine with intellectual light; for every thing
there is perfectly lucid, light continually mingling with


38 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Self-born, with primogenial fires *° you shine,
And various names, and strength of heart are thine:


light. From this heaven and earth resident in the imtel-
lectual Phanes, Orpheus, according to Proclus, derives the
sublunary orders of the Gods; and amoung these (vid. Procl.
in Tim. p. 295), he enumerates the following progeny of
the intellectual earth. ‘She prodaced seven beautiful pure
virgins with voluble eyes, and seven sons, all of them kings,
and covered with downy hair. The daughters are Themis
and prudent Tethys, and fair-haired Mnemosyne and blessed
Thea ; together with Dione, having an illustrious form, and
Phoebe, and Rhea the mother of king Jupiter. Moreover,
this illustrious earth generated celestial sons, which are
also surnamed Titans, because they took revenge on the
great starry Heaven ; and these are Ceous, and great Craaus,
and robust Phorcys, and Saturn, and Ocean, and Hyperion,
and Jupiter.” Now as Hercules is celebrated in this hymn
as the Sun, and the Sun is the same with Hyperion, the
reason is obvious why Hercules is called ‘“‘Earth’s best
blossom.” And we shall find that Saturn, in the follow-
ing hymn, is called ‘‘ blossom of Earth;’’ and Themis, in
hymn 79, ‘‘ Young blossom of Earth ;” and the Titans, in
hymn 37, ‘‘ The illustrious progeny of Heaven and Earth.”
Again,

Phanes, as we are informed by Athenagoras, is denomi-
nated by Orpheus Hercules and Time. Hence, we see the
reason why Hercules in this hymn is said “to shine with
primogenial fires ;” since he is no other than Protogonus in
the intelligible and intellectual worlds, and the Sun in the
sensible world. Or in conformity to the Orphic theory
mentioned in the Introduction, it may be said that he is
celebrated with solar epithets, as being one of the satellites
of the Sun.


% In the editions of Gesner and Hermann we have in this
place Bok:ow, and in the edition of Eschenbach godis: ; but


OF ORPHEUS. 39


Thy mighty head supports the morning light,
And bears, untam’d, the silent gloomy night ;
From east to west, endu'd with strength divine,
Twelve glorious labours to absolve is thine ;
Supremely skill’d, thou reign’st in heav’n’s abodes,
Thyself a God, amidst th’ immortal Gods.

With arms unshaken, infinite, divine,

Come, blessed pow’r, and to our rites incline ;
The mitigations of disease convey,

And drive disastrous maladies away.

Come, shake the branch with thy almighty arm,
Dismiss thy darts, and noxious fate disarm.


the true reading is, I have no doubt, ¢Acyw, conformably
to the above translation. Scaliger also in his version has
‘* Ignibw’ primigenis florens.”


40 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XITT.
TO SATURN.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


Eruenia father, mighty Titan °°, hear,

Great sire of Gods and men, whom all revere ;
Endu’d with various counsel, pure and strong,
To whom increase and decrement belong.
Hence matter’s flowing forms thro’ thee that die,
By thee restor’d, their former place supply.
The world immense in everlasting chains,
Strong and ineffable thy pow’r contains ;
Father of vast eternity, divine,

O mighty Saturn, various speech is thine ;
Blossom of earth and of the starry skies,
Husband of Rhea, and Prometheus wise.
Obsteteric pow’r and venerable root,

From which the various forms of being shoot ;
No parts peculiar can thy pow’r enclose,
Diffus’d thro’ all, from which the world arose.
O best of beings, of a subtle mind,

Propitious hear, to suppliant pray’rs inclin’d ;
The sacred rites benevolent attend,

And grant a blameless life, a blessed end.


88 Saturn is one of the Titans produced by the intellectual
Earth, as is evident from Note 34, on the hymn to Hercules.


OF ORPHEDS. 41


XIV.
TO RHEA*,


THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


IuLustrious Rhea, to my pray’r incline,
Daughter of various-form’d Protogonus °° divine,


37 Rhea, according to the Orphic and Platonic theology,
is one of the zoogonic or vivific principles of the universe,
having a maternal rank among the paternal orders, i. e. be-
tween Saturn, who subsists at the summit, and Jupiter, who
subsists at the extremity of the intellectual order. Hence,
she calls forth the causes latent in Saturn to the procreation
of the universe; and definitely unfolds all the genera of
the Gods. So that she is filled from Saturn, with an intel-
ligible and prolific power, which she imparts to Jupiter,
the Demiurgus of the universe ; filling his essence with a
vivific abundance. Since this Goddess then is a medium
between the two intellectual parents of the universe, Saturn
and Jupiter, the former of which collects intellectual mul-
titude into one, but the latter scatters and divides it s—
hence, says Proclus (in Plat. Theol. p. 266), this Goddess
produces in herself the demiurgic causes of the universe ;
but imparts her diffusive power abundantly to secondary
natures, On this account Plato assimilates her prolific
abundance to the flowing of waters; signifying nothing
more by the word jlowing than that fontal power by which
she contains in transcendent union the divisible rivers of
life. Proclus likewise in p. 267 of the same work informs
us, that this Goddess, according to Orpheus, when consi-
dered as united to Saturn by the most exalted part of her
essence, is called Rhea; but considered as producing Ju-
piter, and together with Jupiter unfolding the total and
partial orders of the Gods, she is called Ceres,


%8 Phanes or Protogonus, as we are informed by Proclus


42 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Who driv’st thy sacred car with speed along,
Drawn by fierce lions, terrible and strong.
Mother of Jove, whose mighty arm can wield

Th’ avenging bolt and shake the dreadful shield.
Brass-sounding ®®, honour’d, Saturn’s blessed queen,
Drum-beating, fury-loving, of a splendid mien.


in Tim, p. 291, not only subsists among the intelligible, but
also among the intellectual Gods; in the demiurgic order,
and among the. supermundane and mundane Gods, And in
a similar manner Night and Heaven: for the peculiarities
of these are received through all the middle orders. Hence,
as Rhea is one of the progeny of the intellectual Earth
resident in Phanes, as we have before observed, the reason
is obvious why she is said in this hymn to be the daughter
of Protogonus, The Phanes, however, and Earth, from
which Rhea proceeds, subsist in that divine order which is
denominated by the Chaldean theologists voyros Kas voepos,
intelligible and at the same time intellectual, and is celebrated
by Plato in the Phedrus under the appellation of Heaven,
This order, as subsisting between the intelligible and intel-
lectual orders, participates of the former, and is xara oxeow
through proximity and alliance, the latter. Hence it is
primarily intellectual.


% The reason why Rhea is here called brass-sowndtng, and
in the next line drwm-beatiny, is in consequence of the en-
thusiastic energy of which she is the source. Hence, says
Porphyry, in his Epistle to Anebo: “Some of those who
suffer a mental alienation energize enthusiastically on hear-
ing certain cymbals or drums, or a certain modulated
sound, such as those who are Corybantically inspired, those
who are possessed by Sabazius, and those who are inspired
by the mother of the Gods.” On this passage, Iamblichus
(De Myst. Sect. ITI. Cap. 9) beautifully observes as follows :
‘‘That music is of a motive nature, and is adapted to excite
the affections, and that the melody of pipes produces or


OF ORPHEUS, 43


Thou joy’st in mountains and tumultuous fight,
And mankind’s horrid howlings thee delight.


heals the disordered passions of the soul, changes the tem-
peraments or dispositions of the body, and by some melodies
causes a Bacchic fury, but by others occasions this fury to
cease ; and likewise how the differences of these accord
with the several dispositions of the soul, and that unstable
and variable melody is adapted to ecstasies, such as are
the melodies of Olympus, and others of the like kind;
all these appear to me to be adduced in a way foreign to
enthusiasm. For they are physical and human, and the
work of our art; but nothing whatever of a divine nature
in them presents itself to the view.

“'We must rather, therefore, say that sounds and melodies
are appropriately consecrated to the Gods, There is also
an alliance in these sounds and melodies to the proper
orders and powers of the several Gods, to the motions in
the universe itself, and to the harmonious sounds which
proceed from the motions. Conformably therefore to such
like adaptations of melodies to the Gods, the Gods them-
selves become present, For there is not any thing which
intercepts ; 80 that whatever has but a casual similitude to
directly participates of them. <A perfect possession likewise
immediately takes place, and a plenitude of a more excel-
lent essence and power.” In Cap. 10, also he observes,
“that since the power of the Corybantes is in a certain
respect of a guardian and efficacious nature, and that of
Sabazius appropriately pertains to Bacchic inspiration, the
purifications of souls, and the solutions of ancient divine
anger, on this account the inspirations of them entirely
differ from each other. With respect, however, to the
Mother of the Gods, those who are precedaneously inspired
by her are women ; but the males that sre thus inspired
are very few in number, and such as are more effeminate.
This enthusiasm, however, has a vivific and replenishing
power, on which account also it in a remarkable degree


44 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


War's parent, mighty, of majestic frame,
Deceitful saviour *°, liberating dame.


differs from all other mania.” In this extract the reason
why Iamblichus says that the enthusiasm of the Mother of
the Gods has a vivific power is because she is a vivific
Goddess, or the source of life to all things, being the same
with Rhea, See more on this most interesting subject in
my translation of this work of Iamblichus on the Mys-
teries.

4 When Jupiter was born (says the fable), his mother
Rhea, in order to deceive Saturn, gave him a stone wrapped
in swaddling bands, in the place of Jupiter, at the same
time informing Saturn that what she gave him was her
offspring. Saturn immediately devoured the stone; and
Jupiter, who was secretly educated, at length obtained the
government of the world. Such is the fable, as narrated by
Phurnutus, (Vid. Opusc. Mythol. p. 147.) According to
Phurnutus also, this fable adumbrates the creation of the
world, ‘For at that time (says he) Nature [i. e. Jupiter
according to him] was then nourished in the world, and at
length prevailed. But the stone devoured by Saturn is the
earth, alluding to its firmly occupying the middle place:
for beings could not be permanent, without such a founda-
tion for their support. From this all things are produced,
and derive their proper aliment.” This explanation of the
fable by Phurnutus, who was a Stoic philosopher, is very
foreign from its true meaning. But the Stoics, though they
greatly excelled in ethics, were very deficient in theology.
The true solution of the fable, therefore, is only to be
derived from Platonic, which are the same with the Orphic
dogmas ; and conformably to these, the development of the
fable is as follows: Rhea is the fontal cause of all life, and
is the middle deity of the intellectual triad, which consists
of Saturn, Rhea, and Jupiter. But the peculiarities of the
vivific order are (as Proclus demonstrates in MS. Comment.
in Parmenidem) motion and permanency, the former unfold-


OF ORPHEUS. 45


Mother of Gods and men, from whom the earth
And spacious heav’ns derive their glorious birth.
Th’ etherial gales, the deeply spreading sea,
Goddess, aerial-form’d, proceed from thee.

Come, pleas’d with wand’rings, blessed and divine,
With peace attended on our labours shine ;

Bring rich abundance ; and, wherever found,
Drive dire disease to earth’s remotest bound.


ing into light the fountains of life, and the latter firmly
establishing this life exempt from its proper rivers. The
same thing is also demonstrated by him in Plat. Theol.
lib. v. Damascius also, rep: apywy, observes, Ty Peg 7
oydous mpoonkel, ws ext ray Kwndéioy KaTa Tas dratpececs,
Kat ovdey nTTOV eoTWoY Wayiws Kat KuBiws. i.e. The
ogdoad, or number eight, pertains to Rhea, as being moved
to every thing, according to divisions or distributions of
her essence, and nevertheless at the same time she remains
firmly and cubically established.” Damascius uses the
word cubically, because eight is a cubic number. Rhea,
therefore, considered as firmly establishing her offspring
Jupiter, in Saturn, who exists in unproceeding union, is
fabulously said to have given Saturn a stone instead of
Jupiter, the stone indicating the jirm establishment of
Jupiter in Saturn. For all divine progeny, at the same
time that they proceed from, abide in their causes. And
the secret education of Jupiter indicates his being nurtured
in the intelligible order: for this order is denominated by
ancient theologists occult,


46 - THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XV.
TO JUPITER“.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


O Jove, much-honour’d, Jove supremely great,

To thee our holy rites we consecrate,

Our pray’rs and expiations, king divine,

For all things to produce with ease, thro” mind
is thine.

Hence mother Earth and mountains swelling high

Proceed from thee, the deep and all within the sky.

Saturnian king, descending fram above,

Magnanimous, commanding, sceptred Jove ;

All-parent, principle and end of all #3,

Whose pow’r almighty shakes this earthly ball ;


“1 For a copious developnient of the nature of this divinity,
see the additional notes.


“ What I have here translated thro’ mind, is in the original
du. ouv kepadny, as it appeared to me to be obvious, that by
the head mind must be indicated, of which the head is the
receptacle,


43 Jupiter is the principle of all things in the universe, so
far as he is the Demiurgus, but so far as he is the final
cause, he is the end of all. Hence, too, Jupiter as the prin-
ciple of the universe contains it in himself: for all things


OF ORPHEUS. AT


Ev’n Nature trembles at thy mighty nod,
Loud-sounding, arm’d with light’ning, thund’ring
God.


flow from their principle. In conformity to this, the follow-
ing Orphic verses are cited by Proclus, in Tim. p. 95.


Hence with the universe great Jove contains
Extended ether, heav’n’s exalted plains ;

The barren sea, wide-bosom’d earth renown’d,
Ocean immense, and Tartarus profound ;
Fountains and rivers, and the boundless main,
With all that Nature’s ample realms contain,
And Gods and Goddesses of each degree ;

All that is past, and all that e’er shall be,
Occultly, and in fair connection lies

In Jove’s vast belly, ruler of the skies.


In the last line of these verses, the belly of Jupiter is indi-
cative of all that subsists as a middle in the universe ; the
belly being the middle part of the body. So that the poet,
by asserting that all things are contained in the belly of
Jupiter, occultly signifies to us, that this deity is not only
the beginning and end, but also the middle of ali things, as
comprehending all middles in himself. A certain modern,
not having the smallest conception of what the Greek
theologist meant by the belly of Jupiter, says, somewhere
in his voluminous mythological treatise, in answer to one
who rightly conceived that the latter part of the above
Orphic lines contained a grand image of the maker of the
universe, “ that it excited no other idea of Jupiter than that
of an enormous glutton.”

In the same place also, Proclus cites other Orphic verses,
which are likewise to be found in the Treatise de Mundo
(ascribed to Aristotle) ; previous to which he observes, that
the Demiurgus, being full of ideas, comprehended through
these all things in himself, as the theologist Orpheus says.


48 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Source of abundance, purifying king,
O various-form’d, from whom all natures spring ;


With these verses I have connected others, conformably to
the order of Stephens, Eschenbach, and Gesner, as follows :


Jove is the first and last, high thund’ring king,
Middle and head, from Jove all beings spring.
In Jove the maJe and female forms combine,
For Jove’s & man, and yet a maid divine.

Jove the strong basis of the earth contains,
And the deep splendour of the starry plains.
Jove is the breath of all; Jove’s wondrous frame
Lives in the rage of ever-restless flame.

Jove is the sea’s strong root, the solar light ;
And Jove’s the moon, fair regent of the night.
Jove is a king, by no restraint confin’d ;

And all things flow from Jove’s prolific mind :
One is the power divine, in all things known,
And one the ruler absolute, alone.

For in Jove’s royal body all things lie,

Fire, night and day, earth, water, and the sky ;
The first begetter’s pleasing Love and Mind ;
These in his mighty body Jove confin’d.

See how his beauteous head and aspect bright
Tllumine heav’n, and scatter boundless light !
Round which his pendent golden tresses shine,
Form’d from the starry beams, with light divine,
On either side two radiant horns behold,
Shap’d like a bull’s, and bright with glitt’ring gold ;
And East and West in opposition lie,

The lucid paths of all the Gods on high.

His eyes the Sun and Moon with borrow’d ray ;
His mind is truth, unconscious of decay,

Royal, etherial; and his ear refin’d

Hears ev’ry voice and sounds of ev’ry kind. .
Thus are his head and mind immortal bright,
His body boundless, stable, full of light.


OF ORPHEUS. 49


Propitious hear my pray’r, give blameless health,
With peace divine, and necessary wealth.


Strong are his members, with a force endu’d,

~ Pow’rful to tame, but ne’er to be subdu’d.
Th’ extended region of surrounding air
Forms his broad shoulders, back, and bosom fair ;
And thro’ the world the ruler of the skies,
Upborne on natal rapid pinions, flies.
His sacred belly earth with fertile plains
And mountains swelling to the clouds contains.
His middle zone’s the spreading sea profound,
Whose roaring waves the solid globe surround.
The distant realms of Tartarus obscure,
Within Earth’s roots, his holy feet secure ;
For these, Earth’s utmost bounds, to Jove belong,
And form his basis permanent and strong.
Thus all things Jove within his breast conceal’d,
And into beauteous light from thence reveal’d.


Jupiter, therefore, or the Demiurgus, is, according to
Orpheus, all things, as containing in the unfathomable
depths of his essence the causes of every thing which the
sensible universe contains, these causes infinitely transcend-
ing the effects which they produce. Hence, by a causal
priority, he is every thing which is contained in the sensible
world. Pherecydes Syrus, also, conformably to this doc-
trine, says of Jupiter, as we learn from Kircher (in Cédip.
Egypt. tom. ii. p. 89),

O Seos eort KuKNos, TeTpaywvos, Kat Se Tpir-ywvros
Kewos 3 9 ypapuen, Kevrpov, Kat TayTa 3po wayTwy.


i, e. “ Jove is a circle, trigon, and a square,
Centre and line, and all things before all.”


Thus too, the ineffable principle of things is said to be all
things prior to all, not as containing all things multitudi-
nously in itself, but as that from which all things are
ineffably unfolded into light.


D


50 THE MYSTIOAL HYMNS


XVI.
TO JUNO *.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


O royat Juno, of majestic mien,
Aerial-form’d, divine, Jove’s blessed queen,
Thron’d in the bosom of cerulean air,

The race of mortals is thy constant care.

The cooling gales thy pow’r alone inspires,
Which nourish life, which ev'ry life desires.
Mother of show’rs and winds, from thee alone,
Producing all things, mortal life is known :
All natures share thy temp’rament divine,
And universal sway alone is thine,

With sounding blasts of wind, the swelling sea
And rolling rivers roar when shook by thee.
Come, blessed Goddess, fam’d almighty queen,
With aspect kind, rejoicing and serene.


«« Juno is called by the Orphic theologists, as we are in-
formed by Proclus, fwoyovos Sea, the vivific Goddess; an
epithet perfectly agreeing with the attributes ascribed to
her in this hymn. Proclus also in Plat, Theol. p. 488,
says, “‘that Juno is the source of the procreation of the
soul.” See more concerning this divinity in the additional
notes.


OF ORPHEUS. 51


XVII.
TO NEPTUNE®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MYREH.


Hear, Neptune, ruler of the sea profound,
Whose liquid grasp begirds the solid ground ;
Who, at the bottom of the stormy main,

Dark and deep-bosom’d hold’st thy wat’ry reign.
Thy awful hand the brazen trident bears,

And Ocean’s utmost bound thy will reveres.
Thee I invoke, whose steeds the foam divide,
From whose dark locks the briny waters glide ;
Whose voice, loud sounding thro’ the roaring deep,
Drives all its billows in a raging heap ;

When fiercely riding thro’ the boiling sea,

Thy hoarse command the trembling waves obey.
Earth-shaking, dark-hair’d God, the liquid plains
(The third division) Fate to thee ordains.

*Tis thine, cerulean demon, to survey,
Well-pleas'd, the monsters of the ocean play.
Confirm earth’s basis, and with prosp’rous gales
Waft ships along, and swell the spacious sails ;
Add gentle Peace, and fair-hair’'d Health beside,
And pour abundance in a blameless tide.


“© See the nature of this divinity unfolded in the addi-
tional notes.


52 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XVITI.
TO PLUTO.
A HYMN.


PLuTo, magnanimous, whose realms profound
Are fix'd beneath the firm and solid ground,
In the Tartarean plains remote from sight,
And wrapt for ever in the depths of night.
Terrestrial Jove *5, thy sacred ear incline,

And pleas’d accept these sacred rites divine.
Earth’s keys ‘’ to thee, illustrious king, belong,
Its secret gates unlocking, deep and strong.
*Tis thine abundant annual fruits to bear,

For needy mortals are thy constant care.

To thee, great king, all-sov’reign Earth's assign’d,
The seat of Gods and basis of mankind.


“ Pluto, says Proclus, in Plat. Theol. p. 368, is called
terrestrial Jupiter, because he governs by his providence the
earth and all it contains,


 Proclus, in the Excerpta from his Commentary on the
Cratylus of Plato, informs us that initiators into the Myste-
ries, in order that sensibles might sympathize with the
Gods, employed the shuttle as a signature of separating, a
cup of wivific, a sceptre of ruling, and a KEY of guardian
power. Hence Pluto, as the guardian of the earth, is here
said to be the keeper of the earth’s keys.


OF ORPHEUS. 53


Thy throne is fix’d in Hades’ dismal plains,
Distant, unknown to rest, where darkness reigns ;
Where, destitute of breath, pale spectres dwell,
In endless, dire, inexorable hell ;

And in dread Acheron, whose depths obscure,
Earth's stable roots eternally secure.

O mighty demon, whose decision dread,

The future fate determines of the dead,

With captive Proserpine, thro’ grassy plains,
Drawn in a four-yok’d car with loosen’d reins,
Rapt o’er the deep, impell’d by love, you flew
Till Eleusina’s city rose to view :

There, in a wondrous cave obscure and deep,
The sacred maid secure from search you keep,
The cave of Atthis, whose wide gates display
An entrance to the kingdoms void of day.

Of works unseen and seen thy power alone
To be the great dispensing source is known.
All-ruling, holy God, with glory bright,

Thee sacred poets and their hymns delight,
Propitious to thy mystics’ works incline,
Rejoicing come, for holy rites are thine.


54 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XIX.
TO THUNDERING JUPITER.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


O Fatuer Jove, who shak’st with fiery light
The world, deep-sounding from thy lofty height.
From thee proceeds th’ etherial lightning’s blaze,
Flashing around intolerable rays.
Thy sacred thunders shake the blest abodes,
The shining regions of th’ immortal Gods.
Thy pow’r divine the flaming lightning shrouds
With dark investiture in fluid clouds. |
’Tis thine to brandish thunders strong and dire,
To scatter storms, and dreadful darts of fire ;

. With roaring flames involving all around,
And bolts of thunder of tremendous sound.
Thy rapid dart can raise the hair upright,
And shake the heart of man with wild affright.
Sudden, unconquer’d, holy, thund’ring God,
With noise unbounded flying all abroad ;
With all-devouring force, entire and strong,
Horrid, untam’d, thou roll’st the flames along.
Rapid, etherial bolt, descending fire,
The earth, all-parent, trembles at thine ire ;


OF ORPHEUS. 55


The sea all-shining, and each beast, that hears
The sound terrific, with dread horror fears :
When Nature’s face is bright with flashing fire,
And in the heav’ns resound thy thunders dire.
Thy thunders white the azure garments tear,
And burst the veil of all-surrounding air.

O Jove, all-blessed, may thy wrath severe,
Hurl’d in the bosom of the deep appear,

And on the tops of mountains be reveal’d,
For thy strong arm is not from us conceal’d.
Propitious to these sacred rites incline,

And to thy suppliants grant a life divine,

Add royal health, and gentle peace beside,
With upright reas’ning for a constant guide.


56 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


TO JUPITER.


As the Primary Cause of Lightning. |
{
é
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE
AND MANNA.


I cau the mighty, holy, splendid, light,

Aerial, dreadful-sounding, fiery-bright,

Flaming, etherial light, with angry voice,
Lightning thro’ lucid clouds with crashing noise.
Untam’d, to whom resentments dire belong,
Pure, holy pow’r, all-parent, great and strong :
Come, and benevolent these rites attend,

And grant the mortal life a pleasing end.


OF ORPHEUS. 57


XXI.
TO THE CLOUDS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MYRRH.


AERIAL Clouds, thro’ heav’ns resplendent plains
Who wander, parents of prolific rains ;

Who nourish fruits, whose wat’ry frames are hurl’d,
By winds impetuous, round the mighty world.
Loud-sounding, lion-roaring, flashing fire,

In Air’s wide bosom bearing thunders dire :
Impell’d by each sonorous stormy gale,

With rapid course along the skies ye sail.

With gentle gales your wat’ry frames I call,

On mother Earth with fruitful show’rs to fall.


58 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XXII.
TO TETHYS ®%.


THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE
AND MANNA.


Tetuys I call, with eyes cerulean bright,

Hid in a veil obscure from human sight :

Great Ocean’s empress, wand’ring thro’ the deep,
And pleas’d, with gentle gales, the earth to sweep ;
Whose ample waves in swift succession go,

And lash the rocky shore with endless flow :
Delighting in the sea serene to play,

In ships exulting, and the wat’ry way.

Mother of Venus, and of clouds obscure,

Great nurse of beasts, and source of fountains pure.
O venerable Goddess, hear my pray’r,

And make benevolent my life thy care ;

Send, blessed queen, to ships a prosp’rous breeze,
And waft them safely o’er the stormy seas.


48 See the nature of this divinity unfolded in the addi-
tional notes.


OF ORPHEUS. 59


X XITI.
TO NEREUS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MYRRH.


O tHov who dost the roots of Ocean keep

In seats cerulean, demon of the deep,

With fifty nymphs (attending in thy train,

Fair virgin artists) glorying thro’ the main :

The dark foundation of the rolling sea,

And Earth’s wide bounds belong, much-fam’d, to
thee.

Great demon, source of all, whose pow’r can make

The sacred basis of blest Ceres shake,

When blust’ring winds in secret caverns pent,

By thee excited, struggle hard for vent.

Come, blessed Nereus, listen to my pray’r,

And cease to shake the earth with wrath severe ;

Send to thy mystics necessary wealth,

With gentle peace, and ever tranquil health.


60 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XXIV.
TO THE NEREIDS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Davauters of Nereus, resident in caves

Merg’d deep in ocean, sporting thro’ the waves ;
Fifty inspir’d Nymphs, who thro’ the main
Delight to follow in the Triton’s train,
Rejoicing close behind their cars to keep ;
Whose forms half wild are nourish’d by the deep,
With other Nymphs of different degree,
Leaping and wand’ring thro’ the liquid sea.
Bright, wat’ry dolphins, sonorous and gay,
Well-pleas’d to sport with bacchanalian play ;
Nymphs beauteous-ey'd, whom sacrifice delights,
Give plenteous wealth, and bless our mystic rites ;
For you at first disclosed the rites divine,

Of holy Bacchus and of Proserpine,

Of fair Calliope, from whom I spring,

And of Apollo bright, the Muses’ king.


OF ORPHEUS. 61


XXV.
TO PROTEUS ”.


Proteus I call, whom Fate decrees to keep
The keys which lock the chambers of the deep ;
First-born, by whose illustrious pow’r alone

All Nature’s principles were clearly shown.
Pure sacred matter to transmute is thine,

And decorate with forms all-various and divine.
All-honour’d, prudent, whose sagacious mind
Knows all that was and is of ev’ry kind,

With all that shall be in succeeding time,

So vast thy wisdom, wondrous and sublime :
For all things Nature first to thee consign’d,
And in thy essence omniform confin’d.

O father, to thy mystics’ rites attend,

And grant a blessed life a prosp’rous end.


4 Proteus, says Proclus, in Plat. Repub. p. 97, though
inferior to the primary Gods, is immortal; and though not
a deity, is a certain angelic intellect of the order of Nep-
tune, comprehending in himself all the forms of things
generated in the universe.


62 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XXXVI.
TO EARTH®.


THE FUMIGATION FROM EVERY KIND OF
SEED, EXCEPT BEANS AND AROMATICS.


O moruer Earth, of Gods and men the source,
Endu’d with fertile, all-destroying force ;
All-parent, bounding, whose prolific pow’rs
Produce a store of beauteous fruits and flow’rs.
All-various maid, th’ immortal world’s strong base,
Eternal, blessed, crown’d with ev'ry grace ;
From whose wide womb as from an endless root,
Fruits many-form'd, mature, and grateful shoot.
Deep-bosom’d, blessed, pleas’d with grassy plains,
Sweet to the smell, and with prolific rains.
All-flow’ry demon, centre of the world,
Around thy orb the beauteous stars are hurl’d
With rapid whirl, eternal and divine,
Whose frames with matchless skill and wisdom shine.
Come, blessed Goddess, listen to my pray’r,
And make increase of fruits thy constant care ;
With fertile Seasons in thy train draw near,
And with propitious mind thy suppliants hear.

& According to the Orphic theology, Earth is the mother


of every thing of which Heaven is the father. See the
additional notes.


OF ORPHEUS. 63


XX VIT.
TO THE MOTHER OF THE GODS.


THE FUMIGATION FROM A VARIETY OF
ODORIFEROUS SUBSTANCES.


Mortuer of Gods, great nurse of all, draw near,
Divinely honour’d, and regard my pray’r.
Thron’d on a car, by lions drawn along,

By bull-destroying lions, swift and strong,
Thou sway’st the sceptre of the pole divine,®!
And the world’s middle seat, much fam’d, is thine.
Hence earth is thine, and needy mortals share
Their constant food, from thy protecting care.
From thee at first both Gods and men arose ;
From thee the sea and ev'ry river flows.

Vesta and source of wealth thy name we find
To mortal men rejoicing to be kind ;

For ev'ry good to give thy soul delights.
Come, mighty pow’, propitious to our rites,
All-taming, blessed, Phrygian Saviour, come,
Saturn’s great queen, rejoicing in the drum.


51 The Mother of the Gods is the same with Rhea; and
Proclus, in the second book of his Commentary on Euclid,
informs us, that the pole of the world is called by the Pytha-
goreans the seal of Rhea.


64 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Celestial, ancient, life-supporting maid,
Inspiring fury; give thy suppliant aid ;
With joyful aspect on our incense shine,
And pleas’d, accept the sacrifice divine.


XX VITI.
TO MERCURY ®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Hermes, draw near, and to my pray’r incline,
Angel of Jove, and Maia’s son divine ;

Prefect of contests, ruler of mankind,

With heart almighty, and a prudent mind.
Celestial messenger of various skill,

Whose pow’rful arts could watchful Argus kill.


52 Proclus, in his admirable Commentary on the First
Alcibiades, of which two excellent editions have been
recently published by Cousin and Creuzer, gives us the
following information respecting Mercury, which as the
reader will easily perceive greatly elucidates some parts of
this hymn, ‘“ Mercury is the source of invention; and hence
he is said to be the son of Maia; because search, which is
implied by Maza, leads invention into light. He bestows
too mathesis on souls, by unfolding the will of his father
Jupiter ; and this he acomplishes, as the angel or messen-
ger of Jupiter. He is likewise the inspective guardian of
gymnastic exercises ; and hence herme, or carved statues of


OF ORPHEUS. 65


With winged feet tis thine thro’ air to course,
O friend of man, and prophet of discourse :
Great life-supporter, to rejoice is thine

In arts gymnastic, and in fraud divine.

With pow’r endu’d all language to explain,

Of care the loos’ner, and the source of gain.
Whose hand contains of blameless peace the rod,
Corucian, blessed, profitable God. |

Of various speech, whose aid in works we find,
And in necessities to mortals kind.

Dire weapon of the tongue, which men revere,
Be present, Hermes, and thy suppliant hear ;
Assist my works, conclude my life with peace,
Give graceful speech, and memory’s increase.


Mercury, were placed in the Paleestree ; of music, and hence
he is honoured as Avpacos, the lyrist among the celestial
constellations ; and of disciplines, because the invention of
geometry, reasoning, and language is referred to this God.
He presides, therefore, over every species of erudition,
leading us to an intelligible essence from this mortal abode,
governing the different herds of souls, and dispersing the
sleep and oblivion with which they are oppressed. He is
likewise the supplier of recollection, the end of which is a
genuine intellectual apprehension of divine natures.”’


66 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


X XIX.
TO PROSERPINE.
A HYMN.


Daveuter of Jove, Persephone divine,

Come, blessed queen, and to these rites incline :
Only-begotten 58, Pluto’s honour’d wife,

O venerable Goddess, source of life :

’Tis thine in earth’s profundities to dwell,

Fast by the wide and dismal gates of hell.

Jove’s holy offspring, of a beauteous mien,
Avenging Goddess, subterranean queen.

The Furies’ source, fair-hair’d, whose frame proceeds
From Jove’s ineffable and secret seeds.

Mother of Bacchus, sonorous, divine,

And many-form’d, the parent of the vine.
Associate of the Seasons, essence bright,
All-ruling virgin, bearing heav’nly light.

With fruits abounding, of a bounteous mind,
Horn‘d, and alone desir’d by those of mortal kind.
O vernal queen, whom grassy plains delight,
Sweet to the smell, and pleasing to the sight:


8 Proclus, in Tim. lib. 2, p. 189, says, “that the theolo-
gist [Orpheus] is accustomed to call Proserpine only-be-
gotten.” Kac yap o Geodoyos rnv Kopny pouvoyevecay ecw
wpocaryopeve. See the additional notes.


OF ORPHEUS, 67


Whose holy form in budding fruits we view,
Earth's vig’rous offspring of a various hue :
Espous’d in autumn *, life and death alone

To wretched mortals from thy pow’r is known:
For thine the task, according to thy will,

Life to produce, and all that lives to kill 5,
Hear, blessed Goddess, send a rich increase

Of various fruits from earth, with lovely Peace :
Send Health with gentle hand, and crown my life
With blest abundance, free from noisy strife ;

_ Last in extreme old age the prey of Death,
Dismiss me willing to the realms beneath,

To thy fair palace and the blissful plains
Where happy spirits dwell, and Pluto reigns.


54 “The rape of Proserpine, says Sallust (De Diis et
Mundo, cap. 4) is fabled to have taken place about the
opposite equinox ; and this rape signifies the descent of
souls.” wept ‘youw Tyy evavriay tonueptay yn Tys Kopys
aprayn pvOodoyerra yeverIar, o bn Kadodos est Twy Wuxuw.
According to Lydus De Mensibus, the festival of Proser-
pine was celebrated on the sixth of the Nones of October.
Hence the reason is obvious why Proserpine is said in this
hymn to have been espoused in autumn.


, 5 Proclus, in Plat. Theol. p. 371, informs us, that accord-
ing to the Eleusinian mysteries, Proserpine, together with
Pluto, governs terrestrial concerns, and the recesses of the
earth ; and that she supplies the extreme parts of the uni-
verse with life, and imparts soul to those who by her power
are rendered inanimate and dead. This is perfectly con-
formable to what is said in the above hymn.


68 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XXX.
TO BACCHUS ®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


Baccuus I call loud-sounding and divine,
Inspiring God, a twofold shape is thine :
Thy various names and attributes I sing,
O firstborn, thrice begotten, Bacchic king.
Rural, ineffable, two-form’d, obscure,
Two-horn’d, with ivy crown’d, and Euion *’ pure :
Bull-fae’d and martial, bearer of the vine,
Endu’d with counsel prudent and divine :
Omadius, whom the leaves of vines adorn,
Of Jove and Proserpine occultly born

In beds ineffable; all-blessed pow’r,
Whom with triennial off’rings men adore.
Immortal demon, hear my suppliant voice,
Give me in blameless plenty to rejoice ;
And listen gracious to my mystic pray’r,
Surrounded with thy choir of nurses fair.


56 See the additional notes.
57 So called from the voice of the Bacchants.


OF ORPHEUS. 69


XX XI.
TO THE CURETES.
A HYMN.


Learine Curetes, who with dancing feet

And circling measures armed footsteps beat :
Whose bosoms Bacchanalian furies fire,

Who move in rhythm to the sounding lyre:
Who traces deaf when lightly leaping tread,
Arm-bearers, strong defenders, rulers dread :
Fam’d Deities the guards of Proserpine °,
Preserving rites mysterious and divine :

Come, and benevolent this hymn attend,

And with glad mind the herdsman's life defend.


58 The Corybantes, who in the supermundane are the same
as the Curetes in the intellectual order, are said by Proclus,
in Plat. Theol. lib. 6, p. 383, “to be the guards of Proser-
pine.” And in hymn xxxviii, the Curetes are celebrated
as being also the Corybantes ; in consequence of both these
triads being of a guardian characteristic, and subsisting in
profound union with each other.


70 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XX XIU.
TO PALLAS ®,
A HYMN.


ONLY-BEGOTTEN, noble race of Jove,

Blessed and fierce, who joy’st in caves to rove :
O warlike Pallas, whose illustrious kind,
Ineffable, and effable we find :

Magnanimous and fam’d, the rocky height,
And groves, and shady mountains thee delight :
In arms rejoicing, who with furies dire

And wild the souls of mortals dost inspire.


69 The supermundane vivific triad consists (as we are
informed by Proclus in Plat. Theol. p. 371) of three zoogo-
mic monads ; and these are Diana, Proserpine, and Minerva.
‘‘And of these (says he) the highest or first is arranged
according to hyparzis[i.e. the summit of essence]; the
second according to power, which is definitive of life; and
the third according to vivifie intellect. Theologists, also,
are accustomed to call the first Coric Diana; the second
Proserpine ; and the third Coric Minerva. I mean that they
are thus denominated by the primary leaders of the Grecian
theology. For by the Barbarians, likewise [i. e. the Chal-
dean theologists], the same things are manifested through
other names, For they call the first monad Hecate; the
middle monad Soul; and the third Virtue.” Conformably
to this, Psellus, in his Exposition of the Chaldaic Dogmas,
says: Tw de {woyorwy apxwy, ny phew axporns Exarn xaNecrac’


OF ORPHEUS 71


Gymnastic virgin of terrific mind,

Dire Gorgon’s bane, unmarried, blessed, kind :
Mother of arts, impetuous ; understood

As fury by the bad, but wisdom by the good.
Female and male, the arts of war are thine,

O much-form’d, dragoness ©, inspir’d, divine :
O’er the Phlegrean giants ®!, rous’d to ire,
Thy coursers driving with destruction dire.


nm Se pecorns, yuxn apxixn’ n de weparwois, apern apxixn.
i. e. “Of the zoogonic principles, the summit is called
Hecate ; the middle, ruling Soul ; and the extremity, ruling
Virtue.” The supermundane order is also called by Pro-
clus apxicn, because the divinities of which it consists are
principles and rulers.

The reason, therefore, is obvious why Minerva in this
hymn is said to delight in caves, rocks, groves, and shady
mountains ; for this arises from her union with Diana. And
hence it appears, that Runkenius was mistaken in asserting
that these epithets were misplaced. We may likewise
hence see the reason why, in line thirteen, Minerva is
called “ female and male,” as well as the Moon; and why
the Moon in the hymn to her is called ravcoge xovpy, “‘all-
wise virgin.”

© It is easy to perceive the agreement between Minerva,
who is characterized by divine wisdom and providence, and
a dragon ; since, according to Phurnutus, a dragon is of a
vigilant and guardian nature.


61 As the fable of the giants is well known, but its real
meaning is known only to a few, the following explanation
of the battles of the Gods is inserted from p. 873 of the
Fragments of the Commentary of Proclus on the Republic
of Plato: ‘The divided progressions of all things and their


12 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Sprung from the head of Jove, of splendid mien,
Purger of evils, all-victorious queen.


essential separations supernally originate from that division
of first operating causes [i.e. from bound and infinity],
which is perfectly arcane ; and subsisting according to those
principles which are expanded above wholes, they dissent
from each other; some being suspended from the unifying
monad bound, and about this determining their subsistence,
but others receiving in themselves a never failing power
from that infinity which is generative of wholes, and is a
cause productive of multitude and progression, and about
this establishing their proper essence. Just, therefore, as
the first principles of things are separated from each other,
all the divine genera and true beings are divided from each
other, according to an orderly progression. Hence some of
them are the leaders of wnion to secondary natures, but
others impart the power of separation ; some are the causes
of conversion, convolving the multitude of progressions to
their proper principles; but others bound the progressions,
and the subordinate generation from the principles, Again,
some supply a generative abundance to inferior natures, but
others impart an immutable and undefiled purity ; some bind
to themselves the cause of separate good, but others of the
good which is consubsistent with the beings that receive it,
And thus in all the orders of being is such a contrariety of
genera diversified. Hence permanency, which establishes
things in themselves, is opposed to efficacious powers, and
which are full of life and motion. Hence, too, the kindred
communion of sameness receives a division according to
species opposite to the separations of difference; but the
genus of similitude is allotted an order contrary to dissi-
militude ; and that of equality to inequality, according to the
same analogy. Is it, therefore, any longer wonderful, if
the authors of fables, perceiving such contrariety in the
Gods themselves and the first of beings, obscurely signified
this to their pupils through battles? the divine genera, in-


_


OF ORPHEUS. 73


Hear me, O Goddess, when to thee I pray,
With supplicating voice both night and day,


deed, being perpetually united to each other, but at the
same time containing in themselves the causes of the union
and separation of all things.

We may also, I think, adduce another mode of solution ;
viz, that the Gods themselves are impartibly connascent
with each other, and subsist uniformly in each other, but
that their progressions into the universe, and their com-
munications are separated in their participants, become
divisible, and are thus filled with contrariety ; the objects
of their providential exertions not being able to receive in
an unmingled manner the powers proceeding from thence,
and without confusion their multiform illuminations, We
may likewise say, that the last orders which are suspended
from divine natures, as being generated remote from first
causes, and as being proximate to the subjects of their
government, which are involved in matter, participate them-
selves of all-various contrariety and separation, and parti-
bly preside over material natures, minutely dividing those
powers which presubsist uniformly and impartibly in their
first operating causes. Such, then, and so many, being
the modes according to which the mystic rumours of the-
ologists refer war to the Gods themselves :—other poets,
and those who have explained divine concerns through a
divinely inspired energy, have ascribed wars and battles
to the Gods according to the first of those modes we
related, in which the divine genera are divided conform-
ably to the first principles of wholes. For those powers
which elevate to causes are, after a manner, opposed to those
that are the sources of generation, and the connective to the
separating ; those that unite to those that multiply the pro-
gression of things; total genera to such as fabricate partibly ;
and those which are expanded above to those that preside
over partial natures; and hence fables, concealing the truth,
assert that such powers fight and war with each other.


74 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


And in my latest hour give peace and health,
Propitious times, and necessary wealth,

And ever present be thy vot’ries aid,

O much implor’d, art’s parent, blue-ey’d maid.


On this account, as it appears to me, they assert that the
Titans were the antagonists of Bacchus, and the Giants of
Jupiter. For union, indivisible energy, and a wholeness
prior to parts * are adapted to those fabricators that have a
subsistence prior to the world. But the Titans and Giants
produce the demiurgic powers into multitude, divisibly ad-
minister the affairs of the universe, and are the proximate
fathers of material natures,”

Proclus, in his elegant hymn to Minerva, says of this
victory of Minerva over the Giants :


H cogins reracaca SeostBeas wvAewvas,
Kat xOovrwy dayacaca Oewnaxa pura yryarvrur.


i. e. The God-trod gates of wisdom by thy hand
Are wide unfolded, and the daring band
Of earth-born giants, that in impious fight,
Strove with thy sire, were vanquish’d by thy might.”


* Whole has a triple subsistence; for it is either prior to parts, |. e. is
the cause of the parts which it contains; or it is the aggregate of parts;
or it subsists in a part. See my translation of Proclus’s Elemente of
Theology.


*~


OF ORPHEUS. T5


XX XITTI.
TO VICTORY.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


O powerFut Victory, by men desir’d,

With adverse breasts to dreadful fury fir’d,
Thee I invoke, whose might alone can quell
Contending rage and molestation fell.

*Tis thine in battle to confer the crown,

The victor’s prize, the mark of sweet renown ;
For thou rul’st all things, Victory divine !

And glorious strife, and joyful shouts are thine.
Come, mighty Goddess, and thy suppliant bless,
With sparkling eyes, elated with success ;

May deeds illustrious thy protection claim,
And find, led on by thee, immortal fame.


76 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XXXIV.
TO APOLLO.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


Buiest Peean, come, propitious to my pray’r,
Illustrious pow’r, whom Memphian tribes revere,
Slayer of Tityus, and the God of health,
Lycorian Pheebus, fruitful source of wealth :
Spermatic, golden-lyr’d, the field from thee
Receives its constant rich fertility.

Titanic, Grunian ®, Smynthian, thee I sing,
Python-destroying ®, hallow’d, Delphian king :


62 Gryneus, according to Strabo, lib. 18, is a town of
Myrinzeus, and is likewise a temple of Apollo, and a most
ancient oracle and temple, sumptuously built of white
stone.


63 ‘‘Typhon, Echidna, and Python being the progeny of
Tartarus and Earth, which is conjoined with Heaven, (says
Olympiodorus in MS. Comment, in Phzdon.) form, as it
were, a certain Chaldaic triad, which is the inspective
guardian of the whole of a disordered fabrication [i. e. of
the fabrication of the last of things].” Orc Taprapou Kaz
I'ns rns aufvyovons tw Ovpavy, o Tudwy, 4 Extdva, o
IIlv@wy, ovoy Xaddarkyn Tis Tpras ehopos Tys aTaKrous wacns
Snucoupytas. And in another part of the same Commentary
he says, “that Typhon is the cause of the all-various sub-


OF ORPHEUS. 17


Rural, light-bearer, and the Muses’ head,
Noble and lovely, arm’d with arrows dread :
Far-darting, Bacchian, twofold, and divine,
Pow’r far diffus’d, and course oblique is thine.
O Delian king, whose light-producing eye
Views all within, and all beneath the sky ;
Whose locks are gold, whose oracles are sure,
Who omens good reveal’st, and precepts pure ;
Hear me entreating for the human kind,
Hear, and be present with benignant mind ;
For thou survey’st this boundless ether all,
And ev’ry part of this terrestrial ball
Abundant, blessed ; and thy piercing sight
Extends beneath the gloomy, silent night ;


¢


terranean winds and waters, and of the violent motion of
the other elements. But Echidna is a cause revenging
and punishing rational and irrational souls; and hence the
upper parts of her are those of a virgin, but the lower those
of aserpent. And Python is the guardian of the whole of
prophetic production, Though it will be better to say, that
he is the cause of the disorder and obstruction pertaining to
things of this kind. Hence, also, Apollo destroyed Python,
in consequence of the latter being adverse [to the prophetic
energy of the former} O sey Tugwy rns ravroms Tw
Uroyewy Wvevparwy Kat vdaTwy, Kat TWY adrAWY goLXELWP
Biacov kwycews atrios’ n Se Acxidva Tipwpos atria Kae Ko\ac-
TUK AoyiKwr Te Kat aoywy Yuxwr’ dio Ta ev ayw wrapSevos°
Ta be KaTw egw opewdys’ o de IlvSwy ppovpos rns parrucns
oAns avadocews’ apewov Se rns wept ravra aragias Te Kat
avyrippatews arriov Aeyew do cat Amo\Awy auroy avaipe
EVAYTLOULLEV OP,


78 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Beyond the darkness, starry-ey’d ®, profound,
The stable roots, deep-fix’d by thee, are found.


The starry-eyed darkness, beyond which Apollo is here
said to fix his roots, is the sphere of the fixed stars, the
region immediately beyond which consists of the etherial
worlds, which according to the Chaldeans are three. For
they assert that there are seven corporeal worlds, one
empyrean and the first ; after this, three etherial, and then
three material worlds, which last consist of the inerratic
sphere, the seven planetary spheres, and the sublunary
region, But that, according to the Orphic theology, there
is an etherial world beyond the sphere of the fixed stars is
evident from the following mystic particulars respecting the
Oracle of Night, which are transmitted to us by Proclus in
his admirable Commentary on the Timeeus, p. 63 and p. 96.
‘‘The artificer of the universe (says he), prior to his whole
fabrication, is said to have betaken himself to the Oracle of
Night, to have been there filled with divine conceptions, to
have received the principles of fabrication, and, if it be
lawful so to speak, to have solved all his doubts. Night,
too, calls upon the father Jupiter to undertake the fabrica-
tion of the universe ; and Jupiter is said by the theologist
[Orpheus] to have thus addressed Night :


Mata Sew virarn, Nuvg auBpore, rws rade Ppacecs ;
TIws dec p’aSavarwy apxny xparepodpova SecSar ;
IIws de wor ev TL Ta Warr’ Egat, Kat Xwpis eKaS ov ;


Le. O Nurse supreme of all the pow’rs divine,
Immortal Night! how with unconquer’d mind
Must I the source of the Immortals fix?

And how will] all things but as one subsist,
Yet each its nature separate preserve ?


To which interrogations the Goddese thus replies :
Adept wavra wept apary AaBe ry Hen perow


OF ORPHEUS. 719


The world’s wide bounds, all-flourishing, are thine,
Thyself of all the source and end divine.


Oupavoy, ev de re -yarav amecpror, ev Se Sadaccay,
Ey de re reipea wavra, ra 7’ ovpavos erepaywro.


i. e, All things receive enclos’d on ev’ry side,
In Ether’s wide, ineffable embrace ;
Then in the midst of Ether place the Heav’n,
In which let Earth of infinite extent,
The Sea, and Stars the crown of Heav’n be fixt.


We also learn from Psellus, that according to the Chal-
deans there are two solar worlds; one which is subservient
to the etherial profundity ; the other zonaic, being one of
the seven spheres. (See his concise Exposition of Chaldaic
Dogmas.) And Proclus, in Tim. p. 264, informs us, “ that
according to the most mystic assertions, the wholeness of
the Sun is in the supermundane order. For there a solar
world and a total light subsist, as the Oracles of the Chal-
deans affirm.” Oc ye muorikwrarot Twy oywr, Kat Thy
odornTa avrov (solis) Tyy ev Tots vIEepKocmis mapadedw-
Kaow* exet yap o nAtaKos KoopLoc, kat TO OAOY hws, ws at TE
Kaddacwv gnuot Neyouot. These etherial worlds pertain to
the supermundane order of Gods, in which the wholeness of
the Sun subsists. But by the wholeness (odorns) Proclus
means the sphere in which the visible orb of the Sun is
fixed, and which is called a wholeness, because it has a
perpetual subsistence, and comprehends in itself all the
multitude of which it is the cause. Conformably to this,
the Emperor Julian (in Orat. v. p. 334) says: ‘* The orb of
the Sun revolves in the starless, much above the inerratic
sphere. Hence he is not the middle of the planets, but of
the three worlds [i. e. of the three etherial worlds], accord-
ing to the telestic hypothesis.” O dicxos ert rys avacrpov
peperat, wodu trys amdavous vyndorepas, Kat ovrw Se Twy
fev wravwpevwv ovK efec TO pecov, Tpluw be TwY Koomwy
Kara ras reNeoTixas urofeces. From all this, therefore, it


80 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


’Tis thine all Nature’s music to inspire
With various-sounding, harmonizing lyre ® :


is evident why Apollo in this hymn is said to fix his roots
beyond the starry-eyed darkness; for this signifies that
Gods are inserted by him in the etherial worlds; roots
being indicative of summits (axpornres) and such, accord-
ing to the Orphic and Chaidaic theologists, are the Goda.
Hence Proclus (in MS. Comment. in Parmenid. lib. vi.)
beautifully observes, “ As trees by their summits are firmly
established in the earth, and all that pertains to them is
through this earthly ; after the same manner divine natures
are by their summits rooted in the one, and each of them is a
unity and one, through an unconfused union with the one
itself.” xaSarep yap Ta devipa rats eavrew Kkopypas end-
purrar Ty yy, Kat est ynwa Ta Kar'exewas, Tov auTov TpoToY
Kat Ta Seca, Tats eaurTwy axpornow eveppi{wrar TW Ev, Kat
exagov aurwy evas est Kat ev, dia THY pos TO Ev aovyxXuUTOV
EvWT.


65 Gesner well observes, in his notes on this hymn, that
the comparison and conjunction of the musical and astro-
nomical elements are most ancient; being derived from
Orpheus and Pythagoras to Plato. The lyre of Apollo,
however, is not only indicative of the harmony of the
universe, of which this divinity is the source, but particu-
larly adumbrates according to the Orphic and Pythagoric
doctrine, the celestial harmony, or the melody caused by the
revolutions of the celestial spheres. This harmony of the
spheres is admirably unfolded by Simplicius in his Com-
mentary on the second book of Aristotle’s Treatise on the
Heavens, as follows: “The Pythagoreans said, that an
harmonic sound is produced from the motion of the celestial
bodies ; and they scientifically collected this from the analogy
of their intervals ; since not only the ratios of the intervals
of the sun and moon, and Venus and Mercury, but also
of the other stars, were discovered by them.” Simplicius


OF ORPHEUS. 81


Now the last string thou tun’st to sweet accord %,
Divinely warbling, now the highest chord ;


adds, ‘ Perhaps the objection of Aristotle to this assertion
of the Pythagoreans may be solved as follows, according to
the philosophy of those men: all things are not commen-
surate with each other, nor is every thing sensible commen-
surate to every thing, even in the sublunary region. This
is evident from dogs, who scent animals at a great distance,
and which are not smelt by men. How much more, there-


6 The following quotations from Nicomachus (Harm. lib.
i, p. 6) illustrates the meaning of the. hypate and nete,'or
the highest and lowest string, in the lyre of Apollo: “From
the motion of Saturn (says he) the most remote of the
planets, the appellation of the gravest sound, hypate, is
derived ; but from the lunar motion, which is the lowest of
all, the most acute sound is called nete, or the lowest.”
But Gesner observes, that a more ancient, and as it were
archetypal, appellation is derived from the ancient triangu-
lar lyre, a copy of which was found among the pictures
lately dug out of the ruins of Herculaneum ; in which the
highest chord next to the chin of the musician is the longest,
and consequently (says he) the sound is the most grave.
Gesner proceeds in observing, that three seasons of the
year are so compared together in a musical ratio, that
hypate signifies the Winter, nete the Summer, and the
Dorian measure represents the intermediate seasons, Spring
and Autumn. Now the reason why the Dorian melody is
assigned to the Spring, is because that measure wholly con-
sists in temperament and moderation, as we learn from
Plutarch in his Treatise De Musica. Hence it is with
great propriety attributed to the Spring, considered as
placed between Winter and Summer; and gratefully tem-
pering the fervent heat of the one, and the intense cold of
the other.


F


82 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Th’ immortal golden lyre, now touch’d by thee,
Responsive yields a Dorian melody.


fore, in things which are separated by so great an interval
as those which are incorruptible from the corruptible, and
celestial from terrestrial natures, is it true to say that the
sound of divine bodies is not audible by terrestrial ears ?
But if any one, like Pythagoras, who is reported to have
heard this harmony, should have his terrestrial body exempt
from him, and his luminous and celestial vehicle, and the
senses which it contains, purified, either through a good
allotment, or through probity of life, or through a perfection
arising from sacred operations, such a one will perceive
things invisible to others, and will hear things inaudible
by others. With respect to divine and immaterial bodies,
however, if any sound is produced by them, it is neither
percussive nor destructive, but it excites the powers and
energies of sublunary sounds, and perfects the sense which
is coordinate with them. It has also a certain analogy
to the sound which concurs with the motion of terrestrial
bodies. But the sound which is with us, in consequence of
the sonorific nature of the air, is a certain energy of the
motion of their impassive sound. If then, air is not passive
there, it is evident that neither will the sound which is
there be passive. Pythagoras, however, seems to have
said that he heard the celestial harmony, as understanding
the harmonic proportions in numbers, of the heavenly bodies,
and that which is audible in them. Some one, however,
may very properly doubt why the stars are seen by our
visive sense, but the sound of them is not heard by our ears !
To this we reply, that neither do we see the stars them-
selves ; for we do not see their magnitudes, or their figures,
or their surpassing beauty. Neither do we see the motion
through which the sound is produced; but we see, as it
were, such an illumination of them as that of the light of the
sun about the earth, the sun himself not being seen by us.
Perhaps too, neither will it be wonderful, that the visive


OF ORPHEUS. 83


All Nature’s tribes to thee their diff’rence owe,
And changing seasons from thy music flow :
Hence, mix’d by thee in equal parts, advance
Summer and Winter in alternate dance ;

This claims the highest, that the lowest string,
The Dorian measure tunes the lovely spring :
Hence by mankind Pan royal, two-horn’d nam’‘d,
Shrill winds emitting thro’ the syrinx fam’d ® ;


sense, as being more immaterial, subsisting rather according
to energy than according to passion, and very much trans-
cending the other senses, should be thought worthy to re-
ceive the splendour and illumination of the celestial bodies,
but that the other senses should not be adapted for this
purpose.”’

6 According to the Pythagoric and Platonic theology,
which is perfectly conformable to that of Orpheus, Apollo
is in the supermundane what Jupiter is in the intellectual
order. For as the former illuminates mundane natures
with supermundane light, so the latter illuminates the
supermundane order with intellectual light. Indeed, there
is such a wonderful agreement between these two divinities,
that the Cyprian priests, as we are informed by the Empe-
ror Julian, in his most excellent Oration to the Sovereign
Sun, raised common altars to Jupiter and the Sun. Hence
we cannot wonder that the same thing is here asserted of
Apollo which Orpheus elsewhere asserts of Jupiter. For
Johan. Diaco. in Hesiod. Theog. quotes the following lines
from Orpheus :


Zeus de re wavtwy est Seos, Wavrwy TE Kepagsns,
IIveuvpact ovptfwv, povaior Te aepopuxrors.


ie. “Jupiter is the God of all, and the mingler of all
things, emitting shrill sounds from winds and air-mingled
voices.”


84 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Since to thy care the figur’d seal’s consign’d ®,
Which stamps the world with forms of ev’ry kind.
Hear me, blest pow’r, and in these rites rejoice,
And save thy mystics nth a supplant voice.


XXXV.
TO LATONA ®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MYRRH.


Dark-ve’p Latona, much invoked queen,
Twin-bearing Goddess, of a noble mien ;
Ceantis great, a mighty mind is thine,
Offspring prolific, blest, of Jove divine :
Pheebus proceeds from thee, the God of light,
And Dian fair, whom winged darts delight ;


® In the preceding note we have mentioned the pro-
found union which subsists between Apollo and Jupiter.
As Jupiter, therefore, considered as the Demiurgus, com-
prebends in himself the archetypal ideas of all sensible
forms, and what these forms are intellectually in the Demi-
urgus they are according to a supermundane characteristic
in Apollo ; hence the latter divinity, as well as the former,
may be said to possess the figured seal, of which every
visible species is nothing more than an impression.


69 See the additional notes.


OF ORPHEUS. 85


She in Ortygia’s honour'd regions born,

In Delos he, which lofty mounts adorn.
Hear me, O queen, and fav'rably attend,
And to this Telete divine afford a pleasing end.


XXXVI.
TO DIANA.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


Hear me, Jove’s daughter, celebrated queen,
Bacchian and Titan, of a noble mien :

In darts rejoicing, and on all to shine,
Torch-bearing Goddess, Dictynna divine.

O’er births presiding ”, and thyself a maid,
To labour pangs imparting ready aid :
Dissolver of the zone, and wrinkled care,
Fierce huntress, glorying in the silvan war :
Swift in the course, in dreadful arrows skill’d,
Wand ring by night, rejoicing in the field :


70 In the original Aoxyera; and Proclus, in Plat. Theol.
p-. 403, informs us that this epithet is given by theologists
to Diana, because she is the inspective guardian of natural
progression and generation. See more concerning this
divinity in the additional notes.


86 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Of manly form, erect, of bounteous mind,
Illustrious demon, nurse of humankind :
Immortal, earthly, bane of monsters fell,
’Tis thine, blest maid, on woody mounts to dwell :
Foe of the stag, whom woods and dogs delight,
In endless youth you flourish fair and bright.

O universal queen, august, divine,

A various form, Cydonian pow’r, is thine.

Dread guardian Goddess, with benignant mind,
Auspicious come, to mystic rites inclin’d ;

Give earth a store of beauteous fruits to bear,
Send gentle Peace, and Health with lovely hair,
And to the mountains drive Disease and Care.


OF ORPHEUS. 87


XXXVIT.
TO THE TITANS.


THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


O mieuty Titans, who from Heav’n and Earth
Derive your noble and illustrious birth,

Our fathers’ sires, in Tartarus ”! profound

Who dwell, deep merg’d beneath the solid ground:
Fountains and principles from whom began

Th’ afflicted miserable race of man 7:


71 ‘*Tartarus (says Olympiodorus in MS. in Comment, on
Phzedon.) is a Deity who is the inspective guardian of the
extremities of the world, just as Pontus [the sea] is the
guardian of the middle, and Olympus of the summits of the
universe, And these three are to be found not only in the
sensible world, but also in the demiurgic intellect, in the
supermundane, and the celestial order.” Or: o Taprapos
€OTL TAS ECXATIAS TOV KogpoU emicKoTWY, ws o Tlovros ras
pecornras, ws o Odvpuros ras axpornras’ eorw ovy Tpets
evpew ouk ev Ty atcOyTw povw Tw Se KocUYW, a\Aa KaL EY TY
Snpcoupyixy vy, Kas ev TW Koouu (lege vrepKocmup) StaKxoopy,
Kat EV TW OUpAVL,


72 The reasons why the Titans are said in this hymn to be
the fountains and principles of mankind depends on the
following arcane narration, for the sources of which I refer
the reader to my Treatise on the Eleusinian and Bacchic
Mysteries: Dionysius, or Bacchus, while he was yet a boy,
was engaged by the Titans, through the stratagems of Juno,
in a variety of sports, with which that period of life is so


88 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Who not alone in earth’s retreats abide,
But in the ocean and the air reside ;

Since ev’ry species from your nature flows,
Which, all-prolific, nothing barren knows.
Avert your rage, if from th’ infernal seats
One of your tribe should visit our retreats.


vehemently allured ; and among the rest, he was particu-
larly captivated with beholding his image in a mirror;
during his admiration of which he was miserably torn in
pieces by the Titans ; who, not content with this cruelty,
first boiled his members in water, and afterwards roasted
them by the fire. But while they were tasting his flesh
thus dressed, Jupiter, excited by the steam, and perceiving
the cruelty of the deed, hurled his thunder at the Titans ;
but committed his members to Apollo, the brother of Bacchus,
that they might be properly interred. And this being per-
formed, Dionysius (whose heart during his laceration was
snatched away by Minerva and preserved), by a new rege-
neration, again emerged, and he, being restored to his
pristine life and integrity, afterwards filled up the number
of the Gods. But in the mean time, from the exhalations
formed from the ashes of the burning bodies of the Titans
mankind were produced. The reader who is desirous of
having a complete development of this fable will find it in
my abovementioned Treatise on the Mysteries, Suffice it
to say at present, in elucidation of this Orphic hymn, that
(as Olympiodorus beautifully observes in MS. Comment. in
Pheedon.) we are composed from fragments, because through
falling into generatiun, i. e, into the sublunary region, our
life has proceeded inte the most distant and extreme divi-
sion; but from Titannic fragments, because the Titans are
the ultimate artificers of things, and the most proximate to
their fabrications, Of these Titans, Bacchus, or the mun-
dane intellect, is the monad, or proximately exempt pro-
ducing cause.


OF ORPHEDS. 89


AXXVITI.
TO THE CURETES ®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Brass-BEATING Salians, ministers of Mars,

Who wear his arms the instruments of wars ;

Whose blessed frames, heav’n, earth, and sea com-
pose,

And from whose breath all animals arose :

Who dwell in Samothracia’s sacred ground,

Defending mortals through the sea profound.

Deathless Curetes, by your pow’r alone,

The greatest mystic rites to men at first were shown.

Who shake old Ocean thund’ring to the sky,

And stubborn oaks with branches waving high.

‘Tis yours in glittering arms the earth to beat,

With lightly leaping, rapid, sounding feet ;

Then ev'ry beast the noise terrific flies,

And the loud tumult wanders thro’ the skies.

73 The first subsistence of the Curetes is in the intellectual
order, as we have before observed, in which they form a
triad characterized by purity. They are also the guards of
that order. But in the supermundane order, they are the
Corybantes, Hence they are celebrated in this hymn as the
Corybantes as well as the Curetes. As they are likewise
celebrated as Winds in this hymn, it follows that in the


sublunary region they are the divinities of such winds as
are of a purifying nature.


90 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


The dust your feet excites, with matchless force
Flies to the clouds amidst their whirling course ;
And ev'ry flower of variegated hue

Grows in the dancing motion form’d by you ;
Immortal demons, to your pow’rs consign’d,
The task to nourish and destroy mankind,
When rushing furious with loud tumult dire,
O’erwhelm’d, they perish in your dreadful ire ;
And live replenish’d with the balmy air,

The food of life, committed to your care.

When shook by you, the seas with wild uproar,
Wide-spreading, and profoundly whirling, roar.
The concave heav’ns with echo’s voice resound,
When leaves with rustling noise bestrewthe ground.
Curetes, Corybantes, ruling kings,

Whose praise the land of Samothracia sings ;
Great Jove’s assessors ; whose immortal breath
Sustains the soul, and wafts her back from death;
Aerial-form’d, who in Olympus shine

The heavenly Twins” all-lucid and divine :
Blowing, serene, from whom abundance springs,
Nurses of seasons, fruit-producing kings.


74 T have before observed that the Curetes and Corybantes
are celebrated in this hymn as one and the same, on account
of the profound union subsisting between the two. Hence
the progression of these two orders into the heavens forms
the constellation called the Twins.


OF ORPHEDS. 91


XX XIX.
TO CORYBAS%.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Tue mighty ruler of this earthly ball

For ever flowing, to these rites I call ;
Martial and blest, unseen by mortal sight,
Preventing fears, and pleas’d with gloomy night :
Hence fancy’s terrors are by thee allay’d,
All-various king, who lov’st the desert shade.
Each of thy brothers killing, blood is thine,
Twofold Curete, many-form’d, divine.

By thee transmuted, Ceres’ body pure
Became a dragon’s savage and obscure :
Avert thy anger, hear me when I pray,

And, by fix’d fate, drive fancy’s fears away.


75 Corybas is celebrated in this hymn as one of the
Curetes ; for he is called Curete. Perhaps, therefore, he is
the last monad of the Curetic triad, and the extremity of
every divine order being of a convertive nature, he is said
to have killed each of his brothers. For slaughter, when
applied to the Gods, signifies a segregation from secondary
and a conversion to primary natures. Hence Corybas
slaughters, i.e. converts his brothers to a superior order
of Gods.


92 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XL.
TO CERES.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


O UNIVERSAL mother, Ceres fam’d,

August, the source of wealth 7, and various nam’d:
Great nurse, all-bounteous, blessed and divine,
Who joy’st in peace ; to nourish corn is thine.
Goddess of seed, of fruits abundant, fair,
Harvest and threshing are thy constant care.
Lovely delightful queen, by all desir'd,

Who dwell’st in Eleusina’s holy vales retir'd.
Nurse of all mortals, whose benignant mind
First ploughing oxen to the yoke confind ;
And gave to men what nature’s wants require,
With plenteous means of bliss, which all desire.


76 The following Orphic verse, which is to be found in-
Diodorus Siculus, i, 12, perfectly accords with what is said
in this and the first line,


I'n unrnp ravruv, Anuarne wovrodoretpa, |
i. e. ‘‘ Earth, mother of all things, Ceres, source of wealth.” ; |


It must be observed that, according to the Orphic theology,
Ceres is‘ the same with Rhea, the vivific Goddess, who
is the centre of the intellectual triad. See the additional
notes.


OF ORPHEUS. 93


In verdure flourishing, in glory bright,

Assessor of great Bacchus, bearing light:
Rejoicing in the reapers’ sickles, kind,

Whose nature lucid, earthly, pure, we find.
Prolific, venerable, nurse divine,

Thy daughter loving, holy Proserpine.

A car with dragons yok’d ’tis thine to guide,
And, orgies singing, round thy throne to ride.
Only-begotten, much-producing queen,

All flowers are thine, and fruits of lovely green.
Bright Goddess, come, with summer’s rich increase
Swelling and pregnant, leading smiling Peace ;
Come with fair Concord and imperial Health,
And join with these a needful store of wealth.


94 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XLI.
TO THE CERALIAN MOTHER.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


CrRALIAN queen, of celebrated name,

From whom both men and Gods immortal came ;
Who widely wand’ring once, oppress’d with grief,
In Eleusina’s valleys found’st relief,

Discovering Proserpine thy daughter pure

In dread Avernus, dismal] and obscure ;

A sacred youth while thro’ the earth you stray,
Bacchus, attending leader of the way ;

The holy marriage of terrestrial Jove

Relating, while oppress’d with grief you rove.
Come, much invok’d, and to these rites inclin’d,
Thy mystic suppliant bless, with fav’ring mind.


OF ORPHEUS. 95


XLII.
TO MISA.


THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


I catt Thesmophorus 7, spermatic God,

Of various names, who bears the leafy rod :
Misa, ineffable, pure, sacred queen,

Twofold Iacchus 78, male and female seen.
Illustrious, whether to rejoice is thine .

In incense offer’d in the fane divine ” ;

Or if in Phrygia most thy soul delights,
Performing with thy mother sacred rites ;
Or if the land of Cyprus is thy care,

Pleas’d with the well crown’d Cytheria fair ;
Or if exulting in the fertile plains

With thy dark mother Isis, where she reigns,
With nurses pure attended, near the flood
Of sacred Egypt, thy divine abode :
Wherever resident, benevolent attend,

And in perfection these our labours end.

77 i, e. The legislator.

78 It is well known that Iacchus is a mystic appellation
of Bacchus, so that Misa is Bacchus. Misa is also said to
be both male and female, because this divinity comprehends
in himself stable power and sameness, which are of a mas-
culine characteristic, and the measures of life and prolific
powers, which are feminine peculiarities. This mixture of
the male and female in one and the same divinity is no un-


usual thing in the Orphic theology.
7 i. e. The temple of Ceres Eleusina,


96 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XLHE.
TO THE SEASONS ®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Davuauters of Jove and Themis, Seasons bright,
Justice, and blessed Peace, and lawful Right,
Vernal and grassy, vivid, holy pow’rs,

Whose balmy breath exhales in lovely flow’rs ;


8 “Sacred rumour (says Procl. in Tim..book iv. p. 247,
of my translation of that work) venerates the invisible
periods [subsisting under one first time], and which are the
causes of those that are visible; delivering the divine
names of Day and Night, and also the causes that con-
stitute, and the invocations and self manifestations of Month
and Year. Hence they are not to be surveyed superficially,
but in divine essenees, which: the laws of sacred institutions
and the oracles of Apollo order us to worship and honour,
by statues and sacrifices, as histories mform us. When
these also are reverenced, mankind are also supplied with
the benefits arising from the periods of the Seasons, and of
the other divinities in a similar manner ; but a preternatural
disposition of every thing about the earth is the consequence
of the worship of these being neglected. Plato, likewise,
in the Laws proclaims that all these are Gods, viz. the
Seasons, Years, and Months, in the same manner as the
Stars and the Sun ; and we do not introduce any thing new
by thinking it proper to direct our attention to the invisible
powers of these prior to those that are visible.”

Conformably to what Proclus here says, viz. “that a pre-
ternatural disposition of every thing about the earth is the


_,


OF ORPHEUS. 97


All-colour'd Seasons, rich increase your care,
Circling, for ever flourishing and fair :
Invested with a veil of shining dew,

A flow’ry veil delightful to the view :
Attending Proserpine, when back from night
The fates and graces lead her up to light ;
When in a band harmonious they advance,
And joyful round her form the solemn dance.


With Ceres triumphing, and Jove divine,


Propitious come, and on our incense shine ;
Give earth a store of blameless fruits to bear,
And make these novel mystics’ life your care.


consequence of the worship of these powers being neglected.”
The inhabitants of Patros, in Egypt, said to the prophet
Jeremiah, ‘‘But we will certainly do whatsoever thing
goeth out of our mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of
Heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her, as we
have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes,
in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem : for
then had we plenty of victuals and were well, and saw no evil.
But since we left off to burn incense to the Queen of
Heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings unto her, we have
wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword
and by famine.” Jeremiah, chap. 44, v. 17, 18.


98 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XLIV.
TO SEMELE.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STOBAX.


CapMEAN Goddess, universal queen,

Thee, Semele, I call, of beauteous mien ;
Deep-bosom’d, lovely flowing locks are thine,
Mother of Bacchus, joyful and djvine,

The mighty offspring, whom Jove’s thunder bright
Fore’d immature, and fright’ned into light.
Born from the deathless counsels, secret, high,
Of Jove Saturnian, regent of the sky ;

Whom Proserpine permits to view the light,
And visit mortals from the realms of night.
Constant attending on the sacred rites,

And feast triennial, which thy soul delights ;
When thy son’s wondrous birth mankind relate,
And secrets pure and holy celebrate.

Now I invoke thee, great Cadmean queen,

To bless thy mystics, lenient and serene.


OF ORPHEUS. 99


X LV.


TO DIONYSIUS BASSAREUS TRI-
ENNALIS ®,


A HYMN.


Come, blessed Dionysius, various-nam’‘d,
Bull-fac’d, begot from thunder, Bacchus fam’d.
Bassarian God, of universal might,

Whom swords and blood and sacred rage delight:
In heaven rejoicing, mad, loud-sounding God,
Furious inspirer, bearer of the rod :

By Gods rever’d, who dwell’st with humankind,
Propitious come, with much rejoicing mind.


81 So called because his rites were performed every third
year.


100 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XLVI.
TO LICKNITUS® BACCHUS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


LickniTaN Bacchus, bearer of the vine,

Thee I invoke to bless these rites divine :

Florid and gay, of Nymphs the blossom bright,
And of fair Venus, Goddess of delight.

"Tis thine mad footsteps with mad Nymphs to beat,
Dancing thro’ groves with lightly leaping feet :
From Jove’s high counsels nurst by Proserpine,
And born the dread of all the pow’rs divine.
Come, blessed God, regard thy suppliant’s voice,
Propitious come, and in these rites rejoice.


82 i.e. The Fan-bearer. Concerning Lilmitus, and the
following Bacchuses, see note 25, on the Moon.


OF ORPHEUS, 101


XLVITI.
TO BACCHUS PERICIONIUS®.
THE FUMIGATION FBOM ABOMATICS.


Baccuus Pericionius, hear my pray’r,

Who mad’st the house of Cadmus once thy care,
With matchless force his pillars twining round,
When burning thunders shook the solid ground,
In flaming, sounding torrents borne along,
Propt by thy grasp indissolubly strong.

Come, mighty Bacchus, to these rites inclin‘d,
and bless thy suppliants with rejoicing mind.


83 So called from wept, and xioms, a little pillar.


102 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


XLVIILI.
TO SABAZIUS*.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Hear me, illustrious father, demon fam’d,
Great Saturn's offspring, and Sabazius nam‘d ;
Inserting Bacchus, bearer of the vine,

And sounding God, within thy thigh divine,
That when mature, the Dionysian God

Might burst the bands of his conceal’d abode,
And come to sacred Tmolus, his delight,
Where Ippa® dwells, all beautiful and bright.


64 «Many (says Plutarch, Symp. 4, 5, p. 671) even now
call the Bacchuses Sabbi, and they utter this word when
they celebrate the orgies of the God’ [Bacchus]. ZafBous
Kat vuy ert ToXXot Tous Baxxous Kadovor, Kal TavTnV adiace
THY Pwvnv, oray opyiagover Ty Bey. “But the power of
Sabazius (says Iamblichus de Myst. sect. iii. cap. x.) appro-
priately pertains to Bacchic inspiration, the purifications of
souls, and the solutions of ancient divine anger.” See the
note on this passage in my translation of that work.


85 “Toppa (says Proclus in Tim, lib. ii. p. 124), who is the
soul of the universe, and is thus called by the theologist
[Orpheus], perhaps because her intellectual conceptions are
essentialized in the most vigorous motions, or perhaps on
account of the most rapid lation of the universe, of which
she is the cause,—placing a testaceous vessel on her head,


OF ORPHEUS. 103


Blest Phrygian God, the most august of all,
Come aid thy mystics, when on thee they call.


°


and encircling the fig leaves that bind her temples with a
dragon, receives Dionysius [or Bacchus]. For with the
most divine part of herself, she becomes the receptacle of
an intellectual essence, and receives the mundane intellect,
which proceeds into her from the thigh of Jupiter. For
there it was united with Jupiter; but proceeding from
thence, and becoming participable by her, it elevates her to
the intelligible, and to the fountain of her nature. For she
hastens to the mother of the Gods, and to mount Ida [i. e.
to the region of ideas, and an intelligible nature], from
which all the series of souls is derived. Hence, also, Ippa
is said to have received Dionysius when he was brought
forth from Jupiter.” H yey yap Irma rov ravros ovoa
yuxn, Kat ourw KekAnpLevy wapa Tw Deodroyy, Taxa wey oTt
Kat €v akualoTarais KWnoETW EVVONTELS aUTNS oVTLWYTOL,
Taxa de Kae dia THv otvrarny rov mayTos dopay ns eoTw 7
atria, Aexcov (lege ArKwov) emt tns Keparns Beuevyn, Kat
Spaxovrt avTw weptorpeyaca, To Kpadiatoy uvmodexerae Aro-
vucov’ THY yap eauTyns Seorarw, ywerat THs voEepas ovotas
vmodoxn, Kat dexerat Tov eykooptoy vow, o Se awo rou
Mnpou tov Atos mpoeow es auTnv’ nv yap Exel curnvwpevos,
Kat mpoe\Owy, Kat peOeKros auTy ‘yevouevos, ews TO voNTOP
GQUTyY avayel, Kal THY EaUTNS WHynv’ EewevyeTas yap *Wpos
THY ENTepa Twv Sewv, ka THY Idnv, ad’ ys waca Tw Puxwy
n getpa’ dvo Kat oudAd\auBavecPar xa Irma Neyerat TiKTovTt
Ty Att


104 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


X LIX.
TO IPPA.


THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


Great nurse of Bacchus, to my pray’r incline,
For holy Sabus’ secret rites are thine,

The mystic rites of Bacchus’ nightly choirs,
Compos’d of sacred, loud-resounding fires.
Hear me, terrestrial mother, mighty queen,
Whether on Ida’s holy mountain seen,

Or if to dwell in Tmolus thee delights,

With holy aspect come, and bless these rites.


OF ORPHEUS. 105


L.
TO LYSIUS LENAUS.
A HYMN.


Hear me, Jove’s son, blest Bacchus, God of wine,
Born of two mothers, honour’d and divine ;
Lysian Euion Bacchus, various-nam'd,

Of Gods the offspring, secret, holy, fam’d.
Fertile and nourishing, whose liberal care
Augments the fruit that banishes despair.
Sounding, magnanimous, Lenzan pow’r,

O various-form’d, medicinal, holy flow’r :

Mortals in thee repose from labour find,
Delightful charm, desir’d by all mankind.
Fair-hair’'d Euion, Bromian, joyful God,

Lysian, insanely raging with the leafy rod.

To these our rites, benignant pow’r, incline,
When fav’ring men, or when on Gods you shine ;
Be present to thy mystics’ supplant pray’r,
Rejoicing come, and fruits abundant bear.


106 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LI.
TO THE NYMPHS *®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Nympus, who from Ocean fam’d derive your birth,
Who dwell in liquid caverns of the earth ;

Nurses of Bacchus, secret-coursing pow’rs,
Fructiferous Goddesses, who nourish flow’rs :
Earthly, rejoicing, who in meadows dwell,

And caves and dens, whose depths extend to hell.
Holy, oblique, who swiftly soar thro’ air,
Fountains,and dews,and winding streams your care,
Seen and unseen, who joy with wand’rings wide,
And gentle course thro’ flow’ry vales to glide;


86 «‘ Nymphs (says Hermeas, in Schol. in Phedrum.) are
Goddesses who preside over regeneration, and are minis-
trant to Bacchus, the offspring of Semele. Hence they
dwell near water, i. e. they ascend into generation [or the
sublunary realms]. But this Bacchus [of whom they are
the offspring] supplies the regeneration of the whole sen-
sible world.” Nuyda Se ecow ePopor Sear rns wadryyeveruas,
uroupyo. Tov ex Dewedns Acovucov’ dio xac wapa Tw vdare
€lol, TovTEoTL TH everest ETLBEeByKkacw" ovros de o Atovycos
Tys wahvyyeverias vrapxe. wavros rou aicOyrov. He adds,
“that some of them excite the irrational nature, others
nature herself, and others preside over bodies.”


OF ORPHEUS. 107


With Pan exulting on the mountains’ height,

Inspir’d, and stridulous, whom woods delight :

Nymphs od’rous, rob’d in white, whose streams
exhale

The breeze refreshing, and the balmy gale ;

With goats and pastures pleas’d, and beasts of prey,

Nurses of fruits, unconscious of decay.

In cold rejoicing, and to cattle kind,

Sportive, thro’ ocean wand’ring unconfin’d.

O Nysian nymphs, insane, whom oaks delight,

Lovers of spring, Peonian virgins bright ;

With Bacchus and with Ceres hear my pray’r,

And to mankind abundant favour bear ;

Propitious listen to your suppliant’s voice,

Come, and benignant in these rites rejoice ;

Give plenteous seasons and sufficient wealth,

And pour in lasting streams, continued health.


108 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LII.
TO TRIETERICUS *.
THE FUMIGATION FBOM AROMATICS.


Baccuus phrenetic ®, much nam‘d, blest, divine,
Bull-horn’d, Lenean, bearer of the vine ;

From fire descended, raging, Nysian king,
From whom initial ceremonies spring.


8” According to the fragment preserved by Ficinus, which
we have before cited, Trietericus Bacchus is the gnostic
power, or intellect of the Sun. Hence as the Sun is to the
sensible world what Protogonus, or Phanes, is to the in-
tellectual orders ; for the latter illuminates those orders
with intelligible, and the former the sensible world with
supermundane light ; in consequence of this analogy, the
reason is obvious why Trietericus is called in this hymn
Ericapeus, i. e. Protogonus ; and also why he is said to be
both the father and the offspring of Gods. For Protogonus
is intelligible intellect (vous voyros), and is the father of the
Gods ; and Trietericus, or the solar intellect, subsists causally
in Protogonus, and proceeds from him and the intellectual
orders of Gods. From his causal subsistence, therefore, in
Protogonus, he is the father of the Gods; but as proceeding
from them, he is their offspring.


88 This word, and others of a similar kind, which lite-
rally signify insanity, are to be considered according to
their recondite meaning, as indicative of a divinely inspired
energy.


\


OF ORPHEUS. 109


Liknitan Bacchus, pure and fiery bright,

Prudent, crown-bearer, wand ring in the night ;

Nurst in Mount Mero, all-mysterious pow’r,

Triple, ineffable, Jove’s secret flow’r :

Ericapeeus, first-begotten nam‘d,

Of Gods the father and the offspring fam’d.

Bearing a sceptre, leader of the choir,

Whose dancing feet phrenetic furies fire,

When the triennial band thou dost inspire,

Omadian, captor, of a fiery light,

Born of two mothers, Amphietus bright ;

Love, mountain-wand’ring ®, cloth’d with skins of
deer,

Apollo golden-ray’d ®, whom all revere.


89 The reason why Trietericus Bacchus is called ‘‘ Love”
in this hymn is from the profound union subsisting between
Phanes, or Protogonus, Jupiter, and Bacchus. For the
first subsistence of Love, according to the Orphic theology,
is in Phanes; and Phanes is intelligible mntellect. But the
intelligible order to which Phanes belongs being absorbed
in the superessential, contains in itself intellect causally, and


* As according to the Orphic theology Trietericus is the
intellect of the Sum, this divinity is with great propriety
celebrated in this hymn as Apollo golden-ray’d (xa:av xpu-
ceyxys). But Hermann, not knowing who Trietericus is in
the Orphic theology, substitutes Supreyyns for xpuceyxys ;
conceiving that Trietericus is the same with Bacchus, or
the mundane intellect. His words are, ‘‘ Vocabulum vaca»
postulat, ut nomen addatur, quo ab Apolline distinguatur
Bacchus. Itaque pro xpuceyxns reposui Supgeyxns.” Vid.
Orphic, Hermann. p. 817.


110 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Great annual God of grapes, with ivy crown’'d,
Bassarian, lovely, virginlike, renown’d.

Come, blessed pon'r, regard thy mystics’ voice,
Propitious come, and in these rites rejoice.


consequently is superior to essential intellect and intellec-
tual vision. Hence Love, according to his first subsistence,
is said to be blind, as having a superintellectual energy.
This being premised, it is no longer wonderful that Triete-
ricus should be called Love. “For the theologist [Or-
pheus], says Proclus, in Tim. lib. ii. p. 102, long before us,
celebrates the demiurgic cause in Phanes. or there, as he
says, the great Bromius, or all-seeing Juptter, was, and amtece-
dently existed ; in order that he might have as it were the
fountains of the twofold fabrication of things. He also
celebrates the paradigmatic cause [i. e, Phanes] in Jupiter.
For again, he likewise is, as he says, Metis the jirst genera-
tor, and much pleasing Love. He is also continually deno-
minated by him Dionysius, and Phanes, and Ericapzus.
All the causes, therefore, participate of, and are in each
other. mada yap o Seodoyos ev ye TY harynre Tnv Snucoupy-
KNV aiTLay avuuynocev” exes yap nV TE Kat Wponv wowep edn
Kat auros, Bpojuos Te pweyas Kat fevs 0 Wavomrns’ Kat ev TY
du Tnv wapadevryparixny’ unTis yap au Kat ouTIs EoTiW ws


oneot.


Kat Myris rpwros -yeverwp, xat Hpws modvreprns’


auros Te 0 Atovuoos Kar payns Kat npiKeTratos, guvEXWws ovou“a-
Serar’ Tavra apa mereiAnX nv adAnAwWY Ta aiTia, Kat Ev aAADAOLS
€OTU.


OF ORPHEUS. 111


LIIL
TO AMPHIETUS BACCHUS.


THE FUMIGATION FROM EVERY AROMATIC
EXCEPT FRANKINCENSE.


TrerrestriaL Dionysius, hear my pray’r,

Rise vigilant with Nymphs of lovely hair:
Great Amphietus Bacchus, annual God,

Who laid asleep in Proserpine’s abode,

Her sacred seat, didst lull to drowsy rest
The rites triennial and the sacred feast;
Which rous’d again by thee, in graceful ring,
Thy nurses round thee mystic anthems sing ;
When briskly dancing with rejoicing pow’rs,
Thou mov’st in concert with the circling hours.
Come blessed, fruitful, horned, and divine,
And on this sacred Telete propitious shine ;
Accept the pious incense and the pray’r,
And make prolific holy fruits thy care.


112 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LIV.


TO SILENUS, SATYRUS,
AND THE PRIESTESSES OF BACCHUS.


THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


Great nurse of Bacchus, to my pray’r incline,
Silenus, honour'd by the pow’rs divine ;

And by mankind at the triennial feast
Illustrious demon, reverenc’d as the best :
Holy, august, the source of lawful rites,
Phrenetic pow'r, whom vigilance delights ;
Surrounded by thy nurses young and fair,
Naiads and Bacchic Nymphs who ivy bear,
With all thy Satyrs on our incense shine,
Demons wild-form’d, and bless the rites divine.
Come, rouse to sacred joy thy pupil king ®!,
And Brumal Nymphs with rites Lenean bring ;
Our orgies shining thro’ the night inspire,

And bless, triumphant pow’r, the sacred choir.


91 Silenus is so called because he was the foster father
or nurse of Bacchus.


OF ORPHEUS. 113


LV.
TO VENUS.


A HYMN.


Heav Ny, illustrious, laughter-loving queen,
Sea-born, night-loving, of an awful mien ;
Crafty, from whom necessity first came,
Producing, nightly, all-connecting dame.

Tis thine the world with harmony to join %,
For all things spring from thee, O pow’r divine.
The triple Fates are ruled by thy decree,
And all productions yield alike to thee:
Whate’er the heav’ns, encircling all, contain,
Earth fruit-producing, and the stormy main,
Thy sway confesses, and obeys thy nod,
Awful attendant of the Brumal God.

Goddess of marriage, charming to the sight,
Mother of Loves, whom banquetings delight ;
Source of persuasion, secret, fav’ring queen,
Illustrious born, apparent and unseen ;


* Venus, according to her first subsistence, ranks among
the supermundane divinities. But she is the cause of all
the harmony and analogy in the universe, and of the union
of form with matter, connecting and comprehending the
powers of all the mundane elements. See the additional
notes.


H


114 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Spousal, Lupercal, and to men inclin’d,
Prolific, most-desir'd, life-giving, kind.

Great sceptre-bearer of the Gods, ’tis thine
Mortals in necessary bands to join ;

And ev'ry tribe of savage monsters dire

In magic chains to bind thro’ mad desire.
Come, Cyprus-born, and to my pray’r incline,
Whether exalted in the heav’ns you shine,

Or pleas’d in od’rous Syria to preside,

Or o'er th’ Egyptian plains thy car to guide,
Fashion’d of gold ; and near its sacred flood,
Fertile and fam’d, to fix thy blest abode ;

Or if rejoicing in the azure shores,

Near where the sea with foaming billows roars,
The circling choirs of mortals thy delight,

Or beauteous Nymphs with eyes cerulean bright,
Pleas’d by the sandy banks renown’d of old,
To drive thy rapid two-yok’d car of gold;

Or if in Cyprus thy fam’d mother fair,

Where nymphs unmarried praise thee ev’ry year,
The loveliest nymphs, who in the chorus join,
Adonis pure to sing, and thee divine.

Come, all-attractive, to my pray’r inclin’d,

For thee I call, with holy, reverent mind.


OF ORPHEUS. 115


LVI.
TO ADONIS.


THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Mucu nam’d, and best of demons, hear my pray’r,
The desert loving, deck’d with tender hair ;
Joy to diffuse, by all desir’d, is thine,
Much form’d, Eubulus, aliment divine.
Female and male, all-charming to the sight,
Adonis, ever flourishing and bright ;
At stated periods doom’d to set and rise
With splendid lamp, the glory of the skies.®
Two horn’d and lovely, reverenc’d with tears,
Of splendid form, adorn’d with copious hairs.
Rejoicing in the chase, all-graceful pow’r,
Sweet plant of Venus, Love's delightful flow’r :
Descended from the secret bed divine
Of Pluto’s queen, the fair-hair'd Proserpine.
’Tis thine to sink in Tartarus profound,
And shine again thro’ heav’ns illustrious round ;
Come, timely pow’r, with providential care,
And to thy mystics earth's productions bear. 9

83 Proclus, in his very elegant hymn to the Sun, cele-
brates him as frequently called Adonis; and this perfectly
agrees with what is said in this and the preceding verse,


and with many other parts of the hymn.
% < Adonis (says Hermeas, in his Scholia on the Phsedrus


116 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LVIL.
TO THE TERRESTRIAL HERMES.
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


Hermes, I call, whom Fate decrees to dwell

Near to Cocytos, the fam’d stream of hell,

And in Necessity’s dread path, whose bourn

To none that reach it e’er permits return.

O Bacchic Hermes, progeny divine

Of Dionysius, parent of the vine,

And of celestial Venus, Paphian queen,
Dark-eyelash’d Goddess, of a lovely mien :

Who constant wand’rest thro’ the sacred seats
Where Hell’s dread empress, Proserpine, retreats ;
To wretched souls the leader of the way,

When Fate decrees, to regions void of day.

Thine is the wand which causes sleep to fly,

Or lulls to slumb’rous rest the weary eye ;

For Proserpine, thro’ Tart’rus dark and wide,
Gave thee for ever flowing souls to guide.

Come, blessed pow’r, the sacrifice attend,

And grant thy mystics’ works a happy end.

of Plato) presides over every thing that grows and perishes


in the earth.” ereidn ruv ev yy pvoperwy Kat aroBiwoKome-
yuw o Seoworns Adwms epeoryce. p, 202.


aa. ape an an


OF ORPHEUS. 117


LVIILI.
TO LOVE®.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS,


I cai, great Love, the source of sweet delight,
Holy and pure, and charming to the sight ;
Darting, and wing’d, impetuous fierce desire,
With Gods and mortals playing, wand’ring fire :


% The following development of the nature of the Divinity
Love is extracted from the admirable Commentary of Pro-
clus on the First Alcibiades of Plato, as illustrative of the
Orphic dogmas respecting this God. ‘Love is neither to
be placed in the first nor among the last of beings. Not in
the first, because the object of Love is superior to Love ;
nor yet among the last, because the lover participates of
Love. It is requisite, therefore, that Love should be estab-
lished between the object of love and the lover, and that it
should be posterior to the beautiful, but prior to every
nature endued with love. Where then does it first subsist ?
How does it extend itself through the universe, and with
what monads does it leap forth ?

‘‘There are three hypostases among the intelligible and
occult Gods; and the first, indeed, ig characterized by the
good, understanding the good itself, and residing in that
place where, according to the [Chaldean] Oracle, the pater-
nal monad abides ; but the second is characterized by wis-
dom, where the first intelligence flourishes; and the third
by the beautiful, where, as Timeus says, the most beautiful
of intelligibles abides. But there are three monads according


118 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Agile and twofold, keeper of the keys
Of heav’n and earth, the air, and spreading seas ;


to these intelligible causes, subsisting uniformly according
to cause in intelligibles, but first unfolding themselves into
light in the ineffable order of the Gods, [i. e. in the summit
of that order which is called intelligible, and at the same
time intellectual,] I mean faith, truth, andlove. And faith,
indeed, establishes all things in good; but truth unfolds
all the knowledge in beings; and lastly, Jove converts all
things, and congregates them into the nature of the beauti-
ful. This triad thence proceeds through all the orders of
the Gods, and imparts to all things by its light a union with
the intelligible itself. It also unfolds itself differently in
different orders, every where combining its powers with the
peculiarities of the Gods. And among some it subsists
ineffably, incomprehensibly, and with transcendent union ;
but among others, as the cause of connecting and binding ;
and among others, as endued with a perfective and forming
power. Here again, it subsists intellectually and pater-
nally ; there, in a manner entirely motive, vivific, and effec-
tive: here, as governing and assimilating ; there, in a libe-
rated and undefiled manner ; and elsewhere, according to a
multiplied and divided mode, Love, therefore, supernally
descends from intelligibles to mundane concerns, calling all
things upwards to divine beauty. ‘Truth, also, proceeds
through all things, illuminating all things with knowledge.
And lastly, faith proceeds through the universe, establish-
ing all things with transcendent union in good. Hence the
[Chaldean] Oracles assert, ‘that all things are governed by
and abide in these.’ And, on this account, they order The-
urgists to conjoin themselves to divinity through this triad.
Intelligibles themselves, indeed, do not require the amatory
medium, on account of their ineffable union. But where
' there is a union and separation of beings, there also Love
abides. For it is the binder and conciliator of natures pos-
terior and prior to itself; but the converter of subsequent to


OF ORPHEUS. 119


Of all that Ceres’ fertile realms contains,
By which th’ all parent Goddess life sustains,


prior, and the elevating and perfecting cause of imperfect
natures.

“The [Chaldean] Oracles, therefore, speak of Love as
binding, and residing in all things; and hence, if it con-
nects all things, it also copulates us with the governments
of demons, But Diotima calls Love a great demon, be-
cause it every where fills up the medium between desiring
and desirable natures. And, indeed, that which is the
object of Love vindicates to itself the first order; but that
which loves is in the third order from the beloved object.
Lastly, Love usurps a middle situation between each, con-
gregating and collecting tegether that which desires and
that which is desired, and filling subordinate from superior
natures, But among the intelligible and occult Gods, it
unites intelligible intellect to the first and secret beauty, by
a certain life better than intelligence. Hence [Orpheus]
the theologist of the Greeks calls this Love blind; for he
says of intelligible intellect,


Tlotpawwy rpardédecow avonparoy wKuy epwra.


i, e. In his breast feeding eyeless rapid Love.


But in natures posterior to intelligibles, it imparts by illu
mination an indissoluble bond to all things perfected by
itself: for a bond is a certain union, but accompanied by
much separation. On this account the [Chaldean] Oracles
are accustomed to call the fire of this Love a copulator: for
proceeding from intelligible intellect, it binds all following
natures with each other, and with itself. Hence it conjoins
all the Gods with intelligible beauty, and demons with Gods;
but it conjoins us with both Gods and demons. In the Gods,
indeed, it has a primary subsistence ; in demons a second-
ary one; and in partial souls a subsistence through a cer-
tain third procession from principles, Again, in the Gods


120 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Or dismal Tartarus is doom’d to keep,
Widely extended, or the sounding deep ;
For thee all Nature’s various realms obey,
Who rul’st alone, with universal sway.
Come, blessed pow’r, regard these mysitc fires,
And far avert unlawful mad desires.


it subsists above essence : for every genus of Gods is super-
essential. But in demons it subsists according to essence :
and in souls according to illumination. And this triple
order appears similar to the triple power of intellect. For
one intellect subsists as imparticipable, being exempt from
all partial genera; but another as participated, of which
also the souls of the Gods participate as of a better nature ;
and another is from this ingenerated in souls, and which is,
indeed, their perfection.” See more concerning this Divi-
nity in the notes on the speech of Diotima in the Banquet
of Plato. (Vol. iv. of my Plato.)


OF ORPHEUS. 121


LIX.
TO THE FATES.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Davuauters of darkling Night, much nam’d, draw
near,

Infinite Fates, and listen to my pray’r;

Who in the heavenly lake % (where waters white

Burst from a fountain hid in depths of night,

And thro’ a dark and stony cavern glide,

A cave profound, invisible) abide ;


96 Gesner confesses he is ignorant what the poet means
by the Aux ovpana, or heavenly lake; as likewise of the
dark cavern in which Orpheus places the Fates. At first
sight, indeed, the whole seems impenetrably obscure ; but
on comparing this hymn with the sixty-ninth, which is to
the Furies, we shall find that the poet expressly calls them
the Fates ; and places them in an obscure cavern by the
holy water of Styx. And from hence it appears, that the
heavenly lake is the same with the Stygian pool; which is
called heavenly, perhaps because the Gods swear by it.
But it is not wonderful that the water is called white ;
since Hesiod, in Theog. v. 791, speaks of the Stygian waters
as falling into the sea with stlvery whirls. And what
strengthens the illustration still more, Fulgentius asserts
that the Fates dwell with Pluto.


nei el el le Ml -


122 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


From whence, wide coursing round the boundless
earth,

Your pow’r extends to those of mortal birth ;

To men with hope elated, trifling, gay,

A race presumptuous, born but to decay.

To these acceding, in a purple veil

To sense impervious, you yourselves conceal,

When in the plain of Fate you joyful ride

In one great car, with Glory for your guide;

Till all-complete your heav’n appointed round,

At Justice, Hope, and Care’s concluding bound,

The terms absolv’d, prescrib’d by ancient law,

Of pow’r immense, and just without a flaw.

For Fate alone with vision unconfin’d

Surveys the conduct of the mortal kind.

Fate is Jove’s perfect and eternal eye,

For Jove and Fate our ev ry deed descry.

Come, gentle pow’rs, well born, benignant, fam’d,

Atropos, Lachesis, and Clotho nam’d ;

Unchang’d, aerial, wand’ring in the night,

Untam’'d, invisible to mortal sight ;

Fates all-producing, all-destroying, hear,

Regard the incense and the holy pray’r ;

Propitious listen to these rites inclin’d,

And far avert distress, with placid mind.


ao ee ee


OF ORPHEUS. 123


LX.
TO THE GRACES”,
THE FUMIGATION FROM STORAX.


Hear me, illustrious Graces, mighty nam’d,
From Jove descended, and Eunomia fam’d,
Thalia and Aglaia fair and bright,

And blest Euphrosyne, whom joys delight :
Mothers of mirth; all lovely to the view,
Pleasure abundant, pure, belongs to you :
Various, for ever flourishing and fair,

Desir’d by mortals, much invok’d in pray’r ;
Circling, dark-ey’d, delightful to mankind,
Come, and your mystics’ bless nth bounteous mind.


% In the same manner as Bacchus subsists in Jupiter,
and Esculapius in Apollo, so the Graces subsist in Venus,
as we are informed by the philosopher Sallust, in his golden
Treatise on the Gods and the World.


124 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXL
TO NEMESIS.
A HYMN.


Ture, Nemesis, I call, almighty queen,

By whom the deeds of mortal life are seen :
Eternal, much rever'd, of boundless sight,
Alone rejoicing in the just and right :
Changing the counsels of the human breast
For ever various, rolling without rest.

To evry mortal is thy influence known,

And men beneath thy righteous bondage groan ;
For ev'ry thought within the mind conceal’d
Is to thy sight perspicuously reveal’d.

The soul unwilling reason to obey,

By lawless passion rul’d, thine eyes survey.

All to see, hear, and rule, O pow’r divine,
Whose nature equity contains, is thine.

Come, blessed, holy Goddess, hear my pray’r,
And make thy mystics’ life thy constant care :
Give aid benignant in the needful hour,

And strength abundant to the reas’ning pow’r ;
And far avert the dire, unfriendly race

Of counsels impious, arrogant, and base.


co al


OF ORPHEUS. 125


LXIL
TO JUSTICE.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE


Tue piercing eye of Justice bright I sing,
Plac’d by the sacred throne of Jove the king,
Perceiving thence, with vision unconfin’d,
The life and conduct of the human kind %,
To thee revenge and punishment belong,
Chastising ev’ry deed unjust and wrong.
Whose pow’r alone dissimilars can join,

And from th’ equality of truth combine :
For all the ill persuasion can inspire,

When urging bad designs with counsel dire,
’Tis thine alone to punish ; with the race
Of lawless passions, and incentives base ;
For thou art ever to the good inclin’d,

And hostile to the men of evil mind.

Come, all-propitious, and thy suppliant hear,
Till fates’ predestin’d fatal hour draws near.


% The first four lines of this hymn are, as I have observed
in the Introduction, cited by Demosthenes in his first Oration
against Aristogiton.


126 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXIILI.
TO EQUITY.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


O siEssep Equity, mankind’s delight,

Th’ eternal friend of conduct just and right :
Abundant, venerable, honour’d maid,

To judgments pure dispensing constant aid,
And conscience stable, and an upright mind ;
For men unjust by thee are undermin’d,
Whose souls perverse thy bondage ne’er desire,
But more untam’d decline thy scourges dire.
Harmonious, friendly pow’r, averse to strife,
In peace rejoicing, and a stable life :

Lovely, convivial, of a gentle mind,

Hating excess, to equal deeds inclind :
Wisdom and virtue, of whate’er degree,
Receive their proper bound alone in thee.
Hear, Goddess Equity, the deeds destroy

Of evil men, which human life annoy ;

That all may yield to thee of mortal birth,
Whether supported by the fruits of earth,

Or in her kindly fertile bosom found,

Or in the realms of marine Jove profound.


OF ORPHEUS. 127


LXIV.
TO LAW.
A HYMN.


Tue holy king of Gods and men I call,
Celestial Law, the righteous seal of all:

The seal which stamps whate’er the earth contains,
And all conceal’d within the liquid plains:
Stable, and starry, of harmonious frame,
Preserving laws eternally the same.

Thy all-composing pow’r in heav'n appears,
Connects its frame, and props the starry spheres ;
And unjust Envy shakes with dreadful sound,
Toss’d by thy arm in giddy whirls around.
*Tis thine the life of mortals to defend,

And crown existence with a blessed end ;

For thy command alone, of all that lives,
Order and rule to ev'ry dwelling gives.

Ever observant of the upright mind,

And of just actions the companion kind.

Foe to the lawless, with avenging ire,

Their steps involving in destruction dire.
Come, blest, abundant pow’r, whom all revere,
By all desir’d, with fav’ring mind draw near ;
Give me thro’ life on thee to fix my sight,
And ne’er forsake the equal paths of right.


128 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXV.
TO MARS ®,
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


MaGNANIMovs, unconquer’d, boist’rous Mars,

In darts rejoicing, and in bloody wars ;

Fierce and untam’d, whose mighty pow’r can make

The strongest walls from their foundations shake :

Mortal-destroying king, defil’d with gore,

Pleas’d with war’s dreadful and tumultuous roar.

Thee human blood }, and swords, and spears de-
light,

And the dire ruin of mad savage fight.


9 ‘¢ Mars, as we are informed by Proclus, in Plat.
Repub. p. 388, is the source of division and motion, sepa-
rating the contrarieties of the universe, which he also per-
petually excites, and immutably preserves in order that the
world may be perfect and filled with forms of every kind.
Hence, also, he presides over war. But he requires the
assistance of Venus, that he may insert order and harmony
into things contrary and discordant.


10 “The slaughter which is ascribed to Murs (says Her-
mias, in Plat. Phedr.) signifies a divulsion from matter
through rapidly turning from it, and no longer energizing
physically, but intellectually. For slaughter, when applied
to the Gods, may be said to be an apostacy from secondary
natures, just as slaughter in this terrestrial region signifies
& privation of the present life.”


OF ORPHEUS. 129


Stay furious contests, and avenging strife,
Whose works with woe embitter human life ;
To lovely Venus and to Bacchus yield,

For arms exchange the labours of the field ;
Encourage peace, to gentle works inclin’d,
And give abundance, with benignant mind.


LXVL
TO VULCAN ™,


THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE
AND MANNA.


Strong, mighty Vulcan, bearing splendid light,
Unweary’'d fire, with flaming torrents bright :
Strong-handed, deathless, and of art divine,
Pure element, a portion of the world is thine :
All-taming artist, all-diffusive pow’r,

Tis thine, supreme, all substance to devour :


101 Vulcan is that divine power which presides over the
spermatic and physical productive powers which the uni-
verse contains ; for whatever Nature accomplishes by verg-
ing to bodies, that Vulcan effects in a divine and exempt
manner, by moving Nature, and using her as an instrument
in his own proper fabrication. For natural heat has a Vul-
canian characteristic, and was produced by Vulcan for the
purpose of fashioning a corporeal nature. Vulcan, there-
fore, is that power which perpetually presides over the


I


130 THIN MYSTICAL HYMNS


+, and Stars, light pure
- narts to men appear.
ities, tribes belong,
ach and strong.
‘neline,
sine
frame,
ve.


and clear,
Ether, Sun, Moo


For these thy luci
To thee all dwellings,
Diffus’'d thro’ mortal bodies,
Hear, blessed pow’r, to holy rites 1
And all propitious on the incense sh{C
Suppress the rage of fire’s unweary’d
And still preserve our nature’s vital flan\


LXVII.
TO ESCULAPIUS ™.


THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


Great Esculapius, skill’d to heal mankind,
All-ruling Pean, and physician kind ;
Whose arts medic’nal can alone assuage
Diseases dire, and stop their dreadful rage.


fluctuating nature of bodies; and hence, says Olympio-
dorus, he operates with bellows, (ev gvaats) which occultly
signifies his operating in natures (avre tov ev rats ducect),
This deity, also, as well as Mars, as Proclus observes, in
Plat. Repub. p. 388, requires the assistance of Venus, in
order that he may invest sensible effects with beauty, and
thus cause the pulchritude of the world.


102 This deity, as I have before observed, subsists in
Apollo, Proclus, in his very elegant hymn to the Sun, says


ympio-
ecultly
TET).
ves, in
1us, in
y, and


sts in
, says


OF ORPHEUS. 13]


Strong, lenient God, regard my suppliant pray’r,
Bring gentle Health, adorn’d with lovely hair ;
Convey the means of mitigating pain,

And raging deadly pestilence restrain.

O pow’ all-flourishing, abundant, bright,
Apollo’s honour’d offspring, God of light ;
Husband of blameless Health, the constant foe
Of dread disease, the minister of woe :

Come, blessed saviour, human health defend 1,
And to the mortal life afford a prosp’rous end.


that Esculapius springs into light from the bland dance of
the Sun.


Zys 5’ aro perhtxodwpos adektKaxov Qiacecns
Tlacnwy Braornoey, env 5 eweraccev vyecny,
TlAnoas appovys wavamrnuovos evpea Koomov.


i, e. “From thy bland dance repelling deadly ill,
Salubrious Peon blossoms into light,
Health far diffusing, and th’ extended world
With streams of harmony innoxious fills.”


108 In the hymn to Apollo, Orpheus, or, as he wrote
these hymns for the Mysteries, the initiating priest, prays
for the welfare of all mankind. Hence, as Esculapius sub-
sists in Apollo, the poet very properly invokes the healing
God to defend human health, or the health of all men.


132 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXVIILI.
TO HEALTH.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


O mucu desir’d, prolific, gen’ral queen.

Hear me, life-bearing Health, of beauteous mien,
Mother of all; by thee diseases dire,

Of bliss destructive, from our life retire ;

And ev'ry house is flourishing and fair,

If with rejoicing aspect thou art there.

Each deedal art thy vig’rous force inspires,
And all the world thy helping hand desires.
Pluto, life’s bane, alone resists thy will,

And ever hates thy all-preserving skill.

O fertile queen, from thee for ever flows

To mortal life from agony repose ;

And men without thy all-sustaining ease

Find nothing useful, nothing form’d to please.
Without thy aid, not Pluto’s self can thrive,

_ Nor man to much afflicted age arrive;

For thou alone, of countenance serene,

Dost govern all things, universal queen.
Assist thy mystics with propitious mind,

And far avert disease of ev'ry kind.


OF ORPHEUS. 133


LXIX.
TO THE FURIES™,


THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Vocirerous Bacchanalian Furies hear!

Ye I invoke, dread pow'rs, whom all revere ;
Nightly, profound, in secret who retire,
Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megara dire :

Deep in a cavern merg’d, involv'd in night,
Near where Styx flows impervious to the sight.
To mankind’s impious counsels ever nigh,
Fateful, and fierce to punish these you fly.
Revenge and sorrows dire to you belong,

Hid in a savage vest, severe and strong.


104 See the note on Hymn lix, to the Fates. The Chal-
dean Oracle observes, ‘‘that the Furies are the bonds of
men,”

_ Ab wowat pepotrwr ayKrepat.


i. e. as Psellus explains it, the powers that punish guilty
souls bind them to their material passions, and in these, as
it were, suffocate them; such punishment being finally the
means of purification. Nor do these powers only afflict the
vicious, but even such as convert themselves to an imma-
terial essence: for these through their connection with
matter require a purification of this kind. This illustrates
what is said in the seventeenth and three following lines of
this hymn.


134 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Terrific virgins, who for ever dwell,

Endu’d with various forms, in deepest hell ;
Aerial, and unseen by human kind,

And swiftly coursing, rapid as the mind.

In vain the sun with wing’d effulgence bright 1%,
In vain the moon far darting milder light,
Wisdom and virtue may attempt in vain,

And pleasing art, our transport to obtain ;
Unless with these you readily conspire,

And far avert your all-destructive ire.

The boundless tribe of mortals you descry,
And justly rule with Right’s impartial eye.
Come, snaky-hair’d, Fates many-form’d, divine,
Suppress your rage, and to our rites incline.


10 Ruhnkenius thinks that this and the five following
lines should be transferred from hence to the hymn to the
Graces ; and Hermann adopting this opinion has omitted
them in the present hymn, and inserted them in hymn lx. to
the Graces. To me, however, it appears that they properly
belong to this hymn to the Furies; and therefore I have
not transferred them,


OF ORPHEUS. 135


LXX.
TO THE FURIES.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Hear me, illustrious Furies, mighty nam‘d,

Terrific pow’rs, for prudent counsel fam’d ;

Holy and pure, from Jove terrestrial born,

And Proserpine, whom lovely locks adorn :

Whose piercing sight with vision unconfin’d

Surveys the deeds of all the impious kind.

On Fate attendant, punishing the race

(With wrath severe) of deeds unjust and base.

Dark-colour’d queens, whose glittering eyes are
bright

With dreadful, radiant, life-destroying light :

Eternal rulers, terrible and strong,

To whom revenge and tortures dire belong ;

Fateful, and horrid to the human sight,

With snaky tresses 1%, wand’ring in the night :


106 «FKischylus (says Pausanias, in Attic. cap. 28) was
the first that represented the Furies with snakes in their
hair.” On this passage I have observed in a note in my
translation of Pausanias as follows: Those who are of
opinion that the Orpbic hymns are spurious compositions
will doubtless imagine that their opinion is indisputably


186 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Hither approach, and in these rites rejoice,
For ye I call with holy suppliant voice.


confirmed by the present passage: for the Furies, in the
above hymn, are called ogiomAoxapol, or snaky-hatred ; and
consequently, it may be said, they must have been written
posterior to the time of Eschylus, if what Pausanias asserts
be true. It must, however, be remembered, that Eschylus
was accused of inserting in his tragedies things belonging
to the Mysteries ; and we have shown, in the Introduction
to these Hymns, that they were used in the Eleusinian
Mysteries. If this be the case, either Pausanias is mis-
taken in what he asserts of Eschylus in this place; or,
which appears to me to be more probable, being a man
religiously fearful of disclosing any particulars belonging
to the mysteries, he means that no one prior to Eschylus
openly represented the Furies with snakes in their hair.
There is also a passage in the Cataplus of Lucian which
very much corroborates my opinion. The passage is as
follows: eure por, eredecOns yap, w Kumoxe ra EXevowr, ovx
omowa Tors exer Ta erSade cor Soxer; KN, ev Aeyets* cov our
mwpocepxeTat tis Sgdovxovoa, PoBepoy Tt, Kat ameidnTiKoY
mpocBrerovea’ apa wou Epwvyus ecrw; i. e. Tell me,
Cynic, for you are initiated in the Eleusinian Mysteries, do
not the present particulars appear to you to be similar to
those which take place in the Mysteries? Cyn. Very much
so. See then, here comes a certain torch-bearer with a
dreadful and threatening countenance. Is it, therefore, one of
the Furies? It is evident from this passage, that the Furies
in the Mysteries were of a terrible appearance, which
Pausanias informs us was not the case with their statues;
and it is from this circumstance of the statues of these
divinities not being dreadful in their appearance, that he
infers Eschylus was the first that represented them to be
so. Hence, as the Mysteries were instituted long before
_Eschylus, it is evident that the terrible aspects of the
Furies were not invented by him: and it is more than pro-


i ee —« + —e . i — = —


OF ORPHEUS. 137


LXXI.
TO MELINOE.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


I catt, Melinoe, saffron-veil’d, terrene,
Who from dread Pluto’s venerable queen,
Mixt with Saturnian Jupiter, arose,

Near where Cocytus’ mournful river flows ;


bable that this dreadful appearance was principally caused
by the snakes in their hair. The present hymn too calls the
Furies goBepwres, i. e. terrific to the sight.

But from what Natales Comes narrates from Menander, it
is evident that the snaky tresses of the Furies were not the
invention of Eschylus, For he informs us that Menander
says, in one of his plays, ‘‘it is fabulously reported that
Tisiphone became enamoured of a certain beautiful youth,
whose name was Cytheron, and that her love for him being
very ardent, she contrived the means of conversing with
him. He, however, being terrified at her formidable aspect,
did not deign to answer her; on which she took one of the
snakes from her hair and threw it at him, which occasioned
his death. But through the commiseration of the Gods,
the mountain which was before called Asterius was from
him denominated Cytheron.” ‘“Fabulati sunt antiqui neque
has quidem severissimas Deas Cupidinis vim potuisse devi-
tare, quando scriptum reliquit Menander in rebus fabulosis,
Tisiphonem ;in amorem cujusdam pueri formosi Cytheronis
nomine incidisse, cujus desiderium cum ferre non posset,
verba de congressu ad illum proferenda curavit. At is
formidandum aspectum veritus, neque responso quidem dig-


ee eE EE eee


138 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


When, under Pluto’s semblance, Jove divine
Deceiv'd with guileful arts dark Proserpine.
Hence, partly black thy limbs and partly white,
From Pluto dark, from Jove etherial bright.
Thy colour’'d members, men by night inspire
When seen in spectred forms, with terrors dire ;
Now darkly visible, involv’d in night,
Perspicuous now they meet the fearful sight.
Terrestrial queen, expel wherever found

The soul’s mad fears to earth’s remotest bound ;
With holy aspect on our incense shine,

And bless thy mystics, and the rites divine.


nam fecit, quo illa unum e suis draconibus e capillis convul-
sum in eum conjecit, quem serpens intra nodos constringens
interemit, ubi Deorum misericordia mons ab illo dictus fuit,
qui prius Asterius dicebatur.” Natalis Comit. Mythol.
lib. iii. p. 216. As none of the ancient tragedians, there-
fore, were the inventors of the fables which are the subjects
of their dramas, but derived them from authors more ancient
than themselves, it is not at all probable that this fable was
invented by Eschylus, and taken by Menander from him.


OF ORPHEUS. 139


LX XII.
TO FORTUNE.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


ApprRoacy, queen Fortune, with propitious mind
And rich abundance, to my pray’r inclin‘d :
Placid and gentle Trivia, mighty nam’d,
Imperial Dian 1%, born of Pluto fam’d,


17” Fortune, according to the Platonic, which is the same
with the Orphic theology, is that divine power which dis-
poses things differing from each other, and happening con-
trary to expectation, to beneficent purposes. Or it may be
defined to be that divine distribution which causes every
thing to fill up the lot assigned to it by the condition of its
being. This divinity, too, congregates all sublunary causes,
and enables them to confer on sublunary effects that particu-
lar good which their nature and merits eminently deserve.
“But the power of Fortune (says Simplicius, in Aristot.
Physic. lib. ii. p. 81) particularly disposes in an orderly
manner the sublunary part of the universe, in which the
nature of what is contingent is contained, and which being
essentially disordered, Fortune, in conjunction with other
primary causes, directs, places in order, and governs,
Hence she is represented guiding a rudder, because she
governs things sailing on the sea of generation [i. e. of the
sublunary world]. Her rudder too is fixed on a globe,
because she directs that which is unstable in generation.
In her other hand she holds the horn of Amalthea, which is
full of fruits, because she is the cause of obtaining all
divine fruits. And on this account we venerate the fortunes


140 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Mankind’s unconquer’d endless praise is thine,
Sepulch’ral, widely wand’ring pow’r divine !

In thee our various mortal life is found,

And some from thee in copious wealth abound ;
While others mourn thy hand averse to bless,
In all the bitterness of deep distress.

Be present, Goddess, to thy vot’ries kind,

And give abundance with benignant mind.


of cities and houses, and of each individual ; because being
very remote from divine union, we are in danger of being
deprived of its participation, and require, in order to obtain
it, the assistance of the Goddess Fortune, and of those
natures superior to the human, who possess the characteris-
tics of this Divinity. Jndeed, every fortune is good ; for every
attainment respects something good, nor does any thing evil
subsist from divinity. But of things that are good, some are
precedaneous, and others are of a punishing or revenging cha-
racteristic, which we are accustomed to call evils. Hence we
speak of two Fortunes, one of which we denominate Goon, and
which is the cause of our obtaining precedaneous good ; but
the other EVIL, which prepares us to receive punishment or
revenge.”

From this beautiful passage, it is easy to see why For-
tune, in this hymn, is called Diana; for each of these
divinities governs the sublunary world. See the original
of the above admirable extract from Simplicius in the notes
to my Pausanias.


OF ORPHEUS. 141


LX XIII.
TO THE DAMON ?%,
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Tuer, mighty ruling Demon dread, I call,

Mild Jove, life-giving, and the source of all:

_ Great Jove, much wand’ring, terrible and strong,
To whom revenge and tortures dire belong.
Mankind from thee in plenteous wealth abound,
When in their dwellings joyful thou art found ;
Or pass thro’ life afflicted and distress‘d,

The needful means of bliss by thee suppress’d.
Tis thine alone, endu’d with boundless might,
To keep the keys of sorrow and delight.

O holy blessed father, hear my pray’r,

Disperse the seeds of life-consuming care,

With fav’ring mind the sacred rites attend,

And grant to life a glorious blessed end.


108 According to the Egyptians, as we are informed by
Macrobius (in Saturnal, lib. i. cap. 19), “the Gods that pre-
side over man at the time of his birth are these four, the
Demon, Fortune, Love, and Necessity.” He adds “that by
the two former they signified the Sun and Moon; because
the Sun, who is the source of spirit, heat, and light, is the
generator and guardian of human life; and on this account
he is believed to be the demon, that is, God of him who is
born. But by Fortune they indicated the Moon, because


142 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LX XIV.
TO LEUCOTHEA.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


I catt, Leucothea, of great Cadmus born,

And Bacchus’ nurse, whom ivy leaves adorn.
Hear, powerful Goddess, in the mighty deep
Vast-bosom’d, destin’d thy domain to keep:

In waves rejoicing, guardian of mankind ;

For ships from thee alone deliv’rance find,
Amidst the fury of th’ unstable main,

When art no more avails, and strength is vain.
When rushing billows with tempestuous ire
O’erwhelm the mariner in ruin dire,

Thou hear’st with pity touch’d his suppliant pray’r,
Resolv’d his life to succour and to spare.

Be ever present, Goddess ! in distress,

Waft ships along with prosp’rous success :

Thy mystics thro’ the stormy sea defend,

And safe conduct them to their destin’d end.

she presides over bodies which are tossed about through
the variety of fortuitous events.” Conformably to this,


Proclus, in his very elegant hymn to the Sun, invokes that
divinity as a blessed demon,


A\Na Sew apiore, wupioredes, oABte Sarpwy.


OF ORPHEUS. 143


LXXV.
TO PALAMON.
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


O nurs’p with Dionysius, doom’d to keep

Thy dwelling in the widely spreading deep ;
With joyful aspect to my pray’r incline,
Propitious come, and bless the rites divine ;

Thy mystics thro’ the earth and sea attend,

And from old Ocean’s stormy waves defend :

For ships their safety ever owe to thee,

Who wand’rest with them thro’ the raging sea.
Come, guardian pow’r, whom mortal tribes desire,
And far avert the deep’s destructive ire.


144 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXXVI.
TO THE MUSES”™.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Dauauters of Jove, loud-sounding, and divine,
Renown’'d, Pierian, sweetly speaking Nine ;
To those whose breasts your sacred furies fire,
Much form’d, the objects of supreme desire.
Sources of blameless virtue to mankind,

Who form to excellence the youthful mind :
Who nurse the soul, and give her to descry
The paths of right with reason’s steady eye.
Commanding queens, who lead to sacred light
The intellect refin’d from error’s night ;

And to mankind each holy rite disclose,

For mystic knowledge from your nature flows.


109 «©The Muses (says Proclus, in Hesiod Op. p. 6)
derive their appellation from investigation: for they are the
sources of erudition.” He adds “that Jupiter is said to be
the father, and Mnemosyne the mother of the Muses, be-
cause the learner ought to possess both intelligence and
memory, the latter of which Mnemosyne imparts, and the
former Jupiter.’ See more concerning the Muses in the
additional notes.


OF ORPHEUS. 145


Clio, and Erato who charms the sight,

With thee, Euterpe, minist’ring delight :
Thalia flourishing, Polymnia fam’d,
Melpomene from skill in music nam’d :
Terpsichore, Urania heav’nly bright,

With thee who gav’st me to behold the light.
Come, venerable, various pow’rs divine,

With fav’ring aspect on your mystics shine ;
Bring glorious, ardent, lovely, fam’d desire,
And warm my bosom with your sacred fire.


146 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


EX XVII.
TO MNEMOSYNE,


OR THE
Goddess of Memory.


THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Tue consort I invoke of Jove divine,

Source of the holy, sweetly speaking Nine;
Free from th’ oblivion of the fallen mind,
By whom the soul with intellect is join’d
Reason’s increase and thought to thee belong,
All-powerful, pleasant, vigilant, and strong.
’Tis thine to waken from lethargic rest

All thoughts deposited within the breast ;
And nought neglecting, vig’rous to excite
The mental eye from dark oblivion’s night.
Come, blessed pon’r, thy mystics’ mem’ry wake
To holy rites, and Lethe’s fetters break.


110 “*Memory (says Plotinus) leads to the object of
memory.” (ayet yap 7 mynun pos To pynuovevTrov.) But
the object of memory to the soul is intellect, and the forms
or ideas it contains, to which the soul tends through remi-
niscence ; 80 that the Goddess of Memory is very properly
said by Orpheus to conjoin the soul with intellect.


OF ORPHEUS. 147


LX XVIII.
TO AURORA.
THE. FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


Hear me, O Goddess, whose emerging ray

Leads on the broad refulgénce of the day ;

Blushing Aurora, whose celestial light

Beams on the world with redd’ning splendours
bright.

Angel of Titan, whom with constant round -

Thy orient beams recall from night profound :

Labour of ev’ry kind to lead is thine,

Of mortal life the minister divine.

Mankind in thee eternally delight,

And none presumes to shun thy beauteous sight.

Soon as thy splendours break the bands of rest,

And eyes unclose, with pleasing sleep oppress ‘d ;

Men, reptiles, birds, and beasts, with gen’ral voice,

And all the nations of the deep rejoice;

For all the culture of our life is thine.

Come, blessed pow’r, and to these rites incline :

Thy holy light increase, and unconfin’d

Diffuse its radiance on thy mystics’ mind.


148 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LX XIX.
TO THEMIS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


ILLustrious Themis, of celestial birth,

Thee I invoke, young blossom of the earth 141,
All-beauteous virgin ;. first from thee alone
Prophetic oracles to men were known,

Giv’n from the deep recesses of the fane

In sacred Pytho, where renown'd you reign.
From thee Apollo’s oracles arose,

And from thy pow’r his inspiration flows.
Honour’d by all, of form divinely bright,
Majestic virgin, wand’ring in the night.
Mankind from thee first learnt perfective rites,
And Bacchus’ nightly choirs thy soul delights ;
For the God’s honours to disclose is thine,
And holy mysteries and rites divine.

Be present, Goddess, to my pray’r inclin’d,
And bless thy Telete nith fav’ring mind.


11 Themis is one of the progeny of the intellectual
Earth resident in Phanes. See the note on Hymn XII, to
Hercules.


OF ORPHEUS. . 149


LXXX.
TO BOREAS ",
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Boreas, whose wintry blasts, terrific, tear

The bosom of the deep surrounding air ;

Cold icy pow’r, approach, and fav’ring blow,

And Thrace awhile desert, expos’d to snow :

The air’s all-misty dark’ning state dissolve,

With pregnant clouds whose frames in show’rs re-
solve.

Serenely temper all within the sky,

And wipe from moisture Ether’s splendid eye.


112 “Orpheus (says Simplicius, in Aristot. de Animé,
lib. 1.) appears to have called the aptitude of bodies, with
respect to life, respiration ; but the total and universal causes
winds, without which partial causes cannot make bodies
properly adapted animated.”


150 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXXXI.
TO ZEPHYRUS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Sea-BorN, aerial, blowing from the west,

Sweet gales, who give to weary’d labour rest.
Vernal and grassy, and of murm’ring sound,

To ships delightful through the sea profound ;
For these, impell’d by you with gentle force,
Pursue with prosp’rous fate their destin’d course.
With blameless gales regard my suppliant pray’r,
Zephyrs unseen, light-wing’d, and form’d from air.


OF ORPHEUS, 151


LXXXII.
TO THE SOUTH WIND.
THE FUMIGATION FROM FRANKINCENSE.


Wipe-coursine gales, whose lightly leaping feet
With rapid wings the air’s wet bosom beat,
Approach, benevolent, swift-whirling pow’rs,
With humid clouds the principles of show’rs ;
For show’ry clouds are portion’d to your care,
To send on earth from all-surrounding air.
Hear, blessed pow’r, these holy rites attend,
And fruitful rains on earth all-parent send.


152 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXXXITI.
TO OCEAN”.


THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Ocean I call, whose nature ever flows,

From whom at first both Gods and men arose;
Sire incorruptible, whose waves surround,

And earth’s all-terminating circle bound :


118 Ocean, as I have before observed in the note on the
hymn to Hercules, according to its first subsistence, is one
of the offspring of the first intellectual Earth. ‘“ And of the
divine Titannic hebdomads (says Proclus, in Tim. lib. v.
p- 292) Ocean both abides and proceeds, uniting himself to
his father [Heaven] and not departing from his kingdom.
But all the rest of the Titans, rejoicing in progression, are
said to have given completion to the will of Earth, but to
have assaulted their father, dividing themselves from his
kingdom, and proceeding into another order. Or rather,
of all the celestial genera, some alone abide in their prin-
ciples, as the two first triads.” ‘For (says Orpheus) as
soon as Heaven understood that they had an implacable
heart and a lawless nature, he hurled them into Tartarus,
the profundity of the earth.” He concealed them, there-
fore, in the unapparent, through transcendency of power.
But others both abide in and proceed from their principles,
as Ocean and Tethys. For when the other Titans pro-
ceeded to assault their father Heaven, Ocean prohibited
them from obeying the mandates of their mother, being
dubious of their rectitude.

‘*But Ocean (says Orpheus) remained within his place of


OF ORPHEUS. 153


Hence every river, hence the spreading sea,
And earth’s pure bubbling fountains spring from


thee.
Hear, mighty sire, for boundless bliss is thine,
Greatest cathartic of the pow’rs divine :


abode, considering to what he should direct his attention,
and whether he should deprive his father of strength, and
unjustly mutilate him in conjunction with Saturn, and the
other brethren, who were obedient to their dear mother ; or
leaving these, stay quietly at home, After much fluctuation
of thought, however, he remained peaceably at home, being
angry with his mother, but still more so with his brethren.”
He therefore abides, and at the same time proceeds together
with Tethys; for she is conjoined with him according to
the first progeny. But the other Titans are induced to
separation and progression. And the leader of these is the
mighty Saturn, as the theologist says; though he evinces
that Saturn is superior to Ocean, by saying that Saturn
himself received the celestial Olympus, and that there
being throned, he reigns over the Titans; but that Ocean
obtained all the middle allotment. For he says, ‘‘ that Ocean
dwells in the divine streams which are posterior to Olym-
pus, and that he environs the Heaven which is there, and
not the highest Heaven, but as the fable says, that which
fell from Olympus, and was there arranged.”

As the latter part of what is here said from Proclus, is a
very remarkable Orphic fragment, and is not to be found in
the Collection of the Orphic remains by either Gesner or
Hermann, I shall give the original for the sake of the
learned reader. Kaz roe ye ort o Kpovos umreprepos eort rov
Oxeavou, dedndwxev o Oeodoyos wah Neywr" Tov pev Kpovoy
ovrov xaTahauBavew tov oupavioy Odupmrov, KeKet Oponc-
Gevra, Bacitevey twv Tiraywy' rov Se Oxeavoy rnv dAntw
aracay THY peony’ vateY yap avTov ev Tos OEeowreotos
petOpos Tors wera Tow Odvpwov, Kas Tov exec weprewew Oupavor,


154 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Earth's friendly limit, fountain of the pole,

Whose waves wide spreading and circumfluent rol.
Approach benevolent, with placid mind,

And be for ever fo thy mystics kind,


@\N’ ov Toy axporaror, ws 8¢ gnow o pvOos, Tov euwerorTa
rou Oudupmou, Kat exer reraypevor,

Proclus also, in p. 298, speaking of the nine deities men-
tioned by Plato in the Timeus, according to their sublunary
allotment ; for they originally proceed from the intellectyal
order, says : “ Heaven terminates, Earth corroborates, and
Ocean moves all generation. But Tethys establishes every
thing i in its proper motion ; intellectual essences in intellec-
tual, middle essences in physical [or such as pertain to
soul], and such as are corporeal in psychical motion ; Ocean
at the same time collectively moving all things. "Saturn
alone divides intellectually ; Rhea vivifies; Phorcys dis-
tributes spermatic productive principles; Jupiter perfects
things apparent from such as are unapparent; and Juno
evolves according to the all-various mutations of visible
natures.”


OF ORPHEUS. 155


LXX XIV.
TO VESTA"
THE FUMIGATLON FROM AROMATICS.


Daveuter of Saturn, venerable dame,
Who dwell’st amidst great fire’s eternal flame ;


14 «Saturn (says Proclus, in Cratyl, p. 83) in conjune-
tion with Rhea, produced Vesta and Juno, who are coordi-
nate with the demiurgic causes. For Vesta imparts from
herself to the Gods an uninclining permanency and seat in
themselves, and an indissoluble essence. But Juno imparts
progression, and a multiplication into things secondary.
She is also the vivifying fountain of wholes, and the mother
of prolific powers; and on this account she is said to
have proceeded together with Jupiter the Demiurgus; and
through this communion she generates maternally such
things as Jupiter generates paternally. But Vesta abides
in herself, possessing an undefiled virginity, and being the
cause of sameness to all things, Each of these divinities,
however, together with her own proper perfection, possesses
according to participation the power of the other. Hence
some say that Vesta is denominated from ¢gsence, (amo rs
eco.as*, lege ovorcas) looking to her proper hyparxis. But
others, surveying her vivific and motive power, which she
derives from Juno, say that she is thus denominated as be-
img the cause of impulsion, (ws woews ovcay a:riqy.) For all


°* My manuscript has egrias* but the edition of this work, by the very
learned Professor Boissonade, Leipsic, 1820, has egos. The true reading
however is doubtless. ovcvas.


156 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


In sacred rites these ministers are thine,
Mystics much blessed, holy, and divine.


divine natures are in all, and particularly such as are co-
ordinate with each other, participate of, and subsist im each
other. Each, therefore, of the demiurgic and vivific orders
participates the form by which it is characterized from
Vesta. The orbs of the planets, likewise, possess the same-
ness of their revolutions from her; and the poles and
centres are always allotted from her their permanent rest.
Vesta, however, does not manifest essence, but the abiding
and firm establishment of essence in itself ; and hence this
Goddess proceeds into light after the mighty Saturn. For
the Divinities prior to Saturn have not a subsistence in
themselves and in another, but this originates from Saturn.
And a subsistence in self is the peculiarity of Vesta, but in
another of Juno.” What is here said by Proclus about a
subsistence in self and in another, the reader will find
explained in the notes on my translation of the Parmenides
of Plato.

In addition to the above admirable development of the
nature of Vesta by Proclus, it is necessary to add, that this
Goddess, according to her mundane allotment, is the Divi-
nity of the Earth; and as such she is celebrated in the
present hymn. Hence Philolaus, in a fragment preserved
by Stobseus (Eclog. Phys. p. 51), says, “that there is a fire
in the middle at the centre, which is the Vesta of the
universe, the house of Jupiter, the mother of the Gods, and
the basis, coherence, and measure of nature.” Hence it
appears that they are greatly mistaken who suppose the
Pythagoreans meant the Sun by the fire at the centre; and
this is still more evident from what Simplicius says in his
Commentary on Arist. de Ccelo, lib. ii. for he there observes,
“that the Pythagoreans supposing the decad to be a perfect
number, were willing to collect the bodies that are moved
in a circle into the decadic number. Hence they say, that
the inerratic sphere, the seven planets, this our earth, and


OF ORPHEUS. 157


In thee the Gods have fix’d their dwelling place,
Strong, stable basis of the mortal race.


the antichthon complete the decad; and in this manner
Aristotle understands the assertions of the Pythagoreans.”
He then adds: Oc de yrnovecrepoy avrwy peracxovres, To
fev Tup ev Tw peo Hace THY SnutoupyiKny Suvamw, Ex TOV
fecov oAnv THYv nv Tpepoveay, Kat TO Wuxopevoy aurns
aveyetpovoay’ dc 0, ot ev Znvos mupyov avro Kadovow, ws
autos ev rots Hudayopeos dunynoaro’ ot dé Atos duAaxny, ws
ey Trovrois* ot de Acos Opovoy’ ws adAor haciw* ayrpov de ryv
‘nv edeyov, ws opyavoy Kas aurny Tov xpovou’ nuepwy yap
€OTW auTn, Kat vuKTwy, aria. i. e. “ But those who more
genuinely participate of the Pythagorean doctrines say
that the fire in the middle is a demiurgic power, nourishing
the whole earth from the middle, and exciting whatever it
contains of a frigid nature. Hence some call it the tower
of Jupiter, as he (i. e. Aristotle) narrates in his Pythagorics.
But others denominate it the guardian of Jupiter, as Aris-
totle relates in the present treatise. And according to
others it is the throne of Jupiter. They called, however,
the earth a cavern, as being itself an instrument of time: for
it is the cause of day and night.” In that part of this
remarkable passage, in which it is said that the Pythago-
reans called the earth a cavern, it is necessary for ayrpoy to
read aotpov, a star. For a little before both Aristotle and
Simplicius inform us, that the Pythagoreans asserted that
the earth exists as one of the stars. And this is confirmed by
their calling the earth one of the instruments of time: for the
stars are thus denominated by Plato in the Timseus. Meur-
sius, in his Denarius Pythagoricus, p. 19, thinks we should
read xeyrpov for avrpov; but he was evidently mistaken.

From this account, given by Simplicius, it appears that
‘the abovementioned decad of the Pythagoreans consists of
the inerratic sphere, the seven planets, the earth, and the
fire in the centre of the earth,


158 . THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


Eternal, much form’d, ever florid queen,
Laughing"® and blessed, and of lovely mien ;
Accept these rites, accord each just desire,
And gentle health and needful good inspire.


18 “The laughter of the Gods (says Proclus, in Plat.
Polit. p. 884) must be defined to be their exuberant energy
in the universe, and the cause of the gladness of all mun-
dane natures. But as such a providence is’ incomprehen-
sible, and the communication of all good from the Gods
is never failing, Homer very properly calle their laughter
unextinguished.” He adds, “fables, however, do not assert
that the Gods always weep, but that they laugh without
ceasing. For tears are symbols of their providence in
mortal and frail concerns, and which now rise into exist-
ence, and then perish; but laughter is a sign of their
energy in wholes, and those perfect natures in the universe
which are perpetuaily moved with undeviating sameness.
On which account, I think, when we divide demiurgic
productions into Gods and men, we attribute laughter to
the generation of the Gods, but tears to the formation of
men and animals; whence a certain poet, in his hymn to
the Sun, says


Mankind’s laborious race thy tears excite,
But the Gods, laughing, blossom’d into light.


But when we make a division into things celestial and
sublunary, again, after the same manner, we must assign
laughter to the former and tears to the latter. And when
we reason concerning the generations and corruptions of
sublunary natures themselves, we must refer the former to
the laughter, and the latter to the tears of the Gods. Hence
in the mysteries also, those who preside over sacred insti-
tutions order both these to be celebrated at stated times.”


OF ORPHEUS. 159


LXXXV.
TO SLEEP.
THE FUMIGATION FROM A POPPY.


Steep, king of Gods, and men of mortal birth,
Sov’ reign of all, sustain’d by mother Earth ;
For thy dominion is supreme alone,

O’er all extended, and by all things known.
*Tis thine all bodies with benignant mind

In other bands than those of brass to bind.
Tamer of cares, to weary toil repose,

And from whom sacred solace in affliction flows.
Thy pleasing gentle chains preserve the soul,
And e’en the dreadful cares of death control ;
For Death, and Lethe with oblivious stream,
Mankind thy genuine brothers justly deem.
With fav’ring aspect to my pray’r incline,
And save thy mystics in their works divine.


160 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS


LXXXVI.
TO THE DIVINITY OF DREAMS.
THE FUMIGATION FROM AROMATICS.


Tues I invoke, blest pow’r of dreams divine,
Angel of future fates, swift wings are thine.
Great source of oracles to human kind,

When stealing soft, and whisp’ring to the mind,
Thro’ sleep’s sweet silence, and the gloom of night,
Thy pow’r awakes th’ intellectual sight ;

To silent souls the will of heaven relates,

And silently reveals their future fates.

Forever friendly to the upright mind,

Sacred and pure, to holy rites inclin’d ;

For these with pleasing hope thy dreams inspire :
Bliss to anticipate, which all desire.

Thy visions manifest of fate disclose,

What methods best may mitigate our woes ;
Reveal what rites the Gods immortal please,

And what the means their anger to appease ;

For ever tranquil is the good man’s end,

Whose life thy dreams admonish and defend.


OF ORPHEUS. 161


But from the wicked turn’d averse to bless,
Thy form unseen, the angel of distress ;

No means to check approaching ill they find,
Pensive with fears, and to the future blind.
Come, blessed pow’r, the signatures reveal
Which heav’n’s decrees mysteriously conceal,
Signs only present to the worthy mind,

Nor omens ill disclose of monstrous kind.


LXXXVII.
TO DEATH",
THE FUMIGATION FROM MANNA.


Hear me, O Death, whose empire unconfin’d
Extends to mortal tribes of ev’ry kind.

On thee the portion of our time depends,

Whose absence lengthenslife, whose presence ends.


116 Hermann’s edition of these Orphic Teletat ends with
a hymn to Mars, which is found among the hymns ascribed
to Homer; both he and Ruhnkenius being of opinion that
it is more Orphic than Homeric. I, however, should say,
that it was written by any one rather than by Orpheus,


L


me at i


162 THE MYSTICAL HYMNS ,


Thy sleep perpetual bursts the vivid folds
By which the soul attracting body holds 12" :
Common to all, of ev'ry sex and age,

For nought escapes thy all-destructive rage.


For can it for a moment be supposed that Orpheus would
pray that he might be able


Oupou tr’av pevos ofv KaTirxeev, os p’epeOnat
Pudowdos xpvepys emeBacvenev.


“To restrain the impetuous force of anger, which excites
him to engage in horrid war!”


117 What is said in this and the preceding line is well
explained by Porphyry in his excellent treatise entitled
Agopua: wpos Ta vonra, or Auxiliaries to the Perception of
Intelligibles, viz. ‘‘That which nature binds, nature also
dissolves; and that which the soul binds, the soul likewise
dissolves, Nature, indeed, bound the body to the soul;
but the soul binds herself to the body. Nature, therefore,
liberates the body from the soul; but the soul liberates
herself from the body.” And again, in the next sentence,
‘‘ Hence there is a twofold death; the one, indeed, univer-
sally known, in which the body is liberated from the soul ;
but the other peculiar to philosophers, in which the soul is
liberated from the body. Nor does the one entirely follow
the other.” The meaning of this twofold death is as
follows : Though the body, by the death which is univer-
sally known, may be loosened from the soul, yet while
material passions and affections reside in the soul, the soul
will continually verge to another body, and as long as this
inclination continues, remain connected with body. But
when, from the predominance of an intellectual nature, the
soul is separated from material affections, it is truly libe-
rated from the body; though the body at the same time
verges and clings to the soul, as to the immediate cause of
its support,


OF ORPHEUS.


Not youth itself thy clemency can gain,
Vig’rous and strong, by thee untimely slain.
In thee the end of nature’s works is known,
In thee all judgment is absolv’d alone.

No suppliant arts thy dreadful rage control,
No vows revoke the purpose of thy soul.

O blessed pow’r, regard my ardent pray’r,
And human life to age abundant spare.


\


163


Seer oxen eo ae — ee


ADDITIONAL NOTES.


THE following Additional Notes are given for the pur-
pose of elucidating the Orphic theology, with which the
preceding hymns are replete. They form the greater
part of the Scholia of Proclus on the Cratylus of Plato,
a work inestimably valuable to the student of the Grecian
theology, and which has been recently published with
very valuable critical notes by the most learned Pro-
fessor Boissonade. The following translation, however,
was made by me many years ago from a manuscript of
this work, which is a copy of an original in the posses-
sion of Mr. Heber, and which is so very rare that it is
not to be found either in the Bodleian Library or the
British Museum, nor, I believe, in any of the public
libraries of Great Britain. I have given the translation
of these Scholia in the order in which they occur in the
original, as I could not have done otherwise without
omitting some part of them, which, on account of their
great importance, I was unwilling to do.


JUPITER is not said to be, but ts, the father of those who
genuinely preserve the proper form of life, such as Her.
cules and the Dioscuri; but of those who are never at any
time able to convert themselves to a divine nature, he never
is nor is said to be the father. Such therefore, as having


166 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


been partakers of a certain energy above human nature,
have again fallen into the sea of dissimilitude!, and for
honour among men have embraced error towards the Gods,
—of these Jupiter is said to be the father.

The paternal cause originates supernally from the intelli-
gible and occult Gods ; for there the first fathers of wholes
subsist ; but it proceeds through all the intellectual Gods
into the demiurgic order. For Timszeus celebrates this
order as at the same time fabricative and paternal ; since he
calls Jupiter the demiurgus and father. The fathers, how-
ever, who are superior to the one fabrication are called
Gods of Gods, but the demiurgus is the father of Gods and
men. Farther still, Jupiter is said to be peculiarly the
father of some, as of Hercules, who immutably preserve a
Jovian and ruling life during their converse with the
realms of generation. Jupiter, therefore, is triply father,
of gods, partial souls, and of souls that embrace an intellec-
tual and Jovian life. The intellectual order of the gods,
therefore, is supernally bounded by the king? of the total
divine genera, and who has a paternal transcendency with
respect to all the intellectual Gods. This king, according
to Orpheus, is called by the blessed immortals that dwell
on lofty Olympus, Phanes Protogonus. But this order
proceeds through the three Nights, and the celestial orders,
into the Titanic or Saturnian series, where it first separates
itself from the fathers, and changes the kingdom of the
Synoches® for a distributive government of wholes, and
unfolds every demiurgic genus of the Gods from all the
abovementioned ruling and royal causes, but proximately
from Saturn, the leader of the Titannic orders. Prior,
however, to other fabricators (Snpuovpyoc) it unfolds Jupiter,
who is allotted the unical strength of the whole demiurgic


1 Plato, in the Politious, thus calls the realms of generation, i. 6. the
whole of a visible nature.


2 That is, intelligible intellect, the extremity of the intelligible order.


3 That is, the divinities who compose the middle of that order of Gods
which is denominated intelligible and at the same time intellectual.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 167


series, and who produces and gives subsistence to all un-
apparent and apparent natures. And he is indeed intellec-
tual, according to the order in which he ranks, but he
produces the species and the genera of beings into the
order of sensibles. He is likewise filled with the Gods
above himself, but imparts from himself a progression into
being to all mundane natures. Hence Orpheus‘ represents
him fabricating every celestial race, making the sun and
moon and the other starry Gods, together with the. sub-
lunary elements, and diversifying the latter with forms
which before had a disordered subsistence. He likewise
represents him presiding over the Gods who are distributed
about the whole world, and who are suspended from him ;
and in the character of a legislator assigning distributions
of providence in the universe according to desert to all
the mundane Gods. Homer too, following Orpheus, cele-
brates him as the common father of Gods and men, as
leader and king, and as the supreme of rulers. He also
says that all the multitude of mundane Gods is collected
about him, abides in and is perfected by him. For all the
mundane Gods are converted to Jupiter through Themis,


feus Se Oeprora KeXevce Oeous, ayopny Se xaderoat.
——————_—_—- 6, apa Tavry
gorncaca Kedevoe Atos rpos Swya veer@at.


i, e. * But Jupiter orders Themis to call the Gods to coun-
cil; and she directing her course every where commands
them to go to the house of Jupiter®.” All of them there-
fore are excited according to the one will of Jupiter, and


4 As what is here said from Orpheus concerning Jupiter is very remark-
able, and is no where else to be found, I give the original for the sake of
the learned reader. 80 xaz Opdhevs Syptoupyouvra prey avrov THY OVpaycay
magay yeveay mapadidwor, kat nALOY WoLovYTa Kat TEANVHY, KaL TOUS aAAOUS
asppous Scous’ Snurovpyourra Se ra uroweAnvyny sotxeta, Kar Staxpivovra
Tos evdeciy araxtws exovTa mporepoy’ cetpas 8 edisavta Jewy wept oAov
TOY KOT LOY ELS avToY aynprnmevas, Kat StafeopoOdToOUVTa mace ToS eyKoC-
procs Sears ear’ afcay Sravyomas MHS ev THY TaYTe mpovotas.


§ Tiiad, xx. 4.


168 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


become Biot evdor®, within Jupiter, as the post says. Jupiter
too again separates them within himself, according to two
coordinations, and excites them to providential energies
about secondary natures; he at the same time, as Timaeus
says, abiding after his accustomed manner ;


ws egaro Kpovidns rodeyor 8° adcacroy eryerper’,


i. e. “Thus spoke Saturnian Jupiter, and excited inevitable
war.” Jupiter however is separate and exempt from all
mundane natures ; whence also the most total and leading
of the other Gods, though they appear to have in a certain
respect equal authority with Jupiter, through a progression
from the same causes, yet call him father. For both Nep-
tune and Juno celebrate him by this appellation, And
though Juno speaks to him as one who is of the same
order,


Kau yap eyo Beos exui* yevos Be jot evber oBer 04,
kat we mpeoBurarqy reKero Kpovos wykudounris®.


i.e. “For I also am a divinity, and Saturn, of inflected
council, endowed me with the greatest dignity, when he
begot me.”

‘And though Neptune says,


pels’ “yap Tex Kpovou exper abehpeot, ovs rexe Pein,
Zeus xat ey, rprraros 8° Attys evepoaw avacowy®,


i.e. “For we are three brothers from Saturn, whom Rhea
bore, Jupiter and I, and the third is Pluto, who governs the
infernal realms :”

‘Yet Jupiter is called father by both these divinities ; and
this because he comprehends in himself the one and im-
partible cause of all fabrication ; is prior to the Saturnian


6 Boe the 14th lino. 1 Ibid, 32.
# Tiad, iv. 68, © Hisd, xv, 187.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 169


triad !°; connectedly contains the three fathers ; and com-
prehends on all sides the vivification of Juno. Hence, at
the same time that this goddess gives animation to the
universe, he also, together with other Gods, gives subsist-
ence to souls, Very properly therefore do we say that the
demiurgus in the Timzeus is the mighty Jupiter. For he it
is who produces mundane intellects and souls, who adorns
all bodies with figures and numbers, and inserts in them one
union, and an indissoluble friendship and bond. For Night
also, in Orpheus, advises Jupiter to employ things of this
kind in the fabrication of the universe.


aurap env decoy Kparepov wept wact Tavvacns.


i. e. But when your power around the whole has spread
A strong coercive bond.—


The proximate bond indeed of mundane natures is that
which subsists through analogy ; but the more perfect bond
is derived from intellect and soul. Hence Timzeus calls the
communion of the elements through analogy, and the in-
dissoluble union from life, a bond. For he says, animals
were generated bound with animated bonds. But a more
venerable bond than these subsists from the demiurgic will.
‘‘For my will (says Jupiter in the Timzus) is a greater and
more principal bond, &c.”

Firmly adhering therefore to this conception respecting
the mighty Jupiter, viz. that he is the demiurgus and father
of the universe, that he is an all-perfect imparticipable?!
intellect, and that he fills all things both with other goods,
and with life, let us survey how from names Socrates
unfolds the mystic truth concerning this divinity. Timzeus
then says that it is difficult to know the essence of the


10 For the Saturnian triad belongs to that order of Gods which is called
supermundane, and which immediately subsists after the intellectual order ;
so that the Jupiter who ranks at the summit of this triad is different from
and inferior to the demiurgus.


‘11 That is, he is not an intellect consubsistent with soul.


- ee:


ee


170 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


demiurgus, and Socrates now says that it is not easy to
understand bis name, which manifests his power and
energy.

Again, our soul knows partibly the impartible nature of
the energy of the Gods, and that which is characterized by
unity in this energy, in a multiplied manner: and this
especially takes place about the demiurgus who expands
intellectual forms, and calls forth intelligible causes, and
evolves them to the fabrication of the universe. For Par-
menides characterizes him by sameness and difference.
According to Homer, two tubs are placed near him; and
the most mystic tradition and the oracles of the Gods say
that the duad is seated with him. For thus they speak:
“He possesses both ; containing intelligibles in intellect,
but introducing sense to the worlds.” These oracles like-
wise call him twice beyond, and twice there (ds erexewa Kat
dts exec), And, in short, they celebrate him through the
duad. For the demiurgus comprehends in himself unitedly
every thing prolific, and which gives subsistence to mun-
dane natures. Very properly therefore is his name two-
fold, of which &a manifests the cause through which, and
this is paternal goodness ; but {nva signifies vivijication, the
first causes of which in the universe the demiurgus unically
comprehends. The former too is a symbol of the Saturnian
and paternal series ; but the latter of the vivific and mater-
nal Rhea. So far likewise as Jupiter receives the whole
of Saturn, he gives subsistence to a triple essence, the
impartible, the partible, and that which subsists between
these ; but according to the Rhea which he contains in him-
self, he scatters as from a fountain, intellectual, psychical,
and corporeal life. But by his demiurgic powers and
energies, he gives a formal subsistence to these, and sepa-
rates them from forms of a prior order, and from each other.
He is also the ruler and king of all things: and is exempt
from the three demiurgi. Yor they, as Socrates says in the


12 And the duad, considered as a divine form or idea, is the source of
fecundity.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 171


Gorgias, divide the kingdom of their father; but Jupiter
the demiurgus at once, without division, reigns over the
three, and-unically governs them.

He is therefore the cause of the paternal triad, and of all
fabrication ; but he connectedly contains the three demi-
urgi. And he is a king indeed, as being coordinated with
the fathers ; but a ruler, as being proximately established
above the demiurgic triad, and comprehending the uniform
cause of it. Plato therefore, by considering his name in
two ways, evinces that images receive partibly the unical
causes of paradigms, and that this is adapted to him who
establishes the intellectual duad in himself. For he gives
subsistence to twofold orders, the celestial and the super-
celestial ; whence also the theologist Orpheus says, that his
sceptre consists of four and twenty measures, as ruling over
a twofold twelve 3, ‘

Farther still, the soul of the world gives life to alter-
motive natures; for to these it becomes the fountain and
principle of motion, as Plato says in the Pheedrus and
Laws. But the demiurgus simply imparts to all things life
divine, intellectual, psychical, and that which is divisible
about bodies, No one however should think that the Gods
in their generations of secondary natures are diminished ;
or that they sustain a division of their proper essence in
giving subsistence to things subordinate ; or that they ex-
pose their progeny to the view, externally to themselves, in
the same manner as the causes of mortal offspring. Nor in
short, must we suppose that they generate with motion or
mutation, but that abiding in themselves, they produce by
their very essence posterior natures, comprehend on all sides
their progeny, and supernally perfect the productions and


% i, e. The twelve Gods who first subsist in the liberated or super-
celestial order, and who are divided into four triads, and the twelve mun-
dane Gods, Jupiter, Neptune, Vulcan; Vesta, Minerva, Mars; Ocres,
Juno, Diana; and Mercury, Venus, Apollo. The first of these triads
is fabricative; the second defensive; the third vivijfic; and the fourth
anagogic or elevating, as is shown by Proclus in the sixth book of his
Theology.


172 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


energies of their offspring. Nor again, when it is said that
Gods are the sons of more total Gods, must it be supposed
that they are disjoined from more ancient causes, and are
cut off from a union with them: or that they receive the
peculiarity of their hyparxis through motion, and an inde-
finiteness converting itself to bound. For there is nothing
irrational and without measure in the natures superior to
us, But we must conceive that their progressions are
effected through similitude; and that there is one commu-
nion of essence, and an indivisible continuity of powers and
energies, between the sons of Gods and their fathers ; all
those Gods that rank in the second order being established
in such as are more ancient; and the more ancient impart-
ing much of perfection, vigour, and efficacious production
to the subordinate. And after this manner we must under-
stand that Jupiter is said to be the son of Saturn. For
Jupiter, being the demiurgic intellect, proceeds from ano-
ther intellect, superior and more uniform, which increases

indeed its proper intellections, but converts the multitude

of them to union; and multiplies its intellectual powers,

but elevates their all-various evolutions to impartible same-


. ness. Jupiter therefore proximately establishing a commu-


nion with this divinity, and being filled from him with total
intellectual good, is very properly said to be the son of
Saturn, both in hymns and in invocations, as unfolding into
light that which is occult, expanding that which is con-
tracted, and dividing that which is impartible in the Satur-
nian monad ; and as emitting a second more partial king-
dom, instead of that which is more total, a demiurgic
instead of a paternal dominion, and an empire which pro-
ceeds every where instead of that which stably abides in
itself,

Why does Socrates apprehend the name of king Saturn
to be uSpiorixov, insolent, and looking to what does he
assert this? We reply, that according to the poets satiety
(xopos) is the cause of insolence; for they thus denominate
immoderation and repletion; and they say that Satiety
brought forth Insolence (u8pi» pac rixret Kopos). He there-


_ —MaMg en ee ii mg el ee aiid pe a ee ee sl


a


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 173


fore who looks without attention to the name of Saturn
will consider it as signifying imsolence. For to him who
suddenly hears it, it manifests satiety and repletion. Why
therefore, since a name of this kind is expressive of inso-
lence, do we not pass it over in silence, as not being
auspicious and adapted to the Gods? May we not say that
the royal series }* of the Gods, beginning with Phanes and
ending in Bacchus, and producing the same sceptre super-
nally as far as to the last kingdom, Saturn being allotted
the fourth royal order, appears according to the fabulous
pretext, differently from the other kings, to have received
the sceptre insolently from Heaven, and to have given it to
Jupiter? For Night receives the sceptre from Phanes ;


14 This royal series consists of Phanes, Night, Heaven, Saturn, Jupiter,
Bacchus. ‘* Ancient theologists (says Syrianus, in his Commentary on
the fourteenth book of Aristotle’s Metaphysics) assert that Night and
Heaven reigned, and prior to these the mighty father of Night and
Heaven, who distributed the world to Gods and mortals, and who first
possessed royal authority, the illustrious Ericapzeus.


ToLoy eAwy Scevere Geors, Ovnrorar Se roopov
ov mpwros BactAcve TreptKAUTOS NPLKETALOS.


Night succeeded Ericapeous, in the hands of whom she has a aceptre:


OKeRTPOV EXOVE’ eV XEPaLY NOLKETraLoV.


To Night Heaven succeeded, who first reigned over the Gods after mother
Night.


os mpwros BartAeve Oewy meta pnrTepa vuKTa.


Chaos transcends the habitude of sovereign dominion: and, with respect
to Jupiter, the oracles given to him by Night manifestly call him not the
first, but the fifth immortal king of the Gods.


abavatov BactAca Oewv meutrrov yeverGat.


According to these theologists therefore, that principle which is most
eminently the first, is the one or the good, after which, according to
Pythagoras, are those two principles Atther and Chaos, which are supe-
rior to the possession of sovereign dominion. In the next place succeed
the first and occult genera of the Gods, in which first shines forth the
father and king of all wholes, and whom on this account they call
Phanes.”


174 ADDITIONAL NOTES,


Heaven derives from Night the dominion over wholes ;
and Bacchus, who is the last king of the Gods, receives the
kingdom from Jupiter. For the father (Jupiter) establishes
him in the royal throne, puts into his hand the sceptre, and
makes him the king of all the mundane Gods. “Hear me,
ye Gods, I place over you a king.”


KNure Geot Tov Supp Baccrea riOnut,


says Jupiter tothe junior Gods. But Saturn alone per-
fectly deprives Heaven of the kingdom, and concedes
dominion to Jupiter, cutting and being cut off, as the fable
says. Plato therefore seeing this succession, which in
Saturn is called by theologists tmsolent (vBpiorixy), thought
it worth while to mention the appearance of insolence in
the name; that from this he might evince the name is
adapted to the God, and that it’ bears an image of the inso-
lence which is ascribed to him in fables. At the same time
he teaches us to refer mythical devices to the truth con-
cerning the Gods, and the apparent absurdity which they
contain to scientific conceptions.

The great, when ascribed to the Gods, must not be con-
sidered as belonging to interval, but as subsisting intellec-
tually, and according to the power of cause, but not accord-
ing to partible transcendency. But why does Plato now
call Saturn d:avoia, the dianoetic part of the soul? May we
not say, that it is because he looks to the multitude of
intellectual conceptions in him, the orders of intelligibles,
and the evolution of forms which he contains; since also in
the Timzeus, he represents the demiurgic intellect as reason-
ing, and making the world, dianoetically energizing: and
this in consequence of looking to his partible and divided
intellections, according to which he fabricates not only
wholes, but parts. When Saturn, however, is called intel-
lect, Jupiter has the order of the dianoetic part: and when
again, Saturn is called the dianoetic part, we must say that
he is so called according to analogy with reference to a
certain other intellect of a higher order. Whether there-
fore you are willing to speak of intelligible and occult


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 175


intellect, or of that which unfolds into light (exdavropixos
vous), or of that which connectedly contains (cuvexrixos
vous), or of that which imparts perfection 5 (redectoupyos
vous), Saturn will be as the dianoetic part to all these.
For he produces united intellection into multitude, and fills
himself wholly with excited intelligibles. Whence also he
is said to be the leader of the Titannic race, and the source
of all-various separation and diversifying power. And
perhaps Plato here primarily delivers twofold interpreta-
tions of the name of the Titans, which Iamblicus and Ame-
lius afterwards adopted. For the one interprets this name
from the Titans extending their powers to all things; but
the other from something imsectile (xapa To Tt aropov), be-
cause the division and separation of wholes into parts
receives its beginning from the Titans. Socrates therefore
now indicates both these interpretations, by asserting of the
king of the Titans that he is a certain great diamoetic power.
For the term great is a symbol of power pervading to all
things ; but the term a certain, of power proceeding to the
most partial natures,

The name Saturn is now triply analysed ; of which the
first asserting this God to be the plenitude of intellectual
good, and to be the satiety of a divine intellect, from its
conveying an image of the satiety and repletion which are
reprobated by the many, is ejected as insolent. The second
also, which exhibits the imperfect and the puerile, is in like
manner rejected. But the third, which celebrates this God
as full of purity, and as the leader of undefiled intelligence,
and an undeviating life, is approved. For king Saturn is
intellect, and the supplier of all intellectual life ; but he is
an intelligible exempt from coordination with sensibles,
immaterial and separate, and converted to himself. He
likewise converts his progeny, and after producing them


15 Of these intellects the first is Phanes, the second Heaven, the third
Earth, and the fourth the Subcelestial Arch, which is celebrated in the
Phsodrus, viz. vous vonros o hayys, expavropixos vous 0 Ovpavos, ovverrixos
vous 1 yy, TeAectoupyos Se vous  vn'ovpavios ays.


a ate,


176 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


into light again embosoms and firmly establishes them in
himself. For the demiurgus of the universe, though he isa
divine intellect, yet he orderly arranges sensibles, and pro-
vides for subordinate natures. But the mighty Saturn is
essentialized in separate intellections, and which transcend
wholes, ‘For the fire which is beyond the first (says the
Chaldean Oracle) does not incline its power downwards.”
But the demiurgus is suspended and proceeds from Saturn,
being himself an intellect subsisting about an immaterial
intellect, energizing about it as the intelligible, and pro-
ducing that which is occult in it, into the apparent. For
the maker of the world is an intellect of intellect. And it
appears to me, that as Saturn is the summit of those Gods
that are properly called intellectual, he is intellect, as with
reference to the intelligible genus of Gods. For all the
intellectual adhere to the intelligible genus of Gods, and
are conjoined with them through intellections. ‘‘ Ye who
understand the supermundane paternal profundity,” says
the hymn tothem. But Saturn is intelligible, with refer-
ence to all the intellectual Gods. Purtty, therefore, indi-
cates this impartible and imparticipable transcendency of
Saturn. For the not coming into contact with matter, the
impartible, and an exemption from habitude, are signified
by purity. Such, indeed, is the transcendency of this God
with respect to all coordination with things subordinate,
and such his undefiled union with the intelligible, that he
does not require a Curetic guard, like Rhea, Jupiter, and
Proserpine, For all these, through their progressions into
secondary natures, require the immutable defence of the
Curetes. But Saturn being firmly established in himself,
and hastily withdrawing himself from all subordinate na-
tures, is established above the guardianship of the Curetes,
He contains, however, the cause of these uniformly in him-
self. For this purity, and the undefiled which he possesses,
give subsistence to all the progressions of the Curetes.
Hence, in the Oracles, he is said to comprehend the first
fountain of the Amilicti, and to ride on all the others.
‘*The intellect of the father riding on attenuated rulers,


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 177


they become refulgent with the furrows of inflexible and
implacable fire.”


Novus rarpos apasos ewoxoupevos Ouyrypoty
Axvaprrov acrparrovoe. apetNKTou Tupos oAKoLs,


He is therefore pure zntellect, as giving subsistence to the
undefiled order, and as being the leader of the whole intel-
lectual series.


Avrovu yap ex@pwoxovotr apecdixrot Te KEpauvot,
Kat rpnornpodoxot xodwot mapeyyeos adxns*

Tlarpoyevous Exarys, xat vrefwxos rupos avOos,
Hoe xparacov rvevua rokwy mupiwy emexerva,


i.e. “From him leap forth the implacable thunders, and
the prester-capacious bosoms of the all-splendid strength
of the father-begotten Hecate, together with the environed
flower of fire, and the strong spirit which is beyond the
fiery poles,”

For he convolves all the hebdomad of the fountains '*,
and gives subsistence to it, from his unical and intelligible
summit. For he is, as the Oracles say, asorvAdevTos,
uncut into fragments, uniform, and undistributed, and con-
nectedly contains all the fountains, converting and uniting
all of them to himself, and being separate from all things
with immaculate purity. Hence he is xopovous, as an
immaterial and pure intellect, and as establishing himself
in the paternal silence. He is also celebrated as the father
of fathers. Saturn, therefore, is a father, and intelligible,
as with reference to the intellectual Gods.

Again, every intellect either abides, and is then intelli-
gible, as being better than motion ; or it is moved, and is then
intellectual; or it is both, and is then intelligible, and at
the same time intellectual. The first of these is Phanes ;


16 That is of the whole intellectual order, which consists of Saturn,
Rhea, Jupiter, the three Curetes, and the separating monad Ocean.


M


178 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


the second, which is alone moved, is Saturn ; and the third,
which is both moved and permanent, is Heaven.

Saturn, from his impartible, unical, paternal, and benefi-
cent subsistence in the intellectual orders, has been con-
sidered by some as the same with the one cause of all
things. He is, however, only analogous to this cause, just
as Orpheus calls the first cause Time (xpoves) nearly
homonymously with Saturn (xpovos). But the Oracles of
the Gods characterize this deity by the epithet of the once
(rw amat); calling him once beyond (awat erexewa). For
the once is allied to the one.

Heaven, the father of Saturn, is an intellect understand-
ing himself indeed, but united to the first intelligibles; in
which he is also firmly established ; and connectedly con-
tains all the intellectual orders, by abiding in intelligible
union. This God too is connective, just as Saturn is of a
separating peculiarity ; and on this account he is father. For
connecting precede separating causes ; and the intelligible
and at the same time intellectual such as are intellectual
only. Whence also Heaven being the Synocheys (ovvoyevs)
of wholes, according to one union gives subsistence to the
Titannic series, and prior to this, to other orders of the
Gods ; some of which abide only in him, which he retains
in himself; but others both abide and proceed, which he is
said to have concealed after they were unfolded into light.
And after all these, he gives subsistence to those divine
orders which proceed into the universe, and are separated
from their father. For he produces twofold monads, and
triads, and hebdomads equal in number to the monads.
These things, however, will be investigated more fully
elsewhere. But this deity is denominated according to the
similitude of the apparent Heaven. For each of them com-
presses and connects all the multitude which it contains,
and causes the sympathy and connection of the whole
world to be one. For connection is second to unifying
power, and proceeds from it. In the Phezedrus, therefore,
Plato delivers to us the production of all secondary natures
by Heaven, and shows us how this divinity leads upwards


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 179


and convolves all things to the intelligible. He likewise
teaches us what its summit is, what the profundity of its
whole order, and what the boundary of the whole of its
progression, Here, therefore, investigating the truth of
things from names, he declares its energy with respect to
things more elevated and simple, and which are arranged
nearer to the one. He also clearly appears here to consider
the order of Heaven as intelligible and at the same time in-
tellectual. For if it sees things on high, it energizes intel-
lectually, and there is prior to it the intelligible genus of
Gods, to which looking it is intellectual ; just as it is in-
telligible to the natures which proceed from it. What then
are the things on high which it beholds? Is it not evident
that they are the supercelestial place, an essence without
colour, without figure, and without the touch, and all the
intelligible extent? An extent comprehending, as Plato
would say, intelligible animals, the one cause of all eternal
natures, and the occult principles of these; but, as the
followers of Orpheus would say, bounded by ether up-
wards, and by Phanes downwards. For all between these
two gives completion to the intelligible order, But Plato
‘now calls this both singularly and plurally ; since all things
are there united, and at the same time each is separated
peculiarly ; and this according to the highest union and
separation.

With respect to the term perewpodoyor, i. ec. those who
discourse on sublime affairs, we must now consider it in a
manner adapted to those who choose an anagogio life, who
live intellectually, and who do not gravitate to earth, but
sublimely tend to a theoretic life. For that which is called
Earth there maternally gives subsistence to such things as
Heaven, which is coordinate to that Earth, produces pater-
nally. And he who energizes there, may be properly called
ueTewpodoyos, or one who discourses about things on high.
Heaven, therefore, being of a connective nature, is expanded
above the Saturnian orders, and all the intellectual series ;
and produces from himeelf all the Titannic race; and prior
to this, the perfective and defensive orders; and, in short,


180 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


is the leader of every good to the intellectual Gods, Plato,
therefore, having celebrated Saturn for his intelligence,
which is without habitude to mundane natures ;5 and for his
life, which is converted to his own exalted place of survey,
now celebrates Heaven for another more perfect energy.
For to be conjoined to more elevated natures is a greater
good than to be converted to oneself. Let no one however
think, that on this account the abovementioned energies are
distributed in the Gods ; as, for instance, that there is pro-
vidence alone in Jupiter, a conversion alone to himself in
Saturn, and an elevation alone to the intelligible in Heaven.
For Jupiter no otherwise provides for mundane natures
than by looking to the intelligible ; since, as Plato says in
the Timseus, intellect understanding ideas in animal itself,
thought it requisite that as many and such as it there per-
ceived should be contained in the universe ; but as Orpheus ”
says with a divinely inspired mouth, ‘‘ Jupiter swallows his
progenitor Phanes, embosoms all his powers, and becomes
all things intellectually which Phanes is intelligibly.”
Saturn also imparts to Jupiter the principles of fabrication
and of providential attention to sensibles, and understand-
ing himself, he becomes united to first intelligibles, and is
filled with the goods which are thence derived. Hence
also the theologist (Orpheus) says “that he was nursed by
Night #8,” If, therefore, the intelligible is nutriment, Saturn
is replete not only with the intelligibles coordinated with
him, but also with the highest and occult intellections.
Heaven himself also fills all secondary natures with his
proper goods, but guards all things by his own most
vigorous powers; and the father supernally committed to
him the connecting and guarding the causes of eternal
animal. But he intellectually perceives himself, and is


17 ws & Opdhevs evOew oropart Acyet, Kat KaTamivel TOY MpoyovOY avTov
Tov dayyta, Kat eyxoAm erat twacas avTov tas Suvawers 0 Geus, wat
YVeTaL TayTG, VOEPWS, OGVAMEp NY EKELYOS VONTWS.


18 80 wat rpedecbat dynoiy avrov o Beodrdoyos vio Ths vuKtos. ‘‘


wavrwv Se Kpovoy vu§ erpedey 08 arcradAev.”


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 181


converted to the intelligibles which he contains; and this
his intelligence, Plato in the Phsedrus calls circulation.
For as that which is moved in a circle is moved about its
own centre, so Heaven energizes about its own intelligible,
according to intellectual circulation. But all the Gods
subsisting in all, and each possessing all energies, one
transcends more in this, and another in a different energy,
and each is particularly characterized according to that in
which it transcends. Thus Jupiter is characterized by
providence, and hence his name is now thus analyzed ;
but Saturn by a conversion to himself, whence also he is
inflected counsel, ayxvounris; and Heaven by habitude to
things more excellent ; from which also he receives his
appellation. For his giving subsistence to a pure and the
Saturnian intellect represents his energy on the other part.
But as there are many powers in Heaven, such as the con-
nective, guardian, and convertive, you will find that this
name is appropriately adapted to all these. For the con-
nective is signified through bounding the intellectual Gods ;
since the connective bounds the multitude which he con-
tains. The power which guards wholes subsists through
the termination and security of an intellectual essence.
And the convertive power subsists through converting, see-
ing, and intellectually energizing natures, to things on high.
But all these are adapted to Heaven. For there is no fear
that the Gods will be dissipated, and that on this account
they require connective causes; or that they will sustain
mutation, and that on this account they stand in need of the
saving aid of guardian causes; but now Socrates at once
manifests all the powers of Heaven, through convertive
energy. For this is to behold things on high, to be con-
verted to them, and through this to be connected and
defended. And it appears to me that Heaven possesses this
peculiarity according to analogy to the intelligible eternity
and the intelligible wholeness, For Timsus particularly
characterizes eternity by this, viz. by abiding in the one
prior to it, and by being established in the summit of intel-
ligibles ; and Socrates says that Heaven surveys things on


182 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


high, viz. the supercelestial place, and such things as are
comprehended in the god-nourished silence of the fathers.
(xa: oga Ty OeoOpenpore oryp weprechywra: Trwr warepwy).
As, therefore, Parmenides signifies each of these orders
through wholeness, the one through intelligible, and the
other through intellectual wholeness ; in like manner both
Timseus and Socrates characterize them by a conversion to
more excellent natures. But the conversion as well as the
wholeness is different. For that of eternity is intelligible,
on which account Timseus does not say that it looks to its
intelligible, but only that it stably abides. But the con-
version of Heaven is intellectual, and on this account
Socrates says, that it sees things on high, and through this
converts, guards, and connects all things posterior to itself.
Whence also in the Phsedrus, it is said by the circulation of
itself, to lead all things to the supercelestial place, and the
summit of the first intelligibles.

As there are three fathers and kings, of which Socrates
here makes mention, Saturn alone appears to have received
the government from his father, and to have transmitted it
to Jupiter, by violence. Mythologists therefore celebrate
the sections of Heaven and Saturn. But the cause of this
is, that Heaven is of the connective, Saturn of the Titannic,
and Jupiter of the demiurgic order. Again, the Titannic
genus rejoices in separations and differences, progressions
and multiplications of powers. Saturn, therefore, as a divid-
ing God, separates his kingdom from that of Heaven; but
as a pure intellect he is exempt from a fabricative energy
proceeding into matter. Hence also the demiurgic genus
is again separated from him. Section therefore is on both
sides of him, For so far as he is a Titan, he is cut off from
the connective causes, but so far as he does not give
himself to material fabrication, he is cut off from the demi-
urgus Jupiter.

With respect, however, to the supercelestial place to
which Heaven extends his intellectual life, some charac-
terize it by ineffable symbols; but others, after giving it a
name, celebrate it as unknown, neither being able to speak


lee se. neta mm - —. ~—- —_-- _


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 183


of its form or figure. And proceeding somewhat higher
than this, they have been able to manifest the boundary ?®
of the intelligible Gods by name alone. But the natures
which are beyond this, they signify through analogy alone,
these natures being ineffable and incomprehensible. Since
that God who closes the paternal order is said by the wise
to be the only deity among the intelligible Gods, that is
denominated : and theurgy ascends as far as to this order.
Since, therefore, the natures prior to Heaven are allotted
such a transcendency of uniform ‘subsistence that some of
them are said to be effable, and at the same time ineffable,
known, and at the same time unknown, through their
alliance to the one, Socrates very properly restrains the dis-
course about them, in consequence of names not being able
to represent their hyparxis ; and, in short, because it re-
quires a certain wonderful employment to separate the
effable and ineffable, of their hyparxis or power. He ac-
cuses, therefore, his memory, not as disbelieving in the fa-
bles, which assert that there are certain more ancient causes
beyond Heaven, nor as not thinking it worth while to men-
tion them. For in the Phzedrus he himself celebrates the
supercelestial place. But he says this, because the first of
beings cannot become known by the exercise of memory
and through phantasy, or opinion, or the dianoetic part.
For we are alone naturally adapted to be conjoined to
them, with the flower of intellect and the hyparxis of our
essence ; and through these we receive the sensation of
their unknown nature. Socrates therefore says, that what
in them is exempt, both from our gnostic and recollective
life, is the cause of our inability to give them a name ; for
they are not naturally adapted to be known through names,
Theologists, likewise, would not remotely signify them, and
through the analogy of things apparent to them, if they
could be named, and apprehended by knowledge.


19 That is Phanes, intelligible intellect, or in the language of Plato
avrogwoy, animal itself.


184 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


Homer™ does not ascend beyond the Saturnian order,
but evincing that Saturn is the proximate cause of the
demiurgus, he calls Jupiter, who is the demiurgus, the son
of Saturn. He also calls the divinities coordinate with him
Juno, Neptune, and Mars ; and he denominates Jupiter the
father of men and Gods. But he does not introduce Saturn
as either energizing or saying anything but as truly a-yxv-
Aounris, In consequence of being converted to himself.

Orpheus greatly availed himself of the license of fables,
and manifests every thing prior to Heaven by names, as far
as to the first cause. He also denominates the ineffable,
who transcends the intelligible unities, Time; whether be-
cause Time presubsists as the cause of all generation, or
because, as delivering the generation of true beings, he
thus denominates the ineffable, that he may indicate the
order of true beings, and the transcendency of the more
total to the more partial ; that a subsistence according to
Time may be the same with a subsistence according to
cause ; in the same manner as generation with an arranged
progression. But Hesiod venerates many of the divine
natures in silence, and does not in short name the first.
For that what is posterior to the first proceeds from some-
thing else, is evident from the verse,


“‘ Chaos of all things was the first produced.”


For it is perfectly impossible that it could be produced
witbout a cause; but he does not say what that is which
gave subsistence to Chaos. He is silent indeed with respect
to both the fathers of intelligibles, the exempt, and the
coordinate ; for they are perfectly ineffable. And with


2% Homer, however, appears to have ascended as far as to the Goddess
Night, or the summit of the intelligible and at the same time intellectual
order.


21 That is to say, the first cause, and bound which is called by Orpheus
ether.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 185


respect to the two coordinations, the natures which are
coordinate with the one, he passes by in silence, but those
alone which are coordinate with the indefinite duad, he
unfolds through genealogy. And on this account Plato
now thinks Hesiod deserves to be mentioned, for passing
by the natures prior to Heaven, as being ineffable. For
this also is indicated concerning them by the Oracles,
which likewise add, ‘‘ they possess mystic silence.” And
Socrates himself, in the Phzedrus, calls the intellectual per-
ception of them punots and exowraa, in which nearly the
whole business 18 ineffable and unknown.

The theology of Hesiod from the monad Rhea produces,
according to things which are more excellent in the coordi-
nation, Vesta; but according to those which are subordi-
nate, Juno; and according to those which subsist between,
Ceres, But according to Orpheus, Ceres is in a certain
respect the same with the whole of vivification, and in a
certain respect is not the same, Yor on high she is Rhea,
but below, in conjunction with Jupiter, she is Ceres: for
here the things begotten are similar to the begetters, and
are nearly the same.

Again, we ought to receive with caution what is now
said concerning effluxions and motions. For Socrates does
not descend to the material flowing of Heraclitus; for
this is false, and unworthy the dianoetic conceptions of
Plato. But since it is lawful to interpret things divine
analogously, through appropriate images, Socrates very pro-
perly assimilates fontal and Saturnian deities to streams ;
in so doing jesting and at the same time acting seriously,
because good is always derived as it were in streams from
on high, to things below. Hence, according to the image
of rivers, after the fontal deities, who eternally devolve
streams of good, the deities who subsist as principles are


23 That is to say, it is false to assert of intellectual and divine natures,
that they are in a perpetual flux; for they are eternally stable themselves,
and are the sources of stability to other things.


186 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


celebrated. For after the fountain of a river the place
where it begins to flow is surveyed.

But those divinities who are peculiarly denominated
total intellectual Gods, of whom the great Saturn is the
father, are properly called fontal. For “from him leap
forth the implacable thunders,” says the Oracle concerning
Saturn. But concerning the vivific fountain Rhea, from
which all life, divine, intellectual, psychical, and mundane
is generated, the Chaldean Oracles thus speak,


Pein Tot voepwy paxapwy wnyy Te poy TE.
Tlavrwy yap rpwrn Suvapess kod\woiow agppacrots
Ackapern, yeveny ext way mpoxecs TpoXaoucay.


ie. “Rhea® is the fountain and river of the blessed intel-
lectual Gods, For first receiving the powers of all things
in her ineffable bosoms, she pours running generation into
every thing.”

For this divinity gives subsistence to the infinite diffusion
of all life, and to all never failing powers. She likewise
moves all things according to the measures of divine mo-
tions, and converts them to herself; establishing all things
in herself, as being coordinate to Saturn. Rhea, therefore,
is so called from causing a perpetual influx of good, and
through being the cause of divine facility, since the life of
the gods is attended with ease (Peo peca Swrres),

Ocean is the cause to all the Gods of acute and vigorous
energy, and bounds the separations of the first, middle, and
last orders; converting himself to himself, and to his proper
principles, through swiftness of intellect, but moving all
things from himself, to energies accommodated to their
natures ; perfecting their powers, and causing them to have
a never failing subsistence. But Tethys imparts perma-
nency to the natures which are moved by Ocean, and


% Gesner, misled by Patricius, has inserted these lines among the
Orphic fragments, in his edition of the works of Orpheus.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 187


stability to the beings which are excited by him to the
generation of secondary natures. She is also the source of
purity of essence to those beings who perpetually desire to
produce all things; as sustaining every thing in the divine
essences which, as it were, leaps forth and percolates. Yor
each of first causes, though it imparts to secondary natures
® participation of good, yet at the same time retains with
itself that which is undefiled, unmingled, and pure from
participation. Thus, for instance, intellect is filled with
life, being, and intelligence, with which also it fills soul ;
but establishing in itself that which in each of these is
genuine and exempt, it also illuminates from itself to beings
of a subordinate rank, inferior measures of these goods.
And vigour of energy, indeed, is present with more ancient
natures,'through Ocean ; but the leaping forth and percolat-
ing through Tethys. For every thing which is imparted
from superior to subordinate natures, whether it be essence,
life, or intelligence, is percolated. And such of these as
are primary are established in themselves; but such as
are more imperfect are transferred to things of a subject
order, Just as with respect to streams of water, such
of them as are nearer their source are purer, but the more
remote are more turbid. Both Ocean and Tethys, there-
fore, are fontal Gods, according to their first subsistence.
Hence Socrates now calls them the fathers of streams.
But they also proceed into other orders of Gods, exhibiting
the same powers among the Gods who rank as principles
or rulers, among those of a liberated, and those of a celes-
tial characteristic; and appropriately in each of these.
Timzeus, however, celebrates their sublunary orders, call-
ing them fathers of Saturn and Rhea, but the progeny of
Heaven and Earth. But their last processions are their
divisible allotments about the earth ; both those which are
apparent on its surface, and those which under the earth
separate the kingdom of Hades from the dominion of
Neptune.

Saturn is conjoined both to Rhea and Jupiter, but to the


188 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


former as father to prolific power, but to the latter as
father to intelligible “ intellect.

Ocean is said to have married Tethys, and Jupiter Juno,
and the like, as establishing a communion with her, con-
formably to the generation of subordinate natures. For an
according coarrangement of the Gods, and a connascent
cooperation in their productions, is called by theologists
marriage.

Tethys is denominated from leaping forth and straining
or cleansing, being as it were Diatethys, and by taking away
the first two syllables Tethys ™.

Saturn is the monad of the Titannic order of the Gods,
but Jupiter of the demiurgic, This last divinity, however,
is twofold, the one exempt and coordinated with Saturn,
being a fontal God, and, in short, ranking with the intellec-
tual fathers, and convolving the extremity of them; but the
other being connumerated with the sons of Saturn, and
allotted a Saturnian summit and dominion in this triad ;
concerning which also the Homeric Neptune says,


rpes yap 7’ ex Kpovou expev adeApent, ous rexe Pein ™,


As brother Gods we three from Saturn came,
And Rhea bore us.


And the first Jupiter indeed, as being the demiurgus of
wholes, is the king of things first, middle, and last, con-
cerning whom Socrates also had just said, that he is the
ruler and king of all things; and life and salvation are
imparted to all things through him.


34 Proclus here means that there is the same analogy between Saturn,
Rhea, and Jupiter, as in the intelligible triad, between father, power, and
intellect.


2 Ort wvoumacrat n .Tndus wapa ro Sitarropevoy Kar nGoupzevoy, ovoy
AtarnOvus, xas apapece Ter spwrwyv dSvocvd\AaBuy TyOvs.


36 Nliad, xv. 187.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 189


But the ruling Jupiter, who ranks as a principle, and
who is coordinate with the three sons of Saturn, governs
the third part of the whole of things, according to that of
Homer,


Tptx0a Se wayra Sedacra——™,


A triple distribution all things own.


He is also the summit of the three, has the same name with
the fontal Jupiter, is united to him, and is monadically
called Jupiter. But the second is called dyadically, marine
Jupiter, and Neptune. And the third is triadically deno-
minated terrestrial Jupiter, Pluto, and Hades. The first of
these also preserves, fabricates, and vivifies summits, but
the second, things of a second rank, and the third those of
a third order. Hence this last is said to have ravished
Proserpine, that together with her he might animate the
extremities of the universe.

The Titannic order dividing itself from the connecting
order of Heaven, but having also something in itself abiding,
and connascent with that order, Saturn is the leader of the
separation, and on this account he both arms others against
his father, and receives the scythe * from his mother,
through which he divides his own kingdom from that of
Heaven. But Ocean is coordinated with those that abide
in the manners of the father, and guards the middle of the
two orders ; so far as a Titan being connumerated with the
Gods that subsist with Saturn; but so far as rejoicing in
a coordination with Heaven, conjoining himself with the
Synoches. For it is fit that he who bounds the first and
second orders should be arranged in the middle of the
natures that are bounded. But every where this God is
allotted a power of this kind, and separates the genera of
the Gods, the Titannic from the connecting (rwv cuvoxixwr),
and the vivific from the demiurgic. Whence also ancient
rumour calls Ocean the God who separates the apparent


2% Tliad, xv. 189. 28 See the Theogony of Hesiod, v. 176, &.


190 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


part of Heaven from the unapparent; and on this account
poeta say, that the sun and the other stars rise from the
ocean, What is now aaid therefore by Plato, comprehends
all the Titannic order through these two conjunctions ;
this order abiding, and at the same time proceeding. And
through the Saturnian order, indeed, it comprehends every
thing separated from the fathers; but through that of
Ocean, every thing conjoined with the connecting Gods.
Or if you had rather so speak, through the Saturnian
order, he comprehends every maternal cause, but through
the other, every thing subservient to the paternal cause.
For the female is the cause of progression and separation,
but the male of union and stable permanency.

Of the demiurgic triad ® which divides the whole world,
and distributes the indivisible, one, and whole fabrication
of the first Jupiter, the summit, and which has the relation
of father, is Jupiter, who, through union with the whole
demiurgic intellect having the same appellation with it, is
for this reason not mentioned here by Plato. But Neptune
is allotted the middle, and that which binds together both
the extremes; being filled indeed from the essence of
Jupiter, but filling Pluto. For of the whole of this triad,
Jupiter indeed is the father, but Neptune the power, and
Pluto the intellect. And all, indeed, are in all; but each
receives a different character of subsistence. Thus Jupiter
subsists according to being; but Neptune according to
power, and Pluto according to intellect. And though all
these divinities are the causes of the life of all things, yet
one is so essentially, another vitally, and another iniellec-
tually. Whence also the theologist Orpheus says, that the
extremes fabricate in conjunction with Proserpine things
first and last ; the middle being coarranged with generative
cause from his own allotment, without Proserpine. Hence
violence is said to have been offered to Proserpine by Jupi-
ter; but she is said to have been ravished by Pluto (d:0 xa


% That is, of the first triad of the supermundane, which subsists imme-
diately after the intellootual order.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 191


pact THY Kopyny vio pev rou dios BiafecOa, vro de rou wiov-
Twos apwrafecOa). But the middle is said to be the cause
of motion to all things. Hence, also, he is called earth-
shaker, as being the origin of motion. And among those
who are allotted the kingdom of Saturn, the middle allot-
ment, and the agile sea (7 evxiwyros Oadacca) are assigned
to him, According to every division, therefore, the sum-
mits are Jovian, the middlés belong to Neptune, and the
extremes to Pluto, And if you look to the centres, such as
the east, that of mid-heaven, and the west; if also you
divide the whole world, as for instance into the inerratic,
planetary, and sublunary spheres ;—or again, if you divide
that which is generated into the fiery, terrestrial, and that
which subsists between; or the earth into its summits,
middle, and hollow, and subterranean parts, this triad every
where distributes the first, middle, and last differences of
things fabricated in demiurgic boundaries.

The name Neptune is now triply analyzed. For Nep-
tune is the trident-bearer ; and the Tritons and Amphitrite
are the familiars of this God. And the first analyzation of
bis name is from the allotment over which he presides, and
from souls coming into generation, in whom the circle of
sameness is fettered; since the sea is analogous to genera-
tion. But the second is from communion with the first.


adda seus wporepos yeyovet, kat wecova ndee 29,


But Jove was born the first, and more he knows.


For a Jupiter of this kind is the proximate intelligible of
Neptune. But the third analysis of his name is from his
energy in externals, For he is motive of nature, and vivific
of things last. He is also the guardian of the earth, and
excites it to generations.

Neptune is an intellectual demiurgic God, who receives
souls descending into generation ; but Hades is an intellec-
tual demiurgic God, who frees souls from generation. For


8 Hom. Iliad.


192 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


as our whole period receives a triple division, into a life
prior to generation, which is Jovian, into a life of genera-
tion, which is Neptunian, and into a life posterior to gene-
ration, which is Plutonian ; Pluto, who is characterized by
intellect, very properly converts ends to beginnings, effect-
ing a circle without a beginning and without an end, not
only in souls, but also in every fabrication of bodies, and
in short, of all periods ;—which circle also he perpetually
convolves. Thus for instance, he converts the ends to the
beginnings of the souls of the stars, and the convolutions of
souls about generation, and the like. And hence Jupiter
is the guardian of the life of souls prior to generation.

Some, however, badly analyze the name of Pluto into
wealth from the earth, through fruits and metals; but
Hades into the invisible, dark, and dreadful. These So-
crates now reprobates, bringing the two names to the same
signification ; referring the name of Pluto, as intellect, to
the wealth of prudence, but that of Hades to an intellect
knowing all things. For this God is a sophist, who, purify-
ing souls after death, frees them from generation. For
Hades is not, as some improperly explain it, evil: for
neither is death evil; though Hades to some appears to be
attended with perturbations (e42a6ws); but it is invisible,
and better than the apparent ; such as is every thing in-
telligible. Intellect, therefore, in every triad of beings, con-
volves itself to being, and the paternal cause, imitating in
its energy the circle.

Men who are lovers of body badly refer to themselves
the passions of the animated nature, and on this account
consider death to be dreadful, as being the cause of corrup-
tion. The truth, however, is, that it is much better for man
to die, and live in Hades a life according to nature, since a
life in conjunction with body is contrary to nature, and is
an impediment to intellectual energy. Hence it is neces-
sary to divest ourselves of the fleshly garments with which
we are clothed, as Ulysses did of his ragged vestments,
and no longer like a wretched mendicant, together with
the indigence of body, put on our rags. For, as the Chal-


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 193


dean Oracle says, ‘“‘ Things divine cannot be obtained by
those whose intellectual eye is directed to body ; but those
only can arrive at the possession of them who stript of their
garments hasten to the summit.”

Neptune, when compared with Jupiter, is said to know
many things ; but Hades, compared with souls to whom he
imparts knowledge, is said to know all things; though
Neptune is more total than Hades,

As it is necessary to analyze Pluto, not only into the
obvious wealth from the earth, but also into the wealth of
wisdom, so likewise Ceres must be analyzed not only into
corporeal nutriment ; but beginning from the Gods them-
selves it is requisite to conceive her to be the supplier of
aliment, first to the Gods themselves, afterwards to the
natures posterior to the Gods; and in the last place, that
the series of this beneficent energy extends as far as to
corporeal nutriment. For the characteristic of love shines
forth first of all in the Gods; and this is the case with the
medicinal and prophetic powers of Apollo, and with those
of every other divinity. But nutriment, when considered
with reference to the Gods, is the communication of in-
tellectual plenitude from more exalted natures to those
of an inferior rank. Gods, therefore, are nourished, when
they view with the eye of intellect Gods prior to them-
selves ; and when they are perfected and view intelligible
beauties, such as justice itself, temperance itself, and the
like, as it is said in the Phzedrus.

From sportive conceptions about the Gods, it is possible
for those to energize entheastically, or according to a
divinely inspired energy, who apply themselves to things
in a more intellectual manner. Thus, for instance, accord-
ing to the material conceptions of the multitude, Venus
derives her origin from foam; and foam corresponds to
seed. Hence, according to them, the pleasure arising from
this in coition is Venus. Who, however, is so stupid as
not to survey primary and eternal natures, prior to such as
are last and corruptible? I will therefore unfold the divine
conception respecting Venus.


N


194 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


They say then that the first Venus was produced from
twofold causes, the one as that through which™, cooperating
with her progression, as calling forth the prolific power of
the father, and imparting it tothe intellectual orders ; but
Heaven as the maker and cause unfolding the goddess into
light, from his own generative abundance. For whence
could that which congregates different genera, according to
one desire of beauty, receive its subsistence except fram
the synochical power of Heaven? From the foam, there-
fore, of his own prolific parts thrown into the sea, Heaven
produced this Goddess, as Orpheus says. But the second
Venus Jupiter produces from his own generative powers,
in conjunction with Dione ; and this goddess likewise pro-
ceeds from foam, after the same manner with the more
ancient Venus, as Orpheus evinces. These goddesses
therefore differ from each other, according to the causes of
their production, their orders and their powers. For she
that proceeds from the genitals of Heaven is supermun-
dane, leads upwards to intelligible beauty, is the supplier
of an unpolluted life, and separates from generation. But
the Venus that proceeds from Dione governs all the coordi-
nations in the celestial world and the earth, binds them
to each other, and perfects their generative progressions,
through a kindred conjunction. These divinities too are
united with each other through a similitude of subsistence :
for they both proceed from generative powers; one from
that of the connectedly containing power of Heaven, and
the other from Jupiter the demiurgus. But the sea signi-
fies an expanded and circumscribed life; its profundity,
- the universally extended progression of such a life ; and its
foam, the greatest purity of nature, that which is full of
prolific light and power, and that which swims upon all
life, and is as it were its highest flower.

According to Orpheus, Ceres is the same with Rhea.
For he says, that subsisting on high in unproceeding union


31 This cause is Saturn, who according to the fable cut off the genital
parts of Heaven. See the Theogony of Hesiod.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 195


with Satarn, she is Rhea, but that by emitting and generat-
ing Jupiter, she is Ceres. For thus he speaks,


Pecny ro rpw eoveay, eret Sos exXeTO pyTyp
’ Teyove Snuyrnp™,


Le. The goddess who was Rhea, when she bore Jove became
Ceres.


But Hesiod says that Ceres is the daughter of Rhea. It
is however evident that these theologists harmonize : for
whether this goddess proceeds from union with Saturn to
& secondary order, or whether she is the first progeny of
Rhea, she is still the same, Ceres, therefore, thus sub-
sisting, and receiving the most ancient and ruling order
from the whole vivific Rhea (rys odAns fwoyovou peas), and
comprehending the middle centres of whole vivification
(rns odAns fwoyouas), she fills all supermundane natures
with the rivers of all-perfect life, pouring upon all things
vitally, indivisibly, and uniformly.

Prior however to all this, she unfolds to us the demiurgic
intellect (Jupiter), and imparts to him the power of vivify-
ing wholes. For as Saturn supplies her from on high with
the cause of being; so Ceres from on high, and from her
own prolific bosoms, pours forth vivification to the demi-
urgus. But possessing herself the middle of all vivific
deity, she governs the whole fountains which she contains,
and comprehends the one bond of the first and last powers
of life. She stably convolves too, and contains all secon-
dary fountains. But she leads forth the uniform causes of
prior natures to the generation of others. This goddess
too comprehends Vesta and Juno: in her right hand parts
Juno, who pours forth the whole order of souls; but in her
left hand parts Vesta, who leads forth all the light of
virtue. Hence Ceres is with great propriety called by


$2 This Orphic fragment is not to be found in Gesner’s or Hermann’s
collection of the Orphic remains.


196 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


Plato ® mother, and at the same time the supplier of aliment.
For, so far as she comprehends in herself the cause of
Juno, she is a mother; but as containing Vesta in her
easence, she is the supplier of aliment. But the paradigm
of this goddess is Night: for tmmortal Night is called the
nurse of the Gods. Night however is the cause of aliment
intelligibly °*: for that which is intelligible is, according to
the oracle®, the aliment of the intellectual orders of Gods.
But Ceres first of all separates the two kinds of aliment in
the Gods, as Orpheus says :


Myoaro yap xporodous, kat audirodous, kas owadous”
Myearo 8’ apBpooiny, kat epvOpou vexrapos apOpov’
Myoaro 8 ayhaa epya pedroawy epiBouBwy %-


i, e. She cares for pow’rs ministrant, whether they
Or Gods precede, or follow, or surround :
Ambrosia, and tenacious nectar red
Are too the objects of her bounteous care.
Last to the bee her providence extends,

Who gathers honey with resounding bum.


Ceres, therefore, our sovereign mistress (Seorova) not only
generates life, but that which gives perfection to life; and
this from supernal natures to such as are last: for virtue ts
the perfection of souls. Hence mothers who are connected
with the circulations of time, bring forth their offspring in
imitation of this twofold and eternal generation of Ceres.
For, at the same time that they send forth their young into
the light, they extend to them milk naturally produced as
their food.

Again, the conjunction of the demiurgic intellect with


88 See p. 521, vol. v. of my translation of Plato.


$4 Because Night subsists at the summit of the intelligible and at the
same time intellectual order, and is wholly absorbed in the intelligible.


% That is, according to one of the Chaldean Oracles,
86 These verses likewise are not in Gesner’s and Hermann’s collection.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 197


the vivific causes is triple: for it is conjoined with the
fountains prior to itself : is present with its kindred coordi-
nate natures ; and coenergizes with the orders posterior to
itself. For it is present with the mother prior to itself,
convertively (emtorperrcxws); with Proserpine posterior to
itself, providentially (xpovonrixws); and with Juno coordi-
nate to itself with an amatory energy (epacuiws). Hence
Jupiter is said to be enamoured of Juno,


ws veo vuy epayac *,


As now I love thee, —


And this love indeed is legal, but the other two appear to
be illegal. This Goddess therefore produces from herself,
in conjunction with the demiurgus and father, all the genera
of souls, the supermundane and mundane, the celestial and
sublunary, the divine, angelic, dsmoniacal, and partial.
After a certain manner too, she is divided from the demi-
urgus, but in a certain respect she is united to him: for
Jupiter is said, in the Philebus, to contain a royal intellect
and a royal soul. For he contains uniformly the paternal
and maternal cause of the world; and the fountain of souls
is said to be in Jupiter; just as again the intelligence of
Jupiter is said to be first participated by Juno. For no
other divinity, says Jupiter in Homer, knows my mind
prior to Juno. Through this ineffable union therefore of
these divinities, the world participates of intellectual souls,
They also give subsistence to intellects who are carried
in souls, and who together with them give completion to
the whole fabrication of things.

The series of our sovereign mistress Juno, beginning
from on high, pervades to the last of things ; and her allot-
ment in the sublunary region is the air. For air is a
symbol of soul, according to which also soul is called a
spirit (rvevpa); just as fire is an image of intellect, but
water of nature, by which the world is nourished (rys xoc-


87 Tliad, xiv. 328.


198 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


porpopou ducews), through which all nutriment and increase
are produced. But earth is the image of body, through its
gross and material nature. Hence Homer, obscurely sig-
nifying this, represents Juno suspended with two anvils
under her feet : for the air is allotted two heavy elements
beneath itself.

For


nov 3 axapavra Bowms rorvia npn
meme ew WKEAYOLO poas.


ie. ‘‘ Fair-eyed venerable Juno sent the sun to the streams
of the ocean,” —is from the same conception.

For he calls the thick cloud produced by Juno the setting
of the sun. The assertion likewise that the end of this
name will be conjoined with the beginning, if any one fre-
quently repeats the name of the Goddess, evinces the con-
version of rational souls to her which proceed from her;
and that voice is air that is struck. On this account also
the voice of rational animals is especially dedicated to this
Goddess, who made the horse of Achilles to become vocal.
But Socrates now delivers these three vivific monads in a
consequent order, viz. Ceres, Juno, Proserpine ; calling the
first the mother, the second the sister, and the third the
daughter of the demiurgus. All of them however are par-
takers of the whole of fabrication; the first in an exempt
manner and intellectually, the second in a fontal manner,
and at the same time in a way adapted to a principle
(apxixws), and the third in a manner adapted to a principle
and leader (apyixws Kas syyepomxws).

Of these Goddesses the last possesses triple powers, and
impartibly and uniformly oomprehends three monads of
Gods. But she is called Core (xopy) through the purity of
her essence, and her undefiled transcendency in her gene-
rations. She also possesses a first, middle, and last empire.
And according to her summit, indeed, she is called Diana
by Orpheus; but according to her middle Proserpine ; and
according to the extremity of the order Minerva. Like-
wise, according to an hyparxis transcending the other


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 199


powers of this triple vivific order, the dominion of Hecate
is established ; but according to a middle power, and which
is generative of wholes, that of Soul; and according to in-
tellectual conversion that of Virtue ®, Core therefore, sub-
sisting on high, and among the supermundane Gods, uni-
formly extends this triple order of divinities ; and together
with Jupiter generates Bacchus, who impartibly presides
over partible fabrication. But beneath, in conjunction with
Pluto, she is particularly beheld according to the middle
peculiarity ; for it is this which proceeding every where
imparts vivification to the last of things. Hence she is
called Proserpine, because she especially associates with
Pluto, and together with him orderly distributes the ex-
tremities of the universe. And according to her extremi-
ties indeed, she is said to be a virgin, and to remain
undefiled: but according to her middle, to be conjoined
with Hades, and to beget the Furies in the subterranean
regions, She therefore is also called Core, but after another
manner than the supermundane and ruling Core. For the
one is the connective unity of the three vivific principles ;
but the other is the middle of them, in herself possessing
the peculiarities of the extremes. Hence in the Proserpine
conjoined with Pluto, you will find the peculiarities of
Hecate and Minerva; but these extremes subsist in her
occultly, while the peculiarity of the middle shines forth,
and that which is characteristic of ruling soul, which in the
supermundane Core was of a ruling * nature, but here sub-
sists according to a mundane peculiarity.

Proserpine is denominated, either through judging of
forms and separating them from each other, thus obscurely
signifying the ablation of slaughter (da ro xpwew ra edn
Ka. Xwpifew adAnXwv, ws rou povov THY avaiperw awmrTroLe-


88 Proclus says this conformably to the theology of the Chaldeans. For
according to that theology, the first monad of the vivific triad is Hecate,
the second Soul, and the third Virtue.


% That is, of a supermundane nature: for the ruling are the supermun-
dane Gods.


200 ADDITIONAL NOTES.


yoy), or through separating souls perfectly from bodies,
through a conversion to things on high, which is the most
fortunate slaughter and death, to such as are worthy of it
(7 dca ro xwpifery Tas Yuxas redews ex Tw cwuarwv Sua THs
Wpos TA avw emiorpodys, owrep ear evruxeoraros Povos Kat
Oavaros ros akvounerors rovrov), But the name depedarra,
Pherephatta, according to a contract with generation, is
adapted to Proserpine ; but according to wisdom and coun-
sel to Minerva, At the same time, however, all the appella-
tions by which she is distinguished are adapted to the
perfection of soul. On this account also she is called
Proserpine, and not by the names of the extremes; since
that which was ravished by Pluto is the middle; the
extremes at the same time being firmly established in
themselves, according to which Core is said to remain a
virgin.

With respect to our sovereign mistress Diana, Plato
delivers three peculiarities of her, the undefiled, the mun-
dane, and the anagogic. And through the first of these
indeed, the goddess is said to be a lover of virginity; but
through the second, according to which she is perfective
of works (reXectoupyos) she is said to be the inspective
guardian of virtue; and through the third she is said to
hate the impulses arising from generation. Of these three,
likewise, the first is especially adapted to the progression
of the goddess, according to which she is allotted an
hyparxis in the vivific triad of the supermundane Gods;
whether we call this deity Hecatic, as Theurgists say, or
Diana with Orpheus. For there being established, she is
filled with undefiled powers from the Gods called Amilicti ®,
But she looks to the fountain of virtue, and embraces its
virginity. For the virginity which is there does not pro-
ceed forth, as the Oracle says, but abiding gives subsist-
ence to Diana, and to supermundane virtue, and is exempt
from all communion, conjunction, and progression, accord-
ing to generation, Hence Core also, according to the


© That is, the Corybantes.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 201


Diana and Minerva which she contains, is said to remain a
virgin ; but according to the prolific power of Proserpine,
she is said to proceed forth, and to be conjoined with the
third demiurgus, and to bring forth, as Orpheus says, “nine
azure-eyed, flower-producing daughters ;”’


evvea Ouryarepas yAauxwaridas avOectoupyous"


since the Diana and the Minerva which she contains pre-
serve their virginity always the same, For the former of
these is characterized according to her stability, but the
latter according to her convertive energy. But that which
is generative is allotted in her a middle order. They say
too, that she aspires after virginity, since the form of her is
comprehended in the vivific fountain, and she understands
fontal virtue, gives subsistence to supermundane and ana-
gogic virtue, and despises all material sexual connexion,
though she inspects the fruits arising from it.

She appears also to be averse to the generations and
progressions of things, but to introduce perfections to them.
And she gives perfection indeed to souls through a life
according to virtue; but to mortal animals she imparts a
restitution to form, But that there is a great union between
Diana, the mundane Hecate, and Core, is evident to those
that are in the least degree conversant with the writings of
Orpheus ; from which it appears that Latona is compre-
hended in Ceres, and together with Jupiter gives subsist-
ence to Core, and the mundane Hecate. To which we may
also add, that Orpheus *! calls Diana Hecate. So that it is
nothing wonderful, if we should elsewhere call the Diana
contained in Core Hecate,

The wise man venerates the last and mundane pro-
gressions of the Gods, though, as Plato says, they are
sports through these Gods [i. e. Venus and Bacchus] being
lovers of sport. For as he says of the terminations of the
other Gods, that they are terrible, and that they avenge and


4! H 8 apa exarn Gasdos weAn avs Avdovca
Anrovs cuGAoKkapo10 Kopn wpogeByoar’ oAUpaoM.


202 ADDITIONAL NOTES,


punish, and thus give perfection to souls; as for instance,
that Justice follows Jupiter, the avenger of the divine law,
and that this divinity is benevolent to those whose manners
are orderly, and who live according to intellect ; but that
she is baneful to those who mingle their life. with inso-
lence and ignorance, until she has entirely subverted them,
their houses, and cities ;—in like manner, he venerates the
terminations of Bacchus and Venus, which produce y\uav-
Supa, sweetness of sensation; every where purifying our
conceptions concerning the Gods, and preparing us to
understand that all things look to the best end, whatever it
may be. For because the terminations of these divinities
strengthen the infirmity of the mortal nature, and recall
corporeal molestation, on this account the Gods, the causes
of these things, are p:Aowarypoves, lovers of sport. Hence
of statues, they make some of them laughing and dancing,
and exhibiting relaxation, but others austere, astonishing
and terrible to the view, analogously to the mundane allot-
ments of the Gods,

That theologists frequently call Bacchus wine, from the
last of his gifts, as for instance Orpheus,


owou warra En Koguw AaBe, Kat pot EverKe.


ie. “Take all the members of wine (that are distributed)
in the world and bring them to me,”

But if the God is thus denominated, certainly his first
and middle energies will be thus called, as well as his
last; so that Socrates now looking to this, calls the God
didowveos, beginning from wine, which, as we have said,
manifests all the powers of the God. Thus also in the
Phzedrus, Socrates calls love in common great, both that
which is divine and that which is a lover of body. By this
epithet wine, therefore, we must understand that the pecu-
liarity of a partial intellect is in common presented to our
view. For the word owovy, such as, is nothing else than in-
tellectual form separated from a total intellect, and in con-
sequence of this becoming participated, particular and alone.


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 203


For an all-perfect intellect is all things, and energizes
according to all things with invariable sameness; but a
partial and participated intellect is indeed all things, but this
according to one form, such as a solar, lunar, or mercurial
form. This therefore, the peculiarity of which is to be
separated from the rest, wine indicates, signifying an intel-
lect such as and particular (onyawvwr Tov o1ov Kat Twa vour).
Since therefore every partial fabrication is suspended from
the Dionysiacal monad, which distributes participated mun-
dane intellects from total intellect [or the intellect which
ranks as a whole], many souls from one soul, and all
sensible forms from their proper totalities; on this account
theologists call both this God and all his fabrications wine.
For all these are the progeny of intellect ; and some things
participate of the partial distribution of intellect in a more
distant, but others in a nearer degree, Wine therefore
energizes in things analogously to its subsistence in them ;
in body, indeed, after the manner of an image, according to
@ false opinion and imagination ; but in intellectual natures
according to an intellectual energy and fabrication ; since
in the laceration of Bacchus by the Titans, the heart of the
God [i. e, the indivisible essence of intellect] is said to have
alone remained undistributed.

Again, theologists especially celebrate two powers of
our sovereign mistress Minerva, the defensive and the per-
_ fective ; the former preserving the order of wholes unde-
filed, and unvanquished by matter, and the latter filling all
things with intellectual light, and converting them to their
cause. And on this account, Plato also in the Timsus,
analogously celebrates Minerva as philopolemic and philo-
sophic. But three orders of this Goddess are delivered by
theologists ; the one fontal and intellectual, according to
which she establishes herself in her father Jupiter, and
subsists in unproceeding union with him; but the second
ranks among the supermundane Gods, according to which
she is present with Core, and bounds and converts all the pro-
gression of that Goddess to herself, And the third is lide-
rated, according to which she perfects and guards the whole


204 ADDITIONAL NOTES,


world, and circularly invests it with her powers, as with a
veil; binding together all the mundane summits, and giving
subsistence to all the allotments in the heavens, and to
those which proceed into the sublunary region. Now
therefore Socrates celebrates her guardian power, through
the name of Pallas; but her perfective power through that
of Minerva. She is the cause therefore of orderly and
measured motion, which she first imparts to the Curetic
order, and afterwards to the other Gods. For Minerva,
according to this power, is the leader of the Curetes, as
Orpheus says, whence also, as well as those divinities she
is adorned with empyrean arms, through which she re-
presses all disorder, preserves the demiurgic series immov-
able, and unfolds dancing through rythmical motion. She
also guards reason as it proceeds from intellect; through
this power vanquishing matter. For the visible region,
says Timzous, is mingled from intellect and necessity, the
latter being obedient to the former, and all material causes
being in subjection to the will of the father. It is this
Goddess therefore who arranges necessity under the pro-
ductions of intellect, raises the universe to the participation
of Jupiter, excites and establishes it in the port of its
father, and eternally guards and defends it. Hence, if the
universe is said to be indissoluble, it is this goddess who
supplies its permanency; and if it moves in measured
motion, through the whole of time, according to one reason
and order, she is the source of this supply. She watch-
fully surveys therefore all the fabrication of her father, and
connects and converts it to him; and vanquishes all mate-
rial indefiniteness, Hence she is called Victory and Health;
the former because she causes intellect to rule over ne-
cessity, and form over matter; and the latter, because she
preserves the world“ perpetually whole, perfect, exempt


42 In the very learned Professor Boissonade’s edition of this work, for
rov xoooyv in this place, there is nothing more than ro coy; and my manu-
script has very erroneously vo xaxov. But the true reading is undoubtedly
zvov xoouov. For Proclus, in what he here says, alludes to the following


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 205


from age, and free from disease. It is the property there-
fore of this Goddess to elevate and distribute, and through
an intellectual dance as it were, to connect, establish, and
defend inferior natures in such as are more divine“,


words of Plato in the Timzous, 81a 8¢ ry attiay Kas Tov Aoytopoy Tovee, ev
odoy ef a&avtwv TedCOV Kat aynpwv Kat avogov avroy [i.e. roy Koopov)
extmnvaro. In all the editions of Plato’s works, however, there is a very
erroneous omission in this passage. For from the text of Proclus, and
also from what Plato previously says, instead of ev oAoy ef arayrwy, it is
necessary to read ev odXov e€ oAwy arayrwv. And then the passage will be
in English, ‘‘Through this cause, and from this reasoning process he
[{i. e. the Demiurgus] fashioned the world one perfect whole, consisting of
all wholes, exempt from age and free from disease.”


48 The whole of this sentence is in my manuscript as follows: Orrecov ovy
TS Seov TavTyNs Kas To avayew Kat pepigey, Kar Sta THs vOepas xoperas
Guvarrery Tors Jevorepots, Kae evidpvery cat Ppovpery evavrots But after
the word pepicery, it is necessary either to add or conceive to be implied
ta Sevrepa, The last word, avrors, is wanting in the Professor’s edition.


THE END.


Printed by BALLANTYNE, HANSON & CO,
Edinburgh and London
