Greeks and Goths: A Study on the Runes (Isaac Taylor, 1879)
======================================
Taylor's 1879 rune-origin theory — the Victorian debate on the runes' debt to the Greek alphabet, a turning point in runology. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/cu31924006284388).

CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


IN MEMORY "

OF

BARRY HOWARD, 1936
HART LIBRARY


Cornell University Library
PD 2014.T24
Greeks and Goths :a study on «he runes /


3 1924 006 284 388


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


GREEKS AND GOTHS


A STUDY ON THE RUNES.


BY


ISAAC TAYLOR, M.A., LL.D.

RECTOR Or SETTEINGTON,
ATTTHOB OF ' WOEDS AHD PLACES,' 'ETETTSCAK RESEARCHES,' ETC. ETC.


1L o n tr o n :


MACMILLAN AND


CO


1879.


[All rights reserved.']
Hi


PD

1011/


$JJ UJCL±l


OXFORD:

E. PICKAED HALL, M.A., AND J. H. STAOT,

PRINTERS TO THE UNIVERSITY.


PREFACE.

In following out certain inquiries as to the
history and connection of early Alphabets, it
became necessary that I should make myself
acquainted with what had been written on the
origin of the Bunes. It speedily became mani-
fest that none of the current theories on the
subject were sufficient to explain the facts. A
re-examination of the conditions of the problem
gradually led to the wholly unexpected con-
clusions which are set forth in the following
pages.

I have thought it -best to publish these results
in a separate form, instead of including them in
a larger forthcoming work on the History of the
Alphabet, because it seemed needful, in putting
forth a theory so entirely novel, to state the
argument with greater fullness of detail, and in


iv Preface.

a more technical form, than would be desirable or
proportionate in a more comprehensive work.

When this book was ready for the press I
accidentally discovered that Bask, the greatest
of Scandinavian scholars, believed that the view
which I have advocated would ultimately prove
to be the true solution of the problem of the
Eunes. I do not find, however, that he ever
worked out the details of the theory or even
formally propounded it.

I have included in the volume a subsidiary
investigation into the Origin of the Oghams,
which are intimately connected with the Eunes.

In expressing my obligations to Professor
Stephens, and my admiration of his monumental
work, I am bound to acknowledge that his un-
wearied toil and his minute accuracy have made
easy a task which would otherwise have been
difficult, if not impossible.


CONTENTS.


§ 1. The Futhorcs.

The Runes. — The various Futhorcs — Gothic — Anglian — Scandinavian. —
The Mceso-Gothic Alphabet . . .... p. I

§ 2. The Dated Monuments.

Buzeo Torque. — Nordenhoff Broach Vi Moss Tools. — Nydam Moss

Arrows. — Charnay Broach. — Vadstena Bracteate. — Ruthwell Cross.
— Date of the earliest Inscriptions . . . . . p. 7

§ 3. The Phoenician Hypothesis.

Opinions of Stephens, Lenormant, Peile, Dieterich. — Difficulties of the
Hypothesis p. 15

§ 4. The Latin Hypothesis.

Its Advocates. — Chronological and Geographical Difficulties. — The
Retrograde and Boustrophedon Inscriptions. — Inadequacy of Dr.
Kirchhoff's Argument. — Principles of Alphabetic Change. — Un-
scientific method of Dr. Wimmer. — Detailed Examination of his
Argument. — The Guttural Test ... . . p. 19

§ 5. The Greek Hypothesis.

Evidence of Tacitus. — A priori probability of the Greek Hypothesis. —
A preliminary Test . . . . . . . . p. 33


iv Preface.

a more technical form, than would be desirable or
proportionate in a more comprehensive work.

When this book was ready for the press I
accidentally discovered that Kask, the greatest
of Scandinavian scholars, believed that the view
which I have advocated would ultimately prove
to be the true solution of the problem of the
Runes. I do not find, however, that he ever
worked out the details of the theory or even
formally propounded it.

I have included in the volume a subsidiary
investigation into the Origin of the Oghams,
which are intimately connected with the Eunes.

In expressing my obligations to Professor
Stephens, and my admiration of his monumental
work, I am bound to acknowledge that his un-
wearied toil and his minute accuracy have made
easy a task which would otherwise have been
difficult, if not impossible.


CONTENTS.


§ 1. The Futhorcs.

The Kiraes. — Tie variouB Futhorcs — Gothic — Anglian — Scandinavian. —
The Moeso-Gothic Alphabet . . .... p. i

§ 2. The Dated Monuments.

Buzeo Torque. — Nordenhoff Broach Vi Moss Tools. — Nydam Moss

Arrows. — Charnay Broach. — Vadstena Bracteate. — Ruthwell Cross.
— Date of the earliest Inscriptions . . . . p. 7

§ 3. The Phoenician Hypothesis.

Opinions of Stephens, Lenormant, Peile, Dieterich. — Difficulties of the
Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . p. 15

§ i. The Latin Hypothesis.

Its Advocates. — Chronological and Geographical Difficulties. — The
Retrograde and Boustrophedon Inscriptions. — Inadequacy of Dr.
KirchhofTs Argument. — Principles of Alphabetic Change. — Un-
scientific method of Dr. Wimmer. — Detailed Examination of his
Argument, — The Guttural Test . . . . . . p. 19

§ 5. The Greek Hypothesis.

Evidence of Tacitus. — A priori probability of the Greek Hypothesis. —
A preliminary Test P- 33


vi Contents.


§ 6. The Chronological Conditions.
The Chronological Tests. — The Boustrophedon Test. — The Paheogra-
phieal Test.— Characteristics of the Alphabet of the Isles.— Influence
of the Persian Invasion on the Thracian Alphabet . • P- 37

§ 7. The Geographical Conditions.
The Thracian and Euxine Colonies. — The Getse. — The Goths. — Position
and Extent of the Gothic Realm. — Commerce of the Dnieper. —
Evidence of Herodotus. — Olbia and Gerrhos . . . p. 43

§ 8. The Thkacian Alphabet.

Thracian Coins. — Alphabet of the Mother Cities of the Colonies in
Thrace. — The Three Stages of the Greek Alphabet . . p. 51

§ 9. The Fdthoeo and the Alphabet.
Phonetic Changes. — Laws of Alphabetic Development and Arrest . p. 56

§ 10. The Liquids and Sibilants.

The I Rune. — The tailed r. — -Resemblances between the Thracian and
Italian Alphabets. — The m and n RuneB. — Change by Correlation.
— The s Rune P- 57

§ 11. The Vowels.

Disuse of Alpha. — Developments of Epsilon. — Iota. — Omega. — The
Twelfth Rune. — Developments of Eta. — Unstable Letters. — Early
forms of the e Rune. — The Aspirate. — The Thirteenth Rune . p. 61

§ 12. The Mutes.
Classification of the Mutes . . P- 7o

§ 13. The Dentals.
The Lautverschiebung. — Grimm's Law. — The Chronological Hypothesis.
How did Debilitation begin? . . . . . . • P- 71


Contents. vii


§ 14. The Labials.

Disuse of Pi. — Gothic Labials developed out of Beta. — Parallel de-
velopment of Names and Forms. — The Moeso-Gothio Labials. —
Stages of the Development . . . . . . • P- 74

! § 15. The Gutturals.

Debilitation of Gutturals. — The Gamma Runes. — Evolution of the ng

Rune The Koppa Runes. — Thrace and Italy. — The Ilix Rune.

— Wen and Cen p. 79

§ 16. The Later Runes.

The Runes superseded by the Latin Letters. — Gradual Disuse of Runes
in Denmark, Sweden, and England. — Simplification of the Scandi-
navian Futhorc. — Elaboration of the Anglian Futhorc. — Later
Developments of the Epsilon and Gamma Runes. — Development
of r final. — The New Runes for m and h. — The Stan Rune . p. 88

§ 17. The Order of the Runes.

Survivals of the Order of the Greek Letters. — Causes of Alphabetic Dis-
location. — The Arabic and Syriac Alphabets. — Attempt to account
for the Order of the Runes . . . . . . p. 99

§ 18. The Oghams.

Runic Inscriptions replaced by Oghams in Wales and Ireland. —
Geographical distribution of Oghams. — Date of Oghams. — Their
Traditional arrangement. — The Oghams derived from the Runes.
— The Bethluisnion. — Comparison of Rune and Ogham Names. —
The ng Ogham. — Restoration of Primitive Values and Arrangement
of the Oghams. — The Tree Runes. — The Ogham Trees. — Principle
of Ogham construction. — Classification of Runes. — Correspondence
of Ogham and Runic Classes. — The Lautverschiebung. — Oghams
invented in Wales. — Date of Scandinavian Invasions. — The Tuatha
De Danann. — The Jutes p. 108


GREEKS AND GOTHS


A STUDY ON THE RUNES.


§ 1. The Futhorcs.

At the time when the Eoman alphabet was in-
troduced by Christian missionaries into Northern
Europe some of the Teutonic nations had been
for several centuries in possession of a peculiar
alphabet of their own. This ancient alphabet was
chiefly used by the Scandinavians, the Northum-
brians, and the Goths. The characters are called
Runes, and the alphabet bears the name of the
Futhorc, from the first six runes,

r, n, t>, #, ft, y, /, «, tu, , r, c .

The one unsolved problem in the History of
the Alphabet is the origin of these Runes. That
they should have been independently invented by
the Teutons is a solution which must be regarded

ft* B


The Futhorcs.


as quite out of the question. The history of the
invention of alphabetic writing shows the enor-
mous difficulty of such an undertaking. It was
only through the slow developments of many
centuries that the united genius of the Phoeni-
cians and the Greeks, the two most cultured
races of the South, succeeded at last in elabo-
rating a pure alphabet out of the cumbrous
picture writing of the Egyptian Hieroglyphics.
That an equivalent result should have been at-
tained off hand by any semi-barbarous Teutonic
tribe is quite incredible. There are, moreover,
such striking resemblances between several of
the runes and the corresponding letters of various
Mediterranean alphabets, that the mathematical
chances against such a series of accidental co-
incidences are absolutely overwhelming. On these
grounds it has been universally admitted that
the Eunes must, in some unknown manner, have
been derived from that one great parent alphabet
to which modern research has affiliated almost
every other alphabet of the world — Ethiopic,
Arabic and Hebrew, Greek, Latin and Etruscan,
Indian and Tibetan, Mongol and Malay.


The Gothic Futhorc.


Eunic inscriptions have been found scattered
over a vast region extending from the Danube
to the Orkneys. The most ancient of these in-
scriptions are earlier in date by at least a
thousand years than the most modern. During
this long period a constant development was
going on, and hence we find, as was to be ex-
pected, that the runes of different countries
and of different periods present very considerable
variations. They may all however be classified
into three main divisions — the Gothic, the
Anglian, and the Scandinavian. The charac-
teristic runes of these three classes are here
tabulated for handy reference.

In this Table the first column, which is styled
for convenience the Gothic Futhorc, contains the
twenty- four primitive runes, which are used
indifferently in all countries in the earliest in-
scriptions. These early inscriptions, which are
about 200 in number, range from the third to
the sixth centuries of our era. Twenty- three
of these runes appear in their order, as a Futhorc,
on a golden Bracteate or medal, from Vadstena,
in East Gothland (Sweden), which may be assigned

B 2


The Futhorcs.


Table of Eunes.


Names.


Values.


RUNES.


JV


I.


II.


III.


Gothic


Anglian


Scandi-
navian.


Alphabet of
Ulphilas.


fech, feh, fe


/


? P


l V


V


P


ur, hur


u


A n


h n


n


n


ou


thorn


th


D > |>


►


p


&


5


asc, sesc, os


a, as, o


& *


r* p


*


A


a


rad, rat


r


R R


i*


R /K


K


p


cen, kaun


c,k


< A


k


Y


K


K


gebo, gifu


g


X


X


r


Y


wen


V, w


P


?


Vpo


v,hv


hegl, hagal


h


NHNH


N


*


h


h


nyd, nod


n


+ *


+


+ l>


N


V


is


i


1


1


1


I


I


ger, yr, ar


y,g',j,a


1h5


<t>


A A


9


j


hie, ih, eoh


ih, i, eo


\nA


vA


X


c


peorth, perc


P


&


K C


K


n


IT


ilix, calc


a, t, k, x


r


Y


qo


q


sigil


s


s


h


h


s


tir


t


t


t


t 1


T


T


berc, berith


6


*


&


B


K


P


hsec, ech, eh


e


n m


M


e


V


man


m


M


M


? Y


M


f*


lagu


I


r


r


r


A


X


ing


»g


o <>


J?


X


X


dag, dseg


d


S DO


M


<J>


6


othil


o, ce


*R


*


K


<o


The Anglian Futhorc.


to the middle of the fourth century a.d. Nine-
teen of them appear also as a Futhorc on a
fifth century broach, found at Charnay in Bur-
gundy.

The second column contains the corresponding
runes of the Anglian Futhorc, which is used
on the Ruthwell Cross and on several Northum-
brian monuments of the seventh and following
centuries. It is given as a Futhorc in sundry
MSS. of the eighth and ninth centuries, the
earliest form appearing on a sword of the sixth
or seventh century, which was found in the
Thames, near London. The Anglian Futhorc
usually contains from four to twelve supplement-
ary runes, which are either survivals or develop-
ments of the primitive Gothic runes. The most
important of these additional runes are — ¥■> a >
P, « ; ^, o ; FfT, y ; Y, ea and q ; y , k 1 M, st
and ss.

In the third column is given the latest, or
Scandinavian Futhorc. It attained its final
form about the tenth century, and contains only
sixteen runes. We find it given as a Futhorc
on a slab in the Picts' House at Maeshowe in


The Futhorcs.


Orkney, and on a twelfth century font at Boerse
in Denmark. Some 2000 runic inscriptions, nine-
tenths probably of the whole number extant, are
written in this Scandinavian Futhorc, which was
used in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Orkney,
Cumberland, and the Isle of Man.

The fourth column contains the M<eso-Gothic
Alphabet, which was compiled in the fourth
century by Ulphilas, Bishop of the Goths. It is
evidently based upon the ancient Gothic Futhorc,
with two or three additions and several modifica-
tions derived from the contemporary Byzantine
Alphabet.

All the evidence, internal and external, goes to
prove that the Gothic Futhorc exhibits the earliest
forms of the runes. If we compare it with the
later Futhorcs, Anglian or Scandinavian, it will
be seen that many of the original runes, such as
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 11, 17, 18, 21, remained almost
unchanged, some, Nos. 7, 8, 13, 23, fell into dis-
use; others, Nos. 4, 14, 15, 22, were modified
in form or value ; while in a few cases, Nos.
9, 12, 20, new developments have replaced the
ancient characters.


The Buzeo Torque.


§ 2. The Dated Monuments.

It is manifest that any investigation into the
origin of the runes must start from the Gothic
Futhorc, and it consequently becomes a matter
of great importance to ascertain as accurately as
possible the dates of the earlier inscriptions. It
will therefore be needful to devote a few pre-
liminary paragraphs to a summary of the evidence
on which the dates of certain standard inscrip-
tions have been approximately determined.

From the historical point of view the most
important runic monument yet discovered is a
massive gold torque, which is now in the Museum
at Bucharest. This torque was found in 1838
at Buzeo in Wallachia, and formed part of a
treasure buried within a ring-mound, which seems
to have been the site of a heathen temple. The
intrinsic value of the gold was about £4000 *.
The torque bears an inscription in unmistakable
runes of the early type, which reads —

X At M»l *M H M H X,
' Dedicated to the temple of the Goths/ Here,

1 Zacher, Das Gothische Alphabet, p. 47.


The Dated Monuments.


then, we have a very definite date. In the second
century a portion of the Goths left their early
homes east of the Vistula, and by the time of
Caracalla had reached the plains of the Lower
Danube. The torque evidently belongs to the
heathen period. In the second half of the third
century the Moesian Goths were converted by As-
colius ; in 325 Theophilus, one of their bishops,
attended the council of Nice ; and not long after-
wards the Gothic runes were superseded by the
alphabet of Ulphilas, who was born in 311. The
Buzeo torque must belong to the period when
the Goths were recent settlers in Dacia and still
heathens. The great intrinsic value of the gold
points to the dedication of the spoils of some
great triumph — the plunder it may be of the
camp of the Emperor Decius, or the ransom of
the wealthy city of Marcianopolis. The most
probable date seems to be between 210 and
250 A.D.

Another dated monument of nearly equal im-
portance comes also from the region of the
Danube. The Roman station of Drusomagus,
now Druisheim, near Augsburg, was established


The Nordenhoff Broach.


by Tiberius, and was finally destroyed in the
convulsions of the fifth century. At the neigh-
bouring village of Nordenhoff, the cemetery of
the third Italian legion has been discovered, and
362 graves have been excavated. In these graves
were found no less than forty- six Roman coins,
ranging in date from Augustus to Valens. The
interments, with few exceptions, are pre-Christian,
and extend from the year 200 a.d. to 400. In
one of these graves, along with many valuable
articles of jewellery, was found a large silver
broach, bearing on the back three separate runic
inscriptions of ownership or donation. The names
of the four successive owners of this broach,
three men and a woman, are all of the Low
German or Gothic type. The grave was that
of a woman, probably the Gothic wife of some
Eoman officer. The broach can hardly have been
deposited in the grave later than the year 400,
probably it was much earlier, and, allowing for
the four successive ownerships, the earliest of the
three inscriptions carries us much further back.
Judging from the character of the runes, two
of the inscriptions seem to be earlier, and one


io TJie Dated Monuments.

later, than the inscription on the Buzeo torque.
The most probable date seems to be between
2 co and 300 a.d.

There are also two dated 'finds' of the early
Iron age, from Danish peat begs, which were
formerly shallow lakes. From the Ti Moss, in
Fyn, was exhumed a collection of 3000 articles,
such as swords, spear-heads, tools, and combs,
evidently the hoard of some chief or trader,
which was lost or hidden in the ancient lake.
A bone comb and a wooden tool-handle were
inscribed with the names of their former owners.
A silver coin of Faustina the younger, who died
in 175 A.D. gives us an approximate date, say
200 to 300 A.D.

The other 'find,' from the Xydam Moss, in
Jutland, is of about the same date. It consisted
of the contents of three war ships, sunk in storm
or battle. The skeletons of the horses still re-
tained the iron bits between their jaws. Along
with arrows inscribed with runes were bronze
broaches, silver clasps, iron swords, knives, and
spears, together T^ith thirty-four Koman coins
dating from 69 to 217 a. d.


The Charnay Broach. 1 1

Second only in interest to the Buzeo torque
is the silver-gilt broach which was found in 1857,
together with a great quantity of ornaments and
weapons, on the battle-field of Charnay, at the
confluence of the Sa6ne and the Doubs. It was
here that the Burgundians were defeated with
immense slaughter by the Franks under Clovis.
This broach, which no doubt belonged to one
of the slain chieftains of the Burgundian host,
bears, in addition to a runic inscription of owner-
ship, a Futhorc, of which the first nineteen runes
are legible. The Burgundians were closely con-
nected with the Goths. Pliny associates Goths
and Burgundians as dwelling near the Vistula,
and at a later period we find Burgundians shar-
ing the fortunes of their Gothic kinsmen inMcesia,
Italy, Illyria, and Asia Minor. The Burgundian
Futhorc on the Charnay broach may therefore
be regarded as essentially a Gothic alphabet of
a date not later than the end of the fifth century,
say 450 to 480 A.D. Great importance must be
attached to the Charnay runes, not only because
of their very precise and definite date, but
because, though they are substantially identical


12 The Dated Montiments.


with the runes on the Buzeo torque, they exhibit
in several cases forms which are distinctively
more modern— notably M instead of H , and \)
instead of A. The forms of the runes in the
Futhorc of the Vadstena bracteate, already re-
ferred to, are obviously of intermediate date.
Taking the date of the Buzeo torque as about
2:0 a.d., and that of the Charnay broach as
about 460, we may with some confidence assign
the Vadstena bracteate to the year 350 or there-
abouts 1 .

But these few runic inscriptions to which, by
some fortunate accident, it has been possible to
assign approximate dates, are by no means the
most ancient which we possess. The most primi-
tive forms of the runes occur upon undated
monuments. From Jutland we have the Thors-


1 Some other dated monuments are of use in enabling us
to trace the subsequent developments of the Runic writing.
Such are the Collingham Cross, erected to the memory of
King Oswin, murdered at Collingham, on August 20th, 650 ;
the Bewcastle Cross, a memorial of King Alcfrith, who died
in 670; and last, though not least, the magnificent Ruth-
well Cross, on which Csedmon inscribed, not later than 680,
a portion of his Dream of the Holy Rood.


Prehistoric Inscriptions. 13

bjerg Moss weapons and the Dalby diadem ; and
from Norway the Tune stone and the Frohaug
bronze, all of which bear inscriptions which may
well belong to the second, or even the first, cen-
tury of our era. In these inscriptions we find,
among other signs of great antiquity, the runes
n, E3, and <{>, which are the remote prototypes
of the third century runes M, D4, and V.

The foregoing evidence establishes the existence,
at a very early date, of a definite runic alphabet,
which must have been a common possession of
the Gothic tribes before the commencement of
their dispersion. Now the southward movement
of the Goths down the valley of the Dnieper
began before the end of the second century,
while their northward migration to the shores
of Sweden must be assigned to a much earlier
period.

In connection with this question of date it is
important to notice that this ancient and wide-
spread Gothic alphabet is wonderfully firm, defi-
nite, and uniform. To decipher the inscription
on the golden torque of the Mcesian Goths by
the help of the alphabet stamped on the golden


14 The Dated Monuments.

Bracteate from Swedish Gothland, is as easy as
it would be to read an Australian tombstone by
the aid of a spelling-book from the United States.
Distant colonies employ the common alphabet of
the mother country.

That the runic alphabet of the third century
should be so widely diffused, and "so uniform in
its character, indicates a considerable previous
antiquity. But these early runes are not the
letters of any other known alphabet. The dated
runes of the third century must already have
had a long history, and must have undergone
great developments and modifications. Their
resemblances to the letters of the Mediterranean
alphabets are sufficiently close to establish the
fact of a common parentage, while the dissem-
blances are such as to demand a considerable
period for their evolution. Just as the geologist
postulates his needful milleniums for the develop-
ment of the Horse from the Hipparion, so the
student of Alphabets claims at once a period
of some centuries as requisite for the growth
of the forms of the earliest extant runes out
of any other known Alphabet. The evolution of


Early Theories. 1 5


the Greek Alphabet from the Semitic, of the
Arabic from the Aramaic, of the Latin from
the Greek, are processes which afford some sort
of measure of the time that would be required
for the development of the Gothic Futhorc out
of any other alphabet — Greek, Latin, Phoenician,
or Carthaginian.

After carefully weighing the whole evidence
before us, it may, I think, be affirmed that the
origin of the Eunes must be placed a century
or two, at the very least, before the commence-
ment of the Christian era.

§ 3. The Phcenician Hypothesis.

We are now prepared, by this preliminary
investigation, to discuss the possible sources
from which the Goths could have obtained the
elements of their ancient Alphabet. We may
dismiss, to begin with, the pre-scientific belief
of the last century, that some Scandinavian
Cadmus — ' the celebrated Woden/ as one writer
ingenuously suggests — either brought the runes
from Asia, or constructed a new alphabet on


1 6 The Phoenician Hypothesis.


eclectic principles, borrowing some letters irom
the Greeks, some from the Eomans, others from
the Hebrews, and inventing the remainder as it
pleased him.

At the present time the most generally ac-
cepted opinion seems to be that the runes were
derived directly from the Phoenician alphabet.
This view is upheld by the great authority of
Professor Stephens 1 , and is supported by the
still greater name of Lenormarit, who specifically
derives the Kunes from the Sidonian type of the
Phoenician Alphabet 2 . Mr. Peile, the most recent
writer on the subject 3 , soberly sums up the pre-
valent view in these words : : It may be asserted
with some confidence that if the runes were
genuine Alphabets (which there seems no reason
to deny) they must have been derived from the
Phoenicians in process of commerce. There is
quite sufficient similarity in several of the cha-
racters to make this view antecedently probable,


1 Runic Monuments, pp. 94, 834.

2 Essai sur la propagation de V Alphabet Phenicien, vol. I,
table v, and p. 112.

3 Encyclopcedia Britannica, 9th edition, Art. Alphabet.


Historical Proof wanting. 1 7

but any historical proof would be extremely
difficult, if not impossible.' The only definite
attempt to give any such 'historical proof is, I
believe, that which has been made by Professor
Dieterich 1 . The essay of this learned Professor
is unfortunately written in a spirit so wholly
uncritical, that it is unnecessary to discuss his
arguments or even to state them. This much,
however, may be said with regard to any such
attempt. The runes, in their earliest forms, must
be affiliated to the Phoenician alphabet of some
definite Time and Place. If, as Mr. Peile sup-
poses, the runes were obtained from Phoenician
traders, they must have come either from Sidon,
Tyre, or Carthage. This must have been either
before the destruction of Sidon by the Persians,
or of Tyre by Alexander, or of Carthage by the
Romans, conditions which limit us to those Phoe-
nician alphabets which were prior to the fourth
century B.C. It is also plain that the more
primitive forms of the Phoenician letters, which
are earlier in date than the great extension of

1 Entrathselung des Odinischen Futhork durch das Semitische
Alphabet. Stockholm, 1864.

C


1 8 The Phoenician Hypothesis.

the Phoenician commerce, as well as all the later
developments of the runes, must be excluded
from the comparison. These obvious conditions
dispose of almost all the arguments which might
be drawn from a superficial comparison of the
tables of Phoenician and runic letters which are
given by Professor Stephens 1 . Thus we can no
longer compare the Semitic letters :£, £ and H
with the late runes of similar form and value.

Moreover, it is contrary to all probability and
analogy to suppose that developments of the
Semitic letters which took place among the
Greeks should have been again precisely and
independently repeated in the case of the Gothic
runes. It is, for instance, impossible to believe
that the remarkable evolution of Aryan vowels
out of certain Semitic gutturals and breathings
should, by mere chance, have run a parallel
course among the civilized Hellenes and th(
semi-barbarous Baltic tribes ; or, to take an in-
stance or two from among the consonants, it is
in the highest degree improbable that botl


1 Runic Monwments, pp. 95, 116.


Improbability of the Hypothesis. 19

Greeks and Goths should independently have
evolved the forms fc, $, and H out of the
Phoenician letters $, W, and ^.

Several of the runes are, no doubt, capable of
explanation from Semitic letters, but even if we
allow the utmost latitude of interpretation it will
be found that more than half of the twenty-four
primitive runes are left unexplained by the
Phoenician hypothesis.

At present, however, this hypothesis hardly
calls for serious refutation, for it has never yet
been seriously propounded. Till some competent
and sober scholar shall succeed in showing how
the Gothic Futhorc, rune by rune, might have
been evolved out of the Phoenician letters, there
is really nothing substantial to be refuted. The
mere assertion of a ' possibility,' which is all that
has yet been given us by the propounders of
the Semitic theory, affords no solid material for
argument.

§ 4. The Latin Hypothesis.

A second hypothesis, which derives the runes
from the Latin Alphabet, stands upon a different

c 2


20 The Latin Hypothesis.

footing. It is obviously suggested by the striking
resemblance of the runes fc, <, Y , H, I, ft, to the
corresponding Eoman letters B, C, F, H, I, R;

and it is supported, not by the allegation
of vague generalities and possibilities, but by
definite arguments, brought forward by writers
of repute, which can be grappled with and
weighed.

The Latin theory was broached by Dr. Kirch-
hoff, five and twenty years ago 1 , and has recently
been worked out in considerable detail by Dr.
Wimmer 2 , a Danish scholar, whose elaborate
arguments have been favourably regarded by
MM. Earle, Khys, Vigfusson, and Sweet, and by
several German scholars of repute.

Dr. Wimmer supposes that the Eunes were
obtained from the Romans, through the Gauls,
in the time of the early empire 3 . In order to
account for certain Eunes which plainly cannot
be of Latin origin, he assumes that his hypo-

1 Das Gothische Runenalphabet. Berlin, 1854.

2 Runeskriftens Oprindelse og Udvikling i Norden. Kopen-
tavn, 1874.

3 Op. cit. p. 1 50.


The Chronological Difficulty. 21

thetieal Gaulish alphabet contained letters derived
from the Massilian Greeks, and others descended
from the old North-Etruscan alphabet!,

The difficulties which beset this theory are
of two kinds — general and special. Passing
over the wholly unwarranted assumption as to
the nature of Dr. Wimmer's imagmary^Gaulish
alphabet, the first objection that presents itself
is that sufficient time is not obtainable for
bringing about the changes which must have
taken place in several of the letters. It has
been already shown that the Goths possessed a
uniform and well-established alphabet in the
second century, before they migrated, one body
northwards to Scandinavia, another southwards
to the Danube. ' Now although ten runes of
the Gothic Futhorc closely resemble the ten
corresponding Roman letters, yet the other four-
teen differ from them very considerably. Barely
a century, if so much, is obtainable on Dr.
Wimmer's theory for the spread of the runes,
through a host of hostile tribes, from the Rhone
to the Vistula, and for the extensive changes
of form and value which must have taken place


22 The Latin Hypothesis.

in several of the letters if the runes are to be
connected with the Latin alphabet. Setting
aside for the present certain fatal phonetic diffi-
culties, which will hereafter be considered, it
is difficult to believe that a century could
possibly suffice for Dr. Wimmer's supposed de-
velopment of the runes X, , and N out of
C ; of M out of E ; or of Y, a runic vowel
and guttural, out of Z, a non- Roman sibilant,
the existence of which in his Gaulish alphabet
Dr. Wimmer fails satisfactorily to explain.

The geographical difficulty is as great as the
chronological. If the runes were obtained from
the Romanized Gauls, we ought to find them
in the possession of those Teutonic tribes which
bordered upon Gaul, or which in some way
came into early contact with the Romans ; that
is, we should look for them among the tribes
of the Rhineland or of the Upper Danube.

In German lands numerous inscribed stones
have been found, dating from the first century
downwards, but none of them bear runes ; they
are written in unmistakable Roman characters,
which exhibit no trace of any tendency towards


The Geographical Difficulty. 23

the development of the characteristic runic forms.
The regions in which runic stones abound are
lands which were never part of the Eoman
empire, and which are as remote as can be from
the Eoman frontier. It is not in the Agri
Decumates, or in Vindelicia, or in Rhsetia, that
runic stones occur, but in Norway, in Denmark,
and more especially in the Swedish provinces
of Gothland and Upland. It is the Jutes in
Jutland, the Goths in Gothland, and the Mceso-
Goths on the Euxine, far remote, all of them,
from the frontiers of Gaul, who were acquainted
with the runes at a time when they were un-
known to the frontier tribes of the Cherusci,
the Alemanni, the Istevones, the Chatti, and
the Franks. Out of all the two thousand runic
stones which have been discovered not one is
claimed by Germany or France. The catalogue
of the runic treasures of Germany consists of
two broaches, a spear -head, and a finger-ring —
the possessions, in all probability, of Gothic
wanderers or exiles who chanced to die on
German soil.

The preceding geographical evidence may be


24 The Latin Hypothesis.

held to prove that the runes could not have
come from the frontiers of Gaul ; while the
chronological evidence shews that the Goths
must have been acquainted with them long
before they had any opportunity of acquiring a
knowledge of the Latin alphabet.

There is another argument of a general nature
which is not without its weight. A large number
of the most ancient runic inscriptions are written
in the early Greek fashion, either in a retrograde
direction, from right to left, or boustrophedon.
The gradual abandonment of this method of
writing can be traced in the runic inscriptions as
plainly as in the Greek. Now if the runic writing
had been acquired from the Eomans nothing can
be more certain than that the earliest runic
inscriptions would have been written from left
to right according to the Eoman method. It is
contrary at the same time to probability and to
experience that any nation which had once become
acquainted with the more convenient method of
writing should have forthwith reverted to the
inconvenient archaic system.

Although the foregoing general considerations


T%e Retrograde Inscriptions. 25

are probably sufficient by themselves to dispose
of Dr. Wimmer's hypothesis, at all events in
the form in which he broaches it, yet it may
be as well to inquire whether, supposing these
preliminary obstacles to be in any way evaded,
the Latin alphabet is capable of affording an
adequate explanation of the origin of the indi-
vidual runes.

Dr. Kirchhoff's attempt to supply such an
explanation must at once be set aside as insuf-
ficient. Indeed he does not seem to be aware
of the real nature of the problem to be solved.
He contents himself with taking fifteen runes
from the Scandinavian Futhorc of the tenth
century, and comparing twelve of them with
the corresponding letters of the Latin alphabet.
He ought rather to have taken in hand the
Gothic Futhorc of the third century, from
which the Scandinavian Futhorc was derived.
The real difficulties of the case only arise when
we come to deal with the characteristic early
runes, such as X, >, X, M, Y, M, £, *, all
of which, as will be seen from the table on
p. 4, disappeared from the later Scandinavian


26 The Latin Hypothesis.

Futhorc. These early runes Dr. Kirchhoff passes
by without a word 1 .

Dr. Wimmer, however, is fully aware that if
the Futhorc is to be derived from the Latin
alphabet the difficulty must be faced of ac-
counting for the forms of the earlier runes. I
will therefore deal with his arguments, rather
than with those of Dr. Kirchhoff, and briefly
examine the accordance of his methods and re-
sults with scientific principles and possibilities.

In tracing alphabetic developments certain
general principles have to be borne in mind.
The laws which govern the origin of letters
resemble in many respects those which regulate
the origin of species and the origin of words.
In Paleography, as in Zoology, Botany, or
Philology, no arbitrary or violent changes are
to be expected. The variations of letters, like
the variations of the sounds which they re-
present, are slow and gradual, and take place
in accordance with phonetic laws, and in obedience
to general principles : — the chief of which are

1 Das Gothisehe Runenalphabet, pp. 4-8.


The Principles of Alphabetic Change. 2j

(i) The Principle of Least Effort, and (2) The
Principle of Sufficient Reason. In the Latin,
English, and Greek alphabets these principles
are exemplified in the gradual and necessary
developments of G out of C, of J out of I, and
of n, U, V, Y, W out of O. We here see how
on the Principle of Least Effort the old letters
were retained, and how additional letters, when
required, were gradually developed by means
of slight differentiations of form. So again, on
the Principle of Sufficient Reason it is manifest
that the letter B gradually acquired its lower
loop, and the letter R developed its tail, in
order to prevent inconvenient confusions with
the letter P.

These fundamental principles of alphabetic
change are constantly neglected by Dr. Wimmer.
His method assumes that" the inventors of the
runes arbitrarily discarded a certain number of
the Latin letters, and then without any Sufficient
Reason invented other letters to supply the vacant
places. If his explanations are correct, several
of the runes, instead of having been evolved,
like the letters of all other alphabets, by the


28 The Latin Hypothesis.

action of slow and natural processes, must have
been invented off hand by some alphabetic law-
giver, who had the power to suspend the action
of Grimm's Law, and whose arbitrary behests
were promptly obeyed over a vast region ex-
tending from the Rhone to the Baltic, and from
the Baltic to the Danube.

If we compare the Latin and the Bunic letters,
we see that in nine cases there is a sufficiently
close correspondence in form and value. We
have

Latin BCFHI'MRST

Runic MNINHt
bcfhimrst

But there are fifteen runes which cannot so easily
be explained. We have

Latin ADEGLNOPUVX

Runic frIXIMX r + *KhP-Y t> ^V\ $

a d e g I n o p u v x th eo y ng

"Dr. Wimmer's task is to explain from the Latin
Alphabet the origin of these fifteen runes. The
explanation which he gives is as follows.

The Latin A was dropped, without Sufficient


Dr. Wimmers Argument. 29

Eeason, and the Etruscan A., which had been
disused for centuries, took its place.

The letter D became ^, and acquired the value
th. It was then doiibled, and one half of it
was turned round, ^••^, in order to obtain the
new rune M, with the value of d ; both changes
being contrary to phonetic law 1 .

The letter E was turned upon its face, and
for no Sufficient Reason usurped the form of
the existing letter M , though there is no trace
in any inscription of the hypothetical inter-
mediate form rn.

The letter G, without Sufficient Reason, was
disused, and a new sign, X, was arbitrarily
invented to supply its place.

The letter L, for no reason at all, was written
upside down, and became t".

The letter N,for no Sufficient Reason, became +.

The letter O, for no Sufficient Reason, and
contrary to the Principle of Least Effort, took
the form fc.

1 In Gothic th should become d, instead of d becoming ih.
In Welsh dd becomes th, but in no known language could
th th become d.


3o The Latin Hypothesis.


The letter P changed its form to F*, and its
value to v, contrary to the phonetic law that p
becomes / A new p was then invented by
placing two fc's vis-a-vis, M, and this hypo-
thetical rune, of which there is no trace in any
inscription, forthwith lost five strokes, and be-
came EC.

The letter V, for no reason at all, was written
upside down, and became f).

The character X having been invented to supply
the place of the disused letter G, the Latin letter
X consequently became unavailable to express
the sound x. Hence the letter Z, which is not
a true Latin letter at all, but Etruscan and
Greek, was taken over and transformed into Y,
with the values x and i, and also, as Dr. Wimmer
contends, with the value of r 1 .

This Greek or Etruscan Z was so familiar to
those who constructed the runes out of the Latin
letters that it was made the parent, not only of
T, but also of the rune \ or s/"*, with the values

1 Dr. Wimmer assigns the value of r to the two runes f
and R, even when they stand side by side in the same in-
scription.


Dr. Wimmer's Argument. 31

i and eo, without Sufficient Reason, and contrary
to phonetic law.

The remaining runes offer a still more crucial
test of the adequacy of Dr. Wimmer's theory.
Identifying the rune < (F) with the Latin C , he
considers that the three runes X, 4> an( l £>
which denote respectively g, y, and ng, were
formed by three different reduplications of the
rune <. How the debilitated sounds g and y
could be obtained by the reduplication (i. e. the
strengthening) of the hard guttural k he does
not explain. But if these runes had been thus
constructed we should expect to find transitional
forms in the earlier inscriptions. Now the rune
X appears, firm and well defined, from the very
first, while the earlier forms of H are first N, and
then § , which certainly do not look like redupli-
cations of <. The ng rune, however, was un-
doubtedly formed by reduplication — as we can
trace it on the earlier monuments through many
successive stages of the process of formation.
We find such early forms as ty, O, Y, tj , Z,
S, Q, <>, the last of which settled into the final
form £ about the sixth century a.d. Dr. Wimmer


32 The Latin Hypothesis.

is therefore plainly right in considering this as
a double rune, derived from <. But it is
equally plain that the ng sound must have arisen
out of gg and not out of kk. In Greek 77 is
equivalent to ng, and Ulphilas, as in the words
juggs, young, and huggrjan, to hunger, employs
the symbols rr (gg) to express the Teutonic
sound ng, either following in this respect the
familiar law of the Greek phonesis, or, more
probably, retaining the usage which he found
in the Gothic Futhorc on which he modelled his
Alphabet. Not only must ng come from gg,
but by Grimm's Law a Gothic k represents a
primitive g. It follows therefore that the ori-
ginal value of the symbol < was g and not k,
as thus, and thus only, can the origin of both of
the two runes < (k), and £ ( n 9)> De explained.
Now in the Latin alphabet the power of the
third symbol, C, had already been changed from
g to c, and hence, independently of all geogra-
phical or chronological considerations, it is obvious
that no modification of the conditions of the Latin
Hypothesis is capable of accounting for the origin
of the runes.


Difficulties of the Latin Hypothesis. 33


In the way of the Latin theory stand a whole
host of insuperable difficulties — chronological, geo-
graphical, phonological, and morphological. Not
only does it fail to account for the origin of
fourteen out of the twenty-four primitive runes,
but it leaves entirely unexplained the order
which they occupy in the Futhorc. Why, it
may be asked, should the Futhorc begin with f
and end with 0, instead of beginning with a and
ending with x or z ?

Dr. Wimmer's argument appears to me to be
so destitute of any solid foundation that I should
not have deemed it needful to examine it in
such detail if it had not obtained the approval
of so many scholars of high repute.

§ 5. The Greek Hypothesis.

From one passage only, in any ancient writer,
do we obtain information as to the nature of
the runes. Tacitus had heard a report of the
existence, somewhere far away in the regions of
the North 1 , of certain inscriptions which were

1 Tacitus, {rermania, § 3. The vague references to the
frontiers of Germany and Rhsetia, and to the place called

D


34 The Greek Hypothesis.


written in Greek characters : monumenta et
tumulos quosdam, Grsecis literis inscriptos. The
report seemed to him so strange that he declines
either to vouch for its truth or to attempt an
explanation; but he gives, for what it might he
worth, the current conjecture. Some persons, he
says, have supposed that Ulysses in his wander-
ings must have visited the northern coasts of
Germany, and left behind him these inscriptions :
quae neque confirmare argumentis, neque refellere
in animo est : ex ingenio suo quisque demat vel
addat fidem.

Modern writers have scouted the account of
Tacitus as an 'absurd story;' a more sagacious
criticism may perhaps discover in it a hint which
may supply the true explanation of the runic
mystery.


Asciburgiuni, where Tacitus localizes these inscriptions, may
perhaps be reconciled by the supposition that the Asciburgium
of Tacitus is really the 'Ao-Kifiovpyiov opos of Ptolemy, which
is undoubtedly the Eiesengebirge on the frontier of Silesia.
Tacitus may have transferred his Asciburgium to the lower
Rhine in order to harmonize with the current Odyssean
legend the reports which he had heard as to the Ascibergian
inscriptions.


The Evidence of Tacitus. 35

It is manifest that if the Phcenician and Latin
solutions have both to be rejected, one other
possibility alone remains — the runes must have
been derived from the Greek letters, since the
Greeks were the only other people in possession
of an alphabet who could have anywise come
into contact, commercial or colonial, with any of
the Teutonic tribes at a period as early as the
circumstances of the case require. If the Greek
alphabet will not afford a solution of the pro-
blem, it must, apparently, be given up as finally
insoluble.

It is at once obvious that the chief difficulties
which stand in the way of a solution from the
Latin Alphabet do not apply equally to the Greek.

If the runes were acquired by the Eastern
Teutons from the Greek colonies on the Euxine
the chronological difficulty disappears, as we
should obtain several centuries for the needful
developments. The geographical difficulty also
assumes a less formidable shape, as in this case
the South-Western Teutons would be the last,
instead of the first, to acquire a knowledge of
the runes. Nor does any difficulty arise from

D 2


36 The Greek Hypothesis.

the retrograde or boustrophedon direction of the
primitive runic writing, as the early Greek in-
scriptions are written in the same manner. It
has just been shown that Dr. Wimmer's theory-
breaks down conspicuously in the attempt to
account for the origin of the runes DC, Y, X,
£, <. We may therefore take these five runes,
which have never yet been satisfactorily ex-
plained, as affording a sort of preliminary test
of the adequacy of the Greek hypothesis. By
Grimm's Law a Greek answers to a Gothic d.
Hence S or M, which are the old runes for d,
may be identified with I or ®, the ancient
forms of 6. Grimm's Law also gives a Gothic g
as the equivalent of a Greek %• Hence X, the
rune for g, is, as it ought to be, simply the
Greek %• But in the early Greek alphabet we
find Y as well as X as the symbol for ch. As
one of these equivalent signs, X, acquired in
Italy the value of x, so the other, Y, might
have acquired the value of w in Seandinavia. In
the next place, by Grimm's Law, a Greek y
answers to a Gothic h. Hence from the Greek
F or f we obtain in Scandinavia, as in Italv


A preliminary Test. 3 7

the symbol < for c (k). Also since gg expresses
the sound of ng in Greek and in Ulphilas, the
double rune <^ or £ for ng is at once explained.
It will be noticed that all these correspondencies,
instead of contravening phonetic laws, are in
entire harmony with them, while the distinctive
peculiarities of the runic system, which are in-
explicable on the Latin hypothesis, receive a
simple and natural explanation from the Greek
alphabet.

The foregoing arguments, which can be stated
in a single paragraph, seem sufficient to justify
a more detailed investigation of a theory which,
though it seems to be the obvious solution of
the problem, and accords with the only state-
ment of any ancient author on the subject, has
not hitherto, so far as I am aware, undergone
the test of a serious examination.


§ 6. The Chronological Conditions.

But before thus examining the Futhorc to see
if by legitimate processes it can be derived, rune
by rune, from the Greek alphabet, it is needful


38 The Chronological Conditions.

to state, as briefly as may be, the geographical
and chronological conditions of the problem, and
to determine the forms which were assumed by
the Greek letters at the time and at the place
at which it would seem that the origin of the
runes may most probably be sought.

First, as to the chronological possibilities.

We have already seen that there is reason to
believe that the runes must have originated at
a considerable period before the year 20a A. D.
Now the amount of phonetic change which
separates the Greek letters from the earliest
runes occupied in the case of Keltic speech about
eight centuries 1 . It seems then to be not un-
reasonable to postulate a somewhat similar period
for the development of corresponding changes in
the Gothic and Scandinavian languages. A some-
what more definite date is given by the signifi-
cant peculiarity in the direction of the earliest
runic writing, a circumstance which points to
the conclusion that the runes must have been
obtained from the Greeks at the very time when


1 Rhys, Lectures on Welsh Philology, p. 45.


The Boustrophedon Test. 39

the Greek writing was in its transition state,
and was passing from the retrograde direction
in which it was received from the Phoenicians,
through the intermediate boustrophedon stage,
into the ultimate direction from left to right.
This consideration would indicate the sixth cen-
tury B.C. as an approximate date for the origin
of the runes.

The palseographical tests agree in pointing to
the same date.

The Greek alphabet from which the runes
were derived must have been distinguished, as
will be seen hereafter, by the following fourteen
characteristics : —

1-3. The introduction of the new letters X, Y,
and A.

4. The use of H to denote both the vowel
and the aspirate.

5-9. The use of R instead of P ; of M instead
of l w ; of ® instead of 0; of > instead of A;
and of A and < instead of I" '.

10-12. The use of h in place of the earlier
U or the later A ; of $ instead of the earlier


40 The Chronological Conditions.

M or the later Z ; and of H instead of the
earlier B or the later K

13, 14. The retention of the gutturals <p
and Y.

These fourteen runic tests are also the charac-
teristic marks of the alphabet of Ionia and
the Isles at the end of the sixth century B.C.

To obtain a superior limit of time we have

the following dates : —

Before the
Introduction of X 40th Olympiad.

Introduction of H 60th „

Introduction of Y . . • . . 47th „

Use of B as a vowel . . . 40th „

Change of B to H .... 45th „

Introduction of the tailed R . 55th „

Change of \t to f* 40th „

Change of V to M . . . . 55th

Change of M to J .... 40th „

Hence it appears that the specially runic forms
of the Greek alphabet were acquired between the
40th and 60th Olympiads.


The Palcsographical Tests.


4i


For the inferior limit of time we have —


After the


Disuse of tailed R . .


. 84th Olympiad.


Disuse of H for aspirate


■ 85th


Change of ® to . .


. 80th


Change of b to A . .


. • 75th


Change of $ to 5 . .


• 75th


Change of ^ to A . .


. 80th


Final disuse of <p and Y


• 75th „


These approximate dates show that several
characteristic runic forms disappeared between
the 75th and 85th Olympiads.

It appears therefore that the Ionian and Island
alphabet exhibits a remarkable approximation to
runic forms between the 60th and the 75th
Olympiads, that is, between the years 540 and
480 B.C. This date for the origin of the runes,
which has been arrived at solely on palaeo-
graphical grounds, is curiously confirmed by his-
torical considerations.

In the sixth century B.C. the shores of Thrace
and of the Black Sea were thickly studded with
colonies from the Isles and the Ionian cities.


42 The Chronological Conditions.

Just at the close of this century the rapid pro-
gress of the Persian arms must have effectually
isolated all these northern colonies from their
parent states, and thus have stereotyped for a
considerable period the alphabet which they pos-
sessed. The Persian expedition to the Danube,
the conquest of Thrace, the capture of Miletus,
Teos, Lesbos, Samos, Naxos, Thasos, Chios, Lemnos,
Tenedos, and Chalcis, are events which took place
between the years 510 and 490. Thus in the
year 500 B.C., at the very time when the runic
characteristics of the Ionian and Island alphabet
had attained their maximum development, the
Ionian and Island colonies on the Euxine were
temporarily, and in some cases permanently, cut
off from intercourse with the parent cities. Such
an isolation of colonial dependencies tends to
perpetuate in them archaic peculiarities. The
case of the Saxon colonists in Transylvania, of
the French habitans in Canada, or of the Dutch
boers at the Cape, are sufficient to shew that
isolated colonists are likely to conserve for cen-
turies the fashions of speech, dress, and writing
which were prevalent in the parent countries


Isolation of the Thracian Colonies. 43

at the time when the severance took place. In
default of any direct evidence it may therefore
be regarded as probable that those special runic
characteristics of the Greek alphabet, which in
Greece itself were but transient, lasting little
more than half a century, might in the Euxine
colonies have been preserved for a much longer
period, very possibly for a century or two after
the Persian invasion.

§ 7. The Geographical Conditions.

We now come to deal with the geographical
possibilities of the problem. We have to inquire
whether any Teutonic people could have had
such intercourse with any of the Greek colonies
in the sixth or following centuries as to enable
them to acquire a knowledge of what we may
call the runic type of the Greek alphabet.

Now the Greek colonies on the shores of Thrace
and of the Euxine were derived almost exclusively
from Ionia and the Isles, where the runic pecu-
liarities of the Greek alphabet are chiefly found.
Samothrace was colonized from Samos, Chalcidice
from Chalcis, Thasos from Paros, while Miletus


44 The Geographical Conditions.


had numerous colonies on the Hellespont, in
Thrace, in the Crimea, and at the mouths of the
Don, the Dniester, and the Dnieper.

If the Thracian Getse were of Gothic race the
problem receives an immediate solution. The
Getse are found not only south of the Balkans
in the valley of the Maritza, but they were spread
over the Wallachian and Bessarabian plains from
the Danube to the Dnieper. If the Getes
were Goths we should thus have Goths and
Greeks dwelling in absolute contact. Procopius
and Jornandes, Jerome and Spartian, agree in
identifying Getes and Goths. The identification
is supported by the high authority of W. Grimm,
whose argument, drawn from the Teutonic cha-
racter of the Dacian plant-names in Dioscorides,
has recently been re-stated with great ability
by Mr. Douse. Canon Bawlinson goes so far as
to affirm that "the identity of the Getae with
the Goths of later times is more than a plausible
conjecture. It may be regarded as historically
certain 1 ." But, weighty as are the opinions of

1 Eawlinson's Herodotus, vol. iii. pp. 69, 180.


Getes and Goths. 45


these authorities, it must be admitted that the
ethnic affinities of the Getse are still so far mat-
ter of controversy as to be unfitted for the basis
of an historical induction. The ethnology of
the Gothini, who are placed by Tacitus in the
extreme south-west of Germany, is still more
uncertain.

But to the north-west of the Greek colonies
of the Euxine, and within reach of the Greek
traders, an universal consensus of ancient and
modern writers places a people who were in-
dubitably of Gothic race. Pytheas of Marseilles,
a contemporary of Alexander, tells us that the
amber country was in the territory of the Goths
(Guttones) who lived on the Bantomannian 1 Bay,
which must be identified either with the Frische.
Haff or the Gulf of Dantzig. Our next authority
is Tacitus, whose information, not being derived
like that of Pytheas from Baltic mariners, would

1 I take this to be the probable reading of the well-known
passage in Pliny. The Low-German word bant, a 'district,'
appears in Bra-bant, and other names. Thus the name of the
Banto-manni would not be a true ethnic term, but a misappre-
hension of Phoenician navigators, and would mean simply the
' people of the district,' the ' country-folk.'


46 The Geographical Conditions.

apply to the south-western rather than to the
northern frontier of the Goths. Tacitus places
the Goths (Gothones) nearly in the same region,
but somewhat farther to the south, east of the
Lygii, who inhabited Silesia and the western part
of modern Poland. The testimony of Ptolemy
(about 150 a.d.) is in harmony with the state-
ments both of Pytheas and of Tacitus. He puts
the Goths (TvOovei) east of the Vistula, and the
Todrai (Jutes'?) in the 'island of Scandia,' which
we may identify with the Swedish province of
Gothland \

It would seem therefore that the northward
migration across the Baltic of a portion of the
Goths' must have taken place at some consider-
able period before the time of Ptolemy. But
there is ample ground for believing that the
residue of the Gothic nation which remained to
the south of the Baltic was very numerous. To
say nothing of the vast hosts which followed the
standards of Athanaric, Alaric, and Theodoric,
we are told that the Gothic army which defeated

1 See Zeuss, Die Deutschen, pp. 134, 51 1-5 13.


Extent of the Gothic Realm, 47

the Emperor Decius in the year 250 numbered
70,000 warriors, while the host which nineteen
years later was routed by Claudius amounted
to no less than 320,000. However much the
numbers may have been exaggerated, it is ob-
vious that these great armies constituted only the
vanguard of the Gothic array which kept rolling
on from the North upon the South, till at last
it spent its force in founding powerful Gothic
kingdoms in G-aul, Italy, and Spain. It seems
therefore to be a very moderate computation if
we reckon the population of the original Gothic
realm to the east of the Vistula at a million of
souls. At the present time the population which
this region is able to support is very sparse.
In the governments of Minsk and Volhynia the
present density is about forty to the square mile.
But the Goths, when they occupied this district,
were a thinly scattered pastoral people, and we
are probably under the mark if we suppose the
present agricultural population to be at least
four times as dense. To support a million of
Goths in their original seats with a density of
ten to the square mile, a territory of 100,000


48 The Geographical Conditions.

square miles would be required. It follows that
the Gothic realm must have stretched southwards
for some 400 or 500 miles from the Baltic coast.
This inference, which agrees with the testimony
of Pytheas, Tacitus, and Ptolemy, is supported
by the recent discovery in Volhyma of a spear-
head bearing an inscription written in Gothic
runes of the early type. This spear-head was
found near the town of Kovel, which stands on
the Pripet, an affluent of the Dnieper, and is
distant about 300 miles from the Baltic coast,
and about 400 miles from the Black Sea.

Here then, on the upper waters of the Dnieper,
in the Eussian governments of Grodno, Minsk,
and Volhyma, we may place the southern limit
of the Gothic tribes before they commenced their
great historical migration down the valley of the
Dnieper to the Euxine and the Danube.

But a nation which held possession of the
amber coast of the Baltic, and also extended so
far southward as to occupy the upper basin of
the Dnieper, would almost necessarily be in com-
mercial intercourse with the enterprising Greek
traders who had the command of the commerce


The Dnieper. 49


of this great river. From the earliest times the
trade route between the Baltic and the Euxine
was by the waterway of the Dnieper, which rises
within 200 miles of the Baltic coast. It was
by this route, the Austrvegr or Eastway, that
the Varangian vikings from Swedish Gothland
descended from the North and swarmed along
the coasts of the Black Sea, and even laid siege
to Constantinople. The Dnieper (Borysthenes)
was known to the Greeks as early as the
seventh century B.C., and the valuable trade of
this great natural highway was in the possession
of the Greek colonies which were established
near its southern outlet. The importance of the
Greek commerce of the Dnieper is evident from
the statement of Herodotus, who had himself
visited Olbia, the flourishing Greek colony esta-
blished at its mouth. Herodotus speaks of the
Borysthenes as being, next after the Nile, the
greatest and most valuable river of the earth.
He adds that it was known as far as the dis-
trict of Gerrhos, forty days' journey from the
sea. Now the distance in a straight line between
the Black Sea and the Baltic is not more than

E


50 The Geographical Conditions.

700 miles, and the northern half of this space
lay, as we have seen, within the limits of the
Gothic realm, the southern frontier of which
would not be more than 400 miles from Olbia,
or about the distance of Olbia from Byzantium.
Now since the Greek merchants from Olbia
ascended the river for a distance of forty days'
journey, and if we reckon a day's journey at
fifteen miles, and make sufficient allowance for
the windings of the stream, this will bring
Gerrhos into close proximity with the southern
border of the Gothic occupancy, if not actually
within it 1 . It may therefore be assumed that
in the sixth and following centuries there was
sufficient opportunity for the Goths on the
Pripet to acquire a knowledge of the Greek
alphabet from the Greek merchants who traded
on the Dnieper for the amber, and other pro-
ducts of the Gothic realm.

1 The name Gerrhos may be the Gothic gards, which in
Ulphilas denotes a ' district,' as in midjun-gards, the world.
In Norse the word denoted a stockaded trading-post. Kiev
was called by the Northmen Kcenu-garthr (Ship-ton). If Kiev
is the Gerrhos of Herodotus, then the river Pripet, on which
Zeuss places the Goths, would be the 'river of Gerrhos.'


Thracian Coins. 51


§ 8. The Thracian Alphabet.

The next step in our investigation is to
ascertain the characteristics of the alphabet which
was used by these Greek traders. The direct
evidence as to the Olbian and Thracian alphabet
is very meagre. The Greek inscription from the
Nogai steppe is only a fragment, and the great
Olbian inscription 1 is useless for our purpose, as
it belongs to a very much later period. We
have to rely mainly on the evidence of a few
Thracian coins, notably a large gold coin of Geta,
King of the Edoni, now in the British Museum,
which is believed 2 to belong to the sixth century
B.c, and several coins of the Orreskioi of about
the same date. But there is no lack of inscrip-
tions of the required date belonging to the cities
and islands from which the Thracian and Euxine
alphabet must have been derived. We have
much early pottery from Thasos 3 , together with


1 BSckh, No. 2058.

2 This coin was found in the bed of the Euphrates, and may-
have been brought from Thrace by a Persian soldier of Darius.

s Dumont, Inscriptions Ceramiques de Grece. Paris, 1872.

E 2


The Titration Alphabet.


the celebrated inscription from Sigeum, several
from Miletus, the mother city of Olbia, and many
more 1 from Paros, Siphnos, Naxos, Melos, Samos,
and Chalcis, all of them belonging to the end
of the sixth century B.C. The evidence of the
Thracian coins goes to show that the Thracian
alphabet was identical with the alphabet of the
mother cities of the Thracian colonies, which is
usually designated as the second alphabet of
Ionia and the Isles 2 .

The following table has been carefully com-
piled from the original sources, to show the
three successive types of the Greek alphabet.
The first column contains the earliest Greek
alphabet, usually called the Cadmean Alphabet,
which is obtained mainly from the Inscriptions
of Thera and Abousimbul. The second column,
which for convenience may be designated the

1 See ^Kirchhoff, Studien zur Geschichte des Griechischen
alphabets, passim.

a This alphabet was probably introduced into Thrace by
means of the Parian colony of Thasos, the Chalcidian colony
of Chalcidice, and the Samian colony of Samothrace. See
Kirchhoff, op. cit., and Lenormant, art. Alfihabet in Daremberg's
Dictionnaire, p. 202.


The Three Greek Alphabets. 53


Thbacian Alphabet, has been compiled from
the legends on Thracian coins, on the pottery
of Thasos, and from inscriptions of the mother
cities of the Thracian colonies. It shows the
forms which were in use during the half century
which preceded the Persian invasion. The third
column contains the later or Standard Greek
Alphabet of the fifth and following centuries,
which may be called the Attic Alphabet.

It will be noticed that those special letter-
forms which have already afforded us a chrono-
logical test (see p. 39) fulfil also the geographical
conditions. The characteristic runic forms of
the Greek letters which point to the end of the
sixth century as the period of the origination of
the runes, are also characteristic of the local
Thracian alphabet. The most important of these
test forms are —

On the page opposite to the Table of Greek
Alphabets the Table of Runes, which has already
been given on page 4, has been reproduced, for
the purpose of facilitating convenient reference.


54


The Thracian Alphabet.


Table of Gkeek Alphabets.


Cadmean.
7th century b. c.


Thracian.

6th century B.C.


Attic.
5th century b. c.


a


A


A


a


P


B


*


B


Y


< A


< a r


r


S


A


> A


A


e


/>


£ F


E


F


X


F


Caret.


t


I


X


z


V


Caret.


H


H


h


B


H


r- r


8


© ®


®


O


i


$


1


1


K


k


k x


K


X


V


A


A A


C


r


M


M


V


N


A- H N


N


£


z


5


3E H


o


o n


O


77


r


p


n


q


* ^


9 y


Caret.


p


i>


P> R R


P


<r


M ?


? j


£ c


T


X *


T


T


V


Caret.


v y y


V Y


<p


Caret.


©


*


X


Caret.


* X
Caret.


X


CO


Caret.


Q O


A


The Fulhorcs.


55


Table of Eunes.


Names.


Values.


RUNES.


IV


I.


II.


III.


Gothic.


Anglian.


Scandi-
navian.


Alphabet of
Ulphilas.


fech, feh, fe


/


% *


B V


r


P


ur, hur


u


A n


n n


n


n


ov


thorn


ih


D > ►


>


i>


A


s


asc, sesc, os


a, se, o


& *


F> P


*


A


a


rad, rat


r


R R


1*


R As.


K


p


cen, kaun


c, k


< A


k


K


K


K


gebo, gifu


g


X


X


r


y


wen


V, IV


P


P


VP©


v,hv


hegl, hagal


h


NMHH


N


*


h


h


nyd, nod


n


+ -r


+


+ I


N


V


is


i


1


1


1


I


i


ger, yr, ar


y,ge,j,a


NhO


4>


AA


g


J


hie, ih, eoh


ih, i, eo


\^


^


z


;


peorth, perc


P


*


K C


K


n


7T


ilix, calc


a, i, k, x


r


Y


qo


q


sigil


s


s


h


H


s


<r


tir


t


t


t


t 1


T


T


berc, berith


I


*


*


B


K


/3


haec, ech, eh


e


n m


M


e


*?


man


m


M


M


? y


M


^


lagu


I


r


h


r


A


X


ing


ng


o <>


*


X


X


dag, daeg


d


H M


M


<I>


6


othil


o, oe


* R


ft


£


CO


56 The Futhorc and the Alphabet.


§ 9. The Futhorc and the Alphabet.

To close the remaining links in the chain of
the argument is now a comparatively easy task.
We have only to examine how the runes of the
earliest Gothic Futhorc, as given in the first
column of the Table of the Kunes, can be
connected, one by one, with the letters of the
Thracian Alphabet which are tabulated on
page 54.

The six centuries which separate the Thracian
Alphabet from the earliest extant runic inscrip-
tions must necessarily have produced considerable
variations in the forms and powers of the indi-
vidual runes. These developments will however
be in accordance with those general Principles
of Alphabetic change which have been at work
in the formation of all other alphabets, and which
have already been formulated. We must expect
to find the special phonetic developments of the
Gothic and Scandinavian languages accompanied
and connoted by corresponding changes in the
powers and forms of the runes. The develop-
ment of new runic forms would also occasionally


The Laws of Alphabetic Development. 5 7

necessitate correlative changes in other runes, in
order to obtain clearer distinction between forms
which were approaching an inconveniently close
resemblance.

It may be laid down as a general rule that
letters which represent the most stable sounds
are the least subject to variation. The letter M,
for instance, which represents one of the most
constant of all sounds, may be traced with great
ease through all the alphabets of the world.
Hence, in those cases in which the Low-German
languages have retained unchanged the primitive
Indo-European sounds, one of the most efficient
causes of alphabetic variation can not operate,
and the correspondence between the runes and
the Greek letters will be the most close. It
follows that the affiliation of the runic liquids
and sibilants ought to be easy to trace. It will
therefore be convenient to begin with these
letters.

\ 10. Liquids axd Sibilants.

L. The lambda of the Thracian alphabet has
the characteristic form I", which is clearlv dis-


58 Liquids and Sibilants.

tinguished on the 6ne hand from the form. U
which grew up on Italian soil 1 and is the
source of our own L, and on the other hand
from the forms A and A which characterise the
standard alphabet of Hellas. The I rune is most
constant and uniform in its form, both in the
inscriptions and in the Futhorcs, retaining un-
changed from first to last the precise shape of
the Thracian h.

R. The strongest argument in favour of a
Latin origin for the runes, and a chief reason,
probably, why the Greek hypothesis has not
hitherto found an advocate, is the western or
tailed form of the r rune, which is either ft
or R. But in the Thracian alphabet, during the
half century before the Persian invasion, the
tailed r appears precisely in the two forms,
closed and open, which we find in the runic
inscriptions. The tailed r is found on the coins
of the Thracian Orreskioi, and also in the parent
alphabets of Paros, Thasos, Melos, and Chalcis.
In this, as in some other cases, the delusive

1 See Kirchhoff, Gr. Alph. p. 140.


The Liquids. 59


resemblance between the runes and the Latin
letters must be attributed to the fact that both
the Italian and Thracian alphabets descended
from the Alphabet of the Isles, while the
standard Greek alphabet represents the Eolo-
Dorian alphabet of the mainland of Hellas.

M. It was only when the Cadmean symbol M
had ceased to be employed to denote s that P~ ,
the early form of mu, could develope into M,
which is the character used for m in the Thra-
cian alphabet. The m rune is M. The change
of form can be easily explained. The e rune, as
will presently be shown, gradually changed its
form from H to M. This change necessitated,
to avoid confusion, a correlated differentiation in
the form of the m, which was effected, on the
Principle of Least Effort, by a slight downward
prolongation of the two cross strokes, M be-
coming M.

N. The Thracian nu appears in the forms
f/, N, and N. The derived rune was +, with
the variants + and h Here, as in the case of
the m rune, we have an instance of correlated
change. The third stroke of the Thracian letter


6o The Liquids.


must have been discarded in order to distinguish,
the n from the h, which had assumed the forms
H and N. But the former existence of the third
stroke in the primitive rune is curiously attested
by the juxtaposition of the h and n runes in the
Futhorc. This singular change in the primitive
order of the letters seems to have been effected,
as in some other similar cases, for the sake of
easy comparison of two runes which must at one
time have been nearly identical in form. When
at last this inconvenient resemblance had caused
the differentiation of the n rune into "f , and of
the h rune into N, the reason for the juxta-
position of the two runes was removed, but
the result remained to attest, as it were, the
similarity of the primitive forms.

S. In the Teutonic languages the sibilant,
like the liquids, retained the power which it
possessed in the holethnic speech, and we con-
sequently find that the forms of this letter are
identical in the Thracian and Runic alphabets.
In both of them the normal shape is $ , with $
as a variant.

Thus it appears that in the case of five


The Vowels. 61


letters, where no changes arising from phonetic
causes were to be expected, no such changes have
taken place. The runes I*, I*, S, are absolutely-
unchanged, while the variations in M and + can
be accounted for as cases of change due to
correlation.

$11. The Vowels.

We now come to the vowels. In the later
Futhorcs we find that a most elaborate and
complicated vowel system has been developed,
but in the earlier inscriptions the vowels are
tolerably simple and constant.

The vowel runes of the Gothic Futhorc are
eight, P, I, *, 1, M, X, Y, A. Of these the
last two were developed out of the Greek gut-
turals Y, ch, and A, g, and will be treated of
when we come to consider the gutturals. The
other six may be regarded as descendants of the
Greek vowels fc, I, ft, Y, H.

The Greek alpha disappeared from the Futhorc
at a very early period, being superseded first by
fc, a development of epsilon, which by normal
debilitation acquired the successive values a, ce,


62 The Vowels.


and o, and afterwards by A, a development of
gamma. The descent of the rune fc from the
Thracian £ is conclusively established by the
three inscriptions on the Nordenhoff broach (p. 9).
In two of these inscriptions, which are probably
the earliest in date, we have £, with the third
bar retained, as in the Thracian alphabet. In
the third inscription we find £, which is the
normal runic form.

The disuse of the third bar affords a curious
argument in favour of the opinion that the f
rune f was not, like the Latin F, a descendant
of the digamma, F. In that case the third bar
of the E would, as in Latin, have been retained
in order to distinguish the two letters. But
when, at a later period, the new f rune was
developed, a distinction was needed, and the E
being unable to regain its third bar, which had
been lost and forgotten, a simple differentiation
was obtained by varying the inclination of the
bars, the two runes £ and P" being as easy to
distinguish as the Latin letters E and F-

The rune I retains the form and value of the
Thracian iota. The Greeks having reduced this


The Twelfth Rune. 63

letter to the last stage of simplicity, there was
no room for modification.

A very obvious identification is that of the
rune £ with the Greek ft, which in Thrace
usually denoted not the long 0, but a shorter
and more open sound. In the early inscriptions
the rune & has the power of 0, and afterwards
that of os. Ultimately this rune fell entirely
into disuse, being replaced by a development of
epsilon.

The twelfth rune in the Futhorc occurs so
seldom in the early inscriptions, and varies so
greatly that it is by no means easy to discover
its parentage. The chief forms in the Gothic
Futhorc are N, V\, N, ■*!, <5, with the value of y;
in the Anglian Futhorc we have +, ^, <{>, cj>,
with the values g, gg, gee, and y; in the Scandi-
navian Futhorc the runes are /K , y, and A, a ;
while in the Mceso- Gothic alphabet we have
y, j, or y. The two Scandinavian runes seem
to be descendants of the Greek gamma, as will
hereafter be explained, but it does not seem to
be so easy to refer the Gothic forms to the same
parentage. The most primitive of all the forms


64 The Vowels.


of this rune is N, which is found on the Berga
stone, and also on a very early golden bracteate,
in both cases with the power of y 1 . These two
inscriptions are written from right to left, which
is a sign of great antiquity. On the Istaby
stone 2 , which is probably later by a century or
two, we find the derived form H, also with the
value of y. The source of this N rune is pro-
bably the Thracian Y, which in the Sigean
inscription is written Y . The closed form $ ,
which is found on the Vadstena bracteate, is
also very ancient, and may be regarded as the
parent of the other closed forms, which are of
considerably later date. It is probable that the
Thracian Y was developed from O through V.
The rune () may be regarded either as derived
from a Greek form intermediate between O and
V, or as a development from O, or it may have
been obtained from V by the curvature and slight
prolongation of the two strokes. An argument,
of no very great weight perhaps, in favour of
the last view is derived from the Alphabet of

1 Stephens, Runic Monuments, pp. 176, 545.

2 Ibid. p. 173.


Unstable Forms. 65


Ulphilas, in which the symbol for v has the two
equivalent forms V and X>, one open and the
other closed, which correspond to the open and
closed forms of the y rune. This looks as if in
the Futhorc from which Ulphilas compiled his
alphabet the forms N and $ were descendants
of equivalent value from the Greek equivalents
Y and V.

The Greek H was the common parent of the
seemingly unrelated runes M, N, and / V. The
Thracian H, as we have seen, had the double
power of fj and h. It may be regarded as a
palseographic axiom that a character which bears
two values is essentially unstable in form. Just
as the double values of I and C involved the
evolution of the new letters J and G, so the
Greek H was differentiated in form in order to
avoid the confusion which was caused by the
vowel and the aspirate being represented by the
same symbol. This differentiation was effected in
different modes by different nations. In Italy the
character H was retained to denote the aspirate,
while in Greece the vowel continued to be ex-
pressed by the unaltered symbol H, out of which,


66 The Vowels.

by successive curtailments, the signs h, r, c, and c
were developed to denote the aspirate. Among
the Goths the two powers of the Thracian H
came to be distinguished by the simple and
obvious device of changing the position of the
cross stroke. To denote the vowel the cross
stroke was moved upwards, retaining its hori-
zontality, while to express the aspirate the cross
stroke was written in a more or less oblique
direction. In the very earliest runic inscriptions
these changes can be observed in progress. Thus
on the Thorsbjerg scabbard, the Dalby diadem,
or the Krogstad stone, the e rune has the
form n. But in this shape it was liable to
confusion with the rune h, which denoted u,
and hence we find in inscriptions of a some-
what later date that the cross stroke begins to
be drawn with a very slight downward curve
or bend, and we get H for e, as on the knife
handle from the Kragehul Moss, and the plane
from the Vi Moss. From this form the transition
is easy to the final shape M. The adoption of
this form involved tbe correlated change of the
m rune from M to M, as has been already noted.


Evolution of the Aspirate. 67

The h rune preserved the greatest resemblance
to the form of the parent letter, affording another
instance of the way in which the alphabets de-
rived from the Thracian and Italian colonies
agree in their divergence from the standard Greek
forms. On the Buzeo torque the Thracian H
stands unaltered, and denotes h. Other very
early forms are H or H, and N or M. About
the fifth century we get N, and finally the old
h rune derived from eta was altogether dropped,
and a new h ruue, %, was developed by the
debilitation of a primitive guttural, either Y
or X, into a simple aspirate. The change of
the h rune from H to N brought about, as has
already been noted, the correlated change of the
11 rune from N to +.

The thirteenth rune in the Futhorc is written
indifferently \ and >/\ It will be observed that
these two forms can easily be obtained from
N and M, the early forms of the h rune, by
shortening the two upright strokes, and then
bringing the cross bar into a more nearly vertical
position. In the oldest of the MS. Futhorcs
(Isidore Codex, Brussels), the value of this rune

p 2


68 The I azeds.

is stated to be ih, that is, an aspirated i, just
as M was at first eh, an aspirated e. In the
famous Vienna Codex (Salisb. Xo. 140). which
stands second in antiquity and authority, the
rune "V bears the name ih, and is said to have
the power of A as well as of i, that is, it was
use! indifferentlr, like its parent the old Greek
H, both as a vowel and as an aspirate. In
later MSS. the rune has assigned to it the
values 1, h. and eo. and the form melts into
1 and I.

A confirmation of the common parentage of
these runes is obtained from the consideration of
their uames. It may be laid down as a general
principle, which will hereafter receive abundant
illustration, that the relationship of related runes
will usually be indicated by the relationship of
their names, as well as of their forms. Obviouslv,
when two runes have proceeded from a common
parent rune,, the development of the names will
usually have proceeded pari passu with the
development of the forms and powers. Thus
in the case of the three late Anglian runes
P, £, P, which bear respectively the powers of


Development of Rune Names. 69

a, a, and 0, the relationship between the three
names esse, as, and os, is as plain as the con-
nection of the forms.

This general principle may be applied to the
three runes M, H, \. In the earliest of the
MS. Futhorcs the runes M and 'V bear the
closely related names hcec and hie ; in later
MSS. we get eeh and eoh ; the most usual
names being eh and ih. The common parentage
of these names is even more obvious than the
common parentage of the forms, and the oldest
of the names clearly indicate that the parent
rune had the power of an aspirated vowel, pro-
bably he. The name of the h rune has in some
way acquired a final I 1 , and is variously written
hegl, hcegl, hagal, hegil, but we have also the
names heih and he, which connect the name of
the h rune with the two vowel names eh and ih.

We thus arrive at the result that of the
twenty-four primitive runes, twelve, namely,
l\ a, M, +, *, l>, I, *, X H, M, \,

1 Probably the accidental resemblance in the form of the
runes H, h, and h , s, may have caused an assimilation of their
names, hegil and segil.


•jo The Mutes.

are descended with comparatively little change
from the ten Thracian letters

r, I*, m, m, s, &, i, a y, h.


§ 12. The Mutes.

The easier half of our task is now completed.
It still remains to deal with the characters which
represent the mutes, sounds which are specially
subject to phonetic change, and which, in the
Teutonic languages, have undergone those sys-
tematic modifications which are formulated under
the designation of Grimm's Law.

Following the familiar nomenclature, which, if
not strictly scientific, is more convenient than
any other, we may divide the mutes into the
three families of dentals, labials, and gutturals,
and into the three classes of Hard, Soft, and
Aspirate. Following this division we have —


Hakd.


Aspirate.


SOFT,


Dentals . .


t .


. 6 .


. d


Labials .


■ P ■


■ f ■


. b


Gutturals .


. k .


X


• 9


The Dentals. 71


In the Teutonic languages, as a rule, dentals
only interchange with dentals, labials with labials,
and gutturals with gutturals. It will therefore
be convenient to discuss separately each of the
families of mutes, beginning with the dentals,
as they offer less difficulty than the other
families.

§ 13. The Dentals.

The dentals of the Thracian Alphabet were
T, ^, and 0. In the earliest Runic inscriptions
the dentals appear in the forms 1\ ^, and El 1 .
The resemblance of form between the three Greek
and the three Eunic dentals is so striking, that
it is difficult to doubt the descent of the one set
from the other. But we are confronted with the
difficulty that the runic characters have not re-
tained the powers which they possessed in the
Greek alphabet, while the changes which they
have undergone are not in accordance with the
changes prescribed by Grimm's Law.

1 This very primitive form occurs on the Frohaug bronze,
which I take to be the oldest runic monument in existence.
The usual early form of this rune is M, and the later form

is H


The Dentals.


The problem may be stated as follows. The
three Greek dentals, T, ®, >, must have come
into the possession of the Goths several centuries
before the Christian era. We lose sight of them
for six centuries, when they emerge from the
darkness with altered values, but with forms so
little changed that there can be no doubt as to
their identity. The values are now t, d, th, in-
stead of t, th, d as in the Greek alphabet, or
th, d, t as required by Grimm's Law.

Here we have a fact of great interest and
importance, which cannot fail to throw con-
siderable light on recent controversies as to the
date and nature of the changes which go by the
name of Grimm's Law. In the first place our
result is, I think, quite fatal to Grimm's own
belief that the Gothic Lautverschiebung did not
commence before the middle of the first century
a.d., and that it was fully completed before
the time of Ulphilas. In the next place our
result is difficult to reconcile with the prevalent
conception as to the way in which the Lautver-
schiebung took place, the so-called Chronological
Hypothesis. On the Chronological Hypothesis it


Grimm's Law. 73


would, I suppose, be necessary, in order to ac-
count for the facts, to assume with Mr. Sweet 1
that T, the strongest of the dentals, was the
first to be attacked by debilitation, and that it
bore in succession the values t, ih, d, t ; that
^ changed from d through t to ih, while ®
changed simply from ih to d.

Obviously inadmissible is the supposition that
^, the easiest of the dentals, was the first to
be attacked by debilitation, that it changed
through t, the most difficult sound, to ih ; while
changed from ih to d, and T retained its
power throughout.

The most simple explanation is to suppose
with G. Curtius that debilitation commenced
with ®, the most unstable of the dentals. In
accordance with phonetic law the debilitation
must have been from ih to d. Then, by the
Principle of Cross Compensation 2 , ^ took the
value of ih, while T, a very stable sound, re-
mained unchanged.

1 Mr. Sweet lays it down as 'an important phonetic law'
that 'general weakening tendencies attack the strongest. articu-
lations first.' 2 See Douse, Grimm's Law, p. 38.


74 The Labials.


This explanation, which seems to be simple,
rational, and adequate, though difficult to re-
concile with the Chronological Hypothesis, is,
I think, consistent with Mr. Douse's ingenious
theory as to the nature of the Lautverscliiebung.

$14. The Labials.

We now come to the labials, b, p, /• It might
naturally be supposed that the three runic labials,
IS, DJ, V , were derived directly from the three
Greek labials, IS, II, F. Further consideration
does not tend to commend this supposition. In
the first place it can hardly be affirmed that the
Thracian alphabet possessed an /, or the Gothic
language a p. The digamma, which was the
source of the Latin F, had the power of v rather
than of /, and it is more than doubtful whether
it passed at all into the Thracian alphabet. The
new letter <J>, which replaced it, was only
struggling into existence, and had the power
of ph rather than of /. On the other hand p can
scarcely be claimed as a true Low German sound.
In Fick's Wortschatz der gertnanischen Sprachein-


Runic Labials all derived from Beta. 75

heit six words only, all of which are probably
loan words, begin with p, and in Csedmon and
Beowulf, taken together, there are only three
such words. Ulphilas uses the Greek letter II
for the transliteration of such foreign words as
Pontius Pilate, Paul, presbyter, and prophet,
but his adoption of the Greek letter is an indi-
cation that in his time the p rune was either
unknown or unfamiliar to the Goths. The p
rune does not occur in any early runic inscription
— it retained its place in the Futhorcs, but,
practically, it seems to have been disused.

Hence it would appear that b was the only
labial which was familiar both to Thracians and
Goths at the time when the runes originated.

The epigraphic evidence points also to the
conclusion that the p and / runes were not inde-
pendently derived from the Greek alphabet, but
were gradually developed out of I*.

The forms as well as the names of the runic
labials are suspiciously similar, unstable, and
interchangeable. In the case of the dentals the
three forms 1 s , ^, M, are singularly distinct and
constant, and their names, tie, thorn, and dag


76 The Labials.

are manifestly unrelated words. But with the
labials both the names and the forms seem to
diverge from a single primitive source, as in the
case of the groups of runes derived from E and
H (pp. 68, 69).

First, as to the names of these three runes.
The final forms into which the names crystalized,
here, peorth, and fe, are sufficiently diverse, but
a comparison of the numerous MS. Futhorcs
shews no such clear distinction. The typical
variations in the names are as follows : —

b rune : bearic, beorc, here, berch, brita, berith, biro.
p rune : perc, perch, peorth, perd. pear, peoih.
f rune : fech, fehe, fer, feoh, /eh, feu, fe.

These names may be easily accounted for as
successive debilitations of three primitive names,
beric, peric, and feeic, and of these we may
consider beric as the ultimate source from which
all the names have been derived.

The forms of the three runic labials, no less
than their names, indicate a development out of
a single primitive rune. The following forms
are selected out of a much larger number as
representatives of the principal types.


Parallel Development of Names and Forms. 7 7

6 rune :&BEEtfKE4 s 1

irane: M i K K RK ^ KK
/rune: ^BbKPfcKPr
All these forms can be explained as develop-
ments out of a primitive form £ or B. Some
of them are especially significant. Thus M is
a b which has reached the half-way stage of
development into an /, while B is an / wbich
has only partially divested itself of the charac-
teristics of b.

Forms of the / type such as V , £ 5 si , or K,
are sometimes used for b, both in earlj and late
monuments, as the heathen Forsa ring, the
heathen Kok stone, the Largs broach, and the
runic stones in the Isle of Man.

The development of the labials was hardly
completed in the time of Dlphilas. This is indi-
cated by his adoption of the Greek II for p, as
well as by his use of K for b, and of fc for /.
His half-opened b is arrested in the first stage
of the development into /, and the curved hooks
of his / are survivals, as it were, of the complete
loops of the B.

It is not difficult to perceive the process by


78 The Labials.

which the p and / runes were developed. The
parent rune & has a vertical stroke and four
oblique bars. The transitional forms K , K show
that the ' p rune, C , has retained the vertical
stroke, together with the second and third of
the oblique bars, while the transitional forms B
and b show that the / rune, P or V ', has retained
the vertical stroke of the &, together with the
second and fourth of the oblique bars.

It will be observed that the runes for /, p,
and b occupy in the Futhorc the approximate
places of the Greek letters /3, -k, and <p. That
the new rune Y with its new power /should have
taken the place of the Greek Ifc, proves that the
development of the new symbol accompanied and
connoted the development of the new sound ;
in other words, the phonetic change was the
efficient cause of the new alphabetic develop-
ment. There are other illustrations of this im-
portant principle. In the earliest Futhorcs the
third and fourth runes, ^ and fc, retain the
relative positions of their Greek prototypes, >
and E. But in the later Futhorcs we find a
new development, \&, with the new value 0,


Stages of the Development. 79

occupying the fourth station, while the old rune
£, with its old value, a or ce, is relegated to
the end of the Futhorc as No. 26.

The probable stages by which the develop-
ment and rearrangement of the labials was
effected may be tabulated as follows : —


2nd letter. 15th letter.


21st letter,


1st stage


B k * (b) P (p)


tQA)


2nd stage


B.(p) '••*•(*>)


4> CpA)


3rd stage


*(/)'"'••* (P)' '


■ ■* (6)


4th stage


& (/) IX (p)


*<&)


5th stage


t (/) * (P)


*(&)


1st nine. 14th rune.


1 8th rune.


<


> 15. The Guttukals.


All the primitive runes have now been traced
to their Thracian prototypes with the exception
of six, A, <, X, ^, Y, &. These represent the
gutturals and their developments. The tendency
of gutturals to weaken into breaths and vowels !•
is illustrated by the development of the Greek
breaths and vowels out of the Semitic gutturals,
and is exhibited in Teutonic languages by the


80 The Gutturals.

Gothic words galeiks, ganohs, gavaknan, bagms,
which are represented in English by alike, enough,
awake, beam ; or by the descent of the words eye,
ye, yea, yoke, among, along, from the Anglo-
Saxon eage, ge, gea, geoc, gemang, gelang.

We may therefore regard as an instance of
normal debilitation the descent from the Greek
gamma of the rune n, which had the power of
u and afterwards of y. In the earlier runic in-
scriptions, such as those on the Buzeo torque
and the Thorsbjerg clasp, this u rune appears in
the form A, which is precisely the shape of the
Thracian g. The identification of the Runic and
Thracian symbol A is confirmed by the position
of the rune in the Futhorc. It retains the exact
place of gamma between Y and |>, which re-
present respectively beta and delta. As was the
case with the / and b runes, the symbol of the
new sound retains the old station, the runic
guttural <, which also descended from gamma,
being moved to another place in the Futhorc.

The rune X has already been explained 1 . In

1 See p. 36, supra.


The Gamma Runes. 81

the Greek alphabet this symbol had the power
of ch, and in the Gothic Futhorc of g. The
change involves no difficulty, as by phonetic law
a Greek x regularly corresponds to a Gothic g.

This debilitation, by the Principle of Cross
Compensation, would involve the hardening of
the g into k or kh, a change which is usually
expressed by the statement that by Grimm's
Law a Gothic c (k) is the regular equivalent of
a Greek y. Now the Thracian gamma was
written in the two forms A and <. We have
just seen that the first of these forms, by the
regular process of debilitation, gives us A, the
early form of the u rune, while <, the other
form of the Greek gamma, gave birth to the
Latin C, and also became <, which is the
regular c rune in the earliest inscriptions. In
the fourth and fifth centuries the two early
forms, A, u, and K, c, began to fall into disuse,
and we can trace their gradual replacement by
h and n for u, and by h, A, h, k, for c, forms
which are obviously akin to the normal or A
form of the Thracian gamma.

It has already been suggested that the puzzling


82 The Gutturals.

twelfth rune N, y, may be descended from the
Greek Y. It is however quite possible that this
rune may also be a descendant of gamma. This
supposition is made more probable by the name
ger, which seems to be akin to ur, the name of
the u rune, and also by the fact that the later
Scandinavian runes for y and a, namely A\, yr,
and A, ar, clearly belong to the gamma family
of runes, being descended from the A form of
the c rune.

Eespecting the development of the ng rune, £,
nothing need be added to what has been said
already. The numerous early variants, such as
<ty, O, v, \\, Z, 2, Q, <>, and other similar
forms given by Professor Stephens 1 , can leave
no doubt that the rune # was developed by a
reduplication of the < rune, a development which
supplies an argument which is as cogent in
favour of the Greek origin of the runes as it
is difficult to reconcile with the Latin or any
other hypothesis.

The eighth and the fifteenth runes, ^ and Y,

1 Runic Monuments, p. 149.


Derivatives from Koppa. 83

are less easy to deal with. They are probably
to be referred to the Greek letters Q and Y,
two differentiated forms of the Semitic letter j5
(koph). These two gutturals established them-
selves in the Greek colonies of Italy and Thrace,
but in the alphabet of Hellas they were ulti-
mately supplanted by K and X, derivatives of
the Semitic 2 (Jcaph). In the standard Greek
alphabet the letter <p, *!, or H survived only
as the numeral koppa, 1 or h. In Italy it ap-
pears as the labialized guttural Q, and from
the Thracian alphabet 1 , through the medium of
the Slavonic runes, it passed into the Russian
alphabet as the letter H (tsherv). The other
descendant of koph, which is written Y or ^V in
the early Greek inscriptions, had the power of
the aspirated guttural. This letter was replaced
in the standard Greek alphabet by X, and the
disused symbol Y was afterwards employed to


1 The koppa was retained in the Alphabet of the Isles, and
seems to haye been introduced into Thrace from the Parian
colony of Thasos and the Chacidian colony of Chalcidice. See
Lenormant, art. Alphabet, in Daremberg's Dictionnaire dea
Antiqv/Uis, p. 202.

G 2


84 The Gutturals.

denote the double consonant ps. But Y, with the
value ch, continued, like 9' to be usecl botl1 iu
Italy and Thrace. It is found in the Caere
syhabarium and in the Bomarzo alphabet, and
established itself in Upper Italy among the
TJmbrians and Etruscans 1 - From the Thracian
alphabet the letter Y as a guttural passed into
the Slavonic runes, and both its form and its
power may be recognized in the Old Slavonic
letter 4 J , which is the parent of the modern
Russian letter JB, (shcha).

The rune Y is frequent in the early Scandi-
navian inscriptions ; it is very constant in its
form, which is exactly that of the old Greek
letter, but to a most perplexing extent it is
variable or uncertain in its value. It cannot be
doubted that in some inscriptions it has the

1 Fabretti, Osservazioni PoleograficM, § 121. As in the case
of the letters r and h, so with regard to the parentage of the
gutturals it will be observed that the Italic and Kunic alphabets
exhibit common features as to which they both differ from the
Greek. The conjecture has already been put forward that this
may be due to the fact that both Italy and Thrace were colonized
from the over-peopled Greek islands, the alphabet of which
differed from the alphabet of the mainland which became the
parent of the standard Greek alphabet.


The Ilix Rune.


power of a vowel. Professor Munch gives it the
power of a neutral vowel, Finn Magnusen takes
it as equivalent to y, while Professor Stephens
maintains that it must be a. In the MS.
Futhorcs it has assigned to it the values of
i, y, iu, c, Ju, x, and it bears the correspond-
ing names of ilix, ilcs, iolx, eolhx, dux, cede,
halh, and hedach. These values and names
make it manifest that the Y rune must have
originally descended from a guttural, which, like
the other primitive gutturals, developed a vowel
sound side by side with the guttural power
which it retained. The rune also acquired the
value of a; in the same way that X, which
supplanted Y in the Greek alphabet as the
aspirated guttural, came to denote x iu the
Latin alphabet.

A further indication of the descent of this
rune from hoph through hoppa is the note-
worthy fact that Y retains in the Futhorc the
original station of hoph, following next after p
and preceding s and t.

The other Greek derivatives of the Semitic
hoph were <p and H. To these forms I venture,


86 The Gutturals.

not without considerable hesitation, to refer the
two runes, t> and Y. The early rune V or P
bears the names wen, ven, uyn, and huun, and has
the power of v, w, and uu. About the seventh
century A.r>. the c rune < or ^ was supplanted
in Scandinavia by the rune Y or V , which was
called by the names cen, ken, chen, chon, and
qhon, and had the power of c, k, and q. The
names and powers of these two runes ^ and Y ,
wen and cen, seem to point to a common descent
from a labialized guttural qven, with the power
of kv. That a primitive kv might yield either
a semi-vowel or a pure guttural is shown by the
related pairs of words-' — venire and come, garden
and yard, guardian and warden, kin and wean,
curb and warp, Korepos, uter and whether, gable
and web, cheese and yeast, question and whisper.
The evidence of the Mceso- Gothic alphabet
is, on the whole, in favour of the origin of the
two runes P* and Y from the Greek koppa,
or H. The three symbols IT (p) t\, and J£ (r) are
employed by Ulphilas as numerals, with the
values 80, 90, and 100, thereby showing that
the second of these symbols c| is the represen-


Wen and Cen. 87


tative of the Greek koppa and the Latin Q.
Although the power of this symbol (^ is not
alphabetic, but solely numerical, we have also
the slightly differentiated form CI, with the al-
phabetic power of q {kv) 1 . The Mceso- Gothic
alphabet has also the symbol bearing the
power of hv, which can best be explained as a
descendant of the Greek <p, <p, or <p (koppa).
We may therefore consider the Mceso -Gothic
letters ci, kv, and O, hv, as the representatives of
the runes Y and I*.

Our investigation into the origin of the twenty-
four runes of the primitive Gothic Futhorc is now
complete. It must be frankly acknowledged that
the affiliation of the eighth and twelfth runes,
^ and N , is open to considerable doubt, but

1 It may be a question whether the Mceso -Gothic letter
y or t> (v) may not be descended from O (koppa) instead
of from Y as has been previously suggested (p. 65). The
name uuine, which it bears in the Vienna Codex, certainly
suggests a connection with the wen and cen runes. It is
also a question whether the Moeso-Gothic Q (j) which some-
times transliterates the Greek iota (2 Tim. iii. 8) may not be
derived from (koppa). But its name jer, and the balance
of the evidence, is, I think, in favour of a connection with
the twelfth rune ^ gee.


88 The Later Runes.

as to the remaining twenty-two runes I trust
that the evidence which it has been possible to
produce may be deemed reasonably conclusive,
especially when it is remembered that the record
of the monuments is not continuous ; the inscrip-
tions from which we derive the Thracian letters
on the one hand, and the earliest runic forms
on the other, being separated by five cen-
turies of epigraphic silence. It is this chasm
in the evidence which has hitherto guarded so
effectually the secret of the runes.


§ 16. The Later Ecnes.

The foregoing investigation has been confined
to the runes of the early Gothic Futhorc. A few
words, however, must be said concerning the
development of the later Futhorcs, in which
nine-tenths of the extant runic monuments are
written.

It was an object with Christian missionaries
to substitute the Latin alphabet for the runic
writing, which was regarded as a sign of heathen-
dom. In spite, however, of this powerful in-


Gradual Disuse of the Runes. 89

fluence it was long before the use of the runes
was entirely suppressed. The use of the Visi-
gothic runes in Spain was condemned by the
Council of Toledo in 11 15. In Denmark and
in Iceland the runes were not formally super-
seded by the Latin alphabet till the fourteenth
century. In Sweden the runes were officially
replaced by the Latin letters in the eleventh
century, but they continued in popular use for
a considerable time. Thus at Haide (Sweden)
there is a runic inscription which records the
burning of the church in the year 1397 1 , and
in Lye Church (Sweden) there are two large
runic sepulchral slabs which bear the date
1449 2 -

In England the practical disuse of the runes
took place at a much earlier time. They survived
longest among the Northmen of Cumberland.
The • latest dated examples which I have been
able to discover are a runic inscription in Carlisle
Cathedral which dates from the year 1092 ; a


1 Stephens, Bimic Monv/ments, p. 711.

2 lb; P- 752.


90 The Later Runes.

twelfth century runic font at Bridekirk in Cum-
berland ; and a rock x engraved with runes at
Barnspike in Cumberland, which records the
treacherous slaughter of Gillhes Bueth, owner
of the lands of Lanercost, by a Norman knight,
Bobert de Yaux, a deed which must have taken
place between 1160 and 11 70 a.d. The runic
stones of the Isle of Man are usually assigned to
the eleventh century. The MS. Futhorcs, which
are very numerous, commonly contain only the
Anglian runes, and belong mostly to the ninth,
tenth, and eleventh centuries, though one Futhorc
seems to be as early as the eighth, and another
as late as the fourteenth century.

The runes of these later Futhorcs and inscrip-
tions naturally differ very considerably from those
of the earliest period. In fact the differences
between the Gothic runes of the third century,
and either the Anglian or Scandinavian runes
of the tenth, are at least as considerable as those
which separate the earliest Gothic runes from
the Greek alphabet.


1 Stephens, Runic Monuments, p. 648.


Simplification of the Scandinavian Futhorc, g i

The changes which took place in the Scandi-
navian and Anglian Futhorcs were in opposite
directions. In Scandinavia, where the runes con-
tinued so long in practical use, the changes -were
in the direction of simplification. Of the twenty-
four primitive Gothic runes, eight, namely, X,
l>, \, Y, M, &, M, &, disappeared altogether
from the Scandinavian Futhorc, while in other
cases the old runes were replaced by new de-
velopments, or by more simple forms, such as
K, K, A\, A , Y, K 1 > which are well adapted
for engraving on stone. Thus not more than
nine or ten of the original Gothic runes continued
practically to be employed.

In England, on the other hand, the Latin
letters rapidly superseded the runes for all pur-
poses of ordinary use, and the runes were regarded
either as magical symbols, as cryptograms, or
merely as subjects of curiosity. Hence the
changes take the form of an arbitrary multi-
plication of symbols, . of fantastic developments
and inventions, or of blunders of ingenious or
ignorant penmen. These developments were so
extensive and so complicated that it would be


92 The Later Runes.

impossible, within any moderate limits, to discuss
them adequately, or to attempt to trace their
genesis. From the MS. Futhorcs of the ninth
and following centuries I have, as a matter of
curiosity, extracted and catalogued as many as
eighty-four different varieties of Anglian gutturals
and vowels which may ultimately be traced back
to three only of the Greek letters, gamma, Jcojyjpa,
and chi.

In attempting to trace and classify these late
runes considerable difficulty arises from the con-
fusion between the descendants of different primi-
tive types ; forms belonging to one type having
acquired features, names, or values, which apper-
tain to some other type. Thus in one MS. Futhorc
the d rune, M, has assigned to it the name thorn
instead of dcecf, evidently from a confusion as to
the phonetic value ; in another Futhorc it is
called man instead of dag, the confusion having
in this case arisen from the close resemblance to
the form of the m rune, M ; in a third case, from
a similar cause, the values of the two runes £
and £ are interchanged. Such instances could
easily be multiplied by the score.


Elaboration of the Anglian Futhorc. 93

Not a few of these late forms are evidently
mere arbitrary fancies or ' elegancies' ; some,
however, are of exceptional interest or import-
ance, either because, as in the Anglian Futhorc,
they throw light on the phonetic tendencies of
the English language in its earlier stages, or
because, as in the case of the Scandinavian
runes, they were ultimately accepted as perma-
nent modifications of the. older Futhorc.

As examples of these later developments we
may take some of the secondary runes which
were derived from the ejosilon and gamma sym-
bols. It will be observed that here, well within
the range of historic proof, we have illustrations
of those principles of co-ordinate change of forms,
names, and powers, which have been assumed
as regulating the pre-historic development of
two or more runes from a common parentage.


94


T/te Later Runes.


The chief developments of the cpsiloit runes
may be tabulated as follows : —


Values.


Forms.


Names.


e


ft


Greek, gth cent. b. o.


e


&


esc?


Nordenhoff, 4th cent. a.d.


<b a


P


sesc asc
ac ns


Anglian, 9th cent.


a aa


p


as asc


Anglian, 8th cent.


00


r* p


OS oos


,, 10th cent.


1? * *


fe


OS


Scandinavian, 9th cent.


The developments of gamma are as interesting
as the developments of epsilon. We have —


Values.


Forms.


Names.


u


A


ur?


Buzeo, 3rd cent.


u


A


ur


Anglian, 8th cent.


u


n


ur


» >j


u


h


ur?


>> j)


oe


/k


oer?


/> y>


y


A


yi'


„ 9th cent.


y


fi»


J' 1 '


>> »


y


A A


y r


Scandinavian.


03


+


rev?


„ 7 th cent.


a


*


ar


8 th cent.


a


A


ar?


,, 10th cent.


k


A


ker


Anglian.


r


*


yr?


Scandinavian.


Development of final r. 95

Noteworthy, from the phonetic point of view,
are the processes by which the Greek gamma
gave birth to the form A> with its threefold
powers of 1c, y, an! /•. The Anglian k rone
ier (?) may be traced through its successive
stages <, !"), h, A. ^, <4», and the Scandina-
vian y rune, yr, through the stages A. A, /K,
A\. In the eighth century this y rune, A, began
to be used to denote the r final, Thus on the
Snoldelev Stone 1 (date about 750 A.D.) we find
fc and A* employed side by side for the medial
and final r, and this usage afterwards became
general The development of this r final out
of y is interesting as an example of the well-
known tendency of a final open vowel to acquire
the trilL Thus from the Spanish palavna we
get palaver, and from el lagarto we obtain,
through Ben Jonson's aUigarta, our modern alli-
gator. Other instances are supplied by the
vulgarisms — taters, feller, jigger, Jemimer, for
potatoes, fellow, chigoe, Jemima ; ani even an
academical t rainin g does not always suffice to

1 Stephens. Bunic Monuments, p. 345,


96 TJie Later Runes.

protect our ears on Sunday from ' Yictorier
our Queen.'

Perplexing as are the various powers of the
rune Y. which stands in the Anglian Futhorcs
for i, y, c, Tc, x, a further element of confusion is
introduced by the employment of the same symbol
to denote m in the later Scandinavian and M anx
inscriptions. By no legitimate phonetic process
can m be derived from either a vowel or a gut-
tural. Dr.Wimmer's characteristic allegation of an
arbitrary transformation of the symbol M into Y
through the intermediate stages ^"1, i^, ^, Y,
being obviously inadmissible, we must therefore
seek some other origin for this rune. Now the
tendency of f and b to become m by assimilation
is well known. Thus the Latin formica cor-
responds to the Greek fivpw^ and the Norse
maur. We have also the related groups of
"words Sporos, fj.opro9, mors and murder ; anfipoTos
and immortal is ; fiopfiw and formido; nokvfiSos,
plumbum, and blei. This interchange is more
especially characteristic of the Keltic languages,
and it is chiefly in the Isle of Man, and in Scan-
dinavia at a time subsequent to the Irish and


The new Runes for m and h. 97

Hebridean conquests of the Northmen, that we
find the Y rune standing for m. I would there-
fore venture to suggest, in default of any better
explanation, that this rune, on which so much
speculation has been expended, may have arisen
through Keltic influence out of the old tran-
sitional rune <j> for b or /. At Maeshowe in
Orkney we find the transitional form ^ for m.
Other early forms of the Y symbol for m are
<f, ^, and <p, which are easily connected with
B or ^. On the Holm stone again we have
an m which is almost identical in form with the
ordinary / rune.

The Anglian rune H, which first appears on
the Charnay broach, grew out of, and supplanted
the earlier h rune H. In Scandinavia, however,
the new h rune was ^, a development which
cannot be derived from H. There are two ways
in which this ^ rune may have arisen, either
from X or from Y. On the Skaag stone, which
is assigned to the third century 1 , we find X, g,
and also #, which has the power of gi or ge,

1 Stephens, Runic Monuments, p. 887.
H


98 The Later Runes.

and is apparently a bind-rune for XI. In later
inscriptions >j« and * have the power sometimes
of g, sometimes of h, and often of as or a. These
phonetic developments are regular, as we see
from the A. S. ge-mang, which became hi-mong
in Northern and a-mong in Southern English.
So also A. S. be-ge-ondan became li-hi-onda in
the north of England and be-y-ond in the south.
The evidence of the monuments thus seems to
point to the evolution of ^ from X I , but the
evidence of the Futhorcs is the other way. In
the Futhorc on the Charnay broach the fifteenth
rune is written %, instead of in the usual form
Y, and in some Anglian Futhorcs the rune #
has assigned to it the power of k or g, and is
called gilc, gilch, chilch, and halh, names which
indicate a descent from the calc or ilix rune Y,
by a downward prolongation of the two cross
strokes.

The mysterious rune M, called stan, which has
the power of st and ss, may here be noticed, not
on account of its importance in the Futhorc,
but as affording a very curious record of the
operation of one of the laws of Gothic pho-


The Stan Rune. 99


nology. In Gothic, d and t in juxtaposition
become st, and st frequently becomes ss. Thus
from the root bud, to bid, the 2nd pers. sing.
praet. is bau-s-t for *bau-d-t ; also from the root
vit, to know, through *vit-da and *vista we get
vissa ; and from vad, to bind, comes gaviss,
through *gavisti. Hence the late rune H, st
or ss, is easily explained as a differentiation of
the old rune Dd c£.


§ 17. The Order of the Runes.

The Mediterranean alphabets have preserved,
essentially, the primitive order of the Semitic
letters. The deviation of the runes in the
Futhorc from this ancient order has been the
subject of many ingenious speculations, but has
never, I believe, been satisfactorily accounted
for.

It is obvious that the order of the runes in
the Futhorc presents certain points of agreement
with the order of the letters in the Greek
alphabet. Thus the Futhorc ends with &, which
is manifestly the descendant of the Greek f\.

H 2


ioo The Order of the Runes.

It has been shown in the foregoing pages that
the first four runes in the Futhorc, Y , h, P, fc,
are the direct descendants of Ifc, I", A, E, the
second, third, fourth, and fifth letters of the
Greek alphabet. In the middle of the Futhorc
we have a similar sequence, the runes DC, Y,
$, 1\ corresponding to the letters P, <p, [ft],
*, T.

It is impossible that such remarkable corres-
pondencies can have been wholly accidental ; they
must be surviving traces of the primitive order
of the runes, which must have been that of the
Greek alphabet. It seems therefore to be worth
while to pursue the investigation a step farther,
and to endeavour to ascertain whether the dis-
locations in the order of the runes can be
accounted for on scientific principles. I am not
aware that these principles have ever been form-
ulated, it will therefore be necessary to estab-
lish them by an examination of the causes
which have produced the dislocations in the
order of other known alphabets ; such, for
instance, as the Ethiopic, Armenian, Persian,
Turkish, or Arabic. An easy illustration is


Causes of Alphabetic Dislocation. 101

afforded by the Arabic alphabet. The Arabic
alphabet was derived from the Aramaic ; the
order of the letters has suffered very consider-
able dislocation, but, owing to the retention of
the ancient names, and also of the primitive
numerical values, it becomes extremely easy to
identify them. In the Syriac alphabet, another
descendant of the Aramaic, the old order of
the letters has been preserved. By placing the
Arabic and Syriac alphabets side by side the
reasons of the changes in the order of the
Arabic letters become at once manifest. We
thus obtain the following table, in which
the connections by dotted lines shew which
of the Arabic letters have not been shifted from
their original places. The bracketed letters are
differentiated forms, evolved subsequently to the
dislocations.


102


The Order of the Runes.


SYRIAC.


ARABIC.


Names.


Forms.


Numerical Values.


Names.


FOKMS.


Numerical
Values.


Olaph

Beth

Gomal


i

CO


Elif

Ba
fTa
iTha


1


1
2
400


<<s,


3 ;


uy


Dolath


j


4 1


O


500


He

Vau

Zain

Cheth

Teth

Yud


Ol

o

1
«4


:


Jim
|Hha
(Cha
|Dal
iDhal

Ra


C

c

j


3
8
600

4

700

200


5
6

7 ...

8 :


9 ....


*_#


>>


Koph

Lomad

Mim

Nun

Semcath

Ee

Pe


r

V


20


Zay
Sin
Shin
|Ssad
iDdad
jTta
iZza


j

k


7

60

300

90

800

9
900


3 —

40-.

50 -.

60 :

70

80


Tsode
Quph
Bish


J

CO
)


90
IOO
200


(Ain
vGhain
Fa


70

1000

80


Shin
Tau


300
400


Qaf
Kaf


el


100
20


Lam


J


3°


Mim


c


40


Nun


u


5°


Ha


IS


5


Waw


J


6


Ya


"


10


Dislocations in the Arabic Alphabet. 103

It will be observed that the Arabic dislo-
cations have been brought about by two causes.
Certain letters have been placed side by side
for the -purpose of easier comparison, either
(1) on account of a close resemblance in their
forms; or (2) because of the similarity of their
values. Thus Ta has been brought from the
end of the alphabet into the third station,
because of the resemblance in form to Ba ; while
Ra, for a like reason, has been moved up four-
teen places, and placed next to Zay. The
juxtapositions of Qaf and Kaf, and of Waw
and Ya, are due to the similarity of their powers.
Both causes have co-operated in bringing about
the peculiar arrangement of the four sibilants,
Zay, Sin, Shin, and Ssad.

These two causes, similarity of form, and simi-
larity of value, which have effected such an
extensive re-arrangement of the Arabic letters,
are sufficient to account for the differences in
the order of the Greek letters and of the runes.
It will be observed that in the Arabic alphabet
ten only out of the twenty-two Syriac letters
have retained their places ; it will, therefore, be


104 The Order of the Runes.

Thbacian Alphabet. Gothic Futhobo.

i. A

2. * r

3- A A 3

4- > V 4

5- £ * S

6. I fc 18

7- H < 3 a.

8. ®

9 I

io. In, X X io a.

ii. I" > 17 a.

12. M H 7

13- N + 13

14. I I 9

15. O, Y S, N 15

'V 7 a.

16. II K 16, 2 a.

17. ?, y r 17

18. fe

19. $ £ 19

20. 1 ^- 20

21. & 21,2 b.

M 7 b.

M 12

h u

M 8

£ 3 b.

22. ft * 22


Dislocations in the Futhorc. 105

110 matter for surprise to find that in the case
of the Futhorc the same causes have produced
a somewhat similar amount of change. The table
on the opposite page shews that the Futhorc has
suffered even less dislocation than the Arabic
alphabet, thirteen out of the twenty-two Greek
letters having retained their places. The small
numerals, and the connections by dotted lines
will enable the reader easily to trace the corres-
pondencies.

If these changes of position, which it must
have taken several centuries to effect, are divided
into two or three hypothetical stages, it will
be more easily seen that they all follow naturally
from the two Principles to which the changes
in the order of the Arabic and other alphabets
are due. Subscript numerals are added in order
to facilitate the identification of the letters.


io6


The Order of the Runes.


cc


cc


f«


J


r«


-e-


CI


In


1


Lxx


rJ3


•e-


W
N


<-


o


M


s


00


i-


o


^


ON


«


r^-


M


z_


M


A:


On
00


lO-


nJ


o

ON


•


.z


O-


r-»


c


^O


>-


r*.


pQ


c_


VD


r>


cd


U


M


tO

►O
53


O


*T\


lo

z


rn


8 i


^


nJ

a
m


to


<-


o

ON

M


KH


■^


* <o

to


Z


to

S3

to


o

z

X


ON


£


>


r>.


1— i

CD
CO


Z

Z

®


N
O

M

on

00


O

1—5
i— t

9P

+^


AC

®


o
o

00
ON

CO


©

ti

i— i
i— i


M

03

«J
O

O


to
©

>

<D
bO

$
CO


m

M

ON


I


r-.


r-


rt


A.


r^


4


«e>


.V


m


X


m


H


*C


.z


r-


a.


00


o

c3


LU


m


LU


u-»


El


CO


V


m


A


Tf


A


**•


LU


in


AC


CO
M


<


ro


W


A


tf


^£-


»n


c&


«


•


V


W


-A.


-*


.<


m


<


trt


<


ro


<


M


A4


N


^


CI


^


N


Rearrangement of the Futhorc. 107

First set of changes.

Omission of superfluous letters — 1, 6, 14.

Development of gutturals and vowels — 3, 7,
10, 15, 17.

Collocation of similar forms — 18 and 10. (Cf.
the Mceso-Gothic forms ]<. and k.)

Result: Stage II.

Second set of changes.

Collocation of similar forms — 7 b and 22; 7 and
13 ; 11 and 20.

Collocation of similar sounds — 3 a and 10 ; 7 a,
9, and 15 a; 17 a and 10 a.

Development and replacement of labials —
2, 1 6, 21.

Result : Stage III.

Third set of changes.

Omission of superfluous letters — io, 15.

Differentiation i of similar forms — 7, 13, 7 b,
22, 12.

Simplification of forms — 5, 8, 17 a.

Collocation of similar forms — 3 b and 22 ; 12,
8 and 7 b.

Collocation of liquids — 11 and 12.

Result: Stage IV.


io8 The Oghams.


§ 18. The Oghams.

The Scandinavian settlers in Northumbria,
Cumbria, and the Isle of Man, having left
behind them so many runic records of their
presence, it may seem strange that not a single
runic stone should have been discovered in the
Scandinavian colony of Pembroke, or even in
Ireland, where Scandinavian chieftains bore sway
for many years in the cities of Dublin, Water-
ford, and Limerick. The runic treasures of
Wales and Ireland are limited to one small
silver coin, struck in Dublin, which bears a
runic legend 1 . But the fact of this remarkable
absence of runic monuments in certain regions
where they might have been looked for, must
be taken in conjunction with another circum-
stance, equally remarkable, tbat it is exactly in
those regions where the expected runic stones
are wanting that Ogham stones abound. These
facts will be explained if it can be established
that the mysterious Ogham character, in which


1 Worsaae, Banes and Norwegians, p. 338.


Rep/aiemcnt of Runes by Oghams. 1 09

the most ancient records of Wales and Ireland
are written, and respecting which, so many wild
conjectures have been made, was originally
nothing more or less than a very simple and
obvious adaptation of the Futhorc to xylographic
necessities, the individual runes being expressed
by a convenient notation consisting of notches
cut with a knife on the edge of a squared staff,
instead of being cut with a chisel on the surface
of a stone. Some such method of notation seems
to be implied by the words book and buchstaben
(be€ch sticks), and may probably be referred to
in the often quoted lines of Yenantius Fortunatus,
a sixth century poet, who says,

Barbara fraxineis pingatur rhuna tabellis,
Quodque papyrus agit, virgnla plana valet.

The geographical distribution of the Ogham
inscriptions raises a strong presumption in favour
of the Scandinavian origin of the Ogham writing.
The Ogham districts of Wales and Ireland were,
without exception, regions of Scandinavian occu-
pancy. As I have elsewhere pointed out 1 , the

1 Words ami Places, fifth edition, pp. 117, 11S.


no The Oghams.

existence of a very early Scandinavian settle-
ment in Pembrokeshire is indicated by a dense
cluster of local names of the Norse type which
surrounds, and radiates from, the fiords of Mil-
ford and Haverford. The Ogham district in
Wales is nearly conterminous with the limits
of this Scandinavian colony as determined by
the local names. Seventeen out of the twenty
Welsh Ogham inscriptions are in the counties of
Pembroke, Cardigan, Carmarthen, and Glamorgan,
nine out of the seventeen being in Pembrokeshire
itself. There are also two Ogham inscriptions in
Devon, and one in Cornwall, and there are said
to be one or two in Scotland 1 - But of the
extant Ogham inscriptions more than five-sixths
are in Ireland, and these, with four or five ex-
ceptions, are found along that part of the
Irish coast which lies opposite to the Scandin-
avian colony in Pembroke, and which, as is
attested by such local names as Waterford and
Smerwick, was frequented and settled by the
Northmen. No less than 148 out of the 155

1 Rhys, Lectures, pp. 288-303.


Distribution of the Ogham Inscriptions. 1 1 r

Irish Oghams are found in the four counties
of Kilkenny, Waterford, Cork, and Kerry 1 , or,
roughly speaking, they fringe the line of coast
which stretches between the two Scandinavian
kingdoms of Waterford and Limerick.

It may safely be affirmed that where the
Northmen never came Ogham inscriptions are
never found.

Strong as is the presumption raised by the
external evidence, the internal evidence is still
more convincing.

The key to the Ogham writing is obtained
from the Book of Ballymote, a MS. of the
fourteenth century, which, in addition to sundry
Irish Alphabets and Scandinavian Futhorcs, con-
tains a transcript of a tract on Oghams. This
tract, from internal evidence, must have been
composed at some time between the years 704
and 909, and is assigned by Dr. Graves to the
early part of the ninth century 2 . That the
Ogham writing is at least as old as the eighth
century may therefore be taken as certain, but

1 Rhys, Lectwres, p. 376. 2 Hermathena, vol. ii. p. 449.


1 1 2 The Oghams.

how niuch older the earliest inscriptions may be
is far more difficult to determine. The best
authorities, Dr. Graves, Mr. Whitley Stokes, and
Professor Ehys, consider that some of them can-
not be later than the fifth or sixth century. I
accept this very early date with some misgiving,
but without discussion, seeing that it depends
on the antiquity to be assigned to certain gram-
matical forms occurring in the inscriptions, a
matter as to which only a professed Keltic
scholar can be competent to pronounce an
opinion.

The Ogham characters in their primitive form
probably consisted of a system of notches on
the edge of a squared stick or stone. They
were afterwards written on a plane surface, on
either side of a central line. The name given
to this line, druim, shows that it represented
the ' ridge' of the primitive squared staff.

The arrangement of the Oghams, according
to the mediaeval Irish tradition, was in four
' groups,' aicme, each group comprising five
Ogham characters. We have —


The Ogham Alphabet. 113

Group I. -, — n — m — m — njyp

b 1 f s n

Group II. ' 11 hi mi i nn

h d t c q

Group in. i-ff-uf-m^m-

m g ng st r

Group IV. H H W HU H+H-

a o u e i

The merest glance at this Ogham alphabet
leads to the opinion that it did not originate
independently among an unlettered people, but
that it was an adaptation from some pre-existing
alphabet, and it is no less manifest what that
alphabet must have been. If it had been, as
has been supposed, an independently invented
cryptogram, we may be s\ire that the more com-
plex and troublesome symbols would not have
been employed to denote the most constantly
recurring sounds, nor, on the other hand, would
the easiest and simplest signs have been selected
to denote sounds which were hardly ever required
in practice. Now j_, the simplest of the Ogham
symbols, represents a sound that never occurs
in any of the inscriptions, and we know its
value only from tradition, whereas TTTTT, one of
the most troublesome and difficult of the symbols,

1


H4 The Oghams.


denotes a letter which was in constant use. So
again -///- never occurs in the inscriptions, while
-fffft- is perpetually employed.

It will then be safe to conclude that the
Ogham alphabet was constructed according to
some rule of thumb out of some familiar existing
alphabet. What could this alphabet have been %
Geographical considerations, as we have already
seen, point to the Futhorc, the only reasonable
alternative being the Latin alphabet advocated
by Dr. Graves, as we may dismiss from considera-
tion the hypothesis of Captain R. F, Burton
that the Ogham descends, through the Arabic
Mushajjar, from the Nabathteo-Chaldeans of the
Plains of Shinar.

If then the choice lies, as it seems to do,
between the Latin alphabet and the Futhorc,
a strong presumption in favour of the latter is
afforded by the absence of an Ogham p (see
p. 75), and the still more significant fact of the
existence of the unnecessary and unused symbol
for in), a peculiarity with respect to which the
Ogham and the Futhorc stand alone among
European alphabets.


Connection of t fie Oghams and the Runes. 115

But these presumptions, derived from internal
evidence, are raised to certainties by an exam-
ination of the Irish Bethluisnion alphabet, which
forms a connecting link between the Ogham
on the one hand and the Futhorc on the other.
In the Bethluisnion alphabet, so called, like the
Alphabet itself, from the names of the two
letters with which it commences, we find on the
one hand that the order of the letters is exactly
the same as the traditional order of the Oghams,
the Bethluisnion characters being arranged in
the same four groups, containing the same five
sounds in each group ; but on the other hand
we find that the names of the Bethluisnion
letters are, for the most part, obviously mere
Keltic adaptations of the names of the Scandin-
avian runes. It follows that the Bethluisnion
names must have been the names by which the
Ogham characters were designated before they
were superseded by the Irish adaptations of the
Boman uncials. But if the Oghams bore names
adapted from the names of the runes, there
seems to be no escape from the conclusion, to
which all other considerations also point, that

1 2


n6


T/ie Oghams.


the Ogham alphabet was based upon the
Futhorc.

The Bethluisnion alphabet, in its mediaeval
form, is as follows : —

The Bethluisnion Alphabet.


Taluks.

Group I. b .

1 .

f

s .

n .

Group II. h .

d .

t .

c .

? •


Group III.


m .

9 ■
ng .

st

r .


Group IT. a


o

H

e
i


Names.
beith .
luis . .
fearn .


Meanings.
birch,
rowan,
alder.


sail sallow.

nion ash?

huath hawthorn ?

dnir oak.

tinne .... 1

coll hazel.

queirt .... apple.

muin vine?

gort ivy?

ngedal .... reed ?

straif sloe 1

ruis elder, (privet ?)

ailm fir? (palm?)

onn furze, (ash ?)

ur heath?


eadhadh
idhadh .


aspen
yew.


1


Dr. Graves has pointed out that some of
the Bethluisnion names, those which I have


The Bethluisnion Alphabet. 117

distinguished by a note of interrogation, are
not true tree names in ancient Irish. It would
seem that meanings have been arbitrarily or
fancifully assigned to some of the names by
later grammarians in order to complete the
fanciful notion of the 'trees' in the 'Ogham
forest.'

Let us now compare these Bethluisnion or
Ogham names with the corresponding rune
names. We have —

Ogham Names. Eune Names.

b braut, boith b berith, brita.

I luir, luis I logr, laaz.

s suil, sail s sigil, sihil, ail, sol.

d duir, dair t tir, tyr.

m niuin m man.

r rait, ruis r rchit, rat.

q quoirt q querth.

9 gort g, q ger, quor.

ch, h sgeith, huath g, q gifu, quith.

c coll c calo.

t trom, tinne th, d thorn, dorn.

e egui, edad e hsec, ech, etli, eh.

i iechua, idad i hie, ih.

a ailra a arm.

u, oi, ur, oir, or w, 0, y ur, oyr, yr,

0, u, w,f onn, uinseann, fearn, ferus . w,f wen, fer.

mj ngedal ng, rag (odal).


n8 The Oghams.


To the standard names, as given in the Book
of Ballymote, I have added from other sources
a few variants which seem to approximate to
the more ancient forms before they were made
significant as Irish words. I have also selected
for comparison several runic variants, taken chiefly
from the Scandinavian Futhorcs.

The comcidencies between the Ogham and
Runic names are too close and too numerous to
be accidental. That the Ogham names were
derived from the rune names, instead of the rune
names from the Ogham names, is proved, if
proof be thought needful, by the word ngedal,
the name of the Ogham character for ng. This
word seems to be meaningless in Irish, the
signification of ' reed ' being most probably
merely an attribution. Now in the Futhorcs
the ng rune, $, and the o rune, £, are called
respectively ing and odal, but their names and
powers are constantly confused and interchanged,
owing to the close resemblance of the forms,
and their juxtaposition at the end of the
Futhorc. It would seem that the word ngedal
was produced by some one who was doubtful


Ogham names derived from Rune names, i ig

whether ing or odal was the true name of the
rune &, and who solved the difficulty by com-
pounding into one word the. two names which
he found attributed to the rune.

From the foregoing arguments we may con-
clude with some confidence that the Ogham
alphabet was, by some unknown process, con-
structed out of the Futhorc. In order to
discover what was the principle of construction
it will be needful to restore, as far as possible,
the primitive powers of the Ogham characters.

Three of the Oghams, - 1 -///-////-, do not occur
on any of the monuments 1 ; their values, h,
ng, st, being those assigned to them by tradi-
tion, as recorded in the book of Ballymote, and
confirmed by the evidence of the Bethluisnion
and Bobeloth alphabets. Professor Rhys has
shown that h, the traditional value of _l, arises
from the debilitation of a primitive guttural,
which he takes to have been ch. He also shows
that the value of -fjjf was originally not st but

1 I take this assertion from Professor Khys. It is possible
that the forthcoming work of Mr. Brash on the Ogham
Monuments may prove the statement to be incorrect.


120 The Oghams.


z, and that this % must be a reduction of a
primitive s. He then proves that an Irish f
represents a Welsh v or w, and shows that
the Ogham TTT, which in Ireland has the value
of f, retains in the Welsh inscriptions its
primitive value of iv. He also considers that
the character ~r must originally have represented
/ as well as b l .

In addition to these restorations of the primi-
tive values of the Oghams, which have been es-
tablished by Prof. Khys, we must expect to find
a Lautverschiebung .among the mutes and vowels.
That the Ogham d, for instance, answers to
a runic t, is proved by a comparison of their
names, duir and tir. But the precise amount
of this Lautverschiebung it will be more easy to
determine hereafter.

Taking then the primitive values of the Oghams
so far as they have been restored by Prof. Rhys,
we may replace the traditional values by the
following scheme, in which the later values are
distinguished by brackets.

1 Rhys, Lectwes on Welsh Philology, pp. 273-277, 286.


Restoration of the Primitive Values. 121


Group I. -| — n — m — rm — rn-nr-

f(b) 1 w(f) a n

Group II. -J U_UI__UlI__JiUL

ch(h) d t c q

Group III. -t-H-Uh-M-Mh

m g ng B, z(rft; r
Group IV. H H HI HH HH+-


Now as Dr. Graves and Prof. Rhys have
observed, this arrangement is clearly not the
primitive order of the Oghams ; the classifica-
tion is based upon form, and the collocation
of the vowels in a group by themselves indicates
the revision of a grammarian. The constructor
of the Oghams would most certainly have be-
gun by employing the more simple and easily
written forms, and would only have resorted to
the more complex characters when the simpler
combinations were exhausted We may safely
assume that the primitive arrangement was in
five Classes, each containing four Oghams, instead
of in four Groups of five Oghams. This con-
clusion is supported by the Welsh tradition
that in the time of Beli the Great there were
only 1 6 ' awgryms,' that they were afterwards


122 The C\/mws.


increased to 20, (the Irish number) and that
finally, in the time of Geraint Fardd Glas, the
number was raised to 24.

Resolving the four traditional Groups into
five Classes, we obtain as the primitive arrange-
ment —

Class 1. -j 1 /— —

f(b) ch(h) m a

Class 2. Li fl H-

1 d g o

Cl a ,s 3. -^-All—IH^^

\v t ug u

Class 4. - .-- UiL^-fw.
&• z e

Class 5. T , ,i '"" / // // Milt

a q r i

If the Ogham mystery is to be cleared up
we must seek for some principle by means of
which the Futhorc can be rearranged in five
classes of four runes, so as to correspond with
the five classes of four Oghams.

The arbitrary and complicated rearrangements
of the Latin and Phoenician alphabets by means
of which Dr. Graves and Prof. Rhys endeavour
to evolve the order of the Ogmic characters are


Restoration of tJie Primitive Arrangement. 123

so obviously inadmissible tbat some other principle
must be sought.

A child, on being shown such runes as P , Y, or
)K, will immediately pronounce them to be trees.
The Scandinavian and Keltic races, looking with
awe on the mysterious Runes and Oghams, seem
to have regarded them as representations of
trees, constituting a sort of alphabetic forest or
arboretum. In several cases the names of the
runes are actually names of trees ; beorc being
the birch, and thoni the thorn tree. In later
times this device of nomenclature was more
extensively employed, ac, the oak, and cesc, the
ash, being added to the runic trees.

This notion of the Northmen that the runes
were a sort of trees is exhibited in their ingenious
invention of the ' tree runes,' and it was carried
out in a still more elaborate method in the con-
struction of the forms and names of the Ogham
characters, which were invariably regarded and
spoken of as trees. The Book of Ballymote
speaks of the twigs and branches of the Ogham
tree, the individual characters are called ' trees,'
feada, the consonants are called 'side trees' too-


124 The Oghams,


bomna, and each cross stroke is called a twig,
Jleasg 1 . A considerable proportion of the names
of the Ogham characters, such as sail, duir, coll,
idad, ceirt, ruis, ailm and onn, are true tree
names in ancient Irish ; in other cases, such as
muin, gort, and ngedal, tree significations seem to
have been assigned to words which were adopted
from the names of the Scandinavian runes.

The resemblance of the Oghams, in their
earliest forms, to trees was much more obvious
than it was afterwards. The Oghams, according
to the Book of Ballymote, were originally written,
not on horizontal lines, but on vertical stems,
thus n, t, g, e, were denoted by E> a » =fc> p'
symbols which in the later Ogham become

These primitive forms of the Ogham symbols
would seem to have been directly suggested
by the ' tree runes,' which are occasionally found
side by side with the ordinary runes, as at Eok
and Rotbrunna in Sweden, Maeshowe in Orkney,
and Hackness in Yorkshire 2 . The principle on

1 Graves, Hermathena, vol. ii. p. 457.

2 See Stephens, Runic Monuments, pp. 228-240, 467, 468.


The Tree Runes. 125

which the tree runes were constructed is very
simple. The runes of the Futhorc were divided
into famiHes headed by certain letters, the common
division being, (1) Frey's family, containing the
runes from ftoh; (2) Hagl's family, from h to t ;
(3) Tyr's family, from t to the end. An upright
stem or tree trunk was then taken, and the
number of branches to the left denoted the
family, and the number to the right the station
in that family. Thus ^ as a tree rune would
represent u, the second rune in the first family
of the Futhorc \

Although the notion of the Ogham trees was
in all probability suggested by the tree runes,
yet it is manifest that no modification of the
principle on which the tree runes were constructed
will suffice to explain the Oghams. We must
therefore seek for some other device, which, like


1 The same principle was applied by the Arabs, after they
had come in contact with the Varangians in the ninth century,
to the construction, out of the Arabic alphabet, of the very
simple cryptograms called El Mushajjar and HI Shajari, the
'branched' or 'tree shaped,' of which much needless mystery
has been made.


126 The Oghams.


the key to the tree runes, ought to be simple,
arbitrary, and easy to remember.

Now if we bear in mind that both the Eunes
and the Oghams were regarded as constituting
a mysterious alphabetic forest in which grew
trees of twenty Species, what would be the
most obvious and easily remembered principle
by which the runic trees could be arranged in
five Genera, so as to correspond with that division
of the Ogham trees into the five classes of four
Oghams, which a system of notation by notches
made imperative ?

In such a case the principle most likely to
be adopted by an uncultured people would, I
think, be to arrange the trees of the runic ar-
boretum according to a sort of rough botanical
classification, putting together in the same class
those runes which most resembled each other in
shape and general appearance. Now if any one,
unacquainted with the Oghams, will try the ex-
periment of taking the Futhorc and endeavouring
to class the runes according to their shapes, con-
sidered as imaginary trees, he will find that they
naturally resolve themselves into five classes,


Plan on which Oghams were constructed. 127

which correspond, with singular exactitude, to
the five classes in which the primitive Oghams
were arranged.

The inventor of the Oghams, proceeding on
this principle, would naturally begin with the
first rune in the Futhorc. His first class would
comprise those branched runes with markedly
tree like forms, such as Y and £, which bear
a general resemblance to V ', the first rune in
the Futhorc. *" The four runes of this type would
be expressed by the first or simplest class of
Oghams, those with one twig, (jleasg) such as

From the second rune, A, he would obtain a
type for his second class, which would consist
of the runes with a single fork or elbow, such
as h, 1, and <. These would be denoted by
Oghams with two twigs, =|, L, cj^, ^.

The third rune, £•, gives a conspicuous and
well-marked type for the third class of runes.
These would be the closed or looped forms,
and might be conceived to represent either
hollow trunks, or trees with interlacing boughs.
Such runes as (>, P>, £, %, would therefore


128 The Oghams.

be represented by Oghams with three twigs,

The fourth rune having already found an
appropriate place in the first class he would go
on to the fifth rune, R or k, which would
supply a type for a well-marked fifth class, con-
taining trees with diverging roots, such as K and
,4^ Either because the fifth rune supplied the
type, or because the root is the last and lowest
characteristic feature of a tree, these root runes
would naturally be represented by the fifth class

of Oghams, those with five twigs, = t E ? fj^ ±,

The most striking rune forms being now ex-
hausted, the four remaining runes would form a
sort of residuum, to be thrown together into the
remaining class. They bear a general resemblance
to trees with crooked stems, such as, $, %, V[,
and would be represented by Oghams of the
fourth class, those with four twigs.

Thus the characteristics of the five classes of
the rune trees would be (i) branches; (2) forks;
(3) loops ; (4) crooks ; (5) roots ; a classification
beginning with the branches at the top, and


The Five Classes of Rune Trees. 129

thence proceeding regularly downwards, and end-
ing with the roots. That this scheme is fanciful
is no objection to it, but rather an argument in
its favour when we remember the fancifulness
of the whole system of the Oghams and their
names.

This theory as to the ideas which may have
passed through the mind of the contriver of the
Oghams must now be tested by ascertaining
whether it will suffice to explain the actual
facts.

The five classes of Oghams would correspond
as follows to the five classes of runes : —

First Class.

Type. The first rune, Y-

Substitution. One -twig Oghams for Branch
Eunes.

Oghams. — ] i / 1—

f, b ch, h m a

Runes. Y JKTf M f Y fc

f, b g, k, h m a

K


130 The Oghams.


Second Class.
Type. The second rune, A.
Substitution. Two -twig Oghams for Fork


Eunes.


Oghams.


"II"""
1


11

d


-H—


H-


Runes.


1


t 1

t


<

c


A

u


Third Class.

Type. The third rune, (>.

Substitution. Three -twig Oghams for Loop
Eunes.

Oghams. -^ w ^ ^_

w t ng u

Eunes. P" l> £ £ $

w th ng o, y

Fourth Class.
Type. The Eesiduum.

Substitution. Four-twig Oghams for Crook
Eunes.

Oghams. - m uu ^ |W _


s, z, st

Eunes. i l/j X t] Z H *V U|

S g S, Z, St i, y


Identification of Runes and Oghams. 131

Fifth Class.
Type. The fifth rune, ft.
Substitution. Five -twig Oghams for Root
Runes.

Oghams. - im ^ fftff hw —

n q r i

Runes. +K Ak * R ft H/K

n k, q r c , y

In the foregoing scheme alternative forms of
the runes have been given in some instances.
This has been done on account of the uncer-
tainty as to the date at which the Ogham
alphabet was invented. Thus if the earliest
Oghams must be dated not later than the fifth
century, as Professor Rhys contends, the runes Y
and A will represent Ogham gutturals, whereas if
it should prove possible to place the invention of
the Oghams as late as the eighth century these
runes might represent m and y. Similarly the
rune K might be either h or n, and Uf either y
or s according to the date. Similar considerations
affect the whole of the runes which have been
placed in the fourth class.

The phonetic differences between the powers
k 2


132 The Oghams.

of the Oghams and of the corresponding runes
do not present any insuperable difficulties. The
equivalence of the Welsh broga and the Teutonic
frog, and the uniform use of the / rune, P, to
denote b on the Keltic soil of the Isle of Man
explain the representation of the f (b) rune
by the b (f) Ogham. Also the names duir and
tir show that the Ogham d represented a runic
t. This is in accordance with phonetic law, a
primitive t being normally debilitated in Welsh
into d 1 . The runic ih might then by Cross
Compensation take the power of t. In like
manner a Welsh g represents a primitive c 2 , and
a primitive g might then become c by pro-
vection. Thus the changes among the Mutes, far
from offering any difficulty, supply a convincing
confirmation of our hypothesis as to the mode
in which the Oghams were derived from the
Runes. We are brought, by an independent
method, to the exact Law of the Lautverschiebung
between Old Welsh and Gothic, according to which
O.W. d corresponds to G. t, OW. t to G. ih, O.W. g


1 Rhys, Lectures on Welsh Philology, Lecture II.

2 Ibid.


The Oghams Invented in Wales. 133

to G. k (c), and O.W. c to G. g or h 1 . Nor can the
interchange between the two throat vowels and
u, and the two lip vowels e and i, be deemed
a matter of importance when we remember the
vague uncertainty with which the vowel sounds
are denoted in runic inscriptions 2 .

On phonetic grounds it would seem probable
that the Oghams originated in the Scandinavian
colony of Pembrokeshire, and were thence carried
across to the opposite Irish coast. The chief
reasons for this belief are as follows. The Ogham
symbol TTT, which stands for f in Ireland, has
retained its original power of v or w in the
Welsh inscriptions. Now this change of w or v
to / is peculiar to the Erse language, and does
not take place in Welsh 3 . Hence if the Oghams
had originated in Ireland, and had thence passed
over to Wales, this Ogham would have had the
power of f or b, instead of w, in the Welsh
inscriptions.

1 Rhys, Lectures, p. 17.

2 In runic inscriptions found in the single province of Upland
(Sweden) the vowel sound in the word sten (stone) is expressed
in no less than twelve different ways, e, a, i, o, u, ei, ia, ai, au,
ae, a, oi. 3 Rhys> Lectures, p. 280.


134 Tfie Oghams.


On these grounds we may conclude that the
Pembrokeshire colony was earlier in date than
the settlements on the opposite Irish coasts ; or,
at all events, that the Oghams must have been
employed in Wales for some considerable period
before they were introduced into Ireland.

But here we are confronted with some import-
ant and startling considerations touching the
date of the earliest Teutonic settlements in
Wales and Ireland. On grammatical grounds
Mr. Stokes and Professor Ehys have been driven
to the conclusion that the invention of the Ogham
writing must be placed 'before the fifth century.'
An equally early date is indicated by the older
Ogham inscriptions being written from right to
left, a fact which would lead us to infer that
the Oobams were derived from the runes at a
time when the direction of the runic writing
was still retrograde.

It would therefore appear that Scandinavian
immigrants must have established themselves in
Wales and Ireland several centuries before the
commencement of the inroads of the vikings.
The harrying of the Irish coasts did not begin


Probable Date of the Oghams. 135

till nearly the end of the eighth century, and the
rule of the Ost-men Kings in Ireland dates only
from the middle of the ninth. It is manifest that
a knowledge of the Ogham, a character derived
from the runes, could not have been acquired by
the Irish and Welsh Kelts from mere bands of
plundering marauders, but must have been ob-
tained from established settlers on their shores,
with whom peaceable intercourse had been set
up. Moreover the tract on Oghams, contained
in the book of Ballymote, appears to have been
written about the year 800, at which time the
Ogham writing must have been already of con-
siderable antiquity, as the tract contains internal
evidence that the compiler was using older
materials, some of which he only partially under-
stood \

From these considerations it is probable that
the introduction of the Oghams into Ireland, and
their anterior invention in the Pembrokeshire
colony, must be earlier than the end of the eighth
century when the inroads of the vikings first began.

1 Graves, Hermathena, vol. ii. p. 450.


136 The Oghams.


We are thus brought to the conclusion that the
legends as to an earlier Scandinavian colonization
in Wales and Ireland, as to which no trust-
worthy historical record has come down to us,
may contain a basis of truth. The ancient
annals and traditions of Ireland make a clear
distinction between the historical Danish ma-
rauders of the ninth century, who are called
Dubhgalls, the 'Black Strangers, 5 and the earlier
invaders called the Tuatha De Danann, whose
arrival is placed far away in the dim period of
Irish legend. It seems probable that these
Tuatha De Danann were also Danes, belonging
to a much earlier immigration, and from them,
I would venture to suggest, the Oghams may
have been obtained. Indeed it is categorically
asserted in the Ogham tract in the book of
Ballymote that this was the case.

If a further conjecture may be ventured I
should be inclined to identify the Tuatha De
Danann with the Jutes from Jutland, whose
settlement in Kent and the Isle of Wight is
the earliest Teutonic migration into Britain which
can be called historical.


The Tuatha de Danann. 137

In favour of this conjecture it may be urged
that the Saxons, like the kindred confederations
of Franks and Lombards, seem to have been
unacquainted with the runes, as thus only can
we account for the entire absence of runic stones
from the Saxon parts of England. Kunic in-
scriptions have been found in no inconsiderable
numbers in Yorkshire, Durham, Northumber-
land, and Cumberland, but not one in Wessex,
Sussex, Essex, Mercia, or even in East Anglia.
The only Southumbrian region which can boast
of any runic inscriptions is that part of Kent
which was settled by the Jutes. The most
ancient of all the runic stones in the British
Isles is one found at Sandwich, which is assigned
to the fifth century. One of the graves in the
great burying place at Gilton, near Sandwich,
contained a sword, whose silver hilt was inscribed
with runes of an equally early date. At Dover
also there is a runic stone of the early Christian
period 1 .

Hence it would appear that the Jutes were

1 Stephens, Runic Monuments, pp. 363, 370, 465.
L


138 The Osrhatns,


the only tribe belonging to the first swarm of
the Teutonic immigration into Britain who were
acquainted with the runes, an inference which
agrees with the abundance of runic monuments
of the oldest type in Jutland, and their remark-
able absence from the Fatherland of the Saxons
and the Angles.

There seems to be no valid reason to prevent
us from supposing that the Jutish adventurers
of the fourth century may have crept on, from
Kent and the Isle of Wight, along the southern
coast of England as far as the fiords of Pembroke-
shire, and from thence have crossed over to the
sheltered havens of Minister. The local names,
which afford the chief evidence as to the existence
of a Scandinavian colony in Pembroke, are cer-
tainly not opposed to this view. In the Ogham
region of South Wales we find such local names
as Helwick, Oxwich, Ramsey, and Gateholm ; in
the Ogham region of Ireland we have Helvick
and Smerwick ; and in the runic region of
Southumbrian England we find Sandwich, Rams-
gate and Eomney. If then it be allowable to
conjecture that in the fourth or fifth century the


The "Jutes. 139

Jutes may have established settlements in Wales
and Ireland, as well as in Kent and the Isle of
Wight, the remaining difficulties as to the date
and origin of the Ogham writing will disappear.
In no other way can the apparently conflict mg
conclusions of Palaeography, Philology, and History
so easilv be reconciled.
