The Battle of the Standards (Taylor, 1864)
==========================================
John Taylor — The Battle of the Standards: the ancient, of four thousand years, against the modern, of the last fifty years (London, 1864), public domain. The follow-up pamphlet to his 1859 The Great Pyramid, the founding text of pyramidology. Scan via Internet Archive (battlestandards00taylgoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.


THE


BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.


PKOJECTION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID WHEN ENTIRE
ASD COVEBED WITH THE CASING STONES.


0. I.eTeloI9nrfli«orarinind.

b. Lerel ot Clumtier lii Rock.

c. Ut«I of Low Wsler In Ui« tnie.

a. Dcsceuillng Pamgc, In a >li^gUUi09 to Entrsnoa of Clmiil«r in

4 PulAT SraPt as been from tbo 1»ttoin of tbe doiceuding passage.


THE


BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS:

THE ANCIENT, OF FOUR THOUSAND YEARS, AGAINST THE

MODERN, OF THE LAST FIFTY YEARS— THE

LESS PERFECT OF THE TWO.


By JOHN TAYLOR,

AUTHOR OP

*'thb great pyramid, why was it built?"

ETC., BTa


"Thou shalt have a perfect and just Weight, a perfect
AND just Measure sualt thou have : that thy Days mat

BE LENGTHENED IN THE LaND WHICH THE LORD THT GOD
OIVETH THEE." — DetU. XXV. 15.


LONDON:

LONGMAN, GREEN, LONGMAN, ROBERTS, & GREEN.

1864.


LONDON:
PRINTED BT J. WBRTHEIMER AND CO.
CIRCUS PLACS, FINSBURT.


t'


CONTENTS.

PAGE.

Preface .......... vii

The Great Pyramid, a Poem, by Patrick Scott, Esq. . . 1

Sonnet, from Petrocchi, by the Rev. Charles Strong . ^

Origin of the Ancient Standard 5

Brief Memoir of the Great Pyramid 21

Supplementary Papers, Battle of the Standards.

(1). Two Letters, by Sir John Herschel, Bart., on the

Modular Unit . 39

(2). Leading Article, from the Times, on the Debate on

Weights and Measures, July 2, 1863 . . . 45

(3). Letter from the Tim^s, of July 9, on the Decimal
and Metric Systems in Practice .... 48

(4). " The Metrical and Decimal Systems" from the

Tim£s of July 15 and 17, 1863 . . .69


*#* As the Bill for legalizing the Metric System of Weights and Measures did
not receive the Queen's assent, Mr. W. Ewart gave notice on July 28, 1863,
that he should move for leave to bring in a new Bill for that purpose, at
the next session ; but " that, as the general opinion of the House seemed to
be in favour of a permissive Bill, he should limit his motion to such a
measure." — Times, Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, relate to this subject, which is most
interesting to every Englishman.


PREFACE.

OUR Motto, from Deuteronomy, points to a very
important consideration : viz. — That the people who
maintain a perfect and just weighty and a perfect and
just measure, may expect lengthened days in the land
which God giveth them. If any people were ever
entitled to so great a favour, it might be the Inhabitants
of this Country. They have had the same measures of
Lengthy Capacity , and Weighty from the earliest times;
and they have been blessed with a long and unbroken
series of peaceful Governments. Greater freedom from
external foes, and from internal dissensions, has not
fallen to the lot of any other nation.

Another remarkable peculiarity of our Country
is, that it has been the home of the oppressed^ when
they have been exiled from other nations. Here, they
have met with personal safety and kind treatment. The
fetters of the slave fall from him, as soon as he lands
on our shores ; yet we interfere not with the Laws of
other countries. We set them a good example, and
would help them to follow ours, as far as we may;
but without interfering with their internal regulations,
because we should object to their intermeddling with
ours. If they wish to become one with us^ we shall be
glad to see them enjoy the same liberty, and that kind
of Government which suits them best; but we presume
not to dictate to any nation.


Vlll PREFACE.

Pour of the great Empires of the World have risen,
flourished, and passed away, since the Great Pyramid
was constructed. Our Government, which is that of a
National Brotherhood^ alone is left, as if to shew Man-
kind, that it is possible to belong to the same original
Family of Man, without absorbing other states, or being
absorbed by any of them. We are advancing towards
the end of the Christian Dispensation ; and it is most
satisfactory to see that we still retain the same Standards
of Length, Capacity and Weight, which were first
established, by an Unxoritten Revelation, about 700 years
before the Jews were formed into a Nation by Moses
under the Laws of a Written Revelation,

It is to be hoped, that Wars may cease, Conquests
be disclaimed; and instead of one Country becoming
greater at the expense of another, or by its downfall,
all may make common cause, and try to lessen, by the
interchange of kind offices, the sudden and unavoidable

calamities which each mav have to endure. We have

»

had happy experience of this good feeling among the
greater part of the Colonies and Countries with which we
are associated, by the bounty which has been extended
to our own land in aid of our distressed operatives ; and
we are generally willing to shew the same good feeling
toward others.

" Oh ! might we all our lineage prove,
Give, and forgive, — do good, and love ;
By soft endearments, in kind strife,
Lightening the load of daily life !"


September, 18(j3.


THE GREAT PYRAMID,

A POEM,

Written for this Work by Patrick Scott, Esq.

AUTHOR OF "A POET'S CHILDREN," "FOOTPATHS BETWEEN TWO WORLDS,"

ETC., ETC.

1.

Dwelling, like greatest things, alone,
Nearest to Heaven of earthly buildings, thou
Dost lift thine ancient brow
In all the grandeur of immortal stone,

And, like the Centuries' Beacon, stand —
Up-springing as a tongue of Fire,
To light the Course of Time through Egypt's mystic land !

2.
'Tis not for Poet to inquire

Why thou wast built ? and when ?
Whether, in monumental state.
So great thyself to tomb the great

Beyond their fellow men ?
Or whether thou dost still endure, .

Work of dark times which thee did raise,

To carry on to future days
The notions of a natural Faith impure ? —
Or dost thou, in thy bodily Magnitude,

Not uninform'd nor rude,
Declare the abstract ties which Science finds,
Seen by the light of geometric minds,
In fix'd proportions, each allied to each ?
Or dost thou still, in inferential speech,
/ Reveal unto mankind the girth

Of the vastly rounded Earth ;

B


THE GREAT PYRAMID,

And to the busy human race

Bequeath a rule, to guide the range
Of all the minor Measurements of Space,
Which Traffic gets, and gives, in endless interchange ?

3.

Thou pointest, like an Index, to th' extremes

Of Time and Life. For ever in thy sight
Rolls that great River, the High Priest of Streams,

As consecrated by old Night
To minister to Memories of the past.
He comes on like a Conqueror, — not for blood,
But to subdue the waste. His waves have cast

More riches round them, as the stream has roll'd
Through many climes its solitary flood.

Than if they surged in gold.
blessed Spirit ! of which no eyes behold
The Source whence thou descendest in thy power

To bid the Desert flower.
Thus, from a Fountain veil'd to mortal eye,

Heaven's bounty streams from high
To fertilize two worlds, and cause to bloom
The waste of Life, the desert of the Tomb.

4.
And near thee the Grand City spreads, where dwell
Sprouts from all modem nations, making there

A mixture of moralities and creeds.

And customs and costumes, that needs
Much time to comprehend, nor less to tell ;

And half-suggests a prayer.
That the indignant Nile would rise, and hide
Th' Augean sights that shock the purer-eyed,
And through the chok*d streets flush its purifying tide.

5.
A thin line parts the living from the dead —

A few steps forward, and we tread
Where the long waste of ages wears the pall

Of Desolation — at our footsteps'-fall
The Locust, rising from his rocky bed,
Flits to some other spot, where he alone
May share, without a peer, his Desert-bounded throne.


\


A POEM. 3

6.

Stupendous pile ! the things which thou hast seen,
In thy long life, pass hj thee as a dream —
This forms the Poet's theme.

From thy old Kings^ till now, the Qreat have been
Subjected to thy gaze. That wondrous man,
Miscaird the Madman, in thy land began
To work his schemes, when Commerce rose.

By long-foreseeing Thought compell'd
To choose her Habitation ; and the East
And Learning, in descending ages, held

In Alexandria's bowers her intellectual feast.

7.
Different was he, that Brand of War, whose breath

Changed, like the fell Simoom, the verdant sod
Into a waste — Genius of Crime and Death,

He the World's demon, and his Soldiers' god !
For still Reflection asks, for what great good
The First Napoleon stain 'd the peaceful Earth with blood.

8.
And in this land the Traveller yet may hear,

Attentive with historic ear— •

As o'er the keel-plough 'd deep

The battle- clamours sweep,

The Voice of Neison cry aloud, to slip
The iron thunder-shower from each recoiling ship.

9.
Enduring pile ! Thou art the link that binds

The Memories of reflective minds —
Vast mass of monumental rock sublime.
That to the present Age dost join the Youth of Time.

*«* This beaatifUl Poem was not received till after the Aathor had published his
First Edition of the '* Great Pyramid." He has much pleasure in adding it now.— The
yarious causes, which have made the Pyramid famous, are touched on by Mr. Scott,
with that consummate Poetic Art, of which he is so profound a master.

Tlie Sonnet, which follows, was originally sent by Mr. Strong to the London Mag<uine,
which the Editor conducted (flrom 1821 to 1824) with the aid of the late John Hamilton
Reynolds and the late Thomas Hood, his valuable coa^utors.


THE GREAT PYRAMID : SONNETS.


SONNET FROM PETROCCHL

lo chiesi al Tempo ; ed a chi sorse il grande
Amplo edifizio che qui al suol traesti ?
Fi non risponde, e pih veloci e presti
Faggitivo per Taere i vanni spande.

Dice alia Fama ; O tu che all* ammirande
Cose d^i vita e questi avanzi e questi !
China ella gli occhi conturbati e mesti,
Qual chi dogliosi alti sospiri tramande.

To gi^ Yolgea maravigliando il passo,
Quando sull' alta mole, altero in mostra,
Yisio girsene Obblio di sasso in sasso ;

Ah to, gridai, forse apristi, ah ! mostra —
Ma in taono ei m'intermppe, orrido e basso,
lo di chi fa non euro ; adesso h nostra.

Translated by hy Friend, the Key. Charles Strong, M.A.
F.RA.S.; AND SINCE republished in the Second Edition

OP his "Sonnets," 1862.

I ask'd of Time ; "To whom arose this high
Majestic pile, here mouldering in decay V
He answer'd not, but swifter sped his way.
With ceaseless pinions winnowing the sky.

To Fame I tum'd : " Speak Thou, whose sons defy
The waste of years, and deathless works essay !"
She heaved a sigh, as one to grief a prey,
And silent, downward cast her tearful eye.

Onward I pass'd, but sad and thoughtful grown,
When, stem in aspect, o'er the ruin'd shrine
I saw Oblivion stalk from stone to stone.

" Dread Power !" 1 cried, "Tell me, whose vast design — ^"
He check'd my further speech, in sullen tone ;
** Whose once it was, I care not ; now 'tis mine !"


AN

ESSAY ON THE STANDARDS,

ETC.


THE appearance of the Great Pyramid was sufficiently
striking to arrest the attention of all strangers
visiting Egypt^ even if the purport of its erection were un-
known. On the left bank of the Nile, about seven miles
from Cairo, is still to be seen a group of Pyramids of
various sizes^ called the Pyramids of Gizehy the largest
of which, when perfect, was about 764 feet in length, on
each of the four sides at the base^ and about 486 feet in
vertical height at the apex. It was originally cased over
with a dark-coloured marble, like the black marble of
Ashford in Derbyshire, the same that is called Swine-
stone by mineralogists; but this became white by the
action of the sun in the course of years, and where it
is now seen, it is of a bright straw-colour. The black
marble of Ashford has changed to a whitish tint even in
thirty years. There are two truncated columns of this
marble, supporting two beautiful antique vases in the
gardens at Chatsworth, which columns are now bleached
throughout of a dead white — ^yet they have not been there,
in that position, more than thirty years, as Sir Joseph
Paxton informed me, when I saw them about three
years ago.

The Swinestone of Egypt was brought from the
Mokattam quarry, about fifteen miles higher up the


b AN ESSAY ON

River Nile, and was, like the black marble of Derby-
shire, capable of receiving a very high polish. It has
often been asserted by some persons, that there never
had been any prismatic casing-stones placed between
the limestone blocks of which the kernel of the Pyra-
mid is constructed; but, in 1837, Colonel Howard Vyse
was so fortunate as to settle this question. He dis-
covered, under the debris on the Northern side of the
Great Pyramid, two of the casing-stones in their original
position; and, before any change was made in them,
Mr. Brettell, a civil engineer, ascertained the angle of
their face with reference to its base, and found it to be
exactly 51° 50' 00". The following remarks, on this
discovery, are made by Sir John Herschel, in the last
edition of his Outlines of Astronomy, 8vo, 1859, page
205:—

•* At the date of the erection of the Great Pyramid
** of Gizeh, which precedes by 3,970 years (say 4,000),
" the present epoch, the longitudes of all the Stars were
" less by 55° 45' than at present. Calculating from this
datum the place of the pole of the heavens among the
stars, it will be found to fall near a Draconis : its
" distance from that star being 3° 44' 25". This
" being the most conspicuous star* in the immediate
** neighbourhood, was therefore the Pole Star at that
" epoch. And the latitude of Gizeh being just 30°
" North, and consequently the altitude of the North
*' Pole there also 30°, it follows that the Star in question
'^ must have had, at its lower culmination at Gizeh, an
'' altitude of 26° 15' 35". Now it is a remarkable fact,
'* ascertained by the late researches of Colonel Vyse,

* " o Draconis is now an inconspicuous star of the fourth
magnitude, but there is distinct evidence to shew that it was
formerly brighter."


THE STANDARDS OP LENGTH, ETC. 7

** that of the nine Pyramids still existing at Gizeh, six

" (including all the largest), have the narrow passages

** by which alone they can be entered (all of which open

" out on the northern faces of their respective Pyra-

" mids), inclined to the horizon downwards, at angles as

'* follows : —

" First, or Pyramid of Cheops
" Second, or Pyramid of Cephren
" Third, or Pyramid of Mycerinus
" Fourth, „ „

" Fifth


" Ninth „ „


26° 41'
25° 55'
26° 2'

27° 0'
27° 12'

28° (y


"Mean 26° 47'

** Of the two Pyramids at Abousseir also, which alone
'' exist in a state of sufficient preservation to admit
'* of the inclinations of their entrance passages being
" determined, one has the angle 27° 5', the other 26°.

"At the bottom of every one of these passages, there-
" fore, the then Pole Star must have been visible at its
'* lower culmination, a circumstance which can hardly
** be supposed to have been unintentional, and was
'' doubtless connected (perhaps superstitiously), with
*^ the astronomical observation of that star, of whose
" proximity to the pole, at the erection of these wonderful
** structures, we are thus furnished with a monumental
*' record of the most impeinshable nature!^

It appears, from these observations, that 4,000 years
ago, or about 2,160 years b.c, while Noah was still
living, the Great Pyramid was constructed. It had
been revealed to the Builders of that wonderful struc-
ture that the Earth was a sphere, the measurement of
which they then made with great exactness; that it
revolved daily on its axis, which was inclined 30° above the
level of the horizon; that the axis was in a line with


8 AN ESSAY ON

the Polar Star; and that the Earth's orbit was completed
round the Sun in the course of a year.

Admitting all this for the present, it may be asked :
" What proof have we that the same knowledge was not
" possessed by the Philosophers of Greece or Rome?"
We answer : " There is not the least reason to believe
" that they, for more than fifteen hundred years
" later, had any conception of these things/^ But, to
answer this question in the most satisfactory manner,
we extract the following passages from ** The Students^
Manual of Ancient Geography/^ published under the
superintendence of Dr. William Smith, in 1861, as the
latest authority on the subject : —

'^ Homer had no idea of the spherical form of the
" Earth : he conceived it to be the upper surface of a
" body of great thickness, which was as round as the
" shield of Achilles, and so fiat that it could be looked
" across. This circular surface was edged by a river
" named Oceanus^ just as a shield is bordered by its rim."
(p. 17).

*' Hecat<tus of Miletus (who flourished about 500
'^ B.C.) supposed the habitable world to be an exact circle,
'' surrounded by the Ocean, with which the Nile was
" connected at its source/^ (p. 26).

'' The true view of the spherical form of the Earth
" originated with the Pythagoreans^ and obtained general
'• belief: its exact form (an oblate spheroid), was not
'* known, although the revolution of the Earth on its
'' axis, which leads to the compression of the surface at
** the poles, appears to have been surmised by Aris"
'' tarchus, B.C. 280." (p. 60).

Herodotus, " as far as we can gather from his descrip-
'' tion, supposed the world to be oval, rather than
*' circular, Greece holding a central position.^^ (p. 28).


THE STANDARDS OF LENGTH, ETC. d

" Eratosthenes (b.c. 276 to 196), a native of Cyrene,
'' and educated at Athens, held the post of Librarian at
" Alexandria under Ptolemy Euergetes, He brought
^' Mathematics and Astronomy to bear on the subject of
" Geography, and was thus enabled to construct a very
'* much improved Chart of the World/^ (p. 46).

** Straboj of Amasia in Pontus (b.c 66 to a.d. 24),
" agrees generally with the views of Eratosthenes. He
" holds the Earth to be spherical, concentric with the
<* outer sphere of the Heavens, but immoveable.^^
(p. 49).

" Claudius Ptolemy completed the science of Geography
** in a work which served as a Text Book on the subject,
'* not only in his own age, but down to the fifteenth
'* century, when the progress of maritime discovery led

*' to its disuse He flourished at Alexandria about

"A.D. 150." (p. 55),

This is what is taught in our schools ; but it is now
seen, from the evidence of the Great Pyramid, that a
thousand years before the time assigned to Homer,
and more than fifteen hundred before Pythagoras
or Hecatseus or Herodotus flourished, the Great Pyra-
mid had been constructed, so as to embody records
of the Earth's /orm, size, and motion, far more accurate
than any of those to which the Greeks or Romans
ever attained.

Yet the Greeks of Alexandria, under Ptolemy Euer-»
getes, in whose reign (276 to 196 b.c), the Septuagint
Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures was made, could
hardly be ignorant of some of those discoveries which
had been made by the sons, or grandsons, of Noah two
thousand years before.

What shall we say then? Shall we admit, as evidence
pf this wonderful Revelation, a monumental Record of the

b5


10 AN ESSAY ON

most imperishable nature f or shall we ignore its existence,
and be content with what is taught, erroneously^ as the
Truth, in our Schools and Universities?

It is not possible to do justice here to the testimony
of the Great Pyramid, but we may insert Si, Memoir on the
subject which was drawn up in 1859, with the view of
being read before the Royal Society. That Paper was
not read, because it was thought more proper for the
Boyal Society of Antiquaries ; but, as it contains the
scientific grounds of the Author's belief, that the Revela^
tion thus embodied in Stone was worthy of the notice of the
Royal Society, he hopes he may be permitted to publish
the Memoir here, and to appeal to the common sense
of mankind for his justification.

tt seems almost incredible, that a country, so recent as
England appears to be from its history, should yet have
had, from the earliest times, a Measure of Length (the
ZncA), which received its determination more than 4,000
years ago. Whether the Inch was brought to this country
by any of those descendants of Noah, " by whom the isles
" of the Gentiles were divided in their lands ; every one
" after his tongue, after their families, in their nations,'*
(Gen. X. 5), we presume not to determine ; but as it
came from Egypt, where the custom of the country was
to use a Cubit J and not a Foot, or a Yard, the Inch most
probably formed a portion of that larger measure. In
the estimation of Sir Isaac Newton/ the Sacred Cubit was
the length of 24*88 English inches. We have some
reason to suppose that it a little exceeded this, being
equal to 34-8832. But this measure forms so nearly
25 of our inches, that four Sacred Cubits (equal to
99*533 inches), are less by only half an inch than
100 inches.

Additional proof of the Antiquity of the English inch,


THE STANDARDS OP LENGTH, ETC. 11

is found in the measures of the Earth, as given in
HerschePs Astronomy, (8vo, 6th Edit. p. 139).

There is a slight difference between the Estimates of
Mr. Airy and M. Bessel; but it is too trifling to
affect our present question.

English Feet. English Miles.

Greater or Equatorial Diameter 41,847,192(M26)— 7925'604(*648)
Lesser or Polar Diameter . . 41,707,324(*620)— 78991 14(»1 70)

Mean Diameter 41,777,253(*523)— 7912-309(*409)

The figures to which an Asterisk is prefixed, are those
in which Mr. Airy's Estimate differs from M. Sessel's.
We proceed now to place before our readers the true
state of the case, by reducing these measures into
English inches.

AiRT. Bessbl.

English Inches. English Inches.

Greater or Equatorial Diameter . . 502,169,112*— 502,166,304
Lesser or Polar Diameter .... 500,491,440*— 500,487,888

Mean Diameter 501,330,276*— 501,327,096

We were induced to make this change, by the convic-
tion at which we had arrived, from studying the Great
Pyramid, that an even number of Inches was intended to
be represented ; and that this number was 500 Millions.

The difference between theEnglish inchesof thepresent
day, and the original inches of 4000 years ago, may be
seen by dividing the mean diameter of 501,330,000,
by 500,000,000. The latter number requires the addition
of 1 and \ in 1000 parts of an inch, to be made equal
to the earlier inch.

In the measure of the Diameter of the Earth before
the Flood, which amounted very nearly to the same
number of inches contained in the present Earth, were
20 millions of Sacred Cubits, of 24-8832 English inches;


12 AN ESSAY ON

and, in the Diameter of the present Earth, are 20 millions
of a Cubit Measure of 25 English inches.

It would have required 2,366,000 inches to bring up
the Diameter before the Flood, to 500,000,000 of inches;
but after the Flood, the mean measure of the Diameter is
found to be 1,330,000, or 1,327,000, above 500 Mil-
lions. If the Ten Foot Rule taken out by Greaves, for the
measure of the Pyramids, in 1636, were, as he says,
perhaps two, in 1000 parts of an inch, less than it
should have been, this difference would more than
make up for the above number.

A similar increase is required for the same reason,
in the estimate of the cubic inch, as contained in the
Porphyry Coffer. We had previously shown, in the
Great Pyramid, that the CoflFer was intended to be 90
digits long, 40 digits deep, and 30 digits wide, also that
each digit was equal to '864 parts of the English inch.
The total is 69,657 English cubic inches; but this num-
ber, in order to make up the cubic inches in the Kamak
cubit, requires a little more than 2 in 1000 parts.

The Author had remarked ("Great Pyramid,'' p. 37)
that one English foot bears the same ratio to the side
of the Great Pyramid, which the circumference of the
Earth bears to one hundred thousand millions of English
feet. " This curious and novel relation,'^ says Sir John
Herschel, ** may be most intelligibly expressed under
'^ the following form of announcement, viz : — That a
" belt encircling the globcy of the breadth of the base
^' of the Great Pyramid, would contain one hundred
" thousand millions of square feet. ... If we suppose
" the belt meridional, and the area expressed in
*^ modular square feet, the approximation is within one
" part in 1,100. The fact is interesting, as oflfering
** the only tolerable approach, in round numbers, to an


THE STANDARDS OF LENGTH, ETC. 13

** arithmetical relation between any of the dimensions
^' of the Pyramid and those of the Earth.'' But in his
next Letter to the Athenaum (May 1, 1860), Sir John
qualifies this opinion by observing, " There is another
and a remarkable one, which I do not find noticed by
Mr. Taylor, or elsewhere ; viz. : that the height of the
** Pyramid, including the casing, and measured from base
" to apex, supposed to terminate in a point, is the two
" hundred and seventy thousandth part of the Earth's
*^ circumference. Taking the equatorial circumference
" as unity, the error of this aliquot is one part in 736;
" but if the polar, is only one in 3,506, the former error
" being in defect, the latter in excess ; so there exists
*' somewhere or other on the globe, a diametral section
'* whose circumference is exactly 270,000 times the ori-
" ginal height of the building. Though not a meridian,
*^ it is not very remote from one.*' The proportion here
stated, had been noticed by the Author, at pp. 26 and 27
of the " Great Pyramid," where he shows that there are
270,000 Roman miles (not 31,500, as Eratosthenes
erroneously imagined) contained in the Earth's circum-
ference of 130,909,000 English feet.

If the circumference of the Earth were divided by
763-9, it is equal to 130,907,200 English feet ; if by
764, to 130,890,100 English feet. The Roman mile is
equal to 4848*5 English feet: 270,000 miles are
130,909,500 feet.

The English inch does not appear to have been in
existence before the Flood. At that time, we find the
Sacred Cubit the only measure recorded. When the
Great Pyramid was constructed, and the new Earth
measured, the Cubit of 25 inches would take the place
of the Sacred Cubit in the East; and, perhaps a 25-inch
Rule may have been adopted in England. A two-foot
Rule has long since superseded this Cubit, if it ever


14 AN ESSAY ON

prevailed with us ; but, it is worth restoring now, if
it be only to shew mankind the size of the Sacred Cubit,
and how correctly the 20-millionth part of the Earth's
diameter may be represented by the 25-inch Rule, which
is only the eighth of an inch longer than that Sacred Cubit,
by which the Ark was measured, when it was built by
Noah, under the direction of the Almighty. Accord-
ing to the measure of the Sacred Cubit, the size of the
Ark a little exceeded that of the *' Great Eastern*^ Iron
Ship ( see p. 308).

From what has been said in the preceding pages, it
will be perceived, that a Divine Revelation was made to
mankind, of which the Great Pyramid is the Record,
about 700 years before the Revelation of which the
Pentateuch is the Record. Although the Art of Writing
was not communicated to mankind, until it was employed
by Moses to reveal the word of God, in order that
after-ages might have no reason to doubt the verity
and authority of the communication; still the earlier
Stone Revelation was quite as precise and indubitable.
We cannot misunderstand its purport, nor hesitate to
believe the Truths it was capable of imparting. No one
has been so bold hitherto, as to deny the validity of the
Evidences embodied in the Marble Monument, though
some persons are to be found who appear to doubt the
validity of the Written Memorial, and strive to dis-
credit its Testimony.

There had been, of old time, Revelations made to
certain persons chosen out for that purpose, before the
communication which was made to the Founders of the
Great Pyramid; and unless these Revelations had
been made, that work could not have been completed.
One related to the Art of Numhei*^ by means of the
so-called Arabic Numerals. Without their aid, the


THE STANDARDS OF LENGTH, ETC. 15

various combinations of figures, increasing ten-fold in
power as each preceded another, (reckoned in order
from right to left), could not have been denoted. The
Art of Writing was then unknown, while Number had
been long resorted to. 2. Geometry was understood, and
practised, before the Flood as well as after. 3. The use
of the Mechanical Powers, with the Art of Shipbuilding ,
must have been made known to Noah by means of a
Divine Revelation ; since he could not otherwise have
built the Ark.

We may go farther back, and say that the knowledge
of the Arts of Common Life must have been com-
municated by Revelation to the First Man ; and that,
without a full command of Language, he could not have
given " Names to all cattle, and to the birds of the air,
** and to every beast of the field ^^j for "whatsoever
'• Adam called every living creature, that was the name
" thereof." He was at once inspired with the Art of
Language in perfection, and had not to learn it by slow
degrees, as a child now learns it by the patient teaching
and long continued care of its parents. The First
Man could never have attained to the right use of
words by this process, any more than an infant, without
father or mother to take care of and instruct it,
could ever learn to clothe, feed, and protect itself.
In all these cases, Man's boasted Reason would prove
but a sorry substitute for that Instinct with which
the Almighty has endowed the inferior creatures.
They never fall below what is required of them, but
they never rise above it; they never fail, but
they never improve. Man is able to surpass himself;
but it is only by receiving Divine Instmction^ when he
feels the need of it, and asks it from his Heavenly
Father. ,


16 AN ESSAY ON

The Knowledge revealed to Man, by the favour of
God, is essentially diflferent from that knowledge which
men are able to acquire for themselves. "Lo, this
*' have I found, that God hath made mant/jori^A^ ; but they
''have sought out many inventions*' (Eccles. vii. 29.)
These are the words of *'the Preacher, the Son of
'^ David,*' and they express a great Truth, which is too
much lost sight of (it may be feared) in the present
day. By the upright, Solomon means the righteous^
(Jasher), a name applied to Noah, ^y ^^ Inventions'^
he means such engines or machines as Uzziah employed,
when it is said, ''He made in Jerusalem engines in-
'' vented by cunning men, to be in the towers, and upon
'* the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal "
(2 Chron. xxvi. 15). Inventions here especially meant
those engines by which men's lives may be destroyed;
but the word is also applicable to those engines or
machines by which men's lives may be preserved, or by
which they themselves may be made more comfortable
while they live.

In some important particulars the two kinds of
Knowledge greatly diflfer. That ipecxilisir knowledge, which
is granted to the upright, is of a nature to which Man,
by his own unaided reason, could never have attained :
it is above his powers, and even beyond his imagination.
Man's inventions, on the contrary, are beneath his
powers, and under his own conception and control.
Again, the knowledge revealed to man is perfect at
the first ; but that which is the. effect of man's discovery
is in a state of progressive improvement. These differences
are well exemplified in the Great Pyramid. Although
the divine knowledge indicated by that wonderful struc-
ture had been imparted so long, and- though it ex-
hibited srxh amazing evidence, as we now see, of those


THE STANDARDS OP LENGTH, ETC. 17

scientific truths which no one endeavours to gainsay or
deny— yet all other men, except the few with whom the
Pyramid originated, remained totally unmoved, unin-*
fluenced, and uninstructed by its teaching. It was not
till about 2,000 years afterwards, that the knowledge it
was capable of communicating was gradually made
known, and this was probably done at Alexandria by
means of the Hebrew Scriptures, and their translation
into Greek. Even then the form of the Earth, and
its revolution on its axis, as well as round the Sun, was not
commonly known ; nor were these facts generally be-
lieved in Europe till after the age of Galileo and
Copernicus.

MosEs was an upright or righteous man, and to him
God said : '^ Come up to me in the Mount, and
" be there ; and I will give thee Tables of Stone, and a
'' Law and Commandments which I have written, that
" thou mayst teach them." They were written, in order
that they might be taught. The necessity for this was
the origin of all alphabetic writing. The Command-
ments were first written on two Tables of Stone by the
" finger of God." Moses, in consequence of the sins
of which the Israelites had been guilty, during his
absence in the Mount, brake the Tables by casting them
from him on his return. The Lord then said to him :
" Hew thee two Tables of Stone like unto the first, and
^* come up unto me into the Mount, and make thee an
** ark of wood. And / will write on the Tables the words
'* which were on the First Tables which thou brakedst,
" and thou shalt put them in the ark" (Deut.x. 1, 2).
Here we see the commencement of all writing in alpha-'
betic characters ; and that it was revealed first to an up^
right or righteous man.

Some persons have supposed that because the art of


IS AN ESSAY ON

ioriting, by means of Hieroglyphics^ is evidently more
imperfect than that of Alphabetic writing, it may be
more ancient. Upon this subject, the late Sir George
Cornewall Lewis makes some valuable remarks in his
^' Historical Survey/^

'' The Egyptologists do not indeed pretend that any
" great amount of historical knowledge has been
" hitherto derived from hieroglyphic inscriptions. They
" profess to have read certain names of kings which
'* they identify variously with names in Manetho's lists;
'^ but they do not assert that the inscriptions furnish
'^ either a coherent chronology, or events in the reigns
^' of the kings. Brugsch, in his work on the Primeval
'* History of Egypt, lays it down, that the ancient
** Egyptians had no Era, that they denoted events only
" by the year of the king's reign, and that this mode of
reckoning affords no materials for a chronological
system. The meagreness of the historical information
which Bunsen and Brugsch profess to have extracted
from the hieroglyphical inscriptions must be apparent
** to every reader. Bunsen, indeed, speaks of ancient
" Egypt as the ' monumental ' nation ; but its monu-
'* ments are colossal buildings, not intelligible inscrip-
^ tions containing historical records. If the hiero-
*' glyphical writings, which have been interpreted, have
'^ been interpreted correctly, and if they may be taken
" as a sample of the rest, we may be satisfied that there
'* is nothing worth knowing. The work of Sir Gardner
** Wilkinson, upon Ancient Egypt ^ which speaks to
*' the eye, is far more instructive than the efforts to
** address the mind through the restored language of
*^ the Egyptians. It may be feared that the future
'* discoveries of the Egyptologists will be attended with
'' results as worthless and as uncertain as those


C€
f<
<(

te


TH£ STANDARDS OF LENGTH^ ETC. 19

" which have hitherto attended their ill-requited and
'' barren labours/**


((


Greaves, in his " Discourse of the Romane foot and
'* Denarius ; from whence, as from two principles, the
" Measures and Weights, used by the Ancients, may be
*^ deduced,"t Makes the following important state-
ment : —

'^ If any shall find some little difference from some
originals, as five or six grains in the English pounds
and it may be one or two parts of a thousand in the
^^ English foot^ different from the standards in the
Exchequer, or the Tower, or at Winchester, or some
other place, it is not much to be wondered. For I
" have found as great differences in collating the English
'^ standards themselves."

Thus Greaves prepares us to expect that difference
in his measure which Raper afSrmed he had found, and
which Dr. Hussey supposed to be as much as two in 1,000
parts of the English foot «r inch.

The same difference is doubtless to be expected at
the present day, but it is of less moment now than it
formerly was, since we can restore the full measure
whenever we please, as Sir John Herschel has shown us,
in his Letter on the Modular Unit; % and whether we add
the thousandth part of an inch, or twice that quantity, it
is practically of no real importance. The Man of Science
can supply the defect at any time, when he is engaged
in calculations which require the addition to be made ;
and, on all other occasions, it is not worth naming.

The Unwritten Revelation, made to mankind 4,000 years
ago, gave rise to most of the measures which have since

♦ Hisioriccd Survey of the Astronomy of the Ancients, 8vo
1862, p. 395.
t London, small 4to, 1647, page 120. :|: See p. 39, following.


20 AN ESSAY ON THE STANDARDS^ ETC.

occupied the minds of men, however diversified they
seem. By that Revelation it was made known, to a few
persons at first, that T\me was a Measure of Space, and
that, while the Earth was revolving on its axis, it made
a perfect measurement of itself every twenty-four hours.
It would be easy to shew in what manner this was done ;
but the following results, with regard to the Pyramid
foot of 1-0909 English, the Greek foot of 1-0101 English,
and the English foot, may be suflScient for this place.
The Earth, in twenty-four hours, reveals itself in a
direct line under the Sun, to the extent of —

120,000,000 Pyramid feet of 1-0909; or, of
129,600,000 Greek feet of 10101 ; or, of
130,908,960 English feet of I'OOO—
which are all the same measure. This is the Circum"
ference of the Earth. But this measure may be as
perfectly represented by 1,570,907,520 Inches, which
will serve the better for comparison. To denote the
Diameter, requires Twenty Millions of Cubits, each of
Twenty-five English Inche^ — a New Measure with us,
but probably the earliest of all Measures, The total is 500
Millions of Inches which, multiplied by 3-1416,* is
equal to 1,570,800,000. The difference is 107,520
Inches, in the entire circumference, being very nearly
the thousandth part of an Inch, required to be added to
Greaves's measure, and possibly to the Inch of the
present day, to compensate for what it may have lost iu
4,000 years. If we wish to make the Inch theoretically
perfect, we have only to add one-thousandth part to it,
as Sir John Herschel proposes.f It must be admitted,
that within this limit, all measures are identical for any
useful purpose.

* See Great Pyramid, p. 81, Hindoo ftatio,
t See Supplementary Papery p. 39.


21


BRIEF MEMOIR OF THE GREAT PYRAMID,

Wiif2 it tsos Butlt

Offered as a Communication to he read before
The Royal Society in 1859.

AN opinion has long been entertained, that the
P^amids of Gizeh were intended for the Tombs
of Kings, and that the Stone Coffers, found in them,
were their Sarcophagi. But, at the commencement of
the present century, certain men of science, who accom-
panied the French expedition into Egypt, endeavoured
to show that the Great Pyramid might have had a
scientific object. M. Jomard thought that the present
Egyptian cubit was intended to be contained 400 times
in the side of the base of the Great Pyramid, and the
common cubit, 500 times ; as also that the side was the
480th part of a degree of the meridian proper to Egypt.
The real Measures, however, fail to support any of these
conclusions; and, after a lapse of more than fifty years,
this theory is held to be as far from verification as it
was at the commencement of the century ; yet, it is in
this direction, if in any, that we may hope to find a
satisfactory answer to the question, " Why was the Great
Pyramid built ? " For if it were constructed on scien-
tific, principles, an accurate estimate of its measures
would, perhaps, reveal its purpose* As a Sepulchre, of
course, we could not expect it to be constructed on any


22 BRIEF MEMOIR OF

well-defined system of proportion ; and further scrutiny-
would be hopeless on that supposition.

The measures of the aide of the base of the Great
Pyramid, made by many diflPerent persons, at diflFerent
times, seem so little to correspond with each other, that,
at first sight, we can discover no chance of reconciling
them. In English feet, they are represented, according
to the best authorities, by the following figures; 693,
728, 746, and 764 feet, the smallest of these numbers
being the earliest of all recent measurements making
any claims to accuracy ; and the largest being the latest
of all. These several stages have one striking peculiarity
running through them — they dififer from each other
apparently by a regular series of increasing numbers.
From 693 to 728, there is an increment of 35 feet (or twice
17J) ; from 728 to 746, of 18 feet; and from 746 to 764,
of 18 feet. We might suppose, from this general result,
that in some way or other the various measures are
capable of adjustment; and, that if the right principle of
increase were ascertained, the whole might be brought
into some kind of harmonious relation. Unless this could
be done, we should have no ground to proceed upon ;
but, if it could be satisfactorily established, that the various
measures formed part of one uniform system, the differ-
ence between them, instead of obstructing, would assist
us in our inquiries after that original measure, which must
first be discovered before we can advance any farther.

The blocks of stones, which constitute the four lowest
tiers of the Great Pyramid, as it now stands, are about
4 feet 10 inches in perpendicular height, and gradually
diminish, as they approach the top of the structure, to
2 feet 2 inches.

In 1637, Mr. John Greaves, Savilian Professor of
Astronomy in the University of Oxford, measured the


THE GREAT FYRAMIP. 23

Great Pyramid with extreme care, and made the side of
the base 693 English feet.

Between 1646 and 1693, the French Mathematicians,
from various measures made by de Monconys, Thevenot,
de Chazelles, Fulgentius of Tours, de Nointel, etc., found
the base to be 682 French feet, or 728 English.

Two Englishmen are named as confirming this
measure, viz. : Melton and Graves.

In 1763, Davison, our Consul at Algiers, records the
base as being equal to 746 feet. This measure was
remarkably confirmed by M. Jomard in 1798, who found
the base to be 227*32 wZtres, or 7458 English feet.

A year after this, Le Pere, the architect, and Colonel
Coutelle, carefully surveying the platform on which the
Great Pyramid was built, perceived two indentations in
the rock, 8 inches deep, one at each extremity, in which
a comer-stone might have been originally placed; and
measuring carefully the base again with this addition,
they affirmed it to be equal to 232*747 metres^ or 7636
English feet.

Finally, in 1837, about 200 years after Greaves had
made his first attempt to determine the true measure of
the base. Colonel Howard Vyse discovered two of the
actual Casing-stones in their original position, under the
debris which had been thrown down on the north side
by forcing the present entrance. ** The size and angle
'' of the building could therefore be exactly determined
*' and all doubts were removed respecting a revStemenf
{Vyse's Operations, vol. i.^.2&l). Each of the casing-
stones was equal to 8 feet 3 inches at the bottom, 4 feet
3 inches at the top, 4 feet 11 inches in perpendicular
height, and 6 feet 3 inches in sloping height. Mr. Perring,
the English surveyor employed by Colonel Howard Vyse,
now measured the base to the extremity of the casing-


24 BBIEF MEMOIR OF

stones, and madeit764 feet; thus establishing^ in the most
conclusive manner, the truth of the conjecture of the
French Savansin 1799, that the indentation at each eud
of the base had been occupied by a corner-stone, and
confirming their measure of 763*6 English feet.

To Colonel Howard Vyse we are indebted for the
discovery, that the casing-stones, being about 8 feet
3 inches wide at the bottom, and only 4 feet 3 inches at
the top, must have sloped gradually upwards from the
base of the Great Pyramid (where they were brought
in contact with a pavement extending 33 feet 6 inches
beyond the casing-stones), to the topmost-stone of the
entire building.

The complete measure of the side of the base, includ-
ing the casing-stones, is thus, by the French estimate,
763-6 English feet, and by the English, 764 feet. Ex-
elusive of the casing- stones, the French made the base
745-8 English feet, and the English, 746 feet. The
diflFerence between the two measurements is only 5 inches
in the entire measure, and 2 J inches in the measure
without the casing stones. The English and the French
nations are both alike entitled to great credit in bringing
about this result, after the Pyramid had existed for
about forty centuries without any light being thrown
on it.

If we deduct the measure allowed by the French
mathematicians in 1798, for the casing-stones, viz. : — 17 8
English feet from 745*8 English feet, we have 728 English
feet left. This would be the measure of the base, if the low-
est tier of stones were hidden by the sand ; and this was
the measure arrived at by the French authorities in 1693.
Allowing for the next tier 17-5 English feet, of which
there is no positive measure extant, and for the third
tier of stones from the bottom, 17*5 English feet, we
have to deduct 35 feet from 728 ; and this leaves 693


THE GREAT PYRAMID. 2$

feet^ which was the measure so carefully estimated by
Greaves about 1637. At this time, therefore, we may
suppose, the three lowest tiers of stones, as they are now
seen, were hidden by the sand. Thus all the various
measurements are found to corroborate each other,
though they were formerly thought to present irre-
concileable diflferences; and the latest measurements,
being those in which we are chiefly interested, are all but
identical with each other, differing only about five
inches in a line of 9,168 inches; though recorded in
the measures of two different countries, France and
England — measures which cannot easily be brought
into exact agreement with each other.

The various estimates which have been made of the
height of the Great Pyramid, are incapable of any
nice adjustment. Greaves, in the first edition of his
Pyramidographia^ comes the nearest to the truth, when
he affirms the perpendicular height to be 481 feet, and
in his " Observations ^^^ published after his death, in
which he states it to be 490 feet: it is about midway
between the two numbers. But by the discovery of the
casing-stones in situ, all doubt as to the original height
is now removed. The angle which the face made with
the base, was most exactly ascertained by Mr. Brettell,
Civil Engineer, to be 51° 50'. This angle, with a base
line of 764 feet, gives for the vertical height, supposing
the Pyramid ended in a point, 486 feet; or with a base
line of 763-6 English feet (the French measure), 485*85
English feet.

What reason, it may be asked, can be assigned for
the Founders of the Great Pyramid giving its face this
angle with the base, and not making each face, as
Greaves and others conjectured it to be, an equilateral
triangle? The only reason we can assign is, that they


26 BRI£F MEMOIR OF

imagined the Earth to be a perfect sphere, and as they
knew that the radius of a circle must bear a certain
proportion to its circumference, they then built a four-
sided Pyramid of such a height in proportion to its
base, that its perpendicular would be equal to the
radius of a circle, whose circumference was equal to the
perimeter of the base. We can hardly imagine that
the Founders of the Great Pyramid were able to deter-
mine the angle of the face of such a Pyramid with
quite as much accuracy as it might be done at the
present time; but if they had such an object in view
as that which we are supposing, they would construct
the Great Pyramid, so as to make the angle of each
face with the base bear some near relation to the angle of
5P 51' 14", which is that ascribed to such a Pyramid
by modem science. The actual angle of the face,
according to the casing stones, was 51° 50'. Can any
proof be required more conclusive than this, that the
reason which is here assigned for the building of the
Great Pyramid, was the true reason? It was to make
a Record of the measure of the Earth that it was built.

Herodotus says of the Great Pyramid, when he saw
it (about 440 B. C.) ^^ that, it is made of polished stone,
"jointed with the greatest exactness; and none of the
" stones are less than 30 feet.^' He saw the Pyramid
when it was covered all over with the casing-stones,
for his measure of the stones is evidently surface-
measure. The lowest of the casing-stones, being 6
feet 3 inches in sloping height, would, with a width
of 5 feet, yield 30 feet in superficial measure; and the
highest of the casing- stones, with a sloping height of
2 feet 10 inches, would, on a length of 12 feiet, yield the
same surface. When the casing-stones were first seen by
Colonel Howard Vyse, *'they were quite perfect, had


THE GREAT PYRAMID. 27

" been hewn into the required angle before they were
" built in, and had then been polished down to one
*' uniform surface; the joints were scarcely perceptible,
*' and not wider than the thickness of silver paper; and
" such is the tenacity of the cement with which they are
'* held together, that a fragment of one that has been
*^ destroyed remained firmly fixed in its original aligne-
"ment, notwithstanding the lapse of time, and the
" violence to which it had been exposed. The pavement,
" beyond the line of the building, was well laid and
" beautifully finished, but, beneath the edifice, it was
" worked with even greater exactness, and to the most
'^ perfect level ; in order probably to obtain a lasting
'* foundation for the magnificent structure to be built
"upon it. I consider (says Colonel Vyse) that the
" workmanship displayed in the King^s Chamber^ in this
^^ pavement, and in t\iQ casing-stones^ is perfectly unrivalled;
*' and that there is no reason to doubt that the whole
" exterior of this vast structure was covered over with
" the same excellent masonry." *

The stones of which the body of the Great Pyramid
consists, were quarried from the rock on which it stands.
They are a free limestone, and abound with fossil re-
mains. The casing-stones are a kind of marble, brought
from a rock on the other side of the river, called the
Mokattam Quarry. This rock is a compact limestone,
which contains few fossils, and is termed, by Geologists,
Swinestone or Stinkstein. It is at first of a dark
colour; but the portions seen in the British Museum
are. now of a yellowish white, or cream colour, bleached
throughout by the Sun in the course of so many cen-
turies. It takes a very high polish; and if the pur-
pose of the Founders had been to construct a building

* V^se, vol. i. p. 261.


28 BRIEF MEMOIR OF

which should remain unimpaired for all future time,
they would endeavour to cover it with casing-stones of
remarkable hardness, whatever might be the colour.
They would join these stones together with the
thinnest cement of extreme tenacity; they would so
arrange the blocks, that all should expose a surface of
equal extent in square feet ; they would make the struc-
ture end in a point, to prevent the lodgment of anything
on the top which might injure the permanency of
the edifice; they would do, in short, all that has been
done by the Founders of the Great Pyramid to preserve it
from disintegration or decay, arising from the action of
of the elements, or from the violence of man.

Let us now enquire for what probable reason they
would take such extraordinary pains. Was it to raise
an imperishable monument, to which all nations, before
they became too widely dispersed, might appeal for a
standard oi measure? If so, we inight expect to find
embodied in the building some unequivocal proofs that
this was their design : we might expect, that, as the propor-
tion which the diameter of a circle bears to its circum-
ference is now known to be that of 1 to 3*141592,
something near this proportion would be that of twice
the perpendicular height of the Great Pyramid to its
perimeter. Let us try the question by this test.

The perpendicular height is 486 feet, and twice that
number is 972 English feet. The perimeter is 3,056 feet.
If we take the French measure, it gives us 485*85
English feet for the height ; 971'7 for the double of that
number; and 3,054 for the perimeter. In the diameter
of a circle equal to 3,056 feet, there are 1,000 feet of
•972 parts of the English foot ; and in its circumference
are 3,144 of such feet. Is there any ancient foot which
comes near this measure ?


((

it

€<
(€


THE GREAT PYBAMID. 29

This is (we find), the earlier Roman foot, sometimes
called the Italian. Greaves says : ** In the year 1639, 1
'^ went into Italy, to view, as the other antiquities of
the Romans, so especially those of weights and
^' measures ; and, to take them with as much exactness
as it was possible, I carried instrumenta with me
made by the best artizans.

My first inquiry was after that monument of
** T. Staiilius Vol. Aper^ in the Vatican gardens, from
'^ whence PhiUmder took the dimensions of the Roman
" foot, as others have since borrowed it from him. In
- the copying out of this upon an English foot in brass,
" divided into 2,000 parts, I spent at least two hours
*' (which I mention to shew with what diligence I pro-
ceeded in this and the rest), so often comparing the
several divisions and digits of it respectively one with
" another, that I think more circumspection could not
*' have been used. It contains 1,944 such parts as the
" English foot contains 2,000/'* This is precisely 972
parts of 1,000, equal to 11 '664 English inches. Many
other authorities might be quoted in corroboration of
this measure.

'* My next search,^^ says Greaves, " was for the foot
" on the Monument of Cossutitcs, in hortis Coloiianis,
" from whence it hath since received its denomination
(though it be now removed), being termed by writers
Pes Colotianus. This foot I took with great care, as it
" did well deserve, being veryfair and perfect; afterwards,
" collating it with that Roman foot which Lucas Ptetus
" caused to be engraven in the Capitol, on a white
** marble stone, I found them exactly to agree. Now
'' this of Cossuiius is 1934 such parts as the English

* Greaves' 8 Works hy Dr. BircA, p. 207.


I


30 BRIEF MEMOIR OF

** foot contains 2,000."* This foot, therefore, contains
967 parts in 1,000, equal to 11-604 English inches.
How may this difference between 972 and 967 be ex-
plained ?

There is a passage in Pliny which throws light upon
it. ''Eratosthenes, who was skilful in all kinds of
^' learning, but especially in this wherein he excels all
'' other persons, and is by all esteemed a great authority,
^* sets down the entire compass of the Earth at 252,000
^^ stades, which measure, by the Roman computation,
^^ makes 31,500 miles. A startling conclusion ! but yet
^' so well supported by skilful reasoning, that we should
" be ashamed not to believe him.^t There is, however,
a great mistake in this statement. If we regard the
proportion which the perimeter of the Great Pyramid
})ears to twice its perpendicular height, and divide 3,056
English feet by 3,150 Roman feet, we obtain for the latter
a foot of 970 of the English foot, or 11*640 inches. This
was the measure of the Roman foot obtained by Raper,
'^ from a measurement of the most ancient buildings in
'^ Rome'' ; and it is also that of many other eminent
authorities. This is sometimes called the later Roman
foot, in contradistinction to the earlier, which is then
called the Italian.

There is a mistake, as we have said, in Pliny's state-
ment, which arose from a misconception as to the length
of the Roman mile. In 5,000 Roman feet of "970 English
feet are 4,850 English feet. This maybe equal to a Roman
mile; but 31,500 of these miles are equal to 152,775,000
English feet; and this number exceeds by one-seventh the
actual measure of the Earth's circumference. There are
only 27,000 Roman miles of 4,850 English feet in

* Greaves' s Works by Birch, p. 208.
t PUn. HisL Nat 1. ii., c. 112.


THE GREAT PYRAMID. 31

130,950,000 English feet; which number is a little more
than the measure of the Earth's circumference, when it is
estimated in the latitude of the Great Pyramid. If we
deduct one-seventh from 152,775,000, it leaves for the
measure 130,950,000 English feet.

Nouet, who accompanied the French expedition into
Egypt in 1798, calculated the latitude of the Great
Pyramid, and found it to be 29° 59' 49"; only 11" short
of 30°. Perring says, that the Pyramids extend from
29° 16' 56" to 30° 2' 30", and that they occupy a space
of fifty-three miles from North to South. Pinkerton
calculates the degree, in latitude 30"^, to contain 363,724
feet; and the circumference is, therefore, equal to
130,940,640 feet.

It is a remarkable property of the English foot, in its
connexion with the base of the Great Pyramid, that if
we divide unity by 764 (the number of feet contained in
the side of the base), the quotient exhibits, very nearly,
the number of feet contained in the circumference of the
Earth, namely, ^^^^ = -00,130,890,052 English feet =
TTJ^o''^^^^?^ — that is to say, one English foot bears
the same ratio to the side of the base of the Great
Pyramid, that the circumference of the Earth bears to
one hundred thousand millions of English feet.

The Greek foot ^ as well as the Roman, is found in the
measures of the Great Pyramid. Eratosthenes erred in
reckoning 252,000 Greek stades in the circumference of
the Earth, as much as he erred in the Eoman measure.
Deducting one-seventh, as before, leaves 216,000 for the
number of Greek stades, which, reckoning 606*06 feet for
the stade, is equal to 130,908,960 English feet. This
is the smaller Greek foot, equal to 1-0101 English feet.
The larger Greek foot is that which Stuart derived from
the measure ot the Hecatompedon at Athens. He made


32 BRIEF MEMOIB OF

that foot equal to 1*0115 English feet, or 12*138 inches;
but Mr. F. Penrose estimates it at 1*01336 English feet,
or 12*16 inches. The smaller Greek foot is called the
Ptolemaic foot. Eight stades of this foot are equal to
one Eoman mile, of 4,848*5 English feet.

A measure is recorded by Herodotus, as found in the
Great Pyramid; but it is superficial or square measure^
and not linear measure. He describes the Great
Pyramid as being '* four-sided, each face on every side
** is eight plethra, and the height is equal'^ (Sier.l 1. 124.)
As square measure, the plethron is often employed to
represent the Latin jugerum^ though this is said to
have contained only 28,800 square feet. It is used by
Herodotus for that quantity of land which in Egypt
was called the Aroura ; this was the square of 100 royal
cubits. One of the smaller Pyramids, the middle one
on the east side of the Great Pyramid, had a base
originally equal to the square of 100 royal cubits, or 172
feet 6 inches, as it was measured by Mr. Perring. It
would^ in that case, contain 295655 square feet.

The words of Herodotus, in the above extract, require
some explanation. If each face of the Great Pyramid
is eight plethra, and the lieight is equal, the height
must be equal to eight plethra also. In this case, he
must mean to say, that the number of squgre feet in the
measure of each face^ and the number of square feet in
the measure of the height, are equal ; but, if so, he must
mean the square of the height, since he alludes only to
superficial measure.

A sloping height of 618 feet, with a base of 764 feet,
(at an angle of 5 1° 50') allows for the content of each
face, 236,076 square feet; and a perpendicular height of
486 feet yields, for the square of that height, 236,196
square feeL In the content of each face, are eight
plethra, of 29,510 square feet, and in the content of


THE GREAT PTRAMIIV 33

the square of the height are eight plethra, of 29,525
square feet. The angle required to make the square of
the height equal in content to the content of each face
is 51° 49' 46", a diflTerence only 14" less than the angle
of 51° 50', as measured by Mr. Brettell.

Diodorus Siculus assigns 700 feet to the side of the
Great Pyramid. He says, "It is in shape four-sided,
*' and each side, at the base, contains 7 plethra,''
meaning linear measure. Each foot is equal therefore
to 1-0909 of the English foot:— 700 of these feet are
763-63, nearly 764 English feet.

Sir Isaac Newton says, that " the oldest feet of which
** any account has been transmitted to us, are the Roman,
'^ the Ptolemaic^ and the Drusian foot, at Tongeren in
" Germany, the last of which is equal to 13J Uncia of
** the English foot" (Neyv ton's Dissertation on Cubits, in
Greaves's Works by Dr. Birch, p. 419). If we add to
the Homan foot of 970 English feet, one inch and a half,
it gives us exactly 1*0909 for this foot of Drums,

The foot of Drusus, or of Diodorus Siculus, might
properly be called the Pyramid foot. In the side of the
base of the Great Pyramid are 700 feet of 1-0909
English feet, or 763630 feet. In the circumference of
the Earth are 120 millions of these Pyramid feet, of
1-0909, equal to 130,908,000 English feet. The English
foot is most closely connected with this Pyramid foot :
if we deduct one twelfth part from the Pyramid foot of
1*0909, it leaves the English foot without any remainder
(10000).

The English Inch, finds its place most wonderfully at
such a time among these measures of the greatest anti-
quity* If the circumference of the Earth be represented
by 130,908,000 English feet, its diameter will be equal
to 41,667,000 English feet, or 500 millions of English
inches, — the only diflerence being that we must divide

c5


34 BRI£F MEMOIR OF

the circumference by 8'141792, instead of 3* 141692, a
difference of 2 in the fifth place.

Plint/ says, ** there are 883 feet in each side of the
" Great Pyramid.*' His words are, '* Amplissima octo
" jugera obtinet soli, quatuor angulorum paribus inter-
" vallis, per octingentos octoginta tres pedes wngulorum
** laterum.^' Greaves, mistaking the meaning of the
word soli, which in this case means surface, says,
'* Certainly Pliny is much mistaken in assigning the
" measure of the side to be 883 feet, and the basis of
" the Pyramid to be but 8 jugera, or Roman acres."
He thinks that '* Pliny writ 28 jugera, instead ' of 8 ;
^* or else in his proportion of the side to the area of the
" basis he hath greatly erred." As a means of correc-
ting this supposed errot in the number of feet in the
side, M. Jomard would change the number 883, to
833, imagining that Pliny meant Roman feet, but this
correction only brings up the measure to VLhoutflve-sixtAs
of the Roman foot. Pliny's measure, as it stands, is the
right one. In the side of the Great Pyramid, ' when
estimated at 7()3 feet, are 883 of -864 English feet; or
10'368 inches; but this is properly a Royal Span, one
of the most ancient of all measures. The eiffht jugera
of surface which are said by Pliny to exist in the equal
intervals of the four angles, are the same as the eight
plethra of Herodotus above mentioned, and both mean
eight arourts, that same Egyptian measure which is equal
to the square of 100 royal cubits.

The Royal Cubit is composed of 2 Royal Spans, It is
equal to 1728 English feet, or 20-736 inches. This
measure is so commonly employed in the interior of the
Great Pyramid, that Sir Isaac Newton, in his Disser-
tation on Cubits ( Greaves^ s Works by Dr. Birch, p. 405),
after mentioning nine eminent examples, varying from


THE GREAT PYRAMID. 85

21 inches to 20*400 inches (the average being 20*662
inches), concludes with saying, " It is my opinion, that
'^ the Pyramid was built throughout, after the measure
" of this cubit/'

The Cubit of Karnak is equal to 2 Royal Cubits^ or 4
Royal Spans, It is equal therefore to 8*456 English feet,
or 41*472 inches. There are four square passages lined
with granite in the interior of the Great Pyramid, which
Greaves found to be all of an equal breadth, viz : 3*463
English feet, or 41*556 inches; and, over one square
hole of this breadth, " are five lines cut parallel and
perpendicular y' as if they were intended to intimate
that the entire space was divisible into four equal parts.
The smallest division is equal to a royal span, the
half is equal to a royal cubit, and the whole is equal to
the cubit of Karnak, An original measure of this largest
kind was lately discovered, in Egypt, " at Karnak, on
" the removal of some stones from one of the towers of a
" propylon, between which it appears to have been acci-
'' dentally left by the masons at the time of its erection,
" at the remote period of the 18th dynasty." Sir Gardner
Wilkinson, who gives this account, attributes these
towers to Horus (or Amun-men), who reigned from
1408 to 1395, B.C. This cubit of Karnak is now in the
British Museum; and measures 41*46 inches, very
nearly 41*472.

The Royal or Philetarian foot is the foot of the Royal
cubit. It is equal therefore, to 1*152 English feet, or
13*824inches. The fragment of Heron alludes to thisfoot,
when it states, that the Italian foot contains 13^ digits
of that foot, of which the Royal or Philetaerian foot
contains 16 digits. In 13*824 inches are 16 digits of
'864 inches; and 13^ digits of *864 inches are equal to
11*664} inches, which is the measure we have before


36 BRIEF MEMOIR OF

assigned to the Italian foot ; as derived from the per-
pendicular height of the Great Pyramid, viz. : "972 of
the English foot, or 11-664 inches.

The Pyramid meter is equal to 3 Pyramid feet of
1-0909 English feet, or 3-2727 English feet; 100 Pyramid
meters are equal to 327'27 English feet. This measure
is also called a Stade.

The Stade of 327*27 English feet is the Egyptian Stade
according to Herodotus. It is also the Stade of Aristotle ;
his estimate of the degree establishes this fact. The
number of 1,111 stades, which Major Rennell thought
to be a purely imaginary measure of Aristotle, gives a
degree of 363-630 English feet, which, in 360 degrees,
produces a circumference of 130,908,000 English feet.

Aristotle says, that the most ancient measurement of
the Earth's circumference was that adopted by Thales
and Anaximander^ who divided it into 400,000 stades.
In 130,908,000 English feet, are 400,000 stades of
327-27, each containing as we have seen, 100 Pyramid
meters of 3-2727 English feet, or 39-2724 inches.
The new French metre is one-tenth of an inch longer
than this, being 39-370 English feet.

The Common Oriental Cubit is the half of this most
ancient Pyramid meter; it is equal therefore, to 1*6363
English feet or 196356 inches. It is contained 80 mil-
lions of times in the circumference of 130,908,000
English feet. Captain Jervis* states ''the cubit uni-
versally '* to be 19 5489 inches, or one-tenth of an inch
less than this.

The halfoi this Common Oriental Cubit, is the Oriental
AS/?anof -8181 of an English foot, equal to 9*8175 inches.
This is that same Geometrical foot, which Mr. De Morgan
finds mentioned in some mathematical works of the early
part of the 16th century, wherein it is said to be equal
* Records of Ancient Science, Calcutta, 1835.


THE GBEAT PYRAMID. 37

to the breadth of 64 barley-corns.* From all his en-
quiries and experiments, Mr. De Morgan comes to the
conclusion^ ** that the Geometrical foot is anything the
" reader pleases between 9*7 and 9*9 English inches/'
adding ''the result from modem barley, gives 9*8."
The Oriental Span, being 9*8175 inches, is contained
160 millions of times in the circumference of
130,908,000 English feet.

By the Table of Constants, the number of seconds in the
circumference of the Earth, is expressed by the figures
1296000. These figures are regarded as those of pro*
portion merely, and as having no reference to any actual
measure. But if we look upon them as Greek feet, and
multiply 360,000 feet by 360 for the degrees, we shall
have the number of 129,600,000 Greek feet, which,
multiplied by 1*0101 for the English foot, will make a
total of 130,908,000 English feet, for the circumference
of the Earth.

In this circumference of the Earth, are 1570,896,000
English inches. Twice this number is 3141,792,000
inches. In the Table of Constants, the figures 3*1415927
are made use of to denote the proportion which the
circumference of a circle bears to its diameter, according
to modern science. Taking the half of this latter
number to mean inches of the English foot, the measure
is only 100,000 inches less than the actual measure
made in Egypt, when the Great Pyramid was con-
structed; at which time, the Circumference of the Earth
was considered equal to 1,570,796,350 English inches.

It is a remarkable circumstance, that, in all these
measures connected with the Great Pyramid, or de-
ducible from the measurement of the Earth's circum-
ference and diameter, made in the latitude of the

* Arithmetical BookSj p. 9.


88 BRIEF MEMOIR OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.

Great Pyramid, we find nothing to reveal the origin of
the Paris foot. It is a measure of very great antiquity,
yet we do not meet with any traces of it in Egypt.
But when Greaves was at Constantinople in 1638, he
measured the Persian Arish, and found it to be 8*197
of the English foot. He measured also the larger Ttark-
ish Pike, and made it equal to 2*200 English feet. He
ascertained, besides, that the smaller Turkish Pike was in
proportion to the larger, as 31 is to 32; but he draws
no inference from any of these statements. Now it is
worthy of notice, that as, in the Table of Constants, the
Paris foot is reckoned at 1-0657654 of the English foot,
or 12'789 inches, so, on comparing the measure with
the smaller Turkish Pike, this is equal to two Paris
feet, (of 12*7881 English inches), and the Persian Arish
is equal to three Paris feet (of 12'788 inches). To
what may we attribute this coincidence ? Was the foot
of Tyre brought by Phoenicians to the coasts of
Gaul ? It would seem so.


SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS. 39

TWO LETTERS,

TO THE EDITOR OF THE ATHEN^Uli,

ON A

BRITISH MODULAR STANDARD OF LENGTH,

BY

Sir J. F. W. HERSCHEL, Bart.
(Reprinted by the Author's permission.)

CoLUNGWOOD, April 23, 1860.

It may not be unwelcome to the scientific portion of your
readers to have their attention directed to a simple numerical
relation between our actual parliamentary standard of length
and the dimensions of the earth, which, in effect, puts us in easy
possession of a '^ modular" system, which might be decimalized,
and which, abstractedly considered, is more scientific in its
origin, and, numerically, very far more accurate than the boasted
metrical system of our French neighbours. It is simply this,—
if the British Imperial standard inch were increased by one
thousandth part, it would be, with all but mathematical pre-
cision, one five-hundred-millionth part of the earth's axis of
rotation.

The calculations of the present Astronomer Royal, published
in the year 1830, have determined the length of this axis at
41,707,620 feet, that is to say, 500,491,440 inches of our Imperial
standard. Those of Bessel, published in 1841, at 500,487,744
such inches. More recently, an elaborate resume of the whole
subject, by M. Schubert, has conducted him to three separate
and independent conclusions, based on arcs measured each in, or
near, a meridian appropriate to the country in which they have
been performed ; viz., the Russian, the British Indian, and the
French arcs. The Russian and the Indian combinations give
respectively 500,532,120 and 500,550,168, while the French arc
gives only 500,368,920. M.Schubert rejects the latter altogether;
but the propriety of doing so appears to Mr. Airy questionable,
on grounds which we consider so far reasonable as to entitle it to
at least half the weight of either of the former. On the other
hand, M. Schubert, in computing his mean result, assigns to the
Russian result double the weight of the Indian,— a decision in


40 SUFPL£M£NTART PAPERS.

which I can by no means acquiesce. Allowing to each of the
former the weight 2, and to the latter 1, the final conclusion from
this calculation is 500,506,699; and from the mean of Airy,
Bessel, and Schubert, 500,495,294, which dififers from 500,500,000
by less than its hundredrand-six-thousandth part. This, then, is
the fractional error of our " modular^' unit in proportion to its
own length of 1*001 British standard inch, or that of a " module"
of 50*05 such inches, which, in this view of the subject, might be
taken for the British unit of linear measure, or one ten-millionth
of the earth's axis. The Astronomer Royal, in discussing these
computations of M. Schubert, Notices of the R, Astron. Soc, (vol. xx.
p. 105), insists, very properly, on the individuality of the polar
diameter of the earth as compared with its equatorial diameters,
which differ materially in different meridians (having regard to
an imaginary sea-level, and independently of the heights of
mountains or continents). If any axis be chosen for a scientific
unit it should assuredly be the polar axis. The nature of things
gives this an absolute, indefeasible preference to every other, not
excepting even that of the equator in the meridian of Paris
itself.

Every geometer will agree that the radius of a circle is a more
fundamental or primary parameter, or unit of linear dimensions,
than its circumference. To beings of other psychological con-
stitution than man, it may be otherwise ; but take the genus homo
and the species geometer as they stand, this is a fact. A fortiori,
the axis, major or minor, of an ellipse is a more primary and
fundamental unit of its dimensions than its periphery, leaving
the question as to which axis, major or minor, to be decided on
its own grounds.

The French m^tre is assumed to be the ten-millionth part of
the quadrant of the earth's elliptic meridian passing through
Paris. Its value is authoritatively stated in the Anuuary of the
French Board of Longitude at 39*37079 British Imperial standard
inches ; and, therefore, in reference to the natural unit in which
it originates, is erroneous by one part in 8,400 of its proper
length, that is to say, between 12 and 13 times more in propor-
tion than our proposed module.

The adoption of such a " British Modular System" of measure
requires no Act of Parliament. It is so easy to convert " Im-p
penal standard" lengths, of whatever denomination, into "British


TWO LETTERS, BY SIR JOHN HERSCHEL. 41

modular" lengths of the same denomination by subtracting (or
modular into imperial by adding) one thousandth, that it is not
worth while to legislate on the subject, so far as measures of
length are concerned. The difference between one part in 1,000
and one in 999, in the conversion and reconversion, being only one
in 999,000, is of no importance whatever. Nor is it worth while to
change our ordinary parlance. 1 foot, or 1 yard, in 1,000 is a
difference telling as nothing in any practical contract for work
on a great scale. On a small one it is quite inappreciable. The
scientific man only is interested in it ; and it suffices him to
know (and the knowledge, to him, is important) that he can refer
all his measurements to the best unit nature affords, by subtract-
ing a thousandth (that is, by writing his figures twice over, in
two lines, one under the other, shifting the lower three figiires
to the right, and executing a subtraction sum) far better than by
referring to the Annuaires des Bureaux of metricized countries,
and performing a calculation of greater complexity, landing him
in twelve or thirteen times the amount of error. Of course, I
am not speaking of a system of decimalization^ To decimalize
our measures we must reduce them to " modular inches," or to
'* modules" of 50 such inches ; but we may speak of modular
miles, yards, feet, or inches with reference to a modular unit,
while retaining the associations of our actual metrical system
A similar remark applies to the Eussian metrical system, which
is based upon the English — the fundamental unit being the
Sagene of 7 British feet.

I ought in fairness to mention, that my attention was drawn in
the first instance to this rapprochement by the statement, over
and over again repeated in Mr. Taylor's recent work, entitled,
« The Great Pyramid, Why was it Built? etc." (Longman, 1859,
pp. 35, 36, 37, 87, 280, 298, etc.) that the diameter of the earth
in the latitude of the Pyramid is 41,666,667 English feet, or
500,000,000 of English inches ; which it is not : and it is sin-
gular that the reduction of Mr. Airy's polar axis from feet to
inches, in page 87, which is rightly performed, does not appear
to have suggested the least misgiving as to the correctness of
the statement, or (which is more to our present purpose) led him
to notice the important practical facility of reduction from the
parliamentary to the modular standard above insisted on. It is
not my object here to criticize the work in question, which, in the


42 SUPFLEMENTART PAPERS.

midst of much confusioD, not perhaps unmixed with error, con-
tains some valuable and (so far as we are aware) original remarks.
Of these, I may mention the conclusion its author has drawn from
the angle of slope of the casing-stones discovered by Col. Vyse,
that the builders of the Pyramid were acquainted with the ratio
of the circumference of a circle to its diameter— a piece of
knowledge they were desirous to embody in its dimensions. In
fact, the slope of the original faces of the Pyramid comes out
from Vyse's (or Perring's) measurement of the linear dimensions
of these stones, 51® 52' 15 J", and by Brettel's measure of their angle,
61® 50' 0", the mean of which diflfers onltf hy a single second from
the angle whose cotangent is the length of an arc of 45° of the
circle, so as to make the whole periphery of the base all but
mathematically equal to the circumference of a circle described
with the height for a radius. So stated, the coincidence is cer-
tainly very striking. It by no means follows, however, that the
ancient Egyptians were in possession of any calcultLs by which
they could have arrived at a theoretical knowledge of the true
ratio. It should be observed that the linear measures above
mentioned are given only to entire inches, and those, inches of
a scale which may or may not have been verified with extreme
precision, and therefore can lay no claim to minute accuracy.
Computing, moreover, on these measures alone, the ratio of the
periphery to the height, comes out 6*2784, while that resulting
from the direct measure of the angle is 6*2878, the true ratio
beuig 6*2832. The individual results differ by one 640th part
of the whole quantity ; and as we do not know with what
instruments or what precautions the angle was measured, and
it is given only to the nearest minute, it seems but reason-
able to admit an equal proportional latitude of uncertainty
in the original workmanship, and in the numerical relation
to which it was intended to conform. Now, this is a very
considerable approximation, much better than that of Archi-
medes a thousand years later. Still, it would be easy for people
in possession of such appliances as they must have had at com-
mand, to ascertain the ratio in question to this, or even to a
greater degree of precision, by tracing, for instance, on a flat
pavement a circle of 100 feet in diameter, and actually measuring
the circumference. This they certainly might have done to the
nearest half-foot, which, on a length of 314 feet, would correspond


TWO LETTERS, BY SIB JOHN HEBSCHEL. 43

to such a latitude of error. If aware of the importance of the
problem, they might have gone much further.

But, again, it by no means follows, from anything which the
dimensions of the Pyramid indicate, that they did possess a
knowledge of the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its
diameter, even approximately. By a very remarkable coin-
cidence, which Mr. Taylor has the merit of having pointed out,
the same slope, or one practically undistinguishable from it
(51° 49' 46") belongs to a pyramid characterized by the property
of having each of its faces equal to the square described upon its
height. This is the characteristic relation which Herodotus dis-
tinctly tells us, it was the intention of its builders that it should
embody, and which we now know that it did embody, in a
manner quite as creditable to their workmanship as the solution
of such a problem was to their geometry. This problem, how-
ever, has no relation to that of the rectification of the circle.
The coincidence is one as purely accidental as anything relating
to abstract number can be; and although in solving the one pro-
blem, which we know they did intend, they at the same time,
practically speaking, resolved another, which stands in no rational
connexion with it, or any connexion, beyond that of happening
to have, very approximately, the same numerical solution,— we
are not entitled to conclude that they were aware of this coinci-
dence, and intending to embody both results in their building.

Another curious and novel relation, for pointing out which we
are indebted to Mr. Taylor, is one (see " Great Pyramid," page 37)
which may be most intelligibly expressed under the following form
of announcement, viz. : — that a belt, encircling the globe, of the
breadth of the base of the Great Pyramid, would contain one
hundred thousand millions of square feet.* If the feet be
Imperial Standard, and the belt Equatorial, this is approximate
only to one part in 288 of the whole. But if we suppose the belt
meridional, and the area expressed in '^ modular'' square feet, the
approximation is within one part in 1,100. The fact is interesting
as offering the only tolerable approach in round numbers to an
arithmetical relation between any of the dimensions of this
Pyramid and those of the Earth.

J. F. W. Hbrschel.


* Mr. Taylor has {in wonU) one hundred millions, which is a misprint.


44 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.


STANDARD OF MEASURE.

CoLLiNawooD, May 1, 1860.

Allow me to correct an oversight in the last paragraph of my
proposal of a British Modular Standard of Measure in your last
number, where it is stated that the only tolerable approach in
round numbers to an arithmetical relation between any of the
dimensions of the Great Pyramid and those of the Earth is that
therein mentioned. There is another, and a remarkable one
which I do not find noticed by Mr. Taylor or elsewhere ; viz, that
the height of the Pyramid, including the casing, and measured
from base to apex, supposed to terminate in a point, is one
two-hundred-and-seventy-thousandth part (l-270,OOOth) of the
earth's circumference. Taking the equatorial circumference as
unity, the error of this aliquot is one part in 736 ; but if the
Polar^ only one in 3,506 : the former error being in defect, the
latter in excess, so there exists somewhere or other on the
globe a diametral section whose circumference is exactly
270,000 times the original height of the building. Though not a
meridian, it is not very remote from one.

J. F.W. Hebschel.


times' article on the debate. 45


LEADING ARTICLE ON THE DEBATE ON WEIGHTS AND

MEASURES.

From the Times of Thursday ^ July 9, 1863.

A very great trial is impendiDg over this free and happy
<50untry. It is not the loss of our cotton trade, of our colonies^
of our prestige, or our maritime supremacy. It is not the ex-
haustion of our coal fields, the deterioration of our racehorses,
or the downfall of the Established Church. It is a change that
would strike far deeper and wider than any of these; for there is
not a household it would not fill with perplexity, confusion, and
shame. From a division in the House of Commons yesterday*
it appears that we are seriously threatened with [a complete
assimilation of all our weights and measures to the French
system. Three years are given to unlearn all the tables upon
which all our buying and selling, hiring and letting, are now done.
At the end of that period — ^that is, in the year 1866 — ^if this Bill
should pass, there are to be no more yards, feet^ inches, ells, nails,
fathoms, furlongs, miles, chains, acres, roods, poles, gallons, quarts,
pints, gills, pounds, ounces, pennyweights, drams, tons, hundred-
weights, quarters, stones, sacks, coombs, bushels, or any of the
measures with which dealing is now regulated. Every one of
these terms will be not only obsolete, but illegal, insomuch as
the obstinate use of them will involve fine and imprisonment.
It is of no use to urge that other countries have undergone this
revolution, and survive. What are France, the Zollverein, and
Portugal to us ? They are accustomed to revolutions, earthquakes,
and wars. The EngUshman finds it physically impossible to learn
things so fast, and forget things so fast. We have been tried hard
for a thousand years, and we cannot fall into a uniform measure of
wheat, of land, of ale, or even of bread and butter. So in three
years it is wholly out of the question that we should forget a
hundred familiar measures, and become equally familiar with new
ones. The arithmetical process involved in the very act of change
is something tremendous. The very first step is the adoption of a
new unit as the base of all other measures of length, surface,
solidity, and weight. That unit, without which it will be penal


46 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

for a shopkeeper to sell the smallest quantity of tape, bread,
sugar, or oil, is thirty-nine inches and thirty-seven thousand and
seventy-nine hundred thousandth parts of an inch of the
Imperial standard measure, and its name, we need not say, is to
be ** Metre." We will not here insist on the principle involved
in adopting a basis selected on so recondite a principle as the
calculation of the length of a quadrant of the earth's meridian.
Why that should govern all transactions in comestibles and
potables, in clothing, and every other affair of buying and selling*
it is impossible to say. But we let that pass. Let one yard be
as good as another. We speak on behalf of the already over-
worked and not very quick wits of our countrymen. We
tremble to think of the softening of the brain, the confusion of
ideas, the mistakes, the losses, this will occasion. How is Lord
Dundreary ever to make it out ? His is a much larger .family
than is generally supposed. He will certainly find that on the
new system he has not so many fingers, or birthdays, as he
thought he had, and that he will have to send a larger birthday
present to his brother Charles.

As to the French, they like change, they like arithmetic, they
like grand ideas, and an astronomical basis. They are always
making little purchases, counting up small savings, and sub-
dividing small properties. They certainly succeed in giving a
most imposing appearance to an hotel bill for a night's lodging,
and even a washing bill. The smallest transaction in sugar or
soap seems to suspend you somewhere between the millions and
the millesimals. In this country our village shopkeeping is
done with very little arithmetic. The wants of the customers
are few ; their orders are small and frequent ; and it often takes
several visits to the shop before the account gets beyond the
simple calculations of pennies and farthings. The orders are
easily adapted to the copper standard. Candles are *^ dipped "
to that length, and neat packets of sugar, coffee, and tea, are
piled in anticipation of the regular demand. There are many
village shopkeepers who cannot even write, and who can only
just do ttie little mental arithmetic which suffices for a ready-
money transaction, or a few hieroglyphics on a suspended slate.
What will these poor creatures say when they are told that all
their quantities and demominatious are changed, that they must
buy new weights and measures, learn new names, and divide the


TIMES^ ARTICLE ON THE DEBATE. 47

next hogshead of sugar that arrives in entirely new proportions?
What will all the small housekeepers say ? They have ascer-
tained that the family requires just so many pounds of meat and
all other soHds, just so many pints of milk and of other drink-
ables ; but for the future they must adjust their natural propor-
tion in litres and grams. We are sorry for them. The only
comfort we can suggest is, that by the tim« this revolution is
enforced, there will probably be not less than thirty or forty
thousand pupil-teachers adrift with nothing to do, and with no
useful accomplishment, except, perhaps, a very slight acquaintance
with vulgar and decimal fractions, the very gift required for this
emergency. As they will by that time have ripened and soured
into an insurgent and dangerous class, they will be the proper
instruments of this great arithmetical revolution.

Three years are supposed to be amply sufficient for undoing
and obliterating the traditions of every trade, the accounts of
every concern, the engagements of every contract, and the
habits of every individual. Why three years? Perhaps that
period is chosen because till lately a Dissenting preacher or
offending clergyman was condemned to three years* silence
before he could be permitted to officiate in the Church of
England. Three years are the period of residence requisite for
a degree at the universities. But we very much doubt whether
the general shopkeepers, who take possession of the comers of
our small streets, or the greengrocers, will be able in three years
to translate their accounts into Decas, Hectos, Kilos, Myrias,
Steres, and Litres, Metres, Millimetres, and Centimetres, and the
hundred other terms extracted by our ingenious neighbours from
Latin or Greek, as may happen to suit their purpose. Before the
House of Commons amuses itself and the public by voting the
introduction of the system, it would be as well if some attempt
were made to realize it by drawing up a few accounts and de-
scribing some business transaction in the new phraseology. It is
admitted that decimal weights and measures inevitably entail a
decimal coinage, as the whole of the present inconvenience
would survive if the measure of value were not assimilated to
the measure of the articles valued. Is the House of Commons,
then, really prepared to see the votes, the reports, the returns
of the revenue, the figures of the national debt, rents, tithes,
rates, taxes, and every other figure, all run up in paper francs,


48 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

and actually paid in gold Napoleons ? That is the necessary
consequence of yesterday afternoon, unless it be considered as a
holyday diversion of no consequence whatever. Travellers, of
course, will find themselves saved a little trouble by having no
necessity to change their money as they pass from London to
Paris, and thence to Belgium, Germany, Italy, and a good way
further. But though travellers are many, they that stop at
home are more, and they are a trifle more fixed in their ways.
We cannot help suspecting that if this change is ever to be, it
will not be in our time. It took England a century and a half
to follow the example of Gregory in correcting our style, and
adapting it to the facts of astronomy. It will hai^dly take less to
persuade England to square all her commercial transactions to
an imaginary basis drawn from astronomy in a matter with
which astronomy happens to have nothing to do.


THE DECIMAL AND METRIC SYSTEMS IN PRACTICE.
A Letter in the "Times" of July %th^ 1863.

The House of Commons have given their sanction to the
second reading of a Bill to compel the English people to aban-
don their old system of weights and measures, mode of reckon-
ing, and coinage, and to adopt, within three years from the
passing of the Act, under pecuniary penalties, the decimal and
metric systems that have been introduced into France. The
arguments, or rather allegations, put forward to justify this re-
volution, and on which the House acted, were, according to Mr.
Ewart, whose knowledge of France and French affords infinite
amusement to the habitues of Meurice's, that the metric system
" proceeded by decimals up and down in a regular tabular form,
and with such extreme accuracy that it was almost impossible
to make a mistake in the calculation ; " that " it was now admitted
to be one of the greatest blessings ever bestowed on France; "
" that our trade was larger with countries using the metric sys-
tem than with countries using the English system ; that it
would effect a saving of labour to one Belgian merchant of
two clerks ; and that it was a perfect decimal system, which
experience had shown to be a system not theoretical but emi-
nently practical." According to Mr. Cobden, who is too apt to


times' letter on the metrical system. 49

adopt without investigation the statements of "mon ami, M.
Michel Chevalier," the eminent expounder of other men's disco-
veries in politico-economical science. Englishmen are to be coerced
into the use of French weights and measures, because when ne-
gotiating the commercial treaty he " felt humiliated ; for, while
the French system was symmetrical, logical, and consistent, the
English was dislocated, incoherent, and utterly inconsistent ; "
because it was recommended by Sir.Rowland Hill, Dr. Farr, and
Mr. Anderson ; because it promised a great economy of time
and labour ; because " the logical sequence with which the
decimals in the French metric system followed one another
afforded satisfaction to the reason, and it gave a constant triumph
to the reason ; " and because certain eminent scientific men^
whose names he quoted, believed boys at school would save half
their time in the study of arithmetic, or " two years at least."

Now, despite these confident assertions, it will not be difficult
to show to all who have something more than a superficial know-
ledge of the habits and customs of Frenchmen that, according to
their experience, the decimal system is not the most convenient
one for trade, and that the metric system is not uniformly and
generally carried out in a symmetrical, logical and consistent
manner, either in trade or in scientific calculations ; but that the
metric system is impracticable in detail, and that in retail trade
the petty purchases and sales, which after all constitute the mass
of trading operations of the people, it renders exactn§ss in deal-
ing impossible, and entails a loss to either seller or buyer, or else
creates a mass of petty credits that from their number cannot be
controlled, and breed endless disputes, insignificant as is the
amount which causes them.

Before, during, and after the metric system was made compul-
sory 1 happened to be following the scientific course — for at that
time the bifurcation dUetudei existed in the College St. Louis,
now the Lycee d*Harcourt, which then boasted a high mathema-
tical reputation and of turning out more successful candidates
for the Ecole Polytechnique than any one of the other colleges.
One of the professors of Math^matiques Speciales was M.
Vincent, well known to the English reader for his Geometrie, and
chief assistant to his father-in-law M. Bourdon in composing the
textbook of arithmetic adopted by the University for the use of
schools and colleges throughout France. The first Professor of
Math6matiques El^mentaires — not very elementary, by the bye

D


60 . SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

—was M. Darville, a mathematician of great promise bad his life
been spared, and a teacher for whom I, and I imagine his Sieves,
felt as Bugbeans do for Arnold. The metric system and the
investigation of the theory on which it was constructed formed
a leading feature in the course, and all the more importance was
attached to it because it was just then coming into compulsory
use. At the same time our system of notation was discussed
and all the questions attached to it were analyzed. Perhaps it
will assist the reader to better understand and estimate the im-
portance of the revolution with which we are threatened in our
-calculations, the soundness of the views of Messrs. Ewart and
Cobden, and the wisdom of the House of Commons, if I endea-
vour to give the heads of the lectures by one of the leading
mathematicians of France at so critical a juncture. Nearly a
quarter of a century has elapsed since I heard them ; but their
clear, distinct, and incisive logic has not faded from the memory,
though I may be unable to do them justice. He did not begin
in the style in vogue under the July Monarchy — " Parmi les
prodiges qu*enfanta la premiere Revolution" — for even then it
was unfortunately necessary to speak of the first Revolution ;
but he commenced by a luminous description of the confusion
that reigned in France among weights and measures before the
commencement of the present century — a confusion as great as
that which exists in England. He bade us all turn out our poc-
kets, when we would find perhaps centimes and liards, sous and
pieces of four sous, half-francs and coppery pieces of 15 sous,
francs, and pieces of 30 sous, §cus of three francs, and pieces of
five francs. Gold had we none. He next dwelt on the advan-
tages of uniformity and the wisdom of having a common stan-
dard for reference — arguments now familiar to the public, and
which no one disputes, — and explained how the Commission
adopted, for the new standard for length, from which the other
standards were deduced, the ten-millionth part of the distance
from the Pole to the Equator, measured on the arc of the meri-
dian, passing from Dunkirk to Bayonne. This part was called
the metre, and to simplify arithmetical calculations it was de-
cided to construct tables on the decimal system, the multiples
being distinguished by Greek prefixes, and the submultiples by
Latin prefixes. Thus, the ten times the unit became a decametre,
and the tenth of a unit a decimetre ; ten times the decametre,


times' letter on the metrical system. 15

or a hundred times the unit, a hectometre ; and a tenth of the
decimetre, or hundredth of the unit, became a centimetre, and
so on ; the succeeding multiples receiving the names of kilometre
and myriametre, and the submultiple the name of millimetre.
Having determined the standard and nomenclature, the other
tables were easily drawn out. For the unit of capacity they
took a cubic decimetre, and called it a litre, employing the same
Greek and Latin prefixes as in the previous instance, to desig-
nate its multiples and submultiples. Henceforward the uni-
formity (or what Mr. Cobden calls the logical sequence) of the
system fails. The imit of weight is the weight of a cubic centi-
metre of distilled water at its maximum density, which was
called a gramme, and received the usual nomenclature. But the
necessities of commerce have compelled the introduction of new
weights and new nomenclature — words not Greek or Latin, but
French — beyond the extreme limit of the metric table; for
after the myriagramme come the quiutal of 100 kilogrammes,
and the miUiei\ or tonneau^ for ship measurement, of 1,000 kilo-
grammes. The unit of superficial measure is the square of ten
metres, called the are, because the square metre, which it would
have been in uniformity, logical sequence, and consistency to
employ, would have been inconveniently small for all practical
purposes ; therefore it is made a submultiple of the unit, and
termed a centiare. The unit of sohd measure is the sterCy a cubic
metre, and it has not the usual number of multiples and sub-
multiples. In the coinage, the violation of uniformity and
breach of logical sequence are greater. The unit is the franc, of
which the sous multiples are the decime and centime ; but it
has no logically sequential multiple beyond the 10-franc-piece,
which is without a name, and the 100-franc-piece, that is a mere
curiosity, and not to be met with in circulation.

I well remember with what surprise, with what ludicrous in-
creduhty, mingled with something akin to contempt for ideo-
logues — for Napoleonism was then in the ascendant — we listened
when the Professor, setting the spectacles more firmly on the
bridge of his nose, and gathering himself up as though he were
about to confront a danger, commenced the examination of the
decimal in conjunction with the metric system by stating, " II
est ^ regretter. Messieurs, que quand Ton eut determin6 h, abolir
les anciens poids et mesures en faveur du syst^me metrique Ton


52 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

n'eut pas en m^me temps remplac6 le syst^me decimal
par le syst^me duod6cimaL" We did not receive this exor-
dium with that noisy manifestation of disapprobation we
were wont to exhibit in other classes, but we certainly
allowed it to appear, that we thought, as the reader probably
will, the proposition absurdly theoretical and impracticable to
revolutionize the system of notation which seemed suggested by
nature, and must have existed ever since men learned to count
on their digits. However, we listened and learned : 10 was so
inconvenient a number, from its having but two divisors (2 and
5) into aliquot parts that a change had been contemplated by
arithmeticians for a long time past. Charles XII. proposed ex-
tending the notation table up to 64, because that number was
both the square and cube of a number ; but that was deemed
preposterous, and 12 suggested instead, which is capable of divi-
sion by four numbers into aliquot parts. "We were then taught
to construct a notation table, using a /3 to represent 10 11, and
the ordinary 12 became our 10. We were repeatedly exercised
in converting decimal accounts into duodecimal accounts, per-
forming with them all the usual arithmetical calculations, and
then converting the results obtained in duodecimals back into
decimal amounts. In a few days we became quite expert in
handling the system, though a fi looked queer in a common sum
to the youngsters and to the private soldiers, of whom we had
several studyiog for St. Cyr. But, before we quitted that part of
the course, scarcely more than a week, we could work as easily
in duodecimals as in decimals. Of course, there was a reason
given for devoting so long a time and so much study to master
operations that apparently would never be used in practice, else
youth and young men f&gging—piochant is the term — ^to pass
their examination for admission into the military and naval
schools at St. Cyr and Brest, or to pass into the higher class of
mathematics for competition the following year for admission
into the Polytechnic and other special scientific schools, would
not have done so, but would have skipped that part ; and I
distinctly remember that the reason given was in the Observa^
toire, under M. Arago. Duodecimals were used in carrying on
astronomical operations as well, also, I think, as in other State
establishments, on account of the great saving of time and labour
they effected. I am unable to say whether or not this was a mere


times' letter on the metrical system. 53

temporary experiment, undertaken at that very critical time
when the use of the metric system was on the eve of being made
compulsory. This digression into a college reminiscence has
been a long one ; its object, which will be its best excuse, has
been to show that, even at the period referred to, French mathe-
maticians regretted the combination of the metric with the deci-
mal system, and that the decimal system was far from being
considered in France so " perfect," so " eminently practical," so
"economical," so "symmetrical," so "consistent," so "satisfactory
to reason " as Mr. Ewart and Mr. Cobden have asserted it
to be.

Let us now pass to the metric system, and if it can be shown
to be not uniformly carried out even by the French, neither in
scientific nor commercial calculations, nor in ordinary trade
transactions ; if it can be shown to be inadequate to represent
what is in daily use, to supply the commonest daily wants, and
to require to be supplemented or "tesselated" by recourse to old
forms and figures and quantities ; if it can be shown not yet to
be uniformly used, not even by Government— popularly used,
after the lapse of considerably more than half a century since its
first introduction, and nearly a quarter of a century since its ob-
servance was attempted to be legally enforced, — and if it can be
shown to be, except for matters of account — even in them en-
tailing the employment of additional figures — ^impracticable to
be carried out in the daily transactions of life, the cause of need-
less outlay and of unnecessary labour, the never ceasing source
of deferred settlements, which means disputes between retail
buyers and sellers,^then surely there will be just grounds to ask
that the Gallo-mania of imperfectly informed persons may not
be allowed to prevail over common sense to the great detriment
of public convenience, and that the legitimate desire to obtain
the simplification and uniformation of our weights and measures
may not be made the pretext for their abandonment in favour of
the adoption of a system which does not afibrd an adequate
quarter or third of the units of admeasurement and weight.

In geographical and astronomical science not even at the
Institute is the metrical system uniformly used, for the members
speak of degrees and minutes, not of myriametres and kilometres,
of longitude and latitude ; of the areas of countries in square
leagues, and not in hectares ; of the mille g^ographique and the


54 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

mille marin, and the lieue marine, by which last distances be-
tween countries are indicated, especially where the sea inter-
venes ; for whoever heard a Frenchman specify the breadth of
ocean that lies between Havre and New York in kilometres 1 In
nautical science, naval architecture, over-sea commerce, and
practical navigation, neither sailor, savant, nor trader, speaks of
the run of a ship in kilometres, but in noeuds, nor of the burden
of a ship in kilogrammes or myriagrammes, but in tonneaux,
which, as the old tonneau, like our ton, happened by chance to
be equal, within 20lb., to 1,000 kilogrammes, have been altered
to consist (each) of the last named number of kilogrammes. The
sailor does not name his soundings in metres, but in brasses,
though in charts they are marked in metres. The kilogramme
is too small, the myriagramme is too large, to designate the
weight of cargo. Consequently, the sailor, shipper, and merchant
speak of t07ines, or miUiers, each of which is a thousand kilo-
grammes. The trade and navigation returns (tableaux des dou-
anes) and all Government reports employ as unit of weight the
metrical quintal, which is 100 kilogrammes. Thus, the State is
a systematic ofiPender against the metrical system, and employs
a dififerent standard from traders. Though the difference is re-
moved by altering the decimal point, it is very palpable in
speaking and manipulation ; and it is a still more palpable viola-
tion of the "logical sequence" of the system. In chymical science
and where minute quantities have to be measured or weighed,
the metric system breaks down, and has to be supplemented by
recurrence to the old system. As Mr. Whitworth is obliged to
express the minute spaces he measures in millionths of an inch,
so would he have to speak of the thousandth part of a millimetre
under the metric system. If Professor Taylor is compelled to
calculate the poison he has recovered from human tissues in al-
most infinitesimal fractions of a grain, so was Orfila obliged to
use nearly as infinitesimal fractions of a millogramme.

Passing to the consideration of the metrical system, from a
popular point of view, it will be found, notwithstanding what
M. Michel Chevalier reported about postiUions giving the postal
distances in kilometres readily in 1841, that neither the metre
nor the kilogramme, nor the are, nor the multiples and the sub-
multiples of the litre are popular, or generally used. To the


TIMES* LETTER ON THE METRICAL SYSTEM. 55

tuass of the French people the sous holds the same relative
position as the penny does in England. Jacques Bonhomme is
more prone to count in sous, than John Bull is to count in
pence. He rarely speaks of the coins of half-franc, franc, two-
francs, and five-francs, other than as the pieces de dix sous, de
vingt soils, et de cent sous. The people speak of the sous ; the
Spicier, the omnibus conductor, post-office clerk, and the employe
of the piece de cinq centimes. But let us go among the people,
into the market place — the halles, which Napoleon called the
Louvre du peuple. If we ask the price of fresh butter, we shall
be told trente-deuaj sous la livre, not trois francs vingt centimes
le kilogramme, nor yet un franc soixante centimes le demt-lilo"
gramme, or the cinq hectogrammes, or the cinq cent grammes,
which the livre is, but the price in sous per pound, neither of
which designations exist under the metrical system. A step
further, and we ask the price of eggs — six Hards apiece ; but the
Hard, which is the fourth part of a sous, and, though not quite
half the value, yet holds the same relative position as our far-
thing, no longer exists. By no combination of modern coins can
we pay six Hards. If we do not wish to buy more than one egg
— and many can't afford or do not require more — we or the
seller must lose or owe half a centime ; but if we desire to take
a quantity, we are told they are so much the quarteron, or
quarter of a hundred (it also means quarter of a pound) ; and
the quarteron does not consist of 25, but of 26. Potatoes, beans,
peas, are priced by the boisseau, which answers to the bushel.
Charcoal is bought by the boisseau also, and wood by the cotret^
smaU faggot. Yet neither quarteron, boisseau, nor cotret is pre-
sumed to exist under the metrical system. Let us step into one
of the neighbouring marckands de vin in the Rue Montorgueil,
where the best oysters are to be had. We beHeve in Mr. Cob-
den's logical sequence of the decimal system, and in M. Cheva-
Her*s postillion's illustration of its universality, and call for
qu^tre dixaines de huitres. As soon as the word dixaine is out,
every head in the room is raised to look at us, and we catch re-
marks anything but compHmentary, "Eh bieu, par example!
En v'l^t-il des drdles de partiouliers ! " and others more energetic.
The gargon gently and benignantly corrects the blunder into
which we have been betrayed by our confidence in the honour-
able member for Rochdale, and says, *' Monsieur veut quatre


56 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

douzaines de huitres." So here, in decimalized Paris, they buy
and sell, not by tens, but by dozens, just as we do under the
" dislocated, incoherent, and utterly inconsistent " system,
which "mortified, worried, wearied, and humiliated" Mr. Cob-
den for two whole years. We have heard that white wine is the
best to drink, and consequently order a bottle ; but we notice
our neighbours, who drink their wine from the wood, ask for a
chopinej instead of for five decilitres, or a demi-setier, instead of
for 250 centilitres. They conclude their repast by calling for
demitasstes de cafe and petits verves de cognac; but do" they
know — does the marchatid de vin know — can M. Chevalier tell,
how many centilitres go to a demi-tasse or a petit verve ? And
yet is it not illegal to sell any liquid except by metrical admea-
surement ? The gavgoii, who has been concihated by the humi-
lity with which we received his reproof, more, perhaps, by the
pi^ce of monnaie blanche which we respectfully tendered for his
acceptance, accompanies us to the doorway, and warns us against
the casks of various dimensions that are being conveyed into
the cellar. Encouraged by his condescension, we venture to
seek for information, and are told, in answer to inquiries, that
they are pieces and feuillettes and demi-feuilleites of wine, and
petits tonneaux of beer. How much do they contain ? " On ne
sait pas au juste." That depends upon the size of the cask ; for
we are esteemed very simple. Mais une piece may contain about
350 bottles, and t\iQ feuillette about 150 bottles. And the bottle ?
" Pas tout-k-fait un litre." The pas tout-d-fait gently covers the
reduction in practice from a quart to a little over a pint. The
" petits tonneaux, mon ami 1" We venture to be familiar. They
are about the size of four-and-a-half gallon casks. " Ma foi, Mon-
sieur, je n'en sais rien," but we sell beer by the choppe, or the
pint, and the cannette. We seek in vain for the first word in our
Spiers^ and are told by the gargon that it is a pint, while the
latter is a quart. We linger before the counter, and we hear a
soldier ask for his goutte, the cochev for a cannon^ a provincial for
a poingon. We leave somewhat confused and dubious of the
wisdom and information of our legislators. We enter a grocer's,
to purchase some postage stamps, and while waiting hear people
ask for devx onces de caft^ un quart de sucre, un demi-qtuivt de
heuvre sale. Let us find a pretext to linger a little longer, and
wo may learn how inconvenient and costly and fruitful of annoy-


times' letter on the metrical system. 57

ance the metrical system is. The sugar is fourteen sous the
pound, the ordinary price at grocers' shops. The purchaser lays
down four sous to pay three sous and a half, the price of the
demi-quart. The Spicier returns two centimes, and says — " Ma
dame, je vous devrai un demi- centime." The poor sempstress
gathers up her small coins, and goes out mumbling, " Mon dieu !
sont-ils b^tes avec leurs centimes ; en voila six demi-centimes
que je perds ce matin ! " and her daily wage, if she be an appren-
tice or can only sew, is perhaps fifty centimes, rather more than
one-eighth of which she loses in change under the symmetrical
and money-saving coinage of the metrical system. Her neigh-
bour asks for two ounces of coffee ; the price is five sous and a
half. The grocer repeats the same story about the half-centime
in giving change, but the buyer exclaims — " Mais, Monsieur, vous
me devez un demi-centime de hier ; donnez-moi mes trois cen-
times." The grocer raises his eyebrows incredulously, and
speaking with an air of injured dignity, as though he preferred
submitting to imposition rather than enter into a discussion,
remarks — "Cest bien, Madame, puisque vous le dites;" but
grumbles in the ear of his spouse, i^epiciere, " La crasseuse, de
me r^clamer un centime !" while the thrifty housewife goes out
with her rescued coin, muttering, " Le vieux voleur, il a voulu
me tromper d'un centime." Such is the amiable state of feeling
between the shopkeeper and his customers, engendered by " the
greatest blessing ever bestowed on France." Why, it keeps the
tradesmen and their customers in constant ill-humour, spoils
the digestion, and conduces to apoplexy among grocers. But
does the customer get fair weight 1 The equivalent of a demi-
quart would be 62*5 grammes. The dealer gives no more than
60. Consider the number of operations that are effected in a
day in all France, and the amount of loss inflicted on the public
customer will be found to be enormous. This leads to the con-
sideration of the extra labour involved. I have before me an
English series and a French series of weights. In the first there
are lib., ^Ib., Jib., 2oz., loz., Joz., ^oz. In the second, there are
600 grammes, or livre, 2 hectos, two of 1 hecto each, J-hecto, 20
grammes, two of 10 grammes each, 5 grammes, 3 grammes, two
of 1 gramme each. The milligrammes and the centigrammes
are not used in the sale of articles of general use, any more than
drams are in England. These divers weights make up the kilo-

d5


58 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

gramme. Thus, while with our incoherent system here we are
enabled to satisfy every ordinary want with seven weights, the
metrical system requires eleven. For the sale of liquids here,
we want four measures — ^the quart, pint, half-pint, and gill. Our
neighbours require five — the litre for the quart ; five decilitres
for the demilitre, chopine, or pint ; two decilitres and five centi-
litres for the demi-setier, or half-pint ; and one decilitre : the
can7ion cannot be measured, but must be guessed at. In the
English system, one weight will weigh each of the aliquot parts
of a pouud. In the metrical system, two are required to weigh
half a pound — the one of two hectos and the one of 50 grammes,
and three to measure the quarter — the hecto, the one of 20
grammes, and the one of 5 grammes. Fancy the additional
thought, time, and labour that are required to select, pick up,
and replace three separate weights instead of one, when multi-
plied by the number of a day's transactions, and the difficulty of
one of the working classes recognizing and verifying the weights.
It is nearly the same with liquid measures, for the half-pint, or
demi'Setier, requires the 2-decilitre and 5-centilitre measures.

But, say the advocates of the metrical system, it is a great
saving, in keeping accounts, of time and labour. We all know
that decimals are easier to handle than vulgar fractions, but let
us try to ascertain what saving results from it in accounts. We
write down the same sum in francs, and in pounds, shillings,
and pence, — 153f. 60c., and 6^. 2s. M.

The metrical system gives us five figures, ours three only, and
thereby saves us the trouble of writing two figures. 40,000^. are
■expressed by five figures, their equivalent in francs becomes
1,000,000, and requires seven figures ; so that we may freely
take as a general rule, that to write down an amount under the
metrical system necessitates the use of two figures more for each
item than would be required to express the same sum in our
mode.

One point further, and I have finished. Will the thirty millions
in the United and Confederate States, the millions in Canada,
West Indies, Australia, and our colonies and possessions, consent
to adopt the metrical system of weights and measures ? If not,
will the general commerce of England be faciUtated, if the diffi-
culties which are said to exist between us and the French,
Greeks, Spaniards, Italians, and Dutch, are created between us
and our American as well as our colonial customers ? B.


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 59


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS.

From the Times, lf>th and 17th Sept., 1863.

ri^HE advocates of the introduction of French weights and
X measures into England, not much discouraged by the with-
drawal of Mr. Ewart's ill-considered Bill of last Session,
threaten a renewal of agitation in its favour. In the inaugural
address of the President of the British Association, Sir William
Armstrong, without entering into the comparative merits of
the decimal and duodecimal systems of notation, declared
that, —

** Science suffers by want of uniformity in weights and mea-
sures, because valuable observations made in one country are,
in a great measure, lost to another, from the labour required
to convert a series of quantities into new denominations. In-
ternational commerce is also impeded by the same cause, which

is productive of constant inconvenience and mistake

The metric system has already been adopted by other nations
besides France, and is the only one which has any chance of
becoming universal. We in England, therefore, have no
alternative but to conform with France, if we desire general
uniformity. ... I am convinced that the decimal division
of the French scale would be attended with great convenience
both in science and commerce. ... In the Elswick Works,
as well as in some other large establishments of the same de-
scription, the inch is adopted as the unit, and aU fractional
parts are expressed in decimals. No difficulty has been expe-
rienced in habituating the workmen to the use of this method,
and it has greatly contributed to the precision of workman-
ship. ... As to our thermometric scale, it was originally
founded in error; it is also most inconvenient in division, and
ought at once to be abandoned in favour of the centigrade
scale. The recognition of the metric system and of the centi-
grade scale by the numerous men of science composing the
British Association would be a most important step towards
effecting that universal adoption of the French standards in
this country which, sooner or later, will inevitably take place ;
and the Association in its collective capacity might take the
lead in this good work by excluding in future all other stan-
dards from their published proceedings.'*


60 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

Acting upon the suggestion of their President, a committee
of the Economical Section of the Association resolved that a
committee should be sent as a deputation to Lord Palmerston
and Sir George Grey to impress upon them the importance of
the introduction into the United Kingdom of a decimal system
of weights and measures with a view to the interests of
science. Under these circumstances, although the Association
was not to be induced by its President's eloquence to ask for
the introduction of French weights and measures, it may be
of service to lay before the reader a condensed account of the
origin and development of the metric system. But before
doing so, it will not be amiss to notice Sir WiUiam Armstrong's
speech, which, like most of those delivered by the partisans of
French weights and measures, is characterized by misappre-
hension of the true facts of the case, by bare assertions un-
supported by proof, and by assumptions without authority.
Sir William confounds what all scientific and competent men,
such as the Astronomer Royal and Professor de Morgan, in-
sist should be kept apart — the decimalization of our own
weights and measures, and the metric system. Because he,
following the example of Mr. Whitworth, employs the inch
divided decimally, it is not demonstrated that " the use of the
French scale would be attended with great convenience,"
since the two have no necessary relationship. The President
of the Association foretold that the universal adoption of the
French standard in this country will inevitably take place.
But how can he, as a hard matter-of-fact man of practical
science, pretend to a knowledge of events yet in the womb of
time ? Nor was Sir William strictly accurate and ingenuous
in his description of our thermometric scale when he described
it as founded in error and most inconvenient in division. It
is true that the zero of Fahrenheit was intended to mark what
was then thought to be the greatest attainable degree of cold,
and which was artificially produced. But the error was dis-
covered, and the temperature of 32 deg., which is that of
melting ice and the zero of the centigrade scale, was adopted
as the point de depart from which all our thermometers are
graduated, ascending and descending. As for the inconve-
nience of the divisions, the reader can judge for himself how
far Sir William is right or wrong in his partiality for the cen-
tigrade. The boiling point stands on the Fahrenheit thermo-
meter at 2 1 2 deg., and on the Centigrade at 100 deg. It
consequently follows that the range of temperature between


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 61

melting ice and boiling water is indicated by 100 divisions on
the centigrade, and by 180 divisions on the Fahrenheit ther-
mometer ; and, therefore, that our thermometric scale is nearly
twice as minute as the French scale, and contains 80 more
divisions to indicate the variations of temperature. The
superior nicety and convenience of Fahrenheit saute nt aux t/eux.
But if such be the case, it will be asked, why do English
chymists use the centigrade ? They do so because they are
distanced \>y French chymists — at all events in chymical litera-
ture ; and for the same reason that French engineers, eques-
trians, and sailors use English terms, such as ** rail," " stuffing-
boxe," •* stud-boke,*' "groorae," '* stopper" (stop her), and
many others well known to the students of the French lan-
guage. For the truth is, that the French have borrowed
almost as many words from us as we have from them, with
the difiPerence that in incorporating them into their language
they have so travestied them that they have become scarcely
recognizable.

To make clearly intelligible the process of thought by which
a society of French savans was led at the close of the 18th
century, in the midst of wars and the agonies of revolution, to
abolish the system of weights and measures which had
descended to them from generation to generation, and to
create a new one, based on a fraction of the earth's circumfe-
rence, it will be necessary to glance briefly at the progress of
astronomical and geometrical sciences, so far as regards the
configuration of the earth. The first opinion was that which
is still held by orthodox Moslems, that the earth is square.
When men became convinced that the surface of the earth
was curved, they jumped to the conclusion that it was a sphere,
and this was the universal belief until the days of Huygens
and Newton. On the occasion of the disputes relative to
Newton's theory of the flattening of the globe, Colbert gave
orders to have the Paris meridian measured through France.
The operation was commenced in 1685, and terminated in
1718, under the direction of the younger Cassini, whose son,
in company with Lacaille, in 1739-40, measured the meridian
from Dunkirk to Perpignan. In 1737, Bouguer and Lacon-
damine measured degrees of meridian in Peru — as did
Maupertuis in Lapland — and demonstrated the flatness of the
earth at the poles. In the trigonometrical operations in Peru,
the quadrant of the meridian was found to measure 5,130,740
toises, whence the Paris toise was also called the*' Perutoise.*'


62 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

It should be here stated, that so far back as 1 670 Picard joined
the parallels of Malvoisine and Araiens, and in the same year
Mouton of Lyons suggested a linear measure in connexion
with a trigonometrical survey of the earth, which he proposed
should be the minute of a degree divided decimally. Cassini
also proposed a new unit of linear measurement — viz., a geo-
metrical foot, which was to be 6-l,000ths of a minute of a
great circle ; or a fathom, being 10-l,0()0,000ths of half the
diameter of the earth, so that the merit, if it be o^e, of sug-
gesting the base of the metrical system belongs to the old
monarchy of France, and not to the Revolution, as modern
Frenchmen are fond of declaring. About the middle of the
18th century, as the fusion of the French provinces into a
centralized whole was preparing, men^s minds were agitated
with a desire to obtain uniformity of measures. Paucton in
his Metrologie, published in 1780, proposed that the unit of
measure for all nations should be the 400,000th part of the de-
gree of the meiiiian proper to each country; and he supported
his proposition by the development of a theory with regard to
ancient measures, which will be understood from what
follows.

The measures of antiquity, according to Pythagoras, were
derived from Egyptian standards, themselves copied from an
invariable prototype taken from nature. Egypt alone pre-
served the authentic model of this universal measure, to which,
the Greeks compared their measures. Paucton states, that this
prototype or natural standard was the measure of the earth,
and that the pyramids were built to record the dimensions of
the earth, and also to furnish an imperishable standard of
linear measure. His conclusions were based upon the mea-
surements of the pyramids and Kilometer, by John Greaves,
Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, who left London
in 1637, taking with him a 10-foot rule ** accurately divided
into 10,000 parts, besides some other instruments for the fuller
discovery of the truth." He engraved the English foot, copied
from the GuUdhall standard, with his name, " J. Gravius,"
underneath, on the wall of the King's Chamber in the Great
Pyramid. Paucton found that the Egyptian cubit, as resulted
from Greaves's measurement, was 1*712 French foot; that
400 of these cubits gave a stadium of 684*8 French feet ex-
actly, or 1 14*13 toises ; and that 500 of these stadia gave
57,066 2-3ds toises as the length of a degree of the meridian.
Whereat he exclaims, " Ce qu'il falloit demontrerr* Bailly


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 63

adopted the same hypothesis ; hut Dr. Peacock, in liis article
on arithmetic in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana, treated it as
ahsurd, and said that it was unfortunate for Paucton, that "the
cu))it of the Nilometer was found to be 20*54in. instead of
19*992, as it should have been," and the length of the side
of the pyramid 71 6J French feet instead of 684 l-5th. Pro-
fessor de Morgan was equally incredulous with respect to the
statement of those who seek ** a mystical origin of weights
and measures." But, in justice to Paucton, it should be
stated that he gives the cubit at 20 27-50in., or 1*712 pteds
de Boi, This pied is equal to 324-839 millimetres, so that
the cubit would %e 555 millimetre; and the latest measure-
ment makes the cubit 525 millimetres, showing no very im-
portant error when we remember that he was careful to ex-
plain that he did not pretend to be strictly accurate, for he
says, " Peut^tre ai-je trop r^tranche de la mesure de M. de
Chazelles." Jommard, who accompanied the French expedi-
tion to Egypt, imagined the side of the base of the pyramid
to be the 480th part of a degree of the meridian proper to
Egypt. Subsequent travellers made admeasurements ; but it
was not until the survey of Colonel Howard Vyse, in 1837,
when what are called the casing stones were discovered, that
the conjectures of Paucton, Jommard, and others were con-
firmed. According to Mr. Perring, the surveyor employed by
Colonel Vyse, the former base, with the casing stones, was
764ft., and the present base, 746ft. ; the former height, in-
cluding the casing stones, 480ft. 9in., the present height,
450ft. 9in. This discovery, we are told, not only solved an
important problem, but at the same time confirmed all previous
measures.

It will be no great inconvenience to turn aside here for a
little while to notice a most ingenious theory started by Mr,
John Taylor in his work on the Great Pyramid, which has
received the approbation of Sir John Herschel, and has every
appearance of being correct, because it shows that our much
abused English inch, which so mortified, annoyed, worried,
wearied, and humiliated Mr. Cobden two years ago on account
of his conceiving it to be incoherent and inconsistent, is an
integral fraction of the earth's diameter which all mathema-
ticians and metrologists agree in declaring, is the best
standard or unit of lineal measure that could be attained, for
it is almost exactly the five hundred millionth of the earth's
polar axis. Professor H. Pope Hennessy, of the Dublin


64 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

Catholic University, suggested that a length of ten inches,
should be adopted as our linear unit from philosophical
considerations, and as being preferable to the metre and pre-
sent foot of twelve inches, if the whole subject were to be
reconsidered. Sir John Herschel subsequently proposed a
similar unit. Where, then, is the wisdom of throwing away
the duodecimal multiple — the foot — of the universally
admitted best unit, the inch, to adopt a foreign standard, the
metre, which is not exact, as will be presently explained, and
which is inconveniently long for ordinary purposes ? To do so
would surely be to drop the substance in pursuit of the
shadow. 4

In his work mentioned above, Mr. John Taylor states that : —
'^ In the vertical height or radius of the Great Pyramid, as
deduced from the angle of the casing stones, 51 deg. 50 min.,
we have the number of 486 English feet, which, when doubled
makes the diameter 972 feet. The base of 764 feet, multi-
plied by 4, gives a perimeter or circumference of 3,056 feet.
Taking the diameter as unity we have 1,000 feet, of 0*972
feet of the English foot, equal to 11,664 inches; of which
feet there are in the circumference 3, 1 44. The true propor-
tion in a sphere would be 3,141*5927, about two and a-half
feet less than the actual measure. Is it possible that the
founders of the Great Pyramid should come so near to the
right proportion of the diameter of a circle to its circum-
ference without intending to express it as nearly as they
were able."

Without quoting further, it may be stated that the results of
Mr. Taylor's analysis of the figures obtained by the measures
of the pyramids are that the English foot is closely connected
with the Egyptian foot, as recorded by Diodorus Siculus, for
if one-twelfth be deducted from the foot of 1*0909 of the
English foot, which is the measure of the Drusian foot, it
leaves the English foot without any remainder. Mr. Taylor
also concludes, that evidence is afforded that a measure, equal
in length to the English inch, was made use of by the founders
of the pyramids when they had ascertained the circumference
of the earth and determined the proportion due to its diameter.
That proportion is at present found by dividing the circum-
ference—viz., 120,000,000 Egyptian feet of 1*0909 English
feet by 3*1415927, which would allow for the diameter about
38,200,000 Egyptian feet ; but this number seems incapable
of furnishing any principle of unity as a measure of the
diameter: —


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 65

*' What was denied to the Egyptian foot was made
attainable by the English inch. In 38,200,000 Egyptian feet
of 1-0909 are contained 41,672,380 English feet, and this
number of feet is equal to 500,068,560 English inches. The
circumference of 120,000,000 of Egyptian feet of 1-0909 is
equal in English feet to 130,908,000, and to 1,570,896,000
English inches. If we double this number we have
3,141,792,000, and if we divide 130,908,000 by the number
3-141792 (instead of by 3-141592) it will give us 41,667,000
English feet, or 500,000,000 inches for the diameter. Thus
the proportion of the diameter to the circumference of a
circle was considered by the founders of the pyramid as 1 to
3-141792."

Without wishing to detract in the slightest from Mr.
Taylor's merit as the developer of a most ingenious theory,
and as a careful analyst, it must be admitted that he has not
been the first to notice the close ajiproximation of English to
ancient measures. M. de Rom^ de Tlsle observes, in his
Tables pour servir a V Intelligence des Mesures, Poids, et Mon^
notes des Anciens, that the English foot more nearly resembles
the Grecian than the Roman foot, for the Grecian foot is equal
to 136-80 French lines, the English foot to 135*25, and the
Roman to 130-60 French lines. Consequently, the English
foot varies no more than 0-55 lines from the Grecian foot;
a,nd we know from Pythagoras that the Greeks were
accustomed to compare their standards with the " Egyptian
prototype." Stuart found the Grecian foot to equal 1*015
English foot, or 12-138 inches, and Mr. Penrose estimates it
to equal 1-01336 English foot, or 12*16 inches. This remark-
able approximation leads Mr. Taylor to conclude that ** by
these several minute and singular coincidences, the English
nation appears to be more closely identified with the people
who founded the Great Pyramid than those nations of
antiquity who were brought into closer contact with Egypt in
the earliest ages." After this, one is almost disposed to look
with favour on the strange theory, that we are descended from,
or have remote affinity with, one of the lost tribes of Israel,
which during their captivity and wanderings preserved a
knowledge of the wisdom of the Egyptians.

In the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid is a por-
phyry vessel, called the pyramid -cofiPer. French savans and
others have suggested that its sides were intended to serve as
standards of linear measure ; but Mr. Taylor insists that it


66 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

was intended as a measure of capacity. According to the
measurements of Colonel Vyse and Mr. Perring, it was 78
inches long, 26*5 inches wide, and 34*5 inches deep. Mr. Taylor
shows that the capacity of the pyramid cofPer is nearly equal
to the Hebrew measure of 4 chomers ; to the Grecian measure
of 128 hecteis; to the Roman measure of 128 modii ; and
to the English measure of a chaldron — ^the difference being
14 quarts between the chaldron and the cofPer.

" But no nation, ancient or modern, is so remarkable for having
preserved a close agreement with the pyramid coffer as our
own. First, our peck of wheat, like the hecteus and the
modius, is contained 128 times in that coffer : secondly, 82
of our bushels of wheat, or four of our quarters of wheat,
would jQll a vessel of that same capacity if we had one still in
use ; but thirdly, though a vessel of this capacity is not in
existence with us at present, we must have had such a mea-
sure in earlier times, since we daily make reference to it, for
when we say eight bushels of wheat are a quarter, we a£&rm it to
be the fourth part of some entire measure which is exactly
equal in capacity to the Pyramid coffer."

The coffer is also found to contain 18.005,760 troy grains,
and would hold 2,500 troy pounds of wheat, or 3,125 troy
pounds of water or wine : —

•* Hence any vessel of capacity which would hold 101b. of
5,760 grains was considered to hold 8 lb. of 7,200 grains.
This was the origin, in all probability, of our avoirdupois pound,
for according to Fleta's explanation of the mercl^ant's pound
and its use, the dealer bought by the pound of 15 oz., and
sold by the pound of 12 oz., the ounce being in each case the
same, 480 troy grains — ^so that although he appeared to sell
at the price he bought, he in reality obtained a profit of 20
per cent."

We will now return to the origin of the metric system. At
the commencement of the French Revolution, when men
were athirst for novelty and the great work of progress was
initiated — afterwards neutralised by the Terror and the Em-
pire — aji agitation arose in the provinces for the establishment
of uniformity in weights and measures. Numerous petitions
to that effect were presented, and, in 1790 , M. de Talleyrand
made a proposition to the Assemblee Constituante relative to
the adoption of uniform international weights and measures.
On the 6th of May, M. de Bonnai made his report upon the
proposition, and on the 8th, the Assemblee rendered a decree
by which the King, Louis XVI, — *' Was supplicated


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 67'

to write to His Britannic Majesty, and to pray him
to engage the Parliament of England to concur with the
National Assembly in the fixation of a natural unity
of weights and measures, in order that, under the auspices of
the two nations, the Commissioners of the Academy of Sciences
might unite in equal numbers with the members chosen from
the Royal Society of London, in the place which shall be re-
spectively judged the most convenient, to determine — in the
latitude of 45 deg., or any other latitude which may be preferred
— ^the length of the pendulum, and to deduce therefrom an
invariable model for all measures and weights."

The letter was written, but, in consequence of the disturbed
state of Europe, no English Commissioners were appointed.
Ill-informed persons make the Royal Society responsible for
not attending. Even Mr. Cobden throws the blame on the
British Government when the terms of the decree clearly
prove, that it was a matter between the two monarchs — two
of the most self-opinionated men of the age — and that
neither the Royal Society nor the British Government had
anything to do with it. If George III. did not please to ask
the Parliament to what Louis XVI. had requested him to
require it to do in obedience to the decree of the Assembl^e^
it is ridiculous to seek to cast the blame and responsibility of
non-compliance either upon the nation, the Royal Society, or
the Government. So far from the people of England
and their rulers being averse from acting in concert with
France, as has been insinuated by Mr. Cobden and his col-
leagues in the metrical system agitation, we have the best of
all evidence that such was the very reverse of truth. Accord-
ing to M. Delambre, in his speech on the progress of
mathematical sciences, delivered 6th of February, 1806, before
the Emperor in Council, the metrical system arose out of the
surveys made both in England and France towards the close
of the last century (1787). After the completion of Cassini's
great map of France, doubts were felt as to the respective
positions of the Observatories of Greenwich, and of Paris,
which rendered it desirable to verify points between Dunkirk
and Boulogne. In England, it was determined to execute a
new triangulation between London and Dover ; and the two
Commissions united in concert to measure the triangles
which crossed the Channel.' As M. Delambre's speech rendered
full justice to the scientific skill of the English Commissioners
at a time when Trafalgar ill-disposed the minds of the Em-


68 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

peror and his subjects towards us, and as it affords the most
complete contradiction to the systematic denigrements of this
country by Messrs. Cobden, Ewart, and their friends, it will
not be amiss to quote : —

" D'apr^s les progr^s des arts et des sciences, on devait
s'attendre que les Anglais se piqueraient de surpasser tout ce
qui avait €i^ fait en ce genre ; ils y reussirent ; le th^odoUte de
Ramsden, les feux Indiens qui servaient de signaux, les
appareils nouveaux employes k la mesure des bases donn^ent
une exactitude jusqu'alors inouie. Les Franqais n*avaient k
mesurer que des angles ; le cercle r^p^titeur que Borda
venait d^inventer n*^tait pas d'une forme aussi imposante que le
theodolite ; mais il reiifermat dans sa construction m^me un
principe qui lui assurait une precision au moins ^gale et plus
ind^pendante du talent de Tartiste. Les commissaires Fran-
9ais, Cassini, Legendre, et Mechain, soutinrent la concur-
rence.'*

The successful issue of the enterprise suggested the idea of
the operation on which shortly after was founded the new system
of weights and measures. In 1790 only, the date of the
French King's letter, was communicated to the public an
account of the survey executed by the Commissioners of the
Royal Society and the Academy of Sciences for the trigo-
nometrical junction of the Paris and Greenwich Observatories.

It will be remarked, that the original idea of theAssembl^e
was to adopt the English standard, by taking for base the
length of the pendulum vibrating seconds in 45 deg. latitude,
and that taking a fraction of the earth's meridian was not
thought of. Huygens first proved that the times of vibrations
of pendulums depended on their length only ; and whatever
their structure, that a certain point may be found, which, in
pendulums that vibrate in the same time, is constantly at the
same distance from the point of suspension. Hence he con-
ceived that the pendulum might afford a standard or unit for
measures of length; and, though gravitation was not the
same in all latitudes, he believed science furnished the means
of determining this correction with sufficient accuracy. The
increase of the pendulum is more regular than that of the
degrees of the meridian, and differs less from the pro-
portion of the squares of the sines to the height of the
pole, either because its measurement is easier than that
of the degrees, is less liable to error, or because the perturba-
ting causes of the regularity of the earth produce less effect
upon gravitation.


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 69

Richer, who was sent, in 1672, by the Academy to make
astronomical observations at Cayenne, remarked that his time-
piece, which had been regulated at Paris, mean time, lost
regularly at Cayenne ; and he was thereby enabled to obtain
the first direct proof of the diminution of gravitation at the
equator. Fresh operations were made at the equator and in
Lapland, and more especially by Borda in the Paris Obser-
vatory, and by Biot, Arago, and Mathieu, at Formentera, Bor-
deaux, and Dunkirk, which established the now well-known
fact — the regular increase of the lengths of the pendulum
going from the equator to the poles. M. le Marquis de
Laplace, after alluding in his Exposition du Systeme du Monde
to this discovery, says, — " The observations of the pendulum,
by furnishing a length invariable and facile to be found at all
times, has suggested the idea of employing it as a universal
measure." The length of the pendulum and that of the
meridian are the two chief means to be found in nature for
determining the unit of lineal measure. The French chose
the meridian ; our predecessors preferred the pendulum.
The reason for the preference given by the French is set forth
in a report to the Academy from Condorcet, Borda, Lagrange,
Laplace, and Mong^s, dated the 19th of March, 1791. There
were three different fundamental units to select from, they say
— ^a quadrant of the equator, or a quadrant of the meridian,
or the length of the pendulum marking seconds. The
Commissioners reported that if the length of pendulum
were employed to furnish the standard, as proposed
in the address to George IIL, the degree of latitude should be
the 45th, because it is the arithmetical mean between all pen-
dulums unequal, one to another, beating seconds in different
latitudes. But they objected that the pendulum standard con-
tained a heterogeneous element — time, and an arbitrary
element — ^the division of the day into 86,400 seconds, while
they deemed it was possible to have a unit of length taken
upon the earth itself which would depend upon no other
quantity. The Commissioners believed it much more natural
to compare the distance between two places with one of the
terrestrial circles than with the length of the pendulum. As
for the quadrant of the equator, they observed that its
regularity was not more certain than regularity or similarity
of the meridians, that the celestial arc corresponding to the
space measured is less capable of being determined with pre-
cision ; and that every nation lays claim to an arc of the


70 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

meridian, while but very few are placed under the equator.
Consequently there remained the quadrant of the terrestrial
meridian only, llie Commissioners recommended that it
should be immediately measured, and its ten-millionth part
adopted as the unit of lineal measurement ; that the
meridian should be divided decimally into degrees, minutes^
and seconds ; and that the base for weights and measures of
capacity should be distilled water, weighed m vacuo at the
temperature of melting ice. The arc to be measured should
be that of the meridian passing from Dunkirk to Barcelona,
which is rather more than 9 J deg., is 6 deg. to the north, and
3^ deg. to the south of the mean parallel, and has its extreme
points at the level of the sea. Already Lacaille had measured
a degree at the Cape, and Boscovich the distance from Rome
to Rimini. In 1762 Beccaria measured a degree in Piedmont,
Liesganig commenced to measure three degrees in Austria, a
fourth in Hungary, and six years later Mason and Dixon
measured two degrees in the plains of Pennsylvania.

Circulars were sent from Paris to foreign States, inviting to
take part and to send savans to form a commission with mem-
bers of the Institute. The commission was subsequently formed,
and consisted of ^Enea (Holland), Balbo (Sardinia), afterwards
replaced by Vassalli, Berthollet (as member of the Egyptian
Institute), Borda, Delambre, IVI^chain, Bresson, Bugg^ (Den-
mark), Ciscar (Spain), Darcet, Coulomb, Fabbrione (Tuscany),
Franchini (Rome), Haiiy, Lagrange, Laplace (president),
Legendre, Mascheroni (Cisalpine Republic), Lef^vre-Gineau,
Mong^s (as member of the Egyptian Institute), Mulledo
(Portugal), Pedrones (Spain), Prony, Tralles (Swiss), Vender-
monde, and Van Swinden (Holland), who took as active and
important a part as any.

It would be tedious to follow the progress of the work and
describe in detail the labours, sufferings, and scientific blunders
of the commissioners. But it may be briefly stated that the ten
millionth part of the meridan measured in Peru toises -nf.ijij^.Vlft^i
was adopted as a standard and base for thenew French weights
and measures, and called a metre. It was equal t/O 443*295936
lines of the Paris foot ; but its legal value and standard were
established by law on the 10th of December, 1799, at 443'296,
thus suppressing three places of decimals. Since the adoption
of the metric system, several subsequent admeasurements have
proved that its base, or the metre, is incorrect. The real length
of the quadrant of the meridian is 5,131,800, not 6,130,740


THE m?:trical and decimal systems. 71

toises, and therefore 1 ,060 toises more than the French savana
calculated it at. Consequently, the true length of the metre
is 443*39 lines — ^not 443,296 lines — and about one-tenth of
a line longer than it is fixed at by law. The commission
committed two mistakes — one in the reduction of the bases,
and the other in comparing the platina rules, — standards of
the metre, — with the toise. The errors were afterwards nearly
compensated. Further, and in spite of the advice of Delambre,
they omitted to recalculate the arc of the Peru meridian in
which Delambre subsequently made a correction of 16 toises
by degree. " Lastly," says M. Saigey, —

'* If even the operations had been made with mathematical
precision, there would always remain the uncertainty of the
deviation of the verticals due to the attraction of continents
or plumb-lines. Wherefore the commissioners greatly de*
ceived themselves when they defined the length of the metre
by means of six decimals. Delambre alone saw, in all pro-
bability, this species of ridiculousness, and niaiserie de geometrey
when he endeavoured to have the length of the metre fixed
at 443-3 lines."

Delambre did his utmost to extenuate the errors of the
Metrical Commission ; and the writer just quoted pointedly
observes, that it was singular to behold the savant charged
with editing the descriptions of the works executed for the
metric system, correct results reputed irrevocable, and sub-
stitute other numbers for those which ought for ever to
represent the dimensions of our globe. Delambre declared
that if the standard were allowed to remain as it then was, it
would be necessary to measure it, not at the temperature
of melting ice — the centigrade zero — as legally must be done,
but at a much higher temperature, which he proposed should
be 8*5 degrees centigrade.

The great argument in favour of the introduction of the
metric system here has been its extreme mathematical ac-
curacy and the presumed ease with which the standard could
be recovered and verified in case of the original being destroy-
ed. Instead of such being the case, the unit is founded in
error, which, according to the arguments of Sir William
Armstrong, is sufficient reason for its abandonment. For we
have been told that instead of the quadrant of the arc of the
meridian being, as the metric system supposes it to be,
10,000,000 metres, it is 856 metres more. This fundamental
error necessarily vitiates the whole series of weights and


i


72 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

measures, and the kilogramme should be augmented by 257
milligrammes. Whether it is of importance or not, it certainly
destroys all pretensions of the metric system to strict mathe*
matical accuracy. Besides the error in the kilogramme^
resulting from that of the metre, there are others of great
moment. Bessel, in his Populdre Verlesungen, published 1848,
shortly after his death, observes that the kilogramme is not
exactly the weight of a cubic decimetre, for " many of the
late weighings show that water at its maximum density has a
different density from that which was assumed by the French
philosophers who prepared the original standard of the kilo-
gramme.*' M. Babinet, of the Institute, admits the existence
of both these errors, and gives the following curious explan-
ation : — M. Lefbvre-Gineau, to whom, with M. Fortin, was
confided the task of determining the kilogramme, pierced a
hole in the hollow cylinder that was to contain a cubic deci-
metre and furnish the unit of weight, ** in order that the air
in the interior should be in equilibrium with the external
atmosphere ! " M. Babinet does not hesitate to express the
gravest doubts respecting the accuracy of the model kilo-
gramme, which is deposited in the Paris archives, and is the
standard of reference for all the States that have adopted the
metric system. As for the original papers and tables of cal-
culations which Delambre was so anxious should be preserved,
and which he induced the Institute to appoint a committee to
examine and receive as a sacred deposit, M. Babinet declares
that he has examined them previous to their sale as waste
paper, and that he was unable to discover the slightest trace
or indication of that careful elaboration which was to be ex-
pected in documents of such a nature. The great pretended
merit of the metric system is that the base — ^the metre — is
intimately connected with the earth, and can always be re-
covered in every part of the globe in case of the original in
Paris being destroyed. But, before the French Commission
terminated their labours, they became aware that all their pro-
ceedings were based on error, and that no future measure of
the quadrant of ameridan would give their length of the metre
as its ten millionth part, and consequently, should the standard
be destroyed, the most deplorable confusion would ensue.
Accordingly Borda was employed to compare the length of the
metre with the length of the pendulum, vibrating seconds in
45 deg. latitude, in order to enable it to be recovered without
measuring an arc ; so that, notwithstanding all the outcry and


THE MEXBICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 73

all the pretensions set up to the strict mathematical accuracy
and the highest scientific character, as compared with our im-
perfect system, which Mr. Cobden termed " illogical,
utterly dislocated and inconsistent," the French metrical
system draws its base, the metre, from the same source that
we obtain the length of our yard, which is the base of our
lengths and measures. The reader will doubtless be led to
enquire why the French refused to have recourse at first to
the pendulum, which would have given to both countries the
same unit of linear measure — ^preparatory, in all probability,
to the establishment of international uniformity — and why they
preferred to run the risk of creating a system based on error,
that must sooner or later lead to confusion. The '^ reason
why " will be found curious, but quite French. On the 4th
Messidore, year 7, M. Delambre appeared at the bar before
the two councils of the legislative body — the Cinq Cents and
the Anciens — to present in the name of the Institute the
standards of the metre and kilogramme, and he then stated
that the object of the metric system was to entitle a French-
man to say — *' Le champ qui fait subsister mes enfans est une
telle proportion du globe. Je suis dans cette proportion co^
propriStaire du monde.''* Elsewhere we read, " The earth is
the Lord's.

There is no lack of evidence of the inconvenience of the
metric system, furnished by practical experience during many
years past, which fully justifies the apprehension entertained
when it was first started. Even Laplace, the last few years
before his death, was seriously disquieted by the anticipated
discordance between the kilogramme and the metre, and in
defence of the system elaborated under his presidency, he
urged the facility it affords for arithmetical calculation, as
compared with the vulgar system, but he admitted that " our
arithmetical scale (the decimal one) is not divisible by three
and by four— two divisors whose simplicity renders them very
usual," and he declared that the addition of two cyphers or
new figures would have sufficed to procure that advantage.
But he feared the duodecimal system would neutralize the ad-
vantage of having ten digits to count upon. To Laplace we may
oppose Professor Playfair, who reviewed, in the first number
of the Edinburgh Review for 1807, the first volume of De-
lambre's work on the Base du Syst^me Metrique, and whom
Mr. James Yates, Secretary of the International Association,
with a recklessness rarely surpassed, quotes as being the author


74 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS,

of a ^' most beautifully written article," in which he expressed
^' a decided wish that the system should be adopted in this
country.'' Professor Flayfair was an admirer of the labours of
the French Commission, but he was anything but a thorough
partisan of the metric system. He objected to several of its
features, to which objections Delambre repHed in the third
volume of his work, that appeared in 1810. This is what the
Edinburgh Reviewer did say more than half a century ago,
and his opinions deserve the most careful attention now: —

** Ten has indeed no advantage as the radix of numerical com-
putation, and has been raised to the dignity which it now holds
merely by the circumstance of its expressing the number of a
man's fingers. They who regard science as the creature of
pure reason must feel somewhat indignant, that a consideration
so foreign and mechanical should have determined the form and
order of one of the most intellectual and abstract of all the
sciences. The duodecimal scale would nowhere have been found
of greater use than when applied to the circle, the case in which
the decimal division is liable to the strongest objections. The
number by which the circumference of the circle is expressed
ought not only to be divisible into four integer parts — as in the
French system [which divided the circle into 400 grades, sub-
divided into 100 minutes, and these into 100 second^], but also
into six; for the sixth part of the circumference, having its chord
equal to the radius, naturally falls, in the construction of in-
struments and in the computations of trigonometry, to be
expressed by an integer number. According to the decimal
division of the quadrant, the sixth part of tiie circumference
not only is without an integer expression, but the decimal
fraction by which it is measured is one that runs on continually
without any termination. This is at least a deformity that
arises from a rigid adherence to the decimal division ; and
it is probably the main cause why that division has been found
so difficult to introduce into trigonometrical and astronomical
calculation. In astronomical tables we believe it has Bever
been adopted."

Following the same side, Mr. John Quincy Adams, who
was the commissioner appointed by the United States*
Government to inquire into the desirability of adopting a de-
cimal system, reported, —

^' The decimal system can be applied only, with many qua-
lifications, to any general system of metrology ; its natural
application is only to numbers ; and time^ space, gravity, and


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 75

extension inflexibly reject its sway. It is a contrivance of man
for computing numbers, and not a property of time, space, or
matter. Nature has no partialities for number ten, and the at-
tempt to shackle her freedom with it will forever prove abortive."

Yet Mr. Yates did not scruple to say, in his evidence before
Mr. Ewart's Committee, that Mr. Adams " passes the highest
eulogy, quite enthusiastically, on the philosophers who were
employed in making the measurement and devising the sys-
tem.** How just and accurate is this representation of Mr.
Adamses opinions may be judged from the quotation of Mr.
Adams's own words: —

'^ The metrology of France is a new and complicated machine
formed &om principles of mathematical precision, the adapt-
ation of which to the uses for which it was devised is yet pro-
blematical, abiding with questionable success the test of ex-
periments."

And he further observes, as to the comparative practical
advantages of the two systems : —

" The habits of every individual inure him to the comparison
of the definite portion of his person with the existing stendard
measures to which he is accustomed. There are few English
men or women but could give a yard, foot, or inch measure
from their own arms, hands, or fingers with great accuracy.
But they could not give the metre or decimetre, although
they should know their dimensions as well as those of the yard
or foot.*'

Although Professor Playfair said, it is an indignity to mak e
an intellectual science depend upon so foreign and mechanical
a consideration as a man having ten fingers to aid his calcula-
tions, yet, as it is held to be a recommendation of the metri-
cal system, it should be a recommendation of our system that
a digit is a finger's breadth ; an inch, the length of the thumb ;
a nailj from the tip to the middle joint of the longest finger ;
a palm^ the breadth of four fingers ; a hand^ the fist with the
thumb uppermost; a span, the space between the tips of
thumb and fingers extended to the utmost; a foot, that of a
man ; a cubit , from the elbow to the end of the longest finger;
a yard, girth of a man's body ; a step, when each foot advances
alternately ; a pace, two steps ; a fathom, width to which a
man's arms and hands can extend, and 82 grains of average
wheat equal to a pennyweight or 24 grains troy.

Having alluded to Mr. Ewart's Committee, it may be per-
mitted to express the surprise which every one who peruses it


76 8UPPLEMENTART PAPERS.

must feel that, in face of the overwhelming balance of
scientific evidence taken against the metric system, a Bill
pretending to be based upon it should have been presented to
Parliament. The Astronomer Royal declared, that the
anomalies complained of in the existing scales of weights and
measures had arisen from a general feeling of convenience,
which prompted the introduction of various kinds, great and
small, such as the yard for one purpose, the inch for another,
and the mile for another; but these do not, he believed, pro-
duce such inconvenience in practice. He did not think the
advantage to be derived from the estabhshment of interna-
tional weights and measures worth mentioning in comparison
with the extreme difficulty of introducing them. The number
of persons is so small, and the daily transactions in foreign
trade are very small in comparison with our domestic transac-
tions. Could the change be made, even per saltum^ firooi the
present to the decimal system, he did not believe it would
be advantageous ; or that the decimal system would
scarcely at all facilitate calculations, except in the coinage.
Few working men ever use the tenth ; they employ the half-
quarter, eighth, and sixteenth, and, comparing the persons
interested in foreign measures with the mass of the people,
the former will be found to be so inconsiderable in number as to
render the establishment of international uniformity in weights
and measures not of the least consequence. There is no
utility in having a system based on a common unit like the
French. All should be done by practice. The merit of the
decimal scale is strictly limited to its application to long sums
of addition, and to troublesome sums of multiplication or
division. The French system would not suit the habits of the
people of this country at all ; it would not be a convenient
system, but the inconvenience of its introduction would be
very much felt by the common people. Uniformity would be
bought at the price of such enormous inconvenience, and the
trouble would be so great, that people would see no advantage
in it at all. If he had a new nation to create, said the Astro-
nomer Eoyal, with a new system of weights and measures,
he would give them the binary scale throughout. That, he
conceived, would be the nearest to perfection — ^the binary scale
with means to enable us to use decimal multiples and sub-
multiples. During the cross-examination of this witness by
Mr. Cobden, a curious episode occurred, which is interesting as
proving that, for a practical man of business, the hon.
member for Rochdale is not at all quick at figures, and anything


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 77

but a ready reckoner or an arithmetical authority. He asked
if a cargo of 27 tons of tea had to pay Is. duty a lb., would it
not be necessary to multiply 27 tons by 20 cwt., then by
1121b., which would be *' a pretty long calculation." Should
these remarks fall under the eye of *^a little boy" in a mer-
chant's ofl&ce — one of those who, Mr. Cobden told the House
of Commons, intended to petition for free trade in arithmetic,
and who are advertised for, to serve without salary for the
first six months, writing a good hand, and quick at figures —
he would be able to show the hon. member for Eochdale that
by the aid of what the Uttle boy will call " gumption/* the
pretty long calculation may be made a remarkably short one.
Inasmuch as 20s, make a pound sterling, and there are 20cwts.
of 1121b. each in a ton, the duty being Is a lb , the little boy
will be able to tell on the instant, without pause or putting pen.
to paper, that the duty per ton will be £1 12, and the duty on the
cargo will be ^61 12, multiplied by 27, which will be the only
calculation he will have to effect to arrive at the required
result.

Professor de Morgan insisted on the necessity of keeping
distinct decimalization and metricalization, two things often
confounded. He was as much for. decimal division as any
person could be, which he believed might be easily introdijced
and would co-exist perfectly well with the binary division
which he was satisfied must always be used by the common
people. He objected to the introduction of French units into
this country upon the balance of convenience and inconvenience.
It would create such an immense amount of confusion through-
out the country, that the inconvenience would far more than
counterbalance the advanatge we should derive in our foreign
commercial relations. The metre was objectionable. It arose
from a mere fanciful connection with the quadrant of the
meridian, and is of no practical importance to any man alive.
** You might just as well," said the Professor with polished
sarcasm, ^^ try to subdivide the distance from the earth tlo the
moon." The metre is too long to be the common measure,
and the next decimal division — the decimetre — would be too
short to take the place of our foot. The litre — about a pint
and three-quarters — is either too large or too small. Hsdf a
litre would not do, because that would destroy the decimal
character.

Mr. William Fairbairn was not prepared to say what would
be the best standard or the best unit, but he beUeved the foot
or the inch would be the best.


78 SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS.

Mr. C. H. Gregory, C.E., freely admitted, that there may
be diiBculties in the way of the adoption in England of the
French standards for money, weights and measures, which,
when considered by those who devote themselves deeply to
the sabject, may be judged to outweigh the advantages of an
identity of our weights and measures, and money with the
French system. All he desired was the decimal division of
our scales.

Mr. J. A. Franklin, a professional auditor, did not believe
it would be just as easy to induce Englishmen to measure
length and capacity by the metre as it would be by the decimal
multiples of the foot. A change is not universally or generally
desired. The differences which exist between the scales of
various localities are rather modes of expressing weights and
measures than a difference in the weights and measures them-
selves. The pound avoirdupois is recognized universally, and
the witness objected to anything else but 7,000 grains being
called a pound in Great Britain.

The evidence as to the metrical system being evaded in
countries, on the inhabitants of which the use has been im-
posed by law, is remarkable, all the more so as it is supplied
by witnesses who desire to force it upon this country. M.
Miq)iel Chevalier admitted that in the two great staples of
trade — wine and corn — it was not used. " No care has been
taken to have the cask of any regular number of hectolitres.
Wine is sold in what we call la hcarique^ generally of that kind
of barrique which we call la Bordelaise, It is two hectolitres
and 18 or 20 litres generally on an average. It would have
been better to have made it of two hectoUtres." The eminent
political economist might have added that elsewhere in France
wine is sold by the piece and demi-piece, feuHUtte and demi'
feidllette, M. Michel Chevalier further said, that not only
were bottles by which wine is sold not metrical, but they were
not alike. For Burgundy they are nearly a litre; for cham-
pagne they are smaller, and for Bordeaux smaller still.
*^ First-rate wine is too dear to have in all cases a full litre in
a bottle." He stated also that ^^ at Marseilles, where there is
a very large trade in grain, grain is sold by the charge. But
what is 2^ charge ? It is not a certain number of hectolitres, as
it ought to be." Mr. Bass, perhaps the largest purchaser of
grain in England, said the French have adopted a decimal and
metrical system, yet there is an entire absence of uniformity
They affect to sell by the hectolitre, a measure of capacity


THE METRICAL AND DECIMAL SYSTEMS. 79

it is referred back to the kilogramme, a measure of weight.
'* In point of fact, so far as I can see, in the French system
they have no measure of capacity." The buyer for Mr. Bass's
house reported, that in Champagne he bought barley by the
quintal of 100 French lbs. (50 kilogrammes), and in Paris by
the metrical quintal (100 kilogrammes) ; on the Loire by the
hectolitre of 65 kilogrammes; on the Saale corn is bought by the
last of 1 1 quarters, not of 10 quarters as is customary elsewhere.
In the price current, wheat is quot^ed by the 120 kilogrammes,
barley by the 100 kilogrammes, rye by the 115 kilogrammes,
and flour by the 6 marks of 159 kilogrammes. If the reader
will refer to The Times' correspondent's letter of last Tuesday
from Paris, he will perceive that, in addition, flour is sold by
the sack of 157 kilogrammes, and at Lyons by the sack of
125 kilogrammes, which quite justifies Mr. Bass's conclusion,
that the metrical system is merely a nominal system, and
that it does not exist so far as the sale of corn goes. Mr.
Dickson, a manufacturer, who opined that the metrical sys-
tem was the greatest blessing ever bestowed on France, ad-
mitted that the people were scarcely yet brought round to use
the blessing. Instead of calculating their produce, or letting
their land by the hectare, they let by the tnesure, which in one
parish consists of 35 ares^ and in another of 44.

To present a Bill to Parliament, and assert that it is based
upon such evidence in favour of the introduction of the metric
system here, is to be almost sublime in audacity. It looks
much like a breach of gQod faith and like an attempt to palm
off an imposture on the public, for the metrical system is not
what it is said to be. It is not accurate ; it is not symmetrical;
it is not logical ; it is not consistent ; and it is not logically
sequential, as Mr. Cobden declared it to be, and yet we are
asked to adopt it instead of the English system, which, as Mr.
Taylor truly says, " has for its foundation all the scientific ac-
curacy attributed to the French, with the further recommend-
ation that it has stood the test of actual experiment for above
4,000 years."


INDEX TO THE GREAT PYRAMID.

• • • ...

ADDED HERE POU THE OONVENrENCE OF THOSE WHO POSSESS THE
FIRST EDITION OF THE BOOK, IN WHICH IT WAS NOT INSERTED.


A.

PAGE.

Air-channels described, Col. Howard Vyse's account of
them 114,116

Almodad — the Inventor of Geometry .... 230

Alphabetic Writing, Origin of 287

Revealed to Moses .... 301

Angle of the Casing-stoues 15

of the Face of the Great Pyramid, why fixed upon . 19

of the Inclination of the three largest Pyramids . 21

Ante- closets [Greaves] 109

Animals slain, but not for food, immediately after the Fall . 215

Arabian Language, Origin of " . . . . . .276

Numerals 277

. „ Preceded Alphabetic Writing . . 285

„ Claim of Hindoos, to earlier Use of . 289

Ark, Measure of Noah's 308

Avoirdupois Pound, the name when given . . .146

Aroura, the Area of the Base of the Eighth Pyi'amid . . 40

compared with the Plethron 40


B.

Base of the Great Pyramid, earliest Measure of ,

by John Greaves .
by De Moncqnys, Th^venot, etc.
by Nathaniel Davidson .
by the French Savans
confirmed by M. Jomard


6
7
9
10
10
11
Measure of, by Le Pdre and Col. Coutelle , 11


82 INDEX.

PAOB.

Babel, Tower of, when commenced 206

Built by the race of Ham .... 250

Date of 262

Description of 257

Belus, Tower of ....-••• • 257

Bushels, rased and stricken .•••••• 1^3 \


C.

Canal of Joseph 244

Chaldean Observation of Eclipses 256

Chronological Table according to the Hebrew Scriptures . 225

Capacity, Measures of, the source of Measures of Weight . 145

Casing-stones, Discovery of, by Col. Howard Vyse . • 5

Description of, by Col. Howard Vyse . . 13

Angle of 15

Cifer or Sipher, an Arabic word of the Saracens. . . 294

Circle, Quadrature of, by Archimedes, etc. ... 79

Proportion of, according to Archimedes . • . 80

„ according to the Hindoos ... 81

Modem Proportion, how far it differs from the

Ancient 81

More Ancient Discovery may be traced to the

Origin of the Pyramids 81

Measures compared 82

Ancient exceeds Modem Computation by 8,300 feet

only . . 82

Circumference of the EaHh, in Latitude 30*^, expressed by

the foot of Drusus .32

Modem Estimates of, in Latitude 30** 83

9) n in Latitude 45** 34

CoflFer, Pyramid (see King's Coffer) 1 20

Congius Komanus ^ ijy

Measure of, attempted by Greaves . . , . 1 78
Various Weights, ascribed to the Ounce and Pound

of the Congius , ^ ]L79

Comer Stone ^ 27o

Ps.oxviii ! 271

Acts iv. 11 ^^^

Ephesians ii. 19 272


SUPPLEMBNTART PAPERS. 83

PA OB.

Zechariah iv. 7, probable references .... 273

Illustrated by our Saviour 273

Count and Account, how applied 286

Cubit, Royal, or Cubit of Memphis 44

Sir I. Newton, on its Use in the Qreat Pyramid . . 44

His Views recently corroborated .... 45

A Measure of the Second Temple .... 51

Cubit of Karnak, its Antiquity, a Double Eoyal Cubit. . 47

Its Length as preserved in the British Museum . . 48

Its Measure that of the Five Passages in the Qreat

Pyramid 48

A Cubit of this Measure referred to by Herodotus . 49

His Observations recently confirmed . . • . 49

Employed in building the Temple of Solomon ^ . 50

The Royal Span the same 50

Cubit of Mekyas, or Nilometer 54

Common Oriental • 57

Double Oiiental 57

Cubit, Sacred, of the Jews 62

Their Itinerary Cubit 63, 71

A Measure of the Altar of Burnt-offering in the Second

Temple 64

Mersennus, on the Sacred 65

A Measure of the Earth before the Flood ... 66

Principle on which it was constructed . . . .67

Cubit and Palm, and the Great Cubit of Ezekiel. . . 67

Cubit, Itinerary, of the Tyrians 69

Employed by Hiram in casting the Pillars of Jachin and

Boaz 68

Cubit Itinerary of the Babylonians 69

Cubits, Itinerary, Table of 70

Cubits, Modern Itinerary . • 71

D.

Degree, Measure of, in Latitude 45** 34

Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds, in Table of Constants . 73

Ptolemaic Measures . 76

How represented in the Modem Division of the Earth's

Circumference in the Table of Constants ... 75


84 INDEX.

Diameter of the Earth, its Decimal Proportions .

Question of John Quincy Adams answered .

Analysis of the Diameter of the Former Earth .

Difference of Ante-diluvian and Modern, explained

Increase effected by the addition of Waters above the
Firmament . . .

Diameter, Equatorial, and Polar .

Difference of

„ in Latitude 30°

Average, or Mean Diameter
Discoveries, Modern, are almost all Inferential


85
86
91
92

93
95
95
95
95
301


E.

Earth, Measure of, by Eratosthenes 26

His Error in taking Proportion for Actual Measure . 27

Diameter of, in Latitude 30°, expressed by the English
Inch . . . . • . • 34

Circumference of, in Latitude 30°, connected with the
Measure of the Great Pyramid 36

Earth, only one Measure of, by the Ancients ... 76
Measures of, in Greek and English Feet ... 87
Probable Arrangement of Measure in Earlier Times. 89
Measures of. Present and Former, compared . . 91
Difference caused by the Deluge .... 92
Amount of, estimated .... 93

Divided in the days of Peleg 240

What is meant by the Earth being divided . . 240

How it was divided 242

Made so by Measure . . . . . ' . . 263

Earth, Former, Diameter of 280

Prese'nt, Diameter of . 280

Circumference of, in Pyra'mid and English Inches . 281

„ in Pyramid and English Feet . 28

„ in Greek Feet and their equivalent

in English Inches . . . 283

Egypt favourable to the Design of the Builders of the

Pyramids . 222

Etymological Illustrations 194

Ezekiel, Measures in 314


SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS. 85


F.

PAQB.

Foot, Roman, compared with the English Foot by Greaves. 24

Various Estimates of the Roman .... 25

Smaller Roman, Extract from Pliny .... 26

„ Various Estimates of 27

*

Evidence that this was the Measure adopted by Eratos-
thenes 29

Both larger' and' smaller measures originated in the

Great Pyramid 29

Foot, Greek, various Estimates of 30

Ptolemaic, a smaller Greek Foot 31

of Drusus -and of Diodorus Sioulus . . . .31

Used to express the Circumference of the Earth, in

Latitude 30°, (see Earth, Circumference of) . . 32

English, examined 34

Allied to, but not derived from, the Egyptian Foot . 36

Royal or Philetserian ... . . . . .53

Geometrical ... . . . . . .66

Clavius's Opinion of .this not correct » » . , 56

Proved to be the Oriental Span 56

Paris, Persian, and Turkish 60

Feet, the above are various arrangements of the same Com-
mon Measure 84

O.

Garlic, Onions, and Radishes — Symbolic Import of . .77

Gallon, Henry III 150

Giants, Measure of 313

Greaves, Character of, by Dr. Hooper, Bishop of Bath and

Wells 194

Greek' Numerals . . . ' . . ' , . . 289

a

Hebrew Measures of Capacity, with reference to the King's

Coffer 124

Heights of the Great Pyramid, various, by Pierre Belon,
in 1565; Sandys in 1610; Greaves, De Monconys,
Thevenot, Melton, Fulgentius, and Dr. Veryard before

1693; Grobert,in 1801; by Davidson forty years earlier 18


86 INDBX.

PA OB.

Height, in English Feet, by Qreaves, etc. . . • . 19

Determined by the Angle of the Casing-stones . 19

Perpendicular, its Proportion to the Periphery . 22

Equal to one-tenth of a Roman Mile ... 23

Square of, slightly differs from the Square of each

Face 41

Herodotus's Description of the Great Pyramid . . .21

His Measure of the Pyramid is Square Measure . 38, 39

Book II. c. 124, explained 39

I.

Interior of Great Pyramid, General Description of, by

George Sandys 101

More exact Description by Greaves . . . 105

Imperial Weights and Measures 157

Do., in the reign of George IV" 300

Table of, compared with Pyramid Coffer . . 158

Wine Measure. ....... 159

Inch, English, when Invented 298

Inscription on the Great Pyramid . , . . 279

J.

Job, an allusion to the Great Pyramid 274

Jomard's opinion that each side of the Pyramid contains
400 of the present Egyptian Cubits and 500 Common

Cubits 2

Confirms Davidson's Measure 11

Joktan, Sons of, the probable Builders 229

Dr. Townsend's Opinion concerning Jobab . . . 236

Joktan, Sons of, settled in Arabia Felix .... 237

Why his Thirteen Sons are named in the order in which

they occur 239

K.

King's Chamber, and Monument within it . . . . Ill
Why built, and the Monument placed in it « , .117

King's Cofter ; Locality of it described . . . .120

A Standard of all Measures of Capacity . . • 122

Its Cubic Contents 123

Standard of Hebrew Measures of Capacity . . .124


SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS. 87

PAOK.

King's Coffer, Measures of, compared with Bishop Cumber-
land's Measures of Length and Capacity . . .128

King's Coffer, a Measure of the Layer in Scripture . .129

„ the Molten Sea .... 132

„ Grecian Measures of Capacity . 138

Table of the same . . ,139

„ Boman Measures of Capacity • 140

Table of the same . . . 140

Qrecian and Boman Measures compared . 141

Identical with the English Chaldron . . 144

Harmony of its measures accounted for . 143

Standard for the Weight of the Troy Pound 145

Equal in Capacity to the English Quarter . 144

Standard of English Measures under
Henry HL ...... 148

L.

Latitude of the Great Pyramid 33

Litre, a French Measure for all Grain and all Liquids . 184

Le Pdre — his Measure of the Great Pyramid and Discovery
of Socket 11

M.

Measures, Greek, Roman, Asiatic, etc., supposed by some to
be derived from Ancient Gteodesy ..... 4

MeasurcR, English, why the name of them should be re-
tained 186,187

Measures of the Earth when expressed in round Numbers
are primitive Numbers 35

Measures of Length, Modem French and English, compared
with each other and with Ancient Measures ... 83

Measures of Wine, Com, Ale, under Henry III. , . 148

Tables of the same 152

Alteration of, under Henry VII. . . . 153

Tables of the same 155

Imperial, under George IV 157

Tables of the same 158

Meridian, Length of Degree of, according to Eratosthenes . 261

Merchants' Pound, a sort of Wholesale Pound . . , 147

Metrology, English and French compared . . . .188


«


88 INDEX.

PAOS.

Mile, English Statute Mile, Breton or Drasian Mile, Irish

Mile, Romano'British Mile, Computed Mile ... 96

Mile, English, not always divided as at present ... 99

WeLih and Irish ..•••••• 99

Computed Mile 100

Small Middle, and Great 100

Monument of Cheops 113

N.

Newton, Sir Isaac, Commentary on the Cubit employed

in building the Great Pyramid . . ' . . 44 ;

Corroboration of his Views 45

Noah, the probable originator of the Great Pyramid . . 228

Notation by Nine Digits and Zero 290

Numerals, Arabio, Table of, in C.C. C. Cambridge . .291

Greek . . 289

Hebrew 294

How recovered 293

0.

Onions, Radishes, and Garlic, Symbolic import of . . 77

Ounces, Mensural and Ponderal, Roman distinction between 176 '

p . . .

Palace, Solomon's, Measure of 312 |

Parasang, Egyptian 58 ;

Pelasgians, Niebuhr, on 201 i

Philitia 219 |

Pint Measure, a Pound in Weight 304

Plethron of Herodotus, Square Measure . , , , 38

Pliny's Measure of the Great Pyramid examined . . 42

His Foot the Royal Span . . . . . .42

Polar Star seen through the inclined passage of the

Great Pyramid, in 1817 203

Polar Star, what the Star was 4000 years ago . . . 203
Pounds, Roman, Commercial and Monetary, Table of .181

Profileof Casing-stones 15

Pyramids of Gizeh, commonly supposed to be Sepulchres 1

Some have tliought them Standards of Measure . . 2

Latter opinion imsupported by proof .... 4

Colonel H. Vyse's Discoveries are in favor of it . . 4

Pyramid, the Greats Earliest Measui'e of the Base by

John Greaves 6


SUPPLEMENTARY PAPERS. 89


9

10
10
12
14
18


PAGE.

Pyramid, the Great, Description of, by Greaves . . 7

Base Measured by De Moncony9, Tli6venot, &c.

„ „ by Davidson

„ Measures of, by the French Savans

Pavement discovered by Caviglia

Pyramid, the Great, Vyse and Perring's Measure of

Various Heights assigned to it • .

Height of, determined by the Angle of the Casing-stone» 1 9

Pyramid, the Great, a Demonstration of the Relation of the

Diameter of a Sphere to its Circumference . . 22

Its Height, the Radius of such a Sphere ... 22

Measure of, according to Herodotus .... 38

Pyramidographia, by Greaves 106

Pyramid, Etymology of 191

Pyramid, the Great, Founders of 199

Probable Age of . . ' 201

Founders were not of the race of Ham . . . 206

Founders were Shepherds 208

The same as the Children of Israel, who afterwards

dwelt in Egypt 218

Founders were of the race of Shem .... 221

Chronological Table according to the Hebrew Scriptures 225

Pyramid Great, alluded to in the Book of Job . . .262

In the Book of Psalms 270

Pyramid combines equal Comers and a Chief Comer Stone 264

• Q.

Question of John Quincy Adams answered ... 86

R.

Radishes, Onions, and Garlic, their Symbolic Import . . 77

Rennell, Major, his error as to the Stade of Aristotle . 58

S.

Shekel of the Sanctuary 164

Shekel of the Hebrews, equal to the Tetradrachm of the

Athenians 172

Shem, descendants of, had no Cities 209

Shepherds, Founders of the Great Pyramid . . . 208

Were an abomination to the Egyptians . . .212

The Cause existed before the Deluge . . . .215


90 INDEJL


Sin-offeriDg, correct Traoaiation of . . . • S16

Sons of God 266

Square of each Face of the Great Pyramid, equal to Squaxe

of the Height 39

Stade of Aristotle 57

Major Reimel]*8 Error oonoemiiig this Stade . S8

Stades, Greek, various 59

Table of the same 60

Solomon*s Temple, Measure of 311, 312

Solomon's Palace, Measure of 313

T.

Temple of Solomon, and Second Temple, were double the

Dimensions usually assigned to them .... 52

Tabernacle, Measure of 300, 310

Troy Pound 146

Troy Weight, Etymology of 189

Tun of Wine, Henry VI 153

W.

Weights and Measures, English derived from Wnglish

Measures of Capacity 151

Table of the same 163

Weights and Measures, Hebrew, derived from Hebrew

Measures of Capacity 165

Table of the same 165

Weights Hebrew, difference between, before and after the

Captivity 166

Weights Grecian, derived from Grecian Measures of

Capacity 1.74

Table of the same • 174

Weights Roman, Measures of Capacity and Table . .175

Weights of various Wine Measures of Henry IH. . , 152

Weights, various, of the Congius 177

Well, in the interior of the Great Pyramid, measured by

Pliny 107

Well, Depth of 119

Winchester Com and Wine Measure .... 155

Ale ditto 156

Writing, first mention of 287


NAMES OF EMINENT PERSONS, WHOSE WORKS

AND OPINIONS ARE CITED.

*♦* The figures refer to the pages of the "Great Pyramid,"
where direct quotations are introduoed.


A.

Adams, John Quincy,86, 182.

iEgius.

Agricola, 176.

Almamon.

Almodad.

Anaximander. •

Antoninus.

Aristides, 79.

Aristotle, 57.

Arrian.

Astle, 285.

Augustinus.

B.

Bailli.

Barth616my.

Belon, 71, 271.

Bernard.

Birch.

Bochart^ 230, 231, 237, 267.

Brettell.

Bryant, 189, 210, 212.

C.

Cassini, 9, 27, 31.

pagnazzi, 25.

Caviglia.

. Oallisthenes.

Cheops.

Clavius.

Cory, 193.

Cossutius.

Coutelle.

Cyrus.

Cumber land| Bishop, 125| 133,
165.


D.

Davidson, Nathaniel, 10.

De Chazelles.

De Morgan, 3, 29, 56, 79.

De Monconys.

Delambre.

De Nointel.

Diodorus Siculus, 32, 245.

DuCange,170.

E.
Ebutius.
Edward III.
Elizabeth, Queen.
Eratosthenes.
Epiphanius.
Ezekiel.

F.
Fleta, 147.
FuJgentius.
Fulvius Ursinus.

G.
George IV.
Gibson.

Gilbert, Davies, 188.
Greaves, John, 7, 23, 28, 42,

48,106,111,117,163,172,

177, 178, 191, 302.

Grobert, 54, 66.
Grote, 252, 255.

H.
Hamilton, 190.
Hammond, Dr., 72.
Hare, Julius.
Harris, of Alexandria.
Henry III.
Henry VI.


92


NAMES OF EMINENT PERSONS


Henry VII.

Henry VIII.

Helps, 2.

Herodotus, 21, 38, 49, 77,207,
210, 244.

Heron.

Herschel, Sir John, 74, 203, 205,
259.

Hesychius.

Hill.

Hiram.

Holland, Dr. Philemon.

Hooper, Bishop, 172, 194.

Hussey, Dr., 28, 164, 167,169,
173, 178, 179.

I.

Ideler.

J.

Jacquier.

Jaugeon.
Jomard.
Josephus.

L.
Lee, Dr. Samuel, 263, 266, 274.
Leslie, Professor, 292.
Le P^re.
Liddell.

Long, Geo., 119.
Linant de £ellefonds, 246.

M.
Mafiaeus.

Manetho, 209, 218.

Mechain.

Melton.,

Mersennus, 65.

Micaiah.

Moses.

N.
Napoleon L

Newton, Sir Isaac, 31, 44, 62.

Niebuhr, 201, 249.


Noah.
Nouet) 33.

P.
Pacatus.
Paucton.
Paley, 4.

Peacock, Dr., 3, 290.
Pastus, Lucas
Pelasgians.
Penrose, F., 25.
Pepys, Sir S.
Perring.
Peter, St.
Philander.
Philostratus.
Pinkerton.
Pliny, 26, 43.
Powell.

Powis, SirThos., 156.
Prideaux, Dean, 251, 267.
Ptolemy Euergetes.
Ptolemy Philadelphus.

R.
Raper, 25.

Rennell, Major, 58, 59.
Re villas.
Robinson, Dr., 1.

S.

Samuel.

Sanchoniatho, 192.

Sandys, Geo., 101.

Scaccia.

Scott.

Scott, Patrick.

Shuckburgh, Sir George.

Sighicellus.

Skene, 149.

Smith, Rev. Robert Payne
307.

Smith, Dr. William.


^


WHOSE WORKS ARE CITED.


93


Snellius.

Solomon.

Stanley, Rev. A. P., 2.

Statins.

Strabo, 306.

Strong, Rev. Charles.

Stuart, S5.

T.
Thales.
Th6venot.
Thirlwall.
Townsend, Dr., 236.

V.
Veryard.


Vespasian.

Villalpandus.

Virgil, 144.

Vyse, Col., 12, 40, 114^ 120,
205.

W.

Wallis, Dr.

Wells, Dr., 265.

White, Professor.

Wilkinson Sir Gardner, 47»
202.

Y.

Young, Dr. Thos., 77, 278.


%


\


