The Cellular Cosmogony; or, The Earth a Concave Sphere (Cyrus R. Teed (Koresh), 1905)
=====================================================================================
Cyrus R. Teed (Koresh) — The Cellular Cosmogony (Estero, Florida, 1905), Parts I-II. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (CellularCosmogony).

THE


CELLULAR COSMOGONY


THE EARTH A CONCAVE SPHERE


PART I

The Universology of Koreshanity

(with addendum: “astronomy’s false foundation.”

BY KORESH

THE FOUNDER OF THE KORESHAN SYSTEM OF EELIGIO-SCIENCK; AUTHOR
OF VOLUMES OF KORESHAN LITERATURE.

PART II

The New Geodesy

BY PROFESSOR U. C. MORROW

ASTRONOMER AND GEODESIST FOE THE KORESHAN UNITY, AND EDITOR OF
THE FLAMING SWOItD.


THE GUIDING STAR PUBLISHING HOUSE,

Estsro, Florida.

1905. A. K. 65.


COPYRIGHT BY

GUIDING STAR PUBLISHING HOUSE
1898



& ^DEDICATION

Th ls little work is part of the skirmish
line of the cArmy of Revolution. It
shall never cease its influence until
every vestige of the fallacies and evils
of a perverted science and religion
shall fave been relegated to oblivion.

...To the...

Firstfruits of the Insurrection,

Offspring of tfe Lord,

I supremely dedicate it;

thence to all men in all grades of prog¬
ress in their liberation from the thral¬
dom to ignorance and the hells of the
competitive system. —K ORESIL


Contents,


Part I,

Introduction.Pages 5-9

THE TJNIVERSOEOGY OF KORESHANITT.— The form of the Universe,
the great Alehemico-Organic World.—Motion and function.—Cause of
motion.—The remote cause of physical motion. The cause of motion fiom
the Biblical and Theological point of view.—The Precession of the Equi¬
noxes as related to the Astro-Biological manifestations.—Transposition of
mental force to Aleliemieo-Organie (physical) energy.—Laws of motion of
Planetary Disci in the shell or Firmament of the Universe.-Why is it
necessary to know the form of the Universe ?.11-3S

Optical Eactors and Illusions.—Positive proofs of Koreshan Cosmogony con¬
trasted with the assumptions of the old school. The vanishing ship s hulk
—The laws of visual impression... 29-34

Koreshan Geodetic Service-Outline of principles of accurate measure-
meut of the Earth’s Contour—Horizontal xectilineation.-Geodetic Survey
revolutionized. 34-39


Part II.

THE NEW GEODESY.— The Question of the shape of the Earth pivoted
upon a specific proposition.—Thi fairness of our propositions. Is the true
Level extended as an Air Lino, tangent or convergent to the water s
surface?....

Modern Geodetic Operations.-The usual facts and phenomena used iu
Modern Astronomv prove the rotundity, but not the con\ oxIt\ of tho
Earth— Horizontal’tangents from the standpoint of the surveyor.--Hori¬
zontal tangents in the Concave Earth. Appearances the basis of usual
Geodetic calculations.—The cross-hair and the vanishing point—Modern
science lias been unable to discover and apply the menus of demonstration
of the Earth's shape.-Limit of lateral vision in Concave Earth.47-63

The Earth Is Not Convex.— Series of Experiments conducted on the water’s
surface by the Koreshan Geodetic Staff.—Universal laws of Hydrostatics.—
Proctor’s denials, comments, and admissions.-Experiments on the Old
Drainage Canal, Chicago-Convincing observations on the return journey.
_The striking feature of the final observation, giving unmistakable evi¬
dence that water is not convex.— Experiments on Lake Michigan 64-76


INDEX.


3


Observations on Southern Waters.— Series of Experiments conducted on tho
Gulf of Mexico and Bay of Naples.—Observations from Naples Beach.—
Sanibel light visible 34 miles.—Cape Romano visible 25 miles with the eye
at water level.—Remarkable observations by Koreshan Geodetic Stall on
the Gulf of Mexico and Naples Bay, Florida.—Experiments on Naples Bay.
—Water’s concavity visible.76-87

Principles of Mechanical Survey —Successive steps in the logic of Geo¬
metrical propositions and applied Mechanics in direct demonstration.—

Ancient and modem Geodetic apparatus.-.Fundamental principles of

Geometry,—Transposition from Geometrical to Mechanical principles.—
The invention of the Rectilineator.— Modus Oporandi of the New Geodesy.
.. 87-100

The Koreshan Geodetic Expedition.— Factors involved in the measurement
of Meridian Are iu the Florida Coast Survey.—Accuracy of the Rectiline¬
ator proved,—System of Reversals and Final Tests.—Preparations for the
Geodetic Survey.—Prof. Morrow’s System of uniform Tide Measures.—
Levels, plumbs, appurtenances, and records.—Personnel of the Staff,
Investigating Committee and Corps of Witnesses. xoo-113

Results and Inevitable Conclusions.—Details of measurements and exten¬
sion of the Air Line into the water.—The testimony of levels, plumbs, and
horizon.—Details of visual projection of the Air Line over Gordon’s Pass.—
The extension of the Air Line into the water.—Facts of measurement of
altitude of the Air Line on 25 tide staffs.—Comparative results of altitude
measurements on Concave and Convex surfaces.—Conclusion of the direct
demonstration.—The New Geodesy, in its success, exceeds in importance
the world’s fruitless scientific research.113-134

Echoes of the Geodetic Survey.— Conclusive answers to irrational objections
and arguments against the results obtained by the Rectilineator.—Obsti¬
nacy manifested by chagrined critics.—Geodetic and Geometric ratio of
Earth’s Concavity.—Two classes of objections urged.—The objections con¬
tradict each other.—Reply to charge of inclining first section.—Charge of
falsification of the facts of measurement.—Other experiments corroborate
the Survey,—Concave or Convex, which?. ..134-145

In the Daily Press.— Reprints and Etchings of Reports and Editorials in the;
great dailies of America.—Reports of the Florida Survey went around the
world.— Proof That We Dive Inside the Globe (from Chicago Tijies-
Hkbald).—K oreshans’ startling claim that their theory is demonstrated by
Experiments and Surveys. -Propositions of the Koreshans.—How the
surveys wore made.—Scientists challenged to open contest.—Easily
susceptible to decision.—A great Revolution would result.—Koreshan
Science and Theology.—What benefits would follow ?— Koreshanity (from
Louisville Courier-Journal) —Prof! Morro w tells of Dr. Teed’s Theories —
Experiments in Florida.—Believes he has proved the Earth Hollow.—
People and planets on inside.—Relations of the Sun, Moon, and Stars to
the world.—Explanation of Gravity.—Reverse of popular theories.—How


4


THF, CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


eclipse* occur.—Circumnavigation of the globe.—Planets not populated.—
Theory of creation.—Is the Copernican System All Wrong?

...145-168

The Hollow Globe and the Bible.—The Cellular Cosmogony demonstrates
the truth of the Astronomy of the Scriptures.—Texts concerning the
Earth’s Concavity, the relations of the Earth, Sun, Moon, and Stars; scien¬
tific demonstration of the Firmamental environ.—The ICoreshan and
Copernican systems compared.—The Firmament is the circumferential
environ.—The “Hollow of His hand,” the Earth’s Concavity.—The arc
and the chord of arc.—What and where are the Physical Heavens ?—Sun,
Moon, and Stars; their location and motion.168-184

Appendix.— Report of Visiting and Investigating Committee.—Testimony con-
corning projection of visual line into the water, May 8, 1897 .—Testimony of
Operators and Watchmen concerning adjustments and precautions taken
to prevent anyone tampering with Apparatus.—Testimony of Aeronauts
Concerning the shape of the World.—The Concavity of the Earth as seen
from a Balloon.—View of the immense terrestrial basin.—Positively ap¬
peared Concave.—Appears as a Concave surface.—Concave instead of
Convex.—Advertisements.185-300


pictures the Staff of Operators and Members of the Visiting the seven Planets as they npp< tr in the teleseop


Introduction..


THIS SCIENTIFIC volume, largely devoted to details of the
execution of the practical demonstration—mechanically con¬
ducted—of the earth’s concavity, is but preliminary to the most
stupendous and comprehensive exposition ever projected and con¬
summated by human intellect. Upon the assumption that the
surface of the earth is convex, there has been predicated that pro¬
digious fallacy, the Copernican system, which, according to the
admission of its most enthusiastic advocates and adherents,
does not contain a single positive proof of scientific accuracy.

In 1870, the Author of the Koreshan System of Universology,
upon the basis of the law of comparative analog}", announced
s the discovery of the cosmogonic form, which he then declared

to be cellular, the surface ofhthe earth being concave, with
a curvature of about eight inches to the mile. This rate of cur-
vation would give a diameter of eight thousand, and a circum¬
ference of twenty-five thousand miles. Applying the common
laws and principles of optics, with perspective foreshortening,
all the phenomena of appearances in optical illusion were
scientifically accounted for, and the earth optically demon¬
strated to be concave, although visual appearances seemed
to indicate the contrary.

After twenty-seven years of almost fruitless effort to find
a man capable, honest, and efficient, with capacity to compre¬
hend the principles of foreshortening in their illusory optical
influence in perspective and foreshortening, and experiencing
the weight of responsibility which a knowledge of the truth
imposed upon the discoverer, the suggestion urged itself that
we transpose, from the domain of optical science to that of
mechanical principles, the effort to enlighten the world as
to cosmic form. Under such impulse, having found our man,


6


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


we urged the necessity for tlie application of a mechanical
device by which a right-angle line could be drawn from a verti¬
cal point perpendicular to the surface of the earth. Professor
U. G. Morrow has the honor of the invention by which the
mechanical proof of the concavity of the earth is so absolute^ 7
demonstrated as to preclude even the possibility of a doubt of
its true contour, in the mind of any person honest enough
to examine without bias or prejudice, the proofs offered.

Professor Morrow has the additional honor also, of having
directed the conduct of all the experiments through which the
mechanical Geodetic demonstration has been carried forward
to a successful geometrical and mathematical conclusion and
climax,—irrefutable and overwhelming. This work, however,
is but the geometrical and mathematical confirmation of that
part of a great system having for its pediment and groundwork
the cosmic structure, the form and function of which had
already been enunciated. The alchemico-organic cosmos (the
physical universe) is the ultimate and therefore the most out¬
ward expression of creative power. It is the language of causa¬
tion manifest in the form of symbolism. Given a knowledge of
this form with its function, the cause is necessarily disclosed.

Deity, if this be the term employed to designate the
Supreme Source of being and activity, cannot be comprehended
until the structure and function of the universe are absolutely
known; hence mankind is ignorant of God until his handi¬
work is accurately deciphered. Yet to know God, who, though
unknown by the world is not unknowable , is the supreme
demand of all intellectual research and development.

If we accept the logical deduction of the fallacious Coperni-
can system of astronomy, we conclude the universe to be illim¬
itable and incomprehensible, and its cause equally so; there¬
fore, not only would the universe be forever beyond the reach
ot the intellectual perspective of human aspiration and effort,
but God himself would be beyond the pale of our conception,
and therefore beyond our adoration.


INTRODUCTION.


7


The Koreshau Cosmogony reduces the universe to piopor-
tiouate limits, and its cause within the comprehension of the
human mind. It demonstrates the possibility of the attainment
of man to his supreme inheritance, the ultimate dominion of the
universe, thus restoring him to the acme of exaltation,—tlie
throne of the Eternal, whence he had his origin.

Embraced in the system of which the external cosmic form
is the mere outward cell, is its correspondent, the macro-
cosmic or Grand Man. Outwardly, this is the visible humanity
in the process of development toward a perfected state, not yet
approached only as it was attained to in the Eord Christ, its
germinal beginning, the firstfruits of the perfected genus.

The alchemico-organic cell is definitely structured. It is
the egg from which the human macrocosm attains its incuba¬
tion, hence when humanity reaches its organic shape it must
assume the correspondential organism. Therefore, if we know
universal form as it obtains in the alchemico-organic cosmos,
we can render the language of this form into that of the legiti¬
mate structure of society; for one is the pattern of'the other.
Its functions and activities can also be readily translated into the
language of societal functions and activities. Genuine societal
fellowship will finally become a structured and composite unity,
evolved through the application of intellectual energy
and direction. It will become the anthropomorphic counter¬
part of the alchemico-organic (physical) world. A knowledge
of the structure and function of the alchemico-organic cosmos
constitutes the basis of a structured theology which is essential
to the organic unity and perpetuity of the human race.

It does not follow, because a fallacious theological system
has maintained the world in a state of offensive and defensive
belligerency, anarchy, and chaos, that a true knowledge of
God and his relation to man and man’s relations to him, is not
essential to genuine human perfection and happiness. In the em¬
phasis of the contrast, regarding the end to be attained, between
the fallacious and the genuine system of cosmogony (the Coper-



THK CKURURAR COSMOGONY.


INTRODUCTION.


9


nican and the Koreshan), we insist that all the labor of inves¬
tigation, the time, and the wealth expended in the Copernican
fallacy have no specific purpose.

Why do we care to know whether the earth moves
or is stationary ? If the universe be illimitable, it is equally
incomprehensible. Why, then, should humanity waste its
energies in the investigation of that which it has already pro¬
nounced incomprehensible, unknown, and unthinkable,—because
illimitable ? We sought to know the exact form of the universe,
because we knew it to be the language of cause; and knowing
the effect , we assured ourselves of the cause , that through con¬
scious knowledge we might enter into and become its power.
The interest of the Koreshan mind in the acquisition of universal
knowledge, resides in the fact that through it we become intel¬
lectual ly instrumental in the organization of the social fabric,
and thus acquire social and individual perfection, thence
universal and individual immortality. We learn to know
of the form and function of the alchemico-organic cosmos, that
we may insure the construction of the organo-vital cosmic
organism.

The perfection of the individual structure depends upon
the perfection of the Grand Man. The perfection of the human
macrocosm (the Grand Man) depends upon the application
of a few fundamental principles, revolutionary and sweeping in
their influence. The principles of equilibrium are as essential
to the institution and perpetuity of human happiness as they
are to the eternal stability of the cosmic structure, the basis
of which knowledge is found in the shape of the surface of the
earth as geometrically confirmed in the application of the Recti-
lineator. As the astral nucleus of the alchemico-organic cos¬
mos is so related in form and function to the circumference
containing it, as to receive the convergence of all energies and
radiate them equitably to all parts of the cosmic structure,
and as the heart of the vidual body, the seat of the commerce
of the body, is the center of collection and distribution, hence


society must be so organically structured as to be able to collect
and distribute the products of nature, coupled with industry
and sustained by the application of economic law. The attain¬
ment of a knowledge of this law is founded upon a knowledge
of the alchemico-organic cosmos.

It is so vastly important, in view of all these facts, for the
world to possess a knowledge of the contour of the earth’s sur¬
face, that we devoted the work of many months to mechanical
application, for the purpose of giving to the world some simple
mechanical proofs of what vre have known and taught for
nearly thirty years. Man’s knowledge of man is his knowl¬
edge of God; not man as he is in his segregate state, but as he will
be when the two forms (male and female) unite in the integral-
ism of his biunity, of which the Son of God was the archetype.
The Ford was Jehovah manifest in his human perfection. To
know the Tord Christ absolutely, is to be in the consciousness
of Deity; and to become like him is to sit upon the throne
of his glory. This knowdedge is so related to the structured
alchemico-organic macrocosm, that to know of the earth’s con¬
cavity and its relation to universal form, is to know God; while
to believe in the earth’s convexity is to deny him and all his
works. All that is opposed to Koreshanity is Antichrist.

KORESH,

The Founder of Koreshanity.

Chicago, Illinois, U. S. A.,

August, 1898 .



The Geodesy and Astronomy of the Bible.

“For the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are olearlv
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead.’'—Rom. i: 20 .

“Who hath measured the waters in the hollow [concavity] of his hand, and
meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth
in a measure, weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?” —
Isa. xl: 12,

“Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? * * Who hath
laid the measures thereof? or who hath stretched the line upon it — Job.
xxxviii: 4 , 6 .

“The man with a measuring line in his hand,” who “stood upon a wall
made by a plumb line, with a plumb-line in his hand.” “He stood, and measured
the earth.” Zech.ii;!; Amos vii: 7 ; Hab. iii: 6.


Goethe Cursed the Copernican. System,

“In whatever way or manner mav have occurred this business, 1 must still
sav that I curse this modern theory of cosmogony (the Copernican system) and
hope that perchance there may appear in due time some scientist of genius who
will pick up courage to upset this universally disseminated delirium of luna¬
tics.”- Von Goethe.

Copernicus on His Uncertain Hypothesis.

“Neither let any one. so far as hypotheses are concerned, expect anything
certain from astronomy, since that science can afford nothing of the kind. The
hypothesis of the terrestrial motion of the earth was nothing but an hypothesis,
valuable only so far as it explained phenomena, and not to be considered with
reference to absolute truth.”— Copernicus, Founder of Modern Astronomy,

An Astronomer Admits That it Cannot be Proven,

“When we consider that the advocates of the earth’s stationary position can
account for and explain the celestial phenomena as accurately, to their own
thinking, as we cun to ours, in addition to which they have the evidences of
their senses, which we have not, and Scriptures and facts in their favor, which
we have not, it is not without some show of reason that they maintain the supe¬
riority of their system. Whereas, we must be content, at present, to take for
granted the truth of the hypothesis of the earth’s motion for one thing. We
shall never, indeed, arrive at a time when we shall be able to pronounce it abso¬
lutely proved to be true. The nature of the subject excludes such a possibility.
However perfect our theory may appear, in our estimation, and however satis¬
factorily the Newtonian hypothesis may seem to account for all celestial phe¬
nomena, yet we are here compelled to admit the astounding truth, that if our
premise be disputed and our facts challenged, the whole range of astronomy
does not contain the proofs of its own accuracy. Startling as this announcement
may appear, it is nevertheless true; and astronomy would indeed be helpless,
were it not for the implied approval of those whose authority is considered a
guarantee oi ils truth . Should this sole refuge fail us. all our arguments, all our
observations, all our boasted accuracy would be useless, and the whole science
ot modern astronomy must fall to the ground!”— Dip Voodhouse, Astronomer,
Cambridge, Eng.


Part I.


THE

Universe logy of Koreshanity.

The Relations of the Physical and Anthropostic Worlds; the Perfect
Man the Supreme Impulser of all Universal
Activity and Motion.

BY KORKSH.

K ORESHANITY is universal science applied to all the
concerns of practical life, involving the science of
immortal life in the body. It includes the science of
religion, founded upon an accurate knowledge of the struct¬
ure aud function of the cosmic organism. It embraces
every department and phase of form and function in the
universe, and is therefore UnivKRSOROGY. It is predicated
upon an absolutely demonstrated premise, a geometric fig¬
ure which embraces three simple elements—the arc, chord,
and radius practically applied to earth measurement by a
process which determines the contour of the surface of the
earth in which w 7 e dwell, aud the direction of its curvation.
This is not theoretical but applied geometry. This contour
Y found to be an upward instead of a downward curve, and
thus it is diametrically opposite to the assumed convexity of
the earth’s surface. The world is therefore face to face
with a radical astronomical revolution.

The earth is a concave sphere, the ratio of curvation
being eight inches to the mile, thus giving a diameter
of eight thousand, and a corresponding circumference of
about twenty-five thousand miles. This fact is physic-



12


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.


ally and mechanically demonstrated by placing a perpendic¬
ular post at any point on the surface of the earth, (though
it were better to place it by the side of a surface of water,)
and extending a straight line at right angles from this per¬
pendicular. The line thus extended will strike the surface
at any distance proportionate to the height of the vertical
post.

“Hypothesis, or guesswork , indeed, lies at the foun¬
dation of all scientific knowledge,” says the Standard Dic¬
tionary, quoting from Fiske’s “Unseen "World,” page 3.
The term science is derived from scire , to know; hence, sci¬
ence is the Tatin term for knowledge. Science means



knowledge, nothing more, nothing less. That which is
founded upon hypothesis (assumption) is not science, nor
should it be dignified by that title. The Copernican system
of astronomy has its foundation in assumption,—this is con¬
ceded b} 7 " all so called scientific astronomers. The Coperni-
cau system has never been demonstrated, therefore it is not
scientific.

What does Koreshanity offer as a substitute for the
gigantic fallacy and farce of the benighted Copernicus?
First, it offers the fact that in experiments carefully made
by the Koreshan Geodetic Staff at Naples, on the Gulf
coast of Florida, the contour of the earth was proven to be
diametrically the reverse of what is taught as true in the


UNIVERSGROGY OE KORESHANITY. 13

pseudo-science of modern times. The surface of the earth
is not convex. It appears to be so because of optical illu¬
sion. The only geodetic survey ever made for the purpose
of determining whether the surface on which we dwell is
convex or concave, was made by the Geodetic Staff of the
Koreshan Unity in the year 1897. In this survey was cor¬
roborated conclusively, the testimony given in 1870, that
the earth is a hollow shell about eight thousand miles in
diameter, and about twenty-five thousand miles in circum¬
ference.

The Form of the Universe, the Great Alchemico**
Organic World.

The alchemico-organic (physical) world or universe is
a shell composed of seven metallic, five mineral, and five
geologic strata, with an inner habitable surface of land and
water. This inner surface, as the reader already under¬
stands, is concave. The seven metallic layers or laminae
are the seven noble metals,—gold constituting the outer¬
most rind of the shell. This shell or crust is a number
of miles in thickness. Wfithin this shell are three prin¬
cipal atmospheres, the first or outermost (the one in
which we exist) being composed chiefly of oxygen and
nitrogen; the one immediately above that is pure hydrogen,
and the one above the hydrogen atmosphere we have denom¬
inated aboron. Within this is the solar electro-magnetic
atmosphere, the nucleus of which is the stellar center. I11
and occupying these atmospheres are the sun and stars,
also the reflections called the planets and the moon. The
planets are mercurial disci moving by electro-magnetic im¬
pulse between the metallic laminae or planes of the concave
shell. They are seen through penetrable raj-s, ultra elec-


14


THE CEKLUKAR COSMOGONY.

tro-magnetic, reflected or bent back in tkeir impingement
on spheres of energy regularly graduated as the stories in
the heavens.

In the foregoing, is presented a descriptive outline



THE CAUSE OF DAY AND NIGHT.

Cross-Sectional View of the Gigantic, Electro-Magnetic Battery, with the sun as
the Perpetual Pi vot and Pole. The Southern Hemisphere of the Cell.

merely, of the alchemico-organo- cosmic form. It is not
assumptive. Neither is it intended, in this synopsis, to
prove the Koreshan Universology ; the proofs and demonstra¬


UNIYERSOLOGY OF KORESHAN!TY. 15

tions of the System will be found in subsequent chapters of
this work. In this chapter, we merely state the facts.

Motion and Function.

We haYe already outlined the general principles of
form. We here insert this axiom: Form is a funda¬
mental property of existence; therefore, that which has nofoini
has no existence. Limitation is a property of form. The
■universe has existence; therefore it has form, hence it has
limitation. While the above axiom partakes somewhat
of the syllogistic method, it will be noticed that the objec¬
tionable feature of the syllogism is expunged; namely,
the premise is not an assumption.

Motion obtains in everything throughout the cosmic
form. Nothing exists without motion. The atoms of the
rock are constantly changing place with all other atoms.
There is circulation in the bar of steel. The angular crys¬
tal atoms of the diamond are in motion, and in their circu¬
lation and impingement they generate electro-magnetic
energy of the most delicate attenuation. All these circu¬
lations are regular and according to the fixed laws of order ;
therefore, while form exists according to definite principles of
form, the laws of motion conform to and determine the
principles and arrangement of organic relation and shape.

Cause of Motion.

The cause of alchemico-orgauic motion is remote and
proximate. Before defining the laws and principles of mo¬
tion, we will here briefly state that within the alchemico-
organic world (kosmos) there resides the anthropostic or cor¬
responding kosmos. These are two discrete spheres, yet
they are co-ordinately one. The alchemico-organic kosmos



i6


THIS CKEEURAR COSMOGONY.


(tlie physical world, the outline of which is given in
preceding pages) is in the form of man ; that is, in the egg
or shell—man in the state of un-incubation. The mass
of humanity is m the same state, with this modification ;
the alchemico-organic kosmos is in space, and is therefore



THE EARTH’S CONCAVE SURFACE.

The Laud Hemisphere.

persistent; while its antliropostic co-ordinate embodies prin¬
ciples which merely correspond to space, and are not
persistent in any one form. For instance: The seven
metallic laminae or plates comprising the general metallic



UNIVERSOROGY OF


rind of the macrocosmic shell, are perpetual. These are
the seven limitations of energies radiating from the stellar
nucleus primarily, and from the solar limbus as the envi¬
ronment of the stellar nucleus. They constitute the
deposit extremities of the seven energies, or the seven


“IN THE HOLLOW OF HIS HAND.’
The Heavens in the Earth.


alchemico-organic spirits of radiation. The geologic strata
through which the energies radiate, are the conditions
of chaos penetrated by the energies before the3^ reach their
extremities of metallic deposition and order.


i8


thk cialurar cosmogony.


The stellar nucleus is the center of space ; the metallic
laminae are at the circumference of space. Corresponden-
tially in humanity, the Lord Christ was the stellar center,
and his quality was the correspondent, in anthropostic
being, of space in the alcliemico-organic kosmos. In the
progress of time in its relation to the development and
progress of the race, the seven churches yet to be formu¬
lated into groups, are the anthropostic depositions corre¬
sponding to the seven metallic plates. The seven churches
are seven qualities of human characteristic, and correspond
to the seven planets, and therefore to the seven primary
substratic laminae of the cosmic crust.

By the remote cause of motion, is meant the cause pri¬
mary to the electro-magnetic energy created at and radiat¬
ing from the stellar nucleus, antithetically generated at
the circumference of the shell and converging to the nucleus.
The cellular kosmos, or the great cosmic egg previously
described, constitutes a great electro-magnetic battery
which is purely physical, or, as denominated in Koreslian
Science, alcliemico-organic. The sun and stars are localiza¬
tions of energy, merging into matter materialized through
voluminous and high-tension convergence. There is, at
these centers, a constant concretion and sublimation.
Knergy is constantly materializing, and the temporary
materialization is as rapidly changed to energy and is radi¬
ated. There is, therefore, a reciprocal interchange of sub¬
stance from center and circumference. The substances
energized at the nucleus are radiated to the circumference
and are there solidified. At the circumference, the surplus
solidification is reduced again to energy and flows to the
nucleus.

As there are seven metallic laminae in the prime circum¬


UNIVFRSOLOGY OF KORFSHANITY.


I 9


ference, so there are seven prime metallic kinds of energy
flowing toward and into the stellar nucleus. As these
influxes are of seven distinct characteristic vibrations, so
the nucleus has seven distinct degrees of energy, all meet¬
ing at one focal point in space, there turning back upon
themselves and flowing out or radiating to the circumference
and depositing at the environments of the kosmos. From
the mineral laminae, geologic strata, and water surface of
the universal rind, there is also a corresponding and co-or¬
dinate inflow or convergence to the stellar nucleus.

We find in this great universal battery, however, in its
electro-magnetic power, but the proximate cause of its
activity and form. Thus far there is no conscious and vol¬
untary force. Associated in co-operative being with this
alcliemico-organic kosmos is another half, endowed with
voluntary and involuntary consciousness, co-existent and
co-eternal. This voluntary and involuntary conscious
existence, the acme of whose life is in the human brain,
while prior and positive as to the momentum of this duplex
cosmic structure, is 011I3" coincident as to its perpetuity.
Xeitlier existed prior to the other in the timic aspect of
their co-ordination. The proximate cause, then, of all the
motions of the alcliemico-organic cosmos, is electro-mag¬
netic energy produced reciprocally at the center and circum¬
ference of the great alcliemico-organic battery, by the de¬
struction of matter; for let it be reiterated and remembered,
that energy is the result of the destruction of matter as
matter, and that matter is the result of the destruction of
energy as energy. In other words, an atom of matter is the
materialization of energy, and energy is the dematerializa¬
tion of matter. Both matter and energy are substance. It
will thus be seen that energy is not therefore a mere mode


20


21


THE CUPULAR COSMOGONY.

of motion or of vibration, but in reality is something in
motion.

The Remote Cause of Physical Motion.

We have hinted only, in a general way, at the proxi¬
mate cause of the activities in the alcliemico-organic kosmos.
The term remote cause , is here employed as being a cause
remote from the electro-magnetic forces upon which immedi¬
ately depend the form, motions, and phenomena of the
cosmic structure outlined in the foregoing. We are now to



SUMMER SOLSTICE, JUNE 21 .

Continuous Day at the North Pole, and Long Night within the Antarctic Circle.

consider the very central and primary cause of all motion.
This cause is mental. Not only is it mental, but it is
voluntary and of the will. There are two cosmic fields of
form and function belonging to discrete degrees, but yet
co-ordinate and interdependent. These are the alchemico-
organic and the organo-vital. The first and lower is that
which embraces the world as the earth, with the stars, sun,
planets, atmosphere, etc.; the other, the higher, is the


UNIVKRSOLOGY OF KORESHANITY.

vegetable, animal, human, angelic, and God kingdoms.
They are both co-eternal; neither existed before the other.
The organo-vital is prior as to quality, and prior also as to
its positive power to create and perpetuate.

The alchemico-organic field centers in the astral nucleus
as the positive pole of its electro-magnetic energyy the
organo-vital centers in the Divine man, the bright and
morning Star, whence originate the voluntary redemptive
will and creative power. The fiord Jesus is the representa¬
tive nucleus of the regenerated manhood. The fiord Christ



WINTER SOLSTICE, DEC. 21.

Continuous Day at the South Pole, and Long Night within the Arctic Circle.

at the time of his manifestation was the center of the
anthropostic universe, the source of being, the point and
origin of creative power.

The Cause of notion From the Biblical and Theological
Point of View.

‘ ‘He is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of every
creatnre: for by him were all things created that are in heaven, and
that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or


22


THU CUIJVUUAR COSMOGONY.


dominions, or principalities, or powers: all tilings were created by
him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things
consist; and he is the head of the body, the church.” Col. i: 15-18.

There can be but one question regarding the above
Seiiptural declaration. Is it true? It is concise, sweeping,
inclusive, conclusive, and lucid. Is the Eord Jesus, the
Christ of God, what he declares himself to be, and what
inspired men have declared him ? Is he the Son of God ?
And does he embody, as the primary offspring of Deity, all
the attributes of the parent? And more than this; in his
development from men as the Son of man, did he absorb
into himself the principles, attributes, life, form, and con¬
sciousness of the parent? We hold that the Tord, as was
declared of him, was the fulness of the Godhead bodily,—
Father, Sou, and Holy Spirit; and further, that when the
Tord was visibly manifest to the outer world, his inner and
spiritual 1W was visible to the spiritual world as the astro-
biological center of that sphere, and beside him there was
no God.

How could the Tord, being born an infant into the
natural world only at the beginning of the age, be the
cause of all things ? The Tord was not only the reincarnation
of Elijah (God the Tord), of Moses, of Abraham, of Noah,
of Enoch, and of Adam, in a direct line, but of all who died
looking to his coming as the Messiah and Son of God
in the indirect lines of reincarnation. He gathered into
himself the spirits of the past. He was also the pole of
influx from the heavenly worlds, and constituted the rolling
together of the heavens as a scroll. He was the Word
infolded and sealed. “Him hath God the Father sealed.’’

Twenty-foui thousand 3 T ears before the beginning of
the Christian age, conditions in the world were the same as
then. God was manifest in the flesh, and the Tord of the


UNIVKKSOPOGY OF KQRK 3 II ANIT Y,


23


Christian Era was identical with the Adamic personality in
the beginning of the 24,000-year cycle. The end and
beginning of every grand zodiacal cycle bring into visible
and personal manifestation the Son of God, who is Father,
Mother, and Son. He, the Tord, was the individual or
undivided man. He held within himself the bride, for “He
who hath the bride is the bridegroom.” He was the biune,
the two-in-one, the parent of himself and also of the sous of
God. As the parent of himself, High Father, he was
Abram; as the Father of the sons of God, he was and is
Abraham. He being the very primate cause of all things,
and possessing both the voluntary and involuntary power of
creative being, it is seen that the cause of all things resides
in voluntary mental energy, supplemented by the involuntary
reflex of voluntary mental activity.

The Precession of the Equinoxes as Related to the
Astro-biological Manifestations.

When the ordinary “scientist” alludes to the precession
of the equinoxes, he has reference merely to the sun’s pre-

cessional movement; but every planet passes through a cor¬
responding precession. The sun’s precessional year is 24,-
000 years long. The precessional years of the planets are
correspondingly longer, proportioned to the difference in
their ordinary years. These precessional years constitute
cycles of time that are definite arid recurrent, and propor¬
tionate to the great complex, solar, lunar, planetary, and
stellar precessions. The movements in the alehemico-
organic sphere have an astro-biological correspondence.
Tlie signs in the physical heavens mark definitely the man¬
ifestations which correspond to them in the astro-biologic
field. Every 24,000 years, there is a similar personal man-


m


n


SI



atmosphere and the free energies of space, enter the vortex
of vibration, which consumes the body. The consciousness
of the man entering thus into the whirlpool of organic dis-


26


27


TIIU CUUUUUAR cosmogony.

with the central and interior mind around which the outer
consciousness had wrapped itself. This interior mind con¬
stitutes the very central consciousness of Deity, the heart of
the anthro-biologic kosmos. Radiating from this afferent
absorption, the gravic spirit in its efferent distribution bap¬
tizes such minds as are prepared to receive the divine over- r,

shadowing, called the Spirit. Every overshadowing of the
primary seven successive baptisms proceeds directly, not
from an invisible “oversoul,” but from the tangible per¬
sonality. The Holy Ghost shed upon the world (the
church) in the beginning of the age, proceeded from the
visible Lord in his conversion from matter to spirit. If the
Lord had not been personal, there could not have obtained
the dissolution of liis body and its conversion to

|

Holy Spirit; and therefore the afflatus—the “oversoul” —
could not have obtained, But the vortical involution, the
anthropostiq took place in alcliemico-organic (physical)
space; therefore it involved the material elements not in¬
cluded in the organo.-vital structure, and the vibrations
were communicated to the elements and essences of the
alcliemico-organic kosmos, converging toward and into
the stellar nucleus of the alcliemico-organic world, and
radiating to its circumferences. It is thus that the con¬
scious mental nucleus of the anlhropostic, imparts moinen- I

turn to the activities of what has been denominated the ’

physical universe. The impulse ceases to be mental energy j

so soon as the influence of correlation has mutated the vi¬
bration of mental force to the vibration of alcliemico-organic ;

(physical) motion.

We do not employ the term vibration as it is usually
employed in common psychical or physical “science;” with
us, vibration signifies not merely motion imparted to atoms. !


UNIVURSOUOGY OF KORUSHANTTY.

or essences, but the dissolving of molecules and atoms, and
their conversion to energy in the various degrees, and vice
versa. It is thus observed that a reciprocal relation exists
between the anthro-biologic (organo-vital) and the alcliem¬
ico-organic -worlds, and that the electro-magnetic energies
active in the latter are the result of a continuous, primary,
voluntary mental energy generated in the human mind,
dependent on the material basis (brains); these two co¬
ordinate fields of operation being co-eternal.

Laws of Motion of Planetary Disci in the Shell or
Firmament of the Universe.

There are seven primary, movable, mercurial disci float¬
ing between the metallic plates or laminae. The momen¬
tum is imparted through the operation of the actinic radia¬
tions from the astral nucleus, projected through the solar
influence. These radiations penetrate the geologic, mineral,
and metallic strata. As the sun radiates its forces in the
form of a cone, the apex of which is at the solar center,
and the base at the metallic strata, the impression made
upon the strata is in the form of a circular area. There
is an impression of the alternate influence of caloric and cru-
osic energy, the one expansile, the other contractile. This
movement follows the rotation of solar motion, therefore
there is necessarily a peristaltic or vermicular motion im-f
parted to the metallic plates or lamina;.

The alternate action of the actinic radiations of calor-
ine and cruosiue produces discular vacui between the plates,
which are filled with mercurial amalgam. These act as
reflectors, throwing back into the heavens the forms of the
disci against the atmospheres, so that in looking toward the
heavens we behold these disci through the operation of the


28


THE CEELUTAR COSMOGONY.


laws of reflection, and are thus enabled to comprehend how
the Lord “spreadetli out the heavens * * * as a molten
looking-glass.”

Why is it Necessary to Know the Form of the
Universe ?

A knowledge of the structural form and function of
the alchemico-organic (physical) kosmos, is the key to our
knowledge of the principles which must govern the organi¬
zation of society in the culminating kingdom of righteous¬
ness. The importance of a knowledge of universal form
and function, as pertaining to the alchemico-organic kosmos,
will be admitted when the mind is sufficiently amplified to
comprehend the relationship of the alchemico-organic mac¬
rocosm to the orgauo-vital macrocosm (the Grand Man), as
pertaining to and comprising the universal mass of human
existence.

The individual (undivided) man (such a man was the
Lord) is the archetype of creation. What he was in the
least form, the alchemico-organic world is in its greatest
form; and what he was in that form, so also is the final
Theocratic kingdom in the earth, namely, in the form and
function of the man. Therefore, w T e discover that the true
interpretation of the alchemico-organic kosmos is the reve¬
lation of the mysteries of Deity; for as the outward and
most material structure is but the expressed thought of the
voluntary and involuntary mental cause producing it, so a
knowledge of this expressed and manifest language reveals
the history of human origin and destiny.


Optical Factors and illusions.

Positive Proofs of Koreshan Cosmogony Contrasted with the Assump¬
tions of the Old School.

JT IS ASSUMED by . those who profess to believe in and

advocate the Copernican system of astronomy, that the
earth is convex because it appears so from optical observa¬
tion. A person standing upon a tower and looking out in
every direction will see the vanishing point at an equal dis¬
tance, and the horizon (the limit of geolinear vision) de¬
scribes a circle around this center of observation. This fact
in appearance is taken as an assumption of the earth’s con¬
vexity, because it is claimed that nothing but a globe would
thus respond to and impress itself upon the organs of vis¬
ion. We maintain that an assumption predicated upon an
optical illusion, is not sufficient ground for the establish¬
ment of a rational conviction. If the earth were a perfectly
flat surface extended illimitably, an observation from a
tower looking out in every direction would assume, to the
eye, the appearance of a circular horizon, for the simple
reason that geolinear foreshortening would provide for a
anisliing point at a given distance from the observer, pro¬
portionate to the elevation of the point from which the
observation is taken.

If a person will stand upon a railroad track equidistant
between two rails, the rails will seem to approach each
other in the distance, the apparent contact, or vanishing
point, being proportioned to the space between the rails
and the height of observation. If they are five feet apart,
the vanishing point is less than if they were six or seven


30


3i


TUB CBBBUBAR COSMOGONY.

feet apart. Suppose we take a geolinear extense on the
surface of the earth as one rail, and an imaginary line
through the air as the other, placing the eye two and one
half feet from the earth’s surface. Now, the same law
obtains in looking parallel along this surface, as in looking
parallel to the rail and along its side. Making our observa¬
tion by the side of the rail, the vanishing point is reached
and the rail disappears, although extended in a straight



line far beyond the vanishing point. The line over which
observation is taken along the surface of the earth is the
geolinear exteuse; it corresponds to the rail, and disappears
by the same law; namely, that of foreshortening.

The Vanishing Ship’s Hull.

The phenomenon of the disappearance of a ship, hull
first, as it recedes from view, is caused by the same law of


O UT I CAB FACTORS AND IBBUSIONS.

foreshortening as that which governs the disappearance of
the rail, or causes the two rails to appear to approach each
other. If we should make calculations on the basis of the
appearance instead of on the basis of the fact that the rails
do not approach but only seem to, we necessarily draw false
conclusions. This is precisely what the astronomers do.
They conclude from appearances rather than from facts.
A balloon six or seven miles distant, appearing about the
size of a pin head, if it be sixty feet in diameter, occupies
as much space in the distance as when near the subjective
point of observation. The law by which the balloon
appears to diminish in size as it recedes from view, is the
same as that which produces geolinear forshortening, or
which makes the surface of the earth diminish longitudinally
as extending from the point of observation. This phenom¬
enon belongs to the organ of vision, and cannot be compre¬
hended only as we possess a correct knowledge of the laws
and phenomena of optics. Owing to this fact, the student
cannot comprehend the principles involved in the phenom¬
ena of optical appearances and illusion, without a thorough
comprehension of the principles and laws of optics.

In another part of this volume, the reader will find a
complete record of the mechanical apparatus and processes
by'which we have so absolutely demonstrated the concavity
of the earth as to overshadow the fallacious conclusions of
the mountebanks,—Copernicus, ct al, and their deluded fol¬
lowers. We place a brief study of optics before the reader,
merely to show wherein the fallacious conclusions of mod¬
ern, so called science, while conflicting with the discovered
and projected truth, are drawn not from facts but from
appearances.


3 2


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


The Laws of Visual Impression.

It might appear, as we proclaim the fact that a thor¬
ough knowledge of the Koreshan Cosmogony demands a
thorough knowledge of optics, that it is our purpose to set
forth a complete optical treatise preparatory to an under¬
standing of the Koreshan Cosmogony. A thorough knowl¬
edge of Koreslianity must necessarily be a question of
growth. A slight knowledge of the laws of optics will
enable the student to see the discrepancies of modern astron¬
omy, as predicated upon a misinterpretation of appearances.
What we behold through the organs of vision, depends
entirely upon the imprint of objectivities upon the retina of
the e} r e. What we see, is merely a picture placed upon the
lining coat of the eyeball, and thence carried through the
optic nerve, optic commissure, and optic tract, to that corti¬
cal area upon which the final function of vision depends.

We subjoin a diagram setting forth some of the correla¬
ted facts of vision. The reader’s attention is again called
to the explicit study of the effects of subjective impression,
or the imprint or picturing of the objective world upon the
retinal coat. See retinal coat in Diagram i, Plate i, with
the area bb as the film upon which the imprint is laid.
The picture upon the retina includes whatsoever is em¬
braced in theobtense between the two lines i, 2, 3, 4; aa is
the optical axis, d is the point of the appearance of the ship
when the hull vanishes, as it recedes from view, as ob¬
served from the subjective a. The dotted lines indicate
the appearance of the actual lines 1, 2, 3, 4, while d is the
apparent position of the ship observed from x (the sub¬
jective point), and c, the ship as it actually is, viewed from
its location in fact, not in appearance as at d. The per-


OPTlCAL FACTORS AND ILLUSIONS.


33


pendicular space 1,1, implants the picture fh ; the space
2, 2, implants the picture eg. It will be noticed that the
picture imprinted from 2, 2, at eg, is shorter than the one
imprinted from 1, 1, at fh , proportionately as the distance
from 1, 1, to 2, 2, in the objective. It follows that if a
picture is imprinted from 3, 3, at bb, the ratio of short¬
ening at bb will correspond to the imprints 1, 1 and 2, 2.
If lines were drawn from the points 4, 4 to the film bb ,
through the focus at B, the subtense of the angle from 4, 4
to B would be so acute as to obliterate the space at the
center of the film bb. The point of obliteration at the
film or retina, bb, corresponds to the vanishing point in the
objective at d. At d the hull of the ship disappears, be¬
cause there is no longer room for the picture upon the
'> retina.

The lower line 1, 2, 3, 4 is the geolinear extense; the
line upon the ground appearing at d, the vanishing point
and the horizon. The upper line may represent a cloud
covering the sky. The two points 4, 4, appear to join at d
because of the distal foreshortening, which it must be
remembered is merely the result of changes upon the retina,
effected by distance. Any object beyond the ship c, as seen
at d , will settle out of sight on the geolinear surface, pro-
j portionately to its distance beyond 4, 4. By comparing the

spaces ww with the spaces yy, it can readily be seen how f
the area of a given space appears to shorten, and narrows
itself upon the retinal coat. Now if we remove the upper
line r, 2, 3, 4 and open up the space above, an object at P
may imprint itself upon the retina; but an object at Q could
not be seen because it is below the ground surface, which,
though it might extend a thousand miles in a straight line,
can make no further imprint upon the retina because the


34


the ceeeular cosmogony.


KORESHAN GEODETIC SERVICE.


35


space between the lower line 4 and d is the obliterated space,
as effecting the retinal film.

We have presented some optical facts upon which
depend the appearances upon which rest the fallacies of the
Copernican system; facts, a want of the understanding of
which places the so called scientists in the catalogue of the
incompetents, which graces the contradictory systems of
astronomy that arise spontaneously, subserve their purpose,
and die the death of the fallacious in the various careers of
mental transformation, as the human mind gropes its way
in darkness.


Koreshan Geodetic Service.

Outline of Principles of Accurate Measurement of the Earth’s
Contour.

QEODESY is the application of mechanical and other
means for the purpose of determining measurements of
the earth’s surface, including not only that of its general
contour as to whether it is concave, flat, or convex, but also
of demonstrating the amount of curvation at any given
point and in any given direction.

The Copernican system of astronomy assumes that the
earth’s surface is convex, and upon this assumption the
fallacious system has been fabricated. No astronomer
has ever yet presented any proof of the Copernican system;
and one of the persistent efforts of the modern physicist
is to find some irrefragable proof of what every so called
astronomical scientist knows to be merely an assumption.


The Koreshan System of astronomy is in direct opposi¬
tion to the Copernican system, and unlike the Copernican
S3 ? stem it is founded, not upon an assumption, but rather
upon a premise so absolutely within the sphere of mechan¬
ical demonstration as to place it be5 7 ond and out of the
uncertainty of mere postulation, which w T e assert to be the
basis of so called, modern science.

Horizontal Rectilineation.

Heretofore, the common method of attempting the
determination of a straight horizontal line has been by the
use of the engineer’s level. There are a number of optical
factors not taken into consideration by the geodetic surveyor
and civil engineer, which render it impossible to extend a
horizontal rectiline by the aid of optical instruments. The
engineer’s level is an instrument used by the surveyor, and
includes a level and small telescope usually placed on the
top of a tripod. This is more especially employed for the
measurement of angles.

It is a fact not generally known, that it is impossible to
determine a horizontal rectiline with a leveling instrument,
or by the unaided eye, along the apex of successive heights of
a given elevation, or along a continuously extended surface.
The scientific reason for this impossibility resides in the
fact that in the determination of a horizontal or lateral rec¬
tiline, an impression made upon the retina of the eye by a
picture from one side of a visual direction must be counter¬
balanced by an equal picture on the opposite side, and the
geodetic engineer, not being acquainted with this law of
obtension in optics, extends a curved line while he believes
he is continuing a rectiline.

Two men of different heights cannot, while adjusting


36


THi; CDULUDAR COSMOGONY.


KORIvSHAN GhODRTlC SERVICE!.


37


tlie tripod to accommodate tlie difference, extend a line of
tlie same curvatiou. A civil engineer six feet tall—adjusting
his tripod to conform to his height—will make a curved line,
by the aid of his instrument, upward of a given curvatiou,
while the man five feet six inches tali, adjusting his tripod
to suit his height, will determine the curvation of a lesser
curve proportionably to .the difference in height of tlie
adjustment. The scientific cause for this discrepancy
resides in the optical illusion referred to above, namely, that
on one side of the visual line there are two factors
entering into the formation of a picture on the retina, as
follows: The perpendicular post producing the effect of
retiual impression, is shortened or elongated proportionably
to the distance of the object in perspective; and in addition
to this, the geolinear foreshortening (the line along the
earth’s surface) induces a corresponding effect upon the
retinal membrane. We confront, then, two kinds of fore¬
shortening—the one geolinear, the other perpendicular—in
all geodetic observations; and an optical phenomenon which
should be attributed to the principle of perspective fore¬
shortening is ignorantly attributed to curvation.

To obviate the introduction of optical science and the
necessity for the explanation of optical illusions and intri¬
cate phenomena incomprehensible to the ordinary mind, we
have instituted a simple mechanical device br^ which a recti-
line can be determined.. (See cut No. 2, Plate 1.)

Perpendicular standards are placed at points where
there is a quiet expanse of water large enough in area to
extend a line six, seven, or more miles. Across these
perpendicular standards the horizontal bar of the Recti-
lineator is adjusted. From this first adjustment the recti-
line is extended in both directions, until the line meets the


water at a distance proportionate to the height of the per¬
pendicular standard. By this operation we extend a chord
from the top of the uprights, at right angles to two points
at the surface of the water, as in cut No. 4, Plate 1. The
relation of the straight line to arc determines the concavity
of the earth as its true contour.

In diagram No. 3, Plate 1, we have an illustration of
the optical effect of an observation made with a leveling in¬
strument, which does not differ in principle from a corre¬
sponding observation made with the unaided eye. The
straight surface over which the line of observation extends,
is represented by AAA; bbb is the visual direction deviating
in a gradual curve away from the straight line aaa. The
mind is unconscious of this curvation of vision, hence the
curved line appears to be straight, as in the dotted line ccc,
while the straight line AAA appears to rise gradually as the
line ddd. The point 1 in the line of vision, appears to be
at the point 2. The vanishing point is where the extremity
of the visual line at 1 seems to meet the line aaa, represented
by the line ddd. Beyond this point, the straight line AAA,
appearing as the line ddd, seems to convex away from the
apparent line ddd. This optical phenomenon, v T hich is an
illusion, is taken as a demonstration of the convexity of the
r earth, and made tlie basis of the illusory system of Copernican

astrouom}'.

In the observation illustrated by diagram No. 3, Plate'
1, we prove that a straight surface curves away from the
line of vision, by the identical argument employed to prove
the convexity of the earth. We can prove that a straight
line bends four different ways, by the same argument used
to sustain the convex theor3 T of the earth.



3 8


the ceeeujlar cosmogony.


Geodetic Survey Revolutionized.

Revolution in astronomy implies revolution in all
things. Tlie great Swedish Seer said: “Every dispensation
proceeds as from an egg/” We reiterate, that a scientific
religion which must embrace scientific social organization, l

will proceed from an astronomical basis, the foundation of
which is the Cellular Cosmogonju Life develops in the
cell. The next * critical work for the Koreshan Unity, is
the demonstration to the world of the concavity of the sur¬
face of the earth. When the world is forced to accept this
proposition, all else follows readily.

In connection with the establishment of the fact, in the
public mind, of the concavity of the surface of the earth,
and next also in importance, is the determination of the
amplitude of the arc or the radius of its curvature. This
cannot be determined accurately by any process of surface
triangulation, because there are too many factors entering
into the process to insure accuracy.

The Rectiiineator, extending its line from any given
height of a prime vertical, approaches the normal curve of
the surface at a proportionate ratio, which may be deter¬
mined at any given point by two exact methods,—each act¬
ing as the verificator of the other. Place a perpendicular
at the requisite height, about six feet, more or less, and
place the initial section of the rectilineal bar, adjusted at
right angles. The points selected should be as nearly level
as possible. After the extension of the line three or four
miles, even less than this will answer, adjust the geodetic
level. This is an instrument having two graduated glass

* Written and published in The Foaming Sword, Nov., 1896, !

before the beginning of the Florida Geodetic Survey, in 1S97. )


KORESHAN GEODETIC SERVICE. 39

perpendiculars very minutely spaced, with microscopes
adjusted to the graduated side of the glass tubes. These
two perpendicular graduates are united by a connecting
tube twelve or fourteen feet long. (The tube and gradu¬
ates contain mercury.)

The amount of variation of the mercury in the gradu¬
ates, with the connecting tube arranged parallel with the
recti line of the section bars at any point, will indicate the
degree of curvature. The instrument must be perfect; this
accomplished, the determination of the radius of curvation
is most simple. This instrument may be verified by the
use of another instrument adjusted to the section bars with
a perpendicular rod, to which is adjusted a very slender
plumb-line. Across the bottom of the rod, which has a
fiat surface, is a minutely divided scale, to which is also
adjusted the microscope. The scale has a definite num¬
ber of divisions to the inch. This will determine tlie
amount of variation from the prime vertical; namely, the
first perpendicular. The deviation from the normal will
increase either from the prime vertical, as the line extends,
or toward it, according to the direction of curvation.

This method of mensuration determines both the direc¬
tion of the curve and the radius of curvature. Any por¬
tion of the surface of the earth can be a thousand-fold more
accurately surveyed by this method, than by any process
ever yet instituted. We know that the result will compel
the world to acknowledge the Koreshan System of
Cosmogony.



NEW GEODESY.


41


Part II.


The New Geodesy.

The Question of the Earth’s Shape Pivoted Upon a
Specific Proposition.


BY PBOF. U. G-. MOBEOW.


1 ■ ,^ le as t r o nom er Ibis to determine the figure of the earth on

winch lie lives and from which his observations are made.—Proctor
No accurate measurements can be obtained of the distance and
magnitude of the heavenly bodies, nor any exact determination of
i leir movements, without a true knowledge of the exact figure of the
eaith ; and hence is derived a powerful motive for ascertaining this
element with all possible precision.—Olmstead. &


S N THE promulgation of the Koreslian System of Astron¬
omy, the discussion of the figure of the earth is
revived ; in fact, the solution of the problem of the
earth’s shape constitutes the foundation of the Cellular
Cosmogony. It is obvious that in the construction of the
true system of astronomy, there should first be ascertained
what are the fundamental principles of the relation of the
earth to the orbs and stars above us ; some well-established
basic fact directly related to the configuration of the earth’s
surface, must be taken as a premise. Once such a premise
is demonstrated mathematically, geometrically, and mechan¬
ically, and the figure of the earth determined, a scientific
foundation is laid for a system of the true relations of uni¬
versal fact and phenomena. In this, the methods pursued
in Koreshan Science, and the conclusions reached there¬
from are revolutionary.


It is well known to those familiar with the history of
astronomy, that the present popular system was not devel¬
oped from a series of demonstrated premises. The conclu¬
sion that the earth is a convex body, was reached through

> the illusion of the sense of vision ; the heavens were con¬
ceived to be a concave, star-strewn sphere because they
appear to be so, to which every part of the earth was
exposed ; and the question seemed to be settled when the
earth was circumnavigated. But there were no direct dem¬
onstrations of the earth’s shape, nor definite calculations of
the extent of its surface. Attempts at geodetic surveys
were few and wholly inadequate to determine the form and
dimension of the earth; measurements of meridian arcs were

j not made with the view to ascertaining the true configu¬

ration of the eaith s surface, but for geographical purposes,
and vveie attempted upon the assumed pvemise -—the precon¬
ceived idea that the surface upon which we live is convex.
Centuries elapsed between the time of the conception of the
idea of the convexity of the earth and any endeavor to
prov e it so , and it was not until the present century that
any endeavor was made to demonstrate the mobility of the
earth.

> A False Premise Leads to Absurd Conclusions.

From the time of its inception, the theory of the earth’s
convexity has directed the course of scientific investigation,
rather than to have been supported by specific demonstra¬
tion. It has been the origin of fallacious theories of light,
heat, and motion; of erroneous conceptions of the laws of
physics, optics, and natural philosophy, and has led to a
false foundation for modern geodetic operations and survey.
All the scientific instruments of today employed in astro-


42


43


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.

nomical and geodetic research, are constructed to conform
to the earth’s assumed convexity, and to the idea conceived
centuries ago, that a ray of light is rectilinear and vision
virtually illimitable. These instruments, the methods of
use of which are the result of a false premise, are now
employed in the endeavor to verif3 T and prove the premise
upon which their construction has depended!

Being evolved from hypotheses, the popular system can
only assume its probability, and must acknowledge its
uncertainty. It would be foolish in the development of a
new system of science, to employ the methods which we
now see have resulted in a scientific jargon. In presenting
to the world the Koreshan System of Astronomy, we are not
in ignorance oi the conditions which we confront; we are
familiar with all the phenomena that are claimed to be cor¬
roborative of the prevailing theory; and it is only by reason
of the discovery of those facts, principles, and laws which
demonstrate the true form of the earth, and which lead to a
correct interpretation of what we see, that the Koreslian
Scientist is warranted in the endeavor to revolutionize the
scientific world.

We might quibble for a century about the relative
merits of the Koreslian and Copernican s}\stems of astronomy,
without reaping any practical benefits or reaching a common
ground of agreement; for between the two systems there is
no harmony. The question must be settled by actual tests
and experiments; and such tests must be simple, absolute,
and devoid of complications; they must not embrace princi¬
ples that are subject to dispute. It is only when such dem¬
onstrations are made and such tests applied, that a premise
of conclusion can be found which will be in harmony with
all other facts ascertained by equally rigorous methods.


NEW 7 GEODESY.

The Fairness of Our Propositions.

We believe we are placing ourselves in an attitude of
fairness—as fairly as we know how to be. Our only object
in the promulgation of the Koreshan System of Science and
? Cult, is to have others share in the appreciation and bene¬

fits of such principles, facts, and laws as have been discov¬
ered by the illustrious Founder of the Koreshan System, in
advance of others who are spending their lives in the
endeavor to develop the great field of science.

Above all others, those who have come to realize the
existence of difficulties and problems unsolved in the popu¬
lar systems, should be the ones most desirous to have them
solved; but w r e are candid when we say that we believe that

! continuing along the usual lines of research will not lead to

a solution of the great questions before us. We therefore
offer to the world a new method of determination of the
contour of the earth. If we are right, we can solve the
difficulties which now confront the scientific world; if we
are wrong, then we must leave the problems as we first found
them—still unsolved.

It is the object of our efforts at present to invite the
attention of the scientific men of the world—astronomers,
l mathematicians, surveyors, and engineers, to the Cosmo-

gonical System of Koreshan Science—not merely to the

stud> 7 of the system from our presentation, but from actual
test of its premises; for to the usual scientific mind, our
astronomical system, though a marvel of completeness, has
the appearance of absurdity, because it occupies the position
of antithesis to all modern concepts.

The first objection usually urged against the Cellular
Cosmogony, is the apparent absurdity of endeavoring to



tion and incurvation of liglit and vision modify results of
survey; and, moreover, the principles and laws of perspec¬
tive not taken into account in field work,—nor in any of
the propositions and experiments whereby' the size of the
earth is thought to be indicated, the laws of which the
physicists have not as yet clearly defined—are factors which,
if applied, would lead to different conclusions from those
arrived at from the usual methods of procedure. It is
because of this that we insist upon the emplo}uiient of
newly-discovered means of applying simple and absolute
tests of the contour of the earth’s surface.

Is the True Level, Extended as a,ti Air=Line, Tangent or
Convergent to the Water’s Surface ?

It is obvious that if the earth were convex, a horizon¬
tal line, representing the true level at any given point on
the water’s surface at right angles to the perpendicular,
extended as an avn-line , could never come in contact with


NEW GEODESY.


45


the suface, but would be tangent to it. This is self-evident.
The relations of the perpendicular, the arc, and the tan¬
gent are shown in the accompanying diagram. Let XY
represent the arc of convexity io miles in length. A, a
perpendicular, the vertical point of which is 6 feet from the
surface; BC, a horizontal straight-edge 15 feet in length,
and D, the extension of the horizontal line BC. It is clear
that the distance from the extended horizontal to the
water’s surface would increase continually at the rate of 8
inches per mile, or the square of the distance in miles multi¬
plied by 8 inches. BF is a line connecting the tangent and
the water at a distance of 3 miles, while PQ is a parallel



tangent beginning at the apex of the arc. In 3 miles the
declination of the water’s surface from PQ is 72 inches, or
6 feet; therefore, the length of the line BF is the amount
of the declination, plus the distance from BD to PQ, which
equals 12 feet. If the air-line be extended in the opposite
direction the result is the same.

If the earth curvates concavely at the rate of 8 inches
per mile, it is evident that the air-line would be convergent
to the water, as represented in the diagram on the follow¬
ing page. Let XY represent the concave arc 10 miles in
length. A, a perpendicular support, the top of which is 6
feet above the water; BC, a horizontal straight-edge 15 feet
in length, and D, the extension of the horizontal line BC.


46


THE CEELT'EAR COSMOGONY.


■*"" ^dpieseuts tiie point where the extended, air-line comes
in contact with tlie water s surface. The distance along
the line of the surface, from the upright support to the con¬
tact point, is about 3 miles. The cosine of the air-line
completes the chord, the extremities of which converge to
tin. v atei equidistant from the perpendicular, being oblicjue
to the horizontals at points of contact.

Even* surveyor and engineer will admit that the
above is a fair statement of the relations that would exist
between the perpendicular, the air-line, and tlie curvating
sin face, if the earth were convex ; tlie principles and laws
of hydrostatics would make it inevitable. Indeed, all



standard works on surveying and leveling insist that such
would be the necessary consequences, as the following from
the Encyclopaedia Britannica:

A line drawn at right angles, crossing the plumb-line (or verti-
ca, ! and touching the earth’s surface, is a true level only in
that particular spot; but tl the line which crosses the plumb be
continued for any considerable length, it will rise above the surface
and the apparent level will be above the true one.

It is equally ti uc that if the earth is concave , the exten¬
sion of tlie idle level at any point on the water’s surface,
as an absolute air-liue, would inevitably and invariably ter¬
minate as a line converging with the water’s surface; and
hence if such a line be extended, and it should converge
to the stuface of the water, it would be an absolute demon-


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS.


47


stration of the earth’s concavity. This, plainly stated, is
the premise of the Koreshan System—it is the premise
upon which it will stand against all opposition!

If the scientific men today are as willing to test the
truth of our propositions as we are to meet them in demon¬
stration of o^r premise, no difficulty whatever will be experi¬
enced in speedily settling the question. We hereby extend to
them the opportunity of demonstrating the earth’s convexity
and to destroy our premises, or to establish the basis of the
Koreshan Cosmogony and thus overthrow all the conclusions
of modern science. In this we are not clamoring for dispute,
but inviting an impartial test of the facts.

There is not another issue before the rvorld today, in
which the principles can be so specifically stated, focalized,
and pivoted upon one point of test, nor so susceptible of
absolute decision, as this one concerning the concavity of
the earth; because the contour of the w r ater’s surface cannot
be changed, and no method of solving the question is so
obviously certain as the one formulated in the Koreshan
System, and now proposed to the world.

Modern Geodetic Operations.

The evidence that the earth is round (convex) is but cumulative
and circumstantial; scores of phenomena ask separately and inde¬
pendently, What other explanation can be imagined except the sphe¬
ricity (convexity) of the earth?—Prof. De Morgan, Secretary English
Royal Astronomical Society.

'yHAT the earth is convex, there has never been any direct
and positive evidence offered; the most eminent astrono¬
mers are unable to place the matter within the range of cer¬
tainty. It seems that they should have settled this question
long ago, but the direct demonstrations have not been forth-



48


'THE CEERUEAR COSMOGONY.


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS.


49


coming; many things pertaining to the science of geodesy
are baffling the skill of the modern scientific mind. Some
missing link needs to be supplied; some absolute fact needs
to be introduced into the field of geodetic operations before
the problem is actually, practically, and absolutely solved.

We maintain that the scientific world today has not put
forth a single effort, or at least has not succeeded in making
any satisfactory demonstration of the earth’s true form.
The Ivoreshan System alone lias been able to reduce the
question of the earth’s shape to a specific and pivotal demon¬
stration. Involving the true principles of universal form, it
ls able to utlllze evei T known fact of cosmic phenomena as
corroborative of the earth’s concavity. It rejects no truth-
endeavors to set aside no well-established and demonstrated
fact, and does not fear the most crucial tests of its premise.

The Usual Facts and Phenomena Used in Modern
Astronomy Prove the Rotundity, But Not the
Convexity of the Earth.

It lias been the effort of the men engaged in the scien¬
tific field for the past century, to reduce the “cumulative
and circumstantial evidence’ ’ of the earth’s convexity to
. some systematic arrangement, rather than to ascertain defi-
nitely and exactly the contour of the earth. The popular
system was developed gradually, but, Proctor says, “not in
any systematic or orderly sequence.’’ The disorderly develop-
ment of the system has necessarily resulted in the perversion
of the true principles, and consequently the hypotheses and
conclusions held forth in the modern scientific world are the
exact reverse of the true system. For this reason all of the '
usuai facts presented in favor of the earth’s rotundity really
d° n °l P r °ve that we live oil its exterior surface, but indicate,


when considered for what they are really worth to the popu¬
lar system, nothing but the fact that the earth is round.
After that conclusion is reached, there remains the charac-
ter of that rotundity" to be considered, and the direction of
such curvature to be definitely ascertained. The Koreshan
System of Cosmogony finds a true place for all the facts
and arguments pointing to the earth’s sphericity, applying
the same to the concavity" instead of the convexity of the
earth. The fact that the earth is proved be a sphere by
“cumulative and circumstantial evidence, ’ ’ does not involve
the assumption that we live on the outside of that sphere.
The size of the earth computed from spherical angles and
meridian arcs would be the same if considered from the
standpoint of the earth’s concavitjy the evidences of spher¬
ical excess find their true application in the hollow globe,
and the spherical triangles in geodetic operations fulfil their
geometric functions in the concave sphere.

In the field of geodetic operations, the assumption that
the earth is convex leads to a misapplication of the facts and
figures involved. The most accurate work in the line of
survey is made with the view to ascertaining, not whether
the earth is convex or concave, but whether the polar diame¬
ter is greater or less than the equatorial; geodesists endeavor
to ascertain, not the direction of the curve of meridian arcs,
but the ratio of their curvature from stellar altitudes and
measurements of arcs, with the view to finding whether the
earth is an oblate or a prolate spheroid.

3A/ e are not attempting to ignore the facts and measure-
ments obtained in this line of field work and coast survey,
by painstaking men with accurate instruments; but endeav-
oring to have them substitute in the stead of assumption, a
basis of absolute facts; so that instead of first measuring



5° the ceeeuear cosmogony.

meridian arcs and deducing a ratio of curvation, they would
first ascertain the direction of such curvature, and then pro¬
ceed with the work of determining whether or not the exten¬
sion of that curvature constitutes a circle or an ellipsoid;
they would then be able to determine whether the earth is
flattened or extended at the poles.

Horizontal Tangents From the Standpoint
of the Surveyor.

In all work of survey and geodetic operations (save in
geodetic measurements with compensation rods), visual lines
are employed; and from the assumption that visual lines are
straight (modified only by refraction), they invariably con¬
clude that the earth curvates downward from the tangent
visual line. We insist that it would be the wiser plan to
first determine absolutely which way the earth curves, and
from that tangible basis, determine the course or direction
of the line of vision. The earth’s surface is tangible , and
can be tested; the lines of vision are intangible, and the
direction and ratio of their curvation cannot be determined
without an absolute demonstration of the earth’s contour,
from which the visual lines are divergent and tangent.

The geodetic surveyor levels his instrument, and reads
a point on the signal staff at a distance of three miles; this
point has an altitude in excess of the altitude of the cross¬
hair; he therefore concludes that the line of sight is straight,
and that the surface of the earth curvates downward from
the visual line. If he knew absolutely that the visual line
approximated a straight line, then it would be conclusive
that the earth curvates downward from the tangent; but a
critical analysis of this fact only proves that a divergency
exists between the visual line and the surface of the earth


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS. ST

or water. If the earth were known to be convex, we could
safely conclude that the apparent tangent was straight or
nearly so; but we should never use the assumption that the
visual line is rectilinear as proof of the theory of convexity
of the earth.

W e endeai-or to represent this in the accompanying dia¬
gram. Let XY represent the water’s surface; T, the "engi¬
neer’s level, and A, the signal staff, at a distance of three
miles, and P the point read on the staff over the cross-hair
of the instrument. Now the excess of the altitude of P
over T amounts, not to 8 inches, but only 5 inches to the
mile, therefore, to make up for the calculated convexity,



refraction, amounting to about 3 inches per mile must lie
allowed. For this reason we have represented the visual
line 1 NP, in the diagram, as curved slightly downward,
while the line Tup would be, not the direction of the line of
\ision, but the direction of the supposed horizontal tangent
running as a right line from T, in the direction in which P
v T ould appear to be, ending at p. From the above, the size
of the eaith is thought to be indicated. Two assumptions
are factors in the usual calculation of the earth’s size; first,
that the visual rays are straight, and second, that the earth
is convex; so that the integral calculus gives a quantity
which is really, when all the facts are considered, applicable
to the interior instead of the exterior surface of the sphere.


52


the; ceeeuear cosmogony.


The one fact manifest in such observations is, that the
lines of vision and the water’s surface are divergent to the
extent of five inches per mile; it does not indicate the direc¬
tion of vision as right lines, nor does it prove the theory of
convexity.

Horizontal Tangents in the Concave Earth.

Assumption should never have any weight against a
fact; facts are the scales in which assumptions and hypoth¬
eses are weighed and often found wanting. . If we had no



absolute proof of the concavity of the water’s surface, we
would be pitting one assumption against another in our
endeavor to establish a new system of Cosmogony. Tet the
intangible visual lines be made to conform to the earth’s
real contour, within the known ratio of divergence.

When this is done, we have that which is represented
in the above diagram. XY represents the water’s surface;
T, the geodetic leveling instrument; A, signal staff, and P,
the point read over the cross-hair. The critical mind will
be able to see that if the earth is concave, the fact of the
divergence of the visual lines from the earth would positively
indicate the curvation of the visual lines , not slightly down¬
ward from a horizontal, but the curvation upward more


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS.


53


rapidly than the ratio of the earth’s curvature; and the differ¬
ence of direction of the curvating visual lines and the curvi¬
linear surface of the water being 5 inches per mile, would
place the ratio of the curvilineating visual lines that much
in excess of the earth’s curvation concavely, from which it
is conclusive that the visual lines curvate upward at a ratio
of about 13 inches per mile, not from the earth’s surface, but
from an external tangent be at right angles to the perpen¬
dicular at T. The lines of vision so curvating, by virtue of
the principles of curvilineation and of perspective foreshort¬
ening, the point P read on the signal staff, would appear to
be in the direction of T np, a line parallel with the external
tangent be , and the water’s surface would appear to be
below the point read to the extent of the altitude of the
engineer’s level, plus the amount of divergence; in other
words, the point P on the staff, would be seen at p , appear¬
ing to be as far below its true position as the visual line is
curved vertically. The visual line is the ‘ ‘horizontal tan¬
gent’ ’ in the concave earth.

Appearances the Basis of Usual Geodetic Calculations.

In this way, certain observed phenomena seem to indi¬
cate that the earth is convex. In survey, lines and angles
are taken into consideration and conclusions reached there¬
from, the main factors in the conclusions being something
assumed and not demonstrated; and thus a number of
things are placed in the category of “proofs” that the
earth is convex, and the whole considered as “cumulative
and circumstantial.” What other explanation can be
imagined except the convexity ? The explanation does not
need to be imagined, but demonstrated. In the usual cal¬
culations of the size of the earth, where visual lines and


54


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.


angles are factors in the calculation, an assumed quantity
enters into the problem and produces erroneous deduc¬
tions; the missing link is needed to bridge over the diffi¬
culty. It has not occurred to the leaders of scientific
thought—they have not even imagined—that practically
the same results as to calculation of the earth’s size would
be obtained if considered from the standpoint of the earth’s
concavity. The difference between the usual and the
Koreshan Geodesy is, that the Koreshan System supplies



a specific premise of geodetic measurements, the conclu¬
sions from which must be absolute; and when the specific
premise is restored, the principles of the true geometry
will be found in the cosmic form.

If we take for instance, the usual method of calculating
the earth’s magnitude, and analyze its chief points, essential
factors will be found to be entirely overlooked and fallacious
ones substituted, the deception being not in the magnitude,
but in the direction of curvature and the character of the
surface on which we live. The instance is that of the
height of a mountain (Fig. i, in the above diagram),
and the distance at which its top is visible at sea over the


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS.


55


horizon, wdiich is supposed to furnish not only a basis of
computation of the magnitude of the earth, but also a
proof of convexity.

Tet DBC be the circumference of the earth; A, the top
of the mountain; B, the farthest point on the circle from
which the mountain may be seen. Then, AB is tangent to
the circle at B; AB is the secant, and AC the external seg¬
ment. Therefore, Geom. 333,

AB 2 AB 2

AC : AB : : AB : AD =-\ CD=-AC-

AC AC

From this it is determined that if the mountain be 2 miles
in height, and is seen at a distance of 126 miles, the value
of CD, expressed mathematically, would be 7,936 miles.

The diagram may be studied further with profit, with
some principles in mind—those of perspective foreshortening
and visual curvilineation. Does it not seem that in the
acceptance of this appearance as indicative of the shape of
the earth, that the direction of the earth’s curvature and
the ratio of foreshortening and visual curvilineation should
be considered as essential factors in the solution of the
problem? Suppose that these factors compensate for the
calculated convexity, the computation of the earth’s mag¬
nitude would be practically the same, if taken upon the
basis of the concavity. We maintain that the above cal¬
culation does not indicate that the earth is convex. Definite
knowledge of which way the earth curves must be made the
prime factor in all such calculations; the concavity of the
earth furnishes a basis for absolute calculation.

For comparison, we present Fig. 2 in the same cut,
showing that if the earth be acknowledged to be concave,
the geometrical relations would be changed but little from


56


THE) celturar cosmogony.


those in Fig. i, and the results of the calculation are
practically the same. B is the point of observation, and
BA the curvilineating visual line diverging from the surface
XY. The top of the mountain would appear to be seen at
a, as far below its real place as the visual line has curvated
in the vertical direction; and the earth would appear to
follow the direction of the dotted segment or arc of circle
beneath.

The Cross-Hair and the Vanishing Point.

There can be no direct visual line from the engineer’s
level to distant objects, for the reason that the “line”
extending.from the eye to the vanishing point of an object,
must embrace a dimension at the vanishing point, equal to
the diameter of the object vanished. Suppose a balloon



ioo feet in diameter recedes horizontally into space, to almost
its vanishing point; it w T ould be a mere speck in the sky.
Tet BC, in the above diagram, represent the diameter
of the balloon, and D the speck or vanishing point. Adjust
the engineer’s level T, so that the cross-hair will just
cover the point. To what part of the balloon is the visual
axis of the instrument pointing ?

Suppose that there could be extended from A to the
balloon, a thread so that its apparent diameter shall be the
same throughout the distance; its diameter would have to
increase in proportion to the distance, until at the place


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS.


57


where the balloon appears to be a point, the thread would
be ioo feet in diameter; which diameter is represented by be.
At b, place an electric light; now direct the instrument to
the point of light; the space between b and c appears con¬
tracted to a point, and consequently the point of light would
- appear to be at d.

Ignoring the important factor of perspective, and as¬
suming, as does the surveyor, that the visual line is a
direct line, measure the distance from b to d; it is 50 feet,
and the light appears to be at d. Shall we then conclude
that d is 50 feet below where the light appears to be ? Shall
we conclude that the longitudinal axis of the thread cur-
vates downward from the visual line extending to b ?

Remove the thread, and the “visual line’ ’ at the vanish¬
ing point of 100 feet embraces the dimension of 100 feet;
but it appears to be contracted to a point. Ret efg be a
hill 60 feet in height, 50 feet of which are within that space
contracted to a hair-line; 10 feet of it would still be visible,
but the space below that is vanished, and the top of the
mountain would be seen at n\ shall we then conclude that
the base of the hill is at op, and that the surface on which
it rests has curvated downward from the line Ad ? This
is precisely the argument used by the surveyor to proye that
the earth is convex, curvating away from the “visual line!”

Modern Science has been Unable to Discover and Apply
the fleans of Demonstration of the Earth’s Shape.

From the above consideration, it will be seen that the
“proofs” usually offered in favor of the earth’s rotundity
do not reach the point of absolute evidence; they do not
demonstrate absolutely whether they are applicable to the
exterior or to the interior surface of an earth, 8,000 miles


58 THU ceeeuear cosmogony.

in diameter. It seems strange that the modern, so called
scientists should have so long failed to find some means of
ascertaining absolutely, the earth’s true form; it seems
never to have occurred to them that the absolute test is to
be found in the extension, as a direct or air-line , of the
horizontal from the vertical point of a given perpendicular,
instead of the visual line, subject to curvilineation. The
latter has played havoc with modern scientific investiga¬
tion and geodetic survey; the former is absolute, and would
long ago have decided the great issue had it been applied
by them. Why has not the ingenuity of the nineteenth
century devised some means to test the surface of the water
in equilibration, by other means than the visual lines?
Something has conspired to prevent them, and for this
reason they have not been able to do so.

The fact that in the Koreshan System, not only are the
principles of such a demonstration discovered,—not only
is the entire question reduced to a specific proposition and
to a pivotal point and fact of demonstration, but also the
invention of a scientific apparatus to enable us to make such
absolute demonstration, is evidence that something has
conspired to render us able to do that which the boasted
scientific world has not done , and has not been able to do.
It evinces the fact that Koresh, the Founder of the marvel¬
ous System of Koreshanity, is promulgating the science of
cosmic form and function; and it bespeaks the success of the
Koreshan System in not only revolutionizing the present
methods of geodetic survey, operations, and experiments,
and of general scientific investigation, but also in overthrow¬
ing every conclusion of modern science !

There is no deceit in the Koreshan System; there is no
reason why there should be. It invites investigation and


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS. 59

test; it openly proclaims to the world, not only its premise,
but also the discovery of absolute measures whereby its
premise may be tested. It comes laying the foundation
for the science of future ages, and every stone in its founda¬
tion must be as solid as the everlasting hills, and its funda¬
mental principles as eternal as the contour of the earth. No
other system has made such bold claims; no other system
has been able to locate its pivot, and no other system fear¬
lessly asks the scientific world to test its truth by ascertain¬
ing, by absolute measures, what is the testimony concern¬
ing the earth’s contour.

Limit of Lateral Vision in Concave Earth.

One of the most common objections advanced by those
giving the Koreshan Cosmogony a casual glance is, that if
the earth be concave, why can we not see the actual rise of
the earth beyond and upward from the horizon, from the
position of the observer ? It appears to such that there
should be no horizon at all in fact, but a continued slope
upward, outward, and onward; that vessels could not dis¬
appear on a concave earth, and that Chicago should be
visible from St. Louis. Of course, such objections are
urged without consideration of the fundamental facts and
laws of vision and principles of perspective, and moreover,
without an investigation of the Koreshan System. We
shall endeavor not to introduce abstruse illustrations in the
removal of this objection, but to use some of the simplest
illustrations, the force and clearness of the application of
which w T e trust wall be realized by those considering the
fadts and arguments.

It is a fadt patent to all, that objedts of a given size,
receding in the distance, appear to grow smaller and smaller


60 THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.

until they entirely disappear. They do not in fadt diminish;
the apparent diminution in size is due to the operation of
certain visual laws in the implantation of the impression of
the objedts upon the retina of the eye. It is a fact well
known to those who have had to do with parallel lines, or
who have observed a straight reach of railway tracks, that
there is an apparent convergence in the distance. When
the mind perceives an object which appears to be small, it is
either actually small in size, or it is distant; if large, it is
either actually large or near. The apparent size of an ob¬
ject, therefore, depends upon the visual angle which the ob¬
ject subtends. We may illustrate this principle by the
following diagram: A represents the eye; BC an arrow 12



inches in length, at a given distance from the eye; and be,
its impression upon the retina of the eye; DE, the same
arrow removed to twice the distance from the eye, and de,
the length of the impression upon the retina; P is the pupil
where the rays cross and focalize. Eet it be noticed here
that de is just one half the length of the image be, and the
angle P be therefore, is proportionally larger than the angle
P de. The same arrow could be removed so far from the
eye as to be entirely invisible. The smallest angle under
which an object can be .seen is about one sixtieth part of
one degree, or one minute (i') of space, so that when an ob¬
ject is removed to a distance which equals 3,000 times its


MODERN GEODETIC OPERATIONS. 61

diameter, it will subtend an angle no larger than one minute
(P) of a degree, and therefore, will be visible as a point;
this is the vanishing point.

For the sake of illustration, let us suppose that a bal¬
loon roo feet in diameter recedes until it appears to be a
mere point. We know that it has not actually been reduced
to a point. The vanishing point of the balloon necessarily
embraces a dimension of ioo feet. If we extend a thread
to the balloon so that it shall have apparently the same
diameter throughout the distance, its diameter will have to
be increased proportionably to the distance, so that when
the balloon is reached the thread would have to be ioo feet
in diameter. When the eye is applied to the thread, its sides,
although curvating outward more and more like a trumpet,
appear absolutely parallel and the sides straight. The upper
or vertical point of the thread at the vanishing point of ioo
feet, would really be higher than it appears to be—being 50
feet higher than the level of the eye, because the whole
dimension of 100 feet has been reduced to a point. . If the
thread be extended in the opposite direction, the result is
the same; and if 10,000 threads be extended radially from
the eye, so that the longitudinal axis of each thread would
be in the same plane, they would be placed so closely and
coinpadtly as to form a surface. The upper surface of each
thread at the flaring end would constitute a part of a rim,
the limit of the slope upward in every direction from the
center, while the appearance would be as if the eye were
looking out upon a flat plane. The fact would be that the
upper surface of the threads would constitute a basin, with
the eye at the bottom of a concavity 50 feet deep !

Eet us inquire if a rise of 8 inches of the surface of the
earth would be perceptible to the eye. Suppose the eye


62


the: CEEEURAR cosmogony.

looks out upon a flat plane, whose radii are one mile in
length. Let the eye be placed near the surface of the plane,
after placing at a distance of one mile, an object having a
vertical dimension of 8 inches. The object would be invis¬
ible, because an object of that dimension is not sufficient to
subtend an angle of one minute (T) of a degree—it is not of
sufficient size to fill the area of vertical perspective for one
mile. The distance at which an object 8 inches in diameter
would become invisible is 8X3,000=24,000 inches, or 2,000
feet, less than one half a mile. A rise of 8 inches of solid
ground or a concavity of 8 inches for an area of one mile
radius, would not be perceptible to the unaided eye.

If the eye be elevated 8 inches above such a concavity,
the horizon will appear to rise 8 inches. Will now the
second mile, curvating four times as much as the first mile,
be apparent to the eye at an altitude of 8 inches ? The
curvature upward of the earth in two miles is 32 inches—2
feet in excess of the curvature for the first mile. The
second mile would actually rise 2 feet higher than the eye,
which has an altitude of 8 inches above the surface. Is
the space of 2 feet at a distance of 2 miles, sufficient to sub¬
tend an angle of more than one minute (1') of a degree?
2X3,000=6,000 feet; an object embracing 2 feet vertical
dimension, would become invisible at a distance of 6,000
feet. The 2 feet vertical rise of the earth in 10,560 feet or 2
miles, would be imperceptible to the eye; and so on, for the
third mile, with similar results.

Let the eye be supposed to look out over a concave area
whose radii would be 6 miles, as represented in Diagram 5,
Plate 2. XY represents the concave surface; S, the begin¬
ning of the arc; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, points on the earth’s sur¬
face one mile apart. The eye at A is situated 24 feet above


modern geodetic operations. 63

the surface, with the horizon at a distance of 6 miles. The
first mile, the definite length of which lies between S and 1,
would make a picture upon the retina of a definite length,
the second mile would make a shorter picture, be; the
third mile, a still shorter picture, cd, ana so on, until the
last mile subtends an angle too minute to be perceived by
the unaided vision; at the distance of 6 miles, the vertical
and geolinear foreshortenings have operated so harmoniously
as to form the horizon point practically on a level with the
eye; beyond which the concave surface appears to drop out
of sight. The earth is not sufficiently concave—that is,
the ratio of concavity is not equal to the vertical perspective,
so as to cause a continuous view outward and upward on the
concave “slope.” What must be the ratio of concavity to
just fill the area of vertical perspective so that each mile will
subtend an angle sufficiently large to be impressed upon the
retina? If the earth were less than one half its present
diameter, curvating concavely as rapidly as 13 inches per
mile, the concavity would not be perceptible; and the hori¬
zon, although exactly 011 a level with the eye, would be so
far distant as to destroy the appearance of a clear-cut line.
The earth curvates concavely at the ratio of about 8 inches
to the mile; it therefore lacks 5 inches to the mile of filling
up the perspective dimensions; so that a view upon the con¬
cave surface curvating 8 inches to the mile, produces that
effect upon the eye which it is supposed would be produced
upon a convex earth, curvating about 5 inches (corrected
for greatest refraction) to the mile—a distinct horizon, the
distance to which is determined by the altitude of the eye
of the observer above the surface at place of observation.
Beyond the horizon, the surface seems to drop out of
sight or curvate downward; and the distinct horizon appears
a little below the actual level at point of observation.



Series of Experiments Conducted on the Water’s
Surface by the Koreshan Geodetic Staff.

|jPON the exterior surface of a globe 25,000 miles in cir¬
cumference, there would be a definite ratio and
amount of curvation. Every part of its surface would be
convex—the arc of a circle; from the apex or summit of any
such arc there would exist a curvature of 8 inches for the
first mile, and at the end of the second mile a declination of
32 inches; while for the third mile, a fall of 72 inches or six
teet; and in six miles, there would be a declination or cur¬
vation downward from a •horizontal tangent, of 24 feet.
For every mile after the first, curvature downward would
increase as the square of the distance in miles multiplied by
8 inches. These figures are obtained from the solution of
a simple geometrical problem, and at present constitute the
formula of calculation of the supposed convexity or ro-
tundity of the earth’s surface. That the reader may know
that we offer here no exaggeration of the amount of the
accredited curvature, we quote as follows, and suggest that
au 3 r work on geodesy or geometry may be referred to:

The curvature of the earth from a tangent line is 8 inches for one
mile from the point ol contact; 32 inches for two miles; 72 inches for
three miles, etc—Mattison’s Astronomy.

The amount of curvature or divergence from the vertical in¬
creases as the square of the distance. The curvature of the earth is 8
inches for the first mile, 32 inches for the second mile, and so on.—
Encyclopaedia Britanuica.

The depression for one mile, determined geometrically, amounts
to S inches; obviously, the depression for two miles is four times 8
inches, or two feet and 8 inches: for three miles, the depression is 9
times 8 inches, or 6 feet; and so on—within such greater distances as


THE EARTH IS NOT CONVEX.


65


have to be considered in ordinary observations. Thus up to xoo
miles it may be said that the depression, estimated geometrically, is
equal to 8 inches multiplied by the square of the number of miles.—
Proctor.

The Universal Laws of Hydrostatics.

If tlie earth were convex, all water in equilibration
would conform to this ratio of convexity; oceans, seas,
lakes, and canals would present convex surfaces, and in a
few miles the curvature would be appreciable to tlie eye.
Upon this point there is no dispute among the physicists.
That such curvature is claimed for all waters at rest, is shown
by any work on hydrostatics, in which will be found some
laws relating to the pressure and balance of fluids. The
foundation law of hydrostatics embraces certain principles
which may be briefly summed up as the necessary conse¬
quences of the property of all liquids:

(1) In a perfect fluid when still, the pressure exerted
at a given point is normal to the surface upon which it acts,
and of equal intensity for all positions of that surface. (2)
The surface of equal pressure in a still fluid mass, is every¬
where at right angles to the direction of gravity—that is,
horizontal. (3) A horizontal surface that is everywhere at
right angles to the direction of the force of gravity. Such
is the surface of a piece of still water.

The above is a brief statement of what is presented in
any standard w T ork upon the balance of fluids. From the
natural consequence of the law of hydrostatics, the surface of
all water must conform to the general contour or configura¬
tion of the earth; this is universally admitted b}^ all scien¬
tists and physicists. The principles involved here are so
clear and self-evident that there can be no escape from the
acknowledgment of so palpable a fact. Tlie issue rests


66


67


the; ce;eeubar cosmogony.

here—not that the question is whether or not these laws are
true—but the great issue of the shape of the earth can be
tested and settled upon this pivot. If water can be deter¬
mined to be convex, the surface of the earth upon which
we live is convex; if water can be determined to have some
other form of surface, then it is equally clear that it would
indicate that the general configuration or form of the earth
does not conform to a convexity. A test of the water’s
surface, then, would settle the question of the convexity or
non-convexity of the earth. The Koreshan System main¬
tains that it is concave, the surface of the earth curvating
upward at the ratio of 8 inches per mile.

Proctor’s Denials, Comments, and Admissions.

Astronomers universally recognize that the issue rests
here. Proctor busied himself to some extent with the ques¬
tion—not in making experiments of survey upon the water’s
surface, but in the endeavor to console himself in referring
to the attacks upon the Copernican system, by denying the
testimony of experimentalists concerning even the non-con¬
vexity of the water’s surface, in which he said:

Of course, if Parallax had, with his eyes a few inches from the
surface of Bedford Canal, seen an object close to the surface six miles
from him, there manifestly would have been something wrong in the
accepted theory about the earth’s rotundity.—Myths and Marvels of
Astronomy, page 279.

Parallax’ chief argument at his first lecture was one which
could not possibly be answered. He described how he had stood up
to his neck in the water of Bedford Canal, where there is a straight
reach of six miles, and had, with the telescope, seen down near the
water’s edge a small boat six miles away. Of course, the only sound
answer to his reiterated questions, “What say you to that? how can
you explain that?” was simply, “We do not explain it; we decline to
believe it.”—Proctor’s Better to Harper’s Weekly.

From the above, it is evident that astronomers in gen¬
eral hold that even the smallest bodies of water conform to


the; rarth is not convrx.

the accredited convexity, and would argue for the rotundity
of the water’s surface in conformity with the usual formula.
That the reader may be able to contrast theory with facts of
experiment, we here present some figures and conditions
which would inevitably obtain were the popular belief true.

If the earth were convex, a boat receding from a given
point upon the surface of a canal would finally disappear
over and beyond a hill of water; the relative distance at
which it would begin to disappear can be exactly calculated
upon the basis of convexity, as for instance: If the eye were
18 inches above the water, any part of the water’s surface
in the direction of the receding boat could not be seen be¬
yond the apex of the bulge; the line of vision would come
in contact with the top of the bulge or hill in i^j miles.
Beyond that point the boat would begin to disappear, until
at the end of three miles, 18 inches of the vertical surface of
the boat above the water would be invisible, because that
much of the boat would be beneath the direct line from the
eye over the apex of the bulge. When 4^2 miles have been
traversed by the boat, an object in the boat 6 feet in height
would be entirely out of sight; while at the end of 6 miles the
surface of the water would be 13^ feet below the line of
vision, or that far below the extension of the direct line
connecting the eye at the apex of the bulge or convexity.
It is obvious that if the boat were this far beneath the line
of vision, no aid to the eye could bring the boat into view;
a telescope with the power of any number of diameters,
could not assist the eye to see through a hill of water occult¬
ing the boat 13^2 feet below its summit!

Experiments on the Old Drainage Canal, Chicago.

As the first of a series of proposed practical experiments
with the view to demonstrating the true form of the water’s


68


THE CELRUEAR COSMOGONY.


surface, experiments were conducted upon the surface of the
Old Illinois Drainage Canal, July 25, 1896; beginning with
the bend in the canal at Summit, Ill., and running up the
canal 5 miles to the northeast, to the first bridge.

At the beginning of the line of experiment, a target 22
inches in diameter was fixed upon a staff driven in the bot¬
tom of the canal, so that the center of the disc was just 18



Old Illinois and Michigan Drainage Canal.—Site of Experiments,
July 25, 1896.


inches, and its lower edge 7 inches, above the water. From
this point a boat containing the three observers, with tele¬
scope, materials for sketches, etc., was rowed a distance of
three miles; the boat was then anchored and an accurate view
was obtained of the target. The whole of the disc of the
target was plainly visible, appearing a little above the water,
with all the sections of colors of black, white, and red painted
upon it. According to the accredited convexity, with the


the; earth is not convex.


69


telescope 12 inches above the water, only 5 inches of the top
of the disc should have been visible.

When the boat was rowed to the distance of 5 miles from
the target, it was anchored under the bridge, and another
view was obtained with a telescope 12 inches above the
water; the target was visible, also the hull or body of a barge
located by the side of the target, upon which, at this dis¬
tance, men were seen working. At this point also, 5
measured miles from the target, the telescope was lowered to
within 6 inches of the water, and through it the target and
the barge were as plainly visible as with the instrument 12
inches from the water’s surface; the target being plainly
discernible against the bank of the canal, in the beginning
of the bend in the course of the canal. With the instru¬
ment 6 inches above the water, the horizon or apex of the
bulge, on the basis of assumed convexity, would be about
three fourths of a mile away, from which apex the water
would curvate away for the remainder of the 5 miles; only
three fourths of a mile of the water’s surface could be
visible to the eye unaided, or aided with the telescope.
The declination in the remaining 4miles would be 12 feet;
the top of the target, which was 29 inches above the water,
should have been 9 feet, 7 inches below the line of vision;
consequently, not only should the target be entirely invis¬
ible, but also the bank of the canal below the tow-path,
which was less than 8 feet above the water.

Convincing Observations on the Return Journey.

Under the bridge from which the above observations
were made, two large targets, one 21x27, and the other
26x38 inches, were fastened side by side so that the lower
edge of each was 7 inches above the water. The paper of


70 the; ceeeuear cosmogony.

which they were made was white; they were placed in the
sunshine directly beneath the bridge. When the boat was
rowed three miles on the return trip, observation was made
with the telescope 12 inches above the water; the entire sur¬
face of the targets was plainly visible above the water.

Upon returning to the first target, 5 measured miles from
the bridge, the boat was anchored; the sun was shining
brightly upon the paper targets under the bridge; the
targets were visible at this distance, to the unaided eye of
each observer sitting in the boat, the eye being about 30
inches above the water. The canal was quiet and still, with
scarcely a ripple on its surface; the conditions were the best
and most favorable for the final tests and observations of
these experiments. A particular observation was made with¬
out the telescope. The writer slowly lowered his head from
its position in a sitting posture, to within a few inches of
the water; as the eye came within 15 inches of the surface,
the targets became invisible; upon sitting erect again they
came into view. Repeatedly the eye was lowered, but each
time the targets could not be seen. To the unaided eye,
about three feet of space above the water appeared occulted,
and that much of the piers under the bridge appeared out
of sight. Will the telescope bring the targets into view
again at a nearer approach to the water ? Had a boat been
alongside the targets, it could not have been seen with the
eye alone; the body of a barge three feet above the water
would have been invisible.

The telescope was placed 12 inches above the water,
and through it the targets were plainly visible. The instru¬
ment was then lowered to within 6 inches of the surface;
the same view was obtained, with the entire surface of the
targets in plain view. The result of the comparison of the



the; earth is not convex. 71

conditions of observation with the accredited convexity, is
the same as in the case of the first target from the view
under the bridge, with the instrument 6 inches above the
water. The tops of the targets, if the water were convex,
should have been 9 feet 10 inches below a direct line extend¬
ing from the eye over the apex of the bulge to the terminus
of the five miles. The accompanying diagram illustrates
what would be the conditions and relations of the eye, the
line of sight to the occulted objects, upon the basis of the
calculated convexity. T represents the telescope, 6 inches
from the surface; A, the apex, ^ of a mile distant; S, the



signals or targets, and B their reflections upon the water
beneath.


The Striking Feature of the Final Observation, Giving
Unmistakable Evidence that Water is Not Convex!

But the most striking feature was noticed in this last
observation at the end of the return journey—important,
because it afforded the most unmistakable evidence of the
wmter’s non-convexity. Directly beneath the targets were
seen their white reflections upon the water, elongated and
waving with the slightly rippling surface. We found here a
fact mirrored in the water, which cannot possibly be ex¬
plained away; this view, obtained from careful and steady
adjustment of the telescope, showed conclusively that we not


72


the cerruear cosmogony.


only saw the targets, but also the water directly beneath the
targets ;—we saw every foot of the water’s surface between
the anchored boat and the white targets; and not only this,
but the surface of the water extending up the canal to
bridge No. 2,—ijj miles more distant. The timbers to
which the targets were fastened, and the stones of which
the piers were built, were visible down to the surface of the
canal.

The evidences presented in these observations were
most satisfying and convincing. Manifestly, had there
been the slightest convexity upon the surface of this canal,
with the telescope 6 inches above the water, no reflections
of the targets upon the water beneath could be seen; and
with the accredited convexity, any object under the bridge,
12 feet above the water’s surface, would have been invisible.
The bridge, the piers, the bank on either side, with the two
lines of telegraph poles, and the targets upon the water,
were carefully observed as to their relative size, from the
time we left them. The last view through the instrument,
of the relations of size and dimension of the objects, was
the same as in the view with the unaided eye, one half mile
from the bridge. There was no distortion; there could
have been no refraction nor mirage. For comparison,
carefully-drawn sketches were taken of each observation.

The surface of the canal is the same today as it was
July 25, 1896; the bridge is there, and the targets can be
placed in the same position again. The same views can be
had under similar conditions, with the targets and objects
standing out in bold relief and in plain view, as indisputable
testimony to the truth of the Koreshan Cosmogony, and in
refutation of the modern system of science built upon the
assumption of the water’s convexity. Once more the tele¬


THE EARTH IS NOT CONVEX.


73


scope is used to revolutionize science ! Three hundred years
ago, it was with the -greatest difficulty that scientists could
be induced to look through the magic tube; at that time,
observation through it meant conversion to the new system.
Today, this scientific instrument is put to a new use, and
the principal difficulty now is to induce leaders of modern
scientific thought to use it upon the surface of any body
of water. We will escort any number of surveyors, engi¬
neers, or scientists to the surface of still water, where the
experiments and observations can be repeated with the
results as given above. Let it be put to the test!

Experiments on Lake Michigan.

That the surface of the sea is convex, is shown by the way in
which the ship disappears when it sails from the shore. First, the
hull goes down behind the horizon, then the sails, and finally the
mastheads. If the ship moved on any other than a convex, surface it
would appear again in the telescope.—Prof. Peabody, Astronomer.

If the water were convex, when boats and ships disap¬
pear in the distance hull down, they would do so because
the intervening hill of water would prevent their being seen;
it is conclusive that if this were the case, the telescope would
be powerless to render the occulted portion of the ships vis¬
ible again. It is equally clear that if the telescope can re¬
store the vanished hulls, the water upon which they sail is
not bulged and does not curvate downward beyond the
horizon.

It is with reference to this phenomenon that special ob¬
servations were made on August 16, 1896, from the shore
of Take Michigan, World’s Fair grounds, by the Experi¬
menting Staff. The atmosphere was clear and the horizon
sharply defined against the sky bejmnd. Several sloop
yachts and a schooner were observed at a distance of about


74


75


the; ceeeuear cosmogony.

12 miles; from an altitude of io feet above the water (from
a pier extending into the lake), the hulls and about one
half of the height of the masts were invisible to the unaided
eye; through an opera glass, all of the surface of the sails
and the full height of masts were visible, with the hulls
still invisible; but with a telescope of about 40 powers,
the hull of each vessel was brought into view with remark¬
able clearness.

We then went to the beach, and with the unaided eye
about 30 inches above the surface of the water, only a very
small portion of the top of the masts could be seen—they
appeared like mere white specks just above the horizon.
With the eye at this distance from the water, if the water
were convex, the horizon would be two miles away, leaving
10 miles to curvate downward from the horizon, placing
the hull of each boat 60 feet below the horizon; and as the
masts of the sloop yachts were probably not over 40 feet
in height, and if not, their tops would have been at least 20
feet out of sight. It was now that the test came with the
opera glass and the telescope. With the opera glass, only
about one half of the height of the sails and masts could be
seen; but through the telescope, the hull of each yacht, at
the distance of 12 miles, was made plainly visible. On the
Rake shore at Roby, Ind., August 23, 1896, we made seven
specific observations, some of which we briefly present be¬
low: We were greeted with the most beautiful horizon—-
clear and well defined; and the observations were rendered
the more satisfactory by reason of the sunshine upon the
vessels from the west. As we approached the shore we
observed, with the unaided eye, what appeared to be a mere
white speck upon the horizon. It was a small steamer,
with only a small portion of the pilot house visible above



THE EARTH IS NOT CONVEX.

the water line. In the field of the telescope, applied to this
horizon point, we observed the steamer down to the adtual
surface of the water upon which it rested; the whole of its
body was in plain view.

In about half an hour the top of the smokestack of
another small steamer was seen; and through the telescope,
the whole of the body of the vessel. A number of obser¬
vations were made of some yachts, whose topmasts only
were visible above the water line by means of the naked
eye, but whose hulls were clearly seen through the instru¬
ment, the altitude of which was about 18 inches above the
Rake level.

Present^, we saw a larger vessel running along the
horizon line, with nearly the whole of its body out of sight.
It was one of the liners running from the docks of Chicago
to Michigan City, Ind. With the telescope it was brought
into full view. It was going in a direction that soon took
it entirely out of sight to the naked eye; not even the small¬
est portion of it was visible to the eye alone; its direction
could only be pointed out by the cloud of smoke which fol¬
lowed it. Once the smoke cleared aw r ay, and there w T as
nothing to indicate to the unaided eye the whereabouts of
the vessel; and it could only be found by sweeping the
horizon with the telescope.

To obtain the very best observation possible, the
the telescope was adjusted very carefully and allowed to rest
upon a support; and through the steady atmosphere upon
the quiet lake, we observed the w T hole of the vessel, every
part of wdiich was entirely obscured to the unaided vision.
The steamer was at least 15 miles distant; according to the
accredited convexity, the lower part of the vessel would
have been 150 feet below the horizon. If we considered


76


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.


OBSERVATIONS ON SOUTHERN WATERS.


77


refraction to be one third (it is seldom allowed to be over
one fifth), there would remain ioo feet between the
refracted visual line and the hull of the steamer!

Now let the facts of this observation be considered.
If it be admitted that convexity intervened between the eye
and the vessel to cut it off from view, would not the con¬
vexity still remain to occult it in the telescopic field ? It is
clearly to be seen that if convexity were the cause of the
disappearance of the vessel, it would be as impossible to see
it through the instrument as with the naked eye. It seems
strange that a matter so easily observed as this, should have
so long escaped even the most casual observer,—to say
nothing of the scientist. We offer at this time no explana-
tion of the reason they have overlooked it; suffice it now to
say that what we have observed can be seen any clear and
calm day upon the Rake.

Observations on Southern Waters.

Series of Experiments Conducted on the Gulf of Mexico
and Bay of Naples.

" J "IIE observations carefully conducted by the members
of the Geodetic Expedition, were in every way satisfac¬
tory and conclusive. These experiments are sufficient to
overthrow the old system of astronomy, and to establish the
Celiular Cosmogony of Koreshanity. The facts obtained
by these processes are such that, were they observed by the
people of the world generally, they would leave not a foot¬
hold for the now declining systems of science!

While the preliminary work with the Rectilineator was
in progress, the operators lost no opportunity for conduct¬


ing all that were possible of the experiments and observa¬
tions in demonstration of the Koreshan premise. About
seventy-five such experiments were conducted; these in¬
volved numerous critical and comparative observations of
the sea horizon under various meteorological and atmospheric
conditions, distant vessels, coast lines, etc.; and the evidences
of the earth’s concavity thus afforded were conclusive and
absolute.

Westward from the Naples coast line, there stretches
the beautiful Gulf of Mexico; away in the distance, from
the north through west to south, the great semi-circle of the
Gulf horizon bounds the waterscape. From the point of ob¬
servation to the lateral arc of horizon of nearly i8o°, the
great concave sheet of water extends. From whatever
height the observation is made, the horizon rises to meet the
horizontal plane of the eye, and beneath lies the dark bowl,
the sides of which gradually curvate upward to the horizon
rim—the limit of the lateral or geolinear perspective.

Vessels of various sizes were daily coming within the
horizon of our Operating Station. From the distance they
came into view, and from plain view they gradually disap¬
peared. In approaching our field of vision, only the topsails
were visible to the naked eye; gradually the lower sails and
finally the hull, were exposed to view. When receding,
the familiar phenomenon of the hull going ‘ ‘down’ ’ was ob¬
served, then the lower sails, and finally the entire vessel.
Were they sailing over a bulge or hill of water on a convex
body ? We are all familiar with the usual illustration used
in text-books of modern schools, to convey the impression
that the earth is convex. Everywhere, from all quarters,
this so called proof that we live on the exterior surface of
the earth is urged against the Koreshan System. It was


THI$ CERRURAR COSMOGONY,


7 °

the purpose of this Expedition to utterly destroy and refute
all the usual objections against the System, by the facts
themselves. The argument of the earth’s convexity, as
made to rest upon the phenomena of the appearance and dis¬
appearance of the hulls of vessels upon the sea, can have no
real basis when the mind realizes the fadts of comparative
observations with the natural eye and a powerful telescope.
In these observations alone, is found that which is worth far
more than the expenses of the Expedition; but our series of
experiments had only begun. We will give brief accounts
of a few of the scores of observations made during the
five months’ experimentation at the Operating Station.

Observations From Naples Beach.

On January 12, from the Naples beach, a four-mast
schooner was observed in the southwest, at a distance of
about 10 miles. It at first appeared to be but a dark line
upon the water horizon. Soon, however, it became more
distinct. The hull and about one half masts, and conse¬
quently about two thirds of the main sails appeared to be
cut off by the water beneath. Through the large mounted
telescope, not only were the top of the masts and the sails,
but also the hull in plain view. Capt. Gilbert, of the sloop
Ada, who was present at the time of the observation, con¬
sidered the vessel about half mast “down;” upon viewing
the vessel through the instrument and seeing the hull even
down to the water upon which it sailed, he considered it a
genuine case of bringing into view the hull of a ship invisi¬
ble to the unaided eye.

How do we know that we saw only about half masts
with the naked eye? We will endeavor to illustrate the
same by means of a rough draft of the four-mast schooner in


Property of Col. W. N. Haldeman, of Louisville Courier-Journal, owner of Naples, Fla., a beautiful Winter Resort.


Bo THE CELL! 'I.A R COSMOGONY.

to the water line, the rigging, masts, and pilot-house were
visible as shown in Fig. 4. This observation was in every
way satisfactory, because the condition of the atmosphere
admitted of a sharp, clear view of the horizon and the
smoke, which made the contrast more effective in the com¬
parative observations. In this experiment the telescope
brought all of the body of the Mangrove into view, when
entirely invisible to the naked eye.

February 7, 5 p. m.; two-mast schooner, with two fly¬
ing jibs was seen, which to the unaided eye appeared about
half mast “down,” with the hull entirely out of sight.
There could be no mistake about this, as the vessel was
observed in the north while the sun was shining brightly
from the southwest. Through the mounted telescope of
about fifty diameters, all of the sails, masts, and hull were
plainly visible to the water line. Sloop was seen at the same
time as two-mast schooner, appearing only as a white .speck
on the horizon. Through the telescope the sail, mast, jib,
and hull were visible.

February 11, 4 p. m.; large schooner observed in south¬
west; appearance to unaided eye about half mast “down,”
with the hull entirely hidden from view. Through the tele¬
scope the lower masts, sails, and hull were visible. State¬
ment to this effect is in possession of the Staff, signed by
Victoria Gratia, Pre-Eminent of the Koreshan Unity, and
Rev. E. M. Castle, who were witnesses of the experiment.

February 13, 9 : 45 a. m.; sloop observed about 9 miles
from shore. With the most careful observation with the
eye alone, not more than half of the mainsail could be seen.
As the vessel was in a calm, the very best opportunity was
afforded for critical observation. The telescope not only
showed plainly the topmast and rigging, but also the hull
down to the surface of the water.



OBSERVATIONS ON SOUTHERN WATERS. 8l

February 15, 10: 15 a. m.; a jigger rig yacht came into
view 7 with only about one third masts visible above horizon.
The horizon line was fine; there was no haze, and topsail of
the vessel w 7 as clear cut and well defined to the naked eye,
the waiter beneath apparently occulting two thirds of sails
and all of hull. At first glance it appeared as a white speck
on the horizon; the most careful view with the unaided vision
would not permit the sight of the low T er sails and hull.
The view through the telescope showed such a contrast,
through which the hull became visible with marked dis¬
tinctness, the vessel in the telescopic field being visible
down to the water upon which it sailed.

February 17, 10 a. m.; schooner observed in northwest.
A sailor passing at the time was asked how far “down”
the vessel appeared to him. “About half mast ‘down,’”
he said. With the axis of the telescope about 5 feet above
water level, the hull was visible, and was observed by mem¬
bers of our Staff and Corps, as v 7 ell as by the sailor. The
telescope w 7 as then taken to the water’s edge, with the tri¬
pod lying on the sand and the telescope resting on a small
support, so that it was about 15 inches above the Gulf level.
Through the instrument in this position, with the head on
the sand at the subjective eyepiece, the hull was still visible.
The sailor considered the vessel about 8 miles distant.
With the eye 15 inches above the water, the horizon, if the
earth w r ere convex, would be about ifb miles distant, leaving
6)4 miles for declination beyond the horizon, which would
amount, according to the ratio of curvature, to a little over
30 feet, placing the hull that far below the line of vision!

Sanibel Light Visible 34 fliles.

The lighthouse on Sanibel Island is 34 miles N. N. W.
from Naples. The light has an elevation of 98 feet above mean



82


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.


tide level. In order that other lights may not be mistaken
for lights in lighthouses, every such light possesses certain
characteristics by which it may be recognized by all—such
as alternating or intermittent flashes, different colors, etc.

On the evening of January 5, 1897, from the dock
extending into the Gulf at Naples, the Sanibel Tight was
observed through the large mounted telescope, directed to
N. N. W. The intermitting flashes showed it to be the
Sanibel Tight beyond any reasonable doubt. Tet us con¬
sider the utter impossibility of observing this light at this
distance if the earth were convex. The axis of the tele¬
scope was about 17 feet above the water level; this would
place the horizon about 5 miles away, leaving 29 miles of
declination from the horizon to the lighthouse, which would
amount to 560 feet, the required height of the light to be
seen at an elevation of 17 feet from Naples. Here is mani¬
fest a difference of 462 feet between the fallacious Coperni-
can theory and facts of actual observation! This light has
also been seen from the Naples dock with the naked eye,
under extremely favorable circumstances, concerning which
we append the following statement:

In March, 1895, one evening between 8 and 9 o’clock p. m., I, in
company with Mr. Drummond and Mr. Hugh McDonald, of Coving¬
ton, Ky., and Thos. E. Hart and N. Walker, of Marco, Fla.,' saw
from the pier or dock at Naples, Fla., the Sanibel Fight in lighthouse
on Sanibel Island, N. N. W. from Naples. The evening was clear
and the light shone clearly. The light is an intermittent one, with
one bright flash and two less bright; these flashes came in regular
order throughout the time of observation, so that we could not have
been mistaken regarding it being the Sanibel Fight. It was at low
tide, with Gulf very smooth, with northeast wind for several days
previous. The mean difference between high and low tides here is
about 2 >% feet. The height .of the floor of the pier from low tide is
about 12 feet.—David N. Walker, Sailor, Marco, Fla.

I was present at the observation referred to, and attest the truth¬
fulness of the above statements.—N. Walker, Marco, Fla.


OBSERVATIONS ON SOUTHERN WATERS.


83


Cape Romano Visible 25 Hiles With the Eye
at Water Level.

With clear atmosphere and calm weather, the distance
at which objects can be seen upon the sea is greater than
would be possible upon the basis of the earth’s convexity.
We append the following statement handed to us by a
citizen of Marco, Fla., an old resident, familiar with every
point along the Florida west coast:

About the 29th of January, 1895, at about 4 p. m., Mr. S. F.
Williams and myself, from Rabbit Key, a small island just north of
Pavillion Key, and a little south of Chokoliska Pass, observed Cape
Romano at a distance of about 25 miles. The timber on the cape
was as plain to the unaided eye as if it had been only a few miles
away with ordinary atmosphere. A little schooner yacht that had
passed us and had been out of sight for over two hours, was in plain
view, even to her hull. There was also a schooner that we had not
seen before, sailing along the channel from Coon Key to Cape Ro¬
mano; but I do not remember whether we could see her hull or not.
The distance I should judge to be about 25 miles. I believe that we
could have seen the above-named objects 10 miles farther, as we laid
down over the deck of the boat, with our heads on a level with the
water, and we could see the cape, schooners, etc., as plainly as when
on the cabin. The sky was cloudy, and we could not see the sun.
There was very little breeze at the time; what there was, came from
the south. The reason I know that it was Cape Romano, is that
there is no other land W. N. W. from Rabbit Key—the course.

Also, Mr. N. Walker, of Marco, and Robert Anderson, of Hotel
Naples, saw Sanibel Fight from the Naples dock, one night in March
of the same year. I would make affidavit of the above, except as to
distance, which may not be exactly correct.—Thos. F. Hart, Marco,
Fla.

Remarkable Observations by Koreshan Geodetic
Staff on the Gulf of Mexico and Naples
Bay, Florida.

The objection had been so often urged by illogical crit¬
ics, that tests upon inland waters were not satisfactory,
that it was decided that observations be made upon the Gulf
itself, the conformity of which to the contour of the earth
no sane mind will question. Against the results of such



8 4


the cellular cosmogony.


observations, no subterfuge can be brought to bear. For
tliis reason also, the air line was surveyed upon the Gulf
coast.

Six and one half miles lie between the points of the
main land extending into the Gulf at Gordon’s and Doctor’s
Passes. These points are long sand-bars, the elevation of
which is equal to the high tide of the Gulf. On the point
at Doctor’s Pass, a large target 3^2 feet square w r as fixed
upon supports; the top of the target was just 5 feet above
low tide. On March 2, the mounted telescope was taken to
Gordon s Pass, and the visual axis of the instrument was
fixed at an elevation of 3% feet above low tide. At this
altitude above the low tide level, all of the surface of the
target was visible, and the white line of the sandy beach
lying beneath it was distinct. No convexity was observa¬
ble at this elevation. On the morning of March 3, at a
time when the Gulf was calm, the observation was repeated.
Also with the telescope fixed 2 feet above the water level,
the target was still visible; the same at 18 inches, and finally,
by reclining at the water’s edge, with the axis of the instru¬
ment 12 inches above the water’s surface, the target was
still in view. Under the conditions of the last observation,
if the water w T ere convex, the horizon would be only
miles distant, leaving miles of the surface, of the Gulf
to decline downward,—amounting to 18 f f ee t. As the tar¬
get was only 5 feet above the low tide water level, it would
be 13 td feet below the line of vision. After deducting nearly
one seventh of this declination to make up for the usual al¬
lowance for refraction, 11 fz feet would remain as the amount
of depression of the target below a line extending through
the visual axis of the telescope over the horizon, to the dis¬
tance of 5% miles beyond the horizon. All of these obser¬


OBSKRVATIONS ON SOUTHERN WATERS. 85

vations were repeated in the afternoon, with the same re¬
sults.

Experiments on Naples Bay.

A straight reach of 4^2 miles was found upon the
smooth waters of Naples Bay. At the most southern ex¬
tremity, a target of white cloth 20x30 inches was fixed upon
an upright with cross-arms; the top of the target stood 2
feet above the higli-tide mark, leaving a space of 4 or 5
inches to the water’s surface. On March 5, at time of high
tide, the Staff sailed to the farthest point northeast from
which the target could be seen with the telescope. To the
naked eye, the target was entirely invisible. The horizon
seemed to occult the lower limbs of the belt of mangrove
trees constituting the background of the views.

Over the water at the point of observation, the telescope
was fixed at an altitude of 30 inches above the water, and
through it the target stood out in bold relief. The instru¬
ment was then lowered to within 18 inches, with the same
observed results. Afterward, at the height of 10 inches
above the water, the entire surface of the target was still
visible. Very careful observations w T ere made and repeated
with the telescope at this altitude. The target was clear
cut and well defined, and even the space between the bottom
of the target and the water w r as observable. Then, to make
the test absolutely satisfactory and conclusive, the telescope
was fixed upon the water’s surface; with the instrument al¬
most touching the water—indeed, it could not be placed closer
without wetting the lenses—long and careful observations
were made. There could be no mistake; the entire surface
of the target could be seen, with a small dark line of the
background appearing beneath it. The terrestrial eyepiece



86


THE CERRURAR COSMOGONY.


was then exchanged for the astronomical eyepiece of greater
power. The target was increased in size, and the relations
of the target and the water’s surface and the background
came out still more noticeably. The object glass is 3 inches
in diameter; the axis of the telescope was 2 inches above
the water. On the basis of convexity, the horizon would
be but one half mile away—for the declination for one half
mile is considered to be 2 inches—leaving 4 miles of surface
to decline from the horizon point, amounting to 10% feet.
The target would have to be higher than 10^ feet above
the water in order to be seen; as it was at an altitude of
only two feet, it would be 8 % feet below the line of sight.

Water’s Concavity Visible.

These are by far the most satisfactory observations
made by the Geodetic Staff, because the tests were more
crucial. The results were conclusive, as they afforded an
ocular demonstration of the earth's concavity. A stake 2 feet
in height was placed midway between the Observing Station
and the target, with cross-bar at top of stake. With the
telescope at same altitude, the cross-bar was observed to be
a little below the top of the target, with the target fore¬
shortened by perspective to a breadth equal to above one
half the length of the stake. With the visual axis of the
telescope 2 inches above the water, the cross-bar was seen
to be in line with the top of the target.

Besides this observation, an absolutely satisfactory view
was had of the water’s surface itself. With the telescope
placed absolutely level, the water appeared to slope gradu¬
ally upward to the center of the telescopic field. With the
objective end of the telescope placed a little upward from
the true level, and with the water still visible near the ob¬


RRINCIPRES OF MECHANIC AR SURVEY.


87


jective end of the instrument, the actual concavity of the
ivater—d. midway depression— was clearly observable. This
midway depression was at the point of the stake with cross¬
bar midway between the point of observation and the target,
from which midway depression there was a gradual slope
upward to the target. This view was obtained by the long
terrestrial eyepiece, and also by the astronomical eyepiece,
the concavity through the latter being the more marked.
There could be no mistake as to the concave arc; the water
was seen to be not convex; it did not appear to be a plane,
but concave!


Principles of Mechanical Survey.

Successive Steps in the Logic of Geometrical Proposi¬
tions and Applied Mechanics in Direct
Demonstration.


JHK FACTS of the observations and experiments pre¬
sented in the preceding chapters are quite sufficient to
demonstrate the earth’s non-convexity, and to destroy the
premise of the modern system of astronomy. To the mind
capable of comprehending a few simple laws of vision, the
observations on the water’s surface as conclusively demon¬
strate that the earth is concave, as the more direct processes
involved in the Koreshan Geodetic Survey. Indeed, the
fact that we have seen the concave arc, and that it can be
seen again under similar circumstances, is a settlement of
the question for those who desire ocular demonstrations.
From these facts, we pass to the consideration of the more
direct processes in the demonstration of the earth’s contour.
The most accurate measurements of the earth’s surface


88


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


are made by mechanical means. The employment of appa¬
ratus for this purpose extends as far back as the history of
astronomy. Starting with the simplest factor of linear
measurement, the mind can at once conceive of the necessity
of mechanical appliances. Space exists between any two
points on the earth’s surface, embracing a number of units
of measure—inches, feet, yards, etc. After a unit of
measure has been agreed upon as the standard, its
length must be preserved, and the means of preservation
reduced to convenience of application or use; wood, iron or
other solid material must constitute the embodiment of
space units, as the rule, yard-measure, or the surveyor’s
chain. The process of measuring by all such appliances, is
simply that of marking their lengths upon a surface, or by
placing them end to end successively throughout the dis¬
tance to be measured. The measurement of meridian arcs
in geodetic survey does not differ in principle from these
simple processes; all modern measurements of the earth
involve the same factors.

Ancient and Modern Geodetic Apparatus.

The evolution of geodetic apparatus from the days of
Ptolemy to the present time, has resulted from the obvious
necessity of obtaining the greatest possible accuracy. Suc¬
cessive improvements have simply increased precision of
adjustment. The first apparatus consisted of wooden rods
placed end to end upon the ground; degrees of latitude and
longitude have been thus measured, and miles of space
determined. In modern times, similar apparatus were used
by Picard, the French astronomer. Improvements were
made by Osterwald, of Germany; by Mason and Dixon, of
Dondon, surveyors of the famous Mason and Dixon line in


PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICAL SURVEY. 80

America. Beccara mounted the sections of his wooden
apparatus upon tripods; Cassini de Tliury employed bars of
iron with adjusting devices; Bessel, iron and zinc; Helmert,
platinum and iridium, resting on iron trusses. U. S. geo¬
detic measurements are made by compound bars of iron and
brass, adjusted so as to compensate for contraction and
expansion,—an invention of Prof. A. D. Bache. The rods
are enclosed in spar-shaped cases made of wood, and
mounted on tripods. The adjustments are made by contact
of fine points, determined by a delicate index. Similar
apparatus are in use by every government in the world,



Prof. Bache’s Apparatus, Used in U. S. Geodetic Coast Survey.


engaged in geodetic work. All such apparatus are em¬
ployed, not for the purpose of determining a straight line,
but to accurately measure distances or meridian arcs; they
involve adjustment of single points only. There is no
attempt at rectilineation; but the fact remains that their use
in modern times by the most skilful geodetic surveyors,
proves that accurate adjustments are not only possible, but
are actually made by simple contact of metal surfaces. The
principles involved in the Koreshan Geodetic Apparatus dif- 1
fer radically from those involved in any other apparatus.
It is susceptible of as great precision in linear measure¬
ment; and consideration of the principles which distinguish
it in its form, purpose, and use, will make apparent its
superiority over any other instrument of survey, as a means
of determining the actual contour of the earth.


go


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


Fundamental Principles of Geometry.

We purpose in this and the succeeding chapters of this
work, to make a direct demonstration of the concavity of
the earth’s surface, involving principles and processes so
simple and so absolute as to be both easy of comprehension
and conclusive. A direct demonstration proceeds from a
premise by regular deduction. First, the premise must be
known and absolutely proven, to the utter exclusion of all
assumptions; and second, all factors involved in the train
of logic must be direct and positive. In the line of
sequences, we must take nothing for granted that would ren¬
der our conclusion less certain than the premise. Our every
step must be upon the sure footing of fact. We purpose to
show that our premise, as well as resultant conclusion, is
so firmly established as to exclude all possibility of doubt
or denial.

We begin at the foundation of geometry, and delineate
for the mind, step by step, the inevitable conclusions.
Geometry is the science of earth-measurement, from yv,
earth, and fierpov, to measure. Modern geometry is a
fragment of the true system of the relations and properties
of form that existed in the past, from which its present
name is derived. Every form has its opposite form, and
every form has its co-ordinate form, possessing correlated
functions. There is no transmutation possible without seg¬
mentation; in the evolution of a circle to its co-ordinated
square, we have the intersection of secant and arc, and rela¬
tion and bisection of radius and chord, as in the diagram
A, on following page. The radius, which is perpendicu¬
lar to the chord, bisects the chord, and also the arc which
it subtends. The simplest angle to which relations of form
can be referred, is the right angle. There can be no merg¬


9 i


principles of mechanical survey.


ence of one circle into another as in figure B, without the
relations of the cross. If two circumferences intersect each
other, the common chord which joins the points of inter¬
section, is bisected at right angles by the straight line
which joins their centers.

Our simplest premise, that the angles relating perpen¬
dicular and horizontal are equal, is susceptible of being



(A) Segmentation in Geometric (B) Bisection of Common Chord
Evolution. and Lineal Axis.

known from a geometrical standpoint. The principles upon
which right angles depend—by which they may be formed,
also furnish a conclusive test and demonstration of the per-



S - - : El

A;

v .. ■ , '

\ ’ <* * ~ V

~ ./

A

:

: b

- , -: •

uSAfAAEa

...

1

i

- *V. .--.ft:

8 —■ • . r

/

;■ ;

i- - - ■ :■ ■

1 ' ■ ■ : - - ■

-• -

__ 1


(C) Right Angles. (D, E; Process of Demonstration ot

' ' 0 ° Right Angles.


pendicular relations of straight lines. To draw a line at
right angles with another, independently of a square as a
guide, we may relate the points of intersection of arcs of
merging circles to the line connecting their centers, as before
illustrated, and as shown in diagrams D and E. Having
demonstrated the principles of right angles, our premise is
proven; and we are ready to take the next step in the line
of sequential propositions and arguments.


92 the; CELLULAR cosmogony.

From the above geometrical facts as a premise, we may
construct a square having four right angles, four sides, two
perpendicular and two horizontal parallels, because two
straight lines which are at right angles with a given straight
line, are parallel with each other. We can know as abso¬
lutely that the sides of a rectangle are parallel to each other,
as we can know that two straight lines are at right angles,
and by the same processes. If we place two rectangles of



Parallels. Eight angles. Square. Rectangle.


equal breadth together, we form a new rectangle which is
equal in area to the sum of the areas of the rectangles com¬
prising it; the sides joined being in unity, the extremes are
parallel. The other sides are as the extension of straight
lines. If this is the result in the conjunction of two rect-



Conjoined Rectangles Forming Continuous Parallels.


angles, the same results would obtain if ten thousand rect¬
angles were drawn end to end. There could be no possible
deviation from a straight rectilinear direction, and we defy
any mathematician to show that there could be!

Transposition from Geometrical to Mechanical
Principles.

When w r e transpose the - geometrical principles under
consideration to mechanics, we have to deal with material


frincipi.es of mechanical survey. 93

surfaces and angles instead of geometric lines which bound
figures on paper; the principles are the same, for geometry
treats of the relations of form of material things. When we
carry our demonstrations from the realm of principles to
principles applied, we do no violence to our conclusion.
Such transposition is necessary to demonstrate the truth
about the material form of the earth, or the character of its
tangible contour.

The principles of right angles constitute the basis of
mechanics as well as of geometry. Every mechanic con¬
siders right angles; he works with the square. The laws of
these relations of form must be obeyed alike by the builder,
engineer, and surveyor. If we place tw r o mechanic s
squares in line, the perpendicular arms will be parallel, and



Rectangular Metal Plates Forming a Straight Line.


may be closely fitted together. It also follows that if we
place the perpendicular arms together, the horizontal blades
will form a straight line; the results are identical. Two
rectangular metal plates accurately trimmed and placed
edge to edge will force the other sides to form a straight
line, as in the accompanying diagram. If two plates joined
will form a straight line, it follows that in the adjustment
of three plates, the result would be the same; the same
result would be invariable for every subsequent adjustment.
Ten thousand plates joined would form a continuous
rectiliue. A straight line would be forced because of the
fact that at every junction the surfaces joined would be
parallel, with the horizontals at right angles; consequently
the horizontals would necessarily be in line. Flagstones


94


the: crrrurar cosmogony.


upon pavements running for miles, are illustrations of the
principles involved. If such squares laid in a straight line
will join accurately the contiguous surfaces, it follows that
if the surfaces were joined accurately, the pavement would
extend in the same direction—in a straight line. There is
no possible escape from this conclusion.

We may further illustrate this principle by reference to
the survey of railroad tangents, which often extend for
miles in a straight line, as related to the right and the left.
These tangents are surveyed by means of the transit instru¬
ment, a small telescope mounted in a horizontal axis, and
made to revolve perpendicularly. The instrument may be
taken one mile from a given'point, and adjusted so that the



Four-mile R. R. Tangent Surveyed by Revolving Transit on Horizontal,
Right-angled Axis—Perpendicular View.

signal staff is coincidental with the perpendicular cross-hair.
As the instrument has a fixed axis at right angles with the
line of vision, or horizontal axis of the tube, if the tube be
revolved on its right-angled axis, so as to point in the oppo¬
site direction, another staff, two miles from the first, may
be placed exactly in line with the first staff and the line of
coilimation extending through the tube. In the accompany¬
ing diagram, presenting a view of the ground from the ver¬
tical, A is the point of the first staff; B, the telescope, CD,
its axis at right angles with the line X; E is the point of
the second staff, and Y is the new line extended from B,
by revolving the telescope perpendicularly on its axis CD.
If the axis be true, the lines X and Y will form a continu-


95


PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICAL SURVEY.

ous straight line two miles in length, its extension being
dependent upon a right-angled axis only three inches from
either side of the line ! If such long distances can be con¬
nected together by so short a right-angled axis, it follows
that if surfaces of rectangles of greater adjusting leverage
are placed in conjunction, they are capable of extending
absolutely straight lines.

The Invention of the Rectilineator.

We have followed the logical line of sequences from the
fundamental premise to conclusions applied in practical
mechanics. Every factor thus far considered is indisputable.
We now purpose to describe the embodiment of all these



Five Sections of the Rectilineator in Adjustment.


principles of right-angulation and rectilineation in a tangible
apparatus, the use and purpose of which can now be easily
comprehended by the reader. The Koreshan geodetic appa¬
ratus called the Rectilineator (from rectus , right, and tinea ,
line), an instrument for surveying a straight line, was in¬
vented by the writer in 1896, at the instance of the Founder
of Koreshanity, for the purpose of demonstrating the premise
of the Koreshan Cosmogony. This instrument is con¬
structed so as to involve the factors of constancy, conve¬
nience of operation, and precision of adjustment, which
we will briefly describe and illustrate.

The Rectilineator consists of a number of sections in
the form of double T squares, each 12 feet in length, with


96 THU cellular cosmogony.

braced and tensioned cross-arms 4 feet in length. The length
of the cross-arms is to the length of the section, as 1 is to 3.
The material of which the sections of the Rectilineator are
constructed, is inch mahogany, seasoned for twelve years in
the shops of the Pullman Palace Car Co., Pullman, Ill. The
horizontal bar of each section is 8 inches in width, while
,the cross-arms are five inches wide. Steel tension rods
crossing the horizontal bar transversely and extending
through the extremities of the cross-arms, are adjusted to
maintain the constancy of the right angles. Finely trimmed



brass facings at the extremities of the cross-arms constitute
the adjusting surfaces. Through flanges on the facings,
ingenious screws were placed for securing the adjustments
when made. As will be seen from the cuts in this connec¬
tion, each section was supported by two strongly built,
pi at formed standards, with adjustable castings to receive
the horizontal sections between the body of the castings
and adjustable cleats with clamps and set screws. The sec¬
tions lest in the castings edgewise, the cross-arms extend¬
ings perpendicularly, as shown in the picture.



PRINCIPLES OP HUCHANICAI, SURVEY. 97

Modus Operandi of the New Geodesy.

The principle involved in the operation of the Recti¬
lineator, is as simple as that of placing two rectangular
plates in contact, or laying two mechanic’s squares together.
Indeed, from the foregoing the mind with a mechanical eye
can at once understand the method without further descrip¬
tion. Supposing the first section accurately leveled and
fastened to its standards by the clamps and screws, the
reader is ready to imagine the adjustment of Section No. 2
to No. 1. This is accomplished by placing two standards
in proper place in line with the preceding standards, and
placing thq castings at approximately the proper height.
Section No. 2 is placed in position in the castings; set
screws are turned so as to raise or lower the horizontal axis
to approximate coincidence with the middle line of the first
section. The brass facings are brought to within one fourth
of an inch of contact. Operators of the set screws are
directed to raise or lower the section to bring the hair-lines
on the two sections exactly coincidental; fine lines are read
with the microscope, and the section is carefully moved hori¬
zontally by the device for that purpose, until the brass fac¬
ings are one fiftieth of an inch apart, as determined by a
bristol card.

The precise adj ustment is determined on the same prin¬
ciple that the thickness of paper is measured by the finest
micrometers, differing only in the fact that the metal sur¬
faces are adjustable, while the thickness of the celluloid
card, .01 inch in thickness, is constant. In measuring the
thickness of sheets of paper, the fact that when two sheets
of paper pass between the fingers of the micrometer with
equal friction, proves the sheets to be of equal thickness.
The difference of a millionth of an inch can be determined


9 8


THE CEUAJUAR COSMOGONY.


PRINCIPLES OP MECHANICAL SURVEY.


99


in this way. So, in case of adjustment of the sections of
the Rectilineator, when the same card passes between the
brass surfaces at top and bottom of the cross-arms with
equal friction, it proves that the adjustment is precise ; that
the brass surfaces of Section 2 are in adjustment with those
of Section 1, and that consequently the hair-line extend¬
ing the whole length of Section 2 is in line with the hair¬
line on SectSoi* 1. The two sections are now ready for
bolting; when bolted, the sections are firm and free from
disturbance, while other adjustments are being made to
Sections 2,3, and so on. The same processes are repeated
in adjusting Section 3 to Section 2. Only the first section
is leveled, for the line to be extended is one which wall not
follow the curve of the earth, but one that will continue as
a rectiline, the line which crosses at right angles the per¬
pendicular at the point of beginning of the survey.

The straight line is forced by right-angulation, from the
first section forward to the terminus of the line. Every
succeeding adjustment being exactly like the first, necessi¬
tates the conclusion that every cross-arm is parallel with all
others by virtue of actual contact, and that consequently the
hair-line of each section is an extension of the hair-line of
each preceding section. This conclusion is so simple, and
so in keeping with our premise at the beginning of the argu¬
ment, as to be absolutely conclusive. So far w r e have taken
nothing for granted, and have asserted only that which is
knoivn by every mathematician and mechanic to be true.
If we can blow that right angles are equal, and they are
invariable and constant in their geometrical functions, we
can also know that the principles of right-angulation and
mechanical rectilineation are one and the same.

The unique principles and. points of the Rectilineator,—



factors of certainty to be considered in the line of evidences
and arguments previous to our final conclusion, may be
summed up as follows :

It is constructed upon geometrical and mechanical principles.

Proceeds from a known basis of measurement with invariable
results.

Compensates for contraction and expansion.

Eliminates atmospheric refraction and visual perspective.

Furnishes a constant basis of relerence for levels, tests, and
measurements, and for ascertaining ratio of curvature of the earth.

Methods of operation and results obtained can be understood by
the simplest mind.

It does not require a “scientist” to interpret the results.

It has two points of adjustment for each cross-arm—finely
trimmed brass facings.

Adjustments are made secure from tampering hands by bolts;
each adjustment is witnessed by every operator.

Standards are platformed, to obviate settling. Other apparatus
are mounted on tripods, terminating in sharp points extending into
the ground.

A complete system of reversals of the sections corrects any possi¬
ble inaccuracies or deviation of right-angles in the cross-arms. This
system makes impossible the charge of any predetermined plan to
construct the instrument so as to run a curved line.

The sections were subjected to all the known crucial tests of
right angles, and the lines were read with microscope.

In trial surveys of a given distance and return, the hair-line axis
returned to hair-line on brass plate on firmly set stake at starting
point, thus proving the perfection of the instrument and the possi¬
bility of absolutely accurate adjustments.

From the above, it will be seen that the principles upon
which the Rectilineator is constructed, differentiate it from
all other geodetic apparatus ever used, in the simple feature
that it has two adjusting points for each cross-arm instead
of one,—as the end of a rod. Its object is to force a
straight line instead of following one to measure its length.
It is not intended to survey a straight line as related to the
right or left, but an air line from the vertical point of any
given perpendicular, in accordance with the plans and
specifications presented in the previous chapter. Follow-


I0 0 THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.

ing the line of argument from the fundamental premise to
the embodiment of the principles in a Geodetic Apparatus,
we are ready to present the facts of the actual demonstration
achieved through its use. On the evening of March 17, 1897,
the Rectilineator stood at the beginning of the line of sur¬
vey, at Naples, Fla., ready for the first adjustment in the
first and only geodetic survey ever made in the history of
the world, to determine whether the earth is flat, convex,
or concave!

The Koreshan Geodetic Expedition.

Factors Involved in the Measurement of Meridian Arc
in the Florida Coast Survey.

HAVING demonstrated the principles of redtilineation and
shown how they are to be applied geodetically, it now
devolves upon us to show the actual relation that the
rectiliue surveyed by such processes, sustains to the actual
meridian arc 8J2 miles in length. The relations of the
chord and arc we have already considered, the principles
of which belong to the direct processes of demonstration
which we have introduced and maintained from the premise.
We must now deal with the factors involved in the processes
of relating a tangibly constructed chord to the great arc of
25,000 miles circumference. In older that these factors
may be thoroughly understood, and the strength and char¬
acter of our evidences appreciated, it is necessary that the
reader consider our work of preparation upon which the
accuracy of the survey depended, our preliminary surveys,
and the methods employed in obtaining accurate measure¬
ments of the Gulf level, which is subject to daily tides.



THE KORESHAN GEODETIC EXPEDITION. IOI

Naples, a beautiful winter resort on the Florida west
coast, (longitude 81 0 55' 25" west, latitude 26° 4' 30"
north,) was selected as the Operating Station for the follow¬
ing reasons: The coast line, north and south, was compara¬
tively straight for a number of miles; the climate admitted
of operations during the winter months, and the site was
near the Koreshan Co-operative and Communistic Colony
at Estero, Tee Co., Fla. The Geodetic Staff of the Ko-
reshau Unity reached the Operating Station January 2, 1897,
with apparatus, and all appurtenances and instruments, and
plans of operations, which required five months’ careful
observations and accurate work to execute. Details of
observations on the water’s surface, by means of the tele¬
scope, have been presented in the preceding chapters.

Accuracy of the Rectilineator Proved.

In the direct line of logical sequences, demonstration of
the accuracy of the apparatus employed, is demanded; this
is absolutely necessary to definite conclusions. It is easy to
be seen that if the earth is concave, only accurate apparatus
could determine it to be so. The duty that w^e owed to the
Founder of the Koreshan System, to ourselves, and to the
world, demanded precision , and herein we found a powerful
incentive to the greatest possible accuracy. Caution forced
us to be sure that such an apparatus would admit of practi¬
cal and precise work, so that months of our time, as well as
mental and physical energy, might not be thrown away in a
futile attempt to settle the question. It was necessary to
submit the apparatus to the most crucial tests that could
be devised in mechanical science. It was a new apparatus,
and if it was inaccurate, it must be made accurate; our oper¬
ators must be drilled and skilled by actual experience with


102


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.


the apparatus, before precise adjustments could be expected;
for “practice makes perfect.” Several weeks were devoted
to practice manipulation of the apparatus and trial surveys.

Proof of mathematical results is obtained in reversing
the operations, and referring the final results to the first.
The cross-arms on several sections must be proven to be at
right angles with the longitudinal hair-line or axis of the
sections of the apparatus. The inventor and mechanical
experts devoted four weeks to test and adjustment of the
right angles; six series of tests were applied, and each sec¬
tion was reversed, end for end, and turned over fifty times
on the special platform with mechanical devices for measure¬
ment and reference. Points and the finest possible lines
engraved on steel and brass plates, to which adjustments
were referred, were read by means of the microscope; in this
way, the very .slightest variation of angles could be detected.
When the hair-line of each section, in the different positions
of reversals in which they could be placed, fell upon the
same point under the microscope, it was a mechanical
demonstration that the cross-arms were at absolute right-
angles with the hair-line on the horizontal bar.

System of Reversals and Final Tests.

During the mechanical tests of the apparatus and
trial surveys, an ingenious system of reversals of the sec¬
tions for use in actual survey-, was invented at the Operat¬
ing Station by Rev. K. M. Castle, of the Geodetic Staff, and
member of the Visiting and Investigating Committee, and
witness of important operations. This system consisted in
turning over each section at its every alternate adjustment;
in this way any inaccuracy in the right-angled cross-arms,
whether great or small, would in the course of a few adjust-


THE KORESHAN GEODETIC EXPEDITION. I03

ments, be made to correct itself. The proposition is self-
evident, and resulted in the geometrical and mechanical
certainty of obviating the effect of any cross-arm varying
from absolute right-angles, and prevented any errors aris¬
ing from such a source. The Check Record Books of the
Staff show that this system of reversals was faithfully
applied throughout the entire line of survey.

After all the adjustments were completed, and the sys¬
tem of reversals was devised for application, and before the
actual line of survey was commenced, the apparatus was
subjected to one of the most crucial tests possible to impose
upon it. A single line connects two points. By means of
approximate right angles, we might extend a line from a
given point to another; but so long as the right angles are
an unknown quantity, they cannot constitute a basis of
reference of the results. In the case of our apparatus, the
cross-arms themselves were being subjected to test. The
fact that we extend a line for a given distance proves noth¬
ing, unless there is a basis of proof preceding the survey;
without the final test,a. slight deviation might remain, which
escaped other methods. To ascertain whether or not there
was, to what extent, and in what direction a trial line has
deviated, we must mechanically relate the results to the
point from which the line was projected. On so large a
scale, this can only be done by taking the last adjustment
in the forward line, as the first adjustment in the return,
and retrace the direction to the beginning; if there had been
a deviation from a rectilinear course, it would be shown
when the original point was reached; if it returned to the
same point , the cross-arms were at right angles, and the
apparatus absolutely accurate. 228 feet were measured; a
stake was fixed at the beginning, with brass plate bearing


io 4 THE CPXmUR COSMOGONY.

fine line coincidental with the horizontal hair-line of the
apparatus. 19 forward adjustments were made, and the
direction retraced; at the last return adjustment, the sec¬
tion was found to be in exactly the same place as originally,
with the hair-line precisely over the fine line on the brass
plate. The results were determined by observations with
the microscope; the apparatus returned to the same point,
after traversing the space of 456 feet, without a deviation of
.0001 of an inch. This test was in accordance with the
plans of critics 011 the field of observations, representing
the Copernican System, who were doing all in their power
to prove the instrument inaccurate. The test was applied,
and the demonstration places the fact that the apparatus
was accurate and capable of surveying an accurate air line,
beyond all doubt or denial!

Preparations for the Geodetic Survey.

hor several w r eeks previous to the beginning of the geo¬
detic operations, the numerous tourists from the North and
fioni Europe, and the residents of Naples, standing upon Col.
Hakleman s long dock, saw two 15-foot, 2x6 inch perpen¬
dicular stakes outlined against the southern horizon. They
marked historic points along the line of the first survey that
determined the true contour and ratio of curvature of the
earth’s surface. From the fixed stake on the approach of
the Naples dock, the dignified stakes marked the direction
of the meridian line. Standing in the long line like senti¬
nels of success, were the lesser stakes that indicated shorter
intervals of space. We had conducted a coast survey; with
surveyor’s instruments, a line or path along which the Rec~
tilineator was to be moved section by section in precise ad¬
justments, had been measured, and eighths of miles marked


Tug KORESHAN GEODETIC EXPEDITION, 105

by stakes, for 4)2 miles down the coast. As the air line
w as to be .straight, and as the shore line was a little irregu¬
lar, the land elevation above the water level varied from 3
to 5 feet. Excavations were necessary, and much other
work of similar character, to remove all obstructions and
clear the way for convenient and uninterrupted operations
when the adjustments began. We refer to these incidental
preparations, in connection with all other factors involved
in obtaining the results, to give something of an idea of the
magnitude of the undertaking we had before us; to show
that care was taken to attain accuracy; that we were
faithful and persistent in the execution of our plans; that
we understood what was required to determine the facts in¬
volved in the question,—geometrically, mathematically,
practically, and mechanically; to manifest to the reader that
we faithfully detail the entire proceeding—all of the obsta¬
cles and difficulties, and how they were removed, as well as
demonstration of principles and facts of measurements—to
prove not only that the survey was made, and made hon¬
estly, and success achieved, but also to show that in consid¬
eration of the fact that it was the first attempt in the his-
toiy of the world to make such a survey, its accomplish¬
ment is a marvel !

Prof. Morrow’s System of Uniform Tide Measures.

We have shown through definition of the laws of hydro¬
statics, that the contour of the water’s surface conforms to
the general contour of the earth’s surface; consequently, its
natural level constitutes the definite curve to which all our
geodetic measurements must be referred; that is, after relat¬
ing that curve to a tangible air line or rectiline, the arc of
the water’s surface is considered as the curve measured,


THE CEEEUEAR cosmogony.


106

from which measurements we are to deduce a definite ratio
of curvature. The fact that it is impossible to operate on
the water’s surface and only on the land, necessitated the
employment of a system of hypsometry (from vfog, height,
and fierpov, to measure) for the measurements of the altitude
of the surveyed line at every eighth division of a mile
throughout the line of survey.

The average difference of tide levels on the Florida
coast is about 3^ feet. The mean tide level is a point mid¬
way between high and low tide levels. It was necessary to
ascertain this point with all possible precision, which we did
by means of a tide register, consisting of a caisson, with



perforations, and a tide staff measure, set in the Gulf, so
that its bottom was below the level of low tide, and its top
above the level of high tide. The perforations admitted the
water from beneath at normal pressure, and prevented wave
fluctuations; thus the water in the caisson was perfectly
still, and only rose and fell with the Gulf tide level. When
the mean tide level was obtained, it was marked upon the
stationary tide register and became the fixed point to which
all other measurements of water level were referred, as we
will show. We desired to project a line from the vertical
altitude of 128 inches above a definite instead of a fluctuating
level; consequently, by means of the tide staff extending


the; koreshan geodetic expedition. 107

vertically from the caisson, that altitude was transferred to
the land elevation where the survey began, by application
of the principles of right angles, as in the Cross-sectional
View. The geodetic level was adjusted to cause the ver¬
tical angle to intersect the tide staff at altitude of 128 inches;
we then had 128 inches altitude as a fixed point on the
beach, as the altitude of the commencement of the air line.

As the mean tide level in the stationary tide register
became a known and fixed quantity, it was taken as a basis
of reference for the measure of the altitude of the air line at
all station points along the entire line. We may illustrate
this process of referring all other tide measurements to the



„ " 5 -

-— .—-.....-tv —-- _■ _.


Process of Referring all Measurements to Stationary Caisson.—Land
Elevation, Looking East.


original, by diagramming tide staff on stationary register,
and tide staff on portable register at any other given point.
XY isthe mean tide level, which is marked as a fixed point
on staff A, the top of which is the altitude of 128 inches
above mean tide level, which is also indicated on the beach
as shown on preceding page. The tide staff A is divided
into feet and inches.

Now what we desire to make clear to the reader, is how
we could obtain the same vertical altitude with accuracy, at
any other point along the line, by measurement of altitude
staff B with the Gulf level constantly varying from the
mean tide level. We will take the measurement on tide


108 THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.

staff A, for instance. At the time of measurement, say 2
miles from the beginning, suppose the water level was 12
inches above mean tide level, leaving 116 inches of tide staff
A, extending above the water at the stationary caisson.
The line PQ will represent the 116-inch measure on the
^staff. Now if staff B, with inches marked from the verti¬
cal point the same as A, be fastened to Register B, 116
inches above the line PQ, it will have the same vertical alti¬
tude as A. The water level in caisson A, as indicated on
the staff A, was received at B by means of our Code of
Signals, so that the adjustment of staff B at the proper alti¬
tude, or corresponding height above the water, was made at
the same instant. In this way, no matter whether the



The Datum Arc of Mean Tide Leyel, Tide Staffs, and Secondary Datum Line.


measurements were taken at high or low tide, or at any
water level between the two extremes, the results were
accurate, because the fixed, point at A was the constant and
unvarying basis of reference. When the vertical altitude
of staff B was ascertained, the corresponding vertical angle
was transferred to the land elevation, the same as illustrated
in the cross-sectional view of the first tide measure.

Measurements of same vertical altitude above the water
were made for 25 points along the beach from the begin¬
ning to the extremity of the line; when completed, the 128-
inch uniform vertical altitude of the 25 tide staffs, necessa¬
rily formed a line parallel with the water’s surface, as in the
above diagram. XY is the water’s continuous surface



The koreshan geodetic expedition. 109

at mean tide level; the curved line PQ, represents the
128-inch vertical altitude of the tide staffs. XY was our
datum line, to which the altitude of the air line above the
water at every successive eighth of a mile tide staff was
referred. The hypsometric principles involved in these
measurements by means of the tide staffs are scientific, and
the process admitted of accurate measurements. With the
line PQ established as a fixed line parallel with the mean
tide level or datum line, measurements were made from
the upper line of reference with equal accuracy; the upper
datum line was constantly above the water, and on the land
elevation, while the lower datum line was sometimes
beneath the tide waters; we found it more convenient
therefore, to measure from the vertical points than from the
datum line beneath the vertical points. When our datum
lines were established, the preparations for the survey were
complete. The ground elevation on the beach on which the
line was extended, was on the average about qjd feet above
mean tide level; at the beginning of the survey, the highest
land elevation, the hair line on the apparatus measured 53
inches above the ground.

Levels, Plumbs, Appurtenances, and Records.

Inasmuch as the Geodetic Survey was extended through
space by means of right angles, regardless of any other
method of determination of a straight line, and regardless
of the consequences, it is obvious that it was not extended
by any leveling process. By reference to cut No. 4, Plate
1, it will be seen that the rectiliiie would vary from the
water level in ever-increasing angles from the beginning to
the end of the line. If the earth were convex, the line at
the end of 4 miles would be higliei than at the beginning,


IIO THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.

and the angles would be divergent from tlie beginning; if
concave, convergent from the beginning. We used levels
for two purposes: First, to level the first section; second,
to ascertain and record the variation of the sections from the
water horizontal at given points along the coast. By refer¬
ence to the “Comprehensive View of the Air Fine,’’ the
reader will understand how the plumb-line should hang with
reference to the right-angled bars first, if the earth were
convex; second, if it were flat; and third, on the basis of the
concavity.

The leveling of the first section was the point for the
exercise and application of the greatest skill and accuracy;
the first section must be accurately leveled ! For this pur¬
pose we applied one of the finest and most sensitive spirit
levels obtainable. In connection with this we had our 12-
foot Mercurial Geodetic Level, invented by the writer,
especially for this survey. Being 12 feet in length, it was
susceptible of being used with great accuracy and precision.
Applied to the first section, the spirit and mercurial levels
agreed. The plumb w T as also applied to the cross-arms of
the first section, as additional corroboration. The horizon
was also observed in relation to the long straight-edge
formed by a number of adjustments, and the straight-edge
was perfectly parallel with the clear-cut water line of the
Gulf of Mexico, viewed from a point three or four rods back
of the appapatus, so as to place the under edge of the
straight-edge and the water line in apparent contiguity.
The leveling was a careful, painstaking, and successful
work, witnessed by every member of the staff, and finally
pronounced perfect at 8 : 50 on the morning of March 18,
1897. From thence the line was projected on the basis of
the principles which we have demonstrated.



THE KORESIIAN GEODETIC EXPEDITION. Ill

Constantly at the hand of the writer, moved along the
line as the work progressed, was the convenient chest
with thermometer, microscope, calipers, rules, compass,
spirit level, triangles, protractor, telescope, thumb bolts,
adjusting gauges, celluloid test card, etc., and the books of
the staff, for the purpose of making the most accurate
observations and measurements, and recording the same on
the field of operations in the presence of all the witnesses.
Kvery item of adjustment, test, observation, and measure¬
ment was checked in the Check Record Book, and described
in detail in the Daily Record Book, to which are appended
the signatures of all operators and witnesses. The facts of
preparation, measurements, and survey contained in this
work are taken today from the records, attested and sworn
to by the entire Geodetic Staff and the Investigating Com¬
mittee.

Personnel of the Staff, Investigating Committee,
and Corps of Witnesses.

In our line of argument, it is necessary to introduce
the Operators and witnesses, that the reader may judge of
the character of the testimony concerning the facts observed;
and to this end we publish the names of all those connected
in any way with the experiments and survey conducted on
the Florida coast. The operations and observations were
not witnessed by the Operating Staff alone. Appended to
this work are the statements of the Visiting and Investi¬
gating Committee, concerning the facts observed when the
air line was projected into the water on May 5, 1897, and
the repetition of the same on May 8; also the sworn state¬
ments of the Operators and Watchman concerning the pre¬
cautions taken to prevent any one tampering with the


112


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


apparatus or its adjustments. In the list of the Operating

Staff, we briefly mention the position each occupied, and the
class of work to which each was assigned:

Division A.

Prof. U. G. Morrow, Geodesist, head of the Expedition; Inventor
of the Rectilineator; in charge of the Field Operations, Experi¬
ments, and Observations; director of Hypsometric Operations;
special Newspaper Correspondent; directed and tested every
Adjustment and Measurement of the entire Survey, and per¬
sonally checked same in the Record Books.

*L. M. Boomer, General Manager.

Rf,v E M Cast EE, of the University System of the Koreslian
' Unity; inventor of the System of'Reversals of sections of the
Rectilineator, and witness of important operations.

George T. Ordway, Operator; manipulated Set Screw No. i;
detached each rear section, and transferred same for forward
adjustment; made reversals in accordance with the Formula ot
the Castle System; signaled tide measures from Stationary
Caisson.

T Tvckson Williamson, Assistant Operator; manipulated Set Screw
No. 2; assisted in detachment of each rear section, and in the
reversals; Watchman,

*H. B. Boomer, Secretary.

Division B.

George W. Hunt, Engineer; in charge of Division B, operating in
' advance of Division A; directed emplacement of the 8-foot plat-
formed standards, and adjustment of castings whicn received t le
sections of the Rectilineator; in charge of all excavations, and
setting of Tide Staffs.

P W. CampbEre, Mechanic and First Assistant Engineer; Assistant
Watchman.

AreEN H. Andrews, Second Assistant Engineer; Assistant Watch¬
man.

Corps of Staff Assistants.

Gustave F'abre. Leroy L’Amoreaux.

Charles Mealy. Laurence Buhbett.

Visiting and Investigating Committee.

Victoria Gratia, Pre-Eminent of the Koreslian Unity.

Rev E- M Castle, ot the Koreslian University, Rstero, Fla.

Prof. O. F. L’Amoreaux, A. M., Ph. D., 31 years m Chair of Lan¬
guages, Wheaton College, Wheaton, Ill.


RESULTS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS.


C. Sterling Baldwin, M. D.

Mrs. Ada Wcltou.

T. R Ehney, Postmaster nt Naples, Fla.

W. D. Fuerifoy, Naples, Fla.

S. L- Green, M. D., Marco, Fla.

Other Witnesses and Ytsitoks.

Hugh McDonald, Covington, Ky.

Mrs. Hugh McDonald, Covington, Ky.

Miss Ann Ilaldeman, Louisville, Ky.

Miss Lucy Lemon, Louisville, Ky.

Miss Elsie Frederickson, Louisville, Ky.

J. T. Smith, Springfield. Ill.

Mr, Strauss, of Louisville Comic, journal.

Capt. Robert Gilbert, Estero, Fia.

Richard Gilbert, Punta Rassa, Fla.

Mrs. Elizabeth Robinson, Chicago, Ill.

R. B. Gilbert, Punta Rassa, Fla.

Mrs. Esther Stotler, Estero, Fla.

Miss Rose Welton, Fstero, Fla.

Carl Leutich, Estero, Fla.

Lester Wiutersgill, Estero, Fla.

G. R. Calhoun, Plant Citv, Fla.

Thos. K. Hart, Marco, Fla.

D. X. Walker, Marco, Fla,

N. Walker, Marco, Fla.

Miss K. M. Large, Naples, Fla.

Neal Harris, Marco, Fla.

^Called to Chicago by U-lngnun announcing tbe ilctilh ot Mi I,, s. Bouinei
before Survey began; hsmUim! in 1" rpnraiions.


Results and Inevitable Conclusions.

Details of fleasurements and Extension of the Air Line
Into the Water.

“ Hew to the line, let the chips fall where they may.”
W HEN we suspended the plumb-line at the first adjustment
of the Geodetic Apparatus, we established beyond all
doubt the direction of the earth’s radius, or the perpen¬
dicular at the initial station. Poised upon the pivot of
adjustment, the bubble in the graduated vial of the spirit


XX 4 THB CULLUIiAR COSMOGONY.

level measured equal distances from the central division of
the scale. The mercury in the 12-foot Mercurial Geodetic
Level stood at equal altitudes in the perpendicular tubes, in
demonstration of the fact that the level is at right angles
with the perpendicular radius of the earth. The plumb and
level invariably tell the truth; they are silent witnesses
testifying from the standpoint of unseen energies , which man
cannot bribe nor change to suit a theory. The bubble-
shifts at the various stations throughout the line of survey,
whether corroborating or denying preconceived opinions,
must be accepted as conclusive.

With perpendicular and horizontal definitely fixed at
the starting point in our survey and -in our argument
concerning the evidences afforded in the line projected, we
have factors which constitute an indisputable basis of
reference. Once leveled, the direction of our line was fixed,
from which it was not possible to depart, the bolts which
held together the brass facings on the adjusted right-angled
cross-arms would admit of no change. The very principles
of construction of the apparatus compelled the maintenance
of the rectiline from the beginning to the end. The line
proj ected must terminate somewhere, either in space or in
the water, according as the earth would be found to be con-
vex or concave. If the earth were convex, the line would
extend into space, as before explained; as the line would
proceed, the bubble in the spirit level would shift at each
successive application, more and more toward the south from
the central division of the scale, while the plumb-line hang¬
ing in the direction of the perpendicular or the earth s
radii at the various stations, would hang toward the initial
station. If concave, the conditions and positions of the
levels and plumb would be the reverse of those on a convex


RESULTS AND INRVITABDR CONCLUSIONS. 115

surface ; if flat, they would be the same continually, as at
the beginning of the line. By reference to Cut 4, Plate 1,
the relations of the plumb to an extension of the horizontal
at the initial station may be clearly seen, as regards the
convex, the flat, and the concave theories. In conjunction
with the tests of levels and plumb, the observations of the
Gulf horizon were made, as before explained. At the
beginning of the line, the straight-edges of the apparatus
when in adj ustment were parallel with the horizon. On a
convex arc, the straight-edges and the horizon line would
appear to converge toward the north with increasing angle,
as the line proceeded ; if flat, their original parallel relations
would be apparent throughout the line ; and if concave,
the apparent convergence would be toward the south, or in
the direction of the movement of the apparatus.

The Testimony of Levels, Plumbs, and Horizon.

We present the evidences of the readings of the levels,
plumb, and horizon, because the evidences afforded by these
means are independent of any measurements of altitude of
the line surveyed above the mean tide level; we offer them
as corroborative of the measurements obtained. It will be
found upon comparison with the table of measurements in
this chapter, that these evidences are in harmony with the
measurements and facts which constitute the factors of our
direct demonstration. The spirit level was applied in test
of position of sections at every twelfth adjustment through¬
out the line. For the first several tests, the divergence of
the water line and the air line was too slight to be detected
by means of the level; and it was not until near the end of
the first eighth-of-mile division of the line that any d ifference
was thus manifest. The bubble had shifted a little—toward


Il6 TUB CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

the north , or rear section of the apparatus. From the first
point of the manifest deviation until the end of the line, the
angle increased proportionately to the distance traversed.

This was corroborated also by the position of the
plumb-line, and the observed increase of angle between the
straight-edges and horizon, always converging toward the
south . We have thus far referred to these angles in general
terms ; the question would arise, What were the actual
angle measurements as ascertained by the levels, plumb, and
horizon, at points where all these tests were applied? If
there were variations, how great or small were the vari¬
ations ? The divisions on the graduated scale of the spirit
level were .075 of an inch apart; the plumb was suspended
from top of the 4-foot right-angled cross-arms, and the
angle read on plate at the bottom of the cross-arms ; the
12-foot mercurial level determined the angle for 12 feet,
while the observed horizon was related to straight-edges 36
feet in length, and therefore determined the angle for 36
feet. We give below the results observed at the end of the
first mile, the second mile, and at end of 2 miles, at last
adjustment of the apparatus in the southerly direction.

Spirit LEVEL, .shift of bubble toward north end of the vial, as
measured on the graduated scale :

1 mi., .0375 in.; 2 miles, .077 in.; 2y$ mi., .0S9 in.

Plumb-Pine, measurement on arc of 4 feet radius, as related to
right-angled cross-arms :

1 mi., .0T5 in.; 2 mi., .037 in. ; 2 Y% mi., .044 in.

Mercurial Geodetic Level, indicating angle of divergence of air
line and horizontal at points of test, for the space of 12 feet :

1 mi., .042 m.; 2 mi., .094 in.; 2 Y% mi., .115 in.

The Horizon, indicating angle for space of 36 feet, as accurately as
could be measured with the eye at a distance of 15 feet from the
apparatus :

1 mi.,.15 in.; 2 mi., .34 in.; 2^ mi., .51 in.


results and inevitable conclusions. 117

These readings, taken as a basis of mathematical
calculations, will be found to very nearly conform to the
relations of chord and radii, over an arc of 25,000 miles
circumference, and are evidences of the angles increased in
about the proper ratio, as the surveyed line progressed from
the beginning to the end ; the chord, tangibly constructed,
was constantly converging with the arc, as we have shown
by the four independent sources of evidence ; and we now
purpose presenting such a net-work of facts of absolute and
direct demonstration, as to render our position invulnerable,
and our premise impregnable.

Details of Visual Projection of the Air Line Over
Gordon’s Pass.

From the Naples dock looking south, a white line in
the Florida sand marks the line of excavations for emplace¬
ment of the standards of the Rectilineator, extending to
Gordon’s Pass, in the southern horizon. This white line is
the actual mark we have made in the world, —our path to
success, the route of demonstration. Carefully and
patiently for eight weeks we followed this course, making
precise adjustments, and executing painstaking, careful,
tedious, and trying work by which the facts we are publish¬
ing were obtained. We diagram the Air Line, the ooast
line, and the water’s surface to the extremity of the line,
covering the space of miles. A is the point of

beginning of the line at altitude of 128 inches; 13 is the
point where the rectiline extended into the waters of the
Gulf of Mexico. The coast line can be easily traced with¬
out lettering; C is Gordon’s Pass; D, the long sand-bar
extending into the Gulf, through an excavation in which
the Air Line was projected ; the excavation admitted of


Il8 THE cellular cosmogony.

vision of the water horizon from the 2V2 mile station, where
the final adjustments of the apparatus were made.

All of the definite measurements of altitude of the line
and of the minute angles of divergence, were made with
reference to the position of the apparatus from the begin¬
ning of the line to the end of the adjustments, covering a
distance of 13,200 feet, or 2 >4 miles ; the line was tangibly
built for this distance. The cross-arms extended 2 feet
below the horizontal axis or middle line of the sections, and
at the end of 2}4 miles were within 7 inches of the ground ;
the axis of the apparatus was rapidly converging with the
water level. We had manipulated the apparatus as far as



Map of Coast Line and Gordon’s Pass, Showing Course of Air Line and Point
of Projection Into the Gulf.

practicable and possible, within the limits of our con¬
veniences for operation from the starting point of i2&-inch
.altitude. The Air Tine at this point was 54 inches nearer
the water’s surface than at the beginning ; whereas, if the
earth were convex, the line would have been 54 inches
above the vertical point of the original 128 inches, making
a difference of 108 inches, or 9 feet , in the position of
the apparatus from that really obtained.

The Extension of the Air Line Into the Water.

For the reasons given above, the extension of the Air
Line into the water, or a continuance of the line in any
direction, we had to employ another method of survey. As


RESULTS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS. IIQ

the line would extend across the Pass and over the sand¬
bar, through the excavation, and into the Gulf south of the
Pass, it was necessary to finish the line by a visual
process. In order that this might be done as accurately as
possible, obviating any errors that might arise from the
adjustment of such an apparatus as the engineer’s level,
parallel with the horizontal axis of the apparatus, two
points on the Air Line surveyed by the apparatus, one-
eighth of a mile apart, were taken as the sighting stations ;
these points were Tide Staffs Nos. 19 and 20. On these
staffs we had left the record of the altitude of the Air Line.
The large telescope, provided with horizontal cross-hair,
was adjusted at Staff No. 19, so that its line of collima-
tion was at the same altitude as the surveyed line at that
point. On Staff No. 20, one eighth of a mile distant, a
steel strip was fixed horizontally at altitude of Air Line at
that point, upon which to train the telescope. When the
telescope was adjusted so that the cross-hair was in line
with the steel strip, the simple matter of projecting the
remainder of the line visually is easily comprehended. At
these distances from the beginning of the line, with the
tending divergence toward the water, refraction .and visual
curvilineation would involve so small a factor of departure
from the rectiline for the remaining distance, as to give an
approximately correct reading on the staffs to the end.
Through the telescope, the steel strip and the cross-hair
were observed to a point below the Gulf horizon—the visual
line extending into the water south of the Pass.

The following diagram gives a perpendicular view
of the line, showing the land elevation. XY is the arc of
curvature ; A, the beginning of the survey ; B, the point of
projection into the w T ater ; C, the Pass, and D, the sand-


120 thje; cellular cosmogony.

bar through which excavation was made ; B, Tide Staff No.
19, with telescope ; F, Tide Staff No. 20. The continuous
line is the line surveyed by section adjustments ; the dotted
line is the portion of the Air Bine projected visually. For
the purposes of measurement and calculation of ratio of
curvature, it was necessary to locate the point on the Gulf
where the line extended into the water. This was done by
directing our sail-boat beyond the Pass, in line with the
telescope axis. When the lower part of the hull appeared
just above the cross-hair, it was obvious that the point was
marked. By means of our Signal Code, the observer at the
telescope transmitted the information that the point was


Profile View of Land Elevation, Showing Process of Visual Projection of Air
Line Into the Gulf.


reached by the sailors in the boat, and the occupants
replied, giving the distance as 4miles from the station¬
ary caisson, or 1^ miles south of the Pass, as indicated by
the tide staffs along the beach.

These observations were participated in by the Visiting
and Investigating Committee, whose testimony we append
at the close of this work, as well as the testimony of the
Operating Staff, who conducted a repetition of the observa¬
tion three days later. At the time of the observations,
sketches of the telescopic view were made by the writer,
showing the boat on the Gulf where the Air Bine was pro¬
jected into the water, as the converging chord of arc ; and
for the benefit of the reader, we herewith produce sketch,



SKETCH OF THE TELESCOPIC VIEW.

Showing Extension of the Air Line into the Gulf through Excavation South of
Gordon’s Pass; also relation of Cross-hair and Steel Strip to
Horizon and Boat in the Distance.

completed the experiment, the results being proclaimed by
the Founder of the Koreshan Cosmogony, for twenty-seven
years previous to the demonstration on the Florida west


122 THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

For tlie purpose of further testing the apparatus, we
retraced the surveyed line by means of the apparatus, for
the distance of one half mile, taking the last forward adjust¬
ment as the first adjustment on the return survey. If the
hair-line of the apparatus returned to the same point on the
tide staffs, it would be a further demonstration of the
accuracy of our work. An error of deviation from the
rectiline would be applied on the return, and would conse¬
quently be made manifest by having fixed points as bases of
reference, such as were recorded upon the tide staffs on the
forward survey. Upon return to the staffs the hair-line
of the apparatus fell upon nearly the same points, as per
the figures in the table of measurements under the follow¬
ing subhead, demonstrating the remarkable accuracy and
efficiency of the apparatus employed to make the first direct
test of the earth’s surface in the history of the world.

Facts of Measurement of Altitude of the Air Line on
25 Tide Staffs.

As the Rectilineator was moved forward, section by
section, in the direction of the tide staffs, the relation of
the hair-line of the sections to the 128-inch altitude, or
secondary datum line, was easily obtained by measurement.
At no place throughout the line of survey did the sections
rise above the original 128-inch altitude. At the end of
the first 660 feet, where the calculated ratio would indicate
.125 of an inch curvation, the hair-line of the apparatus fell
.15 of an inch below the 128-inch altitude, being a differ¬
ence of only .025 of an inch. This is in easy contrast
with the conditions that would result if the earth curved
downward instead of upward. If it were convex, the liair-


RESUI/TS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS. 123

line of the sections would have fallen about .125 of an inch
above the 128-inch altitude. The tide staffs marked


TABLE SHOWING ALTITUDE OF AIR LINE ABOVE DATUM LINE AT
EVERY STATION OF SURVEY, WITH THE MEASURES
COMPARED WITH THE CALCULATED CURVATURE.


03

"S

a

0


a

d

O

U

<£>

MS

d o5
© ©

<X>

fa

a .

©,tn

p os

03CC

©

M ©

<< 33

£

® a

*•3

fl .s

S

§

©

a •
§

'O

◄

fca

S

02

O A

^ fd
•d O
H g

o>

X

Oir< .

fa 03

® 03-S

cp d
d aS .
fa ® a>

t-i

•H h w

<1 03 d

©

°-S
© v

03 d

M cl

Between

5 , inches.

Ah

0 a

0

0)

cS

.5 be
©
©M

0

a

o3

a

©

©

a

S3

V,

O

©

.O

a

d

U

0

fa

a

3

iches Alt
Line A
Datu

^ d qT
Ocg

©S 3

S

to O

■d £

© 3

•*» 3

03 C)

E ©

© >

"3 S

0} *rH

d d
©«
h

id

Q

s

s

f?

&

M

S"*

0 0

s

March 18

0

0

0

1

128

0.

0.

0 .

“ 19

660

i

55

2

127.85

.15

.125

.025

« 23

1,320

i

110

3

127.74

.26

.5

.24

“ 24

1,980

i

165

4

126.625

1.375

1.125

.25

“ 25

2,640

|

220

5

126.125

1.875

2.

.125

“ 27

3,300

3,960


275

6

124.125

3.875

3.125

.75

“ 30

i

330

7

123.675

4.375

4.5

.125

“ 31

4,620

j

385

8

121.57

6.43

6.125

.305

April 1

5,280

1

440

9

119.98

8.02

8.

.02

“ . 2

5,940

n

495

10

117.875

10.125

10.125

.0

“ 8

6,600

11

550

11

116.44

11.56

12.5

.94

“ 9

7,260

it

605

12

113.69

14.31

15.125

.815

“ 13

7,920

H

660

13

111.07

16.93

18.

1.07

“ 14

8,580

n

715

14

107.19

20.81

21.125

.315

“ 14

9,240

it

770

15

104.69

23.31

24.5

1.19

“ 15

9,900

H

825

16

101.69

26.31

28.125

1.825

“ 16

10,560

2

880

17

97.38

30.62

32.

1.38

“ 24

11,220

2i

935

18

93.44

34.56

36.125

1.565

“ 26

11,880

21

990

19

85.32

42.68

40.5

2.18

“ 27

12,540

28

1,045

20

79.75

48.25

45.125

3.125

May 8

13,200

2£

21

74.

54.

50.

4.

“ 8

13,860

2f


22

68.

60.

55.125

4.875

“ 8

14,520

2|-


23

63.

65.

60.5

4.5

“ 8

15,840

3


24

53.

75.

72.

3.

“ 8

21.780

u


25

0.

128.

136.125

8.125


RETURN SURVEY.


“ 6

12,540

28

1,084

20

79.75

48.25

45.125

3.125

“ 11

11,880

2*

1,140

19

85.47

42.53

40.5

2.03

“ 11

11,220

2g

1,194

18

93.68

34.32

36.125

1.805

“ 11

10,560

2

1,250

17

97.13

30.87

32.

1.13


brilliant points of interest throughout the survey ; for each


124


THE CEEEUEAR COSMOGONY.


RESUETS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS.


125


measurement was a demonstration not only of the fact that
the earth curved toward its chord, but also the ratio of its
concavity.

For easy reference and definite record, we have con¬
densed all of the facts of measurements of the Koreshan
Geodetic Survey, into the preceding table of distances and
altitudes, by means of w T hich the results of our work may
be easily compared with the calculated ratio, and how
nearly, at each tide staff, the hair-line of the apparatus
came to indicating the ratio which we have since calculated,
and here present for comparison and study. It will be
noticed that the difference between the measured and the
calculated ratios increases toward the end of the survey ;
the apparent rapid approach of the line to the water’s
surface after 2% miles had been surveyed, is due, not to
actual approach to the mean water level of even curvature,
nor to inaccurate work nor measurements of the tide levels,
but to the crowdiug of the w r aters around the mouth of the
Pass, creating a slight irregularity in the water level in that
vicinity. It will also be noticed that the line projected into
the water at the distance of 4^ miles, instead of 4 miles,
which is due to refraction and incurvation of the visual
lines from the 2*4 miles station to the water’s surface
beyond the Pass.

Comparative Results of Altitude Measurements on
Concave and Convex Surfaces.

It may be asked, What would be the facts of measure¬
ment if such a survey as ours were made upon a convex
surface ? We append table of comparative results, for
reference, study, or test by calculation. Having two
parallel arcs, the mean tide level, and the secondary datum


line, connected by staffs of 128 inches altitude, as fixed bases
of reference, it may be seen that on a convex earth, instead
of the air line falling below the vertical point of every staff,


TABLE contrasting air line as surveyed, with calculated
RESULTS UPON CONVEX SURFACE.


6

PQ

Line,

§ 0 )
s >

3? -

eg

fl .

0^3

O 03

09

!«

be

d > .a


s Distance Fron
ginning.

;ude Surveyed
inches,

ance Below 128
ltitude on Cone
Surface, inches

ulated Distance s
8-lnch Altitude
Convex Surface
inches.

erence Between
, r e and Convex R
ings, inches.

a,l Altitude of Ta
Mean Tide, Con
Surface, inches

a

o>

P

<

73

0

S3

<

tjO

5

O (N

73 1-1
o

5 °

o

©+*

H

o

H

0

128.

0 .

0 .

0.

128.

10.66

i

127.85

.15

.125

.275

128.125

10.67

i

127.74

.26

.5

.76

128.5

10.7

§

126.625

1.375

1.125

2.49

129.125

10.76

4

126.125

1.875

2.

3.875

130,

10.83


124.125

3.875

3.125

6.99

131.125

10.94

;s

123.675

4.375

4.5

8.875

132.5

11.04

£

121.57

6.43

6.125

12.555

134.125

11.17

1

119.98

8.02

8.

16.02

136.

11.33

U

117.875

10.125

10.125

20.25

138.125

11.5

11

116.44

11.56

12.5

24.06

140.5

11.7

is

113.69

14.31

15.125

29.435

143.125

11.92

14

111.07

16.93

18.

34.93

146.

12.16

is

107.19

20.81

21.125

41.935

149.125

12.42

If

104.69

23.31

24.5

47.81

152.5

12.7

If

101.69

26.31

28.125

54.435

156.125

13.01

2

97.38

30.62

32.

62.62

160.

13.3

2g

93.44

34.56

36.125

70.685

164.125

13.67

2i

85.32

42.68

40.5

83.18

168.5

14.04

2§

79.75

48.25

45.125

93.375

173.125

14.42

24

74.

54.

50.

104.

178.

14.8

2 §

68.

60.

55.125

115.125

183.125

15.26

2f

63.

65.

60.5

125.

185.5

15.7

3

53.

75.

72.

147.

, 200.

16.6

41

0 .

128.

136.125

264.125

264.125

22.01

it would rise

above , and

increase in

excess

of altitude

above


the original 128 inches as to the square of the distance.

For instance ; at the end of the first mile, instead of the


126


THE CEEEURAR COSMOGONY.


surveyed line falling 8.02 inches below the secondary datum
line, it would rise about as far above, making a difference
of about 16 inches in the altitude of the line on the concave,
and the line on the convex earth ; while at the end of 4 yk
miles, instead of the line extending into the water, the line
would be projected out into space, 136.125 inches above the
original 128 inches, making a difference between the two
theories of 264.125 inches, or about 22 feet , in 4^ miles.
We could not miss the mark 22 feet with any right-angled
apparatus, nor could we make such a blunder as running a
line into the water on a convex earth !

Conclusion of the Direct Demonstration.

We have followed the line of logical argument from the
beginning of Part II, or the New Geodesy ; we have
stated clearly the principles of our premise, and the rela¬
tions of the chord and arc, and have reviewed the methods
employed in the old geodesy. We have presented a long
line of experiments, disproving by ocular means, the theory
of the earth’s convexity. We have followed the line of
direct demonstration from the very foundation principles of
all geometrical forms and relations; we have embodied
these principles in an apparatus, and have described all of
the details of the Geodetic Survey from the beginning to
the end, and have summed up the measurements and the
results. Step by step we have proven our propositions ;
from the beginning we have made no assumptions, we have
not built upon hypotheses. We have been logical and
clear; honest, open, and frank. The evidences obtained
from the line of experiments and surveys are all in. W T e
have completed the chain of direct demonstration ; only the
conclusions now remain to be stated.


At Gordon’s Pass.

Group of Witnesses and Position of Apparatus at Farthest

Point South.


RESULTS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS.


127


The simple route to conclusion is the relating of the
surveyed Air Line to the datum line or mean tide level.
From the facts of measurements obtained in the work which
we have described, we may construct diagrams which will
illustrate and demonstrate our conclusion. We began with
reference to known and determined perpendicular and
horizontal; from the first adjustment of the Rectilineator,
we projected an Air Line for the distance of about 4 miles ;
the line throughout was straight, and maintained its
parallel relations to the external tangent. In the accom¬
panying diagram, A is the perpendicular; BC, the line
surveyed ; B, the beginning, and C, the point of projection
into the water. The altitude of the line at the beginning



The Air Line, Datum Arc, and External Tangent.—Altitude of Surveyed Line
at 25 Points.


was 128 inches ; it follows that the line was parallel with
the external tangent, and consequently 128 inches above
the external tangent, PQ, throughout the entire distance.
Now, a surface intervenes between the Air Line and the
external tangent, the distance to which is 128 inches at the
beginning, and o at the end ; we have given the measure¬
ments for all the intermediate points—the distance from the
rectiline down to the datum line at every tide staff. The
fine lines in the cut extending downward from the line BC,
indicate the measured distance from BC to the datum arc at
every tide staff. The datum arc is the line which the
measurements relate to the projected rectiline above ; and
as the measurements were made from the surveyed line to


128


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


the water’s surface, it follows as a conclusion forced by the
intellectual comprehension of the principles employed and
the results obtained, that the arc of the water’s surface cur-
vates concavely at about 8 inches to the mile, or 128 inches
(10 feet and 8 inches) in about 4 miles.

We may take the measurements of the space on the
fide staffs between the rectiline and the original 128-inch
altitude, at the various stations of the 25 tide staffs,
beginning at the top of Tide Staff No. 1, and ending at the
bottom of Tide Staff No. 25. XY is the arc of the water’s
surface; A, the perpendicular at the beginning, from
which the rectiline BC was projected. The fine lines are
the tide staffs from the beginning to the end, which are



The Air Line Intersecting the 25 Tide Staffs, Falling Below the Vertical Points
in Proportion to the Square of the Distance.


intersected by the rectiline BC, cutting each staff at a lower
point than the preceding one, until at the last the rectiline
BC touches the arc XY, demonstrating not only the fact
that the water’s surface is concave, but also the definite
ratio of its curvature. The above diagram serves only to
illustrate the relation of the chord, radii, and arc, but not
the scale. A diagram drawn true to scale, sufficiently large
to .show the vertical altitudes, would be too long for print¬
ing. The following specifications for drawing the scale will
serve to convey to the mind the proper proportions on the
basis of the calculated ratio of the concave curvature, which
very nearly agrees with the ratio which we obtained by
processes of mechanical survey:


RESULTS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS.


129


Scale : 1 to 586.667 ; 9 ft.=i mile ; 36 ft. =4 miles.

The scale is projected on the basis of a circle of 42.5 miles circumfer¬
ence ; 13.5 miles diam., with 6.75 miles radius.

.204 in. represent 10 ft. .0136 in. represent 8 in.

.0204 in. “ 1 ft. .2176 in. “ 10% ft.

.0017 in. “ 1 in.

Length of sine of arc, representing 4-mile line of survey, 36 ft.

Curvation of arc in 36 feet, from external tangent, .2176 in.

In the opposite direction, if the drawing be extended to complete
the chord (making diagram 72 feet long), curvature would be the
same.

.2176-j- in. : 36 ft. : : 1 : 1980.

Diagram consists of two principal lines, each 36 feet in length,
beginning parallel to each other, .2176 in., or more than one fifth
of an inch apart; upper line straight, the other being the arc of
the circle of 6.75 miles radius, curvating concavely in the
direction of the sine of arc at the ratio given below, converging
with the sine at the distance of 36 ft.

Curvature per mile on the scale ;

First mile, .0136 in. I Third mile, .1224 in.

Second mile, .0544 in. | Fourth mile, .2176 in.

On scale of 1 to 586.667,

.0136 in. represents 8 in. I .1224 in. represents 72 in.

.0544 in. “ 32 in. | .2176 in. “ 10% ft.

The results obtained in the survey of the sine of arc,
or half a chord, would obtain in the opposite direction also.
At the commencement of the survey, when the first sections
of the apparatus were leveled and in adjustment, special
observations were made of the horizon in the north as well
as in the south ; the straight-edges sustained the same rela¬
tion to the two horizon points ; and the several processes
for leveling the apparatus, which were employed at Station
1, in connection with the observations, constitute the
premise of the conclusion that the ratio of curvature of the
earth toward the north from our stationary caisson, is the
same as toward the south. In this way we definitely relate
nearly 8)4 miles of arc of concave curvature and its chord,
and from the facts obtained, the conclusion is inevitable that


13 ° THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

an area of the earth’s surface of 4^ miles radius contains a
concavity whose depth at the center is about 128 inches.

The extension of the arc of curvature which we have
measured and have demonstrated to be concave, forms a
circumference of about 25,000 miles; which conclusion,
taken in connection with all the astronomical, geographical,
and geodetic facts obtained by centuries of observation and
survey, demonstrates that the surface of the earth upon
which we live is the inner surface of a great cell about
8,000 miles in diameter.

The New Geodesy in Its Success Exceeds in Import¬
ance the World’s Fruitless Scientific
Research.

Our knowledge of the figure of the earth is only obtained by
indirect means.—Astronomer Ball.

The geodetic operations carried on during the last century and a
half for the purpose of determining the figure and dimensions of the
earth have, up to this time, led to no satisfactory results. They have
been performed by the most eminent astronomers, with the most
perfect instruments, and it would seem that they ought to have led
to a final solution of the problem ; such, however, is by no means the
case. Every new measure of a meridian arc has but added, and adds,
to the existing doubts and want of concordance, nay, to the positive
contradiction which the various operations exhibit, as compared with
one another.—Von Schubert.

The problem that has so long engaged the minds of
scientists has been solved ; the earth’s form, the determina¬
tion of which has baffled the skill and taxed the ingenuity
of the scientific world, is at last demonstrated to be
cellular , with its habitable surface concave ! In the light of
all it implies and involves, there is nothing in the entire
realm of science that is of more stupendous import. When
realized, there can be nothing more startling than the
absolute evidences of the earth’s concavity. To the mind
of the rational investigator, the theory of the earth’s con-



RESULTS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS. 131

cave curvature is removed from the plane of mere
probability to that of absolute certainty; the circuitous
route of inquiry concerning the various phenomena of the
universe is now obviated, and the question definitely set¬
tled in the minds of those who have considered and com¬
prehended the meaning of the simple facts afforded through
the application of the principles of accurate geodetic survey.

The importance of an undertaking is always measured
by its ultimate results. On such a basis, we place the
importance of our geodetic survey over against all the
efforts of modern scientific men, with all their millions
of dollars, with all their appliances and apparatus of the
very finest workmanship, and with all their observatories.
With all the facilities at their command, they have failed
to bring to humanity that which they have been commis¬
sioned and paid to discover. The geodesist and geograph¬
ers have almost girdled the globe with surveyors’ chains,
in the endeavor to discover the earth’s true form. Cer¬
tainly, at their bidding, vessels have plied the oceans of the
world in every direction, and from pole to pole, in the hope
of discovering some fact indicative of the correctness of
their conclusions. In the more advanced nations, section
after section has been selected as the field of geodetic obser¬
vations,—for the survey of base lines, spherical triangles,
and quadrilaterals; and yet they have failed to accomplish
that for which they have ostensibly labored. Likewise, the
ingenuity of the astronomers has been directed toward the
heavens in the investigation of all the movements of the
visible orbs above us, and they have failed to discover a
single fact in support of the hypothesis of the earth’s motion
—they have failed to determine the true distance of a single
fixed star, and their calculations of solar, lunar, and planet-


132


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


ary magnitudes and distances are wide of the mark. To
prove the theory of the earth’s diurnal rotation and annual
revolution about the sun, many ingenious experiments have
been conducted, and wonderfully accurate instruments and
mechanical appliances have been employed, but without
success.

When we consider the remarkable success of the geo¬
detic work of the Koreshan System in proving the earth’s
concavity, in contrast with the failure of scientists, how
utterly insignificant seem all their efforts! How fruitless
the many expeditions commissioned by the various govern¬
ments of the world, to make observations of the transits of
Venus for the purpose of determining the true solar paral¬
lax ! How valueless, in view of the failure to prove the
conclusions desired, are the experiments with Foucault’s
pendulum, the rotating gyroscopes, spectral analysis, and
star-gauging ! In short, the stupendous efforts put forth
in the cause of .so called science are needless expenditures
of energy. We are not discrediting the scientific work of
the world; such efforts have their value, but the work thus
far performed by scientists of the old school, is not of para¬
mount importance. We are simply comparing success with
failure, the results of energy directed along the line of
Truth, with that contributed to the cause of the great
mogul of fallacy. The great wonder of the hour, the
startling fact now manifesting and forcing itself upon the
rational mind is, that outside of the ranks of recognized
scientists there should develop a line of scientific work that
eclipses all the efforts of the vast army of astronomers and
teachers in all the observatories and universities of the
world!

Columbus in his adventures struck a chord that re¬


RESULTS AND INEVITABLE CONCLUSIONS. 133

sounded throughout the world; he led the westward march
of empire and the progress of civilization. The operation
of the mighty forces of human development, which before
were confined to the old world, was made to pivot upon the
discovery of new fields of expression. Within the lifetime,
of that one man a great change came; where in the earlier
days of his career his plans fell upon deaf ears, there were
soon awakened in all the kingdoms of Europe, mighty
movements toward the new continent. He lifted the veil
from the new world; that act was the turning-point in the
progress of nations. Vastly more important than the dis¬
covery of the continent of America is the discovery of the
true cosmic form, in which all continents lie, with the
resultant demonstration—that which brings to the world a
comprehensive view of the Fight of Ages ! The Koreshan
System is founded upon a scientific and specific premise.
The System pivots upon the fact of the earth’s concavity;
the demonstration of that fact is the pivot of its success.

The mighty forces of the impending scientific revo¬
lution, hitherto confined in their proper centers and spheres
of elaboration, involved in the integral mind which has
brought to us the marvelous System, and pulsating about
the pivot of the demonstration of the scientific premise,
will soon be manifest in the awakening of the world to the
realization of the dawn of a New World—a New Era, in
which humanity will be saved from the prevailing fallacies\
— ignorance and darkness ! The testimony of the Air Fine,
the chord of arc, will vibrate the world in confirmation of
the message of Koresh ! That testimony is now pro¬
claimed to the world. The tension of human thought and
the voltage of mental energy involved in the work of pro¬
mulgation of the Koreshan System, and the triumphant


134 the CEEEULAR cosmogony.

herald of the facts of the demonstration of its premise, will
be felt in future years—long ages after all fallacious sys¬
tems have been buried in the ruins of the old world !


Echoes of the Geodetic Survey.

Conclusive Answers to Irrational Objections and Argu=
ments Against the Results Obtained by the
Rectilineator.

Obstinacy Manifested by the Chagrined Critics.

I learned, as my first great lesson in the inquiry into obscure
fields of knowledge, never to accept the disbelief of great men or
their accusations of imposture or imbecility, as of any weight when
opposed to the repeated observation of facts by other men admittedly
sane and honest. The whole history of science shows us that when¬
ever educated and scientific men of any age have denied the facts of
other investigators on a priori' grounds of absurdity, the deniers
have always been wrong.—Prof. A. Russell Wallace, the Eminent
Naturalist.


JHE Geodetic work at Naples, Fla., has been completed^
and the facts thereby obtained have been published to
the world. Many are rejoicing over the results; others are
chagrined. In the stubborn resistance immediately mani¬
fested by a few who would have rejoiced had the evidences
produced by the employment of the Rectilineator been
favorable to the Copernican theory, we find history repeat¬
ing itself. Because of this, we publish the above quotation
from the pen of a recognized scientist, which reveals the
character of the opposition to the facts of demonstration
and observation in its true light. Fallacy is rooted and
grounded in the very heart of humanity, and will not aban¬
don its hold without a struggle. For the benefit of the
reader, we here recall the fatuous opposition to the facts of
the discovery, by the noted Harvey, of the circulation of



ECHOES OP THE GEODETIC SURVEY. 135

the blood in the human system. Although he produced
the evidence,—made ocular demonstrations of the flow of
the blood through the arteries and veins of the human
body—the physicians and anatomists of the old schools
refused to investigate. Today, there is not a man that can
be found to deny the circulation of the life fluid through
the arterial and venous systems.

When the telescope was invented and began to reveal
the movements of satellites about the planets, the facts
observed by Galileo and others were stubbornly denied by
the astronomers of the Ptolemaic system; and for years
Galileo succeeded in inducing but few to witness the phe¬
nomena through the telescope. One scientist, who had
more zeal, prejudice, and jealousy than knowledge and
wisdom, wrote a dissertation on the telescope, attempting to
show how astigmatisms could be produced in the lenses,
and the lenses made to revolve in such a way as to give the
appearance of the satellites revolving about the planet
Jupiter. That man lived and died without ever having
made a single astronomical observation by means of the
telescope. What did he know about the telescope ? The
sequel proved that he knew nothing; yet he denied that the
objedts that w T ere seen were possible to be seen.

Geodetic and Geometrical Ratio of Earth’s Concavity.

The earth’s concavity is considered as an absurdity,
and the long line of demonstrations of the same, the mere
result of deception and fraud. What do our critics know
about the facts we have observed ? Upon what reasonable
ground can the evidences we present, be disputed by those
who have never undertaken the lines of experimentation
we have projected? The opposition to our work today is


137


136 the cellular cosmogony.

as unreasonable, absurd, and idiotic as that manifested
against the work of Harvey and Galileo. We persistently
proclaim the facts we have observed and obtained; they are
as persistently denied by a few who have never ventured
near the surface of water to test its contour. We have
surveyed a line by means of a mechanical apparatus, the
results of which are as easily (?) explained away by a few
who have never seen the apparatus, and who know nothing
about its capabilities or methods of use, as the moons of
Jupiter were explained by those who had never observed
their motions through the telescope. These so called
explanations of the results of our survey, we purpose to
overthrow.

We have surveyed a line upon the Gulf coast of
Florida. The measurements were such as to demonstrate
conclusively the concave arc of the earth’s curvature upon
which the survey was made, and not only the direction of
its curvature, but also its ratio. In this survey we found a
definite ratio of approach of the earth’s surface to meet the
rectiline extended from an altitude of 10 feet above the
water level; the line was extended into the water’s surface
at a distance of about 4 miles from the beginning of
the survey, as shown in the diagram on the following
page; XY being the concave arc over 4 miles in length;
AB, the air line; A, the beginning, iofz feet above the
water, and B, the point of extension into the water; N is
north; S, south; 1, 2, 3, 4, the mile stations; ab represents
the external tangent parallel to the air line, showing the
ratio of curvation of the earth’s surface for each mile of
the survey, while cd represents a line referred to later in
the article. The ratio of the concave curvature was in
proportion to the square of the distance; at the end of the



ECHOES OE THE GEODETIC SURVEY.

first mile, the distance between the air line and the water’s
surface was 8 inches less than at the beginning, because
the earth in this distance had curvated upward 8 inches;
the second mile, about 2 feet and 8 inches; third mile, 6
feet, while at the end of the fourth mile the line extended
into the Gulf. In the diagram, the lines of perpendiculars
extending from the air line to the arc at o, 1, 2, 3, 4,
decrease in length in precisely the same proportion that the
earth curvates concavely. Not only was the proper ratio
found to exist at the end of even miles; but also at the end
of every eighth of a mile from the beginning of the survey.



Diagram of Air Line on Concave Surface; Ratio of Curvature.


Let each reader capable of making a mathematical calcula¬
tion of the ratio of curvature of a concave sphere 25,000
miles in circumference, test this ratio and the results
obtained by the survey, and it will be found that such ratio
cannot be obtained by the extension of a right line upon
any other than a concave surface; the geometrical principles
involved will not admit of it.

Two Classes of Objections Urged.

We confront two classes of objections to the character
of the geodetic work upon the coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
From several sources, it is claimed that the Rectilineator is
not sufficiently accurate to extend a straight line; while


138


the: cktujtar cosmogony.


from others comes the accusation that we purposely inclined
the first section at the starting point, so as to extend the line
into the water at a distance of 4 miles; from others, that the
first section of the apparatus was not accurately leveled, but
inclined toward the earth by mistake. We suppose that
these two classes of objections seem satisfactory to the
minds expressing them.

We knew that the objection would be urged that the
apparatus was not accurate, and therefore took extra precau¬
tions, not only that such objections might be overthrown,
but also to insure the accuracy required for such work; we
did not devote four weeks to making the apparatus accu¬
rate, for nothing. The method employed to insure further
accuracy, was by making the apparatus neutralize its own
inaccuracies by reversal or turning-over of each section at
every alternate adjustment. This process would correct
any error arising from any inaccuracy of the brass-facings
—for whatever error in the iine would result from a single
cross-arm being more or less than .001 of an inch out of
right angle, would be corrected when that section should
be reversed, as every mechanic well knows. A source of
inaccuracy is also attributed to the contraction and expan¬
sion of the material of which the apparatus is constructed.
Those who make this objection have never seen the appara¬
tus, and consequently cannot appreciate the fact that the
plan of its construction obviates the effect of whatever
contraction or expansion occurred. Besides, there are no
sources of error or inaccuracy—those of adjustment,
settling, vibration from the wind, or change of temperature,
that could conspire to produce a deviation of the air line
always in the same direction. Check up all the errors that
occur, as is done by all surveyors, and the value of the


Away Down on the Standards.

At Gordon’s Pass, 2% miles south of Naples; 4 feet nearer the water than at beginning; the Straight-edges and the Horizon.


139


RCHORS OF THR GRODEFlC SURVEY.

“elements of chance” is found to reside in the fact that the
deviations are finally neutralized. It is supposed that
settling played an important part in the descent of the line
surveyed; if so, why should the line descend .15 of an inch
for the first eighth of a mile, and 6 inches for the eighth
between the 19th and 20th tide staffs? If settling pro¬
duced the descent, this would be manifest by returning
over the same line. We returned over the same line for a
distance of ^4 of a mile, to ascertain if there would be any
deviation. The fact that the horizontal axis of the appara¬
tus projected the line on the return survey, to the same
points on the record stakes indicating the air line in the
forward survey, is proof of the fact that the factors of set¬
tling, if any existed, were absolutely neutralized, for they
did not swerve the apparatus from a true and direct recti-
line course. Let those who make such objections explain
how the exact and definite ratio was obtained, if we did
not extend a rectiline from the beginning of the survey.

The Objections Contradict Each Other.

We now come to the examination of the charge that
we purposely inclined the first section so as to permit of
extension of the line into the water in 4 miles. Our bur¬
den at the present time is not that we failed to produce the
evidences that the earth is concave, but to get such minds
to see the utter absurdity of such objections. The fact
that these objections contradict each other, is conclusive
proof that both classes of objections are made without a
foundation o-f conclusion, and are simply subterfuges with
which to evade the evidences afforded through the accurate
survey. Suppose that we did purposely incline the first
section out of level, what would be the result ? The charge


140


THF CKI<I<UI<AR COSMOGONY.

involves the admission of three things,—very necessary
factors in the work of extending a rectiline: First, that our
mathematics was exact—necessarily so, to calculate the
angle of inclination; second, that we were capable of mak¬
ing some absolute measurements of angles in the adjust¬
ment of the first section of the apparatus, and third, that
the apparatus, in order to extend a line from the inclined
position of the first section into the water at a distance
agreed (?) upon before the work began, would have to be
perfect and capable of extending a straight line, for with
what else than a perfect apparatus and accurate measure¬
ments of angles, could we strike the water at the distance
desired, from a given inclination of the first section from an
absolute level? In order for the charge to be true, we
would have to extend an absolutely straight line , involving
just the kind of adjustments and minute measurements that
the other class of minds says is impossible. We know that
the first section was level, having applied two of the finest
levels obtainable; we made no mistake—the accuracy of our
line depended upon getting the first sedtion in the abso¬
lutely correct position.

Reply to Charge of Inclining First Section.

We will examine the charge in another light—in the
light of geometrical principles, and will endeavor to illus¬
trate our exposition of this charge and objection in the two
diagrams in the following cut: Let XY represent the con¬
vex arc; AB the air line, beginning at an altitude 10^3 feet*
above the water, and inclined out of level so as to strike

♦Really, to conform to the fact that the air line extended into the water in 4
miles at an angle, with the horizon V/ 2 miles beyond the end of the chord, the
altitude of the starting point, on the convex earth as per charge, would have to
be 18 FEET and 8 inches, instead of 30 feet! For the sake of simple illustration,
we have represented the line as terminating at the horizon, and consequently
parallel to the water.



KCHOKS OF THK GFODKTIC SURVEY. 141

the water in four miles; N is north; S, south; i, 2, 3, 4,
indicate mile stations along the line of survey. Now con¬
trast the ratio of approach of the line to the water’s surface
that we have exhibited in the cut illustrating the line
extended over the concave arc. In the first diagram, the
line began parallel with the water’s surface, and ended ob¬
liquely to it. In this, the line begins at a definite angle
from the horizontal, and ends coincidental with or parallel
to the horizontal at B. The ratio of approach of the line
to the water’s surface would be just the reverse to that
really obtained. As for instance, beginning lofz feet



Results of Projection of Rectiline on the Surface of Supposed Convex and
Flat Earth.


above the water, at the end of the first mile, the line,
according to the basis of the charge, would be 4 feet nearer
the water’s surface than at the beginning. The ratio of
approach of the line to the water’s surface would be more
rapid at the beginning of the line than at the end, and
the ratio of divergence of the line from the end of the line
to the beginning, would be in proportion to the square of
the distance from the end of the line; whereas in fact, in
the survey of the line at Naples, Fla., the ratio of conver¬
gence of the air line and the water’s surface was less at the
beginning of the line and greater at the end. If the air
line had really descended at the ratio of 4 feet for the first


142 'The; cerrurar cosmogony.

mile, and so on, in proportion, the line would have extended
into the surface at a distance of 1 % miles from the begin¬
ning of the line, and the angle of inclination from the hori¬
zontal would have been enormous.

If the earth were a plane, the result of inclining the
first section of the Redtilineator so as to extend the line into
the water in 4 miles, would be an even ratio of descent of
the line, as represented in the diagram below the convex
arc in the preceding cut, in accordance with the principle of
convergence of two straight lines. XY would represent
the water line; AB the air line, as per charge; N is north; S,
south; 1, 2, 3, 4, the mile stations. The approach of the
line to the water for the first mile would have been 2
feet; for the second mile, 2feet, and the same for the
third mile, and the same for the fourth. The air line
would sustain the same obliquity to the horizontal through¬
out the line of survey. On the convex arc, the deviation
of the horizontal axis of the apparatus would be greatest at
the beginning of the line, and horizontal at the end. How
was it ? The line showed no perceptible deviation from the
horizontal until near the end of the first eighth of a mile,
and increased continually as the line progressed, until at
the end of 2miles the obliquity of the air line to the hori¬
zontal was sufficient to extend the visual line from that
point to the surface of the Gulf, below the horizon.

Charge of Falsification of the Facts of Measurement.

We confront the objection that the apparatus was
specially constructed to run a curved line on a convex sur¬
face. This is a mere ignorant subterfuge; no one ever hav¬
ing made such an objection can show how this could be
possible. The construction of such an apparatus would in-


ECHOES OR THE GEODETIC SURVEY.


143


volve the necessity of attaining a thousand fold greater
degree of accuracy and precision of adjustment and skill
than the other class of objectors claim to be possible !

We confront also the charge that we falsified the fadts;
that upon discovery of the convexity of the water, we pub¬
lished the opposite results. If such w r ere the case, it would
be far more easy to gain fame b}^ telling the truth concern¬
ing the results of the only method ever employed capable
of settling the question absolutely, in favor of the Coperni-
can theory, than to lie in favor of the Koreshan Cosmogony;
for by the methods employed we could have determined not
only that the Koreshan System was not true, but also that,
by reason of it not being true, it could never become the
prevailing system. To take such a course, to which we
are subject to charge, would be to commit scientific suicide.
We testify as we do because we knozv what the results mean
as absolutely as the fact that two and two are four. If it
be charged that w T e lied about the results of our survey, it is
an admission on the part of the objectors that if the earth
be convex, the Koreshan Geodetic Staff alone has obtained
the fadts concerning the earth’s form, and a bestowment of
honor upon them as being the first to demonstrate the
Copernican System !

Other Experiments Corroborate the Survey.

The above replies to objections will be conclusive to
those who will consider and comprehend the facts. It
would be impossible to satisfy a man who doubted the accu¬
racy of the multiplication table, until he came to a knowl¬
edge of some simple principles of mathematics. We do not
expect to reach those who zvill not nor cannot reason; their
minds will have to be changed by the turn in the tide of


r 44 the ceuuear cosmogony.

popular favor from the old to the New System. But it
seems strange to us that right in the face of the facts ob¬
tained—in view of the fact that no such direct means have
ever been applied by the old-school scientists, in view of the
fact that they admit that all the so called evidences of the
earth’s convexity are only cumulative and circumstantial,
and in view of the fact that those who criticise our work
were not brave enough to face the issue and participate in
the experiments performed by the Geodetic Staff—that the
direct and absolute evidences we have produced should be
rejected by any mind capable of realizing the geometrical
principles involved in simple right angles.

Corroborative of the demonstration of the earth’s con¬
cavity by means of accurate survey, we have the long line
of evidences obtained by other means,—tests of the surface
of water on canals, lakes, and seas—tests and experiments
which can be repeated upon any body of water, to the satis¬
faction of the most skeptical. The facts we have observed
and the line we have surveyed, demonstrating the earth’s
true form, are susceptible of test. We challenge contradic¬
tion; but our challenge will have to be answered upon the
field of contest,—to which we dare the scientific critics,—in
the many lines of experimentation through which we have
obtained the facts we announce to the world.

Concerning the character of the geodetic work con¬
ducted by our Staff, we reproduce the following extracts
from a series of editorials from the pen of the editor of The
Leaflet , of Ironton, Ohio, who followed the reports of the
work, and reviewed them:

Convex or Concave, Which?

* * He who has read carefully thus far, ueed not be at a loss to
apprehend the nature of the question involved; and may form some



IN THE DAILY PRESS. 145

idea of his own as to the practicability of such demonstration. * * How
shall we dispose of the facts of this seeming innovation on the con¬
vex theory of the earth’s rotundity ? They are now before you. If
these men have laid themselves out to practice a deception on the
gullible of mankind, and have doctored their instruments or tinkered
their manipulations so as to obtain the results they expected, then we
are sold in proportion to our commitment to what they say. What
anybody could possibly expect to accomplish by such course, we can¬
not imagine. The belief does not comport with the intelligence of
the persons capable of the work reported to have been done.

The language quoted does not belong to those who are ignorant
of the laws of mind; nor does the subject matter treated indicate that
it is by those unfamiliar with geometrical requirements. The careful¬
ness and painstaking patience manifested are not characteristic of
those who are incapable, or who care only for short-lived notoriety.
The seeming desire for accuracy to the highest attainable degree in
order to project a straight line, and the frank, open, and unreserved
detail of procedure, the results of which anybody of equal skill could
readily overthrow by experiment, if untrue, do not witness to our
mind a fake. * *

The pressure seems to be on the mathematicians and philosophers
of the whole convexite fraternity—including all adherents of the re¬
nowned Copernican system-—to explain the behavior of the spirit
level, the plumb-line, and the water surface of the earth in their re¬
lation to a straight line projected horizontally!

But it is abhorrent to our sense of the eternal fitness of things to
be committed to a fallacy, on any subject, when the truth may be
known; and veritable measurement ought to go further in establish¬
ing a geometrical fact than, in its absence, mountains of evidence
based on assumption.—Extracts from a series of articles by the Editor
of The Leaflet , Ironton, O.


I


In the Daily Press,

Reprints and Etchings of Reports and Editorials in the
Great Dailies of America.

Reports of the Florida Survey Went Around the World!

JHK importance, magnitude, and influence of the work
of the Koreshan Geodetic Expedition may be appre¬
ciated upon presentation of the evidences afforded through



146


the certurar cosmogony.


IN THE HAITY PRESS.


147


the daily press, which, previous to our display of scientific
plans and facts, was extremely unfavorable to the Koreshan
System. We are often asked, Why have not the results of
your work been made public? Why have not the news¬
papers contained something regarding it ? These questions
are asked by those who are not in touch with the most
prominent factors and direct avenues instrumental in
our propaganda. The results of the greatest, most impor¬
tant, and most remarkable geodetic experiments of modern
times have made a distinct impression on the popular and
the so called scientific mind. The startling information
that the concavity of the earth’s surface has been demon¬
strated, flashed from city to city, and from continent to con¬
tinent, reverberating around the world the echoes of a dar¬
ing and successful achievement, vibrating in the mental
channels which became responsive to the evidences of the
truth. From the columns of the daily press, the news went
to the weeklies, carrying the news to town and hamlet in
various parts of the world; millions of people have been
made aware of the facts; we have had responses from all
parts of the English-speaking world; also from France,
Germany, India, Australia, New Zealand, Mexico, the West
Indies, and Hawaii.

A number of the dailies containing reports of our work
have come into our possession. We do not ask the reader
to take our word for this, for we have evidences that will
perhaps appeal more strongly to the skeptical mind. We
have arranged about a score of available reports and edi¬
torials, showing the large displayed headlines; and by the
etching process we reproduce photograph of the same.
This arrangement includes favorable comments on the
Koreshan System and the Expedition by the Hon. Henry


Watterson, the famous editor of the Eouisville Courier-Jour¬
nal. The display constitutes Plate 3, inserted at the close
of this work. Preceding it is Plate 2, containing exact
reproduction of one half page from the Chicago Times-Her-
aid , which we also reprint in larger type as a part of this
chapter; followed by report of interview by a Courier-Jour-
nal reporter, concerning phenomena supposed to support
the popular system of astronomy.

We reproduce the photograph of the group of reports
and editorials for the purpose also of confronting and refut¬
ing once and for all time, the objection we have so often
heard since the completion of the Florida survey—that our
work is to be looked upon with suspicion because we located
our Operating Station so far from any scientific center.
It is usually the custom of geodesists to operate wherever
practicable; and have the objectors to our work subjected the
work of other geodesists to the same criticism ? Our sur¬
vey began March 18, 1897; upon reference to the double page
Plate 3, reports concerning our work in prospect will be
found in dailies dated in 1896. The plans of the survey
were widely published previous to the Expedition, and the
results of experiments in the vicinity of the great Western
metropolis, were published by every daily and weekly in
the city of Chicago. This does not appear to be an attempt
to evade the scrutiny of the public ! Rather, we challenged
the scientific world to become parties in the Southern exper¬
iments and surveys. We now publish the details of our
work and the result, which are subject to test. The scien¬
tific world now not only has the advantage of our plans in
minute detail, but also the reports of the facts and measure¬
ments obtained, which can be refuted or substantiated upon
repetition of the same, by the same processes.


148


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


PROOF THAT WE LIVE INSIDE THE GLOBE.

Korcshans* Startling Claim That Their Theory is Demonstrated by Experiments
and Surveys.—Scientific Revolution to Follow.

[From the Chicago Times-Herald, Editorial pages, July 25, 1897.]

Advocates of the theory that we are living on the
inside of a hollow shell 8,000 miles in diameter, instead of
on the outside of a convex globe, now claim to be able to
satisfy all who have asked for proof of the correctness of
the theory. This strange Astronomical system, known as
the Koreshan Astronomy, or the Cellular Cosmogony, w 7 as
originated and founded by Dr. Cyrus R. Teed, of Chicago,
and during the past twenty-five years he has succeeded in
making a large number of converts to the belief that all the
popular theories concerning the character of the universe
are fallacious, resulting from the failure to properly
interpret observations of the most common phenomena
of the heavens and the scope of our horizon. In the pro¬
mulgation of the Koreshan System, the discussion of the
shape of the earth is revived ; it is the most radical depart¬
ure from the usual theories known to the world today—it
is a complete antithesis. Consequently, the methods pur¬
sued in the new cosmogony and the conclusions reached
therefrom are decidedly revolutionary.

With the entire system reduced to a pivotal and
specific test, and with the plans for making that test,
a company of experimenters was sent on an expedition
last December to Naples, Fla., where there is a straight
coast for a number of miles, to practically apply the prin¬
ciples of the newly discovered means of testing the earth’s
contour. The work of the Experimenting Staff of the
Koreshan theory is of interest to all, from the simple
fact that never before in all the history of the world
has such a geodetic work been executed. Whatever
might be thought of the results of the series of surveys


IN THE DAILY PRESS.


149


made on the Florida coast, the one fact remains, that
at least the plan is unique and original, seemingly embody¬
ing a number of simple geometrical principles which have
been for some reason entirely overlooked in the usual lines
of scientific research and geodetic survey. The experi¬
ments and surveys on the gulf coast were under the
direction of Professor U. G. Morrow, of Chicago, who has
from time to time supplied the Times-Herald with a report
of the facts observed and results obtained, and now gives
a final summary of the results of his investigations, which
if accepted will revolutionize science.

Propositions of the Koreshans.

The main question involved, constituting the basis
of operations in the new geodesy, is: Will an absolutely
straight line surveyed in two directions from the vertical
point of a perpendicular, and at right angles to that perpen¬
dicular, extend into space, the earth curvating away from
that line, or will the line converge to the water’s surface at
two points, like the chord of a concave arc ? It is claimed
that this is the most direct means possible for determining
whether the earth is rounded or convexed at its surface, or
concaved as the inside of a hollow sphere; and if the experi¬
menters have correctly applied the principles involved they
have succeeded in making the first direct test of the char¬
acter of the surface upon w 7 hich we live. On account of
atmospheric refraction, the rays of light and vision are
bent out of the true rectilinear direction, and consequently
cannot be employed as a practical test. The apparatus used,
called the Rectilineator, is a mechanical contrivance for
the purpose of forcing a straight line. The whole plan of
the survey is clearly illustrated in the ^accompanying dia¬
gram, which explains itself. The survey began with the

’"•'•See etched reproduction of this Editorial on Plate 2.


I 5 °


the; OiLLULAR COSMOGONY.


apparatus at an altitude of ten feet above the water’s sur¬
face, making the basis of the figures eight miles instead of
six, as first proposed.

If the eartli curvates convexly at the ratio of eight
inches to the mile, in four miles from the middle of the
straight chord, or from the given perpendicular, the sur¬
veyed line would be twenty feet from the convex arc—the
line would be that distance above the w r ater at the end of
the survey. On the other hand, if the earth curvates
concavely, as the Koreshaus claim, the line would come in
contact with the water. Their object was to demonstrate
that the line w r ould “run into the water.” They declare
that the line surveyed on the gulf coast terminated, in
accordance with their expectations, in the water at the dis¬
tance of four miles from the given perpendicular.

How the Surveys Were Made.

Along the line surveyed were fixed stakes every eighth
of a mile, upon which the altitude of the “air line” was
registered as the survey progressed, in order that meas¬
urements might be made, and afterward referred to,
of the distance of the line above the water’s surface. In
this way it was proposed to determine whether or not the
line approached the surface at the proper ratio; and the
claim is made that upon no other kind of a surface than the
concave could such relations and figures be observed and
obtained, the line approaching the surface in about the ratio
of the calculated concave curvature. At the end of the
first mile, the “line” was eight inches nearer the surface
than at the beginning; second mile, about thirty-two
inches ; third mile, six feet, while at the end of four miles the
line came in contact with the water. Also at every eighth
of a mile the ratio was along the same line of progression;
t he results for even miles showing the aggregate result for


IN THE) DAILY PRKSS.


I5 1

the measured altitude of the line for the stations interven¬
ing. From these figures it may be seen that the ratio of
concavity determined by these measurements, very closely
approaches the estimated curvature of eight inches to the
mile. The ratio of descent of the line, the increase in the
angle of deviation from the horizontal at stations of test
with the levels, the length of the line surveyed from the
beginning to point of extension into the water, as well as
the direction of the plumb-line at various points, in con¬
sideration of the principles involved in the apparatus em¬
ployed, all declare, it is claimed, the fact of the earth’s
concavity.

Scientists Challenged to Open Contest.

It can easily be imagined what an impetus such
scientific tests would give to a system if they were true.
If it were admitted that the results of this survey so defi¬
nitely define the direction of the earth’s curvature as to
entitle them to credence by the scientific world, the
Koreshans would have a weight of evidence that would
render their position impregnable. The future will reveal
the validity or the fallacy of their claims, and judging
from the line of work planned by the scientists of the new
school, they are not anticipating leaving the field to the
criticism of the scientific world. Upon the strength of the
results of the -work of the expedition, the Founder of the
System issues a general challenge to meet the advocates
of the prevailing system, not merely in discussion, but in
open contest upon the field of operations and experimenta¬
tion. Corroborative of the results of the unique surveys,
they claim to have a long line of facts of observation upon
the surface of water itself, and the force of visible and
tangible facts must be admitted to possess more weight with
the people in general, than platform argument.

Concerning their attitude toward the leaders of mod-


THIS CEERUEAR COSMOGONY.


t 52

ern scientific thought, Professor Morrow says: “If the
scientific men of the world today are as willing to test the
truth of our propositions and results of our geodetic work
as we are to meet them in demonstration of the premise of
the Koreshan System, no difficulty will be experienced
in speedily settling the question. We hereby extend
to them the opportunity of demonstrating the earth’s con¬
vexity, and to destroy our premise or to establish the
basis of the Koreshan Cosmogony, and thus overthrow all
conclusions of modern science. In this we are not clamoring
for dispute, but inviting an impartial test of the facts.

Easily Susceptible to Decision.

“There is not another issue before the world today, in
which the principles can be so specifically stated and
pivoted upon one point of test, nor so susceptible to abso¬
lute decision, as this one concerning the concavity of the
earth; because the water’s surface cannot be changed, and
no method of solving the question is so obviously certain
as the one formulated in the Koreshan System, the results
of which are now proclaimed to the world. We have
employed a unique apparatus in the survey of an air line,
terminating in the water’s surface as we proposed and an¬
ticipated before undertaking the survey. We employed
a process of extension of a right line, concerning which
there can be no question. We eliminated the elements
of refraction of light and incurvation of visual lines, as
well as the effect of perspective foreshortening, by mechan¬
ically forcing a straight line, and thus settled the matter
beyond dispute. The work was laborious, requiring much
time and patience. As yet, the scientists have not been
forcibly made aware of the weight of the evidence obtained.
We were confident in the beginning of our work,
from consideration of the principles involved and the
results which would inevitably follow, that we were pro¬


IN THIi DAIRY PRESS.


153


jecting the greatest and most important geodetic survey of
the nineteenth century.

“The importance of an undertaking is always meas¬
ured by its ultimate results. On such a basis, we place
the importance of our geodetic survey over against all the
efforts of scientific men to determine the earth’s shape,
with all their appliances and apparatus of the very finest
workmanship. We are not discrediting the geodetic work
of the world; such efforts have their value, but the sequel
proves that they are not of paramount importance. We
are simply comparing success with failure—we have suc¬
ceeded in accomplishing that for which they have labored
for centuries, by the application of direct means of deter¬
mining the earth’s true shape. The great wonder of the
hour, the startling fact now manifesting and forcing itself
upon many rational minds is, that outside of the ranks of
recognized scientists there should develop a line of scientific
work that eclipses all the efforts of the vast army of
scientific experimenters the world over.

“Nothing can now impede the progress of the Koreshan
System; it is invincible. The world cannot long with¬
stand the forces of the absolute truth, having for its foun¬
dation the indisputable facts of the greatest discovery of
modern times. The facts we have observed and the lines
we have surveyed demonstrating the earth’s true form, are
susceptible of test. We challenge contradiction; but our
challenge will have to be answered upon the field of
contest, in the many lines of experimentation through
which we have observed the facts we announce to the
world.’’

A Great Revolution Would Result.

The Koreshan scientists have taken the question out
of the realm of discussion concerning various astronomical
and cosmographical phenomena, and placed it at least in an


154


THK CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


effort at demonstration. They claim that if the earth
io really concave, it places the usual explanation of the
character of the orbs above us and the movements of the
sun, moon, and stars entirely on the side of absurdity, and
the habitation of the planets impossible, because in such
case all phenomena would have to be interpreted in accord¬
ance with the ground or foundation from which astronomical
calculations are made:—the arc of the earth’s curvature.
It can readily be seen that if that arc should be concave
instead of convex, the immense distances attributed to the
planets and other heavenly bodies would have to be set
aside, and the stars brought to within a comparatively
short distance above the concave arc.

It may be asked, what is the difference if the world is
concave—in what way does it interest the general public ?
In the event of success on the part of Koreshanity, many
popular theories would be revolutionized. No other
system ever put forth in the world has effected such decid¬
edly radical changes in the channels of human thought and
life as would result from general acceptance of the premise
of the hollow globe theory and its resultant conclusions.
It w r ould turn the scientific mind into newer channels
of investigation, reveal newer laws, and clear away numer¬
ous mysteries concerning cosmical form and function.
Every domain of thought and investigation would be
invaded by the new process—in short, a startling, appalling
and world-wide revolution would necessarily follow if
it were proved beyond doubt to the general mind that the
universe is a great cell or shell containing forms of life
from the lowest domain of existence to the highest realm of
being, as well as all the stars, planets, sun, and moon
and atmospheres. Nothing could be more startling to
the mind today than a vivid conception that the laws
of universal existence and perpetuity have been discovered,


IN THK DAILY PRESS.


155


and all mysteries of the universe revealed through the
knowledge of the earth’s form and the relation of all
its parts.

Koreshan Science and Theology.

How would it affect the popular theology—what has
astronomy to do with a concept of the Creator? All
through the ages past, astronomy and theology have gone
hand in hand. All systems of theology have undertaken
to incorporate an idea of creation, and consequently the
nature and extent of that which has been created. Wher¬
ever changes have been made in general astronomical
systems, they have resulted in changing the popular beliefs
concerning theology and the processes by which the world
was created and its existence maintained. The Koreshans
say that if we admit for a moment that the modern scien¬
tific theories are untrue, the conclusion is inevitable that to
whatever extent the teachers of theology have been in¬
fluenced by a false scientific theory, to that extent the},
have been led astray concerning the Creator ; in such case
they would understand neither the Creator nor his works.
The influence of the prevailing system of science has been
universal. Perhaps no one has attempted to form a mental
picture of the remote habitation of Deity, which the usual
astronomical theory imposes, without attempting to form
some idea as to distance—the mind has endeavored to
reach out into infinite space to touch the heart of the
Creator; it has wandered into a great circumfeience of space.
Koreshans maintain that God is the center and heart of
creation instead of being its circumference.

Thus it would seem that the popular idea of God has
been largely influenced by the prevailing theories concern¬
ing the immensity of the universe and the infinity of space.
If the concept of the universe be so radically modified and
revolutionized as to maintain the limitation of the uni-


IN THE DAILY PRESS.


157


156 THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

verse to tlie dimension of 8,000 miles diameter, it is obvious
that a corresponding change of concept of the Almighty
must necessarily follow. Because of this, Koreshans say
that their system of science and their theology are insepa¬
rably connected and related—that in the discovery of the
fact of the cellular form of the universe there has come to
the world a definite knowledge of the laws of creation, and
consequently the laws of perpetuity of not only the uni¬
verse as the effect of the cause, but also the means of
existence of that cause. It is claimed that the physical
universe is the natural and outermost expression of the
divine mind, and that if the natural universe and its laws
are understood, they unmistakably indicate the character of
the mind which expresses it.

Koreshans attempt to explain the great mystery of
Deity scientifically. Hence the claim that the .scientific
theory of Koreshanity is the foundation or basis of its
religion, which is claimed to be the revival of the primitive
Christian system as it was taught prior to the declension
and the apostasy of the church. Koreshans claim to
defend the Bible—that the Bible teaches that the world
is a hollow sphere, the outermost metallic strata being the
“firmament” of the Old Testament—and that the Bible is
scientifically correct in all its expressions. They hold that
in the demonstration of the earth’s concavity, the inspira¬
tion of the Scriptures is scientifically proved and demon¬
strated. They teach that the two great forms of expres¬
sion of the mind of the Almighty—nature and the Bible—
are to be read in harmony, because originating in the same
divine mind. The argument is that nature is the result of
cause, and is true—a true and tangible index to all knowl¬
edge of all life in all domains of the universe.

Scientific men are yet on the voyage of discovery and
research, from which it follows that they have not yet


definitely located the secret of the great cause of existence,
nor yet satisfactorily explained the real purpose of the
world. The Founder of the Koreslian theory claims to
have discovered that for which the thinking world is look¬
ing. If the leaders of the prevailing theories could be
induced to critically examine the claims to such a discovery,
or to come in contact with its advocates in open field of con¬
test, so that a definite and satisfactory test could be made
of the facts as embraced in the possible determination as
to which way the earth curves, it would undoubtedly reveal
that either the scientists of today are greatly mistaken, or
that the Koreshans are promulgating the rankest and most
absurd fallacy of modern times.

What Benefits Would Follow?

What is claimed to be the benefits to be derived to
humanity through acceptance of such a system ? It is one
of the doctrines of Dr. Teed, its Founder, that there is not
a law in the universe that man cannot apply to himself
when understood; that man is a microcosm, or small world,
involving the functions of the world at large ; that to the
extent that we mistake or misapprehend what are the
laws of the universe, we fail to apply them, but that when
men can comprehend what are the laws and principles
of universal construction and perpetuity, he can adjust
himself to universal being and become immortal. Man
is held to be mortal, and will continue to be mortal
until he has so applied and fulfilled immutable law as to
overcome death and perfect himself mentally, spiritually,
and physically. The very kernel of the system seems to
be the claim to the discovery of the long sought for
“philosopher’s stone,” the science of transmutation,
which is looked upon as the key to all knowledge.

In accordance with this premise, a great system of
organic unity of human and divine co-operation is hoped


i 5 8


thk cewuuar cosmogony.


for by the adherents to the Koreshan views. The laws of
universal existence are sought to be applied to human
affairs in the definition of the true science of government
and political economy it is claimed to be the beginning of
the supreme Theocracy expected by all Christians to be
made manifest in what is termed the “second advent,”
and hence the man originating the system of Koreshanity
has some personal claims as to knowledge of divine law,
and consequently a mission to perform in the world, looking
to the establishment of a system of salvation of humanity
from the present conditions of evil and mortality, through
the institution of a new order of life and organic system
correspondingly fashioned after the general universal order
of the great cellular form which is held to incorporate all
there is. Koresliaus say many people have misunderstood
the claims of Dr. Teed. His system is intricate, necessitat¬
ing study and investigation to comprehend his mission; it is
insisted by his followers that his claims are the rational
claims of the true scientist. Those who have been
engaged in the work of scientific experimentation, hold
that in the practical proofs of the correctness of the Ko¬
reshan Cosmogony, all the scientific, religious, ethical, and
economical principles of the entire system are conclusively
demonstrated to be true.

KORESHANITY.

Prof. Morrow Tells of Dr. Teed’s Theories.—Experiments in Florida.—Believes
He has Proved the Earth is Hollow.—People and Planets on Inside.—
Relations of the Sun, Moon and Stars to the
World.—Explanation of Gravity.

[Courier Journal Reporter’s Interview with Prof. Morrow, at Louisville Kv

July 23, 1897.J ’

Prof. U. G. Morrow, of the Scientific and Geodetic
Stall of the Koreshan Unity, is now in Uouisville on his
way to Chicago, where Dr. Cyrus R. Teed, the originator



Chart of the Koreshan Cosmogony.

Showing the Principal Astronomical Features, in Explanation of the
Phenomena of the Heavens.

Etching No. 8,


IN THE DAILY PRESS.


159


of Koreshanity and Founder of the Unity, lives, and where
the seat of the Order is located. He has received many visit¬
ors anxious to make inquiry concerning the strange theo¬
ries he advocates. Prof. Morrow has just concluded
a series of experiments at Naples, Fla., which he thinks
was highly successful, and which in his opinion conclusively
proves the earth’s surface to be concave and not convex,
as is generally believed, and that we live on the inside
of a great hollow sphere, not the outside. A description
of the experiments was given some time ago in the Courier-
Journal , with diagrams showing the methods employed.
It was a novel undertaking, and, whether one admits
the theory of Koreshanity or not, its results are certainly
not without interest, and will attract attention among
scientists the world over.

Prof. Morrow is enthusiastic over the outcome of his
experiments. To a Courier-Joiirnal reporter last night he
said: “The character of our experiments in Florida was
unique. The long series of observations of the Gulf
horizon and of the water’s contour, led us to apply some
cruical tests; these tests were original, and had never been
applied by those who hold to the popular view. The
instruments we used were telescopes and transits, levels,
plumbs, and a new apparatus, invented by myself, called
the Rectilineator. We are now successful. Our work has
been given an impetus that it has never had before. The
strength of evidence and of argument we claim, ought
to give us a remarkable hold upon the minds of the world.

I have specifications for about twenty-five experiments.
At Naples we performed about sixty experiments, divided
into four classes of tests.”

The advocates of Koreshanity can see no reason why
their doctrines should not become widely prevalent. They
say it will gain a firm foothold in the world, unless some


J 6o THE CEERTJRAR COSMOGONY.

one overthrows it, which nobody, they claim, has yet done.
As a matter of fact, they are anxious for some recognized
scientist to undertake to disprove their doctrines by prac¬
tical demonstrations.

Reverse of Popular Theories.

“The Koreshan System,” said Prof. Morrow last
night, “is radically different from all other modern
theories—it is not a partial difference, but the absolute
antithesis. In other words, the conclusions in all lines of
thought, in all phases of science, economics, and religion,
are the exact reverse of the usual conceptions. That
means, primarily, that we reverse the order of thought; we
reason deductively—that is, from cause to effect, as well as
from effect to cause. We reason from the standpoint of
fixed principles, as well as from evidences of phenomena.
Illustrative of to what extent ours are the reverse of
other theories, we hold that we live on the inside of the
earth instead of on the outside, in the limitation of the
universe instead of its infinity, in the eternity of nature in
preference to a brief existence of the material universe.
We hold that God is central instead of circumferential; that
he possesses a tangible manhood instead of being an
infinite Spirit; that he is inseparably connected with his
universe of expression instead of being extra-cosmical or of
existing over and above the universal order of existence.
We hold that alchemy instead of chemistry is true. We
teach a form of government that is the unity of all forms of
government in the world today, involved in one order of
control.

‘‘Doesn’t the Koreshan System seem absurd?”

“Yes, if one undertakes to account for phenomena in
the hollow globe as men are used to do from the exernal
standpoint. In that way, of course, it would appear


IN THE DAIRY PRESS. 1 6 1

absurd. For instance, if I conclude that the sun is 886,000
miles in diameter and accept that supposition as a fact, why,

I would be foolish for supposing that a big sun like that
could go in a little earth 8,000 miles in diameter. If the
earth is concave, the sun is not 886,000 miles in diameter.
But measured from the concave instead of the convex arc
its diameter would not be over 100 miles, and its distance
not above 1,000. It makes all the difference in the world
as to whether our calculations are made from the basis
of concave arc and the usual convex idea. The sun, moon,
and stars, including Sirius, Arcturus, Procyon, all the
great nebulas and comets, in short, all things that exist in
the heavens above are contained in the shell. They are
not worlds nor systems of worlds; they are not wanderers
nor erratic orbs, but points of generation of energy , every
one of which has a distinctly different function belonging
and necessary to universal perpetuation. The functions of
the planets, the purpose of the stars, and order of their
movements, are specifically indicated and explained in
the Koreshan Cosmogony. It claims to explain the uni¬
verse. It holds that there are no mysteries it does not
reveal, no problems it does not solve. The secret is
claimed to have been found, the philosopher s stone
is being apjhed, the circle has been squared, baser metals
have been transmuted into gold, the Bible is now under¬
stood, and its laws clearly analyzed by the Founder
of Koreshanity.”

How Eclipses Occur.

“How do you account for the exact prediction of eclipses by the
old school astronomers, if their system is not correct?” was asked.

“One thing is sure; if the Copernican system is true,
the old Egyptian or Ptolemaic system was false. We might
ask the usual questioner, How could Ptolemy predict eclipses
if his system was not correct ?



162


TH^ ceerurar cosmogony.


“The old-school astronomy today owes more to the
Egyptian astronomers and to Tycho Brahe than to Newton,
Herschel, or Proctor. No theory of astronomy is consid¬
ered in eclipse predictions; no concept of the universe can
change its form or alter its motions or functions. Eclipses
really occurred and were foretold before Copernicus ever
whirled a school globe. Eclipses occur at regular intervals.
An eclipse cycle is about eighteen years and eleven days in
length. During that time twenty-nine lunar and forty-one
solar eclipses occur. During the next cycle of eighteen
years, these same eclipses happen again. Those who
predict eclipses consult tables as the farmer consults his
almanac. These tables are as accurate and as absolute
as the calendar itself. This is the secret of eclipse pre¬
dictions. A school boy could do it if he once .saw behind
the curtain, understood longitude and time, and the relations
of the sun and moon on the ecliptic. ’ ’

“How do you account for eclipses ? Isn’t the earth’s shadow on
the moon during a lunar eclipse, a proof of convexity ?’’

“The earth casts no shadow on the moon. If it did it
could not be called an eclipse, for eclipse means ‘to cut
off.’ In the old system, they would have to say the sun
is eclipsed when the moon appears obscured. In our
system, the moon is cut off and consequently eclipsed.
The origin of the moon is in the earth’s crust. Energies
generated in the great metallic shell levitate toward
the center. They implant an X-ray photograph of the
earth’s shell upon the under surface of the atmosphere
of hydrogen lying just above our common air. On the
surface of the moon we see a reflection of the earth’s sur¬
face, modified by the photographic impressions of the
denser substances beneath. If anything should cut off
these energies or disturb the ascending magnetisms, that
image would become more or less obscured. The obscuring


IN THE DAIRY PRESS.


163


object, or the eclipsor, is the thing of particular question
here. It is in the earth’s crust—a mercurial disc passing in
the interstices of the metallic shells. It actually cuts off the
levitating currents. If the disc should be forced into a rect¬
angular shape, the ‘shadow’ would appear to be square;
but the disc is round, and consequently the ‘shadow’
is round; thus w r e see it is not necessary to suppose that
the thing that eclipses the moon is a sphere. A disc does
it just the same, and is no proof that the earth is convex,
because instead of it being the earth, it is a small disc only
a few miles in diameter that as effectually breaks the
current as a very dense disc would cut off the cathode or
the anode rays in the X-ray apparatus. The eclipse of the
sun occurs by reason of a conjunction of sun and moon,
causing an eclipse of the sun by a reflex of its own self, or
its shadow. The theory is new to the world, and it requires
a little study and investigation of what we conceive the
universe to be, and how it generally conducts itself before
the theory would appear to be clear in detail.”

Circumnavigation of the Globe.

“How about tlie so called circumnavigation of the globe ?’’

“It is a circumnavigation of the globe. To get a good
idea of the Koreshans’ school globe, tear off the map from
the usual one, divide the pasteboard globe into two hemi¬
spheres, and paste the map on the inside of the globe. The
globe will then have two poles, one equator, one ecliptic,
just as many meridians and parallels of latitude as when the
map was on the outside. The route of a ship marked on
the outside would sustain the same relations as to distance,
latitude, and longitude to all points on the concave surface.
As there are 360 degrees inside a circle or globe, the same
as on the outside, the ship would finally return to the same
point with a good deal safer journey, perhaps, than by
sailing around on the outside of a sphere in rapid rotation



164


THU CRIJ.UR/YR COSMOGONY.


165


and motion through space. Our circumnavigation is simple
and safe; the other is fraught with the difficulty of getting
the oceans to stay on the outside.”

“IIow do you explain what we call gravitation ?”

“By proving that all gravic energies have a center
of generation, and consequently, must be expressed radi¬
ally in all directions from that center. Gravity really
descends from above, consequently it has a tendency to
push objects instead of pulling them. Bight and heat are
forms of gravic energy. That which is called gravity is
but one of 10,000 qualities of descending gravic energy.
Gravic energies are cathode, consequently they descend;
levic energies are anode—hence they ascend. It is not
scientific to hold that everything comes down and nothing
goes up. The usual saying is, ‘everything that goes up
conies down.’ This is universally true. It is the secret
of the supply of the sun’s fuel, the means of the perpetua¬
tion of the earth’s shell. The specific gravity of a sub¬
stance determines, in the universal arrangement, a plane of
static balance or equilibration of every material of the
universe. The lightest substances surround the central
sun; the heaviest substances materialize and ponderate
farthest from the sun. These constitute the two extremes
of space. All other substances are forced to their planes
of rest. Hence the phenomena of some substances rising
when released, and others descending when left without
support.”

“What causes a ship’s hull to disappear first when the vessel is
sailing from shore?’’

“Perspective foreshortening—the same thing that
annihilates space, as it were, between two railroad tracks.
Vv hen the ship has sailed to the vanishing point of the
space equal to the altitude of the eye from the water, all of
the ship’s hull embraced within that vertical .space will



IN THK DAIRY PRKSS.

become invisible; all the sails above that horizontal visual
line will be still in view. Extend the visual power with the
telescope, and the vanishing point is pushed farther away,
according to the power of the eyepiece, and the hull is seeh
to be in plain view.”

Planets Not Populated.

“Are any of the planets inhabited?”

“No—not the planets we see up there in the sky.
They are little focal points of energy, partially materialized
spheres in process of combustion. Their diameter is very
small. Jupiter is nothing like the concept in the usual
theory. The real planets are discs of mercury in the earth,
between the metallic shells; they are concave to the center.
They focalize the sun’s energies in the atmospheres above
us. They are what their names indicate—plan-ets, little
planes. Schiaparelli, with his canals on Mars; Tesla, with
his chimerical communications to imaginary people on the
planets; the theosophists, with their evolution of life from
earth to Mars; to Jupiter—to anywhere else?—will all
vanish as well meant, but futile efforts to do something
great, when it is generally realized that the conclusions of
the old systems are absurd and impossible.”

“How about tlie comets?”

“Comets are small things—lenticular reflections of the
sun’s rays through lenses—broken up belts of crystallic
energies spirating about the central solar sphere. They
have cycles of manifestation. They do not fly off into
space and return. They plunge into and feed the sun.
There is a great variety of comets. Some comet cycles are
longer than others—the periodic appearances of some
comets are not so frequent as others.”

“Why can we not see across the hollow globe, like a fly in
a hollow vessel ?”


i66


167


THB CKI<I<UI<AR COSMOGONY.

“Because tlie atmospheres intervene. They are of
different density. They refract rays of light and vision.
We see but little farther than the upper stratum of our
air. The effect of refraction between the air and hjMrogen
causes the limit of our vision above to appear blue, and to
obscure all within and beyond the sea of hydrogen. The
sun, moon, and stars that we see daily, are near the junc¬
tion of our atmosphere and hydrogen.”

“What is on the outside of the hollow globe you call the earth ?’’

“The shell of the earth is the circumference—the limit
of the universe. It environs all that exists. Outside of
the environ or limit of existence, there is nothing. There
is no infinite space. Space is measure and dimension of
things that are; it is definite. Limitation is a factor of
form; form is a factor of existence. Hence if the universe
exists it is limited, beyond which there is 110 existence.
There is nothing on the outside —no heat, cold, light, dark¬
ness, temperature, condition, entity, quality of substance—
nothing. There couldn’t be. Nothing cannot extend
at all; matter could not extend eternally. No matter how
absurd this may be to the average person, sufficient thought
on the problem will reveal the fact that our conclusions
as to what is not on the outside are reasonable, logical, and
absolute.”


Theory of Creation.

“Wliat do you hold with reference to the creation?”

“That the universe is eternal—as eternal as the

/

Almighty. He says that it is his footstool, and it seems to
be necessary to him now, as the ultimate pediment of
his being; and consequently, he always has and always
will need this footstool. Creation is continuous and eter¬
nal. The processes are now going on, and the laws of the
creation of the universe can only be read through an accu-



IN THK DAIRY PRRSS.

rate understanding of the character of that which is created.
We accept Moses’ account of creation thousands of years
ago. It will occur again, and has occurred millions of
times. As to form, the universe always was; it must have
its rest and recreation, which mean re-creation.”

“What supports the earth in its present position?”

“It is not supported—it needs no support. It is sus*
pended; it is dependent upon its center. The center of the
earth is the terminal point of interior space. It is the
absolute pivot. Job says the Almighty ‘stretched the north
out over the empty place and hung the earth upon nothing’
—upon the absolute pivotal center. He did not hang it
upon long threads of gravic something. There is nothing
outside to attract the earth, and hence it can never move
out of the only space—place—there is. To do so would
be to force the hollow globe into nothing. ’ ’

“What is the cause of day and night?”

‘ ‘The central solar sphere is light on one side and dark
on the other. The sun we see is a refocalization of the
central sun. The central sun rotates on its axis in twenty-
four hours, thereby causing the projected sun to make
its daily orbital sweep of 360 degrees. The projected sun
shines upon one half of the concave sphere at any given
time, leaving the other half dark. In this way, we have
alternations of day and night.”

IS THE COPERNICAN THEORY ALL WRONG?

The Geodetic Staff, recently engaged on surveys on the
Gulf of Mexico and coast of Florida in connection with the
body of mystics and socialists called the Koreshan Unity,
has obtained results startlingly contradictory of the ordi¬
narily accepted notions. They have suspended the plumb-
line; from this, at right angles, they have extended an air


THE HOLLOW GLOBE AND THE BIBLE.


169


168 THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

line which invariably strikes the earth (or rather the sea).
They claim to have demonstrated that the earth curves
eight inches to the mile, not convexly, but concavely.
The result of the investigations of “Parallax” in England,
it will be remembered, were also irreconcilable with the
Copernican theory.

Will not the recognized experts of science take the
matter up and show wherein lies the mistake of these
investigators ? Ordinary men are quite puzzled over it, and
cannot answer.— Brotherhood , Eondon, July, 1897.


The Hollow Globe and the Bible.

The Cellular Cosmogony Demonstrates the Truth of
the Astronomy of the Scriptures.

Texts Concerning the Earth’s Concavity, the Relations of the Earth, Sun,
Moon, and Stars; Scientific Demonstration of the Firmamental Environ.

JHE attitude of the modern scientist toward the Bible,
evinces the fact that between the Bible and the cos¬
mogony founded upon the popular astronomical system,
there is a great disparity. The systems of science now
prevailing in the world are decidedly atheistical in their
tendencies, and the hypotheses and theories they involve
are the battle-axes of all “higher criticism.” The cry of all
skeptically inclined, from the .school of the “new theology”
of Dr. Briggs to the agnosticism and atheism of Ingersoll,
is, that the Bible is not scientific.

The defense offered in the orthodox pulpit is, that the
Bible is “intended to be a religious, and not a scientific
revelation; if a natural philosopher had undertaken to write



an account of the creation of the earth, he would have
begun in a totally different tone.” They say the Bible is
inspired, but not inspired scientifically, and therefore, the
astronomy of the Bible is not correct. They present this
as an excuse for the “blunders” the Bible makes-concern¬
ing the cosmogony and science of the universe. The athe¬
ist plants himself squarely upon the accepted theory of
modern astronomy, and from this basis—from this stand¬
point, he successfully assails the position taken in Christen¬
dom concerning the inerrancy of the Scriptures; and the
popular theologian is powerless to defend the Bible against
the repeated attacks made upon it by those endeavoring to
test the book by the modern pseudo-science.

The subject reduced to a definite issue, will compel the
mind to accept either the Bible or the prevailing theory.
We hold that the two cannot be consistently entertained in
the same mind; consistently, we say, because all familiar
with the history of ecclesiasticism and astronomy are fully
aware of the difficulty which modern theologians have ex¬
perienced in the endeavor to harmonize Moses’ presentation
of cosmogony with the nebular hypothesis. The atheist is
continually pointing out this difficulty; the doctors of
divinity close their eyes to the real basis of the argument,
and blindly and credulously hope that in some way the
Bible may be found to be correct.

It seems never to have occurred to the modern clergy,
that there is a possibility of “science” being deeply in
error. They have accepted “science” in the same way
they have accepted the Bible—without evidence. The
question must be settled by something superior to the
authority of the scientists; by something stronger than the
usual arguments offered from the pulpit, because the theo-


The; CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


170

logian does not prove to the skeptic that the Bible is
scientifically accurate, and consequently he does not prove
that the Bible is inspired; while on the other hand, the
scientists cannot prove that the basis of the modern astro¬
nomical system is correct. A system of science admittedly
inaccurate and uncertain, and having for its foundation
a mere hypothesis, is a poor thing with which to attempt to
disprove the inspiration of the Scriptures. It would be
sheer folly and the height of credulity to accept such
a mogul as the plumb-line of wisdom, by which to formu¬
late a concept of our origin and destiny ! If the modern
system of science, so called, can be proven to be a fallacy,
there is a possibility that the Bible is correct, not only hi
its cosmogony, but in all its teachings. Indeed, we find
that the facts which demonstrate the fallacy of modern
science, not only demonstrate the earth’s true form, but
also corroborate the science of the Bible. Thus both the
Bible and Koreshan Science, their teachings being one and
the same, are opposed to the prevailing scientific theories.

The science of the universe must necessarily be the
science of its creation; true science is the science of cos¬
mogony as well as the science of cosmology and cosmog¬
raphy. Any science, to be in harmony with the Bible—
in order to cover the same ground, must deal not only with
the laws of the form of the universe, but also the laws of
its creation and perpetuity; it must connect, unmistakably,
the idea of God and the science of his expression in cosmic
form it must show how he stands upon his footstool.
Theology and the science of cosmogony are inseparable.
True theology cannot be linked with a fallacious theory of
astronomy, neither can the true science of creation be seen
to be in harmony with the false conception of the func¬


Tini HOLLOW GLOBE AND THE BIBLE. 171

tions of the Creator. The relation ‘between the divine
mind and its expression in the material world must be com¬
plete and perfect. A so called science that does not point
this out and lead the mind to the source of cosmic expres¬
sion, is not worthy of the time applied to its study; a science
that clearly and unmistakably establishes the principles of
this relation becomes the established and basic premise of
all truth, not only of theology, but also of the science
of the laws of the perpetuity of universal being and
existence.

We find nothing in modern astronomy that indicates
what the laws of creation are—nothing to solve the great
mystery of Being. It does not point out the source of
existence, nor the laws of perpetuity. As it knows noth¬
ing about the laws of creation, it contains nothing true
about the science of cosmic form; as it contains nothing
about the laws of physical creation, it is far from revealing
the laws and functions of the divine being; it cannot point
out God ! There is nothing in it to suggest any specific
relation between God and the material world. It has
no use for the laws of analogy, analysis, and synthesis—it
cannot show that the universe is a world of organic unity.
Hence, there is 110 harmony between its aims and purposes,
and the design of the Author of the Bible !

The Koreshan and Copernican Systems Compared.

The world has been taught for centuries that the earth
is convex; that it is a large globe filled with molten matter,
—a crust surrounding and enclosing the great mass of
fire, and that we live on the outside; that the earth, com¬
pared with the universe, is but a mere speck in the vast
ocean of infinite space, having been evolved through a pro-


172


173


the; ceeeuear cosmogony.

cess of development from a vortex of revolution of the burn¬
ing mass of the sun. The popular system teaches the
rotation of the earth upon its axis once in twenty-four
hours, and its revolution around the sun in one year. It
places the sun 92,000,000 miles from the earth, and main¬
tains that around the sun revolves a family of planets and
satellites.

Relatively, the sun is the center of the solar system, the
earth moving about it at the rate of about nineteen miles
per second. The universe is held to be limitless, with¬
out center and without circumference, filling infinite space;
it knows no bounds—it is one vast ocean filled with worlds.
What their relations are no so called scientist knows;
the origin of all things is today a great unsolved problem;
and the purpose of existence is a question equally diffi¬
cult. There is nothing to be learned from a study of such
an hypothesis. Its laws must be as uncertain as the knowl¬
edge of its advocates; it is as full of freaks as the modern
scientific mind is full of vagaries. From the claims of the
infinity of the universe, it sums up nothing; from it there
can be no definite conclusions reached; not being in pos¬
session of the true conception of cosmic form and function
—having no idea as to the cause, purpose, and design of the
universe, men seek to find sublimity in its vastness, and
grandeur in the dazzling orbs; it fills no wants, meets no
necessities nor exigencies of the times; the theory will
accomplish only that which it is capable of putting forth—
nothing !

The Koreshan System maintains and demonstrates that
the universe is a unit; it is an alchemico-organic structure,
limited to the dimensions of 8,000 miles diameter. Accord¬
ing to the great law of analogy, we hold that its form is



THE HOEEOW GEOBE AND THE BIBEE.

cellular; that all life is generated in a cell —omne vivurn ex
ovo! The earth’s shell, composed of metals and minerals,
is about 100 miles in thickness, constituting a gigantic
voltaic pile, the basis of the great galvano-magnetic battery,
furnishing the negative elements of the cell for the gener¬
ation and supply of the sun’s fuel. The concave surface of
the earth alone is habitable. Superimposed upon the strata
of the shell and emplaced in their static planes, are the three
atmospheres. At the center we find the positive pole of the
great battery—the central sun, around and with which the
heavens revolve in twenty-four hours. All of the energies
of the physical universe are engendered through the rela¬
tion of the positive center to the negative circumference;
a great complex battery of physical unity is thus main¬
tained and perpetuated.

The sun proper is located at the center, rotating on its
axis; its projection, the sun we see, has an orbital path on the
ecliptic. The planets are spheres of energy reflected from
metallic disci in the earth’s circumference, and the stars
are focal points of light. The moon is a sphere of energy
derived from the planets and from the magneto-electric
energies generated in the earth’s concave crust. Tilie
whole is eternal; it is God’s footstool, and is essential to
his existence; it is the ultimate and outermost limit of
expression of the divine mind. The earth is the only phys¬
ical world; it has no orbital motion; it is fixed and rela¬
tively stationary, while the sun, moon, planets, and stais
move in orbits in the heavens above us; they are inseparably
connected with the universe. Their functions, as defined
in the Koreshan System, prove their utility and demon¬
strate what they are. The laws of cosmic form and func
tion—the laws of creation, maintenance, and purpose of the


174


THIS CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


universe, with all it contains, are scientifically revealed and
described in the Bible. The Koreshan System corroborates
the Scriptural Cosmogony in its geometric and geodetic
demonstrations of the earth’s concavity, and settles the
question of the inspiration of the Bible.

The Firmament is the Circumferential Environ.

In the Bible the word “firmament” is used. The first
syllable of the word is suggestive of its meaning; but the
Hebrew word rakayia conveys an idea of the character of
the firmament; it not only conveys the idea of expanse, but
that the substances of which the expanse is constructed are
solids. Rakayia means hammered-out plates or lamina;,
from rakah , to beat. The word firmament means plates or
strata of metal. Applied to the universal environ, it means
metallic shells or strata surrounding and enclosing the
world. The conclusions of modern astronomy, that we are
living on the exterior surface of the earth, with an infinity
of unenclosed space extending in every direction, can afford
no explanation of the Scriptural firmament. Proctor
ridiculed Moses’ conception of astronomy because he wrote
of a solid shell enclosing the universe; and another has
said: “Don’t you know that the man who wrote that book
believed the firmament to be a solid affair ?”

That such metallic strata constitute the foundation of
the universe, can be scientifically demonstrated. We have
only to observe a few facts in nature, and ascertain the
specific gravity of all substances, to know their emplace¬
ment in the universal form. Substances lighter than the
atmosphere seek to rise above it. When lighter substances
have reached their static plane they cease to ascend. Sub¬
stances heavier than the atmosphere seek to go below the


THE HOLLOW GLOBE AND THE BIBLE. T 75

atmospheric plane; if released and left free to fall as far as
they will, they do not go down forever, but only to the
planes in which they find their rest points or static balance.
The heaviest metal, therefore, would gravitate to the lowest
point, the next lighter above that, and so on throughout
the list of all substances of which the universe is composed.

The sun is the center from which gravitate all the
energies generated in it. Tight, heat, and thousands of
other qualities of solar and gravic energies radiate, and
consequently descend or gravitate from the solar center to
the circumference. The lighter substances of the universe
surround the solar center, and the arrangement and em¬
placement of all substances and of all planes or strata,
obtain from the relations of their specific gravity; they
materialize at the place of their balance,—the heaviest outer¬
most. The circle of deposition of each substance is equi¬
distant from the gravic center in all directions from that
center, thus constituting each plane a distinct sphere or
shell of the environ. The material universe is a shell, com¬
posed of metallic and mineral strata; the crust of the earth
is about one hundred miles in thickness, embracing a dimen¬
sion of about 8,000 miles diameter. The seven metallic
and five mineral strata constitute the twelve foundations
upon which the geologic strata of earth are founded. Mic.
vi:2; Job xxxviii: 4-6; Psa. civ: 5; Heb. i:io; Jer. xxxi:37.

By processes of contraction and expansion, these lami-
nse or plates beat and thus decompose and recompose each
other; and by these processes they generate energies that
perpetuate the stars; they are, therefore, the foundations of
the stars, for without them there could be no stellar reflec¬
tions. The strata of the earth’s shell, therefore, are
the rakayia or “firmament of heaven,” in which the stars


ijG


THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.


are set or formed. Through the reflection of energies from
the sun, and through the generation and levitation of ener¬
gies in the strata, and consequently by means of the firma¬
ment, the “waters above the firmament” (the sea of hydro¬
gen the water producer) are divided from the waters
beneath. Gen. i:6,14-17.

That the earth is “founded upon the seas and estab¬
lished upon the floods,” (Psa. xxivrn; cxxxvi:6) is a scien¬
tific fact. The beating, decomposing, and recomposing
processes which stratify the substances of the earth’s crust,
obtain at the .conjunction of the atmospheres and at the
water’s surface. Gravic energies hold in solution gold,
mercury, silver, zinc, copper, tin, iron, etc., and these sub¬
stances are deposited in the waters of the oceans and seas.
Thus salt water holds in solution all of the so called ele¬
ments of the universe, and the earth is continually being
recomposed from the elements in the water. The waters
thus become the support of the earth; they continually
supply the material, depositing the same as sediment.

The elements of these substances are derived from the
actinic action of the sun’s rays; as for instance, the action
of the chlorine of the sun upon the sodium of the water,
producing the saline, and from thence the calcium particles.
As the chloride of sodium deposits where the solar energy
meets the ozone of sodium, so gold and other substances
deposit where the solar rays meet their corresponding
mates in the levic energies ascending to meet the gravic
energies holding the cathode gold and other solutions.

The “Hollow of His Hand” the Earth’s Concavity.

Superimposed upon the seven metallic strata are five
mineral strata, upon which are laid the geologic strata


THE HOLLOW GLOBE AND THE BIBLE. 177

comprising the soil of the earth. This makes the earth’s
surface concave to the center of gravity and levity—con¬
cave to the central sun. The Scriptures refer in a strik¬
ing manner in several instances to the earth’s concavity,
indicating that its inner surface is habitable, and to the fact
that we live on the inside instead of on the outside, as in¬
dicated in the Eord’s prayer: “Thy will be done in earth
as it is in heaven.” More than a dozen times the phrase
“in earth” is used in the Bible.

Every part of the concave earth is directly beneath the
sun; every square inch of its surface is “under the sun." In
Ecclesiastes alone the phrase “under the sun” is used more
than a score of times; as Eccl. i 19,14; ii: 11—22; iii:i6 to x:5.
According to Scripture usage, the heavens are above us; all
perpendiculars extend vertically to the solar center, con¬
verging at the center of the earth; every tree, shrub, and
weed, every human being standing erect, indicates the
direction of the astral center; and every minaret, cupola,
dome, monument, and church spire, points to the center of
the universe. A surface from which all perpendiculars con¬
verge above it is necessarily concave.

The surface upon which the seas and oceans rest
is a concavity. “Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow [concavity] of his hand, and meted out heaven with
the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in
a measure, weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills
in a balance?” Isa. xl:i2. Applied to universal form,
which is the ultimate and outermost expression of the mind
of Deity, in which form are contained all the waters in
equilibration, this would indicate that the earth is hollow.
In symbolism, the hand is the ultimate of power; the uni¬
verse is the ultimate and outermost expression and limit of


178


the ceeeuear cosmogony.


THE HOEEOW GEOBE AND THE BIBEE.


179


its interior life; the surface upon which the waters rest is
concave; the world in which the strata of earth are
“weighed” and find their static “balance,” is hollow. The
waters are held in, and consequently conform in contour to
the concave surface; that surface constitutes the “bounds”
with which the waters are “compassed.” “He hath com¬
passed [Heb. chug , encircled, environed] the waters with
a bound” [choq, limit, boundary], (Job xxvi: 10); “Thou
hast set all the borders [gebulah, enclosures, enclosed
places] of the earth.” Psa. Ixxiv:i7.

The Arc and the Chord of Arc.

The foundation of the Koreshan Cosmogony is, that
any part of the earth’s surface constitutes the arc of a circle,
the extension of which completes the circumference of
about 25,000 miles. The Founder of the Koreshan System,
having discovered the true relations and laws of cosmic
form and function, has for twenty-seven years maintained
that a line at right angles to the perpendicular at a given
point, extended as a rectiline, will come in contact with the
water’s surface at a distance determined by knowm ratio of
the earth’s curvation. The extension of such a line from
the perpendicular is the sine of arc, the cosine of which
completes the chord, the extremities of which extend into
the water equidistant from the perpendicular. This is the *
absolute demonstration of the earth’s concavity, and
a complete corroboration of the testimony of the Bible con¬
cerning the arc and chord. That such arc and chord are
indicated in the Scriptures, may be seen from the following:

“It is he that sitteth on the circle [Heb. chug, arc,
compass, sphere] of the earth” (Isa. xl: 22); “He set
a compass [chug, arc, circle, sphere] upon the face of the


depth” (Prov. viii: 27). The words “circle” and “com¬
pass’ ’ here employed do not mean a circular line or ring set
upon a flat surface, but a circular form curving in more
directions than a circle upon a plane; they embrace the
idea of limit, environ, arc, compass, and sphere. The
earth’s surface is spread upon its foundations (Isa. xliv:24),
equidistant from the solar sphere.

“Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
earth? * * Who hath laid the measures [environ, robes,
strata] * * thereof, or who hath stretched the line upon it f ’
Job xxxviii: 4-6. The ‘ ‘man with the measuring line in his
hand (Zech. ii:i; Ezek. xlvii:3; II. Ki. xxi:i3; Zech.
iv: 10), the one that stands “upon a wall made by a plumb-
line, -with a plumb-line in his hand” (Amos vii:7),—
KorESH, the one bringing the knowledge of the laws
of cosmic form, the one making the most remarkable dis¬
covery of modern times—the fact of the cellular form of the
universe, the one who, by practical and scientific application
of the plumb-line and level, will “turn wise men back¬
ward and make their knowledge foolishness” (Isa. xliv:25~
28). Judgment will he “lay to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet; and the hail [crystallized truth] shall
sweep away the refuge of lies” (Isa. xxvii: 15-21); He
shall stand and “measure the earth” (Hab. iii:6) geodetic-
. ally, by the extension of the horizontal as “air line,”
or rectiline, “stretching the line upon it” as the chord
of arc, in demonstration of the earth’s true contour !

What and Where are the Physical Heavens ?

In Scripture usage, the heavens are above us (Ex.
xx:4; Job xxviii:24; xxxvii:3); in Koreshan Science, all
perpendiculars extend through the heavens, converging at



l8o THE CEEEGEAR COSMOGONY.

the astral center. Consequently, the heavens do not sur¬
round the earth as in the popular system, but the earth cir-
cumferentiates the heavens. The heavens are spherical,
and this idea is conveyed in, “He walketh in the circuit
[ chug , arc, circle, sphere] of heaven” Job xxikizj.);
“Knowest thou the ordinances [ chuqqah , statute, limitation,
arc, sphere] of the heavens ?” (Job xxxviii:33). “He com-
passeth the heavens with a circle” (Apoc., Keel, xiii: 12).

There are three physical heavens, corresponding to the
three heavens in another domain (II Cor. xii: 2), and these
three heavens are the three atmospheres which surround
the astral center and fill the intervening space between the
center and circumference of the earth. These atmospheres
being of different density and spherical in form, do not
admit of direct vision of the solar center. Kike curtains
(Psa. civ:2; Isa. xl:22), their expanse prevents direct view
of what is beyond the limit of the outer heaven, or our
atmosphere. That there are more heavens than one, is
evidenced by the fact that the word “heavens” (plural) is
used in the Bible more than one hundred and twenty-five
times.

The heavens contain the energies of the universe; they
occupy the space through which the energies generated in
the great galvano-magnetic battery levitate and gravitate;
the heavens contain the sun, moon, planets, and stars,
which are supplied and maintained by the ascending
or levic energies; the energies of the heavens are levitated,
or heaved up; and consequently, the “heavens” are what
the term implies— shamayim, which means “heaved-up
things.” They are lighter than the earth, and hence are
above it, the substances of which the heavens are composed
being emplaced according to their specific gravity and lev-



TIIE IIOIJ.OW GEOBE AND THE BIBEE. iSl

ity. The limit to which these substances levitate is the
center itself; the atmosphere surrounding and contiguous
to the solar sphere is the highest heaven, and our atmos¬
phere the lowest. The motion of the heavens according to
the Scriptures, may be seen in their relation to the sun,
moon, and constellations.

Sun, Moon, and Stars—Their Location and Motion.

The Koreshan System maintains that the heavenly
bodies move in orbits, revolving with the heavens in
twenty-four hours. The Scriptures also, in their reference
to the orbs above us, invariably teach the revolution and
movement of these “lights” in a stationary earth. Two
great lights were made to rule the day and night (Gen.
1:16,17; Psa. cxxxvi: 8), the sun, moon, and stars being,
not great worlds, but centers of combustion, in which there
is generated, and ffom which radiates light to shine upon
the earth. The revolution of the sun, not the rotation of
the earth, is the cause of the alternations of light and dark¬
ness upon the surface of the shell. The meaning of the
word sun, from the Hebrew shemesh, is a ministrant
“Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven to divide
the day from the night, and let them be for signs and sea¬
sons, and for days and years” (Gen. i: 14; viii: 22); “He
appointed the moon for seasons, and the sun knoweth his
going down” (Psa. civ: 19).

The central sun being the positive pole of the great
universal battery, is the father of light, while the moon, the
circumference, the shell of the earth itself, the negative and
receptive form, is the mother. Through the refractive
powers of the atmospheres, the central sun is projected
(refocalized) upon the upper stratum of our atmosphere.


182


THU CELEUEAR COSMOGONY.


The central sun is projected from the center to its outer¬
most focal point, forming the visible sun. The moon we
see is projected or reflected from the great concave mirrors,
the metallic strata in the circumference; this moon is a
sphere of force in the physical heavens, a sphere of crystal-
lie energy, upon which is implanted the picture of the
earth’s .surface. The visible moon is agravosphere or X-ray
picture of the crust, lienee we see light and dark places
upon it, produced from the earth’s surface and the geologic
strata. The real moon is the laminae of the earth’s shell,
hence the Scriptural expression, “round tires like the
moon” (Isa. iii: 18). The sun is the center, the moon the
circumference; the image or focalization of each we see in
the physical heavens. The moon does not shine borrowed
light directly, as in the Copernican system; the sun and
moon are two great lights; each shines a light of its own,
the light of the moon being derived from thousands of
qualities of solar energies, after utilization, transmutation,
and metamorphosis in the great shell.

That the sun, moon, and stars are in motion, the
Scriptures emphatically declare. There is no more striking
illustration of this fact than in the well-known incident of
the stopping of the sun by Joshua (Josh. x:i2,i3). It is
obvious that if the sun were not in motion, the narrative is
either ridiculously false, or symbolism has no fundamental
relation to material things. If the sun stopped for a whole
day, it was in motion previous to its standing still; when
the sun began motion again, it “went down” and the day
was ended. From that day until this it has had an habit¬
ual motion in its orbit. Referring to this incident the
prophet said: “The sun and moon stood still in their habi¬
tation” (Hab. iii: n); “Did not the sun go back by his


THE HOEEOW GEOBE AND THE BIBEE. 183

means?” “In his time the sun went backward” (Apoc.
Eccl. xlvi:i; xlviii:23). A similar occurrence is found in
II Ki. xx:ii, “And he brought the shadow [of the sun]
ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the
dial of Aliaz.” Also, “So the sun returned ten degrees,
by which degrees it was gone down.” Isa. xxxviii:8.

The movement of the heavens and the orbs they con¬
tain may be seen in the sublime 19th Psalm: “The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his
handiwork. * * Their line [meridian] is gone out through
all the earth [passing over every part of the surface]. * *

In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a
bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a
strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end
of the heaven, and his circuit [Heb. tequphah , revolution]
unto the ends of it.” Also, “Swift as the sun in his
course.” Apoc., I Esdr. iv:34.

The phenomenon of sunrise, as explained in the
Koreshan System, is not caused by the rotation of the earth,
with apparent sunrise above the convex surface, as in the
Copernican system; but by the sun coming into our sphere
of vision, and thus bursting into view. A critical analysis
of the words used in the Scriptures with reference to sun¬
rise and sunset, will reveal the fact that in this as well as
in all other features of cosmic science, the Koreshan Cos¬
mogony is iii harmony with and corroborative of the
Scriptures. The Bible does not convey the idea that the
sun ascends in the morning and goes down or descends in
the evening, but that it comes into view, as in Eccle. 1:5;
“The sun ariseth [Heb. zarach , bursts forth], and the sun
goeth down {bo, goes in], and hastetli to the place where
he arose” {zarach , bursts forth]. With reference to sun-



184


THK CKTXUI.AR COSMOGONY.

rise, this word zarach is used in the Bible scores of times;
as in Psa. civ:22; Jonah iv:S; Nall. iii: 17; Job ix:7; Gen.
xxxii:3i. Also, “The sun shall come forth on the earth.”
Apoc., Jud. xiv: 2.

Likewise, sunset in the Koreshan System is corrobora¬
tive of the correct usage of the Scripture terms employed in
reference to this phenomenon. The sun passes beyond the
sphere of vision and goes into obscurity; it goes out over
the earth beyond the sea of hydrogen and arc of the heav¬
ens. Wherever the words “go down,” and in some places
“set,” etc,, are used with reference to the sun at evening,
they are translated erroneously from the Hebrew word bo,
which means to go in, as iu Gen. xv: 17, “When the sun
went down” [bo] ; also in Gen. xxviii:n; Lx. xxii:26; Deut.
xxiv: 15; Josh. x:i3, and many others. Also in Mark L32,
and Luke iv:4o; “And at even when the sun was set”
[j'tvvu, to go in, not go down].

To determine its accuracy, the Bible must be tested,
not by the current and popular fallacy, but b)^ a system of
science, the fundamentals of which are susceptible of abso¬
lute demonstration. The Koreshan System alone scientific¬
ally defends the Scriptures. The Bible is scientifically
correct; KorPSH, the divine and natural scientist, is its
sole interpreter and expositor !



Addendum.

Astronomy’s False Foundation.

A Lesson on Perspective, Exposing the Character of a
Popular Hypothesis.

BY KOBESIl.


S ATS DARWIN, in “Animals and Plants,” Vol. I, page 9:

“In scientific investigations it is permitted to invent any
hypothesis, and if it explains various large and independent
classes of facts it rises to the rank of a well-grounded theory. ”
It is to this absurd proposition that the most of our “scientific”
theories, if not all of them, owe their existence. He fuither
says, that “the undulations of ether and even its existence are
hypothetical, yet every one now admits the undulatoiy theory
of light.” We agree with Darwin, that the undulatory theory
of light is a mere hypothesis; that is, a mere guess, but we
deny his statement that “everyone now admits the undulatory
theory of light.” “The principle of natural selection,” he
says, “may be looked at as a mere hypothesis, but rendered in
some degree probable by what we positively know of the varia¬
bility of organic beings in a state of nature,—by what we posi¬
tively know of the struggle for existence, and the consequent
almost inevitable preservation of favorable variations,—and
from the analogical formation of domestic races.”

Darwinism, as Darwin himself affirms, is predicated en¬
tirely upon “scientific” guesses; and these, he declares, consti¬
tute the basis of all scientific claims. Speaking of natural
Selection, he says: “Now, this hypothesis may be tested—and
this seems to me to be the only fair and legitimate mannei of
considering the whole question—by trying whether it explains
several large and independent classes of facts; such as the geo¬
logical succession of organic beings, their distribution in past
and present times, and their mutual affinities and homologies.



186 THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

If the principle of natural selection does explain these and other
large bodies of facts, it ought to be received. ’ ’

“Please accept my theories,” says the eminent “scientist,”
‘‘because I can explain many things upon my hypothesis.”
The Koreshan Scientist might beg the question and say, please
accept our theory of Universology, because there is not one
thing that we cannot explain scientifically upon our premise.
But we ask no man to accept anything on the basis of a mere
hypothesis. A knowledge of the construction of the universe
and its functions, with the laws and principles of life depending
upon such knowledge, is too important a matter to be left to
mere conjecture— mere hypothesis. No conclusion is certain
which is not founded upon and grounded in a positively demon¬
strated premise. It is for this reason that the Koreshan System
stands out distinct and unique. It predicates nothing upon
guesswork; its first step in the discussion of any proposition,
is the correct establishment and proof of its premise. Darwin¬
ism is a fair sample of the processes by which modern scientific
conclusions are invariably reached. When in conversation with
Professor Harkness, of the United States Naval Observatory,
we asked him if the Copernican system was not predicated
upon assumption, he replied: “We have to assume something. ”
We maintain that if a premise be assumed, then the conclusion
is equally an assumption.

Fact and Phenomenon Differentiated.

Uet us take the principle of optics in its application to the
definition of the phenomenon of the rotundity of the earth, as
an illustration of correct reasoning from an established premise,
as followed by the logician of the Koreshan School of Science.
We herewith accompany our argument with diagrammatic
illustrations of the principles involved in the argument. (See
Plate IV.) Two lines may be extended parallel with each other,
as in the case of the two rails of a railroad track. The dia-
grams represent certain known facts in optics, which we declare
shall not be overruled, set aside, nor ignored for the purpose of
sustaining an unwarrantable “scientific” theory. If any man


ADDENDUM 187

is too lazy to reason, or too mean to investigate another S
reasoning, we do not expect to make any impression ; or if he
is so wedded to a theory because his grandfather believed in it,
that he will not change his opinion for the truth’s sake, he will
naturally pass this argument by; but for the honest man there
is only one alternative.

The two lines, a /, extending the length of diagram 1,
plate IV, may be taken to represent the tracks of a railroad,
five feet apart. In the major premise of this proposition are in¬
volved the facts as they are, not as they appear. The measure¬
ment of the space at both ends of the track shows that the rails
at each end are just five feet apart. There is no element of
assumption in this part of the premise. We wish to thoroughly
impress upon the student the fact, that so far we have not had
to “assume something.” The rails are straight and parallel,
and five feet apart. These are facts of practical and certain
measurement. From B to c, in either direction, the track indi¬
cates one mile (the entire length of the diagram representing
two miles); in observing the distance from B to c, either way,
the track appears to narrow down to a vanishing point at c.
This appearance is the minor premise. Let it be remembered
that the minor premise involves a fact, but that fact is an ap¬
pearance involved in which are certain optical laws which we
will apply logically in another part of this argument. Do not
forget the fact that we are arguing from premises that are
proven to be true, and that we differ from the ordinary “scien¬
tific” logician, in that we work from a demonstrated premise—
not from an assumption.

Principles of Perspective and the Vanishing Point.

The purpose of this part of the argument is to show the
reason for an appearance, which is in direct opposition to the
fact. Why does the space five feet wide at F F, appear as a
point at c ? Note the dotted lines beginning at S S, and ex¬
tending to the arrow; they make a comparatively long picture
upon the surface indicated by the arrow. Now, note the dot¬
ted lines beginning at F F, and extending to the surface marked


I


i88


THE CKHHUHAR cosmogony.


retina. These lines vanish at the point upon the surface thus
marked; for this reason they appear to come to a point at c.
If we take this appearance as a fact, we are led into an intermin¬
able labyrinth of difficulties. The “scientist” establishes his
assumptions upon these appearances, ignoring the facts and
laws of optics. The objects c? d are in fact at ed, as represented
in diagram i, Plate IV, but they appear to be at £. We are to
distinguish the facts of reality from the facts of appearance , and
show the character of the appearances, and how these appear¬
ances have led the short-sighted “scientists” into their aggre¬
gate of errors, which they delight to call by the title of science.
Thus far there is no element of assumption; we assume noth¬
ing. We have shown that space. is annihilated in appearance
by the law of distal perspective; that foreshortening is an inev¬
itable law of optics, and we hold that these laws are totally ig¬
nored by every so called scientific astronomer. The pseudo
scientists shall not continue to foist their fallacious systems of
astronomy upon a deluded public without a perpetual protest.

It will be remembered that diagram i, Plate IV, represents the
point of observation at B, from which the objective point is seen
at c, but which in reality is at F F. The line DDD, extending to
c < * s not what it appears to be from the outlook or visual point
at B. The apparent line at c, which appears to be only a line,
is the entire breadth of five feet—the distance across the track
at F F. If a middle rail extend midway between the two rails
of the track, it will be seen the entire length of the line, or
nearly so, and seem to blend with the two other rails at c; the
five feet have vanished to a mere point, at e, therefore a space
five feet wide appears like a mere line. The broader the space
in perspective the more rapidly it vanishes by distal extense,
as shown in comparison with the middle rail; and the narrower
the space, the less rapidly it vanishes by distal extense. This
principle belongs more exclusively to the effect on the retina
itself. A balloon in passing out of visual range appears to
diminish rapidly for the first few miles, after which it remains
in view for a long time as a mere speck. These facts will have
their application during the course of this argument.


We subjoin a second diagram. (See Diagram 2, Plate IV.)
Here we have two lines as in diagram 1, but we will employ
them to represent parallel lines, one above the other instead
of side by side, as in the first instance. The line A A appears
to rise to B B, and the line C C appears to drop to B B, if
viewed from the point D. The points A A and C C are vis¬
ible, but they are seen as if at B B. Now, is there any man
capable of thinking, who will be such an obstinate ass as to
take this appearance as the fact , after the phenomenon has been
pointed out to him ? We have studied the phenomena of


to make an application of them to


lished law of Koreshanity; namely, that assumption is no
basis for the establishment of truth.


We subjoin the third diagram. (See Diagram 3, Plate IV.)
In this we take the lower line of the second diagram, A A; we
observe the points A A from the point D, but the principle of
perspective or distal foreshortening causes the objects to appear
at the points B B. This is not due to refraction, but it is due
to distal foreshortening; the space from A to K has contracted
and foreshortened to the point B. This law is operative, and
applies to all space whether in the atmosphere, ethereal, or on
the surface of the earth, terrestrial. If the line A A in diagram
3 represented a flat surface, a convex surface, or a concave sur¬
face, the phenomenon would be practically the same ; a convex¬
ity or concavity of only eight inches to the mile would not
appreciably affect the optical illusion. If the so called scientist
is asked the question, Why does the earth viewed from a balloon
look like a bowl ? he will tell you ist is because of atmospheric
refraction.


If the laws of refraction will operate in an atmosphere of a
uniform density, to distort the vision, what may we not expect
regarding phenomena related to objects claimed to be outside
our atmosphere ? If the point D, in diagram 3, is two feet


ADDENDUM.


r 9° The celuuuar cosmogony.

above the line A A, at the distance of less than a mile the
object at A on the lower line will be seen at B, in either direc¬
tion. The law is the same whether the altitude be two feet and
a half, five hundred feet, three miles, or any distance. A less
or greater altitude could not change the principle nor alter the
character of the phenomenon. The cross-piece at P is seen at
A, but appears to be at B, because the standard, A P, is fore¬
shortened down the two feet and a half. We have thus far
shown certain facts, and optical phenomena connected with
these facts. We have assumed nothing regarding the facts or
the phenomena. We have interpreted the phenomena by de¬
fining the laws upon which they depend, and we challenge all
the scientific men in the world to point out one inaccuracy
either in the facts as presented and pertaining to the reality of
the relation of the lines, or the facts of the optical phenomena.

Specific Statement of Minor Proposition.

We are now prepared to state a minor proposition. Bines
or surfaces separated by narrow or broad spaces,—extended
parallel with each other and viewed in perspective,—will appear
to approach each other proportionate to their distance from each
other and length of perspective. Bet the surface of the earth
be taken as one of these surfaces, and extend a line over this
surface; that is, a visual or optical line. If we stand twenty
feet above the surface of the earth and look toward the horizon
the horizon is seen on a level with the eye. If a roof could be
extended parallel to the surface of the earth twenty feet above
our lookout (forty feet above the earth), the two surfaces would
^appear to approach each other; the lower surface would seem to
rise to a Ievel wit]l tlie e y e > and the upper surface would appear
to drop to a level with the eye,—that is, providing the two
planes are extended the necessary distance. Now, if we re¬
move the upper surface or plane, the lower plane will appear to
rise to a level with the eye, just the same as when the upper
plane occupied its position. It would not be occasioned either
by refraction or convexity, but would be due to the operation
of the principle of foreshortening. How a man can observe


191


this phenomenon and attribute it to anything but its true
cause, and call himself scientific, is one of the enigmas of this
so called enlightened age.

We have practically shown that the apparent rotundity or
convexity of the earth is due to the optical illusion created by
foreshortening. When it is assumed that the earth is convex,
and in this assumption the simplest laws of optics are set aside
and ignored, shall we quietly submit to the imposition and
allow the world to continue in ignorance of the laws of cosmo¬
gonic form, or shall we place the facts in opposition to the as¬
sumptions as they obtain and are made to constitute the basis
of scientific conclusions ?

If a man stands by the side of one of the rails of a railroad
track, say two feet from the rail, his line of vision will meet
the rail at a point determined by the distance in perspective.
This we need only state, for it is a well known fact. No man
will pretend to deny this, unless he be an absolute ignoramus.
Then why should anyone deny the phenomenon as applied to
the extense of any other line or plane ? If the earth were con¬
cave, eight inches to the mile, which would be a practical level
and an apparent straight plane, and we should apply the law of
optics as described, in looking along a geolinear surface the
earth would appear to rise in perspective much more rapidly
than the eight inches to the mile would indicate. If we were
twenty feet above the surface of the earth, the earth would rise
to meet the line of vision and would appear to be convex. The
scientific and honest man, before he projects a theory on the
basis of appearance, would submit the appearance to a rigid
analysis; he would prove his premise by the facts, and not
ignore the most common principles and laws of optics as applied
to geodesy. Bet us demonstrate our premise, then reason
logically, and we are certain of the truth. Bet us assume our
premise from mere appearance and then make our theory fit the
premise, and we have just what the scientific world is attempt¬
ing to cram down the throats of the credulous and unthinking
public.


I9 2 TIIK CHLLUI.AR COSMOGONY.

Qeolinear Foreshortening and Mathematical
Application.

Our sub-major proposition is, that a rigid mathematical
calculation, founded upon the mathematical determination of
the amount of foreshortening of the space between any two given
parallel lines or planes in perspective, when applied to the sur¬
face of the earth, will determine the amount and direction of
deviation which the surface of the earth describes, from a line
extended from the point of observation, to the vanishing point.
Eet two lines be separated by a definite space, and extended
parallel to a distance sufficient to obliterate the space by distal
foreshortening. Extend these lines one mile parallel, a definite
space intervening, then apply the same distance in length with
the same space to any other two lines, and the same results
would obtain. The truth of this statement is obvious to any
candid person. If we make an observation along the side of a
line which we suppose to deviate a few inches one way or the
other, from a rectiline, and calculate the difference between the
definite foreshortening of the known lines and space, and the
space of the indefinite line, the difference is the amount of the
deviation of the unknown line. This will also determine its
direction. Eet this principle be applied to the surface of the
earth, and the demonstration will determine whether the earth
is flat, convex, or concave ; also the amount of deviation, if any,
from a plane. The claim that the earth is convex, is made upon
the mere appearance from optical effects, without any considera¬
tion of the laws of foreshortening, and the whole system of
cosmogony is made to fit this absurdity.

Optics Wholly Ignored by the Astronomer.

We have pursued this argument from a known fact, and
have applied a knowledge of the laws of optics as related to
these facts, to the appearance of the surface of the earth as
under the operation of these laws. We have shown that
the laws of optics prevail and operate in the one case as in
the other. We have shown that the laws of optics are


X

ADDENDUM. 19 °

totally ignored by the “scientist” in his consideration, and
that he attributes an appearance to the application of an im¬
aginary and impossible-operation. It is also demonstrated
in this discussion, that the principle of ^fraction is used as
an argument by the so called scientist, where the prin¬
ciple of refraction does not enter into the proposition. We
have accounted for the appearance of rotundity on the basis of
the known principles of foreshortening in perspective, which
every sensible and conscientious man will admit to be obviously
true. We have shown, then, that if the earth were an extended
plane for ten thousand miles, a view from any altitude would
give the earth the appearance of a rotund form, in dimension
proportionate to the altitude; the greater the altitude, the large>
the appearance. We have shown what every honest scientist
admits ; namely, that the whole system of the Copernican as¬
tronomy is predicated upon an assumption which has no tenable
foundation; therefore we are justified in our challenge of the
accuracy of the system of astronomy which now flourishes
under the title of “science.” We also assure our readers that
tLe time has come which the eminent astronomer, Piofessor
Woodhouse, of Cambridge, England, feared would meet the so
called astronomical profession. He said: “However perfect our
theory may appear, in our estimation, and however satisfacto¬
rily the Newtonian hypothesis may seem to account for all
celestial phenomena, yet we are compelled to admit the as¬
tounding truth that if our premise be disputed and our facts
challenged, the whole range of astronomy does not contain the
proofs of its own accuracy. Startling as this announcement
may appear, it is nevertheless true; and astronomy would in¬
deed be helpless, were it not for the implied approval of those
whose authority is considered a guarantee of its truth. Should
this sole refuge fai; us, all our arguments all our observations,
all'our boasted accuracy would be useless and the whole science
of modern astronomy musi fall to the ground.” We have
shown that the principles of optics have been left entirely out of
consideration in the establishment of the Copernican hypothe-



194


Thr cru.ui.ar cosmogony.


sis, and that therefore it is not worth one thought as constituting
a basis for cosmogonic conviction.

We now state our general proposition: The astronomers of
note admit that the whole fabric of hypothesis called astronomy,
is built upon an assumed premise of appearance. When a
premise is assumed, the conclusion is necessarily an assumption.
It is easy to fit a large aggregation of facts to any hypothesis ;
but this does not prove any proposition. An “hypothesis does
not rise to the rank of a well-grounded theory, ’’ and never can
so long as that hypothesis is predicated upon a premise that is
itself not proven. The earth is of some definite form ; this form
is absolute, but it has never been fixed in the mind of the thinker
for the reason that, up to the present time, the “scientific”
world is looking for some positive proof of the earth’s rotund¬
ity, its revolution on its axis, and its orbital motion. These
have never, so far, been regarded as settled facts. Because of
this uncertainty we claim the right to demand some better
reasons than have ever been adduced, for the acceptation of the
Copernican system of astronomy, and an examination into the
reasons we have promulgated for a disavowal of present “sci¬
entific” claims.



t J LA'i h: No. i.


— - -H ~~ 4 " _


The Horizon or Vanishing Pc


^Appearance. ill


Appearance,
| “hull d own.”


d


Surface 2 or Geolinear


* HartFs Surface 2 or Geolinear ExtenscT ^---- —-r-w-jfl

Tam illustrfif DIAGR ^^ No - *•—Illustrating “The Taws of Visual Impression,” Pages 32-34

“ ustrates a pnnciple. not measurements true to Scale; the height of the objects is not proportioned to the distance


-Q



DIAGRAM No. 3.—Illustrating the Illusions of Optical Phenomena. Page 37.

1 £ " S ix M I 1. E s t _ ___ | I Direction of runnl) line III



— Direction of Vlumb line if flat

3 -arc <-> * 8 u p p 0 8 k t* ~ / ~~— -—^=^= 1 =

* ~ == ^S^ = £^Dim;ioii of Plumb lino if Convex

Comprehensive View of the Air Line, showing use of the Rectilineator in Survey o* Chord of~\ rc V- Vn 1

Geodetic Staff a V 1 les, I Pa, fc 37 10c no. ^9-430. " ^ 1VOreShaa


T tlie ReCtiline ^" r iU of Cli ° rd ^ b >- tile Koreshan

enc fttan at maples, Fla. Pages 37, 109, no, 129-130.


ara^lagag


THE


PART THREE.


(( r T ELLO! Ctrl mea is getting astrava-

1 -•* *c\; i,' l'.' , f - ’ n»i J in

fore him and left lying acres* the’taElo oo*

was'tWa artfcla that vastly eubJecVof tha :
remark and the investigation that promptly
followed,

A.huge porcelain bowl, adorned with gayiy
colored dairy maids, welshed down the end
of a.'fragrant weiehael stem-as Jong as a
tailor's' yardsm-k. Would 11 cool the smoke,
Bripgsio wondered, or would the porcelain

juestlon dis 1 !.Bt er bef i i=ad no
In-rn «o cluse to an Of I i * km by
experiment Grimes would cot objset; ha
kin w. to he r<m rrr.Uy’ proceeded to Si' tho
massive ^** 0 *^ h * , | ** r , tt ** t on tb»
a "dry" pull ta test the {Baugh t.'ju**
t. t« r.d not until then, did h, cpsslfee
the Pi >l>lem that concerned the sbrouHahc*.
ddd i,;.j in-.'i y-d.ry application of Hr,; to tfca
tobn.-c:> and draught So the steal. The face
that a long-st&Bi plpo, require a apocstaf
treatment for lighting had escaped him.
First he tried to reach the bowl by the Sim¬
ula process of’ stretching his-arm. To in¬
crease bio reach he turned his face away
ore d to the left. 1 < r • l- on in -

extreme right corner of his mouth am* ex¬
tending. the stem along hla peJafuliy pro*

. traded right arm. Naiwir.sstandt.-’g t!>o
strain, however, hla right hand fell short of
the howl by a good span. Brlgjpd* sat down
annoyed.

. After some . consideration he bethought
him of the IMP of fire tongs, a pair of wfci-Ji
ho hastened to borrow from Ids wonderln#
landlady. In the tongB ho placed a light@*
match and advanced It carefully toward th*
eluSlve bowl. At a draught of air the puny'


last ha tried to make- the tobacco bum by
holding the thatch to It and blowing. .With
the failure of this experiment h« got mad.

"Grimes .always was an Idiot with hie in¬
fernal pipes," he growled half aloud. "He’ll
bo wanting me to hold the match and hcii>
him Ught this absurd thing, bat. by thun¬
der. ha'll starve for a smoke, before I'll do
It." And instead of going out on b!4 btcy-
-clo he stayed tn to be sure not' to ratsa
Grimes’ homtllatloa at the bands of thWptpa.

Grimes, with perverse deliberation. de¬
ferred smoking until after dinner. Brlggsl*
«ed the way to their room. Ut the gas and
sat. down In eager expectancy. "I thought
you’d be In a hurry to get at It. old man," bp
said, “xo I Ailed It for you."

. Crimes expressed bit thunk*, took n standT
about a yard from the gas Jet and he'd th*
pipe bov/1 at the edge, of the flame. A few
e ^ r ^brought^e™okb-.n mjjrOttjttrq|

And to this day be does not know wbjr.hbs
room-mate rusbed so hurriedly outtnfo-tha
gathering twilight, nor why ho regards Utah
German pipe with such marked disfavor.


CONTRAST C
K-M-tiS—.".i


Mrs. Comeyus—Mabel, why
detest abbs *pfa° a^ofey ”»”<>*


DIAGRAM No. 5


-Showing Limit of Lateral or Geolinear Vision over Concave Arc; Vanishing Point or Horizon in the I-


DO WE LIVE ON THE INSIDE OF THE EARTH?


shads' Startling Giaim *Phet ^Tisir ^PhSoty !
>sirjonstrat«<J by Sxpsrimtsnts ar\<3 Sur-
®ys — SGtentiftG Ffsoolution to follow. j


DIAGRAM No. I.—Illustrating the Vanishing Point of Space between Parallel Railway Tracks.


In Retrospect and Prospect.

A Review of Developments in the Scientific World
Since the Koreshan Survey.

PROF. U. G. MORROW.

“Koreshan Universology is predicated upon the basis of a
calculus having for its premise an abundantly confirmed dem¬
onstration, which obviates every possibility of uncertainty.
It comprises the first step toward universal knowledge, which
it is the province of Koreshanity to place before the world.”—
KorESH, the Founder of Koreshan Universology.

“It is a wonderful thing to be upon a mountain and
watch the scientific literature change. * * A general restate¬
ment of physical science is now due. The extensive researches
in the higher phases and states of matter, beginning with
Crookes, and extending to the present, have so enormously
expanded all conceptions of Nature, that a vast work like
Newton’s Principia is urgently needed .”—Scientific American.

I T IS WITH great satisfaction that we note at this time
(now nearly ten years after the successful conduct of
the series of experiments, including the Koreshan Geodetic
Survey, that furnished the basis for the publication of this
work,) the continued discomfiture of the opponents of the
Koreshan Universology. Not only have they failed in all
their attacks upon the System and its demonstrated premise,
but thay have found that radical changes in their own
conclusions have been forced upon them by facts and dis¬
coveries which corroborate many of the scientific tenets set
forth in the preceding chapters of this little volume.

During the past several years we have received from
various sources all the so called arguments available in
favor of the premise of modern astronomy; and also
numerous “explanations” of the results of the Koreshan
Survey already described in detail. The explanations are



Iq6 THE CELLULAR COSMOGONY.

iu conflict with each other, and no one has taken a certain
fact nor a recognized scientific principle as a basis of at¬
tempted overthrow of the Koreshan demonstrations. Read¬
ers of The Flaming Sword have, during these several
years elapsing since our scientific work in Florida, followed
our replies from week to week, to our numerous critics—
among whom are a few scientists of recognized standing.
Professor Pangley, of the Smithsonian Institution, has said
that “while the views of those who regard the earth as a
hollow sphere enclosing the solar and stellar systems, are
inadmissible and even absurd, it is doubtful if any reason¬
ing with members of this school is desirable, for they
belong to a class upon whom sound arguments are wholly
thrown away.”

Professor Parkin, of the Mt. Rowe Observatory, under¬
took to explain our Geodetic Survey on the basis that ‘ ‘the
south end of the line is 64 feet farther from the center of
the earth than the north end. The earth is not exactly
round. The equator is 13 miles (13.647) higher than the
poles. From Florida to the equator it is up-hill all the way.
They ran into the side of the hill, which they could not help
doing.” Professor Parkin’s explanation is entirely out of
harmony with the recognized principles of hydrostatics, and
contradicts many of the best conclusions of his fellow
astronomers. If the. earth is bulged 13 miles higher at the
equator than at the poles, it follows that the water level
conforms to the ellipsoidal configuration; and if the earth
were convex, the ratio of curvature would be practically
unchanged by such bulge. There could be no up-hill slope
on the sea, because up-hill and down-hill are terms used
relative to inclines above sea level, not with reference to
real or supposed difference of distance from the center of the
earth. The Scientific American , dealing with another phase
of the subject, corroborated with emphasis the Koreshan



ADDENDUM. x 97

conclusions regarding the sea level. Professor Parkin’s
conclusions are without any force whatever, as we clearly
demonstrated in The Flaming Sword for August 16, 1904-
It is impossible to note in this edition more than a very
few points relative to principal developments in the scientific
world since the publication of this volume in 1898, which
has already run through a number of large editions The
accuracy of the Koreshan Survey has been questioned by a
few critics. It has seemed to a number of people that the
fine adjustments of the apparatus used would require almost
superhuman skill. If that be so, then the work of the
Government Geodetic Survey should be discredited on the
basis of the same reasons. Geodesists have made many in¬
teresting estimates of the accuracy of the adjustments of
their instruments. The average probable error of the Colby
apparatus in use in Europe has been estimated to be only
0000015 of an inch; Struve, in making estimates, reduced
the average nearly one half. Geodetic apparatus employed
by the U. S. Government are susceptible of still greater
accuracy. These apparatus are devised for the purpose of
accurately measuring the distance between points. The
method of adjustment is that of placing metal surfaces in
contact. The Koreshan Geodetic apparatus differs from
those employed by the Government, not in points of ac¬
curacy, but in form; the principles of adjustment are
practically the same.

The Startling Testimony of Plumb=Lines.

A number of critics have held that experiments with
plumb-lines suspended side by side for the purpose of
determining whether the divergence of the lines should be
upward or downward, would be a more satisfactory test of
the earth’s shape than the projection of an air line by
mechanical means. The suspension of plumb-lines from


198 THU CUUUURAR COSMOGONY.

the top of the Washington Monument, or from the top of
Eifel Tower, has been suggested to us. We have shown
repeatedly that neither the Monument nor the Tower is high
enough to admit of auy appreciable divergence of the lines
being manifest; for from an altitude of 500 or 1,000 feet,
with the plumb-lines only a few feet apart, the difference of
distance between the lines at top and bottom would be so
small as to be beyond the possibility of definite and accurate
measurement.

Concerning the subject of plumb-line experiments with
the view to determining whether the earth’s center be
4,000 miles beneath our feet or above our heads, we wrote
in Thu Framing Sword for July, 1897 , an article from
which the following quotation is an extract:

“When men of the scientific world awake to the importance
of a thorough investigation of the facts and revision of their
present conclusions sufficient to suspend plumb-lines * * down
the mining shafts a mile in depth at Calumet, Michigan, or
into a similar one at Pittsburg, Pa., they will find a measurable
divergence indicating that the perpendiculars extend from a
central point in the physical heavens down to the earth’s con¬
cave surface. ’’

The fact that such experiments have been performed is
very important; it is with satisfaction that we note them,
for they were conducted four years after the article referred
to above was written, with the results which we knew to be
inevitable. In the Fall of 1901, the engineer at the Tama¬
rack Mines, Calumet, Michigan, undertook to “plumb” a
number of the shafts, for the purpose of constructing
elevator shafts and ventilators; in the use of two plumb-
lines, measuring the distance between the two at top and
bottom, he found that they were farther apart at the bottom.
He called the attention of Professor McNair, of the Michi¬
gan College of Mines, to the strange fact; and Professor


ADDUNDUM.


199


McNair assisted the engineer in conducting a number of
experiments down several of the shafts, with practically the
same results in all. The plumb-lines were 4,250 feet m
length; the bobs of lead weighed sixty pounds each, and hung
in vessels of oil at the bottom. The wires were of No. 24
piano wire. Concerning the experiments, we quote a
paragraph from the Milwaukee Sentinel containing a report

of the results:

“At another shaft the same phenomena were noticed, and
with very little change, except that the divergence of the lines
was even greater, head bobs instead of iron were used, but no
change resulted. * * Several explanations have been oflere

for the fact that the wires supposed to hang parallel to each
other were farther apart 4,250 feet below the surface than they
were at the surface, but no one has suggested anything that
seems to cover the question. * * With no disturbing forces

at work, there should be [according to the idea of the earth s
convexity] a slight convergence. ”

The Tamarack Mine experiments attracted considerable
attention among the scientists, who offered various explana¬
tions of the phenomena observed—and they gave almost
every “reason” for the results except, the right one , which
was perhaps not suggested to their minds at all—that of the
earth’s concavity. Professor McNair was baffled and has
been unable to arrive at any certain and satisfactory
conclusion concerning the cause of the unexpected phe¬
nomena; he has, however, entertained a number of
hypotheses, from the basis of which he, with the assistance
of other engineers, repeated the experiments in a number
of the Tamarack shafts in the month of February, 1902.

The suggestion that the sides of the shaft attracted
the bobs and therefore caused the downward divergence,
has been set aside by Professor McNair as wholly inadequate
to explain the results. He estimates that such attraction,


200


THIS CKlvI.UI.AR COSMOGONY.


ADDENDUM.


201


if there be such, would amount to only a few hundredths of
a grain, and would produce scarcely any sensible or appre¬
ciable effect upon the heavy weights suspended. He
remarks that the common explanation is without foundation,
though offered by many scientists and engineers.

Tlie repulsion theory has been advocated by Professor
Hallock, of the Columbia University; this theory, like the
idea of side attraction, is rejected. The first hypothesis of
Professor McNair was that of magnetic attraction of ad¬
jacent iron ventilating pipes; but when lead bobs were
substituted for iron bobs, and practically the same results
were manifest, the hypothesis was abandoned as inadequate
to explain the divergence, though it did seem for a time to
explain the torsion of the plane of the wires or the greater
azimuth at the bottom. Upon using phosphor-bronze wires
instead of steel piano wires, every idea of magnetic or other
side attraction or repulsion was forced out of consideration.

Professor McNair’s next hypothesis was that the down¬
ward divergence of the plumb-lines in the shafts was caused
by air currents; and the arguments contained in his article
dealing with the subject are designed to prove the theory
true; but even this last resort fails to explain the phe¬
nomena ; for after every precaution was taken to prevent
circulation of the air in the shafts by closing up the top and
shutting off the air from the pipes as completely as possible,
there yet remained, in the final experiment of the series, a
divergence of .018 of a foot, .216 of an inch—and this
divergence was considerably less and nearer the calculated
divergence of gravic rays in the hollow globe , than that
obtained when the air in the shaft was in circulation. In
order to accept this last attempt to explain the phenomena,
one must conclude that the air currents should be constant
in their action throughout a period of several months, which
is beyond belief. But even today, the scientists differ


among themselves as to which theory noted above is the
correct one.

If side attraction were the cause of the divergence,
then of course repulsion and air currents must be left out
of the question; if any one of the three “causes” operated
to produce the results, the other two must be set aside. A
scientific explanation must of necessity be consistent with
itself and with all the facts observed; the lines diverged
downward for the simple reason that the earth is concave in¬
stead of convex. Those who antagonize this conception
should at least agree as to the causes of the results of the
Tamarack Mine experiments—otherwise the people will
ultimately learn to reject their conflicting conclusions as
nothing more than wild and unfounded guesses.

There is yet a possibility of a still more startling series
of experiments at the Tamarack Mines. In the foregoing
experiments the plumb-lines were 12 to 17 feet apart and
showed downward divergences ranging from .018 to .1 of a
foot; but the tests we have in mind may be far more
accurate, and hence more conclusive to our opponents, but
it should be carefully noted by them that the experiments
cited above were conducted by men having no relation nor
sympathy with the Koreshan System. Neither did the
Koreshan Scientists have anything to do with the tests in¬
stituted at Calumet in the second series of experiments.
The distance between shafts No. 2 and No. 5 is 3,200 feet.
It was the intention of the mining engineer to have the
twenty-ninth level opened between the two shafts, a line
suspended in each shaft, and measurements taken at the top
and bottom. The calculated downward divergence of two
perpendiculars 3,200 feet apart, is 8 .22 inches for the length
of 4,250 feet; and we declare with confidence and certainty,
that the two plumb-lines in the proposed experiment just
outlined, will approximate this divergence.


\


202


THE CEEPURAR COSMOGONY.


Remarkable Changes in Scientific Beliefs.

Since the beginning of the Twentieth Century we have
had the satisfaction of noting remarkable changes in the
theories of the modern scientists—a rejection of old tenets
and a near approach to conceptions entertained and taught
in Koreshanity—conceptions and conclusions reached over
thirty-five years ago by the Founder of the Koreshan
System. The discovery of radium has done more to revo¬
lutionize the beliefs of modern scientists than any other
achievement or work of scientists of the old school. Pro¬
fessor and Madame Curie have been instrumental in
bringing before the world remarkable corroborations of
Koreshan Physics; and from the basis of many experiments
with the wonderful radio-active substance, such noted men
as Ford Kelvin, Professor Podge, and Professor Ramsay,
have come to reject the basis of modern chemistry—that of
the indestructibility of the atom. These men, with others
noted in the field of research, are now holding to trans¬
mutation of substance as possible, and not only possible,
but inevitable, since the emanations of radium show the
presence of helium, which is a distinct element.

So startling have been the results of these disclosures
of radium, that many leading minds have abandoned the
doctrines of chemistry, and are now endeavoring to form¬
ulate a new system of chemistry or alchemy. The
conclusion has been reached that the atom is not the
smallest form of matter, but rather electrons, which exist
in the borderland between matter and the intangible some¬
thing they call electricity. It is now admitted that it is
possible to make gold from baser metals, and to precipitate
substances from rays of light; and that processes of radio¬
activity take place at all times in all substances—con¬
ceptions long before entertained and taught in the Koreshan
System. The continual advocacy of Koreshan Universol-


ADDENDUM.


203


ogy for thirty-five years, and a constant bombardment of
the forts of fallacy, cannot but have their effect in the
mental processes of scientific circles.

Professor A. Russell Wallace, the eminent naturalist
and astronomer, has startled the scientific world by setting
forth a conception of the universe at variance with the
accepted theories of cosmology. He holds that the universe
is limited; and one of his arguments in support of this
conclusion is that all astronomers up to the time of Coper¬
nicus held that the universe was geocentric. In Prof.
Wallace’s conception, the earth itself is situated near the
center of the universe. But the tendency of all modern
astronomical speculation has been toward the very opposite
of this view—to the unwarranted conclusion that the uni¬
verse is illimitable.

A second argument used by Prof. Wallace is that if
infinite space were filled with stars the firmament would be
a continuous blaze of light as bright as the noon-day sun,
whereas it is known that the average star-light is only one
forty-ninth that of the moon. Prof. Wallace maintains that
he has had the benefit of the whole mass of facts accumu¬
lated by means of powerful instruments of research, and
affirms that he is not acquainted with any great inductive
result of modern science that has been arrived at so
gradually and so legitimate^, by means of so vast a mass
of precise measurements and observations, as his conclusion
concerning the limitation of the universe and the central
location of the earth.

Prof. Wallace further holds that the earth is the only
habitable planet, that our own humanity is the only race in
the universe; that the earth and the entire universe were
created for man. Man, therefore, is the supreme thing.
Prof. Wallace is not the only astronomer who holds to the
limitation of the universe. Professor Newcomb, of Wash-


e


universe limited, but that space itself has a limit , though by
what it is limited, or how the universe is environed, he does
not pretend to say. In holding to the limitation of the
universe in space, there is an approach to the Koreshan
conception.

Both Professor Wallace and Lord Kelvin are emphatic
in their denunciation of the atheistic conceptions of Spencer.
Huxley, and Haekel, both holding that chance was not a
factor in the origin of creation. Lord Kelvin asks, “Is
there anything so absurd as to believe that a number of
atoms by falling together of their own accord, can make a
sprig of moss, a microbe, a living animal?’’ The universe
cannot be explained on the basis that life sprang from
“a fortuitous concourse of atoms.” The world owes
Professor Wallace a few tributes of respect for his repudia¬
tion of the idea that the universe is infinite, on the ground
that the development of man is the object of the existence
of the cosmos; and to Virchow for strenuously opposing the
Darwinian theory of evolution.

And the future—what does it hold in store for all the
conflicting fallacies of the times? There is but one end for
them. Modern science is doomed because truth is true and
its power is irresistible. There is no long withstanding the
forces of such a revolution in the world of thought as that
which now impends, which is now imminent. The remark¬
able changes of the last few years are but a suggestion of
what is coming. Soon there will be an utter abandonment
of the premise of modern astronomy, with all its absurd
conceptions. The human reason will soon rebel against
such vagaries of the imagination. The mind is seeking the
tangible, the real, the true; and the demand will be met
with the most unmistakable demonstrations in all the lines
and avenues which appeal to human reason and admit of
application to human life for the progress of the race.


Cause of the Variation of the Pendulum.

KORESH.

I T IS CLAIMED that the surface of the earth moves
from west to east nearly twenty-five thousand miles in
twenty-four hours. This is a solid body moving through
space, according to modern science, at a rotary speed of
over one thousand miles an hour, or more than sixteen
miles per minute. Can any sane man imagine that a solid
body with this rate of speed, surrounded by a thin atmo¬
sphere, could so carry its atmosphere with its momentum as
not to produce a contrary motion of the atmosphere, whi e
at the same time it would cause the rotation of an oscillat¬
ing pendulum? _ ,

No one disputes the fact of the motion of the pendulum,
as first observed by Foucault and recently experimented
with by Flammarion. We might, however, question the
uniform direction of the oscillating pendulum in a series of
experiments. But allowing the experiment to be fair and
the motion as reported, we would inquire, What causes
such a phenomenon? Whatsoever the cause of the motion
it must be considered with regard to two propositions. The
first, the supposition that the earth revolves - because the
heavens appear to revolve; and the motion of the pendulum
is taken as corroborative testimony to an hypothesis, a
guess, which still hangs in doubt with the astronomers, for
the reason that with howsoever much reinforcement you
sustain a guess, it still remains hypothetical; and the
astronomers will not stop seeking for still further corrobora-
tion, because they are still in doubt. We wish to assure
our readers that the problem is not settled under the
Copernican system.


206


Thu cuttuuar cosmogony.

The second proposition is, that the Koreshan Geodetic
vSurvey has settled forever the fact that the earth is a
concave shell, and that man inhabits the cellular sphere.
If it could be proven that the earth rotates, then the pendu¬
lum would act the same on the inner as it would on the
outer surface of a ball, were it the motion of the earth that
caused it. It could not, therefore, affect the fact of the
Cellular Cosmogony in the least.

According to the Koreshan System, the earth is com¬
paratively stationary and the heavens are moving within
the stationary earth. The sun is moving at the rate of
about eighteen thousand miles in twenty-four hours. It is
sweeping through space with this velocity and radiating its
energies into the environing shell, in which there is a
corresponding magnetic spiral motion. To this spiral
motion of energy is due the rotation of the pendulum, and
not to the motion of the earth. First, it will be understood
that the pendulum is suspended from a support attached
solidly to the body of the earth. Second, it will be noticed
that the curve of the earth is practically the same at both
extremes of the oscillation, the earth moving just as rapidly
at one point as at the other. There could not be a calcula¬
ble commensuration of difference either in time or space, at
the two extremities, as to curvation or the time of longi¬
tudinal motion.

If the pendulum be swung from north to south and
south to north at the start, it would be subject to the east¬
ward^ motion of the earth, which, were the theory of the
earth s rotate impression in relation to the pendulum ball
true, the ball would apparently move toward the west and
with the opposite swing of the pendulum it would swing
equally toward the west-the motion on one side balancing
the other. This would be the effect if the phenomenon
were the result of the earth’s motion. How would it be



ADDENDUM. 2 °7

when the pendulum rotated around to the east and west
points? The earth would be rotating toward the east, the
pendulum swinging east and west. The earth is moving,
according to the Copernican hypothesis , at the rate of sixteen
miles a minute either with or against the ball, while it
swings westward, and at the same rate with it when the ball
swings eastward. If the earth by its rotation affects the
motion of the pendulum enough to cause this rotation, why
would it not make an appreciable difference distinctively
marked, while swinging east and west?

The swinging of a pendulum could bear no possible
relation to the earth’s rotation, even if the earth were a ball
rotating from east to west at the rate of twenty-five
thousand miles in twenty-four hours. The question of the
relation of the rotating pendulum of Foucault to the rota¬
tion of the earth is equal to the question : “If it takes a
thousand bundles of shingles to shingle an opera house,
how many pancakes will it take to shingle a meeting
house?’’ The marvelous thing about this experiment, is
that any man possessing any claim whatsoever to the title
of scientific should accept this solution without asking the
question, “May there not be some hypothesis for this
motion as reasonable as, or more so than the hypothesis of
the rotation of the earth?’’ If a pendulum were swung at
the north pole, oscillating laterally over the plane of the
earth’s rotation, w 7 ere there such a motion of the earth, the
pendulum hung in space (not upon supports fixed solidly in
the earth), there would be some sense to the proposition;
as it is, it is the veriest nonsense, and later the “scientists’’
will laugh at their own folly.


Copernican Hypothesis in the Schools.

1,1'CTK PAGE BORDEN.


T^HK NOBILJTY AND GRANDBUR of the Koreshan
premise as it confronts the world, are apparent to
those who are able to discern the need of the hour. The
discoveries of modern investigators in the field of research
have only plunged the whole body of so-called “scientists”
into deeper darkness. The field of astronomical research
has been ploughed, but no results have been found to
compare with the extension of an air-line to test the contour
of the earth’s surface and determine in an unmistakable
manner that the famous Copernican hypothesis has been
superseded by a fact that is known.

What has been taught by the Koreshan System during
the past thirty-five years comprises actual knowledge. It
does not deal with conjectures nor find any pleasure in
drawing base lines for triangulation, when the assumption
is that the earth revolves in an orbit about the sun. The
conspicuous absence of facts in the old system, shows how
much time is wasted in searching the heavens, when the
same amount of time put into the investigation of the
earth’s shape would show that it had never been satisfacto¬
rily tested until the Koreshan concept was put forth.

To understand the universe is the acme of human
desire; for all questions of conduct w^ould be solved by a
comprehension of how much is involved in life. The dis¬
covery of the nineteenth century was made in 1870, when
the actual proof of the Cellular Cosmogony was revealed by
the intellect that had become fitted to involve the secrets of
creation. Since that date there has been nothing of much
importance to herald. Of course the application of forces


ADDENDUM.


209


or energies, frankly admitted to be an impenetrable mystery
in their essence, to the uses of life, does go forward without
furnishing any conclusive proofs to guide the world to
clearer conceptions of being. The electric light has not
shown the nature of the electric fluid.

The whole question of putting modern physics into the
hands of the young people in our schools and colleges, does
not rest upon an assumption according to the ideas of mod¬
ern educators. But when the subject of electricity is
treated, it develops that nothing is known of it, per se. The
most that a modern instructor can do is to explain the latest
theory, prefacing his remarks perchance with the statement
that nothing is absolutely known of the matter under dis¬
cussion.

Chemistry has held a very important place in the college
curriculum. laboratories have been generously provided
to facilitate the study of what was called a science. It has
had to revise all its conclusions and to renounce its ground¬
work in the sight of the indestructible atom removed; and
yet, the men who study this branch are not yet willing in
more than a few cases to admit the truth of the discarded
science’ ’ of Alchemy. They are still trying to find out what
has been authoritatively stated by Koreshanity ever since
its introduction into the universe of life.

The same fundamental errors which distinguish chem¬
istry, prevent biology from reaching its object. The origin
of life, either primarily or proximately, is under discussion
daily, without training the mind of the student to appre¬
hend the facts of existence, because he is not taught to
know God, in whom is life. The origin and destiny of
man are completely misunderstood, and so long as these
points are not clear, neither ethics nor the various branches
which relate to man, can make any progress.

Geology is pivoted on the idea, thoroughly inculcated


210


the: ceeeuear cosmogony.


by the exponents of the Copernican hypothesis, that the
earth had a beginning. How far back that epoch should be
placed is a moot point; but the educated men of this period
in the world’s history, think it was once bereft of the
presence of man, because no human remains are found in
certain strata.

Sociology as a science taught in the best colleges is
really non-existent. The pattern for construction is want¬
ing, because the solar system is not understood. The prin¬
ciple of organic unity shown in the cell with its center and
environing walls, must be put forward to insure the orderly
activity of society. With the fundamental error in social
construction expunged, the students might be able to
grapple with the labor question and the various branches of
economics to some purpose.

Psychology is trying to ferret out the mysteries of
modern spiritualism, and is concerned with the measure¬
ment of motory and sensory impulses. These are all
necessary in their places, but the subject of the soul and
the rapport between spirit, soul, and body, are too vast in
their bearing to be put aside; yet the nature of the soul is
still unknown. Metaphysics has no conception of the
beautiful truths that are brought to light in the study of
the brain under the instruction of Koreshanity, whose
Founder has shown the intricate harmonies of cell and fibre,
as used in the correlated organs of the mind.

The above are some of the reasons why modern educa¬
tion is defective in its instructions. The theorizing of the past
has been put up in labeled packages to confuse the mind of
the student. If nothing were taught without a groundwork
of facts, the mind would not be furnished with old rubbish
like an attic or lumber room. Education is the greatest
possible attainment of life. It should never be disparaged ;
but that text-books should exist built upon theories and
conjectures is a shame in a progressive age.


The Principles of the New Geodesy.

rucm page: border.

T he ORDINARY READER is not so familiar with
the term geodesy as the surveyor, because the latter
is in the habit of making use of geodetic instruments in the
pursuit of his own vocation. These instruments are
designed to aid the mechanic and the civil engineer in lay¬
ing out public works and surveying large tracts of land,
where it is necessary to introduce the question of the earth’s
curvature. It is quite enough for the ordinary reader if he
be able to define the word geodesy, from its root meaning.
Not so with the student of Koreshanity. He knows that
the fundamental proposition of this cult calls for a more
extended knowledge of the subject than is held by the
casual reader. He is, therefore; required at the outset to
acquaint himself with the application of the term. He
knows that while he is studying Koreshan Science, it is one
of the first requisites to understand what is meant by a
geodetic survey.

The most interesting account of the authenticity of the
claims made by Koreshan Science would be unintelligible to
one who was not aware of the significance of the terms
used. The New Geodesy has not departed from any of the
known facts of mathematics. It simply rests upon the
assertion which nobody can deny, that the chord of an arc
is not a tangent. It is certain to all who know them, that
the Koreshan geodesists were sincere and indefatigable in
their efforts to ascertain whether the direction of the earth’s
curvature is correctly stated by the ordinary works on
surveying.

It was necessary to invent an apparatus which should
be capable of determining whether a line extended hori-



212 THE CEEHUHAR COSMOGONY.

zontal to a plumb vertical would prove to be a tangent or a
chord. The ordinary surveyor takes it for granted in all
his measurements that the surface upon which they are
drawn is convex. The Koreshan does not incline to work
from an assumption. His method is to use the new
apparatus which is perfectly simple, to settle a question
which the ordinary surveyor takes for granted.. It becomes
necessary in every extended geodetic operation to devise
some method of constructing an instrument to extend a right
line. The ordinary surveyor uses the theodolite or engi¬
neer’s level, and does not understand why there must be an
allowance made for perspective foreshortening. He is
actually obliged to allows tw r o or three inches to the mile for
this factor, but he puts it down as an example of refraction.
The Koreshan does not trust to any optical instrument, but
tries to make his line absolutely straight by the use of the
mechanical principle of right angles.

The civil engineer knows that when he has levelled his
telescope or transit instrument, and trains it on his pole a
mile away, he will find that the altitude of the cross hair
is five or six inches below the height of the pole. Believ¬
ing that the earth’s surface is convex, he is puzzled to know
why the difference should not be eight inches to agree with
the calculated estimate. He considers the discrepancy is
due to refraction, and claims that he is obliged to allow two
or three inches to the mile for this optical factor. The
Koreshan geodesist understands the law of perspective
foreshortening, and differs from the engineer in his theory
of refraction; but the Koreshan prefers to eliminate
optical factors and to run a mechanical line.

So much for the differences between the old geodesy
and the new. The most intricate problems of surveying
are not unnoticed by the latter, but the outlook of the New
Geodesy is so wholly dissimilar to that of the old, that it
will be obvious why theoretical problems raised by compe¬
tent surveyors would be of no interest to the student who
has proved to his own satisfaction that the basis of their
w 7 ork is an erroneous assumption.
