The Ten Princes (Dasha-Kumara-Charita) (Dandin; Arthur W. Ryder (trans.), 1927)
==========================================================
Dandin's 7th-century Sanskrit prose romance of ten princes' adventures — the great picaresque of classical India — in Arthur W. Ryder's complete 1927 English translation (University of Chicago Press). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/tenprinces0000unse).

'


THE  TEN  PRINCES


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO  PRESS
CHICAGO,  ILLINOIS


THE  BAKER  8c  TAYLOR  COMPANY
NEW  YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY  OF  CANADA,  LIMITED
TORONTO

THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
LONDON

THE  MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA
TOKYO,  OSAKA,  KYOTO,  FUKUOKA,  SENDAI

THE  COMMERCIAL  PRESS,  LIMITED
SHANGHAI


DAN  DIN'S  DAS  HA- KUMARA- CHARI  TA

THE  TEN  PRINCES

Translated  from  the  Sanscrit  by

ARTHUR W  RYDER


^P<XOf»c!>  m.


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO  PRESS
CHICAGO  •  ILLINOIS


Copyright  ig27  By
The  University  op  Chicago


All  Rights  Reserved


Published  September  rgz7
Second  Impression  October  rg27


Composed  and  Printed  By
The  University  of  Chicago  Press
Chicago,  Illinois,  U.S.A.


TO  MY  LONG-PROVED  FRIEND

RUTH  N.  PETERSSON

THIS  BOOK  IS  DEDICATED


TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION

I

Of  the  detail  of  Dandin’s  life  we  know  nothing.  He
perhaps  flourished  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventh
Christian  century — certainly  not  later.  He  is  the  au¬
thor  of  two  works:  a  treatise  on  literary  composition,
called  the  Mirror  of  Poetry ;  and  the  novel  whose  full
title  is  the  Adventures  of  the  Ten  Princes.  If,  as  tradi¬
tion  affirms,  he  composed  a  third  work,  we  know  not
what  it  was.  He  was  a  skilful  poet;  an  erudite  and  in¬
genious  lover  of  literature;  the  master  of  a  prose  style
surpassingly  beautiful.

This  is  all  that  we  know.  Dandin  has  been  as  suc¬
cessful  as  Homer — more  successful  than  Shakespeare
— in  baffling  the  impertinences  of  the  “Who’s  Who”
brand  of  scholarship.  And  while  a  few  more  details
might  prove  piquant,  it  is  better  to  know  too  little
than  too  much.  In  the  case  of  truly  great  writers,
both  understanding  and  enjoyment  are  commonly  en¬
hanced  when  we  have  their  works  and  have  lost  their
lives.

II

The  Mirror  of  Poetry  is  a  treatise  which  attained,
and  deserves,  the  position  of  an  authority.  It  was
composed  at  a  favorable  moment  in  classical  Sanskrit
literature,  when  masterpieces  were  recent  and  the  po-

vii


viii  TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION


etic  impulse  was  not  yet  exhausted.  It  treats  of  liter¬
ary  composition  both  in  verse  and  prose,  giving  rules
of  construction  in  the  various  forms,  but  concerning
itself  chiefly  with  “ornaments,”  that  is,  all  figures  of
speech  and  other  devices  which  lend  dignity  and  dis¬
tinction,  which  transform  a  piece  of  writing  into  true
literature.

The  Mirror  of  Poetry  is  itself  written  in  verse,  and
the  author  displays  his  own  poetic  skill  by  composing
almost  all  of  his  illustrative  examples.

Ill

The  Ten  Princes  is  a  prose  novel  in  fourteen  chap¬
ters.  The  first  chapter  relates  the  birth  of  Prince
Rajavahana  and  the  assembling  at  his  father’s  court
of  nine  companion  lads,  princes  or  aristocrats,  all  des¬
tined  in  the  sequel  to  royalty.  In  the  second  chapter,
the  ten  set  forth  to  conquer  the  world.  But  when
Rajavahana  disappears,  the  other  nine  scatter  to
find  him;  and  each  meets  with  gay  adventures,  in  the
course  of  which  he  gains  a  throne  and  a  lady.  The  cen¬
tral  story  recounts  Rajavahana’s  experiences;  but  as
his  comrades  rejoin  him,  they  report  their  own  ex¬
ploits,  so  that  the  book  becomes  a  collection  of  shorter
tales,  somewhat  slightly  framed  in  the  dominating
narrative.

The  text  has  reached  us  in  a  strange  form.  For  only
chapters  vi-xiii  were  composed  by  Dandin.  Chap¬
ters  i-v  and  chapter  xiv  are  by  other  hands.  These


TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION


IX


two  additions  are  of  very  different  length  and  char¬
acter,  and  should  therefore  be  described  separately.

The  true  work  of  Dandin  ends  abruptly  with  chap¬
ter  xiii,  leaving  the  adventure  of  Vishruta  incom¬
plete.  The  fourteenth  chapter  supplies  a  somewhat
careless  completion,  then  proceeds  to  a  conclusion  of
the  main  narrative.  This  chapter  is  written  in  a  com¬
monplace  style,  and  some  of  its  statements  imply  a
negligent  reading  of  Dandin’s  text.  It  is  obviously
inferior.  Dandin  must  have  been  interrupted,  perhaps
by  the  strict  arrest  of  death,  and  a  lesser  mind  adds  a
lame  and  impotent  Conclusion.

Very  different  is  the  case  with  chapters  i-v.
This  extensive  addition  has  one-third  the  length  of  the
genuine  work  of  Dandin;  its  style  is  exquisite;  in  in¬
genuity  of  design  and  detail  it  is  hardly  unworthy  of
Dandin  himself;  it  is  admirably  welded  to  the  main
narrative.  The  fifth  chapter  in  particular,  with  its
harmonious  blending  of  beauty,  wit,  and  invention,
fuses  fittingly  with  the  work  of  the  master.  A  painful
examination  may  indeed  disclose  slight  stylistic  varia¬
tions  and  reveal  some  trivial  inferiority  in  construc¬
tive  skill;  yet  it  may  be  doubted  whether  these  differ¬
ences  would  have  been  detected  had  the  book  been
presented  as  a  unit.  Even  as  matters  stand,  some
have  found  it  possible  to  doubt  the  non-authenticity
of  the  first  five  chapters.  Thus  we  encounter  a  most
remarkable  instance  of  literary  collaboration:  a  true
masterpiece  uncompleted,  with  an  anonymous  com-


X


TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION


plement  hardly  its  inferior.  Let  us  pay  homage  to  the
unknown  artist  of  chapters  i-v,  who  was  zealous
for  art,  not  for  self-exploitation;  who  stands  a  silent
rebuke — needed,  if  unheeded — of  any  age  greedy  for
scholarship  and  other  stultifying  self-advertisement.

The  necessity  of  this  introductory  addition  pre¬
sents  a  puzzle.  While  the  terminal  lacuna  may  be
naturally  attributed  to  the  author’s  death  or  other
imperious  interruption,  the  failure  to  compose  the  ear¬
lier  chapters — which  must  nevertheless  have  been  ful¬
ly  blocked  out  in  Dandin’s  mind — remains  a  mystery.
There  are  no  grounds  for  assuming  that  they  were  ac¬
tually  written,  and  the  manuscript  lost.  It  would  ap¬
pear  that  Dandin  began  composition  with  the  sixth
chapter.  Further  speculation  is  profitless,  since  data
are  lacking.

IV

There  has  been  some  investigation  of  the  sources
which  Dandin  may  have  used  for  the  stories  which
form  his  book;  here  and  there  an  analogy  has  been
found  in  the  earlier  literature.  Yet  the  total  result  is
rather  surprisingly  negative,  considering  the  extraor¬
dinary  wealth  of  Sanskrit  literature  in  tales  of  diverse
nature.  These  dismal  studies  in  influences  and  sources
may  be  securely  left  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  no
love  for  literature,  since  the  result  is  always  the  same.
A  great  author  uses  what  fits  his  purpose,  and  in  using
it,  so  transforms  it  as  to  make  it  his  own.

It  is  of  greater  interest  to  observe  the  author’s  at-


TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION


xi


titude  toward  his  gay  adventurers.  They  are  plainly
not  Sunday-school  heroes;  several  have  an  obvious
streak  of  the  picaresque.  In  particular,  the  hero  of  the
seventh  chapter — the  longest  and  perhaps  the  most
winsome  chapter — is  an  accomplished  rascal.  Yet  he
and  other  rascals  win  the  complete  sympathy  of  the
reader  by  their  lack  of  the  meaner  vices  and  virtues.
The  only  exception  (if  the  translator  may  trust  his
own  feeling)  is  the  hero  of  chapter  viii,  whose  treach¬
ery  the  author  strives  to  explain  by  the  working  of
superhuman  necessity.  The  explanation  satisfies  the
mind,  not  the  heart.

The  purpose  of  the  book  is  the  amusement  of  the
cultivated  reader:  there  is  no  moral  intention.  Most
great  books — Hamlet ,  or  Oedipus ,  or  Shakuntala —
submit  to  a  moral  interpretation,  however  removed
they  may  be  from  formal  sermonizing.  Yet  there  are
a  precious  few  which  employ  the  lavish  resources  of
lofty  art  with  no  design  save  the  entertainment  of  the
truly  cultivated.  Among  them  are  the  Gilbert  and
Sullivan  operas,  and  the  Ten  Princes.

V

It  is  baffling  business  to  discuss  style  in  another
language,  yet  the  attempt  must  be  made.  For  the
Ten  Princes  is  above  all  else  a  triumph  of  literary
style.  Its  incidents  would  indeed  have  interest  if  re¬
lated  in  commonplace  fashion,  but  the  book  becomes
great  by  virtue  of  its  manner.


xii  TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION


This  manner  is  difficult.  Dandin,  like  the  other
Sanskrit  novelists,  does  not  employ  prose  because  it
is  easy;  he  probably  felt  it  more  exacting  than  poetry.
Being  a  careful  student  of  linguistic  and  rhetorical  de¬
vice,  he  commands,  to  begin  with,  the  resources  (nec¬
essary,  though  insufficient)  which  yield  themselves
to  study.  Thus  he  is  fond  of  permitted,  but  unusual,
forms  of  grammatical  inflection;  he  has  an  extensive,
exquisitely  chosen  vocabulary;  he  is  skilful  in  forming
long  compounds;  he  understands  the  elaboration  of  a
beautifully  balanced  sentence.  This  equipment,  with
full  comprehension  of  the  figures  of  speech,  forms  the
inanimate  body  which  can  receive  life  and  charm  only
from  noble  art.

One  feature  of  this  life-giving  art  is  sententious
brevity,  to  be  expected  in  that  literature  wherein  an
author  rejoices  more  in  saving  the  half  of  a  short
vowel  than  in  the  birth  of  a  son.  As  a  consequence,
the  book  is  alive  with  action,  surprising  with  quick
mutation  of  fortune  and  change  of  scene,  yet  never
hurried,  finding  rich  opportunity  for  lingering  descrip¬
tion.

Most  pervasive,  and  most  indescribable,  is  the  use
of  assonance.  This  not  infrequently  proceeds  to  full
internal  rhyme,  shading  away  with  faultless  taste  into
imperfect  rhyme,  alliteration,  and  other  haunting  eu¬
phonies.  The  result  is  one  which  only  the  rarest  prose
shares  with  lofty  poetry— that  the  phrases  gain  a
meaning  beyond  their  meaning,  and  sing  themselves


TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION  xiii

for  days  through  any  sensitive  mind.  Such  phrases
are  kdsi  vdsu  kva  ydsi  or  nagaradevateva  nagaramosha-
roshita.  These  are  deliberately  chosen  as  expressions
of  which  the  mere  literal  rendering  leaves  no  impres¬
sion  of  profundity  or  passion.  For  the  former  means
only:  “What  is  your  name?  What  is  your  goal,  my
soul?  and  the  latter:  “like  the  city’s  guardian  god¬
dess,  angered  at  theft  in  the  city.”

But  the  author’s  most  marvelous  feat  is  the
twelfth  chapter,  which  contains  no  labial  sound.  In
this  chapter  no  word  is  employed  that  contains  any  of
the  letters  #,  o,  p ,  ph,  b,  bh ,  m,  or  v.  The  translator,
lacking  character  for  so  splendid  an  achievement,  has
adopted  the  shabby  substitute  of  a  somewhat  more
highfalutin  style.

It  has  been  stated  that  Dandin’s  manner  is  diffi-
cult,  yet  some  qualification  is  necessary.  His  more
elaborate  passages  are  continually  set  off  by  short,
pungent  colloquialisms,  just  as  Shakespeare  does  not
scruple  to  introduce  into  a  melancholy  meditation  the
expressions:  “there’s  the  rub”  and  “to  grunt  and
sweat  under  a  weary  life.”  Dandin,  like  Shakespeare,
desires  to  employ  all  the  resources  of  language,  the  fa¬
miliar  as  well  as  the  sophisticated.  In  this  the  trans¬
lator,  so  far  as  power  permitted,  has  followed  him,  not
shrinking  even  from  occasional  profanity.

A  considerable  difficulty  is  occasioned  by  the  prop¬
er  names.  These  are,  to  be  sure,  easily  pronounced
and  euphonious;  but  they  are  numerous,  long,  and


xiv  TRANSLATOR’S  INTRODUCTION


foreign  to  the  English  reader.  Furthermore,  their
literal  meaning  is  not  infrequently  played  upon;  yet  it
seemed  only  rarely  advisable  to  translate  them.  Thus
one  of  the  peculiar  graces  of  the  original  becomes  an
unavoidable  embarrassment  of  the  translation.

Further  discussion  of  style  would  tend  to  little
profit.  The  author  of  the  Mirror  of  Poetry  had  at  dis¬
posal  all  the  resources  of  literary  refinement.  In  the
employment  of  those  resources,  we  may  say  of  him,  as
he  of  one  of  his  own  characters:  “He  made  mas¬
terpieces  his  model,  and  undertook  what  was  feasible
yet  ideal.”

Arthur  W.  Ryder

Berkeley,  California
April,  1927


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

I,  The  Princes  Are  Born .  x

II.  The  Brahman’s  Service . 2i

III.  Somadatta’s  Adventure . 2g

IV.  Pushpodbhava’s  Adventure . ^

V.  The  Marriage  of  the  Belle  of  Avanti  ...  45

VI.  Rajavahana’s  Adventure  .......  $g

VII.  Apaharavarman’s  Adventure . 69

VIII.  Upaharavarman’s  Adventure . 107

IX.  Arthapala’s  Adventure . 127

X.  Pramati’s  Adventure .

XI.  Mitragupta’s  Adventure . 157

XII.  Mantragupta’s  Adventure . 185

XIII.  VIshruta’s  Adventure . 199

XIV.  Conclusion . 225

Index  of  Proper  Names . 235


xv


I


May  everlasting  joy  be  thine ,
Conferred  by  Vishnu's  foot  divine ,

Which ,  when  it  trod  the  devils  flat ,
Became  the  staff  of  this  and  that:

The  staff  around  which  is  unfurled
The  sunshade  of  the  living  world ;

The  flagstaff for  the  silken  gleam
Of  sacred  Ganges'  deathless  stream ;

The  mast  of  earth' s  far-driven  ship,
Round  which  the  stars  ( as  axis')  dip;

The  lotus  stalk  of  Brahma's  shrine ;
The  fulcrumed  staff  of  life  divine.


CHAPTER  I

THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN

There  was  once  a  metropolis  called  Blossom  City,
the  very  diadem  of  Magadha  land,  and  a  touchstone
testing  all  proud  cities;  for  it  made  credible  the  high
magnificence  of  the  sea  in  its  wealth  of  gems  and  other
such  objects  ever  displayed  in  its  countless  commod¬
ities.

In  this  city  lived  a  king  named  Rajahansa.  His
stout,  uplifted  arm  seemed  like  Mount  Mandara
churning  the  sea — his  sea  the  whole  hostile  host,
wherein  billows  of  sturdy  soldiers  figured  the  crested
waves;  horses  and  elephants  the  fearful  sharks.  He
was  wrapt  in  the  perfume  of  a  glory  so  pervasive  that
it  plugged  the  chinks  of  the  horizon — a  glory  that
formed  the  theme  of  eager  song  for  throngs  of  dear
and  dainty  companions  of  gods  absorbed  in  sauntering
through  groves  in  the  city  courts  of  heaven’s  king—
a  glory  with  as  white  a  figure  as  autumn  moonlight  or
jasmine  blossom,  as  camphor,  hoarfrost,  or  pearl,  as
lotus  stalk  or  swan  or  celestial  elephant,  as  water,
milk,  God  Shiva’s  laughter.  Mount  Kailasa,  or  kasha
grass.  He  was  blest  with  a  bridegroom’s  bliss  in  being
wedded  to  the  earth,  who  wears  for  girdle  the  tide  of
ocean  set  with  gems  as  massive  and  magnificent  as
heaven’s  peak.  Through  fees  for  endless  sacrifices  he


1


THE  TEN  PRINCES


gave  protection  to  throngs  of  Brahmans  abounding  in
the  high  discipline  of  the  sciences.  He  ever  emulated
the  sun  in  a  radiance  that  tortured  his  foes.  And
the  winsomeness  of  his  unblemished  beauty  was  own
brother  to  the  charm  of  haughty  Love.

This  king  had  a  wise  and  lovely  queen  named  Va-
sumati,  the  central  jewel  in  the  chaplet  of  dainty
ladies.  She  made  it  seem  that  charming  woman  had
been  frightened  into  blamelessness  when  fierce-eyed
Shiva  reduced  the  love-god’s  life  to  ashes.  For  her
mass  of  hair  was  black  as  clustered  bees;  and  her  face,
a  mine  for  love’s  quarrying  and  a  moon  of  light,  left
lotuses  forlorn.  Her  eyes  were  like  two  paired  and
flashing  fishes  figured  on  Love’s  banner.  Her  sigh  was
a  breeze  from  Malabar,  a  soldier  to  lay  all  soldiers  low;
and  her  red  lip  was  a  flower,  yet  a  sword  to  pierce  the
hearts  of  lovelorn  loiterers.  Her  supple,  comely  neck
was  a  conch  of  victory;  her  breasts  seemed  two  w’ell-
filled  bowls,  or  a  pair  of  sheldrake  birds;  her  arms
were  perilous  as  bowstrings,  yet  in  unrivaled  softness
like  two  clinging  lotus  stalks.  Her  navel  seemed  a
lovely  lotus  bud  just  ready  to  flower,  or  an  eddy  in
Ganges’  stream.  Her  generous  hips,  true  chariots  of
conquest,  postponed  the  ambitions  of  meditative
saints.  Her  perfect  thighs,  twin  columns  of  victory,
seemed  plantain  stems  to  stem  ascetic  progress.  Her
feet  were  lilies,  an  antidote  for  heat.  And  all  her  re¬
maining  members  seemed  flowers,  and  weapons,  too.

Such  was  Vasumati,  lapped  in  a  wealth  of  end-


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


3


less  delight  like  the  earth.  And  with  the  earth,  she
brought  happiness  to  the  king  of  Magadha,  as  he
dwelt  in  Blossom  City,  more  lovely  than  the  heavenly
city.

Now  the  king  had  three  ancestral  counselors,  su¬
premely  loyal,  and  of  an  intelligence  so  profound  that
they  had  doubts  about  sharing  in  enterprises  under
consideration  by  the  adviser  of  the  gods.  Their  names
were  Dharmapala,  Padmodbhava,  and  Sitavarman.

The  sons  of  Sitavarman  were  Sumati  and  Satya-
varman.  The  sons  of  Dharmapala  were  Sumantra,
Sumitra,  and  Kamapala.  The  sons  of  Padmodbhava
were  Sushruta  and  Ratnodbhava.

Of  these  Satyavarman  was  pious;  and  having
perceived  the  hollowness  of  one  life  after  another,
he  wandered,  a  passionate  pilgrim.  Kamapala  was
naughty,  so  disregarded  the  counsel  of  father  and  el¬
der  brother  and  roamed  the  earth,  a  connoisseur  of
gay  dogs,  actors,  and  purchasable  females.  Ratnod¬
bhava  had  a  talent  for  trade  and  sailed  the  sea.  The
other  sons  of  counselors,  when  their  fathers  became
permanent  guests  in  the  heavenly  city,  lived  without
change.

Now  it  chanced  that  the  lord  of  Magadha  went
forth  to  war.  His  shafts  were  sharpened  by  skimming
the  skulls  of  princes  in  countless  battles  delivered
with  skilful  use  of  weapons  effective  and  diverse.  His
foe  was  the  monarch  of  Malwa,  overweening  Mana-
sara,  a  glutton  for  conflict  renewed.  The  jangling  roll


4


THE  TEN  PRINCES


of  the  royal  drums  found  fun  in  downing  the  egotistical
bellow  of  the  ocean,  so  that  the  whole  herd  of  ele¬
phants  in  heaven  was  shaken  in  a  passion  of  fear  at
that  fierce  hearing.  He  led  an  army  with  all  four  serv¬
ice  branches,  bending  beneath  its  weight  the  weight
of  earth,  afflicting  the  mighty  head  of  the  earth-sup-
porting  serpent  king.  Filled  with  battle-lust  and
mighty  rage  the  monarch  marched.

And  the  king  of  Malwa,  with  a  numerous  host  of
elephants,  took  his  determination  like  conflict  incar¬
nate  and  came  forth  again  to  face  him.

Thereupon  the  two  joined  battle  in  a  veil  of  dust
that  faded  confusedly  into  the  sky.  It  rose  from  the
earth,  powdered  by  wheel  and  hoof,  and  its  base  was
bathed  in  ichor-streams  that  flowed  from  the  temples
of  thronging  elephants.  It  seemed  a  tent  with  curtains
formed  by  bevies  of  heavenly  nymphs  come  to  select
new  lovers.  Meanwhile,  every  chink  in  the  horizon
was  deafened  by  the  din  of  drums,  drowning  all  other
sounds  in  heaven.  There,  knife  to  knife  and  hand  to
hand,  the  two  armies  slaughtered  and  were  slaugh¬
tered.  In  that  battle  the  king  of  Malwa  saw  his  whole
army  waste  away  and  himself  captured  alive.  But  the
king  of  Magadha  mercifully  reinstated  him  in  his
kingdom.

Yet  our  king,  though  the  unrivaled  lord  of  the  sea-
girdled  earth,  was  childless,  and  ceaselessly  besought
Vishnu,  sole  source  of  life  in  all  the  world.  Presently
his  queen,  beholding  a  happy  vision  toward  the  dawn-


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


5


ing,  heard  the  words:  “Pluck,  together  with  the  king,
the  fruit  of  the  vine  of  your  desire.”  Straightway  she
conceived,  and  her  lover’s  longing  flowered.  The  king
in  turn,  more  blest  than  God  Indra,  summoned  the
circle  of  friendly  monarchs  and  celebrated  the  cere¬
mony  of  the  parting  of  the  queen’s  hair  in  a  fashion
befitting  his  blessings  and  his  longings.

One  day,  surrounded  by  worthy  friends,  counsel¬
ors,  and  chaplains,  the  virtuous  king  was  sitting  on
the  lion-throne  when  a  doorkeeper,  with  dutiful  hands
upon  his  brow,  spoke  with  fit  deference:  “Your  Maj¬
esty,  there  waits  at  the  door  a  holy  monk  desirous  of
an  interview  and  deserving  of  due  honor  from  Your
Majesty.”  Permission  being  granted,  the  ascetic  was
introduced.

Now  the  king,  seeing  him  approach,  readily  recog¬
nized  a  spy  disguised,  dismissed  all  menials  (though
retaining  his  counselors)  and,  as  the  fellow  bowed,
said  with  a  quizzical  smile:  “Well,  holy  sir,  you  roam
the  land  in  wise  disguise.  Tell  us  what  you  have
learned  in  this  spot  or  in  that.”

So  the  artist  in  expression,  humbly  bowing,  said:

“Your  Majesty,  I  bent  my  head  to  Your  Majesty’s
command,  assumed  this  blameless  garb,  penetrated
the  capital  of  the  lord  of  Malwa,  and  lived  there  in
complete  secrecy,  not  returning  without  full  intelli¬
gence  of  that  king’s  doings.  Haughty  Manasara,  hav¬
ing  suffered  defeat  at  your  hands  in  that  struggle  that
checked  his  army’s  march  to  old  age,  was  sunk  in


6


THE  TEN  PRINCES


shame  and  lost  to  pity.  He  propitiated  God  Shiva,
Kali’s  undying  lover,  who  dwells  in  Mahakala,  won
his  favor  by  mighty  penances,  and  received  from  him
a  fearful  club  that  kills  infallibly  one  brave  enemy.
Puffed  with  the  pride  of  imagined  invincibility,  he
prepares  to  assail  you.  Further  decision  rests  with
Your  Majesty.”

Pondering  this  report  and  perceiving  the  purpose
of  the  foe,  his  ministers  respectfully  besought  the
king:  “Your  Majesty,  a  fighting  foe  draws  near,  be¬
friended  by  a  god  whom  there  is  no  resisting.  At  this
time  a  fight  would  be  untimely.  We  should  beat  a
quick  retreat  to  a  fortress.”  But  for  all  their  pleading
the  king,  a  true  king  in  high-pitched  pride,  disdained
their  counsel  as  inadmissible  and  fixed  his  thought  on
resistance.

Then  presumptuous  Manasara,  with  full  equip¬
ment  and  bearing  Shiva’s  mighty  mace,  led  his  pug¬
nacious  vanguard  unhindered  into  Magadha.  At  news
of  this  the  ministers  prevailed  on  Magadha’s  lordly
king,  sorely  against  his  will,  to  deposit  the  royal  ladies
in  a  spot  in  the  Vindhya  forest  inaccessible  to  enemies
and  to  guard  them  with  the  bulk  of  the  army.

But  Rajahansa,  with  a  picked  and  plucky  force,
darted  forth  to  arrest  the  furious  foe.  Then  in  the
clash  of  two  heroic  hatreds,  awakening  wonder  in  curi¬
ous  gods  drawn  by  the  spectacle,  though  the  lord  of
Magadha  rivaled  the  lord  of  heaven  in  a  battle-skill
graced  by  the  handling  of  weapons  sturdy  and  diverse.


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


7


yet  the  ruler  of  Malwa,  intently  bent  on  victory,  was
beforehand  in  hurling  upon  him  the  club  of  Shiva’s
giving.  This  club,  though  chipped  by  a  flight  of  sharp
opposing  shafts,  killed  the  driver — lest  Shiva’s  com¬
mand  be  unfulfilled —  and  stretched  the  king  senseless
on  the  chariot  floor.  Then  the  horses,  unhurt  but  un¬
guided,  carried  the  chariot  by  lucky  chance  into  the
wood  where  the  women  had  taken  refuge.  Mean¬
while,  the  king  of  Malwa,  embracing  victory,  overran
the  rich  realm  of  Magadha  and  occupied  Blossom
City.

Now  when  the  ministers,  worn  by  many  wounds,
yet  by  lucky  chance  not  dead,  regained  a  painful  con¬
sciousness  in  the  cool  breeze  of  dawn,  they  sought
everywhere  but  did  not  find  the  king,  so  returned
in  deep  depression  to  the  queen.  And  Vasumati,  learn¬
ing  from  them  the  destruction  of  the  whole  army  and
the  disappearance  of  the  king,  in  dreadful  distress,
sunk  in  a  sea  of  misery,  determined  to  follow  her  be¬
loved  in  death.

Yet  she  was  dissuaded  by  counselors  and  chap¬
lains,  who  said  with  sententious  concinnity:  “Beauti¬
ful  queen,  the  death  of  earth’s  delight  is  not  yet  ascer¬
tained.  Furthermore,  you  hold  in  pledge  the  delicate
life  of  a  lovely  prince-to-be,  who,  the  astrologers  pre¬
dict,  shall  rule  all  earth  and  crush  proud  foes.  Hence
you  may  not  die  today.”  She  said  no  more,  but  faded
fast.

However,  at  dead  of  night,  when  her  servants’  eyes


8


THE  TEN  PRINCES


were  smoothed  by  slumber,  unable  to  cross  her  lonely
sorrow’s  shoreless  sea,  she  crept  cautiously  from  the
camp  without  an  atom  of  noise  to  a  neighboring  fig
tree  near  which  the  royal  coursers,  grown  weary  and
impotent  in  their  burdened  and  bewildered  flight,  had
come  to  a  stop.  To  a  branch  of  this  tree — it  seemed  to
her  Death’s  signature — she  fastened  one-half  her  up¬
per  garment,  to  serve  as  Death’s  instrument,  then  in
moribund  beauty  lamented  with  a  tear-choked  sweet¬
ness  that  made  the  cuckoo’s  coo  seem  tasteless:  “O
my  king,  Love’s  brother  in  beauty,  in  my  birth-to-be
be  again  my  beloved.”

Hereupon  the  king,  who  had  swooned  from  copious
loss  of  blood  but  had  recovered  beneath  cool,  stream¬
ing  moonbeams,  distinguished  the  very  voice  of  his
queen  and  gently  called  her  name  with  lavish  words  of
love.  She  darted  to  him,  her  lotus-face  blossoming
with  the  quick  joy  of  her  heart.  She  drank  him  in
with  fasting  eyes  that  did  not  wink.  She  called  the
chaplains  and  the  counselors  with  a  loud,  piercing  cry,
showing  him  to  them.  Then  the  counselors  bowed  till
their  brows  touched  their  feet,  praised  the  power  of
Providence,  and  said:  “Your  Majesty,  the  horses,
when  the  driver  perished,  swiftly  brought  the  chariot
into  the  wood.”  And  their  ruler  related  how  his  sol¬
diers  had  been  slain  in  battle,  how  he  himself  had  been
smitten  by  the  club  pitilessly  hurled  by  the  king  of
Malwa  who  rejoiced  in  Shiva’s  favor,  how  he  had


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


9


swooned,  had  been  brought  to  the  wood,  and  how  the
breeze  of  dawn  had  restored  him.

Then  all  the  counselors,  with  festive  deference,
brought  him  to  the  camp  at  a  propitious  moment  and
extracted  every  splinter.  Whereupon  the  king’s  lotus-
face  blossomed  and  his  wounds  were  quickly  healed.

Nevertheless,  since  his  manly  effort  had  been  frus¬
trated  by  hostile  fate,  the  lord  of  Magadha  was  sunk
in  gloom,  growing  more  and  more  morose  until,  with
the  consent  of  the  counselors,  Vasumati  consoled  him
with  her  gentle  voice  and  her  wisdom:  “O  King,
among  all  kings  of  earth  you  are  most  glorious  and
most  eminent,  yet  you  hide  today  in  the  depths  of  the
Vindhya  forest.  Thus  fortune  seems  a  glittering  water
bubble,  a  lightning  flash  that  gleams  and  goes.  Per¬
ceive  how  all  things  hang  from  fate.  Nay,  in  olden
days  uncounted  lords  of  earth  who  rivaled  great  Indra
in  lordliness— I  name  but  Harishchandra  and  Rama —
felt  the  full  turn  of  the  screw  of  pain  while  fate  pulled
the  cord,  yet  lived  long  to  rule  their  realms  thereafter.
So  shall  it  be  with  you.  Ponder  for  a  time  the  working
of  fate,  and  dispel  your  gloom.”

Then,  with  all  his  soldiers,  Rajahansa  paid  a  visit
to  a  hermit  named  Vamadeva,  pious,  even  radiant  in
piety,  hoping  thus  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  longing.  He
bowed  before  the  hermit,  received  a  hospitable  greet¬
ing,  spoke  as  propriety  prescribed,  dwelt  a  little
in  the  restful  hermitage.  At  last  Rajahansa,  longing


IO


THE  TEN  PRINCES


for  that  kingdom  of  the  lunar  line  which  he  adorned,
spoke  well-weighed  words:  “Holy  sir,  through  fate’s
great  power  Manasara  has  vanquished  me  and  enjoys
the  realm  that  should  be  mine  to  cherish.  Hence  I
have  come  to  a  self-subduing  saint,  in  the  thought  that
I  too  may  sternly  subdue  the  senses,  thus  through  your
generous  mercy  to  eradicate  my  enemy.”

But  the  hermit  (to  whom  past,  present,  and  future
were  revealed)  said  to  the  king:  “No  need,  my  friend,
of  emaciating  self-denial.  In  Vasumati’s  womb  lies
one  who  shall  infallibly  delight  the  king  and  destroy
the  whole  host  of  foes.  Endure  for  a  space.”  At  once
the  words  “It  is  true”  were  spoken  by  a  voice  in  heav¬
en.  And  the  king  embraced  the  hermit’s  promise.

Presently,  when  the  days  of  her  pregnancy  were
past,  Vasumati  gave  birth  at  an  auspicious  moment
to  a  son  marked  with  all  marks  of  royalty.  And
through  a  chaplain,  Brahma’s  peer  in  holiness,  the
king,  mindful  of  his  duty,  gave  the  name  Rajavahana
to  the  dainty  prince  radiant  in  infant  baptism  and
trinkets  fit  for  a  baby  boy.

At  the  very  same  time  charming  sons  were  born  to
the  counselors  Sumati,  Sumantra,  Sumitra,  and  Su-
shruta.  They  shone  like  the  new  moon  at  its  rising,
they  were  destined  to  long  life,  and  their  names  were
Pramati,  Mitragupta,  Mantragupta,  and  Vishruta.
With  these  sons  of  counselors  as  his  friends,  Rajava¬
hana  grew  up,  enjoying  the  sports  of  boyhood.

Now  one  day  a  certain  holy  man,  delivering  to  the


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


ii


king  a  certain  dainty  prince,  radiant  with  the  marks
of  royalty  and  a  delight  to  the  eyes,  said  with  much
emotion:  “O  joy  of  earth,  when  I  entered  the  wood  to
gather  sacred  grass  and  fagots,  I  beheld  an  unprotect¬
ed  woman  shedding  the  tears  of  patent  misery.  And
when  I  asked  her:  ‘Why  do  you  weep  in  a  wild  wood?’
she  wiped  away  her  tears  with  her  lotus-hands  and
sobbed  out  her  story:  ‘Hermit,  the  king  of  Videha  sur¬
passes  the  love-god  in  beauty,  and  his  glory  is  the
theme  of  gathered  gods.  He,  with  queen  and  prince,
came  to  Blossom  City — since  the  king  of  Magadha
was  his  friend — for  the  festival  of  the  parting  of  the
queen’s  hair.  After  a  time,  the  king  of  Malwa,  strong
in  Shiva’s  favor,  came  to  assail  the  king  of  Magadha.
Between  these  two  famous  champions  arose  an  incal¬
culable  conflict,  in  which  King  Praharavarman  of  Vi¬
deha  stood  beside  his  friend  until  his  own  contingent
was  shattered.  He  was  then  seized  by  the  victor,  but
dismissed  for  mercy  or  merit,  and  started  for  his  capi¬
tal  with  such  tattered  troops  as  had  survived  the
slaughter.  Then,  on  the  rough  road  through  the  forest
he  was  fiercely  assailed  by  a  savage  multitude,  pro¬
tected  the  women  with  the  bulk  of  his  force,  and
barely  escaped.

“  ‘Now  I  had  been  chosen  to  nurse  his  twin  baby
boys,  and  I  could  not  keep  pace  with  the  swift  flight
of  the  king,  nor  could  my  daughter.  At  that  moment,
like  wrath  incarnate,  a  tiger,  open-mouthed,  leaped
snuffling  toward  me.  In  terror  I  tripped  on  a  spur  of


12


THE  TEN  PRINCES


rock  and  fell.  The  baby  dropped  from  my  hands  be¬
neath  a  cow  that  lay  there  dead.  While  the  tiger
tugged  hungrily  at  the  body,  he  was  killed  by  a  shaft
from  a  bow.  And  the  baby,  his  hair  all  tousled,  was
seized  by  the  savages  and  taken  I  know  not  where.
Nor  do  I  know  what  became  of  my  daughter,  who
carried  the  twin  prince.  So  I  swooned,  recovering  in
the  hut  of  an  amiable  shepherd  who  healed  my  hurts.
When  I  recovered,  I  felt  I  must  find  the  king,  but  I
am  perplexed.  I  have  no  companion,  and  my  daughter
is  lost.’  This  story  she  told,  then  added:  ‘I  will  go  to
my  master  alone,’  and  started  on  the  spot.

“Thereupon,  grieved  at  the  sorrow  of  Your  Maj¬
esty’s  friend,  the  lord  of  Videha,  I  sought  the  prince,
the  scion  of  his  line.  In  my  search  I  came  to  a  shining
shrine  of  the  Dreadful  Goddess,  where  wild  savages
were  about  to  sacrifice  the  prince  to  the  goddess,  in
hope  of  a  long  succession  of  such  victories.  ‘How
shall  we  kill  him?’  they  debated.  ‘Shall  we  slash  him
with  a  sword  as  he  hangs  from  the  branch  of  a  tree?
Plant  his  feet  in  a  sand  bank  and  make  him  the  target
of  a  flight  of  sharpened  shafts?  Or  let  him  run  the
gauntlet  of  a  many-legged  pack  of  frisky  curs?’

“Then  I  said  to  them:  ‘Most  noble  savages,  I  am
an  aged  Brahman.  I  blundered  from  my  path  in  the
wild  and  dreadful  wood  and  laid  my  son  in  a  shady
spot  while  I  went  a  little  distance  to  recover  the  trail.
I  have  searched  but  cannot  find  where  he  went  or
who  seized  him.  Many  days  have  passed  without


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


J3


sight  of  his  face.  What  shall  I  do?  Where  shall  I  go?
Can  it  be  that  you  gentlemen  have  seen  him?’

“  ‘Most  worthy  Brahman,’  they  replied,  ‘we  have
one  here.  Can  he  really  be  your  own  ?  If  so,  take  him.’
And,  fate  being  kind,  they  let  me  have  him.  I  gave
them  my  blessing,  took  the  boy,  restored  him  with
cool  water  and  what  little  I  had.  Now  I  trustfully
bring  him  to  your  bosom.  You  resemble  the  prince’s
father.  Pray  protect  him.”  And  the  king,  moderating
a  little  his  grief  at  his  friend’s  misfortune  by  the
pleasure  of  seeing  this  source  of  his  friend’s  joy,
named  the  boy  Upaharavarman  and  cherished  him
as  he  did  Rajavahana.

On  a  certain  holy  day  the  king,  traveling  to  bathe
at  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  passed  a  hut  of  the  wild
folk;  and  beholding  a  surpassingly  beautiful  boy  being
fondled  by  a  woman,  he  was  so  overcome  with  curios¬
ity  that  he  questioned  her:  “My  good  girl,  that  lad  is
splendidly  handsome  and  bears  all  the  marks  of  royal¬
ty.  He  is  not  born  of  your  breed.  Whose  eyes  should
he  delight?  How  has  he  come  into  your  hand?  You
must  tell  the  truth.”  And  the  wild  woman  bowed
low,  replying  prettily:  “O  King,  when  the  king  of
Videha — he  looked  like  the  king  of  heaven — was  on
the  trail  near  our  village,  a  band  of  our  wild  fellows
looted  all  he  had,  and  my  husband  seized  this  prince
and  gave  him  to  me  to  rear.”  Then  the  sagacious
king,  after  reflection,  inferred  this  to  be  the  second
prince  mentioned  in  the  hermit’s  narration,  wheedled


14


THE  TEN  PRINCES


the  woman  with  flattery  and  something  more  sub¬
stantial,  gave  the  boy  the  name  Apaharavarman,  and
entrusted  him  to  the  queen’s  care.

On  another  day  a  pupil  of  Vamadeva,  one  Soma-
devasharman,  delivered  a  baby  boy  to  the  king,  say¬
ing:  “Your  Majesty,  on  my  return  from  a  bathing  pil¬
grimage  at  Ramatirtha,  I  saw  in  a  stretch  of  forest  an
old  woman  who  carried  a  splendid  boy,  and  I  said  po¬
litely:  ‘Who  are  you,  mother?  Why  do  you  wander
wearily,  holding  a  boy,  here  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  ?’

“  ‘Worthy  hermit,’  said  the  old  woman,  ‘there  is  a
land  beyond  the  sea  named  Kalayavana,  where
dwells  a  merchant  named  Kalagupta,  wealthy  and
worthy,  who  has  a  dear  daughter,  a  delight  to  the
eyes,  named  Suvritta.  She  married  a  handsome  man
of  affairs  from  this  country,  son  of  a  counselor  of  Ma-
gadha’s  king,  a  man  of  charming  virtue  named  Ra-
tnodbhava,  a  tireless  traveler;  and  she  brought  him  a
splendid  dowry.  In  course  of  time,  when  his  graceful
lady  became  pregnant,  Ratnodbhava,  homesick  for  a
sight  of  his  brother,  somehow  persuaded  his  father-in-
law  and  embarked  with  his  lovely  bride  for  Blossom
City.  On  the  voyage  the  ship  was  buffeted  by  mon¬
strous  billows  and  foundered.  Now  I  had  been  chosen
to  nurse  my  lady  languid  with  her  burden,  so  I  bore
her  up  in  my  hands,  bestrode  a  plank,  and  came  some¬
how  safe  to  shore.  Whether  Ratnodbhava  was  drowned
with  his  friends  or  by  what  means  he  came  to  land,  I
do  not  know.  Today,  at  the  last  limit  of  misery,  Su-


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


!5


vritta  bore  her  son  here  in  the  midst  of  the  forest.  She
swooned  with  the  pangs  of  labor  and  is  lying  in  the
cool  shade  of  a  tree.  And  since  it  was  not  possible  to
stay  in  the  wild  wood,  I  undertook  to  find  a  path  lead¬
ing  to  some  settlement;  but  it  seemed  wrong  to  leave
the  baby  beside  his  unconscious  mother,  so  I  brought
the  boy  too.’

“At  this  moment  a  wild  elephant  appeared.  In
terror  at  the  sight  she  dropped  the  boy  and  ran,  while
I  waited  developments  from  the  shelter  of  a  neighbor¬
ing  thicket  of  vines.  While  the  huge  elephant  was
gathering  the  baby,  like  a  mouthful  of  green  stuff,
from  the  ground,  a  lion  with  a  fearful  roar  fastened
his  fierce  grip  upon  him.  Mad  with  fright,  the  ele¬
phant  tossed  the  boy  so  that  he  fell  from  the  sky.  Yet
long  life  was  predestined,  for  a  monkey  perched  on  a
lofty  branch,  picked  him  with  the  notion  that  he  was
ripe  fruit.  Finding  him  quite  unlike  fruit,  the  monkey
flung  him  dowm  at  the  base  of  a  broad  branch  and
made  off.  The  baby,  a  glorious  fellow,  took  all  his
troubles  unhurt.  And  when  the  lion  had  killed  the  ele¬
phant,  he  too  departed.  I  then  issued  from  my  thick¬
et  and  contrived  to  retrieve  from  his  tree  the  baby,
who  seemed  splendor  solidified.  I  searched  far  in  the
forest  for  his  mother,  but  failing  to  find  her,  took  the
boy  and  told  my  teacher,  at  whose  command  I  bring
him  to  you.”

And  the  king,  marveling  at  the  simultaneous  good
fortune  of  all  his  friends,  yet  anxious  concerning  the


1 6


THE  TEN  PRINCES


father’s  fate,  gave  Ratnodbhava’s  son  the  name  Push-
podbhava,  and  handing  the  boy  to  his  uncle  Sushruta,
told  the  tale  of  adventure  with  mingled  grief  and  joy.

Another  day  Vasumati  appeared  before  her  be¬
loved  with  a  boy  on  her  bosom.  And  when  he  asked:
“Where  does  this  one  come  from?”  she  replied:

“Last  night,  my  king,  when  my  eyes  were  sealed
in  slumber,  a  heavenly  lady  laid  a  princely  boy  before
me,  awakened  me,  and  said  with  deference:  ‘O  Queen,
I  am  a  lady  of  the  Yaksha  demigods.  I  am  called  Tara-
vali,  dear  daughter  of  Manibhadra,  and  the  beloved
of  your  counselor  Kamapala,  son  of  Dharmapala.
With  the  consent  of  the  Yaksha  king,  I  have  brought
you  this  child  of  my  body,  that  he  may  loyally  attend
your  son  Rajavahana,  that  pure  treasure  of  glory,  des¬
tined  lord  of  the  lands  of  the  sea-girdled  earth.  Pray
cherish  him  as  you  would  the  god  of  love.’  And  while
I  paid  her  honor,  my  eyes  aflower  with  wonder,  that
sweet-glancing  Yaksha  lady  vanished.”  Hereupon
Rajahansa,  his  mind  amazed  that  Kamapala  had
won  a  Yaksha  bride,  summoned  the  amiable  counse¬
lor  Sumitra,  gave  him  his  own  nephew  (with  the  name
Arthapala)  and  told  him  the  whole  strange  adventure.

On  yet  another  day  a  pupil  who  lived  in  Vamade-
va’s  hermitage  produced  a  dainty  blossom  of  a  boy
who  appropriated  the  glory  of  the  gods  and  made  a
mock  of  Love’s  deadly  beauty.  “Your  Majesty,”  he
said,  “on  the  occasion  of  a  pilgrimage  I  came  to  the
bank  of  the  Kaveri,  where  I  encountered  an  aged


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


17


woman  who  wept  as  she  clasped  to  her  breast  a  tou-
sle-headed  boy.  ‘Who  are  you,  mother?’  1  said.  ‘Whose
are  the  eyes  that  delight  in  this  boy?  Why  did  you
enter  the  wild  wood?  What  is  the  source  of  your  sor¬
row?’

“She  wiped  away  her  tears  with  both  hands,  gazed
at  me  as  at  one  able  to  pluck  the  dart  of  her  sorrow,
and  told  me  that  sorrow’s  source:  ‘Brahman,  Raja-
hansa  had  a  counselor  named  Sitavarman,  whose
younger  son  Satyavarman  came  as  a  pilgrim  to  this
region.  On  a  certain  land-grant  he  married  a  Brah¬
man’s  daughter  named  Kali,  but  as  she  was  childless,
he  wedded  her  sister  Gauri,  a  girl  of  golden  beauty,
who  bore  him  a  son.  One  day  the  jealous  Kali  enticed
the  boy  and  me,  his  nurse,  on  some  pretext  and  flung
us  into  this  river.  I  clutched  the  boy  with  one  hand
and  paddled  with  the  other  until  I  caught  the  branch
of  a  tree  swept  down  by  the  current.  I  laid  the  boy
upon  it  and  was  floating  down  stream  when  I  was
stung  by  a  black  snake  that  cowered  in  the  tree.  The
tree  of  my  refuge  stranded  at  this  spot.  But  the  ven¬
om  burns,  I  am  already  dead,  and  there  is  none  to
protect  him  in  the  forest.  Such  is  my  sorrow.’  With
these  words  she  fell  to  the  ground,  her  limbs  twitching
with  pain  from  the  pitiless  poison.

“For  all  my  heartfelt  pity  I  failed  to  conjure  the
poison  away  with  my  texts  from  Scripture,  and  when
I  searched  for  a  curative  herb  in  the  neighboring  jun¬
gle,  I  returned  only  to  find  life  departed.  Thereupon


i8


THE  TEN  PRINCES


I  performed  the  holy  ceremony  of  cremation  and  took
in  charge  the  helpless  boy,  though  my  mind  was  dis¬
traught  with  grief.  Perceiving  the  hopelessness  of  a
search  after  Satyavarman,  since,  when  I  heard  his
story,  I  had  not  learned  the  name  of  the  land-grant
where  he  lived,  I  reflected  that  you  were  the  natural
protector  of  your  minister’s  son,  hence  I  have  brought
him  to  you.”  Upon  hearing  this  tale,  the  king  was
distressed  by  his  clueless  ignorance  of  Satyavarman’s
whereabouts,  so  delivered  the  boy  (whom  he  named
Somadatta)  to  an  uncle,  the  counselor  Sumati,  who
lavished  upon  him  the  care  and  affection  that  he  felt
for  his  own  brother.

So,  with  a  band  of  princely  boys  about  him,  Raja-
vahana  enjoyed  the  sports  of  boyhood,  went  riding  on
everything  that  could  be  ridden,  and  in  due  course  en¬
dured  the  hair-clipping,  investiture,  and  the  other  sac¬
raments.  From  appropriate  professors  the  boys  learned
the  whole  art  of  writing  and  mastered  all  the  local  dia¬
lects.  They  became  versed  in  complete  Scripture  with
the  six  ancillary  disciplines;  proficient  also  in  all  tra¬
ditional  tales,  not  to  mention  poetry,  drama,  romances,
novels,  mythology,  and  the  more  elaborate  fiction.
They  became  erudite  in  ethics,  grammar,  astronomy,
logic,  metaphysics,  and  all  related  subjects.  They
digested  the  writings  of  Kautilya,  Kamandaki,  and
other  works  on  the  prudent  conduct  of  life.  They  cul¬
tivated  a  gift  for  the  lute  and  other  musical  instru¬
ments,  adding  a  talent  for  choral  singing  and  the


THE  PRINCES  ARE  BORN


J9


science  of  rhetoric.  They  mastered  the  mysterious
powers  of  gems,  magical  spells,  and  drugs.  They  ex¬
celled  in  equitation,  as  well  as  in  riding  elephants  and
other  creatures.  They  perfected  themselves  in  the
technique  of  various  weapons  and  acquired  a  scientific
skill  in  thievery,  gambling,  and  the  arts  of  deception
in  general.

Hence,  when  the  king  beheld  that  princely  band,
radiant  in  youth  and  diligent  in  duty,  he  thought:  “It
is  rough  on  my  enemies,”  and  straightway  experienced
the  extremity  of  joy.


CHAPTER  II

THE  BRAHMAN’S  SERVICE

One  day  Vamadeva  came  before  the  king  who  sat
surrounded  by  his  band  of  princely  lads — a  high-bred
brotherhood,  graced  with  all  graces,  who  cast  a  doubt
upon  the  love-god’s  beauty  and  made  a  mock  of  the
war-god’s  spirit  of  daring;  whose  hands,  furthermore,
bore  the  plain  marks  of  royalty,  the  banner,  the  sun¬
shade,  and  the  thunderbolt.  The  king  bowed  his  head
in  accepted  deference,  the  black  hair  of  the  bending
boys  clustered  like  bees  about  the  hermit’s  lotus-feet.
Then  Vamadeva  warmly  embraced  the  boys,  the  des¬
tined  destroyers  of  their  foes;  pronounced  a  benedic¬
tion  wTell-weighed  and  self-fulfilling;  and  said:  “Delight
of  earth,  your  generous  son  enjoys  that  lavish  loveli¬
ness  of  youth  which  must  seem  the  ripe  fruit  of  your
ambition.  Surely  the  time  has  come  when  he  and  his
companions  should  undertake  the  conquest  of  the
quarters  of  the  world.  Rajavahana  is  apt  for  any
hardship.  Let  him  march  to  the  conquest  of  the  quar¬
ters.”

When  the  king  beheld  the  lads,  lovely  as  the  love-
god,  manly  as  classic  heroes,  capable  of  the  wrath  that
reduces  foes  to  ashes,  mocking  the  speed  of  the  wind,
their  martial  dash  assured  him  of  success.  He  there¬
fore  gave  the  prince  fit  instructions,  appointed  the


21


'll


THE  TEN  PRINCES


others  his  counselors,  and  at  an  auspicious  moment
dismissed  them  to  victory.

Now  Rajavahana,  following  a  favorable  prognos¬
tic,  marched  a  certain  distance,  then  plunged  into  the
Vindhya  forest.  There  he  encountered  a  man  whose
members  were  maculated  with  welted  scars,  whose
body  was  hard  as  iron — a  Brahman  betrayed  by  his
sacramental  cord  but  manifesting  the  wild  energy  of  a
savage,  a  hideous  sight.  Yet  on  receiving  a  civil  greet¬
ing,  Rajavahana  said:  “Man,  why  do  you  dwell  alone
in  the  heart  of  the  Vindhya  forest,  a  wild  wood  where
terror  dogs  the  trails,  fit  habitation  for  beasts,  remote
from  the  haunts  of  men  ?  The  sacred  cord  across  your
shoulder  marks  you  a  Brahman.  The  scars  suggest  a
savage.  Explain  the  paradox.”

The  man  thereupon,  believing  that  the  glorious
youth  had  more  than  mere  human  power,  learned
from  the  prince’s  companions  his  name  and  lineage,
then  told  his  own  story:  “O  prince,  in  this  forest  dwell
many  nominal  Brahmans,  men  who  abandon  scriptur¬
al  and  other  learning,  spurn  the  duties  of  their  order,
put  away  truth,  purity,  and  all  the  virtues;  who  seek
after  sin,  following  the  lead  of  savages  and  eating  their
food.  Of  one  of  these  I  was  the  reprobate  son,  and  my
name  is  Matanga.  With  a  barbarous  band  I  would
enter  settlements,  seize  wealthy  villagers  with  their
wives  and  children,  imprison  them  in  the  forest,  plun¬
der  all  their  property,  and  destroy  them.  So  I  lived,  a
stranger  to  pity.


THE  BRAHMAN’S  SERVICE


23


“One  day  I  spied  a  band  of  my  companions  in  a
desolate  spot  preparing  to  kill  a  Brahman;  and  pity
pierced  my  heart  so  that  I  said:  ‘Sinners,  you  may  not
slay  a  Brahman.’  Red-eyed  with  wrath,  they  exhaus¬
ted  the  lexicon  of  abuse.  Made  indignant  by  their
taunts,  I  fought  long  to  save  the  Brahman;  but  they
struck  me  down.  I  died  and  went  to  hell  where  I  be¬
held  the  death-god  seated  in  the  midst  of  a  great  as¬
semblage  on  a  lion-throne  inlaid  with  gems,  and  sur¬
rounded  by  embodied  spirits.  I  paid  him  honor  with
the  rigor  obsequii;  but  he,  regarding  me,  called  his  coun¬
selor  Chitragupta  and  said:  ‘Counselor,  that  man’s
death-hour  has  not  come.  His  life  was  evil,  yet  he  met
his  end  defending  a  Brahman.  From  this  moment  the
stain  of  sin  falls  from  him,  and  his  light  shall  arise  in
the  doing  of  good  deeds.  Let  him  inspect  the  choicer
tortures  of  those  most  deeply  damned,  then  reassume
his  former  form.’  So  Chitragupta  exhibited  here  and
there  those  bound  to  red-hot  posts  of  iron,  those  flung
into  broad  saucers  of  boiling  oil,  those  brayed  by
clubs,  those  chiseled  by  sharp-edged  adzes,  then  dis¬
missed  me  after  deducing  an  admirable  moral.

“Reassuming  my  former  form,  I  found  myself  lying
for  a  moment  on  a  rock  in  the  heart  of  the  great  forest,
under  the  eye  of  the  Brahman  now  performing  his  de¬
votions.  Soon  after,  kinsmen  of  my  caste  learned  the
adventure,  hastened  to  me,  took  me  to  a  dwelling,  and
healed  my  hurts.  The  grateful  Brahman  did  not  de¬
part  until  he  had  taught  me  to  read,  had  epitomized


24


THE  TEN  PRINCES


for  me  various  Scriptures,  had  given  me  moral  in¬
struction  as  a  detergent  of  unrighteousness,  had
opened  to  me  the  worship  of  that  Shiva  accessible  to
the  eye  of  true  faith,  and  had  received  from  me  the
reverence  due  a  teacher.  From  that  hour  I  turned  my
back  on  the  whole  company  of  kinsmen  who  associate
with  savages;  I  ponder  prayerfully  that  moon-browed
Shiva  who  is  all  life’s  sole  master;  I  dwell  in  this  wild
wood  a  stranger  to  iniquity.  Your  Majesty,  I  have  a
secret  for  your  ear  alone.  Come  with  me.”

He  withdrew  the  prince  from  his  comrades,  and
continued:  “O  King, before  this  morning’s  dawn  Shiva
drew  near  as  I  slept;  broke  the  seal  of  my  slumber,  his
countenance  lovely  and  serene;  and  spoke  to  me  as  I
bowed  low  in  veneration:  ‘Matanga,  by  the  bank  of  a
stream  in  the  heart  of  the  Dandaka  forest,  behind  a
crystal  symbol  of  my  divinity  adored  by  heavenly
saints  and  angels,  near  a  rock  marked  by  the  foot¬
prints  of  Himalaya’s  daughter,  a  certain  cave  opens
like  the  mouth  of  Brahma.  Upon  entering,  you  will
find  there  deposited  a  copper  plate.  Consider  it  a  de¬
cree  of  the  Creator,  perform  the  fate-compelling  cere¬
mony  thereon  described,  and  you  shall  become  lord  of
the  lower  world.  Your  companion  in  the  adventure  is
a  prince  who  will  arrive  today  or  tomorrow.’  Sir,  your
arrival  fulfils  the  divine  decree.  Make  me  happy  by
befriending  my  ambition.”

He  bowed  his  head.  Rajavahana  assented  and,
leaving  his  comrades  sunk  in  slumber  at  night,  came


THE  BRAHMAN’S  SERVICE


25


with  Matanga  to  another  forest.  Then  in  the  morning,
when  the  prince’s  companions  found  no  trace  of  him,
in  deep  depression  they  searched  minutely  through
the  neighboring  jungle.  Failing,  yet  determined  to
find  him,  they  planned  bold,  distant  expeditions,
agreed  on  a  rendezvous,  and  scattered.

Meanwhile  Matanga,  serenely  satisfied  and  safe  in
the  matchless  manhood  of  the  prince,  fearlessly  en¬
tered  the  cave,  which  he  discovered  through  the  secret
sign  of  Shiva’s  giving.  Seizing  the  copper  plate,  he
pursued  that  path  to  the  world  below,  stopping  near  a
swan-dotted  pool  in  a  pleasure  grove  beside  a  splendid
city.  Here  he  offered  in  sacrifice  an  assortment  of  ma¬
terials  prescribed  by  Shiva,  while  Rajavahana  gazed
amazed  and  prevented  intervention.  When  the  flame
leaped  high  from  the  fagots  and  sacred  butter,  he  mut¬
tered  a  prayer  and  offered  his  body,  the  home  of  past
pieties,  receiving  in  return  a  heavenly  body  that
flashed  like  lightning.

Straightway  a  girl,  bejeweled  with  glittering  strings
of  gems,  the  comeliest  in  the  whole  world’s  family  of
lovely  ladies,  accompanied  by  many  modest  maidens,
glided  forward  with  the  grace  of  a  swan  and  offered
the  brilliant  Brahman  a  single  flashing  gem.  And
when  he  asked  her  name,  she  slowly  lifted  respectful
hands  and  spoke  with  a  bird-song’s  wistful  sweetness:

“Best  of  Brahmans,  I  am  the  dear  daughter  of  the
best  of  demons.  My  name  is  Kalinai.  My  father  was
this  world’s  mighty  monarch  and  overcame  gods  in


26


THE  TEN  PRINCES


battle,  until  Vishnu,  impatient  of  his  prowess,  sent
him  a  guest  to  the  death-god’s  city.  Then,  seeing  me
sunk  in  a  sea  of  sorrow  at  his  loss,  a  holy  hermit  took
pity  on  me,  saying:  ‘Maiden,  when  a  man  appears
who  seems  a  god,  he  shall  become  your  lover  and  shall
rule  the  whole  world  below.’  When  I  heard  his  word,
I  waited  long,  longing  for  sight  of  you  as  the  pensive
plover  waits  wistfully  for  thunder,  the  promise  of  rain.
I  see  your  arrival  as  the  ripe  fruit  of  my  desire.  With
the  permission  of  the  ministers  who  support  my  state,
I  come  to  you,  mounting  the  chariot  of  a  heart  whose
driver  is  Love.  Embrace  as  bride  the  glory  of  this
world’s  kingdom,  and  let  me  share  her  wifehood.”
Thereupon  Matanga,  with  Raj  avahana’s  consent,  mar¬
ried  the  maiden.  Much  pleased  with  the  winning  of  a
divine  bride,  he  appropriated  the  kingship  of  the
world  below  and  felt  complete  complacence.

Since  Rajavahana  desired  to  return  to  earth  in
order  to  rejoin  the  band  of  comrades  whom  he  had
eluded  in  making  this  expedition,  he  accepted  a  token
of  Matanga’s  gratitude  for  friendly  services  in  a  gem,
the  gift  of  Kalindi,  that  counteracted  hunger,  thirst,
and  other  tribulations;  bade  Matanga  farewell  after
a  brief  escort;  and  retraced  the  path  through  the  cave.
Failing  to  find  his  comrades  there,  he  roamed  the
earth.  In  his  wandering  he  entered  a  park  in  a  spa¬
cious  suburb.  Here  he  was  planning  to  rest,  when  he
caught  sight  of  a  man  who  had  entered  the  garden  and
sat  with  a  lady  in  a  hammock,  while  pleasant  friends


THE  BRAHMAN’S  SERVICE


27


were  grouped  about  them.  The  man’s  heart  seemed
to  blossom  with  supreme  delight  and  his  lotus-face  to
burst  into  flower  as  he  leaped  from  the  hammock  with
the  cry:  “It  is  my  master,  the  gem  of  the  lunar  line,
the  pure  treasure  of  glory.  It  is  Rajavahana.  Oh,
happiness!  When  I  least  hoped  it,  I  fall  at  his  feet.
Today  is  a  holiday  for  my  eyes.”  Herewith  he  mani¬
fested  his  excess  of  joy  in  the  grace  of  thoughtless
speed,  and,  as  the  prince  stepped  forward  three  or
four  paces,  touched  with  his  brow  his  master’s  lotus-
feet,  while  from  his  chaplet  laughing  jasmine  blos¬
soms  dropped.

The  prince’s  eyes  filled  with  tears  of  joy  as  he  em¬
braced  the  throbbing  form.  “My  good,  my  excellent
Somadatta!”  he  cried.  Then,  seated  in  the  cool  shade
of  a  dilly  tree,  he  asked  with  fond  familiarity:  “My
friend,  in  what  region,  in  what  manner  have  you
lived?  What  is  your  present  goal?  Who  is  this  lady?
How  have  you  come  by  these  companions  ?  Pray  tell
me.”  And  Somadatta,  his  fierce  fever  of  anxiety  al¬
layed  by  the  fortuitous  meeting  with  his  friend,  folded
his  lotus-hands  and  modestly  related  the  nature  of  his
adventure.


CHAPTER  III

SOMADATTA’S  ADVENTURE

“Your  Majesty,  while  wandering  with  the  aspira¬
tion  of  doing  you  some  humble  service,  I  was  tortured
by  thirst  in  a  forest  region,  so  drank  cool  water  from
a  vine-bordered  stream,  beside  which  I  found  a  splen¬
did  gem.  This  I  secured  and  continued  my  journey
until  the  excessive  heat  of  heaven’s  gem  made  advance
impossible.  Upon  entering  a  temple  found  even  in
this  jungle,  I  discovered  an  aged,  discouraged  Brah¬
man  with  many  sons  and  made  compassionate  in¬
quiries.  The  Brahman  answered,  his  face  pale  with
privation,  but  reflecting  the  great  hope  that  filled  his
mind:  ‘Oh,  sir,  I  save  these  motherless  sons  by  every
pitiful  shift.  For  the  moment  I  give  them  what  alms
I  can  collect  in  this  wild  wilderness,  living  here  in
Shiva’s  shrine.’

“  ‘Brahman,’  I  asked,  ‘from  what  country  comes
the  king  who  camps  near  by?  What  is  his  name  and
the  occasion  of  his  coming?’  ‘My  good  sir,’  answered
the  Brahman,  ‘Mattakala,  king  of  the  Latas,  heard
untold  tales  of  the  matchless  beauty  of  Vamalochana,
a  pearl  of  a  girl,  daughter  of  Viraketu,  lord  of  this
land,  and  besieged  his  capital  after  he  had  spurned  the
demand  for  his  daughter.  Then  Viraketu  flinched  and
surrendered  his  daughter,  a  mighty  bribe.  The  lord


29


30


THE  TEN  PRINCES


of  Lata,  delighted  at  winning  the  maiden,  started
home,  resolved  to  hold  the  wedding  only  in  his  own
city,  and  camps  at  present  in  this  forest  for  a  hunting-
holiday.  But  Manapala,  Viraketu’s  imperious  minis¬
ter,  incited  by  the  priceless  maiden  and  indignant  at
his  lord’s  humiliation,  has  interposed  the  camp  of  an
army  counting  all  four  service  branches.’

“At  this  point  pity  so  filled  my  spirit  that  I  gave
my  gem  to  the  poor  Brahman,  reflecting  that  he  had  a
large  family  of  boys,  was  scholarly,  penniless,  old,  a
fit  object  of  charity.  His  countenance  blossomed  with
boundless  bliss,  and  he  departed  with  redundant  ben¬
edictions.  Thereupon,  being  weary,  I  fell  into  a  pleas¬
ant  slumber.

“Presently,  conducted  by  a  number  of  swordsmen,
the  Brahman  returned,  both  arms  bound  behind  him,
and  the  marks  of  whips  upon  his  limbs.  ‘There  is  your
thief,’  he  said,  pointing  at  me.  The  king’s  hirelings
loosed  the  Brahman,  refused  to  hear  my  tale  of  the  ac¬
quisition  of  the  gem,  seized  me  roughly  (though  they
could  not  frighten  me),  dragged  me  by  cords  to  a  dun¬
geon  where  they  indicated  certain  men  in  fetters  with
the  words:  ‘There  are  your  friends,’  and  fettered  both
my  feet.  In  bewilderment  and  hopeless  tribulation  I
turned  and  said:  ‘Well,  my  rough  and  ready  men,  for
what  cause  do  you  endure  the  dolor  of  a  dreary  dun¬
geon?  They  called  you  my  comrades.  What  does  it
mean?’

“Perceiving  my  plight,  those  manly  thieves  related


SOMADATTA’S  ADVENTURE


31


the  doings  of  the  king  of  Lata  (already  known  to  me
from  the  Brahman’s  narrative),  then  continued :  ‘Wor¬
thy  sir,  we  are  servants  of  Manapala,  Viraketu’s  min¬
ister.  At  his  command  we  made  our  way  by  night
through  an  underground  passage  into  the  dwelling  of
the  king  of  Lata,  with  the  object  of  assassination.  Not
finding  the  king,  we  consoled  our  disappointment  by
abstracting  a  great  treasure;  then  plunged  into  the
jungle.  Next  day  great  numbers  of  the  king’s  men
tracked  us  down,  surrounded  and  caught  us  with
the  treasure,  brought  us  fast-bound  to  camp.  But
missing  a  single  priceless  gem  at  the  final  inventory,
they  fettered  us  as  you  see,  to  kill  us  if  we  failed  to  re¬
store  the  ruby.’

‘‘Now  when  I  learned  of  the  gem  and  the  spot
where  it  was  found,  I  concluded  that  my  find  must  be
this  very  ruby;  so  touched  on  the  Brahman’s  wretched
poverty  that  had  prompted  my  gift,  and  imparted  my
name,  birth,  and  the  circumstances  of  my  search  for
you,  sir,  thus  forming  friendship  with  conversation
natural  to  our  situation.  Then  at  midnight  I  burst
their  bonds  and  mine,  seized  with  their  aid  all  the
weapons  of  our  sleeping  sentinels,  dispersed  the  charg¬
ing  watch  with  some  smart  display  of  valor,  and  es¬
caped  to  Manapala’s  camp.  And  Manapala  treated
me  with  honor  when  he  heard  from  his  own  servants
the  tale  of  my  origin,  my  self-esteem,  and  my  recent
prowess.

“Next  day  certain  envoys  came  from  Mattakala,


32


THE  TEN  PRINCES


delivering  this  rancorous  message  to  Manapala :  ‘Coun¬
selor,  sturdy  thieves  abstracted  great  treasure  by
means  of  an  underground  passage  into  my  royal  resi¬
dence.  They  took  refuge  in  your  camp.  Surrender
them.  You  will  rue  a  refusal.’  At  this  the  counselor’s
eyes  grew  red  with  wrath,  and  he  snubbed  them  thus:
‘Who  is  the  king  of  Lata?  What  meaning  has  his
friendship?  What  profit  in  further  service  of  the
booby?’  The  men  reported  Manapala’s  fustian  verba¬
tim  to  Mattakala,  who,  enraged  and  also  proud  of  his
personal  prowess,  advanced  to  fight  with  a  small  force,
while  haughty  Manapala,  having  previously  resolved
on  battle,  equipped  his  men  and  advanced  with  eager
fearlessness.

“I  too  prepared  for  battle  with  the  serviceable
equipment  courteously  provided  by  the  counselor — a
chariot  with  several  horses  and  a  skilful  driver;  a
stout,  well-fitting  coat  of  mail;  a  bow;  a  double  quiver
stocked  with  various  kinds  of  arrows — and,  confident
in  my  contingent,  followed  the  counselor  intent  on  de¬
stroying  his  foe.  Avoiding  the  tangled  struggle  of  the
hostile  hosts,  wantonly  delighting  in  my  strength  of
arm,  I  shot  a  shower  of  shafts  and  struck  down  my
foes.  Then,  guiding  my  splendid  chariot-horses  to¬
ward  the  enemy  king,  I  swiftly  overtook  his  chariot
and  cut  off  his  head.  When  he  was  down  and  his  sur¬
viving  soldiers  scattered,  the  counselor,  supremely  joy¬
ful,  made  sure  of  assorted  horses,  elephants,  and  other
booty,  and  paid  me  peculiar  honor.  The  king  also,


SOMADATTA’S  ADVENTURE


33


upon  learning  all  details  of  the  adventure  from  a  mes¬
senger  despatched  by  Manapala,  came  with  great
gratification  to  meet  us.  Expressing  surprise  at  my
courage,  with  the  consent  of  counselors  and  kinsmen
he  celebrated  no  small  festival,  giving  me  his  own
daughter  on  a  lucky  day  and  anointing  me  crown
prince.

“Since  then,  I  spend  my  days  anticipating  the
wishes  of  the  king  and  enjoying  manifold  delights
with  Vamalochana  (whom  you  see  here),  yet  subject
to  fits  of  depression  when,  as  often,  your  absence  stabs
my  heart  with  pain.  Hence,  taking  competent  advice,
I  have  come  today  with  my  wife  to  a  spot  sacred  to  re¬
union  with  friends,  hoping  to  win  the  favor  of  that  su¬
preme  Shiva  whose  home  is  Mahakala.  And  Shiva
shows  mercy  to  the  faithful.  Through  his  grace  I  see
your  lotus-feet  and  attain  the  pinnacle  of  joy.”

Having  listened  to  the  tale  and  complimented  his
friend  on  his  courage,  Rajavahana,  censuring  fate  for
the  unmerited  trial,  recounted  the  detail  of  his  own
adventure.  At  its  conclusion  he  perceived  before  him
Pushpodbhava,  so  eagerly  bowing  that  his  brow
touched  his  toes.  With  a  warm  embrace,  his  bright
eyes  dimmed  with  tears  of  joy,  the  prince  indicated
him  with  the  words :  “See,  my  good  Somadatta !  Here
is  Pushpodbhava.”  The  two  friends,  dismissing  the
sorrow  of  long  separation,  found  delight  in  an  embrace.

Then  the  prince,  seated  once  more  in  the  shade  of
the  tree,  said  with  a  courteous  smile:  “Comrade,  I


34


THE  TEN  PRINCES


had  a  Brahman’s  business  to  perform,  and  being  sure
that  my  friends  would  interpose  an  obstacle  if  they
knew  the  facts,  I  departed,  leaving  you  all  asleep.
Tell  me  the  decision  of  my  friends  on  waking.  Where
did  they  go  in  search  of  me?  And  what  has  been  your
personal  journey?”  The  other  swept  his  brow  with
dutiful  hands  and  told  his  deferential  tale.


CHAPTER  IV

PUSHPODBHAVA’S  ADVENTURE

“Your  Majesty,  your  friends  did  indeed  infer  that
you  had  gone  to  serve  a  Brahman;  yet  being  unable  to
determine  the  direction  taken,  we  scattered  and  went
our  several  ways  to  search  for  Your  Majesty.

“For  my  part,  I  roamed  the  earth  in  search  of
Your  Majesty  until  a  day  when  I  found  the  ray  of  the
midday  sun  unendurable,  so  that  I  seated  myself  for  a
moment  in  the  cool  shade  of  a  tree  beneath  a  cliff.
Glancing  up,  I  beheld  before  me  the  shadow  of  a  man,
but  shaped  like  a  turtle  with  all  his  limbs  drawn  in  at
noon.  I  felt  pity  for  any  man  falling  with  such  precip¬
itancy  from  the  sky,  so  I  caught  him  in  mid-air  and
eased  his  fall  to  earth.  He  had  lost  consciousness  in
the  dreadful  drop;  and  when  I  revived  him  with  cool
restoratives,  the  tears  of  limitless  misery  streamed
from  his  eyes  as  I  asked  why  he  fell  from  the  precipice.

“He  wiped  the  teardrops  away  with  his  finger  tips
and  said:  ‘Kind  sir,  I  am  Ratnodbhava,  son  of  Pad-
modbhava,  counselor  of  the  lord  of  Magadha.  On  a
trading  trip  I  came  to  Kalayavana,  a  land  beyond  the
sea,  where  I  married  a  merchant’s  daughter.  While  I
was  returning  with  her,  our  ship  was  shattered  at  sea
within  sight  of  land;  and  all  were  drowned,  save  that
I,  through  fate’s  partiality,  came  somehow  safe  to


35


36


THE  TEN  PRINCES


shore.  Yet  having  lost  my  dear  wife,  I  struggle  still  in
a  sea  of  misery  and  see  no  shore  of  that  sorrow,
though,  from  reverence  for  a  certain  holy  hermit’s
counsel,  I  have  dragged  out  sixteen  dreary  years.
Hence  I  flung  myself  from  the  mountain.’

“At  this  moment  a  woman’s  moan  was  heard  and
the  words:  ‘A  prophet  has  promised  reunion  with  your
husband  and  your  son.  It  is  sinful  to  weary  of  waiting
and  to  cast  yourself  into  the  fire.’  When  I  heard  this,
it  flashed  through  my  mind  that  the  man  was  my
father,  and  I  said:  ‘Father,  I  have  much  to  communi¬
cate  to  you.  However,  it  must  all  wait.  In  this  emer¬
gency,  I  cannot  disregard  the  woman’s  moan.  Pray
stay  here  a  mere  moment.’

“I  hurried  away  and  soon  found  myself  in  the  pres¬
ence  of  a  woman  who,  with  folded  hands,  was  desper¬
ately  plunging  into  a  fire  that  writhed  with  horrid
flames.  I  snatched  her  from  the  blaze,  conducted  her
to  my  father,  and  said  to  the  moaning  old  woman  who
accompanied  her:  ‘Mother,  whence  come  you  two?
Why  do  you  suffer  in  this  wild  wood?  Tell  me.’

“  ‘My  son,’  she  sobbed,  ‘this  is  Suvritta,  daughter
of  a  certain  Kalagupta,  a  merchant  in  Kalayavana,  a
land  beyond  the  sea.  While  she  was  traveling  with
her  beloved  husband,  the  ship  sank  at  sea.  With  me,
her  nurse,  she  clung  to  a  plank  and  came  through
lucky  fate  to  shore.  Her  hour  was  upon  her,  and  she
bore  her  son  in  a  jungle.  And  when — unhappy  me! —
the  baby  was  seized  by  a  wild  elephant,  she  wandered


PUSHPODBHAVA’S  ADVENTURE  37


on  with  me.  She  trusted  a  prophet’s  prediction  that
she  should  meet  her  husband  and  her  son  after  sixteen
years,  and  spent  that  space  of  time  in  a  pious  hermit¬
age;  then,  unable  to  endure  her  shoreless  sorrow,  kin¬
dled  a  fire  and  was  about  to  sacrifice  herself.’

“On  hearing  this,  I  recognized  my  mother  and
grew  stiff  with  deference.  Then  I  gave  her  my  full  his¬
tory  and  introduced  to  her  my  father  whose  face  al¬
ready  was  aflower  and  his  eyes  wide  with  wonder  at
the  nurse’s  tale.  My  parents  recognized  each  other  by
certain  tokens  and  thrilled  with  bliss.  They  anointed
their  dutiful  son  with  a  stream  of  joyful  tears,  clasped
me  close,  caressed  my  head,  then  seated  themselves  in
the  shade  of  a  tree.

“  ‘How  fares  our  gracious  King  Rajahansa?’  asked
my  father,  and  I  told  him  all — the  loss  of  the  king¬
dom,  your  birth,  sir,  the  accumulation  of  princely
lads,  your  undertaking  to  conquer  the  quarters,  your
journey  with  Matanga,  the  reason  for  our  search  after
you.  Then  I  found  them  a  home  in  the  hermitage  of
a  holy  man.

“Thereafter,  still  intent  on  searching  for  Your  Maj¬
esty,  but  recollecting  that  money  is  the  necessary
condition  of  all  success,  I  procured  a  band  of  disciples,
apt  assistants  in  the  occult  science  for  the  possession
of  which  I  am  myself,  sir,  under  obligation  to  you.
With  them  I  visited  the  archeological  remains  of  cities
in  the  heart  of  the  Vindhya  forest,  and,  by  means  of
magic  ointment,  discovered  jars  filled  with  valuables


38


THE  TEN  PRINCES


at  the  roots  of  such  trees  as  betrayed  the  presence  of
various  treasure.  These  I  exhumed,  after  posting  sen¬
tinels  on  every  side,  and  made  a  pile  of  countless
coins.  I  next  visited  a  merchant  caravan  that,  arriv¬
ing  opportunely,  encamped  in  the  neighborhood;  pur¬
chased  stout  oxen  and  sacks;  packed  the  sacks  on  the
oxen;  and  transported  the  treasure  to  camp,  dissimu¬
lating  the  character  of  my  merchandise.

“With  the  captain  of  the  caravan,  a  certain  mer¬
chant’s  son  named  Chandrapala,  I  formed  a  friendship
and  entered  Ujjain  in  his  company.  To  this  great
city  I  also  brought  my  parents.  Then,  with  the  guid¬
ance  and  approbation  of  Chandrapala’s  father,  Ban-
dhupala,  a  man  in  whom  all  virtues  kept  house,  I  con¬
structed  a  secret  chamber,  after  catching  a  glimpse  of
the  king  of  Malwa.

“Now  when  I  prepared  to  search  for  you  in  wild
forest  regions,  my  admirable  friend  Bandhupala
learned  my  intention  and  said:  ‘You  cannot  search
the  whole  boundless  earth.  Forget  your  dejection;
live  quietly.  I  will  tell  you  as  soon  as  I  see  a  happy
omen  that  indicates  the  finding  of  a  guide  for  you.’
My  heart  revived  with  the  nectar  of  his  counsel,  and  I
continued  with  him  from  day  to  day.

“But  at  last  I  saw  a  pearl  of  a  girl  named  Bala-
chandrika,  who  seemed  the  guardian  goddess  of  a  cer¬
tain  merchant’s  dwelling.  Her  figure  was  instinct
with  the  fresh  grace  of  youth,  her  face  charmed  like
the  moon,  and  her  person  was  grateful  as  moonlight


PUSHPODBHAVA’S  ADVENTURE


39


to  the  eyes.  My  self-possession  was  shaken  by  her
loveliness,  and  I  became  the  target  of  Love’s  flowery
shafts.  She  too,  with  the  eyes  of  a  startled  fawn,  cast
in  my  direction  more  than  one  sidelong  glance  that
served  as  arrow  for  blossom-arrowed  Love;  and  she
trembled  like  a  vine  that  sways  to  a  gentle  breeze.
Her  curious  glances  played  upon  my  person,  drawn,
withdrawn  in  a  drawn  battle  between  love  and  shy¬
ness,  betraying  her  state  of  mind.  While  her  sweet
hints  revealed  her  feeling,  I  planned  the  means  of
happy  meeting.

“One  day  Bandhupala  went  with  me  to  a  wooded
park  at  the  city’s  edge,  in  order  to  win  news  of  you  by
divination.  And  while  he  listened  to  the  speech  of
birds  beside  a  certain  tree,  I  wandered  in  a  distant
grove,  indulging  melancholy  joys.  There,  beside  a
lovely  lake,  I  beheld  Balachandrika,  wistful  and  wan,
sole  source  to  me  of  cherished  wishes.  I  thrilled  to  the
charm  of  her  winsome  glances,  fascinating  with  trou¬
bled  love  and  bashful  eagerness,  but  I  saw  that  the
gleaming  smile  of  that  blossom-face  was  sad  with  the
havoc  of  ravaging  passion.  I  must  know  the  cause  of
this,  so  approached  her  courteously  and  said:  ‘Sweet
maiden,  why  is  your  face  a  fading  flower?’

“She  trusted  me  with  her  secret;  forgetting  shame
and  fear,  she  told  her  hesitating  tale:  ‘Gentle  friend.
King  Manasara  of  Malwa,  yielding  to  the  infirmities
of  age,  anointed  his  son  Darpasara  lord  of  Ujjain.
This  prince,  ambitious  to  rule  all  lands  of  earth  encir-


4o


THE  TEN  PRINCES


cled  by  the  seven  seas,  departed  to  perform  austerities
on  Kailasa  peak,  leaving  as  regents  two  cousins,
Chandavarman  and  Daruvarman,  men  of  headstrong
character.  Now  while  Chandavarman  rules  the  whole
realm  without  a  rival,  Daruvarman,  transgressing  the
command  of  uncle  and  elder  brother,  pursues  with
wicked  purpose  the  wives  and  wealth  of  other  men.
And  since  one  day  perceiving  that  my  heart  gives  it¬
self  to  you  (whose  beauty,  sir,  is  like  the  love-god’s),
he  makes  light  of  the  sin  of  violating  a  virgin,  and
strives  to  force  my  inclination.  Hence  my  anxiety;
hence  my  melancholy.’

“When  I  had  learned  her  heartfelt,  overflowing
love  for  me,  and  the  obstacle  to  the  success  of  my
longings,  I  comforted  my  weeping  beloved;  and  hav¬
ing  excogitated  a  plan  for  killing  Daruvarman,  I  said:
‘Gentle  maiden,  I  have  devised  a  pleasant  plan  to
kill  your  black-hearted  lover.  Through  trustworthy
friends  you  must  spread  among  the  citizens  the  re¬
port  that  a  holy  saint  has  made  the  following  predic¬
tion:  “A  certain  Yaksha  demigod  dominates  Bala-
chandrika  as  a  succubus.  If  any  bold  fellow,  matri¬
monially  eligible,  and  avid  to  enjoy  her  boundless
beauty,  shall  vanquish  the  Yaksha  in  the  love-cham¬
ber,  and  shall  issue  forth  unscathed  after  enjoying  the
heavenly  bliss  of  conversation  with  the  fawn-eyed
maiden  and  her  single  girl  companion,  he  is  destined
to  clasp  in  marriage  that  bosom  lovely  as  a  pair  of
sheldrake  birds.”


PUSHPODBHAVA’S  ADVENTURE


41


“  ‘Now  if  Daruvarman,  hearing  continual  gossip
to  this  effect,  is  frightened  and  keeps  quiet,  so  much
the  better.  If  however  his  depravity  drives  him  still  to
seek  union  with  you,  then  your  friends  must  say  to
him:  “Sir,  since  you  are  the  counselor  of  King  Darpa-
sara,  it  would  be  undignified  to  attempt  this  deed  of
daring  in  our  dwelling.  Rather  let  the  citizens  witness
the  flower-eyed  maiden  conducted  to  your  palace.  If
there  Your  Highness  shall  have  his  sport  with  her,
then  he  may  marry  her  and  fulfil  his  wishes.”  To  this
he  will  assent.  You  will  then  visit  his  palace,  and  I
will  go  too,  wearing  the  dress  of  a  girl.  In  some  private
chamber  I  will  kill  him  by  brute  force,  using  fists  and
knees  and  feet;  then  leave  the  house  with  you,  com¬
posedly  posing  as  your  girl  companion.  This  plan  you
must  adopt  wfithout  fear  or  shame  and  afterward  re¬
veal  our  overwhelming  love  to  your  father,  mother,
and  brothers,  winning  them  by  every  argument  to  our
marriage.  They  will  surely  give  you  to  a  youth  like
me,  well-born,  wealthy,  and  handsome.  And  when
you  have  told  them  the  manner  of  Daruvarman’s
death,  you  must  report  what  they  say.’

“Her  flower-face  seemed  ready  to  bloom  as  she  re¬
plied:  ‘Dear  friend,  it  is  your  task  to  kill  cruel  Daru¬
varman.  When  he  is  dead,  your  wishes  will  doubtless
bear  fruit.  It  shall  be  as  you  say.  I  will  follow  in¬
structions  exactly.’  With  this  she  darted  many  a
half-glance  at  me  and  very  deliberately  went  to  her
home.


42


THE  TEN  PRINCES


“I  next  returned  to  Bandhupala  and  learned  from
his  divination  that  I  should  be  reunited  with  you,  sir,
only  after  the  lapse  of  thirty  days.  I  accompanied  him
to  his  home,  whence  he  dismissed  me  to  my  own
dwelling.  Here  I  received  a  message  from  Balachan-
drika  that  she  was  preparing  to  visit  Daruvarman,  hav¬
ing  been  summoned  to  sport  in  the  love-chamber  by
this  victim  caught  in  the  tangling  toils  of  my  device.
Therefore  I  deftly  affixed  to  the  proper  portions  of  my
person  the  frippery  appropriate  to  a  pretty  girl-
gems,  anklets,  girdle,  bracelets,  armbands,  earrings,
necklaces,  silks,  and  powder— made  myself  feel  natu¬
ral  in  a  stunning  frock,  and  with  my  darling  called  at
the  fellow’s  door.  He,  when  the  porter  announced  us,
came  forward  ceremoniously,  forbade  all  other  attend¬
ants  to  leave  the  doorway,  but  conducted  Balachan-
drika  and  me  to  a  boudoir.  Meanwhile,  since  the  Ya-
ksha  story  had  become  the  talk  of  the  town,  an  in¬
quisitive  crowd  of  citizens  gathered  expectantly  round
Daruvarman’s  door.

“That  creature,  devoid  of  discernment  and  dom¬
inated  by  passion,  led  my  lady  to  a  gem-incrusted,
golden  couch  with  swan’s-down  cushions,  offering  her
and  me — for  the  dim  light  and  my  bewitching  dress
quite  concealed  my  sex — an  assortment  of  luxuries,
including  ornaments  of  gold  and  gems,  gay  stuffs  of
finest  texture,  yellow  sandal  mixed  with  musk,  betel
with  camphor,  fragrant  flowers.  For  just  twenty  sec¬
onds  he  stood  there  chattering,  and  laughing  as  he


PUSHPODBHAVA’S  ADVENTURE  43

talked;  then,  blind  with  passion,  showed  a  mind  to
fondle  the  sweet  maiden’s  bosom.

“My  turn  had  come.  Red  with  wrath,  I  dashed
him  headlong  from  the  couch  and  drubbed  him  dead
with  fists  and  knees  and  feet.  Then,  rearranging  my
jewelry  disordered  in  the  heat  of  the  tussle,  and
soothing  my  shuddering  darling,  I  returned  to  the
court  of  the  palace  and  screamed  aloud  as  if  shaken  by
terror:  ‘Oh,  oh!  The  hideous  Yaksha  that  dominates
Balachandrika  is  killing  Daruvarman.  Quick,  quick!
Look  at  him!’  When  the  gathered  crowd  heard  this,
tears  streamed  and  shouts  of  mourning  deafened  the
horizon.  They  rushed  in,  gossiping  together:  ‘He
knew  a  mighty  Yaksha  lived  in  Balachandrika.  Yet
Daruvarman,  blind  with  passion,  had  to  invite  her.
His  own  act  killed  the  fellow.  Why  mourn  for  him?'

“In  the  midst  of  this  hubbub  my  love’s  eyes  danced
with  fright,  but  I  was  shrewd  enough  to  hasten
home  with  her.  After  some  days  I  publicly  married
my  moon-faced  maiden  in  the  manner  prescribed  by
holy  men,  and  enjoyed  to  the  full  the  exquisite  de¬
lights  of  long-anticipated  love.  Today,  being  the  day
foretold  by  Bandhupala’s  birds,  I  left  the  city,  waiting
without;  and  now  my  eyes  enjoy,  in  seeing  you,  a  sec¬
ond  blissful  holiday.”

When  Rajavahana  had  listened  to  his  friend’s
story,  he  recounted  to  him  with  unflagging  gusto  his
own  experiences  and  Somadatta’s;  then  bade  Soma-
datta  return  as  soon  as  he  had  worshiped  Shiva,  lord


44


THE  TEN  PRINCES


of  Mahakala,  and  had  conducted  wife  and  friends  to
their  camp.  Thereafter,  attended  by  Pushpodbhava,
he  entered  the  capital  of  Avanti,  Ujjain,  that  heaven
on  earth.  Once  there,  Pushpodbhava  introduced  him
to  Bandhupala  and  other  friends  as  his  prince,  son  of
his  kingly  master,  thus  conciliating  for  him  abundant
homage,  but  gave  out  the  report  abroad  that  he  was
an  eminent  Brahman,  proficient  in  all  polite  arts.  In
his  own  home  he  provided  his  prince  with  baths,  food,
and  other  daily  comforts.


CHAPTER  V


THE  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  BELLE  OF
AVANTI

Then  came  the  spring.  In  separated  hearts  the
season  fanned  the  flame  of  fondness  with  southern
breezes  (leading  Love’s  marshaled  army)  that  blew
dilute  as  if  subtilized  by  the  snapping  of  serpents
crowding  tree-cavities  on  Malabar  Mountain,  that
traveled  tranquilly  as  if  balanced  by  their  sandal’s
perfumed  burden.  It  made  the  horizon’s  circle  vocal
with  coo  and  hum  of  bees  and  cuckoos  whose  throats
were  thrilling  to  the  flavor  of  the  mango  blossoms’
honey.  In  minds  of  self-sufficing  maids  it  caused  fan¬
tasies  to  flower,  and  flowers  to  flare  on  mango,  vitex,
red  ashoka ,  dhak,  and  sesamum.  It  spurred  the  spirit
of  sensitive  taste  toward  love’s  great  festival.

In  this  entrancing  season  the  belle  of  Avanti,
Manasara’s  daughter  Avantisundari,  with  her  favorite
friend  Balachandrika  who  loved  a  frolic  in  a  lovely
country  garden,  surrounded  too  by  a  bevy  of  the
city’s  sweetest  maidens,  piled  sand  in  the  cool  shade
of  a  baby  mango  tree  and  there  paid  playful  worship
to  the  love-god  with  a  varied  heap  of  fragrant  offer¬
ings,  among  them  perfumes,  blossoms,  turmeric  pow¬
der,  and  strips  of  Chinese  silk.

Into  this  wooded  garden,  like  Love  with  Spring,

45


46


THE  TEN  PRINCES


came  Rajavahana  attended  by  Pushpodbhava;  for  he
longed  to  behold  the  belle  of  Avanti,  the  image  of  the
goddess  Charm.  From  time  to  time,  from  spot  to
spot,  he  listened  to  polylogies  of  cuckoo  companies
and  parrot  parties  and  swarms  of  bees  amid  mangoes
gay  with  crowding  twig  and  flower  and  fruit  on
branches  swaying  to  the  southern  breezes.  He  gazed
from  time  to  time  at  lakes  winsome  with  clear,  cool
waters  tunefully  troubled  by  serried  swans  and  cranes
and  ducks  and  sheldrakes  that  gaily  played  where  lo¬
tus  clusters — blue  and  bright  and  white — began  to
open  into  flower.  So,  with  unhesitating  grace,  he
drew  near  the  lovely  ladies.  Then  Balachandrika
waved  a  hand  that  said:  “No  shyness!  Come!”  And
summoned  thus,  surpassing  heaven’s  king  in  majesty,
Rajavahana  stood  face  to  face  with  slender-waisted
Avantisundari.

She  shone,  a  creation  of  Love.  Yes,  Love  had
fashioned  a  paragon  of  women,  as  if  he  wished,  in
wistful  memory  of  Charm,  to  image  forth  this  dupli¬
cate.  He  formed  her  feet  from  the  sweetness  of  two
autumn  lilies  in  his  own  pleasure  pool;  the  languid
grace  of  her  gait  from  the  course  of  a  wanton  swan
down  a  long  lake  in  a  planted  garden;  her  calves  from
a  quiver’s  curve;  her  comely  thighs  from  the  shapeli¬
ness  of  two  plantain  stems  by  the  door  of  a  summer¬
house;  her  generous  hips  from  the  sweep  of  conquer¬
ing  chariots;  her  navel  (which  seemed  an  eddy  in
Ganges’  stream)  from  the  semblance  of  an  early-


THE  BELLE  OF  AVANTI


47


flowering  ornamental  lotus  bud;  her  three  plicatures
from  the  ordered  rise  of  a  palace  stairway;  her  capil-
lation  from  the  lovely  sheen  of  bees  that,  clinging,
form  Love’s  bowstring;  her  breasts  from  the  beauty
of  two  full  golden  bowls;  her  arms  from  the  delicacy
of  vines  in  a  bower;  her  neck  from  the  symmetry  of  a
conch  of  victory;  her  lip,  like  a  bimba  fruit,  from  the
redness  of  mango  flowers  that  maidens  fondly  wear
above  the  ear;  her  sweet  smile  from  the  splendor  of
Love’s  flower-arrows;  her  every  word  from  the  witch¬
ery  of  the  soft  song  of  Love’s  first  messenger,  the
cuckoo;  the  breath  of  her  sigh  from  the  gentleness  of
the  southern  breeze,  leader  of  all  Love’s  soldiers;  her
eyes  from  the  pride  of  two  fishes  figured  on  a  conquer¬
ing  banner;  her  brows  from  the  curve  of  a  bow;  her
face  from  the  spotless  enchantment  of  Love’s  first
friend,  the  moon;  her  hair  from  the  similitude  of  a  pet
peacock’s  fan.  Then  he  bathed  the  image  in  sandal
perfume,  mingled  with  essence  of  honey  and  musk,
and  polished  it  with  camphor  dust.

Like  the  embodied  goddess  of  beauty,  the  daugh¬
ter  of  Malwa’s  monarch  gazed  at  one  who  seemed  the
love-god,  incarnate,  self-propitiate,  self-revealed  to
grant  her  heart’s  desire;  and  such  emotion  filled  her
that  she  trembled  like  a  vine  swaying  to  soft  breezes.
Hence  she  relied  on  a  demure  deportment  and  turned
aside,  making  shy  trial  of  this  demeanor  now,  and
now  of  that.

With  passionate  wonder  he  gazed  at  her  and  mur-


48


THE  TEN  PRINCES


mured:  “Surely,  when  God  created  his  host  of  lovely
women,  she  was  a  marvelous  accident,  as  when  (to
quote  the  homely  proverb)  a  worm  traces  a  perfect
letter  while  boring  in  a  book.  Else,  why  did  he,  pos¬
sessed  of  such  creative  skill,  fashion  no  rival  loveli¬
ness?”  And  she,  unable  for  shame  to  face  him,  with¬
drew  half-hidden  among  her  friends,  still  gazing  at
Rajavahana  from  under  arching  eyebrows  with  side¬
long  glances  of  eyes  half-closed  yet  seeking  his.  His
beauty  was  the  snare,  and  she  the  deer.

He  also  felt  his  heart  the  target  of  bitter  shafts
that  sapped  his  strength  with  the  sum  of  graces  which
she  then  revealed.  Meantime  she  wondered:  “No  ri¬
val  vies  with  him  in  charm.  In  what  city  does  he
make  holiday  for  the  eyes  of  blissful  maidens  ?  Among
all  matrons  blest  in  husband  and  in  son,  what  mother}
through  possession  of  this  gem,  becomes  herself  the
central  pearl  of  honor’s  diadem  ?  Who  is  his  goddess  ?
What  his  errand  here?  Since  I  discovered  that  he
mocks  the  love-god’s  beauty,  the  jealous  god  tortures
me  cruelly,  makes  me  a  disembodied  spirit  like  him¬
self.  What  shall  I  do?  How  can  I  know  him?”

Now  Balachandrika,  interpreting  their  secret  feel¬
ings  by  research  of  their  manners,  felt  that  a  full  re¬
cital  of  the  prince’s  story  would  not  be  etiquette  be¬
fore  a  company  of  young  ladies,  so  introduced  him  in
more  general  terms:  “Princess,  this  is  a  gentleman  of
lofty  birth,  proficient  in  all  gracious  arts,  a  dangerous
enemy,  one  who  draws  near  to  the  divine.  He  is  a


THE  BELLE  OF  AVANTI


49


judge  of  gems  and  charms  and  balms.  He  merits  at¬
tention  and  should  receive  your  homage.”

The  princess,  serenely  greeting  this  echo  of  her
own  desire,  gently  ruffled  by  rapture  as  a  wave  by  a
zephyr,  provided  a  decorous  throne  for  the  prince
who  transcended  the  love-god’s  deadly  beauty.  Then,
by  the  skilful  hand  of  her  friend,  she  paid  him  homage
with  abundant,  varied  offerings,  including  perfumes,
flowers,  rice,  camphor,  and  betel  leaves.

Meanwhile  Rajavahana  was  thinking:  “Surely,  in
a  former  life  she  was  Yajnavati,  my  bride.  No  other¬
wise  could  such  love  for  her  rise  in  my  heart.  In  the
hour  when  the  curse  was  fulfilled,  the  holy  hermit  did
indeed  grant  us  a  common  memory  of  that  life;  yet
when  occasion  offers,  I  will  awaken  her  remembrance
by  hinting  the  details.”  At  this  moment  a  beautiful
swan  moved  gaily  toward  him.  And  seeing  Balachan-
drika,  at  the  princess’  eager  instigation,  prepared  to
catch  it,  he  thought:  “The  time  to  speak  has  come.”
Thereupon  Rajavahana,  an  artist  in  narration,  related
this  graceful  tale:

“Dear  friend,  in  days  long  past  there  was  a  king
named  Shamba.  With  his  heart’s  dearest  he  thought
to  spend  a  happy  hour  beside  a  lotus  pond.  There  in
a  cluster  of  red  water  lilies  lay  a  swan  that  slept  inert.
He  crept  upon  it,  caught  it,  and  bound  its  feet  with  a
cord  of  lotus  fiber.  Then,  gazing  at  his  beloved’s  lov¬
ing  countenance,  while  a  slow  smile  bloomed  upon  his
cheek,  he  said:  ‘My  moon-faced  bride,  the  swan  is


5°


THE  TEN  PRINCES


bound  and  lies  calm  as  a  peaceful  saint.  Go  with  him
where  you  will.’  Then  the  swan  pronounced  a  curse  on
Shamba:  ‘O  King,  I  am  a  saint,  vowed  to  lifelong  pov¬
erty  and  chastity.  I  lay  in  this  lotus  cluster,  deep  in
devotion,  sunk  in  bliss,  when  you  brought  shame  upon
me  for  no  cause  beyond  your  kingly  pride.  For  this
sin  endure  the  torment  of  separation  from  your  love.’
And  Shamba’s  face  grew  sad,  for  he  could  not  suffer
separation  from  the  mistress  of  his  life.  He  fell  stiffly
to  the  ground  and  spoke  imploringly:  ‘Master,  for¬
give  a  deed  inspired  by  ignorance.’  Then  pity  entered
the  holy  heart,  and  these  words  were  spoken:  ‘O
King,  throughout  your  present  life  the  curse  shall  be
remitted.  Yet  my  words  may  not  be  frustrate.  In  a
life  to  be,  when  this  flower-eyed  lady’s  soul  has  entered
another  body,  you  shall  love  her  with  devotion.  Then,
because  you  have  bound  my  feet  for  two  moments,
for  two  months  your  feet  shall  be  fettered,  while  you
endure  the  sadness  of  separation  from  your  love.  Yet
you  shall  live  long  thereafter  with  your  bride,  in  king¬
ly  happiness.’  He  also  granted  both  a  memory  con¬
tinuing  from  life  to  life.  Therefore — you  must  not
bind  a  swan.”

When  the  princess  heard  this  tale,  she  regained  re¬
membrance  of  her  own  former  life.  Her  memory
whispered  that  this  was  indeed  her  soul’s  delight;  and
the  stem  of  devotion  put  forth  blossoms  as  she  said
with  a  tender  smile:  “Dear  sir,  in  days  long  past
Shamba  thus  bound  the  swan  in  deference  to  the  ap-


THE  BELLE  OF  AVANTI


5i


peal  of  Yajnavati.  Thus  in  the  world  even  discerning
men  do  wrong  for  gallant  reasons.”  In  this  fashion
maiden  and  prince,  by  hints  revealing  each  to  each  a
common  knowledge  of  life  and  names  recalled  from
long  ago,  felt  their  hearts  fill  with  a  passion  of  love.

At  this  moment  the  queen  of  Malwa,  with  her  reti¬
nue,  approached  the  spot  to  witness  her  daughter’s
holiday.  But  Balachandrika,  seeing  her  from  afar  and
fearing  disclosure  of  the  secret,  waved  an  agitated
hand  that  sent  Rajavahana  with  Pushpodbhava  into
the  cover  of  a  group  of  trees.  Manasara’s  queen  re¬
mained  but  a  moment  to  enjoy  her  daughter’s  gay  and
graceful  play  with  her  friends;  then  wished  to  conduct
the  princess  to  the  palace.

As  the  belle  of  Avanti  followed  her  mother,  she
spoke  these  words,  ambiguous  between  swan  and
prince:  “O  splendid  royal  creature,  you  came  to  me
in  the  garden  to  share  my  holiday,  and  I  send  you
away  untimely.  I  follow  my  mother,  for  such  is  my
duty.  Love  me  no  less  for  this.”  She  added  courteous
nothings,  but  more  than  once  her  wistful  eyes  turned
back  to  seek  his  face,  as  she  moved  toward  the  palace.

There,  introducing  the  subject  of  her  longing,  she
learned  from  Balachandrika  his  name  and  lineage,
while  Love’s  bewildering  arrows  pierced  her  heart.  In
the  anguish  of  separation  she  faded  daily  like  the  cres¬
cent  of  the  waning  moon.  Food  and  all  occupation
grew  distasteful;  in  a  quiet  chamber  her  slender  body
tossed  on  a  couch  of  flower  clusters  and  single  bios-


THE  TEN  PRINCES


52

soms  sprinkled  with  sandal  perfume.  Her  girl  friends,
grieved  to  see  their  dainty  princess  so  tortured  by  the
flame  of  love,  devised  and  used  many  refrigerant  rem¬
edies — water  for  sprinkling  gathered  in  golden  bowls,
with  infusions  of  sandal,  cuscus,  and  camphor;  gar¬
ments  made  of  softest  fibers;  lotus-leaf  fans.  Yet  this
cooling  service  of  her  person,  like  water  in  boiling  oil,
turned  to  universal  heat.

On  Balachandrika,  distressed  and  at  her  wits’  end,
the  maiden  turned  a  tear-dimmed,  peeping  glance
from  half-closed  eyes,  and  with  lips  parched  by  hot
sighs  of  absent  love,  she  slowly  sobbed:  “They  say,
my  dear,  Love  has  five  arrows,  made  of  flowers.  It  is
not  true.  He  strikes  me  with  countless  shafts,  and
they  are  iron.  My  dear,  I  find  the  moon  more  fierce
than  the  fire  beneath  the  sea.  For  though  the  ocean
dries  when  entered  by  the  fire,  it  swells  again  at  the
moment  when  the  fire  departs.  But  how  can  I  de¬
scribe  the  cruelty  of  the  ruthless  moon,  who  kills  the
lotus,  home  and  birthplace  of  his  own  sister.  Beauty?
The  southern  breeze  blows  thin,  scorched,  doubtless,
by  contact  with  a  heart  that  shrivels  in  the  flame  of
absence.  This  couch  of  new-plucked  blossoms  burns
my  body,  as  if  tufted  with  flames  of  desire.  Even
this  sandal  sears  my  limbs,  as  if  thick  with  clotted
venom  from  the  dripping  fangs  of  serpents  that  coiled
round  its  mother-tree.  Give  over  your  toil  to  cool  and
heal.  The  prince  whose  beauty  beats  the  deadly  love-
god,  is  the  only  physician  for  the  sickness  of  love.  And
him  I  cannot  win.  What  shall  I  do?”


THE  BELLE  OF  AVANTI


53


Now  Balachandrika  perceived  that  the  delicate
princess  was  reduced  to  the  last  extremity  of  love’s
fever,  with  no  salvation  other  than  the  handsome
Rajavahana  to  whom  her  heart  was  subject;  and  she
thought:  “I  must  bring  the  prince  at  once.  If  not,
Love  will  lead  her  down  the  path  of  memory.  Well,
when  prince  and  princess  met  in  the  garden,  the
archer-god  shot  simultaneous  shafts.  Therefore,  it
should  be  easy  to  bring  the  prince.”  She  then  left  the
belle  of  Avanti  in  the  care  of  friends  deft  in  necessary
service,  and  visited  the  prince’s  dwelling.

She  found  Rajavahana  (whose  heart  seemed  a  quiv¬
er  to  hold  the  flower-arrows  of  the  archer)  reclining
on  a  couch  strewn  with  blossoms  that  withered  at  the
touch  of  his  fevered  limbs,  and  conversing  with  Push-
podbhava  concerning  the  mistress  of  his  life.  When  he
saw  that  mistress’  favored  friend  draw  near,  he  thrilled
with  joy  to  find  before  him  in  Balachandrika  the  very
simple  that  he  sought.  And  when  her  gracefully
joined  hands  were  lifted,  seeming  a  lovely  lotus  bud
against  the  background  of  her  brow,  he  offered  her  a
decorous  seat,  received  a  gracious  gift  of  betel  leaves
and  camphor  from  Avantisundari,  and  begged  for
tidings  of  his  love.

This  was  the  flattering  reply:  “Your  Majesty,
since  seeing  you  in  the  garden,  she  is  racked  by  love
and  finds  no  peace  on  beds  of  flowers.  She  seeks  the
unattainable,  as  a  dwarf  the  fruit  on  a  lofty  tree:  love-
blinded,  she  seeks  the  bliss  of  resting  on  your  bosom.
Unurged,  she  has  written  a  letter  and  bade  me  deliver


54


THE  TEN  PRINCES


it  to  her  beloved.”  The  prince  took  the  letter  and
read:

Your  body,  like  a  tender  flower,

Shows  matchless  love-compelling  power;

Dear  friend,  you  must  not  let  me  find
A  hardened  heart,  to  love  unkind.

When  he  had  read,  he  said  with  reverence:  “Dear
friend,  you  are  at  once  the  beloved  bride  of  Pushpod-
bhava,  who  follows  me  like  a  shadow,  and,  so  to  speak,
the  projected  life  of  that  fawn-eyed  maiden.  Your
wit  watered  the  vine  of  this  enterprise.  I  will  do  any¬
thing.  The  fawn-eyed  lady  accuses  me  of  carrying  a
hard  heart.  When  she  met  my  gaze  in  the  garden,  she
straightway  stole  my  heart  and  took  it  home  with  her.
Let  her  judge  whether  it  be  soft  or  hard.  It  is  no  light
matter  to  enter  a  maid’s  chamber.  Yet  in  one  day  or
two  at  most,  I  will  contrive  a  proper  method  to  be
united  with  her.  Give  her  this  word  from  me,  and  let
it  be  your  care  that  no  harm  befall  one  delicate  as  a
siris  flower.”  And  Balachandrika,  joyful  at  receiving
his  love-laden  message,  departed  for  the  palace.

Rajavahana  also  withdrew  with  Pushpodbhava,
to  console  the  woe  of  absence  in  the  garden  where  he
had  experienced  the  blissful  vision  of  his  soul’s  chosen.
There  he  found  the  grove  of  trees  whose  twigs  had
yielded  flower  clusters  to  the  maid  with  partridge
eyes;  the  spot  where  she,  her  face  entrancing  as  the
autumn  moon,  had  offered  worship  to  the  love-god;
the  cool  bank  of  sand  that  preserved  her  footprints;


THE  BELLE  OF  AVANTI


55


the  remnant  of  the  meal  untasted  by  his  sweet-smiling
lady;  the  blossom  couch  within  the  bower  of  jasmine
vines.  Ever  recalling  beginnings  half-completed  when
he  met  the  perfect  princess,  ever  beholding  with
alarm — for  they  seemed  the  tufted  flame-points  of
passion — the  young  mango  twigs  that  trembled  in  the
gentle  breeze,  ever  hearing  the  coo  and  cry  and  hum
of  love’s  whisperers,  cuckoo,  parrot,  and  bee,  he
moved  from  spot  to  spot,  for  emotion  forbade  repose.

At  this  juncture  a  Brahman  chanced  to  appear,  at¬
tended  by  a  fellow  with  shaven  pate.  The  Brahman
charmed  by  his  taste  in  costume,  for  his  robe  was  gay
and  finely  woven,  while  showy  gems  hung  sparkling
from  his  ears.  Observing  that  Rajavahana  was  source
and  center  of  a  circle  of  majesty,  he  pronounced  a  ben¬
ediction.  And  when  the  prince  courteously  inquired:
“Who,  sir,  are  you?  In  what  branch  of  scholarship
are  you  eminent?”  he  announced:  “I  am  Vidye-
shvara,  the  scientist.  My  special  field  is  legerdemain.
I  travel  widely,  providing  diversion  for  princes,  and
have  today  reached  Ujjain  in  my  rounds.”  Then,  re¬
garding  Rajavahana  more  narrowly,  he  laughed  and
asked  with  meaning:  “Why  so  pale  in  this  pleasure-
garden?”

To  this  question  Pushpodbhava  felt  it  incumbent
on  himself  to  give  respectful  answer:  “Surely,  sir,
your  first  words  came  to  us  from  lips  friendly  to  good¬
ness.  Your  chaste  benediction  made  you  at  once  a
dear  friend  of  ours.  And  what  secret  is  kept  from


56


THE  TEN  PRINCES


friends?  When  the  princess  of  Malwa  came  to  this
garden  to  celebrate  the  spring  festival  and  chanced  to
meet  this  prince,  a  passion  came  to  birth,  mutual  and
overwhelming.  His  present  melancholy  results  from
the  lack  of  means  to  bring  about  a  firm  and  happy
union.”

Then  Vidyeshvara,  remarking  the  sweet  embar¬
rassment  of  the  prince’s  countenance,  said  with  a
quizzical  smile:  “Your  Majesty,  what  ambition  of
yours  is  unattainable  while  I  am  at  your  service?  I
will  perplex  the  mind  of  the  monarch  of  Malwa  by
scientific  jugglery,  will  celebrate  his  daughter’s  wed¬
ding  in  the  very  presence  of  the  populace,  and  will  in¬
troduce  you  into  her  chamber.  This  proposal  should
be  conveyed  beforehand  to  the  princess  through  the
agency  of  her  friend.”  And  the  prince,  delighted  to
find  unselfish  friendship,  witnessed  a  display  of  Vidye-
shvara’s  dexterity  in  jugglery,  tested  his  judgment  of
deception,  of  pretended  affection,  of  genuine  devotion,
and  parted  with  high  esteem.

So  Rajavahana,  deeming  his  desire  as  good  as
granted  through  Vidyeshvara’s  scientific  skill,  re¬
turned  with  Pushpodbhava  to  his  dwelling,  whence  he
sent  to  his  darling,  by  the  mouth  of  Balachandrika,
an  account  of  the  plan  for  their  union  undertaken  by
the  Brahman;  then,  torn  by  impatience,  he  tried  to
fight  the  night.

When  morning  dawned,  the  scientist  Vidyeshvara,
correct  in  taste,  style,  deportment,  and  gait,  with


THE  BELLE  OF  AVANTI


57


numerous  attendants  equally  correct,  came  to  the
palace  entrance,  briskly  presenting  his  credentials  to
the  doorkeepers,  who  obsequiously  informed  the  king
of  the  arrival  of  a  conjurer.  The  king  of  Malwa,  him¬
self  desirous  of  witnessing  the  spectacle,  spurred
furthermore  by  curious  ladies,  summoned  the  scien¬
tist  into  a  special  chamber,  where  he  pronounced  a
formal  benediction  and  was  bidden  to  begin.  Then
amid  the  blare  of  the  banging  band,  while  warbling
women  cooed  like  mating  cuckoos,  while  waving  pea¬
cock  feather-dusters  fascinated  the  spectators’  spirits
to  a  pitch  of  passion,  while  the  whirl  of  attendants  gy¬
rated  about  him,  he  stood  for  a  moment  with  squint¬
ing  eyes.  Straightway  hooded  serpents,  with  violent
venting  of  vehement  venom,  dazzling  the  palace  with
the  jewels  on  their  crests,  crawled  horribly  forth.  But
numerous  vultures  seized  the  monstrous  snakes  in
their  beaks,  and  paraded  the  sky.  Next,  the  Brah¬
man  astonished  the  king  with  a  spectacle  of  Man-lion
tearing  the  devil  chieftain  Hiranyakashipu,  then  said:
“Your  Majesty,  as  our  concluding  number  it  is  proper
that  you  witness  a  scene  of  happy  omen.  We  are
therefore  to  present  a  wedding,  initiating  a  long  life  of
felicity,  between  a  maiden  personating  your  daugh¬
ter  and  a  prince  marked  with  all  marks  of  royalty.”

Receiving  the  permission  of  the  expectant  mon¬
arch,  his  face  blossoming  at  the  quaint  conception  of
success  in  such  a  stratagem,  he  smeared  his  eyes  with
a  most  mystifying  lotion  and  peered  about  him.  And


58


THE  TEN  PRINCES


while  all  the  spellbound  spectators  cried:  “This  is
magic!”  at  the  appearance  of  Rajavahana,  his  heart
aflower  with  bliss,  and  of  Avantisundari,  forewarned
and  richly  decked  with  splendid  gems,  the  prestidigi¬
tator  showed  his  perfect  familiarity  with  every  text
of  the  marriage  service  by  uniting  them  before  the
sacred  fire.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony,  the  Brahman
cried  aloud:  “All  creatures  of  magic,  begone!”  and  all
the  phantom  forms  obediently  vanished.  Rajavahana
also,  previously  instructed  in  the  mechanics  of  disap¬
pearance,  floated  like  a  specter  into  the  maidens’
apartments.  The  king  of  Malwa,  for  his  part,  con¬
sidering  this  a  superior  exhibition,  gave  the  Brahman
scientist  a  munificent  fee,  dismissed  him,  and  with¬
drew  to  the  inner  palace.

Meanwhile,  the  belle  of  Avanti,  with  her  best
friends  as  bridesmaids,  conducted  her  husband  to  a
splendid  chamber.  Thus  Rajavahana,  tasting  fruition
of  his  wishes  through  powers  human  and  superhuman,
systematically  conquered  the  shyness  of  his  fawn¬
eyed  bride  by  tastefully  tender  attentions,  taught  her
the  bliss  of  abandon,  awakened  an  intimate  confi¬
dence.  Finally,  eager  for  the  heavenly  delight  of  hear¬
ing  a  beloved  woman  repeat  his  own  words,  he  related
the  complicated  and  exciting  history  of  the  fourteen
divisions  of  the  universe.  .


CHAPTER  VI

RAJAVAH ANA’S  ADVENTURE

When  the  perfect  princess  had  listened  to  the  out¬
line  of  cosmic  history,  her  eyes  blossomed  with  won¬
der;  and  she  said  with  a  smile:  “Beloved,  through
your  kindness  I  know  today  why  ears  are  mine.  To¬
day  you  have  given  me  the  lamp  of  education,  dispel¬
ling  the  darkness  in  my  mind.  Ripened  now  is  the
fruit  of  the  devotion  paid  your  lotus-feet.  What  serv¬
ice  may  I  do  you,  to  balance  the  favor  of  your  kind¬
ness  ?  For  I  have  nothing  of  my  own,  since  all  is  yours.
And  yet,  poor  as  I  am,  I  retain  one  dominion.  For
without  my  will  you  cannot  taste  my  kiss,  poor  fare
perhaps  for  one  who  has  touched  the  lips  of  Erudi¬
tion;  or  clasp  me  to  your  bosom,  where  Beauty’s
breasts  have  lain.”

With  this  she  rested  her  generous  breast  on  her
lover’s  bosom  like  a  cloud  upon  the  sky,  while  her  eye,
sparkling  with  awakened  passion,  was  bright  as  a  full¬
blown  plantain  flower;  while  her  mass  of  hair  mocked
the  peacock’s  splendid  fan  (being  dotted  with  blos¬
soms  that  drew  the  flashing  bees);  and  shyly  kissed
her  lover’s  lip,  a  red  flower  bud  to  her,  and  a  gem  dart¬
ing  red  rays  of  light.  Released  by  passion’s  first  sur¬
render,  the  charming  chain  of  joy  uncoiled  yet  more
its  gay,  surprising  links.  When  love  grew  faint,  they

59


6o


THE  TEN  PRINCES


slept;  and  to  both  came  a  dream  in  which  they  saw  an
aged  swan  whose  feet  were  bound  with  lotus  stems.
They  woke  together.  Then  the  prince  found  his  feet
concealed  by  silver  fetters,  caught,  as  it  seemed,  in  a
binding  chain  of  moonbeams  that  had  strayed  among
lilies.

The  princess  perceived  it,  bewildered  by  wonder
and  terrible  fright,  and  loosed  her  throat  in  a  scream.
Thereupon  the  whole  houseful  of  maidens,  as  if  en¬
veloped  by  flames,  as  if  harried  by  goblins,  shudder¬
ing,  oblivious  of  the  relation  between  present  act  and
future  consequence,  forgetting  their  engagement  to
keep  the  secret,  bruising  their  limbs  on  the  floor,
splitting  their  throats  with  shrieks,  veiling  their
cheeks  in  rivers  of  tears,  went  crazy.  At  this  moment
of  muddle  the  chamberlains,  who  had  unhindered  en¬
trance,  bustled  in,  crying:  “What  now?  What  now?”
and  discovered  the  plight  of  the  prince.  His  personal
dignity  curbed  their  handcuffing  zeal,  but  they  made
an  immediate  report  to  Chandavarman.

Flaming  with  fury,  he  entered.  He  listened  with
fire  in  his  eye;  and  having  identified  the  pair,  he
sneered:  “Aha!  Here  he  is,  the  friend  of  Pushpod-
bhava,  that  foreign  son  of  a  merchant,  that  money-
mad  prig,  that  husband  of  Balachandrika  who  caused
my  younger  brother’s  death — damn  her!  Here  he  is,
the  handsome  coxcomb,  the  arrogant  artist,  who  tick¬
les  the  silly  townsfolk  with  his  skill  in  a  pack  of  jug¬
gling  tricks,  and  fools  them  by  shamming  the  dignity


RAJAVAHANA’S  ADVENTURE


61


of  something  superhuman !  A  bogus  robe  of  virtue  out¬
side,  and  rottenness  inside!  A  mountebank!  A  quack!
Aha!  And  here  she  is,  his  mistress — curse  her! — the
belle  of  Avanti,  who  disdains  men  like  lions,  even  men
like  me!  This  very  day  she  shall  see  how  her  husband
adorns  an  impaling-stake!  The  drab  who  dirties  her
family!”

Distorting  his  brow  in  a  horrible  frown,  he  seemed
the  death-god  with  stiff  arm  rough  as  a  bar  of  black
iron  when  he  seized  the  prince’s  hand  (fair  as  a  lily  and
marked  with  the  royal  marks  of  lotus  and  wheel)  and
tugged  with  brute  force.  The  prince,  a  natural  hero
eminent  in  all  manly  virtues,  felt  patient  endurance  to
be  the  sole  specific  for  a  calamity  sent  by  fate,  so
cried:  “Remember,  O  graceful  as  a  swan,  the  swan’s
story.  Endure,  my  soul,  two  months.”  With  this
consolation  to  her  who,  being  his  life,  longed  to  leave
life  behind,  he  passed  into  the  power  of  his  enemy.

Then  the  queen  and  king  of  Malwa  learned  the
facts  with  pain;  yet,  made  indulgent  by  their  son-
in-law’s  beauty,  they  saved  him  from  death,  though
his  enemy  hinted  the  alternative  of  suicide.  But
since  they  had  abdicated,  they  could  not  rescue  him
from  misfortune.  For  vindictive  Chandavarman  des¬
patched  a  full  report  to  Darpasara,  performing  auster¬
ities  on  Kailasa  peak;  seized  Pushpodbhava’s  whole
fortune  and  imprisoned  his  entire  household  without
trial;  and  kept  Rajavahana  confined,  like  a  lordly  lion
cub,  in  a  wooden  cage.  Such  torments  as  hunger  and


62


THE  TEN  PRINCES


thirst  were  indeed  averted  by  the  power  of  the  magi¬
cal  gem  which  lay  concealed  in  his  thick-growing  hair;
but  Chandavarman,  trusting  none  but  himself,  had
him  transported  on  an  expedition  to  destroy  the  king
of  the  Angas,  who  had  refused  a  request  for  his
daughter’s  hand.

With  an  army  of  terrifying  size,  Chandavarman
besieged  Champa,  the  Anga  capital,  whose  king,  Sim-
havarman,  was  indomitable  as  a  lion.  Too  impatient
to  await  the  near  arrival  of  kings  summoned  by  his
numerous  envoys  and  hastening  by  forced  marches  to
his  relief,  he  breached  the  wall;  issued  forth  with  a
mighty  force;  and,  like  Disdain  clad  in  living  flesh  and
blood,  assailed  the  hostile  host.  In  that  great  struggle
Simhavarman’s  entire  army  melted  away;  he  was  bat¬
tered  by  a  hundred  bitter  blows  and  was  captured  by
Chandavarman,  who  leaped  with  superhuman  agility
from  elephant  to  elephant.  Yet  his  life  was  spared  by
the  victor,  who,  feeling  an  overmastering  desire  for  the
daughter  Ambalika — reputed  a  pearl  of  a  girl-
plucked  all  the  darts  from  his  person,  but  kept  a  pre¬
vious  promise  by  thrusting  him  into  prison.  There¬
upon,  hosts  of  astrologers  concurred  in  computing
that  the  princess  should  be  married  that  very  day,
when  morning  dawned.

While  Chandavarman  was  making  festive  prepa¬
rations,  a  courier  named  Enajangha  returned  from
Kailasa  peak,  reporting  this  response  from  the  pleni¬
potentiary  Darpasara:  “Fool!  What  possible  mercy


RAJAVAHANA’S  ADVENTURE  63

can  there  be  for  one  caught  violating  the  virgins’
apartments?  The  king  is  old.  Senility  strips  his  mind
of  pride  and  scorn.  He  takes  his  naughty  daughter’s
part.  But  why  should  you  humor  any  whim  of  his?
Do  not  delay  to  give  my  ears  a  holiday  by  sending
word  that  the  lovesick  swain  has  been  executed  with
fancy  tortures.  And  the  naughty  girl,  with  her
younger  brother  Kirtisara,  should  have  her  feet  tied
and  be  kept  in  jail.”

Hereupon  he  glared  at  his  attendants  and  issued
orders:  “At  dawn  bring  that  vulgar  violator  of  vir¬
gins’  chambers  to  the  palace  door.  And  tether  along¬
side  the  big  elephant  Hot-baby  with  all  his  trappings
on.  As  soon  as  I  am  married,  I  will  give  that  villain
with  my  own  hand  as  a  plaything  to  the  elephant.
Then  I  will  climb  Hot-baby’s  back  and  go  to  capture
that  crowd  of  kings  who  are  coming  to  help  my  ene¬
my,  with  their  treasure  and  their  animals.”

So,  at  the  first  blush  of  the  following  dawn,  the
prince  was  brought  by  guardsmen  into  the  royal
courtyard.  Near  him  stood  Hot-baby,  with  dripping
cheeks.  At  that  moment  the  prince  felt  his  feet  freed
from  the  silver  fetter,  which,  transformed  into  a  heav¬
enly  nymph  winsome  as  the  crescent  moon,  walked
about  him  with  respectfully  lifted  hands  and  said  with
deference:  “Your  Majesty,  lend  me  your  gracious  at¬
tention.  I  am  a  nymph  named  Suratamanjari,  child
of  Somarashmi.  One  day,  when  my  gaze  was  riveted
on  a  silly  swan  snapping  at  a  lotus  in  the  sky,  my


64


THE  TEN  PRINCES


pearl  necklace  parted  in  my  effort  to  stop  him  and
chanced  to  drop  where  the  great  sage  Markandeya
was  dipping  in  and  out  a  shallow  Himalayan  pool.  It
fell  on  his  head,  doubling  the  silver  luster  with  the
flash  of  gems.  But  he  was  enraged  and  let  fall  a  curse
upon  me:  ‘Wretched  female,  turn  to  inanimate  metal.’
Yet  he  relented,  decreeing  that  this  sorrow  should
pass  after  I  had  served  two  months  as  a  chain  for  your
lotus-feet,  and  granting  me  full  powers  of  perception.

“When  for  this  serious  offense  I  had  become  a  sil¬
ver  chain,  a  fairy  named  Virashekhara,  son  of  Mana-
savega  and  grandson  of  Vegavat,  a  king  of  Ikshvaku’s
line,  came  to  Kailasa  peak  and  possessed  himself  of
me.  Thereafter,  being  at  enmity  with  the  fairy  em¬
peror  Naravahanadatta,  scion  of  King  Vatsa’s  line,
who  continued  a  hostility  begun  by  his  father,  he
sought  a  competent  ally  and  came  to  an  understand¬
ing  with  austere  Darpasara,  who  promised  him  his
sister,  the  belle  of  Avanti.

“One  night  when  moonlight  purified  the  sky,  flesh
conquered  spirit;  and  he,  longing  to  behold  Avanti-
sundari,  dear  goal  of  his  desire,  visited  the  women’s
chambers  that  gleamed  like  the  palace  of  heaven’s
king.  Safe  in  his  magic  power  of  invisibility,  he  dis¬
covered  her  at  the  moment  when  her  head  rested  on
your  bosom,  sleeping  in  love’s  sweet  faintness,  her
passion’s  flood  diked  by  your  nectar-tales,  your  con¬
catenated  history  of  creation,  continuance,  and  de¬
struction  of  the  cosmos.  Infuriate,  yet  curbed  by  your


RAJAVAHANA’S  ADVENTURE  65

personal  dignity  in  his  deep  desire  to  lay  hands  upon
you,  he  used  what  power  fate  gave  him  while  you  and
she  lay  sleeping  in  the  utter  bliss  of  mutual  embraces:
he  fettered  your  lotus-feet  with  me,  a  silver  chain,  and
departed,  ramping  with  rage.  Today  my  curse  is  ful¬
filled,  and  your  bimensual  subjection.  Grant  me  your
gracious  pardon.  What  may  I  do  for  you  ?”  She  fell  at
his  feet  and  was  dismissed  with  the  direction:  “Com¬
fort  with  this  story  her  who  is  my  life.”

The  very  next  moment  shouts  arose:  “Murdered!
Chandavarman  is  murdered!  His  sturdy  arm  was  just
extended,  fervent  for  the  hand  of  Simhavarman’s
daughter  Ambalika,  when  a  cursed  thief  pounced  on
him,  drubbed  him,  and  stuck  a  knife  in  him.  Then  the
villain  spread  a  mat  of  a  hundred  corpses  on  the  pal¬
ace  floor,  and  stalks  about  unabashed.”  On  hearing
this,  the  prince  tossed  the  mahout  aside,  mounted  the
must  elephant,  and  made  for  the  palace  at  top  speed,
while  the  great  beast’s  impetus  ploughed  a  path
through  the  infantry.  Into  the  palace  he  burst,  shout¬
ing  with  a  voice  deep  as  many  thunders:  “Who  is  the
hero  who  has  done  this  great  deed,  hardly  possible  for
a  mere  man?  Let  him  come  forth,  and  mount  this
must  elephant  with  me.  He  is  safe  at  my  side,  though
gods  and  devils  pursue  him.”

Hearing  this,  the  man  came  forth  with  intense  de¬
light,  advanced  saluting,  and  briskly  mounted  the
back  of  the  elephant,  which  crumpled  at  command.
Even  as  he  climbed,  the  prince  recognized  him;  and


66


THE  TEN  PRINCES


his  eyes  blossomed  with  joy  as  he  cried:  “Ah!  My
dear,  my  very  dear  Apaharavarman!”  Then,  as  his
friend  sat  behind,  he  caught  two  sturdy  arms  thrust
beneath  his  own  armpits,  thus  seeming  to  embrace
himself;  after  which,  he  reached  behind  him  and
clasped  his  friend.  But  Apaharavarman  broke  the
friendly  bond  at  once  in  order  to  hurl  to  the  ground
picked  men  of  diverse  enemy  service  branches,  proud
of  their  pluck,  who  surged  about,  using  bow,  discus,
lance,  barb,  dart,  spear,  club,  mace,  and  other  assorted
weapons.  A  moment  later  he  saw  that  army  sur¬
rounded  by  another  host  that  doubled  in  from  every
side.

Presently  a  gentleman — blond  as  a  wingseed  blos¬
som,  with  hair  like  a  black  gem,  with  hands  and  feet
as  fine  as  lilies,  with  long  eyes  brilliant  black  and  mil¬
ky  white,  with  a  jeweled  dagger  at  his  hip,  with  silken
robe,  slender  and  broad  in  waist  and  chest — showered
dexterous  shafts  on  the  hostile  host,  while  sternly
scoring  with  his  toes  the  roots  of  the  ears  of  his  fleet,
approaching  elephant.  This  man,  inferring  from  pre¬
vious  description  that  Prince  Rajavahana  was  before
him,  bowed  ceremoniously,  then  fixed  his  glance  on
Apaharavarman  and  reported:  “Following  your  in¬
structions  as  to  route,  this  gathered  group  of  kings  has
come  to  the  relief  of  the  Anga  sovereign.  The  enemy
army  is  crushed  and  dispersed.  Women  and  children
could  take  their  weapons.  What  next?”

“Your  Majesty,”  cried  the  delighted  Apaharavar-


RAJAVAHANA’S  ADVENTURE  67

man,  “pray  grant  this  faithful  servant  the  favor  of  a
glance.  You  are  to  consider  his  get-up  a  disguise  and
his  name  Dhanamitra  an  incognito.  If  you  have  no
objection,  let  him  free  the  Anga  king  from  confine¬
ment  and  assemble  the  dissipated  treasure  and  ani¬
mals,  while  Your  Majesty  seeks  a  retired  and  pleasant
resting-place.  Then  let  him  wait  upon  you  with  yon¬
der  kings  friendly  to  us.”  “As  you  will,”  replied  the
prince,  and,  following  the  indicated  path  from  the
city,  he  dismounted  from  the  elephant  beneath  a  tre¬
mendous  banyan  tree  in  silky  sand  cooled  by  puff’s
of  wind  from  Ganges’  billows.  Apaharavarman  too,
having  already  dismounted,  quickly  smoothed  with
his  own  hand  a  space  of  Ganges  sand  broad  as  an
elephant’s  back  and  seated  himself  comfortably.

As  the  prince  sat  thus,  Dhanamitra  hastened  to
him  with  low  obeisance,  and  with  Dhanamitra  came
Upaharavarman,  Arthapala,  Pramati,  Mitragupta,
Mantragupta,  and  Vishruta;  also  King  Praharavar-
man  of  Videha,  Kamapala,  lord  of  Benares,  and  Sim-
havarman,  sovereign  of  the  Angas.  Penetrated  with
joy,  the  prince  arose,  crying:  “Is  it  possible?  The
whole  company  of  my  friends!  What  a  festive  occa¬
sion!”  And  when  they  had  greeted  him  with  due  cere¬
mony,  he  embraced  them  with  passionate  fondness.
He  also  looked  with  a  filial  eye  upon  the  three  kings
— of  Benares,  Videha,  and  Anga — presented  by  his
friends,  and  thrilled  with  delight  when  they  fervently
embraced  him,  their  grey  hair  waving  with  joy.


68


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Then,  after  the  interchanges  of  affection,  at  the  ur¬
gent  desire  of  all  his  dear  comrades,  he  recounted  his
own  adventures  with  those  of  Somadatta  and  Push-
podbhava,  thereby  clearing  the  ground  for  an  ordered
narrative  of  his  friends’  experiences.  First  among
them  was  Apaharavarman,  who  related  the  following
history.


CHAPTER  VII

APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE

“Your  Majesty,  on  the  day  when  you  plunged  into
Devils’  Hole  in  order  to  serve  a  Brahman,  and  all  your
friends  set  out  in  search  of  you,  I  too  roamed  the
earth.  Now  I  learned  from  a  certain  group  of  gossi-
pers  that  in  the  Anga  country,  on  the  bank  of  the
Ganges  outside  the  capital  Champa,  there  lived  a
great  sage  named  Marichi  in  whom  potent  austerities
had  begotten  divine  insight;  and  I  traveled  to  that  re¬
gion,  desirous  of  learning  from  him  your  whereabouts.
In  his  hermitage  I  discovered  under  a  baby  mango  a
hermit  pale  with  depression  of  spirit,  from  whom  I  re¬
ceived  the  attentions  due  a  guest.  Then  after  a  mo¬
ment’s  rest,  I  said:  ‘Where  is  saintly  Marichi  ?  I  de¬
sire  to  learn  from  him  the  route  of  a  friend  who  had
occasion  to  make  a  distant  journey.  The  sage  has  an
international  reputation  for  miraculous  powers  of
penetration.’

“With  a  deep-drawn,  burning  sigh  he  told  this
tale:  ‘Such  a  sage  there  was  in  this  hermitage.  To
him  one  day  there  came  in  deep  dejection  a  mem¬
ber  of  the  frail  sisterhood,  named  Kamamanjari.  She
had  fairly  won  her  name  as  gem  of  the  Anga  capi¬
tal,  but  her  breasts  were  starred  with  teardrops  and
her  disheveled  hair  swept  the  ground  as  she  paid  him

69


70


THE  TEN  PRINCES


homage.  At  the  same  moment  a  group  of  her  rela¬
tives,  headed  by  the  mother,  came  running  compas¬
sionately  behind  her  and  fell  to  the  ground  in  a  long
line  before  the  hermit.  That  merciful  creature  con¬
soled  them  with  his  liquid  tones  and  asked  the  courte¬
zan  the  source  of  her  distress;  and  she,  with  seeming
shame,  despondency,  and  dignity,  replied:  “Holy  sir,
your  servant  is  a  vessel  of  tribulation  in  this  life,  yet,
in  hope  of  a  blessed  resurrection,  takes  refuge  at  your
holy  feet,  known  as  a  defense  of  the  afflicted.”

“  ‘At  this  point  the  mother  lifted  her  hands,
touched  the  earth  with  hair  dappled  with  grey,  lifted
her  head,  and  spoke:  “Holy  sir,  this  your  maid-serv¬
ant  acquaints  you  with  my  own  wrongdoing.  And
this  wrongdoing  of  mine  lay  in  the  performance  of  my
obvious  duty.  For  obvious  duty  is  as  follows  for  the
mother  of  a  fille  de  joie;  care  of  her  daughter’s  person
from  the  hour  of  birth;  nourishment  by  a  diet  so  regu¬
lated  as  to  develop  stateliness,  vigor,  complexion,  in¬
telligence,  while  harmonizing  the  humors,  gastric  cale-
faction,  and  secretions;  not  permitting  her  to  see  too
much  even  of  her  father  after  the  fifth  year;  festive
ritual  on  birthdays  and  holy  days;  instruction  in  the
arts  of  flirtation,  both  major  and  minor;  thorough
training  in  dance,  song,  instrumental  music,  acting,
painting,  also  judgment  of  foods,  perfumes,  flowers,
not  forgetting  writing  and  graceful  speech;  a  conver¬
sational  acquaintance  with  grammar,  with  logical  in¬
ference  and  conclusion;  profound  skill  in  money-mak-


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE


7i


ing>  sport,  and  betting  on  cockfights  or  chess;  assidu¬
ous  use  of  go-betweens  in  the  passages  of  coquetry;
display  of  numerous  well-dressed  attendants  at  re¬
ligious  or  secular  celebrations;  careful  selection  of
teachers  to  insure  success  at  unpremeditated  vocal
and  other  exhibitions;  advertising  on  a  national  scale
by  a  staff  of  trained  specialists;  publicity  for  beauty-
marks  through  astrologers  and  such;  eulogistic  men¬
tion  in  gatherings  of  men  about  town  of  her  beauty,
character,  accomplishments,  charm,  and  sweetness  by
hangers-on,  gay  dogs,  buffoons,  female  religionists,  and
others;  raising  her  price  considerably  when  she  has  be¬
come  an  object  of  desire  to  young  gentlemen;  surren¬
der  to  a  lover  of  independent  fortune,  a  philogynist  or
one  intoxicated  by  seeing  her  charms,  a  gentleman
eminent  for  rank,  figure,  youth,  money,  vigor,  purity,
generosity,  cleverness,  gallantry,  art,  character,  and
sweetness  of  disposition;  delivery,  with  gracious  ex¬
aggeration  of  value  received,  to  one  less  affluent,  but
highly  virtuous  and  cultivated  (the  alternative  is
levying  on  his  natural  guardians,  after  informal  union
with  such  a  gentleman);  collection  of  bad  debts  by
vamping  judge  and  jury;  mothering  a  lover’s  daugh¬
ter;  abstraction  by  ingenious  tricks  of  money  left
in  an  admirer’s  possession  after  payment  for  peri¬
odical  pleasures;  steady  quarreling  with  a  defaulter  or
miser;  stimulation  of  the  spirit  of  generosity  in  an
overthrifty  adorer  by  the  incentive  of  jealousy;  re¬
pulse  of  the  impecunious  by  biting  speeches,  by  pub-


72


THE  TEN  PRINCES


lie  taunts,  by  cutting  his  daughters,  and  by  other  em¬
barrassing  habits,  as  well  as  by  simple  contempt;  con¬
tinued  clinging  to  the  open-handed,  the  chivalrous,
the  blameless,  the  wealthy,  with  full  consideration  of
the  interrelated  chances  of  money  and  misery.

“  ‘  “Besides,  a  courtezan  should  show  readiness  in¬
deed,  but  no  devotion  to  a  lover;  and,  even  if  fond  of
him,  she  should  not  disobey  mother  or  grandmother.
In  spite  of  all,  the  girl  disregards  her  God-given  voca¬
tion  and  has  spent  a  whole  month  of  amusement — at
her  own  expense! — with  a  Brahman  youth,  a  fellow
from  nowhere  whose  face  is  his  fortune.  Her  snippi¬
ness  has  offended  several  perfectly  solvent  admirers
and  has  pauperized  her  own  family.  And  when  I  scol¬
ded  her  and  told  her:  ‘This  is  no  kind  of  a  scheme.
This  isn’t  pretty,’  she  was  angry  and  took  to  the
woods.  And  if  she  is  obstinate,  this  whole  family  will
stay  right  here  and  starve  to  death.  There  is  nothing
else  to  do.”  And  the  mother  wept.

“  ‘Then  the  hermit  spoke  to  the  gay  girl:  “My
dear  young  woman,  be  assured  that  life  in  the  forest
is  difficult.  Its  reward  is  either  final  salvation  or  a  pe¬
riod  in  Paradise.  Now  of  these  the  former  is  grounded
in  profound  insight  and  is,  as  a  rule,  hardly  attainable;
while  the  latter  is  easy  for  anybody  who  fulfils  the  du¬
ties  of  his  station.  You  had  best  resign  your  visionary
ambition  and  abide  by  your  mother’s  judgment.”

“  ‘But  she  impatiently  rejected  this  sympathetic


APAHARAVARMAN’S,  ADVENTURE


73


counsel,  saying:  “If  I  find  no  refuge  at  your  holy  feet,
may  the  god  of  fire  provide  a  refuge  for  my  misery.”

“  ‘So  the  hermit,  after  some  reflection,  said  to  the
courtezan’s  mother:  “Go  home  for  a  time.  Wait  a
few  days,  until  this  delicate  creature,  wonted  to  pleas¬
ant  luxury,  grows  disgusted  with  the  hardships  of  life
in  the  forest  and,  with  the  aid  of  repeated  homilies
from  me,  returns  to  normalcy.”  And  her  relatives
withdrew,  assenting.

“  ‘Now  the  courtezan  grudged  no  devotion  to  the
holy  hermit.  She  wore  a  neat  and  simple  costume;
was  not  overattentive  to  ornament;  watered  the  seed¬
ling  trees;  took  pains  to  gather  bunches  of  flowers  for
ceremonies  of  worship;  made  a  pleasing  Variety  of
offerings;  provided  perfumes,  garlands,  incense,
lamps,  dance,  song,  and  instrumental  music  in  honor
of  Love’s  chastiser,  Shiva;  drew  the  hermit  into  cor¬
ners  to  discuss  the  relations  of  the  three  things  worth
living  for  (virtue,  money,  and  love);  and  discoursed
decorously  of  the  Supreme  Being.  In  a  surprisingly
short  time  she  had  him  in  love.

“  ‘One  day,  seeing  that  he  was  secretly  smitten,
she  said  with  a  little  smile:  “Why,  the  world  is  a  fool
even  to  consider  money  and  love  in  comparison  with
virtue.”  “Tell  me,  my  soul,”  said  Marichi,  “by  what
percentage  you  value  virtue  above  money  and  love.”
Thus  encouraged,  but  slow  and  shy,  she  began:

“  ‘  “A  poor,  ignorant  thing  like  me!  Can  I  teach  a


74


THE  TEN  PRINCES


holy  hermit  the  bigness  or  littleness  of  virtue,  money,
and  love?  Still,  your  question  is  just  one  more  kind¬
ness  to  a  servant.  So  listen.  Of  course,  without  virtue
there  isn't  any  money  or  love.  But  virtue  without
those  things  gives  us  blissful  felicity,  and  we  can  get
it  by  simple  introspection.  It  doesn’t  depend  so  much
on  external  instruments,  the  way  money  and  love  do.
And  if  nourished  by  seeing  the  real  Truth,  it  isn’t  hurt
if  you  pursue — just  a  little,  you  know — money  and
love.  Or  if  it  is,  it  is  restored  without  much  trouble
and  you  win  a  special  blessing  by  avoiding  that  sin  in
future.  For  example:  Brahma  pursued  Tilottama,
Shiva  violated  a  thousand  wives  of  hermits,  Vishnu
flirted  with  sixteen  thousand  girls,  Prajapati  offered
love  even  to  his  own  daughter,  Indra  was  Ahalya’s
paramour,  the  moon-god  fouled  his  teacher’s  bed,  the
sun-god  debauched  a  mare,  the  wind-god  seduced  the
wife  of  a  monkey,  Brihaspati  ran  after  Utathya’s
wife,  Parashara  deflowered  a  fisherman’s  daughter,
his  son  intrigued  with  a  brother’s  wife,  Atri  had  deal¬
ings  with  a  doe.  And  when  immortals  do  all  those
things,  such  devil’s  tricks  don’t  injure  their  virtue,  be¬
cause  they  have  the  power  of  Truth.  And  when  a  soul
is  purified  by  virtue,  dirt  never  sticks,  any  more  than
in  the  sky.  So  I  feel  that  money  and  love  don’t  touch
even  one  per  cent  of  virtue.”

“  ‘Having  listened  to  this,  the  sage  felt  the  tide  of
passion  surge,  and  he  said:  “My  pet,  you  are  truly
wise:  with  those  who  have  vision  of  the  Truth,  virtue


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  75

is  not  shackled  by  the  indulgence  of  sense.  But  from
birth  I  have  never  studied  the  doctrine  of  money  and
love.  I  ought  to  learn  their  nature,  attendant  condi¬
tions,  and  reward.”

Well,  said  she,  the  nature  of  money  is  to  be
earned,  multiplied,  and  saved;  its  attendant  condi¬
tions  are  agriculture,  cattle-raising,  trade,  peace,  war,
and  so  forth;  its  reward  is  charity  to  the  deserving.
Love  s  nature  lies  in  an  exquisite  contact  with  inef¬
fable  joy  in  a  man  and  a  woman  whose  minds  concen¬
trate  on  sense-experience.  Its  attendant  conditions
are  all  that  is  blissful  and  blazing  in  this  contact.  And
its  reward  is  a  manifest  and  self-communicated  glad¬
ness,  intensely  delightful,  arising  from  reciprocal  tan-
gency,  sweet  in  memory,  occasioning  self-approba¬
tion,  supreme.  For  love’s  sake,  men — even  men  who
live  in  the  most  sacred  places — endure  grievous  mar¬
tyrdoms,  great  sacrifices  of  money,  terrible  battles,
sea-voyages,  and  other  fearful  dangers.”

”  ‘Hereupon,  were  it  constraining  destiny,  or  the
woman  s  smartness,  or  his  own  dulness,  he  forgot  his
vows  and  yielded  to  her  fascination.  She  put  the  poor
booby  in  a  carriage  and  carried  him  far  away  along
the  splendid  public  street  to  her  own  home  in  the  city.
And  drums  were  beaten  with  the  announcement:  “To¬
morrow  is  Love’s  festival.”

“  ‘The  next  day,  when  the  sage  had  been  bathed
and  anointed,  had  assumed  a  pretty  garland,  had
practiced  lovers’  manners  and  so  turned  his  back  on


7  6


THE  TEN  PRINCES


his  true  profession  that  he  grieved  if  a  moment  passed
without  her,  she  took  him  along  the  gaudy  public
street  to  a  holiday  crowd  in  a  wooded  garden,  where
the  king  sat  among  hundreds  of  young  ladies.  And
when  the  king  said  with  a  smile:  “My  dear,  be  seated
with  His  Holiness,”  she  made  a  fluttering  curtsy,
smiled,  and  sat  down.

“  ‘Thereupon  a  most  beautiful  woman  rose,  lifted
her  joined  hands,  and  curtsied  to  the  king,  saying:
“Your  Majesty,  she  has  won  the  bet.  From  this  day  I
am  her  slave.”  Then  the  crowd  raised  a  racket  rooted
in  wonder  and  delight.  The  king  too  was  delighted
and  dismissed  the  courtezan  with  gracious  gifts  of  pre¬
cious  stones  in  settings  and  a  great  train  of  attend¬
ants,  while  the  most  eminent  ladies  of  her  profession
and  the  most  prominent  citizens  gave  her  a  multi¬
tudinous  ovation.

“  ‘She,  however,  before  going  home,  said  to  the
sage:  “My  duty  to  you,  holy  sir.  You  have  put  your
servant  under  no  transient  obligation.  You  may  now
resume  your  vocation.”  “My  darling,”  he  cried,
pricked  by  love  as  by  a  knife-point,  “what  does  it
mean?  How  can  you  be  so  cynical?  What  has  be¬
come  of  your  superlative  fondness  for  me?”

“Holy  sir,”  she  replied  with  a  smile,  “you  saw
the  girl  who  just  confessed  defeat  before  the  royal  ret¬
inue.  She  and  I  once  had  a  tiff,  and  she  said  with  a
sneer:  ‘You  boast  as  if  you  had  seduced  Marichi.’  So


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  77

I  wagered  my  freedom  and  went  into  the  business.
And  I  won.  Thank  you  so  much.”

Thus  cast  off,  the  poor  innocent  repented  and
listlessly  returned  to  the  woods.  And  I,  dear  sir,  am
the  wretched  man  whom  she  treated  so.  The  whore
who  had  the  power  to  inspire  passion,  has  herself,  by
withdrawing  it,  encouraged  religion.  Soon  I  shall  be
able  to  bring  myself  to  attend  your  business.  Till
then,  remain  in  Champa,  the  Anga  capital.’

“Now  the  sun  went  to  his  setting,  as  if  fearful  of
touching  the  darkness  that  drifted  from  the  hermit’s
soul;  the  red  flare  of  passion  left  the  sage  to  gleam  as
evening  twilight;  the  clusters  of  day-blooming  lilies
shrank  together  as  if  his  tale  had  made  them  indif¬
ferent  to  life.  And  I,  having  accepted  the  poor  fellow’s
offer  of  aid,  sat  with  him,  telling  twilight  tales;
shared  his  bed  for  the  night;  and  when  the  red  rays  of
the  waking  sun — mocking  the  blossoming  twigs  of  the
wishing-tree — shot  like  a  forest  fire  from  Sunrise
Peak,  I  said  a  respectful  farewell  and  started  for  the
city.

“In  a  lonely  spot  outside  a  monastery  that  stood
beside  the  road,  I  beheld  a  naked  Jain  monk  seated  in
a  grove  of  red  ashoka  trees,  careless  of  his  religious
meditations,  wasted  with  mental  misery,  deserving
first  prize  for  homeliness — a  pitiful  presence.  And  I
noticed  that  the  teardrops  falling  on  his  chest  carried
lumps  of  dirt  dislodged  from  his  face.  So  I  drew  near


78


THE  TEN  PRINCES


and  made  inquiries.  ‘Austerities  and  tears,’  I  said,
‘fit  ill  together.  If  it  is  no  secret,  I  could  wish  to  learn
the  source  of  your  sorrow.’

“  ‘Listen,  kind  sir,’  he  said.  ‘I  am  the  eldest  son  of
a  prosperous  merchant  named  Nidhipalita  in  this  very
Champa,  and  my  name  is  Vasupalita.  But  my  nick¬
name  is  Ugly,  because  I  am  ugly.  There  is  another
named  Handsome  in  town,  and  he  is  handsome;  he  is
rich  in  social  attractions,  but  ill  endowed  with  wealth.
Between  him  and  me  a  quarrel  was  fomented  on  the
subject  of  good  looks  and  cash  by  such  city  scoun¬
drels  as  pick  a  living  out  of  quarrels.  One  day  in  a
holiday  gathering  we  indulged  ourselves  in  a  budget
of  cutting  taunts,  rooted  in  mutual  disdain.  The
scoundrels  had  started  the  squabble  themselves,  but
they  claimed  to  appease  it  by  laying  down  this  princi¬
ple:  “Neither  looks  nor  cash  is  the  proof  of  manhood;
but  he  is  the  best  man  whose  youthful  vigor  attracts
the  gayest  girls.  Now  Kamamanjari  is  the  nonpareil
among  these  young  persons.  He  whom  she  prefers,
may  fly  the  flag  of  fortune.”  We  agreed  and  sent  her
our  proposals.

“  ‘Now  it  was  I  who  awakened  a  loving  rapture  in
the  creature.  At  least,  she  came  to  me,  as  he  and  I  sat
there;  darted  at  my  person  a  dark-eyed,  sidelong
glance  that  was  both  flower  and  fetter;  and  caused  my
embarrassed  rival’s  face  to  fall.  I  fancied  myself  hap¬
py,  and  made  her  mistress  of  my  money,  of  my  house.


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  79

of  my  household,  of  my  person,  of  my  life.  She  left  me
a  loin  cloth.  Cast  off  as  a  beggar,  the  target  of  univer¬
sal  ridicule,  unable  to  endure  the  gibes  of  the  city's
dignitaries,  I  welcomed  instruction  concerning  the
path  of  salvation  from  a  certain  monk  in  this  heretic
monastery;  then,  considering  how  natural  was  such  a
costume  for  those  emerging  from  a  house  of  evil  fame,
I  felt  a  surge  of  religious  despair,  and  abandoned  the
loin  cloth,  too.

“  ‘But  presently,  when  the  dirt  caked  on  my  per¬
son,  when  my  hair  was  plucked  till  it  hurt  horribly,
when  I  suffered  the  exquisite  tortures  of  hunger  and
thirst,  when  even  in  standing,  sitting,  lying,  and  eat¬
ing  I  was  cramped  like  a  new-caught  elephant  in  dis¬
ciplinary  chains,  I  pondered  profoundly:  “I  am  of
Brahman  origin.  It  is  irreligious  in  me  to  condescend
to  this  heretical  course.  My  forefathers  trod  the  path
prescribed  by  revelation  and  sacred  tradition.  And  I
am  sunk  so  low  as  to  wear  scandal-breeding  canoni¬
cals,  to  invite  condign  chastisement,  and  even — by
hearing  constant  blasphemies  against  Vishnu,  Shiva,
Brahma,  and  other  true  gods — to  harvest  hell  when  I
am  dead.  Such  doctrine,  fruitless,  deceitful,  false!  To
think  that  I  should  practice  it  as  true!”  With  that  es¬
timate  of  my  own  perversity,  I  betook  myself  to  this
lonely  clump  of  ashokas ,  and  here  I  weep  profusely.’

“At  this  point  I  pitied  him  and  said:  ‘Be  patient,
sir.  Remain  here  yet  a  little  while.  I  will  endeavor  to


8o


THE  TEN  PRINCES


persuade  that  female  to  make  voluntary  restitution  of
your  possessions.  There  are  ways  and  means.’  So  I
consoled  him  and  rose  to  take  farewell.

“Even  while  entering  the  city,  I  learned  from
street  gossip  that  the  town  was  full  of  skinflints  and
capitalists;  and,  since  I  desired  to  bring  these  gentry
to  orthodox  thinking  by  revealing  the  perishable  na¬
ture  of  riches,  I  resolved  to  tread  the  path  of  scientific
thievery.  I  did  not  sit  down  until  I  had  entered  a  dive
and  mingled  with  the  professionals.  I  found  no  end  of
enjoyment  observing  their  skill  in  all  the  twenty-five
branches  of  the  art  of  gambling:  their  sleight  of  hand,
extremely  difficult  to  detect,  over  the  dice-board;  the
accompanying  sneers  and  jeers;  their  death-defying
truculence;  their  systems  (chiefly  argument,  force,
and  bluff)  devised  to  gain  a  gambler’s  confidence  and
calculated  to  win  the  stakes;  their  flattery  of  the
strong;  their  threats  toward  the  weak;  their  clever¬
ness  in  picking  partners;  their  fantastic  means  of  al¬
lurement;  the  varied  wagers  proposed;  their  magnani¬
mous  way  of  dividing  the  cash;  the  intermittent  buzz
of  talk,  largely  obscene;  and  much  besides.

“Now  when  a  player  made  a  careless  throw,  I
laughed  a  little.  But  his  opponent  seemed  to  flare  up,
looking  at  me  with  an  eye  red  with  wrath,  and  shout¬
ing:  ‘Man,  you  tell  him  how  to  play  when  you  laugh.
Let  this  uneducated  duffer  go.  I’ll  just  play  with  you
— you  seem  a  smart  one.’  The  proprietor  offered  no
objection:  he  clinched  with  me,  and  I  won  sixteen


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  81


thousand  dinars.  Half  I  gave  to  the  proprietor  and
his  staff;  half  I  pocketed.  Then  I  rose,  and  with  me
rose  delighted  congratulations  from  the  company.  I
humored  the  proprietor’s  invitation  and  shared  a
most  noble  banquet  in  his  establishment.  But  he  who
had  occasioned  my  gambling  incarnation,  became  a
friend,  trustworthy  as  a  second  heart.  His  name  was
Vimardaka.

“From  his  lips  I  studied  every  house  in  the  city,
with  emphasis  on  wealth,  occupation,  and  character;
then  in  a  darkness  black  as  the  stain  on  Shiva’s  neck,
clad  in  the  concealment  of  a  black  cloak,  girded  with
a  sharp  sword,  provided  with  a  varied  kit — trowel,
scissors,  tweezers,  dummy,  magic  powder,  trick  lamp,
measuring-tape,  hook,  cord,  dark  lantern,  bee-basket,
and  other  tools — I  visited  the  house  of  a  miserly  capi¬
talist;  breached  the  wall;  penetrated  the  interior  un¬
perceived  through  an  opening  narrow  as  a  telescope,
all  as  unconcerned  as  if  entering  my  own  dwelling;  ap¬
propriated  considerable  capital;  and  departed.

“On  the  public  street,  dense  with  palpable  dark¬
ness  from  black  and  crowding  clouds,  I  suddenly  per¬
ceived  a  momentary  splendor  like  a  lightning  flash.
This  resolved  itself  into  a  young  woman  wearing
gleaming  gems;  she  drew  near,  having  issued  forth  at
that  spacious  hour,  and  seemed  the  city’s  guardian
goddess  angered  at  theft  in  the  city.

“And  when  I  sympathetically  inquired:  ‘What  is
your  name?  What  is  your  goal,  my  soul?’  she  stam-


82


THE  TEN  PRINCES


mered  this  terrified  reply:  ‘In  this  city,  sir,  lives  a
most  worthy  merchant,  Kuberadatta.  I  am  his
daughter.  At  my  birth  my  father  promised  me  as
wife  to  a  certain  Dhanamitra,  a  wealthy  youth  of  our
own  city.  He,  however,  showed  an  extraordinary  no¬
bility:  when  his  parents  perished,  with  his  own  proper¬
ty  he  purchased  poverty  (if  the  expression  is  permis¬
sible)  from  a  throng  of  jobbers.  As  a  consequence,
people  pleasantly  tacked  to  him  the  honorable  sobri¬
quet  of  “Mister  Noble”;  and  poor  as  he  was,  he  still
sought  my  hand.  But  now  that  I  am  a  woman,  my
father  refuses  me  to  a  beggar  and  plans  to  bestow  me
on  a  certain  wholesaler  named  Arthapati — a  rich
man,  as  the  name  indicates.  This  calamity,  you  must
know,  impends  at  dawn  of  day.  I  knew  it,  and  con¬
sented  to  a  meeting  with  my  darling.  I  gave  my  serv¬
ants  the  slip;  and  through  the  street  where  I  played
as  a  girl,  I  go  to  his  dwelling — a  woman  whose  escort
is  love.  Do  not  prevent  me.  Take  this  treasure.’  And
unfastening  her  jewels,  she  handed  them  to  me.

“  ‘You  are  a  good  girl,’  I  said,  consoling  her.  ‘Come,
let  me  accompany  you  to  your  lover’s  house.’  But
when  I  had  taken  three  or  four  steps,  the  gleam  of  a
torch  stole  our  shroud  of  darkness;  and  a  sizable
squad  of  police  fell  upon  us,  baton  and  sword  in  hand.
‘Feel  no  fear,  my  dear,’  said  I  to  the  trembling  girl.
‘The  last  resort  is  this  arm  of  mine,  with  its  friendly
sword.  But  from  regard  for  you  I  have  devised  a
pleasant  plan.  I  will  lie  here,  counterfeiting  the


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  83

cramps  of  deadly  poison,  while  you  tell  those  fellows:

We  entered  this  city  by  night.  My  escort — whom
you  see — was  stung  by  a  serpent  there  at  the  corner  of
the  public  hall.  If  you  have  any  kindly  necromancer
who  can  restore  him,  he  would  also  save  a  helpless
woman  s  life.  And  the  maiden,  there  being  no  other
way,  put  a  terrified  stammer  into  her  tone  and  a
storm  of  tears  into  her  eyes,  tremblingly  tottered  for¬
ward,  and  repeated  my  words,  while  I  lay  counterfeit¬
ing  poison  cramps.

So  I  was  examined  by  one  of  them,  who  fancied
himself  as  a  poison  specialist.  He  treated  me  with  sig¬
net  rings,  charms,  spells,  silent  prayer,  and  other  spe¬
cifics  without  success.  Then  he  reported:  ‘It  was  a
cobra.  He  is  done  for.  You  can  see  that  his  limbs  are
rigid  and  discolored,  his  eye  is  filmy,  his  respiration
has  just  ceased.  W  eep  your  fill,  my  soul.  Tomorrow
we  shall  have  a  cremation.  Who  escapes  fate?’  And
off  he  went  with  the  others.

“I  rose  and  conducted  her  to  Mister  Noble,  to
whom  I  said:  ‘I  am  a  thief.  I  met  this  lady  in  mid¬
journey;  she  was  on  her  way  to  you,  escorted  by  a  lov¬
ing  heart.  I  sympathized  and  brought  her  safe.  These
jewels  are  hers.’  And  I  gave  him  a  gleaming  mass  that
cleft  the  veil  of  darkness.

Mister  Noble  took  them  and  said,  his  shyness
struggling  with  his  joy:  ‘Sir,  you  have  this  night
given  me  my  darling,  but  stolen  my  power  of  speech,
for  I  know  not  how  to  express  myself.  Shall  I  call  your


84


THE  TEN  PRINCES


action  unique?  I  should  be  lessening  your  constant
character.  Shall  I  call  it  unequaled  by  others?  The
comparison  would  limit  your  natural  faculty,  since
avarice  and  other  human  failings  are  foreign  to  you.
Shall  I  aver  that  you  have  this  day  breathed  life  into
virtue?  The  statement  would  be  quite  discourteous
to  your  previous  glories.  Shall  I  say  that  nobility  has
now  found  its  true  externalization  ?  Such  an  assertion
would  be  improper,  as  neglecting  your  normal  pur¬
pose.  Shall  I  declare  that  your  generous  deed  has  pur¬
chased  my  freedom  ?  I  should  insult  your  intelligence,
implying  an  extravagant  price  for  a  trifle.  Shall  I
swear  that  this  body  is  yours,  a  return  for  the  gift  of
my  love?  I  should  forget  that  this  body,  destined  to
death  if  I  lost  her,  is  also  your  gift.  Ah,  only  this
statement  will  fit  the  case:  you  must  care  for  me
from  this  hour,  since  I  am  your  slave.’  And  he  fell  at
my  feet.

“I  helped  him  to  rise,  pressed  him  to  my  breast,  and
said:  ‘Dear  sir,  what  is  your  present  purpose?’  And
he  replied:  ‘Without  her  parents’  consent  I  cannot
marry  her  and  live  here.  Therefore,  this  very  night  I
plan  to  flee  the  country.  Yet  who  am  I,  to  be  honored
by  your  concern?’

“  ‘Right,’  said  I.  ‘The  discerning  man  does  not
reckon  lands  as  native  or  foreign.  However,  this  lady
is  exquisitely  dainty,  and  forest  trails  are  roughly
strewn  with  hardships.  Such  an  unmotivated  flight
from  the  country  smacks  of  a  certain  flabbiness,  both


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  85

of  intelligence  and  character.  It  is  better  to  live  with
her  happily  in  this  very  city.  Come,  let  us  take  her  to
her  own  dwelling.’  He  agreed  without  demur;  we  took
her  home  at  once;  and  while  she  served  as  picket,  he
and  I  stripped  the  house  to  the  bare  clay  walls.

“Then,  after  an  expedition  to  conceal  our  booty,
we  fell  in  with  policemen;  and  finding  a  must  elephant
kneeling  beside  the  road,  we  tossed  the  driver  off  and
mounted.  But  even  as  I  made  the  animal  rise,  he  tan¬
gled  his  forefeet  in  his  neck-rope;  and  since  he  braced
himself  on  the  broad  chest  of  the  fallen  driver,  his
great  tusk  was  smeared  with  clinging  gore  when  he
pounded  the  police.  We  used  him  to  pulverize  Artha-
pati’s  house.  Next,  we  drove  him  into  a  deserted  gar¬
den  and  dismounted  by  catching  the  branch  of  a  tree.
Then  we  started  home,  had  a  bath,  and  went  to  bed.

“Presently  the  sun’s  disc  was  lifted;  it  seemed  the
ruby  horn  of  splendid  Sunrise  Peak  lifting  from  the
sea  and  was  gay  as  a  golden  garland  of  flowers  from
the  wishing-tree.  We  rose,  washed  our  faces,  repeated
our  morning  prayers,  then  roamed  the  town  agog  at
our  exploits,  and  listened  to  the  babble  in  the  houses
of  bridegroom  and  bride.  Arthapati  was  consoling
Kuberadatta  in  the  matter  of  money,  but  postpon¬
ing  for  a  month  his  marriage  with  the  daughter  of
the  family.

“Thereupon  I  whispered  these  instructions  to  Dha-
namitra:  ‘Visit  the  Anga  king,  my  friend,  and  secret¬
ly  show  him  this  wallet  of  choice  leather,  saying:


86


THE  TEN  PRINCES


“Your  Majesty  surely  knows  me.  I  am  Dhanamitra,
only  son  of  Vasumitra,  the  multimillionaire;  but  a
throng  of  needy  beggars  stripped  me,  so  that  I  be¬
came  an  object  of  derision.  And  when  Kuberadatta,
reproaching  my  poverty,  planned  to  give  to  Artha-
pati  his  daughter,  a  sweet  girl  betrothed  to  me  from
birth,  I  entered  an  unkempt  garden  near  the  city,  re¬
solved  to  die  of  heartache.  But  a  tangle-haired  her¬
mit  snatched  the  knife  from  my  throat,  asking:  ‘What
is  the  cause  of  this  desperate  deed?’  ‘Poverty,’  said  I,
‘own  brother  of  derision.’

“  ‘  “Now  he  took  pity  on  me,  saying:  ‘You  are  a
fool,  my  boy.  There  is  nothing  more  wholly  reprehen¬
sible  than  suicide.  Good  men  do  not  destroy  the  soul;
they  use  the  soul  to  save  the  soul.  There  are  many
means  of  making  money,  but  no  means  of  making  life
by  patching  a  cut  throat.  And  what  need?  I  know  my
thaumaturgy:  I  have  contrived  this  magic  wallet  of
choice  leather  which  holds  a  lakh.  With  its  aid  I
granted  their  desires  to  people  during  a  long  residence
in  Assam;  but  when  envious  age  assailed  me,  I  came
hither,  hoping  to  find  this  region  a  heaven  on  earth.
I  give  the  wallet  to  you.  In  other  hands  than  mine  it
is  said  to  work  only  for  merchants  and  courtezans.
Moreover,  anything  sinfully  stolen  by  its  owner,
must  first  be  restored;  anything  honestly  earned
must  be  given  to  gods  and  Brahmans.  Then,  if  set  in
a  hallowed  spot  and  worshiped  like  a  god,  it  will  be
found  filled  with  gold  every  morning.  Such  is  its  na-


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  87

ture.’  Herewith  he  gave  it  to  me,  and  as  1  bowed,  he
vanished  in  a  rocky  cave.  This  priceless  leather  wal¬
let  I  have  brought,  feeling  that  I  should  not  make  a
living  by  it  without  previous  report  to  Your  Majesty.
Of  course,  Your  Majesty  is  the  final  arbiter.”

“  ‘Now  the  king  will  be  quite  certain  to  say:  “I
am  delighted,  my  dear  sir.  Go,  and  enjoy  your  treas¬
ure  to  the  full.”  Thereupon  you  will  say:  “Be  gra¬
ciously  pleased  to  see  that  nobody  steals  it.”  This  also
he  will  assuredly  promise.  You  will  then  go  home,
will  disburse  charity  according  to  a  set  program,  will
worship  the  wallet  each  day,  will  fill  it  each  night  with
the  proceeds  of  robbery,  and  each  morning  will  ex¬
hibit  it  to  the  populace.  Presently  greedy  Kubera-
datta,  no  longer  caring  a  straw  for  Arthapati,  will  vol¬
untarily  approach  you  with  his  daughter.  Next,
purse-proud  Arthapati  will  be  angry  and  try  to  sue
you;  after  which,  you  and  I,  by  artful  dodges,  will
leave  him  with  a  loin  cloth.  Besides,  this  maneuvre
will  quite  conceal  our  own  thievery/

“Dhanamitra  was  delighted  and  did  as  I  sugges¬
ted.  That  very  day  Vimardaka,  at  my  instigation,  en¬
tered  Arthapati’s  service  and  fanned  his  hostility  to
Mister  Noble;  while  greedy  Kuberadatta  turned  his
back  on  Arthapati,  obsequiously  offering  his  daughter
to  Dhanamitra.  And  Arthapati  fought  back.

“In  these  same  days  announcement  was  made  that
Kamamanjari’s  younger  sister  Ragamanjari  was  to
give  a  musical  performance  in  public,  so  that  gay  so-


88


THE  TEN  PRINCES


ciety  gathered  with  tense  anticipation.  I  was  there
too,  with  my  friend  Dhanamitra.  And  when  her
dance  began,  there  was  a  second  dance  on  the  stage  of
my  heart.  For  the  archer-god  lurked  in  the  cover  of
the  lotus  cluster  which  her  flashing  glances  made,  and
tortured  me  terribly,  seeming  to  draw  power  from  the
medley  of  all  emotions  and  sentiments  dramatically
communicable.  She  seemed  the  city’s  guardian  god¬
dess  angered  at  theft  in  the  city  as  she  fettered  me  in
the  twining  coils  of  coquettish  glances  darkly  gleam¬
ing  like  blue  lilies’  glossy  petals.  After  the  dance,  as
she  stood,  a  shining  success — whether  flirtatiously,  or
graciously,  or  fortuitously,  I  do  not  know — she  darted
at  me,  unobserved  even  by  the  girls,  more  than  one
peeping  glance  with  playful  fluttering  of  arching
brows;  then,  with  a  little  careless,  gleaming  smile,  de¬
parted,  still  escorted  by  the  eyes  and  thoughts  of  all.
I  went  home,  my  hunger  replaced  by  resistless  long¬
ing,  and  feigning  a  headache,  lay  limp  on  my  lonely
bed.

“Now  Dhanamitra,  deeply  versed  in  the  book  of
love,  came  to  me  with  this  confidential  report:  ‘My
friend,  that  courtezan  is  blest  indeed,  to  whom  your
heart  is  thus  devoted.  I  have  closely  followed  the
course  of  her  feelings,  too;  the  archer-god  will  soon
stretch  her  also  on  a  bed  of  arrows.  A  meeting  is  sim¬
ple  to  arrange,  since  you  both  pursue  an  honorable
purpose.  But  you  must  know  that  this  gay  girl  adopts
a  most  elevated  style,  running  counter  to  courtezan


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  89

character.  She  declares:  “My  price  is  virtue,  not
cash.  Hereafter,  no  gentleman  may  hold  my  hand  ex¬
cept  in  matrimony.”  Now  her  sister  Kamamanjari,
failing  in  repeated  dissuasion,  and  her  mother  Ma-
dhavasena  sobbed  out  this  tearful  petition  to  the  king:
“Your  Majesty,  we  had  high  hopes  that  your  servant
Ragamanjari — with  character,  accomplishments,  and
cleverness  to  match  her  beauty — would  fulfil  our  am¬
bitions  for  her.  But  she  is  a  complete  disappoint¬
ment:  she  breaks  every  family  tradition;  she  is  in¬
different  to  money,  and  expects  virtue  as  payment  for
youthful  favors.  She  obstinately  apes  the  conduct  of
a  good  woman.  Now  if — even  at  the  cost  of  Your  Maj¬
esty’s  high  intervention — she  should  at  last  return
to  normal  manners,  it  would  be  a  sweet  relief.”

“  ‘And  when  she  still  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  ad¬
monitions  of  the  obliging  king,  her  mother  and  sister
besought  the  sovereign  with  importunate  tears:  “If
any  snake  should  deceive  and  ruin  the  girl  against  our
will,  you  must  torture  him  to  death  like  a  thief.”  So
matters  stand:  her  relatives  will  not  consent  without
money,  and  she  will  show  no  favor  to  a  man  who  offers
money.  You  must  reconcile  these  opposites.’  ‘There  is
nothing  to  reconcile,’  said  I.  ‘We  will  seduce  her  with
virtue  and  secretly  satisfy  her  relatives  with  money.’

“So  I  won  the  good  will  of  Kamamanjari’s  chief
go-between,  a  certain  Buddhist  nun  named  Dharma-
rakshita,  with  such  bribes  as  tatters  and  scraps;  and
through  her  mediation  I  struck  this  bargain  with  the


9o


THE  TEN  PRINCES


cocotte — that  I  should  steal  from  Mister  Noble  and
give  to  her  the  miraculous  wallet,  in  return  for  Raga-
manjari.  Receiving  her  assent,  I  put  the  matter
through;  then  seduced  Ragamanjari  by  my  virtue,
and  plucked  the  flower  of  her  hand.

“On  the  evening  when  the  theft  of  the  magic  wal¬
let  became  known,  in  the  hearing  of  noteworthy  men
about  town  (summoned  ostensibly  for  another  pur¬
pose)  my  spy  Vimardaka,  a  nominal  partisan  of  Ar-
thapati,  turned  upon  Dhanamitra  and  rated  him
roundly.  ‘Sir,’  said  Dhanamitra,  ‘what  object  has
this  barking  at  me  in  another  man’s  quarrel  ?  I  do  not
recall  doing  you  the  slightest  injury.’  ‘Regular  purse-
pride  !’  retorted  the  other,  still  seeming  to  scold.  ‘After
the  other  fellow  has  paid  his  honest  tax  for  a  wife,  you
dazzle  her  parents  with  cash  and  try  to  get  the  girl.
Then  you  ask:  “What  injury  have  I  done  you?”  Well,
everyone  knows  that  Vimardaka  is  the  projected  life
of  wholesaler  Arthapati.  Here  I  am — I  am  ready  to
give  my  life  for  him.  I  wouldn’t  shrink  from  Brah¬
man-murder.  If  I  wanted  to  keep  my  eyes  open  just
one  night,  I  could  lower  the  high  temperature  of  your
pride  in  that  magic  wallet.’  Still  speaking,  he  was
bustled  away  by  prominent  citizens,  who  indignantly
tried  to  squelch  him.

“This  occurrence,  with  a  previous  reference  to  the
loss  of  the  magic  wallet,  was  reported  with  counterfeit
distress  by  Dhanamitra  to  the  king,  who  summoned
Arthapati  and  privately  inquired:  ‘Sir,  have  you


APAHARAVARMAN’S '  ADVENTURE


91


acquaintance  with  one  Vimardaka?’  ‘Certainly,  Your
Majesty,  replied  the  booby.  ‘He  is  a  very  close
friend.  What  service  can  he  render?’  ‘Can  you  pro¬
duce  him?  asked  the  king.  ‘Assuredly  I  can,’  said  he,
and  going  forth,  he  searched  minutely  but  vainly  in
his  own  house,  among  the  gay  girls,  in  the  gambling
dive,  in  the  market.  How  could  the  lubber  find  him?
Inasmuch  as  Vimardaka,  commissioned  by  me,  and
having  received  from  me  a  token  by  which  to  recog¬
nize  you,  my  prince,  had  started  that  same  day  for
Ujjain  to  search  for  you,  sir.  So  Arthapati,  failing  to
find  him,  and  feeling  his  own  responsibility  for  the  fel¬
ony,  was  mad  enough  or  frightened  enough  to  contra¬
dict  himself;  and  after  demonstration  by  Dhanami-
tra,  was  seized  by  order  of  the  angry  king  and  thrown
into  chains.

“In  these  same  days  Kamamanjari,  desiring  to
milk  the  magic  wallet  with  due  regard  to  all  condi¬
tions  imposed,  paid  a  secret  visit  to  Mister  Ugly,
whom  she  had  previously  milked  dry  and  converted
into  a  naked  heretic.  She  restored  his  entire  stolen
fortune  and  returned  only  after  begging  his  forgive¬
ness  with  no  end  of  amenity.  And  he,  his  soul  thus
snatched  from  naked  heresy  by  my  pastoral  ministra¬
tions,  returned  with  extreme  delight  to  his  true  reli¬
gion.  The  lady  meanwhile,  in  her  eagerness  to  milk  the
magic  wallet,  stripped  her  house  in  a  very  few  days  to
the  bare  fireplace.

“Then  at  my  suggestion,  Dhanamitra  confided  in


91


THE  TEN  PRINCES


the  king:  ‘Your  Majesty,  the  girl  Kamamanjari  is  so
outrageously  grasping  that  people  have  fastened  upon
her  the  nickname  Greedy-girl;  yet  today  she  is  heed¬
lessly  throwing  away  her  furniture,  down  to  mortar
and  pestle.  This,  I  believe,  results  from  her  posses¬
sion  of  my  magic  wallet,  for  such  is  its  nature.  It  is
said  to  work  only  for  merchants  and  courtezans.  I
have  my  suspicions  of  her.’  And  she,  with  her  mother,
was  immediately  summoned  before  the  king.

“I  took  her  aside  to  say  with  simulated  agitation:
‘Surely,  madam,  your  thorough  and  strikingly  public
generosity  has  brought  you  under  suspicion  of  posess-
ing  the  magic  wallet.  You  are  summoned  by  the  Anga
king  to  answer  for  this;  and  if  repeatedly  pressed,  you
are  certain  to  plead  its  acquisition  through  me.  Then
I  shall  be  put  to  death  by  torture.  And  when  I  am
dead,  your  sister  will  cease  to  live.  And  you  have  be¬
come  a  beggar.  And  the  magic  wallet  will  return  to
Dhanamitra.  This  emergency  is  calamitous,  however
you  face.  What  remedy  is  there?’

“  ‘Too  true,’  replied  she  and  her  mother  with  tears.
‘Through  our  childish  simplicity  the  secret  is  as  good
as  out.  If  the  king  insists,  though  we  may  deny  twice,
thrice,  even  four  times,  we  are  sure  to  impute  the
theft  to  you.  And  at  the  mention  of  your  name  our
whole  family  would  be  ruined.  Well,  this  disgrace
roots  in  Arthapati;  and  the  whole  capital  knows  our
intimacy  with  that  lumpkin.  We  can  best  shield  our-


APAHARAVARMAN’S .  ADVENTURE


93


selves  by  claiming  that  he  gave  it  to  us.’  This  I  ap¬
proved,  and  the  two  ladies  went  to  court.

“There  the  king  examined  them,  saying:  ‘It  is  not
decent  for  courtezans  to  pretend  to  charity,  since  it  is
no  decently  earned  money  that  men  bring  to  them.’
He  hammered  this  point  home,  terrifying  them  by
hints  of  the  slitting  of  ears  and  noses,  until  those  two
damned  whores  accused  the  wretched  Arthapati  of
the  theft.  The  king  in  a  fury  condemned  him  to  death,
but  was  restrained  by  none  other  than  Dhanamitra,
who  respectfully  pleaded:  ‘Oh,  sir,  royal  tradition
graciously  grants  exemption  from  the  death  penalty
to  merchants  guilty  of  such  felonies.  If  you  feel  furi¬
ous,  confiscate  the  criminal’s  property  and  exile  him.’

“Thus  Dhanamitra  received  wide  applause,  the
monarch  was  gratified,  and  purse-proud  Arthapati,  re¬
duced  to  a  single  rag,  was  exiled  in  view  of  the  whole
city.  A  certain  portion  of  his  possessions  the  king,  fol¬
lowing  a  compassionate  suggestion  of  Dhanamitra,
bestowed  on  Kamamanjari,  who,  duped  by  the  mirage
of  the  magic  wallet,  had  quite  stripped  herself.  Dha¬
namitra  married  his  good  girl  on  a  lucky  day.  And  I,
successful  in  my  stratagem,  filled  a  house  with  gold
and  gems  for  Ragamanjari.

“But  the  skinflint  and  capitalist  class  in  that  city
was  so  plucked  that  its  members  wandered  for  alms,
begging  bowl  in  hand,  from  house  to  house  of  the  des¬
titute  class,  now  grown  wealthy  with  their  property.


94


THE  TEN  PRINCES


bestowed  by  me.  For  no  man,  however  shrewd,  can
cross  the  line  traced  by  fate.  So  in  my  own  case:  one
day  I  was  ingratiatingly  offering  Ragamanjari  some¬
thing  to  drink  in  order  to  end  a  lovers’  quarrel,  and
when  I  had  too  often  sipped  the  wine  of  her  lips,
sweetly  and  repeatedly  offered,  I  was  smitten  by  an
intemperate  madness.  Now  it  is  the  nature  of  intem¬
perance  and  enthusiasm  to  adopt  a  wrong  method  in
habitual  actions.  So,  as  madness  mounted,  I  cried:
‘In  a  single  night  I  could  steal  all  the  money  in  this
city  and  fill  your  house  with  it;’  and  repelling  hun¬
dreds  of  humble  obsecrations  from  my  dearest,  like  a
must  elephant  fiercely  snapping  his  chain,  with  no
great  retinue,  but  attended  by  a  nurse  named  Shriga-
lika,  I  started,  sword  in  hand,  as  impetuous  as  you
please.  Even  when  I  met  policemen,  I  attacked  them
without  thinking,  and  was  not  particularly  angry
when  they  took  me  for  a  thief  and  struck  me.  It
seemed  a  game.  But  the  sword  dropped  from  my
groggy  hand,  so  that  I  only  killed  two  or  three  before
falling,  my  eyes  rolling  and  bloodshot.  The  nurse  ran
to  me  at  once,  with  bleats  of  misery;  but  my  enemies
fettered  me.

“Misfortune  banished  madness:  I  was  sober  in  a
moment,  and  my  returning  wits  at  once  admonished
me:  ‘Dear  me!  This  is  no  small  disaster,  due  to  my
own  dementia.  Besides,  everyone  knows  that  Dhana-
mitra  is  my  friend  and  Ragamanjari  my  bride.  For
my  wrongdoing  they  will  both  be  tracked  down  and


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  95

will  certainly  be  apprehended  tomorrow.  Here,  how¬
ever,  is  a  scheme  which,  if  carried  through  according
to  my  directions,  will  preserve  them  and  possibly  pull
me  out  of  this  hole.’

“So,  when  I  had  mentally  settled  on  a  plan,  I
snarled  at  Shrigalika:  ‘Be  off,  you  lump  of  anility,  and
be  damned  to  you!  It  was  you  who  introduced  that
cursed  courtezan,  that  scaly  Ragamanjari  to  my  en¬
emy,  my  pretended  friend  Dhanamitra,  crazy  over
his  magic  wallet!  Because  I  stole  that  scoundrel’s
magic  purse  and  prigged  your  daughter’s  priceless
jewels,  I  have  to  lose  my  innocent  life  today!’

“She  was  supremely  clever:  she  caught  my  drift,
and  lifting  her  hands,  humbly  approached  the  men.
She  softened  them  with  her  tear-choked  tone  and
begged  in  my  hearing:  ‘Gentlemen,  please  wait  long
enough  for  me  to  learn  from  him  exactly  what  has
been  stolen  from  us.’  When  they  consented,  she
turned  again  to  me,  fell  at  my  feet,  and  said:  ‘Oh,  sir,
forgive  your  servant’s  single  offense.  Of  course,  you
must  hate  Dhanamitra — he  seduced  your  wife.  But
you  ought  to  pardon  your  humble  Ragamanjari —
consider  how  long  she  was  faithful  to  you.  And  when
a  girl  lives  by  her  looks,  her  gewgaws  are  her  soul.
Tell  me  where  her  gems  are  hidden.’

“With  a  pretense  of  pity,  I  said:  ‘Yes,  death  has
his  hand  upon  me.  Why  should  I  persist  in  hating  the
woman?’  Then,  as  if  answering  her  inquiry,  I  whis¬
pered  in  her  ear  that  she  must  do  thus  and  so.  And


THE  TEN  PRINCES


96

she,  feigning  enlightenment,  said:  ‘Long  life  to  you!
May  the  gods  be  gracious  to  you !  May  our  lord,  the
Anga  king,  liberate  you — he  loves  a  man.  And  may
these  kind  gentlemen  be  good  to  you.’  She  hurried
away;  and  I,  by  order  of  the  police  captain,  was  led  to
jail.

“The  next  day  I  met  Kantaka,  the  jailer.  He  was
rather  conceited,  imagined  himself  handsome  and  a
lady  killer,  had  recently  inherited  the  job  from  his  de¬
funct  father,  and  was  somewhat  young,  flighty,  and
green.  He  gave  me  a  bit  of  a  lecture,  then  said:  ‘If
you  refuse  to  return  Dhanamitra’s  magic  purse  or  if
you  fail  to  restore  your  pickings  and  stealings  to  the
citizens,  you  will  see  the  eighteen  tortures  one  after
another  and  end  up  by  learning  what  death  looks  like.’

“  ‘My  dear  sir,’  I  answered  with  a  smile,  ‘suppose
I  should  restore  all  the  money  I  have  stolen  since  I
was  born,  I  could  not  fill  the  greedy  maw  of  the  magic
wallet  of  my  enemy  Dhanamitra,  that  false  friend
who  stole  Arthapati’s  wife.  Besides,  I  would  endure
ten  thousand  tortures  sooner  than  give  it  up.  You
may  regard  this  as  final.’  In  some  such  fashion  pro¬
ceeded  our  daily  inquisition,  half  wheedling,  half  bul¬
lying,  while  with  congenial  food  and  drink  my  wounds
were  healing,  so  that  in  a  few  days  I  was  quite  my  old
self.

“Now  at  a  time  when  the  day  was  dying  in  a  blaze
of  sunlight  yellow  as  Vishnu’s  robe,  Shrigalika  came
with  joyful  face  and  flaming  dress,  waved  the  attend-


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  97


ants  aside,  snuggled  close,  and  said:  ‘I  congratulate
you,  sir.  Your  admirable  plan  bears  fruit.  As  you
bade  me,  I  found  Dhanamitra  and  said:  “Sir,  your
friend,  having  met  such  and  such  a  misfortune,  sends
you  this  message:  ‘I  am  today  in  jail  through  the
fault  of  drink  (natural  when  one  associates  with  cour¬
tezans);  do  not  delay;  this  very  day  you  must  memo¬
rialize  the  king  in  these  terms:  “Your  Majesty,
through  Your  Majesty’s  grace  that  magic  purse,  sto¬
len  by  Arthapati,  has  been  recovered.  But  I  scraped
an  acquaintance  with  a  certain  gambling  sharp,  Ra-
gamanjari’s  husband,  because  of  his  wonderful  finesse
in  the  polite  arts,  in  poetical  questions,  and  in  social
tittle-tattle.  Knowing  him,  I  humored  his  wife  by
sending  her  daily  such  trifles  as  dresses  and  jewels.
Now  that  vulgar-minded  gambler  suspected  me  and
was  angered  to  the  point  of  stealing  the  magic  wallet
and  his  wife’s  jewel  casket.  On  his  next  thieving  ex¬
pedition  he  was  caught  by  the  police.  Once  in  trouble,
he  obeyed  the  impulse  of  earlier  affection  for  a  nurse
of  Ragamanjari,  who  had  followed  him  weeping,  and
revealed  to  her  the  spot  where  the  jewels  lay  hidden.
Now  if  he  could  be  neatly  inveigled  into  surrendering
my  magic  wallet  as  well,  then  Your  Gracious  Majesty
might  pardon  him.”

“  ‘  “  ‘Thus  approached,  the  king  will  not  execute
me,  but  will  actually  try  coaxing  to  make  me  restore
your  property.  This  will  work  to  our  advantage.
Now  Dhanamitra  obeyed  instructions  exactly,  and


98


THE  TEN  PRINCES


with  no  great  apprehension,  so  confident  was  he  of
your  competence.

“  ‘I,  for  my  part,  convinced  Ragamanjari  with  the
token  from  you,  got  from  her  all  the  money  I  wanted,
and,  in  the  way  that  you  indicated,  won  over  Manga-
lika,  nurse  of  Princess  Ambalika.  Using  her  as  a
bridge,  I  promoted  a  tremendous  friendship  between
Ragamanjari  and  Ambalika.  And  since  I  was  the
bearer  of  fresh  presents  every  day  and  was  lavish  with
ravishing  stories,  I  basked  in  the  princess’  favor.

“  ‘One  day  as  she  sat  on  the  palace  balcony,  I
made  a  pretense  of  fixing  the  lotus  over  her  ear,  as  if
it  were  falling  (though  it  sat  well  enough);  feigning  to
fumble,  I  knocked  it  off;  then  picked  it  up  from  the
floor  and  dropped  it  on  Kantaka,  who  on  some  errand
had  entered  the  courtyard  near  the  princess’  cham¬
bers;  and  in  the  act  I  laughed  aloud,  pretending  to
scare  some  billing  and  cooing  pigeons.  So  he  thought
he  had  made  a  hit  and  glanced  up  with  a  smirk,  while
the  princess  laughed  heartily  at  my  carryings-on;  then
I  went  through  a  smart  little  pantomime,  so  that  he
might  imagine  her  conduct  flirtatious,  with  himself
the  object  of  her  attention.  The  love-god  tautened
his  bow  and  pierced  the  policeman  with  a  venom-
tipped,  bewildering  shaft;  yet  he  contrived  to  stagger
from  the  spot.

“  ‘In  the  evening  I  visited  Kantaka’s  dwelling,
with  a  little  girl  carrying  a  basket  which,  I  said,  came
from  Ragamanjari’s  house;  it  bore  the  seal  of  the  prin-


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE


99


cess’  signet  ring  and  contained  scented  betel  gum,
two  silk  garments,  and  an  assortment  of  jewels.  Sunk
in  passion’s  unplumbed  sea,  he  regarded  me  as  a  res¬
cue  ship,  and  rejoiced  exceedingly.  And  when  I  de¬
scribed  the  vicissitudes  of  the  princess’  sufferings,  the
simpleton  turned  quite  maudlin.  At  his  request,  I
brought  him  next  day — saying  that  his  love  sent
them — a  sticky  mass  of  gum  (my  own  leavings),  faded
flowers,  and  soiled  linen.  And  I  took  things  from  him
for  the  princess,  which  I  secretly  threw  away.

“  ‘When  love’s  flame  had  thus  been  kindled,  I
took  him  aside  and  tutored  him.  “Sir,”  said  I,  “the
mystic  marks  on  your  person  are  not  misleading.  For
a  neighbor  of  mine,  a  fortune-teller,  informs  me:  ‘This
kingdom  will  fall  into  Kantaka’s  hand.  His  mystic
marks  make  that  a  certainty.’  Naturally,  then,  this
princess  loves  you.  So  the  king,  having  no  other  issue,
will  indeed  be  angry  when  he  learns  that  you  have  had
dealings  with  her,  yet  fearing  his  daughter’s  death,
will  not  only  not  destroy  you,  but  will  actually  make
you  crown  prince.  Thus  this  business  fits  into  predes¬
tined  events.  Why  not  serve  fortune,  my  son  ?  If  you
can  devise  no  means  of  entering  the  princess’  cham¬
bers,  still  the  interval  between  prison  wall  and  park
palings  measures  only  three  fathoms.  For  that  dis¬
tance  you  can  have  a  tunnel  dug  by  some  handy
house-breaker.  And  when  you  enter  the  park,  you
will  find  sentinels  in  our  service.  For  her  servants  are
truly  devoted  and  will  not  split.”


IOO


THE  TEN  PRINCES


“  ‘  “A  splendid  scheme,  dear  lady,”  said  he.  “I
happen  to  have  a  thief,  a  genuine  son  of  Sagara  for
digging.  If  we  take  him,  he  will  do  this  job
in  a  jiffy.”  “Which  one  is  he?”  said  I.  “And  why  not
take  him?”  Whereupon  he  indicated  you  with  the
words:  “The  fellow  who  stole  that  magic  wallet  of
Dhanamitra.”

“  ‘  “Well  then,”  I  said,  “you  must  come  to  an
agreement  with  him,  swearing  that,  once  this  job  is
done,  you  will  set  him  free  with  happy  dispatch.  And
when  the  work  is  over,  you  will  fetter  him  once  more,
reporting  to  the  king  that  this  well-known  thief  is
quite  recovered,  but  so  audacious  and  vindictive  that
he  will  not  disclose  the  magic  purse.  Then  you  will
give  him  his  happy  dispatch — in  a  word,  kill  him.
Thus  your  aim  is  gained,  and  the  secret  does  not  leak.”
He  agreed  with  delight  and  waits  without,  having  del¬
egated  me  to  tempt  you.  You  must  plan  the  next
step.’

“  ‘You  have  left  me  little  to  say,’  I  replied  pleas¬
antly.  ‘Your  plan  covers  the  case.  Bring  him  in.’  So
the  fellow  was  introduced  and  took  an  oath  to  set  me
free,  while  I  swore  not  to  betray  the  secret.

“My  fetters  were  removed,  I  enjoyed  a  bath,  food,
and  ointment;  then  began  at  the  corner  of  the  prison
wall  where  the  darkness  was  dense  and  dug  a  tunnel
with  a  snake’s-head  spade.  And  I  reflected:  ‘The
man  took  an  oath  to  free  me,  while  it  was  in  his  mind
to  kill  me.  Even  if  I  kill  him,  I  am  no  oath-breaker.’


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  ioi


As  I  emerged,  he  extended  his  hand  to  fetter  me,  but
I  felled  him  with  a  kick  in  the  chest  and  cut  off  his
head  with  a  knife.  Then  I  said  to  Shrigalika:  Tell
me,  my  dear,  about  the  entrance  to  the  women’s
apartments.  I  should  not  like  this  laborious  job  to
prove  unproductive.  I  will  prig  some  little  memento
there  before  I  leave.’

“At  the  spot  which  she  indicated,  I  made  my  way
into  the  maidens’  quarters.  There,  in  the  blaze  of
jeweled  lamps  I  beheld  the  princess  securely  sleeping
among  attendants  who  slumbered  sound  after  their
giddy  games.  She  lay  on  a  couch  whose  ivory  feet
were  shaped  to  the  likeness  of  recumbent  lions  and  set
with  splendid  precious  gems;  its  pillows  were  stuffed
with  swan’s-down;  and  scattered  flowers  were  strewn
about  its  border.  The  instep  of  her  left  foot  nestled
beneath  the  right  heel;  the  ankle  showed  a  slight,
sweet  outward  sweep;  the  calves  lay  close;  the  dainty
knees  were  bent;  the  thighs  had  a  graceful  curve.  One
soft  and  shapely  arm  hung  limp  over  the  hip;  the
other  comely  arm  was  bent  so  that  its  open,  flowerlike
hand  rested  beside  her  cheek.  Over  the  swell  of  the
hips  clung  close  the  shift  of  Chinese  silk.  The  lower
body  had  a  trim  elegance;  the  generous  breasts,  like
two  budding  blossoms,  trembled  in  answer  to  each
deep  breath.  On  the  charming  flexure  of  the  neck
shone  a  necklace  of  rubies  strung  on  a  string  of  bur¬
nished  gold;  one  earring  lay  snug,  peeping  from  be¬
neath  a  lovely  ear  half  hidden,  while  the  jeweled  orna-


102


THE  TEN  PRINCES


ment  of  the  lovely  ear  which  was  wholly  visible,  dart¬
ed  pencils  of  light,  gilding  the  ribbons  in  the  loose¬
hanging  hair  that  they  informally  fastened.  The
slight  parting  of  two  red  lips  was  hardly  noted  by  eyes
intent  on  the  innate  beauty  of  each;  one  blossom-hand
caressed  and  decked  her  cheek;  shadowed  in  the  mir¬
ror  of  her  upper  cheek,  the  bed’s  gay  canopy  rendered
cosmetic  service;  the  lotus-eyes  were  closed,  becalmed
the  banner  of  the  brows.  Upon  her  forehead  the
beauty-spot  of  sandal  paste  was  loosened  by  little  in¬
vading  pearls  of  weariness;  like  vines  that  stretch
toward  the  moon,  the  locks  of  hair  curled  toward  her
face.  Securely  sleeping,  in  quiet  recovery  from  gay
and  giddy  play,  one  side  half  sinking  in  the  dazzling
whiteness  of  the  coverlet,  she  seemed  a  lightning-flash
lying  in  the  lap  of  an  autumn  cloud.

“At  this  vision  the  red  fire  of  desire  darted  sparks;
I  was  frightened;  I  lost  all  lust  for  stealing;  nay,  my
own  heart  was  stolen  by  her;  I  stood  for  a  moment  un¬
certain,  but  thinking  hard:  If  I  do  not  win  this  sweet¬
eyed  maid,  love  will  not  let  me  live.  Yet  if  I  approach
her  without  warning,  she  will  surely  scream  and  slay
my  hopes,  for  she  is  a  mere  girl.  Then  my  life  would
be  forfeit.  So  this  must  be  my  plan.’  I  took  from  a
bracket  a  tablet  colored  with  a  resinous  paste,  drew  a
brush  from  a  jewel  box,  and  wrote  the  following  quat¬
rain,  referring  to  her,  lying  thus  asleep,  and  me,  pros¬
trate  at  her  feet:


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  103


Your  slave  bows  low  to  seek
This  one  petition  meek:

Sleep  not  so  like  a  bride—

I  am  not  at  your  side.

“From  a  golden  basket  I  took  a  preparation  of
scented  betel  leaves,  a  bit  of  camphor,  and  some  coral-
tree  gum,  chewing  them  to  produce  a  liquor  red  as  lac;
so  with  the  tip  of  my  tongue  I  outlined  on  the  plaster
of  the  wall  a  pair  of  loving  sheldrake  birds.  Then  I  ef¬
fected  an  exchange  of  rings  and  tore  myself  away.

“Returning  through  the  tunnel  into  the  prison,  I
found  a  fellow-prisoner,  an  estimable  citizen  named
Simhaghosha,  with  whom  I  had  fraternized  in  recent
days.  I  told  him  how  I  had  killed  the  wretched  Kan-
taka  and  how  he  could  win  liberty  by  turning  infor¬
mer.  Then  I  departed  with  Shrigalika.

“On  the  highway  I  fell  in  with  a  police  patrol.  And
I  thought:  ‘I  can  escape  by  running.  They  would
never  touch  me.  But  she  would  be  caught,  poor  thing !
So  this  is  better.’  I  scuttled  straight  toward  them,
clapped  my  elbows  to  my  back,  wheeled  around,  and
cried:  ‘Gentlemen,  gentlemen!  If  I  am  a  thief,  tie  me
up.  That  is  your  job,  not  this  elderly  female’s.’

“From  so  slight  a  hint  she  divined  my  strategy,
obsequiously  drew  near,  and  whimpered:  ‘Dear  gen¬
tlemen,  this  is  my  son.  He  has  long  been  under  treat¬
ment  for  lunatic  seizures.  Just  yesterday  he  seemed
pretty  well,  quite  his  true  self  indeed.  So  I  made  bold


104


THE  TEN  PRINCES


to  take  off  his  strait-jacket;  gave  him  a  bath,  oint¬
ment,  two  spick-and-span  garments;  made  him  eat
boiled  rice  and  milk;  and  left  him  free  on  his  bed  last
evening.  But  in  the  night  he  had  another  seizure,
shouted  out:  “I’m  going  to  kill  Kantaka  and  make
love  to  the  princess,”  and  started  down  the  highway-
full  gallop.  When  I  saw  my  son  in  such  a  state,  I  fol¬
lowed,  not  minding  the  time  of  night.  Please,  please
tie  him  up  and  give  him  back  to  me.’

“I  turned  on  her  with  a  shout:  ‘You  ancient  fe¬
male,  who  has  ever  tied  the  wind-god  ?  How  can  these
crows  fetter  the  monarch  of  the  birds?  Heaven  for¬
bid!’

“Then  those  fellows  said  to  her:  ‘You  are  a  luna¬
tic  yourself.  You  think  a  lunatic  is  sane  and  set  him
free.  Who  cares  to  tie  him  now?’  And  to  the  tune  of
this  taunting  and  trimming,  she  chased  after  me,  cry¬
ing.  I  led  the  way  to  Ragamanjari’s  house,  where  I
lavished  redundant  consolation  on  my  bride  drooping
under  the  strain  of  long  separation;  and  there  I  spent
the  rest  of  the  night.  At  dawn  I  found  Mister  Noble.

“Next  I  visited  holy  Marichi  who,  recuperating
from  his  difficulty  with  the  gay  girl,  had  recovered  di¬
vine  insight  at  the  heavy  cost  of  renewed  austerities,
and  who  instructed  me  that  my  meeting  with  you,
sir,  would  take  place  in  the  circumstances  since  real¬
ized.  Meanwhile,  Simhaghosha  had  disclosed  Kanta-
ka’s  dereliction  and  had  been  appointed  to  the  vacant
office  by  the  gratified  king.  He  procured  me — through


APAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  105


the  same  tunnel  from  the  prison — a  second  entrance
to  the  chamber  of  the  princess,  who  received  me
pleasantly,  having  learned  the  story  from  Shrigalika
and  taken  a  fondness  to  me.

“In  these  same  days  Chandavarman,  whose
suit  of  Simhavarman’s  daughter  had  been  repulsed,
angrily  clashed  with  him  and  besieged  the  capital.
While  he  strove  to  close  in,  the  Anga  king,  too  impet¬
uous  to  await  allies,  however  near,  himself  breached
the  wall,  issued  forth,  and  fought  a  superior  enemy.  In
that  great  struggle  Simhavarman’s  armor  was  pierced,
and  he  was  forcibly  captured.  Then  Chandavarman
roughly  seized  Ambalika,  conveying  her  to  his  quar¬
ters  for  a  forced  marriage;  and  we  heard  that  he  was
dressing  for  a  wedding  at  daybreak.

“Now  I  was  in  Dhanamitra’s  house,  making  cer¬
tain  festive  preparations  for  that  same  wedding;  and
I  said:  ‘My  friend,  a  group  of  kings  allied  with  the
Anga  sovereign,  is  close  at  hand.  Using  the  utmost
secrecy,  you  and  the  city  elders  must  direct  them
hither.  When  you  arrive,  you  will  see  an  enemy
shorter  by  a  head.’

“jjg  assented.  None  noticed  my  knife  as  with  the
rest  I  entered  the  doomed  scoundrel  s  quarters,  noisy
with  holiday  bustle,  cluttered  with  wedding  parapher¬
nalia,  packed  by  a  press  of  people  crowding  in  or
squeezing  out.  He  was  just  ready  to  grasp  the  blos¬
som-hand  of  Ambalika  which  droning  clergymen  be¬
fore  the  sacred  fire  were  offering  with  scriptural  ritu-


io6


THE  TEN  PRINCES


al,  when  I  clutched  his  long,  strong  arm,  and  drove
the  knife  to  his  heart.  A  few  others  also  effervesced,
and  I  sent  them  below.

“As  I  stalked  through  the  smitten,  shaken  quar¬
ters,  I  perceived  the  sweetly  trembling  form  of  the
wide-eyed  princess;  I  carried  her  into  an  inner  cham¬
ber,  longing  for  a  blissful  kiss.  Just  at  that  moment  I
was  honored  by  hearing  your  voice,  sir,  deep  as  the
roll  of  thunder  from  fresh-forming  clouds.”

Now  Prince  Rajavahana,  having  listened  to  this
history,  said  with  a  smile:  “Well,  as  a  rough  customer
you  excel  the  professor  of  theft.”  He  then  turned  to
Upaharavarman  with  the  words:  “Your  story  now.
You  have  the  next  turn.”  The  latter  smiled,  bowed,
and  began.


CHAPTER  VIII

UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE

“During  my  wanderings  I  found  myself  one  day  in
the  Videha  country.  Without  entering  the  capital  Mi-
thila,  I  sought  repose  at  a  hermit’s  dwelling  outside.
Here  an  aged  hermit  woman  gave  me  water  to  wash
my  feet,  and  I  rested  for  a  moment  on  the  terrace.
But  from  her  first  sight  of  me  she  strangely  shed  a
limitless  stream  of  tears.  And  when  I  inquired:  ‘What
is  this,  mother?  Tell  me  the  reason,’  she  recited  her
pitiful  tale.

“  ‘You  must  have  heard,  sir — long  life  to  you ! —
that  the  sovereign  of  this  city  Mithila  bore  the  name
Praharavarman.  He  and  King  Rajahansa  of  Maga-
dha  were  friends  as  close  as  the  fabled  Bala  and  Sham-
bala,  while  their  dear  queens,  Vasumati  and  Priyam-
vada,  were  such  friends  as  you  never  saw.  So  Priyam-
vada,  with  consort  as  escort,  came  to  Blossom  City,
eager  to  see  her  dear  Vasumati  and  wish  her  joy  of  her
first  baby.

“  ‘Just  at  that  time  the  king  of  Magadha  fought  a
great  fight  with  the  king  of  Malwa,  after  which  the
king  of  Magadha  went  the  way  that  ends  in  the  van¬
ishing  point.  The  king  of  Malwa  took  pains  to  spare
our  monarch,  who  started  for  his  own  land;  but  learn¬
ing  that  his  kingdom  had  been  usurped  by  Vikatavar-

107


io8


THE  TEN  PRINCES


man  and  the  other  sons  of  his  eldest  brother  Samhara-
varman,  and  hoping  for  the  gift  of  some  kind  of  army
from  his  sister’s  son,  lord  of  the  Suhma  country,  he
ventured  on  forest  trails  and  was  plucked  bare  by
wild  looters.

“  ‘Now  I  held  the  younger  of  two  baby  princes  in
my  arms;  alone  with  him  I  fled  deep  into  the  jungle,
terrified  by  the  flights  of  wild  men’s  arrows.  There  I
tumbled  when  a  tiger’s  claws  skimmed  close,  and  the
baby  dropped  from  my  hands  beneath  a  cow  that  lay
there  dead.  While  the  tiger  tugged  at  the  body,  his
life  was  snuffed  out  by  a  shaft  from  a  bow.  The  baby
was  seized  by  wild  Bhil  lads.  Then  a  shepherd  carried
me,  swooning  and  senseless,  to  his  hut,  where  he
gently  healed  my  hurts.  When  I  recovered,  I  felt  I
must  find  my  king;  but  I  was  perplexed,  for  I  had  no
companion.  At  this  moment  my  own  daughter  ap¬
peared,  with  a  certain  youth.  She  was  weeping  bit¬
terly.

“  ‘When  all  her  tears  were  shed,  she  related  the
seizing  by  the  Bhil  chieftain  of  the  prince  whom  she
was  carrying  when  our  caravan  was  shattered,  the
healing  of  her  hurts  by  a  certain  forest-dweller,  her
peremptory  refusal — from  disgust  at  debasing  misce¬
genation  when  he  planned  to  marry  her  after  her  re¬
covery,  his  resentful  attempt  to  cut  off  her  head  in  a
lonely  thicket,  the  wretch’s  death  at  the  hands  of  this
chance-met  youth,  and  her  own  marriage.  The  youth,
when  questioned,  proved  to  be  an  attendant  of  the


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  109


king  of  Videha,  detained  by  a  commission  and  later
following  the  trail.

“  ‘The  youth  and  I  sought  out  our  master,  carry¬
ing  such  a  report  of  the  little  princes  as  burned  his
ears  and  Queen  Priyamvada’s.  Now  a  harsh  fate  or¬
dained  for  the  king  a  long  war  with  his  eldest  brother’s
sons,  in  which,  after  much  extremely  bitter  fighting,
he  was  captured  and  the  queen  too  became  a  prisoner.
On  me  lies  a  curse:  old  as  I  am,  I  cannot  lose  this  for¬
lorn  life,  and  have,  you  see,  taken  to  hermit  wander¬
ing;  while  my  daughter,  forlornly  living  still,  has,  you
see,  actually  taken  service  with  Kalpasundari,  Vikata-
varman’s  queen.  And  yet,  if  the  two  princes  had
grown  up  without  accident,  they  would  by  now  be  just
attaining  such  years  and  looks  as  yours.  Oh,  if  they
were  here,  the  king’s  kinsmen  would  not  be  behaving
so  impudently.’  And  she  wept  without  restraint.

“When  I  had  heard  the  old  woman’s  story,  I  too
felt  a  surge  of  tears,  and  I  confided  in  her:  If  things
stand  so,  mother,  be  comforted.  In  your  hour  of  need
did  you  not  beseech  a  holy  man  to  care  for  the  prince  ?
He  took  the  lad  and  saw  to  his  rearing.  That  was  a
happy  inspiration.  You  wonder  why?  I  am  the  prince.
And  I  might  kill  wretched  Vikatavarman  if  I  could
somehow  come  at  him.  But  he  has  a  great  many
younger  brothers,  and  the  people  of  the  city  side  with
them;  while  no  man  in  this  land  knows  me  for  what  I
am.  Why,  my  own  parents  would  not  recognize  me,
others  even  less.  I  must  fit  a  plan  to  this  exigency.


no


THE  TEN  PRINCES


At  my  words  the  old  woman  embraced  me  with
tears,  stroking  my  head  time  and  again,  while  her
breasts  grew  moist  and  she  quavered  tremulously:

My  dear  boy,  long  life  to  you!  Blessings  on  you!  At
last  all-blessed  fate  shows  a  favoring  face.  At  last
Praharavarman  is  king  in  Videha,  for  at  last  you  are
ready  with  long,  strong  arm  to  ferry  him  over  his
misery  s  shoreless  sea.  Ah,  me!  Ah,  me!  How  happy
Queen  Priyamvada  will  be!’  And  in  her  overwhelming
joy  she  gave  me  a  bath,  a  meal,  and  other  comforts.
That  night  I  lay  on  a  straw  mat  in  the  hermitage,  re¬
flecting:  ‘This  enterprise  demands  chicane.  Women
are  the  natural  source  of  chicaneries.  Therefore  I  will
get  from  her  the  news  of  the  women’s  side  of  the  house
and  thus  initiate  some  maneuvre.’

“I  was  still  reflecting  when  night  retreated,  dis¬
lodged  (as  it  seemed)  by  the  snorting  impetuosity  of
the  coursers  of  the  sun  that  rose  from  the  sea,  and
rising,  made  mild  weather,  as  if  the  day-maker  were
cooled  by  his  ocean  sojourn.  I  left  my  bed,  repeated  to
the  end  my  morning  prayers,  and  said  to  my  foster-
mother:  ‘Tell  me,  mother.  Have  you  knowledge  of
the  female  court  of  headstrong  Vikatavarman  ?’  Be¬
fore  the  words  were  out,  a  woman  appeared,  at  sight
of  whom  my  old  nurse  cried,  in  a  voice  half  stifled  by
tears  of  joy:  ‘Pushkarika,  my  child,  this  is  our  mas¬
ter’s  son.  This  is  the  prince  whom  I  heartlessly  left  in
the  forest.  Thus  he  comes  back  to  us.’

Then  she,  overpowered  by  overwhelming  joy,


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  1 1 1


wept  copiously  and  babbled  abundantly;  and  when
her  spasms  were  spent,  she  plunged  into  court  gossip
with  her  mother.  To  me  she -said:  ‘My  prince,  Kal-
pasundari,  daughter  of  King  Kalindavarman  of  As¬
sam,  surpasses  the  very  nymphs  of  heaven  in  accom¬
plishments  and  beauty;  and  she  keeps  her  husband
well  in  hand.  Hence  Vikatavarman,  for  all  his  numer¬
ous  seraglio,  has  a  single  charmer.’

“And  I  replied:  ‘Take  her  fragrant  garlands  from
me.  Awaken  hatred  for  her  husband  by  reprehending
his  outrageous  infidelities.  Stir  her  self-pity  by  pictur¬
ing  Vasavadatta  and  other  heroines  of  romance  who
had  such  husbands.  Spare  no  pains  to  discover  and
publish  the  king’s  flirtations,  however  secret,  with
other  court  ladies;  so  stiffen  her  pride.’  To  my  foster-
mother  I  said:  ‘In  the  same  way  you  too  must  drop
everything  else  and  keep  near  the  queen.  It  must  be
your  task  to  give  me  a  daily  report  of  all  that  happens
there.  But  your  daughter,  as  I  said,  if  our  scheme  is
to  have  a  sweet,  successful  ending,  must  follow  Kal-
pasundari  like  a  shadow.’  And  the  two  women  fol¬
lowed  my  directions  exactly.

“After  a  few  days  my  foster-mother  said:  ‘My
dear  son,  we  have  produced  and  fixed  in  her  such  a
state  of  mind  that  she  thinks  herself  pitiable  as  a  jas¬
mine  vine  wedded  to  a  nim  tree.  What  next  ?’  I  paint¬
ed  my  own  likeness  and  said:  ‘Take  her  this.  And
when  you  have  exhibited  it  and  expatiated  on  it,  she
will  be  certain  to  ask:  “Is  there  any  man  as  good-


1 12


THE  TEN  PRINCES


looking  as  this?”  And  you  will  answer:  “What  if
there  were?”  Then  you  must  let  me  know  what  she
says  to  that.’

“She  agreed  and  visited  the  court.  When  she  re¬
turned,  she  took  me  aside  to  report:  ‘My  son,  I
showed  that  picture  to  the  adorable  queen.  She  was  a
picture  herself  as  she  pored  over  it  and  said:  “This
world  has  found  its  master.  For  even  the  god  of  the
blossom-bow  does  not  possess  such  beauty.  He  in  this
picture  is  a  perfect  picture.  Nor  do  I  know  anybody
in  the  country  who  could  make  a  thing  so  perfect.
Who  painted  it?”

“  ‘I  smiled  and  observed:  “Your  Majesty,  it  is  as
you  graciously  affirm.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  even
the  blessed  love-god  as  being  so  beautiful.  And  yet,  be¬
tween  sea  and  sea  the  world  is  wide  and  fate  is  great.
Somewhere  even  such  beauty  might  be  realized.  Sup¬
pose  some  youth  were  found,  possessing  such  beauty
and  other  things  to  match — artistic  gifts,  character,
scientific  attainments,  education,  style — and  suppose
he  were  of  lofty  birth,  what  good  will  he  get  from  it?”
“Mother,”  said  she,  “what  can  I  answer  ?  Body,  heart,
life — all  is  trivial  and  unworthy.  So  he  will  get  noth¬
ing.  But  if  this  is  not  an  imposition,  you  must  do  me
the  favor  of  revealing  him  as  he  is,  so  that  my  eyes
may  do  what  they  were  made  to  do.”

“  ‘Then  I  clinched  the  matter  by  stating:  “There
is  such  a  prince,  traveling  incognito.  At  the  spring
festival  he  chanced  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  you,  playing


UPAHARAV ARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  113


(like  Charm  in  living  flesh  and  blood)  with  your
friends  in  the  city  park.  He  became  a  mere  mark  for
the  love-god’s  arrows  and  sought  me  out.  His  splen¬
did  beauty  and  yours,  the  unique  attractions  of  both
seemed  to  belong  together;  so  I  was  induced  long
since  to  wait  upon  you  with  gifts  from  his  hands,  with
garlands,  wreaths,  fragrant  essences,  and  the  like.
With  his  own  hand  he  painted  his  own  likeness  and
sent  it,  to  show  how  deep  are  his  meditations  on  you.
If  this  matter  is  settled,  nothing  is  hard  for  him;  he
has  much  more  than  man’s  measure  of  strength,  val¬
or,  and  wit.  I  will  introduce  him  this  very  day.  You
must  grant  him  a  meeting.”

“  ‘She  seemed  to  ponder  a  little  before  replying:
“Mother,  this  is  no  longer  much  of  a  secret  to  you,  so
I  will  explain.  My  dear  father  felt  a  great  affection
for  King  Praharavarman.  And  Queen  Priyamvada
was  a  dear  companion  of  my  mother  Manavati.  Now
these  two  ladies,  before  their  babies  were  born,  came
to  an  agreement:  ‘The  daughter  of  whichever  has  a
daughter,  shall  be  given  to  the  son  of  the  one  who  has
a  son.’  But  when  I  was  born  and  Vikatavarman  asked
for  my  hand,  Father  unluckily  gave  me  to  him,  think¬
ing  that  Priyamvada’s  son  had  perished.  My  husband
is  hard-hearted,  unfilial,  none  too  good-looking,  gaw¬
ky  in  love-making,  fat-headed  about  poetry,  acting,
and  the  arts,  conceited  about  his  courage,  a  terrible
boaster,  a  liar,  and  he  gives  nice  things  to  the  wrong
people.  This  husband  doesn’t  please  me  much,  es-


THE  TEN  PRINCES


i  r4

pecially  lately.  Why,  he  actually  turned  his  back  on
my  darling  Pushkarika  who  was  right  beside  him  in
the  garden,  and  picked  flowers  with  his  own  hand
from  the  little  sandal  tree  that  I  have  tended  like  a
baby,  to  adorn  that  girl  Ramayantika,  the  girl  who
has  fastened  a  jealous  rivalry  on  me,  who  doesn’t
know  her  place,  who  always  grabs  the  center  of  the
stage.  And  just  after  I  had  left  it,  he  amused  himself
with  her  on  the  jeweled  bench  in  the  enclosure  on  the
pretty  little  hill.  The  man  is  impossible;  he  begins  to
neglect  me.  Why  should  I  wait?  Pain  in  this  life
clogs  fear  for  the  next.  When  a  woman’s  heart  has  be¬
come  a  quiver  for  the  arrows  of  the  love-god,  it  is  un¬
endurable  suffering  to  be  forced  to  live  with  someone
she  doesn  t  want.  So  you  must  bring  me  together
with  that  man  today  in  the  jasmine  bower  in  the  gar¬
den.  Just  merely  from  hearing  about  him  I  am  terri¬
bly  in  love.  And  here  is  a  pile  of  money.  With  its  help
I  will  set  him  in  the  rascal’s  place  and  give  him  my
deep  devotion.  Then  I  shall  begin  to  live.”  I  prom¬
ised  and  have  returned.  My  prince  must  dictate  the
next  step.’

“Then,  when  I  had  absorbed  from  her  the  details
that  concerned  the  terrain  of  the  women’s  quarters,
the  disposition  of  the  chamberlains,  and  the  plan  of
the  garden;  when  the  sun’s  disc  grew  crimson  as  if
blood  were  shed  in  the  fall  from  Sunset  Peak;  when
the  sky  spread  dark  and  wide  as  if  choked  by  smoke
from  the  sun’s  coal  dying  as  it  sank  in  the  waves  of  the


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  115


western  sea;  when  the  planet-heralded  moon,  proud
of  invading  an  elder’s  bed,  rose  up  to  enlighten  me  in
my  design  against  another’s  wife;  when  the  god  of  the
blossom-bow,  ambitious  to  subdue  the  world,  kindled
his  majesty  with  the  smiling  circle  of  the  moon,  eager¬
ly  moving  (like  the  flower-face  of  Ivalpasundari)  to
behold  me,  I  duly  sought  my  couch.  There  I  fell  into
meditation:  ‘This  business  is  as  good  as  done.  Yet
there  may  be  loss  of  virtue  if  I  approach  another’s
wife,  though  this  is  permitted  by  theologians  in  cases
where  both  money  and  love  are  won.  Furthermore,  I
commit  this  transgression  while  combining  a  design
for  the  release  of  my  parents  from  bondage;  that
should  outweigh  even  this  obliquity  and  leave  me  a
balance,  however  slender,  to  virtue’s  account.  And
yet — and  yet — when  they  learn  it,  what  will  Prince
Rajavahana,  what  will  my  comrades  say?’  So  I  sank
into  troubled  slumber.

“In  dream  I  beheld  the  blessed  god  with  the  ele¬
phant’s  head,  who  said  to  me:  ‘Beloved  Upaharavar-
man,  feel  no  crippling  indecision.  In  you  dwells  a
spark  of  my  spirit,  and  in  that  sweet  lady  the  spirit  of
the  goddess  of  the  sacred  river,  wont  to  rumple
Shiva’s  matted  locks.  In  an  earlier  life,  when  vexed
by  my  advances,  she  laid  on  me  the  curse  of  mortality ;
and  I  in  turn  cursed  her,  saying:  “As  here  in  heaven
you  bring  delight  to  many,  so  having  become  a
mortal — be  shared  by  more  than  one.”  Yet  I  added
in  answer  to  her  plea:  “I  will  myself  give  you  a  life  s


n6


THE  TEN  PRINCES


devotion,  yet  I  shall  have  one  predecessor.”  There¬
fore  do  not  shrink  from  this  enterprise.  It  is  destined.’
I  woke  with  calm  joy,  and  spent  the  day  in  the
thought  of  an  adventurous  meeting  with  my  love,  and
of  what  should  follow.

“On  the  next  day  the  love-god,  with  no  change  in
tactics,  showered  his  shafts  upon  me.  At  last  the  lake
of  the  sun’s  splendor  dried,  and  muddy  darkness
grew.  Black  as  that  darkness  was  my  cloak,  and  stout
my  mail,  as,  with  sword  in  hand  and  other  trusty  ap¬
purtenances,  recalling  the  landmarks  mentioned  by
my  old  mother,  I  drew  near  the  palace  moat  brim¬
ming  with  water.  Beside  the  trench  I  found  a  bam¬
boo  pole  which  Pushkarika  had  providently  deposited
at  the  door  of  her  mother’s  lodge;  I  laid  it  flat  and
crossed  the  moat;  I  stood  it  straight  and  scaled  the
wall.  I  reached  the  ground  within  by  way  of  a  brick
stairway  that  climbed  the  height  of  the  entrance  gate.
Once  down,  I  skirted  the  row  of  dilly  trees,  followed
the  sandal-tree  alley  for  a  little  distance,  and  heard  to
the  north  the  plaintive  cry  of  pairs  of  sheldrake  birds.
So  to  the  north  by  the  trumpet-flower  path  I  felt  my
way  for  an  estimated  arrow’s  flight  along  the  massive,
bulging  stucco  wall;  turned  east  by  the  sanded  path
with  double  border  of  clumps  of  ashokas  and  figs;  and
after  a  little  faced  south  to  enter  the  mango  corridor.

“Then  I  touched  the  slide  of  my  dark  lantern  and
by  its  winking  light  inspected  a  thick-set  bower  of  jas¬
mine  vines,  sheltering  a  jeweled  bench.  On  one  side  of


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  1 1 7


it  I  found  an  inner  recess,  walled  about  with  rows  of
young  yellow  amaranths  crowded  with  bloom,  and  a
door  made  of  red  ashoka  branches  that  had  fallen  to
earth,  dotted  with  the  fresh  glory  of  blossoming  buds,
pink  with  masses  of  gay  flower  clusters.  I  opened  and
entered.  There  was  a  couch  thickly  strewn  with  blos¬
soms,  lotus-leaf  and  dhak-wood  receptacles  filled  with
aphrodisiac  delights,  an  ivory-handled  fan,  a  vase
holding  scented  water.  I  sat  down  and  rested  a  mo¬
ment,  sniffing  the  heavy  perfume.

“I  heard  the  sound  of  gentlest  feet.  At  once  I  left
the  rendezvous  to  stand  outside,  leaning  on  a  red
ashoka  trunk.  The  lovely  maid  crept  near — slowly,  as
if  love  were  cooling — and  not  finding  me  there,  was
dreadfully  shaken.  Like  a  frantic  swan  she  loosed  a
quivering  cry,  sweet  with  the  passion  that  choked  her
throat:  ‘Too  plain!  I  am  deceived.  I  cannot  live.  O
my  heart,  why  deem  the  impossible  possible;  then  suf¬
fer  such  disquiet  that  it  cannot  be?  O  blessed  archer-
god,  how  have  I  sinned  against  you,  that  you  burn  me
so,  yet  do  not  reduce  me  to  ashes?’

“At  this  I  opened  the  lantern  and  stood  revealed.
And  I  said:  ‘My  jealous  love,  you  have  surely  sinned
deeply  against  the  love-god,  since  you  mock  his  very
life,  his  goddess-bride  with  your  beauty,  his  bow  with
the  curve  of  your  brows,  his  bee-strung  bow-string
with  the  luster  of  your  dark  curls,  his  shafts  with  your
darting  glances,  his  saffron-tinted  banner  of  victory
with  the  light  of  your  lips,  his  foremost  friend  (the


1 1 8


THE  TEN  PRINCES


southern  breeze)  with  the  breath  of  your  perfumed
sigh,  his  cuckoo  with  your  sweeter  song,  his  staff  of
flowers  with  your  slender  arms,  his  two  bowls  filled
for  the  rite  of  universal  conquest  with  your  breasts,
his  lake  of  delight  with  your  navel,  his  victorious
chariot  with  your  hips,  the  twin  pillars  of  his  temple’s
jeweled  archway  with  your  thighs,  the  flowers  that
deck  his  hair  with  the  grace  of  your  feet.  The  love-god
has  cause  to  torment  you.  But  I  am  unoffending,  and
he  earns  blame  by  torturing  me.  Be  kind,  my  sweet,
give  me  life  with  your  life-giving  glances,  for  I  am
stung  by  the  serpent  of  love.’  And  I  embraced  her.  I
clasped  her  close,  while  her  eyes  grew  wide  and  soft  in
a  passion  of  love.

“When  she  had  yielded  and  when  I  perceived  that
her  eyes  were  a  little  reddened  and  rolling,  that  her
cheek  was  overspread  with  a  gentle  moisture,  that  her
sweet  murmurs  were  without  restraint  or  coherence,
that  she  bore  blushing  traces  of  teeth  and  nails,  that
her  limbs  grew  limp  as  in  despair,  I  relaxed  the  tension
of  mind  and  body,  sinking  into  a  state  like  hers.  So
severed  yet  united,  we  performed  love’s  final  ritual,
abiding  for  a  time  in  utter  mutual  trust,  like  two  who
long  have  known  each  other’s  thoughts.  Then,  with
a  long  and  burning  sigh,  with  a  somewhat  wistful
glance,  I  timidly  stretched  out  my  arms,  embraced
her  gently,  and  touched  her  face  with  a  tender  kiss.

“Her  tears  started  as  she  lifted  lovely  hands  to  her
brow  and  said:  ‘Remember,  my  lord,  if  you  go,  my


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  1 1 9


life  goes  too.  Take  me  with  you.  Else,  I  am  nothing.

I  have  no  use  save  in  your  service.’

“And  I  replied:  ‘My  sweet,  what  man  of  mind
does  not  exult  in  a  woman’s  love?  If  your  heart  is  set
on  kindness  to  me,  you  must  follow  my  instructions
with  no  delay.  Secretly  show  my  likeness  to  the  king
and  say:  “Does  this  figure  attain  the  limit  of  mascu¬
line  charm,  or  does  it  not?”  And  he  is  certain  to  say:
“It  most  assuredly  does.”  Then  continue:  “Well,
there  is  a  certain  hermit  woman  who  has  gained  as¬
surance  by  foreign  travel,  a  true  mother  to  me.  She
displayed  to  me  this  pictured  form  and  said:  ‘I  know
a  magic  spell  by  use  of  which  you  may  assume  this
form,  if  first  you  fast,  then  on  a  day  of  new  or  full
moon,  in  a  sequestered  spot,  at  night,  alone,  you  offer
in  a  sacrificial  fire  abandoned  by  chaplains  a  hundred
twigs  of  sandal  wood,  a  hundred  twigs  of  fragrant
aloe,  handfuls  of  camphor,  and  many  silk  garments.
Then  you  must  ring  a  bell.  Now  if  your  husband,
summoned  by  the  tinkle  of  the  bell,  shall  confess  to
you  his  every  secret,  then  close  his  eyes  and  embrace
you,  this  form  shall  pass  to  him,  while  you  regain  your
former  figure.  If  this  plan  pleases  you  and  your  hus¬
band,  there  must  be  no  deviation  from  the  ritual  pre¬
scribed.’

“  ‘  “If  this  refiguration  commends  itself  to  you,
sir,  come  to  a  decision  with  friends,  counselors,  young¬
er  brothers,  and  citizens,  and  attend  the  ceremony  ap¬
proved  by  them.”  To  this  he  will  doubtless  assent.


120


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Then,  when  with  due  ritual  the  priest  has  pacified  the
sacrificial  victim  where  the  paths  cross  in  this  very
garden,  and  when  the  fire  is  abandoned,  I  will  enter
under  cover  of  the  smoke  and  take  my  stand  in  this
same  bower.  But  when  twilight  darkens,  you  will
whisper  with  a  humorous  smile  to  Vikatavarman:
“You  are  a  deceiver,  and  ungrateful.  In  the  very  fig¬
ure  gained  by  my  favor,  a  figure  that  makes  holiday
for  the  eyes  of  the  world,  you  plan  to  entertain  my
jealous  rivals.  For  my  part,  I  would  not  raise  a  vam¬
pire  to  my  own  destruction.”  Then  you  must  seek  me
secretly,  reporting  what  answer  he  makes.  There¬
after,  I  shall  know  what  to  do.  And  see  that  Pushka-
rika  obliterates  my  footprints  in  the  garden.’  She
agreed,  reverencing  my  words  like  a  lesson  in  Scrip¬
ture;  still  athirst  with  desire,  she  crept  to  her  chamber.
And  I  went  as  I  had  come,  and  sought  my  own  dwell¬
ing.

“So  the  adorable  lady  played  her  part,  and  the
rogue  followed  her  leading.  And  the  news  of  a  miracle
to  be  went  buzzing  among  the  citizens:  ‘Have  you
heard?  By  virtue  of  a  magic  spell  of  the  queen’s,  King
Vikatavarman  is  going  to  get  a  figure  fit  for  a  god.  I
don’t  think  this  trickery  is  exactly  religious.  And
how  about  a  possible  miscalculation?  They  say  the
queen  herself  will  do  the  job  in  the  garden  outside  her
own  chamber.  Yes,  even  the  counselors  have  discussed
and  approved,  and  they  are  wise  as  the  professor  in
heaven.  If  it  works,  it  is  the  biggest  miracle  ever.


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  121


Well,  you  can’t  reckon  the  power  of  gems  and  spells
and  drugs.’  While  such  gossip  went  the  rounds,  when
the  day  of  new  moon  came,  when  darkness  deepened
in  the  advancing  hour  of  twilight,  there  rose  from  the
garden  outside  the  queen’s  chambers  a  column  of
smoke,  empurpled  like  Shiva’s  neck.  And  the  smell  of
sacrifices — milk,  ghee,  curds,  sesame,  yellow  mustard,
suet,  flesh,  blood — floated  down  the  breeze  and  filled
the  air.  And  when  the  smoke  suddenly  thinned,  I  had
entered  there.

“Then  the  stately  lady  came  to  the  summer-house,
embraced  me,  and  said  with  a  smile:  ‘Rogue,  your
plan  is  successful,  and  that  animal  is  finished.  I
tempted  him  in  the  fashion  you  taught  me,  saying:
“Deceiver,  I  will  not  give  you  perfect  beauty.  For
with  that  beauty  you  will  be  sought  after  by  heavenly
nymphs,  not  to  mention  women.  And  you  are  giddy
as  a  bee.  There  is  no  telling  where  one  so  heartless
would  alight.”  He  fell  at  my  feet  and  said:  “Beloved,
forgive  my  knaveries.  Hereafter  I  would  not  notice
another  woman,  even  mentally.  Hasten  to  fulfil  your
promise.”

“  ‘So  I  have  come  to  you  in  this  wedding  dress.  At
first,  this  wife  was  given  you  by  love  as  priest,  with
passion’s  flame  for  witness;  with  this  holy  fire  as  wit¬
ness,  she  is  given  again  by  her  own  heart.’  And  tiptoe
on  my  instep,  she  clasped  my  neck  with  two  arms  like
graceful  vines  while  the  tender  intertwining  fingers
figured  interlacing  leaves,  sweetly  lifted  her  face —


122


THE  TEN  PRINCES


a  flower-face  willingly  lifted — and  with  wild,  wide
glances  kissed  me  again  and  again.

“Then  I  said:  ‘Stay  right  here  among  the  ama¬
ranth  clusters,  while  I  go  forth  to  finish  what  must  be
finished.’  So  I  left  her,  approached  the  sacrificial  fire,
and  rang  the  bell  which  hung  from  an  ashoka  bough,
while  she  warbled,  enticing  our  enemy  like  a  minister
of  fate.  And  I  proceeded  to  offer  in  the  fire  the  aloe,
the  sandal,  and  the  rest.

“The  king  drew  near  the  appointed  spot;  and  when
I  perceived  that  a  measure  of  doubt  and  amazement
laid  hold  on  him  as  he  stood,  I  said:  ‘Tell  me  the  truth
once  more,  calling  this  sacred  fire  to  witness.  I  will
dower  you  with  this  beauty,  if  you  will  not  use  it  to
make  love  to  my  rivals.’  Then  a  clear  confidence
arose  in  him  that  this  was  no  chicanery,  but  the  queen
herself;  and  he  prepared  to  swear  an  oath.

“But  I  smiled  and  said:  ‘Why  swear?  What  mor¬
tal  woman  can  supplant  me?  And  if  you  can  win  the
love  of  nymphs,  then  do  so.  But  tell  me  your  secrets.
When  they  are  fully  told,  the  old,  accustomed  form
will  drop  from  you.’

“And  he  confessed:  ‘I  hold  in  bondage  my  father’s
younger  brother  Praharavarman.  With  my  counse¬
lors  I  have  resolved  to  poison  him  and  proclaim  his
death  by  indigestion.  To  my  younger  brother  Vishala-
varman  I  have  planned  to  give  an  army  division  for
an  assault  on  the  Pundra  country.  A  leading  citizen
from  Panchala  and  a  trader  in  my  protection  have


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  123


quietly  advised  me  that  a  certain  diamond  worth  the
wide  world,  can  be  had  for  next  to  nothing  from  a
Greek  named  Khanati.  And  a  householder  of  my  in¬
timate  acquaintance,  a  leader  in  his  district,  one  Sha-
tahali,  has  come  to  employ — for  my  advantage — cer¬
tain  army  generals  in  an  expedition  to  destroy  by  pop¬
ular  rioting  that  liar,  that  boaster,  that  rascally  parti¬
san  Anantasira.  Such  are  my  secret  plans  for  the
moment.’

“Having  listened,  I  said  to  him:  ‘Your  life  is  done.
Receive  the  reward  that  fits  your  conduct,’  and  bisect¬
ed  him  with  my  knife.  I  flung  the  divided  body  into
the  handy  fire  that  was  blazing  high  with  sacrificial
butter,  and  there  it  was  consumed.  Then  I  comforted
my  heart’s  dearest,  who  showed  some  womanish  dis¬
tress;  went,  holding  her  flower-hand,  to  her  chambers;
with  her  permission  summoned  all  the  ladies,  and
straightway  paid  them  my  respects.  After  brief  and
pleasant  conversation  with  these  astonished  ladies,  I
dismissed  them  all;  then,  clasping  close  my  bride,
spent  a  night  that  seemed  too  short.  And  from  her
lips  I  learned  the  character  of  the  court.

“At  dawn  I  bathed,  repeated  my  prayers,  and  met
my  counselors,  to  whom  I  said:  ‘Gentlemen,  my  na¬
ture  has  changed  with  my  form.  The  father  whom  I
thought  to  poison,  must  be  released  and  reinstated  in
this  kingdom,  which  is  his.  We  must  show  him  filial
obedience.  There  is  no  guilt  like  parricide.’

“I  also  summoned  my  brother  Vishalavarman  and


124


THE  TEN  PRINCES


said:  ‘My  dear,  the  Pundras  are  at  present  impecu¬
nious.  If  smitten  by  the  blind  madness  of  resentment,
they  might  so  forget  themselves  as  to  assail  our
realm,  which  is  prosperous.  Therefore  postpone  your
campaign  until  failure  of  seed  grain  or  ripened  crops.
For  the  moment  a  military  movement  is  ill-advised.’

“To  the  two  prominent  citizens  I  said:  T  should
lose  virtue  if  I  acquired  a  great  treasure  for  no  true
equivalent,  so  pay  its  just  price.’

“Next  I  summoned  the  district  leader  Shatahali
and  explained:  ‘It  was  planned  to  destroy  Ananta-
sira  as  being  a  partisan  of  Praharavarman.  Why  kill
him  now  that  my  father  is  reinstated?  Make  no  fur¬
ther  move  in  this  affair.’  So  they,  recognizing  every
detail  as  squaring  with  their  secret  knowledge,  were
convinced  of  my  identity;  bestowed  astonished  praise
upon  me  and  the  queen;  released  my  parents  from
confinement;  and  restored  their  kingdom.  And  after
I  had  secretly  conveyed  a  complete  account  of  my
procedure  through  the  old  nurse,  my  parents  climbed
the  climax  of  delight  when  I  fell  at  their  feet,  and  gra¬
ciously  invested  me  with  the  dignity  of  crown  prince.

“With  my  spirit  thus  at  rest,  I  had  experience  of
pleasures  embittered  by  the  pain  of  separation  from
my  prince,  when  presently  I  learned  from  a  dispatch
of  my  father’s  friend  Simhavarman  that  Chandavar-
man  was  assaulting  Champa;  and  realizing  that  aid
to  friends  is  no  less  incumbent  than  slaughter  of  ene¬
mies,  I  started  with  a  considerable  force  stripped  for


UPAHARAVARMAN’S  ADVENTURE  125


quick  service.  In  so  doing,  I  was  heaped  with  cumu¬
lative  holiday  rejoicing,  for  I  perceived  the  glory  of
my  revered  prince.”

When  he  had  heard  this  story,  Prince  Rajavahana
smiled  and  said:  “See  now!  The  invasion  of  another’s
bed,  effected  by  chicane  at  that,  yet  undertaken  to  re¬
lease  parents  from  the  pains  of  bondage,  enacted  by
annihilation  of  a  wicked  enemy,  resulting  in  the  ac¬
quisition  of  a  kingdom,  has  brought  the  happiest  con¬
sequences,  both  in  money  and  virtue.  What  enter¬
prise,  indeed,  of  the  intelligent  fails  to  show  a  fair  is¬
sue?”  Then,  fixing  a  long  and  loving  glance  on  Artha-
pala’s  face,  he  bade  him  relate  his  adventure.  The
latter  bowed  and  began.


.


CHAPTER  IX

ARTHAP ALA’S  ADVENTURE

“I  too,  Your  Majesty,  intent  on  the  same  purpose
as  these  friends,  wandered  the  circle  of  the  lands
bounded  by  the  billow-garlanded  sea  and  came  one
day  to  the  city  of  Kashi,  to  Benares.  When  I  had
bathed  in  the  sacred  pool  whose  waters  are  limpid  as  a
fractured  gem,  when  I  had  reverently  worshiped  Ben¬
ares’  lord,  the  ever-blessed  Shiva,  I  wandered  still  un¬
til  I  met  an  elongated  fellow  with  sturdy  arms  like
bars  of  iron,  with  loin  cloth  tightly  girt,  with  eyes
swollen  and  red  from  ceaseless  weeping.  And  I  reflect¬
ed:  ‘This  is  a  rough  specimen,  yet  his  eye  shines  dim
through  showers  of  misery  and  his  habitude  betokens
desperation.  The  poor  man  is  clearly  careless  of  life
and  is  about  to  meet  some  calamity  rooted  in  the  suf¬
fering  of  one  he  loves.  I  will  ask  him  whether  friendly
service  is  possible,  even  from  me.’

“So  I  approached  and  said:  ‘My  dear  sir,  these  reg¬
imentals  hint  despair.  If  it  is  no  secret,  I  could  wish
to  learn  the  source  of  your  sorrow.’  He  inspected  me
respectfully,  then  said:  ‘What  harm?  Listen’;  and
seated  with  me  beneath  an  oleander,  he  told  his  tale.

“  ‘My  good  sir,  my  name  is  Purnabhadra.  I  am  a
householder’s  son,  but  hung  loose  on  society  in  the
East.  Though  carefully  reared  by  my  father,  I  obeyed


128


THE  TEN  PRINCES


the  call  of  fate  and  made  a  profession  of  thievery.
Now  in  this  city  of  Kashi,  while  stealing  in  the  house
of  an  eminent  business  man,  I  was  caught  with  the
coin  and  fettered.  I  was  condemned  to  die  and  the
signal  was  given  by  the  chief  counselor,  Kamapala,
who  looked  on  from  the  height  of  the  palace  entrance-
gate;  whereupon  a  must  elephant  called  Death-win¬
ner,  to  whom  murder  was  sport,  lumbered  toward  me
with  monstrous  trunk  curled  back,  while  the  jangling
of  his  bells  was  reinforced  by  throaty  yells  from  the
crowd.

“  ‘As  he  charged,  I  scolded  him  defiantly;  as  he
aimed  a  glancing  blow  with  his  tusk,  I  thrust  two  stout
arms  into  a  perforated  stick  of  wood  and  scrubbed
his  mouth;  he  seemed  dismayed  and  turned.  The
infuriated  driver  headed  him  back  with  blistering
words  and  kicks  of  unrestrained  ferocity.  Again  with
double  rage  I  scolded  and  thumped  until  he  turned
and  trotted  off.  Then,  when  I  followed  with  boister¬
ous  abuse,  the  rabid  driver  screamed:  “I’ll  kill  you,
you  damned  dummy  of  an  elephant!”  pounded  the
creature  time  and  again  with  a  sharp  goad  at  the  cor¬
ner  of  the  eye,  and  contrived  to  make  him  face  me.

“Take  away  this  wormy  animal!”  I  shouted.
“Bring  on  a  real  elephant.  I  should  like  a  moment’s
sport  before  I  go  my  destined  way.”  And  when  the
beast  saw  me  bellowing  like  mad,  he  disregarded  the
driver’s  stern  persuasions  and  bolted.  Then  the  coun¬
selor  summoned  me  and  said:  “My  good  man,  this


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


129


beast  is  death  in  the  flesh;  Death-winner  is  his  name;
murder  is  his  sport.  In  spite  of  all,  you  have  mastered
him.  Now  if  you  abandoned  your  degrading  profes¬
sion,  could  you  earn  an  honest  living  in  our  service?”
“Yes,  sir,”  I  said;  and  he  became  a  friend.

“  ‘One  day  I  made  quiet  inquiries,  and  he  confided
his  history  to  me:  “In  Blossom  City  lived  Dharma-
pala,  counselor  of  a  victorious  monarch,  famed  for  pru¬
dence  and  sacred  learning.  His  son  Sumitra  emulated
the  father  in  the  prudential  virtues.  I  am  Sumitra’s
younger  brother,  but  by  another  mother.  My  father,
being  conventional,  tried  to  curb  my  dalliance  with
the  gay  girls,  but  my  naughtiness  was  ineradicable.
So  I  left  home  and  wandered  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.
In  this  c;ty  of  Benares  I  visited  a  garden  in  order  to
worship  Love’s  chastiser,  Shiva,  and  there  I  chanced
to  behold  Kantimati,  daughter  of  King  Chandasimha
of  Benares,  playing  ball  with  girl  friends.  I  loved  her,
contrived  to  become  acquainted,  and  secretly  enjoyed
her  society  in  the  palace.  She  became  pregnant  by  me
and  bore  a  son.

“  ‘  “The  child  seemed  stillborn;  lest  the  secret  be
let  slip,  a  servant  laid  the  body  on  a  mound  in  the  gar¬
den,  whence  a  Bhil  woman  conveyed  it  to  the  grave¬
yard.  But  as  she  returned  by  the  highway  at  night,
she  was  seized  by  policemen,  was  menaced  with  tor¬
tures,  and  in  her  fright  she  half  revealed  the  secret.
By  order  of  the  king  she  pointed  me  out  as  I  slept  se¬
curely  at  night  in  a  recess  beneath  the  mound  in  the


1 3°


THE  TEN  PRINCES


garden;  I  was  tied  with  adequate  cords,  was  taken  to
the  graveyard,  and  was  on  the  point  of  perishing  be¬
neath  a  sword  held  aloft  by  a  headsman.  But  through
fate’s  power  I  burst  my  bonds,  seized  the  sword,  killed
that  proletarian  and  a  few  others,  and  made  my  es¬
cape.

“  ‘  “As  I  wandered  helpless  in  the  forest,  I  was  ap¬
proached  one  day  by  a  maiden  with  her  maidservant.
Her  beauty  was  heavenly,  but  she  was  weeping.  Her
lifted  flower-hands  sweetly  framed  her  face,  her  curls
played  gaily  round  her  cheeks  as  she  bowed  and  sat
with  me  in  the  cool  shade  of  a  mighty  forest  banyan
tree;  and  when  I  eagerly  inquired:  ‘Who  are  you,  my
soul?  Whence  come  you?  For  what  cause  do  you
show  favor  to  my  poor  person?’  her  answer  was  un¬
stinted  honey:  ‘Sir,  I  am  the  daughter  of  Manibha-
dra,  a  lord  of  the  Yaksha  demigods,  and  my  name  is
Taravali.  On  one  occasion,  as  I  returned  from  Mala¬
bar,  where  I  had  paid  homage  to  Lopamudra,  the  sage
Agastya’s  wife,  I  found  a  crying  baby  boy  in  a  Ben¬
ares  graveyard.  I  took  him  and  loved  him  so  that  I
carried  him  to  my  parents,  and  my  father  carried  him
to  the  palace  hall  of  our  god  and  king,  Kubera,  who
summoned  me  and  asked:  “Maiden,  what  is  your
feeling  toward  this  boy?”  “Such  tender  love  for  this
tender  love,”  I  replied,  “as  if  he  were  a  child  of  my
body.”  “The  poor  girl  is  right,”  said  he  and  related  a
terrific  tale  that  related  to  the  baby.

‘Of  the  complicated  detail  I  grasped  only  this


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


131

— that  you  are  Shaunaka  and  Shudraka  and  Kama-
pala,  the  same  man  in  diverse  incarnations;  that
Bandhumati  and  Vinayavati  and  Kantimati  are  the
same  woman;  that  Vedimati,  Aryadasi,  Somadevi  are
one  and  the  same;  that  Hansavali,  Shurasena,  and
Sulochana  are  not  different  persons;  that  Nandini,
Rangapataka,  and  Indrasena  are  identical.

“  ‘  “  ‘Now  the  herdsman’s  daughter  whom  you
married  when  you  were  Shaunaka,  was  Aryadasi  then,
but  today  myself,  Taravali.  And  the  boy,  when  you
were  Shudraka,  was  born  to  me  (Aryadasi  in  that  in¬
carnation)  but  reared  by  Vinayavati  out  of  love  per¬
sisting  subliminally.  To  her,  in  her  present  life  as
Kantimati,  the  same  child  has  been  born.  Thus  fate
snatched  him  from  the  jaws  of  many  deaths  and  let
me  have  him;  and  I,  obeying  the  god’s  command,
gave  him  to  Vasumati,  queen  of  Rajahansa  who  was
then  enduring  hardships  in  the  jungle,  that  he  might
serve  her  son  Rajavahana,  world-emperor  to  be.
Thereafter,  graciously  dismissed  by  those  whose  word
I  honor,  I  came,  by  destiny’s  devious  device,  to  bow
low  at  the  lotus-feet  of  one  whom  death  has  mouthed
and  dropped.’

“  ‘  “On  hearing  this,  I  repeatedly  embraced  my
love  of  many  lives,  consoling  her  over  and  over  while
happy  tears  rolled  down  my  cheeks;  then  in  a  great
palace  which  her  divine  power  revealed,  I  reveled  day
and  night  in  such  delights  as  earth  can  hardly  know.

“  ‘  “After  two  or  three  days  I  said  to  my  adorable


1 32


THE  TEN  PRINCES


lady:  ‘My  dear,  I  wish  to  repay  a  wrong:  I  wish  to
enjoy  the  pleasure  of  vengeance  upon  Chandasimha,
who  threatened  my  life.’  And  she  replied  with  a
smile:  ‘Come,  dear.  I  will  take  you — to  see  Kanti-
mati.’  So  at  midnight  I  was  taken  to  the  king’s  pal¬
ace.  There  I  held  a  naked  sword  at  his  throat,
awakened  him,  and  while  he  shuddered,  said:  T  am
your  son-in-law.  Without  permission  from  you  I  ap¬
proached  your  daughter.  I  have  come  to  wipe  out
that  transgression  by  showing  an  interest  in  you.’
Fearfully  frightened,  he  groveled,  saying:  ‘The  trans¬
gression  is  mine.  I  was  a  fool.  When  you  did  me  the
honor  of  meeting  my  daughter,  I  broke  all  bounds  like
a  lunatic  and  decreed  your  death.  From  this  mo¬
ment,’  said  he,  ‘Kantimati  is  at  your  disposal,  and
this  kingdom,  and  my  life,  of  course.’  The  next  day
he  assembled  all  his  counselors  and  gave  me  his
daughter’s  hand  with  due  ceremony.  So  Taravali  told
Kantimati  the  story  of  her  son,  and  the  tale  of  their
former  lives  to  Somadevi,  Sulochana,  and  Indrasena.
In  this  fashion  I  pass,  indeed,  as  counselor,  but  am  in
fact  crown  prince,  and  spend  gay  days  with  gayest
ladies.”

“  ‘So  he  lived,  the  one  sure  friend  of  everybody,
constant  in  kindness  even  to  a  creature  like  me.  And
when  an  intestinal  disorder  took  his  father-in-law  to
heaven — the  queen’s  eldest  brother  Chandaghosha
having  previously  tapered  to  annihilation  in  conse¬
quence  of  excessive  attachment  to  women — the


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


1 33


worthy  man  anointed  Prince  Simhaghosha,  a  lad  of
some  five  years,  and  gave  him  fitting  education.  But
the  boy  has  the  quick  passions  of  youth;  and  certain
cronies  of  slander-loving  Chandaghosha  have  trapped
him,  saying:  “That  snake  violated  your  sister.  After¬
ward,  while  the  king  slept,  he  lifted  a  sword  to  kill
him.  The  king,  scarcely  awake,  was  frightened  into
compliance  and  gave  his  daughter.  Then  he  poisoned
the  king’s  eldest  heir  Chandaghosha,  and  at  this
moment  is  using  you,  whom  he  thinks  a  helpless  boy,
as  a  figurehead  to  lull  suspicion  in  the  people;  but
presently  he  will  make  way  with  you — he  is  quite  cal¬
lous.  So  strive  to  send  him  to  the  death-god’s  city.”
Though  thus  corrupted,  the  boy  was  unable,  from  fear
of  the  fairy  Taravali,  to  do  him  an  injury.

“  ‘In  these  same  days  the  queen  dowager  Sula-
kshana,  observing  an  alteration  in  the  bearing  of  Kanti-
mati,  made  affectionate  inquiry.  “Your  Majesty,”
she  said,  “you  cannot  play  fast  and  loose  with  me.
Give  me  the  true  explanation  of  the  recent  alteration
in  your  flower-face.”  And  she  replied:  “Madam,  can
you  recall  that  I  ever  played  fast  and  loose  with  you  ?
My  friend  and  fellow-wife  Taravali  is  grumpy  because
our  husband,  when  alone  with  her,  blunderingly  used
my  name  to  her;  she  disdained  my  fondness,  she
scorned  my  submissive  courtesy,  she  flounced  away  in
a  huff.  And  our  husband  is  depressed.  Hence  my
melancholy.”  The  pith  of  this  Sulakshana  whispered
to  her  beloved  boy,  who  now  forgets  his  fear.  While


134


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Kamapala  betrayed  the  pain  of  separation  in  features
jaundiced  by  longing  for  his  love,  in  eyes  dimmed  by
tears  that  manhood  would  not  shed,  in  somewhat  sap¬
less  speech  turned  arid  (as  it  seemed)  by  burning
sighs,  while  he  could  hardly  perform  his  functions  at
court,  the  boy  had  him  seized  and  fettered  by  conspir¬
ators.  His  imputed  crimes  are  trumpeted  from  place
to  place,  and  his  eyes  are  to  be  torn  out  with  such  sav-
agery  that  death  may  ensue.  This  is  why  I  stand
alone  and  weep  my  fill;  this  is  why  I  gird  my  loins  and
long  to  die  in  that  most  generous  presence.’

“Now  when  I  learned  my  father’s  perilous  plight,
I  said  in  a  rush  of  tears:  ‘My  honest  friend,  why  hide
the  truth  from  you?  I  am  that  son  of  his  whom  the
Yaksha  lady  gave  in  pledge  to  Queen  Vasumati,  that
he  might  humbly  serve  Prince  Rajavahana.  I  feel  in
me  the  power  to  kill  a  thousand  hirelings  with  uplifted
weapons  in  order  to  rescue  my  father.  Yet  if  one  man,
during  the  scuffle,  should  sink  a  knife  in  his  body,
then  all  my  effort  would  be  but  an  offering  in  dead
ashes.’

“Before  the  words  were  out,  a  great  snake  raised
his  head  through  a  hole  in  the  wall.  I  charmed  him
and  drugged  him  and  caught  him,  then  said  to  Pur-
nabhadra:  ‘Dear  friend,  our  end  is  gained.  Unnoticed
in  the  scuffle,  I  will  let  this  fellow  drop  and  will  make
him  bite  Father,  but  will  arrest  the  poisoning  process
just  at  the  point  where  he  will  be  left  for  dead.  Mean¬
while,  you  must  fearlessly  enlighten  my  mother,  say-


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


135


mg:  “Your  son  whom  the  Yaksha  lady  entrusted  to
Queen  Vasumati  in  the  forest,  has  returned,  has
learned  his  father’s  plight  from  me,  and  will  use  his
wit  to  do  thus  and  so.  Now  you  must  overcome  your
diffidence  and  send  this  petition  to  the  king:  ‘It  is
doubtless  a  warrior’s  duty  to  chastise  a  scoundrel,
whether  relative  or  not,  without  compunction;  but  it
is  a  woman’s  duty  to  follow  the  fate  of  her  husband,
whether  scoundrel  or  not.  Therefore  I  shall  mount  the
pyre  with  him.  Pray  authorize  the  final  rite  that  be¬
fits  a  young  woman.’  And  he  will  certainly  grant  this
request.  Then  you  must  convey  your  husband  to  his
own  dwelling  and  lay  him  on  a  bed  of  sacred  grass  in
an  unfrequented  corner  screened  by  a  curtain,  while
you  wait  near  by  in  the  costume  of  a  wife  who  follows
her  husband  in  death.  Presently  I  will  arrive  in  the
outer  court  and  will  be  admitted  by  you.  I  will  resus¬
citate  Father,  and  we  will  follow  his  recommendation
as  to  subsequent  action.”  ’  The  fellow  agreed  and  joy¬
fully  bustled  off.

“At  the  place  of  proclamation  I  climbed  a  tama¬
rind  tree  with  thick,  spreading  branches,  and  lay  hid¬
den,  while  the  crowd  sought  the  highest  spots  they
could  find;  and  high  and  low  their  chattering  buzz  be¬
gan.  Then  my  father  was  brought  forth,  his  arms
bound  like  a  thief’s  behind  his  back,  the  center  of  a
gabbling  throng.  Just  below  me  they  halted  him
while  the  headsman  thrice  made  this  proclamation:
‘This  is  Kamapala,  the  counselor.  Coveting  the  king-


1 36


THE  TEN  PRINCES


dom,  he  clandestinely  poisoned  his  sovereign  Chanda-
simha  and  the  heir  apparent,  Chandaghosha.  Fur¬
ther,  he  plotted  evil  against  our  present  monarch
Simhaghosha,  who  now  comes  to  years  of  discretion.
He  confidentially  summoned  to  a  secret  interview  the
counselor  Shivanaga,  likewise  Sthuna  and  Angaravar-
sha,  and  babbled  of  royal  murder.  These  loyal  men
reported  the  plot,  and  the  judge  decreed  deprivation
of  vision  as  the  legal  penalty  for  this  kingdom-covet¬
ing  Brahman.  He  is  now  on  his  way  to  have  his  eyes
torn  out.  And  if  any  second  criminal  be  detected,  His
Majesty  will  in  like  manner  visit  upon  him  the  appro¬
priate  penalty.’

“While  the  crowd  cheered  this  announcement,  I
dropped  the  snake — whose  hood  swelled  wickedly —
on  my  father.  Then  I  jumped  dowm  as  if  terrified;  es¬
caped  identification  in  the  throng;  and  when  the  vi¬
cious  serpent  stung  my  father,  I  quickly  checked  the
venom’s  effect,  saving  his  life,  though  he  seemed
dead  as  he  sank  to  the  ground.  ‘It  is  a  fact,’  I  cried,

*  that  chastisement  from  heaven  falls  on  him  who
scorns  his  king.  The  sovereign  planned  to  take  his
sight — fate  takes  his  life.’  Some  approved  my  dic¬
tum,  but  others  carped;  while  the  snake  bit  the  heads¬
man  too  and  left  the  scene;  for  the  frightened  crowd
dispersed  and  made  way  for  him.

“Then  my  mother,  learning  the  facts  from  Pur-
nabhadra,  displayed  peculiar  self-possession  even  in
face  of  such  an  exigency:  accompanied  by  servants  of


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


137


the  family,  she  boldly  came  on  foot,  sat  holding  my
father’s  head  in  her  lap,  and  made  this  request  of  the
king:  ‘This  is  my  husband;  whether  guilty  or  not
guilty  toward  you,  heaven  only  knows.  That  specula¬
tion  is  profitless  to  me.  But  he  held  my  hand  in  mar¬
riage;  I  should  bring  dishonor  on  your  family,  should
I  abandon  him.  Pray  permit  me  to  mount  the  pyre
with  my  dear  lord.’  This  proposal  delighted  the  sov¬
ereign,  who  decreed:  ‘Let  there  be  rites  consonant  with
family  dignity.  After  their  celebration,  let  my  sister’s
husband  experience  the  ultimate  sacrament.’

“Now  the  headsman  departed  this  life  because  I
prevented  every  application  of  medical  magic;  and
when  I  pointed  out  that  Kamapala  had  been  bitten  by
the  same  cobra,  the  king  permitted  transference  to  his
own  dwelling  for  a  funeral  eulogy.  So  my  father  was
brought  home  and  laid  on  a  bed  of  sacred  grass  in  an
unfrequented  corner.  Then  my  mother  donned  her
death-vestments,  bade  her  friends  a  pathetic  adieu,
paid  lingering  worship  to  the  house  divinities,  earnest¬
ly  repressed  the  servants’  lamentations,  and  entered
alone  where  stood  my  father’s  bed.  There  she  beheld
her  husband  sound  and  well,  for  I  had  previously  been
admitted  by  Purnabhadra  and  had  neutralized  the
poison.

“With  the  gushing  tears  of  supreme  delight  she
fell  at  her  husband’s  feet;  then  hugged  me  again  and
again,  while  her  breasts  grew  moist  and  joyful  sobbing
struggled  with  stammering  speech :  ‘My  son,  I  wickedly


1 38


THE  TEN  PRINCES


deserted  you  the  moment  you  were  born.  I  was  heart¬
less  to  you;  how  can  you  be  so  kind  to  me?  Ah,  but
your  father  did  no  wrong;  you  were  right  to  snatch
him  from  the  jaws  of  death.  Still,  Taravali  has  no
feeling;  she  really  received  you  from  the  god  Kubera
and  gave  you  to  Queen  Vasumati,  did  not  give  you  to
me.  No,  it  was  quite  natural.  I  was  not  good  enough.
Such  a  heap  of  luck  it  would  be  if  a  wretch  like  me
could  drink  in  the  nectar  of  your  baby-talk.  Come,
embrace  me!’  And  again  and  again  she  stroked  my
head,  drew  me  to  her  lap,  scolded  Taravali,  hugged
me,  drenched  me  with  tears;  her  slender  body  quiv¬
ered,  and  for  a  time  she  seemed  another  woman.

“My  father  also,  lifted  from  hell  to  heaven,  from
woe  so  bitter  to  happiness  so  complete,  extracted
every  detail  of  the  story  from  Purnabhadra,  and
counted  himself  more  blest  than  heaven’s  blessed
king.  But  when  I  had  given  a  brief  account  of  myself,
I  said — for  my  parents  were  lost  in  joy  and  wonder:
‘You  must  give  orders  for  our  future  course  of  action.’
‘My  dear  son,’  said  my  father,  ‘this  house  of  ours  is
walled  in  an  extensive  circuit,  it  is  an  inexhaustible  re¬
pository  of  weapons,  and  its  defenses  are  unassailable.
Moreover,  many  feudatories  are  under  obligation  to
me,  and  a  majority  of  the  citizens  do  not  approve  my
degradation.  Besides,  I  have  some  thousands  of  sol¬
diers,  with  friends,  sons,  and  wives.  So  let  us  hold  our
ground  for  a  few  days,  stirring  passions  foreign  and
domestic.  We  will  direct  these  passions;  will  instigate


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


*39


to  effort  subjects,  enemies,  and  hereditary  foes;  and
will  extirpate  this  intractable  king.’  ‘So  be  it.  I  see
no  objection,’  said  I,  approving  Father’s  plan.

“While  we  stood  thus  on  the  defensive,  the  king
learned  the  story  with  qualms  of  self-reproach  and  ap¬
plied  various  offensive  maneuvres,  which  we  coun¬
tered  day  by  day.  In  this  posture  of  affairs  I  discov¬
ered  through  Purnabhadra  the  location  of  the  king’s
sleeping  quarters  and  at  once  dug  a  tunnel  with  a
snake’s-head  spade,  starting  from  the  corner  of  the
wall  of  our  own  dwelling  and  debouching  in  a  girls’
dormitory,  a  regular  heaven  on  earth,  where  the
womenfolk  were  flustered  on  beholding  me.  One
maiden  among  them  seemed  the  crescent  moon,  dis¬
concerting  with  her  loveliness  the  dark  of  the  under¬
world;  or  the  earth-goddess  in  living  flesh  and  blood;
or  Shiva’s  bride  descending  to  vanquish  demons;  or
the  blessed  love-god’s  love  sojourning  in  the  world  be¬
low;  or  kingly  glory  hiding  in  a  hole  to  escape  the
sight  of  so  many  unworthy  kings;  or  an  image  of  bur¬
nished  gold,  dazzling  in  splendor.  She  trembled  be¬
fore  me  like  a  sandal  sapling  before  the  southern
breeze.

“In  this  company  of  ladies,  constituted  as  de¬
scribed,  there  was  a  silver-haired  chaperon— she
seemed  a  stalk  of  the  white-blooming  grass— who  fell
at  my  feet  and  said  with  timid  dejection:  ‘Pray  grant
us  a  guaranty  of  safety,  for  we  are  women,  and  have
no  other  recourse.  Are  you  a  prince,  athirst  for  com-


THE  TEN  PRINCES


1 40

bat  with  devils,  eager  to  enter  hell?  Pray  tell  us  your
name  and  the  cause  of  your  coming.’

“And  I  replied:  ‘Ladies,  feel  no  fear.  I  am  Artha-
pala,  son  of  the  distinguished  Brahman  Kamapala
and  of  Queen  Kantimati.  For  good  and  sufficient  rea¬
sons  I  was  threading  a  tunnel  connecting  my  house
with  the  palace  and,  in  so  doing,  encountered  you.
Tell  me,’  said  I,  ‘who  you  are  and  how  you  come  to
dwell  here.’

“The  old  lady  lifted  her  hands  and  spoke:  ‘Blest
are  we,  my  prince,  that  these  eyes  see  you  safe.  Lis¬
ten.  To  Chandasimha,  your  mother’s  father,  Queen
Lilavati  bore  two  children,  Chandaghosha  and  Kan¬
timati.  Now  Chandaghosha,  the  heir  apparent,  was
excessively  attached  to  women;  consequently  he  faded
away  and  went  to  heaven  during  the  pregnancy  of
his  queen  Acharavati,  who  later  gave  birth  to  a
daughter,  the  maiden  here  present,  Manikarnika.
But  the  pangs  of  labor  slew  her,  and  she  followed  her
husband.  Then  King  Chandasimha  summoned  me  se¬
cretly  and  issued  orders,  thus:  “Riddhimati,  this
maiden  shows  the  signs  of  future  fortune.  Hence  I
plan  to  educate  her  properly  and  give  her  to  Darpa-
sara,  heir  of  the  monarch  of  Malwa.  Yet  I  feel  some
fear,  derived  from  the  doings  of  Kantimati,  as  to  the
public  acknowledgment  of  nubile  maidens.  You  there¬
fore  (with  generous  assistance)  are  to  rear  her  in
a  great  subterranean  dwelling,  which  I  have  con¬
structed,  to  baffle  my  enemies,  in  the  recesses  of  an


ARTHAPALA’S  ADVENTURE


141

artificial  hill,  providing  it  with  numerous  rooms  for
social  and  theatrical  use.  It  contains  supplies  that
you  could  not  exhaust  in  a  hundred  years.”  Hereupon
in  the  double  thickness  of  the  wall  of  his  own  apart¬
ment  he  shot  back  a  panel  for  a  cubit’s  breadth  and
through  the  opening  compelled  us  to  enter  this  place,
where  we  have  seen  the  passing  of  twelve  years  and
where  this  girl  has  grown  from  child  to  woman.  Mean¬
while,  the  king  has  quite  forgotten.  By  her  grand¬
father,  it  is  true,  this  maiden  was  destined  to  Darpa-
sara;  but  before  her  birth,  your  mother  Kantimati
won  her  in  a  game  of  chance,  so  that  her  own  mother
promised  her  as  wife  to  you.  Hence  you  alone,  my
prince,  should  plan  what  is  proper.’

“And  I  rejoined:  T  must  first  finish  a  small  job  in
the  palace;  then  I  will  return  and  do  what  is  right  by
you.’  So  I  followed  a  passage  which  they  lighted,  shot
the  panel,  entered  the  chamber  where  Simhaghosha
slept  securely  at  dead  of  night,  and  captured  him
alive.  Like  the  king  of  birds  with  a  snake,  I  clutched
and  bore  my  wriggling  prey  through  that  same  hole
in  the  wall  into  the  presence  of  the  ladies.  I  took  him
home,  fastened  his  feet  with  fetters  of  iron,  and  pri¬
vately  exhibited  him  to  my  parents,  his  face  dirty
from  measuring  the  dwelling,  his  eyes  reddened  by
copious  tears;  and  I  told  the  story  of  the  secret  pas¬
sage.

“My  parents,  overjoyed,  multiplied  his  fetters —
for  they  were  alert  to  his  evil  disposition — and  with


142


THE  TEN  PRINCES


all  due  ceremony  bestowed  the  damsel’s  hand  upon
me.  The  kingdom  lacked  a  lord  and  fell  to  us.  My
mother  suggested  the  liberation  of  Simhaghosha,  but
we  dreaded  sedition  and  kept  him  a  prisoner.  Such
was  our  situation  when  the  Anga  king,  Simhavarman,
was  assailed  by  enemies;  and  we,  aware  of  his  devoted
loyalty  to  you,  sir,  marched  to  his  relief.  Thus  I  was
honored  by  sprinklings  of  dust  from  your  lotus-feet.
And  now  let  Simhaghosha,  though  all  unworthy,
cleanse  himself  of  all  his  trespasses  by  propitiatory
prostration  at  your  feet.”  And  Arthapala  raised  his
hands  and  bowed.

Then  Prince  Rajavahana  spoke:  “Great  valor,  and
great  ingenuity  of  design !  Let  your  kinsman  be  liber¬
ated  and  brought  before  me.”  He  turned  to  Pramati,
saying  with  an  affectionate  smile:  “We  now  await
your  adventure.”


CHAPTER  X

PRAMATFS  ADVENTURE

He  bowed  and  told  this  tale.  “Your  Majesty,
when  widely  wandering  in  search  of  you,  I  once  came
to  a  halt  beneath  a  lordly,  sky-scraping  tree  that
grew  on  Vindhya’s  side.  Since  still  the  declining  sun,
like  a  spray  of  blossoms,  adorned  the  brow  of  the
West,  I  bathed  in  the  waters  of  a  pool;  then  paid
homage  to  the  twilight  while  darkness  slowly  leveled
gulch  and  hill.  To  make  a  bed,  I  strewed  the  ground
with  flowering  twigs;  then  lifted  my  hands  and  prayed:
‘May  the  resident  divinity  of  this  tree  be  my  refuge  as
I  sleep  unguarded  in  this  wild  wood,  fierce  with  its
hosts  of  murderous  prowlers,  with  its  deep  caves
puffed  with  floods  of  nocturnal  darkness  black  as
Shiva’s  neck.’  And  I  lay  down,  pillowing  my  head  on
my  left  arm.

“A  moment  later,  my  limbs  were  strangely  thrill¬
ing  to  such  felicity  as  earth  can  hardly  show,  my
senses  were  steeped  in  ecstasy,  my  soul  was  filled  with
life  and  joy,  my  hair  was  rapturously  erect,  my  right
arm  throbbing  auspiciously.  I  slowly  opened  wonder¬
ing  eyes  to  behold  above  me  an  awning  of  dazzling
silk,  that  seemed  a  beam  of  the  spotless  moon.  Glanc¬
ing  toward  the  left,  I  observed  gay  couches  along  a
mortared  wall,  where  women  most  securely  slept.


143


x44


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Turning  to  the  right,  I  perceived  a  single  maiden,  who
lay  on  a  bed  white  as  a  mass  of  nectar  foam.  The
finely  woven  shift  slipped  from  her  bosom;  to  her  per¬
son  clung  clustered  light  like  the  tusk  of  the  primal
boar;  loose  on  her  shoulder  hung  a  silken  robe  that  re¬
called  the  sea  of  milk:  she  seemed  the  earth-goddess,
fainting  with  fear.  With  the  breath  of  sighs  that
caused  red  rays  of  light  to  ripple  gaily  round  her  blos¬
som-lip,  sighs  that  were  laden  with  fragrance  from  her
flower-face,  she  seemed  to  fan  the  dying  spark  of  love
slain  by  the  deadly  fire  of  Shiva’s  eye;  the  lovely  eyes
were  closed,  the  face  asleep,  as  when  imprisoned  bees
lie  slumbering  in  the  folded  lily’s  cup.  She  seemed  a
jeweled  vine  from  the  wishing- tree  in  Paradise,
plucked  by  the  arrogant  elephant  of  heaven,  and
tossed  to  earth.

“And  I  reflected:  ‘What  has  become  of  the  wild
forest?  And  how  is  it  replaced  by  this  massive  palace
that  towers  like  the  war-god’s  sharp-pronged  lance
and  grazes  the  empyrean  vault?  What  has  become  of
the  flowery  bed  strewn  on  the  forest  floor?  And  how
is  it  replaced  by  this  couch  of  swan’s-down  and  silk,
brilliant  as  moon-rays  massed?  Who  are  these  lovely
sleepers,  calm  as  a  bevy  of  nymphs  that  have  swooned
on  falling  from  swings  whose  cords  are  made  of  moon¬
beams?  And  who  is  she  of  the  lotus-hands,  who  lies
like  a  goddess  on  a  bed  of  silk  spotless  as  the  full  moon
of  autumn?  No  goddess  can  she  be,  for  she  shrinks
like  a  lotus-cluster  at  the  soft  caress  of  moonlight;  for


PRAMATI’S  ADVENTURE


145


her  cheek,  dotted  with  pearls  of  weariness,  seems  a
mango  fruit,  white  and  ripe,  dappled  with  drops  of
sap  that  dripped  from  the  broken  stem;  for  her  breath
comes  panting,  fired  by  her  new- won  womanhood;  the
pigment  pales  on  her  breast;  her  garments  show  the
soil  of  use.  She  must  be  mortal  woman.  Yet — heaven
be  praised ! — her  youth  is  virgin :  for  her  limbs  are  sup¬
ple,  though  rich  in  feminine  grace;  her  complexion,
though  winsome  exceedingly,  is  interwoven  with  pal¬
lor;  her  face  has  nothing  florid,  a  stranger  to  the  pres¬
sure  of  remorse;  her  lip  is  a  jewel,  clear  as  coral;  her
firmly  modeled  cheek  is  not  too  rounded  nor  too  red,
but  like  the  petal  of  a  champak  bud;  she  sleeps  in
sweet  security,  free  from  fear  of  shafts  of  love;  her
breast  is  innocent  of  passion’s  pitiless  deformation;
and  I,  whose  heart  respects  the  bounds  of  righteous¬
ness — I  love  her.  But  if  my  love  is  fully  shown  in  an
embrace,  she  will  surely  wake  with  a  scream.  Yet,
not  embracing  her,  I  shall  never  sleep  again.  Well,
come  what  may,  I  will  put  fortune  to  the  test.  So  I
touched  her  gently,  but  myself  feigned  sleep,  in  a
strange  commingling  of  passion  and  timidity.

“A  curious  tremor  shook  her.  Though  her  left  side
thrilled  with  pleasure,  the  slow  beginnings  of  a  yawn
left  her  limbs  languid.  The  lifting  lashes  quivered
over  half-opened  eyes  still  dimmed  by  weariness,  the
perfect  charm  of  her  girlish  glance  subdued  by  un¬
completed  sleep.  Stirred  by  miracle-working  love,  her
shy  states  of  feeling  shifted  (but  description  is  vain)


146


THE  TEN  PRINCES


being  compounded  of  fright  and  wonder  and  joy  and
passion  and  apprehension  and  gayety  and  woman’s
wish  to  charm.  The  voice  that  strove  to  wake  her
maidens,  the  heart  that  was  yielding  to  assaulting
love,  the  limbs  on  which  her  agitation  issued  as  pearls
of  moisture— these  with  a  mighty  effort  she  held  to
their  service.  Sweetly  peeping,  her  eager  eyes
marched  to  slow  reconnaissance  of  my  person.  She
raised  her  head  and  shoulders,  yet  still  lay  timidly  up¬
on  the  bed.

“For  all  my  depth  of  love,  a  drowsiness  overcame
me;  1  know  not  how.  My  body  suffered  sensations  of
discomfort,  and  I  awoke.  Awake,  I  saw  before  me  the
same  wild  forest,  the  same  great  tree,  the  same  couch
of  leaves.  And  night  grew  light  with  dawn.  And  in
my  mind  was  fixed  this  mystery  and  purpose:  ‘Was  it
dream?  Hallucination?  Illusion  sent  by  devils  or  by
gods?  Come  what  may,  I  will  not  leave  this  bed  of
earth  until  I  know  the  truth.  While  life  persists,  I
will  lie  down  beside  this  goddess.’

“A  woman  appeared  before  me.  Her  slender  figure
drooped  like  a  chaplet  of  lilies  scorched  by  the  rays  of
the  sun;  her  robe  was  travel  stained.  Her  lips,  stran¬
gers  to  rouge  and  showing  pale,  their  luster  fading
under  burning  sighs,  seemed  to  be  spouting  dusky
smoke  from  the  gloomy  fire  of  separated  love;  her  eyes
were  reddened,  as  if  unceasing  streams  of  weeping  had
drained  them,  leaving  only  blood  behind.  With  her
abundant  hair  plaited  in  a  single  braid  and  fluttering


PRAMATI’S  ADVENTURE


147


only  within  the  bonds  of  chaste  decorum,  with  her
black  hood  of  a  fabric  finely  woven  but  tattered,  she
seemed  the  animate  banner  of  wifely  fidelity.  Though
sadly  wasted,  she  retained,  through  heavenly  inter¬
vention,  some  freshness  of  color.

“I  fell  at  her  feet.  Two  graceful  arms  that  quiv¬
ered  with  joy  helped  me  to  rise.  She  embraced  me
as  a  son,  stroked  my  head;  and  the  milk  of  tender  af¬
fection  flowed  from  her  breasts;  tears  less  scalding
choked  her  utterance  as  she  lovingly  stammered:  ‘My
dear,  my  dear!  Did  Vasumati,  queen  of  Magadha’s
monarch,  tell  you  how  Manibhadra’s  daughter,  Tara-
vali,  delivered  to  her  hand  the  baby  Arthapala  and
disappeared  after  narrating  a  strange  tale  learned
from  the  god  Kubera  and  relating  to  herself,  her  hus¬
band,  her  son,  and  her  friends?  Well,  I  am  Taravali,
the  mother  of  you  boys.  Vexed  with  unreasoning
pique,  I  flounced  away  from  the  protecting  care
of  your  father  Kamapala,  son  of  Dharmapala  and
younger  brother  of  Sumantra.  Penitent  and  lonely,  I
was  visited  in  a  vision  by  a  goblin-like  creature  who
laid  a  curse  on  me,  saying:  “You  are  jealous.  That
you  may  suffer  a  full  year  of  loneliness,  I  will  possess
you.”  And  even  as  he  spoke,  I  awoke,  imp-ridden.
That  year  is  gone,  long  as  a  thousand  years.  Last
night,  having  learned  of  a  festive  assembly  summoned
in  Shravasti  by  Shiva,  god  of  gods,  and  seeing  my
kinsfolk  convoked  from  every  quarter,  I  started,
curse-free,  to  seek  my  husband’s  side;  at  that  moment


148


THE  TEN  PRINCES


you  arrived  and  fell  asleep  with  the  prayer:  “May  the
resident  divinity  be  my  refuge.”  Still  clogged  by  the
cruel  curse,  I  did  not  at  the  moment  fully  recognize
you,  yet  realized  that  I  could  not  abandon  a  suppliant
to  the  unending  hazards  of  this  wild  wood;  I  therefore
took  you  with  me  as  you  slept.

“  ‘But  when  I  drew  near  the  hall  where  gods  were
gathered,  I  reflected  that  I  could  not  attend  the  divine
assembly  in  company  of  a  mortal  youth.  Just  then  I
chanced  to  perceive  Navamalika,  daughter  of  Shra-
vasti’s  sovereign  who  is  deservedly  named  Dharma-
vardhana,  Virtue’s  Extender.  She  lay,  for  relief  from
summer  heat,  on  a  soft  and  spacious  couch  upon  the
palace  balcony,  and  I  thought:  “Thank  heaven!  She
slumbers,  and  her  maidens  are  deep  in  sleep.  This
princely  Brahman  may  rest  here  a  mere  moment  until
I  return,  my  duty  done”;  and  I  laid  you  there  to  rest
while  I  sought  my  destination.

“  ‘When  I  had  inspected  the  splendid  festival,  had
felt  the  comfort  of  converse  with  my  own  people,  and
had  shown  veneration  for  the  lord  of  the  triple  uni¬
verse  with  a  diffidence  enhanced  by  consciousness  of
my  own  transgression,  I  paid  homage  to  the  blessed
mother,  the  mountain’s  daughter,  Shiva’s  devoted
goddess-bride,  who  favored  me  with  the  smiling
words:  “No  more  fear,  my  dear.  Now  abide  at  your
husband’s  side.  The  curse  is  overpast.”

“  ‘At  once  my  self-possession  was  restored.  I  re¬
turned,  and  seeing  you,  knew  you  for  what  you  are.


PRAMATI’S  ADVENTURE


149


“See,”  I  said,  “this  is  the  friend  and  very  life  of  dar¬
ling  Arthapala:  this  is  my  son  Pramati,  to  whom,  in
ignorance  indeed,  I  have  been  heartlessly  indifferent.
For  now  his  love  is  fixed  upon  her,  and  the  maiden
loves  the  youth.  Yet  both  feign  sleep  and — whether
from  shyness  or  alarm — do  not  communicate  their
feeling.  And  I  must  go,  while  still  this  maiden,
breathed  upon  by  love,  preserves  her  secret  unimpart¬
ed  to  friend  or  waiting-maid.  For  the  moment  I  re¬
move  the  prince,  that  he  may  later  create  his  oppor¬
tunity,  find  fit  means,  and  gain  his  goal.”  So  I  used
my  power  to  plunge  you  into  slumber,  and  returned
you  to  this  leafy  bed.  Such  is  the  truth.  Now  I
would  seek  your  father’s  kindness.’  And  as  I  bowed,
she  embraced  me  time  and  again,  stroked  my  head,
kissed  me  on  both  cheeks,  and  departed,  faint  with
affection.  Then  I,  a  slave  to  love,  turned  my  face  to
Shravasti.

“On  the  journey  I  came  to  a  large  market  town,
where  business  men  were  raising  a  tremendous  bom-
bilation  over  a  cockfight,  so  that  I  could  not  repress  a
snicker  as  I  joined  them.  And  a  certain  Brahman
who  sat  near  me,  a  gay  old  gentleman,  quietly  asked
an  explanation  of  my  merriment.  ‘How  in  the  world,’
said  I,  ‘can  men  be  such  fatheads  as  to  match  Crane,
that  cock  in  the  western  pen,  against  Cocoanut,  the
rooster  in  the  eastern  pen?  Cocoanut  outclasses  him.’
‘Be  still,’  said  the  wise  old  boy.  ‘Don’t  give  these  nin¬
nies  a  tip,’  and  he  handed  me  some  betel  gum  (cam-


THE  TEN  PRINCES


I5°

phor  flavor)  from  his  little  box,  filling  in  the  intermis¬
sion  with  spicy  anecdotes.  Then  the  two  birds  went
at  each  other  full  tilt,  stab  and  counterstab,  with
wing-flapping  and  defiant  cock-a-doodling.  And  the
poor  cock  from  the  western  pen  was  beaten.  The  old
gentleman,  delighted  at  backing  a  winner,  made  a
friend  of  me  in  spite  of  the  disparity  in  age;  gave  me  a
bath,  food,  and  other  comforts  in  his  own  house  that
day;  and  when  I  started  next  morning  for  Shravasti,
he  set  me  on  my  road,  turning  back  with  the  friendly
farewell:  ‘Don’t  forget  me  when  your  business  is
done.’

“I  continued  to  Shravasti,  where,  weary  with  trav¬
el,  I  lay  down  to  rest  among  vines  in  a  park  outside
the  city.  Awakened  by  the  cry  of  swans,  I  rose  to  see
a  maiden  drawing  near,  whose  feet  were  eloquent  with
tinkling  anklets.  She  approached,  alternating  her  at¬
tention  between  me  and  the  figure  of  a  man  resem¬
bling  me,  drawn  on  a  tablet  which  she  held  in  her
hand;  she  stood  for  a  time  in  wonder,  speculation,  and

j°y;<

“So,  seeing  my  own  likeness  there  on  the  tablet
and  assuming  that  the  play  of  her  glances  was  not  ac¬
cidental,  I  said:  ‘Surely  this  pleasant  spot,  this  dedi¬
cated  garden,  is  common  property.  Why  weary  your¬
self  with  irksome  standing?  Will  you  not  be  seated?’
And  she  sat  down  with  the  smiling  reply:  ‘You  are
very  thoughtful  of  me.’  Our  desultory  conversation
developed  some  personal  detail,  on  which  she  relied  to


PRAMATI’S  ADVENTURE


151

remark:  ‘You  are  a  guest  in  my  country  and  seem
somewhat  fatigued  by  travel.  If  it  is  not  wrong,  you
would  confer  a  favor  by  resting  today  in  my  house.’
‘My  dear  young  lady,’  said  I,  ‘it  is  not  wrong  at  all,
quite  the  reverse,  rather’;  and  I  followed  her  home,
where  I  was  served  with  a  bath,  food,  and  entertain¬
ment  fit  for  a  king.  When  I  was  comfortably  seated,
she  secretly  inquired:  ‘In  your  devious  journey ings,
dear  sir,  did  you  anywhere  by  any  chance  encounter
anything  in  the  nature  of  a  miracle?’

“Then  this  flashed  through  my  mind:  ‘There  is
genuine  ground  for  hope.  This  girl  may  be  a  friend  of
the  princess,  who  may  have  been  unriddled  by  the
whole  obtrusive  throng  of  waiting-women.  Why,  on
this  tablet  appears  the  palace  balcony,  with  its  orient
awning  shading  her;  the  sweetly  tumbled  couch,
shimmering  like  clustered  clouds  of  autumn;  and  the
likeness  of  myself,  at  rest  against  its  edge,  my  eyes
lapped  in  slumber.  Oh,  surely  the  princess  too  has
been  laid  so  low  by  love  that  she,  frantic  with  feverish
torment  of  unendurable  feeling,  persistently  pestered
by  solicitous  friends,  gave  them  an  adequate  answer
by  this  creation  of  careless  artistry.  This  maiden
questions  me  because  her  suspicion  is  roused  by  the
correspondence  of  feature;  I  will  resolve  her  suspicion
by  telling  the  plain  truth.’

“With  this  purpose  I  said:  ‘Dear  maiden,  give  me
the  picture.’  And  she  put  it  in  my  hand.  I  took  it  and
added  my  darling,  counterfeiting  slumber,  faint  with


i52


THE  TEN  PRINCES


the  flickering  passion  of  love;  then  observed:  ‘When
asleep  in  a  vast,  wild  wood,  I  encountered  a  maid  like
that,  resting  beside  a  man  like  this.  Was  it  a  dream,
do  you  think?’  She  gleefully  demanded  details;  and  I
told  the  whole  story,  while  she  described  her  friend’s
varying  moods  toward  me.  Then  I  said:  ‘If  your
friend’s  heart  inclines  to  show  me  kindness,  wait  a
few  days.  I  will  return  when  I  have  devised  some
plan  for  dwelling  in  the  maidens’  quarters  without
awakening  suspicion.’  I  won  her  reluctant  assent,  re¬
turned  to  the  market  town,  and  sought  out  my  gay
old  gentleman.

“He  gave  me  his  bustling  attention;  provided  a
bath,  food,  and  the  like  as  before;  then  inquired  pri¬
vately:  ‘Sir,  why  have  you  returned  so  promptly?’
‘You  have  reason  to  ask.  Listen,  sir,’  I  said.  ‘There
is  a  city  called  Shravasti,  whose  sovereign  is  King
Dharmavardhana,  an  epigonous  son  of  Virtue.  He  has
a  daughter  Navamalika,  the  refutation  of  Beauty,  the
life  of  Love,  the  denial  of  daintiness  to  the  jasmine
bud.  When  I  chanced  to  behold  her,  she  pierced  my
mortal  part  with  a  shower  of  sidelong  glances  that
seemed  a  flight  of  the  shafts  of  Love.  Impotent  to
draw  those  darts,  I  return  to  you,  a  physician  rivaled
only  by  the  divine  authority  on  medical  science.  Will
you  generously  play  a  part  in  my  plan  ?  I  wish  to  shift
to  woman’s  costume  and  to  become  your  daughter.
You  will  take  me  to  court  and  will  say  to  Dharma¬
vardhana  as  he  sits  on  his  judgment-seat:  “This  is


PRAM  ATI’S  ADVENTURE


T53


my  child,  my  only  daughter.  At  her  very  birth,  her
mother  found  final  rest.  I  have  reared  her,  a  mother
and  a  father  too.  Now  a  certain  Brahman  youth,
matrimonially  eligible,  has  gone  to  the  Avanti  capital,
Ujjain,  planning  for  her  sake  to  earn  his  marriage-
portion  of  education.  The  girl  has  a  fondness  for  him
and  should  not  be  bestowed  on  any  other.  But  she  is
a  young  woman,  and  he  is  dilatory.  I  wish  to  fetch
him,  marry  him  fast,  delegate  responsibility  to  him,
and  retire  to  religious  meditation.  In  view  of  the
difficulty  of  protecting  daughters  who  have  left  child¬
hood’s  years  behind,  more  particularly  motherless
daughters,  I  appear  before  Your  Majesty,  the  refuge
of  the  afflicted,  standing  toward  your  subjects  in  loco
parentis  utriusque.  If  Your  Majesty,  the  model  of  an¬
tique  royal  virtue,  can  regard  as  worthy  of  your  gra¬
cious  favor  an  aged  Brahman  of  some  scholarship,  no
resources,  and  postulant  humility,  permit  this  maiden
(whose  character  is  irreproachable)  to  repose  in  the
shadow  of  your  arm  until  I  fetch  her  predetermined
bridegroom.”

“  ‘To  this  he  will  certainly  give  joyful  assent  and
will  ask  me  to  live  with  his  daughter.  Now  on  the
twelfth  day  of  the  proximate  month,  when  you  are
gone,  there  will  be  a  festive  bathing  pilgrimage  of  the
court  ladies.  You  will  then  be  waiting,  with  a  bride¬
groom’s  trousseau,  in  a  temple  of  the  war-god,  lying
in  the  midst  of  a  clump  of  ratan  about  three  miles  east
of  the  bathing-pool.  I  will  spend  the  intervening


154


THE  TEN  PRINCES


time,  with  no  questions  asked,  in  the  pleasant  society
of  the  princess;  then  in  the  course  of  this  festival  I
will  playfully  enter  the  stream  of  Ganges;  and  while
all  the  girls  are  giddy  with  gayety,  I  will  dive  and
swim  under  water,  coming  to  the  surface  in  your  vi¬
cinity.  I  will  next  don  the  costume  you  have  brought,
discard  my  feminine  apparel,  and  follow  you,  nomi¬
nally  as  your  son-in-law  to  be.

“  ‘Now  when  the  princess  fails  to  find  me  after
searching  everywhere,  she  will  weep  and  mope  in  her
chamber,  saying:  “I  will  not  taste  food  without  that
girl.”  When  a  great  caterwauling  results,  when  serv¬
ants  bawl  and  girl  friends  whimper  and  citizens
mourn  and  king  and  counselors  are  at  their  wits’  end,
you  will  seek  an  audience,  exhibit  me,  and  say:  “Your
Majesty,  I  introduce  my  son-in-law,  a  deserving  serv¬
ant  of  your  might.  He  is  erudite  in  the  four  bodies
of  Scripture;  grounded  in  the  six  ancillary  disciplines;
a  master  of  formal  logic;  au  courant  both  as  to  theory
and  practice  in  the  sixty-four  social  accomplishments;
a  specialist  in  literature  relating  to  elephants,  chari¬
ots,  and  horses;  a  champion  archer  and  club-fighter;
versed  in  mythology  and  traditional  lore;  a  creative
artist  in  poetry,  drama,  and  sophisticated  fiction;  a
scholarly  economist  and  mystical  theologian;  never
envious  of  another’s  talent;  a  candid  friend;  capable;
generous;  blest  with  a  retentive  memory;  unassum¬
ing.  I  do  not  discover  in  him  the  most  minute  posi¬
tive  blemish,  or  deficiency  in  virtue.  Hence  he  should


PRAMATFS  ADVENTURE


155


not  enter  the  family  of  a  mere  Brahman  like  me.  Let
me  bestow  your  daughter  upon  him,  then — so  please
Your  Gracious  Majesty — proceed  to  that  final  self-ex¬
amination  that  befits  my  declining  years.”

“  ‘When  he  hears  this,  a  pallor  will  invade  his
countenance,  an  extreme  dubitancy  will  oppress  his
mind;  and  with  his  counselors  he  will  endeavor  to
pacify  you  by  preachments  on  the  impermanence  of
mortal  things.  You  will  turn  a  deaf  ear,  strain  your
lungs  in  lamentation,  choke  your  throat  with  cease¬
less  weeping,  bring  logs  of  wood,  kindle  a  fire  at  the
palace  entrance-gate,  and  prepare  to  mount  the  pyre.
Then  king  and  counselors  will  fall  at  your  feet,  the
king  will  bribe  you  with  unstinted  gifts,  and  will  give
me  his  daughter.  Presently,  appeased  by  my  compe¬
tence,  he  will  devolve  on  me  the  whole  burden  of
royal  administration.  This  seems  the  plan  to  pursue,
if  it  meets  your  approval.’

“Then  that  wisest  of  wise  old  gentlemen  (Pancha-
lasharman  was  his  name)  rehearsed  the  points  in  the
plot,  and  entered  on  its  execution,  adding  ingenious
details  of  his  own.  The  fruition  of  my  wishes  followed
according  to  schedule;  and,  like  a  bee,  I  tasted  the
flower  of  my  virgin  jasmine.  Thereafter,  with  the
double  purpose  of  succoring  King  Simhavarman  and
of  keeping  the  rendezvous  with  my  friends,  I  mobi¬
lized  all  my  troops  and  marched  hither  to  Champa,
where  heaven  grants  me  a  blissful  meeting  with  my
prince.”


1 56


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Having  heard  the  adventure  of  Pramati,  the  prince
observed,  while  a  smile  bloomed  slowly  on  his  face:
“Energy  disguised  as  grace,  vigorous  action  masked
by  gentle  manners — it  is  the  wise  man’s  way.  Now,”
and  he  turned  to  Mitragupta,  “you  have  your  en¬
trance  cue.”


CHAPTER  XI

MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE

He  told  this  tale.  “I  too.  Your  Majesty,  having
the  same  inducement  as  my  friends  for  wandering,
chanced  upon  a  great  festive  gathering  in  a  park  out¬
side  the  city  Damalipta  in  the  Suhma  country.  There
in  a  sequestered  bower  of  creeping  vines  I  beheld  a
pensive  youth,  diverting  his  thoughts  by  playing  a
lute.  ‘Dear  sir,’  I  asked,  cwhat  is  this  festival,  and  for
what  purpose  celebrated?  For  what  cause  do  you,  sir,
disregard  it  and  sit  apart  in  seeming  pensiveness,  v/ith
a  seven-stringed  lute  as  sole  companion?’

“And  he  replied:  ‘My  kindly  friend,  Tungadhan-
van,  the  childless  king  of  the  Suhma  country,  prayed
for  two  children  at  the  feet  of  Shiva’s  bride,  who  now,
forgetting  her  love  for  her  Vindhya  home,  dwells  in
yonder  shrine.  As  he  fasted  and  slept,  she  spoke  to
him  in  a  dream:  “One  son  shall  be  yours,  and  a  single
daughter  shall  be  born.  The  son  shall  live  a  servant
of  the  daughter’s  husband.  The  daughter,  on  the
third  day  of  every  month  from  her  seventh  year  until
her  marriage,  must  honor  me  by  a  dance  in  which  she
plays  with  a  ball,  that  she  may  acquire  a  virtuous
husband.  She  must  be  given  to  the  man  whom  she
loves.  And  this  festival  must  be  called  the  festival  of
the  ball.”


*57


i58


THE  TEN  PRINCES


“  ‘With  no  long  interval,  the  king’s  dear  queen,
Medini,  gave  birth  to  one  son,  and  a  single  daughter
was  born.  Today  the  princess  Kandukavati — the
girl  with  the  ball — will  honor  the  moon-browed  god¬
dess  with  her  ball  play.  But  her  friend  Chandrasena
has  been  my  foster-sister,  and  dear  to  me;  and  she,  in
recent  days,  has  been  the  object  of  impetuous  ad¬
vances  from  Prince  Bhimadhanvan.  Hence  I  sit  pen¬
sive  apart,  stabbed  by  the  darting  pain  of  Love’s
arrows,  seeking  a  trifling  consolation  in  the  plaintive
strain  of  the  lute.’

“At  this  moment  a  tinkle  of  anklets  drew  near,  and
a  maiden  appeared.  His  eye  bloomed  wide  when  he
saw  her;  he  rose,  and  when  he  sat  down  in  the  same
place,  her  arms  were  round  his  neck.  ‘This  is  my  life,’
he  chirped,  ‘whose  loss  burns  like  fire.  The  prince  is
Death,  taking  my  life  and  leaving  me  cold.  Yet
prince  he  is;  I  cannot  injure  him.  So  I  will  give  her
one  last,  lingering  look  at  my  person,  then  cease  to
draw  breath  that  has  no  recompense.’

“Her  face  swam  in  tears  as  she  clung  closer,  say¬
ing:  ‘My  dear  lord,  you  must  not  for  my  sake  dare
any  desperate  deed.  You  are  the  son  of  Arthadasa,  a
most  respectable  merchant,  and  your  elders  named
you  Koshadasa;  but  because  you  were  so  devoted  to
me,  your  enemies  gave  you  the  nickname  Veshadasa
— the  gay  girl’s  slave;  so  if  you  should  die  and  I  should
live,  I  should  prove  the  proverb  that  gay  girls  are
heartless.  Take  me  today  to  some  nice  country.’


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE


l$9


“He  turned  to  me  and  said:  ‘My  dear  sir,  among
the  kingdoms  visited  by  you,  which  one  is  wealthy,
fertile,  and  prevailingly  populated  by  the  virtuous?’
‘My  dear  sir,’  I  replied  with  a  slight  smile,  ‘the  sea-
clad  earth  is  wide.  There  is  no  end  of  pleasant  popu¬
lations  in  one  region  and  another.  Further,  if  unable
to  devise  a  plan  for  your  happiness  and  union  here,  I
will  myself  serve  as  guide.’

“At  this  point  the  jingling  of  jeweled  anklets  was
heard.  The  girl  jumped  up,  saying:  ‘She  has  come.
Princess  Kandukavati  is  about  to  honor  the  Vindhya-
dwelling  goddess  by  playing  ball.  At  this  festival  of
the  bail  the  exhibition  is  public.  Satisfy  your  eyes;
come  and  see.  I  must  wait  upon  her.’  She  went,  and
we  followed  her.

“The  red-lipped  princess  stood  on  a  great,  jeweled
dancing  platform  when  I  first  beheld  her.  So  straight¬
way  was  she  in  my  heart  that  neither  I  nor  any  other
saw  her  pass.  I  gazed  amazed  and  thought,  dis¬
traught:  ‘Is  this  the  goddess  Beauty?  No,  no.  In
Beauty’s  hand  a  lily  lies;  her  hand  is  the  lily’s  self.
Beauty  was  sought  by  primal  man  and  antique  kings;
her  virgin  virtue  is  unstaled  by  custom’s  history.’

“Even  as  I  meditated,  with  wholly  faultless  grace
she  crossed  her  hands  and  touched  the  earth  with
blossom  finger  tips;  her  black  curls  rippled  as  she  paid
a  fluttering  curtsy  to  the  blessed  goddess;  she  held  the
ball  as  if  she  held  the  love-god  in  her  hand,  his  eyes
flaring  with  impatient  passion.  With  playful  grace


i6o


THE  TEN  PRINCES


she  dropped  it  on  the  ground.  As  it  rose  sluggishly,
she  struck  it  with  her  flower-hand — the  thumb  a  little
bent,  the  tender  fingers  extended— bounced  it  from
the  back  of  her  hand,  and  caught  it  falling  in  mid-air,
while  her  flashing  glances  flickered  round  it  like  bees
about  a  blossom  cluster.  Then  she  let  it  fall.  Patting
or  pounding,  andante  or  allegro ,  she  kept  its  motion
timed  with  her  forward  or  backward  steps.  Inert,  she
made  it  hop  with  heartless  blows;  frisky,  she  soothed
it.  Sidewise  and  straight  she  struck,  with  the  left  hand
and  the  right  in  turn,  making  it  fly  like  a  bird.  If  it
soared  too  high,  she  caught  it,  taught  it  moderation;
she  tossed  it  wide  from  side  to  side,  then  brought  it
home.

“Such  was  her  sweet,  surprising  sport,  bringing
each  moment  the  cry  or  the  sigh  of  applause  from  the
fascinated  spectators  round  the  platform.  While  I
stood  gazing,  leaning  on  Koshadasa’s  shoulder,  with
tingling  cheek  and  widened  eye  and  momently  mount¬
ing  emotion,  she  learned  the  peeping  glance  of  co¬
quetry  from  love,  till  then  a  stranger,  her  graceful,
curving  eyebrows  swerving  sweetly  as  she  followed
the  flight  of  the  ball.  The  greedy  bees  that  sought  to
seize  the  fragrance  of  her  flower-face  she  seemed  to
pelt  with  blooming,  rippling  rays  of  light  reflected
from  her  lips,  rays  made  wavy  by  her  quick-drawn
breath.  In  her  swift  pursuit  of  whirling  circles  traced
by  the  ball,  she  seemed  to  inclose  herself  within  a
cage  of  flowers,  in  shy  avoidance  of  me.  She  struck  in


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  161


five  directions,  as  if  fearfully  baffling  the  love-god’s
five  arrows,  flying  simultaneously.  In  flexuous  dash
she  mocked  the  lightning  flash,  with  its  eager  gleam
against  the  dark.  Her  twinkling  feet  kept  time  to  the
tinkling  jewels  that  decked  her;  her  red  lip  was
washed  with  light  as  she  smiled  at  the  part  she  played;
she  tossed  to  its  place  the  wealth  of  hair  that  sought
her  shoulder.  With  the  jingle  of  stricken  gems  on  her
girdle  string,  with  the  gleam  of  rustling  silk  that
swung  from  her  swaying  hips,  she  gave  graceful  life  to
the  ball  with  blows  from  lovely  arms  now  bent,  now
straightened.  Then  she  would  fold  her  arms;  then  her
curls  would  flutter  to  rest  on  her  back  as  she  stooped.
The  rapid  readjusting  of  the  fallen  earring’s  golden
plate  hardly  hindered  the  timing  of  her  steps,  and  the
ball  whirled  out  or  in  with  each  quick  lift  of  hand  or
foot.  As  she  rose  and  sank,  her  central  necklace  string
was  seen  and  lost  by  fleeting  moments;  as  she  bowed
and  stood  erect,  her  pearls  had  no  repose.  The  breeze
from  the  blossom  over  her  ear  served  as  fan  to  dry  her
cheek’s  cosmetic  moistened  by  starting  drops;  one
blossom-hand  was  busy  in  patting  the  gown  that
slipped  from  her  bosom’s  slope.  She  crouched  and
rose;  she  closed  and  opened  her  eyes;  she  paused  and
began  again:  and  wonder  awoke  as  the  princess  gaily
played.

“Whether  bouncing  the  ball  from  the  ground  or
keeping  it  in  the  air,  whether  playing  with  one  or  with
more  than  one,  she  showed  us  many  sightly  tricks.


THE  TEN  PRINCES


162

Then  at  the  end  of  her  friendly  diversion  with  Chan-
drasena  and  other  girls,  having  worshiped  the  goddess,
attended  by  my  heart  as  devoted  companion,  flashing
at  me  a  sidelong  look  like  a  lotus  arrow  of  blossom-
arrowed  Love,  with  a  slyly  repeated  backward  turn  of
a  face  as  sweet  as  the  full  moon’s  disc  and  a  glance
that  left  me  in  doubt  whether  or  no  her  heart  had
darted  to  meet  me  and  been  recalled,  she  went  with
her  friends  to  the  palace.

“Faint  with  love,  I  went  to  Koshadasa’s  dwelling,
where  he  assiduously  entertained  me  with  a  most  su¬
perior  bath,  food,  and  other  comforts.  In  the  evening
came  Chandrasena,  who  showed  quiet  respect  for  me,
then  with  tender  gentleness  rubbed  shoulders  with
her  lover  and  sat  down.  Koshadasa  was  delighted.
‘All  my  life,  my  sweet-eyed  love,’  he  caroled,  ‘may  I
thus  receive  your  kindness.’  ‘Why  make  a  mere  prayer
of  it,  my  friend?’  said  I  with  a  smile.  ‘There  is  a  magic
lotion  with  which  she  may  anoint  her  eyes.  Then
when  she  approaches  the  prince,  she  will  seem  a  she-
monkey  to  him;  he  will  forget  his  love,  and  abandon
her.’

“But  she  smiled  as  she  replied:  ‘Oh,  sir,  you  are
much  too  kind  to  your  very  humble  servant,  with
your  readiness  to  strip  her  of  human  form  (without  re¬
birth)  and  make  a  monkey  of  her.  Enough  of  this!
There  is  another  way  to  gain  our  end.  The  princess,
when  playing  ball  today,  was  smitten,  sir,  by  your
beauty  that  makes  a  mock  of  the  love-god,  who,  as  if


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  163

angered,  tortures  her  terribly.  Having  penetrated  her
secret,  I  shall  tell  my  mother,  who  will  tell  the  prin¬
cess’  mother,  the  queen,  who  will  tell  the  king.  And
when  the  king  learns  the  situation,  he  will  bestow  his
daughter’s  hand  on  you.  Then  the  prince  must  live  as
your  servant:  such  is  the  decree  of  the  goddess.  And
when  the  kingdom  is  subject  to  you,  Bhimadhanvan
will  be  in  no  position  to  flout  you  and  pester  me.  So
let  our  friend  be  patient  for  three  or  four  days.’  With
this  she  bowed  to  me,  embraced  her  lover,  and  with¬
drew.  The  night  dragged  away  while  Koshadasa
and  I  made  endless  arrangements  to  conform  to  her
plan.

“When  morning  dawned,  I  did  my  devoirs;  then
visited  the  garden  blest  by  the  remembered  vision  of
my  love.  There  the  prince  met  me,  spoke  without  in¬
solence,  and  engaged  me  for  a  time  in  agreeable  con¬
versation.  Conducting  me  to  the  palace,  he  provided
a  bath,  food,  and  a  couch  as  luxurious  as  his  own.
While  I  slept,  enjoying  in  dream  the  bliss  of  behold¬
ing  and  clasping  my  darling,  he  ordered  many  stout¬
armed  menials  to  bind  me  most  securely  with  fetters
of  iron.  And  when  I  awoke,  he  pitched  into  me  rough¬
ly:  ‘You  sneak!  Chandrasena’s  chatter — damn  her!
— drifted  through  the  lattice  and  was  overheard  by  a
hunchback  woman  that  I  employ  to  follow  her  and
spy  on  her.  So  you  love  that  hussy  Kandukavati!
And  I  am  to  live  as  your  servant!  And  I  mustn’t  flout
you!  And  I  am  to  give  Chandrasena  to  Koshadasa!’


164


THE  TEN  PRINCES


With  this  he  turned  to  a  fellow  beside  him,  shouting:
‘Throw  him  into  the  ocean !’

“  ‘Yes,  yes,  Your  Majesty,’  cried  the  fellow,  as  jol¬
ly  as  if  a  kingdom  had  been  given  him,  and  he  did  it.
With  nothing  to  cling  to,  I  tossed  my  arms  wildly  and
clasped  to  my  bosom  a  stick  of  wood  that  fate  provid¬
ed;  so  I  floated  while  the  day  passed  and  a  long,  long
night.  At  daybreak  I  spied  a  kind  of  boat,  manned  by
Greeks.  They  pulled  me  in  and  reported  to  their  cap¬
tain  Rameshu:  ‘Here  is  a  man  wearing  fetters  of  iron.
We  found  him  in  the  water.  We  could  use  him  to
sprinkle  a  thousand  bunches  of  grapes  at  a  time.’

“Just  then  a  galley,  attended  by  numerous  smaller
craft,  bore  down  on  us,  terrifying  the  Greeks.  The
swift  boats  were  about  us  in  a  moment,  like  dogs
around  a  boar.  A  fight  followed,  in  which  the  Greeks
were  worsted.  But  when  they  were  demoralized  and
disheartened,  I  encouraged  them  by  saying:  ‘Strike
off  my  fetters,  and  I  will  destroy  your  enemies  single-
handed.’  They  did  so;  and  I,  with  a  horn-bow  that
shot  showers  of  shafts  with  a  terrible  twang,  made
mincemeat  of  all  those  hostile  hirelings.

“I  leaped  on  a  boat  lashed  alongside,  and  on  its
death-strewn  deck  engaged  in  single  combat  with  the
captain,  whom  I  captured  alive.  He  proved  to  be
Bhimadhanvan.  He  showed  embarrassment  when  I
introduced  myself,  and  said:  ‘My  son,  have  you  ob¬
served  how  oddly  fate  can  hop?’  But  the  crew  of  the
merchantman  bound  him  fast  with  my  discarded  fet-


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  165


ters,  trolled  out  their  joyous  chanties,  and  paid  me
something  like  worship.

“However,  the  ship  got  out  of  hand  when  buffeted
by  contrary  winds;  she  fell  far  off  her  course  and
fetched  up  at  a  tight  little  island.  Being  in  need  of
fresh  water,  fuel,  bulbs,  roots,  and  fruit,  we  landed  on
a  compact  pile  of  rocks.  Before  us  rose  a  great  moun¬
tain.  ‘Ah,’  said  I,  ‘this  is  a  charming  mountain  side,  a
most  lovely  lower  slope  where  the  very  rocks  are  fra¬
grant,  cool  mountain  water  rich  with  moonlike  drops
of  honey  from  lilies  blue  and  white,  an  entrancing
grove  of  trees  laden  with  blossom  clusters  in  varied
hues’;  so  I  gazed  and  gazed  with  eyes  that  would  not
be  satisfied.  I  climbed  unaware  to  the  summit  and
came  to  a  pool  tinged  red  by  the  flashing  rocks  of  a
ruby  stairway  and  dusted  with  lotus  pollen.

“After  I  had  bathed,  chewed  a  few  nectar-sweet
lotus  stalks,  and  pinned  a  white  lily  on  my  shoulder,  a
hideous  ghost  rose  from  the  bank  and  plunged  toward
me,  crying  ‘Who  are  you  ?  Where  do  you  come  from  ?’
in  a  tone  of  scolding  disapproval.  ‘My  dear  sir,’  I  re¬
plied  without  alarm,  ‘I  am  a  Brahman,  as  you  can  see.
I  have  been  traveling — from  an  enemy’s  hand  into
the  sea,  from  the  sea  into  a  Greek  ship,  from  the  Greek
ship  to  this  admirable  mountain  with  its  complex  ge¬
ology,  and  I  chanced  to  rest  beside  this  pool.  Greet¬
ings!’  ‘If  you  don’t  answer  my  questions,’  said  he,
‘I’ll  eat  you.’  ‘Very  well,’  said  I.  ‘Ask  them.’  So  our
interview  continued  with  a  single  quatrain:


THE  TEN  PRINCES


1 66


Can  a  woman’s  heart  be  callous?

How  do  good  wives  please  the  soul?

Can  true  love  mistake  its  object?

Smartness  gain  a  distant  goal?

“  ‘As  to  that,  you  must  consult  Dhumini,  Gomini,
Nimbavati,  and  Nitambavati,’  I  answered.  And  when
he  said:  ‘Tell  me.  What  sort  of  women  were  they  ?’  I
related  this  story.

“  ‘There  is  a  country  called  Trigarta.  In  it  lived
three  householders  with  much  accumulated  capital;
they  were  brothers,  and  their  names  were  Dhanaka,
Dhanyaka,  and  Dhunyaka.  During  their  lifetime
Indra  sent  no  rain  for  twelve  years:  the  grain  drooped;
plants  failed  to  seed;  trees  bore  no  fruit;  the  clouds
were  barren;  rivers  dwindled;  swamps  were  mere
mudholes;  many  springs  went  dry;  bulbs,  roots,  and
fruit  grew  scarce;  story-telling  declined;  social  pleas¬
ures  fell  into  disuse;  robber  bands  multiplied;  anthro¬
pophagy  appeared;  human  skulls,  white  as  cranes,
rolled  underfoot;  thirsty  crows  migrated  in  clouds;
cities,  villages,  towns,  and  other  settlements  decayed.

“  ‘When  these  householders  had  exhausted  their
store  of  grain,  and  had  eaten  in  turn  the  goats  and
sheep,  the  drove  of  buffalo,  the  herd  of  cows,  the
maidservants,  the  manservants,  the  children,  the  eld¬
est  and  the  middle  wife,  they  agreed  to  eat  next  day
the  youngest  wife,  Dhumini.  But  Dhunyaka,  the
youngest  brother,  unable  to  eat  his  darling,  fled  with


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  167

her  that  same  night.  Carrying  her  when  she  grew
weary,  he  plunged  into  a  forest.  Relieving  her  hunger
and  thirst  with  his  own  flesh  and  blood,  he  carried  her,
until  in  mid-journey  he  encountered  a  man  writhing
on  the  forest  floor,  with  hands  and  feet  and  ears  and
nose  cut  off.  This  man  too  he  charitably  took  on  his
shoulder,  and  in  a  forest  nook  abounding  in  bulbs,
roots,  and  deer  he  laboriously  thatched  a  hut  of
leaves,  where  he  lived  a  long  time.  He  treated  the  piti¬
ful  mutilations  with  oil  of  almonds  and  sesame,  and
shared  his  own  meat  and  vegetables  equally.

“  ‘One  day,  when  the  wounds  were  healed  and  vig¬
or  had  returned,  when  Dhunyaka  had  gone  to  hunt
deer,  Dhumini  approached  the  man  with  sexual  de¬
sire,  and  for  all  his  upbraiding,  forced  him  to  satisfy
her.  When  her  husband  returned  and  asked  for  water,
she  tossed  him  the  bucket  and  rope,  saying:  “Draw
your  own  drink;  my  head  aches.”  Then,  as  he  drew
water  from  the  well,  she  gave  him  a  quick  push  from
behind.

“  ‘She  put  the  cripple  on  her  shoulder  and  wan¬
dered  from  land  to  land,  winning  the  name  of  a  devo¬
ted  wife  and  a  variety  of  honors.  Finally  she  settled
down  in  immense  affluence  through  the  favor  of  His
Majesty  of  Avanti.  Presently  she  learned  that  her
husband,  accidentally  discovered  and  rescued  by
thirsty  merchants,  was  roaming  Avanti,  begging  his
bread.  So  Dhumini  deposed  that  he  was  the  wretch
who  had  mutilated  her  lord,  and  had  that  saintly


i68


THE  TEN  PRINCES


character  condemned  by  the  unwitting  king  to  torture
and  death.

“  ‘But  when  Dhunyaka  was  being  led  to  execu¬
tion,  his  arms  bound  behind  his  back — since  a  pro¬
longation  of  life  was  predestined,  he  cheerfully  said  to
the  functionary:  “If  the  beggar  whom  I  am  supposed
to  have  mutilated  is  prepared  to  speak  ill  of  me,  my
punishment  is  deserved.”  “No  harm  in  trying,”  said
the  officer,  summoned  the  cripple,  and  presented  him.
That  upright  fellow  wept  profusely,  fell  at  the  saintly
feet,  and  gave  a  true  relation  of  the  man’s  charity  and
the  woman’s  vile  behavior.  The  king,  enraged,  disfig¬
ured  the  trollop’s  face  and  appointed  her  cook  for  the
dogs,  while  Dhunyaka  became  the  recipient  of  his  fa¬
vor.  And  that  is  why  I  say  that  woman’s  heart  may
be  callous.’

“Then,  at  the  ghost’s  request,  I  told  the  story  of
Gomini:  ‘In  the  Dravidian  country  is  a  city  called
Kanchi,  where  lived  Shaktikumara,  the  multimillion¬
aire  son  of  a  merchant.  As  he  approached  the  age  of
eighteen,  he  anxiously  reflected:  “There  is  no  true
happiness  for  a  man  without  a  wife,  or  with  a  wife
who  lacks  the  appropriate  virtues.  Now  how  could  I
find  a  virtuous  wife?”

“  ‘So,  diffident  of  the  problematical  satisfaction  in
a  wife  recommended  by  others,  he  became  a  fortune¬
teller,  tucked  a  measure  of  rice  in  his  garment’s  hem,
and  roamed  the  earth.  Now  those  who  had  daughters


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  169


exhibited  their  daughters  to  him  as  a  man  who  could
interpret  stigmata.  But  whatever  the  stigmata,  he
would  say  whenever  he  saw  a  girl  of  his  own  caste:
“My  good  girl,  can  you  feed  me  properly  with  this
measure  of  rice?”  As  a  result,  he  wandered  from
house  to  house,  ridiculed  and  rejected.

“  ‘In  a  city  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Kaveri  in  the
Shibi  country,  he  one  day  inspected  a  maiden  pre¬
sented  by  her  nurse.  She  was  meagerly  begemmed,
for  she  with  her  parents  had  run  through  a  great  prop¬
erty,  though  still  possessing  a  dilapidated  mansion.
When  he  set  eyes  on  her,  he  thought:  “In  the  case  of
this  girl,  not  a  single  member  is  too  fat  or  too  thin,
too  short  or  too  long,  lacking  in  symmetry  or  purity
of  outline.  The  fingers  have  a  tinge  of  pink;  the  hands
are  marked  with  many  stigmata  of  fortune— the  bar¬
ley-corn,  the  fish,  the  lotus,  the  bowl,  and  others.  The
ankle  joints  are  even;  the  feet  plump,  not  stringy.  The
calves  have  a  classic  curve;  and  the  knees  slip  almost
unobserved  into  the  swell  of  the  thighs.  The  hips  are
balanced,  regular,  sweetly  set,  and  shaped  like  chari¬
ot  wheels.  The  navel  has  elegance, flatness, and  depth;
the  lower  body  is  adorned  with  three  plicatures.  The
breasts,  with  emergent  nipples,  give  a  broad-based
beauty  to  the  entire  chest.  The  graceful  arms  are
marked  with  the  lines  that  promise  money,  grain,  and
numerous  sons;  the  nails  have  a  glossy  polish  like  a
jewel;  the  fingers  are  straight,  tapering,  pink;  there  is
daintiness  in  the  slope  of  the  shoulder,  and  an  absence


170


THE  TEN  PRINCES


of  knobbiness  at  the  joints.  The  slender  neck  shows
the  conch-shell’s  curve.  The  lip  has  a  slight  pout  and
an  even  color;  the  charming  chin  does  not  retreat;  the
cheek  is  full  and  firm;  the  brows  unite  to  form  a  black,
soft,  wavy  line;  the  nose  resembles  a  half-blown  ses-
amum  blossom;  the  great,  gentle  eyes  have  a  sweet
and  modest  glance,  yet  flashing  with  three  colors —
pure  black,  white,  and  the  pigmented  part;  the  brow
charms  like  the  crescent  moon;  the  curls  are  bewitch¬
ing  as  a  mine  of  sapphires;  each  lovely  ear  has  double
decoration,  its  ring  and  the  winsome  line  of  a  droop¬
ing  lotus  stem:  the  whole  face  is  like  a  lily.  Her  hair  is
abundant,  long,  curly  (not  kinky),  not  fading  even  at
the  end,  of  a  smooth,  glossy  black  throughout,  and
fragrant.

“  ‘  “Such  is  her  person;  the  character  must  corre¬
spond.  Besides,  I  love  her.  So  I  will  apply  my  test
and  marry  her.  For  endless  regrets  are  the  certain
portion  of  the  heedless.”  So,  with  an  affectionate
glance,  he  said  to  her:  “My  dear  young  lady,  are  you
by  any  chance  competent  to  convert  this  measure  of
rice  into  an  adequate  meal  for  me?”

“  ‘Hereupon  the  girl  signaled  with  her  eyes  to  the
old  serving-woman,  who  took  the  measure  of  grain
from  his  hand,  washed  the  girl’s  feet,  and  seated  her
in  a  spot,  carefully  sprinkled  and  swept,  before  the
house  door.  The  girl  trampled  the  fragrant  rice,  dried
it  a  little  at  a  time,  turned  it  repeatedly  in  the  sun,
put  it  on  a  hard,  level  spot,  struck  it  very  gently  with


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE


lyi

a  hollow  stalk,  and  extracted  the  kernels  without
crushing  the  husks.  “Mother,”  she  said  to  the  nurse,
“jewelers  find  a  use  for  these  husks,  which  serve  to
polish  gems.  Take  them  these,  and  with  the  pennies
earned  buy  firewood — solid  sticks,  neither  too  moist
nor  too  dry — a  modest  kettle,  and  two  saucers.”

“  ‘When  this  had  been  done,  in  a  shallow,  wide¬
mouthed,  pot-bellied  mortar  of  urjoon  wood,  with  a
long,  heavy  acacia  pestle,  plated  with  iron  at  the  head,
smooth  in  the  body,  and  with  a  perceptible  tenuity  in
the  waist,  she  caused  the  grains  to  rise  and  fall  with
the  busy  grace  and  skill  of  her  arm;  repeatedly  made
them  hop  and  sink  with  her  fingers;  stripped  them  of
awns  in  the  winnowing  sieve;  rinsed  them  a  number
of  times;  then — having  paid  honor  to  the  fireplace —
dropped  them  into  quintessential  boiled  water.  As
the  grains  softened,  hopped,  and  swelled,  she  col¬
lected  the  fire,  fitted  the  lid  to  the  kettle,  and  strained
off  the  scum.  Then  she  patted  with  the  ladle;  stirred
a  little  at  a  time;  and  making  sure  that  the  clots  were
cooking  evenly,  set  the  kettle  upside  down.  Next,  she
sprinkled  with  water  such  fagots  as  were  only  scorched
and  sent  the  charred,  but  no  longer  burning,  sticks  to
the  retailers  with  the  command:  “For  the  pennies
you  get  for  these,  buy  as  much  as  you  can  in  vege¬
tables,  butter,  curds,  oil,  emblic,  and  tamarind.”

“  ‘When  the  nurse  had  done  this,  she  provided  a
couple  of  hors  d’oeuvres;  then,  remarking  that  the
scummy  broth  should  be  set  in  a  new  saucer  planted


17  2


THE  TEN  PRINCES


in  moist  sand,  she  cooled  it  with  a  gentle  breeze  from
a  palm-leaf  fan,  added  sufficient  salt,  and  let  the
smoke  from  the  wood  fire  scent  it;  she  also  ground  the
emblic  fine  to  bring  out  its  odor,  sweet  as  a  lotus;  next,
by  the  lips  of  the  nurse,  she  invited  him  to  take  a  bath.
This  he  did  thoroughly,  receiving  oil  and  emblic  from
her  after  she  too  had  bathed.

“  ‘After  his  bath,  he  seated  himself  on  a  plank  set
on  the  pavement  (sprinkled  and  swept),  and  fingered
the  two  saucers  of  liquid  served  on  the  quarter  of  a
greenish  white  plantain  leaf  clipped  from  a  tree  in  the
courtyard.  Then  she  set  the  rice  gruel  before  him.  He
drank,  relaxed,  felt  happy;  and  satisfaction  pervaded
his  frame.  Next,  she  served  him  two  ladlefuls  of  rice,
and  brought  a  little  butter,  soup,  and  a  relish.  The
following  course  was  the  rest  of  the  rice,  with  curds,
powdered  spices,  and  fragrant,  refreshing  buttermilk
and  clotted  cheese.

“  ‘The  man  enjoyed  his  meal  to  the  last  morsel,
then  asked  for  water.  She  let  ft  spout  a  continuous
stream  from  a  new  pitcher;  it  was  rich  with  the  odor
of  incense,  perfumed  with  fresh  trumpet  flowers,  fra¬
grant  with  full-blown  lotuses.  He  set  the  saucer  to  his
lips.  His  eyelashes  were  tinged  and  granulated  by
clinging  drops,  cool  as  snow;  his  ears  took  delight  in
the  trickling  sound  of  the  stream;  his  cheek  tingled
and  thrilled  at  the  delicious  contact;  his  nostrils  ex¬
panded  to  the  rushing  gush  of  fragrance;  his  sense  of
taste  was  entranced  by  the  exquisite  flavor:  he  drank


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE


173


the  pure  water  in  great  gulps.  Then,  in  obedience  to  a
nod,  the  maiden  gave  him  a  gargle  from  another  ves¬
sel.  Finally,  the  old  nurse  cleared  the  table;  and  on
the  pavement,  freshly  cleansed  with  cow  dung,  he
dozed  for  a  time,  wrapped  in  his  ragged  cloak.  Greatly
pleased,  he  married  the  girl  with  all  due  ceremony  and
took  her  home.

“  ‘After  marriage,  however,  he  neglected  her  and
kept  a  mistress,  whom  the  wife  also  treated  as  a  dear
friend.  Her  husband  she  served  as  a  god,  indefatiga¬
ble  in  personal  attention,  indomitable  in  household
duty,  winning  the  devotion  of  domestics  by  inexhaust¬
ible  considerateness.  Subjugated  by  her  merits,  the
husband  subordinated  the  entire  household  to  her,
made  her  sole  mistress  of  life  and  person,  and  thus  en¬
joyed  virtue,  money,  and  love.  And  that,  I  may  say,
is  how  good  wives  please  the  soul.’

“Then,  at  the  ghost’s  request,  I  told  the  tale  of
Nimbavati:  ‘In  Surat  was  a  city  called  Valabhi.  In  it
lived  Grihagupta,  a  ship  captain,  rich  as  the  god  of
wealth.  He  had  a  daughter  Ratnavati,  whom  a  mer¬
chant’s  son,  Balabhadra,  came  from  Madhumati  to
marry.  The  bliss  of  secret  love  with  his  young  bride
was,  however,  impetuously  overdone,  so  that  in  a
flash  he  conceived  no  small  hatred  for  her.  He  did  not
wish  to  see  her  again.  He  disregarded  hundreds  of  ad¬
monitions  from  friends,  feeling  such  embarrassment
that  he  actually  avoided  the  house.  From  that  mo-


174


THE  TEN  PRINCES


ment,  relatives  and  strangers  mortified  the  unhappy
woman  by  saying:  “This  is  not  Ratnavati,  the  Jewel
Girl;  this  is  Nimbavati,  the  Bitter-fruit  Girl.”

“  ‘After  a  certain  interval  of  humiliation  and  of
wondering  what  to  do,  she  saw  an  aged  hermit
woman,  her  foster-mother,  approaching  with  flowers
from  a  sacrificial  service;  and  alone  with  her,  she
wept  piteously.  The  old  woman  tearfully  tried  every
means  to  soothe  her  and  asked  the  cause  of  her  weep¬
ing;  whereupon,  for  all  her  shame,  the  matter  being  so
important,  she  forced  herself  to  stammer:  “Oh,  Moth¬
er!  What  can  I  say?  Unhappy  love  is  a  living  death
for  women,  for  honest  wives  especially.  My  case  is  an
illustration.  All  my  relatives,  my  mother  more  than
any,  look  at  me  with  contempt.  Oh,  give  me  a  kindly
glance.  If  you  won’t,  this  very  day  I  shall  lose  my  use¬
less  life.  But  do  not  repeat  my  secret  until  it  is  all
over.”  And  she  fell  at  the  old  woman’s  feet.

“  ‘The  latter  helped  her  to  rise  and  said  with  a
rush  of  tears:  “My  dear  child,  you  must  dare  no  des¬
perate  deed.  Here  am  I,  awaiting  your  commands.
Just  in  so  far  as  I  have  value,  I  am  wholly  at  your
service.  If  you  are  quite  despondent,  then  practice
penance  (I  will  show  you  how)  with  the  aim  of  other¬
worldly  blessings.  Surely  this  is  a  consequence  of  sin
in  a  past  existence  that  you,  with  such  a  figure,  such
character,  and  such  social  position,  have  become,
without  visible  reason,  an  object  of  hatred  to  your
husband.  If  there  is  any  possible  remedy  for  your


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  175

husband’s  alienation,  point  it  out;  for  your  intelli¬
gence  is  keen.”

“  ‘So  the  wife  painfully  pondered  for  a  time  with
downcast  face,  drew  a  long,  burning  sigh,  and  said:
“Holy  mother,  her  husband  is  the  sole  divinity  for  a
woman,  at  least  for  the  good  kind.  Therefore  I  must
contrive  something  that  will  result  in  doing  what  he
wishes.  Now  next  door  lives  a  merchant,  our  most
prominent  citizen  by  reason  of  gentle  birth,  property,
and  intimacy  with  the  king.  His  daughter  Kanaka-
vati  has  much  my  bearing  and  figure,  and  is  a  very
dear  friend  of  mine.

“  *  “I  will  play  with  her,  and  being  on  the  balcony
of  her  mansion,  will  double  the  number  of  my  jewels.
Meanwhile  you,  by  piteous  petition  to  her  mother,
must  somehow  manage  to  bring  my  husband  to  her
house.  When  you  are  just  below,  I  will  go  giddy  with
gayety  and  drop  a  ball,  which  you  will  catch  and  put
in  his  hand,  saying:  ‘My  son,  that  is  your  wife’s  friend
Kanakavati,  daughter  of  Nidhipatidatta,  our  most
prominent  business  man.  She  is  quite  scandalized
with  you  on  Ratnavati’s  account,  thinking  you  frivo¬
lous  and  heartless.  So  you  must  restore  this  ball;  it  is
enemy  property.’

“  ‘  “Hereupon  he  will  certainly  look  up  and  will
mistake  me  for  my  friend;  then  when  I  bow  and  beg
for  the  ball,  while  you  nudge  him  again,  he  will  return
it  with  eagerness.  From  this  initial  weakness  you  will
cause  him  to  fall  in  love,  grow  warmer  and  warmer.


THE  TEN  PRINCES


176

appoint  a  rendezvous,  and  elope  with  me  to  another
country.”  The  old  woman  joyfully  assented  and  car¬
ried  out  the  plan.

“  ‘So  Balabhadra,  deluded  by  the  old  hermit  wom¬
an,  took  her  for  Kanakavati,  made  sure  of  her  treas¬
ure  of  jewels,  and  eloped  in  the  ininterstitial  dark¬
ness  of  night.  The  old  woman  then  spread  this  gossip:
“Balabhadra  told  me  yesterday  that  he  had  behaved
like  a  fool  in  neglecting  Ratnavati  without  valid  rea¬
son,  in  insulting  her  parents,  and  in  disregarding  his
friends;  and  that,  having  thus  involved  himself,  he
was  ashamed  to  live  here.  I  presume  it  will  soon  ap¬
pear  that  he  has  taken  her  away.”  On  hearing  this,
her  relatives  made  only  perfunctory  search.

“  ‘Now  on  the  journey  Ratnavati  procured  a
slave  woman,  had  her  carry  the  provisions  and  other
baggage,  and  so  came  to  a  hamlet.  Even  in  that
small  place  Balabhadra,  a  shrewd  business  man,  mul¬
tiplied  his  modest  capital  into  a  great  fortune.  He
was  accounted  the  leading  citizen  and  had  a  corps  of
servants  in  proportion  to  his  wealth.  On  one  occasion
he  beat  the  housekeeper  severely,  saying  roughly:
“You  neglect  your  work,  you  steal  everything  in
sight,  you  are  impudent.”  The  servant  was  furious
and  betrayed  the  critical  point  in  his  secret  history,
which  he  had  told  her  in  a  moment  of  confidence.

“  ‘Upon  this  information,  the  avaricious  police
captain  convoked  the  town  council  and  took  him  to
task,  saying:  “This  scoundrel  Balabhadra  is  living  in


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE


177


our  city  with  Kanakavati,  whom  he  stole  from  her
father  Nidhipatidatta.  You  gentlemen  will  not  object
to  the  entire  confiscation  of  his  property.”

“  ‘This  alarmed  Balabhadra,  but  Ratnavati  said
to  him:  “Do  not  be  alarmed.  Tell  them  that  this  is
not  Nidhipatidatta’s  daughter  Kanakavati,  but  Gri-
hagupta’s  daughter  Ratnavati,  given  you  by  her  par¬
ents  in  Valabhi  and  decently  married.  If  they  do  not
believe,  let  them  send  a  messenger  to  her  relatives.”
Balabhadra  consented  and  remained  on  bail  from  his
guild  until  Grihagupta,  informed  by  letter,  visited  the
hamlet  and  returned  most  joyfully  with  daughter  and
son-in-law.  In  view  of  this,  Balabhadra  became  very
devoted  to  Ratnavati,  still  imagining  her  to  be  Kana¬
kavati.  Hence  I  say  that  love  may  mistake  its  object.’

“Finally,  wdien  questioned  by  the  ghost,  I  told  the
story  of  Nitambavati:  ‘In  Shurasena  is  a  city  called
Mathura.  In  it  lived  a  youth  of  good  family,  a  de¬
votee  of  social  elegancies  and  gay  girls.  In  his  friends’
behalf  he  brought  many  disagreements  to  a  happy
termination  by  sheer  strength  of  arm,  so  that  rough
customers  gave  him  the  nickname  Thorny.

“  ‘One  day  he  met  a  foreign  artist,  carrying  a  pic¬
ture  of  a  young  woman,  the  mere  sight  of  which  made
Thorny  lovesick.  “My  dear  sir,”  he  said,  “this  seems
incongruous.  The  figure  is  almost  too  beautiful  for
virtue,  yet  the  modest  pose  indicates  lofty  breeding,
the  complexion  is  clear,  the  person  charms  by  a  cer-


178


THE  TEN  PRINCES


tain  measure  of  innocence,  the  glance  shows  self-es¬
teem.  Yet  her  husband  is  not  traveling:  she  lacks  the
single  braid  and  other  tokens  of  separation.  Further,
the  beauty-spot  is  set  on  the  right  side.  I  believe  that
you  have  represented,  with  exquisite  address,  the
wife  of  a  dilapidated  old  business  man,  miserable
from  the  lack  of  normal  satisfaction.”

“  ‘  “You  are  quite  right,”  said  the  painter,  with
admiration.  “This  is  Nitambavati — attractive  as  her
name — wife  of  the  merchant  Anantakirti  in  the  Avanti
capital,  Ujjain.  Entranced  by  her  loveliness,  I  paint¬
ed  her  thus.”  And  Thorny,  his  mind  in  a  whirl,  start¬
ed  that  moment  for  Ujjain  to  see  her.  He  assumed
the  name  Bhargava,  disguised  himself  as  a  beggar,
entered  her  house,  and  beheld  her.

“  £His  passion  mounted  at  the  sight;  on  leaving
the  house,  he  asked  and  received  from  the  aldermen
the  position  of  policeman  in  the  cemetery.  There  he
procured  shrouds  from  corpses  and  other  garments,
with  which  he  paid  court  to  a  Buddhist  nun  named
Arhantika.  Through  her  he  sounded  Nitambavati,
who  scolded  the  nun  and  refused.

“  ‘Informed  by  the  nun  that  she  was  an  honest
woman,  difficult  to  seduce,  he  gave  his  go-between
secret  instructions:  “Approach  the  merchant’s  wife
once  more  and  whisper  this:  ‘You  know  me  as  a  seeker
after  salvation,  sunk  in  religious  meditation  upon
clear  perception  of  the  vanity  of  unregenerate  life;
could  such  as  I  desire  to  deprave  honest  wives?  The


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE


179


notion  is  preposterous.  No,  I  tested  you  to  discover
whether  such  levity,  common  with  the  other  sort  of
woman,  made  any  appeal  to  you,  blest  with  a  noble
fortune,  superhuman  beauty,  and  early  youth.  I  am
delighted  to  find  such  incorruptibility.  Now  I  wish  to
see  you  a  mother.  But  your  husband  is  the  subject  of
demoniac  possession,  is  debilitated  by  jaundice,  and
incapable  of  functioning.  You  cannot  have  a  child  by
him  without  remedial  measures.  Now  please  pay  at¬
tention.  You  are  to  enter  the  orchard  alone  and,  with
all  secrecy,  put  your  foot  in  the  hand  of  a  necromancer
whom  I  shall  conduct  thither;  when  he  has  spoken  a
spell  over  it,  you  are  to  feign  a  lovers’  quarrel  and
kick  your  husband  in  the  chest.  Thereafter  he  will  be
successful  in  making  you  the  mother  of  a  bouncing
baby  and  will  treat  you  like  a  queen.  Pray  feel  no  hesi¬
tation.’  That  she  will  consent,  is  obvious.  At  night
you  will  introduce  me  into  the  orchard,  and  her  too.
I  need  ask  no  further  favors  from  you.”

“  ‘To  his  great  pleasure,  the  nun  approved.  That
same  night  he  entered  the  orchard;  and  when  Nitam-
bavati  was  produced  by  the  zealous  holy  woman,  in
pretending  to  touch  her  foot  he  snatched  a  golden
anklet,  lightly  scratched  her  thigh  with  a  knife,  and
scurried  off.  In  dreadful  agitation  she  rated  her  own
frivolity  and  was  ready  to  kill  the  nun;  she  bathed  the
wound  in  the  garden  pond,  and  bandaged  it;  then,
with  a  view  to  symmetry,  she  removed  the  other  an¬
klet,  and  lay  alone  in  her  bed  for  three  or  four  days.


x8o


THE  TEN  PRINCES


“  ‘The  rogue  meanwhile  approached  Anantakirti,
offering  the  anklet  for  sale.  “This  is  my  wife’s  an¬
klet,”  cried  he.  “How  did  you  come  by  it?”  But  he
pressed  in  vain  for  an  answer,  the  fellow  insisting  that
he  would  speak  in  the  presence  of  the  merchant  guild.
At  last  he  ordered  his  wife  to  send  him  both  her  an¬
klets;  and  she,  in  shame  and  alarm,  sent  the  other  one,
with  this  message:  “Last  night  I  went  to  rest  in  the
orchard  and  lost  an  anklet  when  the  fastening  slipped.
I  hunted  for  it  today,  and  did  not  find  it.  But  here  is
its  mate.”

“  ‘Upon  this  information,  the  merchant  took  the
fellow  before  the  merchants’  guild.  There  the  rogue,
when  questioned,  modestly  reported:  “It  is  known  to
you  of  course  that  by  your  appointment  I  guard  the
graveyard,  making  my  living  thereby.  I  even  spend
my  nights  in  the  cemetery,  thinking  that  grave-rob¬
bers  who  would  seek  to  avoid  me,  might  occasionally
burn  the  bodies.  The  other  night  I  saw  a  woman,  a
brunette,  clawing  a  half-burned  corpse  from  its  pyre.
Her  greed  was  greater  than  her  timidity,  so  that  I
caught  her;  and  I  chanced  to  scratch  her  thigh  slightly
with  my  knife.  I  also  snatched  this  anklet  from  her
foot.  At  this  point  she  made  off  in  a  hurry.  I  have
told  you  how  I  came  by  it;  further  action  rests  with
you.”

“  ‘So  the  citizens,  after  deliberation,  unanimously
voted  that  she  was  a  witch.  Her  husband  cast  her  off,
and  the  rogue  encountered  her  at  night  in  that  same


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  181

graveyard;  she  was  lamenting  piteously,  knotting  a
noose,  and  preparing  to  die.  He  soothed  her,  saying:
“My  sweet,  maddened  by  your  beauty,  I  suggested
through  the  nun  many  means  of  winning  you;  and
when  they  failed,  I  adopted  this  means  to  give  you
undivided,  lifelong  love.  Forgive  your  slave  who  has
no  other  hope.”  He  fell  repeatedly  at  her  feet,  whee¬
dled  her  hundreds  of  times,  and  won  her  consent —
for  she  had  no  other  recourse.  So  it  may  be  said  that
cleverness  gains  a  difficult  goal.’

“Having  listened  to  this,  the  ghost  paid  me  honor.
At  this  moment  pearls,  big  as  half-developed  iron-
wood  buds,  and  drops  of  water  began  falling  from  the
sky.  I  glanced  up  in  considerable  surprise,  to  see  a
giant  dragging  a  struggling  woman  with  him.  ‘Look
at  that  ill-bred  ogre,  abducting  a  woman  against  her
will!’  I  cried,  grieved  at  my  limitations  in  celestial  lo¬
comotion  and  my  lack  of  a  sword.  But  my  friend  the
ghost  rose  with  a  scolding  cry:  ‘Stop,  scoundrel!  Stop,
kidnaper!’  and  took  issue  with  the  giant.  The  maiden,
dropped  in  heedless  fury,  came  falling  from  the  sky
like  a  blossom  cluster  from  the  tree  of  Paradise,  and
I  caught  her  with  upstretched  arms.  She  trembled,
kept  her  eyes  closed,  and  tingled  with  pleasure  at
touching  my  person,  so  that  I  held  her  just  so,  not
setting  her  down.

“Meanwhile  the  other  two  were  destroying  each
other  with  mountain  crags,  vehemently  uprooted


182


THE  TEN  PRINCES


trees,  and  blows  from  fists  and  feet.  But  her  I  laid  on
the  softest  sand  of  the  lake’s  petal-dotted  margin,
made  a  rapturous  inspection,  and  discerned  my  life’s
sole  darling,  Princess  Kandukavati.  As  I  soothed  her
back  to  calmness,  she  examined  me  with  peeping
glances,  recognized  me,  and  piteously  weeping,  said:
‘Oh,  my  dear  lord,  at  the  festival  of  the  ball  I  fell
deeply  in  love  at  first  sight  and  was  encouraged  by
my  friend  Chandrasena  with  tales  of  you.  So  when  I
heard  that  you  were  drowned  in  the  middle  of  the  sea
by  my  wicked  brother  Bhimadhanvan,  I  eluded  my
friends  and  servants  and  went  alone  into  the  garden,
longing  to  leave  life  behind.  There  that  nasty  giant —
who  can  change  his  form  at  will — made  love  to  me.  I
rejected  his  proposal  with  quivering  terror,  but  he
seized  me  and  made  off.  And  here  he  came  to  his  end,
you  saw  how.  And  I,  by  happy  chance,  fell  into  the
hand  of  the  lord  of  my  life.  Bless  you!’

“On  hearing  this,  I  descended  the  mountain  with
her  and  embarked.  We  cast  off  the  moorings;  and  the
ship,  flying  before  the  return  wind,  sailed  back  to
Damalipta,  where  we  disembarked  in  a  hurry.  We
were  met  by  the  wailing  of  weeping  citizens,  lament¬
ing:  ‘Tungadhanvan,  king  of  Suhma,  childless
through  the  loss  of  son  and  daughter,  and  stricken  in
years,  sets  forth  with  his  consort-queen  to  seek  slow
peace  by  starvation  on  stainless  Ganges’  shore.  The
loyal  Board  of  Aldermen,  knowing  no  other  lord,  plan
to  die  beside  him.’


MITRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  183


“At  once  I  reported  the  facts  to  the  king  and  re¬
stored  both  his  children.  In  his  delight  the  lord  of
Damalipta  made  me  his  son-in-law,  and  the  prince  be¬
came  my  servant.  At  my  command,  the  creature,  for
dear  life’s  sake,  dropped  Chandrasena,  who  gave  her
love  to  Koshadasa.  Thereupon,  I  marched  hither  to
succor  Simhavarman,  and  now  experience  a  blissful
holiday  in  beholding  you,  my  lord.”

“A  strange  evolution  of  fate!”  cried  Prince  Raja-
vahana,  “and  manliness  happy  in  seizing  opportuni¬
ties  !”  Then,  while  a  smile  sparkled  on  his  lip,  he  fixed
on  Mantragupta  a  glance  that  flowered  with  joy.  The
latter’s  lifted  hands  half  hid  his  face,  and  as  his  lovely
lip  twitched  with  the  soreness  left  by  a  charming  mis¬
tress’  kisses,  he  told  his  tale  without  the  use  of  labial
letters.


CHAPTER  XII

MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE

“I  too,  0  joy  of  the  king  of  kings,  longing  to  learn
the  fate  that  followed  you  into  the  mountain  cave,
came  in  my  wandering  to  Kalinga.  At  a  little  distance
from  the  Kalinga  city,  I  sat  on  the  fragrant,  flower-
strewn  slope  of  a  hill,  in  a  wild  wood  adjoining  a  cre¬
mating  cemetery;  sleep  licked  my  eyes,  and  I  reclined.

“While  darkness  drifted  from  black  night’s  spread¬
ing  tresses,  at  the  hour  when  fiends  are  free,  fog  falls,
cold  chills,  and  the  whole  world  snugly  hugs  its  home
— as  I  fought  the  slumber  that  softly  stroked  my  eyes
with  rustling  bustle  from  densely  interlacing  branches
— there  came  to  my  ear  this  strident  whining  of  two
giants,  male  and  female:  ‘Why  does  that  villainous
magician — damn  him!— choose  to  give  orders  at  the
hour  when  love  is  longing,  and  so  abuse  poor  people
distressed  by  excess  of  passion?  May  some  omnip¬
otence  confound  our  vile  king’s  magic!’

“A  curiosity  assailed  my  heart  to  see  who  this  ma¬
gician  was,  and  what  this  magic,  and  what  this  menial
giant  had  in  hand.  So,  moving  a  little  distance  toward
him,  I  beheld  a  creature  with  body-decorations
formed  from  grimly  gleaming  bits  of  dead  men’s
bones,  with  smears  of  ashy  dust  from  half-charred
coals  of  fire-scorched  wood,  with  matted  hair  tawny

185


1 86


THE  TEN  PRINCES


as  the  lightning  flash;  his  left  hand  sprinkled  sesame,
mustard,  and  other  substances  with  constant  crepita¬
tion  upon  a  fire  that  spouted  flame-sheets  as  it
clutched  each  moment  and  devoured  its  diverse  fuel
an  ogreish  fire  that  gulped  the  blackness  of  encircling
forests.  Before  him  cringed  the  menial,  crying:  ‘What
must  I  do?  Grant  a  command.’  From  that  bestial
being  he  received  this  order:  ‘Go  to  the  palace  of
Kardana,  Kalinga’s  king;  bring  hither  his  daughter
Kanakalekha.’  And  the  giant  did  it.

“With  frightful  fear,  with  tear-choked  throat,
with  torment-tortured  heart,  she  screamed  for  father
and  mother,  while  the  sorcerer  scattered  the  drooping
blossoms  of  her  chaplet,  tore  the  ribbon,  and  clutched
her  flowing  hair,  quivering  with  zeal  to  sever  her  head
with  the  knife  he  had  whetted  on  a  rock.  In  a  flash  I
snatched  the  knife  from  his  hand,  severing  his  own
head  with  its  matted  mass  of  unkempt  hair  and
thrusting  it  into  the  hollow  trunk  of  a  handy  rotten
tree.  On  seeing  this,  the  compliant  giant’s  anguish
languished,  and  he  said:  ‘Oh,  sir,  sleep  never  visits
my  eyes  for  the  badgering  gripe  of  this  beast.  He
menaces,  he  terrifies,  he  issues  immoral  orders.  Oh,
you  have  done  a  happy,  holy  deed  in  sending  that  hu¬
man  crow  to  taste  the  flavor  of  hell’s  torments  in  the
son  of  Lucifer’s  city.  You  are  a  treasure  of  mercy,  an
infinity  of  glory;  and  your  humble  servant  longs  to  do
your  bidding.  Quick!  Issue  orders.’  And  he  bowed
low.


MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  187


“So  I  instructed  him:  ‘My  friend,  this  is  the  path
trodden  by  the  righteous,  for  petty  cause  to  show  no
petty  gratitude.  If  then  your  purpose  holds,  restore
to  her  home  this  maiden  whose  lissom  form,  impatient
of  abuse,  has  been  most  roughly  abused  by  that  im¬
moral  creature.  Thus  you  would  completely  satisfy
my  heart.’

“On  hearing  this,  she  darted  a  somewhat  sidelong,
bravely  gleaming  glance,  that  seemed  a  dark-hued
lily  clinging  to  her  ear;  with  languid  charm  she  made
graceful  play  with  eyebrows  curved  like  Cupid’s  bow,
dancing  on  the  stage  of  her  forehead;  her  cheek  tin¬
gled  with  a  blush;  she  hovered  midway  between  desire
and  shrinking;  with  toetips  curled  and  flashing  light
from  their  nails,  she  nervously  marked  the  ground,
while  she  turned  aside  the  flower  of  her  face;  her
breath  that,  issuing  from  her  mouth,  burdened  her
blossom-lip,  that  dried  the  sandal  powder  on  her  bos¬
om’s  slope  (wet  with  intercrossing  beads  of  spray  from
streams  of  joyful  tears),  slow-drawn  yet  swift  as
Love’s  skilled  shaft  in  piercing  its  target  of  the  heart
— that  breath  framed  in  the  tremulous  gleam  of  a
smile  these  few  words,  soft  and  sweet  as  a  cuckoo’s
song:  ‘Oh,  sir,  for  what  cause  do  you  snatch  your
handmaid  from  the  clutch  of  death,  only  to  fling  her
straight  into  the  sea  of  love,  tossed  by  tempests  of
passion,  restless  with  billows  of  longing?  I  would  be
considered  but  a  grain  of  dust  on  your  fair  foot;  if  you
feel  pity  for  such,  let  me  linger,  clinging  still.  And  if


1 88


THE  TEN  PRINCES


you  dread  to  dwell  in  a  princess’  palace,  lest  the  secret
be  calamitously  betrayed,  dismiss  the  fear;  for  my
friends  and  my  attendants  are  devoted  and  will  strive
that  none  may  know.’

“Then  the  love-god  drew  his  bowstring  to  his  ear
and  pitilessly  pierced  my  heart;  her  peeping  glances,
like  ferreous  fetters,  bound  me  fast;  I  fixed  my  gaze  on
the  giant’s  face,  and  spoke:  ‘Should  I  disobey  this
winsome  lady,  love  would  lead  me  straightway  to
nothingness.  Take  me  with  this  fawn-eyed  maiden  to
the  maidens’  mansion.’  And  that  night-flier  took  me
to  the  maidens’  wing  of  the  palace,  dazzling  as  massed
clouds  of  autumn.

“There  for  a  certain  space  of  time,  at  my  moon¬
faced  maiden’s  behest,  I  stood  on  the  moon-balcony,
my  desire  for  independence  oozing  at  sight  of  her.
But  she  roused  certain  girls,  her  friends,  from  heedless
slumber  by  gentle  clapping  of  her  hands  and  gave
them  knowledge  of  our  situation.  These  then  ap¬
proached,  and  prostrate  at  my  feet,  their  eyes  filled
with  starting  tears,  spoke  in  soft,  singing  tones  blurred
by  the  buzz  of  numerous  bees  drawn  to  the  filaments
of  flowers  in  their  hair:  ‘Sir,  your  glory  vanquishes
the  sun.  This  friend  of  ours  failed  to  be  plucked  by
death  only  because  she  became  the  target  of  your
glance.  She  has  now  been  given  you  by  Love,  her
guardian,  with  passion’s  flame  as  witness.  Then  let
your  soft  eyes  behold  this  passion-quivering  gem  of
wonder  adorning  a  bosom  unshaken  as  a  rock  on  the


MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  189


Mount  of  Jewels;  and  let  her  breast  be  blest  with  the
close  embraces  of  a  most  fitting  mate.’  Thus  the  fet¬
ters  of  my  love  were  riveted  by  her  most  courteous
friends,  and  I  was  beatified  in  union  with  my  lissom
lady.

“Then  came  a  season  when  the  hearts  of  absent
husbands  languished,  when  the  crowding  iron-woods
drooped  at  the  assaults  of  greedy  bees,  when  the  ses-
amum  trees  dotted  with  beauty  the  face  of  flashing
forests,  when  playful  King  Love  stole  the  waking
wingseed  blossoms  to  serve  him.  as  golden  umbrella,
when  the  rush  of  southern  breezes  blew  bees  and  blos¬
soms  from  the  mangoes,  when  warbling  cuckoos  pas¬
sion  offered  impassioned  fairies  their  initial  weapon
for  campaigns  of  love,  when  shyness  fought  with  eager
longing  in  the  minds  of  modest  maidens,  when  breezes
cooled  by  contact  with  sandal  on  southern  mountain
slopes  gave  graceful  dancing  lessons  to  various  classes
of  vines.  At  this  season  Kalinga’s  king,  with  the
women  of  his  court,  his  daughter,  and  all  the  city  s
population,  for  thirteen  days  gave  way  to  the  taste
for  playful  holidays  in  a  forest  by  the  sea  a  forest
that  assaulting  sunbeams  could  not  enter,  with  sand¬
banks  stroked  by  blossom  clusters  on  vine  twigs  bend¬
ing  to  the  rush  of  buzzing  bees,  and  cooled  by  clouds
of  spray  from  breaking  billows.

“There  women  gathered  by  the  thousand  for  con¬
tinuous  song  and  concert  and  for  amorous  dalliance.
And  while  the  king  delighted  in  coquetry’s  endless


190


THE  TEN  PRINCES


crisscross,  quite  subdued  to  love  of  love,  a  numerous
sea-borne  army  startled  him;  and  Jayasimha,  king  of
Andhra,  took  him  captive  with  his  queen.  My  dar¬
ling  also,  Kanakalekha,  was  led  captive  away  with  her
friends,  her  eyes  dancing  with  fright.

“Then  the  flame  of  love  devoured  me,  all  thought
of  food  subdued  by  anxious  longing;  grace  left  my  per¬
son  as  I  pondered:  ‘Gone!  The  daughter  of  Kalinga’s
king,  with  father  and  mother,  in  hostile  hands!  That
king  will  of  a  certainty  lose  self-control  and  strive  to
seize  her.  This  she  will  not  endure,  and  will  find  a
way — poison  perhaps — of  sudden  death.  When  she  is
in  that  state,  love  will  loose  my  hold  on  life.  What
rescue  may  there  be?’

“At  this  point  appeared  a  Brahman,  journeying
from  the  Andhra  capital,  who  told  this  story:  ‘Jaya¬
simha  has  striven  to  slay  Kardana  from  rancor  roused
by  numerous  reproaches,  yet  spared  him  for  love  fed
by  the  sight  of  Kanakalekha.  But  the  princess,  pos¬
sessed  by  a  certain  Yaksha,  disdains  to  stand  before
the  monarch.  The  latter,  calling  numerous  necro¬
mancers  to  his  aid,  struggles  to  expel  the  spirit,  but
vainly.’

“Then  I  saw  hope.  From  that  old  hollow  tree  that
had  set  the  stage  for  Shiva’s  dance  I  drew  a  mass  of
matted  hair,  becoming  so  an  unkempt  sorcerer,  and
concealed  all  my  person  with  a  begging-wallet  and
abundant  rags.  I  also  enlisted  certain  disciples,  whom
I  kept  in  constant  good  humor  by  gifts  of  food,  gar-


MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  191


ments,  and  the  like,  acquired  from  people  fooled  by  a
pack  of  juggling  tricks.

“After  some  days  I  came  to  the  Andhra  capital,  at
a  distance  from  which  I  dwelt  in  a  forest  beside  a  lake
that  stretched  away  like  the  ocean,  was  dotted  with
bits  of  petals  dropped  from  countless  lilies  clipped  by
swarming  swans,  was  made  beautiful  by  flocking
cranes.  I  displayed  dexterity  in  bamboozling  all  the
citizens,  attracting  them  by  artful  dodges  that  my
disciples  advertised,  until  this  report  of  me  was  uni¬
versal:  ‘You  know  that  hermit  who  sleeps  on  the  bare
ground  at  the  edge  of  the  lake  in  the  wilderness?  He
has  all  the  Scriptures — all  their  mysteries  and  the  six
ancillary  disciplines,  too — at  the  tip  of  his  tongue.
And  all  the  other  books  that  nobody  understands —
he  will  explain  you  their  meaning  from  the  meaning
of  those.  Nothing  falls  from  his  lips  that  isn’t  so.  Be¬
sides,  he  is  benevolence  personified.  That  is  why  his
ceremonies  always  succeed.  Just  by  sprinkling  on
their  heads  a  few  grains  of  dust  from  his  feet,  lots  of
people  have  been  cured  of  lots  of  diseases  that  no  doc¬
tor  could  touch.  Purify  your  head  with  water  that
has  washed  his  feet,  and  that  moment  disappear  the
fiercest  seizures  that  follow  all  the  machinations  of
necromancers.  You  cannot  imagine  any  limit  to  his
power.  And  he  hasn’t  the  least  grain  of  conceit.’

“This  gossip,  being  in  everybody’s  mouth,  sufficed
to  entice  the  king,  whose  mind  was  concentrated  on
the  expulsion  of  the  Yaksha  that  possessed  Kanaka-


i92


THE  TEN  PRINCES


lekha.  He  visited  me  daily;  manifested  the  most  wor¬
shipful  consideration;  bribed  my  disciples;  and  at  last,
picking  his  moment,  bashfully  besought  my  services.

I  plunged  into  meditation,  received  illumination  at
the  proper  moment,  fixed  him  with  a  stare,  and  spoke:
‘My  son,  your  effort  is  worthy.  For  the  acquisition  of
this  jewel  among  maidens,  sole  repository  of  all  stig¬
mata  of  fortune,  will  lead  to  domination  of  the  earth,
shining  in  her  girdle  of  the  milky  sea,  radiant  with  a
thousand  strings  of  pearls  in  the  Ganges  and  other
streams.  Yet  the  Yaksha  who  possesses  her  permits
no  necromancer  to  behold  those  eyes,  graceful  and
dark-hued  as  lilies;  therefore  be  patient  for  three  days,
while  I  endeavor  to  attain  your  object.’

“Thus  instructed,  the  king  departed  happily.  And
I  went  forth,  night  after  moonless  night,  when  the
whole  horizon  was  engulfed  by  multitudinous,  cling¬
ing  grains  of  darkness  and  sleep  held  all  eyes  of  men  in
its  fetters,  to  hollow  out  with  a  spade,  at  a  distance
from  the  landing  steps,  a  spot  on  the  shore  of  the  lake,
water-tight,  with  a  hardly  discernible  aperture,  yet
possible  to  enter  from  water-level.  When  I  had  closed
the  entrance  with  thick-set  stone  and  brick  until  I
deemed  the  appearance  of  the  shore  unsuspicious,  I
cleansed  my  person  with  my  morning  bath,  took  red
lilies  in  my  hands,  and  adored  the  sun — the  central
gem  in  heaven’s  pearl  necklace  of  countless  constella¬
tions;  the  sole  lion  for  the  slaying  of  night’s  dark,  wild
elephant;  the  graceful  dancer  on  the  stage  of  Golden


MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  193


Mountain’s  peak;  the  only  crocodile  to  breast  the
gathered,  billowing  clouds  of  heaven’s  sea;  the  witness
of  right  and  wrong;  the  possessor  of  a  thousand  beams
to  streak  with  beauty  the  body  of  the  East.  There¬
after  I  sought  my  dwelling.

“When  the  three  days  were  gone,  when  the  lord  of
day  showed  a  glory  equaling  the  splendor  of  the  gold¬
en  slope  of  Sunset  Peak  and  was  yet  more  beautiful
beside  the  swelling,  sandal-scented  breast  of  twilight
(who  clothed  herself  in  impalpable  air  for  fear  of  in¬
sult  from  Shiva’s  jealous  bride),  the  king  drew  near,
so  lowly  bowing  that  his  diadem  flashed  reflected
light  from  the  nails  of  my  feet  on  the  ground.  And  I
discoursed  thus:  ‘I  felicitate  you  on  seeing  the  happy
issue  of  your  wishes.  For  in  this  world  success  visits
no  soul  that  does  not  strive,  while  all  blessings  are  ever
ready  to  the  hand  of  those  not  indolent.  Thus  my
spirit  has  been  induced  by  your  lofty,  pure-minded  pi¬
ety,  by  your  worshipful  deference,  to  so  consecrate
this  lake  that  here  and  now  success  may  come  to  you.
At  midnight  you  are  to  plunge  in  throat-high,  then
straightway  float  as  quiet  as  may  be  on  the  water  s
surface,  holding  motionless  the  breath  in  your  body.
After  a  moment,  for  one  who  gives  ear  to  the  raucous
cries  of  frightened  swans  scratched  by  the  prickly
stalks  of  swaying  lotus  clusters  hidden  in  the  waves
that  lap  the  shore,  there  will  become  audible  the  rum¬
bling  roar  of  mighty  waters.  When  that  rumbling
ceases,  you  will  emerge,  dripping,  with  slightly  red-


J94


THE  TEN  PRINCES


dened  eyes,  but  endued  with  beauty  charming  all  be¬
holders,  before  which  that  Yaksha  will  not  dare  to
stand.  And  the  maiden’s  heart,  fettered  by  love’s  un¬
breakable  bonds,  will  find  unendurable  a  moment’s
intermission  of  your  society;  while  the  wide  expanse
of  earth  (your  second  bride),  not  overmuch  regarding
your  disdained  rivals,  may  undoubtedly  be  considered
safe  in  your  hand.  If  this  approves  itself,  let  function¬
aries  soundly  based  in  varied  specialties,  with  numer¬
ous  other  well-wishers,  provide  and  produce  a  hundred
fishermen;  let  them  post  hundreds  of  confidential
agents  at  determined  intervals  along  the  lake;  and  let
them  institute  an  alert  service  of  sentinel  soldiers  at  a
distance  of  thirty  fathoms  from  the  bank.  Who
knows,  in  such  a  case,  what  enemies  may  plot,  if  a
loophole  be  left?’

“This  captivated  his  fancy,  while  his  function¬
aries  raised  no  objection,  since  they  could  detect  no
defect  in  the  plan  and  realized  that  the  king’s  design,
born  of  deep  desire  for  the  maiden,  was  irrevocably
fixed.  As  he  stood  there,  absorbed  in  his  purpose,  I
addressed  him :  ‘O  King,  I  have  lingered  long  among
your  people,  yet  such  long  lingering  is  not  recom¬
mended  to  such  as  I.  When  your  object  is  attained,
you  will  see  me  here  no  more.  So  long  I  have  lingered,
feeling  that  my  departure  would  be  reprehensible  if  I
rendered  you  no  service  after  receiving  some  mouth¬
fuls  of  food  in  your  kingdom.  I  have  now  rendered
such  service.  Go  then  to  the  palace,  bathe  in  pure,


MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  195


pleasantly  scented  water,  assume  white  garlands  and
cosmetics,  propitiate  with  gifts  appropriate  to  your
power  all  the  divinities  of  earth;  then  return,  dispell¬
ing  night’s  deep  darkness  with  thousands  of  flames
on  torch-tips  dipped  in  oil  of  sesame,  and  strive  to¬
ward  success.’

“And  he,  to  manifest  his  gratitude,  replied:  ‘This
success  is  no  success  if  you,  sir,  are  absent.  Such  lofty
indifference  is  a  melancholy  thing,  depriving  your  un¬
offending  servant  of  your  presence.  Yet  the  words  of
the  worthy  may  not  be  frustrate.’  And  he  departed
for  his  bath.

“So  I  went  forth  in  the  lonely  night  and  hid  in  the
hole  in  the  shore,  pressing  my  ear  to  a  tiny  crack.  At
midnight  came  the  king,  having  completed  the  cere¬
monies  enjoined;  posted  guards  from  spot  to  spot;
and  brought  his  fisherfolk.  Since  the  inner  prickings
of  apprehension  had  been  banished,  he  plunged  with
abandon  into  the  water  of  the  lake.  And  when,  with
flying  hair  and  stopped  ears  and  nose,  he  reached  an
elephant’s  depth,  I  caught  him  as  he  floated  by  a
crocodile’s  trick,  myself  not  emerging,  and  wrapped
my  begging-wallet  round  his  throat.  In  my  pitiless
grip,  under  blows  from  fists  and  feet  relentless  as  the
ruthless  death-god’s  gripe,  he  soon  became  motion¬
less.  Then  I  dragged  the  body  to  the  hole,  hid  it,  and
issued  from  the  water.

“Among  the  gathered  soldiers  that  change  of  form
awakened  amazement.  But  I  mounted  an  elephant,


THE  TEN  PRINCES


196

laid  claim  to  the  white  umbrella  and  all  other  shining
insignia  of  royalty,  and  traveled  by  the  king’s  high¬
way,  the  throng  falling  back  in  fear  of  a  beating  from
the  truncheons  of  grim  policemen.  That  night  emo¬
tion  drove  desire  of  sleep  from  my  eyes.  And  when
the  sun’s  circle  swung  in  sight,  seeming  the  red-
streaked  head  of  a  heavenly  elephant  or  a  jeweled
mirror  for  the  face  of  the  East,  I  did  my  devoirs;
seated  myself  on  the  royal  throne  brilliant  with  thick¬
set  gems  that  bristled  with  rays  of  light;  and  addressed
my  retinue  seated  near,  whose  attitudes  were  con¬
strained  by  respectful  timidity  as  they  observed  my
conformance  to  convention:  ‘Behold  the  power  of
holiness,  since  through  that  unconquerable  hermit  s
sinless  self-discipline  I  acquired  this  changed  and
most  sightly  body,  lustrous  as  a  lotus  petal,  in  that
lake  whose  lilies  draw  the  happy  bees.  Today  let  every
heretic  head  be  bowed  in  shame.  Now  let  the  temples
of  the  most  high  gods— Shiva,  Vishnu,  Brahma,  and
the  rest — witness  pious  services  of  dance  and  song.
And  let  all  applicants  receive  from  this  palace  suffi¬
cient  wealth  to  banish  misery.’

“And  they,  their  eyes  wide  with  a  sense  of  the  mi¬
raculous,  cried:  ‘Subdue,  O  lord  of  the  world,  the
whole  wide  world;  hide  beneath  your  glory  the
glories  of  the  primal  king.’  Repeating  such  blessings,
they  performed  the  ceremonies  enjoined.

“Now  when  a  maiden  named  Shashankasena,  a
dearly  loved  friend  of  my  beloved,  chanced  to  come


MANTRAGUPTA’S  ADVENTURE  197


before  me  on  some  mission,  I  quietly  inquired:  ‘Have
you  by  any  chance  at  any  time  seen  such  a  person  as  I
am?’  After  a  brief  glance,  her  heart  climbed  the  cli¬
max  of  joy;  she  made  pretty  play  with  the  gleaming
grace  of  a  smile;  she  covered  her  blossom-lip  with  the
swaying  branch  of  her  hand;  the  moisture  of  joy
loosened  the  rouge  around  her  eyes;  bowing  low,  she
stammered  slow  words  of  affection:  ‘Indeed  I  know
well,  if  this  be  no  web  of  magic.  Tell  me  what  it
means.’  I  told  her  ail,  and  taught  her  lips  a  message
to  produce  perfect  bliss  in  her  friend’s  heart.  There¬
after  I  freed  the  king  of  Kalinga  and  paid  him  honor;
he  gave  me  my  darling  in  lawful  wedlock;  and  happy
with  her,  I  ruled  the  realms  of  Andhra  and  Kalinga.
Then  I  led  hither  a  sizable  army  to  succor  the  Anga
monarch  assailed  by  his  foe,  and  chancing  to  meet  you
in  the  midst  of  my  friends,  felt  my  soul  overflow  with
delight.”

While  all  the  friends  greeted  with  congratulations
this  tale  of  clever  craft,  Prince  Rajavahana,  his  lip
bathed  in  the  light  of  a  smile,  declared:  “A  marvelous
feat  of  holiness!  In  this  case  also  religious  self-denial
bears  noble  fruit!  But  joking  aside,  we  witness  here
the  quintessence  of  adroitness  and  resolution,  culmi¬
nating  in  joy.”  Hereupon  he  cast  on  scholarly  Vi-
shruta  a  glance  that  seemed  a  blooming  lily,  and  said:
“Will  you  descend  into  our  mortal  world?”


CHAPTER  XIII
VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE

He  told  this  tale.  “Your  Majesty,  I  wandered  too;
and  in  the  Vindhya  forest  I  met  beside  a  well  a  lad  of
some  eight  years,  unfit  to  suffer,  yet  suffering  from
hunger  and  thirst.  He  stammered  with  fright:  ‘O  no¬
ble  sir,  help  me  in  my  suffering.  An  aged  man,  my  sole
support,  fell  into  this  well  while  drawing  water  to
quench  my  devouring  thirst,  and  I  cannot  pull  him
out.’  I  approached,  extracted  the  old  gentleman  by
means  of  a  vine-stem,  reinvigorated  the  boy  with
water  drawn  through  a  hollow  bamboo  and  five  or  six
fruits  which  I  knocked  with  stones  from  the  top  of  a
bread-fruit  tree  that  rose  an  arrow’s  flight  above  us.
Then  I  sat  in  the  shade  and  questioned  the  ancient:
‘Father,  who  is  this  boy?  Who,  indeed,  are  you?  And
how  did  this  mishap  befall?’

“He  choked  with  tears  as  he  replied:  ‘Listen,  no¬
ble  sir.  In  the  Vidarbha  country  lived  one  Punyavar-
man,  the  gem  of  Bhoja’s  royal  line,  who  seemed  a  par¬
tial  incarnation  of  Virtue.  He  was  powerful,  truthful,
bountiful;  self-disciplined,  he  disciplined  his  people
and  attached  his  dependents;  he  was  glorious,  lofty,
vigorous  in  mind  and  body;  he  made  masterpieces  his
model,  and  undertook  what  was  feasible  yet  ideal;  he
caressed  the  wise,  impressed  his  servants,  blessed  his


199


200


THE  TEN  PRINCES


kinsfolk,  distressed  his  foes;  he  was  deaf  to  illogical
discourse,  insatiable  in  his  thirst  for  virtue,  discrimi¬
nating  in  the  social  arts,  a  penetrating  critic  of  ethi¬
cal  and  economic  compendia;  he  recompensed  the
slightest  favor  munificently,  supervised  treasury  and
stables  heedfully,  controlled  all  functionaries  watch¬
fully;  encouraging  the  conscientious  by  gifts  and  hon¬
ors,  he  had  a  ready  remedy  for  calamities  brought  by
gods  or  men;  he  was  deft  in  applying  the  six  expedi¬
ents  and  regulated  the  four  castes  with  traditional
wisdom;  his  glory  was  pure.  He  filled  the  life  of  a  man
with  worthy  deeds,  yet  for  the  unworthiness  of  his
subjects  was  translated  into  divinity.

“  ‘His  successor  as  ruler  of  the  land  was  his  son
Anantavarman  who,  though  rich  in  every  virtue,  hap¬
pened  to  be  somewhat  inattentive  to  administrative
duty.  One  day  he  was  privately  admonished  by  an
aged  counselor,  Vasurakshita,  a  favorite  of  his  father’s
and  an  outspoken  man:  “My  son,  you  possess  in  full
measure  every  personal  advantage,  beginning  with
noble  birth.  Your  intelligence  is  naturally  keen,  and
distinguished  beyond  others  by  large  attainments  in
dance,  vocal  music,  and  similar  arts,  as  well  as  in  the
subtle  minutiae  of  poetry.  Yet  that  intelligence,  un¬
disciplined  in  political  science,  appears  dull,  like  gold
not  purified  by  fire.  For  even  an  exalted  king,  if  de¬
void  of  trained  intelligence,  does  not  perceive  when
enemies  are  getting  the  better  of  him.  Nor  can  he
properly  discriminate  effect  and  cause.  Acting  im-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


201


prudently,  he  is  baffled  in  his  enterprises,  is  exploited
by  subjects  and  foreigners.  He  is  despised,  and  his
commands  no  longer  conduce  to  security  or  prosperity
of  his  people.  His  people,  disobeying  his  edicts,  say
what  they  like,  behave  as  they  like,  confound  all  the
proprieties.  And  people  who  disregard  decorum  exile
their  master  and  themselves  both  from  this  world  and
the  next.  Surely,  the  common  man  travels  contented¬
ly  only  on  the  road  lighted  by  the  lamp  of  tested
knowledge.  Nay,  the  divine  eye  of  demonstrated  fact
ranges  unimpeded  over  objects  recondite  or  remote,
over  past,  present,  and  future.  Without  it,  though
boasting  two  large,  wide-opened  eyes,  a  man  is  blind,
unable  to  discern  the  nature  of  things.  Therefore
abandon  your  passion  for  decorative  studies  and  mas¬
ter  political  science,  necessary  in  your  station.  Fortify
your  power  by  this  acquisition;  establish  an  enduring
and  unquestioned  rule  over  the  sea-girdled  earth.”

“  ‘On  hearing  this,  the  king  said:  “My  teacher
gives  me  opportune  instruction.  It  shall  be  done.”
And  he  entered  the  women’s  part  of  the  palace.  When
he  took  occasion  to  mention  the  matter  to  the  ladies,
he  was  overheard  by  a  fellow,  Viharabhadra,  who  was
sitting  there — a  skilful  mind-reader,  a  privileged  per¬
son,  an  adept  in  song,  dance,  instrumental  music,  and
related  arts,  a  connoisseur  of  unconventional  women,
shrewd,  talkative,  suggestive,  critical,  a  buffoon,  a
scandalmonger,  a  detractor,  ready  to  take  bribes  even
from  ministers  of  state,  an  instructor  in  all  naughti-


202


THE  TEN  PRINCES


ness,  a  pilot  in  amorous  intrigue,  a  corruptor  of
youth.

“  ‘This  fellow  smiled  and  said:  “Your  Majesty,
whenever  a  man  becomes  the  lucky  recipient  of  power,
rascals  find  means  to  abuse  his  mind  with  manifold
inducements,  thus  serving  their  own  purposes.  Some,
for  example,  holding  out  the  hope  of  exquisite  re¬
wards  to  be  enjoyed  actually  after  death,  shave  his
head,  tie  him  with  cords  of  sacred  grass,  wrap  him  in  a
fuzzy  skin,  smear  him  with  butter,  send  him  starving
to  bed — meanwhile  abstracting  all  his  property.  Even
more  terrible  are  the  hypocrites  who  rob  him  of  son,
wife,  body,  and  life  itself.  And  if  a  fellow  of  the  more
sensible  sort  refuses  to  part  with  his  possessions  for
this  mirage,  yet  others  crowd  around  him,  saying:  ‘We
know  how  to  convert  a  single  penny  into  a  fortune,
how  to  kill  all  your  enemies  without  a  sword,  how  to
make  an  unaided  mortal  emperor,  if  you  follow  the
path  we  point  out/

“And  when  he  asks:  ‘What  path  is  that?’  they
continue:  ‘Well,  there  are  four  royal  studies — theol¬
ogy*  agriculture,  metaphysics,  political  science.  Three
of  them — theology,  agriculture,  metaphysics — are  big
and  slow  to  show  results.  Leave  them  alone.  Just
study  political  science.  Now  Professor  Vishnugupta
has  made  a  little  epitome  of  this  for  the  king — twenty-
four  thousand  lines  of  poetry.  Learn  it  by  heart,  ap¬
ply  it  in  detail;  and  it  does  what  it  promises.’  ‘Good,’
says  he,  and  starts  to  study.  He  learns  it  (meanwhile


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


203


growing  old)  and  finds  that  book  leading  to  other
books.  It  can’t  be  truly  understood  until  the  whole
wordy  mass  is  mastered.  Well,  suppose  he  does  mas¬
ter  it,  later  or  sooner.  The  first  result  is  that  he  no
longer  trusts  anyone,  even  son  or  wife.  Even  for  his
own  belly  he  must  have  just  so  much  porridge,  made
of  just  so  many  grains  of  rice.  For  the  cooking  of  just
so  much  porridge,  he  must  be  given  just  so  much  fire¬
wood,  correctly  weighed  and  measured.

“Having  risen  from  table,  after  absorbing  a
fistful  (or  half  a  fistful)  with  his  mouth  rinsed  (or  un¬
rinsed),  he  must  spend  the  first  eighth  of  the  day  in
listening  to  a  complete  statement  of  receipts  and  dis¬
bursements.  While  he  is  listening,  a  double  amount
is  stolen  by  the  knavish  bureaucrats  who  have  the
wit  to  multiply  a  thousandfold  the  forty  tricks  of  pec¬
ulation  taught  by  Chanakya.  In  the  second  eighth,
his  ears  tingle  with  the  vociferation  of  litigious  sub¬
jects — a  tough  life!  And  even  so,  the  legal  officers  de¬
termine  victory  and  defeat  according  to  their  own  no¬
tions,  making  the  king  responsible  for  injustice  and
shame  and  for  their  own  interests.  In  the  third
eighth,  he  gets  a  chance  to  bathe  and  eat,  but  he  is
always  afraid  of  poison  until  the  food  is  quite  digested.
In  the  fourth  eighth,  he  stands  stretching  out  his  hand
to  receive  gold.

“  ‘  “In  the  fifth,  he  has  great  bother  with  counsels
of  state.  Here  too,  the  counselors  make  private  com¬
binations  as  if  they  were  neutrals,  and  juggle  at  their


204


THE  TEN  PRINCES


own  sweet  will  the  inexpedient  and  the  expedient,  the
possible  and  the  impossible,  the  reports  of  envoys  and
spies,  places,  times,  enterprises,  situations,  so  picking
a  living  from  their  adherents,  opponents,  and  friends.
By  secretly  stirring  foreign  and  domestic  passions,
then  seeming  to  pacify  them  publicly,  they  hold  their
monarch  in  subjection.  In  the  sixth,  recreation  or
more  counsels  of  state;  you  see,  his  maximum  time  for
recreation  is  ninety  minutes.  In  the  seventh,  a  tire¬
some  military  review.  In  the  eighth,  worry  about  the
competence  of  his  friend,  the  general.

“  *  “When  at  last  he  greets  the  twilight,  in  the
first  eighth  of  the  night  he  must  interview  secret
agents  and,  in  accordance  with  their  reports,  set  des¬
peradoes  at  work — murderers,  incendiaries,  poisoners.
In  the  second  eighth,  after  snatching  a  bite,  he  says
his  prayers  like  a  priest.  In  the  third,  he  lies  down  to
a  musical  accompaniment  and  can  sleep  (perhaps)
through  the  fourth  and  fifth.  Let  him  rest  as  best  he
can,  poor  duffer,  with  his  mind  dizzy  with  everlasting
fretting.  Then  in  the  sixth  begins  bother  with  books
and  bother  with  business;  in  the  seventh,  more  coun¬
sel  and  despatch  of  messengers.  Of  course  the  messen¬
gers  exaggerate  both  pleasant  reports  and  accounts  of
misfortune,  to  increase  their  trade  on  roads  where
they  pay  no  tolls;  by  manufacturing  business  out  of
next  to  nothing,  they  keep  forever  on  the  go.  In  the
eighth,  the  chaplain  and  others  come  and  say:  ‘A  bad
dream  last  night!  The  planets  are  adverse,  and  the


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


205


omens  evil.  Let  us  have  expiatory  services,  and  let  all
the  sacrificial  equipment  be  of  solid  gold — only  so  is
the  ceremony  efficacious.  These  Brahmans  are  al¬
most  like  the  god  Brahma;  a  benediction  pronounced
by  them  brings  a  double  blessing.  And  those  others
are  pitifully  poor,  with  large  families,  and  are  compe¬
tent  performers,  but  have  never  yet  received  a  fee;
anything  you  give  them  spells  heaven,  long  life,  avoid¬
ance  of  calamity.’  Thus  they  extract  tremendous  fees
in  others’  names,  and  slyly  devour  them.

“  ‘  “So  when  a  man  learns  his  political  science  and
governs  accordingly — without  a  particle  of  repose  day
or  night,  with  no  end  of  botheration,  with  unremitting
irritations — he  finds  it  difficult  to  control  his  own
household,  not  to  mention  an  empire.  Whatever  gifts,
whatever  homage,  whatever  compliments  he  gets
from  his  fellow-scholars,  he  thinks  a  cheat  and  does
not  trust  them.  Now  lack  of  confidence  is  the  mother
of  misfortune.  The  less  technique  a  man  uses,  the  bet¬
ter  he  succeeds.  Science  is  wasted.  Why,  even  a  baby
contrives  to  get  milk  from  his  mother,  one  way  or  an¬
other.  Drop  this  cramping  research;  follow  your  in¬
stincts  to  the  pleasures  of  sense.

“  ‘  “Take  the  very  fellows  who  preach:  ‘This  is
the  way  to  conquer  the  senses;  this  is  the  way  to  elude
the  six  enemies  (desire,  anger,  greed,  passion,  perver¬
sity,  envy) ;  always  apply  the  four  rules  of  strategy  to
friends  and  enemies;  spend  your  time  in  worrying
about  peace  and  war;  don’t  give  a  moment  to  pleasure’


206


THE  TEN  PRINCES


— why,  these  pious  frauds  enjoy  the  salary  stolen
from  you  in  servant-girls’  houses.  And  what  kind  of
scamps  are  the  inspired  scribblers  who  are  so  fierce  on
theory — Shukra,  Angirasa,  Vishnu,  Indra,  Parashara,
and  all  the  rest?  Did  they  conquer  the  six  enemies?
Did  they  practice  what  they  preached?  You  can  read
success  or  failure  in  what  they  actually  did.  Besides,
the  educated  are  fooled  by  the  uneducated,  in  plenty
of  cases.

“Would  it  not  be  silly  for  Your  Majesty,  con¬
sidering  your  universally  honored  ancestry,  blooming
youth,  handsome  appearance,  and  limitless  power?
Don’t  spoil  it  all  by  studying  science:  that  makes  you
distrust  everybody,  interferes  with  enjoyment,  com¬
pels  you  to  consider  alternatives,  and  so  troubles
every  enterprise  with  doubt.  You  have  ten  thousand
elephants,  three  hundred  thousand  horses,  no  end  of
foot  soldiers;  and  your  treasuries  burst  with  gold  and
gems.  And  if  all  the  people  in  the  world  should  eat  for
a  thousand  ages,  they  would  not  empty  your  grana¬
ries.

“Isn’t  it  enough  to  take  pains  with  what  others
have  earned  for  you?  Why,  the  life  of  a  mortal  passes
like  four  or  five  days,  and  precious  little  of  that  fit  for
real  enjoyment.  Fools  earn  money  and  go  to  seed  do¬
ing  it;  they  don’t  want  to  take  the  smallest  nibble  at
what  they  have  earned.  Why  spin  it  out?  Pack  the  ad¬
ministrative  burden  on  devoted  friends  who  have
backs  for  burdens;  amuse  yourself  with  these  heaven-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


207


ly  ladies;  indulge  in  song,  music,  drink,  and  gossip  as
occasion  offers;  make  your  body  pay  its  way.”  With
this  he  fell  flat  on  the  floor  and  lay  still,  his  hands
clasped  on  his  brow,  while  the  ladies  laughed  aloud
and  their  eyes  twinkled  approval.

“  ‘Then  the  monarch  smiled  and  said:  “Rise!  You
give  me  good  advice,  and  are  therefore  my  teacher.
Why  behave  in  a  manner  so  unprofessorial  ?”  So  he
helped  him  to  his  feet,  remaining  in  playful  humor.

“  ‘In  the  following  days,  when  repeatedly  stimu¬
lated  by  the  old  counselor  to  the  appointed  task,  he
assented  verbally,  but  iirwardly  despised  him  as  a  ped¬
ant.  So  then  the  counselor  reflected:  “I  am  an  ob¬
stinate  blockhead.  Urging  him  to  an  irksome  task,  I
have  become  in  his  eyes  an  importunate  bore,  an  ob¬
ject  of  ridicule.  His  conduct  is  quite  obviously  altered.
Thus,  he  no  longer  looks  on  me  with  affection;  he  does
not  speak  with  a  smile,  or  impart  his  secrets,  or  touch
my  hand.  He  does  not  sympathize  with  my  setbacks,
or  congratulate  me  on  happy  occasions.  He  sends  me
no  ingratiating  gifts  and  does  not  enumerate  my  serv¬
ices.  He  no  longer  inquires  about  my  household,  or
notices  my  friends,  or  confides  his  plans  to  me,  or  in¬
vites  me  to  visit  the  ladies.  Moreover,  he  employs  me
in  humiliating  jobs,  permits  others  to  pre-empt  my
chair,  gives  his  confidence  to  my  enemies,  leaves  my
remarks  unanswered.  He  reprehends  my  familiar  fail¬
ings,  turns  any  faiblesse  of  mine  into  a  jest,  rejects  his
own  conviction  when  championed  by  me,  does  not  ac-


208


THE  TEN  PRINCES


knowledge  the  valuable  gifts  that  I  send,  causes  the
blunders  of  political  scientists  to  be  bellowed  forth  in
my  hearing  by  fools.  The  great  Chanakya  is  right  in
saying:  ‘We  love  the  sympathetic  mischief- worker;
we  hate  the  unsympathizing  benefactor.’

“Yet  what  can  I  do?  Despite  his  waywardness,
I  cannot  abandon  this  king,  my  king  by  generations
of  inheritance.  Yet  not  abandoning  him,  what  benefit
can  I  confer,  when  my  words  go  unheeded?  Surely,
this  realm  will  fall  a  prey  to  Vasantabhanu,  lord  of
Ashmaka,  who  knows  his  political  science.  I  only  hope
that  disasters,  when  they  come,  will  bring  our  king  to
his  senses.  Though  misfortunes,  among  their  disa¬
greeable  consequences,  may  also  produce  hatred,
still,  since  honest  conduct  does  not  please  him,  let  the
inevitable  misfortune  come.  If  I  can  bridle  my  ma¬
licious  tongue,  I  may  somehow  keep  my  footing  at
court.”

“  ‘While  the  counselor  was  in  this  mood  and  the
king  was  flirting,  Chandrapalita  arrived,  son  of  In-
drapalita,  counselor  of  the  lord  of  Ashmaka.  He  had
been  exiled  by  his  father  for  loose  living,  and  came  at¬
tended  by  numerous  bands  of  musicians,  by  crafts-
women  of  no  mean  skill,  and  by  many  menials  and
spies  in  disguise.  With  such  an  assortment  of  diver¬
sions  he  captured  Viharabhadra,  and  so  bridged  the
gap  to  the  king.

“  ‘Whenever  he  found  an  opening,  he  would  white-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


209


wash  some  vice  or  other,  after  this  fashion:  “Your
Majesty,  there  is  nothing  so  beneficial  as  hunting.  It

gives  the  legs  magnificent  exercise;  and  long-winded

*

speed  might  prove  very  handy  after  a  defeat.  It  dries
up  the  phlegmatic  humor;  thus  promoting  digestion,
the  sole  foundation  of  health.  By  reducing  fat,  it
makes  the  body  vigorous,  sinewy,  agile.  It  gives
power  to  endure  cold,  heat,  wind,  rain  ,  hunger,  thirst.
It  interprets  the  mental  activities  of  living  beings
from  their  physical  expression.  It  supplements  scanty
crops  with  the  flesh  of  deer,  buffaloes,  wild  oxen,  and
other  game.  It  makes  land  routes  secure  by  killing
such  creatures  as  wolves  and  tigers.  It  explores  moun¬
tainous  or  forested  regions,  with  their  varied  re¬
sources.  It  wins  the  confidence  of  jungle  tribes.  It
fosters  energy,  thus  impressing  hostile  armies.  These
advantages  deserve  a  high  rating.

“  ‘  “Or  take  gambling.  It  develops  an  unexampled
magnanimity,  since  you  drop  a  pile  of  money  like  a
straw.  With  its  alternations  of  winning  and  losing,
it  liberates  you  from  servile  joy  or  despondency.  It
nourishes  impetuosity,  the  basis  of  all  manliness.  It
compels  a  continuous  exercise  of  quick  intelligence  in
detecting  tricks  (very  difficult  to  perceive)  with  dice,
sleight  of  hand,  the  board,  and  other  equipment.  De¬
manding  exclusive  attention,  it  gives  superb  training
in  mental  concentration.  It  makes  for  delight  in  au¬
dacity,  the  companion  of  brisk  resolution;  for  ability


210


THE  TEN  PRINCES


to  hold  one’s  own  while  rubbing  up  with  the  toughest
customers;  for  the  cultivation  of  self-reliance;  for  get¬
ting  a  living  without  stinginess.

Or  again,  take  the  society  of  good-looking
girls.  That  makes  money  and  virtue  worth  having.
That  means  genuine  manly  pride;  skill  in  thought¬
reading;  conduct  untainted  by  sordid  greed;  training
in  all  the  social  arts;  quickness  of  wit  and  speech  be¬
cause  you  must  be  forever  devising  means  to  get  what
you  lack,  to  keep  what  you  get,  to  enjoy  what  you
keep,  to  dream  of  what  you  enjoy,  to  pacify  the  pee¬
vish,  and  so  on;  public  deference  for  your  well-
groomed  person  and  stunning  clothes;  social  accepta¬
bility;  great  respect  from  servants;  smiling  address;
dignity;  gallantry;  the  winning,  through  children,  of
salvation  on  earth  and  salvation  in  heaven.

“Then  again,  take  alcohol.  This  fortifies  the
charm  of  youth  through  steady  use  of  spirituous  anti¬
dotes  to  numerous  diseases.  It  neutralizes  all  misfor¬
tunes  by  increasing  self-esteem.  It  kindles  sexual  de¬
sire  and  improves  the  capacity  for  pleasure.  It
drowns  the  consciousness  of  sin,  so  counteracting
morbidity.  By  removing  the  fetters  of  reticence,  it
conduces  to  mutual  confidence.  By  repressing  envy,
it  makes  for  pure  joy.  It  encourages  continual  enjoy¬
ment  of  music  and  other  sense-impressions;  the  acqui¬
sition  of  countless  and  varied  friendships;  unrivaled
beauty  of  person;  unparalleled  graces;  martial  spirit,
resulting  from  the  loss  of  fear  and  depression.


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


21 1


“Beneficial  also,  on  occasion,  are  scurrility,
cruelty,  and  spoliation  of  goods.  For  a  king  is  not  a
hermit,  subduing  the  six  enemies  to  bask  in  religious
peace,  nor  can  he  be  held  to  commonplace  morality.”

“  ‘So  the  poor  king  adopted  these  opinions,  like
the  counsels  of  a  teacher,  with  the  greatest  respect;
while  his  ministers,  imitating  him,  embraced  vicious
courses  without  restraint.  And  as  all  were  equally  self-
indulgent,  no  man  investigated  another’s  delinquency.

“  ‘Since  king  and  ministers  behaved  alike,  the
bureaucrats  consumed  the  profits  of  their  own  labors,
thus  slowly  drying  up  the  sources  of  revenue,  while
their  master’s  expenditures  increased  daily;  for  he
was  subservient  to  gay  dogs.  His  confidence  was  in¬
creased  by  finding  a  community  of  tastes  in  the  vas¬
sals,  prominent  citizens,  and  district  leaders  to  whom,
with  their  wives,  he  issued  invitations  for  alcoholic
conversaziones.  He  found  them  ready  to  transgress
convention  and  took  liberties  with  the  ladies  on  any
pretext;  while  they,  abating  their  reverence  for  court
ladies  who  met  them  half  way,  indulged  in  many  flir¬
tations.

“  ‘Presently,  all  the  ladies  of  the  land,  finding  in¬
delicacy  easy  and  pleasant,  broke  the  bonds  of  de¬
corum;  they  did  not  care  a  straw  for  their  husbands  as
they  listened  to  the  proposals  of  crowding  lovers.
Passionate  squabbles  resulted.  The  strong  killed  the
weak.  Thieves  stole  the  wealth  of  the  wealthy.  The
paths  of  crime  were  free  and  frequented.  Citizens


212


THE  TEN  PRINCES


whose  kinsfolk  were  slain,  whose  property  was  plun¬
dered,  who  were  sick  of  slaughter  and  bondage,  loosed
their  throats  in  sobbing  lamentation.  Unjust  punish¬
ments  begot  fear  and  wrath.  Greed  stalked  through
impoverished  households.  The  self-respecting  flamed
with  humiliated  pride.  Treasons  flowed  from  all  these
wrongs.

“  ‘Then  poisoners  and  other  plotters,  in  the  pay  of
the  lord  of  Ashmaka,  destroyed  Anantavarman’s
picked  soldiers  and  debilitated  his  army  by  many  de¬
vices.  Dressed  as  hunters,  they  enticed  men  by  stories
of  abundant  game  into  ravines  without  exit,  then  set
fire  to  the  dry  grass  and  bamboo  clumps  at  the  en¬
trance.  They  urged  the  killing  of  tigers  and  other
wild  beasts,  then  helped  the  beasts  to  kill  them.  They
enlisted  deadly  hunger  and  thirst  against  men  led  far
astray  by  desire  for  the  water  of  some  choice  well.
They  led  rough  chases  that  caused  falls  from  cliffs  on
treacherous  slopes  covered  with  grass  and  brush.
They  drew  thorns  from  feet  with  poison-tipped
knives;  they  made  easy  prey  of  stragglers,  striving  in¬
dividually  to  rejoin  a  scattered  troop.  Others  they
shot  with  arrows,  pretending  to  mistake  them  for
deer;  or  dared  them  to  scale  rugged  heights,  and
pushed  them  off  with  no  witnesses;  or  disguised  them¬
selves  as  men  of  the  jungle  to  overpower  small  bands
in  a  thicket.  They  forced  others  into  brawls  at  gam¬
bling  matches,  cockfights,  festivals,  and  the  like;
made  them  injure  each  other;  fomented  secret  un-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


213


pleasantnesses,  then  published  the  resulting  insults
before  witnesses,  thus  compelling  duels  to  conceal  dis¬
honor.  Attaching  themselves  in  the  guise  of  friends  to
others’  wives,  they  suggested  acts  of  violence  aimed
at  lovers,  husbands,  or  both.  They  seduced  some  with
fit  females,  lurking  at  the  rendezvous  and  bursting
out  with  damning  evidence.  Some  they  induced  to
enter  caves,  to  dig  for  treasure,  to  practice  magic,  at¬
tributing  their  death  to  the  difficulties  of  the  job.
They  would  persuade  men  to  mount  must  elephants,
meanwhile  suppressing  precautions;  or,  on  some  wild
wager,  excite  a  rogue  elephant  against  a  picked  troop.
They  assassinated  those  who  quarreled  over  a  dona¬
tion,  casting  the  blame  on  the  disputants;  they  se¬
cretly  smote  those  who  abused  vassal  cities  or  dis¬
tricts,  and  proclaimed  the  names  of  personal  enemies.
They  spread  debilitating  disease  by  encouraging  con¬
stant  indulgence  with  that  kind  of  female;  they  skil¬
fully  rubbed  poison  on  garments,  ornaments,  gar¬
lands,  and  salves;  they  fostered  sickness  in  the  name
of  medicine.

“  ‘Then  Vasantabhanu  instigated  Bhanuvarman,
lord  of  Vanavasi,  to  make  war  on  Anantavarman,  who
mobilized  for  offense  the  moment  his  boundary  was
violated.  Of  all  his  vassals,  the  first  to  arrive  and  the
most  welcome  was  the  lord  of  Ashmaka.  When  the
others  gathered,  they  made  a  short  march,  encamping
on  the  bank  of  the  Nerbudda.

“  ‘At  this  juncture,  the  king  summoned  a  girl  in


2I4


THE  TEN  PRINCES


the  train  of  a  powerful  vassal,  the  lord  of  Kuntala;
she  was  dancer  to  the  person  of  His  Majesty  of  Avan-
ti,  was  called  “the  human  sylph,”  and  was  highly  ex¬
tolled  by  Chandrapalita  and  others  for  terpsichorean
talent.  On  seeing  her  dance,  he  fell  in  love,  made  her
drunk,  and  abused  her.

“  ‘Then  the  lord  of  Ashmaka  whispered  to  the  lord
of  Kuntala:  “This  wanton  king  outrages  our  wives.
What  measure  of  humiliation  must  we  endure?  1  have
a  hundred  elephants;  you  have  five  hundred.  Let  us
join  forces,  and  speak  a  quiet  word  to  the  lord  of  Mu-
rala,  Virasena;  also  to  Ekavira,  lord  of  Richika;  to
Kumaragupta,  lord  of  Konkana;  and  to  Nagapala,
ruler  of  Sasikya.  They  will  infallibly  resent  his  in¬
solence  and  fall  in  with  our  plan.  Besides,  this  lord  of
Vanavasi  is  a  dear  friend  of  mine.  We  will  let  him  en¬
gage  our  blackguard  in  front,  while  we  attack  from
the  rear.  And  we  will  divide  the  treasure  and  ani¬
mals.”

“  ‘Receiving  joyful  assent,  he  made  up  parcels  as
gifts — twenty  fine  garments,  twenty-five  portions  of
gold,  saffron,  and  blankets — chose  a  fit  go-between,
came  to  an  understanding  with  the  vassals  mentioned,
and  won  them  to  his  plan.  For  these  vassals  and  for
the  lord  of  Vanavasi,  Anantavarman  next  day  be¬
came  mincemeat,  because  he  despised  political  science.

“  ‘Now  Vasantabhanu,  having  set  his  own  guards
over  the  chaotic  booty  of  treasure  and  animals,  made
this  insidious  proposal  to  all  his  confederates:  “Di-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


215


vide  the  spoil  in  proportion  to  your  exertions  and
your  contributions  of  force.  I  shall  be  content  with
any  fragment  you  may  allot.”  Thus  he  baited  all  the
vassals  into  a  ruinous  squabble,  and  himself  swal¬
lowed  the  whole  plunder.  After  bestowing  a  petty
fraction  on  the  lord  of  Vanavasi,  he  faced  about  and
reduced  the  entire  realm  of  Anantavarman.

“  ‘In  this  posture  of  affairs,  the  aged  counselor
Vasurakshita,  with  the  help  of  certain  hereditary  serv¬
ants  of  the  monarchy,  contrived  to  escape  with  the
lad  Bhaskaravarman  (whom  you  see  here),  with  his
elder  sister,  the  thirteen-year  old  Manjuvadini,  and
with  their  mother,  Queen  Vasundhara.  The  counse¬
lor,  foreseeing  the  inevitable  disaster,  perished  by  an
inflammatory  fever;  but  certain  friends  (of  whom  I
was  one)  conducted  the  queen  and  the  royal  children
to  the  city  Mahishmati  and  presented  them  to  Mitra-
varman,  her  consort’s  half-brother.

“  ‘This  scoundrel  fancied  her  as  loose  as  himself;
and  when  she  repulsed  him,  he  heartlessly  strove  to
kill  this  lad,  imagining  that  she  preserved  her  honor
only  to  keep  her  son  fit  for  the  succession.  When  the
queen  understood  the  situation,  she  besought  me
thus:  “Father  Nalijangha,  wherever  you  have  to  put
him,  save  my  boy’s  life,  and  your  own.  If  my  life  is
preserved,  I  will  follow.  And  when  you  are  secure,
send  me  a  message.”

“  ‘I  managed  to  spirit  him  away  from  the  muddle
at  court  and  plunged  into  the  Vindhya  forest.  I  gave


21 6


THE  TEN  PRINCES


him  a  few  days’  rest  in  a  herdsmen’s  hamlet — for  we
traveled  on  foot — but  fearing  a  descent  of  the  king’s
agents  even  there,  made  a  further  long  journey.  Then,
when  dreadful  thirst  distressed  him,  I  tried  to  give
him  water  but  stumbled  and  fell  into  this  well,  where
you  were  so  kind  to  me.  Henceforth,  sir,  pray  help
this  helpless  prince.’  And  he  bowed  respectfully.

“Now  when  I  inquired  concerning  the  mother’s
origin,  he  told  me:  ‘His  mother  was  born  to  Kusu-
madhanvan,  lord  of  Kosala,  and  Sagaradatta,  daugh¬
ter  of  Vaishravana,  a  merchant  of  Patna.’  ‘In  that
case,’  said  I,  ‘his  mother  and  my  father  had  the  same
maternal  grandfather.’  And  I  embraced  him  tender¬
ly*  Then  the  old  gentleman  asked  which  of  the  sons
of  Sindhudatta  was  my  father,  and  showed  great  de¬
light  at  hearing  the  name  of  Sushruta.  Thereupon  I
engaged  to  destroy  the  arrogant  usurper  by  adopting
his  own  political  tricks,  and  to  re-establish  the  lad  in
his  paternal  inheritance;  but  the  more  pressing  anxi¬
ety  was  the  alleviation  of  his  hunger.

“At  this  moment  two  deer  flashed  past,  and  a  hun¬
ter  who  had  missed  them  with  three  arrows.  Snatch¬
ing  from  his  hand  his  remaining  two  arrows  and  the
bow,  I  shot.  One  arrow  pierced  beyond  the  feather,  the
other  not  so  far;  but  both  deer  fell  dead.  One  I  gave
to  the  hunter;  the  other  I  scraped,  cleaned,  skinned,
and  cut  up,  then  spitted  the  quarters,  neck,  and
other  parts  over  the  coals  of  a  bonfire,  and  satisfied


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


217


the  hunger  of  my  two  companions  and  myself  with
roast  venison.

“The  barbarian  was  greatly  tickled  by  my  smart¬
ness  in  this  business,  and  I  asked  him:  ‘Do  you  hap¬
pen  to  know  any  news  from  Mahishmati?’  ‘I  left  the
city  today,’  he  replied,  ‘after  selling  tiger  skins  and
leather  goods.  You  can  wager  I  know.  Chandavar-
man’s  younger  brother  Prachandavarman  is  coming
to  make  a  proposal  to  Manjuvadini,  Anantavarman’s
daughter,  and  the  city  is  set  for  a  holiday.’

“Then  I  whispered  my  aged  friend:  ‘That  knavish
Mitravarman  is  trying  to  win  the  mother’s  confidence
by  honorable  conduct  toward  the  daughter,  through
whom  he  will  draw  the  boy  back  in  order  to  kill  him.
Therefore  return,  give  the  queen  secret  assurance  of
the  lad’s  welfare  and  of  my  existence,  but  lament  in
public  that  the  young  prince  has  been  eaten  by  a  tiger.
That  traitor,  inwardly  delighted,  will  express  insin¬
cere  sympathy  for  the  queen;  whereupon  you  will
bear  him  this  message  from  her:  “The  boy  for  whose
sake  I  opposed  your  purpose,  has  for  my  sins  departed
this  life.  Today  I  am  ready  to  receive  your  orders.”
This  will  please  him  and  cause  him  to  co-operate.

“  ‘Then  she  must  dip  a  garland  in  water  holding
the  deadly  vatsanabha  poison  in  solution  and  lay  it  on
his  chest  and  face  with  the  conjuring  spell:  “May  this
become  a  sword-thrust  if  you  are  a  sinner  and  I  a
faithful  wife.”  This  will  prove  fatal.  Next,  she  must


218


THE  TEN  PRINCES


drop  this  antidote  in  the  water,  dip  the  garland,  and
give  it  to  her  own  daughter.  When  he  dies  and  the
girl  is  unaffected,  the  citizens  will  say:  “She  is  a  faith¬
ful  wife,”  and  will  follow  her  lead.

“  ‘Then  she  must  send  a  message  to  Prachanda-
varman:  “This  realm  lacks  a  leader.  You  should  ap¬
propriate  it,  and  this  maiden  too.”  Meanwhile,  the
boy  and  I,  disguised  as  grim  ascetics,  will  dwell  beside
the  cemetery  outside  the  city,  awaiting  alms  from  the
queen’s  own  hand.

“  ‘At  this  point,  let  the  queen  make  a  secret  com¬
munication  to  staid,  respectable  citizens  and  chosen
counselors:  The  Vindhya-dwelling  goddess  visited
me  in  the  night  with  gracious  power  of  vision.  Four
days  from  now,  Prachandavarman  will  die.  On  the
fifth  day,  a  certain  Brahman  youth,  if  he  finds  her
shrine  on  the  bank  of  the  Reva  empty,  will — after  all
worshipers  have  withdrawn — fling  wide  the  door  and
come  forth  with  my  son.  He  will  guard  this  kingdom
and  make  my  son  its  ruler.  The  boy  is  meanwhile  held
hidden  by  the  goddess,  who  has  assumed  the  form  of  a
tigress.  And  dear  little  Manjuvadini  is  the  destined
bride  of  the  Brahman  youth.  All  must  remain  a  pro¬
found  secret  among  you  until  these  things  come  to
pass.”  ’

“The  old  gentleman  joyfully  approved,  and  start¬
ed;  events  followed  as  planned.  And  gossip  spread  in
widening  circles:  ‘What  wonderful  power  have  faith¬
ful  wives!  One  touch  from  a  garland  proved  a  sword-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


219


thrust  for  him.  And  you  can’t  possibly  say  there  was
any  trick  in  the  business,  because  the  very  same
wreath,  given  to  her  daughter,  looked  beautiful  on
her  breast,  didn’t  kill  her  at  all.  Anyone  who  disobeys
this  faithful  wife,  will  just  turn  to  ashes.’

“Now  when  the  queen  beheld  her  son  and  me  ap¬
proaching,  in  grim  ascetic  garb,  to  receive  alms,  her
breasts  grew  moist  as  she  rose  to  greet  us,  and  her
voice  broke  with  joy  as  she  said:  ‘Receive  my  rever¬
ence,  holy  sir,  and  relieve  my  helplessness.  To  me  it
is  all  a  dream.  Is  it  true,  or  not?’  ‘Results  will  show,’
said  I,  ‘no  later  than  today.’  And  she  replied:  ‘If  so,
your  handmaid  is  blest  indeed.  For  the  dream  prom¬
ised  her  a  protector.’  And  she  bade  Manjuvadini
bow,  while  the  girl’s  shy  demeanor  betrayed  her  pleas¬
ure  at  the  sight  of  me.  ‘If  you  are  playing  me  false,’
continued  the  queen  in  happy  mood,  ‘tomorrow  I
shall  have  to  punish  this  hermit  lad  of  yours.’  ‘Very
well,’  said  I  with  a  smile,  and  accepted  her  alms;  but
my  manhood  melted  as  my  glances  led  to  an  absorb¬
ing  passion  for  Manjuvadini.

“I  summoned  Nalijangha;  and  as  he  followed  me
forth,  I  quietly  inquired:  ‘Where  is  that  rogue  Pra-
chandavarman,  whose  speedy  doom  has  been  pre¬
dicted?’  And  he  replied:  ‘Quite  certain  that  the  king¬
dom  is  his,  he  is  in  the  royal  reception  hall,  where  ac¬
tors  fawn  upon  him.’  ‘Then  wait  in  the  garden,’  I
bade  my  venerable  friend;  deposited  my  trappings  in
an  empty  cell  by  its  wall;  and  engaged  the  prince  to


220


THE  TEN  PRINCES


guard  them.  I  myself  assumed  the  costume  of  a  pro¬
fessional  entertainer  and  went  to  amuse  Prachanda-
varman.

“At  the  hour  when  the  sun’s  rays  redden,  I  pre¬
sented  a  vaudeville  program  adapted  to  the  mentality
of  the  gathering — dance,  song,  assorted  pathos,  and
the  like;  hand-waving,  foot-flourishing,  and  high  kick¬
ing;  the  scorpion  wiggle,  the  crocodile  waddle,  and  the
fish  twitch.  Next,  I  snatched  knives  from  the  nearest,
disposed  them  about  my  person,  and  exhibited  certain
spectacular  and  scientific  specialties,  such  as  the
hawk  swoop  and  the  osprey  dive.  Then  I  hurled  a
knife  a  distance  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet,  striking
Prachandavarman  in  the  chest,  while  I  bellowed:
‘May  Vasantabhanu  live  a  thousand  years.’  A  merce¬
nary  flourished  his  sword  to  cut  me  down;  I  leaped  on
the  hump  his  shoulder  made,  easily  paralyzing  him
and  widening  the  excited  eyes  of  the  crowd;  then  at  a
bound  I  took  the  twelve-foot  wall.

“My  first  word  on  landing  in  the  garden  was:
‘Here  is  the  visible  track  of  my  companions’;  for  the
footprints  were  not  obliterated  in  the  sand  leveled  by
Nalijangha’s  steps.  So  I  hurried  to  the  east  along  the
wall  by  the  alley  of  tamal  trees,  then  ran  to  the  south
where  my  trail  was  lost  among  scattered  heaps  of
bricks,  leaped  the  encircling  moat  of  the  rampart,  and
darted  into  the  empty  cell.  Here  I  assumed  my  ear¬
lier  garb  and  returned  with  the  prince  to  the  cemetery,
while  the  court,  agog  at  my  exploit,  was  hesitant  in


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


221


pursuit.  Now  previously  I  had  devised  a  nook  for  con¬
cealment  in  the  shrine  of  the  goddess,  in  the  very  base
of  the  statue;  its  entrance  was  hidden  by  slabs  of  stone
movable  from  the  side.

“Then  as  the  dark  night  glided  by,  the  lad  and  I
attired  ourselves  in  silken  garments  brought  by  eu¬
nuchs  and  adorned  with  priceless  gems;  entered  there;
and  remained  without  a  sound.  The  queen  had  on  the
previous  day  given  the  fire-sacrament  with  fitting  cer¬
emony  to  Prachandavarman  of  Malwa  and  had  re¬
ported  to  Chandavarman  that  his  death  was  due  to  a
treacherous  trick  of  the  lord  of  Ashmaka.  This  day  at
dawn  she  came  with  the  respectable  citizens,  counse¬
lors,  and  vassals  previously  bidden  to  the  rendezvous,
and  worshiped  the  blessed  goddess.  Before  all  these
witnesses  she  proved  the  shrine  empty  by  investiga¬
ting  every  recess;  then  stood  at  gaze  with  the  crowd,
while  a  shrill  drum-beat  gave  the  signal.

“The  signaling  sound  trickled  through  a  tiny
crack;  I  applied  my  head  to  the  iron  pedestal  carrying
the  image  and,  gripping  it  with  both  hands,  swung  one
side  over — a  task  to  tax  the  energy  of  a  muscular
man.  Then  I  emerged  with  the  young  prince.

“I  replaced  the  grim  goddess,  flung  wide  the  door,
and  made  my  appearance,  addressing  the  citizens
who  fell  flat  with  glances  of  glad  conviction,  with  visi¬
ble  thrills,  with  lifted  hands  and  mounting  astonish¬
ment:  The  Vindhya-dwelling  goddess  thus  enjoins
you  through  my  lips:  “I  mercifully  took  the  form  of  a


222


THE  TEN  PRINCES


tigress  to  conceal  this  lad,  whom  today  I  restore  to
you.  From  today  you  must  receive  him  as  my  son,
the  fondling  of  no  heedless  mother.”  Furthermore,
you  are  to  consider  me  his  protector,  whose  ambition
it  is  to  shatter  that  pot  which  is  Ashmaka — the  cruel
lord  whose  false  heart  is  betrayed  by  his  very  skill  in
devising  uncounted  guileful  wiles.  As  the  wages  of
this  protection,  the  holy  goddess  graciously  grants  me
the  lad’s  sweet-faced  sister.’

“At  this  the  people  cried  with  delight:  ‘Blest  is
Bhoja’s  dynasty,  receiving  you  as  its  chief  from  the
holy  goddess.’  My  mother-in-law  attained  a  state  of
ineffable  bliss,  and  that  very  day  gave  me  Manjuva-
dini’s  blossom-hand  with  all  due  ceremony.

“Under  cover  of  night  I  completely  plugged  the
nook  beneath  the  statue,  so  that  searchers  found  no
cranny  for  hiding.  The  people  indulged  in  gossip  that
made  them  forget  their  meals  and  was  enriched  with
invented  details;  they  inferred  that  a  spirit  of  divinity
dwelt  in  me;  and  my  word  became  law.  They  be¬
stowed  on  the  prince  the  title  ‘Son  of  the  holy  god¬
dess,’  and  this  became  a  source  of  prestige.  On  an  aus¬
picious  day  I  clothed  him  brilliantly  and  had  the
chaplain  perform  the  rite  of  investiture;  I  let  the  lad
learn  political  science,  while  I  attended  to  the  details
of  government.

“Then  I  reflected:  ‘The  realm  is  indeed  docile  to
the  three  factors  of  power,  while  the  factors — wise
planning,  prestige,  and  energy — so  dovetail  as  to  ac-


VISHRUTA’S  ADVENTURE


223


complish  results.  Our  ambitions  are  defined  by  wise
planning,  set  in  motion  by  prestige,  brought  to  a  hap¬
py  issue  by  energy.  Now  the  tree  of  government —
whose  fivefold  root  is  wise  planning,  whose  double
stem  is  prestige,  whose  four  branches  are  energy,
whose  seventy- two  leaves  are  the  counselors,  whose
six  twigs  are  the  six  expedients,  whose  flower  is  power,
and  the  fruit,  success — should  benefit  its  governor.
But  so  wide  are  its  ramifications  that  one  needs  a
companion  for  full  exploitation.  Now  Aryaketu,  Mi-
travarman’s  counselor,  having  his  origin  in  Kosala,  is
loyal  to  the  prince’s  mother  and  possesses  the  qualities
of  a  counselor.  Through  contempt  of  his  advice,  Mi-
travarman  came  to  grief.  If  he  could  be  secured,  it
would  be  a  blessing.’

“So  I  summoned  Nalijangha  and  gave  him  secret
instructions:  ‘Father,  put  this  question  privately  to
noble  Aryaketu:  “Who  is  this  mystery  man  that  en¬
joys  the  glory  of  our  kingdom?  You  know  the  snake
has  caught  our  young  prince.  Will  he  spew  him  out  or
swallow  him  ?”  Then  convey  his  answer  to  me.’

“Presently  he  brought  me  this  report:  ‘I  waited
upon  him  with  frequent  gifts,  skilfully  beat  about  the
bush,  stroked  his  hands  and  feet,  then  in  a  moment  of
perfect  confidence  questioned  him  in  the  fashion  dic¬
tated  by  you.  And  he  made  answer:  “My  very  dear
sir,  you  are  much  mistaken.  This  man  gives  evidence
of  pure  aristocratic  descent,  unrivaled  penetration,
superhuman  vigor,  measureless  nobility,  miraculous


224


THE  TEN  PRINCES


skill  with  weapons,  no  mean  acquaintance  with  the
arts,  a  benevolent  spirit,  and  a  majesty  irresistible  to
his  enemies.  In  him  converge  virtues,  elsewhere  hard¬
ly  to  be  discovered  individually.  To  his  foes  he  is  a
upas,  to  the  loyal  a  sandal  tree:  witness  his  supplant¬
ing  of  pedantic  Ashmaka,  and  the  restitution  of  our
prince  to  his  paternal  dominion.  Depend  upon  it,

•  _  yy  y

sir.

“Even  after  this,  I  tested  the  man  by  a  number  of
traps  before  familiarizing  him  with  my  design.  With
his  friendly  aid  I  selected  truthful,  incorruptible
counselors  and  spies  diversely  disguised.  Learning
from  these  that  the  whole  realm  was  avaricious  of
wealth,  very  uppish,  and  intractable,  I  publicly  ex¬
tolled  generosity;  exalted  piety;  confounded  heretics;
cleaned  up  prickly  enemies;  baffled  the  stratagems  of
foes;  settled  the  four  castes  in  their  several  duties;  de¬
termined  to  replenish  the  treasury,  since  the  best
measures  of  regulation  are  dependent  on  money,  and
there  is  nothing  more  fatal  than  weakness  in  that  de¬
partment.  Such  were  my  principles  of  government.”


CHAPTER  XIV

*

CONCLUSION


“And  I  reflected:  ‘My  subordinates,  without  ex¬
ception,  are  most  valorous  and  so  devoted  to  me  as
not  to  care  a  straw  for  their  lives  in  comparison  with
my  command.  With  the  total  armies  of  two  king¬
doms  at  my  back,  I  am  not  inferior  to  Vasantabhanu,
lord  of  Ashmaka,  and  I  hold  the  advantage  in  politi¬
cal  science.  I  am  therefore  competent  to  conquer  Va¬
santabhanu  and  to  establish  in  his  paternal  inherit¬
ance  Bhaskaravarman,  son  of  Anantavarman,  sover¬
eign  of  Vidarbha.  Besides,  the  rumor  springs  up
everywhere  that  this  prince  is  the  adopted  son  of  the
holy  goddess  and  that  I  am  his  deputed  companion.
Even  yet  no  man  knows  that  this  is  a  consequence  of
my  craft.  Now  our  partisans  have  confidence  in  this
prince  Bhaskaravarman,  believing  that  he,  the  son  of
their  rightful  lord  Anantavarman,  will  gain  this  king¬
dom  through  the  grace  of  the  holy  goddess;  while  the
army  of  the  lord  of  Ashmaka,  realizing  that  the  prince
enjoys  the  favor  of  the  goddess,  and  that  human  pow¬
er  is  no  match  for  power  divine,  has  little  stomach  for
a  fight  with  us.

“  ‘Again,  our  hereditary  counselors,  desirous  from
the  first  of  the  prince’s  elevation,  and  now  secured  by
gifts  and  honors  from  me,  show  a  peculiar  enthusiasm

225


226


THE  TEN  PRINCES


for  the  prince.  On  the  other  hand,  reliable  emissaries
of  mine  have,  at  my  command,  greatly  gained  upon
the  intimate  servants  of  the  lord  of  Ashmaka  and  have
insinuated  this  quiet  word:  “You  are  our  friends,
hence  have  a  right  to  hear  from  us  what  is  profitable.
If  any  side  with  Vasantabhanu,  lord  of  Ashmaka,  in
dividing  the  prince  from  his  companion,  the  famous
Vishruta,  deputed  by  the  goddess  herself,  and  fight
with  him,  they  too  will  become  guests  of  the  death-
god.  So  long  as  the  lord  of  Ashmaka  adopts  no  hostile
measures,  you  will  follow  Bhaskaravarman,  son  of
Anantavarman.  Thus  the  lord  of  Ashmaka  may
dismiss  alarms  and  live  in  peace  and  prosperity  with
his  people.  Otherwise,  he  will  fall  a  victim  to  the  tri¬
dent  of  the  holy  goddess.  Inform  all,  once  for  all,  of
the  commands  the  goddess  lays  upon  me.  We  feel  a
sincere  friendship  for  you,  so  long  as  all  abide  by  our
bidding.”  ’

“Upon  hearing  this,  the  intimate  servants  of  the
lord  of  Ashmaka,  who  already  realized  that  the  prince
was  the  nursling  of  the  goddess,  were  shaken  in  al¬
legiance.  And  since  the  message  came  from  me,  they
fell  decidedly  under  my  influence.

“Now  the  lord  of  Ashmaka,  becoming  familiar
with  all  these  circumstances,  reflected:  ‘All  the  he¬
reditary  subjects  of  the  prince  desire  him  as  their  sov¬
ereign;  while  my  servants,  remote  and  intimate,  seem
shaken  in  allegiance.  If  then  I  remain  at  home,  rely¬
ing  on  leniency,  I  shall  be  unable  to  guard  even  my


CONCLUSION


227


own  kingdom,  permeated  by  disaffection.  Hence,  be¬
fore  it  comes  to  a  dissension  with  my  troops,  whose
wavering  betrays  my  own  uncertainty,  I  will  employ
them  in  war;  in  that  case,  he  will  be  obliged  to  give
me  a  brief  interview.’  With  this  in  mind,  impelled  to
the  crime  of  unmotivated  invasion,  he  marched  with
his  army  against  us,  and  into  the  jaws  of  death.

“Apprised  of  his  approach,  the  prince  led  our  van;
while  I  mounted  a  horse  and  rode  straight  at  the  lord
of  Ashmaka.  Thereupon  his  entire  army  drew  the  in¬
ference  that  there  could  be  but  one  unique  explana¬
tion  for  the  charge  of  a  single  man  against  so  limitless
a  host — namely,  the  guardian  favor  of  the  goddess;
and  they  stood  stock  still  like  painted  pictures.  I
singled  out  Vasantabhanu  and  challenged  him  to
combat;  he  faced  me  and  fetched  a  stout  blow  with
his  sword.  Parrying  this  with  particular  skill,  I  coun¬
tered;  and  as  his  severed  head  dropped  on  the  ground,
I  shouted  to  his  army:  ‘Let  any  who  still  desire  to
fight,  step  forward  and  fight  with  me.  If  not,  let  all
fall  at  the  feet  of  the  prince  and  become  his  men.
Thereafter,  undiminished  in  livelihood,  securely  pur¬
suing  their  several  avocations,  let  them  dwell  in
peace.’

“Without  delay  or  exception,  all  servants  of  the
lord  of  Ashmaka  clambered  from  their  mounts,  fell  be¬
fore  the  prince,  and  became  subservient  to  him.  I  in¬
stalled  him  as  lord  of  the  kingdom  of  Ashmaka,  con¬
firmed  the  hereditary  functionaries  in  their  offices.


228


THE  TEN  PRINCES


and  appropriated  the  army  of  the  lord  of  Ashmaka.
With  it  I  proceeded  to  Vidarbha,  anointed  Prince
Bhaskaravarman  in  the  capital  city,  and  set  him  in
the  place  of  his  fathers.

“One  day,  when  the  king  was  with  his  mother  Va-
sundhara,  I  said  respectfully:  ‘I  desire  to  undertake  a
certain  task.  Until  it  is  performed  I  can  nowhere  re¬
main  at  ease.  Pray  permit  my  wife,  your  sister  Man-
juvadini,  to  dwell  a  few  days  with  you.  I  wish  to  wan¬
der  for  a  space  of  time,  seeking  one  I  love;  when  that
person  is  found,  I  will  return.’

“Now  the  king  asked  his  mother’s  permission  be¬
fore  replying:  ‘You,  sir,  are  the  unique  cause  of  our
wonderful  success,  evidenced  in  the  winning  of  this
kingdom.  Without  you  we  cannot  for  a  moment  bear
the  burden  of  this  kingdom.  How  can  you  make  such
a  proposal?’

“But  I  replied:  ‘You  need  not  cherish  a  grain  of
anxiety.  In  your  palace  is  the  pearl  of  counselors,  Arya-
ketu,  capable  of  bearing  the  burden  of  several  such
kingdoms.  I  will  put  him  in  charge  before  departing.’
Though  plied  with  much  such  argument,  the  king  and
his  mother  delayed  my  departure  some  little  time  with
acts  of  affectionate  insistence.  Incidentally,  he  gave
me  the  kingdom  of  Prachandavarman,  overlord  of
Utkala.

“When  I  had  settled  that  government,  I  bade  my
young  king  farewell  and  began  my  journey  in  search
of  you,  sir.  But  being  summoned  by  Simhavarman,


CONCLUSION


229


the  Anga  monarch,  to  succor  him,  I  came  hither,
where  whatever  good  I  ever  did,  had  rich  reward.  For
here  I  met  my  master.”

Hereafter,  the  princes  there  assembled — Apahara-
varman,  Upaharavarman,  Arthapala,  Pramati,  Mi-
tragupta,  Mantragupta,  and  Vishruta — sent  servants
to  summon  Prince  Somadatta,  who  was  enjoying  the
position  of  crown  prince  in  Patalipura  and  who,  with
his  bride  Vamalochana,  was  awaiting  the  invitation.
Then  all,  in  the  companionship  of  Rajavahana,  told
tales  in  mutually  pleasing  union  until  from  Blossom
City  came  a  dispatch  sent  by  King  Rajahansa.  With
this  in  hand,  the  gathered  princes  bowed  before  Ra¬
javahana,  saying:  “Your  Majesty,  receive  this  dis¬
patch  of  your  father,  Rajahansa.”  He  rose,  bowed  re¬
peatedly  with  deep  respect,  and  received  the  dispatch
before  these  witnesses.

Then  Prince  Rajavahana  laid  the  letter  on  his
brow,  lowered  it,  broke  the  seal,  and  read  in  the  hear¬
ing  of  all:  “Blessings  and  benedictions.  Given  from
Blossom  City,  our  capital.  King  Rajahansa  greets
Rajavahana  and  the  other  princes  sojourning  in  the
city  of  Champa  and  sends  these  directions  in  writing.
When  you  bade  us  a  dutiful  farewell  and  set  forth  on
your  journey,  we  established  our  residence  in  a  forest
glade  by  Shiva’s  shrine.  Thither  returned  the  army,
reporting  that  Rajavahana  had  withdrawn  by  night
to  a  shrine  of  Shiva  in  order  to  worship  the  god;  that


230


THE  TEN  PRINCES


all  the  remaining  princes,  failing  to  find  him  in  the
morning,  had  vowed  to  bow  with  Rajavahana  before
Rajahansa  or  to  die,  and  had  scattered.

“When  we  learned  your  story  from  the  lips  of  the
soldiers  returning  thence,  your  mother  and  I,  two
hearts  sunk  in  a  sea  of  unendurable  sorrow,  deter¬
mined  to  visit  Vamadeva’s  hermitage  and,  having
made  him  acquainted  with  these  events,  to  leave  life
behind.  But  when  we  arrived  and  bowed  before  him,
our  purpose  was  already  known  to  that  holy  sage,  to
whom  past,  present,  and  future  are  revealed.  Dis¬
cerning  our  determination,  he  spoke:  ‘O  King,  all
your  purpose  is  already  known,  through  the  power  of
divine  insight.  These  princes  of  yours,  having  for  Ra-
javahana’s  sake  suffered  sorrow  for  a  season,  will  then,
through  turn  of  fate  and  matchless  valor,  complete
the  conquest  of  the  quarters.  They  will  win  many
kingdoms  and  at  the  end  of  sixteen  years  will  return
in  the  train  of  Rajavahana  victorious,  to  fall  prone  be¬
fore  you  and  Vasumati  and  to  perform  your  com¬
mands.  For  their  sake  therefore  you  must  dare  no
desperate  deed.’

“Trusting  the  holy  sage’s  word,  the  queen  and  I
have  fortified  our  hearts  and  drawn  breath  until  this
day.  Now  when  the  limit  drew  near,  I  visited  Va¬
madeva’s  hermitage  and  spoke  respectfully:  ‘My  lord,
the  limit  set  by  you  is  near  at  hand.  Is  further  intelli¬
gence  in  your  mind  today?’

“The  holy  sage  replied:  ‘O  King,  Rajavahana  and


CONCLUSION


231


all  the  other  princes  have  vanquished  many  doughty
foes,  have  completed  the  conquest  of  the  quarters,
have  subdued  the  earth,  and  are  united  in  Champa.
Send  speedy  couriers  with  dispatches  to  recall  them.’

“I  hearkened  to  the  words  of  the  holy  sage  and
have  sent  this  dispatch  to  summon  you.  If  you  delay
a  moment  more,  you  will  hear  that  I  and  Vasumati,
your  mother,  are  but  a  tale  remembered.  Realizing
this,  drink  only  water  on  your  journey.”

So  they  laid  their  sire’s  dispatch  on  their  brows
and  determined  to  go.  They  determined  also  to  assign
adequate  forces  to  the  guarding  of  the  conquered
kingdoms  and  to  appoint  to  every  office  a  fit  and  com¬
petent  functionary;  further,  to  secure  their  line  of
march  with  proper  detachments,  to  defeat  their  initial
enemy,  Manasara  of  Malwa,  annexing  his  kingdom
also,  and  then  to  bow  in  Blossom  City  before  the  feet
of  King  Rajahansa  and  Queen  Vasumati.  So,  taking
their  wives,  they  marched  with  a  picked  force  against
the  monarch  of  Malwa.  And  Rajavahana,  surrounded
by  companion  princes,  the  moment  he  reached  Ujjain,
straightway  defeated  and  slew — despite  his  might —
Manasara,  monarch  of  Malwa.  He  recovered  Princess
Avantisundari,  freed  Prince  Pushpodbhava  with  his
household  from  the  prison  where  he  was  kept  by  the
counsel  of  Chandavarman,  and  with  his  aid  settled
the  kingdom  of  Malwa,  appointing  certain  statesmen
and  soldiers  to  guard  it.  With  the  remainder  of  their
picked  army  the  princes  came  home  to  Blossom  City


THE  TEN  PRINCES


232

and  there — Rajavahana  leading — adored  the  feet  of
Rajahansa  and  of  their  mother,  Vasumati.  These  two,
on  winning  back  their  sons,  felt  their  happiness  com¬
plete.

Then,  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  of  Vasumati
the  queen,  Vamadeva,  penetrating  the  longing  of  the
ten  princes,  said  to  them:  “Depart  now  together  and
rule  in  righteousness,  each  his  own  kingdom.  But
when  desire  awakens,  then  return  to  bow  low  at  your
parents’  feet.”  So  all  the  princes,  receiving  with  rever¬
ence  the  command  of  the  sage,  bowed  before  him  and
their  parents;  went  and  paraded  the  conquered
world;  then  returned  and  related,  in  the  sage’s  pres¬
ence,  each  his  own  tale.  And  the  parents,  hearing
those  most  ingenious  adventures  testifying  to  the  na¬
tive  valor  of  their  lads,  experienced  the  extremity  of

j°y-

Then  the  king  deferentially  addressed  the  sage:
“Holy  sir,  through  your  grace  we  have  attained  a
bliss  surpassing  human  wishes,  beyond  the  range  of
speech  or  thought.  Henceforth  it  befits  me  to  live  a
forest  hermit  at  my  teacher’s  feet,  aiming  at  full  pos¬
session  of  my  soul.  Pray  ordain  that  Rajavahana  be
anointed  ruler  over  the  kingdom  of  Blossom  City  and
over  Manasara’s  realm;  that  the  remaining  kingdoms
be  severally  assigned  to  the  nine  princes;  that  these
princes,  obeying  Rajavahana  yet  in  perfect  amity,
pluck  all  thorny  rivals  and  take  joy  in  the  earth  who
wears  the  four  seas  as  a  girdle.”


CONCLUSION


233


And  the  sage,  perceiving  the  lads  insistent  to  dis¬
suade  their  sire  from  embracing  the  hermit  life,  said
to  them:  “My  princely  lads,  your  father  treads  the
path  becoming  to  his  years.  In  my  hermitage  he  will
lead  his  pious  life  with  no  hardship.  Pray  do  not  dis¬
suade  him.  For  there  he  will  win  the  grace  of  God.
Nor  would  you  be  always  happy  in  your  father’s
house.”  They  bowed  to  the  holy  bidding  and  ceased
their  insistence.

So  Rajavahana  was  established  in  Blossom  City;
and  all  his  comrades,  with  his  consent,  governed  their
several  kingdoms,  coming  and  going  at  will  to  greet
their  parents.  Thus  settled,  all  the  princely  lads,
righteously  ruling — under  Rajavahana’s  command —
the  circle  of  earth’s  lands,  in  amity  perfectly  recipro¬
cated,  delighted  in  kingly  joys  that  gods  can  scarce
attain.


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES

This  index  has  been  prepared  to  facilitate  correct  pronunciation.

Consonants  are  pronounced  much  as  in  English;  vowels  as  in  Italian.

The  distinction  between  long  and  short  vowels  is  important,  long  vowels  having  real
musical  length  and  short  vowels  being  genuinely  short.  Consequently,  correct  pronuncia¬
tion  gives  somewhat  the  effect  of  chanting.

Long  vowels  are  marked  by  the  macron.  All  unmarked  vowels  (not  diphthongs)  are

short.

The  accent  is  indicated,  though  the  rules  for  its  placing  are  almost  those  of  classical
Latin.

The  page  number  refers  to  the  first  appearance  of  the  name.


Acha'ravati,  queen  of  Prince  Chan-
daghosha,  140

Aga'stya,  an  ancient  sage,  130
Aha'lya,  a  woman  beloved  by
Indra,  74

Amba'lika,  princess  of  the  Anga
kingdom,  62

Anantaklr'ti,  a  merchant  in  Ujj  ain,
178

AnantasT'ra,  a  partisan  of  the  true
king  of  Videha,  123
Anantavar'man,  a  king  who  is
ruined  by  evil  counsel,  200
An'dhra,  name  of  a  country,  190
An'ga,  a  kingdom,  62
Angaravar'sha,  a  counselor,  136
An'girasa,  an  authority  on  ethics,
206

Apaharavar'man,  one  of  the  ten
princes,  14

Arhan'tika,  a  Buddhist  nun,  178
Arthada'sa,  the  father  of  Kosha-
dasa,  158

Arthapa'la,  one  of  the  ten  princes,
16

Ar'thapati,  a  wholesale  merchant
in  Champa,  82

Aryada'si,  the  name  of  Somadevi
in  another  birth,  131


Aryake'tu,  a  statesman,  223

Ash'maka,  a  vassal  kingdom,  208

At'ri,  an  ancient  sage,  74

Avan'ti,  a  portion  of  the  kingdom
of  Malwa,  44

Avantisun'darf,  the  belle  of  Avan-
ti,  and  bride  of  Raj  avahana,  45

Ba'la,  a  fabled  demon,  107

Balabha'dra,  the  husband  of  Rat-
navati,  173

Balachan'drika,  the  bride  of  Push-
podbhava,  39

Ban'dhumati,  the  name  of  Kanti-
mati  in  another  birth,  131

Bandhupa'la,  father  of  Chandra-
pala,  38

Bena'res,  the  modern  name  of  the
city  Varanasi,  or  Kashi,  67

Bhanuvar'man,  the  lord  of  Vana-
vasi,  213

Bhar'gava,  a  name  assumed  by
Thorny,  178

Bhaskaravar'man,  prince  of  Vi-
darbha,  215

Bhlmadhan'van,  prince  of  the  Suh-
ma  country,  158

Bho'ja,  founder  of  a  famous  dy¬
nasty,  199


235


236


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Brah'ma,  a  great  god,  one  of  the
trinity,  xvi

Brihas'pati,  the  professor  in  heav¬
en,  74

Cham'pa,  capital  of  the  Anga
kingdom,  62

Cha'nakya,  an  authority  on  politi¬
cal  science,  203

Chandagho'sha,  brother-in-law  of
the  king  of  Benares,  132

Chandasi'mha,  king  of  Benares,
129

Chandavar'man,  regent  of  Malwa,
40

Chandrapa'la,  a  friend  of  Push-
podbhava,  38

Chandrapalita,  a  gay  dog,  208

Chandrase'na,  a  maiden  beloved
by  Koshadasa,  158

Chitragup'ta,  counselor  of  the
death-god,  23

Damalip'ta,  the  capital  of  the
Suhma  country,  157

Dan'daka,  name  of  a  forest,  24

Dan'din,  the  author  of  the  Ten
Princes ,  vii

Darpasa'ra,  son  of  King  Manasara,

39

Daruvar'man,  a  lover  of  Bala-
chandrika,  40

Da'sha-kuma'ra-cha'rita,  the  Ad¬
ventures  of  the  Ten  Princes,  title
of  the  book

Dha'naka,  a  wealthy  householder,
166

Dhanami'tra,  a  friend  of  Apahara-
varman,  67

Dhan'yaka,  a  wealthy  householder,
166


Dharmapala,  a  counselor  of  King
Rajahansa,  3

Dharmarak'shita,  a  Buddhist  nun,
89

Dharmavar'dhana,  king  of  Shra-
vasti,  148

Dhu'minI,  a  callous-hearted  wom¬
an,  166

Dhun'yaka,  a  man  ill  rewarded  for
kindness  to  his  wife,  166

Ekavl'ra,  lord  of  Richika,  214
Enajan'gha,  a  courier,  62

Gau'ri,  the  wife  of  Satyavarman,

Go'mini,  a  good  wife,  166
Grihagup'ta,  a  ship  captain,  father
of  Ratnavati,  173

Hansa'vali,  the  name  of  Sulochana
in  another  birth,  13 1
Harishchan'dra,  a  mythical  king,  9
Himalaya,  a  great  mountain  sys¬
tem,  24

Hiranyaka'shipu,  a  devil,  57

Ikshva'ku,  a  fairy  king,  64
In'dra,  a  god,  king  of  heaven,  5
Indrapalita,  counselor  of  the  lord
of  Ashmaka,  208

Indrase'na,  a  lady  at  the  court  of
Benares,  131

Jayasi'mha,  king  of  the  Andhra
country,  190

Kaila'sa,  a  peak  in  the  Himalaya,  1
Kalagup'ta,  a  merchant  in  Kalaya-
vana,  14

Kalaya'vana,  a  land  beyond  the
sea,  14


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES


237


Kali  (first),  a  goddess,  wife  of
Shiva,  6

Ka'li  (second),  the  wife  of  Satya-
varman,  17

Kalindavar'man,  king  of  Assam,
hi

Kalin'di,  the  bride  of  Matanga,  25
Kalin'ga,  name  of  a  country,  185
Kalpasun'dari,  the  bride  of  Upaha-
ravarman,  109

Kamaman'jari,  a  gay  girl,  69
Kaman'daki,  a  writer  on  ethics,  18
Kamapa'la,  son  of  Dharmapala,  3
Kanakale'kha,  the  bride  of  Man-
tragupta,  186

Kana'kavad,  the  daughter  of  a
merchant  in  Valabhi,  175
Kan'chi,  name  of  a  city,  168
Kanduka'vad,  the  bride  of  Mitra-
gupta,  1 58

Kan' taka,  a  j  ailer,  96
Kan'timad,  princess  of  Benares,
129

Kar'dana,  the  king  of  the  Kalinga
country,  186

Ka'sha,  a  white-flowering  grass,  1
Ka'shI,  the  ancient  name  of
Benares,  127

Kauti'lya,  a  writer  on  political
science,  18
Kave'ri,  a  river,  16
Kha'nati,  a  Greek  trader,  123
Kirtisa'ra,  prince  of  Malwa,  63
Kon'kana,  a  vassal  kingdom,  214
Ko'sala,  name  of  a  kingdom,  216
Koshada'sa,  a  friend  of  Mitra-
gupta,  158

Kube'ra,  a  god,  lord  of  the  Yaksha
demigods,  130


Kuberadat'ta,  a  merchant  in
Champa,  82

Kumaragup'ta,  lord  of  Konkana,
214

Kun'tala,  a  vassal  kingdom,  214
Kusumadhan'van,  lord  of  Kosala,
216

La'ta,  a  kingdom,  29
Lila'vad,  queen  of  King  Chanda-
simha,  140

Lopamud'ra,  wife  of  the  sage
Agastya,  130

Madhavase'na,  mother  of  Kama-
manjari,  89

Ma'dhumatl,  name  of  a  city,  173
Ma'gadha,  the  kingdom  of  King
Rajahansa,  1

Mahaka'la,  a  shrine  of  Shiva,  6
Mahi'shmati,  name  of  a  city,  215
Mal'wa,  the  modern  form  of  the
Sanskrit  “Ma'lava,”  a  kingdom,
3

Manapa'la,  chief  counselor  of
Viraketu,  30

Manasa'ra,  king  of  Malwa,  3
Manasave'ga,  a  fairy,  64
Ma'navad,  mother  of  Queen  Kal-
pasundari,  113

Man'dara,  a  mythical  mountain,  1
Man'galika,  nurse  of  Princess
Ambalika,  98

Manibha'dra,  a  Yaksha  demigod,
16

Manikar'nika,  the  bride  of  Artha-
pala,  1 40

Manjuva'dini,  the  bride  of  Vi-
shruta,  215

Mantragup'ta,  one  of  the  ten
princes,  10


238


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Mari'chi,  a  holy  man  who  has  an
experience  with  a  gay  girl,  69
Markande'ya,  an  eminent  sage,  64
Matan'ga,  a  Brahman  who  be¬
comes  king  of  the  lower  world,  22
Ma'thura,  name  of  a  city,  177
Mattaka'la,  king  of  Lata,  29
Me'dini,  queen  of  the  Suhma
country,  158

Mi'thila,  a  city,  capital  of  Videha,
107

Mitragup'ta,  one  of  the  ten
princes,  10

Mitravar'man,  half-brother  of  An-
antavarman,  215
Mu'rala,  a  vassal  kingdom,  214

Nagapa'la,  lord  of  Sasikya,  214
Nalijan'gha,  an  aged  retainer  of
the  queen  of  Vidarbha,  215
Nan'dinI,  the  name  of  Indrasena
in  another  birth,  131
Naravahanadat'ta,  emperor  of  the
fairies,  64

Navama'lika,  the  bride  of  Pramati,
148

Nerbud'da,  the  modern  form  of  the
Sanskrit  “Nar'mada,”  a  river,
213

Nidhipa'lita,  a  merchant  in  Cham-
pa,  78

Nidhipatidat'ta,  a  business  man  in
Valabhi,  175

Nim'bavati,  a  wife  who  recovers
her  husband’s  affection,  166

Nitam'bavati,  a  woman  won  by  an
artful  dodge,  166

Padmod’bhava,  a  counselor  of
King  Rajahansa,  3

Pancha'la,  name  of  a  country,  122


Panchalashar'man,  a  gay  old  gen¬
tleman,  155

Para'shara,  an  ancient  sage,  74

Patna,  the  modern  name  of  the
Sanskrit  “Patalipu'tra,”  a  city,
216

Prachandavar'man,  the  younger
brother  of  Chandavarman,  217

Praharavar'man,  king  of  Videha,
11

Praja'pati,  a  great  god,  74

Pra'mati,  one  of  the  ten  princes,  10

Priyam'vada,  queen  of  Videha,  and
mother  of  two  of  the  ten  princes,
107

Pun'dra,  name  of  a  country,  122

Punyavar'man,  a  king  with  many
virtues,  199

Purnabha'dra,  a  servant  and
friend  of  Kamapala,  127

Push'karika,  a  maid  of  Queen
Kalpasundari,  no

Pushpod'bhava,  one  of  the  ten
princes,  16

Ragaman'jari,  a  gay  girl  who  mar¬
ries  Apaharavarman,  87

Rajahan'sa,  a  king  and  father  of
the  hero,  1

Rajava'hana,  prince  of  Magadha,
the  hero  of  the  book,  10

Ra'ma,  a  mythical  king,  9

Ramatir'tha,  a  sacred  place  of
pilgrimage,  14

Ramayan'tika,  a  rival  of  Queen
Kalpasundari,  114

Rame'shu,  a  Greek,  captain  of  a
sailing  vessel,  164

Rangapata'ka,  the  name  of  Indra¬
sena  in  another  birth,  131


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES


239


Rat'nava'ti,  a  wife  who  recovers
her  husband’s  affection,  173
Ratnod'bhava.  son  of  Padmod-
bhava,  3

Re  va,  a  river,  now  called  “Ner-
budda,”  218

Richi'ka,  a  vassal  kingdom,  214
Rid'dhimati,  a  silver-haired  chap¬
eron,  140

Sa'gara,  the  father  ot  sixty  thou¬
sand  sons  who  dug  down  to  hell
100

Sagaradat'ta,  the  mother  ot  Queen
Vasundhara,  216

Samharavar'man,  eldest  brother  ot
Praharavarman,  108
Sasi'kya,  a  vassal  kingdom,  214
Satyavar'man,  son  ot  Sitavarman,
3

Shaktikuma'ra,  a  man  who  seeks  a
satisfactory  wife,  168
Shakun'tala,  a  play  by  Kalidasa,
xi

Sham'ba,  the  name  of  Rajavahana
in  a  previous  incarnation,  49
Sham'bala,  a  fabled  demon,  107
Shashankase'na,  a  maiden  in  the
train  of  Kariakalekha,  196
Sha'tahali,  a  scheming  citizen  oi
Videha,  123

Shaun'aka,  the  name  of  Kamapala
in  another  birth,  131
Shi'bi,  name  of  a  country,  169
Shi'va,  a  great  god,  one  of  the
trinity,  I

Shivana'ga,  a  counselor,  136
Shravas'ti,  name  of  a  city,  147
Shriga'lika,  a  nurse,  94
Shud'raka,  the  name  of  Kamapala
in  another  birth,  13 1


Shuk'ra,  an  authority  on  ethics,
206

Shurase'na,  name  of  a  country,  177
Shurase'na,  the  name  of  Sulochana
in  another  birth,  131
Simhagho'sha  (first),  prince  of
Benares,  133

Simhagho'sha  (second),  a  prisoner
who  becomes  j  ailer,  103
Simhavar'man,  king  of  the  Anga
country,  62

Sindhudat'ta,  the  father  of  Su-
shruta,  216

Sitavar'man,  a  counselor  of  King
Rajahansa,  3

SSmadat'ta,  one  of  the  ten  princes,
18

Somadevashar'man,  a  youthful
hermit,  14

Somade'vi,  a  lady  at  the  court  of
Benares,  131

Somara'shmi,  father  of  Surata-
manjari,  63

Sthu'na,  a  counselor,  136
Suh'ma,  name  of  a  country,  108
Sulak'shana,  queen  dowager  of
Benares,  133

Sulo'chana,  a  lady  at  the  court  of
Benares,  131

Suman'tra,  son  of  Dharmapala,  3
Su'mati,  son  of  Sitavarman,  3
Sumi'tra,  son  of  Dharmapala,  3
Surataman'jari,  a  nymph,  63
Su'shruta,  son  of  Padmodbhava,  3
Suvrit'ta,  the  wife  of  Ratnod-
bhava,  14

Tara'vaii,  a  lady  of  the  Yaksha
demigods,  16
Tilot'tama,  a  nymph,  74


240


THE  TEN  PRINCES


Trigar'ta.  name  of  a  country  166

Tungadhan'van,  king  of  the  Suh
ma  country,  1 57

Ujjain,  the  modern  name  of
UjjayinI,  a  capital  city,  38

Upaharavar'man,  one  of  the  ten
princes,  13

U'tathya,  the  elder  brother  of
Brihaspati,  74

U'tkala,  name  of  a  kingdom,  228

Vaishra'vana,  a  merchant  of  Pat¬
na,  216

Va'labhi,  name  of  a  city,  173

Vamade'va,  a  hermit,  9

Vamalo'chana  bride  of  Soma-
datta,  29

Vanava'sl,  a  vassal  city,  213

Vasantabha'nu,  the  lord  of  Ash-
maka,  208

Vasavadat'ta,  a  heroine  of  ro¬
mance,  hi

Va'sumati,  a  queen  and  mother  of
the  hero,  2

Vasumi'tra,  father  of  Dhanamitra,

86

Vasun'dhara,  queen  of  Vidarbha,
215

Vasupa'lita,  a  man  whose  nick¬
name  is  “Mister  Ugly,”  78

Vasurak'shita,  a  statesman  whose
excellent  advice  goes  unheeded,
200

7at'sa,  a  fairy,  64


Vatsana'bha,  a  deadly  poison,  217
Ve'dimatl,  the  name  of  Somadevi
in  another  birth,  131
Ve'gavat,  a  fairy,  64
Veshada'sa,  a  nickname  of  Kosha-
dasa,  158

Vidar'bha,  name  of  a  country,  199
Vide'ha,  name  of  a  kingdom,  1 1
Vidyesh'vara,  a  scientific  conjurer,
55

Viharabha'dra,  a  corruptor  of
youth,  201

Vikatavar'man,  the  usurping  mon¬
arch  of  Videha,  107
Vimar'daka,  a  gambler,  81
Vina'yavati,  the  name  of  Kanti-
mati  in  another  birth,  13 1
Vin'dhya,  a  great  forest,  9
Virake'tu,  father-in-law  of  Soma-
datta,  29

Vlrase'na,  lord  of  Murala,  214
Vlrashe'khara,  a  fairy,  64
Vishalavar'man,  a  prince  of  Vide¬
ha,  122

Vish'nu,  a  great  god,  one  of  the
trinity,  xvi

Vishnugup'ta,  an  authority  on
political  science,  202
Vi'shruta,  one  of  the  ten  princes,  10

Yaj'navati,  the  name  of  the  belle  of
Avanti  in  a  previous  incarna¬
tion,  49

Yak'sha,  a  group  of  demigods,  16


[PRINTED  "II
IN  U  S-AJ


Date  Due


- 86T  2  6  ’4  d

APB

FE9  '65

M5,  *Sg.J

OCrdi?  6/

RESEm

Library  Bureau  Cat  no.  1137


891.238

•  D18 _ Bamdin


author

tR9

TITLE


The  ten  princes


date  due


BORROWER’S  NAME

TTt -


891.236

D18

tR9
