Poems (1842), Vol. 2 (Alfred Tennyson, 1842)
============================================
Volume 2 of the 1842 collection. Public domain. Internet Archive (1842 first edition, vol. 2).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 



BODLEIAN LIBRARY 

The gift of 
Miss Emma F. I. Dunston 




y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



POEMS. 



BY 

ALFRED TENNYSON. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. II. 



LONDON : 

EDWARD MOXON, DOVER STREET. 



Digitized by 



ioxnov : 

BRAIMURY AND EVANS, PR TNT KM, WH IT KKRI A RS . 



Digitized by 



CONTENTS 

OF 

VOLUME THE SECOND. 

— « — 

FAOB 

THE EPIC • . .1 

MORTE D'ARTHUR 4 

THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER; OR, THE PICTURES 19 

DORA 33 

AUDLEY COURT 42 

WALKING TO THE MAIL 47 

ST. SIMEON STTLITES 53 

THE TALKING OAK 64 

LOVE AND DUTY 83 

ULYSSES 88 

LOCKSLEY HALL 92 

GODIVA 112 



Digitized by 



vi 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

THE TWO VOICES 116 

THE DAT-DREAM I — 

PROLOGUE 148 

THE SLEEPING PALACE 149 

THE SLEEPING BEAUTY 152 

THE ARRIVAL 154 

THE REVIVAL 156 

THE DEPARTURE 158 

MORAL 160 

l'envoi 161 

EPILOGUE 164 

AMPHION . . 165 

ST. AGNES 171 

SIR GALAHAD 174 

EDWARD GRAY 179 

WILL WATERPROOF'S LYRICAL MONOLOGUE . . 1 82 

LADY CLARE 195 

THE LORD OF BURLEIGH 201 

SIR LAUNCELOT AND QUEEN GUINEVERE . . . 206 



Digitized by 



CONTENTS. vii 

PACiB 

a farewell 209 

the beggar maid 211 

the vision of sin - .213 

the skipping rope 227 

" mote eastward, happy earth, and leate " . 228 

"break, break, break," 229 

the poet's song 230 



Digitized by 



itized by G00gk 



POEMS. 



THE EPIC. 



At Francis Allen's on the Christmas-eve, — 
The game of forfeits done — the girls all kiss'd 
Beneath the sacred bush and past away — 
The parson Holmes, the poet Everard Hall, 
The host, and I sat round the wassail-bowl, 
Then half-way ebb'd : and there we held a talk, 
How all the old honour had from Christmas gone, 
Or gone, or dwindled down to some odd games 
In some odd nooks like this ; till I, tired out 
With cutting eights that day upon the pond, 
Where, three times slipping from the outer edge, 

VOL. II. ^ B 



Digitized by 



2 



THE EPIC. 



I bump'd the ice into three several stars, 

Fell in a doze ; and half-awake I heard 

The parson taking wide and wider sweeps, 

Now harping on the church-commissioners, 

Now hawking at Geology and schism, 

Until I woke, and found him settled down 

Upon the general decay of faith 

Right thro' the world, " at home was little left, 

And none abroad ; there was no anchor, none, 

To hold by." Francis, laughing, clapp'd his hand 

On Everard's shoulder, with " I hold by him." 

" And I," quoth Everard, " by the wassail-bowl." 

" Why yes," I said, " we knew your gift that way 

At college : but another which you had, 

I mean of verse (for so we held it then,) 

What came of that 1" " You know," said Frank, " he 

His epic of King Arthur in the fire !" 

And then to me demanding why % " Oh, sir, 

He thought that nothing new was said, or else 

Something so said 'twas nothing — that a truth 

Looks freshest in the fashion of the day : 

God knows — he has a mint of reasons : ask. 



Digitized by 



THE EPIC. 



3 



It pleased me well enough." " Nay, nay," said Hall, 

" Why take the style of those heroic times? 

For nature brings not back the Mastodon, 

Nor we those times ; and why should any man 

Remodel models rather than the life % 

And these twelve books of mine (to speak the truth) 

Were faint Homeric echoes, nothing worth, 

Mere chaff and draff, much better burnt." " But I," 

Said Francis, " pick'd the eleventh from this hearth, 

And have it : keep a thing, its use will come. 

I hoard it as a sugar-plum for Holmes." 

He laugh'd, and I, though sleepy, like a horse 

That hears the corn-bin open, prick'd my ears, 

For I remember'd Everard's college fame 

When we were Freshmen : then at my request 

He brought it, and the poet little urged, 

But with some prelude of disparagement, 

Read, mouthing out his hollow oes and aes, 

Deep-chested music, and to this result. 



Digitized by 



4 



MORTE d'ARTHUR. 



MORTE D'ARTHCJR. 

So all day long the noise of battle roll'd 

Among the mountains by the winter sea, 

Until King Arthur's table, man by man, 

Had falTn in Lyonness about their Lord, 

King Arthur : then, because his wound was deep, 

The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him, 

Sir Bedivere, the last of all his knights, 

And bore him to a chapel nigh the field, 

A broken chancel with a broken cross, 

That stood on a dark strait of barren land. 

On one side lay the Ocean, and on one 

Lay a great water, and the moon was full. 

Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere : 
" The sequel of to-day unsolders all 
The goodliest fellowship of famous knights 
Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep 



Digitized by 



MORTB D'ARTHUR. 



They sleep— the men I loved. I think that we 

Shall nevermore, at any future time, 

Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds, 

Walking about the gardens and the halls 

Of Camelot, as in the days that were. 

I perish by this people which I made, — 

Though Merlin sware that I should come again 

To rule once more — but let what will be, be, 

I am so deeply smitten through the helm 

That without help I cannot last till morn. 

Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur, 

Which was my pride : for thou rememberest how 

In those old days, one summer noon, an arm 

Rose up from out the bosom of the lake, 

Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 

Holding the sword — and how I row'd across 

And took it, and have worn it, like a king : 

And, wheresoever I am sung or told 

In aftertime, this also shall be known : 

But now delay not : take Excalibur, 

And fling him far into the middle meer : 

Watch what thou seest, and lightly bring me word." 



Digitized by 



6 



MORTE d'ARTHUR. 



To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere : 
" It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus, 
Aidless, alone, and smitten through the helm. 
A little thing may harm a wounded man. 
Yet I thy hest will all perform at full, 
Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word." 

So saying, from the ruin'd shrine he stepp'd, 
And in the moon athwart the place of tombs, 
Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men, 
Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang 
Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down 
By zigzag paths, and juts of pointed rock, 
Came on the shining levels of the lake. 

There drew he forth the brand Excalibur, 
And o'er him, drawing it, the winter moon, 
Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth 
And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt : 
For all the haft twinkled with diamond studs, 
Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work 
Of subtlest jewellery. He gazed so long 
That both his eyes were dazzled, as he stood, 
This way and that dividing the swift mind, 



Digitized by 



MORTE d'ARTHUB. 



7 



In act to throw: but at the last it seem'd 
Better to leave Excalibur conceaTd 
There in the many-knotted waterflags, 
That whistled stiff and dry about the marge. 
So strode he back slow to the wounded king. 

Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere : 
" Hast thou perform'd my mission which I gave ? 
What is it thou hast seen ? or what hast heard ? " 

And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere : 
" I heard the ripple washing in the reeds, 
And the wild water lapping on the crag." 

To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale : 
" Thou hast betray'd thy nature and thy name, 
Not rendering true answer, as beseem M 
Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight : 
For surer sign had follow'd, either hand, 
Or voice, or else a motion of the meer. 
This is a shameful thing for men to lie. 
Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again 
As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing 
I bad thee, watch, and lightly bring me word." 

Then went Sir Bedivere the second time, 



Digitized by 



8 



MORTE D'ARTHUR. 



Counting the dewy pebbles, fix'd in thought ; 
But when he saw the wonder of the hilt, 
How curiously and strangely chased, he smote 
His palms together, and he cried aloud. 

" And if indeed I cast the brand away, 
Surely a precious thing, one worthy note, 
Should thus be lost for ever from the earth, 
Which might have pleased the eyes of many men. 
What good should follow this, if this were done 1 
What harm, undone ? deep harm to disobey, 
Seeing obedience is the bond of rule. 
Were it well to obey then, if a king demand 
An act unprofitable, against himself ? 
The King is sick, and knows not what he does. 
What record, or what relic of my lord 
Should be to aftertime, but empty breath 
And rumours of a doubt ! but were this kept, 
Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings, 
Some one might show it at a joust of arms, 
Saying, < King Arthur's sword, Excalibur, 
Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake. 
Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps 



Digitized by 



JfOBTB - D'ARTHUB. 



9 



Upon the hidden bases of the hills.' 

So might some old man speak in the aftertime 

To all the people, winning reverence. 

But now much honour and much fame were lost." 

So spake he, clouded with his own conceit, 
And hid Excalibur the second time, 
And so strode back slow to the wounded King. 

Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily : 
" What is it thou hast seen ? or what hast heard ?" 

And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere : 
" I heard the water lapping on the crag, 
And the long ripple washing in the reeds." 

To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath : 
u Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue, 
Unknightly, traitor-hearted ! Woe is me ! 
Authority forgets a dying king, 
Laid widowed of the power in his eye 
That bowed the will. I see thee what thou art. 
For thou, the latest-left of all my knights, 
In whom should meet the offices of all, 
Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt ; 
Either from lust of gold, or like a girl 



Digitized by 



10 



MORTE D'AItTHUR. 



Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes. 

Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice, 

And the third time may prosper, get thee hence : 

But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur, 

I will arise and slay thee with my hands." 

Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran, 
And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged 
Among the bulrush-beds, and clutch'd the sword, 
And strongly wheel'd and threw it. The great brand 
Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon, 
And flashing round and round, and whirled in an arch, 
Shot like a streamer of the northern morn, 
Seen where the moving isles of winter shock 
By night, with noises of the northern sea. 
So flash'd and fell the brand Excalibur : 
But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
And caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him 
Three times, and drew him under in the meer. 
And lightly went the other to the King. 

Then spoke King Arthur, drawing thicker breath: 



Digitized by 



MORTE D'ARTHUR. H 

" Now see I by thine eyes that this is done. 
Speak out : what is it thou hast heard, or seen ! 19 

And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere : 
" Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems 
Should blind my purpose, for I never saw, 
Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die, 
Not though I live three lives of mortal men, 
So great a miracle as yonder hilt. 
Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him, 
But when I look'd again, behold an arm, 
Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful, 
That caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him 
Three times, and drew him under in the meer." 

And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard : 
" My end draws nigh ; 'tis time that I were gone. 
Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight, 
And bear me to the margin ; yet I fear 
My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die.*' 

So saying, from the pavement he half rose, 
Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm, 
And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes 
As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere 



Digitized by 



12 



JIORTB d'ARTHUB. 



Remorsefully regarded thro' his tears, 
And would have spoken, but he found not words, 
Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee, 
O'er both his shoulders drew the languid hands, 
And rising bore him thro' the place of tombs. 

But, as he walk'd, King Arthur panted hard, 
Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed 
When all the house is mute. So sigh'd the King, 
Muttering and murmuring at his ear " Quick, quick ! 
I fear it is too late, and I shall die." 
But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge, 
Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walk'd, 
Larger than human on the frozen hills. 
He heard the deep behind him, and a cry 
Before. His own thought drove him like a goad. 
Dry clashed his harness in the icy caves 
And barren chasms, and all to left and right 
The bare black cliff clang'd round him, as he based 
His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang 
Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels — 
And on a sudden, lo ! the level lake, 
And the long glories of the winter moon. 



Digitized by 



MORTE D'ARTHUR. 



13 



Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge, 
Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern, 
Beneath them ; and descending they were ware 
That all the decks were dense with stately forms 
Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream — by these 
Three Queens with crowns of gold— and from them rose 
A cry that shiver'd to the tingling stars, 
And, as it were one voice, an agony 
Of lamentation, like a wind, that shrills 
All night in a waste land, where no one comes, 
Or hath come, since the making of the world. 

Then murmur'd Arthur, " Place me in the barge," 
And to the barge they came. There those three Queens 
Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept. 
But she, that rose the tallest of them all 
And fairest, laid his head upon her lap, 
And loosed the shatter'd casque, and chafed his hands, 
And calTd him by his name, complaining loud, 
And dropping bitter tears against his brow 
Striped with dark blood : for all his face was white 
And colourless, and like the wither'd moon 
Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east ; 



Digitized by 



u 



MORTE D'ARTHUR. 



And all his greaves and cuisses dash'd with drops 

Of onset ; and the light and lustrous curls — 

That made his forehead like a rising sun 

High from the dais-throne — were parch'd with dust, 

Or, clotted into points and hanging loose, 

Mix'd with the knightly growth that fringed his lips. 

So like a shatter'd column lay the King ; 

Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest, 

From spur to plume a star of tournament, 

Shot thro 1 the lists at Camelot, and charged 

Before the eyes of ladies and of kings. 

Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere, 
" Ah ! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go ? 
Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes ? 
For now I see the true old times are dead, 
When every morning brought a noble chance, 
And every chance brought out a noble knight. 
Such times have been not since the light that led 
The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh. 
But now the whole round table is dissolved 
Which was an image of the mighty world ; 
And l y the last, go forth companionless, 



Digitized by 



MORTIS D'ARTHUR, 



15 



And the days darken round nie, and the years, 
Among new men, strange faces, other minds." 

And slowly answer'd Arthur from the barge : 
" The old order changeth, yielding place to new, 
And God fulfils himself in many ways, 
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world. 
Comfort thyself : what comfort is in me ? 
I have lived my life, and that which I have done 
May He within himself make pure ! but thou — 
If thou shouldst never see my face again, 
Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer 
Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice 
Rise like a fountain for me night and day. 
For what are men better than sheep or goats 
That nourish a blind life within the brain, 
If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer 
Both for themselves and those who call them friend ? 
For so the whole round earth is every way 
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God. 
But now farewell. I am going a long way 
With these thou seest — -if indeed I go — 
(For all my mind is clouded with a doubt) 



Digitized by 



16 



MORTE D'ARTHUR. 



To the island-valley of Avilion ; 
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow, 
Nor ever wind blows loudly ; but it lies 
Deep-meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard-lawns 
And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea, 
Where I will heal me of my grievous wound." 

So said he, and the barge with oar and sail 
Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan 
That, fluting a wild carol ere her death, 
Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood 
With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere 
Revolving many memories, till the hull 
Look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn, 
And on the meer the wailing died away. 



Here ended Hall, and our last light, that long 
Had wink'd and threaten 'd darkness, flared and fell 
At which the Parson, sent to sleep with sound, 
And waked with silence, grunted " Good ! " but we 
Sat rapt : it was the tone with which he read — 
Perhaps some modern touches here and there 



Digitized by 



MORTE D'aRTHUR. 



17 



Redeem'd it from the charge of nothingness — 

Or else we loved the man, and prized his work ; 

I know not : but we sitting, as I said, 

The cock crew loud ; as at that time of year 

The lusty bird takes every hour for dawn : 

Then Francis, muttering, like a man ill used, 

" There now — that's nothing !" drew a little back, 

And drove his heel into the smoulder'd log, 

That sent a blast of sparkles up the flue : 

And so to bed ; where yet in sleep I seem'd 

To sail with Arthur under looming shores, 

Point after point, till on to dawn, when dreams 

Begin to feel the truth and stir of day, 

To me, methought, who waited with a crowd, 

There came a bark that, blowing forward, bore 

King Arthur, like a modern gentleman 

Of stateliest port ; and all the people cried, 

" Arthur is come again : he cannot die." 

Then those that stood upon the hills behind 

Repeated — " Come again, and thrice as fair 

And, further inland, voices echoed — " Gome 

VOL. II. c 



Digitized by 



18 



MORTE d'aRTHUR. 



With all good things, and war shall be no more." 
At this a hundred bells began to peal, 
That with the sound I woke, and heard indeed 
The clear church-bells ring in the Christmas morn. 



tized by Google 



THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER; 

OR, 

THE PICTURES. 



This morning is the morning of the day, 
When I and Eustace from the city went 
To see the Gardener's Daughter ; I and he, 
Brothers in Art ; a friendship so complete 
Portion 'd in halves between us, that we grew 
The fable of the city where we dwelt. 

My Eustace might have sat for Hercules ; 
So muscular he spread, so broad of breast. 
He, by some law that holds in love, and draws 
The greater to the lesser, long desired 
A certain miracle of symmetry, 
A miniature of loveliness, all grace 
c 2 



Digitized by 



20 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER; 

Summ'd up and closed in little ; — Juliet, she 

So light of foot, so light of spirit — oh, she 

To me myself, for some three careless moons, 

The summer pilot of an empty heart 

Unto the shores of nothing ! Know you not 

Such touches are but embassies of love, 

To tamper with the feelings, ere he found 

Empire for life ? but Eustace painted her, 

And said to me, she sitting with us then, 

" When will you paint like this % " and I replied, 

(My words were half in earnest, half in jest,) 

" 'Tis not your work, but Love's. Love, unperceiyed, 

A more ideal Artist he than all, 

Came, drew your pencil from you, made those eyes 

Darker than darkest pansies, and that hair 

More black than ashbuds in the front of March." > 

And Juliet answer'd laughing, " Go and see 

The Gardener's daughter : trust me, after that, 

You scarce can fail to match his masterpiece." 

And up we rose, and on the spur we went. 

Not wholly in the busy world, nor quite 
Beyond it, blooms the garden that I love. 



Digitized by 



OR, THE PICTURES. ^ 

News from the humming city comes to it 
In sound of funeral or of marriage bells, 
And, sitting muffled in dark leaves, you hear 
The windy clanging of the minster clock ; 
Although between it and the garden lies 
A league of grass, wash'd by a slow broad stream, 
That, stirr'd with languid pulses of the oar, 
Waves all its lazy lilies, and creeps on, 
Barge-laden, to three arches of a bridge 
Crown'd with the minster-towers. 

The fields between 
Are dewy-fresh, brows'd by deep-udder'd kine, 
And all about the large lime feathers low, 
The lime a summer home of murmurous wings. 

In that still place she, hoarded in herself, 
Grew, seldom seen : not less among us lived 
Her fame from lip to lip. Who had not heard 
Of Rose, the Gardener's daughter 1 Where was he, 
So blunt in memory, so old at heart, 
At such a distance from his youth in grief, 
That, having seen, forgot ? The common mouth, 
So gross to express delight, in praise of her 



Digitized by 



22 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER; 

Grew oratory. Such a lord is Love, 
And Beauty such a mistress of the world. 

And if I said that Fancy, led by Love, 
Would play with flying forms and images, 
Yet this is also true, that, long before 
I look'd upon her, when I heard her name 
My heart was like a prophet to my heart, 
And told me I should love. A crowd of hopes, 
That sought to sow themselves like winged seeds, 
Born out of everything I heard and saw, 
Flutter'd about my senses and my soul ; 
And vague desires, like fitful blasts of balm 
To one that travels quickly, made the air 
Of Life delicious, and all kinds of thought, 
That verged upon them, sweeter than the dream 
Dream'd by a happy man, when the dark East, 
Unseen, is brightening to his bridal morn. 

And sure this orbit of the memory folds 
For ever in itself the day we went 
To see her. All the land in flowery squares, 
Beneath a broad and equal-blowing wind, 
Smelt of the coming summer, as one large cloud 



Digitized by 



OR, THE PICTURES. ^ 

Drew downward : but all else of Heaven was pure 
Up to the Sun, and May from verge to verge, 
And May with me from head to heel. And now, 
As though 'twere yesterday, as though it were 
The hour just flown, that morn with all its sound, 
(For those old Mays had thrice the life of these,) 
Rings in mine ears. The steer forgot to graze, 
And, where the hedge-row cuts the pathway, stood, 
Leaning his horns into the neighbour field, 
And lowing to his fellows. From the woods 
Came voices of the well-contented doves. 
The lark could scarce get out his notes for joy, 
But shook his song together as he near'd 
His happy home, the ground. To left and right, 
The cuckoo told his name to all the hills ; 
The mellow ouzel fluted in the elm ; 
The redcap whistled, and the nightingale 
Sang loud, as though he were the bird of day. 

And Eustace turn'd, and smiling said to me, 
" Hear how the bushes echo ! by my life, 
These birds have joyful thoughts. Think you they sing 
Like poets, from the vanity of song ? 



Digitized by 



24 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER ; 

Or have they any sense of why they sing ? 

And would they praise the heavens for what they have ? " 

And I made answer, " Were there nothing else 

For which to praise the heavens but only love, 

That only love were cause enough for praise." 

Lightly he laughed, as one that read my thought, 
And on we went ; but ere an hour had pass'd, 
We reach'd a meadow slanting to the North ; 
Down which a well-worn pathway courted us 
To one green wicket in a privet hedge ; 
This, yielding, gave into a grassy walk 
Thro' crowded lilac-ambush trimly pruned ; 
And one warm gust, full-fed with perfume, blew 
Beyond us, as we enter'd in the cool. 
The garden stretches southward. In the midst 
A cedar spread his dark-green layers of shade. 
The garden-glasses shone, and momently 
The twinkling laurel scatter 'd silver lights. 

" Eustace," I said, " this wonder keeps the house." 
He nodded, but a moment afterwards 
He cried, " Look ! look !" Before he ceased I turn'd, 
And, ere a star can wink, beheld her there. 



Digitized by 



OR, THE PICTURES. 25 

For up the porch there grew an Eastern rose, 
That, flowering high, the last night's gale had caught, 
And blown across the walk. One arm aloft — 
Gown'd in pure white, that fitted to the shape — 
Holding the bush, to fix it back, she stood. 
A single stream of all her soft brown hair 
Pour'd on one side : the shadow of the flowers 
Stole all the golden gloss, and, wavering 
Lovingly lower, trembled on her waist — 
Ah, happy shade — and still went wavering down, 
But, ere it touch'd a foot, that might have danced 
The greensward into greener circles, dipt, 
And mix'd with shadows of the common ground ! 
But the full day dwelt on her brows, and sunn'd 
Her violet eyes, and all her Hebe-bloom, 
And doubled his own warmth against her lips, 
And on the bounteous wave of such a breast 
As never pencil drew. Half light, half shade, 
She stood, a sight to make an old man young. 

So rapt, we near'd the house ; but she, a Kose 
In roses, mingled with her fragrant toil, 
Nor heard us come, nor from her tendance turn'd 



Digitized by 



26 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER; 

Into the world without ; till close at hand, 
And almost ere I knew mine own intent, 
This murmur broke the stillness of that air 
Which brooded round about her : 

" Ah, one rose, 
One rose, but one, by those fair fingers culTd, 
Were worth a hundred kisses press'd on lips 
Less exquisite than thine." 

She look'd : but all 
Suffused with blushes — neither self-possess'd 
Nor startled, but betwixt this mood and that, 
Divided in a graceful quiet — paused, 
And dropt the branch she held, and turning, wound 
Her looser hair in braid, and stirr'd her lips 
For some sweet answer, though no answer came, 
Nor yet refused the rose, but granted it, 
And moved away, and left me, statue-like, 
In act to render thanks. 

I, that whole day, 
Saw her no more, although I linger'd there 
Till every daisy slept, and Love's white star 
Beam'd thro' the thicken'd cedar in the dusk. 



Digitized by 



OR, THE PICTURES. 27 

So home we went, and all the livelong way 
With solemn gibe did Eustace banter me. 
" Now," said he, " will you climb the top of Art. 
You cannot fail but work in hues to dim 
The Titianic Flora. Will you match 
My Juliet ? you, not you, — the Master, Love, 
A more ideal Artist he than all." 

So home I went, but could not sleep for joy, 
Reading her perfect features in the gloom, 
Kissing the rose she gave me o'er and o'er, 
And shaping faithful record of the glance 
That graced the giving — such a noise of life 
Swarm'd in the golden present, such a voice 
CalTd to me from the years to come, and such 
A length of bright horizon rimm'd the dark. 
And all that night I heard the watchmen peal 
The sliding season : all that night I heard 
The heavy clocks knolling the drowsy hours. 
The drowsy hours, dispensers of all good, 
O'er the mute city stole with folded wings, 
Distilling odours on me as they went 
To greet their fairer sisters of the East. 



Digitized by 



28 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER ; 

Love at first sight, first-born, and heir to all, 
Made this night thus. Henceforward squall nor storm 
Could keep me from that Eden where she dwelt. 
Light pretexts drew me : sometimes a Dutch love 
For tulips ; then for roses, moss or musk, 
To grace my city-rooms ; or fruits and cream 
Served in the weeping elm ; and more and more 
A word could bring the colour to my cheek ; 
A thought would fill my eyes with happy dew; 
Love trebled life within me, and with each 
The year increased. 

The daughters of the year, 
One after one, thro' that still garden pass'd : 
Each garlanded with her peculiar flower 
Danced into light, and died into the shade ; 
And each in passing touch'd with some new grace 
Or seem'd to touch her, so that day by day, 
Like one that never can be wholly known, 
Her beauty grew ; till Autumn brought an hour 
For Eustace, when I heard his deep " I will," 
Breathed, like the covenant of a God, to hold 
From thence thro' all the worlds : but I rose up 

Digitized by GooQle 



OR, THE PICTURES. 29 

Full of his bliss, and following her dark eyes 
Felt earth as air beneath me, till I reach'd 
The wicket-gate, and found her standing there. 

There sat we down upon a garden mound, 
Two mutually enfolded ; Love, the third, 
Between us, in the circle of his arms 
Enwound us both ; and over many a range 
Of waning lime the gray cathedral towers, 
Across a hazy glimmer of the west, 
Reveal'd their shining windows : from them clash' d 
The bells ; we listen 'd ; with the time we play'd ; 
We spoke of other things ; we coursed about 
The subject most at heart, more near and near, 
Like doves about a dovecote, wheeling round 
The central wish, until we settled there. 

Then, in that time and place, I spoke to her, 
Requiring, though I knew it was mine own, 
Yet for the pleasure that I took to hear, 
Requiring at her hand the greatest gift, 
A woman's heart, the heart of her I loved ; 
And in that time and place she answer'd me, 
And in the compass of three little words, 



Digitized by 



30 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER ; 

More musical than ever came in one, 
The silver fragments of a broken voice, 
Made me most happy, lisping " I am thine." 

Shall I cease here ? Is this enough to say 
That my desire, like all strongest hopes, 
By its own energy fulfiird itself, 
Merged in completion ? Would you learn at full 
How passion rose thro' circumstantial grades 
Beyond all grades develop'd ? and indeed 
I had not staid so long to tell you all, 
But while I mused came Memory with sad eyes, 
Holding the folded annals of my youth ; 
And while I mused, Love with knit brows went by, 
And with a flying finger swept my lips, 
And spake, " Be wise : not easily forgiven 
Are those, who setting wide the doors, that bar 
The secret bridal chambers of the heart, 
Let in the day." Here, then, my words have end. 

Yet might I tell of meetings, of farewells — 
Of that which came between, more sweet than each, 
In whispers, like the whispers of the leaves 



Digitized by 



OB, THE PICTURES. 

That tremble round a nightingale — in sighs 
Which perfect Joy, perplex'd for utterance, 
Stole from her sister Sorrow. Might I not tell 
Of difference, reconcilement, pledges given, 
And vows, where there was never need of vows, 
And kisses, where the heart on one wild leap 
Hung tranced from all pulsation, as above 
The heavens between their fairy fleeces pale 
Sow'd all their mystic gulfs with fleeting stars ; 
Or while the balmy glooming, crescent-lit, 
Spread the light haze along the river-shores, 
And in the hollows ; or as once we met 
Unheedful, though beneath a whispering rain 
Night slid down one long stream of sighing wind, 
And in her bosom bore the baby, Sleep. 

But this whole hour your eyes have been intent 
On that veil'd picture — veil'd, for what it holds 
May not be dwelt on by the common day. 
This prelude has prepared thee. Eaise thy soul ; 
Make thine heart ready with thine eyes : the time 
Is come to raise the veil. 



Digitized by 



32 THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER. 

Behold her there, 
As I beheld her ere she knew my heart, 
My first, last love ; the idol of my youth, 
The darling of my manhood, and, alas ! 
Now the most blessed memory of mine age. 



Digitized by 



DORA. 



With farmer Allan at the farm abode 
William and Dora. William was his son, 
And she his niece. He often look'd at them, 
And often thought " I'll make them man and wife." 
Now Dora felt her uncle's will in all, 
And yearn'd towards William ; but the youth, because 
He had been always with her in the house, 
Thought not of Dora. 

Then there came a day 
When Allan calPd his son, and said, " My son, 
I married late ; but I would wish to see 
My grandchild on my knees before I die : 
And I have set my heart upon a match. 

TOL. II. D 



Digitized by 



34 DORA. 

•Now therefore look to Dora ; she is well 
To look to ; thrifty too beyond her age. 
She is my brother's daughter : he and I 
Had once hard words, and parted, and he died 
In foreign lands ; but for his sake I bred 
His daughter Dora : take her for your wife ; 
For I have wish'd this marriage, night and day, 
For many years." But William answer'd short, 
" I cannot marry Dora ; by my life, 
I will not marry Dora." Then the old man 
Was wroth, and doubled up his hands, and said, 
" You will not, boy ! you dare to answer thus ! 
But in my time a father's word was law, 
And so it shall be now for me. Look to't. 
Consider : take a month to think, and give 
An answer to my wish ; or by the Lord 
That made me, you shall pack, and nevermore 
Darken my doors again." And William heard, 
And answer'd something madly ; bit his lips, 
And broke away. The more he look'd at her 
The less he liked her ; and his ways were harsh ; 
But Dora bore them meekly. Then before 



Digitized by 



DORA. 



The month was out he left his father's house, 
And hired himself to work within the fields ; 
And half in love, half spite, he woo'd and wed 
A labourer's daughter, Mary Morrison. 

Then, when the bells were ringing, Allan calTd 
His niece and said, " My girl, I love you well ; 
But if you speak with him that was my son, 
Or change a word with her he calls his wife, 
My home is none of yours. My will is law." 
And Dora promised, being meek. She thought, 
" It cannot be : my uncle's mind will change !" 

And days went on, and there was born a boy 
To William ; then distresses came on him ; 
And day by day he pass'd his father's gate, 
Heart-broken, and his father help'd him not. 
But Dora stored what little she could save, 
And sent it them by stealth, nor did they know 
Who sent it ; till at last a fever seized 
On William, and in harvest time he died. 

Then Dora went to Mary. Mary sat 
And look'd with tears upon her boy, and thought 
Hard things of Dora. Dora came and said, 
d 2 



Digitized by 



' DORA. 

" I have obey'd my uncle until now, 
And I have sinn'd, for it was all thro' me 
This evil came on William at the first. 
But, Mary, for the sake of him that's gone, 
And for your sake, the woman that he chose, 
And for this orphan, I am come to you : 
You know there has not been for these five years 
So full a harvest : let me take the boy, 
And I will set him in my uncle's eye 
Among the wheat ; that when his heart is glad 
Of the full harvest, he may see the boy, 
And bless him for the sake of him that's gone." 

And Dora took the child and went her way 
Across the wheat, and sat upon a mound 
That was unsown, where many poppies grew. 
Far off the farmer came into the field 
And spied her not ; for none of all his men 
Dare tell him Dora waited with the child ; 
And Dora would have risen and gone to him, 
But her heart fail'.d her ; and the reapers reap'd, 
And the sun fell, and all the land was dark. 

But when the morrow came, she rose and took 



Digitized by 



DORA. 37 

The child once more, and sat upon the mound ; 

And made a little wreath of all the flowers 

That grew about, and tied it round his hat 

To make him pleasing in her uncle's eye. 

Then when the farmer pass'd into the field 

He spied her, and he left his men at work 

And came and said, " Where were you yesterday ? 

Whose child is that 1 What are you doing here ?" 

So Dora cast her eyes upon the ground 

And answer'd softly, " This is William's child !" 

« And did I not," said Allan, " did I not 

Forbid you, Dora V Dora said again, 

" Do with me as you will, but take the child 

And bless him for the sake of him that's gone !" 

And Allan said, " I see it is a trick 

Got up betwixt you and the woman there. 

I must be taught my duty, and by you ! 

You knew my word was law, and yet you dared 

To slight it. Well— for I will take the boy ; 

But go you hence, and never see me more." 

So saying, he took the boy, that cried aloud 
And struggled hard. The wreath of flowers fell 



Digitized by 



38 



DORA. 



At Dora's feet. She bow'd upon her hands, 

And the boy's cry came to her from the field, 

More and more distant. She bow'd down her head, 

Remembering the day when first she came, 

And all the things that had been. She bow'd down 

And wept in secret ; and the reapers reap'd, 

And the sun fell, and all the land was dark. 

Then Dora went to Mary's house, and stood 
Upon the threshold. Mary saw the boy 
Was not with Dora. She broke out in praise 
To God, that help'd her in her widowhood. 
And Dora said, " My uncle took the boy ; 
But, Mary, let me live and work with you : 
He says that he will never see me more." • 
Then answer'd Mary, " This shall never be, 
That thou shouldst take my trouble on thyself : 
And, now I think, he shall not have the boy, 
For he will teach him hardness, and to slight 
His mother ; therefore thou and I will go, 
And I will have my boy, and bring him home ; 
And I will beg of him to take thee back ; 
But if he will not take thee back again, 



Digitized by 



DORA. 

Then thou and I will live within one house, 
And work for William's child, until he grows 
Of age to help us." 

So the women kiss'd 
Each other, and set out, and reach'd the farm. 
The door was off the latch ; they peep'd, and saw 
The boy set up betwixt his grandsire's knees, 
Who thrust him in the hollows of his arm, 
And clapp'd him on the hands and on the cheeks, 
Like one that loved him ; and the lad stretch'd out 
And babbled for the golden seal, that hung 
From Allan's watch, and sparkled by the fire. 
Then they came in : but when the boy beheld 
His mother, he cried out to come to her, 
And Allan set him down ; and Mary said : 

" O Father ! — if you let me call you so — 
I never came a-begging for myself, 
Or William, or this child ; but now I come 
For Dora : take her back ; she loves you well. 
O Sir, when William died, he died at peace 
With all men ; for I ask'd him, and he said, 
He could not ever rue his marrying me ; 



Digitized by 



40 



DORA. 



I had been a patient wife : but, Sir, he said 

That he was wrong to cross his father thus. 

' God bless him 1 ' he said, ' and may he never know 

The troubles I have gone thro' ! ' Then he turn'd 

His face and pass'd — unhappy that I am ! 

But now, Sir, let me have my boy, for you 

Will make him hard, and he will learn to slight 

His father's memory ; and take Dora back, 

And let all this be as it was before." 

So Mary said, and Dora hid her face 
By Mary. There was silence in the room ; 
And all at once the old man burst in sobs : — 

" I have been to blame — to blame. I have kill'd my son. 
I have kill'd him — but I loved him — my dear son. 
May God forgive me ! — I have been to blame. 
Kiss me, my children." 

Then they clung about 
The old man's neck, and kiss'd him many times. 
And all the man was broken with remorse ; 
And all his love came back a hundredfold ; 
And for three hours he sobb'd o'er William's child, 
Thinking of William. 



Digitized by 



DORA. 41 

So those four abode 
Within one house together ; and as years 
Went forward, Mary took another mate ; 
But Dora lived unmarried till her death. 



Digitized by 



AUDLEY COURT. 



The Bull, the Fleece are cramm'd, and not a room 
For love or money. Let us picnic there 
At Audley Court." 

I spoke, while Audley feast 
Humm'd like a hive all round the narrow quay, 
To Francis, with a basket on his arm, 
To Francis just alighted from the boat, 
And breathing of the sea. " With all my heart," 
Said Francis. Then we shoulder'd through the swarm, 
And rounded by the stillness of the beach 
To where the bay runs up its latest horn. 

We left the dying ebb that faintly lipp'd 
The flat red granite ; so by many a sweep 



Digitized by 



AUDLEY COURT. 



43 



Of meadow smooth from aftermath we reach'd 
The griffin-guarded gates, and pass'd thro' all 
The pillar'd dusk of sounding sycamores, 
And cross'd the garden to the gardener's lodge, 
With all its casements bedded, and its walls 
And chimneys muffled in the leafy vine. 

There, on a slope of orchard, Francis laid 
A damask napkin wrought with horse and hound, 
Brought out a dusky loaf that smelt of home, 
And, half-cut-down, a pasty costly-made, 
Where quail and pigeon, lark and leveret, lay, 
Like fossils of the rock, with golden yokes 
Imbedded and injellied ; last, with these, 
A flask of cider from his father's vats, 
Prime, which I knew ; and so we sat and eat 
And talk'd old matters over : who was dead, 
Who married, who was like to be, and how 
The races went, and who would rent the hall : 
Then touch'd upon the game, how scarce it was 
This season ; glancing thence, discuss'd the farm, 
The fourfield system, and the price of grain ; 
And struck upon the corn-laws, where we split, 



Digitized by 



44 



AUDLEY COURT. 



And came again together on the king 
With heated faces ; till he laugh'd aloud ; 
And, while the blackbird on the pippin hung 
To hear him, clapp'd his hand in mine and sang — 

" Oh ! who would fight and march and countermarch, 
Be shot for sixpence in a battle-field, 
And shovelTd up into a bloody trench 
Where no one knows ? but let me liVe my life. 

" Oh ! who would cast and balance at a desk, 
Perch'd like a crow upon a three-legg'd stool, 
Till all his juice is dried, and all his joints 
Are full of chalk 1 but let me live my life. 

" Who'd serve the state ? for if I carved my name 
Upon the cliffs that guard my native land, 
I might as well have traced it in the sands ; 
The sea wastes all : but let me live my life. 

" Oh ! who would love ? I woo'd a woman once, 
But she was sharper than an eastern wind, 
And all my heart turn'd from her, as a thorn 
Turns from the sea : but let me live my life." 

He sang his song, and I replied with mine, 
I found it in a volume, all of songs, 



Digitized by 



AUDLEY COURT. 



45 



Knock'd down to me, when old Sir Robert's pride, 
His books — the more the pity, so I said— 
Came to the hammer here in March — and this — 
I set the words, and added names I knew. 

" Sleep, Ellen Aubrey, sleep, and dream of me, 
Sleep, Ellen, folded in thy sister's arm, 
And sleeping, haply dream her arm is mine. 

" Sleep, Ellen, folded in Emilia's arm, 
Emilia, fairer than all else but thou, 
For thou art fairer than all else that is. 

" Sleep, breathing health and peace upon her breast. 
Sleep, breathing love and trust against her lip, 
I go to-night ; I come to-morrow morn. 

" I go, but I return : I would I were 
The pilot of the darkness and the dream. 
Sleep, Ellen Aubrey, love, and dream of me." 

So sang we each to either, Francis Hale, 
The farmer's son who lived across the bay, 
My friend ; and I, that having wherewithal, 
And in the fallow leisure of my life, 
Did what I would ; but ere the night we rose 
And saunter'd home beneath a moon, that, just 



Digitized by 



46 



AUDLBY COURT. 



In crescent, dimly rain'd about the leaf 
Twilights of airy silver, till we reach'd 
The limit of the hills ; and as we sank 
From rock to rock upon the glooming quay, 
The town was hush'd beneath us : lower down 
The bay was oily-calm ; the harbour-buoy 
With one green sparkle ever and anon 
Dipt by itself, and we were glad at heart. 



Digitized by 



WALKING TO THE MAIL. 



John. I'm glad I walk'd. How fresh the country looks ! 
Is yonder planting where this byway joins 
The turnpike ? 

James. Yes. 

John. And when does this come by f 
James. The mail t At one o'clock. 

John. What is it now ? 

James. A quarter to. 

John. Whose house is that I see 
Beyond the watermills % 

James. Sir Edward Head's : 
But he's abroad : the place is to be sold. 
John. Oh, his. He was not broken. 



Digitized by 



48 



WALKING TO THE MAIL. 



James. No, sir, he, 
Vex'd with a morbid devil in his blood 
That veil'd the world with jaundice, hid his face 
From all men, and commercing with himself, 
He lost the sense that handles daily life — 
That keeps us all in order more or less — 
And sick of home went overseas for change. 

John. And whither ? 

James. Nay, who knows ? he's here and there. 
But let him go ; his devil goes with him, 
As well as with his tenant, Jocky Dawes. 

John. What's that ? 

James. You saw the man but yesterday : 
He pick'd the pebble from your horse's foot. 
His house was haunted by a jolly ghost 
That rummaged like a rat. No servant staid : 
The farmer vext packs up his beds and chairs, 
And all his household stuff ; and with his boy 
Betwixt his knees, his wife upon the tilt, 
Sets forth, and meets a friend who hails him, " What ! 
You're flitting ! " " Yes, we're flitting," says the ghost, 
(For they had pack'd the thing among the beds,) 



Digitized by 



WALKING TO THE MAIL. 



49 



" Oh well," says he, " you flitting with us too — 
Jack, turn the horses' heads and home again." 

John. He left his wife behind ; for so I heard. 

James. He left her, yes. I met my lady once : 
A woman like a'butt, and harsh as prabs. 

John. Oh yet but I remember, ten years back — 
'Tis now at least ten years — and then she was — 
You could not light upon a sweeter thing. 
A body slight and round, and like a pear 
In growing, modest eyes, a hand, a foot 
Lessening in perfect cadence, and a skin 
As clean and white as privet when it flowers. 

James. Ay, ay, the blossom fades, and they that loved 
At first like dove and dove were cat and dog. 
She was the daughter of a cottager 
Out of her sphere. What betwixt shame and pride, 
New things and old, himself and her, she sour'd 
To what she is : a nature never kind ! 
Like men, like manners : like breeds like, they say. 
Kind nature is the best : those manners next 
That fit us like a nature second-hand ; 
Which are indeed the manners of the great. 

TOL. II. E 



Digitized by 



50 



WALKING TO THE MAIL. 



John. But I had heard it was this bill that past, 
And fear of change at home, that drove him hence. 

James. That was the last drop in the cup of gall. 
I once was near him, when his bailiff brought 
A Chartist pike. You should have seen him wince 
As from a venomous thing : he thought himself 
A mark for all, and shudder d, lest a cry 
Should break his sleep by night, and his nice eyes 
Should see the raw mechanic's bloody thumbs 
Sweat on his blazon 'd chairs ; but, sir, you know 
That these two parties still divide the world — 
Of those that want, and those that have : and still 
The same old sore breaks out from age to age 
With much the same result. Now I, that am 
A Tory to the quick, was as a boy 
Destructive, when I had not what I would. 
I was at school — a college in the South : 
There lived a flayflint near ; we stole his fruit, 
His hens, his eggs ; but there was law for us ; 
We paid in person, scored upon the part 
Which cherubs want. He had a sow, sir. She, 
With meditative grunts of much content, 
Lay great with pig, wallowing in sun and mud. 



Digitized by 



WALKING TO THE MAIL. 



51 



By night we dragg'd her to the college tower 
From her warm bed, and up the corkscrew stair 
With hand and rope we haled the groaning sow, 
And on the leads we kept her till she pigg'd. 
Large range of prospect had the mother sow, 
And but for daily loss of one she loved, 
As one by one we took them — but for this — 
As never sow was higher in this world — 
Might have been happy : but what lot is pure ? 
We took them all, till she was left alone 
Upon her tower, the Niobe of swine, 
And so return 'd unfarrow'd to her sty. 
John. They found you out % 

James. Not they. 

John. Well — after all — 
What know we of the secret of a man 1 
His nerves were wrong. What ails us, who are sound, 
That we should mimic this raw fool the world, 
Which charts us all in its coarse blacks or whites, 
As ruthless as a baby with a worm, 
As cruel as a schoolboy ere he grows 
To Pity — more from ignorance than will. 

£ 2 



Digitized by 



52 WALKING TO THE MAIL. 

But put your best foot forward, or I fear 
That we shall miss the mail : and here it comes 
With five at top : as quaint a four-in-hand 
As you shall see — three pyebalds and a roan. 



Digitized by 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



Altho' I be the basest of mankind, 

From scalp to sole one slough and crust of sin, 

Unfit for earth, unfit for heaven, scarce meet 

For troops of devils, mad with blasphemy, 

I will not cease to grasp the hope I hold 

Of saintdom, and to clamour, mourn and sob, 

Battering the gates of heaven with storms of prayer, 

Have mercy, Lord, and take away my sin. 

Let this avail, just, dreadful, mighty God, 
This not be all in vain, that thrice ten years, 
Thrice multiplied by superhuman pangs, 
In hungers and in thirsts, fevers and cold, 
In coughs, aches, stitches, ulcerous throes and cramps 



Digitized by 



54 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



A sign betwixt the meadow and the cloud, 

Patient on this tall pillar I have borne 

Rain, wind, frost, heat, hail, damp, and sleet, and snow ; 

And I had hoped that ere this period closed 

Thou wouldst have caught me up into thy rest, 

Denying not these weather-beaten limbs 

The meed of saints, the white robe and the palm. 

O take the meaning, Lord : I do not breathe, 
Not whisper, any murmur of complaint. 
Pain heap'd ten-hundred-fold to this, were still 
Less burthen, by ten-hundred-fold, to bear, 
Than were those lead-like tons of sin, that crush'd 
My spirit flat before thee. 

0 Lord, Lord, 
Thou knowest I bore this better at the first, 
For I was strong and hale of body then ; 
And though my teeth, which now are dropt away, 
Would chatter with the cold, and all my beard 
Was tagged with icy fringes in the moon, 
I drown 'd the whoopings of the owl with sound 
Of pious hymns and psalms, and sometimes saw 
An angel stand and watch me, as I sang. 



Digitized by 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



Now am I feeble grown : my end draws nigh — 
I hope my end draws nigh : half deaf I am, 
So that I scarce can hear the people hum 
About the column's base, and almost blind, 
And scarce can recognise the fields I know. 
And both my thighs are rotted with the dew, 
Yet cease I not to clamour and to cry, 
While my stiff spine can hold my weary head, 
Till all my limbs drop piecemeal from the stone, 
Have mercy, mercy : take away my sin. 

O Jesus, if thou wilt not save my soul, 
Who may be saved ] who is it may be saved ? 
Who may be made a saint, if I fail here 1 
Show me the man hath suffer'd more than I. 
For did not all thy martyrs die one death ] 
For either they were stoned, or crucified, 
Or burn'd in fire, or boil'd in oil, or sawn 
In twain beneath the ribs ; but I die here 
To-day, and whole years long, a life of death. 
Bear witness, if I could have found a way 
(And needfully I sifted all my thought) 
More slowly-painful to subdue this home 



Digitized by 



56 



ST. SIMEON 8TYLITE8. 



Of sin, my flesh, which I despise and hate, 
I had not stinted practice, 0 my God. 

For not alone this pillar-punishment, 
Not this alone I bore : but while I lived 
In the white convent down the valley there, 
For many weeks about my loins I wore 
The rope that haled the buckets from the well, 
Twisted as tight as I could knot the noose, 
And spake not of it to a single soul, 
Until the ulcer, eating through my skin, 
Betray'd my secret penance, so that all 
My brethren marvell'd greatly. More than this 
I bore, whereof, 0 God, thou knowest all. 

Three winters, that my soul might grow to thee, 
I lived up there on yonder mountain side. 
My right leg chain'd into the crag, I lay 
Pent in a roofless close of ragged stones, 
Inswath'd sometimes in wandering mist, and twice 
Black'd with thy branding thunder, and sometimes 
Sucking the damps for drink, and eating not, 
Except the spare chance-gift of those that came 
To touch my body and be heal'd, and live. 



Digitized by 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 

And they say then that I work'd miracles, 
Whereof my fame is loud amongst mankind, 
Cured lameness, palsies, cancers. Thou, 0 God, 
Knowest alone whether this was or no. 
Have mercy, mercy ; cover all my sin. 

Then, that I might be more alone with thee, 
Three years I lived upon a pillar, high 
Six cubits, and three years on one of twelve ; 
And twice three years I crouch'd on one that rose 
Twenty by measure ; last of all, I grew 
Twice ten long weary weary years to this, 
That numbers forty cubits from the soil. 

I think that I have borne as much as this — 
Or else I dream — and for so long a time, 
If I may measure time by yon slow light, 
And this high dial, which my sorrow crowns — 
So much— even so. 

And yet I know not well, 
For that the evil ones come here, and say, 
" Fall down, 0 Simeon : thou hast suffer'd long 
For ages and for ages !" then they prate 
Of penances I cannot have gone thro', 



Digitized by 



58 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



Perplexing me with lies ; and oft I fall, 
Maybe for months, in such blind lethargies, 
That Heaven, and Earth, and Time are choked. 

But yet 

Bethink thee, Lord, while thou and all the saints 
Enjoy themselves in heaven, and men on earth 
House in the shade of comfortable roofs, ! 
Sit with their wives by fires, eat wholesome food, 
And wear warm clothes, and even beasts have stalls, 
I, 'tween the spring and downfall of the light, 
Bow down one thousand and two hundred times 
To Christ, the Virgin Mother, and the Saints ; 
Or in the night, after a little sleep, 
I wake : the chill stars sparkle ; I am wet 
With drenching dews, or stiff with crackling frost. 
I wear an undress'd goatskin on my back ; 
A grazing iron collar grinds my neck ; 
And in my weak, lean arms I lift the cross, 
And strive and wrestle with thee till I die : 
O mercy, mercy ! wash away my sin. 

0 Lord, thou knowest what a man I am ; 
A sinful man, conceived and born in sin : 



Digitized by 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



59 



Tis their own doing ; this is none of mine ; 
Lay it not to me. Am I to blame for this, 
That here come those that worship me 1 Ha ! ha ! 
They think that I am somewhat. What am I ? 
The silly people take me for a saint, 
And bring me offerings of fruit and flowers : 
And I, in truth (thou wilt bear witness here) 
Have all in all endured as much, and more 
Than many just and holy men, whose names 
Are register'd and calendar'd for saints. 

Good people, you do ill to kneel to me. 
What is it I can have done to merit this ? 
I am a sinner viler than you all. 
It may be I have wrought some miracles, 
And cured some halt and maim'd ; but what of that ? 
It may be, no one, even among the saints, 
May match his pains with mine. But what of that ? 
Yet do not rise : for you may look on me, 
And in your looking you may kneel to God. 
Speak ! is there any of you halt or maim'd ? 
I think you know I have some power with Heaven 
Prom my long penance : let him speak his wish. 



Digitized by 



60 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



Yes, I can heal him. Power goes forth from me. 
They say that they are heal'd. Ah, hark ! they shout 
" St. Simeon Stylites." Why, if so, 
God reaps a harvest in me. O my soul, 
God reaps a harvest in thee. If this be, 
Can I work miracles and not be saved ? 
This is not told of any. They were saints. 
It cannot be but that I shall be saved ; 
Yea, crown'd a saint. They shout, " Behold a saint ! " 
And lower voices saint me from above. 
Courage, St. Simeon ! This dull chrysalis 
Cracks into shining wings, and hope ere death 
Spreads more and more and more, that God hath now 
Sponged and made blank of crimeful record all 
My mortal archives. 

0 my sons, my sons, 
I, Simeon of the pillar, by surname 
Stylites, among men ; I, Simeon, 
The watcher on the column till the end ; 
I, Simeon, whose brain the sunshine bakes ; 
I, whose bald brows in silent hours become 
Unnaturally hoar with rime, do now 



Digitized by 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



61 



From my high nest of penance here proclaim 

That Pontius and Iscariot by my side 

Show'd like fair seraphs. On the coals I lay, 

A vessel full of sin : all hell beneath 

Made me boil over. Devils pluck'd my sleeve ; 

Abaddon and Asmodeus caught at me. 

I smote them with the cross ; they swarm 'd again. 

In bed like monstrous apes they crush'd my chest. 

They flapp'd my light out as I read : I saw 

Their faces grow between me and my book : 

With colt-like whinny and with hoggish whine 

They burst my prayer. Yet this way was left, 

And by this way I 'scaped them. Mortify 

Your flesh, like me, with scourges and with thorns ; 

Smite, shrink not, spare not. If it may be, fast 

Whole Lents, and pray. I hardly, with slow steps — 

With slow, faint steps, and much exceeding pain — 

Have scrambled past those pits of fire, that still 

Sing in mine ears. But yield not me the praise : 

God only thro' his bounty hath thought fit 

Among the powers and princes of this world, 

To make me an example to mankind, 



Digitized by 



62 



8T. SIMEON STYLITES. 



Which few can reach to. Yet I do not say 
But that a time may come — yea, even now, 
Now, now, his footsteps smite the threshold stairs 
Of life — I say, that time is at the doors 
When you may worship me without reproach ; 
For I will leave my relics in your land, 
And you may carve a shrine about my dust, 
And burn a fragrant lamp before my bones, 
When I am gather d to the glorious saints. 

While I spake then, a sting of shrewdest pain 
Ran shrivelling thro* me, and a cloudlike change, 
In passing, with a grosser film made thick 
These heavy, horny eyes. The end ! the end ! 
Surely the end ! What's here ] a shape, a shade, 
A flash of light. Is that the angel there 
That holds a crown ] Come, blessed brother, come. 
I know thy glittering face. I waited long ; 
My brows are ready. What ! deny it now 1 
Nay, draw, draw, draw nigh. So I clutch it. Christ ! 
'Tis gone : 'tis here again ; the crown ! the crown ! 
So now 'tis fitted on and grows to me, 
And from it melt the dews of Paradise, 



Digitized by 



ST. SIMEON STYLITES. 



63 



Sweet ! sweet ! spikenard, and balm, and frankincense. 
Ah ! let me not be fool'd, sweet saints. I trust 
That I am whole, and clean, and meet for Heaven. 

Speak, if there be a priest, a man of God, 
Among you there, and let him presently 
Approach, and lean a ladder on the shaft, 
And climbing up into mine airy home, 
Deliver me the blessed sacrament ; 
For by the warning of the Holy Ghost, 
I prophesy that I shall die to-night, 
A quarter before twelve. 

But thou, O Lord, 
Aid all this foolish people ; let them take 
Example, pattern : lead them to thy light. 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



Once more the gate behind me falls ; 

Once more before my face 
I see the moulder'd Abbey-walls, 

That stand within the chace. 

ii. 

Beyond the lodge the city lies, 
Beneath its drift of smoke ; 

And ah ! with what delighted eyes 
I turn to yonder oak. 

in. 

For when my passion first began, 
Ere that, which in me burn'd, 

The love, that makes me thrice a man, 
Could hope itself return'd ; 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



65 



IV. 

To yonder oak within the field 
I spoke without restraint, 

And with a larger faith appeal'd 
Than Papist unto Saint. 

V. 

For oft I talk'd with him apart, 
And told him of my choice, 

Until he plagiarised a heart, 
And answer'd with a voice . 

VI. 

Tho' what he whisper d under Heaven 
None else could understand ; 

I found him garrulously given, 
A babbler in the land. 

VII. 

But since I heard him make reply 

Is many a weary hour ; 
'Twere well to question him, and try 

If yet he keeps the power. 

▼OL. II. p 



Digitized by 



66 



THE TALKING OAK. 



Tin- 
Hail, hidden to the knees in fern, 

Broad Oak of Sumner-chace, 
Whose topmost branches can discern 
The roofs of Sumner-place ! 

IX. 

Say thou, whereon I carved her name, 

If ever maid or spouse, 
As fair as my Olivia, came 

To rest beneath thy boughs. — 

" 0 Walter, I have shelter d here 
Whatever maiden grace 
The good old Summers, year by year, 
Made ripe in Sumner-chace : 

XI. 

" Old Summers, when the monk was fat, 
And, issuing shorn and sleek, 
Would twist his girdle tight, and pat 
The girls upon the cheek, 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



67 



XII. 

" Ere yet, in scorn of Peter s-pence, 
And number d bead, and shrift, 
Bluff Harry broke into the spence, 
And turn'd the cowls adrift : 

XIII. 

" And I have seen some score of those 
Fresh faces, that would thrive 
When his man-minded offset rose 
To chase the deer at five ; 

XIV. 

" And all that from the town would stroll, 
Till that wild wind made work 
In which the gloomy brewers soul 
Went by me, like a stork : 

XT. 

" The slight she-slips of loyal blood, 
And others, passing praise, 
Strait-laced, but all-too-full in bud 
For puritanic stays : 
p 2 



d by Google 



THE TALKING OAK. 
xvi. 

" And I have shadow'd many a group 
Of beauties, that were born 
In teacup-times of hood and hoop, 
Or while the patch was worn ; 

XVII. 

" And, leg and arm with love-knots gay, 
About me leap'd and laugh'd 
The modish Cupid of the day, 
And shrilTd his tinsel shaft. 

xvni. 

" I swear (and else may insects prick 
Each leaf into a gall) 
This girl, for whom your heart is sick, 
Is three times worth them all ; 

XIX. 

" For those and theirs, by Nature's law, 
Have faded long ago ; 
But in these latter springs I saw 
Your own Olivia blow, 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



69 



xx. 

" From when she gambolTd on the greens, 
A baby-germ, to when 
The maiden blossoms of her teens 
Could number five from ten. 

XXI. 

" I swear, by leaf, and wind, and rain, 
(And hear me with thine ears,) 
That, tho* I circle in the grain 
Five hundred rings of years — 



" Yet, since I first could cast a shade, 
Did never creature pass 
So slightly, musically made, 
So light upon the grass : 

xxm. 

" For as to fairies, that will flit 
To make the greensward fresh, 
I hold them exquisitely knit, 
But far too spare of flesh." 



tized by Google 



THE TALKING OAK. 



XXIT. 

Oh, hide thy knotted knees in fern, 

And overlook the chace ; 
And from thy topmost branch discern 

The roofs of Somner-place. 

XXV. 

But thou, whereon I carved her name, 
That oft hast heard my vows, 

Declare when last Olivia came 
To sport beneath thy boughs. 

XXVI. 

" 0 yesterday, you know, the fan- 
Was holden at the town ; 
Her father left his good arm-chair, 
And rode his hunter down. 

XXVII. 

" And with him Albert came on his. 
I look'd at him with joy : 
As cowslip unto oxlip is, 
So seems she to the boy. 



tized by Google 



THE TALKING OAK. 



XXVIII. 

" An hour had past — and, sitting straight 
Within the low-wheel'd chaise, 
Her mother trundled to the gate 
Behind the dappled grays. 

XXIX. 

" But, as for her, she staid at home, 
And on the roof she went, 
And down the way you use to come 
She look'd with discontent. 



XXX. 

" She left the novel half-uncut 
Upon the rosewood shelf ; 
She left the new piano shut : 
She could not please herself. 



" Then ran she, gamesome as the colt, 
And livelier than a lark 
She sent her voice through all the holt 
Before her, and the park. 



Digitized by 



72 



THE TALKING OAK. 



" A light wind chased her on the wing, 
And in the chase grew wild, 
As close as might be would he cling 
About the darling child : 

XXXIII. 

" But light as any wind that blows 
So fleetly did she stir, 
The flower, she touch'd on, dipt and rose, 
And turn'd to look at her. 

XXXIV. 

" And here she came, and round me play'd, 
And sang to me the whole 
Of those three stanzas that you made 
About my ' giant bole 

XXXV. 

" And in a fit of frolic mirth 

She strove to span my waist : 
Alas, I was so broad of girth, 
I could not be embraced* 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



73 



" I wish'd myself the fair young beech 
That here beside me stands, 
That round me, clasping each in each, 
She might have lock'd her hands. 

XXXVII. 

" Yet seem'd the pressure thrice as sweet 
As woodbine's fragile hold, 
Or when I feel about my feet 
The berried briony fold." 

XXXVIII. 

O muffle round thy knees with fern, 
And shadow Sumner-chace ! 

Long may thy topmost branch discern 
The roofs of Sumner-place ! 



But tell me, did she read the name 

I carved with many vows 
When last with throbbing heart I came 

To rest beneath thy boughs ? 



tized by Google 



74 



THE TALKING OAK. 



XL. 

" O yes, she wander'd round and round 
These knotted knees of mine, 
And found, and kiss'd the name she found, 
And sweetly murmur'd thine. 

XLI. 

" A teardrop trembled from its source, 
And down my surface crept. 
My sense of touch is something coarse, 
But I believe she wept. 

XLII. 

" Then flush'd her cheek with rosy light, 
She glanced across the plain ; 
But not a creature was in sight : 
She kiss'd me once again. 

XLIII. 

" Her kisses were so close and kind, 
That, trust me on my word, 
Hard wood I am, and wrinkled rind, 
But yet my sap was stirr'd : 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



75 



XLIV. 

" And even into my inmost ring 
A pleasure I discern'd, 
Like those blind motions of the Spring, 
That show the year is turn'd. 

XLV. 

" Thrice-happy he that may caress 
The ringlet's waving balm — 
The cushions of whose touch may press 
The maiden's tender palm. 

" I, rooted here among the groves, 
But languidly adjust 
My vapid vegetable loves 
With anthers and with dust : 

XLV1I. 

" For ah ! the Dryad-days were brief 
Whereof the poets talk, 
When that, which breathes within the leaf, 
Could slip its bark and walk. 



Digitized by 



76 



THE TALKING OAK. 



xlviii. 

" But could I, as in times foregone, 
From spray, and branch, and stem, 
Have suck'd and gather'd into one 
The life that spreads in them, 

XLIX. 

" She had not found me so remiss ; 
But lightly issuing thro', 
I would have paid her kiss for kiss 
With usury thereto." 

L. 

O flourish high, with leafy towers, 

And overlook the lea, 
Pursue thy loves among the bowers, 

But leave thou mine to me. 

LI. 

0 flourish, hidden deep in fern, 
Old oak, I love thee well ; 

A thousand thanks for what I learn 
And what remains to tell. 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



77 



" 'Tis little more : the day was warm ; 
At last, tired out with play, 
She sank her head upon her arm, 
And at my feet she lay. 

LIU. 

" Her eyelids dropp'd their silken eaves. 
I breathed upon her eyes 
Thro' all the summer of my leaves 
A welcome mix d with sighs. 

LIV. 

" I took the swarming sound of life — 
The music from the town — 
The whispers of the drum and fife, 
And lull'd them in my own, 

LV. 

" Sometimes I let a sunbeam slip 
To light her shaded eye ; 
A second flutterd round her lip 
Like a golden butterfly ; 



tized by Google 



78 



THE TALKING OAK. 



LVI. 

" A third would glimmer on her neck 
To make the necklace shine ; 
Another slid, a sunny fleck, 
From head to ancle fine. 

LVII. 

" Then close and dark my arms I spread, 
And shadow'd all her rest — 
Dropt dews upon her golden head, 
An acorn in her breast. 

LVIII. 

" But in a pet she started up, 
And pluck'd it out, and drew 
My little oakling from the cup, 
And flung him in the dew. 

L1X. 

" And yet it was a graceful gift — 
I felt a pang within 
As when I see the woodman lift 
His axe to slay my kin. 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



79 



LX. 

" I shook him down because he was 
The finest on the tree. 
He lies beside thee on the grass. 
0 kiss him once for me. 

LXl. 

" O kiss him twice and thrice for me, 
That have no lips to kiss, 
For never yet was oak on lea 
Shall grow so fair as this." 



Step deeper yet in herb and fern, 
Look further thro' the chace, 

Spread upward till thy boughs discern 
The front of Sumner-place. 

LXIII. 

This fruit of thine by Love is blest 

That but a moment lay 
Where fairer fruit of Love may rest 

Some happy future day. 



tized by Google 



80 



THE TALKING OAK. 



LXIY. 

I kiss it twice, I kiss it thrice, 
The warmth it thence shall win 

To riper life may magnetise 
The baby-oak within. 

LXV. 

But thou, while kingdoms overset, 
Or lapse from hand to hand, 

Thy leaf shall never fail, nor yet 
Thine acorn in the land. 

Lxn. 

May never saw dismember thee, 
Nor wielded axe disjoint, 

That art the fairest-spoken tree 
From here to Lizard-point. 

LXV 1 1. 

0 rock upon thy towery top 
All throats that gurgle sweet ! 

All starry culmination drop 
Balm-dews to bathe thy feet ! 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



81 



LXVUI. 

All grass of silky feather grow — 
And while he sinks or swells 

The full south-breeze around thee blow 
The sound of minster bells. 

LX1X. 

The fat earth feed thy branchy root, 
That under deeply strikes ! 

The northern morning o'er thee shoot, 
High up, in silver spikes ! 

LXX. 

Nor ever lightning char thy grain, 

But, rolling as in sleep, 
Low thunders bring the mellow rain, 

That makes thee broad and deep ! 

LXXI. 

And hear me swear a solemn oath, 

That only by thy side 
Will I to Olive plight my troth, 

And gain her for my bride. 

YOL. II. o 



Digitized by 



THE TALKING OAK. 



LXXII. 

And when my marriage-morn may fall, 
She, Dryad-like, shall wear 

Alternate leaf and acorn-ball 
In wreath about her hair. 



LXXIII. 

And I will work in prose and rhyme, 
And praise thee more in both 

Than bard has honour d beech or lime, 
Or that Thessalian growth, 

Lxxir. 

In which the swarthy ringdove sat, 
And mystic sentence spoke ; 

And more than England honours that, 
Thy famous brother-oak, 

LXXV. 

Wherein the younger Charles abode 
Till all the paths were dim, 

And far below the Roundhead rode, 
And humm'd a surly hymn. 



Digitized by 



LOVE AND DUTY. 

1 - 



Of love that never found his earthly close, 

What sequel ? Streaming eyes and breaking hearts ? 

Or all the same as if he had not been ? 

Not so. Shall Error in the round of time 
Still father Truth 1 0 shall the braggart shout 
For some blind glimpse of freedom work itself 
Thro' madness, hated by the wise, to law 
System and empire ? Sin itself be found 
The cloudy porch oft opening on the Sun ? 
And only he, this wonder, dead, become 
Mere highway dust 1 or year by year alone 
Sit brooding in the ruins of a life, 
Nightmare of youth, the spectre of himself ? 

If this were thus, if this, indeed, were all, 
Better the narrow brain, the stony heart, 
o 2 



Digitized by 



84 



LOVE AND DUTY. 



The staring eye glazed o'er with sapless days, 
The long mechanic pacings to and fro, 
The set gray life, and apathetic end. 
But am I not the nobler thro' thy love ? 
0 three times less unworthy ! likewise thou 
Art more thro' Love, and greater than thy years. 
The Sun will run his orbit, and the Moon 
Her circle. Wait, and Love himself will bring 
The drooping flower of knowledge changed to fruit 
Of wisdom. Wait : my faith is large in Time, 
And that which shapes it to some perfect end. 

Will some one say, then why not ill for good ? 
Why took ye not your pastime ? To that man 
My work shall answer, since I knew the right 
And did it ; for a man is not as God, 
But then most Godlike being most a man. 

— So let me think 'tis well for thee and me — 
Ill-fated that I am, what lot is mine 
Whose foresight preaches peace, my heart so slow 
To feel it ! for how hard it seem'd to me, 
When eyes, love-languid thro' half-tears, would dwell 
One earnest, earnest moment upon mine, 



Digitized by 



LOVE AND DUTY. 



85 



Then not to dare to see ! when thy low voice, 
Faltering, would break its syllables, to keep 
My own full-tuned, — hold passion in a leash, 
And not leap forth and fall about thy neck, 
And on thy bosom, (deep-desired relief !) 
Rain out the heavy mist of tears, that weigh 'd 
Upon my brain, my senses and my soul ! 

For Love himself took part against himself 
To warn us off, and Duty loved of Love— 
O this world's curse, — beloved but hated — came 
Like Death betwixt thy dear embrace and mine, 
And crying, " Who is this ? behold thy bride," 
She push'd me from thee. 

If the sense is hard 
To alien ears, I did not speak to these — 
No, not to thee, but to thyself in me : 
Hard is my doom and thine : thou knowest it all. 

Could Love part thus ? was it not well to speak, 
To have spoken once t It could not but be well. 
The slow sweet hours that bring us all things good, 
The slow sad hours that bring us all things ill, 
And all good things from evil, brought the night 



Digitized by 



86 



LOVE AND DUTY. 



In which we sat together and alone, 
And to the want, that hollo w'd all the heart, 
Gave utterance by the yearning of an eye, 
That burn'd upon its object thro' such tears 
As flow but once a life. 

The trance gave way 
To those caresses, when a hundred times 
In that last kiss, which never was the last, 
Farewell, like endless welcome, lived and died. 
Then follow'd counsel, comfort, and the words 
That make a man feel strong in speaking truth ; 
Till now the dark was worn, and overhead 
The lights of sunset and of sunrise mix'd 
In that brief night ; the summer night, that paused 
Among her stars to hear us ; stars that hung 
Love-charm'd to listen : all the wheels of Time 
Spun round in station, but the end had come. 

O then like those, that clench their nerves to rush 
Upon their dissolution, we two rose, 
There — closing like an individual life — 
In one blind cry of passion and of pain, 
Like bitter accusation ev'n to death, 



Digitized by 



LOVE AND DUTY. 



87 



Caught up the whole of love and utter'd it, 
And bade adieu for ever. 

Live — yet live — 
Shall sharpest pathos blight us, knowing all 
Life needs for life is possible to will — 
Live happy ! tend thy flowers : be tended by 
My blessing ! should my shadow cross thy thoughts 
Too sadly for their peace, so put it back 
For calmer hours in memory's darkest hold, 
If unforgotten ! should it cross thy dreams, 
So might it come like one that looks content, 
With quiet eyes unfaithful to the truth, 
And point thee forward to a distant light, 
Or seem to lift a burthen from thy heart 
And leave thee freer, till thou wake refresh'd, 
Then when the first low matin-chirp hath grown 
Full quire, and morning driv'n her plow of pearl 
Far furrowing into light the mounded rack, 
Beyond the fair green field and eastern sea. 



Digitized by 



ULYSSES. 



It little profits that an idle king, 

By this still hearth, among these barren crags, 

Match'd with an aged wife, I mete and dole 

Unequal laws unto a savage race, 

That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me. 

I cannot rest from travel : I will drink 

Life to the lees : all times I have enjoy 'd 

Greatly, have suffer'd greatly, both with those 

That loved me, and alone ; on shore, and when 

Thro' scudding drifts the rainy Hyades 

Vext the dim sea : I am become a name ; 

For always roaming with a hungry heart 

Much have I seen and known ; cities of men 

And manners, climates, councils, governments, 



Digitized by 



ULYSSES. 



89 



Myself not least, but honour'd of them all ; 

And drunk delight of battle with my peers, 

Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy. 

I am a part of all that I have met ; 

Yet all experience is an arch wherethro' 

Gleams that untravelTd world, whose margin fades 

For ever and for ever when I move. 

How dull it is to pause, to make an end, 

To rust unburnish'd, not to shine in use ! 

As tho' to breathe were life. Life piled on life 

Were all too little, and of one to me 

Little remains : but every hour is saved 

From that eternal silence, something more, 

A bringer of new things ; and vile it were 

For some three suns to store and hoard myself, 

And this gray spirit yearning in desire 

To follow knowledge, like a sinking star, 

Beyond the utmost bound of human thought. 

This is my son, mine own Telemachus, 
To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle — 
Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil 
This labour, by slow prudence to make mild 



Digitized by 



90 



ULYSSES. 



A rugged people, and thro' soft degrees 

Subdue them to the useful and the good. 

Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere 

Of common duties, decent not to fail 

In offices of tenderness, and pay 

Meet adoration to my household gods 

When I am gone. He works his work, I mine. 

There lies the port : the vessel puffs her sail : 
There gloom the dark broad seas. My mariners, 
Souls that have toil'd, and wrought, and thought with me— 
That ever with a frolic welcome took 
The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed 
Free hearts, free foreheads — you and I are old ; 
Old age hath yet his honour and his toil ; 
Death closes all : but something ere the end, 
Some work of noble note, may yet be done, 
Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods. 
The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks : 
The long day wanes : the slow moon climbs : the deep 
Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends, 
'Tis not too late to seek a newer world. 
Push off, and, sitting well in order, smite 



Digitized by 



ULYSSES. 



91 



The sounding furrows ; for my purpose holds 

To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths 

Of all the western stars, until I die. 

It may be that the gulfs will wash us down : 

It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, 

And see the great Achilles, whom we knew. 

Tho' much is taken, much abides ; and tho' 

We are not now that strength which in old days 

Moved earth and heaven ; that which we are, we are ; 

One equal temper of heroic hearts, 

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will 

To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 



Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet 'tis early 
morn : 

Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the 
bugle horn. 

'Tis the place, and round the gables, as of old, the curlews 
call, 

Dreary gleams about the moorland flying over Locksley 
Hall; 

Locksley Hall, that in the distance overlooks the sandy 
tracts, 

And the hollow ocean-ridges roaring into cataracts. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 93 

Many a night from yonder ivied casement, ere I went to 
rest, 

Did I look on great Orion sloping slowly to the West. 



Many a night I saw the Pleiads, rising thro' the mellow 
shade, 

Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid. 



Here about the beach I wander'd, nourishing a youth 
sublime 

With the fairy tales of science, and the long result of 
Time; 



When the centuries behind me like a fruitful land 
reposed ; 

When I clung to all the present for the promise that it 
closed ; 



When I dipt into the future far as human eye could 
see ; 

Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder that 
would be. 



Digitized by 



94 



LOCKSLBY HALL. 



In the Spring a fuller crimson comes upon the Robin's 
breast ; 

In the Spring the wanton lapwing gets himself another 
crest ; 

In the Spring a livelier iris changes on the burnish'd dove ; 
In the Spring a young man's fancy lightly turns to thoughts 
of love. 

Then her cheek was pale and thinner than should be for 
one so young, 

And her eyes on all my motions with a mute observance 
hung. 

And I said, " My cousin Amy, speak, and speak the truth 
to me, 

Trust me, cousin, all the current of my being sets to thee." 

On her pallid cheek and forehead came a colour and a 
light, 

As I have seen the rosy red flushing in the northern 
night. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 95 

And she turn'd — her bosom shaken with a sudden storm 
of sighs — 

All the spirit deeply dawning in the dark of hazel eyes — 



Saying, " I have hid my feelings, fearing they should do 
me wrong 

Saying, " Dost thou love me, cousin V weeping, " I have 
loved thee long." 

Love took up the glass of Time, and turn'd it in his 

glowing hands ; 
Every moment, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden sands. 



Love took up the harp of Life, and smote on all the 
chords with might ; 

Smote the chord of Self, that, trembling, pass'd in music 
out of sight. 

Many a morning on the moorland did we hear the copses 
ring, 

And her whisper throng'd my pulses with the fullness of 
the Spring. 



Digitized by 



96 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 



Many an evening by the waters did we watch the stately 
ships, 

And our spirits rush'd together at the touching of the hps. 

0 my cousin, shallow-hearted ! O my Amy, mine no 
more ! 

O the dreary, dreary moorland ! O the barren, barren 
shore ! 

Falser than all fancy fathoms, falser than all songs have 
sung, 

Puppet to a father s threat, and servile to a shrewish 
tongue ! 

Is it well to wish thee happy ? — having known me — to 
decline 

On a range of lower feelings and a narrower heart than 
mine ! 

Yet it shall be : thou shalt lower to his level day by day, 
What is fine within thee growing coarse to sympathise 
with clay. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 97 

As the husband is, the wife is : thou art mated with a 
clown, 

And the grossness of his nature will have weight to drag 
thee down. 

He will hold thee, when his passion shall have spent its 
novel force, 

Something better than his dog, a little dearer than his 
horse. 

What is this ? his eyes are heavy : think not they are 

glazed with wine. 
Go to him : it is thy duty : kiss him : take his hand in thine. 

It may be my lord is weary, that his brain is overwrought : 
Soothe him with thy finer fancies, touch him with thy 
lighter thought. 

He will answer to the purpose, easy things to under- 
stand 

Better thou wert dead before me, tho* I slew thee with 
my hand ! 

▼OL. II. h 



Digitized by 



98 LOCKSLEY HALL. 

Better thou and I were lying, hidden from the heart's 
disgrace, 

Roll'd in one another s arms, and silent in a last embrace. 

Cursed be the social wants that sin against the strength 
of youth ! 

Cursed be the social lies that warp us from the living 
truth! 

Cursed be the sickly forms that err from honest Nature s 
rule ! 

Cursed be the gold that gilds the straiten d forehead of 
the fool ! 

Well— tis well that I should bluster !— Hadst thou less 

unworthy proved — 
Would to God— for I had loved thee more than ever 

wife was loved. 

Am I mad, that I should cherish that which bears but 
bitter fruit 1 

I will pluck it from my bosom, tho' my heart be at the 
root. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 99 

Never, tho' my mortal summers to such length of years 
should come 

As the many-winter d crow that leads the clanging rookery 
home. 

Where is comfort ? in division of the records of the 
mind ? 

Can I part her from herself, and love her, as I knew her, 
kind? 

I remember one that perish'd : sweetly did she speak and 
move : 

Such a one do I remember, whom to look at was to love. 

Can I think of her as dead, and love her for the love she 
bore ? 

No— she never loved me truly: love is love for evermore. 

Comfort 1 comfort scorn d of devils ! this is truth the poet 
sings, 

That a sorrows crown of sorrow is remembering happier 
things. 

h 2 

Digitized by Google 



100 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 



Drug thy memories, lest thou learn it, lest thy heart be 
put to proof, 

In the dead unhappy night, and when the rain is on the 



Like a dog, he hunts in dreams, and thou art staring at 
the wall, 

Where the dying night-lamp flickers, and the shadows rise 
and fall. 



Then a hand shall pass before thee, pointing to his drunken 



To thy widow'd marriage-pillows, to the tears that thou 
wilt weep. 



Thou shalt hear the " Never, never," whisper d by the 

phantom years, 
And a song from out the distance in the ringing of thine ears ; 



And an eye shall vex thee, looking ancient kindness on 
thy pain. 

Turn thee, turn thee on thy pillow : get thee to thy rest 



roof. 



sleep, 



again. 




Digitized by 



Google 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 



101 



Nay, but Nature brings thee solace ; for a tender voice 
will cry. 

'Tis a purer life than thine ; a lip to drain thy trouble dry. 



Baby lips will laugh me down : my latest rival brings 
thee rest. 

Baby fingers, waxen touches, press me from the mother's 
breast. 



0, the child too clothes the father with a dearness not 
his due. 

Half is thine and half is his : it will be worthy of the 
two. 



O, I see thee old and formal, fitted to thy petty part, 
With a little hoard of maxims preaching down a 
daughter's heart. 



" They were dangerous guides the feelings — she herself 

was not exempt — 
Truly, she herself had suffer 'd " — Perish in thy self-con- 

tempt ! 



Digitized by 



102 LOCKSLEY HALL. 

Overlive it — lower yet — be happy ! wherefore should 
I care ? 

I myself must mix with action, lest I wither by despair. 



What is that which I should turn to, lighting upon days 
like these ? 

Ev^ry door is barr'd with gold, and opens but to golden 
keys. 

Every gate is throng'd with suitors, all the markets over- 
flow. 

I have but an angry fancy : what is that which I should do ? 



I had been content to perish, falling on the foeman's 
ground, 

When the ranks are rolTd in vapour, and the winds are 
laid with sound. 



But the jingling of the guinea helps the hurt that Honour 

feels, 

And the nations do but murmur, snarling at each other's 
heels. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 



103 



Can I but relive in sadness ? I will turn that earlier page. 
Hide me from my deep emotion, O thou wondrous 
Mother-Age ! 

Make me feel the wild pulsation that I felt before the 
strife, 

When I heard my days before me, and the tumult of my 

life; 

Yearning for the large excitement that the coming years 
would yield, 

Eager-hearted as a boy when first he leaves his father's 
field, 

And at night along the dusky highway near and nearer 
drawn, 

Sees in heaven the light of London flaring like a dreary 
dawn ; 

And his spirit leaps within him to be gone before him then, 
Underneath the light he looks at, in among the throngs 
of men ; 



Digitized by 



104 



LOCKSLEY HALL; 



Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping some- 
thing new : 

That which they have done but earnest of the things that 
they shall do : 

For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see, 
Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder that 
would be ; 

Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails, 
Pilots of the purple twilight, dropping down with costly 
bales ; 

Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rain'd a 
ghastly dew 

From the nations' airy navies grappling in the central 
blue ; 

Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rush- 
ing warm, 

With the standards of the peoples plunging thro' the 
thunder-storm ; 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL, 105 

Till the war-drum throbb'd no longer, and the battle-flags 
were furl'd 

In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world. 



There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm 
in awe, 

And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law. 



So I triumph'd, ere my passion sweeping thro' me left 
me dry, 

Left me with the palsied heart, and left me with the 
jaundiced eye ; 

Eye, to which all order festers, all things here are out of 
joint, 

Science moves, but slowly slowly, creeping on from point 
to point : 



Slowly comes a hungry people, as a lion, creeping 
nigher, 

Glares at one that nods and winks behind a slowly-dying 
fire. 



Digitized by 



106 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 



Yet I doubt not thro' the ages one increasing purpose runs, 
And the thoughts of men are widen'd with the process of 
the suns. 

What is that to him that reaps not harvest of his youth- 
ful joys, 

Tho' the deep heart of existence beat for ever like a boy's 1 

Knowlege comes, but wisdom lingers, and I linger on 
the shore, 

And the individual withers, and the world is more and 
more. 

Knowlege comes, but wisdom lingers, and he bears a 
laden breast, 

Full of sad experience moving toward the stillness of 
his rest. 

Hark, my merry comrades call me, sounding on the 
bugle-horn, 

They to whom my foolish passion were a target for their 
scorn : 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL, 



107 



Shall it not be scorn to me to harp on such a moulder'd 
string ? 

I am shamed thro' all my nature to have loved so slight 
a thing. 

Weakness to be wroth with weakness ! woman's pleasure, 
woman's pain — 

Nature made them blinder motions bounded in a shal- 
lower brain : 

Woman is the lesser man, and all thy passions, match'd 
with mine, 

Are as moonlight unto sunlight, and as water unto wine — 

Here at least, where nature sickens, nothing. Ah, for 
some retreat 

Deep in yonder shining Orient, where my life began to 
beat ; 

Where in wild Mahratta-battle fell my father evil-starred ; 

I was left a trampled orphan, and a selfish uncle's 
ward. 



Digitized by 



108 LOCKSLEY HALL. 

Or to burst all links of habit — there to wander far 
away, 

On from island unto island at the gateways of the day. 

Larger constellations burning, mellow moons and happy 
skies, 

Breadths of tropic shade and palms in cluster, knots of 
Paradise. 

Never comes the trader, never floats an European flag, 
Slides the bird o'er lustrous woodland, droops the trailer 
from the crag ; 

Droops the heavy-blossom'd bower, hangs the heavy- 
fruited tree — 

Summer isles of Eden lying in dark-purple spheres 
of sea. 

There methinks would be enjoyment more than in this 

march of mind, 
In the steamship, in the railway, in the thoughts that 

shake mankind. 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. 109 

There the passions cramp 'd no longer shall have scope 

and breathing-space ; 
I will take some savage woman, she shall rear my dusky race. 

Iron-jointed, supple-sinew'd, they shall dive, and they 
shall run, 

Catch the wild goat by the hair, and hurl their lances in 
the sun ; 

Whistle back the parrot's call, and leap the rainbows of 
the brooks, 

Not with blinded eyesight poring over miserable books 

Fool, again the dream, the fancy ! but I know my words 
are wild, 

But I count the gray barbarian lower than the Christian 
child. 

/, to herd with narrow foreheads, vacant of our glorious 
gains, 

Like a beast with lower pleasures, like a beast with lower 
pains ! 



Digitized by 



110 LOCKSLEY HALL. 

Mated with a squalid savage — what to me were sun or 
clime ? 

I the heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time — 
i 

I that rather held it better men should perish one by 
one, 

Than that earth should stand at gaze like Joshua's moon 
in Ajalon ! 

Not in vain the distance beacons. Forward, forward let 
us range. 

Let the peoples spin for ever down the ringing grooves of 
change. 

Thro' the shadow of the world we sweep into the younger 
day : 

Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay. 

Mother-Age (for mine I knew not) help me as when 
life begun : 

Rift the hills, and roll the waters, flash the lightnings, 
weigh the Sun — 



Digitized by 



LOCKSLEY HALL. HI 

0, I see the crescent promise of my spirit hath not 
set. 

Ancient founts of inspiration well thro' all my fancy yet. 



Howsoever these things be, a long farewell to Locksley 
Hall! 

Now for me the woods may wither, now for me the roof- 
tree fall. 



Comes a vapour from the margin, blackening over heath 
and holt, 

Cramming all the blast before it, in its breast a thunder- 
bolt. 



Let it fall on Locksley Hall, with rain or hail, or fire or 
snow ; 

For the mighty wind arises, roaring seaward, and I go. 



Digitized by 



GODIVA. 



I waited for the train at Coventry ; 
I hung with grooms and porters on the bridge, 
To watch the three tall spires ; and there I shaped 
The city's ancient legend into this : — 

Not only we, the latest seed of Time, 
New men, that in the flying of a wheel 
Cry down the past, not only we, that prate 
Of rights and wrongs, have loved the people weD, 
And loathed to see them overtax'd ; but she 
Did more, and underwent, and overcame, 
The woman of a thousand summers back, 
Godiva, wife to that grim Earl, who ruled 
In Coventry : for when he laid a tax 
Upon his town, and all the mothers brought 



Digitized by 



GODIVA. 



113 



Their children, clamouring, " If we pay, we starve ;" 

She sought her lord, and found him, where he strode 

About the hall, among his dogs, alone, 

His beard a foot before him, and his hair 

A yard behind. She told him of their tears, 

And pray'd him, " If they pay this tax, they starve." 

Whereat he stared, replying, half-amazed, 

" You would not let your little finger ache 

For such as these?" — " But I would die," said she. 

He laugh 'd, and swore by Peter and by Paul : 

Then fillip'd at the diamond in her ear, 

" O ay, ay, ay, you talk ! " — " Alas ! " she said, 

" But prove me what it is I would not do." 

And from a heart, as rough as Esau's hand, 

He answer'd, " Ride you naked thro' the town, 

And I repeal it ;" and nodding, as in scorn, 

He parted, with great strides among his dogs. 

So left alone, the passions of her mind, 
As winds from all the compass shift and blow, 
Made war upon each other for an hour, 
Till pity won. She sent a herald forth, 
And bad him cry, with sound of trumpet, all 

VOL. II. I 



Digitized by 



114 



GODIVA. 



The hard condition ; but that she would loose 
The people : therefore, as they loved her well, 
From then till noon no foot should pace the street, 
No eye look down, she passing ; but that all 
Should keep within, door shut, and window barr'd. 

Then fled she to her inmost bower, and there 
Unclasp 'd the wedded eagles of her belt, 
The grim Earl's gift ; but ever at a breath 
She linger'd, looking like a summer moon 
Half-dipt in cloud : anon she shook her head, 
And shower'd the rippled ringlets to her knee ; 
Unclad herself in haste ; adown the stair 
Stole on ; and, like a creeping sunbeam, slid 
From pillar unto pillar, until she reach'd 
The gateway ; there she found her palfrey trapt 
In purple blazon'd with armorial gold. 

Then she rode forth, clothed on with chastity : 
The deep air listen 'd round her as she rode, 
And all the low wind hardly breathed for fear. 
The little wide-mouth'd heads upon the spout 
Had cunning eyes to see : the barking cur 
Made her cheek flame : her palfrey's footfall shot 



Digitized by 



GODIVA. 115 

Light horrors thro' her pulses : the blind walls 
Were full of chinks and holes ; and overhead 
Fantastic gables, crowding, stared : but she 
Not less thro' all bore up, till, last, she saw 
The white-flower'd elder-thicket from the field 
Gleam thro' the Gothic archways in the wall. 

Then she rode back, clothed on with chastity : 
And one low churl, compact of thankless earth, 
The fatal byword of all years to come, 
Boring a little auger-hole in fear, 
•Peep'd — but his eyes, before they had their will, 
Were shrivell'd into darkness in his head, 
And dropt before him. So the Powers, who wait 
On noble deeds, cancelTd a sense misused ; 
And she, that knew not, pass'd : and all at once, 
With twelve great shocks of sound, the shameless noon 
Was clash'd and hammer'd from a hundred towers, 
One after one : but even then she gain'd 
Her bower ; whence reissuing, robed and crown 'd, 
To meet her lord, she took the tax away, 
And built herself an everlasting name. 

i 2 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



A still small voice spake unto me, 
" Thou art so full of misery, 
Were it not better not to be ?" 

Then to the still small voice I said ; 
" Let me not cast in endless shade 
What is so wonderfully made." 

To which the voice did urge reply ; 

" To-day I saw the dragon-fly 

Come from the wells where he did lie. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOKWS. 117 

" An inner impulse rent the veil 
Of his old husk : from head to tail 
Came out clear plates of sapphire mail. 

" He dried his wings : like gauze they grew : 
Thro' crofts and pastures wet with dew 
A living flash of light he flew." 

I said, " When first the world began, 
Young Nature thro' five cycles ran, 
And in the sixth she moulded man. 

" She gave him mind, the lordliest 
Proportion, and, above the rest, 
Dominion in the head and breast." 

Thereto the silent voice replied ; 

" Self-blinded are you by your pride : 

Look up thro' night : the world is wide. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 

" This truth within thy mind rehearse, 

That in a boundless universe 

Is boundless better, boundless worse. 

" Think you this mould of hopes and fears 
Could find no statelier than his peers 
In yonder hundred million spheres ? " 

It spake, moreover, in my mind : 

" Tho' thou wert scatter'd to the wind, 

Yet is there plenty of the kind." 

Then did my response clearer fall : 
" No compound of this earthly ball 
Is like another, all in all." 

To which he answer'd scoffingly ; 
" Good soul ! suppose I grant it thee, 
Who'll weep for thy deficiency 1 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



119 



" Or will one beam be less intense, 

When thy peculiar difference 

Is canceled in the world of sense ?" 

1 would have said, " Thou canst not know," 
But my full heart, that work'd below, 
Rain'd thro' my sight its overflow. 

Again the voice spake unto me : 
" Thou art so steep 'd in misery, 
Surely 'twere better not to be. 

" Thine anguish will not let thee sleep, 

Nor any train of reason keep : 

Thou canst not think, but thou wilt weep." 

I said, " The years with change advance : 
If I make dark my countenance, 
I shut my life from happier chance. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 

" Some turn this sickness yet might take, 
Ev'n yet." But he : " What drug can make 
A wither'd palsy cease to shake ? " 

I wept, " Tho' I should die, I know 
That all about the thorn will blow 
In tufts of rosy-tinted snow ; 

" And men, thro' novel spheres of thought 
Still moving after truth long sought, 
Will learn new things when I am not." 

" Yet," said the secret voice, " some time, 
Sooner or later, will gray prime 
Make thy grass hoar with early rime. 

" Not less swift souls that yearn for light, 

Rapt after heaven's starry flight, 

Would sweep the tracts of day and night. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



121 



" Not less the bee would range her cells, 
The furzy prickle fire the dells, 
The foxglove cluster dappled bells." 

I said that " all the years invent ; 
Each month is various to present 
The world with some development. 

" Were this not well, to bide mine hour, 
Tho' watching from a ruin'd tower 
How grows the day of human power 1" 

" The highest-mounted mind," he said, 
" Still sees the sacred morning spread 
The silent summit overhead. 

" Will thirty seasons render plain 
Those lonely lights that still remain, 
Just breaking over land and main ? 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 

" Or make that morn, from his cold crown 
And crystal silence creeping down, 
Flood with full daylight glebe and town ? 

" Forerun thy peers, thy time, and let 
Thy feet, millenniums hence, be set 
In midst of knowlege, dream'd not yet. 

" Thou hast not gain'd a real height, 
Nor art thou nearer to the light, 
Because the scale is infinite. 

" 'Twere better not to breathe or speak, 
Than cry for strength, remaining weak, 
And seem to find, but still to seek. 

" Moreover, but to seem to find 

Asks what thou lackest, thought resign'd, 

A healthy frame, a quiet mind." 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



123 



I said, " When I am gone away, 
' He dared not tarry,' men will say, 
Doing dishonour to my clay." 

" This is more vile," he made reply, 

" To breathe and loathe, to live and sigh, 

Than once from dread of pain to die. 

" Sick art thou — a divided will 
Still heaping on the fear of ill 
The fear of men, a coward still. 

" Do men love thee ? Art thou so bound 
To men, that how thy name may sound 
Will vex thee lying underground ? 

" The memory of the wither'd leaf 
In endless time is scarce more brief 
Than of the garner'd Autumn-sheaf. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" Go, vexed Spirit, sleep in trust ; 
The right ear, that is fill'd with dust, 
Hears little of the false or just." 

" Hard task, to pluck resolve," I cried, 
" From emptiness and the waste wide 
Of that abyss, or scornful pride ! 

« Nay — rather yet that I could raise 
One hope that warm'd me in the days 
While still I yearn'd for human praise. 

" When, wide in soul and bold of tongue, 
Among the tents I paused and sung, 
The distant battle flash'd and rung. 

" I sung the joyful Psean clear, 
And, sitting, burnish M without fear 
The brand, the buckler, and the spear — 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 125 

" Waiting to strive a happy strife, 
To war with falsehood to the knife, 
And not to lose the good of life — 

" Some hidden principle to move, 

To put together, part and prove, 

And mete the bounds of hate and love — 

" As far as might be, to carve out 
Free space for every human doubt, 
That the whole mind might orb about — 

" To search thro' all I felt or saw, 
The springs of life, the depths of awe, • 
And reach the law within the law : 

" At least, not rotting like a weed, 
But, having sown some generous seed, 
Fruitful of further thought and deed, 



Digitized by 



126 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" To pass, when Life her light withdraws, 
Not void of righteous self-applause, 
Nor in a merely selfish cause — 

" In some good cause, not in mine own, 
To perish, wept for, honour'd, known, 
And like a warrior overthrown ; 

" Whose eyes are dim with glorious tears, 
When, soiTd with noble dust, he hears 
His country's war-song thrill his ears : 

" Then dying of a mortal stroke, 
What time the foeman's line is broke, 
And all the war is roll'd in smoke." 

" Yea ! " said the voice, " thy dream was good, 
While thou abodest in the bud. 
It was the stirring of the blood. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 127 

" If Nature put not forth her power 
About the opening of the flower, 
Who is it that could live an hour ? 

" Then comes the check, the change, the fall. 
Pain rises up, old pleasures pall. 
There is one remedy for all. 

" Yet hadst thou, thro' enduring pain, 
Link'd month to month with such a chain 
Of knitted purport, all were vain. 

" Thou hadst not between death and birth 
Dissolved the riddle of the earth. 
So were thy labour little-worth. 

" That men with knowlege merely play'd, 
I told thee — hardly nigher made, 
Tho' scaling slow from grade to grade ; 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 

" Much less this dreamer, deaf and blind, 
Named man, may hope some truth to find, 
That bears relation to the mind. 

" For every worm beneath the moon 
Draws different threads, and late and soon 
Spins, toiling out his own cocoon. 

" Cry, faint not : either Truth is born 
Beyond the polar gleam forlorn, 
Or in the gateways of the morn. 

" Cry, faint not, climb : the summits slope 
Beyond the furthest flights of hope, 
Wrapt in dense cloud from base to cope. 

" Sometimes a little corner shines, 

As over rainy mist inclines 

A gleaming crag with belts of pines. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



129 



" I will go forward, sayest thou, 
I shall not fail to find her now. 
Look up, the fold is on her brow. 

" If straight thy track, or if oblique, 

Thou know'st not. Shadows thou dost strike, 

Embracing cloud, Ixion-like ; 

" And owning but a little more 
Than beasts, abidest lame and poor, 
Calling thyself a little lower 

" Than angels. Cease to wail and brawl ! 
Why inch by inch to darkness crawl ? 
There is one remedy for all. 

" O dull, one-sided voice," said I, 
" Wilt thou make everything a lie, 
To flatter me that I may die 1 

TOL. II. K 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICBS. 

" I know that age to age succeeds, 
Blowing a noise of tongues and deeds, 
A dust of systems and of creeds. 

" I cannot hide that some have striven, 
Achieving calm, to whom was given 
The joy that mixes man with Heaven 

" Who, rowing hard against the stream, 
Saw distant gates of Eden gleam, 
And did not dream it was a dream ; 

" But heard, by secret transport led, 
Ev'n in the charnels of the dead, 
The murmur of the fountain-head — 

" Which did accomplish their desire, 
Bore and forbore, and did not tire, 
Like Stephen, an unquenched fire 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 131 

" He heeded not reviling tones, 

Nor sold his heart to idle moans, 

Tho' cursed and scorn'd, and bruised with stones : 

" But looking upward, full of grace, 
He pray'd, and from a happy place 
God's glory smote him on the face." 

The sullen answer slid betwixt : 

" Not that the grounds of hope Were fix'd, 

The elements were kindlier mix'd." 

I said, " I toil beneath the curse, 
But, knowing not the universe, 
I fear to slide from bad to worse, 

" And that, in seeking to undo 
One riddle, and to find the true 
I knit a hundred others new : 
k 2 



Digitized by 



132 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" Or that this anguish fleeting hence, 
Unmanacled from bonds of sense, 
Be fix'd and froz'n to permanence : 

" For I go, weak from suffering here ; 
Naked I go, and void of cheer : 
What is it that I may not fear ? " 

" Consider well," the voice replied, 

" His face, that two hours since hath died; 

Wilt thou find passion, pain or pride ? 

" Will he obey when one commands 1 
Or answer should one press his hands ? 
He answers not, nor understands. 

" His palms are folded on his breast : 
There is no other thing express'd 
But long disquiet merged in rest. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 133 

" His lips are very mild and meek : 
Though one should smite him on the cheek, 
And on the mouth, he will not speak. 

" His little daughter, whose sweet face 
He kiss'd, taking his last embrace, 
Becomes dishonour to her race — 

" His sons grow up that bear his name, 
Some grow to honour, some to shame, — 
But he is chill to praise or blame. 

" He will not hear the north-wind rave, 
Nor, moaning, household shelter crave 
From winter rains that beat his grave. 

" High up the vapours fold and swim : 
About him broods the twilight dim : 
The place he knew forgetteth him." 



Digitized by 



134 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" If all be dark, vague voice," I said, 

" These things are wrapt in doubt and dread, 

Nor canst thou show the dead are dead. 

" The sap dries up : the plant declines. 

A deeper tale my heart divines. 

Know I not Death ? the outward signs ? 

" I found him when my years were few ; 
A shadow on the graves I knew, 
And darkness in the village yew. 

" From grave to grave the shadow crept : 
In her still place the morning wept : 
Touch'd by his feet the daisy slept. 

" The simple senses crown'd his head : 
' Omega ! thou art Lord/ they said, 
' We find no motion in the dead.' 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



135 



" Why, if man rot in dreamless ease, 
Should that plain fact, as taught by these, 
Not make him sure that he shall cease ? 

" Who forged that other influence, 

That heat of inward evidence, 

By which he doubts against the sense ? 

" He owns the fatal gift of eyes, 
That read his spirit blindly wise, 
Not simple as a thing that dies. 

" Here sits he shaping wings to fly : 
His heart forebodes a mystery : 
He names the name Eternity. 

" That type of Perfect in his mind 
In Nature can he nowhere find. 
He sows himself on every wind. 



Digitized by 



136 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" He seems to hear a Heavenly Friend, 
And thro' thick veils to apprehend 
A labour working to an end. 

" The end and the beginning vex 
His reason : many things perplex, 
With motions, checks, and counterchecks. 

" He knows a baseness in his blood 

At such strange war with something good, 

He may not do the thing he would. 

" Heaven opens inward, chasms yawn. 
Vast images in glimmering dawn, 
Half shown, are broken and withdrawn. 

" Ah ! sure within him and without, 
Could his dark wisdom find it out, 
There must be answer to his doubt. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 137 

" But thou canst answer not again. 
With thine own weapon art thou slain, 
Or thou wilt answer but in vain. 

" The doubt would rest, I dare not solve. 
In the same circle we revolve. 
Assurance only breeds resolve." 

As when a billow, blown against, 

Falls back, the voice with which I fenced 

A little ceased, but recommenced. 

" Where wert thou when thy father play'd 
In his free field, and pastime made, 
A merry boy in sun and shade ? 

" A merry boy they called him then. 
He sat upon the knees of men 
In days that never come again. 



Digitized by 



138 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" Before the little ducts began 

To feed thy bones with lime, and ran 

Their course, till thou wert also man : 

" Who took a wife, who rear'd his race, 
Whose wrinkles gather'd on his face, 
Whose troubles number with his days : 

" A life of nothings, nothing-worth, 
From that first nothing ere his birth 
To that last nothing under earth ! " 

" These words," I said, " are like the rest, 
No certain clearness, but at best 
A vague suspicion of the breast : 

" But if I grant, thou might'st defend 
The thesis which thy words intend — 
That to begin implies to end ; 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



139 



" Yet how should I for certain hold, 
Because my memory is so cold, 
That I first was in human mould ? 

" I cannot make this matter plain, 
But I would shoot, howe'er in vain, 
A random arrow from the brain. 

" It may be that no life is found, 
Which only to one engine bound 
Falls off, but cycles always round. 

" As old mythologies relate, 
Some draught of Lethe might await 
The slipping thro' from state to state. 

" As here we find in trances, men 
Forget the dream that happens then, 
Until they fall in trance again. 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



" So might we, if our state were such 

As one before, remember much, 

For those two likes might meet and touch. 

" But, if I lapsed from nobler place, 
Some legend of a fallen race 
Alone might hint of my disgrace ; 

" Some vague emotion of delight 

In gazing up an Alpine height, 

Some yearning toward the lamps of night. 

" Or if thro' lower lives I came — 
Tho' all experience past became 
Consolidate in mind and frame — 

" I might forget my weaker lot ; 
For is not our first year forgot ? 
The haunts of memory echo not. 



Digitized by 



THB TWO VOICBS. 141 

" And men, whose reason long was blind, 
From cells of madness unconfined, 
Oft lose whole years of darker mind. 

" Much more, if first I floated free, 
As naked essence, must I be 
Incompetent of memory : 

" For memory dealing but with time, 
And he with matter, could she climb 
Beyond her own material prime 1 

" Moreover, something is or seems, 
That touches me with mystic gleams, 
Like glimpses of forgotten dreams — 

" Of something felt, like something here ; 
Of something done, I know not where ; 
Such as no language may declare. 1 ' 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 

The still voice laugh'd. " I talk," said he, 
" Not with thy dreams. Suffice it thee 
Thy pain is a reality." 

" But thou," said I, "hast miss'd thy mark, 
Who sought'st to wreck my mortal ark, 
By making all the horizon dark. 

" Why not set forth, if I should do 
This rashness, that which might ensue 
With this old soul in organs new ? 

" Whatever crazy sorrow saith, 

No life that breathes with human breath 

Has ever truly long'd for death. 

" 'Tis life, whereof our nerves are scant, 
Oh life, not death, for which we pant ; 
More life, and fuller, that I want." 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 143 

I ceas'd, and sat as one forlorn. 
Then said the voice, in quiet scorn, 
" Behold, it is the Sabbath morn." 

And I arose, and I released 

The casement, and the light increased 

With freshness in the dawning east. 

Like soften'd airs that blowing steal, 
When meres begin to uncongeal, 
The sweet church bells began to peal. 

On to God's house the people prest. 
Passing the place where each must rest, 
Each enterd like a welcome guest. 

One walk'd between his wife and child, 
With measur'd footfall firm and mild, 
And now and then he gravely smiled. 



Digitized by 



144 



THE TWO VOICES. 



The prudent partner of his blood 
Lean'd on him, faithful, gentle, good, 
Wearing the rose of womanhood, 

And in their double love secure, 
The little maiden walk'd demure, 
Pacing with downward eyelids pure. 

These three made unity so sweet, 
My frozen heart began to beat, 
Remembering its ancient heat. 

I blest them, and they wander'd on : 
I spoke, but answer came there none : 
The dull and bitter voice was gone. 

A second voice was at mine ear, 

A little whisper silver-clear, 

A murmur, " Be of better cheer." 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 



145 



As from some blissful neighbourhood, 

A notice faintly understood, 

" I see the end, and know the good." 

A little hint to solace woe, 

A hint, a whisper breathing low, 

" I may not speak of what I know." 

Like an iEolian harp that wakes 

No certain air, but overtakes 

Far thought with music that it makes. 

Such seem'd the whisper at my side : 

" What is it thou knowest, sweet voice ?" I cried. 

" A hidden hope," the voice replied : 

So heavenly-toned, that in that hour 
From out my sullen heart a power 
Broke, like the rainbow from the shower, 
vol. n. l 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 

To feel, altho' no tongue can prove, 
That every cloud, that spreads above 
And veileth love, itself is love. 

And forth into the fields I went, 
And Nature's living motion lent 
The pulse of hope to discontent. 

I wonder'd at the bounteous hours, 
The slow result of winter showers : 
You scarce could see the grass for flowers. 

I wonder'd, while I paced along. 

The woods were fiU'd so full with song, 

There seem'd no room for sense of wrong. 

So variously seem'd all things wrought, 
I marvell'd how the mind was brought 
To anchor by one gloomy thought ; 



Digitized by 



THE TWO VOICES. 147 

And wherefore rather I made choice 
To commune with that barren voice, 
Than him that said, " Rejoice ! rejoice ! " 

1838. 



l 2 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



PROLOGUE. 
O, Lady Flora, let me speak : 

A pleasant hour has past away 
While, dreaming on your damask cheek, 

The dewy sister-eyelids lay. 
As by the lattice you reclined, 

I went thro' many wayward moods 
To see you dreaming — and, behind, 

A summer crisp with shining woods. 
And I too dream'd, until at last 

Across my fancy, brooding warm, 
The reflex of a legend past, 

And loosely settled into form. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 

And would you have the thought I had, 

And see the vision that I saw, 
So take the broidery-frame, and add 

A crimson to the quaint Macaw, 
And I will tell it. Turn your face, 

Nor look with that too-earnest eye — 
The rhymes are dazzled from their place, 

And order'd words asunder fly. 



THE SLEEPING PALACE, 

The varying year with blade and sheaf 

Clothes and reclothes the happy plains ; 
Here rests the sap within the leaf, 

Here stays the blood along the veins. 
Faint shadows, vapours lightly curl'd, 

Faint murmurs from the meadows come, 
Like hints and echoes of the world 

To spirits folded in the womb. 



Digitized by 



150 



THE DAY -DREAM. 



Soft lustre bathes the range of urns 

On every slanting terrace-lawn. 
The fountain to his place returns 

Deep in the garden lake withdrawn. 
Here droops the banner on the tower, 

On the hall-hearths the festal fires, 
The peacock in his laurel bower, 

The parrot in his gilded wires. 

Roof-haunting martins warm their eggs: 

In these, in those the life is stay'd. 
The mantles from the golden pegs 

Droop sleepily: no sound is made, 
Not even of a gnat that sings. 

More like a picture seemeth all 
Than those old portraits of old kings, 

That watch the sleepers from the wall. 

Here sits the Butler with a flask 

Between his knees, half-drain'd ; and there 
The wrinkled steward at his task, 

The maid-of-honour blooming fair : 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 151 

The page has caught her hand in his : 

Her lips are sever'd as to speak : 
His own are pouted to a kiss : 

The blush is fix'd upon her cheek. 

Till all the hundred summers pass, 

The beams, that thro' the Oriel shine, 
Make prisms in every carven glass, 

And beaker brimm'd with noble wine. 
Each baron at the banquet sleeps, 

Grave faces gatherd in a ring. 
His state the king reposing keeps. 

He must have been a jolly king. 

All round a hedge upshoots, and shows 

At distance like a little wood ; 
Thorns, ivies, woodbine, misletoes, 

And grapes with bunches red as blood ; 
All creeping plants, a wall of green 

Close-matted, bur and brake and briar, 
And glimpsing over these, just seen, 

High up, the topmost palace-spire. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



When will the hundred summers die, 

And thought and time be born again, 
And newer knowlege, drawing nigh, 

Bring truth that sways the soul of men ? 
Here all things in their place remain, 

As all were order'd, ages since. 
Come, Care and Pleasure, Hope and Pain, 

And bring the fated fairy Prince. 



THE SLEEPING BEAUTY. 
Year after year unto her teet, 

She lying on her couch alone, 
Across the purpled coverlet, 

The maiden's jet-black hair has grown, 
On either side her tranced form 

Forth streaming from a braid of pearl : 
The slumbrous light is rich and warm, 

And moves not on the rounded curl. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



153 



The silk star-broider d coverlid 

Unto her limbs itself doth mould 
Languidly ever ; and, amid 

Her full black ringlets downward roll'd, 
Glows forth each softly-shadow'd arm 

With bracelets of the diamond bright : 
Her constant beauty doth inform 

Stillness with love, and day with light. 

She sleeps : her breathings are not heard 

In palace chambers far apart. 
The fragrant tresses are not stirr'd 

That lie upon her charmed heart. 
She sleeps : on either hand upswells 

The gold-fringed pillow lightly prest : 
She sleeps, nor dreams, but ever dwells 

A perfect form in perfect rest c 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM, 



THE ARRIVAL. 

All precious things, discover'd late, 

To those that seek them issue forth ; 
For love in sequel works with fate, 

And draws the veil from hidden worth 
He travels far from other skies — 

His mantle glitters on the rocks — 
A fairy Prince, with joyful eyes, 

And lighter-footed than the fox. 

The bodies and the bones of those 

That strove in other days to pass, 
Are wither'd in the thorny close, 

Or scatter'd blanching in the grass. 
He gazes on the silent dead : 

" They perish'd in their daring deeds.' 
This proverb flashes thro' his head, 

" The man y fail : the one succeeds." 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



155 



He comes, scarce knowing what he seeks : 

He breaks the hedge : he enters there : 
The colour flies into his cheeks : 

He trusts to light on something fair ; 
For all his life the charm did talk 

About his path, and hover near 
With words of promise in his walk, 

And whisper d voices in his ear. 

More close and close his footsteps wind ; 

The magic music in his heart 
Beats quick and quicker, till he find 

The quiet chamber far apart. 
His spirit flutters like a lark, 

He stoops — to kiss her — on his knee. 
" Love, if thy tresses be so dark, 

How dark those hidden eyes must be ! " 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



THE REVIVAL. 
A touch, a kiss ! the charm was snapt. 

There rose a noise of striking clocks, 
And feet that ran, and doors that clapt, 

And barking dogs, and crowing cocks. 
A fuller light illumined all, 

A breeze thro* all the garden swept, 
A sudden hubbub shook the hall, 

And sixty feet the fountain leapt. 

The hedge broke in, the banner blew, 

The butler drank, the steward scrawl'd, 
The fire shot up, the martin flew, 

The parrot scream'd, the peacock squall'd, 
The maid and page renew'd their strife, 

The palace bang'd, and buzz'd and clackt, 
And all the long pent stream of life 

Dash'd downward in a cataract. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



157 



And last of all the king awoke, 

And in his chair himself uprear'd, 
And yawn'd, and rubb'd his face, and spoke, 

" By holy rood, a royal beard ! 
How say you ? we have slept, my lords. 

My beard has grown into my lap." 
The barons swore, with many words, 

'Twas but an after-dinner's nap. 

" Pardy," return'd the king, " but still 

My joints are something stiff or so. 
My lord, and shall we pass the bill 

I mention 'd half an hour ago ? " 
The chancellor, sedate and vain, 

In courteous words return'd reply ; 
But dallied with his golden chain, 

And, smiling, put the question by. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



THE DEPARTURE. 
And on her lover's arm she leant, 

And round her waist she felt it fold, 
And far across the hills they went 

In that new world which is the old : 
Across the hills, and far away 

Beyond their utmost purple rim, 
And deep into the dying day 

The happy princess follow'd him. 

" I'd sleep another hundred years, 

0 love, for such another kiss 
" 0 wake for ever, love," she hears, 

" 0 love, 'twas such as this and this." 
And o'er them many a sliding star, 

And many a merry wind was borne, 
And, stream'd thro' many a golden bai^ 

The twilight melted into morn. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



159 



" O eyes long laid in happy sleep !" 

" 0 happy sleep, that lightly fled !" 
" O happy kiss, that woke thy sleep !" 

" 0 love, thy kiss would wake the dead !" 
And o'er them many a flowing range 

Of vapour buoy'd the crescent-bark, 
And, rapt thro' many a rosy change, 

The twilight died into the dark. 

" A hundred summers ! can it be ? 

And whither goest thou, tell me where V 1 
" 0 seek my father's court with me, 

For there are greater wonders there." 
And o'er the hills, and far away 

Beyond their utmost purple rim, 
Beyond the night, across the day, 

Thro' all the world she follow'd him. 



Digitized by Google 



THE DAY DREAM. 



MORAL. 

So, Lady Flora, take my lay, 

And if you find no moral there, 
Go look in any glass and say, 

What moral is in being fair. 
Oh, to what uses shall we put 

The wildweed-flower that simply blows I 
And is there any moral shut 

Within the bosom of the rose ? 

But any man that walks the mead, 

In bud or blade, or bloom, may find, 
According as his humours lead, 

A meaning suited to his mind. 
And liberal applications lie 

In Art like Nature, dearest friend ; 
So 'twere to cramp its use, if I 

Should hook it to some useful end. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



161 



L'ENVOI. 

You shake your head. A random string 

Your finer female sense offends. 
Well — were it not a pleasant thing 

To fall asleep with all one's friends ; 
To pass with all our social ties 

To silence from the paths of men ; 
And every hundred years to rise 

And learn the world, and sleep again ; 
To sleep thro* terms of mighty wars, 

And wake on science grown to more, 
On secrets of the brain, the stars, 

As wild as aught of fairy lore ; 
And all that else the years will show, 

The Poet-forms of stronger hours, 
The vast Republics that may grow, 

The Federations and the Powers ; 

VOL. ii. v M 



Digitized by 



162 THE DAY-DREAM. 

Titanic forces taking birth 

In divers seasons, divers climes ; 

For we are Ancients of the earth, 
And in the morning of the times. 

So sleeping, so aroused from sleep 
Thro* sunny decads new and strange, 

Or gay quinquenniads would we reap 
The flower and quintessence of change. 

Ah, yet would I — and would I might ! 

So much your eyes my fancy take — 
Be still the first to leap to light 

That I might kiss those eyes awake ! 
For, am I right or am I wrong, 

To choose your own you did not care ; 
You'd have my moral from the song, 

And I will take my pleasure there : 
And, am I right or am I wrong, 

My fancy, ranging thro' and thro', 
To search a meaning for the song, 

Perforce will still revert to you ; 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 163 



Nor finds a closer truth than this 
All-graceful head, so richly curl'd, 

And evermore a costly kiss 
The prelude to some brighter world. 



For since the time when Adam first 

Embraced his Eve in happy hour, 
And every bird of Eden burst 

In carol, every bud to flower, 
What eyes, like thine, have waken'd hopes ? 

What lips, like thine, so sweetly join'd ? 
Where on the double rosebud droops 

The fullness of the pensive mind ; 
The pensive mind that, self-involved, 

Yet sleeps a dreamless sleep to me ; 
A sleep by kisses undissolved, 

Which lets thee neither hear nor see : 
But break it. In the name of wife, 

And in the rights that name may give, 
Are clasp'd the moral of thy life, 

And that for which I care to live. 



Digitized by 



THE DAY-DREAM. 



EPILOGUE. 

So, Lady Flora, take my lay, 

And, if you find a meaning there, 
0 whisper to your glass, and say, 

" What wonder, if he thinks me fair ?" 
What wonder I was all unwise, 

To shape the song for your delight 
Like long-tail'd birds of Paradise, 

That float thro' Heaven, and cannot light ? 
Or old-world trains, upheld at court 

By Cupid-boys of blooming hue — 
But take it— earnest wed with sport, 

And either sacred unto you. 



Digitized by 



AMPHION. 



My father left a park to me, 

But it is wild and barren, 
A garden too with scarce a tree 

And waster than a warren : 
Yet say the neighbours when they call, 

It is not bad but good land, 
And in it is the germ of all 

That grows within the woodland . 

O had I lived when song was great 

In days of old Amphion, 
And ta'en my fiddle to the gate, 

Nor cared for seed or scion ! 



Digitized by 



AMPHION. 



And had I lived when song was great, 
And legs of trees were limber, 

And ta'en my fiddle to the gate, 
And fiddled in the timber ! 

'Tis said he had a tuneful tongue, 

Such happy intonation, 
Wherever he sat down and sung 

He left a small plantation ; 
Wherever in a lonely grove 

He set up his forlorn pipes, 
The gouty oak began to move, 

And flounder into hornpipes. 

The mountain stirr'd its bushy crown, 

And, as tradition teaches, 
Young ashes pirouetted down 

Coquetting with young beeches ; 
And briony-vine and ivy-wreath 

Ran forward to his rhyming, 
And from the valleys underneath 

Came little copses climbing. 



Digitized by 



AMPH10N. 



167 



The birch-tree swang her fragrant hair, 

The bramble cast her berry, 
The gin within the juniper 

Began to make him merry. 
The poplars, in long order due, 

With cypress promenaded, 
The shock-head willows two and two 

By rivers gallopaded. 

Came wet-shod alder from the wave, 

Came yews, a dismal coterie ; 
Each pluck'd his one foot from the grave, 

Poussetting with a sloe-tree : 
Old elms came breaking from the vine, 

The vine stream 'd out to follow, 
And, sweating rosin, plump'd the pine 

From many a cloudy hollow. 

And wasn't it a sight to see, 
When, ere his song was ended, 

Like some great landslip, tree by tree, 
The country-side descended ; 



Digitized by 



AMPHION. 



And shepherds from the mountain-eaves 
Look'd down, half-pleased, half-frightened, 

As dash'd about the drunken leaves 
The random sunshine lightend ! 

Oh, nature first was fresh to men, 

And wanton without measure ; 
So youthful and so flexile then, 

You moved her at your pleasure. 
Twang out, my fiddle ! shake the twigs ! 

And make her dance attendance ; 
Blow, flute, and stir the stiff-set sprigs, 

And scirrhous roots and tendons. 

'Tis vain ! in such a brassy age 

I could not move a thistle ; 
The very sparrows in the hedge 

Scarce answer to my whistle ; 
Or at the most, when three-parts-sick 

With straniming and with scraping, 
A jackass heehaws from the rick, 

The passive oxen gaping. 



Digitized by 



AMPHION. 



169 



But what is that I hear ? a sound 

Like sleepy counsel pleading : 
O Lord ! — 'tis in my neighbour's ground, 

The modern Muses reading. 
They read Botanic Treatises, 

And Works on Gardening thro' there, 
And Methods of transplanting trees, 

To look as if they grew there. 

The wither'd Misses ! how they prose 

O'er books of travelPd seamen, 
And show you slips of all that grows 

From England to Van Diemen. 
They read in arbours clipp'd and cut, 

And alleys, faded places, 
By squares of tropic summer shut 

And warm'd in crystal cases. 

But these, though fed with careful dirt, 
Are neither green nor sappy ; 

Half-conscious of the garden-squirt, 
The poor things look unhappy. 



Digitized by 



AMPHION. 



Better to me the meanest weed 
That blows upon its mountain, 

The vilest herb that runs to seed 
Beside its native fountain. 

And I must work thro 1 months of toil, 

And years of cultivation, 
Upon my proper patch of soil 

To grow my own plantation. 
I'll take the showers as they fall, 

I will not vex my bosom, 
Enough if at the end of all 

A little garden blossom. 



Digitized by 



ST. AGNES. 



Deep on the convent-roof the snows 

Are sparkling to the moon : 
My breath to heaven like vapour goes : 

May my soul follow soon ! 
The shadows of the convent-towers 

Slant down the snowy sward, 
Still creeping with the creeping hours 

That lead me to my Lord : 
Make Thou my spirit pure and clear 

As are the frosty skies, 
Or this first snowdrop of the year 

That in my bosom lies. 



Digitized by 



ST. AGNES. 



As these white robes are soiled and dark, 

To yonder shining ground ; 
As this pale taper's earthly spark, 

To yonder argent round ; 
So shows my soul before the Lamb, 

My spirit before Thee ; 
So in mine earthly house I am, 

To that I hope to be. 
Break up the heavens, O Lord ! and far, 

Thro' all yon starlight keen, 
Draw me, thy bride, a glittering star, 

In raiment white and clean. 

in. 

He lifts me to the golden doors ; 

The flashes come and go ; 
All heaven bursts her starry floors, 

And strows her lights below, 
And deepens on and up ! the gates 

Roll back, and far within 
For me the Heavenly Bridegroom waits, 

To make me pure of sin. 



Digitized by 



ST. AGNES. 



The sabbaths of Eternity, 

One sabbath deep and wide — 

A light upon the shining sea — 
The Bridegroom with his bride 



SIR GALAHAD. 



My good blade carves the casques of men, 

My tough lance thrusteth sure, 
My strength is as the strength of ten, 

Because ray heart is pure. 
The shattering trumpet shrilleth high, 

The hard brands shiver on the steel, 
The splintered spear-shafts crack and fly, 

The horse and rider reel : 
They reel, they roll in clanging lists, 

And when the tide of combat stands, 
Perfume and flowers fall in showers, 

That lightly rain from ladies' hands. 



Digitized by 



SIR GALAHAD. 



175 



How sweet are looks that ladies bend 

On whom their favours fall ! 
For them I battle till the end, 

To save from shame and thrall : 
But all my heart is drawn above, 

My knees are bow'd in crypt and shrine : 
I never felt the kiss of love, 

Nor maiden's hand in mine. 
More bounteous aspects on me beam, 

Me mightier transports move and thrill ; 
So keep I fair thro' faith and prayer 

A virgin heart in work and will. 

in. 

When down the stormy crescent goes, 

A light before me swims, 
Between dark stems the forest glows, 

I hear a noise of hymns : 
Then by some secret shrine I ride ; 

I hear a voice, but none are there ; 
The stalls are void, the doors are wide, 

The tapers burning fair. 



Digitized by 



SIR GALAHAD. 



Fair gleams the snowy altar-cloth, 
The silver vessels sparkle clean, 

The shrill bell rings, the censer swings, 
And solemn chaunts resound between. 

IV. 

Sometimes on lonely mountain-meres 

I find a magic bark ; 
I leap on board : no helmsman steers : 

I float till all is dark. 
A gentle sound, an awful light ! 

Three angels bear the holy Grail : 
With folded feet, in stoles of white, 

On sleeping wings they sail. 
Ah, blessed vision ! blood of God ! 

My spirit beats her mortal bars, 
As down dark tides the glory slides, 

And star-like mingles with the stars. 

v. 

When on my goodly charger borne 

Thro' dreaming towns I go, 
The cock crows ere the Christmas morn, 

The streets are dumb with snow. 



Digitized by 



SIR GALAHAD. 



177 



The tempest crackles on the leads, 

And, ringing, spins from brand and mail ; 
But o'er the dark a glory spreads, 

And gilds the driving hail. 
I leave the plain, I climb the height : 

No branchy thicket shelter yields ; 
But blessed forms in whistling storms 

Fly o'er waste fens and windy fields. 

VI. 

A maiden knight — to me is given 

Such hope, I know not fear ; 
I yearn to breathe the airs of heaven 

That often meet me here. 
I muse on joy that will not cease, 

Pure spaces clothed in living beams, 
Pure lilies of eternal peace, 

Whose odours haunt my dreams ; 
And, stricken by an angel's hand, 

This mortal armour that I wear, 
This weight and size, this heart and eyes, 

Are touch'd, are turn'd to finest air. 

VOL. II. n 



Digitized by 



178 



SIR GALAHAD. 



The clouds are broken in the sky, 

And thro' the mountain-walls 
A rolling organ-harmony 

Swells up, and shakes and falls. 
Then move the trees, the copses nod, 

Wings flutter, voices hover clear : 
" O just and faithful knight of God ! 

Ride on ! the prize is near." 
So pass I hostel, hall, and grange ; 

By bridge and ford, by park and pale, 
All-arm'd I ride, whate'er betide, 

Until I find the holy Grail. 



Digitized by 



EDWARD GRAY. 



Sweet Emma Moreland of yonder town 

Met me walking on yonder way, 
" And have you lost your heart ? " she said ; 

" And are you married yet, Edward Gray V 

Sweet Emma Moreland spoke to me: 

Bitterly weeping I turn'd away : 
" Sweet Emma Moreland, love no more 

Can touch the heart of Edward Gray. 

" Ellen Adair she loved me well, 

Against her father's and mother's will : 

To-day I sat for an hour and wept, 
By Ellen's grave, on the windy hill. 

N 2 



Digitized by 



EDWARD GRAY. 



" Shy she was, and I thought her cold ; 

Thought her proud, and fled over the sea 
FilTd I was with folly and spite, 

When Ellen Adair was dying for me. 

" Cruel, cruel the words I said ! 

Cruelly came they back to-day : 
' You're too slight and fickle/ I said, 

< To trouble the heart of Edward Gray.' 

" There I put my face in the grass — 
Whisper'd, 1 Listen to my despair : 

I repent me of all I did : 
Speak a little, Ellen Adair ! ' 

" Then I took a pencil, and wrote 
On the mossy stone, as I lay, 

6 Here lies the body of Ellen Adair ; 
And here the heart of Edward Gray ! ' 



Digitized by 



EDWARD GRAY. 



181 



" Love may come, and love may go, 
And fly, like a bird, from tree to tree : 

But I will love no more, no more, 
Till Ellen Adair come back to me. 

" Bitterly wept I over the stone : 
Bitterly weeping I turn'd away : 

There lies the body of Ellen Adair ! 
And there the heart of Edward Gray ! " 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 

MADE AT THE COCK. 



O plump head-waiter at The Cock, 

To which I most resort, 
How goes the time ? 'Tis five o'clock. 

Go fetch a pint of port : 
But let it not be such as that 

You set before chance-comers, 
But such whose father-grape grew fat 

On Lusitanian summers. 

No vain libation to the Muse, 

But may she still be kind, 
And whisper lovely words, and use 

Her influence on the mind, 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. J 83 

To make me write my random rhymes, 

Ere they be half-forgotten ; 
Nor add and alter, many times, 

Till all be ripe and rotten. 

I pledge her, and she comes and dips 

Her laurel in the wine, 
And lays it thrice upon my lips, 

These favour'd lips of mine ; 
Until the charm have power to make 

New lifeblood warm the bosom, 
And barren commonplaces break 

To full and kindly blossom. 

I pledge her silent at the board : 

Her gradual fingers steal 
And touch upon the master-chord 

Of all I felt and feel. 
Old wishes, ghosts of broken plans, 

And phantom hopes assemble ; 
And that child's heart, within the man's 

Begins to move and tremble. 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S 

Thro' many an hour of summer suns, 

By many pleasant ways, 
Like Hezekiah's, backward runs 

The shadow of my days : 
1 kiss the lips I once have kiss'd ; 

The gas-light wavers dimmer ; 
And softly, thro' a vinous mist, 

My college friendships glimmer. 

I grow in worth, and wit, and sense, 

Unboding critic-pen, 
Or that eternal want of pence, 

Which vexes public men, 
Who hold their hands to all, and cry 

For that which all deny them — 
Who sweep the crossings, wet or dry, 

And all the world go by them. 

Ah yet, though all the world forsake, 
Though fortune clip my wings, 

I will not cramp my heart, nor take 
Half-views of men and things. 



Digitized by 



LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 185 

Let Whig and Tory stir their blood ; 

There must be stormy weather ; 
But for some true result of good 

All parties work together. 

Let there be thistles, there are grapes ; 

If old things, there are new ; 
Ten thousand broken lights and shapes, 

Yet glimpses of the true. 
Let raffs be rife in prose and rhyme, 

We lack not rhymes and reasons, 
As on this whirligig of Time 

We circle with the seasons. 



This earth is rich in man and maid ; 

With fair horizons bound : 
This whole wide earth, of light and shade, 

Comes out, a perfect round. 
High over roaring Temple-bar, 

And, set in Heaven's third story, 
I look at all things as they are, 

But thro' a kind of glory 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S 



Head-waiter, honour'd by the guest 

Half-mused, or reeling-ripe, 
The pint, you brought me, was the best 

That ever came from pipe. 
But though the port surpasses praise, 

My nerves have dealt with stiffer. 
Is there some magic in the place ? 

Or do my peptics differ ? 

For since I came to live and learn, 

No pint of white or red 
Had ever half the power to turn 

This wheel within my head, 
Which bears a season'd brain about, 

Unsubject to confusion, 
Though soak'd and saturate, out and out, 

Thro' every convolution. 

For I am of a numerous house, 

With many kinsmen gay, 
Where long and largely we carouse 

As who shall say me nay : 



Digitized by 



LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 



187 



Each month, a birth-day coming on, 

We drink defying trouble, 
Or sometimes two would meet in one, 

And then we drank it double ; 

Whether the vintage, yet unkept, 

Had relish fiery-new, 
Or, elbow-deep in sawdust, slept, 

As old as Waterloo ; 
Or stow'd (when classic Canning died) 

In musty bins and chambers, 
Had cast upon its crusty side 

The gloom of ten Decembers. 

The Muse, the jolly Muse, it is ! 

She answer d to my call, 
She changes with that mood or this, 

Is all-in-all to all : 
She lit the spark within my throat, 

To make my blood run quicker, 
Used all her fiery will, and smote 

Her life into the liquor. 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S 

And hence this halo lives about 

The waiter's hands, that reach 
To each his perfect pint of stout, 

His proper chop to each. 
He looks not like the common breed 

That with the napkin dally ; 
I think he came, like Gan^knede, 

From some delightful valley. 

The Cock was of a larger egg 

Than modern poultry drop, 
Stept forward on a firmer leg, 

And cramm'd a plumper crop ; 
Upon an ampler dunghill trod, 

Crow'd lustier late and early, 
Sipt wine from silver, praising God, 

And raked in golden barley. 

A private life was all his joy, 

Till in a court he saw 
A something-pottle-bodied boy, 

That knuckled at the taw : 



Digitized by 



LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 



189 



He stoop 'd and clutch'd him, fair and good, 

Flew over roof and casement : 
His brothers of the weather stood 

Stock-still for sheer amazement. 

But he, by farmstead, thorpe and spire, 

And follow'd witk acclaims, 
A sign to many a staring shire, 

Came crowing over Thames. 
Right down by smoky Paul's they bore, 

With motion less or greater ; 
One fixd for ever at the door, 

And one became head-waiter. 

# * * * 

But whither would my fancy go ? 

How out of place she makes 
The violet of a legend blow 

Among the chops and steaks ! 
'Tis but a steward of the can, 

One shade more plump than common ; 
As just and mere a serving-man 

As any, born of woman. 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF S 



I ranged too high : what draws me down 

Into the common day ? 
Is it the weight of that half-crown, 

Which I shall have to pay ? 
For, something duller than at first, 

Nor wholly comfortable, 
I sit (my empty glass reversed), 

And thrumming on the table : 

Half fearful that, with self at strife, 
I take myself to task ; 

Lest of the fullness of my life 
I leave an empty flask : 

For I had hope, by something rare, 
To prove myself a poet ; 

But, while I plan and plan, my hau- 
ls gray before I know it. 

So fares it since the years began, 

Till they be gather'd up ; 
The truth, that flies the flowing can, 

Will haunt the vacant cup : 



Digitized by 



LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 



191 



And others' follies teach us not, 
Nor much their wisdom teaches ; 

A nd most, of sterling worth, is what 
Our own experience preaches. 

Ah ! let the rusty theme alone ! 

We know not what we know. 
But for my pleasant hour, 'tis gone, 

'Tis gone, and let it go. 
Tis gone : a thousand such have slipt 

Away from my embraces, 
And fall'n into the dusty crypt 

Of darkened forms and faces. 

Go, therefore, thou ! thy betters went 

Long since, and came no more ; 
With peals of genial clamour sent 

From many a tavern-door, 
With twisted quirks and happy hits, 

From misty men of letters ; 
The tavern-hours of mighty wits — 

Thine elders and thy betters. 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S 



Hours, when the Poet's words and looks 

Had yet their native glow : 
Not yet the fear of little books 

Had made him talk for show ; 
But, all his vast heart sherris-warra'd, 

He flashed his random speeches ; 
Ere days, that deal in ana, swarm'd 

His literary leeches. ~ 

So mix for ever with the past, 

Like all good things on earth ! 
For should I prize thee, could'st thou last, 

At half thy real worth ? 
I hold it good, good things should pass : 

With time I will not quarrel : 
It is but yonder empty glass 

That makes me maudlin-moral. 

* * * * 

Head-waiter of the chop-house here, 

To which I most resort, 
I too must part : I hold thee dear 

For this good pint of port. 



Digitized by 



LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 



193 



For this, thou shalt from all things suck 
Marrow of mirth and laughter ; 

And, wheresoe'er thou move, good luck 
Shall fling her old shoe after. 

But thou wilt never move from hence, 

The sphere thy fate allots : 
Thy latter days increased with pence 

Go down among the pots : 
Thou battenest by the greasy gleam 

In haunts of hungry sinners, 
Old boxes, larded with the steam 

Of thirty thousand dinners. 

We fret, we fume, would shift our skins, 

Would quarrel with our lot ; 
Thy care is, under polish'd tins, 

To serve the hot-and-hot ; 
To come and go, and come again, 

Returning like the pewit, 
And watch'd by silent gentlemen, 

That trifle with the cruet. 

TOL. II. o 



Digitized by 



WILL WATERPROOF'S LYRICAL MONOLOGUE. 

Live long, ere from thy topmost head 

The thick-set hazel dies ; 
Long, ere the hateful crow shall tread 

The corners of thine eyes : 
Live long, nor feel in head or chest 

Our changeful equinoxes, 
Till mellow Death, like some late guest, 

Shall call thee from the boxes. 

But when he calls, and thou shalt cease 

To pace the gritted floor, 
And, laying down an unctuous lease 

Of life, shalt earn no more ; 
No carved cross-bones, the types of Death, 

Shall show thee past to Heaven ; 
But carved cross-pipes, and, underneath, 

A pint-pot, neatly graven. 



Digitized by 



LADY CLARE. 



Lord Ronald courted Lady Clare, 
I trow they did not part in scorn ; 

Lord Ronald, her cousin, courted her, 
And they will wed the morrow morn. 

4 ' He does not love me for my birth, 
Nor for my lands so broad and fair ; 

He loves me for my own true worth, 
And that is well," said Lady Clare. 

In there came old Alice the nurse, 

Said, " Who was this that went from thee ? " 
" It was my cousin," said Lady Clare, 

" To-morrow he weds with me." 
o 2 



Digitized by 



LADY CLARE. 



" O God be thank'd ! " said Alice the nurse, 
" That all comes round so just and fair : 

Lord Ronald is heir of all your lands, 
And you are not the Lady Clare." 

" Are ye out of your mind, my nurse, my nurse 1 " 
Said Lady Clare, " that ye speak so wild?" 

" As God 's above ! " said Alice the nurse, 
" I speak the truth : you are my child. 

" The old Earl's daughter died at my breast ; 

I speak the truth, as I live by bread ! 
I buried her like my own sweet child, 

And put my child in her stead." 

" Falsely, falsely have ye done, 

0 mother," she said, " if this be true, 

To keep the best man under the sun 
So many years from his due. 



Digitized by 



LADY CLARE. 



197 



" Nay now, my child," said Alice the nurse, 
" But keep the secret for your life, 

And all you have will be Lord Ronald's, 
When you are man and wife." 

" If I'm a beggar born," she said, 
" I will speak out, for I dare not lie. 

Pull off, pull off, the brooch of gold, 
And fling the diamond necklace by." 

" Nay now, my child," said Alice the nurse, 
" But keep the secret all ye can." 

She said " Not so : but I will know 
If there be any faith in man." 

" Nay now, what faith 1 " said Alice the nurse, 
" The man will cleave unto his right." 

" And he shall have it," the lady replied, 
« Though I should die to-night." 



Digitized by 



LADY CLARE. 

" Yet give one kiss to your mother dear ! 

Alas, my child, I sinn'd for thee." 
" O mother, mother, mother," she said, 

" So strange it seems to me. 



Yet here's a kiss for my mother dear, 
My mother dear, if this be so, 
And lay your hand upon my head, 
And bless me, mother, ere I go." 

She clad herself in a russet gown, 
She was no longer Lady Clare : 

She went by dale, and she went by down, 
With a single rose in her hair. 



Down stept Lord Ronald from his tower : 
" O Lady Clare, you shame your worth 

Why come you drest like a village maid, 
That are the flower of the earth 1" 



Digitized by 



LADY CLARE. 'W 

" If I come drest like a village maid, 

I am but as my fortunes are : 
I am a beggar born," she said, 

" And not the Lady Clare." 

" Play me no tricks," said Lord Ronald, 
" For I am yours in word and in deed. 

Play me no tricks," said Lord Ronald, 
" Your riddle is hard to read." 

O and proudly stood she up ! 

Her heart within her did not fail : 
She look'd into Lord Ronald's eyes, 

And told him all her nurse's tale. 

He laugh'd a laugh of merry scorn : 

He turn'd, and kiss'd her where she stood : 

" If you are not the heiress born, 

And I," said he, " the next in blood — 



Digitized by 



LADY CLARB. 



" If you are not the heiress born, 
And I," said he, " the lawful heir, 

We two will wed to-morrow morn, 
And you shall still be Lady Clare." 



Digitized by 



THE LORD OF BURLEIGH. 



In her ear he whispers gaily, 

" If my heart by signs can tell, 
Maiden, I have watch'd thee daily, 

And I think thou lov'st me well." 
She replies, in accents fainter, 

" There is none I love like thee." 
He is but a landscape-painter, 

And a village maiden she. 
He to lips, that fondly falter, 

Presses his without reproof ; 
Leads her to the village altar, 

And they leave her father's roof. 
" I can make no marriage present ; 

Little can I give my wife. 
Love will make our cottage pleasant, 

And I love thee more than life." 



Digitized by 



202 



THE LORD OF BURLEIGH. 



They by parks and lodges going 

See the lordly castles stand : 
Summer woods, about them blowing, 

Made a murmur in the land. 
From deep thought himself he rouses, 

Says to her that loves him well, 
" Let us see these handsome houses 

Where the wealthy nobles dwell." 
So she goes by him attended, 

Hears him lovingly converse, 
Sees whatever fair and splendid 

Lay betwixt his home and hers ; 
Parks with oak and chestnut shady, 

Parks and order'd gardens great, 
Ancient homes of lord and lady, 

Built for pleasure and for state. 
All he shows her makes him dearer : 

Evermore she seems to gaze 
On that cottage growing nearer, 

Where they twain will spend their days. 
O but she will love him truly ! 

He shall have a cheerful home ; 



Digitized by 



THE LORD OF BURLEIGH. 



203 



She will order all tilings duly, 

When beneath his roof they come. 
Thus her heart rejoices greatly, 

Till a gateway she discerns 
With armorial bearings stately, 

And beneath the gate she turns ; 
Sees a mansion more majestic 

Than all those she saw before * 
Many a gallant gay domestic 

Bows before him at the door. 
And they speak in gentle murmur, 

When they answer to his call, 
While he treads with footstep firmer, 

Leading on from hall to hall. 
And, while now she wonders blindly, 

Nor the meaning can divine, 
Proudly turns he round and kindly, 

" All of this is mine and thine/' 
Here he lives in state and bounty, 

Lord of Burleigh, fair and free ; 
Not a lord in all the county 

Is so great a lord as he. 



Digitized by 



204 



THE LORD OF BURLEIGH. 



All at once the colour flushes 

Her sweet face from brow to chin : 
As it were with shame she blushes, 

And her spirit changed within. 
Then her countenance all over 

Pale again as death did prove : 
But he clasp'd her like a lover, 

And he cheer 'd her soul with love. 
So she strove against her weakness, 

Though at times her spirits sank ; 
Shaped her heart with woman's meekness 

To all duties of her rank : 
And a gentle consort made he, 

And her gentle mind was such 
That she grew a noble lady, 

And the people loved her much. 
But a trouble weigh'd upon her, 

And perplex'd her, night and morn, 
With the burthen of an honour 

Unto which she was not born. 
Faint she grew, and ever fainter, 

As she murmur'd, " Oh, that he 



Digitized by 



THE LORD OF BURLEIGH. 



205 



Were once more that landscape-painter, 

Which did win my heart from me!" 
So she droop'd and droop 'd before him, 

Fading slowly from his side : 
Three fair children first she bore him, 

Then before her time she died. 
Weeping, weeping late and early, 

Walking up and pacing down, 
Deeply mourn 'd the Lord of Burleigh, 

Burleigh-house by Stamford-town. 
And he came to look upon her, 

And he look'd at her and said, 
" Bring the dress, and put it on her, 

That she wore when she was wed." 
Then her people, softly treading, 

Bore to earth her body, drest 
In the dress that she was wed in, 

That her spirit might have rest. 



Digitized by 



SIR LAUNCELOT & QUEEN GUINEVERE, 
a ragraent. 



Like souls that balance joy and pain, 
With tears and smiles from heaven again 
The maiden Spring upon the plain 
Came in a sun-lit fall of rain. 

In crystal vapour everywhere 
Blue isles of Heaven laugh'd between, 
And, far in forest-deeps unseen, 
The topmost linden gather 'd green 

From draughts of balmy air. 

Sometimes the linnet piped his song : 
Sometimes the throstle whistled strong : 



Digitized by 



SIR LAUNCELOT AND QUEEN GUINEVERE. 207 

Sometimes the sparhawk, wheel'd along, 
Hush'd all the groves from fear of wrong : 

By grassy capes with fuller sound 
In curves the yellowing river ran, 
And drooping chestnut-buds began 
To spread into the perfect fan, 

Above the teeming ground. 

Then, in the boyhood of the year, 
Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere 
Rode thro' the coverts of the deer, 
With blissful treble ringing clear. 

She seem'd a part of joyous Spring : 
A gown of grass-green silk she wore, 
Buckled with golden clasps before ; 
A light-green tuft of plumes she bore 

Closed in a golden ring. 

Now on some twisted ivy-net, 

Now by some tinkling rivulet, 

On mosses thick with violet, 

Her cream-white mule his pastern set : 

And now more fleet she skimm'd the plains 



Digitized by 



SIR LAUNCELOT AND QUEEN GUINEVERE. 

Than she whose elfin prancer springs 
By night to eery warblings, 
When all the glimmering moorland rings 
With jingling bridle-reins. 

As she fled fast thro' sun and shade, 
The happy winds upon her play'd, 
Blowing the ringlet from the braid : 
She look'd so lovely, as she sway'd 

The rein with dainty finger-tips, 
A man had given all other bliss, 
And all his worldly worth for this, 
To waste his whole heart in' one kiss 

Upon her perfect lips. 



Digitized by 



A FAREWELL. 



Flow down, cold rivulet, to the sea, 
Thy tribute wave deliver : 

No more by thee my steps shall be, 
For ever and for ever. 

Flow, softly flow, by lawn and lea, 

A rivulet then a river : 
No where by thee my steps shall be, 

For ever and for ever. 

But here will sigh thine alder tree, 
And here thine aspen shiver; 

And here by thee will hum the bee, 
For ever and for ever. 

TOL. II. p 



Digitized by 



A PARE WELL. 

A hundred suns will stream on thee, 
A thousand moons will quiver ; 

But not by thee my steps shall be, 
For ever and for ever. 



Digitized by 



THE BEGGAR MAID. 



Her arms across her breast she laid ; 

She was more fair than words can say : 
Bare-footed came the beggar maid 

Before the king Cophetua. 
In robe and crown the king stept down, 

To meet and greet her on her way : 
" It is no wonder," said the lords, 

" She is more beautiful than day." 

As shines the moon in clouded skies, 

She in her poor attire was seen : 
One praised her ancles, one her eyes, 

One her dark hair and loyesome mien, 
p 2 



Digitized by 



212 



THE BEGGAR MAID. 



So sweet a face, such angel grace, 
In all that land had never been : 

Cophetua sware a royal oath : 

" This beggar maid shall be my queen ! " 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OF SIN. 



I had a vision when the night was late : 

A youth came riding toward a palace-gate. 

He rode a horse with wings, that would have flown, 

But that his heavy rider kept him down. 

And from the palace came a child of sin, 

And took him by the curls, and led him in, 

Where sat a company with heated eyes, 

Expecting when a fountain should arise : 

A sleepy light upon their brows and lips — 

As when the sun, a crescent of eclipse, 

Dreams over lake and lawn, and isles and capes — 

Suffused them, sitting, lying, languid shapes, 

By heaps of gourds, and skins of wine, and piles of grapes' 

Then methought I heard a mellow sound, 
Gathering up from all the lower ground ; 



Digitized by 



214 



THE VISION OP SIN. 



Narrowing in to where they sat assembled 

Low voluptuous music winding trembled, 

Wov'n in circles : they that heard it sigh'd, 

Panted hand in hand with faces pale, 

Swung themselves, and in low tones replied ; 

Till the fountain spouted, showering wide 

Sleet of diamond-drift and pearly hail ; 

Then the music touch'd the gates and died ; 

Rose again from where it seem'd to fail, 

Storm 'd in orbs of song, a growing gale ; 

Till thronging in and in, to where they waited, 

As 'twere a hundred-throated nightingale, 

The strong tempestuous treble throbb'd and palpitated ; 

Ran into its giddiest whirl of sound, 

Caught the sparkles, and in circles, 

Purple gauzes, golden hazes, liquid mazes, 

Flung the torrent rainbow round : 

Then they started from their places, 

Moved with violence, changed in hue, 

Caught each other with wild grimaces, 

Half-invisible to the view, 

Wheeling with precipitate paces 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OF SIN. 



215 



To the melody, till they flew , 
Hair, and eyes, and limbs, and faces, 
Twisted hard in fierce embraces, 
Like to Furies, like to Graces, 
Dash'd together in blinding dew : 
Till, kilPd with some luxurious agony, 
The nerve-dissolving melody 
Flutter'd headlong from the sky. 

And then I look'd up toward a mountain-tract, 
That girt the region with high cliff and lawn : 
I saw that every morning, far withdrawn 
Beyond the darkness and the cataract, 
God made Himself an awful rose of dawn, 
Unheeded : and detaching, fold by fold, 
From those still heights, and, slowly drawing near, 
A vapour heavy, hueless, formless, cold, 
Came floating on for many a month and year, 
Unheeded : and I thought I would have spoken, 
And warn'd that madman ere it grew too late : 
But, as in dreams, I could not. Mine was broken, 
When that cold vapour touch'd the palace gate, 



Digitized by 



216 



THE VISION OP SIN. 



And link'd again. I saw within my head 
A gray and gap-tooth 'd man as lean as death, 
Who slowly rode across a wither'd heath, 
And lighted at a ruin'd inn, and said : 



" Wrinkled ostler, grim and thin ! 
Here is custom come your way ; 
Take my brute, and lead him in, 
Stuff his ribs with mouldy hay. 



" Bitter barmaid, waning fast ! 

See that * sheets are on my bed ; 
What ! the flower of life is past : 
It is long before you wed. 



" Slip-shod waiter, lank and sour, 
At The Dragon on the heath ! 
Let us have a quiet hour, 

Let us hob-and-nob with Death. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OP SIN. 217 

" I am old, but let me drink ; 

Bring me spices, bring me wine ; 
I remember, when I think, 

That my youth was half divine. 

" Wine is good for shrivelTd lips, 
When a blanket wraps the day, 
When the rotten woodland drips, 
And the leaf is stamp 'd in clay. 

" Sit thee down, and have no shame, 
Cheek by jowl, and knee by knee : 
What care I for any name t 
What for order or degree ? 

" Let me screw thee up a peg; 

Let me loose thy tongue with wine : 
Callest thou that thing a leg ? 

Which is thinnest 1 thine or mine ? 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OP SIN. 

" Thou shalt not be saved by works : 
Thou hast been a sinner too : 
Ruin'd trunks on withered forks, 
Empty scarecrows, I and you ! 

" Fill the cup, and fill the can : 
Have a rouse before the morn : 
Every minute dies a man, 
Every minute one is born. 

" We are men of ruin'd blood ; 

Therefore comes it we are wise : 
Fish are we that love the mud, 
Rising to no fancy-flies. 

" Name and fame ! to fly sublime 

Thro' the courts, the camps, the schools, 
Is to be the ball of Time, 

Bandied in the hands of fools. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OF SIN. 

" Friendship ! — to be two in one — 
Let the canting liar pack ! 
Well I know, when I am gone, 
How she mouths behind my back. 

" Virtue ! — to be good and just — 
Every heart, when sifted well, 
Is a clot of warmer dust, 

Mix'd with cunning sparks of hell. 

" O ! we two as well can look 

Whited thought and cleanly life 
As the priest, above his book 
Leering at his neighbour's wife. 

" Fill the Cup, and fill the can : 
Have a rouse before the morn : 
Every minute dies a man, 
Every minute one is born. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OF SIN. 



' Drink, and let the parties rave : 
They are fill'd with idle spleen ; 
Rising, falling, like a wave, 

For they know not what they mean. 

' He that roars for liberty 

Faster binds the tyrant's power ; 
And the tyrant's cruel glee 
Forces on the freer hour. 

' Fill the can, and fill the cup : 
All the windy ways of men 
Are but dust that rises up, 
And is lightly laid again. 

1 Greet her with applausive breath, 
Freedom, gaily doth she tread ; 
In her right a civic wreath, 
In her left a human head. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OF SIN. 



221 



" No, I love not what is new ; 
She is of an ancient house : 
And I think we know the hue 
Of that cap upon her brows. 

" Let her go ! her thirst she slakes 
Where the bloody conduit runs ; 
Then her sweetest meal she makes 
On the first-born of her sons. 

" Drink to lofty hopes that cool — 
Visions of a perfect State : 
Drink we, last, the public fool, 
Frantic love and frantic hate. 

" Chant me now some wicked stave, 
Till thy drooping courage rise, 
And the glow-worm of the grave 
Glimmer in thy rheumy eyes. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OP 8IN. 

" Fear not thou to loose thy tongue ; 
Set thy hoary fancies free : 
What is loathsome to the young 
Savours well to thee and me. 

" Change, reverting to the years, 

When thy nerves could understand 
What there is in loving tears, 

And the warmth of hand in hand. 

" Tell me tales of thy first love — 
April hopes, the fools of chance ; 
Till the graves begin to move, 
And the dead begin to dance. 

" Fill the can, and fill the cup : 
All the windy ways of men 
Are but dust that rises up, 
And is lightly laid again. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OP SIN. 



223 



" Trooping from their mouldy dens 
The chap-fallen circle spreads: 
Welcome, fellow-citizens, 

Hollow hearts and empty heads ! 

" You are bones, and what of that ? 
Every face, however full, 
Padded round with flesh and fat, 
Is but modell'd on a skull. 

" Death is king, and Vivat Rex ! 
Tread a measure on the stones, 
Madam — if I know your sex, 
From the fashion of your bones, 

" No, I cannot praise the fire 

In your eye — nor yet your lip : 
All the more do I admire 

Joints of cunning workmanship. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OF SIN. 



" Lo ! God's likeness — the ground-plan — 
Neither modelTd, glazed, or framed : 
Buss me, thou rough sketch of man, 
Far too naked to be shamed ! 

" Drink to Fortune, drink to Chance, 
While we keep a little breath ! 
Drink to heavy Ignorance ! 

Hob-and-nob with brother Death ! 

" Thou art mazed, the night is long, 
And the longer night is near : 
What ! I am not all as wrong 
As a bitter jest is dear. 

" Youthful hopes, by scores, to all, 

When the locks are crisp and curPd ; 
Unto me my maudlin gall 

And my mockeries of the world. 



Digitized by 



THE VISION OP SIN. 225 

" Fill the cup, and fill the can ! 
Mingle madness, mingle scorn ! 
Dregs of life, and lees of man : 
Yet we will not die forlorn." 

The voice grew faint : there came a further change ; 

Again arose the mystic mountain-range : 

Below were men and horses pierced with worms, 

And slowly quickening into lower forms ; 

By shards and scurf of salt, and scum of dross, 

Old plash of rains, and refuse patch'd with moss. 

Then some one said, " Behold ! it was a crime 

Of sense avenged by sense that wore with time." 

Another said : " The crime of sense became 

The crime of malice, and is equal blame." 

And one : " He had not wholly quench'd his power ; 

A little grain of conscience made him sour." 

At last I heard a voice upon the slope, 

Cry to the summit, " Is there any hope ? " 

TOL. II. Q 



Digitized by 



226 



THE VISION OF SIN. 



To which an answer peal'd from that high land, 
But in a tongue no man could understand ; 
And on the glimmering limit far withdrawn 
God made Himself an awful rose of dawn. 



Digitized by 



THE SKIPPING-ROPE. 



Sure never yet was Antelope 

Could skip so lightly by. 
Stand off, or else my skipping-rope 

Will hit you in the eye. 
How lightly whirls the skipping-rope ! 

How fairy-like you fly ! 
Go, get you gone, you muse and mope — 

I hate that silly sigh. 
Nay, dearest, teach me how to hope, 

Or tell me how to die. 
There, take it, take my skipping-rope, 

And hang yourself thereby. 



Digitized by 



Move eastward, happy earth, and leave 
Yon orange sunset waning slow. 

From fringes of the faded eve, 
O, happy planet, eastward go ; 

Till over thy dark shoulder glow 
Thy silver sister-world, and rise 
To glass herself in dewy eyes 

That watch me from the glen below. 

Ah, bear me with thee, lightly borne, 
Dip forward under starry light, 

And move me to my marriage-morn, 
And round again to happy night. 



Digitized by 



Break, break, break, 

On thy cold gray stones, O Sea I 
And I would that my tongue could utter 

The thoughts that arise in me. 

O well for the fisherman's boy, 

That he shouts with his sister at play ! 

O well for the sailor lad, 

That he sings in his boat on the bay ! 

And the stately ships go on 
To their haven under the hill ; 

But 0 for the touch of a vanished hand, 
And the sound of a voice that is still ! 

Break, break, break, 

At the foot of thy crags, O Sea ! 
But the tender grace of a day that is dead 

Will never come back to me. 



Digitized by 



THE POET'S SONG. 



The rain had fallen, the Poet arose, 

He pass'd by the town, and out of the street ; 
A light wind blew from the gates of the sun, 

And waves of shadow went over the wheat, 
And he sat him down in a lonely place, 

And chanted a melody loud and sweet, 
That made the wild-swan pause in her cloud, 

And the lark drop down at his feet. 

The swallow stopt as he hunted the bee, 

The snake slipt under a spray, 
The wild hawk stood with the down on his beak, 

And stared, with his foot on the prey, 



Digitized by 



THE POET'S SONG. 



231 



And the nightingale thought, " I have sung many songs, 

But never a one so gay, 
For he sings of what the world will be 

When the years have died away." 



THE END. 



4^ 



Digitized by 



The Idyl of " Dora" was partly suggested by one of Miss 
Mitford's pastorals; and the ballad of Lady Clare, by the novel 
of " Inheritance." 



London: 

BRADBURY AND BYANS, PRINTERS, WHITBFRIARS. 



Digitized by 



y Google 



itized by G00gk 



y Google 



y Google 
