De Fuga in Persecutione (Tertullian, trans. S. Thelwall.)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf04.iii.x.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  De Fuga in Persecutione

 IX.

 De Fuga in Persecutione. [1133]

 [Translated by the Rev. S. Thelwall.]

 ------------------------

 1.  My brother Fabius, you very lately asked, because some news or
 other were communicated, whether or not we ought to flee in
 persecution.  For my part, having on the spot made some observations in
 the negative suited to the place and time, I also, owing to the
 rudeness of some persons, took away with me the subject but half
 treated, meaning to set it forth now more fully by my pen; for your
 inquiry had interested me in it, and the state of the times had already
 on its own account pressed it upon me.  As persecutions in increasing
 number threaten us, so the more are we called on to give earnest
 thought to the question of how faith ought to receive them, and the
 duty of carefully considering it concerns you no less, who no doubt, by
 not accepting the Comforter, the guide to all truth, have, as was
 natural, opposed us hitherto in regard to other questions also.  We
 have therefore applied a methodical treatment, too, to your inquiry, as
 we see that we must first come to a decision as to how the matter
 stands in regard to persecution itself, whether it comes on us from God
 or from the devil, that with the less difficulty we may get on firm
 ground as to our duty to meet it; for of everything one's knowledge is
 clearer when it is known from whom it has its origin.  It is enough
 indeed to lay it down, (in bar of all besides,) that nothing happens
 without the will of God.  But lest we be diverted from the point before
 us, we shall not by this deliverance at once give occasion to the other
 discussions if one make answer--Therefore evil and sin are both from
 God; the devil henceforth, and even we ourselves, are entirely free.
 The question in hand is persecution.  With respect to this, let me in
 the meantime say, that nothing happens without God's will; on the
 ground that persecution is especially worthy of God, and, so to speak,
 requisite, for the approving, to wit, or if you will, the rejection of
 His professing servants.  For what is the issue of persecution, what
 other result comes of it, but the approving and rejecting of faith, in
 regard to which the Lord will certainly sift His people?  Persecution,
 by means of which one is declared either approved or rejected, is just
 the judgment of the Lord.  But the judging properly belongs to God
 alone.  This is that fan which even now cleanses the Lord's
 threshing-floor--the Church, I mean--winnowing the mixed heap of
 believers, and separating the grain [1134] of the martyrs from the
 chaff of the deniers; and this is also the ladder [1135] of which Jacob
 dreams, on which are seen, some mounting up to higher places, and
 others going down to lower.  So, too, persecution may be viewed as a
 contest.  By whom is the conflict proclaimed, but by Him by whom the
 crown and the rewards are offered?  You find in the Revelation its
 edict, setting forth the rewards by which He incites to victory--those,
 above all, whose is the distinction of conquering in persecution, in
 very deed contending in their victorious struggle not against flesh and
 blood, but against spirits of wickedness.  So, too, you will see that
 the adjudging of the contest belongs to the same glorious One, as
 umpire, who calls us to the prize.  The one great thing in persecution
 is the promotion of the glory of God, as He tries and casts away, lays
 on and takes off.  But what concerns the glory of God will surely come
 to pass by His will.  And when is trust in God more strong, than when
 there is a greater fear of Him, and when persecution breaks out?  The
 Church is awe-struck.  Then is faith both more zealous in preparation,
 and better disciplined in fasts, and meetings, and prayers, and
 lowliness, in brotherly-kindness and love, in holiness and temperance.
 There is no room, in fact, for ought but fear and hope.  So even by
 this very thing we have it clearly proved that persecution, improving
 as it does the servants of God, cannot be imputed to the devil.

 2.  If, because injustice is not from God, but from the devil, and
 persecution consists of injustice (for what more unjust than that the
 bishops of the true God, that all the followers of the truth, should be
 dealt with after the manner of the vilest criminals?), persecution
 therefore seems to proceed from the devil, by whom the injustice which
 constitutes persecution is perpetrated, we ought to know, as you have
 neither persecution without the injustice of the devil, nor the trial
 of faith without persecution, that the injustice necessary for the
 trial of faith does not give a warrant for persecution, but supplies an
 agency; that in reality, in reference to the trial of faith, which is
 the reason of persecution, the will of God goes first, but that as the
 instrument of persecution, which is the way of trial, the injustice of
 the devil follows.  For in other respects, too, injustice in proportion
 to the enmity it displays against righteousness affords occasion for
 attestations of that to which it is opposed as an enemy, that so
 righteousness may be perfected in injustice, as strength is perfected
 in weakness. [1136] For the weak things of the world have been chosen
 by God to confound the strong, and the foolish things of the world to
 confound its wisdom. [1137] Thus even injustice is employed, that
 righteousness may be approved in putting unrighteousness to shame.
 Therefore, since the service is not of free-will, but of subjection
 (for persecution is the appointment of the Lord for the trial of faith,
 but its ministry is the injustice of the devil, supplied that
 persecution may be got up), we believe that persecution comes to pass,
 no question, by the devil's agency, but not by the devil's
 origination.  Satan will not be at liberty to do anything against the
 servants of the living God unless the Lord grant leave, either that He
 may overthrow Satan himself by the faith of the elect which proves
 victorious in the trial, or in the face of the world show that
 apostatizers to the devil's cause have been in reality His servants.
 You have the case of Job, whom the devil, unless he had received
 authority from God, could not have visited with trial, not even, in
 fact, in his property, unless the Lord had said, "Behold, all that he
 has I put at your disposal; but do not stretch out your hand against
 himself." [1138] In short, he would not even have stretched it out,
 unless afterwards, at his request, the Lord had granted him this
 permission also, saying, "Behold, I deliver him to you; only preserve
 his life."  So he asked in the case of the apostles likewise an
 opportunity to tempt them, having it only by special allowance, since
 the Lord in the Gospel says to Peter, "Behold, Satan asked that he
 might sift you as grain; but I have prayed for you that your faith fail
 not;" [1139] that is, that the devil should not have power granted him
 sufficient to endanger his faith.  Whence it is manifest that both
 things belong to God, the shaking of faith as well as the shielding of
 it, when both are sought from Him--the shaking by the devil, the
 shielding by the Son.  And certainly, when the Son of God has faith's
 protection absolutely committed to Him, beseeching it of the Father,
 from whom He receives all power in heaven and on earth, how entirely
 out of the question is it that the devil should have the assailing of
 it in his own power!  But in the prayer prescribed to us, when we say
 to our Father, "Lead us not into temptation" [1140] (now what greater
 temptation is there than persecution?), we acknowledge that that comes
 to pass by His will whom we beseech to exempt us from it.  For this is
 what follows, "But deliver us from the wicked one," that is, do not
 lead us into temptation by giving us up to the wicked one, for then are
 we delivered from the power of the devil, when we are not handed over
 to him to be tempted.  Nor would the devil's legion have had power over
 the herd of swine [1141] unless they had got it from God; so far are
 they from having power over the sheep of God.  I may say that the
 bristles of the swine, too, were then counted by God, not to speak of
 the hairs of holy men.  The devil, it must be owned, seems indeed to
 have power--in this case really his own--over those who do not belong
 to God, the nations being once for all counted by God as a drop of the
 bucket, and as the dust of the threshing-floor, and as the spittle of
 the mouth, and so thrown open to the devil as, in a sense, a free
 possession.  But against those who belong to the household of God he
 may not do ought as by any right of his own, because the cases marked
 out in Scripture show when--that is, for what reasons--he may touch
 them.  For either, with a view to their being approved, the power of
 trial is granted to him, challenged or challenging, as in the instances
 already referred to, or, to secure an opposite result, the sinner is
 handed over to him, as though he were an executioner to whom belonged
 the inflicting of punishment, as in the case of Saul.  "And the Spirit
 of the Lord," says Scripture, "departed from Saul, and an evil spirit
 from the Lord troubled and stifled him;" [1142] or the design is to
 humble, as the apostle tells us, that there was given him a stake, the
 messenger of Satan, to buffet him; [1143] and even this sort of thing
 is not permitted in the case of holy men, unless it be that at the same
 time strength of endurance may be perfected in weakness.  For the
 apostle likewise delivered Phygellus and Hermogenes over to Satan that
 by chastening they might be taught not to blaspheme. [1144] You see,
 then, that the devil receives more suitably power even from the
 servants of God; so far is he from having it by any right of his own.

 3.  Seeing therefore, too, these cases occur in persecutions more than
 at other times, as there is then among us more of proving or rejecting,
 more of abusing or punishing, it must be that their general occurrence
 is permitted or commanded by Him at whose will they happen even
 partially; by Him, I mean, who says, "I am He who make peace and create
 evil," [1145] --that is, war, for that is the antithesis of peace.  But
 what other war has our peace than persecution?  If in its issues
 persecution emphatically brings either life or death, either wounds or
 healing, you have the author, too, of this.  "I will smite and heal, I
 will make alive and put to death." [1146] "I will burn them," He
 says, "as gold is burned; and I will try them," He says, "as silver is
 tried," [1147] for when the flame of persecution is consuming us, then
 the stedfastness of our faith is proved.  These will be the fiery darts
 of the devil, by which faith gets a ministry of burning and kindling;
 yet by the will of God.  As to this I know not who can doubt, unless it
 be persons with frivolous and frigid faith, which seizes upon those who
 with trembling assemble together in the church.  For you say, seeing we
 assemble without order, and assemble at the same time, and flock in
 large numbers to the church, the heathen are led to make inquiry about
 us, and we are alarmed lest we awaken their anxieties.  Do ye not know
 that God is Lord of all?  And if it is God's will, then you shall
 suffer persecution; but if it is not, the heathen will be still.
 Believe it most surely, if indeed you believe in that God without whose
 will not even the sparrow, a penny can buy, falls to the ground. [1148]
 But we, I think, are better than many sparrows.

 4.  Well, then, if it is evident from whom persecution proceeds, we are
 able at once to satisfy your doubts, and to decide from these
 introductory remarks alone, that men should not flee in it.  For if
 persecution proceeds from God, in no way will it be our duty to flee
 from what has God as its author; a twofold reason opposing; for what
 proceeds from God ought not on the one hand to be avoided, and it
 cannot be evaded on the other.  It ought not to be avoided, because it
 is good; for everything must be good on which God has cast His eye.
 And with this idea has perhaps this statement been made in Genesis,
 "And God saw because it is good;" not that He would have been ignorant
 of its goodness unless He had seen it, but to indicate by this
 expression that it was good because it was viewed by God.  There are
 many events indeed happening by the will of God, and happening to
 somebody's harm.  Yet for all that, a thing is therefore good because
 it is of God, as divine, as reasonable; for what is divine, and not
 reasonable and good?  What is good, yet not divine?  But if to the
 universal apprehension of mankind this seems to be the case, in
 judging, man's faculty of apprehension does not predetermine the nature
 of things, but the nature of things his power of apprehension.  For
 every several nature is a certain definite reality, and it lays it on
 the perceptive power to perceive it just as it exists.  Now, if that
 which comes from God is good indeed in its natural state (for there is
 nothing from God which is not good, because it is divine, and
 reasonable), but seems evil only to the human faculty, all will be
 right in regard to the former; with the latter the fault will lie.  In
 its real nature a very good thing is chastity, and so is truth, and
 righteousness; and yet they are distasteful to many.  Is perhaps the
 real nature on this account sacrificed to the sense of perception?
 Thus persecution in its own nature too is good, because it is a divine
 and reasonable appointment; but those to whom it comes as a punishment
 do not feel it to be pleasant.  You see that as proceeding from Him,
 even that evil has a reasonable ground, when one in persecution is cast
 out of a state of salvation, just as you see that you have a reasonable
 ground for the good also, when one by persecution has his salvation
 made more secure.  Unless, as it depends on the Lord, one either
 perishes irrationally, or is irrationally saved, he will not be able to
 speak of persecution as an evil, which, while it is under the direction
 of reason, is, even in respect of its evil, good.  So, if persecution
 is in every way a good, because it has a natural basis, we on valid
 grounds lay it down, that what is good ought not to be shunned by us,
 because it is a sin to refuse what is good; besides that, what has been
 looked upon by God can no longer indeed be avoided, proceeding as it
 does from God, from whose will escape will not be possible.  Therefore
 those who think that they should flee, either reproach God with doing
 what is evil, if they flee from persecution as an evil (for no one
 avoids what is good); or they count themselves stronger than God:  so
 they think, who imagine it possible to escape when it is God's pleasure
 that such events should occur.

 5.  But, says some one, I flee, the thing it belongs to me to do, that
 I may not perish, if I deny; it is for Him on His part, if He chooses,
 to bring me, when I flee, back before the tribunal.  First answer me
 this:  Are you sure you will deny if you do not flee, or are you not
 sure?  For if you are sure, you have denied already, because by
 presupposing that you will deny, you have given yourself up to that
 about which you have made such a presupposition; and now it is vain for
 you to think of flight, that you may avoid denying, when in intention
 you have denied already.  But if you are doubtful on that point, why do
 you not, in the incertitude of your fear wavering between the two
 different issues, presume that you are able rather to act a confessor's
 part, and so add to your safety, that you may not flee, just as you
 presuppose denial to send you off a fugitive?  The matter stands
 thus--we have either both things in our own power, or they wholly lie
 with God.  If it is ours to confess or to deny, why do we not
 anticipate the nobler thing, that is, that we shall confess?  If you
 are not willing to confess, you are not willing to suffer; and to be
 unwilling to confess is to deny.  But if the matter is wholly in God's
 hand, why do we not leave it to His will, recognising His might and
 power in that, just as He can bring us back to trial when we flee, so
 is He able to screen us when we do not flee; yes, and even living in
 the very heart of the people?  Strange conduct, is it not, to honour
 God in the matter of flight from persecution, because He can bring you
 back from your flight to stand before the judgment-seat; but in regard
 of witness-bearing, to do Him high dishonour by despairing of power at
 His hands to shield you from danger?  Why do you not rather on this,
 the side of constancy and trust in God, say, I do my part; I depart
 not; God, if He choose, will Himself be my protector?  It beseems us
 better to retain our position in submission to the will of God, than to
 flee at our own will.  Rutilius, a saintly martyr, after having
 ofttimes fled from persecution from place to place, nay, having bought
 security from danger, as he thought, by money, was, notwithstanding the
 complete security he had, as he thought, provided for himself, at last
 unexpectedly seized, and being brought before the magistrate, was put
 to the torture and cruelly mangled,--a punishment, I believe, for his
 fleeing,--and thereafter he was consigned to the flames, and thus paid
 to the mercy of God the suffering which he had shunned.  What else did
 the Lord mean to show us by this example, but that we ought not to flee
 from persecution because it avails us nothing if God disapproves?

 6.  Nay, says some one, he fulfilled the command, when he fled from
 city to city.  For so a certain individual, but a fugitive likewise,
 has chosen to maintain, and others have done the same who are unwilling
 to understand the meaning of that declaration of the Lord, that they
 may use it as a cloak for their cowardice, although it has had its
 persons as well as its times and reasons to which it specially
 applies.  "When they begin," He says, "to persecute you, flee from city
 to city." [1149] We maintain that this belongs specially to the
 persons of the apostles, and to their times and circumstances, as the
 following sentences will show, which are suitable only to the
 apostles:  "Do not go into the way of the Gentiles, and into a city of
 the Samaritans do not enter:  but go rather to the lost sheep of the
 house of Israel." [1150] But to us the way of the Gentiles is also
 open, as in it we in fact were found, and to the very last we walk; and
 no city has been excepted.  So we preach throughout all the world; nay,
 no special care even for Israel has been laid upon us, save as also we
 are bound to preach to all nations.  Yes, and if we are apprehended, we
 shall not be brought into Jewish councils, nor scourged in Jewish
 synagogues, but we shall certainly be cited before Roman magistrates
 and judgment-seats. [1151] So, then, the circumstances of the
 apostles even required the injunction to flee, their mission being to
 preach first to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.  That,
 therefore, this preaching might be fully accomplished in the case of
 those among whom this behoved first of all to be carried out--that the
 sons might receive bread before the dogs, for that reason He commanded
 them to flee then for a time--not with the object of eluding danger,
 under the plea strictly speaking which persecution urges (rather He was
 in the habit of proclaiming that they would suffer persecutions, and of
 teaching that these must be endured); but in order to further the
 proclamation of the Gospel message, lest by their being at once put
 down, the diffusion of the Gospel too might be prevented.  Neither were
 they to flee to any city as if by stealth, but as if everywhere about
 to proclaim their message; and for this, everywhere about to undergo
 persecutions, until they should fulfil their teaching.  Accordingly the
 Saviour says, "Ye will not go over all the cities of Israel." [1152]
 So the command to flee was restricted to the limits of Judea.  But no
 command that shows Judea to be specially the sphere for preaching
 applies to us, now that the Holy Spirit has been poured out upon all
 flesh.  Therefore Paul and the apostles themselves, mindful of the
 precept of the Lord, bear this solemn testimony before Israel, which
 they had now filled with their doctrine--saying, "It was necessary that
 the word of God should have been first delivered to you; but seeing ye
 have rejected it, and have not thought yourselves worthy of eternal
 life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles." [1153] And from that time they
 turned their steps away, as those who went before them had laid it
 down, and departed into the way of the Gentiles, and entered into the
 cities of the Samaritans; so that, in very deed, their sound went forth
 into all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. [1154]
 If, therefore, the prohibition against setting foot in the way of the
 Gentiles, and entering into the cities of the Samaritans, has come to
 an end, why should not the command to flee, which was issued at the
 same time, have come also to an end?  Accordingly, from the time when,
 Israel having had its full measure, the apostles went over to the
 Gentiles, they neither fled from city to city, nor hesitated to
 suffer.  Nay, Paul too, who had submitted to deliverance from
 persecution by being let down from the wall, as to do so was at this
 time a matter of command, refused in like manner now at the close of
 his ministry, and after the injunction had come to an end, to give in
 to the anxieties of the disciples, eagerly entreating him that he would
 not risk himself at Jerusalem, because of the sufferings in store for
 him which Agabus had foretold; but doing the very opposite, it is thus
 he speaks, "What do ye, weeping and disquieting my heart?  For I could
 wish not only to suffer bonds, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the
 name of my Lord Jesus Christ." [1155] And so they all said, "Let the
 will of the Lord be done."  What was the will of the Lord?  Certainly
 no longer to flee from persecution.  Otherwise they who had wished him
 rather to avoid persecution, might also have adduced that prior will of
 the Lord, in which He had commanded flight.  Therefore, seeing even in
 the days of the apostles themselves, the command to flee was temporary,
 as were those also relating to the other things at the same time
 enjoined, that [command] cannot continue with us which ceased with our
 teachers, even although it had not been issued specially for them; or
 if the Lord wished it to continue, the apostles did wrong who were not
 careful to keep fleeing to the last.

 7.  Let us now see whether also the rest of our Lord's ordinances
 accord with a lasting command of flight.  In the first place, indeed,
 if persecution is from God, what are we to think of our being ordered
 to take ourselves out of its way, by the very party who brings it on
 us?  For if He wanted it to be evaded, He had better not have sent it,
 that there might not be the appearance of His will being thwarted by
 another will.

 For He wished us either to suffer persecution or to flee from it.  If
 to flee, how to suffer?  If to suffer, how to flee?  In fact, what
 utter inconsistency in the decrees of One who commands to flee, and yet
 urges to suffer, which is the very opposite!  "Him who will confess Me,
 I also will confess before My Father." [1156] How will he confess,
 fleeing?  How flee, confessing?  "Of him who shall be ashamed of Me,
 will I also be ashamed before My Father." [1157] If I avoid
 suffering, I am ashamed to confess.  "Happy they who suffer persecution
 for My name's sake." [1158] Unhappy, therefore, they who, by running
 away, will not suffer according to the divine command.  "He who shall
 endure to the end shall be saved." [1159] How then, when you bid me
 flee, do you wish me to endure to the end?  If views so opposed to each
 other do not comport with the divine dignity, they clearly prove that
 the command to flee had, at the time it was given, a reason of its own,
 which we have pointed out.  But it is said, the Lord, providing for the
 weakness of some of His people, nevertheless, in His kindness,
 suggested also the haven of flight to them.  For He was not able even
 without flight--a protection so base, and unworthy, and servile--to
 preserve in persecution such as He knew to be weak!  Whereas in fact He
 does not cherish, but ever rejects the weak, teaching first, not that
 we are to fly from our persecutors, but rather that we are not to fear
 them.  "Fear not them who are able to kill the body, but are unable to
 do ought against the soul; but fear Him who can destroy both body and
 soul in hell." [1160] And then what does He allot to the fearful?
 "He who will value his life more than Me, is not worthy of Me; and he
 who takes not up his cross and follows Me, cannot be My disciple."
 [1161] Last of all, in the Revelation, He does not propose flight to
 the "fearful," [1162] but a miserable portion among the rest of the
 outcast, in the lake of brimstone and fire, which is the second death.

 8.  He sometimes also fled from violence Himself, but for the same
 reason as had led Him to command the apostles to do so:  that is, He
 wanted to fulfil His ministry of teaching; and when it was finished, I
 do not say He stood firm, but He had no desire even to get from His
 Father the aid of hosts of angels:  finding fault, too, with Peter's
 sword.  He likewise acknowledged, it is true, that His "soul was
 troubled, even unto death," [1163] and the flesh weak; with the design,
 (however,) first of all, that by having, as His own, trouble of soul
 and weakness of the flesh, He might show you that both the substances
 in Him were truly human; lest, as certain persons have now brought it
 in, you might be led to think either the flesh or the soul of Christ
 different from ours; and then, that, by an exhibition of their states,
 you might be convinced that they have no power at all of themselves
 without the spirit.  And for this reason He puts first "the willing
 spirit," [1164] that, looking to the natures respectively of both the
 substances, you may see that you have in you the spirit's strength as
 well as the flesh's weakness; and even from this may learn what to do,
 and by what means to do it, and what to bring under what,--the weak,
 namely, under the strong, that you may not, as is now your fashion,
 make excuses on the ground of the weakness of the flesh, forsooth, but
 put out of sight the strength of the spirit.  He also asked of His
 Father, that if it might be, the cup of suffering should pass from Him.
 [1165] So ask you the like favour; but as He did, holding your
 position,--merely offering supplication, and adding, too, the other
 words:  "but not what I will, but what Thou wilt."  But when you run
 away, how will you make this request? taking, in that case, into your
 own hands the removal of the cup from you, and instead of doing what
 your Father wishes, doing what you wish yourself.

 9.  The teaching of the apostles was surely in everything according to
 the mind of God:  they forgot and omitted nothing of the Gospel.
 Where, then, do you show that they renewed the command to flee from
 city to city?  In fact, it was utterly impossible that they should have
 laid down anything so utterly opposed to their own examples as a
 command to flee, while it was just from bonds, or the islands in which,
 for confessing, not fleeing from the Christian name, they were
 confined, they wrote their letters to the Churches.  Paul [1166] bids
 us support the weak, but most certainly it is not when they flee.  For
 how can the absent be supported by you?  By bearing with them?  Well,
 he says that people must be supported, if anywhere they have committed
 a fault through the weakness of their faith, just as (he enjoins) that
 we should comfort the faint-hearted; he does not say, however, that
 they should be sent into exile.  But when he urges us not to give place
 to evil, [1167] he does not offer the suggestion that we should take to
 our heels, he only teaches that passion should be kept under restraint;
 and if he says that the time must be redeemed, because the days are
 evil, [1168] he wishes us to gain a lengthening of life, not by flight,
 but by wisdom.  Besides, he who bids us shine as sons of light, [1169]
 does not bid us hide away out of sight as sons of darkness.  He
 commands us to stand stedfast, [1170] certainly not to act an opposite
 part by fleeing; and to be girt, not to play the fugitive or oppose the
 Gospel.  He points out weapons, too, which persons who intend to run
 away would not require.  And among these he notes the shield [1171]
 too, that ye may be able to quench the darts of the devil, when
 doubtless ye resist him, and sustain his assaults in their utmost
 force.  Accordingly John also teaches that we must lay down our lives
 for the brethren; [1172] much more, then, we must do it for the Lord.
 This cannot be fulfilled by those who flee.  Finally, mindful of his
 own Revelation, in which he had heard the doom of the fearful, (and so)
 speaking from personal knowledge, he warns us that fear must be put
 away.  "There is no fear," says he, "in love; but perfect love casteth
 out fear; because fear has torment"--the fire of the lake, no doubt.
 "He that feareth is not perfect in love" [1173] --to wit, the love of
 God.  And yet who will flee from persecution, but he who fears?  Who
 will fear, but he who has not loved?  Yes; and if you ask counsel of
 the Spirit, what does He approve more than that utterance of the
 Spirit?  For, indeed, it incites all almost to go and offer themselves
 in martyrdom, not to flee from it; so that we also make mention of it.
 If you are exposed to public infamy, says he, it is for your good; for
 he who is not exposed to dishonour among men is sure to be so before
 the Lord.  Do not be ashamed; righteousness brings you forth into the
 public gaze.  Why should you be ashamed of gaining glory?  The
 opportunity is given you when you are before the eyes of men.  So also
 elsewhere:  seek not to die on bridal beds, nor in miscarriages, nor in
 soft fevers, but to die the martyr's death, that He may be glorified
 who has suffered for you.

 10.  But some, paying no attention to the exhortations of God, are
 readier to apply to themselves that Greek versicle of worldly wisdom,
 "He who fled will fight again;" perhaps also in the battle to flee
 again.  And when will he who, as a fugitive, is a defeated man, be
 conqueror?  A worthy soldier he furnishes to his commander Christ, who,
 so amply armed by the apostle, as soon as he hears persecution's
 trumpet, runs off from the day of persecution.  I also will produce in
 answer a quotation taken from the world:  "Is it a thing so very sad to
 die?" [1174] He must die, in whatever way of it, either as conquered
 or as conqueror.  But although he has succumbed in denying, he has yet
 faced and battled with the torture.  I had rather be one to be pitied
 than to be blushed for.  More glorious is the soldier pierced with a
 javelin in battle, than he who has a safe skin as a fugitive.  Do you
 fear man, O Christian?--you who ought to be feared by the angels, since
 you are to judge angels; who ought to be feared by evil spirits, since
 you have received power also over evil spirits; who ought to be feared
 by the whole world, since by you, too, the world is judged.  You are
 Christ-clothed, you who flee before the devil, since into Christ you
 have been baptized.  Christ, who is in you, is treated as of small
 account when you give yourself back to the devil, by becoming a
 fugitive before him.  But, seeing it is from the Lord you flee, you
 taunt all runaways with the futility of their purpose.  A certain bold
 prophet also had fled from the Lord, he had crossed over from Joppa in
 the direction of Tarsus, as if he could as easily transport himself
 away from God; but I find him, I do not say in the sea and on the land,
 but, in fact, in the belly even of a beast, in which he was confined
 for the space of three days, unable either to find death or even thus
 escape from God.  How much better the conduct of the man who, though he
 fears the enemy of God, does not flee from, but rather despises him,
 relying on the protection of the Lord; or, if you will, having an awe
 of God all the greater, the more that he has stood in His presence,
 says, "It is the Lord, He is mighty.  All things belong to Him;
 wherever I am, I am in His hand:  let Him do as He wills, I go not
 away; and if it be His pleasure that I die, let Him destroy me Himself,
 while I save myself for Him.  I had rather bring odium upon Him by
 dying by His will, than by escaping through my own anger."

 11.  Thus ought every servant of God to feel and act, even one in an
 inferior place, that he may come to have a more important one, if he
 has made some upward step by his endurance of persecution.  But when
 persons in authority themselves--I mean the very deacons, and
 presbyters, and bishops--take to flight, how will a layman be able to
 see with what view it was said, Flee from city to city?  Thus, too,
 with the leaders turning their backs, who of the common rank will hope
 to persuade men to stand firm in the battle?  Most assuredly a good
 shepherd lays down his life for the sheep, according to the word of
 Moses, when the Lord Christ had not as yet been revealed, but was
 already shadowed forth in himself:  "If you destroy this people," he
 says, "destroy me also along with it." [1175] But Christ, confirming
 these foreshadowings Himself, adds:  "The bad shepherd is he who, on
 seeing the wolf, flees, and leaves the sheep to be torn in pieces."
 [1176] Why, a shepherd like this will be turned off from the farm;
 the wages to have been given him at the time of his discharge will be
 kept from him as compensation; nay, even from his former savings a
 restoration of the master's loss will be required; for "to him who hath
 shall be given, but from him who hath not shall be taken away even that
 which he seemeth to have." [1177] Thus Zechariah threatens:  "Arise,
 O sword, against the shepherds, and pluck ye out the sheep; and I will
 turn my hand against the shepherds." [1178] And against them both
 Ezekiel and Jeremiah declaim with kindred threatenings, for their not
 only wickedly eating of the Sheep,--they feeding themselves rather than
 those committed to their charge,--but also scattering the flock, and
 giving it over, shepherdless, a prey to all the beasts of the field.
 And this never happens more than when in persecution the Church is
 abandoned by the clergy.  If any one recognises the Spirit also, he
 will hear him branding the runaways.  But if it does not become the
 keepers of the flock to flee when the wolves invade it--nay, if that is
 absolutely unlawful (for He who has declared a shepherd of this sort a
 bad one has certainly condemned him; and whatever is condemned has,
 without doubt, become unlawful)--on this ground it will not be the duty
 of those who have been set over the Church to flee in the time of
 persecution.  But otherwise, if the flock should flee, the overseer of
 the flock would have no call to hold his ground, as his doing so in
 that case would be, without good reason, to give to the flock
 protection, which it would not require in consequence of its liberty,
 forsooth, to flee.

 12.  So far, my brother, as the question proposed by you is concerned,
 you have our opinion in answer and encouragement.  But he who inquires
 whether persecution ought to be shunned by us must now be prepared to
 consider the following question also:  Whether, if we should not flee
 from it, we should at least buy ourselves off from it.  Going further
 than you expected, therefore, I will also on this point give you my
 advice, distinctly affirming that persecution, from which it is evident
 we must not flee, must in like manner not even be bought off.  The
 difference lies in the payment; but as flight is a buying off without
 money, so buying off is money-flight.  Assuredly you have here too the
 counselling of fear.  Because you fear, you buy yourself off; and so
 you flee.  As regards your feet, you have stood; in respect of the
 money you have paid, you have run away.  Why, in this very standing of
 yours there was a fleeing from persecution, in the release from
 persecution which you bought; but that you should ransom with money a
 man whom Christ has ransomed with His blood, how unworthy is it of God
 and His ways of acting, who spared not His own Son for you, that He
 might be made a curse for us, because cursed is he that hangeth on a
 tree, [1179] --Him who was led as a sheep to be a sacrifice, and just
 as a lamb before its shearer, so opened He not His mouth; [1180] but
 gave His back to the scourges, nay, His cheeks to the hands of the
 smiter, and turned not away His face from spitting, and, being numbered
 with the transgressors, was delivered up to death, nay, the death of
 the cross.  All this took place that He might redeem us from our sins.
 The sun ceded to us the day of our redemption; hell re-transferred the
 right it had in us, and our covenant is in heaven; the everlasting
 gates were lifted up, that the King of Glory, the Lord of might, might
 enter in, [1181] after having redeemed man from earth, nay, from hell,
 that he might attain to heaven.  What, now, are we to think of the man
 who strives against that glorious One, nay, slights and defiles His
 goods, obtained at so great a ransom--no less, in truth, than His most
 precious blood?  It appears, then, that it is better to flee than to
 fall in value, if a man will not lay out for himself as much as he cost
 Christ.  And the Lord indeed ransomed him from the angelic powers which
 rule the world--from the spirits of wickedness, from the darkness of
 this life, from eternal judgment, from everlasting death.  But you
 bargain for him with an informer, or a soldier or some paltry thief of
 a ruler--under, as they say, the folds of the tunic--as if he were
 stolen goods whom Christ purchased in the face of the whole world, yes,
 and set at liberty.  Will you value, then, this free man at any price,
 and possess him at any price, but the one, as we have said, it cost the
 Lord,--namely, His own blood?  (And if not,) why then do you purchase
 Christ in the man in whom He dwells, as though He were some human
 property?  No otherwise did Simon even try to do, when he offered the
 apostles money for the Spirit of Christ.  Therefore this man also, who
 in buying himself has bought the Spirit of Christ, will hear that word,
 "Your money perish with you, since you have thought that the grace of
 God is to be had at a price!" [1182] Yet who will despise him for
 being (what he is), a denier?  For what says that extorter?  Give me
 money:  assuredly that he may not deliver him up, since he tries to
 sell you nothing else than that which he is going to give you for
 money.  When you put that into his hands, it is certainly your wish not
 to be delivered up.  But not delivered up, had you to be held up to
 public ridicule?  While, then, in being unwilling to be delivered up,
 you are not willing to be thus exposed; by this unwillingness of yours
 you have denied that you are what you have been unwilling to have it
 made public that you are.  Nay, you say, While I am unwilling to be
 held up to the public as being what I am, I have acknowledged that I am
 what I am unwilling to be so held up as being, that is, a Christian.
 Can Christ, therefore, claim that you, as a witness for Him, have
 stedfastly shown Him forth?  He who buys himself off does nothing in
 that way.  Before one it might, I doubt not, be said, You have
 confessed Him; so also, on the account of your unwillingness to confess
 Him before many you have denied Him.  A man's very safety will
 pronounce that he has fallen while getting out of persecution's way.
 He has fallen, therefore, whose desire has been to escape.  The refusal
 of martyrdom is denial.  A Christian is preserved by his wealth, and
 for this end has his treasures, that he may not suffer, while he will
 be rich toward God.  But it is the case that Christ was rich in blood
 for him.  Blessed therefore are the poor, because, He says, the kingdom
 of heaven is theirs who have the soul only treasured up. [1183] If we
 cannot serve God and mammon, can we be redeemed both by God and by
 mammon?  For who will serve mammon more than the man whom mammon has
 ransomed?  Finally, of what example do you avail yourself to warrant
 your averting by money the giving of you up?  When did the apostles,
 dealing with the matter, in any time of persecution trouble, extricate
 themselves by money?  And money they certainly had from the prices of
 lands which were laid down at their feet, [1184] there being, without a
 doubt, many of the rich among those who believed--men, and also women,
 who were wont, too, to minister to their comfort.  When did Onesimus,
 or Aquila, or Stephen, [1185] give them aid of this kind when they were
 persecuted?  Paul indeed, when Felix the governor hoped that he should
 receive money for him from the disciples, [1186] about which matter he
 also dealt with the apostle in private, certainly neither paid it
 himself, nor did the disciples for him.  Those disciples, at any rate,
 who wept because he was equally persistent in his determination to go
 to Jerusalem, and neglectful of all means to secure himself from the
 persecutions which had been foretold as about to occur there, at last
 say, "Let the will of the Lord be done."  What was that will?  No doubt
 that he should suffer for the name of the Lord, not that he should be
 bought off.  For as Christ laid down His life for us, so, too, we
 should do for Him; and not only for the Lord Himself, nay, but likewise
 for our brethren on His account.  This, too, is the teaching of John
 when he declares, not that we should pay for our brethren, but rather
 that we should die for them.  It makes no difference whether the thing
 not to be done by you is to buy off a Christian, or to buy one.  And so
 the will of God accords with this.  Look at the condition--certainly of
 God's ordaining, in whose hand the king's heart is--of kingdoms and
 empires.  For increasing the treasury there are daily provided so many
 appliances--registerings of property, taxes in kind benevolences, taxes
 in money; but never up to this time has ought of the kind been provided
 by bringing Christians under some purchase-money for the person and the
 sect, although enormous gains could be reaped from numbers too great
 for any to be ignorant of them.  Bought with blood, paid for with
 blood, we owe no money for our head, because Christ is our Head.  It is
 not fit that Christ should cost us money.  How could martyrdoms, too,
 take place to the glory of the Lord, if by tribute we should pay for
 the liberty of our sect?  And so he who stipulates to have it at a
 price, opposes the divine appointment.  Since, therefore, Cæsar has
 imposed nothing on us after this fashion of a tributary sect--in fact,
 such an imposition never can be made,--with Antichrist now close at
 hand, and gaping for the blood, not for the money of Christians--how
 can it be pointed out to me that there is the command, "Render to Cæsar
 the things which are Cæsar's?" [1187] A soldier, be he an informer or
 an enemy, extorts money from me by threats, exacting nothing on Cæsar's
 behalf; nay, doing the very opposite, when for a bribe he lets me
 go--Christian as I am, and by the laws of man a criminal.  Of another
 sort is the denarius which I owe to Cæsar, a thing belonging to him,
 about which the question then was started, it being a tribute coin due
 indeed by those subject to tribute, not by children.  Or how shall I
 render to God the things which are God's,--certainly, therefore, His
 own likeness and money inscribed with His name, that is, a Christian
 man?  But what do I owe God, as I do Cæsar the denarius, but the blood
 which His own Son shed for me?  Now if I owe God, indeed, a human being
 and my own blood; but I am now in this juncture, that a demand is made
 upon me for the payment of that debt, I am undoubtedly guilty of
 cheating God if I do my best to withhold payment.  I have well kept the
 commandment, if, rendering to Cæsar the things which are Cæsar's, I
 refuse to God the things which are God's!

 13.  But also to every one who asks me I will give on the plea of
 charity, not under any intimidation.  Who asks? [1188] He says.  But he
 who uses intimidation does not ask.  One who threatens if he does not
 receive, does not crave, but compels.  It is not alms he looks for, who
 comes not to be pitied, but to be feared.  I will give, therefore,
 because I pity, not because I fear, when the recipient honours God and
 returns me his blessing; not when rather he both believes that he has
 conferred a favour on me, and, beholding his plunder, says, "Guilt
 money."  Shall I be angry even with an enemy?  But enmities have also
 other grounds.  Yet withal he did not say a betrayer, or persecutor, or
 one seeking to terrify you by his threats.  For how much more shall I
 heap coals upon the head of a man of this sort, if I do not redeem
 myself by money?  "In like manner," says Jesus, "to him who has taken
 away your coat, grant even your cloak also."  But that refers to him
 who has sought to take away my property, not my faith.  The cloak, too,
 I will grant, if I am not threatened with betrayal.  If he threatens, I
 will demand even my coat back again.  Even now, the declarations of the
 Lord have reasons and laws of their own.  They are not of unlimited or
 universal application.  And so He commands us to give to every one who
 asks, yet He Himself does not give to those who ask a sign.  Otherwise,
 if you think that we should give indiscriminately to all who ask, that
 seems to me to mean that you would give, I say not wine to him who has
 a fever, but even poison or a sword to him who longs for death.  But
 how we are to understand, "Make to yourselves friends of mammon,"
 [1189] let the previous parable teach you.  The saying was addressed to
 the Jewish people; inasmuch as, having managed ill the business of the
 Lord which had been entrusted to them, they ought to have provided for
 themselves out of the men of mammon, which we then were, friends rather
 than enemies, and to have delivered us from the dues of sins which kept
 us from God, if they bestowed the blessing upon us, for the reason
 given by the Lord, that when grace began to depart from them, they,
 betaking themselves to our faith, might be admitted into everlasting
 habitations.  Hold now any other explanation of this parable and saying
 you like, if only you clearly see that there is no likelihood of our
 opposers, should we make them friends with mammon, then receiving us
 into everlasting abodes.  But of what will not cowardice convince men?
 As if Scripture both allowed them to flee, and commanded them to buy
 off!  Finally, it is not enough if one or another is so rescued.  Whole
 Churches have imposed tribute en masse on themselves.  I know not
 whether it is matter for grief or shame when among hucksters, and
 pickpockets, and bath-thieves, and gamesters, and pimps, Christians too
 are included as taxpayers in the lists of free soldiers and spies.  Did
 the apostles, with so much foresight, make the office of overseer of
 this type, that the occupants might be able to enjoy their rule free
 from anxiety, under colour of providing (a like freedom for their
 flocks)?  For such a peace, forsooth, Christ, returning to His Father,
 commanded to be bought from the soldiers by gifts like those you have
 in the Saturnalia!

 14.  But how shall we assemble together? say you; how shall we observe
 the ordinances of the Lord?  To be sure, just as the apostles also did,
 who were protected by faith, not by money; which faith, if it can
 remove a mountain, can much more remove a soldier.  Be your safeguard
 wisdom, not a bribe.  For you will not have at once complete security
 from the people also, should you buy off the interference of the
 soldiers.  Therefore all you need for your protection is to have both
 faith and wisdom:  if you do not make use of these, you may lose even
 the deliverance which you have purchased for yourself; while, if you do
 employ them, you can have no need of any ransoming.  Lastly, if you
 cannot assemble by day, you have the night, the light of Christ
 luminous against its darkness.  You cannot run about among them one
 after another.  Be content with a church of threes.  It is better that
 you sometimes should not see your crowds, than subject yourselves (to a
 tribute bondage).  Keep pure for Christ His betrothed virgin; let no
 one make gain of her.  These things, my brother, seem to you perhaps
 harsh and not to be endured; but recall that God has said, "He who
 receives it, let him receive it," [1190] that is, let him who does not
 receive it go his way.  He who fears to suffer, cannot belong to Him
 who suffered.  But the man who does not fear to suffer, he will be
 perfect in love--in the love, it is meant, of God; "for perfect love
 casteth out fear." [1191] "And therefore many are called, but few
 chosen." [1192] It is not asked who is ready to follow the broad way,
 but who the narrow.  And therefore the Comforter is requisite, who
 guides into all truth, and animates to all endurance.  And they who
 have received Him will neither stoop to flee from persecution nor to
 buy it off, for they have the Lord Himself, One who will stand by us to
 aid us in suffering, as well as to be our mouth when we are put to the
 question.

 [1133] [Written, say, circa a.d. 208.]

 [1134] Matt. iii. 12.

 [1135] Gen. xxviii. 12.

 [1136] 2 Cor. xii. 9.

 [1137] 1 Cor. i. 27, 28.

 [1138] Job i. 12.

 [1139] Luke xxii. 31, 32.

 [1140] Matt. vi. 13.

 [1141] Mark v. 11.

 [1142] 1 Sam. xvi. 14.

 [1143] 2 Cor. xii. 7.

 [1144] 2 Tim. i. 15; see 1 Tim. i. 20.

 [1145] Isa. xlv. 7.

 [1146] Deut. xxxii. 39.

 [1147] Zech. xiii. 9.

 [1148] Matt. x. 29.

 [1149] Matt. x. 23.

 [1150] Matt. x. 5.

 [1151] Matt. x. 17.

 [1152] Matt. x. 23.

 [1153] Acts xiii. 46.

 [1154] Ps. xix. 4.

 [1155] Acts xxi. 13.

 [1156] Matt. x. 32, 33.

 [1157] Mark viii. 38; Luke ix. 26.

 [1158] Matt. v. 11.

 [1159] Matt. x. 22.

 [1160] Matt. x. 28.

 [1161] Matt. x. 37, 38.

 [1162] Rev. xxi. 8.

 [1163] Matt. xxvi. 38.

 [1164] Matt. xxvi. 41.

 [1165] Matt. xxvi. 39.

 [1166] 1 Thess. v. 14.

 [1167] Eph. iv. 27.

 [1168] Eph. v. 16.

 [1169] 1 Thess. v. 5.

 [1170] 1 Cor. xv. 58.

 [1171] Eph. vi. 16.

 [1172] 1 John iii. 16.

 [1173] 1 John iv. 18.

 [1174] Æneid, xii. 646.

 [1175] Ex. xxxii. 32.

 [1176] John x. 12.

 [1177] Luke viii. 18.

 [1178] Zech. xiii. 7.

 [1179] Rom. viii. 32; Gal. iii. 13.

 [1180] Isa. liii. 7.

 [1181] Ps. xxiv. 7.

 [1182] Acts viii. 20.

 [1183] Matt. v. 3.

 [1184] Acts iv. 34, 35.

 [1185] Stephanas is perhaps intended.--Tr.

 [1186] Acts xxiv. 26.

 [1187] Matt. xxii. 21.

 [1188] Matt. v. 42.

 [1189] Luke xvi. 9.

 [1190] Matt. xix. 12.

 [1191] 1 John iv. 18.

 [1192] Matt. xxii. 14.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Persecutions threaten, p. 116.)

 We have reserved this heroic tract to close our series of the ascetic
 essays of our author because it places even his sophistical enthusiasm
 in a light which shows much to admire.  Strange that this defiant hero
 should have died (as we may infer) in his bed, and in extreme old age.
 Great man, how much, alike for weal and woe, the ages have been taught
 by thee!

 This is the place for a tabular view of the ten persecutions of the
 Ante-Nicene Church.  They are commonly enumerated as follows: [1193] --

 1.  Under Nero----a.d. 64.

 2.  Under Trajan----a.d. 95.

 3.  Under Trajan----a.d. 107.

 4.  Under Hadrian (a.d. 118 and)----a.d. 134.

 5.  Under Aurelius (a.d. 177) and Severus----a.d. 202.

 6.  Under Maximin----a.d. 235.

 7.  Under Decius----a.d. 250.

 8.  Under Valerian----a.d. 254.

 9.  Under Aurelian----a.d. 270.

 10.  Under Diocletian (a.d. 284 and)----a.d. 303.

 Periods of Comparative Rest.

 1.  Under Antoninus Pius----a.d. 151.

 2.  Under Commodus----a.d. 185.

 3.  Under Alexander Severus----a.d. 223.

 4.  Under Philip----a.d. 248.

 5.  Under Diocletian----a.d. 284 till a.d. 303.

 In thus chastising and sifting his Church in the years of her gradual
 growth "from the smallest of all seeds," we see illustrations of the
 Lord's Epistles to the seven churches of the Apocalypse.  Who can doubt
 that Tertullian's writings prepared the North-African Church for the
 Decian furnace, and all believers for the "seven times hotter" fires of
 Diocletian?

 II.

 (To the fearful, p. 120.)

 In the Patientia [1194] Tertullian reflects the views of Catholics, and
 seems to allow those "persecuted in one city to flee to another."  So
 also in the Ad Uxorem, [1195] as instanced by Kaye. [1196] In the
 Fuga we have the enthusiast, but not as Gibbon will have it, [1197] the
 most wild and fanatical of declaimers.  On the whole subject we again
 refer our readers to the solid and sober comments of Kaye on the
 martyrdoms and persecutions of the early faithful, and on the patristic
 views of the same.

 III.

 (Enormous gains from numbers, p. 124.)

 Christians were now counted by millions.  The following tabular view of
 the Christian population of the world from the beginning has been
 attributed to Sharon Turner.  I do not find it in any of his works with
 which I am familiar.  The nineteenth century is certainly credited too
 low, according to the modern computists; but I insert it merely for the
 centuries we are now considering.

 Growth of the Church in Numbers.

 1.  First century----500,000

 2.  Second century----2,000,000

 3.  Third century----5,000,000

 4.  Fourth century----10,000,000

 5.  Fifth century----15,000,000

 6.  Sixth century----20,000,000

 7.  Seventh century----24,000,000

 8.  Eighth century----30,000,000

 9.  Ninth century----40,000,000

 10.  Tenth century----50,000,000

 11.  Eleventh century----70,000,000

 12.  Twelfth century----80,000,000

 13.  Thirteenth century----75,000,000

 14.  Fourteenth century----80,000,000

 15.  Fifteenth century----100,000,000

 16.  Sixteenth century----125,000,000

 17.  Seventeenth century----155,000,000

 18.  Eighteenth century----200,000,000

 19.  Nineteenth century----400,000,000

 [1193] See what Gibbon can say to minimize the matter (in cap. xvi. 4,
 vol. ii. p. 45, New York).

 [1194] Cap. xiii.

 [1195] I. cap. iii.

 [1196] pp. 46, 138.

 [1197] In his disgraceful chap. xvi.

 X.

 Appendix. [1198]

 [Translated by the Rev. S. Thelwall.]

 ------------------------

 1.  A Strain of Jonah the Prophet.

 After the living, aye--enduring death

 Of Sodom and Gomorrah; after fires

 Penal, attested by time-frosted plains

 Of ashes; after fruitless apple-growths,

 5  Born but to feed the eye; after the death

 Of sea and brine, both in like fate involved;

 While whatsoe'er is human still retains

 In change corporeal its penal badge: [1199]

 A city--Nineveh--by stepping o'er

 10  The path of justice and of equity,

 On her own head had well-nigh shaken down

 More fires of rain supernal.  For what dread [1200]

 Dwells in a mind subverted?  Commonly

 Tokens of penal visitations prove

 15  All vain where error holds possession.  Still,

 Kindly and patient of our waywardness,

 And slow to punish, the Almighty Lord

 Will launch no shaft of wrath, unless He first

 Admonish and knock oft at hardened hearts,

 20  Rousing with mind august presaging seers.

 For to the merits of the Ninevites

 The Lord had bidden Jonah to foretell

 Destruction; but he, conscious that He spare;

 The subject, and remits to suppliants

 25  The dues of penalty, and is to good

 Ever inclinable, was loth to face

 That errand; lest he sing his seerly strain

 In vain, and peaceful issue of his threats

 Ensue.  His counsel presently is flight:

 30  (If, howsoe'er, there is at all the power

 God to avoid, and shun the Lord's right hand

 'Neath whom the whole orb trembles and is held

 In check:  but is there reason in the act

 Which in [1201] his saintly heart the prophet dares?)

 35  On the beach-lip, over against the shores

 Of the Cilicians, is a city poised, [1202]

 Far-famed for trusty port--Joppa her name.

 Thence therefore Jonah speeding in a barque

 Seeks Tarsus, [1203] through the signal providence

 40  Of the same God; [1204] nor marvel is't, I ween,

 If, fleeing from the Lord upon the lands,

 He found Him in the waves.  For suddenly

 A little cloud had stained the lower air

 With fleecy wrack sulphureous, itself [1205]

 45  By the wind's seed excited: by degrees,

 Bearing a brood globose, it with the sun

 Cohered, and with a train caliginous

 Shut in the cheated day.  The main becomes

 The mirror of the sky; the waves are dyed so

 50  With black encirclement; the upper air

 Down rushes into darkness, and the sea

 Uprises; nought of middle space is left;

 While the clouds touch the waves, and the waves all

 Are mingled by the bluster of the winds

 55  In whirling eddy.  'Gainst the renegade,

 'Gainst Jonah, diverse frenzy joined to rave,

 While one sole barque did all the struggle breed

 'Twixt sky and surge.  From this side and from that

 Pounded she reels; 'neath each wave-breaking blow

 60  The forest of her tackling trembles all;

 As, underneath, her spinal length of keel,

 Staggered by shock on shock, all palpitates;

 And, from on high, her labouring mass of yard

 Creaks shuddering; and the tree-like mast itself

 65  Bends to the gale, misdoubting to be riven.

 Meantime the rising [1206] clamour of the crew

 Tries every chance for barque's and dear life's sake:

 To pass from hand to hand [1207] the tardy coils

 To tighten the girth's noose:  straitly to bind

 70  The tiller's struggles; or, with breast opposed,

 T' impel reluctant curves.  Part, turn by turn,

 With foremost haste outbale the reeking well

 Of inward sea.  The wares and cargo all

 They then cast headlong, and with losses seek

 75  Their perils to subdue.  At every crash

 Of the wild deep rise piteous cries; and out

 They stretch their hands to majesties of gods,

 Which gods are none; whom might of sea and sky

 Fears not, nor yet the less from off their poops

 80  With angry eddy sweeping sinks them down.

 Unconscious of all this, the guilty one

 'Neath the poop's hollow arch was making sleep

 Re-echo stertorous with nostril wide

 Inflated:  whom, so soon as he who guides

 85  The functions of the wave-dividing prow

 Saw him sleep-bound in placid peace, and proud

 In his repose, he, standing o'er him, shook,

 And said, "Why sing'st, with vocal nostril, dreams,

 In such a crisis?  In so wild a whirl,

 90  Why keep'st thou only harbour?  Lo! the wave

 Whelms us, and our one hope is in the gods.

 Thou also, whosoever is thy god,

 Make vows, and, pouring prayers on bended knee,

 Win o'er thy country's Sovran!"

 Then they vote

 95  To learn by lot who is the culprit, who

 The cause of storm; nor does the lot belie

 Jonah:  whom then they ask, and ask again,

 "Who? whence? who in the world? from what abode,

 What people, hail'st thou?"  He avows himself

 100  A servant, and an over-timid one,

 Of God, who raised aloft the sky, who based

 The earth, who corporally fused the whole:

 A renegade from Him he owns himself,

 And tells the reason.  Rigid turned they all

 105  With dread.  "What grudge, then, ow'st thou us?  What now

 Will follow?  By what deed shall we appease

 The main?"  For more and far more swelling grew

 The savage surges.  Then the seer begins

 Words prompted by the Spirit of the Lord: [1208]

 110  "Lo!  I your tempest am; I am the sum

 Of the world's [1209] madness:  'tis in me," he says,

 "That the sea rises, and the upper air

 Down rushes; land in me is far, death near,

 And hope in God is none!  Come, headlong hurl

 115  Your cause of bane:  lighten your ship, and cast

 This single mighty burden to the main,

 A willing prey!"  But they--all vainly!--strive

 Homeward to turn their course; for helm refused

 To suffer turning, and the yard's stiff poise

 120  Willed not to change.  At last unto the Lord

 They cry:  "For one soul's sake give us not o'er

 Unto death's maw, nor let us be besprent

 With righteous blood, if thus Thine own right hand

 Leadeth."  And from the eddy's depth a whale

 125  Outrising on the spot, scaly with shells, [1210]

 Unravelling his body's train, 'gan urge

 More near the waves, shocking the gleaming brine,

 Seizing--at God's command--the prey; which, rolled

 From the poop's summit prone, with slimy jaws

 130  He sucked; and into his long belly sped

 The living feast; and swallowed, with the man,

 The rage of sky and main.  The billowy waste

 Grows level, and the ether's gloom dissolves;

 The waves on this side, and the blasts on that,

 135  Are to their friendly mood restored; and, where

 The placid keel marks out a path secure,

 White traces in the emerald furrow bloom.

 The sailor then does to the reverend Lord

 Of death make grateful offering of his fear; [1211]

 140  Then enters friendly ports.

 Jonah the seer

 The while is voyaging, in other craft

 Embarked, and cleaving 'neath the lowest waves

 A wave:  his sails the intestines of the fish,

 Inspired with breath ferine; himself, shut in;

 145  By waters, yet untouched; in the sea's heart

 And yet beyond its reach; 'mid wrecks of fleets

 Half-eaten, and men's carcasses dissolved

 In putrid disintegrity:  in life

 Learning the process of his death; but still--

 150  To be a sign hereafter of the Lord [1212] --

 A witness was he (in his very self), [1213]

 Not of destruction, but of death's repulse.

 ------------------------

 [1198] [Elucidation.]

 [1199] These two lines, if this be their true sense, seem to refer to
 Lot's wife.  But the grammar and meaning of this introduction are alike
 obscure.

 [1200] "Metus;" used, as in other places, of godly fear.

 [1201] Lit. "from," i.e., which, urged by a heart which is that of a
 saint, even though on this occasion it failed, the prophet dared.

 [1202] Libratur.

 [1203] "Tarshish," Eng. ver.; perhaps Tartessus in Spain.  For this
 question, and the "trustiness" of Joppa (now Jaffa) as a port, see
 Pusey on Jonah i. 3.

 [1204] Ejusdem per signa Dei.

 [1205] i.e., the cloud.

 [1206] Genitus (Oehler); geminus (Migne) ="twin clamour," which is not
 inapt.

 [1207] Mandare (Oehler).  If this be the true reading, the rendering in
 the text seems to represent the meaning; for "mandare" with an
 accusative, in the sense of "to bid the tardy coils tighten the girth's
 noose," seems almost too gross a solecism for even so lax a Latinist as
 our present writer.  Migne, however, reads mundare--to "clear" the
 tardy coils, i.e., probably from the wash and weed with which the gale
 was cloying them.

 [1208] Tunc Domini vates ingesta Spiritus infit.  Of course it is a
 gross offence against quantity to make a genitive in "us" short, as the
 rendering in the text does.  But a writer who makes the first syllable
 in "clamor" and the last syllable of gerunds in do short, would
 scarcely be likely to hesitate about taking similar liberties with a
 genitive of the so-called fourth declension.  It is possible, it is
 true, to take "vates" and "Spiritus" as in apposition, and render,
 "Then the seer-Spirit of the Lord begins to utter words inspired," or
 "Then the seer-Spirit begins to utter the promptings of the Lord."  But
 these renderings seem to accord less well with the ensuing words.

 [1209] Mundi.

 [1210] i.e., apparently with shells which had gathered about him as he
 lay in the deep.

 [1211] This seems to be the sense of Oehler's "Nauta at tum Domino leti
 venerando timorem Sacrificat grates"--"grates" being in apposition with
 "timorem."  But Migne reads:  "Nautæ tum Domino læti venerando timorem
 Sacrificant grates:"-- "The sailors then do to the reverend Lord Gladly
 make grateful sacrifice of fear:" and I do not see that Oehler's
 reading is much better.

 [1212] Comp. Matt. xii. 38-41; Luke xi. 29, 30.

 [1213] These words are not in the original, but are inserted (I
 confess) to fill up the line, and avoid ending with an incomplete
 verse.  If, however, any one is curious enough to compare the
 translation, with all its defects, with the Latin, he may be somewhat
 surprised to find how very little alteration or adaptation is necessary
 in turning verse into verse.

 2.  A Strain of Sodom.

 (Author Uncertain.)

 Already had Almighty God wiped off

 By vengeful flood (with waters all conjoined

 Which heaven discharged on earth and the sea's plain [1214]

 Outspued) the times of the primeval age:

 5  Had pledged Himself, while nether air should bring

 The winters in their course, ne'er to decree,

 By liquid ruin, retribution's due;

 And had assigned, to curb the rains, the bow

 Of many hues, sealing the clouds with band

 10  Of purple and of green, Iris its name,

 The rain-clouds' proper baldric. [1215]

 But alike

 With mankind's second race impiety

 Revives, and a new age of ill once more

 Shoots forth; allotted now no more to showers

 15  For ruin, but to fires:  thus did the land

 Of Sodom earn to be by glowing dews

 Upburnt, and typically thus portend

 The future end. [1216] There wild voluptuousness

 (Modesty's foe) stood in the room of law;

 20  Which prescient guest would shun, and sooner choose

 At Scythian or Busirian altar's foot

 'Mid sacred rites to die, and, slaughtered, pour

 His blood to Bebryx, or to satiate

 Libyan palæstras, or assume new forms;

 25  By virtue of Circæan cups, than lose

 His outraged sex in Sodom.  At heaven's gate

 There knocked for vengeance marriages commit

 With equal incest common 'mong a race

 By nature rebels 'gainst themselves; [1217] and hurts

 30  Done to man's name and person equally.

 But God, forewatching all things, at fix'd time

 Doth judge the unjust; with patience tarrying

 The hour when crime's ripe age--not any force

 Of wrath impetuous--shall have circumscribed

 35  The space for waiting. [1218]

 Now at length the day

 Of vengeance was at hand.  Sent from the host

 Angelical, two, youths in form, who both

 Were ministering spirits, [1219] carrying

 The Lord's divine commissions, come beneath

 40  The walls of Sodom.  There was dwelling Lot

 A transplantation from a pious stock;

 Wise, and a practicer of righteousness,

 He was the only one to think on God:

 As oft a fruitful tree is wont to lurk,

 45  Guest-like, in forests wild.  He, sitting then

 Before the gate (for the celestials scarce

 Had reached the ramparts), though he knew not them

 Divine, [1220] accosts them unsolicited,

 Invites, and with ancestral honour greets;

 50  And offers them, preparing to abide

 Abroad, a hospice.  By repeated prayers

 He wins them; and then ranges studiously

 The sacred pledges [1221] on his board, [1222] and quits [1223]

 His friends with courteous offices.  The night

 55  Had brought repose:  alternate [1224] dawn had chased

 The night, and Sodom with her shameful law

 Makes uproar at the doors.  Lot, suppliant wise,

 Withstands:  "Young men, let not your new fed lust

 Enkindle you to violate this youth! [1225]

 60  Whither is passion's seed inviting you?

 To what vain end your lust?  For such an end

 No creatures wed:  not such as haunt the fens;

 Not stall-fed cattle; not the gaping brood

 Subaqueous; nor they which, modulant

 65  On pinions, hang suspended near the clouds;

 Nor they which with forth-stretched body creep

 Over earth's face.  To conjugal delight

 Each kind its kind doth owe:  but female still

 To all is wife; nor is there one that has

 70  A mother save a female one.  Yet now,

 If youthful vigour holds it right [1226] to waste

 The flower of modesty, I have within

 Two daughters of a nuptial age, in whom

 Virginity is swelling in its bloom,

 75  Already ripe for harvest--a desire

 Worthy of men--which let your pleasure reap!

 Myself their sire, I yield them; and will pay

 For my guests' sake, the forfeit of my grief!"

 Answered the mob insane:  "And who art thou?

 80  And what? and whence? to lord it over us,

 And to expound us laws?  Shall foreigner

 Rule Sodom, and hurl threats?  Now, then, thyself

 For daughters and for guests shalt sate our greed!

 One shall suffice for all!"  So said, so done:

 85  The frantic mob delays not.  As, whene'er

 A turbid torrent rolls with wintry tide,

 And rushes at one speed through countless streams

 Of rivers, if, just where it forks, some tree

 Meets the swift waves (not long to stand, save while

 90  By her root's force she shall avail to oppose

 Her tufty obstacles), when gradually

 Her hold upon the undermined soil

 Is failing, with her bared stem she hangs,

 And, with uncertain heavings to and fro,

 95  Defers her certain fall; not otherwise

 Lot in the mid-whirl of the dizzy mob

 Kept nodding, now almost o'ercome.  But power

 Divine brings succour:  the angelic youths,

 Snatching him from the threshold, to his roof

 100  Restore him; but upon the spot they mulct

 Of sight the mob insane in open day,--

 Fit augury of coming penalties!

 Then they unlock the just decrees of God:

 That penalty condign from heaven will fall

 105  On Sodom; that himself had merited

 Safety upon the count of righteousness.

 "Gird thee, then, up to hasten hence thy flight,

 And with thee to lead out what family

 Thou hast:  already we are bringing on

 110  Destruction o'er the city."  Lot with speed

 Speaks to his sons-in-law; but their hard heart

 Scorned to believe the warning, and at fear

 Laughed.  At what time the light attempts to climb

 The darkness, and heaven's face wears double hue

 115  From night and day, the youthful visitants

 Were instant to outlead from Sodoma

 The race Chaldæan, [1227] and the righteous house

 Consign to safety:  "Ho! come, Lot! arise,

 And take thy yokefellow and daughters twain,

 120  And hence, beyond the boundaries be gone,

 Preventing [1228] Sodom's penalties!"  And eke

 With friendly hands they lead them trembling forth,

 And then their final mandates give:  "Save, Lot,

 Thy life, lest thou perchance should will to turn

 125  Thy retroverted gaze behind, or stay

 The step once taken:  to the mountain speed!"

 Lot feared to creep the heights with tardy step,

 Lest the celestial wrath-fires should o'ertake

 And whelm him:  therefore he essays to crave

 130  Some other ports; a city small, to wit,

 Which opposite he had espied.  "Hereto,"

 He said, "I speed my flight:  scarce with its walls

 'Tis visible; nor is it far, nor great."

 They, favouring his prayer, safety assured

 135  To him and to the city; whence the spot

 Is known in speech barbaric by the name

 Segor. [1229] Lot enters Segor while the sun

 Is rising, [1230] the last sun, which glowing bears

 To Sodom conflagration; for his rays

 140  He had armed all with fire:  beneath him spreads

 An emulous gloom, which seeks to intercept

 The light; and clouds combine to interweave

 Their smoky globes with the confused sky:

 Down pours a novel shower:  the ether seethes

 145  With sulphur mixt with blazing flames: [1231] the air

 Crackles with liquid heats exust.  From hence

 The fable has an echo of the truth

 Amid its false, that the sun's progeny

 Would drive his father's team; but nought availed

 150  The giddy boy to curb the haughty steeds

 Of fire:  so blazed our orb:  then lightning reft

 The lawless charioteer, and bitter plaint

 Transformed his sisters.  Let Eridanus

 See to it, if one poplar on his banks

 155  Whitens, or any bird dons plumage there

 Whose note old age makes mellow! [1232]

 Here they mourn

 O'er miracles of metamorphosis

 Of other sort.  For, partner of Lot's flight,

 His wife (ah me, for woman! even then [1233]

 160  Intolerant of law!) alone turned back

 At the unearthly murmurs of the sky)

 Her daring eyes, but bootlessly:  not doomed

 To utter what she saw! and then and there

 Changed into brittle salt, herself her tomb

 165  She stood, herself an image of herself,

 Keeping an incorporeal form:  and still

 In her unsheltered station 'neath the heaven

 Dures she, by rains unmelted, by decay

 And winds unwasted; nay, if some strange hand

 170  Deface her form, forthwith from her own store

 Her wounds she doth repair.  Still is she said

 To live, and, 'mid her corporal change, discharge

 With wonted blood her sex's monthly dues.

 Gone are the men of Sodom; gone the glare

 175  Of their unhallowed ramparts; all the house

 Inhospitable, with its lords, is gone:

 The champaign is one pyre; here embers rough

 And black, here ash-heaps with hoar mould, mark out

 The conflagration's course:  evanished

 180  Is all that old fertility [1234] which Lot,

 Seeing outspread before him,...

 . . . . . . . . . . . .
 .

 No ploughman spends his fruitless toil on glebes

 Pitchy with soot:  or if some acres there,

 But half consumed, still strive to emulate

 185  Autumn's glad wealth, pears, peaches, and all fruits

 Promise themselves full easely [1235] to the eye

 In fairest bloom, until the plucker's hand

 Is on them:  then forthwith the seeming fruit

 Crumbles to dust 'neath the bewraying touch,

 190  And turns to embers vain.

 Thus, therefore (sky

 And earth entombed alike), not e'en the sea

 Lives there:  the quiet of that quiet sea

 Is death! [1236] --a sea which no wave animates

 Through its anhealant volumes; which beneath

 195  Its native Auster sighs not anywhere;

 Which cannot from its depths one scaly race,

 Or with smooth skin or cork-like fence encased,

 Produce, or curled shell in single valve

 Or double fold enclosed.  Bitumen there

 200  (The sooty reek of sea exust) alone,

 With its own crop, a spurious harvest yields;

 Which 'neath the stagnant surface vivid heat

 From seething mass of sulphur and of brine

 Maturing tempers, making earth cohere

 205  Into a pitch marine. [1237] At season due

 The heated water's fatty ooze is borne

 Up to the surface; and with foamy flakes

 Over the level top a tawny skin

 Is woven.  They whose function is to catch

 210  That ware put to, tilting their smooth skin down

 With balance of their sides, to teach the film,

 Once o'er the gunnel, to float in:  for, lo!

 Raising itself spontaneous, it will swim

 Up to the edge of the unmoving craft;

 215  And will, when pressed, [1238] for guerdon large, ensure

 Immunity from the defiling touch

 Of weft which female monthly efflux clothes.

 Behold another portent notable,

 Fruit of that sea's disaster:  all things cast

 220  Therein do swim:  gone is its native power

 For sinking bodies:  if, in fine, you launch

 A torch's lightsome [1239] hull (where spirit serves

 For fire) therein, the apex of the flame

 Will act as sail; put out the flame, and 'neath

 225  The waters will the light's wrecks ruin go!

 Such Sodom's and Gomorrah's penalties,

 For ages sealed as signs before the eyes

 Of unjust nations, whose obdurate hearts

 God's fear have quite forsaken, [1240] will them teach

 230  To reverence heaven-sanctioned rights, [1241] and lift

 Their gaze unto one only Lord of all.

 ------------------------

 [1214] Maris æquor.

 [1215] See Gen. ix. 21, 22; x. 8-17.

 [1216] Comp. 2 Pet. iii. 5-14.

 [1217] The expression, "sinners against their own souls," in Num. xvi.
 38--where, however, the LXX. have a very different version--may be
 compared with this; as likewise Prov. viii. 36.

 [1218] Whether the above be the sense of this most obscure triplet I
 will not presume to determine.  It is at least (I hope) intelligible
 sense.  But that the reader may judge for himself whether he can offer
 any better, I subjoin the lines, which form a sentence alone, and
 therefore can be judged of without their context:-- "Tempore sed certo
 Deus omnia prospectulatus, Judicat injustos, patiens ubi criminis ætas
 Cessandi spatium vis nulla coëgerit iræ."

 [1219] Comp. Heb. i. 14.  It may be as well here to inform the reader
 once for all that prosody as well as syntax is repeatedly set at
 defiance in these metrical fragments; and hence, of course, arise some
 of the chief difficulties in dealing with them.

 [1220] "Divinos;" i.e., apparently "superhuman," as everything heavenly
 is.

 [1221] Of hospitality--bread and salt, etc.

 [1222] "Mensa;" but perhaps "mensæ" may be suggested--"the sacred
 pledges of the board."

 [1223] "Dispungit," which is the only verb in the sentence, and refers
 both to pia pignora and to amicos.  I use "quit" in the sense in which
 we speak of "quitting a debtor," i.e., giving him his full due; but the
 two lines are very hard, and present (as in the case of those before
 quoted) a jumble of words without grammar; "pia pignora mensa
 Officiisque probis studio dispungit amicos;" which may be somewhat more
 literally rendered than in our text, thus:  "he zealously discharges"
 (i.e., fulfils) "his sacred pledges" (i.e., the promised hospitality
 which he had offered them) "with (a generous) board, and discharges"
 (i.e., fulfils his obligations to) "his friends with honourable
 courtesies."

 [1224] Altera =alterna.  But the statement differs from Gen. xix. 4.

 [1225] "Istam juventam," i.e., the two "juvenes" (ver. 31) within.

 [1226] "Fas" =hosion, morally right; distinct from "jus" or "licitum."

 [1227] i.e., Lot's race or family, which had come from "Ur of the
 Chaldees."  See Gen. xi. 26, 27, 28.

 [1228] I use "preventing" in its now unusual sense of "anticipating the
 arrival of."

 [1229] Segor in the LXX., "Zoar" in Eng. ver.

 [1230] "Simul exoritur sol."  But both the LXX. and the Eng. ver. say
 the sun was risen when Lot entered the city.

 [1231] So Oehler and Migne.  But perhaps we may alter the pointing
 slightly, and read:-- "Down pours a novel shower, sulphur mixt With
 blazing flames:  the ether seethes:  the air Crackles with liquid
 exust."

 [1232] The story of Phaëthon and his fate is told in Ov., Met., ii.
 1-399, which may be compared with the present piece.  His two sisters
 were transformed into white poplars, according to some; alders,
 according to others.  See Virg., Æn., x. 190 sqq., Ec., vi. 62 sqq.
 His half-brother (Cycnus or Cygnus) was turned into a swan:  and the
 scene of these transformations is laid by Ovid on the banks of the
 Eridanus (the Po).  But the fable is variously told; and it has been
 suggested that the groundwork of it is to be found rather in the
 still-standing of the sun recorded in Joshua.

 [1233] i.e., as she had been before in the case of Eve.  See Gen. iii.
 1 sqq.

 [1234] I have hazarded the bold conjecture--which I see others
 (Pamelius at all events) had hazarded before me--that "feritas" is used
 by our author as ="fertilitas."  The word, of course, is very
 incorrectly formed etymologically; but etymology is not our author's
 forte apparently.  It will also be seen that there is seemingly a gap
 at this point, or else some enormous mistake, in the mss.  An attempt
 has been made (see Migne) to correct it, but not a very satisfactory
 one.  For the common reading, which gives two lines, "Occidit illa
 prior feritas, quam prospiciens Loth Nullus arat frustra piceas
 fuligine glebas," which are evidently entirely unconnected with one
 another, it is proposed to read, "Occidit illa prior feritas, quam
 prospiciens Loth, Deseruisse pii fertur commercia fratris. Nullas
 arat," etc. This use of "fratris" in a wide sense may be justified from
 Gen. xiii. 8 (to which passage, with its immediate context, there seems
 to be a reference, whether we adopt the proposed correction or no), and
 similar passages in Holy Writ.  But the transition is still abrupt to
 the "nullus arat," etc.; and I prefer to leave the passage as it is,
 without attempting to supply the hiatus.

 [1235] This use of "easely" as a dissyllable is justifiable from
 Spenser.

 [1236] This seems to be the sense, but the Latin is somewhat strange:
 "mors est maris illa quieti," i.e., illa (quies) maris quieti mors
 est.  The opening lines of "Jonah" (above) should be compared with this
 passage and its context.

 [1237] Inque picem dat terræ hærere marinam.

 [1238] "Pressum" (Oehler); "pretium" (Migne):  "it will yield a prize,
 namely, that," etc.

 [1239] Luciferam.

 [1240] Oehler's pointing is disregarded.

 [1241] "De cælo jura tueri;" possibly "to look for laws from heaven."

 3.  Genesis.

 (Author Uncertain.)

 In the beginning did the Lord create

 The heaven and earth: [1242] for formless was the land, [1243]

 And hidden by the wave, and God immense [1244]

 O'er the vast watery plains was hovering,

 5  While chaos and black darkness shrouded all:

 Which darkness, when God bade be from the pole [1245]

 Disjoined, He speaks, "Let there be light;" and all

 In the clear world [1246] was bright.  Then, when the Lord

 The first day's work had finished, He formed

 10  Heaven's axis white with nascent clouds:  the deep

 Immense receives its wandering [1247] shores, and draws

 The rivers manifold with mighty trains.

 The third dun light unveiled earth's [1248] face, and soon

 (Its name assigned [1249] ) the dry land's story 'gins:

 15  Together on the windy champaigns rise

 The flowery seeds, and simultaneously

 Fruit-bearing boughs put forth procurvant arms.

 The fourth day, with [1250] the sun's lamp generates

 The moon, and moulds the stars with tremulous light

 20  Radiant:  these elements it [1251] gave as signs

 To th' underlying world, [1252] to teach the times

 Which, through their rise and setting, were to change.

 Then, on the fifth, the liquid [1253] streams receive

 Their fish, and birds poise in the lower air

 25  Their pinions many-hued.  The sixth, again,

 Supples the ice-cold snakes into their coils,

 And over the whole fields diffuses herds

 Of quadrupeds; and mandate gave that all

 Should grow with multiplying seed, and roam

 30  And feed in earth's immensity.

 All these

 When power divine by mere command arranged,

 Observing that things mundane still would lack

 A ruler, thus It [1254] speaks:  "With utmost care,

 Assimilated to our own aspect, [1255]

 35  Make We a man to reign in the whole orb."

 And him, although He with a single word [1256]

 Could have compounded, yet Himself did deign

 To shape him with His sacred own right hand,

 Inspiring his dull breast from breast divine.

 40  Whom when He saw formed in a likeness such

 As is His own, He measures how he broods

 Alone on gnawing cares.  Straight way his eyes

 With sleep irriguous He doth perfuse;

 That from his left rib woman softlier

 45  May formed be, and that by mixture twin

 His substance may add firmness to her limbs.

 To her the name of "Life"--which is called "Eve" [1257] --

 Is given:  wherefore sons, as custom is,

 Their parents leave, and, with a settled home,

 50  Cleave to their wives.

 The seventh came, when God

 At His works' end did rest, decreeing it

 Sacred unto the coming ages' joys.

 Straightway--the crowds of living things deployed

 Before him--Adam's cunning skill (the gift

 55  Of the good Lord) gives severally to all

 The name which still is permanent.  Himself,

 And, joined with him, his Eve, God deigns address

 "Grow, for the times to come, with manifold

 Increase, that with your seed the pole and earth [1258]

 60  Be filled; and, as Mine heirs, the varied fruits

 Pluck ye, which groves and champaigns render you,

 From their rich turf."  Thus after He discoursed,

 In gladsome court [1259] a paradise is strewn,

 And looks towards the rays of th' early sun. [1260]

 65  These joys among, a tree with deadly fruits,

 Breeding, conjoined, the taste of life and death,

 Arises.  In the midst of the demesne [1261]

 Flows with pure tide a stream, which irrigates

 Fair offsprings from its liquid waves, and cuts

 70  Quadrified paths from out its bubbling fount

 Here wealthy Phison, with auriferous waves,

 Swells, and with hoarse tide wears [1262] conspicuous gems,

 This prasinus, [1263] that glowing carbuncle, [1264]

 By name; and raves, transparent in its shoals,

 75  The margin of the land of Havilath.

 Next Gihon, gliding by the Æthiops,

 Enriches them.  The Tigris is the third,

 Adjoined to fair Euphrates, furrowing

 Disjunctively with rapid flood the land

 80  Of Asshur.  Adam, with his faithful wife,

 Placed here as guard and workman, is informed

 By such the Thunderer's [1265] speech:  "Tremble ye not

 To pluck together the permitted fruits

 Which, with its leafy bough, the unshorn grove

 85  Hath furnished; anxious only lest perchance

 Ye cull the hurtful apple, [1266] which is green

 With a twin juice for functions several."

 And, no less blind meantime than Night herself,

 Deep night 'gan hold them, nor had e'en a robe

 90  Covered their new-formed limbs.

 Amid these haunts,

 And on mild berries reared, a foamy snake,

 Surpassing living things in sense astute,

 Was creeping silently with chilly coils.

 He, brooding over envious lies instinct

 95  With gnawing sense, tempts the soft heart beneath

 The woman's breast:  "Tell me, why shouldst thou dread

 The apple's [1267] happy seeds?  Why, hath not

 All known fruits hallowed? [1268] Whence if thou be prompt

 To cull the honeyed fruits, the golden world [1269]

 100  Will on its starry pole return." [1270] But she

 Refuses, and the boughs forbidden fears

 To touch.  But yet her breast 'gins be o'er come

 With sense infirm.  Straightway, as she at length

 With snowy tooth the dainty morsels bit,

 105  Stained with no cloud the sky serene up-lit!

 Then taste, instilling lure in honeyed jaws,

 To her yet uninitiated lord

 Constrained her to present the gift; which he

 No sooner took, then--night effaced!:--their eyes

 110  Shone out serene in the resplendent world. [1271]

 When, then, they each their body bare espied,

 And when their shameful parts they see, with leaves

 Of fig they shadow them.

 By chance, beneath

 The sun's now setting light, they recognise

 115  The sound of the Lord's voice, and, trembling, haste

 To bypaths.  Then the Lord of heaven accosts

 The mournful Adam:  "Say, where now thou art."

 Who suppliant thus answers:  "Thine address,

 O Lord, O Mighty One, I tremble at,

 120  Beneath my fearful heart; and, being bare,

 I faint with chilly dread."  Then said the Lord:

 "Who hath the hurtful fruits, then, given you?"

 "This woman, while she tells me how her eyes

 With brilliant day promptly perfused were,

 125  And on her dawned the liquid sky serene,

 And heaven's sun and stars, o'ergave them me!"

 Forthwith God's anger frights perturbed Eve,

 While the Most High inquires the authorship

 Of the forbidden act.  Hereon she opes

 130  Her tale:  "The speaking serpent's suasive words

 I harboured, while the guile and bland request

 Misled me:  for, with venoms viperous

 His words inweaving, stories told he me

 Of those delights which should all fruits excel."

 135  Straightway the Omnipotent the dragon's deeds

 Condemns, and bids him be to all a sight

 Unsightly, monstrous; bids him presently

 With grovelling beast to crawl; and then to bite

 And chew the soil; while war should to all time

 140  'Twixt human senses and his tottering self

 Be waged, that he might creep, crestfallen, prone,

 Behind the legs of men, [1272] --that while he glides

 Close on their heels they may down-trample him.

 The woman, sadly caught by guileful words,

 145  Is bidden yield her fruit with struggle hard,

 And bear her husband's yoke with patient zeal. [1273]

 "But thou, to whom the sentence [1274] of the wife

 (Who, vanquished, to the dragon pitiless

 Yielded) seemed true, shalt through long times deplore

 150  Thy labour sad; for thou shalt see, instead

 Of wheaten harvest's seed, the thistle rise,

 And the thorn plenteously with pointed spines:

 So that, with weary heart and mournful breast,

 Full many sighs shall furnish anxious food; [1275]

 155  Till, in the setting hour of coming death,

 To level earth, whence thou thy body draw'st,

 Thou be restored."  This done, the Lord bestows

 Upon the trembling pair a tedious life;

 And from the sacred gardens far removes

 160  Them downcast, and locates them opposite,

 And from the threshold bars them by mid fire,

 Wherein from out the swift heat is evolved

 A cherubim, [1276] while fierce the hot point glows,

 And rolls enfolding flames.  And lest their limbs

 165  With sluggish cold should be benumbed, the Lord

 Hides flayed from cattle's flesh together sews,

 With vestures warm their bare limbs covering.

 When, therefore, Adam--now believing--felt

 (By wedlock taught) his manhood, he confers

 170  On his loved wife the mother's name; and, made

 Successively by scions twain a sire,

 Gives names to stocks [1277] diverse:  Caïn the first

 Hath for his name, to whom is Abel joined.

 The latter's care tended the harmless sheep;

 175  The other turned the earth with curved plough.

 These, when in course of time [1278] they brought their gifts

 To Him who thunders, offered--as their sense

 Prompted them--fruits unlike.  The elder one

 Offered the first-fruits [1279] of the fertile glebes:

 180  The other pays his vows with gentle lamb,

 Bearing in hand the entrails pure, and fat

 Snow-white; and to the Lord, who pious vows

 Beholds, is instantly acceptable.

 Wherefore with anger cold did Cain glow; [1280]

 185  With whom God deigns to talk, and thus begins:

 "Tell Me, if thou live rightly, and discern

 Things hurtful, couldst thou not then pass thine age

 Pure from contracted guilt?  Cease to essay

 With gnawing sense thy brother's ruin, who,

 190  Subject to thee as lord, his neck shall yield."

 Not e'en thus softened, he unto the fields

 Conducts his brother; whom when overta'en

 In lonely mead he saw, with his twin palms

 Bruising his pious throat, he crushed life out.

 195  Which deed the Lord espying from high heaven,

 Straitly demands "where Abel is on earth? "

 He says "he will not as his brother's guard

 Be set."  Then God outspeaks to him again:

 "Doth not the sound of his blood's voice, sent up

 200  To Me, ascend unto heaven's lofty pole?

 Learn, therefore, for so great a crime what doom

 Shall wait thee.  Earth, which with thy kinsman's blood

 Hath reeked but now, shall to thy hateful hand

 Refuse to render back the cursed seeds

 205  Entrusted her; nor shall, if set with herbs,

 Produce her fruit:  that, torpid, thou shalt dash

 Thy limbs against each other with much fear."......

 ------------------------

 [1242] Terram.

 [1243] Tellus.

 [1244] Immensus.  See note on the word in the fragment "Concerning the
 Cursing of the Heathen's Gods."

 [1245] Cardine.

 [1246] Mundo.

 [1247] "Errantia;" so called, probably, either because they appear to
 move as ships pass them, or because they may be said to "wander" by
 reason of the constant change which they undergo from the action of the
 sea, and because of the shifting nature of their sands.

 [1248] Terrarum.

 [1249] "God called the dry land Earth:"  Gen. i. 10.

 [1250] i.e., "together with;" it begets both sun and moon.

 [1251] i.e., "the fourth day."

 [1252] Mundo.

 [1253] Or, "lucid"--liquentia.

 [1254] i.e., "Power Divine."

 [1255] So Milton and Shakespeare.

 [1256] As (see above, l. 31) He had all other things.

 [1257] See Gen. iii. 20, with the LXX., and the marg. in the Eng. ver.

 [1258] Terræ.

 [1259] The "gladsome court"--"læta aula"--seems to mean Eden, in which
 the garden is said to have been planted.  See Gen. ii. 8.

 [1260] i.e., eastward.  See the last reference.

 [1261] Ædibus in mediis.

 [1262] Terit.  So Job (xiv. 19), "The waters wear the stones."

 [1263] "Onyx," Eng. ver.  See the following piece, l. 277.

 [1264] "Bdellium," Eng. Ver.; anthrax, LXX.

 [1265] Comp. Ps. xxix. 3, especially in "Great Bible" (xxviii. 3 in
 LXX.)

 [1266] Malum.

 [1267] Mali.

 [1268] "Numquid poma Deus non omnia nota sacravit?"

 [1269] Mundus.

 [1270] The writer, supposing it to be night (see 88, 89), seems to mean
 that the serpent hinted that the fruit would instantly dispel night and
 restore day.  Compare the ensuing lines.

 [1271] Mundo.

 [1272] Virorum.

 [1273] "Servitiumque sui studio perferre mariti;" or, perhaps, "and
 drudge in patience at her husband's beck."

 [1274] "Sententia:"  her sentence, or opinion, as to the fruit and its
 effects.

 [1275] Or, "That with heart-weariness and mournful breast Full many
 sighs may furnish anxious food."

 [1276] The writer makes "cherubim"--or "cherubin"--singular.  I have
 therefore retained his mistake.  What the "hot point"--"calidus
 apex"--is, is not clear.  It may be an allusion to the "flaming sword"
 (see Gen. iii. 24); or it may mean the top of the flame.

 [1277] Or, "origins"--"orsis"--because Cain and Abel were original
 types, as it were, of two separate classes of men.

 [1278] "Perpetuo;" "in process of time," Eng. ver.; meth' hemeras, LXX.
 in Gen. iv. 3.

 [1279] Quæ prosata fuerant.  But, as Wordsworth remarks on Gen. iv., we
 do not read that Cain's offerings were first-fruits even.

 [1280] Quod propter gelida Cain incanduit ira.  If this, which is
 Oehler's and Migne's reading, be correct, the words gelida and
 incanduit seem to be intentionally contrasted, unless incandescere be
 used here in a supposed sense of "growing white," "turning pale."
 Urere is used in Latin of heat and cold indifferently.  Calida would,
 of course, be a ready emendation; but gelida has the advantage of being
 far more startling.

 4.  A Strain of the Judgment of the Lord.

 (Author Uncertain.) [1281]

 Who will for me in fitting strain adapt

 Field-haunting muses? and with flowers will grace

 The spring-tide's rosy gales?  And who will give

 The summer harvest's heavy stalks mature?

 5  And to the autumn's vines their swollen grapes?

 Or who in winter's honour will commend

 The olives, ever-peaceful? and will ope

 Waters renewed, even at their fountainheads?

 And cut from waving grass the leafy flowers?

 10  Forthwith the breezes of celestial light

 I will attune.  Now be it granted me

 To meet the lightsome [1282] muses! to disclose

 The secret rivers on the fluvial top

 Of Helicon, [1283] and gladsome woods that grow

 15  'Neath other star. [1284] And simultaneously

 I will attune in song the eternal flames;

 Whence the sea fluctuates with wave immense:

 What power [1285] moves the solid lands to quake;

 And whence the golden light first shot its rays

 20  On the new world; or who from gladsome clay

 Could man have moulded; whence in empty world [1286]

 Our race could have upgrown; and what the greed

 Of living which each people so inspires;

 What things for ill created are; or what

 25  Death's propagation; whence have rosy wreaths

 Sweet smell and ruddy hue; what makes the vine

 Ferment in gladsome grapes away; and makes

 Full granaries by fruit of slender stalks

 distended be; or makes the tree grow ripe

 30  'Mid ice, with olives black; who gives to seeds

 Their increments of vigour various;

 And with her young's soft shadowings protects

 The mother.  Good it is all things to know

 Which wondrous are in nature, that it may

 35  Be granted us to recognise through all

 The true Lord, who light, seas, sky, earth prepared,

 And decked with varied star the new-made world; [1287]

 And first bade beasts and birds to issue forth;

 And gave the ocean's waters to be stocked

 40  With fish; and gathered in a mass the sands,

 With living creatures fertilized.  Such strains

 With stately [1288] muses will I spin, and waves

 Healthful will from their fountainheads disclose:

 And may this strain of mine the gladsome shower

 45  Catch, which from placid clouds doth come, and flows

 Deeply and all unsought into men's souls,

 And guide it into our new-fumed lands

 In copious rills. [1289]

 Now come:  if any one

 Still ignorant of God, and knowing naught

 50  Of life to come, [1290] would fain attain to touch

 The care-effacing living nymph, and through

 The swift waves' virtue his lost life repair,

 And 'scape the penalties of flame eterne, [1291]

 And rather win the guerdons of the life

 55  To come, let such remember God is One,

 Alone the object of our prayers; who 'neath

 His threshold hath the whole world poised; Himself

 Eternally abiding, and to be

 Alway for aye; holding the ages [1292] all;

 60  Alone, before all ages; [1293] unbegotten,

 Limitless God; who holds alone His seat

 Supernal; supereminent alone

 Above high heavens; omnipotent alone;

 Whom all things do obey; who for Himself

 65  Formed, when it pleased Him, man for aye; and gave

 Him to be pastor of beasts tame, and lord

 Of wild; who by a word [1294] could stretch forth heaven;

 And with a word could solid earth suspend;

 And quicklier than word [1295] had the seas wave

 70  Disjoined; [1296] and man's dear form with His own hands

 Did love to mould; and furthermore did will

 His own fair likeness [1297] to exist in him;

 And by His Spirit on his countenance

 The breath [1298] of life did breathe.

 Unmindful he

 75  Of God, such guilt rashly t' incur!  Beyond

 The warning's range he was not ought to touch. [1299]

 One fruit illicit, whence he was to know

 Forthwith how to discriminate alike

 Evil and equity, God him forbade

 80  To touch.  What functions of the world [1300] did God

 Permit to man, and sealed the sweet sweet pledge

 Of His own love! and jurisdiction gave

 O'er birds, and granted him both deep and soil

 To tame, and mandates useful did impart

 85  Of dear salvation!  'Neath his sway He gave

 The lands, the souls of flying things, the race

 Feathered, and every race, or tame or wild,

 Of beasts, and the sea's race, and monsterforms

 Shapeless of swimming things.  But since so soon

 90  The primal man by primal crime transgressed

 The law, and left the mandates of the Lord

 (Led by a wife who counselled all the ills),

 By death he 'gan to perish.  Woman 'twas

 Who sin's first ill committed, and (the law

 95  Transgressed) deceived her husband.  Eve, induced

 By guile, the thresholds oped to death, and proved

 To her own self, with her whole race as well,

 A procreatrix of funereal woes.

 Hence unanticipated wickedness,

 100  Hence death, like seed, for aye, is scattered.  Then

 More frequent grew atrocious deed; and toil

 More savage set the corrupt orb astir:

 (This lure the crafty serpent spread, inspired

 By envy's self:)  then peoples more invent

 105  Practices of ill deeds; and by ill deeds

 Gave birth to seeds of wickedness.

 And so

 The only Lord, whose is the power supreme.

 Who o'er the heights the summits holds of heaven

 Supreme, and in exalted regions dwells

 110  In lofty light for ages, mindful too

 Of present time, and of futurity

 Prescient beforehand, keeps the progeny

 Of ill-desert, and all the souls which move

 By reason's force much-erring man--nor less

 115  Their tardy bodies governs He--against

 The age decreed, so soon as, stretched in death,

 Men lay aside their ponderous limbs, and light

 As air, shall go, their earthly bonds undone,

 And take in diverse parts their proper spheres

 120  (But some He bids be forthwith by glad gales

 Recalled to life, and be in secret kept

 To wait the decreed law's awards, until

 Their bodies with resuscitated limbs

 Revive. [1301] )  Then shall men 'gin to weigh the awards

 125  Of their first life, and on their crime and faults

 To think, and keep them for their penalties

 Which will be far from death; and mindful grow

 Of pious duties, by God's judgments taught;

 To wait expectant for their penalty

 130  And their descendants', fruit of their own crime;

 Or else to live wholly the life of sheep, [1302]

 Without a name; and in God's ear, now deaf,

 Pour unavailing weeping.  Shall not God

 Almighty, 'neath whose law are all things ruled,

 135  Be able after death life to restore?

 Or is there ought which the creation's Lord

 Unable seems to do?  If, darkness chased,

 He could outstretch the light, and could compound

 All the world's mass by a word suddenly,

 140  And raise by potent voice all things from nought,

 Why out of somewhat [1303] could He not compound

 The well-known shape which erst had been, which He

 Had moulded formerly; and bid the form

 Arise assimilated to Himself

 145  Again? Since God's are all things, earth the more

 Gives Him all back; for she will, when He bids,

 Unweave whate'er she woven had before.

 If one, perhaps, laid on sepulchral pyre,

 The flame consumed; or one in its blind waves

 150  The ocean have dismembered; if of one

 The entrails have, in hunger, satisfied

 The fishes; or on any's limbs wild beasts

 Have fastened cruel death; or any's blood,

 His body reft by birds, unhid have lain:

 155  Yet shall they not wrest from the mighty Lord

 His latest dues.  Need is that men appear

 Quickened from death 'fore God, and at His bar

 Stand in their shapes resumed.  Thus arid seeds

 Are drops into the vacant lands, and deep

 160  In the fixt furrows die and rot:  and hence

 Is not their surface [1304] animated soon

 With stalks repaired? and do they [1305] not grow strong

 And yellow with the living grains? and, rich

 With various usury, [1306] new harvests rise

 165  In mass?  The stars all set, and, born again,

 Renew their sheen; and day dies with its light

 Lost in dense night; and now night wanes herself

 As light unveils creation presently;

 And now another and another day

 170  Rises from its own stars; and the sun sets,

 Bright as it is with splendour--bearing light;

 Light perishes when by the coming eve

 The world [1307] is shaded; and the phoenix lives

 By her own soot [1308] renewed, and presently

 175  Rises, again a bird, O wondrous sight!

 After her burnings!  The bare tree in time

 Shoots with her leaves; and once more are her boughs

 Curved by the germen of the fruits.

 While then

 The world [1309] throughout is trembling at God's voice,

 180  And deeply moved are the high air's powers, [1310]

 Then comes a crash unwonted, then ensue

 Heaven's mightiest murmurs, on the approach of God,

 The whole world's [1311] Judge!  His countless ministers

 Forthwith conjoin their rushing march, and God

 185  With majesty supernal fence around.

 Angelic bands will from the heaven descend

 To earth; all, God's host, whose is faculty

 Divine; in form and visage spirits all

 Of virtue:  in them fiery vigour is;

 190  Rutilant are their bodies; heaven's might

 Divine about them flashes; the whole orb

 Hence murmurs; and earth, trembling to her depths

 (Or whatsoe'er her bulk is [1312] ), echoes back

 The roar, parturient of men, whom she,

 195  Being bidden, will with grief upyield. [1313] All stand

 In wonderment.  At last disturbed are

 The clouds, and the stars move and quake from height

 Of sudden power. [1314] When thus God comes, with voice

 Of potent sound, at once throughout all realms

 200  The sepulchres are burst, and every ground

 Outpours bones from wide chasms, and opening sand

 Outbelches living peoples; to the hair [1315]

 The members cleave; the bones inwoven are

 With marrow; the entwined sinews rule

 205  The breathing bodies; and the veins 'gin throb

 With simultaneously infused blood:

 And, from their caves dismissed, to open day

 Souls are restored, and seek to find again

 Each its own organs, as at their own place

 210  They rise. O wondrous faith!  Hence every age

 Shoots forth; forth shoots from ancient dust the host

 Of dead.  Regaining light, there rise again

 Mothers, and sires, and high-souled youths, and boys,

 And maids unwedded; and deceased old men

 215  Stand by with living souls; and with the cries

 Of babes the groaning orb resounds. [1316] Then tribes

 Various from their lowest seats will come:

 Bands of the Easterns; those which earth's extreme

 Sees; those which dwell in the downsloping clime

 220  Of the mid-world, and hold the frosty star's

 Riphæan citadels.  Every colonist

 Of every land stands frighted here:  the boor;

 The son of Atreus [1317] with his diadem

 Of royalty put off; the rich man mixt

 225  Coequally in line with pauper peers.

 Deep tremor everywhere:  then groans the orb

 With prayers; and peoples stretching forth their hands

 Grow stupid with the din!

 The Lord Himself

 Seated, is bright with light sublime; and fire

 230  Potent in all the Virtues [1318] flashing shines.

 And on His high-raised throne the Heavenly One

 Coruscates from His seat; with martyrs hemmed

 (A dazzling troop of men), and by His seers

 Elect accompanied (whose bodies bright

 235  Effulgent are with snowy stoles), He towers

 Above them.  And now priests in lustrous robes

 Attend, who wear upon their marked [1319] front

 Wreaths golden-red; and all submissive kneel

 And reverently adore.  The cry of all

 240  Is one:  "O Holy, Holy Holy, God!"

 To these [1320] the Lord will mandate give, to range

 The people in twin lines; and orders them

 To set apart by number the depraved;

 While such as have His biddings followed

 245  With placid words He calls, and bids them, clad

 With vigour--death quite conquered--ever dwell

 Amid light's inextinguishable airs,

 Stroll through the ancients' ever blooming realm,

 Through promised wealth, through ever sunny swards,

 250  And in bright body spend perpetual life.

 A place there is, beloved of the Lord,

 In Eastern coasts, where light is bright and clear,

 And healthier blows the breeze; day is eterne,

 Time changeless:  'tis a region set apart

 255  By God, most rich in plains, and passing blest,

 In the meridian [1321] of His cloudless seat.

 There gladsome the air, and is in light

 Ever to be; soft is the wind, and breathes

 Life-giving blasts; earth, fruitful with a soil

 260  Luxuriant, bears all things; in the meads

 Flowers shed their fragrance; and upon the plains

 The purple--not in envy--mingles all

 With golden-ruddy light.  One gladsome flower,

 With its own lustre clad, another clothes;

 265  And here with many a seed the dewy fields

 Are dappled, and the snowy tilths are crisped

 With rosy flowers.  No region happier

 Is known in other spots; none which in look

 Is fairer, or in honour more excels.

 270  Never in flowery gardens are there born

 Such lilies, nor do such upon our plains

 Outbloom; nor does the rose so blush, what time,

 New-born, 'tis opened by the breeze; nor is

 The purple with such hue by Tyrian dye

 275  Imbued.  With coloured pebbles beauteous gleams

 The gem:  here shines the prasinus; [1322] there glows

 The carbuncle; and giant-emerald

 Is green with grassy light.  Here too are born

 The cinnamons, with odoriferous twigs;

 280  And with dense leaf gladsome amomum joins

 Its fragrance.  Here, a native, lies the gold

 Of radiant sheen; and lofty groves reach heaven

 In blooming time, and germens fruitfullest

 Burden the living boughs.  No glades like these

 285  Hath Ind herself forth-stretcht; no tops so dense

 Rears on her mount the pine; nor with a shade

 So lofty-leaved is her cypress crisped;

 Nor better in its season blooms her bough

 In spring-tide.  Here black firs on lofty peak

 290  Bloom; and the only woods that know no hail

 Are green eternally:  no foliage falls;

 At no time fails the flower.  There, too, there blooms

 A flower as red as Tarsine purple is:

 A rose, I ween, it is (red hue it has,

 295  An odour keen); such aspect on its leaves

 It wears, such odour breathes.  A tree it [1323] stands,

 With a new flower, fairest in fruits; a crop

 Life-giving, dense, its happy strength does yield.

 Rich honies with green cane their fragrance join,

 300  And milk flows potable in runners full;

 And with whate'er that sacred earth is green,

 It all breathes life; and there Crete's healing gift [1324]

 Is sweetly redolent.  There, with smooth tide,

 Flows in the placid plains a fount:  four floods

 305  Thence water parted lands. [1325] The garden robed

 With flowers, I wot, keeps ever spring; no cold

 Of wintry star varies the breeze; and earth,

 After her birth-throes, with a kindlier blast

 Repairs.  Night there is none; the stars maintain

 310  Their darkness; angers, envies, and dire greed

 Are absent; and out-shut is fear, and cares

 Driven from the threshold.  Here the Evil One

 Is homeless; he is into worthy courts

 Out-gone, nor is't e'er granted him to touch

 315  The glades forbidden.  But here ancient faith

 Rests in elect abode; and life here treads,

 Joying in an eternal covenant;

 And health [1326] without a care is gladsome here

 In placid tilths, ever to live and be

 320  Ever in light.

 Here whosoe'er hath lived

 Pious, and cultivant of equity

 And goodness; who hath feared the thundering God

 With mind sincere; with sacred duteousness

 Tended his parents; and his other life [1327]

 325  Spent ever crimeless; or who hath consoled

 With faithful help a friend in indigence;

 Succoured the over-toiling needy one,

 As orphans' patron, and the poor man's aid;

 Rescued the innocent, and succoured them

 330  When press with accusation; hath to guests

 His ample table's pledges given; hath done

 All things divinely; pious offices

 Enjoined; done hurt to none; ne'er coveted

 Another's:  such as these, exulting all

 335  In divine praises, and themselves at once

 Exhorting, raise their voices to the stars;

 Thanksgivings to the Lord in joyous wise

 They psalming celebrate; and they shall go

 Their harmless way with comrade messengers.

 340  When ended hath the Lord these happy gifts,

 And likewise sent away to realms eterne

 The just, then comes a pitiable crowd

 Wailing its crimes; with parching tears it pours

 All groans effusely, and attests [1328] in acts

 345  With frequent ululations.  At the sight

 Of flames, their merit's due, and stagnant pools

 Of fire, wrath's weapons, they 'gin tremble all. [1329]

 Them an angelic host, upsnatching them,

 Forbids to pray, forbids to pour their cries

 350  (Too late!) with clamour loud:  pardon withheld,

 Into the lowest bottom they are hurled!

 O miserable men! how oft to you

 Hath Majesty divine made itself known!

 The sounds of heaven ye have heard; have seen

 355  Its lightnings; have experienced its rains

 Assiduous; its ires of winds and hail!

 How often nights and days serene do make

 Your seasons--God's gifts--fruitful with fair yields!

 Roses were vernal; the grain's summer-tide

 360  Failed not; the autumn variously poured

 Its mellow fruits; the rugged winter brake

 The olives, icy though they were:  'twas God

 Who granted all, nor did His goodness fail.

 At God earth trembled; on His voice the deep

 365  Hung, and the rivers trembling fled and left

 Sands dry; and every creature everywhere

 Confesses God!  Ye (miserable men!)

 Have heaven's Lord and earth's denied; and oft

 (Horrible!) have God's heralds put to flight; [1330]

 370  And rather slain the just with slaughter fell;

 And, after crime, fraud ever hath in you

 Inhered.  Ye then shall reap the natural fruit

 Of your iniquitous sowing.  That God is

 Ye know; yet are ye wont to laugh at Him.

 375  Into deep darkness ye shall go of fire

 And brimstone; doomed to suffer glowing ires

 In torments just. [1331] God bids your bones descend

 To [1332] penalty eternal; go beneath

 The ardour of an endless raging hell; [1333]

 380  Be urged, a seething mass, through rotant pools

 Of flame; and into threatening flame He bids

 The elements convert; and all heaven's fire

 Descend in clouds.

 Then greedy Tartarus

 With rapid fire enclosed is; and flame

 385  Is fluctuant within with tempest waves;

 And the whole earth her whirling embers blends!

 There is a flamy furrow; teeth acute

 Are turned to plough it, and for all the years [1334]

 The fiery torrent will be armed:  with force

 390  Tartarean will the conflagrations gnash

 Their teeth upon the world. [1335] There are they scorched

 In seething tide with course precipitate;

 Hence flee; thence back are borne in sharp career;

 The savage flame's ire meets them fugitive!

 395  And now at length they own the penalty

 Their own, the natural issue of their crime.

 And now the reeling earth, by not a swain

 Possest, is by the sea's profundity

 Prest, at her farthest limit, where the sun

 400  (His ray out-measured) divides the orb,

 And where, when traversed is the world, [1336] the stars

 Are hidden.  Ether thickens.  O'er the light

 Spreads sable darkness; and the latest flames

 Stagnate in secret rills.  A place there is

 405  Whose nature is with sealed penalties

 Fiery, and a dreadful marsh white-hot

 With heats infernal, where, in furnaces

 Horrific, penal deed roars loud, and seethes,

 And, rushing into torments, is up-caught

 410  By the flame's vortex wide; by savage wave

 And surge the turbid sand all mingled is

 With miry bottom.  Hither will be sent,

 Groaning, the captive crowd of evil ones,

 And wickedness (the sinful body's train)

 415  To burn! Great is the beating there of breasts,

 By bellowing of grief accompanied;

 Wild is the hissing of the flames, and thence

 The ululation of the sufferers!

 And flames, and limbs sonorous, [1337] will outrise

 420  Afar:  more fierce will the fire burn; and up

 To th' upper air the groaning will be borne.

 Then human progeny its bygone deeds

 Of ill will weigh; and will begin to stretch

 Heavenward its palms; and then will wish to know

 425  The Lord, whom erst it would not know, what time

 To know Him had proved useful to them.  There,

 His life's excesses, handiworks unjust,

 And crimes of savage mind, each will confess,

 And at the knowledge of the impious deeds

 430  Of his own life will shudder.  And now first,

 Whoe'er erewhile cherished ill thoughts of God;

 Had worshipped stones unsteady, lyingly

 Pretending to divinity; hath e'er

 Made sacred to gore-stained images

 435  Altars; hath voiceless pictured figures feared;

 Hath slender shades of false divinity

 Revered; whome'er ill error onward hath

 Seduced; whoe'er was an adulterer,

 Or with the sword had slain his sons; whoe'er

 440  Had stalked in robbery; whoe'er by fraud

 His clients had deferred; whoe'er with mind

 Unfriendly had behaved himself, or stained

 His palms with blood of men, or poison mixt

 Wherein death lurked, or robed with wicked guise

 445  His breast, or at his neighbour's ill, or gain

 Iniquitous, was wont to joy; whoe'er

 Committed whatsoever wickedness

 Of evil deeds:  him mighty heat shall rack,

 And bitter fire; and these all shall endure,

 450  In passing painful death, their punishment.

 Thus shall the vast crowd lie of mourning men!

 This oft as holy prophets sang of old,

 And (by God's inspiration warned) oft told

 The future, none ('tis pity!) none (alas!)

 455  Did lend his ears.  But God Almighty willed

 His guerdons to be known, and His law's threats

 'Mid multitudes of such like signs promulged.

 He 'stablished them [1338] by sending prophets more,

 These likewise uttering words divine; and some,

 460  Roused from their sleep, He bids go from their tombs

 Forth with Himself, when He, His own tomb burst,

 Had risen.  Many 'wildered were, indeed,

 To see the tombs agape, and in clear light

 Corpses long dead appear; and, wondering

 465  At their discourses pious, dulcet words!

 Starward they stretch their palms at the mere sound, [1339]

 And offer God and so--victorious Christ

 Their gratulating homage.  Certain 'tis

 That these no more re-sought their silent graves,

 470  Nor were retained within earth's bowels shut; [1340]

 But the remaining host reposes now

 In lowliest beds, until--time's circuit run--

 That great day do arrive.

 Now all of you

 Own the true Lord, who alone makes this soul

 475  Of ours to see His light [1341] and can the same

 (To Tartarus sent) subject to penalties;

 And to whom all the power of life and death

 Is open.  Learn that God can do whate'er

 He list; for 'tis enough for Him to will,

 480  And by mere speaking He achieves the deed;

 And Him nought plainly, by withstanding, checks.

 He is my God alone, to whom I trust

 With deepest senses.  But, since death concludes

 Every career, let whoe'er is to-day

 485  Bethink him over all things in his mind.

 And thus, while life remains, while 'tis allowed

 To see the light and change your life, before

 The limit of allotted age o'ertake

 You unawares, and that last day, which [1342] is

 490  By death's law fixt, your senseless eyes do glaze,

 Seek what remains worth seeking:  watchful be

 For dear salvation; and run down with ease

 And certainty the good course.  Wipe away

 By pious sacred rites your past misdeeds

 495  Which expiation need; and shun the storms,

 The too uncertain tempests, of the world. [1343]

 Then turn to right paths, and keep sanctities.

 Hence from your gladsome minds depraved crime

 Quite banish; and let long-inveterate fault

 500  Be washed forth from your breast; and do away

 Wicked ill-stains contracted; and appease

 Dread God by prayers eternal; and let all

 Most evil mortal things to living good

 Give way:  and now at once a new life keep

 505  Without a crime; and let your minds begin

 To use themselves to good things and to true:

 And render ready voices to God's praise.

 Thus shall your piety find better things

 All growing to a flame; thus shall ye, too,

 510  Receive the gifts of the celestial life; [1344]

 And, to long age, shall ever live with God,

 Seeing the starry kingdom's golden joys.

 ------------------------

 [1281] The reader is requested to bear in mind, in reading this piece,
 tedious in its elaborate struggles after effect, that the constant
 repetitions of words and expressions with which his patience will be
 tried, are due to the original.  It was irksome to reproduce them; but
 fidelity is a translator's first law.

 [1282] Luciferas.

 [1283] Helicon is not named in the original, but it seems to be meant.

 [1284] i.e., in another clime or continent.  The writer is (or feigns
 to be) an African.  Helicon, of course, is in Europe.

 [1285] Virtus.

 [1286] Sæculo.

 [1287] Mundum.

 [1288] Compositis.

 [1289] I have endeavoured to give some intelligible sense to these
 lines; but the absence of syntax in the original, as it now stands,
 makes it necessary to guess at the meaning as best one may.

 [1290] Venturi ævi.

 [1291] "But in them nature's copy's not eterne."--Shakespeare, Macbeth,
 act iii. scene 2.

 [1292] Sæcula.

 [1293] Sæcula.

 [1294] Sermone tenus:  i.e., the exertion (so to speak) needed to do
 such mighty works only extended to the uttering of a speech; no more
 was requisite.  See for a similar allusion to the contrast between the
 making of other things and the making of man, the "Genesis," 30-39.

 [1295] Dicto.

 [1296] i.e., from the solid mass of earth.  See Gen. i. 9, 10.

 [1297] Faciem.

 [1298] "Auram," or "breeze."

 [1299] "Immemor ille Dei temere committere tale! Non ultra monitum
 quidquam contingeret." Whether I have hit the sense here I know not.
 In this and in other passages I have punctuated for myself.

 [1300] Munera mundi.

 [1301] These lines, again, are but a guess at the meaning of the
 original, which is as obscure as defiance of grammar can well make it.
 The sense seems to be, in brief, that while the vast majority are,
 immediately on their death, shut up in Hades to await the "decreed
 age," i.e., the day of judgment, some, like the children raised by
 Elijah and Elisha, the man who revived on touching Elisha's bones, and
 the like, are raised to die again.  Lower down it will be seen that the
 writer believes that the saints who came out of their graves after our
 Lord's resurrection (see Matt. xxvii. 51-54) did not die again.

 [1302] Cf. Ps. xlix. 14 (xlviii. 15 in LXX.).

 [1303] i.e., the dust into which our bodies turn.

 [1304] i.e., the surface or ridge of the furrows.

 [1305] i.e., the furrows.

 [1306] "Some thirty-fold, some sixty-fold, some an hundred-fold."  See
 the parable of the sower.

 [1307] Mundo.

 [1308] Fuligine.

 [1309] Mundo.

 [1310] Virtutibus.  Perhaps the allusion is to Eph. ii. 2, Matt. xxiv.
 29, Luke xxi. 26.

 [1311] Mundi.

 [1312] Vel quanta est.  If this be the right sense, the words are
 probably inserted, because the conflagration of "the earth and the
 works that are therein" predicted in 2 Pet. iii. 10, and referred to
 lower down in this piece, is supposed to have begun, and thus the
 "depths" of the earth are supposed to be already diminishing.

 [1313] I have ventured to alter one letter of the Latin; and for "quos
 reddere jussa docebit," read "quos reddere jussa dolebit."  If the
 common reading be retained, the only possible meaning seems to be "whom
 she will teach to render (to God) His commands," i.e., to render
 obedience to them; or else, "to render (to God) what they are bidden to
 render," i.e., an account of themselves; and earth, as their mother,
 giving them birth out of her womb, is said to teach them to do this.
 But the emendation, which is at all events simple, seems to give a
 better sense:  "being bidden to render the dead, whom she is keeping,
 up, earth will grieve at the throes it causes her, but will do it."

 [1314] Subitæ virtutis ab alto.

 [1315] Comis, here "the heads."

 [1316] This passage is imitated from Virgil, Æn., vi. 305 sqq.; Georg.,
 iv. 475 sqq.

 [1317] i.e., "the king."  The "Atridæ" of Homer are referred
 to,--Agamemnon "king of men," and Menelaus.

 [1318] Or, "Powers."

 [1319] Insigni.  The allusion seems to be to Ezek. ix. 4, 6, Rev. vii.
 3 et seqq., xx. 3, 4, and to the inscribed mitre of the Jewish high
 priest, see Ex. xxviii. 36; xxxix. 30.

 [1320] I have corrected "his" for "hic."  If the latter be retained, it
 would seem to mean "hereon."

 [1321] Cardine, i.e., the hinge as it were upon which the sun turns in
 his course.

 [1322] See the "Genesis," 73.

 [1323] Or, "there."  The question is, whether a different tree is
 meant, or the rose just spoken of.

 [1324] This seems to be marshmallows.

 [1325] Here again it is plain that the writer is drawing his
 description from what we read of the garden of Eden.

 [1326] "Salus," health (probably) in its widest sense, both bodily and
 mental; or perhaps "safety," "salvation."

 [1327] Reliquam vitam, i.e., apparently his life in all other
 relations; unless it mean his life after his parents' death, which
 seems less likely.

 [1328] i.e., "appeals to."  So Burke:  "I attest the former, I attest
 the coming generations."  This "attesting of its acts" seems to refer
 to Matt. xxv. 44.  It appeals to them in hope of mitigating its doom.

 [1329] This seems to be the sense.  The Latin stands thus:  "Flammas
 pro meritis, stagnantia tela tremiscunt."

 [1330] Or, "banished."

 [1331] I adopt the correction (suggested in Migne) of justis for
 justas.

 [1332] This is an extraordinary use for the Latin dative; and even if
 the meaning be "for (i.e., to suffer) penalty eternal," it is scarcely
 less so.

 [1333] Gehennæ.

 [1334] Or, "in all the years:"  but see note 5 on this page.

 [1335] Mundo.

 [1336] Mundo.

 [1337] "Artusque sonori," i.e., probably the arms and hands with which
 (as has been suggested just before) the sufferers beat their unhappy
 breasts.

 [1338] i.e., the "guerdons" and the "threats."

 [1339] "Ipsa voce," unless it mean "voice and all," i.e., and their
 voice as well as their palms.

 [1340] See note 1, p. 137.

 [1341] Here again a correction suggested in Migne's ed., of "suam
 lucem" for "sua luce," is adopted.

 [1342] "Qui" is read here, after Migne's suggestion, for "quia;" and
 Oehler's and Migne's punctuation both are set aside.

 [1343] Mundi.

 [1344] Or, "assume the functions of the heavenly life."

 5.  Five Books in Reply to Marcion.

 (Author Uncertain.)

 Book I.--Of the Divine Unity, and the Resurrection of the Flesh.

 Part I.--Of the Divine Unity.

 After the Evil One's impiety

 Profound, and his life-grudging mind, entrapped

 Seducèd men with empty hope, it laid

 Them bare, by impious suasion to false trust

 5  In him,--not with impunity, indeed;

 For he forthwith, as guilty of the deed,

 And author rash of such a wickedness,

 Received deserved maledictions.  Thus,

 Thereafter, maddened, he, most desperate foe,

 10  Did more assail and instigate men's minds

 In darkness sunk.  He taught them to forget

 The Lord, and leave sure hope, and idols vain

 Follow, and shape themselves a crowd of gods,

 Lots, auguries, false names of stars, the show

 15  Of being able to o'errule the births

 Of embryos by inspecting entrails, and

 Expecting things to come, by hardihood

 Of dreadful magic's renegadoes led,

 Wondering at a mass of feigned lore;

 20  And he impelled them headlong to spurn life,

 Sunk in a criminal insanity;

 To joy in blood; to threaten murders fell;

 To love the wound, then, in their neighbour's flesh;

 Or, burning, and by pleasure's heat entrapped,

 25  To transgress nature's covenants, and stain

 Pure bodies, manly sex, with an embrace

 Unnameable, and uses feminine

 Mingled in common contact lawlessly;

 Urging embraces chaste, and dedicate

 30  To generative duties, to be held

 For intercourse obscene for passion's sake.

 Such in time past his deeds, assaulting men,

 Through the soul's lurking-places, with a flow

 Of scorpion-venom,--not that men would blame

 35  Him, for they followed of their own accord:

 His suasion was in guile; in freedom man

 Performed it.

 Whileas the perfidious one

 Continuously through the centuries [1345]

 Is breathing such ill fumes, and into hearts

 40  Seduced injecting his own counselling

 And hoping in his folly (alas!) to find

 Forgiveness of his wickedness, unware

 What sentence on his deed is waiting him;

 With words of wisdom's weaving, [1346] and a voice

 45  Presaging from God's Spirit, speak a host

 Of prophets.  Publicly he [1347] does not dare

 Nakedly to speak evil of the Lord,

 Hoping by secret ingenuity

 He possibly may lurk unseen.  At length

 50  The soul's Light [1348] as the thrall of flesh is held;

 The hope of the despairing, mightier

 Than foe, enters the lists; the Fashioner,

 The Renovator, of the body He;

 True Glory of the Father; Son of God;

 55  Author unique; a Judge and Lord He came,

 The orb's renowned King; to the opprest

 Prompt to give pardon, and to loose the bound;

 Whose friendly aid and penal suffering

 Blend God and renewed man in one.  With child

 60  Is holy virgin:  life's new gate opes; words

 Of prophets find their proof, fulfilled by facts;

 Priests [1349] leave their temples, and--a star their guide--

 Wonder the Lord so mean a birth should choose.

 Waters--sight memorable!--turn to wine;

 65  Eyes are restored to blind; fiends trembling cry,

 Outdriven by His bidding, and own Christ!

 All limbs, already rotting, by a word

 Are healed; now walks the lame; the deaf forthwith

 Hears hope; the maimed extends his hand; the dumb

 70  Speaks mighty words:  sea at His bidding calms,

 Winds drop; and all things recognise the Lord:

 Confounded is the foe, and yields, though fierce,

 Now triumphed over, to unequal [1350] arms!

 When all his enterprises now revoked

 75  He [1351] sees; the flesh, once into ruin sunk,

 Now rising; man--death vanquisht quite--to heavens

 Soaring; the peoples sealed with holy pledge

 Outpoured; [1352] the work and envied deeds of might

 Marvellous; [1353] and hears, too, of penalties

 80  Extreme, and of perpetual dark, prepared

 For himself by the Lord by God's decree

 Irrevocable; naked and unarmed,

 Damned, vanquisht, doomed to perish in a death

 Perennial, guilty now, and sure that he

 85  No pardon has, a last impiety

 Forthwith he dares,--to scatter everywhere

 A word for ears to shudder at, nor meet

 For voice to speak.  Accosting men cast off

 From God's community, [1354] men wandering

 90  Without the light, found mindless, following

 Things earthly, them he teaches to become

 Depraved teachers of depravity.

 By [1355] them he preaches that there are two Sires,

 And realms divided:  ill's cause is the Lord [1356]

 95  Who built the orb, fashioned breath-quickened flesh,

 And gave the law, and by the seers' voice spake.

 Him he affirms not good, but owns Him just;

 Hard, cruel, taking pleasure fell in war;

 In judgment dreadful, pliant to no prayers.

 100  His suasion tells of other one, to none

 E'er known, who nowhere is, a deity

 False, nameless, constituting nought, and who

 Hath spoken precepts none.  Him he calls good;

 Who judges none, but spares all equally,

 105  And grudges life to none.  No judgment waits

 The guilty; so he says, bearing about

 A gory poison with sweet honey mixt

 For wretched men.  That flesh can rise--to which

 Himself was cause of ruin, which he spoiled

 110  Iniquitously with contempt (whence, [1357] cursed,

 He hath grief without end), its ever-foe,--

 He doth deny; because with various wound

 Life to expel and the salvation whence

 He fell he strives:  and therefore says that Christ

 115  Came suddenly to earth, [1358] but was not made,

 By any compact, partner of the flesh;

 But Spirit-form, and body feigned beneath

 A shape imaginary, seeks to mock

 Men with a semblance that what is not is.

 120  Does this, then, become God, to sport with men

 By darkness led? to act an impious lie?

 Or falsely call Himself a man?  He walks,

 Is carried, clothed, takes due rest, handled is,

 Suffers, is hung and buried:  man's are all

 125  Deeds which, in holy body conversant,

 But sent by God the Father, who hath all

 Created, He did perfect properly,

 Reclaiming not another's but His own;

 Discernible to peoples who of old

 130  Were hoping for Him by His very work,

 And through the prophets' voice to the round world [1359]

 Best known:  and now they seek an unknown Lord,

 Wandering in death's threshold manifest,

 And leave behind the known.  False is their faith,

 135  False is their God, deceptive their reward,

 False is their resurrection, death's defeat

 False, vain their martyrdoms, and e'en Christ's name

 An empty sound:  whom, teaching that He came

 Like magic mist, they (quite demented) own

 140  To be the actor of a lie, and make

 His passion bootless, and the populace [1360]

 (A feigned one!) without crime!  Is God thus true?

 Are such the honours rendered to the Lord?

 Ah! wretched men! gratuitously lost

 145  In death ungrateful!  Who, by blind guide led,

 Have headlong rushed into the ditch! [1361] and as

 In dreams the fancied rich man in his store

 Of treasure doth exult, and with his hands

 Grasps it, the sport of empty hope, so ye, so

 150  Deceived, are hoping for a shadow vain

 Of guerdon!

 Ah! ye silent laughingstocks,

 Or doomed prey, of the dragon, do ye hope,

 Stern men, for death in room of gentle peace? [1362]

 Dare ye blame God, who hath works

 155  So great? in whose earth, 'mid profuse displays

 Of His exceeding parent-care, His gifts

 (Unmindful of Himself!) ye largely praise,

 Rushing to ruin! do ye reprobate--

 Approving of the works--the Maker's self,

 160  The world's [1363] Artificer, whose work withal

 Ye are yourselves?  Who gave those little selves

 Great honours; sowed your crops; made all the brutes [1364]

 Your subjects; makes the seasons of the year

 Fruitful with stated months; grants sweetnesses,

 165  Drinks various, rich odours, jocund flowers,

 And the groves' grateful bowers; to growing herbs

 Grants wondrous juices; founts and streams dispreads

 With sweet waves, and illumes with stars the sky

 And the whole orb:  the infinite sole Lord,

 170  Both Just and Good; known by His work; to none

 By aspect known; whom nations, flourishing

 In wealth, but foolish, wrapped in error's shroud,

 (Albeit 'tis beneath an alien name

 They praise Him, yet) their Maker knowing! dread

 175  To blame:  nor e'en one [1365] --save you, hell's new gate!--

 Thankless, ye choose to speak ill of your Lord!

 These cruel deadly gifts the Renegade

 Terrible has bestowed, through Marcion--thanks

 To Cerdo's mastership--on you; nor comes

 180  The thought into your mind that, from Christ's name

 Seduced, Marcion's name has carried you

 To lowest depths. [1366] Say of His many acts

 What one displeases you? or what hath God

 Done which is not to be extolled with praise?

 185  Is it that He permits you, all too long,

 (Unworthy of His patience large,) to see

 Sweet light? you, who read truths, [1367] and, docking them,

 Teach these your falsehoods, and approve as past

 Things which are yet to be? [1368] What hinders, else,

 190  That we believe your God incredible? [1369]

 Nor marvel is't if, practiced as he [1370] is,

 He captived you unarmed, persuading you

 There are two Fathers (being damned by One),

 And all, whom he had erst seduced, are gods;

 195  And after that dispread a pest, which ran

 With multiplying wound, and cureless crime,

 To many.  Men unworthy to be named,

 Full of all magic's madness, he induced

 To call themselves "Virtue Supreme;" and feign

 200  (With harlot comrade) fresh impiety;

 To roam, to fly. [1371] He is the insane god

 Of Valentine, and to his Æonage

 Assigned heavens thirty, and Profundity

 Their sire. [1372] He taught two baptisms, and led

 205  The body through the flame.  That there are gods

 So many as the year hath days, he bade

 A Basilides to believe, and worlds

 As many.  Marcus, shrewdly arguing

 Through numbers, taught to violate chaste form

 210  'Mid magic's arts; taught, too, that the Lord's cup

 Is an oblation, and by prayers is turned

 To blood.  His [1373] suasion prompted Hebion

 To teach that Christ was born from human seed;

 He taught, too, circumcision, and that room

 215  Is still left for the Law, and, though Law's founts

 Are lost, [1374] its elements must be resumed.

 Unwilling am I to protract in words

 His last atrocity, or to tell all

 The causes, or the names at length.  Enough

 220  It is to note his many cruelties

 Briefly, and the unmentionable men,

 The dragon's organs fell, through whom he now,

 Speaking so much profaneness, ever toils

 To blame the Maker of the world. [1375] But come;

 225  Recall your foot from savage Bandit's cave,

 While space is granted, and to wretched men

 God, patient in perennial parent-love,

 Condones all deeds through error done!  Believe

 Truly in the true Sire, who built the orb;

 230  Who, on behalf of men incapable

 To bear the law, sunk in sin's whirlpool, sent

 The true Lord to repair the ruin wrought,

 And bring them the salvation promised

 Of old through seers.  He who the mandates gave

 235  Remits sins too.  Somewhat, deservedly,

 Doth He exact, because He formerly

 Entrusted somewhat; or else bounteously,

 As Lord, condones as it were debts to slaves:

 Finally, peoples shut up 'neath the curse,

 240  And meriting the penalty, Himself

 Deleting the indictment, bids be washed!

 Part II.--Of the Resurrection of the Flesh.

 The whole man, then, believes; the whole is washed;

 Abstains from sin, or truly suffers wounds

 For Christ's name's sake:  he rises a true [1376] man,

 245  Death, truly vanquish, shall be mute.  But not

 Part of the man,--his soul,--her own part [1377] left

 Behind, will win the palm which, labouring

 And wrestling in the course, combinedly

 And simultaneously with flesh, she earns.

 250  Great crime it were for two in chains to bear

 A weight, of whom the one were affluent

 The other needy, and the wretched one

 Be spurned, and guerdons to the happy one

 Rendered.  Not so the Just--fair Renderer

 255  Of wages--deals, both good and just, whom we

 Believe Almighty:  to the thankless kind

 Full is His will of pity.  Nay, whate'er

 He who hath greater mortal need [1378] doth need [1379]

 That, by advancement, to his comrade he

 260  May equalled be, that will the affluent

 Bestow the rather unsolicited:

 So are we bidden to believe, and not

 Be willing to cast blame unlawfully

 On the Lord in our teaching, as if He

 265  Were one to raise the soul, as having met

 With ruin, and to set her free from death

 So that the granted faculty of life

 Upon the ground of sole desert (because

 She bravely acted), should abide with her; [1380]

 270  While she who ever shared the common lot

 Of toil, the flesh, should to the earth be left,

 The prey of a perennial death.  Has, then,

 The soul pleased God by acts of fortitude?

 By no means could she Him have pleased alone

 275  Without the flesh.  Hath she borne penal bonds? [1381]

 The flesh sustained upon her limbs the bonds.

 Contemned she death?  But she hath left the flesh

 Behind in death.  Groaned she in pain?

 The flesh is slain and vanquisht by the wound.  Repose

 280  Seeks she?  The flesh, spilt by the sword in dust,

 Is left behind to fishes, birds, decay,

 And ashes; torn she is, unhappy one!

 And broken; scattered, she melts away.

 Hath she not earned to rise? for what could she

 285  Have e'er committed, lifeless and alone?

 What so life-grudging [1382] cause impedes, or else

 Forbids, the flesh to take God's gifts, and live

 Ever, conjoined with her comrade soul,

 And see what she hath been, when formerly

 290  Converted into dust? [1383] After, renewed,

 Bear she to God deserved meeds of praise,

 Not ignorant of herself, frail, mortal, sick. [1384]

 Contend ye as to what the living might [1385]

 Of the great God can do; who, good alike

 295  And potent, grudges life to none?  Was this

 Death's captive? [1386] shall this perish vanquished

 Which the Lord hath with wondrous wisdom made,

 And art?  This by His virtue wonderful

 Himself upraises; this our Leader's self

 300  Recalls, and this with His own glory clothes

 God's art and wisdom, then, our body shaped

 What can by these be made, how faileth it

 To be by virtue reproduced? [1387] No cause

 Can holy parent-love withstand; (lest else

 305  Ill's cause [1388] should mightier prove than Power Supreme;)

 That man even now saved by God's gift, may learn [1389]

 (Mortal before, now robed in light immense

 Inviolable, wholly quickened, [1390] soul

 And body) God, in virtue infinite,

 310  In parent-love perennial, through His King

 Christ, through whom opened is light's way; and now,

 Standing in new light, filled now with each gift, [1391]

 Glad with fair fruits of living Paradise,

 May praise and laud Him to eternity, [1392]

 315  Rich in the wealth of the celestial hall.

 [1345] Sæcula.

 [1346] The "tectis" of the edd. I have ventured to alter to "textis,"
 which gives (as in my text) a far better sense.

 [1347] i.e., the Evil One.

 [1348] i.e., the Son of God.

 [1349] i.e., the Magi.

 [1350] i.e., arms which seemed unequal; for the cross, in which Christ
 seemed to be vanquished, was the very means of His triumph.  See Col.
 ii. 14, 15.

 [1351] i.e., the Enemy.

 [1352] i.e., with the Holy Spirit, the "Pledge" or "Promise" of the
 Father (see Acts i. 4, 5), "outpoured" upon "the peoples"--both Jewish
 and Gentile--on the day of Pentecost and many subsequent occasions;
 see, for instances, Acts x. and xix.

 [1353] The "mirandæ virtutis opus, invisaque facts," I take to be the
 miracles wrought by the apostles through the might (virtus) of the
 Spirit, as we read in the Acts.  These were objects of "envy" to the
 Enemy, and to such as--like Simon Magus, of whom we find record--were
 his servants.

 [1354] i.e., excommunicated, as Marcion was.  The "last impiety"
 (extremum nefas), or "last atrocity" (extremum facinus),--see 218,
 lower down--seems to mean the introduction of heretical teaching.

 [1355] This use of the ablative, though quite against classical usage,
 is apparently admissible in late Latinity.  It seems to me that the
 "his" is an ablative here, the men being regarded for the moment as
 merely instruments, not agents; but it may be a dative ="to these he
 preaches," etc., i.e., he dictates to them what they afterwards are to
 teach in public.

 [1356] It must be borne in mind that "Dominus" (the Lord), and "Deus"
 (God), are kept as distinct terms throughout this piece.

 [1357] i.e., for which reason.

 [1358] i.e., as Marcion is stated by some to have taught, in the
 fifteenth year of Tiberius; founding his statement upon a perverted
 reading of Luke iii. 1.  It will be remembered that Marcion only used
 St. Luke's Gospel, and that in a mutilated and corrupted form.

 [1359] Orbi.

 [1360] i.e., of the Jews.

 [1361] "In fossa," i.e., as Fabricius (quoted in Migne's ed.) explains
 it, "in defossa."  It is the past part. of fodio.

 [1362] If this line be correct,--"Speratis pro pace truces homicidia
 blanda,"--though I cannot see the propriety of the "truces" in it, it
 seems to mean, "Do ye hope or expect that the master you are serving
 will, instead of the gentle peace he promises you, prove a murderer and
 lead you to death?  No, you do not expect it; but so it is."

 [1363] Mundi.

 [1364] Animalia.

 [1365] The sentence breaks off abruptly, and the verb which should
 apparently have gone with "e'en one" is joined to the "ye" in the next
 line.

 [1366] The Latin is:-- "Nec venit in mentem quod vos, a nomine Christi
 Seductos, ad Marcionis tulit infima nomen." The rendering in my text, I
 admit, involves an exceedingly harsh construction of the Latin, but I
 see not how it is to be avoided; unless either (1) we take nomen
 absolutely, and "ad Marcionis infima" together, and translate, "A name
 has carried you to Marcion's lowest depths;" in which case the question
 arises, What name is meant? can it be the name "Electi"?  Or else (2)
 we take "tulit" as referring to the "terrible renegade," i.e., the
 arch-fiend, and "infima" as in apposition with "ad Marcionis nomen,"
 and translate, "He has carried you to the name of Marcion--deepest
 degradation."

 [1367] i.e., the Gospels and other parts of Holy Scripture.

 [1368] i.e., I take it, the resurrection.  Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 17, 18.

 [1369] Whether this be the sense (i.e., "either tell us what it is
 which displeases you in our God, whether it be His too great patience
 in bearing with you, or what; or else tell us what is to hinder us from
 believing your God to be an incredible being") of this passage, I will
 not venture to determine.  The last line in the edd. previous to
 Oehler's ran:  "Aut incredibile quid differt credere vestrum?"  Oehler
 reads "incredibilem" (sc. Deum), which I have followed; but he
 suggests, "Aut incredibilem qui differt cædere vestrum?"  Which may
 mean "or else"--i.e., if it were not for his "too great
 patience"--"why"--"qui"--"does He delay to smite your incredible god?"
 and thus challenge a contest and prove His own superiority.

 [1370] i.e., the "terrible renegade."

 [1371] The reference here is to Simon Magus; for a brief account of
 whom, and of the other heretics in this list, down to Hebion inclusive,
 the reader is referred to the Adv. omn. Hær., above.  The words "to
 roam, to fly," refer to the alleged wanderings of Simon with his
 paramour Helen, and his reported attempt (at Rome, in the presence of
 St. Peter) to fly.  The tale is doubtful.

 [1372] The Latin runs thus:-- "Et ævo Triginta tribuit cælos, patremque
 Profundum." But there seems a confusion between Valentine and his æons
 and Basilides and his heavens.  See the Adv. omn. Hær., above.

 [1373] i.e., the Evil One's, as before.

 [1374] i.e., probably Jerusalem and the temple there.

 [1375] Mundi.

 [1376] Oehler's "versus" (="changed the man rises") is set aside for
 Migne's "verus."  Indeed it is probably a misprint.

 [1377] i.e., her own dwelling or "quarters,"--the body, to wit, if the
 reading "sua parte" be correct.

 [1378] Egestas.

 [1379] Eget.

 [1380] I have ventured to alter the "et viventi" of Oehler and Migne
 into "ut vivendi," which seems to improve the sense.

 [1381] It seems to me that these ideas should all be expressed
 interrogatively, and I have therefore so expressed them in my text.

 [1382] See line 2.

 [1383] "Cernere quid fuerit conversa in pulvere quondam." Whether the
 meaning be that, as the soul will be able (as it should seem) to
 retrace all that she has experienced since she left the body, so the
 body, when revived, will be able as it were to look back upon all that
 has happened to her since the soul left her,--something after the
 manner in which Hamlet traces the imaginary vicissitudes of Cæsar's
 dust,--or whether there be some great error in the Latin, I leave the
 reader to judge.

 [1384] i.e., apparently remembering that she was so before.

 [1385] Vivida virtus.

 [1386] I rather incline to read for "hæc captiva fuit mortis," "hæc
 captiva fuat mortis" = "Is this To be death's thrall?" "This" is, of
 course, the flesh.

 [1387] For "Quod cupit his fieri, deest hoc virtute reduci," I venture
 to read, "Quod capit," etc., taking "capit" as ="capax est."  "By
 these," of course, is by wisdom and art; and "virtue" ="power."

 [1388] i.e., the Evil One.

 [1389] i.e., may learn to know.

 [1390] Oehler's "visus" seems to be a mistake for "vivus," which is
 Migne's reading; as in the fragment "De exsecrandis gentium diis," we
 saw (sub. fin.) "videntem" to be a probable misprint for "viventem."
 If, however, it is to be retained, it must mean "appearing" (i.e., in
 presence of God) "wholly," in body as well as soul.

 [1391] i.e., the double gift of a saved soul and a saved body.

 [1392] In æternum.

 Book II.--Of the Harmony of the Old and New Laws. [1393]

 After the faith was broken by the dint

 Of the foe's breathing renegades, [1394] and sworn

 With wiles the hidden pest [1395] emerged; with lies

 Self-prompted, scornful of the Deity

 5  That underlies the sense, he did his plagues

 Concoct:  skilled in guile's path, he mixed his own

 Words impious with the sayings of the saints.

 And on the good seed sowed his wretched tares,

 Thence willing that foul ruin's every cause

 10  Should grow combined; to wit, that with more speed

 His own iniquitous deeds he may assign

 To God clandestinely, and may impale

 On penalties such as his suasion led;

 False with true veiling, turning rough with smooth,

 15  And, (masking his spear's point with rosy wreaths,)

 Slaying the unwary unforeseen with death

 Supreme.  His supreme wickedness is this:

 That men, to such a depth of madness sunk!

 Off-broken boughs! [1396] should into parts divide

 20  The endlessly-dread Deity; Christ's deeds

 Sublime should follow with false praise, and blame

 The former acts, [1397] God's countless miracles,

 Ne'er seen before, nor heard, nor in a heart

 Conceived; [1398] and should so rashly frame in words

 25  The impermissible impiety

 Of wishing by "wide dissimilitude

 Of sense" to prove that the two Testaments

 Sound adverse each to other, and the Lord's

 Oppose the prophets' words; of drawing down

 30  All the Law's cause to infamy; and eke

 Of reprobating holy fathers' life

 Of old, whom into friendship, and to share

 His gifts, God chose.  Without beginning, one

 Is, for its lesser part, accepted. [1399] Though

 35  Of one are four, of four one, [1400] yet to them

 One part is pleasing, three they (in a word)

 Reprobate:  and they seize, in many ways,

 On Paul as their own author; yet was he

 Urged by a frenzied impulse of his own

 40  To his last words: [1401] all whatsoe'er he spake

 Of the old covenant [1402] seems hard to them

 Because, deservedly, "made gross in heart." [1403]

 Weight apostolic, grace of beaming word,

 Dazzles their mind, nor can they possibly

 45  Discern the Spirit's drift.  Dull as they are,

 Seek they congenial animals!

 But ye

 Who have not yet, (false deity your guide,

 Reprobate in your very mind, [1404] ) to death's

 Inmost caves penetrated, learn there flows

 50  A stream perennial from its fount, which feeds

 A tree, (twice sixfold are the fruits, its grace!)

 And into earth and to the orb's four winds

 Goes out:  into so many parts doth flow

 The fount's one hue and savour. [1405] Thus, withal,

 55  From apostolic word descends the Church,

 Out of Christ's womb, with glory of His Sire

 All filled, to wash off filth, and vivify

 Dead fates. [1406] The Gospel, four in number, one

 In its diffusion 'mid the Gentiles, this,

 60  By faith elect accepted, Paul hands down

 (Excellent doctor!) pure, without a crime;

 And from it he forbade Galatian saints

 To turn aside withal; whom "brethren false,"

 (Urging them on to circumcise themselves,

 65  And follow "elements," leaving behind

 Their novel "freedom,") to "a shadow old

 Of things to be" were teaching to be slaves.

 These were the causes which Paul had to write

 To the Galatians:  not that they took out

 70  One small part of the Gospel, and held that

 For the whole bulk, leaving the greater part

 Behind.  And hence 'tis no words of a book,

 But Christ Himself, Christ sent into the orb,

 Who is the gospel, if ye will discern;

 75  Who from the Father came, sole Carrier

 Of tidings good; whose glory vast completes

 The early testimonies; by His work

 Showing how great the orb's Creator is:

 Whose deeds, conjoined at the same time with words,

 80  Those faithful ones, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,

 Recorded unalloyed (not speaking words

 External), sanctioned by God's Spirit, 'neath

 So great a Master's eye!

 This paschal Lamb

 Is hung, a victim, on the tree:  Him Paul,

 85  Writing decrees to Corinth, with his torch, [1407]

 Hands down as slain, the future life and God

 Promised to the fathers, whom before

 He had attracted.

 See what virtue, see

 What power, the paschal image [1408] has; ye thus

 90  Will able be to see what power there is

 In the true Passover.

 Lest well-earned love

 Should tempt the faithful sire and seer, [1409] to whom

 His pledge and heir [1410] was dear, whom God by chance [1411]

 Had given him, to offer him to God

 95  (A mighty execution!), there is shown

 To him a lamb entangled by the head

 In thorns; a holy victim--holy blood

 For blood--to God.  From whose piacular death,

 That to the wasted race [1412] it might be sign

 100  And pledge of safety, signed are with blood

 Their posts and thresholds many: [1413] --aid immense!

 The flesh (a witness credible) is given

 For food.  The Jordan crossed, the land possessed,

 Joshua by law kept Passover with joy,

 105  And immolates a lamb; and the great kings

 And holy prophets that were after him,

 Not ignorant of the good promises

 Of sure salvation; full of godly fear

 The great Law to transgress, (that mass of types

 110  In image of the Supreme Virtue once

 To come,) did celebrate in order due

 The mirrorly-inspected passover. [1414]

 In short, if thou recur with rapid mind

 To times primordial, thou wilt find results

 115  Too fatal following impious words.  That man

 Easily credulous, alas! and stripped

 Of life's own covering, might covered be

 With skins, a lamb is hung: the wound slays sins,

 Or death by blood effaces or enshrouds

 120  Or cherishes the naked with its fleece.

 Is sheep's blood of more worth than human blood,

 That, offered up for sins, it should quench wrath?

 Or is a lamb (as if he were more dear!)

 Of more worth than much people's?  aid immense!

 125  As safeguard of so great salvation, could

 A lamb, if offered, have been price enough

 For the redeemed?  Nay: but Almighty God,

 The heaven's and earth's Creator, infinite, [1415]

 Living, and perfect, and perennially

 130  Dwelling in light, is not appeased by these,

 Nor joys in cattle's blood.  Slain be all flocks;

 Be every herd upburned into smoke;

 That expiatively 't may pardon win

 Of but one sin:  in vain at so vile price;

 135  Will the stained figure of the Lord--foul flesh--

 Prepare, if wise, such honours: [1416] but the hope

 And faith to mortals promised of old--

 Great Reason's counterpart [1417] --hath wrought to bring

 These boons premeditated and prepared

 140  Erst by the Father's passing parent-love;

 That Christ should come to earth, and be a man!

 Whom when John saw, baptism's first opener, John,

 Comrade of seers, apostle great, and sent

 As sure forerunner, witness faithful; John,

 145  August in life, and marked with praise sublime, [1418]

 He shows, to such as sought of olden time

 God's very Paschal Lamb, that He is come

 At last, the expiation of misdeed,

 To undo many's sins by His own blood,

 150  In place of reprobates the Proven One,

 In place of vile the dear; in body, man;

 And, in life, God: that He, as the slain Lamb,

 Might us accept, [1419] and for us might outpour

 Himself Thus hath it pleased the Lord to spoil

 155  Proud death:  thus wretched man will able be

 To hope salvation.  This slain paschal Lamb

 Paul preaches:  nor does a phantasmal shape

 Of the sublime Lord (one consimilar

 To Isaac's silly sheep [1420] ) the passion bear,

 160  Wherefore He is called Lamb:  but 'tis because,

 As wool, He these renewed bodies clothes,

 Giving to many covering, yet Himself

 Never deficient.  Thus does the Lord shroud

 In His Sire's virtue, those whom, disarrayed

 165  Of their own light, He by His death redeemed,

 Virtue which ever is in Him.  So, then,

 The Shepherd who hath lost the sheep Himself

 Re-seeks it.  He, prepared to tread the strength

 Of the vine, and its thorns, or to o'ercome

 170  The wolf's rage, and regain the cattle lost,

 And brave to snatch them out, the Lion He

 In sheepskin-guise, unasked presents Himself

 To the contemned [1421] teeth, baffling by His garb

 The robber's bloody jaws.

 Thus everywhere

 175  Christ seeks force-captured Adam; treads the path

 Himself where death wrought ruin; permeates

 All the old heroes' monuments; [1422] inspects

 Each one; the One of whom all types were full;

 Begins e'en from the womb to expel the death

 180  Conceived simultaneously with seed

 Of flesh within the bosom; purging all

 Life's stages with a silent wisdom; debts

 Assuming; [1423] ready to cleanse all, and give

 Their Maker back the many whom the one [1424]

 185  Had scattered.  And, because one direful man

 Down-sunk in pit iniquitous did fall,

 By dragon-subdued virgin's [1425] suasion led;

 Because he pleased her wittingly; [1426] because

 He left his heavenly covering [1427] behind:

 190  Because the "tree" their nakedness did prove;

 Because dark death coerced them:  in like wise

 Out of the self-same mass [1428] re-made returns

 Renewed now,--the flower of flesh, and host

 Of peace,--a flesh from espoused virgin born,

 195  Not of man's seed; conjoined to its own

 Artificer; without the debt of death.

 These mandates of the Father through bright stars

 An angel carries down, that angel-fame

 The tidings may accredit; telling how

 200  "A virgin's debts a virgin, flesh's flesh,

 Should pay."  Thus introduced, the Giant-Babe,

 The Elder-Boy, the Stripling-Man, pursues

 Death's trail.  Thereafter, when completed was

 The ripe age of man's strength, when man is wont

 205  To see the lives that were his fellows drop

 By slow degrees away, and to be changed

 In mien to wrinkles foul and limbs inert,

 While blood forsakes his veins, his course he stayed,

 And suffered not his fleshly garb to age.

 210  Upon what day or in what place did fall

 Most famous Adam, or outstretched his hand

 Rashly to touch the tree, on that same day,

 Returning as the years revolve, within

 The stadium of the "tree" the brave Athlete,

 215  'Countering, outstretched His hands, and, penalty

 For praise pursuing, [1429] quite did vanquish death,

 Because He left death of His own accord

 Behind, disrobing Him of fleshly slough,

 And of death's dues; and to the "tree" affixed

 220  The serpent's spoil--"the world's [1430] prince" vanquisht quite!

 Grand trophy of the renegades:  for sign

 Whereof had Moses hung the snake, that all,

 Who had by many serpents stricken been,

 Might gaze upon the dragon's self, and see

 225  Him vanquisht and transfixt.

 When, afterwards,

 He reached the infernal region's secret waves,

 And, as a victor, by the light which aye

 Attended Him, revealed His captive thrall,

 And by His virtue thoroughly fulfilled

 230  The Father's bidding, He Himself re-took

 The body which, spontaneous, He had left:

 This was the cause of death:  this same was made

 Salvation's path:  a messenger of guile

 The former was; the latter messenger

 235  Of peace:  a spouse her man [1431] did slay; a spouse

 Did bear a lion: [1432] hurtful to her man [1433]

 A virgin [1434] proved; a man [1435] from virgin born

 Proved victor:  for a type whereof, while sleep

 His [1436] body wrapped, out of his side is ta'en

 240  A woman, [1437] who is her lord's [1438] rib; whom, he,

 Awaking, called "flesh from his flesh, and bones

 From his own bones;" with a presaging mind

 Speaking.  Faith wondrous!  Paul deservedly,

 (Most certain author!) teaches Christ to be

 245  "The Second Adam from the heavens." [1439] Truth,

 Using her own examples, doth refulge;

 Nor covets out of alien source to show

 Her paces keen: [1440] this is a pauper's work,

 Needy of virtue of his own!  Great Paul

 250  These mysteries--taught to him--did teach; to wit,

 Discerning that in Christ thy glory is,

 O Church! from His side, hanging on high "tree,"

 His lifeless body's "blood and humour" flowed.

 The blood the woman [1441] was; the waters were

 255  The new gifts of the font: [1442] this is the Church,

 True mother of a living people; flesh

 New from Christ's flesh, and from His bones a bone.

 A spot there is called Golgotha,--of old

 The fathers' earlier tongue thus called its name,--

 260  "The skull-pan of a head:"  here is earth's midst;

 Here victory's sign; here, have our elders taught,

 There was a great head [1443] found; here the first man,

 We have been taught, was buried; here the Christ

 Suffers; with sacred blood the earth [1444] grows moist.

 265  That the old Adam's dust may able be,

 Commingled with Christ's blood, to be upraised

 By dripping water's virtue.  The "one ewe"

 That is, which, during Sabbath-hours, alive

 The Shepherd did resolve that He would draw

 270  Out of th' infernal pit.  This was the cause

 Why, on the Sabbaths, He was wont to cure

 The prematurely dead limbs of all flesh;

 Or perfected for sight the eyes of him

 Blind from his birth--eyes which He had not erst

 275  Given; or, in presence of the multitude,

 Called, during Sabbath-hours, one wholly dead

 To life, e'en from the sepulchre. [1445] Himself

 The new man's Maker, the Repairer good

 Of th' old, supplying what did lack, or else

 280  Restoring what was lost.  About to do--

 When dawns "the holy day"--these works, for such

 As hope in Him, in plenitude, (to keep

 His plighted word,) He taught men thus His power

 To do them.

 What?  If flesh dies, and no hope

 285  Is given of salvation, say, what grounds

 Christ had to feign Himself a man, and head

 Men, or have care for flesh?  If He recalls [1446]

 Some few, why shall He not withal recall

 All?  Can corruption's power liquefy

 290  The body and undo it, and shall not

 The virtue of the Lord be powerful

 The undone to recall?

 They, who believe

 Their bodies are not loosed from death, do not

 Believe the Lord, who wills to raise His own

 295  Works sunken; or else say they that the Good

 Wills not, and that the Potent hath not power,--

 Ignorant from how great a crime they suck

 Their milk, in daring to set things infirm

 Above the Strong. [1447] In the grain lurks the tree;

 300  And if this [1448] rot not, buried in the earth,

 It yields not tree-graced fruits. [1449] Soon bound will be

 The liquid waters:  'neath the whistling cold

 They will become, and ever will be stones,

 Unless a mighty power, by leading on

 305  Soft-breathing warmth, undo them.  The great bunch

 Lurks in the tendril's slender body:  if

 Thou seek it, it is not; when God doth will,

 'Tis seen to be.  On trees their leaves, on thorns

 The rose, the seeds on plains, are dead and fail,

 310  And rise again, new living.  For man's use

 These things doth God before his eyes recall

 And form anew--man's, for whose sake at first [1450]

 The wealthy One made all things bounteously.

 All naked fall; with its own body each

 315  He clothes.  Why man alone, on whom He showered

 Such honours, should He not recall in all

 His first perfection [1451] to Himself? man, whom

 He set o'er all?

 Flesh, then, and blood are said

 To be not worthy of God's realm, as if

 320  Paul spake of flesh materially.  He

 Indeed taught mighty truths; but hearts inane

 Think he used carnal speech:  for pristine deeds

 He meant beneath the name of "flesh and blood;"

 Remembering, heavenly home--slave that he is,

 325  His heavenly Master's words; who gave the name

 Of His own honour to men born from Him

 Through water, and from His own Spirit poured

 A pledge; [1452] that, by whose virtue men had been

 Redeemed, His name of honour they withal

 330  Might, when renewed, receive.  Because, then, He

 Refused, on the old score, the heavenly realm

 To peoples not yet from His fount re-born,

 Still with their ancient sordid raiment clad--

 These are "the dues of death"--saying that that

 335  Which human is must needs be born again,--

 "What hath been born of flesh is flesh; and what

 From Spirit, life;" [1453] and that the body, washed,

 Changing with glory its old root's new seeds, [1454]

 Is no more called "from flesh:"  Paul follows this;

 340  Thus did he speak of "flesh."  In fine, he said [1455]

 This frail garb with a robe must be o'erclad,

 This mortal form be wholly covered;

 Not that another body must be given,

 But that the former one, dismantled, [1456] must

 345  Be with God's kingdom wholly on all sides

 Surrounded:  "In the moment of a glance,"

 He says, "it shall be changed:"  as, on the blade,

 Dispreads the red corn's [1457] face, and changes 'neath

 The sun's glare its own hue; so the same flesh,

 350  From "the effulgent glory" [1458] borrowing,

 Shall ever joy, and joying, [1459] shall lack death;

 Exclaiming that "the body's cruel foe

 Is vanquisht quite; death, by the victory

 Of the brave Christ, is swallowed;" [1460] praises high

 355  Bearing to God, unto the highest stars.

 [1393] I have so frequently had to construct my own text (by altering
 the reading or the punctuation of the Latin) in this book, that, for
 brevity's sake, I must ask the reader to be content with this statement
 once for all, and not expect each case to be separately noted.

 [1394] The "foe," as before, is Satan; his "breathing instruments" are
 the men whom he uses (cf. Shakespeare's "no breather" = no man, in the
 dialogue between Orlando and Jacques, As you Like it, act iii. sc. 2);
 and they are called "renegades," like the Evil One himself, because
 they have deserted from their allegiance to God in Christ.

 [1395] Heresy.

 [1396] Cf. John xv. 2, 4, 5, 6; Rom. xi. 17-20.  The writer simply
 calls them "abruptos homines;" and he seems to mean excommunicated,
 like Marcion.

 [1397] i.e., those recorded in the Old Testament.

 [1398] I have followed Migne's suggestion here, and transposed one line
 of the original.  The reference seems to be to Isa. lxiv. 4, quoted in
 1 Cor. ii. 9, where the Greek differs somewhat remarkably from the LXX.

 [1399] Unless some line has dropped out here, the construction, harsh
 enough in my English, is yet harsher in the Latin.  "Accipitur" has no
 subject of any kind, and one can only guess from what has gone before,
 and what follows, that it must mean "one Testament."

 [1400] Harsh still.  It must refer to the four Gospels--the "coat
 without seam"--in their quadrate unity; Marcion receiving but one--St.
 Luke's--and that without St. Luke's name, and also in a mutilated and
 interpolated form.

 [1401] This seems to be the sense.  The allusion is to the fact that
 Marcion and his sect accepted but ten of St. Paul's Epistles:  leaving
 out entirely those to Timothy and Titus, and all the other books,
 except his one Gospel.

 [1402] It seems to me that the reference here must evidently be to the
 Epistle to the Hebrews, which treats specially of the old covenant.  If
 so, we have some indication as to the authorship, if not the date, of
 the book:  for Tertullian himself, though he frequently cites the
 Epistle, appears to hesitate (to say the least) as to ascribing it to
 St. Paul.

 [1403] Comp. Isa. vi. 9, 10, with Acts xxviii. 17-29.

 [1404] The reference seems to be to Rom. i. 28; comp., too, Tit. i. 15,
 16.

 [1405] The reference is to Gen. ii. 9-14.

 [1406] Fata mortua.  This extraordinary expression appears to mean
 "dead men;" men who, through Adam, are fated, so to speak, to die, and
 are under the sad fate of being "dead in trespasses and sins."  See
 Eph. ii. 1.  As far as quantity is concerned, it might as well be
 "facta mortua," "dead works," such as we read of in Heb. vi. 1; ix.
 14.  It is true these works cannot strictly be said to be ever
 vivified; but a very similar inaccuracy seems to be committed by our
 author lower down in this same book.

 [1407] I have followed Oehler's "face" for the common "phase;" but what
 the meaning is I will not venture to decide.  It may probably mean one
 of two things:  (a) that Paul wrote by torchlight; (b) that the light
 which Paul holds forth in his life and writings, is a torch to show the
 Corinthians and others Christ.

 [1408] i.e., the legal passover, "image" or type of "the true
 Passover," Christ.  See 1 Cor. v. 6-9.

 [1409] Abraham.  See Gen. xxii. 1-19.

 [1410] Isaac, a pledge to Abraham of all God's other promises.

 [1411] Forte.  I suppose this means out of the ordinary course of
 nature; but it is a strange word to use.

 [1412] Israel, wasted by the severities of their Egyptian captivity.

 [1413] "Multa;" but "muta" ="mute" has been suggested, and is not
 inapt.

 [1414] I have given what appears to be a possible sense for these
 almost unintelligible lines.  They run as follows in Oehler:-- "Et
 reliqui magni reges sanctique prophetæ, Non ignorantes certæ promissa
 salutis, Ingentemque metu pleni transcendere legem, Venturam summæ
 virtutis imagine molem, Inspectam e speculo celebrarunt ordine
 pascham." I rather incline to alter them somehow thus :-- "Ingentemque
 metu plenis transcendere legem, Venturum in summæ virtutis
 imagine,--solem Inspectum e speculo,--celebrarunt ordine pascham;"
 connecting these three lines with "non ignorantes," and rendering:--
 "Not ignorant of the good promises Of sure salvation; and that One
 would come, For such as filled are with godly fear The law to overstep,
 a mighty One, In Highest Virtue's image,--the Sun seen In mirror:--did
 in order celebrate The passover." That is, in brief, they all, in
 celebrating the type, looked forward to the Antitype to come.

 [1415] Immensus.

 [1416] This, again, seems to be the meaning, unless the passage (which
 is not probable) be corrupt.  The flesh, "foul" now with sin, is called
 the "stained image of the Lord," as having been originally in His
 image, but being now stained by guilt.

 [1417] Faith is called so, as being the reflection of divine reason.

 [1418] i.e., the praise of Christ Himself.  See Matt. xi. 7-15, with
 the parallel passage, Luke vii. 24-30; comp. also John v. 33-35.

 [1419] i.e., perhaps "render acceptable."

 [1420] See above, 91-99.

 [1421] i.e., teeth which He contemned, for His people's sake:  not that
 they are to us contemptible.

 [1422] i.e., perhaps permeating, by the influence of His death, the
 tombs of all the old saints.

 [1423] i.e., undertaking our debts in our stead.

 [1424] Adam.  See Rom. v., passim.

 [1425] It is an idea of the genuine Tertullian, apparently, that Eve
 was a "virgin" all the time she was with Adam in Paradise.  A similar
 idea appears in the "Genesis" above.

 [1426] Consilio.  Comp. 1 Tim. ii. 14, "Adam was not deceived."

 [1427] Called "life's own covering" (i.e., apparently his innocence) in
 117, above.

 [1428] Or, "ore."

 [1429] Comp. Heb. xii. 2, "Who, for the joy that was set before
 Him"--"hos anti tes prokeimenes hauto charas.

 [1430] Mundi.  See John xiv. 30.

 [1431] Virum.

 [1432] "The Lion of the tribe of Juda."  Rev. v. 5.

 [1433] Viro.  This use of "man" may be justified, to say nothing of
 other arguments, from Jer. xliv. 19, where "our men" seem plainly ="our
 husbands."  See marg.

 [1434] Virgo:  a play on the word in connection with the "viro" and
 what follows.

 [1435] Vir.

 [1436] i.e., Adam's.  The constructions, as will be seen, are oddly
 confused throughout, and I rather suspect some transposition of lines.

 [1437] Mulier.

 [1438] Mariti.

 [1439] See 1 Cor. xv. 22 sqq., especially 45, 47.

 [1440] Acres gressus.

 [1441] Femina.

 [1442] Lavacri.

 [1443] "Os;" lit., "face" or "mouth."

 [1444] Terra.

 [1445] This would seem to refer to Lazarus; but it seems to be an
 assumption that his raising took place on a Sabbath.

 [1446] i.e., to life.

 [1447] I have ventured to alter the "Morti," of the edd. into "Forti;"
 and "causas" (as we have seen) seems, in this late Latin, nearly
 ="res."

 [1448] i.e., the grain.

 [1449] This may seem an unusual expression, as it is more common to
 regard the fruit as gracing the tree, than the tree the fruit.  But, in
 point of fact, the tree, with its graceful form and foliage, may be
 said to give a grace to the fruit; and so our author puts it here:
 "decoratos arbore fructus."

 [1450] I read "primum" here for "primus."

 [1451] "Tantum" ="tantum quantum primo fuerat," i.e., with a body as
 well as a spirit.

 [1452] Pignus:  "the promise of the Father" (Acts i. 4); "the earnest
 of the Spirit" (2 Cor. i. 22; v. 5.).  See, too, Eph. i. 13, 14; Rom.
 viii. 23.

 [1453] The reference is to John iii. 6, but it is not quite correctly
 given.

 [1454] See note on 245, above.

 [1455] See 2 Cor. v. 1. sqq.

 [1456] I read "inermum"--a very rare form--here for "inermem."  But
 there seems a confusion in the text, which here, as elsewhere, is
 probably corrupt.

 [1457] "Ceræ," which seems senseless here, I have changed to "cereris."

 [1458] There seems to be a reference to 2 Pet. i. 17.

 [1459] Here again I have altered the punctuation by a very simple
 change.

 [1460] See 1 Cor. xv. 54; Isa. xxv. 8 (where the LXX. have a strange
 reading).

 Book III.--Of the Harmony of the Fathers of the Old and New Testaments.

 Now hath the mother, formerly surnamed

 Barren, giv'n birth: [1461] now a new people, born

 From the free woman, [1462] joys:  (the slave expelled,

 Deservedly, with her proud progeny;

 5  Who also leaves ungratefully behind

 The waters of the living fount, [1463] and drinks--

 Errant on heated plains--'neath glowing star: [1464] )

 Now can the Gentiles as their parent claim

 Abraham; who, the Lord's voice following,

 10  Like him, have all things left, [1465] life's pilgrimage

 To enter.  "Be glad, barren one;" conceive

 The promised people; "break thou out, and cry,"

 Who with no progeny wert blest; of whom

 Spake, through the seers, the Spirit of old time:

 15  She hath borne, out of many nations, one;

 With whose beginning are her pious limbs

 Ever in labour.

 Hers "just Abel" [1466] was,

 A pastor and a cattle--master he;

 Whom violence of brother's right hand slew

 20  Of old.  Her Enoch, signal ornament,

 Limb from her body sprung, by counsel strove

 To recall peoples gone astray from God

 And following misdeed, (while raves on earth

 The horde of robber-renegades, [1467] ) to flee

 25  The giants'sacrilegious cruel race;

 Faithful in all himself.  With groaning deep [1468]

 Did he please God, and by deserved toil

 Translated [1469] is reserved as a pledge,

 With honour high.  Perfect in praise, and found

 30  Faultless, and just--God witnessing [1470] the fact--

 In an adulterous people, Noah (he

 Who in twice fifty years [1471] the ark did weave)

 By deeds and voice the coming ruin told.

 Favour he won, snatched out of so great waves

 35  Of death, and, with his progeny, preserved.

 Then, in the generation [1472] following,

 Is Abraham, whose sons ye do deny

 Yourselves to be; who first--race, country, sire,

 All left behind--at suasion of God's voice

 40  Withdrew to realms extern:  such honours he

 At God's sublime hand worthily deserved

 As to be father to believing tribes

 And peoples.  Jacob with the patriarchs

 (Himself their patriarch) through all his own

 45  Life's space the gladdest times of Christ foresang

 By words, act, virtue, toil.

 Him follows--free

 From foul youth's stain--Joseph, by slander feigned,

 Doomed to hard penalty and gaol:  his groans

 Glory succeeds, and the realm's second crown, so

 50  And in dearth's time large power of furnishing

 Bread:  so appropriate a type of Christ,

 So lightsome type of Light, is manifest

 To all whose mind hath eyes, that they may see

 In a face-mirror [1473] their sure hope.

 Himself

 55  The patriarch Judah, see; the origin

 Of royal line, [1474] whence leaders rose, nor kings

 Failed ever from his seed, until the Power

 To come, by Gentiles looked for, promised long,

 Came.

 Moses, leader of the People, (he

 60  Who, spurning briefly--blooming riches, left

 The royal thresholds,) rather chose to bear

 His people's toils, afflicted, with bowed neck,

 By no threats daunted, than to gain himself

 Enjoyments, and of many penalties

 65  Remission:  admirable for such faith

 And love, he, with God's virtue armed, achieved

 Great exploits:  smote the nation through with plagues;

 And left their land behind, and their hard king

 Confounds, and leads the People back; trod waves;

 70  Sunk the foes down in waters; through a "tree" [1475]

 Made ever-bitter waters sweet; spake much

 (Manifestly to the People) with the Christ, [1476]

 From whose face light and brilliance in his own

 Reflected shone; dashed on the ground the law

 75  Accepted through some few, [1477] --implicit type,

 And sure, of his own toils!--smote through the rock;

 And, being bidden, shed forth streams; and stretched

 His hands that, by a sign, [1478] he vanquish might

 The foe; of Christ all severally, all [1479]

 80  Combined through Christ, do speak.  Great and approved,

 He [1480] rests with praise and peace.

 But Joshua,

 The son of Nun, erst called Oshea--this man

 The Holy Spirit to Himself did join

 As partner in His name: [1481] hence did he cleave

 85  The flood; constrained the People to pass o'er;

 Freely distributed the land--the prize

 Promised the fathers!--stayed both sun and moon

 While vanquishing the foe; races extern

 And giants' progeny outdrave; razed groves;

 90  Altars and temples levelled; and with mind

 Loyal [1482] performed all due solemnities:

 Type of Christ's name; his virtue's image.

 What

 Touching the People's Judges shall I say

 Singly? whose virtues, [1483] if unitedly

 95  Recorded, fill whole volumes numerous

 With space of words.  But yet the order due

 Of filling out the body of my words,

 Demands that, out of many, I should tell

 The life of few.

 Of whom when Gideon, guide

 100  Of martial band, keen to attack the foe,

 (Not keen to gain for his own family,

 By virtue, [1484] tutelary dignity, [1485] )

 And needing to be strengthened [1486] in the faith

 Excited in his mind, seeks for a sign

 105  Whereby he either could not, or could, wage

 Victorious war; to wit, that with the dew

 A fleece, exposèd for the night, should be

 Moistened, and all the ground lie dry around

 (By this to show that, with the world, [1487] should dry [1488]

 110  The enemies' palm); and then again, the fleece

 Alone remaining dry, the earth by night

 Should with the self-same [1489] moisture be bedewed:

 For by this sign he prostrated the heaps

 Of bandits; with Christ's People 'countering them

 115  Without much soldiery, with cavalry [1490]

 Three hundred--the Greek letter Tau, in truth,

 That number is [1491] --with torches armed, and horns

 Of blowers with the mouth:  then [1492] was the fleece,

 The people of Christ's sheep, from holy seed

 120  Born (for the earth means nations various,

 And scattered through the orb), which fleece the word

 Nourishes; night death's image; Tau the sign

 Of the dear cross; the horn the heraldings

 Of life; the torches shining in their stand [1493]

 125  The glowing Spirit:  and this testing, too,

 Forsooth, an image of Christ's virtue was: [1494]

 To teach that death's fierce battles should not be

 By trump angelic vanquished before

 Th' indocile People be deservedly

 130  By their own fault left desolate behind,

 And Gentiles, flourishing in faith, received

 In praise.

 Yea, Deborah, a woman far

 Above all fame, appears; who, having braced

 Herself for warlike toil, for country's sake,

 135  Beneath the palm-tree sang how victory

 Had crowned her People; thanks to whom it was

 That the foes, vanquisht, turned at once their backs,

 And Sisera their leader fled; whose flight

 No man, nor any band, arrested:  him,

 140  Suddenly renegade, a woman's hand--

 Jael's [1495] --with wooden weapon vanquished quite,

 For token of Christ's victory.

 With firm faith

 Jephthah appears, who a deep-wounding vow

 Dared make--to promise God a grand reward

 145  Of war:  him [1496] then, because he senselessly

 Had promised what the Lord not wills, first meets

 The pledge [1497] dear to his heart; who suddenly

 Fell by a lot unhoped by any.  He,

 To keep his promise, broke the sacred laws

 150  Of parenthood:  the shade of mighty fear

 Did in his violent mind cover his vow

 Of sin:  as solace of his widowed life

 For [1498] wickedness, renown, and, for crime, praise,

 He won.

 Nor Samson's strength, all corporal might

 155  Passing, must we forget; the Spirit's gift

 Was this; the power was granted to his head. [1499]

 Alone he for his People, daggerless,

 Armless, an ass-jaw grasping, prostrated

 A thousand corpses; and no bonds could keep

 160  The hero bound:  but after his shorn pride

 Forsook him thralled, he fell, and, by his death,--

 Though vanquisht,--bought his foes back 'neath his power.

 Marvellous Samuel, who first received

 The precept to anoint kings, to give chrism

 165  And show men-Christs, [1500] so acted laudably

 In life's space as, e'en after his repose,

 To keep prophetic rights. [1501]

 Psalmographist

 David, great king and prophet, with a voice

 Submiss was wont Christ's future suffering

 170  To sing:  which prophecy spontaneously

 His thankless lawless People did perform:

 Whom [1502] God had promised that in time to come,

 Fruit of his womb, [1503] a holy progeny,

 He would on his sublime throne set:  the Lord's

 175  Fixt faith did all that He had promised.

 Corrector of an inert People rose

 Emulous [1504] Hezekiah; who restored

 Iniquitous forgetful men the Law: [1505]

 All these God's mandates of old time he first

 180  Bade men observe, who ended war by prayers, [1506]

 Not by steel's point:  he, dying, had a grant

 Of years and times of life made to his tears:

 Deservedly such honour his career

 Obtained.

 With zeal immense, Josiah, prince

 185  Himself withal, in like wise acted:  none

 So much, before or after!--Idols he

 Dethroned; destroyed unhallowed temples; burned

 With fire priests on their altars; all the bones

 Of prophets false updug; the altars burned,

 190  The carcases to be consumed did serve

 For fuel!

 To the praise of signal faith,

 Noble Elijah, (memorable fact!)

 Was rapt; [1507] who hath not tasted yet death's dues;

 Since to the orb he is to come again.

 195  His faith unbroken, then, chastening with stripes

 People and frenzied king, (who did desert

 The Lord's best service), and with bitter flames

 The foes, shut up the stars; kept in the clouds

 The rain; showed all collectively that God

 200  Is; made their error patent;--for a flame,

 Coming with force from heaven at his prayers,

 Ate up the victim's parts, dripping with flood,

 Upon the altar: [1508] --often as he willed,

 So often from on high rushed fire; [1509] the stream

 205  Dividing, he made pathless passable; [1510]

 And, in a chariot raised aloft, was borne

 To paradise's hall.

 Disciple his

 Elisha was, succeeding to his lot: [1511]

 Who begged to take to him Elijah's lot [1512]

 210  In double measure; so, with forceful stripe,

 The People to chastise: [1513] such and so great

 A love for the Lord's cause he breathed.  He smote

 Through Jordan; made his feet a way, and crossed

 Again; raised with a twig the axe down--sunk

 215  Beneath the stream; changed into vital meat

 The deathful food; detained a second time,

 Double in length, [1514] the rains; cleansed leprosies; [1515]

 Entangled foes in darkness; and when one

 Offcast and dead, by bandits'slaughter slain

 220  His limbs, after his death, already hid

 In sepulchre, did touch, he--light recalled--

 Revived.

 Isaiah, wealthy seer, to whom

 The fount was oped,--so manifest his faith!

 Poured from his mouth God's word forth.  Promised was

 225  The Father's will, bounteous through Christ; through him

 It testified before the way of life,

 And was approved: [1516] but him, though stainless found,

 And undeserving, the mad People cut

 With wooden saw in twain, and took away

 230  With cruel death.

 The holy Jeremy

 Followed; whom the Eternal's Virtue bade

 Be prophet to the Gentiles, and him told

 The future:  who, because he brooded o'er

 His People's deeds illaudable, and said

 235  (Speaking with voice presaging) that, unless

 They had repented of betaking them

 To deeds iniquitous against their slaves, [1517]

 They should be captived, bore hard bonds, shut up

 In squalid gaol; and, in the miry pit,

 240  Hunger exhausted his decaying limbs.

 But, after he did prove what they to hear

 Had been unwilling, and the foes did lead

 The People bound in their triumphal trains,

 Hardly at length his wrinkled right hand lost

 245  Its chains:  it is agreed that by no death

 Nor slaughter was the hero ta'en away.

 Faithful Ezekiel, to whom granted was

 Rich grace of speech, saw sinners' secrets; wailed

 His own afflictions; prayed for pardon; saw

 250  The vengeance of the saints, which is to be

 By slaughter; and, in Spirit wrapt, the place

 Of the saints' realm, its steps and accesses,

 And the salvation of the flesh, he saw.

 Hosea, Amos, Micah, Joel, too,

 255  With Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, come;

 Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai,

 And Zechariah who did violence

 Suffer, and Malachi--angel himself!

 Are here:  these are the Lord's seers; and their choir,

 260  As still they sing, is heard; and equally

 Their proper wreath of praise they all have earned.

 How great was Daniel!  What a man!

 What power!

 Who by their own mouth did false witnesses

 Bewray, and saved a soul on a false charge

 265  Condemned; [1518] and, before that, by mouth resolved

 The king's so secret dreams; foresaw how Christ

 Dissolves the limbs of kingdoms; was accused

 For his Lord's was made the lions' prey;

 And, openly preserved [1519] before all eyes,

 270  Rested in peace.

 His Three Companions, scarce

 With due praise to be sung, did piously

 Contemn the king's iniquitous decree,

 Out of so great a number:  to the flames

 Their bodies given were; but they preferred,

 275  For the Great Name, to yield to penalties

 Themselves, than to an image stretch their palms

 On bended knees.  Now their o'erbrilliant faith,

 Now hope outshining all things, the wild fires

 Hath quencht, and vanquisht the iniquitous!

 280  Ezra the seer, doctor of Law, and priest

 Himself (who, after full times, back did lead

 The captive People), with the Spirit filled

 Of memory, restored by word of mouth

 All the seers' volumes, by the fires and mould [1520]

 285  Consumèd.

 Great above all born from seed

 Is John whose praises hardly shall we skill

 To tell:  the washer [1521] of the flesh:  the Lord's

 Open forerunner; washer, [1522] too, of Christ,

 Himself first born again from Him:  the first

 290  Of the new convenant, last of the old,

 Was he; and for the True Way's sake he died,

 The first slain victim.

 See God-Christ! behold

 Alike, His Twelve-Fold Warrior-Youth! [1523] in all

 One faith, one dove, one power; the flower of men;

 295  Lightening the world [1524] with light; comrades of Christ

 And apostolic men; who, speaking truth,

 Heard with their ears Salvation, [1525] with their eyes

 Saw It, and handled with their hand the late

 From death recovered body, [1526] and partook

 300  As fellow-guests of food therewith, as they

 Themselves bear witness.

 Him did Paul as well

 (Forechosen apostle, and in due time sent),

 When rapt into the heavens, [1527] behold:  and sent

 By Him, he, with his comrade Barnabas,

 305  And with the earlier associates

 Joined in one league together, everywhere

 Among the Gentiles hands the doctrine down

 That Christ is Head, whose members are the Church,

 He the salvation of the body, He

 310  The members' life perennial;

 He, made flesh, He, ta'en away for all, Himself first rose

 Again, salvation's only hope; and gave

 The norm to His disciples:  they at once

 All variously suffered, for His Name,

 315  Unworthy penalties.

 Such members bears

 With beauteous body the free mother, since

 She never her Lord's precepts left behind,

 And in His home hath grown old, to her Lord

 Ever most choice, having for His Name's sake

 320  Penalties suffered.  For since, barren once,

 Not yet secure of her futurity,

 She hath outgiven a people born of seed

 Celestial, and [1528] been spurned, and borne the spleen [1529]

 Of her own handmaid; now 'tis time to see

 325  This former-barren mother have a son

 The heir of her own liberty; not like

 The handmaid's heir, yoked in estate to her,

 Although she bare him from celestial seed

 Conceived.  Far be it that ye should with words

 330  Unlawful, with rash voice, collectively

 Without distinction, give men exemplary

 (Heaven's glowing constellations, to the mass

 Of men conjoined by seed alone or blood),

 The rugged bondman's [1530] name; or that one think

 335  That he may speak in servile style about

 A People who the mandates followèd

 Of the Lord's Law.  No:  but we mean the troop

 Of sinners, empty, mindless, who have placed

 God's promises in a mistrustful heart;

 340  Men vanquisht by the miserable sweet

 Of present life:  that troop would have been bound

 Capital slavery to undergo,

 By their own fault, if sin's cause shall impose

 Law's yoke upon the mass.  For to serve God,

 345  And be whole-heartedly intent thereon,

 Untainted faith, and freedom, is thereto

 Prepared spontaneous.

 The just fathers, then,

 And holy stainless prophets, many, sang

 The future advent of the Lord; and they

 350  Faithfully testify what Heaven bids

 To men profane:  with them the giants, [1531] men

 With Christ's own glory satiated, made

 The consorts of His virtue, filling up

 The hallowed words, have stablished our faith;

 355  By facts predictions proving.

 Of these men

 Disciples who succeeded them throughout

 The orb, men wholly filled with virtue's breath,

 And our own masters, have assigned to us

 Honours conjoined with works.

 Of whom the first

 360  Whom Peter bade to take his place and sit

 Upon this chair in mightiest Rome where he

 Himself had sat, [1532] was Linus, great, elect,

 And by the mass approved.  And after him

 Cletus himself the fold's flock undertook;

 365  As his successor Anacletus was

 By lot located:  Clement follows him;

 Well known was he to apostolic men: [1533]

 Next Evaristus ruled without a crime

 The law. [1534] To Sixtus Sextus Alexander

 370  Commends the fold:  who, after he had filled

 His lustral times up, to Telesphorus

 Hands it in order:  excellent was he,

 And martyr faithful.  After him succeeds

 A comrade in the law, [1535] and master sure:

 375  When lo! the comrade of your wickedness,

 Its author and forerunner--Cerdo hight--

 Arrived at Rome, smarting with recent wounds:

 Detected, for that he was scattering

 Voices and words of venom stealthily:

 380  For which cause, driven from the band, he bore

 This sacrilegious brood, the dragon's breath

 Engendering it.  Blooming in piety

 United stood the Church of Rome, compact

 By Peter:  whose successor, too, himself,

 385  And now in the ninth place, Hyginus was,

 The burden undertaking of his chair.

 After him followed Pius--Hermas his

 Own brother [1536] was; angelic "Pastor" he,

 Because he spake the words delivered him: [1537]

 390  And Anicetus [1538] the allotted post

 In pious order undertook.  'Neath whom

 Marcion here coming, the new Pontic pest,

 (The secret daring deed in his own heart

 Not yet disclosed,) went, speaking commonly,

 395  In all directions, in his perfidy,

 With lurking art.  But after he began

 His deadly arrows to produce, cast off

 Deservedly (as author of a crime

 So savage), reprobated by the saints,

 400  He burst, a wondrous monster! on our view.

 [1461] Isa. liv. 1; Gal. iv. 27.

 [1462] Gal. iv. 19-31.

 [1463] The Jewish people leaving Christ, "the fountain of living
 waters" (Jer. ii. 13; John vii. 37-39), is compared to Hagar leaving
 the well, which was, we may well believe, close to Abraham's tent.

 [1464] Et tepidis errans ardenti sidere potat.  See Gen. xxi. 12-20.

 [1465] See Matt. xix. 27; Mark x. 28; Luke xviii. 28.

 [1466] See Matt. xxiii. 35.

 [1467] i.e., apparently the "giants;" see Gen. vi. 4; but there is no
 mention of them in Enoch's time (Migne).

 [1468] i.e., over the general sinfulness.

 [1469] I suggest "translatus" for "translatum" here.

 [1470] See Gen. vii. 1.

 [1471] Loosely; 120 years is the number in Gen. vi. 3.

 [1472] Gente.

 [1473] Speculo vultus.  The two words seem to me to go together, and,
 unless the second be indeed redundant, to mean perhaps a small
 hand-mirror, which affords more facilities for minute examination of
 the face than a larger fixed one.

 [1474] "Sortis;" lit. "lot," here ="the line or family chosen by lot."
 Compare the similar derivation of "clergy."

 [1475] Lignum.

 [1476] I have ventured to substitute "Christo" for "Christi;" and thus,
 for "Cum Christi populo manifeste multa locutus," read, "Cum Christo
 (populo manifeste) multa locutus." The reference is to the fact, on
 which such special stress is laid, of the Lord's "speaking to Moses
 face to face, as a man speaketh with his friend."  See especially Num.
 xii. 5-8, Deut. xxxiv. 9-12, with Deut. xviii. 17-19, Acts iii. 22, 23,
 vii. 37.

 [1477] The Latin in Oehler and Migne is thus: "Acceptam legem per
 paucos fudit in orbem;" and the reference seems to me to be to Ex.
 xxxii. 15-20, though the use of "orbem" for "ground" is perhaps
 strange; but "humum" would have been against the metre, if that
 argument be of any weight in the case of a writer so prolific of false
 quantities.  Possibly the lines may mean that "he diffused through some
 few"--i.e., through the Jews, "few" as compared with the total
 inhabitants of the orb--"the Law which he had received;" but then the
 following line seems rather to favour the former view, because the
 tables of the Law--called briefly "the Law"--broken by Moses so soon
 after he had received them, were typical of the inefficacy of all
 Moses' own toils, which, after all, ended in disappointment, as he was
 forbidden, on account of a sin committed in the very last of the forty
 years, to lead the people into "the land," as he had fondly hoped to
 do.  Only I suspect some error in "per paucos;" unless it be lawful to
 supply "dies," and take it to mean "received during but few days,"
 i.e., "within few days," "only a few days before," and "accepted" or
 "kept" by the People "during but a few days."  Would it be lawful to
 conjecture "perpaucis" as one word, with "ante diebus" to be
 understood?

 [1478] i.e., the sign of the cross.  See Tertullian, adv. Marc., l.
 iii. c. xviii. sub. fin.; also adv. Jud., c. x. med.

 [1479] i.e., all the acts and the experiences of Moses.

 [1480] Moses.

 [1481] See Ex. xxiii. 20-23; and comp. adv. Marc., l. iii. c. xvi.

 [1482] Legitima, i.e., reverent of law.

 [1483] i.e., virtuous acts.

 [1484] Or, "valour."

 [1485] The Latin runs thus: "Acer in hostem. Non virtute sua tutelam
 acquirere genti." I have ventured to read "suæ," and connect it with
 "genti;" and thus have obtained what seems to me a probable sense.  See
 Judg. viii. 22, 23.

 [1486] I read "firmandus" for "firmatus."

 [1487] Mundo.

 [1488] I have again ventured a correction, "coarescere" for
 "coalescere."  It makes at least some sense out of an otherwise (to me)
 unintelligible passage, the "palm" being taken as the well-known symbol
 of bloom and triumph.  So David in Ps. xcii. 12 (xci. 13 in LXX.), "The
 righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree."  To "dry" here is, of
 course, neuter, and means to "wither."

 [1489] I have changed "eadem"--which must agree with "nocte," and hence
 give a false sense; for it was not, of course, on "the same night," but
 on the next, that this second sign was given--into "eodem," to agree
 with "liquore," which gives a true one, as the "moisture," of course,
 was the same,--dew, namely.

 [1490] Equite.  It appears to be used loosely for "men of war"
 generally.

 [1491] Which is taken, from its form, as a sign of the cross; see
 below.

 [1492] Refers to the "when" in 99, above.

 [1493] Lychno.  The "faces" are probably the wicks.

 [1494] "Scilicet hoc testamen erat virtutis imago."

 [1495] The text as it stands is, in Oehler:-- ..."Hic Baal Christi
 victoria signo Extemplo refugam devicit femina ligno;" which I would
 read:-- ..."Hunc Jael, Christi victoriæ signo, Extemplo," etc.

 [1496] For "hic" I would incline to read "huic."

 [1497] i.e., child.

 [1498] i.e., instead of.

 [1499] i.e., to his unshorn Nazarite locks.

 [1500] Viros ostendere Christos.

 [1501] See 1 Sam. xxviii. (in LXX. 1 Kings) 11-19.

 [1502] i.e., to whom, to David.

 [1503] "Ex utero:"  a curious expression for a man; but so it is.

 [1504] i.e., emulous of David's virtues.

 [1505] Comp. especially 2 Chron. xxix.; xxx.; xxxi.

 [1506] Our author is quite correct in his order.  A comparison of dates
 as given in the Scripture history shows us that his reforms preceded
 his war with Sennacherib.

 [1507] The "tactus" of the Latin is without sense, unless indeed it
 refer to his being twice "touched" by an angel.  See 1 Kings (in LXX. 3
 Kings) xix. 1-8.  I have therefore substituted "raptus," there being no
 mention of the angel in the Latin.

 [1508] "Aras" should probably be "aram."

 [1509] See 2 Kings (in LXX. 4 Kings) i. 9-12.

 [1510] For "transgressas et avia fecit," I read "transgressus avia
 fecit," taking "transgressus" as a subst.

 [1511] Sortis.

 [1512] Sortem.

 [1513] Our author has somewhat mistaken Elisha's mission apparently;
 for as there is a significant difference in the meaning of their
 respective names, so there is in their works:  Elijah's miracles being
 rather miracles of judgment, it has been remarked; Elisha's, of mercy.

 [1514] The reference is to a famine in Elisha's days, which--2 Kings
 (in LXX. 4 Kings) viii. i.--was to last seven years; whereas that for
 which Elijah prayed, as we learn in Jas. v. 17., lasted three and six
 months.  But it is not said that Elisha prayed for that famine.

 [1515] We only read of one leprosy which Elisha cleansed--Naaman's.  He
 inflicted leprosy on Gehazi, which was "to cleave to him and to his
 seed for ever."

 [1516] Prætestata viam vitæ atque probata per ipsam est.  I suspect we
 should read "via," quantity being of no importance with our author, and
 take "prætestata" as passive:  "The way of life was testified before,
 and proved, through him."

 [1517] This seems to be the meaning, and the reference will then be to
 Jer. xxxiv. 8-22 (in LXX. xli. 8-22); but the punctuation both in
 Oehler and Migne makes nonsense, and I have therefore altered it.

 [1518] See the apocryphal "Susanna."

 [1519] For "servatisque palam cunctis in pace quievit," which the edd.
 give, I suggest "servatusque," etc., and take "palam" for governing
 "cunctis."

 [1520] Ignibus et multa consumpta volumina vatum.  Multamust,
 apparently, be an error for some word signifying "mould" or the like;
 unless, with the disregard of construction and quantity observable in
 this author, it be an acc. pl. to agree with volumina, so that we must
 take "omnia multa volumina" together, which would alter the whole
 construction of the context.

 [1521] Ablutor.

 [1522] Ablutor.

 [1523] Juventus.

 [1524] Mundo.

 [1525] Salutem =Christum.  So Simeon, "Mine eyes have seen Thy
 salvation," where the Greek word should be noted and compared with its
 usage in the LXX., especially in the Psalms.  See Luke ii. 30.

 [1526] Comp. 1 John i. 1, 2.

 [1527] See 2 Cor. xii. 1 sqq.

 [1528] The common reading is, "Atque suæ famulæ portavit spreta
 dolorem," for which Oehler reads "portarit;" but I incline rather to
 suggest that "portavit" be retained, but that the "atque" be changed
 into "aeque," thus:  "Aeque suæ famulæ portavit spreta dolorem;" i.e.,
 Since, like Sarah, the once barren Christian church-mother hath had
 children, equally, like Sarah, hath she had to bear scorn and spleen at
 her handmaid's--the Jewish church-mother's--hands.

 [1529] Dolorem.

 [1530] i.e., Ishmael's.

 [1531] "Immanes," if it be the true reading.

 [1532] This is the way Oehler's punctuation reads.  Migne's reads as
 follows:-- ..."Of whom the first Whom mightiest Rome bade take his
 place and sit Upon the chair where Peter's self had sat," etc.

 [1533] "Is apostolicis bene notus."  This may mean, (a) as in our text;
 (b) by his apostolically-minded writings--writings like an apostle's;
 or (c) by the apostolic writings, i.e., by the mention made of him,
 supposing him to be the same, in Phil. iv. 3.

 [1534] Legem.

 [1535] Legis.

 [1536] Germine frater.

 [1537] An allusion to the well-known Pastor or Shepherd of Hermas.

 [1538] Our author makes the name Anicetus.  Rig. (as quoted by Oehler)
 observes that a comparison of the list of bishops of Rome here given
 with that given by Tertullian in de Præscr., c. xxxii., seems to show
 that this metrical piece cannot be his.

 Book IV.--Of Marcion's Antitheses. [1539]

 What the Inviolable Power bids

 The youthful people, [1540] which, rich, free, and heir,

 Possesses an eternal hope of praise

 (By right assigned) is this:  that with great zeal

 5  Burning, armed with the love of peace--yet not

 As teachers (Christ alone doth all things teach [1541] ),

 But as Christ's household--servants--o'er the earth

 They should conduct a massive war; [1542] should raze

 The wicked's lofty towers, savage walls,

 10  And threats which 'gainst the holy people's bands

 Rise, and dissolve such empty sounds in air.

 Wherefore we, justly speaking emulous words, [1543]

 Out of his [1544] own words even strive to express

 The meaning of salvation's records, [1545] which

 15  Large grace hath poured profusely; and to ope

 To the saints' eyes the Bandit's [1546] covert plague:

 Lest any untrained, daring, ignorant,

 Fall therein unawares, and (being caught)

 Forfeit celestial gifts.

 God, then, is One

 20  To mortals all and everywhere; a Realm

 Eternal, Origin of light profound;

 Life's Fount; a Draught fraught [1547] with all wisdom.  He

 Produced the orb whose bosom all things girds;

 Him not a region, not a place, includes as

 25  In circuit:  matter none perennial is, [1548]

 So as to be self-made, or to have been

 Ever, created by no Maker:  heaven's,

 Earth's, sea's, and the abyss's [1549] Settler [1550] is

 The Spirit; air's Divider, Builder, Author,

 30  Sole God perpetual, Power immense, is He. [1551]

 Him had the Law the People [1552] shown to be

 One God, [1553] whose mighty voice to Moses spake

 Upon the mount.  Him this His Virtue, too,

 His Wisdom, Glory, Word, and Son, this Light

 35  Begotten from the Light immense, [1554] proclaims

 Through the seers' voices, to be One:  and Paul, [1555]

 Taking the theme in order up, thus too

 Himself delivers; "Father there is One [1556]

 Through whom were all things made:  Christ One, through whom

 40  God all things made;" [1557] to whom he plainly owns

 That every knee doth bow itself; [1558] of whom

 Is every fatherhood [1559] in heaven and earth

 Called:  who is zealous with the highest love

 Of parent-care His people-ward; and wills

 45  All flesh to live in holy wise, and wills

 His people to appear before Him pure

 Without a crime.  With such zeal, by a law [1560]

 Guards He our safety; warns us loyal be;

 Chastens; is instant.  So, too, has the same

 50  Apostle (when Galatian brethren

 Chiding)--Paul--written that such zeal hath he. [1561]

 The fathers'sins God freely rendered, then,

 Slaying in whelming deluge utterly Parents alike with progeny, and e'en

 55  Grandchildren in "fourth generation" [1562] now

 Descended from the parent-stock, when He

 Has then for nearly these nine hundred years

 Assisted them.  Hard does the judgment seem?

 The sentence savage?  And in Sodom, too,

 60  That the still guiltless little one unarmed

 And tender should lose life:  for what had e'er

 The infant sinned?  What cruel thou mayst think,

 Is parent-care's true duty.  Lest misdeed

 Should further grow, crime's authors He did quench,

 65  And sinful parents' brood.  But, with his sires,

 The harmless infant pays not penalties

 Perpetual, ignorant and not advanced

 In crime:  but lest he partner should become

 Of adult age's guilt, death immature

 70  Undid spontaneous future ills.

 Why, then,

 Bids God libation to be poured to Him

 With blood of sheep? and takes so stringent means

 By Law, that, in the People, none transgress

 Erringly, threatening them with instant death

 75  By stoning? and why reprobates, again,

 These gifts of theirs, and says they are to Him

 Unwelcome, while He chides a People prest

 With swarm of sin? [1563] Does He, the truthful, bid,

 And He, the just, at the same time repel?

 80  The causes if thou seekst, cease to be moved

 Erringly:  for faith's cause is weightier

 Than fancied reason. [1564] Through a mirror [1565] --shade

 Of fulgent light!--behold what the calf's blood,

 The heifer's ashes, and each goat, do mean:

 85  The one dismissed goes off, the other falls

 A victim at the temple.

 With calf's blood

 With water mixt the seer [1566] (thus from on high

 Bidden) besprinkled People, vessels all,

 Priests, and the written volumes of the Law.

 90  See here not their true hope, nor yet a mere

 Semblance devoid of virtue: [1567] but behold

 In the calf's type Christ destined bodily

 To suffer; who upon His shoulders bare

 The plough-beam's hard yokes, [1568] and with fortitude

 95  Brake His own heart with the steel share, and poured

 Into the furrows water of His own

 Life's blood.  For these "temple-vessels" do

 Denote our bodies:  God's true temple [1569] He,

 Not dedicated erst; for to Himself

 100  He by His blood associated men,

 And willed them be His body's priests, Himself

 The Supreme Father's perfect Priest by right.

 Hearing, sight, step inert, He cleansed; and, for a "book," [1570]

 Sprinkled, by speaking [1571] words of presage, those

 105  His witnesses:  demonstrating the Law

 Bound by His holy blood.

 This cause withal

 Our victim through "the heifer" manifests

 From whose blood taking for the People's sake

 Piacular drops, them the first Levite [1572] bare

 110  Within the veil; and, by God's bidding, burned

 Her corse without the camp's gates; with whose ash

 He cleansed lapsed bodies.

 Thus our Lord (who us

 By His own death redeemed), without the camp [1573]

 Willingly suffering the violence

 115  Of an iniquitous People, did fulfil

 The Law, by facts predictions proving; [1574] who

 A people of contamination full

 Doth truly cleanse, conceding all things, as

 The body's Author rich; within heaven's veil

 120  Gone with the blood which--One for many's deaths--

 He hath outpoured.

 A holy victim, then,

 Is meet for a great priest; which worthily

 He, being perfect, may be proved to have,

 And offer.  He a body hath:  this is

 125  For mortals a live victim; worthy this

 Of great price did He offer, One for all.

 The [1575] semblance of the "goats" teaches that they

 Are men exiled out of the "peoples twain" [1576]

 As barren; [1577] fruitless both; (of whom the Lord

 130  Spake also, in the Gospel, telling how

 The kids are severed from the sheep, and stand

 On the left hand [1578] ):  that some indeed there are

 Who for the Lord's Name's sake have suffered:  thus

 That fruit has veiled their former barrenness:

 135  And such, the prophet teaches, on the ground

 Of that their final merit worthy are

 Of the Lord's altar:  others, cast away

 (As was th' iniquitous rich man, we read,

 By Lazarus [1579] ), are such as have remained

 140  Exiled, persistent in their stubbornness.

 Now a veil, hanging in the midst, did both

 Dissever, [1580] and had into portions twain

 Divided the one shrine. [1581] The inner parts

 Were called "Holies of holies." Stationed there

 145  An altar shone, noble with gold; and there,

 At the same time, the testaments and ark

 Of the Law's tablets; covered wholly o'er

 With lambs'skins [1582] dyed with heaven's hue; within

 Gold-clad; [1583] and all between of wood.  Here are so

 150  The tablets of the Law; here is the urn

 Replete with manna; here is Aaron's rod

 Which puts forth germens of the cross [1584] --unlike

 The cross itself, yet born of storax-tree [1585] --And over it--in
 uniformity

 155  Fourfold--the cherubim their pinions spread,

 And the inviolable sanctities [1586]

 Covered obediently. [1587] Without the veil

 Part of the shrine stood open:  facing it,

 Heavy with broad brass, did an altar stand;

 160  And with two triple sets (on each side one)

 Of branches woven with the central stem,

 A lampstand, and as many [1588] lamps:

 The golden substance wholly filled with light

 The temple. [1589]

 Thus the temple's outer face,

 165  Common and open, does the ritual

 Denote, then, of a people lingering

 Beneath the Law; amid whose [1590] gloom there shone

 The Holy Spirit's sevenfold unity

 Ever, the People sheltering. [1591] And thus

 170  The Lampstand True and living Lamps do shine

 Persistently throughout the Law and Seers

 On men subdued in heart.  And for a type

 Of earth, [1592] the altar--so tradition says--

 Was made.  Here constantly, in open space,

 175  Before all eyes were visible of old

 The People's "works," [1593] which ever--"not without

 Blood" [1594] --it did offer, shedding out the gore

 Of lawless life. [1595] There, too, the Lord--Himself

 Made victim on behalf of all--denotes

 180  The whole earth [1596] --altar in specific sense.

 Hence likewise that new covenant author, whom

 No language can describe, Disciple John,

 Testifies that beneath such altar he

 Saw souls which had for Christ's name suffered,

 185  Praying the vengeance of the mighty God

 Upon their slaughter. [1597] There, [1598] meantime, is rest.

 In some unknown part there exists a spot

 Open, enjoying its own light; 'tis called

 "Abraham's bosom;" high above the glooms, [1599]

 190  And far removed from fire, yet 'neath the earth. [1600]

 The brazen altar this is called, whereon

 (We have recorded) was a dusky veil. [1601]

 This veil divides both parts, and leaves the one

 Open, from the eternal one distinct

 195  In worship and time's usage.  To itself

 Tis not unfriendly, though of fainter love,

 By time and space divided, and yet linked

 By reason.  'Tis one house, though by a veil

 Parted it seems:  and thus (when the veil burst,

 200  On the Lord's passion) heavenly regions oped

 And holy vaults, [1602] and what was double erst

 Became one house perennial.

 Order due

 Traditionally has interpreted

 The inner temple of the people called

 205  After Christ's Name, with worship heavenly,

 God's actual mandates following; (no "shade"

 Is herein bound, but persons real; [1603] ) complete

 By the arrival of the "perfect things." [1604]

 The ark beneath a type points out to us

 210  Christ's venerable body, joined, through "wood," [1605]

 With sacred Spirit:  the aërial [1606] skins

 Are flesh not born of seed, outstretcht on "wood;" [1607]

 At the same time, with golden semblance fused, [1608]

 Within, the glowing Spirit joined is

 215  Thereto; that, with peace [1609] granted, flesh might bloom

 With Spirit mixt.  Of the Lord's flesh, again,

 The urn, golden and full, a type doth bear.

 Itself denotes that the new covenant's Lord

 Is manna; in that He, true heavenly Bread,

 220  Is, and hath by the Father been transfused [1610]

 Into that bread which He hath to His saints

 Assigned for a pledge:  this Bread will He

 Give perfectly to them who (of good works

 The lovers ever) have the bonds of peace

 225  Kept.  And the double tablets of the law

 Written all over, these, at the same time,

 Signify that that Law was ever hid

 In Christ, who mandate old and new fulfilled,

 Ark of the Supreme Father as He is,

 230  Through whom He, being rich, hath all things given.

 The storax-rod, too, nut's fruit bare itself;

 (The virgin's semblance this, who bare in blood

 A body:)  on the "wood" [1611] conjoined 'twill lull

 Death's bitter, which within sweet fruit doth lurk,

 235  By virtue of the Holy Spirit's grace:

 Just as Isaiah did predict "a rod"

 From Jesse's seed [1612] --Mary--from which a flower

 Issues into the orb.

 The altar bright with gold

 Denotes the heaven on high, whither ascend

 240  Prayers holy, sent up without crime:  the Lord

 This "altar" spake of, where if one doth gifts

 Offer, he must first reconciliate

 Peace with his brother: [1613] thus at length his prayers

 Can flame unto the stars.  Christ, Victor sole

 245  And foremost. [1614] Priest, thus offered incense born

 Not of a tree, but prayers. [1615]

 The cherubim [1616]

 Being, with twice two countenances, one,

 And are the one word through fourfold order led; [1617]

 The hoped comforts of life's mandate new,

 250  Which in their plenitude Christ bare Himself

 Unto us from the Father.  But the wings

 In number four times six, [1618] the heraldings

 Of the old world denote, witnessing things

 Which, we are taught, were after done.  On these [1619]

 255  The heavenly words fly through the orb:  with these

 Christ's blood is likewise held context, so told

 Obscurely by the seers' presaging mouth.

 The number of the wings doth set a seal

 Upon the ancient volumes; teaching us

 260  Those twenty-four have certainly enough

 Which sang the Lord's ways and the times of peace:

 These all, we see, with the new covenant

 Cohere.  Thus also John; the Spirit thus

 To him reveals that in that number stand

 265  The enthroned elders white [1620] and crowned, who (as

 With girding-rope) all things surround, before

 The Lord's throne, and upon the glassy sea

 Subigneous:  and four living creatures, winged

 And full of eyes within and outwardly,

 270  Do signify that hidden things are oped,

 And all things shut are at the same time seen,

 In the word's eye.  The glassy flame-mixt sea

 Means that the laver's gifts, with Spirit fused

 Therein, upon believers are conferred.

 275  Who could e'en tell what the Lord's parent-care

 Before His judgment-seat, before His bar,

 Prepared hath? that such as willing be

 His forum and His judgment for themselves

 To antedate, should 'scape! that who thus hastes

 280  Might find abundant opportunity!

 Thus therefore Law and wondrous prophets sang;

 Thus all parts of the covenant old and new,

 Those sacred rights and pregnant utterances

 Of words, conjoined, do flourish.  Thus withal,

 285  Apostles' voices witness everywhere;

 Nor aught of old, in fine, but to the new

 Is joined.

 Thus err they, and thus facts retort

 Their sayings, who to false ways have declined;

 And from the Lord and God, eternal King,

 290  Who such an orb produced, detract, and seek

 Some other deity 'neath feigned name,

 Bereft of minds, which (frenzied) they have lost;

 Willing to affirm that Christ a stranger is

 To the Law; nor is the world's [1621] Lord; nor doth will

 295  Salvation of the flesh; nor was Himself

 The body's Maker, by the Father's power. [1622]

 Them must we flee, stopping (unasked) our ears;

 Lest with their speech they stain innoxious hearts.

 Let therefore us, whom so great grace [1623] of God

 300  Hath penetrated, and the true celestial words

 Of the great Master-Teacher in good ways

 Have trained, and given us right monuments; [1624]

 Pay honour ever to the Lord, and sing

 Endlessly, joying in pure faith, and sure

 305  Salvation.  Born of the true God, with bread

 Perennial are we nourished, and hope

 With our whole heart after eternal life.

 [1539] The state of the text in some parts of this book is frightful.
 It has been almost hopeless to extract any sense whatever out of the
 Latin in many passages--indeed, the renderings are in these cases
 little better than guess-work--and the confusion of images, ideas, and
 quotations is extraordinary.

 [1540] See the preceding book.

 [1541] I have changed the unintelligible "daret" of the edd. into
 "docet."  The reference seems to be to Matt. xxiii. 8; Jas. iii. 1; 1
 Pet. v. 2, 3.

 [1542] Molem belli deducere terræ.

 [1543] Æmulamenta.  Migne seems to think the word refers to Marcion's
 "Antitheses."

 [1544] i.e., apparently Marcion's.

 [1545] Monumenta.

 [1546] See the opening of the preceding book.

 [1547] "Conditus;" i.e., probably (in violation of quantity) the past
 part. of "condio" = flavoured, seasoned.

 [1548] I have altered the punctuation here.

 [1549] Inferni.

 [1550] Locator.

 [1551] These lines are capable, according to their punctuation, of
 various renderings, which for brevity's sake I must be content to omit.

 [1552] i.e., the People of Israel.  See the de Idol., p. 148, c. v.
 note 1.

 [1553] See Deut. vi. 3, 4, quoted in Mark xii. 29, 30.

 [1554] This savours of the Nicene Creed.

 [1555] Migne's pointing is followed, in preference to Oehler's.

 [1556] "Unum hunc esse Patrem;" i.e., "that this One (God) is the
 Father."  But I rather incline to read, "unumque esse;" or we may
 render, "This One is the Sire."

 [1557] See 1 Cor. viii. 5, 6 (but notice the prepositions in the Greek;
 our author is not accurate in rendering them); Eph. iv. 4, 5, 6.

 [1558] Ad quem se curvare genu plane omne fatetur.  The reference is to
 Phil. ii. 10; but our author is careless in using the present tense,
 "se curvare."

 [1559] The reference is to Eph. iii. 14, 15; but here again our author
 seems in error, as he refers the words to Christ, whereas the meaning
 of the apostle appears clearly to refer them tothe Father.

 [1560] Legitimos.  See book iv. 91.

 [1561] See Gal. iii. 20.  But here, again, "Galatas" seems rather like
 an error; for in speaking to the Corinthians St. Paul uses an
 expression more like our author's:  see 2 Cor. xi. 2.  The Latin, too,
 is faulty:  "Talem se Paulus zelum se scripsit habere," where, perhaps,
 for the first "se" we should read "sic."

 [1562] Comp. Ex. xx. 5; Deut. v. 9.

 [1563] See Isa. i. 10-15; Jer. vi. 20.

 [1564] Causa etenim fidei rationis imagine major.

 [1565] Comp. 1 Cor. xiii. 12; Heb. x. 1.

 [1566] Moses.  See Heb. ix. 19-22, and the references there.

 [1567] Comp. Heb. ix. 13.

 [1568] Alluding probably to our Lord's bearing of the cross-beam of His
 cross--the beam being the "yokes," and the upright stem of the cross
 the "plough-beam"--on His shoulders.--See John xix. 17.

 [1569] Templum.  Comp. John ii. 19-22; Col. ii. 9.

 [1570] Libro.  The reference is to the preceding lines, especially 89,
 and Heb. ix. 19, auto to biblion.  The use of "libro" is curious, as it
 seems to be used partly as if it would be equivalent to pro libro, "in
 the place of a book," partly in a more truly datival sense, "to serve
 the purposes of a book;" and our "for" is capable of the two senses.

 [1571] For this comparison of "speaking" to "sprinkling," comp. Deut.
 xxxii. 2, "My doctrine shall drop as the rain; my speech shall distil
 as the dew," etc.; Job xxix. 22, "My speech dropped upon them;" with
 Eph. v. 26, and with our Lord's significant action (recorded in the
 passage here alluded to, John xx. 22) of "breathing on" (enephusesen)
 His disciples.  Comp., too, for the "witnesses" and "words of presage,"
 Luke xxiv. 48, 49; Acts i. 6-8.

 [1572] i.e., the chief of the Levites, the high priest.

 [1573] Comp. Heb. xiii. 12, 13; John xix. 19, 20.

 [1574] Comp. the preceding book, 355.

 [1575] The passage which follows is almost unintelligible.  The sense
 which I have offered in my text is so offered with great diffidence, as
 I am far from certain of having hit the meaning; indeed, the state of
 the text is such, that any meaning must be a matter of some
 uncertainty.

 [1576] i.e., perhaps the Jewish and Christian peoples.  Comp. adv.
 Jud., c. 1.

 [1577] i.e., "barren" of faith and good works.  The "goats" being but
 "kids" (see Lev. xvi. 8), would, of course, be barren.  "Exiled" seems
 to mean "excommunicated."  But the comparison of the sacrificed goat to
 a penitent, and of the scapegoat to an impenitent, excommunicate, is
 extravagant.  Yet I see no other sense.

 [1578] See Matt. xxv. 31-33.

 [1579] i.e., Lazarus was not allowed to help him.  In that sense he may
 be said to have been "cast away;" but it is Abraham, not Lazarus, who
 pronounces his doom.  See Luke xvi. 19-31.

 [1580] i.e., in that the blood of the one was brought within the veil;
 the other was not.

 [1581] Ædem.

 [1582] The meaning seems to be, that the ark, when it had to be removed
 from place to place, had (as we learn from Num. iv. 5) to be covered
 with "the second veil" (as it is called in Heb. ix. 3), which was "of
 blue," etc.  But that this veil was made "of lambs' skins" does not
 appear; on the contrary, it was made of "linen."  The outer veil,
 indeed (not the outmost, which was of "badgers' skins," according to
 the Eng. ver.; but of "huakinthina dermata"--of what material is not
 said--according to the LXX.), was made "of rams' skins;" but then they
 were "dyed red" (heruthrodanomena, LXX.), not "blue."  So there is some
 confusion in our author.

 [1583] The ark was overlaid with gold without as well as within.  (See
 Ex. xxv. 10, 11; xxxvii. 1, 2; and this is referred to in Heb. ix. 3,
 4--kiboton...perikekalummenen--where our Eng. ver. rendering is
 defective, and in the context as well.)  This, however, may be said to
 be implied in the following words:  "and all between," i.e., between
 the layers above and beneath, "of wood."

 [1584] Migne supposes some error in these words.  Certainly the sense
 is dark enough; but see lower down.

 [1585] It yielded "almonds," according to the Eng. ver. (Num. xvii.
 8).  But see the LXX.

 [1586] Sagmina.  But the word is a very strange one to use indeed.  See
 the Latin Lexicons, s.v.

 [1587] It might be questionable whether "jussa" refers to "cherubim" or
 to "sagmina."

 [1588] i.e., twice three + the central one = 7.

 [1589] Our author persists in calling the tabernacle temple.

 [1590] i.e., the Law's.

 [1591] "Tegebat," i.e., with the "fiery-cloudy pillar," unless it be an
 error for "regebat," which still might apply to the pillar.

 [1592] Terræ.

 [1593] "Operæ," i.e., sacrifices.  The Latin is a hopeless jumble of
 words without grammatical sequence, and any rendering is mere
 guesswork.

 [1594] Heb. ix. 7.

 [1595] i.e., of animals which, as irrational, were "without the Law."

 [1596] Terram.

 [1597] Rev. vi. 9, 10.

 [1598] i.e., beneath the altar.  See the 11th verse ib.

 [1599] Or possibly, "deeper than the glooms:"  "altior a tenebris."

 [1600] Terra.

 [1601] See 141, 142, above.

 [1602] Cælataque sancta.  We might conjecture "celataque sancta," ="and
 the sanctuaries formerly hidden."

 [1603] This sense appears intelligible, as the writer's aim seems to be
 to distinguish between the "actual" commands of God, i.e., the
 spiritual, essential ones, which the spiritual people "follow," and
 which "bind"--not the ceremonial observance of a "shadow of the future
 blessings" (see Heb. x. 1), but "real persons," i.e., living souls.
 But, as Migne has said, the passage is probably faulty and mutilated.

 [1604] Comp. Heb. vii. 19; x. 1; xi. 11, 12.

 [1605] "Lignum:"  here probably ="the flesh," which He took from Mary;
 the "rod" (according to our author) which Isaiah had foretold.

 [1606] Aërial, i.e., as he said above, "dyed with heaven's hue."

 [1607] "Ligno," i.e., "the cross," represented by the "wood" of which
 the tabernacle's boards, on which the coverings were stretched (but
 comp. 147-8, above), were made.

 [1608] As the flame of the lamps appeared to grow out of and be fused
 with the "golden semblance" or "form" of the lampstand or candlestick.

 [1609] Of which the olive--of which the pure oil for the lamps was to
 be made:  Ex. xxvii. 20; Lev. xxiv. 2--is a type.  "Peace" is granted
 to "the flesh" through Christ's work and death in flesh.

 [1610] Traditus.

 [1611] In ligno.  The passage is again in an almost desperate state.

 [1612] Isa. xi. 1, 2.

 [1613] Matt. v. 23, 24.

 [1614] Primus.

 [1615] See Rev. viii. 3, 4.

 [1616] Here ensues a confused medley of all the cherubic figures of
 Moses, Ezekiel, and St. John.

 [1617] i.e., by the four evangelists.

 [1618] The cherubim, (or, "seraphim" rather,) of Isa. vi. have each six
 wings.  Ezekiel mentions four cherubim, or "living creatures."  St.
 John likewise mentions four "living creatures."  Our author, combining
 the passages, and thrusting them into the subject of the Mosaic
 cherubim, multiplies the six (wings) by the four (cherubs), and so
 attains his end--the desired number "twenty-four"--to represent the
 books of the Old Testament, which (by combining certain books) may be
 reckoned to be twenty-four in number.

 [1619] These wings.

 [1620] There is again some great confusion in the text.  The elders
 could not "stand enthroned:"  nor do they stand "over," but "around"
 God's throne; so that the "insuper solio" could not apply to that.

 [1621] Mundi.

 [1622] Virtute.

 [1623] Honestas.

 [1624] Or, "records:"  "monumenta," i.e., the written word, according
 to the canon.

 Book V.--General Reply to Sundry of Marcion's Heresies. [1625]

 The first Book did the enemy's words recall

 In order, which the senseless renegade

 Composed and put forth lawlessly; hence, too,

 Touched briefly flesh's hope, Christ's victory,

 5  And false ways' speciousness.  The next doth teach

 The Law's conjoined mysteries, and what

 In the new covenant the one God hath

 Delivered.  The third shows the race, create

 From freeborn mother, to be ministers

 10  Sacred to seers and patriarchs; [1626] whom Thou,

 O Christ, in number twice six out of all, [1627]

 Chosest; and, with their names, the lustral [1628] times

 Of our own elders noted, (times preserved

 On record,) showing in whose days appeared

 15  The author [1629] of this wickedness, unknown,

 Lawless, and roaming, cast forth [1630] with his brood.

 The fourth, too, the piacular rites recalls

 Of the old Law themselves, and shows them types

 In which the Victim True appeared, by saints

 20  Expected long since, with the holy Seed.

 This fifth doth many twists and knots untie,

 Rolls wholly into sight what ills soe'er

 Were lurking; drawing arguments, but not

 Without attesting prophet.

 And although

 25  With strong arms fortified we vanquish foes,

 Yet hath the serpent mingled so at once

 All things polluted, impious, unallowed,

 Commaculate,--the blind's path without light!

 A voice contaminant!--that, all the while

 30  We are contending the world's Maker is

 Himself sole God, who also spake by voice

 Of seers, and proving that there is none else

 Unknown; and, while pursuing Him with praise,

 Who is by various endearment [1631] known,

 35  Are blaming--among other fallacies--

 The Unknown's tardy times:  our subject's fault

 Will scarce keep pure our tongue.  Yet, for all that,

 Guile's many hidden venoms us enforce

 (Although with double risk [1632] ) to ope our words.

 40  Who, then, the God whom ye say is the true,

 Unknown to peoples, alien, in a word,

 To all the world? [1633] Him whom none knew before?

 Came he from high?  If 'tis his own [1634] he seeks,

 Why seek so late?  If not his own, why rob

 45  Bandit-like? and why ply with words unknown

 So oft throughout Law's rein a People still

 Lingering 'neath the Law?  If, too, he comes

 To pity and to succour all combined,

 And to re-elevate men vanquisht quite

 50  By death's funereal weight, and to release

 Spirit from flesh's bond obscene, whereby

 The inner man (iniquitously dwarfed)

 Is held in check; why, then, so late appear

 His ever-kindness, duteous vigilance?

 55  How comes it that he ne'er at all before

 Offered himself to any, but let slip

 Poor souls in numbers? [1635] and then with his mouth

 Seeks to regain another's subjects:  ne'er

 Expected; not known; sent into the orb.

 60  Seeking the "ewe" he had not lost before,

 The Shepherd ought [1636] to have disrobed himself

 Of flesh, as if his victor-self withal

 Had ever been a spirit, and as such [1637]

 Willed to rescue all expelled souls,

 65  Without a body, everywhere, and leave

 The spoiled flesh to earth; wholly to fill

 The world [1638] on one day equally with corpses

 To leave the orb void; and to raise the souls

 To heaven.  Then would human progeny

 70  At once have ceased to be born; nor had

 Thereafter any scion of your [1639] kith

 Been born, or spread a new pest [1640] o'er the orb.

 Or (since at that time [1641] none of all these things

 Is shown to have been done) he should have set

 75  A bound to future race; with solid heart

 Nuptial embraces would he, in that case

 Have sated quite; [1642] made men grow torpid, reft

 Of fruitful seed; made irksome intercourse

 With female sex; and closed up inwardly

 80  The flesh's organs genital:  our mind

 Had had no will, no potent faculty

 Our body:  after this the "inner man"

 Could withal, joined with blood, [1643] have been infused

 And cleaved to flesh, and would have ever been

 85  Perishing.  Ever perishes the "ewe:"

 And is there then no power of saving her?

 Since man is ever being born beneath

 Death's doom, what is the Shepherd's work, if thus

 The "ewe" is stated [1644] to be found?  Unsought

 90  In that case, but not rescued, she is proved.

 But now choice is allowed of entering

 Wedlock, as hath been ever; and that choice

 Sure progeny hath yoked:  nations are born

 And folk scarce numerable, at whose birth

 95  Their souls by living bodies are received;

 Nor was it meet that Paul (though, for the time,

 He did exhort some few, discerning well

 The many pressures of a straitened time)

 To counsel men in like case to abide

 100  As he himself: [1645] for elsewhere he has bidden

 The tender ages marry, nor defraud

 Each other, but their compact's dues discharge.

 But say, whose suasion hath, with fraud astute,

 Made you "abide," and in divided love

 105  Of offspring live secure, and commit crime

 Adulterous, and lose your life? and, though

 'Tis perishing, belie (by verbal name)

 That fact.  For which cause all the so sweet sounds

 Of his voice pours he forth, that "you must do,

 110  Undaunted, whatsoever pleases you;"

 Outwardly chaste, stealthily stained with crime!

 Of honourable wedlock, by this plea, [1646]

 He hath deprived you.  But why more?  'Tis well

 (Forsooth) to be disjoined! for the world, too,

 115  Expedient 'tis! lest any of your seed

 Be born!  Then will death's organs [1647] cease at length!

 The while you hope salvation to retain,

 Your "total man" quite loses part of man,

 With mind profane:  but neither is man said

 120  To be sole spirit, nor the flesh is called

 "The old man;" nor unfriendly are the flesh

 And spirit, the true man combined in one,

 The inner, and he whom you call "old foe;" [1648]

 Nor are they seen to have each his own set

 125  Of senses.  One is ruled; the other rules,

 Groans, joys, grieves, loves; himself [1649] to his own flesh

 Most dear, too; through which [1650] his humanity

 Is visible, with which commixt he is

 Held ever:  to its wounds he care applies;

 130  And pours forth tears; and nutriments of food

 Takes, through its limbs, often and eagerly:

 This hopes he to have ever with himself

 Immortal; o'er its fracture doth he groan;

 And grieves to quit it limb by limb:  fixt time

 135  Death lords it o'er the unhappy flesh; that so

 From light dust it may be renewed, and death

 Unfriendly fail at length, when flesh, released,

 Rises again.  This will that victory be

 Supreme and long expected, wrought by Him,

 140  The aye-to-be-revered, who did become

 True man; and by His Father's virtue won:

 Who man's redeemed limbs unto the heavens

 Hath raised, [1651] and richly opened access up

 Thither in hope, first to His nation; then

 145  To those among all tongues in whom His work

 Is ever doing:  Minister imbued

 With His Sire's parent-care, seen by the eye

 Of the Illimitable, He performed,

 By suffering, His missions. [1652]

 What say now

 150  The impious voices? what th' abandoned crew?

 If He Himself, God the Creator's self,

 Gave not the Law, [1653] He who from Egypt's vale [1654]

 Paved in the waves a path, and freely gave

 The seats which He had said of old, why comes

 155  He in that very People and that land

 Aforesaid? and why rather sought He not

 Some other [1655] peoples or some rival [1656] realms?

 Why, further, did He teach that, through the seers,

 (With Name foretold in full, yet not His own,)

 160  He had been often sung of?  Whence, again,

 Could He have issued baptism's kindly gifts,

 Promised by some one else, as His own works?

 These gifts men who God's mandates had transgressed,

 And hence were found polluted, longed for,

 165  And begged a pardoning rescue from fierce death.

 Expected long, they [1657] came:  but that to those

 Who recognised them when erst heard, and now

 Have recognised them, when in due time found,

 Christ's true hand is to give them, this, with voice

 170  Paternal, the Creator-Sire Himself

 Warns ever from eternity, and claims;

 And thus the work of virtue which He framed,

 And still frames, arms, and fosters, and doth now

 Victorious look down on and reclothe

 175  With His own light, should with perennial praise

 Abide. [1658]

 What [1659] hath the Living Power done

 To make men recognise what God can give

 And man can suffer, and thus live? [1660] But since

 Neither predictions earlier nor facts

 180  The latest can suede senseless frantic [1661] men

 That God became a man, and (after He

 Had suffered and been buried) rose; that they

 May credit those so many witnesses

 Harmonious, [1662] who of old did cry aloud

 185  With heavenly word, let them both [1663] learn to trust

 At least terrestrial reason.

 When the Lord

 Christ came to be, as flesh, born into the orb

 In time of king Augustus' reign at Rome,

 First, by decree, the nations numbered are

 190  By census everywhere:  this measure, then,

 This same king chanced to pass, because the

 Will

 Supreme, in whose high reigning hand doth lie

 The king's heart, had impelled him: [1664] he was first

 To do it, and the enrolment was reduced

 195  To orderly arrangement.  Joseph then

 Likewise, with his but just delivered wife

 Mary, [1665] with her celestial Son alike,

 Themselves withal are numbered.  Let, then, such

 As trust to instruments of human skill,

 200  Who may (approving of applying them

 As attestators of the holy word)

 Inquire into this census, if it be

 But found so as we say, then afterwards

 Repent they and seek pardon while time still

 205  Is had [1666]

 The Jews, who own [1667] to having wrought

 A grave crime, while in our disparagement

 They glow, and do resist us, neither call

 Christ's family unknown, nor can [1668] affirm

 They hanged a man, who spake truth, on a tree: [1669]

 210  Ignorant that the Lord's flesh which they bound [1670]

 Was not seed-gendered.  But, while partially

 They keep a reticence, so partially

 They triumph; for they strive to represent

 God to the peoples commonly as man.

 215  Behold the error which o'ercomes you both! [1671]

 This error will our cause assist, the while,

 We prove to you those things which certain are.

 They do deny Him God; you falsely call

 Him man, a body bodiless! and ah!

 220  A various insanity of mind

 Sinks you; which him who hath presumed to hint

 You both do, sinking, sprinkle: [1672] for His deeds

 Will then approve Him man alike and God

 Commingled, and the world [1673] will furnish signs

 225  No few.

 While then the Son Himself of God

 Is seeking to regain the flesh's limbs, [1674]

 Already robed as King, He doth sustain

 Blows from rude palms; with spitting covered is

 His face; a thorn-inwoven crown His head

 230  Pierces all round; and to the tree [1675] Himself

 Is fixed; wine drugged with myrrh, [1676] is drunk, and gall [1677]

 Is mixt with vinegar; parted His robe, [1678]

 And in it [1679] lots are cast; what for himself

 Each one hath seized he keeps; in murky gloom,

 235  As God from fleshly body silently

 Outbreathes His soul, in darkness trembling day

 Took refuge with the sun; twice dawned one day;

 Its centre black night covered:  from their base

 Mounts move in circle, wholly moved was earth,

 240  Saints' sepulchres stood ope, and all things joined

 In fear to see His passion whom they knew!

 His lifeless side a soldier with bare spear

 Pierces, and forth flows blood, nor water less

 Thence followed.  These facts they [1680] agree to hide,

 245  And are unwilling the misdeed to own,

 Willing to blink the crime.

 Can spirit, then,

 Without a body wear a robe? or is't

 Susceptible of penalty? the wound

 Of violence does it bear? or die? or rise?

 250  Is blood thence poured? from what flesh. since ye say

 He had none? or else, rather, feigned He? if

 'Tis safe for you to say so; though you do

 (Headlong) so say, by passing over more

 In silence.  Is not, then, faith manifest?

 255  And are not all things fixed?  The day before

 He then [1681] should suffer, keeping Passover,

 And handing down a memorable rite [1682]

 To His disciples, taking bread alike

 And the vine's juice, "My body, and My blood

 260  Which is poured [1683] for you, this is," did He say;

 And bade it ever afterward be done.

 Of what created elements were made,

 Think ye, the bread and wine which were (He said)

 His body with its blood? and what must be

 265  Confessed?  Proved He not Himself the world's [1684]

 Maker, through deeds? and that He bore at once

 A body formed from flesh and blood?

 This God

 This true Man, too, the Father's Virtue 'neath

 An Image, [1685] with the Father ever was,

 270  United both in glory and in age; [1686]

 Because alone He ministers the words

 Of the All-Holder; whom He [1687] upon earth

 Accepts; [1688] through whom He all things did create:

 God's Son, God's dearest Minister, is He!

 275  Hence hath He generation, hence Name too,

 Hence, finally, a kingdom; Lord from Lord;

 Stream from perennial Fount!  He, He it was

 Who to the holy fathers (whosoe'er

 Among them doth profess to have "seen God" [1689] )--

 280  God is our witness--since the origin

 Of this our world, [1690] appearing, opened up

 The Father's words of promise and of charge

 From heaven high:  He led the People out;

 Smote through th'iniquitous nation; was Himself

 285  The column both of light and of cloud's shade;

 And dried the sea; and bids the People go

 Right through the waves, the foe therein involved

 And covered with the flood and surge:  a way

 Through deserts made He for the followers

 290  Of His high biddings; sent down bread in showers [1691]

 From heaven for the People; brake the rock;

 Bedewed with wave the thirsty; [1692] and from God

 The mandate of the Law to Moses spake

 With thunder, trumpet-sound, and flamey column

 295  Terrible to the sight, while men's hearts shook.

 After twice twenty years, with months complete,

 Jordan was parted; a way oped; the wave

 Stood in a mass; and the tribes shared the land,

 Their fathers' promised boons!  The Father's word,

 300  Speaking Himself by prophets' mouth, that He [1693]

 Would come to earth and be a man, He did

 Predict; Christ manifestly to the earth

 Foretelling.

 Then, expected for our aid,

 Life's only Hope, the Cleanser of our flesh, [1694]

 305  Death's Router, from th' Almighty Sire's empire

 At length He came, and with our human limbs

 He clothed Him.  Adam--virgin--dragon--tree, [1695]

 The cause of ruin, and the way whereby

 Rash death us all had vanquisht! by the same

 310  Our Shepherd treading, seeking to regain

 His sheep--with angel--virgin--His own flesh--

 And the "tree's" remedy; [1696] whence vanquisht man

 And doomed to perish was aye wont to go

 To meet his vanquisht peers; hence, interposed,

 315  One in all captives' room, He did sustain

 In body the unfriendly penalty

 With patience; by His own death spoiling death;

 Becomes salvation's cause; and, having paid

 Throughly our debts by throughly suffering

 320  On earth, in holy body, everything,

 Seeks the infern! here souls, bound for their crime,

 Which shut up all together by Law's weight,

 Without a guard, [1697] were asking for the boons

 Promised of old, hoped for, and tardy, He

 325  To the saints'rest admitted, and, with light,

 Brought back.  For on the third day mounting up, [1698]

 A victor, with His body by His Sire's

 Virtue immense, (salvation's pathway made,)

 And bearing God and man is form create,

 330  He clomb the heavens, leading back with Him

 Captivity's first-fruits (a welcome gift

 And a dear figure [1699] to the Lord), and took

 His seat beside light's Father, and resumed

 The virtue and the glory of which, while

 335  He was engaged in vanquishing the foe

 He had been stripped; [1700] conjoined with Spirit; bound

 With flesh, on our part.  Him, Lord, Christ, King, God,

 Judgment and kingdom given to His hand,

 The father is to send unto the orb.

 ------------------------

 [1625] I make no apology for the ruggedness of the versification and
 the obscurity of the sense in this book, further than to say that the
 state of the Latin text is such as to render it almost impossible to
 find any sense at all in many places, while the grammar and metre are
 not reducible to any known laws.  It is about the hardest and most
 uninteresting book of the five.

 [1626] Or, "consecrated by seers and patriarchs."

 [1627] i.e., all the number of Thy disciples.

 [1628] Tempora lustri, i.e., apparently the times during which these
 "elders" (i.e., the bishops, of whom a list is given at the end of book
 iii.) held office.  "Lustrum" is used of other periods than it strictly
 implies, and this seems to give some sense to this difficult passage.

 [1629] i.e., Marcion.

 [1630] i.e., excommunicated.

 [1631] Complexu vario.

 [1632] Ancipiti quamquam cum crimine.  The last word seems almost
 ="discrimine;" just as our author uses "cerno" ="discerno."

 [1633] Mundo.

 [1634] Cf. John i. 11, and see the Greek.

 [1635] Whether this be the sense I know not.  The passage is a mass of
 confusion.

 [1636] i.e., according to Marcion's view.

 [1637] i.e., as spirits, like himself.

 [1638] Mundum.

 [1639] i.e., Marcionite.

 [1640] See book ii. 3.

 [1641] i.e., apparently on the day of Christ's resurrection.

 [1642] Replesset, i.e., replevisset.  If this be the right reading, the
 meaning would seem to be, "would have taken away all further desire
 for" them, as satiety or repletion takes away all appetite for food.
 One is almost inclined to hazard the suggestion "represset," i.e.,
 repressisset, "he would have repressed," but that such a contraction
 would be irregular.  Yet, with an author who takes such liberties as
 the present one, perhaps that might not be a decisive objection.

 [1643] "Junctus," for the edd.'s "junctis," which, if retained, will
 mean "in the case of beings still joined with (or to) blood."

 [1644] "Docetur," for the edd.'s "docentur."  The sense seems to be, if
 there be any, exceedingly obscure; but for the idea of a
 half-salvation--the salvation of the "inner man" without the
 outer--being no salvation at all, and unworthy of "the Good Shepherd"
 and His work, we may compare the very difficult passage in the de
 Pudic., c. xiii. ad fin.

 [1645] This sense, which I deduce from a transposition of one line and
 the supplying of the words "he did exhort," which are not expressed,
 but seem necessary, in the original, agrees well with 1 Cor. vii.,
 which is plainly the passage referred to.

 [1646] "Causa;" or perhaps "means."  It is, of course, the French
 "chose."

 [1647] i.e., you and your like, through whom sin, and in consequence
 death, is disseminated.

 [1648] Here, again, for the sake of the sense, I have transposed a
 line.

 [1649] i.e., "the other," the "inner man," or spirit.

 [1650] i.e., through flesh.

 [1651] i.e., in His own person.

 [1652] I hope I have succeeded in giving some intelligible sense; but
 the passage as it stands in the Latin is nearly hopeless.

 [1653] I read "legem" for "leges."

 [1654] I read "valle" for "calle."

 [1655] Alios.

 [1656] Altera.

 [1657] i.e., "the gifts of baptism."

 [1658] This seems to give sense to a very obscure passage, in which I
 have been guided more by Migne's pointing than by Oehler's.

 [1659] I read here "quid" for "quod."

 [1660] i.e., to make men live by recognising that.  Comp. the
 Psalmist's prayer:  "Give me understanding and I shall live" (Ps. cxix.
 144; in LXX., Ps. cxviii. 144).

 [1661] The "furentes" of Pam. and Rig. is preferred to Oehler's
 "ferentes."

 [1662] "Complexis," lit. "embracing."

 [1663] i.e., both Jews and Gentile heretics, the "senseless frantic
 men" just referred to probably:  or possibly the "ambo" may mean "both
 sects," viz., the Marcionites and Manichees, against whom the writer
 whom Oehler supposes to be the probable author of these "Five Books,"
 Victorinus, a rhetorician of Marseilles, directed his efforts.  But it
 may again be the acc. neut. pl., and mean "let them"--i.e., the
 "senseless frantic men"--"learn to believe as to both facts," i.e., the
 incarnation and the resurrection; (see vers. 179, 180;) "the testimony
 at least of human reason."

 [1664] I would suggest here, for "...quia summa voluntas In cujus manu
 regnantis cor legibus esset," something like this, "...quia summa
 voluntas, In cujus manu regnantis cor regis, egisset," which would only
 add one more to our author's false quantities.  "Regum egisset" would
 avoid even that, while it would give some sense.  Comp. Prov. xxi. 1.

 [1665] Maria cum conjuge feta.  What follows seems to decide the
 meaning of "feta," as a child could hardly be included in a census
 before birth.

 [1666] Again I have had to attempt to amend the text of the Latin in
 order to extract any sense, and am far from sure that I have extracted
 the right one.

 [1667] "Fatentur," unless our author use it passively ="are confessed."

 [1668] "Possunt," i.e., probably "have the hardihood."

 [1669] Because Christ plainly, as they understood Him, "made Himself
 the Son of God;" and hence, if they confessed that He had said the
 truth, and yet that they hanged Him on a tree, they would be
 pronouncing their own condemnation.

 [1670] "Vinctam" for "victam" I read here.

 [1671] i.e., you and the Jews.  See above on 185.

 [1672] Quod qui præsumpsit mergentes spargitis ambo.  What the meaning
 is I know not, unless it be this:  if any one hints to you that you are
 in an error which is sinking you into perdition, you both join in
 trying to sink him (if "mergentes" be active; or "while you are
 sinking," if neuter), and in sprinkling him with your doctrine (or
 besprinkling him with abuse).

 [1673] Mundus.

 [1674] "Dum carnis membra requirit," i.e., seeking to regain for God
 all the limbs of the flesh as His instruments.  Comp. Rom. vi. 13, 19.

 [1675] Ligno.

 [1676] "Scriblita," a curious word.

 [1677] Fel miscetur aceto.  The reading may have arisen--and it is not
 confined to our author--from confounding oxos with oinos.  Comp. Matt.
 xxvii. 33 with Mark xv. 23.

 [1678] This is an error, if the "coat" be meant.

 [1679] Perhaps for "in illa" we should read "in illam"--"on it," for
 "in it."

 [1680] The Jews.

 [1681] For "ante diem quam cum pateretur" I have read "qua tum."

 [1682] Or, "deed"--"factum."

 [1683] Or, "is being poured"--"funditur."

 [1684] Mundi.

 [1685] I read with Migne, "Patris sub imagine virtus," in preference to
 the conjecture which Oehler follows, "Christi sub imagine virtus."  The
 reference seems clearly to be to Heb. i. 3.

 [1686] Ævo.  Perhaps here ="eternity."

 [1687] i.e., "The All-Holder."

 [1688] Capit.

 [1689] Cf. Jacob's words in Gen. xxxii. 30; Manoah's in Judg. xiii. 22;
 etc.

 [1690] Mundi.

 [1691] For "dimisit in umbris" I read here "demisit in imbris."  If we
 retain the former reading, it will then mean, "dispersed during the
 shades of night," during which it was that the manna seems always to
 have fallen.

 [1692] "Sitientis" in Oehler must be a misprint for "sitientes."

 [1693] There ought to be a "se" in the Latin if this be the meaning.

 [1694] For "Mundator carnis seræ" ="the Cleanser of late flesh" (which
 would seem, if it mean anything, to mean that the flesh had to wait
 long for its cleansing), I have read "carnis nostræ."

 [1695] Lignum.

 [1696] I have followed the disjointed style of the Latin as closely as
 I could here.

 [1697] Here we seem to see the idea of the "limbus patrum."

 [1698] "Subiens" ="going beneath," i.e., apparently coming beneath the
 walls of heaven.

 [1699] i.e., a figure of the future harvest.

 [1700] I have hazarded the conjecture "minutus" here for the edd.'s
 "munitus."  It adds one more, it is true, to our author's false
 quantities, but that is a minor difficulty, while it improves (to my
 mind) the sense vastly.

 (N.B.--It has been impossible to note the changes which I have had to
 make in the text of the Latin.  In some cases they will suggest
 themselves to any scholar who may compare the translation with the
 original; and in others I must be content to await a more fitting
 opportunity, if such ever arise, for discussing them.)

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Appendix, p. 127.)

 About these versifications, which are "poems" only as mules are horses,
 it is enough to say of them, with Dupin, "They are no more Tertullian's
 than they are Virgil's or Homer's.  The poem called Genesis seems to be
 that which Gennadius attributes to Salvian, Bishop of Marseilles.  That
 concerning the Judgment of God was, perhaps, composed by Verecundus, an
 African bishop.  In the books Against Marcion there are some opinions
 different from those of Tertullian.  There is likewise a poem To a
 Senator in Pamelius' edition, one of Sodom, and in the Bibliotheca
 Patrum one of Jonas and Nineve; the first of which is ancient, and the
 other two seem to be by the same author."

 It is worth while to observe that this rhymester makes two bishops out
 of one. [1701] Cletus and Anacletus he supposes different persons,
 which brings Clement into the fourth place in the see of Rome.  Our
 author elsewhere makes St. Clement the immediate successor of the
 apostles. [1702]

 II.

 (Or is there ought, etc., l. 136, p. 137.)

 In taking leave of Tertullian, it may be well to say a word of his
 famous saying, Certum est quia impossibile est.  It occurs in the tract
 De Carne Christi, [1703] and is one of those startling epigrammatic
 dicta of our author which is no more to be pressed in argument than any
 other bon-mot of a wit or a poet.  It is evidently designed as a
 rhetorical climax, to enforce the same idea which we find in the hymn
 of Aquinas:--

 "Et si sensus deficit,

 Adfirmandum cor sincerum

 Sola fides sufficit."

 As Jeremy Taylor [1704] argues, the condition is, that holy Scripture
 affirms it.  If that be the case, then "all things are possible with
 God:"  I believe; but I do not argue, for it is impossible with men.
 This is the plain sense of the great Carthaginian doctor's pithy
 rhetoric.  But Dr. Bunsen sets it on all-fours, and treats it as if it
 were soberly designed to defy reason,--that reason to which Tertullian
 constantly makes his appeal against Marcion, and in many of his sayings
 [1705] hardly less witty.  Speaking of Hippolytus, that writer remarks,
 [1706] "He might have said on some points, Credibile licet ineptum:  he
 would never have exclaimed with Tertullian, Credibile quia ineptum.'"
 Why attempt to prove the absurdity of such a reflection?  As well
 attempt to defend St. John's hyperbole [1707] against a mind incapable
 of comprehending a figure of speech.

 [1701] See p. 156, supra.

 [1702] See De Præscrip., cap. xxxii. vol. iii. p. 258.

 [1703] Cap. v. vol. iii. p. 525.

 [1704] Christ in the Holy Sacrament, § xi. 6.

 [1705] De Anima, cap. xvii.

 [1706] Vol. i. p. 304.

 [1707] Chap. xxi. verse 25.

  Minucius Felix

 Minucius Felix.

 [Translated by the Rev. Robert Ernest Wallis, Ph.D.]

 Introductory Note

 to

 Minucius Felix.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 210.]  Though Tertullian is the founder of Latin Christianity,
 his contemporary Minucius Felix gives to Christian thought its earliest
 clothing in Latinity.  The harshness and provincialism, with the
 Græcisms, if not the mere Tertullianism, of Tertullian, deprive him of
 high claims to be classed among Latin writers, as such; but in Minucius
 we find, at the very fountain-head of Christian Latinity, a disciple of
 Cicero and a precursor of Lactantius in the graces of style.  The
 question of his originality is earnestly debated among moderns, as it
 was in some degree with the ancients.  It turns upon the doubt as to
 his place with respect to Tertullian, whose Apology he seems to quote,
 or rather to abridge.  But to me it seems evident that his argument
 reflects so strikingly that of Tertullian's Testimony of the Soul,
 coincident though it be with portions of the Apology, that we must make
 the date of the Testimony the pivot of our inquiry concerning
 Minucius.  Now, Tertullian's Apology preceded the Testimony, and the
 latter preceded the essay on the Flesh of Christ.  If the Testimony was
 quoted or employed by Minucius, therefore, he could not have written
 before [1708] a.d. 205; and the statement of Jerome is confirmed, which
 makes our author, and not Tertullian, the copyist.  The modern
 discussion of the matter is an interesting literary controversy; not
 yet settled, perhaps, though the dip of the balance just now sustains
 my own impressions. [1709] But it is a very unimportant matter in
 itself, the primary place in Latin Christianity being necessarily
 adjudged to the commanding genius and fertile mind of Tertullian, while
 it is no discredit to assign to Minucius his proper but secondary
 credit, of showing, at the very outset of the literature of Western
 Christianity, that believers were not all illiterate men, nor destitute
 of polite erudition, and that the language of the Tusculan philosopher
 was not degraded by its new destination to the higher and holier
 service of the faith.

 Like Tertullian, our author appears to have been a jurisconsult, at
 Rome, at some period of his history.  Beautiful glimpses of his life
 and character and surroundings are gained from his own pages, and
 nearly all we know about him is to be found therein.  So far, he is his
 own biographer.  He probably continued a layman, and may have lived, as
 some suppose, till the middle of the third century.

 It is not unimportant to note that we are still dealing with "the
 North-African school," and that Rome has nothing to do with the birth
 of Latin Christianity, as such.  We have entered upon the third
 Christian century, and as yet the venerable apostolic see of the West
 has made no movement whatever towards the creation of a Latin
 literature among Christians.  So far from being "the mother and
 mistress" of the churches, she is yet voiceless in Christendom; while
 Africa holds the mastery of Christian thought alike in her schools of
 Alexandria and Carthage.  This, although it is our fourth volume,
 contains nothing to modify this fact; and yet the whole literature of
 early Christianity is contained in our series.  Well said Æneas
 Sylvius, who afterwards became Pope Pius the Second, "Verily, before
 the Council of Nice, some regard there was unto the Bishops of Rome,
 although but small."  Holy men as most of them were, they are invisible
 and unfelt in the formation of Christian theology. [1710]

 In our author's style and thought there is a charm and a fragrance
 which associate him, in my mind, with the pure spirit of "Mathetes,"
 with whose Epistle to Diognetus, written nearly a hundred years before,
 it may be profitably compared.  See also my prefatory remarks to
 Mathetes, and the reference to Bunsen which I have suffixed to the
 Notice of the Edinburgh editors. [1711]

 In the Edinburgh series, Minucius comes into view after Cyprian, and
 not till the end of the thirteenth volume of that edition.  It will
 gratify the scholar to find it here where it belongs, and not less to
 note that it has an index of its own, while in the Edinburgh edition
 its contents are indexed with those of Cyprian.  Consequently, the
 joint index is rendered nearly worthless, and the injury and confusion
 resulting to the Contents of Cyprian are not inconsiderable.

 Here follows the valuable Prefatory Notice of Dr. Wallis:

 Minucius Felix is said by Jerome [1712] to have been an advocate at
 Rome prior to his conversion to Christianity. [1713] Very little else
 is known, however, of his history; and of his writings nothing with any
 certainty, except the following dialogue; although Jerome speaks of
 another tract as having, probably without reason, been ascribed to him.

 The Octavius, which is here translated, is a supposed argument between
 the heathen Cæcilius and the Christian Octavius--the writer being
 requested to arbitrate between the disputants.  The date of its
 composition is still a matter of keen dispute.  The settlement of the
 point hinges upon the answer to the question--Whether, in the numerous
 passages which are strikingly similar, occurring in the Apologeticus
 and the Octavius, Tertullian borrowed from Minucius, or Minucius
 borrowed from Tertullian?  If Minucius borrowed from Tertullian, he
 must have flourished in the commencement of the third century, as the
 Apologeticus was written about the year 198 a.d.  If, on the other
 hand, Tertullian borrowed from Minucius, the Octavius was written
 probably about the year 166, and Minucius flourished in the reign of
 Marcus Aurelius.  The later date was the one adopted by earlier
 critics, and the reasons for it are well given by Mr. Holden in his
 introduction.  The earlier date was suggested by Rösler, maintained by
 Niebuhr, and elaborately defended by Muralto.  An exhaustive exhibition
 of arguments in favour of the earlier date has been given by Adolf
 Ebert in his paper, Tertullian's Verhältniss zu Minucius Felix,
 Leipzig, 1868.

 Of the literary character of the dialogue, it is sufficient to quote
 the testimony of the late Dean Milman:  "Perhaps no late work, either
 Pagan or Christian, reminds us of the golden days of Latin prose so
 much as the Octavius of Minucius Felix." [1714]

 In considering the claim of the dialogue to such praise as this, it
 must be borne in mind that the text as we have it is very uncertain,
 and often certainly corrupt; so that many passages seem to us confused,
 and some hopelessly obscure.  Only one manuscript of the work has come
 down to us; which is now in the Imperial Library in Paris.  It is
 beautifully written.  Some editors have spoken of two other mss.; but
 it is now known that they were wrong.  They supposed that the first
 edition was taken from a different ms. than the Codex Regius, and they
 were not aware that a codex in Brussels was merely a transcript of the
 one in Paris.

 The Octavius appears in the ms. as the eighth book of Arnobius, and at
 first it was published as such.  To Franciscus Balduinus (1560) is due
 the merit of having discovered the real author.

 There are very many editions of the Octavius.  Among the earlier, those
 of Gronovius (1709) and Davies (1712) are valuable.  Among the later,
 Lindner (1760), Eduard de Muralto (1836), and Oehler (1847) may be
 mentioned.  There is a very good English edition by the Rev. H. A.
 Holden, M.A., Cambridge, 1853.  The most recent edition is that of Carl
 Halm, published under the auspices of the Imperial Academy of Letters
 in Vienna; Vindobonæ, 1867.  Both Holden and Halm give new recensions
 of the Codex Regius. [1715]

 [1708] Possibly as late as a.d. 230.  Comp. Wordsworth, Hippol., p.
 126.

 [1709] A condensed and valuable view of this matter may be seen in Dr.
 Schaff's History, etc., vol. iii. pp. 834-841.

 [1710] See Bishop Jewell, Works, vol. i. pp. 386, 441.  Cambridge,
 1845.

 [1711] Vol. I. of this series, pp. 23, 24.  See also Bunsen, Hippol.,
 i. p. 244.

 [1712] De Viris Illustribus, c. 58.

 [1713] [His connection with the Roman courts is inferred from cap. ii.
 infra.]

 [1714] Milman's Hist. of Christianity, vol. iii. book iv. ch. iii.

 [1715] [Dr. Wallis, the learned translator of the Octavius, is
 described in the Edinburgh edition as "Senior Priest-Vicar of Wells
 Cathedral, and incumbent of Christ Church, Coxley, Somerset."]

 The Octavius of Minucius Felix.

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.--Argument:  Minucius Relates How Delightful to Him is the
 Recollection of the Things that Had Happened to Him with Octavius While
 He Was Associated with Him at Rome, and Especially of This Disputation.

 When I consider and mentally review my remembrance of Octavius, my
 excellent and most faithful companion, the sweetness and charm of the
 man so clings to me, that I appear to myself in some sort as if I were
 returning to past times, and not merely recalling in my recollection
 things which have long since happened and gone by.  Thus, in the degree
 in which the actual contemplation of him is withdrawn from my eyes, it
 is bound up in my heart and in my most intimate feelings.  And it was
 not without reason that that remarkable and holy man, when he departed
 this life, left to me an unbounded regret for him, especially since he
 himself also glowed with such a love for me at all times, that, whether
 in matters of amusement or of business, he agreed with me in similarity
 of will, in either liking or disliking the same things. [1716] You
 would think that one mind had been shared between us two.  Thus he
 alone was my confidant in my loves, my companion in my mistakes; and
 when, after the gloom had been dispersed, I emerged from the abyss of
 darkness into the light of wisdom and truth, he did not cast off his
 associate, but--what is more glorious still--he outstripped him.  And
 thus, when my thoughts were traversing the entire period of our
 intimacy and friendship, the direction of my mind fixed itself chiefly
 on that discourse of his, wherein by very weighty arguments he
 converted Cæcilius, who was still cleaving to superstitious vanities,
 to the true religion. [1717]

 [1716] [Sallust, Catiline, "Idem facere atque sentire," etc.  Also,
 Catiline's speech, p. 6 of The Conspiracy.]

 [1717] [Beautiful tribute to Christian friendship, in a primitive
 example.  We must bear in mind that the story is of an earlier period
 than that of the work itself, written at Cirta.]

 Chapter II.--Argument:  The Arrival of Octavius at Rome During the Time
 of the Public Holidays Was Very Agreeable to Minucius.  Both of Them
 Were Desirous of Going to the Marine Baths of Ostia, with Cæcilius
 Associated with Them as a Companion of Minucius.  On Their Way Together
 to the Sea, Cæcillus, Seeing an Image of Serapis, Raises His Hand to
 His Mouth, and Worships It.

 For, for the sake of business and of visiting me, Octavius had hastened
 to Rome, having left his home, his wife, his children, and that which
 is most attractive in children, while yet their innocent years are
 attempting only half-uttered words,--a language all the sweeter for the
 very imperfection of the faltering tongue.  And at this his arrival I
 cannot express in words with how great and with how impatient a joy I
 exulted, since the unexpected presence of a man so very dear to me
 greatly enhanced my gladness.  Therefore, after one or two days, when
 the frequent enjoyment of our continual association had satisfied the
 craving of affection, and when we had ascertained by mutual narrative
 all that we were ignorant of about one another by reason of our
 separation, we agreed to go to that very pleasant city Ostia, that my
 body might have a soothing and appropriate remedy for drying its
 humours from the marine bathing, especially as the holidays of the
 courts at the vintage-time had released me from my cares.  For at that
 time, after the summer days, the autumn season was tending to a milder
 temperature.  And thus, when in the early morning we were going towards
 the sea along the shore (of the Tiber), that both the breathing air
 might gently refresh our limbs, and that the yielding sand might sink
 down under our easy footsteps with excessive pleasure; Cæcilius,
 observing an image of Serapis, raised his hand to his mouth, as is the
 custom of the superstitious common people, and pressed a kiss on it
 with his lips.

 Chapter III.--Argument:  Octavius, Displeased at the Act of This
 Superstitious Man, Sharply Reproaches Minucius, on the Ground that the
 Disgrace of This Wicked Deed is Reflected Not Less on Himself, as
 Cæcilius' Host, Than on Cæcilius.

 Then Octavius said:  "It is not the part of a good man, my brother
 Marcus, so to desert a man who abides by your side at home and abroad,
 in this blindness of vulgar ignorance, as that you should suffer him in
 such broad daylight as this to give himself up to stones, however they
 may be carved into images, anointed and crowned; since you know that
 the disgrace of this his error redounds in no less degree to your
 discredit than to his own."  With this discourse of his we passed over
 the distance between the city and the sea, and we were now walking on
 the broad and open shore.  There the gently rippling wave was smoothing
 the outside sands as if it would level them for a promenade; and as the
 sea is always restless, even when the winds are lulled, it came up on
 the shore, although not with waves crested and foaming, yet with waves
 crisped and curling.  Just then we were excessively delighted at its
 vagaries, as on the very threshold of the water we were wetting the
 soles of our feet, and it now by turns approaching broke upon our feet,
 and now the wave retiring and retracing its course, sucked itself back
 into itself.  And thus, slowly and quietly going along, we tracked the
 coast of the gently bending shore, beguiling the way with stories.
 These stories were related by Octavius, who was discoursing on
 navigation.  But when we had occupied a sufficiently reasonable time of
 our walk with discourse, retracing the same way again, we trod the path
 with reverted footsteps.  And when we came to that place where the
 little ships, drawn up on an oaken framework, were lying at rest
 supported above the (risk of) ground-rot, we saw some boys eagerly
 gesticulating as they played at throwing shells into the sea.  This
 play is:  To choose a shell from the shore, rubbed and made smooth by
 the tossing of the waves; to take hold of the shell in a horizontal
 position with the fingers; to whirl it along sloping and as low down as
 possible upon the waves, that when thrown it may either skim the back
 of the wave, or may swim as it glides along with a smooth impulse, or
 may spring up as it cleaves the top of the waves, and rise as if lifted
 up with repeated springs.  That boy claimed to be conqueror whose shell
 both went out furthest, and leaped up most frequently.

 Chapter IV.--Argument:  Cæcilius, Somewhat Grieved at This Kind of
 Rebuke Which for His Sake Minucius Had Had to Bear from Octavius, Begs
 to Argue with Octavius on the Truth of His Religion.  Octavius with His
 Companion Consents, and Minucius Sits in the Middle Between Cæcilius
 and Octavius.

 And thus, while we were all engaged in the enjoyment of this spectacle,
 Cæcilius was paying no attention, nor laughing at the contest; but
 silent, uneasy, standing apart, confessed by his countenance that he
 was grieving for I knew not what.  To whom I said:  "What is the
 matter?  Wherefore do I not recognise, Cæcilius, your usual liveliness?
 and why do I seek vainly for that joyousness which is characteristic of
 your glances even in serious matters?"  Then said he:  "For some time
 our friend Octavius' speech has bitterly vexed and worried me, in which
 he, attacking you, reproached you with negligence, that he might under
 cover of that charge more seriously condemn me for ignorance.
 Therefore I shall proceed further:  the matter is now wholly and
 entirely between me and Octavius.  If he is willing that I, a man of
 that form of opinion, should argue with him, he will now at once
 perceive that it is easier to hold an argument among his comrades, than
 to engage in close conflict after the manner of the philosophers.  Let
 us be seated on those rocky barriers that are cast there for the
 protection of the baths, and that run far out into the deep, that we
 may be able both to rest after our journey, and to argue with more
 attention."  And at his word we sat down, so that, by covering me on
 either side, they sheltered me in the midst of the three. [1718] Nor
 was this a matter of observance, or of rank, or of honour, because
 friendship always either receives or makes equals; but that, as an
 arbitrator, and being near to both, I might give my attention, and
 being in the middle, I might separate the two.  Then Cæcilius began
 thus:--

 [1718] "Ita ut me ex tribus medium lateris ambitione protegerent."

 Chapter V.--Argument:  Cæcilius Begins His Argument First of All by
 Reminding Them that in Human Affairs All Things are Doubtful and
 Uncertain, and that Therefore It is to Be Lamented that Christians, Who
 for the Most Part are Untrained and Illiterate Persons, Should Dare to
 Determine on Anything with Certainty Concerning the Chief of Things and
 the Divine Majesty:  Hence He Argues that the World is Governed by No
 Providence, and Concludes that It is Better to Abide by the Received
 Forms of Religion.

 "Although to you, Marcus my brother, the subject on which especially we
 are inquiring is not in doubt, inasmuch as, being carefully informed in
 both kinds of life, you have rejected the one and assented to the
 other, yet in the present case your mind must be so fashioned that you
 may hold the balance of a most just judge, nor lean with a disposition
 to one side (more than another), lest your decision may seem not to
 arise so much from our arguments, as to be originated from your own
 perceptions.  Accordingly, if you sit in judgment on me, as a person
 who is new, and as one ignorant of either side, there is no difficulty
 in making plain that all things in human affairs are doubtful,
 uncertain, and unsettled, and that all things are rather probable than
 true.  Wherefore it is the less [1719] wonderful that some, from the
 weariness of thoroughly investigating truth, should rashly succumb to
 any sort of opinion rather than persevere in exploring it with
 persistent diligence.  And thus all men must be indignant, all men must
 feel pain, [1720] that certain persons--and these unskilled in
 learning, strangers to literature, without knowledge even [1721] of
 sordid arts--should dare to determine on any certainty concerning the
 nature at large, and the (divine) majesty, of which so many of the
 multitude of sects in all ages (still doubt), and philosophy itself
 deliberates still.  Nor without reason; since the mediocrity of human
 intelligence is so far from (the capacity of) divine investigation,
 that neither is it given us to know, nor is it permitted to search, nor
 is it religious to ravish, [1722] the things that are supported in
 suspense in the heaven above us, nor the things which are deeply
 submerged below the earth; and we may rightly seem sufficiently happy
 and sufficiently prudent, if, according to that ancient oracle of the
 sage, we should know ourselves intimately.  But even if we indulge in a
 senseless and useless labour, and wander away beyond the limits proper
 to our humility, and though, inclined towards the earth, we transcend
 with daring ambition heaven itself, and the very stars, let us at least
 not entangle this error with vain and fearful opinions.  Let the seeds
 of all things have been in the beginning condensed by a nature
 combining them in itself--what God is the author here?  Let the members
 of the whole world be by fortuitous concurrences united, digested,
 fashioned--what God is the contriver?  Although fire may have lit up
 the stars; although (the lightness of) its own material may have
 suspended the heaven; although its own material may have established
 the earth by its weight; [1723] and although the sea may have flowed in
 from moisture, [1724] whence is this religion?  Whence this fear?  What
 is this superstition?  Man, and every animal which is born, inspired
 with life, and nourished, [1725] is as a voluntary concretion of the
 elements, into which again man and every animal is divided, resolved,
 and dissipated.  So all things flow back again into their source, and
 are turned again into themselves, without any artificer, or judge, or
 creator.  Thus the seeds of fires, being gathered together, cause other
 suns, and again others, always to shine forth.  Thus the vapours of the
 earth, being exhaled, cause the mists always to grow, which being
 condensed and collected, cause the clouds to rise higher; and when they
 fall, cause the rains to flow, the winds to blow, the hail to rattle
 down; or when the clouds clash together, they cause the thunder to
 bellow, the lightnings to grow red, the thunderbolts to gleam forth.
 Therefore they fall everywhere, they rush on the mountains, they strike
 the trees; without any choice, [1726] they blast places sacred and
 profane; they smite mischievous men, and often, too, religious men.
 Why should I speak of tempests, various and uncertain, wherein the
 attack upon all things is tossed about without any order or
 discrimination?--in shipwrecks, that the fates of good and bad men are
 jumbled together, their deserts confounded?--in conflagrations, that
 the destruction of innocent and guilty is united?--and when with the
 plague-taint of the sky a region is stained, that all perish without
 distinction?--and when the heat of war is raging, that it is the better
 men who generally fall?  In peace also, not only is wickedness put on
 the same level with (the lot of) those who are better, but it is also
 regarded in such esteem, [1727] that, in the case of many people, you
 know not whether their depravity is most to be detested, or their
 felicity to be desired.  But if the world were governed by divine
 providence and by the authority of any deity, Phalaris and Dionysius
 would never have deserved to reign, Rutilius and Camillus would never
 have merited banishment, Socrates would never have merited the poison.
 Behold the fruit-bearing trees, behold the harvest already white, the
 vintage, already dropping, is destroyed by the rain, is beaten down by
 the hail.  Thus either an uncertain truth is hidden from us, and kept
 back; or, which is rather to be believed, in these various and wayward
 chances, fortune, unrestrained by laws, is ruling over us.

 [1719] The ms. and first edition read "more;" Ursinus suggested minus
 instead of magis.

 [1720] This clause is otherwise read:  "Therefore we must be indignant,
 nay, must be grieved."

 [1721] Otherwise for "even," "except."

 [1722] The reading of the ms. is "stuprari," as above.  "Scrutari,"
 "sciari," or "lustrare" and "suspicari," are proposed emendations.

 [1723] Or, "although its weight may have established the earth."

 [1724] Or, "although the moisture may have flowed into the sea."

 [1725] Variously read, "is raised up," or "and is raised up."  The ms.
 has "attollitur," which by some is amended into "et alitur," or "et
 tollitur."

 [1726] Either "delectu" or "dilectu."

 [1727] Or, "it is extolled."

 Chapter VI.--Argument:  The Object of All Nations, and Especially of
 the Romans, in Worshipping Their Divinities, Has Been to Attain for
 Their Worship the Supreme Dominion Over the Whole Earth.

 "Since, then, either fortune is certain or nature is uncertain, how
 much more reverential and better it is, as the high priests of truth,
 to receive the teaching of your ancestors, to cultivate the religions
 handed down to you, to adore the gods whom you were first trained by
 your parents to fear rather than to know [1728] with familiarity; not
 to assert an opinion concerning the deities, but to believe your
 forefathers, who, while the age was still untrained in the birth-times
 of the world itself, deserved to have gods either propitious to them,
 or as their kings. [1729] Thence, therefore, we see through all
 empires, and provinces, and cities, that each people has its national
 rites of worship, and adores its local gods:  as the Eleusinians
 worship Ceres; the Phrygians, Mater; [1730] the Epidaurians,
 Æsculapius; the Chaldæans; Belus; the Syrians, Astarte; the Taurians,
 Diana; the Gauls, Mercurius; the Romans, all divinities.  Thus their
 power and authority has occupied the circuit of the whole world:  thus
 it has propagated its empire beyond the paths of the sun, and the
 bounds of the ocean itself; in that in their arms they practise a
 religious valour; in that they fortify their city with the religions of
 sacred rites, with chaste virgins, with many honours, and the names of
 priests; in that, when besieged and taken, all but the Capitol alone,
 they worship the gods which when angry any other people would have
 despised; [1731] and through the lines of the Gauls, marvelling at the
 audacity of their superstition, they move unarmed with weapons, but
 armed with the worship of their religion; while in the city of an
 enemy, when taken while still in the fury of victory, they venerate the
 conquered deities; while in all directions they seek for the gods of
 the strangers, and make them their own; while they build altars even to
 unknown divinities, and to the Manes.  Thus, in that they acknowledge
 the sacred institutions of all nations, they have also deserved their
 dominion.  Hence the perpetual course of their veneration has
 continued, which is not weakened by the long lapse of time, but
 increased, because antiquity has been accustomed to attribute to
 ceremonies and temples so much of sanctity as it has ascribed of age.

 [1728] "To think of rather than to know" in some texts.

 [1729] Neander quotes this passage as illustrating the dissatisfied
 state of the pagan mind with the prevailing infidelity at that time.

 [1730] Or, "the great mother" [i.e., Cybele.  S.].

 [1731] Or, "which another people, when angry, would have despised."

 Chapter VII.--Argument:  That the Roman Auspices and Auguries Have Been
 Neglected with Ill Consequences, But Have Been Observed with Good
 Fortune.

 "Nor yet by chance (for I would venture in the meantime even to take
 for granted the point in debate, and so to err on the safe side) have
 our ancestors succeeded in their undertakings either by the observance
 of auguries, or by consulting the entrails, or by the institution of
 sacred rites, or by the dedication of temples.  Consider what is the
 record of books.  You will at once discover that they have inaugurated
 the rites of all kinds of religions, either that the divine indulgence
 might be rewarded, or that the threatening anger might be averted, or
 that the wrath already swelling and raging might be appeased.  Witness
 the Idæan mother, [1732] who at her arrival both approved the chastity
 of the matron, and delivered the city from the fear of the enemy.
 Witness the statues of the equestrian brothers, [1733] consecrated even
 as they had showed themselves on the lake, who, with horses breathless,
 [1734] foaming, and smoking, announced the victory over the Persian on
 the same day on which they had gained it.  Witness the renewal of the
 games of the offended Jupiter, [1735] on account of the dream of a man
 of the people.  And an acknowledged witness is the devotion of the
 Decii.  Witness also Curtius, who filled up the opening of the profound
 chasm either with the mass, or with the glory of his knighthood.
 Moreover, more frequently than we wished have the auguries, when
 despised, borne witness to the presence of the gods:  thus Allia is an
 unlucky name; thus the battle of Claudius and Junius is not a battle
 against the Carthaginians, but a fatal shipwreck.  Thus, that
 Thrasymenus might be both swollen and discoloured with the blood of the
 Romans, Flaminius despised the auguries; and that we might again demand
 our standards from the Parthians, Crassus both deserved and scoffed at
 the imprecations of the terrible sisters.  I omit the old stories,
 which are many, and I pass by the songs of the poets about the births,
 and the gifts, and the rewards of the gods.  Moreover, I hasten over
 the fates predicted by the oracles, lest antiquity should appear to you
 excessively fabulous.  Look at the temples and lanes of the gods by
 which the Roman city is both protected and armed:  they are more august
 by the deities which are their inhabitants, who are present and
 constantly dwelling in them, than opulent by the ensigns and gifts of
 worship.  Thence therefore the prophets, filled with the god, and
 mingled with him, collect futurity beforehand, give caution for
 dangers, medicine for diseases, hope for the afflicted, help to the
 wretched, solace to calamities, alleviation to labours.  Even in our
 repose we see, we hear, we acknowledge the gods, whom in the day-time
 we impiously deny, refuse, and abjure.

 [1732] Otherwise, "the goddess mother."

 [1733] Scil. Castor and Pollux.

 [1734] Otherwise, "who breathless with horses foaming," etc.

 [1735] Otherwise, "the offence of Jupiter, the renewal of the games,"
 etc.

 Chapter VIII.--Argument:  The Impious Temerity of Theodorus, Diagoras,
 and Protagoras is Not at All to Be Acquiesced In, Who Wished Either
 Altogether to Get Rid of the Religion of the Gods, or at Least to
 Weaken It.  But Infinitely Less to Be Endured is that Skulking and
 Light-Shunning People of the Christians, Who Reject the Gods, and Who,
 Fearing to Die After Death, Do Not in the Meantime Fear to Die.

 "Therefore, since the consent of all nations concerning the existence
 of the immortal gods remains established, although their nature or
 their origin remains uncertain, I suffer nobody swelling with such
 boldness, and with I know not what irreligious wisdom, who would strive
 to undermine or weaken this religion, so ancient, so useful, so
 wholesome, even although he may be Theodorus of Cyrene, or one who is
 before him, Diagoras the Melian, [1736] to whom antiquity applied the
 surname of Atheist,--both of whom, by asseverating that there were no
 gods, took away all the fear by which humanity is ruled, and all
 veneration absolutely; yet never will they prevail in this discipline
 of impiety, under the name and authority of their pretended
 philosophy.  When the men of Athens both expelled Protagoras of Abdera,
 and in public assembly burnt his writings, because he disputed
 deliberately [1737] rather than profanely concerning the divinity, why
 is it not a thing to be lamented, that men (for you will bear with my
 making use pretty freely of the force of the plea that I have
 undertaken)--that men, I say, of a reprobate, unlawful, and desperate
 faction, should rage against the gods? who, having gathered together
 from the lowest dregs the more unskilled, and women, credulous and, by
 the facility of their sex, yielding, establish a herd of a profane
 conspiracy, which is leagued together by nightly meetings, and solemn
 fasts and inhuman meats--not by any sacred rite, but by that which
 requires expiation--a people skulking and shunning the light, silent in
 public, but garrulous in corners.  They despise the temples as
 dead-houses, they reject the gods, they laugh at sacred things;
 wretched, they pity, if they are allowed, the priests; half naked
 themselves, they despise honours and purple robes.  Oh, wondrous folly
 and incredible audacity! they despise present torments, although they
 fear those which are uncertain and future; and while they fear to die
 after death, they do not fear to die for the present:  so does a
 deceitful hope soothe their fear with the solace of a revival. [1738]

 [1736] According to the codex, "the Milesian."  [See note in Reeve's
 Apologies of Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Minucius Felix, vol. ii. p.
 59.  S.]

 [1737] Some have corrected this word, reading "without consideration,"
 scil. "inconsulte;" and the four first editions omit the subsequent
 words, "concerning the divinity."

 [1738] There are various emendations of this passage, but their meaning
 is somewhat obscure.  One is elaborately ingenious:  "Ita illis pavorum
 fallax spes solatio redivivo blanditur," which is said to imply, "Thus
 the hope that deceives their fears, soothes them with the hope of
 living again."

 Chapter IX.--Argument:  The Religion of the Christians is Foolish,
 Inasmuch as They Worship a Crucified Man, and Even the Instrument
 Itself of His Punishment.  They are Said to Worship the Head of an Ass,
 and Even the Nature of Their Father.  They are Initiated by the
 Slaughter and the Blood of an Infant, and in Shameless Darkness They
 are All Mixed Up in an Uncertain Medley.

 "And now, as wickeder things advance more fruitfully, and abandoned
 manners creep on day by day, those abominable shrines of an impious
 assembly are maturing themselves throughout the whole world.  Assuredly
 this confederacy ought to be rooted out and execrated.  They know one
 another by secret marks and insignia, and they love one another almost
 before they know one another.  Everywhere also there is mingled among
 them a certain religion of lust, and they call one another
 promiscuously brothers and sisters, that even a not unusual debauchery
 may by the intervention of that sacred name become incestuous:  it is
 thus that their vain and senseless superstition glories in crimes.
 Nor, concerning these things, would intelligent report speak of things
 so great and various, [1739] and requiring to be prefaced by an
 apology, unless truth were at the bottom of it.  I hear that they adore
 the head of an ass, that basest of creatures, consecrated by I know not
 what silly persuasion,--a worthy and appropriate religion for such
 manners.  Some say that they worship the virilia of their pontiff and
 priest, [1740] and adore the nature, as it were, of their common
 parent.  I know not whether these things are false; certainly suspicion
 is applicable to secret and nocturnal rites; and he who explains their
 ceremonies by reference to a man punished by extreme suffering for his
 wickedness, and to the deadly wood of the cross, appropriates fitting
 altars for reprobate and wicked men, that they may worship what they
 deserve.  Now the story about the initiation of young novices is as
 much to be detested as it is well known.  An infant covered over with
 meal, that it may deceive the unwary, is placed before him who is to be
 stained with their rites:  this infant is slain by the young pupil, who
 has been urged on as if to harmless blows on the surface of the meal,
 with dark and secret wounds.  Thirstily--O horror!--they lick up its
 blood; eagerly they divide its limbs.  By this victim they are pledged
 together; with this consciousness of wickedness they are covenanted to
 mutual silence. [1741] Such sacred rites as these are more foul than
 any sacrileges.  And of their banqueting it is well known all men speak
 of it everywhere; even the speech of our Cirtensian [1742] testifies to
 it.  On a solemn day they assemble at the feast, with all their
 children, sisters, mothers, people of every sex and of every age.
 There, after much feasting, when the fellowship has grown warm, and the
 fervour of incestuous lust has grown hot with drunkenness, a dog that
 has been tied to the chandelier is provoked, by throwing a small piece
 of offal beyond the length of a line by which he is bound, to rush and
 spring; and thus the conscious light being overturned and extinguished
 in the shameless darkness, the connections of abominable lust involve
 them in the uncertainty of fate.  Although not all in fact, yet in
 consciousness all are alike incestuous, since by the desire of all of
 them everything is sought for which can happen in the act of each
 individual.

 [1739] Otherwise read "abominable."

 [1740] This charge, as Oehler thinks, refers apparently to the kneeling
 posture in which penitents made confession before their bishop.

 [1741] This calumny seems to have originated from the sacrament of the
 Eucharist.

 [1742] Scil. Fronto of Cirta, spoken of again in ch. xxxi.  [A recent
 very interesting discovery goes to show that our author was the chief
 magistrate of Cirta, in Algeria, from a.d. 210 to 217.  See Schaff,
 vol. iii. p. 841.]

 Chapter X.--Argument:  Whatever the Christians Worship, They Strive in
 Every Way to Conceal:  They Have No Altars, No Temples, No Acknowledged
 Images.  Their God, Like that of the Jews, is Said to Be One, Whom,
 Although They are Neither Able to See Nor to Show, They Think
 Nevertheless to Be Mischievous, Restless, and Unseasonably Inquisitive.

 "I purposely pass over many things, for those that I have mentioned are
 already too many; and that all these, or the greater part of them, are
 true, the obscurity of their vile religion declares.  For why do they
 endeavour with such pains to conceal and to cloak whatever they
 worship, since honourable things always rejoice in publicity, while
 crimes are kept secret?  Why have they no altars, no temples, no
 acknowledged images? [1743] Why do they never speak openly, never
 congregate freely, unless for the reason that what they adore and
 conceal is either worthy of punishment, or something to be ashamed of?
 Moreover, whence or who is he, or where is the one God, solitary,
 desolate, whom no free people, no kingdoms, and not even Roman
 superstition, have known?  The lonely and miserable nationality of the
 Jews worshipped one God, and one peculiar to itself; but they
 worshipped him openly, with temples, with altars, with victims, and
 with ceremonies; and he has so little force or power, that he is
 enslaved, with his own special nation, to the Roman deities.  But the
 Christians, moreover, what wonders, what monstrosities do they
 feign!--that he who is their God, whom they can neither show nor
 behold, inquires diligently into the character of all, the acts of all,
 and, in fine, into their words and secret thoughts; that he runs about
 everywhere, and is everywhere present:  they make him out to be
 troublesome, restless, even shamelessly inquisitive, since he is
 present at everything that is done, wanders in and out in all places,
 although, being occupied with the whole, he cannot give attention to
 particulars, nor can he be sufficient for the whole while he is busied
 with particulars.  What! because they threaten conflagration to the
 whole world, and to the universe itself, with all its stars, are they
 meditating its destruction?--as if either the eternal order constituted
 by the divine laws of nature would be disturbed, or the league of all
 the elements would be broken up, and the heavenly structure dissolved,
 and that fabric in which it is contained and bound together [1744]
 would be overthrown. [1745]

 [1743] Otherwise, "no consecrated images."

 [1744] Otherwise, "we are contained and bound together."

 [1745] [These very accusations, reduced back to Christian language,
 show that much of the Creed was, in fact, known to the heathen at this
 period.]

 Chapter XI.--Argument:  Besides Asserting the Future Conflagration of
 the Whole World, They Promise Afterwards the Resurrection of Our
 Bodies:  and to the Righteous an Eternity of Most Blessed Life; To the
 Unrighteous, of Extreme Punishment.

 "And, not content with this wild opinion, they add to it and associate
 with it old women's fables: [1746] they say that they will rise again
 after death, and ashes, and dust; and with I know not what confidence,
 they believe by turns in one another's lies:  you would think that they
 had already lived again.  It is a double evil and a twofold madness to
 denounce destruction to the heaven and the stars, which we leave just
 as we find them, and to promise eternity to ourselves, who are dead and
 extinct--who, as we are born, so also perish!  It is for this cause,
 doubtless, also that they execrate our funeral piles, and condemn our
 burials by fire, as if every body, even although it be withdrawn from
 the flames, were not, nevertheless, resolved into the earth by lapse of
 years and ages, and as if it mattered not whether wild beasts tore the
 body to pieces, or seas consumed it, or the ground covered it, or the
 flames carried it away; since for the carcases every mode of sepulture
 is a penalty if they feel it; if they feel it not, in the very
 quickness of their destruction there is relief.  Deceived by this
 error, they promise to themselves, as being good, a blessed and
 perpetual life after their death; to others, as being unrighteous,
 eternal punishment.  Many things occur to me to say in addition, if the
 limits of my discourse did not hasten me.  I have already shown, and
 take no more pains to prove, [1747] that they themselves are
 unrighteous; although, even if I should allow them to be righteous, yet
 your agreement also concurs with the opinions of many, that guilt and
 innocence are attributed by fate.  For whatever we do, as some ascribe
 it to fate, so you refer it to God:  thus it is according to your sect
 to believe that men will, not of their own accord, but as elected to
 will.  Therefore you feign an iniquitous judge, who punishes in men,
 not their will, but their destiny.  Yet I should be glad to be informed
 whether or no you rise again with bodies; [1748] and if so, with what
 bodies--whether with the same or with renewed bodies?  Without a body?
 Then, as far as I know, there will neither be mind, nor soul, nor
 life.  With the same body?  But this has already been previously
 destroyed.  With another body?  Then it is a new man who is born, not
 the former one restored; and yet so long a time has passed away,
 innumerable ages have flowed by, and what single individual has
 returned from the dead either by the fate of Protesilaus, with
 permission to sojourn even for a few hours, or that we might believe it
 for an example?  All such figments of an unhealthy belief, and vain
 sources of comfort, with which deceiving poets have trifled in the
 sweetness of their verse, have been disgracefully remoulded by you,
 believing undoubtingly [1749] on your God.

 [1746] [1 Tim. iv. 7.]

 [1747] "And I have already shown, without any trouble," is another
 reading.

 [1748] Otherwise, "without a body or with."

 [1749] Otherwise, "too credulous."

 Chapter XII.--Argument:  Moreover, What Will Happen to the Christians
 Themselves After Death, May Be Anticipated from the Fact that Even Now
 They are Destitute of All Means, and are Afflicted with the Heaviest
 Calamities and Miseries.

 "Neither do you at least take experience from things present, how the
 fruitless expectations of vain promise deceive you.  Consider, wretched
 creatures, (from your lot) while you are yet living, what is
 threatening you after death. [1750] Behold, a portion of you--and, as
 you declare, the larger and better portion--are in want, are cold, are
 labouring in hard work and hunger; and God suffers it, He feigns; He
 either is not willing or not able to assist His people; and thus He is
 either weak or inequitable.  Thou, who dreamest over a posthumous
 immortality, when thou art shaken by danger, [1751] when thou art
 consumed with fever, when thou art torn with pain, dost thou not then
 feel thy real condition?  Dost thou not then acknowledge thy frailty?
 Poor wretch, art thou unwillingly convinced of thine infirmity, and
 wilt not confess it?  But I omit matters that are common to all alike.
 Lo, for you there are threats, punishments, tortures, and crosses; and
 that no longer as objects of adoration, but as tortures to be
 undergone; fires also, which you both predict and fear.  Where is that
 God who is able to help you when you come to life again, since he
 cannot help you while you are in this life?  Do not the Romans, without
 any help from your God, govern, reign, have the enjoyment of the whole
 world, and have dominion over you?  But you in the meantime, in
 suspense and anxiety, are abstaining from respectable enjoyments.  You
 do not visit exhibitions; you have no concern in public displays; you
 reject the public banquets, and abhor the sacred contests; the meats
 previously tasted by, and the drinks made a libation of upon, the
 altars.  Thus you stand in dread of the gods whom you deny.  You do not
 wreath your heads with flowers; you do not grace your bodies with
 odours; you reserve unguents for funeral rites; you even refuse
 garlands to your sepulchres--pallid, trembling beings, worthy of the
 pity even of our gods!  Thus, wretched as you are, you neither rise
 again, nor do you live in the meanwhile.  Therefore, if you have any
 wisdom or modesty, cease from prying into the regions of the sky, and
 the destinies and secrets of the world:  it is sufficient to look
 before your feet, especially for untaught, uncultivated, boorish,
 rustic people:  they who have no capacity for understanding civil
 matters, are much more denied the ability to discuss divine.

 [1750] Otherwise, "while you consider, while you are yet alive, poor
 wretches, what is threatening after death."

 [1751] Some read, "with shivering."

 Chapter XIII.--Argument:  Cæcilius at Length Concludes that the New
 Religion is to Be Repudiated; And that We Must Not Rashly Pronounce
 Upon Doubtful Matters.

 "However, if you have a desire to philosophize, let any one of you who
 is sufficiently great, imitate, if he can, Socrates the prince of
 wisdom.  The answer of that man, whenever he was asked about celestial
 matters, is well known:  What is above us is nothing to us.'  Well,
 therefore, did he deserve from the oracle the testimony of singular
 wisdom, which oracle he himself had a presentiment of, that he had been
 preferred to all men for the reason, not that he had discovered all
 things, but because he had learnt that he knew nothing.  And thus the
 confession of ignorance is the height of wisdom.  From this source
 flowed the safe doubting of Arcesilas, and long after of Carneades, and
 of very many of the Academics, [1752] in questions of the highest
 moment, in which species of philosophy the unlearned can do much with
 caution, and the learned can do gloriously.  What! is not the
 hesitation of Simonides the lyric poet to be admired and followed by
 all?  Which Simonides, when he was asked by Hiero the tyrant what, and
 what like he thought the gods to be, asked first of all for a day to
 deliberate; then postponed his reply for two days; and then, when
 pressed, he added only another; and finally, when the tyrant inquired
 into the causes of such a long delay, he replied that, the longer his
 research continued, the obscurer the truth became to him. [1753] In
 my opinion also, things which are uncertain ought to be left as they
 are.  Nor, while so many and so great men are deliberating, should we
 rashly and boldly give an opinion in another direction, lest either a
 childish superstition should be introduced, or all religion should be
 overthrown."

 [1752] This is otherwise read, "Academic Pyrrhonists."

 [1753] Cicero, de Natura Deorum, i. 22.

 Chapter XIV.--Argument:  With Something of the Pride of
 Self-Satisfaction, Cæcilius Urges Octavius to Reply to His Arguments;
 And Minucius with Modesty Answers Him, that He Must Not Exult at His
 Own by No Means Ordinary Eloquence, and at the Harmonious Variety of
 His Address.

 Thus far Cæcilius; and smiling cheerfully (for the vehemence of his
 prolonged discourse had relaxed the ardour of his indignation), he
 added:  "And what does Octavius venture to reply to this, a man of the
 race of Plautus, [1754] who, while he was chief among the millers, was
 still the lowest of philosophers?"  "Restrain," said I, "your
 self-approval against him; for it is not worthy of you to exult at the
 harmony of your discourse, before the subject shall have been more
 fully argued on both sides; especially since your reasoning is striving
 after truth, not praise.  And in however great a degree your discourse
 has delighted me by its subtile variety, yet I am very deeply moved,
 not concerning the present discussion, but concerning the entire kind
 of disputation--that for the most part the condition of truth should be
 changed according to the powers of discussion, and even the faculty of
 perspicuous eloquence.  This is very well known to occur by reason of
 the facility of the hearers, who, being distracted by the allurement of
 words from attention to things, assent without distinction to
 everything that is said, and do not separate falsehood from truth;
 unaware that even in that which is incredible there is often truth, and
 in verisimilitude falsehood.  Therefore the oftener they believe bold
 assertions, the more frequently they are convinced by those who are
 more clever, and thus are continually deceived by their temerity.  They
 transfer the blame of the judge to the complaint of uncertainty; so
 that, everything being condemned, they would rather that all things
 should be left in suspense, than that they should decide about matters
 of doubt.  Therefore we must take care that we do not in such sort
 suffer from the hatred at once of all discourses, even as very many of
 the more simple kind are led to execration and hatred of men in
 general.  For those who are carelessly credulous are deceived by those
 whom they thought worthy; and by and by, by a kindred error, they begin
 to suspect every one as wicked, and dread even those whom they might
 have regarded as excellent.  Now therefore we are anxious--because in
 everything there may be argument on both sides; and on the one hand,
 the truth is for the most part obscure; and on the other side there is
 a marvellous subtlety, which sometimes by its abundance of words
 imitates the confidence of acknowledged proof--as carefully as possible
 to weigh each particular, that we may, while ready to applaud
 acuteness, yet elect, approve, and adopt those things which are right."

 [1754] "Plautinæ prosapiæ."  The expression is intended as a reproach
 against the humble occupations of many of the Christian professors.
 Plautus is said, when in need, to have laboured at a baker's
 hand-mill.  Cæcilius tells Octavius that he may be the first among the
 millers, but he is the last among the philosophers.  Stieber proposes
 "Christianorum" instead of "pistorum"--"Christians" instead of
 "millers."

 Chapter XV.--Argument:  Cæcilius Retorts Upon Minucius, with Some
 Little Appearance of Being Hurt, that He is Foregoing the Office of a
 Religious Umpire, When He is Weakening the Force of His Argument.  He
 Says that It Should Be Left to Octavius to Confute All that He Had
 Advanced.

 "You are withdrawing," says Cæcilius, "from the office of a religious
 judge; for it is very unfair for you to weaken the force of my pleading
 by the interpolation of a very important argument, since Octavius has
 before him each thing that I have said, sound and unimpaired, if he can
 refute it."  "What you are reproving," said I, "unless I am mistaken, I
 have brought forward for the common advantage, so that by a scrupulous
 examination we might weigh our decision, not by the pompous style of
 the eloquence, but by the solid character of the matter itself.  Nor
 must our attention, as you complain, be any longer called away, but
 with absolute silence let us listen to the reply of our friend
 Januarius, [1755] who is now beckoning to us."

 [1755] Scil. "Octavius."

 Chapter XVI.--Argument:  Octavius Arranges His Reply, and Trusts that
 He Shall Be Able to Dilute the Bitterness of Reproach with the River of
 Truthful Words.  He Proceeds to Weaken the Individual Arguments of
 Cæcilius.  Nobody Need Complain that the Christians, Unlearned Though
 They May Be, Dispute About Heavenly Things Because It is Not the
 Authority of Him Who Argues, But the Truth of the Argument Itself, that
 Should Be Considered.

 And thus Octavius began:  "I will indeed speak as I shall be able to
 the best of my powers, and you must endeavour with me to dilute the
 very offensive strain of recriminations in the river [1756] of
 veracious words.  Nor will I disguise in the outset, that the opinion
 of my friend Natalis [1757] has swayed to and fro in such an erratic,
 vague, and slippery manner, that we are compelled to doubt whether your
 [1758] information was confused, or whether it wavered backwards and
 forwards [1759] by mere mistake.  For he varied at one time from
 believing the gods, at another time to being in a state of hesitation
 on the subject; so that the direct purpose of my reply was established
 with the greater uncertainty, [1760] by reason of the uncertainty of
 his proposition.  But in my friend Natalis--I will not allow, I do not
 believe in, any chicanery--far from his simplicity is crafty trickery.
 [1761] What then?  As he who knows not the right way, when as it
 happens one road is separated into many, because he knows not the way,
 remains in anxiety, and dares neither make choice of particular roads,
 nor try them all; so, if a man has no stedfast judgment of truth, even
 as his unbelieving suspicion is scattered, so his doubting opinion is
 unsettled.  It is therefore no wonder if Cæcilius in the same way is
 cast about by the tide, and tossed hither and thither among things
 contrary and repugnant to one another; but that this may no longer be
 the case, I will convict and refute all that has been said, however
 diverse, confirming and approving the truth alone; and for the future
 he must neither doubt nor waver.  And since my brother broke out in
 such expressions as these, that he was grieved, that he was vexed, that
 he was indignant, that he regretted that illiterate, poor, unskilled
 people should dispute about heavenly things; let him know that all men
 are begotten alike, with a capacity and ability of reasoning and
 feeling, without preference of age, sex, or dignity.  Nor do they
 obtain wisdom by fortune, but have it implanted by nature; moreover,
 the very philosophers themselves, or any others who have gone forth
 unto celebrity as discoverers of arts, before they attained an
 illustrious name by their mental skill, were esteemed plebeian,
 untaught, half-naked.  Thus it is, that rich men, attached to their
 means, have been accustomed to gaze more upon their gold than upon
 heaven, while our sort of people, though poor, have both discovered
 wisdom, and have delivered their teaching to others; whence it appears
 that intelligence is not given to wealth, nor is gotten by study, but
 is begotten with the very formation of the mind.  Therefore it is
 nothing to be angry or to be grieved about, though any one should
 inquire, should think, should utter his thoughts about divine things;
 since what is wanted is not the authority of the arguer, but the truth
 of the argument itself:  and even the more unskilled the discourse, the
 more evident the reasoning, since it is not coloured by the pomp of
 eloquence and grace; but as it is, it is sustained by the rule of
 right.

 [1756] Some read, "in the light."

 [1757] Cæcilius.

 [1758] Otherwise "his."

 [1759] Some read "cavillaverit" instead of "vacillaverit," which would
 give the sense, "make captious objections."

 [1760] This is otherwise given "certainty," which helps the meaning of
 the passage.

 [1761] Otherwise, "Far from his guileless subtlety is so crafty a
 trickery."  But the readings are very unsettled.

 Chapter XVII.--Argument:  Man Ought Indeed to Know Himself, But This
 Knowledge Cannot Be Attained by Him Unless He First of All Acknowledges
 the Entire Scope of Things, and God Himself.  And from the Constitution
 and Furniture of the World Itself, Every One Endowed with Reason Holds
 that It Was Established by God, and is Governed and Administered by
 Him.

 "Neither do I refuse to admit what Cæcilius earnestly endeavoured to
 maintain among the chief matters, that man ought to know himself, and
 to look around and see what he is, whence he is, why he is; whether
 collected together from the elements, or harmoniously formed of atoms,
 or rather made, formed, and animated by God.  And it is this very thing
 which we cannot seek out and investigate without inquiry into the
 universe; since things are so coherent, so linked and associated
 together, that unless you diligently examine into the nature of
 divinity, you must be ignorant of that of humanity.  Nor can you well
 perform your social duty unless you know that community of the world
 which is common to all, especially since in this respect we differ from
 the wild beasts, that while they are prone and tending to the earth,
 and are born to look upon nothing but their food, we, whose countenance
 is erect, whose look is turned towards heaven, as is our converse and
 reason, whereby we recognise, feel, and imitate God, [1762] have
 neither right nor reason to be ignorant of the celestial glory which
 forms itself into our eyes and senses.  For it is as bad as the
 grossest sacrilege even, to seek on the ground for what you ought to
 find on high.  Wherefore the rather, they who deny that this furniture
 of the whole world was perfected by the divine reason, and assert that
 it was heaped together by certain fragments [1763] casually adhering to
 each other, seem to me not to have either mind or sense, or, in fact,
 even sight itself.  For what can possibly be so manifest, so confessed,
 and so evident, when you lift your eyes up to heaven, and look into the
 things which are below and around, than that there is some Deity of
 most excellent intelligence, by whom all nature is inspired, is moved,
 is nourished, is governed?  Behold the heaven itself, how broadly it is
 expanded, how rapidly it is whirled around, either as it is
 distinguished in the night by its stars, or as it is lightened in the
 day by the sun, and you will know at once how the marvellous and divine
 balance of the Supreme Governor is engaged therein.  Look also on the
 year, how it is made by the circuit of the sun; and look on the month,
 how the moon drives it around in her increase, her decline, and decay.
 What shall I say of the recurring changes of darkness and light; how
 there is thus provided for us an alternate restoration of labour and
 rest?  Truly a more prolix discourse concerning the stars must be left
 to astronomers, whether as to how they govern the course of navigation,
 or bring on [1764] the season of ploughing or of reaping, each of which
 things not only needed a Supreme Artist and a perfect intelligence, nor
 only to create, to construct, and to arrange; but, moreover, they
 cannot be felt, perceived and understood without the highest
 intelligence and reason.  What! when the order of the seasons and of
 the harvests is distinguished by stedfast variety, does it not attest
 its Author and Parent?  As well the spring with its flowers, and the
 summer with its harvests, and the grateful maturity of autumn, and the
 wintry olive-gathering, [1765] are needful; and this order would easily
 be disturbed unless it were established by the highest intelligence.
 Now, how great is the providence needed, lest there should be nothing
 but winter to blast with its frost, or nothing but summer to scorch
 with its heat, to interpose the moderate temperature of autumn and
 spring, so that the unseen and harmless transitions of the year
 returning on its footsteps may glide by!  Look attentively at the sea;
 it is bound by the law of its shore.  Wherever there are trees, look
 how they are animated from the bowels of the earth!  Consider the
 ocean; it ebbs and flows with alternate tides.  Look at the fountains,
 how they gush in perpetual streams!  Gaze on the rivers; they always
 roll on in regular courses.  Why should I speak of the aptly ordered
 peaks of the mountains, the slopes of the hills, the expanses of the
 plains?  Wherefore should I speak of the multiform protection provided
 by animated creatures against one another?--some armed with horns, some
 hedged with teeth, and shod with claws, and barbed with stings, or with
 freedom obtained by swiftness of feet, or by the capacity of soaring
 furnished by wings?  The very beauty of our own figure especially
 confesses God to be its artificer:  our upright stature, our uplooking
 countenance, our eyes placed at the top, as it were, for outlook; and
 all the rest of our senses as if arranged in a citadel.

 [1762] Some read, "the Lord God."

 [1763] Scil. "atoms."

 [1764] According to some, "point out" or "indicate."

 [1765] Olives ripen in the month of December.

 Chapter XVIII.--Argument:  Moreover, God Not Only Takes Care of the
 Universal World, But of Its Individual Parts.  That by the Decree of
 the One God All Things are Governed, is Proved by the Illustration of
 Earthly Empires.  But Although He, Being Infinite and Immense--And How
 Great He Is, is Known to Himself Alone--Cannot Either Be Seen or Named
 by Us, Yet His Glory is Beheld Most Clearly When the Use of All Titles
 is Laid Aside.

 "It would be a long matter to go through particular instances.  There
 is no member in man which is not calculated both for the sake of
 necessity and of ornament; and what is more wonderful still, all have
 the same form, but each has certain lineaments modified, and thus we
 are each found to be unlike to one another, while we all appear to be
 like in general.  What is the reason of our being born? what means the
 desire of begetting?  Is it not given by God, and that the breasts
 should become full of milk as the offspring grows to maturity, and that
 the tender progeny should grow up by the nourishment afforded by the
 abundance of the milky moisture?  Neither does God have care alone for
 the universe as a whole, but also for its parts.  Britain is deficient
 in sunshine, but it is refreshed by the warmth of the sea that flows
 around it.  The river Nile tempers the dryness of Egypt; the Euphrates
 cultivates Mesopotamia; the river Indus makes up for the want of rains,
 and is said both to sow and to water the East.  Now if, on entering any
 house, you should behold everything refined, well arranged, and
 adorned, assuredly you would believe that a master presided over it,
 and that he himself was much better than all those excellent things.
 So in this house of the world, when you look upon the heaven and the
 earth, its providence, its ordering, its law, believe that there is a
 Lord and Parent of the universe far more glorious than the stars
 themselves, and the parts of the whole world.  Unless, perchance--since
 there is no doubt as to the existence of providence--you think that it
 is a subject of inquiry, whether the celestial kingdom is governed by
 the power of one or by the rule of many; and this matter itself does
 not involve much trouble in opening out, to one who considers earthly
 empires, for which the examples certainly are taken from heaven.  When
 at any time was there an alliance in royal authority which either began
 with good faith or ceased without bloodshed?  I pass over the Persians
 who gathered the augury for their chieftainship from the neighing of
 horses; [1766] and I do not quote that absolutely dead fable of the
 Theban brothers. [1767] The story about the twins (Romulus and
 Remus), in respect of the dominion of shepherds, and of a cottage, is
 very well known.  The wars of the son-in-law and the father-in-law
 [1768] were scattered over the whole world; and the fortune [1769] of
 so great an empire could not receive two rulers.  Look at other
 matters.  The bees have one king; the flocks one leader; among the
 herds there is one ruler.  Canst thou believe that in heaven there is a
 division of the supreme power, and that the whole authority of that
 true and divine empire is sundered, when it is manifest that God, the
 Parent of all, has neither beginning nor end--that He who gives birth
 to all gives perpetuity to Himself--that He who was before the world,
 was Himself to Himself instead of the world?  He orders everything,
 whatever it is, by a word; arranges it by His wisdom; perfects it by
 His power.  He can neither be seen--He is brighter than light; nor can
 be grasped--He is purer than touch; [1770] nor estimated; He is greater
 than all perceptions; infinite, immense, and how great is known to
 Himself alone.  But our heart is too limited to understand Him, and
 therefore we are then worthily estimating Him when we say that He is
 beyond estimation.  I will speak out in what manner I feel.  He who
 thinks that he knows the magnitude of God, is diminishing it; he who
 desires not to lessen it, knows it not.  Neither must you ask a name
 for God.  God is His name.  We have need of names when a multitude is
 to be separated into individuals by the special characteristics of
 names; to God, who is alone, the name God is the whole.  If I were to
 call Him Father, you would judge Him to be earthly; if a King, you
 would suspect Him to be carnal; if a Lord, you will certainly
 understand Him to be mortal.  Take away the additions of names, and you
 will behold His glory.  What! is it not true that I have in this matter
 the consent of all men?  I hear the common people, when they lift their
 hands to heaven, say nothing else but Oh God, and God is great, and God
 is true, and if God shall permit.  Is this the natural discourse of the
 common people, or is it the prayer of a confessing Christian?  And they
 who speak of Jupiter as the chief, are mistaken in the name indeed, but
 they are in agreement about the unity of the power.

 [1766] [In the case of Darius Hystaspes.]

 [1767] Eteocles and Polynices.

 [1768] Pompey and Cæsar.

 [1769] According to some, "one fate."

 [1770] These words are omitted by some editors.

 Chapter XIX.--Argument:  Moreover, the Poets Have Called Him the Parent
 of Gods and Men, the Creator of All Things, and Their Mind and Spirit.
 And, Besides, Even the More Excellent Philosophers Have Come Almost to
 the Same Conclusion as the Christians About the Unity of God.

 "I hear the poets also announcing the One Father of gods and men;' and
 that such is the mind of mortal men as the Parent of all has appointed
 His day. [1771] What says the Mantuan Maro?  Is it not even more
 plain, more apposite, more true?  In the beginning,' says he, the
 spirit within nourishes, and the mind infused stirs the heaven and the
 earth,' and the other members of the world.  Thence arises the race of
 men and of cattle,' [1772] and every other kind of animal.  The same
 poet in another place calls that mind and spirit God.  For these are
 his words: [1773] For that God pervades all the lands, and the tracts
 of the sea, and the profound heaven, from whom are men and cattle; from
 whom are rain and fire.' [1774] What else also is God announced to be
 by us, but mind, and reason, and spirit?  Let us review, if it is
 agreeable, the teaching of philosophers.  Although in varied kinds of
 discourse, yet in these matters you will find them concur and agree in
 this one opinion.  I pass over those untrained and ancient ones who
 deserved to be called wise men for their sayings.  Let Thales the
 Milesian be the first of all, for he first of all disputed about
 heavenly things.  That same Thales the Milesian said that water was the
 beginning of things, but that God was that mind which from water formed
 all things.  Ah! a higher and nobler account of water and spirit than
 to have ever been discovered by man.  It was delivered to him by God.
 You see that the opinion of this original philosopher absolutely agrees
 with ours.  Afterwards Anaximenes, and then Diogenes of Apollonia,
 decide that the air, infinite and unmeasured, is God.  The agreement of
 these also as to the Divinity is like ours.  But the description of
 Anaxagoras also is, that God is said to be the motion of an infinite
 mind; and the God of Pythagoras is the soul passing to and fro and
 intent, throughout the universal nature of things, from whom also the
 life of all animals is received.  It is a known fact, that Xenophanes
 delivered that God was all infinity with a mind; and Antisthenes, that
 there are many gods of the people, but that one God of Nature was the
 chief of all; that Xeuxippus [1775] acknowledged as God a natural
 animal force whereby all things are governed.  What says Democritus?
 Although the first discoverer of atoms, does not he especially speak of
 nature, which is the basis of forms, and intelligence, as God?  Strato
 also himself says that God is nature.  Moreover, Epicurus, the man who
 feigns either otiose gods or none at all, still places above all,
 Nature.  Aristotle varies, but nevertheless assigns a unity of power:
 for at one time he says that Mind, at another the World, is God; at
 another time he sets God above the world. [1776] Heraclides of Pontus
 also ascribes, although in various ways, a divine mind to God.
 Theophrastus, and Zeno, and Chrysippus, and Cleanthes are indeed
 themselves of many forms of opinion but they are all brought back to
 the one fact of the unity of providence.  For Cleanthes discoursed of
 God as of a mind, now of a soul, now of air, but for the most part of
 reason.  Zeno, his master, will have the law of nature and of God, and
 sometimes the air, and sometimes reason, to be the beginning of all
 things.  Moreover, by interpreting Juno to be the air, Jupiter the
 heaven, Neptune the sea, Vulcan to be fire, and in like manner by
 showing the other gods of the common people to be elements, he forcibly
 denounces and overcomes the public error.  Chrysippus says almost the
 same.  He believes that a divine force, a rational nature, and
 sometimes the world, and a fatal necessity, is God; and he follows the
 example of Zeno in his physiological interpretation of the poems of
 Hesiod, of Homer, and of Orpheus.  Moreover, the teaching of Diogenes
 of Babylon is that of expounding and arguing that the birth of Jupiter,
 and the origin of Minerva, and this kind, are names for other things,
 not for gods.  For Xenophon the Socratic says that the form of the true
 God cannot be seen, and therefore ought not to be inquired after.
 Aristo the Stoic [1777] says that He cannot at all be comprehended.
 And both of them were sensible of the majesty of God, while they
 despaired of understanding Him.  Plato has a clearer discourse about
 God, both in the matters themselves and in the names by which he
 expresses them; and his discourse would be altogether heavenly, if it
 were not occasionally fouled by a mixture of merely civil belief.
 Therefore in his Timæus Plato's God is by His very name the parent of
 the world, the artificer of the soul, the fabricator of heavenly and
 earthly things, whom both to discover he declares is difficult, on
 account of His excessive and incredible power; and when you have
 discovered Him, impossible to speak of in public.  The same almost are
 the opinions also which are ours.  For we both know and speak of a God
 who is parent of all, and never speak of Him in public unless we are
 interrogated. [1778]

 [1771] Homer, Odyss., xviii. 136, 137.

 [1772] Virgil, Æneid, vi. 724.

 [1773] Some read, "For these things are true."

 [1774] Virgil, Georgics, iv. 221; Æneid, i. 743.

 [1775] Otherwise, "Speusippus."

 [1776] The ms. here inserts, "Aristoteles of Pontus varies, at one time
 attributing the supremacy to the world, at another to the divine
 mind."  Some think that this is an interpolation, others transfer the
 words to Theophrastus below.

 [1777] Otherwise, "Aristo the Chian."

 [1778] [See note on Plato, chap. xxvi.]

 Chapter XX.--Argument:  But If the World is Ruled by Providence and
 Governed by the Will of One God, an Ignorant Antipathy Ought Not to
 Carry Us Away into the Error of Agreement with It:  Although Delighted
 with Its Own Fables, It Has Brought in Ridiculous Traditions.  Nor is
 It Shown Less Plainly that the Worship of the Gods Has Always Been
 Silly and Impious, in that the Most Ancient of Men Have Venerated Their
 Kings, Their Illustrious Generals, and Inventors of Arts, on Account of
 Their Remarkable Deeds, No Otherwise Than as Gods.

 "I have set forth the opinions almost of all the philosophers whose
 more illustrious glory it is to have pointed out that there is one God,
 although with many names; so that any one might think either that
 Christians are now philosophers, or that philosophers were then already
 Christians.  But if the world is governed by providence, and directed
 by the will of one God, antiquity of unskilled people ought not,
 however delighted and charmed with its own fables, to carry us away
 into the mistake of a mutual agreement, when it is rebutted by the
 opinions of its own philosophers, who are supported by the authority
 both of reason and of antiquity.  For our ancestors had such an easy
 faith in falsehoods, that they rashly believed even other monstrosities
 as marvellous wonders; [1779] a manifold Scylla, a Chimæra of many
 forms, and a Hydra rising again from its auspicious wounds, and
 Centaurs, horses entwined with their riders; and whatever Report was
 allowed [1780] to feign, they were entirely willing to listen to.  Why
 should I refer to those old wives' fables, that men were changed from
 men into birds and beasts, and from men into trees and flowers?--which
 things, if they had happened at all, would happen again; and because
 they cannot happen now, therefore never happened at all.  In like
 manner with respect to the gods too, our ancestors believed carelessly,
 credulously, with untrained simplicity; while worshipping their kings
 religiously, desiring to look upon them when dead in outward forms,
 anxious to preserve their memories in statues, [1781] those things
 became sacred which had been taken up merely as consolations.
 Thereupon, and before the world was opened up by commerce, and before
 the nations confounded their rites and customs, each particular nation
 venerated its Founder, or illustrious Leader, or modest Queen braver
 than her sex, or the discoverer of any sort of faculty or art, as a
 citizen of worthy memory; and thus a reward was given to the deceased,
 and an example to those who were to follow.

 [1779] Some editors read, "mere wonders," apparently on conjecture
 only.

 [1780] Otherwise, "was pleased."

 [1781] Four early editions read "instantius" for "in statuis," making
 the meaning probably, "more keenly," "more directly."

 Chapter XXI.--Argument:  Octavius Attests the Fact that Men Were
 Adopted as Gods, by the Testimony of Euhemerus, Prodicus, Persæus, and
 Alexander the Great, Who Enumerate the Country, the Birthdays, and the
 Burial-Places of the Gods.  Moreover He Sets Forth the Mournful
 Endings, Misfortunes, and Deaths of the Gods.  And, in Addition, He
 Laughs at the Ridiculous and Disgusting Absurdities Which the Heathens
 Continually Allege About the Form and Appearance of Their Gods.

 "Read the writings of the Stoics, [1782] or the writings of wise men,
 you will acknowledge these facts with me.  On account of the merits of
 their virtue or of some gift, Euhemerus asserts that they were esteemed
 gods; and he enumerates their birthdays, their countries, their places
 of sepulture, and throughout various provinces points out these
 circumstances of the Dictæan Jupiter, and of the Delphic Apollo, and of
 the Pharian Isis, and of the Eleusinian Ceres.  Prodicus speaks of men
 who were taken up among the gods, because they were helpful to the uses
 of men in their wanderings, by the discovery of new kinds of produce.
 Persæus philosophizes also to the same result; and he adds thereto,
 that the fruits discovered, and the discoverers of those same fruits,
 were called by the same names; as the passage of the comic writer runs,
 that Venus freezes without Bacchus and Ceres.  Alexander the Great, the
 celebrated Macedonian, wrote in a remarkable document [1783] addressed
 to his mother, that under fear of his power there had been betrayed to
 him by the priest the secret of the gods having been men:  to her he
 makes Vulcan the original of all, and then the race of Jupiter.  And
 you behold the swallow and the cymbal of Isis, [1784] and the tomb of
 your Serapis or Osiris empty, with his limbs scattered about.  Then
 consider the sacred rites themselves, and their very mysteries:  you
 will find mournful deaths, misfortunes, and funerals, and the griefs
 and wailings of the miserable gods.  Isis bewails, laments, and seeks
 after her lost son, with her Cynocephalus and her bald priests; and the
 wretched Isiacs beat their breasts, and imitate the grief of the most
 unhappy mother.  By and by, when the little boy is found, Isis
 rejoices, and the priests exult, Cynocephalus the discoverer boasts,
 and they do not cease year by year either to lose what they find, or to
 find what they lose.  Is it not ridiculous either to grieve for what
 you worship, or to worship that over which you grieve?  Yet these were
 formerly Egyptian rites, and now are Roman ones.  Ceres with her
 torches lighted, and surrounded [1785] with a serpent, with anxiety and
 solicitude tracks the footsteps of Proserpine, stolen away in her
 wandering, and corrupter.  These are the Eleusinian mysteries.  And
 what are the sacred rites of Jupiter?  His nurse is a she-goat, and as
 an infant he is taken away from his greedy father, lest he should be
 devoured; and clanging uproar [1786] is dashed out of the cymbals of
 the Corybantes, lest the father should hear the infant's wailing.
 Cybele of Dindymus--I am ashamed to speak of it--who could not entice
 her adulterous lover, who unhappily was pleasing to her, to lewdness,
 because she herself, as being the mother of many gods, was ugly and
 old, mutilated him, doubtless that she might make a god of the eunuch.
 On account of this story, the Galli also worship her by the punishment
 of their emasculated body.  Now certainly these things are not sacred
 rites, but tortures.  What are the very forms and appearances (of the
 gods)? do they not argue the contemptible and disgraceful characters of
 your gods? [1787] Vulcan is a lame god, and crippled; Apollo,
 smooth-faced after so many ages; Æsculapius well bearded,
 notwithstanding that he is the son of the ever youthful Apollo; Neptune
 with sea-green eyes; Minerva with eyes bluish grey; Juno with ox-eyes;
 Mercury with winged feet; Pan with hoofed feet; Saturn with feet in
 fetters; Janus, indeed, wears two faces, as if that he might walk with
 looks turned back; Diana sometimes is a huntress, with her robe girded
 up high; and as the Ephesian she has many and fruitful breasts; and
 when exaggerated as Trivia, she is horrible with three heads and with
 many hands.  What is your Jupiter himself?  Now he is represented in a
 statue as beardless, now he is set up as bearded; and when he is called
 Hammon, he has horns; and when Capitolinus, then he wields the
 thunderbolts; and when Latiaris, he is sprinkled with gore; and when
 Feretrius, he is not approached; [1788] and not to mention any further
 the multitude of Jupiters, the monstrous appearances of Jupiter are as
 numerous as his names.  Erigone was hanged from a noose, that as a
 virgin she might be glowing [1789] among the stars.  The Castors die by
 turns, that they may live.  Æsculapius, that he may rise into a god, is
 struck with a thunderbolt.  Hercules, that he may put off humanity, is
 burnt up by the fires of OEta. [1790]

 [1782] Otherwise, according to some, "of the historians."

 [1783] This treatise is mentioned by Athenagoras, Legat. pro Christ.,
 ch. xxviii.  [See vol. ii. p. 143, this series.]  Also by Augustine, de
 Civ. Dei., lib. viii. ch. iii. and xxvii.  In the fifth chapter
 Augustine calls the priest by the name of Leo.

 [1784] This passage is very doubtful both in its text and its meaning.

 [1785] Otherwise, "carried about."

 [1786] Otherwise, "his approach is drowned."

 [1787] Otherwise, "do they not show what are the sports and the honours
 of your gods?"

 [1788] These words are very variously read.  Davis conjectures that
 they should be, "When Feretrius, he does not hear," and explains the
 allusion as follows:  that Jupiter Feretrius could only be approached
 with the spolia opima; and Minucius is covertly ridiculing the Romans,
 because, not having taken spolia opima for so long a time, they could
 not approach Feretrius.

 [1789] Otherwise, "pointed out," or "designated."

 [1790] Otherwise corrupted into Ætna.

 Chapter XXII.--Argument:  Moreover, These Fables, Which at First Were
 Invented by Ignorant Men, Were Afterwards Celebrated by Others, and
 Chiefly by Poets, Who Did No Little Mischief to the Truth by Their
 Authority.  By Fictions of This Kind, and by Falsehoods of a Yet More
 Attractive Nature, the Minds of Young People are Corrupted, and Thence
 They Miserably Grow Old in These Beliefs, Although, on the Other Hand,
 the Truth is Obvious to Them If They Will Only Seek After It.

 "These fables and errors we both learn from ignorant parents, and, what
 is more serious still, we elaborate them in our very studies and
 instructions, especially in the verses of the poets, who as much as
 possible have prejudiced [1791] the truth [1792] by their authority.
 And for this reason Plato rightly expelled from the state which he had
 founded in his discourse, the illustrious Homer whom he had praised and
 crowned. [1793] For it was he especially who in the Trojan was
 allowed your gods, although he made jests of them, still to interfere
 in the affairs and doings of men:  he brought them together in contest;
 he wounded Venus; he bound, wounded, and drove away Mars.  He relates
 that Jupiter was set free by Briareus, so as not to be bound fast by
 the rest of the gods; and that he bewailed in showers of blood his son
 Sarpedon, because he could not snatch him from death; and that, enticed
 by the girdle of Venus, he lay more eagerly with his wife Juno than he
 was accustomed to do with his adulterous loves.  Elsewhere Hercules
 threw out dung, and Apollo is feeding cattle for Admetus.  Neptune,
 however, builds walls for Laomedon, and the unfortunate builder did not
 receive the wages for his work.  Then Jupiter's thunderbolt is
 fabricated [1794] on the anvil with the arms of Æneas, although there
 were heaven, and thunderbolts, and lightnings long before Jupiter was
 born in Crete; and neither could the Cyclops imitate, nor Jupiter
 himself help fearing, the flames of the real thunderbolt.  Why should I
 speak of the detected adultery of Mars and Venus, and of the violence
 of Jupiter against Ganymede,--a deed consecrated, (as you say,) in
 heaven?  And all these things have been put forward with this view,
 that a certain authority might be gained for the vices [1795] of men.
 By these fictions, and such as these, and by lies of a more attractive
 kind, the minds of boys are corrupted; and with the same fables
 clinging to them, they grow up even to the strength of mature age; and,
 poor wretches, they grow old in the same beliefs, although the truth is
 plain, if they will only seek after it.  For all the writers of
 antiquity, both Greek and Roman, have set forth that Saturn, the
 beginner of this race and multitude, was a man.  Nepos knows this, and
 Cassius in his history; and Thallus and Diodorus speak the same thing.
 This Saturn then, driven from Crete, by the fear of his raging son, had
 come to Italy, and, received by the hospitality of Janus, taught those
 unskilled and rustic men many things,--as, being something of a Greek,
 and polished,--to print letters for instance, to coin money, to make
 instruments.  Therefore he preferred that his hiding-place, because he
 had been safely hidden (latent) there, should be called Latium; and he
 gave a city, from his own name, the name of Saturnia, and Janus,
 Janiculum, so that each of them left their names to the memory of
 posterity.  Therefore it was certainly a man that fled, certainly a man
 who was concealed, and the father of a man, and sprung from a man.  He
 was declared, however, to be the son of earth or of heaven, because
 among the Italians he was of unknown parents; as even to this day we
 call those who appear unexpectedly, sent from heaven, those who are
 ignoble and unknown, sons of the earth.  His son Jupiter reigned at
 Crete after his father was driven out.  There he died, there he had
 sons.  To this day the cave of Jupiter is visited, and his sepulchre is
 shown, and he is convicted of being human by those very sacred rites of
 his.

 [1791] Some read, "and it is marvellous how these have prejudiced,"
 etc.

 [1792] Some read, "the truth itself."

 [1793] Plat., de Rep., lib. iii.

 [1794] Otherwise, "Then Vulcan fabricates," etc.

 [1795] Otherwise, "judgments."

 Chapter XXIII.--Argument:  Although the Heathens Acknowledge Their
 Kings to Be Mortal, Yet They Feign that They are Gods Even Against
 Their Own Will, Not Because of Their Belief in Their Divinity, But in
 Honour of the Power that They Have Exerted.  Yet a True God Has Neither
 Rising Nor Setting.  Thence Octavius Criticises the Images and Shrines
 of the Gods.

 "It is needless to go through each individual case, and to develope the
 entire series of that race, since in its first parents their mortality
 is proved, and must have flowed down into the rest by the very law of
 their succession, unless perhaps you fancy that they were gods after
 death; as by the perjury of Proculus, Romulus became a god; and by the
 good-will of the Mauritanians, Juba is a god; and other kings are
 divine who are consecrated, not in the faith of their divinity, but in
 honour of the power that they exercised.  Moreover, this name is
 ascribed to those who are unwilling to bear it.  They desire to
 persevere in their human condition.  They fear that they may be made
 gods; although they are already old men, they do not wish it.
 Therefore neither are gods made from dead people, since a god cannot
 die; nor of people that are born, since everything which is born dies.
 But that is divine which has neither rising nor setting.  For why, if
 they were born, are they not born in the present day also?--unless,
 perchance, Jupiter has already grown old, and child-bearing has failed
 in Juno, and Minerva has grown grey before she has borne children.  Or
 has that process of generation ceased, for the reason that no assent is
 any longer yielded to fables of this kind?  Besides, if the gods could
 create, [1796] they could not perish:  we should have more gods than
 all men together; so that now, neither would the heaven contain them,
 nor the air receive them, nor the earth bear them.  Whence it is
 manifest, that those were men whom we both read of as having been born,
 and know to have died.  Who therefore doubts that the common people
 pray to and publicly worship the consecrated images of these men; in
 that the belief and mind of the ignorant is deceived by the perfection
 of art, is blinded by the glitter of gold, is dimmed with the shining
 of silver and the whiteness of ivory?  But if any one were to present
 to his mind with what instruments and with what machinery every image
 is formed, he would blush that he had feared matter, treated after his
 fancy by the artificer to make a god. [1797] For a god of wood, a
 portion perhaps of a pile, or of an unlucky log, is hung up, is cut, is
 hewn, is planed; and a god of brass or of silver, often from an impure
 vessel, as was done by the Egyptian king, [1798] is fused, is beaten
 with hammers and forged on anvils; and the god of stone is cut, is
 sculptured, and is polished by some abandoned man, nor feels the injury
 done to him in his nativity, any more than afterwards it feels the
 worship flowing from your veneration; unless perhaps the stone, or the
 wood, or the silver is not yet a god.  When, therefore, does the god
 begin his existence?  Lo, it is melted, it is wrought, it is
 sculptured--it is not yet a god; lo, it is soldered, it is built
 together--it is set up, and even yet it is not a god; lo, it is
 adorned, it is consecrated, it is prayed to--then at length it is a
 god, when man has chosen it to be so, and for the purpose has dedicated
 it.

 [1796] "Be created" is a more probable reading.

 [1797] Otherwise, "that he had rashly been so deceived by the artificer
 in the material, as to make a god."

 [1798] [Footbaths.  See vol. ii., Theophilus, p. 92, and Athenagoras,
 p. 143.]

 Chapter XXIV.--Argument:  He Briefly Shows, Moreover, What Ridiculous,
 Obscene, and Cruel Rites Were Observed in Celebrating the Mysteries of
 Certain Gods.

 "How much more truly do dumb animals naturally judge concerning your
 gods?  Mice, swallows, kites, know that they have no feeling: they gnaw
 them, they trample on them, they sit upon them; and unless you drive
 them off, they build their nests in the very mouth of your god.
 Spiders, indeed, weave their webs over his face, and suspend their
 threads from his very head.  You wipe, cleanse, scrape, and you protect
 and fear those whom you make; while not one of you thinks that he ought
 to know God before he worships Him; desiring without consideration to
 obey their ancestors, choosing rather to become an addition to the
 error of others, than to trust themselves; in that they know nothing of
 what they fear.  Thus avarice has been consecrated in gold and silver;
 thus the form of empty statues has been established; thus has arisen
 Roman superstition.  And if you reconsider the rites of these gods, how
 many things are laughable, and how many also pitiable!  Naked people
 run about in the raw winter; some walk bonneted, and carry around old
 bucklers, or beat drums, or lead their gods a-begging through the
 streets.  Some fanes it is permitted to approach once a year, some it
 is forbidden to visit at all.  There is one place where a man may not
 go, and there are some that are sacred from women:  it is a crime
 needing atonement for a slave even to be present at some ceremonies.
 Some sacred places are crowned by a woman having one husband, some by a
 woman with many; and she who can reckon up most adulteries is sought
 after with most religious zeal.  What! would not a man who makes
 libations of his own blood, and supplicates (his god) by his own
 wounds, be better if he were altogether profane, than religious in such
 a way is this?  And he whose shameful parts are cut off, how greatly
 does he wrong God in seeking to propitiate Him in this manner! since,
 if God wished for eunuchs, He could bring them as such into existence,
 and would not make them so afterwards.  Who does not perceive that
 people of unsound mind, and of weak and degraded apprehension, are
 foolish in these things, and that the very multitude of those who err
 affords to each of them mutual patronage?  Here the defence of the
 general madness is the multitude of the mad people.

 Chapter XXV.--Argument:  Then He Shows that Cæcilius Had Been Wrong in
 Asserting that the Romans Had Gained Their Power Over the Whole World
 by Means of the Due Observance of Superstitions of This Kind.  Rather
 the Romans in Their Origin Were Collected by Crime, and Grew by the
 Terrors of Their Ferocity.  And Therefore the Romans Were Not So Great
 Because They Were Religious, But Because They Were Sacrilegious with
 Impunity.

 "Nevertheless, you will say that that very superstition itself gave,
 increased, and established their empire for the Romans, since they
 prevailed not so much by their valour as by their religion and piety.
 Doubtless the illustrious and noble justice of the Romans had its
 beginning from the very cradle of the growing empire.  Did they not in
 their origin, when gathered together and fortified by crime, grow by
 the terror of their own fierceness?  For the first people were
 assembled together as to an asylum.  Abandoned people, profligate,
 incestuous, assassins, traitors, had flocked together; and in order
 that Romulus himself, their commander and governor, might excel his
 people in guilt, he committed fratricide. [1799] These are the first
 auspices of the religious state!  By and by they carried off, violated,
 and ruined foreign virgins, already betrothed, already destined for
 husbands, and even some young women from their marriage vows--a thing
 unexampled [1800] --and then engaged in war with their parents, that
 is, with their fathers-in-law, and shed the blood of their kindred.
 What more irreligious, what more audacious, what could be safer than
 the very confidence of crime?  Now, to drive their neighbours from the
 land, to overthrow the nearest cities, with their temples and altars,
 to drive them into captivity, to grow up by the losses of others and by
 their own crimes, is the course of training common to the rest of the
 kings and the latest leaders with Romulus.  Thus, whatever the Romans
 hold, cultivate, possess, is the spoil of their audacity.  All their
 temples are built from the spoils of violence, that is, from the ruins
 of cities, from the spoils of the gods, from the murders of priests.
 This is to insult and scorn, to yield to conquered religions, to adore
 them when captive, after having vanquished them.  For to adore what you
 have taken by force, is to consecrate sacrilege, not divinities.  As
 often, therefore, as the Romans triumphed, so often they were polluted;
 and as many trophies as they gained from the nations, so many spoils
 did they take from the gods.  Therefore the Romans were not so great
 because they were religious, but because they were sacrilegious with
 impunity.  For neither were they able in the wars themselves to have
 the help of the gods against whom they took up arms; and they began to
 worship those when they were triumphed over, whom they had previously
 challenged.  But what avail such gods as those on behalf of the Romans,
 who had had no power on behalf of their own worshippers against the
 Roman arms?  For we know the indigenous gods of the Romans--Romulus,
 Picus, Tiberinus, and Consus, and Pilumnus, and Picumnus.  Tatius both
 discovered and worshipped Cloacina; Hostilius, Fear and Pallor.
 Subsequently Fever was dedicated by I know not whom:  such was the
 superstition that nourished that city,--diseases and ill states of
 health.  Assuredly also Acca Laurentia, and Flora, infamous harlots,
 must be reckoned among the diseases [1801] and the gods of the Romans.
 Such as these doubtless enlarged the dominion of the Romans, in
 opposition to others who were worshipped by the nations:  for against
 their own people neither did the Thracian Mars, nor the Cretan Jupiter,
 nor Juno, now of Argos, now of Samos, now of Carthage, nor Diana of
 Tauris, nor the Idæan Mother, nor those Egyptian--not deities, but
 monstrosities--assist them; unless perchance among the Romans the
 chastity of virgins was greater, or the religion of the priests more
 holy:  though absolutely among very many of the virgins unchastity was
 punished, in that they, doubtless without the knowledge of Vesta, had
 intercourse too carelessly with men; and for the rest their impunity
 arose not from the better protection of their chastity, but from the
 better fortune of their immodesty.  And where are adulteries better
 arranged by the priests than among the very altars and shrines? where
 are more panderings debated, or more acts of violence concerted?
 Finally, burning lust is more frequently gratified in the little
 chambers of the keepers of the temple, than in the brothels
 themselves.  And still, long before the Romans, by the ordering of God,
 the Assyrians held dominion, the Medes, the Persians, the Greeks also,
 and the Egyptians, although they had not any Pontiffs, nor Arvales, nor
 Salii, nor Vestals, nor Augurs, nor chickens shut up in a coop, by
 whose feeding or abstinence the highest concerns of the state were to
 be governed.

 [1799] Parricidium.

 [1800] Virg., Æneid, viii. 635.

 [1801] Some read "probra" for "morbos," scil. "reproaches."

 Chapter XXVI.--Argument:  The Weapon that Cæcilius Had Slightly
 Brandished Against Him, Taken from the Auspices and Auguries of Birds,
 Octavius Retorts by Instancing the Cases of Regulus, Mancinus, Paulus,
 and Cæsar.  And He Shows by Other Examples, that the Argument from the
 Oracles is of No Greater Force Than the Others.

 "And now I come to those Roman auspices and auguries which you have
 collected with extreme pains, and have borne testimony that they were
 both neglected with ill consequences, and observed with good fortune.
 Certainly Clodius, and Flaminius, and Junius lost their armies on this
 account, because they did not judge it well to wait for the very solemn
 omen given by the greedy pecking of the chickens.  But what of
 Regulus?  Did he not observe the auguries, and was taken captive?
 Mancinus maintained his religious duty, and was sent under the yoke,
 and was given up.  Paulus also had greedy chickens at Cannæ, yet he was
 overthrown with the greater part of the republic. [1802] Caius Cæsar
 despised the auguries and auspices that resisted his making his voyage
 into Africa before the winter, and thus the more easily he both sailed
 and conquered.  But what and how much shall I go on to say about
 oracles?  After his death Amphiaraus answered as to things to come,
 though he knew not (while living) that he should be betrayed by his
 wife on account of a bracelet.  The blind Tiresias saw the future,
 although he did not see the present.  Ennius invented the replies of
 the Pythian Apollo concerning Pyrrhus, although Apollo had already
 ceased to make verses; and that cautious and ambiguous oracle of his,
 failed just at the time when men began to be at once more cultivated
 and less credulous.  And Demosthenes, because he knew that the answers
 were feigned, complained that the Pythia philippized.  But sometimes,
 it is true, even auspices or oracles have touched the truth.  Although
 among many falsehoods chance might appear as if it imitated
 forethought; yet I will approach the very source of error and
 perverseness, whence all that obscurity has flowed, and both dig into
 it more deeply, and lay it open more manifestly.  There are some
 insincere and vagrant spirits degraded from their heavenly vigour by
 earthly stains and lusts.  Now these spirits, after having lost the
 simplicity of their nature by being weighed down and immersed in vices,
 for a solace of their calamity, cease not, now that they are ruined
 themselves, to ruin others; and being depraved themselves, to infuse
 into others the error of their depravity and being themselves alienated
 from God, to separate others from God by the introduction of degraded
 superstitions.  The poets know that those spirits are demons; the
 philosophers discourse of them; Socrates knew it, who, at the nod and
 decision of a demon that was at his side, either declined or undertook
 affairs.  The Magi, also, not only know that there are demons, but,
 moreover, whatever miracle they affect to perform, do it by means of
 demons; by their aspirations and communications they show their
 wondrous tricks, making either those things appear which are not, or
 those things not to appear which are.  Of those magicians, the first
 both in eloquence and in deed, Sosthenes, [1803] not only describes the
 true God with fitting majesty, but the angels that are the ministers
 and messengers of God, even the true God.  And he knew that it enhanced
 His veneration, that in awe of the very nod and glance of their Lord
 they should tremble.  The same man also declared that demons were
 earthly, wandering, hostile to humanity.  What said Plato, [1804] who
 believed that it was a hard thing to find out God?  Does not he also,
 without hesitation, tell of both angels and demons?  And in his
 Symposium also, does not he endeavour to explain the nature of demons?
 For he will have it to be a substance between mortal and immortal--that
 is, mediate between body and spirit, compounded by mingling of earthly
 weight and heavenly lightness; whence also he warns us of the desire of
 love, [1805] and he says that it is moulded and glides into the human
 breast, and stirs the senses, and moulds the affections, and infuses
 the ardour of lust.

 [1802] Reipublicæ; but it is shrewdly conjectured that the passage was
 written, "cum majore R. P. parte"--"with the greater part of the Roman
 people," and the mistake made by the transcriber of the ms.

 [1803] Otherwise Hostanes.

 [1804] [Octavius and Minucius had but one mind (see cap. i. supra), and
 both were philosophers of the Attic Academy reflecting Cicero.  See my
 remarks on Athenagoras, vol. ii. p. 126, this series.]

 [1805] According to some editors, "warns us that the desire of love is
 received."

 Chapter XXVII.--Argument:  Recapitulation.  Doubtless Here is a Source
 of Error:  Demons Lurk Under the Statues and Images, They Haunt the
 Fanes, They Animate the Fibres of the Entrails, Direct the Flights of
 Birds, Govern the Lots, Pour Forth Oracles Involved in False
 Responses.  These Things Not from God; But They are Constrained to
 Confess When They are Adjured in the Name of the True God, and are
 Driven from the Possessed Bodies.  Hence They Flee Hastily from the
 Neighbourhood of Christians, and Stir Up a Hatred Against Them in the
 Minds of the Gentiles Who Begin to Hate Them Before They Know Them.

 "These impure spirits, therefore--the demons--as is shown by the Magi,
 by the philosophers, and by Plato, consecrated under statues and
 images, lurk there, and by their afflatus attain the authority as of a
 present deity; while in the meantime they are breathed into the
 prophets, while they dwell in the shrines, while sometimes they animate
 the fibres of the entrails, control the flights of birds, direct the
 lots, are the cause of oracles involved in many falsehoods.  For they
 are both deceived, and they deceive; inasmuch as they are both ignorant
 of the simple truth, and for their own ruin they confess not that which
 they know.  Thus they weigh men downwards from heaven, and call them
 away from the true God to material things:  they disturb the life,
 render all men [1806] unquiet; creeping also secretly into human
 bodies, with subtlety, as being spirits, they feign diseases, alarm the
 minds, wrench about the limbs; that they may constrain men to worship
 them, being gorged with the fumes of altars or the sacrifices of
 cattle, that, by remitting what they had bound, they may seem to have
 cured it.  These raging maniacs also, whom you see rush about in
 public, are moreover themselves prophets without a temple; thus they
 rage, thus they rave, thus they are whirled around.  In them also there
 is a like instigation of the demon, but there is a dissimilar occasion
 for their madness.  From the same causes also arise those things which
 were spoken of a little time ago by you, that Jupiter demanded the
 restoration of his games in a dream, that the Castors appeared with
 horses, and that a small ship was following the leading of the matron's
 girdle.  A great many, even some of your own people, know all those
 things that the demons themselves confess concerning themselves, as
 often as they are driven by us from bodies by the torments of our words
 and by the fires of our prayers.  Saturn himself, and Serapis, and
 Jupiter, and whatever demons you worship, overcome by pain, speak out
 what they are; and assuredly they do not lie to their own discredit,
 especially when any of you are standing by.  Since they themselves are
 the witnesses that they are demons, believe them when they confess the
 truth of themselves; for when abjured by the only and true God,
 unwillingly the wretched beings shudder in [1807] their bodies, and
 either at once leap forth, or vanish by degrees, as the faith of the
 sufferer assists or the grace of the healer inspires.  Thus they fly
 from Christians when near at hand, whom at a distance they harassed by
 your means in their assemblies.  And thus, introduced into the minds of
 the ignorant, they secretly sow there a hatred of us by means of fear.
 For it is natural both to hate one whom you fear, and to injure one
 whom you have feared, if you can.  Thus they take possession of the
 minds and obstruct the hearts, that men may begin to hate us before
 they know us; lest, if known, they should either imitate us, or not be
 able to condemn us.

 [1806] Some read "slumbers" for "all men."

 [1807] "Cling to" is another reading.

 Chapter XXVIII.--Argument:  Nor is It Only Hatred that They Arouse
 Against the Christians, But They Charge Against Them Horrid Crimes,
 Which Up to This Time Have Been Proved by Nobody.  This is the Work of
 Demons.  For by Them a False Report is Both Set on Foot and
 Propagated.  The Christians are Falsely Accused of Sacrilege, of
 Incest, of Adultery, of Parricide; And, Moreover, It is Certain and
 True that the Very Same Crimes, or Crimes Like to or Greater Than
 These, are in Fact Committed by the Gentiles Themselves.

 "But how unjust it is, [1808] to form a judgment on things unknown and
 unexamined, as you do!  Believe us ourselves when penitent, for we also
 were the same as you, and formerly, while yet blind and obtuse, thought
 the same things as you; to wit, that the Christians worshipped
 monsters, devoured infants, mingled in incestuous banquets.  And we did
 not perceive that such fables as these were always set afloat by those
 (newsmongers), and were never either inquired into nor proved; and that
 in so long a time no one had appeared to betray (their doings), to
 obtain not only pardon for their crime, but also favour for its
 discovery:  moreover, that it was to this extent not evil, that a
 Christian, when accused, neither blushed nor feared, and that he only
 repented that he had not been one before.  We, however, when we
 undertook to defend and protect some sacrilegious and incestuous
 persons, and even parricides, did not think that these (Christians)
 were to be heard at all.  Sometimes even, when we affected to pity
 them, we were more cruelly violent against them, so as to torture them
 [1809] when they confessed, that they might deny, to wit, that they
 might not perish; making use of a perverse inquisition against them,
 not to elicit the truth, but to compel a falsehood.  And if any one, by
 reason of greater weakness, overcome with suffering, and conquered,
 should deny that he was a Christian, we showed favour to him, as if by
 forswearing that name he had at once atoned for all his deeds by that
 simple denial.  Do not you acknowledge that we felt and did the same as
 you feel and do? when, if reason and not the instigation of a demon
 were to judge, they should rather have been pressed not to disavow
 themselves Christians, but to confess themselves guilty of incests, of
 abominations, of sacred rites polluted, of infants immolated.  For with
 these and such as these stories, did those same demons fill up the ears
 of the ignorant against us, to the horror of their execration.  Nor yet
 was it wonderful, since the common report of men, [1810] which is,
 always fed by the scattering of falsehoods, is wasted away when the
 truth is brought to light.  Thus this is the business of demons, for by
 them false rumours are both sown and cherished.  Thence arises what you
 say that you hear, that an ass's head is esteemed among us a divine
 thing.  Who is such a fool as to worship this?  Who is so much more
 foolish as to believe that it is an object of worship? unless that you
 even consecrate whole asses in your stables, together with your Epona,
 [1811] and religiously devour [1812] those same asses with Isis.  Also
 you offer up and worship the heads of oxen and of wethers, and you
 dedicate gods mingled also of a goat and a man, and gods with the faces
 of dogs and lions.  Do you not adore and feed Apis the ox, with the
 Egyptians?  And you do not condemn their sacred rites instituted in
 honour of serpents, and crocodiles, and other beasts, and birds, and
 fishes, of which if any one were to kill one of these gods, he is even
 punished with death.  These same Egyptians, together with very many of
 you, are not more afraid of Isis than they are of the pungency of
 onions, nor of Serapis more than they tremble at the basest noises
 produced by the foulness of their bodies.  He also who fables against
 us about our adoration of the members of the priest, tries to confer
 upon us what belongs really to himself.  (Ista enim impudicitæ eorum
 forsitan sacra sint, apud quos sexus omnis membris omnibus prostat,
 apud quos iota impudicitia vocatur urbanitas; qui scortorum licentiæ
 invident, qui medios viros lambunt, libidinoso ore inguinibus
 inhærescunt, homines malæ linguæ etiam si tacerent, quos prius tædescit
 impudicitiæ suæ quam pudescit.)  Abomination! they suffer on themselves
 such evil deeds, as no age is so effeminate as to be able to bear, and
 no slavery so cruel as to be compelled to endure.

 [1808] Otherwise read, "But how great a fault it is."

 [1809] "To urge them" is the reading in some text.

 [1810] "Of all men" is another reading.

 [1811] Otherwise, "Hippona."

 [1812] Otherwise, "devote," and other readings.

 Chapter XXIX.--Argument:  Nor is It More True that a Man Fastened to a
 Cross on Account of His Crimes is Worshipped by Christians, for They
 Believe Not Only that He Was Innocent, But with Reason that He Was
 God.  But, on the Other Hand, the Heathens Invoke the Divine Powers of
 Kings Raised into Gods by Themselves; They Pray to Images, and Beseech
 Their Genii.

 "These, and such as these infamous things, we are not at liberty even
 to hear; it is even disgraceful with any more words to defend ourselves
 from such charges.  For you pretend that those things are done by
 chaste and modest persons, which we should not believe to be done at
 all, unless you proved that they were true concerning yourselves.  For
 in that you attribute to our religion the worship of a criminal and his
 cross, [1813] you wander far from the neighbourhood of the truth, in
 thinking either that a criminal deserved, or that an earthly being was
 able, to be believed God.  Miserable indeed is that man whose whole
 hope is dependent on mortal man, for all his help is put an end to with
 the extinction of the man. [1814] The Egyptians certainly choose out
 a man for themselves whom they may worship; him alone they propitiate;
 him they consult about all things; to him they slaughter victims; and
 he who to others is a god, to himself is certainly a man whether he
 will or no, for he does not deceive his own consciousness, if he
 deceives that of others.  "Moreover, a false flattery disgracefully
 caresses princes and kings, not as great and chosen men, as is just,
 but as gods; whereas honour is more truly rendered to an illustrious
 man, and love is more pleasantly given to a very good man.  Thus they
 invoke their deity, they supplicate their images, they implore their
 Genius, that is, their demon; and it is safer to swear falsely by the
 genius of Jupiter than by that of a king.  Crosses, moreover, we
 neither worship nor wish for. [1815] You, indeed, who consecrate gods
 of wood, adore wooden crosses perhaps as parts of your gods.  For your
 very standards, as well as your banners; and flags of your camp, what
 else are they but crosses glided and adorned?  Your victorious trophies
 not only imitate the appearance of a simple cross, but also that of a
 man affixed to it.  We assuredly see the sign of a cross, [1816]
 naturally, in the ship when it is carried along with swelling sails,
 when it glides forward with expanded oars; and when the military yoke
 is lifted up, it is the sign of a cross; and when a man adores God with
 a pure mind, with hands outstretched.  Thus the sign of the cross
 either is sustained by a natural reason, or your own religion is formed
 with respect to it.

 [1813] [A reverent allusion to the Crucified, believed in and
 worshipped as God.]

 [1814] [Jer. xvii. 5-7.]

 [1815] [See Justin Martyr's Dialogue with Trypho, chap. lxxxix. et
 seqq. vol. i. p. 244.  S.]

 [1816] [See Reeves's Apologies (ut supra), vol. ii. p. 144, note.  S.]

 Chapter XXX.--Argument:  The Story About Christians Drinking the Blood
 of an Infant that They Have Murdered, is a Barefaced Calumny.  But the
 Gentiles, Both Cruelly Expose Their Children Newly Born, and Before
 They are Born Destroy Them by a Cruel Abortion.  Christians are Neither
 Allowed to See Nor to Hear of Manslaughter.

 "And now I should wish to meet him who says or believes that we are
 initiated by the slaughter and blood of an infant.  Think you that it
 can be possible for so tender, so little a body to receive those fatal
 wounds; for any one to shed, pour forth, and drain that new blood of a
 youngling, and of a man scarcely come into existence?  No one can
 believe this, except one who can dare to do it.  And I see that you at
 one time expose your begotten children to wild beasts and to birds; at
 another, that you crush them when strangled with a miserable kind of
 death.  There are some women who, by drinking medical preparations,
 [1817] extinguish the source of the future man in their very bowels,
 and thus commit a parricide before they bring forth.  And these things
 assuredly come down from the teaching of your gods.  For Saturn did not
 expose his children, but devoured them.  With reason were infants
 sacrificed to him by parents in some parts of Africa, caresses and
 kisses repressing their crying, that a weeping victim might not be
 sacrificed.  Moreover, among the Tauri of Pontus, and to the Egyptian
 Busiris, it was a sacred rite to immolate their guests, and for the
 Galli to slaughter to Mercury human, or rather inhuman, sacrifices.
 The Roman sacrificers buried living a Greek man and a Greek woman, a
 Gallic man and a Gallic woman; and to this day, Jupiter Latiaris is
 worshipped by them with murder; and, what is worthy of the son of
 Saturn, he is gorged with the blood of an evil and criminal man.  I
 believe that he himself taught Catiline to conspire under a compact of
 blood, and Bellona to steep her sacred rites with a draught of human
 gore, and taught men to heal epilepsy with the blood of a man, that is,
 with a worse disease.  They also are not unlike to him who devour the
 wild beasts from the arena, besmeared and stained with blood, or
 fattened with the limbs or the entrails of men.  To us it is not lawful
 either to see or to hear of homicide; and so much do we shrink from
 human blood, that we do not use the blood even of eatable animals in
 our food.

 [1817] By medicaments and drinks.

 Chapter XXXI.--Argument:  The Charge of Our Entertainments Being
 Polluted with Incest, is Entirely Opposed to All Probability, While It
 is Plain that Gentiles are Actually Guilty of Incest.  The Banquets of
 Christians are Not Only Modest, But Temperate.  In Fact, Incestuous
 Lust is So Unheard Of, that with Many Even the Modest Association of
 the Sexes Gives Rise to a Blush.

 "And of the incestuous banqueting, the plotting of demons has falsely
 devised an enormous fable against us, to stain the glory of our
 modesty, by the loathing excited by an outrageous infamy, that before
 inquiring into the truth it might turn men away from us by the terror
 of an abominable charge.  It was thus your own Fronto [1818] acted in
 this respect:  he did not produce testimony, as one who alleged a
 charge, but he scattered reproaches as a rhetorician.  For these things
 have rather originated from your own nations.  Among the Persians, a
 promiscuous association between sons and mothers is allowed.  Marriages
 with sisters are legitimate among the Egyptians and in Athens.  Your
 records and your tragedies, which you both read and hear with pleasure,
 glory in incests:  thus also you worship incestuous gods, who have
 intercourse with mothers, with daughters, with sisters.  With reason,
 therefore, is incest frequently detected among you, and is continually
 permitted.  Miserable men, you may even, without knowing it, rush into
 what is unlawful:  since you scatter your lusts promiscuously, since
 you everywhere beget children, since you frequently expose even those
 who are born at home to the mercy of others, it is inevitable that you
 must come back to your own children, and stray to your own offspring.
 Thus you continue the story of incest, even although you have no
 consciousness of your crime.  But we maintain our modesty not in
 appearance, but in our heart we gladly abide by the bond of a single
 marriage; in the desire of procreating, we know either one wife, or
 none at all.  We practise sharing in banquets, which are not only
 modest, but also sober:  for we do not indulge in entertainments nor
 prolong our feasts with wine; but we temper our joyousness with
 gravity, with chaste discourse, and with body even more chaste (divers
 of us unviolated) enjoy rather than make a boast of a perpetual
 virginity of a body.  So far, in fact, are they from indulging in
 incestuous desire, that with some even the (idea of a) modest
 intercourse of the sexes causes a blush.  Neither do we at once stand
 on the level of the lowest of the people, if we refuse your honours and
 purple robes; and we are not fastidious, if we all have a discernment
 of one good, but are assembled together with the same quietness with
 which we live as individuals; and we are not garrulous in corners,
 although you either blush or are afraid to hear us in public.  And that
 day by day the number of us is increased, is not a ground for a charge
 of error, but is a testimony which claims praise; for, in a fair mode
 of life, our actual number both continues and abides undiminished, and
 strangers increase it.  Thus, in short, we do not distinguish our
 people by some small bodily mark, as you suppose, but easily enough by
 the sign of innocency and modesty.  Thus we love one another, to your
 regret, with a mutual love, because we do not know how to hate.  Thus
 we call one another, to your envy, brethren:  as being men born of one
 God and Parent, and companions in faith, and as fellow-heirs in hope.
 You, however, do not recognise one another, and you are cruel in your
 mutual hatreds; nor do you acknowledge one another as brethren, unless
 indeed for the purpose of fratricide.

 [1818] [Fronto is called "our Cirtensian" in cap. ix. supra; and this
 suggests that the Octavius was probably written in Cirta, circaa.d.
 210.  See supra, p. 178.]

 Chapter XXXII.--Argument:  Nor Can It Be Said that the Christians
 Conceal What They Worship Because They Have No Temples and No Altars,
 Inasmuch as They are Persuaded that God Can Be Circumscribed by No
 Temple, and that No Likeness of Him Can Be Made.  But He is Everywhere
 Present, Sees All Things, Even the Most Secret Thoughts of Our Hearts;
 And We Live Near to Him, and in His Protection.

 "But do you think that we conceal what we worship, if we have not
 temples and altars?  And yet what image of God shall I make, since, if
 you think rightly, man himself is the image of God?  What temple shall
 I build to Him, when this whole world fashioned by His work cannot
 receive Him?  And when I, a man, dwell far and wide, shall I shut up
 the might of so great majesty within one little building?  Were it not
 better that He should be dedicated in our mind, consecrated in our
 inmost heart?  Shall I offer victims and sacrifices to the Lord, such
 as He has produced for my use, that I should throw back to Him His own
 gift?  It is ungrateful when the victim fit for sacrifice is a good
 disposition, and a pure mind, and a sincere judgment. [1819]
 Therefore he who cultivates innocence supplicates God; he who
 cultivates justice makes offerings to God; he who abstains from
 fraudulent practices propitiates God; he who snatches man from danger
 slaughters the most acceptable victim.  These are our sacrifices, these
 are our rites of God's worship; thus, among us, he who is most just is
 he who is most religious.  But certainly the God whom we worship we
 neither show nor see.  Verily for this reason we believe Him to be God,
 that we can be conscious of Him, but cannot see Him; for in His works,
 and in all the movements of the world, we behold His power ever present
 when He thunders, lightens, darts His bolts, or when He makes all
 bright again.  Nor should you wonder if you do not see God.  By the
 wind and by the blasts of the storm all things are driven on and
 shaken, are agitated, and yet neither wind nor tempest comes under our
 eyesight.  Thus we cannot look upon the sun, which is the cause of
 seeing to all creatures:  the pupil of the eye is with drawn from his
 rays, the gaze of the beholder is dimmed; and if you look too long, all
 power of sight is extinguished.  What! can you sustain the Architect of
 the sun Himself, the very source of light, when you turn yourself away
 from His lightnings, and hide yourself from His thunderbolts?  Do you
 wish to see God with your carnal eyes, when you are neither able to
 behold nor to grasp your own soul itself, by which you are enlivened
 and speak?  But, moreover, it is said that God is ignorant of man's
 doings; and being established in heaven, He can neither survey all nor
 know individuals.  Thou errest, O man, and art deceived; for from where
 is God afar off, when all things heavenly and earthly, and which are
 beyond this province of the universe, are known to God, are full of
 God?  Everywhere He is not only very near to us, but He is infused into
 us.  Therefore once more look upon the sun:  it is fixed fast in the
 heaven, yet it is diffused over all lands equally; present everywhere,
 it is associated and mingled with all things; its brightness is never
 violated.  How much more God, who has made all things, and looks upon
 all things, from whom there can be nothing secret, is present in the
 darkness, is present in our thoughts, as if in the deep darkness.  Not
 only do we act in Him, but also, I had almost said, we live with Him.

 [1819] According to some editions, "conscience."

 Chapter XXXIII.--Argument:  That Even If God Be Said to Have Nothing
 Availed the Jews, Certainly the Writers of the Jewish Annals are the
 Most Sufficient Witnesses that They Forsook God Before They Were
 Forsaken by Him.

 "Neither let us flatter ourselves concerning our multitude.  We seem
 many to ourselves, but to God we are very few.  We distinguish peoples
 and nations; to God this whole world is one family.  Kings only know
 all the matters of their kingdom by the ministrations of their
 servants:  God has no need of information.  We not only live in His
 eyes, but also in His bosom.  But it is objected that it availed the
 Jews nothing that they themselves worshipped the one God with altars
 and temples, with the greatest superstition.  You are guilty of
 ignorance if you are recalling later events while you are forgetful or
 unconscious of former ones.  For they themselves also, as long as they
 worshipped our God--and He is the same God of all--with chastity,
 innocency, and religion, as long as they obeyed His wholesome precepts,
 from a few became innumerable, from poor became rich, from being
 servants became kings; a few overwhelmed many; unarmed men overwhelmed
 armed ones as they fled from them, following them up by God's command,
 and with the elements striving on their behalf.  Carefully read over
 their Scriptures, or if you are better pleased with the Roman writings,
 [1820] inquire concerning the Jews in the books (to say nothing of
 ancient documents) of Flavius Josephus [1821] or Antoninus Julianus,
 and you shall know that by their wickedness they deserved this fortune,
 and that nothing happened which had not before been predicted to them,
 if they should persevere in their obstinacy.  Therefore you will
 understand that they forsook before they were forsaken, and that they
 were not, as you impiously say, taken captive with their God, but they
 were given up by God as deserters from His discipline.

 [1820] [Minucius is blamed for not introducing more Scripture!  He
 relates his friend's argument with a scoffing Pagan.  How could
 Octavius have used the Scriptures with such an antagonist?]

 [1821] [Wars of the Jews, b. v. cap. 9, etc.]

 Chapter XXXIV.--Argument:  Moreover, It is Not at All to Be Wondered at
 If This World is to Be Consumed by Fire, Since Everything Which Has a
 Beginning Has Also an End.  And the Ancient Philosophers are Not Averse
 from the Opinion of the Probable Burning Up of the World.  Yet It is
 Evident that God, Having Made Man from Nothing, Can Raise Him Up from
 Death into Life.  And All Nature Suggests a Future Resurrection.

 "Further, in respect of the burning up of the world, it is a vulgar
 error not to believe either that fire will fall upon it in an
 unforeseen way, or that the world will be destroyed by it. [1822] For
 who of wise men doubts, who is ignorant, that all things which have had
 a beginning perish, all things which are made come to an end?  The
 heaven also, with all things which are contained in heaven, will cease
 even as it began.  The nourishment of the seas by the sweet waters of
 the springs shall pass away into the power of fire. [1823] The Stoics
 have a constant belief that, the moisture being dried up, all this
 world will take fire; and the Epicureans have the very same opinion
 concerning the conflagration of the elements and the destruction of the
 world.  Plato speaks, saying that parts of the world are now inundated,
 and are now burnt up by alternate changes; and although he says that
 the world itself is constructed perpetual and indissoluble, yet he adds
 that to God Himself, the only artificer, [1824] it is both dissoluble
 and mortal.  Thus it is no wonder if that mass be destroyed by Him by
 whom it was reared.  You observe that philosophers dispute of the same
 things that we are saying, not that we are following up their tracks,
 but that they, from the divine announcements of the prophets, imitated
 the shadow of the corrupted truth.  Thus also the most illustrious of
 the wise men, Pythagoras first, and Plato chiefly, have delivered the
 doctrine of resurrection with a corrupt and divided faith; for they
 will have it, that the bodies being dissolved, the souls alone both
 abide for ever, and very often pass into other new bodies.  To these
 things they add also this, by way of misrepresenting the truth, that
 the souls of men return into cattle, birds, and beasts.  Assuredly such
 an opinion as that is not worthy of a philosopher's inquiry, but of the
 ribaldry of a buffoon. [1825] But for our argument it is sufficient,
 that even in this your wise men do in some measure harmonize with us.
 But who is so foolish or so brutish as to dare to deny that man, as he
 could first of all be formed by God, so can again be re-formed; that he
 is nothing after death, and that he was nothing before he began to
 exist; and as from nothing it was possible for him to be born, so from
 nothing it may be possible for him to be restored?  Moreover, it is
 more difficult to begin that which is not, than to repeat that which
 has been.  Do you think that, if anything is withdrawn from our feeble
 eyes, it perishes to God?  Every body, whether it is dried up into
 dust, or is dissolved into moisture, or is compressed into ashes, or is
 attenuated into smoke, is withdrawn from us, but it is reserved for God
 in the custody of the elements.  Nor, as you believe, do we fear any
 loss from sepulture, [1826] but we adopt the ancient and better custom
 of burying in the earth.  See, therefore, how for our consolation all
 nature suggests a future resurrection.  The sun sinks down and arises,
 the stars pass away and return, the flowers die and revive again, after
 their wintry decay the shrubs resume their leaves, seeds do not
 flourish again. unless they are rotted: [1827] thus the body in the
 sepulchre is like the trees which in winter hide their verdure with a
 deceptive dryness.  Why are you in haste for it to revive and return,
 while the winter is still raw?  We must wait also for the spring-time
 of the body.  And I am not ignorant that many, in the consciousness of
 what they deserve, rather desire than believe that they shall be
 nothing after death; for they would prefer to be altogether
 extinguished, rather than to be restored for the purpose of
 punishment.  And their error also is enhanced, both by the liberty
 granted them in this life, and by God's very great patience, whose
 judgment, the more tardy it is, is so much the more just.

 [1822] This passage is very indefinite, and probably corrupt; the
 meaning is anything but satisfactory.  The general meaning is given
 freely thus:  "Further, it is a vulgar error to doubt or disbelieve a
 future conflagration of the world."

 [1823] This passage is very variously read, without substantial
 alteration of the sense.

 [1824] Otherwise, "to God Himself alone, the artificer."

 [1825] This is otherwise read, "the work of the mimic or buffoon."

 [1826] Scil. "by burning."

 [1827] [1 Cor. xv. 36, Job xiv. 7-15.]

 Chapter XXXV.--Argument:  Righteous and Pious Men Shall Be Rewarded
 with Never-Ending Felicity, But Unrighteous Men Shall Be Visited with
 Eternal Punishment.  The Morals of Christians are Far More Holy Than
 Those of the Gentiles.

 "And yet men are admonished in the books and poems of the most learned
 poets of that fiery river, and of the heat flowing in manifold turns
 from the Stygian marsh,--things which, prepared for eternal torments,
 and known to them by the information of demons and from the oracles of
 their prophets, they have delivered to us.  And therefore among them
 also even king Jupiter himself swears religiously by the parching banks
 and the black abyss; for, with foreknowledge of the punishment destined
 to him, with his worshippers, he shudders.  Nor is there either measure
 or termination to these torments.  There the intelligent fire [1828]
 burns the limbs and restores them, feeds on them and nourishes them.
 As the fires of the thunderbolts strike upon the bodies, and do not
 consume them; as the fires of Mount Ætna and of Mount Vesuvius, and of
 burning lands everywhere, glow, but are not wasted; so that penal fire
 is not fed by the waste of those who burn, but is nourished by the
 unexhausted eating away of their bodies.  But that they who know not
 God are deservedly tormented as impious, as unrighteous persons, no one
 except a profane man hesitates to believe, since it is not less wicked
 to be ignorant of, than to offend the Parent of all, and the Lord of
 all.  And although ignorance of God is sufficient for punishment, even
 as knowledge of Him is of avail for pardon, yet if we Christians be
 compared with you, although in some things our discipline is inferior,
 yet we shall be found much better than you.  For you forbid, and yet
 commit, adulteries; we are born [1829] men only for our own wives:  you
 punish crimes when committed; with us, even to think of crimes is to
 sin:  you are afraid of those who are aware of what you do; we are even
 afraid of our own conscience alone, without which we cannot exist:
 finally, from your numbers the prison boils over; but there is no
 Christian there, unless he is accused on account of his religion, or a
 deserter.

 [1828] pur sophronoun is an expression of Clemens Alexandrinus, so that
 there is no need for the emendation of "rapiens" instead of "sapiens,"
 suggested by one editor.

 [1829] "Are known as" is another reading.

 Chapter XXXVI.--Argument:  Fate is Nothing, Except So Far as Fate is
 God.  Man's Mind is Free, and Therefore So is His Action:  His Birth is
 Not Brought into Judgment.  It is Not a Matter of Infamy, But of Glory,
 that Christians are Reproached for Their Poverty; And the Fact that
 They Suffer Bodily Evils is Not as a Penalty, But as a Discipline.

 "Neither let any one either take comfort from, or apologize for what
 happens from fate.  Let what happens be of the disposition of fortune,
 yet the mind is free; and therefore man's doing, not his dignity, is
 judged.  For what else is fate than what God has spoken [1830] of each
 one of us? who, since He can foresee our constitution, determines also
 the fates for us, according to the deserts and the qualities of
 individuals.  Thus in our case it is not the star under which we are
 born that is punished, but the particular nature of our disposition is
 blamed.  And about fate enough is said; or if, in consideration of the
 time, we have spoken too little, we shall argue the matter at another
 time more abundantly [1831] and more fully.  But that many of us are
 called poor, this is not our disgrace, but our glory; for as our mind
 is relaxed by luxury, so it is strengthened by frugality.  And yet who
 can be poor if he does not want, if he does not crave for the
 possessions of others, if he is rich towards God?  He rather is poor,
 who, although he has much, desires more.  Yet I will speak [1832]
 according as I feel.  No one can be so poor as he is born.  Birds live
 without any patrimony, and day by day the cattle are fed; and yet these
 creatures are born for us--all of which things, if we do not lust
 after, we possess.  Therefore, as he who treads a road is the happier
 the lighter he walks, so happier is he in this journey of life who
 lifts himself along in poverty, and does not breathe heavily under the
 burden of riches.  And yet even if we thought wealth useful to us, we
 should ask it of God.  Assuredly He might be able to indulge us in some
 measure, whose is the whole; but we would rather despise riches than
 possess them: [1833] we desire rather innocency, we rather entreat
 for patience, we prefer being good to being prodigal; and that we feel
 and suffer the human mischiefs of the body is not punishment--it is
 warfare.  For fortitude is strengthened by infirmities, and calamity is
 very often the discipline of virtue; in addition, strength both of mind
 and of body grows torpid without the exercise of labour.  Therefore all
 your mighty men whom you announce as an example have flourished
 illustriously by their afflictions.  And thus God is neither unable to
 aid us, nor does He despise us, since He is both the ruler of all men
 and the lover of His own people.  But in adversity He looks into and
 searches out each one; He weighs the disposition of every individual in
 dangers, even to death at last; He investigates the will of man,
 certain that to Him nothing can perish.  Therefore, as gold by the
 fires, so are we declared by critical moments.

 [1830] Fatus.

 [1831] Otherwise read, "both more truly."

 [1832] Some read, "I will speak at length."

 [1833] Probably a better reading is "strive for them."

 Chapter XXXVII.--Argument:  Tortures Most Unjustly Inflicted for the
 Confession of Christ's Name are Spectacles Worthy of God.  A Comparison
 Instituted Between Some of the Bravest of the Heathens and the Holy
 Martyrs.  He Declares that Christians Do Not Present Themselves at
 Public Shows and Processions, Because They Know Them, with the Greatest
 Certainty, to Be No Less Impious Than Cruel.

 "How beautiful is the spectacle to God when a Christian does battle
 with pain; when he is drawn up against threats, and punishments, and
 tortures; when, mocking [1834] the noise of death, he treads under foot
 the horror of the executioner; when he raises up his liberty against
 kings and princes, and yields to God alone, whose he is; when,
 triumphant and victorious, he tramples upon the very man who has
 pronounced sentence against him!  For he has conquered who has obtained
 that for which he contends.  What soldier would not provoke peril with
 greater boldness under the eyes of his general?  For no one receives a
 reward before his trial, and yet the general does not give what he has
 not:  he cannot preserve life, but he can make the warfare glorious.
 But God's soldier is neither forsaken in suffering, nor is brought to
 an end by death.  Thus the Christian may seem to be miserable; he
 cannot be really found to be so.  You yourselves extol unfortunate men
 to the skies; Mucius Scævola, for instance, who, when he had failed in
 his attempt against the king, would have perished among the enemies
 unless he had sacrificed his right hand.  And how many of our people
 have borne that not their right hand only, but their whole body, should
 be burned--burned up without any cries of pain, especially when they
 had it in their power to be sent away!  Do I compare men with Mucius or
 Aquilius, or with Regulus?  Yet boys and young women among us treat
 with contempt crosses and tortures, wild beasts, and all the bugbears
 of punishments, with the inspired [1835] patience of suffering.  And do
 you not perceive, O wretched men, that there is nobody who either is
 willing without reason to undergo punishment, or is able without God to
 bear tortures?  Unless, perhaps, the fact has deceived you, that those
 who know not God abound in riches, flourish in honours, and excel in
 power.  Miserable men! in this respect they are lifted up the higher,
 that they may fall down lower.  For these are fattened as victims for
 punishment, as sacrifices they are crowned for the slaughter.  Thus in
 this respect some are lifted up to empires and dominations, that the
 unrestrained exercise of power might make a market of their spirit to
 the unbridled licence that is characteristic of a ruined soul. [1836]
 For, apart from the knowledge of God, what solid happiness can there
 be, since death must come?  Like a dream, happiness slips away before
 it is grasped.  Are you a king?  Yet you fear as much as you are
 feared; and however you may be surrounded with abundant followers, yet
 you are alone in the presence of danger.  Are you rich?  But fortune is
 ill trusted; and with a large travelling equipage the brief journey of
 life is not furnished, but burdened.  Do you boast of the fasces and
 the magisterial robes?  It is a vain mistake of man, and an empty
 worship of dignity, to glitter in purple and to be sordid in mind.  Are
 you elevated by nobility of birth? do you praise your parents?  Yet we
 are all born with one lot; it is only by virtue that we are
 distinguished.  We therefore, who are estimated by our character and
 our modesty, reasonably abstain from evil pleasures, and from your
 pomps and exhibitions, the origin of which in connection with sacred
 things we know, and condemn their mischievous enticements.  For in the
 chariot games who does not shudder at the madness of the people
 brawling among themselves? or at the teaching of murder in the
 gladiatorial games?  In the scenic games also the madness is not less,
 but the debauchery is more prolonged:  for now a mimic either expounds
 or shows forth adulteries; now nerveless player, while he feigns lust,
 suggests it; the same actor disgraces your gods by attributing to them
 adulteries, sighs, hatreds; the same provokes your tears with pretended
 sufferings, with vain gestures and expressions.  Thus you demand
 murder, in fact, while you weep at it in fiction.

 [1834] "Arridens," but otherwise "arripiens," scil. "snatching at,"
 suggesting possibly the idea of the martyrs chiding the delays of the
 executioners, or provoking the rush of the wild beasts.

 [1835] Otherwise, "unhoped-for."  [This chapter has been supposed to
 indicate that the work was written in a time of persecution.  Faint
 tokens of the same have been imagined also, in capp. 29 and 33, supra.]

 [1836] This passage is peculiar; the original is, "Ut ingenium eorum
 perditæ mentis licentiæ potestatis liberæ nundinentur," with various
 modifications of reading.

 Chapter XXXVIII.--Argument:  Christians Abstain from Things Connected
 with Idol Sacrifices, Lest Any One Should Think Either that They Yield
 to Demons, or that They are Ashamed of Their Religion.  They Do Not
 Indeed Despise All the Colour and Scent of Flowers, for They are
 Accustomed to Use Them Scattered About Loosely and Negligently, as Well
 as to Entwine Their Necks with Garlands; But to Crown the Head of a
 Corpse They Think Superfluous and Useless.  Moreover, with the Same
 Tranquillity with Which They Live They Bury Their Dead, Waiting with a
 Very Certain Hope the Crown of Eternal Felicity.  Therefore Their
 Religion, Rejecting All the Superstitions of the Gentiles, Should Be
 Adopted as True by All Men.

 "But that we despise the leavings of sacrifices, and the cups out of
 which libations have been poured, is not a confession of fear, but an
 assertion of our true liberty.  For although nothing which comes into
 existence as an inviolable gift of God is corrupted by any agency, yet
 we abstain, lest any should think either that we are submitting to
 demons, to whom libation has been made, or that we are ashamed of our
 religion.  But who is he who doubts of our indulging ourselves in
 spring flowers, when we gather both the rose of spring and the lily,
 and whatever else is of agreeable colour and odour among the flowers?
 For these we both use scattered loose and free, and we twine our necks
 with them in garlands.  Pardon us, forsooth, that we do not crown our
 heads; we are accustomed to receive the scent of a sweet flower in our
 nostrils, not to inhale it with the back of our head or with our hair.
 Nor do we crown the dead.  And in this respect I the more wonder at
 you, in the way in which you apply to a lifeless person, or to one who
 does not feel, a torch; or a garland [1837] to one who does not smell
 it, when either as blessed he does not want, or, being miserable, he
 has no pleasure in, flowers.  Still we adorn our obsequies with the
 same tranquillity with which we live; and we do not bind to us a
 withering garland, but we wear one living with eternal flowers from
 God, since we, being both moderate and secure in the liberality of our
 God, are animated to the hope of future felicity by the confidence of
 His present majesty.  Thus we both rise again in blessedness, and are
 already living in contemplation of the future.  Then let Socrates the
 Athenian buffoon see to it, confessing that he knew nothing, although
 boastful in the testimony of a most deceitful demon; let Arcesilaus
 also, and Carneades, and Pyrrho, and all the multitude of the Academic
 philosophers, deliberate; let Simonides also for ever put off the
 decision of his opinion.  We despise the bent brows of the
 philosophers, whom we know to be corrupters, and adulterers, and
 tyrants, and ever eloquent against their own vices.  We who [1838] bear
 wisdom not in our dress, but in our mind, we do not speak great things,
 but we live them; we boast that we have attained what they have sought
 for with the utmost eagerness, and have not been able to find.  Why are
 we ungrateful? why do we grudge if the truth of divinity has ripened in
 the age of our time?  Let us enjoy our benefits, and let us in
 rectitude moderate our judgments; let superstition be restrained; let
 impiety be expiated; let true religion be preserved.

 [1837] The probable reading here is, "You apply to a lifeless person,
 either if he has feeling, a torch; or, if he feels not, a garland."

 [1838] "We who do not," etc., is a conjectural reading, omitting the
 subsequent "we."

 Chapter XXXIX.--Argument:  When Octavius Had Finished This Address,
 Minucius and Cæcilius Sate for Some Time in Attentive and Silent
 Wonder.  And Minucius Indeed Kept Silence in Admiration of Octavius,
 Silently Revolving What He Had Heard.

 When Octavius had brought his speech to a close, for some time we were
 struck into silence, and held our countenances fixed in attention and
 as for me, I was lost in the greatness of my admiration, that he had so
 adorned those things which it is easier to feel than to say, both by
 arguments and by examples, and by authorities derived from reading; and
 that he had repelled the malevolent objectors with the very weapons of
 the philosophers with which they are armed, and had moreover shown the
 truth not only as easy, but also as agreeable.

 Chapter XL.--Argument:  Then Cæcilius Exclaims that He is Vanquished by
 Octavius; And That, Being Now Conqueror Over Error, He Professes the
 Christian Religion.  He Postpones, However, Till the Morrow His
 Training in the Fuller Belief of Its Mysteries.

 While, therefore, I was silently turning over these things in my own
 mind, Cæcilius broke forth:  "I congratulate as well my Octavius as
 myself, as much as possible on that tranquillity in which we live, and
 I do not wait for the decision.  Even thus we have conquered:  not
 unjustly do I assume to myself the victory.  For even as he is my
 conqueror, so I am triumphant over error.  Therefore, in what belongs
 to the substance of the question, I both confess concerning providence,
 and I yield to God; [1839] and I agree concerning the sincerity of the
 way of life which is now mine.  Yet even still some things remain in my
 mind, not as resisting the truth, but as necessary to a perfect
 training [1840] of which on the morrow, as the sun is already sloping
 to his setting, we shall inquire at length in a more fitting and ready
 manner."

 [1839] Otherwise read, "and I believe concerning God."

 [1840] [i.e., he will become a catechumen on the morrow.]

 Chapter XLI.--Argument:  Finally, All are Pleased, and Joyfully
 Depart:  Cæcilius, that He Had Believed; Octavius, that He Had
 Conquered; And Minucius, that the Former Had Believed, and the Latter
 Had Conquered.

 "But for myself," said I, "I rejoice more fully on behalf of all of us;
 because also Octavius has conquered for me, in that the very great
 invidiousness of judging is taken away from me.  Nor can I acknowledge
 by my praises the merit of his words:  the testimony both of man, and
 of one man only, is weak.  He has an illustrious reward from God,
 inspired by whom he has pleaded, and aided by whom he has gained the
 victory."

 After these things we departed, glad and cheerful:  Cæcilius, to
 rejoice that he had believed; Octavius, that he had succeeded; and I,
 that the one had believed, and the other had conquered.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Editions, p. 171.)

 For an interesting account of the bibliographical history of this work,
 see Dupin.  It passed for the Eight Book of Arnobius until a.d. 1560,
 and was first printed in its true character at Heidelberg in that year,
 with a learned preface by Balduinus, who restored it to its true
 author.

 II.

 (The neighing of horses, note 1, p. 183.)

 It strikes me as singular that the Edinburgh edition, which gives a
 note to each of the instances that follow, should have left me to
 supply this reference to the case of Darius Hystaspes.  The story is
 told, as will be remembered by all who have ever read it, by Herodotus,
 and is certainly one of the most extraordinary in history, when one
 reflects that a horse elected a great monarch, and one whose life not a
 little affected the fortunes of mankind.  A knavish groom was indeed
 the engineer of this election, as often, in such events, the secret
 springs of history are hidden; but, if the story is not wholly a fable,
 the coincidence of thunder in the heavens is most noteworthy.  It
 seemed to signify the overruling of Providence, and the power of God to
 turn the folly, not less than the wrath, of men, to God's praise.  See
 Herod., book iii. cap. lxxxvi.

 III.

 (From nothing, p. 194.)

 From this chapter, if not from others, it had been rashly affirmed that
 our author imagined that the soul perishes with the body, and is to be
 renewed out of nothing.  The argument is wholly ad hominem, and asserts
 nothing from the author's own point of view, as I understand it.  He
 gives what is "sufficient for his argument," and professes nothing
 more.  He was not a clergyman, nor is his work a sermon to the
 faithful.  He defies any one to deny, that, if God could form man out
 of nothing, He can make him anew out of nothing.  The residue of the
 argument is a brilliant assertion of the imperishability of matter, in
 terms which might satisfy modern science; and the implication is, that
 the soul no more perishes to the sight of God than does the body
 vaporized and reserved in the custody of the elements.

  Commodianus

 Commodianus.

 [Translated by the Rev. Robert Ernest Wallis, Ph.D.]

 Introductory Note

 to the

 Instructions of Commodianus.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 240.]  Our author seems to have been a North-African bishop, of
 whom little is known save what we learn from his own writings.  He has
 been supposed to incline to some ideas of Praxeas, and also to the
 Millenarians, but perhaps on insufficient grounds.  His Millenarianism
 reflects the views of a very primitive age, and that without the
 corrupt Chiliasm of a later period, which brought about a practical
 repudiation of the whole system. [1841] Of his writings, two poems
 only remain, and of these the second, a very recent discovery, has no
 place in the Edinburgh series.  I greatly regret that it cannot be
 included in ours.

 As a poetical work the following prose version probably does it no
 injustice.  His versification is pronounced very crabbed, and his
 diction is the wretched patois of North Africa.  But the piety and
 earnestness of a practical Christian seem everywhere conspicuous in
 this fragment of antiquity.

 [1841] He gives us a painful picture of the decline of godliness in his
 days; of which see Wordsworth's Hippolytus, p. 140.

 The Instructions of Commodianus

 in favour of

 Christian Discipline,

 Against the Gods of the Heathens.

 (Expressed in Acrostics.)

 I.--Preface.

 My preface sets forth the way to the wanderer and a good visitation
 when the goal of life shall have come, that he may become eternal--a
 thing which ignorant hearts disbelieve.  I in like manner have wandered
 for a long time, by giving attendance upon heathen fanes, my parents
 themselves being ignorant. [1842] Thence at length I withdrew myself
 by reading concerning the law.  I bear witness to the Lord; I grieve
 alas, the crowd of citizens! ignorant of what it loses in going to seek
 vain gods.  Thoroughly taught by these things, I instruct the ignorant
 in the truth.

 [1842] [Sufficient evidence of his heathen origin.]

 II.--God's Indignation.

 In the law, the Lord of heaven, and earth, and sea has commanded,
 saying, Worship not vain gods made by your own hands out of wood or
 gold, lest my wrath destroy you for such things.  The people before
 Moses, unskilled, abiding without law, and ignorant of God, prayed to
 gods that perished, after the likenesses of which they fashioned vain
 idols.  The Lord having brought the Jews out of the land of Egypt,
 subsequently imposed on them a law; and the Omnipotent enjoined these
 things, that they should serve Him alone, and not those idols.
 Moreover, in that law is taught concerning the resurrection, and the
 hope of living in happiness again in the world, if vain idols be
 forsaken and not worshipped.

 III.--The Worship of Demons.

 When Almighty God, to beautify the nature of the world, willed that
 that earth should be visited by angels, when they were sent down they
 despised His laws.  Such was the beauty of women, that it turned them
 aside; so that, being contaminated, they could not return to heaven.
 Rebels from God, they uttered words against Him.  Then the Highest
 uttered His judgment against them; and from their seed giants are said
 to have been born.  By them arts were made known in the earth, and they
 taught the dyeing of wool, and everything which is done; and to them,
 when they died, men erected images.  But the Almighty, because they
 were of an evil seed, did not approve that, when dead, they should be
 brought back from death.  Whence wandering they now subvert many
 bodies, and it is such as these especially that ye this day worship and
 pray to as gods.

 IV.--Saturn.

 And Saturn the old, if he is a god, how does he grow old?  Or if he was
 a god, why was he driven by his terrors to devour his children?  But
 because he was not a god, he consumed the bowels of his sons in a
 monstrous madness.  He was a king upon earth, born in the mount
 Olympus; and he was not divine, but called himself a god.  He fell into
 weakness of mind, and swallowed a stone for his son.  Thus he became a
 god; of late he is called Jupiter.

 V.--Jupiter.

 This Jupiter was born to Saturn in the island of Breta; and when he was
 grown up, he deprived his father of the kingdom.  He then deluded the
 wives and sisters of the nobles.  Moreover, Pyracmon, a smith, had made
 for him a sceptre.  In the beginning God made the heaven, the earth,
 and the sea.  But that frightful creature, born in the midst of time,
 went forth as a youth from a cave, and was nourished by stealth.
 Behold, that God is the author of all things, not that Jupiter.

 VI.--Of the Same Jupiter's Thunderbolt.

 Ye say, O fools, Jupiter thunders.  It is he that hurls thunderbolts;
 and if it was childishness that thought thus, why for two hundred years
 have ye been babies? [1843] And will ye still be so always?  Infancy
 is passed into maturity, old age does not enjoy trifles, the age of
 boyhood has departed; let the mind of youth in like manner depart.
 Your thoughts ought to belong to the character of men.  Thou art then a
 fool, to believe that it is Jupiter that thunders.  He, born on the
 earth, is nourished with goats' milk.  Therefore if Saturn had devoured
 him, who was it in those times that sent rain when he was dead?
 Especially, if a god may be thought to be born of a mortal father,
 Saturn grew old on the earth, and on the earth he died.  There was none
 that predicted his previous birth.  Or if he thunders, the law would
 have been given by him.  The stories that the poets feign seduce you.
 He, however, reigned in Crete, and there died.  He who to you is the
 Almighty became Alcmena's lover; he himself would in like manner be in
 love with living men now if he were alive.  Ye pray to unclean gods,
 and ye call them heavenly who are born of mortal seed from those
 giants.  Ye hear and ye read that he was born in the earth:  whence was
 it that that corrupter so well deserved to ascend into heaven?  And the
 Cyclopes are said to have forged him a thunderbolt; for though he was
 immortal, he received arms from mortals.  Ye have conveyed to heaven by
 your authority one guilty of so many crimes, and, moreover, a parricide
 of his own relations.

 [1843] [An index of time.  He writes, therefore, in the third century.]

 VII.--Of the Septizonium and the Stars.

 Your want of intelligence deceives you concerning the circle of the
 zone, and perchance from that you find out that you must pray to
 Jupiter.  Saturn is told of there, but it is as a star, for he was
 driven forth by Jupiter, or let Jupiter be believed to be in the star.
 He who controlled the constellations of the pole, and the sower of the
 soil; he who made war with the Trojans, he loved the beautiful Venus.
 Or among the stars themselves Mars was caught with her by married
 jealousy:  he is called the youthful god.  Oh excessively foolish, to
 think that those who are born of Maia rule from the stars, or that they
 rule the entire nature of the world!  Subjected to wounds, and
 themselves living under the dominion of the fates, obscene,
 inquisitive, warriors of an impious life; and they made sons, equally
 mortal with themselves, and were all terrible, foolish, strong, in the
 sevenfold girdle.  If ye worship the stars, worship also the twelve
 signs of the zodiac, as well the ram, the bull, the twins, as the
 fierce lion; and finally, they go on into fishes,--cook them and you
 will prove them.  A law without law is your refuge:  what wishes to be,
 will prevail.  A woman desires to be wanton; she seeks to live without
 restraint.  Ye yourselves will be what ye wish for, and pray to as gods
 and goddesses.  Thus I worshipped while I went astray, and now I
 condemn it.

 VIII.--Of the Sun and Moon.

 Concerning the Sun and Moon ye are in error, although they are in our
 immediate presence; in that ye, as I formerly did, think that you must
 pray to them.  They, indeed, are among the stars; but they do not run
 of their own accord.  The Omnipotent, when He established all things at
 first, placed them there with the stars, on the fourth day.  And,
 indeed, He commanded in the law that none should worship them.  Ye
 worship so many gods who promise nothing concerning life, whose law is
 not on the earth, nor are they themselves foretold.  But a few priests
 seduce you, who say that any deity destined to die can be of service.
 Draw near now, read, and learn the truth.

 IX.--Mercury.

 Let your Mercury be depicted with a Saraballum, and with wings on his
 helmet or his cap, and in other respects naked.  I see a marvellous
 thing, a god flying with a little satchel.  Run, poor creatures, with
 your lap spread open when he flies, that he may empty his satchel:  do
 ye from thence be prepared.  Look on the painted one, since he will
 thus cast you money from on high:  then dance ye securely.  Vain man,
 art thou not mad, to worship painted gods in heaven?  If thou knowest
 not how to live, continue to dwell with the beasts.

 X.--Neptune.

 Ye make Neptune a god descended from Saturn; and he wields a trident
 that he may spear the fishes.  It is plain by his being thus provided
 that he is a sea-god.  Did not he himself with Apollo raise up walls
 for the Trojans?  How did that poor stone-mason become a god?  Did not
 he beget the cyclops-monster?  And was he himself when dead unable to
 live again, though his structure admitted of this? [1844] Thus
 begotten, he begot who was already once dead.

 [1844] We have changed marhus et into mortuus, and de suo into denuo.

 XI.--Apollo the Soothsaying and False.

 Ye make Apollo a player on the cithara, and divine.  Born at first of
 Maia, in the isle of Delos, subsequently, for offered wages, a builder,
 obeying the king Laomedon, he reared the walls of the Trojans.  And he
 established himself, and ye are seduced into thinking him a god, in
 whose bones the love of Cassandra burned, whom the virgin craftily
 sported with, and, though a divine being, he is deceived.  By his
 office of augur he was able to know the double-hearted one.  Moreover
 rejected, he, though divine, departed thence.  Him the virgin burnt up
 with her beauty, whom he ought to have burnt up; while she ought first
 of all to have loved the god who thus lustfully began to love Daphne,
 and still follows her up, wishing to violate the maid.  The fool loves
 in vain.  Nor can he obtain her by running.  Surely, if he were a god,
 he would come up with her through the air.  She first came under the
 roof, and the divine being remained outside.  The race of men deceive
 you, for they were of a sad way of life.  Moreover, he is said to have
 fed the cattle of Admetus.  While in imposed sports he threw the quoit
 into the air, he could not restrain it as it fell, and it killed his
 friend.  That was the last day of his companion Hyacinthus.  Had he
 been divine, he would have foreknown the death of his friend.

 XII.--Father Liber--Bacchus.

 Ye yourselves say that Father Liber was assuredly twice begotten.
 First of all he was born in India of Proserpine and Jupiter, and waging
 war against the Titans, when his blood was shed, he expired even as one
 of mortal men.  Again, restored from his death, in another womb Semele
 conceived him again of Jupiter, a second Maia, whose womb being
 divided, he is taken away near to birth from his dead mother, and as a
 nursling is given to be nourished to Nisus.  From this being twice born
 he is called Dionysus; and his religion is falsely observed in vanity;
 and they celebrate his orgies such that now they themselves seem to be
 either foolhardy or burlesquers of Mimnermomerus.  They conspire in
 evil; they practise beforehand with pretended heat, that they may
 deceive others into saying that a deity is present.  Hence you
 manifestly see men living a life like his, violently excited with the
 wine which he himself had pressed out; they have given him divine
 honour in the midst of their drunken excess.

 XIII.--The Unconquered One.

 The unconquered one was born from a rock, if he is regarded as a god.
 Now tell us, then, on the other hand, which is the first of these two.
 The rock has overcome the god:  then the creator of the rock has to be
 sought after.  Moreover, you still depict him also as a thief;
 although, if he were a god, he certainly did not live by theft.
 Assuredly he was of earth, and of a monstrous nature.  And he turned
 other people's oxen into his caves; just as did Cacus, that son of
 Vulcan.

 XIV.--Sylvanus.

 Whence, again, has Sylvanus appeared to be a god?  Perhaps it is
 agreeable so to call him from this, that the pipe sings sweetly because
 he bestows the wood; for, perhaps, it might not be so.  Thou hast
 bought a venal master, when thou shalt have bought from him.  Behold
 the wood fails!  What is due to him?  Art thou not ashamed, O fool, to
 adore such pictures?  Seek one God who will allow you to live after
 death.  Depart from such as have become dead in life.

 XV.--Hercules.

 Hercules, because he destroyed the monster of the Aventine Mount, who
 had been wont to steal the herds of Evander, is a god:  the rustic mind
 of men, untaught also, when they wished to return thanks instead of
 praise to the absent thunderer, senselessly vowed victims as to a god
 to be besought, they made milky altars as a memorial to themselves.
 Thence it arises that he is worshipped in the ancient manner.  But he
 is no god, although he was strong in arms.

 XVI.--Of the Gods and Goddesses.

 Ye say that they are gods who are plainly cruel, and ye say that
 genesis assigns the fates to you.  Now, then, say to whom first of all
 sacred rites are paid.  Between the ways on either side immature death
 is straying.  If the fates give the generations, why do you pray to the
 god?  Thou art vainly deceived who art seeking to beseech the manes,
 and thou namest them to be lords over thee who are fabricated.  Or,
 moreover, I know not what women you pray to as goddesses--Bellona and
 Nemesis the goddesses, together with the celestial Fury, the Virgins
 and Venus, for whom your wives are weak in the loins.  Besides, there
 are in the lanes other demons which are not as yet numbered, and are
 worn on the neck, so that they themselves cannot give to themselves an
 account.  Plagues ought rather to be exported to the ends of the earth.

 XVII.--Of Their Images.

 A few wicked and empty poets delude you; while they seek with
 difficulty to procure their living, they adorn falsehood to be for
 others under the guise of mystery.  Thence feigning to be smitten by
 some deity, they sing of his majesty, and weary themselves under his
 form.  Ye have often seen the Dindymarii, with what a din they enter
 upon luxuries while they seek to feign the furies, or when they strike
 their backs with the filthy axe, although with their teaching they keep
 what they heal by their blood.  Behold in what name they do not compel
 those who first of all unite themselves to them with a sound mind.  But
 that they may take away a gift, they seek such minds.  Thence see how
 all things are feigned.  They cast a shadow over a simple people, lest
 they should believe, while they perish, the thing once for all
 proceeded in vanity from antiquity, that a prophet who uttered false
 things might be believed; but their majesty has spoken nought.

 XVIII.--Of Ammydates and the Great God.

 We have already said many things of an abominable superstition, and yet
 we follow up the subject, lest we should be said to have passed
 anything over.  And the worshippers worshipped their Ammydates after
 their manner.  He was great to them when there was gold in the temple.
 They placed their heads under his power, as if he were present.  It
 came to the highest point that Cæsar took away the gold.  The deity
 failed, or fled, or passed away into fire.  The author of this
 wickedness is manifest who formed this same god, and falsely
 prophesying seduces so many and so great men, and only was silent about
 Him who was accustomed to be divine.  For voices broke forth, as if
 with a changed mind, as if the wooden god were speaking into his ear.
 Say now yourselves if they are not false deities?  From that prodigy
 how many has that prophet destroyed?  He forgot to prophesy who before
 was accustomed to prophesy; so those prodigies are feigned among those
 who are greedy of wine, whose damnable audacity feigns deities, for
 they were carried about, and such an image was dried up.  For both he
 himself is silent, and no one prophesies concerning him at all.  But ye
 wish to ruin yourselves.

 XIX.--Of the Vain Nemesiaci.

 Is it not ignominy, that a prudent man should be seduced and worship
 such a one, or say that a log is Diana?  You trust a man who in the
 morning is drunk, costive, and ready to perish, who by art speaks
 falsely what is seen by him.  While he lives strictly, he feeds on his
 own bowels.  A detestable one defiles all the citizens; and he has
 attached to himself--a similar gathering being made--those with whom he
 feigns the history, that he may adorn a god.  He is ignorant how to
 prophesy for himself; for others he dares it.  He places it on his
 shoulder when he pleases, and again he places it down.  Whirling round,
 he is turned by himself with the tree of the two-forked one, as if you
 would think that he was inspired with the deity of the wood.  Ye do not
 worship the gods whom they themselves falsely announce; ye worship the
 priests themselves, fearing them vainly.  But if thou art strong in
 heart, flee at once from the shrines of death.

 XX.--The Titans.

 Ye say that the Titans are to you Tutans.  Ye ask that these fierce
 ones should be silent under your roof, as so many Lares, shrines,
 images made like to a Titan.  For ye foolishly adore those who have
 died by an evil death, not reading their own law.  They themselves
 speak not, and ye dare to call them gods who are melted out of a brazen
 vessel; ye should rather melt them into little vessels for yourselves.

 XXI.--The Montesiani.

 Ye call the mountains also gods.  Let them rule in gold, darkened by
 evil, and aiding with an averted mind.  For if a pure spirit and a
 serene mind remained to you, thou thyself ought to examine for thyself
 concerning them.  Thou art become senseless as a man, if thou thinkest
 that these can save thee, whether they rule or whether they cease.  If
 thou seekest anything healthy, seek rather the righteousness of the
 law, that brings the help of salvation, and says that you are becoming
 eternal.  For what you shall follow in vanity rejoices you for a time.
 Thou art glad for a brief space, and afterwards bewailest in the
 depths.  Withdraw thyself from these, if thou wilt rise again with
 Christ.

 XXII.--The Dulness of the Age.

 Alas, I grieve, citizens, that ye are thus blinded by the world.  One
 runs to the lot; another gazes on the birds; another, having shed the
 blood of bleating animals, calls forth the manes, and credulously
 desires to hear vain responses.  When so many leaders and kings have
 taken counsel concerning life, what benefit has it been to them to have
 known even its portents?  Learn, I beg you, citizens, what is good;
 beware of idol-fanes.  Seek, indeed, all of you, in the law of the
 Omnipotent.  Thus it has pleased the Lord of lords Himself in the
 heavens, that demons should wander in the world for our discipline.
 And yet, on the other hand, He has sent out His mandates, that they who
 forsake their altars shall become inhabitants of heaven.  Whence I am
 not careful to argue this in a small treatise.  The law teaches; it
 calls on you in your midst.  Consider for yourselves.  Ye have entered
 upon two roads; decide upon the right one. [1845]

 [1845] [He defers to the Canon Law and notes the Duæ Viæ.]

 XXIII.--Of Those Who are Everywhere Ready.

 While thou obeyest the belly, thou sayest that thou art innocent; and,
 as if courteously, makest thyself everywhere ready.  Woe to thee,
 foolish man! thou thyself lookest around upon death.  Thou seekest in a
 barbarous fashion to live without law.  Thou thyself hymnest thyself
 also to play upon a word, who feignest thyself simple.  I live in
 simplicity with such a one.  Thou believest that thou livest, whilst
 thou desirest to fill thy belly.  To sit down disgracefully of no
 account in thy house, ready for feasting, and to run away from
 precepts.  Or because thou believest not that God will judge the dead,
 thou foolishly makest thyself ruler of heaven instead of Him.  Thou
 regardest thy belly as if thou canst provide for it.  Thou seemest at
 one time to be profane, at another to be holy.  Thou appearest as a
 suppliant of God, under the aspect of a tyrant.  Thou shalt feel in thy
 fates by whose law thou art aided.

 XXIV.--Of Those Who Live Between the Two.

 Thou who thinkest that, by living doubtfully between the two, thou art
 on thy guard, goest on thy way stript of law, broken down by luxury.
 Thou art looking forward vainly to so many things, why seekest thou
 unjust things?  And whatever thou hast done shall there remain to thee
 when dead.  Consider, thou foolish one, thou wast not, and lo, thou art
 seen.  Thou knowest not whence thou hast proceeded, nor whence thou art
 nourished.  Thou avoidest the excellent and benignant God of thy life,
 and thy Governor, who would rather wish thee to live.  Thou turnest
 thyself to thyself, and givest thy back to God.  Thou drownest thyself
 in darkness, whilst thou thinkest thou art abiding in light.  Why
 runnest thou in the synagogue to the Pharisees, that He may become
 merciful to thee, whom thou of thy own accord deniest?  Thence thou
 goest abroad again; thou seekest healthful things.  Thou wishest to
 live between both ways, but thence thou shalt perish.  And, moreover,
 thou sayest, Who is He who has redeemed from death, that we may believe
 in Him, since there punishments are awarded?  Ah! not thus, O malignant
 man, shall it be as thou thinkest.  For to him who has lived well there
 is advantage after death.  Thou, however, when one day thou diest,
 shalt be taken away in an evil place.  But they who believe in Christ
 shall be led into a good place, and those to whom that delight is given
 are caressed; but to you who are of a double mind, against you is
 punishment without the body.  The course of the tormentor stirs you up
 to cry out against your brother.

 XXV.--They Who Fear and Will Not Believe.

 How long, O foolish man, wilt thou not acknowledge Christ?  Thou
 avoidest the fertile field, and castest thy seeds on the sterile one.
 Thou seekest to abide in the wood where the thief is delaying.  Thou
 sayest, I also am of God; and thou wanderest out of doors.  Now at
 length, after so many invitations, enter within the palace.  Now is the
 harvest ripe, and the time so many times prepared.  Lo, now reap!
 What! dost thou not repent?  Thence now, if thou hast not, gather the
 seasonable wines.  The time of believing to life is present in the time
 of death.  The first law of God is the foundation of the subsequent
 law.  Thee, indeed, it assigned to believe in the second law.  Nor are
 threats from Himself, but from it, powerful over thee.  Now astounded,
 swear that thou wilt believe in Christ; for the Old Testament proclaims
 concerning Him.  For it is needful only to believe in Him who was dead,
 to be able to rise again to live for all time.  Therefore, if thou art
 one who disbelievest that these things shall be, at length he shall be
 overcome in his guilt in the second death.  I will declare things to
 come in few words in this little treatise.  In it can be known when
 hope must be preferred.  Still I exhort you as quickly as possible to
 believe in Christ.

 XXVI.--To Those Who Resist the Law of Christ the Living God.

 Thou rejectest, unhappy one, the advantage of heavenly discipline, and
 rushest into death while wishing to stray without a bridle.  Luxury and
 the shortlived joys of the world are ruining thee, whence thou shalt be
 tormented in hell for all time.  They are vain joys with which thou art
 foolishly delighted.  Do not these make thee to be a man dead?  Cannot
 thirty years at length make thee a wise man?  Ignorant how thou hast
 first strayed, look upon ancient time, thou thinkest now to enjoy here
 a joyous life in the midst of wrongs.  These are the ruins of thy
 friends, wars, or wicked frauds, thefts with bloodshed:  the body is
 vexed with sores, and groaning and wailing is indulged; whether a
 slight disease invade thee, or thou art held down by long sickness, or
 thou art bereaved of thy children, or thou mournest over a lost wife.
 All is a wilderness:  alas, dignities are hurried down from their
 height by vices and poverty; doubly so, assuredly, if thou languishest
 long.  And callest thou it life when this life of glass is mortal?
 Consider now at length that this time is of no avail, but in the future
 you have hope without the craft of living.  Certainly the little
 children which have been snatched away desired to live.  Moreover, the
 young men who have been deprived of life, perchance were preparing to
 grow old, and they themselves were making ready to enjoy joyful days;
 and yet we unwillingly lay aside all things in the world.  I have
 delayed with a perverse mind, and I have thought that the life of this
 world was a true one; and I judged that death would come in like manner
 as ye did--that when once life had departed, the soul also was dead and
 perished.  These things, however, are not so; but the Founder and
 Author of the world has certainly required the brother slain by a
 brother.  Impious man, say, said He, where is thy brother? and he
 denied.  For the blood of thy brother has cried aloud to Me to heaven.
 Thou art tormented, I see, when thou thoughtest to feel nothing; but he
 lives and occupies the place on the right hand.  He enjoys delights
 which thou, O wicked one, hast lost; and when thou hast called back the
 world, he also has gone before, and will be immortal:  for thou shalt
 wail in hell.  Certainly God lives, who makes the dead to live, that He
 may give worthy rewards to the innocent and to the good; but to the
 fierce and impious, cruel hell.  Commence, O thou who art led away, to
 perceive the judgments of God.

 XXVII.--O Fool, Thou Dost Not Die to God.

 O fool, thou dost not absolutely die; nor, when dead, dost thou escape
 the lofty One.  Although thou shouldst arrange that when dead thou
 perceivest nothing, thou shalt foolishly be overcome.  God the Creator
 of the world liveth, whose laws cry out that the dead are in
 existence.  But thou, whilst recklessly thou seekest to live without
 God, judgest that in death is extinction, and thinkest that it is
 absolute.  God has not ordered it as thou thinkest, that the dead are
 forgetful of what they have previously done.  Now has the governor made
 for us receptacles of death, and after our ashes we shall behold them.
 Thou art stripped, O foolish one, who thinkest that by death thou art
 not, and hast made thy Ruler and Lord to be able to do nothing.  But
 death is not a mere vacuity, if thou reconsiderest in thine heart.
 Thou mayest know that He is to be desired, for late thou shalt perceive
 Him.  Thou wast the ruler of the flesh; certainly flesh ruled not
 thee.  Freed from it, the former is buried; thou art here.  Rightly is
 mortal man separated from the flesh.  Therefore mortal eyes will not be
 able to be equalled (to divine things).  Thus our depth keeps us from
 the secret of God.  Give thou now, whilst in weakness thou art dying,
 the honour to God, and believe that Christ will bring thee back living
 from the dead.  Thou oughtest to give praises in the church to the
 omnipotent One.

 XXVIII.--The Righteous Rise Again.

 Righteousness and goodness, peace and true patience, and care
 concerning one's deeds, make to live after death.  But a crafty mind,
 mischievous, perfidious, evil, destroys itself by degrees, and delays
 in a cruel death.  O wicked man, hear now what thou gainest by thy evil
 deeds.  Look on the judges of earth, who now in the body torture with
 terrible punishments; either chastisements are prepared for the
 deserving by the sword, or to weep in a long imprisonment.  Dost thou,
 last of all, hope to laugh at the God of heaven and the Ruler of the
 sky, by whom all things were made?  Thou ragest, thou art mad, and now
 thou takest away the name of God, from whom, moreover, thou shalt not
 escape; and He will award punishments according to your deeds.  Now I
 would have you be cautious that thou come not to the burning of fire.
 Give thyself up at once to Christ, that goodness may attend thee.

 XXIX.--To the Wicked and Unbelieving Rich Man.

 Thou wilt, O rich man, by insatiably looking too much to all thy
 wealth, squander those things to which thou art still seeking to
 cling.  Thou sayest, I do not hope when dead to live after such things
 as these.  O ungrateful to the great God, who thus judgest thyself to
 be a god; to Him who, when thou knewest nothing of it, brought thee
 forth, and then nourished thee.  He governs thy meadows; He, thy
 vineyards; He, thy herd of cattle; and He, whatever thou possessest.
 Nor dost thou give heed to these things; or thou, perchance, rulest all
 things.  He who made the sky, and the earth, and the salt seas, decreed
 to give us back again ourselves in a golden age.  And only if thou
 believest, thou livest in the secret of God.  Learn God, O foolish man,
 who wishes thee to be immortal, that thou mayest give Him eternal
 thanks in thy struggle.  His own law teaches thee; but since thou
 seekest to wander, thou disbelievest all things, and thence thou shalt
 go into hell.  By and by thou givest up thy life; thou shalt be taken
 where it grieveth thee to be:  there the spiritual punishment, which is
 eternal, is undergone; there are always wailings:  nor dost thou
 absolutely die therein--there at length too late proclaiming the
 omnipotent God.

 XXX.--Rich Men, Be Humble.

 Learn, O thou who art about to die, to show thyself good to all.  Why,
 in the midst of the people, makest thou thyself to be another than thou
 art?  Thou goest where thou knowest not, and ignorantly thence thou
 departest.  Thou managest wickedly with thy very body; thou thirstest
 always after riches.  Thou exaltest thyself too much on high; and thou
 bearest pride, and dost not willingly look on the poor.  Now ye do not
 even feed your parents themselves when placed under you.  Ah, wretched
 men, let ordinary men flee far from you.  He lived, and I have
 destroyed him; the poor man cries out heureka.  By and by thou shalt be
 driven with the furies of Charybdis, when thou thyself dost perish.
 Thus ye rich men are undisciplined, ye give a law to those, ye
 yourselves not being prepared.  Strip thyself, O rich man turned away
 from God, of such evils, if assuredly, perchance, what thou hast seen
 done may aid thee.  Be ye the attendant of God while ye have time.
 Even as the elm loves the vine, so love ye people of no account.
 Observe now, O barren one, the law which is terrible to the evil, and
 equally benignant to the good; be humble in prosperity.  Take away, O
 rich men, hearts of fraud, and take up hearts of peace.  And look upon
 your evil-doing.  Do ye do good?  I am here.

 XXXI.--To Judges.

 Consider the sayings of Solomon, all ye judges; in what way, with one
 word of his, he disparages you.  How gifts and presents corrupt the
 judges, thence, thence follows the law.  Ye always love givers; and
 when there shall be a cause, the unjust cause carries off the victory.
 Thus I am innocent; nor do I, a man of no account, accuse you, because
 Solomon openly raises the blasphemy.  But your god is your belly, and
 rewards are your laws.  Paul the apostle suggests this, I am not
 deceitful.

 XXXII.--To Self-Pleasers.

 If place or time is favourable, or the person has advanced, let there
 be a new judge.  Why now art thou lifted up thence?  Untaught, thou
 blasphemest Him of whose liberality thou livest.  In such weakness thou
 dost not ever regard Him.  Throughout advances and profits thou
 greedily presumest on fortune.  There is no law to thee, nor dost thou
 discern thyself in prosperity.  Although they may be counted of gold,
 let the strains of the pipe always be raving.  If thou hast not adored
 the crucifixion of the Lord, thou hast perished. [1846] Both place
 and occasion and person are now given to thee, if, however, thou
 believest; but if not, thou shalt fear before Him.  Bring thyself into
 obedience to Christ, and place thy neck under Him.  To Him remains the
 honour and all the confidence of things.  When the time flatters thee,
 be more cautious.  Not foreseeing, as it behoves thee, the final awards
 of fate, thou art not able ever to live again without Christ.

 [1846] [This is not Patripassianism.  Nor does the "one God" of the
 next chapter involve this heresy.]

 XXXIII.--To the Gentiles.

 O people, ferocious, without a shepherd, now at length wander not.  For
 I also who admonish you was the same, ignorant, wandering.  Now,
 therefore, take the likeness of your Lord.  Raise upward your wild and
 roughened hearts.  Enter stedfastly into the fold of your sylvan
 Shepherd, remaining safe from robbers under the royal roof.  In the
 wood are wolves; therefore take refuge in the cave.  Thou warrest, thou
 art mad; nor dost thou behold where thou abidest.  Believe in the one
 God, that when dead thou mayest live, and mayest rise in His kingdom,
 when there shall be the resurrection to the just.

 XXXIV.--Moreover, to Ignorant Gentiles.

 The unsubdued neck refuses to bear the yoke of labour.  Then it
 delights to be satisfied with herbs in the rich plains.  And still
 unwillingly is subdued the useful mare, and it is made to be less
 fierce when it is first brought into subjection.  O people, O man, thou
 brother, do not be a brutal flock.  Pluck thyself forth at length, and
 thyself withdraw thyself.  Assuredly thou art not cattle, thou art not
 a beast, but thou art born a man.  Do thou thyself wisely subdue
 thyself, and enter under arms.  Thou who followest idols art nothing
 but the vanity of the age.  Your trifling hearts destroy you when
 almost set free.  There gold, garments, silver is brought to the
 elbows; there war is made; there love is sung of instead of psalms.
 Dost thou think it to be life, when thou playest or lookest forward to
 such things as these?  Thou choosest, O ignorant one, things that are
 extinct; thou seekest golden things.  Thence thou shalt not escape the
 plague, although thyself art divine.  Thou seekest not that grace which
 God sent to be read of in the earth, but thus as a beast thou
 wanderest.  The golden age before spoken of shall come to thee if thou
 believest, and again thou shalt begin to live always an immortal life.
 That also is permitted to know what thou wast before.  Give thyself as
 a subject to God, who governs all things. [1847]

 [1847] [Here ends the apologetic portion.]

 XXXV.--Of the Tree of Life and Death.

 Adam was the first who fell, and that he might shun the precepts of
 God, Belial was his tempter by the lust of the palm tree.  And he
 conferred on us also what he did, whether of good or of evil, as being
 the chief of all that was born from him; and thence we die by his
 means, as he himself, receding from the divine, became an outcast from
 the Word.  We shall be immortal when six thousand years are
 accomplished.  The tree of the apple being tasted, death has entered
 into the world.  By this tree of death we are born to the life to
 come.  On the tree depends the life that bears fruits--precepts.  Now,
 therefore, pluck [1848] believingly the fruits of life.  A law was
 given from the tree to be feared by the primitive man, whence comes
 death by the neglect of the law of the beginning.  Now stretch forth
 your hand, and take of the tree of life.  The excellent law of the Lord
 which follows has issued from the tree.  The first law is lost; man
 eats whence he can, who adores the forbidden gods, the evil joys of
 life.  Reject this partaking; it will suffice you to know what it
 should be.  If you wish to live, surrender yourselves to the second
 law.  Avoid the worship of temples, the oracles of demons; turn
 yourselves to Christ, and ye shall be associates with God.  Holy is
 God's law, which teaches the dead to live.  God alone has commanded us
 to offer to Him the hymn of praise.  All of you shun absolutely the law
 of the devil.

 [1848] Scil. "capite," conjectural for "cavete."

 XXXVI.--Of the Foolishness of the Cross.

 I have spoken of the twofold sign whence death proceeded, and again I
 have said that thence life frequently proceeds; but the cross has
 become foolishness to an adulterous people.  The awful King of eternity
 shadows forth these things by the cross, that they may now believe on
 Him. [1849] O fools, that live in death!  Cain slew his younger
 brother by the invention of wickedness.  Thence the sons of Enoch
 [1850] are said to be the race of Cain.  Then the evil people increased
 in the world, which never transfers souls to God.  To believe the cross
 came to be a dread, and they say that they live righteously.  The first
 law was in the tree; and thence, too, the second.  And thence the
 second law first of all overcame the terrible law with peace. [1851]
 Lifted up, they have rushed into vain prevarications.  They are
 unwilling to acknowledge the Lord pierced with nails; but when His
 judgment shall come, they will then discern Him.  But the race of Abel
 already believes on a merciful Christ.

 [1849] [Or, "shadows forth Himself."]

 [1850] "Eusebius tells of another Enoch, who was not translated without
 seeing death."--Rig.  [See Gen. iv. 17, 18.  S.]

 [1851] Et inde secunda terribilem legem primo cum pace
 revincit.--Davis, conjecturally.

 XXXVII.--The Fanatics Who Judaize.

 What! art thou half a Jew? wilt thou be half profane?  Whence thou
 shalt not when dead escape the judgment of Christ.  Thou thyself
 blindly wanderest, and foolishly goest in among the blind.  And thus
 the blind leadeth the blind into the ditch.  Thou goest whither thou
 knowest not, and thence ignorantly withdrawest.  Let them who are
 learning go to the learned, and let the learned depart.  But thou goest
 to those from whom thou canst learn nothing.  Thou goest forth before
 the doors, and thence also thou goest to the idols.  Ask first of all
 what is commanded in the law.  Let them tell thee if it be commanded to
 adore the gods; for they are ignored in respect of that which they are
 especially able to do.  But because they are guilty of that very crime,
 they relate nothing concerning the commandments of God save what is
 marvellous.  Then, however, they blindly lead you with them into the
 ditch.  There are deaths too well known by them to relate, or because
 the heaping up of the plough closes up the field.  The Almighty would
 not have them understand their King.  Why such a wickedness?  He
 Himself took refuge from those bloody men. He gave Himself to us by a
 superadded law.  Thence now they lie concealed with us, deserted by
 their King.  But if you think that in them there is hope, you are
 altogether in error if you worship God and heathen temples.

 XXXVIII.--To the Jews.

 Evil always, and recalcitrant, with a stiff neck ye wish not that ye
 should be overcome; thus ye will be heirs.  Isaiah said that ye were of
 hardened heart.  Ye look upon the law which Moses in wrath dashed to
 pieces; and the same Lord gave to him a second law.  In that he placed
 his hope; but ye, half healed, reject it, and therefore ye shall not be
 worthy of the kingdom of heaven.

 XXXIX.--Also to the Jews.

 Look upon Leah, that was a type of the synagogue, which Jacob received
 as a sign, with eyes so weak; and yet he served again for the younger
 one beloved:  a true mystery, and a type of our Church.  Consider what
 was abundantly said of Rebecca from heaven; whence, imitating the
 alien, ye may believe in Christ.  Thence come to Tamar and the
 offspring of twins.  Look to Cain, the first tiller of the earth, and
 Abel the shepherd, who was an unspotted offerer in the ruin of his
 brother, and was slain by his brother.  Thus therefore perceive, that
 the younger are approved by Christ.

 XL.--Again to the Same.

 There is not an unbelieving people such as yours.  O evil men! in so
 many places, and so often rebuked by the law of those who cry aloud.
 And the lofty One despises your Sabbaths, and altogether rejects your
 universal monthly feasts according to law, that ye should not make to
 Him the commanded sacrifices; who told you to throw a stone for your
 offence.  If any should not believe that He had perished by an unjust
 death, and that those who were beloved were saved by other laws, thence
 that life was suspended on the tree, and believe not on Him.  God
 Himself is the life; He Himself was suspended for us.  But ye with
 indurated heart insult Him.

 XLI.--Of the Time of Antichrist. [1852]

 Isaiah said:  This is the man who moveth the world and so many kings,
 and under whom the land shall become desert.  Hear ye how the prophet
 foretold concerning him.  I have said nothing elaborately, but
 negligently.  Then, doubtless, the world shall be finished when he
 shall appear.  He himself shall divide the globe into three ruling
 powers, when, moreover, Nero shall be raised up from hell, Elias shall
 first come to seal the beloved ones; at which things the region of
 Africa and the northern nation, the whole earth on all sides, for seven
 years shall tremble.  But Elias shall occupy the half of the time, Nero
 shall occupy half.  Then the whore Babylon, being reduced to ashes, its
 embers shall thence advance to Jerusalem; and the Latin conqueror shall
 then say, I am Christ, whom ye always pray to; and, indeed, the
 original ones who were deceived combine to praise him.  He does many
 wonders, since his is the false prophet.  Especially that they may
 believe him, his image shall speak.  The Almighty has given it power to
 appear such.  The Jews, recapitulating Scriptures from him, exclaim at
 the same time to the Highest that they have been deceived.

 [1852] [See Elucidation at end.]

 XLII.--Of the Hidden and Holy People of the Almighty Christ, the Living
 God.

 Let the hidden, the final, the holy people be longed for; and, indeed,
 let it be unknown by us where it abides, acting by nine of the tribes
 and a half...; and he has bidden to live by the former law.  Now let us
 all live:  the tradition of the law is new, as the law itself teaches,
 I point out to you more plainly.  Two of the tribes and a half are
 left:  wherefore is the half of the tribes separated from them?  That
 they might be martyrs, when He should bring war on His elected ones
 into the world; or certainly the choir of the holy prophets would rise
 together upon the people who should impose a check upon them whom the
 obscene horses have slaughtered with kicking heel; nor would the band
 hurry rashly at any time to the gift of peace.  Those of the tribes are
 withdrawn, and all the mysteries of Christ are fulfilled by them
 throughout the whole age.  Moreover, they have arisen from the crime of
 two brothers, by whose auspices they have followed crime.  Not
 undeservedly are these bloody ones thus scattered:  they shall again
 assemble on behalf of the mysteries of Christ.  But then the things
 told of in the law are hastening to their completion.  The Almighty
 Christ descends to His elect, who have been darkened from our view for
 so long a time--they have become so many thousands--that is the true
 heavenly people.  The son does not die before his father, then; nor do
 they feel pains in their bodies, nor polypus in their nostrils.  They
 who cease depart in ripe years in their bed, fulfilling all the things
 of the law, and therefore they are protected.  They are bidden to pass
 on the right side of their Lord; and when they have passed over as
 before, He dries up the river.  Nor less does the Lord Himself also
 proceed with them.  He has passed over to our side, they come with the
 King of heaven; and in their journey, what shall I speak of which God
 will bring to pass?  Mountains subside before them, and fountains break
 forth.  The creation rejoices to see the heavenly people.  Here,
 however, they hasten to defend the captive matron.  But the wicked king
 who possesses her, when he hears, flies into the parts of the north,
 and collects all his followers.  Moreover, when the tyrant shall dash
 himself against the army of God, his soldiery are overthrown by the
 celestial terror; the false prophet himself is seized with the wicked
 one, by the decree of the Lord; they are handed over alive to Gehenna.
 From him chiefs and leaders are bidden to obey; then will the holy ones
 enter into the breasts of their ancient mother, that, moreover, they
 also may be refreshed whom he has evil persuaded.  With various
 punishments he will torment those who trust in him; they come to the
 end, whereby offences are taken away from the world.  The Lord will
 begin to give judgment by fire.

 XLIII.--Of the End of This Age.

 The trumpet gives the sign in heaven, the lion being taken away, and
 suddenly there is darkness with the din of heaven.  The Lord casts down
 His eyes, so that the earth trembles.  He cries out, so that all may
 hear throughout the world:  Behold, long have I been silent while I
 bore your doings in such a time.  They cry out together, complaining
 and groaning too late.  They howl, they bewail; nor is there room found
 for the wicked.  What shall the mother do for the sucking child, when
 she herself is burnt up?  In the flame of fire the Lord will judge the
 wicked.  But the fire shall not touch the just, but shall by all means
 lick them up. [1853] In one place they delay, but a part has wept at
 the judgment.  Such will be the heat, that the stones themselves shall
 melt.  The winds assemble into lightnings, the heavenly wrath rages;
 and wherever the wicked man fleeth, he is seized upon by this fire.
 There will be no succour nor ship of he sea.  Amen [1854] flames on the
 nations, and the Medes and Parthians burn for a thousand years, as the
 hidden words of John declare.  For then after a thousand years they are
 delivered over to Gehenna; and he whose work they were, with them are
 burnt up.

 [1853] [The translator here inserts a mark of interrogation.  The
 meaning is:  lick up them (the wicked) who have persecuted them.  Dan.
 iii. 22.]

 [1854] [Rev. iii. 14.]

 XLIV.--Of the First Resurrection.

 From heaven will descend the city in the first resurrection; this is
 what we may tell of such a celestial fabric.  We shall arise again to
 Him, who have been devoted to Him.  And they shall be incorruptible,
 even already living without death.  And neither will there be any grief
 nor any groaning in that city.  They shall come also who overcame cruel
 martyrdom under Antichrist, and they themselves live for the whole
 time, and receive blessings because they have suffered evil things; and
 they themselves marrying, beget for a thousand years.  There are
 prepared all the revenues of the earth, because the earth renewed
 without end pours forth abundantly.  Therein are no rains; no cold
 comes into the golden camp.  No sieges as now, nor rapines, nor does
 that city crave the light of a lamp.  It shines from its Founder.
 Moreover, Him it obeys; in breadth 12,000 furlongs and length and
 depth.  It levels its foundation in the earth, but it raises its head
 to heaven.  In the city before the doors, moreover, sun and moon shall
 shine; he who is evil is hedged up in torment, for the sake of the
 nourishment of the righteous.  But from the thousand years God will
 destroy all those evils.

 XLV.--Of the Day of Judgment.

 I add something, on account of unbelievers, of the day of judgment.
 Again, the fire of the Lord sent forth shall be appointed.  The earth
 gives a true groan; then those who are making their journey in the last
 end, and then all unbelievers, groan.  The whole of nature is converted
 in flame, which yet avoids the camp of His saints.  The earth is burned
 up from its foundations, and the mountains melt.  Of the sea nothing
 remains:  it is overcome by the powerful fire.  This sky perishes, and
 the stars and these things are changed.  Another newness of sky and of
 everlasting earth is arranged.  Thence they who deserve it are sent
 away in a second death, but the righteous are placed in inner
 dwelling-places.

 XLVI.--To Catechumens.

 In few words, I admonish all believers in Christ, who have forsaken
 idols, for your salvation.  In the first times, if in any way thou
 fallest into error, still, when entreated, do thou leave all things for
 Christ; and since thou hast known God, be a recruit good and approved,
 and let virgin modesty dwell with thee in purity.  Let the mind be
 watchful for good things.  Beware that thou fall not into former sins.
 In baptism the coarse dress of thy birth is washed.  For if any sinful
 catechumen is marked with punishment, let him live in the signs of
 Christianity, although not without loss. [1855] The whole of the
 matter for thee is this, Do thou ever shun great sins.

 [1855] [Catechumens falling away before baptism must not despair, but
 persevere and remain under discipline.]

 XLVII.--To the Faithful.

 I admonish the faithful not to hold their brethren in hatred.  Hatreds
 are accounted impious by martyrs for the flame.  The martyr is
 destroyed whose confession is of such kind; nor is it taught that the
 evil is expiated by the shedding of blood.  A law is given to the
 unjust man that he may restrain himself.  Thence he ought to be free
 from craft; so also oughtest thou.  Twice dost thou sin against God, if
 thou extendest strifes to thy brother; whence thou shalt not avoid sin
 following thy former courses.  Thou hast once been washed:  shalt thou
 be able to be immersed again?

 XLVIII.--O Faithful, Beware of Evil.

 The birds are deceived, and the beasts of the woods in the woods, by
 those very charms by which their ruin is ever accomplished, and caves
 as well as food deceive them as they follow; and they know not how to
 shun evil, nor are they restrained by law.  Law is given to man, and a
 doctrine of life to be chosen, from which he remembers that he may be
 able to live carefully, and recalls his own place, and takes away those
 things which belong to death.  He severely condemns himself who
 forsakes rule; either bound with iron, or cast down from his degree; or
 deprived of life, he loses what he ought to enjoy.  Warned by example,
 do not sin gravely; translated by the laver, rather have charity; flee
 far from the bait of the mouse-trap, where there is death.  Many are
 the martyrdoms which are made without shedding of blood.  Not to desire
 other men's goods; to wish to have the benefit of martyrdom; to bridle
 the tongue, thou oughtest to make thyself humble; not willingly to use
 force, nor to return force used against thee, thou wilt be a patient
 mind, understand that thou art a martyr.

 XLIX.--To Penitents.

 Thou art become a penitent; pray night and day; yet from thy Mother the
 Church do not far depart, and the Highest will be able to be merciful
 to thee.  The confession of thy fault shall not be in vain.  Equally in
 thy state of accusation learn to weep manifestly.  Then, if thou hast a
 wound, seek herbs and a physician; and yet in thy punishments thou
 shalt be able to mitigate thy sufferings.  For I will even confess that
 I alone of you am here, and that terror must be foregone.  I have
 myself felt the destruction; and therefore I warn those who are wounded
 to walk more cautiously, to put thy hair and thy beard in the dust of
 the earth, and to be clothed in sackcloth, and to entreat from the
 highest King will aid thee, that thou perish not perchance from among
 the people.

 L.--Who Have Apostatized from God.

 Moreover, when war is waged, or an enemy attacks, if one be able either
 to conquer or to be hidden, they are great trophies; but unhappy will
 he be who shall be taken by them.  He loses country and king who has
 been unwilling to fight worthily for the truth, for his country, or for
 life.  He ought to die rather than go under a barbarian king; and let
 him seek slavery who is willing to transfer himself to enemies without
 law.  Then, if in warring thou shouldst die for thy king, thou hast
 conquered, or if thou hast given thy hands, thou hast perished
 uninjured by law.  The enemy crosses the river; do thou hide under thy
 lurking-place; or, if he can enter or not, do not linger.  Everywhere
 make thyself safe, and thy friends also; thou hast conquered.  And take
 watchful care lest any one enter in that lurking-place.  It will be an
 infamous thing if any one declares himself to the enemy.  He who knows
 not how to conquer, and runs to deliver himself up, has weakly foregone
 praise for neither his own nor his country's good.  Then he was
 unwilling to live, since life itself will perish.  If any one is
 without God, or profane from the enemy, they are become as sounding
 brass, or deaf as adders:  such men ought abundantly to pray or to hide
 themselves.

 LI.--Of Infants.

 The enemy has suddenly come flooding us over with war; and before they
 could flee, he has seized upon the helpless children.  They cannot be
 reproached, although they are seen to be taken captive; nor, indeed, do
 I excuse them.  Perhaps they have deserved it on account of the faults
 of their parents; therefore God has given them up.  However, I exhort
 the adults that they run to arms, and that they should be born again,
 as it were, to their Mother from the womb.  Let them avoid a law that
 is terrible, and always bloody, impious, intractable, living with the
 life of the beasts; for when another war by chance should be to be
 waged, he who should be able to conquer or even rightly to know how to
 beware.

 LII.--Deserters.

 For deserters are not called so as all of one kind.  One is wicked,
 another partially withdraws; but yet true judgments are decreed for
 both.  So Christ is fought against, even as Cæsar is obeyed.  Seek the
 refuge of the king, if thou hast been a delinquent.  Do thou implore of
 Him; do thou prostrate confess to Him:  He will grant all things whose
 also are all our things.  The camp being replaced, beware of sinning
 further; do not wander long as a soldier through caves of the wild
 beasts.  Let it be sin to thee to cease from unmeasured doing.

 LIII.--To the Soldiers of Christ.

 When thou hast given thy name to the warfare, thou art held by a
 bridle.  Therefore begin thou to put away thy former doings.  Shun
 luxuries, since labour is threatening arms.  With all thy virtue thou
 must obey the king's command, if thou wishest to attain the last times
 in gladness.  He is a good soldier, always wait for things to be
 enjoyed.  Be unwilling to flatter thyself; absolutely put away sloth,
 that thou mayest daily be ready for what is set before thee.  Be
 careful beforehand; in the morning revisit the standards.  When thou
 seest the war, take the nearest contest.  This is the king's glory, to
 see the soldiery prepared.  The king is present; desire that ye may
 fight beyond his hope.  He makes ready gifts.  He gladly looks for the
 victory, and assigns you to be a fit follower.  Do thou be unwilling to
 spare thyself besides for Belial; be thou rather diligent, that he may
 give fame for your death.

 LIV.--Of Fugitives.

 The souls of those that are lost deservedly of themselves separate
 themselves.  Begotten of him, they again recur to those things which
 are his.  The root of Cain, the accursed seed, breaks forth and takes
 refuge in the servile nation under a barbarian king; and there the
 eternal flame will torment on the day decreed.  The fugitive will
 wander vaguely without discipline, loosed from law to go about through
 the defiles of the ways.  These, therefore, are such whom no penalty
 has restrained.  If they will not live, they ought to be seen by the
 idols.

 LV.--Of the Seed of the Tares.

 Of the seed of the tares, who stand mingled in the Church.  When the
 times of the harvest are filled up, the tares that have sprung up are
 separated from the fruit, because God had not sent them.  The
 husbandman separates all those collected tares.  The law is our field;
 whoever does good in it, assuredly the Ruler Himself will afford a true
 repose, for the tares are burned with fire.  If, therefore, you think
 that under one they are delaying, you are wrong.  I designate you as
 barren Christians; cursed was the fig-tree without fruit in the word of
 the Lord, and immediately it withered away.  Ye do not works; ye
 prepare no gift for the treasury, and yet ye thus vainly think to
 deserve well of the Lord.

 LVI.--To the Dissembler.

 Dost thou dissemble with the law that was given with such public
 announcement, crying out in the heavenly word of so many prophets?  If
 a prophet had only cried out to the clouds, [1856] the word of the Lord
 uttered by him would surely suffice.  The law of the Lord proclaims
 itself into so many volumes of prophets; none of them excuses
 wickedness; thus even thou wishest from the heart to see good things;
 thou art also seeking to live by deceits.  Why, then, has the law
 itself gone forth with so much pains?  Thou abusest the commands of the
 Lord, and yet thou callest thyself His son.  Thou art seen, if thou
 wilt be such without reason.  I say, the Almighty seeks the meek to be
 His sons, those who are upright with a good heart, those who are
 devoted to the divine law; but ye know already where He has plunged the
 wicked.

 [1856] Or, "If one prophet only had cried out to the world."

 LVII.--That Worldly Things are Absolutely to Be Avoided.

 If certain teachers, while looking for your gifts or fearing your
 persons, relax individual things to you, not only do I not grieve, but
 I am compelled to speak the truth.  Thou art going to vain shows with
 the crowd of the evil one, where Satan is at work in the circus with
 din.  Thou persuadest thyself that everything that shall please thee is
 lawful.  Thou art the offspring of the Highest, mingled with the sons
 of the devil.  Dost thou wish to see the former things which thou hast
 renounced?  Art thou again conversant with them?  What shall the
 Anointed One profit thee?  Or if it is permitted, on account of
 weakness, that thou foolishly profane...Love not the world, nor its
 contents.  Such is God's word, and it seems good to thee.  Thou
 observest man's command, and shunnest God's.  Thou trustedst to the
 gift whereby the teachers shut up their mouths, that they may be
 silent, and not tell thee the divine commands; while I speak the truth,
 as thou art bound look to the Highest.  Assign thyself as a follower to
 Him whose son thou wast.  If thou seekest to live, being a believing
 man, as do the Gentiles, the joys of the world remove thee from the
 grace of Christ.  With an undisciplined mind thou seekest what thou
 presumest to be easily lawful, both thy dear actors and their musical
 strains; nor carest thou that the offspring of such an one should
 babble follies.  While thou thinkest that thou art enjoying life, thou
 art improvidently erring.  The Highest commands, and thou shunnest His
 righteous precepts.

 LVIII.--That the Christian Should Be Such.

 When the Lord says that man should eat bread with groaning, here what
 art thou now doing, who desirest to live with joy?  Thou seekest to
 rescind the judgment uttered by the highest God when He first formed
 man; thou wishest to abandon the curb of the law.  If the Almighty God
 have bidden thee live with sweat, thou who art living in pleasure wilt
 already be a stranger to Him.  The Scripture saith that the Lord was
 angry with the Jews.  Their sons, refreshed with food, rose up to
 play.  Now, therefore, why do we follow these circumcised men? [1857]
 In what respect they perished, we ought to beware; the greatest part of
 you, surrendered to luxuries, obey them.  Thou transgressest the law in
 staining thyself with dyes:  against thee the apostle cries out; yea,
 God cries out by him.  Your dissoluteness, says he, in itself ruins
 [1858] you.  Be, then, such as Christ wishes you to be, gentle, and in
 Him joyful, for in the world you are sad.  Run, labour, sweat, fight
 with sadness.  Hope comes with labour, and the palm is given to
 victory.  If thou wishest to be refreshed, give help and encouragement
 to the martyr.  Wait for the repose to come in the passage of death.

 [1857] Sponte profectos.

 [1858] Deperdunt.

 LIX.--To the Matrons of the Church of the Living God.

 Thou wishest, O Christian woman, that the matrons should be as the
 ladies of the world.  Thou surroundest thyself with gold, or with the
 modest silken garment.  Thou givest the terror of the law from thy ears
 to the wind.  Thou affectest vanity with all the pomp of the devil.
 Thou art adorned at the looking-glass with thy curled hair turned back
 from thy brow.  And moreover, with evil purposes, thou puttest on false
 medicaments, on thy pure eyes the stibium, with painted beauty, or thou
 dyest thy hair that it may be always black.  God is the overlooker, who
 dives into each heart.  But these things are not necessary for modest
 women.  Pierce thy breast with chaste and modest feeling.  The law of
 God bears witness that such laws fail from the heart which believes; to
 a wife approved of her husband, let it suffice that she is so, not by
 her dress, but by her good disposition.  To put on clothes which the
 cold and the heat or too much sun demands, only that thou mayest be
 approved modest, and show forth the gifts of thy capacity among the
 people of God.  Thou who wast formerly most illustrious, givest to
 thyself the guise of one who is contemptible.  She who lay without
 life, was raised by the prayers of the widows.  She deserved this, that
 she should be raised from death, not by her costly dress, but by her
 gifts.  Do ye, O good matrons, flee from the adornment of vanity; such
 attire is fitting for women who haunt the brothels.  Overcome the evil
 one, O modest women of Christ.  Show forth all your wealth in giving.

 LX.--To the Same Again.

 Hear my voice, thou who wishest to remain a Christian woman, in what
 way the blessed Paul commands you to be adorned.  Isaiah, moreover, the
 teacher and author that spoke from heaven, for he detests those who
 follow the wickedness of the world, says:  The daughters of Zion that
 are lifted up shall be brought low.  It is not right in God that a
 faithful Christian woman should be adorned.  Dost thou seek to go forth
 after the fashion of the Gentiles, O thou who art consecrated to God?
 God's heralds, crying aloud in the law, condemn such to be unrighteous
 women, who in such wise adorn themselves.  Ye stain your hair; ye paint
 the opening of your eyes with black; ye lift up your pretty hair one by
 one on your painted brow; ye anoint your cheeks with some sort of ruddy
 colour laid on; and, moreover, earrings hang down with very heavy
 weight.  Ye bury your neck with necklaces; with gems and gold ye bind
 hands worthy of God with an evil presage.  Why should I tell of your
 dresses, or of the whole pomp of the devil?  Ye are rejecting the law
 when ye wish to please the world.  Ye dance in your houses; instead of
 psalms, ye sing love songs.  Thou, although thou mayest be chaste, dost
 not prove thyself so by following evil things.  Christ therefore makes
 you, such as you are, equal with the Gentiles.  Be pleasing to the
 hymned chorus, and to an appeased Christ with ardent love fervently
 offer your savour to Christ.

 LXI.--In the Church to All the People of God.

 I, brethren, am not righteous who am lifted up out of the filth, nor do
 I exalt myself; but I grieve for you, as seeing that out of so great a
 people, none is crowned in the contest; certainly, even if he does not
 himself fight, yet let him suggest encouragement to others.  Ye rebuke
 calamity; O belly, stuff yourself out with luxury.  The brother labours
 in arms with a world opposed to him; and dost thou, stuffed with
 wealth, neither fight, nor place thyself by his side when he is
 fighting?  O fool, dost not thou perceive that one is warring on behalf
 of many?  The whole Church is suspended on such a one if he conquers.
 Thou seest that thy brother is withheld, and that he fights with the
 enemy.  Thou desirest peace in the camp, he outside rejects it.  Be
 pitiful, that thou mayest be before all things saved.  Neither dost
 thou fear the Lord, who cries aloud with such an utterance; even He who
 commands us to give food even to our enemies.  Look forward to thy
 meals from that Tobias who always on every day shared them entirely
 with the poor man.  Thou seekest to feed him, O fool, who feedeth thee
 again.  Dost thou wish that he should prepare for me, who is setting
 before him his burial?  The brother oppressed with want, nearly
 languishing away, cries out at the splendidly fed, and with distended
 belly.  What sayest thou of the Lord's day?  If he have not placed
 himself before, call forth a poor man from the crowd whom thou mayest
 take to thy dinner.  In the tablets is your hope from a Christ
 refreshed.

 LXII.--To Him Who Wishes for Martyrdom.

 Since, O son, thou desirest martyrdom, hear.  Be thou such as Abel was,
 or such as Isaac himself, or Stephen, who chose for himself on the way
 the righteous life.  Thou indeed desirest that which is a matter suited
 for the blessed.  First of all, overcome the evil one with thy good
 acts by living well; and when He thy King shall see thee, be thou
 secure.  It is His own time, and we are living for both; so that if war
 fails, the martyrs shall go in peace.  Many indeed err who say, With
 our blood we have overcome the wicked one; and if he remains, they are
 unwilling to overcome.  He perishes by lying in wait, and the wicked
 thus feels it; but he that is lawful does not feel the punishments
 applied.  With exclamation and with eagerness beat thy breast with thy
 fists.  Even now, if thou hast conquered by good deeds, thou art a
 martyr in Him.  Thou, therefore, who seekest to extol martyrdom with
 thy word, in peace clothe thyself with good deeds, and be secure.
 [1859]

 [1859] [Compare Clement's reproof, vol. ii. p. 423, this series.]

 LXIII.--The Daily War.

 Thou seekest to wage war, O fool, as if wars were at peace.  From the
 first formed day in the end you fight.  Lust precipitates you, there is
 war; fight with it.  Luxury persuades, neglect it; thou hast overcome
 the war.  Be sparing of abundance of wine, lest by means of it thou
 shouldest go wrong.  Restrain thy tongue from cursing, because with it
 thou adorest the Lord.  Repress rage.  Make thyself peaceable to all.
 Beware of trampling on thy inferiors when weighed down with miseries.
 Lend thyself as a protector only, and do no hurt.  Lead yourselves in a
 righteous path, unstained by jealousy.  In thy riches make thyself
 gentle to those that are of little account.  Give of thy labour, clothe
 the naked.  Thus shalt thou conquer.  Lay snares for no man, since thou
 servest God.  Look to the beginning, whence the envious enemy has
 perished.  I am not a teacher, but the law itself teaches by its
 proclamation.  Thou wearest such great words vainly, who in one moment
 seekest without labour to raise a martyrdom to Christ.

 LXIV.--Of the Zeal of Concupiscence.

 In desiring, thence thou perishest, whilst thou art burning with envy
 of thy neighbour.  Thou extinguishest thyself, when thou inflamest
 thyself within.  Thou art jealous, O envious man, of another who is
 struggling with evil, and desirest that thou mayest become equally the
 possessor of so much wealth.  The law does not thus behold him when
 thou seekest to fall upon him.  Depending on all things, thou livest in
 the lust of gain; and although thou art guilty to thyself, thou
 condemnest thyself by thy own judgment.  The greedy survey of the eyes
 is never satisfied.  Now, therefore, if thou mayest return and
 consider, lust is vain...whence God cries out, Thou fool, this night
 thou art summoned.  Death rushes after thee.  Whose, then, shall be
 those talents?  By hiding the unrighteous gains in the concealed
 treasury, when the Lord shall supply to every one his daily life.  Let
 another accumulate; do thou seek to live well.  And when thy heart is
 conscious of God, thou shalt be victor over all things; yet I do not
 say that thou shouldest boast thyself in public, when thou art watching
 for thy day by living without fraud.  The bird perishes in the midst of
 food, or carelessly sticks fast in the bird-lime.  Think that in thy
 simplicity thou hast much to beware of.  Let others trangress these
 bounds.  Do thou always look forward.

 LXV.--They Who Give from Evil.

 Why dost thou senselessly feign thyself good by the wound of another?
 Whence thou bestowest, another is daily weeping.  Dost not thou believe
 that the Lord sees those things from heaven?  The Highest says, He does
 not prove of the gifts of the wicked.  Thou shalt break forth upon the
 wretched when thou shalt have gained a place.  One gives gifts that he
 may make another of no account; or if thou hast lent on usury, taking
 twenty-four per cent, thou wishest to bestow charity that thou mayest
 purge thyself, as being evil, with that which is evil.  The Almighty
 absolutely rejects such works as these.  Thou hast given that which has
 been wrung from tears; that candidate, oppressed with ungrateful
 usuries, and become needy, deplores it.  Besides having obtained an
 opportunity for the exactors, thy enemy for the present is the people;
 thou consecrated, hast become wicked for reward.  Also thou wishest to
 atone for thyself by the gain of wages.  O wicked one, thou deceivest
 thyself, but none else.

 LXVI.--Of a Deceitful Peace.

 The arranged time comes to our people; there is peace in the world;
 and, at the same time, ruin is weighing us down from the enticement of
 the world, (the destruction) of the reckless people whom ye have rent
 into schism.  Either obey the law of the city, or depart from it.  Ye
 behold the mote sticking in our eyes, and will not see the beam in your
 own.  A treacherous peace is coming to you; persecution is rife; the
 wounds do not appear; and thus, without slaughter, ye are destroyed.
 War is waged in secret, because, in the midst of peace itself, scarcely
 one of you has behaved himself with caution.  O badly fortified, and
 foretold for slaughter, ye praise a treacherous peace, a peace that is
 mischievous to you.  Having become the soldiers of another than Christ,
 ye have perished.

 I warn certain readers only to consider, and to give material to others
 by an example of life, to avoid strife, and to shun so many quarrels;
 to repress terror, and never to be proud; moreover, denounce the
 righteous obedience of wicked men.  Make yourselves like to Christ your
 Master, O little ones.  Be among the lilies of the field by your
 benefits; ye have become blessed when ye bear the edicts; ye are
 flowers in the congregation; ye are Christ's lanterns.  Keep what ye
 are, and ye shall be able to tell it.

 LXVIII.--To Ministers.

 Exercise the mystery of Christ, O deacons, with purity; therefore, O
 ministers, do the commands of your Master; do not play the person of a
 righteous judge; strengthen your office by all things, as learned men,
 looking upwards, always devoted to the Supreme God.  Render the
 faithful sacred ministries of the altar to God, prepared in divine
 matters to set an example; yourselves incline your head to the pastors,
 so shall it come to pass that ye may be approved of Christ.

 LXIX.--To God's Shepherds.

 A shepherd, if he shall have confessed, has doubled his conflict.
 Moreover, the apostle bids that such should be teachers.  Let him be a
 patient ruler; let him know when he may relax the reins; let him
 terrify at first, and then anoint with honey; and let him first observe
 to do himself what he says.  The shepherd who minds worldly things is
 esteemed in fault, against whose countenance thou mightest dare to say
 anything.  Gehenna itself bubbles up in hell with rumours.  Woe to the
 wretched people which wavers with doubtful brow! if such a shepherd
 shall be present to it, it is almost ruined.  But a devout man
 restrains it, governing rightly.  The swarms are rejoiced under
 suitable kings; in such there is hope, and the entire Church lives.

 LXX.--I Speak to the Elder-Born.

 The time demands that I alone should speak to you truth.

 He is often admonished by one word which many refuse.  I wish you to
 turn your hatred against me alone, that the hearts of all may tremble
 at the tempter.  Look to the saying that truly begets hatred, (and
 consider) how many things I have lately indeed foretold concerning a
 delusive peace, while, alas, the enticing seducer has come upon you
 unawares, and because ye have not known how that his wiles were
 imminent, ye have perished; ye work absolutely bitter things, but that
 is itself the characteristic of the world; not any one for whom ye
 intercede acts for nothing.  He who takes refuge from your fire,
 plunges in the whirlpool.  Then the wretch, stripped naked, seeks
 assistance from you.  The judges themselves shudder at your frauds...of
 a shorter title, I should not labour at so many lines.  Ye who teach,
 look upon those to whom ye willingly tend, when for yourselves ye both
 receive banquets and feed upon them.  For those things are ye already
 almost entering the foundations of the earth.

 LXXI.--To Visit the Sick.

 If thy brother should be weak--I speak of the poor man--do not
 empty-handed visit such an one as he lies ill.  Do good under God; pay
 your obedience by your money.  Thence he shall be restored; or if he
 should perish, let a poor man be refreshed, who has nothing wherewith
 to pay you, but the Founder and Author of the world on his behalf.  Or
 if it should displease thee to go to the poor man, always hateful, send
 money, and something whence he may recover himself.  And, similarly, if
 thy poor sister lies upon a sick-bed, let your matrons begin to bear
 her victuals.  God Himself cries out, Break thy bread to the needy.
 There is no need to visit with words, but with benefits.  It is wicked
 that thy brother should be sick through want of food.  Satisfy him not
 with words.  He needs meat and drink.  Look upon such assuredly
 weakened, who are not able to act for themselves.  Give to them at
 once.  I pledge my word that fourfold shall be given you by God.

 LXXII.--To the Poor in Health.

 What can healthful poverty do, unless wealth be present?  Assuredly, if
 thou hast the means, at once communicate also to thy brother.  Be
 responsible to thyself for one, lest thou shouldst be said to be
 proud.  I promise that thou shalt live more secure than the rich man.
 Receive into thy ears the teaching of the great Solomon:  God hates the
 poor man to be a pleader on high. [1860] Therefore submit thyself,
 and give honour to Him that is powerful; for the soft speech--thou
 knowest the proverb--melts. [1861] One is conquered by service, even
 although there be an ancient anger.  If the tongue be silent, thou hast
 found nothing better.  If there should not wholesomely be an art
 whereby life may be governed, either give aid or direction by the
 command of Him that is mighty.  Let it not shame or grieve you that a
 healthy man should have faith.  In the treasury, besides, thou oughtest
 to give of thy labour, even as that widow whom the Anointed One
 preferred. [1862]

 [1860] [Prov. xxiii. 11.]

 [1861] [Prov. xv. 1.]

 [1862] [Mark xii. 42; Luke xxi. 2.]

 LXXIII.--That Sons are Not to Be Bewailed.

 Although the death of sons leaves grief for the heart, yet it is not
 right either to go forth in black garments, or to bewail them.  The
 Lord prudently says that ye must grieve with the mind, not with outward
 show, which is finished in the week.  In the book of Solomon the
 promises of the Lord concerning the resurrection are forgotten if thou
 wouldest make thy sons martyrs, and thus with thy voice will bewail
 them.  Art thou not ashamed without restraint to lament thy sons, like
 the Gentiles?  Thou tearest thy face, thou beatest thy breast, thou
 takest off thy garments; and dost thou not fear the Lord, whose kingdom
 thou desirest to behold?  Mourn as it is right, but do not do wrong on
 their behalf.  Ye therefore are such.  What less than Gentiles are ye?
 Ye do as the crowds that are descended from the diabolical stock.  Ye
 cry that they are extinct.  With what advantage, O false one, thou hast
 perished!  The father has not led his son with grief to be slain at the
 altar, nor has the prophet mourned over a deceased son with grief, nor
 even has a weeping parent.  But one devoted to God was hastily dying.

 LXXIV.--Of Funeral Pomp.

 Thou who seekest to be careful of the pomp of death art in error.  As a
 servant of God, thou oughtest even in death to please Him.  Alas that
 the lifeless body should be adorned in death!  O true vanity, to desire
 honour for the dead!  A mind enchained to the world; not even in death
 devoted to Christ.  Thou knowest the proverbs.  He wished to be carried
 through the forum.  Thus ye, who are like to him, and living with
 untrained mind, wish to have a happy and blessed day at your death,
 that the people may come together, and that you may see praise with
 mourning.  Thou dost not foresee whither thou mayest deserve to go when
 dead.  Lo, they are following thee; and thou, perchance, art already
 burning, being driven to punishment.  What will the pomp benefit the
 dead man?  Thou shalt be accused, who seekest them on account of those
 gatherings.  Thou desirest to live under idols.  Thou deceivest
 thyself.

 LXXV.--To the Clerks.

 They will assemble together at Easter, that day of ours most blessed;
 and let them rejoice, who ask for divine entertainments.  Let what is
 sufficient be expended upon them, wine and food.  Look back at the
 source whence these things may be told on your behalf.  Ye are wanting
 in a gift to Christ, in moderate expenditure.  Since ye yourselves do
 it not, in what manner can ye persuade the righteousness of the law to
 such people, even once in the year?  Thus often blasphemy suggests to
 many concerning you.

 LXXVI.--Of Those Who Gossip, and of Silence.

 When a thing appears to anybody of no consequence, and is not shunned,
 and it rushes forth, as if easy, whilst thou abusest it.  Fables assist
 it when thou comest to pour out prayers, or to beat thy breast for thy
 daily sin.  The trumpet of the heralds sounds forth, while the reader
 is reading, that the ears may be open, and thou rather impedest them.
 Thou art luxurious with thy lips, with which thou oughtest to groan.
 Shut up thy breast to evils, or loose them in thy breast.  But since
 the possession of money gives barefacedness to the wealthy, thence
 every one perishes when they are most trusting to themselves.  Thus,
 moreover, the women assemble, as if they would enter the bath.  They
 press closely, and make of God's house as if it were a fair.  Certainly
 the Lord frightened the house of prayer.  The Lord's priest commanded
 with "sursum corda," when prayer was to be made, that your silence
 should be made.  Thou answerest fluently, and moreover abstainest not
 from promises.  He entreats the Highest on behalf of a devoted people,
 lest any one should perish, and thou turnest thyself to fables.  Thou
 mockest at him, or detractest from thy neighbour's reputation.  Thou
 speakest in an undisciplined manner, as if God were absent--as if He
 who made all things neither hears nor sees.

 LXXVII.--To the Drunkards.

 I place no limit to a drunkard; but I prefer a beast.  From those who
 are proud in drinking thou withdrawest in thine inner mind, holding the
 power of the ruler, O fool, among Cyclopes.  Thence in the histories
 thou criest, While I am dead I drink not.  Be it mine to drink the best
 things, and to be wise in heart.  Rather give assistance (what more
 seekest thou to abuse?) to the lowest pauper, and ye shall both be
 refreshed.  If thou doest such things, thou extinguishest Gehenna for
 thyself.

 LXXVIII.--To the Pastors.

 Thou who seekest to feed others, and hast prepared what thou couldest
 by assiduously feeding, hast done rightly.  But still look after the
 poor man, who cannot feed thee again:  then will thy table be approved
 by the one God.  The Almighty has bidden such even especially to be
 fed.  Consider, when thou feedest the sick, thou art also lending to
 the High One.  In that thing the Lord has wished that you should stand
 before Him approved.

 LXXIX.--To the Petitioners.

 If thou desirest, when praying, to be heard from heaven, break the
 chains from the lurking-places of wickedness; or if, pitying the poor,
 thou prayest by thy benefits, doubt not but what thou shalt have asked
 may be given to the petitioner.  Then truly, if void of benefits, thou
 adorest God, do not thus at all make thy prayers vainly.

 LXXX.--The Name of the Man of Gaza.

 Ye who are to be inhabitants of the heavens with God-Christ, hold fast
 the beginning, look at all things from heaven.  Let simplicity, let
 meekness dwell in your body.  Be not angry with thy devout brother
 without a cause, for ye shall receive whatever ye may have done from
 him.  This has pleased Christ, that the dead should rise again, yea,
 with their bodies; and those, too, whom in this world the fire has
 burned, when six thousand years are completed, and the world has come
 to an end.  The heaven in the meantime is changed with an altered
 course, for then the wicked are burnt up with divine fire.  The
 creature with groaning burns with the anger of the highest God.  Those
 who are more worthy, and who are begotten of an illustrious stem, and
 the men of nobility under the conquered Antichrist, according to God's
 command living again in the world for a thousand years, indeed, that
 they may serve the saints, and the High One, under a servile yoke, that
 they may bear victuals on their neck.  Moreover, that they may be
 judged again when the reign is finished.  They who make God of no
 account when the thousandth year is finished shall perish by fire, when
 they themselves shall speak to the mountains.  All flesh in the
 monuments and tombs is restored according to its deed:  they are
 plunged in hell; they bear their punishments in the world; they are
 shown to them, and they read the things transacted from heaven; the
 reward according to one's deeds in a perpetual tyranny.  I cannot
 comprehend all things in a little treatise; the curiosity of the
 learned men shall find my name in this. [1863]

 [1863] [Dr. Schaff says this Nomen Gazæi may indicate his possession of
 the wealth of truth, etc.  But, if we read the acrostical initials of
 the verses backwards, we find the name Commodianus Mendicus Christi,
 which betokens his poverty also, in the spirit of St. Paul (2 Cor. vi.
 10; also, Rev. ii. 9), which our author would naturally make emphatic
 here.]

 Elucidation.

 ------------------------

 I know nothing of the second poem of our author, and am indebted for
 the following particulars to Dr. Schaff. [1864]

 It is an apologetic poem against Jews and Gentiles, written in uncouth
 hexameters, and discusses in forty-seven sections the doctrine
 concerning God and the Redeemer and mankind.  It treats of the names of
 Son and Father; and here, probably, he lays himself open to the charge
 of Patripassian heresy.  He passes to the obstacles encountered by the
 Gospel, warns the Jews and the Gentiles to forsake their unprofitable
 devotions, and enlarges on the eschatology, as he conceives of it.  Let
 me now quote textually, as follows:--

 "The most interesting part of the second poem is the conclusion.  It
 contains a fuller description of Antichrist than the first poem.  The
 author expects that the end of the world will come with the seventh
 persecution.  The Goths will conquer Rome and redeem the Christians;
 but then Nero will appear as the heathen Antichrist, reconquer Rome,
 and rage against the Christians three years and a half.  He will be
 conquered in turn by the Jewish and real Antichrist from the East, who,
 after the defeat of Nero and the burning of Rome, will return to Judea,
 perform false miracles, and be worshipped by the Jews.  At last Christ
 appears, that is, God himself (from the Monarchian stand-point of the
 author) with the lost Twelve Tribes [?] as his army, which had lived
 beyond Persia in happy simplicity and virtue.  Under astounding
 phenomena of nature he will conquer Antichrist and his host, convert
 all nations, and take possession of the holy city of Jerusalem."

 This idea of a double Antichrist re-appears in Lactantius, Inst. Div.,
 vii. 16 seqq.

 This second poem was discovered by Cardinal Pitra in 1852.  The two
 poems were edited by E. Ludwig, Leipzig, 1877 and 1878.

 [1864] Hist., vol. ii. 855.

  Origen

 Origen.

 [Translated by the Rev. Frederick Crombie, D.D.]

 Introductory Note

 to the

 Works of Origen.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 185-230-254.]  The reader will remember the rise and rapid
 development of the great Alexandrian school, and the predominance which
 was imparted to it by the genius of the illustrious Clement. [1865]
 But in Origen, his pupil, who succeeded him at the surprising age of
 eighteen, a new sun was to rise upon its noontide.  Truly was
 Alexandria "the mother and mistress of churches" in the benign sense of
 a nurse and instructress of Christendom, not its arrogant and usurping
 imperatrix.

 The full details of Origen's troubled but glorious career are given by
 Dr. Crombie, who in my opinion deserves thanks for the kind and
 apologetic temper of his estimate of the man and the sublime doctor, as
 well as of the period of his life.  Upon the fervid spirit of a
 confessor in an age of cruelty, lust, and heathenism, what right have
 we to sit in judgment?  Of one whose very errors were virtues at their
 source, how can a Christian of our self-indulgent times presume to
 speak in censure?  Well might the Psalmist exclaim, [1866] "Let us fall
 now into the hand of the Lord; for His mercies are great:  let me not
 fall into the hand of man."

 Justly has it been urged that to those whose colossal labours during
 the ante-Nicene period exposed them to hasty judgment, and led them
 into mistakes, much indulgence must be shown.  The language of theology
 was but assuming shape under their processes, and we owe them an
 incalculable debt of gratitude:  but it was not yet moulded into
 precision; nor had great councils, presided over by the Holy Ghost, as
 yet afforded those safeguards to freedom of thought which gradually
 defined the limits of orthodoxy.  To no single teacher did the Church
 defer.  Holy Scripture and the quod ab omnibuswere the grand
 prescription, against which no individual prelate or doctor could
 prevail, against which no see could uplift a voice, without
 chastisement and subjection.  Over and over again were the bishops of
 patriarchal and apostolic sees, including Rome, adjudged heretics, and
 anathematized by the inexorable law of truth, and of "the faith once
 delivered to the saints," which not even "an angel from heaven" might
 presume to change or to enlarge.  But before the great Synodical period
 (a.d. 325 to 451), while orthodoxy is marvellously maintained and
 witnessed to by Origen and Tertullian themselves, their errors, however
 serious, have never separated them from the grateful and loving regard
 of those upon whom their lives of heroic sorrow and suffering have
 conferred blessings unspeakable.  The Church cannot leave their errors
 uncorrected.  Their persons she leaves to the Master's award:  their
 characters she cherishes, while their faults she deplores.

 The great feature of the ante-Nicene theology, even in the mistakes of
 the writers, is its reliance on the Holy Scripture.  What wealth of
 Scripture they lavish in their pages!  We identify the Scriptures by
 their aid; but, were they lost in other forms, we might almost restore
 them from their pages.  And forever is the Church indebted to Origen
 for the patient and encyclopedic labour and learning which he bestowed
 on the Scriptures in producing his Hexapla.  Would that, in his
 interpretations of the inspired text, he had more strictly adhered to
 the counsels of Leonides, who was of Bacon's opinion, that the meanings
 which flow naturally from the holy text are sweetest and best, even as
 that wine is best which is not crushed out and extorted from the grape,
 but which trickles of itself from the ripe and luscious cluster in all
 its purity and natural flavour.  So Hooker remarks; and his view is
 commonly accepted by critics, that the interpretation of a text which
 departeth most from its natural rendering is commonly the worst.

 It is too striking an illustration of the childlike simplicity of the
 primitive faithful to be passed by, in Origen's history, that anecdote
 of his father, Leonides, who was himself a confessor and martyr:  how
 he used to strip the bosom of his almost inspired boy as he lay asleep,
 and imprint kisses on his naked breast, "the temple of the Holy
 Ghost."  That blessed Spirit, he believed, was near to his own lips
 when he thus saluted a Christian child, "for of such is the kingdom of
 heaven."  From a child, this other Timothy "knew the Scriptures"
 indeed.  His own doting father imbued him with the literature of the
 Greeks, but, far better, he taught him to love the lively oracles of
 the Lord of glory; and in these he became so proficient, even from
 tender years, that he puzzled his parent with his "understanding and
 answers," like the holy Child of Nazareth when He heard the doctors in
 the Temple, and also "asked them questions."  In will he was also a
 martyr from his youth, and to the genuine spirit of martyrdom we must
 attribute that heroic fault of his youth which he lived to condemn in
 riper years, and which, evil and rash as it was, enabled the Church,
 once and for all, to give an authoritative interpretation to the
 language of the Saviour, and to guard her children thenceforth from
 similar exploits of pious mistake.  None can doubt the purity of the
 motive.  Few draw the important inference of the nature of the Church's
 conflict with that intolerable prevalence of sensuality and shameless
 vice which so impressed her children with the import of Christ's words,
 "Blessed are the pure in heart:  for they shall see God."

 Here follows the very full account of the life of Origen by Dr.
 Crombie, professor of biblical criticism in St. Mary's College, St.
 Andrew:

 [1865] Vol. ii. p. 105, this series.

 [1866] 2 Sam. xxiv. 14.

 Origen, surnamed Adamantinus, was born in all probability at
 Alexandria, about the year 185 a.d. [1867] Notwithstanding that his
 name is derived from that of an Egyptian deity, [1868] there seems no
 reason to doubt that his parents were Christian at the time of his
 birth.  His father Leonides was probably, as has been conjectured,
 [1869] one of the many teachers of rhetoric or grammar who abounded in
 that city of Grecian culture, and appears to have been a man of decided
 piety.  Under his superintendence, the youthful Origen was not only
 educated in the various branches of Grecian learning, but was also
 required daily to commit to memory and to repeat portions of Scripture
 prescribed him by his father; and while under this training, the spirit
 of inquiry into the meaning of Scripture, which afterwards formed so
 striking a feature in the literary character of the great Alexandrine,
 began to display itself.  Eusebius [1870] relates that he was not
 satisfied with the plain and obvious meaning of the text, but sought to
 penetrate into its deeper signification, and caused his father trouble
 by the questions which he put to him regarding the sense of particular
 passages of Holy Writ.  Leonides, like many parents, assumed the
 appearance of rebuking the curiosity of the boy for inquiring into
 things which were beyond his youthful capacity, and recommended him to
 be satisfied with the simple and apparent meaning of Scripture, while
 he is described as inwardly rejoicing at the signs of genius exhibited
 by his son, and as giving thanks to God for having made him the parent
 of such a child. [1871] But this state of things was not to last; for
 in the year 202 when Origen was about seventeen years of age, the great
 persecution of the Christians under Septimius Severus broke out, and
 among the victims was his father Leonides, who was apprehended and put
 in prison.  Origen wished to share the fate of his father, but was
 prevented from quitting his home by the artifice of his mother, who was
 obliged to conceal his clothes to prevent him from carrying out his
 purpose.  He wrote to his father, however, a letter, exhorting him to
 constancy under his trials, and entreating him not to change his
 convictions for the sake of his family. [1872] By the death of his
 father, whose property was confiscated to the imperial treasury, Origen
 was left, with his mother and six younger brothers dependent upon him
 for support.  At this juncture, a wealthy and benevolent lady of
 Alexandria opened to him her house, of which he became an inmate for a
 short time.  The society, however, which he found there was far from
 agreeable to the feelings of the youth.  The lady had adopted as her
 son one Paul of Antioch, whom Eusebius terms an "advocate of the
 heretics then existing at Alexandria."  The eloquence of the man drew
 crowds to hear him, although Origen could never be induced to regard
 him with any favour, nor even to join with him in any act of worship,
 giving then, as Eusebius remarks, "unmistakeable specimens of the
 orthodoxy of his faith." [1873]

 Finding his position in his household so uncomfortable, he resolved to
 enter upon the career of a teacher of grammar, and to support himself
 by his own exertions.  As he had been carefully instructed by his
 father in Grecian literature, and had devoted himself to study after
 his death, he was enabled successfully to carry out his intention.  And
 now begins the second stadium of his career.

 The diligence and ability with which Origen prosecuted his profession
 speedily attracted attention and brought him many pupils.  Among others
 who sought to avail themselves of his instructions in the principles of
 the Christian religion, were two young men, who afterwards became
 distinguished in the history of the Church,--Plutarch, who died the
 death of martyrdom, and Heraclas, who afterwards became bishop of
 Alexandria.  It was not, however, merely by his success as a teacher
 that Origen gained a reputation.  The brotherly kindness and unwearied
 affection which he displayed to all the victims of the persecution,
 which at that time was raging with peculiar severity at Alexandria
 under the prefect Aquila, and in which many of his old pupils and
 friends were martyred, are described as being so marked and
 conspicuous, as to draw down upon him the fury of the mob, so that he
 was obliged on several occasions to flee from house to house to escape
 instant death.  It is easy to understand that services of this kind
 could not fail to attract the attention of the heads of the Christian
 community at Alexandria; and partly, no doubt, because of these, but
 chiefly on account of his high literary reputation, Bishop Demetrius
 appointed him to the office of master in the Catechetical School, which
 was at that time vacant (by the departure of Clement, who had quitted
 the city on the outbreak of the persecution), although he was still a
 layman, and had not passed his eighteenth year.  The choice of
 Demetrius was amply justified by the result.  Origen discontinued his
 instructions in literature, in order to devote himself exclusively to
 the work of teaching in the Catechetical School.  For his labours he
 refused all remuneration.  He sold the books which he possessed,--many
 of them manuscripts which he himself had copied,--on condition of
 receiving from the purchaser four obols [1874] a day; and on this
 scanty pittance he subsisted, leading for many years a life of the
 greatest asceticism and devotion to study.  After a day of labour in
 the school, he used to devote the greater part of the night to the
 investigation of Scripture, sleeping on the bare ground, and keeping
 frequent fasts.  He carried out literally the command of the Saviour,
 not to possess two coats, nor wear shoes.  He consummated his work of
 mortification of the flesh by an act of self mutilation, springing from
 a perverted interpretation of our Lord's words in Matthew xix. 12 and
 the desire to place himself beyond the reach of temptation in the
 intercourse which he necessarily had to hold with youthful female
 catechumens. [1875] This act was destined to exercise a baneful
 influence upon his subsequent career in the Church.

 During the episcopate of Zephyrinus (201-218) Origen visited Rome,
 [1876] and on his return again resumed his duties in the Catechetical
 School, transferring the care of the younger catechumens to his friend
 and former pupil Heraclas, that he might devote himself with less
 distraction to the instruction of the more advanced, and to the more
 thorough investigation and exposition of Scripture.  With a view to
 accomplish this more successfully, it is probable that about this time
 he set himself to acquire a knowledge of the Hebrew language, the fruit
 of which may be seen in the fragments which remain to us of his magnum
 opus, the Hexapla, and as many among the more cultured heathens,
 attracted by his reputation, seem to have attended his lectures, he
 felt it necessary to make himself more extensively acquainted with the
 doctrines of the Grecian schools, that he might meet his opponents upon
 their own ground, and for this purpose he attended the prelections of
 Ammonius Saccas, at that time in high repute at Alexandria as an
 expounder of the Neo-Platonic philosophy, of which school he has
 generally been considered the founder.  The influence which the study
 of philosophical speculations exerted upon the mind of Origen may be
 traced in the whole course of his after development, and proved the
 fruitful source of many of those errors which were afterwards laid to
 his charge, and the controversies arising out of which disturbed the
 peace of the Church during the two following centuries.  As was to be
 expected, the fame of the great Alexandrine teacher was not confined to
 his native city, but spread far and wide; and an evidence of this was
 the request made by the Roman governor of the province of Arabia to
 Demetrius and to the prefect of Egypt, that they would send Origen to
 him that he might hold an interview with one whose reputation was so
 great.  We have no details of this visit, for all that Eusebius relates
 is that, "having accomplished the objects of his journey, he again
 returned to Alexandria." [1877] It was in the year 216 that the
 Emperor Caracalla visited Alexandria, and directed a bloody persecution
 against its inhabitants, especially the literary members of the
 community, in revenge for the sarcastic verses which had been composed
 against him for the murder of his brother Geta, a crime which he had
 perpetrated under circumstances of the basest treachery and cruelty.

 Origen occupied too prominent a position in the literary Society of the
 city to be able to remain with safety, and therefore withdrew to
 Palestine to his friend Bishop Alexander of Jerusalem, and afterwards
 to Cæsarea, where he received an honourable welcome from Bishop
 Theoctistus.  This step proved the beginning of his after troubles.
 These two men, filled with becoming admiration for the most learned
 teacher in the Church, requested him to expound the Scriptures in their
 presence in a public assembly of the Christians.  Origen, although
 still a layman, and without any sacerdotal dignity in the Church,
 complied with the request.  When this proceeding reached the ears of
 Demetrius, he was filled with the utmost indignation.  "Such an act was
 never either heard or done before, that laymen should deliver
 discourses in the presence of the bishops," [1878] was his indignant
 remonstrance to the two offending bishops, and Origen received a
 command to return immediately to Alexandria.  He obeyed, and for some
 years appears to have devoted himself solely to his studies in his
 usual spirit of self-abnegation.

 It was probably during this period that the commencement of his
 friendship with Ambrosius is to be dated.  Little is known of this
 individual.  Eusebius [1879] states that he had formerly been an
 adherent of the Valentinian heresy, but had been converted by the
 arguments and eloquence of Origen to the orthodox faith of the Church.
 They became intimate friends; and as Ambrose seems to have been
 possessed of large means, and entertained an unbounded admiration of
 the learning and abilities of his friend, it was his delight to bear
 the expenses attending the transcription and publication of the many
 works which he persuaded him to give to the world.  He furnished him
 "with more than seven amanuenses, who relieved each other at stated
 times, and with an equal number of transcribers, along with young girls
 who had been practiced in calligraphy," [1880] to make fair copies for
 publication of the works dictated by Origen.  The literary activity of
 these years must have been prodigious, and probably they were among the
 happiest which Origen ever enjoyed.  Engaged in his favourite studies,
 surrounded by many friends, adding yearly to his own stores of
 learning, and enriching the literature of the Church with treatises of
 the highest value in the department of sacred criticism and exegesis,
 it is difficult to conceive a condition of things more congenial to the
 mind of a true scholar.  Only one incident of any importance seems to
 have taken place during these peaceful years,--his visit to Julia
 Mammæa, the pious mother of Alexander Severus.  This noble lady had
 heard of the fame of Origen, and invited him to visit her at Antioch,
 sending a military escort to conduct him from Alexandria to the Syrian
 capital.  He remained with her some time, "exhibiting innumerable
 illustrations of the glory of the Lord, and of the excellence of divine
 instruction, and then hastened back to his accustomed studies." [1881]

 These happy years, however, were soon to end.  Origen was called to
 Greece, probably about the year 228, [1882] upon what Eusebius vaguely
 calls "the pressing need of ecclesiastical affairs." [1883] But, this
 has generally been understood [1884] to refer to the prevalence of
 heretical views in the Church there, for the eradication of which the
 assistance of Origen was invoked.  Before entering on this journey, he
 obtained letters of recommendation from his bishop. [1885] He passed
 through Palestine on his way to Greece, and at Cæsarea received at the
 hands of his friends Alexander and Theoctistus ordination to the office
 of presbyter,--an honour which proved to him afterwards the source of
 much persecution and annoyance.  No doubt the motives of his friends
 were of the highest kind, and among them may have been the desire to
 take away the ground of objection formerly raised by Demetrius against
 the public preaching of a mere layman in the presence of a bishop.  But
 they little dreamed of the storm which this act of theirs was to raise,
 and of the consequences which it was to bring upon the head of him whom
 they had sought to honour.  After completing his journey through
 Greece, Origen returned to Alexandria about the year 230.  He there
 found his bishop greatly incensed against him for what had taken place
 at Cæsarea.  Nor did his anger expend itself in mere objurgations and
 rebukes.  In the year 231 a synod was summoned by Demetrius, composed
 of Egyptian bishops and Alexandrian presbyters, who declared Origen
 unworthy to hold the office of teacher, and excommunicated him from the
 fellowship of the Church of Alexandria.  Even this did not satisfy the
 vindictive feeling of Demetrius.  He summoned a second synod, in which
 the bishops alone were permitted to vote, and by their suffrages Origen
 was degraded from the office of presbyter, and intimation of this
 sentence was ordered to be made by encyclical letter to the various
 Churches.  The validity of the sentence was recognised by all of them,
 with the exception of those in Palestine, Phoenicia, Arabia, and
 Achaia; a remarkable proof of the position of influence which was at
 that time held by the Church of Alexandria.  Origen appears to have
 quitted the city before the bursting of the storm, and betook himself
 to Cæsarea, which henceforth became his home, and the seat of his
 labours for a period of nearly a quarter of a century.  The motives
 which impelled Demetrius to this treatment of Origen have been
 variously stated and variously criticized.  Eusebius [1886] refers his
 readers for a full account of all the matters involved to the treatise
 which he and Pamphilus composed in his defence; but this work has not
 come down to us, [1887] although we possess a brief notice of it in the
 Bibliotheca of Photius, [1888] from which we derive our knowledge of
 the proceedings of the two synods.  There seems little reason to doubt
 that jealousy of interference on the part of the bishops of another
 diocese was one main cause of the resentment displayed by Demetrius;
 while it is also possible that another alleged cause, the heterodox
 character of some of Origen's opinions, as made known in his already
 published works, among which were his Stromata and De Principiis,
 [1889] may have produced some effect upon the minds of the hostile
 bishops.  Hefele [1890] asserts that the act of the Palestinian bishops
 was contrary to the Church law of the time, and that Demetrius was
 justified on that ground for his procedure against him.  But it may
 well be doubted whether there was any generally understood law or
 practice existing at so early a period of the Church's history.  If so,
 it is difficult to understand how it should have been unknown to the
 Palestinian bishops; or, on the supposition of any such existing law or
 usage, it is equally difficult to conceive that either they themselves
 or Origen should have agreed to disregard it, knowing as they did the
 jealous temper of Demetrius, displayed on the occasion of Origen's
 preaching at Cæsarea already referred to.  This had drawn from the
 Alexandrine bishop an indignant remonstrance, in which he had asserted
 that such an act was "quite unheard of before;" [1891] but, to this
 statement the Cæsarean bishops replied in a letter, in which they
 enumerated several instances of laymen who had addressed the
 congregation. [1892] The probabilities, therefore, are in favour of
 there being no generally understood law or practice on the subject, and
 that the procedure, therefore, was dictated by hierarchical jealousy on
 the part of Demetrius.  According to Eusebius, [1893] indeed, the act
 of mutilation already referred to was made a ground of accusation
 against Origen; and there seems no doubt that there existed an old
 canon of the Church, [1894] based upon the words in Deuteronomy xxiii.
 1, which rendered one who had committed such an act ineligible for
 office in the Church.  But there is no trace of this act, as
 disqualifying Origen for the office of presbyter, having been urged by
 Demetrius, so far as can be discovered from the notices of the two
 synods which have been preserved by Rufinus and Photius.  And it seems
 extremely probable, as Redepenning remarks, [1895] that if Demetrius
 were acquainted with this act of Origen, as Eusebius says he was,
 [1896] he made no public mention of it, far less that he made it a
 presence for his deposition.

 Demetrius did not long survive the execution of his vengeance against
 his unfortunate catechist.  He died about a year afterwards, and was
 succeeded by Heraclas, the friend and former pupil of Origen.  It does
 not, however, appear that Heraclas made any effort to have the sentence
 against Origen recalled, so that he might return to the early seat of
 his labours.  Origen devoted himself at Cæsarea chiefly to exegetical
 studies upon the books of Scripture, enjoying the countenance and
 friendship of the two bishops Alexander and Theoctistus, who are said
 by Eusebius "to have attended him the whole time as pupils do their
 master."  He speedily raised the theological school of that city to a
 degree of reputation which attracted many pupils.  Among those who
 placed themselves under his instructions were two young Cappadocians,
 who had come to Cæsarea with other intentions, but who were so
 attracted by the whole character and personality of Origen, that they
 immediately became his pupils.  The former of these, afterwards Gregory
 Thaumaturgus, Bishop of New Cæsarea, has left us, in the panegyric
 which he wrote after a discipleship of five years, a full and admiring
 account of the method of his great master.

 The persecution under the Emperor Maximin obliged Origen to take refuge
 in Cæsarea in Cappadocia, where he remained in concealment about two
 years in the house of a Christian lady named Juliana, who was the
 heiress of Symmachus, the Ebionite translator of the Septuagint, and
 from whom he obtained several mss. which had belonged to Symmachus.
 Here, also, he composed his Exhortation to Martyrdom, which was
 expressly written for the sake of his friends Ambrosius and
 Protoctetus, who had been imprisoned on account of their Christian
 profession, but who recovered their freedom after the death of
 Maximin,--an event which allowed Origen to return to the Palestinian
 Cæsarea and to the prosecution of his labours.  A visit to Athens,
 where he seems to have remained some time, and to Bostra in Arabia, in
 order to bring back to the true faith Bishop Beryllus, who had
 expressed heterodox opinions upon the subject of the divinity of
 Christ, (in which attempt he proved successful,) were the chief events
 of his life during the next five years.  On the outbreak of the Decian
 persecution, however, in 249, he was imprisoned at Tyre, to which city
 he had gone from Cæsarea for some unknown reason, and was made to
 suffer great cruelties by his persecutors.  The effect of these upon a
 frame worn out by ascetic labours may be easily conceived.  Although he
 survived his imprisonment, his body was so weakened by his sufferings,
 that he died at Tyre in 254, in the seventieth year of his age.

 The character of Origen is singularly pure and noble; for his moral
 qualities are as remarkable as his intellectual gifts.  The history of
 the Church records the names of few whose patience and meekness under
 unmerited suffering were more conspicuous than his.  How very
 differently would Jerome have acted under circumstances like those
 which led to Origen's banishment from Alexandria!  And what a
 favourable contrast is presented by the self-denying asceticism of his
 whole life, to the sins which stained the early years of Augustine,
 prior to his conversion!  The impression which his whole personality
 made upon those who came within the sphere of his influence is
 evidenced in a remarkable degree by the admiring affection displayed
 towards him by his friend Ambrose and his pupil Gregory.  Nor was it
 friends alone that he so impressed.  To him belongs the rare honour of
 convincing heretics of their errors, and of leading them back to the
 Church; a result which must have been due as much to the gentleness and
 earnestness of his Christian character, as to the prodigious learning,
 marvellous acuteness, and logical power, which entitle him to be
 regarded as the greatest of the Fathers.  It is singular, indeed, that
 a charge of heresy should have been brought, not only after his death,
 but even during his life, against one who rendered such eminent
 services to the cause of orthodox Christianity.  But this charge must
 be considered in reference to the times when he lived and wrote.  No
 General Council had yet been held to settle authoritatively the
 doctrine of the Church upon any of those great questions, the
 discussion of which convulsed the Christian world during the two
 following centuries; and in these circumstances greater latitude was
 naturally permissible than would have been justifiable at a later
 period.  Moreover, a mind so speculative as that of Origen, and so
 engrossed with the deepest and most difficult problems of human
 thought, must sometimes have expressed itself in a way liable to be
 misunderstood.  But no doubt the chief cause of his being regarded as a
 heretic is to be found in the haste with which he allowed many of his
 writings to be published.  Had he considered more carefully what he
 intended to bring before the public eye, less occasion would have been
 furnished to objectors, and the memory of one of the greatest scholars
 and most devoted Christians that the world has ever seen would have
 been freed, to a great extent at least, from the reproach of heresy.

 Origen was a very voluminous author.  Jerome says that he wrote more
 than any individual could read; and Epiphanius [1897] relates that his
 writings amounted to 6,000 volumes, by which statement we are probably
 to understand that every individual treatise, large or small, including
 each of the numerous homilies, was counted as a separate volume.  The
 admiration entertained for him by his friend Ambrosius, and the
 readiness with which the latter bore all the expenses of transcription
 and publication, led Origen to give to the world much which otherwise
 would never have seen the light.

 [1867] Cf. Redepenning's Origenes, vol. i. pp. 417-420 (Erste Beilage:
 über Origenes Geburtsjahr und den Ort, wo er geboren wurde).  [His
 surname denotes the strength, clearness, and point of his mind and
 methods.  It is generally given Adamantius.]

 [1868] Horus vel Or.  Cf. Ibid. (Zweite Beilage:  über Namen und
 Beinamen der Origenes).  [But compare Cave, vol. i. p. 322.  Lives of
 the Fathers, Oxford, 1840.]

 [1869] Encyclopædie der Katholischen Theologie, s.v. Origenes.

 [1870] Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. ii. § 9.

 [1871] Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. ii. §§ 10, 11.

 [1872] Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. ii.:  Epeche, me di' hemas
 allo ti phroneses.

 [1873] tes ex ekeinou peri ten pistin orthodoxias enarge pareicheto
 deigmata.

 [1874] The obol was about three-halfpence of English money.

 [1875] For a full discussion of the doubts which have been thrown upon
 the credibility of Eusebius in this matter by Schnitzer and Baur, cf.
 Redepenning, Origenes, vol. i. pp. 444-458, and Hefele, Encyclopædie
 der Katholischen Theologie, s.v. Origenes.

 [1876] [Where he met with Hippolytus, and heard him preach, according
 to St. Jerome.]

 [1877] Euseb., Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 19, § 16.

 [1878] Ibid., b. vi. c. 19.

 [1879] Ibid., b. vi. c. 18.

 [1880] Euseb., Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 23.

 [1881] Euseb., Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 21:  par' he chronon diatripsas
 pleista te hosa eis ten tou Kuriou doxan kai tes tou theiou
 didaskaleiou aretes epideixamenos, epi tas sunetheis espeude diatribas.

 [1882] Cf. Hefele, Encyclopædie, etc., s.v. Origenes.

 [1883] 'Epeigouses chreias ekklesiastikon heneka pragmaton.

 [1884] Cf. Redepenning, vol. i. p. 406, etc.

 [1885] Cf. ibid.

 [1886] Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 22. and c. 33.

 [1887] With the exception of the first book; cf. Migne, vol. ix. pp.
 542-632.

 [1888] Cf. Photii Bibliotheca, ed. Hoeschel, p. 298.

 [1889] Eusebius expressly mentions that both these works, among others,
 were published before he left Alexandria.--Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 24.

 [1890] s.v. Origenes.

 [1891] Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 19.

 [1892] Ibid.

 [1893] Ibid., b. vi. c. 8.

 [1894] ho akroteriasas heauton me genestho klerikos.  Cf. Redepenning,
 vol. i. pp. 208, 216, 218.

 [1895] Cf. Redepenning, vol. i. p. 409, note 2.

 [1896] Hist. Eccles., b. vi. c. 8.

 [1897] Hæres, lxiv. 63.

 The works of the great Adamantinus may be classed under the following
 divisions:

 (1)  Exegetical Works.

 These comprise Scholia, brief notes on Scripture, of which only
 fragments remain:  Tomoi, Commentaries, lengthened expositions, of
 which we possess considerable portions, including those on Matthew,
 John, and Epistle to the Romans; and about 200 Homilies, upon the
 principal books of the Old and New Testaments, a full list of which may
 be seen in Migne's edition.  In these works his peculiar system of
 interpretation found ample scope for exercise; and although he carried
 out his principle of allegorizing many things, which in their
 historical and literal signification offended his exegetical sense, he
 nevertheless maintains that "the passages which hold good in their
 historical acceptation are much more numerous than those which contain
 a purely spiritual meaning." [1898] The student will find much that
 is striking and suggestive in his remarks upon the various passages
 which he brings under review.  For an account of his method of
 interpreting Scripture, and the grounds on which he based it, the
 reader may consult the fourth book of the treatise On the Principles.

 [1898] [De Princip., b. iv. i. 19.  S.]

 (2)  Critical Works.

 The great critical work of Origen was the Hexapla or Six-columned
 Bible; an attempt to provide a revised text of the Septuagint
 translation of Old Testament Scripture.  On this undertaking he is said
 to have spent eight-and-twenty years of his life, and to have acquired
 a knowledge of Hebrew in order to qualify himself for the task.  Each
 page of this work consisted, with the exception to be noticed
 immediately, of six columns.  In the first was placed the current
 Hebrew text; in the second, the same represented in Greek letters; in
 the third, the version of Aquila; in the fourth, that of Symmachus; in
 the fifth, the text of the LXX., as it existed at the time; and in the
 sixth, the version of Theodotion.  Having come into possession also of
 certain other Greek translations of some of the books of Scripture, he
 added these in their appropriate place, so that the work presented in
 some parts the appearance of seven, eight, or nine columns, and was
 termed Heptapla, Octopla, or Enneapla, in consequence.  He inserted
 critical marks in the text of the LXX., an asterisk to denote what
 ought to be added, and an obelus to denote what ought to be omitted;
 taking the additions chiefly from the version of Theodotion.  The work,
 with the omission of the Hebrew column, and that representing the
 Hebrew in Greek letters, was termed Tetrapla; and with regard to it, it
 is uncertain whether it is to be considered a preliminary work on the
 part of Origen, undertaken by way of preparation for the larger, or
 merely as an excerpt from the latter.  The whole extended, it is said,
 to nearly fifty volumes, and was, of course, far too bulky for common
 use, and too costly for transcription.  It was placed in some
 repository in the city of Tyre, from which it was removed after
 Origen's death to the library at Cæsarea, founded by Pamphilus, the
 friend of Eusebius.  It is supposed to have been burnt at the capture
 of Cæsarea by the Arabs in 653 a.d.  The column, however, containing
 the version of the LXX. had been copied by Pamphilus and Eusebius,
 along with the critical marks of Origen, although, owing to
 carelessness on the part of subsequent transcribers, the text was soon
 again corrupted.  The remains of this work were published by Montfaucon
 at Paris, 1713, 2 vols. folio; by Bahrdt at Leipsic in 1769; and is at
 present again in course of publication from the Clarendon press,
 Oxford, under the editorship of Mr. Field, who has made use of the
 Syriac-Hexaplar version, and has added various fragments not contained
 in prior editions.  (For a full and critical account of this work, the
 English reader is referred to Dr. Sam. Davidson's Biblical Criticism,
 vol. i. ch. xii., which has been made use of for the above notice.)

 (3)  Apologetical Works.

 His great apologetical work was the treatise undertaken at the special
 request of his friend Ambrosius, in answer to the attack of the heathen
 philosopher Celsus on the Christian religion, in a work which he
 entitled Logos alethes or A True Discourse.  Origen states that he had
 heard that there were two individuals of this name, both of them
 Epicureans, the earlier of the two having lived in the time of Nero,
 and the other in the time of Adrian, or later. [1899] Redepenning is
 of opinion that Celsus must have composed his work in the time of
 Marcus Aurelius (161-180 a.d.), on account of his supposed mention of
 the Marcionites (whose leader did not make his appearance at Rome
 before 142 a.d.), and of the Marcellians (followers of the Carpocratian
 Marcellina), a sect which was founded after the year 155 a.d. under
 Bishop Anicetus. [1900] Origen believed his opponent to be an
 Epicurean, but to have adopted other doctrines than those of Epicurus,
 because he thought that by so doing he could assail Christianity to
 greater advantage. [1901] The work which Origen composed in answer to
 the so-styled True Discourse consists of eight books, and belongs to
 the latest years of his life.  It has always been regarded as the great
 apologetic work of antiquity; and no one can peruse it without being
 struck by the multifarious reading, wonderful acuteness, and rare
 subtlety of mind which it displays.  But the rule which Origen
 prescribed to himself, of not allowing a single objection of his
 opponent to remain unanswered, leads him into a minuteness of detail,
 and into numerous repetitions, which fatigue the reader, and detract
 from the interest and unity of the work.  He himself confesses that he
 began it on one plan, and carried it out on another. [1902] No doubt,
 had he lived to re-write and condense it, it would have been more
 worthy of his reputation.  But with all its defects, it is a great
 work, and well deserves the notice of the students of Apologetics.  The
 table of contents subjoined to the translation will convey a better
 idea of its nature than any description which our limits would permit
 us to give.

 [1899] Cf. Contra Celsum, I. c. viii. ad fin.

 [1900] Cf. Redepenning, vol. ii. p. 131, note 2.

 [1901] Contra Celsum, I. ch. viii.

 [1902] Preface, b. i. § 6.

 (4)  Dogmatic Works.

 These include the Stromateis, a work composed in imitation of the
 treatise of Clement of the same name, and consisting originally of ten
 books, of which only three fragments exist in a Latin version by
 Jerome; [1903] a treatise on the Resurrection, of which four fragments
 remain; [1904] and the treatise Peri 'Archon, De Principiis, which
 contains Origen's views on various questions of systematic theology.
 The work has come down to us in the Latin translation of his admirer
 Rufinus; but, from a comparison of the few fragments of the original
 Greek which have been preserved, we see that Rufinus was justly
 chargeable with altering many of Origen's expressions, in order to
 bring his doctrine on certain points more into harmony with the
 orthodox views of the time.  The De Principiis consists of four books,
 and is the first of the works of Origen in this series, to which we
 refer the reader.

 [1903] Migne, vol. i. pp. 102-107.

 [1904] Migne, vol. i. 91-100.

 (5)  Practical Works.

 Under this head we place the little treatise Peri Euches, On Prayer,
 written at the instance of his friend Ambrose, and which contains an
 exposition of the Lord's Prayer; the Logos protreptikos  eis marturion,
 Exhortation to Martyrdom, composed at the outbreak of the persecution
 by Maximian, when his friends Ambrose and Protoctetus were imprisoned.
 Of his numerous letters only two have come down entire, viz., that
 which was addressed to Julius Africanus, who had questioned the
 genuineness of the history of Susanna in the apocryphal additions to
 the book of Daniel, and that to Gregory Thaumaturgus on the use of
 Greek philosophy in the explanation of Scripture, although, from the
 brevity of the latter, it is questionable whether it is more than a
 fragment of the original. [1905] The Philokalia, Philocalia, was a
 compilation from the writings of Origen, intended to explain the
 difficult passages of Scripture, and executed by Basil the Great and
 Gregory of Nazianzum; large extracts of which have been preserved,
 especially of that part which was taken from the treatise against
 Celsus.  The remains were first printed at Paris in 1618, and again at
 Cambridge in 1676, in the reprint of Spencer's edition of the Contra
 Celsum.  In the Benedictine edition, and in Migne's reprint, the
 various portions are quoted in footnotes under the respective passages
 of Origen's writings.

 [1905] Both of these are translated in the first volume of Origen's
 works in this series.

 (6)  Editions of Origin. [1906]

 The first published works of Origen were his Homilies, which appeared
 in 1475, although neither the name of the publisher nor the place of
 publication is given.  These were followed by the treatise against
 Celsus in the translation of Christopher Persana, which appeared at
 Rome in 1481; and this, again, by an edition of the Homilies at Venice
 in 1503, containing those on the first four books of Moses, Joshua, and
 Judges.  The first collective edition of the whole works was given to
 the world in a Latin translation by James Merlin, and was published in
 two folio volumes, first at Paris in 1512 and 1519, and afterwards at
 Paris in 1522 and 1530.  A revision of Merlin's edition was begun by
 Erasmus, and completed, after his death, by Beatus Rhenanus.  This
 appeared at Basle in 1536 in two folio volumes, and again in 1557 and
 1571.  A much better and more complete edition was undertaken by the
 Benedictine Gilbertus Genebrardus, which was published also in two
 volumes folio at Paris in 1574, and again in 1604 and 1619.  Hoeschel
 published the treatise against Celsus at Augsburg in 1605; Spencer, at
 Cambridge in 1658 and 1677, to which was added the Philocalia, which
 had first appeared in a Latin translation by Genebrardus, and
 afterwards in Greek by Tarinus at Paris in 1618 and 1624, in quarto.
 Huet, Bishop of Avranches, published the exegetical writings in Greek,
 including the Commentaries on Matthew and John, in two volumes folio,
 of which the one appeared at Rouen in 1668, and the other at Paris in
 1679.  The great edition by the two learned Benedictines of St.
 Maur--Charles de la Rue, and his nephew Vincent de la Rue--was
 published at Paris between the years 1733 and 1759.  This is a work of
 immense industry and labour, and remains the standard to the present
 time.  It has been reprinted by Migne in his series of the Greek
 Fathers, in nine volumes, large 8vo.  In Oberthür's series of the Greek
 Fathers, seven volumes contain the chief portion of Origen's writings;
 while Lommatzsch has published the whole in twenty-five small volumes,
 Berlin, 1831-48, containing the Greek text alone.

 For further information upon the life and opinions of Origen, the
 reader may consult Redepenning's Origenes, 2 vols., Bonn, 1841, 1846;
 the articles in Herzog's Encyclopädie and Wetzer's and Wette's
 Kirchen-Lexikon, by Kling and Hefele respectively; the brilliant sketch
 by Pressensé in his Martyrs and Apologists; [1907] and the learned
 compilation of Huet, entitled Origeniana, to be found in the ninth
 volume of Migne's edition.

 [In the Edinburgh series the foregoing Life was delayed till the
 appearance of the second volume.  The earlier volume appeared with a
 preface, as follows:]--

 The name of the illustrious Origen comes before us in this series in
 connection with his works De Principiis, Epistola ad Africanum,
 Epistola ad Gregorium, [1908] and the treatise Contra Celsum. [1909]

 It is in his treatise Peri 'Archon, or, as it is commonly known under
 the Latin title, De Principiis, that most fully develops his system,
 and brings out his peculiar principles.  None of his works exposed him
 to so much animadversion in the ancient Church as this.  On it chiefly
 was based the charge of heresy which some vehemently pressed against
 him,--a charge from which even his firmest friends felt it no easy
 matter absolutely to defend him.  The points on which it was held that
 he had plainly departed from the orthodox faith, were the four
 following:  First, That the souls of men had existed in a previous
 state, and that their imprisonment in material bodies was a punishment
 for sins which they had then committed.  Second, That the human soul of
 Christ had also previously existed, and been united to the Divine
 nature before that incarnation of the Son of God which is related in
 the Gospels.  Third, That our material bodies shall be transformed into
 absolutely ethereal ones at the resurrection; and Fourth, That all men,
 and even devils, shall be finally restored through the mediation of
 Christ.  His principles of interpreting Scripture are also brought out
 in this treatise; and while not a little ingenuity is displayed in
 illustrating and maintaining them, the serious errors into which they
 might too easily lead will be at once perceived by the reader.

 It is much to be regretted that the original Greek of the De Principiis
 has for the most part perished.  We possess it chiefly in a Latin
 translation by Rufinus.  And there can be no doubt that he often took
 great liberties with his author.  So much was this felt to be the case,
 that Jerome undertook a new translation of the work; but only small
 portions of his version have reached our day.  He strongly accuses
 Rufinus of unfaithfulness as an interpreter, while he also inveighs
 bitterly against Origen himself, as having departed from the Catholic
 Faith, specially in regard to the doctrine of the Trinity.  There
 seems, however, after all, no adequate reason to doubt the substantial
 orthodoxy of our author, although the bent of his mind and the nature
 of his studies led him to indulge in many vain and unauthorized
 speculations.

 The Epistle to Africanus was drawn forth by a letter which that learned
 writer had addressed to Origen respecting the story of Susanna appended
 to the book of Daniel.  Africanus had grave doubts as to the canonical
 authority of the account.  Origen replies to his objections, and seeks
 to uphold the story as both useful in itself, and a genuine portion of
 the ancient prophetical writings.

 The treatise of Origen Against Celsus is, of all his works, the most
 interesting to the modern reader.  It is a defence of Christianity in
 opposition to a Greek philosopher named Celsus, who had attacked it in
 a work entitled 'Alethes Logos, that is, The True Word, or The True
 Discourse.  Of this work we know nothing, except from the quotations
 contained in the answer given to it by Origen.  Nor has anything very
 certain been ascertained respecting its author.  According to Origen,
 he was a follower of Epicures, but others have regarded him as a
 Platonist.  If we may judge of the work by those specimens of it
 presented in the reply of Origen, it was little better than a compound
 of sophistry and slander.  But there is reason to be grateful for it,
 as having called forth the admirable answer of Origen.  This work was
 written in the old age of our author, and is composed with great care;
 while it abounds with proofs of the widest erudition.  It is also
 perfectly orthodox; and, as Bishop Bull has remarked, it is only fair
 that we should judge from a work written with the view of being
 considered by the world at large, and with the most elaborate care, as
 to the mature and finally accepted views of the author.

 The best edition of Origen's works is that superintended by Charles and
 Charles Vincent de la Rue, Paris, 1783, 4 vols. fol., which is
 reprinted by Migne.  There is also an edition in 25 volumes, based upon
 that of De la Rue, but without the Latin translation, by Lommatzsch,
 Berlin, 1831-1848.  The De Principiis has been separately edited by
 Redepenning, Leipzig, 1836.  Spencer edited the Contra Celsum,
 Cambridge, 1677.

 [Professor Crombie was assisted in the Contra Celsum by the Rev. W. H.
 Cairns, M.A., Rector of the Dumfries Academy.  Mr. Cairns (since
 deceased) was the translator of Books VII. and VIII. of that work.]

 [The Works of Origen included in this volume having been placed in my
 hands by the Right Reverend Editor of the present series (who restricts
 himself to a limited task of supervision), I have endeavoured to do for
 them that which seemed needful in the circumstances.  The temptation
 was strong to enter upon annotations, for which no one of the authors
 among the Ante-Nicene Fathers offers larger room, and to insert
 corrections of various sorts, based upon modern progress and research.
 But, in accordance with the plan of this series, I have been forced to
 resist this temptation, and have striven only to be useful in matters
 which, though of great moment, are toilsome, and in no wise flattering
 to editorial vanity or conceit.

 I have silently corrected numerous typographical errors which exist in
 the Edinburgh edition, and have sought to secure uniformity in the
 details of reproducing the work, and, above all, accuracy in all its
 parts.  Particularly, I may mention that the Scripture references
 needed correction to the extent of more than a hundred places, and that
 references to classical and other writers were often quite astray.  A
 very few notes, enclosed in brackets, are all that I have deemed it
 expedient or proper, on my part, to add.

 While no one who is aware of human infirmity will ever dare to claim
 perfection in the typography of a book which has passed through the
 press under his hands, yet in the present case I venture to assure the
 student and reader that no pains or effort have been spared in order to
 make the volume as accurate as possible in this respect.  Much
 experience and training incline me to hope and believe that success has
 attended my efforts.  S.]

 [1906] Abridged from Redepenning.

 [1907] Harwood's translation.

 [1908] i.e., Thaumaturgus.

 [1909] [The Messrs. Clark announced, in their original plan, that, of
 the manifold works of this great Father, only these specimens could be
 given.]

 Prefatory Notice to Origen's Works.

 ------------------------

 [The great biblical scholar and critic of the first half of the third
 century deserves a more cordial recognition and appreciation than have
 always been accorded to him.  While it is true that in various matters
 he has strange, even wild, fancies, and gives utterance to expressions
 which can hardly, if at all, be justified; while it is also true that
 he indulges beyond all reason (as it appears to us of the present age)
 in utterly useless speculations, and carries to excess his great love
 of allegorizing,--yet these are rather of the nature of possible
 guesses and surmises on numerous topics, of more or less interest, than
 deliberate, systematic teaching as matters of faith.  He frequently
 speaks of them in this wise, and does not claim for these guesses and
 speculations any more credit than they may appear to his readers to be
 worth.  In the great fundamentals of the Christian creed Origen is
 unquestionably sound and true.  He does not always express himself in
 accordance with the exact definitions which the Church Catholic secured
 in the century after his decease, as a necessary result of the struggle
 with Arian and other deadly heresies; but surely, in fairness, he is
 not to be too severely judged for this.  Some writers (e.g., J. M.
 Neale, in his History of the Patriarchate of Alexandria) give an
 unfavorable and condemnatory view of Origen and his career, but I am of
 opinion that Neale and others push their objections much too far.  I
 hold that Bishop Bull, and men like him, are nearer to truth and
 justice in defending Origen and his lifelong labors in the cause of the
 Master.

 The Peri 'Archon, which has come to us through the professedly
 paraphrastic but really unsatisfactory version of Rufinus, is the work
 which has given chief offence, and brought much odium upon Origen; but
 as this was written in early life, and it is doubtful in how far Origen
 is responsible for many things that are in it, it is only fair and just
 to judge him by such works as the Kata Kelson and his valuable Homilies
 on various books of Holy Scripture. [1910] These go far to prove
 clearly that he, whom Dr. Barrow designates as "the father of
 interpreters," is worthy the high estimate which ancient as well as
 modern defenders of his good name have fully set forth, and to justify
 the conviction, that, if we possessed more out of the numerous works of
 his which have entirely perished, we should rank him even more highly
 than is done by Bishop Bull in his Defensio Fidei Nicenæ. [1911]

 In conclusion, I give a paragraph from the very valuable Introduction
 to the Criticism of the New Testament, by Dr. F. H. Scrivener, [1912]
 one of the ablest of living biblical scholars and critics:--

 "Origen is the most celebrated biblical critic of antiquity.  His is
 the highest name among the critics and expositors of the early Church.
 He is perpetually engaged in the discussion of various readings of the
 New Testament, and employs language, in describing the then existing
 state of the text, which would be deemed strong if applied even to its
 present condition, after the changes which sixteen more centuries must
 needs have produced....Seldom have such warmth of fancy and so bold a
 grasp of mind been united with the lifelong, patient industry which
 procured for this famous man the honourable appellation of
 Adamantius."  S.]

 [1910] It is matter of deep regret that the proposal of the Edinburgh
 publishers, to include in Origen's works a translation of his Homilies,
 did not meet with sufficient encouragement to warrant them in adding
 these to the present series.

 [1911] Book II. cap. ix.

 [1912] Third edition, Cambridge, 1883, pp. 418, 509.

 Prologue of Rufinus.

 ------------------------

 I know that very many of the brethren, induced by their thirst for a
 knowledge of the Scriptures, have requested some distinguished men,
 well versed in Greek learning, to translate Origen into Latin, and so
 make him accessible to Roman readers.  Among these, when our brother
 and colleague [1913] had, at the earnest entreaty of Bishop Damasus,
 translated two of the Homilies on the Song of Songs out of Greek into
 Latin, he prefixed so elegant and noble a preface to that work, as to
 inspire every one with a most eager desire to read and study Origen,
 saying that the expression, "The King hath brought me into his
 chamber," [1914] was appropriate to his feelings, and declaring that
 while Origen in his other works surpassed all writers, he in the Song
 of Songs surpassed even himself.  He promises, indeed, in that very
 preface, that he will present the books on the Song of Songs, and
 numerous others of the works of Origen, in a Latin translation, to
 Roman readers.  But he, finding greater pleasure in compositions of his
 own, pursues an end that is attended with greater fame, viz., in being
 the author rather than the translator of works.  Accordingly we enter
 upon the undertaking, which was thus begun and approved of by him,
 although we cannot compose in a style of elegance equal to that of a
 man of such distinguished eloquence; and therefore I am afraid lest,
 through my fault, the result should follow, that that man, whom he
 deservedly esteems as the second teacher of knowledge and wisdom in the
 Church after the apostles, should, through the poverty of my language,
 appear far inferior to what he is.  And this consideration, which
 frequently recurred to my mind, kept me silent, and prevented me from
 yielding to the numerous entreaties of my brethren, until your
 influence, my very faithful brother Macarius, which is so great,
 rendered it impossible for my unskilfulness any longer to offer
 resistance.  And therefore, that I might not find you too grievous an
 exactor, I gave way, even contrary to my resolution; on the condition
 and arrangement, however, that in my translation I should follow as far
 as possible the rule observed by my predecessors, and especially by
 that distinguished man whom I have mentioned above, who, after
 translating into Latin more than seventy of those treatises of Origen
 which are styled Homilies and a considerable number also of his
 writings on the apostles, in which a good many "stumbling-blocks" are
 found in the original Greek, so smoothed and corrected them in his
 translation, that a Latin reader would meet with nothing which could
 appear discordant with our belief.  His example, therefore, we follow,
 to the best of our ability; if not with equal power of eloquence, yet
 at least with the same strictness of rule, taking care not to reproduce
 those expressions occurring in the works of Origen which are
 inconsistent with and opposed to each other.  The cause of these
 variations we have explained more freely in the Apologeticus, which
 Pamphilus wrote in defence of the works of Origen, where we added a
 brief tract, in which we showed, I think, by unmistakeable proofs, that
 his books had been corrupted in numerous places by heretics and
 malevolent persons, and especially those books of which you now require
 me to undertake the translation, i.e., the books which may be entitled
 De Principiis or De Principatibus, and which are indeed in other
 respects full of obscurities and difficulties.  For he there discusses
 those subjects with respect to which philosophers, after spending all
 their lives upon them, have been unable to discover anything.  But here
 our author strove, as much as in him lay, to turn to the service of
 religion the belief in a Creator, and the rational nature of created
 beings, which the latter had degraded to purposes of wickedness.  If,
 therefore, we have found anywhere in his writings, any statement
 opposed to that view, which elsewhere in his works he had himself
 piously laid down regarding the Trinity, we have either omitted it, as
 being corrupt, and not the composition of Origen, or we have brought it
 forward agreeably to the rule which we frequently find affirmed by
 himself.  If, indeed, in his desire to pass rapidly on, he has, as
 speaking to persons of skill and knowledge, sometimes expressed himself
 obscurely, we have, in order that the passage might be clearer, added
 what we had read more fully stated on the same subject in his other
 works, keeping explanation in view, but adding nothing of our own, but
 simply restoring to him what was his, although occurring in other
 portions of his writings.

 These remarks, therefore, by way of admonition, I have made in the
 preface, lest slanderous individuals perhaps should think that they had
 a second time discovered matter of accusation.  But let perverse and
 disputatious men have a care what they are about.  For we have in the
 meantime undertaken this heavy labour, if God should aid your prayers,
 not to shut the mouths of slanderers (which is impossible, although God
 perhaps will do it), but to afford material to those who desire to
 advance in the knowledge of these things.  And, verily, in the presence
 of God the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, I adjure and
 beseech every one, who may either transcribe or read these books, by
 his belief in the kingdom to come, by the mystery of the resurrection
 from the dead, and by that everlasting fire prepared for the devil and
 his angels, that, as he would not possess for an eternal inheritance
 that place where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and where
 their fire is not quenched and their worm dieth not, he add nothing to
 Scripture, and take nothing away from it, and make no insertion or
 alteration, but that he compare his transcript with the copies from
 which he made it, and make the emendations and distinctions according
 to the letter, and not have his manuscript incorrect or indistinct,
 lest the difficulty of ascertaining the sense, from the indistinctness
 of the copy, should cause greater difficulties to the readers.

 [1913] Jerome is the person alluded to.

 [1914] Cant. i. 4.

 Origen De Principiis.

 ------------------------

 Preface.

 1.  All who believe and are assured that grace and truth were obtained
 through Jesus Christ, and who know Christ to be the truth, agreeably to
 His own declaration, "I am the truth," [1915] derive the knowledge
 which incites men to a good and happy life from no other source than
 from the very words and teaching of Christ.  And by the words of Christ
 we do not mean those only which He spake when He became man and
 tabernacled in the flesh; for before that time, Christ, the Word of
 God, was in Moses and the prophets.  For without the Word of God, how
 could they have been able to prophesy of Christ?  And were it not our
 purpose to confine the present treatise within the limits of all
 attainable brevity, it would not be difficult to show, in proof of this
 statement, out of the Holy Scriptures, how Moses or the prophets both
 spake and performed all they did through being filled with the Spirit
 of Christ.  And therefore I think it sufficient to quote this one
 testimony of Paul from the Epistle to the Hebrews, [1916] in which he
 says:  "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
 the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction
 with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
 season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
 treasures of the Egyptians." [1917] Moreover, that after His
 ascension into heaven He spake in His apostles, is shown by Paul in
 these words:  "Or do you seek a proof of Christ who speaketh in me?"
 [1918]

 2.  Since many, however, of those who profess to believe in Christ
 differ from each other, not only in small and trifling matters, but
 also on subjects of the highest importance, as, e.g., regarding God, or
 the Lord Jesus Christ, or the Holy Spirit; and not only regarding
 these, but also regarding others which are created existences, viz.,
 the powers [1919] and the holy virtues; [1920] it seems on that account
 necessary first of all to fix a definite limit and to lay down an
 unmistakable rule regarding each one of these, and then to pass to the
 investigation of other points.  For as we ceased to seek for truth
 (notwithstanding the professions of many among Greeks and Barbarians to
 make it known) among all who claimed it for erroneous opinions, after
 we had come to believe that Christ was the Son of God, and were
 persuaded that we must learn it from Himself; so, seeing there are many
 who think they hold the opinions of Christ, and yet some of these think
 differently from their predecessors, yet as the teaching of the Church,
 transmitted in orderly succession from the apostles, and remaining in
 the Churches to the present day, is still preserved, that alone is to
 be accepted as truth which differs in no respect from ecclesiastical
 and apostolical tradition.

 3.  Now it ought to be known that the holy apostles, in preaching the
 faith of Christ, delivered themselves with the utmost clearness on
 certain points which they believed to be necessary to every one, even
 to those who seemed somewhat dull in the investigation of divine
 knowledge; leaving, however, the grounds of their statements to be
 examined into by those who should deserve the excellent gifts of the
 Spirit, and who, especially by means of the Holy Spirit Himself, should
 obtain the gift of language, of wisdom, and of knowledge:  while on
 other subjects they merely stated the fact that things were so, keeping
 silence as to the manner or origin of their existence; clearly in order
 that the more zealous of their successors, who should be lovers of
 wisdom, might have a subject of exercise on which to display the fruit
 of their talents,--those persons, I mean, who should prepare themselves
 to be fit and worthy receivers of wisdom.

 4.  The particular points [1921] clearly delivered in the teaching of
 the apostles are as follow:--

 First, That there is one God, who created and arranged all things, and
 who, when nothing existed, called all things into being--God from the
 first creation and foundation of the world--the God of all just men, of
 Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Enoch, Noe, Sere, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the
 twelve patriarchs, Moses, and the prophets; and that this God in the
 last days, as He had announced beforehand by His prophets, sent our
 Lord Jesus Christ to call in the first place Israel to Himself, and in
 the second place the Gentiles, after the unfaithfulness of the people
 of Israel.  This just and good God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
 Christ, Himself gave the law and the prophets, and the Gospels, being
 also the God of the apostles and of the Old and New Testaments.

 Secondly, That Jesus Christ Himself, who came (into the world), was
 born of the Father before all creatures; that, after He had been the
 servant of the Father in the creation of all things--"For by Him were
 all things made" [1922] --He in the last times, divesting Himself (of
 His glory), became a man, and was incarnate although God, and while
 made a man remained the God which He was; that He assumed a body like
 to our own, differing in this respect only, that it was born of a
 virgin and of the Holy Spirit:  that this Jesus Christ was truly born,
 and did truly suffer, and did not endure this death common (to man) in
 appearance only, but did truly die; that He did truly rise from the
 dead; and that after His resurrection He conversed with His disciples,
 and was taken up (into heaven).

 Then, Thirdly, the apostles related that the Holy Spirit was associated
 in honour and dignity with the Father and the Son.  But in His case it
 is not clearly distinguished whether He is to be regarded as born or
 innate, [1923] or also as a Son of God or not:  for these are points
 which have to be inquired into out of sacred Scripture according to the
 best of our ability, and which demand careful investigation.  And that
 this Spirit inspired each one of the saints, whether prophets or
 apostles; and that there was not one Spirit in the men of the old
 dispensation, and another in those who were inspired at the advent of
 Christ, is most clearly taught throughout the Churches.

 5.  After these points, also, the apostolic teaching is that the soul,
 having a substance [1924] and life of its own, shall, after its
 departure from the world, be rewarded according to its deserts, being
 destined to obtain either an inheritance of eternal life and
 blessedness, if its actions shall have procured this for it, or to be
 delivered up to eternal fire and punishments, if the guilt of its
 crimes shall have brought it down to this:  and also, that there is to
 be a time of resurrection from the dead, when this body, which now "is
 sown in corruption, shall rise in incorruption," and that which "is
 sown in dishonour will rise in glory." [1925] This also is clearly
 defined in the teaching of the Church, that every rational soul is
 possessed of free-will and volition; that it has a struggle to maintain
 with the devil and his angels, and opposing influences, [1926] because
 they strive to burden it with sins; but if we live rightly and wisely,
 we should endeavour to shake ourselves free of a burden of that kind.
 From which it follows, also, that we understand ourselves not to be
 subject to necessity, so as to be compelled by all means, even against
 our will, to do either good or evil.  For if we are our own masters,
 some influences perhaps may impel us to sin, and others help us to
 salvation; we are not forced, however, by any necessity either to act
 rightly or wrongly, which those persons think is the case who say that
 the courses and movements of the stars are the cause of human actions,
 not only of those which take place beyond the influence of the freedom
 of the will, but also of those which are placed within our own power.
 But with respect to the soul, whether it is derived from the seed by a
 process of traducianism, so that the reason or substance of it may be
 considered as placed in the seminal particles of the body themselves,
 or whether it has any other beginning; and this beginning, itself,
 whether it be by birth or not, or whether bestowed upon the body from
 without or no, is not distinguished with sufficient clearness in the
 teaching of the Church.

 6.  Regarding the devil and his angels, and the opposing influences,
 the teaching of the Church has laid down that these beings exist
 indeed; but what they are, or how they exist, it has not explained with
 sufficient clearness.  This opinion, however, is held by most, that the
 devil was an angel, and that, having become an apostate, he induced as
 many of the angels as possible to fall away with himself, and these up
 to the present time are called his angels.

 7.  This also is a part of the Church's teaching, that the world was
 made and took its beginning at a certain time, and is to be destroyed
 on account of its wickedness.  But what existed before this world, or
 what will exist after it, has not become certainly known to the many,
 for there is no clear statement regarding it in the teaching of the
 Church.

 8.  Then, finally, that the Scriptures were written by the Spirit of
 God, and have a meaning, not such only as is apparent at first sight,
 but also another, which escapes the notice of most.  For those (words)
 which are written are the forms of certain mysteries, [1927] and the
 images of divine things.  Respecting which there is one opinion
 throughout the whole Church, that the whole law is indeed spiritual;
 but that the spiritual meaning which the law conveys is not known to
 all, but to those only on whom the grace of the Holy Spirit is bestowed
 in the word of wisdom and knowledge.

 The term asomaton, i.e., incorporeal, is disused and unknown, not only
 in many other writings, but also in our own Scriptures.  And if any one
 should quote it to us out of the little treatise entitled The Doctrine
 of Peter, [1928] in which the Saviour seems to say to His disciples, "I
 am not an incorporeal demon," [1929] I have to reply, in the first
 place, that that work is not included among ecclesiastical books; for
 we can show that it was not composed either by Peter or by any other
 person inspired by the Spirit of God.  But even if the point were to be
 conceded, the word asomaton there does not convey the same meaning as
 is intended by Greek and Gentile authors when incorporeal nature is
 discussed by philosophers.  For in the little treatise referred to he
 used the phrase "incorporeal demon" to denote that that form or outline
 of demoniacal body, whatever it is, does not resemble this gross and
 visible body of ours; but, agreeably to the intention of the author of
 the treatise, it must be understood to mean that He had not such a body
 as demons have, which is naturally fine, [1930] and thin as if formed
 of air (and for this reason is either considered or called by many
 incorporeal), but that He had a solid and palpable body.  Now,
 according to human custom, everything which is not of that nature is
 called by the simple or ignorant incorporeal; as if one were to say
 that the air which we breathe was incorporeal, because it is not a body
 of such a nature as can be grasped and held, or can offer resistance to
 pressure.

 9.  We shall inquire, however, whether the thing which Greek
 philosophers call asomaton, or "incorporeal," is found in holy
 Scripture under another name.  For it is also to be a subject of
 investigation how God himself is to be understood,--whether as
 corporeal, and formed according to some shape, or of a different nature
 from bodies,--a point which is not clearly indicated in our teaching.
 And the same inquiries have to be made regarding Christ and the Holy
 Spirit, as well as respecting every soul, and everything possessed of a
 rational nature.

 10.  This also is a part of the teaching of the Church, that there are
 certain angels of God, and certain good influences, which are His
 servants in accomplishing the salvation of men.  When these, however,
 were created, or of what nature they are, or how they exist, is not
 clearly stated.  Regarding the sun, moon, and stars, whether they are
 living beings or without life, there is no distinct deliverance. [1931]

 Every one, therefore, must make use of elements and foundations of this
 sort, according to the precept, "Enlighten yourselves with the light of
 knowledge," [1932] if he would desire to form a connected series and
 body of truths agreeably to the reason of all these things, that by
 clear and necessary statements he may ascertain the truth regarding
 each individual topic, and form, as we have said, one body of doctrine,
 by means of illustrations and arguments,--either those which he has
 discovered in holy Scripture, or which he has deduced by closely
 tracing out the consequences and following a correct method.

 [1915] John xiv. 6.

 [1916] [Here, and frequently elsewhere (some two hundred times in all),
 Origen, in his extant works, ascribes the authorship of the Epistle to
 the Hebrews to St. Paul.  Eusebius (Ecclesiastical History, vi. 25)
 quotes Origen as saying, "My opinion is this:  the thoughts are the
 apostle's; but the diction and phraseology belong to some one who has
 recorded what the apostle said, and as one who noted down what his
 master dictated.  If, then, any Church considers this Epistle as coming
 from Paul, let it be commended for this; for neither did those ancient
 men deliver it as such without cause.  But who it was that committed
 the Epistle to writing, is known only to God."  S.]

 [1917] Heb. xi. 24-26.

 [1918] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

 [1919] Dominationes.

 [1920] Virtutes.

 [1921] Species.

 [1922] John i. 3.

 [1923] Innatus.  The words which Rufinus has rendered "natus an
 innatus" are rendered by Jerome in his Epistle to Avitus (94 alias 59),
 "factus an infectus."  Criticising the errors in the first book of the
 Principles, he says:  "Origen declares the Holy Spirit to be third in
 dignity and honour after the Father and the Son; and although
 professing ignorance whether he were created or not (factus an
 infectus), he indicated afterwards his opinion regarding him,
 maintaining that nothing was uncreated except God the Father."  Jerome,
 no doubt, read genetos e agenetos, and Rufinus gennetos e
 agennetos.--R.

 [1924] Substantia.

 [1925] 1 Cor. xv. 42, 43.

 [1926] Virtutes.

 [1927] Sacramentorum.

 [1928] Eusebius (Hist. Eccles., iii. c. 36), treating of Ignatius,
 quotes from his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna as follows:  "Writing
 to the Smyrnæans, he (Ignatius) has employed words respecting Jesus, I
 know not whence they are taken, to the following effect:  But I know
 and believe that He was seen after the resurrection; and when He came
 to Peter and his companions, He said to them, Take and handle Me, and
 see that I am not an incorporeal spirit.'"  Jerome, in his catalogue of
 ecclesiastical writers, says the words are a quotation from the Gospel
 of the Nazarenes, a work which he had recently translated.  Origen here
 quotes them, however, from The Doctrine of Peter, on which Ruæus
 remarks that the words might be contained in both of these apocryphal
 works.

 [1929] Dæmonium.

 [1930] Subtile.

 [1931] [See note, infra, at end of cap. vi.  S.]

 [1932] Hos. x. 12.  The words in the text are not the rendering of the
 Authorized Version, but that of the Septuagint, which has photisate
 heautois phos gnoseos.  Where the Masoretic text has t"v (et tempus)
 Origen evidently read td (scientia), the similarity of Vau and Daleth
 accounting for the error of the transcriber.

 Book I.

 Chapter I.--On God.

 1.  I know that some will attempt to say that, even according to the
 declarations of our own Scriptures, God is a body, because in the
 writings of Moses they find it said, that "our God is a consuming
 fire;" [1933] and in the Gospel according to John, that "God is a
 Spirit, and they who worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in
 truth." [1934] Fire and spirit, according to them, are to be regarded
 as nothing else than a body.  Now, I should like to ask these persons
 what they have to say respecting that passage where it is declared that
 God is light; as John writes in his Epistle, "God is light, and in Him
 there is no darkness at all." [1935] Truly He is that light which
 illuminates the whole understanding of those who are capable of
 receiving truth, as is said in the thirty-sixth Psalm, "In Thy light we
 shall see light." [1936] For what other light of God can be named,
 "in which any one sees light," save an influence of God, by which a
 man, being enlightened, either thoroughly sees the truth of all things,
 or comes to know God Himself, who is called the truth?  Such is the
 meaning of the expression, "In Thy light we shall see light;" i.e., in
 Thy word and wisdom which is Thy Son, in Himself we shall see Thee the
 Father.  Because He is called light, shall He be supposed to have any
 resemblance to the light of the sun?  Or how should there be the
 slightest ground for imagining, that from that corporeal light any one
 could derive the cause of knowledge, and come to the understanding of
 the truth?

 2.  If, then, they acquiesce in our assertion, which reason itself has
 demonstrated, regarding the nature of light, and acknowledge that God
 cannot be understood to be a body in the sense that light is, similar
 reasoning will hold true of the expression "a consuming fire."  For
 what will God consume in respect of His being fire?  Shall He be
 thought to consume material substance, as wood, or hay, or stubble?
 And what in this view can be called worthy of the glory of God, if He
 be a fire, consuming materials of that kind?  But let us reflect that
 God does indeed consume and utterly destroy; that He consumes evil
 thoughts, wicked actions, and sinful desires, when they find their way
 into the minds of believers; and that, inhabiting along with His Son
 those souls which are rendered capable of receiving His word and
 wisdom, according to His own declaration, "I and the Father shall come,
 and We shall make our abode with him?" [1937] He makes them, after
 all their vices and passions have been consumed, a holy temple, worthy
 of Himself.  Those, moreover, who, on account of the expression "God is
 a Spirit," think that He is a body, are to be answered, I think, in the
 following manner.  It is the custom of sacred Scripture, when it wishes
 to designate anything opposed to this gross and solid body, to call it
 spirit, as in the expression, "The letter killeth, but the spirit
 giveth life," [1938] where there can be no doubt that by "letter" are
 meant bodily things, and by "spirit" intellectual things, which we also
 term "spiritual."  The apostle, moreover, says, "Even unto this day,
 when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart:  nevertheless, when
 it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away:  and where the
 Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." [1939] For so long as any
 one is not converted to a spiritual understanding, a veil is placed
 over his heart, with which veil, i.e., a gross understanding, Scripture
 itself is said or thought to be covered:  and this is the meaning of
 the statement that a veil was placed over the countenance of Moses when
 he spoke to the people, i.e., when the law was publicly read aloud.
 But if we turn to the Lord, where also is the word of God, and where
 the Holy Spirit reveals spiritual knowledge, then the veil is taken
 away, and with unveiled face we shall behold the glory of the Lord in
 the holy Scriptures.

 3.  And since many saints participate in the Holy Spirit, He cannot
 therefore be understood to be a body, which being divided into
 corporeal parts, is partaken of by each one of the saints; but He is
 manifestly a sanctifying power, in which all are said to have a share
 who have deserved to be sanctified by His grace.  And in order that
 what we say may be more easily understood, let us take an illustration
 from things very dissimilar.  There are many persons who take a part in
 the science [1940] or art of medicine:  are we therefore to suppose
 that those who do so take to themselves the particles of some body
 called medicine, which is placed before them, and in this way
 participate in the same?  Or must we not rather understand that all who
 with quick and trained minds come to understand the art and discipline
 itself, may be said to be partakers of the art of healing?  But these
 are not to be deemed altogether parallel instances in a comparison of
 medicine to the Holy Spirit, as they have been adduced only to
 establish that that is not necessarily to be considered a body, a share
 in which is possessed by many individuals.  For the Holy Spirit differs
 widely from the method or science of medicine, in respect that the Holy
 Spirit is an intellectual existence [1941] and subsists and exists in a
 peculiar manner, whereas medicine is not at all of that nature.

 4.  But we must pass on to the language of the Gospel itself, in which
 it is declared that "God is a Spirit," and where we have to show how
 that is to be understood agreeably to what we have stated.  For let us
 inquire on what occasion these words were spoken by the Saviour, before
 whom He uttered them, and what was the subject of investigation.  We
 find, without any doubt, that He spoke these words to the Samaritan
 woman, saying to her, who thought, agreeably to the Samaritan view,
 that God ought to be worshipped on Mount Gerizim, that "God is a
 Spirit."  For the Samaritan woman, believing Him to be a Jew, was
 inquiring of Him whether God ought to be worshipped in Jerusalem or on
 this mountain; and her words were, "All our fathers worshipped on this
 mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where we ought to
 worship." [1942] To this opinion of the Samaritan woman, therefore,
 who imagined that God was less rightly or duly worshipped, according to
 the privileges of the different localities, either by the Jews in
 Jerusalem or by the Samaritans on Mount Gerizim, the Saviour answered
 that he who would follow the Lord must lay aside all preference for
 particular places, and thus expressed Himself:  "The hour is coming
 when neither in Jerusalem nor on this mountain shall the true
 worshippers worship the Father.  God is a Spirit, and they who worship
 Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth." [1943] And observe how
 logically He has joined together the spirit and the truth:  He called
 God a Spirit, that He might distinguish Him from bodies; and He named
 Him the truth, to distinguish Him from a shadow or an image.  For they
 who worshipped in Jerusalem worshipped God neither in truth nor in
 spirit, being in subjection to the shadow or image of heavenly things;
 and such also was the case with those who worshipped on Mount Gerizim.

 5.  Having refuted, then, as well as we could, every notion which might
 suggest that we were to think of God as in any degree corporeal, we go
 on to say that, according to strict truth, God is incomprehensible, and
 incapable of being measured. [1944] For whatever be the knowledge
 which we are able to obtain of God, either by perception or reflection,
 we must of necessity believe that He is by many degrees far better than
 what we perceive Him to be.  For, as if we were to see any one unable
 to bear a spark of light, or the flame of a very small lamp, and were
 desirous to acquaint such a one, whose vision could not admit a greater
 degree of light than what we have stated, with the brightness and
 splendour of the sun, would it not be necessary to tell him that the
 splendour of the sun was unspeakably and incalculably better and more
 glorious than all this light which he saw?  So our understanding, when
 shut in by the fetters of flesh and blood, and rendered, on account of
 its participation in such material substances, duller and more obtuse,
 although, in comparison with our bodily nature, it is esteemed to be
 far superior, yet, in its efforts to examine and behold incorporeal
 things, scarcely holds the place of a spark or lamp.  But among all
 intelligent, that is, incorporeal beings, what is so superior to all
 others--so unspeakably and incalculably superior--as God, whose nature
 cannot be grasped or seen by the power of any human understanding, even
 the purest and brightest?

 6.  But it will not appear absurd if we employ another similitude to
 make the matter clearer.  Our eyes frequently cannot look upon the
 nature of the light itself--that is, upon the substance of the sun; but
 when we behold his splendour or his rays pouring in, perhaps, through
 windows or some small openings to admit the light, we can reflect how
 great is the supply and source of the light of the body.  So, in like
 manner. the works of Divine Providence and the plan of this whole world
 are a sort of rays, as it were, of the nature of God, in comparison
 with His real substance and being.  As, therefore, our understanding is
 unable of itself to behold God Himself as He is, it knows the Father of
 the world from the beauty of His works and the comeliness of His
 creatures.  God, therefore, is not to be thought of as being either a
 body or as existing in a body, but as an uncompounded intellectual
 nature, [1945] admitting within Himself no addition of any kind; so
 that He cannot be believed to have within him a greater and a less, but
 is such that He is in all parts Monas, and, so to speak, Enas, and is
 the mind and source from which all intellectual nature or mind takes
 its beginning.  But mind, for its movements or operations, needs no
 physical space, nor sensible magnitude, nor bodily shape, nor colour,
 nor any other of those adjuncts which are the properties of body or
 matter.  Wherefore that simple and wholly intellectual nature [1946]
 can admit of no delay or hesitation in its movements or operations,
 lest the simplicity of the divine nature should appear to be
 circumscribed or in some degree hampered by such adjuncts, and lest
 that which is the beginning of all things should be found composite and
 differing, and that which ought to be free from all bodily
 intermixture, in virtue of being the one sole species of Deity, so to
 speak, should prove, instead of being one, to consist of many things.
 That mind, moreover, does not require space in order to carry on its
 movements agreeably to its nature, is certain from observation of our
 own mind.  For if the mind abide within its own limits, and sustain no
 injury from any cause, it will never, from diversity of situation, be
 retarded in the discharge of its functions; nor, on the other hand,
 does it gain any addition or increase of mobility from the nature of
 particular places.  And here, if any one were to object, for example,
 that among those who are at sea, and tossed by its waves the mind is
 considerably less vigorous than it is wont to be on land, we are to
 believe that it is in this state, not from diversity of situation, but
 from the commotion or disturbance of the body to which the mind is
 joined or attached.  For it seems to be contrary to nature, as it were,
 for a human body to live at sea; and for that reason it appears, by a
 sort of inequality of its own, to enter upon its mental operations in a
 slovenly and irregular manner, and to perform the acts of the intellect
 with a duller sense, in as great degree as those who on land are
 prostrated with fever; with respect to whom it is certain, that if the
 mind do not discharge its functions as well as before, in consequence
 of the attack of disease, the blame is to be laid not upon the place,
 but upon the bodily malady, by which the body, being disturbed and
 disordered, renders to the mind its customary services under by no
 means the well-known and natural conditions:  for we human beings are
 animals composed of a union of body and soul, and in this way (only)
 was it possible for us to live upon the earth.  But God, who is the
 beginning of all things, is not to be regarded as a composite being,
 lest perchance there should be found to exist elements prior to the
 beginning itself, out of which everything is composed, whatever that be
 which is called composite.  Neither does the mind require bodily
 magnitude in order to perform any act or movement; as when the eye by
 gazing upon bodies of larger size is dilated, but is compressed and
 contracted in order to see smaller objects.  The mind, indeed, requires
 magnitude of an intellectual kind, because it grows, not after the
 fashion of a body, but after that of intelligence.  For the mind is not
 enlarged, together with the body, by means of corporal additions, up to
 the twentieth or thirtieth year of life; but the intellect is sharpened
 by exercises of learning, and the powers implanted within it for
 intelligent purposes are called forth; and it is rendered capable of
 greater intellectual efforts, not being increased by bodily additions,
 but carefully polished by learned exercises.  But these it cannot
 receive immediately from boyhood, or from birth, because the framework
 of limbs which the mind employs as organs for exercising itself is weak
 and feeble; and it is unable to bear the weight of its own operations,
 or to exhibit a capacity for receiving training.

 7.  If there are any now who think that the mind itself and the soul is
 a body, I wish they would tell me by way of answer how it receives
 reasons and assertions on subjects of such importance--of such
 difficulty and such subtlety?  Whence does it derive the power of
 memory? and whence comes the contemplation of invisible [1947] things?
 How does the body possess the faculty of understanding incorporeal
 existences?  How does a bodily nature investigate the processes of the
 various arts, and contemplate the reasons of things?  How, also, is it
 able to perceive and understand divine truths, which are manifestly
 incorporeal?  Unless, indeed, some should happen to be of opinion, that
 as the very bodily shape and form of the ears or eyes contributes
 something to hearing and to sight, and as the individual members,
 formed by God, have some adaptation, even from the very quality of
 their form, to the end for which they were naturally appointed; so also
 he may think that the shape of the soul or mind is to be understood as
 if created purposely and designedly for perceiving and understanding
 individual things, and for being set in motion by vital movements.  I
 do not perceive, however, who shall be able to describe or state what
 is the colour of the mind, in respect of its being mind, and acting as
 an intelligent existence.  Moreover, in confirmation and explanation of
 what we have already advanced regarding the mind or soul--to the effect
 that it is better than the whole bodily nature--the following remarks
 may be added.  There underlies every bodily sense a certain peculiar
 sensible substance, [1948] on which the bodily sense exerts itself.
 For example, colours, form, size, underlie vision; voices and sound,
 the sense of hearing; odours, good or bad, that of smell; savours, that
 of taste; heat or cold, hardness or softness, roughness or smoothness,
 that of touch.  Now, of those senses enumerated above, it is manifest
 to all that the sense of mind is much the best.  How, then, should it
 not appear absurd, that under those senses which are inferior,
 substances should have been placed on which to exert their powers, but
 that under this power, which is far better than any other, i.e., the
 sense of mind, nothing at all of the nature of a substance should be
 placed, but that a power of an intellectual nature should be an
 accident, or consequent upon bodies?  Those who assert this, doubtless
 do so to the disparagement of that better substance which is within
 them; nay, by so doing, they even do wrong to God Himself, when they
 imagine He may be understood by means of a bodily nature, so that
 according to their view He is a body, and that which may be understood
 or perceived by means of a body; and they are unwilling to have it
 understood that the mind bears a certain relationship to God, of whom
 the mind itself is an intellectual image, and that by means of this it
 may come to some knowledge of the nature of divinity, especially if it
 be purified and separated from bodily matter.

 8.  But perhaps these declarations may seem to have less weight with
 those who wish to be instructed in divine things out of the holy
 Scriptures, and who seek to have it proved to them from that source how
 the nature of God surpasses the nature of bodies.  See, therefore, if
 the apostle does not say the same thing, when, speaking of Christ, he
 declares, that "He is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of
 every creature." [1949] Not, as some suppose, that the nature of God
 is visible to some and invisible to others:  for the apostle does not
 say "the image of God invisible" to men or "invisible" to sinners, but
 with unvarying constancy pronounces on the nature of God in these
 words:  "the image of the invisible God."  Moreover, John, in his
 Gospel, when asserting that "no one hath seen God at any time," [1950]
 manifestly declares to all who are capable of understanding, that there
 is no nature to which God is visible:  not as if, He were a being who
 was visible by nature, and merely escaped or baffled the view of a
 frailer creature, but because by the nature of His being it is
 impossible for Him to be seen.  And if you should ask of me what is my
 opinion regarding the Only-begotten Himself, whether the nature of God,
 which is naturally invisible, be not visible even to Him, let not such
 a question appear to you at once to be either absurd or impious,
 because we shall give you a logical reason.  It is one thing to see,
 and another to know:  to see and to be seen is a property of bodies; to
 know and to be known, an attribute of intellectual being.  Whatever,
 therefore, is a property of bodies, cannot be predicated either of the
 Father or of the Son; but what belongs to the nature of deity is common
 to the Father and the Son. [1951] Finally, even He Himself, in the
 Gospel, did not say that no one has seen the Father, save the Son, nor
 any one the Son, save the Father; but His words are:  "No one knoweth
 the Son, save the Father; nor any one the Father, save the Son." [1952]
 By which it is clearly shown, that whatever among bodily natures is
 called seeing and being seen, is termed, between the Father and the
 Son, a knowing and being known, by means of the power of knowledge, not
 by the frailness of the sense of sight.  Because, then, neither seeing
 nor being seen can be properly applied to an incorporeal and invisible
 nature, neither is the Father, in the Gospel, said to be seen by the
 Son, nor the Son by the Father, but the one is said to be known by the
 other.

 9.  Here, if any one lay before us the passage where it is said,
 "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God," [1953] from
 that very passage, in my opinion, will our position derive additional
 strength; for what else is seeing God in heart, but, according to our
 exposition as above, understanding and knowing Him with the mind?  For
 the names of the organs of sense are frequently applied to the soul, so
 that it may be said to see with the eyes of the heart, i.e., to perform
 an intellectual act by means of the power of intelligence.  So also it
 is said to hear with the ears when it perceives the deeper meaning of a
 statement.  So also we say that it makes use of teeth, when it chews
 and eats the bread of life which cometh down from heaven.  In like
 manner, also, it is said to employ the services of other members, which
 are transferred from their bodily appellations, and applied to the
 powers of the soul, according to the words of Solomon, "You will find a
 divine sense." [1954] For he knew that there were within us two kinds
 of senses:  the one mortal, corruptible, human; the other immortal and
 intellectual, which he now termed divine.  By this divine sense,
 therefore, not of the eyes, but of a pure heart, which is the mind, God
 may be seen by those who are worthy.  For you will certainly find in
 all the Scriptures, both old and new, the term "heart" repeatedly used
 instead of "mind," i.e., intellectual power.  In this manner,
 therefore, although far below the dignity of the subject, have we
 spoken of the nature of God, as those who understand it under the
 limitation of the human understanding.  In the next place, let us see
 what is meant by the name of Christ.

 [1933] Deut. iv. 24.

 [1934] John iv. 24.

 [1935] 1 John i. 5.

 [1936] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

 [1937] John xiv. 23.

 [1938] 2 Cor. iii. 6.

 [1939] 2 Cor. iii. 15-17.

 [1940] Disciplina.

 [1941] Subsistentia.

 [1942] John iv. 20.

 [1943] John iv. 23, 24.

 [1944] "Inæstimabilem."

 [1945] "Simplex intellectualis natura."

 [1946] "Natura illa simplex et tota mens."

 [1947] Some read "visible."

 [1948] "Substantia quædam sensibilis propria."

 [1949] Col. i. 15.

 [1950] John i. 18.

 [1951] "Constat inter Patrem et Filium."

 [1952] Matt. xi. 27.

 [1953] Matt. v. 8.

 [1954] Cf. Prov. ii. 5.

 Chapter II.--On Christ.

 1.  In the first place, we must note that the nature of that deity
 which is in Christ in respect of His being the only-begotten Son of God
 is one thing, and that human nature which He assumed in these last
 times for the purposes of the dispensation (of grace) is another.  And
 therefore we have first to ascertain what the only-begotten Son of God
 is, seeing He is called by many different names, according to the
 circumstances and views of individuals.  For He is termed Wisdom,
 according to the expression of Solomon:  "The Lord created me--the
 beginning of His ways, and among His works, before He made any other
 thing; He founded me before the ages.  In the beginning, before He
 formed the earth, before He brought forth the fountains of waters,
 before the mountains were made strong, before all the hills, He brought
 me forth." [1955] He is also styled First-born, as the apostle has
 declared:  "who is the first-born of every creature." [1956] The
 first-born, however, is not by nature a different person from the
 Wisdom, but one and the same.  Finally, the Apostle Paul says that
 "Christ (is) the power of God and the wisdom of God." [1957]

 2.  Let no one, however, imagine that we mean anything impersonal
 [1958] when we call Him the wisdom of God; or suppose, for example,
 that we understand Him to be, not a living being endowed with wisdom,
 but something which makes men wise, giving itself to, and implanting
 itself in, the minds of those who are made capable of receiving His
 virtues and intelligence.  If, then, it is once rightly understood that
 the only-begotten Son of God is His wisdom hypostatically [1959]
 existing, I know not whether our curiosity ought to advance beyond
 this, or entertain any suspicion that that hupostasis or substantia
 contains anything of a bodily nature, since everything that is
 corporeal is distinguished either by form, or colour, or magnitude.
 And who in his sound senses ever sought for form, or colour, or size,
 in wisdom, in respect of its being wisdom?  And who that is capable of
 entertaining reverential thoughts or feelings regarding God, can
 suppose or believe that God the Father ever existed, even for a moment
 of time, [1960] without having generated this Wisdom?  For in that case
 he must say either that God was unable to generate Wisdom before He
 produced her, so that He afterwards called into being her who formerly
 did not exist, or that He possessed the power indeed, but--what cannot
 be said of God without impiety--was unwilling to use it; both of which
 suppositions, it is patent to all, are alike absurd and impious:  for
 they amount to this, either that God advanced from a condition of
 inability to one of ability, or that, although possessed of the power,
 He concealed it, and delayed the generation of Wisdom.  Wherefore we
 have always held that God is the Father of His only-begotten Son, who
 was born indeed of Him, and derives from Him what He is, but without
 any beginning, not only such as may be measured by any divisions of
 time, but even that which the mind alone can contemplate within itself,
 or behold, so to speak, with the naked powers of the understanding.
 And therefore we must believe that Wisdom was generated before any
 beginning that can be either comprehended or expressed.  And since all
 the creative power of the coming creation [1961] was included in this
 very existence of Wisdom (whether of those things which have an
 original or of those which have a derived existence), having been
 formed beforehand and arranged by the power of foreknowledge; on
 account of these very creatures which had been described, as it were,
 and prefigured in Wisdom herself, does Wisdom say, in the words of
 Solomon, that she was created the beginning of the ways of God,
 inasmuch as she contained within herself either the beginnings, or
 forms, or species of all creation.

 3.  Now, in the same way in which we have understood that Wisdom was
 the beginning of the ways of God, and is said to be created, forming
 beforehand and containing within herself the species and beginnings of
 all creatures, must we understand her to be the Word of God, because of
 her disclosing to all other beings, i.e., to universal creation, the
 nature of the mysteries and secrets which are contained within the
 divine wisdom; and on this account she is called the Word, because she
 is, as it were, the interpreter of the secrets of the mind.  And
 therefore that language which is found in the Acts of Paul, [1962]
 where it is said that "here is the Word a living being," appears to me
 to be rightly used.  John, however, with more sublimity and propriety,
 says in the beginning of his Gospel, when defining God by a special
 definition to be the Word, "And God was the Word, [1963] and this was
 in the beginning with God."  Let him, then, who assigns a beginning to
 the Word or Wisdom of God, take care that he be not guilty of impiety
 against the unbegotten Father Himself, seeing he denies that He had
 always been a Father, and had generated the Word, and had possessed
 wisdom in all preceding periods, whether they be called times or ages,
 or anything else that can be so entitled.

 4.  This Son, accordingly, is also the truth and life of all things
 which exist.  And with reason.  For how could those things which were
 created live, unless they derived their being from life? or how could
 those things which are, truly exist, unless they came down from the
 truth? or how could rational beings exist, unless the Word or reason
 had previously existed? or how could they be wise, unless there were
 wisdom?  But since it was to come to pass that some also should fall
 away from life, and bring death upon themselves by their
 declension--for death is nothing else than a departure from life--and
 as it was not to follow that those beings which had once been created
 by God for the enjoyment of life should utterly perish, it was
 necessary that, before death, there should be in existence such a power
 as would destroy the coming death, and that there should be a
 resurrection, the type of which was in our Lord and Saviour, and that
 this resurrection should have its ground in the wisdom and word and
 life of God.  And then, in the next place, since some of those who were
 created were not to be always willing to remain unchangeable and
 unalterable in the calm and moderate enjoyment of the blessings which
 they possessed, but, in consequence of the good which was in them being
 theirs not by nature or essence, but by accident, were to be perverted
 and changed, and to fall away from their position, therefore was the
 Word and Wisdom of God made the Way.  And it was so termed because it
 leads to the Father those who walk along it.

 Whatever, therefore, we have predicated of the wisdom of God, will be
 appropriately applied and understood of the Son of God, in virtue of
 His being the Life, and the Word, and the Truth and the Resurrection:
 for all these titles are derived from His power and operations, and in
 none of them is there the slightest ground for understanding anything
 of a corporeal nature which might seem to denote either size, or form,
 or colour; for those children of men which appear among us, or those
 descendants of other living beings, correspond to the seed of those by
 whom they were begotten, or derive from those mothers, in whose wombs
 they are formed and nourished, whatever that is, which they bring into
 this life, and carry with them when they are born. [1964] But it is
 monstrous and unlawful to compare God the Father, in the generation of
 His only-begotten Son, and in the substance [1965] of the same, to any
 man or other living thing engaged in such an act; for we must of
 necessity hold that there is something exceptional and worthy of God
 which does not admit of any comparison at all, not merely in things,
 but which cannot even be conceived by thought or discovered by
 perception, so that a human mind should be able to apprehend how the
 unbegotten God is made the Father of the only-begotten Son.  Because
 His generation is as eternal and everlasting as the brilliancy which is
 produced from the sun.  For it is not by receiving the [1966] breath of
 life that He is made a Son, by any outward act, but by His own nature.

 5.  Let us now ascertain how those statements which we have advanced
 are supported by the authority of holy Scripture.  The Apostle Paul
 says, that the only-begotten Son is the "image of the invisible God,"
 and "the first-born of every creature." [1967] And when writing to
 the Hebrews, he says of Him that He is "the brightness of His glory,
 and the express image of His person." [1968] Now, we find in the
 treatise called the Wisdom of Solomon the following description of the
 wisdom of God:  "For she is the breath of the power of God, and the
 purest efflux [1969] of the glory of the Almighty." [1970] Nothing
 that is polluted can therefore come upon her.  For she is the splendour
 of the eternal light, and the stainless mirror of God's working, and
 the image of His goodness.  Now we say, as before, that Wisdom has her
 existence nowhere else save in Him who is the beginning of all things:
 from whom also is derived everything that is wise, because He Himself
 is the only one who is by nature a Son, and is therefore termed the
 Only-begotten.

 6.  Let us now see how we are to understand the expression "invisible
 image," that we may in this way perceive how God is rightly called the
 Father of His Son; and let us, in the first place, draw our conclusions
 from what are customarily called images among men.  That is sometimes
 called an image which is painted or sculptured on some material
 substance, such as wood or stone; and sometimes a child is called the
 image of his parent, when the features of the child in no respect belie
 their resemblance to the father.  I think, therefore, that that man who
 was formed after the image and likeness of God may be fittingly
 compared to the first illustration.  Respecting him, however, we shall
 see more precisely, God willing, when we come to expound the passage in
 Genesis.  But the image of the Son of God, of whom we are now speaking,
 may be compared to the second of the above examples, even in respect of
 this, that He is the invisible image of the invisible God, in the same
 manner as we say, according to the sacred history, that the image of
 Adam is his son Seth.  The words are, "And Adam begat Seth in his own
 likeness, and after his own image." [1971] Now this image contains
 the unity of nature and substance belonging to Father and Son.  For if
 the Son do, in like manner, all those things which the Father doth,
 then, in virtue of the Son doing all things like the Father, is the
 image of the Father formed in the Son, who is born of Him, like an act
 of His will proceeding from the mind.  And I am therefore of opinion
 that the will of the Father ought alone to be sufficient for the
 existence of that which He wishes to exist.  For in the exercise of His
 will He employs no other way than that which is made known by the
 counsel of His will.  And thus also the existence [1972] of the Son is
 generated by Him.  For this point must above all others be maintained
 by those who allow nothing to be unbegotten, i.e., unborn, save God the
 Father only.  And we must be careful not to fall into the absurdities
 of those who picture to themselves certain emanations, so as to divide
 the divine nature into parts, and who divide God the Father as far as
 they can, since even to entertain the remotest suspicion of such a
 thing regarding an incorporeal being is not only the height of impiety,
 but a mark of the greatest folly, it being most remote from any
 intelligent conception that there should be any physical division of
 any incorporeal nature.  Rather, therefore, as an act of the will
 proceeds from the understanding, and neither cuts off any part nor is
 separated or divided from it, so after some such fashion is the Father
 to be supposed as having begotten the Son, His own image; namely, so
 that, as He is Himself invisible by nature, He also begat an image that
 was invisible.  For the Son is the Word, and therefore we are not to
 understand that anything in Him is cognisable by the senses.  He is
 wisdom, and in wisdom there can be no suspicion of anything corporeal.
 He is the true light, which enlightens every man that cometh into this
 world; but He has nothing in common with the light of this sun.  Our
 Saviour, therefore, is the image of the invisible God, inasmuch as
 compared with the Father Himself He is the truth:  and as compared with
 us, to whom He reveals the Father, He is the image by which we come to
 the knowledge of the Father, whom no one knows save the Son, and he to
 whom the Son is pleased to reveal Him.  And the method of revealing Him
 is through the understanding.  For He by whom the Son Himself is
 understood, understands, as a consequence, the Father also, according
 to His own words:  "He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also."
 [1973]

 7.  But since we quoted the language of Paul regarding Christ, where He
 says of Him that He is "the brightness of the glory of God, and the
 express figure of His person," [1974] let us see what idea we are to
 form of this.  According to John, "God is light."  The only-begotten
 Son, therefore, is the glory of this light, proceeding inseparably from
 (God) Himself, as brightness does from light, and illuminating the
 whole of creation.  For, agreeably to what we have already explained as
 to the manner in which He is the Way, and conducts to the Father; and
 in which He is the Word, interpreting the secrets of wisdom, and the
 mysteries of knowledge, making them known to the rational creation; and
 is also the Truth, and the Life, and the Resurrection,--in the same way
 ought we to understand also the meaning of His being the brightness:
 for it is by its splendour that we understand and feel what light
 itself is.  And this splendour, presenting itself gently and softly to
 the frail and weak eyes of mortals, and gradually training, as it were,
 and accustoming them to bear the brightness of the light, when it has
 put away from them every hindrance and obstruction to vision, according
 to the Lord's own precept, "Cast forth the beam out of thine eye,"
 [1975] renders them capable of enduring the splendour of the light,
 being made in this respect also a sort of mediator between men and the
 light.

 8.  But since He is called by the apostle not only the brightness of
 His glory, but also the express figure of His person or subsistence,
 [1976] it does not seem idle to inquire how there can be said to be
 another figure of that person besides the person of God Himself,
 whatever be the meaning of person and subsistence.  Consider, then,
 whether the Son of God, seeing He is His Word and Wisdom, and alone
 knows the Father, and reveals Him to whom He will (i.e., to those who
 are capable of receiving His word and wisdom), may not, in regard of
 this very point of making God to be understood and acknowledged, be
 called the figure of His person and subsistence; that is, when that
 Wisdom, which desires to make known to others the means by which God is
 acknowledged and understood by them, describes Himself first of all, it
 may by so doing be called the express figure of the person of God.  In
 order, however, to arrive at a fuller understanding of the manner in
 which the Saviour is the figure of the person or subsistence of God,
 let us take an instance, which, although it does not describe the
 subject of which we are treating either fully or appropriately, may
 nevertheless be seen to be employed for this purpose only, to show that
 the Son of God, who was in the form of God, divesting Himself (of His
 glory), makes it His object, by this very divesting of Himself, to
 demonstrate to us the fulness of His deity.  For instance, suppose that
 there were a statue of so enormous a size as to fill the whole world,
 and which on that account could be seen by no one; and that another
 statue were formed altogether resembling it in the shape of the limbs,
 and in the features of the countenance, and in form and material, but
 without the same immensity of size, so that those who were unable to
 behold the one of enormous proportions, should, on seeing the latter,
 acknowledge that they had seen the former, because it preserved all the
 features of its limbs and countenance, and even the very form and
 material, so closely, as to be altogether undistinguishable from it; by
 some such similitude, the Son of God, divesting Himself of His equality
 with the Father, and showing to us the way to the knowledge of Him, is
 made the express image of His person:  so that we, who were unable to
 look upon the glory of that marvellous light when placed in the
 greatness of His Godhead, may, by His being made to us brightness,
 obtain the means of beholding the divine light by looking upon the
 brightness.  This comparison, of course, of statues, as belonging to
 material things, is employed for no other purpose than to show that the
 Son of God, though placed in the very insignificant form of a human
 body, in consequence of the resemblance of His works and power to the
 Father, showed that there was in Him an immense and invisible
 greatness, inasmuch as He said to His disciples, "He who sees Me, sees
 the Father also;" and, "I and the Father are one."  And to these belong
 also the similar expression, "The Father is in Me, and I in the
 Father."

 9.  Let us see now what is the meaning of the expression which is found
 in the Wisdom of Solomon, where it is said of Wisdom that "it is a kind
 of breath of the power of God, and the purest efflux of the glory of
 the Omnipotent, and the splendour of eternal light, and the spotless
 mirror of the working or power of God, and the image of His goodness."
 [1977] These, then, are the definitions which he gives of God,
 pointing out by each one of them certain attributes which belong to the
 Wisdom of God, calling wisdom the power, and the glory, and the
 everlasting light, and the working, and the goodness of God.  He does
 not say, however, that wisdom is the breath of the glory of the
 Almighty, nor of the everlasting light, nor of the working of the
 Father, nor of His goodness, for it was not appropriate that breath
 should be ascribed to any one of these; but, with all propriety, he
 says that wisdom is the breath of the power of God.  Now, by the power
 of God is to be understood that by which He is strong; by which He
 appoints, restrains, and governs all things visible and invisible;
 which is sufficient for all those things which He rules over in His
 providence; among all which He is present, as if one individual.  And
 although the breath of all this mighty and immeasurable power, and the
 vigour itself produced, so to speak, by its own existence, proceed from
 the power itself, as the will does from the mind, yet even this will of
 God is nevertheless made to become the power of God. [1978]

 Another power accordingly is produced, which exists with properties of
 its own,--a kind of breath, as Scripture says, of the primal and
 unbegotten power of God, deriving from Him its being, and never at any
 time non-existent.  For if any one were to assert that it did not
 formerly exist, but came afterwards into existence, let him explain the
 reason why the Father, who gave it being, did not do so before.  And if
 he shall grant that there was once a beginning, when that breath
 proceeded from the power of God, we shall ask him again, why not even
 before the beginning, which he has allowed; and in this way, ever
 demanding an earlier date, and going upwards with our interrogations,
 we shall arrive at this conclusion, that as God was always possessed of
 power and will, there never was any reason of propriety or otherwise,
 why He may not have always possessed that blessing which He desired.
 By which it is shown that that breath of God's power always existed,
 having no beginning save God Himself.  Nor was it fitting that there
 should be any other beginning save God Himself, from whom it derives
 its birth.  And according to the expression of the apostle, that Christ
 "is the power of God," [1979] it ought to be termed not only the breath
 of the power of God, but power out of power.

 10.  Let us now examine the expression, "Wisdom is the purest efflux of
 the glory of the Almighty;" and let us first consider what the glory of
 the omnipotent God is, and then we shall also understand what is its
 efflux.  As no one can be a father without having a son, nor a master
 without possessing a servant, so even God cannot be called omnipotent
 unless there exist those over whom He may exercise His power; and
 therefore, that God may be shown to be almighty, it is necessary that
 all things should exist.  For if any one would have some ages or
 portions of time, or whatever else he likes to call them, to have
 passed away, while those things which were afterwards made did not yet
 exist, he would undoubtedly show that during those ages or periods God
 was not omnipotent, but became so afterwards, viz., from the time that
 He began to have persons over whom to exercise power; and in this way
 He will appear to have received a certain increase, and to have risen
 from a lower to a higher condition; since there can be no doubt that it
 is better for Him to be omnipotent than not to be so.  And now how can
 it appear otherwise than absurd, that when God possessed none of those
 things which it was befitting for Him to possess, He should afterwards,
 by a kind of progress, come into the possession of them?  But if there
 never was a time when He was not omnipotent, of necessity those things
 by which He receives that title must also exist; and He must always
 have had those over whom He exercised power, and which were governed by
 Him either as king or prince, of which we shall speak more fully in the
 proper place, when we come to discuss the subject of the creatures.
 But even now I think it necessary to drop a word, although cursorily,
 of warning, since the question before us is, how wisdom is the purest
 efflux of the glory of the Almighty, lest any one should think that the
 title of Omnipotent was anterior in God to the birth of Wisdom, through
 whom He is called Father, seeing that Wisdom, which is the Son of God,
 is the purest efflux of the glory of the Almighty.  Let him who is
 inclined to entertain this suspicion hear the undoubted declaration of
 Scripture pronouncing, "In wisdom hast Thou made them all," [1980] and
 the teaching of the Gospel, that "by Him were all things made, and
 without Him nothing was made;" [1981] and let him understand from this
 that the title of Omnipotent in God cannot be older than that of
 Father; for it is through the Son that the Father is almighty.  But
 from the expression "glory of the Almighty," of which glory Wisdom is
 the efflux, this is to be understood, that Wisdom, through which God is
 called omnipotent, has a share in the glory of the Almighty.  For
 through Wisdom, which is Christ, God has power over all things, not
 only by the authority of a ruler, but also by the voluntary obedience
 of subjects.  And that you may understand that the omnipotence of
 Father and Son is one and the same, as God and the Lord are one and the
 same with the Father, listen to the manner in which John speaks in the
 Apocalypse:  "Thus saith the Lord God, which is, and which was, and
 which is to come, the Almighty." [1982] For who else was "He which is
 to come" than Christ?  And as no one ought to be offended, seeing God
 is the Father, that the Saviour is also God; so also, since the Father
 is called omnipotent, no one ought to be offended that the Son of God
 is also called omnipotent.  For in this way will that saying be true
 which He utters to the Father, "All Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine,
 and I am glorified in them." [1983] Now, if all things which are the
 Father's are also Christ's, certainly among those things which exist is
 the omnipotence of the Father; and doubtless the only-begotten Son
 ought to be omnipotent, that the Son also may have all things which the
 Father possesses.  "And I am glorified in them," He declares.  For "at
 the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and things
 in earth, and things under the earth; and every tongue shall confess
 that the Lord Jesus is in the glory of God the Father." [1984]
 Therefore He is the efflux of the glory of God in this respect, that He
 is omnipotent--the pure and limpid Wisdom herself--glorified as the
 efflux of omnipotence or of glory. And that it may be more clearly
 understood what the glory of omnipotence is, we shall add the
 following.  God the Father is omnipotent, because He has power over all
 things, i.e., over heaven and earth, sun, moon, and stars, and all
 things in them.  And He exercises His power over them by means of His
 Word, because at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things
 in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth.  And if
 every knee is bent to Jesus, then, without doubt, it is Jesus to whom
 all things are subject, and He it is who exercises power over all
 things, and through whom all things are subject to the Father; for
 through wisdom, i.e., by word and reason, not by force and necessity,
 are all things subject.  And therefore His glory consists in this very
 thing, that He possesses all things, and this is the purest and most
 limpid glory of omnipotence, that by reason and wisdom, not by force
 and necessity, all things are subject.  Now the purest and most limpid
 glory of wisdom is a convenient expression to distinguish it from that
 glory which cannot be called pure and sincere.  But every nature which
 is convertible and changeable, although glorified in the works of
 righteousness or wisdom, yet by the fact that righteousness or wisdom
 are accidental qualities, and because that which is accidental may also
 fall away, its glory cannot be called sincere and pure.  But the Wisdom
 of God, which is His only-begotten Son, being in all respects incapable
 of change or alteration, and every good quality in Him being essential,
 and such as cannot be changed and converted, His glory is therefore
 declared to be pure and sincere.

 11.  In the third place, wisdom is called the splendour of eternal
 light.  The force of this expression we have explained in the preceding
 pages, when we introduced the similitude of the sun and the splendour
 of its rays, and showed to the best of our power how this should be
 understood.  To what we then said we shall add only the following
 remark.  That is properly termed everlasting or eternal which neither
 had a beginning of existence, nor can ever cease to be what it is.  And
 this is the idea conveyed by John when he says that "God is light."
 Now His wisdom is the splendour of that light, not only in respect of
 its being light, but also of being everlasting light, so that His
 wisdom is eternal and everlasting splendour.  If this be fully
 understood, it clearly shows that the existence of the Son is derived
 from the Father but not in time, nor from any other beginning, except,
 as we have said, from God Himself.

 12.  But wisdom is also called the stainless mirror of the energeia or
 working of God.  We must first understand, then, what the working of
 the power of God is.  It is a sort of vigour, so to speak, by which God
 operates either in creation, or in providence, or in judgment, or in
 the disposal and arrangement of individual things, each in its season.
 For as the image formed in a mirror unerringly reflects all the acts
 and movements of him who gazes on it, so would Wisdom have herself to
 be understood when she is called the stainless mirror of the power and
 working of the Father:  as the Lord Jesus Christ also, who is the
 Wisdom of God, declares of Himself when He says, "The works which the
 Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." [1985] And again He
 says, that the Son cannot do anything of Himself, save what He sees the
 Father do.  As therefore the Son in no respect differs from the Father
 in the power of His works, and the work of the Son is not a different
 thing from that of the Father, but one and the same movement, so to
 speak, is in all things, He therefore named Him a stainless mirror,
 that by such an expression it might be understood that them is no
 dissimilarity whatever between the Son and the Father.  How, indeed,
 can those things which are said by some to be done after the manner in
 which a disciple resembles or imitates his master, or according to the
 view that those things are made by the Son in bodily material which
 were first formed by the Father in their spiritual essence, agree with
 the declarations of Scripture, seeing in the Gospel the Son is said to
 do not similar things, but the same things in a similar manner?

 13.  It remains that we inquire what is the "image of His goodness;"
 and here, I think, we must understand the same thing which we expressed
 a little ago, in speaking of the image formed by the mirror.  For He is
 the primal goodness, doubtless, out of which the Son is born, who,
 being in all respects the image of the Father, may certainly also be
 called with propriety the image of His goodness.  For there is no other
 second goodness existing in the Son, save that which is in the Father.
 And therefore also the Saviour Himself rightly says in the Gospel,
 "There is none good save one only, God the Father," [1986] that by such
 an expression it may be understood that the Son is not of a different
 goodness, but of that only which exists in the Father, of whom He is
 rightly termed the image, because He proceeds from no other source but
 from that primal goodness, lest there might appear to be in the Son a
 different goodness from that which is in the Father.  Nor is there any
 dissimilarity or difference of goodness in the Son.  And therefore it
 is not to be imagined that there is a kind of blasphemy, as it were, in
 the words, "There is none good save one only, God the Father," as if
 thereby it may be supposed to be denied that either Christ or the Holy
 Spirit was good.  But, as we have already said, the primal goodness is
 to be understood as residing in God the Father, from whom both the Son
 is born and the Holy Spirit proceeds, retaining within them, without
 any doubt, the nature of that goodness which is in the source whence
 they are derived.  And if there be any other things which in Scripture
 are called good, whether angel, or man, or servant, or treasure, or a
 good heart, or a good tree, all these are so termed catachrestically,
 [1987] having in them an accidental, not an essential goodness.  But it
 would require both much time and labour to collect together all the
 titles of the Son of God, such, e.g., as the true light, or the door,
 or the righteousness, or the sanctification, or the redemption, and
 countless others; and to show for what reasons each one of them is so
 given.  Satisfied, therefore, with what we have already advanced, we go
 on with our inquiries into those other matters which follow.

 [1955] Prov. viii. 22-25.  The reading in the text differs considerably
 from that of the Vulgate.

 [1956] Col. i. 15.

 [1957] 1 Cor. i. 24.

 [1958] Aliquid insubstantivum.

 [1959] Substantialiter.

 [1960] Ad punctum alicujus momenti.

 [1961] Omnis virtus ac deformatio futuræ creaturæ.

 [1962] This work is mentioned by Eusebius, Hist. Eccles., iii. c. 3 and
 25, as among the spurious writings current in the Church.  The Acts of
 Paul and Thecla was a different work from the Acts of Paul.  The words
 quoted, "Hic est verbum animal vivens," seem to be a corruption from
 Heb. iv. 12, zon gar ho logos tou Theou.  [Jones on the Canon, vol. ii.
 pp. 353-411, as to Paul and Thecla.  As to this quotation of our
 author, see Lardner, Credib., ii. p. 539.]

 [1963] Or, "and the Word was God."

 [1964] "Quoniam hi qui videntur apud nos hominum filii, vel ceterorum
 animalium, semini eorum a quibus seminati sunt respondent, vel earum
 quarum in utero formantur ac nutriuntur, habent ex his quidquid illud
 est quod in lucem hanc assumunt, ac deferunt processuri."  Probably the
 last two words should be "deferunt processuris"--"and hand it over to
 those who are destined to come forth from them," i.e., to their
 descendants.

 [1965] Subsistentia.  Some would read here, "substantia."

 [1966] Per adoptionem Spiritus.  The original words here were probably
 eispoiesis tou pneumatos, and Rufinus seems to have mistaken the
 allusion to Gen. ii. 7.  To "adoption," in the technical theological
 sense, the words in the text cannot have any reference.--Schnitzer.

 [1967] Col. i. 15.

 [1968] Heb. i. 3.

 [1969] aporrhoia.

 [1970] Wisd. vii. 25.

 [1971] Gen. v. 3.

 [1972] Subsistentia.

 [1973] John xiv. 9.

 [1974] Heb. i. 3.

 [1975] Luke vi. 42.

 [1976] Heb. i. 3.  Substantiæ vel subsistentiæ.

 [1977] Wisd. vii. 25, 26.

 [1978] "Hujus ergo totius virtutis tantæ et tam immensæ vapor, et, ut
 ita dicam, vigor ipse in propriâ subsistentiâ effectus, quamvis ex ipsa
 virtute velut voluntas ex mente procedat, tamen et ipsa voluntas Dei
 nihilominus Dei virtus efficitur."

 [1979] 1 Cor. i. 24.

 [1980] Ps. civ. 24.

 [1981] John i. 3.

 [1982] Rev. i. 8.

 [1983] John xvii. 10.

 [1984] Phil. ii. 10, 11.

 [1985] John v. 19.

 [1986] [Luke xviii. 19.]

 [1987] Abusive [= improperly used.  S.]

 Chapter III.--On the Holy Spirit.

 1.  The next point is to investigate as briefly as possible the subject
 of the Holy Spirit.  All who perceive, in whatever manner, the
 existence of Providence, confess that God, who created and disposed all
 things, is unbegotten, and recognise Him as the parent of the
 universe.  Now, that to Him belongs a Son, is a statement not made by
 us only; although it may seem a sufficiently marvellous and incredible
 assertion to those who have a reputation as philosophers among Greeks
 and Barbarians, by some of whom, however, an idea of His existence
 seems to have been entertained, in their acknowledging that all things
 were created by the word or reason of God.  We, however, in conformity
 with our belief in that doctrine, which we assuredly hold to be
 divinely inspired, believe that it is possible in no other way to
 explain and bring within the reach of human knowledge this higher and
 diviner reason as the Son of God, than by means of those Scriptures
 alone which were inspired by the Holy Spirit, i.e., the Gospels and
 Epistles, and the law and the prophets, according to the declaration of
 Christ Himself.  Of the existence of the Holy Spirit no one indeed
 could entertain any suspicion, save those who were familiar with the
 law and the prophets, or those who profess a belief in Christ.  For
 although no one is able to speak with certainty of God the Father, it
 is nevertheless possible for some knowledge of Him to be gained by
 means of the visible creation and the natural feelings of the human
 mind; and it is possible, moreover, for such knowledge to be confined
 from the sacred Scriptures.  But with respect to the Son of God,
 although no one knoweth the Son save the Father, yet it is from sacred
 Scripture also that the human mind is taught how to think of the Son;
 and that not only from the New, but also from the Old Testament, by
 means of those things which, although done by the saints, are
 figuratively referred to Christ, and from which both His divine nature,
 and that human nature which was assumed by Him, may be discovered.

 2.  Now, what the Holy Spirit is, we are taught in many passages of
 Scripture, as by David in the fifty-first Psalm, when he says, "And
 take not Thy Holy Spirit from me;" [1988] and by Daniel, where it is
 said, "The Holy Spirit which is in thee." [1989] And in the New
 Testament we have abundant testimonies, as when the Holy Spirit is
 described as having descended upon Christ, and when the Lord breathed
 upon His apostles after His resurrection, saying, "Receive the Holy
 Spirit;" [1990] and the saying of the angel to Mary, "The Holy Spirit
 will come upon thee;" [1991] the declaration by Paul, that no one can
 call Jesus Lord, save by the Holy Spirit. [1992] In the Acts of the
 Apostles, the Holy Spirit was given by the imposition of the apostles'
 hands in baptism. [1993] From all which we learn that the person of
 the Holy Spirit was of such authority and dignity, that saving baptism
 was not complete except by the authority of the most excellent Trinity
 of them all, i.e., by the naming of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and
 by joining to the unbegotten God the Father, and to His only-begotten
 Son, the name also of the Holy Spirit.  Who, then, is not amazed at the
 exceeding majesty of the Holy Spirit, when he hears that he who speaks
 a word against the Son of man may hope for forgiveness; but that he who
 is guilty of blasphemy against the Holy Spirit has not forgiveness,
 either in the present world or in that which is to come! [1994]

 3.  That all things were created by God, and that there is no creature
 which exists but has derived from Him its being, is established from
 many declarations of Scripture; those assertions being refuted and
 rejected which are falsely alleged by some respecting the existence
 either of a matter co-eternal with God, or of unbegotten souls, in
 which they would have it that God implanted not so much the power of
 existence, as equality and order.  For even in that little treatise
 called The Pastor or Angel of Repentance, composed by Hermas, we have
 the following:  "First of all, believe that there is one God who
 created and arranged all things; who, when nothing formerly existed,
 caused all things to be; who Himself contains all things, but Himself
 is contained by none." [1995] And in the book of Enoch also we have
 similar descriptions.  But up to the present time we have been able to
 find no statement in holy Scripture in which the Holy Spirit could be
 said to be made or created, [1996] not even in the way in which we have
 shown above that the divine wisdom is spoken of by Solomon, or in which
 those expressions which we have discussed are to be understood of the
 life, or the word, or the other appellations of the Son of God.  The
 Spirit of God, therefore, which was borne upon the waters, as is
 written in the beginning of the creation of the world, is, I am of
 opinion, no other than the Holy Spirit, so far as I can understand; as
 indeed we have shown in our exposition of the passages themselves, not
 according to the historical, but according to the spiritual method of
 interpretation.

 4.  Some indeed of our predecessors have observed, that in the New
 Testament, whenever the Spirit is named without that adjunct which
 denotes quality, the Holy Spirit is to be understood; as e.g., in the
 expression, "Now the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, and peace;"
 [1997] and, "Seeing ye began in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in
 the flesh?" [1998] We are of opinion that this distinction may be
 observed in the Old Testament also, as when it is said, "He that giveth
 His Spirit to the people who are upon the earth, and Spirit to them who
 walk thereon." [1999] For, without doubt, every one who walks upon
 the earth (i.e., earthly and corporeal beings) is a partaker also of
 the Holy Spirit, receiving it from God.  My Hebrew master also used to
 say that those two seraphim in Isaiah, which are described as having
 each six wings, and calling to one another, and saying, "Holy, holy,
 holy, is the Lord God of hosts," [2000] were to be understood of the
 only-begotten Son of God and of the Holy Spirit.  And we think that
 that expression also which occurs in the hymn of Habakkuk, "In the
 midst either of the two living things, or of the two lives, Thou wilt
 be known," [2001] ought to be understood of Christ and of the Holy
 Spirit.  For all knowledge of the Father is obtained by revelation of
 the Son through the Holy Spirit, so that both of these beings which,
 according to the prophet, are called either "living things" or "lives,"
 exist as the ground of the knowledge of God the Father.  For as it is
 said of the Son, that "no one knoweth the Father but the Son, and he to
 whom the Son will reveal Him," [2002] the same also is said by the
 apostle of the Holy Spirit, when He declares, "God hath revealed them
 to us by His Holy Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, even the
 deep things of God;" [2003] and again in the Gospel, when the Saviour,
 speaking of the divine and profounder parts of His teaching, which His
 disciples were not yet able to receive, thus addresses them:  "I have
 yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; but when
 the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, is come, He will teach you all things,
 and will bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
 unto you." [2004] We must understand, therefore, that as the Son, who
 alone knows the Father, reveals Him to whom He will, so the Holy
 Spirit, who alone searches the deep things of God, reveals God to whom
 He will:  "For the Spirit bloweth where He listeth." [2005] We are
 not, however, to suppose that the Spirit derives His knowledge through
 revelation from the Son.  For if the Holy Spirit knows the Father
 through the Son's revelation, He passes from a state of ignorance into
 one of knowledge; but it is alike impious and foolish to confess the
 Holy Spirit, and yet to ascribe to Him ignorance.  For even although
 something else existed before the Holy Spirit, it was not by
 progressive advancement that He came to be the Holy Spirit; as if any
 one should venture to say, that at the time when He was not yet the
 Holy Spirit He was ignorant of the Father, but that after He had
 received knowledge He was made the Holy Spirit.  For if this were the
 case, the Holy Spirit would never be reckoned in the Unity of the
 Trinity, i.e., along with the unchangeable Father and His Son, unless
 He had always been the Holy Spirit.  When we use, indeed, such terms as
 "always" or "was," or any other designation of time, they are not to be
 taken absolutely, but with due allowance; for while the significations
 of these words relate to time, and those subjects of which we speak are
 spoken of by a stretch of language as existing in time, they
 nevertheless surpass in their real nature all conception of the finite
 understanding.

 5.  Nevertheless it seems proper to inquire what is the reason why he
 who is regenerated by God unto salvation has to do both with Father and
 Son and Holy Spirit, and does not obtain salvation unless with the
 co-operation of the entire Trinity; and why it is impossible to become
 partaker of the Father or the Son without the Holy Spirit.  And in
 discussing these subjects, it will undoubtedly be necessary to describe
 the special working of the Holy Spirit, and of the Father and the Son.
 I am of opinion, then, that the working of the Father and of the Son
 takes place as well in saints as in sinners, in rational beings and in
 dumb animals; nay, even in those things which are without life, and in
 all things universally which exist; but that the operation of the Holy
 Spirit does not take place at all in those things which are without
 life, or in those which, although living, are yet dumb; nay, is not
 found even in those who are endued indeed with reason, but are engaged
 in evil courses, and not at all converted to a better life.  In those
 persons alone do I think that the operation of the Holy Spirit takes
 place, who are already turning to a better life, and walking along the
 way which leads to Jesus Christ, i.e., who are engaged in the
 performance of good actions, and who abide in God.

 6.  That the working of the Father and the Son operates both in saints
 and in sinners, is manifest from this, that all who are rational beings
 are partakers of the word, i.e., of reason, and by this means bear
 certain seeds, implanted within them, of wisdom and justice, which is
 Christ.  Now, in Him who truly exists, and who said by Moses, "I Am Who
 I Am," [2006] all things, whatever they are, participate; which
 participation in God the Father is shared both by just men and sinners,
 by rational and irrational beings, and by all things universally which
 exist.  The Apostle Paul also shows truly that all have a share in
 Christ, when he says, "Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into
 heaven? (i.e., to bring Christ down from above;) or who shall descend
 into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)  But
 what saith the Scripture?  The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
 and in thy heart." [2007] By which he means that Christ is in the
 heart of all, in respect of His being the word or reason, by
 participating in which they are rational beings.  That declaration also
 in the Gospel, "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
 had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin," [2008] renders it
 manifest and patent to all who have a rational knowledge of how long a
 time man is without sin, and from what period he is liable to it, how,
 by participating in the word or reason, men are said to have sinned,
 viz., from the time they are made capable of understanding and
 knowledge, when the reason implanted within has suggested to them the
 difference between good and evil; and after they have already begun to
 know what evil is, they are made liable to sin, if they commit it.  And
 this is the meaning of the expression, that "men have no excuse for
 their sin," viz., that, from the time the divine word or reason has
 begun to show them internally the difference between good and evil,
 they ought to avoid and guard against that which is wicked:  "For to
 him who knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." [2009]
 Moreover, that all men are not without communion with God, is taught
 in the Gospel thus, by the Saviour's words:  "The kingdom of God cometh
 not with observation; neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there!
 but the kingdom of God is within you." [2010] But here we must see
 whether this does not bear the same meaning with the expression in
 Genesis:  "And He breathed into his face the breath of life, and man
 became a living soul." [2011] For if this be understood as applying
 generally to all men, then all men have a share in God.

 7.  But if this is to be understood as spoken of the Spirit of God,
 since Adam also is found to have prophesied of some things, it may be
 taken not as of general application, but as confined to those who are
 saints.  Finally, also, at the time of the flood, when all flesh had
 corrupted their way before God, it is recorded that God spoke thus, as
 of undeserving men and sinners:  "My Spirit shall not abide with those
 men for ever, because they are flesh." [2012] By which, it is clearly
 shown that the Spirit of God is taken away from all who are unworthy.
 In the Psalms also it is written:  "Thou wilt take away their spirit,
 and they will die, and return to their earth.  Thou wilt send forth Thy
 Spirit, and they shall be created, and Thou wilt renew the face of the
 earth;" [2013] which is manifestly intended of the Holy Spirit, who,
 after sinners and unworthy persons have been taken away and destroyed,
 creates for Himself a new people, and renews the face of the earth,
 when, laying aside, through the grace of the Spirit, the old man with
 his deeds, they begin to walk in newness of life.  And therefore the
 expression is competently applied to the Holy Spirit, because He will
 take up His dwelling, not in all men, nor in those who are flesh, but
 in those whose land [2014] has been renewed.  Lastly, for this reason
 was the grace and revelation of the Holy Spirit bestowed by the
 imposition of the apostles' hands after baptism.  Our Saviour also,
 after the resurrection, when old things had already passed away, and
 all things had become new, Himself a new man, and the first-born from
 the dead, His apostles also being renewed by faith in His resurrection,
 says, "Receive the Holy Spirit." [2015] This is doubtless what the
 Lord the Saviour meant to convey in the Gospel, when He said that new
 wine cannot be put into old bottles, but commanded that the bottles
 should be made new, i.e., that men should walk in newness of life, that
 they might receive the new wine, i.e., the newness of grace of the Holy
 Spirit.  In this manner, then, is the working of the power of God the
 Father and of the Son extended without distinction to every creature;
 but a share in the Holy Spirit we find possessed only by the saints.
 And therefore it is said, "No man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by
 the Holy Ghost." [2016] And on one occasion, scarcely even the
 apostles themselves are deemed worthy to hear the words, "Ye shall
 receive the power of the Holy Ghost coming upon you." [2017] For this
 reason, also, I think it follows that he who has committed a sin
 against the Son of man is deserving of forgiveness; because if he who
 is a participator of the word or reason of God cease to live agreeably
 to reason, he seems to have fallen into a state of ignorance or folly,
 and therefore to deserve forgiveness; whereas he who has been deemed
 worthy to have a portion of the Holy Spirit, and who has relapsed, is,
 by this very act and work, said to be guilty of blasphemy against the
 Holy Spirit.  Let no one indeed suppose that we, from having said that
 the Holy Spirit is conferred upon the saints alone, but that the
 benefits or operations of the Father and of the Son extend to good and
 bad, to just and unjust, by so doing give a preference to the Holy
 Spirit over the Father and the Son, or assert that His dignity is
 greater, which certainly would be a very illogical conclusion.  For it
 is the peculiarity of His grace and operations that we have been
 describing.  Moreover, nothing in the Trinity can be called greater or
 less, since the fountain of divinity alone contains all things by His
 word and reason, and by the Spirit of His mouth sanctifies all things
 which are worthy of sanctification, as it is written in the Psalm:  "By
 the word of the Lord were the heavens strengthened, and all their power
 by the Spirit of His mouth." [2018] There is also a special working
 of God the Father, besides that by which He bestowed upon all things
 the gift of natural life.  There is also a special ministry of the Lord
 Jesus Christ to those upon whom he confers by nature the gift of
 reason, by means of which they are enabled to be rightly what they
 are.  There is also another grace of the Holy Spirit, which is bestowed
 upon the deserving, through the ministry of Christ and the working of
 the Father, in proportion to the merits of those who are rendered
 capable of receiving it.  This is most clearly pointed out by the
 Apostle Paul, when demonstrating that the power of the Trinity is one
 and the same, in the words, "There are diversities of gifts, but the
 same Spirit; there are diversities of administrations, but the same
 Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God
 who worketh all in all.  But the manifestation of the Spirit is given
 to every man to profit withal." [2019] From which it most clearly
 follows that there is no difference in the Trinity, but that which is
 called the gift of the Spirit is made known through the Son, and
 operated by God the Father.  "But all these worketh that one and the
 self-same Spirit, dividing to every one severally as He will." [2020]

 8.  Having made these declarations regarding the Unity of the Father,
 and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, let us return to the order in
 which we began the discussion.  God the Father bestows upon all,
 existence; and participation in Christ, in respect of His being the
 word of reason, renders them rational beings.  From which it follows
 that they are deserving either of praise or blame, because capable of
 virtue and vice.  On this account, therefore, is the grace of the Holy
 Ghost present, that those beings which are not holy in their essence
 may be rendered holy by participating in it.  Seeing, then, that
 firstly, they derive their existence from God the Father; secondly,
 their rational nature from the Word; thirdly, their holiness from the
 Holy Spirit,--those who have been previously sanctified by the Holy
 Spirit are again made capable of receiving Christ, in respect that He
 is the righteousness of God; and those who have earned advancement to
 this grade by the sanctification of the Holy Spirit, will nevertheless
 obtain the gift of wisdom according to the power and working of the
 Spirit of God.  And this I consider is Paul's meaning, when he says
 that to "some is given the word of wisdom, to others the word of
 knowledge, according to the same Spirit."  And while pointing out the
 individual distinction of gifts, he refers the whole of them to the
 source of all things, in the words, "There are diversities of
 operations, but one God who worketh all in all." [2021] Whence also
 the working of the Father, which confers existence upon all things, is
 found to be more glorious and magnificent, while each one, by
 participation in Christ, as being wisdom, and knowledge, and
 sanctification, makes progress, and advances to higher degrees of
 perfection; and seeing it is by partaking of the Holy Spirit that any
 one is made purer and holier, he obtains, when he is made worthy, the
 grace of wisdom and knowledge, in order that, after all stains of
 pollution and ignorance are cleansed and taken away, he may make so
 great an advance in holiness and purity, that the nature which he
 received from God may become such as is worthy of Him who gave it to be
 pure and perfect, so that the being which exists may be as worthy as He
 who called it into existence.  For, in this way, he who is such as his
 Creator wished him to be, will receive from God power always to exist,
 and to abide for ever.  That this may be the case, and that those whom
 He has created may be unceasingly and inseparably present with Him, Who
 IS, it is the business of wisdom to instruct and train them, and to
 bring them to perfection by confirmation of His Holy Spirit and
 unceasing sanctification, by which alone are they capable of receiving
 God.  In this way, then, by the renewal of the ceaseless working of
 Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in us, in its various stages of progress,
 shall we be able at some future time perhaps, although with difficulty,
 to behold the holy and the blessed life, in which (as it is only after
 many struggles that we are able to reach it) we ought so to continue,
 that no satiety of that blessedness should ever seize us; but the more
 we perceive its blessedness, the more should be increased and
 intensified within us the longing for the same, while we ever more
 eagerly and freely receive and hold fast the Father, and the Son, and
 the Holy Spirit.  But if satiety should ever take hold of any one of
 those who stand on the highest and perfect summit of attainment, I do
 not think that such an one would suddenly be deposed from his position
 and fall away, but that he must decline gradually and little by little,
 so that it may sometimes happen that if a brief lapsus take place, and
 the individual quickly repent and return to himself, he may not utterly
 fall away, but may retrace his steps, and return to his former place,
 and again make good that which had been lost by his negligence.

 [1988] Ps. li. 11.

 [1989] Dan. iv. 8.

 [1990] John xx. 22.

 [1991] Luke i. 35.

 [1992] 1 Cor. xii. 3.

 [1993] Acts viii. 18.

 [1994] Cf. Matt. xii. 32 and Luke xii. 10.

 [1995] Cf. Hermæ Past., Vision v. Mandat. 1.  [See vol. ii. p. 20.]

 [1996] Per quem Spiritus Sanctus factura esse vel creatura diceretur.

 [1997] Gal. v. 22.

 [1998] Gal. iii. 3.

 [1999] Isa. xlii. 5.

 [2000] Isa. vi. 3.

 [2001] Hab. iii. 2.

 [2002] Luke x. 22.

 [2003] 1 Cor. ii. 10.

 [2004] Cf. John xvi. 12, 13, and xiv. 26.

 [2005] John iii. 8.

 [2006] Ex. iii. 14.

 [2007] Rom. x. 6-8.

 [2008] John xv. 22.

 [2009] Jas. iv. 17.

 [2010] Luke xvii. 20, 21.

 [2011] Gen. ii. 7.

 [2012] Gen. vi. 3.

 [2013] Ps. civ. 29, 30.

 [2014] Terra.

 [2015] John xx. 22.

 [2016] 1 Cor. xii. 3.

 [2017] Acts i. 8.

 [2018] Ps. xxxiii. 6.

 [2019] 1 Cor. xii. 4-7.

 [2020] 1 Cor. xii. 11.

 [2021] 1 Cor. xii. 6.

 Chapter IV.--On Defection, or Falling Away.

 1.  To exhibit the nature of defection or falling away, on the part of
 those who conduct themselves carelessly, it will not appear out of
 place to employ a similitude by way of illustration.  Suppose, then,
 the case of one who had become gradually acquainted with the art or
 science, say of geometry or medicine, until he had reached perfection,
 having trained himself for a lengthened time in its principles and
 practice, so as to attain a complete mastery over the art:  to such an
 one it could never happen, that, when he lay down to sleep in the
 possession of his skill, he should awake in a state of ignorance.  It
 is not our purpose to adduce or to notice here those accidents which
 are occasioned by any injury or weakness, for they do not apply to our
 present illustration.  According to our point of view, then, so long as
 that geometer or physician continues to exercise himself in the study
 of his art and in the practice of its principles, the knowledge of his
 profession abides with him; but if he withdraw from its practice, and
 lay aside his habits of industry, then, by his neglect, at first a few
 things will gradually escape him, then by and by more and more, until
 in course of time everything will be forgotten, and be completely
 effaced from the memory.  It is possible, indeed, that when he has
 first begun to fall away, and to yield to the corrupting influence of a
 negligence which is small as yet, he may, if he be aroused and return
 speedily to his senses, repair those losses which up to that time are
 only recent, and recover that knowledge which hitherto had been only
 slightly obliterated from his mind.  Let us apply this now to the case
 of those who have devoted themselves to the knowledge and wisdom of
 God, whose learning and diligence incomparably surpass all other
 training; and let us contemplate, according to the form of the
 similitude employed, what is the acquisition of knowledge, or what is
 its disappearance, especially when we hear from the apostle what is
 said of those who are perfect, that they shall behold face to face the
 glory of the Lord in the revelation of His mysteries.

 2.  But in our desire to show the divine benefits bestowed upon us by
 Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which Trinity is the fountain of all
 holiness, we have fallen, in what we have said, into a digression,
 having considered that the subject of the soul, which accidentally came
 before us, should be touched on, although cursorily, seeing we were
 discussing a cognate topic relating to our rational nature.  We shall,
 however, with the permission of God through Jesus Christ and the Holy
 Spirit, more conveniently consider in the proper place the subject of
 all rational beings, which are distinguished into three genera and
 species.

 Chapter V.--On Rational Natures.

 1.  After the dissertation, which we have briefly conducted to the best
 of our ability, regarding the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, it follows
 that we offer a few remarks upon the subject of rational natures, and
 on their species and orders, or on the offices as well of holy as of
 malignant powers, and also on those which occupy an intermediate
 position between these good and evil powers, and as yet are placed in a
 state of struggle and trial.  For we find in holy Scripture numerous
 names of certain orders and offices, not only of holy beings, but also
 of those of an opposite description, which we shall bring before us, in
 the first place; and the meaning of which we shall endeavour, in the
 second place, to the best of our ability, to ascertain.  There are
 certain holy angels of God whom Paul terms "ministering spirits, sent
 forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation." [2022]
 In the writings also of St. Paul himself we find him designating them,
 from some unknown source, as thrones, and dominions, and
 principalities, and powers; and after this enumeration, as if knowing
 that there were still other rational offices [2023] and orders besides
 those which he had named, he says of the Saviour:  "Who is above all
 principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that
 is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come."
 [2024] From which he shows that there were certain beings besides
 those which he had mentioned, which may be named indeed in this world,
 but were not now enumerated by him, and perhaps were not known by any
 other individual; and that there were others which may not be named in
 this world, but will be named in the world to come.

 2.  Then, in the next place, we must know that every being which is
 endowed with reason, and transgresses its statutes and limitations, is
 undoubtedly involved in sin by swerving from rectitude and justice.
 Every rational creature, therefore, is capable of earning praise and
 censure:  of praise, if, in conformity to that reason which he
 possesses, he advance to better things; of censure, if he fall away
 from the plan and course of rectitude, for which reason he is justly
 liable to pains and penalties.  And this also is to be held as applying
 to the devil himself, and those who are with him, and are called his
 angels.  Now the titles of these beings have to be explained, that we
 may know what they are of whom we have to speak.  The name, then, of
 Devil, and Satan, and Wicked One, who is also described as Enemy of
 God, is mentioned in many passages of Scripture.  Moreover, certain
 angels of the devil are mentioned, and also a prince of this world,
 who, whether the devil himself or some one else, is not yet clearly
 manifest.  There are also certain princes of this world spoken of as
 possessing a kind of wisdom which will come to nought; but whether
 these are those princes who are also the principalities with whom we
 have to wrestle, or other beings, seems to me a point on which it is
 not easy for any one to pronounce.  After the principalities, certain
 powers also are named with whom we have to wrestle, and carry on a
 struggle even against the princes of this world and the rulers of this
 darkness.  Certain spiritual powers of wickedness also, in heavenly
 places, are spoken of by Paul himself.  What, moreover, are we to say
 of those wicked and unclean spirits mentioned in the Gospel?  Then we
 have certain heavenly beings called by a similar name, but which are
 said to bend the knee, or to be about to bend the knee, at the name of
 Jesus; nay, even things on earth and things under the earth, which Paul
 enumerates in order.  And certainly, in a place where we have been
 discussing the subject of rational natures, it is not proper to be
 silent regarding ourselves, who are human beings, and are called
 rational animals; nay, even this point is not to be idly passed over,
 that even of us human beings certain different orders are mentioned in
 the words, "The portion of the Lord is His people Jacob; Israel is the
 cord of His inheritance." [2025] Other nations, moreover, are called
 a part of the angels; since "when the Most High divided the nations,
 and dispersed the sons of Adam, He fixed the boundaries of the nations
 according to the number of the angels of God." [2026] And therefore,
 with other rational natures, we must also thoroughly examine the reason
 of the human soul.

 3.  After the enumeration, then, of so many and so important names of
 orders and offices, underlying which it is certain that there are
 personal existences, let us inquire whether God, the creator and
 founder of all things, created certain of them holy and happy, so that
 they could admit no element at all of an opposite kind, and certain
 others so that they were made capable both of virtue and vice; or
 whether we are to suppose that He created some so as to be altogether
 incapable of virtue, and others again altogether incapable of
 wickedness, but with the power of abiding only in a state of happiness,
 and others again such as to be capable of either condition. [2027] In
 order, now, that our first inquiry may begin with the names themselves,
 let us consider whether the holy angels, from the period of their first
 existence, have always been holy, and are holy still, and will be holy,
 and have never either admitted or had the power to admit any occasion
 of sin.  Then in the next place, let us consider whether those who are
 called holy principalities began from the moment of their creation by
 God to exercise power over some who were made subject to them, and
 whether these latter were created of such a nature, and formed for the
 very purpose of being subject and subordinate.  In like manner, also,
 whether those which are called powers were created of such a nature and
 for the express purpose of exercising power, or whether their arriving
 at that power and dignity is a reward and desert of their virtue.
 Moreover, also, whether those which are called thrones or seats gained
 that stability of happiness at the same time with their coming forth
 into being, [2028] so as to have that possession from the will of the
 Creator alone; or whether those which are called dominions had their
 dominion conferred on them, not as a reward for their proficiency, but
 as the peculiar privilege of their creation, [2029] so that it is
 something which is in a certain degree inseparable from them, and
 natural.  Now, if we adopt the view that the holy angels, and the holy
 powers, and the blessed seats, and the glorious virtues, and the
 magnificent dominions, are to be regarded as possessing those powers
 and dignities and glories in virtue of their nature, [2030] it will
 doubtless appear to follow that those beings which have been mentioned
 as holding offices of an opposite kind must be regarded in the same
 manner; so that those principalities with whom we have to struggle are
 to be viewed, not as having received that spirit of opposition and
 resistance to all good at a later period, or as falling away from good
 through the freedom of the will, but as having had it in themselves as
 the essence of their being from the beginning of their existence.  In
 like manner also will it be the case with the powers and virtues, in
 none of which was wickedness subsequent or posterior to their first
 existence.  Those also whom the apostle termed rulers and princes of
 the darkness of this world, are said, with respect to their rule and
 occupation of darkness, to fall not from perversity of intention, but
 from the necessity of their creation.  Logical reasoning will compel us
 to take the same view with regard to wicked and malignant spirits and
 unclean demons.  But if to entertain this view regarding malignant and
 opposing powers seem to be absurd, as it is certainly absurd that the
 cause of their wickedness should be removed from the purpose of their
 own will, and ascribed of necessity to their Creator, why should we not
 also be obliged to make a similar confession regarding the good and
 holy powers, that, viz., the good which is in them is not theirs by
 essential being, which we have manifestly shown to be the case with
 Christ and the Holy Spirit alone, as undoubtedly with the Father also?
 For it was proved that there was nothing compound in the nature of the
 Trinity, so that these qualities might seem to belong to it as
 accidental consequences.  From which it follows, that in the case of
 every creature it is a result of his own works and movements, that
 those powers which appear either to hold sway over others or to
 exercise power or dominion, have been preferred to and placed over
 those whom they are said to govern or exercise power over, and not in
 consequence of a peculiar privilege inherent in their constitutions,
 but on account of merit.

 4.  But that we may not appear to build our assertions on subjects of
 such importance and difficulty on the ground of inference alone, or to
 require the assent of our hearers to what is only conjectural, let us
 see whether we can obtain any declarations from holy Scripture, by the
 authority of which these positions may be more credibly maintained.
 And, firstly, we shall adduce what holy Scripture contains regarding
 wicked powers; we shall next continue our investigation with regard to
 the others, as the Lord shall be pleased to enlighten us, that in
 matters of such difficulty we may ascertain what is nearest to the
 truth, or what ought to be our opinions agreeably to the standard of
 religion.  Now we find in the prophet Ezekiel two prophecies written to
 the prince of Tyre, the former of which might appear to any one, before
 he heard the second also, to be spoken of some man who was prince of
 the Tyrians.  In the meantime, therefore, we shall take nothing from
 that first prophecy; but as the second is manifestly of such a kind as
 cannot be at all understood of a man, but of some superior power which
 had fallen away from a higher position, and had been reduced to a lower
 and worse condition, we shall from it take an illustration, by which it
 may be demonstrated with the utmost clearness, that those opposing and
 malignant powers were not formed or created so by nature, but fell from
 a better to a worse position, and were converted into wicked beings;
 that those blessed powers also were not of such a nature as to be
 unable to admit what was opposed to them if they were so inclined and
 became negligent, and did not guard most carefully the blessedness of
 their condition.  For if it is related that he who is called the prince
 of Tyre was amongst the saints, and was without stain, and was placed
 in the paradise of God, and adorned also with a crown of comeliness and
 beauty, is it to be supposed that such an one could be in any degree
 inferior to any of the saints?  For he is described as having been
 adorned with a crown of comeliness and beauty, and as having walked
 stainless in the paradise of God:  and how can any one suppose that
 such a being was not one of those holy and blessed powers which, as
 being placed in a state of happiness, we must believe to be endowed
 with no other honour than this?  But let us see what we are taught by
 the words of the prophecy themselves.  "The word of the Lord," says the
 prophet, "came to me, saying, Son of man, take up a lamentation over
 the prince of Tyre, and say to him, Thus saith the Lord God, Thou hast
 been the seal of a similitude, and a crown of comeliness among the
 delights of paradise; thou wert adorned with every good stone or gem,
 and wert clothed with sardonyx, and topaz, and emerald, and carbuncle,
 and sapphire, and jasper, set in gold and silver, and with agate,
 amethyst, and chrysolite, and beryl, and onyx:  with gold also didst
 thou fill thy treasures, and thy storehouses within thee.  From the day
 when thou wert created along with the cherubim, I placed thee in the
 holy mount of God.  Thou wert in the midst of the fiery stones:  thou
 wert stainless in thy days, from the day when thou wert created, until
 iniquities were found in thee:  from the greatness of thy trade, thou
 didst fill thy storehouses with iniquity, and didst sin, and wert
 wounded from the mount of God.  And a cherub drove thee forth from the
 midst of the burning stones; and thy heart was elated because of thy
 comeliness, thy discipline was corrupted along with thy beauty:  on
 account of the multitude of thy sins, I cast thee forth to the earth
 before kings; I gave thee for a show and a mockery on account of the
 multitude of thy sins, and of thine iniquities:  because of thy trade
 thou hast polluted thy holy places.  And I shall bring forth fire from
 the midst of thee, and it shall devour thee, and I shall give thee for
 ashes and cinders on the earth in the sight of all who see thee:  and
 all who know thee among the nations shall mourn over thee.  Thou hast
 been made destruction, and thou shalt exist no longer for ever." [2031]
 Seeing, then, that such are the words of the prophet, who is there
 that on hearing, "Thou wert a seal of a similitude, and a crown of
 comeliness among the delights of paradise," or that "From the day when
 thou wert created with the cherubim, I placed thee in the holy mount of
 God," can so enfeeble the meaning as to suppose that this language is
 used of some man or saint, not to say the prince of Tyre?  Or what
 fiery stones can he imagine in the midst of which any man could live?
 Or who could be supposed to be stainless from the very day of his
 creation, and wickedness being afterwards discovered in him, it be said
 of him then that he was cast forth upon the earth?  For the meaning of
 this is, that He who was not yet on the earth is said to be cast forth
 upon it:  whose holy places also are said to be polluted.  We have
 shown, then, that what we have quoted regarding the prince of Tyre from
 the prophet Ezekiel refers to an adverse power, and by it it is most
 clearly proved that that power was formerly holy and happy; from which
 state of happiness it fell from the time that iniquity was found in it,
 and was hurled to the earth, and was not such by nature and creation.
 We are of opinion, therefore, that these words are spoken of a certain
 angel who had received the office of governing the nation of the
 Tyrians, and to whom also their souls had been entrusted to be taken
 care of.  But what Tyre, or what souls of Tyrians, we ought to
 understand, whether that Tyre which is situated within the boundaries
 of the province of Phoenicia, or some other of which, this one which we
 know on earth is the model; and the souls of the Tyrians, whether they
 are those of the former or those which belong to that Tyre which is
 spiritually understood, does not seem to be a matter requiting
 examination in this place; lest perhaps we should appear to investigate
 subjects of so much mystery and importance in a cursory manner, whereas
 they demand a labour and work of their own.

 5.  Again, we are taught as follows by the prophet Isaiah regarding
 another opposing power.  The prophet says, "How is Lucifer, who used to
 arise in the morning, fallen from heaven!  He who assailed all nations
 is broken and beaten to the ground.  Thou indeed saidst in thy heart, I
 shall ascend into heaven; above the stars of heaven shall I place my
 throne; I shall sit upon a lofty mountain, above the lofty mountains
 which are towards the north; I shall ascend above the clouds; I shall
 be like the Most High.  Now shalt thou be brought down to the lower
 world, and to the foundations of the earth.  They who see thee shall be
 amazed at thee, and shall say, This is the man who harassed the whole
 earth, who moved kings, who made the whole world a desert, who
 destroyed cities, and did not unloose those who were in chains.  All
 the kings of the nations have slept in honour, every one in his own
 house; but thou shalt be cast forth on the mountains, accursed with the
 many dead who have been pierced through with swords, and have descended
 to the lower world.  As a garment cloned with blood, and stained, will
 not be clean; neither shalt thou be clean, because thou hast destroyed
 my land and slain my people:  thou shalt not remain for ever, most
 wicked seed.  Prepare thy sons for death on account of the sins of thy
 father, lest they rise again and inherit the earth, and fill the earth
 with wars.  And I shall rise against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and
 I shall cause their name to perish, and their remains, and their seed."
 [2032] Most evidently by these words is he shown to have fallen from
 heaven, who formerly was Lucifer, and who used to arise in the
 morning.  For if, as some think, he was a nature of darkness, how is
 Lucifer said to have existed before?  Or how could he arise in the
 morning, who had in himself nothing of the light?  Nay, even the
 Saviour Himself teaches us, saying of the devil, "Behold, I see Satan
 fallen from heaven like lightning." [2033] For at one time he was
 light.  Moreover our Lord, who is the truth, compared the power of His
 own glorious advent to lightning, in the words, "For as the lightning
 shineth from the height of heaven even to its height again, so will the
 coming of the Son of man be." [2034] And notwithstanding He compares
 him to lightning, and says that he fell from heaven, that He might show
 by this that he had been at one time in heaven, and had had a place
 among the saints, and had enjoyed a share in that light in which all
 the saints participate, by which they are made angels of light, and by
 which the apostles are termed by the Lord the light of the world.  In
 this manner, then, did that being once exist as light before he went
 astray, and fell to this place, and had his glory turned into dust,
 which is peculiarly the mark of the wicked, as the prophet also says;
 whence, too, he was called the prince of this world, i.e., of an
 earthly habitation:  for he exercised power over those who were
 obedient to his wickedness, since "the whole of this world"--for I term
 this place of earth, world--"lieth in the wicked one," [2035] and in
 this apostate.  That he is an apostate, i.e., a fugitive, even the Lord
 in the book of Job says, "Thou wilt take with a hook the apostate
 dragon," i.e., a fugitive. [2036] Now it is certain that by the
 dragon is understood the devil himself.  If then they are called
 opposing powers, and are said to have been once without stain, while
 spotless purity exists in the essential being of none save the Father,
 Son, and Holy Spirit, but is an accidental quality in every created
 thing; and since that which is accidental may also fall away, and since
 those opposite powers once were spotless, and were once among those
 which still remain unstained, it is evident from all this that no one
 is pure either by essence or nature, and that no one was by nature
 polluted.  And the consequence of this is, that it lies within
 ourselves and in our own actions to possess either happiness or
 holiness; or by sloth and negligence to fall from happiness into
 wickedness and ruin, to such a degree that, through too great
 proficiency, so to speak, in wickedness (if a man be guilty of so great
 neglect), he may descend even to that state in which he will be changed
 into what is called an "opposing power."

 [2022] Heb. i. 14.

 [2023] Officia.

 [2024] Eph. i. 21.

 [2025] Deut. xxxii. 9.

 [2026] Deut. xxxii. 8.  The Septuagint here differs from the Masoretic
 text.

 [2027] [See note at end of chap. vi.  S.]

 [2028] Simul cum substantiæ suæ prolatione--at the same time with the
 emanation of their substance.

 [2029] Conditionis prærogativa.

 [2030] Substantialiter.

 [2031] Ezek. xxviii. 11-19.

 [2032] Isa. xiv. 12-22.

 [2033] Luke x. 18.

 [2034] Matt. xxiv. 27.

 [2035] 1 John v. 19.

 [2036] Job xl. 20 [LXX.].

 Chapter VI.--On the End or Consummation.

 1.  An end or consummation would seem to be an indication of the
 perfection and completion of things.  And this reminds us here, that if
 there be any one imbued with a desire of reading and understanding
 subjects of such difficulty and importance, he ought to bring to the
 effort a perfect and instructed understanding, lest perhaps, if he has
 had no experience in questions of this kind, they may appear to him as
 vain and superfluous; or if his mind be full of preconceptions and
 prejudices on other points, he may judge these to be heretical and
 opposed to the faith of the Church, yielding in so doing not so much to
 the convictions of reason as to the dogmatism of prejudice.  These
 subjects, indeed, are treated by us with great solicitude and caution,
 in the manner rather of an investigation and discussion, than in that
 of fixed and certain decision.  For we have pointed out in the
 preceding pages those questions which must be set forth in clear
 dogmatic propositions, as I think has been done to the best of my
 ability when speaking of the Trinity.  But on the present occasion our
 exercise is to be conducted, as we best may, in the style of a
 disputation rather than of strict definition.

 The end of the world, then, and the final consummation, will take place
 when every one shall be subjected to punishment for his sins; a time
 which God alone knows, when He will bestow on each one what he
 deserves.  We think, indeed, that the goodness of God, through His
 Christ, may recall all His creatures to one end, even His enemies being
 conquered and subdued.  For thus says holy Scripture, "The Lord said to
 My Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy
 footstool." [2037] And if the meaning of the prophet's language here
 be less clear, we may ascertain it from the Apostle Paul, who speaks
 more openly, thus:  "For Christ must reign until He has put all enemies
 under His feet." [2038] But if even that unreserved declaration of
 the apostle do not sufficiently inform us what is meant by "enemies
 being placed under His feet," listen to what he says in the following
 words, "For all things must be put under Him."  What, then, is this
 "putting under" by which all things must be made subject to Christ?  I
 am of opinion that it is this very subjection by which we also wish to
 be subject to Him, by which the apostles also were subject, and all the
 saints who have been followers of Christ.  For the name "subjection,"
 by which we are subject to Christ, indicates that the salvation which
 proceeds from Him belongs to His subjects, agreeably to the declaration
 of David, "Shall not my soul be subject unto God?  From Him cometh my
 salvation." [2039]

 2.  Seeing, then, that such is the end, when all enemies will be
 subdued to Christ, when death--the last enemy--shall be destroyed, and
 when the kingdom shall be delivered up by Christ (to whom all things
 are subject) to God the Father; let us, I say, from such an end as
 this, contemplate the beginnings of things.  For the end is always like
 the beginning:  and, therefore, as there is one end to all things, so
 ought we to understand that there was one beginning; and as there is
 one end to many things, so there spring from one beginning many
 differences and varieties, which again, through the goodness of God,
 and by subjection to Christ, and through the unity of the Holy Spirit,
 are recalled to one end, which is like unto the beginning:  all those,
 viz., who, bending the knee at the name of Jesus, make known by so
 doing their subjection to Him:  and these are they who are in heaven,
 on earth, and under the earth:  by which three classes the whole
 universe of things is pointed out, those, viz., who from that one
 beginning were arranged, each according to the diversity of his
 conduct, among the different orders, in accordance with their desert;
 for there was no goodness in them by essential being, as in God and His
 Christ, and in the Holy Spirit.  For in the Trinity alone, which is the
 author of all things, does goodness exist in virtue of essential being;
 while others possess it as an accidental and perishable quality, and
 only then enjoy blessedness, when they participate in holiness and
 wisdom, and in divinity itself.  But if they neglect and despise such
 participation, then is each one, by fault of his own slothfulness,
 made, one more rapidly, another more slowly, one in a greater, another
 in a less degree, the cause of his own downfall.  And since, as we have
 remarked, the lapse by which an individual falls away from his position
 is characterized by great diversity, according to the movements of the
 mind and will, one man falling with greater ease, another with more
 difficulty, into a lower condition; in this is to be seen the just
 judgment of the providence of God, that it should happen to every one
 according to the diversity of his conduct, in proportion to the desert
 of his declension and defection.  Certain of those, indeed, who
 remained in that beginning which we have described as resembling the
 end which is to come, obtained, in the ordering and arrangement of the
 world, the rank of angels; others that of influences, others of
 principalities, others of powers, that they may exercise power over
 those who need to have power upon their head.  Others, again, received
 the rank of thrones, having the office of judging or ruling those who
 require this; others dominion, doubtless, over slaves; all of which are
 conferred by Divine Providence in just and impartial judgment according
 to their merits, and to the progress which they had made in the
 participation and imitation of God.  But those who have been removed
 from their primal state of blessedness have not been removed
 irrecoverably, but have been placed under the rule of those holy and
 blessed orders which we have described; and by availing themselves of
 the aid of these, and being remoulded by salutary principles and
 discipline, they may recover themselves, and be restored to their
 condition of happiness.  From all which I am of opinion, so far as I
 can see, that this order of the human race has been appointed in order
 that in the future world, or in ages to come, when there shall be the
 new heavens and new earth, spoken of by Isaiah, it may be restored to
 that unity promised by the Lord Jesus in His prayer to God the Father
 on behalf of His disciples:  "I do not pray for these alone, but for
 all who shall believe on Me through their word:  that they all may be
 one, as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be
 one in Us;" [2040] and again, when He says:  "That they may be one,
 even as We are one; I in them, and Thou in Me, that they may be made
 perfect in one." [2041] And this is further confirmed by the language
 of the Apostle Paul:  "Until we all come in the unity of the faith to a
 perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ."
 [2042] And in keeping with this is the declaration of the same
 apostle, when he exhorts us, who even in the present life are placed in
 the Church, in which is the form of that kingdom which is to come, to
 this same similitude of unity:  "That ye all speak the same thing, and
 that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined
 together in the same mind and in the same judgment." [2043]

 3.  It is to be borne in mind, however, that certain beings who fell
 away from that one beginning of which we have spoken, have sunk to such
 a depth of unworthiness and wickedness as to be deemed altogether
 undeserving of that training and instruction by which the human race,
 while in the flesh, are trained and instructed with the assistance of
 the heavenly powers; and continue, on the contrary, in a state of
 enmity and opposition to those who are receiving this instruction and
 teaching.  And hence it is that the whole of this mortal life is full
 of struggles and trials, caused by the opposition and enmity of those
 who fell from a better condition without at all looking back, and who
 are called the devil and his angels, and the other orders of evil,
 which the apostle classed among the opposing powers.  But whether any
 of these orders who act under the government of the devil, and obey his
 wicked commands, will in a future world be converted to righteousness
 because of their possessing the faculty of freedom of will, or whether
 persistent and inveterate wickedness may be changed by the power of
 habit into nature, is a result which you yourself, reader, may approve
 of, if neither in these present worlds which are seen and temporal, nor
 in those which are unseen and are eternal, that portion is to differ
 wholly from the final unity and fitness of things.  But in the
 meantime, both in those temporal worlds which are seen, as well as in
 those eternal worlds which are invisible, all those beings are
 arranged, according to a regular plan, in the order and degree of their
 merits; so that some of them in the first, others in the second, some
 even in the last times, after having undergone heavier and severer
 punishments, endured for a lengthened period, and for many ages, so to
 speak, improved by this stern method of training, and restored at first
 by the instruction of the angels, and subsequently by the powers of a
 higher grade, and thus advancing through each stage to a better
 condition, reach even to that which is invisible and eternal, having
 travelled through, by a kind of training, every single office of the
 heavenly powers.  From which, I think, this will appear to follow as an
 inference, that every rational nature may, in passing from one order to
 another, go through each to all, and advance from all to each, while
 made the subject of various degrees of proficiency and failure
 according to its own actions and endeavours, put forth in the enjoyment
 of its power of freedom of will.

 4.  But since Paul says that certain things are visible and temporal,
 and others besides these invisible and eternal, we proceed to inquire
 how those things which are seen are temporal--whether because there
 will be nothing at all after them in all those periods of the coming
 world, in which that dispersion and separation from the one beginning
 is undergoing a process of restoration to one and the same end and
 likeness; or because, while the form of those things which are seen
 passes away, their essential nature is subject to no corruption.  And
 Paul seems to confirm the latter view, when he says, "For the fashion
 of this world passeth away." [2044] David also appears to assert the
 same in the words, "The heavens shall perish, but Thou shalt endure;
 and they all shall wax old as a garment, and Thou shalt change them
 like a vesture, and like a vestment they shall be changed." [2045]
 For if the heavens are to be changed, assuredly that which is changed
 does not perish, and if the fashion of the world passes away, it is by
 no means an annihilation or destruction of their material substance
 that is shown to take place, but a kind of change of quality and
 transformation of appearance.  Isaiah also, in declaring prophetically
 that there will be a new heaven and a new earth, undoubtedly suggests a
 similar view.  For this renewal of heaven and earth, and this
 transmutation of the form of the present world, and this changing of
 the heavens will undoubtedly be prepared for those who are walking
 along that way which we have pointed out above, and are tending to that
 goal of happiness to which, it is said, even enemies themselves are to
 be subjected, and in which God is said to be "all and in all."  And if
 any one imagine that at the end material, i.e., bodily, nature will be
 entirely destroyed, he cannot in any respect meet my view, how beings
 so numerous and powerful are able to live and to exist without bodies,
 since it is an attribute of the divine nature alone--i.e., of the
 Father, Son, and Holy Spirit--to exist without any material substance,
 and without partaking in any degree of a bodily adjunct.  Another,
 perhaps, may say that in the end every bodily substance will be so pure
 and refined as to be like the æther, and of a celestial purity and
 clearness.  How things will be, however, is known with certainty to God
 alone, and to those who are His friends through Christ and the Holy
 Spirit. [2046]

 [2037] Ps. cx. 1.

 [2038] 1 Cor. xv. 25.

 [2039] Ps. lxii. 1.

 [2040] John xvii. 20, 21.

 [2041] John xvii. 22, 23.

 [2042] Eph. iv. 13.

 [2043] 1 Cor. i. 10.

 [2044] 1 Cor. vii. 31.

 [2045] Ps. cii. 26.

 [2046] [The language used by Origen in this and the preceding chapter
 affords a remarkable illustration of that occasional extravagance in
 statements of facts and opinions, as well as of those strange
 imaginings and wild speculations as to the meaning of Holy Scripture,
 which brought upon him subsequently grave charges of error and
 heretical pravity.  See Neander's History of the Christian Religion and
 Church during the First Three Centuries (Rose's translation), vol. ii.
 p. 217 et seqq., and Hagenbach's History of Doctrines, vol. i. p. 102
 et seqq.  See also Prefatory Note to Origen's Works, supra, p. 235.
 S.]

 Chapter VII.--On Incorporeal and Corporeal Beings.

 1.  The subjects considered in the previous chapter have been spoken of
 in general language, the nature of rational beings being discussed more
 by way of intelligent inference than strict dogmatic definition, with
 the exception of the place where we treated, to the best of our
 ability, of the persons of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.  We have now
 to ascertain what those matters are which it is proper to treat in the
 following pages according to our dogmatic belief, i.e., in agreement
 with the creed of the Church.  All souls and all rational natures,
 whether holy or wicked, were formed or created, and all these,
 according to their proper nature, are incorporeal; but although
 incorporeal, they were nevertheless created, because all things were
 made by God through Christ, as John teaches in a general way in his
 Gospel, saying, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
 God, and the Word was God.  The same was in the beginning with God.
 All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made." [2047]
 The Apostle Paul, moreover, describing created things by species and
 numbers and orders, speaks as follows, when showing that all things
 were made through Christ:  "And in Him were all things created, that
 are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether
 they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers:  all
 things were created by Him, and in Him:  and He is before all, and He
 is the head." [2048] He therefore manifestly declares that in Christ
 and through Christ were all things made and created, whether things
 visible, which are corporeal, or things invisible, which I regard as
 none other than incorporeal and spiritual powers.  But of those things
 which he had termed generally corporeal or incorporeal, he seems to me,
 in the words that follow, to enumerate the various kinds, viz.,
 thrones, dominions, principalities, powers, influences.

 These matters now have been previously mentioned by us, as we are
 desirous to come in an orderly manner to the investigation of the sun,
 and moon, and stars by way of logical inference, and to ascertain
 whether they also ought properly to be reckoned among the
 principalities on account of their being said to be created in 'Archas,
 i.e., for the government of day and night; or whether they are to be
 regarded as having only that government of day and night which they
 discharge by performing the office of illuminating them, and are not in
 reality chief of that order of principalities.

 2.  Now, when it is said that all things were made by Him, and that in
 Him were all things created, both things in heaven and things on earth,
 there can be no doubt that also those things which are in the
 firmament, which is called heaven, and in which those luminaries are
 said to be placed, are included amongst the number of heavenly things.
 And secondly, seeing that the course of the discussion has manifestly
 discovered that all things were made or created, and that amongst
 created things there is nothing which may not admit of good and evil,
 and be capable of either, what are we to think of the following opinion
 which certain of our friends entertain regarding sun, moon, and stars,
 viz., that they are unchangeable, and incapable of becoming the
 opposite of what they are?  Not a few have held that view even
 regarding the holy angels, and certain heretics also regarding souls,
 which they call spiritual natures.

 In the first place, then, let us see what reason itself can discover
 respecting sun, moon, and stars,--whether the opinion, entertained by
 some, of their unchangeableness be correct,--and let the declarations
 of holy Scripture, as far as possible, be first adduced.  For Job
 appears to assert that not only may the stars be subject to sin, but
 even that they are actually not clean from the contagion of it.  The
 following are his words:  "The stars also are not clean in Thy sight."
 [2049] Nor is this to be understood of the splendour of their
 physical substance, as if one were to say, for example, of a garment,
 that it is not clean; for if such were the meaning, then the accusation
 of a want of cleanness in the splendour of their bodily substance would
 imply an injurious reflection upon their Creator.  For if they are
 unable, through their own diligent efforts, either to acquire for
 themselves a body of greater brightness, or through their sloth to make
 the one they have less pure, how should they incur censure for being
 stars that are not clean, if they receive no praise because they are
 so? [2050]

 3.  But to arrive at a clearer understanding on these matters, we ought
 first to inquire after this point, whether it is allowable to suppose
 that they are living and rational beings; then, in the next place,
 whether their souls came into existence at the same time with their
 bodies, or seem to be anterior to them; and also whether, after the end
 of the world, we are to understand that they are to be released from
 their bodies; and whether, as we cease to live, so they also will cease
 from illuminating the world.  Although this inquiry may seem to be
 somewhat bold, yet, as we are incited by the desire of ascertaining the
 truth as far as possible, there seems no absurdity in attempting an
 investigation of the subject agreeably to the grace of the Holy Spirit.

 We think, then, that they may be designated as living beings, for this
 reason, that they are said to receive commandments from God, which is
 ordinarily the case only with rational beings.  "I have given a
 commandment to all the stars," [2051] says the Lord.  What, now, are
 these commandments?  Those, namely, that each star, in its order and
 course, should bestow upon the world the amount of splendour which has
 been entrusted to it.  For those which are called "planets" move in
 orbits of one kind, and those which are termed aplaneis are different.
 Now it manifestly follows from this, that neither can the movement of
 that body take place without a soul, nor can living things be at any
 time without motion.  And seeing that the stars move with such order
 and regularity, that their movements never appear to be at any time
 subject to derangement, would it not be the height of folly to say that
 so orderly an observance of method and plan could be carried out or
 accomplished by irrational beings?  In the writings of Jeremiah,
 indeed, the moon is called the queen of heaven. [2052] Yet if the
 stars are living and rational beings, there will undoubtedly appear
 among them both an advance and a falling back.  For the language of
 Job, "the stars are not clean in His sight," seems to me to convey some
 such idea.

 4.  And now we have to ascertain whether those beings which in the
 course of the discussion we have discovered to possess life and reason,
 were endowed with a soul along with their bodies at the time mentioned
 in Scripture, when "God made two great lights, the greater light to
 rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night, and the stars
 also," [2053] or whether their spirit was implanted in them, not at the
 creation of their bodies, but from without, after they had been already
 made.  I, for my part, suspect that the spirit was implanted in them
 from without; but it will be worth while to prove this from Scripture:
 for it will seem an easy matter to make the assertion on conjectural
 grounds, while it is more difficult to establish it by the testimony of
 Scripture.  Now it may be established conjecturally as follows.  If the
 soul of a man, which is certainly inferior while it remains the soul of
 a man, was not formed along with his body, but is proved to have been
 implanted strictly from without, much more must this be the case with
 those living beings which are called heavenly.  For, as regards man,
 how could the soul of him, viz., Jacob, who supplanted his brother in
 the womb, appear to be formed along with his body?  Or how could his
 soul, or its images, be formed along with his body, who, while lying in
 his mother's womb, was filled with the Holy Ghost?  I refer to John
 leaping in his mother's womb, and exulting because the voice of the
 salutation of Mary had come to the ears of his mother Elisabeth.  How
 could his soul and its images be formed along with his body, who,
 before he was created in the womb, is said to be known to God, and was
 sanctified by Him before his birth?  Some, perhaps, may think that God
 fills individuals with His Holy Spirit, and bestows upon them
 sanctification, not on grounds of justice and according to their
 deserts; but undeservedly.  And how shall we escape that declaration:
 "Is there unrighteousness with God?  God forbid!" [2054] or this:  "Is
 there respect of persons with God?" [2055] For such is the defence of
 those who maintain that souls come into existence with bodies.  So far,
 then, as we can form an opinion from a comparison with the condition of
 man, I think it follows that we must hold the same to hold good with
 heavenly beings, which reason itself and scriptural authority show us
 to be the case with men.

 5.  But let us see whether we can find in holy Scripture any
 indications properly applicable to these heavenly existences.  The
 following is the statement of the Apostle Paul:  "The creature was made
 subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of Him who subjected
 the same in hope, because the creature itself also shall be delivered
 from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
 children of God." [2056] To what vanity, pray, was the creature made
 subject, or what creature is referred to, or how is it said "not
 willingly," or "in hope of what?"  And in what way is the creature
 itself to be delivered from the bondage of corruption?  Elsewhere,
 also, the same apostle says:  "For the expectation of the creature
 waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God." [2057] And again
 in another passage, "And not only we, but the creation itself groaneth
 together, and is in pain until now." [2058] And hence we have to
 inquire what are the groanings, and what are the pains.  Let us see
 then, in the first place, what is the vanity to which the creature is
 subject.  I apprehend that it is nothing else than the body; for
 although the body of the stars is ethereal, it is nevertheless
 material.  Whence also Solomon appears to characterize the whole of
 corporeal nature as a kind of burden which enfeebles the vigour of the
 soul in the following language:  "Vanity of vanities, saith the
 Preacher; all is vanity.  I have looked, and seen all the works that
 are done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity." [2059] To this
 vanity, then, is the creature subject, that creature especially which,
 being assuredly the greatest in this world, holds also a distinguished
 principality of labour, i.e., the sun, and moon, and stars, are said to
 be subject to vanity, because they are clothed with bodies, and set
 apart to the office of giving light to the human race.  "And this
 creature," he remarks, "was subjected to vanity not willingly."  For it
 did not undertake a voluntary service to vanity, but because it was the
 will of Him who made it subject, and because of the promise of the
 Subjector to those who were reduced to this unwilling obedience, that
 when the ministry of their great work was performed, they were to be
 freed from this bondage of corruption and vanity when the time of the
 glorious redemption of God's children should have arrived.  And the
 whole of creation, receiving this hope, and looking for the fulfilment
 of this promise now, in the meantime, as having an affection for those
 whom it serves, groans along with them, and patiently suffers with
 them, hoping for the fulfilment of the promises.  See also whether the
 following words of Paul can apply to those who, although not willingly,
 yet in accordance with the will of Him who subjected them, and in hope
 of the promises, were made subject to vanity, when he says, "For I
 could wish to be dissolved," or "to return and be with Christ, which is
 far better." [2060] For I think that the sun might say in like
 manner, "I would desire to be dissolved," or "to return and be with
 Christ, which is far better."  Paul indeed adds, "Nevertheless, to
 abide in the flesh is more needful for you;" while the sun may say, "To
 abide in this bright and heavenly body is more necessary, on account of
 the manifestation of the sons of God."  The same views are to be
 believed and expressed regarding the moon and stars.

 Let us see now what is the freedom of the creature, or the termination
 of its bondage.  When Christ shall have delivered up the kingdom to God
 even the Father, then also those living things, when they shall have
 first been made the kingdom of Christ, shall be delivered, along with
 the whole of that kingdom, to the rule of the Father, that when God
 shall be all in all, they also, since they are a part of all things,
 may have God in themselves, as He is in all things.

 [2047] John i. 1-3.

 [2048] Col. i. 16-18.

 [2049] Job xxv. 5.

 [2050] [See note, supra, p. 262.  S.]

 [2051] Isa. xlv. 12.

 [2052] Jer. vii. 18.

 [2053] Gen. i. 16.

 [2054] Rom. ix. 14.

 [2055] Rom. ii. 11.

 [2056] Cf. Rom. viii. 20, 21.

 [2057] Rom. viii. 19.

 [2058] Rom. viii. 22, cf. 23.

 [2059] Eccles. i. 1, 14.

 [2060] Phil. i. 23.

 Chapter VIII.--On the Angels.

 1.  A similar method must be followed in treating of the angels; nor
 are we to suppose that it is the result of accident that a particular
 office is assigned to a particular angel:  as to Raphael, e.g., the
 work of curing and healing; to Gabriel, the conduct of wars; to
 Michael, the duty of attending to the prayers and supplications of
 mortals.  For we are not to imagine that they obtained these offices
 otherwise than by their own merits, and by the zeal and excellent
 qualities which they severally displayed before this world was formed;
 so that afterwards in the order of archangels, this or that office was
 assigned to each one, while others deserved to be enrolled in the order
 of angels, and to act under this or that archangel, or that leader or
 head of an order.  All of which things were disposed, as I have said,
 not indiscriminately and fortuitously, but by a most appropriate and
 just decision of God, who arranged them according to deserts, in
 accordance with His own approval and judgment:  so that to one angel
 the Church of the Ephesians was to be entrusted; to another, that of
 the Smyrnæans; one angel was to be Peter's, another Paul's; and so on
 through every one of the little ones that are in the Church, for such
 and such angels as even daily behold the face of God must be assigned
 to each one of them; [2061] and there must also be some angel that
 encampeth round about them that fear God. [2062] All of which things,
 assuredly, it is to be believed, are not performed by accident or
 chance, or because they (the angels) were so created, lest on that view
 the Creator should be accused of partiality; but it is to be believed
 that they were conferred by God, the just and impartial Ruler of all
 things, agreeably to the merits and good qualities and mental vigour of
 each individual spirit.

 2.  And now let us say something regarding those who maintain the
 existence of a diversity of spiritual natures, that we may avoid
 falling into the silly and impious fables of such as pretend that there
 is a diversity of spiritual natures both among heavenly existences and
 human souls, and for that reason allege that they were called into
 being by different creators; for while it seems, and is really, absurd
 that to one and the same Creator should be ascribed the creation of
 different natures of rational beings, they are nevertheless ignorant of
 the cause of that diversity.  For they say that it seems inconsistent
 for one and the same Creator, without any existing ground of merit, to
 confer upon some beings the power of dominion, and to subject others
 again to authority; to bestow a principality upon some, and to render
 others subordinate to rulers.  Which opinions indeed, in my judgment,
 are completely rejected by following out the reasoning explained above,
 and by which it was shown that the cause of the diversity and variety
 among these beings is due to their conduct, which has been marked
 either with greater earnestness or indifference, according to the
 goodness or badness of their nature, and not to any partiality on the
 part of the Disposer.  But that this may more easily be shown to be the
 case with heavenly beings, let us borrow an illustration from what
 either has been done or is done among men, in order that from visible
 things we may, by way of consequence, behold also things invisible.

 Paul and Peter are undoubtedly proved to have been men of a spiritual
 nature.  When, therefore, Paul is found to have acted contrary to
 religion, in having persecuted the Church of God, and Peter to have
 committed so grave a sin as, when questioned by the maid-servant, to
 have asserted with an oath that he did not know who Christ was, how is
 it possible that these--who, according to those persons of whom we
 speak, were spiritual beings--should fall into sins of such a nature,
 especially as they are frequently in the habit of saying that a good
 tree cannot bring forth evil fruits?  And if a good tree cannot produce
 evil fruit, and as, according to them, Peter and Paul were sprung from
 the root of a good tree, how should they be deemed to have brought
 forth fruits so wicked?  And if they should return the answer which is
 generally invented, that it was not Paul who persecuted, but some other
 person, I know not whom, who was in Paul; and that it was not Peter who
 uttered the denial, but some other individual in him; how should Paul
 say, if he had not sinned, that "I am not worthy to be called an
 apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God?" [2063] Or why did
 Peter weep most bitterly, if it were another than he who sinned?  From
 which all their silly assertions will be proved to be baseless.

 3.  According to our view, there is no rational creature which is not
 capable both of good and evil.  But it does not follow, that because we
 say there is no nature which may not admit evil, we therefore maintain
 that every nature has admitted evil, i.e., has become wicked.  As we
 may say that the nature of every man admits of his being a sailor, but
 it does not follow from that, that every man will become so; or, again,
 it is possible for every one to learn grammar or medicine, but it is
 not therefore proved that every man is either a physician or a
 grammarian; so, if we say that there is no nature which may not admit
 evil, it is not necessarily indicated that it has done so.  For, in our
 view, not even the devil himself was incapable of good; but although
 capable of admitting good, he did not therefore also desire it, or make
 any effort after virtue.  For, as we are taught by those quotations
 which we adduced from the prophets, there was once a time when he was
 good, when he walked in the paradise of God between the cherubim.  As
 he, then, possessed the power either of receiving good or evil, but
 fell away from a virtuous course, and turned to evil with all the
 powers of his mind, so also other creatures, as having a capacity for
 either condition, in the exercise of the freedom of their will, flee
 from evil, and cleave to good.  There is no nature, then, which may not
 admit of good or evil, except the nature of God--the fountain of all
 good things--and of Christ; for it is wisdom, and wisdom assuredly
 cannot admit folly; and it is righteousness, and righteousness will
 never certainly admit of unrighteousness; and it is the Word, or
 Reason, which certainly cannot be made irrational; nay, it is also the
 light, and it is certain that the darkness does not receive the light.
 In like manner, also, the nature of the Holy Spirit, being holy, does
 not admit of pollution; for it is holy by nature, or essential being.
 If there is any other nature which is holy, it possesses this property
 of being made holy by the reception or inspiration of the Holy Spirit,
 not having it by nature, but as an accidental quality, for which reason
 it may be lost, in consequence of being accidental.  So also a man may
 possess an accidental righteousness, from which it is possible for him
 to fall away.  Even the wisdom which a man has is still accidental,
 although it be within our own power to become wise, if we devote
 ourselves to wisdom with the zeal and effort of our life; and if we
 always pursue the study of it, we may always be participators of
 wisdom:  and that result will follow either in a greater or less
 degree, according to the desert of our life or the amount of our zeal.
 For the goodness of God, as is worthy of Him, incites and attracts all
 to that blissful end, where all pain, and sadness, and sorrow fall away
 and disappear.

 4.  I am of opinion, then, so far as appears to me, that the preceding
 discussion has sufficiently proved that it is neither from want of
 discrimination, nor from any accidental cause, either that the
 "principalities" hold their dominion, or the other orders of spirits
 have obtained their respective offices; but that they have received the
 steps of their rank on account of their merits, although it is not our
 privilege to know or inquire what those acts of theirs were, by which
 they earned a place in any particular order.  It is sufficient only to
 know this much, in order to demonstrate the impartiality and
 righteousness of God, that, conformably with the declaration of the
 Apostle Paul, "there is no acceptance of persons with Him," [2064] who
 rather disposes everything according to the deserts and moral progress
 of each individual.  So, then, the angelic office does not exist except
 as a consequence of their desert; nor do "powers" exercise power except
 in virtue of their moral progress; nor do those which are called
 "seats," i.e., the powers of judging and ruling, administer their
 powers unless by merit; nor do "dominions" rule undeservedly, for that
 great and distinguished order of rational creatures among celestial
 existences is arranged in a glorious variety of offices.  And the same
 view is to be entertained of those opposing influences which have given
 themselves up to such places and offices, that they derive the property
 by which they are made "principalities," or "powers," or rulers of the
 darkness of the world, or spirits of wickedness, or malignant spirits,
 or unclean demons, not from their essential nature, nor from their
 being so created, but have obtained these degrees in evil in proportion
 to their conduct, and the progress which they made in wickedness.  And
 that is a second order of rational creatures, who have devoted
 themselves to wickedness in so headlong a course, that they are
 unwilling rather than unable to recall themselves; the thirst for evil
 being already a passion, and imparting to them pleasure.  But the third
 order of rational creatures is that of those who are judged fit by God
 to replenish the human race, i.e., the souls of men, assumed in
 consequence of their moral progress into the order of angels; of whom
 we see some assumed into the number:  those, viz., who have been made
 the sons of God, or the children of the resurrection, or who have
 abandoned the darkness, and have loved the light, and have been made
 children of the light; or those who, proving victorious in every
 struggle, and being made men of peace, have been the sons of peace, and
 the sons of God; or those who, mortifying their members on the earth,
 and, rising above not only their corporeal nature, but even the
 uncertain and fragile movements of the soul itself, have united
 themselves to the Lord, being made altogether spiritual, that they may
 be for ever one spirit with Him, discerning along with Him each
 individual thing, until they arrive at a condition of perfect
 spirituality, and discern all things by their perfect illumination in
 all holiness through the word and wisdom of God, and are themselves
 altogether undistinguishable by any one.

 We think that those views are by no means to be admitted, which some
 are wont unnecessarily to advance and maintain, viz., that souls
 descend to such a pitch of abasement that they forget their rational
 nature and dignity, and sink into the condition of irrational animals,
 either large or small; and in support of these assertions they
 generally quote some pretended statements of Scripture, such as, that a
 beast, to which a woman has unnaturally prostituted herself, shall be
 deemed equally guilty with the woman, and shall be ordered to be
 stoned; or that a bull which strikes with its horn, [2065] shall be put
 to death in the same way; or even the speaking of Balaam's ass, when
 God opened its mouth, and the dumb beast of burden, answering with
 human voice, reproved the madness of the prophet.  All of which
 assertions we not only do not receive, but, as being contrary to our
 belief, we refute and reject.  After the refutation and rejection of
 such perverse opinions, we shall show, at the proper time and place,
 how those passages which they quote from the sacred Scriptures ought to
 be understood.

 [2061] Matt. xviii. 10.

 [2062] Ps. xxxiv. 7.  Tum demun per singulos minimorum, qui sunt in
 ecclesiâ, qui vel qui adscribi singulis debeant angeli, qui etiam
 quotidie videant faciem Dei; sed et quis debeat esse angelus, qui
 circumdet in circuitu timentium Deum.

 [2063] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

 [2064] Cf. Rom. ii. 11.

 [2065] [See Exod. xxi. 28, 29.  S.]

 Fragment from the First Book of the de Principiis.

 Translated by Jerome in His Epistle to Avitus.

 "It is an evidence of great negligence and sloth, that each one should
 fall down to such (a pitch of degradation), and be so emptied, as that,
 in coming to evil, he may be fastened to the gross body of irrational
 beasts of burden."

 Another Fragment from the Same.

 Translated in the Same Epistle to Avitus.

 "At the end and consummation of the world, when souls and rational
 creatures shall have been sent forth as from bolts and barriers, [2066]
 some of them walk slowly on account of their slothful habits, others
 fly with rapid flight on account of their diligence.  And since all are
 possessed of free-will, and may of their own accord admit either of
 good or evil, the former will be in a worse condition than they are at
 present, while the latter will advance to a better state of things;
 because different conduct and varying wills will admit of a different
 condition in either direction, i.e., angels may become men or demons,
 and again from the latter they may rise to be men or angels."

 [2066] De quibusdam repagulis atque carceribus.  There is an allusion
 here to the race-course and the mode of starting the chariots.

 Book II.

 Chapter I.--On the World.

 1.  Although all the discussions in the preceding book have had
 reference to the world and its arrangements, it now seems to follow
 that we should specially re-discuss a few points respecting the world
 itself, i.e., its beginning and end, or those dispensations of Divine
 Providence which have taken place between the beginning and the end, or
 those events which are supposed to have occurred before the creation of
 the world, or are to take place after the end.

 In this investigation, the first point which clearly appears is, that
 the world in all its diversified and varying conditions is composed not
 only of rational and diviner natures, and of a diversity of bodies, but
 of dumb animals, wild and tame beasts, of birds, and of all things
 which live in the waters; [2067] then, secondly, of places, i.e., of
 the heaven or heavens, and of the earth or water, as well as of the
 air, which is intermediate, and which they term æther, and of
 everything which proceeds from the earth or is born in it.  Seeing,
 then, [2068] there is so great a variety in the world, and so great a
 diversity among rational beings themselves, on account of which every
 other variety and diversity also is supposed to have come into
 existence, what other cause than this ought to be assigned for the
 existence of the world, especially if we have regard to that end by
 means of which it was shown in the preceding book that all things are
 to be restored to their original condition?  And if this should seem to
 be logically stated, what other cause, as we have already said, are we
 to imagine for so great a diversity in the world, save the diversity
 and variety in the movements and declensions of those who fell from
 that primeval unity and harmony in which they were at first created by
 God, and who, being driven from that state of goodness, and drawn in
 various directions by the harassing influence of different motives and
 desires, have changed, according to their different tendencies, the
 single and undivided goodness of their nature into minds of various
 sorts? [2069]

 2.  But God, by the ineffable skill of His wisdom, transforming and
 restoring all things, in whatever manner they are made, to some useful
 aim, and to the common advantage of all, recalls those very creatures
 which differed so much from each other in mental conformation to one
 agreement of labour and purpose; so that, although they are under the
 influence of different motives, they nevertheless complete the fulness
 and perfection of one world, and the very variety of minds tends to one
 end of perfection.  For it is one power which grasps and holds together
 all the diversity of the world, and leads the different movements
 towards one work, lest so immense an undertaking as that of the world
 should be dissolved by the dissensions of souls.  And for this reason
 we think that God, the Father of all things, in order to ensure the
 salvation of all His creatures through the ineffable plan of His word
 and wisdom, so arranged each of these, that every spirit, whether soul
 or rational existence, however called, should not be compelled by
 force, against the liberty of his own will, to any other course than
 that to which the motives of his own mind led him (lest by so doing the
 power of exercising free-will should seem to be taken away, which
 certainly would produce a change in the nature of the being itself);
 and that the varying purposes of these would be suitably and usefully
 adapted to the harmony of one world, by some of them requiring help,
 and others being able to give it, and others again being the cause of
 struggle and contest to those who are making progress, amongst whom
 their diligence would be deemed more worthy of approval, and the place
 of rank obtained after victory be held with greater certainty, which
 should be established by the difficulties of the contest. [2070]

 3.  Although the whole world is arranged into offices of different
 kinds, its condition, nevertheless, is not to be supposed as one of
 internal discrepancies and discordances; but as our one body is
 provided with many members, and is held together by one soul, so I am
 of opinion that the whole world also ought to be regarded as some huge
 and immense animal, which is kept together by the power and reason of
 God as by one soul.  This also, I think, is indicated in sacred
 Scripture by the declaration of the prophet, "Do not I fill heaven and
 earth? saith the Lord;" [2071] and again, "The heaven is My throne, and
 the earth is My footstool;" [2072] and by the Saviour's words, when He
 says that we are to swear "neither by heaven, for it is God's throne;
 nor by the earth, for it is His footstool." [2073] To the same effect
 also are the words of Paul, in his address to the Athenians, when he
 says, "In Him we live, and move, and have our being." [2074] For how
 do we live, and move, and have our being in God, except by His
 comprehending and holding together the whole world by His power?  And
 how is heaven the throne of God, and the earth His footstool, as the
 Saviour Himself declares, save by His power filling all things both in
 heaven and earth, according to the Lord's own words?  And that God, the
 Father of all things, fills and holds together the world with the
 fulness of His power, according to those passages which we have quoted,
 no one, I think, will have any difficulty in admitting.  And now, since
 the course of the preceding discussion has shown that the different
 movements of rational beings, and their varying opinions, have brought
 about the diversity that is in the world, we must see whether it may
 not be appropriate that this world should have a termination like its
 beginning.  For there is no doubt that its end must be sought amid much
 diversity and variety; which variety, being found to exist in the
 termination of the world, will again furnish ground and occasion for
 the diversities of the other world which is to succeed the present.

 4.  If now, in the course of our discussion, it has been ascertained
 that these things are so, it seems to follow that we next consider the
 nature of corporeal being, seeing the diversity in the world cannot
 exist without bodies.  It is evident from the nature of things
 themselves, that bodily nature admits of diversity and variety of
 change, so that it is capable of undergoing all possible
 transformations, as, e.g., the conversion of wood into fire, of fire
 into smoke, of smoke into air, of oil into fire.  Does not food itself,
 whether of man or of animals, exhibit the same ground of change?  For
 whatever we take as food, is converted into the substance of our body.
 But how water is changed into earth or into air, and air again into
 fire, or fire into air, or air into water, although not difficult to
 explain, yet on the present occasion it is enough merely to mention
 them, as our object is to discuss the nature of bodily matter.  By
 matter, therefore, we understand that which is placed under bodies,
 viz., that by which, through the bestowing and implanting of qualities,
 bodies exist; and we mention four qualities--heat, cold, dryness,
 humidity.  These four qualities being implanted in the hule, or matter
 (for matter is found to exist in its own nature without those qualities
 before mentioned), produce the different kinds of bodies.  Although
 this matter is, as we have said above, according to its own proper
 nature without qualities, it is never found to exist without a
 quality.  And I cannot understand how so many distinguished men have
 been of opinion that this matter, which is so great, and possesses such
 properties as to enable it to be sufficient for all the bodies in the
 world which God willed to exist, and to be the attendant and slave of
 the Creator for whatever forms and species He wished in all things,
 receiving into itself whatever qualities He desired to bestow upon it,
 was uncreated, i.e., not formed by God Himself, who is the Creator of
 all things, but that its nature and power were the result of chance.
 And I am astonished that they should find fault with those who deny
 either God's creative power or His providential administration of the
 world, and accuse them of impiety for thinking that so great a work as
 the world could exist without an architect or overseer; while they
 themselves incur a similar charge of impiety in saying that matter is
 uncreated, and co-eternal with the uncreated God.  According to this
 view, then, if we suppose for the sake of argument that matter did not
 exist, as these maintain, saying that God could not create anything
 when nothing existed, without doubt He would have been idle, not having
 matter on which to operate, which matter they say was furnished Him not
 by His own arrangement, but by accident; and they think that this,
 which was discovered by chance, was able to suffice Him for an
 undertaking of so vast an extent, and for the manifestation of the
 power of His might, and by admitting the plan of all His wisdom, might
 be distinguished and formed into a world.  Now this appears to me to be
 very absurd, and to be the opinion of those men who are altogether
 ignorant of the power and intelligence of uncreated nature.  But that
 we may see the nature of things a little more clearly, let it be
 granted that for a little time matter did not exist, and that God, when
 nothing formerly existed, caused those things to come into existence
 which He desired, why are we to suppose that God would create matter
 either better or greater, or of another kind, than that which He did
 produce from His own power and wisdom, in order that that might exist
 which formerly did not?  Would He create a worse and inferior matter,
 or one the same as that which they call uncreated?  Now I think it will
 very easily appear to any one, that neither a better nor inferior
 matter could have assumed the forms and species of the world, if it had
 not been such as that which actually did assume them.  And does it not
 then seem impious to call that uncreated, which, if believed to be
 formed by God, would doubtless be found to be such as that which they
 call uncreated?

 5.  But that we may believe on the authority of holy Scripture that
 such is the case, hear how in the book of Maccabees, where the mother
 of seven martyrs exhorts her son to endure torture, this truth is
 confirmed; for she says, "I ask of thee, my son, to look at the heaven
 and the earth, and at all things which are in them, and beholding
 these, to know that God made all these things when they did not exist."
 [2075] In the book of the Shepherd also, in the first commandment, he
 speaks as follows:  "First of all believe that there is one God who
 created and arranged all things, and made all things to come into
 existence, and out of a state of nothingness." [2076] Perhaps also
 the expression in the Psalms has reference to this:  "He spake, and
 they were made; He commanded, and they were created." [2077] For the
 words, "He spake, and they were made," appear to show that the
 substance of those things which exist is meant; while the others, "He
 commanded, and they were created," seem spoken of the qualities by
 which the substance itself has been moulded.

 [2067] The words "in aquis" are omitted in Redepenning's edition.

 [2068] The original of this sentence is found at the close of the
 Emperor Justinian's Epistle to Menas, patriarch of Constantinople, and,
 literally translated, is as follows:  "The world being so very varied,
 and containing so many different rational beings, what else ought we to
 say was the cause of its existence than the diversity of the falling
 away of those who decline from unity (tes henados) in different
 ways?"--Ruæus.  Lommatzsch adds a clause not contained in the note of
 the Benedictine editor:  "And sometimes the soul selects the life that
 is in water" (enudron).

 [2069] Lit. "into various qualities of mind."

 [2070] "Et diversi motus propositi earum (rationabilium
 subsistentiarum) ad unius mundi consonantiam competenter atque utiliter
 aptarentur, dum aliæ juvari indigent, aliæ juvare possunt, aliæ vero
 proficientibus certamina atque agones movent, in quibus eorum
 probabilior haberetur industria, et certior post victoriam reparati
 gradus statio teneretur, quæ per difficultates laborantium
 constitisset."

 [2071] Jer. xxiii. 24.

 [2072] Isa. lxvi. 1.

 [2073] Matt. v. 34.

 [2074] Acts xvii. 28.

 [2075] 2 Mac. vii. 28.

 [2076] Hermæ Past., book ii.  [See vol. ii. p. 20, of this series.  S]

 [2077] Ps. cxlviii. 5.

 Chapter II.--On the Perpetuity of Bodily Nature.

 1.  On this topic some are wont to inquire whether, as the Father
 generates an uncreated Son, and brings forth a Holy Spirit, not as if
 He had no previous existence, but because the Father is the origin and
 source of the Son or Holy Spirit, and no anteriority or posteriority
 can be understood as existing in them; so also a similar kind of union
 or relationship can be understood as subsisting between rational
 natures and bodily matter.  And that this point may be more fully and
 thoroughly examined, the commencement of the discussion is generally
 directed to the inquiry whether this very bodily nature, which bears
 the lives and contains the movements of spiritual and rational minds,
 will be equally eternal with them, or will altogether perish and be
 destroyed.  And that the question may be determined with greater
 precision, we have, in the first place, to inquire if it is possible
 for rational natures to remain altogether incorporeal after they have
 reached the summit of holiness and happiness (which seems to me a most
 difficult and almost impossible attainment), or whether they must
 always of necessity be united to bodies.  If, then, any one could show
 a reason why it was possible for them to dispense wholly with bodies,
 it will appear to follow, that as a bodily nature, created out of
 nothing after intervals of time, was produced when it did not exist, so
 also it must cease to be when the purposes which it served had no
 longer an existence.

 2.  If, however, it is impossible for this point to be at all
 maintained, viz., that any other nature than the Father, Son, and Holy
 Spirit can live without a body, the necessity of logical reasoning
 compels us to understand that rational natures were indeed created at
 the beginning, but that material substance was separated from them only
 in thought and understanding, and appears to have been formed for them,
 or after them, and that they never have lived nor do live without it;
 for an incorporeal life will rightly be considered a prerogative of the
 Trinity alone.  As we have remarked above, therefore, that material
 substance of this world, possessing a nature admitting of all possible
 transformations, is, when dragged down to beings of a lower order,
 moulded into the crasser and more solid condition of a body, so as to
 distinguish those visible and varying forms of the world; but when it
 becomes the servant of more perfect and more blessed beings, it shines
 in the splendour of celestial bodies, and adorns either the angels of
 God or the sons of the resurrection with the clothing of a spiritual
 body, out of all which will be filled up the diverse and varying state
 of the one world.  But if any one should desire to discuss these
 matters more fully, it will be necessary, with all reverence and fear
 of God, to examine the sacred Scriptures with greater attention and
 diligence, to ascertain whether the secret and hidden sense within them
 may perhaps reveal anything regarding these matters; and something may
 be discovered in their abstruse and mysterious language, through the
 demonstration of the Holy Spirit to those who are worthy, after many
 testimonies have been collected on this very point.

 Chapter III.--On the Beginning of the World, and Its Causes.

 1.  The next subject of inquiry is, whether there was any other world
 before the one which now exists; and if so, whether it was such as the
 present, or somewhat different, or inferior; or whether there was no
 world at all, but something like that which we understand will be after
 the end of all things, when the kingdom shall be delivered up to God,
 even the Father; which nevertheless may have been the end of another
 world,--of that, namely, after which this world took its beginning; and
 whether the various lapses of intellectual natures provoked God to
 produce this diverse and varying condition of the world.  This point
 also, I think, must be investigated in a similar way, viz., whether
 after this world there will be any (system of) preservation and
 amendment, severe indeed, and attended with much pain to those who were
 unwilling to obey the word of God, but a process through which, by
 means of instruction and rational training, those may arrive at a
 fuller understanding of the truth who have devoted themselves in the
 present life to these pursuits, and who, after having had their minds
 purified, have advanced onwards so as to become capable of attaining
 divine wisdom; and after this the end of all things will immediately
 follow, and there will be again, for the correction and improvement of
 those who stand in need of it, another world, either resembling that
 which now exists, or better than it, or greatly inferior; and how long
 that world, whatever it be that is to come after this, shall continue;
 and if there will be a time when no world shall anywhere exist, or if
 there has been a time when there was no world at all; or if there have
 been, or will be several; or if it shall ever come to pass that there
 will be one resembling another, like it in every respect, and
 indistinguishable from it.

 2.  That it may appear more clearly, then, whether bodily matter can
 exist during intervals of time, and whether, as it did not exist before
 it was made, so it may again be resolved into non-existence, let us
 see, first of all, whether it is possible for any one to live without a
 body.  For if one person can live without a body, all things also may
 dispense with them; seeing our former treatise has shown that all
 things tend towards one end.  Now, if all things may exist without
 bodies, there will undoubtedly be no bodily substance, seeing there
 will be no use for it.  But how shall we understand the words of the
 apostle in those passages, in which, discussing the resurrection of the
 dead, he says, "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
 mortal must put on immortality.  When this corruptible shall have put
 on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
 shall be brought to pass the saying which is written, Death is
 swallowed up in victory!  Where, O death, is thy victory?  O death, thy
 sting has been swallowed up:  the sting of death is sin, and the
 strength of sin is the law." [2078] Some such meaning, then, as this,
 seems to be suggested by the apostle.  For can the expression which he
 employs, "this corruptible," and "this mortal," with the gesture, as it
 were, of one who touches or points out, apply to anything else than to
 bodily matter?  This matter of the body, then, which is now corruptible
 shall put on incorruption when a perfect soul, and one furnished with
 the marks [2079] of incorruption, shall have begun to inhabit it.  And
 do not be surprised if we speak of a perfect soul as the clothing of
 the body (which, on account of the Word of God and His wisdom, is now
 named incorruption), when Jesus Christ Himself, who is the Lord and
 Creator of the soul, is said to be the clothing of the saints,
 according to the language of the apostle, "Put ye on the Lord Jesus
 Christ." [2080] As Christ, then, is the clothing of the soul, so for
 a kind of reason sufficiently intelligible is the soul said to be the
 clothing of the body, seeing it is an ornament to it, covering and
 concealing its mortal nature.  The expression, then, "This corruptible
 must put on incorruption," is as if the apostle had said, "This
 corruptible nature of the body must receive the clothing of
 incorruption--a soul possessing in itself incorruptibility," because it
 has been clothed with Christ, who is the Wisdom and Word of God.  But
 when this body, which at some future period we shall possess in a more
 glorious state, shall have become a partaker of life, it will then, in
 addition to being immortal, become also incorruptible.  For whatever is
 mortal is necessarily also corruptible; but whatever is corruptible
 cannot also be said to be mortal.  We say of a stone or a piece of wood
 that it is corruptible, but we do not say that it follows that it is
 also mortal.  But as the body partakes of life, then because life may
 be, and is, separated from it, we consequently name it mortal, and
 according to another sense also we speak of it as corruptible.  The
 holy apostle therefore, with remarkable insight, referring to the
 general first cause of bodily matter, of which (matter), whatever be
 the qualities with which it is endowed (now indeed carnal, but by and
 by more refined and pure, which are termed spiritual), the soul makes
 constant use, says, "This corruptible must put on incorruption."  And
 in the second place, looking to the special cause of the body, he says,
 "This mortal must put on immortality."  Now, what else will
 incorruption and immortality be, save the wisdom, and the word, and the
 righteousness of God, which mould, and clothe, and adorn the soul?  And
 hence it happens that it is said, "The corruptible will put on
 incorruption, and the mortal immortality."  For although we may now
 make great proficiency, yet as we only know in part, and prophesy in
 part, and see through a glass, darkly, those very things which we seem
 to understand, this corruptible does not yet put on incorruption, nor
 is this mortal yet clothed with immorality; and as this training of
 ours in the body is protracted doubtless to a longer period, up to the
 time, viz., when those very bodies of ours with which we are enveloped
 may, on account of the word of God, and His wisdom and perfect
 righteousness, earn incorruptibility and immortality, therefore is it
 said, "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
 put on immortality."

 3.  But, nevertheless, those who think that rational creatures can at
 any time lead an existence out of the body, may here raise such
 questions as the following.  If it is true that this corruptible shall
 put on incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality, and that death
 is swallowed up at the end; this shows that nothing else than a
 material nature is to be destroyed, on which death could operate, while
 the mental acumen of those who are in the body seems to be blunted by
 the nature of corporeal matter.  If, however, they are out of the body,
 then they will altogether escape the annoyance arising from a
 disturbance of that kind.  But as they will not be able immediately to
 escape all bodily clothing, they are just to be considered as
 inhabiting more refined and purer bodies, which possess the property of
 being no longer overcome by death, or of being wounded by its sting; so
 that at last, by the gradual disappearance of the material nature,
 death is both swallowed up, and even at the end exterminated, and all
 its sting completely blunted by the divine grace which the soul has
 been rendered capable of receiving, and has thus deserved to obtain
 incorruptibility and immortality.  And then it will be deservedly said
 by all, "O death, where is thy victory?  O death, where is thy sting?
 The sting of death is sin."  If these conclusions, then, seem to hold
 good, it follows that we must believe our condition at some future time
 to be incorporeal; and if this is admitted, and all are said to be
 subjected to Christ, this (incorporeity) also must necessarily be
 bestowed on all to whom the subjection to Christ extends; since all who
 are subject to Christ will be in the end subject to God the Father, to
 whom Christ is said to deliver up the kingdom; and thus it appears that
 then also the need of bodies will cease. [2081] And if it ceases,
 bodily matter returns to nothing, as formerly also it did not exist.

 Now let us see what can be said in answer to those who make these
 assertions.  For it will appear to be a necessary consequence that, if
 bodily nature be annihilated, it must be again restored and created;
 since it seems a possible thing that rational natures, from whom the
 faculty of free-will is never taken away, may be again subjected to
 movements of some kind, through the special act of the Lord Himself,
 lest perhaps, if they were always to occupy a condition that was
 unchangeable, they should be ignorant that it is by the grace of God
 and not by their own merit that they have been placed in that final
 state of happiness; and these movements will undoubtedly again be
 attended by variety and diversity of bodies, by which the world is
 always adorned; nor will it ever be composed (of anything) save of
 variety and diversity,--an effect which cannot be produced without a
 bodily matter.

 4.  And now I do not understand by what proofs they can maintain their
 position, who assert that worlds sometimes come into existence which
 are not dissimilar to each other, but in all respects equal.  For if
 there is said to be a world similar in all respects (to the present),
 then it will come to pass that Adam and Eve will do the same things
 which they did before:  there will be a second time the same deluge,
 and the same Moses will again lead a nation numbering nearly six
 hundred thousand out of Egypt; Judas will also a second time betray the
 Lord; Paul will a second time keep the garments of those who stoned
 Stephen; and everything which has been done in this life will be said
 to be repeated,--a state of things which I think cannot be established
 by any reasoning, if souls are actuated by freedom of will, and
 maintain either their advance or retrogression according to the power
 of their will.  For souls are not driven on in a cycle which returns
 after many ages to the same round, so as either to do or desire this or
 that; but at whatever point the freedom of their own will aims, thither
 do they direct the course of their actions.  For what these persons say
 is much the same as if one were to assert that if a medimnus of grain
 were to be poured out on the ground, the fall of the grain would be on
 the second occasion identically the same as on the first, so that every
 individual grain would lie for the second time close beside that grain
 where it had been thrown before, and so the medimnus would be scattered
 in the same order, and with the same marks as formerly; which certainly
 is an impossible result with the countless grains of a medimnus, even
 if they were to be poured out without ceasing for many ages.  So
 therefore it seems to me impossible for a world to be restored for the
 second time, with the same order and with the same amount of births,
 and deaths, and actions; but that a diversity of worlds may exist with
 changes of no unimportant kind, so that the state of another world may
 be for some unmistakeable reasons better (than this), and for others
 worse, and for others again intermediate.  But what may be the number
 or measure of this I confess myself ignorant, although, if any one can
 tell it, I would gladly learn.

 5.  But this world, which is itself called an age, is said to be the
 conclusion of many ages.  Now the holy apostle teaches that in that age
 which preceded this, Christ did not suffer, nor even in the age which
 preceded that again; and I know not that I am able to enumerate the
 number of anterior ages in which He did not suffer.  I will show,
 however, from what statements of Paul I have arrived at this
 understanding.  He says, "But now once in the consummation of ages, He
 was manifested to take away sin by the sacrifice of Himself." [2082]
 For He says that He was once made a victim, and in the consummation of
 ages was manifested to take away sin.  Now that after this age, which
 is said to be formed for the consummation of other ages, there will be
 other ages again to follow, we have clearly learned from Paul himself,
 who says, "That in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches
 of His grace in His kindness towards us." [2083] He has not said, "in
 the age to come," nor "in the two ages to come," whence I infer that by
 his language many ages are indicated.  Now if there is something
 greater than ages, so that among created beings certain ages may be
 understood, but among other beings which exceed and surpass visible
 creatures, (ages still greater) (which perhaps will be the case at the
 restitution of all things, when the whole universe will come to a
 perfect termination), perhaps that period in which the consummation of
 all things will take place is to be understood as something more than
 an age.  But here the authority of holy Scripture moves me, which says,
 "For an age and more." [2084] Now this word "more" undoubtedly means
 something greater than an age; and see if that expression of the
 Saviour, "I will that where I am, these also may be with Me; and as I
 and Thou are one, these also may be one in Us," [2085] may not seem to
 convey something more than an age and ages, perhaps even more than ages
 of ages,--that period, viz., when all things are now no longer in an
 age, but when God is in all.

 6.  Having discussed these points regarding the nature of the world to
 the best of our ability, it does not seem out of place to inquire what
 is the meaning of the term world, which in holy Scripture is shown
 frequently to have different significations.  For what we call in Latin
 mundus, is termed in Greek kosmos, and kosmos signifies not only a
 world, but also an ornament.  Finally, in Isaiah, where the language of
 reproof is directed to the chief daughters of Sion, and where he says,
 "Instead of an ornament of a golden head, thou wilt have baldness on
 account of thy works," [2086] he employs the same term to denote
 ornament as to denote the world, viz., kosmos.  For the plan of the
 world is said to be contained in the clothing of the high priest, as we
 find in the Wisdom of Solomon, where he says, "For in the long garment
 was the whole world." [2087] That earth of ours, with its
 inhabitants, is also termed the world, as when Scripture says, "The
 whole world lieth in wickedness." [2088] Clement indeed, a disciple
 of the apostles, makes mention of those whom the Greeks called
 'Antichthones , and other parts of the earth, to which no one of our
 people can approach, nor can any one of those who are there cross over
 to us, which he also termed worlds, saying, "The ocean is impassable to
 men; and those are worlds which are on the other side of it, which are
 governed by these same arrangements of the ruling God." [2089] That
 universe which is bounded by heaven and earth is also called a world,
 as Paul declares:  "For the fashion of this world will pass away."
 [2090] Our Lord and Saviour also points out a certain other world
 besides this visible one, which it would indeed be difficult to
 describe and make known.  He says, "I am not of this world." [2091]
 For, as if He were of a certain other world, He says, "I am not of this
 world."  Now, of this world we have said beforehand, that the
 explanation was difficult; and for this reason, that there might not be
 afforded to any an occasion of entertaining the supposition that we
 maintain the existence of certain images which the Greeks call
 "ideas:"  for it is certainly alien to our (writers) to speak of an
 incorporeal world existing in the imagination alone, or in the fleeting
 world of thoughts; and how they can assert either that the Saviour
 comes from thence, or that the saints will go thither, I do not see.
 There is no doubt, however, that something more illustrious and
 excellent than this present world is pointed out by the Saviour, at
 which He incites and encourages believers to aim.  But whether that
 world to which He desires to allude be far separated and divided from
 this either by situation, or nature, or glory; or whether it be
 superior in glory and quality, but confined within the limits of this
 world (which seems to me more probable), is nevertheless uncertain, and
 in my opinion an unsuitable subject for human thought.  But from what
 Clement seems to indicate when he says, "The ocean is impassable to
 men, and those worlds which are behind it," speaking in the plural
 number of the worlds which are behind it, which he intimates are
 administered and governed by the same providence of the Most High God,
 he appears to throw out to us some germs of that view by which the
 whole universe of existing things, celestial and super-celestial,
 earthly and infernal, is generally called one perfect world, within
 which, or by which, other worlds, if any there are, must be supposed to
 be contained.  For which reason he wished the globe of the sun or moon,
 and of the other bodies called planets, to be each termed worlds.  Nay,
 even that pre-eminent globe itself which they call the non-wandering
 (aplane), they nevertheless desire to have properly called world.
 Finally, they summon the book of Baruch the prophet to bear witness to
 this assertion, because in it the seven worlds or heavens are more
 clearly pointed out.  Nevertheless, above that sphere which they call
 non-wandering (aplane), they will have another sphere to exist, which
 they say, exactly as our heaven contains all things which are under it,
 comprehends by its immense size and indescribable extent the spaces of
 all the spheres together within its more magnificent circumference; so
 that all things are within it, as this earth of ours is under heaven.
 And this also is believed to be called in the holy Scriptures the good
 land, and the land of the living, having its own heaven, which is
 higher, and in which the names of the saints are said to be written, or
 to have been written, by the Saviour; by which heaven that earth is
 confined and shut in, which the Saviour in the Gospel promises to the
 meek and merciful.  For they would have this earth of ours, which
 formerly was named "Dry," to have derived its appellation from the name
 of that earth, as this heaven also was named firmament from the title
 of that heaven.  But we have treated at greater length of such opinions
 in the place where we had to inquire into the meaning of the
 declaration, that in the beginning "God made the heavens and the
 earth."  For another heaven and another earth are shown to exist
 besides that "firmament" which is said to have been made after the
 second day, or that "dry land" which was afterwards called "earth."
 Certainly, what some say of this world, that it is corruptible because
 it was made, and yet is not corrupted, because the will of God, who
 made it and holds it together lest corruption should rule over it, is
 stronger and more powerful than corruption, may more correctly be
 supposed of that world which we have called above a "non-wandering"
 sphere, since by the will of God it is not at all subject to
 corruption, for the reason that it has not admitted any causes of
 corruption, seeing it is the world of the saints and of the thoroughly
 purified, and not of the wicked, like that world of ours.  We must see,
 moreover, lest perhaps it is with reference to this that the apostle
 says, "While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
 things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal,
 but the things which are unseen are eternal.  For we know that if our
 earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
 God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." [2092]
 And when he says elsewhere, "Because I shall see the heavens, the works
 of Thy fingers," [2093] and when God said, regarding all things
 visible, by the mouth of His prophet, "My hand has formed all these
 things," [2094] He declares that that eternal house in the heavens
 which He promises to His saints was not made with hands, pointing out,
 doubtless, the difference of creation in things which are seen and in
 those which are not seen.  For the same thing is not to be understood
 by the expressions, "those things which are not seen," and "those
 things which are invisible."  For those things which are invisible are
 not only not seen, but do not even possess the property of visibility,
 being what the Greeks call asomata, i.e., incorporeal; whereas those of
 which Paul says, "They are not seen," possess indeed the property of
 being seen, but, as he explains, are not yet beheld by those to whom
 they are promised.

 7.  Having sketched, then, so far as we could understand, these three
 opinions regarding the end of all things, and the supreme blessedness,
 let each one of our readers determine for himself, with care and
 diligence, whether any one of them can be approved and adopted. [2095]
 For it has been said that we must suppose either that an incorporeal
 existence is possible, after all things have become subject to Christ,
 and through Christ to God the Father, when God will be all and in all;
 or that when, notwithstanding all things have been made subject to
 Christ, and through Christ to God (with whom they formed also one
 spirit, in respect of spirits being rational natures), then the bodily
 substance itself also being united to most pure and excellent spirits,
 and being changed into an ethereal condition in proportion to the
 quality or merits of those who assume it (according to the apostle's
 words, "We also shall be changed"), will shine forth in splendour; or
 at least that when the fashion of those things which are seen passes
 away, and all corruption has been shaken off and cleansed away, and
 when the whole of the space occupied by this world, in which the
 spheres of the planets are said to be, has been left behind and
 beneath, [2096] then is reached the fixed abode of the pious and the
 good situated above that sphere, which is called non-wandering
 (aplanes), as in a good land, in a land of the living, which will be
 inherited by the meek and gentle; to which land belongs that heaven
 (which, with its more magnificent extent, surrounds and contains that
 land itself) which is called truly and chiefly heaven, in which heaven
 and earth, the end and perfection of all things, may be safely and most
 confidently placed,--where, viz., these, after their apprehension and
 their chastisement for the offences which they have undergone by way of
 purgation, may, after having fulfilled and discharged every obligation,
 deserve a habitation in that land; while those who have been obedient
 to the word of God, and have henceforth by their obedience shown
 themselves capable of wisdom, are said to deserve the kingdom of that
 heaven or heavens; and thus the prediction is more worthily fulfilled,
 "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth;" [2097] and,
 "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for they shall inherit the kingdom of
 heaven;" [2098] and the declaration in the Psalm, "He shall exalt thee,
 and thou shalt inherit the land." [2099] For it is called a descent
 to this earth, but an exaltation to that which is on high.  In this
 way, therefore, does a sort of road seem to be opened up by the
 departure of the saints from that earth to those heavens; so that they
 do not so much appear to abide in that land, as to inhabit it with an
 intention, viz., to pass on to the inheritance of the kingdom of
 heaven, when they have reached that degree of perfection also.

 [2078] 1 Cor. xv. 53-56; cf. Hos. xiii. 14 and Isa. xxv. 8.

 [2079] Dogmatibus.  Schnitzer says that "dogmatibus" here yields no
 sense.  He conjectures deigmasi, and renders "proofs," "marks."

 [2080] Rom. xiii. 14.

 [2081] This passage is found in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus; and,
 literally translated, his rendering is as follows:  "If these (views)
 are not contrary to the faith, we shall perhaps at some future time
 live without bodies.  But if he who is perfectly subject to Christ is
 understood to be without a body, and all are to be subjected to Christ,
 we also shall be without bodies when we have been completely subjected
 to Him.  If all have been subjected to God, all will lay aside their
 bodies, and the whole nature of bodily things will be dissolved into
 nothing; but if, in the second place, necessity shall demand, it will
 again come into existence on account of the fall of rational
 creatures.  For God has abandoned souls to struggle and wrestling, that
 they may understand that they have obtained a full and perfect victory,
 not by their own bravery, but by the grace of God.  And therefore I
 think that for a variety of causes are different worlds created, and
 the errors of those refuted who contend that worlds resemble each
 other."  A fragment of the Greek original of the above is found in the
 Epistle of Justinian to the patriarch of Constantinople.  "If the
 things subject to Christ shall at the end be subjected also to God, all
 will lay aside their bodies; and then, I think, there will be a
 dissolution (analusis) of the nature of bodies into non-existence (eis
 to me on), to come a second time into existence, if rational (beings)
 should again gradually come down (hupokatabe)."

 [2082] Heb. ix. 26.

 [2083] Eph. ii. 7.

 [2084] In sæculum et adhuc.

 [2085] Cf. John xvii. 24, 21, 22.

 [2086] Cf. Isa. iii. 24.  Origen here quotes the Septuagint, which
 differs both from the Hebrew and the Vulgate:  kai anti tou kosmou tes
 kephales tou chrusiou phalakroma hexeis dia ta erga sou.

 [2087] Wisd. xviii. 24.  Poderis, lit. "reaching to the feet."

 [2088] 1 John v. 19.

 [2089] Clemens Rom., Ep. i., ad Cor., c. 20.  [See vol. i. p. 10, of
 this series.  S.]

 [2090] 1 Cor. vii. 31.

 [2091] John xvii. 16.

 [2092] 2 Cor. iv. 18-v. 1.

 [2093] Ps. viii. 3.

 [2094] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 [2095] This passage is found in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus, and,
 literally translated, is as follows:  "A threefold suspicion,
 therefore, is suggested to us regarding the end, of which the reader
 may examine which is the true and better one.  For we shall either live
 without a body, when, being subject to Christ, we shall be subject to
 God, and God shall be all in all; or, as things subject to Christ will
 be subject along with Christ Himself to God, and enclosed in one
 covenant, so all substance will be reduced to the best quality and
 dissolved into an ether, which is of a purer and simpler nature; or at
 least that sphere which we have called above aplane, and whatever is
 contained within its circumference (circulo), will be dissolved into
 nothing, but that one by which the anti-zone (antizone) itself is held
 together and surrounded will be called a good land; and, moreover,
 another sphere which surrounds this very earth itself with its
 revolution, and is called heaven, will be preserved for a habitation of
 the saints."

 [2096] Omnique hoc mundi statu, in quo planetarum dicuntur sphæræ,
 supergresso atque superato.

 [2097] Matt. v. 5.

 [2098] Matt. v. 3.

 [2099] Ps. xxxvii. 34.

 Chapter IV.--The God of the Law and the Prophets, and the Father of Our
 Lord Jesus Christ, is the Same God.

 1.  Having now briefly arranged these points in order as we best could,
 it follows that, agreeably to our intention from the first, we refute
 those who think that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is a different
 God from Him who gave the answers of the law to Moses, or commissioned
 the prophets, who is the God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
 Jacob.  For in this article of faith, first of all, we must be firmly
 grounded.  We have to consider, then, the expression of frequent
 recurrence in the Gospels, and subjoined to all the acts of our Lord
 and Saviour, "that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by this or
 that prophet," it being manifest that the prophets are the prophets of
 that God who made the world.  From this therefore we draw the
 conclusion, that He who sent the prophets, Himself predicted what was
 to be foretold of Christ.  And there is no doubt that the Father
 Himself, and not another different from Him, uttered these
 predictions.  The practice, moreover, of the Saviour or His apostles,
 frequently quoting illustrations from the Old Testament, shows that
 they attribute authority to the ancients.  The injunction also of the
 Saviour, when exhorting His disciples to the exercise of kindness, "Be
 ye perfect, even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect; for He
 commands His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and sendeth rain
 on the just and on the unjust," [2100] most evidently suggests even to
 a person of feeble understanding, that He is proposing to the imitation
 of His disciples no other God than the maker of heaven and the bestower
 of the rain.  Again, what else does the expression, which ought to be
 used by those who pray, "Our Father who art in heaven," [2101] appear
 to indicate, save that God is to be sought in the better parts of the
 world, i.e., of His creation?  Further, do not those admirable
 principles which He lays down respecting oaths, saying that we ought
 not to "swear either by heaven, because it is the throne of God; nor by
 the earth, because it is His footstool," [2102] harmonize most clearly
 with the words of the prophet, "Heaven is My throne, and the earth is
 My footstool?" [2103] And also when casting out of the temple those
 who sold sheep, and oxen, and doves, and pouring out the tables of the
 money-changers, and saying, "Take these things, hence, and do not make
 My Father's house a house of merchandise," [2104] He undoubtedly called
 Him His Father, to whose name Solomon had raised a magnificent temple.
 The words, moreover, "Have you not read what was spoken by God to
 Moses:  I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
 Jacob; He is not a God of the dead, but of the living," [2105] most
 clearly teach us, that He called the God of the patriarchs (because
 they were holy, and were alive) the God of the living, the same, viz.,
 who had said in the prophets, "I am God, and besides Me there is no
 God." [2106] For if the Saviour, knowing that He who is written in
 the law is the God of Abraham, and that it is the same who says, "I am
 God, and besides Me there is no God, acknowledges that very one to be
 His Father who is ignorant of the existence of any other God above
 Himself, as the heretics suppose, He absurdly declares Him to be His
 Father who does not know of a greater God.  But if it is not from
 ignorance, but from deceit, that He says there is no other God than
 Himself, then it is a much greater absurdity to confess that His Father
 is guilty of falsehood.  From all which this conclusion is arrived at,
 that He knows of no other Father than God, the Founder and Creator of
 all things.

 2.  It would be tedious to collect out of all the passages in the
 Gospels the proofs by which the God of the law and of the Gospels is
 shown to be one and the same.  Let us touch briefly upon the Acts of
 the Apostles, [2107] where Stephen and the other apostles address their
 prayers to that God who made heaven and earth, and who spoke by the
 mouth of His holy prophets, calling Him the "God of Abraham, of Isaac,
 and of Jacob;" the God who "brought forth His people out of the land of
 Egypt."  Which expressions undoubtedly clearly direct our
 understandings to faith in the Creator, and implant an affection for
 Him in those who have learned piously and faithfully thus to think of
 Him; according to the words of the Saviour Himself, who, when He was
 asked which was the greatest commandment in the law, replied, "Thou
 shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
 and with all thy mind.  And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love
 thy neighbour as thyself."  And to these He added:  "On these two
 commandments hang all the law and the prophets." [2108] How is it,
 then, that He commends to him whom He was instructing, and was leading
 to enter on the office of a disciple, this commandment above all
 others, by which undoubtedly love was to be kindled in him towards the
 God of that law, inasmuch as such had been declared by the law in these
 very words?  But let it be granted, notwithstanding all these most
 evident proofs, that it is of some other unknown God that the Saviour
 says, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," etc.,
 etc.  How, in that case, if the law and the prophets are, as they say,
 from the Creator, i.e., from another God than He whom He calls good,
 shall that appear to be logically said which He subjoins, viz., that
 "on these two commandments hang the law and the prophets?"  For how
 shall that which is strange and foreign to God depend upon Him?  And
 when Paul says, "I thank my God, whom I serve in my spirit from my
 forefathers with pure conscience," [2109] he clearly shows that he came
 not to some new God, but to Christ.  For what other forefathers of Paul
 can be intended, except those of whom he says, "Are they Hebrews? so am
 I:  are they Israelites? so am I." [2110] Nay, will not the very
 preface of his Epistle to the Romans clearly show the same thing to
 those who know how to understand the letters of Paul, viz., what God he
 preaches?  For his words are:  "Paul, the servant of Jesus Christ,
 called to be an apostle, set apart to the Gospel of God, which He had
 promised afore by His prophets in the holy Scriptures concerning His
 Son, who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and who
 was declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit
 of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead of Christ Jesus our
 Lord," [2111] etc.  Moreover, also the following, "Thou shalt not
 muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn.  Doth God take
 care for oxen? or saith he it altogether for our sakes?  For our sakes,
 no doubt, this is written, that he that plougheth should plough in
 hope, and he that thresheth in hope of partaking of the fruits." [2112]
 By which he manifestly shows that God, who gave the law on our
 account, i.e., on account of the apostles, says, "Thou shalt not muzzle
 the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn;" whose care was not for
 oxen, but for the apostles, who were preaching the Gospel of Christ.
 In other passages also, Paul, embracing the promises of the law, says,
 "Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with
 promise; that it may be well with thee, and that thy days may be long
 upon the land, the good land, which the Lord thy God will give thee."
 [2113] By which he undoubtedly makes known that the law, and the God
 of the law, and His promises, are pleasing to him.

 3.  But as those who uphold this heresy are sometimes accustomed to
 mislead the hearts of the simple by certain deceptive sophisms, I do
 not consider it improper to bring forward the assertions which they are
 in the habit of making, and to refute their deceit and falsehood.  The
 following, then, are their declarations.  It is written, that "no man
 hath seen God at any time." [2114] But that God whom Moses preaches
 was both seen by Moses himself, and by his fathers before him; whereas
 He who is announced by the Saviour has never been seen at all by any
 one.  Let us therefore ask them and ourselves whether they maintain
 that He whom they acknowledge to be God, and allege to be a different
 God from the Creator, is visible or invisible.  And if they shall say
 that He is visible, besides being proved to go against the declaration
 of Scripture, which says of the Saviour, "He is the image of the
 invisible God, the first-born of every creature," [2115] they will fall
 also into the absurdity of asserting that God is corporeal.  For
 nothing can be seen except by help of form, and size, and colour, which
 are special properties of bodies.  And if God is declared to be a body,
 then He will also be found to be material, since every body is composed
 of matter.  But if He be composed of matter, and matter is undoubtedly
 corruptible, then, according to them, God is liable to corruption!  We
 shall put to them a second question.  Is matter made, or is it
 uncreated, i.e., not made?  And if they shall answer that it is not
 made, i.e., uncreated, we shall ask them if one portion of matter is
 God, and the other part the world?  But if they shall say of matter
 that it is made, it will undoubtedly follow that they confess Him whom
 they declare to be God to have been made!--a result which certainly
 neither their reason nor ours can admit.  But they will say, God is
 invisible.  And what will you do?  If you say that He is invisible by
 nature, then neither ought He to be visible to the Saviour.  Whereas,
 on the contrary, God, the Father of Christ, is said to be seen, because
 "he who sees the Son," he says, "sees also the Father." [2116] This
 certainly would press us very hard, were the expression not understood
 by us more correctly of understanding, and not of seeing.  For he who
 has understood the Son will understand the Father also.  In this way,
 then, Moses too must be supposed to have seen God, not beholding Him
 with the bodily eye, but understanding Him with the vision of the heart
 and the perception of the mind, and that only in some degree.  For it
 is manifest that He, viz., who gave answers to Moses, said, "You shall
 not see My face, but My hinder parts." [2117] These words are, of
 course, to be understood in that mystical sense which is befitting
 divine words, those old wives' fables being rejected and despised which
 are invented by ignorant persons respecting the anterior and posterior
 parts of God.  Let no one indeed suppose that we have indulged any
 feeling of impiety in saying that even to the Saviour the Father is not
 visible.  Let him consider the distinction which we employ in dealing
 with heretics.  For we have explained that it is one thing to see and
 to be seen, and another to know and to be known, or to understand and
 to be understood. [2118] To see, then, and to be seen, is a property
 of bodies, which certainly will not be appropriately applied either to
 the Father, or to the Son, or to the Holy Spirit, in their mutual
 relations with one another.  For the nature of the Trinity surpasses
 the measure of vision, granting to those who are in the body, i.e., to
 all other creatures, the property of vision in reference to one
 another.  But to a nature that is incorporeal and for the most part
 intellectual, no other attribute is appropriate save that of knowing or
 being known, as the Saviour Himself declares when He says, "No man
 knoweth the Son, save the Father; nor does any one know the Father,
 save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him." [2119] It is
 clear, then, that He has not said, "No one has seen the Father, save
 the Son;" but, "No one knoweth the Father, save the Son."

 4.  And now, if, on account of those expressions which occur in the Old
 Testament, as when God is said to be angry or to repent, or when any
 other human affection or passion is described, (our opponents) think
 that they are furnished with grounds for refuting us, who maintain that
 God is altogether impassible, and is to be regarded as wholly free from
 all affections of that kind, we have to show them that similar
 statements are found even in the parables of the Gospel; as when it is
 said, that he who planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, who
 slew the servants that were sent to them, and at last put to death even
 the son, is said in anger to have taken away the vineyard from them,
 and to have delivered over the wicked husbandmen to destruction, and to
 have handed over the vineyard to others, who would yield him the fruit
 in its season.  And so also with regard to those citizens who, when the
 head of the household had set out to receive for himself a kingdom,
 sent messengers after him, saying, "We will not have this man to reign
 over us;" [2120] for the head of the household having obtained the
 kingdom, returned, and in anger commanded them to be put to death
 before him, and burned their city with fire.  But when we read either
 in the Old Testament or in the New of the anger of God, we do not take
 such expressions literally, but seek in them a spiritual meaning, that
 we may think of God as He deserves to be thought of.  And on these
 points, when expounding the verse in the second Psalm, "Then shall He
 speak to them in His anger, and trouble them in His fury," [2121] we
 showed, to the best of our poor ability, how such an expression ought
 to be understood.

 [2100] Matt. v. 48, 45.

 [2101] Matt. vi. 9.

 [2102] Matt. v. 34, 35.

 [2103] Isa. lxvi. 1.

 [2104] John ii. 16.

 [2105] Matt. xxii. 31, 32; cf. Ex. iii. 6.

 [2106] Isa. xlv. 6.

 [2107] Acts vii.

 [2108] Matt. xxii. 37, 39, 40.

 [2109] 2 Tim. i. 3.

 [2110] 2 Cor. xi. 22.

 [2111] Rom. i. 1-4.

 [2112] 1 Cor. ix. 9, 10; cf. Deut. xxv. 4.

 [2113] Eph. vi. 2, 3; cf. Ex. xx. 12.

 [2114] John i. 18.

 [2115] Col. i. 15.

 [2116] John xiv. 9.

 [2117] Ex. xxxiii. 20, cf. 23.

 [2118] Aliud sit videre et videri, et aliud nôsse et nosci, vel
 cognoscere atque cognosci.

 [2119] Matt. xi. 27.

 [2120] Luke xix. 14.

 [2121] Ps. ii. 5.

 Chapter V.--On Justice and Goodness.

 1.  Now, since this consideration has weight with some, that the
 leaders of that heresy (of which we have been speaking) think they have
 established a kind of division, according to which they have declared
 that justice is one thing and goodness another, and have applied this
 division even to divine things, maintaining that the Father of our Lord
 Jesus Christ is indeed a good God, but not a just one, whereas the God
 of the law and the prophets is just, but not good; I think it necessary
 to return, with as much brevity as possible, an answer to these
 statements.  These persons, then, consider goodness to be some such
 affection as would have benefits conferred on all, although the
 recipient of them be unworthy and undeserving of any kindness; but
 here, in my opinion, they have not rightly applied their definition,
 inasmuch as they think that no benefit is conferred on him who is
 visited with any suffering or calamity.  Justice, on the other hand,
 they view as that quality which rewards every one according to his
 deserts.  But here, again, they do not rightly interpret the meaning of
 their own definition.  For they think that it is just to send evils
 upon the wicked and benefits upon the good; i.e., so that, according to
 their view, the just God does not appear to wish well to the bad, but
 to be animated by a kind of hatred against them.  And they gather
 together instances of this, wherever they find a history in the
 Scriptures of the Old Testament, relating, e.g., the punishment of the
 deluge, or the fate of those who are described as perishing in it, or
 the, destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a shower of fire and
 brimstone, or the falling of all the people in the wilderness on
 account of their sins, so that none of those who had left Egypt were
 found to have entered the promised land, with the exception of Joshua
 and Caleb.  Whereas from the New Testament they gather together words
 of compassion and piety, through which the disciples are trained by the
 Saviour, and by which it seems to be declared that no one is good save
 God the Father only; and by this means they have ventured to style the
 Father of the Saviour Jesus Christ a good God, but to say that the God
 of the world is a different one, whom they are pleased to term just,
 but not also good.

 2.  Now I think they must, in the first place, be required to show, if
 they can, agreeably to their own definition, that the Creator is just
 in punishing according to their deserts, either those who perished at
 the time of the deluge, or the inhabitants of Sodom, or those who had
 quitted Egypt, seeing we sometimes behold committed crimes more wicked
 and detestable than those for which the above-mentioned persons were
 destroyed, while we do not yet see every sinner paying the penalty of
 his misdeeds.  Will they say that He who at one time was just has been
 made good?  Or will they rather be of opinion that He is even now just,
 but is patiently enduring human offences, while that then He was not
 even just, inasmuch as He exterminated innocent and sucking children
 along with cruel and ungodly giants?  Now, such are their opinions,
 because they know not how to understand anything beyond the letter;
 otherwise they would show how it is literal justice for sins to be
 visited upon the heads of children to the third and fourth generation,
 and on children's children after them.  By us, however, such things are
 not understood literally; but, as Ezekiel taught [2122] when relating
 the parable, we inquire what is the inner meaning contained in the
 parable itself.  Moreover, they ought to explain this also, how He is
 just, and rewards every one according to his merits, who punishes
 earthly-minded persons and the devil, seeing they have done nothing
 worthy of punishment. [2123] For they could not do any good if,
 according to them, they were of a wicked and ruined nature.  For as
 they style Him a judge, He appears to be a judge not so much of actions
 as of natures; and if a bad nature cannot do good, neither can a good
 nature do evil.  Then, in the next place, if He whom they call good is
 good to all, He is undoubtedly good also to those who are destined to
 perish.  And why does He not save them?  If He does not desire to do
 so, He will be no longer good; if He does desire it, and cannot effect
 it, He will not be omnipotent.  Why do they not rather hear the Father
 of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospels, preparing fire for the devil
 and his angels?  And how shall that proceeding, as penal as it is sad,
 appear to be, according to their view, the work of the good God?  Even
 the Saviour Himself, the Son of the good God, protests in the Gospels,
 and declares that "if signs and wonders had been done in Tyre and
 Sidon, they would have repented [2124] long ago, sitting in sackcloth
 and ashes."  And when He had come near to those very cities, and had
 entered their territory, why, pray, does He avoid entering those
 cities, and exhibiting to them abundance of signs and wonders, if it
 were certain that they would have repented, after they had been
 performed, in sackcloth and ashes?  But as He does not do this, He
 undoubtedly abandons to destruction those whom the language of the
 Gospel shows not to have been of a wicked or ruined nature, inasmuch as
 it declares they were capable of repentance.  Again, in a certain
 parable of the Gospel, where the king enters in to see the guests
 reclining at the banquet, he beheld a certain individual not clothed
 with wedding raiment, and said to him, "Friend, how camest thou in
 hither, not having a wedding garment?" and then ordered his servants,
 "Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness; there will
 be weeping and gnashing of teeth." [2125] Let them tell us who is
 that king who entered in to see the guests, and finding one amongst
 them with unclean garments, commanded him to be bound by his servants,
 and thrust out into outer darkness.  Is he the same whom they call
 just?  How then had he commanded good and bad alike to be invited,
 without directing their merits to be inquired into by his servants?  By
 such procedure would be indicated, not the character of a just God who
 rewards according to men's deserts, as they assert, but of one who
 displays undiscriminating goodness towards all.  Now, if this must
 necessarily be understood of the good God, i.e., either of Christ or of
 the Father of Christ, what other objection can they bring against the
 justice of God's judgment?  Nay, what else is there so unjust charged
 by them against the God of the law as to order him who had been invited
 by His servants, whom He had sent to call good and bad alike, to be
 bound hand and foot, and to be thrown into outer darkness, because he
 had on unclean garments?

 3.  And now, what we have drawn from the authority of Scripture ought
 to be sufficient to refute the arguments of the heretics.  It will not,
 however, appear improper if we discuss the matter with them shortly, on
 the grounds of reason itself.  We ask them, then, if they know what is
 regarded among men as the ground of virtue and wickedness, and if it
 appears to follow that we can speak of virtues in God, or, as they
 think, in these two Gods.  Let them give an answer also to the
 question, whether they consider goodness to be a virtue; and as they
 will undoubtedly admit it to be so, what will they say of injustice?
 They will never certainly, in my opinion, be so foolish as to deny that
 justice is a virtue.  Accordingly, if virtue is a blessing, and justice
 is a virtue, then without doubt justice is goodness.  But if they say
 that justice is not a blessing, it must either be an evil or an
 indifferent thing.  Now I think it folly to return any answer to those
 who say that justice is an evil, for I shall have the appearance of
 replying either to senseless words, or to men out of their minds.  How
 can that appear an evil which is able to reward the good with
 blessings, as they themselves also admit?  But if they say that it is a
 thing of indifference, it follows that since justice is so, sobriety
 also, and prudence, and all the other virtues, are things of
 indifference.  And what answer shall we make to Paul, when he says, "If
 there be any virtue, and, if there be any praise, think on these
 things, which ye have learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
 me?" [2126] Let them learn, therefore, by searching the holy
 Scriptures, what are the individual virtues, and not deceive themselves
 by saying that that God who rewards every one according to his merits,
 does, through hatred of evil, recompense the wicked with evil, and not
 because those who have sinned need to be treated with severer remedies,
 and because He applies to them those measures which, with the prospect
 of improvement, seem nevertheless, for the present, to produce a
 feeling of pain.  They do not read what is written respecting the hope
 of those who were destroyed in the deluge; of which hope Peter himself
 thus speaks in his first Epistle:  "That Christ, indeed, was put to
 death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which He went and
 preached to the spirits who were kept in prison, who once were
 unbelievers, when they awaited the long-suffering of God in the days of
 Noah, when the ark was preparing, in which a few, i.e., eight souls,
 were saved by water.  Whereunto also baptism by a like figure now saves
 you." [2127] And with regard to Sodom and Gomorrah, let them tell us
 whether they believe the prophetic words to be those of the Creator
 God--of Him, viz., who is related to have rained upon them a shower of
 fire and brimstone.  What does Ezekiel the prophet say of them?
 "Sodom," he says, "shall be restored to her former condition." [2128]
 But why, in afflicting those who are deserving of punishment, does He
 not afflict them for their good?--who also says to Chaldea, "Thou hast
 coals of fire, sit upon them; they will be a help to thee." [2129]
 And of those also who fell in the desert, let them hear what is related
 in the seventy-eighth Psalm, which bears the superscription of Asaph;
 for he says, "When He slew them, then they sought Him." [2130] He
 does not say that some sought Him after others had been slain, but he
 says that the destruction of those who were killed was of such a nature
 that, when put to death, they sought God.  By all which it is
 established, that the God of the law and the Gospels is one and the
 same, a just and good God, and that He confers benefits justly, and
 punishes with kindness; since neither goodness without justice, nor
 justice without goodness, can display the (real) dignity of the divine
 nature.

 We shall add the following remarks, to which we are driven by their
 subtleties.  If justice is a different thing from goodness, then, since
 evil is the opposite of good, and injustice of justice, injustice will
 doubtless be something else than an evil; and as, in your opinion, the
 just man is not good, so neither will the unjust man be wicked; and
 again, as the good man is not just, so the wicked man also will not be
 unjust.  But who does not see the absurdity, that to a good God one
 should be opposed that is evil; while to a just God, whom they allege
 to be inferior to the good, no one should be opposed!  For there is
 none who can be called unjust, as there is a Satan who is called
 wicked.  What, then, are we to do?  Let us give up the position which
 we defend, for they will not be able to maintain that a bad man is not
 also unjust, and an unjust man wicked.  And if these qualities be
 indissolubly inherent in these opposites, viz., injustice in
 wickedness, or wickedness in injustice, then unquestionably the good
 man will be inseparable from the just man, and the just from the good;
 so that, as we speak of one and the same wickedness in malice and
 injustice, we may also hold the virtue of goodness and justice to be
 one and the same.

 4.  They again recall us, however, to the words of Scripture, by
 bringing forward that celebrated question of theirs, affirming that it
 is written, "A bad tree cannot produce good fruits; for a tree is known
 by its fruit." [2131] What, then, is their position?  What sort of
 tree the law is, is shown by its fruits, i.e., by the language of its
 precepts.  For if the law be found to be good, then undoubtedly He who
 gave it is believed to be a good God.  But if it be just rather than
 good, then God also will be considered a just legislator.  The Apostle
 Paul makes use of no circumlocution, when he says, "The law is good;
 and the commandment is holy, and just, and good." [2132] From which
 it is clear that Paul had not learned the language of those who
 separate justice from goodness, but had been instructed by that God,
 and illuminated by His Spirit, who is at the same time both holy, and
 good, and just; and speaking by whose Spirit he declared that the
 commandment of the law was holy, and just, and good.  And that he might
 show more clearly that goodness was in the commandment to a greater
 degree than justice and holiness, repeating his words, he used, instead
 of these three epithets, that of goodness alone, saying, "Was then that
 which is good made death unto me?  God forbid." [2133] As he knew
 that goodness was the genus of the virtues, and that justice and
 holiness were species belonging to the genus, and having in the former
 verses named genus and species together, he fell back, when repeating
 his words, on the genus alone.  But in those which follow he says, "Sin
 wrought death in me by that which is good," [2134] where he sums up
 generically what he had beforehand explained specifically.  And in this
 way also is to be understood the declaration, "A good man, out of the
 good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things; and an evil
 man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things." [2135]
 For here also he assumed that there was a genus in good or evil,
 pointing out unquestionably that in a good man there were both justice,
 and temperance, and prudence, and piety, and everything that can be
 either called or understood to be good.  In like manner also he said
 that a man was wicked who should without any doubt be unjust, and
 impure, and unholy, and everything which singly makes a bad man.  For
 as no one considers a man to be wicked without these marks of
 wickedness (nor indeed can he be so), so also it is certain that
 without these virtues no one will be deemed to be good.  There still
 remains to them, however, that saying of the Lord in the Gospel, which
 they think is given them in a special manner as a shield, viz., "There
 is none good but one, God the Father." [2136] This word they declare
 is peculiar to the Father of Christ, who, however, is different from
 the God who is Creator of all things, to which Creator he gave no
 appellation of goodness.  Let us see now if, in the Old Testament, the
 God of the prophets and the Creator and Legislator of the word is not
 called good.  What are the expressions which occur in the Psalms?  "How
 good is God to Israel, to the upright in heart!" [2137] and, "Let
 Israel now say that He is good, that His mercy endureth for ever;"
 [2138] the language in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, "The Lord is good
 to them that wait for Him, to the soul that seeketh Him." [2139] As
 therefore God is frequently called good in the Old Testament, so also
 the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is styled just in the Gospels.
 Finally, in the Gospel according to John, our Lord Himself, when
 praying to the Father, says, "O just Father, the world hath not known
 Thee." [2140] And lest perhaps they should say that it was owing to
 His having assumed human flesh that He called the Creator of the world
 "Father," and styled Him "Just," they are excluded from such a refuge
 by the words that immediately follow, "The world hath not known Thee."
 But, according to them, the world is ignorant of the good God alone.
 For the world unquestionably recognises its Creator, the Lord Himself
 saying that the world loveth what is its own.  Clearly, then, He whom
 they consider to be the good God, is called just in the Gospels.  Any
 one may at leisure gather together a greater number of proofs,
 consisting of those passages, where in the New Testament the Father of
 our Lord Jesus Christ is called just, and in the Old also, where the
 Creator of heaven and earth is called good; so that the heretics, being
 convicted by numerous testimonies, may perhaps some time be put to the
 blush.

 [2122] Ezek. xviii. 3.

 [2123] [Cum nihil dignum poena commiserint.  S.]

 [2124] Poenitentiam egissent.

 [2125] Matt. xxii. 12, 13.

 [2126] Phil. iv. 8, 9.

 [2127] 1 Pet. iii. 18-21.

 [2128] Ezek. xvi. 55, cf. 53.

 [2129] Isa. xlvii. 14, 15.  The Septuagint here differs from the
 Hebrew:  echeis anthrakas puros, kathisai ep' autous, houtoi esontai
 soi boetheia.

 [2130] Ps. lxxviii. 34.

 [2131] Matt. vii. 18, cf. xii. 33.

 [2132] Rom. vii. 12.

 [2133] Rom. vii. 13.

 [2134] Rom. vii. 13.

 [2135] Matt. xii. 35.

 [2136] Matt. xix. 17.

 [2137] Ps. lxxiii. 1.

 [2138] Ps. cxviii. 2.

 [2139] Lam. iii. 25.

 [2140] John xvii. 25:  Juste Pater.

 Chapter VI.--On the Incarnation of Christ.

 1.  It is now time, after this cursory notice of these points, to
 resume our investigation of the incarnation of our Lord and Saviour,
 viz., how or why He became man.  Having therefore, to the best of our
 feeble ability, considered His divine nature from the contemplation of
 His own works rather than from our own feelings, and having
 nevertheless beheld (with the eye) His visible creation while the
 invisible creation is seen by faith, because human frailty can neither
 see all things with the bodily eye nor comprehend them by reason,
 seeing we men are weaker and frailer than any other rational beings
 (for those which are in heaven, or are supposed to exist above the
 heaven, are superior), it remains that we seek a being intermediate
 between all created things and God, i.e., a Mediator, whom the Apostle
 Paul styles the "first-born of every creature." [2141] Seeing,
 moreover, those declarations regarding His majesty which are contained
 in holy Scripture, that He is called the "image of the invisible God,
 and the first-born of every creature," and that "in Him were all things
 created, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions,
 or principalities, or powers, all things were created by Him, and in
 Him:  and He is before all things, and by Him all things consist,"
 [2142] who is the head of all things, alone having as head God the
 Father; for it is written, "The head of Christ is God;" [2143] seeing
 clearly also that it is written, "No one knoweth the Father, save the
 Son, nor doth any one know the Son, save the Father" [2144] (for who
 can know what wisdom is, save He who called it into being? or, who can
 understand clearly what truth is, save the Father of truth? who can
 investigate with certainty the universal nature of His Word, and of God
 Himself, which nature proceeds from God, except God alone, with whom
 the Word was), we ought to regard it as certain that this Word, or
 Reason (if it is to be so termed), this Wisdom, this Truth, is known to
 no other than the Father only; and of Him it is written, that "I do not
 think that the world itself could contain the books which might be
 written," [2145] regarding, viz., the glory and majesty of the Son of
 God.  For it is impossible to commit to writing (all) those particulars
 which belong to the glory of the Saviour.  After the consideration of
 questions of such importance concerning the being of the Son of God, we
 are lost in the deepest amazement that such a nature, pre-eminent above
 all others, should have divested itself of its condition of majesty and
 become man, and tabernacled amongst men, as the grace that was poured
 upon His lips testifies, and as His heavenly Father bore Him witness,
 and as is confessed by the various signs and wonders and miracles
 [2146] that were performed by Him; who also, before that appearance of
 His which He manifested in the body, sent the prophets as His
 forerunners, and the messengers of His advent; and after His ascension
 into heaven, made His holy apostles, men ignorant and unlearned, taken
 from the ranks of tax-gatherers or fishermen, but who were filled with
 the power of His divinity, to itinerate throughout the world, that they
 might gather together out of every race and every nation a multitude of
 devout believers in Himself.

 2.  But of all the marvellous and mighty acts related of Him, this
 altogether surpasses human admiration, and is beyond the power of
 mortal frailness to understand or feel, how that mighty power of divine
 majesty, that very Word of the Father, and that very wisdom of God, in
 which were created all things, visible and invisible, can be believed
 to have existed within the limits of that man who appeared in Judea;
 nay, that the Wisdom of God can have entered the womb of a woman, and
 have been born an infant, and have uttered wailings like the cries of
 little children!  And that afterwards it should be related that He was
 greatly troubled in death, saying, as He Himself declared, "My soul is
 sorrowful even unto death;" [2147] and that at the last He was brought
 to that death which is accounted the most shameful among men, although
 He rose again on the third day.  Since, then, we see in Him some things
 so human that they appear to differ in no respect from the common
 frailty of mortals, and some things so divine that they can
 appropriately belong to nothing else than to the primal and ineffable
 nature of Deity, the narrowness of human understanding can find no
 outlet; but, overcome with the amazement of a mighty admiration, knows
 not whither to withdraw, or what to take hold of, or whither to turn.
 If it think of a God, it sees a mortal; if it think of a man, it
 beholds Him returning from the grave, after overthrowing the empire of
 death, laden with its spoils.  And therefore the spectacle is to be
 contemplated with all fear and reverence, that the truth of both
 natures may be clearly shown to exist in one and the same Being; so
 that nothing unworthy or unbecoming may be perceived in that divine and
 ineffable substance, nor yet those things which were done be supposed
 to be the illusions of imaginary appearances.  To utter these things in
 human ears, and to explain them in words, far surpasses the powers
 either of our rank, or of our intellect and language.  I think that it
 surpasses the power even of the holy apostles; nay, the explanation of
 that mystery may perhaps be beyond the grasp of the entire creation of
 celestial powers.  Regarding Him, then, we shall state, in the fewest
 possible words, the contents of our creed rather than the assertions
 which human reason is wont to advance; and this from no spirit of
 rashness, but as called for by the nature of our arrangement, laying
 before you rather (what may be termed) our suspicions than any clear
 affirmations.

 3.  The Only-begotten of God, therefore, through whom, as the previous
 course of the discussion has shown, all things were made, visible and
 invisible, according to the view of Scripture, both made all things,
 and loves what He made.  For since He is Himself the invisible image of
 the invisible God, He conveyed invisibly a share in Himself to all His
 rational creatures, so that each one obtained a part of Him exactly
 proportioned to the amount of affection with which he regarded Him.
 But since, agreeably to the faculty of free-will, variety and diversity
 characterized the individual souls, so that one was attached with a
 warmer love to the Author of its being, and another with a feebler and
 weaker regard, that soul (anima) regarding which Jesus said, "No one
 shall take my life (animam) from me," [2148] inhering, from the
 beginning of the creation, and afterwards, inseparably and indissolubly
 in Him, as being the Wisdom and Word of God, and the Truth and the true
 Light, and receiving Him wholly, and passing into His light and
 splendour, was made with Him in a pre-eminent degree [2149] one spirit,
 according to the promise of the apostle to those who ought to imitate
 it, that "he who is joined in the Lord is one spirit." [2150] This
 substance of a soul, then, being intermediate between God and the
 flesh--it being impossible for the nature of God to intermingle with a
 body without an intermediate instrument--the God-man is born, as we
 have said, that substance being the intermediary to whose nature it was
 not contrary to assume a body.  But neither, on the other hand, was it
 opposed to the nature of that soul, as a rational existence, to receive
 God, into whom, as stated above, as into the Word, and the Wisdom, and
 the Truth, it had already wholly entered.  And therefore deservedly is
 it also called, along with the flesh which it had assumed, the Son of
 God, and the Power of God, the Christ, and the Wisdom of God, either
 because it was wholly in the Son of God, or because it received the Son
 of God wholly into itself.  And again, the Son of God, through whom all
 things were created, is named Jesus Christ and the Son of man.  For the
 Son of God also is said to have died--in reference, viz., to that
 nature which could admit of death; and He is called the Son of man, who
 is announced as about to come in the glory of God the Father, with the
 holy angels.  And for this reason, throughout the whole of Scripture,
 not only is the divine nature spoken of in human words, but the human
 nature is adorned by appellations of divine dignity.  More truly indeed
 of this than of any other can the statement be affirmed, "They shall
 both be in one flesh, and are no longer two, but one flesh." [2151]
 For the Word of God is to be considered as being more in one flesh with
 the soul than a man with his wife.  But to whom is it more becoming to
 be also one spirit with God, than to this soul which has so joined
 itself to God by love as that it may justly be said to be one spirit
 with Him?

 4.  That the perfection of his love and the sincerity of his deserved
 affection [2152] formed for it this inseparable union with God, so that
 the assumption of that soul was not accidental, or the result of a
 personal preference, but was conferred as the reward of its virtues,
 listen to the prophet addressing it thus:  "Thou hast loved
 righteousness, and hated wickedness:  therefore God, thy God, hath
 anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." [2153] As
 a reward for its love, then, it is anointed with the oil of gladness;
 i.e., the soul of Christ along with the Word of God is made Christ.
 Because to be anointed with the oil of gladness means nothing else than
 to be filled with the Holy Spirit.  And when it is said "above thy
 fellows," it is meant that the grace of the Spirit was not given to it
 as to the prophets, but that the essential fulness of the Word of God
 Himself was in it, according to the saying of the apostle, "In whom
 dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." [2154] Finally, on this
 account he has not only said, "Thou hast loved righteousness;" but he
 adds, "and Thou hast hated wickedness."  For to have hated wickedness
 is what the Scripture says of Him, that "He did no sin, neither was any
 guile found in His mouth," [2155] and that "He was tempted in all
 things like as we are, without sin." [2156] Nay, the Lord Himself
 also said, "Which of you will convince Me of sin?" [2157] And again
 He says with reference to Himself, "Behold, the prince of this world
 cometh, and findeth nothing in Me." [2158] All which (passages) show
 that in Him there was no sense of sin; and that the prophet might show
 more clearly that no sense of sin had ever entered into Him, he says,
 "Before the boy could have knowledge to call upon father or mother, He
 turned away from wickedness." [2159]

 5.  Now, if our having shown above that Christ possessed a rational
 soul should cause a difficulty to any one, seeing we have frequently
 proved throughout all our discussions that the nature of souls is
 capable both of good and evil, the difficulty will be explained in the
 following way.  That the nature, indeed, of His soul was the same as
 that of all others cannot be doubted, otherwise it could not be called
 a soul were it not truly one.  But since the power of choosing good and
 evil is within the reach of all, this soul which belonged to Christ
 elected to love righteousness, so that in proportion to the immensity
 of its love it clung to it unchangeably and inseparably, so that
 firmness of purpose, and immensity of affection, and an
 inextinguishable warmth of love, destroyed all susceptibility (sensum)
 for alteration and change; and that which formerly depended upon the
 will was changed by the power of long custom into nature; and so we
 must believe that there existed in Christ a human and rational soul,
 without supposing that it had any feeling or possibility of sin.

 6.  To explain the matter more fully, it will not appear absurd to make
 use of an illustration, although on a subject of so much difficulty it
 is not easy to obtain suitable illustrations.  However, if we may speak
 without offence, the metal iron is capable of cold and heat.  If, then,
 a mass of iron be kept constantly in the fire, receiving the heat
 through all its pores and veins, and the fire being continuous and the
 iron never removed from it, it become wholly converted into the latter;
 could we at all say of this, which is by nature a mass of iron, that
 when placed in the fire, and incessantly burning, it was at any time
 capable of admitting cold?  On the contrary, because it is more
 consistent with truth, do we not rather say, what we often see
 happening in furnaces, that it has become wholly fire, seeing nothing
 but fire is visible in it?  And if any one were to attempt to touch or
 handle it, he would experience the action not of iron, but of fire.  In
 this way, then, that soul which, like an iron in the fire, has been
 perpetually placed in the Word, and perpetually in the Wisdom, and
 perpetually in God, [2160] is God in all that it does, feels, and
 understands, and therefore can be called neither convertible nor
 mutable, inasmuch as, being incessantly heated, it possessed
 immutability from its union with the Word of God.  To all the saints,
 finally, some warmth from the Word of God must be supposed to have
 passed; and in this soul the divine fire itself must be believed to
 have rested, from which some warmth may have passed to others.  Lastly,
 the expression, "God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness
 above thy fellows," [2161] shows that that soul is anointed in one way
 with the oil of gladness, i.e., with the word of God and wisdom; and
 his fellows, i.e., the holy prophets and apostles, in another.  For
 they are said to have "run in the odour of his ointments;" [2162] and
 that soul was the vessel which contained that very ointment of whose
 fragrance all the worthy prophets and apostles were made partakers.
 As, then, the substance of an ointment is one thing and its odour
 another, so also Christ is one thing and His fellows another.  And as
 the vessel itself, which contains the substance of the ointment, can by
 no means admit any foul smell; whereas it is possible that those who
 enjoy its odour may, if they remove a little way from its fragrance,
 receive any foul odour which comes upon them:  so, in the same way, was
 it impossible that Christ, being as it were the vessel itself, in which
 was the substance of the ointment, should receive an odour of an
 opposite kind, while they who are His "fellows" will be partakers and
 receivers of His odour, in proportion to their nearness to the vessel.

 7.  I think, indeed, that Jeremiah the prophet, also, understanding
 what was the nature of the wisdom of God in him, which was the same
 also which he had assumed for the salvation of the world, said, "The
 breath of our countenance is Christ the Lord, to whom we said, that
 under His shadow we shall live among the nations." [2163] And
 inasmuch as the shadow of our body is inseparable from the body, and
 unavoidably performs and repeats its movements and gestures, I think
 that he, wishing to point out the work of Christ's soul, and the
 movements inseparably belonging to it, and which accomplished
 everything according to His movements and will, called this the shadow
 of Christ the Lord, under which shadow we were to live among the
 nations.  For in the mystery of this assumption the nations live, who,
 imitating it through faith, come to salvation.  David also, when
 saying, "Be mindful of my reproach, O Lord, with which they reproached
 me in exchange for Thy Christ," [2164] seems to me to indicate the
 same.  And what else does Paul mean when he says, "Your life is hid
 with Christ in God;" [2165] and again in another passage, "Do you seek
 a proof of Christ, who speaketh in me?" [2166] And now he says that
 Christ was hid in God.  The meaning of which expression, unless it be
 shown to be something such as we have pointed out above as intended by
 the prophet in the words "shadow of Christ," exceeds, perhaps, the
 apprehension of the human mind.  But we see also very many other
 statements in holy Scripture respecting the meaning of the word
 "shadow," as that well-known one in the Gospel according to Luke, where
 Gabriel says to Mary, "The Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and
 the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee." [2167] And the
 apostle says with reference to the law, that they who have circumcision
 in the flesh, "serve for the similitude and shadow of heavenly things."
 [2168] And elsewhere, "Is not our life upon the earth a shadow?"
 [2169] If, then, not only the law which is upon the earth is a
 shadow, but also all our life which is upon the earth is the same, and
 we live among the nations under the shadow of Christ, we must see
 whether the truth of all these shadows may not come to be known in that
 revelation, when no longer through a glass, and darkly, but face to
 face, all the saints shall deserve to behold the glory of God, and the
 causes and truth of things.  And the pledge of this truth being already
 received through the Holy Spirit, the apostle said, "Yea, though we
 have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no
 more." [2170]

 The above, meanwhile, are the thoughts which have occurred to us, when
 treating of subjects of such difficulty as the incarnation and deity of
 Christ.  If there be any one, indeed, who can discover something
 better, and who can establish his assertions by clearer proofs from
 holy Scriptures, let his opinion be received in preference to mine.

 [2141] Col. i. 15.

 [2142] Col. i. 16, 17.

 [2143] 1 Cor. xi. 3.

 [2144] Matt. xi. 27.

 [2145] John xxi. 25.

 [2146] Virtutibus, probably for dunamesin.

 [2147] Matt. xxvi. 38.

 [2148] John x. 18.  "No other soul which descended into a human body
 has stamped on itself a pure and unstained resemblance of its former
 stamp, save that one of which the Savior says, No one will take my soul
 from me, but I lay it down of myself.'"--Jerome, Epistle to Avitus, p.
 763.

 [2149] Principaliter.

 [2150] 1 Cor. vi. 17.

 [2151] Gen. ii. 24; cf. Mark x. 8.

 [2152] Meriti affectus.

 [2153] Ps. xlv. 7.

 [2154] Col. ii. 9.

 [2155] Isa. liii. 9.

 [2156] Heb. iv. 15.

 [2157] John viii. 46.

 [2158] John xiv. 30.

 [2159] This quotation is made up of two different parts of Isaiah:
 chap. viii. 4, "Before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father
 and my mother;" and chap. vii. 16, "Before the child shall know to
 refuse the evil, and choose the good."

 [2160] Semper in verbo, semper in sapientia, semper in Deo.

 [2161] Ps. xlv. 7.

 [2162] Illi enim in odore unguentorum ejus circumire dicuntur; perhaps
 an allusion to Song of Sol. i. 3 or to Ps. xlv. 8.

 [2163] Lam. iv. 20.

 [2164] Ps. lxxxix. 50, 51.

 [2165] Col. iii. 3.

 [2166] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

 [2167] Luke i. 35.

 [2168] Heb. viii. 5.

 [2169] Job viii. 9.

 [2170] 2 Cor. v. 16.

 Chapter VII.--On the Holy Spirit.

 1.  As, then, after those first discussions which, according to the
 requirements of the case, we held at the beginning regarding the
 Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, it seemed right that we should retrace
 our steps, and show that the same God was the creator and founder of
 the world, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, i.e., that the God
 of the law and of the prophets and of the Gospel was one and the same;
 and that, in the next place, it ought to be shown, with respect to
 Christ, in what manner He who had formerly been demonstrated to be the
 Word and Wisdom of God became man; it remains that we now return with
 all possible brevity to the subject of the Holy Spirit.

 It is time, then, that we say a few words to the best of our ability
 regarding the Holy Spirit, whom our Lord and Saviour in the Gospel
 according to John has named the Paraclete.  For as it is the same God
 Himself, and the same Christ, so also is it the same Holy Spirit who
 was in the prophets and apostles, i.e., either in those who believed in
 God before the advent of Christ, or in those who by means of Christ
 have sought refuge in God.  We have heard, indeed, that certain
 heretics have dared to say that there are two Gods and two Christs, but
 we have never known of the doctrine of two Holy Spirits being preached
 by any one. [2171] For how could they maintain this out of Scripture,
 or what distinction could they lay down between Holy Spirit and Holy
 Spirit, if indeed any definition or description of Holy Spirit can be
 discovered?  For although we should concede to Marcion or to Valentinus
 that it is possible to draw distinctions in the question of Deity, and
 to describe the nature of the good God as one, and that of the just God
 as another, what will he devise, or what will he discover, to enable
 him to introduce a distinction in the Holy Spirit?  I consider, then,
 that they are able to discover nothing which may indicate a distinction
 of any kind whatever.

 2.  Now we are of opinion that every rational creature, without any
 distinction, receives a share of Him in the same way as of the Wisdom
 and of the Word of God.  I observe, however, that the chief advent of
 the Holy Spirit is declared to men, after the ascension of Christ to
 heaven, rather than before His coming into the world.  For, before
 that, it was upon the prophets alone, and upon a few individuals--if
 there happened to be any among the people deserving of it--that the
 gift of the Holy Spirit was conferred; but after the advent of the
 Saviour, it is written that the prediction of the prophet Joel was
 fulfilled, "In the last days it shall come to pass, and I will pour out
 my Spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophesy," [2172] which is
 similar to the well-known statement, "All nations shall serve Him."
 [2173] By the grace, then, of the Holy Spirit, along with numerous
 other results, this most glorious consequence is clearly demonstrated,
 that with regard to those things which were written in the prophets or
 in the law of Moses, it was only a few persons at that time, viz., the
 prophets themselves, and scarcely another individual out of the whole
 nation, who were able to look beyond the mere corporeal meaning and
 discover something greater, i.e., something spiritual, in the law or in
 the prophets; but now there are countless multitudes of believers who,
 although unable to unfold methodically and clearly the results of their
 spiritual understanding, [2174] are nevertheless most firmly persuaded
 that neither ought circumcision to be understood literally, nor the
 rest of the Sabbath, nor the pouring out of the blood of an animal, nor
 that answers were given by God to Moses on these points.  And this
 method of apprehension is undoubtedly suggested to the minds of all by
 the power of the Holy Spirit.

 3.  And as there are many ways of apprehending Christ, who, although He
 is wisdom, does not act the part or possess the power of wisdom in all
 men, but only in those who give themselves to the study of wisdom in
 Him; and who, although called a physician, does not act as one towards
 all, but only towards those who understand their feeble and sickly
 condition, and flee to His compassion that they may obtain health; so
 also I think is it with the Holy Spirit, in whom is contained every
 kind of gifts.  For on some is bestowed by the Spirit the word of
 wisdom, on others the word of knowledge, on others faith; and so to
 each individual of those who are capable of receiving Him, is the
 Spirit Himself made to be that quality, or understood to be that which
 is needed by the individual who has deserved to participate. [2175]
 These divisions and differences not being perceived by those who hear
 Him called Paraclete in the Gospel, and not duly considering in
 consequence of what work or act He is named the Paraclete, they have
 compared Him to some common spirits or other, and by this means have
 tried to disturb the Churches of Christ, and so excite dissensions of
 no small extent among brethren; whereas the Gospel shows Him to be of
 such power and majesty, that it says the apostles could not yet receive
 those things which the Saviour wished to teach them until the advent of
 the Holy Spirit, who, pouring Himself into their souls, might enlighten
 them regarding the nature and faith of the Trinity.  But these persons,
 because of the ignorance of their understandings, are not only unable
 themselves logically to state the truth, but cannot even give their
 attention to what is advanced by us; and entertaining unworthy ideas of
 His divinity, have delivered themselves over to errors and deceits,
 being depraved by a spirit of error, rather than instructed by the
 teaching of the Holy Spirit, according to the declaration of the
 apostle, "Following the doctrine of devils, forbidding to marry, to the
 destruction and ruin of many, and to abstain from meats, that by an
 ostentatious exhibition of stricter observance they may seduce the
 souls of the innocent." [2176]

 4.  We must therefore know that the Paraclete is the Holy Spirit, who
 teaches truths which cannot be uttered in words, and which are, so to
 speak, unutterable, and "which it is not lawful for a man to utter,"
 [2177] i.e., which cannot be indicated by human language.  The phrase
 "it is not lawful" is, we think, used by the apostle instead of "it is
 not possible;" as also is the case in the passage where he says, "All
 things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient:  all things
 are lawful for me; but all things edify not." [2178] For those things
 which are in our power because we may have them, he says are lawful for
 us.  But the Paraclete, who is called the Holy Spirit, is so called
 from His work of consolation, paraclesis being termed in Latin
 consolatio.  For if any one has deserved to participate in the Holy
 Spirit by the knowledge of His ineffable mysteries, he undoubtedly
 obtains comfort and joy of heart.  For since he comes by the teaching
 of the Spirit to the knowledge of the reasons of all things which
 happen--how or why they occur--his soul can in no respect be troubled,
 or admit any feeling of sorrow; nor is he alarmed by anything, since,
 clinging to the Word of God and His wisdom, he through the Holy Spirit
 calls Jesus Lord.  And since we have made mention of the Paraclete, and
 have explained as we were able what sentiments ought to be entertained
 regarding Him; and since our Saviour also is called the Paraclete in
 the Epistle of John, when he says, "If any of us sin, we have a
 Paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and He is the
 propitiation for our sins;" [2179] let us consider whether this term
 Paraclete should happen to have one meaning when applied to the
 Saviour, and another when applied to the Holy Spirit.  Now Paraclete,
 when spoken of the Saviour, seems to mean intercessor.  For in Greek,
 Paraclete has both significations--that of intercessor and comforter.
 On account, then, of the phrase which follows, when he says, "And He is
 the propitiation for our sins," the name Paraclete seems to be
 understood in the case of our Saviour as meaning intercessor; for He is
 said to intercede with the Father because of our sins.  In the case of
 the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete must be understood in the sense of
 comforter, inasmuch as He bestows consolation upon the souls to whom He
 openly reveals the apprehension of spiritual knowledge.

 [2171] According to Pamphilus in his Apology, Origen, in a note on Tit.
 iii. 10, has made a statement the opposite of this.  His words are:
 "But there are some also who say, that it was one Holy Spirit who was
 in the prophets, and another who was in the apostles of our Lord Jesus
 Christ."--Ruæus.

 [2172] Joel ii. 28.

 [2173] Ps. lxxii. 11.

 [2174] Qui licet non omnes possint per ordinem atque ad liquidum
 spiritualis intelligentiæ explanare consequentiam.

 [2175] Ita per singulos, qui eum capere possunt, hoc efficitur, vel hoc
 intelligitur ipse Spiritus, quo indiget ille, qui eum participare
 meruerit.  Schnitzer renders, "And so, in every one who is susceptible
 of them, the Spirit is exactly that which the receiver chiefly needs."

 [2176] 1 Tim. iv. 1-3.

 [2177] 2 Cor. xii. 4.

 [2178] 1 Cor. x. 23.

 [2179] 1 John ii. 1, 2.

 Chapter VIII.--On the Soul (Anima).

 1.  The order of our arrangement now requires us, after the discussion
 of the preceding subjects, to institute a general inquiry regarding the
 soul; [2180] and, beginning with points of inferior importance, to
 ascend to those that are of greater.  Now, that there are souls [2181]
 in all living things, even in those which live in the waters, is, I
 suppose, doubted by no one.  For the general opinion of all men
 maintains this; and confirmation from the authority of holy Scripture
 is added, when it is said that "God made great whales, and every living
 creature [2182] that moveth which the waters brought forth after their
 kind." [2183] It is confirmed also from the common intelligence of
 reason, by those who lay down in certain words a definition of soul.
 For soul is defined as follows:  a substance phantastike and hormetike,
 which may be rendered into Latin, although not so appropriately,
 sensibilis et mobilis. [2184] This certainly may be said
 appropriately of all living beings, even of those which abide in the
 waters; and of winged creatures too, this same definition of animamay
 be shown to hold good.  Scripture also has added its authority to a
 second opinion, when it says, "Ye shall not eat the blood, because the
 life [2185] of all flesh is its blood; and ye shall not eat the life
 with the flesh;" [2186] in which it intimates most clearly that the
 blood of every animal is its life.  And if any one now were to ask how
 it can be said with respect to bees, wasps, and ants, and those other
 things which are in the waters, oysters and cockles, and all others
 which are without blood, and are most clearly shown to be living
 things, that the "life of all flesh is the blood," we must answer, that
 in living things of that sort the force which is exerted in other
 animals by the power of red blood is exerted in them by that liquid
 which is within them, although it be of a different colour; for colour
 is a thing of no importance, provided the substance be endowed with
 life. [2187] That beasts of burden or cattle of smaller size are
 endowed with souls, [2188] there is, by general assent, no doubt
 whatever.  The opinion of holy Scripture, however, is manifest, when
 God says, "Let the earth bring forth the living creature after its
 kind, four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and beasts of the earth
 after their kind." [2189] And now with respect to man, although no
 one entertains any doubt, or needs to inquire, yet holy Scripture
 declares that "God breathed into his countenance the breath of life,
 and man became a living soul." [2190] It remains that we inquire
 respecting the angelic order whether they also have souls, or are
 souls; and also respecting the other divine and celestial powers, as
 well as those of an opposite kind.  We nowhere, indeed, find any
 authority in holy Scripture for asserting that either the angels, or
 any other divine spirits that are ministers of God, either possess
 souls or are called souls, and yet they are felt by very many persons
 to be endowed with life.  But with regard to God, we find it written as
 follows:  "And I will put My soul upon that soul which has eaten blood,
 and I will root him out from among his people;" [2191] and also in
 another passage, "Your new moons, and sabbaths, and great days, I will
 not accept; your fasts, and holidays, and festal days, My soul hateth."
 [2192] And in the twenty-second Psalm, regarding Christ--for it is
 certain, as the Gospel bears witness, that this Psalm is spoken of
 Him--the following words occur:  "O Lord, be not far from helping me;
 look to my defence:  O God, deliver my soul from the sword, and my
 beloved one from the hand of the dog;" [2193] although there are also
 many other testimonies respecting the soul of Christ when He
 tabernacled in the flesh.

 2.  But the nature of the incarnation will render unnecessary any
 inquiry into the soul of Christ.  For as He truly possessed flesh, so
 also He truly possessed a soul.  It is difficult indeed both to feel
 and to state how that which is called in Scripture the soul of God is
 to be understood; for we acknowledge that nature to be simple, and
 without any intermixture or addition.  In whatever way, however, it is
 to be understood, it seems, meanwhile, to be named the soul of God;
 whereas regarding Christ there is no doubt.  And therefore there seems
 to me no absurdity in either understanding or asserting some such thing
 regarding the holy angels and the other heavenly powers, since that
 definition of soul appears applicable also to them.  For who can
 rationally deny that they are "sensible and moveable?"  But if that
 definition appear to be correct, according to which a soul is said to
 be a substance rationally "sensible and moveable," the same definition
 would seem also to apply to angels.  For what else is in them than
 rational feeling and motion?  Now those beings who are comprehended
 under the same definition have undoubtedly the same substance.  Paul
 indeed intimates that there is a kind of animal-man [2194] who, he
 says, cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God, but declares that
 the doctrine of the Holy Spirit seems to him foolish, and that he
 cannot understand what is to be spiritually discerned.  In another
 passage he says it is sown an animal body, and arises a spiritual body,
 pointing out that in the resurrection of the just there will be nothing
 of an animal nature.  And therefore we inquire whether there happen to
 be any substance which, in respect of its being anima, is imperfect.
 But whether it be imperfect because it falls away from perfection, or
 because it was so created by God, will form the subject of inquiry when
 each individual topic shall begin to be discussed in order.  For if the
 animal man receive not the things of the Spirit of God, and because he
 is animal, is unable to admit the understanding of a better, i.e., of a
 divine nature, it is for this reason perhaps that Paul, wishing to
 teach us more plainly what that is by means of which we are able to
 comprehend those things which are of the Spirit, i.e., spiritual
 things, conjoins and associates with the Holy Spirit an understanding
 [2195] rather than a soul. [2196] For this, I think, he indicates
 when he says, "I will pray with the spirit, I will pray with the
 understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the
 understanding also." [2197] And he does not say that "I will pray
 with the soul," but with the spirit and the understanding.  Nor does he
 say, "I will sing with the soul," but with the spirit and the
 understanding.

 3.  But perhaps this question is asked, If it be the understanding
 which prays and sings with the spirit, and if it be the same which
 receives both perfection and salvation, how is it that Peter says,
 "Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls?"
 [2198] If the soul neither prays nor sings with the spirit, how shall
 it hope for salvation? or when it attains to blessedness, shall it be
 no longer called a soul? [2199] Let us see if perhaps an answer may
 be given in this way, that as the Saviour came to save what was lost,
 that which formerly was said to be lost is not lost when it is saved;
 so also, perhaps, this which is saved is called a soul, and when it has
 been placed in a state of salvation will receive a name from the Word
 that denotes its more perfect condition.  But it appears to some that
 this also may be added, that as the thing which was lost undoubtedly
 existed before it was lost, at which time it was something else than
 destroyed, so also will be the case when it is no longer in a ruined
 condition.  In like manner also, the soul which is said to have
 perished will appear to have been something at one time, when as yet it
 had not perished, and on that account would be termed soul, and being
 again freed from destruction, it may become a second time what it was
 before it perished, and be called a soul.  But from the very
 signification of the name soul which the Greek word conveys, it has
 appeared to a few curious inquirers that a meaning of no small
 importance may be suggested.  For in sacred language God is called a
 fire, as when Scripture says," Our God is a consuming fire." [2200]
 Respecting the substance of the angels also it speaks as follows:  "Who
 maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a burning fire;" [2201]
 and in another place, "The angel of the Lord appeared in a flame of
 fire in the bush." [2202] We have, moreover, received a commandment
 to be "fervent in spirit;" [2203] by which expression undoubtedly the
 Word of God is shown to be hot and fiery.  The prophet Jeremiah also
 hears from Him, who gave him his answers, "Behold, I have given My
 words into thy mouth a fire." [2204] As God, then, is a fire, and the
 angels a flame of fire, and all the saints are fervent in spirit, so,
 on the contrary, those who have fallen away from the love of God are
 undoubtedly said to have cooled in their affection for Him, and to have
 become cold.  For the Lord also says, that, "because iniquity has
 abounded, the love of many will grow cold." [2205] Nay, all things,
 whatever they are, which in holy Scripture are compared with the
 hostile power, the devil is said to be perpetually finding cold; and
 what is found to be colder than he?  In the sea also the dragon is said
 to reign.  For the prophet [2206] intimates that the serpent and
 dragon, which certainly is referred to one of the wicked spirits, is
 also in the sea.  And elsewhere the prophet says, "I will draw out my
 holy sword upon the dragon the flying serpent, upon the dragon the
 crooked serpent, and will slay him." [2207] And again he says:  "Even
 though they hide from my eyes, and descend into the depths of the sea,
 there will I command the serpent, and it shall bite them." [2208] In
 the book of Job also, he is said to be the king of all things in the
 waters. [2209] The prophet [2210] threatens that evils will be
 kindled by the north wind upon all who inhabit the earth.  Now the
 north wind is described in holy Scripture as cold, according to the
 statement in the book of Wisdom, "That cold north wind;" [2211] which
 same thing also must undoubtedly be understood of the devil.  If, then,
 those things which are holy are named fire, and light, and fervent,
 while those which are of an opposite nature are said to be cold; and if
 the love of many is said to wax cold; we have to inquire whether
 perhaps the name soul, which in Greek is termed psuche, be so termed
 from growing cold [2212] out of a better and more divine condition, and
 be thence derived, because it seems to have cooled from that natural
 and divine warmth, and therefore has been placed in its present
 position, and called by its present name.  Finally, see if you can
 easily find a place in holy Scripture where the soul is properly
 mentioned in terms of praise:  it frequently occurs, on the contrary,
 accompanied with expressions of censure, as in the passage, "An evil
 soul ruins him who possesses it;" [2213] and, "The soul which sinneth,
 it shall die." [2214] For after it has been said, "All souls are
 Mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is Mine,"
 [2215] it seemed to follow that He would say, "The soul that doeth
 righteousness, it shall be saved," and "The soul which sinneth, it
 shall die."  But now we see that He has associated with the soul what
 is censurable, and has been silent as to that which was deserving of
 praise.  We have therefore to see if, perchance, as we have said is
 declared by the name itself, it was called psuche, i.e., anima, because
 it has waxed cold from the fervour of just things, [2216] and from
 participation in the divine fire, and yet has not lost the power of
 restoring itself to that condition of fervour in which it was at the
 beginning.  Whence the prophet also appears to point out some such
 state of things by the words, "Return, O my soul, unto thy rest."
 [2217] From all which this appears to be made out, that the
 understanding, falling away from its status and dignity, was made or
 named soul; and that, if repaired and corrected, it returns to the
 condition of the understanding. [2218]

 4.  Now, if this be the case, it seems to me that this very decay and
 falling away of the understanding is not the same in all, but that this
 conversion into a soul is carried to a greater or less degree in
 different instances, and that certain understandings retain something
 even of their former vigour, and others again either nothing or a very
 small amount.  Whence some are found from the very commencement of
 their lives to be of more active intellect, others again of a slower
 habit of mind, and some are born wholly obtuse, and altogether
 incapable of instruction.  Our statement, however, that the
 understanding is converted into a soul, or whatever else seems to have
 such a meaning, the reader must carefully consider and settle for
 himself, as these views are not be regarded as advanced by us in a
 dogmatic manner, but simply as opinions, treated in the style of
 investigation and discussion.  Let the reader take this also into
 consideration, that it is observed with regard to the soul of the
 Saviour, that of those things which are written in the Gospel, some are
 ascribed to it under the name of soul, and others under that of
 spirit.  For when it wishes to indicate any suffering or perturbation
 affecting Him, it indicates it under the name of soul; as when it says,
 "Now is My soul troubled;" [2219] and, "My soul is sorrowful, even unto
 death;" [2220] and, "No man taketh My soul [2221] from Me, but I lay it
 down of Myself." [2222] Into the hands of His Father He commends not
 His soul, but His spirit; and when He says that the flesh is weak, He
 does not say that the soul is willing, but the spirit:  whence it
 appears that the soul is something intermediate between the weak flesh
 and the willing spirit.

 5.  But perhaps some one may meet us with one of those objections which
 we have ourselves warned you of in our statements, and say, "How then
 is there said to be also a soul of God?"  To which we answer as
 follows:  That as with respect to everything corporeal which is spoken
 of God, such as fingers, or hands, or arms, or eyes, or feet, or mouth,
 we say that these are not to be understood as human members, but that
 certain of His powers are indicated by these names of members of the
 body; so also we are to suppose that it is something else which is
 pointed out by this title--soul of God.  And if it is allowable for us
 to venture to say anything more on such a subject, the soul of God may
 perhaps be understood to mean the only-begotten Son of God.  For as the
 soul, when implanted in the body, moves all things in it, and exerts
 its force over everything on which it operates; so also the
 only-begotten Son of God, who is His Word and Wisdom, stretches and
 extends to every power of God, being implanted in it; and perhaps to
 indicate this mystery is God either called or described in Scripture as
 a body.  We must, indeed, take into consideration whether it is not
 perhaps on this account that the soul of God may be understood to mean
 His only-begotten Son, because He Himself came into this world of
 affliction, and descended into this valley of tears, and into this
 place of our humiliation; as He says in the Psalm, "Because Thou hast
 humiliated us in the place of affliction." [2223] Finally, I am aware
 that certain critics, in explaining the words used in the Gospel by the
 Saviour, "My soul is sorrowful, even unto death," have interpreted them
 of the apostles, whom He termed His soul, as being better than the rest
 of His body.  For as the multitude of believers is called His body,
 they say that the apostles, as being better than the rest of the body,
 ought to be understood to mean His soul.

 We have brought forward as we best could these points regarding the
 rational soul, as topics of discussion for our readers, rather than as
 dogmatic and well-defined propositions.  And with respect to the souls
 of animals and other dumb creatures, let that suffice which we have
 stated above in general terms.

 [2180] Anima.

 [2181] Animæ.

 [2182] Animam animantium.

 [2183] Gen. i. 21:  pasan psuchen zoon, Sept.

 [2184] Erasmus remarks, that phantastike may be rendered imaginitiva,
 which is the understanding:  hormetike, impulsiva, which refers to the
 affections (Schnitzer).

 [2185] Animam.

 [2186] Lev. xvii. 14:  he psuche pases sarkos aima autou esti, Sept.

 [2187] Vitalis.

 [2188] Animantia.

 [2189] Gen. i. 24, living creature, animam.

 [2190] Gen. ii. 7, animam viventem.

 [2191] Lev. xvii. 10.  It is clear that in the text which Origen or his
 translator had before him he must have read psuche instead of
 prosopon:  otherwise the quotation would be inappropriate (Schnitzer).

 [2192] Isa. i. 13, 14.

 [2193] Ps. xxii. 19, 20, unicam meam, monogene mou.

 [2194] Animalem.

 [2195] Mens.

 [2196] Anima.

 [2197] 1 Cor. xiv. 15.

 [2198] 1 Pet. i. 9.

 [2199] These words are found in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus, and,
 literally translated, are as follows:  "Whence infinite caution is to
 be employed, lest perchance, after souls have obtained salvation and
 come to the blessed life, they should cease to be souls.  For as our
 Lord and Saviour came to seek and to save what was lost, that it might
 cease to be lost; so the soul which was lost, and for whose salvation
 the Lord came, shall, when it has been saved, cease for a soul.  This
 point in like manner must be examined, whether, as that which has been
 lost was at one time not lost, and a time will come when it will be no
 longer lost; so also at some time a soul may not have been a soul, and
 a time may be when it will by no means continue to be a soul."  A
 portion of the above is also found, in the original Greek, in the
 Emperor Justinian's Letter to Menas, Patriarch of Constantinople.

 [2200] Deut. iv. 24.

 [2201] Ps. civ. 4; cf. Heb. i. 7.

 [2202] Ex. iii. 2.

 [2203] Rom. xii. 11.

 [2204] Cf. Jer. i. 9.  The word "fire" is found neither in the Hebrew
 nor in the Septuagint.

 [2205] Matt. xxiv. 12.

 [2206] Cf. Ezek. xxxii. 2 seqq.

 [2207] Isa. xxvii. 1.

 [2208] Amos ix. 3.

 [2209] Job xli. 34 [LXX.].

 [2210] Jer. i. 14.

 [2211] Ecclus. xliii. 20.

 [2212] psuche from psuchesthai.

 [2213] Ecclus. vi. 4.

 [2214] Ezek. xviii. 4, cf. 20.

 [2215] Ezek. xviii. 4, 19.

 [2216] "By falling away and growing cold from a spiritual life, the
 soul has become what it now is, but is capable also of returning to
 what it was at the beginning, which I think is intimated by the prophet
 in the words, Return, O my soul, unto thy rest,' so as to be wholly
 this."--Epistle of Justinian to Patriarch of Constantinople.

 [2217] Ps. cxvi. 7.

 [2218] "The understanding (Nous) somehow, then, has become a soul, and
 the soul, being restored, becomes an understanding.  The understanding
 falling away, was made a soul, and the soul, again, when furnished with
 virtues, will become an understanding.  For if we examine the case of
 Esau, we may find that he was condemned because of his ancient sins in
 a worse course of life.  And respecting the heavenly bodies we must
 inquire, that not at the time when the world was created did the soul
 of the sun, or whatever else it ought to be called, begin to exist, but
 before that it entered that shining and burning body.  We may hold
 similar opinions regarding the moon and stars, that, for the foregoing
 reasons, they were compelled, unwillingly, to subject themselves to
 vanity on account of the rewards of the future; and to do, not their
 own will, but the will of their Creator, by whom they were arranged
 among their different offices."--Jerome's Epistle to Avitus.  From
 these, as well as other passages, it may be seen how widely Rufinus
 departed in his translation from the original.

 [2219] John xii. 27.

 [2220] Matt. xxvi. 38.

 [2221] Animam.

 [2222] John x. 18.

 [2223] Ps. xliv. 19.

 Chapter IX.--On the World and the Movements of Rational Creatures,
 Whether Good or Bad; And on the Causes of Them.

 1.  But let us now return to the order of our proposed discussion, and
 behold the commencement of creation, so far as the understanding can
 behold the beginning of the creation of God.  In that commencement,
 [2224] then, we are to suppose that God created so great a number of
 rational or intellectual creatures (or by whatever name they are to be
 called), which we have formerly termed understandings, as He foresaw
 would be sufficient.  It is certain that He made them according to some
 definite number, predetermined by Himself:  for it is not to be
 imagined, as some would have it, that creatures have not a limit,
 because where there is no limit there can neither be any comprehension
 nor any limitation.  Now if this were the case, then certainly created
 things could neither be restrained nor administered by God.  For,
 naturally, whatever is infinite will also be incomprehensible.
 Moreover, as Scripture says, "God has arranged all things in number and
 measure;" [2225] and therefore number will be correctly applied to
 rational creatures or understandings, that they may be so numerous as
 to admit of being arranged, governed, and controlled by God.  But
 measure will be appropriately applied to a material body; and this
 measure, we are to believe, was created by God such as He knew would be
 sufficient for the adorning of the world.  These, then, are the things
 which we are to believe were created by God in the beginning, i.e.,
 before all things.  And this, we think, is indicated even in that
 beginning which Moses has introduced in terms somewhat ambiguous, when
 he says, "In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth." [2226]
 For it is certain that the firmament is not spoken of, nor the dry
 land, but that heaven and earth from which this present heaven and
 earth which we now see afterwards borrowed their names.

 2.  But since those rational natures, which we have said above were
 made in the beginning, were created when they did not previously exist,
 in consequence of this very fact of their nonexistence and commencement
 of being, are they necessarily changeable and mutable; since whatever
 power was in their substance was not in it by nature, but was the
 result of the goodness of their Maker.  What they are, therefore, is
 neither their own nor endures for ever, but is bestowed by God.  For it
 did not always exist; and everything which is a gift may also be taken
 away, and disappear.  And a reason for removal will consist in the
 movements of souls not being conducted according to right and
 propriety.  For the Creator gave, as an indulgence to the
 understandings created by Him, the power of free and voluntary action,
 by which the good that was in them might become their own, being
 preserved by the exertion of their own will; but slothfulness, and a
 dislike of labour in preserving what is good, and an aversion to and a
 neglect of better things, furnished the beginning of a departure from
 goodness.  But to depart from good is nothing else than to be made
 bad.  For it is certain that to want goodness is to be wicked.  Whence
 it happens that, in proportion as one falls away from goodness, in the
 same proportion does he become involved in wickedness.  In which
 condition, according to its actions, each understanding, neglecting
 goodness either to a greater or more limited extent, was dragged into
 the opposite of good, which undoubtedly is evil.  From which it appears
 that the Creator of all things admitted certain seeds and causes of
 variety and diversity, that He might create variety and diversity in
 proportion to the diversity of understandings, i.e., of rational
 creatures, which diversity they must be supposed to have conceived from
 that cause which we have mentioned above.  And what we mean by variety
 and diversity is what we now wish to explain.

 3.  Now we term world everything which is above the heavens, or in the
 heavens, or upon the earth, or in those places which are called the
 lower regions, or all places whatever that anywhere exist, together
 with their inhabitants.  This whole, then, is called world.  In which
 world certain beings are said to be super-celestial, i.e., placed in
 happier abodes, and clothed with heavenly and resplendent bodies; and
 among these many distinctions are shown to exist, the apostle, e.g.,
 saying, "That one is the glory of the sun, another the glory of the
 moon, another the glory of the stars; for one star differeth from
 another star in glory." [2227] Certain beings are called earthly, and
 among them, i.e., among men, there is no small difference; for some of
 them are Barbarians, others Greeks; and of the Barbarians some are
 savage and fierce, and others of a milder disposition.  And certain of
 them live under laws that have been thoroughly approved; others, again,
 under laws of a more common or severe kind; [2228] while some, again,
 possess customs of an inhuman and savage character, rather than laws.
 And certain of them, from the hour of their birth, are reduced to
 humiliation and subjection, and brought up as slaves, being placed
 under the dominion either of masters, or princes, or tyrants.  Others,
 again, are brought up in a manner more consonant with freedom and
 reason:  some with sound bodies, some with bodies diseased from their
 early years; some defective in vision, others in hearing and speech;
 some born in that condition, others deprived of the use of their senses
 immediately after birth, or at least undergoing such misfortune on
 reaching manhood.  And why should I repeat and enumerate all the
 horrors of human misery, from which some have been free, and in which
 others have been involved, when each one can weigh and consider them
 for himself?  There are also certain invisible powers to which earthly
 things have been entrusted for administration; and amongst them no
 small difference must be believed to exist, as is also found to be the
 case among men.  The Apostle Paul indeed intimates that there are
 certain lower powers, [2229] and that among them, in like manner, must
 undoubtedly be sought a ground of diversity.  Regarding dumb animals,
 and birds, and those creatures which live in the waters, it seems
 superfluous to require; since it is certain that these ought to be
 regarded not as of primary, but of subordinate rank.

 4.  Seeing, then, that all things which have been created are said to
 have been made through Christ, and in Christ, as the Apostle Paul most
 clearly indicates, when he says, "For in Him and by Him were all things
 created, whether things in heaven or things on earth, visible and
 invisible, whether they be thrones, or powers, or principalities, or
 dominions; all things were created by Him, and in Him;" [2230] and as
 in his Gospel John indicates the same thing, saying, "In the beginning
 was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God:  the
 same was in the beginning with God:  all things were made by Him; and
 without Him was not anything made;" [2231] and as in the Psalm also it
 is written, "In wisdom hast Thou made them all;" [2232] --seeing, then,
 Christ is, as it were, the Word and Wisdom, and so also the
 Righteousness, it will undoubtedly follow that those things which were
 created in the Word and Wisdom are said to be created also in that
 righteousness which is Christ; that in created things there may appear
 to be nothing unrighteous or accidental, but that all things may be
 shown to be in conformity with the law of equity and righteousness.
 How, then, so great a variety of things, and so great a diversity, can
 be understood to be altogether just and righteous, I am sure no human
 power or language can explain, unless as prostrate suppliants we pray
 to the Word, and Wisdom, and Righteousness Himself, who is the
 only-begotten Son of God, and who, pouring Himself by His graces into
 our senses, may deign to illuminate what is dark, to lay open what is
 concealed, and to reveal what is secret; if, indeed, we should be found
 either to seek, or ask, or knock so worthily as to deserve to receive
 when we ask, or to find when we seek, or to have it opened to us when
 we knock.  Not relying, then, on our own powers, but on the help of
 that Wisdom which made all things, and of that Righteousness which we
 believe to be in all His creatures, although we are in the meantime
 unable to declare it, yet, trusting in His mercy, we shall endeavour to
 examine and inquire how that great variety and diversity in the world
 may appear to be consistent with all righteousness and reason.  I mean,
 of course, merely reason in general; for it would be a mark of
 ignorance either to seek, or of folly to give, a special reason for
 each individual case.

 5.  Now, when we say that this world was established in the variety in
 which we have above explained that it was created by God, and when we
 say that this God is good, and righteous, and most just, there are
 numerous individuals, especially those who, coming from the school of
 Marcion, and Valentinus, and Basilides, have heard that there are souls
 of different natures, who object to us, that it cannot consist with the
 justice of God in creating the world to assign to some of His creatures
 an abode in the heavens, and not only to give such a better habitation,
 but also to grant them a higher and more honourable position; to favour
 others with the grant of principalities; to bestow powers upon some,
 dominions on others; to confer upon some the most honourable seats in
 the celestial tribunals; to enable some to shine with more resplendent
 glory, and to glitter with a starry splendour; to give to some the
 glory of the sun, to others the glory of the moon, to others the glory
 of the stars; to cause one star to differ from another star in glory.
 And, to speak once for all, and briefly, if the Creator God wants
 neither the will to undertake nor the power to complete a good and
 perfect work, what reason can there be that, in the creation of
 rational natures, i.e., of beings of whose existence He Himself is the
 cause, He should make some of higher rank, and others of second, or
 third, or of many lower and inferior degrees?  In the next place, they
 object to us, with regard to terrestrial beings, that a happier lot by
 birth is the case with some rather than with others; as one man, e.g.,
 is begotten of Abraham, and born of the promise; another, too, of Isaac
 and Rebekah, and who, while still in the womb, supplants his brother,
 and is said to be loved by God before he is born.  Nay, this very
 circumstance,--especially that one man is born among the Hebrews, with
 whom he finds instruction in the divine law; another among the Greeks,
 themselves also wise, and men of no small learning; and then another
 amongst the Ethiopians, who are accustomed to feed on human flesh; or
 amongst the Scythians, with whom parricide is an act sanctioned by law;
 or amongst the people of Taurus, where strangers are offered in
 sacrifice,--is a ground of strong objection.  Their argument
 accordingly is this:  If there be this great diversity of
 circumstances, and this diverse and varying condition by birth, in
 which the faculty of free-will has no scope (for no one chooses for
 himself either where, or with whom, or in what condition he is born);
 if, then, this is not caused by the difference in the nature of souls,
 i.e., that a soul of an evil nature is destined for a wicked nation,
 and a good soul for a righteous nation, what other conclusion remains
 than that these things must be supposed to be regulated by accident and
 chance?  And if that be admitted, then it will be no longer believed
 that the world was made by God, or administered by His providence; and
 as a consequence, a judgment of God upon the deeds of each individual
 will appear a thing not to be looked for.  In which matter, indeed,
 what is clearly the truth of things is the privilege of Him alone to
 know who searches all things, even the deep things of God.

 6.  We, however, although but men, not to nourish the insolence of the
 heretics by our silence, will return to their objections such answers
 as occur to us, so far as our abilities enable us.  We have frequently
 shown, by those declarations which we were able to produce from the
 holy Scriptures, that God, the Creator of all things, is good, and
 just, and all-powerful.  When He in the beginning created those beings
 which He desired to create, i.e., rational natures, He had no other
 reason for creating them than on account of Himself, i.e., His own
 goodness.  As He Himself, then, was the cause of the existence of those
 things which were to be created, in whom there was neither any
 variation nor change, nor want of power, He created all whom He made
 equal and alike, because there was in Himself no reason for producing
 variety and diversity.  But since those rational creatures themselves,
 as we have frequently shown, and will yet show in the proper place,
 were endowed with the power of free-will, this freedom of will incited
 each one either to progress by imitation of God, or reduced him to
 failure through negligence.  And this, as we have already stated, is
 the cause of the diversity among rational creatures, deriving its
 origin not from the will or judgment of the Creator, but from the
 freedom of the individual will.  Now God, who deemed it just to arrange
 His creatures according to their merit, brought down these different
 understandings into the harmony of one world, that He might adorn, as
 it were, one dwelling, in which there ought to be not only vessels of
 gold and silver, but also of wood and clay (and some indeed to honour,
 and others to dishonour), with those different vessels, or souls, or
 understandings.  And these are the causes, in my opinion, why that
 world presents the aspect of diversity, while Divine Providence
 continues to regulate each individual according to the variety of his
 movements, or of his feelings and purpose.  On which account the
 Creator will neither appear to be unjust in distributing (for the
 causes already mentioned) to every one according to his merits; nor
 will the happiness or unhappiness of each one's birth, or whatever be
 the condition that falls to his lot, be deemed accidental; nor will
 different creators, or souls of different natures, be believed to
 exist.

 7.  But even holy Scripture does not appear to me to be altogether
 silent on the nature of this secret, as when the Apostle Paul, in
 discussing the case of Jacob and Esau, says:  "For the children being
 not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of
 God according to election might stand, not of works, but of Him who
 calleth, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger, as it is
 written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." [2233] And after
 that, he answers himself, and says, "What shall we say then?  Is there
 unrighteousness with God?"  And that he might furnish us with an
 opportunity of inquiring into these matters, and of ascertaining how
 these things do not happen without a reason, he answers himself, and
 says, "God forbid." [2234] For the same question, as it seems to me,
 which is raised concerning Jacob and Esau, may be raised regarding all
 celestial and terrestrial creatures, and even those of the lower world
 as well.  And in like manner it seems to me, that as he there says,
 "The children being not yet born, neither having done any good or
 evil," so it might also be said of all other things, "When they were
 not yet" created, "neither had yet done any good or evil, that the
 decree of God according to election may stand," that (as certain think)
 some things on the one hand were created heavenly, some on the other
 earthly, and others, again, beneath the earth, "not of works" (as they
 think), "but of Him who calleth," what shall we say then, if these
 things are so?  "Is there unrighteousness with God?  God forbid."  As,
 therefore, when the Scriptures are carefully examined regarding Jacob
 and Esau, it is not found to be unrighteousness with God that it should
 be said, before they were born, or had done anything in this life, "the
 elder shall serve the younger;" and as it is found not to be
 unrighteousness that even in the womb Jacob supplanted his brother, if
 we feel that he was worthily beloved by God, according to the deserts
 of his previous life, so as to deserve to be preferred before his
 brother; so also is it with regard to heavenly creatures, if we notice
 that diversity was not the original condition of the creature, but
 that, owing to causes that have previously existed, a different office
 is prepared by the Creator for each one in proportion to the degree of
 his merit, on this ground, indeed, that each one, in respect of having
 been created by God an understanding, or a rational spirit, has,
 according to the movements of his mind and the feelings of his soul,
 gained for himself a greater or less amount of merit, and has become
 either an object of love to God, or else one of dislike to Him; while,
 nevertheless, some of those who are possessed of greater merit are
 ordained to suffer with others for the adorning of the state of the
 world, and for the discharge of duty to creatures of a lower grade, in
 order that by this means they themselves may be participators in the
 endurance of the Creator, according to the words of the apostle:  "For
 the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason
 of him who hath subjected the same in hope." [2235] Keeping in view,
 then, the sentiment expressed by the apostle, when, speaking of the
 birth of Esau and Jacob, he says, "Is there unrighteousness with God?
 God forbid," I think it right that this same sentiment should be
 carefully applied to the case of all other creatures, because, as we
 formerly remarked, the righteousness of the Creator ought to appear in
 everything.  And this, it appears to me, will be seen more clearly at
 last, if each one, whether of celestial or terrestrial or infernal
 beings, be said to have the causes of his diversity in himself, and
 antecedent to his bodily birth.  For all things were created by the
 Word of God, and by His Wisdom, and were set in order by His Justice.
 And by the grace of His compassion He provides for all men, and
 encourages all to the use of whatever remedies may lead to their cure,
 and incites them to salvation.

 8.  As, then, there is no doubt that at the day of judgment the good
 will be separated from the bad, and the just from the unjust, and all
 by the sentence of God will be distributed according to their deserts
 throughout those places of which they are worthy, so I am of opinion
 some such state of things was formerly the case, as, God willing, we
 shall show in what follows.  For God must be believed to do and order
 all things and at all times according to His judgment.  For the words
 which the apostle uses when he says, "In a great house there are not
 only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth, and
 some to honour and some to dishonour;" [2236] and those which he adds,
 saying, "If a man purge himself, he will be a vessel unto honour,
 sanctified and meet for the Master's use, unto every good work," [2237]
 undoubtedly point out this, that he who shall purge himself when he is
 in this life, will be prepared for every good work in that which is to
 come; while he who does not purge himself will be, according to the
 amount of his impurity, a vessel unto dishonour, i.e., unworthy.  It is
 therefore possible to understand that there have been also formerly
 rational vessels, whether purged or not, i.e., which either purged
 themselves or did not do so, and that consequently every vessel,
 according to the measure of its purity or impurity, received a place,
 or region, or condition by birth, or an office to discharge, in this
 world.  All of which, down to the humblest, God providing for and
 distinguishing by the power of His wisdom, arranges all things by His
 controlling judgment, according to a most impartial retribution, so far
 as each one ought to be assisted or cared for in conformity with his
 deserts.  In which certainly every principle of equity is shown, while
 the inequality of circumstances preserves the justice of a retribution
 according to merit.  But the grounds of the merits in each individual
 case are only recognised truly and clearly by God Himself, along with
 His only-begotten Word, and His Wisdom, and the Holy Spirit.

 [2224] The original of this passage is found in Justinian's Epistle to
 Menas, Patriarch of Constantinople, apud finem.  "In that beginning
 which is cognisable by the understanding, God, by His own will, caused
 to exist as great a number of intelligent beings as was sufficient; for
 we must say that the power of God is finite, and not, under pretence of
 praising Him, take away His limitation.  For if the divine power be
 infinite, it must of necessity be unable to understand even itself,
 since that which is naturally illimitable is incapable of being
 comprehended.  He made things therefore so great as to be able to
 apprehend and keep them under His power, and control them by His
 providence; so also He prepared matter of such a size (tosauten hulen)
 as He had the power to ornament."

 [2225] Wisdom xi. 20:  "Thou hast ordered all things in measure, and
 number, and weight."

 [2226] Gen. i. 1.

 [2227] 1 Cor. xv. 41.

 [2228] Vilioribus et asperioribus.

 [2229] Inferna.

 [2230] Col. i. 16.

 [2231] John i. 1, 2.

 [2232] Ps. civ. 24.

 [2233] Rom. ix. 11, 12.

 [2234] The text runs, "Respondet sibi ipse, et ait," on which Ruæus
 remarks that the sentence is incomplete, and that "absit" probably
 should be supplied.  This conjecture has been adopted in the
 translation.

 [2235] Rom. viii. 20, 21.

 [2236] 2 Tim. ii. 20.

 [2237] 2 Tim. ii. 21.

 Chapter X.--On the Resurrection, and the Judgment, the Fire of Hell,
 and Punishments.

 1.  But since the discourse has reminded us of the subjects of a future
 judgment and of retribution, and of the punishments of sinners,
 according to the threatenings of holy Scripture and the contents of the
 Church's teaching--viz., that when the time of judgment comes,
 everlasting fire, and outer darkness, and a prison, and a furnace, and
 other punishments of like nature, have been prepared for sinners--let
 us see what our opinions on these points ought to be. [2238] But that
 these subjects may be arrived at in proper order, it seems to me that
 we ought first to consider the nature of the resurrection, that we may
 know what that (body) is which shall come either to punishment, or to
 rest, or to happiness; which question in other treatises which we have
 composed regarding the resurrection we have discussed at greater
 length, and have shown what our opinions were regarding it.  But now,
 also, for the sake of logical order in our treatise, there will be no
 absurdity in restating a few points from such works, especially since
 some take offence at the creed of the Church, as if our belief in the
 resurrection were foolish, and altogether devoid of sense; and these
 are principally heretics, who, I think, are to be answered in the
 following manner.  If they also admit that there is a resurrection of
 the dead, let them answer us this, What is that which died?  Was it not
 a body?  It is of the body, then, that there will be a resurrection.
 Let them next tell us if they think that we are to make use of bodies
 or not.  I think that when the Apostle Paul says, that "it is sown a
 natural body, it will arise a spiritual body," [2239] they cannot deny
 that it is a body which arises, or that in the resurrection we are to
 make use of bodies.  What then?  If it is certain that we are to make
 use of bodies, and if the bodies which have fallen are declared to rise
 again (for only that which before has fallen can be properly said to
 rise again), it can be a matter of doubt to no one that they rise
 again, in order that we may be clothed with them a second time at the
 resurrection.  The one thing is closely connected with the other.  For
 if bodies rise again, they undoubtedly rise to be coverings for us; and
 if it is necessary for us to be invested with bodies, as it is
 certainly necessary, we ought to be invested with no other than our
 own.  But if it is true that these rise again, and that they arise
 "spiritual" bodies, there can be no doubt that they are said to rise
 from the dead, after casting away corruption and laying aside
 mortality; otherwise it will appear vain and superfluous for any one to
 arise from the dead in order to die a second time.  And this, finally,
 may be more distinctly comprehended thus, if one carefully consider
 what are the qualities of an animal body, which, when sown into the
 earth, recovers the qualities of a spiritual body.  For it is out of
 the animal body that the very power and grace of the resurrection educe
 the spiritual body, when it transmutes it from a condition of indignity
 to one of glory.

 2.  Since the heretics, however, think themselves persons of great
 learning and wisdom, we shall ask them if every body has a form of some
 kind, i.e., is fashioned according to some shape.  And if they shall
 say that a body is that which is fashioned according to no shape, they
 will show themselves to be the most ignorant and foolish of mankind.
 For no one will deny this, save him who is altogether without any
 learning.  But if, as a matter of course, they say that every body is
 certainly fashioned according to some definite shape, we shall ask them
 if they can point out and describe to us the shape of a spiritual body;
 a thing which they can by no means do.  We shall ask them, moreover,
 about the differences of those who rise again.  How will they show that
 statement to be true, that there is "one flesh of birds, another of
 fishes; bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial; that the glory of the
 celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial another; that one is
 the glory of the sun, another the glory of the moon, another the glory
 of the stars; that one star differeth from another star in glory; and
 that so is the resurrection of the dead?" [2240] According to that
 gradation, then, which exists among heavenly bodies, let them show to
 us the differences in the glory of those who rise again; and if they
 have endeavoured by any means to devise a principle that may be in
 accordance with the differences in heavenly bodies, we shall ask them
 to assign the differences in the resurrection by a comparison of
 earthly bodies.  Our understanding of the passage indeed is, that the
 apostle, wishing to describe the great difference among those who rise
 again in glory, i.e., of the saints, borrowed a comparison from the
 heavenly bodies, saying, "One is the glory of the sun, another the
 glory of the moon, another the glory of the stars."  And wishing again
 to teach us the differences among those who shall come to the
 resurrection, without having purged themselves in this life, i.e.,
 sinners, he borrowed an illustration from earthly things, saying,
 "There is one flesh of birds, another of fishes."  For heavenly things
 are worthily compared to the saints, and earthly things to sinners.
 These statements are made in reply to those who deny the resurrection
 of the dead, i.e., the resurrection of bodies.

 3.  We now turn our attention to some of our own (believers), who,
 either from feebleness of intellect or want of proper instruction,
 adopt a very low and abject view of the resurrection of the body.  We
 ask these persons in what manner they understand that an animal body is
 to be changed by the grace of the resurrection, and to become a
 spiritual one; and how that which is sown in weakness will arise in
 power; how that which is planted in dishonour will arise in glory; and
 that which was sown in corruption, will be changed to a state of
 incorruption.  Because if they believe the apostle, that a body which
 arises in glory, and power, and incorruptibility, has already become
 spiritual, it appears absurd and contrary to his meaning to say that it
 can again be entangled with the passions of flesh and blood, seeing the
 apostle manifestly declares that "flesh and blood shall not inherit the
 kingdom of God, nor shall corruption inherit incorruption."  But how do
 they understand the declaration of the apostle, "We shall all be
 changed?"  This transformation certainly is to be looked for, according
 to the order which we have taught above; and in it, undoubtedly, it
 becomes us to hope for something worthy of divine grace; and this we
 believe will take place in the order in which the apostle describes the
 sowing in the ground of a "bare grain of corn, or of any other fruit,"
 to which "God gives a body as it pleases Him," as soon as the grain of
 corn is dead.  For in the same way also our bodies are to be supposed
 to fall into the earth like a grain; and (that germ being implanted in
 them which contains the bodily substance) although the bodies die, and
 become corrupted, and are scattered abroad, yet by the word of God,
 that very germ which is always safe in the substance of the body,
 raises them from the earth, and restores and repairs them, as the power
 which is in the grain of wheat, after its corruption and death, repairs
 and restores the grain into a body having stalk and ear.  And so also
 to those who shall deserve to obtain an inheritance in the kingdom of
 heaven, that germ of the body's restoration, which we have before
 mentioned, by God's command restores out of the earthly and animal body
 a spiritual one, capable of inhabiting the heavens; while to each one
 of those who may be of inferior merit, or of more abject condition, or
 even the lowest in the scale, and altogether thrust aside, there is yet
 given, in proportion to the dignity of his life and soul, a glory and
 dignity of body,--nevertheless in such a way, that even the body which
 rises again of those who are to be destined to everlasting fire or to
 severe punishments, is by the very change of the resurrection so
 incorruptible, that it cannot be corrupted and dissolved even by severe
 punishments.  If, then, such be the qualities of that body which will
 arise from the dead, let us now see what is the meaning of the
 threatening of eternal fire.

 4.  We find in the prophet Isaiah, that the fire with which each one is
 punished is described as his own; for he says, "Walk in the light of
 your own fire, and in the flame which ye have kindled." [2241] By
 these words it seems to be indicated that every sinner kindles for
 himself the flame of his own fire, and is not plunged into some fire
 which has been already kindled by another, or was in existence before
 himself.  Of this fire the fuel and food are our sins, which are called
 by the Apostle Paul "wood, and hay, and stubble." [2242] And I think
 that, as abundance of food, and provisions of a contrary kind and
 amount, breed fevers in the body, and fevers, too, of different sorts
 and duration, according to the proportion in which the collected poison
 [2243] supplies material and fuel for disease (the quality of this
 material, gathered together from different poisons, proving the causes
 either of a more acute or more lingering disease); so, when the soul
 has gathered together a multitude of evil works, and an abundance of
 sins against itself, at a suitable time all that assembly of evils
 boils up to punishment, and is set on fire to chastisements; when the
 mind itself, or conscience, receiving by divine power into the memory
 all those things of which it had stamped on itself certain signs and
 forms at the moment of sinning, will see a kind of history, as it were,
 of all the foul, and shameful, and unholy deeds which it has done,
 exposed before its eyes:  then is the conscience itself harassed, and,
 pierced by its own goads, becomes an accuser and a witness against
 itself.  And this, I think, was the opinion of the Apostle Paul
 himself, when he said, "Their thoughts mutually accusing or excusing
 them in the day when God will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
 according to my Gospel." [2244] From which it is understood that
 around the substance of the soul certain tortures are produced by the
 hurtful affections of sins themselves.

 5.  And that the understanding of this matter may not appear very
 difficult, we may draw some considerations from the evil effects of
 those passions which are wont to befall some souls, as when a soul is
 consumed by the fire of love, or wasted away by zeal or envy, or when
 the passion of anger is kindled, or one is consumed by the greatness of
 his madness or his sorrow; on which occasions some, finding the excess
 of these evils unbearable, have deemed it more tolerable to submit to
 death than to endure perpetually torture of such a kind.  You will ask
 indeed whether, in the case of those who have been entangled in the
 evils arising from those vices above enumerated, and who, while
 existing in this life, have been unable to procure any amelioration for
 themselves, and have in this condition departed from the world, it be
 sufficient in the way of punishment that they be tortured by the
 remaining in them of these hurtful affections, i.e., of the anger, or
 of the fury, or of the madness, or of the sorrow, whose fatal poison
 was in this life lessened by no healing medicine; or whether, these
 affections being changed, they will be subjected to the pains of a
 general punishment.  Now I am of opinion that another species of
 punishment may be understood to exist; because, as we feel that when
 the limbs of the body are loosened and torn away from their mutual
 supports, there is produced pain of a most excruciating kind, so, when
 the soul shall be found to be beyond the order, and connection, and
 harmony in which it was created by God for the purposes of good and
 useful action and observation, and not to harmonize with itself in the
 connection of its rational movements, it must be deemed to bear the
 chastisement and torture of its own dissension, and to feel the
 punishments of its own disordered condition.  And when this dissolution
 and rending asunder of soul shall have been tested by the application
 of fire, a solidification undoubtedly into a firmer structure will take
 place, and a restoration be effected.

 6.  There are also many other things which escape our notice, and are
 known to Him alone who is the physician of our souls.  For if, on
 account of those bad effects which we bring upon ourselves by eating
 and drinking, we deem it necessary for the health of the body to make
 use of some unpleasant and painful drug, sometimes even, if the nature
 of the disease demand, requiring the severe process of the amputating
 knife; and if the virulence of the disease shall transcend even these
 remedies, the evil has at last to be burned out by fire; how much more
 is it to be understood that God our Physician, desiring to remove the
 defects of our souls, which they had contracted from their different
 sins and crimes, should employ penal measures of this sort, and should
 apply even, in addition, the punishment of fire to those who have lost
 their soundness of mind!  Pictures of this method of procedure are
 found also in the holy Scriptures.  In the book of Deuteronomy, the
 divine word threatens sinners with the punishments of fevers, and
 colds, and jaundice, [2245] and with the pains of feebleness of vision,
 and alienation of mind and paralysis, and blindness, and weakness of
 the reins.  If any one, then, at his leisure gather together out of the
 whole of Scripture all the enumerations of diseases which in the
 threatenings addressed to sinners are called by the names of bodily
 maladies, he will find that either the vices of souls, or their
 punishments, are figuratively indicated by them.  To understand now,
 that in the same way in which physicians apply remedies to the sick, in
 order that by careful treatment they may recover their health, God so
 deals towards those who have lapsed and fallen into sin, is proved by
 this, that the cup of God's fury is ordered, through the agency of the
 prophet Jeremiah, [2246] to be offered to all nations, that they may
 drink it, and be in a state of madness, and vomit it forth.  In doing
 which, He threatens them, saying, That if any one refuse to drink, he
 shall not be cleansed. [2247] By which certainly it is understood
 that the fury of God's vengeance is profitable for the purgation of
 souls.  That the punishment, also, which is said to be applied by fire,
 is understood to be applied with the object of healing, is taught by
 Isaiah, who speaks thus of Israel:  "The Lord will wash away the filth
 of the sons or daughters of Zion, and shall purge away the blood from
 the midst of them by the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of
 burning." [2248] Of the Chaldeans he thus speaks:  "Thou hast the
 coals of fire; sit upon them:  they will be to thee a help." [2249]
 And in other passages he says, "The Lord will sanctify in a burning
 fire" [2250] and in the prophecies of Malachi he says, "The Lord
 sitting will blow, and purify, and will pour forth the cleansed sons of
 Judah." [2251]

 7.  But that fate also which is mentioned in the Gospels as overtaking
 unfaithful stewards who, it is said, are to be divided, and a portion
 of them placed along with unbelievers, as if that portion which is not
 their own were to be sent elsewhere, undoubtedly indicates some kind of
 punishment on those whose spirit, as it seems to me, is shown to be
 separated from the soul.  For if this Spirit is of divine nature, i.e.,
 is understood to be a Holy Spirit, we shall understand this to be said
 of the gift of the Holy Spirit:  that when, whether by baptism, or by
 the grace of the Spirit, the word of wisdom, or the word of knowledge,
 or of any other gift, has been bestowed upon a man, and not rightly
 administered, i.e., either buried in the earth or tied up in a napkin,
 the gift of the Spirit will certainly be withdrawn from his soul, and
 the other portion which remains, that is, the substance of the soul,
 will be assigned its place with unbelievers, being divided and
 separated from that Spirit with whom, by joining itself to the Lord, it
 ought to have been one spirit.  Now, if this is not to be understood of
 the Spirit of God, but of the nature of the soul itself, that will be
 called its better part which was made in the image and likeness of God;
 whereas the other part, that which afterwards, through its fall by the
 exercise of free-will, was assumed contrary to the nature of its
 original condition of purity,--this part, as being the friend and
 beloved of matter, is punished with the fate of unbelievers.  There is
 also a third sense in which that separation may be understood, this
 viz., that as each believer, although the humblest in the Church, is
 said to be attended by an angel, who is declared by the Saviour always
 to behold the face of God the Father, and as this angel was certainly
 one with the object of his guardianship; so, if the latter is rendered
 unworthy by his want of obedience, the angel of God is said to be taken
 from him, and then that part of him--the part, viz., which belongs to
 his human nature--being rent away from the divine part, is assigned a
 place along with unbelievers, because it has not faithfully observed
 the admonitions of the angel allotted it by God.

 8.  But the outer darkness, in my judgment, is to be understood not so
 much of some dark atmosphere without any light, as of those persons
 who, being plunged in the darkness of profound ignorance, have been
 placed beyond the reach of any light of the understanding.  We must
 see, also, lest this perhaps should be the meaning of the expression,
 that as the saints will receive those bodies in which they have lived
 in holiness and purity in the habitations of this life, bright and
 glorious after the resurrection, so the wicked also, who in this life
 have loved the darkness of error and the night of ignorance, may be
 clothed with dark and black bodies after the resurrection, that the
 very mist of ignorance which had in this life taken possession of their
 minds within them, may appear in the future as the external covering of
 the body.  Similar is the view to be entertained regarding the prison.
 Let these remarks, which have been made as brief as possible, that the
 order of our discourse in the meantime might be preserved, suffice for
 the present occasion.

 [2238] [Elucidation I.]

 [2239] 1 Cor. xv. 44: natural, animale (psuchikon).

 [2240] 1 Cor. xv. 39-42.

 [2241] Isa. l. 11.

 [2242] 1 Cor. iii. 12.

 [2243] Intemperies.

 [2244] Rom. ii. 15, 16.

 [2245] Aurigine [aurugine].  Deut. xxviii.

 [2246] Cf. Jer. xxv. 15, 16.

 [2247] Cf. Jer. xxv. 28, 29.

 [2248] Isa. iv. 4.

 [2249] Isa. xlvii. 14, 15; vid. note, chap. v. § 3 [p. 280, supra.  S].

 [2250] Isa. x. 17, cf. lxvi. 16.

 [2251] Cf. Mal. iii. 3.

 Chapter XI.--On Counter Promises. [2252]

 1.  Let us now briefly see what views we are to form regarding
 promises.  It is certain that there is no living thing which can be
 altogether inactive and immoveable, but delights in motion of every
 kind, and in perpetual activity and volition; and this nature, I think
 it evident, is in all living things.  Much more, then, must a rational
 animal, i.e., the nature of man, be in perpetual movement and
 activity.  If, indeed, he is forgetful of himself, and ignorant of what
 becomes him, all his efforts are directed to serve the uses of the
 body, and in all his movements he is occupied with his own pleasures
 and bodily lusts; but if he be one who studies to care or provide for
 the general good, then, either by consulting for the benefit of the
 state or by obeying the magistrates, he exerts himself for that,
 whatever it is, which may seem certainly to promote the public
 advantage.  And if now any one be of such a nature as to understand
 that there is something better than those things which seem to be
 corporeal, and so bestow his labour upon wisdom and science, then he
 will undoubtedly direct all his attention towards pursuits of that
 kind, that he may, by inquiring into the truth, ascertain the causes
 and reason of things.  As therefore, in this life, one man deems it the
 highest good to enjoy bodily pleasures, another to consult for the
 benefit of the community, a third to devote attention to study and
 learning; so let us inquire whether in that life which is the true one
 (which is said to be hidden with Christ in God, i.e., in that eternal
 life), there will be for us some such order and condition of existence.

 2.  Certain persons, then, refusing the labour of thinking, and
 adopting a superficial view of the letter of the law, and yielding
 rather in some measure to the indulgence of their own desires and
 lusts, being disciples of the letter alone, are of opinion that the
 fulfilment of the promises of the future are to be looked for in bodily
 pleasure and luxury; and therefore they especially desire to have
 again, after the resurrection, such bodily structures [2253] as may
 never be without the power of eating, and drinking, and performing all
 the functions of flesh and blood, not following the opinion of the
 Apostle Paul regarding the resurrection of a spiritual body.  And
 consequently they say, that after the resurrection there will be
 marriages, and the begetting of children, imagining to themselves that
 the earthly city of Jerusalem is to be rebuilt, its foundations laid in
 precious stones, and its walls constructed of jasper, and its
 battlements of crystal; that it is to have a wall composed of many
 precious stones, as jasper, and sapphire, and chalcedony, and emerald,
 and sardonyx, and onyx, and chrysolite, and chrysoprase, and jacinth,
 and amethyst.  Moreover, they think that the natives of other countries
 are to be given them as the ministers of their pleasures, whom they are
 to employ either as tillers of the field or builders of walls, and by
 whom their ruined and fallen city is again to be raised up; and they
 think that they are to receive the wealth of the nations to live on,
 and that they will have control over their riches; that even the camels
 of Midian and Kedar will come, and bring to them gold, and incense, and
 precious stones.  And these views they think to establish on the
 authority of the prophets by those promises which are written regarding
 Jerusalem; and by those passages also where it is said, that they who
 serve the Lord shall eat and drink, but that sinners shall hunger and
 thirst; that the righteous shall be joyful, but that sorrow shall
 possess the wicked.  And from the New Testament also they quote the
 saying of the Saviour, in which He makes a promise to His disciples
 concerning the joy of wine, saying, "Henceforth I shall not drink of
 this cup, until I drink it with you new in My Father's kingdom." [2254]
 They add, moreover, that declaration, in which the Saviour calls
 those blessed who now hunger and thirst, [2255] promising them that
 they shall be satisfied; and many other scriptural illustrations are
 adduced by them, the meaning of which they do not perceive is to be
 taken figuratively.  Then, again, agreeably to the form of things in
 this life, and according to the gradations of the dignities or ranks in
 this world, or the greatness of their powers, they think they are to be
 kings and princes, like those earthly monarchs who now exist; chiefly,
 as it appears, on account of that expression in the Gospel:  "Have thou
 power over five cities." [2256] And to speak shortly, according to
 the manner of things in this life in all similar matters, do they
 desire the fulfilment of all things looked for in the promises, viz.,
 that what now is should exist again.  Such are the views of those who,
 while believing in Christ, understand the divine Scriptures in a sort
 of Jewish sense, drawing from them nothing worthy of the divine
 promises.

 3.  Those, however, who receive the representations of Scripture
 according to the understanding of the apostles, entertain the hope that
 the saints will eat indeed, but that it will be the bread of life,
 which may nourish the soul with the food of truth and wisdom, and
 enlighten the mind, and cause it to drink from the cup of divine
 wisdom, according to the declaration of holy Scripture:  "Wisdom has
 prepared her table, she has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine
 in her cup, and she cries with a loud voice, Come to me, eat the bread
 which I have prepared for you, and drink the wine which I have
 mingled." [2257] By this food of wisdom, the understanding, being
 nourished to an entire and perfect condition like that in which man was
 made at the beginning, is restored to the image and likeness of God; so
 that, although an individual may depart from this life less perfectly
 instructed, but who has done works that are approved of, [2258] he will
 be capable of receiving instruction in that Jerusalem, the city of the
 saints, i.e., he will be educated and moulded, and made a living stone,
 a stone elect and precious, because he has undergone with firmness and
 constancy the struggles of life and the trials of piety; and will there
 come to a truer and clearer knowledge of that which here has been
 already predicted, viz., that "man shall not live by bread alone, but
 by every word which proceedeth from the mouth of God." [2259] And
 they also are to be understood to be the princes and rulers who both
 govern those of lower rank, and instruct them, and teach them, and
 train them to divine things.

 4.  But if these views should not appear to fill the minds of those who
 hope for such results with a becoming desire, let us go back a little,
 and, irrespective of the natural and innate longing of the mind for the
 thing itself, let us make inquiry so that we may be able at last to
 describe, as it were, the very forms of the bread of life, and the
 quality of that wine, and the peculiar nature of the principalities,
 all in conformity with the spiritual view of things. [2260] Now, as
 in those arts which are usually performed by means of manual labour,
 the reason why a thing is done, or why it is of a special quality, or
 for a special purpose, is an object of investigation to the mind,
 [2261] while the actual work itself is unfolded to view by the agency
 of the hands; so, in those works of God which were created by Him, it
 is to be observed that the reason and understanding of those things
 which we see done by Him remains undisclosed.  And as, when our eye
 beholds the products of an artist's labour, the mind, immediately on
 perceiving anything of unusual artistic excellence, burns to know of
 what nature it is, or how it was formed, or to what purposes it was
 fashioned; so, in a much greater degree, and in one that is beyond all
 comparison, does the mind burn with an inexpressible desire to know the
 reason of those things which we see done by God.  This desire, this
 longing, we believe to be unquestionably implanted within us by God;
 and as the eye naturally seeks the light and vision, and our body
 naturally desires food and drink, so our mind is possessed with a
 becoming and natural desire to become acquainted with the truth of God
 and the causes of things.  Now we have received this desire from God,
 not in order that it should never be gratified or be capable of
 gratification; otherwise the love of truth would appear to have been
 implanted by God into our minds to no purpose, if it were never to have
 an opportunity of satisfaction.  Whence also, even in this life, those
 who devote themselves with great labour to the pursuits of piety and
 religion, although obtaining only some small fragments from the
 numerous and immense treasures of divine knowledge, yet, by the very
 circumstance that their mind and soul is engaged in these pursuits, and
 that in the eagerness of their desire they outstrip themselves, do they
 derive much advantage; and, because their minds are directed to the
 study and love of the investigation of truth, are they made fitter for
 receiving the instruction that is to come; as if, when one would paint
 an image, he were first with a light pencil to trace out the outlines
 of the coming picture, and prepare marks for the reception of the
 features that are to be afterwards added, this preliminary sketch in
 outline is found to prepare the way for the laying on of the true
 colours of the painting; so, in a measure, an outline and sketch may be
 traced on the tablets of our heart by the pencil of our Lord Jesus
 Christ.  And therefore perhaps is it said, "Unto every one that hath
 shall be given, and be added." [2262] By which it is established,
 that to those who possess in this life a kind of outline of truth and
 knowledge, shall be added the beauty of a perfect image in the future.

 5.  Some such desire, I apprehend, was indicated by him who said, "I am
 in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
 Christ, which is far better;" [2263] knowing that when he should have
 returned to Christ he would then know more clearly the reasons of all
 things which are done on earth, either respecting man, or the soul of
 man, or the mind; or regarding any other subject, such as, for
 instance, what is the Spirit that operates, what also is the vital
 spirit, or what is the grace of the Holy Spirit that is given to
 believers.  Then also will he understand what Israel appears to be, or
 what is meant by the diversity of nations; what the twelve tribes of
 Israel mean, and what the individual people of each tribe.  Then, too,
 will he understand the reason of the priests and Levites, and of the
 different priestly orders, the type of which was in Moses, and also
 what is the true meaning of the jubilees, and of the weeks of years
 with God.  He will see also the reasons for the festival days, and holy
 days, and for all the sacrifices and purifications.  He will perceive
 also the reason of the purgation from leprosy, and what the different
 kinds of leprosy are, and the reason of the purgation of those who lose
 their seed.  He will come to know, moreover, what are the good
 influences, [2264] and their greatness, and their qualities; and those
 too which are of a contrary kind, and what the affection of the former,
 and what the strife-causing emulation of the latter is towards men.  He
 will behold also the nature of the soul, and the diversity of animals
 (whether of those which live in the water, or of birds, or of wild
 beasts), and why each of the genera is subdivided into so many species;
 and what intention of the Creator, or what purpose of His wisdom, is
 concealed in each individual thing.  He will become acquainted, too,
 with the reason why certain properties are found associated with
 certain roots or herbs, and why, on the other hand, evil effects are
 averted by other herbs and roots.  He will know, moreover, the nature
 of the apostate angels, and the reason why they have power to flatter
 in some things those who do not despise them with the whole power of
 faith, and why they exist for the purpose of deceiving and leading men
 astray.  He will learn, too, the judgment of Divine Providence on each
 individual thing; and that, of those events which happen to men, none
 occur by accident or chance, but in accordance with a plan so carefully
 considered, and so stupendous, that it does not overlook even the
 number of the hairs of the heads, not merely of the saints, but perhaps
 of all human beings, and the plan of which providential government
 extends even to caring for the sale of two sparrows for a denarius,
 whether sparrows there be understood figuratively or literally.  Now
 indeed this providential government is still a subject of
 investigation, but then it will be fully manifested.  From all which we
 are to suppose, that meanwhile not a little time may pass by until the
 reason of those things only which are upon the earth be pointed out to
 the worthy and deserving after their departure from life, that by the
 knowledge of all these things, and by the grace of full knowledge, they
 may enjoy an unspeakable joy.  Then, if that atmosphere which is
 between heaven and earth is not devoid of inhabitants, and those of a
 rational kind, as the apostle says, "Wherein in times past ye walked
 according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the
 power of the air, the spirit who now worketh in the children of
 disobedience." [2265] And again he says, "We shall be caught up in
 the clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall we ever be with the
 Lord." [2266]

 6.  We are therefore to suppose that the saints will remain there until
 they recognise the twofold mode of government in those things which are
 performed in the air.  And when I say "twofold mode," I mean this:
 When we were upon earth, we saw either animals or trees, and beheld the
 differences among them, and also the very great diversity among men;
 but although we saw these things, we did not understand the reason of
 them; and this only was suggested to us from the visible diversity,
 that we should examine and inquire upon what principle these things
 were either created or diversely arranged.  And a zeal or desire for
 knowledge of this kind being conceived by us on earth, the full
 understanding and comprehension of it will be granted after death, if
 indeed the result should follow according to our expectations.  When,
 therefore, we shall have fully comprehended its nature, we shall
 understand in a twofold manner what we saw on earth.  Some such view,
 then, must we hold regarding this abode in the air.  I think,
 therefore, that all the saints who depart from this life will remain in
 some place situated on the earth, which holy Scripture calls paradise,
 as in some place of instruction, and, so to speak, class-room or school
 of souls, in which they are to be instructed regarding all the things
 which they had seen on earth, and are to receive also some information
 respecting things that are to follow in the future, as even when in
 this life they had obtained in some degree indications of future
 events, although "through a glass darkly," all of which are revealed
 more clearly and distinctly to the saints in their proper time and
 place.  If any one indeed be pure in heart, and holy in mind, and more
 practised in perception, he will, by making more rapid progress,
 quickly ascend to a place in the air, and reach the kingdom of heaven,
 through those mansions, so to speak, in the various places which the
 Greeks have termed spheres, i.e., globes, but which holy Scripture has
 called heavens; in each of which he will first see clearly what is done
 there, and in the second place, will discover the reason why things are
 so done:  and thus he will in order pass through all gradations,
 following Him who hath passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God,
 who said, "I will that where I am, these may be also." [2267] And of
 this diversity of places He speaks, when He says, "In My Father's house
 are many mansions."  He Himself is everywhere, and passes swiftly
 through all things; nor are we any longer to understand Him as existing
 in those narrow limits in which He was once confined for our sakes,
 i.e., not in that circumscribed body which He occupied on earth, when
 dwelling among men, according to which He might be considered as
 enclosed in some one place.

 7.  When, then, the saints shall have reached the celestial abodes,
 they will clearly see the nature of the stars one by one, and will
 understand whether they are endued with life, or their condition,
 whatever it is.  And they will comprehend also the other reasons for
 the works of God, which He Himself will reveal to them.  For He will
 show to them, as to children, the causes of things and the power of His
 creation, [2268] and will explain why that star was placed in that
 particular quarter of the sky, and why it was separated from another by
 so great an intervening space; what, e.g., would have been the
 consequence if it had been nearer or more remote; or if that star had
 been larger than this, how the totality of things would not have
 remained the same, but all would have been transformed into a different
 condition of being.  And so, when they have finished all those matters
 which are connected with the stars, and with the heavenly revolutions,
 they will come to those which are not seen, or to those whose names
 only we have heard, and to things which are invisible, which the
 Apostle Paul has informed us are numerous, although what they are, or
 what difference may exist among them, we cannot even conjecture by our
 feeble intellect.  And thus the rational nature, growing by each
 individual step, not as it grew in this life in flesh, and body, and
 soul, but enlarged in understanding and in power of perception, is
 raised as a mind already perfect to perfect knowledge, no longer at all
 impeded by those carnal senses, but increased in intellectual growth;
 and ever gazing purely, and, so to speak, face to face, on the causes
 of things, it attains perfection, firstly, viz., that by which it
 ascends to (the truth), [2269] and secondly, that by which it abides in
 it, having problems and the understanding of things, and the causes of
 events, as the food on which it may feast.  For as in this life our
 bodies grow physically to what they are, through a sufficiency of food
 in early life supplying the means of increase, but after the due height
 has been attained we use food no longer to grow, but to live, and to be
 preserved in life by it; so also I think that the mind, when it has
 attained perfection, eats and avails itself of suitable and appropriate
 food in such a degree, that nothing ought to be either deficient or
 superfluous.  And in all things this food is to be understood as the
 contemplation and understanding of God, which is of a measure
 appropriate and suitable to this nature, which was made and created;
 and this measure it is proper should be observed by every one of those
 who are beginning to see God, i.e., to understand Him through purity of
 heart.

 [2252] Repromissionibus.

 [2253] Carnes.

 [2254] Matt. xxvi. 29.

 [2255] Matt. v. 6.

 [2256] Cf. Luke xix. 19 and 17.

 [2257] Cf. Prov. ix. 1-5.

 [2258] Opera probabilia.

 [2259] Deut. viii. 3.

 [2260] The passage is somewhat obscure, but the rendering in the text
 seems to convey the meaning intended.

 [2261] Versatur in sensu.

 [2262] Luke xix. 26; cf. Matt. xxv. 29.

 [2263] Phil. i. 23.

 [2264] Virtutes.

 [2265] Eph. ii. 2.  There is an evident omission of some words in the
 text, such as, "They will enter into it," etc.

 [2266] 1 Thess. iv. 17.

 [2267] John xvii. 24.

 [2268] Virtutem suæ conditionis.  Seine Schöpferkraft (Schnitzer).

 [2269] In id:  To that state of the soul in which it gazes purely on
 the causes of things.

 Book III.

 Preface of Rufinus.

 Reader, remember me in your prayers, that we too may deserve to be made
 emulators of the spirit.  The two former books on The Principles I
 translated not only at your instance, but even under pressure from you
 during the days of Lent; [2270] but as you, my devout brother Macarius,
 were not only living near me during that time, but had more leisure at
 your command than now, so I also worked the harder; whereas I have been
 longer in explaining these two latter books, seeing you came less
 frequently from a distant extremity of the city to urge on my labour.
 Now if you remember what I warned you of in my former preface,--that
 certain persons would be indignant, if they did not hear that we spoke
 some evil of Origen,--that, I imagine, you have forthwith experienced,
 has come to pass.  But if those demons [2271] who excite the tongues of
 men to slander were so infuriated by that work, in which he had not as
 yet fully unveiled their secret proceedings, what, think you, will be
 the case in this, in which he will expose all those dark and hidden
 ways, by which they creep into the hearts of men, and deceive weak and
 unstable souls?  You will immediately see all things thrown into
 confusion, seditions stirred up, clamours raised throughout the whole
 city, and that individual summoned to receive sentence of condemnation
 who endeavoured to dispel the diabolical darkness of ignorance by means
 of the light of the Gospel lamp. [2272] Let such things, however, be
 lightly esteemed by him who is desirous of being trained in divine
 learning, while retaining in its integrity the rule of the Catholic
 faith. [2273] I think it necessary, however, to remind you that the
 principle observed in the former books has been observed also in these,
 viz., not to translate what appeared contrary to Origen's other
 opinions, and to our own belief, but to pass by such passages as being
 interpolated and forged by others.  But if he has appeared to give
 expression to any novelties regarding rational creatures (on which
 subject the essence of our faith does not depend), for the sake of
 discussion and of adding to our knowledge, when perhaps it was
 necessary for us to answer in such an order some heretical opinions, I
 have not omitted to mention these either in the present or preceding
 books, unless when he wished to repeat in the following books what he
 had already stated in the previous ones, when I have thought it
 convenient, for the sake of brevity, to curtail some of these
 repetitions.  Should any one, however, peruse these passages from a
 desire to enlarge his knowledge, and not to raise captious objections,
 he will do better to have them expounded by persons of skill.  For it
 is an absurdity to have the fictions of poetry and the ridiculous plays
 of comedy [2274] interpreted by grammarians, and to suppose that
 without a master and an interpreter any one is able to learn those
 things which are spoken either of God or of the heavenly virtues, and
 of the whole universe of things, in which some deplorable error either
 of pagan philosophers or of heretics is confuted; and the result of
 which is, that men would rather rashly and ignorantly condemn things
 that are difficult and obscure, than ascertain their meaning by
 diligence and study.

 [2270] Diebus quadragesimæ.

 [2271] Dæmones.

 [2272] Evangelicæ lucernæ lumine diabolicas ignorantiæ tenebras.

 [2273] Salvâ fidei Catholicæ regula.  [This remonstrance of Rufinus
 deserves candid notice.  He reduces the liberties he took with his
 author to two heads:  (1) omitting what Origen himself contradicts, and
 (2) what was interpolated by those who thus vented their own heresies
 under a great name.  "To our own belief," may mean what is contrary to
 the faith, as reduced to technical formula, at Nicæa; i.e., Salva
 regula fidei.  Note examples in the parallel columns following.]

 [2274] Comoediarum ridiculas fabulas.

 Translated from Latin of Rufinus.

 Chapter I.--On the Freedom of the Will. [2275]

 1.  Some such opinions, we believe, ought to be entertained regarding
 the divine promises, when we direct our understanding to the
 contemplation of that eternal and infinite world, and gaze on its
 ineffable joy and blessedness.  But as the preaching of the Church
 includes a belief in a future and just judgment of God, which belief
 incites and persuades men to a good and virtuous life, and to an
 avoidance of sin by all possible means; and as by this it is
 undoubtedly indicated that it is within our own power to devote
 ourselves either to a life that is worthy of praise, or to one that is
 worthy of censure, I therefore deem it necessary to say a few words
 regarding the freedom of the will, seeing that this topic has been
 treated by very many writers in no mean style.  And that we may
 ascertain more easily what is the freedom of the will, let us inquire
 into the nature of will and of desire. [2276]

 2.  Of all things which move, some have the cause of their motion
 within themselves, others receive it from without:  and all those
 things only are moved from without which are without life, as stones,
 and pieces of wood, and whatever things are of such a nature as to be
 held together by the constitution of their matter alone, or of their
 bodily substance. [2277] That view must indeed be dismissed which
 would regard the dissolution of bodies by corruption as motion, for it
 has no bearing upon our present purpose.  Others, again, have the cause
 of motion in themselves, as animals, or trees, and all things which are
 held together by natural life or soul; among which some think ought to
 be classed the veins of metals.  Fire, also, is supposed to be the
 cause of its own motion, and perhaps also springs of water.  And of
 those things which have the causes of their motion in themselves, some
 are said to be moved out of themselves, others by themselves.  And they
 so distinguish them, because those things are moved out of themselves
 which are alive indeed, but have no soul; [2278] whereas those things
 which have a soul are moved by themselves, when a phantasy, [2279]
 i.e., a desire or incitement, is presented to them, which excites them
 to move towards something.  Finally, in certain things endowed with a
 soul, there is such a phantasy, i.e., a will or feeling, [2280] as by a
 kind of natural instinct calls them forth, and arouses them to orderly
 and regular motion; as we see to be the case with spiders, which are
 stirred up in a most orderly manner by a phantasy, i.e., a sort of wish
 and desire for weaving, to undertake the production of a web, some
 natural movement undoubtedly calling forth the effort to work of this
 kind.  Nor is this very insect found to possess any other feeling than
 the natural desire of weaving; as in like manner bees also exhibit a
 desire to form honeycombs, and to collect, as they say, aerial honey.
 [2281]

 3.  But since a rational animal not only has within itself these
 natural movements, but has moreover, to a greater extent than other
 animals, the power of reason, by which it can judge and determine
 regarding natural movements, and disapprove and reject some, while
 approving and adopting others, so by the judgment of this reason may
 the movements of men be governed and directed towards a commendable
 life.  And from this it follows that, since the nature of this reason
 which is in man has within itself the power of distinguishing between
 good and evil, and while distinguishing possesses the faculty of
 selecting what it has approved, it may justly be deemed worthy of
 praise in choosing what is good, and deserving of censure in following
 that which is base or wicked.  This indeed must by no means escape our
 notice, that in some dumb animals there is found a more regular
 movement [2282] than in others, as in hunting-dogs or war-horses, so
 that they may appear to some to be moved by a kind of rational sense.
 But we must believe this to be the result not so much of reason as of
 some natural instinct, [2283] largely bestowed for purposes of that
 kind.  Now, as we had begun to remark, seeing that such is the nature
 of a rational animal, some things may happen to us human beings from
 without; and these, coming in contact with our sense of sight, or
 hearing, or any other of our senses, may incite and arouse us to good
 movements, or the contrary; and seeing they come to us from an external
 source, it is not within our own power to prevent their coming.  But to
 determine and approve what use we ought to make of those things which
 thus happen, is the duty of no other than of that reason within us,
 i.e., of our own judgment; by the decision of which reason we use the
 incitement, which comes to us from without for that purpose, which
 reason approves, our natural movements being determined by its
 authority either to good actions or the reverse.

 4.  If any one now were to say that those things which happen to us
 from an external cause, and call forth our movements, are of such a
 nature that it is impossible to resist them, whether they incite us to
 good or evil, let the holder of this opinion turn his attention for a
 little upon himself, and carefully inspect the movements of his own
 mind, unless he has discovered already, that when an enticement to any
 desire arises, nothing is accomplished until the assent of the soul is
 gained, and the authority of the mind has granted indulgence to the
 wicked suggestion; so that a claim might seem to be made by two parties
 on certain probable grounds as to a judge residing within the tribunals
 of our heart, in order that, after the statement of reasons, the decree
 of execution may proceed from the judgment of reason. [2284] For, to
 take an illustration:  if, to a man who has determined to live
 continently and chastely, and to keep himself free from all pollution
 with women, a woman should happen to present herself, inciting and
 alluring him to act contrary to his purpose, that woman is not a
 complete and absolute cause or necessity of his transgressing, [2285]
 since it is in his power, by remembering his resolution, to bridle the
 incitements to lust, and by the stern admonitions of virtue to restrain
 the pleasure of the allurement that solicits him; so that, all feeling
 of indulgence being driven away, his determination may remain firm and
 enduring.  Finally, if to any men of learning, strengthened by divine
 training, allurements of that kind present themselves, remembering
 forthwith what they are, and calling to mind what has long been the
 subject of their meditation and instruction, and fortifying themselves
 by the support of a holier doctrine, they reject and repel all
 incitement to pleasure, and drive away opposing lusts by the
 interposition of the reason implanted within them.

 5.  Seeing, then, that these positions are thus established by a sort
 of natural evidence, is it not superfluous to throw back the causes of
 our actions on those things which happen to us from without, and thus
 transfer the blame from ourselves, on whom it wholly lies?  For this is
 to say that we are like pieces of wood, or stones, which have no motion
 in themselves, but receive the causes of their motion from without.
 Now such an assertion is neither true nor becoming, and is invented
 only that the freedom of the will may be denied; unless, indeed, we are
 to suppose that the freedom of the will consists in this, that nothing
 which happens to us from without can incite us to good or evil.  And if
 any one were to refer the causes of our faults to the natural disorder
 [2286] of the body, such a theory is proved to be contrary to the
 reason of all teaching. [2287] For, as we see in very many
 individuals, that after living unchastely and intemperately, and after
 being the captives of luxury and lust, if they should happen to be
 aroused by the word of teaching and instruction to enter upon a better
 course of life, there takes place so great a change, that from being
 luxurious and wicked men, they are converted into those who are sober,
 and most chaste and gentle; so, again, we see in the case of those who
 are quiet and honest, that after associating with restless and
 shameless individuals, their good morals are corrupted by evil
 conversation, and they become like those whose wickedness is complete.
 [2288] And this is the case sometimes with men of mature age, so that
 such have lived more chastely in youth than when more advanced years
 have enabled them to indulge in a freer mode of life.  The result of
 our reasoning, therefore, is to show that those things which happen to
 us from without are not in our own power; but that to make a good or
 bad use of those things which do so happen, by help of that reason
 which is within us, and which distinguishes and determines how these
 things ought to be used, is within our power.

 6.  And now, to confirm the deductions of reason by the authority of
 Scripture--viz., that it is our own doing whether we live rightly or
 not, and that we are not compelled, either by those causes which come
 to us from without, or, as some think, by the presence of fate--we
 adduce the testimony of the prophet Micah, in these words:  "If it has
 been announced to thee, O man, what is good, or what the Lord requires
 of thee, except that thou shouldst do justice, and love mercy, and be
 ready to walk with the Lord thy God." [2289] Moses also speaks as
 follows:  "I have placed before thy face the way of life and the way of
 death:  choose what is good, and walk in it." [2290] Isaiah,
 moreover, makes this declaration:  "If you are willing, and hear me, ye
 shall eat the good of the land.  But if you be unwilling, and will not
 hear me, the sword shall consume you; for the mouth of the Lord has
 spoken this." [2291] In the Psalm, too, it is written:  "If My people
 had heard Me, if Israel had walked in My ways, I would have humbled her
 enemies to nothing;" [2292] by which he shows that it was in the power
 of the people to hear, and to walk in the ways of God.  The Saviour
 also saying, "I say unto you, Resist not evil;" [2293] and, "Whoever
 shall be angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment;"
 [2294] and, "Whosoever shall look upon a woman to lust after her, hath
 already committed adultery with her in his heart;" [2295] and in
 issuing certain other commands,--conveys no other meaning than this,
 that it is in our own power to observe what is commanded.  And
 therefore we are rightly rendered liable to condemnation if we
 transgress those commandments which we are able to keep.  And hence He
 Himself also declares:  "Every one who hears my words, and doeth them,
 I will show to whom he is like:  he is like a wise man who built his
 house upon a rock," etc. [2296] So also the declaration:  "Whoso
 heareth these things, and doeth them not, is like a foolish man, who
 built his house upon the sand," etc. [2297] Even the words addressed
 to those who are on His right hand, "Come unto Me, all ye blessed of My
 Father," etc.; "for I was an hungered, and ye gave Me to eat; I was
 thirsty, and ye gave Me drink," [2298] manifestly show that it depended
 upon themselves, that either these should be deserving of praise for
 doing what was commanded and receiving what was promised, or those
 deserving of censure who either heard or received the contrary, and to
 whom it was said, "Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire."  Let us
 observe also, that the Apostle Paul addresses us as having power over
 our own will, and as possessing in ourselves the causes either of our
 salvation or of our ruin:  "Dost thou despise the riches of His
 goodness, and of His patience, and of His long-suffering, not knowing
 that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?  But, according to
 thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou art treasuring up for thyself
 wrath on the day of judgment and of the revelation of the just judgment
 of God, who will render to every one according to his work:  to those
 who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and
 immortality, eternal life; [2299] while to those who are contentious,
 and believe not the truth, but who believe iniquity, anger,
 indignation, tribulation, and distress, on every soul of man that
 worketh evil, on the Jew first, and (afterwards) on the Greek; but
 glory, and honour, and peace to every one that doeth good, to the Jew
 first, and (afterwards) to the Greek." [2300] You will find also
 innumerable other passages in holy Scripture, which manifestly show
 that we possess freedom of will.  Otherwise there would be a
 contrariety in commandments being given us, by observing which we may
 be saved, or by transgressing which we may be condemned, if the power
 of keeping them were not implanted in us.

 7.  But, seeing there are found in the sacred Scriptures themselves
 certain expressions occurring in such a connection, that the opposite
 of this may appear capable of being understood from them, let us bring
 them forth before us, and, discussing them according to the rule of
 piety, [2301] let us furnish an explanation of them, in order that from
 those few passages which we now expound, the solution of those others
 which resemble them, and by which any power over the will seems to be
 excluded, may become clear.  Those expressions, accordingly, make an
 impression on very many, which are used by God in speaking of Pharaoh,
 as when He frequently says, "I will harden Pharaoh's heart." [2302]
 For if he is hardened by God, and commits sin in consequence of being
 so hardened, the cause of his sin is not himself.  And if so, it will
 appear that Pharaoh does not possess freedom of will; and it will be
 maintained, as a consequence, that, agreeably to this illustration,
 neither do others who perish owe the cause of their destruction to the
 freedom of their own will.  That expression, also, in Ezekiel, when he
 says, "I will take away their stony hearts, and will give them hearts
 of flesh, that they may walk in My precepts, and keep My ways," [2303]
 may impress some, inasmuch as it seems to be a gift of God, either to
 walk in His ways or to keep His precepts, [2304] if He take away that
 stony heart which is an obstacle to the keeping of His commandments,
 and bestow and implant a better and more impressible heart, which is
 called now [2305] a heart of flesh.  Consider also the nature of the
 answer given in the Gospel by our Lord and Saviour to those who
 inquired of Him why He spoke to the multitude in parables.  His words
 are:  "That seeing they may not see; and hearing they may hear, and not
 understand; lest they should be converted, and their sins be forgiven
 them." [2306] The words, moreover, used by the Apostle Paul, that "it
 is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
 showeth mercy;" [2307] in another passage also, "that to will and to do
 are of God:" [2308] and again, elsewhere, "Therefore hath He mercy
 upon whom He will, and whom He will He hardeneth.  Thou wilt say then
 unto me, Why doth He yet find fault?  For who shall resist His will?  O
 man, who art thou that repliest against God?  Shall the thing formed
 say to him who hath formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?  Hath not
 the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel
 unto honour, and another to dishonour?" [2309] --these and similar
 declarations seem to have no small influence in preventing very many
 from believing that every one is to be considered as having freedom
 over his own will, and in making it appear to be a consequence of the
 will of God whether a man is either saved or lost.

 8.  Let us begin, then, with those words which were spoken to Pharaoh,
 who is said to have been hardened by God, in order that he might not
 let the people go; and, along with his case, the language of the
 apostle also will be considered, where he says, "Therefore He hath
 mercy on whom He will, and whom He will He hardeneth." [2310] For it
 is on these passages chiefly that the heretics rely, asserting that
 salvation is not in our own power, but that souls are of such a nature
 as must by all means be either lost or saved; and that in no way can a
 soul which is of an evil nature become good, or one which is of a
 virtuous nature be made bad.  And hence they maintain that Pharaoh,
 too, being of a ruined nature, was on that account hardened by God, who
 hardens those that are of an earthly nature, but has compassion on
 those who are of a spiritual nature.  Let us see, then, what is the
 meaning of their assertion; and let us, in the first place, request
 them to tell us whether they maintain that the soul of Pharaoh was of
 an earthly nature, such as they term lost.  They will undoubtedly
 answer that it was of an earthly nature.  If so, then to believe God,
 or to obey Him, when his nature opposed his so doing, was an
 impossibility.  And if this were his condition by nature, what further
 need was there for his heart to be hardened, and this not once, but
 several times, unless indeed because it was possible for him to yield
 to persuasion?  Nor could any one be said to be hardened by another,
 save him who of himself was not obdurate.  And if he were not obdurate
 of himself, it follows that neither was he of an earthly nature, but
 such an one as might give way when overpowered [2311] by signs and
 wonders.  But he was necessary for God's purpose, in order that, for
 the saving of the multitude, He might manifest in him His power by his
 offering resistance to numerous miracles, and struggling against the
 will of God, and his heart being by this means said to be hardened.
 Such are our answers, in the first place, to these persons; and by
 these their assertion may be overturned, according to which they think
 that Pharaoh was destroyed in consequence of his evil nature. [2312]
 And with regard to the language of the Apostle Paul, we must answer
 them in a similar way.  For who are they whom God hardens, according to
 your view?  Those, namely, whom you term of a ruined nature, and who, I
 am to suppose, would have done something else had they not been
 hardened.  If, indeed, they come to destruction in consequence of being
 hardened, they no longer perish naturally, but in virtue of what
 befalls them.  Then, in the next place, upon whom does God show mercy?
 On those, namely, who are to be saved.  And in what respect do those
 persons stand in need of a second compassion, who are to be saved once
 by their nature, and so come naturally to blessedness, except that it
 is shown even from their case, that, because it was possible for them
 to perish, they therefore obtain mercy, that so they may not perish,
 but come to salvation, and possess the kingdom of the good.  And let
 this be our answer to those who devise and invent the fable [2313] of
 good or bad natures, i.e., of earthly or spiritual souls, in
 consequence of which, as they say, each one is either saved or lost.

 9.  And now we must return an answer also to those who would have the
 God of the law to be just only, and not also good; and let us ask such
 in what manner they consider the heart of Pharaoh to have been hardened
 by God--by what acts or by what prospective arrangements. [2314] For
 we must observe the conception of a God [2315] who in our opinion is
 both just and good, but according to them only just.  And let them show
 us how a God whom they also acknowledge to be just, can with justice
 cause the heart of a man to be hardened, that, in consequence of that
 very hardening, he may sin and be ruined.  And how shall the justice of
 God be defended, if He Himself is the cause of the destruction of those
 whom, owing to their unbelief (through their being hardened), He has
 afterwards condemned by the authority of a judge?  For why does He
 blame him, saying, "But since thou wilt not let My people go, lo, I
 will smite all the first-born in Egypt, even thy first-born," [2316]
 and whatever else was spoken through Moses by God to Pharaoh?  For it
 behoves every one who maintains the truth of what is recorded in
 Scripture, and who desires to show that the God of the law and the
 prophets is just, to render a reason for all these things, and to show
 how there is in them nothing at all derogatory to the justice of God,
 since, although they deny His goodness, they admit that He is a just
 judge, and creator of the world.  Different, however, is the method of
 our reply to those who assert that the creator of this world is a
 malignant being, i.e., a devil.

 10.  But since we acknowledge the God who spoke by Moses to be not only
 just, but also good, let us carefully inquire how it is in keeping with
 the character of a just and good Deity to have hardened the heart of
 Pharaoh.  And let us see whether, following the example of the Apostle
 Paul, we are able to solve the difficulty by help of some parallel
 instances:  if we can show, e.g., that by one and the same act God has
 pity upon one individual, but hardens another; not purposing or
 desiring that he who is hardened should be so, but because, in the
 manifestation of His goodness and patience, the heart of those who
 treat His kindness and forbearance with contempt and insolence is
 hardened by the punishment of their crimes being delayed; while those,
 on the other hand, who make His goodness and patience the occasion of
 their repentance and reformation, obtain compassion.  To show more
 clearly, however, what we mean, let us take the illustration employed
 by the Apostle Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he says, "For
 the earth, which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and
 bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, will receive
 blessing from God; but that which beareth thorns and briers is
 rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned." [2317]
 Now from those words of Paul which we have quoted, it is clearly
 shown that by one and the same act on the part of God--that, viz., by
 which He sends rain upon the earth--one portion of the ground, when
 carefully cultivated, brings forth good fruits; while another,
 neglected and uncared for, produces thorns and thistles.  And if one,
 speaking as it were in the person of the rain, [2318] were to say, "It
 is I, the rain, that have made the good fruits, and it is I that have
 caused the thorns and thistles to grow," however hard [2319] the
 statement might appear, it would nevertheless be true; for unless the
 rain had fallen, neither fruits, nor thorns, nor thistles would have
 sprung up, whereas by the coming of the rain the earth gave birth to
 both.  Now, although it is due to the beneficial action of the rain
 that the earth has produced herbs of both kinds, it is not to the rain
 that the diversity of the herbs is properly to be ascribed; but on
 those will justly rest the blame for the bad seed, who, although they
 might have turned up the ground by frequent ploughing, and have broken
 the clods by repeated harrowing, and have extirpated all useless and
 noxious weeds, and have cleared and prepared the fields for the coming
 showers by all the labour and toil which cultivation demands, have
 nevertheless neglected to do this, and who will accordingly reap briers
 and thorns, the most appropriate fruit of their sloth.  And the
 consequence therefore is, that while the rain falls in kindness and
 impartiality [2320] equally upon the whole earth, yet, by one and the
 same operation of the rain, that soil which is cultivated yields with a
 blessing useful fruits to the diligent and careful cultivators, while
 that which has become hardened through the neglect of the husbandman
 brings forth only thorns and thistles.  Let us therefore view those
 signs and miracles which were done by God, as the showers furnished by
 Him from above; and the purpose and desires of men, as the cultivated
 and uncultivated soil, which is of one and the same nature indeed, as
 is every soil compared with another, but not in one and the same state
 of cultivation.  From which it follows that every one's will, [2321] if
 untrained, and fierce, and barbarous, is either hardened by the
 miracles and wonders of God, growing more savage and thorny than ever,
 or it becomes more pliant, and yields itself up with the whole mind to
 obedience, if it be cleared from vice and subjected to training.

 11.  But, to establish the point more clearly, it will not be
 superfluous to employ another illustration, as if, e.g., one were to
 say that it is the sun which hardens and liquefies, although liquefying
 and hardening are things of an opposite nature.  Now it is not
 incorrect to say that the sun, by one and the same power of its heat,
 melts wax indeed, but dries up and hardens mud: [2322] not that its
 power operates one way upon mud, and in another way upon wax; but that
 the qualities of mud and wax are different, although according to
 nature they are one thing, [2323] both being from the earth.  In this
 way, then, one and the same working upon the part of God, which was
 administered by Moses in signs and wonders, made manifest the hardness
 of Pharaoh, which he had conceived in the intensity of his wickedness
 [2324] but exhibited the obedience of those other Egyptians who were
 intermingled with the Israelites, and who are recorded to have quitted
 Egypt at the same time with the Hebrews.  With respect to the statement
 that the heart of Pharaoh was subdued by degrees, so that on one
 occasion he said, "Go not far away; ye shall go a three days' journey,
 but leave your wives, and your children, and your cattle," [2325] and
 as regards any other statements, according to which he appears to yield
 gradually to the signs and wonders, what else is shown, save that the
 power of the signs and miracles was making some impression on him, but
 not so much as it ought to have done?  For if the hardening were of
 such a nature as many take it to be, he would not indeed have given way
 even in a few instances.  But I think there is no absurdity in
 explaining the tropical or figurative [2326] nature of that language
 employed in speaking of "hardening," according to common usage.  For
 those masters who are remarkable for kindness to their slaves, are
 frequently accustomed to say to the latter, when, through much patience
 and indulgence on their part, they have become insolent and worthless:
 "It is I that have made you what you are; I have spoiled you; it is my
 endurance that has made you good for nothing:  I am to blame for your
 perverse and wicked habits, because I do not have you immediately
 punished for every delinquency according to your deserts."  For we must
 first attend to the tropical or figurative meaning of the language, and
 so come to see the force of the expression, and not find fault with the
 word, whose inner meaning we do not ascertain.  Finally, the Apostle
 Paul, evidently treating of such, says to him who remained in his
 sins:  "Despisest thou the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and
 long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
 repentance? but, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
 unto thyself wrath on the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
 judgment of God." [2327] Such are the words of the apostle to him who
 is in his sins.  Let us apply these very expressions to Pharaoh, and
 see if they also are not spoken of him with propriety, since, according
 to his hardness and impenitent heart, he treasured and stored up for
 himself wrath on the day of wrath, inasmuch as his hardness could never
 have been declared and manifested, unless signs and wonders of such
 number and magnificence had been performed.

 12.  But if the proofs which we have adduced do not appear full enough,
 and the similitude of the apostle seem wanting in applicability, [2328]
 let us add the voice of prophetic authority, and see what the prophets
 declare regarding those who at first, indeed, leading a righteous life,
 have deserved to receive numerous proofs of the goodness of God, but
 afterwards, as being human beings, have fallen astray, with whom the
 prophet, making himself also one, says:  "Why, O Lord, hast Thou made
 us to err from Thy way? and hardened our heart, that we should not fear
 Thy name?  Return, for Thy servants' sake, for the tribes of Thine
 inheritance, that we also for a little may obtain some inheritance from
 Thy holy hill." [2329] Jeremiah also employs similar language:  "O
 Lord, Thou hast deceived us, and we were deceived; Thou hast held (us),
 and Thou hast prevailed." [2330] The expression, then, "Why, O Lord,
 hast Thou hardened our heart, that we should not fear Thy name?" used
 by those who prayed for mercy, is to be taken in a figurative, moral
 acceptation, [2331] as if one were to say, "Why hast Thou spared us so
 long, and didst not requite us when we sinned, but didst abandon us,
 that so our wickedness might increase, and our liberty of sinning be
 extended when punishment ceased?"  In like manner, unless a horse
 continually feel the spur [2332] of his rider, and have his mouth
 abraded by a bit, [2333] he becomes hardened.  And a boy also, unless
 constantly disciplined by chastisement, will grow up to be an insolent
 youth, and one ready to fall headlong into vice.  God accordingly
 abandons and neglects those whom He has judged undeserving of
 chastisement:  "For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth
 every son whom He receiveth." [2334] From which we are to suppose
 that those are to be received into the rank and affection of sons, who
 have deserved to be scourged and chastened by the Lord, in order that
 they also, through endurance of trials and tribulations, may be able to
 say, "Who shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
 Jesus? shall tribulation, or anguish, or famine, or nakedness, or
 peril, or sword?" [2335] For by all these is each one's resolution
 manifested and displayed, and the firmness of his perseverance made
 known, not so much to God, who knows all things before they happen, as
 to the rational and heavenly virtues, [2336] who have obtained a part
 in the work of procuring human salvation, as being a sort of assistants
 and ministers to God.  Those, on the other hand, who do not yet offer
 themselves to God with such constancy and affection, and are not ready
 to come into His service, and to prepare their souls for trial, are
 said to be abandoned by God, i.e., not to be instructed, inasmuch as
 they are not prepared for instruction, their training or care being
 undoubtedly postponed to a later time.  These certainly do not know
 what they will obtain from God, unless they first entertain the desire
 of being benefited; and this finally will be the case, if a man come
 first to a knowledge of himself, and feel what are his defects, and
 understand from whom he either ought or can seek the supply of his
 deficiencies.  For he who does not know beforehand of his weakness or
 his sickness, cannot seek a physician; or at least, after recovering
 his health, that man will not be grateful to his physician who did not
 first recognise the dangerous nature of his ailment.  And so, unless a
 man has first ascertained the defects of his life, and the evil nature
 of his sins, and made this known by confession from his own lips, he
 cannot be cleansed or acquitted, lest he should be ignorant that what
 he possesses has been bestowed on him by favour, but should consider as
 his own property what flows from the divine liberality, which idea
 undoubtedly generates arrogance of mind and pride, and finally becomes
 the cause of the individual's ruin.  And this, we must believe, was the
 case with the devil, who viewed as his own, and not as given him by
 God, the primacy [2337] which he held at the time when he was
 unstained; [2338] and thus was fulfilled in him the declaration, that
 "every one who exalteth himself shall be abased." [2339] From which
 it appears to me that the divine mysteries were concealed from the wise
 and prudent, according to the statement of Scripture, that "no flesh
 should glory before God," [2340] and revealed to children--to those,
 namely, who, after they have become infants and little children, i.e.,
 have returned to the humility and simplicity of children, then make
 progress; and on arriving at perfection, remember that they have
 obtained their state of happiness, not by their own merits, but by the
 grace and compassion of God.

 13.  It is therefore by the sentence of God that he is abandoned who
 deserves to be so, while over some sinners God exercises forbearance;
 not, however, without a definite principle of action. [2341] Nay, the
 very fact that He is long-suffering conduces to the advantage of those
 very persons, since the soul over which He exercises this providential
 care is immortal; and, as being immortal and everlasting, it is not,
 although not immediately cared for, excluded from salvation, which is
 postponed to a more convenient time.  For perhaps it is expedient for
 those who have been more deeply imbued with the poison of wickedness to
 obtain this salvation at a later period.  For as medical men sometimes,
 although they could quickly cover over the scars of wounds, keep back
 and delay the cure for the present, in the expectation of a better and
 more perfect recovery, knowing that it is more salutary to retard the
 treatment in the cases of swellings caused by wounds, and to allow the
 malignant humours to flow off for a while, rather than to hasten a
 superficial cure, by shutting up in the veins the poison of a morbid
 humour, which, excluded from its customary outlets, will undoubtedly
 creep into the inner parts of the limbs, and penetrate to the very
 vitals of the viscera, producing no longer mere disease in the body,
 but causing destruction to life; so, in like manner, God also, who
 knows the secret things of the heart, and foreknows the future, in much
 forbearance allows certain events to happen, which, coming from without
 upon men, cause to come forth into the light the passions and vices
 which are concealed within, that by their means those may be cleansed
 and cured who, through great negligence and carelessness, have admitted
 within themselves the roots and seeds of sins, so that, when driven
 outwards and brought to the surface, they may in a certain degree be
 cast forth and dispersed. [2342] And thus, although a man may appear
 to be afflicted with evils of a serious kind, suffering convulsions in
 all his limbs, he may nevertheless, at some future time, obtain relief
 and a cessation from his trouble; and, after enduring his afflictions
 to satiety, may, after many sufferings, be restored again to his
 (proper) condition.  For God deals with souls not merely with a view to
 the short space of our present life, included within sixty years [2343]
 or more, but with reference to a perpetual and never-ending period,
 exercising His providential care over souls that are immortal, even as
 He Himself is eternal and immortal.  For He made the rational nature,
 which He formed in His own image and likeness, incorruptible; and
 therefore the soul, which is immortal, is not excluded by the shortness
 of the present life from the divine remedies and cures.

 14.  But let us take from the Gospels also the similitudes of those
 things which we have mentioned, in which is described a certain rock,
 having on it a little superficial earth, on which, when a seed falls,
 it is said quickly to spring up; but when sprung up, it withers as the
 sun ascends in the heavens, and dies away, because it did not cast its
 root deeply into the ground. [2344] Now this rock undoubtedly
 represents the human soul, hardened on account of its own negligence,
 and converted into stone because of its wickedness.  For God gave no
 one a stony heart by a creative act; but each individual's heart is
 said to become stony through his own wickedness and disobedience.  As,
 therefore, if one were to blame a husbandman for not casting his seed
 more quickly upon rocky ground, because seed cast upon other rocky soil
 was seen to spring up speedily, the husbandman would certainly say in
 reply:  "I sow this soil more slowly, for this reason, that it may
 retain the seed which it has received; for it suits this ground to be
 sown somewhat slowly, lest perhaps the crop, having sprouted too
 rapidly, and coming forth from the mere surface of a shallow soil,
 should be unable to withstand the rays of the sun."  Would not he who
 formerly found fault acquiesce in the reasons and superior knowledge of
 the husbandman, and approve as done on rational grounds what formerly
 appeared to him as founded on no reason?  And in the same way, God, the
 thoroughly skilled husbandman of all His creation, undoubtedly conceals
 and delays to another time those [2345] things which we think ought to
 have obtained health sooner, in order that not the outside of things,
 rather than the inside, may be cured.  But if any one now were to
 object to us that certain seeds do even fall upon rocky ground, i.e.,
 on a hard and stony heart, we should answer that even this does not
 happen without the arrangement of Divine Providence; inasmuch as, but
 for this, it would not be known what condemnation was incurred by
 rashness in hearing and indifference in investigation, [2346] nor,
 certainly, what benefit was derived from being trained in an orderly
 manner.  And hence it happens that the soul comes to know its defects,
 and to cast the blame upon itself, and, consistently with this, to
 reserve and submit itself to training, i.e., in order that it may see
 that its faults must first be removed, and that then it must come to
 receive the instruction of wisdom.  As, therefore, souls are
 innumerable, so also are their manners, and purposes, and movements,
 and appetencies, and incitements different, the variety of which can by
 no means be grasped by the human mind; and therefore to God alone must
 be left the art, and the knowledge, and the power of an arrangement of
 this kind, as He alone can know both the remedies for each individual
 soul, and measure out the time of its cure.  It is He alone then who,
 as we said, recognises the ways of individual men, and determines by
 what way He ought to lead Pharaoh, that through him His name might be
 named in all the earth, having previously chastised him by many blows,
 and finally drowning him in the sea.  By this drowning, however, it is
 not to be supposed that God's providence as regards Pharaoh was
 terminated; for we must not imagine, because he was drowned, that
 therefore he had forthwith completely [2347] perished:  "for in the
 hand of God are both we and our words; all wisdom, also, and knowledge
 of workmanship," [2348] as Scripture declares.  But these points we
 have discussed according to our ability, treating of that chapter
 [2349] of Scripture in which it is said that God hardened the heart of
 Pharaoh, and agreeably to the statement, "He hath mercy on whom He will
 have mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth." [2350]

 15.  Let us now look at those passages of Ezekiel where he says, "I
 will take away from them their stony heart, and I will put in them a
 heart of flesh, that they may walk in My statutes, and keep Mine
 ordinances. [2351] For if God, when He pleases, takes away a heart of
 stone and bestows a heart of flesh, that His ordinances may be observed
 and His commandments may be obeyed, it will then appear that it is not
 in our power to put away wickedness.  For the taking away of a stony
 heart seems to be nothing else than the removal of the wickedness by
 which one is hardened, from whomsoever God pleases to remove it.  Nor
 is the bestowal of a heart of flesh, that the precepts of God may be
 observed and His commandments obeyed, any other thing than a man
 becoming obedient, and no longer resisting the truth, but performing
 works of virtue.  If, then, God promises to do this, and if, before He
 takes away the stony heart, we are unable to remove it from ourselves,
 it follows that it is not in our power, but in God's only, to cast away
 wickedness.  And again, if it is not our doing to form within us a
 heart of flesh, but the work of God alone, it will not be in our power
 to live virtuously, but it will in everything appear to be a work of
 divine grace.  Such are the assertions of those who wish to prove from
 the authority of Holy Scripture that nothing lies in our own power.
 Now to these we answer, that these passages are not to be so
 understood, but in the following manner.  Take the case of one who was
 ignorant and untaught, and who, feeling the disgrace of his ignorance,
 should, driven either by an exhortation from some person, or incited by
 a desire to emulate other wise men, hand himself over to one by whom he
 is assured that he will be carefully trained and competently
 instructed.  If he, then, who had formerly hardened himself in
 ignorance, yield himself, as we have said, with full purpose of mind to
 a master, and promise to obey him in all things, the master, on seeing
 clearly the resolute nature of his determination, will appropriately
 promise to take away all ignorance, and to implant knowledge within his
 mind; not that he undertakes to do this if the disciple refuse or
 resist his efforts, but only on his offering and binding himself to
 obedience in all things.  So also the Word of God promises to those who
 draw near to Him, that He will take away their stony heart, not indeed
 from those who do not listen to His word, but from those who receive
 the precepts of His teaching; as in the Gospels we find the sick
 approaching the Saviour, asking to receive health, and thus at last be
 cured.  And in order that the blind might be healed and regain their
 sight, their part consisted in making supplication to the Saviour, and
 in believing that their cure could be effected by Him; while His part,
 on the other hand, lay in restoring to them the power of vision.  And
 in this way also does the Word of God promise to bestow instruction by
 taking away the stony heart, i.e., by the removal of wickedness, that
 so men may be able to walk in the divine precepts, and observe the
 commandments of the law.

 16.  There is next brought before us that declaration uttered by the
 Saviour in the Gospel:  "That seeing they may see, and not perceive;
 and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest they should happen
 to be converted, and their sins be forgiven them." [2352] On which
 our opponent will remark:  "If those who shall hear more distinctly are
 by all means to be corrected and converted, and converted in such a
 manner as to be worthy of receiving the remission of sins, and if it be
 not in their own power to hear the word distinctly, but if it depend on
 the Instructor to teach more openly and distinctly, while he declares
 that he does not proclaim to them the word with clearness, lest they
 should perhaps hear and understand, and be converted, and be saved, it
 will follow, certainly, that their salvation is not dependent upon
 themselves.  And if this be so, then we have no free-will either as
 regards salvation or destruction."  Now were it not for the words that
 are added, "Lest perhaps they should be converted, and their sins be
 forgiven them," we might be more inclined to return the answer, that
 the Saviour was unwilling that those individuals whom He foresaw would
 not become good, should understand the mysteries of the kingdom of
 heaven, and that therefore He spoke to them in parables; but as that
 addition follows, "Lest perhaps they should be converted, and their
 sins be forgiven them," the explanation is rendered more difficult.
 And, in the first place, we have to notice what defence this passage
 furnishes against those heretics who are accustomed to hunt out of the
 Old Testament any expressions which seem, according to their view, to
 predicate severity and cruelty of God the Creator, as when He is
 described as being affected with the feeling of vengeance or
 punishment, or by any of those emotions, however named, from which they
 deny the existence of goodness in the Creator; for they do not judge of
 the Gospels with the same mind and feelings, and do not observe whether
 any such statements are found in them as they condemn and censure in
 the Old Testament.  For manifestly, in the passage referred to, the
 Saviour is shown, as they themselves admit, not to speak distinctly,
 for this very reason, that men may not be converted, and when
 converted, receive the remission of sins.  Now, if the words be
 understood according to the letter merely, nothing less, certainly,
 will be contained in them than in those passages which they find fault
 with in the Old Testament.  And if they are of opinion that any
 expressions occurring in such a connection in the New Testament stand
 in need of explanation, it will necessarily follow that those also
 occurring in the Old Testament, which are the subject of censure, may
 be freed from aspersion by an explanation of a similar kind, so that by
 such means the passages found in both Testaments may be shown to
 proceed from one and the same God.  But let us return, as we best may,
 to the question proposed.

 17.  We said formerly, when discussing the case of Pharaoh, that
 sometimes it does not lead to good results for a man to be cured too
 quickly, especially if the disease, being shut up within the inner
 parts of the body, rage with greater fierceness.  Whence God, who is
 acquainted with secret things, and knows all things before they happen,
 in His great goodness delays the cure of such, and postpones their
 recovery to a remoter period, and, so to speak, cures them by not
 curing them, lest a too favourable state of health [2353] should render
 them incurable.  It is therefore possible that, in the case of those to
 whom, as being "without," the words of our Lord and Saviour were
 addressed, He, seeing from His scrutiny of the hearts and reins that
 they were not yet able to receive teaching of a clearer type, veiled by
 the covering of language the meaning of the profounder mysteries, lest
 perhaps, being rapidly converted and healed, i.e., having quickly
 obtained the remission of their sins, they should again easily slide
 back into the same disease which they had found could be healed without
 any difficulty.  For if this be the case, no one can doubt that the
 punishment is doubled, and the amount of wickedness increased; since
 not only are the sins which had appeared to be forgiven repeated, but
 the court [2354] of virtue also is desecrated when trodden by deceitful
 and polluted beings, [2355] filled within with hidden wickedness.  And
 what remedy can there ever be for those who, after eating the impure
 and filthy food of wickedness, have tasted the pleasantness of virtue,
 and received its sweetness into their mouths, and yet have again
 betaken themselves to the deadly and poisonous provision of sin?  And
 who doubts that it is better for delay and a temporary abandonment to
 occur, in order that if, at some future time, they should happen to be
 satiated with wickedness, and the filth with which they are now
 delighted should become loathsome, the word of God may at last be
 appropriately made clear to them, and that which is holy be not given
 to the dogs, nor pearls be cast before swine, which will trample them
 under foot, and turn, moreover, and rend and assault those who have
 proclaimed to them the word of God?  These, then, are they who are said
 to be "without," undoubtedly by way of contrast with those who are said
 to be "within," and to hear the word of God with greater clearness.
 And yet those who are "without" do hear the word, although it is
 covered by parables, and overshadowed by proverbs.  There are others,
 also, besides those who are without, who are called Tyrians, and who do
 not hear at all, respecting whom the Saviour knew that they would have
 repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes, if the miracles
 performed among others had been done amongst them, and yet these do not
 hear those things which are heard even by those who are "without:"  and
 I believe, for this reason, that the rank of such in wickedness was far
 lower and worse than that of those who are said to be "without," i.e.,
 who are not far from those who are within, and who have deserved to
 hear the word, although in parables; and because, perhaps, their cure
 was delayed to that time when it will be more tolerable for them on the
 day of judgment, than for those before whom those miracles which are
 recorded were performed, that so at last, being then relieved from the
 weight of their sins, they may enter with more ease and power of
 endurance upon the way of safety.  And this is a point which I wish
 impressed upon those who peruse these pages, that with respect to
 topics of such difficulty and obscurity we use our utmost endeavour,
 not so much to ascertain clearly the solutions of the questions (for
 every one will do this as the Spirit gives him utterance), as to
 maintain the rule of faith in the most unmistakeable manner, [2356] by
 striving to show that the providence of God, which equitably
 administers all things, governs also immortal souls on the justest
 principles, (conferring rewards) according to the merits and motives of
 each individual; the present economy of things [2357] not being
 confined within the life of this world, but the pre-existing state of
 merit always furnishing the ground for the state that is to follow,
 [2358] and thus by an eternal and immutable law of equity, and by the
 controlling influence of Divine Providence, the immortal soul is
 brought to the summit of perfection.  If one, however, were to object
 to our statement, that the word of preaching was purposely put aside by
 certain men of wicked and worthless character, and (were to inquire)
 why the word was preached to those over whom the Tyrians, who were
 certainly despised, are preferred in comparison (by which proceeding,
 certainly, their wickedness was increased, and their condemnation
 rendered more severe, that they should hear the word who were not to
 believe it), they must be answered in the following manner:  God, who
 is the Creator of the minds of all men, foreseeing complaints against
 His providence, especially on the part of those who say, "How could we
 believe when we neither beheld those things which others saw, nor heard
 those words which were preached to others? in so far is the blame
 removed from us, since they to whom the word was announced, and the
 signs manifested, made no delay whatever, but became believers,
 overpowered by the very force of the miracles;" wishing to destroy the
 grounds for complaints of this kind, and to show that it was no
 concealment of Divine Providence, but the determination of the human
 mind which was the cause of their ruin, bestowed the grace of His
 benefits even upon the unworthy and the unbelieving, that every mouth
 might indeed be shut, and that the mind of man might know that all the
 deficiency was on its own part, and none on that of God; and that it
 may, at the same time, be understood and recognised that he receives a
 heavier sentence of condemnation who has despised the divine benefits
 conferred upon him than he who has not deserved to obtain or hear them,
 and that it is a peculiarity of divine compassion, and a mark of the
 extreme justice of its administration, that it sometimes conceals from
 certain individuals the opportunity of either seeing or hearing the
 mysteries of divine power, lest, after beholding the power of the
 miracles, and recognising and hearing the mysteries of its wisdom, they
 should, on treating them with contempt and indifference, be punished
 with greater severity for their impiety.

 18.  Let us now look to the expression, "It is not of him that willeth,
 nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy." [2359] For
 our opponents assert, that if it does not depend upon him that willeth,
 nor on him that runneth, but on God that showeth mercy, that a man be
 saved, our salvation is not in our own power.  For our nature is such
 as to admit of our either being saved or not, or else our salvation
 rests solely on the will of Him who, if He wills it, shows mercy, and
 confers salvation.  Now let us inquire, in the first place, of such
 persons, whether to desire blessings be a good or evil act; and whether
 to hasten after good as a final aim [2360] be worthy of praise.  If
 they were to answer that such a procedure was deserving of censure,
 they would evidently be mad; for all holy men both desire blessings and
 run after them, and certainly are not blameworthy.  How, then, is it
 that he who is not saved, if he be of an evil nature, desires blessing,
 and runs after them, but does not find them?  For they say that a bad
 tree does not bring forth good fruits, whereas it is a good fruit to
 desire blessings.  And how is the fruit of a bad tree good?  And if
 they assert that to desire blessings, and to run after them, is an act
 of indifference, [2361] i.e., neither good nor bad, we shall reply,
 that if it be an indifferent act to desire blessings, and to run after
 them, then the opposite of that will also be an indifferent act, viz.,
 to desire evils, and to run after them; whereas it is certain that it
 is not an indifferent act to desire evils, and to run after them, but
 one that is manifestly wicked.  It is established, then, that to desire
 and follow after blessings is not an indifferent, but a virtuous
 proceeding.

 Having now repelled these objections by the answer which we have given,
 let us hasten on to the discussion of the subject itself, in which it
 is said, "It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
 of God that showeth mercy." [2362] In the book of Psalms--in the
 Songs of Degrees, which are ascribed to Solomon--the following
 statement occurs:  "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in
 vain that build it; except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh
 but in vain." [2363] By which words he does not indeed indicate that
 we should cease from building or watching over the safe keeping of that
 city which is within us; but what he points out is this, that whatever
 is built without God, and whatever is guarded without him, is built in
 vain, and guarded to no purpose.  For in all things that are well built
 and well protected, the Lord is held to be the cause either of the
 building or of its protection.  As if, e.g., we were to behold some
 magnificent structure and mass of splendid building reared with
 beauteous architectural skill, would we not justly and deservedly say
 that such was built not by human power, but by divine help and might?
 And yet from such a statement it will not be meant that the labour and
 industry of human effort were inactive, and effected nothing at all.
 Or again, if we were to see some city surrounded by a severe blockade
 of the enemy, in which threatening engines were brought against the
 walls, and the place hard pressed by a vallum, and weapons, and fire,
 and all the instruments of war, by which destruction is prepared, would
 we not rightly and deservedly say, if the enemy were repelled and put
 to flight, that the deliverance had been wrought for the liberated city
 by God?  And yet we would not mean, by so speaking, that either the
 vigilance of the sentinels, or the alertness of the young men, [2364]
 or the protection of the guards, had been wanting.  And the apostle
 also must be understood in a similar manner, because the human will
 alone is not sufficient to obtain salvation; nor is any mortal running
 able to win the heavenly (rewards), and to obtain the prize of our high
 calling [2365] of God in Christ Jesus, unless this very good will of
 ours, and ready purpose, and whatever that diligence within us may be,
 be aided or furnished with divine help.  And therefore most logically
 [2366] did the apostle say, that "it is not of him that willeth, nor of
 him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy;" in the same manner as
 if we were to say of agriculture what is actually written:  "I planted,
 Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.  So then neither is he that
 planteth anything, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the
 increase." [2367] As, therefore, when a field has brought good and
 rich crops to perfect maturity, no one would piously and logically
 assert that the husbandman had made those fruits, but would acknowledge
 that they had been produced by God; so also is our own perfection
 brought about, not indeed by our remaining inactive and idle, [2368]
 (but by some activity on our part):  and yet the consummation of it
 will not be ascribed to us, but to God, who is the first and chief
 cause of the work.  So, when a ship has overcome the dangers of the
 sea, although the result be accomplished by great labour on the part of
 the sailors, and by the aid of all the art of navigation, and by the
 zeal and carefulness of the pilot, and by the favouring influence of
 the breezes, and the careful observation of the signs of the stars, no
 one in his sound senses would ascribe the safety of the vessel, when,
 after being tossed by the waves, and wearied by the billows, it has at
 last reached the harbour in safety, to anything else than to the mercy
 of God.  Not even the sailors or pilot venture to say, "I have saved
 the ship," but they refer all to the mercy of God; not that they feel
 that they have contributed no skill or labour to save the ship, but
 because they know that while they contributed the labour, the safety of
 the vessel was ensured by God.  So also in the race of our life we
 ourselves must expend labour, and bring diligence and zeal to bear; but
 it is from God that salvation is to be hoped for as the fruit of our
 labour.  Otherwise, if God demand none of our labour, His commandments
 will appear to be superfluous.  In vain, also, does Paul blame some for
 having fallen from the truth, and praise others for abiding in the
 faith; and to no purpose does he deliver certain precepts and
 institutions to the Churches:  in vain, also, do we ourselves either
 desire or run after what is good.  But it is certain that these things
 are not done in vain; and it is certain that neither do the apostles
 give instructions in vain, nor the Lord enact laws without a reason.
 It follows, therefore, that we declare it to be in vain, rather, for
 the heretics to speak evil of these good declarations.

 19.  After this there followed this point, that "to will and to do are
 of God." [2369] Our opponents maintain that if to will be of God, and
 if to do be of Him, or if, whether we act or desire well or ill, it be
 of God, then in that case we are not possessed of free-will.  Now to
 this we have to answer, that the words of the apostle do not say that
 to will evil is of God, or that to will good is of Him; nor that to do
 good or evil is of God; but his statement is a general one, that to
 will and to do are of God.  For as we have from God this very quality,
 that we are men, [2370] that we breathe, that we move; so also we have
 from God (the faculty) by which we will, as if we were to say that our
 power of motion is from God, [2371] or that the performing of these
 duties by the individual members, and their movements, are from God.
 From which, certainly, I do not understand this, that because the hand
 moves, e.g., to punish unjustly, or to commit an act of theft, the act
 is of God, but only that the power of motion [2372] is from God; while
 it is our duty to turn those movements, the power of executing which we
 have from God, either to purposes of good or evil.  And so what the
 apostle says is, that we receive indeed the power of volition, but that
 we misuse the will either to good or evil desires.  In a similar way,
 also, we must judge of results.

 20.  But with respect to the declaration of the apostle, "Therefore
 hath He mercy on whom He will have mercy, and whom He will He
 hardeneth.  Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth He yet find fault?
 For who hath resisted His will?  Nay but, O man, who art thou that
 repliest against God?  Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
 it, Why hast thou made me thus?  Hath not the potter power over the
 clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto
 dishonour?" [2373] Some one will perhaps say, that as the potter out
 of the same lump makes some vessels to honour, and others to dishonour,
 so God creates some men for perdition, and others for salvation; and
 that it is not therefore in our own power either to be saved or to
 perish; by which reasoning we appear not to be possessed of free-will.
 We must answer those who are of this opinion with the question, Whether
 it is possible for the apostle to contradict himself?  And if this
 cannot be imagined of an apostle, how shall he appear, according to
 them, to be just in blaming those who committed fornication in Corinth,
 or those who sinned, and did not repent of their unchastity, and
 fornication, and uncleanness, which they had committed?  How, also,
 does he greatly praise those who acted rightly, like the house of
 Onesiphorus, saying, "The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus;
 for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain:  but, when he
 had come to Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me.  The
 Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day."
 [2374] Now it is not consistent with apostolic gravity to blame him
 who is worthy of blame, i.e., who has sinned, and greatly to praise him
 who is deserving of praise for his good works; and again, as if it were
 in no one's power to do any good or evil, to say that it was the
 Creator's doing that every one should act virtuously or wickedly,
 seeing He makes one vessel to honour, and another to dishonour.  And
 how can he add that statement, "We must all stand before the
 judgment-seat of Christ, that every one of us may receive in his body,
 according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad?" [2375]
 For what reward of good will be conferred on him who could not commit
 evil, being formed by the Creator to that very end? or what punishment
 will deservedly be inflicted on him who was unable to do good in
 consequence of the creative act of his Maker? [2376] Then, again, how
 is not this opposed to that other declaration elsewhere, that "in a
 great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
 wood and of earth, and some to honour, and some to dishonour.  If a man
 therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour,
 sanctified, and meet for the Master's use, prepared unto every good
 work." [2377] He, accordingly, who purges himself, is made a vessel
 unto honour, while he who has disdained to cleanse himself from his
 impurity is made a vessel unto dishonour.  From such declarations, in
 my opinion, the cause of our actions can in no degree be referred to
 the Creator.  For God the Creator makes a certain vessel unto honour,
 and other vessels to dishonour; but that vessel which has cleansed
 itself from all impurity He makes a vessel unto honour, while that
 which has stained itself with the filth of vice He makes a vessel unto
 dishonour.  The conclusion from which, accordingly, is this, that the
 cause of each one's actions is a pre-existing one; and then every one,
 according to his deserts, is made by God either a vessel unto honour or
 dishonour.  Therefore every individual vessel has furnished to its
 Creator out of itself the causes and occasions of its being formed by
 Him to be either a vessel unto honour or one unto dishonour.  And if
 the assertion appear correct, as it certainly is, and in harmony with
 all piety, that it is due to previous causes that every vessel be
 prepared by God either to honour or to dishonour, it does not appear
 absurd that, in discussing remoter causes in the same order, and in the
 same method, we should come to the same conclusion respecting the
 nature of souls, and (believe) that this was the reason why Jacob was
 beloved before he was born into this world, and Esau hated, while he
 still was contained in the womb of his mother.

 21.  Nay, that very declaration, that from the same lump a vessel is
 formed both to honour and to dishonour, will not push us hard; for we
 assert that the nature of all rational souls is the same, as one lump
 of clay is described as being under the treatment of the potter.
 Seeing, then, the nature of rational creatures is one, God, according
 to the previous grounds of merit, [2378] created and formed out of it,
 as the potter out of the one lump, some persons to honour and others to
 dishonour.  Now, as regards the language of the apostle, which he
 utters as if in a tone of censure, "Nay but, O man, who art thou that
 repliest against God?" he means, I think, to point out that such a
 censure does not refer to any believer who lives rightly and justly,
 and who has confidence in God, i.e., to such an one as Moses was, of
 whom Scripture says that "Moses spake, and God answered him by a
 voice;" [2379] and as God answered Moses, so also does every saint
 answer God.  But he who is an unbeliever, and loses confidence in
 answering before God owing to the unworthiness of his life and
 conversation, and who, in relation to these matters, does not seek to
 learn and make progress, but to oppose and resist, and who, to speak
 more plainly, is such an one as to be able to say those words which the
 apostle indicates, when he says, "Why, then, does He yet find fault?
 for who will resist His will?"--to such an one may the censure of the
 apostle rightly be directed, "Nay but, O man, who art thou that
 repliest against God?"  This censure accordingly applies not to
 believers and saints, but to unbelievers and wicked men.

 Now, to those who introduce souls of different natures, [2380] and who
 turn this declaration of the apostle to the support of their own
 opinion, we have to reply as follows:  If even they are agreed as to
 what the apostle says, that out of the one lump are formed both those
 who are made to honour and those who are made to dishonour, whom they
 term of a nature that is to be saved and destroyed, there will then be
 no longer souls of different natures, but one nature for all.  And if
 they admit that one and the same potter may undoubtedly denote one
 Creator, there will not be different creators either of those who are
 saved, or of those who perish.  Now, truly, let them choose whether
 they will have a good Creator to be intended who creates bad and ruined
 men, or one who is not good, who creates good men and those who are
 prepared to honour.  For the necessity of returning an answer will
 extort from them one of these two alternatives.  But according to our
 declaration, whereby we say that it is owing to preceding causes that
 God makes vessels either to honour or to dishonour, the approval of
 God's justice is in no respect limited.  For it is possible that this
 vessel, which owing to previous causes was made in this world to
 honour, may, if it behave negligently, be converted in another world,
 according to the deserts of its conduct, into a vessel unto dishonour:
 as again, if any one, owing to preceding causes, was formed by his
 Creator in this life a vessel unto dishonour, and shall mend his ways
 and cleanse himself from all filth and vice, he may, in the new world,
 be made a vessel to honour, sanctified and useful, and prepared unto
 every good work.  Finally, those who were formed by God in this world
 to be Israelites, and who have lived a life unworthy of the nobility of
 their race, and have fallen away from the grandeur of their descent,
 will, in the world to come, in a certain degree [2381] be converted, on
 account of their unbelief, from vessels of honour into vessels of
 dishonour; while, on the other hand, many who in this life were
 reckoned among Egyptian or Idumean vessels, having adopted the faith
 and practice of Israelites, when they shall have done the works of
 Israelites, and shall have entered the Church of the Lord, will exist
 as vessels of honour in the revelation of the sons of God.  From which
 it is more agreeable to the rule of piety to believe that every
 rational being, according to his purpose and manner of life, is
 converted, sometimes from bad to good, and falls away sometimes from
 good to bad:  that some abide in good, and others advance to a better
 condition, and always ascend to higher things, until they reach the
 highest grade of all; while others, again, remain in evil, or, if the
 wickedness within them begin to spread itself further, they descend to
 a worse condition, and sink into the lowest depth of wickedness.
 Whence also we must suppose that it is possible there may be some who
 began at first indeed with small offences, but who have poured out
 wickedness to such a degree, and attained such proficiency in evil,
 that in the measure of their wickedness they are equal even to the
 opposing powers:  and again, if, by means of many severe
 administrations of punishment, they are able at some future time to
 recover their senses, and gradually attempt to find healing for their
 wounds, they may, on ceasing from their wickedness, be restored to a
 state of goodness.  Whence we are of opinion that, seeing the soul, as
 we have frequently said, is immortal and eternal, it is possible that,
 in the many and endless periods of duration in the immeasurable and
 different worlds, it may descend from the highest good to the lowest
 evil, or be restored from the lowest evil to the highest good.

 22.  But since the words of the apostle, in what he says regarding
 vessels of honour or dishonour, that "if a man therefore purge himself,
 he will be a vessel unto honour, sanctified and meet for the Master's
 service, and prepared unto every good work," appear to place nothing in
 the power of God, but all in ourselves; while in those in which he
 declares that "the potter hath power over the clay, to make of the same
 lump one vessel to honour, another to dishonour," he seems to refer the
 whole to God,--it is not to be understood that those statements are
 contradictory, but the two meanings are to be reduced to agreement, and
 one signification must be drawn from both, viz., that we are not to
 suppose either that those things which are in our own power can be done
 without the help of God, or that those which are in God's hand can be
 brought to completion without the intervention of our acts, and
 desires, and intention; because we have it not in our own power so to
 will or do anything, as not to know that this very faculty, by which we
 are able to will or to do, was bestowed on us by God, according to the
 distinction which we indicated above.  Or again, when God forms
 vessels, some to honour and others to dishonour, we are to suppose that
 He does not regard either our wills, or our purposes, or our deserts,
 to be the causes of the honour or dishonour, as if they were a sort of
 matter from which He may form the vessel of each one of us either to
 honour or to dishonour; whereas the very movement of the soul itself,
 or the purpose of the understanding, may of itself suggest to him, who
 is not unaware of his heart and the thoughts of his mind, whether his
 vessel ought to be formed to honour or to dishonour.  But let these
 points suffice, which we have discussed as we best could, regarding the
 questions connected with the freedom of the will. [2382]

 [2275] The whole of this chapter has been preserved in the original
 Greek, which is literally translated in corresponding portions on each
 page, so that the differences between Origen's own words and
 amplifications and alterations of the paraphrase of Rufinus may be at
 once patent to the reader.

 [2276] Natura ipsius arbitrii voluntatisque.

 [2277] Quæcunque hujusmodi sunt, quæ solo habitu materiæ suæ vel
 corporum constant.

 [2278] Non tamen animantia sunt.

 [2279] Phantasia.

 [2280] Voluntas vel sensus.

 [2281] Mella, ut aiunt, aeria congregandi.  Rufinus seems to have read,
 in the original, aeroplastein instead of keroplastein,--an evidence
 that he followed in general the worst readings (Redepenning).

 [2282] Ordinatior quidem motus.

 [2283] Incentivo quodam et naturali motu.

 [2284] Ita ut etiam verisimilibus quibusdam causis intra cordis nostri
 tribunalia velut judici residenti ex utrâque parte adhiberi videatur
 assertio, ut causis prius expositis gerendi sententia de rationis
 judicio proferatur.

 [2285] Causa ei perfecta et absoluta vel necessitas prævaricandi.

 [2286] Naturalem corporis intemperiem; psilen ten kataskeuen.

 [2287] Contra rationem totius eruditionis.  In the Greek, "contra
 rationem" is expressed by para to enarges esti:  and the words logou
 paideutikou (rendered by Rufinus "totius eruditionis," and connected
 with "contra rationem") belong to the following clause.

 [2288] Quibus nihil ad turpitudinem deest.

 [2289] Mic. vi. 8.

 [2290] Deut. xxx. 15.

 [2291] Isa. i. 19, 20.

 [2292] Ps. lxxxi. 13, 14.

 [2293] Matt. v. 39.

 [2294] Matt. v. 22.

 [2295] Matt. v. 28.

 [2296] Matt. vii. 24.

 [2297] Matt. vii. 26.

 [2298] Matt. xxv. 34 sq.

 [2299] The words in the text are:  His qui secundum patientiam boni
 operis, gloria et incorruptio, qui quærunt vitam eternam.

 [2300] Rom. ii. 4-10.

 [2301] Secundum pietatis regulam.

 [2302] Ex. iv. 21, etc.

 [2303] Ezek. xi. 19, 20.

 [2304] Justificationes.

 [2305] The word "now" is added, as the term "flesh" is frequently used
 in the New Testament in a bad sense (Redepenning).

 [2306] Mark iv. 12.

 [2307] Rom. ix. 16.

 [2308] Phil. ii. 13.

 [2309] Rom. ix. 18 sq.

 [2310] Rom. ix. 18.

 [2311] Obstupefactus.

 [2312] Naturaliter.

 [2313] Commentitias fabulas introducunt.

 [2314] Quid faciente vel quid prospiciente.

 [2315] Prospectus et intuitus Dei.  Such is the rendering of ennoia by
 Rufinus.

 [2316] Ex. ix. 17, cf. xi. 5 and xii. 12.

 [2317] Heb. vi. 7, 8.

 [2318] Ex personâ imbrium.

 [2319] Dure.

 [2320] Bonitas et æquitas imbrium.

 [2321] Propositum.

 [2322] Limum.

 [2323] Cum utique secundum naturam unum sit.

 [2324] Malitiæ suæ intentione conceperat.

 [2325] Cf. Ex. viii. 27-29.

 [2326] Tropum vel figuram sermonis.

 [2327] Rom. ii. 4, 5.

 [2328] Et apostolicæ similitudinis parum munimenti habere adhus videtur
 assertio.

 [2329] Isa. lxiii. 17, 18.  Here the Septuagint differs from the
 Masoretic text.

 [2330] Jer. xx. 7.

 [2331] Morali utique tropo accipiendum.

 [2332] Ferratum calcem.

 [2333] Frenis ferratis.

 [2334] Heb. xii. 6.

 [2335] Rom. viii. 35.

 [2336] Rationabilibus coelestibusque virtutibus.

 [2337] Primatus.

 [2338] Immaculatus.

 [2339] Luke xviii. 14.

 [2340] 1 Cor. i. 29.

 [2341] Non tamen sine certâ ratione.

 [2342] Digeri.  The rendering "dispersed" seems to agree best with the
 meaning intended to be conveyed.

 [2343] In the Greek the term is pentekontaetian.

 [2344] Cf. Matt. xiii. 5, 6.

 [2345] Hæc.

 [2346] Persecrutationis improbitas.

 [2347] Substantialiter.

 [2348] Wisd. vii. 16.

 [2349] Capitulum.

 [2350] Rom. ix. 18.

 [2351] Ezek. xi. 19, 20.

 [2352] Mark iv. 12.

 [2353] Prospera sanitas.

 [2354] Aula.

 [2355] Mentes.

 [2356] Evidentissimâ assertione pietatis regulam teneamus.

 [2357] Dispensatio humana.

 [2358] Futuri status causam præstat semper anterior meritorum status.

 [2359] Rom. ix. 16.

 [2360] Ad finem boni.

 [2361] Medium est velle bona.

 [2362] Rom. ix. 16.

 [2363] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

 [2364] Procinctum juvenum.

 [2365] Supernæ vocationis.

 [2366] Valde consequenter.

 [2367] 1 Cor. iii. 6, 7.

 [2368] "Nostra perfectio non quidem nobis cessantibus et otiosis
 efficitur."  There is an ellipsis of some such words as, "but by
 activity on our part."

 [2369] Cf. Phil. ii. 13.

 [2370] Hoc ipsum, quod homines sumus.

 [2371] Sicut dicamus, quod movemur, ex Deo est.

 [2372] Hoc ipsum, quod movetur.

 [2373] Rom. ix. 18-21.

 [2374] 2 Tim. i. 16-18.

 [2375] 2 Cor. v. 10.

 [2376] Ex ipsâ conditoris creatione.

 [2377] 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

 [2378] Secundum præcedentes meritorum causas.

 [2379] Ex. xix. 19.

 [2380] Diversas animarum naturas.

 [2381] Quodammodo.

 [2382] [Elucidation II.]

 Translation from the Greek.

 Chapter I.--On the Freedom of the Will, [2383] With an Explanation and
 Interpretation of Those Statements of Scripture Which Appear to Nullify
 It.

 1.  Since in the preaching of the Church there is included the doctrine
 respecting a just judgment of God, which, when believed to be true,
 incites those who hear it to live virtuously, and to shun sin by all
 means, inasmuch as they manifestly acknowledge that things worthy of
 praise and blame are within our own power, come and let us discuss by
 themselves a few points regarding the freedom of the will--a question
 of all others most necessary.  And that we may understand what the
 freedom of the will is, it is necessary to unfold the conception of it,
 [2384] that this being declared with precision, the subject may be
 placed before us.

 2.  Of things that move, some have the cause of their motion within
 themselves; others, again, are moved only from without.  Now only
 portable things are moved from without, such as pieces of wood, and
 stones, and all matter that is held together by their constitution
 alone. [2385] And let that view be removed from consideration which
 calls the flux of bodies motion, since it is not needed for our present
 purpose.  But animals and plants have the cause of their motion within
 themselves, and in general whatever is held together by nature and a
 soul, to which class of things they say that metals also belong.  And
 besides these, fire too is self-moved, and perhaps also fountains of
 water.  Now, of those things which have the cause of their movement
 within themselves, some, they say, are moved out of themselves, others
 from themselves:  things without life, out of themselves; animate
 things, from themselves.  For animate things are moved from themselves,
 a phantasy [2386] springing up in them which incites to effort.  And
 again, in certain animals phantasies are formed which call forth an
 effort, the nature of the phantasy [2387] stirring up the effort in an
 orderly manner, as in the spider is formed the phantasy of weaving; and
 the attempt to weave follows, the nature of its phantasy inciting the
 insect in an orderly manner to this alone.  And besides its phantasial
 nature, nothing else is believed to belong to the insect. [2388] And
 in the bee there is formed the phantasy to produce wax.

 3.  The rational animal, however, has, in addition to its phantasial
 nature, also reason, which judges the phantasies, and disapproves of
 some and accepts others, in order that the animal may be led according
 to them.  Therefore, since there are in the nature of reason aids
 towards the contemplation of virtue and vice, by following which, after
 beholding good and evil, we select the one and avoid the other, we are
 deserving of praise when we give ourselves to the practice of virtue,
 and censurable when we do the reverse.  We must not, however, be
 ignorant that the greater part of the nature assigned to all things is
 a varying quantity [2389] among animals, both in a greater and a less
 degree; so that the instinct in hunting-dogs and in war-horses
 approaches somehow, so to speak, to the faculty of reason.  Now, to
 fall under some one of those external causes which stir up within us
 this phantasy or that, is confessedly not one of those things that are
 dependent upon ourselves; but to determine that we shall use the
 occurrence in this way or differently, is the prerogative of nothing
 else than of the reason within us, which, as occasion offers, [2390]
 arouses us towards efforts inciting to what is virtuous and becoming,
 or turns us aside to what is the reverse.

 4.  But if any one maintain that this very external cause is of such a
 nature that it is impossible to resist it when it comes in such a way,
 let him turn his attention to his own feelings and movements, (and see)
 whether there is not an approval, and assent, and inclination of the
 controlling principle towards some object on account of some specious
 arguments. [2391] For, to take an instance, a woman who has appeared
 before a man that has determined to be chaste, and to refrain from
 carnal intercourse, and who has incited him to act contrary to his
 purpose, is not a perfect [2392] cause of annulling his determination.
 For, being altogether pleased with the luxury and allurement of the
 pleasure, and not wishing to resist it, or to keep his purpose, he
 commits an act of licentiousness.  Another man, again (when the same
 things have happened to him who has received more instruction, and has
 disciplined himself [2393] ), encounters, indeed, allurements and
 enticements; but his reason, as being strengthened to a higher point,
 and carefully trained, and confirmed in its views towards a virtuous
 course, or being near to confirmation, [2394] repels the incitement,
 and extinguishes the desire.

 5.  Such being the case, to say that we are moved from without, and to
 put away the blame from ourselves, by declaring that we are like to
 pieces of wood and stones, which are dragged about by those causes that
 act upon them from without, is neither true nor in conformity with
 reason, but is the statement of him who wishes to destroy [2395] the
 conception of free-will.  For if we were to ask such an one what was
 free-will, he would say that it consisted in this, that when purposing
 to do some thing, no external cause came inciting to the reverse.  But
 to blame, on the other hand, the mere constitution of the body, [2396]
 is absurd; for the disciplinary reason, [2397] taking hold of those who
 are most intemperate and savage (if they will follow her exhortation),
 effects a transformation, so that the alteration and change for the
 better is most extensive,--the most licentious men frequently becoming
 better than those who formerly did not seem to be such by nature; and
 the most savage men passing into such a state of mildness, [2398] that
 those persons who never at any time were so savage as they were, appear
 savage in comparison, so great a degree of gentleness having been
 produced within them.  And we see other men, most steady and
 respectable, driven from their state of respectability and steadiness
 by intercourse with evil customs, so as to fall into habits of
 licentiousness, often beginning their wickedness in middle age, and
 plunging into disorder after the period of youth has passed, which, so
 far as its nature is concerned, is unstable.  Reason, therefore,
 demonstrates that external events do not depend on us, but that it is
 our own business to use them in this way or the opposite, having
 received reason as a judge and an investigator [2399] of the manner in
 which we ought to meet those events that come from without.

 6.  Now, that it is our business to live virtuously, and that God asks
 this of us, as not being dependent on Him nor on any other, nor, as
 some think, upon fate, but as being our own doing, the prophet Micah
 will prove when he says:  "If it has been announced to thee, O man,
 what is good, or what does the Lord require of thee, except to do
 justice and to love mercy?" [2400] Moses also:  "I have placed before
 thy face the way of life, and the way of death:  choose what is good,
 and walk in it." [2401] Isaiah too:  "If you are willing, and hear
 me, ye shall eat the good of the land; but if ye be unwilling, and will
 not hear me, the sword will consume you:  for the mouth of the Lord
 hath spoken it." [2402] And in the Psalms:  "If My people had heard
 Me, and Israel had walked in My ways, I would have humbled their
 enemies to nothing, and laid My hand upon those that afflicted them;"
 [2403] showing that it was in the power of His people to hear and to
 walk in the ways of God.  And the Saviour also, when He commands, "But
 I say unto you, Resist not evil;" [2404] and, "Whosoever shall be angry
 with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment;" [2405] and,
 "Whosoever shall look upon a woman to lust after her, hath already
 committed adultery with her in his heart;" [2406] and by any other
 commandment which He gives, declares that it lies with ourselves to
 keep what is enjoined, and that we shall reasonably [2407] be liable to
 condemnation if we transgress.  And therefore He says in addition:  "He
 that heareth My words, and doeth them, shall be likened to a prudent
 man, who built his house upon a rock," etc., etc.; "while he that
 heareth them, but doeth them not, is like a foolish man, who built his
 house upon the sand," etc. [2408] And when He says to those on His
 right hand, "Come, ye blessed of My Father," etc.; "for I was an
 hungered, and ye gave Me to eat; I was athirst, and ye gave Me to
 drink," [2409] it is exceedingly manifest that He gives the promises to
 these as being deserving of praise.  But, on the contrary, to the
 others, as being censurable in comparison with them, He says, "Depart,
 ye cursed, into everlasting fire!" [2410] And let us observe how Paul
 also converses [2411] with us as having freedom of will, and as being
 ourselves the cause of ruin or salvation, when he says, "Dost thou
 despise the riches of His goodness, and of His patience, and of His
 long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
 repentance?  But, according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou
 art treasuring up for thyself wrath on the day of wrath and revelation
 of the righteous judgment of God; who will render to every one
 according to his works:  to those who, by patient continuance in
 well-doing, seek for glory and immortality, eternal life; while to
 those who are contentious, and believe not the truth, but who believe
 iniquity, anger, wrath, tribulation, and distress, on every soul of man
 that worketh evil; on the Jew first, and on the Greek:  but glory, and
 honour, and peace to every one that worketh good; to the Jew first, and
 to the Greek." [2412] There are, indeed, innumerable passages in the
 Scriptures which establish with exceeding clearness the existence of
 freedom of will.

 7.  But, since certain declarations of the Old Testament and of the New
 lead to the opposite conclusion--namely, that it does not depend on
 ourselves to keep the commandments and to be saved, or to transgress
 them and to be lost--let us adduce them one by one, and see the
 explanations of them, in order that from those which we adduce, any one
 selecting in a similar way all the passages that seem to nullify
 free-will, may consider what is said about them by way of explanation.
 And now, the statements regarding Pharaoh have troubled many,
 respecting whom God declared several times, "I will harden Pharaoh's
 heart." [2413] For if he is hardened by God, and commits sin in
 consequence of being hardened, he is not the cause of sin to himself;
 and if so, then neither does Pharaoh possess free-will.  And some one
 will say that, in a similar way, they who perish have not free-will,
 and will not perish of themselves.  The declaration also in Ezekiel, "I
 will take away their stony hearts, and will put in them hearts of
 flesh, that they may walk in My precepts, and keep My commandments,"
 [2414] might lead one to think that it was God who gave the power to
 walk in His commandments, and to keep His precepts, by His withdrawing
 the hindrance--the stony heart, and implanting a better--a heart of
 flesh.  And let us look also at the passage in the Gospel--the answer
 which the Saviour returns to those who inquired why He spake to the
 multitude in parables.  His words are:  "That seeing they might not
 see; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest they should be
 converted, and their sins be forgiven them." [2415] The passage also
 in Paul:  "It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
 of God that showeth mercy." [2416] The declarations, too, in other
 places, that "both to will and to do are of God;" [2417] "that God hath
 mercy upon whom He will have mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth.
 Thou wilt say then, Why doth He yet find fault?  For who hath resisted
 His will?"  "The persuasion is of Him that calleth, and not of us."
 [2418] "Nay, O man, who art thou that repliest against God?  Shall
 the thing formed say to him that hath formed it, Why hast thou made me
 thus?  Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to
 make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" [2419] Now
 these passages are sufficient of themselves to trouble the multitude,
 as if man were not possessed of free-will, but as if it were God who
 saves and destroys whom He will.

 8.  Let us begin, then, with what is said about Pharaoh--that he was
 hardened by God, that he might not send away the people; along with
 which will be examined also the statement of the apostle, "Therefore
 hath He mercy on whom He will have mercy, and whom He will He
 hardeneth." [2420] And certain of those who hold different opinions
 misuse these passages, themselves also almost destroying free-will by
 introducing ruined natures incapable of salvation, and others saved
 which it is impossible can be lost; and Pharaoh, they say, as being of
 a ruined nature, is therefore hardened by God, who has mercy upon the
 spiritual, but hardens the earthly.  Let us see now what they mean.
 For we shall ask them if Pharaoh was of an earthy nature; and when they
 answer, we shall say that he who is of an earthy nature is altogether
 disobedient to God:  but if disobedient, what need is there of his
 heart being hardened, and that not once, but frequently?  Unless
 perhaps, since it was possible for him to obey (in which case he would
 certainly have obeyed, as not being earthy, when hard pressed by the
 signs and wonders), God needs him to be disobedient to a greater
 degree, [2421] in order that He may manifest His mighty deeds for the
 salvation of the multitude, and therefore hardens his heart.  This will
 be our answer to them in the first place, in order to overturn their
 supposition that Pharaoh was of a ruined nature.  And the same reply
 must be given to them with respect to the statement of the apostle.
 For whom does God harden?  Those who perish, as if they would obey
 unless they were hardened, or manifestly those who would be saved
 because they are not of a ruined nature.  And on whom has He mercy?  Is
 it on those who are to be saved?  And how is there need of a second
 mercy for those who have been prepared once for salvation, and who will
 by all means become blessed on account of their nature?  Unless
 perhaps, since they are capable of incurring destruction, if they did
 not receive mercy, they will obtain mercy, in order that they may not
 incur that destruction of which they are capable, but may be in the
 condition of those who are saved.  And this is our answer to such
 persons.

 9.  But to those who think they understand the term "hardened," we must
 address the inquiry, What do they mean by saying that God, by His
 working, hardens the heart, and with what purpose does He do this?  For
 let them observe the conception [2422] of a God who is in reality just
 and good; but if they will not allow this, let it be conceded to them
 for the present that He is just; and let them show how the good and
 just God, or the just God only, appears to be just, in hardening the
 heart of him who perishes because of his being hardened:  and how the
 just God becomes the cause of destruction and disobedience, when men
 are chastened by Him on account of their hardness and disobedience.
 And why does He find fault with him, saying, "Thou wilt not let My
 people go;" [2423] "Lo, I will smite all the first-born in Egypt, even
 thy first-born;" [2424] and whatever else is recorded as spoken from
 God to Pharaoh through the intervention of Moses?  For he who believes
 that the Scriptures are true, and that God is just, must necessarily
 endeavour, if he be honest, [2425] to show how God, in using such
 expressions, may be distinctly [2426] understood to be just.  But if
 any one should stand, declaring with uncovered head that the Creator of
 the world was inclined to wickedness, [2427] we should need other words
 to answer them.

 10.  But since they say that they regard Him as a just God, and we as
 one who is at the same time good and just, let us consider how the good
 and just God could harden the heart of Pharaoh.  See, then, whether, by
 an illustration used by the apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, we
 are able to prove that by one operation [2428] God has mercy upon one
 man while He hardens another, although not intending to harden; but,
 (although) having a good purpose, hardening follows as a result of the
 inherent principle of wickedness in such persons, [2429] and so He is
 said to harden him who is hardened.  "The earth," he says, "which
 drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs
 meet for them for whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God; but
 that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh to
 cursing, whose end is to be burned." [2430] As respects the rain,
 then, there is one operation; and there being one operation as regards
 the rain, the ground which is cultivated produces fruit, while that
 which is neglected and is barren produces thorns.  Now, it might seem
 profane [2431] for Him who rains to say, "I produced the fruits, and
 the thorns that are in the earth;" and yet, although profane, it is
 true.  For, had rain not fallen, there would have been neither fruits
 nor thorns; but, having fallen at the proper time and in moderation,
 both were produced.  The ground, now, which drank in the rain which
 often fell upon it, and yet produced thorns and briers, is rejected and
 nigh to cursing.  The blessing, then, of the rain descended even upon
 the inferior land; but it, being neglected and uncultivated, yielded
 thorns and thistles.  In the same way, therefore, the wonderful works
 also done by God are, as it were, the rain; while the differing
 purposes are, as it were, the cultivated and neglected land, being
 (yet), like earth, of one nature.

 11.  And as if the sun, uttering a voice, were to say, "I liquefy and
 dry up," liquefaction and drying up being opposite things, he would not
 speak falsely as regards the point in question; [2432] wax being melted
 and mud being dried by the same heat; so the same operation, which was
 performed through the instrumentality of Moses, proved the hardness of
 Pharaoh on the one hand, the result of his wickedness, and the yielding
 of the mixed Egyptian multitude who took their departure with the
 Hebrews.  And the brief statement [2433] that the heart of Pharaoh was
 softened, as it were, when he said, "But ye shall not go far:  ye will
 go a three days' journey, and leave your wives," [2434] and anything
 else which he said, yielding little by little before the signs, proves
 that the wonders made some impression even upon him, but did not
 accomplish all (that they might).  Yet even this would not have
 happened, if that which is supposed by the many--the hardening of
 Pharaoh's heart--had been produced by God Himself.  And it is not
 absurd to soften down such expressions agreeably to common usage:
 [2435] for good masters often say to their slaves, when spoiled by
 their kindness and forbearance, "I have made you bad, and I am to blame
 for offences of such enormity."  For we must attend to the character
 and force of the phrase, and not argue sophistically, [2436]
 disregarding the meaning of the expression.  Paul accordingly, having
 examined these points clearly, says to the sinner:  "Or despisest thou
 the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering; not
 knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? but, after
 thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thyself wrath
 against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of
 God." [2437] Now, let what the apostle says to the sinner be
 addressed to Pharaoh, and then the announcements made to him will be
 understood to have been made with peculiar fitness, as to one who,
 according to his hardness and unrepentant heart, was treasuring up to
 himself wrath; seeing that his hardness would not have been proved nor
 made manifest unless miracles had been performed, and miracles, too, of
 such magnitude and importance.

 12.  But since such narratives are slow to secure assent, [2438] and
 are considered to be forced, [2439] let us see from the prophetical
 declarations also, what those persons say, who, although they have
 experienced the great kindness of God, have not lived virtuously, but
 have afterwards sinned.  "Why, O Lord, hast Thou made us to err from
 Thy ways?  Why hast Thou hardened our heart, so as not to fear Thy
 name?  Return for Thy servants' sake, for the tribes of Thine
 inheritance, that we may inherit a small portion of Thy holy mountain."
 [2440] And in Jeremiah:  "Thou hast deceived me, O Lord, and I was
 deceived; Thou wert strong, and Thou didst prevail." [2441] For the
 expression, "Why hast Thou hardened our heart, so as not to fear Thy
 name?" uttered by those who are begging to receive mercy, is in its
 nature as follows:  "Why hast Thou spared us so long, not visiting us
 because of our sins, but deserting us, until our transgressions come to
 a height?"  Now He leaves the greater part of men unpunished, both in
 order that the habits of each one may be examined, so far as it depends
 upon ourselves, and that the virtuous may be made manifest in
 consequence of the test applied; while the others, not escaping notice
 from God--for He knows all things before they exist--but from the
 rational creation and themselves, may afterwards obtain the means of
 cure, seeing they would not have known the benefit had they not
 condemned themselves.  It is of advantage to each one, that he perceive
 his own peculiar nature [2442] and the grace of God.  For he who does
 not perceive his own weakness and the divine favour, although he
 receive a benefit, yet, not having made trial of himself, nor having
 condemned himself, will imagine that the benefit conferred upon him by
 the grace of Heaven is his own doing.  And this imagination, producing
 also vanity, [2443] will be the cause of a downfall:  which, we
 conceive, was the case with the devil, who attributed to himself the
 priority which he possessed when in a state of sinlessness. [2444]
 "For every one that exalteth himself shall be abased," and "every one
 that humbleth himself shall be exalted." [2445] And observe, that for
 this reason divine things have been concealed from the wise and
 prudent, in order, as says the apostle, that "no flesh should glory in
 the presence of God;" [2446] and they have been revealed to babes, to
 those who after childhood have come to better things, and who remember
 that it is not so much from their own effort, as by the unspeakable
 goodness (of God), that they have reached the greatest possible extent
 of blessedness.

 13.  It is not without reason, then, that he who is abandoned, is
 abandoned to the divine judgment, and that God is long-suffering with
 certain sinners; but because it will be for their advantage, with
 respect to the immortality of the soul and the unending world, [2447]
 that they be not quickly brought [2448] into a state of salvation, but
 be conducted to it more slowly, after having experienced many evils.
 For as physicians, who are able to cure a man quickly, when they
 suspect that a hidden poison exists in the body, do the reverse of
 healing, making this more certain through their very desire to heal,
 deeming it better for a considerable time to retain the patient under
 inflammation and sickness, in order that he may recover his health more
 surely, than to appear to produce a rapid recovery, and afterwards to
 cause a relapse, and (thus) that hasty cure last only for a time; in
 the same way, God also, who knows the secret things of the heart, and
 foresees future events, in His long-suffering, permits (certain events
 to occur), and by means of those things which happen from without
 extracts the secret evil, in order to cleanse him who through
 carelessness has received the seeds of sin, that having vomited them
 forth when they came to the surface, although he may have been deeply
 involved in evils, he may afterwards obtain healing after his
 wickedness, and be renewed. [2449] For God governs souls not with
 reference, let me say, to the fifty [2450] years of the present life,
 but with reference to an illimitable [2451] age:  for He made the
 thinking principle immortal in its nature, and kindred to Himself; and
 the rational soul is not, as in this life, excluded from cure.

 14.  Come now, and let us use the following image [2452] from the
 Gospel.  There is a certain rock, with a little surface-soil, on which,
 if seeds fall, they quickly spring up; but when sprung up, as not
 having root, they are burned and withered when the sun has arisen.  Now
 this rock is a human soul, hardened on account of its negligence, and
 converted to stone because of its wickedness; for no one receives from
 God a heart created of stone, but it becomes such in consequence of
 wickedness.  If one, then, were to find fault with the husbandman for
 not sowing his seed sooner upon the rocky soil, when he saw other rocky
 ground which had received seed flourishing, the husbandman would reply,
 "I shall sow this ground more slowly, casting in seeds that will be
 able to retain their hold, this slower method being better for the
 ground, and more secure than that which receives the seed in a more
 rapid manner, and more upon the surface."  (The person finding fault)
 would yield his assent to the husbandman, as one who spoke with sound
 reason, and who acted with skill:  so also the great Husbandman of all
 nature postpones that benefit which might be deemed premature, [2453]
 that it may not prove superficial.  But it is probable that here some
 one may object to us with reference to this:  "Why do some of the seeds
 fall upon the earth that has superficial soil, the soul being, as it
 were, a rock?"  Now we must say, in answer to this, that it was better
 for this soul, which desired better things precipitately, [2454] and
 not by a way which led to them, to obtain its desire, in order that,
 condemning itself on this account, it may, after a long time, endure to
 receive the husbandry which is according to nature.  For souls are, as
 one may say, innumerable; and their habits are innumerable, and their
 movements, and their purposes, and their assaults, and their efforts,
 of which there is only one admirable administrator, who knows both the
 season, and the fitting helps, and the avenues, and the ways, viz., the
 God and Father of all things, who knows how He conducts even Pharaoh by
 so great events, and by drowning in the sea, with which latter
 occurrence His superintendence of Pharaoh does not cease.  For he was
 not annihilated when drowned:  "For in the hand of God are both we and
 our words; all wisdom also, and knowledge of workmanship." [2455] And
 such is a moderate defence with regard to the statement that "Pharaoh's
 heart was hardened," and that "God hath mercy upon whom He will have
 mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth."

 15.  Let us look also at the declaration in Ezekiel, which says, "I
 shall take away their stony hearts, and will put in them hearts of
 flesh, that they may walk in My statutes and keep My precepts." [2456]
 For if God, when He wills, takes away the stony hearts, and implants
 hearts of flesh, so that His precepts are obeyed and His commandments
 are observed, it is not in our power to put away wickedness.  For the
 taking away of the stony hearts is nothing else than the taking away of
 the wickedness, according to which one is hardened, from him from whom
 God wills to take it; and the implanting of a heart of flesh, so that a
 man may walk in the precepts of God and keep His commandments, what
 else is it than to become somewhat yielding and unresistent to the
 truth, and to be capable of practising virtues?  And if God promises to
 do this, and if, before He takes away the stony hearts, we do not lay
 them aside, it is manifest that it does not depend upon ourselves to
 put away wickedness; and if it is not we who do anything towards the
 production within us of the heart of flesh, but if it is God's doing,
 it will not be our own act to live agreeably to virtue, but altogether
 (the result of) divine grace.  Such will be the statements of him who,
 from the mere words (of Scripture), annihilates free-will. [2457] But
 we shall answer, saying, that we ought to understand these passages
 thus:  That as a man, e.g., who happened to be ignorant and uneducated,
 on perceiving his own defects, either in consequence of an exhortation
 from his teacher, or in some other way, should spontaneously give
 himself up to him whom he considers able to introduce [2458] him to
 education and virtue; and, on his yielding himself up, his instructor
 promises that he will take away his ignorance, and implant instruction,
 not as if it contributed nothing to his training, and to the avoiding
 of ignorance, that he brought himself to be healed, but because the
 instructor promised to improve him who desired improvement; so, in the
 same way, the Word of God promises to take away wickedness, which it
 calls a stony heart, from those who come to it, not if they are
 unwilling, but (only) if they submit themselves to the Physician of the
 sick, as in the Gospels the sick are found coming to the Saviour, and
 asking to obtain healing, and so are cured.  And, let me say, the
 recovery of sight by the blind is, so far as their request goes, the
 act of those who believe that they are capable of being healed; but as
 respects the restoration of sight, it is the work of our Saviour.
 Thus, then, does the Word of God promise to implant knowledge in those
 who come to it, by taking away the stony and hard heart, which is
 wickedness, in order that one may walk in the divine commandments, and
 keep the divine injunctions.

 16.  There was after this the passage from the Gospel, where the
 Saviour said, that for this reason did He speak to those without in
 parables, that "seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not
 understand; lest they should be converted, and their sins be forgiven
 them." [2459] Now, our opponent will say, "If some persons are
 assuredly converted on hearing words of greater clearness, so that they
 become worthy of the remission of sins, and if it does not depend upon
 themselves to hear these words of greater clearness, but upon him who
 teaches, and he for this reason does not announce them to them more
 distinctly, lest they should see and understand, it is not within the
 power of such to be saved; and if so, we are not possessed of free-will
 as regards salvation and destruction."  Effectual, indeed, would be the
 reply to such arguments, were it not for the addition, "Lest they
 should be converted, and their sins be forgiven them,"--namely, that
 the Saviour did not wish those who were not to become good and virtuous
 to understand the more mystical (parts of His teaching), and for this
 reason spake to them in parables; but now, on account of the words,
 "Lest they should be converted, and their sins be forgiven them," the
 defence is more difficult.  In the first place, then, we must notice
 the passage in its bearing on the heretics, who hunt out those portions
 from the Old Testament where is exhibited, as they themselves daringly
 assert, the cruelty [2460] of the Creator of the world [2461] in His
 purpose of avenging and punishing the wicked, [2462] or by whatever
 other name they wish to designate such a quality, so speaking only that
 they may say that goodness does not exist in the Creator; and who do
 not deal with the New Testament in a similar manner, nor in a spirit of
 candour, [2463] but pass by places similar to those which they consider
 censurable in the Old Testament.  For manifestly, and according to the
 Gospel, is the Saviour shown, as they assert, by His former words, not
 to speak distinctly for this reason, that men might not be converted,
 and, being converted, might become deserving of the remission of sins:
 which statement of itself is nothing inferior [2464] to those passages
 from the Old Testament which are objected to.  And if they seek to
 defend the Gospel, we must ask them whether they are not acting in a
 blameworthy manner in dealing differently with the same questions; and,
 while not stumbling against the New Testament, but seeking to defend
 it, they nevertheless bring a charge against the Old regarding similar
 points, whereas they ought to offer a defence in the same way of the
 passages from the New.  And therefore we shall force them, on account
 of the resemblances, to regard all as the writings of one God.  Come,
 then, and let us, to the best of our ability, furnish an answer to the
 question submitted to us.

 17.  We asserted also, when investigating the subject of Pharaoh, that
 sometimes a rapid cure is not for the advantage of those who are
 healed, if, after being seized by troublesome diseases, they should
 easily get rid of those by which they had been entangled.  For,
 despising the evil as one that is easy of cure, and not being on their
 guard a second time against falling into it, they will be involved in
 it (again).  Wherefore, in the case of such persons, the everlasting
 God, the Knower of secrets, who knows all things before they exist, in
 conformity with His goodness, delays sending them more rapid
 assistance, and, so to speak, in helping them does not help, the latter
 course being to their advantage.  It is probable, then, that those
 "without," of whom we are speaking, having been foreseen by the
 Saviour, according to our supposition, as not (likely) to prove steady
 in their conversion, [2465] if they should hear more clearly the words
 that were spoken, were (so) treated by the Saviour as not to hear
 distinctly the deeper (things of His teaching), [2466] lest, after a
 rapid conversion, and after being healed by obtaining remission of
 sins, they should despise the wounds of their wickedness, as being
 slight and easy of healing, and should again speedily relapse into
 them.  And perhaps also, suffering punishment for their former
 transgressions against virtue, which they had committed when they had
 forsaken her, they had not yet filled up the (full) time; in order
 that, being abandoned by the divine superintendence, and being filled
 [2467] to a greater degree by their own evils which they had sown, they
 may afterwards be called to a more stable repentance; so as not to be
 quickly entangled again in those evils in which they had formerly been
 involved when they treated with insolence the requirements of virtue,
 and devoted themselves to worse things.  Those, then, who are said to
 be "without" (manifestly by comparison with those "within"), not being
 very far from those "within," while those "within" hear clearly, do
 themselves hear indistinctly, because they are addressed in parables;
 but nevertheless they do hear.  Others, again, of those "without," who
 are called Tyrians, although it was foreknown that they would have
 repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes, had the Saviour come
 near their borders, do not hear even those words which are heard by
 those "without" (being, as is probable, very far inferior in merit to
 those "without" [2468] ), in order that at another season, after it has
 been more tolerable for them than for those who did not receive the
 word (among whom he mentioned also the Tyrians), they may, on hearing
 the word at a more appropriate time, obtain a more lasting repentance.
 But observe whether, besides our desire to investigate (the truth), we
 do not rather strive to maintain an attitude of piety in everything
 regarding God and His Christ, [2469] seeing we endeavour by every means
 to prove that, in matters so great and so peculiar regarding the varied
 providence of God, He takes an oversight of the immortal soul.  If,
 indeed, one were to inquire regarding those things that are objected
 to, why those who saw wonders and who heard divine words are not
 benefited, while the Tyrians would have repented if such had been
 performed and spoken amongst them; and should ask, and say, Why did the
 Saviour proclaim such to these persons, to their own hurt, that their
 sin might be reckoned to them as heavier? we must say, in answer to
 such an one, that He who understands the dispositions [2470] of all
 those who find fault with His providence--(alleging) that it is owing
 to it that they have not believed, because it did not permit them to
 see what it enabled others to behold, and did not arrange for them to
 hear those words by which others, on hearing them, were
 benefited--wishing to prove that their defence is not founded on
 reason, He grants those advantages which those who blame His
 administration asked; in order that, after obtaining them, they may
 notwithstanding be convicted of the greatest impiety in not having even
 then yielded themselves to be benefited, and may cease from such
 audacity; and having been made free in respect to this very point, may
 learn that God occasionally, in conferring benefits upon certain
 persons, delays and procrastinates, not conferring the favour of seeing
 and hearing those things which, when seen and heard, would render the
 sin of those who did not believe, after acts so great and peculiar,
 heavier and more serious.

 18.  Let us look next at the passage:  "So, then, it is not of him that
 willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy."
 [2471] For they who find fault say:  If "it is not of him that
 willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy,"
 salvation does not depend upon ourselves, but upon the arrangement
 [2472] made by Him who has formed [2473] us such as we are, or on the
 purpose [2474] of Him who showeth mercy when he pleases.  Now we must
 ask these persons the following questions:  Whether to desire what is
 good is virtuous or vicious; and whether the desire to run in order to
 reach the goal in the pursuit of what is good be worthy of praise or
 censure?  And if they shall say that it is worthy of censure, they will
 return an absurd answer; [2475] since the saints desire and run, and
 manifestly in so acting do nothing that is blameworthy.  But if they
 shall say that it is virtuous to desire what is good, and to run after
 what is good, we shall ask them how a perishing nature desires better
 things; [2476] for it is like an evil tree producing good fruit, since
 it is a virtuous act to desire better things.  They will give (perhaps)
 a third answer, that to desire and run after what is good is one of
 those things that are indifferent, [2477] and neither beautiful [2478]
 nor wicked.  Now to this we must say, that if to desire and to run
 after what is good be a thing of indifference, then the opposite also
 is a thing of indifference, viz., to desire what is evil, and to run
 after it.  But it is not a thing of indifference to desire what is
 evil, and to run after it.  And therefore also, to desire what is good,
 and to run after it, is not a thing of indifference.  Such, then, is
 the defence which I think we can offer to the statement, that "it is
 not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
 showeth mercy." [2479] Solomon says in the book of Psalms (for the
 Song of Degrees [2480] is his, from which we shall quote the words):
 "Unless the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it;
 except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh in vain:" [2481]
 not dissuading us from building, nor teaching us not to keep watch in
 order to guard the city in our soul, but showing that what is built
 without God, and does not receive a guard from Him, is built in vain
 and watched to no purpose, because God might reasonably be entitled the
 Lord of the building; and the Governor of all things, the Ruler of the
 guard of the city.  As, then, if we were to say that such a building is
 not the work of the builder, but of God, and that it was not owing to
 the successful effort of the watcher, but of the God who is over all,
 that such a city suffered no injury from its enemies, we should not be
 wrong, [2482] it being understood that something also had been done by
 human means, but the benefit being gratefully referred to God who
 brought it to pass; so, seeing that the (mere) human desire is not
 sufficient to attain the end, and that the running of those who are, as
 it were, athletes, does not enable them to gain the prize of the high
 calling of God in Christ Jesus--for these things are accomplished with
 the assistance of God--it is well said that "it is not of him that
 willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy."  As
 if also it were said with regard to husbandry what also is actually
 recorded:  "I planted, Apollos watered; and God gave the increase.  So
 then neither is he that planteth anything, neither he that watereth;
 but God that giveth the increase." [2483] Now we could not piously
 assert that the production of full crops was the work of the
 husbandman, or of him that watered, but the work of God.  So also our
 own perfection is brought about, not as if we ourselves did nothing;
 [2484] for it is not completed [2485] by us, but God produces the
 greater part of it.  And that this assertion may be more clearly
 believed, we shall take an illustration from the art of navigation.
 For in comparison with the effect of the winds, [2486] and the mildness
 of the air, [2487] and the light of the stars, all co-operating in the
 preservation of the crew, what proportion [2488] could the art of
 navigation be said to bear in the bringing of the ship into
 harbour?--since even the sailors themselves, from piety, do not venture
 to assert often that they had saved the ship, but refer all to God; not
 as if they had done nothing, but because what had been done by
 Providence was infinitely [2489] greater than what had been effected by
 their art.  And in the matter of our salvation, what is done by God is
 infinitely greater than what is done by ourselves; and therefore, I
 think, is it said that "it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
 runneth, but of God that showeth mercy."  For if in the manner which
 they imagine we must explain the statement, [2490] that "it is not of
 him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth
 mercy," the commandments are superfluous; and it is in vain that Paul
 himself blames some for having fallen away, and approves of others as
 having remained upright, and enacts laws for the Churches:  it is in
 vain also that we give ourselves up to desire better things, and in
 vain also (to attempt) to run.  But it is not in vain that Paul gives
 such advice, censuring some and approving of others; nor in vain that
 we give ourselves up to the desire of better things, and to the chase
 after things that are pre-eminent.  They have accordingly not well
 explained the meaning of the passage. [2491]

 19.  Besides these, there is the passage, "Both to will and to do are
 of God." [2492] And some assert that, if to will be of God, and to do
 be of God, and if, whether we will evil or do evil, these (movements)
 come to us from God, then, if so, we are not possessed of free-will.
 But again, on the other hand, when we will better things, and do things
 that are more excellent, [2493] seeing that willing and doing are from
 God, it is not we who have done the more excellent things, but we only
 appeared (to perform them), while it was God that bestowed them; [2494]
 so that even in this respect we do not possess free-will.  Now to this
 we have to answer, that the language of the apostle does not assert
 that to will evil is of God, or to will good is of Him (and similarly
 with respect to doing better and worse); but that to will in a general
 [2495] way, and to run in a general way, (are from Him).  For as we
 have from God (the property) of being living things and human beings,
 so also have we that of willing generally, and, so to speak, of motion
 in general.  And as, possessing (the property) of life and of motion,
 and of moving, e.g., these members, the hands or the feet, we could not
 rightly say [2496] that we had from God this species of motion, [2497]
 whereby we moved to strike, or destroy, or take away another's goods,
 but that we had received from Him simply the generic [2498] power of
 motion, which we employed to better or worse purposes; so we have
 obtained from God (the power) of acting, in respect of our being living
 things, and (the power) to will from the Creator [2499] while we employ
 the power of will, as well as that of action, for the noblest objects,
 or the opposite.

 20.  Still the declaration of the apostle will appear to drag us to the
 conclusion that we are not possessed of freedom of will, in which,
 objecting against himself, he says, "Therefore hath He mercy on whom He
 will have mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth.  Thou wilt say then
 unto me, Why doth He yet find fault?  For who hath resisted His will?
 Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God?  Shall the
 thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?
 Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
 vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?" [2500] For it will
 be said:  If the potter of the same lump make some vessels to honour
 and others to dishonour, and God thus form some men for salvation and
 others for ruin, then salvation or ruin does not depend upon ourselves,
 nor are we possessed of free-will.  Now we must ask him who deals so
 with these passages, whether it is possible to conceive of the apostle
 as contradicting himself.  I presume, however, that no one will venture
 to say so.  If, then, the apostle does not utter contradictions, how
 can he, according to him who so understands him, reasonably find fault,
 censuring the individual at Corinth who had committed fornication, or
 those who had fallen away, and had not repented of the licentiousness
 and impurity of which they had been guilty?  And how can he bless those
 whom he praises as having done well, as he does the house of
 Onesiphorus in these words:  "The Lord give mercy to the house of
 Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain:
 but, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found
 me.  The Lord grant to him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that
 day." [2501] It is not consistent for the same apostle [2502] to
 blame the sinner as worthy of censure, and to praise him who had done
 well as deserving of approval; and again, on the other hand, to say, as
 if nothing depended on ourselves, that the cause was in the Creator
 [2503] why the one vessel was formed to honour, and the other to
 dishonour.  And how is this statement correct: [2504] "For we must
 all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ; that every one may
 receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done,
 whether it be good or bad," [2505] since they who have done evil have
 advanced to this pitch of wickedness [2506] because they were created
 vessels unto dishonour, while they that have lived virtuously have done
 good because they were created from the beginning for this purpose, and
 became vessels unto honour?  And again, how does not the statement made
 elsewhere conflict with the view which these persons draw from the
 words which we have quoted (that it is the fault of the Creator that
 one vessel is in honour and another in dishonour), viz., "that in a
 great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
 wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour.  If a man
 therefore purge himself, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified,
 and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good work;"
 [2507] for if he who purges himself becomes a vessel unto honour, and
 he who allows himself to remain unpurged [2508] becomes a vessel unto
 dishonour, then, so far as these words are concerned, the Creator is
 not at all to blame.  For the Creator makes vessels of honour and
 vessels of dishonour, not from the beginning according to His
 foreknowledge, [2509] since He does not condemn or justify beforehand
 [2510] according to it; but (He makes) those into vessels of honour who
 purged themselves, and those into vessels of dishonour who allowed
 themselves to remain unpurged:  so that it results from older causes
 [2511] (which operated) in the formation of the vessels unto honour and
 dishonour, that one was created for the former condition, and another
 for the latter.  But if we once admit that there were certain older
 causes (at work) in the forming of a vessel unto honour, and of one
 unto dishonour, what absurdity is there in going back to the subject of
 the soul, and (in supposing) that a more ancient cause for Jacob being
 loved and for Esau being hated existed with respect to Jacob before his
 assumption of a body, and with regard to Esau before he was conceived
 in the womb of Rebecca?

 21.  And at the same time, it is clearly shown that, as far as regards
 the underlying nature, [2512] as there is one (piece of) clay which is
 under the hands of the potter, from which piece vessels are formed unto
 honour and dishonour; so the one nature of every soul being in the
 hands of God, and, so to speak, there being (only) one lump of
 reasonable beings, [2513] certain causes of more ancient date led to
 some being created vessels unto honour, and others vessels unto
 dishonour.  But if the language of the apostle convey a censure when he
 says, "Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God?" it
 teaches us that he who has confidence before God, and is faithful, and
 has lived virtuously, would not hear the words, "Who art thou that
 repliest against God?"  Such an one, e.g., as Moses was, "For Moses
 spake, and God answered him with a voice;" [2514] and as God answers
 Moses, so does a saint also answer God.  But he who does not possess
 this confidence, manifestly, either because he has lost it, or because
 he investigates these matters not from a love of knowledge, but from a
 desire to find fault, [2515] and who therefore says, "Why does He yet
 find fault? for who hath resisted His will?" would merit the language
 of censure, which says, "Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest
 against God?"

 Now to those who introduce different natures, and who make use of the
 declaration of the apostle (to support their view), the following must
 be our answer.  If they maintain [2516] that those who perish and those
 who are saved are formed of one lump, and that the Creator of those who
 are saved is the Creator also of them who are lost, and if He is good
 who creates not only spiritual but also earthy (natures) (for this
 follows from their view), it is nevertheless possible that he who, in
 consequence of certain former acts of righteousness, [2517] had now
 been made a vessel of honour, but who had not (afterwards) acted in a
 similar manner, nor done things befitting a vessel of honour, was
 converted in another world into a vessel of dishonour; as, on the other
 hand, it is possible that he who, owing to causes more ancient than the
 present life, was here a vessel of dishonour, may after reformation
 become in the new creation "a vessel of honour, sanctified and meet for
 the Master's use, prepared unto every good work."  And perhaps those
 who are now Israelites, not having lived worthily of their descent,
 will be deprived of their rank, being changed, as it were, from vessels
 of honour into those of dishonour; and many of the present Egyptians
 and Idumeans who came near to Israel, when they shall have borne fruit
 to a larger extent, shall enter into the Church of the Lord, being no
 longer accounted Egyptians and Idumeans, but becoming Israelites:  so
 that, according to this view, it is owing to their (varying) purposes
 that some advance from a worse to a better condition, and others fall
 from better to worse; while others, again, are preserved in a virtuous
 course, or ascend from good to better; and others, on the contrary,
 remain in a course of evil, or from bad become worse, as their
 wickedness flows on.

 22.  But since the apostle in one place does not pretend that the
 becoming of a vessel unto honour or dishonour depends upon God, but
 refers back the whole to ourselves, saying, "If, then, a man purge
 himself, he will be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, meet for the
 Master's use, and prepared unto every good work;" and elsewhere does
 not even pretend that it is dependent upon ourselves, but appears to
 attribute the whole to God, saying, "The potter hath power over the
 clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour and another to
 dishonour;" and as his statements are not contradictory, we must
 reconcile them, and extract one complete statement from both.  Neither
 does our own power, [2518] apart from the knowledge [2519] of God,
 compel us to make progress; nor does the knowledge of God (do so),
 unless we ourselves also contribute something to the good result; nor
 does our own power, apart from the knowledge of God, and the use of the
 power that worthily belongs to us, [2520] make a man become (a vessel)
 unto honour or dishonour; nor does the will of God alone [2521] form a
 man to honour or to dishonour, unless He hold our will to be a kind of
 matter that admits of variation, [2522] and that inclines to a better
 or worse course of conduct.  And these observations are sufficient to
 have been made by us on the subject of free-will.

 [2383] peri tou autexousiou.

 [2384] ten ennoian autou anaptuxai.

 [2385] upo hexeos mones.

 [2386] phantasias.

 [2387] phuseos phantastikes.

 [2388] kai oudenos allou meta ten phantastiken autou phusin
 pepisteumenou tou zoou.

 [2389] posos.

 [2390] para tas aphormas.

 [2391] dia tasde tas pithanotetas.

 [2392] autoteles.

 [2393] eskekoti.

 [2394] engus ge tou bebaiothenai gegenemenos.

 [2395] paracharattein.

 [2396] psilen ten kataskeuen.

 [2397] logou paideutikou.

 [2398] hemerotetos .

 [2399] exetasten.

 [2400] Mic. vi. 8.

 [2401] Cf. Deut. xxx. 15, 16, cf. 19.

 [2402] Isa. i. 19, 20.

 [2403] Ps. lxxxi. 13, 14.

 [2404] Matt. v. 39.

 [2405] Matt. v. 22.

 [2406] Matt. v. 28.

 [2407] eulogos.

 [2408] Cf. Matt. vii. 26.

 [2409] Matt. xxv. 34.

 [2410] Matt. xxv. 41.

 [2411] dialegetai.

 [2412] Rom. ii. 4-10.

 [2413] Ex. iv. 21, cf. vii. 3.

 [2414] Ezek. xi. 19, 20.

 [2415] Cf. Mark iv. 12 and Luke viii. 10.

 [2416] Rom. ix. 16.

 [2417] Cf. Phil. ii. 13.

 [2418] Gal. v. 8.

 [2419] Rom. ix. 20, 21.

 [2420] Cf. Rom. ix. 18.

 [2421] chrezei de autou ho Theos...epi pleion apeithountos.

 [2422] ennoian.

 [2423] Cf. Ex. iv. 23 and ix. 17.

 [2424] Cf. Ex. xii. 12.

 [2425] eugnomone.

 [2426] tranos.

 [2427] apograpsamenos tis gumne te kephale histato pros to poneron
 einai ton demiourgon.

 [2428] energeia.

 [2429] dia to tes kakias hupokeimenon tou par' heautois kakou.

 [2430] Heb. vi. 7, 8.

 [2431] dusphemon.

 [2432] para to hupokeimenon.

 [2433] kai to kata to brachu de anagegraphthai.

 [2434] Cf. Ex. viii. 28, 29.

 [2435] ouk atopon de kai apo sunetheias ta toiauta paramuthesasthai.

 [2436] sukophantein.

 [2437] Rom. ii. 4, 5.

 [2438] duspeitheis.

 [2439] biaioi.

 [2440] Isa. lxiii. 17, 18.

 [2441] Jer. xx. 7.

 [2442] idiotetos.

 [2443] phusiosin.

 [2444] amomos.

 [2445] Cf. Luke xiv. 11.

 [2446] Cf. 1 Cor. i. 29.

 [2447] ton apeiron aiona.

 [2448] sunergethenai .

 [2449] anastoicheiothenai.

 [2450] pentekontaetian.  Rufinus has "sexaginta annos."

 [2451] aperanton aiona.

 [2452] eikoni.

 [2453] tachion.

 [2454] propetesteron, kai ouchi hodo ep' auta hodeusase.

 [2455] Cf. Wisd. vii. 16.

 [2456] Ezek. xi. 19, 20.

 [2457] apo ton psilon rheton to eph' hemin anairon.

 [2458] cheiragogesein.

 [2459] Mark iv. 12.

 [2460] omotes.

 [2461] demiourgou.

 [2462] he amuntike kai antapodotike ton cheironon proairesis.

 [2463] eugnomonos.

 [2464] oudenos elatton.

 [2465] heoramenous ou bebaious esesthai en te epistrophe.

 [2466] ton bathuteron.

 [2467] epi pleion emphorethentas.

 [2468] hos eikos mallon porro ontes tes axias ton exo.

 [2469] ei me mallon hemeis pros to exetastiko kai to eusebes pante
 agonizometha terein peri Theou, etc.

 [2470] diatheseis.

 [2471] Rom. ix. 16.

 [2472] kataskeues.

 [2473] kataskeuasantos.

 [2474] proaireseos.

 [2475] para ten enargeian.

 [2476] ta kreittona.

 [2477] ton meson esti.

 [2478] asteion.

 [2479] Rom. ix. 16.

 [2480] ode ton anabathmon.

 [2481] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

 [2482] ouk an ptaioimen.

 [2483] 1 Cor. iii. 6, 7.

 [2484] he hemetera teleiosis ouchi meden hemon praxanton ginetai.

 [2485] apartizetai.

 [2486] pnoen.

 [2487] eukrasian.

 [2488] arithmon.

 [2489] eis huperbolen pollaplasion.

 [2490] eklambanein.

 [2491] exeilephasi ta kata ton topon.

 [2492] Cf. Phil. ii. 13.

 [2493] ta diapheronta.

 [2494] hemeis men edoxamen, ho de Theos tauta edoresato.

 [2495] to katholou thelein.

 [2496] eulogos.

 [2497] to eidikon tode.

 [2498] to men genikon, to kineisthai.

 [2499] demiourgou.

 [2500] Rom. ix. 18-21.

 [2501] 2 Tim. i. 16-18.

 [2502] ou kata ton auton de apostolon esti.

 [2503] para ten aitian tou demiourgou.

 [2504] hugies.

 [2505] 2 Cor. v. 10.

 [2506] epi touto praxeos.

 [2507] 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

 [2508] aperikatharton heauton periidon.

 [2509] prognosin.

 [2510] prokatakrinei e prodikaioi.

 [2511] ek presbuteron aition.

 [2512] hoson epi te hupokeimene phusei.

 [2513] henos phuramatos ton logikon hupostaseon.

 [2514] Cf. Ex. xix. 19.

 [2515] kata philoneikian.

 [2516] sozousi.

 [2517] ek proteron tinon katorthomaton.

 [2518] to eph' hemin.

 [2519] episteme:  probably in the sense of prognosis.

 [2520] tes katachreseos tou kat' axian tou eph' hemin.  "Nec sine usu
 liberi nostri arbitrii, quod peculiare nobis et meriti nostri est"
 (Redepenning).

 [2521] oute tou epi to Theo monon.

 [2522] hulen tina diaphoras.

 Chapter II.--On the Opposing Powers.

 1.  We have now to notice, agreeably to the statements of Scripture,
 how the opposing powers, or the devil himself, contends with the human
 race, inciting and instigating men to sin.  And in the first place, in
 the book of Genesis, [2523] the serpent is described as having seduced
 Eve; regarding whom, in the work entitled The Ascension of Moses [2524]
 (a little treatise, of which the Apostle Jude makes mention in his
 Epistle), the archangel Michael, when disputing with the devil
 regarding the body of Moses, says that the serpent, being inspired by
 the devil, was the cause of Adam and Eve's transgression.  This also is
 made a subject of inquiry by some, viz., who the angel was that,
 speaking from heaven to Abraham, said, "Now I know that thou fearest
 God, and on my account hast not spared thy beloved son, whom thou
 lovedst." [2525] For he is manifestly described as an angel who said
 that he knew then that Abraham feared God, and had not spared his
 beloved son, as the Scripture declares, although he did not say that it
 was on account of God that Abraham had done this, but on his, that is,
 the speaker's account.  We must also ascertain who that is of whom it
 is stated in the book of Exodus that he wished to slay Moses, because
 he was taking his departure for Egypt; [2526] and afterwards, also, who
 he is that is called the destroying [2527] angel, as well as he who in
 the book of Leviticus is called Apopompæus, i.e., Averter, regarding
 whom Scripture says, "One lot for the Lord, and one lot for Apopompæus,
 i.e., the Averter." [2528] In the first book of Kings, also, an evil
 spirit is said to strangle [2529] Saul; and in the third book, Micaiah
 the prophet says, "I saw the Lord of Israel sitting on His throne, and
 all the host of heaven standing by Him, on His right hand and on His
 left.  And the Lord said, Who will deceive Achab king of Israel, that
 he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?  And one said on this manner,
 and another said on that manner.  And there came forth a spirit, and
 stood before the Lord, and said, I will deceive him.  And the Lord said
 to him, Wherewith?  And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying
 spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.  And He said, Thou shalt
 deceive him, and prevail also:  go forth, and do so quickly.  And now
 therefore the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all thy
 prophets:  the Lord hath spoken evil concerning thee." [2530] Now by
 this last quotation it is clearly shown that a certain spirit, from his
 own (free) will and choice, elected to deceive (Achab), and to work a
 lie, in order that the Lord might mislead the king to his death, for he
 deserved to suffer.  In the first book of Chronicles also it is said,
 "The devil, Satan, stood up against Israel, and provoked David to
 number the people." [2531] In the Psalms, moreover, an evil angel is
 said to harass [2532] certain persons.  In the book of Ecclesiastes,
 too, Solomon says, "If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee,
 leave not thy place; for soundness will restrain many transgressions."
 [2533] In Zechariah [2534] we read that the devil stood on the right
 hand of Joshua, and resisted him.  Isaiah says that the sword of the
 Lord arises against the dragon, the crooked [2535] serpent. [2536]
 And what shall I say of Ezekiel, who in his second vision prophesies
 most unmistakeably to the prince of Tyre regarding an opposing power,
 and who says also that the dragon dwells in the rivers of Egypt? [2537]
 Nay, with what else are the contents of the whole work which is
 written regarding Job occupied, save with the (doings) of the devil,
 who asks that power may be given him over all that Job possesses, and
 over his sons, and even over his person?  And yet the devil is defeated
 through the patience of Job.  In that book the Lord has by His answers
 imparted much information regarding the power of that dragon which
 opposes us.  Such, meanwhile, are the statements made in the Old
 Testament, so far as we can at present recall them, on the subject of
 hostile powers being either named in Scripture, or being said to oppose
 the human race, and to be afterwards subjected to punishment.

 Let us now look also to the New Testament, where Satan approaches the
 Saviour, and tempts Him:  wherein also it is stated that evil spirits
 and unclean demons, which had taken possession of very many, were
 expelled by the Saviour from the bodies of the sufferers, who are said
 also to be made free by Him.  Even Judas, too, when the devil had
 already put it in his heart to betray Christ, afterwards received Satan
 wholly into him; for it is written, that after the sop "Satan entered
 into him." [2538] And the Apostle Paul teaches us that we ought not
 to give place to the devil; but "put on," he says, "the armour of God,
 that ye may be able to resist the wiles of the devil:" [2539]
 pointing out that the saints have to "wrestle not against flesh and
 blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers
 of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
 places." [2540] Nay, he says that the Saviour even was crucified by
 the princes of this world, who shall come to nought, [2541] whose
 wisdom also, he says, he does not speak.  By all this, therefore, holy
 Scripture teaches us that there are certain invisible enemies that
 fight against us, and against whom it commands us to arm ourselves.
 Whence, also, the more simple among the believers in the Lord Christ
 are of opinion, that all the sins which men have committed are caused
 by the persistent efforts of these opposing powers exerted upon the
 minds of sinners, because in that invisible struggle these powers are
 found to be superior (to man).  For if, for example, there were no
 devil, no single human being [2542] would go astray.

 2.  We, however, who see the reason (of the thing) more clearly, do not
 hold this opinion, taking into account those (sins) which manifestly
 originate as a necessary consequence of our bodily constitution. [2543]
 Must we indeed suppose that the devil is the cause of our feeling
 hunger or thirst?  Nobody, I think, will venture to maintain that.  If,
 then, he is not the cause of our feeling hunger and thirst, wherein
 lies the difference when each individual has attained the age of
 puberty, and that period has called forth the incentives of the natural
 heat?  It will undoubtedly follow, that as the devil is not the cause
 of our feeling hunger and thirst, so neither is he the cause of that
 appetency which naturally arises at the time of maturity, viz., the
 desire of sexual intercourse.  Now it is certain that this cause is not
 always so set in motion by the devil that we should be obliged to
 suppose that bodies would nor possess a desire for intercourse of that
 kind if the devil did not exist.  Let us consider, in the next place,
 if, as we have already shown, food is desired by human beings, not from
 a suggestion of the devil, but by a kind of natural instinct, whether,
 if there were no devil, it were possible for human experience to
 exhibit such restraint in partaking of food as never to exceed the
 proper limits; i.e., that no one would either take otherwise than the
 case required, or more than reason would allow; and so it would result
 that men, observing due measure and moderation in the matter of eating,
 would never go wrong.  I do not think, indeed, that so great moderation
 could be observed by men (even if there were no instigation by the
 devil inciting thereto), as that no individual, in partaking of food,
 would go beyond due limits and restraint, until he had learned to do so
 from long usage and experience.  What, then, is the state of the case?
 In the matter of eating and drinking it was possible for us to go
 wrong, even without any incitement from the devil, if we should happen
 to be either less temperate or less careful (than we ought); and are we
 to suppose, then, in our appetite for sexual intercourse, or in the
 restraint of our natural desires, our condition is not something
 similar? [2544] I am of opinion, indeed, that the same course of
 reasoning must be understood to apply to other natural movements as
 those of covetousness, or of anger, or of sorrow, or of all those
 generally which through the vice of intemperance exceed the natural
 bounds of moderation.  There are therefore manifest reasons for holding
 the opinion, that as in good things the human will [2545] is of itself
 weak to accomplish any good (for it is by divine help that it is
 brought to perfection in everything); so also, in things of an opposite
 nature we receive certain initial elements, and, as it were, seeds of
 sins, from those things which we use agreeably to nature; [2546] but
 when we have indulged them beyond what is proper, and have not resisted
 the first movements to intemperance, then the hostile power, seizing
 the occasion of this first transgression, incites and presses us hard
 in every way, seeking to extend our sins over a wider field, and
 furnishing us human beings with occasions and beginnings of sins, which
 these hostile powers spread far and wide, and, if possible, beyond all
 limits.  Thus, when men at first for a little desire money,
 covetousness begins to grow as the passion increases, and finally the
 fall into avarice takes place.  And after this, when blindness of mind
 has succeeded passion, and the hostile powers, by their suggestions,
 hurry on the mind, money is now no longer desired, but stolen, and
 acquired by force, or even by shedding human blood.  Finally, a
 confirmatory evidence of the fact that vices of such enormity proceed
 from demons, may be easily seen in this, that those individuals who are
 oppressed either by immoderate love, or incontrollable anger, or
 excessive sorrow, do not suffer less than those who are bodily vexed by
 devils.  For it is recorded in certain histories, that some have fallen
 into madness from a state of love, others from a state of anger, not a
 few from a state of sorrow, and even from one of excessive joy; which
 results, I think, from this, that those opposing powers, i.e., those
 demons, having gained a lodgment in their minds which has been already
 laid open to them by intemperance, have taken complete possession of
 their sensitive nature, [2547] especially when no feeling of the glory
 of virtue has aroused them to resistance.

 3.  That there are certain sins, however, which do not proceed from the
 opposing powers, but take their beginnings from the natural movements
 of the body, is manifestly declared by the Apostle Paul in the
 passage:  "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
 the flesh:  and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye
 cannot do the things that ye would." [2548] If, then, the flesh lust
 against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, we have
 occasionally to wrestle against flesh and blood, i.e., as being men,
 and walking according to the flesh, and not capable of being tempted by
 greater than human temptations; since it is said of us, "There hath no
 temptation taken you, but such as is common to man:  but God is
 faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
 able." [2549] For as the presidents of the public games do not allow
 the competitors to enter the lists indiscriminately or fortuitously,
 but after a careful examination, pairing in a most impartial
 consideration either of size or age, this individual with that--boys,
 e.g., with boys, men with men, who are nearly related to each other
 either in age or strength; so also must we understand the procedure of
 divine providence, which arranges on most impartial principles all who
 descend into the struggles of this human life, according to the nature
 of each individual's power, which is known only to Him who alone
 beholds the hearts of men:  so that one individual fights against one
 temptation of the flesh, [2550] another against a second; one is
 exposed to its influence for so long a period of time, another only for
 so long; one is tempted by the flesh to this or that indulgence,
 another to one of a different kind; one has to resist this or that
 hostile power, another has to combat two or three at the same time; or
 at one time this hostile influence, at another that; at some particular
 date having to resist one enemy, and at another a different one; being,
 after the performance of certain acts, exposed to one set of enemies,
 after others to a second.  And observe whether some such state of
 things be not indicated by the language of the apostle:  "God is
 faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are
 able," [2551] i.e., each one is tempted in proportion to the amount of
 his strength or power of resistance. [2552] Now, although we have
 said that it is by the just judgment of God that every one is tempted
 according to the amount of his strength, we are not therefore to
 suppose that he who is tempted ought by all means to prove victorious
 in the struggle; in like manner as he who contends in the lists,
 although paired with his adversary on a just principle of arrangement,
 will nevertheless not necessarily prove conqueror.  But unless the
 powers of the combatants are equal, the prize of the victor will not be
 justly won; nor will blame justly attach to the vanquished, because He
 allows us indeed to be tempted, but not "beyond what we are able:"  for
 it is in proportion to our strength that we are tempted; and it is not
 written that, in temptation, He will make also a way to escape so as
 that we should bear it, but a way to escape so as that we should be
 able to bear it. [2553]  But it depends upon ourselves to use either
 with energy or feebleness this power which He has given us.  For there
 is no doubt that under every temptation we have a power of endurance,
 if we employ properly the strength that is granted us.  But it is not
 the same thing to possess the power of conquering and to be victorious,
 as the apostle himself has shown in very cautious language, saying,
 "God will make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it,"
 [2554] not that you will bear it.  For many do not sustain temptation,
 but are overcome by it.  Now God enables us not to sustain
 (temptation), (otherwise there would appear to be no struggle), but to
 have the power of sustaining it. [2555] But this power which is given
 us to enable us to conquer may be used, according to our faculty of
 free-will, either in a diligent manner, and then we prove victorious,
 or in a slothful manner, and then we are defeated.  For if such a power
 were wholly given us as that we must by all means prove victorious, and
 never be defeated, what further reason for a struggle could remain to
 him who cannot be overcome?  Or what merit is there in a victory, where
 the power of successful resistance [2556] is taken away?  But if the
 possibility of conquering be equally conferred on us all, and if it be
 in our own power how to use this possibility, i.e., either diligently
 or slothfully, then will the vanquished be justly censured, and the
 victor be deservedly lauded.  Now from these points which we have
 discussed to the best of our power, it is, I think, clearly evident
 that there are certain transgressions which we by no means commit under
 the pressure of malignant powers; while there are others, again, to
 which we are incited by instigation on their part to excessive and
 immoderate indulgence.  Whence it follows that we have to inquire how
 those opposing powers produce these incitements within us.

 4.  With respect to the thoughts which proceed from our heart, or the
 recollection of things which we have done, or the contemplation of any
 things or causes whatever, we find that they sometimes proceed from
 ourselves, and sometimes are originated by the opposing powers; not
 seldom also are they suggested by God, or by the holy angels.  Now such
 a statement will perhaps appear incredible, [2557] unless it be
 confirmed by the testimony of holy Scripture.  That, then, thoughts
 arise within ourselves, David testifies in the Psalms, saying, "The
 thought of a man will make confession to Thee, and the rest of the
 thought shall observe to Thee a festival day." [2558] That this,
 however, is also brought about by the opposing powers, is shown by
 Solomon in the book of Ecclesiastes in the following manner:  "If the
 spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for
 soundness restrains great offences." [2559] The Apostle Paul also
 will bear testimony to the same point in the words:  "Casting down
 imaginations, and every high thing that exalted itself against the
 knowledge of Christ." [2560] That it is an effect due to God,
 nevertheless, is declared by David, when he says in the Psalms,
 "Blessed is the man whose help is in Thee, O Lord, Thy ascents (are) in
 his heart." [2561] And the apostle says that "God put it into the
 heart of Titus." [2562] That certain thoughts are suggested to men's
 hearts either by good or evil angels, is shown both by the angel that
 accompanied Tobias, [2563] and by the language of the prophet, where he
 says, "And the angel who spoke in me answered." [2564] The book of
 the Shepherd [2565] declares the same, saying that each individual is
 attended by two angels; that whenever good thoughts arise in our
 hearts, they are suggested by the good angel; but when of a contrary
 kind, they are the instigation of the evil angel.  The same is declared
 by Barnabas in his Epistle, [2566] where he says there are two ways,
 one of light and one of darkness, over which he asserts that certain
 angels are placed;--the angels of God over the way of light, the angels
 of Satan over the way of darkness.  We are not, however, to imagine
 that any other result follows from what is suggested to our heart,
 whether good or bad, save a (mental) commotion only, and an incitement
 instigating us either to good or evil.  For it is quite within our
 reach, when a malignant power has begun to incite us to evil, to cast
 away from us the wicked suggestions, and to resist the vile
 inducements, and to do nothing that is at all deserving of blame.  And,
 on the other hand, it is possible, when a divine power calls us to
 better things, not to obey the call; our freedom of will being
 preserved to us in either case.  We said, indeed, in the foregoing
 pages, that certain recollections of good or evil actions were
 suggested to us either by the act of divine providence or by the
 opposing powers, as is shown in the book of Esther, when Artaxerxes had
 not remembered the services of that just man Mordecai, but, when
 wearied out with his nightly vigils, had it put into his mind by God to
 require that the annals of his great deeds should be read to him;
 whereon, being reminded of the benefits received from Mordecai, he
 ordered his enemy Haman to be hanged, but splendid honours to be
 conferred on him, and impunity from the threatened danger to be granted
 to the whole of the holy nation.  On the other hand, however, we must
 suppose that it was through the hostile influence of the devil that the
 suggestion was introduced into the minds of the high priests and the
 scribes which they made to Pilate, when they came and said, "Sir, we
 remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three
 days I will rise again." [2567] The design of Judas, also, respecting
 the betrayal of our Lord and Saviour, did not originate in the
 wickedness of his mind alone.  For Scripture testifies that the "devil
 had already put it into his heart to betray Him." [2568] And
 therefore Solomon rightly commanded, saying, "Keep thy heart with all
 diligence." [2569] And the Apostle Paul warns us:  "Therefore we
 ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard,
 lest perhaps we should let them slip." [2570] And when he says,
 "Neither give place to the devil," [2571] he shows by that injunction
 that it is through certain acts, or a kind of mental slothfulness, that
 room is made for the devil, so that, if he once enter our heart, he
 will either gain possession of us, or at least will pollute the soul,
 if he has not obtained the entire mastery over it, by casting on us his
 fiery darts; and by these we are sometimes deeply wounded, and
 sometimes only set on fire.  Seldom indeed, and only in a few
 instances, are these fiery darts quenched, so as not to find a place
 where they may wound, i.e., when one is covered by the strong and
 mighty shield of faith.  The declaration, indeed, in the Epistle to the
 Ephesians, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
 principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
 this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places," [2572] must
 be so understood as if "we" meant, "I Paul, and you Ephesians, and all
 who have not to wrestle against flesh and blood:"  for such have to
 struggle against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the
 darkness of this world, not like the Corinthians, whose struggle was as
 yet against flesh and blood, and who had been overtaken by no
 temptation but such as is common to man.

 5.  We are not, however, to suppose that each individual has to contend
 against all these (adversaries).  For it is impossible for any man,
 although he were a saint, to carry on a contest against all of them at
 the same time.  If that indeed were by any means to be the case, as it
 is certainly impossible it should be so, human nature could not
 possibly bear it without undergoing entire destruction. [2573] But
 as, for example, if fifty soldiers were to say that they were about to
 engage with fifty others, they would not be understood to mean that one
 of them had to contend against the whole fifty, but each one would
 rightly say that "our battle was against fifty," all against all; so
 also this is to be understood as the apostle's meaning, that all the
 athletes and soldiers of Christ have to wrestle and struggle against
 all the adversaries enumerated,--the struggle having, indeed, to be
 maintained against all, but by single individuals either with
 individual powers, or at least in such manner as shall be determined by
 God, who is the just president of the struggle.  For I am of opinion
 that there is a certain limit to the powers of human nature, although
 there may be a Paul, of whom it is said, "He is a chosen vessel unto
 Me;" [2574] or a Peter, against whom the gates of hell do not prevail;
 or a Moses, the friend of God:  yet not one of them could sustain,
 without destruction to himself, [2575] the whole simultaneous assault
 of these opposing powers, unless indeed the might of Him alone were to
 work in him, who said, "Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world."
 [2576] And therefore Paul exclaims with confidence, "I can do all
 things through Christ, who strengtheneth me;" [2577] and again, "I
 laboured more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the grace of God
 which was with me." [2578] On account, then, of this power, which
 certainly is not of human origin operating and speaking in him, Paul
 could say, "For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor
 angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
 to come, nor height, nor depth, nor power, nor any other creature,
 shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
 Jesus our Lord." [2579] For I do not think that human nature can
 alone of itself maintain a contest with angels, and with the powers of
 the height and of the abyss, [2580] and with any other creature; but
 when it feels the presence of the Lord dwelling within it, confidence
 in the divine help will lead it to say, "The Lord is my light, and my
 salvation; whom shall I fear?  The Lord is the protector of my life; of
 whom shall I be afraid?  When the enemies draw near to me, to eat my
 flesh, my enemies who trouble me, they stumbled and fell.  Though an
 host encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise
 against me, in Him shall I be confident." [2581] From which I infer
 that a man perhaps would never be able of himself to vanquish an
 opposing power, unless he had the benefit of divine assistance.  Hence,
 also, the angel is said to have wrestled with Jacob.  Here, however, I
 understand the writer to mean, that it was not the same thing for the
 angel to have wrestled with Jacob, and to have wrestled against him;
 but the angel that wrestles with him is he who was present with him in
 order to secure his safety, who, after knowing also his moral progress,
 gave him in addition the name of Israel, i.e., he is with him in the
 struggle, and assists him in the contest; seeing there was undoubtedly
 another angel against whom he contended, and against whom he had to
 carry on a contest.  Finally, Paul has not said that we wrestle with
 princes, or with powers, but against principalities and powers.  And
 hence, although Jacob wrestled, it was unquestionably against some one
 of those powers which, Paul declares, resist and contend with the human
 race, and especially with the saints.  And therefore at last the
 Scripture says of him that "he wrestled with the angel, and had power
 with God," so that the struggle is supported by help of the angel, but
 the prize of success conducts the conqueror to God.

 6.  Nor are we, indeed, to suppose that struggles of this kind are
 carried on by the exercise of bodily strength, and of the arts of the
 wrestling school; [2582] but spirit contends with spirit, according to
 the declaration of Paul, that our struggle is against principalities,
 and powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this world.  Nay, the
 following is to be understood as the nature of the struggles; when,
 e.g., losses and dangers befall us, or calumnies and false accusations
 are brought against us, it not being the object of the hostile powers
 that we should suffer these (trials) only, but that by means of them we
 should be driven either to excess of anger or sorrow, or to the last
 pitch of despair; or at least, which is a greater sin, should be
 forced, when fatigued and overcome by any annoyances, to make
 complaints against God, as one who does not administer human life
 justly and equitably; the consequence of which is, that our faith may
 be weakened, or our hopes disappointed, or we may be compelled to give
 up the truth of our opinions, or be led to entertain irreligious
 sentiments regarding God.  For some such things are written regarding
 Job, after the devil had requested God that power should be given him
 over his goods.  By which also we are taught, that it is not by any
 accidental attacks that we are assailed, whenever we are visited with
 any such loss of property, nor that it is owing to chance when one of
 us is taken prisoner, or when the dwellings in which those who are dear
 to us are crushed to death, fall in ruins; for, with respect to all
 these occurrences, every believer ought to say, "Thou couldst have no
 power at all against Me, except it were given thee from above." [2583]
 For observe that the house of Job did not fall upon his sons until
 the devil had first received power against them; nor would the horsemen
 have made an irruption in three bands, [2584] to carry away his camels
 or his oxen, and other cattle, unless they had been instigated by that
 spirit to whom they had delivered themselves up as the servants of his
 will.  Nor would that fire, as it seemed to be, or thunderbolt, as it
 has been considered, have fallen upon the sheep of the patriarch, until
 the devil had said to God, "Hast Thou not made a hedge about all that
 is without and within his house and around all the rest of his
 property?  But now put forth Thy hand, and touch all that he hath, (and
 see) if he do not renounce Thee to Thy face." [2585]

 7.  The result of all the foregoing remarks is to show, that all the
 occurrences in the world which are considered to be of an intermediate
 kind, whether they be mournful or otherwise are brought about, not
 indeed by God, and yet not without Him; while He not only does not
 prevent those wicked and opposing powers that are desirous to bring
 about these things (from accomplishing their purpose), but even permits
 them to do so, although only on certain occasions and to certain
 individuals, as is said with respect to Job himself, that for a certain
 time he was made to fall under the power of others, and to have his
 house plundered by unjust persons.  And therefore holy Scripture
 teaches us to receive all that happens as sent by God, knowing that
 without Him no event occurs.  For how can we doubt that such is the
 case, viz., that nothing comes to man without (the will of) God, when
 our Lord and Saviour declares, "Are not two sparrows sold for a
 farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your
 Father who is in heaven." [2586] But the necessity of the case has
 drawn us away in a lengthened digression on the subject of the struggle
 waged by the hostile powers against men, and of those sadder events
 which happen to human life, i.e., its temptations--according to the
 declaration of Job, "Is not the whole life of man upon the earth a
 temptation?" [2587] --in order that the manner of their occurrence, and
 the spirit in which we should regard them, might be clearly shown.  Let
 us notice next, how men fall away into the sin of false knowledge, or
 with what object the opposing powers are wont to stir up conflict with
 us regarding such things.

 [2523] Gen. iii.

 [2524] This apocryphal work, entitled in Hebrew phtyrt msh, and in
 Greek 'Analepsis, or 'Anabasis Mouseos, is mentioned by several ancient
 writers; e.g., by Athanasius, in his Synopsis Sacræ Scripturæ;
 Nicephorus Constantinopolitanus in his Stichometria, appended to the
 Chronicon of Eusebius (where he says the 'Analepsis contained 1400
 verses), in the Acts of the Council of Nice, etc., etc. (Ruæus).

 [2525] Gen. xxii. 12.  The reading in the text is according to the
 Septuagint and Vulgate, with the exception of the words "quem
 dilexisti," which are an insertion.

 [2526] Cf. Ex. iv. 24-26.

 [2527] Ex. xii. 23, exterminator.  Percussor, Vulgate; olothreuon,
 Sept.

 [2528] Lev. xvi. 8.  'Apopompaios is the reading of the Sept., "Caper
 emissarius" of the Vulgate, z'zl of the Masoretic text.  Cf. Fürst and
 Gesenius s.v.  Rufinus translates Apopompæus by "transmissor."

 [2529] 1 Sam. xviii. 10, effocare.  Septuagint has epese:  Vulgate,
 "invasit;" the Masoretic text ttslch.

 [2530] 1 Kings xxii. 19-23.

 [2531] 1 Chron. xxi. 1.

 [2532] Atterere.

 [2533] Eccles. x. 4, "For yielding pacifieth great offences."  The
 words in the text are, "Quoniam sanitas compescet multa peccata."  The
 Vulgate has, "Curatio faciet cessare peccata maxima."  The Septuagint
 reads, Iama katapausei hamartias megalas:  while the Masoretic text has
 mrph' (curatio).

 [2534] Zech. iii. 1.

 [2535] Perversum.

 [2536] Isa. xxvii. 1.

 [2537] Ezek. xxviii. 12 sq.

 [2538] Cf. John xiii. 27.

 [2539] Eph. vi. 13.

 [2540] Eph. vi. 12.

 [2541] Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 6.

 [2542] Nemo hominum omnino.

 [2543] Ex corporali necessitate descendunt.

 [2544] Quod non simile aliquid pateremur?

 [2545] Propositum.

 [2546] Quæ in usu naturaliter habentur.

 [2547] Sensum eorum penitus possederint.

 [2548] Gal. v. 17.

 [2549] 1 Cor. x. 13.

 [2550] Carnem talem.

 [2551] 1 Cor. x. 13.

 [2552] Pro virtutis suæ quantitate, vel possibilitate.

 [2553] Nec tamen scriptum est, quia faciet in tentatione etiam exitum
 sustinendi, sed exitum ut sustinere possimus.

 [2554] 1 Cor. x. 13.

 [2555] Ut sustinere possimus.

 [2556] Repugnandi vincendique.

 [2557] Fabulosum.

 [2558] Ps. lxxvi. 10.  Such is the reading of the Vulgate and of the
 Septuagint.  The authorized version follows the Masoretic text.

 [2559] Eccles. x. 4; cf. note 8, p. 329.

 [2560] 2 Cor. x. 5.

 [2561] Ps. lxxxiv. 5.  The words in the text are:  Beatus vir, cujus
 est susceptio apud te, Domine, adscensus in corde ejus.  The Vulgate
 reads:  Beatus vir, cujus est auxilium abs te:  ascensiones in corde
 suo disposuit.  The Septuagint the same.  The Masoretic text has mslvt
 ("festival march or procession:"  Furst).  Probably the Septuagint and
 Vulgate had mlvt before them, the similarity between Samech and Ayin
 accounting for the error in transcription.

 [2562] 2 Cor. viii. 16.

 [2563] [See book of Tobit, chaps. v. vi.  S.]

 [2564] Zech. i. 14.  The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Masoretic text all
 have "in me," although the Authorized Version reads "with me."

 [2565] Shepherd of Hermas, Command. vi. 2.  See vol. ii. p. 24.

 [2566] Epistle of Barnabas.  See vol. i. pp. 148, 149.

 [2567] Matt. xxvii. 63.

 [2568] John xiii. 2.

 [2569] Prov. iv. 23.

 [2570] Heb. ii. 1.

 [2571] Eph. iv. 27.

 [2572] Eph. vi. 12.

 [2573] Sine maxima subversione sui.

 [2574] Acts ix. 15.

 [2575] Sine aliquâ pernicie sui.

 [2576] John xvi. 33.

 [2577] Phil. iv. 13.

 [2578] 1 Cor. xv. 10.

 [2579] Rom. viii. 38, 39.  The word "virtus," dunamis, occurring in the
 text, is not found in the text. recept.  Tischendorf reads Dunameis in
 loco (edit. 7).  So also Codex Siniaticus.

 [2580] Excelsa et profunda.

 [2581] Ps. xxvii. 1-3.

 [2582] Palæstricæ artis exercitiis.

 [2583] John xix. 11.

 [2584] Tribus ordinibus.

 [2585] Cf. Job i. 10, 11.  "Nisi in faciem benedixerit tibi."  The
 Hebrew verb vrv has the double signification of "blessing" and
 "cursing."  Cf. Davidson's Commentary on Job, p. 7.  Septuag.
 eulogesei.

 [2586] Matt. x. 29.

 [2587] Cf. Job vii. 1.  The Septuagint reads, poteron ouchi
 peiraterion, etc.; the Vulgate, "militia," the Masoretic text has
 tsv'.  Cf. Davidson's Commentary on Job, in loc.

 Chapter III.--On Threefold Wisdom.

 1.  The holy apostle, wishing to teach us some great and hidden truth
 respecting science and wisdom, says, in the first Epistle to the
 Corinthians:  "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the
 wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of the world, that come to
 nought:  but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
 wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory:  which none
 of the princes of the world knew:  for had they known it, they would
 not have crucified the Lord of glory." [2588] In this passage,
 wishing to describe the different kinds of wisdom, he points out that
 there is a wisdom of this world, and a wisdom of the princes of this
 world, and another wisdom of God.  But when he uses the expression
 "wisdom of the princes of this world," I do not think that he means a
 wisdom common to all the princes of this world, but one rather that is
 peculiar to certain individuals among them.  And again, when he says,
 "We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which
 God ordained before the world unto our glory," [2589] we must inquire
 whether his meaning be, that this is the same wisdom of God which was
 hidden from other times and generations, and was not made known to the
 sons of men, as it has now been revealed to His holy apostles and
 prophets, and which was also that wisdom of God before the advent of
 the Saviour, by means of which Solomon obtained his wisdom, and in
 reference to which the language of the Saviour Himself declared, that
 what He taught was greater than Solomon, in these words, "Behold, a
 greater than Solomon is here," [2590] --words which show, that those
 who were instructed by the Saviour were instructed in something higher
 than the knowledge of Solomon.  For if one were to assert that the
 Saviour did indeed Himself possess greater knowledge, but did not
 communicate more to others than Solomon did, how will that agree with
 the statement which follows:  "The queen of the south shall rise up in
 the judgment, and condemn the men of this generation, because she came
 from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold,
 a greater than Solomon is here?"  There is therefore a wisdom of this
 world, and also probably a wisdom belonging to each individual prince
 of this world.  But with respect to the wisdom of God alone, we
 perceive that this is indicated, that it operated to a less degree in
 ancient and former times, and was (afterwards) more fully revealed and
 manifested through Christ.  We shall inquire, however, regarding the
 wisdom of God in the proper place.

 2.  But now, since we are treating of the manner in which the opposing
 powers stir up those contests, by means of which false knowledge is
 introduced into the minds of men, and human souls led astray, while
 they imagine that they have discovered wisdom, I think it necessary to
 name and distinguish the wisdom of this world, and of the princes of
 this world, that by so doing we may discover who are the fathers of
 this wisdom, nay, even of these kinds of wisdom. [2591] I am of
 opinion, therefore, as I have stated above, that there is another
 wisdom of this world besides those (different kinds of) wisdom [2592]
 which belong to the princes of this world, by which wisdom those things
 seem to be understood and comprehended which belong to this world.
 This wisdom, however, possesses in itself no fitness for forming any
 opinion either respecting divine things, [2593] or the plan of the
 world's government, or any other subjects of importance, or regarding
 the training for a good or happy life; but is such as deals wholly with
 the art of poetry, e.g., or that of grammar, or rhetoric, or geometry,
 or music, with which also, perhaps, medicine should be classed.  In all
 these subjects we are to suppose that the wisdom of this world is
 included.  The wisdom of the princes of this world, on the other hand,
 we understand to be such as the secret and occult philosophy, as they
 call it, of the Egyptians, and the astrology of the Chaldeans and
 Indians, who make profession of the knowledge of high things, [2594]
 and also that manifold variety of opinion which prevails among the
 Greeks regarding divine things.  Accordingly, in the holy Scriptures we
 find that there are princes over individual nations; as in Daniel
 [2595] we read that there was a prince of the kingdom of Persia, and
 another prince of the kingdom of Græcia, who are clearly shown, by the
 nature of the passage, to be not human beings, but certain powers.  In
 the prophecies of Ezekiel, [2596] also, the prince of Tyre is
 unmistakeably shown to be a kind of spiritual power.  When these, then,
 and others of the same kind, possessing each his own wisdom, and
 building up his own opinions and sentiments, beheld our Lord and
 Saviour professing and declaring that He had for this purpose come into
 the world, that all the opinions of science, falsely so called, might
 be destroyed, not knowing what was concealed within Him, they forthwith
 laid a snare for Him:  for "the kings of the earth set themselves, and
 the rulers assembled together, against the Lord and His Christ." [2597]
 But their snares being discovered, and the plans which they had
 attempted to carry out being made manifest when they crucified the Lord
 of glory, therefore the apostle says, "We speak wisdom among them that
 are perfect, but not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of
 this world, who are brought to nought, which none of the princes of
 this world knew:  for had they known it, they would not have crucified
 the Lord of glory." [2598]

 3.  We must, indeed, endeavour to ascertain whether that wisdom [2599]
 of the princes of this world, with which they endeavour to imbue men,
 is introduced into their minds by the opposing powers, with the purpose
 of ensnaring and injuring them, or only for the purpose of deceiving
 them, i.e., not with the object of doing any hurt to man; but, as these
 princes of this world esteem such opinions to be true, they desire to
 impart to others what they themselves believe to be the truth:  and
 this is the view which I am inclined to adopt.  For as, to take an
 illustration, certain Greek authors, or the leaders of some heretical
 sect, after having imbibed an error in doctrine instead of the truth,
 and having come to the conclusion in their own minds that such is the
 truth, proceed, in the next place, to endeavour to persuade others of
 the correctness of their opinions; so, in like manner, are we to
 suppose is the procedure of the princes of this world, in which to
 certain spiritual powers has been assigned the rule over certain
 nations, and who are termed on that account the princes of this world.
 There are besides, in addition to these princes, certain special
 energies [2600] of this world, i.e., spiritual powers, which bring
 about certain effects, which they have themselves, in virtue of their
 freedom of will, chosen to produce, and to these belong those princes
 who practise the wisdom of this world:  there being, for example, a
 peculiar energy and power, which is the inspirer of poetry; another, of
 geometry; and so a separate power, to remind us of each of the arts and
 professions of this kind.  Lastly, many Greek writers have been of
 opinion that the art of poetry cannot exist without madness; [2601]
 whence also it is several times related in their histories, that those
 whom they call poets [2602] were suddenly filled with a kind of spirit
 of madness.  And what are we to say also of those whom they call
 diviners, [2603] from whom, by the working of those demons who have the
 mastery over them, answers are given in carefully constructed verses?
 Those persons, too, whom they term Magi or Malevolent, [2604]
 frequently, by invoking demons over boys of tender years, have made
 them repeat poetical compositions which were the admiration and
 amazement of all.  Now these effects we are to suppose are brought
 about in the following manner:  As holy and immaculate souls, after
 devoting themselves to God with all affection and purity, and after
 preserving themselves free from all contagion of evil spirits, [2605]
 and after being purified by lengthened abstinence, and imbued with holy
 and religious training, assume by this means a portion of divinity, and
 earn the grace of prophecy, and other divine gifts; so also are we to
 suppose that those who place themselves in the way of the opposing
 powers, i.e., who purposely admire and adopt their manner of life and
 habits, [2606] receive their inspiration, and become partakers of their
 wisdom and doctrine.  And the result of this is, that they are filled
 with the working of those spirits to whose service they have subjected
 themselves.

 4.  With respect to those, indeed, who teach differently regarding
 Christ from what the rule of Scripture allows, it is no idle task to
 ascertain whether it is from a treacherous purpose that these opposing
 powers, in their struggles to prevent a belief in Christ, have devised
 certain fabulous and impious doctrines; or whether, on hearing the word
 of Christ, and not being able to cast it forth from the secrecy of
 their conscience, nor yet to retain it pure and holy, they have, by
 means of vessels that were convenient to their use, [2607] and, so to
 speak, through their prophets, introduced various errors contrary to
 the rule of Christian truth.  Now we are to suppose rather that
 apostate and refugee powers, [2608] which have departed from God out of
 the very wickedness of their mind and will, [2609] or from envy of
 those for whom there is prepared (on their becoming acquainted with the
 truth) an ascent to the same rank, whence they themselves had fallen,
 did, in order to prevent any progress of that kind, invent these errors
 and delusions of false doctrine.  It is then clearly established, by
 many proofs, that while the soul of man exists in this body, it may
 admit different energies, i.e., operations, from a diversity of good
 and evil spirits.  Now, of wicked spirits there is a twofold mode of
 operation:  i.e., when they either take complete and entire possession
 of the mind, [2610] so as to allow their captives [2611] the power
 neither of understanding nor feeling; as, for instance, is the case
 with those commonly called possessed, [2612] whom we see to be deprived
 of reason, and insane (such as those were who are related in the Gospel
 to have been cured by the Saviour); or when by their wicked suggestions
 they deprave a sentient and intelligent soul with thoughts of various
 kinds, persuading it to evil, of which Judas is an illustration, who
 was induced at the suggestion of the devil to commit the crime of
 treason, according to the declaration of Scripture, that "the devil had
 already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray him." [2613]

 But a man receives the energy, i.e., the working, of a good spirit,
 when he is stirred and incited to good, and is inspired to heavenly or
 divine things; as the holy angels and God Himself wrought in the
 prophets, arousing and exhorting them by their holy suggestions to a
 better course of life, yet so, indeed, that it remained within the will
 and judgment of the individual, either to be willing or unwilling to
 follow the call to divine and heavenly things.  And from this manifest
 distinction, it is seen how the soul is moved by the presence of a
 better spirit, i.e., if it encounter no perturbation or alienation of
 mind whatever from the impending inspiration, nor lose the free control
 of its will; as, for instance, is the case with all, whether prophets
 or apostles, who ministered to the divine responses without any
 perturbation of mind. [2614] Now, that by the suggestions of a good
 spirit the memory of man is aroused to the recollection of better
 things, we have already shown by previous instances, when we mentioned
 the cases of Mordecai and Artaxerxes.

 5.  This too, I think, should next be inquired into, viz., what are the
 reasons why a human soul is acted on at one time by good (spirits), and
 at another by bad:  the grounds of which I suspect to be older than the
 bodily birth of the individual, as John (the Baptist) showed by his
 leaping and exulting in his mother's womb, when the voice of the
 salutation of Mary reached the ears of his mother Elisabeth; and as
 Jeremiah the prophet declares, who was known to God before he was
 formed in his mother's womb, and before he was born was sanctified by
 Him, and while yet a boy received the grace of prophecy. [2615] And
 again, on the other hand it is shown beyond a doubt, that some have
 been possessed by hostile spirits from the very beginning of their
 lives:  i.e., some were born with an evil spirit; and others, according
 to credible histories, have practised divination [2616] from
 childhood.  Others have been under the influence of the demon called
 Python, i.e., the ventriloquial spirit, from the commencement of their
 existence.  To all which instances, those who maintain that everything
 in the world is under the administration of Divine Providence (as is
 also our own belief), can, as it appears to me, give no other answer,
 so as to show that no shadow of injustice rests upon the divine
 government, than by holding that there were certain causes of prior
 existence, in consequence of which the souls, before their birth in the
 body, contracted a certain amount of guilt in their sensitive nature,
 or in their movements, on account of which they have been judged worthy
 by Divine Providence of being placed in this condition.  For a soul is
 always in possession of free-will, as well when it is in the body as
 when it is without it; and freedom of will is always directed either to
 good or evil.  Nor can any rational and sentient being, i.e., a mind or
 soul, exist without some movement either good or bad.  And it is
 probable that these movements furnish grounds for merit even before
 they do anything in this world; so that on account of these merits or
 grounds they are, immediately on their birth, and even before it, so to
 speak, assorted by Divine Providence for the endurance either of good
 or evil.

 Let such, then, be our views respecting those events which appear to
 befall men, either immediately after birth, or even before they enter
 upon the light.  But as regards the suggestions which are made to the
 soul, i.e., to the faculty of human thought, by different spirits, and
 which arouse men to good actions or the contrary, even in such a case
 we must suppose that there sometimes existed certain causes anterior to
 bodily birth.  For occasionally the mind, when watchful, and casting
 away from it what is evil, calls to itself the aid of the good; or if
 it be, on the contrary, negligent and slothful, it makes room through
 insufficient caution for these spirits, which, lying in wait secretly
 like robbers, contrive to rush into the minds of men when they see a
 lodgment made for them by sloth; as the Apostle Peter says, "that our
 adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
 devour." [2617] On which account our heart must be kept with all
 carefulness both by day and night, and no place be given to the devil;
 but every effort must be used that the ministers of God--those spirits,
 viz., who were sent to minister to them who are called to be heirs of
 salvation [2618] --may find a place within us, and be delighted to
 enter into the guest-chamber [2619] of our soul, and dwelling within us
 may guide us by their counsels; if, indeed, they shall find the
 habitation of our heart adorned by the practice of virtue and
 holiness.  But let that be sufficient which we have said, as we best
 could, regarding those powers which are hostile to the human race.

 [2588] 1 Cor. ii. 6-8.

 [2589] 1 Cor. ii. 7.

 [2590] Matt. xii. 42.

 [2591] Sapientiarum harum.

 [2592] Sapientias illas.

 [2593] De divinitate.

 [2594] De scientiâ excelsi pollicentium.

 [2595] Cf. Dan. x.

 [2596] Cf. Ezek. xxvi.

 [2597] Ps. ii. 2.

 [2598] 1 Cor. ii. 6-8.

 [2599] Istæ sapientiæ.

 [2600] Energiæ.

 [2601] Insania.

 [2602] Vates.

 [2603] Divinos.

 [2604] Magi vel malefici.

 [2605] Dæmonum.

 [2606] Id est, industria vita, vel studio amico illis et accepto.

 [2607] Per vasa opportuna sibi.

 [2608] Apostatæ et refugæ virtutes.

 [2609] Propositi.

 [2610] Penitus ex integro.

 [2611] Eos quos obsederint.

 [2612] Energumenos.

 [2613] John xix. 2.

 [2614] [See Oehler's Old Testament Theology, § 207, "Psychological
 Definition of the Prophetic State in Ancient Times," pp. 468, 469.  S.]

 [2615] Jer. i. 5, 6.

 [2616] Divinasse.

 [2617] 1 Pet. v. 8.

 [2618] Heb. i. 14.

 [2619] Hospitium.

 Chapter IV.--On Human Temptations.

 1.  And now the subject of human temptations must not, in my opinion,
 be passed over in silence, which take their rise sometimes from flesh
 and blood, or from the wisdom of flesh and blood, which is said to be
 hostile to God.  And whether the statement be true which certain
 allege, viz., that each individual has as it were two souls, we shall
 determine after we have explained the nature of those temptations,
 which are said to be more powerful than any of human origin, i.e.,
 which we sustain from principalities and powers, and from the rulers of
 the darkness of this world, and from spiritual wickedness in high
 places, or to which we are subjected from wicked spirits and unclean
 demons.  Now, in the investigation of this subject, we must, I think,
 inquire according to a logical method whether there be in us human
 beings, who are composed of soul and body and vital spirit, some other
 element, possessing an incitement of its own, and evoking a movement
 towards evil.  For a question of this kind is wont to be discussed by
 some in this way:  whether, viz., as two souls are said to co-exist
 within us, the one is more divine and heavenly and the other inferior;
 or whether, from the very fact that we inhere in bodily structures
 which according to their own proper nature are dead, and altogether
 devoid of life (seeing it is from us, i.e., from our souls, that the
 material body derives its life, it being contrary and hostile to the
 spirit), we are drawn on and enticed to the practice of those evils
 which are agreeable to the body; or whether, thirdly (which was the
 opinion of some of the Greek philosophers), although our soul is one in
 substance, it nevertheless consists of several elements, and one
 portion of it is called rational and another irrational, and that which
 is termed the irrational part is again separated into two
 affections--those of covetousness and passion.  These three opinions,
 then, regarding the soul, which we have stated above, we have found to
 be entertained by some, but that one of them, which we have mentioned
 as being adopted by certain Grecian philosophers, viz., that the soul
 is tripartite, I do not observe to be greatly confirmed by the
 authority of holy Scripture; while with respect to the remaining two
 there is found a considerable number of passages in the holy Scriptures
 which seem capable of application to them.

 2.  Now, of these opinions, let us first discuss that which is
 maintained by some, that there is in us a good and heavenly soul, and
 another earthly and inferior; and that the better soul is implanted
 within us from heaven, such as was that which, while Jacob was still in
 the womb, gave him the prize of victory in supplanting his brother
 Esau, and which in the case of Jeremiah was sanctified from his birth,
 and in that of John was filled by the Holy Spirit from the womb.  Now,
 that which they term the inferior soul is produced, they allege, along
 with the body itself out of the seed of the body, whence they say it
 cannot live or subsist beyond the body, on which account also they say
 it is frequently termed flesh.  For the expression, "The flesh lusteth
 against the Spirit," [2620] they take to be applicable not to the
 flesh, but to this soul, which is properly the soul of the flesh.  From
 these words, moreover, they endeavour notwithstanding to make good the
 declaration in Leviticus:  "The life of all flesh is the blood
 thereof." [2621] For, from the circumstance that it is the diffusion
 of the blood throughout the whole flesh which produces life in the
 flesh, they assert that this soul, which is said to be the life of all
 flesh, is contained in the blood.  This statement, moreover, that the
 flesh struggles against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh;
 and the further statement, that "the life of all flesh is the blood
 thereof," is, according to these writers, simply calling the wisdom of
 the flesh by another name, because it is a kind of material spirit,
 which is not subject to the law of God, nor can be so, because it has
 earthly wishes and bodily desires.  And it is with respect to this that
 they think the apostle uttered the words:  "I see another law in my
 members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
 captivity to the law of sin which is in my members." [2622] And if
 one were to object to them that these words were spoken of the nature
 of the body, which indeed, agreeably to the peculiarity of its nature,
 is dead, but is said to have sensibility, or wisdom [2623] which is
 hostile to God, or which struggles against the spirit; or if one were
 to say that, in a certain degree, the flesh itself was possessed of a
 voice, which should cry out against the endurance of hunger, or thirst,
 or cold, or of any discomfort arising either from abundance or
 poverty,--they would endeavour to weaken and impair the force of such
 (arguments), by showing that there were many other mental perturbations
 [2624] which derive their origin in no respect from the flesh, and yet
 against which the spirit struggles, such as ambition, avarice,
 emulation, envy, pride, and others like these; and seeing that with
 these the human mind or spirit wages a kind of contest, they lay down
 as the cause of all these evils, nothing else than this corporal soul,
 as it were, of which we have spoken above, and which is generated from
 the seed by a process of traducianism.  They are accustomed also to
 adduce, in support of their assertion, the declaration of the apostle,
 "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, fornication,
 uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, poisonings, [2625] hatred,
 contentions, emulations, wrath, quarrelling, dissensions, heresies,
 sects, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and the like;" [2626]
 asserting that all these do not derive their origin from the habits or
 pleasures of the flesh, so that all such movements are to be regarded
 as inherent in that substance which has not a soul, i.e., the flesh.
 The declaration, moreover, "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that
 not many wise men among you according to the flesh are called," [2627]
 would seem to require to be understood as if there were one kind of
 wisdom, carnal and material, and another according to the spirit, the
 former of which cannot indeed be called wisdom, unless there be a soul
 of the flesh, which is wise in respect of what is called carnal
 wisdom.  And in addition to these passages they adduce the following:
 "Since the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
 flesh, so that we cannot do the things that we would." [2628] What
 are these things now respecting which he says, "that we cannot do the
 things that we would?"  It is certain, they reply, that the spirit
 cannot be intended; for the will of the spirit suffers no hindrance.
 But neither can the flesh be meant, because if it has not a soul of its
 own, neither can it assuredly possess a will.  It remains, then, that
 the will of this soul be intended which is capable of having a will of
 its own, and which certainly is opposed to the will of the spirit.  And
 if this be the case, it is established that the will of the soul is
 something intermediate between the flesh and the spirit, undoubtedly
 obeying and serving that one of the two which it has elected to obey.
 And if it yield itself up to the pleasures of the flesh, it renders men
 carnal; but when it unites itself with the spirit, it produces men of
 the Spirit, and who on that account are termed spiritual.  And this
 seems to be the meaning of the apostle in the words, "But ye are not in
 the flesh, but in the Spirit." [2629]

 We have accordingly to ascertain what is this very will (intermediate)
 between flesh and spirit, besides that will which is said to belong to
 the flesh or the spirit.  For it is held as certain, that everything
 which is said to be a work of the spirit is (a product of) the will of
 the spirit, and everything that is called a work of the flesh (proceeds
 from) the will of the flesh.  What else then, besides these, is that
 will of the soul which receives a separate name, [2630] and which will,
 the apostle being opposed to our executing, says:  "Ye cannot do the
 things that ye would?"  By this it would seem to be intended, that it
 ought to adhere to neither of these two, i.e., to neither flesh nor
 spirit.  But some one will say, that as it is better for the soul to
 execute its own will than that of the flesh; so, on the other hand, it
 is better to do the will of the spirit than its own will.  How, then,
 does the apostle say, "that ye cannot do the things that ye would?"
 Because in that contest which is waged between flesh and spirit, the
 spirit is by no means certain of victory, it being manifest that in
 very many individuals the flesh has the mastery.

 3.  But since the subject of discussion on which we have entered is one
 of great profundity, which it is necessary to consider in all its
 bearings, [2631] let us see whether some such point as this may not be
 determined:  that as it is better for the soul to follow the spirit
 when the latter has overcome the flesh, so also, if it seem to be a
 worse course for the former to follow the flesh in its struggles
 against the spirit, when the latter would recall the soul to its
 influence, it may nevertheless appear a more advantageous procedure for
 the soul to be under the mastery of the flesh than to remain under the
 power of its own will.  For, since it is said to be neither hot nor
 cold, but to continue in a sort of tepid condition, it will find
 conversion a slow and somewhat difficult undertaking.  If indeed it
 clung to the flesh, then, satiated at length, and filled with those
 very evils which it suffers from the vices of the flesh, and wearied as
 it were by the heavy burdens of luxury and lust, it may sometimes be
 converted with greater ease and rapidity from the filthiness of matter
 to a desire for heavenly things, and (to a taste for) spiritual
 graces.  And the apostle must be supposed to have said, that "the
 Spirit contends against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit, so
 that we cannot do the things that we would" (those things, undoubtedly,
 which are designated as being beyond the will of the spirit, and the
 will of the flesh), meaning (as if we were to express it in other
 words) that it is better for a man to be either in a state of virtue or
 in one of wickedness, than in neither of these; but that the soul,
 before its conversion to the spirit, and its union with it, [2632]
 appears during its adherence to the body, and its meditation of carnal
 things, to be neither in a good condition nor in a manifestly bad one,
 but resembles, so to speak, an animal.  It is better, however, for it,
 if possible, to be rendered spiritual through adherence to the spirit;
 but if that cannot be done, it is more expedient for it to follow even
 the wickedness of the flesh, than, placed under the influence of its
 own will, to retain the position of an irrational animal.

 These points we have now discussed, in our desire to consider each
 individual opinion, at greater length than we intended, that those
 views might not be supposed to have escaped our notice which are
 generally brought forward by those who inquire whether there is within
 us any other soul than this heavenly and rational one, which is
 naturally opposed to the latter, and is called either the flesh, or the
 wisdom of the flesh, or the soul of the flesh.

 4.  Let us now see what answer is usually returned to these statements
 by those who maintain that there is in us one movement, and one life,
 proceeding from one and the same soul, both the salvation and the
 destruction of which are ascribed to itself as a result of its own
 actions.  And, in the first place, let us notice of what nature those
 commotions [2633] of the soul are which we suffer, when we feel
 ourselves inwardly drawn in different directions; when there arises a
 kind of contest of thoughts in our hearts, and certain probabilities
 are suggested us, agreeably to which we lean now to this side, now to
 that, and by which we are sometimes convicted of error, and sometimes
 approve of our acts. [2634] It is nothing remarkable, however, to say
 of wicked spirits, that they have a varying and conflicting judgment,
 and one out of harmony with itself, since such is found to be the case
 in all men, whenever, in deliberating upon an uncertain event, council
 is taken, and men consider and consult what is to be chosen as the
 better and more useful course.  It is not therefore surprising that, if
 two probabilities meet, and suggest opposite views, they should drag
 the mind in contrary directions.  For example, if a man be led by
 reflection to believe and to fear God, it cannot then be said that the
 flesh contends against the Spirit; but, amidst the uncertainty of what
 may be true and advantageous, the mind is drawn in opposite
 directions.  So, also, when it is supposed that the flesh provokes to
 the indulgence of lust, but better counsels oppose allurements of that
 kind, we are not to suppose that it is one life which is resisting
 another, but that it is the tendency of the nature of the body, which
 is eager to empty out and cleanse the places filled with seminal
 moisture; as, in like manner, it is not to be supposed that it is any
 opposing power, or the life of another soul, which excites within us
 the appetite of thirst, and impels us to drink, or which causes us to
 feel hunger, and drives us to satisfy it.  But as it is by the natural
 movements of the body that food and drink are either desired or
 rejected, [2635] so also the natural seed, collected together in course
 of time in the various vessels, has an eager desire to be expelled and
 thrown away, and is so far from never being removed, save by the
 impulse of some exciting cause, that it is even sometimes spontaneously
 emitted.  When, therefore, it is said that "the flesh struggles against
 the Spirit," these persons understand the expression to mean that habit
 or necessity, or the delights of the flesh, arouse a man, and withdraw
 him from divine and spiritual things.  For, owing to the necessity of
 the body being drawn away, we are not allowed to have leisure for
 divine things, which are to be eternally advantageous.  So again, the
 soul, devoting itself to divine and spiritual pursuits, and being
 united to the spirit, is said to fight against the flesh, by not
 permitting it to be relaxed by indulgence, and to become unsteady
 through the influence of those pleasures for which it feels a natural
 delight.  In this way, also, they claim to understand the words, "The
 wisdom of the flesh is hostile to God," [2636] not that the flesh
 really has a soul, or a wisdom of its own.  But as we are accustomed to
 say, by an abuse [2637] of language, that the earth is thirsty, and
 wishes to drink in water, this use of the word "wishes" is not proper,
 but catachrestic,--as if we were to say again, that this house wants to
 be rebuilt, [2638] and many other similar expressions; so also is the
 wisdom of the flesh to be understood, or the expression, that "the
 flesh lusteth against the Spirit."  They generally connect with these
 the expression, "The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto Me from
 the ground." [2639] For what cries unto the Lord is not properly the
 blood which was shed; but the blood is said improperly to cry out,
 vengeance being demanded upon him who had shed it.  The declaration
 also of the apostle, "I see another law in my members, warring against
 the law of my mind," [2640] they so understand as if he had said, That
 he who wishes to devote himself to the word of God is, on account of
 his bodily necessities and habits, which like a sort of law are
 ingrained in the body, distracted, and divided, and impeded, lest, by
 devoting himself vigorously to the study of wisdom, he should be
 enabled to behold the divine mysteries.

 5.  With respect, however, to the following being ranked among the
 works of the flesh, viz., heresies, and envyings, and contentions, or
 other (vices), they so understand the passage, that the mind, being
 rendered grosser in feeling, from its yielding itself to the passions
 of the body, and being oppressed by the mass of its vices, and having
 no refined or spiritual feelings, is said to be made flesh, and derives
 its name from that in which it exhibits more vigour and force of will.
 [2641] They also make this further inquiry, "Who will be found, or
 who will be said to be, the creator of this evil sense, called the
 sense of the flesh?"  Because they defend the opinion that there is no
 other creator of soul and flesh than God.  And if we were to assert
 that the good God created anything in His own creation that was hostile
 to Himself, it would appear to be a manifest absurdity.  If, then, it
 is written, that "carnal wisdom is enmity against God," [2642] and if
 this be declared to be a result of creation, God Himself will appear to
 have formed a nature hostile to Himself, which cannot be subject to Him
 nor to His law, as if it were (supposed to be) an animal of which such
 qualities are predicated.  And if this view be admitted, in what
 respect will it appear to differ from that of those who maintain that
 souls of different natures are created, which, according to their
 natures, [2643] are destined either to be lost or saved?  But this is
 an opinion of the heretics alone, who, not being able to maintain the
 justice of God on grounds of piety, compose impious inventions of this
 kind.  And now we have brought forward to the best of our ability, in
 the person of each of the parties, what might be advanced by way of
 argument regarding the several views, and let the reader choose out of
 them for himself that which he thinks ought to be preferred.

 [2620] Gal. v. 17.

 [2621] Lev. xvii. 14.

 [2622] Rom. vii. 23.

 [2623] Sensum vel sapientiam.

 [2624] Passiones animæ.

 [2625] Veneficia.  Pharmakeia.  "Witchcraft" (Auth. Version).

 [2626] Gal. v. 19-21.

 [2627] 1 Cor. i. 26.

 [2628] Gal. v. 17.

 [2629] Rom. viii. 9.

 [2630] The text here is very obscure, and has given some trouble to
 commentators.  The words are:  "Quæ ergo ista est præter hæc voluntas
 animæ quæ extrinsecus nominatur," etc.  Redepenning understands
 "extrinsecus" as meaning "seorsim," "insuper," and refers to a note of
 Origen upon the Epistle to the Romans (tom. i. p. 466):  "Et idcirco
 extrinsecus eam (animam, corporis et spiritus mentione factâ, Rom. i.
 3, 4) apostolus non nominat, sed carnem tantum vel spiritum," etc.
 Schnitzer supposes that in the Greek the words were, Tes exo
 kaloumenes, where exo is to be taken in the sense of kato, so that the
 expression would mean "anima inferior."

 [2631] In quâ necesse est ex singulis quibusque partibus quæ possunt
 moveri discutere.

 [2632] Priusquam--unum efficiatur cum eo.

 [2633] Passiones.

 [2634] Quibus nunc quidem arguimur, nunc vero nosmet ipsos amplectimur.

 [2635] Evacuantur.

 [2636] Cf. Rom. viii. 2.

 [2637] Abusive = improperly used.

 [2638] Recomponi vult.

 [2639] Gen. iv. 10.

 [2640] Rom. vii. 23.

 [2641] Plus studii vel propositi.

 [2642] Rom. viii. 7.

 [2643] Naturaliter.

 Chapter V.--That the World Took Its Beginning in Time.

 1.  And now, since there is one of the articles of the Church [2644]
 which is held principally in consequence of our belief in the truth of
 our sacred history, viz. that this world was created and took its
 beginning at a certain time, and, in conformity to the cycle of time
 [2645] decreed to all things, is to be destroyed on account of its
 corruption, there seems no absurdity in re-discussing a few points
 connected with this subject.  And so far, indeed, as the credibility of
 Scripture is concerned, the declarations on such a matter seem easy of
 proof.  Even the heretics, although widely opposed on many other
 things, yet on this appear to be at one, yielding to the authority of
 Scripture.

 Concerning, then, the creation of the world, what portion of Scripture
 can give us more information regarding it, than the account which Moses
 has transmitted respecting its origin?  And although it comprehends
 matters of profounder significance than the mere historical narrative
 appears to indicate, and contains very many things that are to be
 spiritually understood, and employs the letter, as a kind of veil, in
 treating of profound and mystical subjects; nevertheless the language
 of the narrator shows that all visible things were created at a certain
 time.  But with regard to the consummation of the world, Jacob is the
 first who gives any information, in addressing his children in the
 words:  "Gather yourselves together unto me, ye sons of Jacob, that I
 may tell you what shall be in the last days," or "after the last days."
 [2646] If, then, there be "last days," or a period "succeeding the
 last days," the days which had a beginning must necessarily come to an
 end.  David, too, declares:  "The heavens shall perish, but Thou shalt
 endure; yea, all of them shall wax old as doth a garment:  as a vesture
 shalt Thou change them, and they shall be changed:  but Thou art the
 same, and Thy years shall have no end." [2647] Our Lord and Saviour,
 indeed, in the words, "He who made them at the beginning, made them
 male and female," [2648] Himself bears witness that the world was
 created; and again, when He says, "Heaven and earth shall pass away,
 but My word shall not pass away," [2649] He points out that they are
 perishable, and must come to an end.  The apostle, moreover, in
 declaring that "the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly,
 but by reason of Him who hath subjected the same in hope, because the
 creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
 into the glorious liberty of the children of God," [2650] manifestly
 announces the end of the world; as he does also when he again says,
 "The fashion of this world passeth away." [2651] Now, by the
 expression which he employs, "that the creature was made subject to
 vanity," he shows that there was a beginning to this world:  for if the
 creature were made subject to vanity on account of some hope, it was
 certainly made subject from a cause; and seeing it was from a cause, it
 must necessarily have had a beginning:  for, without some beginning,
 the creature could not be subject to vanity, nor could that (creature)
 hope to be freed from the bondage of corruption, which had not begun to
 serve.  But any one who chooses to search at his leisure, will find
 numerous other passages in holy Scripture in which the world is both
 said to have a beginning and to hope for an end.

 2.  Now, if there be any one who would here oppose either the authority
 or credibility of our Scriptures, [2652] we would ask of him whether he
 asserts that God can, or cannot, comprehend all things?  To assert that
 He cannot, would manifestly be an act of impiety.  If then he answer,
 as he must, that God comprehends all things, it follows from the very
 fact of their being capable of comprehension, that they are understood
 to have a beginning and an end, seeing that which is altogether without
 any beginning cannot be at all comprehended.  For however far
 understanding may extend, so far is the faculty of comprehending
 illimitably withdrawn and removed when there is held to be no
 beginning.

 3.  But this is the objection which they generally raise:  they say,
 "If the world had its beginning in time, what was God doing before the
 world began?  For it is at once impious and absurd to say that the
 nature of God is inactive and immoveable, or to suppose that goodness
 at one time did not do good, and omnipotence at one time did not
 exercise its power."  Such is the objection which they are accustomed
 to make to our statement that this world had its beginning at a certain
 time, and that, agreeably to our belief in Scripture, we can calculate
 the years of its past duration.  To these propositions I consider that
 none of the heretics can easily return an answer that will be in
 conformity with the nature of their opinions.  But we can give a
 logical answer in accordance with the standard of religion, [2653] when
 we say that not then for the first time did God begin to work when He
 made this visible world; but as, after its destruction, there will be
 another world, so also we believe that others existed before the
 present came into being.  And both of these positions will be confirmed
 by the authority of holy Scripture.  For that there will be another
 world after this, is taught by Isaiah, who says, "There will be new
 heavens, and a new earth, which I shall make to abide in my sight,
 saith the Lord;" [2654] and that before this world others also existed
 is shown by Eccelesiastes, in the words:  "What is that which hath
 been?  Even that which shall be.  And what is that which has been
 created?  Even this which is to be created:  and there is nothing
 altogether new under the sun.  Who shall speak and declare, Lo, this is
 new?  It hath already been in the ages which have been before us."
 [2655] By these testimonies it is established both that there were
 ages [2656] before our own, and that there will be others after it.  It
 is not, however, to be supposed that several worlds existed at once,
 but that, after the end of this present world, others will take their
 beginning; respecting which it is unnecessary to repeat each particular
 statement, seeing we have already done so in the preceding pages.

 4.  This point, indeed, is not to be idly passed by, that the holy
 Scriptures have called the creation of the world by a new and peculiar
 name, terming it katabole, which has been very improperly translated
 into Latin by "constitutio;" for in Greek katabole signifies rather
 "dejicere," i.e., to cast downwards,--a word which has been, as we have
 already remarked, improperly translated into Latin by the phrase
 "constitutio mundi," as in the Gospel according to John, where the
 Saviour says, "And there will be tribulation in those days, such as was
 not since the beginning of the world;" [2657] in which passage katabole
 is rendered by beginning (constitutio), which is to be understood as
 above explained.  The apostle also, in the Epistle to the Ephesians,
 has employed the same language, saying, "Who hath chosen us before the
 foundation of the world;" [2658] and this foundation he calls katabole,
 to be understood in the same sense as before.  It seems worth while,
 then, to inquire what is meant by this new term; and I am, indeed, of
 opinion [2659] that, as the end and consummation of the saints will be
 in those (ages) which are not seen, and are eternal, we must conclude
 (as frequently pointed out in the preceding pages), from a
 contemplation of that very end, that rational creatures had also a
 similar beginning.  And if they had a beginning such as the end for
 which they hope, they existed undoubtedly from the very beginning in
 those (ages) which are not seen, and are eternal. [2660] And if this
 is so, then there has been a descent from a higher to a lower
 condition, on the part not only of those souls who have deserved the
 change by the variety of their movements, but also on that of those
 who, in order to serve the whole world, were brought down from those
 higher and invisible spheres to these lower and visible ones, although
 against their will--"Because the creature was subjected to vanity, not
 willingly, but because of Him who subjected the same in hope;" [2661]
 so that both sun, and moon, and stars, and angels might discharge their
 duty to the world, and to those souls which, on account of their
 excessive mental defects, stood in need of bodies of a grosser and more
 solid nature; and for the sake of those for whom this arrangement was
 necessary, this visible world was also called into being.  From this it
 follows, that by the use of the word a descent from a higher to a lower
 condition, shared by all in common, would seem to be pointed out.  The
 hope indeed of freedom is entertained by the whole of creation--of
 being liberated from the corruption of slavery--when the sons of God,
 who either fell away or were scattered abroad, [2662] shall be gathered
 together into one, or when they shall have fulfilled their other duties
 in this world, which are known to God alone, the Disposer of all
 things.  We are, indeed, to suppose that the world was created of such
 quality and capacity as to contain not only all those souls which it
 was determined should be trained in this world, but also all those
 powers which were prepared to attend, and serve, and assist them.  For
 it is established by many declarations that all rational creatures are
 of one nature:  on which ground alone could the justice of God in all
 His dealings with them be defended, seeing every one has the reason in
 himself, why he has been placed in this or that rank in life.

 5.  This arrangement of things, then, which God afterwards appointed
 (for He had, from the very origin of the world, clearly perceived the
 reasons and causes affecting those who, either owing to mental
 deficiencies, deserved to enter into bodies, or those who were carried
 away by their desire for visible things, and those also who, either
 willingly or unwillingly, were compelled, (by Him who subjected the
 same in hope), to perform certain services to such as had fallen into
 that condition), not being understood by some, who failed to perceive
 that it was owing to preceding causes, originating in free-will, that
 this variety of arrangement had been instituted by God, they have
 concluded that all things in this world are directed either by
 fortuitous movements or by a necessary fate, and that nothing is within
 the power of our own will.  And, therefore, also they were unable to
 show that the providence of God was beyond the reach of censure.

 6.  But as we have said that all the souls who lived in this world
 stood in need of many ministers, or rulers, or assistants; so, in the
 last times, when the end of the world is already imminent and near, and
 the whole human race is verging upon the last destruction, and when not
 only those who were governed by others have been reduced to weakness,
 but those also to whom had been committed the cares of government, it
 was no longer such help nor such defenders that were needed, but the
 help of the Author and Creator Himself was required to restore to the
 one the discipline of obedience, which had been corrupted and profaned,
 and to the other the discipline of rule.  And hence the only-begotten
 Son of God, who was the Word and the Wisdom of the Father, when He was
 in the possession of that glory with the Father, which He had before
 the world was, divested Himself [2663] of it, and, taking the form of a
 servant, was made obedient unto death, that He might teach obedience to
 those who could not otherwise than by obedience obtain salvation.  He
 restored also the laws of rule and government [2664] which had been
 corrupted, by subduing all enemies under His feet, that by this means
 (for it was necessary that He should reign until He had put all enemies
 under His feet, and destroyed the last enemy--death) He might teach
 rulers themselves moderation in their government.  As He had come,
 then, to restore the discipline, not only of government, but of
 obedience, as we have said, accomplishing in Himself first what He
 desired to be accomplished by others, He became obedient to the Father,
 not only to the death of the cross, but also, in the end of the world,
 embracing in Himself all whom He subjects to the Father, and who by Him
 come to salvation, He Himself, along with them, and in them, is said
 also to be subject to the Father; all things subsisting in Him, and He
 Himself being the Head of all things, and in Him being the salvation
 and the fulness of those who obtain salvation.  And this consequently
 is what the apostle says of Him:  "And when all things shall be
 subjected to Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject to Him
 that put all things under Him, that God may be all in all."

 7.  I know not, indeed, how the heretics, not understanding the meaning
 of the apostle in these words, consider the term [2665] "subjection"
 degrading as applied to the Son; for if the propriety of the title be
 called in question, it may easily be ascertained from making a contrary
 supposition.  Because if it be not good to be in subjection, it follows
 that the opposite will be good, viz., not to be in subjection.  Now the
 language of the apostle, according to their view, appears to indicate
 by these words, "And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then
 shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that put all things
 under Him," [2666] that He, who is not now in subjection to the Father,
 will become subject to Him when the Father shall have first subdued all
 things unto Him.  But I am astonished how it can be conceived to be the
 meaning, that He who, while all things are not yet subdued to Him, is
 not Himself in subjection, should--at a time when all things have been
 subdued to Him, and when He has become King of all men, and holds sway
 over all things--be supposed then to be made subject, seeing He was not
 formerly in subjection; for such do not understand that the subjection
 of Christ to the Father indicates that our happiness has attained to
 perfection, and that the work undertaken by Him has been brought to a
 victorious termination, seeing He has not only purified the power of
 supreme government over the whole of creation, but presents to the
 Father the principles of the obedience and subjection of the human race
 in a corrected and improved condition. [2667] If, then, that
 subjection be held to be good and salutary by which the Son is said to
 be subject to the Father, it is an extremely rational and logical
 inference to deduce that the subjection also of enemies, which is said
 to be made to the Son of God, should be understood as being also
 salutary and useful; as if, when the Son is said to be subject to the
 Father, the perfect restoration of the whole of creation is signified,
 so also, when enemies are said to be subjected to the Son of God, the
 salvation of the conquered and the restoration of the lost is in that
 understood to consist.

 8.  This subjection, however, will be accomplished in certain ways, and
 after certain training, and at certain times; for it is not to be
 imagined that the subjection is to be brought about by the pressure of
 necessity (lest the whole world should then appear to be subdued to God
 by force), but by word, reason, and doctrine; by a call to a better
 course of things, by the best systems of training, by the employment
 also of suitable and appropriate threatenings, which will justly impend
 over those who despise any care or attention to their salvation and
 usefulness.  In a word, we men also, in training either our slaves or
 children, restrain them by threats and fear while they are, by reason
 of their tender age, incapable of using their reason; but when they
 have begun to understand what is good, and useful, and honourable, the
 fear of the lash being over, they acquiesce through the suasion of
 words and reason in all that is good.  But how, consistently with the
 preservation of freedom of will in all rational creatures, each one
 ought to be regulated, i.e., who they are whom the word of God finds
 and trains, as if they were already prepared and capable of it; who
 they are whom it puts off to a later time; who these are from whom it
 is altogether concealed, and who are so situated as to be far from
 hearing it; who those, again, are who despise the word of God when made
 known and preached to them, and who are driven by a kind of correction
 and chastisement to salvation, and whose conversion is in a certain
 degree demanded and extorted; who those are to whom certain
 opportunities of salvation are afforded, so that sometimes, their faith
 being proved by an answer alone, [2668] they have unquestionably
 obtained salvation; [2669] --from what causes or on what occasions
 these results take place, or what the divine wisdom sees within them,
 or what movements of their will leads God so to arrange all these
 things, is known to Him alone, and to His only-begotten Son, through
 whom all things were created and restored, and to the Holy Spirit,
 through whom all things are sanctified, who proceedeth from the Father,
 [2670] to whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

 [2644] De ecclesiasticis definitionibus unum.

 [2645] Consummationem sæculi.

 [2646] Gen. xlix. 1.  The Vulgate has, "In diebus novissimis;" the
 Sept. 'Ep' eschaton ton hemeron:  the Masoretic text, tyrch'v.

 [2647] Ps. cii. 26, 27.

 [2648] Matt. xix. 4.

 [2649] Matt. xxiv. 35.

 [2650] Rom. viii. 20, 21.

 [2651] 1 Cor. vii. 31.

 [2652] Auctoritate Scripturæ nostræ, vel fidei.

 [2653] Regulam pietatis.

 [2654] Cf. Isa. lxvi. 22.

 [2655] Cf. Eccles. i. 9, 10.  The text is in conformity with the
 Septuag.:  Ti to gegonos; Auto to genesomenon.  Kai ti to pepoiemenon ;
 Auto to poiethesomenon.  Kai ouk esti pan prosphaton hupo ton helion.
 Os lalesei kai erei.  Ide touto kainon estin ede gegonen en tois aiosi
 tois genomenois apo emtrosthen hemon.

 [2656] Sæcula.

 [2657] Matt. xxiv. 21.

 [2658] Eph. i. 4.

 [2659] The following is Jerome's version of this passage (Epistle to
 Avitus):  "A divine habitation, and a true rest above (apud superos), I
 think is to be understood, where rational creatures dwell, and where
 before their descent to a lower position, and removal from invisible to
 visible (worlds), and fall to earth, and need of gross bodies, they
 enjoyed a former blessedness.  Whence God the Creator made for them
 bodies suitable to their humble position and created this visible
 world, and sent into the world ministers for the salvation and
 correction of those who had fallen:  of whom some were to obtain
 certain localities, and be subject to the necessities of the world;
 others were to discharge with care and attention the duties enjoined
 upon them at all times, and which were known to God, the Arranger (of
 all things).  And of these, the sun, moon, and stars, which are called
 creature' by the apostle, received the more elevated places of the
 world.  Which creature' was made subject to vanity, in that it was
 clothed with gross bodies, and was open to view, and yet was subject to
 vanity not voluntarily, but because of the will of Him who subjected
 the same in hope."  And again:  "While others, whom we believe to be
 angels, at different places and times, which the Arranger alone knows,
 serve the government of the world."  And a little further on:  "Which
 order of things is regulated by the providential government of the
 whole world, some powers falling down from a loftier position, others
 gradually sinking to earth:  some falling voluntarily, others being
 cast down against their will:  some undertaking, of their own accord,
 the service of stretching out the hand to those who fall; others being
 compelled to persevere for so long a time in the duty which they have
 undertaken."  And again:  "Whence it follows that, on account of the
 various movements, various worlds also are created, and after this
 world which we now inhabit, there will be another greatly dissimilar.
 But no other being save God alone, the Creator of all things, can
 arrange the deserts (of all), both to the time to come and to that
 which preceded, suitably to the differing lapses and advances (of
 individuals), and to the rewards of virtues or the punishment of vices,
 both in the present and in the future, and in all (times), and to
 conduct them all again to one end:  for He knows the causes why He
 allows some to enjoy their own will, and to fall from a higher rank to
 the lowest condition:  and why He begins to visit others, and bring
 them back gradually, as if by giving them His hand, to their pristine
 state, and placing them in a lofty position" (Ruæus).

 [2660] [According to Hagenbach (History of Doctrines, vol. i. p. 167),
 "Origen formally adopts the idea of original sin, by asserting that the
 human soul does not come into the world in a state of innocence,
 because it has already sinned in a former state....And yet subsequent
 times, especially after Jerome, have seen in Origen the precursor of
 Pelagius.  Jerome calls the opinion that man can be without sin,
 Origenis ramusculus."  S.]

 [2661] Cf. Rom. viii. 20, 21.

 [2662] Dispersi.

 [2663] Exinanivit semet ipsum.

 [2664] Regendi regnandique.

 [2665] [Elucidation II.]

 [2666] 1 Cor. xv. 28.

 [2667] Cum non solum regendi ac regnandi summam, quam in universam
 emendaverit creaturam, verum etiam obedientæ et subjectione correcta
 reparataque humani generis Patri offerat instituta.

 [2668] By a profession of faith in baptism.

 [2669] Indubitatam ceperit salutem.

 [2670] It was not until the third Synod of Toledo, a.d. 589, that the
 "Filioque" clause was added to the Creed of Constantinople,--this
 difference forming, as is well known, one of the dogmatic grounds for
 the disunion between the Western and Eastern Churches down to the
 present day, the latter Church denying that the Spirit proceedeth from
 the Father and the Son.  [See Elucidation III.]

 Chapter VI.--On the End of the World.

 1.  Now, respecting the end of the world and the consummation of all
 things, we have stated in the preceding pages, to the best of our
 ability, so far as the authority of holy Scripture enabled us, what we
 deem sufficient for purposes of instruction; and we shall here only add
 a few admonitory remarks, since the order of investigation has brought
 us back to the subject.  The highest good, then, after the attainment
 of which the whole of rational nature is seeking, which is also called
 the end of all blessings, [2671] is defined by many philosophers as
 follows:  The highest good, they say, is to become as like to God as
 possible.  But this definition I regard not so much as a discovery of
 theirs, as a view derived from holy Scripture.  For this is pointed out
 by Moses, before all other philosophers, when he describes the first
 creation of man in these words:  "And God said, Let Us make man in Our
 own image, and after Our likeness;" [2672] and then he adds the words:
 "So God created man in His own image:  in the image of God created He
 him; male and female created He them, and He blessed them." [2673]
 Now the expression, "In the image [2674] of God created He him,"
 without any mention of the word" likeness," [2675] conveys no other
 meaning than this, that man received the dignity of God's image at his
 first creation; but that the perfection of his likeness has been
 reserved for the consummation,--namely, that he might acquire it for
 himself by the exercise of his own diligence in the imitation of God,
 the possibility of attaining to perfection being granted him at the
 beginning through the dignity of the divine image, and the perfect
 realization of the divine likeness being reached in the end by the
 fulfilment of the (necessary) works.  Now, that such is the case, the
 Apostle John points out more clearly and unmistakeably, when he makes
 this declaration:  "Little children, we do not yet know what we shall
 be; but if a revelation be made to us from the Saviour, ye will say,
 without any doubt, we shall be like Him." [2676] By which expression
 he points out with the utmost certainty, that not only was the end of
 all things to be hoped for, which he says was still unknown to him, but
 also the likeness to God, which will be conferred in proportion to the
 completeness of our deserts.  The Lord Himself, in the Gospel, not only
 declares that these same results are future, but that they are to be
 brought about by His own intercession, He Himself deigning to obtain
 them from the Father for His disciples, saying, "Father, I will that
 where I am, these also may be with Me; and as Thou and I are one, they
 also may be one in Us." [2677] In which the divine likeness itself
 already appears to advance, if we may so express ourselves, and from
 being merely similar, to become the same, [2678] because undoubtedly in
 the consummation or end God is "all and in all."  And with reference to
 this, it is made a question by some [2679] whether the nature of bodily
 matter, although cleansed and purified, and rendered altogether
 spiritual, does not seem either to offer an obstruction towards
 attaining the dignity of the (divine) likeness, or to the property of
 unity, [2680] because neither can a corporeal nature appear capable of
 any resemblance to a divine nature which is certainly incorporeal; nor
 can it be truly and deservedly designated one with it, especially since
 we are taught by the truths of our religion that that which alone is
 one, viz., the Son with the Father, must be referred to a peculiarity
 of the (divine) nature.

 2.  Since, then, it is promised that in the end God will be all and in
 all, we are not, as is fitting, to suppose that animals, either sheep
 or other cattle, come to that end, lest it should be implied that God
 dwelt even in animals, whether sheep or other cattle; and so, too, with
 pieces of wood or stones, lest it should be said that God is in these
 also.  So, again, nothing that is wicked must be supposed to attain to
 that end, lest, while God is said to be in all things, He may also be
 said to be in a vessel of wickedness.  For if we now assert that God is
 everywhere and in all things, on the ground that nothing can be empty
 of God, we nevertheless do not say that He is now "all things" in those
 in whom He is.  And hence we must look more carefully as to what that
 is which denotes the perfection of blessedness and the end of things,
 which is not only said to be God in all things, but also "all in all."
 Let us then inquire what all those things are which God is to become in
 all.

 3.  I am of opinion that the expression, by which God is said to be
 "all in all," means that He is "all" in each individual person.  Now He
 will be "all" in each individual in this way:  when all which any
 rational understanding, cleansed from the dregs of every sort of vice,
 and with every cloud of wickedness completely swept away, can either
 feel, or understand, or think, will be wholly God; and when it will no
 longer behold or retain anything else than God, but when God will be
 the measure and standard of all its movements; and thus God will be
 "all," for there will no longer be any distinction of good and evil,
 seeing evil nowhere exists; for God is all things, and to Him no evil
 is near:  nor will there be any longer a desire to eat from the tree of
 the knowledge of good and evil, on the part of him who is always in the
 possession of good, and to whom God is all.  So then, when the end has
 been restored to the beginning, and the termination of things compared
 with their commencement, that condition of things will be
 re-established in which rational nature was placed, when it had no need
 to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; so that when all
 feeling of wickedness has been removed, and the individual has been
 purified and cleansed, He who alone is the one good God becomes to him
 "all," and that not in the case of a few individuals, or of a
 considerable number, but He Himself is "all in all."  And when death
 shall no longer anywhere exist, nor the sting of death, nor any evil at
 all, then verily God will be "all in all."  But some are of opinion
 that that perfection and blessedness of rational creatures, or natures,
 can only remain in that same condition of which we have spoken above,
 i.e., that all things should possess God, and God should be to them all
 things, if they are in no degree prevented by their union with a bodily
 nature.  Otherwise they think that the glory of the highest blessedness
 is impeded by the intermixture of any material substance. [2681] But
 this subject we have discussed at greater length, as may be seen in the
 preceding pages.

 4.  And now, as we find the apostle making mention of a spiritual body,
 let us inquire, to the best of our ability, what idea we are to form of
 such a thing.  So far, then, as our understanding can grasp it, we
 consider a spiritual body to be of such a nature as ought to be
 inhabited not only by all holy and perfect souls, but also by all those
 creatures which will be liberated from the slavery of corruption.
 Respecting the body also, the apostle has said, "We have a house not
 made with hands, eternal in the heavens," [2682] i.e., in the mansions
 of the blessed.  And from this statement we may form a conjecture, how
 pure, how refined, and how glorious are the qualities of that body, if
 we compare it with those which, although they are celestial bodies, and
 of most brilliant splendour, were nevertheless made with hands, and are
 visible to our sight.  But of that body it is said, that it is a house
 not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.  Since, then, those
 things "which are seen are temporal, but those things which are not
 seen are eternal," [2683] all those bodies which we see either on earth
 or in heaven, and which are capable of being seen, and have been made
 with hands, but are not eternal, are far excelled in glory by that
 which is not visible, nor made with hands, but is eternal.  From which
 comparison it may be conceived how great are the comeliness, and
 splendour, and brilliancy of a spiritual body; and how true it is, that
 "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart
 of man to conceive, what God hath prepared for them that love Him."
 [2684] We ought not, however, to doubt that the nature of this
 present body of ours may, by the will of God, who made it what it is,
 be raised to those qualities of refinement, and purity, and splendour
 (which characterize the body referred to), according as the condition
 of things requires, and the deserts of our rational nature shall
 demand.  Finally, when the world required variety and diversity, matter
 yielded itself with all docility throughout the diverse appearances and
 species of things to the Creator, as to its Lord and Maker, that He
 might educe from it the various forms of celestial and terrestrial
 beings.  But when things have begun to hasten to that consummation that
 all may be one, as the Father is one with the Son, it may be understood
 as a rational inference, that where all are one, there will no longer
 be any diversity.

 5.  The last enemy, moreover, who is called death, is said on this
 account to be destroyed, that there may not be anything left of a
 mournful kind when death does not exist, nor anything that is adverse
 when there is no enemy.  The destruction of the last enemy, indeed, is
 to be understood, not as if its substance, which was formed by God, is
 to perish, but because its mind and hostile will, which came not from
 God, but from itself, are to be destroyed.  Its destruction, therefore,
 will not be its non-existence, but its ceasing to be an enemy, and (to
 be) death.  For nothing is impossible to the Omnipotent, nor is
 anything incapable of restoration [2685] to its Creator:  for He made
 all things that they might exist, and those things which were made for
 existence cannot cease to be. [2686] For this reason also will they
 admit of change and variety, so as to be placed, according to their
 merits, either in a better or worse position; but no destruction of
 substance can befall those things which were created by God for the
 purpose of permanent existence. [2687] For those things which
 agreeably to the common opinion are believed to perish, the nature
 either of our faith or of the truth will not permit us to suppose to be
 destroyed.  Finally, our flesh is supposed by ignorant men and
 unbelievers to be destroyed after death, in such a degree that it
 retains no relic at all of its former substance.  We, however, who
 believe in its resurrection, understand that a change only has been
 produced by death, but that its substance certainly remains; and that
 by the will of its Creator, and at the time appointed, it will be
 restored to life; and that a second time a change will take place in
 it, so that what at first was flesh (formed) out of earthly soil, and
 was afterwards dissolved by death, and again reduced to dust and ashes
 ("For dust thou art," [2688] it is said, "and to dust shalt thou
 return"), will be again raised from the earth, and shall after this,
 according to the merits of the indwelling soul, advance to the glory of
 a spiritual body.

 6.  Into this condition, then, we are to suppose that all this bodily
 substance of ours will be brought, when all things shall be
 re-established in a state of unity, and when God shall be all in all.
 And this result must be understood as being brought about, not
 suddenly, but slowly and gradually, seeing that the process of
 amendment and correction will take place imperceptibly in the
 individual instances during the lapse of countless and unmeasured ages,
 some outstripping others, and tending by a swifter course towards
 perfection, [2689] while others again follow close at hand, and some
 again a long way behind; and thus, through the numerous and uncounted
 orders of progressive beings who are being reconciled to God from a
 state of enmity, the last enemy is finally reached, who is called
 death, so that he also may be destroyed, and no longer be an enemy.
 When, therefore, all rational souls shall have been restored to a
 condition of this kind, then the nature of this body of ours will
 undergo a change into the glory of a spiritual body.  For as we see it
 not to be the case with rational natures, that some of them have lived
 in a condition of degradation owing to their sins, while others have
 been called to a state of happiness on account of their merits; but as
 we see those same souls who had formerly been sinful, assisted, after
 their conversion and reconciliation to God, to a state of happiness; so
 also are we to consider, with respect to the nature of the body, that
 the one which we now make use of in a state of meanness, and
 corruption, and weakness, is not a different body from that which we
 shall possess in incorruption, and in power, and in glory; but that the
 same body, when it has cast away the infirmities in which it is now
 entangled, shall be transmuted into a condition of glory, being
 rendered spiritual, so that what was a vessel of dishonour may, when
 cleansed, become a vessel unto honour, and an abode of blessedness.
 And in this condition, also, we are to believe, that by the will of the
 Creator, it will abide for ever without any change, as is confirmed by
 the declaration of the apostle, when he says, "We have a house, not
 made with hands, eternal in the heavens."  For the faith of the Church
 [2690] does not admit the view of certain Grecian philosophers, that
 there is besides the body, composed of four elements, another fifth
 body, which is different in all its parts, and diverse from this our
 present body; since neither out of sacred Scripture can any produce the
 slightest suspicion of evidence for such an opinion, nor can any
 rational inference from things allow the reception of it, especially
 when the holy apostle manifestly declares, that it is not new bodies
 which are given to those who rise from the dead, but that they receive
 those identical ones which they had possessed when living, transformed
 from an inferior into a better condition.  For his words are:  "It is
 sown an animal body, it will rise a spiritual body; it is sown in
 corruption, it will arise in incorruption:  it is sown in weakness, it
 will arise in power:  it is sown in dishonour, it will arise in glory."
 [2691] As, therefore, there is a kind of advance in man, so that from
 being first an animal being, and not understanding what belongs to the
 Spirit of God, he reaches by means of instruction the stage of being
 made a spiritual being, and of judging all things, while he himself is
 judged by no one; so also, with respect to the state of the body, we
 are to hold that this very body which now, on account of its service to
 the soul, is styled an animal body, will, by means of a certain
 progress, when the soul, united to God, shall have been made one spirit
 with Him (the body even then ministering, as it were, to the spirit),
 attain to a spiritual condition and quality, especially since, as we
 have often pointed out, bodily nature was so formed by the Creator, as
 to pass easily into whatever condition he should wish, or the nature of
 the case demand.

 7.  The whole of this reasoning, then, amounts to this:  that God
 created two general natures,--a visible, i.e., a corporeal nature; and
 an invisible nature, which is incorporeal.  Now these two natures admit
 of two different permutations.  That invisible and rational nature
 changes in mind and purpose, because it is endowed with freedom of
 will, [2692] and is on this account found sometimes to be engaged in
 the practice of good, and sometimes in that of the opposite.  But this
 corporeal nature admits of a change in substance; whence also God, the
 arranger of all things, has the service of this matter at His command
 in the moulding, or fabrication, or re-touching of whatever He wishes,
 so that corporeal nature may be transmuted, and transformed into any
 forms or species whatever, according as the deserts of things may
 demand; which the prophet evidently has in view when he says, "It is
 God who makes and transforms all things." [2693]

 8.  And now the point for investigation is, whether, when God shall be
 all in all, the whole of bodily nature will, in the consummation of all
 things, consist of one species, and the sole quality of body be that
 which shall shine in the indescribable glory which is to be regarded as
 the future possession of the spiritual body.  For if we rightly
 understand the matter, this is the statement of Moses in the beginning
 of his book, when he says, "In the beginning God created the heavens
 and the earth." [2694] For this is the beginning of all creation:  to
 this beginning the end and consummation of all things must be recalled,
 i.e., in order that that heaven and that earth may be the habitation
 and resting-place of the pious; so that all the holy ones, and the
 meek, may first obtain an inheritance in that land, since this is the
 teaching of the law, and of the prophets, and of the Gospel.  In which
 land I believe there exist the true and living forms of that worship
 which Moses handed down under the shadow of the law; of which it is
 said, that "they serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things"
 [2695] --those, viz., who were in subjection in the law.  To Moses
 himself also was the injunction given, "Look that thou make them after
 the form and pattern which were showed thee on the mount." [2696]
 From which it appears to me, that as on this earth the law was a sort
 of schoolmaster to those who by it were to be conducted to Christ, in
 order that, being instructed and trained by it, they might more easily,
 after the training of the law, receive the more perfect principles of
 Christ; so also another earth, which receives into it all the saints,
 may first imbue and mould them by the institutions of the true and
 everlasting law, that they may more easily gain possession of those
 perfect institutions of heaven, to which nothing can be added; in which
 there will be, of a truth, that Gospel which is called everlasting, and
 that Testament, ever new, which shall never grow old.

 9.  In this way, accordingly, we are to suppose that at the
 consummation and restoration of all things, those who make a gradual
 advance, and who ascend (in the scale of improvement), will arrive in
 due measure and order at that land, and at that training which is
 contained in it, where they may be prepared for those better
 institutions to which no addition can be made.  For, after His agents
 and servants, the Lord Christ, who is King of all, will Himself assume
 the kingdom; i.e., after instruction in the holy virtues, He will
 Himself instruct those who are capable of receiving Him in respect of
 His being wisdom, reigning in them until He has subjected them to the
 Father, who has subdued all things to Himself, i.e., that when they
 shall have been made capable of receiving God, God may be to them all
 in all.  Then accordingly, as a necessary consequence, bodily nature
 will obtain that highest condition [2697] to which nothing more can be
 added.  Having discussed, up to this point, the quality of bodily
 nature, or of spiritual body, we leave it to the choice of the reader
 to determine what he shall consider best.  And here we may bring the
 third book to a conclusion.

 [2671] Finis omnium:  "bonorum" understood.

 [2672] Gen. i. 26.

 [2673] Gen. i. 27, 28.

 [2674] Imago.

 [2675] Similitudo.

 [2676] Cf. 1 John iii. 2.

 [2677] Cf. John xvii. 24; cf. 21.

 [2678] Ex simili unum fieri.

 [2679] Jerome, in his Epistle to Avitus, No. 94, has the passage thus:
 "Since, as we have already frequently observed, the beginning is
 generated again from the end, it is a question whether then also there
 will be bodies, or whether existence will be maintained at some time
 without them when they shall have been annihilated, and thus the life
 of incorporeal beings must be believed to be incorporeal, as we know is
 the case with God.  And there is no doubt that if all the bodies which
 are termed visible by the apostle, belong to that sensible world, the
 life of incorporeal beings will be incorporeal."  And a little after:
 "That expression, also, used by the apostle, The whole creation will be
 freed from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
 children of God' (Rom. viii. 21), we so understand, that we say it was
 the first creation of rational and incorporeal beings which is not
 subject to corruption, because it was not clothed with bodies:  for
 wherever bodies are, corruption immediately follows.  But afterwards it
 will be freed from the bondage of corruption, when they shall have
 received the glory of the sons of God, and God shall be all in all."
 And in the same place:  "That we must believe the end of all things to
 be incorporeal, the language of the Saviour Himself leads us to think,
 when He says, As I and Thou are one, so may they also be one in Us'
 (John xvii. 21).  For we ought to know what God is, and what the
 Saviour will be in the end, and how the likeness of the Father and the
 Son has been promised to the saints; for as they are one in Him, so
 they also are one in them.  For we must adopt the view, either that the
 God of all things is clothed with a body, and as we are enveloped with
 flesh, so He also with some material covering, that the likeness of the
 life of God may be in the end produced also in the saints:  or if this
 hypothesis is unbecoming, especially in the judgment of those who
 desire, even in the smallest degree, to feel the majesty of God, and to
 look upon the glory of His uncreated and all-surpassing nature, we are
 forced to adopt the other alternative, and despair either of attaining
 any likeness to God, if we are to inhabit for ever the same bodies, or
 if the blessedness of the same life with God is promised to us, we must
 live in the same state as that in which God lives."  All these points
 have been omitted by Rufinus as erroneous, and statements of a
 different kind here and there inserted instead (Ruæus).

 [2680] Ad unitatis proprietatem.

 [2681] "Here the honesty of Rufinus in his translation seems very
 suspicious:  for Origen's well-known opinion regarding the sins and
 lapses of blessed spirits he here attributes to others.  Nay, even the
 opinion which he introduces Origen as ascribing to others, he exhibits
 him as refuting a little further on, sec. 6, in these words:  And in
 this condition (of blessedness) we are to believe that, by the will of
 the Creator, it will abide for ever without any change,' etc.  I
 suspect, therefore, that all this is due to Rufinus himself, and that
 he has inserted it, instead of what is found in the beginning of the
 chapter, sec. 1, and which in Jerome's Epistle to Avitus stands as
 follows:  Nor is there any doubt that, after certain intervals of time,
 matter will again exist, and bodies be formed, and a diversity be
 established in the world, on account of the varying wills of rational
 creatures who, after (enjoying) perfect blessedness down to the end of
 all things, have gradually fallen away to a lower condition and
 received into them so much wickedness that they are converted) into an
 opposite condition, by their unwillingness to retain their original
 state, and to preserve their blessedness uncorrupted.  Nor is this
 point to be suppressed, that many rational creatures retain their first
 condition (principium) even to the second and third and fourth worlds,
 and allow no room for any change within them while others, again, will
 lose so little of their pristine state, that they will appear to have
 lost almost nothing, and some are to be precipitated with great
 destruction into the lowest pit.  And God, the disposer of all things,
 when creating His worlds, knows how to treat each individual agreeably
 to his merits, and He is acquainted with the occasions and causes by
 which the government (gubernacula) of the world is sustained and
 commenced:  so that he who surpassed all others in wickedness, and
 brought himself completely down to the earth, is made in another world,
 which is afterwards to be formed, a devil, the beginning of the
 creation of the Lord (Job xl. 19), to be mocked by the angels who have
 lost the virtue of their original condition' (exordii
 virtutem)."--Ruæus.

 [2682] 2 Cor. v. 1.

 [2683] 2 Cor. iv. 18.

 [2684] 1 Cor. ii. 9; cf. Isa. lxiv., 4.

 [2685] Insanabile.

 [2686] ["Origen went so far, that, contrary to the general opinion, he
 allowed Satan the glimmer of a hope of future grace....He is here
 speaking of the last enemy, death:  but it is evident, from the
 context, that he identifies death with the devil," etc.  (Hagenbach's
 History of Doctrines, vol. i. p. 145-147.  See also, supra, book i. vi.
 3. p. 261.)  S.]

 [2687] Ut essent et permanerent.

 [2688] Gen. iii. 19.

 [2689] Ad summa.

 [2690] [Elucidation IV.]

 [2691] 1 Cor. xv. 28.

 [2692] [Elucidation V.]

 [2693] Cf. Ps. cii. 25, 26.

 [2694] Gen. i. 1.

 [2695] Heb. viii. 5.

 [2696] Ex. xxv. 40.

 [2697] Jerome (Epistle to Avitus, No. 94) says that Origen, "after a
 most lengthened discussion, in which he asserts that all bodily nature
 is to be changed into attenuated and spiritual bodies, and that all
 substance is to be converted into one body of perfect purity, and more
 brilliant than any splendour (mundissimum et omni splendore purius),
 and such as the human mind cannot now conceive," adds at the last, "And
 God will be all in all,' so that the whole of bodily nature may be
 reduced into that substance which is better than all others, into the
 divine, viz., than which none is better."  From which, since it seems
 to follow that God possesses a body, although of extreme tenuity (licet
 tenuissimum), Rufinus has either suppressed this view, or altered the
 meaning of Origen's words (Ruæus).

 Book IV.

 Translated from the Latin of Rufinus.

 Chapter I.--That the Scriptures are Divinely Inspired.

 1.  But as it is not sufficient, in the discussion of matters of such
 importance, to entrust the decision to the human senses and to the
 human understanding, and to pronounce on things invisible as if they
 were seen by us, [2698] we must, in order to establish the positions
 which we have laid down, adduce the testimony of Holy Scripture.  And
 that this testimony may produce a sure and unhesitating belief, either
 with regard to what we have still to advance, or to what has been
 already stated, it seems necessary to show, in the first place, that
 the Scriptures themselves are divine, i.e., were inspired by the Spirit
 of God.  We shall therefore with all possible brevity draw forth from
 the Holy Scriptures themselves, such evidence on this point as may
 produce upon us a suitable impression, (making our quotations) from
 Moses, the first legislator of the Hebrew nation, and from the words of
 Jesus Christ, the Author and Chief of the Christian religious system.
 [2699] For although there have been numerous legislators among the
 Greeks and Barbarians, and also countless teachers and philosophers who
 professed to declare the truth, we do not remember any legislator who
 was able to produce in the minds of foreign nations an affection and a
 zeal (for him) such as led them either voluntarily to adopt his laws,
 or to defend them with all the efforts of their mind.  No one, then,
 has been able to introduce and make known what seemed to himself the
 truth, among, I do not say many foreign nations, but even amongst the
 individuals of one single nation, in such a manner that a knowledge and
 belief of the same should extend to all.  And yet there can be no doubt
 that it was the wish of the legislators that their laws should be
 observed by all men, if possible; and of the teachers, that what
 appeared to themselves to be truth, should become known to all.  But
 knowing that they could by no means succeed in producing any such
 mighty power within them as would lead foreign nations to obey their
 laws, or have regard to their statements, they did not venture even to
 essay the attempt, lest the failure of the undertaking should stamp
 their conduct with the mark of imprudence.  And yet there are
 throughout the whole world--throughout all Greece, and all foreign
 countries--countless individuals who have abandoned the laws of their
 country, and those whom they had believed to be gods, and have yielded
 themselves up to the obedience of the law of Moses, and to the
 discipleship and worship of Christ; and have done this, not without
 exciting against themselves the intense hatred of the worshippers of
 images, so as frequently to be exposed to cruel tortures from the
 latter, and sometimes even to be put to death.  And yet they embrace,
 and with all affection preserve, the words and teaching of Christ.

 2.  And we may see, moreover, how that religion itself grew up in a
 short time, making progress by the punishment and death of its
 worshippers, by the plundering of their goods, and by the tortures of
 every kind which they endured; and this result is the more surprising,
 that even the teachers of it themselves neither were men of skill,
 [2700] nor very numerous; and yet these words are preached throughout
 the whole world, so that Greeks and Barbarians, wise and foolish, adopt
 the doctrines of the Christian religion. [2701] From which it is no
 doubtful inference, that it is not by human power or might that the
 words of Jesus Christ come to prevail with all faith and power over the
 understandings and souls of all men.  For, that these results were both
 predicted by Him, and established by divine answers proceeding from
 Him, is clear from His own words:  "Ye shall be brought before
 governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony against them and the
 Gentiles." [2702] And again:  "This Gospel of the kingdom shall be
 preached among all nations." [2703] And again:  "Many shall say to Me
 in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and drunk in Thy name, and
 in Thy name cast out devils?  And I will say unto them, Depart from Me,
 ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you." [2704] If these sayings,
 indeed, had been so uttered by Him, and yet if these predictions had
 not been fulfilled, they might perhaps appear to be untrue, [2705] and
 not to possess any authority.  But now, when His declarations do pass
 into fulfilment, seeing they were predicted with such power and
 authority, it is most clearly shown to be true that He, when He was
 made man, delivered to men the precepts of salvation. [2706]

 3.  What, then, are we to say of this, which the prophets had
 beforehand foretold of Him, that princes would not cease from Judah,
 nor leaders from between his thighs, until He should come for whom it
 has been reserved (viz., the kingdom), and until the expectation of the
 Gentiles should come?  For it is most distinctly evident from the
 history itself, from what is clearly seen at the present day, that from
 the times of Christ onwards there were no kings amongst the Jews.  Nay,
 even all those objects of Jewish pride, [2707] of which they vaunted so
 much, and in which they exulted, whether regarding the beauty of the
 temple or the ornaments of the altar, and all those sacerdotal fillets
 and robes of the high priests, were all destroyed together.  For the
 prophecy was fulfilled which had declared, "For the children of Israel
 shall abide many days without king and prince:  there shall be no
 victim, nor altar, nor priesthood, nor answers." [2708] These
 testimonies, accordingly, we employ against those who seem to assert
 that what is spoken in Genesis by Jacob refers to Judah; and who say
 that there still remains a prince of the race of Judah--he, viz., who
 is the prince of their nation, whom they style Patriarch [2709] --and
 that there cannot fail (a ruler) of his seed, who will remain until the
 advent of that Christ whom they picture to themselves.  But if the
 prophet's words be true, when he says, "The children of Israel shall
 abide many days without king, without prince; and there shall be no
 victim, nor altar, nor priesthood;" [2710] and if, certainly, since the
 overthrow of the temple, victims are neither offered, nor any altar
 found, nor any priesthood exists, it is most certain that, as it is
 written, princes have departed from Judah, and a leader from between
 his thighs, until the coming of Him for whom it has been reserved.  It
 is established, then, that He is come for whom it has been reserved,
 and in whom is the expectation of the Gentiles.  And this manifestly
 seems to be fulfilled in the multitude of those who have believed on
 God through Christ out of the different nations.

 4.  In the song of Deuteronomy, [2711] also, it is prophetically
 declared that, on account of the sins of the former people, there was
 to be an election of a foolish nation,--no other, certainly, than that
 which was brought about by Christ; for thus the words run:  "They have
 moved Me to anger with their images, and I will stir them up to
 jealousy; I will arouse them to anger against a foolish nation." [2712]
 We may therefore evidently see how the Hebrews, who are said to have
 excited God's anger by means of those (idols), which are no gods, and
 to have aroused His wrath by their images, were themselves also excited
 to jealousy by means of a foolish nation, which God hath chosen by the
 advent of Jesus Christ and His disciples.  For the following is the
 language of the apostle:  "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that
 not many wise men among you after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
 noble (are called):  but God has chosen the foolish things of the
 world, and the things which are not, to destroy the things which
 formerly existed." [2713] Carnal Israel, therefore, should not boast;
 for such is the term used by the apostle:  "No flesh, I say, should
 glory in the presence of God." [2714]

 5.  What are we to say, moreover, regarding those prophecies of Christ
 contained in the Psalms, especially the one with the superscription, "A
 song for the Beloved;" [2715] in which it is stated that "His tongue is
 the pen of a ready writer; fairer than the children of men;" that
 "grace is poured into His lips?"  Now, the indication that grace has
 been poured upon His lips is this, that, after a short period had
 elapsed--for He taught only during a year and some months [2716] --the
 whole world, nevertheless, became filled with His doctrine, and with
 faith in His religion.  There arose, then, "in His days righteous men,
 and abundance of peace," [2717] abiding even to the end, which end is
 entitled "the taking away of the moon;" and "His dominion shall extend
 from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth." [2718]
 There was a sign also given to the house of David.  For a virgin
 conceived, and bare Emmanuel, which, when interpreted, signifies, "God
 with us:  know it, O nations, and be overcome." [2719] For we are
 conquered and overcome, who are of the Gentiles, and remain as a kind
 of spoils of His victory, who have subjected our necks to His grace.
 Even the place of His birth was predicted in the prophecies of Micah,
 who said, "And thou, Bethlehem, land of Judah, art by no means small
 among the leaders of Judah:  for out of thee shall come forth a Leader,
 who shall rule My people Israel." [2720] The weeks of years, also,
 which the prophet Daniel had predicted, extending to the leadership of
 Christ, [2721] have been fulfilled.  Moreover, he is at hand, who in
 the book of Job [2722] is said to be about to destroy the huge beast,
 who also gave power to his own disciples to tread on serpents and
 scorpions, and on all the power of the enemy, without being injured by
 him.  But if any one will consider the journeys of Christ's apostles
 throughout the different places, in which as His messengers they
 preached the Gospel, he will find that both what they ventured to
 undertake is beyond the power of man, and what they were enabled to
 accomplish is from God alone.  If we consider how men, on hearing that
 a new doctrine was introduced by these, were able to receive them; or
 rather, when desiring often to destroy them, they were prevented by a
 divine power which was in them, we shall find that in this nothing was
 effected by human strength, but that the whole was the result of the
 divine power and providence,--signs and wonders, manifest beyond all
 doubt, bearing testimony to their word and doctrine.

 6.  These points now being briefly established, viz., regarding the
 deity of Christ, and the fulfilment of all that was prophesied
 respecting Him, I think that this position also has been made good,
 viz., that the Scriptures themselves, which contained these
 predictions, were divinely inspired,--those, namely, which had either
 foretold His advent, or the power of His doctrine, or the bringing over
 of all nations (to His obedience).  To which this remark must be added,
 that the divinity and inspiration both of the predictions of the
 prophets and of the law of Moses have been clearly revealed and
 confirmed, especially since the advent of Christ into the world.  For
 before the fulfilment of those events which were predicted by them,
 they could not, although true and inspired by God, be shown to be so,
 because they were as yet unfulfilled.  But the coming of Christ was a
 declaration that their statements were true and divinely inspired,
 although it was certainly doubtful before that whether there would be
 an accomplishment of those things which had been foretold.

 If any one, moreover, consider the words of the prophets with all the
 zeal and reverence which they deserve, it is certain that, in the
 perusal and careful examination thus given them, he will feel his mind
 and senses touched by a divine breath, and will acknowledge that the
 words which he reads were no human utterances, but the language of God;
 and from his own emotions he will feel that these books were the
 composition of no human skill, nor of any mortal eloquence, but, so to
 speak, of a style that is divine. [2723] The splendour of Christ's
 advent, therefore, illuminating the law of Moses by the light of truth,
 has taken away that veil which had been placed over the letter (of the
 law), and has unsealed, for every one who believes upon Him, all the
 blessings which were concealed by the covering of the word.

 7.  It is, however, a matter attended with considerable labour, to
 point out, in every instance, how and when the predictions of the
 prophets were fulfilled, so as to appear to confirm those who are in
 doubt, seeing it is possible for everyone who wishes to become more
 thoroughly acquainted with these things, to gather abundant proofs from
 the records of the truth themselves.  But if the sense of the letter,
 which is beyond man, does not appear to present itself at once, on the
 first glance, to those who are less versed in divine discipline, it is
 not at all to be wondered at, because divine things are brought down
 somewhat slowly to (the comprehension of) men, and elude the view in
 proportion as one is either sceptical or unworthy.  For although it is
 certain that all things which exist in this world, or take place in it,
 are ordered by the providence of God, and certain events indeed do
 appear with sufficient clearness to be under the disposal of His
 providential government, yet others again unfold themselves so
 mysteriously and incomprehensibly, that the plan of Divine Providence
 with regard to them is completely concealed; so that it is occasionally
 believed by some that particular occurrences do not belong to (the plan
 of) Providence, because the principle eludes their grasp, according to
 which the works of Divine Providence are administered with
 indescribable skill; which principle of administration, however, is not
 equally concealed from all.  For even among men themselves, one
 individual devotes less consideration to it, another more; while by
 every man, He who is on earth, whoever is the inhabitant of heaven, is
 more acknowledged. [2724] And the nature of bodies is clear to us in
 one way, that of trees in another, that of animals in a third; the
 nature of souls, again, is concealed in a different way; and the manner
 in which the diverse movements of rational understandings are ordered
 by Providence, eludes the view of men in a greater degree, and even, in
 my opinion, in no small degree that of the angels also.  But as the
 existence of divine providence is not refuted by those especially who
 are certain of its existence, but who do not comprehend its workings or
 arrangements by the powers of the human mind; so neither will the
 divine inspiration of holy Scripture, which extends throughout its
 body, be believed to be non-existent, because the weakness of our
 understanding is unable to trace out the hidden and secret meaning in
 each individual word, the treasure of divine wisdom being hid in the
 vulgar and unpolished vessels of words, [2725] as the apostle also
 points out when he says, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels,"
 [2726] that the virtue of the divine power may shine out the more
 brightly, no colouring of human eloquence being intermingled with the
 truth of the doctrines.  For if our books induced men to believe
 because they were composed either by rhetorical arts or by the wisdom
 of philosophy, then undoubtedly our faith would be considered to be
 based on the art of words, and on human wisdom, and not upon the power
 of God; whereas it is now known to all that the word of this preaching
 has been so accepted by numbers throughout almost the whole world,
 because they understood their belief to rest not on the persuasive
 words of human wisdom, but on the manifestation of the Spirit and of
 power.  On which account, being led by a heavenly, nay, by a more than
 heavenly power, to faith and acceptance, [2727] that we may worship the
 sole Creator of all things as our God, let us also do our utmost
 endeavour, by abandoning the language of the elements of Christ, which
 are but the first beginnings of wisdom, to go on to perfection, in
 order that that wisdom which is given to them who are perfect, may be
 given to us also.  For such is the promise of him to whom was entrusted
 the preaching of this wisdom, in the words:  "Howbeit we speak wisdom
 among them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of
 the princes of this world, who will be brought to nought;" [2728] by
 which he shows that this wisdom of ours has nothing in common, so far
 as regards the beauty of language, with the wisdom of this world.  This
 wisdom, then, will be inscribed more clearly and perfectly on our
 hearts, if it be made known to us according to the revelation of the
 mystery which has been hid from eternity, [2729] but now is manifest
 through the Scriptures of prophecy, and the advent of our Lord and
 Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever.  Amen.

 Many, not understanding the Scriptures in a spiritual sense, but
 incorrectly, [2730] have fallen into heresies.

 8.  These particulars, then, being briefly stated regarding the
 inspiration of the sacred Scriptures by the Holy Spirit, it seems
 necessary to explain this point also, viz., how certain persons, not
 reading them correctly, have given themselves over to erroneous
 opinions, inasmuch as the procedure to be followed, in order to attain
 an understanding of the holy writings, is unknown to many.  The Jews,
 in fine, owing to the hardness of their heart, and from a desire to
 appear wise in their own eyes, have not believed in our Lord and
 Saviour, judging that those statements which were uttered respecting
 Him ought to be understood literally, i.e., that He ought in a sensible
 and visible manner to preach deliverance to the captives, and first
 build a city which they truly deem the city of God, and cut off at the
 same time the chariots of Ephraim, [2731] and the horse from Jerusalem;
 that He ought also to eat butter and honey, [2732] in order to choose
 the good before He should come to know how to bring forth evil. [2733]
 They think, also, that it has been predicted that the wolf--that
 four-footed animal--is, at the coming of Christ, to feed with the
 lambs, and the leopard to lie down with kids, and the calf and the bull
 to pasture with lions, and that they are to be led by a little child to
 the pasture; that the ox and the bear are to lie down together in the
 green fields, and that their young ones are to be fed together; that
 lions also will frequent stalls with the oxen, and feed on straw.  And
 seeing that, according to history, there was no accomplishment of any
 of those things predicted of Him, in which they believed the signs of
 Christ's advent were especially to be observed, they refused to
 acknowledge the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ; nay, contrary to all
 the principles of human and divine law, [2734] i.e., contrary to the
 faith of prophecy, they crucified Him for assuming to Himself the name
 of Christ.  Thereupon the heretics, reading that it is written in the
 law, "A fire has been kindled in Mine anger;" [2735] and that "I the
 Lord am a jealous (God), visiting the sins of the fathers upon the
 children unto the third and fourth generation;" [2736] and that "it
 repenteth Me that I anointed Saul to be king;" [2737] and, "I am the
 Lord, who make peace and create evil;" [2738] and again, "There is not
 evil in a city which the Lord hath not done;" [2739] and, "Evils came
 down from the Lord upon the gates of Jerusalem;" [2740] and, "An evil
 spirit from the Lord plagued Saul;" [2741] and reading many other
 passages similar to these, which are found in Scripture, they did not
 venture to assert that these were not the Scriptures of God, but they
 considered them to be the words of that creator God whom the Jews
 worshipped, and who, they judged, ought to be regarded as just only,
 and not also as good; but that the Saviour had come to announce to us a
 more perfect God, who, they allege; is not the creator of the
 world,--there being different and discordant opinions among them even
 on this very point, because, when they once depart from a belief in God
 the Creator, who is Lord of all, they have given themselves over to
 various inventions and fables, devising certain (fictions), and
 asserting that some things were visible, and made by one (God), and
 that certain other things were invisible, and were created by another,
 according to the vain and fanciful suggestions of their own minds.  But
 not a few also of the more simple of those, who appear to be restrained
 within the faith of the Church, are of opinion that there is no greater
 God than the Creator, holding in this a correct and sound opinion; and
 yet they entertain regarding Him such views as would not be entertained
 regarding the most unjust and cruel of men.

 9.  Now the reason of the erroneous apprehension of all these points on
 the part of those whom we have mentioned above, is no other than this,
 that holy Scripture is not understood by them according to its
 spiritual, but according to its literal meaning.  And therefore we
 shall endeavour, so far as our moderate capacity will permit, to point
 out to those who believe the holy Scriptures to be no human
 compositions, but to be written by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and
 to be transmitted and entrusted to us by the will of God the Father,
 through His only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, what appears to us, who
 observe things by a right way of understanding, [2742] to be the
 standard and discipline delivered to the apostles by Jesus Christ, and
 which they handed down in succession to their posterity, the teachers
 of the holy Church.  Now, that there are certain mystical economies
 [2743] indicated in holy Scripture, is admitted by all, I think, even
 the simplest of believers.  But what these are, or of what kind they
 are, he who is rightly minded, and not overcome with the vice of
 boasting, will scrupulously [2744] acknowledge himself to be ignorant.
 For if anyone, e.g., were to adduce the case of the daughters of Lot,
 who seem, contrary to the law of God, [2745] to have had intercourse
 with their father, or that of the two wives of Abraham, or of the two
 sisters who were married to Jacob, or of the two handmaids who
 increased the number of his sons, what other answer could be returned
 than that these were certain mysteries, [2746] and forms of spiritual
 things, but that we are ignorant of what nature they are?  Nay, even
 when we read of the construction of the tabernacle, we deem it certain
 that the written descriptions are the figures of certain hidden things;
 but to adapt these to their appropriate standards, and to open up and
 discuss every individual point, I consider to be exceedingly difficult,
 not to say impossible.  That that description, however, is, as I have
 said, full of mysteries, does not escape even the common
 understanding.  But all the narrative portion, relating either to the
 marriages, or to the begetting of the children, or to battles of
 different kinds, or to any other histories whatever, what else can they
 be supposed to be, save the forms and figures of hidden and sacred
 things?  As men, however, make little effort to exercise their
 intellect, or imagine that they possess knowledge before they really
 learn, the consequence is that they never begin to have knowledge or if
 there be no want of a desire, at least, nor of an instructor, and if
 divine knowledge be sought after, as it ought to be, in a religious and
 holy spirit, and in the hope that many points will be opened up by the
 revelation of God--since to human sense they are exceedingly difficult
 and obscure--then, perhaps, he who seeks in such a manner will find
 what it is lawful [2747] to discover.

 10.  But lest this difficulty perhaps should be supposed to exist only
 in the language of the prophets, seeing the prophetic style is allowed
 by all to abound in figures and enigmas, what do we find when we come
 to the Gospels?  Is there not hidden there also an inner, namely a
 divine sense, which is revealed by that grace alone which he had
 received who said, "But we have the mind of Christ, that we might know
 the things freely given to us by God.  Which things also we speak, not
 in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Spirit
 teacheth?" [2748] And if one now were to read the revelations which
 were made to John, how amazed would he not be that there should be
 contained within them so great an amount of hidden, ineffable
 mysteries, [2749] in which it is clearly understood, even by those who
 cannot comprehend what is concealed, that something certainly is
 concealed.  And yet are not the Epistles of the Apostles, which seem to
 some to be plainer, filled with meanings so profound, that by means of
 them, as by some small receptacle, [2750] the clearness of incalculable
 light [2751] appears to be poured into those who are capable of
 understanding the meaning of divine wisdom?  And therefore, because
 this is the case, and because there are many who go wrong in this life,
 I do not consider that it is easy to pronounce, without danger, that
 anyone knows or understands those things, which, in order to be opened
 up, need the key of knowledge; which key, the Saviour declared, lay
 with those who were skilled in the law.  And here, although it is a
 digression, I think we should inquire of those who assert that before
 the advent of the Saviour there was no truth among those who were
 engaged in the study of the law, how it could be said by our Lord Jesus
 Christ that the keys of knowledge were with them, who had the books of
 the prophets and of the law in their hands.  For thus did He speak:
 "Woe unto you, ye teachers of the law, who have taken away the key of
 knowledge:  ye entered not in yourselves, and them who wished to enter
 in ye hindered." [2752]

 11.  But, as we had begun to observe, the way which seems to us the
 correct one for the understanding of the Scriptures, and for the
 investigation of their meaning, we consider to be of the following
 kind:  for we are instructed by Scripture itself in regard to the ideas
 which we ought to form of it.  In the Proverbs of Solomon we find some
 such rule as the following laid down, respecting the consideration of
 holy Scripture:  "And do thou," he says, "describe these things to
 thyself in a threefold manner, in counsel and knowledge, and that thou
 mayest answer the words of truth to those who have proposed them to
 thee." [2753] Each one, then, ought to describe in his own mind, in a
 threefold manner, the understanding of the divine letters,--that is, in
 order that all the more simple individuals may be edified, so to speak,
 by the very body of Scripture; for such we term that common and
 historical sense:  while, if some have commenced to make considerable
 progress, and are able to see something more (than that), they may be
 edified by the very soul of Scripture.  Those, again, who are perfect,
 and who resemble those of whom the apostle says, "We speak wisdom among
 them that are perfect, but not the wisdom of this world, nor of the
 princes of this world, who will be brought to nought; but we speak the
 wisdom of God, hidden in a mystery, which God hath decreed before the
 ages unto our glory;" [2754] --all such as these may be edified by the
 spiritual law itself (which has a shadow of good things to come), as if
 by the Spirit.  For as man is said to consist of body, and soul, and
 spirit, so also does sacred Scripture, which has been granted by the
 divine bounty [2755] for the salvation of man; which we see pointed
 out, moreover, in the little book of The Shepherd, which seems to be
 despised by some, where Hermas is commanded to write two little books,
 and afterwards to announce to the presbyters of the Church what he
 learned from the Spirit.  For these are the words that are written:
 "And you will write," he says, "two books; and you will give the one to
 Clement, and the other to Grapte. [2756] And let Grapte admonish the
 widows and orphans, and let Clement send through all the cities which
 are abroad, while you will announce to the presbyters of the Church."
 Grapte, accordingly, who is commanded to admonish the orphans and
 widows, is the pure understanding of the letter itself; by which those
 youthful minds are admonished, who have not yet deserved to have God as
 their Father, and are on that account styled orphans.  They, again, are
 the widows, who have withdrawn themselves from the unjust man, to whom
 they had been united contrary to law; but who have remained widows,
 because they have not yet advanced to the stage of being joined to a
 heavenly Bridegroom.  Clement, moreover, is ordered to send into those
 cities which are abroad what is written to those individuals who
 already are withdrawing from the letter,--as if the meaning were to
 those souls who, being built up by this means, have begun to rise above
 the cares of the body and the desires of the flesh; while he himself,
 who had learned from the Holy Spirit, is commanded to announce, not by
 letter nor by book, but by the living voice, to the presbyters of the
 Church of Christ, i.e., to those who possess a mature faculty of
 wisdom, capable of receiving spiritual teaching.

 12.  This point, indeed, is not to be passed by without notice, viz.,
 that there are certain passages of Scripture where this "body," as we
 termed it, i.e., this inferential historical sense, [2757] is not
 always found, as we shall prove to be the case in the following pages,
 but where that which we termed "soul" or "spirit" can only be
 understood.  And this, I think, is indicated in the Gospels, where
 there are said to be placed, according to the manner of purification
 among the Jews, six water-vessels, containing two or three firkins
 [2758] a-piece; by which, as I have said, the language of the Gospel
 seems to indicate, with respect to those who are secretly called by the
 apostle "Jews," that they are purified by the word of
 Scripture,--receiving indeed sometimes two firkins, i.e., the
 understanding of the "soul" or "spirit," according to our statement as
 above; sometimes even three (firkins), when in the reading (of
 Scripture) the "bodily" sense, which is the "historical," may be
 preserved for the edification of the people.  Now six water-vessels are
 appropriately spoken of, with regard to those persons who are purified
 by being placed in the world; for we read that in six days--which is
 the perfect number--this world and all things in it were finished.  How
 great, then, is the utility of this first "historical" sense which we
 have mentioned, is attested by the multitude of all believers, who
 believe with adequate faith and simplicity, and does not need much
 argument, because it is openly manifest to all; whereas of that sense
 which we have called above the "soul," as it were, of Scripture, the
 Apostle Paul has given us numerous examples in the first Epistle to the
 Corinthians.  For we find the expression, "Thou shalt not muzzle the
 mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn." [2759] And afterwards,
 when explaining what precept ought to be understood by this, he adds
 the words:  "Doth God take care for oxen? or saith He it altogether for
 our sakes?  For our sakes, no doubt, this is written; that he who
 plougheth should plough in hope, and he that thresheth, in hope of
 partaking." [2760] Very many other passages also of this nature,
 which are in this way explained of the law, contribute extensive
 information to the hearers.

 13.  Now a "spiritual" interpretation is of this nature:  when one is
 able to point out what are the heavenly things of which these serve as
 the patterns and shadow, who are Jews "according to the flesh," and of
 what things future the law contains a shadow, and any other expressions
 of this kind that may be found in holy Scripture; or when it is a
 subject of inquiry, what is that wisdom hidden in a mystery which "God
 ordained before the world for our glory, which none of the princes of
 this world knew;" [2761] or the meaning of the apostle's language,
 when, employing certain illustrations from Exodus or Numbers, he says:
 "These things happened to them in a figure, [2762] and they are written
 on our account, on whom the ends of the ages have come." [2763] Now,
 an opportunity is afforded us of understanding of what those things
 which happened to them were figures, when he adds:  "And they drank of
 that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ."
 [2764] In another Epistle also, when referring to the tabernacle, he
 mentions the direction which was given to Moses:  "Thou shalt make (all
 things) according to the pattern which was showed thee in the mount."
 [2765] And writing to the Galatians, and upbraiding certain
 individuals who seem to themselves to read the law, and yet without
 understanding it, because of their ignorance of the fact that an
 allegorical meaning underlies what is written, he says to them in a
 certain tone of rebuke:  "Tell me, ye who desire to be under the law,
 do ye not hear the law?  For it is written that Abraham had two sons;
 the one by a bond-maid, the other by a free woman.  But he who was of
 the bond-woman was born according to the flesh; but he of the free
 woman was by promise.  Which things are an allegory:  for these are the
 two covenants." [2766] And here this point is to be attended to,
 viz., the caution with which the apostle employs the expression, "Ye
 who are under the law, do ye not hear the law?"  Do ye not hear, i.e.,
 do ye not understand and know?  In the Epistle to the Colossians,
 again, briefly summing up and condensing the meaning of the whole law,
 he says:  "Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in
 respect of holy days, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath, which are
 a shadow of things to come." [2767] Writing to the Hebrews also, and
 treating of those who belong to the circumcision, he says:  "Those who
 serve to the example and shadow of heavenly things." [2768] Now
 perhaps, through these illustrations, no doubt will be entertained
 regarding the five books of Moses, by those who hold the writings of
 the apostle, as divinely inspired.  And if they require, with respect
 to the rest of the history, that those events which are contained in it
 should be considered as having happened for an ensample to those of
 whom they are written, we have observed that this also has been stated
 in the Epistle to the Romans, where the apostle adduces an instance
 from the third book of Kings, saying, "I have left me seven thousand
 men who have not bowed the knee to Baal;" [2769] which expression Paul
 understood as figuratively spoken of those who are called Israelites
 according to the election, in order to show that the advent of Christ
 had not only now been of advantage to the Gentiles, but that very many
 even of the race of Israel had been called to salvation.

 14.  This being the state of the case, we shall sketch out, as if by
 way of illustration and pattern, what may occur to us with regard to
 the manner in which holy Scripture is to be understood on these several
 points, repeating in the first instance, and pointing out this fact,
 that the Holy Spirit, by the providence and will of God, through the
 power of His only-begotten Word, who was in the beginning God with God,
 enlightened the ministers of truth, the prophets and apostles, to
 understand the mysteries of those things or causes which take place
 among men, or with respect to men. [2770] And by "men," I now mean
 souls that are placed in bodies, who, relating those mysteries that are
 known to them, and revealed through Christ, as if they were a kind of
 human transactions, or handing down certain legal observances and
 injunctions, described them figuratively; [2771] not that anyone who
 pleased might view these expositions as deserving to be trampled under
 foot, but that he who should devote himself with all chastity, and
 sobriety, and watchfulness, to studies of this kind, might be able by
 this means to trace out the meaning of the Spirit of God, which is
 perhaps lying profoundly buried, and the context, which may be pointing
 again in another direction than the ordinary usage of speech would
 indicate.  And in this way he might become a sharer in the knowledge of
 the Spirit, and a partaker in the divine counsel, because the soul
 cannot come to the perfection of knowledge otherwise than by
 inspiration of the truth of the divine wisdom.  Accordingly, it is of
 God, i.e., of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, that
 these men, filled with the Divine Spirit, chiefly treat; then the
 mysteries relating to the Son of God--how the Word became flesh, and
 why He descended even to the assumption of the form of a servant--are
 the subject, as I have said, of explanation by those persons who are
 filled with the Divine Spirit.  It next followed, necessarily, that
 they should instruct mortals by divine teaching, regarding rational
 creatures, both those of heaven and the happier ones of earth; and also
 (should explain) the differences among souls, and the origin of these
 differences; and then should tell what this world is, and why it was
 created; whence also sprung the great and terrible wickedness which
 extends over the earth.  And whether that wickedness is found on this
 earth only, or in other places, is a point which it was necessary for
 us to learn from divine teaching.  Since, then, it was the intention of
 the Holy Spirit to enlighten with respect to these and similar
 subjects, those holy souls who had devoted themselves to the service of
 the truth, this object was kept in view, in the second place, viz., for
 the sake of those who either could not or would not give themselves to
 this labour and toil by which they might deserve to be instructed in or
 to recognise things of such value and importance, to wrap up and
 conceal, as we said before, in ordinary language, under the covering of
 some history and narrative of visible things, hidden mysteries.  There
 is therefore introduced the narrative of the visible creation, and the
 creation and formation of the first man; then the offspring which
 followed from him in succession, and some of the actions which were
 done by the good among his posterity, are related, and occasionally
 certain crimes also, which are stated to have been committed by them as
 being human; and afterwards certain unchaste or wicked deeds also are
 narrated as being the acts of the wicked.  The description of battles,
 moreover, is given in a wonderful manner, and the alternations of
 victors and vanquished, by which certain ineffable mysteries are made
 known to those who know how to investigate statements of that kind.  By
 an admirable discipline of wisdom, too, the law of truth, even of the
 prophets, is implanted in the Scriptures of the law, each of which is
 woven by a divine art of wisdom, as a kind of covering and veil of
 spiritual truths; and this is what we have called the "body" of
 Scripture, so that also, in this way, what we have called the covering
 of the letter, woven by the art of wisdom, might be capable of edifying
 and profiting many, when others would derive no benefit.

 15.  But as if, in all the instances of this covering (i.e., of this
 history), the logical connection and order of the law had been
 preserved, we would not certainly believe, when thus possessing the
 meaning of Scripture in a continuous series, that anything else was
 contained in it save what was indicated on the surface; so for that
 reason divine wisdom took care that certain stumbling-blocks, or
 interruptions, [2772] to the historical meaning should take place, by
 the introduction into the midst (of the narrative) of certain
 impossibilities and incongruities; that in this way the very
 interruption of the narrative might, as by the interposition of a bolt,
 present an obstacle to the reader, whereby he might refuse to
 acknowledge the way which conducts to the ordinary meaning; and being
 thus excluded and debarred from it, we might be recalled to the
 beginning of another way, in order that, by entering upon a narrow
 path, and passing to a loftier and more sublime road, he might lay open
 the immense breadth of divine wisdom. [2773] This, however, must not
 be unnoted by us, that as the chief object of the Holy Spirit is to
 preserve the coherence of the spiritual meaning, either in those things
 which ought to be done or which have been already performed, if He
 anywhere finds that those events which, according to the history, took
 place, can be adapted to a spiritual meaning, He composed a texture of
 both kinds in one style of narration, always concealing the hidden
 meaning more deeply; but where the historical narrative could not be
 made appropriate to the spiritual coherence of the occurrences, He
 inserted sometimes certain things which either did not take place or
 could not take place; sometimes also what might happen, but what did
 not:  and He does this at one time in a few words, which, taken in
 their "bodily" meaning, seem incapable of containing truth, and at
 another by the insertion of many.  And this we find frequently to be
 the case in the legislative portions, where there are many things
 manifestly useful among the "bodily" precepts, but a very great number
 also in which no principle of utility is at all discernible, and
 sometimes even things which are judged to be impossibilities.  Now all
 this, as we have remarked, was done by the Holy Spirit in order that,
 seeing those events which lie on the surface can be neither true nor
 useful, we may be led to the investigation of that truth which is more
 deeply concealed, and to the ascertaining of a meaning worthy of God in
 those Scriptures which we believe to be inspired by Him.

 16.  Nor was it only with regard to those Scriptures which were
 composed down to the advent of Christ that the Holy Spirit thus dealt;
 but as being one and the same Spirit, and proceeding from one God, He
 dealt in the same way with the evangelists and apostles.  For even
 those narratives which He inspired them to write were not composed
 without the aid of that wisdom of His, the nature of which we have
 above explained.  Whence also in them were intermingled not a few
 things by which, the historical order of the narrative being
 interrupted and broken up, the attention of the reader might be
 recalled, by the impossibility of the case, to an examination of the
 inner meaning.  But, that our meaning may be ascertained by the facts
 themselves, let us examine the passages of Scripture.  Now who is
 there, pray, possessed of understanding, that will regard the statement
 as appropriate, [2774] that the first day, and the second, and the
 third, in which also both evening and morning are mentioned, existed
 without sun, and moon, and stars--the first day even without a sky?
 And who is found so ignorant as to suppose that God, as if He had been
 a husbandman, planted trees in paradise, in Eden towards the east, and
 a tree of life in it, i.e., a visible and palpable tree of wood, [2775]
 so that anyone eating of it with bodily teeth should obtain life, and,
 eating again of another tree, should come to the knowledge of good and
 evil?  No one, I think, can doubt that the statement that God walked in
 the afternoon in paradise, and that Adam lay hid under a tree, is
 related figuratively in Scripture, that some mystical meaning may be
 indicated by it.  The departure of Cain from the presence of the Lord
 will manifestly cause a careful reader to inquire what is the presence
 of God, and how anyone can go out from it.  But not to extend the task
 which we have before us beyond its due limits, it is very easy for
 anyone who pleases to gather out of holy Scripture what is recorded
 indeed as having been done, but what nevertheless cannot be believed as
 having reasonably and appropriately occurred according to the
 historical account.  The same style of Scriptural narrative occurs
 abundantly in the Gospels, as when the devil is said to have placed
 Jesus on a lofty mountain, that he might show Him from thence all the
 kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.  How could it literally
 come to pass, either that Jesus should be led up by the devil into a
 high mountain, or that the latter should show him all the kingdoms of
 the world (as if they were lying beneath his bodily eyes, and adjacent
 to one mountain), i.e., the kingdoms of the Persians, and Scythians,
 and Indians? or how could he show in what manner the kings of these
 kingdoms are glorified by men?  And many other instances similar to
 this will be found in the Gospels by anyone who will read them with
 attention, and will observe that in those narratives which appear to be
 literally recorded, there are inserted and interwoven things which
 cannot be admitted historically, but which may be accepted in a
 spiritual signification. [2776]

 17.  In the passages containing the commandments also, similar things
 are found.  For in the law Moses is commanded to destroy every male
 that is not circumcised on the eighth day, which is exceedingly
 incongruous; [2777] since it would be necessary, if it were related
 that the law was executed according to the history, to command those
 parents to be punished who did not circumcise their children, and also
 those who were the nurses of little children.  The declaration of
 Scripture now is, "The uncircumcised male, i.e., who shall not have
 been circumcised, shall be cut off from his people." [2778] And if we
 are to inquire regarding the impossibilities of the law, we find an
 animal called the goat-stag, [2779] which cannot possibly exist, but
 which, as being in the number of clean beasts, Moses commands to be
 eaten; and a griffin, [2780] which no one ever remembers or heard of as
 yielding to human power, but which the legislator forbids to be used
 for food.  Respecting the celebrated [2781] observance of the Sabbath
 also he thus speaks:  "Ye shall sit, everyone in your dwellings; no one
 shall move from his place on the Sabbath-day." [2782] Which precept
 it is impossible to observe literally; for no man can sit a whole day
 so as not to move from the place where he sat down.  With respect to
 each one of these points now, those who belong to the circumcision, and
 all who would have no more meaning to be found in sacred Scripture than
 what is indicated by the letter, consider that there should be no
 investigation regarding the goat-stag, and the griffin, and the
 vulture; and they invent some empty and trifling tales about the
 Sabbath, drawn from some traditional sources or other, alleging that
 everyone's place is computed to him within two thousand cubits. [2783]
 Others, again, among whom is Dositheus the Samaritan, censure indeed
 expositions of this kind, but themselves lay down something more
 ridiculous, viz., that each one must remain until the evening in the
 posture, place, or position in which he found himself on the
 Sabbath-day; i.e., if found sitting, he is to sit the whole day, or if
 reclining, he is to recline the whole day.  Moreover, the injunction
 which runs, "Bear no burden on the Sabbath-day," [2784] seems to me an
 impossibility.  For the Jewish doctors, in consequence of these
 (prescriptions), have betaken themselves, as the holy apostle says, to
 innumerable fables, saying that it is not accounted a burden if a man
 wear shoes without nails, but that it is a burden if shoes with nails
 be worn; and that if it be carried on one shoulder, they consider it a
 burden but if on both, they declare it to be none.

 18.  And now, if we institute a similar examination with regard to the
 Gospels, how shall it appear otherwise than absurd to take the
 injunction literally, "Salute no man by the way?" [2785] And yet
 there are simple individuals, who think that our Saviour gave this
 command to His apostles!  How, also, can it appear possible for such an
 order as this to be observed, especially in those countries where there
 is a rigorous winter, attended by frost and ice, viz., that one should
 possess "neither two coats, nor shoes?" [2786] And this, that when
 one is smitten on the right cheek, he is ordered to present the left
 also, since everyone who strikes with the right hand smites the left
 cheek?  This precept also in the Gospels must be accounted among
 impossibilities, viz., that if the right eye "offend" thee, it is to be
 plucked out; for even if we were to suppose that bodily eyes were
 spoken of, how shall it appear appropriate, that when both eyes have
 the property of sight, the responsibility of the "offence" should be
 transferred to one eye, and that the right one?  Or who shall be
 considered free of a crime of the greatest enormity, that lays hands
 upon himself?  But perhaps the Epistles of the Apostle Paul will appear
 to be beyond this.  For what is his meaning, when he says, "Is any man
 called, being circumcised?  Let him not become uncircumcised." [2787]
 This expression indeed, in the first place, does not on careful
 consideration seem to be spoken with reference to the subject of which
 he was treating at the time, for this discourse consisted of
 injunctions relating to marriage and to chastity; and these words,
 therefore, will have the appearance an unnecessary addition to such a
 subject.  In the second place, however, what objection would there be,
 if, for the sake of avoiding that unseemliness which is caused by
 circumcision, a man were able to become uncircumcised? [2788] And, in
 the third place, that is altogether impossible.

 The object of all these statements on our part, is to show that it was
 the design of the Holy Spirit, who deigned to bestow upon us the sacred
 Scriptures, to show that we were not to be edified by the letter alone,
 or by everything in it,--a thing which we see to be frequently
 impossible and inconsistent; for in that way not only absurdities, but
 impossibilities, would be the result; but that we are to understand
 that certain occurrences were interwoven in this "visible" history,
 which, when considered and understood in their inner meaning, give
 forth a law which is advantageous to men and worthy of God.

 19.  Let no one, however, entertain the suspicion that we do not
 believe any history in Scripture to be real, because we suspect certain
 events related in it not to have taken place; or that no precepts of
 the law are to be taken literally, because we consider certain of them,
 in which either the nature or possibility of the case so requires,
 incapable of being observed; or that we do not believe those
 predictions which were written of the Saviour to have been fulfilled in
 a manner palpable to the senses; or that His commandments are not to be
 literally obeyed.  We have therefore to state in answer, since we are
 manifestly so of opinion, that the truth of the history may and ought
 to be preserved in the majority of instances.  For who can deny that
 Abraham was buried in the double cave [2789] at Hebron, as well as
 Isaac and Jacob, and each of their wives?  Or who doubts that Shechem
 was given as a portion to Joseph? [2790] or that Jerusalem is the
 metropolis of Judea, on which the temple of God was built by
 Solomon?--and countless other statements.  For the passages which hold
 good in their historical acceptation are much more numerous than those
 which contain a purely spiritual meaning.  Then, again, who would not
 maintain that the command to "honour thy father and thy mother, that it
 may be well with thee," [2791] is sufficient of itself without any
 spiritual meaning, and necessary for those who observe it? especially
 when Paul also has confirmed the command by repeating it in the same
 words.  And what need is there to speak of the prohibitions, "Thou
 shalt not commit adultery," "Thou shalt not steal," "Thou shalt not
 bear false witness," [2792] and others of the same kind?  And with
 respect to the precepts enjoined in the Gospels, no doubt can be
 entertained that very many of these are to be literally observed, as,
 e.g., when our Lord says, "But I say unto you, Swear not at all;"
 [2793] and when He says, "Whosoever looketh upon a woman to lust after
 her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart;" [2794] the
 admonitions also which are found in the writings of the Apostle Paul,
 "Warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the
 weak, be patient towards all men," [2795] and very many others.  And
 yet I have no doubt that an attentive reader will, in numerous
 instances, hesitate whether this or that history can be considered to
 be literally true or not; or whether this or that precept ought to be
 observed according to the letter or no.  And therefore great pains and
 labour are to be employed, until every reader reverentially understand
 that he is dealing with divine and not human words inserted in the
 sacred books.

 20.  The understanding, therefore, of holy Scripture which we consider
 ought to be deservedly and consistently maintained, is of the following
 kind.  A certain nation is declared by holy Scripture to have been
 chosen by God upon the earth, which nation has received several names:
 for sometimes the whole of it is termed Israel, and sometimes Jacob;
 and it was divided by Jeroboam son of Nebat into two portions; and the
 ten tribes which were formed under him were called Israel, while the
 two remaining ones (with which were united the tribe of Levi, and that
 which was descended from the royal race of David) was named Judah.  Now
 the whole of the country possessed by that nation, which it had
 received from God, was called Judea, in which was situated the
 metropolis, Jerusalem; and it is called metropolis, being as it were
 the mother of many cities, the names of which you will frequently find
 mentioned here and there in the other books of Scripture, but which are
 collected together into one catalogue in the book of Joshua the son of
 Nun. [2796]

 21.  This, then, being the state of the case, the holy apostle desiring
 to elevate in some degree, and to raise our understanding above the
 earth, says in a certain place, "Behold Israel after the flesh;" [2797]
 by which he certainly means that there is another Israel which is not
 according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.  And again in
 another passage, "For they are not all Israelites who are of Israel."
 [2798]

 22.  Being taught, then, by him that there is one Israel according to
 the flesh, and another according to the Spirit, when the Saviour says,
 "I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," [2799] we
 do not understand these words as those do who savour of earthly things,
 i.e., the Ebionites, who derive the appellation of "poor" from their
 very name (for "Ebion" means "poor" in Hebrew [2800] ); but we
 understand that there exists a race of souls which is termed "Israel,"
 as is indicated by the interpretation of the name itself:  for Israel
 is interpreted to mean a "mind," or "man seeing God."  The apostle,
 again, makes a similar revelation respecting Jerusalem, saying, "The
 Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all."
 [2801] And in another of his Epistles he says:  "But ye are come unto
 mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, and to the heavenly
 Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, and to the Church
 of the first-born which is written in heaven." [2802] If, then, there
 are certain souls in this world who are called Israel, and a city in
 heaven which is called Jerusalem, it follows that those cities which
 are said to belong to the nation of Israel have the heavenly Jerusalem
 as their metropolis; and that, agreeably to this, we understand as
 referring to the whole of Judah (of which also we are of opinion that
 the prophets have spoken in certain mystical narratives), any
 predictions delivered either regarding Judea or Jerusalem, or invasions
 of any kind, which the sacred histories declare to have happened to
 Judea or Jerusalem.  Whatever, then, is either narrated or predicted of
 Jerusalem, must, if we accept the words of Paul as those of Christ
 speaking in him, be understood as spoken in conformity with his opinion
 regarding that city which he calls the heavenly Jerusalem, and all
 those places or cities which are said to be cities of the holy land, of
 which Jerusalem is the metropolis.  For we are to suppose that it is
 from these very cities that the Saviour, wishing to raise us to a
 higher grade of intelligence, promises to those who have well managed
 the money entrusted to them by Himself, that they are to have power
 over ten or five cities.  If, then, the prophecies delivered concerning
 Judea, and Jerusalem, and Judah, and Israel, and Jacob, not being
 understood by us in a carnal sense, signify certain divine mysteries,
 it certainly follows that those prophecies also which were delivered
 either concerning Egypt or the Egyptians, or Babylonia and the
 Babylonians, and Sidon and the Sidonians, are not to be understood as
 spoken of that Egypt which is situated on the earth, or of the earthly
 Babylon, Tyre, or Sidon.  Nor can those predictions which the prophet
 Ezekiel delivered concerning Pharaoh king of Egypt, apply to any man
 who may seem to have reigned over Egypt, as the nature of the passage
 itself declares.  In a similar manner also, what is spoken of the
 prince of Tyre cannot be understood of any man or king of Tyre.  And
 how could we possibly accept, as spoken of a man, what is related in
 many passages of Scripture, and especially in Isaiah, regarding
 Nebuchadnezzar?  For he is not a man who is said to have "fallen from
 heaven," or who was "Lucifer," or who "arose in the morning."  But with
 respect to those predictions which are found in Ezekiel concerning
 Egypt, such as that it is to be destroyed in forty years, so that the
 foot of man should not be found within it, and that it should suffer
 such devastation, that throughout the whole land the blood of men
 should rise to the knees, I do not know that anyone possessed of
 understanding could refer this to that earthly Egypt which adjoins
 Ethiopia.  But let us see whether it may not be understood more
 fittingly in the following manner:  viz., that as there is a heavenly
 Jerusalem and Judea, and a nation undoubtedly which inhabits it, and is
 named Israel; so also it is possible that there are certain localities
 near to these which may seem to be called either Egypt, or Babylon, or
 Tyre, or Sidon, and that the princes of these places, and the souls, if
 there be any, that inhabit them, are called Egyptians, Babylonians,
 Tyrians, and Sidonians.  From whom also, according to the mode of life
 which they lead there, a sort of captivity would seem to result, in
 consequence of which they are said to have fallen from Judea into
 Babylonia or Egypt, from a higher and better condition, or to have been
 scattered into other countries.

 23.  For perhaps as those who, departing this world in virtue of that
 death which is common to all, are arranged, in conformity with their
 actions and deserts--according as they shall be deemed worthy--some in
 the place which is called "hell," [2803] others in the bosom of
 Abraham, and in different localities or mansions; so also from those
 places, as if dying there, if the expression can be used, [2804] do
 they come down from the "upper world" [2805] to this "hell."  For that
 "hell" to which the souls of the dead are conducted from this world,
 is, I believe, on account of this distinction, called the "lower hell"
 by Scripture, as is said in the book of Psalms:  "Thou hast delivered
 my soul from the lowest hell." [2806] Everyone, accordingly, of those
 who descend to the earth is, according to his deserts, or agreeably to
 the position which he occupied there, ordained to be born in this
 world, in a different country, or among a different nation, or in a
 different mode of life, or surrounded by infirmities of a different
 kind, or to be descended from religious parents, or parents who are not
 religious; so that it may sometimes happen that an Israelite descends
 among the Scythians, and a poor Egyptian is brought down to Judea.  And
 yet our Saviour came to gather together the lost sheep of the house of
 Israel; and as many of the Israelites did not accept His teaching,
 those who belonged to the Gentiles were called.  From which it will
 appear to follow, that those prophecies which are delivered to the
 individual nations ought to be referred rather to the souls, and to
 their different heavenly mansions.  Nay, the narratives of the events
 which are said to have happened either to the nation of Israel, or to
 Jerusalem, or to Judea, when assailed by this or that nation, cannot in
 many instances be understood as having actually [2807] occurred, and
 are much more appropriate to those nations of souls who inhabit that
 heaven which is said to pass away, or who even now are supposed to be
 inhabitants of it.

 If now anyone demand of us clear and distinct declarations on these
 points out of holy Scripture, we must answer that it was the design of
 the Holy Spirit, in those portions which appear to relate the history
 of events, rather to cover and conceal the meaning:  in those passages,
 e.g., where they are said to go down into Egypt, or to be carried
 captive to Babylonia, or when in these very countries some are said to
 be brought to excessive humiliation, and to be placed under bondage to
 their masters; while others, again, in these very countries of their
 captivity, were held in honour and esteem, so as to occupy positions of
 rank and power, and were appointed to the government of provinces;--all
 which things, as we have said, are kept hidden and covered in the
 narratives of holy Scripture, because "the kingdom of heaven is like a
 treasure hid in a field; which when a man findeth, he hideth it, and
 for joy thereof goeth away and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth
 that field." [2808] By which similitude, consider whether it be not
 pointed out that the very soil and surface, so to speak, of
 Scripture--that is, the literal meaning--is the field, filled with
 plants and flowers of all kinds; while that deeper and profounder
 "spiritual" meaning are the very hidden treasures of wisdom and
 knowledge which the Holy Spirit by Isaiah calls the dark and invisible
 and hidden treasures, for the finding out of which the divine help is
 required:  for God alone can burst the brazen gates by which they are
 enclosed and concealed, and break in pieces the iron bolts and levers
 by which access is prevented to all those things which are written and
 concealed in Genesis respecting the different kinds of souls, and of
 those seeds and generations which either have a close connection with
 Israel [2809] or are widely separated from his descendants; as well as
 what is that descent of seventy souls into Egypt, which seventy souls
 became in that land as the stars of heaven in multitude.  But as not
 all of them were the light of this world--"for all who are of Israel
 are not Israel" [2810] --they grow from being seventy souls to be an
 important people, [2811] and as the "sand by the sea-shore
 innumerable."

 [2698] Visibiliter de invisibilibus pronunciare.

 [2699] Principis Christianorum religionis et dogmatis.

 [2700] Satis idonei.

 [2701] Religionem Christianæ doctrinæ.

 [2702] Matt. x. 18.

 [2703] Cf. Matt. xxiv. 14.

 [2704] Cf. Matt. vii. 22, 23.

 [2705] Fortasse minus vera esse viderentur.

 [2706] Salutaria præcepta.

 [2707] Illæ omnes ambitiones Judaicæ.

 [2708] Cf. Hos. iii. 4.  Quoted from the Septuagint.

 [2709] On the Patriarch of the Jews, cf. Milman's History of the Jews,
 vol. ii. p. 399 sq., and vol. iii. p. 7 sq.

 [2710] Deut. xxxii.

 [2711] Deut. xxxii.

 [2712] Deut. xxxii. 21.

 [2713] 1 Cor. i. 26-28.

 [2714] 1 Cor. i. 29.

 [2715] Ps. xlv. 1, 2.

 [2716] [See note infra, Contra Celsum, B. II. cap. xii.  S.]

 [2717] Cf. Ps. lxxii. 7.

 [2718] Ps. lxxii. 8.

 [2719] Cf. Isa. viii. 8, 9.  Quoted from the Septuagint.

 [2720] Cf. Mic. v. 2 with Matt. ii. 6.

 [2721] Cf. Dan. ix. 25.  Ad ducem Christum; "To Messiah the Prince,"
 Auth. Vers.

 [2722] The allusion is perhaps to Job xli. 1.

 [2723] Divino, ut ita dixerim, cothurno.

 [2724] "Nam et inter ipsos homines ab alio minus, ab alio amplius
 consideratur:  plus vero ab omni homine, qui in terris est, quis-quis
 ille est coeli habitator, agnoscitur."  The translation of Rufinus, as
 Redepenning remarks, seems very confused.  Probably also the text is
 corrupt.  The Greek without doubt gives the genuine thought of Origen.
 By omitting the ab we approximate to the Greek, and get:  "but he,
 whoever he be, who is inhabitant of heaven, is better known than any
 man who is on the earth;" or according to the punctuation in the old
 editions, "but he who is inhabitant of heaven is better known than any
 man on earth, whoever he be."

 [2725] In vilioribus et incomptis verborum vasculis.

 [2726] Cf. 2 Cor. iv. 7.

 [2727] Ad fidem credulitatemque.

 [2728] 1 Cor. ii. 6.

 [2729] Temporibus eternis.

 [2730] Male.

 [2731] Cf. Zech. ix. 10.

 [2732] Cf. Isa. vii. 15.

 [2733] Ut priusquam cognosceret proferre malum, eligeret bonum.

 [2734] Contra jus fasque.

 [2735] Cf. Jer. xv. 14.

 [2736] Cf. Ex. xx. 5.

 [2737] Cf. 1 Sam. xv. 11.

 [2738] Cf. Isa. xlv. 7.

 [2739] Cf. Amos iii. 6.

 [2740] Cf. Mic. i. 12.

 [2741] Cf. 1 Sam. xvi. 14; xviii. 10.

 [2742] The text, as it stands, is probably corrupt:  "Propter quod
 conabimur pro mediocritate sensus nostri his, qui credunt Scripturas
 sanctas non humana verba aliqua esse composita, sed Sancti Spiritus
 inspiratione conscripta, et voluntate Dei patris per unigenitum filium
 suum Jesum Christum nobis quoque esse tradita et commissa, quæ nobis
 videntur, recta via intelligentiæ observantibus, demonstrare illam
 regulam et disciplinam, quam ab Jesu Christo traditam sibi apostoli per
 successionem posteris quoque suis, sanctam ecclesiam docentibus,
 tradiderunt."

 [2743] Dispensationes.

 [2744] Religiosius.

 [2745] Contra fas.

 [2746] Sacramenta quædam.

 [2747] Fas.

 [2748] Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 16 and 12, 13.

 [2749] Tantam occultationem ineffabilium sacramentorum.

 [2750] Per breve quoddam receptaculum.

 [2751] Immensæ lucis claritas.

 [2752] Luke xi. 52.

 [2753] Cf. Prov. xxii. 20, 21.  The Masoretic text reads, kkyrvhl .trv
 tvts"mb (sysls, keri) svsls kkl ytvtk 'lh .kkychlsl tm' syrm' vyshl tm'
 yr"m' tsq

 [2754] 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7.

 [2755] Largitione.

 [2756] [Hermas, vol. ii. pp. 3, 8, 12, this series.  Origen seems to
 overrule this contempt of a minority; and, what is more strange, he
 appears to have accepted the fiction of the Pauline Hermas as authentic
 history.  How naturally this became the impression in the East has been
 explained; and the De Principiis, it must not be forgotten, was not the
 product of the author's mature mind.]

 [2757] Consquentia historialis intelligentiæ.

 [2758] Metretes.

 [2759] Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 9 and Deut. xxv. 4.

 [2760] Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 9, 10.

 [2761] Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 7.

 [2762] In figurâ.  Greek (text. recept.) tupoi.  Lachmann reads
 tupikos.

 [2763] 1 Cor. x. 11.

 [2764] 1 Cor. x. 4.

 [2765] Cf. Ex. xxv. 40 and Heb. viii. 5.

 [2766] Gal. iv. 21-24.

 [2767] Col. ii. 16.

 [2768] Heb. viii. 5.

 [2769] Rom. xi. 4; cf. 1 Kings xix. 18.

 [2770] Quæ inter homines, vel de hominibus geruntur.

 [2771] Figuraliter describebant.

 [2772] Intercapedines.

 [2773] Ut ita celsioris cujusdam et eminentioris tramitis per angusti
 callis ingressum immensam divinæ scientiæ latitudinem pandat.

 [2774] Consequenter, alii "convenienter."

 [2775] Lignum.

 [2776] [See note, p. 262, supra.  See also Dr. Lee, The Inspiration of
 Holy Scripture, pp. 523-527.  S.]

 [2777] Inconsequens.

 [2778] Cf. Gen. xvii. 14.

 [2779] Tragelaphus; "wild goat," Auth. Vers. Deut. xiv. 5; Heb. vq',
 hapax leg.

 [2780] Gryphus; "ossifrage," Auth. Vers. Lev. xi. 13; Heb. srph.

 [2781] Opinatissimâ.

 [2782] Cf. Ex. xvi. 29.

 [2783] Ulnas.

 [2784] Jer. xvii. 21.

 [2785] Luke x. 4.

 [2786] Luke x. 4.

 [2787] 1 Cor. vii. 18.

 [2788] Secundo vero, quid obesset, si obscoenitatis vitandæ causa ejus,
 quæ ex circumcisione est, posset aliquis revocare præputium?

 [2789] Duplici spelunca.

 [2790] Cf. Gen. xlviii. 22 and Josh. xxiv. 32.

 [2791] Cf. Ex. xx. 12 and Eph. vi. 2, 3.

 [2792] Cf. Ex. xx. 13-16.

 [2793] Cf. Matt. v. 34.

 [2794] Matt. v. 28.

 [2795] 1 Thess. v. 14.

 [2796] In libro Jesu Naue.

 [2797] 1 Cor. x. 18.

 [2798] Rom. ix. 6.

 [2799] Matt. xv. 24.

 [2800] Ebion, Heb. nvyv', (from hv', to desire), lit. "wishing,"
 "desiring;" secondarily, "poor."

 [2801] Gal. iv. 26.

 [2802] Cf. Heb. xii. 22, 23.

 [2803] Infernus.

 [2804] Velut illic, si dici potest, morientes.

 [2805] A superis.

 [2806] Cf. Ps. xxx. 3. and Deut. xxxii. 22.

 [2807] Corporaliter.

 [2808] Matt. xiii. 44.

 [2809] Ad propinquitatem pertinent Israel.

 [2810] Rom. ix. 6.

 [2811] Ex ipsis Septuaginta animabus fiunt aliqui.

 Translated from the Greek.

 Chapter I.--On the Inspiration of Holy Scripture, and How the Same is
 to be Read and Understood, and What is the Reason of the Uncertainty in
 it; and of the Impossibility or Irrationality of Certain Things in it,
 Taken According to the Letter.

 (The translation from the Greek is designedly literal, that the
 difference between the original and the paraphrase of Rufinus may be
 more clearly seen.)

 1.  Since, in our investigation of matters of such importance, not
 satisfied with the common opinions, and with the clear evidence of
 visible things, [2812] we take in addition, for the proof of our
 statements, testimonies from what are believed by us to be divine
 writings, viz., from that which is called the Old Testament, and that
 which is styled the New, and endeavour by reason to confirm our faith;
 and as we have not yet spoken of the Scriptures as divine, come and let
 us, as if by way of an epitome, treat of a few points respecting them,
 laying down those reasons which lead us to regard them as divine
 writings.  And before making use of the words of the writings
 themselves, and of the things which are exhibited in them, we must make
 the following statement regarding Moses and Jesus Christ,--the lawgiver
 of the Hebrews, and the Introducer of the saving doctrines according to
 Christianity.  For, although there have been very many legislators
 among the Greeks and Barbarians, and teachers who announced opinions
 which professed to be the truth, we have heard of no legislator who was
 able to imbue other nations with a zeal for the reception of his words;
 and although those who professed to philosophize about truth brought
 forward a great apparatus of apparent logical demonstration, no one has
 been able to impress what was deemed by him the truth upon other
 nations, or even on any number of persons worth mentioning in a single
 nation.  And yet not only would the legislators have liked to enforce
 those laws which appeared to be good, if possible, upon the whole human
 race, but the teachers also to have spread what they imagined to be
 truth everywhere throughout the world.  But as they were unable to call
 men of other languages and from many nations to observe their laws, and
 accept their teaching, they did not at all attempt to do this,
 considering not unwisely the impossibility of such a result happening
 to them.  Whereas all Greece, and the barbarous part of our world,
 contains innumerable zealots, who have deserted the laws of their
 fathers and the established gods, for the observance of the laws of
 Moses and the discipleship of the words of Jesus Christ; although those
 who clave to the law of Moses were hated by the worshippers of images,
 and those who accepted the words of Jesus Christ were exposed, in
 addition, to the danger of death.

 2.  And if we observe how powerful the word has become in a very few
 years, notwithstanding that against those who acknowledged Christianity
 conspiracies were formed, and some of them on its account put to death,
 and others of them lost their property, and that, notwithstanding the
 small number of its teachers, [2813] it was preached everywhere
 throughout the world, so that Greeks and Barbarians, wise and foolish,
 gave themselves up to the worship that is through Jesus, [2814] we have
 no difficulty in saying that the result is beyond any human power,
 [2815] Jesus having taught with all authority and persuasiveness that
 His word should not be overcome; so that we may rightly regard as
 oracular responses [2816] those utterances of His, such as, "Ye shall
 be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a testimony
 against them and the Gentiles;" [2817] and, "Many shall say unto Me in
 that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten in Thy name, and drunk in Thy
 name, and in Thy name cast out devils?  And I shall say unto them,
 Depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity, I never knew you." [2818] Now
 it was perhaps (once) probable that, in uttering these words, He spoke
 them in vain, so that they were not true; but when that which was
 delivered with so much authority has come to pass, it shows that God,
 having really become man, delivered to men the doctrines of salvation.
 [2819]

 3.  And what need is there to mention also that it was predicted of
 Christ [2820] that then would the rulers fail from Judah, and the
 leaders from his thighs, [2821] when He came for whom it is reserved
 (the kingdom, namely); and that the expectation of the Gentiles should
 dwell in the land? [2822] For it is clearly manifest from the
 history, and from what is seen at the present day, that from the times
 of Jesus there were no longer any who were called kings of the Jews;
 [2823] all those Jewish institutions on which they prided themselves--I
 mean those arrangements relating to the temple and the altar, and the
 offering of the service, and the robes of the high priest having been
 destroyed.  For the prophecy was fulfilled which said, "The children of
 Israel shall sit many days, there being no king, nor ruler, nor
 sacrifice, nor altar, nor priesthood, nor responses." [2824] And
 these predictions we employ to answer those who, in their perplexity as
 to the words spoken in Genesis by Jacob to Judah, assert that the
 Ethnarch, [2825] being of the race of Judah, is the ruler of the
 people, and that there will not fail some of his seed, until the advent
 of that Christ whom they figure to their imagination.  But if "the
 children of Israel are to sit many days without a king, or ruler, or
 altar, or priesthood, or responses;" and if, since the temple was
 destroyed, there exists no longer sacrifice, nor altar, nor priesthood,
 it is manifest that the ruler has failed out of Judah, and the leader
 from between his thighs.  And since the prediction declares that "the
 ruler shall not fail from Judah, and the leader from between his
 thighs, until what is reserved for Him shall come," it is manifest that
 He is come to whom (belongs) what is reserved--the expectation of the
 Gentiles.  And this is clear from the multitude of the heathen who have
 believed on God through Jesus Christ.

 4.  And in the song in Deuteronomy, [2826] also, it is prophetically
 made known that, on account of the sins of the former people, there was
 to be an election of foolish nations, which has been brought to pass by
 no other than by Jesus.  "For they," He says, "moved Me to jealousy
 with that which is not God, they have provoked Me to anger with their
 idols; and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a
 people, and will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation." [2827]
 Now it is possible to understand with all clearness how the Hebrews,
 who are said to have moved God to jealousy by that which is not God,
 and to have provoked Him to anger by their idols, were (themselves)
 aroused to jealousy by that which was not a people--the foolish nation,
 namely, which God chose by the advent of Jesus Christ and His
 disciples.  We see, indeed, "our calling, that not many wise men after
 the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble (are called); but God hath
 chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and base
 things, and things that are despised, hath God chosen, and things that
 are not, to bring to nought the things which formerly existed;" [2828]
 and let not the Israel according to the flesh, which is called by the
 apostle "flesh," boast in the presence of God.

 5.  And what are we to say regarding the prophecies of Christ in the
 Psalms, there being a certain ode with the superscription "For the
 Beloved," [2829] whose" tongue" is said to be the "pen of a ready
 writer, who is fairer than the sons of men," since "grace was poured on
 His lips?"  For a proof that grace was poured on His lips is this, that
 although the period of His teaching was short--for He taught somewhere
 about a year and a few months--the world has been filled with his
 teaching, and with the worship of God (established) through Him.  For
 there arose "in His days righteousness and abundance of peace," [2830]
 which abides until the consummation, which has been called the taking
 away of the moon; and He continues "ruling from sea to sea, and from
 the rivers to the ends of the earth." [2831] And to the house of
 David has been given a sign:  for the Virgin bore, and was pregnant,
 [2832] and brought forth a son, and His name is Emmanuel, which is,
 "God with us;" and as the same prophet says, the prediction has been
 fulfilled, "God (is) with us; know it, O nations, and be overcome; ye
 who are strong, be vanquished:" [2833] for we of the heathen have
 been overcome and vanquished, we who have been taken by the grace of
 His teaching.  The place also of His birth has been foretold in (the
 prophecies of) Micah:  "For thou, Bethlehem," he says, "land of Judah,
 art by no means the least among the rulers of Judah; for out of thee
 shall come forth a Ruler, who shall rule My people Israel." [2834]
 And according to Daniel, seventy weeks were fulfilled until (the coming
 of) Christ the Ruler. [2835] And He came, who, according to Job,
 [2836] has subdued the great fish, [2837] and has given power to His
 true disciples to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and all the power
 of the enemy, [2838] without sustaining any injury from them.  And let
 one notice also the universal advent of the apostles sent by Jesus to
 announce the Gospel, and he will see both that the undertaking was
 beyond human power, and that the commandment came from God.  And if we
 examine how men, on hearing new doctrines, and strange words, yielded
 themselves up to these teachers, being overcome, amid the very desire
 to plot against them, by a divine power that watched over these
 (teachers), we shall not be incredulous as to whether they also wrought
 miracles, God bearing witness to their words both by signs, and
 wonders, and divers miracles.

 6.  And while we thus briefly [2839] demonstrate the deity of Christ,
 and (in so doing) make use of the prophetic declarations regarding Him,
 we demonstrate at the same time that the writings which prophesied of
 Him were divinely inspired; and that those documents which announced
 His coming and His doctrine were given forth with all power and
 authority, and that on this account they obtained the election from the
 Gentiles. [2840] We must say, also, that the divinity of the
 prophetic declarations, and the spiritual nature of the law of Moses,
 shone forth after the advent of Christ.  For before the advent of
 Christ it was not altogether possible to exhibit manifest proofs of the
 divine inspiration of the ancient Scripture; whereas His coming led
 those who might suspect the law and the prophets not to be divine, to
 the clear conviction that they were composed by (the aid of) heavenly
 grace.  And he who reads the words of the prophets with care and
 attention, feeling by the very perusal the traces of the divinity
 [2841] that is in them, will be led by his own emotions to believe that
 those words which have been deemed to be the words of God are not the
 compositions of men.  The light, moreover, which was contained in the
 law of Moses, but which had been concealed by a veil, shone forth at
 the advent of Jesus, the veil being taken away, and those blessings,
 the shadow of which was contained in the letter, coming forth gradually
 to the knowledge (of men).

 7.  It would be tedious now to enumerate the most ancient prophecies
 respecting each future event, in order that the doubter, being
 impressed by their divinity, may lay aside all hesitation and
 distraction, and devote himself with his whole soul to the words of
 God.  But if in every part of the Scriptures the superhuman element of
 thought [2842] does not seem to present itself to the uninstructed,
 that is not at all wonderful for, with respect to the works of that
 providence which embraces the whole world, some show with the utmost
 clearness that they are works of providence, while others are so
 concealed as to seem to furnish ground for unbelief with respect to
 that God who orders all things with unspeakable skill and power.  For
 the artistic plan [2843] of a providential Ruler is not so evident in
 those matters belonging to the earth, as in the case of the sun, and
 moon, and stars; and not so clear in what relates to human occurrences,
 as it is in the souls and bodies of animals,--the object and reason of
 the impulses, and phantasies and natures of animals, and the structure
 of their bodies, being carefully ascertained by those who attend to
 these things. [2844] But as (the doctrine of) providence is not at
 all weakened [2845] (on account of those things which are not
 understood) in the eyes of those who have once honestly accepted it, so
 neither is the divinity of Scripture, which extends to the whole of it,
 (lost) on account of the inability of our weakness to discover in every
 expression the hidden splendour of the doctrines veiled in common and
 unattractive phraseology. [2846] For we have the treasure in earthen
 vessels, that the excellency of the power of God may shine forth, and
 that it may not be deemed to proceed from us (who are but) human
 beings.  For if the hackneyed [2847] methods of demonstration (common)
 among men, contained in the books (of the Bible), had been successful
 in producing conviction; then our faith would rightly have been
 supposed to rest on the wisdom of men, and not on the power of God; but
 now it is manifest to everyone who lifts up his eyes, that the word and
 preaching have not prevailed among the multitude "by persuasive words
 of wisdom, but by demonstration of the Spirit and of power." [2848]
 Wherefore, since a celestial or even a super-celestial power compels us
 to worship the only Creator, let us leave the doctrine of the beginning
 of Christ, i.e., the elements, [2849] and endeavour to go on to
 perfection, in order that the wisdom spoken to the perfect may be
 spoken to us also.  For he who possesses it promises to speak wisdom
 among them that are perfect, but another wisdom than that of this
 world, and of the rulers of this world, which is brought to nought.
 And this wisdom will be distinctly stamped [2850] upon us, and will
 produce a revelation of the mystery that was kept silent in the eternal
 ages, [2851] but now has been manifested through the prophetic
 Scriptures, and the appearance of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to
 whom be glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

 8.  Having spoken thus briefly [2852] on the subject of the divine
 inspiration of the holy Scriptures, it is necessary to proceed to the
 (consideration of the) manner in which they are to be read and
 understood, seeing numerous errors have been committed in consequence
 of the method in which the holy documents [2853] ought to be examined;
 [2854] not having been discovered by the multitude.  For both the
 hardened in heart, and the ignorant persons [2855] belonging to the
 circumcision, have not believed on our Saviour, thinking that they are
 following the language of the prophecies respecting Him, and not
 perceiving in a manner palpable to their senses [2856] that He had
 proclaimed liberty to the captives, nor that He had built up what they
 truly consider the city of God, nor cut off "the chariots of Ephraim,
 and the horse from Jerusalem," [2857] nor eaten butter and honey, and,
 before knowing or preferring the evil, had selected the good. [2858]
 And thinking, moreover, that it was prophesied that the wolf--the
 four-footed animal--was to feed with the lamb, and the leopard to lie
 down with the kid, and the calf and bull and lion to feed together,
 being led by a little child, and that the ox and bear were to pasture
 together, their young ones growing up together, and that the lion was
 to eat straw like the ox: [2859] seeing none of these things visibly
 accomplished during the advent of Him who is believed by us to be
 Christ, they did not accept our Lord Jesus; but, as having called
 Himself Christ improperly, [2860] they crucified Him.  And those
 belonging to heretical sects reading this (statement), "A fire has been
 kindled in Mine anger;" [2861] and this, "I am a jealous God, visiting
 the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
 fourth generation;" [2862] and this, "I repent of having anointed Saul
 to be king;" [2863] and this, "I am a God that maketh peace, and
 createth evil;" [2864] and, among others, this, "There is not
 wickedness in the city which the Lord hath not done;" [2865] and again
 this, "Evils came down from the Lord upon the gates of Jerusalem;"
 [2866] and, "An evil spirit from the Lord plagued Saul;" [2867] and
 countless other passages like these--they have not ventured to
 disbelieve these as the Scriptures of God; but believing them to be the
 (words) of the Demiurge, whom the Jews worship, they thought that as
 the Demiurge was an imperfect and unbenevolent God, the Saviour had
 come to announce a more perfect Deity, who, they say, is not the
 Demiurge, being of different opinions regarding Him; and having once
 departed from the Demiurge, who is the only uncreated God, they have
 given themselves up to fictions, inventing to themselves hypotheses,
 according to which they imagine that there are some things which are
 visible, and certain other things which are not visible, all which are
 the fancies of their own minds.  And yet, indeed, the more simple among
 those who profess to belong to the Church have supposed that there is
 no deity greater than the Demiurge, being right in so thinking, while
 they imagine regarding Him such things as would not be believed of the
 most savage and unjust of mankind.

 9.  Now the cause, in all the points previously enumerated, of the
 false opinions, and of the impious statements or ignorant assertions
 [2868] about God, appears to be nothing else than the not understanding
 the Scripture according to its spiritual meaning, but the
 interpretation of it agreeably to the mere letter.  And therefore, to
 those who believe that the sacred books are not the compositions of
 men, but that they were composed by inspiration [2869] of the Holy
 Spirit, agreeably to the will of the Father of all things through Jesus
 Christ, and that they have come down to us, we must point out the ways
 (of interpreting them) which appear (correct) to us, who cling to the
 standard [2870] of the heavenly Church of Jesus Christ according to the
 succession of the apostles.  Now, that there are certain mystical
 economies made known by the holy Scriptures, all--even the most simple
 of those who adhere to the word--have believed; but what these are,
 candid and modest individuals confess that they know not.  If, then,
 one were to be perplexed about the intercourse of Lot with his
 daughters, and about the two wives of Abraham, and the two sisters
 married to Jacob, and the two handmaids who bore him children, they can
 return no other answer than this, that these are mysteries not
 understood by us.  Nay, also, when the (description of the) fitting out
 of the tabernacle is read, believing that what is written is a type,
 [2871] they seek to adapt what they can to each particular related
 about the tabernacle,--not being wrong so far as regards their belief
 that the tabernacle is a type of something, but erring sometimes in
 adapting the description of that of which the tabernacle is a type, to
 some special thing in a manner worthy of Scripture.  And all the
 history that is considered to tell of marriages, or the begetting of
 children, or of wars, or any histories whatever that are in circulation
 among the multitude, they declare to be types; but of what in each
 individual instance, partly owing to their habits not being thoroughly
 exercised--partly, too, owing to their precipitation--sometimes, even
 when an individual does happen to be well trained and clear-sighted,
 owing to the excessive difficulty of discovering things on the part of
 men,--the nature of each particular regarding these (types) is not
 clearly ascertained.

 10.  And what need is there to speak of the prophecies, which we all
 know to be filled with enigmas and dark sayings?  And if we come to the
 Gospels, the exact understanding of these also, as being the mind of
 Christ, requires the grace that was given to him who said, "But we have
 the mind of Christ, that we might know the things freely given to us by
 God.  Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
 teacheth, but which the Spirit teacheth." [2872] And who, on reading
 the revelations made to John, would not be amazed at the unspeakable
 mysteries therein concealed, and which are evident (even) to him who
 does not comprehend what is written?  And to what person, skilful in
 investigating words, would the Epistles of the Apostles seem to be
 clear and easy of understanding, since even in them there are countless
 numbers of most profound ideas, which, (issuing forth) as by an
 aperture, admit of no rapid comprehension? [2873] And therefore,
 since these things are so, and since innumerable individuals fall into
 mistakes, it is not safe in reading (the Scriptures) to declare that
 one easily understands what needs the key of knowledge, which the
 Saviour declares is with the lawyers.  And let those answer who will
 not allow that the truth was with these before the advent of Christ,
 how the key of knowledge is said by our Lord Jesus Christ to be with
 those who, as they allege, had not the books which contain the secrets
 [2874] of knowledge, and perfect mysteries. [2875] For His words run
 thus:  "Woe unto you, ye lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of
 knowledge:  ye have not entered in yourselves, and them that were
 entering in ye hindered." [2876]

 11.  The way, then, as it appears to us, in which we ought to deal with
 the Scriptures, and extract from them their meaning, is the following,
 which has been ascertained from the Scriptures themselves.  By Solomon
 in the Proverbs we find some such rule as this enjoined respecting the
 divine doctrines of Scripture: [2877] "And do thou portray them in a
 threefold manner, in counsel and knowledge, to answer words of truth to
 them who propose them to thee." [2878] The individual ought, then, to
 portray the ideas of holy Scripture in a threefold manner upon his own
 soul; in order that the simple man may be edified by the "flesh," as it
 were, of the Scripture, for so we name the obvious sense; while he who
 has ascended a certain way (may be edified) by the "soul," as it were.
 The perfect man, again, and he who resembles those spoken of by the
 apostle, when he says, "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect,
 but not the wisdom of the world, nor of the rulers of this world, who
 come to nought; but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, the hidden
 wisdom, which God hath ordained before the ages, unto our glory,"
 [2879] (may receive edification) from the spiritual law, which has a
 shadow of good things to come.  For as man consists of body, and soul,
 and spirit, so in the same way does Scripture, which has been arranged
 to be given by God for the salvation of men.  And therefore we deduce
 this also from a book which is despised by some--The Shepherd--in
 respect of the command given to Hermas to write two books, and after so
 doing to announce to the presbyters of the Church what he had learned
 from the Spirit.  The words are as follows:  "You will write two books,
 and give one to Clement, and one to Grapte.  And Grapte shall admonish
 the widows and the orphans, and Clement will send to the cities abroad,
 while you will announce to the presbyters of the Church."  Now Grapte,
 who admonishes the widows and the orphans, is the mere letter (of
 Scripture), which admonishes those who are yet children in soul, and
 not able to call God their Father, and who are on that account styled
 orphans,--admonishing, moreover, those who no longer have an unlawful
 bridegroom, [2880] but who remain widows, because they have not yet
 become worthy of the (heavenly) Bridegroom; while Clement, who is
 already beyond the letter, is said to send what is written to the
 cities abroad, as if we were to call these the "souls," who are above
 (the influence of) bodily (affections) and degraded [2881] ideas,--the
 disciple of the Spirit himself being enjoined to make known, no longer
 by letters, but by living words, to the presbyters of the whole Church
 of God, who have become grey [2882] through wisdom.

 12.  But as there are certain passages of Scripture which do not at all
 contain the "corporeal" sense, as we shall show in the following
 (paragraphs), there are also places where we must seek only for the
 "soul," as it were, and "spirit" of Scripture.  And perhaps on this
 account the water-vessels containing two or three firkins a-piece are
 said to lie for the purification of the Jews, as we read in the Gospel
 according to John:  the expression darkly intimating, with respect to
 those who (are called) by the apostle "Jews" secretly, that they are
 purified by the word of Scripture, receiving sometimes two firkins,
 i.e., so to speak, the "psychical" and "spiritual" sense; and sometimes
 three firkins, since some have, in addition to those already mentioned,
 also the "corporeal" sense, which is capable of (producing)
 edification.  And six water-vessels are reasonably (appropriate) to
 those who are purified in the world, which was made in six days--the
 perfect number.  That the first "sense," then, is profitable in this
 respect, that it is capable of imparting edification, is testified by
 the multitudes of genuine and simple believers; while of that
 interpretation which is referred back to the "soul," there is an
 illustration in Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians.  The
 expression is, "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth
 out the corn;" [2883] to which he adds, "Doth God take care of oxen? or
 saith He it altogether for our sakes?  For our sakes, no doubt, this
 was written:  that he that plougheth should plough in hope, and that he
 who thresheth, in hope of partaking." [2884] And there are numerous
 interpretations adapted to the multitude which are in circulation, and
 which edify those who are unable to understand profounder meanings, and
 which have somewhat the same character.

 13.  But the interpretation is "spiritual," when one is able to show of
 what heavenly things the Jews "according to the flesh" served as an
 example and a shadow, and of what future blessings the law contains a
 shadow.  And, generally, we must investigate, according to the
 apostolic promise, "the wisdom in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which
 God ordained before the world for the glory" of the just, which "none
 of the princes of this world knew." [2885] And the same apostle says
 somewhere, after referring to certain events mentioned as occurring in
 Exodus and Numbers, "that these things happened to them figuratively,
 but that they were written on our account, on whom the ends of the
 world are come." [2886] And he gives an opportunity for ascertaining
 of what things these were patterns, when he says:  "For they drank of
 the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ."
 [2887] And in another Epistle, when sketching the various matters
 relating to the tabernacle, he used the words:  "Thou shalt make
 everything according to the pattern showed thee in the mount." [2888]
 Moreover, in the Epistle to the Galatians, as if upbraiding those who
 think that they read the law, and yet do not understand it, judging
 that those do not understand it who do not reflect that allegories are
 contained under what is written, he says:  "Tell me, ye that desire to
 be under the law, do ye not hear the law?  For it is written, Abraham
 had two sons; the one by the bond-maid, the other by the free woman.
 But he who was by the bond-maid was born according to the flesh; but he
 of the free woman was by promise.  Which things are an allegory: [2889]
 for these are the two covenants," and so on.  Now we must carefully
 observe each word employed by him.  He says:  "Ye who desire to be
 under the law," not "Ye that are under the law;" and, "Do ye not
 hearthe law?"--"hearing" being understood to mean "comprehending" and
 "knowing."  And in the Epistle to the Colossians, briefly abridging the
 meaning of the whole legislation, he says:  "Let no man therefore judge
 you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a festival, or of a new
 moon, or of Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come." [2890]
 Moreover, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, discoursing of those who
 belong to the circumcision, he writes:  "who serve for an ensample and
 shadow of heavenly things." [2891] Now it is probable that, from
 these illustrations, those will entertain no doubt with respect to the
 five books of Moses, who have once given in their adhesion to the
 apostle, as divinely inspired; [2892] but do you wish to know, with
 regard to the rest of the history, if it also happened as a pattern?
 We must note, then, the expression in the Epistle to the Romans, "I
 have left to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to
 Baal," [2893] quoted from the third book of Kings, which Paul has
 understood as equivalent (in meaning) to those who are Israelites
 according to election, because not only were the Gentiles benefited by
 the advent of Christ, but also certain of the race of God. [2894]

 14.  This being the state of the case, we have to sketch what seem to
 us to be the marks of the (true) understanding of Scriptures.  And, in
 the first place, this must be pointed out, that the object of the
 Spirit, which by the providence of God, through the Word who was in the
 beginning with God, illuminated the ministers of truth, the prophets
 and apostles, was especially (the communication) of ineffable mysteries
 regarding the affairs of men (now by men I mean those souls that make
 use of bodies), in order that he who is capable of instruction may by
 investigation, and by devoting himself to the study of the profundities
 of meaning contained in the words, become a participator of all the
 doctrines of his counsel.  And among those matters which relate to
 souls (who cannot otherwise obtain perfection apart from the rich and
 wise truth of God), the (doctrines) belonging to God and His
 only-begotten Son are necessarily laid down as primary, viz., of what
 nature He is, and in what manner He is the Son of God, and what are the
 causes of His descending even to (the assumption of) human flesh, and
 of complete humanity; and what, also, is the operation of this (Son),
 and upon whom and when exercised.  And it was necessary also that the
 subject of kindred beings, and other rational creatures, both those who
 are divine and those who have fallen from blessedness, together with
 the reasons of their fall, should be contained in the divine teaching;
 and also that of the diversities of souls, and of the origin of these
 diversities, and of the nature of the world, and the cause of its
 existence.  We must learn also the origin of the great and terrible
 wickedness which overspreads the earth, and whether it is confined to
 this earth only, or prevails elsewhere.  Now, while these and similar
 objects were present to the Spirit, who enlightened the souls of the
 holy ministers of the truth, there was a second object, for the sake of
 those who were unable to endure the fatigue of investigating matters so
 important, viz., to conceal the doctrine relating to the previously
 mentioned subjects, in expressions containing a narrative which
 conveyed an announcement regarding the things of the visible creation,
 [2895] the creation of man, and the successive descendants of the first
 men until they became numerous; and other histories relating the acts
 of just men, and the sins occasionally committed by these same men as
 being human beings, and the wicked deeds, both of unchastity and vice,
 committed by sinful and ungodly men.  And what is most remarkable, by
 the history of wars, and of the victors, and the vanquished, certain
 mysteries are indicated to those who are able to test these
 statements.  And more wonderful still, the laws of truth are predicted
 by the written legislation;--all these being described in a connected
 series, with a power which is truly in keeping with the wisdom of God.
 For it was intended that the covering also of the spiritual truths--I
 mean the "bodily" part of Scripture--should not be without profit in
 many cases, but should be capable of improving the multitude, according
 to their capacity.

 15.  But since, if the usefulness of the legislation, and the sequence
 and beauty [2896] of the history, were universally evident of itself,
 [2897] we should not believe that any other thing could be understood
 in the Scriptures save what was obvious, the word of God has arranged
 that certain stumbling-blocks, as it were, and offences, and
 impossibilities, should be introduced into the midst of the law and the
 history, in order that we may not, through being drawn away in all
 directions by the merely attractive nature of the language, [2898]
 either altogether fall away from the (true) doctrines, as learning
 nothing worthy of God, or, by not departing from the letter, come to
 the knowledge of nothing more divine.  And this also we must know, that
 the principal aim being to announce the "spiritual" connection in those
 things that are done, and that ought to be done, where the Word found
 that things done according to the history could be adapted to these
 mystical senses, He made use of them, concealing from the multitude the
 deeper meaning; but where, in the narrative of the development of
 super-sensual things, [2899] there did not follow the performance of
 those certain events, which was already indicated by the mystical
 meaning, the Scripture interwove in the history (the account of) some
 event that did not take place, sometimes what could not have happened;
 sometimes what could, but did not.  And sometimes a few words are
 interpolated which are not true in their literal acceptation, [2900]
 and sometimes a larger number.  And a similar practice also is to be
 noticed with regard to the legislation, in which is often to be found
 what is useful in itself, and appropriate to the times of the
 legislation; and sometimes also what does not appear to be of utility;
 and at other times impossibilities are recorded for the sake of the
 more skilful and inquisitive, in order that they may give themselves to
 the toil of investigating what is written, and thus attain to a
 becoming conviction of the manner in which a meaning worthy of God must
 be sought out in such subjects.

 16.  It was not only, however, with the (Scriptures composed) before
 the advent (of Christ) that the Spirit thus dealt; but as being the
 same Spirit, and (proceeding) from the one God, He did the same thing
 both with the evangelists and the apostles,--as even these do not
 contain throughout a pure history of events, which are interwoven
 indeed according to the letter, but which did not actually occur.
 [2901] Nor even do the law and the commandments wholly convey what is
 agreeable to reason.  For who that has understanding will suppose that
 the first, and second, and third day, and the evening and the morning,
 existed without a sun, and moon, and stars? and that the first day was,
 as it were, also without a sky?  And who is so foolish as to suppose
 that God, after the manner of a husbandman, planted a paradise in Eden,
 towards the east, and placed in it a tree of life, visible and
 palpable, so that one tasting of the fruit by the bodily teeth obtained
 life? and again, that one was a partaker of good and evil by
 masticating what was taken from the tree?  And if God is said to walk
 in the paradise in the evening, and Adam to hide himself under a tree,
 I do not suppose that anyone doubts that these things figuratively
 indicate certain mysteries, the history having taken place in
 appearance, and not literally. [2902] Cain also, when going forth
 from the presence of God, certainly appears to thoughtful men as likely
 to lead the reader to inquire what is the presence of God, and what is
 the meaning of going out from Him.  And what need is there to say more,
 since those who are not altogether blind can collect countless
 instances of a similar kind recorded as having occurred, but which did
 not literally [2903] take place?  Nay, the Gospels themselves are
 filled with the same kind of narratives; e.g., the devil leading Jesus
 up into a high mountain, in order to show him from thence the kingdoms
 of the whole world, and the glory of them.  For who is there among
 those who do not read such accounts carelessly, that would not condemn
 those who think that with the eye of the body--which requires a lofty
 height in order that the parts lying (immediately) under and adjacent
 may be seen--the kingdoms of the Persians, and Scythians, and Indians,
 and Parthians, were beheld, and the manner in which their princes are
 glorified among men?  And the attentive reader may notice in the
 Gospels innumerable other passages like these, so that he will be
 convinced that in the histories that are literally recorded,
 circumstances that did not occur are inserted.

 17.  And if we come to the legislation of Moses, many of the laws
 manifest the irrationality, and others the impossibility, of their
 literal [2904] observance.  The irrationality (in this), that the
 people are forbidden to eat vultures, although no one even in the
 direst famines was (ever) driven by want to have recourse to this bird;
 and that children eight days old, which are uncircumcised, are ordered
 to be exterminated from among their people, it being necessary, if the
 law were to be carried out at all literally with regard to these, that
 their fathers, or those with whom they are brought up, should be
 commanded to be put to death.  Now the Scripture says:  "Every male
 that is uncircumcised, who shall not be circumcised on the eighth day,
 shall be cut off from among his people." [2905] And if you wish to
 see impossibilities contained in the legislation, let us observe that
 the goat-stag is one of those animals that cannot exist, and yet Moses
 commands us to offer it as being a clean beast; whereas a griffin,
 which is not recorded ever to have been subdued by man, the lawgiver
 forbids to be eaten.  Nay, he who carefully considers (the famous
 injunction relating to) the Sabbath, "Ye shall sit each one in your
 dwellings:  let no one go out from his place on the seventh day,"
 [2906] will deem it impossible to be literally observed:  for no living
 being is able to sit throughout a whole day, and remain without moving
 from a sitting position.  And therefore those who belong to the
 circumcision, and all who desire that no meaning should be exhibited,
 save the literal one, do not investigate at all such subjects as those
 of the goat-stag and griffin and vulture, but indulge in foolish talk
 on certain points, multiplying words and adducing tasteless [2907]
 traditions; as, for example, with regard to the Sabbath, saying that
 two thousand cubits is each one's limit. [2908] Others, again, among
 whom is Dositheus the Samaritan, condemning such an interpretation,
 think that in the position in which a man is found on the Sabbath-day,
 he is to remain until evening.  Moreover, the not carrying of a burden
 on the Sabbath-day is an impossibility; and therefore the Jewish
 teachers have fallen into countless absurdities, [2909] saying that a
 shoe of such a kind was a burden, but not one of another kind; and that
 a sandal which had nails was a burden, but not one that was without
 them; and in like manner what was borne on one shoulder (was a load),
 but not that which was carried on both.

 18.  And if we go to the Gospel and institute a similar examination,
 what would be more irrational than (to take literally the injunction),
 "Salute no man by the way," [2910] which simple persons think the
 Saviour enjoined on the apostles?  The command, moreover, that the
 right cheek should be smitten, is most incredible, since everyone who
 strikes, unless he happen to have some bodily defect, [2911] smites the
 left cheek with his right hand.  And it is impossible to take
 (literally, the statement) in the Gospel about the "offending" of the
 right eye.  For, to grant the possibility of one being "offended" by
 the sense of sight, how, when there are two eyes that see, should the
 blame be laid upon the right eye?  And who is there that, condemning
 himself for having looked upon a woman to lust after her, would
 rationally transfer the blame to the right eye alone, and throw it
 away?  The apostle, moreover, lays down the law, saying, "Is any man
 called, being circumcised?  Let him not become uncircumcised." [2912]
 In the first place, anyone will see that he does not utter these words
 in connection with the subject before him.  For, when laying down
 precepts on marriage and purity, how will it not appear that he has
 introduced these words at random? [2913] But, in the second place,
 who will say that a man does wrong who endeavours to become
 uncircumcised, if that be possible, on account of the disgrace that is
 considered by the multitude to attach to circumcision.

 All these statements have been made by us, in order to show that the
 design of that divine power which gave us the sacred Scriptures is,
 that we should not receive what is presented by the letter alone (such
 things being sometimes not true in their literal acceptation, but
 absurd and impossible), but that certain things have been introduced
 into the actual history and into the legislation that are useful in
 their literal sense. [2914]

 19.  But that no one may suppose that we assert respecting the whole
 that no history is real [2915] because a certain one is not; and that
 no law is to be literally observed, because a certain one, (understood)
 according to the letter, is absurd or impossible; or that the
 statements regarding the Saviour are not true in a manner perceptible
 to the senses; [2916] or that no commandment and precept of His ought
 to be obeyed;--we have to answer that, with regard to certain things,
 it is perfectly clear to us that the historical account is true; as
 that Abraham was buried in the double cave at Hebron, as also Isaac and
 Jacob, and the wives of each of them; and that Shechem was given as a
 portion to Joseph; [2917] and that Jerusalem is the metropolis of
 Judea, in which the temple of God was built by Solomon; and innumerable
 other statements.  For the passages that are true in their historical
 meaning are much more numerous than those which are interspersed with a
 purely spiritual signification.  And again, who would not say that the
 command which enjoins to "honour thy father and thy mother, that it may
 be well with thee," [2918] is useful, apart from all allegorical
 meaning, [2919] and ought to be observed, the Apostle Paul also having
 employed these very same words?  And what need is there to speak of the
 (prohibitions), "Thou shalt not commit adultery," "Thou shalt not
 kill," "Thou shalt not steal," "Thou shalt not bear false witness?"
 [2920] And again, there are commandments contained in the Gospel
 which admit of no doubt whether they are to be observed according to
 the letter or not; e.g., that which says, "But I say unto you, Whoever
 is angry with his brother," [2921] and so on.  And again, "But I say
 unto you, Swear not at all." [2922] "And in the writings of the
 apostle the literal sense is to be retained:  "Warn them that are
 unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient towards
 all men;" [2923] although it is possible for those ambitious of a
 deeper meaning to retain the profundities of the wisdom of God, without
 setting aside the commandment in its literal meaning. [2924] The
 careful (reader), however, will be in doubt [2925] as to certain
 points, being unable to show without long investigation whether this
 history so deemed literally occurred or not, and whether the literal
 meaning of this law is to be observed or not.  And therefore the exact
 reader must, in obedience to the Saviour's injunction to "search the
 Scriptures," [2926] carefully ascertain in how far the literal meaning
 is true, and in how far impossible; and so far as he can, trace out, by
 means of similar statements, the meaning everywhere scattered through
 Scripture of that which cannot be understood in a literal
 signification.

 20.  Since, therefore, as will be clear to those who read, the
 connection taken literally is impossible, while the sense preferred
 [2927] is not impossible, but even the true one, it must be our object
 to grasp the whole meaning, which connects the account of what is
 literally impossible in an intelligible manner with what is not only
 not impossible, but also historically true, and which is allegorically
 understood, in respect of its not having literally occurred. [2928]
 For, with respect to holy Scripture, our opinion is that the whole of
 it has a "spiritual," but not the whole a "bodily" meaning, because the
 bodily meaning is in many places proved to be impossible.  And
 therefore great attention must be bestowed by the cautious reader on
 the divine books, as being divine writings; the manner of understanding
 which appears to us to be as follows:--The Scriptures relate that God
 chose a certain nation upon the earth, which they call by several
 names.  For the whole of this nation is termed Israel, and also Jacob.
 And when it was divided in the times of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the
 ten tribes related as being subject to him were called Israel; and the
 remaining two, along with the tribe of Levi, being ruled over by the
 descendants of David, were named Judah.  And the whole of the territory
 which the people of this nation inhabited, being given them by God,
 receives the name of Judah, the metropolis of which is Jerusalem,--a
 metropolis, namely, of numerous cities, the names of which lie
 scattered about in many other passages (of Scripture), but are
 enumerated together in the book of Joshua the son of Nun. [2929]

 21.  Such, then, being the state of the case, the apostle, elevating
 our power of discernment (above the letter), says somewhere, "Behold
 Israel after the flesh," [2930] as if there were an Israel "according
 to the Spirit."  And in another place he says, "For they who are the
 children of the flesh are not the children of God;" nor are "they all
 Israel who are of Israel;" [2931] nor is "he a Jew who is one
 outwardly, nor is that circumcision' which is outward in the flesh:
 but he is a Jew who is one inwardly;' and circumcision is that of the
 heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter." [2932] For if the
 judgment respecting the "Jew inwardly" be adopted, we must understand
 that, as there is a "bodily" race of Jews, so also is there a race of
 "Jews inwardly," the soul having acquired this nobility for certain
 mysterious reasons.  Moreover, there are many prophecies which predict
 regarding Israel and Judah what is about to befall them.  And do not
 such promises as are written concerning them, in respect of their being
 mean in expression, and manifesting no elevation (of thought), nor
 anything worthy of the promise of God, need a mystical interpretation?
 And if the "spiritual" promises are announced by visible signs, then
 they to whom the promises are made are not "corporeal."  And not to
 linger over the point of the Jew who is a Jew "inwardly," nor over that
 of the Israelite according to the "inner man"--these statements being
 sufficient for those who are not devoid of understanding--we return to
 our subject, and say that Jacob is the father of the twelve patriarchs,
 and they of the rulers of the people; and these, again, of the other
 Israelites.  Do not, then, the "corporeal" Israelites refer their
 descent to the rulers of the people, and the rulers of the people to
 the patriarchs, and the patriarchs to Jacob, and those still higher up;
 while are not the "spiritual" Israelites, of whom the "corporeal"
 Israelites were the type, sprung from the families, and the families
 from the tribes, and the tribes from some one individual whose descent
 is not of a "corporeal" but of a better kind,--he, too, being born of
 Isaac, and he of Abraham,--all going back to Adam, whom the apostle
 declares to be Christ?  For every beginning of those families which
 have relation to God as to the Father of all, took its commencement
 lower down with Christ, who is next to the God and Father of all,
 [2933] being thus the Father of every soul, as Adam is the father of
 all men.  And if Eve also is intended by the apostle to refer to the
 Church, it is not surprising that Cain, who was born of Eve, and all
 after him, whose descent goes back to Eve, should be types of the
 Church, inasmuch as in a pre-eminent sense they are all descended from
 the Church.

 22.  Now, if the statements made to us regarding Israel, and its tribes
 and its families, are calculated to impress us, when the Saviour says,
 "I was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," [2934]
 we do not understand the expression as the Ebionites do, who are poor
 in understanding (deriving their name from the poverty of their
 intellect--"Ebion" signifying "poor" in Hebrew), so as to suppose that
 the Saviour came specially to the "carnal" Israelites; for "they who
 are the children of the flesh are not the children of God." [2935]
 Again, the apostle teaches regarding Jerusalem as follows:  "The
 Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all."
 [2936] And in another Epistle:  "But ye are come unto mount Zion, and
 to the city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
 innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and to the
 Church of the first-born which are written in heaven." [2937] If,
 then, Israel is among the race of souls, [2938] and if there is in
 heaven a city of Jerusalem, it follows that the cities of Israel have
 for their metropolis the heavenly Jerusalem, and it consequently is the
 metropolis of all Judea.  Whatever, therefore, is predicted of
 Jerusalem, and spoken of it, if we listen to the words of Paul as those
 of God, and of one who utters wisdom, we must understand the Scriptures
 as speaking of the heavenly city, and of the whole territory included
 within the cities of the holy land.  For perhaps it is to these cities
 that the Saviour refers us, when to those who have gained credit by
 having managed their "pounds" well, He assigns the presidency over five
 or ten cities.  If, therefore, the prophecies relating to Judea, and
 Jerusalem, and Israel, and Judah, and Jacob, not being understood by us
 in a "carnal" sense, indicate some such mysteries (as already
 mentioned), it will follow also that the predictions concerning Egypt
 and the Egyptians, Babylon and the Babylonians, Tyre and the Tyrians,
 Sidon and the Sidonians, or the other nations, are spoken not only of
 these "bodily" Egyptians, and Babylonians, and Tyrians, and Sidonians,
 but also of their "spiritual" (counterparts).  For if there be
 "spiritual" Israelites, it follows that there are also "spiritual"
 Egyptians and Babylonians.  For what is related in Ezekiel concerning
 Pharaoh king of Egypt does not at all apply to the case of a certain
 man who ruled or was said to rule over Egypt, as will be evident to
 those who give it careful consideration.  Similarly, what is said about
 the ruler of Tyre cannot be understood of a certain man who ruled over
 Tyre.  And what is said in many places, and especially in Isaiah, of
 Nebuchadnezzar, cannot be explained of that individual.  For the man
 Nebuchadnezzar neither fell from heaven, nor was he the morning star,
 nor did he arise upon the earth in the morning.  Nor would any man of
 understanding interpret what is said in Ezekiel about Egypt--viz., that
 in forty years it should be laid desolate, so that the footstep of man
 should not be found thereon, and that the ravages of war should be so
 great that the blood should run throughout the whole of it, and rise to
 the knees--of that Egypt which is situated beside the Ethiopians whose
 bodies are blackened by the sun.

 23.  And perhaps as those here, dying according to the death common to
 all, are, in consequence of the deeds done here, so arranged as to
 obtain different places according to the proportion of their sins, if
 they should be deemed worthy of the place called Hades; [2939] so those
 there dying, so to speak, descend into this Hades, being judged
 deserving of different abodes--better or worse--throughout all this
 space of earth, and (of being descended) from parents of different
 kinds, [2940] so that an Israelite may sometimes fall among Scythians,
 and an Egyptian descend into Judea.  And yet the Saviour came to gather
 together the lost sheep of the house of Israel; but many of the
 Israelites not having yielded to His teaching, those from the Gentiles
 were called....And these points, as we suppose, have been concealed in
 the histories.  For "the kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a
 field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof
 goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field." [2941]
 Let us notice, then, whether the apparent and superficial and obvious
 meaning of Scripture does not resemble a field filled with plants of
 every kind, while the things lying in it, and not visible to all, but
 buried, as it were, under the plants that are seen, are the hidden
 treasures of wisdom and knowledge; which the Spirit through Isaiah
 [2942] calls dark and invisible and concealed, God alone being able to
 break the brazen gates that conceal them, and to burst the iron bars
 that are upon the gates, in order that all the statements in the book
 of Genesis may be discovered which refer to the various genuine kinds,
 and seeds, as it were, of souls, which stand nearly related to Israel,
 or at a distance from it; and the descent into Egypt of the seventy
 souls, that they may there become as the "stars of heaven in
 multitude."  But since not all who are of them are the light of the
 world--"for not all who are of Israel are Israel" [2943] --they become
 from seventy souls as the "sand that is beside the sea-shore
 innumerable."

 [2812] te enargeia ton blepomenon.

 [2813] oude ton didaskalon pleonazonton.

 [2814] te dia 'Iesou theosebeia.

 [2815] meizon e kata anthropon to pragma einai.

 [2816] chresmous.

 [2817] Matt. x. 18.

 [2818] Cf. Matt. vii. 22, 23.

 [2819] soteria dogmata.

 [2820] proepheteuthe ho Christos.

 [2821] ek ton meron.

 [2822] epidemese.

 [2823] ouk eti basileis 'Ioudaian echrematisan.

 [2824] Cf. Hos. iii. 4.  Quoted from the Septuagint.

 [2825] Termed by Rufinus "Patriarch."

 [2826] Deut. xxxii.

 [2827] Deut. xxxii. 21.

 [2828] Cf. 1 Cor. i. 26-28.

 [2829] Ps. xlv. 1, 2.

 [2830] Cf. Ps. lxxii. 7.

 [2831] Ps. lxxii. 8.

 [2832] eteke kai en gastri esche, kai eteken huion.

 [2833] Cf. Isa. viii. 8, 9.

 [2834] Cf. Mic. v. 2 with Matt. ii. 6.

 [2835] Cf. Dan. ix. 25.

 [2836] Cf. Job xl. and xli.

 [2837] to mega ketos.

 [2838] Cf. Luke x. 19.

 [2839] hos en epitom*.

 [2840] dia touto tes apo ton ethnon ekloges kekratekota.

 [2841] ichnos enthousiasmou.

 [2842] to huper anthropon ton noematon.

 [2843] ho technikos logos.

 [2844] Sphodra tou pros ti kai heneka tinos heuriskomenou tois touton
 epimelomenois, peri tas hormas, kai tas phantasias, kai phuseis ton
 zoon, kai tas kataskeuas ton somaton.

 [2845] chreokopeitai.

 [2846] en eutelei kai eukataphroneto lexei.

 [2847] kathemaxeumenai.

 [2848] 1 Cor. ii. 4.

 [2849] tes stoicheioseos.

 [2850] entupothesetai.

 [2851] chronois aioniois.

 [2852] hos en epidrome.

 [2853] ta hagia anagnosmata.

 [2854] pos dei ephodeuein.

 [2855] hoi idiotai ton ek tes peritomes.

 [2856] aisthetos.

 [2857] Cf. Zech. ix. 10.

 [2858] Cf. Isa. vii. 15.

 [2859] Cf. Isa. xi. 6, 7.

 [2860] para to deon.

 [2861] Cf. Jer. xv. 14.

 [2862] Cf. Ex. xx. 5.

 [2863] Cf. 1 Sam. xv. 11.

 [2864] Cf. Isa. xlv. 7.

 [2865] Cf. Amos iii. 6.

 [2866] Cf. Mic. i. 12.

 [2867] Cf. 1 Sam. xvi. 14; xviii. 10.

 [2868] idiotikon.

 [2869] epipnoias.

 [2870] kanonos.

 [2871] tupous einai ta gegrammena.

 [2872] 1 Cor. ii. 12, 13, and 16 ad fin.

 [2873] Murion hoson kakei, hos di opes, megiston kai pleiston noematon
 ou bracheian aphormen parechonton.

 [2874] aporrheta.

 [2875] pantele musteria.

 [2876] Luke xi. 52.

 [2877] The Septuagint:  Kai su de apograpsai auta seauto trissos, eis
 bsulen kai gnosin epi to platos tes kardias sou ; didako oun se alethe
 logon, kai gnosin alethe hupakouein, tou apokrinesthai se logous
 aletheias tois proballomenois soi.  The Vulgate reads:  Ecce, descripsi
 eam tibi tripliciter, in cogitationibus et scientia, ut ostenderem tibi
 firmitatem et eloquia veritatis, respondere ex his illis, qui miserunt
 te.

 [2878] Cf. note 4, ut supra.

 [2879] 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7.

 [2880] paranomo numphio.

 [2881] ton kato noematon.

 [2882] pepoliomenois.

 [2883] Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 9 and Deut. xxv. 4.

 [2884] Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 9, 10.

 [2885] Cf. 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7, 8.

 [2886] 1 Cor. x. 11.

 [2887] 1 Cor. x. 4.

 [2888] Cf. Ex. xxv. 40 and Heb. viii. 5.

 [2889] allegoroumena.

 [2890] Col. ii. 16.

 [2891] Heb. viii. 5.

 [2892] hos theion andra.

 [2893] Rom. xi. 4; cf. 1 Kings xix. 18.  [3 Kings according to the
 Septuagint and Vulgate enumeration.  S.]

 [2894] tinas apo tou theiou genous, i.e., Israelites.

 [2895] peri ton aistheton demiourgematon.

 [2896] glaphuron.

 [2897] autothen.

 [2898] hupo tes lexeos helkomenoi to agogon akraton echouses.

 [2899] en te diegesei tes peri ton noeton akolouthias.

 [2900] kata to soma.

 [2901] Oude touton pante akraton ten historian ton prosuphasmenon kata
 to somatikon echonton, me gegenemenon ; oude ten nomothesian kai tas
 entolas pantos to eulogon emphainonta .  One ms. reads gegenemenen,
 referring to historian, on which one editor remarks, "Hic et in
 sequentibus imploro fidem codicum!"

 [2902] dia dokouses istorias kai ou somatikos gegenemenes.

 [2903] kata ten lexin.

 [2904] hoson epi to kath' heautous tereisthai.

 [2905] Gen. xvii. 14.

 [2906] Ex. xvi. 29.

 [2907] psuchras paradoseis.

 [2908] topon hekasto einai dischilious pecheis.

 [2909] Eis aperantologian eleluthasi.

 [2910] Luke x. 4.

 [2911] ei me ara peponthos ti para phusin tunchanoi.

 [2912] 1 Cor. vii. 18.

 [2913] eike.

 [2914] kai te kata to rheton chresimon nomothesia.

 [2915] gegonen.

 [2916] kata to aistheton.

 [2917] Cf. Gen. xlviii. 22 and Josh. xxiv. 32.

 [2918] Cf. Ex. xx. 12 and Eph. vi. 2, 3.

 [2919] choris pases anagoges.

 [2920] Cf. Ex. xx. 13-16.

 [2921] [Matt. v. 22.]

 [2922] Matt. v. 34.

 [2923] 1 Thess. v. 14.

 [2924] Ei kai para tois philotimoterois dunatai sozein hekaston auton,
 meta tou me atheteisthai ten kata to rheton hentolen, bathe Theou
 sophias.

 [2925] perielkusthesetai.

 [2926] John v. 39.

 [2927] hoproegoumenos.

 [2928] Olon ton noun philotimeteon katalambanein, suneironta ton peri
 ton kata ten lexin adunaton logon noetos tois ou monon ouk adunatois,
 alla kai alethesi kata ten historian, sunallegoroumenois tois hoson epi
 te lexei, me gegenemenois.

 [2929] en 'Iesou to tou Naue.

 [2930] 1 Cor. x. 18.

 [2931] Rom. ix. 6, 8.

 [2932] Rom. ii. 28, 29.

 [2933] Pasa gar arche patrion ton hos pros ton ton holon Theon,
 katotero apo tou Christou erxato tou meta ton ton holon Theon kai
 patera.

 [2934] Matt. xv. 24.

 [2935] Rom. ix. 8.  [See Dr. Burton's Inquiry into the Heresies of the
 Apostolic Age (Bampton Lectures), pp. 184, 185, 498, 499.  S.]

 [2936] Gal. iv. 26.

 [2937] Heb. xii. 22, 23.

 [2938] en psuchon genei.

 [2939] tou kaloumenou choriou hadou.

 [2940] kai para toisde, e toisde tois patrasi.

 [2941] Matt. xiii. 44.

 [2942] Cf. Isa. xlv. 3.

 [2943] Rom. ix. 6.

 From the Latin.

 24.  This descent of the holy fathers into Egypt will appear as granted
 to this world by the providence of God for the illumination of others,
 and for the instruction of the human race, that so by this means the
 souls of others might be assisted in the work of enlightenment.  For to
 them was first granted the privilege of converse with God, because
 theirs is the only race which is said to see God; this being the
 meaning, by interpretation, of the word "Israel." [2944] And now it
 follows that, agreeably to this view, ought the statement to be
 accepted and explained that Egypt was scourged with ten plagues, to
 allow the people of God to depart, or the account of what was done with
 the people in the wilderness, or of the building of the tabernacle by
 means of contributions from all the people, or of the wearing of the
 priestly robes, or of the vessels of the public service, because, as it
 is written, they truly contain within them the "shadow and form of
 heavenly things."  For Paul openly says of them, that "they serve unto
 the example and shadow of heavenly things." [2945] There are,
 moreover, contained in this same law the precepts and institutions,
 according to which men are to live in the holy land.  Threatenings also
 are held out as impending over those who shall transgress the law;
 different kinds of purifications are moreover prescribed for those who
 required purification, as being persons who were liable to frequent
 pollution, that by means of these they may arrive at last at that one
 purification after which no further pollution is permitted.  The very
 people are numbered, though not all; for the souls of children are not
 yet old enough to be numbered according to the divine command:  nor are
 those souls who cannot become the head of another, but are themselves
 subordinated to others as to a head, who are called "women," who
 certainly are not included in that numbering which is enjoined by God;
 but they alone are numbered who are called "men," by which it might be
 shown that the women could not be counted separately, [2946] but were
 included in those called men.  Those, however, especially belong to the
 sacred number, who are prepared to go forth to the battles of the
 Israelites, and are able to fight against those public and private
 enemies [2947] whom the Father subjects to the Son, who sits on His
 right hand that He may destroy all principality and power, and by means
 of these bands of His soldiery, who, being engaged in a warfare for
 God, do not entangle themselves in secular business, He may overturn
 the Kingdom of His adversary; by whom the shields of faith are borne,
 and the weapons of wisdom brandished; among whom also the helmet of
 hope and salvation gleams forth, and the breastplate of brightness
 fortifies the breast that is filled with God.  Such soldiers appear to
 me to be indicated, and to be prepared for wars of this kind, in those
 persons who in the sacred books are ordered by God's command to be
 numbered.  But of these, by far the more perfect and distinguished are
 shown to be those of whom the very hairs of the head are said to be
 numbered.  Such, indeed, as were punished for their sins, whose bodies
 fell in the wilderness, appear to possess a resemblance to those who
 had made indeed no little progress, but who could not at all, for
 various reasons, attain to the end of perfection; because they are
 reported either to have murmured, or to have worshipped idols, or to
 have committed fornication, or to have done some evil work which the
 mind ought not even to conceive.  I do not consider the following even
 to be without some mystical meaning, [2948] viz., that certain (of the
 Israelites), possessing many flocks and animals, take possession by
 anticipation of a country adapted for pasture and the feeding of
 cattle, which was the very first that the right hand of the Hebrews had
 secured in war. [2949] For, making a request of Moses to receive this
 region, they are divided off by the waters of the Jordan, and set apart
 from any possession in the holy land.  And this Jordan, according to
 the form of heavenly things, may appear to water and irrigate thirsty
 souls, and the senses that are adjacent to it. [2950] In connection
 with which, even this statement does not appear superfluous, that Moses
 indeed hears from God what is described in the book of Leviticus, while
 in Deuteronomy it is the people that are the auditors of Moses, and who
 learn from him what they could not hear from God.  For as Deuteronomy
 is called, as it were, the second law, which to some will appear to
 convey this signification, that when the first law which was given
 through Moses had come to an end, so a second legislation seems to have
 been enacted, which was specially transmitted by Moses to his successor
 Joshua, who is certainly believed to embody a type [2951] of our
 Saviour, by whose second law--that is, the precepts of the Gospel--all
 things are brought to perfection.

 25.  We have to see, however, whether this deeper meaning may not
 perhaps be indicated, viz., that as in Deuteronomy the legislation is
 made known with greater clearness and distinctness than in those books
 which were first written, so also by that advent of the Saviour which
 He accomplished in His state of humiliation, when He assumed the form
 of a servant, that more celebrated and renowned second advent in the
 glory of His Father may not be pointed out, and in it the types of
 Deuteronomy may be fulfilled, when in the kingdom of heaven all the
 saints shall live according to the laws of the everlasting Gospel; and
 as in His coming now He fulfilled that law which has a shadow of good
 things to come, so also by that (future) glorious advent will be
 fulfilled and brought to perfection the shadows of the present advent.
 For thus spake the prophet regarding it:  "The breath of our
 countenance, Christ the Lord, to whom we said, that under Thy shadow we
 shall live among the nations;" [2952] at the time, viz., when He will
 more worthily transfer all the saints from a temporal to an everlasting
 Gospel, according to the designation, employed by John in the
 Apocalypse, of "an everlasting Gospel." [2953]

 26.  But let it be sufficient for us in all these matters to adapt our
 understanding to the rule of religion, and so to think of the words of
 the Holy Spirit as not to deem the language the ornate composition of
 feeble human eloquence, but to hold, according to the scriptural
 statement, that "all the glory of the King is within," [2954] and that
 the treasure of divine meaning is enclosed within the frail vessel of
 the common letter.  And if any curious reader were still to ask an
 explanation of individual points, let him come and hear, along with
 ourselves, how the Apostle Paul, seeking to penetrate by help of the
 Holy Spirit, who searches even the "deep things" of God, into the
 depths of divine wisdom and knowledge, and yet, unable to reach the
 end, so to speak, and to come to a thorough knowledge, exclaims in
 despair and amazement, "Oh the depth of the riches of the knowledge and
 wisdom of God!" [2955] Now, that it was from despair of attaining a
 perfect understanding that he uttered this exclamation, listen to his
 own words:  "How unsearchable are God's judgments! and His ways, how
 past finding out!" [2956] For he did not say that God's judgments
 were difficult to discover, but that they were altogether inscrutable;
 nor that it was (simply) difficult to trace out His ways, but that they
 were altogether past finding out.  For however far a man may advance in
 his investigations, and how great soever the progress that he may make
 by unremitting study, assisted even by the grace of God, and with his
 mind enlightened, he will not be able to attain to the end of those
 things which are the object of his inquiries.  Nor can any created mind
 deem it possible in any way to attain a full comprehension (of things);
 but after having discovered certain of the objects of its research, it
 sees again others which have still to be sought out.  And even if it
 should succeed in mastering these, it will see again many others
 succeeding them which must form the subject of investigation.  And on
 this account, therefore, Solomon, the wisest of men, beholding by his
 wisdom the nature of things, says, "I said, I will become wise; and
 wisdom herself was made far from me, far further than it was; and a
 profound depth, who shall find?" [2957] Isaiah also, knowing that the
 beginnings of things could not be discovered by a mortal nature, and
 not even by those natures which, although more divine than human, were
 nevertheless themselves created or formed; knowing then, that by none
 of these could either the beginning or the end be discovered, says,
 "Tell the former things which have been, and we know that ye are gods;
 or announce what are the last things, and then we shall see that ye are
 gods." [2958] For my Hebrew teacher also used thus to teach, that as
 the beginning or end of all things could be comprehended by no one,
 save only our Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, so under the form
 of a vision Isaiah spake of two seraphim alone, who with two wings
 cover the countenance of God, and with two His feet, and with two do
 fly, calling to each other alternately, and saying, "Holy, holy, holy
 is the Lord God of Sabaoth; the whole earth is full of Thy glory."
 [2959] That the seraphim alone have both their wings over the face of
 God, and over His feet, we venture to declare as meaning that neither
 the hosts of holy angels, nor the "holy seats," nor the "dominions,"
 nor the "principalities," nor the "powers," can fully understand the
 beginning of all things, and the limits of the universe.  But we are to
 understand that those "saints" whom the Spirit has enrolled, and the
 "virtues," approach very closely to those very beginnings, and attain
 to a height which the others cannot reach; and yet whatever it be that
 these "virtues" have learned through revelation from the Son of God and
 from the Holy Spirit--and they will certainly be able to learn very
 much, and those of higher rank much more than those of a
 lower--nevertheless it is impossible for them to comprehend all things,
 according to the statement, "The most part of the works of God are
 hid." [2960] And therefore also it is to be desired that every one,
 according to his strength, should ever stretch out to those things that
 are before, "forgetting the things that are behind," both to better
 works and to a clearer apprehension and understanding, through Jesus
 Christ our Saviour, to whom be glory for ever!

 27.  Let every one, then, who cares for truth, be little concerned
 about words and language, seeing that in every nation there prevails a
 different usage of speech; but let him rather direct his attention to
 the meaning conveyed by the words, than to the nature of the words that
 convey the meaning, especially in matters of such importance and
 difficulty:  as, e.g., when it is an object of investigation whether
 there is any "substance" in which neither colour, nor form, nor touch,
 nor magnitude is to be understood as existing visible to the mind
 alone, which any one names as he pleases; for the Greeks call such
 asomaton, i.e., "incorporeal," while holy Scripture declares it to be
 "invisible," for Paul calls Christ the "image of the invisible God,"
 and says again, that by Christ were created all things "visible and
 invisible."  And by this it is declared that there are, among created
 things, certain "substances" that are, according to their peculiar
 nature, invisible.  But although these are not themselves "corporeal,"
 they nevertheless make use of bodies, while they are themselves better
 than any bodily substances.  But that "substance" of the Trinity which
 is the beginning and cause of all things, "from which are all things,
 and through which are all things, and in which are all things," cannot
 be believed to be either a body or in a body, but is altogether
 incorporeal.  And now let it suffice to have spoken briefly on these
 points (although in a digression, caused by the nature of the subject),
 in order to show that there are certain things, the meaning of which
 cannot be unfolded at all by any words of human language, but which are
 made known more through simple apprehension than by any properties of
 words.  And under this rule must be brought also the understanding of
 the sacred Scripture, in order that its statements may be judged not
 according to the worthlessness of the letter, but according to the
 divinity of the Holy Spirit, by whose inspiration they were caused to
 be written.

 Summary (of Doctrine) Regarding the Father, the Son, and the Holy
 Spirit, and the Other Topics Discussed in the Preceding Pages.

 28.  It is now time, after the rapid consideration which to the best of
 our ability we have given to the topics discussed, to recapitulate, by
 way of summing up what we have said in different places, the individual
 points, and first of all to restate our conclusions regarding the
 Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

 Seeing God the Father is invisible and inseparable from the Son, the
 Son is not generated from Him by "prolation," as some suppose.  For if
 the Son be a "prolation" of the Father (the term "prolation" being used
 to signify such a generation as that of animals or men usually is),
 then, of necessity, both He who "prolated" and He who was "prolated"
 are corporeal.  For we do not say, as the heretics suppose, that some
 part of the substance of God was converted into the Son, or that the
 Son was procreated by the Father out of things non-existent, [2961]
 i.e., beyond His own substance, so that there once was a time when He
 did not exist; but, putting away all corporeal conceptions, we say that
 the Word and Wisdom was begotten out of the invisible and incorporeal
 without any corporeal feeling, as if it were an act of the will
 proceeding from the understanding.  Nor, seeing He is called the Son of
 (His) love, will it appear absurd if in this way He be called the Son
 of (His) will.  Nay, John also indicates that "God is Light," [2962]
 and Paul also declares that the Son is the splendour of everlasting
 light. [2963] As light, accordingly, could never exist without
 splendour, so neither can the Son be understood to exist without the
 Father; for He is called the "express image of His person," [2964] and
 the Word and Wisdom.  How, then, can it be asserted that there once was
 a time when He was not the Son?  For that is nothing else than to say
 that there was once a time when He was not the Truth, nor the Wisdom,
 nor the Life, although in all these He is judged to be the perfect
 essence of God the Father; for these things cannot be severed from Him,
 or even be separated from His essence.  And although these qualities
 are said to be many in understanding, [2965] yet in their nature and
 essence they are one, and in them is the fulness of divinity.  Now this
 expression which we employ--"that there never was a time when He did
 not exist"--is to be understood with an allowance.  For these very
 words "when" or "never" have a meaning that relates to time, whereas
 the statements made regarding Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are to be
 understood as transcending all time, all ages, and all eternity.  For
 it is the Trinity alone which exceeds the comprehension not only of
 temporal but even of eternal intelligence; while other things which are
 not included in it [2966] are to be measured by times and ages.  This
 Son of God, then, in respect of the Word being God, which was in the
 beginning with God, no one will logically suppose to be contained in
 any place; nor yet in respect of His being "Wisdom," or "Truth," or the
 "Life," or "Righteousness," or "Sanctification," or "Redemption:"  for
 all these properties do not require space to be able to act or to
 operate, but each one of them is to be understood as meaning those
 individuals who participate in His virtue and working.

 29.  Now, if any one were to say that, through those who are partakers
 of the "Word" of God, or of His "Wisdom," or His "Truth," or His
 "Life," the Word and Wisdom itself appeared to be contained in a place,
 we should have to say to him in answer, that there is no doubt that
 Christ, in respect of being the "Word" or "Wisdom," or all other
 things, was in Paul, and that he therefore said, "Do you seek a proof
 of Christ speaking in me?" [2967] and again, "I live, yet not I, but
 Christ liveth in me." [2968] Seeing, then, He was in Paul, who will
 doubt that He was in a similar manner in Peter and in John, and in each
 one of the saints; and not only in those who are upon the earth, but in
 those also who are in heaven?  For it is absurd to say that Christ was
 in Peter and in Paul, but not in Michael the archangel, nor in
 Gabriel.  And from this it is distinctly shown that the divinity of the
 Son of God was not shut up in some place; otherwise it would have been
 in it only, and not in another.  But since, in conformity with the
 majesty of its incorporeal nature, it is confined to no place; so,
 again, it cannot be understood to be wanting in any.  But this is
 understood to be the sole difference, that although He is in different
 individuals as we have said--as Peter, or Paul, or Michael, or
 Gabriel--He is not in a similar way in all beings whatever.  For He is
 more fully and clearly, and, so to speak, more openly in archangels
 than in other holy men. [2969] And this is evident from the
 statement, that when all who are saints have arrived at the summit of
 perfection, they are said to be made like, or equal to, the angels,
 agreeably to the declaration in the Gospels. [2970] Whence it is
 clear that Christ is in each individual in as great a degree as the
 amount of his deserts allows. [2971]

 30.  Having, then, briefly restated these points regarding the nature
 of the Trinity, it follows that we notice shortly this statement also,
 that "by the Son" are said to be created "all things that are in
 heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
 thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers:  all things were
 created by Him, and for Him; and He is before all, and all things
 consist by Him, who is the Head." [2972] In conformity with which
 John also in his Gospel says:  "All things were created by Him; and
 without Him was not anything made." [2973] And David, intimating that
 the mystery of the entire Trinity was (concerned) in the creation of
 all things, says:  "By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made; and
 all the host of them by the Spirit of His mouth." [2974]

 After these points we shall appropriately remind (the reader) of the
 bodily advent and incarnation of the only-begotten Son of God, with
 respect to whom we are not to suppose that all the majesty of His
 divinity is confined within the limits of His slender body, so that all
 the "word" of God, and His "wisdom," and "essential truth," and "life,"
 was either rent asunder from the Father, or restrained and confined
 within the narrowness of His bodily person, and is not to be considered
 to have operated anywhere besides; but the cautious acknowledgment of a
 religious man ought to be between the two, so that it ought neither to
 be believed that anything of divinity was wanting in Christ, nor that
 any separation at all was made from the essence of the Father, which is
 everywhere.  For some such meaning seems to be indicated by John the
 Baptist, when he said to the multitude in the bodily absence of Jesus,
 "There standeth one among you whom ye know not:  He it is who cometh
 after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose."
 [2975] For it certainly could not be said of Him, who was absent, so
 far as His bodily presence is concerned, that He was standing in the
 midst of those among whom the Son of God was not bodily present.

 31.  Let no one, however, suppose that by this we affirm that some
 portion of the divinity of the Son of God was in Christ, and that the
 remaining portion was elsewhere or everywhere, which may be the opinion
 of those who are ignorant of the nature of an incorporeal and invisible
 essence.  For it is impossible to speak of the parts of an incorporeal
 being, or to make any division of them; but He is in all things, and
 through all things, and above all things, in the manner in which we
 have spoken above, i.e., in the manner in which He is understood to be
 either "wisdom," or the "word," or the "life," or the "truth," by which
 method of understanding all confinement of a local kind is undoubtedly
 excluded.  The Son of God, then, desiring for the salvation of the
 human race to appear unto men, and to sojourn among them, assumed not
 only a human body, as some suppose, but also a soul resembling our
 souls indeed in nature, but in will and power [2976] resembling
 Himself, and such as might unfailingly accomplish all the desires and
 arrangements of the "word" and "wisdom."  Now, that He had a soul,
 [2977] is most clearly shown by the Saviour in the Gospels, when He
 said, "No man taketh my life from me, but I lay it down of myself.  I
 have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again."
 [2978] And again, "My soul is sorrowful even unto death." [2979]
 And again, "Now is my soul troubled." [2980] For the "Word" of God is
 not to be understood to be a "sorrowful and troubled" soul, because
 with the authority of divinity He says, "I have power to lay down my
 life."  Nor yet do we assert that the Son of God was in that soul as he
 was in the soul of Paul or Peter and the other saints, in whom Christ
 is believed to speak as He does in Paul.  But regarding all these we
 are to hold, as Scripture declares, "No one is clean from filthiness,
 not even if his life lasted but a single day." [2981] But this soul
 which was in Jesus, before it knew the evil, selected the good; and
 because He loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, therefore God
 "anointed Him with the oil of gladness above His fellows." [2982] He
 is anointed, then, with the oil of gladness when He is united to the
 "word" of God in a stainless union, and by this means alone of all
 souls was incapable of sin, because it was capable of (receiving) well
 and fully the Son of God; and therefore also it is one with Him, and is
 named by His titles, and is called Jesus Christ, by whom all things are
 said to be made.  Of which soul, seeing it had received into itself the
 whole wisdom of God, and the truth, and the life, I think that the
 apostle also said this:  "Our life is hidden with Christ in God; but
 when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear
 with him in glory." [2983] For what other Christ can be here
 understood, who is said to be hidden in God, and who is afterwards to
 appear, except Him who is related to have been anointed with the oil of
 gladness, i.e., to have been filled with God essentially, [2984] in
 whom he is now said to be hidden?  For on this account is Christ
 proposed as an example to all believers, because as He always, even
 before he knew evil at all, selected the good, and loved righteousness,
 and hated iniquity, and therefore God anointed Him with the oil of
 gladness; so also ought each one, after a lapse or sin, to cleanse
 himself from his stains, making Him his example, and, taking Him as the
 guide of his journey, enter upon the steep way of virtue, that so
 perchance by this means, as far as possible we may, by imitating Him,
 be made partakers of the divine nature, according to the words of
 Scripture:  "He that saith that he believeth in Christ, ought so to
 walk, as He also walked." [2985]

 This "word," then, and this "wisdom," by the imitation of which we are
 said to be either wise or rational (beings), becomes "all things to all
 men, that it may gain all;" and because it is made weak, it is
 therefore said of it, "Though He was crucified through weakness, yet He
 liveth by the power of God." [2986] Finally, to the Corinthians who
 were weak, Paul declares that he "knew nothing, save Jesus Christ, and
 Him crucified." [2987]

 32.  Some, indeed, would have the following language of the apostle
 applied to the soul itself, as soon as it had assumed flesh from Mary,
 [2988] viz., "Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to
 be equal with God, but divested Himself (of His glory) [2989] taking
 upon Himself the form of a servant;" [2990] since He undoubtedly
 restored it to the form of God by means of better examples and
 training, and recalled it to that fulness of which He had divested
 Himself.

 As now by participation in the Son of God one is adopted as a son,
 [2991] and by participating in that wisdom which is in God is rendered
 wise, so also by participation in the Holy Spirit is a man rendered
 holy and spiritual.  For it is one and the same thing to have a share
 in the Holy Spirit, which is (the Spirit) of the Father and the Son,
 since the nature of the Trinity is one and incorporeal.  And what we
 have said regarding the participation of the soul is to be understood
 of angels and heavenly powers in a similar way as of souls, because
 every rational creature needs a participation in the Trinity.

 Respecting also the plan of this visible world--seeing one of the most
 important questions usually raised is as to the manner of its
 existence--we have spoken to the best of our ability in the preceding
 pages, for the sake of those who are accustomed to seek the grounds of
 their belief in our religion, and also for those who stir against us
 heretical questions, and who are accustomed to bandy about [2992] the
 word "matter," which they have not yet been able to understand; of
 which subject I now deem it necessary briefly to remind (the reader).

 33.  And, in the first place, it is to be noted that we have nowhere
 found in the canonical Scriptures, [2993] up to the present time, the
 word "matter" used for that substance which is said to underlie
 bodies.  For in the expression of Isaiah, "And he shall devour hule,"
 i.e., matter, "like hay," [2994] when speaking of those who were
 appointed to undergo their punishments, the word "matter" was used
 instead of "sins."  And if this word "matter" should happen to occur in
 any other passage, it will never be found, in my opinion, to have the
 signification of which we are now in quest, unless perhaps in the book
 which is called the Wisdom of Solomon, a work which is certainly not
 esteemed authoritative by all. [2995] In that book, however, we find
 written as follows:  "For thy almighty hand, that made the world out of
 shapeless matter, wanted not means to send among them a multitude of
 bears and fierce lions." [2996] Very many, indeed, are of opinion
 that the matter of which things are made is itself signified in the
 language used by Moses in the beginning of Genesis:  "In the beginning
 God made heaven and earth; and the earth was invisible, and not
 arranged:" [2997] for by the words "invisible and not arranged" Moses
 would seem to mean nothing else than shapeless matter.  But if this be
 truly matter, it is clear then that the original elements of bodies
 [2998] are not incapable of change.  For those who posited
 "atoms"--either those particles which are incapable of subdivision, or
 those which are subdivided into equal parts--or any one element, as the
 principles of bodily things, could not posit the word "matter" in the
 proper sense of the term among the first principles of things.  For if
 they will have it that matter underlies every body--a substance
 convertible or changeable, or divisible in all its parts--they will
 not, as is proper, assert that it exists without qualities.  And with
 them we agree, for we altogether deny that matter ought to be spoken of
 as "unbegotten" or "uncreated," agreeably to our former statements,
 when we pointed out that from water, and earth, and air or heat,
 different kinds of fruits were produced by different kinds of trees; or
 when we showed that fire, and air, and water, and earth were
 alternately converted into each other, and that one element was
 resolved into another by a kind of mutual consanguinity; and also when
 we proved that from the food either of men or animals the substance of
 the flesh was derived, or that the moisture of the natural seed was
 converted into solid flesh and bones;--all which go to prove that the
 substance of the body is changeable, and may pass from one quality into
 all others.

 34.  Nevertheless we must not forget that a substance never exists
 without a quality, and that it is by an act of the understanding alone
 that this (substance) which underlies bodies, and which is capable of
 quality, is discovered to be matter.  Some indeed, in their desire to
 investigate these subjects more profoundly, have ventured to assert
 that bodily nature [2999] is nothing else than qualities.  For if
 hardness and softness, heat and cold, moisture and aridity, be
 qualities; and if, when these or other (qualities) of this sort be cut
 away, nothing else is understood to remain, then all things will appear
 to be "qualities."  And therefore also those persons who make these
 assertions have endeavoured to maintain, that since all who say that
 matter was uncreated will admit that qualities were created by God, it
 may be in this way shown that even according to them matter was not
 uncreated; since qualities constitute everything, and these are
 declared by all without contradiction to have been made by God.  Those,
 again, who would make out that qualities are superimposed from without
 upon a certain underlying matter, make use of illustrations of this
 kind:  e.g., Paul undoubtedly is either silent, or speaks, or watches,
 or sleeps, or maintains a certain attitude of body; for he is either in
 a sitting, or standing, or recumbent position.  For these are
 "accidents" belonging to men, without which they are almost never
 found.  And yet our conception of man does not lay down any of these
 things as a definition of him; but we so understand and regard him by
 their means, that we do not at all take into account the reason of his
 (particular) condition either in watching, or in sleeping, or in
 speaking, or in keeping silence, or in any other action that must
 necessarily happen to men. [3000] If any one, then, can regard Paul
 as being without all these things which are capable of happening, he
 will in the same way also be able to understand this underlying
 (substance) without qualities.  When, then, our mind puts away all
 qualities from its conception, and gazes, so to speak, upon the
 underlying element alone, and keeps its attention closely upon it,
 without any reference to the softness or hardness, or heat or cold, or
 humidity or aridity of the substance, then by means of this somewhat
 simulated process of thought [3001] it will appear to behold matter
 clear from qualities of every kind.

 35.  But some one will perhaps inquire whether we can obtain out of
 Scripture any grounds for such an understanding of the subject.  Now I
 think some such view is indicated in the Psalms, when the prophet says,
 "Mine eyes have seen thine imperfection;" [3002] by which the mind of
 the prophet, examining with keener glance the first principles of
 things, and separating in thought and imagination only between matter
 and its qualities, perceived the imperfection of God, which certainly
 is understood to be perfected by the addition of qualities.  Enoch
 also, in his book, speaks as follows:  "I have walked on even to
 imperfection;" [3003] which expression I consider may be understood in
 a similar manner, viz., that the mind of the prophet proceeded in its
 scrutiny and investigation of all visible things, until it arrived at
 that first beginning in which it beheld imperfect matter (existing)
 without "qualities."  For it is written in the same book of Enoch, "I
 beheld the whole of matter;" [3004] which is so understood as if he had
 said:  "I have clearly seen all the divisions of matter which are
 broken up from one into each individual species either of men, or
 animals, or of the sky, or of the sun, or of all other things in this
 world."  After these points, now, we proved to the best of our power in
 the preceding pages that all things which exist were made by God, and
 that there was nothing which was not made, save the nature of the
 Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and that God, who is by
 nature good, desiring to have those upon whom He might confer benefits,
 and who might rejoice in receiving His benefits, created creatures
 worthy (of this), i.e., who were capable of receiving Him in a worthy
 manner, who, He says, are also begotten by Him as his sons.  He made
 all things, moreover, by number and measure.  For there is nothing
 before God without either limit or measure.  For by His power He
 comprehends all things, and He Himself is comprehended by the strength
 of no created thing, because that nature is known to itself alone.  For
 the Father alone knoweth the Son, and the Son alone knoweth the Father,
 and the Holy Spirit alone searcheth even the deep things of God.  All
 created things, therefore, i.e., either the number of rational beings
 or the measure of bodily matter, are distinguished by Him as being
 within a certain number or measurement; since, as it was necessary for
 an intellectual nature to employ bodies, and this nature is shown to be
 changeable and convertible by the very condition of its being created
 (for what did not exist, but began to exist, is said by this very
 circumstance to be of mutable nature), it can have neither goodness nor
 wickedness as an essential, but only as an accidental attribute of its
 being.  Seeing, then, as we have said, that rational nature was mutable
 and changeable, so that it made use of a different bodily covering of
 this or that sort of quality, according to its merits, it was
 necessary, as God foreknew there would be diversities in souls or
 spiritual powers, that He should create also a bodily nature the
 qualities of which might be changed at the will of the Creator into all
 that was required.  And this bodily nature must last as long as those
 things which require it as a covering:  for there will be always
 rational natures which need a bodily covering; and there will therefore
 always be a bodily nature whose coverings must necessarily be used by
 rational creatures, unless some one be able to demonstrate by arguments
 that a rational nature can live without a body.  But how
 difficult--nay, how almost impossible--this is for our understanding,
 we have shown in the preceding pages, in our discussion of the
 individual topics.

 36.  It will not, I consider, be opposed to the nature of our
 undertaking, if we restate with all possible brevity our opinions on
 the immortality of rational natures.  Every one who participates in
 anything, is unquestionably of one essence and nature with him who is
 partaker of the same thing.  For example, as all eyes participate in
 the light, so accordingly all eyes which partake of the light are of
 one nature; but although every eye partakes of the light, yet, inasmuch
 as one sees more clearly, and another more obscurely, every eye does
 not equally share in the light.  And again, all hearing receives voice
 or sound, and therefore all hearing is of one nature; but each one
 hears more rapidly or more slowly, according as the quality of his
 hearing is clear and sound.  Let us pass now from these sensuous
 illustrations to the consideration of intellectual things.  Every mind
 which partakes of intellectual light ought undoubtedly to be of one
 nature with every mind which partakes in a similar manner of
 intellectual light.  If the heavenly virtues, then, partake of
 intellectual light, i.e., of divine nature, because they participate in
 wisdom and holiness, and if human souls, have partaken of the same
 light and wisdom, and thus are mutually of one nature and of one
 essence,--then, since the heavenly virtues are incorruptible and
 immortal, the essence of the human soul will also be immortal and
 incorruptible.  And not only so, but because the nature of Father, and
 Son, and Holy Spirit, whose intellectual light alone all created things
 have a share, is incorruptible and eternal, it is altogether consistent
 and necessary that every substance which partakes of that eternal
 nature should last for ever, and be incorruptible and eternal, so that
 the eternity of divine goodness may be understood also in this respect,
 that they who obtain its benefits are also eternal.  But as, in the
 instances referred to, a diversity in the participation of the light
 was observed, when the glance of the beholder was described as being
 duller or more acute, so also a diversity is to be noted in the
 participation of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, varying with the degree
 of zeal or capacity of mind.  If such were not the case, [3005] we have
 to consider whether it would not seem to be an act of impiety to say
 that the mind which is capable of (receiving) God should admit of a
 destruction of its essence; [3006] as if the very fact that it is able
 to feel and understand God could not suffice for its perpetual
 existence, especially since, if even through neglect the mind fall away
 from a pure and complete reception of God, it nevertheless contains
 within it certain seeds of restoration and renewal to a better
 understanding, seeing the "inner," which is also called the "rational"
 man, is renewed after "the image and likeness of God, who created
 him."  And therefore the prophet says, "All the ends of the earth shall
 remember, and turn unto the Lord; and all the kindreds of the nations
 shall worship before Thee." [3007]

 37.  If any one, indeed, venture to ascribe essential corruption to Him
 who was made after the image and likeness of God, then, in my opinion,
 this impious charge extends even to the Son of God Himself, for He is
 called in Scripture the image of God. [3008] Or he who holds this
 opinion would certainly impugn the authority of Scripture, which says
 that man was made in the image of God; and in him are manifestly to be
 discovered traces of the divine image, not by any appearance of the
 bodily frame, which is corruptible, but by mental wisdom, by justice,
 moderation, virtue, wisdom, discipline; in fine, by the whole band of
 virtues, which are innate in the essence of God, and which may enter
 into man by diligence and imitation of God; as the Lord also intimates
 in the Gospel, when He says, "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
 also is merciful;" [3009] and, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father also
 is perfect." [3010] From which it is clearly shown that all these
 virtues are perpetually in God, and that they can never approach to or
 depart from Him, whereas by men they are acquired only slowly, and one
 by one.  And hence also by these means they seem to have a kind of
 relationship with God; and since God knows all things, and none of
 things intellectual in themselves can elude His notice [3011] (for God
 the Father alone, and His only-begotten Son, and the Holy Spirit, not
 only possess a knowledge of those things which they have created, but
 also of themselves), a rational understanding also, advancing from
 small things to great, and from things visible to things invisible, may
 attain to a more perfect knowledge.  For it is placed in the body, and
 advances from sensible things themselves, which are corporeal, to
 things that are intellectual.  But lest our statement that things
 intellectual are not cognisable by the senses should appear unbecoming,
 we shall employ the instance of Solomon, who says, "You will find also
 a divine sense;" [3012] by which he shows that those things which are
 intellectual are to be sought out not by means of a bodily sense, but
 by a certain other which he calls "divine."  And with this sense must
 we look on each of those rational beings which we have enumerated
 above; and with this sense are to be understood those words which we
 speak, and those statements to be weighed which we commit to writing.
 For the divine nature knows even those thoughts which we revolve within
 us in silence.  And on those matters of which we have spoken, or on the
 others which follow from them, according to the rule above laid down,
 are our opinions to be formed.

 [2944] Cf. Gen. xxxii. 28-30.

 [2945] Heb. viii. 5.

 [2946] Extrinsecus.

 [2947] Hostes inimicosque.

 [2948] Ne illud quidem sacramento aliquo vacuum puto.

 [2949] Quem primum omnium Israelitici belli dextra defenderat.

 [2950] Rigare et inundare animas sitientes, et sensus adjacentes sibi.

 [2951] Formam.

 [2952] Lam. iv. 20.

 [2953] Cf. Rev. xiv. 6.

 [2954] Omnis gloria regis intrinsecus est.  Heb., Sept., and Vulgate
 all read, "daughter of the king."  Probably the omission of "filiæ" in
 the text may be due to an error of the copyists.  [Cf. Ps. xlv. 13.]

 [2955] Rom. xi. 33.

 [2956] Rom. xi. 33.

 [2957] [Eccles. vii. 23, 24.]  The Septuagint reads:  Eipa,
 Sophisthesomai ; kai haute emakrunthe ap' emou, makran huper ho en, kai
 bathu bathos, tis heuresei auto; the Vulgate translates this literally.

 [2958] Cf. Isa. xli. 22, 23.

 [2959] Isa. vi. 3.

 [2960] Cf. Ecclus. xvi. 21.

 [2961] Ex nullis substantibus.

 [2962] 1 John i. 5.

 [2963] Cf. Heb. i. 3.

 [2964] Cf. Heb. i. 3.

 [2965] Quæ quidem quamvis intellectu multa esse dicantur.

 [2966] Quæ sunt extra Trinitatem.

 [2967] Cf. 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

 [2968] Gal. ii. 20.

 [2969] Quam in aliis sanctis viris.  "Aliis" is found in the mss., but
 is wanting in many editions.

 [2970] Cf. Matt. xxii. 30 and Luke xx. 36.

 [2971] Unde constat in singulis quibusque tantum effici Christum,
 quantum ratio indulserit meritorum.

 [2972] Cf. Col. i. 16-18.

 [2973] John i. 3.

 [2974] Ps. xxxiii. 6.

 [2975] Cf. John i. 26, 27.

 [2976] Proposito vero et virtute similem sibi.

 [2977] Animam.

 [2978] John x. 18.

 [2979] Matt. xxvi. 38.

 [2980] John xii. 27.

 [2981] Cf. Job xv. 14.

 [2982] Ps. xlv. 7.

 [2983] Cf. Col. iii. 3, 4.

 [2984] Substantialiter.

 [2985] Cf. 1 John ii. 6.

 [2986] 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

 [2987] 1 Cor. ii. 2.

 [2988] De Maria corpus assumsit.

 [2989] Semet ipsum exinanivit.

 [2990] Phil. ii. 6, 7.

 [2991] In filium adoptatur.

 [2992] Ventilare.

 [2993] In Scripturis canonicis.

 [2994] Isa. x. 17, kai phagetai osei chorton ten hulen, Sept.  The
 Vulgate follows the Masoretic text.

 [2995] [Elucidation VI].

 [2996] Wisd. xi. 17.

 [2997] Gen. i. 2, "invisibilis et incomposita;" "inanis et vacua,"
 Vulg.

 [2998] Initia corporum.

 [2999] Naturam corpoream.

 [3000] Nec tamen sensus noster manifeste de eo aliquid horum definit,
 sed ita eum per hæc intelligimus, vel consideramus, ut non omnino
 rationem status ejus comprehendamus, vel in eo, quod vigilat, vel in
 eo, quod dormit, aut in quo loquitur, vel tacet, et si qua alia sunt,
 quæ accidere necesse est hominibus.

 [3001] Tunc simulatâ quodammodo cogitatione.

 [3002] Ps. cxxxix. 16, to akatergaston mou eidosan hoi ophthalmoi sou,
 Sept.; "Imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tui," Vulg. (same as in the
 text.) kkyny" v'r ymlg--"Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being
 imperfect," Auth. Vers.  Cf. Gesenius and Fürst, s.v., sln.

 [3003] Ambulavi usque ad imperfectum; cf. Book of Enoch, chap. xvii.

 [3004] Universas materias perspexi; cf. Book of Enoch, chap. xvii.  [On
 this apocryphal book, see the learned remarks of Dr. Pusey in his reply
 to Canon Farrar, What is of Faith as to Everlasting Punishment; pp.
 52-59.  London, 1881.]

 [3005] Alioquin.

 [3006] Substantialem interitum.

 [3007] Ps. xxii. 27.

 [3008] Cf. Col. i. 15 and 2 Cor. iv. 4.

 [3009] Luke vi. 36.

 [3010] Matt. v. 48.

 [3011] Nihil eum rerum intellectualium ex se lateat.

 [3012] Cf. Prov. ii. 5, epignosin Theou heureseis (Sept.), Scientiam
 Dei invenies (Vulg.).  'tsmt syhl' tr.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Teaching of the Church, p. 240.)

 It is noteworthy how frequently our author employs this expression in
 this immediate connection.  Concerning the punishment of the wicked he
 asserts a "clearly defined teaching."  He shows what the Church's
 teaching "has laid down" touching demons and angels.  Touching the
 origin of the world, he again asserts the Church's teaching, and then
 concedes, that, over and above what he maintains, there is "no clear
 statement regarding it,"--i.e., the creation and its antecedents.
 Elsewhere he speaks of "the faith of the Church," and all this as
 something accepted by all Christians recognised as orthodox or
 Catholics.

 Not to recur to the subject of the creeds [3013] known at this period
 in the East and West, this frequent recognition of a system of
 theology, or something like it, starts some interesting inquiries.  We
 have space to state only some of them:--

 1.  Was Origen here speaking of the catechetical school of Alexandria,
 and assuming its teaching to be that of the whole Church?

 2.  If so, was not this recognition of the Alexandrian leadership the
 precursor of that terrible shock which was given to Christendom by the
 rise of Arianism out of such a stronghold of orthodoxy?

 3.  Does not the power of Athanasius to stand "against the world"
 assure us that he was strong in the position that "the teaching of the
 Church," in Alexandria and elsewhere, was against Arias, whom he was
 able to defeat by prescription as well as by Scripture?

 4.  Is it not clear that all this was asserted, held, and defined
 without help from the West, and that the West merely responded Amen to
 what Alexandria had taught from the beginning?

 5.  Is not the evidence overwhelming, that nothing but passive
 testimony was thus far heard of in connection with the see of Rome?

 6.  If the "teaching of the Church," then, was so far independent of
 that see that Christendom neither waited for its voice, nor recognised
 it as of any exceptional importance in the definition of the faith and
 the elimination of heresy, is it not evident that the entire fabric of
 the Middle-Age polity in the West has its origin in times and manners
 widely differing from the Apostolic Age and that of the Ante-Nicene
 Fathers?

 II.

 (Subjection, p. 343.)

 The subordination of the Son, as held by all Nicene Christians, is
 defended by Bull [3014] at great length and with profound learning.  It
 is my purpose elsewhere to quote his splendid tribute to the
 substantial orthodoxy of Origen.  Professor Shedd, in his work on
 Christian Doctrine, [3015] pronounces the Nicene Creed "the received
 creed-statement among all Trinitarian Churches."  I assume that this
 note will be of interest to all theological minds.  For an
 unsatisfactory and meagre account of primitive creeds, see Bunsen,
 Hippol., iii. pp. 125-132.

 III.

 (Proceedeth from the Father, p. 344.)

 The double procession is no part of the Creed of Christendom; nor did
 it become fixed in the West, till, by the influence of Charlemagne, the
 important but not immaculate Council of Frankfort (a.d. 794) completed
 the work of Toledo, and committed the whole West to its support.  The
 Anglican Church recites the Filioque liturgically, but explains its
 adhesion to this formula in a manner satisfactory to the Easterns.  It
 has no rightful place in the Creed, however; and its retention in the
 Nicene Symbol is a just offence, not only to the Greeks, but against
 the great canon, Quod semper, etc.

 Compare Pearson on the Creed, [3016] and these candid words:  "Although
 the addition of words to the formal Creed be not justifiable," etc.
 Consult the valuable work of Theophanes Procopowicz, Bishop of
 Novgorod, which contains a history of the literature of the subject
 down to his times. [3017] It is a matter debated anew in our own age,
 in view of advances to the Greeks made by Dr. Döllinger and the Old
 Catholics.  Let me refer to a volume almost equally learned and
 ill-digested, [3018] written by a clever author who was perverted to
 Romanism, and returned, after many years, to the Church of England.  It
 bears the marks of many unreal impressions received during his
 "Babylonish captivity."  I refer to a work of E. S. Foulkes.

 IV.

 (The faith of the Church, p. 347.)

 Before the Nicene Council local creeds were in use, all agreeing
 substantially; all scriptural, but some more full than others.  Of
 these the ancient Symbol of Jerusalem was chief, and this forms the
 base of the Nicene Creed.  It is here noteworthy that Origen speaks of
 "the faith" as something settled and known:  clearly, he did not
 intentionally transgress it.  Bull says, [3019] "Græci Scriptores
 Ante-Nicæni ton kanona tes pisteos passim in scriptis suis
 commemorant."  See the Jerusalem Creed, on the same page; and note, the
 Church of Jerusalem is called by the Second OEcumenical Council (a.d.
 381), "the mother of all the Churches."  So ignorant were the Fathers
 of that date of any other "mother Church," that they address this very
 statement to the clergy of Rome. [3020] Compare Eusebius, book iv.
 cap. viii.

 V.

 (Endowed with freedom of will, p. 347.)

 Elsewhere in this treatise our author defines the will as "able to
 resist external causes."  The profound work of Edwards needs no words
 of mine. [3021] As an example of logic the most acute, it is the
 glory of early American literature.  I read it eagerly during my
 college course, while under the guidance of my instructor in
 philosophy, the amiable and profound Dr. Tappan (afterwards president
 of the University of Michigan), who taught us to admire it, but not to
 regard it as infallible.  See his vigorous review of Edwards, [3022] in
 which he argues as a disciple of Coleridge and of Plato.

 On allied subjects, let me refer to Wiggers's Augustinismus, etc.,
 translated by Professor Emerson of Andover; [3023] also to Bledsoe's
 Theodicy, [3024] heretofore cited.  I venture to say, that, among the
 thinkers of America, and as Christian philosophers, both Bledsoe and
 Tappan are less known and honoured than they deserve to be.

 VI.

 (Not esteemed authoritative by all, p. 379.)

 Not by Jerome, nor Rufinus, nor Chrysostom.  Gregory the Great, Bishop
 of Rome, is also shown by Lardner (Credib., v. 127) to have quoted "the
 wisdom of Solomon" only as the sayings of a wise man; not at all as
 Scripture.  The Easterns are equally represented by John Damascene
 (a.d. 730), who says of this book that it is one of those "excellent
 and useful" books which are not reckoned with the hagiographa.  But
 Methodius is an exception; for he quotes this book twice (says Lardner)
 as if it were Scripture, and certainly cites it not infrequently.  Yet
 his testimony does not amount, perhaps, to more than an acceptance of
 the same as only deutero-canonical; i.e., as one of the books read in
 the Church for instruction, but not appealed to as establishing any
 doctrine otherwise unknown to the Church.  We may examine this subject
 when we come to Methodius, in vol. vi. of this series.

 ------------------------

 Note.

 This is a convenient place for the following tables, compiled from
 Eusebius as far as his history goes; i.e. a.d. 305.  See also Dr.
 Robinson's Researches.

 I.  The See of Jerusalem.

 1.  James, the Lord's brother.

 2.  Simeon.

 3.  Justus.

 4.  Zacchæus.

 5.  Tobias.

 6.  Benjamin.

 7.  John.

 8.  Matthew.

 9.  Philip.

 10.  Seneca.

 11.  Justus.

 12.  Levi.

 13.  Ephres.

 14.  Joseph.

 15.  Judah.

 16.  Marcus.

 17.  Cassian.

 18.  Publius.

 19.  Maximus.

 20.  Julian.

 21.  Caius.

 22.  Symmachus.

 23.  Caius II.

 24.  Julian II.

 25.  Capito.

 26.  Maximus II.

 27.  Antoninus.

 28.  Valens.

 29.  Dolichianus.

 30.  Narcissus.

 31.  Dius.

 32.  Germanio.

 33.  Gordius.

 34.  Narcissus II.

 35.  Alexander.

 36.  Mazabanes.

 37.  Hymenæus.

 38.  Zabdas.

 39.  Hermon, a.d. 300.

 II.  The See of Alexandria.

 1.  Annianus.

 2.  Avilius.

 3.  Cerdon.

 4.  Primus.

 5.  Justus.

 6.  Eumenes.

 7.  Marcus.

 8.  Celadion.

 9.  Aggripinus.

 10.  Julianus.

 11.  Demetrius.

 12.  Heraclas.

 13.  Dionysius.

 14.  Maximus.

 15.  Theonas.

 16.  Peter.

 17.  Achillas.

 18.  Alexander, [3025] a.d. 326.

 [3013] On which consult Dupin, and, for another view, Bunsen's
 Hippolytus.  See also p. 383, infra.

 [3014] Vol. v. p. 134, and passim to 745; also vi. 368.

 [3015] Vol. ii. p. 438.

 [3016] pp. 521-526.

 [3017] Tractatus de Processione Spiritus Sancti, Gothæ, a.d. 1772.

 [3018] Christendom's Divisions, London, 1865.

 [3019] Vol. vi. p. 132, 133.

 [3020] Theodoret, book v. cap. ix.

 [3021] Ed. Converse, New York, 1829.

 [3022] A Review of Edward's Inquiry, by Henry Philip Tappan, New York,
 1839.

 [3023] New York, 1840.

 [3024] New York, 1854.  See vol. ii. p. 522, this series.

 [3025] Alexander, dying just after the Nicene Council, was succeeded by
 the great Athanasius.

 A Letter to Origen from Africanus

 About the History of Susanna.

 ------------------------

 Greeting, my lord and son, most worthy Origen, from Africanus. [3026]
 In your sacred discussion with Agnomon you referred to that prophecy of
 Daniel which is related of his youth.  This at that time, as was meet,
 I accepted as genuine.  Now, however, I cannot understand how it
 escaped you that this part of the book is spurious.  For, in sooth,
 this section, although apart from this it is elegantly written, is
 plainly a more modern forgery.  There are many proofs of this.  When
 Susanna is condemned to die, the prophet is seized by the Spirit, and
 cries out that the sentence is unjust.  Now, in the first place, it is
 always in some other way that Daniel prophesies--by visions, and
 dreams, and an angel appearing to him, never by prophetic inspiration.
 Then, after crying out in this extraordinary fashion, he detects them
 in a way no less incredible, which not even Philistion the play-writer
 would have resorted to.  For, not satisfied with rebuking them through
 the Spirit, he placed them apart, and asked them severally where they
 saw her committing adultery.  And when the one said, "Under a
 holm-tree" (prinos), he answered that the angel would saw him asunder
 (prisein); and in a similar fashion menaced the other who said, "Under
 a mastich-tree" (schinos), with being rent asunder (schisthenai).  Now,
 in Greek, it happens that "holm-tree" and "saw asunder," and "rend" and
 "mastich-tree" sound alike; but in Hebrew they are quite distinct.  But
 all the books of the Old Testament have been translated from Hebrew
 into Greek.

 2.  Moreover, how is it that they who were captives among the
 Chaldæans, lost and won at play, [3027] thrown out unburied on the
 streets, as was prophesied of the former captivity, their sons torn
 from them to be eunuchs, and their daughters to be concubines, as had
 been prophesied; how is it that such could pass sentence of death, and
 that on the wife of their king Joakim, whom the king of the Babylonians
 had made partner of his throne?  Then if it was not this Joakim, but
 some other from the common people, whence had a captive such a mansion
 and spacious garden?  But a more fatal objection is, that this section,
 along with the other two at the end of it, is not contained in the
 Daniel received among the Jews.  And add that, among all the many
 prophets who had been before, there is no one who has quoted from
 another word for word.  For they had no need to go a-begging for words,
 since their own were true; but this one, in rebuking one of those men,
 quotes the words of the Lord:  "The innocent and righteous shalt thou
 not slay."  From all this I infer that this section is a later
 addition.  Moreover, the style is different.  I have struck the blow;
 do you give the echo; answer, and instruct me.  Salute all my masters.
 The learned all salute thee.  With all my heart I pray for your and
 your circle's health.

 [3026] [See Routh's Reliquiæ, vol. ii. p. 115; also Euseb., i. 7, and
 Socrates, ii. 35.  He ranks with the great pupils of the Alexandrian
 school, with which, however, he seems to have had only a slight
 personal relation.  Concerning this Epistle to Origen, and the answer
 of the latter, consult Routh's very full annotations (ut supra, pp.
 312-328).  Concerning Gregory Thaumaturgus, the greatest of Origen's
 pupils, we shall know more when we come to vol. vi. of this series.  He
 died circa 270.]

 [3027] Nolte would change estragalomenoi (or astragalomenoi, as
 Wetsten. has it), which is a hapax eiremenon, into strangalomenoi or
 estrangalomenoi, "strangled."  He compares Tob. ii. 3.

 A Letter from Origen to Africanus.

 ------------------------

 Origen to Africanus, a beloved brother in God the Father, through Jesus
 Christ, His holy Child, greeting.  Your letter, from which I learn what
 you think of the Susanna in the Book of Daniel, which is used in the
 Churches, although apparently somewhat short, presents in its few words
 many problems, each of which demands no common treatment, but such as
 oversteps the character of a letter, and reaches the limits of a
 discourse. [3028] And I, when I consider, as best I can, the measure
 of my intellect, that I may know myself, am aware that I am wanting in
 the accuracy necessary to reply to your letter; and that the more, that
 the few days I have spent in Nicomedia have been far from sufficient to
 send you an answer to all your demands and queries even after the
 fashion of the present epistle.  Wherefore pardon my little ability,
 and the little time I had, and read this letter with all indulgence,
 supplying anything I may omit.

 2.  You begin by saying, that when, in my discussion with our friend
 Bassus, I used the Scripture which contains the prophecy of Daniel when
 yet a young man in the affair of Susanna, I did this as if it had
 escaped me that this part of the book was spurious.  You say that you
 praise this passage as elegantly written, but find fault with it as a
 more modern composition, and a forgery; and you add that the forger has
 had recourse to something which not even Philistion the play-writer
 would have used in his puns between prinos and prisein, schinos and
 schisis, which words as they sound in Greek can be used in this way,
 but not in Hebrew.  In answer to this, I have to tell you what it
 behoves us to do in the cases not only of the History of Susanna, which
 is found in every Church of Christ in that Greek copy which the Greeks
 use, but is not in the Hebrew, or of the two other passages you mention
 at the end of the book containing the history of Bel and the Dragon,
 which likewise are not in the Hebrew copy of Daniel; but of thousands
 of other passages also which I found in many places when with my little
 strength I was collating the Hebrew copies with ours.  For in Daniel
 itself I found the word "bound" followed in our versions by very many
 verses which are not in the Hebrew at all, beginning (according to one
 of the copies which circulate in the Churches) thus:  "Ananias, and
 Azarias, and Misael prayed and sang unto God," down to "O, all ye that
 worship the Lord, bless ye the God of gods.  Praise Him, and say that
 His mercy endureth for ever and ever.  And it came to pass, when the
 king heard them singing, and saw them that they were alive."  Or, as in
 another copy, from "And they walked in the midst of the fire, praising
 God and blessing the Lord," down to "O, all ye that worship the Lord,
 bless ye the God of gods.  Praise Him, and say that His mercy endureth
 to all generations." [3029] But in the Hebrew copies the words, "And
 these three men, Sedrach, Misach, and Abednego fell down bound into the
 midst of the fire," are immediately followed by the verse,
 "Nabouchodonosor the king was astonished, and rose up in haste, and
 spake, and said unto his counsellors."  For so Aquila, following the
 Hebrew reading, gives it, who has obtained the credit among the Jews of
 having interpreted the Scriptures with no ordinary care, and whose
 version is most commonly used by those who do not know Hebrew, as the
 one which has been most successful.  Of the copies in my possession
 whose readings I gave, one follows the Seventy, and the other
 Theodotion; and just as the History of Susanna which you call a forgery
 is found in both, together with the passages at the end of Daniel, so
 they give also these passages, amounting, to make a rough guess, to
 more than two hundred verses.

 3.  And in many other of the sacred books I found sometimes more in our
 copies than in the Hebrew, sometimes less.  I shall adduce a few
 examples, since it is impossible to give them all.  Of the Book of
 Esther neither the prayer of Mardochaios nor that of Esther, both
 fitted to edify the reader, is found in the Hebrew.  Neither are the
 letters; [3030] nor the one written to Amman about the rooting up of
 the Jewish nation, nor that of Mardochaios in the name of Artaxerxes
 delivering the nation from death.  Then in Job, the words from "It is
 written, that he shall rise again with those whom the Lord raises," to
 the end, are not in the Hebrew, and so not in Aquila's edition; while
 they are found in the Septuagint and in Theodotion's version, agreeing
 with each other at least in sense.  And many other places I found in
 Job where our copies have more than the Hebrew ones, sometimes a little
 more, and sometimes a great deal more:  a little more, as when to the
 words, "Rising up in the morning, he offered burnt-offerings for them
 according to their number," they add, "one heifer for the sin of their
 soul;" and to the words, "The angels of God came to present themselves
 before God, and the devil came with them," "from going to and fro in
 the earth, and from walking up and down in it."  Again, after "The Lord
 gave, the Lord has taken away," the Hebrew has not, "It was so, as
 seemed good to the Lord."  Then our copies are very much fuller than
 the Hebrew, when Job's wife speaks to him, from "How long wilt thou
 hold out?  And he said, Lo, I wait yet a little while, looking for the
 hope of my salvation," down to "that I may cease from my troubles, and
 my sorrows which compass me."  For they have only these words of the
 woman, "But say a word against God, and die."

 4.  Again, through the whole of Job there are many passages in the
 Hebrew which are wanting in our copies, generally four or five verses,
 but sometimes, however, even fourteen, and nineteen, and sixteen.  But
 why should I enumerate all the instances I collected with so much
 labour, to prove that the difference between our copies and those of
 the Jews did not escape me?  In Jeremiah I noticed many instances, and
 indeed in that book I found much transposition and variation in the
 readings of the prophecies.  Again, in Genesis, the words, "God saw
 that it was good," when the firmament was made, are not found in the
 Hebrew, and there is no small dispute among them about this; and other
 instances are to be found in Genesis, which I marked, for the sake of
 distinction, with the sign the Greeks call an obelisk, as on the other
 hand I marked with an asterisk those passages in our copies which are
 not found in the Hebrew.  What needs there to speak of Exodus, where
 there is such diversity in what is said about the tabernacle and its
 court, and the ark, and the garments of the high priest and the
 priests, that sometimes the meaning even does not seem to be akin?
 And, forsooth, when we notice such things, we are forthwith to reject
 as spurious the copies in use in our Churches, and enjoin the
 brotherhood to put away the sacred books current among them, and to
 coax the Jews, and persuade them to give us copies which shall be
 untampered with, and free from forgery!  Are we to suppose that that
 Providence which in the sacred Scriptures has ministered to the
 edification of all the Churches of Christ, had no thought for those
 bought with a price, for whom Christ died; [3031] whom, although His
 Son, God who is love spared not, but gave Him up for us all, that with
 Him He might freely give us all things? [3032]

 5.  In all these cases consider whether it would not be well to
 remember the words, "Thou shalt not remove the ancient landmarks which
 thy fathers have set." [3033] Nor do I say this because I shun the
 labour of investigating the Jewish Scriptures, and comparing them with
 ours, and noticing their various readings.  This, if it be not arrogant
 to say it, I have already to a great extent done to the best of my
 ability, labouring hard to get at the meaning in all the editions and
 various readings; [3034] while I paid particular attention to the
 interpretation of the Seventy, lest I might to be found to accredit any
 forgery to the Churches which are under heaven, and give an occasion to
 those who seek such a starting-point for gratifying their desire to
 slander the common brethren, and to bring some accusation against those
 who shine forth in our community.  And I make it my endeavour not to be
 ignorant of their various readings, lest in my controversies with the
 Jews I should quote to them what is not found in their copies, and that
 I may make some use of what is found there, even although it should not
 be in our Scriptures.  For if we are so prepared for them in our
 discussions, they will not, as is their manner, scornfully laugh at
 Gentile believers for their ignorance of the true reading as they have
 them.  So far as to the History of Susanna not being found in the
 Hebrew.

 6.  Let us now look at the things you find fault with in the story
 itself.  And here let us begin with what would probably make any one
 averse to receiving the history:  I mean the play of words between
 prinos and prisis, schinos and schisis.  You say that you can see how
 this can be in Greek, but that in Hebrew the words are altogether
 distinct.  On this point, however, I am still in doubt; because, when I
 was considering this passage (for I myself saw this difficulty), I
 consulted not a few Jews about it, asking them the Hebrew words for
 prinos and prisein, and how they would translate schinos the tree, and
 how schisis.  And they said that they did not know these Greek words
 prinos and schinos, and asked me to show them the trees, that they
 might see what they called them.  And I at once (for the truth's dear
 sake) put before them pieces of the different trees.  One of them then
 said, that he could not with any certainty give the Hebrew name of
 anything not mentioned in Scripture, since, if one was at a loss, he
 was prone to use the Syriac word instead of the Hebrew one; and he went
 on to say, that some words the very wisest could not translate.  "If,
 then," said he, "you can adduce a passage in any Scripture where the
 schinos is mentioned, or the prinos, you will find there the words you
 seek, together with the words which have the same sound; but if it is
 nowhere mentioned, we also do not know it."  This, then, being what the
 Hebrews said to whom I had recourse, and who were acquainted with the
 history, I am cautious of affirming whether or not there is any
 correspondence to this play of words in the Hebrew.  Your reason for
 affirming that there is not, you yourself probably know.

 7.  Moreover, I remember hearing from a learned Hebrew, said among
 themselves to be the son of a wise man, and to have been specially
 trained to succeed his father, with whom I had intercourse on many
 subjects, the names of these elders, just as if he did not reject the
 History of Susanna, as they occur in Jeremias as follows:  "The Lord
 make thee like Zedekias and Achiab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in
 the fire, for the iniquity they did in Israel." [3035] How, then,
 could the one be sawn asunder by an angel, and the other rent in
 pieces?  The answer is, that these things were prophesied not of this
 world, but of the judgment of God, after the departure from this
 world.  For as the lord of that wicked servant who says, "My lord
 delayeth his coming," and so gives himself up to drunkenness, eating
 and drinking with drunkards, and smiting his fellow-servants, shall at
 his coming "cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the
 unbelievers," [3036] even so the angels appointed to punish will
 accomplish these things (just as they will cut asunder the wicked
 steward of that passage) on these men, who were called indeed elders,
 but who administered their stewardship wickedly.  One will saw asunder
 him who was waxen old in wicked days, who had pronounced false
 judgment, condemning the innocent, and letting the guilty go free;
 [3037] and another will rend in pieces him of the seed of Chanaan, and
 not of Judah, whom beauty had deceived, and whose heart lust had
 perverted. [3038]

 8.  And I knew another Hebrew, who told about these elders such
 traditions as the following:  that they pretended to the Jews in
 captivity, who were hoping by the coming of Christ to be freed from the
 yoke of their enemies, that they could explain clearly the things
 concerning Christ,...and that they so deceived the wives of their
 countrymen. [3039] Wherefore it is that the prophet Daniel calls the
 one "waxen old in wicked days," and says to the other, "Thus have ye
 dealt with the children of Israel; but the daughters of Juda would not
 abide your wickedness."

 9.  But probably to this you will say, Why then is the "History" not in
 their Daniel, if, as you say, their wise men hand down by tradition
 such stories?  The answer is, that they hid from the knowledge of the
 people as many of the passages which contained any scandal against the
 elders, rulers, and judges, as they could, some of which have been
 preserved in uncanonical writings (Apocrypha).  As an example, take the
 story told about Esaias; and guaranteed by the Epistle to the Hebrews,
 which is found in none of their public books.  For the author of the
 Epistle to the Hebrews, in speaking of the prophets, and what they
 suffered, says, "They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were
 slain with the sword." [3040] To whom, I ask, does the "sawn asunder"
 refer (for by an old idiom, not peculiar to Hebrew, but found also in
 Greek, this is said in the plural, although it refers to but one
 person)?  Now we know very well that tradition says that Esaias the
 prophet was sawn asunder; and this is found in some apocryphal work,
 which probably the Jews have purposely tampered with, introducing some
 phrases manifestly incorrect, that discredit might be thrown on the
 whole.

 However, some one hard pressed by this argument may have recourse to
 the opinion of those who reject this Epistle as not being Paul's;
 against whom I must at some other time use other arguments to prove
 that it is Paul's. [3041] At present I shall adduce from the Gospel
 what Jesus Christ testifies concerning the prophets, together with a
 story which He refers to, but which is not found in the Old Testament,
 since in it also there is a scandal against unjust judges in Israel.
 The words of our Saviour run thus:  "Woe unto you, scribes and
 Pharisees, hypocrites because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and
 garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, and say, If we had been in the
 days of our fathers, we would not have been partaken with them in the
 blood of the prophets.  Wherefore be ye witnesses unto yourselves, that
 ye are the children of them which killed the prophets.  Fill ye up then
 the measure of your fathers.  Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how
 can ye escape the damnation of Gehenna?  Wherefore, behold, I send unto
 you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill
 and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and
 persecute them from city to city:  that upon you may come all the
 righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel
 unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
 temple and the altar.  Verily I say unto you, All these things shall
 come upon this generation."  And what follows is of the same tenor:  "O
 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them
 which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
 together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye
 would not!  Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." [3042]

 Let us see now if in these cases we are not forced to the conclusion,
 that while the Saviour gives a true account of them, none of the
 Scriptures which could prove what He tells are to be found.  For they
 who build the tombs of the prophets and garnish the sepulchres of the
 righteous, condemning the crimes their fathers committed against the
 righteous and the prophets, say, "If we had been in the days of our
 fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
 prophets." [3043] In the blood of what prophets, can any one tell
 me?  For where do we find anything like this written of Esaias, or
 Jeremias, or any of the twelve, or Daniel?  Then about Zacharias the
 son of Barachias, who was slain between the temple and the altar, we
 learn from Jesus only, not knowing it otherwise from any Scripture.
 Wherefore I think no other supposition is possible, than that they who
 had the reputation of wisdom, and the rulers and elders, took away from
 the people every passage which might bring them into discredit among
 the people.  We need not wonder, then, if this history of the evil
 device of the licentious elders against Susanna is true, but was
 concealed and removed from the Scriptures by men themselves not very
 far removed from the counsel of these elders.

 In the Acts of the Apostles also, Stephen, in his other testimony,
 says, "Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted?  And
 they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One;
 of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers." [3044] That
 Stephen speaks the truth, every one will admit who receives the Acts of
 the Apostles; but it is impossible to show from the extant books of the
 Old Testament how with any justice he throws the blame of having
 persecuted and slain the prophets on the fathers of those who believed
 not in Christ.  And Paul, in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians,
 testifies this concerning the Jews:  "For ye, brethren, became
 followers of the Churches of God which in Judea are in Christ Jesus:
 for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as
 they have of the Jews; who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own
 prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are
 contrary to all men." [3045] What I have said is, I think, sufficient
 to prove that it would be nothing wonderful if this history were true,
 and the licentious and cruel attack was actually made on Susanna by
 those who were at that time elders, and written down by the wisdom of
 the Spirit, but removed by these rulers of Sodom, [3046] as the Spirit
 would call them.

 10.  Your next objection is, that in this writing Daniel is said to
 have been seized by the Spirit, and to have cried out that the sentence
 was unjust; while in that writing of his which is universally received
 he is represented as prophesying in quite another manner, by visions
 and dreams, and an angel appearing to him, but never by prophetic
 inspiration.  You seem to me to pay too little heed to the words, "At
 sundry times, and in divers manners, God spake in time past unto the
 fathers by the prophets." [3047] This is true not only in the
 general, but also of individuals.  For if you notice, you will find
 that the same saints have been favoured with divine dreams and angelic
 appearances and (direct) inspirations.  For the present it will suffice
 to instance what is testified concerning Jacob.  Of dreams from God he
 speaks thus:  "And it came to pass, at the time that the cattle
 conceived, that I saw them before my eyes in a dream, and, behold, the
 rams and he-goats which leaped upon the sheep and the goats,
 white-spotted, and speckled, and grisled.  And the angel of God spake
 unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob.  And I said, What is it?  And he
 said, Lift up thine eyes and see, the goats and rams leaping on the
 goats and sheep, white-spotted, and speckled, and grisled:  for I have
 seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.  I am God, who appeared unto thee
 in the place of God, where thou anointedst to Me there a pillar, and
 vowedst a vow there to Me:  now arise, get thee out from this land, and
 return unto the land of thy kindred." [3048]

 And as to an appearance (which is better than a dream), he speaks as
 follows about himself:  "And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a
 man with him until the breaking of the day.  And he saw that he
 prevailed not against him, and he touched the breadth of his thigh; and
 the breadth of Jacob's thigh grew stiff while he was wrestling with
 him.  And he said to him, Let me go, for the day breaketh.  And he
 said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.  And he said unto
 him, What is thy name?  And he said, Jacob.  And he said to him, Thy
 name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name:  for
 thou hast prevailed with God, and art powerful with men.  And Jacob
 asked him, and said, Tell me thy name.  And he said, Wherefore is it
 that thou dost ask after my name?  And he blessed him there.  And Jacob
 called the name of the place Vision of God:  for I have seen God face
 to face, and my life is preserved.  And the sun rose, when the vision
 of God passed by." [3049] And that he also prophesied by inspiration,
 is evident from this passage:  "And Jacob called unto his sons, and
 said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you what shall befall
 you in the last days.  Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of
 Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.  Reuben, my first-born, my
 might, and the beginning of my children, hard to be born, hard and
 stubborn.  Thou wert wanton, boil not over like water; because thou
 wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou the couch to which
 thou wentest up." [3050] And so with the rest:  it was by inspiration
 that the prophetic blessings were pronounced.  We need not wonder,
 then, that Daniel sometimes prophesied by inspiration, as when he
 rebuked the elders sometimes, as you say, by dreams and visions, and at
 other times by an angel appearing unto him.

 11.  Your other objections are stated, as it appears to me, somewhat
 irreverently, and without the becoming spirit of piety.  I cannot do
 better than quote your very words:  "Then, after crying out in this
 extraordinary fashion, he detects them in a way no less incredible,
 which not even Philistion the play-writer would have resorted to.  For,
 not satisfied with rebuking them through the Spirit, he placed them
 apart, and asked them severally where they saw her committing adultery;
 and when the one said, Under a holm-tree' (prinos) he answered that the
 angel would saw him asunder (prisein); and in a similar fashion
 threatened the other, who said, Under a mastich-tree' (schinos), with
 being rent asunder."

 You might as reasonably compare to Philistion the play-writer, a story
 somewhat like this one, which is found in the third book of Kings,
 which you yourself will admit to be well written.  Here is what we read
 in Kings:--

 "Then there appeared two women that were harlots before the king, and
 stood before him.  And the one woman said, To me, my lord, I and this
 woman dwell in one house; and we were delivered in the house.  And it
 came to pass, the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman
 was delivered also:  and we were together; there is no one in our house
 except us two.  And this woman's child died in the night; because she
 overlaid it.  And she arose at midnight, and took my son from my arms.
 And thine handmaid slept.  And she laid it in her bosom, and laid her
 dead child in my bosom.  And I arose in the morning to give my child
 suck, and he was dead; but when I had considered it in the morning,
 behold, it was not my son which I did bear.  And the other woman said,
 Nay; the dead is thy son, but the living is my son.  And the other
 said, No; the living is my son, but the dead is thy son.  Thus they
 spake before the king.  Then said the king, Thou sayest, This is my son
 that liveth, and thy son is the dead:  and thou sayest, Nay; but thy
 son is the dead, and my son is the living.  And the king said, Bring me
 a sword.  And they brought a sword before the king.  And the king said,
 Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to
 the other.  Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the
 king (for her bowels yearned after her son), and she said, To me, my
 lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it.  But the other
 said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.  Then the king
 answered and said, Give the child to her which said, Give her the
 living child, and in no wise slay it:  for she is the mother of it.
 And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and
 they feared the face of the king:  for they saw that the wisdom of God
 was in him to do judgment." [3051]

 For if we were at liberty to speak in this scoffing way of the
 Scriptures in use in the Churches, we should rather compare this story
 of the two harlots to the play of Philistion than that of the chaste
 Susanna.  And just as the people would not have been persuaded if
 Solomon had merely said, "Give this one the living child, for she is
 the mother of it;" so Daniel's attack on the elders would not have been
 sufficient had there not been added the condemnation from their own
 mouth, when both said that they had seen her lying with the young man
 under a tree, but did not agree as to what kind of tree it was.  And
 since you have asserted, as if you knew for certain, that Daniel in
 this matter judged by inspiration (which may or may not have been the
 case), I would have you notice that there seem to me to be some
 analogies in the story of Daniel to the judgment of Solomon, concerning
 whom the Scripture testifies that the people saw that the wisdom of God
 was in him to do judgment. [3052] This might be said also of Daniel,
 for it was because wisdom was in him to do judgment that the elders
 were judged in the manner described.

 12.  I had nearly forgotten an additional remark I have to make about
 the prino-prisein and schino-schisein difficulty; that is, that in our
 Scriptures there are many etymological fancies, so to call them, which
 in the Hebrew are perfectly suitable, but not in the Greek.  It need
 not surprise us, then, if the translators of the History of Susanna
 contrived it so that they found out some Greek words, derived from the
 same root, which either corresponded exactly to the Hebrew form (though
 this I hardly think possible), or presented some analogy to it.  Here
 is an instance of this in our Scripture.  When the woman was made by
 God from the rib of the man, Adam says, "She shall be called woman,
 because she was taken out of her husband."  Now the Jews say that the
 woman was called "Essa," and that "taken" is a translation of this word
 as is evident from "chos isouoth essa," which means, "I have taken the
 cup of salvation;" [3053] and that "is" means "man," as we see from
 "Hesre aïs," which is, "Blessed is the man." [3054] According to the
 Jews, then, "is" is "man," and "essa," "woman," because she was taken
 out of her husband (is).  It need not then surprise us if some
 interpreters of the Hebrew "Susanna," which had been concealed among
 them at a very remote date, and had been preserved only by the more
 learned and honest, should have either given the Hebrew word for word,
 or hit upon some analogy to the Hebrew forms, that the Greeks might be
 able to follow them.  For in many other passages we can find traces of
 this kind of contrivance on the part of the translators, which I
 noticed when I was collating the various editions.

 13.  You raise another objection, which I give in your own words:
 "Moreover, how is it that they, who were captives among the Chaldeans,
 lost and won at play, thrown out unburied on the streets, as was
 prophesied of the former captivity, their sons torn from them to be
 eunuchs, and their daughters to be concubines, as had been prophesied;
 how is it that such could pass sentence of death, and that on the wife
 of their king Joakim, whom the king of the Babylonians had made partner
 of his throne?  Then, if it was not this Joakim, but some other from
 the common people, whence had a captive such a mansion and spacious
 garden?"

 Where you get your "lost and won at play, and thrown out unburied on
 the streets," I know not, unless it is from Tobias; and Tobias (as also
 Judith), we ought to notice, the Jews do not use.  They are not even
 found in the Hebrew Apocrypha, as I learned from the Jews themselves.
 However, since the Churches use Tobias, you must know that even in the
 captivity some of the captives were rich and well to do.  Tobias
 himself says, "Because I remembered God with all my heart; and the Most
 High gave me grace and beauty in the eyes of Nemessarus, and I was his
 purveyor; and I went into Media, and left in trust with Gabael, the
 brother of Gabrias, at Ragi, a city of Media, ten talents of silver."
 [3055] And he adds, as if he were a rich man, "In the days of
 Nemessarus I gave many alms to my brethren.  I gave my bread to the
 hungry, and my clothes to the naked:  and if I saw any of my nation
 dead, and cast outside the walls of Nineve, I buried him; and if king
 Senachereim had slain any when he came fleeing from Judea, I buried
 them privily (for in his wrath he killed many)."  Think whether this
 great catalogue of Tobias's good deeds does not betoken great wealth
 and much property, especially when he adds, "Understanding that I was
 sought for to be put to death, I withdrew myself for fear, and all my
 goods were forcibly taken away." [3056]

 And another captive, Dachiacharus, the son of Ananiel, the brother of
 Tobias, was set over all the exchequer of the kingdom of king Acherdon;
 and we read, "Now Achiacharus was cup-bearer and keeper of the signet,
 and steward and overseer of the accounts." [3057]

 Mardochaios, too, frequented the court of the king, and had such
 boldness before him, that he was inscribed among the benefactors of
 Artaxerxes.

 Again we read in Esdras, that Neemias, a cup-bearer and eunuch of the
 king, of Hebrew race, made a request about the rebuilding of the
 temple, and obtained it; so that it was granted to him, with many more,
 to return and build the temple again.  Why then should we wonder that
 one Joakim had garden, and house, and property, whether these were very
 expensive or only moderate, for this is not clearly told us in the
 writing?

 14.  But you say, "How could they who were in captivity pass sentence
 of death?" asserting, I know not on what grounds, that Susanna was the
 wife of a king, because of the name Joakim.  The answer is, that it is
 no uncommon thing, when great nations become subject, that the king
 should allow the captives to use their own laws and courts of justice.
 Now, for instance, that the Romans rule, and the Jews pay the
 half-shekel to them, how great power by the concession of Cæsar the
 ethnarch has; so that we, who have had experience of it, know that he
 differs in little from a true king!  Private trials are held according
 to the law, and some are condemned to death.  And though there is not
 full licence for this, still it is not done without the knowledge of
 the ruler, as we learned and were convinced of when we spent much time
 in the country of that people.  And yet the Romans only take account of
 two tribes, while at that time besides Judah there were the ten tribes
 of Israel.  Probably the Assyrians contented themselves with holding
 them in subjection, and conceded to them their own judicial processes.

 15.  I find in your letter yet another objection in these words:  "And
 add, that among all the many prophets who had been before, there is no
 one who has quoted from another word for word.  For they had no need to
 go a-begging for words, since their own were true.  But this one, in
 rebuking one of these men, quotes the words of the Lord, The innocent
 and righteous shalt thou not slay.'"  I cannot understand how, with all
 your exercise in investigating and meditating on the Scriptures, you
 have not noticed that the prophets continually quote each other almost
 word for word.  For who of all believers does not know the words in
 Esaias?  "And in the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be
 manifest, and the house of the Lord on the top of the mountains, and it
 shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall come unto it.
 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
 mountain of the Lord, unto the house of the God of Jacob; and He will
 teach us His way, and we will walk in it:  for out of Zion shall go
 forth a law, and a word of the Lord from Jerusalem.  And He shall judge
 among the nations, and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat
 their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks:
 nation shall not lift up sword against nation; neither shall they learn
 war any more." [3058]

 But in Micah we find a parallel passage, which is almost word for
 word:  "And in the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be
 manifest, established on the top of the mountains, and it shall be
 exalted above the hills; and people shall hasten unto it.  And many
 nations shall come, and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the
 Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and they will teach us His way,
 and we will walk in His paths:  for a law shall go forth from Zion, and
 a word of the Lord from Jerusalem.  And He shall judge among many
 people, and rebuke strong nations; and they shall beat their swords
 into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks:  nation shall
 not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
 more." [3059]

 Again, in First Chronicles, the psalm which is put in the hands of
 Asaph and his brethren to praise the Lord, beginning, "Give thanks unto
 the Lord, call upon His name," [3060] is in the beginning almost
 identical with Psalm cv., down to "and do my prophets no harm;" and
 after that it is the same as Psalm xcvi., from the beginning of that
 psalm, which is something like this, "Praise the Lord all the earth,"
 down to "For He cometh to judge the earth."  (It would have taken up
 too much time to quote more fully; so I have given these short
 references, which are sufficient for the matter before us.)  And you
 will find the law about not bearing a burden on the Sabbath-day in
 Jeremias, as well as in Moses. [3061] And the rules about the
 passover, and the rules for the priests, are not only in Moses, but
 also at the end of Ezekiel. [3062] I would have quoted these, and
 many more, had I not found that from the shortness of my stay in
 Nicomedia my time for writing you was already too much restricted.

 Your last objection is, that the style is different.  This I cannot
 see.

 This, then, is my defence.  I might, especially after all these
 accusations, speak in praise of this history of Susanna, dwelling on it
 word by word, and expounding the exquisite nature of the thoughts.
 Such an encomium, perhaps, some of the learned and able students of
 divine things may at some other time compose.  This, however, is my
 answer to your strokes, as you call them.  Would that I could instruct
 you!  But I do not now arrogate that to myself.  My lord and dear
 brother Ambrosius, who has written this at my dictation, and has, in
 looking over it, corrected as he pleased, salutes you.  His faithful
 spouse, Marcella, and her children, also salute you.  Also Anicetus.
 Do you salute our dear father Apollinarius, and all our friends.

 [3028] [See Dr. Pusey's Lectures on Daniel the Prophet, lect. vi. p.
 326, 327; also The Uncanonical and Apocryphal Scriptures, by Rev. R. W.
 Churton, B.D. (1884), pp. 389-404.  S.]

 [3029] "The Song of the Three Holy Children" (in the Apocrypha).

 [3030] This should probably be corrected, with Pat. Jun., into, "Nor
 are the letters, neither," etc.

 [3031] 1 Cor. vi. 20; Rom. xiv. 15.

 [3032] Rom. viii. 32.

 [3033] Prov. xxii. 28.

 [3034] Origen's most important contribution to biblical literature was
 his elaborate attempt to rectify the text of the Septuagint by
 collating it with the Hebrew original and other Greek versions.  On
 this he spent twenty-eight years, during which he travelled through the
 East collecting materials.  The form in which he first issued the
 result of his labours was that of the Tetrapla, which presented in four
 columns the texts of the LXX., Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion.  He
 next issued the Hexapla, in which the Hebrew text was given, first in
 Hebrew and then in Greek letters.  Of some books he gave two additional
 Greek versions, whence the title Octapla; and there was even a seventh
 Greek version added for some books.  Unhappily this great work, which
 extended to nearly fifty volumes, was never transcribed, and so
 perished (Kitto, Cycl.).

 [3035] Jer. xxix. 22, 23.

 [3036] Luke xii. 45, 46.

 [3037] Susanna 52, 53.

 [3038] Susanna 56.

 [3039] Et utrumque sigillatim in quamcunque mulierem incidebat, et cui
 vitium afferre cupiebat, ei secreto affirmasse sibi a Deo datum e suo
 semine progignere Christum.  Hinc spe gignendi Christum decepta mulier,
 sui copiam decipienti faciebat, et sic civium uxores stuprabant
 seniores Achiab et Sedekias.

 [3040] Heb. xi. 37.

 [3041] [See note supra, p. 239.  S.]

 [3042] Matt. xxiii. 29-38.

 [3043] Matt. xxiii. 30.

 [3044] Acts vii. 52.

 [3045] 1 Thess. ii. 14, 15.

 [3046] Isa. i. 10.

 [3047] Heb. i. 1.

 [3048] Gen. xxxi. 10-13.

 [3049] Gen. xxxii. 24-31.

 [3050] Gen. xlix. 1-4.

 [3051] 1 Kings iii. 16-28.

 [3052] 1 Kings iii. 28.

 [3053] Ps. cxvi. 13.

 [3054] Ps. i. 1.

 [3055] Tob. i. 12-14.

 [3056] Tob. i. 19.

 [3057] Tob. i. 22.

 [3058] Isa. ii. 2-4.

 [3059] Mic. iv. 1-3.

 [3060] 1 Chron. xvi. 8.

 [3061] Ex. xxxv. 2; Num. xv. 32; Jer. xvii. 21-24.

 [3062] In Levit. passim; Ezek. xliii.; xliv.; xlv.; xlvi.

 A Letter from Origen to Gregory. [3063]

 ------------------------

 1.  Greeting in God, my most excellent sir, and venerable son Gregory,
 from Origen.  A natural readiness of comprehension, as you well know,
 may, if practice be added, contribute somewhat to the contingent end,
 if I may so call it, of that which any one wishes to practise.  Thus,
 your natural good parts might make of you a finished Roman lawyer or a
 Greek philosopher, so to speak, of one of the schools in high
 reputation.  But I am anxious that you should devote all the strength
 of your natural good parts to Christianity for your end; and in order
 to this, I wish to ask you to extract from the philosophy of the Greeks
 what may serve as a course of study or a preparation for Christianity,
 and from geometry and astronomy what will serve to explain the sacred
 Scriptures, in order that all that the sons of the philosophers are
 wont to say about geometry and music, grammar, rhetoric, and astronomy,
 as fellow-helpers to philosophy, we may say about philosophy itself, in
 relation to Christianity.

 2.  Perhaps something of this kind is shadowed forth in what is written
 in Exodus from the mouth of God, that the children of Israel were
 commanded to ask from their neighbours, and those who dwelt with them,
 vessels of silver and gold, and raiment, in order that, by spoiling the
 Egyptians, they might have material for the preparation of the things
 which pertained to the service of God.  For from the things which the
 children of Israel took from the Egyptians the vessels in the holy of
 holies were made,--the ark with its lid, and the Cherubim, and the
 mercy-seat, and the golden coffer, where was the manna, the angels'
 bread.  These things were probably made from the best of the Egyptian
 gold.  An inferior kind would be used for the solid golden candlestick
 near the inner veil, and its branches, and the golden table on which
 were the pieces of shewbread, and the golden censer between them.  And
 if there was a third and fourth quality of gold, from it would be made
 the holy vessels; and the other things would be made of Egyptian
 silver.  For when the children of Israel dwelt in Egypt, they gained
 this from their dwelling there, that they had no lack of such precious
 material for the utensils of the service of God.  And of the Egyptian
 raiment were probably made all those things which, as the Scripture
 mentions, needed sewed and embroidered work, sewed with the wisdom of
 God, the one to the other, that the veils might be made, and the inner
 and the outer courts.  And why should I go on, in this untimely
 digression, to set forth how useful to the children of Israel were the
 things brought from Egypt, which the Egyptians had not put to a proper
 use, but which the Hebrews, guided by the wisdom of God, used for God's
 service?  Now the sacred Scripture is wont to represent as an evil the
 going down from the land of the children of Israel into Egypt,
 indicating that certain persons get harm from sojourning among the
 Egyptians, that is to say, from meddling with the knowledge of this
 world, after they have subscribed to the law of God, and the
 Israelitish service of Him.  Ader [3064] at least, the Idumæan; so long
 as he was in the land of Israel, and had not tasted the bread of the
 Egyptians, made no idols.  It was when he fled from the wise Solomon,
 and went down into Egypt, as it were flying from the wisdom of God, and
 was made a kinsman of Pharaoh by marrying his wife's sister, and
 begetting a child, who was brought up with the children of Pharaoh,
 that he did this.  Wherefore, although he did return to the land of
 Israel, he returned only to divide the people of God, and to make them
 say to the golden calf, "These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought
 thee up from the land of Egypt." [3065] And I may tell you from my
 experience, that not many take from Egypt only the useful, and go away
 and use it for the service of God; while Ader the Idumæan has many
 brethren.  These are they who, from their Greek studies, produce
 heretical notions, and set them up, like the golden calf, in Bethel,
 which signifies "God's house."  In these words also there seems to me
 an indication that they have set up their own imaginations in the
 Scriptures, where the word of God dwells, which is called in a figure
 Bethel.  The other figure, the word says, was set up in Dan.  Now the
 borders of Dan are the most extreme, and nearest the borders of the
 Gentiles, as is clear from what is written in Joshua, the son of Nun.
 Now some of the devices of these brethren of Ader, as we call them, are
 also very near the borders of the Gentiles.

 3.  Do you then, my son, diligently apply yourself to the reading of
 the sacred Scriptures.  Apply yourself, I say.  For we who read the
 things of God need much application, lest we should say or think
 anything too rashly about them.  And applying yourself thus to the
 study of the things of God, with faithful prejudgments such as are well
 pleasing to God, knock at its locked door, and it will be opened to you
 by the porter, of whom Jesus says, "To him the porter opens." [3066]
 And applying yourself thus to the divine study, seek aright, and with
 unwavering trust in God, the meaning of the holy Scriptures, which so
 many have missed.  Be not satisfied with knocking and seeking; for
 prayer is of all things indispensable to the knowledge of the things of
 God.  For to this the Saviour exhorted, and said not only, "Knock, and
 it shall be opened to you; and seek, and ye shall find," [3067] but
 also, "Ask, and it shall be given unto you." [3068] My fatherly love
 to you has made me thus bold; but whether my boldness be good, God will
 know, and His Christ, and all partakers of the Spirit of God and the
 Spirit of Christ.  May you also be a partaker, and be ever increasing
 your inheritance, that you may say not only, "We are become partakers
 of Christ," [3069] but also partakers of God.

 [3063] This Gregory, styled the Wonder-worker, (Thaumaturgus) was
 afterwards bishop of Neo-Cæsarea.

 [3064] Origen evidently confounds Hadad the Edomite, of 1 Kings xi. 14,
 with Jeroboam.

 [3065] [1 Kings xii. 28.  S.]

 [3066] John x. 3.

 [3067] Matt. vii. 7.

 [3068] Luke xi. 9.

 [3069] Heb. iii. 14.

 Elucidation.

 ------------------------

 This golden letter, doubtless genuine, was attended with very great
 consequences, of which we shall gather more hereafter.  It is worthy of
 the solemn consideration of young students to whom this page may come.
 Gregory was unbaptized when Origen (circa a.d. 230) thus addressed his
 conscience.

 On the letters here inserted, let me refer the student to Routh,
 Reliqu., ii. pp. 312-327; also same vol., pp. 222-228; also iii.
 254-256.

 For the facts concerning this letter to Gregory, see Cave, i. p. 400.
