A Treatise on the Soul (Tertullian, trans. Peter Holmes)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf03.iv.xi.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  A Treatise on the Soul

 IX.

 A Treatise on the Soul. [1489]

 [Translated by Peter Holmes, D.D.]

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.--It is Not to the Philosophers that We Resort for
 Information About the Soul But to God. [1490]

 Having discussed with Hermogenes the single point of the origin of the
 soul, so far as his assumption led me, that the soul consisted rather
 in an adaptation [1491] of matter than of the inspiration [1492] of
 God, I now turn to the other questions incidental to the subject; and
 (in my treatment of these) I shall evidently have mostly to contend
 with the philosophers. In the very prison of Socrates they skirmished
 about the state of the soul. I have my doubts at once whether the time
 was an opportune one for their (great) master--(to say nothing of the
 place), although that perhaps does not much matter. For what could the
 soul of Socrates then contemplate with clearness and serenity? The
 sacred ship had returned (from Delos), the hemlock draft to which he
 had been condemned had been drunk, death was now present before him:
 (his mind) was, [1493] as one may suppose, [1494] naturally excited
 [1495] at every emotion; or if nature had lost her influence, it must
 have been deprived of all power of thought. [1496] Or let it have been
 as placid and tranquil so you please, inflexible, in spite of the
 claims of natural duty, [1497] at the tears of her who was so soon to
 be his widow, and at the sight of his thenceforward orphan children,
 yet his soul must have been moved even by its very efforts to suppress
 emotion; and his constancy itself must have been shaken, as he
 struggled against the disturbance of the excitement around him.
 Besides, what other thoughts could any man entertain who had been
 unjustly condemned to die, but such as should solace him for the injury
 done to him?  Especially would this be the case with that glorious
 creature, the philosopher, to whom injurious treatment would not
 suggest a craving for consolation, but rather the feeling of resentment
 and indignation. Accordingly, after his sentence, when his wife came to
 him with her effeminate cry, O Socrates, you are unjustly condemned! he
 seemed already to find joy in answering, Would you then wish me justly
 condemned? It is therefore not to be wondered at, if even in his
 prison, from a desire to break the foul hands of Anytus and Melitus,
 he, in the face of death itself, asserts the immortality of the soul by
 a strong assumption such as was wanted to frustrate the wrong (they had
 inflicted upon him). So that all the wisdom of Socrates, at that
 moment, proceeded from the affectation of an assumed composure, rather
 than the firm conviction of ascertained truth. For by whom has truth
 ever been discovered without God? By whom has God ever been found
 without Christ? By whom has Christ ever been explored without the Holy
 Spirit?  By whom has the Holy Spirit ever been attained without the
 mysterious gift of faith? [1498] Socrates, as none can doubt, was
 actuated by a different spirit. For they say that a demon clave to him
 from his boyhood--the very worst teacher certainly, notwithstanding the
 high place assigned to it by poets and philosophers--even next to,
 (nay, along with) the gods themselves. The teachings of the power of
 Christ had not yet been given--(that power) which alone can confute
 this most pernicious influence of evil that has nothing good in it, but
 is rather the author of all error, and the seducer from all truth. Now
 if Socrates was pronounced the wisest of men by the oracle of the
 Pythian demon, which, you may be sure, neatly managed the business for
 his friend, of how much greater dignity and constancy is the assertion
 of the Christian wisdom, before the very breath of which the whole host
 of demons is scattered!  This wisdom of the school of heaven frankly
 and without reserve denies the gods of this world, and shows no such
 inconsistency as to order a "cock to be sacrificed to Æsculapius:"
 [1499] no new gods and demons does it introduce, but expels the old
 ones; it corrupts not youth, but instructs them in all goodness and
 moderation; and so it bears the unjust condemnation not of one city
 only, but of all the world, in the cause of that truth which incurs
 indeed the greater hatred in proportion to its fulness:  so that it
 tastes death not out of a (poisoned) cup almost in the way of jollity;
 but it exhausts it in every kind of bitter cruelty, on gibbets and in
 holocausts. [1500] Meanwhile, in the still gloomier prison of the world
 amongst your Cebeses and Phædos, in every investigation concerning
 (man's) soul, it directs its inquiry according to the rules of God. At
 all events, you can show us no more powerful expounder of the soul than
 the Author thereof. From God you may learn about that which you hold of
 God; but from none else will you get this knowledge, if you get it not
 from God. For who is to reveal that which God has hidden? To that
 quarter must we resort in our inquiries whence we are most safe even in
 deriving our ignorance. For it is really better for us not to know a
 thing, because He has not revealed it to us, than to know it according
 to man's wisdom, because he has been bold enough to assume it.

 [1489] [It is not safe to date this treatise before a.d. 203, and
 perhaps it would be unsafe to assign a later date. The note of the
 translator, which follows, relieves me from any necessity to add more,
 just here.]

 [1490] In this treatise we have Tertullian's speculations on the
 origin, the nature, and the destiny of the human soul. There are, no
 doubt, paradoxes startling to a modern reader to be found in it, such
 as that of the soul's corporeity; and there are weak and inconclusive
 arguments. But after all such drawbacks (and they are not more than
 what constantly occur in the most renowned speculative writers of
 antiquity), the reader will discover many interesting proofs of our
 author's character for originality of thought, width of information,
 firm grasp of his subject, and vivacious treatment of it, such as we
 have discovered in other parts of his writings. If his subject permits
 Tertullian less than usual of an appeal to his favourite Holy
 Scripture, he still makes room for occasional illustration from it, and
 with his characteristic ability; if, however, there is less of his
 sacred learning in it, the treatise teems with curious information
 drawn from the secular literature of that early age. Our author often
 measures swords with Plato in his discussions on the soul, and it is
 not too much to say that he shows himself a formidable opponent to the
 great philosopher. See Bp. Kaye, On Tertullian, pp. 199, 200.

 [1491] Suggestu. [Kaye, pp. 60 and 541.]

 [1492] Flatu "the breath."

 [1493] Utique.

 [1494] Consternata.

 [1495] Consternata.

 [1496] Externata. "Externatus = ektos phrenon. Gloss. Philox.

 [1497] Pietatis.

 [1498] Fidei sacramento.

 [1499] The allusion is to the inconsistency of the philosopher, who
 condemned the gods of the vulgar, and died offering a gift to one of
 them.

 [1500] Vivicomburio.

 Chapter II.--The Christian Has Sure and Simple Knowledge Concerning the
 Subject Before Us.

 Of course we shall not deny that philosophers have sometimes thought
 the same things as ourselves. The testimony of truth is the issue
 thereof. It sometimes happens even in a storm, when the boundaries of
 sky and sea are lost in confusion, that some harbour is stumbled on (by
 the labouring ship) by some happy chance; and sometimes in the very
 shades of night, through blind luck alone, one finds access to a spot,
 or egress from it. In nature, however, most conclusions are suggested,
 as it were, by that common intelligence wherewith God has been pleased
 to endow the soul of man. This intelligence has been caught up by
 philosophy, and, with the view of glorifying her own art, has been
 inflated (it is not to be wondered at that I use this language) with
 straining after that facility of language which is practised in the
 building up and pulling down of everything, and which has greater
 aptitude for persuading men by speaking than by teaching. She assigns
 to things their forms and conditions; sometimes makes them common and
 public, sometimes appropriates them to private use; on certainties she
 capriciously stamps the character of uncertainty; she appeals to
 precedents, as if all things are capable of being compared together;
 she describes all things by rule and definition, allotting diverse
 properties even to similar objects; she attributes nothing to the
 divine permission, but assumes as her principles the laws of nature. I
 could bear with her pretensions, if only she were herself true to
 nature, and would prove to me that she had a mastery over nature as
 being associated with its creation. She thought, no doubt, that she was
 deriving her mysteries from sacred sources, as men deem them, because
 in ancient times most authors were supposed to be (I will not say
 godlike, but) actually gods: as, for instance, the Egyptian Mercury,
 [1501] to whom Plato paid very great deference; [1502] and the Phrygian
 Silenus, to whom Midas lent his long ears, when the shepherds brought
 him to him; and Hermotimus, to whom the good people of Clazomenæ built
 a temple after his death; and Orpheus; and Musæus; and Pherecydes, the
 master of Pythagoras. But why need we care, since these philosophers
 have also made their attacks upon those writings which are condemned by
 us under the title of apocryphal, [1503] certain as we are that nothing
 ought to be received which does not agree with the true system of
 prophecy, which has arisen in this present age; [1504] because we do
 not forget that there have been false prophets, and long previous to
 them fallen spirits, which have instructed the entire tone and aspect
 of the world with cunning knowledge of this (philosophic) cast? It is,
 indeed, not incredible that any man who is in quest of wisdom may have
 gone so far, as a matter of curiosity, as to consult the very prophets;
 (but be this as it may), if you take the philosophers, you would find
 in them more diversity than agreement, since even in their agreement
 their diversity is discoverable. Whatever things are true in their
 systems, and agreeable to prophetic wisdom, they either recommend as
 emanating from some other source, or else perversely apply [1505] in
 some other sense. This process is attended with very great detriment to
 the truth, when they pretend that it is either helped by falsehood, or
 else that falsehood derives support from it. The following circumstance
 must needs have set ourselves and the philosophers by the ears,
 especially in this present matter, that they sometimes clothe
 sentiments which are common to both sides, in arguments which are
 peculiar to themselves, but contrary in some points to our rule and
 standard of faith; and at other times defend opinions which are
 especially their own, with arguments which both sides acknowledge to be
 valid, and occasionally conformable to their system of belief. The
 truth has, at this rate, been well-nigh excluded by the philosophers,
 through the poisons with which they have infected it; and thus, if we
 regard both the modes of coalition which we have now mentioned, and
 which are equally hostile to the truth, we feel the urgent necessity of
 freeing, on the one hand, the sentiments held by us in common with them
 from the arguments of the philosophers, and of separating, on the other
 hand, the arguments which both parties employ from the opinions of the
 same philosophers. And this we may do by recalling all questions to
 God's inspired standard, with the obvious exception of such simple
 cases as being free from the entanglement of any preconceived conceits,
 one may fairly admit on mere human testimony; because plain evidence of
 this sort we must sometimes borrow from opponents, when our opponents
 have nothing to gain from it. Now I am not unaware what a vast mass of
 literature the philosophers have accumulated concerning the subject
 before us, in their own commentaries thereon--what various schools of
 principles there are, what conflicts of opinion, what prolific sources
 of questions, what perplexing methods of solution. Moreover, I have
 looked into Medical Science also, the sister (as they say) of
 Philosophy, which claims as her function to cure the body, and thereby
 to have a special acquaintance with the soul. From this circumstance
 she has great differences with her sister, pretending as the latter
 does to know more about the soul, through the more obvious treatment,
 as it were, of her in her domicile of the body. But never mind all this
 contention between them for pre-eminence!  For extending their several
 researches on the soul, Philosophy, on the one hand, has enjoyed the
 full scope of her genius; while Medicine, on the other hand, has
 possessed the stringent demands of her art and practice. Wide are men's
 inquiries into uncertainties; wider still are their disputes about
 conjectures. However great the difficulty of adducing proofs, the
 labour of producing conviction is not one whit less; so that the gloomy
 Heraclitus was quite right, when, observing the thick darkness which
 obscured the researches of the inquirers about the soul, and wearied
 with their interminable questions, he declared that he had certainly
 not explored the limits of the soul, although he had traversed every
 road in her domains. To the Christian, however, but few words are
 necessary for the clear understanding of the whole subject. But in the
 few words there always arises certainty to him; nor is he permitted to
 give his inquiries a wider range than is compatible with their
 solution; for "endless questions" the apostle forbids. [1506] It must,
 however, be added, that no solution may be found by any man, but such
 as is learned from God; and that which is learned of God is the sum and
 substance of the whole thing.

 [1501] Mentioned below, c. xxxiii.; also Adv. Valent. c. xv.

 [1502] See his Phædrus, c. lix. (p. 274); also Augustin, De. Civ. Dei,
 viii. 11; Euseb. Præp. Evang. ix. 3.

 [1503] Or spurious; not to be confounded with our so-called Apocrypha,
 which were in Tertullian's days called Libri Ecclesiastici.

 [1504] Here is a touch of Tertullian's Montanism.

 [1505] Subornant.

 [1506] 1 Tim. i. 4.

 Chapter III.--The Soul's Origin Defined Out of the Simple Words of
 Scripture.

 Would to God that no "heresies had been ever necessary, in order that
 they which are approved may be made manifest!" [1507] We should then be
 never required to try our strength in contests about the soul with
 philosophers, those patriarchs of heretics, as they may be fairly
 called. [1508] The apostle, so far back as his own time, foresaw,
 indeed, that philosophy would do violent injury to the truth. [1509]
 This admonition about false philosophy he was induced to offer after he
 had been at Athens, had become acquainted with that loquacious city,
 [1510] and had there had a taste of its huckstering wiseacres and
 talkers. In like manner is the treatment of the soul according to the
 sophistical doctrines of men which "mix their wine with water." [1511]
 Some of them deny the immortality of the soul; others affirm that it is
 immortal, and something more. Some raise disputes about its substance;
 others about its form; others, again, respecting each of its several
 faculties. One school of philosophers derives its state from various
 sources, while another ascribes its departure to different
 destinations. The various schools reflect the character of their
 masters, according as they have received their impressions from the
 dignity [1512] of Plato, or the vigour [1513] of Zeno, or the
 equanimity [1514] of Aristotle, or the stupidity [1515] of Epicurus, or
 the sadness [1516] of Heraclitus, or the madness [1517] of Empedocles.
 The fault, I suppose, of the divine doctrine lies in its springing from
 Judæa [1518] rather than from Greece. Christ made a mistake, too, in
 sending forth fishermen to preach, rather than the sophist. Whatever
 noxious vapours, accordingly, exhaled from philosophy, obscure the
 clear and wholesome atmosphere of truth, it will be for Christians to
 clear away, both by shattering to pieces the arguments which are drawn
 from the principles of things--I mean those of the philosophers--and by
 opposing to them the maxims of heavenly wisdom--that is, such as are
 revealed by the Lord; in order that both the pitfalls wherewith
 philosophy captivates the heathen may be removed, and the means
 employed by heresy to shake the faith of Christians may be repressed.
 We have already decided one point in our controversy with Hermogenes,
 as we said at the beginning of this treatise, when we claimed the soul
 to be formed by the breathing [1519] of God, and not out of matter. We
 relied even there on the clear direction of the inspired statement
 which informs us how that "the Lord God breathed on man's face the
 breath of life, so that man became a living soul" [1520] --by that
 inspiration of God, of course. On this point, therefore, nothing
 further need be investigated or advanced by us. It has its own
 treatise, [1521] and its own heretic. I shall regard it as my
 introduction to the other branches of the subject.

 [1507] 1 Cor. x. 19.

 [1508] Compare Tertullian's Adv. Hermog. c. viii.

 [1509] Col. ii. 8.

 [1510] Linguatam civitatem. Comp. Acts xvii. 21.

 [1511] Isa. i. 22.

 [1512] Honor.

 [1513] Vigor. Another reading has "rigor" (aklerotes), harshness.

 [1514] Tenor.

 [1515] Stupor.

 [1516] Moeror.

 [1517] Furor.

 [1518] Isa. ii. 3.

 [1519] Flatu.

 [1520] Gen. ii. 7.

 [1521] Titulus.

 Chapter IV.--In Opposition to Plato, the Soul Was Created and
 Originated at Birth.

 After settling the origin of the soul, its condition or state comes up
 next.  For when we acknowledge that the soul originates in the breath
 of God, it follows that we attribute a beginning to it.  This Plato,
 indeed, refuses to assign to it, for he will have the soul to be unborn
 and unmade. [1522] We, however, from the very fact of its having had a
 beginning, as well as from the nature thereof, teach that it had both
 birth and creation. And when we ascribe both birth and creation to it,
 we have made no mistake: for being born, indeed, is one thing, and
 being made is another,--the former being the term which is best suited
 to living beings. When distinctions, however, have places and times of
 their own, they occasionally possess also reciprocity of application
 among themselves. Thus, the being made admits of being taken in the
 sense of being brought forth; [1523] inasmuch as everything which
 receives being or existence, in any way whatever, is in fact generated.
 For the maker may really be called the parent of the thing that is
 made: in this sense Plato also uses the phraseology. So far, therefore,
 as concerns our belief in the souls being made or born, the opinion of
 the philosopher is overthrown by the authority of prophecy [1524] even.

 [1522] See his Phædrus, c. xxiv.

 [1523] Capit itaque et facturam provenisse poni.

 [1524] Or, "inspiration."

 Chapter V.--Probable View of the Stoics, that the Soul Has a Corporeal
 Nature.

 Suppose one summons a Eubulus to his assistance, and a Critolaus, and a
 Zenocrates, and on this occasion Plato's friend Aristotle. They may
 very possibly hold themselves ready for stripping the soul of its
 corporeity, unless they happen to see other philosophers opposed to
 them in their purpose--and this, too, in greater numbers--asserting for
 the soul a corporeal nature. Now I am not referring merely to those who
 mould the soul out of manifest bodily substances, as Hipparchus and
 Heraclitus (do) out of fire; as Hippon and Thales (do) out of water; as
 Empedocles and Critias (do) out of blood; as Epicurus (does) out of
 atoms, since even atoms by their coherence form corporeal masses; as
 Critolaus and his Peripatetics (do) out of a certain indescribable
 quintessence, [1525] if that may be called a body which rather includes
 and embraces bodily substances;--but I call on the Stoics also to help
 me, who, while declaring almost in our own terms that the soul is a
 spiritual essence (inasmuch as breath and spirit are in their nature
 very near akin to each other), will yet have no difficulty in
 persuading (us) that the soul is a corporeal substance. Indeed, Zeno,
 defining the soul to be a spirit generated with (the body, [1526] )
 constructs his argument in this way:  That substance which by its
 departure causes the living being to die is a corporeal one. Now it is
 by the departure of the spirit, which is generated with (the body,)
 that the living being dies; therefore the spirit which is generated
 with (the body) is a corporeal substance. But this spirit which is
 generated with (the body) is the soul:  it follows, then, that the soul
 is a corporeal substance. Cleanthes, too, will have it that family
 likeness passes from parents to their children not merely in bodily
 features, but in characteristics of the soul; as if it were out of a
 mirror of (a man's) manners, and faculties, and affections, that bodily
 likeness and unlikeness are caught and reflected by the soul also.  It
 is therefore as being corporeal that it is susceptible of likeness and
 unlikeness. Again, there is nothing in common between things corporeal
 and things incorporeal as to their susceptibility. But the soul
 certainly sympathizes with the body, and shares in its pain, whenever
 it is injured by bruises, and wounds, and sores: the body, too, suffers
 with the soul, and is united with it (whenever it is afflicted with
 anxiety, distress, or love) in the loss of vigour which its companion
 sustains, whose shame and fear it testifies by its own blushes and
 paleness. The soul, therefore, is (proved to be) corporeal from this
 inter-communion of susceptibility. Chrysippus also joins hands in
 fellowship with Cleanthes when he lays it down that it is not at all
 possible for things which are endued with body to be separated from
 things which have not body; because they have no such relation as
 mutual contact or coherence. Accordingly Lucretius says: [1527]

 "Tangere enim et tangi nisi corpus nulla potest res."

 "For nothing but body is capable of touching or of being touched."

 (Such severance, however, is quite natural between the soul and the
 body); for when the body is deserted by the soul, it is overcome by
 death. The soul, therefore, is endued with a body; for if it were not
 corporeal, it could not desert the body.

 [1525] Ex quinta nescio qua substantia. Comp. Cicero's Tuscul. i. 10.

 [1526] Consitum.

 [1527] De Nat. Rer. i. 305.

 Chapter VI.--The Arguments of the Platonists for the Soul's
 Incorporeality, Opposed, Perhaps Frivolously.

 These conclusions the Platonists disturb more by subtilty than by
 truth. Every body, they say, has necessarily either an animate nature
 [1528] or an inanimate one. [1529] If it has the inanimate nature, it
 receives motion externally to itself; if the animate one, internally.
 Now the soul receives motion neither externally nor internally: not
 externally, since it has not the inanimate nature; nor internally,
 because it is itself rather the giver of motion to the body. It
 evidently, then, is not a bodily substance, inasmuch as it receives
 motion neither way, according to the nature and law of corporeal
 substances. Now, what first surprises us here, is the unsuitableness of
 a definition which appeals to objects which have no affinity with the
 soul. For it is impossible for the soul to be called either an animate
 body or an inanimate one, inasmuch as it is the soul itself which makes
 the body either animate, if it be present to it, or else inanimate, if
 it be absent from it.  That, therefore, which produces a result, cannot
 itself be the result, so as to be entitled to the designation of an
 animate thing or an inanimate one. The soul is so called in respect of
 its own substance. If, then, that which is the soul admits not of being
 called an animate body or an inanimate one, how can it challenge
 comparison with the nature and law of animate and inanimate bodies?
 Furthermore, since it is characteristic of a body to be moved
 externally by something else, and as we have already shown that the
 soul receives motion from some other thing when it is swayed (from the
 outside, of course, by something else) by prophetic influence or by
 madness, therefore I must be right in regarding that as bodily
 substance which, according to the examples we have quoted, is moved by
 some other object from without. Now, if to receive motion from some
 other thing is characteristic of a body, how much more is it so to
 impart motion to something else!  But the soul moves the body, all
 whose efforts are apparent externally, and from without. It is the soul
 which gives motion to the feet for walking, and to the hands for
 touching, and to the eyes for sight, and to the tongue for speech--a
 sort of internal image which moves and animates the surface. Whence
 could accrue such power to the soul, if it were incorporeal? How could
 an unsubstantial thing propel solid objects? But in what way do the
 senses in man seem to be divisible into the corporeal and the
 intellectual classes? They tell us that the qualities of things
 corporeal, such as earth and fire, are indicated by the bodily
 senses--of touch and sight; whilst (the qualities) of incorporeal
 things--for instance, benevolence and malignity--are discovered by the
 intellectual faculties. And from this (they deduce what is to them) the
 manifest conclusion, that the soul is incorporeal, its properties being
 comprehended by the perception not of bodily organs, but of
 intellectual faculties.  Well, (I shall be much surprised) if I do not
 at once cut away the very ground on which their argument stands.  For I
 show them how incorporeal things are commonly submitted to the bodily
 senses--sound, for instance, to the organ of hearing; colour, to the
 organ of sight; smell, to the olfactory organ.  And, just as in these
 instances, the soul likewise has its contact with [1530] the body; not
 to say that the incorporeal objects are reported to us through the
 bodily organs, for the express reason that they come into contact with
 the said organs. Inasmuch, then, as it is evident that even incorporeal
 objects are embraced and comprehended by corporeal ones, why should not
 the soul, which is corporeal, be equally comprehended and understood by
 incorporeal faculties? It is thus certain that their argument fails.
 Among their more conspicuous arguments will be found this, that in
 their judgment every bodily substance is nourished by bodily
 substances; whereas the soul, as being an incorporeal essence, is
 nourished by incorporeal aliments--for instance, by the studies of
 wisdom. But even this ground has no stability in it, since Soranus, who
 is a most accomplished authority in medical science, affords us as
 answer, when he asserts that the soul is even nourished by corporeal
 aliments; that in fact it is, when failing and weak, actually refreshed
 oftentimes by food. Indeed, when deprived of all food, does not the
 soul entirely remove from the body? Soranus, then, after discoursing
 about the soul in the amplest manner, filling four volumes with his
 dissertations, and after weighing well all the opinions of the
 philosophers, defends the corporeality of the soul, although in the
 process he has robbed it of its immortality. For to all men it is not
 given to believe the truth which Christians are privileged to hold. As,
 therefore, Soranus has shown us from facts that the soul is nourished
 by corporeal aliments, let the philosopher (adopt a similar mode of
 proof, and) show that it is sustained by an incorporeal food. But the
 fact is, that no one has even been able to quench this man's [1531]
 doubts and difficulties about the condition of the soul with the
 honey-water of Plato's subtle eloquence, nor to surfeit them with the
 crumbs from the minute nostrums of Aristotle. But what is to become of
 the souls of all those robust barbarians, which have had no nurture of
 philosopher's lore indeed, and yet are strong in untaught practical
 wisdom, and which although very starvelings in philosophy, without your
 Athenian academies and porches, and even the prison of Socrates, do yet
 contrive to live? For it is not the soul's actual substance which is
 benefited by the aliment of learned study, but only its conduct and
 discipline; such ailment contributing nothing to increase its bulk, but
 only to enhance its grace. It is, moreover, a happy circumstance that
 the Stoics affirm that even the arts have corporeality; since at the
 rate the soul too must be corporeal, since it is commonly supposed to
 be nourished by the arts.  Such, however, is the enormous preoccupation
 of the philosophic mind, that it is generally unable to see straight
 before it. Hence (the story of) Thales falling into the well. [1532] It
 very commonly, too, through not understanding even its own opinions,
 suspects a failure of its own health. Hence (the story of) Chrysippus
 and the hellebore. Some such hallucination, I take it, must have
 occurred to him, when he asserted that two bodies could not possibly be
 contained in one: he must have kept out of mind and sight the case of
 those pregnant women who, day after day, bear not one body, but even
 two and three at a time, within the embrace of a single womb. One finds
 likewise, in the records of the civil law, the instance of a certain
 Greek woman who gave birth to a quint [1533] of children, the mother of
 all these at one parturition, the manifold parent of a single brood,
 the prolific produce from a single womb, who, guarded by so many
 bodies--I had almost said, a people--was herself no less then the sixth
 person! The whole creation testifies how that those bodies which are
 naturally destined to issue from bodies, are already (included) in that
 from which they proceed. Now that which proceeds from some other thing
 must needs be second to it. Nothing, however, proceeds out of another
 thing except by the process of generation; but then they are two
 (things).

 [1528] Animale, "having the nature of soul."

 [1529] Inanimale.

 [1530] Accedit.

 [1531] We follow Oehler's view of this obscure passage, in preference
 to Rigaltius'.

 [1532] See Tertullian's Ad Nationes (our translation), p. 33, Supra..

 [1533] Quinionem.

 Chapter VII.--The Soul's Corporeality Demonstrated Out of the Gospels.

 So far as the philosophers are concerned, we have said enough. As for
 our own teachers, indeed, our reference to them is ex abundanti--a
 surplusage of authority: in the Gospel itself they will be found to
 have the clearest evidence for the corporeal nature of the soul. In
 hell the soul of a certain man is in torment, punished in flames,
 suffering excruciating thirst, and imploring from the finger of a
 happier soul, for his tongue, the solace of a drop of water. [1534] Do
 you suppose that this end of the blessed poor man and the miserable
 rich man is only imaginary? Then why the name of Lazarus in this
 narrative, if the circumstance is not in (the category of) a real
 occurrence? But even if it is to be regarded as imaginary, it will
 still be a testimony to truth and reality. For unless the soul
 possessed corporeality, the image of a soul could not possibly contain
 a finger of a bodily substance; nor would the Scripture feign a
 statement about the limbs of a body, if these had no existence. But
 what is that which is removed to Hades [1535] after the separation of
 the body; which is there detained; which is reserved until the day of
 judgment; to which Christ also, on dying, descended? I imagine it is
 the souls of the patriarchs. But wherefore (all this), if the soul is
 nothing in its subterranean abode?  For nothing it certainly is, if it
 is not a bodily substance. For whatever is incorporeal is incapable of
 being kept and guarded in any way; it is also exempt from either
 punishment or refreshment. That must be a body, by which punishment and
 refreshment can be experienced. Of this I shall treat more fully in a
 more fitting place. Therefore, whatever amount of punishment or
 refreshment the soul tastes in Hades, in its prison or lodging, [1536]
 in the fire or in Abraham's bosom, it gives proof thereby of its own
 corporeality. For an incorporeal thing suffers nothing, not having that
 which makes it capable of suffering; else, if it has such capacity, it
 must be a bodily substance. For in as far as every corporeal thing is
 capable of suffering, in so far is that which is capable of suffering
 also corporeal. [1537]

 [1534] Luke xvi. 23, 24.

 [1535] Ad inferna. [See p. 59, supra.]

 [1536] Diversorio.

 [1537] Compare De Resur. Carnis, xvii. There is, however, some
 variation in Tertullian's language on this subject.  In his Apol.
 xlviii. he speaks as if the soul could not suffer when separated from
 the body. See also his De Testimonio Animæ, ch. iv., p. 177, supra; and
 see Bp. Kaye, p. 183.

 Chapter VIII.--Other Platonist Arguments Considered.

 Besides, it would be a harsh and absurd proceeding to exempt anything
 from the class of corporeal beings, on the ground that it is not
 exactly like the other constituents of that class. And where individual
 creatures possess various properties, does not this variety in works of
 the same class indicate the greatness of the Creator, in making them at
 the same time different and yet like, amicable yet rivals?  Indeed, the
 philosophers themselves agree in saying that the universe consists of
 harmonious oppositions, according to Empedocles' (theory of) friendship
 and enmity. Thus, then, although corporeal essences are opposed to
 incorporeal ones, they yet differ from each other in such sort as to
 amplify their species by their variety, without changing their genus,
 remaining all alike corporeal; contributing to God's glory in their
 manifold existence by reason of their variety; so various, by reason of
 their differences; so diverse, in that some of them possess one kind of
 perception, others another; some feeding on one kind of aliment, others
 on another; some, again, possessing visibility, while others are
 invisible; some being weighty, others light. They are in the habit of
 saying that the soul must be pronounced incorporeal on this account,
 because the bodies of the dead, after its departure from them, become
 heavier, whereas they ought to be lighter, being deprived of the weight
 of a body--since the soul is a bodily substance.  But what, says
 Soranus (in answer to this argument), if men should deny that the sea
 is a bodily substance, because a ship out of the water becomes a heavy
 and motionless mass? How much truer and stronger, then, is the soul's
 corporeal essence, which carries about the body, which eventually
 assumes so great a weight with the nimblest motion! Again, even if the
 soul is invisible, it is only in strict accordance with the condition
 of its own corporeality, and suitably to the property of its own
 essence, as well as to the nature of even those beings to which its
 destiny made it to be invisible. The eyes of the owl cannot endure the
 sun, whilst the eagle is so well able to face his glory, that the noble
 character of its young is determined by the unblinking strength of
 their gaze; while the eaglet, which turns away its eye from the sun's
 ray, is expelled from the nest as a degenerate creature! So true is it,
 therefore, than to one eye an object is invisible, which may be quite
 plainly seen by another,--without implying any incorporeality in that
 which is not endued with an equally strong power (of vision). The sun
 is indeed a bodily substance, because it is (composed of) fire; the
 object, however, which the eaglet at once admits the existence of, the
 owl denies, without any prejudice, nevertheless, to the testimony of
 the eagle. There is the selfsame difference in respect of the soul's
 corporeality, which is (perhaps) invisible to the flesh, but perfectly
 visible to the spirit. Thus John, being "in the Spirit" of God, [1538]
 beheld plainly the souls of the martyrs. [1539]

 [1538] Rev. i. 10.

 [1539] Rev. vi. 9.

 Chapter IX.--Particulars of the Alleged Communication to a Montanist
 Sister.

 When we aver that the soul has a body of a quality and kind peculiar to
 itself, in this special condition of it we shall be already supplied
 with a decision respecting all the other accidents of its corporeity;
 how that they belong to it, because we have shown it to be a body, but
 that even they have a quality peculiar to themselves, proportioned to
 the special nature of the body (to which they belong); or else, if any
 accidents (of a body) are remarkable in this instance for their
 absence, then this, too, results from the peculiarity of the condition
 of the soul's corporeity, from which are absent sundry qualities which
 are present to all other corporeal beings. And yet, notwithstanding all
 this, we shall not be at all inconsistent if we declare that the more
 usual characteristics of a body, such as invariably accrue to the
 corporeal condition, belong also to the soul--such as form [1540] and
 limitation; and that triad of dimensions [1541] --I mean length, and
 breadth and height--by which philosophers gauge all bodies. What now
 remains but for us to give the soul a figure? [1542] Plato refuses to
 do this, as if it endangered the soul's immortality. [1543] For
 everything which has figure is, according to him, compound, and
 composed of parts; [1544] whereas the soul is immortal; and being
 immortal, it is therefore indissoluble; and being indissoluble, it is
 figureless:  for if, on the contrary, it had figure, it would be of a
 composite and structural formation. He, however, in some other manner
 frames for the soul an effigy of intellectual forms, beautiful for its
 just symmetry and tuitions of philosophy, but misshapen by some
 contrary qualities. As for ourselves, indeed, we inscribe on the soul
 the lineaments of corporeity, not simply from the assurance which
 reasoning has taught us of its corporeal nature, but also from the firm
 conviction which divine grace impresses on us by revelation. For,
 seeing that we acknowledge spiritual charismata, or gifts, we too have
 merited the attainment of the prophetic gift, although coming after
 John (the Baptist). We have now amongst us a sister whose lot it has
 been to be favoured with sundry gifts of revelation, which she
 experiences in the Spirit by ecstatic vision amidst the sacred rites of
 the Lord's day in the church: she converses with angels, and sometimes
 even with the Lord; she both sees and hears mysterious communications;
 [1545] some men's hearts she understands, and to them who are in need
 she distributes remedies. Whether it be in the reading of Scriptures,
 or in the chanting of psalms, or in the preaching of sermons, or in the
 offering up of prayers, in all these religious services matter and
 opportunity are afforded to her of seeing visions. It may possibly have
 happened to us, whilst this sister of ours was rapt in the Spirit, that
 we had discoursed in some ineffable way about the soul. After the
 people are dismissed at the conclusion of the sacred services, she is
 in the regular habit of reporting to us whatever things she may have
 seen in vision (for all her communications are examined with the most
 scrupulous care, in order that their truth may be probed).  "Amongst
 other things," says she, "there has been shown to me a soul in bodily
 shape, and a spirit has been in the habit of appearing to me; not,
 however, a void and empty illusion, but such as would offer itself to
 be even grasped by the hand, soft and transparent and of an etherial
 colour, and in form resembling that of a human being in every respect."
 This was her vision, and for her witness there was God; and the apostle
 most assuredly foretold that there were to be "spiritual gifts" in the
 church. [1546] Now, can you refuse to believe this, even if indubitable
 evidence on every point is forthcoming for your conviction? Since,
 then, the soul is a corporeal substance, no doubt it possesses
 qualities such as those which we have just mentioned, amongst them the
 property of colour, which is inherent in every bodily substance.  Now
 what colour would you attribute to the soul but an etherial transparent
 one? Not that its substance is actually the ether or air (although this
 was the opinion of Ænesidemus and Anaximenes, and I suppose of
 Heraclitus also, as some say of him), nor transparent light (although
 Heraclides of Pontus held it to be so). "Thunder-stones," [1547]
 indeed, are not of igneous substance, because they shine with ruddy
 redness; nor are beryls composed of aqueous matter, because they are of
 a pure wavy whiteness. How many things also besides these are there
 which their colour would associate in the same class, but which nature
 keeps widely apart! Since, however, everything which is very attenuated
 and transparent bears a strong resemblance to the air, such would be
 the case with the soul, since in its material nature [1548] it is wind
 and breath, (or spirit); whence it is that the belief of its corporeal
 quality is endangered, in consequence of the extreme tenuity and
 subtilty of its essence. Likewise, as regards the figure of the human
 soul from your own conception, you can well imagine that it is none
 other than the human form; indeed, none other than the shape of that
 body which each individual soul animates and moves about. This we may
 at once be induced to admit from contemplating man's original
 formation.  For only carefully consider, after God hath breathed upon
 the face of man the breath of life, and man had consequently become a
 living soul, surely that breath must have passed through the face at
 once into the interior structure, and have spread itself throughout all
 the spaces of the body; and as soon as by the divine inspiration it had
 become condensed, it must have impressed itself on each internal
 feature, which the condensation had filled in, and so have been, as it
 were, congealed in shape, (or stereotyped). Hence, by this densifying
 process, there arose a fixing of the soul's corporeity; and by the
 impression its figure was formed and moulded. This is the inner man,
 different from the outer, but yet one in the twofold condition. [1549]
 It, too, has eyes and ears of its own, by means of which Paul must have
 heard and seen the Lord; [1550] it has, moreover all the other members
 of the body by the help of which it effects all processes of thinking
 and all activity in dreams. Thus it happens that the rich man in hell
 has a tongue and poor (Lazarus) a finger and Abraham a bosom. [1551] By
 these features also the souls of the martyrs under the altar are
 distinguished and known. The soul indeed which in the beginning was
 associated with Adam's body, which grew with its growth and was moulded
 after its form proved to be the germ both of the entire substance (of
 the human soul) and of that (part of) creation.

 [1540] Habitum.

 [1541] Illud trifariam distantivum (Trichos diastematikon) Fr. Junius.

 [1542] Effigiem.

 [1543] See his Phædo, pp. 105, 106.

 [1544] Structile.

 [1545] Sacramenta.

 [1546] 1 Cor. xii. 1-11. [A key to our author's

 [1547] Cerauniis gemmis.

 [1548] Tradux.

 [1549] Dupliciter unus.

 [1550] 2 Cor. xii. 2-4.

 [1551] Luke xvi. 23, 24.

 Chapter X.--The Simple Nature of the Soul is Asserted with Plato. The
 Identity of Spirit and Soul.

 It is essential to a firm faith to declare with Plato [1552] that the
 soul is simple; in other words uniform and uncompounded; simply that is
 to say in respect of its substance.  Never mind men's artificial views
 and theories, and away with the fabrications of heresy! [1553] Some
 maintain that there is within the soul a natural substance--the
 spirit--which is different from it: [1554] as if to have life--the
 function of the soul--were one thing; and to emit breath--the alleged
 [1555] function of the spirit--were another thing.  Now it is not in
 all animals that these two functions are found; for there are many
 which only live but do not breathe in that they do not possess the
 organs of respiration--lungs and windpipes. [1556] But of what use is
 it, in an examination of the soul of man, to borrow proofs from a gnat
 or an ant, when the great Creator in His divine arrangements has
 allotted to every animal organs of vitality suited to its own
 disposition and nature, so that we ought not to catch at any
 conjectures from comparisons of this sort?  Man, indeed, although
 organically furnished with lungs and windpipes, will not on that
 account be proved to breathe by one process, and to live by another;
 [1557] nor can the ant, although defective in these organs, be on that
 account said to be without respiration, as if it lived and that was
 all. For by whom has so clear an insight into the works of God been
 really attained, as to entitle him to assume that these organic
 resources are wanting to any living thing? There is that Herophilus,
 the well-known surgeon, or (as I may almost call him) butcher, who cut
 up no end of persons, [1558] in order to investigate the secrets of
 nature, who ruthlessly handled [1559] human creatures to discover
 (their form and make): I have my doubts whether he succeeded in clearly
 exploring all the internal parts of their structure, since death itself
 changes and disturbs the natural functions of life, especially when the
 death is not a natural one, but such as must cause irregularity and
 error amidst the very processes of dissection.  Philosophers have
 affirmed it to be a certain fact, that gnats, and ants, and moths have
 no pulmonary or arterial organs. Well, then, tell me, you curious and
 elaborate investigator of these mysteries, have they eyes for seeing
 withal? But yet they proceed to whatever point they wish, and they both
 shun and aim at various objects by processes of sight: point out their
 eyes to me, show me their pupils. Moths also gnaw and eat: demonstrate
 to me their mandibles, reveal their jaw-teeth. Then, again, gnats hum
 and buzz, nor even in the dark are they unable to find their way to our
 ears: [1560] point out to me, then, not only the noisy tube, but the
 stinging lance of that mouth of theirs. Take any living thing whatever,
 be it the tiniest you can find, it must needs be fed and sustained by
 some food or other: show me, then, their organs for taking into their
 system, digesting, and ejecting food. What must we say, therefore? If
 it is by such instruments that life is maintained, these instrumental
 means must of course exist in all things which are to live, even though
 they are not apparent to the eye or to the apprehension by reason of
 their minuteness.  You can more readily believe this, if you remember
 that God manifests His creative greatness quite as much in small
 objects as in the very largest. If, however, you suppose that God's
 wisdom has no capacity for forming such infinitesimal corpuscles, you
 can still recognise His greatness, in that He has furnished even to the
 smallest animals the functions of life, although in the absence of the
 suitable organs,--securing to them the power of sight, even without
 eyes; of eating, even without teeth; and of digestion, even without
 stomachs. Some animals also have the ability to move forward without
 feet, as serpents, by a gliding motion; or as worms, by vertical
 efforts; or as snails and slugs, by their slimy crawl. Why should you
 not then believe that respiration likewise may be effected without the
 bellows of the lungs, and without arterial canals? You would thus
 supply yourself with a strong proof that the spirit or breath is an
 adjunct of the human soul, for the very reason that some creatures lack
 breath, and that they lack it because they are not furnished with
 organs of respiration. You think it possible for a thing to live
 without breath; then why not suppose that a thing might breathe without
 lungs? Pray, tell me, what is it to breathe? I suppose it means to emit
 breath from yourself. What is it not to live? I suppose it means not to
 emit breath from yourself. This is the answer which I should have to
 make, if "to breathe" is not the same thing as "to live." It must,
 however, be characteristic of a dead man not to respire:  to respire,
 therefore, is the characteristic of a living man. But to respire is
 likewise the characteristic of a breathing man: therefore also to
 breathe is the characteristic of a living man.  Now, if both one and
 the other could possibly have been accomplished without the soul, to
 breathe might not be a function of the soul, but merely to live. But
 indeed to live is to breathe, and to breathe is to live. Therefore this
 entire process, both of breathing and living, belongs to that to which
 living belongs--that is, to the soul.  Well, then, since you separate
 the spirit (or breath) and the soul, separate their operations also.
 Let both of them accomplish some act apart from one another--the soul
 apart, the spirit apart. Let the soul live without the spirit; let the
 spirit breathe without the soul. Let one of them quit men's bodies, let
 the other remain; let death and life meet and agree. If indeed the soul
 and the spirit are two, they may be divided; and thus, by the
 separation of the one which departs from the one which remains, there
 would accrue the union and meeting together of life and of death. But
 such a union never will accrue: therefore they are not two, and they
 cannot be divided; but divided they might have been, if they had been
 (two). Still two things may surely coalesce in growth. But the two in
 question never will coalesce, since to live is one thing, and to
 breathe is another. Substances are distinguished by their operations.
 How much firmer ground have you for believing that the soul and the
 spirit are but one, since you assign to them no difference; so that the
 soul is itself the spirit, respiration being the function of that of
 which life also is! But what if you insist on supposing that the day is
 one thing, and the light, which is incidental to the day, is another
 thing, whereas day is only the light itself?  There must, of course, be
 also different kinds of light, as (appears) from the ministry of fires.
 So likewise will there be different sorts of spirits, according as they
 emanate from God or from the devil. Whenever, indeed, the question is
 about soul and spirit, the soul will be (understood to be) itself the
 spirit, just as the day is the light itself. For a thing is itself
 identical with that by means of which itself exists.

 [1552] See his Phædo, p. 80; Timæus, § 12, p. 35 (Bekker, pp. 264,
 265).

 [1553] We have here combined two readings, effigies (Oehler's) and
 hæreses (the usual one).

 [1554] Aliam.

 [1555] This is the force of the subjunctive fiat.

 [1556] Arterias.

 [1557] Aliunde spirabit, aliunde vivet. "In the nature of man, life and
 breath are inseparable," Bp. Kaye, p. 184.

 [1558] Sexcentos.

 [1559] Odit.

 [1560] Aurium cæci.

 Chapter XI.--Spirit--A Term Expressive of an Operation of the Soul, Not
 of Its Nature.  To Be Carefully Distinguished from the Spirit of God.

 But the nature of my present inquiry obliges me to call the soul spirit
 or breath, because to breathe is ascribed to another substance. We,
 however, claim this (operation) for the soul, which we acknowledge to
 be an indivisible simple substance, and therefore we must call it
 spirit in a definitive sense--not because of its condition, but of its
 action; not in respect of its nature, but of its operation; because it
 respires, and not because it is spirit in any especial sense. [1561]
 For to blow or breathe is to respire. So that we are driven to
 describe, by (the term which indicates this respiration--that is to
 say) spirit--the soul which we hold to be, by the propriety of its
 action, breath. Moreover, we properly and especially insist on calling
 it breath (or spirit), in opposition to Hermogenes, who derives the
 soul from matter instead of from the afflatus or breath of God. He, to
 be sure, goes flatly against the testimony of Scripture, and with this
 view converts breath into spirit, because he cannot believe that the
 (creature on which was breathed the) Spirit of God fell into sin, and
 then into condemnation; and therefore he would conclude that the soul
 came from matter rather than from the Spirit or breath of God. For this
 reason, we on our side even from that passage, maintain the soul to be
 breath and not the spirit, in the scriptural and distinctive sense of
 the spirit; and here it is with regret that we apply the term spirit at
 all in the lower sense, in consequence of the identical action of
 respiring and breathing.  In that passage, the only question is about
 the natural substance; to respire being an act of nature. I would not
 tarry a moment longer on this point, were it not for those heretics who
 introduce into the soul some spiritual germ which passes my
 comprehension: (they make it to have been) conferred upon the soul by
 the secret liberality of her mother Sophia (Wisdom), without the
 knowledge of the Creator. [1562] But (Holy) Scripture, which has a
 better knowledge of the soul's Maker, or rather God, has told us
 nothing more than that God breathed on man's face the breath of life,
 and that man became a living soul, by means of which he was both to
 live and breathe; at the same time making a sufficiently clear
 distinction between the spirit and the soul, [1563] in such passages as
 the following, wherein God Himself declares: "My Spirit went forth from
 me, and I made the breath of each. And the breath of my Spirit became
 soul." [1564] And again:  "He giveth breath unto the people that are on
 the earth, and Spirit to them that walk thereon." [1565] First of all
 there comes the (natural) soul, that is to say, the breath, to the
 people that are on the earth,--in other words, to those who act
 carnally in the flesh; then afterwards comes the Spirit to those who
 walk thereon,--that is, who subdue the works of the flesh; because the
 apostle also says, that "that is not first which is spiritual, but that
 which is natural, (or in possession of the natural soul,) and afterward
 that which is spiritual." [1566] For, inasmuch as Adam straightway
 predicted that "great mystery of Christ and the church," [1567] when he
 said, "This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; therefore
 shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his
 wife, and they two shall become one flesh," [1568] he experienced the
 influence of the Spirit.  For there fell upon him that ecstasy, which
 is the Holy Ghost's operative virtue of prophecy. And even the evil
 spirit too is an influence which comes upon a man. Indeed, the Spirit
 of God not more really "turned Saul into another man," [1569] that is
 to say, into a prophet, when "people said one to another, What is this
 which is come to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?"
 [1570] than did the evil spirit afterwards turn him into another
 man--in other words, into an apostate. Judas likewise was for a long
 time reckoned among the elect (apostles), and was even appointed to the
 office of their treasurer; he was not yet the traitor, although he was
 become fraudulent; but afterwards the devil entered into him.
 Consequently, as the spirit neither of God nor of the devil is
 naturally planted with a man's soul at his birth, this soul must
 evidently exist apart and alone, previous to the accession to it of
 either spirit: if thus apart and alone, it must also be simple and
 uncompounded as regards its substance; and therefore it cannot respire
 from any other cause than from the actual condition of its own
 substance.

 [1561] Proprie "by reason of its nature."

 [1562] See the tract Adv. Valentin., c. xxv. infra.

 [1563] Compare Adv. Hermog. xxxii. xxxiii.; also Irenæus, v. 12, 17.
 [See Vol. I. p. 527, this Series.]

 [1564] Tertullian's reading of Isa. lvii. 16.

 [1565] Isa. xlii. 5.

 [1566] 1 Cor. xv. 46.

 [1567] Eph. v. 31, 32.

 [1568] Gen. ii. 24, 25.

 [1569] 1 Sam. x. 6.

 [1570] 1 Sam. x. 11.

 Chapter XII.--Difference Between the Mind and the Soul, and the
 Relation Between Them.

 In like manner the mind also, or animus, which the Greeks designate
 NOUS, is taken by us in no other sense than as indicating that faculty
 or apparatus [1571] which is inherent and implanted in the soul, and
 naturally proper to it, whereby it acts, whereby it acquires knowledge,
 and by the possession of which it is capable of a spontaneity of motion
 within itself, and of thus appearing to be impelled by the mind, as if
 it were another substance, as is maintained by those who determine the
 soul to be the moving principle of the universe [1572] --the god of
 Socrates, Valentinus' "only-begotten" of his father [1573] Bythus, and
 his mother Sige.  How confused is the opinion of Anaxagoras! For,
 having imagined the mind to be the initiating principle of all things,
 and suspending on its axis the balance of the universe; affirming,
 moreover, that the mind is a simple principle, unmixed, and incapable
 of admixture, he mainly on this very consideration separates it from
 all amalgamation with the soul; and yet in another passage he actually
 incorporates it with [1574] the soul. This (inconsistency) Aristotle
 has also observed: but whether he meant his criticism to be
 constructive, and to fill up a system of his own, rather than
 destructive of the principles of others, I am hardly able to decide. As
 for himself, indeed, although he postpones his definition of the mind,
 yet he begins by mentioning, as one of the two natural constituents of
 the mind, [1575] that divine principle which he conjectures to be
 impassible, or incapable of emotion, and thereby removes from all
 association with the soul. For whereas it is evident that the soul is
 susceptible of those emotions which it falls to it naturally to suffer,
 it must needs suffer either by the mind or with the mind. Now if the
 soul is by nature associated with the mind, it is impossible to draw
 the conclusion that the mind is impassible; or again, if the soul
 suffers not either by the mind or with the mind, it cannot possibly
 have a natural association with the mind, with which it suffers
 nothing, and which suffers nothing itself.  Moreover, if the soul
 suffers nothing by the mind and with the mind, it will experience no
 sensation, nor will it acquire any knowledge, nor will it undergo any
 emotion through the agency of the mind, as they maintain it will. For
 Aristotle makes even the senses passions, or states of emotion.  And
 rightly too. For to exercise the senses is to suffer emotion, because
 to suffer is to feel. In like manner, to acquire knowledge is to
 exercise the senses; and to undergo emotion is to exercise the senses;
 and the whole of this is a state of suffering.  But we see that the
 soul experiences nothing of these things, in such a manner as that the
 mind also is affected by the emotion, by which, indeed, and with which,
 all is effected. It follows, therefore, that the mind is capable of
 admixture, in opposition to Anaxagoras; and passible or susceptible of
 emotion, contrary to the opinion of Aristotle. Besides, if a separate
 condition between the soul and mind is to be admitted, so that they be
 two things in substance, then of one of them, emotion and sensation,
 and every sort of taste, and all action and motion, will be the
 characteristics; whilst of the other the natural condition will be
 calm, and repose, and stupor. There is therefore no alternative: either
 the mind must be useless and void, or the soul. But if these affections
 may certainly be all of them ascribed to both, then in that case the
 two will be one and the same, and Democritus will carry his point when
 he suppresses all distinction between the two. The question will arise
 how two can be one--whether by the confusion of two substances, or by
 the disposition of one?  We, however, affirm that the mind coalesces
 with [1576] the soul,--not indeed as being distinct from it in
 substance, but as being its natural function and agent. [1577]

 [1571] Suggestum.

 [1572] Comp. The Apology, c. xlviii.; August. De Civ. Dei, xiii. 17.

 [1573] Comp. Adv. Valentin. vii. infra.

 [1574] Addicit.

 [1575] Alterum animi genus.

 [1576] Concretum.

 [1577] Substantiæ officium.

 Chapter XIII.--The Soul's Supremacy.

 It next remains to examine where lies the supremacy; in other words,
 which of the two is superior to the other, so that with which the
 supremacy clearly lies shall be the essentially superior substance;
 [1578] whilst that over which this essentially superior substance shall
 have authority shall be considered as the natural functionary of the
 superior substance. Now who will hesitate to ascribe this entire
 authority to the soul, from the name of which the whole man has
 received his own designation in common phraseology?  How many souls,
 says the rich man, do I maintain? not how many minds. The pilot's
 desire, also, is to rescue so many souls from shipwreck, not so many
 minds; the labourer, too, in his work, and the soldier on the field of
 battle, affirms that he lays down his soul (or life), not his mind.
 Which of the two has its perils or its vows and wishes more frequently
 on men's lips--the mind or the soul? Which of the two are dying
 persons, said to have to do with the mind or the soul? In short,
 philosophers themselves, and medical men, even when it is their purpose
 to discourse about the mind, do in every instance inscribe on their
 title-page [1579] and table of contents, [1580] "De Anima" ("A treatise
 on the soul").  And that you may also have God's voucher on the
 subject, it is the soul which He addresses; it is the soul which He
 exhorts and counsels, to turn the mind and intellect to Him. It is the
 soul which Christ came to save; it is the soul which He threatens to
 destroy in hell; it is the soul (or life) which He forbids being made
 too much of; it is His soul, too (or life), which the good Shepherd
 Himself lays down for His sheep. It is to the soul, therefore, that you
 ascribe the supremacy; in it also you possess that union of substance,
 of which you perceive the mind to be the instrument, not the ruling
 power.

 [1578] Substantiæ massa.

 [1579] Faciem operis.

 [1580] Fontem materiæ.

 Chapter XIV.--The Soul Variously Divided by the Philosophers; This
 Division is Not a Material Dissection.

 Being thus single, simple, and entire in itself, it is as incapable of
 being composed and put together from external constituents, as it is of
 being divided in and of itself, inasmuch as it is indissoluble. For if
 it had been possible to construct it and to destroy it, it would no
 longer be immortal. Since, however, it is not mortal, it is also
 incapable of dissolution and division. Now, to be divided means to be
 dissolved, and to be dissolved means to die. Yet (philosophers) have
 divided the soul into parts: Plato, for instance, into two; Zeno into
 three; Panætius, into five or six; Soranus, into seven; Chrysippus,
 into as many as eight; and Apollophanes, into as many as nine; whilst
 certain of the Stoics have found as many as twelve parts in the soul.
 Posidonius makes even two more than these: he starts with two leading
 faculties of the soul,--the directing faculty, which they designate
 hegemonikon; and the rational faculty, which they call logikon,--and
 ultimately subdivided these into seventeen [1581] parts. Thus variously
 is the soul dissected by the different schools. Such divisions,
 however, ought not to be regarded so much as parts of the soul, as
 powers, or faculties, or operations thereof, even as Aristotle himself
 has regarded some of them as being. For they are not portions or
 organic parts of the soul's substance, but functions of the soul--such
 as those of motion, of action, of thought, and whatsoever others they
 divide in this manner; such, likewise, as the five senses themselves,
 so well known to all--seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling.
 Now, although they have allotted to the whole of these respectively
 certain parts of the body as their special domiciles, it does not from
 that circumstance follow that a like distribution will be suitable to
 the sections of the soul; for even the body itself would not admit of
 such a partition as they would have the soul undergo. But of the whole
 number of the limbs one body is made up, so that the arrangement is
 rather a concretion than a division. Look at that very wonderful piece
 of organic mechanism by Archimedes,--I mean his hydraulic organ, with
 its many limbs, parts, bands, passages for the notes, outlets for their
 sounds, combinations for their harmony, and the array of its pipes; but
 yet the whole of these details constitute only one instrument. In like
 manner the wind, which breathes throughout this organ at the impulse of
 the hydraulic engine, is not divided into separate portions from the
 fact of its dispersion through the instrument to make it play: it is
 whole and entire in its substance, although divided in its operation.
 This example is not remote from (the illustration) of Strato, and
 Ænesidemus, and Heraclitus: for these philosophers maintain the unity
 of the soul, as diffused over the entire body, and yet in every part
 the same. [1582] Precisely like the wind blown in the pipes throughout
 the organ, the soul displays its energies in various ways by means of
 the senses, being not indeed divided, but rather distributed in natural
 order. Now, under what designations these energies are to be known, and
 by what divisions of themselves they are to be classified, and to what
 special offices and functions in the body they are to be severally
 confined, the physicians and the philosophers must consider and decide:
 for ourselves, a few remarks only will be proper.

 [1581] This is Oehler's text; another reading has twelve, which one
 would suppose to be the right one.

 [1582] Ubique ipsa.

 Chapter XV.--The Soul's Vitality and Intelligence. Its Character and
 Seat in Man.

 In the first place, (we must determine) whether there be in the soul
 some supreme principle of vitality and intelligence [1583] which they
 call "the ruling power of the soul"--to hegemonikon for if this be not
 admitted, the whole condition of the soul is put in jeopardy. Indeed,
 those men who say that there is no such directing faculty, have begun
 by supposing that the soul itself is simply a nonentity. One
 Dicæarchus, a Messenian, and amongst the medical profession Andreas and
 Asclepiades, have thus destroyed the (soul's) directing power, by
 actually placing in the mind the senses, for which they claim the
 ruling faculty. Asclepiades rides rough-shod over us with even this
 argument, that very many animals, after losing those parts of their
 body in which the soul's principle of vitality and sensation is thought
 mainly to exist, still retain life in a considerable degree, as well as
 sensation: as in the case of flies, and wasps, and locusts, when you
 have cut off their heads; and of she-goats, and tortoises, and eels,
 when you have pulled out their hearts. (He concludes), therefore, that
 there is no especial principle or power of the soul; for if there were,
 the soul's vigour and strength could not continue when it was removed
 with its domiciles (or corporeal organs).  However, Dicæarchus has
 several authorities against him--and philosophers too--Plato, Strato,
 Epicurus, Democritus, Empedocles, Socrates, Aristotle; whilst in
 opposition to Andreas and Asclepiades (may be placed their brother)
 physicians Herophilus, Erasistratus, Diocles, Hippocrates, and Soranus
 himself; and better than all others, there are our Christian
 authorities. We are taught by God concerning both these questions--viz.
 that there is a ruling power in the soul, and that it is enshrined
 [1584] in one particular recess of the body.  For, when one reads of
 God as being "the searcher and witness of the heart;" [1585] when His
 prophet is reproved by His discovering to him the secrets of the heart;
 [1586] when God Himself anticipates in His people the thoughts of their
 heart, [1587] "Why think ye evil in your hearts?" [1588] when David
 prays "Create in me a clean heart, O God," [1589] and Paul declares,
 "With the heart man believeth unto righteousness," [1590] and John
 says, "By his own heart is each man condemned;" [1591] when, lastly,
 "he who looketh on a woman so as to lust after her, hath already
 committed adultery with her in his heart," [1592] --then both points
 are cleared fully up, that there is a directing faculty of the soul,
 with which the purpose of God may agree; in other words, a supreme
 principle of intelligence and vitality (for where there is
 intelligence, there must be vitality), and that it resides in that most
 precious part [1593] of our body to which God especially looks:  so
 that you must not suppose, with Heraclitus, that this sovereign faculty
 of which we are treating is moved by some external force; nor with
 Moschion, [1594] that it floats about through the whole body; nor with
 Plato, that it is enclosed in the head; nor with Zenophanes, that it
 culminates in the crown of the head; nor that it reposes in the brain,
 according to the opinion of Hippocrates; nor around the basis of the
 brain, as Herophilus thought; nor in the membranes thereof, as Strato
 and Erasistratus said; nor in the space between the eyebrows, as Strato
 the physician held; nor within the enclosure [1595] of the breast,
 according to Epicurus:  but rather, as the Egyptians have always
 taught, especially such of them as were accounted the expounders of
 sacred truths; [1596] in accordance, too, with that verse of Orpheus or
 Empedocles:

 "Namque homini sanguis circumcordialis est sensus." [1597]

 "Man has his (supreme) sensation in the blood around his heart."

 Even Protagoras [1598] likewise, and Apollodorus, and Chrysippus,
 entertain this same view, so that (our friend) Asclepiades may go in
 quest of his goats bleating without a heart, and hunt his flies without
 their heads; and let all those (worthies), too, who have predetermined
 the character of the human soul from the condition of brute animals, be
 quite sure that it is themselves rather who are alive in a heartless
 and brainless state.

 [1583] Sapientialis.

 [1584] Consecratum.

 [1585] Wisd. i. 6.

 [1586] Prov. xxiv. 12.

 [1587] Ps. cxxxix. 23.

 [1588] Matt. ix. 4.

 [1589] Ps. li. 12.

 [1590] Rom. x. 10.

 [1591] 1 John iii. 20.

 [1592] Matt. v. 28.

 [1593] In eo thesauro.

 [1594] Not Suidas' philosopher of that name, but a renowned physician
 mentioned by Galen and Pliny (Oehler).

 [1595] Lorica.

 [1596] The Egyptian hierophants.

 [1597] The original, as given in Stobæus, Eclog. i. p. 1026, is this
 hexameter: Aima gar anthropois perikardion esti noema.

 [1598] Or probably that Praxagoras the physician who is often mentioned
 by Athenæus and by Pliny (Pamel.).

 Chapter XVI.--The Soul's Parts. Elements of the Rational Soul.

 That position of Plato's is also quite in keeping with the faith, in
 which he divides the soul into two parts--the rational and the
 irrational.  To this definition we take no exception, except that we
 would not ascribe this twofold distinction to the nature (of the soul).
 It is the rational element which we must believe to be its natural
 condition, impressed upon it from its very first creation by its
 Author, who is Himself essentially rational. For how should that be
 other than rational, which God produced on His own prompting; nay more,
 which He expressly sent forth by His own afflatus or breath? The
 irrational element, however, we must understand to have accrued later,
 as having proceeded from the instigation of the serpent--the very
 achievement of (the first) transgression--which thenceforward became
 inherent in the soul, and grew with its growth, assuming the manner by
 this time of a natural development, happening as it did immediately at
 the beginning of nature.  But, inasmuch as the same Plato speaks of the
 rational element only as existing in the soul of God Himself, if we
 were to ascribe the irrational element likewise to the nature which our
 soul has received from God, then the irrational element will be equally
 derived from God, as being a natural production, because God is the
 author of nature. Now from the devil proceeds the incentive to sin. All
 sin, however, is irrational: therefore the irrational proceeds from the
 devil, from whom sin proceeds; and it is extraneous to God, to whom
 also the irrational is an alien principle.  The diversity, then,
 between these two elements arises from the difference of their authors.
 When, therefore, Plato reserves the rational element (of the soul) to
 God alone, and subdivides it into two departments: the irascible, which
 they call thumikon, and the concupiscible, which they designate by the
 term epithumetikon (in such a way as to make the first common to us and
 lions, and the second shared between ourselves and flies, whilst the
 rational element is confined to us and God)--I see that this point will
 have to be treated by us, owing to the facts which we find operating
 also in Christ. For you may behold this triad of qualities in the Lord.
 There was the rational element, by which He taught, by which He
 discoursed, by which He prepared the way of salvation; there was
 moreover indignation in Him, by which He inveighed against the scribes
 and the Pharisees; and there was the principle of desire, by which He
 so earnestly desired to eat the passover with His disciples. [1599] In
 our own cases, accordingly, the irascible and the concupiscible
 elements of our soul must not invariably be put to the account of the
 irrational (nature), since we are sure that in our Lord these elements
 operated in entire accordance with reason. God will be angry, with
 perfect reason, with all who deserve His wrath; and with reason, too,
 will God desire whatever objects and claims are worthy of Himself.  For
 He will show indignation against the evil man, and for the good man
 will He desire salvation. To ourselves even does the apostle allow the
 concupiscible quality. "If any man," says he, "desireth the office of a
 bishop, he desireth a good work." [1600] Now, by saying "a good work,"
 he shows us that the desire is a reasonable one. He permits us likewise
 to feel indignation.  How should he not, when he himself experiences
 the same? "I would," says he, "that they were even cut off which
 trouble you." [1601] In perfect agreement with reason was that
 indignation which resulted from his desire to maintain discipline and
 order. When, however, he says, "We were formerly the children of
 wrath," [1602] he censures an irrational irascibility, such as proceeds
 not from that nature which is the production of God, but from that
 which the devil brought in, who is himself styled the lord or "master"
 of his own class, "Ye cannot serve two masters," [1603] and has the
 actual designation of "father:"  "Ye are of your father the devil."
 [1604] So that you need not be afraid to ascribe to him the mastery and
 dominion over that second, later, and deteriorated nature (of which we
 have been speaking), when you read of him as "the sewer of tares," and
 the nocturnal spoiler of the crop of corn. [1605]

 [1599] Luke xxii. 15.

 [1600] 1 Tim. iii. 1.

 [1601] Gal. v. 12.

 [1602] Eph. ii. 3.

 [1603] Matt. vi. 24.

 [1604] John vi. 44.

 [1605] Matt. xiii. 25.

 Chapter XVII.--The Fidelity of the Senses, Impugned by Plato,
 Vindicated by Christ Himself.

 Then, again, when we encounter the question (as to the veracity of
 those five senses which we learn with our alphabet; since from this
 source even there arises some support for our heretics. They are the
 faculties of seeing, and hearing, and smelling, and tasting, and
 touching. The fidelity of these senses is impugned with too much
 severity by the Platonists, [1606] and according to some by Heraclitus
 also, and Diocles, and Empedocles; at any rate, Plato, in the Timæus,
 declares the operations of the senses to be irrational, and vitiated
 [1607] by our opinions or beliefs. Deception is imputed to the sight,
 because it asserts that oars, when immersed in the water, are inclined
 or bent, notwithstanding the certainty that they are straight; because,
 again, it is quite sure that that distant tower with its really
 quadrangular contour is round; because also it will discredit the fact
 of the truly parallel fabric of yonder porch or arcade, by supposing it
 to be narrower and narrower towards its end; and because it will join
 with the sea the sky which hangs at so great a height above it.  In the
 same way, our hearing is charged with fallacy: we think, for instance,
 that that is a noise in the sky which is nothing else than the rumbling
 of a carriage; or, if you prefer it [1608] the other way, when the
 thunder rolled at a distance, we were quite sure that it was a carriage
 which made the noise.  Thus, too, are our faculties of smell and taste
 at fault, because the selfsame perfumes and wines lose their value
 after we have used them awhile. On the same principle our touch is
 censured, when the identical pavement which seemed rough to the hands
 is felt by the feet to be smooth enough; and in the baths a stream of
 warm water is pronounced to be quite hot at first, and beautifully
 temperate afterwards. Thus, according to them, our senses deceive us,
 when all the while we are (the cause of the discrepancies, by) changing
 our opinions. The Stoics are more moderate in their views; for they do
 not load with the obloquy of deception every one of the senses, and at
 all times. The Epicureans, again, show still greater consistency, in
 maintaining that all the senses are equally true in their testimony,
 and always so--only in a different way. It is not our organs of
 sensation that are at fault, but our opinion. The senses only
 experience sensation, they do not exercise opinion; it is the soul that
 opines. They separated opinion from the senses, and sensation from the
 soul. Well, but whence comes opinion, if not from the senses? Indeed,
 unless the eye had descried a round shape in that tower, it could have
 had no idea that it possessed roundness. Again, whence arises sensation
 if not from the soul? For if the soul had no body, it would have no
 sensation. Accordingly, sensation comes from the soul, and opinion from
 sensation; and the whole (process) is the soul. But further, it may
 well be insisted on that there is a something which causes the
 discrepancy between the report of the senses and the reality of the
 facts.  Now, since it is possible, (as we have seen), for phenomena to
 be reported which exist not in the objects, why should it not be
 equally possible for phenomena to be reported which are caused not by
 the senses, but by reasons and conditions which intervene, in the very
 nature of the case? If so, it will be only right that they should be
 duly recognised. The truth is, that it was the water which was the
 cause of the oar seeming to be inclined or bent: out of the water, it
 was perfectly straight in appearance (as well as in fact).  The
 delicacy of the substance or medium which forms a mirror by means of
 its luminosity, according as it is struck or shaken, by the vibration
 actually destroys the appearance of the straightness of a right line.
 In like manner, the condition of the open space which fills up the
 interval between it and us, necessarily causes the true shape of the
 tower to escape our notice; for the uniform density of the surrounding
 air covering its angles with a similar light obliterates their
 outlines. So, again, the equal breadth of the arcade is sharpened or
 narrowed off towards its termination, until its aspect, becoming more
 and more contracted under its prolonged roof, comes to a vanishing
 point in the direction of its farthest distance. So the sky blends
 itself with the sea, the vision becoming spent at last, which had
 maintained duly the boundaries of the two elements, so long as its
 vigorous glance lasted. As for the (alleged cases of deceptive)
 hearing, what else could produce the illusion but the similarity of the
 sounds? And if the perfume afterwards was less strong to the smell, and
 the wine more flat to the taste, and the water not so hot to the touch,
 their original strength was after all found in the whole of them pretty
 well unimpaired. In the matter, however, of the roughness and
 smoothness of the pavement, it was only natural and right that limbs
 like the hands and the feet, so different in tenderness and
 callousness, should have different impressions. In this way, then,
 there cannot occur an illusion in our senses without an adequate cause.
 Now if special causes, (such as we have indicated,) mislead our senses
 and (through our senses) our opinions also, then we must no longer
 ascribe the deception to the senses, which follow the specific causes
 of the illusion, nor to the opinions we form; for these are occasioned
 and controlled by our senses, which only follow the causes. Persons who
 are afflicted with madness or insanity, mistake one object for
 another.  Orestes in his sister sees his mother; Ajax sees Ulysses in
 the slaughtered herd; Athamas and Agave descry wild beasts in their
 children. Now is it their eyes or their phrenzy which you must blame
 for so vast a fallacy?  All things taste bitter, in the redundancy of
 their bile, to those who have the jaundice. Is it their taste which you
 will charge with the physical prevarication, or their ill state of
 health? All the senses, therefore, are disordered occasionally, or
 imposed upon, but only in such a way as to be quite free of any fault
 in their own natural functions. But further still, not even against the
 specific causes and conditions themselves must we lay an indictment of
 deception. For, since these physical aberrations happen for stated
 reasons, the reasons do not deserve to be regarded as deceptions.
 Whatever ought to occur in a certain manner is not a deception. If,
 then, even these circumstantial causes must be acquitted of all censure
 and blame, how much more should we free from reproach the senses, over
 which the said causes exercise a liberal sway! Hence we are bound most
 certainly to claim for the senses truth, and fidelity, and integrity,
 seeing that they never render any other account of their impressions
 than is enjoined on them by the specific causes or conditions which in
 all cases produce that discrepancy which appears between the report of
 the senses and the reality of the objects. What mean you, then, O most
 insolent Academy? You overthrow the entire condition of human life; you
 disturb the whole order of nature; you obscure the good providence of
 God Himself: for the senses of man which God has appointed over all His
 works, that we might understand, inhabit, dispense, and enjoy them,
 (you reproach) as fallacious and treacherous tyrants! But is it not
 from these that all creation receives our services?  Is it not by their
 means that a second form is impressed even upon the world?--so many
 arts, so many industrious resources, so many pursuits, such business,
 such offices, such commerce, such remedies, counsels, consolations,
 modes, civilizations, and accomplishments of life! All these things
 have produced the very relish and savour of human existence; whilst by
 these senses of man, he alone of all animated nature has the
 distinction of being a rational animal, with a capacity for
 intelligence and knowledge--nay, an ability to form the Academy itself!
 But Plato, in order to disparage the testimony of the senses, in the
 Phædrus denies (in the person of Socrates) his own ability to know even
 himself, according to the injunction of the Delphic oracle; and in the
 Theætetus he deprives himself of the faculties of knowledge and
 sensation; and again, in the Phædrus he postpones till after death the
 posthumous knowledge, as he calls it, of the truth; and yet for all he
 went on playing the philosopher even before he died. We may not, I say,
 we may not call into question the truth of the (poor vilified) senses,
 [1609] lest we should even in Christ Himself, bring doubt upon [1610]
 the truth of their sensation; lest perchance it should be said that He
 did not really "behold Satan as lightning fall from heaven;" [1611]
 that He did not really hear the Father's voice testifying of Himself;
 [1612] or that He was deceived in touching Peter's wife's mother;
 [1613] or that the fragrance of the ointment which He afterwards
 smelled was different from that which He accepted for His burial;
 [1614] and that the taste of the wine was different from that which He
 consecrated in memory of His blood. [1615] On this false principle it
 was that Marcion actually chose to believe that He was a phantom,
 denying to Him the reality of a perfect body. Now, not even to His
 apostles was His nature ever a matter of deception. He was truly both
 seen and heard upon the mount; [1616] true and real was the draught of
 that wine at the marriage of (Cana in) Galilee; [1617] true and real
 also was the touch of the then believing Thomas. [1618] Read the
 testimony of John: "That which we have seen, which we have heard, which
 we have looked upon with our eyes, and our hands have handled, of the
 Word of life." [1619] False, of course, and deceptive must have been
 that testimony, if the witness of our eyes, and ears, and hands be by
 nature a lie.

 [1606] Academici.

 [1607] Coimplicitam "entangled" or "embarrassed." See the Timæus pp.
 27, 28.

 [1608] Vel.

 [1609] Sensus istos.

 [1610] Deliberetur.

 [1611] Luke x. 18.

 [1612] Matt. iii. 17.

 [1613] Matt. viii. 15.

 [1614] Matt. xxvi. 7-12.

 [1615] Matt. xxvi. 27, 28; Luke xxii. 19, 20; 1 Cor. xi. 25.

 [1616] Matt. xvii. 3-8.

 [1617] John ii. 1-10.

 [1618] John xx. 27.

 [1619] 1 John i. 1.

 Chapter XVIII.--Plato Suggested Certain Errors to the Gnostics.
 Functions of the Soul.

 I turn now to the department of our intellectual faculties, such as
 Plato has handed it over to the heretics, distinct from our bodily
 functions, having obtained the knowledge of them before death. [1620]
 He asks in the Phædo, What, then, (do you think) concerning the actual
 possession of knowledge? Will the body be a hindrance to it or not, if
 one shall admit it as an associate in the search after knowledge? I
 have a similar question to ask: Have the faculties of their sight and
 hearing any truth and reality for human beings or not?  Is it not the
 case, that even the poets are always muttering against us, that we can
 never hear or see anything for certain? He remembered, no doubt, what
 Epicharmus the comic poet had said: "It is the mind which sees, the
 mind that hears--all else is blind and deaf." To the same purport he
 says again, that man is the wisest whose mental power is the clearest;
 who never applies the sense of sight, nor adds to his mind the help of
 any such faculty, but employs the intellect itself in unmixed serenity
 when he indulges in contemplation for the purpose of acquiring an
 unalloyed insight into the nature of things; divorcing himself with all
 his might from his eyes and ears and (as one must express himself) from
 the whole of his body, on the ground of its disturbing the soul, and
 not allowing it to possess either truth or wisdom, whenever it is
 brought into communication with it. We see, then, that in opposition to
 the bodily senses another faculty is provided of a much more
 serviceable character, even the powers of the soul, which produce an
 understanding of that truth whose realities are not palpable nor open
 to the bodily senses, but are very remote from men's everyday
 knowledge, lying in secret--in the heights above, and in the presence
 of God Himself. For Plato maintains that there are certain invisible
 substances, incorporeal, celestial, [1621] divine, and eternal, which
 they call ideas, that is to say, (archetypal) forms, which are the
 patterns and causes of those objects of nature which are manifest to
 us, and lie under our corporeal senses: the former, (according to
 Plato,) are the actual verities, and the latter the images and
 likenesses of them. Well, now, are there not here gleams of the
 heretical principles of the Gnostics and the Valentinians? It is from
 this philosophy that they eagerly adopt the difference between the
 bodily senses and the intellectual faculties,--a distinction which they
 actually apply to the parable of the ten virgins: making the five
 foolish virgins to symbolize the five bodily senses, seeing that these
 are so silly and so easy to be deceived; and the wise virgin to express
 the meaning of the intellectual faculties, which are so wise as to
 attain to that mysterious and supernal truth, which is placed in the
 pleroma. (Here, then, we have) the mystic original of the ideas of
 these heretics. For in this philosophy lie both their Æons and their
 genealogies. Thus, too, do they divide sensation, both into the
 intellectual powers from their spiritual seed, and the sensuous
 faculties from the animal, which cannot by any means comprehend
 spiritual things. From the former germ spring invisible things; from
 the latter, visible things which are grovelling and temporary, and
 which are obvious to the senses, placed as they are in palpable forms.
 [1622] It is because of these views that we have in a former passage
 stated as a preliminary fact, that the mind is nothing else than an
 apparatus or instrument of the soul, [1623] and that the spirit is no
 other faculty, separate from the soul, but is the soul itself exercised
 in respiration; although that influence which either God on the one
 hand, or the devil on the other, has breathed upon it, must be regarded
 in the light of an additional element. [1624] And now, with respect to
 the difference between the intellectual powers and the sensuous
 faculties, we only admit it so far as the natural diversity between
 them requires of us. (There is, of course, a difference) between things
 corporeal and things spiritual, between visible and invisible beings,
 between objects which are manifest to the view and those which are
 hidden from it; because the one class are attributed to sensation, and
 the other to the intellect. But yet both the one and the other must be
 regarded as inherent in the soul, and as obedient to it, seeing that it
 embraces bodily objects by means of the body, in exactly the same way
 that it conceives incorporeal objects by help of the mind, except that
 it is even exercising sensation when it is employing the intellect. For
 is it not true, that to employ the senses is to use the intellect? And
 to employ the intellect amounts to a use of the senses? [1625] What
 indeed can sensation be, but the understanding of that which is the
 object of the sensation? And what can the intellect or understanding
 be, but the seeing of that which is the object understood? Why adopt
 such excruciating means of torturing simple knowledge and crucifying
 the truth? Who can show me the sense which does not understand the
 object of its sensation, or the intellect which perceives not the
 object which it understands, in so clear a way as to prove to me that
 the one can do without the other? If corporeal things are the objects
 of sense, and incorporeal ones objects of the intellect, it is the
 classes of the objects which are different, not the domicile or abode
 of sense and intellect; in other words, not the soul (anima) and the
 mind (animus). By what, in short, are corporeal things perceived?  If
 it is by the soul, [1626] then the mind is a sensuous faculty, and not
 merely an intellectual power; for whilst it understands, it also
 perceives, because without the perception there is no understanding.
 If, however, corporeal things are perceived by the soul, then it
 follows that the soul's power is an intellectual one, and not merely a
 sensuous faculty; for while it perceives it also understands, because
 without understanding there is no perceiving. And then, again, by what
 are incorporeal things understood? If it is by the mind, [1627] where
 will be the soul? If it is by the soul, where will be the mind? For
 things which differ ought to be mutually absent from each other, when
 they are occupied in their respective functions and duties. It must be
 your opinion, indeed, that the mind is absent from the soul on certain
 occasions; for (you suppose) that we are so made and constituted as not
 to know that we have seen or heard something, on the hypothesis [1628]
 that the mind was absent at the time. I must therefore maintain that
 the very soul itself neither saw nor heard, since it was at the given
 moment absent with its active power--that is to say, the mind. The
 truth is, that whenever a man is out of his mind, [1629] it is his soul
 that is demented--not because the mind is absent, but because it is a
 fellow-sufferer (with the soul) at the time. [1630] Indeed, it is the
 soul which is principally affected by casualties of such a kind.
 Whence is this fact confirmed? It is confirmed from the following
 consideration: that after the soul's departure, the mind is no longer
 found in a man: it always follows the soul; nor does it at last remain
 behind it alone, after death. Now, since it follows the soul, it is
 also indissolubly attached to it; just as the understanding is attached
 to the soul, which is followed by the mind, with which the
 understanding is indissolubly connected. Granted now that the
 understanding is superior to the senses, and a better discoverer of
 mysteries, what matters it, so long as it is only a peculiar faculty of
 the soul, just as the senses themselves are? It does not at all affect
 my argument, unless the understanding were held to be superior to the
 senses, for the purpose of deducing from the allegation of such
 superiority its separate condition likewise. After thus combating their
 alleged difference, I have also to refute this question of superiority,
 previous to my approaching the belief (which heresy propounds) in a
 superior god. On this point, however, of a (superior) god, we shall
 have to measure swords with the heretics on their own ground. [1631]
 Our present subject concerns the soul, and the point is to prevent the
 insidious ascription of a superiority to the intellect or
 understanding. Now, although the objects which are touched by the
 intellect are of a higher nature, since they are spiritual, than those
 which are embraced by the senses, since these are corporeal, it will
 still be only a superiority in the objects--as of lofty ones contrasted
 with humble--not in the faculties of the intellect against the senses.
 For how can the intellect be superior to the senses, when it is these
 which educate it for the discovery of various truths? It is a fact,
 that these truths are learned by means of palpable forms; in other
 words, invisible things are discovered by the help of visible ones,
 even as the apostle tells us in his epistle: "For the invisible things
 of Him are clearly seen from the creation of the world, being
 understood by the things that are made;" [1632] and as Plato too might
 inform our heretics:  "The things which appear are the image [1633] of
 the things which are concealed from view," [1634] whence it must needs
 follow that this world is by all means an image of some other: so that
 the intellect evidently uses the senses for its own guidance, and
 authority, and mainstay; and without the senses truth could not be
 attained.  How, then, can a thing be superior to that which is
 instrumental to its existence, which is also indispensable to it, and
 to whose help it owes everything which it acquires? Two conclusions
 therefore follow from what we have said: (1) That the intellect is not
 to be preferred above the senses, on the (supposed) ground that the
 agent through which a thing exists is inferior to the thing itself; and
 (2) that the intellect must not be separated from the senses, since the
 instrument by which a thing's existence is sustained is associated with
 the thing itself.

 [1620] Said ironically, as if rallying Plato for inconsistency between
 his theory here and the fact.

 [1621] Supermundiales "placed above this world."

 [1622] Imaginibus.

 [1623] See above, c. xii. p. 192.

 [1624] Above, c. xi. p. 191.

 [1625] Intelligere sentire est.

 [1626] Oehler has "anima;" we should rather have expected "animo,"
 which is another reading.

 [1627] "Animo" this time.

 [1628] Subjunctive verb, "fuerit."

 [1629] Dementit.

 [1630] The opposite opinion was held by Tertullian's opponents, who
 distinguished between the mind and the soul. They said, that when a man
 was out of his mind, his mind left him, but that his soul remained.
 (Lactantius, De Opif. xviii.; Instit. Div. vii. 12; La Cerda).

 [1631] See his treatise, Against Marcion.

 [1632] Rom. i. 20.

 [1633] Facies.

 [1634] Timæus, pp. 29, 30, 37, 38.

 Chapter XIX.--The Intellect Coeval with the Soul in the Human Being. An
 Example from Aristotle Converted into Evidence Favourable to These
 Views.

 Nor must we fail to notice those writers who deprive the soul of the
 intellect even for a short period of time. They do this in order to
 prepare the way of introducing the intellect--and the mind also--at a
 subsequent time of life, even at the time when intelligence appears in
 a man. They maintain that the stage of infancy is supported by the soul
 alone, simply to promote vitality, without any intention of acquiring
 knowledge also, because not all things have knowledge which possess
 life. Trees, for instance, to quote Aristotle's example, [1635] have
 vitality, but have not knowledge; and with him agrees every one who
 gives a share to all animated beings of the animal substance, which,
 according to our view, exists in man alone as his special
 property,--not because it is the work of God, which all other creatures
 are likewise, but because it is the breath of God, which this (human
 soul) alone is, which we say is born with the full equipment of its
 proper faculties. Well, let them meet us with the example of the trees:
 we will accept their challenge, (nor shall we find in it any detriment
 to our own argument;) for it is an undoubted fact, that whilst trees
 are yet but twigs and sprouts, and before they even reach the sapling
 stage, there is in them their own proper faculty of life, as soon as
 they spring out of their native beds. But then, as time goes on, the
 vigour of the tree slowly advances, as it grows and hardens into its
 woody trunk, until its mature age completes the condition which nature
 destines for it. Else what resources would trees possess in due course
 for the inoculation of grafts, and the formation of leaves, and the
 swelling of their buds, and the graceful shedding of their blossom, and
 the softening of their sap, were there not in them the quiet growth of
 the full provision of their nature, and the distribution of this life
 over all their branches for the accomplishment of their maturity?
 Trees, therefore, have ability or knowledge; and they derive it from
 whence they also derive vitality--that is, from the one source of
 vitality and knowledge which is peculiar to their nature, and that from
 the infancy which they, too, begin with.  For I observe that even the
 vine, although yet tender and immature, still understands its own
 natural business, and strives to cling to some support, that, leaning
 on it, and lacing through it, [1636] it may so attain its growth.
 Indeed, without waiting for the husbandman's training, without an
 espalier, without a prop, whatever its tendrils catch, it will fondly
 cling to, [1637] and embrace with really greater tenacity and force by
 its own inclination than by your volition. It longs and hastens to be
 secure. Take also ivy-plants, never mind how young: I observe their
 attempts from the very first to grasp objects above them, and
 outrunning everything else, to hang on to the highest thing, preferring
 as they do to spread over walls with their leafy web and woof rather
 than creep on the ground and be trodden under by every foot that likes
 to crush them. On the other hand, in the case of such trees as receive
 injury from contact with a building, how do they hang off as they grow
 and avoid what injures them! You can see that their branches were
 naturally meant to take the opposite direction, and can very well
 understand the vital instincts [1638] of such a tree from its avoidance
 of the wall.  It is contented (if it be only a little shrub) with its
 own insignificant destiny, which it has in its foreseeing instinct
 thoroughly been aware of from its infancy, only it still fears even a
 ruined building. On my side, then, why should I not contend for these
 wise and sagacious natures of trees?  Let them have vitality, as the
 philosophers permit it; but let them have knowledge too, although the
 philosophers disavow it. Even the infancy of a log, then, may have an
 intellect (suitable to it): how much more may that of a human being,
 whose soul (which may be compared with the nascent sprout of a tree)
 has been derived from Adam as its root, and has been propagated amongst
 his posterity by means of woman, to whom it has been entrusted for
 transmission, and thus has sprouted into life with all its natural
 apparatus, both of intellect and of sense! I am much mistaken if the
 human person, even from his infancy, when he saluted life with his
 infant cries, does not testify to his actual possession of the
 faculties of sensation and intellect by the fact of his birth,
 vindicating at one and the same time the use of all his senses--that of
 seeing by the light, that of hearing by sounds, that of taste by
 liquids, that of smell by the air, that of touch by the ground. This
 earliest voice of infancy, then, is the first effort of the senses, and
 the initial impulse of mental perceptions. [1639] There is also the
 further fact, that some persons understand this plaintive cry of the
 infant to be an augury of affliction in the prospect of our tearful
 life, whereby from the very moment of birth (the soul) has to be
 regarded as endued with prescience, much more with intelligence.
 Accordingly by this intuition [1640] the babe knows his mother,
 discerns the nurse, and even recognises the waiting-maid; refusing the
 breast of another woman, and the cradle that is not his own, and
 longing only for the arms to which he is accustomed. Now from what
 source does he acquire this discernment of novelty and custom, if not
 from instinctive knowledge? How does it happen that he is irritated and
 quieted, if not by help of his initial intellect? It would be very
 strange indeed that infancy were naturally so lively, if it had not
 mental power; and naturally so capable of impression and affection, if
 it had no intellect. But (we hold the contrary): for Christ, by
 "accepting praise out of the mouth of babes and sucklings," [1641] has
 declared that neither childhood nor infancy is without sensibility,
 [1642] --the former of which states, when meeting Him with approving
 shouts, proved its ability to offer Him testimony; [1643] while the
 other, by being slaughtered, for His sake of course, knew what violence
 meant. [1644]

 [1635] His De Anima, ii. 2, 3.

 [1636] Innixa et innexa.

 [1637] Amabit.

 [1638] Animationem. The possession and use of an "anima."

 [1639] Intellectuam.

 [1640] Spiritu. The mental instinct, just mentioned.

 [1641] Ps. viii. 2; Matt. xxi. 16.

 [1642] Hebetes.

 [1643] Matt. xxi. 15.

 [1644] Matt. ii. 16-18.

 Chapter XX.--The Soul, as to Its Nature Uniform, But Its Faculties
 Variously Developed. Varieties Only Accidental.

 And here, therefore, we draw our conclusion, that all the natural
 properties of the soul are inherent in it as parts of its substance;
 and that they grow and develope along with it, from the very moment of
 its own origin at birth.  Just as Seneca says, whom we so often find on
 our side: [1645] "There are implanted within us the seeds of all the
 arts and periods of life. And God, our Master, secretly produces our
 mental dispositions;" that is, from the germs which are implanted and
 hidden in us by means of infancy, and these are the intellect: for from
 these our natural dispositions are evolved.  Now, even the seeds of
 plants have, one form in each kind, but their development varies: some
 open and expand in a healthy and perfect state, while others either
 improve or degenerate, owing to the conditions of weather and soil, and
 from the appliance of labour and care; also from the course of the
 seasons, and from the occurrence of casual circumstances. In like
 manner, the soul may well be [1646] uniform in its seminal origin,
 although multiform by the process of nativity. [1647] And here local
 influences, too, must be taken into account. It has been said that dull
 and brutish persons are born at Thebes; and the most accomplished in
 wisdom and speech at Athens, where in the district of Colythus [1648]
 children speak--such is the precocity of their tongue--before they are
 a month old. Indeed, Plato himself tells us, in the Timæus, that
 Minerva, when preparing to found her great city, only regarded the
 nature of the country which gave promise of mental dispositions of this
 kind; whence he himself in The Laws instructs Megillus and Clinias to
 be careful in their selection of a site for building a city.
 Empedocles, however, places the cause of a subtle or an obtuse
 intellect in the quality of the blood, from which he derives progress
 and perfection in learning and science. The subject of national
 peculiarities has grown by this time into proverbial notoriety.  Comic
 poets deride the Phrygians for their cowardice; Sallust reproaches the
 Moors for their levity, and the Dalmatians for their cruelty; even the
 apostle brands the Cretans as "liars." [1649] Very likely, too,
 something must be set down to the score of bodily condition and the
 state of the health. Stoutness hinders knowledge, but a spare form
 stimulates it; paralysis prostrates the mind, a decline preserves it.
 How much more will those accidental circumstances have to be noticed,
 which, in addition to the state of one's body or one's health, tend to
 sharpen or to dull the intellect! It is sharpened by learned pursuits,
 by the sciences, the arts, by experimental knowledge, business habits,
 and studies; it is blunted by ignorance, idle habits, inactivity, lust,
 inexperience, listlessness, and vicious pursuits.  Then, besides these
 influences, there must perhaps [1650] be added the supreme powers. Now
 these are the supreme powers: according to our (Christian) notions,
 they are the Lord God and His adversary the devil; but according to
 men's general opinion about providence, they are fate and necessity;
 and about fortune, it is man's freedom of will.  Even the philosophers
 allow these distinctions; whilst on our part we have already undertaken
 to treat of them, on the principles of the (Christian) faith, in a
 separate work. [1651] It is evident how great must be the influences
 which so variously affect the one nature of the soul, since they are
 commonly regarded as separate "natures." Still they are not different
 species, but casual incidents of one nature and substance--even of that
 which God conferred on Adam, and made the mould of all (subsequent
 ones). Casual incidents will they always remain, but never will they
 become specific differences.  However great, too, at present is the
 variety of men's maunders, it was not so in Adam, the founder of their
 race.  But all these discordances ought to have existed in him as the
 fountainhead, and thence to have descended to us in an unimpaired
 variety, if the variety had been due to nature.

 [1645] Sæpe noster.

 [1646] Licebit.

 [1647] Fetu.

 [1648] Tertullian perhaps mentions this "demus" of Athens as the
 birthplace of Plato (Oehler).

 [1649] Tit. i. 12.

 [1650] Si et alia.

 [1651] Tertullian wrote a work De Fato, which is lost. Fulgentius, p.
 561, gives a quotation from it.

 Chapter XXI.--As Free-Will Actuates an Individual So May His Character
 Change.

 Now, if the soul possessed this uniform and simple nature from the
 beginning in Adam, previous to so many mental dispositions (being
 developed out of it), it is not rendered multiform by such various
 development, nor by the triple [1652] form predicated of it in "the
 Valentinian trinity" (that we may still keep the condemnation of that
 heresy in view), for not even this nature is discoverable in Adam. What
 had he that was spiritual? Is it because he prophetically declared "the
 great mystery of Christ and the church?" [1653] "This is bone of my
 bone, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman. Therefore shall
 a man leave his father and mother, and he shall cleave unto his wife;
 and they two shall be one flesh." [1654] But this (gift of prophecy)
 only came on him afterwards, when God infused into him the ecstasy, or
 spiritual quality, in which prophecy consists. If, again, the evil of
 sin was developed in him, this must not be accounted as a natural
 disposition: it was rather produced by the instigation of the (old)
 serpent as far from being incidental to his nature as it was from being
 material in him, for we have already excluded belief in "Matter."
 [1655] Now, if neither the spiritual element, nor what the heretics
 call the material element, was properly inherent in him (since, if he
 had been created out of matter, the germ of evil must have been an
 integral part of his constitution), it remains that the one only
 original element of his nature was what is called the animal (the
 principle of vitality, the soul), which we maintain to be simple and
 uniform in its condition. Concerning this, it remains for us to inquire
 whether, as being called natural, it ought to be deemed subject to
 change. (The heretics whom we have referred to) deny that nature is
 susceptible of any change, [1656] in order that they may be able to
 establish and settle their threefold theory, or "trinity," in all its
 characteristics as to the several natures, because "a good tree cannot
 produce evil fruit, nor a corrupt tree good fruit; and nobody gathers
 figs of thorns, nor grapes of brambles." [1657] If so, then "God will
 not be able any longer to raise up from the stones children unto
 Abraham; nor to make a generation of vipers bring forth fruits of
 repentance." [1658] And if so, the apostle too was in error when he
 said in his epistle, "Ye were at one time darkness, (but now are ye
 light in the Lord:)" [1659] and, "We also were by nature children of
 wrath;" [1660] and, "Such were some of you, but ye are washed." [1661]
 The statements, however, of holy Scripture will never be discordant
 with truth. A corrupt tree will never yield good fruit, unless the
 better nature be grafted into it; nor will a good tree produce evil
 fruit, except by the same process of cultivation. Stones also will
 become children of Abraham, if educated in Abraham's faith; and a
 generation of vipers will bring forth the fruits of penitence, if they
 reject the poison of their malignant nature. This will be the power of
 the grace of God, more potent indeed than nature, exercising its sway
 over the faculty that underlies itself within us--even the freedom of
 our will, which is described as autexousios (of independent authority);
 and inasmuch as this faculty is itself also natural and mutable, in
 whatsoever direction it turns, it inclines of its own nature. Now, that
 there does exist within us naturally this independent authority (to
 autexousion ), we have already shown in opposition both to Marcion
 [1662] and to Hermogenes. [1663] If, then, the natural condition has to
 be submitted to a definition, it must be determined to be
 twofold--there being the category of the born and the unborn, the made
 and not-made. Now that which has received its constitution by being
 made or by being born, is by nature capable of being changed, for it
 can be both born again and re-made; whereas that which is not-made and
 unborn will remain for ever immoveable. Since, however, this state is
 suited to God alone, as the only Being who is unborn and not-made (and
 therefore immortal and unchangeable), it is absolutely certain that the
 nature of all other existences which are born and created is subject to
 modification and change; so that if the threefold state is to be
 ascribed to the soul, it must be supposed to arise from the mutability
 of its accidental circumstances, and not from the appointment of
 nature.

 [1652] i.e., the carnal, the animal, and the spiritual. Comp. Adv.
 Valentin. xxv., and De Resur. Carnis, lv.

 [1653] Eph. v. 32.

 [1654] Gen. ii. 23, 24.

 [1655] See Adv. Hermog. xiii.

 [1656] See Adv. Valentin. xxix.

 [1657] Luke vi. 43, 44.

 [1658] Matt. iii. 7-9.

 [1659] Eph. v. 8.

 [1660] Eph. ii. 3.

 [1661] 1 Cor. vi. 11.

 [1662] See our Anti-Marcion, ii. 5-7.

 [1663] In his work against this man, entitled De Censu Animæ, not now
 extant.

 Chapter XXII.--Recapitulation. Definition of the Soul.

 Hermogenes has already heard from us what are the other natural
 faculties of the soul, as well as their vindication and proof; whence
 it may be seen that the soul is rather the offspring of God than of
 matter. The names of these faculties shall here be simply repeated,
 that they may not seem to be forgotten and passed out of sight.  We
 have assigned, then, to the soul both that freedom of the will which we
 just now mentioned, and its dominion over the works of nature, and its
 occasional gift of divination, independently of that endowment of
 prophecy which accrues to it expressly from the grace of God. We shall
 therefore now quit this subject of the soul's disposition, in order to
 set out fully in order its various qualities. [1664] The soul, then, we
 define to be sprung from the breath of God, immortal, possessing body,
 having form, simple in its substance, intelligent in its own nature,
 developing its power in various ways, free in its determinations,
 subject to be changes of accident, in its faculties mutable, rational,
 supreme, endued with an instinct of presentiment, evolved out of one
 (archetypal soul). It remains for us now to consider how it is
 developed out of this one original source; in other words, whence, and
 when, and how it is produced.

 [1664] Tertullian had shown that "the soul is the breath or afflatus of
 God," in ch. iv. and xi. above. He demonstrated its "immortality" in
 ch. ii.-iv., vi., ix., xiv.; and he will repeat his proof hereafter, in
 ch. xxiv., xxxviii., xlv., li., liii., liv. Moreover, he illustrates
 the soul's "corporeity" in ch. v.-viii.; its "endowment with form or
 figure," in ch. ix.; its "simplicity in substance" in ch. x. and xi.;
 its "inherent intelligence," in ch. xii.; its varied development, in
 ch. xiii.-xv. The soul's "rationality," "supremacy," and "instinctive
 divination," Tertullian treated of in his treatise De Censu Animæ
 against Hermogenes (as he has said in the text); but he has treated
 somewhat of the soul's "rational nature" in the sixteenth chapter
 above; in the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters he referred to the
 soul's "supremacy or hegemony;" whilst we have had a hint about its
 "divining faculty," even in infants, in ch. xix. The propagation of
 souls from the one archetypal soul is the subject of the chapter before
 us, as well as of the five succeeding ones (La Cerda).

 Chapter XXIII.--The Opinions of Sundry Heretics Which Originate
 Ultimately with Plato.

 Some suppose that they came down from heaven, with as firm a belief as
 they are apt to entertain, when they indulge in the prospect of an
 undoubted return thither. Saturninus, the disciple of Menander, who
 belonged to Simon's sect, introduced this opinion: he affirmed that man
 was made by angels. A futile, imperfect creation at first, weak and
 unable to stand, he crawled upon the ground like a worm, because he
 wanted the strength to maintain an erect posture; but afterwards
 having, by the compassion of the Supreme Power (in whose image, which
 had not been fully understood, he was clumsily formed), obtained a
 slender spark of life, this roused and righted his imperfect form, and
 animated it with a higher vitality, and provided for its return, on its
 relinquishment of life, to its original principle. Carpocrates, indeed,
 claims for himself so extreme an amount of the supernal qualities, that
 his disciples set their own souls at once on an equality with Christ
 (not to mention the apostles); and sometimes, when it suits their
 fancy, even give them the superiority--deeming them, forsooth, to have
 partaken of that sublime virtue which looks down upon the
 principalities that govern this world. Apelles tells us that our souls
 were enticed by earthly baits down from their super-celestial abodes by
 a fiery angel, Israel's God and ours, who then enclosed them firmly
 within our sinful flesh. The hive of Valentinus fortifies the soul with
 the germ of Sophia, or Wisdom; by means of which germ they recognise,
 in the images of visible objects, the stories and Milesian fables of
 their own Æons. I am sorry from my heart that Plato has been the
 caterer to all these heretics. For in the Phædo he imagines that souls
 wander from this world to that, and thence back again hither; whilst in
 the Timæus he supposes that the children of God, to whom had been
 assigned the production of mortal creatures, having taken for the soul
 the germ of immortality, congealed around it a mortal body,--thereby
 indicating that this world is the figure of some other. Now, to procure
 belief in all this--that the soul had formerly lived with God in the
 heavens above, sharing His ideas with Him, and afterwards came down to
 live with us on earth, and whilst here recollects the eternal patterns
 of things which it had learnt before--he elaborated his new formula,
 matheseis anamneseis, which means that "learning is reminiscence;"
 implying that the souls which come to us from thence forget the things
 amongst which they formerly lived, but that they afterwards recall
 them, instructed by the objects they see around them. Forasmuch,
 therefore, as the doctrines which the heretics borrow from Plato are
 cunningly defended by this kind of argument, I shall sufficiently
 refute the heretics if I overthrow the argument of Plato.

 Chapter XXIV.--Plato's Inconsistency. He Supposes the Soul
 Self-Existent, Yet Capable of Forgetting What Passed in a Previous
 State.

 In the first place, I cannot allow that the soul is capable of a
 failure of memory; because he has conceded to it so large an amount of
 divine quality as to put it on a par with God. He makes it unborn,
 which single attribute I might apply as a sufficient attestation of its
 perfect divinity; he then adds that the soul is immortal,
 incorruptible, incorporeal--since he believed God to be the
 same--invisible, incapable of delineation, uniform, supreme, rational,
 and intellectual. What more could he attribute to the soul, if he
 wanted to call it God? We, however, who allow no appendage to God
 [1665] (in the sense of equality), by this very fact reckon the soul as
 very far below God: for we suppose it to be born, and hereby to possess
 something of a diluted divinity and an attenuated felicity, as the
 breath (of God), though not His spirit; and although immortal, as this
 is an attribute of divinity, yet for all that passible, since this is
 an incident of a born condition, and consequently from the first
 capable of deviation from perfection and right, [1666] and by
 consequence susceptible of a failure in memory. This point I have
 discussed sufficiently with Hermogenes. [1667] But it may be further
 observed, that if the soul is to merit being accounted a god, by reason
 of all its qualities being equal to the attributes of God, it must then
 be subject to no passion, and therefore to no loss of memory; for this
 defect of oblivion is as great an injury to that of which you predicate
 it, as memory is the glory thereof, which Plato himself deems the very
 safeguard of the senses and intellectual faculties, and which Cicero
 has designated the treasury of all the sciences. Now we need not raise
 the doubt whether so divine a faculty as the soul was capable of losing
 memory: the question rather is, whether it is able to recover afresh
 that which it has lost. I could not decide whether that, which ought to
 have lost memory, if it once incurred the loss, would be powerful
 enough to recollect itself. Both alternatives, indeed, will agree very
 well with my soul, but not with Plato's. In the second place, my
 objection to him will stand thus: (Plato,) do you endow the soul with a
 natural competency for understanding those well-known ideas of yours?
 Certainly I do, will be your answer. Well, now, no one will concede to
 you that the knowledge, (which you say is) the gift of nature, of the
 natural sciences can fail.  But the knowledge of the sciences fails;
 the knowledge of the various fields of learning and of the arts of life
 fails; and so perhaps the knowledge of the faculties and affections of
 our minds fails, although they seem to be inherent in our nature, but
 really are not so:  because, as we have already said, [1668] they are
 affected by accidents of place, of manners and customs, of bodily
 condition, of the state of man's health--by the influences of the
 Supreme Powers, and the changes of man's free-will.  Now the
 instinctive knowledge of natural objects never fails, not even in the
 brute creation. The lion, no doubt, will forget his ferocity, if
 surrounded by the softening influence of training; he may become, with
 his beautiful mane, the plaything of some Queen Berenice, and lick her
 cheeks with his tongue.  A wild beast may lay aside his habits, but his
 natural instincts will not be forgotten. He will not forget his proper
 food, nor his natural resources, nor his natural alarms; and should the
 queen offer him fishes or cakes, he will wish for flesh; and if, when
 he is ill, any antidote be prepared for him, he will still require the
 ape; and should no hunting-spear be presented against him, he will yet
 dread the crow of the cock. In like manner with man, who is perhaps the
 most forgetful of all creatures, the knowledge of everything natural to
 him will remain ineradicably fixed in him,--but this alone, as being
 alone a natural instinct. He will never forget to eat when he is
 hungry; or to drink when he is thirsty; or to use his eyes when he
 wants to see; or his ears, to hear; or his nose, to smell; or his
 mouth, to taste; or his hand, to touch.  These are, to be sure, the
 senses, which philosophy depreciates by her preference for the
 intellectual faculties.  But if the natural knowledge of the sensuous
 faculties is permanent, how happens it that the knowledge of the
 intellectual faculties fails, to which the superiority is ascribed?
 Whence, now, arises that power of forgetfulness itself which precedes
 recollection? From long lapse of time, he says. But this is a
 shortsighted answer. Length of time cannot be incidental to that which,
 according to him, is unborn, and which therefore must be deemed most
 certainly eternal. For that which is eternal, on the ground of its
 being unborn, since it admits neither of beginning nor end of time, is
 subject to no temporal criterion. And that which time does not measure,
 undergoes no change in consequence of time; nor is long lapse of time
 at all influential over it. If time is a cause of oblivion, why, from
 the time of the soul's entrance into the body, does memory fail, as if
 thenceforth the soul were to be affected by time? for the soul, being
 undoubtedly prior to the body, was of course not irrespective of time.
 Is it, indeed, immediately on the soul's entrance into the body that
 oblivion takes place, or some time afterwards? If immediately, where
 will be the long lapse of the time which is as yet inadmissible in the
 hypothesis? [1669] Take, for instance, the case of the infant. If some
 time afterwards, will not the soul, during the interval previous to the
 moment of oblivion, still exercise its powers of memory? And how comes
 it to pass that the soul subsequently forgets, and then afterwards
 again remembers? How long, too, must the lapse of the time be regarded
 as having been, during which the oblivion oppressed the soul? The whole
 course of one's life, I apprehend, will be insufficient to efface the
 memory of an age which endured so long before the soul's assumption of
 the body.  But then, again, Plato throws the blame upon the body, as if
 it were at all credible that a born substance could extinguish the
 power of one that is unborn. There exist, however, among bodies a great
 many differences, by reason of their rationality, their bulk, their
 condition, their age, and their health.  Will there then be supposed to
 exist similar differences in obliviousness? Oblivion, however, is
 uniform and identical. Therefore bodily peculiarity, with its manifold
 varieties, will not become the cause of an effect which is an
 invariable one. There are likewise, according to Plato's own testimony,
 many proofs to show that the soul has a divining faculty, as we have
 already advanced against Hermogenes. But there is not a man living, who
 does not himself feel his soul possessed with a presage and augury of
 some omen, danger, or joy. Now, if the body is not prejudicial to
 divination, it will not, I suppose, be injurious to memory. One thing
 is certain, that souls in the same body both forget and remember. If
 any corporeal condition engenders forgetfulness, how will it admit the
 opposite state of recollection? Because recollection, after
 forgetfulness, is actually the resurrection of the memory. Now, how
 should not that which is hostile to the memory at first, be also
 prejudicial to it in the second instance? Lastly, who have better
 memories than little children, with their fresh, unworn souls, not yet
 immersed in domestic and public cares, but devoted only to those
 studies the acquirement of which is itself a reminiscence? Why, indeed,
 do we not all of us recollect in an equal degree, since we are equal in
 our forgetfulness? But this is true only of philosophers! But not even
 of the whole of them. Amongst so many nations, in so great a crowd of
 sages, Plato, to be sure, is the only man who has combined the oblivion
 and the recollection of ideas. Now, since this main argument of his by
 no means keeps its ground, it follows that its entire superstructure
 must fall with it, namely, that souls are supposed to be unborn, and to
 live in the heavenly regions, and to be instructed in the divine
 mysteries thereof; moreover, that they descend to this earth, and here
 recall to memory their previous existence, for the purpose, of course,
 of supplying to our heretics the fitting materials for their systems.

 [1665] Nihil Deo appendimus.

 [1666] Exorbitationis.

 [1667] In his, now lost, treatise, De Censu Animæ.

 [1668] Above, in ch. xix. xx. pp. 200, 201.

 [1669] Or, "which has been too short for calculation."

 Chapter XXV.--Tertullian Refutes, Physiologically, the Notion that the
 Soul is Introduced After Birth.

 I shall now return to the cause of this digression, in order that I may
 explain how all souls are derived from one, when and where and in what
 manner they are produced. Now, touching this subject, it matters not
 whether the question be started by the philosopher, by the heretic, or
 by the crowd. Those who profess the truth care nothing about their
 opponents, especially such of them as begin by maintaining that the
 soul is not conceived in the womb, nor is formed and produced at the
 time that the flesh is moulded, but is impressed from without upon the
 infant before his complete vitality, but after the process of
 parturition. They say, moreover, that the human seed having been duly
 deposited ex concubiterin the womb, and having been by natural impulse
 quickened, it becomes condensed into the mere substance of the flesh,
 which is in due time born, warm from the furnace of the womb, and then
 released from its heat. (This flesh) resembles the case of hot iron,
 which is in that state plunged into cold water; for, being smitten by
 the cold air (into which it is born), it at once receives the power of
 animation, and utters vocal sound. This view is entertained by the
 Stoics, along with Ænesidemus, and occasionally by Plato himself, when
 he tells us that the soul, being quite a separate formation,
 originating elsewhere and externally to the womb, is inhaled [1670]
 when the new-born infant first draws breath, and by and by exhaled
 [1671] with the man's latest breath. We shall see whether this view of
 his is merely fictitious. Even the medical profession has not lacked
 its Hicesius, to prove a traitor both to nature and his own calling.
 These gentlemen, I suppose, were too modest to come to terms with women
 on the mysteries of childbirth, so well known to the latter. But how
 much more is there for them to blush at, when in the end they have the
 women to refute them, instead of commending them. Now, in such a
 question as this, no one can be so useful a teacher, judge, or witness,
 as the sex itself which is so intimately concerned. Give us your
 testimony, then, ye mothers, whether yet pregnant, or after delivery
 (let barren women and men keep silence),--the truth of your own nature
 is in question, the reality of your own suffering is the point to be
 decided.  (Tell us, then,) whether you feel in the embryo within you
 any vital force [1672] other than your own, with which your bowels
 tremble, your sides shake, your entire womb throbs, and the burden
 which oppresses you constantly changes its position? Are these
 movements a joy to you, and a positive removal of anxiety, as making
 you confident that your infant both possesses vitality and enjoys it?
 Or, should his restlessness cease, your first fear would be for him;
 and he would be aware of it within you, since he is disturbed at the
 novel sound; and you would crave for injurious diet, [1673] or would
 even loathe your food--all on his account; and then you and he, (in the
 closeness of your sympathy,) would share together your common
 ailments--so far that with your contusions and bruises would he
 actually become marked,--whilst within you, and even on the selfsame
 parts of the body, taking to himself thus peremptorily [1674] the
 injuries of his mother! Now, whenever a livid hue and redness are
 incidents of the blood, the blood will not be without the vital
 principle, [1675] or soul; or when disease attacks the soul or
 vitality, (it becomes a proof of its real existence, since) there is no
 disease where there is no soul or principle of life. Again, inasmuch as
 sustenance by food, and the want thereof, growth and decay, fear and
 motion, are conditions of the soul or life, he who experiences them
 must be alive. And, so, he at last ceases to live, who ceases to
 experience them.  And thus by and by infants are still-born; but how
 so, unless they had life? For how could any die, who had not previously
 lived? But sometimes by a cruel necessity, whilst yet in the womb, an
 infant is put to death, when lying awry in the orifice of the womb he
 impedes parturition, and kills his mother, if he is not to die
 himself.  Accordingly, among surgeons' tools there is a certain
 instrument, which is formed with a nicely-adjusted flexible frame for
 opening the uterus first of all, and keeping it open; it is further
 furnished with an annular blade, [1676] by means of which the limbs
 within the womb are dissected with anxious but unfaltering care; its
 last appendage being a blunted or covered hook, wherewith the entire
 foetus is extracted [1677] by a violent delivery. There is also
 (another instrument in the shape of) a copper needle or spike, by which
 the actual death is managed in this furtive robbery of life: they give
 it, from its infanticide function, the name of embruosphaktes , the
 slayer of the infant, which was of course alive. Such apparatus was
 possessed both by Hippocrates, and Asclepiades, and Erasistratus, and
 Herophilus, that dissector of even adults, and the milder Soranus
 himself, who all knew well enough that a living being had been
 conceived, and pitied this most luckless infant state, which had first
 to be put to death, to escape being tortured alive. Of the necessity of
 such harsh treatment I have no doubt even Hicesius was convinced,
 although he imported their soul into infants after birth from the
 stroke of the frigid air, because the very term for soul, forsooth, in
 Greek answered to such a refrigeration! [1678] Well, then, have the
 barbarian and Roman nations received souls by some other process, (I
 wonder;) for they have called the soul by another name than psuche? How
 many nations are there who commence life [1679] under the broiling sun
 of the torrid zone, scorching their skin into its swarthy hue? Whence
 do they get their souls, with no frosty air to help them?  I say not a
 word of those well-warmed bed-rooms, and all that apparatus of heat
 which ladies in childbirth so greatly need, when a breath of cold air
 might endanger their life. But in the very bath almost a babe will slip
 into life, and at once his cry is heard! If, however, a good frosty air
 is to the soul so indispensable a treasure, then beyond the German and
 the Scythian tribes, and the Alpine and the Argæan heights, nobody
 ought ever to be born! But the fact really is, that population is
 greater within the temperate regions of the East and the West, and
 men's minds are sharper; whilst there is not a Sarmatian whose wits are
 not dull and humdrum. The minds of men, too, would grow keener by
 reason of the cold, if their souls came into being amidst nipping
 frosts; for as the substance is, so must be its active power. Now,
 after these preliminary statements, we may also refer to the case of
 those who, having been cut out of their mother's womb, have breathed
 and retained life--your Bacchuses [1680] and Scipios. [1681] If,
 however, there be any one who, like Plato, [1682] supposes that two
 souls cannot, more than two bodies could, co-exist in the same
 individual, I, on the contrary, could show him not merely the
 co-existence of two souls in one person, as also of two bodies in the
 same womb, but likewise the combination of many other things in natural
 connection with the soul--for instance, of demoniacal possession; and
 that not of one only, as in the case of Socrates' own demon; but of
 seven spirits as in the case of the Magdalene; [1683] and of a legion
 in number, as in the Gadarene. [1684] Now one soul is naturally more
 susceptible of conjunction with another soul, by reason of the identity
 of their substance, than an evil spirit is, owing to their diverse
 natures. But when the same philosopher, in the sixth book of The Laws,
 warns us to beware lest a vitiation of seed should infuse a soil into
 both body and soul from an illicit or debased concubinage, I hardly
 know whether he is more inconsistent with himself in respect of one of
 his previous statements, or of that which he had just made. For he here
 shows us that the soul proceeds from human seed (and warns us to be on
 our guard about it), not, (as he had said before,) from the first
 breath of the new-born child. Pray, whence comes it that from
 similarity of soul we resemble our parents in disposition, according to
 the testimony of Cleanthes, [1685] if we are not produced from this
 seed of the soul? Why, too, used the old astrologers to cast a man's
 nativity from his first conception, if his soul also draws not its
 origin from that moment? To this (nativity) likewise belongs the
 inbreathing of the soul, whatever that is.

 [1670] "Inhaled" is Bp. Kaye's word for adduci, "taken up."

 [1671] Educi.

 [1672] Vivacitas.

 [1673] Ciborum vanitates.

 [1674] Rapiens.

 [1675] Anima.

 [1676] Anulocultro. [To be seen in the Museum at Naples.]

 [1677] Or, "the whole business (totem facinus) is despatched."

 [1678] So Plato, Cratylus, p. 399, c. 17.

 [1679] Censentur.

 [1680] Liberi aliqui.

 [1681] See Pliny, Natural History, vii. 9.

 [1682] See above, ch. x.

 [1683] Mark xvi. 9.

 [1684] Mark vi. 1-9.

 [1685] See above, ch. v.

 Chapter XXVI.--Scripture Alone Offers Clear Knowledge on the Questions
 We Have Been Controverting.

 Now there is no end to the uncertainty and irregularity of human
 opinion, until we come to the limits which God has prescribed. I shall
 at last retire within our own lines and firmly hold my ground there,
 for the purpose of proving to the Christian (the soundness of) my
 answers to the Philosophers and the Physicians. Brother (in Christ), on
 your own foundation [1686] build up your faith. Consider the wombs of
 the most sainted women instinct with the life within them, and their
 babes which not only breathed therein, but were even endowed with
 prophetic intuition. See how the bowels of Rebecca are disquieted,
 [1687] though her child-bearing is as yet remote, and there is no
 impulse of (vital) air. Behold, a twin offspring chafes within the
 mother's womb, although she has no sign as yet of the twofold nation.
 Possibly we might have regarded as a prodigy the contention of this
 infant progeny, which struggled before it lived, which had animosity
 previous to animation, if it had simply disturbed the mother by its
 restlessness within her.  But when her womb opens, and the number of
 her offspring is seen, and their presaged condition known, we have
 presented to us a proof not merely of the (separate) souls of the
 infants, but of their hostile struggles too. He who was the first to be
 born was threatened with detention by him who was anticipated in birth,
 who was not yet fully brought forth, but whose hand only had been born.
 Now if he actually imbibed life, and received his soul, in Platonic
 style, at his first breath; or else, after the Stoic rule, had the
 earliest taste of animation on touching the frosty air; what was the
 other about, who was so eagerly looked for, who was still detained
 within the womb, and was trying to detain (the other) outside? I
 suppose he had not yet breathed when he seized his brother's heel;
 [1688] and was still warm with his mother's warmth, when he so strongly
 wished to be the first to quit the womb. What an infant! so emulous, so
 strong, and already so contentious; and all this, I suppose, because
 even now full of life!  Consider, again, those extraordinary
 conceptions, which were more wonderful still, of the barren woman and
 the virgin: these women would only be able to produce imperfect
 offspring against the course of nature, from the very fact that one of
 them was too old to bear seed, and the other was pure from the contact
 of man. If there was to be bearing at all in the case, it was only
 fitting that they should be born without a soul, (as the philosopher
 would say,) who had been irregularly conceived. However, even these
 have life, each of them in his mother's womb. Elizabeth exults with
 joy, (for) John had leaped in her womb; [1689] Mary magnifies the Lord,
 (for) Christ had instigated her within. [1690] The mothers recognise
 each their own offspring, being moreover each recognised by their
 infants, which were therefore of course alive, and were not souls
 merely, but spirits also. Accordingly you read the word of God which
 was spoken to Jeremiah, "Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew
 thee." [1691] Since God forms us in the womb, He also breathes upon us,
 as He also did at the first creation, when "the Lord God formed man,
 and breathed into him the breath of life." [1692] Nor could God have
 known man in the womb, except in his entire nature: "And before thou
 camest forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee." [1693] Well, was it
 then a dead body at that early stage? Certainly not. For "God is not
 the God of the dead, but of the living."

 [1686] Of the Scriptures.

 [1687] Gen. xxv. 22, 23.

 [1688] Gen. xxv. 26.

 [1689] Luke i. 41-45.

 [1690] Luke i. 46.

 [1691] Jer. i. 5.

 [1692] Gen. ii. 7.

 [1693] Jer. i. 5.

 Chapter XXVII.--Soul and Body Conceived, Formed and Perfected in
 Element Simultaneously.

 How, then, is a living being conceived? Is the substance of both body
 and soul formed together at one and the same time? Or does one of them
 precede the other in natural formation? We indeed maintain that both
 are conceived, and formed, and perfectly simultaneously, as well as
 born together; and that not a moment's interval occurs in their
 conception, so that, a prior place can be assigned to either. [1694]
 Judge, in fact, of the incidents of man's earliest existence by those
 which occur to him at the very last. As death is defined to be nothing
 else than the separation of body and soul, [1695] life, which is the
 opposite of death, is susceptible of no other definition than the
 conjunction of body and soul.  If the severance happens at one and the
 same time to both substances by means of death, so the law of their
 combination ought to assure us that it occurs simultaneously to the two
 substances by means of life. Now we allow that life begins with
 conception, because we contend that the soul also begins from
 conception; life taking its commencement at the same moment and place
 that the soul does. Thus, then, the processes which act together to
 produce separation by death, also combine in a simultaneous action to
 produce life. If we assign priority to (the formation of) one of the
 natures, and a subsequent time to the other, we shall have further to
 determine the precise times of the semination, according to the
 condition and rank of each. And that being so, what time shall we give
 to the seed of the body, and what to the seed of the soul? Besides, if
 different periods are to be assigned to the seminations then arising
 out of this difference in time, we shall also have different
 substances. [1696] For although we shall allow that there are two kinds
 of seed--that of the body and that of the soul--we still declare that
 they are inseparable, and therefore contemporaneous and simultaneous in
 origin. Now let no one take offence or feel ashamed at an
 interpretation of the processes of nature which is rendered necessary
 (by the defence of the truth). Nature should be to us an object of
 reverence, not of blushes. It is lust, not natural usage, which has
 brought shame on the intercourse of the sexes.  It is the excess, not
 the normal state, which is immodest and unchaste: the normal condition
 has received a blessing from God, and is blest by Him: "Be fruitful,
 and multiply, (and replenish the earth.)" [1697] Excess, however, has
 He cursed, in adulteries, and wantonness, and chambering. [1698] Well,
 now, in this usual function of the sexes which brings together the male
 and the female in their common intercourse, we know that both the soul
 and the flesh discharge a duty together: the soul supplies desire, the
 flesh contributes the gratification of it; the soul furnishes the
 instigation, the flesh affords the realization. The entire man being
 excited by the one effort of both natures, his seminal substance is
 discharged, deriving its fluidity from the body, and its warmth from
 the soul. Now if the soul in Greek is a word which is synonymous with
 cold, [1699] how does it come to pass that the body grows cold after
 the soul has quitted it? Indeed (if I run the risk of offending modesty
 even, in my desire to prove the truth), I cannot help asking, whether
 we do not, in that very heat of extreme gratification when the
 generative fluid is ejected, feel that somewhat of our soul has gone
 from us? And do we not experience a faintness and prostration along
 with a dimness of sight?  This, then, must be the soul-producing seed,
 which arises at once from the out-drip of the soul, just as that fluid
 is the body-producing seed which proceeds from the drainage of the
 flesh.  Most true are the examples of the first creation. Adam's flesh
 was formed of clay. Now what is clay but an excellent moisture, whence
 should spring the generating fluid?  From the breath of God first came
 the soul. But what else is the breath of God than the vapour of the
 spirit, whence should spring that which we breathe out through the
 generative fluid? Forasmuch, therefore, as these two different and
 separate substances, the clay and the breath, combined at the first
 creation in forming the individual man, they then both amalgamated and
 mixed their proper seminal rudiments in one, and ever afterwards
 communicated to the human race the normal mode of its propagation, so
 that even now the two substances, although diverse from each other,
 flow forth simultaneously in a united channel; and finding their way
 together into their appointed seed-plot, they fertilize with their
 combined vigour the human fruit out of their respective natures.  And
 inherent in this human product is his own seed, according to the
 process which has been ordained for every creature endowed with the
 functions of generation. Accordingly from the one (primeval) man comes
 the entire outflow and redundance of men's souls--nature proving
 herself true to the commandment of God, "Be fruitful, and multiply."
 [1700] For in the very preamble of this one production, "Let us make
 man," [1701] man's whole posterity was declared and described in a
 plural phrase, "Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea," etc.
 [1702] And no wonder: in the seed lies the promise and earnest of the
 crop.

 [1694] Comp. De Resurr. Carnis, xlv.

 [1695] So Plato, Phædo, p. 64.

 [1696] Materiæ.

 [1697] Gen. i. 28.

 [1698] Lupanaria.

 [1699] See above, c. xxv. p. 206.

 [1700] Gen. i. 28.

 [1701] Ver. 26.

 [1702] Ver. 26.

 Chapter XXVIII.--The Pythagorean Doctrine of Transmigration Sketched
 and Censured.

 What, then, by this time means that ancient saying, mentioned by Plato,
 [1703] concerning the reciprocal migration of souls; how they remove
 hence and go thither, and then return hither and pass through life, and
 then again depart from this life, and afterwards become alive from the
 dead? Some will have it that this is a saying of Pythagoras; Albinus
 supposes it to be a divine announcement, perhaps of the Egyptian
 Mercury. [1704] But there is no divine saying, except of the one true
 God, by whom the prophets, and the apostles, and Christ Himself
 declared their grand message. More ancient than Saturn a good deal (by
 some nine hundred years or so), and even than his grandchildren, is
 Moses; and he is certainly much more divine, recounting and tracing
 out, as he does, the course of the human race from the very beginning
 of the world, indicating the several births (of the fathers of mankind)
 according to their names and their epochs; giving thus plain proof of
 the divine character of his work, from its divine authority and word.
 If, indeed, the sophist of Samos is Plato's authority for the eternally
 revolving migration of souls out of a constant alternation of the dead
 and the living states, then no doubt did the famous Pythagoras, however
 excellent in other respects, for the purpose of fabricating such an
 opinion as this, rely on a falsehood, which was not only shameful, but
 also hazardous. Consider it, you that are ignorant of it, and believe
 with us.  He feigns death, he conceals himself underground, he condemns
 himself to that endurance for some seven years, during which he learns
 from his mother, who was his sole accomplice and attendant, what he was
 to relate for the belief of the world concerning those who had died
 since his seclusion; [1705] and when he thought that he had succeeded
 in reducing the frame of his body to the horrid appearance of a dead
 old man, he comes forth from the place of his concealment and deceit,
 and pretends to have returned from the dead. Who would hesitate about
 believing that the man, whom he had supposed to have died, was come
 back again to life? especially after hearing from him facts about the
 recently dead, [1706] which he evidently could only have discovered in
 Hades itself! Thus, that men are made alive after death, is rather an
 old statement. But what if it be rather a recent one also? The truth
 does not desire antiquity, nor does falsehood shun novelty. This
 notable saying I hold to be plainly false, though ennobled by
 antiquity. How should that not be false, which depends for its evidence
 on a falsehood?--How can I help believing Pythagoras to be a deceiver,
 who practises deceit to win my belief? How will he convince me that,
 before he was Pythagoras, he had been Æthalides, and Euphorbus, and the
 fisherman Pyrrhus, and Hermotimus, to make us believe that men live
 again after they have died, when he actually perjured himself
 afterwards as Pythagoras. In proportion as it would be easier for me to
 believe that he had returned once to life in his own person, than so
 often in the person of this man and that, in the same degree has he
 deceived me in things which are too hard to be credited, because he has
 played the impostor in matters which might be readily believed. Well,
 but he recognised the shield of Euphorbus, which had been formerly
 consecrated at Delphi, and claimed it as his own, and proved his claim
 by signs which were generally unknown. Now, look again at his
 subterranean lurking-place, and believe his story, if you can. For, as
 to the man who devised such a tricksty scheme, to the injury of his
 health, fraudulently wasting his life, and torturing it for seven years
 underground, amidst hunger, idleness, and darkness--with a profound
 disgust for the mighty sky--what reckless effort would he not make,
 what curious contrivance would he not attempt, to arrive at the
 discovery of this famous shield? Suppose now, that he found it in some
 of those hidden researches; suppose that he recovered some slight
 breath of report which survived the now obsolete tradition; suppose him
 to have come to the knowledge of it by an inspection which he had
 bribed the beadle to let him have,--we know very well what are the
 resources of magic skill for exploring hidden secrets: there are the
 catabolic spirits, which floor their victims; [1707] and the paredral
 spirits, which are ever at their side [1708] to haunt them; and the
 pythonic spirits, which entrance them by their divination and
 ventriloquistic [1709] arts. For was it not likely that Pherecydes
 also, the master of our Pythagoras, used to divine, or I would rather
 say rave and dream, by such arts and contrivances as these? Might not
 the self-same demon have been in him, who, whilst in Euphorbus,
 transacted deeds of blood? But lastly, why is it that the man, who
 proved himself to have been Euphorbus by the evidence of the shield,
 did not also recognise any of his former Trojan comrades? For they,
 too, must by this time have recovered life, since men were rising again
 from the dead.

 [1703] Phædo, p. 70.

 [1704] [Hermes. See Bacon, De Aug. i. p. 99.]

 [1705] De posteris defunctis.

 [1706] De posteris defunctis.

 [1707] From kataballein, to knock down.

 [1708] From paredos, sitting by one.

 [1709] From puthonikos, an attribute of Pythius Apollo; this class were
 sometimes called engastrimuthoi, ventriloquists.

 Chapter XXIX.--The Pythagorean Doctrine Refuted by Its Own First
 Principle, that Living Men are Formed from the Dead.

 It is indeed, manifest that dead men are formed from living ones; but
 it does not follow from that, that living men are formed from dead
 ones. For from the beginning the living came first in the order of
 things, and therefore also from the beginning the dead came afterwards
 in order. But these proceeded from no other source except from the
 living. The living had their origin in any other source (you please)
 than in the dead; whilst the dead had no source whence to derive their
 beginning, except from the living. If, then, from the very first the
 living came not from the dead, why should they afterwards (be said to)
 come from the dead? Had that original source, whatever it was, come to
 an end? Was the form or law thereof a matter for regret? Then why was
 it preserved in the case of the dead? Does it not follow that, because
 the dead came from the living at the first, therefore they always came
 from the living? For either the law which obtained at the beginning
 must have continued in both of its relations, or else it must have
 changed in both; so that, if it had become necessary for the living
 afterwards to proceed from the dead, it would be necessary, in like
 manner, for the dead also not to proceed from the living. For if a
 faithful adherence to the institution was not meant to be perpetuated
 in each respect, then contraries cannot in due alternation continue to
 be re-formed from contraries. We, too, will on our side adduce against
 you certain contraries, of the born and the unborn, of vision [1710]
 and blindness, of youth and old age, of wisdom and folly. Now it does
 not follow that the unborn proceeds from the born, on the ground that a
 contrary issues from a contrary; nor, again, that vision proceeds from
 blindness, because blindness happens to vision; nor, again, that youth
 revives from old age, because after youth comes the decrepitude of
 senility; nor that folly [1711] is born with its obtuseness from
 wisdom, because wisdom may possibly be sometimes sharpened out of
 folly.  Albinus has some fears for his (master and friend) Plato in
 these points, and labours with much ingenuity to distinguish different
 kinds of contraries; as if these instances did not as absolutely
 partake of the nature of contrariety as those which are expounded by
 him to illustrate his great master's principle--I mean, life and
 death.  Nor is it, for the matter of that, true that life is restored
 out of death, because it happens that death succeeds [1712] life.

 [1710] Visualitatis.

 [1711] Insipientiam. "Imbecility" is the meaning here, though the word
 takes the more general sense in the next clause.

 [1712] Deferatur.

 Chapter XXX.--Further Refutation of the Pythagorean Theory.  The State
 of Contemporary Civilisation.

 But what must we say in reply to what follows? For, in the first place,
 if the living come from the dead, just as the dead proceed from the
 living, then there must always remain unchanged one and the selfsame
 number of mankind, even the number which originally introduced (human)
 life. The living preceded the dead, afterwards the dead issued from the
 living, and then again the living from the dead. Now, since this
 process was evermore going on with the same persons, therefore they,
 issuing from the same, must always have remained in number the same.
 For they who emerged (into life) could never have become more nor fewer
 than they who disappeared (in death). We find, however, in the records
 of the Antiquities of Man, [1713] that the human race has progressed
 with a gradual growth of population, either occupying different
 portions of the earth as aborigines, or as nomad tribes, or as exiles,
 or as conquerors--as the Scythians in Parthia, the Temenidæ in
 Peloponnesus, the Athenians in Asia, the Phrygians in Italy, and the
 Phoenicians in Africa; or by the more ordinary methods of migration,
 which they call apoikiai or colonies, for the purpose of throwing off
 redundant population, disgorging into other abodes their overcrowded
 masses. The aborigines remain still in their old settlements, and have
 also enriched other districts with loans of even larger populations.
 Surely it is obvious enough, if one looks at the whole world, that it
 is becoming daily better cultivated and more fully peopled than
 anciently. All places are now accessible, all are well known, all open
 to commerce; most pleasant farms have obliterated all traces of what
 were once dreary and dangerous wastes; cultivated fields have subdued
 forests; flocks and herds have expelled wild beasts; sandy deserts are
 sown; rocks are planted; marshes are drained; and where once were
 hardly solitary cottages, there are now large cities. No longer are
 (savage) islands dreaded, nor their rocky shores feared; everywhere are
 houses, and inhabitants, and settled government, and civilized life.
 What most frequently meets our view (and occasions complaint), is our
 teeming population: our numbers are burdensome to the world, which can
 hardly supply us from its natural elements; our wants grow more and
 more keen, and our complaints more bitter in all mouths, whilst Nature
 fails in affording us her usual sustenance. In very deed, pestilence,
 and famine, and wars, and earthquakes have to be regarded as a remedy
 for nations, as the means of pruning the luxuriance of the human race;
 and yet, when the hatchet has once felled large masses of men, the
 world has hitherto never once been alarmed at the sight of a
 restitution of its dead coming back to life after their millennial
 exile. [1714] But such a spectacle would have become quite obvious by
 the balance of mortal loss and vital recovery, if it were true that the
 dead came back again to life. Why, however, is it after a thousand
 years, and not at the moment, that this return from death is to take
 place, when, supposing that the loss is not at once supplied, there
 must be a risk of an utter extinction, as the failure precedes the
 compensation? Indeed, this furlough of our present life would be quite
 disproportioned to the period of a thousand years; so much briefer is
 it, and on that account so much more easily is its torch extinguished
 than rekindled.  Inasmuch, then, as the period which, on the hypothesis
 we have discussed, ought to intervene, if the living are to be formed
 from the dead, has not actually occurred, it will follow that we must
 not believe that men come back to life from the dead (in the way
 surmised in this philosophy).

 [1713] A probable allusion to Varro's work, De Antiqq. Rerum Humanarum.

 [1714] An allusion to Plato's notion that, at the end of a thousand
 years, such a restoration of the dead, took place. See his Phædrus, p.
 248, and De Republ. x. p. 614.

 Chapter XXXI.--Further Exposure of Transmigration, Its Inextricable
 Embarrassment.

 Again, if this recovery of life from the dead take place at all,
 individuals must of course resume their own individuality. Therefore
 the souls which animated each several body must needs have returned
 separately to their several bodies. Now, whenever two, or three, or
 five souls are re-enclosed (as they constantly are) in one womb, it
 will not amount in such cases to life from the dead, because there is
 not the separate restitution which individuals ought to have; although
 at this rate, (no doubt,) the law of the primeval creation is signally
 kept, [1715] by the production still of several souls out of only one!
 Then, again, if souls depart at different ages of human life, how is it
 that they come back again at one uniform age? For all men are imbued
 with an infant soul at their birth. But how happens it that a man who
 dies in old age returns to life as an infant? If the soul, whilst
 disembodied, decreases thus by retrogression of its age, how much more
 reasonable would it be, that it should resume its life with a richer
 progress in all attainments of life after the lapse of a thousand
 years! At all events, it should return with the age it had attained at
 its death, that it might resume the precise life which it had
 relinquished. But even if, at this rate, they should reappear the same
 evermore in their revolving cycles, it would be proper for them to
 bring back with them, if not the selfsame forms of body, at least their
 original peculiarities of character, taste, and disposition, because it
 would be hardly possible [1716] for them to be regarded as the same, if
 they were deficient in those characteristics by means of which their
 identity should be proved. (You, however, meet me with this question):
 How can you possibly know, you ask, whether all is not a secret
 process? may not the work of a thousand years take from you the power
 of recognition, since they return unknown to you? But I am quite
 certain that such is not the case, for you yourself present Pythagoras
 to me as (the restored) Euphorbus. Now look at Euphorbus: he was
 evidently possessed of a military and warlike soul, as is proved by the
 very renown of the sacred shields. As for Pythagoras, however, he was
 such a recluse, and so unwarlike, that he shrank from the military
 exploits of which Greece was then so full, and preferred to devote
 himself, in the quiet retreat of Italy, to the study of geometry, and
 astrology, and music--the very opposite to Euphorbus in taste and
 disposition.  Then, again, the Pyrrhus (whom he represented) spent his
 time in catching fish; but Pythagoras, on the contrary, would never
 touch fish, abstaining from even the taste of them as from animal food.
 Moreover, Æthalides and Hermotimus had included the bean amongst the
 common esculents at meals, while Pythagoras taught his disciples not
 even to pass through a plot which was cultivated with beans. I ask,
 then, how the same souls are resumed, which can offer no proof of their
 identity, either by their disposition, or habits, or living? And now,
 after all, (we find that) only four souls are mentioned as recovering
 life [1717] out of all the multitudes of Greece. But limiting ourselves
 merely to Greece, as if no transmigrations of souls and resumptions of
 bodies occurred, and that every day, in every nation, and amongst all
 ages, ranks, and sexes, how is it that Pythagoras alone experiences
 these changes into one personality and another? Why should not I too
 undergo them? Or if it be a privilege monopolized by philosophers--and
 Greek philosophers only, as if Scythians and Indians had no
 philosophers--how is it that Epicurus had no recollection that he had
 been once another man, nor Chrysippus, nor Zeno, nor indeed Plato
 himself, whom we might perhaps have supposed to have been Nestor, from
 his honeyed eloquence?

 [1715] Signatur. Rigaltius reads "singulatur," after the Codex
 Agobard., as meaning, "The single origin of the human race is in
 principle maintained," etc.

 [1716] Temere.

 [1717] Recensentur.

 Chapter XXXII.--Empedocles Increased the Absurdity of Pythagoras by
 Developing the Posthumous Change of Men into Various Animals.

 But the fact is, Empedocles, who used to dream that he was a god, and
 on that account, I suppose, disdained to have it thought that he had
 ever before been merely some hero, declares in so many words: "I once
 was Thamnus, and a fish." Why not rather a melon, seeing that he was
 such a fool; or a cameleon, for his inflated brag? It was, no doubt, as
 a fish (and a queer one too!) that he escaped the corruption of some
 obscure grave, when he preferred being roasted by a plunge into Ætna;
 after which accomplishment there was an end for ever to his
 metensomatosis or putting himself into another body--(fit only now for)
 a light dish after the roast-meat. At this point, therefore, we must
 likewise contend against that still more monstrous presumption, that in
 the course of the transmigration beasts pass from human beings, and
 human beings from beasts. Let (Empedocles') Thamnuses alone. Our slight
 notice of them in passing will be quite enough: (to dwell on them
 longer will inconvenience us,) lest we should be obliged to have
 recourse to raillery and laughter instead of serious instruction. Now
 our position is this: that the human soul cannot by any means at all be
 transferred to beasts, even when they are supposed to originate,
 according to the philosophers, out of the substances of the elements.
 Now let us suppose that the soul is either fire, or water, or blood, or
 spirit, or air, or light; we must not forget that all the animals in
 their several kinds have properties which are opposed to the respective
 elements. There are the cold animals which are opposed to
 fire--water-snakes, lizards, salamanders, and what things soever are
 produced out of the rival element of water. In like manner, those
 creatures are opposite to water which are in their nature dry and
 sapless; indeed, locusts, butterflies, and chameleons rejoice in
 droughts. So, again, such creatures are opposed to blood which have
 none of its purple hue, such as snails, worms, and most of the fishy
 tribes. Then opposed to spirit are those creatures which seem to have
 no respiration, being unfurnished with lungs and windpipes, such as
 gnats, ants, moths, and minute things of this sort. Opposed, moreover,
 to air are those creatures which always live under ground and under
 water, and never imbibe air--things of which you are more acquainted
 with the existence than with the names. Then opposed to light are those
 things which are either wholly blind, or possess eyes for the darkness
 only, such as moles, bats, and owls. These examples (have I adduced),
 that I might illustrate my subject from clear and palpable natures. But
 even if I could take in my hand the "atoms" of Epicurus, or if my eye
 could see the "numbers" of Pythagoras, or if my foot could stumble
 against the "ideas" of Plato, or if I could lay hold of the
 "entelechies" of Aristotle, the chances would be, that even in these
 (impalpable) classes I should find such animals as I must oppose to one
 another on the ground of their contrariety. For I maintain that, of
 whichsoever of the before-mentioned natures the human soul is composed,
 it would not have been possible for it to pass for new forms into
 animals so contrary to each of the separate natures, and to bestow an
 origin by its passage on those beings, from which it would have to be
 excluded and rejected rather than to be admitted and received, by
 reason of that original contrariety which we have supposed it to
 possess, [1718] and which commits the bodily substance receiving it to
 an interminable strife; and then again by reason of the subsequent
 contrariety, which results from the development inseparable from each
 several nature. Now it is on quite different conditions [1719] that the
 soul of man has had assigned to it (in individual bodies [1720] ) its
 abode, and aliment, and order, and sensation, and affection, and sexual
 intercourse, and procreation of children; also (on different conditions
 has it, in individual bodies, received especial) dispositions, as well
 as duties to fulfil, likings, dislikes, vices, desires, pleasures,
 maladies, remedies--in short, its own modes of living, its own outlets
 of death. How, then, shall that (human) soul which cleaves to the
 earth, and is unable without alarm to survey any great height, or any
 considerable depth, and which is also fatigued if it mounts many steps,
 and is suffocated if it is submerged in a fish-pond,--(how, I say,
 shall a soul which is beset with such weaknesses) mount up at some
 future stage into the air in an eagle, or plunge into the sea in an
 eel?  How, again, shall it, after being nourished with generous and
 delicate as well as exquisite viands, feed deliberately on, I will not
 say husks, but even on thorns, and the wild fare of bitter leaves, and
 beasts of the dung-hill, and poisonous worms, if it has to migrate into
 a goat or into a quail?--nay, it may be, feed on carrion, even on human
 corpses in some bear or lion? But how indeed (shall it stoop to this),
 when it remembers its own (nature and dignity)? In the same way, you
 may submit all other instances to this criterion of incongruity, and so
 save us from lingering over the distinct consideration of each of them
 in turn. Now, whatever may be the measure and whatever the mode of the
 human soul, (the question is forced upon us,) what it will do in far
 larger animals, or in very diminutive ones? It must needs be, that
 every individual body of whatever size is filled up by the soul, and
 that the soul is entirely covered by the body. How, therefore, shall a
 man's soul fill an elephant?  How, likewise, shall it be contracted
 within a gnat? If it be so enormously extended or contracted, it will
 no doubt be exposed to peril. And this induces me to ask another
 question: If the soul is by no means capable of this kind of migration
 into animals, which are not fitted for its reception, either by the
 habits of their bodies or the other laws of their being, will it then
 undergo a change according to the properties of various animals, and be
 adapted to their life, notwithstanding its contrariety to human
 life--having, in fact, become contrary to its human self by reason of
 its utter change? Now the truth is, if it undergoes such a
 transformation, and loses what it once was, the human soul will not be
 what it was; and if it ceases to be its former self, the
 metensomatosis, or adaptation of some other body, comes to nought, and
 is not of course to be ascribed to the soul which will cease to exist,
 on the supposition of its complete change. For only then can a soul be
 said to experience this process of the metensomatosis, when it
 undergoes it by remaining unchanged in its own (primitive) condition.
 Since, therefore, the soul does not admit of change, lest it should
 cease to retain its identity; and yet is unable to remain unchanged in
 its original state, because it fails then to receive contrary
 (bodies),--I still want to know some credible reason to justify such a
 transformation as we are discussing. For although some men are compared
 to the beasts because of their character, disposition, and pursuits
 (since even God says, "Man is like the beasts that perish" [1721] ), it
 does not on this account follow that rapacious persons become kites,
 lewd persons dogs, ill-tempered ones panthers, good men sheep,
 talkative ones swallows, and chaste men doves, as if the selfsame
 substance of the soul everywhere repeated its own nature in the
 properties of the animals (into which it passed). Besides, a substance
 is one thing, and the nature of that substance is another thing;
 inasmuch as the substance is the special property of one given thing,
 whereas the nature thereof may possibly belong to many things.  Take an
 example or two. A stone or a piece of iron is the substance: the
 hardness of the stone and the iron is the nature of the substance.
 Their hardness combines objects by a common quality; their substances
 keep them separate.  Then, again, there is softness in wool, and
 softness in a feather: their natural qualities are alike, (and put them
 on a par;) their substantial qualities are not alike, (and keep them
 distinct.) Thus, if a man likewise be designated a wild beast or a
 harmless one, there is not for all that an identity of soul. Now the
 similarity of nature is even then observed, when dissimilarity of
 substance is most conspicuous: for, by the very fact of your judging
 that a man resembles a beast, you confess that their soul is not
 identical; for you say that they resemble each other, not that they are
 the same. This is also the meaning of the word of God (which we have
 just quoted): it likens man to the beasts in nature, but not in
 substance. Besides, God would not have actually made such a comment as
 this concerning man, if He had known him to be in substance only
 bestial.

 [1718] Hujus.

 [1719] Alias.

 [1720] This is the force of the objective nouns, which are all put in
 the plural form.

 [1721] Ps. xlix. 20.

 Chapter XXXIII.--The Judicial Retribution of These Migrations Refuted
 with Raillery.

 Forasmuch as this doctrine is vindicated even on the principle of
 judicial retribution, on the pretence that the souls of men obtain as
 their partners the kind of animals which are suited to their life and
 deserts,--as if they ought to be, according to their several
 characters, either slain in criminals destined to execution, or reduced
 to hard work in menials, or fatigued and wearied in labourers, or
 foully disgraced in the unclean; or, again, on the same principle,
 reserved for honour, and love, and care, and attentive regard in
 characters most eminent in rank and virtue, usefulness, and tender
 sensibility,--I must here also remark, that if souls undergo a
 transformation, they will actually not be able to accomplish and
 experience the destinies which they shall deserve; and the aim and
 purpose of judicial recompense will be brought to nought, as there will
 be wanting the sense and consciousness of merit and retribution. And
 there must be this want of consciousness, if souls lose their
 condition; and there must ensue this loss, if they do not continue in
 one stay. But even if they should have permanency enough to remain
 unchanged until the judgment,--a point which Mercurius Ægyptius
 recognised, when he said that the soul, after its separation from the
 body, was not dissipated back into the soul of the universe, but
 retained permanently its distinct individuality, "in order that it
 might render," to use his own words, "an account to the Father of those
 things which it has done in the body;" --(even supposing all this, I
 say,) I still want to examine the justice, the solemnity, the majesty,
 and the dignity of this reputed judgment of God, and see whether human
 judgment has not too elevated a throne in it--exaggerated in both
 directions, in its office both of punishments and rewards, too severe
 in dealing out its vengeance, and too lavish in bestowing its favour.
 What do you suppose will become of the soul of the murderer? (It will
 animate), I suppose, some cattle destined for the slaughter-house and
 the shambles, that it may itself be killed, even as it has killed; and
 be itself flayed, since it has fleeced others; and be itself used for
 food, since it has cast to the wild beasts the ill-fated victims whom
 it once slew in woods and lonely roads. Now, if such be the judicial
 retribution which it is to receive, is not such a soul likely to find
 more of consolation than of punishment, in the fact that it receives
 its coup de grâce from the hands of most expert practitioners--is
 buried with condiments served in the most piquant styles of an Apicius
 or a Lurco, is introduced to the tables of your exquisite Ciceros, is
 brought up on the most splendid dishes of a Sylla, finds its obsequies
 in a banquet, is devoured by respectable (mouths) on a par with itself,
 rather than by kites and wolves, so that all may see how it has got a
 man's body for its tomb, and has risen again after returning to its own
 kindred race--exulting in the face of human judgments, if it has
 experienced them? For these barbarous sentences of death consign to
 various wild beasts, which are selected and trained even against their
 nature for their horrible office the criminal who has committed murder,
 even while yet alive; nay, hindered from too easily dying, by a
 contrivance which retards his last moment in order to aggravate his
 punishment. But even if his soul should have anticipated by its
 departure the sword's last stroke, his body at all events must not
 escape the weapon: retribution for his own crime is yet exacted by
 stabbing his throat and stomach, and piercing his side. After that he
 is flung into the fire, that his very grave may be cheated. [1722] In
 no other way, indeed, is a sepulture allowed him. Not that any great
 care, after all, is bestowed on his pyre, so that other animals light
 upon his remains. At any rate, no mercy is shown to his bones, no
 indulgence to his ashes, which must be punished with exposure and
 nakedness. The vengeance which is inflicted among men upon the homicide
 is really as great as that which is imposed by nature. Who would not
 prefer the justice of the world, which, as the apostle himself
 testifies, "beareth not the sword in vain," [1723] and which is an
 institute of religion when it severely avenges in defence of human
 life? When we contemplate, too, the penalties awarded to other
 crimes--gibbets, and holocausts, and sacks, and harpoons, and
 precipices--who would not think it better to receive his sentence in
 the courts of Pythagoras and Empedocles?  For even the wretches whom
 they will send into the bodies of asses and mules to be punished by
 drudgery and slavery, how will they congratulate themselves on the mild
 labour of the mill and the water-wheel, when they recollect the mines,
 and the convict-gangs, and the public works, and even the prisons and
 black-holes, terrible in their idle, do-nothing routine? Then, again,
 in the case of those who, after a course of integrity, have surrendered
 their life to the Judge, I likewise look for rewards, but I rather
 discover punishments. To be sure, it must be a handsome gain for good
 men to be restored to life in any animals whatsoever! Homer, so dreamt
 Ennius, remembered that he was once a peacock; however, I cannot for my
 part believe poets, even when wide awake. A peacock, no doubt, is a
 very pretty bird, pluming itself, at will, on its splendid feathers;
 but then its wings do not make amends for its voice, which is harsh and
 unpleasant; and there is nothing that poets like better than a good
 song. His transformation, therefore, into a peacock was to Homer a
 penalty, not an honour.  The world's remuneration will bring him a much
 greater joy, when it lauds him as the father of the liberal sciences;
 and he will prefer the ornaments of his fame to the graces of his tail!
 But never mind! let poets migrate into peacocks, or into swans, if you
 like, especially as swans have a respectable voice: in what animal will
 you invest that righteous hero Æacus? In what beast will you clothe the
 chaste and excellent Dido?  What bird shall fall to the lot of
 Patience? what animal to the lot of Holiness? what fish to that of
 Innocence?  Now all creatures are the servants of man; all are his
 subjects, all his dependants. If by and by he is to become one of these
 creatures, he is by such a change debased and degraded, he to whom, for
 his virtues, images, statues, and titles are freely awarded as public
 honours and distinguished privileges, he to whom the senate and the
 people vote even sacrifices! Oh, what judicial sentences for gods to
 pronounce, as men's recompense after death! They are more mendacious
 than any human judgments; they are contemptible as punishments,
 disgusting as rewards; such as the worst of men could never fear, nor
 the best desire; such indeed, as criminals will aspire to, rather than
 saints,--the former, that they may escape more speedily the world's
 stern sentence,--the latter that they may more tardily incur it. How
 well, (forsooth), O ye philosophers do you teach us, and how usefully
 do you advise us, that after death rewards and punishments fall with
 lighter weight! whereas, if any judgment awaits souls at all, it ought
 rather to be supposed that it will be heavier at the conclusion of life
 than in the conduct [1724] thereof, since nothing is more complete than
 that which comes at the very last--nothing, moreover, is more complete
 than that which is especially divine. Accordingly, God's judgment will
 be more full and complete, because it will be pronounced at the very
 last, in an eternal irrevocable sentence, both of punishment and of
 consolation, (on men whose) souls are not to transmigrate into beasts,
 but are to return into their own proper bodies. And all this once for
 all, and on "that day, too, of which the Father only knoweth;" [1725]
 (only knoweth,) in order that by her trembling expectation faith may
 make full trial of her anxious sincerity, keeping her gaze ever fixed
 on that day, in her perpetual ignorance of it, daily fearing that for
 which she yet daily hopes.

 [1722] Or, "that he may be punished even in his sepulture."

 [1723] Rom. xiii. 4.

 [1724] In administratione.

 [1725] Mark xiii. 32.

 Chapter XXXIV.--These Vagaries Stimulated Some Profane Corruptions of
 Christianity. The Profanity of Simon Magus Condemned.

 No tenet, indeed, under cover of any heresy has as yet burst upon us,
 embodying any such extravagant fiction as that the souls of human
 beings pass into the bodies of wild beasts; but yet we have deemed it
 necessary to attack and refute this conceit, as a consistent sequel to
 the preceding opinions, in order that Homer in the peacock might be got
 rid of as effectually as Pythagoras in Euphorbus; and in order that, by
 the demolition of the metempsychosis and metensomatosis by the same
 blow, the ground might be cut away which has furnished no
 inconsiderable support to our heretics. There is the (infamous) Simon
 of Samaria in the Acts of the Apostles, who chaffered for the Holy
 Ghost: after his condemnation by Him, and a vain remorse that he and
 his money must perish together, [1726] he applied his energies to the
 destruction of the truth, as if to console himself with revenge.
 Besides the support with which his own magic arts furnished him, he had
 recourse to imposture, and purchased a Tyrian woman of the name of
 Helen out of a brothel, with the same money which he had offered for
 the Holy Spirit,--a traffic worthy of the wretched man. He actually
 feigned himself to be the Supreme Father, and further pretended that
 the woman was his own primary conception, wherewith he had purposed the
 creation of the angels and the archangels; that after she was possessed
 of this purpose she sprang forth from the Father and descended to the
 lower spaces, and there anticipating the Father's design had produced
 the angelic powers, which knew nothing of the Father, the Creator of
 this world; that she was detained a prisoner by these from a
 (rebellious) motive very like her own, lest after her departure from
 them they should appear to be the offspring of another being; and that,
 after being on this account exposed to every insult, to prevent her
 leaving them anywhere after her dishonour, she was degraded even to the
 form of man, to be confined, as it were, in the bonds of the flesh.
 Having during many ages wallowed about in one female shape and another,
 she became the notorious Helen who was so ruinous to Priam, and
 afterwards to the eyes of Stesichorus, whom, she blinded in revenge for
 his lampoons, and then restored to sight to reward him for his
 eulogies. After wandering about in this way from body to body, she, in
 her final disgrace, turned out a viler Helen still as a professional
 prostitute. This wench, therefore, was the lost sheep, upon whom the
 Supreme Father, even Simon, descended, who, after he had recovered her
 and brought her back--whether on his shoulders or loins I cannot
 tell--cast an eye on the salvation of man, in order to gratify his
 spleen by liberating them from the angelic powers. Moreover, to deceive
 these he also himself assumed a visible shape; and feigning the
 appearance of a man amongst men, he acted the part of the Son in Judea,
 and of the Father in Samaria. O hapless Helen, what a hard fate is
 yours between the poets and the heretics, who have blackened your fame
 sometimes with adultery, sometimes with prostitution!  Only her rescue
 from Troy is a more glorious affair than her extrication from the
 brothel. There were a thousand ships to remove her from Troy; a
 thousand pence were probably more than enough to withdraw her from the
 stews. Fie on you, Simon, to be so tardy in seeking her out, and so
 inconstant in ransoming her! How different from Menelaus! As soon as he
 has lost her, he goes in pursuit of her; she is no sooner ravished than
 he begins his search; after a ten years' conflict he boldly rescues
 her:  there is no lurking, no deceiving, no cavilling. I am really
 afraid that he was a much better "Father," who laboured so much more
 vigilantly, bravely, and perseveringly, about the recovery of his
 Helen.

 [1726] Acts viii. 18-21. [Vol. I. pp. 171, 182, 193, 347.]

 Chapter XXXV.--The Opinions of Carpocrates, Another Offset from the
 Pythagorean Dogmas, Stated and Confuted.

 However, it is not for you alone, (Simon), that the transmigration
 philosophy has fabricated this story. Carpocrates also makes equally
 good use of it, who was a magician and a fornicator like yourself, only
 he had not a Helen. [1727] And why should he not? since he asserted
 that souls are reinvested with bodies, in order to ensure the overthrow
 by all means of divine and human truth. For, (according to his
 miserable doctrine,) this life became consummated to no man until all
 those blemishes which are held to disfigure it have been fully
 displayed in its conduct; because there is nothing which is accounted
 evil by nature, but simply as men think of it.  The transmigration of
 human souls, therefore, into any kind of heterogeneous bodies, he
 thought by all means indispensable, whenever any depravity whatever had
 not been fully perpetrated in the early stage of life's passage. Evil
 deeds (one may be sure) appertain to life. Moreover, as often as the
 soul has fallen short as a defaulter in sin, it has to be recalled to
 existence, until it "pays the utmost farthing," [1728] thrust out from
 time to time into the prison of the body. To this effect does he tamper
 with the whole of that allegory of the Lord which is extremely clear
 and simple in its meaning, and ought to be from the first understood in
 its plain and natural sense. Thus our "adversary" (therein mentioned
 [1729] ) is the heathen man, who is walking with us along the same road
 of life which is common to him and ourselves. Now "we must needs go out
 of the world," [1730] if it be not allowed us to have conversation with
 them. He bids us, therefore, show a kindly disposition to such a man.
 "Love your enemies," says He, "pray for them that curse you," [1731]
 lest such a man in any transaction of business be irritated by any
 unjust conduct of yours, and "deliver thee to the judge" of his own
 (nation [1732] ), and you be thrown into prison, and be detained in its
 close and narrow cell until you have liquidated all your debt against
 him. [1733] Then, again, should you be disposed to apply the term
 "adversary" to the devil, you are advised by the (Lord's) injunction,
 "while you are in the way with him," to make even with him such a
 compact as may be deemed compatible with the requirements of your true
 faith. Now the compact you have made respecting him is to renounce him,
 and his pomp, and his angels. Such is your agreement in this matter.
 Now the friendly understanding you will have to carry out must arise
 from your observance of the compact: you must never think of getting
 back any of the things which you have abjured, and have restored to
 him, lest he should summon you as a fraudulent man, and a transgressor
 of your agreement, before God the Judge (for in this light do we read
 of him, in another passage, as "the accuser of the brethren," [1734] or
 saints, where reference is made to the actual practice of legal
 prosecution); and lest this Judge deliver you over to the angel who is
 to execute the sentence, and he commit you to the prison of hell, out
 of which there will be no dismissal until the smallest even of your
 delinquencies be paid off in the period before the resurrection. [1735]
 What can be a more fitting sense than this? What a truer
 interpretation? If, however, according to Carpocrates, the soul is
 bound to the commission of all sorts of crime and evil conduct, what
 must we from his system understand to be its "adversary" and foe? I
 suppose it must be that better mind which shall compel it by force to
 the performance of some act of virtue, that it may be driven from body
 to body, until it be found in none a debtor to the claims of a virtuous
 life. This means, that a good tree is known by its bad fruit--in other
 words, that the doctrine of truth is understood from the worst possible
 precepts.  I apprehend [1736] that heretics of this school seize with
 especial avidity the example of Elias, whom they assume to have been so
 reproduced in John (the Baptist) as to make our Lord's statement
 sponsor for their theory of transmigration, when He said, "Elias is
 come already, and they knew him not;" [1737] and again, in another
 passage, "And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to
 come." [1738] Well, then, was it really in a Pythagorean sense that the
 Jews approached John with the inquiry, "Art thou Elias?" [1739] and not
 rather in the sense of the divine prediction, "Behold, I will send you
 Elijah" the Tisbite? [1740] The fact, however, is, that their
 metempsychosis, or transmigration theory, signifies the recall of the
 soul which had died long before, and its return to some other body. But
 Elias is to come again, not after quitting life (in the way of dying),
 but after his translation (or removal without dying); not for the
 purpose of being restored to the body, from which he had not departed,
 but for the purpose of revisiting the world from which he was
 translated; not by way of resuming a life which he had laid aside, but
 of fulfilling prophecy,--really and truly the same man, both in respect
 of his name and designation, as well as of his unchanged humanity. How,
 therefore could John be Elias? You have your answer in the angel's
 announcement: "And he shall go before the people," says he, "in the
 spirit and power of Elias"--not (observe) in his soul and his body.
 These substances are, in fact, the natural property of each individual;
 whilst "the spirit and power" are bestowed as external gifts by the
 grace of God and so may be transferred to another person according to
 the purpose and will of the Almighty, as was anciently the case with
 respect to the spirit of Moses. [1741]

 [1727] For Carpocrates, see Irenæus, i. 24; Eusebius, H. E. iv. 7;
 Epiphan. Hær. 27.

 [1728] Matt. v. 26.

 [1729] Ver. 25.

 [1730] 1 Cor. v. 10.

 [1731] Luke vi. 27.

 [1732] Matt. v. 25.

 [1733] Ver. 26.

 [1734] Rev. xii. 10.

 [1735] Morâ resurrectionis. For the force of this phrase, as apparently
 implying a doctrine of purgatory, and an explanation of Tertullian's
 teaching on this point, see Bp. Kaye on Tertullian, pp. 328, 329. [See
 p. 59, supra.]

 [1736] Spero.

 [1737] Matt. xvii. 12.

 [1738] Matt. xi. 14.

 [1739] John i. 21.

 [1740] Mal. iv. 5.

 [1741] Num. xii. 2.

 Chapter XXXVI.--The Main Points of Our Author's Subject. On the Sexes
 of the Human Race.

 For the discussion of these questions we abandoned, if I remember
 rightly, ground to which we must now return. We had established the
 position that the soul is seminally placed in man, and by human agency,
 and that its seed from the very beginning is uniform, as is that of the
 soul also, to the race of man; (and this we settled) owing to the rival
 opinions of the philosophers and the heretics, and that ancient saying
 mentioned by Plato (to which we referred above). [1742] We now pursue
 in their order the points which follow from them. The soul, being sown
 in the womb at the same time as the body, receives likewise along with
 it its sex; and this indeed so simultaneously, that neither of the two
 substances can be alone regarded as the cause of the sex.  Now, if in
 the semination of these substances any interval were admissible in
 their conception, in such wise that either the flesh or the soul should
 be the first to be conceived, one might then ascribe an especial sex to
 one of the substances, owing to the difference in the time of the
 impregnations, so that either the flesh would impress its sex upon the
 soul, or the soul upon the sex; even as Apelles (the heretic, not the
 painter [1743] ) gives the priority over their bodies to the souls of
 men and women, as he had been taught by Philumena, and in consequence
 makes the flesh, as the later, receive its sex from the soul. They also
 who make the soul supervene after birth on the flesh predetermine, of
 course, the sex of the previously formed soul to be male or female,
 according to (the sex of) the flesh. But the truth is, the seminations
 of the two substances are inseparable in point of time, and their
 effusion is also one and the same, in consequence of which a community
 of gender is secured to them; so that the course of nature, whatever
 that be, shall draw the line (for the distinct sexes).  Certainly in
 this view we have an attestation of the method of the first two
 formations, when the male was moulded and tempered in a completer way,
 for Adam was first formed; and the woman came far behind him, for Eve
 was the later formed. So that her flesh was for a long time without
 specific form (such as she afterwards assumed when taken out of Adam's
 side); but she was even then herself a living being, because I should
 regard her at that time in soul as even a portion of Adam. Besides,
 God's afflatus would have animated her too, if there had not been in
 the woman a transmission from Adam of his soul also as well as of his
 flesh.

 [1742] In ch. xxviii. at the beginning.

 [1743] See above, ch. xxiii. [Also p. 246, infra.]

 Chapter XXXVII.--On the Formation and State of the Embryo. Its Relation
 with the Subject of This Treatise.

 Now the entire process of sowing, forming, and completing the human
 embryo in the womb is no doubt regulated by some power, which ministers
 herein to the will of God, whatever may be the method which it is
 appointed to employ. Even the superstition of Rome, by carefully
 attending to these points, imagined the goddess Alemona to nourish the
 foetus in the womb; as well as (the goddesses) Nona and Decima, called
 after the most critical months of gestation; and Partula, to manage and
 direct parturition; and Lucina, to bring the child to the birth and
 light of day. We, on our part, believe the angels to officiate herein
 for God. The embryo therefore becomes a human being in the womb from
 the moment that its form is completed. The law of Moses, indeed,
 punishes with due penalties the man who shall cause abortion, inasmuch
 as there exists already the rudiment of a human being, [1744] which has
 imputed to it even now the condition of life and death, since it is
 already liable to the issues of both, although, by living still in the
 mother, it for the most part shares its own state with the mother. I
 must also say something about the period of the soul's birth, that I
 may omit nothing incidental in the whole process. A mature and regular
 birth takes place, as a general rule, at the commencement of the tenth
 month. They who theorize respecting numbers, honour the number ten as
 the parent of all the others, and as imparting perfection to the human
 nativity. For my own part, I prefer viewing this measure of time in
 reference to God, as if implying that the ten months rather initiated
 man into the ten commandments; so that the numerical estimate of the
 time needed to consummate our natural birth should correspond to the
 numerical classification of the rules of our regenerate life. But
 inasmuch as birth is also completed with the seventh month, I more
 readily recognize in this number than in the eighth the honour of a
 numerical agreement with the sabbatical period; so that the month in
 which God's image is sometimes produced in a human birth, shall in its
 number tally with the day on which God's creation was completed and
 hallowed. Human nativity has sometimes been allowed to be premature,
 and yet to occur in fit and perfect accordance with an hebdomad or
 sevenfold number, as an auspice of our resurrection, and rest, and
 kingdom. The ogdoad, or eightfold number, therefore, is not concerned
 in our formation; [1745] for in the time it represents there will be no
 more marriage. [1746] We have already demonstrated the conjunction of
 the body and the soul, from the concretion of their very seminations to
 the complete formation of the foetus. We now maintain their conjunction
 likewise from the birth onwards; in the first place, because they both
 grow together, only each in a different manner suited to the diversity
 of their nature--the flesh in magnitude, the soul in intelligence--the
 flesh in material condition, the soul in sensibility. We are, however,
 forbidden to suppose that the soul increases in substance, lest it
 should be said also to be capable of diminution in substance, and so
 its extinction even should be believed to be possible; but its inherent
 power, in which are contained all its natural peculiarities, as
 originally implanted in its being, is gradually developed along with
 the flesh, without impairing the germinal basis of the substance, which
 it received when breathed at first into man. Take a certain quantity of
 gold or of silver--a rough mass as yet: it has indeed a compact
 condition, and one that is more compressed at the moment than it will
 be; yet it contains within its contour what is throughout a mass of
 gold or of silver. When this mass is afterwards extended by beating it
 into leaf, it becomes larger than it was before by the elongation of
 the original mass, but not by any addition thereto, because it is
 extended in space, not increased in bulk; although in a way it is even
 increased when it is extended: for it may be increased in form, but not
 in state.  Then, again, the sheen of the gold or the silver, which when
 the metal was any in block was inherent in it no doubt really, but yet
 only obscurely, shines out in developed lustre.  Afterwards various
 modifications of shape accrue, according to the feasibility in the
 material which makes it yield to the manipulation of the artisan, who
 yet adds nothing to the condition of the mass but its configuration. In
 like manner, the growth and developments of the soul are to be
 estimated, not as enlarging its substance, but as calling forth its
 powers.

 [1744] Causa hominis.

 [1745] The ogdoad, or number eight, mystically representing "heaven,"
 where they do not marry.

 [1746] Beyond the hebdomad comes the resurrection, on which see Matt.
 xxii. 30.

 Chapter XXXVIII.--On the Growth of the Soul. Its Maturity Coincident
 with the Maturity of the Flesh in Man.

 Now we have already [1747] laid down the principle, that all the
 natural properties of the soul which relate to sense and intelligence
 are inherent in its very substance, and spring from its native
 constitution, but that they advance by a gradual growth through the
 stages of life and develope themselves in different ways by accidental
 circumstances, according to men's means and arts, their manners and
 customs their local situations, and the influences of the Supreme
 Powers; [1748] but in pursuance of that aspect of the association of
 body and soul which we have now to consider, we maintain that the
 puberty of the soul coincides with that of the body, and that they
 attain both together to this full growth at about the fourteenth year
 of life, speaking generally,--the former by the suggestion of the
 senses, and the latter by the growth of the bodily members; and (we fix
 on this age) not because, as Asclepiades supposes, reflection then
 begins, nor because the civil laws date the commencement of the real
 business of life from this period, but because this was the appointed
 order from the very first. For as Adam and Eve felt that they must
 cover their nakedness after their knowledge of good and evil so we
 profess to have the same discernment of good and evil from the time
 that we experience the same sensation of shame. Now from the
 before-mentioned age (of fourteen years) sex is suffused and clothed
 with an especial sensibility, and concupiscence employs the ministry of
 the eye, and communicates its pleasure to another, and understands the
 natural relations between male and female, and wears the fig-tree apron
 to cover the shame which it still excites, and drives man out of the
 paradise of innocence and chastity, and in its wild pruriency falls
 upon sins and unnatural incentives to delinquency; for its impulse has
 by this time surpassed the appointment of nature, and springs from its
 vicious abuse.  But the strictly natural concupiscence is simply
 confined to the desire of those aliments which God at the beginning
 conferred upon man. "Of every tree of the garden" He says, "ye shall
 freely eat;" [1749] and then again to the generation which followed
 next after the flood He enlarged the grant: "Every moving thing that
 liveth shall be meat for you; behold, as the green herb have I given
 you all these things," [1750] --where He has regard rather to the body
 than to the soul, although it be in the interest of the soul also. For
 we must remove all occasion from the caviller, who, because the soul
 apparently wants ailments, would insist on the soul's being from this
 circumstance deemed mortal, since it is sustained by meat and drink and
 after a time loses its rigour when they are withheld, and on their
 complete removal ultimately droops and dies. Now the point we must keep
 in view is not merely which particular faculty it is which desires
 these (aliments), but also for what end; and even if it be for its own
 sake, still the question remains, Why this desire, and when felt, and
 how long? Then again there is the consideration, that it is one thing
 to desire by natural instinct, and another thing to desire through
 necessity; one thing to desire as a property of being, another thing to
 desire for a special object. The soul, therefore, will desire meat and
 drink--for itself indeed, because of a special necessity; for the
 flesh, however, from the nature of its properties. For the flesh is no
 doubt the house of the soul, and the soul is the temporary inhabitant
 of the flesh. The desire, then, of the lodger will arise from the
 temporary cause and the special necessity which his very designation
 suggests,--with a view to benefit and improve the place of his
 temporary abode, while sojourning in it; not with the view, certainly,
 of being himself the foundation of the house, or himself its walls, or
 himself its support and roof, but simply and solely with the view of
 being accommodated and housed, since he could not receive such
 accommodation except in a sound and well-built house. (Now, applying
 this imagery to the soul,) if it be not provided with this
 accommodation, it will not be in its power to quit its dwelling-place,
 and for want of fit and proper resources, to depart safe and sound, in
 possession, too, of its own supports, and the aliments which belong to
 its own proper condition,--namely immortality, rationality,
 sensibility, intelligence, and freedom of the will.

 [1747] See above, in ch. xx.

 [1748] See above, in ch. xxiv.

 [1749] Gen. ii. 16.

 [1750] Gen. ix. 3.

 Chapter XXXIX.--The Evil Spirit Has Marred the Purity of the Soul from
 the Very Birth.

 All these endowments of the soul which are bestowed on it at birth are
 still obscured and depraved by the malignant being who, in the
 beginning, regarded them with envious eye, so that they are never seen
 in their spontaneous action, nor are they administered as they ought to
 be. For to what individual of the human race will not the evil spirit
 cleave, ready to entrap their souls from the very portal of their
 birth, at which he is invited to be present in all those superstitious
 processes which accompany childbearing? Thus it comes to pass that all
 men are brought to the birth with idolatry for the midwife, whilst the
 very wombs that bear them, still bound with the fillets that have been
 wreathed before the idols, declare their offspring to be consecrated to
 demons: for in parturition they invoke the aid of Lucina and Diana; for
 a whole week a table is spread in honour of Juno; on the last day the
 fates of the horoscope [1751] are invoked; and then the infant's first
 step on the ground is sacred to the goddess Statina. After this does
 any one fail to devote to idolatrous service the entire head of his
 son, or to take out a hair, or to shave off the whole with a razor, or
 to bind it up for an offering, or seal it for sacred use--in behalf of
 the clan, of the ancestry, or for public devotion? On this principle of
 early possession it was that Socrates, while yet a boy, was found by
 the spirit of the demon. Thus, too, is it that to all persons their
 genii are assigned, which is only another name for demons. Hence in no
 case (I mean of the heathen, of course) is there any nativity which is
 pure of idolatrous superstition. It was from this circumstance that the
 apostle said, that when either of the parents was sanctified, the
 children were holy; [1752] and this as much by the prerogative of the
 (Christian) seed as by the discipline of the institution (by baptism,
 and Christian education). "Else," says he, "were the children unclean"
 by birth: [1753] as if he meant us to understand that the children of
 believers were designed for holiness, and thereby for salvation; in
 order that he might by the pledge of such a hope give his support to
 matrimony, which he had determined to maintain in its integrity.
 Besides, he had certainly not forgotten what the Lord had so
 definitively stated:  "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit,
 he cannot enter into the kingdom of God;" [1754] in other words, he
 cannot be holy.

 [1751] Fata Scribunda.

 [1752] 1 Cor. vii. 14.

 [1753] 1 Cor. vii. 14.

 [1754] John iii. 5.

 Chapter XL.--The Body of Man Only Ancillary to the Soul in the
 Commission of Evil.

 Every soul, then, by reason of its birth, has its nature in Adam until
 it is born again in Christ; moreover, it is unclean all the while that
 it remains without this regeneration; [1755] and because unclean, it is
 actively sinful, and suffuses even the flesh (by reason of their
 conjunction) with its own shame. Now although the flesh is sinful, and
 we are forbidden to walk in accordance with it, [1756] and its works
 are condemned as lusting against the spirit, [1757] and men on its
 account are censured as carnal, [1758] yet the flesh has not such
 ignominy on its own account. For it is not of itself that it thinks
 anything or feels anything for the purpose of advising or commanding
 sin. How should it, indeed? It is only a ministering thing, and its
 ministration is not like that of a servant or familiar friend--animated
 and human beings; but rather that of a vessel, or something of that
 kind: it is body, not soul. Now a cup may minister to a thirsty man;
 and yet, if the thirsty man will not apply the cup to his mouth, the
 cup will yield no ministering service. Therefore the differentia, or
 distinguishing property, of man by no means lies in his earthy element;
 nor is the flesh the human person, as being some faculty of his soul,
 and a personal quality; but it is a thing of quite a different
 substance and different condition, although annexed to the soul as a
 chattel or as an instrument for the offices of life. Accordingly the
 flesh is blamed in the Scriptures, because nothing is done by the soul
 without the flesh in operations of concupiscence, appetite,
 drunkenness, cruelty, idolatry, and other works of the
 flesh,--operations, I mean, which are not confined to sensations, but
 result in effects. The emotions of sin, indeed, when not resulting in
 effects, are usually imputed to the soul: "Whosoever looketh on a woman
 to lust after, hath already in his heart committed adultery with her."
 [1759] But what has the flesh alone, without the soul, ever done in
 operations of virtue, righteousness, endurance, or chastity? What
 absurdity, however, it is to attribute sin and crime to that substance
 to which you do not assign any good actions or character of its own!
 Now the party which aids in the commission of a crime is brought to
 trial, only in such a way that the principal offender who actually
 committed the crime may bear the weight of the penalty, although the
 abettor too does not escape indictment. Greater is the odium which
 falls on the principal, when his officials are punished through his
 fault. He is beaten with more stripes who instigates and orders the
 crime, whilst at the same time he who obeys such an evil command is not
 acquitted.

 [1755] Rom. vi. 4.

 [1756] Gal. v. 16.

 [1757] Ver. 17.

 [1758] Rom. viii. 5.

 [1759] Matt. v. 28.

 Chapter XLI.--Notwithstanding the Depravity of Man's Soul by Original
 Sin, There is Yet Left a Basis Whereon Divine Grace Can Work for Its
 Recovery by Spiritual Regeneration.

 There is, then, besides the evil which supervenes on the soul from the
 intervention of the evil spirit, an antecedent, and in a certain sense
 natural, evil which arises from its corrupt origin. For, as we have
 said before, the corruption of our nature is another nature having a
 god and father of its own, namely the author of (that) corruption.
 Still there is a portion of good in the soul, of that original, divine,
 and genuine good, which is its proper nature.  For that which is
 derived from God is rather obscured than extinguished. It can be
 obscured, indeed, because it is not God; extinguished, however, it
 cannot be, because it comes from God. As therefore light, when
 intercepted by an opaque body, still remains, although it is not
 apparent, by reason of the interposition of so dense a body; so
 likewise the good in the soul, being weighed down by the evil, is,
 owing to the obscuring character thereof, either not seen at all, its
 light being wholly hidden, or else only a stray beam is there visible
 where it struggles through by an accidental outlet. Thus some men are
 very bad, and some very good; but yet the souls of all form but one
 genus: even in the worst there is something good, and in the best there
 is something bad. For God alone is without sin; and the only man
 without sin is Christ, since Christ is also God. Thus the divinity of
 the soul bursts forth in prophetic forecasts in consequence of its
 primeval good; and being conscious of its origin, it bears testimony to
 God (its author) in exclamations such as: Good God! God knows! and
 Good-bye! [1760] Just as no soul is without sin, so neither is any soul
 without seeds of good.  Therefore, when the soul embraces the faith,
 being renewed in its second birth by water and the power from above,
 then the veil of its former corruption being taken away, it beholds the
 light in all its brightness. It is also taken up (in its second birth)
 by the Holy Spirit, just as in its first birth it is embraced by the
 unholy spirit. The flesh follows the soul now wedded to the Spirit, as
 a part of the bridal portion--no longer the servant of the soul, but of
 the Spirit. O happy marriage, if in it there is committed no violation
 of the nuptial vow!

 [1760] Deo commendo = God be wi' ye. De Test. c. ii. p. 176, supra.

 Chapter XLII.--Sleep, the Mirror of Death, as Introductory to the
 Consideration of Death.

 It now remains (that we discuss the subject) of death, in order that
 our subject-matter may terminate where the soul itself completes it;
 although Epicurus, indeed, in his pretty widely known doctrine, has
 asserted that death does not appertain to us. That, says he, which is
 dissolved lacks sensation; and that which is without sensation is
 nothing to us. Well, but it is not actually death which suffers
 dissolution and lacks sensation, but the human person who experiences
 death. Yet even he has admitted suffering to be incidental to the being
 to whom action belongs. Now, if it is in man to suffer death, which
 dissolves the body and destroys the senses, how absurd to say that so
 great a susceptibility belongs not to man! With much greater precision
 does Seneca say: "After death all comes to an end, even (death)
 itself." From which position of his it must needs follow that death
 will appertain to its own self, since itself comes to an end; and much
 more to man, in the ending of whom amongst the "all," itself also ends.
 Death, (says Epicurus) belongs not to us; then at that rate, life
 belongs not to us.  For certainly, if that which causes our dissolution
 have no relation to us, that also which compacts and composes us must
 be unconnected with us. If the deprivation of our sensation be nothing
 to us, neither can the acquisition of sensation have anything to do
 with us. The fact, however, is, he who destroys the very soul, (as
 Epicurus does), cannot help destroying death also. As for ourselves,
 indeed, (Christians as we are), we must treat of death just as we
 should of the posthumous life and of some other province of the soul,
 (assuming) that we at all events belong to death, if it does not
 pertain to us. And on the same principle, even sleep, which is the very
 mirror of death, is not alien from our subject-matter.

 Chapter XLIII.--Sleep a Natural Function as Shown by Other
 Considerations, and by the Testimony of Scripture.

 Let us therefore first discuss the question of sleep, and afterwards in
 what way the soul encounters [1761] death. Now sleep is certainly not a
 supernatural thing, as some philosophers will have it be, when they
 suppose it to be the result of causes which appear to be above nature.
 The Stoics affirm sleep to be "a temporary suspension of the activity
 of the senses;" [1762] the Epicureans define it as an intermission of
 the animal spirit; Anaxagoras and Xenophanes as a weariness of the
 same; Empedocles and Parmenides as a cooling down thereof; Strato as a
 separation of the (soul's) connatural spirit; Democritus as the soul's
 indigence; Aristotle as the interruption [1763] of the heat around the
 heart. As for myself, I can safely say that I have never slept in such
 a way as to discover even a single one of these conditions.  Indeed, we
 cannot possibly believe that sleep is a weariness; it is rather the
 opposite, for it undoubtedly removes weariness, and a person is
 refreshed by sleep instead of being fatigued.  Besides, sleep is not
 always the result of fatigue; and even when it is, the fatigue
 continues no longer. Nor can I allow that sleep is a cooling or
 decaying of the animal heat, for our bodies derive warmth from sleep in
 such a way that the regular dispersion of the food by means of sleep
 could not so easily go on if there were too much heat to accelerate it
 unduly, or cold to retard it, if sleep had the alleged refrigerating
 influence. There is also the further fact that perspiration indicates
 an over-heated digestion; and digestion is predicated of us as a
 process of concoction, which is an operation concerned with heat and
 not with cold.  In like manner, the immortality of the soul precludes
 belief in the theory that sleep is an intermission of the animal
 spirit, or an indigence of the spirit, or a separation of the (soul's)
 connatural spirit. The soul perishes if it undergoes diminution or
 intermission. Our only resource, indeed, is to agree with the Stoics,
 by determining the soul to be a temporary suspension of the activity of
 the senses, procuring rest for the body only, not for the soul also.
 For the soul, as being always in motion, and always active, never
 succumbs to rest,--a condition which is alien to immortality: for
 nothing immortal admits any end to its operation; but sleep is an end
 of operation. It is indeed on the body, which is subject to mortality,
 and on the body alone, that sleep graciously bestows [1764] a cessation
 from work. He, therefore, who shall doubt whether sleep is a natural
 function, has the dialectical experts calling in question the whole
 difference between things natural and supernatural--so that what things
 he supposed to be beyond nature he may, (if he likes,) be safe in
 assigning to nature, which indeed has made such a disposition of
 things, that they may seemingly be accounted as beyond it; and so, of
 course, all things are natural or none are natural, (as occasion
 requires.) With us (Christians), however, only that can receive a
 hearing which is suggested by contemplating God, the Author of all the
 things which we are now discussing. For we believe that nature, if it
 is anything, is a reasonable work of God.  Now reason presides over
 sleep; for sleep is so fit for man, so useful, so necessary, that were
 it not for it, not a soul could provide agency for recruiting the body,
 for restoring its energies, for ensuring its health, for supplying
 suspension from work and remedy against labour, and for the legitimate
 enjoyment of which day departs, and night provides an ordinance by
 taking from all objects their very colour.  Since, then, sleep is
 indispensable to our life, and health, and succour, there can be
 nothing pertaining to it which is not reasonable, and which is not
 natural. Hence it is that physicians banish beyond the gateway of
 nature everything which is contrary to what is vital, healthful, and
 helpful to nature; for those maladies which are inimical to
 sleep--maladies of the mind and of the stomach--they have decided to be
 contrariant to nature, and by such decision have determined as its
 corollary that sleep is perfectly natural.  Moreover, when they declare
 that sleep is not natural in the lethargic state, they derive their
 conclusion from the fact that it is natural when it is in its due and
 regular exercise. For every natural state is impaired either by defect
 or by excess, whilst it is maintained by its proper measure and
 amount.  That, therefore, will be natural in its condition which may be
 rendered non-natural by defect or by excess.  Well, now, what if you
 were to remove eating and drinking from the conditions of nature? if in
 them lies the chief incentive to sleep. It is certain that, from the
 very beginning of his nature, man was impressed with these instincts
 (of sleep). [1765] If you receive your instruction from God, (you will
 find) that the fountain of the human race, Adam, had a taste of
 drowsiness before having a draught of repose; slept before he laboured,
 or even before he ate, nay, even before he spoke; in order that men may
 see that sleep is a natural feature and function, and one which has
 actually precedence over all the natural faculties. From this primary
 instance also we are led to trace even then the image of death in
 sleep. For as Adam was a figure of Christ, Adam's sleep shadowed out
 the death of Christ, who was to sleep a mortal slumber, that from the
 wound inflicted on His side might, in like manner (as Eve was formed),
 be typified the church, the true mother of the living. This is why
 sleep is so salutary, so rational, and is actually formed into the
 model of that death which is general and common to the race of man.
 God, indeed, has willed (and it may be said in passing that He has,
 generally, in His dispensations brought nothing to pass without such
 types and shadows) to set before us, in a manner more fully and
 completely than Plato's example, by daily recurrence the outlines of
 man's state, especially concerning the beginning and the termination
 thereof; thus stretching out the hand to help our faith more readily by
 types and parables, not in words only, but also in things. He
 accordingly sets before your view the human body stricken by the
 friendly power of slumber, prostrated by the kindly necessity of repose
 immoveable in position, just as it lay previous to life, and just as it
 will lie after life is past: there it lies as an attestation of its
 form when first moulded, and of its condition when at last
 buried--awaiting the soul in both stages, in the former previous to its
 bestowal, in the latter after its recent withdrawal. Meanwhile the soul
 is circumstanced in such a manner as to seem to be elsewhere active,
 learning to bear future absence by a dissembling of its presence for
 the moment. We shall soon know the case of Hermotimus. But yet it
 dreams in the interval. Whence then its dreams? The fact is, it cannot
 rest or be idle altogether, nor does it confine to the still hours of
 sleep the nature of its immortality. It proves itself to possess a
 constant motion; it travels over land and sea, it trades, it is
 excited, it labours, it plays, it grieves, it rejoices, it follows
 pursuits lawful and unlawful; it shows what very great power it has
 even without the body, how well equipped it is with members of its own,
 although betraying at the same time the need it has of impressing on
 some body its activity again. Accordingly, when the body shakes off its
 slumber, it asserts before your eye the resurrection of the dead by its
 own resumption of its natural functions.  Such, therefore, must be both
 the natural reason and the reasonable nature of sleep. If you only
 regard it as the image of death, you initiate faith, you nourish hope,
 you learn both how to die and how to live, you learn watchfulness, even
 while you sleep.

 [1761] Decurrat.

 [1762] So Bp. Kaye, p. 195.

 [1763] Marcorem, "the decay."

 [1764] Adulatur.

 [1765] Gen. ii. 21.

 Chapter XLIV.--The Story of Hermotimus, and the Sleeplessness of the
 Emperor Nero. No Separation of the Soul from the Body Until Death.

 With regard to the case of Hermotimus, they say that he used to be
 deprived of his soul in his sleep, as if it wandered away from his body
 like a person on a holiday trip. His wife betrayed the strange
 peculiarity. His enemies, finding him asleep, burnt his body, as if it
 were a corpse: when his soul returned too late, it appropriated (I
 suppose) to itself the guilt of the murder. However the good citizens
 of Clazomenæ consoled poor Hermotimus with a temple, into which no
 woman ever enters, because of the infamy of this wife.  Now why this
 story? In order that, since the vulgar belief so readily holds sleep to
 be the separation of the soul from the body, credulity should not be
 encouraged by this case of Hermotimus. It must certainly have been a
 much heavier sort of slumber: one would presume it was the nightmare,
 or perhaps that diseased languor which Soranus suggests in opposition
 to the nightmare, or else some such malady as that which the fable has
 fastened upon Epimenides, who slept on some fifty years or so.
 Suetonius, however, informs us that Nero never dreamt, and Theopompus
 says the same thing about Thrasymedes; but Nero at the close of his
 life did with some difficulty dream after some excessive alarm. What
 indeed would be said, if the case of Hermotimus were believed to be
 such that the repose of his soul was a state of actual idleness during
 sleep, and a positive separation from his body? You may conjecture it
 to be anything but such a licence of the soul as admits of flights away
 from the body without death, and that by continual recurrence, as if
 habitual to its state and constitution.  If indeed such a thing were
 told me to have happened at any time to the soul--resembling a total
 eclipse of the sun or the moon--I should verily suppose that the
 occurrence had been caused by God's own interposition, for it would not
 be unreasonable for a man to receive admonition from the Divine Being
 either in the way of warning or of alarm, as by a flash of lightning,
 or by a sudden stroke of death; only it would be much the more natural
 conclusion to believe that this process should be by a dream, because
 if it must be supposed to be, (as the hypothesis we are resisting
 assumes it to be,) not a dream, the occurrence ought rather to happen
 to a man whilst he is wide awake.

 Chapter XLV.--Dreams, an Incidental Effect of the Soul's Activity.
 Ecstasy.

 We are bound to expound at this point what is the opinion of Christians
 respecting dreams, as incidents of sleep, and as no slight or trifling
 excitements of the soul, which we have declared to be always occupied
 and active owing to its perpetual movement, which again is a proof and
 evidence of its divine quality and immortality. When, therefore, rest
 accrues to human bodies, it being their own especial comfort, the soul,
 disdaining a repose which is not natural to it, never rests; and since
 it receives no help from the limbs of the body, it uses its own.
 Imagine a gladiator without his instruments or arms, and a charioteer
 without his team, but still gesticulating the entire course and
 exertion of their respective employments: there is the fight, there is
 the struggle; but the effort is a vain one. Nevertheless the whole
 procedure seems to be gone through, although it evidently has not been
 really effected. There is the act, but not the effect. This power we
 call ecstasy, in which the sensuous soul stands out of itself, in a way
 which even resembles madness. [1766] Thus in the very beginning sleep
 was inaugurated by ecstasy: "And God sent an ecstasy upon Adam, and he
 slept." [1767] The sleep came on his body to cause it to rest, but the
 ecstasy fell on his soul to remove rest: from that very circumstance it
 still happens ordinarily (and from the order results the nature of the
 case) that sleep is combined with ecstasy. In fact, with what real
 feeling, and anxiety, and suffering do we experience joy, and sorrow,
 and alarm in our dreams! Whereas we should not be moved by any such
 emotions, by what would be the merest fantasies of course, if when we
 dream we were masters of ourselves, (unaffected by ecstasy.) In these
 dreams, indeed, good actions are useless, and crimes harmless; for we
 shall no more be condemned for visionary acts of sin, than we shall be
 crowned for imaginary martyrdom. But how, you will ask, can the soul
 remember its dreams, when it is said to be without any mastery over its
 own operations? This memory must be an especial gift of the ecstatic
 condition of which we are treating, since it arises not from any
 failure of healthy action, but entirely from natural process; nor does
 it expel mental function--it withdraws it for a time. It is one thing
 to shake, it is another thing to move; one thing to destroy, another
 thing to agitate. That, therefore, which memory supplies betokens
 soundness of mind; and that which a sound mind ecstatically experiences
 whilst the memory remains unchecked, is a kind of madness. We are
 accordingly not said to be mad, but to dream, in that state; to be in
 the full possession also of our mental faculties, [1768] if we are at
 any time. For although the power to exercise these faculties [1769] may
 be dimmed in us, it is still not extinguished; except that it may seem
 to be itself absent at the very time that the ecstasy is energizing in
 us in its special manner, in such wise as to bring before us images of
 a sound mind and of wisdom, even as it does those of aberration.

 [1766] We had better give Tertullian's own succinct definition:
 "Excessus sensûs et amentiæ instar."

 [1767] Gen. ii. 21.

 [1768] Prudentes.

 [1769] Sapere.

 Chapter XLVI.--Diversity of Dreams and Visions. Epicurus Thought
 Lightly of Them, Though Generally Most Highly Valued. Instances of
 Dreams.

 We now find ourselves constrained to express an opinion about the
 character of the dreams by which the soul is excited. And when shall we
 arrive at the subject of death? And on such a question I would say,
 When God shall permit: that admits of no long delay which must needs
 happen at all events. Epicurus has given it as his opinion that dreams
 are altogether vain things; (but he says this) when liberating the
 Deity from all sort of care, and dissolving the entire order of the
 world, and giving to all things the aspect of merest chance, casual in
 their issues, fortuitous in their nature. Well, now, if such be the
 nature of things, there must be some chance even for truth, because it
 is impossible for it to be the only thing to be exempted from the
 fortune which is due to all things. Homer has assigned two gates to
 dreams, [1770] --the horny one of truth, the ivory one of error and
 delusion. For, they say, it is possible to see through horn, whereas
 ivory is untransparent.  Aristotle, while expressing his opinion that
 dreams are in most cases untrue, yet acknowledges that there is some
 truth in them. The people of Telmessus will not admit that dreams are
 in any case unmeaning, but they blame their own weakness when unable to
 conjecture their signification. Now, who is such a stranger to human
 experience as not sometimes to have perceived some truth in dreams? I
 shall force a blush from Epicurus, if I only glance at some few of the
 more remarkable instances. Herodotus [1771] relates how that Astyages,
 king of the Medes, saw in a dream issuing from the womb of his virgin
 daughter a flood which inundated Asia; and again, in the year which
 followed her marriage, he saw a vine growing out from the same part of
 her person, which overspread the whole of Asia. The same story is told
 prior to Herodotus by Charon of Lampsacus. Now they who interpreted
 these visions did not deceive the mother when they destined her son for
 so great an enterprise, for Cyrus both inundated and overspread Asia.
 Philip of Macedon, before he became a father, had seen imprinted on the
 pudenda of his consort Olympias the form of a small ring, with a lion
 as a seal. He had concluded that an offspring from her was out of the
 question (I suppose because the lion only becomes once a father), when
 Aristodemus or Aristophon happened to conjecture that nothing of an
 unmeaning or empty import lay under that seal, but that a son of very
 illustrious character was portended. They who know anything of
 Alexander recognise in him the lion of that small ring.  Ephorus writes
 to this effect.  Again, Heraclides has told us, that a certain woman of
 Himera beheld in a dream Dionysius' tyranny over Sicily.  Euphorion has
 publicly recorded as a fact, that, previous to giving birth to
 Seleucus, his mother Laodice foresaw that he was destined for the
 empire of Asia. I find again from Strabo, that it was owing to a dream
 that even Mithridates took possession of Pontus; and I further learn
 from Callisthenes that it was from the indication of a dream that
 Baraliris the Illyrian stretched his dominion from the Molossi to the
 frontiers of Macedon. The Romans, too, were acquainted with dreams of
 this kind.  From a dream Marcus Tullius (Cicero) had learnt how that
 one, who was yet only a little boy, and in a private station, who was
 also plain Julius Octavius, and personally unknown to (Cicero) himself,
 was the destined Augustus, and the suppressor and destroyer of (Rome's)
 civil discords. This is recorded in the Commentaries of Vitellius. But
 visions of this prophetic kind were not confined to predictions of
 supreme power; for they indicated perils also, and catastrophes: as,
 for instance, when Cæsar was absent from the battle of Philippi through
 illness, and thereby escaped the sword of Brutus and Cassius, and then
 although he expected to encounter greater danger still from the enemy
 in the field, he quitted his tent for it, in obedience to a vision of
 Artorius, and so escaped (the capture by the enemy, who shortly after
 took possession of the tent); as, again, when the daughter of
 Polycrates of Samos foresaw the crucifixion which awaited him from the
 anointing of the sun and the bath of Jupiter. [1772] So likewise in
 sleep revelations are made of high honours and eminent talents;
 remedies are also discovered, thefts brought to light, and treasures
 indicated. Thus Cicero's eminence, whilst he was still a little boy,
 was foreseen by his nurse. The swan from the breast of Socrates
 soothing men, is his disciple Plato.  The boxer Leonymus is cured by
 Achilles in his dreams. Sophocles the tragic poet discovers, as he was
 dreaming, the golden crown, which had been lost from the citadel of
 Athens. Neoptolemus the tragic actor, through intimations in his sleep
 from Ajax himself, saves from destruction the hero's tomb on the
 Rhoetean shore before Troy; and as he removes the decayed stones, he
 returns enriched with gold.  How many commentators and chroniclers
 vouch for this phenomenon? There are Artemon, Antiphon, Strato,
 Philochorus, Epicharmus, Serapion, Cratippus, and Dionysius of Rhodes,
 and Hermippus--the entire literature of the age.  I shall only laugh at
 all, if indeed I ought to laugh at the man who fancied that he was
 going to persuade us that Saturn dreamt before anybody else; which we
 can only believe if Aristotle, (who would fain help us to such an
 opinion,) lived prior to any other person.  Pray forgive me for
 laughing.  Epicharmus, indeed, as well as Philochorus the Athenian,
 assigned the very highest place among divinations to dreams.  The whole
 world is full of oracles of this description: there are the oracles of
 Amphiaraus at Oropus, of Amphilochus at Mallus, of Sarpedon in the
 Troad, of Trophonius in Boeotia, of Mopsus in Cilicia, of Hermione in
 Macedon, of Pasiphäe in Laconia. Then, again, there are others, which
 with their original foundations, rites, and historians, together with
 the entire literature of dreams, Hermippus of Berytus in five portly
 volumes will give you all the account of, even to satiety.  But the
 Stoics are very fond of saying that God, in His most watchful
 providence over every institution, gave us dreams amongst other
 preservatives of the arts and sciences of divination, as the especial
 support of the natural oracle. So much for the dreams to which credit
 has to be ascribed even by ourselves, although we must interpret them
 in another sense. As for all other oracles, at which no one ever
 dreams, what else must we declare concerning them, than that they are
 the diabolical contrivance of those spirits who even at that time dwelt
 in the eminent persons themselves, or aimed at reviving the memory of
 them as the mere stage of their evil purposes, going so far as to
 counterfeit a divine power under their shape and form, and, with equal
 persistence in evil, deceiving men by their very boons of remedies,
 warnings, and forecasts,--the only effect of which was to injure their
 victims the more they helped them; while the means whereby they
 rendered the help withdrew them from all search after the true God, by
 insinuating into their minds ideas of the false one? And of course so
 pernicious an influence as this is not shut up nor limited within the
 boundaries of shrines and temples: it roams abroad, it flies through
 the air, and all the while is free and unchecked. So that nobody can
 doubt that our very homes lie open to these diabolical spirits, who
 beset their human prey with their fantasies not only in their chapels
 but also in their chambers.

 [1770] See the Odyssey, xix. 562, etc. [Also, Æneid, vi. 894.]

 [1771] See i. 107, etc.

 [1772] See an account of her vision and its interpretation in Herodot.
 iv. 124.

 Chapter XLVII.--Dreams Variously Classified. Some are God-Sent, as the
 Dreams of Nebuchadnezzar; Others Simply Products of Nature.

 We declare, then, that dreams are inflicted on us mainly by demons,
 although they sometimes turn out true and favourable to us. When,
 however, with the deliberate aim after evil, of which we have just
 spoken, they assume a flattering and captivating style, they show
 themselves proportionately vain, and deceitful, and obscure, and
 wanton, and impure. And no wonder that the images partake of the
 character of the realities. But from God--who has promised, indeed, "to
 pour out the grace of the Holy Spirit upon all flesh, and has ordained
 that His servants and His handmaids should see visions as well as utter
 prophecies" [1773] --must all those visions be regarded as emanating,
 which may be compared to the actual grace of God, as being honest,
 holy, prophetic, inspired, instructive, inviting to virtue, the
 bountiful nature of which causes them to overflow even to the profane,
 since God, with grand impartiality, "sends His showers and sunshine on
 the just and on the unjust." [1774] It was, indeed by an inspiration
 from God that Nebuchadnezzar dreamt his dreams; [1775] and almost the
 greater part of mankind get their knowledge of God from dreams. Thus it
 is that, as the mercy of God super-abounds to the heathen, so the
 temptation of the evil one encounters the saints, from whom he never
 withdraws his malignant efforts to steal over them as best he may in
 their very sleep, if unable to assault them when they are awake. The
 third class of dreams will consist of those which the soul itself
 apparently creates for itself from an intense application to special
 circumstances. Now, inasmuch as the soul cannot dream of its own accord
 (for even Epicharmus is of this opinion), how can it become to itself
 the cause of any vision? Then must this class of dreams be abandoned to
 the action of nature, reserving for the soul, even when in the ecstatic
 condition, the power of enduring whatever incidents befall it? Those,
 moreover, which evidently proceed neither from God, nor from diabolical
 inspiration, nor from the soul, being beyond the reach as well of
 ordinary expectation, usual interpretation, or the possibility of being
 intelligibly related, will have to be ascribed in a separate category
 to what is purely and simply the ecstatic state and its peculiar
 conditions.

 [1773] Joel iii. 1.

 [1774] Matt. v. 45.

 [1775] Dan. ii. 1, etc.

 Chapter XLVIII.--Causes and Circumstances of Dreams. What Best
 Contributes to Efficient Dreaming.

 They say that dreams are more sure and clear when they happen towards
 the end of the night, because then the vigour of the soul emerges, and
 heavy sleep departs. As to the seasons of the year, dreams are calmer
 in spring, since summer relaxes, and winter somehow hardens, the soul;
 while autumn, which in other respects is trying to health, is apt to
 enervate the soul by the lusciousness of its fruits.  Then, again, as
 regards the position of one's body during sleep, one ought not to lie
 on his back, nor on his right side, nor so as to wrench [1776] his
 intestines, as if their cavity were reversely stretched: a palpitation
 of the heart would ensue, or else a pressure on the liver would produce
 a painful disturbance of the mind. But however this be, I take it that
 it all amounts to ingenious conjecture rather than certain proof
 (although the author of the conjecture be no less a man than Plato);
 [1777] and possibly all may be no other than the result of chance. But,
 generally speaking, dreams will be under control of a man's will, if
 they be capable of direction at all; for we must not examine what
 opinion on the one hand, and superstition on the other, have to
 prescribe for the treatment of dreams, in the matter of distinguishing
 and modifying different sorts of food.  As for the superstition, we
 have an instance when fasting is prescribed for such persons as mean to
 submit to the sleep which is necessary for receiving the oracle, in
 order that such abstinence may produce the required purity; while we
 find an instance of the opinion when the disciples of Pythagoras, in
 order to attain the same end, reject the bean as an aliment which would
 load the stomach, and produce indigestion. But the three brethren, who
 were the companions of Daniel, being content with pulse alone, to
 escape the contamination of the royal dishes, [1778] received from God,
 besides other wisdom, the gift especially of penetrating and explaining
 the sense of dreams. For my own part, I hardly know whether fasting
 would not simply make me dream so profoundly, that I should not be
 aware whether I had in fact dreamt at all. Well, then, you ask, has not
 sobriety something to do in this matter?  Certainly it is as much
 concerned in this as it is in the entire subject: if it contributes
 some good service to superstition, much more does it to religion. For
 even demons require such discipline from their dreamers as a
 gratification to their divinity, because they know that it is
 acceptable to God, since Daniel (to quote him again) "ate no pleasant
 bread" for the space of three weeks. [1779] This abstinence, however,
 he used in order to please God by humiliation, and not for the purpose
 of producing a sensibility and wisdom for his soul previous to
 receiving communication by dreams and visions, as if it were not rather
 to effect such action in an ecstatic state. This sobriety, then, (in
 which our question arises,) will have nothing to do with exciting
 ecstasy, but will rather serve to recommend its being wrought by God.

 [1776] Conresupinatis.

 [1777] See his Timæus, c. xxxii. p. 71.

 [1778] Dan. i. 8-14

 [1779] Dan. x. 2.

 Chapter XLIX.--No Soul Naturally Exempt from Dreams.

 As for those persons who suppose that infants do not dream, on the
 ground that all the functions of the soul throughout life are
 accomplished according to the capacity of age, they ought to observe
 attentively their tremors, and nods, and bright smiles as they sleep,
 and from such facts understand that they are the emotions of their soul
 as it dreams, which so readily escape to the surface through the
 delicate tenderness of their infantine body. The fact, however, that
 the African nation of the Atlantes are said to pass through the night
 in a deep lethargic sleep, brings down on them the censure that
 something is wrong in the constitution of their soul. Now either
 report, which is occasionally calumnious against barbarians, deceived
 Herodotus, [1780] or else a large force of demons of this sort
 domineers in those barbarous regions. Since, indeed, Aristotle remarks
 of a certain hero of Sardinia that he used to withhold the power of
 visions and dreams from such as resorted to his shrine for inspiration,
 it must lie at the will and caprice of the demons to take away as well
 as to confer the faculty of dreams; and from this circumstance may have
 arisen the remarkable fact (which we have mentioned [1781] ) of Nero
 and Thrasymedes only dreaming so late in life. We, however, derive
 dreams from God. Why, then, did not the Atlantes receive the dreaming
 faculty from God, because there is really no nation which is now a
 stranger to God, since the gospel flashes its glorious light through
 the world to the ends of the earth? Could it then be that rumour
 deceived Aristotle, or is this caprice still the way of demons? (Let us
 take any view of the case), only do not let it be imagined that any
 soul is by its natural constitution exempt from dreams.

 [1780] Who mentions this story of the Atlantes in iv. 184.

 [1781] In ch. xliv. p. 223.

 Chapter L.--The Absurd Opinion of Epicurus and the Profane Conceits of
 the Heretic Menander on Death, Even Enoch and Elijah Reserved for
 Death.

 We have by this time said enough about sleep, the mirror and image of
 death; and likewise about the occupations of sleep, even dreams. Let us
 now go on to consider the cause of our departure hence--that is, the
 appointment and course of death--because we must not leave even it
 unquestioned and unexamined, although it is itself the very end of all
 questions and investigations. According to the general sentiment of the
 human race, we declare death to be "the debt of nature." So much has
 been settled by the voice of God; [1782] such is the contract with
 everything which is born: so that even from this the frigid conceit of
 Epicurus is refuted, who says that no such debt is due from us; and not
 only so, but the insane opinion of the Samaritan heretic Menander is
 also rejected, who will have it that death has not only nothing to do
 with his disciples, but in fact never reaches them. He pretends to have
 received such a commission from the secret power of One above, that all
 who partake of his baptism become immortal, incorruptible and
 instantaneously invested with resurrection-life. We read, no doubt, of
 very many wonderful kinds of waters: how, for instance, the vinous
 quality of the stream intoxicates people who drink of the Lyncestis;
 how at Colophon the waters of an oracle-inspiring fountain [1783]
 affect men with madness; how Alexander was killed by the poisonous
 water from Mount Nonacris in Arcadia. Then, again, there was in Judea
 before the time of Christ a pool of medicinal virtue. It is well known
 how the poet has commemorated the marshy Styx as preserving men from
 death; although Thetis had, in spite of the preservative, to lament her
 son. And for the matter of that, were Menander himself to take a plunge
 into this famous Styx, he would certainly have to die after all; for
 you must come to the Styx, placed as it is by all accounts in the
 regions of the dead. Well, but what and where are those blessed and
 charming waters which not even John Baptist ever used in his
 preministrations, nor Christ after him ever revealed to His disciples?
 What was this wondrous bath of Menander? He is a comical fellow, I
 ween. [1784] But why (was such a font) so seldom in request, so
 obscure, one to which so very few ever resorted for their cleansing? I
 really see something to suspect in so rare an occurrence of a sacrament
 to which is attached so very much security and safety, and which
 dispenses with the ordinary law of dying even in the service of God
 Himself, when, on the contrary, all nations have "to ascend to the
 mount of the Lord and to the house of the God of Jacob," who demands of
 His saints in martyrdom that death which He exacted even of His Christ.
 No one will ascribe to magic such influence as shall exempt from death,
 or which shall refresh and vivify life, like the vine by the renewal of
 its condition. Such power was not accorded to the great Medea
 herself--over a human being at any rate, if allowed her over a silly
 sheep. Enoch no doubt was translated, [1785] and so was Elijah; [1786]
 nor did they experience death: it was postponed, (and only postponed,)
 most certainly: they are reserved for the suffering of death, that by
 their blood they may extinguish Antichrist. [1787] Even John underwent
 death, although concerning him there had prevailed an ungrounded
 expectation that he would remain alive until the coming of the Lord.
 [1788] Heresies, indeed, for the most part spring hurriedly into
 existence, from examples furnished by ourselves: they procure their
 defensive armour from the very place which they attack. The whole
 question resolves itself, in short, into this challenge: Where are to
 be found the men whom Menander himself has baptized? whom he has
 plunged into his Styx? Let them come forth and stand before us--those
 apostles of his whom he has made immortal?  Let my (doubting) Thomas
 see them, let him hear them, let him handle them--and he is convinced.

 [1782] Gen. ii. 17. [Not ex natura, but as penalty.]

 [1783] Scaturigo dæmonica.

 [1784] It is difficult to say what Tertullian means by his "comicum
 credo." Is it a playful parody on the heretic's name, the same as the
 comic poet's (Menander)?

 [1785] Gen. v. 24; Heb. xi. 5.

 [1786] 2 Kings ii. 11.

 [1787] Rev. xi. 3.

 [1788] John xxi. 23.

 Chapter LI.--Death Entirely Separates the Soul from the Body.

 But the operation of death is plain and obvious: it is the separation
 of body and soul. Some, however, in reference to the soul's
 immortality, on which they have so feeble a hold through not being
 taught of God, maintain it with such beggarly arguments, that they
 would fain have it supposed that certain souls cleave to the body even
 after death. It is indeed in this sense that Plato, although he
 despatches at once to heaven such souls as he pleases, [1789] yet in
 his Republic [1790] exhibits to us the corpse of an unburied person,
 which was preserved a long time without corruption, by reason of the
 soul remaining, as he says, unseparated from the body. To the same
 purport also Democritus remarks on the growth for a considerable while
 of the human nails and hair in the grave. Now, it is quite possible
 that the nature of the atmosphere tended to the preservation of the
 above-mentioned corpse.  What if the air were particularly dry, and the
 ground of a saline nature? What, too, if the substance of the body
 itself were unusually dry and arid?  What, moreover, if the mode of the
 death had already eliminated from the corpse all corrupting matter? As
 for the nails, since they are the commencement of the nerves, they may
 well seem to be prolonged, owing to the nerves themselves being relaxed
 and extended, and to be protruded more and more as the flesh fails.
 The hair, again, is nourished from the brain, which would cause it
 endure for a long time as its secret aliment and defence. Indeed, in
 the case of living persons themselves, the whole head of hair is
 copious or scanty in proportion to the exuberance of the brain. You
 have medical men (to attest the fact). But not a particle of the soul
 can possibly remain in the body, which is itself destined to disappear
 when time shall have abolished the entire scene on which the body has
 played its part. And yet even this partial survival of the soul finds a
 place in the opinions of some men; and on this account they will not
 have the body consumed at its funeral by fire, because they would spare
 the small residue of the soul. There is, however, another way of
 accounting for this pious treatment, not as if it meant to favour the
 relics of the soul, but as if it would avert a cruel custom in the
 interest even of the body; since, being human, it is itself undeserving
 of an end which is also inflicted upon murderers. The truth is, the
 soul is indivisible, because it is immortal; (and this fact) compels us
 to believe that death itself is an indivisible process, accruing
 indivisibly to the soul, not indeed because it is immortal, but because
 it is indivisible. Death, however, would have to be divided in its
 operation, if the soul were divisible into particles, any one of which
 has to be reserved for a later stage of death.  At this rate, a part of
 death will have to stay behind for a portion of the soul. I am not
 ignorant that some vestige of this opinion still exists. I have found
 it out from one of my own people.  I am acquainted with the case of a
 woman, the daughter of Christian parents, [1791] who in the very flower
 of her age and beauty slept peacefully (in Jesus), after a singularly
 happy though brief married life.  Before they laid her in her grave,
 and when the priest began the appointed office, at the very first
 breath of his prayer she withdrew her hands from her side, placed them
 in an attitude of devotion, and after the holy service was concluded
 restored them to their lateral position. Then, again, there is that
 well-known story among our own people, that a body voluntarily made way
 in a certain cemetery, to afford room for another body to be placed
 near to it. If, as is the case, similar stories are told amongst the
 heathen, (we can only conclude that) God everywhere manifests signs of
 His own power--to His own people for their comfort, to strangers for a
 testimony unto them. I would indeed much rather suppose that a portent
 of this kind happened from the direct agency of God than from any
 relics of the soul:  for if there were a residue of these, they would
 be certain to move the other limbs; and even if they moved the hands,
 this still would not have been for the purpose of a prayer. Nor would
 the corpse have been simply content to have made way for its neighbour:
 it would, besides, have benefited its own self also by the change of
 its position.  But from whatever cause proceeded these phenomena, which
 you must put down amongst signs and portents, it is impossible that
 they should regulate nature. Death, if it once falls short of totality
 in operation, is not death. If any fraction of the soul remain, it
 makes a living state. Death will no more mix with life, than will night
 with day.

 [1789] See below, ch. liv.

 [1790] Ch. x. p. 614.

 [1791] Vernaculam ecclesiæ.

 Chapter LII.--All Kinds of Death a Violence to Nature, Arising from
 Sin.--Sin an Intrusion Upon Nature as God Created It.

 Such, then, is the work of death--the separation of the soul from the
 body.  Putting out of the question fates and fortuitous circumstances,
 it has been, according to men's views, distinguished in a twofold
 form--the ordinary and the extraordinary. The ordinary they ascribe to
 nature, exercising its quiet influence in the case of each individual
 decease; the extraordinary is said to be contrary to nature, happening
 in every violent death. As for our own views, indeed, we know what was
 man's origin, and we boldly assert and persistently maintain that death
 happens not by way of natural consequence to man, but owing to a fault
 and defect which is not itself natural; although it is easy enough, no
 doubt, to apply the term natural to faults and circumstances which seem
 to have been (though from the emergence of an external cause [1792] )
 inseparable to us from our very birth.  If man had been directly
 appointed to die as the condition of his creation, [1793] then of
 course death must be imputed to nature.  Now, that he was not thus
 appointed to die, is proved by the very law which made his condition
 depend on a warning, and death result from man's arbitrary choice.
 Indeed, if he had not sinned, he certainly would not have died.  That
 cannot be nature which happens by the exercise of volition after an
 alternative has been proposed to it, and not by necessity--the result
 of an inflexible and unalterable condition.  Consequently, although
 death has various issues, inasmuch as its causes are manifold, we
 cannot say that the easiest death is so gentle as not to happen by
 violence (to our nature). The very law which produces death, simple
 though it be, is yet violence. How can it be otherwise, when so close a
 companionship of soul and body, so inseparable a growth together from
 their very conception of two sister substances, is sundered and
 divided? For although a man may breathe his last for joy, like the
 Spartan Chilon, while embracing his son who had just conquered in the
 Olympic games; or for glory, like the Athenian Clidemus, while
 receiving a crown of gold for the excellence of his historical
 writings; or in a dream, like Plato; or in a fit of laughter, like
 Publius Crassus,--yet death is much too violent, coming as it does upon
 us by strange and alien means, expelling the soul by a method all its
 own, calling on us to die at a moment when one might live a jocund life
 in joy and honour, in peace and pleasure. That is still a violence to
 ships: although far away from the Capharean rocks, assailed by no
 storms, without a billow to shatter them, with favouring gale, in
 gliding course, with merry crews, they founder amidst entire security,
 suddenly, owing to some internal shock.  Not dissimilar are the
 shipwrecks of life,--the issues of even a tranquil death. It matters
 not whether the vessel of the human body goes with unbroken timbers or
 shattered with storms, if the navigation of the soul be overthrown.

 [1792] Ex accidentia.

 [1793] In mortem directo institutus est. [See p. 227, supra.]

 Chapter LIII.--The Entire Soul Being Indivisible Remains to the Last
 Act of Vitality; Never Partially or Fractionally Withdrawn from the
 Body.

 But where at last will the soul have to lodge, when it is bare and
 divested of the body? We must certainly not hesitate to follow it
 thither, in the order of our inquiry. We must, however, first of all
 fully state what belongs to the topic before us, in order that no one,
 because we have mentioned the various issues of death, may expect from
 us a special description of these, which ought rather to be left to
 medical men, who are the proper judges of the incidents which appertain
 to death, or its causes, and the actual conditions of the human body.
 Of course, with the view of preserving the truth of the soul's
 immortality, whilst treating this topic, I shall have, on mentioning
 death, to introduce phrases about dissolution of such a purport as
 seems to intimate that the soul escapes by degrees, and piece by piece;
 for it withdraws (from the body) with all the circumstances of a
 decline, seeming to suffer consumption, and suggests to us the idea of
 being annihilated by the slow process of its departure. But the entire
 reason of this phenomenon is in the body, and arises from the body. For
 whatever be the kind of death (which operates on man), it undoubtedly
 produces the destruction either of the matter, or of the region, or of
 the passages of vitality: of the matter, such as the gall and the
 blood; of the region, such as the heart and the liver; of the passages,
 such as the veins and the arteries.  Inasmuch, then, as these parts of
 the body are severally devastated by an injury proper to each of them,
 even to the very last ruin and annulling of the vital powers--in other
 words, of the ends, the sites, and the functions of nature--it must
 needs come to pass, amidst the gradual decay of its instruments,
 domiciles, and spaces, that the soul also itself, being driven to
 abandon each successive part, assumes the appearance of being lessened
 to nothing; in some such manner as a charioteer is assumed to have
 himself failed, when his horses, through fatigue, withdraw from him
 their energies. But this assumption applies only to the circumstances
 of the despoiled person, not to any real condition of suffering.
 Likewise the body's charioteer, the animal spirit, fails on account of
 the failure of its vehicle, not of itself--abandoning its work, but not
 its vigour--languishing in operation, but not in essential
 condition--bankrupt in solvency, not in substance--because ceasing to
 put in an appearance, but not ceasing to exist. Thus every rapid
 death--such as a decapitation, or a breaking of the neck, [1794] which
 opens at once a vast outlet for the soul; or a sudden ruin, which at a
 stroke crushes every vital action, like that inner ruin
 apoplexy--retards not the soul's escape, nor painfully separates its
 departure into successive moments. Where, however, the death is a
 lingering one, the soul abandons its position in the way in which it is
 itself abandoned. And yet it is not by this process severed in
 fractions: it is slowly drawn out; and whilst thus extracted, it causes
 the last remnant to seem to be but a part of itself. No portion,
 however, must be deemed separable, because it is the last; nor, because
 it is a small one, must it be regarded as susceptible of dissolution.
 Accordant with a series is its end, and the middle is prolonged to the
 extremes; and the remnants cohere to the mass, and are waited for, but
 never abandoned by it.  And I will even venture to say, that the last
 of a whole is the whole; because while it is less, and the latest, it
 yet belongs to the whole, and completes it. Hence, indeed, many times
 it happens that the soul in its actual separation is more powerfully
 agitated with a more anxious gaze, and a quickened loquacity; whilst
 from the loftier and freer position in which it is now placed, it
 enunciates, by means of its last remnant still lingering in the flesh,
 what it sees, what it hears, and what it is beginning to know. In
 Platonic phrase, indeed, the body is a prison, [1795] but in the
 apostle's it is "the temple of God," [1796] because it is in Christ.
 Still, (as must be admitted,) by reason of its enclosure it obstructs
 and obscures the soul, and sullies it by the concretion of the flesh;
 whence it happens that the light which illumines objects comes in upon
 the soul in a more confused manner, as if through a window of horn.
 Undoubtedly, when the soul, by the power of death, is released from its
 concretion with the flesh, it is by the very release cleansed and
 purified: it is, moreover, certain that it escapes from the veil of the
 flesh into open space, to its clear, and pure, and intrinsic light; and
 then finds itself enjoying its enfranchisement from matter, and by
 virtue of its liberty it recovers its divinity, as one who awakes out
 of sleep passes from images to verities. Then it tells out what it
 sees; then it exults or it fears, according as it finds what lodging is
 prepared for it, as soon as it sees the very angel's face, that
 arraigner of souls, the Mercury of the poets.

 [1794] We have made Tertullian's "cervicum messis" include both these
 modes of instantaneous death.

 [1795] Phædo, p. 62, c. 6.

 [1796] 1 Cor. iii. 16; vi. 19; 2 Cor. vi. 16.

 Chapter LIV.--Whither Does the Soul Retire When It Quits the Body?
 Opinions of Philosophers All More or Less Absurd. The Hades of Plato.

 To the question, therefore, whither the soul is withdrawn, we now give
 an answer. Almost all the philosophers, who hold the soul's
 immortality, notwithstanding their special views on the subject, still
 claim for it this (eternal condition), as Pythagoras, and Empedocles,
 and Plato, and as they who indulge it with some delay from the time of
 its quitting the flesh to the conflagration of all things, and as the
 Stoics, who place only their own souls, that is, the souls of the wise,
 in the mansions above. Plato, it is true, does not allow this
 destination to all the souls, indiscriminately, of even all the
 philosophers, but only of those who have cultivated their philosophy
 out of love to boys. So great is the privilege which impurity obtains
 at the hands of philosophers!  In his system, then, the souls of the
 wise are carried up on high into the ether: according to Arius, [1797]
 into the air; according to the Stoics, into the moon. I wonder, indeed,
 that they abandon to the earth the souls of the unwise, when they
 affirm that even these are instructed by the wise, so much their
 superiors.  For where is the school where they can have been instructed
 in the vast space which divides them? By what means can the pupil-souls
 have resorted to their teachers, when they are parted from each other
 by so distant an interval?  What profit, too, can any instruction
 afford them at all in their posthumous state, when they are on the
 brink of perdition by the universal fire? All other souls they thrust
 down to Hades, which Plato, in his Phædo, [1798] describes as the bosom
 of the earth, where all the filth of the world accumulates, settles,
 and exhales, and where every separate draught of air only renders
 denser still the impurities of the seething mass.

 [1797] An Alexandrian philosopher in great repute with the Emperor
 Augustus.

 [1798] Phædo, pp. 112-114.

 Chapter LV.--The Christian Idea of the Position of Hades; The
 Blessedness of Paradise Immediately After Death. The Privilege of the
 Martyrs.

 By ourselves the lower regions (of Hades) are not supposed to be a bare
 cavity, nor some subterranean sewer of the world, but a vast deep space
 in the interior of the earth, and a concealed recess in its very
 bowels; inasmuch as we read that Christ in His death spent three days
 in the heart of the earth, [1799] that is, in the secret inner recess
 which is hidden in the earth, and enclosed by the earth, and
 superimposed on the abysmal depths which lie still lower down. Now
 although Christ is God, yet, being also man, "He died according to the
 Scriptures," [1800] and "according to the same Scriptures was buried."
 [1801] With the same law of His being He fully complied, by remaining
 in Hades in the form and condition of a dead man; nor did He ascend
 into the heights of heaven before descending into the lower parts of
 the earth, that He might there make the patriarchs and prophets
 partakers of Himself. [1802] (This being the case), you must suppose
 Hades to be a subterranean region, and keep at arm's length those who
 are too proud to believe that the souls of the faithful deserve a place
 in the lower regions. [1803] These persons, who are "servants above
 their Lord, and disciples above their Master," [1804] would no doubt
 spurn to receive the comfort of the resurrection, if they must expect
 it in Abraham's bosom. But it was for this purpose, say they, that
 Christ descended into hell, that we might not ourselves have to descend
 thither. Well, then, what difference is there between heathens and
 Christians, if the same prison awaits them all when dead? How, indeed,
 shall the soul mount up to heaven, where Christ is already sitting at
 the Father's right hand, when as yet the archangel's trumpet has not
 been heard by the command of God, [1805] --when as yet those whom the
 coming of the Lord is to find on the earth, have not been caught up
 into the air to meet Him at His coming, [1806] in company with the dead
 in Christ, who shall be the first to arise? [1807] To no one is heaven
 opened; the earth is still safe for him, I would not say it is shut
 against him. When the world, indeed, shall pass away, then the kingdom
 of heaven shall be opened.  Shall we then have to sleep high up in
 ether, with the boy-loving worthies of Plato; or in the air with Arius;
 or around the moon with the Endymions of the Stoics? No, but in
 Paradise, you tell me, whither already the patriarchs and prophets have
 removed from Hades in the retinue of the Lord's resurrection. How is
 it, then, that the region of Paradise, which as revealed to John in the
 Spirit lay under the altar, [1808] displays no other souls as in it
 besides the souls of the martyrs? How is it that the most heroic martyr
 Perpetua on the day of her passion saw only her fellow-martyrs there,
 in the revelation which she received of Paradise, if it were not that
 the sword which guarded the entrance permitted none to go in thereat,
 except those who had died in Christ and not in Adam? A new death for
 God, even the extraordinary one for Christ, is admitted into the
 reception-room of mortality, specially altered and adapted to receive
 the new-comer. Observe, then, the difference between a heathen and a
 Christian in their death: if you have to lay down your life for God, as
 the Comforter [1809] counsels, it is not in gentle fevers and on soft
 beds, but in the sharp pains of martyrdom: you must take up the cross
 and bear it after your Master, as He has Himself instructed you. [1810]
 The sole key to unlock Paradise is your own life's blood. [1811] You
 have a treatise by us, [1812] (on Paradise), in which we have
 established the position that every soul is detained in safe keeping in
 Hades until the day of the Lord.

 [1799] Matt. xii. 40.

 [1800] 1 Cor. xv. 3.

 [1801] Ver. 4.

 [1802] 1 Pet. iii. 19.

 [1803] See Irenæus, adv. Hæres. v. [Vol. I. p. 566, this Series.]

 [1804] Matt. x. 24.

 [1805] 1 Cor. xv. 52 and 1 Thess. iv. 16.

 [1806] 1 Thess. iv. 17.

 [1807] Ver. 16.

 [1808] Rev. vi. 9.

 [1809] Paracletus.

 [1810] Matt. xvi. 24.

 [1811] The souls of the martyrs were, according to Tertullian, at once
 removed to Paradise (Bp. Kaye, p. 249).

 [1812] De Paradiso.  [Compare, p. 216, note 9, supra.]

 Chapter LVI.--Refutation of the Homeric View of the Soul's Detention
 from Hades Owing to the Body's Being Unburied. That Souls Prematurely
 Separated from the Body Had to Wait for Admission into Hades Also
 Refuted.

 There arises the question, whether this takes place immediately after
 the soul's departure from the body; whether some souls are detained for
 special reasons in the meantime here on earth; and whether it is
 permitted them of their own accord, or by the intervention of
 authority, to be removed from Hades [1813] at some subsequent time?
 Even such opinions as these are not by any means lacking persons to
 advance them with confidence. It was believed that the unburied dead
 were not admitted into the infernal regions before they had received a
 proper sepulture; as in the case of Homer's Patroclus, who earnestly
 asks for a burial of Achilles in a dream, on the ground that he could
 not enter Hades through any other portal, since the souls of the
 sepulchred dead kept thrusting him away. [1814] We know that Homer
 exhibited more than a poetic licence here; he had in view the rights of
 the dead. Proportioned, indeed, to his care for the just honours of the
 tomb, was his censure of that delay of burial which was injurious to
 souls. (It was also his purpose to add a warning), that no man should,
 by detaining in his house the corpse of a friend, only expose himself,
 along with the deceased, to increased injury and trouble, by the
 irregularity [1815] of the consolation which he nourishes with pain and
 grief. He has accordingly kept a twofold object in view in picturing
 the complaints of an unburied soul: he wished to maintain honour to the
 dead by promptly attending to their funeral, as well as to moderate the
 feelings of grief which their memory excited. But, after all, how vain
 is it to suppose that the soul could bear the rites and requirements of
 the body, or carry any of them away to the infernal regions! And how
 much vainer still is it, if injury be supposed to accrue to the soul
 from that neglect of burial which it ought to receive rather as a
 favour!  For surely the soul which had no willingness to die might well
 prefer as tardy a removal to Hades as possible. It will love the
 undutiful heir, by whose means it still enjoys the light. If, however,
 it is certain that injury accrues to the soul from a tardy interment of
 the body--and the gist of the injury lies in the neglect of the
 burial--it is yet in the highest degree unfair, that that should
 receive all the injury to which the faulty delay could not possibly be
 imputed, for of course all the fault rests on the nearest relations of
 the dead. They also say that those souls which are taken away by a
 premature death wander about hither and thither until they have
 completed the residue of the years which they would have lived through,
 had it not been for their untimely fate. Now either their days are
 appointed to all men severally, and if so appointed, I cannot suppose
 them capable of being shortened; or if, notwithstanding such
 appointment, they may be shortened by the will of God, or some other
 powerful influence, then (I say) such shortening is of no validity, if
 they still may be accomplished in some other way. If, on the other
 hand, they are not appointed, there cannot be any residue to be
 fulfilled for unappointed periods. I have another remark to make.
 Suppose it be an infant that dies yet hanging on the breast; or it may
 be an immature boy; or it may be, once more, a youth arrived at
 puberty:  suppose, moreover, that the life in each case ought to have
 reached full eighty years, how is it possible that the soul of either
 could spend the whole of the shortened years here on earth after losing
 the body by death? One's age cannot be passed without one's body, it
 being by help of the body that the period of life has its duties and
 labours transacted. Let our own people, moreover, bear this in mind,
 that souls are to receive back at the resurrection the self-same bodies
 in which they died.  Therefore our bodies must be expected to resume
 the same conditions and the same ages, for it is these particulars
 which impart to bodies their especial modes. By what means, then, can
 the soul of an infant so spend on earth its residue of years, that it
 should be able at the resurrection to assume the state of an
 octogenarian, although it had barely lived a month? Or if it shall be
 necessary that the appointed days of life be fulfilled here on earth,
 must the same course of life in all its vicissitudes, which has been
 itself ordained to accompany the appointed days, be also passed through
 by the soul along with the days? Must it employ itself in school
 studies in its passage from infancy to boyhood; play the soldier in the
 excitement and vigour of youth and earlier manhood; and encounter
 serious and judicial responsibilities in the graver years between ripe
 manhood and old age? Must it ply trade for profit, turn up the soil
 with hoe and plough, go to sea, bring actions at law, get married, toil
 and labour, undergo illnesses, and whatever casualties of weal and woe
 await it in the lapse of years? Well, but how are all these
 transactions to be managed without one's body? Life (spent) without
 life? But (you will tell me) the destined period in question is to be
 bare of all incident whatever, only to be accomplished by merely
 elapsing. What, then, is to prevent its being fulfilled in Hades, where
 there is absolutely no use to which you can apply it? We therefore
 maintain that every soul, whatever be its age on quitting the body,
 remains unchanged in the same, until the time shall come when the
 promised perfection shall be realized in a state duly tempered to the
 measure of the peerless angels. Hence those souls must be accounted as
 passing an exile in Hades, which people are apt to regard as carried
 off by violence, especially by cruel tortures, such as those of the
 cross, and the axe, and the sword, and the lion; but we do not account
 those to be violent deaths which justice awards, that avenger of
 violence.  So then, you will say, it is all the wicked souls that are
 banished in Hades. (Not quite so fast, is my answer.) I must compel you
 to determine (what you mean by Hades), which of its two regions, the
 region of the good or of the bad. If you mean the bad, (all I can say
 is, that) even now the souls of the wicked deserve to be consigned to
 those abodes; if you mean the good why should you judge to be unworthy
 of such a resting-place the souls of infants and of virgins, and [1816]
 those which, by reason of their condition in life were pure and
 innocent?

 [1813] Ab inferis.

 [1814] Iliad, xxiii. 72, etc.

 [1815] Enormitate.

 [1816] We have treated this particle as a conjunction but it may only
 be an intensive particle introducing an explanatory clause: "even those
 which were pure," etc. [a better rendering.]

 Chapter LVII.--Magic and Sorcery Only Apparent in Their Effects.  God
 Alone Can Raise the Dead.

 It is either a very fine thing to be detained in these infernal regions
 with the Aori, or souls which were prematurely hurried away; or else a
 very bad thing indeed to be there associated with the Biaeothanati, who
 suffered violent deaths. I may be permitted to use the actual words and
 terms with which magic rings again, that inventor of all these odd
 opinions--with its Ostanes, and Typhon, and Dardanus, and Damigeron,
 and Nectabis, and Berenice. There is a well-known popular bit of
 writing, [1817] which undertakes to summon up from the abode of Hades
 the souls which have actually slept out their full age, and had passed
 away by an honourable death, and had even been buried with full rites
 and proper ceremony. What after this shall we say about magic? Say, to
 be sure, what almost everybody says of it--that it is an imposture.
 But it is not we Christians only whose notice this system of imposture
 does not escape. We, it is true, have discovered these spirits of evil,
 not, to be sure, by a complicity with them, but by a certain knowledge
 which is hostile to them; nor is it by any procedure which is
 attractive to them, but by a power which subjugates them that we handle
 (their wretched system)--that manifold pest of the mind of man, that
 artificer of all error, that destroyer of our salvation and our soul at
 one swoop. [1818] In this way, even by magic, which is indeed only a
 second idolatry, wherein they pretend that after death they become
 demons, just as they were supposed in the first and literal idolatry to
 become gods (and why not? since the gods are but dead things), the
 before-mentioned Aori Biaeothanati are actually invoked,--and not
 unfairly, [1819] if one grounds his faith on this principle, that it is
 clearly credible for those souls to be beyond all others addicted to
 violence and wrong, which with violence and wrong have been hurried
 away by a cruel and premature death and which would have a keen
 appetite for reprisals.  Under cover, however, of these souls, demons
 operate, especially such as used to dwell in them when they were in
 life, and who had driven them, in fact, to the fate which had at last
 carried them off.  For, as we have already suggested, [1820] there is
 hardly a human being who is unattended by a demon; and it is well known
 to many, that premature and violent deaths, which men ascribe to
 accidents, are in fact brought about by demons.  This imposture of the
 evil spirit lying concealed in the persons of the dead, we are able, if
 I mistake not, to prove by actual facts, when in cases of exorcism (the
 evil spirit) affirms himself sometimes to be one of the relatives
 [1821] of the person possessed by him, sometimes a gladiator or a
 bestiarius, [1822] and sometimes even a god; always making it one of
 his chief cares to extinguish the very truth which we are proclaiming,
 that men may not readily believe that all souls remove to Hades, and
 that they may overthrow faith in the resurrection and the judgment. And
 yet for all that, the demon, after trying to circumvent the bystanders,
 is vanquished by the pressure of divine grace, and sorely against his
 will confesses all the truth. So also in that other kind of magic,
 which is supposed to bring up from Hades the souls now resting there,
 and to exhibit them to public view, there is no other expedient of
 imposture ever resorted to which operates more powerfully. Of course,
 why a phantom becomes visible, is because a body is also attached to
 it; and it is no difficult matter to delude the external vision of a
 man whose mental eye it is so easy to blind. The serpents which emerged
 from the magicians' rods, certainly appeared to Pharaoh and to the
 Egyptians as bodily substances. It is true that the verity of Moses
 swallowed up their lying deceit. [1823] Many attempts were also wrought
 against the apostles by the sorcerers Simon and Elymas, [1824] but the
 blindness which struck (them) was no enchanter's trick. What novelty is
 there in the effort of an unclean spirit to counterfeit the truth?  At
 this very time, even, the heretical dupes of this same Simon (Magus)
 are so much elated by the extravagant pretensions of their art, that
 they undertake to bring up from Hades the souls of the prophets
 themselves. And I suppose that they can do so under cover of a lying
 wonder. For, indeed, it was no less than this that was anciently
 permitted to the Pythonic (or ventriloquistic) spirit [1825] --even to
 represent the soul of Samuel, when Saul consulted the dead, after
 (losing the living) God. [1826] God forbid, however, that we should
 suppose that the soul of any saint, much less of a prophet, can be
 dragged out of (its resting-place in Hades) by a demon. We know that
 "Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light" [1827] --much
 more into a man of light--and that at last he will "show himself to be
 even God," [1828] and will exhibit "great signs and wonders, insomuch
 that, if it were possible, he shall deceive the very elect." [1829] He
 hardly [1830] hesitated on the before-mentioned occasion to affirm
 himself to be a prophet of God, and especially to Saul, in whom he was
 then actually dwelling. You must not imagine that he who produced the
 phantom was one, and he who consulted it was another; but that it was
 one and the same spirit, both in the sorceress and in the apostate
 (king), which easily pretended an apparition of that which it had
 already prepared them to believe as real--(even the spirit) through
 whose evil influence Saul's heart was fixed where his treasure was, and
 where certainly God was not. Therefore it came about, that he saw him
 through whose aid he believed that he was going to see, because he
 believed him through whose help he saw. But we are met with the
 objection, that in visions of the night dead persons are not
 unfrequently seen, and that for a set purpose. [1831] For instance, the
 Nasamones consult private oracles by frequent and lengthened visits to
 the sepulchres of their relatives, as one may find in Heraclides, or
 Nymphodorus, or Herodotus; [1832] and the Celts, for the same purpose,
 stay away all night at the tombs of their brave chieftains, as Nicander
 affirms.  Well, we admit apparitions of dead persons in dreams to be
 not more really true than those of living persons; but we apply the
 same estimate to all alike--to the dead and to the living, and indeed
 to all the phenomena which are seen. Now things are not true because
 they appear to be so, but because they are fully proved to be so. The
 truth of dreams is declared from the realization, not the aspect.
 Moreover, the fact that Hades is not in any case opened for (the escape
 of) any soul, has been firmly established by the Lord in the person of
 Abraham, in His representation of the poor man at rest and the rich man
 in torment. [1833] No one, (he said,) could possibly be despatched from
 those abodes to report to us how matters went in the nether regions,--a
 purpose which, (if any could be,) might have been allowable on such an
 occasion, to persuade a belief in Moses and the prophets. The power of
 God has, no doubt, sometimes recalled men's souls to their bodies, as a
 proof of His own transcendent rights; but there must never be, because
 of this fact, any agreement supposed to be possible between the divine
 faith and the arrogant pretensions of sorcerers, and the imposture of
 dreams, and the licence of poets. But yet in all cases of a true
 resurrection, when the power of God recalls souls to their bodies,
 either by the agency of prophets, or of Christ, or of apostles, a
 complete presumption is afforded us, by the solid, palpable, and
 ascertained reality (of the revived body), that its true form must be
 such as to compel one's belief of the fraudulence of every incorporeal
 apparition of dead persons.

 [1817] Litteratura.

 [1818] Oehler takes these descriptive clauses as meant of Satan,
 instead of being synonymes of magic, as the context seems to require.

 [1819] Æque.

 [1820] Above, in ch. xxxix. p. 219.

 [1821] Aliquem ex parentibus.

 [1822] One who fought with wild beasts in the public games, only
 without the weapons allowed to the gladiator.

 [1823] Ex. vii. 12.

 [1824] Acts viii. 9; xiii. 8.

 [1825] See above in ch. xxviii. p. 209, supra.

 [1826] 1 Sam. xxviii. 6-16.

 [1827] 2 Cor. xi. 14.

 [1828] 2 Thess. ii. 4.

 [1829] Matt. xxiv. 24.

 [1830] Si forte.

 [1831] Non frustra.

 [1832] In iv. 172.

 [1833] Luke xvi. 26. [Compare note 15, p. 231. supra.]

 Chapter LVIII.--Conclusion. Points Postponed. All Souls are Kept in
 Hades Until the Resurrection, Anticipating Their Ultimate Misery or
 Bliss.

 All souls, therefore, are shut up within Hades: do you admit this? (It
 is true, whether) you say yes or no: moreover, there are already
 experienced there punishments and consolations; and there you have a
 poor man and a rich. And now, having postponed some stray questions
 [1834] for this part of my work, I will notice them in this suitable
 place, and then come to a close. Why, then, cannot you suppose that the
 soul undergoes punishment and consolation in Hades in the interval,
 while it awaits its alternative of judgment, in a certain anticipation
 either of gloom or of glory?  You reply: Because in the judgment of God
 its matter ought to be sure and safe, nor should there be any inkling
 beforehand of the award of His sentence; and also because (the soul)
 ought to be covered first by its vestment [1835] of the restored flesh,
 which, as the partner of its actions, should be also a sharer in its
 recompense. What, then, is to take place in that interval? Shall we
 sleep? But souls do not sleep even when men are alive: it is indeed the
 business of bodies to sleep, to which also belongs death itself, no
 less than its mirror and counterfeit sleep. Or will you have it, that
 nothing is there done whither the whole human race is attracted, and
 whither all man's expectation is postponed for safe keeping? Do you
 think this state is a foretaste of judgment, or its actual
 commencement? a premature encroachment on it, or the first course in
 its full ministration? Now really, would it not be the highest possible
 injustice, even [1836] in Hades, if all were to be still well with the
 guilty even there, and not well with the righteous even yet? What,
 would you have hope be still more confused after death? would you have
 it mock us still more with uncertain expectation? or shall it now
 become a review of past life, and an arranging of judgment, with the
 inevitable feeling of a trembling fear? But, again, must the soul
 always tarry for the body, in order to experience sorrow or joy? Is it
 not sufficient, even of itself, to suffer both one and the other of
 these sensations? How often, without any pain to the body, is the soul
 alone tortured by ill-temper, and anger, and fatigue, and very often
 unconsciously, even to itself? How often, too, on the other hand,
 amidst bodily suffering, does the soul seek out for itself some furtive
 joy, and withdraw for the moment from the body's importunate society? I
 am mistaken if the soul is not in the habit, indeed, solitary and
 alone, of rejoicing and glorifying over the very tortures of the body.
 Look for instance, at the soul of Mutius Scævola as he melts his right
 hand over the fire; look also at Zeno's, as the torments of Dionysius
 pass over it. [1837] The bites of wild beasts are a glory to young
 heroes, as on Cyrus were the scars of the bear. [1838] Full well, then,
 does the soul even in Hades know how to joy and to sorrow even without
 the body; since when in the flesh it feels pain when it likes, though
 the body is unhurt; and when it likes it feels joy though the body is
 in pain. Now if such sensations occur at its will during life, how much
 rather may they not happen after death by the judicial appointment of
 God! Moreover, the soul executes not all its operations with the
 ministration of the flesh; for the judgment of God pursues even simple
 cogitations and the merest volitions. "Whosoever looketh on a woman to
 lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart."
 [1839] Therefore, even for this cause it is most fitting that the soul,
 without at all waiting for the flesh, should be punished for what it
 has done without the partnership of the flesh. So, on the same
 principle, in return for the pious and kindly thoughts in which it
 shared not the help of the flesh, shall it without the flesh receive
 its consolation.  Nay more, [1840] even in matters done through the
 flesh the soul is the first to conceive them, the first to arrange
 them, the first to authorize them, the first to precipitate them into
 acts. And even if it is sometimes unwilling to act, it is still the
 first to treat the object which it means to effect by help of the
 body.  In no case, indeed, can an accomplished fact be prior to the
 mental conception [1841] thereof. It is therefore quite in keeping with
 this order of things, that that part of our nature should be the first
 to have the recompense and reward to which they are due on account of
 its priority. In short, inasmuch as we understand "the prison" pointed
 out in the Gospel to be Hades, [1842] and as we also interpret "the
 uttermost farthing" [1843] to mean the very smallest offence which has
 to be recompensed there before the resurrection, [1844] no one will
 hesitate to believe that the soul undergoes in Hades some compensatory
 discipline, without prejudice to the full process of the resurrection,
 when the recompense will be administered through the flesh besides.
 This point the Paraclete has also pressed home on our attention in most
 frequent admonitions, whenever any of us has admitted the force of His
 words from a knowledge of His promised spiritual disclosures. [1845]
 And now at last having, as I believe, encountered every human opinion
 concerning the soul, and tried its character by the teaching of (our
 holy faith,) we have satisfied the curiosity which is simply a
 reasonable and necessary one.  As for that which is extravagant and
 idle, there will evermore be as great a defect in its information, as
 there has been exaggeration and self-will in its researches.

 [1834] Nescio quid.

 [1835] "Operienda" is Oehler's text; another reading gives
 "opperienda," q.d., "the soul must wait for the restored body."

 [1836] This "etiam" is "otium" in the Agobardine ms., a good reading;
 q.d. "a most iniquitous indifference to justice," etc.

 [1837] Comp. The Apology, last chapter.

 [1838] Xen. Cyropæd. p. 6.

 [1839] Matt. v. 28.

 [1840] Quid nunc si.

 [1841] Conscientia.

 [1842] Matt. v. 25.

 [1843] Ver. 26.

 [1844] Morâ resurrectionis. See above, on this opinion of Tertullian,
 in ch. xxxv.

 [1845] [A symptom of Montanism.]

  The Prescription Against Heretics

 Tertullian.

 ------------------------

 Part Second.

 Introduction, by the American Editor.

 ------------------------

 The Second Class of Tertullian's works, according to the logical method
 I have endeavoured to carry out, is that which includes his treatises
 against the heresies of his times. In these, the genius of our author
 is brilliantly illustrated, while, in melancholy fact, he is
 demonstrating the folly of his own final lapse and the wickedness of
 that schism and heresy into which he fell away from Truth. Were it not
 that history abounds in like examples of the frailty of the human
 intellect and of the insufficiency of "man that walketh to direct his
 steps," we should be forced to a theory of mental decay to account for
 inconsistencies so gross and for delusions so besotted. "Genius to
 madness is indeed allied," and who knows but something like that
 imbecility which closed the career of Swift [1846] may have been the
 fate of this splendid wit and versatile man of parts? Charity,
 admiration and love force this inquiry upon my own mind continually, as
 I explore his fascinating pages. And the order in which the student
 will find them in this series, will lead, I think, to similar
 reflections on the part of many readers. We observe a natural bent and
 turn of mind, even in his Catholic writings, which indicate his perils.
 These are more and more apparent in his recent works, as his enthusiasm
 heats itself into a frenzy which at last becomes a rage. He breaks down
 by degrees, as in orthodoxy so also in force and in character. It is
 almost like the collapse of Solomon or of Bacon. And though our own
 times have produced no example of stars of equal magnitude, to become
 falling-stars, we have seen illustrations the most humiliating, of
 those calm words of Bishop Kaye: "Human nature often presents the
 curious phenomenon of an union of the most opposite qualities in the
 same mind; of vigour, acuteness and discrimination on some subjects,
 with imbecility, dulness and bigotry on others." Milton, himself
 another example of his own threnode, breaks forth in this splendid
 utterance of lyrical confession:

 "God of our fathers what is man?

 Nor do I name of men the common rout,

 That, wandering loose about,

 Grow up and perish as the summer fly,

 Heads without name, no more remembered,

 But such as thou hast solemnly elected,

 With gifts and graces eminently adorned,

 To some great work, thy glory

 And people's safety, which in part they effect."

 And here, I must venture a remark on the ambiguity of the expressions
 concerning our author's Montanism. In the treatise against Marcion,
 written late in his career, Tertullian identifies himself with the
 Church and strenuously defends its faith and its apostolic order.  In
 only rare instances does his weakness for the "new prophecy" crop out,
 and then, it is only as one identifies himself with a school within the
 church. Precisely so Fenelon maintained his milder Montanism, without a
 thought of deserting the Latin Church. Afterwards Fenelon drew back,
 but at last poor Tertullian fell away. So with the Jansenists. They
 credited the miracles and the convulsions (or ecstasies) of their
 school, [1847] and condemned those who rejected them, as Tertullian
 condemns the Psychics. The great expounder of the Nicene Faith (Bp.
 Bull) does indeed speak very decidedly of Tertullian as a lapser, even
 when he wrote his first book against Marcion. His semi-schismatic
 position must be allowed. But, was it a formal lapse at that time? The
 English non-jurors were long in communion with the Church, even while
 they denounced their brethren and the "Erastianizing" clergy, much as
 Tertullian does the Psychics. St. Augustine speaks of Tertullianists
 [1848] with great moderation, and notes the final downfall of our
 author as something distinct from Tertullianism. When we reflect,
 therefore, that only four of all his varied writings (now extant) are
 proofs of an accomplished lapse, ought we not carefully to maintain the
 distinction between the Montanistic Tertullian and Tertullian the
 Montanist? Bishop Bull, it seems to me would not object to this way of
 putting it, when we consider his own discrimination in the following
 weighty words.  He says:

 "A clear distinction must be made between those works which Tertullian,
 when already a Montanist, wrote specifically in defence of Montanism
 against the church, and those which he composed, as a Montanist indeed,
 yet not in defence of Montanism against the church, but rather, in
 defence of the common doctrines of the church--and of Montanus, in
 opposition to other heretics."

 Now in arranging the works of this second class, the Prescription comes
 logically first, because, written in Orthodoxy, it forcibly upholds the
 Scriptural Rule of Faith, the Catholic touchstone of all professed
 verity. It is also a necessary Introduction to the great work against
 Marcion which I have placed next in order; giving it the precedence to
 which it is entitled in part on chronological ground, in part because
 of the general purity of its material with the exhibition it presents
 of the author's mental processes and of his very gradual decline from
 Truth.

 Very fortunate were the Edinburgh Editors in securing for this work and
 some others, the valuable labours of Dr. Holmes, of whom I have
 elsewhere given some biographical particulars. The merit and fulness of
 his annotations are so marked, that I have been spared a great deal of
 work, such as I was forced to bestow on the former volumes of this
 American Edition. But on the other hand these pages have given me much
 patient study and toil as an editor, because of the "shreds and
 patches" in which Tertullian comes to us, in the Edinburgh Series; and
 because of some typographical peculiarities, exceptional in that Series
 itself, and presenting complications, when transferred to a new form of
 mechanical arrangement. For example, apart from some valuable material
 which belongs to the General Preface, and which I have transferred
 accordingly, the following dislocations confronted me to begin with:
 The Marcion is presented to us in Volume VII. apart from the other
 writings of Tertullian. At the close of Vol. XI. we reach the Ad
 Nationes, of which Dr. Holmes is the translator, another hand (Mr.
 Thelwall's) having been employed on former pages of that volume.  It is
 not till we reach Volume XV. that Tertullian again appears, but this
 volume is wholly the work of Dr. Holmes.  Finally, in Volume XVIII., we
 meet Tertullian again, (Mr. Thelwall the able translator), but, here is
 placed the "Introduction" to all the works of Tertullian, which, of
 course, I have, transferred to its proper place. I make these
 explanations by no means censoriously, but to point out at once the
 nature of my own task, and the advantage that accrues to the reader, by
 the order in which the works of the great Tertullian appear in this
 edition, enabling him to compare different or parallel passages, all
 methodically arranged in consecutive pages, without a minute's search,
 or delay.

 Now, as to typographical difficulties to which I have referred, Dr.
 Holmes marks all his multiplied and useful notes with brackets, which
 are almost always superfluous, and which in this American Edition are
 used to designate my own contributions, when printed with the text, or
 apart from Preface and Elucidations. These, therefore, I have removed
 necessarily and with no appreciable loss to the work, but great gain to
 the beauty of the page. But, again, Dr. Holmes' translations are all so
 heavily bracketed as to become an eyesore, and the disfigured pages
 have been often complained of as afflictive to the reader. Many words
 strictly implied by the original Latin, and which should therefore be
 unmarked, are yet put between brackets. Even minute words (and, or to
 wit, or again,) when, in the nature of the case the English idiom
 requires them, are thus marked. I have not retained these blemishes;
 but when an inconsiderable word or a repetition does add to the sense,
 or qualify it, I have italicized such words, throwing more important
 interpolations into parenthetical marks, which are less painful to the
 sight than brackets. I have found them quite as serviceable to denote
 the auxiliary word or phrase; and where the author himself uses a
 parenthesis, I have observed very few instances in which a sensible
 reader would confound it with the translator's efforts to eke out the
 sense. Sometimes, an awkward interpolation has been thrown into a
 footnote.  Occasionally the crabbed sentences of the great Carthaginian
 are so obscure that Dr. Holmes has been unable to make them lucid,
 although, with the original in hand, he probably felt a force in his
 own rendering which the mere English reader must fail to perceive. In a
 few such instances, noting the fact in the margin, I have tried to
 bring out the sense, by slight modifications of punctuation and
 arrangement. Occasionally too I have dropped a superfluous
 interpolation (such as e.g., to conclude, or let me say again,) when I
 have found that it only served to clog and overcharge a sentence. Last
 of all, Dr. Holmes' headings have sometimes been condensed, to avoid
 phrases and sentences immediately recurring in the chapter. [1849]
 These purely mechanical parts require a terse form of statement, like
 those in the English Bible, and I have frequently reduced them on that
 model, dropping redundant adverbs and adjectives to bring out the
 catchwords.

 [1846] "From Marlboro's eyes the tears of dotage flow, And Swift
 expires a driveller and a show."

 [1847] See the story of the Abbé Paris, Guettée, Histoire de L'Eglise
 de France, Tom. xii. p. 12.  Also, Parton, Voltaire, Vol. I. pp. 236,
 261, etc.

 [1848] See opp. Tom. viii. p. 46, Ed. Migne.

 [1849] Take e.g. the heading to chapter xxiv. of the De Præscriptione.
 It reads thus: "St. Peter's further vindication. St. Paul was not at
 all superior to St. Peter in teaching. Nothing was imparted to the
 former, in the "third heaven," to enable him to add to the
 faith--however foolishly the heretics may boast of him as if they had,
 forsooth, been favoured with some of the secrets so imparted to him in
 paradise." If the reader will turn to the chapter referred to, he will
 observe an instance of condensation by which nothing is forfeited that
 is requisite to a heading, though redundancies are dropped.

 I.

 The Prescription Against Heretics. [1850]

 [Translated by the Rev. Peter Holmes, D.D., F.R.A.S., Etc., Etc.]

 ------------------------

 Chapter I.--Introductory. Heresies Must Exist, and Even Abound; They
 are a Probation to Faith.

 The character of the times in which we live is such as to call forth
 from us even this admonition, that we ought not to be astonished at the
 heresies (which abound) [1851] neither ought their existence to
 surprise us, for it was foretold that they should come to pass; [1852]
 nor the fact that they subvert the faith of some, for their final cause
 is, by affording a trial to faith, to give it also the opportunity of
 being "approved." [1853] Groundless, therefore, and inconsiderate is
 the offence of the many [1854] who are scandalized by the very fact
 that heresies prevail to such a degree. How great (might their offence
 have been) if they had not existed. [1855] When it has been determined
 that a thing must by all means be, it receives the (final) cause for
 which it has its being. This secures the power through which it exists,
 in such a way that it is impossible for it not to have existence.

 [1850] Of the various forms of the title of this treatise, de
 Præscriptione Hæreticorum, de Præscriptionibus Hæreticorum, de
 Præscriptionibus adversus Hæreticos, the first is adopted by Oehler
 after the oldest authorities, such as the Liber Argobardinus and the
 Codex Paterniacensis (or Seletstadiensis), and the Editio Princeps of
 Rhenanus. The term præscriptio is a legal one, meaning a demurrer, or
 formal objection. The genitive hæreticorum is used in an objective
 sense, as if adversus hæreticos. Tertullian himself, in de Carne
 Christi, ii. says, "Sed plenius ejusmodi præscriptionibus adversus
 omnes hæreses alibi jam usi sumus." The title therefore means, "On the
 Church's Prescriptive Rule against Heresies of all kinds." [Elucidation
 I.]

 [1851] Istas.

 [1852] Matt. vii. 15; xxiv. 4, 11, 24; 1 Tim. iv. 1-3; 2 Pet. ii. 1.

 [1853] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [1854] Plerique, "the majority."

 [1855] The Holy Ghost having foretold that they should exist.
 (Rigalt.)

 Chapter II.--Analogy Between Fevers and Heresies. Heresies Not to Be
 Wondered At: Their Strength Derived from Weakness of Men's Faith. They
 Have Not the Truth. Simile of Pugilists and Gladiators in Illustration.

 Taking the similar case [1856] of fever, which is appointed a place
 amongst all other deadly and excruciating issues (of life) for
 destroying man: we are not surprised either that it exists, for there
 it is, or that it consumes man, for that is the purpose of its
 existence.  In like manner, with respect to heresies, which are
 produced for the weakening and the extinction of faith, since we feel a
 dread because they have this power, we should first dread the fact of
 their existence; for as long as they exist, they have their power; and
 as long as they have their power, they have their existence. But still
 fever, as being an evil both in its cause [1857] and in its power, as
 all know, we rather loathe than wonder at, and to the best of our power
 guard against, not having its extirpation in our power. Some men prefer
 wondering at heresies, however, which bring with them eternal death and
 the heat of a stronger fire, for possessing this power, instead of
 avoiding their power when they have the means of escape: but heresies
 would have no power, if (men) would cease to wonder that they have such
 power. For it either happens that, while men wonder, they fall into a
 snare, or, because they are ensnared, they cherish their surprise, as
 if heresies were so powerful because of some truth which belonged to
 them. It would no doubt be a wonderful thing that evil should have any
 force of its own, were it not that heresies are strong in those persons
 who are not strong in faith. In a combat of boxers and gladiators,
 generally speaking, it is not because a man is strong that he gains the
 victory, or loses it because he is not strong, but because he who is
 vanquished was a man of no strength; and indeed this very conqueror,
 when afterwards matched against a really powerful man, actually retires
 crest-fallen from the contest. In precisely the same way, heresies
 derive such strength as they have from the infirmities of
 individuals--having no strength whenever they encounter a really
 powerful faith.

 [1856] Denique has in Tertullian sometimes the meaning of proinde.

 [1857] Causam "purpose," "final cause."

 Chapter III.--Weak People Fall an Easy Prey to Heresy, Which Derives
 Strength from the General Frailty of Mankind. Eminent Men Have Fallen
 from Faith; Saul, David, Solomon. The Constancy of Christ.

 It is usual, indeed, with persons of a weaker character, to be so built
 up (in confidence) by certain individuals who are caught by heresy, as
 to topple over into ruin themselves. How comes it to pass, (they ask),
 that this woman or that man, who were the most faithful, the most
 prudent, and the most approved [1858] in the church, have gone over to
 the other side? Who that asks such a question does not in fact reply to
 it himself, to the effect that men whom heresies have been able to
 pervert [1859] ought never to have been esteemed prudent, or faithful,
 or approved? This again is, I suppose, an extraordinary thing, that one
 who has been approved should afterwards fall back? Saul, who was good
 beyond all others, is afterwards subverted by envy. [1860] David, a
 good man "after the Lord's own heart," [1861] is guilty afterwards of
 murder and adultery. [1862] Solomon, endowed by the Lord with all grace
 and wisdom, is led into idolatry, by women. [1863] For to the Son of
 God alone was it reserved to persevere to the last without sin. [1864]
 But what if a bishop, if a deacon, if a widow, if a virgin, if a
 doctor, if even a martyr, [1865] have fallen from the rule (of faith),
 will heresies on that account appear to possess [1866] the truth? Do we
 prove the faith [1867] by the persons, or the persons by the faith?  No
 one is wise, no one is faithful, no one excels in dignity, [1868] but
 the Christian; and no one is a Christian but he who perseveres even to
 the end. [1869] You, as a man, know any other man from the outside
 appearance. You think as you see. And you see as far only as you have
 eyes. But says (the Scripture), "the eyes of the Lord are lofty."
 [1870] "Man looketh at the outward appearance, but God looketh at the
 heart." [1871] "The Lord (beholdeth and) knoweth them that are His;"
 [1872] and "the plant which (my heavenly Father) hath not planted, He
 rooteth up;" [1873] and "the first shall," as He shows, "be last;"
 [1874] and He carries "His fan in His hand to purge His
 threshing-floor." [1875] Let the chaff of a fickle faith fly off as
 much as it will at every blast of temptation, all the purer will be
 that heap of corn which shall be laid up in the garner of the Lord. Did
 not certain of the disciples turn back from the Lord Himself, [1876]
 when they were offended? Yet the rest did not therefore think that they
 must turn away from following Him, [1877] but because they knew that He
 was the Word of Life, and was come from God, [1878] they continued in
 His company to the very last, after He had gently inquired of them
 whether they also would go away. [1879] It is a comparatively small
 thing, [1880] that certain men, like Phygellus, and Hermogenes, and
 Philetus, and Hymenæus, deserted His apostle: [1881] the betrayer of
 Christ was himself one of the apostles. We are surprised at seeing His
 churches forsaken by some men, although the things which we suffer
 after the example of Christ Himself, show us to be Christians. "They
 went out from us," says (St. John,) "but they were not of us. If they
 had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us." [1882]

 [1858] Usitatissimi, "most experienced."

 [1859] Demutare.

 [1860] 1 Sam. xviii. 8, 9.

 [1861] 1 Sam. xiii. 14.

 [1862] 2 Sam. xi.

 [1863] 1 Kings xi. 4.

 [1864] Heb. iv. 15. [See p. 221, supra.]

 [1865] [Here the word martyr means no more than a witness or confessor,
 and may account for what are called exaggerated statements as to the
 number of primitive martyrs. See Kaye p. 128.]

 [1866] Obtinere.

 [1867] Fidem, "The Creed."

 [1868] Major.

 [1869] Matt. x. 22.

 [1870] Jer. xxxii. 19.

 [1871] 1 Sam. xvi. 7.

 [1872] 2 Tim. ii. 19.

 [1873] Matt. xv. 13.

 [1874] Matt. xx. 16.

 [1875] Matt. iii. 12.

 [1876] John vi. 66.

 [1877] A vestigiis ejus.

 [1878] John i. 1; vi. 68, and xvi. 30.

 [1879] John vi. 67.

 [1880] Minus.

 [1881] 2 Tim. i. 15; ii. 17; 1 Tim. i. 20.

 [1882] 1 John ii. 19. [i.e., with the Apostolic Churches. See Cap. xx,
 infra.]

 Chapter IV.--Warnings Against Heresy Given Us in the New Testament.
 Sundry Passages Adduced. These Imply the Possibility of Falling into
 Heresy.

 But let us rather be mindful of the sayings of the Lord, and of the
 letters of the apostles; for they have both told us beforehand that
 there shall be heresies, and have given us, in anticipation, warnings
 to avoid them; and inasmuch as we are not alarmed because they exist,
 so we ought not to wonder that they are capable of doing that, on
 account of which they must be shunned. The Lord teaches us that many
 "ravening wolves shall come in sheep's clothing." [1883] Now, what are
 these sheep's clothing's, but the external surface of the Christian
 profession? Who are the ravening wolves but those deceitful senses and
 spirits which are lurking within to waste the flock of Christ? Who are
 the false prophets but deceptive predictors of the future? Who are the
 false apostles but the preachers of a spurious gospel? [1884] Who also
 are the Antichrists, both now and evermore, but the men who rebel
 against Christ? [1885] Heresies, at the present time, will no less rend
 the church by their perversion of doctrine, than will Antichrist
 persecute her at that day by the cruelty of his attacks, [1886] except
 that persecution make seven martyrs, (but) heresy only apostates. And
 therefore "heresies must needs be in order that they which are approved
 might be made manifest," [1887] both those who remained stedfast under
 persecution, and those who did not wander out of their way [1888] into
 heresy. For the apostle does not mean [1889] that those persons should
 be deemed approved who exchange their creed for heresy; although they
 contrariously interpret his words to their own side, when he says in
 another passage, "Prove all things; hold fast that which is good;"
 [1890] as if, after proving all things amiss, one might not through
 error make a determined choice of some evil thing.

 [1883] Matt. vii. 15.

 [1884] Adulteri evangelizatores, the spurious preachers of the gospel.
 [Galat. i. 8, 9, an example of Apostolic præscription.]

 [1885] Hoc scil. "tempore."

 [1886] Oehler's "persecutionem" ought of course to be "persecutionum."

 [1887] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [1888] Exorbitaverint.

 [1889] Juvat.

 [1890] 1 Thess. v. 21. [But Truth is to be demonstrated as a theorem,
 not treated as a problem of which we must seek the solution.]

 Chapter V.--Heresy, as Well as Schism and Dissension, Disapproved by
 St. Paul, Who Speaks of the Necessity of Heresies, Not as a Good, But,
 by the Will of God, Salutary Trials for Training and Approving the
 Faith of Christians.

 Moreover, when he blames dissensions and schisms, which undoubtedly are
 evils, he immediately adds heresies likewise. Now, that which he
 subjoins to evil things, he of course confesses to be itself an evil;
 and all the greater, indeed, because he tells us that his belief of
 their schisms and dissensions was grounded on his knowledge that "there
 must be heresies also." [1891] For he shows us that it was owing to the
 prospect of the greater evil that he readily believed the existence of
 the lighter ones; and so far indeed was he from believing, in respect
 of evils (of such a kind), that heresies were good, that his object was
 to forewarn us that we ought not to be surprised at temptations of even
 a worse stamp, since (he said) they tended "to make manifest all such
 as were approved;" [1892] in other words, those whom they were unable
 to pervert. [1893] In short, since the whole passage [1894] points to
 the maintenance of unity and the checking of divisions, inasmuch as
 heresies sever men from unity no less than schisms and dissensions, no
 doubt he classes heresies under the same head of censure as he does
 schisms also and dissensions. And by so doing, he makes those to be
 "not approved," who have fallen into heresies; more especially when
 with reproofs he exhorts [1895] men to turn away from such, teaching
 them that they should "all speak and think the selfsame thing," [1896]
 the very object which heresies do not permit.

 [1891] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [1892] 1 Cor. xi. 18.

 [1893] Depravare.

 [1894] Capitulum.

 [1895] Objurget.

 [1896] 1 Cor. i. 10.

 Chapter VI.--Heretics are Self-Condemned. Heresy is Self-Will, Whilst
 Faith is Submission of Our Will to the Divine Authority.  The Heresy of
 Apelles.

 On this point, however, we dwell no longer, since it is the same Paul
 who, in his Epistle to the Galatians, counts "heresies" among "the sins
 of the flesh," [1897] who also intimates to Titus, that "a man who is a
 heretic" must be "rejected after the first admonition," on the ground
 that "he that is such is perverted, and committeth sin, as a
 self-condemned man." [1898] Indeed, in almost every epistle, when
 enjoining on us (the duty) of avoiding false doctrines, he sharply
 condemns [1899] heresies. Of these the practical effects [1900] are
 false doctrines, called in Greek heresies, [1901] a word used in the
 sense of that choice which a man makes when he either teaches them (to
 others) [1902] or takes up with them (for himself). [1903] For this
 reason it is that he calls the heretic self-condemned, [1904] because
 he has himself chosen that for which he is condemned. We, however, are
 not permitted to cherish any object [1905] after our own will, nor yet
 to make choice of that which another has introduced of his private
 fancy. In the Lord's apostles we possess our authority; for even they
 did not of themselves choose to introduce anything, but faithfully
 delivered to the nations (of mankind) the doctrine [1906] which they
 had received from Christ. If, therefore, even "an angel from heaven
 should preach any other gospel" (than theirs), he would be called
 accursed [1907] by us. The Holy Ghost had even then foreseen that there
 would be in a certain virgin (called) Philumene [1908] an angel of
 deceit, "transformed into an angel of light," [1909] by whose miracles
 and illusions [1910] Apelles was led (when) he introduced his new
 heresy.

 [1897] Gal. v. 20.

 [1898] Tit. iii. 10, 11.

 [1899] Taxat.

 [1900] Opera.

 [1901] Haireseis .

 [1902] Instituendas.

 [1903] Suscipiendas.

 [1904] [A remarkable word is subjoined by the Apostle (exestraptai)
 which signifies turned inside out, and so self-condemned, as exhibiting
 his inward contentiousness and pravity.

 [1905] Nihil, any doctrine.

 [1906] Disciplinam, including both the principles and practice of the
 Christian religion.

 [1907] Anathema. See Gal. i. 8.

 [1908] Concerning Philumene, see below, chap. xxv.; Eusebius, Hist.
 Eccl. v. 13; Augustine, de Hæres, chap. xlii. ; Jerome, Epist. adv.
 Ctesiph. (Works, ed. Ben.) iv. 477, and in his Commentary on Galatians,
 ii. See also Tertullian, Against Marcion, p. 139, Edinb. Edition.

 [1909] 2 Cor. xi. 14.

 [1910] Præstigiis.

 Chapter VII.--Pagan Philosophy the Parent of Heresies. The Connection
 Between Deflections from Christian Faith and the Old Systems of Pagan
 Philosophy.

 These are "the doctrines" of men and "of demons" [1911] produced for
 itching ears of the spirit of this world's wisdom: this the Lord called
 "foolishness," [1912] and "chose the foolish things of the world" to
 confound even philosophy itself. For (philosophy) it is which is the
 material of the world's wisdom, the rash interpreter of the nature and
 the dispensation of God. Indeed [1913] heresies are themselves
 instigated [1914] by philosophy. From this source came the Æons, and I
 known not what infinite forms, [1915] and the trinity of man [1916] in
 the system of Valentinus, who was of Plato's school. From the same
 source came Marcion's better god, with all his tranquillity; he came of
 the Stoics. Then, again, the opinion that the soul dies is held by the
 Epicureans; while the denial of the restoration of the body is taken
 from the aggregate school of all the philosophers; also, when matter is
 made equal to God, then you have the teaching of Zeno; and when any
 doctrine is alleged touching a god of fire, then Heraclitus comes in.
 The same subject-matter is discussed over and over again [1917] by the
 heretics and the philosophers; the same arguments [1918] are involved.
 Whence comes evil? Why is it permitted? What is the origin of man? and
 in what way does he come? Besides the question which Valentinus has
 very lately proposed--Whence comes God? Which he settles with the
 answer: From enthymesis and ectroma. [1919] Unhappy Aristotle! who
 invented for these men dialectics, the art of building up and pulling
 down; an art so evasive in its propositions, [1920] so far-fetched in
 its conjectures, so harsh, in its arguments, so productive of
 contentions--embarrassing [1921] even to itself, retracting everything,
 and really treating of [1922] nothing! Whence spring those "fables and
 endless genealogies," [1923] and "unprofitable questions," [1924] and
 "words which spread like a cancer?" [1925] From all these, when the
 apostle would restrain us, he expressly names philosophy as that which
 he would have us be on our guard against. Writing to the Colossians, he
 says, "See that no one beguile you through philosophy and vain deceit,
 after the tradition of men, and contrary to the wisdom of the Holy
 Ghost." [1926] He had been at Athens, and had in his interviews (with
 its philosophers) become acquainted with that human wisdom which
 pretends to know the truth, whilst it only corrupts it, and is itself
 divided into its own manifold heresies, by the variety of its mutually
 repugnant sects. What indeed has Athens to do with Jerusalem? What
 concord is there between the Academy and the Church? what between
 heretics and Christians? Our instruction comes from "the porch of
 Solomon," [1927] who had himself taught that "the Lord should be sought
 in simplicity of heart." [1928] Away with [1929] all attempts to
 produce a mottled Christianity of Stoic, Platonic, and dialectic
 composition! We want no curious disputation after possessing Christ
 Jesus, no inquisition after enjoying the gospel! With our faith, we
 desire no further belief. For this is our palmary faith, that there is
 nothing which we ought to believe besides.

 [1911] 1 Tim. iv. 1.

 [1912] 1 Cor. iii. 18 and 25.

 [1913] Denique.

 [1914] Subornantur.

 [1915] Formeæ, "Ideæ" (Oehler).

 [1916] See Tertullian's treatises, adversus Valentinum, xxv., and de
 Anima, xxi.; also Epiphanius, Hær. xxxi . 23.

 [1917] Volutatur.

 [1918] Retractatus.

 [1919] "De enthymesi;" for this word Tertullian gives animationem (in
 his tract against Valentinus, ix.), which seems to mean, "the mind in
 operation." (See the same treatise, x. xi.) With regard to the other
 word, Jerome (on Amos. iii.) adduces Valentinus as calling Christ
 ektroma, that is, abortion.

 [1920] Sententiis.

 [1921] Molestam.

 [1922] Tractaverit, in the sense of conclusively settling.

 [1923] 1 Tim. i. 4.

 [1924] Tit. iii. 9.

 [1925] 2 Tim. ii. 17.

 [1926] Col. ii. 8. The last clause, "præter providentiam Spiritus
 Sancti," is either Tertullian's reading, or his gloss of the apostle's
 ou kata Christon--"not after Christ."

 [1927] Because in the beginning of the church the apostles taught in
 Solomon's porch, Acts iii. 5.

 [1928] Wisdom of Solomon, i. 1.

 [1929] Viderint.

 Chapter VIII.--Christ's Word, Seek, and Ye Shall Find, No Warrant for
 Heretical Deviations from the Faith. All Christ's Words to the Jews are
 for Us, Not Indeed as Specific Commands, But as Principles to Be
 Applied.

 I come now to the point which (is urged both by our own brethren and by
 the heretics). Our brethren adduce it as a pretext for entering on
 curious inquiries, [1930] and the heretics insist on it for importing
 the scrupulosity (of their unbelief). [1931] It is written, they say,
 "Seek, and ye shall find." [1932] Let us remember at what time the Lord
 said this. I think it was at the very outset of His teaching, when
 there was still a doubt felt by all whether He were the Christ, and
 when even Peter had not yet declared Him to be the Son of God, and John
 (Baptist) had actually ceased to feel assurance about Him. [1933] With
 good reason, therefore, was it then said, "Seek, and ye shall find,"
 when inquiry was still be to made of Him who was not yet become known.
 Besides, this was said in respect of the Jews. For it is to them that
 the whole matter [1934] of this reproof [1935] pertains, seeing that
 they had (a revelation) where they might seek Christ.

 "They have," says He, "Moses and Elias," [1936] --in other words, the
 law and the prophets, which preach Christ; as also in another place He
 says plainly, "Search the Scriptures, in which ye expect (to find)
 salvation; for they testify of me;" [1937] which will be the meaning of
 "Seek, and ye shall find." For it is clear that the next words also
 apply to the Jews: "Knock, and it shall be opened unto you." [1938] The
 Jews had formerly been in covenant with [1939] God; but being
 afterwards cast off on account of their sins, they began to be [1940]
 without God. The Gentiles, on the contrary, had never been in covenant
 with God; they were only as "a drop from a bucket," and "as dust from
 the threshing floor," [1941] and were ever outside the door. Now, how
 shall he who was always outside knock at the place where he never was?
 What door does he know of, when he has passed through none, either by
 entrance or ejection?  Is it not rather he who is aware that he once
 lived within and was thrust out, that (probably) found the door and
 knocked thereat? In like manner, "Ask, and ye shall receive," [1942] is
 suitably said [1943] to one who was aware from whom he ought to
 ask,--by whom also some promise had been given; that is to say, "the
 God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob." Now, the Gentiles knew nothing
 either of Him, or of any of His promises. Therefore it was to Israel
 that he spake when He said, "I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
 house of Israel." [1944] Not yet had He "cast to the dogs the
 children's bread;" [1945] not yet did He charge them to "go into the
 way of the Gentiles." [1946] It is only at the last that He instructs
 them to "go and teach all nations, and baptize them," [1947] when they
 were so soon to receive "the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, who should
 guide them into all the truth." [1948] And this, too, makes towards the
 same conclusion. If the apostles, who were ordained [1949] to be
 teachers to the Gentiles, were themselves to have the Comforter for
 their teacher, far more needless [1950] was it to say to us, "Seek, and
 ye shall find," to whom was to come, without research, [1951] our
 instruction [1952] by the apostles, and to the apostles themselves by
 the Holy Ghost. All the Lord's sayings, indeed, are set forth for all
 men; through the ears of the Jews have they passed on to us. Still most
 of them were addressed to Jewish persons; [1953] they therefore did not
 constitute instruction properly designed [1954] for ourselves, but
 rather an example. [1955]

 [1930] Curiositatem.

 [1931] Scrupulositatem, "hair-splitting."

 [1932] Matt. vii. 7.

 [1933] See our translation of the Anti-Marcion, iv. 18 (infra), and
 Tertullian's treatise, de Bapt. x.

 [1934] Sermo.

 [1935] Suggillationis.

 [1936] Luke xvi. 29.

 [1937] John v. 39.

 [1938] Matt. vii. 7.

 [1939] Penes.

 [1940] Or, "were for the first time."

 [1941] Isa. xl. 15.

 [1942] Matt. vii. 7.

 [1943] Competit.

 [1944] Matt. xv. 24.

 [1945] Ver. 26.

 [1946] Matt. x. 5.

 [1947] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [1948] John xvi. 13.

 [1949] Destinati.

 [1950] Multo magis vacabat.

 [1951] Ultro.

 [1952] Doctrina.

 [1953] In personas, i.e., Judæorum (Oehler).

 [1954] Proprietatem admonitionis.

 [1955] "That is, not a specific command" primarily meant for us, but a
 principle "to be applied by us" (Dodgson).

 Chapter IX.--The Research After Definite Truth Enjoined on Us. When We
 Have Discovered This, We Should Be Content.

 I now purposely [1956] relinquish this ground of argument. Let it be
 granted, that the words, "Seek, and ye shall find," were addressed to
 all men (equally). Yet even here one's aim is [1957] carefully to
 determine [1958] the sense of the words [1959] consistently with [1960]
 (that reason), [1961] which is the guiding principle [1962] in all
 interpretation. (Now) no divine saying is so unconnected [1963] and
 diffuse, that its words only are to be insisted on, and their
 connection left undetermined. But at the outset I lay down (this
 position) that there is some one, and therefore definite, thing taught
 by Christ, which the Gentiles are by all means bound to believe, and
 for that purpose to "seek," in order that they may be able, when they
 have "found" it, to believe. However, [1964] there can be no indefinite
 seeking for that which has been taught as one only definite thing. You
 must "seek" until you "find," and believe when you have found; nor have
 you anything further to do but to keep what you have believed provided
 you believe this besides, that nothing else is to be believed, and
 therefore nothing else is to be sought, after you have found and
 believed what has been taught by Him who charges you to seek no other
 thing than that which He has taught. [1965] When, indeed, any man
 doubts about this, proof will be forthcoming, [1966] that we have in
 our possession [1967] that which was taught by Christ.  Meanwhile, such
 is my confidence in our proof, that I anticipate it, in the shape of an
 admonition to certain persons, not "to seek" anything beyond what they
 have believed--that this is what they ought to have sought, how to
 avoid [1968] interpreting, "Seek, and ye shall find," without regard to
 the rule of reason.

 [1956] Sponte.

 [1957] Expetit.

 [1958] Certare.

 [1959] Sensus.

 [1960] Cum.

 [1961] See Oehler's note.

 [1962] Gubernaculo. See Irenæus, ii. 46, for a similar view (Rigalt.).
 Surely Dodgson's version, if intelligible in itself even, incorrectly
 represents Tertullian's sense.

 [1963] Dissoluta.

 [1964] Porro.

 [1965] [Not to be contented with Truth, once known, is a sin preceding
 that against the Holy Spirit, and this state of mind explains the
 judicial blindness inflicted on Lapsers, as asserted by St. Paul, 2
 Thess. ii. 10, 13, where note--"they received not the love of the
 truth." They had it and were not content with it.]

 [1966] Constabit.

 [1967] Penes nos.

 [1968] Ne.

 Chapter X.--One Has Succeeded in Finding Definite Truth, When He
 Believes. Heretical Wits are Always Offering Many Things for Vain
 Discussion, But We are Not to Be Always Seeking.

 Now the reason of this saying is comprised in three points: in the
 matter, in the time, in the limit. [1969] In the matter, so that you
 must consider what it is you have to seek; in the time, when you have
 to seek; in the limit, how long. What you have "to seek," then, is that
 which Christ has taught, [1970] (and you must go on seeking) of course
 for such time as you fail to find, [1971] --until indeed you find
 [1972] it. But you have succeeded in finding [1973] when you have
 believed. For you would not have believed if you had not found; as
 neither would you have sought except with a view to find. Your object,
 therefore, in seeking was to find; and your object in finding was to
 believe. All further delay for seeking and finding you have prevented
 [1974] by believing. The very fruit of your seeking has determined for
 you this limit.  This boundary [1975] has He set for you Himself, who
 is unwilling that you should believe anything else than what He has
 taught, or, therefore, even seek for it. If, however, because so many
 other things have been taught by one and another, we are on that
 account bound to go on seeking, so long as we are able to find
 anything, we must (at that rate) be ever seeking, and never believe
 anything at all. For where shall be the end of seeking? where the stop
 [1976] in believing? where the completion in finding?  (Shall it be)
 with Marcion? But even Valentinus proposes (to us the) maxim, "Seek,
 and ye shall find." (Then shall it be) with Valentinus? Well, but
 Apelles, too, will assail me with the same quotation; Hebion also, and
 Simon, and all in turn, have no other argument wherewithal to entice
 me, and draw me over to their side. Thus I shall be nowhere, and still
 be encountering [1977] (that challenge), "Seek, and ye shall find,"
 precisely as if I had no resting-place; [1978] as if (indeed) I had
 never found that which Christ has taught--that which ought [1979] to be
 sought, that which must needs [1980] be believed.

 [1969] In modo.

 [1970] This is, "the matter."

 [1971] "The time."

 [1972] "The limit."

 [1973] Invenisti.

 [1974] Fixisti, "determined."

 [1975] Fossam.

 [1976] Statio, "resting-place."

 [1977] Dum convenero.

 [1978] This is the rendering of Oehler's text, "et velut si nusquam.
 There are other readings of this obscure passage, of which as we add
 the two most intelligible. The Codex Agobardinus has, "et velim si
 nunquam;" that is, "and I would that I were nowhere," with no fixed
 belief--in such wise as never to have had the truth; not, as must now
 be, to have forfeited it. (Dodgson).  This seems far-fetched, and
 inferior to the reading of Pamelius and his mss.:  "et velint me sic
 esse nusquam;"--or (as Semler puts it) "velint sic nusquam;" i.e., "and
 they (the heretics) would wish me to be nowhere"--without the fixed
 faith of the Catholic. This makes good sense. [Semler is here
 mentioned, and if anybody wishes to understand what sort of editor he
 was, he may be greatly amused by Kaye's examination of some of his
 positions, pp. 64-84. Elucidation II.]

 [1979] Oportet.

 [1980] Necesse est. Observe these degrees of obligation.

 Chapter XI.--After We Have Believed, Search Should Cease; Otherwise It
 Must End in a Denial of What We Have Believed. No Other Object Proposed
 for Our Faith.

 There is impunity in erring, if there is no delinquency; although
 indeed to err it is itself an act of delinquency. [1981] With impunity,
 I repeat, does a man ramble, [1982] when he (purposely) deserts
 nothing. But yet, if I have believed what I was bound to believe, and
 then afterwards think that there is something new to be sought after, I
 of course expect that there is something else to be found, although I
 should by no means entertain such expectation, unless it were because I
 either had not believed, although I apparently had become a believer,
 or else have ceased to believe. If I thus desert my faith, I am found
 to be a denier thereof. Once for all I would say, No man seeks, except
 him who either never possessed, or else has lost (what he sought). The
 old woman (in the Gospel) [1983] had lost one of her ten pieces of
 silver, and therefore she sought it; [1984] when, however, she found
 it, she ceased to look for it. The neighbour was without bread, and
 therefore he knocked; but as soon as the door was opened to him, and he
 received the bread, he discontinued knocking. [1985] The widow kept
 asking to be heard by the judge, because she was not admitted; but when
 her suit was heard, thenceforth she was silent. [1986] So that there is
 a limit both to seeking, and to knocking, and to asking. "For to every
 one that asketh," says He, "it shall be given, and to him that knocketh
 it shall be opened, and by him that seeketh it shall be found." [1987]
 Away with the man [1988] who is ever seeking because he never finds;
 for he seeks there where nothing can be found. Away with him who is
 always knocking because it will never be opened to him; for he knocks
 where there is none (to open). Away with him who is always asking
 because he will never be heard; for he asks of one who does not hear.

 [1981] Quamvis et errare delinquere est.

 [1982] Vagatur.

 [1983] Anus illa.

 [1984] Luke xv. 8.

 [1985] Luke xi. 5.

 [1986] Luke xviii. 2, 3.

 [1987] Luke xi. 9.

 [1988] Viderit.

 Chapter XII.--A Proper Seeking After Divine Knowledge, Which Will Never
 Be Out of Place or Excessive, is Always Within the Rule of Faith.

 As for us, although we must still seek, and that always, yet where
 ought our search to be made?  Amongst the heretics, where all things
 are foreign [1989] and opposed to our own verity, and to whom we are
 forbidden to draw near? What slave looks for food from a stranger, not
 to say an enemy of his master? What soldier expects to get bounty and
 pay from kings who are unallied, I might almost say hostile--unless
 forsooth he be a deserter, and a runaway, and a rebel? Even that old
 woman [1990] searched for the piece of silver within her own house. It
 was also at his neighbour's door that the persevering assailant kept
 knocking. Nor was it to a hostile judge, although a severe one, that
 the widow made her appeal. No man gets instruction [1991] from that
 which tends to destruction. [1992] No man receives illumination from a
 quarter where all is darkness. Let our "seeking," therefore be in that
 which is our own, and from those who are our own: and concerning that
 which is our own,--that, and only that, [1993] which can become an
 object of inquiry without impairing the rule of faith.

 [1989] Extranea.

 [1990] Although Tertullian calls her "anus," St. Luke's word is gune
 not graus.

 [1991] Instrui potest.

 [1992] Unde destruitur.

 [1993] Idque dumtaxat.

 Chapter XIII.--Summary of the Creed, or Rule of Faith. No Questions
 Ever Raised About It by Believers.  Heretics Encourage and Perpetuate
 Thought Independent of Christ's Teaching.

 Now, with regard to this rule of faith--that we may from this point
 [1994] acknowledge what it is which we defend--it is, you must know,
 that which prescribes the belief that there is one only God, and that
 He is none other than the Creator of the world, who produced all things
 out of nothing through His own Word, first of all sent forth; [1995]
 that this Word is called His Son, and, under the name of God, was seen
 "in diverse manners" by the patriarchs, heard at all times in the
 prophets, at last brought down by the Spirit and Power of the Father
 into the Virgin Mary, was made flesh in her womb, and, being born of
 her, went forth as Jesus Christ; thenceforth He preached the new law
 and the new promise of the kingdom of heaven, worked miracles; having
 been crucified, He rose again the third day; (then) having ascended
 [1996] into the heavens, He sat at the right hand of the Father; sent
 instead of Himself [1997] the Power of the Holy Ghost to lead such as
 believe; will come with glory to take the saints to the enjoyment of
 everlasting life and of the heavenly promises, and to condemn the
 wicked to everlasting fire, after the resurrection of both these
 classes shall have happened, together with the restoration of their
 flesh. This rule, as it will be proved, was taught by Christ, and
 raises amongst ourselves no other questions than those which heresies
 introduce, and which make men heretics. [1998]

 [1994] Jam hinc.

 [1995] Primo omnium demissum. Literally, "sent down." See on this
 procession of the Son of God to create the world, Bishop Bull's Defence
 of the Nicene Creed, etc., by the translator of this work, pp. 445 and
 following.

 [1996] Ereptum, having been taken away.

 [1997] Vicariam. [Scott's Christian Life, Vol. III. p. 64.]

 [1998] [See Bunsen (Hippol. III. Notes, etc., p. 129.) for a castigated
 form of the Latin Creed, as used in Rome. Observe it lacks the word
 Catholic. But a much better study of these formulas may be found in
 Dupin's comparative Table.  First Cent. pp. 9-12.]

 Chapter XIV.--Curiosity Ought Not Range Beyond the Rule of Faith.
 Restless Curiosity, the Feature of Heresy.

 So long, however, as its form exists in its proper order, you may seek
 and discuss as much as you please, and give full rein to [1999] your
 curiosity, in whatever seems to you to hang in doubt, or to be shrouded
 in obscurity. You have at hand, no doubt, some learned [2000] brother
 gifted with the grace of knowledge, some one of the experienced class,
 some one of your close acquaintance who is curious like yourself;
 although with yourself, a seeker he will, after all, [2001] be quite
 aware [2002] that it is better for you to remain in ignorance, lest you
 should come to know what you ought not, because you have acquired the
 knowledge of what you ought to know. [2003] "Thy faith," He says, "hath
 saved thee" [2004] not observe your skill [2005] in the Scriptures.
 Now, faith has been deposited in the rule; it has a law, and (in the
 observance thereof) salvation. Skill, [2006] however, consists in
 curious art, having for its glory simply the readiness that comes from
 knack. [2007] Let such curious art give place to faith; let such glory
 yield to salvation. At any rate, let them either relinquish their
 noisiness, [2008] or else be quiet. To know nothing in opposition to
 the rule (of faith), is to know all things. (Suppose) that heretics
 were not enemies to the truth, so that we were not forewarned to avoid
 them, what sort of conduct would it be to agree with men who do
 themselves confess that they are still seeking? For if they are still
 seeking, they have not as yet found anything amounting to certainty;
 and therefore, whatever they seem for a while [2009] to hold, they
 betray their own scepticism, [2010] whilst they continue seeking. You
 therefore, who seek after their fashion, looking to those who are
 themselves ever seeking, a doubter to doubters, a waverer to waverers,
 must needs be "led, blindly by the blind, down into the ditch." [2011]
 But when, for the sake of deceiving us, they pretend that they are
 still seeking, in order that they may palm [2012] their essays [2013]
 upon us by the suggestion of an anxious sympathy, [2014] --when, in
 short (after gaining an access to us), they proceed at once to insist
 on the necessity of our inquiring into such points as they were in the
 habit of advancing, then it is high time for us in moral obligation
 [2015] to repel [2016] them, so that they may know that it is not
 Christ, but themselves, whom we disavow. For since they are still
 seekers, they have no fixed tenets yet; [2017] and being not fixed in
 tenet, they have not yet believed; and being not yet believers, they
 are not Christians. But even though they have their tenets and their
 belief, they still say that inquiry is necessary in order to
 discussion. [2018] Previous, however, to the discussion, they deny what
 they confess not yet to have believed, so long as they keep it an
 object of inquiry. When men, therefore, are not Christians even on
 their own admission, [2019] how much more (do they fail to appear such)
 to us! What sort of truth is that which they patronize, [2020] when
 they commend it to us with a lie?  Well, but they actually [2021] treat
 of the Scriptures and recommend (their opinions) out of the Scriptures!
 To be sure they do. [2022] From what other source could they derive
 arguments concerning the things of the faith, except from the records
 of the faith?

 [1999] Omnem libidinem effundas, "pour out the whole desire for."

 [2000] Doctor, literally, "teacher." See Eph. iv. 11; also above; chap.
 iii. p. 244.

 [2001] This seems to be the more probable meaning of novissime in this
 rather obscure sentence. Oehler treats it adverbially as "postremo,"
 and refers to a similar use of the word below in chap. xxx. Dr. Routh
 (and, after him, the translator in The Library of the Fathers,
 Tertullian, p. 448) makes the word a noun, "thou newest of novices,"
 and refers to Tertullian's work, against Praxeas, chap. xxvii., for a
 like use. This seems to us too harsh for the present context.

 [2002] Sciet.

 [2003] See 1 Cor. xii. 8.

 [2004] Luke xviii. 42.

 [2005] Exercitatio.

 [2006] Exercitatio.

 [2007] De peritiæ studio.

 [2008] Non obstrepant.

 [2009] Interim.

 [2010] Dubitationem.

 [2011] Matt. xv. 14.

 [2012] Insinuent.

 [2013] Tractatus.

 [2014] Or, "by instilling an anxiety into us" (Dodgson).

 [2015] Jam debemus.

 [2016] Refutare.

 [2017] Nondum tenent.

 [2018] Ut defendant.

 [2019] Nec sibi sunt.

 [2020] Patrocinantur.

 [2021] Ipsi.

 [2022] Scilicet.

 Chapter XV.--Heretics Not to Be Allowed to Argue Out of the Scriptures.
 The Scriptures, in Fact, Do Not Belong to Them. [2023]

 We are therefore come to (the gist of) our position; for at this point
 we were aiming, and for this we were preparing in the preamble of our
 address (which we have just completed),--so that we may now join issue
 on the contention to which our adversaries challenge us. They put
 forward [2024] the Scriptures, and by this insolence [2025] of theirs
 they at once influence some.  In the encounter itself, however, they
 weary the strong, they catch the weak, and dismiss waverers with a
 doubt.  Accordingly, we oppose to them this step above all others, of
 not admitting them to any discussion of the Scriptures. [2026]

 If in these lie their resources, before they can use them, it ought to
 be clearly seen to whom belongs the possession of the Scriptures, that
 none may be admitted to the use thereof who has no title at all to the
 privilege.

 [2023] [See Marcion, B. I. Cap. xxii. infra, note.]

 [2024] Obtendunt.

 [2025] Audacia.

 [2026] De Scripturis. But as this preposition is often the sign of the
 instrument in Tertullian, this phrase may mean "out of," or "by means
 of the Scriptures." See the last chapter.

 Chapter XVI.--Apostolic Sanction to This Exclusion of Heretics from the
 Use of the Scriptures. Heretics, According to the Apostle, are Not to
 Be Disputed With, But to Be Admonished.

 I might be thought to have laid down this position to remedy distrust
 in my case, [2027] or from a desire of entering on the contest [2028]
 in some other way, were there not reasons on my side, especially this,
 that our faith owes deference [2029] to the apostle, who forbids us to
 enter on "questions," or to lend our ears to new-fangled statements,
 [2030] or to consort with a heretic "after the first and second
 admonition," [2031] not, (be it observed,) after discussion.
 Discussion he has inhibited in this way, by designating admonition as
 the purpose of dealing with a heretic, and the first one too, because
 he is not a Christian; in order that he might not, after the manner of
 a Christian, seem to require correction again and again, and "before
 two or three witnesses," [2032] seeing that he ought to be corrected,
 for the very reason that he is not to be disputed with; and in the next
 place, because a controversy over the Scriptures can, clearly, [2033]
 produce no other effect than help to upset either the stomach or the
 brain.

 [2027] De consilio diffidentiæ.

 [2028] Constitutionis, "prima causarum conflictio,"--a term of the law
 courts.

 [2029] Obsequium.

 [2030] 1 Tim. vi. 3, 4.

 [2031] Tit. iii. 10.

 [2032] Matt. xviii. 16.

 [2033] Plane, ironical.

 Chapter XVII.--Heretics, in Fact, Do Not Use, But Only Abuse,
 Scripture. No Common Ground Between Them and You.

 Now this heresy of yours [2034] does not receive certain Scriptures;
 and whichever of them it does receive, it perverts by means of
 additions and diminutions, for the accomplishment of it own purpose;
 and such as it does receive, it receives not in their entirety; but
 even when it does receive any up to a certain point [2035] as entire,
 it nevertheless perverts even these by the contrivance of diverse
 interpretations. Truth is just as much opposed by an adulteration of
 its meaning as it is by a corruption of its text. [2036] Their vain
 presumptions must needs refuse to acknowledge the (writings) whereby
 they are refuted. They rely on those which they have falsely put
 together, and which they have selected, because of [2037] their
 ambiguity. Though most skilled [2038] in the Scriptures, you will make
 no progress, [2039] when everything which you maintain is denied on the
 other side, and whatever you deny is (by them) maintained. As for
 yourself, indeed, you will lose nothing but your breath, and gain
 nothing but vexation from their blasphemy.

 [2034] Ista hæresis.

 [2035] Aliquatenus.

 [2036] Stilus.

 [2037] "De" has often the sense of "propter" in our author.

 [2038] Literally, "O most skilled."

 [2039] Quid promovebis.

 Chapter XVIII.--Great Evil Ensues to the Weak in Faith, from Any
 Discussion Out of the Scriptures. Conviction Never Comes to the Heretic
 from Such a Process.

 But with respect to the man for whose sake you enter on the discussion
 of the Scriptures, [2040] with the view of strengthening him when
 afflicted with doubts, (let me ask) will it be to the truth, or rather
 to heretical opinions that he will lean? Influenced by the very fact
 that he sees you have made no progress, whilst the other side is on an
 equal footing [2041] (with yourself) in denying and in defence, or at
 any rate on a like standing [2042] he will go away confirmed in his
 uncertainty [2043] by the discussion, not knowing which side to adjudge
 heretical. For, no doubt, they too are able [2044] to retort these
 things on us. It is indeed a necessary consequence that they should go
 so far as to say that adulterations of the Scriptures, and false
 expositions thereof, are rather introduced by ourselves, inasmuch as
 they, no less than we [2045] maintain that truth is on their side.

 [2040] Or, "from the Scriptures."

 [2041] Æquo gradu.

 [2042] Statu certe pari.

 [2043] Incertior.

 [2044] Habent.

 [2045] Proinde.

 Chapter XIX.--Appeal, in Discussion of Heresy, Lies Not to the
 Scriptures. The Scriptures Belong Only to Those Who Have the Rule of
 Faith.

 Our appeal, therefore, must not be made to the Scriptures; nor must
 controversy be admitted on points in which victory will either be
 impossible, [2046] or uncertain, or not certain enough. [2047] But even
 if a discussion from the Scriptures [2048] should not turn out in such
 a way as to place both sides on a par, (yet) the natural order of
 things would require that this point should be first proposed, which is
 now the only one which we must discuss: "With whom lies that very faith
 to which the Scriptures belong. [2049] From what and through whom, and
 when, and to whom, has been handed down that rule, [2050] by which men
 become Christians?" For wherever it shall be manifest that the true
 Christian rule and faith shall be, there will likewise be the true
 Scriptures and expositions thereof, and all the Christian traditions.

 [2046] Nulla.

 [2047] Parum certa.

 [2048] Conlatio scripturarum, or, "a polemical comparison of the
 Scriptures."

 [2049] Quibus competat fides ipsa cujus sint Scripturæ.

 [2050] Disciplina [or, where was the guide-post set?]

 Chapter XX.--Christ First Delivered the Faith. The Apostles Spread It;
 They Founded Churches as the Depositories Thereof. That Faith,
 Therefore, is Apostolic, Which Descended from the Apostles, Through
 Apostolic Churches.

 Christ Jesus our Lord (may He bear with me a moment in thus expressing
 myself!), whosoever He is, of what God soever He is the Son, of what
 substance soever He is man and God, of what faith soever He is the
 teacher, of what reward soever He is the Promiser, did, whilst He lived
 on earth, Himself declare what He was, what He had been, what the
 Father's will was which He was administering, what the duty of man was
 which He was prescribing; (and this declaration He made,) either openly
 to the people, or privately to His disciples, of whom He had chosen the
 twelve chief ones to be at His side, [2051] and whom He destined to be
 the teachers of the nations. Accordingly, after one of these had been
 struck off, He commanded the eleven others, on His departure to the
 Father, to "go and teach all nations, who were to be baptized into the
 Father, and into the Son, and into the Holy Ghost." [2052] Immediately,
 therefore, so did the apostles, whom this designation indicates as "the
 sent." Having, on the authority of a prophecy, which occurs in a psalm
 of David, [2053] chosen Matthias by lot as the twelfth, into the place
 of Judas, they obtained the promised power of the Holy Ghost for the
 gift of miracles and of utterance; and after first bearing witness to
 the faith in Jesus Christ throughout Judæa, and founding churches
 (there), they next went forth into the world and preached the same
 doctrine of the same faith to the nations. They then in like manner
 founded churches in every city, from which all the other churches, one
 after another, derived the tradition of the faith, [2054] and the seeds
 of doctrine, and are every day deriving them, [2055] that they may
 become churches. Indeed, it is on this account only that they will be
 able to deem themselves apostolic, as being the offspring of apostolic
 churches.  Every sort of thing [2056] must necessarily revert to its
 original for its classification. [2057] Therefore the churches,
 although they are so many and so great, comprise but the one primitive
 church, (founded) by the apostles, from which they all (spring).  In
 this way all are primitive, and all are apostolic, whilst they are all
 proved to be one, in (unbroken) unity, by their peaceful communion,
 [2058] and title of brotherhood, and bond [2059] of
 hospitality,--privileges [2060] which no other rule directs than the
 one tradition of the selfsame mystery. [2061]

 [2051] Mark iv. 34.

 [2052] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [2053] Ps. cix. 8; comp. with Acts i. 15-20.

 [2054] Traducem fidei.

 [2055] Mutuantur "borrowing."

 [2056] Omne genus.

 [2057] Censeatur or, "for its origin."

 [2058] Communicatio pacis.

 [2059] Contesseratio. [3 John 8.]

 [2060] Jura, "rights."

 [2061] That is, of the faith, or Christian creed.

 Chapter XXI.--All Doctrine True Which Comes Through the Church from the
 Apostles, Who Were Taught by God Through Christ. All Opinion Which Has
 No Such Divine Origin and Apostolic Tradition to Show, is Ipso Facto
 False.

 From this, therefore, do we draw up our rule. Since the Lord Jesus
 Christ sent the apostles to preach, (our rule is) that no others ought
 to be received as preachers than those whom Christ appointed; for "no
 man knoweth the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
 reveal Him." [2062] Nor does the Son seem to have revealed Him to any
 other than the apostles, whom He sent forth to preach--that, of course,
 which He revealed to them. Now, what that was which they preached--in
 other words, what it was which Christ revealed to them--can, as I must
 here likewise prescribe, properly be proved in no other way than by
 those very churches which the apostles founded in person, by declaring
 the gospel to them directly themselves, both vivâ voce, as the phrase
 is, and subsequently by their epistles. If, then, these things are so,
 it is in the same degree [2063] manifest that all doctrine which agrees
 with the apostolic churches--those moulds [2064] and original sources
 of the faith must be reckoned for truth, as undoubtedly containing that
 which the (said) churches received from the apostles, the apostles from
 Christ, Christ from God.  Whereas all doctrine must be prejudged [2065]
 as false [2066] which savours of contrariety to the truth of the
 churches and apostles of Christ and God. It remains, then, that we
 demonstrate whether this doctrine of ours, of which we have now given
 the rule, has its origin [2067] in the tradition of the apostles, and
 whether all other doctrines do not ipso facto [2068] proceed from
 falsehood. We hold communion with the apostolic churches because our
 doctrine is in no respect different from theirs. This is our witness of
 truth.

 [2062] Matt. xi. 27.

 [2063] Perinde.

 [2064] Matricibus.

 [2065] Præjudicandam. [This then is Præscription.]

 [2066] De mendacio.

 [2067] Censeatur.

 [2068] Ex hoc ipso, "from this very circumstance."

 Chapter XXII.--Attempt to Invalidate This Rule of Faith Rebutted. The
 Apostles Safe Transmitters of the Truth. Sufficiently Taught at First,
 and Faithful in the Transmission.

 But inasmuch as the proof is so near at hand, [2069] that if it were at
 once produced there would be nothing left to be dealt with, let us give
 way for a while to the opposite side, if they think that they can find
 some means of invalidating this rule, just as if no proof were
 forthcoming from us. They usually tell us that the apostles did not
 know all things: (but herein) they are impelled by the same madness,
 whereby they turn round to the very opposite point, [2070] and declare
 that the apostles certainly knew all things, but did not deliver all
 things to all persons,--in either case exposing Christ to blame for
 having sent forth apostles who had either too much ignorance, or too
 little simplicity. What man, then, of sound mind can possibly suppose
 that they were ignorant of anything, whom the Lord ordained to be
 masters (or teachers), [2071] keeping them, as He did, inseparable
 (from Himself) in their attendance, in their discipleship, in their
 society, to whom, "when they were alone, He used to expound" all things
 [2072] which were obscure, telling them that "to them it was given to
 know those mysteries," [2073] which it was not permitted the people to
 understand? Was anything withheld from the knowledge of Peter, who is
 called "the rock on which the church should be built," [2074] who also
 obtained "the keys of the kingdom of heaven," [2075] with the power of
 "loosing and binding in heaven and on earth?" [2076] Was anything,
 again, concealed from John, the Lord's most beloved disciple, who used
 to lean on His breast [2077] to whom alone the Lord pointed Judas out
 as the traitor, [2078] whom He commended to Mary as a son in His own
 stead? [2079] Of what could He have meant those to be ignorant, to whom
 He even exhibited His own glory with Moses and Elias, and the Father's
 voice moreover, from heaven? [2080] Not as if He thus disapproved
 [2081] of all the rest, but because "by three witnesses must every word
 be established." [2082] After the same fashion, [2083] too, (I
 suppose,) were they ignorant to whom, after His resurrection also, He
 vouchsafed, as they were journeying together, "to expound all the
 Scriptures." [2084] No doubt [2085] He had once said, "I have yet many
 things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now;" but even then He
 added, "When He, the Spirit of truth, shall come, He will lead you into
 all truth." [2086] He (thus) shows that there was nothing of which they
 were ignorant, to whom He had promised the future attainment of all
 truth by help of the Spirit of truth.  And assuredly He fulfilled His
 promise, since it is proved in the Acts of the Apostles that the Holy
 Ghost did come down. Now they who reject that Scripture [2087] can
 neither belong to the Holy Spirit, seeing that they cannot acknowledge
 that the Holy Ghost has been sent as yet to the disciples, nor can they
 presume to claim to be a church themselves [2088] who positively have
 no means of proving when, and with what swaddling-clothes [2089] this
 body was established. Of so much importance is it to them not to have
 any proofs for the things which they maintain, lest along with them
 there be introduced damaging exposures [2090] of those things which
 they mendaciously devise.

 [2069] Expedita.

 [2070] Susam rursus convertun.

 [2071] Magistros.

 [2072] Mark iv. 34.

 [2073] Matt. xiii. 11.

 [2074] Matt. xvi. 18. [See Kaye p. 222, also Elucidation II.]

 [2075] Ver. 19.

 [2076] Ver. 19.

 [2077] John xxi. 20.

 [2078] John xiii. 25. [N.B. loco suo.]

 [2079] John xix. 26.

 [2080] Matt. xvii. 1-8.

 [2081] Reprobans.

 [2082] Deut. xix. 15, and 2 Cor. xiii. 1.

 [2083] Itaque, ironical.

 [2084] Luke xxiv. 27.

 [2085] Plane.

 [2086] John xvi. 12, 13.

 [2087] See Tertullian's Anti-Marcion, iv. 5, and v. 2 (Trans. pp. 187
 and 377).

 [2088] Nec ecclesiam se dicant defendere.

 [2089] Incunabulis, infant nursing.

 [2090] Traductiones.

 Chapter XXIII.--The Apostles Not Ignorant. The Heretical Pretence of
 St. Peter's Imperfection Because He Was Rebuked by St. Paul. St. Peter
 Not Rebuked for Error in Teaching.

 Now, with the view of branding [2091] the apostles with some mark of
 ignorance, they put forth the case of Peter and them that were with him
 having been rebuked by Paul. "Something therefore," they say, "was
 wanting in them." (This they allege,) in order that they may from this
 construct that other position of theirs, that a fuller knowledge may
 possibly have afterwards come over (the apostles,) such as fell to the
 share of Paul when he rebuked those who preceded him. I may here say to
 those who reject The Acts of the Apostles: "It is first necessary that
 you show us who this Paul was,--both what he was before he was an
 apostle, and how he became an apostle,"--so very great is the use which
 they make of him in respect of other questions also. It is true that he
 tells us himself that he was a persecutor before he became an apostle,
 [2092] still this is not enough for any man who examines before he
 believes, since even the Lord Himself did not bear witness of Himself.
 [2093] But let them believe without the Scriptures, if their object is
 to believe contrary to the Scriptures. [2094] Still they should show,
 from the circumstance which they allege of Peter's being rebuked by
 Paul, that Paul added yet another form of the gospel besides that which
 Peter and the rest had previously set forth. But the fact is, [2095]
 having been converted from a persecutor to a preacher, he is introduced
 as one of the brethren to brethren, by brethren--to them, indeed, by
 men who had put on faith from the apostles' hands.  Afterwards, as he
 himself narrates, he "went up to Jerusalem for the purpose of seeing
 Peter," [2096] because of his office, no doubt, [2097] and by right of
 a common belief and preaching.  Now they certainly would not have been
 surprised at his having become a preacher instead of a persecutor, if
 his preaching were of something contrary; nor, moreover, would they
 have "glorified the Lord," [2098] because Paul had presented himself as
 an adversary to Him. They accordingly even gave him "the right hand of
 fellowship," [2099] as a sign of their agreement with him, and arranged
 amongst themselves a distribution of office, not a diversity of gospel,
 so that they should severally preach not a different gospel, but (the
 same), to different persons, [2100] Peter to the circumcision, Paul to
 the Gentiles. Forasmuch, then, as Peter was rebuked because, after he
 had lived with the Gentiles, he proceeded to separate himself from
 their company out of respect for persons, the fault surely was one of
 conversation, not of preaching. [2101] For it does not appear from
 this, that any other God than the Creator, or any other Christ than
 (the son) of Mary, or any other hope than the resurrection, was (by
 him) announced.

 [2091] Suggillandam.

 [2092] Gal. i. 13.

 [2093] John v. 31.

 [2094] Ut credunt contra Scripturas.

 [2095] Atquin.

 [2096] Gal. i. 18.

 [2097] Scilicet.

 [2098] Gal. i. 24.

 [2099] Gal. ii. 9.

 [2100] The same verse. [Note Peter's restriction to Jews.]

 [2101] Vers. 12, 13. See also Anti-Marcion, iv. 3 (Trans. p. 182).

 Chapter XXIV.--St. Peter's Further Vindication. St. Paul Not Superior
 to St. Peter in Teaching. Nothing Imparted to the Former in the Third
 Heaven Enabled Him to Add to the Faith. Heretics Boast as If Favoured
 with Some of the Secrets Imparted to Him.

 I have not the good fortune, [2102] or, as I must rather say, [2103] I
 have not the unenviable task, [2104] of setting apostles by the ears.
 [2105] But, inasmuch as our very perverse cavillers obtrude the rebuke
 in question for the set purpose of bringing the earlier [2106] doctrine
 into suspicion, I will put in a defence, as it were, for Peter, to the
 effect that even Paul said that he was "made all things to all men--to
 the Jews a Jew," to those who were not Jews as one who was not a
 Jew--"that he might gain all." [2107] Therefore it was according to
 times and persons and causes that they used to censure certain
 practices, which they would not hesitate themselves to pursue, in like
 conformity to times and persons and causes. Just (e.g.) as if Peter too
 had censured Paul, because, whilst forbidding circumcision, he actually
 circumcised Timothy himself. Never mind [2108] those who pass sentence
 on apostles! It is a happy fact that Peter is on the same level with
 Paul in the very glory [2109] of martyrdom. Now, although Paul was
 carried away even to the third heaven, and was caught up to paradise,
 [2110] and heard certain revelations there, yet these cannot possibly
 seem to have qualified him for (teaching) another doctrine, seeing that
 their very nature was such as to render them communicable to no human
 being. [2111] If, however, that unspeakable mystery [2112] did leak
 out, [2113] and become known to any man, and if any heresy affirms that
 it does itself follow the same, (then) either Paul must be charged with
 having betrayed the secret, or some other man must actually [2114] be
 shown to have been afterwards "caught up into paradise," who had
 permission to speak out plainly what Paul was not allowed (even) to
 mutter.

 [2102] Non mihi tam bene est.

 [2103] Immo.

 [2104] Non mihi tam male est.

 [2105] Ut committam.

 [2106] Superiorem, "that which Peter had preached."

 [2107] 1 Cor. ix. 20, 22.

 [2108] Viderint.

 [2109] Et in martyrio.

 [2110] 2 Cor. xii. 4.

 [2111] Nulli hominum.

 [2112] Nescio quid illud.

 [2113] Emanavit.

 [2114] Et.

 Chapter XXV.--The Apostles Did Not Keep Back Any of the Deposit of
 Doctrine Which Christ Had Entrusted to Them. St. Paul Openly Committed
 His Whole Doctrine to Timothy.

 But here is, as we have said, [2115] the same madness, in their
 allowing indeed that the apostles were ignorant of nothing, and
 preached not any (doctrines) which contradicted one another, but at the
 same time insisting that they did not reveal all to all men, for that
 they proclaimed some openly and to all the world, whilst they disclosed
 others (only) in secret and to a few, because Paul addressed even this
 expression to Timothy: "O Timothy, guard that which is entrusted to
 thee;" [2116] and again: "That good thing which was committed unto thee
 keep." [2117] What is this deposit? Is it so secret as to be supposed
 to characterize [2118] a new doctrine? or is it a part of that charge
 of which he says, "This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy?" [2119]
 and also of that precept of which he says, "I charge thee in the sight
 of God, who quickeneth all things, and before Jesus Christ who
 witnessed a good confession under Pontius Pilate, that thou keep this
 commandment?" [2120] Now, what is (this) commandment and what is (this)
 charge? From the preceding and the succeeding contexts, it will be
 manifest that there is no mysterious [2121] hint darkly suggested in
 this expression about (some) far-fetched [2122] doctrine, but that a
 warning is rather given against receiving any other (doctrine) than
 that which Timothy had heard from himself, as I take it publicly:
 "Before many witnesses" is his phrase. [2123] Now, if they refuse to
 allow that the church is meant by these "many witnesses," it matters
 nothing, since nothing could have been secret which was produced
 "before many witnesses." Nor, again, must the circumstance of his
 having wished him to "commit these things to faithful men, who should
 be able to teach others also," [2124] be construed into a proof of
 there being some occult gospel. For, when he says "these things," he
 refers to the things of which he is writing at the moment. In
 reference, however, to occult subjects, he would have called them, as
 being absent, those things, not these things, to one who had a joint
 knowledge of them with himself. [2125]

 [2115] Above, in chap. xxii. [Note the Gnostic madness of such a plea.
 Kaye, p. 235 and Elucidation IV.]

 [2116] 1 Tim. vi. 20.

 [2117] 2 Tim. i. 14.

 [2118] Ut alterius doctrinæ deputetur.

 [2119] 1 Tim. i. 18.

 [2120] 1 Tim. vi. 13.

 [2121] Nescis quid.

 [2122] Remotiore.

 [2123] 2 Tim. ii. 2.

 [2124] 2 Tim. ii. 2.

 [2125] Apud conscientiam. [Clement of Alexandria is to be interpreted
 by Tertullian, with whom he does not essentially differ. For Clement's
 Esoteric Doctrine (See Vol. II. pp. 302, 313, etc.) is defined as
 perfecting the type of the Christian by the strong meat of Truth, of
 which the entire deposit is presupposed as common to all Christians. We
 must not blame Clement for the abuse of his teaching by perverters of
 Truth itself.]

 Chapter XXVI.--The Apostles Did in All Cases Teach the Whole Truth to
 the Whole Church. No Reservation, Nor Partial Communication to
 Favourite Friends.

 Besides which, it must have followed, that, for the man to whom he
 committed the ministration of the gospel, he would add the injunction
 that it be not ministered in all places, [2126] and without respect to
 persons, [2127] in accordance with the Lord's saying, "Not to cast
 one's pearls before swine, nor that which is holy unto dogs." [2128]
 Openly did the Lord speak, [2129] without any intimation of a hidden
 mystery.  He had Himself commanded that, "whatsoever they had heard in
 darkness" and in secret, they should "declare in the light and on the
 house-tops." [2130] He had Himself foreshown, by means of a parable,
 that they should not keep back in secret, fruitless of interest, [2131]
 a single pound, that is, one word of His.  He used Himself to tell them
 that a candle was not usually "pushed away under a bushel, but placed
 on a candlestick," in order to "give light to all who are in the
 house." [2132] These things the apostles either neglected, or failed to
 understand, if they fulfilled them not, by concealing any portion of
 the light, that is, of the word of God and the mystery of Christ. Of no
 man, I am quite sure, were they afraid,--neither of Jews nor of
 Gentiles in their violence; [2133] with all the greater freedom, then,
 would they certainly preach in the church, who held not their tongue in
 synagogues and public places. Indeed they would have found it
 impossible either to convert Jews or to bring in Gentiles, unless they
 "set forth in order" [2134] that which they would have them believe.
 Much less, when churches were advanced in the faith, would they have
 withdrawn from them anything for the purpose of committing it
 separately to some few others. Although, even supposing that among
 intimate friends, [2135] so to speak, they did hold certain
 discussions, yet it is incredible that these could have been such as to
 bring in some other rule of faith, differing from and contrary to that
 which they were proclaiming through the Catholic churches, [2136] --as
 if they spoke of one God in the Church, (and) another at home, and
 described one substance of Christ, publicly, (and) another secretly,
 and announced one hope of the resurrection before all men, (and)
 another before the few; although they themselves, in their epistles,
 besought men that they would all speak one and the same thing, and that
 there should be no divisions and dissensions in the church, [2137]
 seeing that they, whether Paul or others, preached the same things.
 Moreover, they remembered (the words): "Let your communication be yea,
 yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than this cometh of evil;" [2138]
 so that they were not to handle the gospel in a diversity of treatment.

 [2126] Passim.

 [2127] Inconsiderate.

 [2128] Matt. vii. 6.

 [2129] John xviii. 20.

 [2130] Matt. x. 27.

 [2131] Luke xix. 20-24.

 [2132] Matt. v. 15.

 [2133] Literally, "the violence of neither Jew nor Gentile."

 [2134] Luke i. 1.

 [2135] Domesticos. [All this interprets Clement and utterly deprives
 the Trent System of its appeal to a secret doctrine, against our
 Præscription.]

 [2136] Catholice, or, "which they were bringing before the public in
 catholic way."

 [2137] 1 Cor. i. 10.

 [2138] Matt. v. 37.

 Chapter XXVII.--Granted that the Apostles Transmitted the Whole
 Doctrine of Truth, May Not the Churches Have Been Unfaithful in Handing
 It On? Inconceivable that This Can Have Been the Case.

 Since, therefore, it is incredible that the apostles were either
 ignorant of the whole scope of the message which they had to declare,
 [2139] or failed to make known to all men the entire rule of faith, let
 us see whether, while the apostles proclaimed it, perhaps, simply and
 fully, the churches, through their own fault, set it forth otherwise
 than the apostles had done. All these suggestions of distrust [2140]
 you may find put forward by the heretics.  They bear in mind how the
 churches were rebuked by the apostle: "O foolish Galatians, who hath
 bewitched you?" [2141] and, "Ye did run so well; who hath hindered
 you?" [2142] and how the epistle actually begins: "I marvel that ye are
 so soon removed from Him, who hath called you as His own in grace, to
 another gospel." [2143] That they likewise (remember), what was written
 to the Corinthians, that they "were yet carnal," who "required to be
 fed with milk," being as yet "unable to bear strong meat;" [2144] who
 also "thought that they knew somewhat, whereas they knew not yet
 anything, as they ought to know." [2145] When they raise the objection
 that the churches were rebuked, let them suppose that they were also
 corrected; let them also remember those (churches), concerning whose
 faith and knowledge and conversation the apostle "rejoices and gives
 thanks to God," which nevertheless even at this day, unite with those
 which were rebuked in the privileges of one and the same institution.

 [2139] Plenitudinem prædicationis.

 [2140] Scrupulositatis.

 [2141] Gal. iii. 1.

 [2142] Gal. v. 7.

 [2143] Gal. i. 6.

 [2144] 1 Cor. iii. 1, and following verses.

 [2145] 1 Cor. viii. 2.

 Chapter XXVIII.--The One Tradition of the Faith, Which is Substantially
 Alike in the Churches Everywhere, a Good Proof that the Transmission
 Has Been True and Honest in the Main.

 Grant, then, that all have erred; that the apostle was mistaken in
 giving his testimony; that the Holy Ghost had no such respect to any
 one (church) as to lead it into truth, although sent with this view by
 Christ, [2146] and for this asked of the Father that He might be the
 teacher of truth; [2147] grant, also, that He, the Steward of God, the
 Vicar of Christ, [2148] neglected His office, permitting the churches
 for a time to understand differently, (and) to believe differently,
 what He Himself was preaching by the apostles,--is it likely that so
 many churches, and they so great, should have gone astray into one and
 the same faith?  No casualty distributed among many men issues in one
 and the same result. Error of doctrine in the churches must necessarily
 have produced various issues.  When, however, that which is deposited
 among many is found to be one and the same, it is not the result of
 error, but of tradition. Can any one, then, be reckless [2149] enough
 to say that they were in error who handed on the tradition?

 [2146] John xiv. 26.

 [2147] John xv. 26.

 [2148] [Tertullian knows no other Vicar of Christ than the Holy
 Spirit.  They who attribute infallibility to any mortal man become
 Montanists; they attribute the Paraclete's voice to their oracle.]

 [2149] Audeat.

 Chapter XXIX.--The Truth Not Indebted to the Care of the Heretics; It
 Had Free Course Before They Appeared. Priority of the Church's Doctrine
 a Mark of Its Truth.

 In whatever manner error came, it reigned of course [2150] only as long
 as there was an absence of heresies? Truth had to wait for certain
 Marcionites and Valentinians to set it free. During the interval the
 gospel was wrongly [2151] preached; men wrongly believed; so many
 thousands were wrongly baptized; so many works of faith were wrongly
 wrought; so many miraculous gifts, [2152] so many spiritual endowments,
 [2153] were wrongly set in operation; so many priestly functions, so
 many ministries, [2154] were wrongly executed; and, to sum up the
 whole, so many martyrs wrongly received their crowns! Else, if not
 wrongly done, and to no purpose, how comes it to pass that the things
 of God were on their course before it was known to what God they
 belonged? that there were Christians before Christ was found? that
 there were heresies before true doctrine? Not so; for in all cases
 truth precedes its copy, the likeness succeeds the reality. Absurd
 enough, however, is it, that heresy should be deemed to have preceded
 its own prior doctrine, even on this account, because it is that
 (doctrine) itself which foretold that there should be heresies against
 which men would have to guard! To a church which possessed this
 doctrine, it was written--yea, the doctrine itself writes to its own
 church--"Though an angel from heaven preach any other gospel than that
 which we have preached, let him be accursed." [2155]

 [2150] Utique, ironical.

 [2151] Perperam.

 [2152] Virtutes, "potestatem edendi miracula" (Oehler).

 [2153] Charismata.

 [2154] Ministeria. Another reading has mysteria, "mysteries" or
 "sacraments."

 [2155] Gal. i. 8. [In this chapter (xxix.) the principle of
 Prescription is condensed and brought to the needle-point--Quod semper.
 If you can't show that your doctrine was always taught, it is false:
 and this is "Prescription."]

 Chapter XXX.--Comparative Lateness of Heresies. Marcion's Heresy. Some
 Personal Facts About Him. The Heresy of Apelles. Character of This Man;
 Philumene; Valentinus; Nigidius, and Hermogenes.

 Where was Marcion then, that shipmaster of Pontus, the zealous student
 of Stoicism? Where was Valentinus then, the disciple of Platonism? For
 it is evident that those men lived not so long ago,--in the reign of
 Antoninus for the most part, [2156] --and that they at first were
 believers in the doctrine of the Catholic Church, in the church of Rome
 under the episcopate of the blessed Eleutherus, [2157] until on account
 of their ever restless curiosity, with which they even infected the
 brethren, they were more than once expelled. Marcion, indeed, [went]
 with the two hundred sesterces which he had brought into the church,
 and, [2158] when banished at last to a permanent excommunication, they
 scattered abroad the poisons of their doctrines. Afterwards, it is
 true, Marcion professed repentance, and agreed to the conditions
 granted to him--that he should receive reconciliation if he restored to
 the church all the others whom he had been training for perdition: he
 was prevented, however, by death. It was indeed [2159] necessary that
 there should be heresies; [2160] and yet it does not follow from that
 necessity, that heresies are a good thing. As if it has not been
 necessary also that there should be evil! It was even necessary that
 the Lord should be betrayed; but woe to the traitor! [2161] So that no
 man may from this defend heresies. If we must likewise touch the
 descent [2162] of Apelles, he is far from being "one of the old
 school," [2163] like his instructor and moulder, Marcion; he rather
 forsook the continence of Marcion, by resorting to the company of a
 woman, and withdrew to Alexandria, out of sight of his most abstemious
 [2164] master. Returning therefrom, after some years, unimproved,
 except that he was no longer a Marcionite, he clave [2165] to another
 woman, the maiden Philumene (whom we have already [2166] mentioned),
 who herself afterwards became an enormous prostitute. Having been
 imposed on by her vigorous spirit, [2167] he committed to writing the
 revelations which he had learned of her. Persons are still living who
 remember them,--their own actual disciples and successors,--who cannot
 therefore deny the lateness of their date. But, in fact, by their own
 works they are convicted, even as the Lord said. [2168] For since
 Marcion separated the New Testament from the Old, he is (necessarily)
 subsequent to that which he separated, inasmuch as it was only in his
 power to separate what was (previously) united. Having then been united
 previous to its separation, the fact of its subsequent separation
 proves the subsequence also of the man who effected the separation.  In
 like manner Valentinus, by his different expositions and acknowledged
 [2169] emendations, makes these changes on the express ground of
 previous faultiness, and therefore demonstrates the difference [2170]
 of the documents. These corrupters of the truth we mention as being
 more notorious and more public [2171] than others. There is, however, a
 certain man [2172] named Nigidius, and Hermogenes, and several others,
 who still pursue the course [2173] of perverting the ways of the Lord.
 Let them show me by what authority they come!  If it be some other God
 they preach, how comes it that they employ the things and the writings
 and the names of that God against whom they preach? If it be the same
 God, why treat Him in some other way? Let them prove themselves to be
 new apostles! [2174] Let them maintain that Christ has come down a
 second time, taught in person a second time, has been twice crucified,
 twice dead, twice raised! For thus has the apostle described (the order
 of events in the life of Christ); for thus, too, is He [2175]
 accustomed to make His apostles--to give them, (that is), power besides
 of working the same miracles which He worked Himself. [2176] I would
 therefore have their mighty deeds also brought forward; except that I
 allow their mightiest deed to be that by which they perversely vie with
 the apostles.  For whilst they used to raise men to life from the dead,
 these consign men to death from their living state.

 [2156] Fere.

 [2157] [Kaye, p. 226.]

 [2158] See adv. Marcion, iv. 4. infra.

 [2159] Enim, profecto (Oehler).

 [2160] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [2161] Mark. xiv. 21.

 [2162] Stemma. The reading of the Cod. Agobard. is "stigma," which
 gives very good sense.

 [2163] Vetus.

 [2164] Sanctissimi. This may be an ironical allusion to Marcion's
 repudiation of marriage.

 [2165] Impegit.

 [2166] In chap. vi. p. 246 above.

 [2167] Energemate. Oehler defines this word, "vis et efficacia dæmonum,
 quibus agebatur." [But see Lardner, Credib. viii. p. 540.]

 [2168] Matt. vii. 16.

 [2169] Sine dubio.

 [2170] Alterius fuisse. One reading is anterius; i.e., "demonstrates
 the priority" of the book he alters.

 [2171] Frequentiores.

 [2172] Nescio qui.

 [2173] Ambulant.

 [2174] Compare de Carne Christi, chap. ii. [Elucidation IV.]

 [2175] Christ; so Routh.

 [2176] We add Oehler's reading of this obscure passage: "Sic enim
 apostolus descripsit, sic enim apostolos solet facere, dare præterea
 illis virtutem eadem signa edendi quæ et ipse." ["It is worthy of
 remark" (says Kaye, p. 95), "that he does not appeal to any instance of
 the exercise of miraculous powers in his own day."]

 Chapter XXXI.--Truth First, Falsehood Afterwards, as Its Perversion.
 Christ's Parable Puts the Sowing of the Good Seed Before the Useless
 Tares.

 Let me return, however, from this digression [2177] to discuss [2178]
 the priority of truth, and the comparative lateness [2179] of
 falsehood, deriving support for my argument even from that parable
 which puts in the first place the sowing by the Lord of the good seed
 of the wheat, but introduces at a later stage the adulteration of the
 crop by its enemy the devil with the useless weed of the wild oats.
 For herein is figuratively described the difference of doctrines, since
 in other passages also the word of God is likened unto seed. From the
 actual order, therefore, it becomes clear, that that which was first
 delivered is of the Lord and is true, whilst that is strange and false
 which was afterwards introduced. This sentence will keep its ground in
 opposition to all later heresies, which have no consistent quality of
 kindred knowledge [2180] inherent in them--to claim the truth as on
 their side.

 [2177] Ab excessu.

 [2178] Disputandam. Another reading has deputandam, i.e., "to
 attribute."

 [2179] Posteritatem.

 [2180] Nulla constantia de conscientia, "no conscientious ground of
 confidence" (Dodgson).

 Chapter XXXII.--None of the Heretics Claim Succession from the
 Apostles. New Churches Still Apostolic, Because Their Faith is that
 Which the Apostles Taught and Handed Down. The Heretics Challenged to
 Show Any Apostolic Credentials.

 But if there be any (heresies) which are bold enough to plant
 themselves in the midst of the apostolic age, that they may thereby
 seem to have been handed down by the apostles, because they existed in
 the time of the apostles, we can say: Let them produce the original
 records [2181] of their churches; let them unfold the roll of their
 bishops, running down in due succession from the beginning in such a
 manner that [that first bishop of theirs [2182] ] bishop shall be able
 to show for his ordainer and predecessor some one of the apostles or of
 apostolic men,--a man, moreover, who continued stedfast with the
 apostles. For this is the manner in which the apostolic churches
 transmit [2183] their registers: [2184] as the church of Smyrna, which
 records that Polycarp was placed therein by John; as also the church of
 Rome, which makes Clement to have been ordained in like manner by
 Peter. [2185] In exactly the same way the other churches likewise
 exhibit (their several worthies), whom, as having been appointed to
 their episcopal places by apostles, they regard as transmitters of the
 apostolic seed. Let the heretics contrive [2186] something of the same
 kind. For after their blasphemy, what is there that is unlawful for
 them (to attempt)? But should they even effect the contrivance, they
 will not advance a step. For their very doctrine, after comparison with
 that of the apostles, will declare, by its own diversity and
 contrariety, that it had for its author neither an apostle nor an
 apostolic man; because, as the apostles would never have taught things
 which were self-contradictory, so the apostolic men would not have
 inculcated teaching different from the apostles, unless they who
 received their instruction from the apostles went and preached in a
 contrary manner. To this test, therefore will they be submitted for
 proof [2187] by those churches, who, although they derive not their
 founder from apostles or apostolic men (as being of much later date,
 for they are in fact being founded daily), yet, since they agree in the
 same faith, they are accounted as not less apostolic because they are
 akin in doctrine. [2188] Then let all the heresies, when challenged to
 these two [2189] tests by our apostolic church, offer their proof of
 how they deem themselves to be apostolic. But in truth they neither are
 so, nor are they able to prove themselves to be what they are not. Nor
 are they admitted to peaceful relations and communion by such churches
 as are in any way connected with apostles, inasmuch as they are in no
 sense themselves apostolic because of their diversity as to the
 mysteries of the faith. [2190]

 [2181] Origines, "the originals" (Dodgson).

 [2182] Ille. A touch of irony occurs in the phrase "primus ille
 episcopus."

 [2183] Deferunt.

 [2184] Fastos.

 [2185] [Linus and Cletus must have died or been martyred, therefore,
 almost as soon as appointed. Our author had seen these registers, no
 doubt.]

 [2186] Confingant.

 [2187] Probabuntur. Another reading is provocabuntur, "will be
 challenged." [Not to one particular See, but to all the Apostolic
 churches: Quod ubique.]

 [2188] Pro consanguinitate doctrinæ.

 [2189] That is, the succession of bishops from the apostles, and the
 identity of doctrine with the apostolic.

 [2190] Sacramenti.

 Chapter XXXIII.--Present Heresies (Seedlings of the Tares Noted by the
 Sacred Writers) Already Condemned in Scripture.  This Descent of Later
 Heresy from the Earlier Traced in Several Instances.

 Besides all this, I add a review of the doctrines themselves, which,
 existing as they did in the days of the apostles, were both exposed and
 denounced by the said apostles. For by this method they will be more
 easily reprobated, [2191] when they are detected to have been even then
 in existence, or at any rate to have been seedlings [2192] of the
 (tares) which then were. Paul, in his first epistle to the Corinthians,
 sets his mark on certain who denied and doubted the resurrection.
 [2193] This opinion was the especial property of the Sadducees. [2194]
 A part of it, however, is maintained by Marcion and Apelles and
 Valentinus, and all other impugners of the resurrection. Writing also
 to the Galatians, he inveighs against such men as observed and defend
 circumcision and the (Mosaic) law. [2195] Thus runs Hebion's heresy.
 Such also as "forbid to marry" he reproaches in his instructions to
 Timothy. [2196] Now, this is the teaching of Marcion and his follower
 Apelles. (The apostle) directs a similar blow [2197] against those who
 said that "the resurrection was past already." [2198] Such an opinion
 did the Valentinians assert of themselves. When again he mentions
 "endless genealogies," [2199] one also recognises Valentinus, in whose
 system a certain Æon, whosoever he be, [2200] of a new name, and that
 not one only, generates of his own grace [2201] Sense and Truth; and
 these in like manner produce of themselves Word [2202] and Life, while
 these again afterwards beget Man and the Church. From these primary
 eight [2203] ten other Æons after them spring, and then the twelve
 others arise with their wonderful names, to complete the mere story of
 the thirty Æons. The same apostle, when disapproving of those who are
 "in bondage to elements," [2204] points us to some dogma of Hermogenes,
 who introduces matter as having no beginning, [2205] and then compares
 it with God, who has no beginning. [2206] By thus making the mother of
 the elements a goddess, he has it in his power "to be in bondage" to a
 being which he puts on a par with [2207] God. John, however, in the
 Apocalypse is charged to chastise those "who eat things sacrificed to
 idols," and "who commit fornication." [2208] There are even now another
 sort of Nicolaitans. Theirs is called the Gaian [2209] heresy. But in
 his epistle he especially designates those as "Antichrists" who "denied
 that Christ was come in the flesh," [2210] and who refused to think
 that Jesus was the Son of God. The one dogma Marcion maintained; the
 other, Hebion. [2211] The doctrine, however, of Simon's sorcery, which
 inculcated the worship of angels, [2212] was itself actually reckoned
 amongst idolatries and condemned by the Apostle Peter in Simon's own
 person.

 [2191] Traducentur.

 [2192] Semina sumpsisse.

 [2193] 1 Cor. xv. 12.

 [2194] Comp. Tertull. De Resur. Carnis, xxxvi.

 [2195] Gal. v. 2.

 [2196] 1 Tim. iv. 3.

 [2197] Æque tangit.

 [2198] 2 Tim. ii. 3.

 [2199] 1 Tim. i. 4.

 [2200] Nescio qui.

 [2201] Charite.

 [2202] Sermonem.

 [2203] De qua prima ogdoade. [See Irenæus, Vol. I. p. 316, etc. this
 Series.]

 [2204] Gal. iv. 9.

 [2205] Non natam, literally, "as being unbegotten."

 [2206] Deo non nato.

 [2207] Comparat.

 [2208] Rev. ii. 14.

 [2209] Gaiana. So Oehler; the common reading being "Caiana."

 [2210] 1 John iv. 3.

 [2211] Comp. Epiphanius, i. 30.

 [2212] Referred to perhaps in Col. ii. 18.

 Chapter XXXIV.--No Early Controversy Respecting the Divine Creator; No
 Second God Introduced at First. Heresies Condemned Alike by the
 Sentence and the Silence of Holy Scripture.

 These are, as I suppose, the different kinds of spurious doctrines,
 which (as we are informed by the apostles themselves) existed in their
 own day.  And yet we find amongst so many various perversions of truth,
 not one school [2213] which raised any controversy concerning God as
 the Creator of all things. No man was bold enough to surmise a second
 god. More readily was doubt felt about the Son than about the Father,
 until Marcion introduced, in addition to the Creator, another god of
 goodness only.  Apelles made the Creator of some nondescript [2214]
 glorious angel, who belonged to the superior God, the god (according to
 him,) of the law and of Israel, affirming that he was fire. [2215]
 Valentinus disseminated his Æons, and traced the sin of one Æon [2216]
 to the production of God the Creator. To none, forsooth, except these,
 nor prior to these, was revealed the truth of the Divine Nature; and
 they obtained this especial honour and fuller favour from the devil, we
 cannot doubt, [2217] because he wished even in this respect to rival
 God, that he might succeed, by the poison of his doctrines, in doing
 himself what the Lord said could not be done--making "the disciples
 above their Master." [2218] Let the entire mass [2219] of heresies
 choose, therefore, for themselves the times when they should appear,
 provided that the when be an unimportant point; allowing, too, that
 they be not of the truth, and (as a matter of course [2220] ) that such
 as had no existence in the time of the apostles could not possibly have
 had any connection with the apostles. If indeed they had then existed,
 their names would be extant, [2221] with a view to their own repression
 likewise.  Those (heresies) indeed which did exist in the days of the
 apostles, are condemned in their very mention. [2222] If it be true,
 then, that those heresies, which in the apostolic times were in a rude
 form, are now found to be the same, only in a much more polished shape,
 they derive their condemnation from this very circumstance. Or if they
 were not the same, but arose afterwards in a different form, and merely
 assumed from them certain tenets, then, by sharing with them an
 agreement in their teaching, [2223] they must needs partake in their
 condemnation, by reason of the above-mentioned definition, [2224] of
 lateness of date, which meets us on the very threshold. [2225] Even if
 they were free from any participation in condemned doctrine, they would
 stand already judged [2226] on the mere ground of time, being all the
 more spurious because they were not even named by the apostles. Whence
 we have the firmer assurance, that these were (the heresies) which even
 then, [2227] were announced as about to arise.

 [2213] Institutionem.

 [2214] Nescio quem.

 [2215] Igneum, "consisted of fire."

 [2216] "The ectroma, or fall of Sophia from the Pleroma, from whom the
 Creator was fabled to be descended" (Dodgson).

 [2217] Scilicet.

 [2218] Luke vi. 40.

 [2219] Universæ.

 [2220] Utique.

 [2221] Nominarentur et ipsæ.

 [2222] Nominatione, i.e. by the apostles.

 [2223] Prædicationis.

 [2224] Fine.

 [2225] Præcedente.

 [2226] Præjudicarentur. [i.e. by Præscription.]

 [2227] i.e., in the days of the apostles, and by their mouth.

 Chapter XXXV.--Let Heretics Maintain Their Claims by a Definite and
 Intelligible Evidence. This the Only Method of Solving Their Questions.
 Catholics Appeal Always to Evidence Traceable to Apostolic Sources.

 Challenged and refuted by us, according to these definitions, let all
 the heresies boldly on their part also advance similar rules to these
 against our doctrine, whether they be later than the apostles or
 contemporary with the apostles, provided they be different from them;
 provided also they were, by either a general or a specific censure,
 precondemned by them. For since they deny the truth of (our doctrine),
 they ought to prove that it also is heresy, refutable by the same rule
 as that by which they are themselves refuted; and at the same time to
 show us where we must seek the truth, which it is by this time evident
 has no existence amongst them.  Our system [2228] is not behind any in
 date; on the contrary, it is earlier than all; and this fact will be
 the evidence of that truth which everywhere occupies the first place.
 The apostles, again, nowhere condemn it; they rather defend it,--a fact
 which will show that it comes from themselves. [2229] For that doctrine
 which they refrain from condemning, when they have condemned every
 strange opinion, they show to be their own, and on that ground too they
 defend it.

 [2228] Res.

 [2229] Indicium proprietatis, a proof of its being their own.

 Chapter XXXVI.--The Apostolic Churches the Voice of the Apostles. Let
 the Heretics Examine Their Apostolic Claims, in Each Case,
 Indisputable. The Church of Rome Doubly Apostolic; Its Early Eminence
 and Excellence. Heresy, as Perverting the Truth, is Connected
 Therewith.

 Come now, you who would indulge a better curiosity, if you would apply
 it to the business of your salvation, run over the apostolic churches,
 in which the very thrones [2230] of the apostles are still pre-eminent
 in their places, [2231] in which their own authentic writings [2232]
 are read, uttering the voice and representing the face of each of them
 severally. Achaia is very near you, (in which) you find Corinth. Since
 you are not far from Macedonia, you have Philippi; (and there too) you
 have the Thessalonians. Since you are able to cross to Asia, you get
 Ephesus. Since, moreover, you are close upon Italy, [2233] you have
 Rome, from which there comes even into our own hands the very authority
 (of apostles themselves). [2234] How happy is its church, on which
 apostles poured forth all their doctrine along with their blood! where
 Peter endures a passion like his Lord's! where Paul wins his crown in a
 death like John's [2235] where the Apostle John was first plunged,
 unhurt, into boiling oil, and thence remitted to his island-exile! See
 what she has learned, what taught, what fellowship has had with even
 (our) churches in Africa! [2236] One Lord God does she acknowledge, the
 Creator of the universe, and Christ Jesus (born) of the Virgin Mary,
 the Son of God the Creator; and the Resurrection of the flesh; the law
 and the prophets she unites [2237] in one volume with the writings of
 evangelists and apostles, from which she drinks in her faith. This she
 seals with the water (of baptism), arrays with the Holy Ghost, feeds
 with the Eucharist, cheers with martyrdom, [2238] and against such a
 discipline thus (maintained) she admits no gainsayer. This is the
 discipline which I no longer say foretold that heresies should come,
 but from [2239] which they proceeded. However, they were not of her,
 because they were opposed to her. [2240] Even the rough wild-olive
 arises from the germ [2241] of the fruitful, rich, and genuine [2242]
 olive; also from the seed [2243] of the mellowest and sweetest fig
 there springs the empty and useless wild-fig. In the same way heresies,
 too, come from our plant, [2244] although not of our kind; (they come)
 from the grain of truth, [2245] but, owing to their falsehood, they
 have only wild leaves to show. [2246]

 [2230] Cathedræ.

 [2231] Suis locis præsident.

 [2232] Authenticæ. This much disputed phrase may refer to the
 autographs or the Greek originals (rather than the Latin translations),
 or full unmutilated copies as opposed to the garbled ones of the
 heretics. The second sense is probably the correct one.

 [2233] [Note, those near by may resort to this ancient and glorious
 church; not as any better than Corinth, or Philippi, or having any
 higher Apostolic throne. See Irenæus, Vol. I. p. 415, (note) and
 Elucid. p. 460.]

 [2234] Compare our Anti-Marcion, iv. 5, p. 186.

 [2235] The Baptist's.

 [2236] [Observe--"even with us in Africa." If this implies noteworthy
 love, it proves that there was no organic relation requiring such
 particular fellowship, even in the West.]

 [2237] Miscet.

 [2238] We have taken Oehler's hint in favour of "martyrio." The usual
 reading "martyrium" (meaning "she exhorts to martyrdom") is stiff, and
 unsuited to the context.

 [2239] De.

 [2240] Or, "they were not of it, because they were opposed to it,"
 i.e., the discipline or teaching.

 [2241] Nucleo.

 [2242] Necessariæ.

 [2243] Papavere. "Ego cum aliis papaver ficus interpretor de
 seminalibus ficus, non de ipso fructu" (Oehler).

 [2244] Frutice.

 [2245] We again follow Oehler's hint, who would like to read "de grano
 veritatis." The texts are obscure, and vary much here.

 [2246] Silvestres.

 Chapter XXXVII.--Heretics Not Being Christians, But Rather Perverters
 of Christ's Teaching, May Not Claim the Christian Scriptures. These are
 a Deposit, Committed to and Carefully Kept by the Church.

 Since this is the case, in order that the truth may be adjudged to
 belong to us, "as many as walk according to the rule," which the church
 has handed down from the apostles, the apostles from Christ, and Christ
 from God, the reason of our position is clear, when it determines that
 heretics ought not to be allowed to challenge an appeal to the
 Scriptures, since we, without the Scriptures, prove that they have
 nothing to do with the Scriptures. For as they are heretics, they
 cannot be true Christians, because it is not from Christ that they get
 that which they pursue of their own mere choice, and from the pursuit
 incur and admit the name of heretics. [2247] Thus, not being
 Christians, they have acquired [2248] no right to the Christian
 Scriptures; and it may be very fairly said to them, "Who are you? When
 and whence did you come? As you are none of mine, what have you to do
 with that which is mine? Indeed, Marcion, by what right do you hew my
 wood?  By whose permission, Valentinus, are you diverting the streams
 of my fountain? By what power, Apelles, are you removing my landmarks?
 This is my property. Why are you, the rest, sowing and feeding here at
 your own pleasure?  This (I say) is my property. I have long possessed
 it; I possessed it before you. I hold sure title-deeds from the
 original owners themselves, to whom the estate belonged.  I am the heir
 of the apostles.  Just as they carefully prepared their will and
 testament, and committed it to a trust, and adjured (the trustees to be
 faithful to their charge), [2249] even so do I hold it. As for you,
 they have, it is certain, always held you as disinherited, and rejected
 you as strangers--as enemies. But on what ground are heretics strangers
 and enemies to the apostles, if it be not from the difference of their
 teaching, which each individual of his own mere will has either
 advanced or received in opposition to the apostles?"

 [2247] "That is, in following out their own choice (ahiresis) of
 opinions, they both receive and admit the name of heretics,"
 hairetikoi, "self-choosers" (Dodgson). [In Theology, technically, one
 must be a baptized Christian in order to be a heretic. The Mohammedans,
 e.g., are not heretics but pagans. But, our author speaks
 rhetorically.]

 [2248] Capiunt.

 [2249] Compare 1 Tim. v. 21, and vi. 13; 2 Tim. ii. 14, and iv. 1-4.

 Chapter XXXVIII.--Harmony of the Church and the Scriptures. Heretics
 Have Tampered with the Scriptures, and Mutilated, and Altered Them.
 Catholics Never Change the Scriptures, Which Always Testify for Them.

 Where diversity of doctrine is found, there, then, must the corruption
 both of the Scriptures and the expositions thereof be regarded as
 existing. On those whose purpose it was to teach differently, lay the
 necessity of differently arranging the instruments of doctrine. [2250]
 They could not possibly have effected their diversity of teaching in
 any other way than by having a difference in the means whereby they
 taught. As in their case, corruption in doctrine could not possibly
 have succeeded without a corruption also of its instruments, so to
 ourselves also integrity of doctrine could not have accrued, without
 integrity in those means by which doctrine is managed. Now, what is
 there in our Scriptures which is contrary to us? [2251] What of our own
 have we introduced, that we should have to take it away again, or else
 add to it, or alter it, in order to restore to its natural soundness
 anything which is contrary to it, and contained in the Scriptures?
 [2252] What we are ourselves, that also the Scriptures are (and have
 been) from the beginning. [2253] Of them we have our being, before
 there was any other way, before they were interpolated by you. Now,
 inasmuch as all interpolation must be believed to be a later process,
 for the express reason that it proceeds from rivalry which is never in
 any case previous to nor home-born [2254] with that which it emulates,
 it is as incredible to every man of sense that we should seem to have
 introduced any corrupt text into the Scriptures, existing, as we have
 been, from the very first, and being the first, as it is that they have
 not in fact introduced it who are both later in date and opposed (to
 the Scriptures). One man perverts the Scriptures with his hand, another
 their meaning by his exposition. For although Valentinus seems to use
 the entire volume, [2255] he has none the less laid violent hands on
 the truth only with a more cunning mind and skill [2256] than Marcion.
 Marcion expressly and openly used the knife, not the pen, since he made
 such an excision of the Scriptures as suited his own subject-matter.
 [2257] Valentinus, however, abstained from such excision, because he
 did not invent Scriptures to square with his own subject-matter, but
 adapted his matter to the Scriptures; and yet he took away more, and
 added more, by removing the proper meaning of every particular word,
 and adding fantastic arrangements of things which have no real
 existence. [2258]

 [2250] By the instrumenta doctrinæ he here means the writings of the
 New Testament.

 [2251] [Our author insists on the precise agreement of Catholic
 Tradition with Holy Scripture. See valuable remarks on Schleiermacher,
 in Kaye, pp. 279-284.]

 [2252] We add the original of this sentence, which is obscured by its
 terseness: "Quid de proprio intulimus, ut aliquid contrarium ei et in
 Scripturis deprehensum detractione vel adjectione vel transmutatione
 remediaremus?"

 [2253] That is, teaching the same faith and conversation (De la Cerda).

 [2254] Domestica.

 [2255] Integro instrumento.

 [2256] Callidiore ingenio.

 [2257] That is, cutting out whatever did not fall in with it (Dodgson).

 [2258] Non comparentium rerum. [Note, he says above "of them, the
 Scriptures, we, Catholics, have our being." Præscription does not
 undervalue Scripture as the food and life of the Church, but supplies a
 short and decisive method with innovaters.]

 Chapter XXXIX.--What St. Paul Calls Spiritual Wickednesses Displayed by
 Pagan Authors, and by Heretics, in No Dissimilar Manner. Holy Scripture
 Especially Liable to Heretical Manipulation.  Affords Material for
 Heresies, Just as Virgil Has Been the Groundwork of Literary
 Plagiarisms, Different in Purport from the Original.

 These were the ingenious arts of "spiritual wickednesses," [2259]
 wherewith we also, my brethren, may fairly expect to have "to wrestle,"
 as necessary for faith, that the elect may be made manifest, (and) that
 the reprobate may be discovered. And therefore they possess influence,
 and a facility in thinking out and fabricating [2260] errors, which
 ought not to be wondered at as if it were a difficult and inexplicable
 process, seeing that in profane writings also an example comes ready to
 hand of a similar facility. You see in our own day, composed out of
 Virgil, [2261] a story of a wholly different character, the
 subject-matter being arranged according to the verse, and the verse
 according to the subject-matter. In short, [2262] Hosidius Geta has
 most completely pilfered his tragedy of Medea from Virgil. A near
 relative of my own, among some leisure productions [2263] of his pen,
 has composed out of the same poet The Table of Cebes. On the same
 principle, those poetasters are commonly called Homerocentones,
 "collectors of Homeric odds and ends," who stitch into one piece,
 patchwork fashion, works of their own from the lines of Homer, out of
 many scraps put together from this passage and from that (in
 miscellaneous confusion). Now, unquestionably, the Divine Scriptures
 are more fruitful in resources of all kinds for this sort of facility.
 Nor do I risk contradiction in saying [2264] that the very Scriptures
 were even arranged by the will of God in such a manner as to furnish
 materials for heretics, inasmuch as I read that "there must be
 heresies," [2265] which there cannot be without the Scriptures.

 [2259] See Eph. vi. 12, and 1 Cor. xi. 18.

 [2260] Instruendis.

 [2261] Oehler reads "ex Vergilio," although the Codex Agobard. as "ex
 Virgilio."

 [2262] Denique. ["Getica lyra."]

 [2263] Otis.

 [2264] Nec periclitor dicere. [Truly, a Tertullianic paradox; but
 compare 2 Pet. iii. 16. N.B. Scripture the test of heresy.]

 [2265] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 Chapter XL.--No Difference in the Spirit of Idolatry and of Heresy. In
 the Rites of Idolatry, Satan Imitated and Distorted the Divine
 Institutions of the Older Scriptures. The Christian Scriptures
 Corrupted by Him in the Perversions of the Various Heretics.

 The question will arise, By whom is to be interpreted [2266] the sense
 of the passages which make for heresies? By the devil, of course, to
 whom pertain those wiles which pervert the truth, and who, by the
 mystic rites of his idols, vies even with the essential portions [2267]
 of the sacraments of God. [2268] He, too, baptizes some--that is, his
 own believers and faithful followers; [2269] he promises the putting
 away [2270] of sins by a laver (of his own); and if my memory still
 serves me, Mithra there, (in the kingdom of Satan,) sets his marks on
 the foreheads of his soldiers; celebrates also the oblation of bread,
 and introduces an image of a resurrection, and before a sword wreathes
 a crown. [2271] What also must we say to (Satan's) limiting his chief
 priest [2272] to a single marriage? He, too, has his virgins; he, too,
 has his proficients in continence. [2273] Suppose now we revolve in our
 minds the superstitions of Numa Pompilius, and consider his priestly
 offices and badges and privileges, his sacrificial services, too, and
 the instruments and vessels of the sacrifices themselves, and the
 curious rites of his expiations and vows: is it not clear to us that
 the devil imitated the well-known [2274] moroseness of the Jewish law?
 Since, therefore he has shown such emulation in his great aim of
 expressing, in the concerns of his idolatry, those very things of which
 consists the administration of Christ's sacraments, it follows, of
 course, that the same being, possessing still the same genius, both set
 his heart upon, [2275] and succeeded in, adapting [2276] to his profane
 and rival creed the very documents of divine things and of the
 Christian saints [2277] --his interpretation from their
 interpretations, his words from their words, his parables from their
 parables. For this reason, then, no one ought to doubt, either that
 "spiritual wickednesses," from which also heresies come, have been
 introduced by the devil, or that there is any real difference between
 heresies and idolatry, seeing that they appertain both to the same
 author and the same work that idolatry does. They either pretend that
 there is another god in opposition to the Creator, or, even if they
 acknowledge that the Creator is the one only God, they treat of Him as
 a different being from what He is in truth. The consequence is, that
 every lie which they speak of God is in a certain sense a sort of
 idolatry.

 [2266] "Interpretur" is here a passive verb.

 [2267] Res.

 [2268] Sacramentorum divinorum. The form, however, of this phrase seems
 to point not only to the specific sacraments of the gospel, but to the
 general mysteries of our religion.

 [2269] Compare Tertullian's treatises, de Bapt. v. and de Corona, last
 chapter.

 [2270] Expositionem.

 [2271] "Et sub gladio redimit coronam" is the text of this obscure
 sentence, which seems to allude to a pretended martyrdom. Compare
 Tertullian's tract, de Corona, last chapter.

 [2272] The Flamen Dialis. See Tertullian's tract, ad Uxorem, i. 7.

 [2273] [Corruptio optimi pessima. Compare the surprising parallels of
 M. Huc between debased Christianity and the paganism of Thibet, etc.
 Souvenirs d'un voyage, etc. Hazlitt's translation, 1867.]

 [2274] Morositatem Illam. [He refers to the minute and vexatious
 ordinances complained of by St. Peter (Acts xiv. 10,) which Latin
 Christianity has ten-folded, in his name.]

 [2275] Gestiit.

 [2276] Attemperare.

 [2277] i.e., the Scriptures of the New Testament.

 Chapter XLI.--The Conduct of Heretics: Its Frivolity, Worldliness, and
 Irregularity. The Notorious Wantonness of Their Women.

 I must not omit an account of the conduct [2278] also of the
 heretics--how frivolous it is, how worldly, how merely human, without
 seriousness, without authority, without discipline, as suits their
 creed. To begin with, it is doubtful who is a catechumen, and who a
 believer; they have all access alike, they hear alike, they pray
 alike--even heathens, if any such happen to come among them. "That
 which is holy they will cast to the dogs, and their pearls," although
 (to be sure) they are not real ones, "they will fling to the swine."
 [2279] Simplicity they will have to consist in the overthrow of
 discipline, attention to which on our part they call brothelry. [2280]
 Peace also they huddle up [2281] anyhow with all comers; for it matters
 not to them, however different be their treatment of subjects, provided
 only they can conspire together to storm the citadel of the one only
 Truth. All are puffed up, all offer you knowledge.  Their catechumens
 are perfect before they are full-taught. [2282] The very women of these
 heretics, how wanton they are! For they are bold enough to teach, to
 dispute, to enact exorcisms, to undertake [2283] cures--it may be even
 to baptize. [2284] Their ordinations, are carelessly administered,
 [2285] capricious, changeable. [2286] At one time they put novices in
 office; at another time, men who are bound to some secular employment;
 [2287] at another, persons who have apostatized from us, to bind them
 by vainglory, since they cannot by the truth. Nowhere is promotion
 easier than in the camp of rebels, where the mere fact of being there
 is a foremost service. [2288] And so it comes to pass that to-day one
 man is their bishop, to-morrow another; to-day he is a deacon who
 to-morrow is a reader; to-day he is a presbyter who tomorrow is a
 layman. For even on laymen do they impose the functions of priesthood.

 [2278] Conversationis.

 [2279] See Matt. vii. 6.

 [2280] Lenocinium. "Pandering" is Archdeacon Dodgson's word.

 [2281] Miscent.

 [2282] Edocti.

 [2283] Repromittere.

 [2284] Compare Tertullian's tract, de Bapt. I. and de Veland. Virg.
 viii. [Also, Epiphan. iv. p. 453, Ed. Oehler.]

 [2285] Temerariæ.

 [2286] They were constantly changing their ministers. It was a saying
 of the heretics, "Alius hodie episcopus, cras alius" (Rigalt.).

 [2287] Sæculo obstrictos.

 [2288] Promereri est.

 Chapter XLII.--Heretics Work to Pull Down and to Destroy, Not to Edify
 and Elevate. Heretics Do Not Adhere Even to Their Own Traditions, But
 Harbour Dissent Even from Their Own Founders.

 But what shall I say concerning the ministry of the word, since they
 make it their business not to convert the heathen, but to subvert our
 people?  This is rather the glory which they catch at, to compass the
 fall of those who stand, not the raising of those who are down.
 Accordingly, since the very work which they purpose to themselves comes
 not from the building up of their own society, but from the demolition
 of the truth, they undermine our edifices, that they may erect their
 own. Only deprive them of the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the
 divinity of the Creator, and they have not another objection to talk
 about. The consequence is, that they more easily accomplish the ruin of
 standing houses than the erection of fallen ruins. It is only when they
 have such objects in view that they show themselves humble and bland
 and respectful. Otherwise they know no respect even for their own
 leaders.  Hence it is [supposed] that schisms seldom happen among
 heretics, because, even when they exist, they are not obvious. [2289]
 Their very unity, however, [2290] is schism. I am greatly in error if
 they do not amongst themselves swerve even from their own regulations,
 forasmuch as every man, just as it suits his own temper, modifies the
 traditions he has received after the same fashion as the man who handed
 them down did, when he moulded them according to his own will.  The
 progress of the matter is an acknowledgment at once of its character
 and of the manner of its birth. That was allowable to the Valentinians
 which had been allowed to Valentinus; that was also fair for the
 Marcionites which had been done by Marcion--even to innovate on the
 faith, as was agreeable to their own pleasure. In short, all heresies,
 when thoroughly looked into, are detected harbouring dissent in many
 particulars even from their own founders. The majority of them have not
 even churches. [2291] Motherless, houseless, creedless, outcasts, they
 wander about in their own essential worthlessness. [2292]

 [2289] Non parent.

 [2290] Enim. [e.g. The Trent system of Unity, alas! is of this sort.]

 [2291] Hence the saying, "Wasps make combs, so Marcionites make
 churches" (see our Anti-Marcion, p. 187); describing the strangeness
 and uselessness of the societies, not (as Gibbon said) their number
 (Dodgson).

 [2292] Sua in vilitate. Another reading, pronounced corrupt by Oehler,
 has "quasi sibi latæ vagantur," q.d. "All for themselves, as it were,
 they wander" etc. (Dodgson).

 Chapter XLIII.--Loose Company Preferred by Heretics. Ungodliness the
 Effect of Their Teaching the Very Opposite of Catholic Truth, Which
 Promotes the Fear of God, Both in Religious Ordinances and Practical
 Life.

 It has also been a subject of remark, how extremely frequent is the
 intercourse which heretics hold with magicians, with mountebanks, with
 astrologers, with philosophers; and the reason is, [2293] that they are
 men who devote themselves to curious questions. "Seek, and ye shall
 find," is everywhere in their minds. Thus, from the very nature of
 their conduct, may be estimated the quality of their faith. In their
 discipline we have an index of their doctrine. They say that God is not
 to be feared; therefore all things are in their view free and
 unchecked. Where, however is God not feared, except where He is not?
 Where God is not, there truth also is not. Where there is no truth,
 then, naturally enough, there is also such a discipline as theirs. But
 where God is, there exists "the fear of God, which is the beginning of
 wisdom." [2294] Where the fear of God is, there is seriousness, an
 honourable and yet thoughtful [2295] diligence, as well as an anxious
 carefulness and a well-considered admission (to the sacred ministry)
 [2296] and a safely-guarded [2297] communion, and promotion after good
 service, and a scrupulous submission (to authority), and a devout
 attendance, [2298] and a modest gait, and a united church, and God in
 all things.

 [2293] Scilicet.

 [2294] Ps. cxi. 10; Prov. i. 7.

 [2295] Attonita, as if in fear that it might go wrong (Rigalt.).

 [2296] In contrast to the opposite fault of the heresies exposed above.

 [2297] Deliberata, where the character was well weighed previous to
 admission to the eucharist.

 [2298] Apparitio, the duty and office of an apparitor, or attendant on
 men of higher rank, whether in church or state.

 Chapter XLIV.--Heresy Lowers Respect for Christ, and Destroys All Fear
 of His Great Judgment. The Tendency of Heretical Teaching on This
 Solemn Article of the Faith. The Present Treatise an Introduction to
 Certain Other Anti-Heretical Works of Our Author.

 These evidences, then, of a stricter discipline existing among us, are
 an additional proof of truth, from which no man can safely turn aside,
 who bears in mind that future judgment, when "we must all stand before
 the judgment-seat of Christ," [2299] to render an account of our faith
 itself before all things. What, then, will they say who shall have
 defiled it, even the virgin which Christ committed to them with the
 adultery of heretics? I suppose they will allege that no injunction was
 ever addressed to them by Him or by His apostles concerning depraved
 [2300] and perverse doctrines assailing them, [2301] or about their
 avoiding and abhorring the same.  (He and His apostles, perhaps,) will
 acknowledge [2302] that the blame rather lies with themselves and their
 disciples, in not having given us previous warning and instruction!
 They [2303] will, besides, add a good deal respecting the high
 authority of each doctor of heresy,--how that these mightily
 strengthened belief in their own doctrine; how that they raised the
 dead, restored the sick, foretold the future, that so they might
 deservedly be regarded as apostles. As if this caution were not also in
 the written record: that many should come who were to work even the
 greatest miracles, in defence of the deceit of their corrupt preaching.
 So, forsooth, they will deserve to be forgiven! If, however, any, being
 mindful of the writings and the denunciations of the Lord and the
 apostles, shall have stood firm in the integrity of the faith, I
 suppose they will run great risk of missing pardon, when the Lord
 answers: I plainly forewarned you that there should be teachers of
 false doctrine in my name, as well as that of the prophets and apostles
 also; and to my own disciples did I give a charge, that they should
 preach the same things to you. But as for you, it was not, of course,
 to be supposed [2304] that you would believe me! I once gave the gospel
 and the doctrine of the said rule (of life and faith) to my apostles;
 but afterwards it was my pleasure to make considerable changes in it! I
 had promised a resurrection, even of the flesh; but, on second
 thoughts, it struck me [2305] that I might not be able to keep my
 promise!  I had shown myself to have been born of a virgin; but this
 seemed to me afterwards to be a discreditable thing. [2306] I had said
 that He was my Father, who is the Maker of the sun and the showers; but
 another and better father has adopted me! I had forbidden you to lend
 an ear to heretics; but in this I erred! Such (blasphemies), it is
 possible, [2307] do enter the minds of those who go out of the right
 path, [2308] and who do not defend [2309] the true faith from the
 danger which besets it.  On the present occasion, indeed, our treatise
 has rather taken up a general position against heresies, (showing that
 they must) all be refuted on definite, equitable, and necessary rules,
 without [2310] any comparison with the Scriptures. For the rest, if God
 in His grace permit, we shall prepare answers to certain of these
 heresies in separate treatises. [2311] To those who may devote their
 leisure in reading through these (pages), in the belief of the truth,
 be peace, and the grace of our God Jesus Christ for ever. [2312]

 [2299] 2 Cor. v. 10.

 [2300] Scævis.

 [2301] Futuris.

 [2302] It seems to us, that this is the force of the strong irony,
 indicated by the "credo," which pervades this otherwise unintelligible
 passage.  Dodgson's version seems untenable:  "Let them (the heretics)
 acknowledge that the fault is with themselves rather than with those
 who prepared us so long beforehand."

 [2303] Christ and His apostles, as before, in continuation of the
 strong irony.

 [2304] This must be the force of a sentence which is steeped in irony:
 "Scilicet cum vos non crederetis." We are indebted to Oehler for
 restoring the sentence thus.

 [2305] Recogitavi.

 [2306] Turpe.

 [2307] Capit.

 [2308] Exorbitant.

 [2309] Cavent.

 [2310] This sense comes from the "repellendas" and the "a collatione
 Scripturarum."

 [2311] Specialiter. He did this, indeed, in his treatises against
 Marcion, Hermogenes, the Valentinians, Praxeas, and others. [These are
 to follow in this Series. Kaye (p. 47) justly considered this sentence
 as proving the De Præscript, a preface to all his treatises against
 particular heresies.]

 [2312] Elucidation V.

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Prescription, Chap. I., p. 243, Supra.)

 In adopting this expression from the Roman Law, Tertullian has simply
 puzzled beginners to get at his idea. Nor do they learn much when it is
 called a demurrer, which, if I comprehend the word as used in
 law-cases, is a rejoinder to the testimony of the other party,
 amounting to--"Well, what of it? It does not prove your case."
 Something like this is indeed in Tertullian's use of the term
 præscription; but Dr. Holmes furnishes what seems to me the best
 explanation, (though he only half renders it,) "the Prescriptive Rule
 against Heresies." In a word, it means, "the Rule of Faith asserted
 against Heresies." And his practical point is, it is useless to discuss
 Scripture with convicted (Titus iii. 10, 11.) heretics; every one of
 them is ready with "his psalm, his doctrine, his interpretation," and
 you may argue fruitlessly till Doomsday. But bring them to the test of
 (Quod Semper, etc.), the apostolic præscription (1 Corinthians xi.
 16).--We have no such custom neither the Churches of God. State this
 Rule of Faith, viz. Holy Scripture, as interpreted from the apostolic
 day: if it proves the doctrine or custom a novelty, then it has no
 foundation, and even if it be harmless, it cannot be innocently
 professed against the order and peace of the churches.

 II.

 (Semler, cap. x., note 15, p. 248.)

 The extent to which Bp. Kaye has stretched his notice of this critic is
 to be accounted for by the fact that, for a time, the German School of
 the last century exerted a sad influence in England. In early life Dr.
 Pusey came near to being led away by it, and Hugh James Rose was raised
 up to resist it. Semler lived (at Halle and elsewhere) from a.d. 1725
 to 1791. Kahnis in his invaluable manual, named below, thus speaks of
 his Patristic theories: "The history of the Kingdom of God became,
 under his hands, a world of atoms, which crossed each other as
 chaotically as the masses of notes which lay heaped up in the memory of
 Semler....Under his pragmatical touches the halo of the martyrs faded,
 etc." Internal Hist. of German Protestantism (since circa 1750, ) by
 Ch. Fred. Aug. Kahnis, D.D. (Lutheran) Professor at Leipzig.
 Translated.  T. and F. Clark, Edinburgh, 1856.

 III.

 (Peter, cap. xxii. note 6, p. 253.)

 In the treatise of Cyprian, De Unitate, we shall have occasion to speak
 fully on this interesting point.  The reference to Kaye may suffice,
 here.  But, since the inveterate confusion of all that is said of Peter
 with all that is claimed by a modern bishop for himself promotes a
 false view of this passage, it may be well to note (1) that St. Peter's
 name is expounded by himself (1 Peter ii. 4, 5) so as to make Christ
 the Rock and all believers "lively stones"--or Peters--by faith in Him.
 St. Peter is often called the rock, most justly, in this sense, by a
 rhetorical play on his name: Christ the Rock and all believers "lively
 stones," being cemented with Him by the Spirit.  But, (2) this
 specialty of St. Peter, as such, belongs to him (Cephas) only. (3) So
 far as transmitted it belongs to no particular See. (4) The claim of
 Rome is disproved by Præscription. (5) Were it otherwise, it would not
 justify that See in making new articles of Faith.  (6) Nor in its
 Schism with the East.  (7) When it restores St. Peter's Doctrine and
 Holiness, to the Latin Churches, there will be no quarrel about
 pre-eminence. Meantime, Rome's fallibility is expressly taught in
 Romans xi. 18-21.

 IV.

 (The Apostles, cap. xxv. p. 254.)

 Nothing less than a new incarnation of Christ and a new commission to
 new apostles can give us anything new in religion. This præscription is
 our Catholic answer to the Vatican oracles of our own time. These give
 us a new revelation, prefacing the Gospels (1) by defining the
 immaculate conception of Mary in the womb of her mother; and (2) adding
 a new chapter to the Acts of the Apostles, in defining the
 infallibility of a single bishop.

 Clearly, had Tertullian known anything of this last dogma of Latin
 Novelty, he would not have taken the trouble to write this treatise. He
 would have said to heretics, We can neither discuss Scripture nor
 Antiquity with you. Rome is the touchstone of dogma, and to its bishop
 we refer you.

 V.

 (Truth and Peace, cap. xliv. p. 265.)

 The famous appeal of Bishop Jewel, known as "the Challenge at Paul's
 Cross," which he made in a sermon preached there on Passion Sunday,
 a.d. 1560, is an instance of "Præscription against heresies," well
 worthy of being recalled, in a day which has seen Truth and Peace newly
 sacrificed to the ceaseless innovations of Rome. It is as follows:--"If
 any learned man of all our adversaries, or, if all the learned men that
 be alive, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old
 Catholic doctor or father; or out of any old general Council; or out of
 the Holy Scriptures of God; [2313] or, any one example of the primitive
 Church, whereby it may be clearly and plainly proved, that--

 1. There was any private mass in the whole world at that time, for the
 space of six hundred years after Christ; or that--

 2. There was then any communion ministered unto the people under one
 kind; or that--

 3. The people had their common prayers, then, in a strange tongue that
 they understood not; or that--

 4. The bishop of Rome was then called an universal bishop, or the head
 of the universal Church; or that--

 5. The people was then taught to believe that Christ's body is really,
 substantially, corporally, carnally or naturally in the Sacrament; or
 that--

 6. His body is, or may be, in a thousand places or more, at one time;
 or that--

 7. The priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his head; or that--

 8. The people did then fall down and worship it with godly honour; or
 that--

 9. The Sacrament was then, or now ought to be, hanged up under a
 canopy; or that--

 10. In the Sacrament after the words of consecration there remaineth
 only the accidents and shews, without the substance of bread and wine;
 or that--

 11. The priest then divided the Sacrament in three parts and afterwards
 received himself, alone; or that--

 12. Whosoever had said the Sacrament is a pledge, a token, or a
 remembrance of Christ's body, had therefore been judged a heretic; or
 that--

 13. It was lawful, then, to have thirty, twenty, fifteen, ten, or five
 masses said in one Church, in one day; or that--

 14. Images were then set up in churches to the intent the people might
 worship them; or that--

 15. The lay people was then forbidden to read the word of God, in their
 own tongue:

 "If any man alive be able to prove any of these articles, by any one
 clear or plain clause or sentence, either of the Scriptures, or of the
 old doctors, or of any old General Council, or by any Example of the
 Primitive Church; I promise, then, that I will give over and subscribe
 unto him."

 All this went far beyond the concession of præscription which makes
 little of any one saying of any one Father, and demands the general
 consent of Antiquity; but, it is needless to say that Jewel's challenge
 has remained unanswered for more than three hundred years, and so it
 will be to all Eternity.

 With great erudition Jewel enlarged his propositions and maintained all
 his points. See his works, vol. I., p. 20 et seqq. Cambridge University
 Press, 1845.

 [2313] It must be remembered that an appeal to Scripture lies behind
 Tertullian's Præscription: only he will not discuss Holy Scripture with
 heretics.
