0EO<DPA2TOT tQ EPE2IOT

n E P I T £1 N

A I 0 O N

B I B A I O N.

TH EOPH RASTUS's

History of STONES.
With an English Version,

AND

Critical and Philosophical NOTES,

Including the Modern Hiftory of the Gems, fcfc
defcribed by that Author, and of many other of
the Native Fossils.

By JOHN HILL.

To which are added,

TWO LETTERS:

One to Dr. James Parsons, F. R.S.
On the Colours of the Sapphire and Turquoi/e.

AND THE OTHER,

To Martin Folkes, Efq; Do&or of Laws,

and President of the Royal Society-,

Upon the Effects of different Mcnftruums on Copper.

Both tending to illuftrate the Doclrine of the Gems
being coloured by Metalline Particles.

L O N D O A r ,
Printed for C. Davis, againft Grays- Inn in Holbom^
Printer to the Royal Society.
MDCCXLVI.



T O



HIS GRACE

CHARLES

Duke of Richmond, Lennox,
and Aubigny,

Earl of March and Darnley,

Baron of Settr.ington and Torbolton,

One of the Lords of His Majesty's mod
Honourable Privy Council,

Matter of the Horfe to His Majefty,
Lieutenant-Gene r a l,
and

Knight of the Moft Noble Order of the Garten

My Lord,

TT Do my felt the Honour of laying
J[ at your Grace's Feet, an Attempt
to contribute fomething to the Study
cf the Fossile Kingdom, in an Ex-

A z



C iv )

planation of what one of the oldeft
Authors upon that Subject has left us,
as every Part of polite Learnings and
particularly what regards Natural
History, has a kind of Claim, from
the Honour of your Grace's Example,
to your Grace's Patronage and Pro-
tection.

The Honour and Advantages that
Botany, in particular, has received
from your Grace's Regard, are flrongly
and in lafting Colours painted in thofe
Gardens, where vour Grace has fo ad-
apted the Soil and Situation, to Plants
and Trees naturally the Product of the
moft diftant Regions; that an Inhabi-
tant of the Weftern World, entering the
American Grove at Goodwood, would
be aftoni/hed to fee himfelf, as it were
in a Moment, tranfported to his own
Climate ; nothing there ftriking his
Eyes but the beautiful Productions of
the Vegetable World in his own na-
tive Soil.


The Animal Kingdom is no lefs
illuftrated, in the noble Collection your
Grace has made of the more wonder-
ful Species of it ; and particularly of
the dreadful Beauties of the Serpent
kind, Natives of warmer Climates:
and which, to the Happinefs of this
Illand, are here unknown unlefs in
fuch Repositories; where their varied
Paintings are not lefs pleafing, than
their Prefence, while living, is terrible.

Nor have the Curiofities of the Fos-
sil e World been denied a Place among
the other many and wonderful Pro-
ductions of Nature honoured with
your Grace's Obfervation. But fuch
is the Misfortune attending this Part
of Natural Knowledge, that the Ob-
jects it offers, though not lefs beau-
tiful, are yet lefs obvious to the Re-
fearches of even the mo ft inquifitive
Part of Mankind : A fpreading Tree,
an elegantly flowering Plant, or an

A 3



( vi )

extraordinary Animal, are Objects
which dire&ly meet the Eyes, and
can hardly efcape Gbfervation ; while
Rocks of Gold and Maffes of Gems, or
what to a phiiofophic Eye is yet more
admirable, the Parts of Plants or
Animals, immerfed in Stone, or buried
under immenfe Quantities of Earth,
are not to be found without fearching
for thorn at vail Depths within the Bo-
fom -of the Earth, where Nature firft
formed, or the Univerfal Deluge, or
fome other dreadful Cataftrophe, has
buried them, never by any natural
Means to appear again.

This, my Lord, is one of the Dis-
couragements under which this Study
labours, and which has deterred Num-
bers of the Curious from entering upon
it. If what I have here endeavoured
to fet in a new Light, may incite
others to enquire into this Branch of
Natural Knowledge, and to overlook
thefe Difficulties, I fhall have my full
Reward,



(vii)

Your Grace's Goodnefs will, I hope,
pardon me that I cannot conclude this
Addrefs, without begging your leave
publickly to exprefs my great Obliga-
tions to Your Grace on this Occafion,
and acknowledging, with the warmeft
and fincereft Overflowings of a Heart
full of Gratitude, that to your Grace
alone, as the firft Spring, is owing
both this, and whatever elfe I may
hereafter offer, flnce from your Grace s
Goodnefs I have Leifure to profecute
thefe Studies : and that I muft ever be,
with the greateft Refpect,

My Lord,



Tour Grace* j mqft Obedient,

And mofi Devoted Servant,

John Hill,



LIST



OF THE

SUBSCRIBERS.

THE Reverend Mr. Bryan AIlk>t.
Mr. Jofeph Ames, F. R. S.
The Reverend Dr. Angier.
Thomas Apreece, Efqy
Mrs. D. Apreece.
Mr. William Arderon, F. R. S.

Lovewell Badcock, Efq\

Henry Baker, Efq\ F. R. S.

Charles Balguy, M. D.

Mr. George Barnard.

Mr. John Blackflone.

The Reverend Mr. John Branfoot.

Dr. Brocklefby.



The Right Honourable the Counters of Chefterfield.
Mr. Mark Catefby, F. R. S.
Samuel Clarke, Efq- 9 F. R. S.



(x)

Mr. Peter Collinfon, F. R. S.
Mrs. Colembine.
Mr. John Cuff.
Noah Curtis, Efq\

Mr. Emanuel Mendez Da Cofta. Three Books.

Mr. Andrew Deidier.
Henry Brufter Dorley, Efq\
Mr. Francis Drake, F. R. S.
Mr. Duncomb.

Mr. Jonathan Fawkoner, F. R. S.
The Reverend Mr. Fifher.

Martin Foikes, Efq- 9 LL.D. and President of

the Royal Society. Three Books.
Br. John Fothergill.

Mr. Richard Gammon.

Mr. George Gamier. Three Books.

The Reverend Mr. Gibert.

The Genllemens Society at Grantham.

John Green, M. D. S. G. S.

Mr. Richard Hamilton, Surgedn.
John Henry Hampe, M. B. F. R. §.
Mr. Francis Haukfbee.
Samuel Hickman, Efq\ F. R. S.
The Reverend Dr. Hill.
The Reverend Mr. Hill.
Br. Edward Hody, F. R. S.
George Holmes, Efq\ F. R.S.



( xi )

The Reverend Dr. Howard.
Mr. William Hunter, Surgeon.

Dr. Charles Jernegan,
Captain Maurice Johnfon.

Mr. Edmund Killick, Surgeon.
Gowin Knight, M. B. F. R. S.
Mr. Thomas Knowlton. Six Books.

The Right Honourable the Lord Vifcount Lonfdale,

Three Books.
The Reverend Dr. Lavington.
Mr. William Lake.

The Reverend Dr. Lamb, Dean 0/ Peterborough.

Marmaduke Lawfon, Efq\

Mr. William Little.

Mr. Robert Levitt. Two Books.

His Grace the Duke of Mountague. Six Books.

Sir Richard Manningham, Kt. Lie. Coll. M. F.R. S.

Dr. Thomas Manningham.

The Reverend Mr. Marfhall.

Mr. W. Mapletoff.

Mrs. M. M afters.

Mr. Jofeph Miller.

The Reverend Dr. Miles, F. R. S.

Jofeph Middlemore, Efq\

Edward Millward, M.D. F t R t S.

Mr. Mitchell.

Mr. John-Francis Mitchell,



( ^ )

Dr. Mitchell.

Mr. Murray, Surgeon.

Mr. Turberville Needham.

Mr. James Nelfon.

The Reverend Br. Neve.

The Reverend Mr. Timothy Neve.

George Ogle, Efq\

James Parfons, M. B. F. R. S. Three Books.
Mr. Pierce, Surgeon.
Mr. W. Potter, Surgeon.

Richard Richardfon, Efq\
Benjamin Ruffell, jun. Efq.

The Honourable Charles Stanhope, Efqy
Br. Peter Shaw.

Mr. Timothy Sheldrake, Trufs-maker.

Mr. James Sherwood, Surgeon.

Sir Hans Sloane, Bart. M. B. F. R. S.

Daniel Smyth, Efq\

The Gentlemens Society at Spalding.

Mr. William Strong.

The Right Honourable the Lord Vifcount Tyrconneh

The Reverend Mr. Talbot.

Mr. Ifaac Terry.

The Reverend Mr. Tyfon.



( xiii )



His Excellency Baron Waffenaer.
Mr. William Watfon,
Mr. James Watfon.
Dr. Watfon.
Br. Wallis.

Matthew Wildbore, Efqy
Mr. George Wirgman.



( xiv )



THE

PREFACE.

TH E many References toTHEoPHRA-
stus, and the Quotations from him>
fo frequent in the Works of all the later Writers
of Foffils, would make one believe, at firft
fight, that nothing was more universally known,
or perfectly underftood, than the Treafife before
us : But when we come to enquire more
ftri&ly into the Truth, and examine with our
own Eyes what it really is that he has left us,
we fhall find that though no Author is fo often
quoted, no Author is fo little underfiood, or,
indeed, has been fo little read; thofe who are fo
free with his Name, having given themfelves,
generally, very little Trouble about his Works,
and only taken upon truft from one another,
what we fhall in moft Cafes find, on a ftri£t
Enquiry, to have been originally quoted from
him by Pliny ; and as to that Author, who-
ever is acquainted with the Works of the more
antienfc Writers, muft know, that however
much Fraifc he may deferve for that Treafure



C ™ )

of Knowledge, he has, with almoft infinite
Pains, colledted and handed down to us, yet
he is very little to be depended on for the Cor-
rednefs of his Quotations.

But it is no Wonder that the genuine Work
of this Author on the Subject of Fo lils, flbould
have been fo long and fo much neglected to be
read; fince whoever {hall take up even the bed
Editions of it we have at prefent, will find enough
in every Page to difhearten him from making
any farther Progrefs in it : The numerous De-
fers, Lacuna > where whole Words, Parts of
Words, and in fome Places even many Words
together are wanting; and the many Sentences,
either by the careful Prefervation of old Errors,
or the injudicious Corrections of the Editors, ren-
dered perfectly unintelligible, will foon (hew,
that it is a Work not to be read to any Advan-
tage, without a more than ordinary Attention,
a Knowledge of the Subject, and a continual
Confultation of other of the Antients. Nor can
it, indeed, be wondered at, that an Author
who wrote more than Two thoufand Years a-
go, and on a Subjedt fo little underftood, fliould
be liable to numerous Errors in printing, which
few of his Editors would have Capacity or In-
duftry to fet right.



( xvi )

In fuch Condition has this Treatife hitherto
lain ; full of excellent Matter, but rendered,
in this Manner, almoft unintelligible. The
Author is remarkable for ufing very few Words 5
and where it was fo common a thing, to find
fome of thofe few abfolutely wanting, it feem-
ed no eafy Tafk rightly to underftand him.
On this Occafion, as alfo in regard to the Er-
rors, fo frequent and perplexing, I have been
at the pains of confulting the reft of the An-
tients, in order to find what it was moft like-
ly he (hould fay, by what they have faid on
the fame Occafion : In thefe Undertakings,
Pliny alfo, where he could be depended on, has
been of Angular Service ; a Paflage from him,
frequently a literal Tranflation of this Author,
(hewing evidently how he had read the Origi-
nal, who had the Advantage of feeing it, if
not abfolutely in its native Purity, yet at leaft
before the Rife of many of the Errors that
have made it much more unintelligible to us.
This, and examining his Words by, and com-
paring them with the Subftance he is defcri-
bing, in fuch Cafes where we are fo happy to
have the Subftance yet in Ufe; are the two
great Methods I have taken to underftand him;
and the laft of them I have had the Happi-
nefs of more frequent Opportunities of refer-
ring



HI



( xvii )

ring to than another Perfon naturally vvouH
have had, having been many Years making
Collections for a Hiftory of the Medicinal
Earths; and, on that Occafion, procuring Spe-
cimens of them, and of other Fofiils, from
various Parts of the World, and often from the
very Places he is defcribing the Body he men-
tions to be produced in,

Where thefe Methods have not proved fuf-
ficient, I have had Recourfe to the Critics ;
and as Reafon, and either of the before named
Afliftances dire&ed, have adopted the Opinions,
fometimes of one, and fometimes of another.
T>e Last I have often had Occafion to name,
for the Helps I have received from him ; but,
above all others, I have been moft obliged to
the excellent Sahnafias : And notwithftanding
that I have fometimes found it neeeffary to diffent
from, and even cenfure the Opinions of thefe
excellent Commentators, yet, on the Whole, I
am to acknowledge myfelf greatly obliged to
them, and that even more and oftener than I
have had Opportunity to name it.

Befide thefe, I have been at the Pains of
examining many other of the Critics, and have
adopted feveral of their Opinions. Many others,
whom I have not been able to fee, and many

a



( xviii )

of the Quotations I have taken on Credit from
Salmafius^ who has carefully collected them, and
whofe Fidelity I have never once found Occa-
fion to queftion : His Opinions, indeed, I have
in fome Places been obliged to diflent from, as
I have every where ventured to think for my-
felf, and determine myfelf by the Bodies them-
felves which are delcribed, whenever I could
be fo happy to have them before me : And,
indeed, any one who will ftudy Nature's felf,
will often fee wherein he muft diflent, not only
from the beft Critics, but even from the beft
Authors in Natural Hiftory.

By thefe Means, and with thefe Affiftances,
it is, that I have undertaken to give a new
Edition of the Greek Text, in which whatever
may be the Service I have done, I promife my-
felf I fhall, at leaft, be liable to no Cenfure ;
fince tho' I have filled up all the Defefts, and
amended the Errors, fo as to make the Work
now plain, intelligible, and eafy to be read, I
have every where in the Notes mentioned where
the Lacunae were, and what were the Words
that I have ventured to alter; fo that this
Edition yet leaves the Text for thofe who
would attempt new Emendations, in the fame
Condition with the others, as by referring to
the Notes, it will always be feen bow I found



( * ix )

it To this let me add, that in order to leave
the Author as much himfelf as poflible, I have
been moft fcriipuloufly fparing in the Altera-
tions, which I could elfe have wifh'd much
more numerous : This the learned Reader will
fee in fome few Places, where, though I have
left the Original (landing, as I found it, I have
yet, by the Tranflation, (hewn how I thought a
few Letters might have been altered to Advan-
tage. I am forry to add, that, notwithftanding
all the Corrections of the Prefs, there are yet,
here and there, fome Errors of a Letter or fo
in the Text j I think, however, there are fewer
of them than in moft other Works lately print-
ed in this Language - y and as they are but tri-
fling, the Greek Reader will eafily fee what
they are, and others they will not concern.

Thus much for the Greek Text. In regard
to the E?iglift, I have only to obferve, that as
my Intent was to render the Work as intelli-
gible to the Englift as to the learned Reader,
I have not tied myfelf down to a bare verbal
Tranflation. This Author is remarkably con-
cife in his Expreffion \ and want of Words ha$
in many Places helped to render him lefs eafily
intelligible : I have, therefore, to make his Senfe
the more evident, attempted to give, not bare-
ly his Words, {nit his Meaning j and in many

3 %



( ™ )

Places have tranflated a lingle Syllable into a
whole Sentence, by giving, where that Syllable
referred to fomething faid before, a lliort Reca-
pitulation of the Matter referred to ; and by
that means preferving the neceflary Connection
of Thought, without which, what followed
might have appeared obfcure.

Befides this, in order to ferve the great End
of making the Work as eafy and intelligible as
poffible, I have divided the Whole into a
Number of Seftions, which are no other than
fo many diftindl feparate Sentences, often ha-
ving not the leaft Reference to, or Connexion
with one another $ and this is done, not only
in the Englifb, but in the Greek alfo, by which
the Tranflation may be every where readily
compared with the Original, and the Reader
prevented from being confounded, by imagin-
ing the Author is carrying on his Reafonings
on any particular Subjedt, when perhaps he has
fuddehly dropt it, and is gone on to a different
one. I promife myfelf it will appear, that I
have followed the Author's Meaning clofely and
regularly in this Particular; and yet in many
Places, where the Sentences are here made to
terminate, there is not in the other Editions
fo much as a Stop : How much this rauft, in
a continued Treatife, before rendered too ob-



( xxi )

fcure by many other Defedls, at firft fight, con-
found even a judicious Reader, is eafy to ima-
gine.

I have chofen to give the Tranflation in
Englijh rather than Latin, partly becaufe there
are already many Latin Tranflations of this
Work, and all very much and very defervedly
cenfured; the Tranflators many of them ha-
ving, in numerous Inftances, only given a
Word, that in the Latin exprefled fome one
Senfe of that they were tranflating from the
Greek, and never given themfelves the Trouble
of fo much as attempting to give the Author's
Meaning ; and partly, becaufe one great Intent
of this Edition was, to make the Treatife as
univerfally read and underftood here as poflible :
And it may be obferved, that thofe who are
able to read Latin Tranflations to Advantage, ge-
nerally are able to have made them, and there-
fore are above having Recourfe to them. In the
Notes, however, has been the principal Labour;
in thefe, befide giving an Account of the La-
cunae that are filled up, and Alterations that
are made, I have endeavoured, partly by Exa-
minations of the Bodies themfelves, which are
defcribed, partly by Comparifon of the Words
with thofe of others of the Antients, and partly
by the Afiiftance of the Critics, to elucidate, ex«?
5



( xxii )

plain, and account for, whatever the Author has
left us. How far I have been fo happy to fuc-
ceed in this, is left to the Determination of the
learned Reader ; what I have offered are given
but as Conjectures, and, at this diftance of
Time, it is impoffible that this ever fhould be
perfectly done.

To the Authors general Syftems I have added
thofe of the later Naturalifts ; and in this, it is
furprifing to fee how much thofe of the beft
of them agree with his , and to every Gem,
Stone, Earth, or other Subftance he describes,
I have added the more modern Hiftory of it»
And in this we fliall alfo be furprifed to fee how
much was fo early known. Befide thefe, I
have occafionally taken in many other fpfhle
Bodies which he has not defcribed, in order to
render the Whole as ufeful as a Treatife in fo>
fmall a Compafs might be. In thefe Things it
may be necelfary to obferve, that I have nc*
where fervilely tied myfelf down to the Opi-
nions of any particular Author : In the Syftems
I have in general followed the late excellent
Dr. Woodward^ a Man ever to be remembered
with the higheft Veneration by all who make
thefe Things their Study, and who has, per-
haps given us more real Knowledge in the
FoiTile World than all who went before him 5.



( xxiii )

As the Dwarf, however, on the Giant's Shoul-
ders, there are fome Things, perhaps, in which
a much lefs Genius may, by the Help of the
Fund of Knowledge he has left, fee yet fome-
thing farther ; and in fuch, and fuch only, I
have ventured to diffent from him. In the
Accounts of particular Subftances, I have not
omitted what was to be colle&ed from Authors
mod to be depended on, but have made the
Bodies themfelves my great Inftruiiors ; and
every where, where I could have them before
me, formed my Defcriptions from them.

Whatever may be the Reception of this At-
tempt in the karned World, this I can with great
Juftice affirm, that be the Defefts of it what
they will, Labour has not been wanting in it.
If rny Intentions are fo far anfwered, that the
Judicious look on it as a Thing of any real Ufe
in the Study of Foffils ; or if it fpirit up any
body elfe to give us Editions of the Works of
the Antients on other Subjects in the fame man-
ner, as I find my own particular Avocations will
not permit me to engage in more, at the utmoft,
than thofe on this j I fhall account myfelf very
happy, that I have ventured to break the Ice,
and point out a Way to make the Works of
thefe early Naturalises generally ufeful.



GEO-



0 EO * P ASTO T

TOT EPEZIOT

II E PI TflN

A I 0 & N

B I B A I O N.

THEOPHRASTUS's

HISTORY

O F

STONES.



( 2 )

0EO*PASTOT

TOT EPESIOT
n e p i t n n

4 A I 0 O N

B I B A I O N.

«. ' a ^ XI N C¥ tyi yij GrwJifcLfD/.cdVt Tel [djj

8 THIS excellent Author, notwithftanding that he has
made the Title of the Treatife before us promife no more
than an Account of Stones, we {hall find hereafter, did not
mean to confine himfelf in it ftricfly and literally to dif-
courfe of only that Part of the foible Kingdom generally
underftood by this Name, but to take into his Confidera-
tion, at the fame Time, all thofe other mineral Sub-
ftances which appeared to him to be formed of Matter of a
like Kind with them ; as the various Earths, See. in fhort
all the native Foilils, which, according to his Philofo-
phy, had Earth, not Water, for the Bafts of their Forma-
tion.

b Our Author's general Syftem of the foflile World I
Ihall not, in thefe Times of greater Knowledge, attempt
to vindicate in all its Parts, but muft do him the Juftice
to obferve, that it was far from being either abfurd, or
improbable, at the Time when he wrote, when the Sci-
ences, to which the prefent Age owes its Improvements
in Natural Knowledge, were fo little underftood ; and fo
hyf of the Experiments, which have now given Light into



( 3 )

THEOPH RASTUS's

HISTORY

O F

STONES.

I. F Things formed in the Earth, fome have
V^/ their Origin from Water, others from
Earth.

II. b Water is the'Bafis of Metals, as Silver, Gold,
and the reft Earth of Stones, as well the more



it, had been made \ and that it carries, at leaft, an equal
Air of Probability, with many that have been fince formed,
and is abfolutely more fuccin&ly, clearly, and philofophi-
cally delivered than any of them all.

The Principles of mixed Bodies, as well thofe of the
fcjjile, as of the vegetable and anhnal Kingdoms, are indeed
fo intimately mixed, and clofely combined together, at their
original Formation, that we are not to wonder, an Author,
who wrote in fuch early Times, was not clearly acquainted
with the exacl: Manner of their Compofition : Thofe
who have followed him, even after the Difcoveries of
many fucceeding Ages, and with the Aflifrance of Che-
miftry, the beft and fureft of all Means of judging, and
which, whatever fome Men of fertile Imaginations may have
thought, we have no found Reafon to believe was much
known in his Time, have yet been of late found to have
run into great Errors about them ; and even thofe of
the prefent and laft Age, who have been able to difcover
their Miftakes, and have the Advantage of yet greater and
farther Improvements in that Science, if they will fpeak

B 2



( 4 )

Icrct }\l6cov vs&iTlQTtQoi. (c « Tiveg Svj rr\g yv\<; cuj-



frankly and ingenuoufly, muft own, that though they have
difcovered the Errors of their Predeceflbrs, and are certain
they are nearer the real Knowledge of the Myfleries of
Nature than thofe of any other Age have been, they yet arc
fcnfible, that they are only making farther and farther Ad-
vances toward what, perhaps, it is not in human Nature
ever perfectly to know.

Chemical Analyfifes, when judicioufly and carefully made,
are unqueftionably the fureft and betl Methods we can ufe,
towards the Attainment of that Knowledge ; and yet, how
imperfect our beft Difcoveries by thefe may appear to the
induftrious and ingenious of future Ages, may be gueffed
by the Errors we can difcover in thofe of but a few be-
fore us.

When Chemifrry became, fome Time ago, better un-
derftood and more praciifed than it had probably ever
before been, the Profeffors of it, finding a certain Num-
ber of different Subflances, into which almoft all
mixed Bodies were refolvible, immediately looked upon
thefe as fixed and unalterable in themfelves , and as they
found them, in a Manner, in all mixed Bodies, they deter-
mined that they were the true Principles or Elements of
which all Bodies were compounded, and fixed their Num-
ber, and their Names, viz* That they were five, Spirit,
Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth. Here then the whole
Work feemed effected, the Secrets of Nature opened, and
the true, fixed, and unalterable Principles of mixed Bodies
clearly known.

But what Figure does this boaftcd Philofophy, this Set
of Principles now make ? when our own Experience, and
the Difcoveries of later Chemifts give us even the un-
queftionable Teftimony of our Senfes, that no lefs than
three of the five are fo far from deferving the Name of
Principles or Elements, that they are themfelves mixed Bo-
dies, and refolvible with proper Care into other diftincl: and
different Subftances. For the fame Chemiftry, which has



( 5 )

precious, as the common and of the various Earths
of peculiar Kinds, whether remarkable for Colour,
Smoothnefs, Denfity, or whatever other Quality.

brought Sulphur out of a mixed Body, will alfo feparate
that Sulphur into Salt, Water y and Eanh ; and when it has
extracted from another, that Salt, they efteemed fo true a
Principle, will afterwards reduce it alfo into Water and
Earth ; and Spirit, we now find, is no other than Oil at-
tenuated by Salts, and diflblved in Water. This appears
by this plain and eafy Experiment of Mr. Boyle's, viz. If
Spirit of Wine be mixed with ten or twelve times it's
Weight of Water, and fet in a cool Place, the Salts will
fly off, the Water mix itfelf with the Water in the Mix-
ture, and the Oil be left fwimming at the Top.

Inftead of the five Principles, therefore, of the Chemifts
before us, farther Difcoveries have reduced us to a Neceffi-
ty of owning only two, vifible, obvious, and the Objects
of our Senfes ; and even thefe two may perhaps hereafter
be proved to be more nearly allied to each other than we
at prefent imagine : thefe are Water and Earth \ the ve-
ry Principles, and the only ones, acknowledged by this ex-
cellent Author, whofe Works I am offering my Remarks
on, and who, to his immortal Honour be it recorded, dis-
covered that by Reafon and Philofophy alone, which we
owe the Knowledge of to a thoufand tedious Experiments.

His Syftem, though founded on this excellent Bafis, I do
not, as I before obferved, attempt to juftify ; Obferva-
tions, which it was impoffible for him to have made, have
given us the Teftimony of our Senfes, that Metals do con-
tain more or lefs of an abfolute, genuine, and verifiable
Earth ; and Stones, it is as certain, are never wholly di-
vefted of that Water which once ferved to bring their con-
it intent Parts together.

But to return to the Principles of mixed Bodies : Rea-
fon informs us, that thefe two, Water and Earth, alone
can never have made all the Differences, and V irtues of
them ; we are compelled therefore to acknowledge a third,
a6 obvious to our Reafon as the others to our Senfes ; an
a£tive Something, to give that to the Mafs, which W ater and
E*irth alone could not; This unknown Principle js what



( 6 )

KTrcvKg* kv rcw'Q, %gyj vofxi'^nv, cog dnXcoq
ei7reiv 9 cm xctQaociq tiv'@» Quuji^clvou pyij oy.uXr\g vXfjg 9
etre poqg % etrs ^tifi^cr^cog 2l\& tiv(@^ yivo/ufyyjg , etrz, cog

rcc%cc ft C4dt%£jj tou ft XTcog, ra o cymvcog > TO,
J' ciXkoog*.



fome Chemifts have called Acid, and the Metaphysicians
Fire \ Words which in their general and common Accep-
tation convey Ideas very different from thofe we mean to
exprefs by them on this Occafion, but which we muft be
indulged in the Ufe of, till a more perfect Knowledge of
the Thing we mean to exprefs has taught us to give it a
more determinate Name.

c The Author has here juflly, clearly, and fuccindHy
given the general Manner, in which the conftitucnt Mat-
ter of Earths and Stones has been brought together, and
hinted at the various other Means by which it is done in
other particular Cafes.

The two general Ways he allows are by Afflux and Per-
colation-, and nothing is more certain than that, by thefe
two Methods, the two great Claries of the Bodies he is
here to treat of, have been brought into a State of Forma-
tion ; the Earths and Stones of Strata by Afflux : and the
Gryftals, Spars, and other Bodies of that Kind, by Per^
eolation.

The Agent, in the firft of thefe Cafes, has been Gravi-
ty; and in the other, the continual palling of Water
through the folid Strata.

When we look up to the original Formation of thefe
Sub fiances, we find the Particles, of which they were to
be compofed, in loofe Atoms, diffufed, and floating in that
confufed and irregular Mafs of Matter (for that is evidently



( 7 )

III. The Metals have been confidered in another
- Work ; the Stones and Earths of various Kinds,

therefore, are to be the Subjeft of this Treatife.

IV. AH thefe we are (plainly fpeaking) to judge
formed by the Concretion of Matter pure and equal
in its conftituent Parts, which has been brought to-
gether in that State by mere Afflux, or by means of
fome Kind of Percolation ; or feparated, as before
obferved, from the impurer Matter it was once
among, in fome other Manner \ for perhaps it is
effected in fome Cafes by one, and in others by
other of thefe Means c .



the Senfe of the Word tDljlD which we find tranflated
the Deep) out of which this Earth was to be formed.
The great Agent in gathering thefe fcattered Atoms into a.
Mafs, and feparating them from the Water they were be-
fore floating in, feems to have been what in the Mofaic
Account of the Creation is called the Spirit of the Creator.

On the Action of this powerful Minilter, the conftituent
Particles of Matter were collected into a Body, by their
own Weight feparated themfelves from the Fluid they be-
fore fwam in, and fubfided, fome lboner, fome later, in
Proportion to their different Gravities. By this Means
the Particles of Stone, for Inftance, precipitated themfelves
and formed a Stratum entire, homogene, and pure, before
thofe of Clay began to fubiide, which afterwards falling in
a Mafs on the Stratum of Stone already formed, confri-
tuted another of Clay over it ; and after all this, a Quan-
tity of yet lighter Matter, fettling on the Surface of this
laft formed Stratum, added to that another of what wc
call vegetable Mould, or fomething of that Kind : In this
Manner were the different Strata of the Earth formed, and
the Difference of the Matter, which was to fubfide in dif-
ferent Parts of the Globe, made that almoit infinite Variety
to be found in the Matter of the Strata.

This original Structure of the Earth, however, we are
not now to expect to find it in ; the univerfal Deluge has
made many and wonderful ^Alterations in it, which are now

B 4



( 8 )

g. A(p CdV 07} i&l 7D hetOVj 73? ZTWVOV, Xj 7S



every where obvious to our Senfcs, and are everlafting Re?
cords of that fatal Cataftrophe, of which the Earth, in the
Condition we now fee it, is but the Ruins.

There are many and inconteftible Proofs, that the Sur-
face of the Globe, to a Depth beyond what we ever dig,
was, in the Time of that fatal Calamity, diflblved and re-
duced nearly into the Condition it was in at the Time of
its original Formation ; the ftony, mineral, and even me-
talline, as well as earthy Matter, floating in the Waters
that then covered it, in feparate Particles; thefe, when
the Tumult of that Immenfity of Waters began to ceafe,
were by the fame Laws of Gravity again precipitated, and
fubfided in Proportion to their different Weights but this
not in their original Purity, for the metalline and other
heterogene Matter, nay and even extraneous Subftances,
the Shells of Sea Fifties, &f, if of about equal Gravity,
fubfided among the ftony Matter they were before fufpend-
ed^amidfl^ and made a Part of the Stratum that Precipitation
formed ; the lighter Matters, the Earths, Clays, &c. after-
wards fubfided into other Strata over thefe, and with them
other extraneous Particles and Subftances of Gravities like
theirs : And thus the prefent Surface of the Globe was
•formed, in Strata of different Kinds, and that again ac-
cording to their different Gravities; except where the
Motion of the Waters prevented this Regularity, by lodging
jfometimes on lighter Strata already formed, other whole Beds
of weightier Matter, which its immenfe and irrefiftible Force
had taken up, and now in its abating fuffered to fubfide
3gain. This then, with the Alterations made by Earth-
quakes afterwards burfting, and elevating or finking the
Strata in many Places, is the prefent Condition of the
outer Cruft of this Earth to a certain Depth, far within
which perhaps all our Refearches lie, and in the Mafs of



( 9 )

V, From the Differences of the conftituent Matter,
and Manner of its Coalefcence, the Concrete afiumes
its different Qualities^ as Smootbnefs^ Denftty^ Bright-
nefsy Tranfparenc)\ and the like; and according
as it is more pure and equal, the more does it par-
take of them.



which we find, according to the Syftem of our Author,
the Strata of Stone and Earth, formed by the Concretion of
Matter, equal in Weight and many other of its Properties,
and brought together in that State by mere Afflux, by
means of the Action of Gravity ; and in the perpendicular
Fi (lures of thofe Strata, and fome other Places, Cryftais,
Spars, and other like Subftances, feparated by Percolation
from the arenaceous, argillaceous, and other Matter, among
which they fubfided in their feparated Particles ; and
brought together there by the continual draining of Wa-
ter through the folid Strata, which in its Pafiage had
taken them up with it, and there deferted them in dif-
ferent Manners, and left them to affume the Figures which
are the natural and neceffary Confequences of their Concre-
tions.

Thefe then are the two general Methods of Formation
of thefe Bodies mentioned by our Author; the various
others, which he hints at as taking Place in fome particu-
lar Cafes, are too numerous to be all recited here : Ter-
reftml and fparry Matter, warned from the Strata by the
Water of Springs in their Paffage, and fubiiding at fome
Diftance from their Source, round various Subftances in
Form of Incruftations, is one : Matter of a like Kind, and
feparated in a like Manner, dropping from the Tops of
Caverns with the Water, and either deferted by it at the
Top, and left in Form of Icycles or Stalatta y or at the
Bottom, and left in Manes called Stalagmites •, or Drop-
Jionesy is another very frequent one. Many others there
alfo are - y but the Bodies formed by thefe, as well as thofe,
though not brought together by mere Percolation, or mere
Afflux, are however, in general, of the Number of the Bodies
formed of Particles originally brought together by the one or
|fre other of thefe Means, and therefore very juftly redu-



( 1° )

<§r\ To j$ oXov, cog av ccK^eictg £#5/ x£ r Qv?x-



d P H j) -zryfyg, mg 3*(i[t8 9 roTg

'fyvxgS ywty* >ccdXv{ tccog s Jsy e^a *$v'*? AiUay J<p*



cible under them as general Heads. What the Author
adds of the various Stones and Earths, thus formed, owing
their various Qualities to the Variety and Purity of the
conftituent Matter, and of the Manner of Concretion, is
plain, evident, and inconteftible.

d The Author has here, in his accuftomed clear and fuc-
cinct Manner, given his Opinion in regard to the Caufes
of the Concretion of that Matter he had before defcribed
the Nature of, for the Formation of the Bodies which are
to be the Subject of the prefent Treat ife.

The certain and immediate Caufe of the Cohefion of
thefe Particles, which had before, by their Gravity, been
precipitated from among the fluid Matter they were at
firft fufpended in, was that univerfal Property in Matter
called Attraction. The Preffure of the circumambient
Atmofphere may ferve to account for the Cohefion of large
Mafles of Matter ; but the minute Contacts of leffer Par-
ticles of it, which fometimes cohere with a Force almoft
infinitely greater than the Preffure upon them can be fup-
pofed to influence, reduce us to a Necefiity of having Re-
courfe to this other Power of Attraction, a Property in
all Matter, by which the Particles of Bodies draw one an-
other with a certain Force, which acts infinitely more



( " )

VI. On the whole, the more perfectly the Concretion
was formed, and the more equal in its conftituent Parts
the concreting Matter was, the more does the Con-
crete pofTefs the peculiar Properties which are owing
to that Equality.

VII. d The Concretion is, in fome of thefe Sub-
ftances, owing to Heat, and in others to Cold. There
is perhaps nothing to hinder but that the Coalefcence
of fome Kinds of Stones may be occafioned by the
one, and of others by the other of thefe Caufes :
though that of the Earths of all Kinds feems owing
only to Heat. From thefe contrary Caufes, how-
ever, may happen the Concretion or Diffipation of
contrary Subftances.

intenfely at the Con tail, or extremely near it, than at
any determinate Distance.

How far the Heat, which is apparently manifeft to our
Senfes at great Depths in the Earth, and is from thence,
and from much greater Depths than we are ever likely to
have Opportunities of being acquainted with, continually
pafling upwards to the Surface, may have been concerned
in diftipating the remaining Part of the Water, which had
ferved to bring the Particles of Stones and Earths to-
gether; and, by that means, been inftrumental to the
bringing them into their prefent State ; and how far the
Cold about the Surface may have aflifted in the Forma-
tion of others, by preventing the Diffipation or farther Rife
of their conftituent Particles, which had been warned from
among the Matter of the Strata by the Water which con-
tinually alfo afcends from below towards the Surface, in-
ceffantly pervading them, and detaching and bearing up
with it thefe Particles from among them, is a Subject of
too nice Enquiry, and too long to be particularly decided
here. The bare Mention of it may however ferve to ex-
plain in what Manner Heat and Cold may be concerned
in the reducing fome of the fofTile Subftances into the State
we find them in 5 and how Heat would have deftroyed the



( 12 )

a}. 9 lhirtHig § citrtv or nig tiOoig' cv }§

rjf yy ygtofActci re, £ yto%fw*hh $ Xeiorqji,



Siwctpeig, rx TtTsroieiv, rj isrcco^eiv, y tx fir\ izrcto^etr



very Means of Coalefcence in thofe Subjects, to the For-
mation of which Cold has, according to this Philofophy,
been elTential ; and Cold, on the contrary, mufl have pre-
vented what Heat uninterrupted might have had Power of
doing in the others.

e The Author, having now treated of the conftituent
Matter of thefe foffile Subftances, and the Manner and
Caufes of its Coalefcence, in order to their Formation,
comes here to the Confideration of the Differences of the
diftinct Claffes and feparate Species of them. And thefe
he veryjuftly and philofophically deduces from the dif-
ferent Matter of which they are formed, and the various
Elaborations it has paffed in the Affluxes by which it has
been brought together. The terreflrial Matter, which
ferves as the Bafis of their Formation, he obferves, is very
commonly found differing in Colour, Denfity, &c, and
hence the Stones formed of it have very frequently thefe
Differences, which make the many various Species of the



( 13 )

VIII. There are in Stones of different Kinds many
peculiar Qualities, which arife from this, that therq,
are many very great Differences both in the Matter
and Manner of the Affluxes of the terreftrial Parti-
cles from which they were formed ; of which thofe
in regard to Colour, Tenacity, Smoothnefs, Denfity,
and the like Accidents, are frequent, though thofe
in other more remarkable Properties, are not fo
common e .

IX. Thefe Qualities Stones have, therefore, from
the common Differences of the Matter and Manner
of the Affluxes of their conftituent Parts : But befides
thefe, they have others f which arife from the more
peculiar Powers of their concreted Maffes ; fuch are
their afting upon other Bodies, or being fubjeft, or
not fubjeft to be afted upon by them. Thus fome
are fufible, others will never liquify in the Fire ;
fome may be calcined, others are incombuftible ;

common Strata of them ; but that there are alfo other Va-
rieties in this coalefcent Matter, in regard to more pecu-
liar Qualities, which are more rarely found, but which,
wherever they are, make Differences in the Body formed
from them, of other and more remarkable Kinds, as he
goes on to mew in their proper Places.

Some Editions of this Author have it mo*) ha^ct) and
others -nro^a* ha.<po%«,) in the laft Line of this Sentence ; the
£o«* hatpozai is a very rational and judicious Alteration of De
Laet's, and in all Probability was the true original Reading.

f The common Differences of the more frequent and
large Maffes of Stone having been now accounted for,
from the frequent Diverfities of the Earths from which
they were formed, which are found to differ, like them,
in the common Accidents of Colour, & c. and even much
more than they, in every Pit ; the Author now proceeds
to enumerate the Differences of a more remarkable Kind,
obfervable in the more rare and valuable Species, and oc-



( H )

£ aXkct rimg cpoioi, £ of cuury ry xcujcth £
*GTvgco<rei vrXeixg "tyjvlig OA&tyo&g*

Xt9Sv rcc Ti6e$ua eig icwjxg. tregoi ^ oXkIw tivo,



cafioned, according to his Syftem, by Diverfities of lefs
frequent, and therefore more remarkable Qualities in the
Matter from which they were formed ; which, together
with the more fingular Operations of Nature, in feparating
and afterwards bringing that Matter into a Mafs, have im-
parted to the formed Subftance Qualities, or, as he chufes
to exprefs it by a Word of greater Signification, Powers
more fingular and obfervable than thofe occafioned by left
effential and more common Varieties in both.

s After aligning the Caufes of the various Figures and
Qualities as well of the common, as the more rare and
precious Kinds of Stones and Earths, the Author here en-
ters into a Detail of what they are.

The Emerald is the Stone whofe Properties he begins
with; but as he only hints, in this Place, at what he more
particularly explains himfelf upon fome Pages after, I fhall
referve what I have to offer, on this Subject, to that Part
of the Work, where there will be a more immediate Op-
portunity of comparing it with his own Words.

The Stone he next mentions, and of which he has re-
corded the petrifying Power, but not the Name, is the
Lapis AJpus, or Sarcophagus. The AJJian, or Flem -con-
fuming Stone. The Sarcophagus, Boct. 403. AJius vel
AJJius Lapis, Char It. 25 1. Sarcophagus, five AJJius Lapis,
De Laet. 133. Ajfius Lapis ? Salmaf. in So/in. 847. Plin.
Book 36. Chap. 17.

This was a Stone much known., and ufed among the
Greeks in their Sepultures, and by them called cragaopayo?
from its Power of confuming the Flefh of Bodies buried in
it, which it is faid to have perfectly effected in forty Days.



( H )

and in others, other liich particular Properties are
obfervable : To which it may be added, that in
the Adtion of the Fire on them, they alfo fhew ma-
ny Differences.

X. Some are faid to have a Power of making Water
become of their own Colour, as the Emerald. Others
of petrifying, or converting wholly into Stone, what-
ever is put into VefTels made of them. Others have

This Property it was much famed for, and all the ancient
Naturalifts mention it \ but the other, of turning into Stone
Things put into VefTels of it, has been recorded only by
this Author and Mucianus^ from whom Pliny has copied
it, and from him fome few only of the later Naturalifts.
The Account Mutianus gives of it is, that it converted into
Stone the Shoes of Perfons buried in it, as alfoj the Uten-
fils, which it was in fome Places cuftomary to bury with
the Body, particularly thofe the Perfons while living had
moft delighted in : The Utenfils he mentions are fuch as
muft have been made of many different Materials ; whence
it appears, that this Stone had a Power of confuming only
Flefh ; but that its petrifying Quality extended to Sub-
fiances of very different Kinds. Whether it really pof-
feffed this laft Quality, or not, has been much doubted, and
many have been afraid, from its fuppofed Improbability,
to record it. What has much encouraged a Difbelief of it
is Mutianus 's Account of its thus taking Place on Subjects
of different Kinds and Textures : But this, in my Opinion,
is no Objection at all, and the whole Account, very pro-
bably, true : Petrifactions, in thofe early Days, might not
be diftinguifhed from Tncruftations of fparry or irony Mat-
ter, as even, with many People, they are not to this Day ;
the Incruftations of Spar on Mofs and other Subftances, in
fome Springs, being yet called by many petrified Mols,
&c. and thefe might eafily be formed on Subftances en-
clofed in VefTels, made of this Stone, by Water, if its Si-
tuation was in the Way of its paffing through its Pores,
diflodging from the common Matter of the Stone, and car-
rying witli it fparry or other fuch Particles, and afterwards



( *6 )



leaving them* in Form of Incruftations, on whatever it
found in its Way ; and by this Means Things made of
SuMlances of ever fo different Natures and Textures, which
happened to be enclofed, and in the Way of the Paffage of
the Water, would be equally incrufted with, and in Ap-
pearance turned to Stone, without Regard to their different
Configuration of Pores or Parts.

The Place where this Stone was dug was near Ajfos, a
City in Lycicti from whence it had its Name ; and Boethis
informs us, that in that Country, and in fome Parts of the
Eaft, there were alfo Stones of this Kind, which, if tied
to the Bodies of living Perfohs, would, in the fame Man-
ner, confume their Flefh.

The Stones mentioned next, as having an attractive
Power, are the Load-ftone, Amber, £sfr. but as both theft?
and the I/apis Lydius are hereafter defcribed more at
large by the Author, I fhall refefve to that Place what 1
have to add in regard to them.

h This is one of the many PafTages for which this excel-
lent Author has been cenfured by Perfons who had never
fufficiently findied, or, perhaps, even read him (as I hope
to prove has been the general Cafe in the Accufations he
has been fabjecl: to) and which has been as much mifun-
derftood and mifreprefented as perhaps any one of them all.

Pliny has given the Handle to the Accufations of him
in this Place, by faying, that he and Mutiamis believed
there were Stones which brought forth young. Idem Tbeo-
phrajfus et Mutianus effe allquos lapides qui pariant credunt.
This has been a fufficient Source of Cenfures on this Au-*
thor; moft of thofe who quote, or mention him, never'
having given themfelves the Trouble of learning anything
more of him than what Pliny has told them ; as this, and
many other PafTages, frequently quoted from him, to be

hereafter



( i7 )

an attra£Hve Quality. And others ierve for the
Trial of Metals, as that called the Heraclian, or
Lydian Stone.

XI. The greateft, however, and moft wonderful of
all the Qualities of Stones is that (if the Accounts
of it are truej of thofe which bring forth young.

hereafter confidered, will abundantly prove. But, with
Piiny's Leave, I muft obferve, that I find no Reafon here
to imagine, that Theiphrajius ever believed any fuch Thing ;
he mentions it, on the contrary, as a Thing which he did
not believe ; but which, though, as it was generally reputed
true, and a very remarkable Property of a Stone, he could
not avoid mentioning in a Place where he was profefiedly
writing on that Subject; but would not however let pafs*
even though he did allow it a Place, without frankly ex-
prefling his own Sufpicion that it was but an idle and ground-
kfs Story.

The Stone meant is the /Etites, or Eagle Stone; the
; tes,feu Aquilinus Lapis , Worm. 77. Char It. 31. Lapis
Mtites^ Bott.^js. De Laet. 114. JEtiiee^ Gefn.de Lap k io*
famous for its imaginary Virtues in affifting in Delivery 5
preventing Abortions, and, which it at leaft equally pof-
felTes, difcovering Thieves. That the general Opinion
was long what our Author records as reported of it, is
eafily proved ; and we cannot wonder at that's being firm-
ly believed, when we find fuch Virtues as the other of choak-
ing Thieves, £ffr* as certainly credited, and recorded by
the graveft Authors.

That it was, long after, as well as before this Author's
Time, believed to have this Property of bringing forth, is
evident from the Words prccgnans^ gravidas Uterus^ \[kv^^
& c. fo conftantly ufed in defcribing it. Pliny fays of it, eji
autem lapis ijle praegnans intus, quum qnatias, alio velut in
utero fonante. Diofcorides^ uH'itw u; h^a Ifjcvpuv
fodqxav. And almoft numberlefs Inftances might be brought
of the earlieft as well as later Authors ufing the like Ex-
preflions, and evidently teftifying, that the Stone was, or
had been generally believed to poflefs this fo remarkable
Quality, and which perhaps this Author, who is accufed of
believing, was the very firft who ever doubted,



( r8.)

y cm-lag. yXvypjo) $ eyjft, ^ rogvdtfoi, ^



In order to the eftablifhing a more rational Account of
the Formation of this Stone, it may not be arnifs here to
look into the Formation of Pebbles and Flints in general, of
which Clafs of Stones this is a Species ; and by which we
fhall find, that the Callimiis, or included Stone, is inftead
of a young One, indeed the older of the two, and has had
fome Share in the Formation of its Parent, as the outer
one was generally efteemed, though that has nothing to do
with the Production of it.

The Flints and Pebbles, we now every where fee, were
all formed in the Waters of the Deluge, by the mere Afflux
of their conftituent Matter \ the firft Concretion of this
was generally in fmall Quantity, and formed a little Lump
or Nodule ; this afterwards encreafed in Bignefs by the Ap-
plication of frefh Matter, in different Quantities, and at
different Times to it : If this new Matter happened to be
of different Textures and Appearances, the feparate Quan-
tities, that at times affixed themfelves, became different
Crufts of various Colours, as may be obferved frequently
in our common Pebbles ; if of the fame Nature and Co-
lour, and affixed nearly all at once, the Appofition became
imperceptible afterwards, and the Mafs formed of the
whole appeared a Flint, or Pebble, of regular and fimilar
Subflance : and if, laftly, this Matter, before its Applica-
tion, had received other various coloured Affluxes into it*
it (hews them in the Concrete, in irregular Lines and Striae,
and becomes an Agate, Onyx, or other fuch Stone. In all
thefe Cafes the Matter firft formed into a Mafs, yet re-
mains in Form of a central Nucleus, in or near the Middle
©f the Stone, according to the equal or irregular Quanti-



( '9 )

XII. But the moft known and general Properties of
Stones are their feveral FitnelTes for the various
Kinds of* Work. Some of them are proper fdr en-
graving on, others may be fhaped by the Turner's
Tools, others may be cut or fawed : Some alfd
there are which no Iron Inftruments will touch ; and
others which are very difficultly, or fcarce at all to
be cut by them 1 .



ty of the additional Matter which formed each Cruft ; this
being fometimes all of the fame Colour with that Nucleus*
made it unperceivable, but fometimes, as before obferved,
Was of different Colours, and left it evident to the Eye.

This Nucleus in fome, indeed moft of thefe MafTes
being of the Texture of the reft, has remained in its Place*
and become a vifible Spot of equal Hardnefs and Beauty
with the reft of the Stone ; in others, after the Application
of fome, or all the outer Crufts, it has fhrunk into a
fmaller Cbmpafs, detached itfelf from the inner Cruft, and
become a loofe^ feparate Stone, rolling about in the Cavity*
now too large for it, and rattling in it when fhaken : And
this is our iEtites ; and the central Nucleus fo detached*
;md fhrunk, its Callimus. In others, this central Nucleus
has fallen into loofe 3 fandy$ or earthy Matter, and remain 4
ing in that Form, loofe in its Cavity, made what is called
the Geodes, or baftard Eagle Stone. The Geodes, and the
Eagle Stone, fo much renowned for Virtues, and fo fa-
buloufly talked of as to its Origin, are therefore no other
than common Pebbles, the central Nuclei of which have*
from the different Nature and Texture of the Matter
they were formed of, detached themfelves from the fuper-
added Crufts, and either fhrunk, on becoming more dry$
into fmaller Dimenfions ; or fallen into the original Grit$
or fandy Matter, of which they were firft compofed.

1 1 cannot but obferve from this Paflage of our Author.,
that, fo early as in his Time, not only very many Species of
precious Stones were in Ufe, and their different Degrees of
Hardnefs familiarly known* but that the various Manners
of working them were alfo well underftood > even better

C a



( 20 )

iy. Ei<ri q 7erA«'#£ aT^cu ^ rcwTtzg ihorvHag
Sl&tpogGU. cu p xv k£ s ffiupsijoc, i(j rag (ncXr^o-*
Tyt&gi [AuXotfiorq'&g ^ Xetir^g, ^ rocXXcc rol
roiccorci, 'ZdOcrjov, , zr\eiO(riv \jz& u^xxc 'W ' k

is. Kcu cvloig ys k$ s tottqv gAov, e£ w JV £
vofA,ct<r(Jfycu \i6oJcfttca, IlaaJcw re JJevJeXiKoov, %
X'tuv re ^ OyGaiKcov.



than in the fucceeding Ages, for he is here clear in the Di-
ftindlion between the yKvjfloi and to^ei/Io*, which much later
Writers of his Nation are very juftly accufcd of having
confounded ; for the yhvwlov and rop&vlw of the Greeks, how-
ever confufedly mifunderftood by fome of them, and ufed
as fynonymous Terms by others, are really Words of di-
ffinct and determinate Senfe, and fignify the Ccelatura and
< TGrnatura of the Lathis ; which, I think, it is evident
from this Paflage, was well known to this Author, however
it came to be forgotten afterwards.

k The Author, having now mentioned feveral very re-
markable Properties in Stones, and their general Characters
as to Difference of Texture, from the different Ways they
are to be worked on, proceeds here to relate the many other
Differences they have in their feveral peculiar Qualities,
which they owe, as he has before eftabliflied it, to the dif-
ferent Matter and Manner of the Affluxes of their confti-
tuent Parts, and fuch of which as arife from the more com-
mon Varieties of terreftrial Matter, in Colour, &c. he
again obferves, are common to many and great Quantities.

This is only repeating, in its due Place, and at the Head
of that Clafs of Stones to which it properly belongs, what
he had before given as a Part of his general Syftem : it was
long, however, before this Paflage was in a Condition to be
thus underftood, for after the Word veevras, there was by
Defecl: in the Copy a Gap left, which fome Editors had
filled up with the Word &apo$a» only, but others, finding



XIII. There are alfo, befides thefe, many other
Differences obfcrvable in them, according to their
ieveral Qualities ; of which thofe in regard to Co-
lour, Hardnefs, Softnefs, Smoothnefs, and the like
Accidents, becaufe of the Number and Diverfity of
thofe Qualities, happen to many k .

XIV. And to fome indeed through whole Coun-
tries ; from which Quarries of them have obtained
their Names as the Parian, the Pentelkan, the
Chian, and the Theban \



the Hiatus too large for that alone, have given their Opinion
that the Word ihovflat is alfo to be added : in that Man-
ner I have written it, and it appears evidently to me to
have filled up a Gap in the Senfe, as well as in the Writing, .
by making the Beginning, as well as all the reft of the Sen-
tence, clearly refer to what I have obferved the Author to
have faid before, Page 13. and of which this is no more
than a Recapitulation in its proper Place.

k The Author here gives an Account of the various
Kinds of Marble and Alabafter known in his Time ; and
even fo early as that, we find the Parian well known, and,
as may very rationally be guelTed from its being named be-
fore all the other Kinds, moft efteemed of any. This was
originally dug only in the Ifland of Paros, and the Strata
of it were always found fo cracked, that it was fcarce ever
to be had in Pieces of more than about five Feet long, fo
that the fineft Blocks of it juft ferved for Statues of a natu-
ral Size : they were extremely valued for the Elegance of
their Colour, and the excellent Polifh they would take.

A Marble of this Kind, but perhaps not exactly the
fame with this of the Ancients, is now dug in many Partj
of Italy, and much efteemed for the fame Qualities.

The Pentelican, the Kind he next mentions, is now
wholly unknown, and has been fo for many Ages.

The Cbian was a dark colour'd Marble, fo named from the
Iflani of CbioS} where it was dug ; fomething of the Kind of

£3



( 22 )

lL Ka) cog l cv AlyvTrjcp &r^ug d\aCct<?{J~

TVS* £ ^ |r©v fiifag Tspvf)' ^ o tS t\s(pavji

$f*>oi((^, o Xzgvirqg xaA^©"' & V Ttrvihw (pari

Kj TV\ VJVKVOTqll T(S Tlct^/Ob, T Q KXtpOT'/jjct fAOVCV B^OOV



the Lapis Obfidianus of /Ethiopia <> and, like it, in fome
Degree tranfparent.

The Theban is a Marble well known to this Time ; it
is red, variegated with other Colours, and is of two Kinds :
The one fofter, and marked only with yellow 5 which is
the Bracatello of the modern Italians ; the other extremely
hard and variegated with Black, White, and many other
Colours ; This is the Pyrrhopcecilus and Syenites of Pliny,
and the Granate of the Moderns. Many of the Works
of the Ancients in Greece* Italy, and elfewhere, are of this
Marble.

The Alabafter is the Alabajlrites, Bod. 490. De Laetl
j66. Worm. 42. MatthioL 1386. It is a well known
gtone, white, and approaching to the Nature of Marble,
but much fofter. The Alabaftrum and Aiabajlriies of Na-
turalifts, though by fome efteemed fynonymous Terms,
and by others confounded with one another, are different
Subftances ,* the Alabajirum is properly the foft Stone, of a
gypfeous Subftance, burning eafily into a Kind of Plaifter ;
and the Alabajlrites the hard, bearing a good Polifh, and
approaching to the Texture of Marble. All the later Au-
thors confirm what Theofthrajlus here mentions, of its be-
ing found about Thebes. The Quarries of it there are not
yet exhaufted, and probably will not be in many Ages.
This Stone was by the Greeks called alfo fometimes Onyx,
and by the Latins , Marmor Onychites ', from its Ufe in
making Boxes for preferving precious Ointments, which
Boxes were commonly called Onyxes and Alabafters. Thus



( 23 )

XV. In /Egypt, about Thebes, there is alfo found
the Alabafter, which is dug in large MafTes ; and
the Chernites, which refembles Ivory, and in which,
it is faid, Darius was buried as alfo the Poms,
which in Colour and Hardnefs emulates the Parian
Marble, though Angular in its remarkable Light-
nefs, in which it refembles the Tophus, and on Ac-
count of which the /Egyptians generally ufed it in
the Partitions of their more elegant Edifices.



Diofcorides clxccQocr^rv); b %a>&{t>wt oral;. And hence have
been a thoufand Miftakes in the later Authors of lefs read-
ing, who have mifunderftood Pliny, and confounded the
Onyx Marble, as the Alabafter was frequently called, with
the precious Stone of that Name. This Author, however,
cannot be accufed of having given any Occafion to the Con-
fufion ; for though the Onyx was, in his Time, fometimes
called alfo Alabafter, as well as the Alabafter Onyx, from
their common Ufe in thefe Boxes, he here clearly explains
himfelf as to which Kind he is treating of, by obferving,
that it is that which is dug in large MafTes, by way of
DiftindHon from the Onyx or Alabafter Gem, as what we
now call only the Onyx was then fometimes called.

The Chernites, or Chermites, was a white Marble, ufed
in the Sepultures of the ancient Greets, &c. and about
which there have been many Miftakes among the later
Authors, which, as the Species of Marble is now unknown
among us, it would be but idle to enquire into.

The Porus was alfo a Marble much in Efteem with the
Ancients, but unknown to us. Its peculiar Property, as
our Author obferves, was its Lightnefs. It cut well, and
bore a tolerable Polifti, and the Statues, EsjV. made of it,
were common in Greece, and called llu-ux, as thofe of the
Parian Marble were called Flags*. The Tophus, to which
our Author compares this Marble for Lightnefs, is a rough
Stone of the Pumice Kind, brittle, and eafily crumbling
into Powder. It is not much known in England, but com-
mon in Germany, where it is ufed inftead of the Pumice,
and called Topffjitin and Tugstein, This was a Stone well.



( 24 )

is-'. EJg/Vfc^) Kj p'tXag ctVTdh Sl&tpavvjg, opowg

Al ft iv mcw^) dic&(po{)cc< 9 Kctdd7rzg eAe%0g
ffliVQTSQcu nXetocriv. cu '^xf rdg SiwdfjLetg m rcig
ttpifflp&S* chc tri 7s7g oXc;g \&rdgxxctv, Qwj-



known among the Greeks^ and was what they called the
Porus, without any Addition ; whereas the other, here de-
fcribed among the Marbles by the Author, was called the
Pgrian Marble, from its Refemblance to this Porus. The
dark trahfparent Stone, next mentioned, was probably of
the Obfidianus Kind, as well as the Chian. The Antients
had two or three of thefe dark Marbles, of fine Texture,
- i$ great Ufe among them. They bore a fine Polim, were
tranfparent in fome Degree when cut into thin Plates, and
reflected the Images of Things as our Looking-glafTes do :
the fineft Kind was, for this Reafon, called o^etvos dkb lyq
which was afterwards written by the Latins^ Opfia-
nus, Opfidianus^ and Obfidianus. And the true Origin of
the Name being forgotten from the falfe fpelling the Word,
After-ages thought it had received it from one Obfi-
$ti5> whom they imagined the firil Finder of it.

m The Author, having now gone through the common
Differences of the Strata of Stone, arifing from common
Caufes, and particularly mentioned, and in few Words
defcrjbed the various Species of Marble known in his Time,
€omes now to the Consideration of certain more extraordi-
nary Qualities in Stones of fmaller Size, arifing from the
Powers of more particular Combinations of Matter in their
Formation. The particular Stones he mentions in this
Place, as poffefling thefe Powers, are hereafter treated of
more at large. I fhall therefore refer, for what I have
to obferve in regard to them, to their proper Places,
where they are feparately defcribed. To thofe particu-
larly named the Author adds a great Nupiber, which he alfo
Jiereafter defcribes, in the Words tJk »eta» s-q>%a.y\ha yxwrjiw,
^rhich I have chofen to tranilate u tfrit are cut as Gems^'



( 25 )

XVI. There is alfo found in the fame Place a
tranfparent Stone, fomething like the Chian ; and in
others, there are many other Kinds.

XVII. Thefe then are the Differences which have
been mentioned as common to many Stones. But
thofe which arife from the particular Powers m before
named, are lefs frequent \ nor do they, like thefe,



not as the literal Meaning of the W ords might feem to
imply, limiting what are added only to thofe on which
Seals were engraven, [t is evident, the Author meant
himfelf no fuch Limitation, fince he has afterwards defcrib^
ed, among the Stones of this Clafs, many which he exprefsly
fays were too fmall for this particular Ufe. The Reafon of
his ufing that Word in this Place is, that the Greeks had
no particular Name for the pellucid Stones, which we call
diftinctly Gems \ they called all Stones ; whether large or
fmall, hard or foft, precious or common, by the general
Name TuOo^ and diftinguifhed them, one from another, by
their Epithets only, as hcttpwU &c. and as the general Ufe of
what we call Gems, and they had no particular Name
for, was the ferving for Seals - y they fometimes, inftead of
diftinguifhingthem by particular or defcriptive Epithets, cal-
led them Seal Stones, and hence the Word Seal Stone aftayU
or <r<fgctyih f ov became with them a common Word for what
we call Gem ; and in, that Senfe it is evidently ufed here
by this Author.

Moft of the Stones of this Clafs were found to be of fo
campoct a Texture, as to refift the Force of Eire, at leaft
of common Fires, and even the ftrongeft known in this
Author's Time ; the folar indeed, which we are able to
throw on Bodies, by reflecting Burning-glaiTes, no Stone,
not even the Diamond, in all Circumftances and Pofitions,
can withftand : But as fome Stones, which he had yet to
treat of, were fubjecr. to great Changes, from the Action of
Fire a fuch as was then commonly ufed on certain Occa-
fions, whether culinary, or for the melting of Metals,
thefe he firft chufes to defcribe^ and proceeds to give the
feveral Differences of.



( 26 )

vrdftTrav eicrt Xj <r^iK^ y KuQd7re^ ifrs, <r/Jt,d()cty$@» 9
£ 7d QdgSioVy Kj o dv6()ct%> itj q <rdir(pei(i@* 9 £
%t$ov Xofca r etg rd crQy/LyiSia, yhv7f]o)v. oi y (£ c»

VOTS£ & Xj TrgodTvv 'iccog faKjeoVy rivctg x^ 7TQ(rctg
e%X<riv hctcpo&g.

ifl't Kd]d r Trugcociv ol $j ty^qv^) j£ pewiVj
totnti^ o\ [Aelct\X<&TDi* pet dfjuct tm d^yv^y x^ red
XuXxa Xj tn^ta n % n q ok txtgov. el mvvv

oict r vI(>otvi& r \SGFct(yxfivioQv> etre Xj ol couTctg.
dxrcujTcag 3 ^ ol 7rvPG[tdxQi } (c ol [jlvXIcu pixciv, o7g
37rilt6ia<riv ol Kuiovjeg.



n The Author is here treating of the various Kinds of
Sparse formed near the Veins of different Metals, and af-
fuming their Colours from, and partaking of the Natures
of the particular Metals in the Mines of which they are
found. All thefe are formed by the Percolation and Afflux
of their conftituent Matter, which is taken up by the Wa-
ter continually pervading the Strata, and in its Way fepa-
rated from the groffer Particles it was at firft repofited
among, and mixed with ; and finally tinged with a Colour
from, and in fome Degree impregnated with the Virtues of
the metalline Matter, among which it is deferted by the
Water in which it was before fufpended., and left to co-
agulate, and affume the Form naturally arifing from the
Concretion of its Parts : Where thefe Spars are formed
out of the Reach of metalline Matter, and have received,
in their Paffage through the Strata., no Impregnations from



( 27 )

happen to whole Strata, or vaft Mattes : Some of
the Stones, in which they take Place, are very
fcarce and fmall, as the Emerald, the Carnelian, the
Carbuncle ', the Sapphire, and, in general, all that
are cut as Gems ; and fome of them are found in di-
viding other Stones.

XVIII. Some few of thefe Stones there are, which
are fubjedt to the Force of Fire, and may be burnt.
Thefe fhall be firft treated of, in Confederation of
what their Differences are.

XIX. In regard to the Action of Fire on them, fome
are fufible, and melt by it \ as the metalline Kinds.
For the Stones, which partake of the Nature of
Metals, as Silver, Copper, or Iron, n melt in the Fur-
naces with them ; either by means of the Humidity
of the metalline Matter they partake of, or of their
own Nature : And in this Manner the Pyritte alfo,
and thofe Kinds of them called the Molares, melt
with the Matter they are laid on in burning n .



it, they are white ; which is the natural Colour of their
conftituent Particles ; but where they are formed in or
about Mines, they, as our Author very juftly remarks,
partake of the Nature of, and, in fome Degree, owe their
Form and Mode of Exiftence to the particular Metal of the
.Mi tie. Their Shape and Virtues are often given them by
the metalline Particles mixed with them in their Concre-
tions, their Colours always ; and that in a ftronger or
fainter Degree, as there has been more or lefs of that Mat-
ter mingled in their MafTes.

If the metalline Particles are in the Mixture in any con-
fiderable Quantity, the whole affumes a Shape peculiar to
the Metal to which they belong ; if that be Lead, the
fparry Concretions are cubic ; if Iron, rhomboidal ; and if
Ti?:, they {hoot into the Form of quadralateral Pyramids.
Thefe are the Metals of which we can pretty certainly



(28)

* . O* 3 5 Ae/*<n wdflag Tqxeddg, ttxIo)
§ fActgfAagx . tStov 3 fcaSfcrt^cQ^, £ Hoy/ay

yive&'cot* Sonets oiv XToog oKcog cJJn ?rA«0V



judge, from the Figure of the Spar about the Mine ; for the
others., though they influence the {hooting of it in no lefs
Degree, yet they do not always throw it into fuch deter-
minate or regular Figures.

But if the metalline Particles, afTumed into the Spar at
the Time of its Concretion, have a very great Power in
determining it to a certain Figure, the Influence they have
over it, in regard to Colour, is much greater, as all that
it has of that is wholly owing to them, and as they are in
greater or leffer Quantities in it, they give it different
Degrees of it, from the flighteft Tinge to the deepeft Colour.

What Metal has been concerned in effecting this Change
of Colour, is not lefs eafily and certainly difcoverable from
the Colour itfelf, than what has influenced the Shape, from
the Shape. If Lead has furniflied the metalline Particles,
the Spar is yellow ; if Iron, red ; if Tin, black ; if Copper,
it is either greenifh or bluifh, according to the Quality of
the Menftruum Nature has furnifhed for diflblving the
Particles of that Metal, and bringing them into a State of
mixing in the Concretion ; for Acids and Alkalis both
diflblve Copper, but with this Difference of Colour, that
the Solution with an Acid is green, and that with an Alkali
is blue.

Though this Author was perfectly right, therefore, in
his Opinion of thefe Subftances partaking of the Nature of
the Metals they were found among ; he errs in imagining
that they are fufible, and melt with thofe Metals ; he may
very well, however, be pardoned in this, fince it has been
an Error which many later Authors, who had more Op-
portunities of informing themfelves of the Truth than he
can reafonably be fuppofed to have had, have alfo fallen
into ; nay, and many who imagine they underftand thefe
Things very well, from the conftant Ufe of it in fluxing



(2 9 )

XX. Some abfolutety affirm, that all Stones will
melt in the Fire except Marble, which by burning
is reduced to Afhes : But this is faying abfolutely,
and of all, what ought only to be faid in general,
and of the greater Number.



the Ores of Metals, believe the fame of it even yet. This
is however an abfolutely erroneous Opinion, for Spar is not
fufible, but calcines in the Fires ufedfor melting the Ores of
Metals. The Ufe it is of, in the fufing them is this : Thofe
Ores are frequently clogged and loaded with Sulphurs, which
make them very difficult of Fufion ; and the Calx of Spar is of
the fame Ufe in that Cafe, that Lime, or any other fixed
Alkali would be ; that is, it abforbs thofe Sulphurs ; and by
that means deftroying what would impede the Fufion of
the Ore, does in fome 5enfe affift its melting ; but no one,-
who ever faw the Fufion of Ore with its Spar about it,
ever yet obferved the leaft Particle of that to melt.

The Pyritae and Molarcs, as many Kinds of them were
originally called, are no more capable of Fufion in the
Fire than the Spars. They are Maffes of mineral, faline,
and fulphureous Matter, either in detached Pieces of dif-^
ferent Figures and Textures, or in whole Veins. The
various Kinds of them contain different Quantities of dif-
ferent Metals, but generally too fmall to be worth the
Charge and Trouble of working ; Gold, Silver, Copper,
and Iron are frequently found thus in them. But the
principal Subftanees of which they are formed are Salts,
Sulphurs, and Earths. The common Copperas of our
Shops is made from different Kinds of them, in different
Quantities ; and no Species yields it in fueh Plenty as the
echinated Kind of the Chalk Pits of Kent and Surrey. The
Marchafites, as thofe are pai cicularly called which are not
in detached Pieces, but run in Veins, or fill the perpendi-
cular Fiffures of Strata, often abound with Copper, and
with a mineral, arfenical Juice, feldom found in the others ;
fome of thefe alfo contain Antimony ; others Bifmuth, and
fome Iron and Tin. When they are very rich in thefe
Metals, they lofe the Name of Marchafites, and are
5



( 3° )

o itj Ac Joy i$lvn ol rivig 1^vF^(T[jlbvoi TvF%dvx(riv.

73 TTjKTVVy iVMfAOV BIVCC4 GStt, yjij V^OTVjQ, \%{



called Ores. The Mineral, called in fome Parts of Eng-
land Mundick, is of this Kind, containing Copper and
fometimes other Metals ; but the Sulphur is fo abundant in
thefe Kinds of Ores, that they are not to be fluxed with-
out great Trouble ; the Addition of Lime, or fome fimi-
lar Subftance, is often neceflary to bring them to fufe at
all, and at beft they are the moft troublefome, and leaft
profitable, unlefs where very rich indeed, of any Ores in
the World.

This Author however was not fingle, though erroneous, in
his Opinion of the Pyritae and Molares melting in the Fire j
his Mafter Artjiotle had probably led him into it, who has,

JHet. L* 4* c • ^' TJjx/Iat & % o TuGo^ o GJvglfjuaxoS) aire ratfyw
guv> to o\ 'm^fyv^evov otocv guy tbuKw yifvilca cxKr^bv, ecl pvj^.cu
TqjCQvlau are £e?v.

° Some few Species of Flints are Subftances of this Kind,
and above all others that found in whole Strata (not in de-
tached Mafles or Nodules, as the common Flints are) and
called Chert or Whern in fome Parts of Englcmd ; a Lump
of this, put into a moderate Fire, will, as the Heat pene-
trates it, fly to Pieces in Scales or thin Flakes, which fall
off, from Time to Time, till the whole is reduced to a
Mafs of coarfe Powder ; but it is an Error to infer from
this, that thefe Stones are not fufible ; for the fame Stone,
or even the very Powder, into which it has been mattered
by the Fire, put into a Crucible with Salt of Tartar, or any
other fixed alkaline Salt, and placed in a ftronger Fire,
will melt and boil in the Veflel, and form a very good
Glafs,as I have many Times experienced.


( 3* )

XXI. For fome burft 0 and fly in Piedes in the
Fire ; as, though not fufible, yet not of Power-
wholly to refill the Force of the Heat : which is
alfo the Cafe in earthen Veffels : And this is an
Effeft no way repugnant to Reafon ; for thefe are
abfolutely dry, whereas whatever is fufible muft be*
at leaft in fome Degree, moift, and retain, to the
Time of its Fufion, more or lefs of its Humidity.



To learn the real Caufes of the different Degrees of this
Fufibility in different foffile Subftances, it will be neceffa-
ry, firft, to confider the Caufe of their Solidity, or, in
other Words, of their Cohefion ; and this, as I have before
obfervedj is that Power refiding in all Matter, called At-
traction.

This Power, it has alfo already been obferved, is infi-
nitely ftrongeft at the Point of Contact. ; and therefore the
Cohefion of all Bodies muft be in Proportion to the Num-
ber of Points in which their conftituent Particles touch
one another. Thofe Particles therefore which have the
leaft Solidity, with relation to their Surfaces, though they
attract leaft at Diftances, yet, when they touch, cohere
the moft intimately ; but where, from contrary Caufes, the
Cohefion is fmall, as in fpherical Bodies, whofe Surfaces
can only touch in a Point, their Particles eafily recede from
one another on any Impulfe, and whenever they are fet in
Motion, Fluidity takes Place.

By what means Fire is an Agent in bringing Things in-
to this State, is eafily underftood. Its Particles, which are
very powerful and very active, infinuate themfelves into
the Subftance of the Matter to be melted, break and divide
its Particles, and occafion a much fmaller Contact of
Parts than there was before, and of courfe a weaker Co-
hefion, more fiery Particles continually getting in as the
Matter continues on the Fire; more and more diminifh the
De gree of Contact:, till at laft there is not enough of it to
keep the Particles from rolling one over another, that is
coming into a State of Fufion.



( 32 )

fcS'. <fra<r) J) ^ r TjAixpivw rxg j^ey umfyif>cu-
n£jg TsXtwg, to? cL%(>uxs sivcu p; Kci!&G(>i%9ev&,i
frdkw Kgj QuvMfiu&iv&g' rxg 3 £ ficthcucoZJsgxg <£

i^cugsicQg r vy^oTTjjoc. QjfJtJoouvet 3 t*V jfc nvKvxg
^m^cuvofiiv^s cncXtyivvecQg' rig 3 fMVXS, % uv y
Qvvig mown}, 3'^cw^^g iivcu (c rvjitlxg*

xy. "Evict 3 r dvQ^cxSv^J ry xcwcret,

Kj $ict{3/JX<ri isrAelo) %oovov> cccnreg ci Bi'vctg ci>

t« fAtjctXAa 7tj £g 0 'zroja/AQg Kojatpeget. ku/.ov^)
ft hay cLvQyuceg cflnjeOao-i, <£ fftfi^C/ T*'r*
gctV <£>f0-<£ Tig", eir* *b?n)fJLaQcuvov^> ^ tpcLxiv xeuov^t
dio % <z?oAvv x^oyoy r, x^ig* q $' otrpyj Qagtta



This is the general Caufe of the Fufion of foflile and
other Subftances, and the different Degrees of Fire, they
require to bring them to it, are proportioned to their dif-
ferent Contact of Parts or Degrees of Cohefion \ fuch as
have leaft Contacts melt fooneft, and for this Reafon Lead
melts more readily than Gold : the different Gravity of the
Subftances has nothing to do in this, fince it is not accord-
ing to the Quantity of Matter they contain, but the Num-
ber of Points in which the Particles of that Matter touch
one another,- and for this Reafon it is that Lead, which
is heavier than moft other Metals, notwithstanding its fu-
perior Quantity of Matter, melts alfo more readily than
moft others.

p The Stone here defcribed is the Lapis Thracius of the

Ikter



( 33 )

XXIL It is laid alfo, that on expofmg to tile
Sun's Rays fome arc wholly dried up, fo as to be
rendered ufelefs, unlefs macerated and impregnated
again with Moifture ; while others, by the fame
means become fofter and more brittle * It is evident
that the Humidity is extracted in both thefe Cafes %
the Difference is, that the more denfe and compaft
harden by this drying; whereas the loofer, and
thofe of a lefs firm Texture, become more brittle
and foft by it.

XXIII. Some of the mere brittle Stones there
alfo are, which become as it were burning Coals*
when put into a Fire, and continue fo a long time;
of this Kind are thofe about Bena, found in Mines*
and wafh'd down by the Torrents, for they will take
fire on throwing burning Coals on them, and con-
tinue burning fo long as any one blows them ; after-
wards they will deaden, and may after that be made
to burn again : They are therefore of long Continu-
ance, but their Smell is troublefome and difagreeable p*



later Authors, a Stone much talked of in all the Writings
of the Naturalifts, and by fome allowed a Place in the Ca-
talogues of the Materia Medica^ but now wholly unknown.
There is, however, no queftion, from our Author's Ac-
count of this Subftance, but that it was the very Thing
afterwards well known under that Name. Bina^ or Be-
na^ the Place he mentions where it was found, was a
Town in Thracia 5 and every Particular he has recorded
of it has been fince applied to the Lapis Thracius : It's in-
flammable Quality, difagreeable Smell, and the Manner in
which it was found, were the fame with thofe of the
'Thracius of the later Writers. This v/as well known ioDi-
cfecrides, Sec, as is evident from what they have faid of it*
but there has been fo much Confufioh about it among the

D



( 34 )

*Ov 3 KdXxcri azrTvov, eg IJv cv roTg pzlctxhoig,
TOiSrog 0^cf.K07reig ^ QwjjiQeig icuutqv, cv t«

Xj isrt/yiivy rig q .

Writers fince, that little more than the Name has been
handed down to us ; feme have been of opinion, that it
was a kind of Coal, others of "Jet, and others of the Am-<
f elites* What is to be gathered from the Antients about
it is, that it was a hard bituminous Suhftance, very in-
flammable, of a brittle Texture, and of a very difagree-
able Smell when burning. It was fometimes dug, as our
Author obferves, but principally found in the River Pontus,
into which it had probably been warned from the Banks,
in the Strata of which it was originally lodged, by the darn-
ing of the waves in Storms, or diflodged by other Acci-
dents. As is alfo the Cafe with the Pyrites, Lucius Hcl-
montu, Amber, and many other of the foflile Subftances,
which are now generally found on the Shores of the Sea
or large Rivers; and of which a diligent Enquirer will
always find a much larger Quantity in the Strata of the
neighbouring Land, than are feen warned on the Shore,
and generally many Handing out from among the Matter
of the Strata of the Shores or adjacent Cliffs, and ready
to be warned out by Rains, or diflodged by the Earth of
the Strata cracking after Froft, and fo rolled down into the
River, tho' in their natural Situation out of the reach of
its Waves ; the dafhing of which in Storms and high
Tides againft the Banks, are the more common Means
of getting them out.

Moft of the Editions have it dtyuxxfm rjj fybuSvu ; Sal-
mafius firft reffored the Paffage to its original Senfe, by al-
tering it to xMvtrtiy which there is no room to doubt was
the original Reading. Nor is that the only Thing in which,
this Sentence is indebted to that excellent Critick for re-
ftoring it to its native Senfe and Purity, as indeed are
many other Parts of this Author's Works,

q The Spimis, or, as the excellent Critic juft men-
tioned would have it called, Spilus y w^of, was another in-



( 3* )

XXlV. That alfo which is called the Splnus^ is
found in Mines. This Stone cut in Pieces and
thrown together in a Heap, expofed to the Sun,
burns i and that the more, if it be moiftened or
fprinkled with Water



durated Bitumen of the Lapis Thracius Kind, of which
Ibeophra/ius is not the only Author who has recorded this
memorable Quality, Which we have no Right either to
confirm or queftion, as the Subftance is now wholly un-
known to us»

The general Characaeriftics of thefe fohd Bitumens, the
Gals of Bodies the Author is here describing, are, that
they are denfe, dry, and friable Subftances, eafily inflam-
i mable, fuftble by Fire, and condenfing by Cold. They
are foluble in Oil, not to be difunited by Water, as the
argillaceous Earths are, and yield in Diftillation a large
Quantity of fetid Oil.

The Bodies of thisClafs, known to the Antients and un~
derftood under this general Name, were, behde the c ihra-
cius and Spinus^ I. The dfphaltum, called alfo Biturncrt
Judaicwn) and by Sorapion^ Gutnmifunerum > this was found
in Diofcc?"idcs , s Time about Sic/on in Phoenicia^ Zant in
Sicily , and in Judtza* The Account in the facred W ritirigSj
of its having been ufed as Mortar in the building; the
* Tower of Babel, is unqueftionable ; Strabo and others of
\ the Antients afferting, that it was found plentifully about
Babylon ; and that the Buildings of the old Babylon were
of Brick cemented with this Subftance.

2. The Piffafphaltos$ found, according to Diofcorides^
in the Ceraunian Mountains of Apollonia ; this was not fo
hard as the former, and of a morepleafant Smell; it is now
found in the Campania of Rome, near a fmali Town cal-

i led Catbo, where it ouzes through the Crannies of Rocics^
: and is at firft of the Confiftence of Honey, but foon dries
and becomes hard.

3. Amber* of which the Author treats hereafter in this
Work*

4. Jet, the Gagates of Diofcorides, and black Amtgr
0f the Shops j a dry, hard, fliining Subftance, €>f a hm

D 2



( 36 )

TWMGg, anew?®* oov. yw\) ^ xt&> cv t| wo*-



black, burning like Pitch, and emitting a thick black
Smoke. Jts Name it had from Gagis, a Town in Lyeia,
where it was originally found ; it is now dug in France v
Germany, Sweedcn* and fome Parts of England.

5. Cannel Coal, the Ampelites of Di:fcorides, cal-
led alfo Terra Pharmacith by fome Authors, tho' its Ufe
in Medicine at prefent is almofr. wholly unknown. This
is as hard as the foregoing, and takes an excellent Polifh ;
we have it in many Parts of England^ where it is turned
into Toys of many Kinds. And

6. The Lithanthrax, or common Coal, well known
to all.

Thefe were the folic! Bitumens, known as fuch to the
Antients, and which tho' thev v/ere not all known fo
early as in this Author's Days, I judged it not amifs thus
fhordy to mention here, that it may be obferved from
their Qualities and Defcriptions, and thofe of the two
mentioned by the Author, that it was neither of thefe
that he knew by either of the two Names of thofe he
has d jfcribed.

1 The Lipara Stone (fo called from Lipara, one of the
iEolian Iflands, from whence it was ufuaily brought among
the Pumices of which thofe Iflands always furnifhed a large
Quantity) is a fmaU Stone, ufually about the bignefs of
a Filbert, of an irregular and uncertain Shape, and po-
rous friable Confritution, like that of the Pumices, but
more eafily crumbling to Powder between the Fingers
than even the fofteil Kinds of them. The Colour is ge-
nerally of a dulky grey, and the whole external Face of
it evidently fhews that it has fuffcred Changes by the Fire*
The Antients had thefe Stones in great Efteem, and Pliny
has recorded an idle Tradition concerning them, which I
iuppofe was then generally believed, fuffita ea.omnes be/lias
evQcaii, but at prefent they are fo little regarded, that



( 37 )

XXV. r But the Li-para Stone empties itfelf as it
were in burni'ng, and becomes like the Pumice, chan-
ging at once both its Colour and Denfity for before
burning it is black, imooth, and compact. This
Stone is found in the Pumices, feparately, in different



the Writers on thefe Subjects have even forgot to name
them \ and Wonnius, the only Naturalifl: of the more late
ones, who had actually received them, and gave them a
Place in his Mufeum, and a Defcription in the Hillory of
it, feems not to have known that it ever had any Name
at all. I don't know that any body elfe has obferved that
his lapilli cinerei /iitnee, are the Liparis or Lipara:us La-
pis of the Antients ; but his Defcription fo exadtly agrees
with fome Stones I have, which I received with fome Pu-"
mices from Hccla, and have always judged to be the Liparai,
that I make not the leaft queftion of their being the very
S.ones : His Words are, Ejujdem montis ( fc, /Ltnce ) et ab
eodem tracfu, ad me delati Junt Lapilli, crncrei, objeuri &
adujli, qui vi ignis naturam juam plane amijerunt, et pcroji
Junt redditi, Iceves & inequales, it a ui ad natura?n Pumi^
cum quam proxime accedant, Jed Jriabiliores Junt iff Jacile in
minutiores paries, vel digitorum cG?npreffu djfiliant.

Befides thofe which I have from Iceland, I have fome-
times feen of them among Quantities of Pumice. I can-
not fay I ever had the Fortune to find any one in a Mate
of the Pumice, or ever had an Opportunity of obferving
their Texture before they had palled the Fire ; but the
Account this Author gives of them may probably enough
be true in both Circumflances ; it being very common to
obferve fmall Stones of the Flint, Pebble, and other
Kinds, immerfed in Maffes of a different Texture ; and
the intenfe Degree of Heat thefe, with the Pumices, rnufl
have fuffered, might very probably effect Changes as great
or much greater, than between the prefent State of this
Stone and what this Author defcrib-.s to have been its
Original.

As to what regards the Pumice itfelf, as the Author
hereafter defcribes it more at large, I mall referve to tha^
Place what I have to obferve about it.

D 3



( 38 )

$M)tyfi$j*(& oc^oGi % ufaoQi, KaGdnsg cv xv]<*
TOigeicpy ^ & QuuzxyS* coootb^ ^ cv MyjXaa (pari rlu}
zlosvj^/v cv afaco Tin XiOa yivtcdg. ^ C4ceiv(^ $
T'dry Ohztw dv]i7rs7rcvQas* TsrXlw 6 Xtdog xrog chc

CfACl@* TCp Al7rOLPCU(*>,

%5 . ILkitojoStcu 3 Kj o cv Tej^yJi { £ %i>ce\lag

yiVO{Jfyj@** TXTO 3 TO %to^W 6<f"i Ai7T&^V.

c O 3 cv Tij a%$a ty\ JLajvedh xaXx-

fD/jy TuoXvg, ofAolcog t Bivcug Kaio/jfy'®*, ocrf^Iw
d(pty<riv drtpdtfx, to ok KctjotxcwcriMg opciov
yivty yy kskcuj/M/^.

kyi* Ovg q KaXScriv dJQug dyO&KUg, r 3-f>v7piQ-
fdjicov rluu ffielaVi «<ri yzdSetg. okxuIgv^) 3 ^
<5rvf>%v^ %a^a7ri^ ol dvQgyiKtg. «cn 3 ts&I re rlu)
Aiyv^mla), C7rx y^aj to r}te%]()ov t tlj cv r§f HA«#,
(SaSiZovjcov OXv ( u7rid.^e rlu) $i ogxg. oig Kj ol x&X-
MS <|f «,

8 The Name of this Place is differently fpelt in different
Editions of this Author, fome having it tfectfiy others
Tf#t>h 9 and probably neither of them right ; for there is
no mention of any Place in Sicily of either the one or the
ether of thefe Names in the antient Geography : But
however uncertain the Place of Production of thefe Stones
be, what our Author obferves of them is very well worth
noting, that they became light, porous, and refembling
Pumices from the Action of the Fire. It were much to
be wifh'd we were now acquainted with this Stone, fince
if we knew any which we could by Fire reduce to a Pu-
mice, it would give us a Light into the Origin of that
Body, which we at prefent very much want.

The Subftance next mentioned is evidently of the Clafs
if foM Bitumens, and a Species of the Lapis Thraciut



( 39 )

Places, and as it were in Cells, no where continuous
to the Matter of them. It is laid, that in Melos
the Pumice is produced in this Manner in fome
other Stone, as this is on the contrary in it : But
the Stone which the Pumice is found in is not at
all like the Lipara Stone, which is found in it.

XXVI. Certain Stones there are about f Tetras
in Sicily, which is over againft Lipara, which
empty themfelves in the fame manner in the Fire.'

XXVII. And in the Pomontory called Erineas r
there is a great Quantity of Stone like that found
about Beria y which, when burnt, emits a bituminous
Smell, and leaves a Matter refembling calcined
Earth.

XXVIII. Thole foffile Subftances that are called
Coals, and are broken for Ufe, are earthy, they
kindle however, and burn like wood Coals. Thefe
are found in Liguria y where there aifo is Amber,
and in Elis, in the Way to Olympias over the
Mountains. Thefe are ufed by the Smiths c .



before defcribed. The Refiduum after burning, or Caput
mortuum of all the Bitumens, is a calcined Earth, and
Rocks and Promontories are the moft common Places out
of which they are found exfudating.

1 TheSubftance here defcribed, whatever Miftakes there
have been among Authors iince about it, appears to me to
be evidentlv no other than the common Pit Coal, and I
have made it appear as clearly fo in the Tranflation, only
by having properly rendered the Word av^mH^ the care-
Jefsly mifunderftanding which Word alone has been the
Occafion of all the erroneous Guefies about the Subftance
here defcribed. The Authors of thefe feem all to have
underftood the Word «^a|, as fignifying Foffile or Pit
Coal; and therefore, as the Author compares the burning of
this Subftance to that, they were neceiilt^ted to think of



I 4° )

vff. Et^e#i? Si vrojz v cv (ro7g) TZKctiflwvXfiq fti*
fd&oig Xid©* 9 og tj jS oij^ 7*r<z(>ofAot(&> aiv £uA#
QowcQto* ore S' S^ax^ro rig tXaiov, x,aie^)' iLj ct
&cKcu>6elq, rare ^ccub^J Kj cwTog, aonreg d7ra8rjg w.

A'. T aiv pi %v xctiOfJSjJOov auTcti ty$,<po(>cu.

Act. *AAAo Si n $og Wi hlQcov, oocort^ g£ cvuv-



fome other Subftance that he might here mean, as it was
impoffible he mould intend to compare a Thing to itfelf.

TVormius, on this Foundation, imagined, that he meant
the Cannel Coal : Shiod Galenus vocat Ampelitidem, iffc.
Tbeophrajlus Carbones vocat quod eorum colorem habcat, iff
vices gerat. Thus is Theophrajlus, according to Cuftom,
accufed of faying Things he never meant, becaufe the
People who quote him have not been at the pains to un-
derhand him : IxTtalovloLi $s yjj <bv£xv\va Kct§a,7rt% ci avfyzx.ES, is
evidently, they kindle and burn like Wood Coals, or, as
we call it,' Charcoal, for that is the genuine and determi-
nate Senfe cf the Word in Greet, and Carbo in La-
thi ; as is evident from the other Works of this Author,
Pliny 9 and all the other old Natural ills ; and even the
more correct of the Moderns, when they would exprefs
what we call Pit Coal, the Subftance here defcribed by
the Author, never ufe the Words «y0§a| or Carbo alone,
but always Carbo fiffilis, and ?u0av0£a|. See Woodward,
Charlton, Merret, &c. The fimilar Ufe of this Bitumen
got it the Name of Coal, but always with an Addition
that diftinguifhed it from what was more commonly and
properly fo called , and expreffed its not being of vegetable,
but foffile Origin.

v It is much to be queflioned, whether this was the true
original Reading, and genuine Senfe of the Author ; in all
probability fome Errors in the old Editions have made this



( 4i )

XXIX. There v is alfo found in the Mines of
Scaptefyla a Stone, in its external Appearance fome-
thing refembling rotten Wood, on which, if Oil
be poured, it burns ; but when the Oil is burnt
away, the burning of the Stone ceafes, as if it were
in itfelf not liable to fuch Accidents.

XXX. Thefe then are the Differences of the
Stones which are fubjedt to the Force of Fire.

XXXI. But there is another Kind of Stone,
formed, as it were, of contrary Principles, and en-
tirely incombuftible w , which is called the x Car-



PafTage exprefs what the Author never meant to fay. The
Subftance, and indeed the only Subftance defcribed by the
other antient Naturalifts, as refembling rotten Wood, is
the Gagates or Jet before mentioned among the Bitu-
mens ; but that has no fuch Quality as the Author has
here afcribed to this Stone of Scaptefylce.

The Antients, it is to be obferved, had a common O-
pinicn of the Bitumens, that the Fire of them was en-
creafed by Water, and extinguished by Oil ; and very pro-
bably this was the Sentiment originally delivered here by
the Author, however Errors upon Errors in different Co-
pies of his Works may fince have altered the Senfe of
them. The Stone itfelf was probably a Bitumen of the
Lapis Thradus Kind, as the Place from whence it hath
its Name was a Town of that Country.

w The Author having now gone through the different
EfFe&s of Eire on the different Kinds of Stones which are
fubjecT: to be acted upon by it, comes here to the Confi-
deration of fome others, which, either from the different
Matter of their conftituent Particles, or the different Man-
ner of their Combinations, he efteems of a Texture not
to be injured by Fire, but altogether fafe againft its Ef-
forts, and, as his own Words exprefs it, incombuftible.

None of thefe indeed are of Power to refift the folar
Fire collected by a great reflecting Burning-glafs, but are
firft calcined as it were, and fplit and fluttered in Pieces..


( 42 )



by it, and afterwards melted into a Glafs. This, how-
ever, was probably a kind of Fire unknown in thcfe ex-
treme Degrees of Power, till very long fince the Time of
this Author. And as the culinary Fire, or that ufed in
thofe Times for fluxing Ores, the frrcngerc they then
knew, tho' much lefs intenfe than thofe we now ufe on
that Occafion (of which there are many unqneftionable
Proofs ; nay, that even thofe of the Workers in Metals,
but a few Ages ago were fo) had no Power of making any
Ciiange in thefe Stones, the Author is not to be cenfured
for efleeming them incomBuftlble, or not knowing what
it was impoffible he mould have feen, but is to be under-
Hood with regard to the Action of the Fires ufed in his time,
and muft then be allowed to have been well acquainted with
the Subjects he treats of in this Divifion of his Work.

x The Antients exprefled by this Word all the red trans-
parent Gems, which have been fince diftinguifned under
the Names of the different Kinds of Ruby, Granate, Hya-
cynth, &c. all which they efteemed only different Species
of the Carbuncle : And in Justification of them it muft be
acknowledged, that not only the foffile Genera in gene-
ral want thofe fixt and determinate Charac~teriflics, by
which thofe of the vegetable and animal Kingdoms are
unalterably diftinguiihed from each other; but that thofe
of the Gems in particular have fewer fixed and unvariable
Differences by which their Genera and Species may be
determina^tely fixed, than any other.

The Reafon of the Difficulty in regularly methodizing
snd difcinguifhing the Genera and fubordinate Species in
the various Clafles of the foffile Kingdom, is, that in the
Time of their original Concretions their Particles fcarce
ever coalefced in perfect Purity, but took up among them
from amidft the Mais of fluid Matter in which they were
at that Time fuftained, Particles of extraneous Matter of
various Kinds in various Places ; fo that not only the ex-
ternal Face, but even the interior Conftitution of the fame
Species is found in different Places very different, and in



( 43 )

buncle, on which they engrave Seals : Its Colour is
red, and of fuch a Kind, that when held againft



many Specimens not to be known at fiift fight even to
the moft accurate Obferver,

But if this be the Cafe in foffile Suhftances in general, it
is much more particularly fo in this Clafs of them, the Gems,
the Differences of which are owing to the Diftribution of*
certain kind of Particles in their Manes ; which are fo very
uncertain, both in Quantity and Manner of placing, and
in their various Effects upon the Mafs, that fcarce any
thing of certainty is to be determined from them.
What can be afcertained in general is this :
The Mafs of conftituent Matter of them all, is a pellu-
cid cryftalline Subftance, which is in different Kinds of
different Degrees of Hardnefs, from that of the Diamond
to that of the mereft fhattery Cryftal. This cryftalline
Matter, had it concreted in perfect Purity, had been co-
lourlefs alike in all ; and the various Species had been di-
ftinguifhable only by their different Degrees of Hardnefs ;
but as this Matter, in the time of its Coalefcence, aflln
med into it any Particles of a proper degree of Gravity
and Finenefs, which happened to float in its Way, it be-
came by that Means different not only in Colour, nay,
and in Degree of Colour, according to the Nature and
Quantity of the Particles it took up into itfelf, but from
their different Nature was alfo altered in what alone could
have been its determinate Charafteriftics, its Hardnefs
and fpecifick Gravity. Many Reafons may be alledged
why the Particles thus afiumed into the cryftalline Nodules
at the Time of their Formation, muft have been princi-
pally of the metalline Kind ; and we find, in effect, that
it was fo. The various Colours of the Gems have their
Rife from thefe Admixtures ; and, according to what I
have before obferved as to the colouring of Spars by the
fame Means, when the metalline Matter thus mixed with
the cryftalline was Lead, the Stone became a Topaz, or,
as the Antients call'd it, a Chryfolite ; for it is very evi-
dent, that what they call'd the Topaz, we now call the
Chryfolite ; and what they call'd the Chryfolite, we now,
S>n the contrary, call the Topaz.



(44)

fjbocjty vrgog 3 r y v\Xiov tM/u)jjov, ccvdgcucog xuiojlS/jx
motet ffioxv* Ti/AtaTolov $' cog et7reiv. [jlIk^ov yd(>

K.agWI$ov@» (C MaasrctXiag.

AS'. Ou yccui^j S* o MtA'qJov z ycoviei^g cov.



Our Topaz is a very elegant and very beautiful Gem,
of which the Jewellers have two Kinds, the Oriental and
Occidental ; the Oriental are of a fine pure gold Colour,
of different Degrees of Deepnefs. They are of very great
Splendour, and equal the Ruby in Hardnefs. They are
brought from Arabia , and many Parts of the Eaft Indies.
The Occidental are often very beautiful; and fcarce to
be diftinguiftied from the Oriental but by their Softnefs,
for they are no harder than common Cryftal. We have
them from Silejia and Bohemia.

The Topaz of the Antients, now call'd the Chryfolite,
differs from this in Co' our, for it has always an Admixture
of green with the yellow, probably from Particles of
Copper diffolved in an Acid, and taken up with thofe of
the Lead into the Matter of the Gem, at the Time of its
original Concretion.

As thefe Gems have their Colours from this accidental
Admixture of extraneous Particles, they may alfo be di-
verted of them by Fire, without any Injury to their Tex-
ture ; and the Oriental Topaz thus rendered colourlefs, is
like fome other Gems to be hereafter defcribed, fomctimes
made to counterfeit a Diamond.

When Lead and Iron together thus entred the Compofi-
tion, the Stone became a Hyacynth ; when Iron alone, the
Ruby Granate, and other red Gems, or, as the Antients
in one Word exprefs it, the Carbuncles were produced \
when Copper, diffolved by Acids, the Emerald \ by Al-
calics, the Sr.pphire ; and fo of the reft. No Wonder is it,
therefore, that the Gems in particular have never been
perfectly reduced to Method, fince there is fo little Room
for determining any thing fix'd and ftable in regard to
them s and when the Operations by which Nature gave
them their Exiftence, have been fo uncertain and liable to
fuch numberlefs accidental Variations,



( 45 )

the y Sun, it refembles that of a burning CoaL
This Stone is extremely valuable, one of a very
ffriall Size being prized at forty Aurei. It is brought
from Carthage and MajfiHa.

XXXII. There is alfo an incombuftible Stone
found about Miletum z ^ which is of an angular



y It was from this Property of refembling a burning
Coal when held againft the Sun* that this Stone obtain'd
the Names Carbunculus and cl'ty*% 9 which afterwards being*
mifundcrflood, there grew an Opinion of its having the
Qualities of a burning Coal, mining in the dark ; and as
no Gem ever was, or indeed ever will be found endued
with that Quality, it was fuppofed that the true Carbuncle
of the Antients was loft, but long generally believed, that
there had fome time been fuch a Stone. The Words of
this Author, however, fet it very clear, that this Appear-
ance in the Sun only was the Occafion of the Name.
That Species of Carbuncle of the Antients which poffeffed
this Quality in the greateft Degree, was the Garamantine
or Carthaginian ; and as the Author gives alfo Carthage
for the Place whence this he here defcribes was brought,
there is no doubt but the particular Species here meant,
is the Garamantine Carbuncle of the Antients, which is
the true Garnet of the Moderns. Experience fhews, that
this Stone has more the Appearance of a fire Coal in the
Sun than the Ruby or any other of the red Gems ; and it
is famous for fuftaining the Force of Fire unhurt, which
is the other great Characteriftic of it mentioned by the
Author.

z The Mllciian Kind is generally fuppofed to be that
call'd by other Authors the Alabandine y as the Places from
whence they have their Names are in the fame King-
dom. And ^rheophrajhis^ who defcribes the Miletian, has
not mentioned the Alabdndine ; and PIiny 9 who defcribes
that, has not named the Miletian.

The other Gems, by the Antients included in the gene-
ral Name Carbuncle, are diftinguifhed by later Writers
into various Species of the Ruby, Garnet, Almandine*
and Hyacynth j and are.


( 46 )

TOV 0 ^ BcjUftOLfOV \?(v. CftQIOV ft T^07T0V TiVCt £ 7^



i* The Rubinus verus^ the True Ruby. This is of a
fine blood Colour, and of extreme Hardnefs, and, when
large, is by fome calFd a Carbuncle. This is from Ca?n*
baja, Calicut, Coria, and the Ifland of Ceylon.

2. The Balafs Ruby, Rubinus Balajjius or Palladus*
This is of a paler red than the former, but tinged with a
mixture of blue ; its common Shape is oblong and pointed.
And either this or the Rock Ruby, as it is call'd, a Spe-
cies of the Garnet hereafter to be mentioned, is probably
the Carbunculus A?nethyfkizontes of Pliny, The Balafs Ruby
is principally from the Ifland of Ceylon.

3. The Rubinus Spinelius, the Spinell Ruby. This is of
a clearer red than the Balafs, but is not fo bright nor hard
as the true Ruby.

4. The Rubacus, the Rubacelle. This is red, with a
caft of yellow, and is the leaft valuable of all the Clafs.

5. The Granatus verus, the true Garnet. This is a
very beautiful Gem, and was, as before obferved, the Car-
buncle of Tbeophrajlus, and Carbunculus Garamanticus of
the Antients in general : Its Colour is a deep red, ap-
proaching to that of a ripe Mulberry, but held to the Sun,
or let on a light Foil, a true Fire Colour. This is fome-
times found as big as an Egg.

6. The Granatus Sorranus, the Sorane Garnet. This
is of an intenfe red 3 but with fome mixture of yellowifh,
or the Colour of the Hyacynth of the Moderns.

7. That Species of the Garnet called the Reck Ruby,
the Rubinus rupiwn, and by the Italians Rubino de la Rccca*
This is a very hard Gem, and is of a fine red, mixed with
a violet Colour.

8. The Almandine; a Stone of a middle Nature, be-
tween the Ruby and Garnet. This is the Atefandicus 9?



( 47 )

Shape, and fometimes regularly hexangular; they
call this alio a Carbuncle from its not being injured
by the Fire •, but that is ftrange, for the Diamond *
might as properly be for that Reafon called by the
fame Name, as it alfo poffeiTes that Quality.



Pliny, and probably the Milefian Carbuncle of our Author
already defcribed.

Cj. The Amandine. This was the Trcszenins of the An-
tients, and was variegated with red and white 3 but is at
prefent little known.

10. The Sandajlrum of Pliny, a Gem now wholly loft.

11. The Hyacynth of the Antients, truly and properly a
violet-coloured Gem, and which, if it be now at ail known,
is ranked by the Moderns among the Amethyfts. The
Stones we know by the Name of Hyacynths being Gems of
a yellowifti red in three or four Degrees, which will be
more particularly fpoken of hereafter.

a The Diamond, unqueftionably, comes neareft of all
Gems deferving the Character of incombuftible ; it will
bear extreme Degrees of Fire, and that for a long time
together, and come out unhurt ; but it fuffers fome Da-
mage, if fuddenly brought into the Cold after thefe fevere
Tryals \ and much mere by the Burning-glafs, v/hich is
able to deftroy its very Nature, and irrecoverably fpoil it.
And this has taught us, that no Stone can bear Fire in the
cxtremeft Degree unhurt.

The Diamond is the hard eft and moft refplendent of
all Gems, and has ever in all Ages been eileemed much
more valuable than all others 5 its Colour, when pure, as
it generally is, is that of perfectly clear Water; but it i&
fometimes found tinged with metalline Particles, affumed
into it at the Time of its original Formation, as die other
Gems, and is thence yellowifli, redifli, or bluiih, and fome-
times, but very rarely, greenifh. As the Diamond thus is
fometimes of the Colour of other Gems, but greatly fupe-
rior in Hardnefs to them; fo the common Cryftal, fome-
times from the fame Accidents, refembles them, and is
much fofter, and of little Value. Cryftals . thus tinged arc
what the Jewellers call Baftard Emeralds, Sapphires, £sV„

5



( 48 )



'Ett« Kj 73 cAov y\ yJos-qgtg ok c xcclctttav<rtct)$
Sonet ncri ym&cu. ttrXyv 6k & dtpgS ScLXuojqg



*The Diamond is compofed of various Laminae laid clofe
one on another \ and Jewellers of Skill will fometimes
find the Joinings, and with the Edge of a fine Inftrument
fplit a Diamond into two of equal apparent Surfaces.

If the plain Surfaces of the Plates of a Diamond be turn-
ed to the Focus of the ftrongeft Burning-glafs, it receives
no Hurt, even by that powerful Fire ; but if the Edges
and Joinings of the Laminae are turned to it, the Stone fe-
rrates at them, is reduced into a number of Scales or thin
Flakes, and afterwards melts into a Glafs which has no-
thing of the native Splendor of the Diamond.

b The Author here explains upon the Manner in which
thefe Stones refift the Action of the Fire, which he de-
clares to be by their containing naturally no Moifture,
which he has before declared to be effential to Fufibility 5
not by their having already fuffered all the Change they were
liable to, from their having been before expofed to that
Element ; as he gives the very rational Opinion of fome
People in his Time, and which we mail eafily perceive
hereafter was alfo his oWn, that fome Subftances, com-
monly fuppofed in their native State, had certainly been,
and had by that means been diverted of whatever that Ele-
ment could drive out of them, and brought into a Condi-
tion of not fuffering any farther Changes by the fami
Means.



( 49 )

( . XXXIII. The Power thefe Stones have of re-
fitting the Force of Fire, is net from the fame
Caufe with that of the Pumices, or of Afhes^;
They feem not to burn, becaufe they abfolutely and
originally contain no Moifture ; whereas thofe Sub-
ftances do not kindle nor burn in the Fire, becaufe
their .Humidity has been already extracted..

XXXIV. Some are of opinion, that the c Pu-
mices have been entirely made what they are b$
burning ; that Kind excepted which they efteem
formed by the Concretion of the Froth of the Sea :
This Opinion, as to the Sea kind, they take from
the apparent Teftimony of their Senfes.



c The Author mentioning it but as the Opinion of fome,
that the Pumice had already pafTed the Fire, and by it been
reduced into its prefent State, is a Proof that the general
Opinion in his Time was, that it was in its native Condition :
And this feems to have been an Error of the later as well
as the antient Writers of Foflils, who have almoft all given
it a Place among the native foffil Stones, as if Natwre had
formed it as we fee it : Whereas there is all the Evidence
that our Senfes can give, that it is no more than a Cinder^
the Remainder of feme other foflxle Body calcined by a
violent Fire either fubterranean unfeen, and perhaps fine*?
extinguished, or that of the burning Mountains, on and
about all which it is conftantly found, and that in vaft
Quantities ; and the more violent Explofions of whicM
may have toffed immenfe Quantities of it to Places fb diA
tant, as to make People forget its coming thence ; or in-
to Seas, whofe Tides and Storms may have carried them
to other Shores, near which no fuch Repofitories of it
are fituated, which might yet more puzzle and miflead
People about its Origin. The great Quantities of Pu-
mices found in this' Manner, far from any Fires by which
they might have been formed, floating on the Surface of
the Sea, thus thrown on it, or perhaps raifed by the bu ril-
ing of Vulcanos from its Bottom ; and fomethmg altered



( 50 )



from their original Figure and Colour, by being wafhed and
rounded by the Motion of the Waves, gave Rife to an Opi-
nion in fome, that they were another Kind, different from
thofe of the burning Mountains ; and that they were form-
ed by a Concretion of the Frsth of the Sea, and in which,
as the Author obferves, they had the apparent Teftimony
of their Senfes. Many have erroneoufly imagined, that
by this- Kind fuppofed by fome to be formed of the Froth
of the Sea, this Author meant the Alcyonium ; and have
fallen foul upon him for ranking that Subftance among the
Pumices : But no one has done him more Injuftice in this
point than his Editor De Laet^ who, tho* in his Edition of
this Author he does Honour to Fur tonus , for having j uni-
fied him in this point, and obferved that this was not his
Meaning, yet afterwards, in his own Hiftory of Gems, £sfr.
charges him with it,- L. z. p* 131. Thcopbrajius etiam al-
cyoniumf quod ex maris fpuma ccncrcfcat, Pumicem vocat.

d For thefe there is, indeed, the apparent and unqueftion-
able Teftimony of our Senfes, that they owe their prefent
Mode of Exiftence to the Action of Fire, fcarce any fof-
file Subftance being of Strength and Solidity enough to bear
the exceflivc Degree of it in thefe Places, without being
affected and altered in its Form by it, and reduced to a
Slag or Cinder of fuch Kind and Texture as its conftituent
Parts difpofed it moft readHy to fall into. As to thofe
found floating on the Sea, I before obferved how hardly the
Author has fared about them in De Laefs Hands \ but
Boetius has yet infinitely more puzzled this Caufe in re-
gard to him, and feems even to have mifunderftood the
Mifunderftandings of others concerning him \ for he tells
us, L. 2. />. 400. fpeaking of the Pumice in general,
'Ahxvmcv a Tbeophrafto vocari putant^ quod e marina fpuma
ccaflus fit ; And this is one of the many Inltances in which
5



( 5i )

XXXV. As alfo the other, in regard to thofc
form'd in the d Mouths and different Openings of
the burning Mountains through which the Flames
have made their way ; and thofe made by burning
the Lapis e Arabicus^ a Stone* which when it has
palTed the Fire alfumes the Form of the Pumice.

this good old Writer is fo ftrangely mifreprefented, that it
is impofnble, from the Accounts of others, to make the
leaft Guefs at what he has left us, the very Word 'axxuopio*
is no where to be found in this whole Book ; and what he
is generally charged with is, not the calling the Pumice
Alcyonium, as this Author imagines, but the Alcyonium a
Pumice ; and even that Accufation, we fee, from a careful
Review of his own Words, is wholly groundlefs and er-
roneous.

e In the other Editions of this Author there is the Word
hiccQoipx^ where I have given 'A^aSmS j the former is the
Name of no Stone in the World, and the latter of one
very aptly placed in this Clafs of Foffils, and which all the
Antients have defcribedj but this Author no where elfe has
the Name of : There is therefore no queftion but that
this was the original Reading, and the common Text,
A»a£a£«, no more than an Error which got early into the
Copies, and has been ever fince ( as Errors ufually are )
carefully and exactly preferved. This is alfo the Opinion
of Be Laet, who, however carelefs of this Author in his
Liber de Gemmis, yet is a thoughtful and good Critick on
him in many Places in his Edition of this Treatife.

This Arabicus, or, as it is fometimes called, Arabus La-
pis, is defcribed alfo by Dio[corides> Pliny^ Jfidorus, Sec,
as a white Stone, refembling the pureft Ivory, which when
burnt became fpungy, porous, and friable \ in more, af-
fumed the Form of the Pumice, and was ufed, like it, as
a Dentrifice. Diofcorides, fpeaking of it, fays, 'o&Auv $1
cpr,yp.a, yUflcu xauO'K x«Mif«, and O oz 1 ApecQiy^ teyopuoi; ?u0o?
tuxiv ixtyaflos dew&v* Pliny^ Arabicus Lapis Ebori Jimilis
dentifriciis accommodatur crernatus. And this was fo early as
In thofe Times, and even continues yet to be one princi-
pal Ufe of all the Pumice Kind*

E %



( 5* )

foti. fJLei^v^y 3 ol 703ra SokSciv cv oig $

trig* ^ cv n)7g itdXisoe, ^ y Ktos-yjgig. Tax**

o yi ft XTGog, ox a cc/Aa;< ^ wXztxg tqqttoi rr\g



f That all true genuine Pumices are formed by the Ac-
tion of Fire, I believe, is an unqueftionable Certainty ;
but as the antient as well as modern Naturalifts have often
confufedly placed among them, and under their Names^
other Stones of different Kinds, and abfolutely different
Origin, tho' fomething refembling them in external Figure,
the Author does very judicioufly here in allotting a diffe-
rent PrOcefs of Nature for the Formation of fuch.

s Thefe Pumices,- as they are called, of Nifuros^ feem
not only an Inftance of the different Operations of Nature
ufed in the Formation of the different- Pumices, but of
there having been Stones of wholly different Kinds and
Origin ranked among them. The Defcription the Author
gives of them, proves them to be no genuine Pumices, but
natural and original Nodules, or loofe Maffes of Matter, and
covered with a Cruft, as mod of the natural Nodules are,
but none of the Pumices ever are feen to be \ nor, indeed,
is it eafy to be conceived, from their manner of Formation,
how they mould : Thefe were foffile Subftances, therefore,
of fome other Clafs, which, as they in fome fuperficial
Manner refembled the Pumice, the indeterminate Manner
of writing in thofe early Times, had given Occafion to be
ranked among them. What they really were is not eafy,
at this diftance of Time, to determine - f but the moft
probable Conjecture is, that they were Pyritae, fome of
which I have at this Time that bear fome rude external
' Refemblance of the Pumice-kind ; and we fhall prefently
fee this Author defcribing a Pumice, which he fays is fome-
thing like one Species of the Pyrita, called MolarU \ it may



( 53 )

TJie Places, indeed,, in which Pumices are produced,
feem to teftify the Manner of their Formation ; for
they are principally found about the Openings .of
the burning Mountains. On the whole, foroe
Kinds, perhaps, may be formed by the Adtion of
Fire on Stones of a proper Texture, and others in
ibme other Manner ; for there are in Nature marly
different Ways of Produ6lion f .

XXXVI. The Pumices in the Ifland of *Nifuros
feem an Inftance of this, for they appear to have 1
been formed by a flight Coalefcence only of an h are-



give fome Light into this Cafe to obferve, that Strabo, men-
tioning this Ifland, fays, Saxofa eft & molar is lapidis copia
pr ted it a. De Laet imagines the Stone defcribed by our
Author muft have been very different from that of Stra-
Z^'s, becaufe it v/as liable to crumble to pieces in the Fin-
gers \ but as I have already obferyed, that the Molar is
of the Antients was a Species of the Pyrites, and as no
Stone is fo liable to crumble in pieces as the Pyrites, when
it has lain fome time expofed the Air, and the Salts have
fcot and got loofe, I am fo far from being of his Opini-
on, that I look upon it as a Certainty, that the Nifura
Pumice of our Author, and Molaris of Strabo, are the
very fame Subftance ; and that Strabc's Words are a great
Confirmation of my Conjecture ; as is alfo the Size our
Author allots the Stone, and its Property of crumbling in
pieces, which he alfo obferves was not univerfal, but only
happened to fome of them, thofe, I imagine, which had
lain moft expofed, and the Salts of which had been lep
loofe by the Humidity of the Air, while the others conti-
nued firm and folid, as thofe in England and other Places
do, while lodged in the Strata they were originally depo-
sed amongft : And this I take to have been the Occafion
of the different degrees of Hardnefs of this Subftance which
our Author has defcribed, tho' the Philofophy of his Times
had not looked far enough into Nature to fee the Caufe.
J The beginning of this Sentence appears to have been

E 3



( 54)

my,* QjficeicQg* Qipeiov 3 hctfiGdvxcnv, on r dj~
£/(T>CQ{jfy£a)/ hicvt Sl&QgvTrjov^) at t %^p(t\v aazrtg
ag uppov, 75 prtfu Quuui^avcu [A,y$k Q)fA>r

$-eig oarov 'sroAA^, f\ finc^S ftei£pg f otuv a>7ru-
fieiQQovj t aval.

hy. *EA«(pg^ St <r(po$£p £ h dfifJioo^ng cv M?fAtf
*u?cL<rct evict <? cw cv Ai#a> rivt ^i^a ylv\) 9

always hitherto faultily printed in the Editions which have
come to our Knowledge ; the Honour of fetting it right,
by the Emendation according to which I have given it, be-
longs to De Laet*> whom it is much more Pleafure to me
to name thus with Refpecl than Cenfure 5 though an ear-
neft Defire of doing the Author Juftice, and finding his true
Meaning, the only End I have in view in my Ann . -
tions on him, fometimes obliges me to fpeak in that man-
ner. What is here aybpu}^ is in the other Editions » c xj
efyt/xo? ; which, as Sand was not the Subftance here treated
of, could never have been the original Reading.

The Ifland of Melos^ fometime called alfo Mimalh, has
been always known to abound with Pumices, and thofe of
the very fineft Kind ; which it did alfo in this Author's
Time, as appears by his Defcription of their being light
and fandy, or eafily. rubbed to Powder ; from which laft
Quality, pofTeffed in fome Circumftances in a much greater
degree, it was principally, I fuppofe, that the Pyrites of
JNifurcs obtained the Name of Pumice : As from fome
like Similitude of Subflances did the Stones next mentioned
Jiere under the Pumice Name, and faid to be produced in
other Stones ; and which, whatever they were, as it is not
eafy at this diftance of Time, and with the little Light
vve have from the Writings of the Antients, to afcertain^



( 55 )

naceons TVlatter : What is efteemed a Proof of this
is, that fome of the Pumices found there crumble
in the handling into a kind of Sand, as if they ne-
ver had been thoroughly concreted or bound into
a Mafs.

XXXVII. Thefe are found in Heaps, many of
them at lead as big as can be grafped in a Man's
Hand, and fometimes larger than that, when the
fuperficial Part is taken off.

XXXVIII. All the Pumices of the h Ifiand of
Melos are alfo light and fandy ; and fome Kinds
there are which are produced, as was before ob-
ferved, in other Stones..



I am perfectly convinced, however, from the Account of
their being found in other Stone, and that as we cannot
but conclude from the Account, unaltered in its own Texr
ture, were no genuine Pumices.

The Differences afterwards alTigned to the different Spe-
cies of the Pumice, are what may be obferved in a greater
or leffer degree in the different Kinds we now have brought
from Germany, the Eafi Indies, and the burning Mountains,
and the Author appears to have been very well acquainted
with them : His aligning a greater Degree of the abftcr-
gent Quality to that from the Shores than that from the
burning Mountains; and a greater than even in that, to
that of the Sea, is probably very juft, though not now re-
garded, as the Sea Salt incorporated in the Mafs of thofe,
muft add much to this Quality.

The Author having now gone through the Hiftory of
the Pumices, returns to the Confederation of thofe Stones
he was before defcribing, and from the Hiftory of which
he had looked on this as a Digreffion. The Stones here
treated of, are what he has before named among the Gem
Kind, as I have already obierved in regard to the Senfe of
the Word o-tyayihtv ; fome of the Kinds of which he ob-
ferves differ only in their external Figures and Colours, and
others in more peculiar Qualities.



( 56 )

Xgcoftofli ft org piXcuvci, ok J pvax,®*, §»*
Of ZixeXia. mvMog re £ Qagetct,, cuutyi ts tyif f&u-
XdSqg. yct^ rig Kj TOicwTTj Kiosyjf'/g, £ @ci-

f ^ ^TVKVCTY^s @ Of TV) xfai t 5T0Xvll[JLG-

regov iTtgyig. cftyiKjiKYj 3 ^ v\ etc 5 pveue®*
ftciXXov M&ffig Kj XdjKY\g. <TpY$\.%od\div[ $ 9 ox £
BaXdozryg aZvi[g*

fid. Kcu ?oe< j£ Ki&rq cJvn to<t£tov «-
f)Y i & m ot)». *zs& 3 r *zirv(iXf&jj&)v xcci r ditv^drcov Xi9av 9
d(p y a)u $2 eig txtq cLXKcig ^Bco^reov

rdg ctiriotg.

Xfo. Tojv 5 XlQcov xai clTXcu Tcig iSdrrj^g
y\v(px<Tiv*



1 TheCarnelian is one of the femipellucid Gems, and has
its Name Cameo las, Car mollis,- ox, as it is fometimes im-
properly written, Corniolus, from its Colour, which, in the
different Degrees in different Kinds, 1 refembles Flefli with
more or lefs of the Blood in it ; and Sardus or Sarda, from
Sardinia, the Place where it was originally found. The
different Kinds of this Stone are found in different Places,
and our Lapidaries make a great Diftinction between the
Oriental and Occidental, which differ extremely in Hard-
nefs. The Antients divided this, as they did alfo other
Gems, into Male and Female (as will be feen hereafter in
this Author) in regard to their deeper or paler Colour > both



( 57 )

XXXIX. The different Sorts alfo vary from one
another in Colour, Compadtnefs, and Gravity.

XL. As to their Colour, there is a black Kind
found on the Sicilian Shores, which is compadt
and weighty, and fomething refembling that kind
pf the Pyrites called the Molaris ; for there is a
natural Pumice of this Texture, heavy and com-
pare and this is of more Value and more ufeful
than many of the others this Kind from the Shores
being a better Abftergent than the light white Kind :
But the moft abftergent of all others, is that from
the Sea itfelf.

XLI. Hitherto has the Pumice been treated
of : Hereafter are to be confidered the Natures and
Caufes of the Diyerfity of the other fevera! Kinds
qf combuftible and incombuftible Stones; from the
Hiftory of which this Digreflion has been made.

XLII. There are, befide what has been already
named, among the Stones which are cut as Gems,
other Differences, in regard to their feveral pecqliar
Qualities.

XLIII. Some of which are in the external Ap-
pearance only. Of this Kind are thofe of the 1 Carne-

which Colours, however, are fometfimes found in different
Parts of the fame Stone. The Jewellers of our time reck-
on four Species of this Stone; the common or red, the
white, die yellow, and the beryll Carnelian ; the firft of
thefe is again divided into Male and Female, and is much
in efteem for Seals ; we have it from the Eaji bidies^ as
alfo from Bohemia^ Silefia^ Sardinia, and many other
Places ; nor is our own Kingdom without it, though I
have never yet found any here perfectly fine. The white
is a very beautiful Stone, of a fine Grain, and equal Hard-
nefs, with many Kinds of the red ; it is not perfectly white*
byt raiher what we call a pearl Colour, white with a flight



( 58 )



Admixture of blue. The yellow is a very beautiful Stone,
often of a fine flame Colour, and more tranfparent than
either of the former ; this is found in the Eajl Indies and
Bohemia only. And the laft, or Beryll Carnelian, is pro-
perly the Male Oriental Kind ; it is of a deeper Colour
than any of the others, as alfo much harder, and more
tranfparent : Some of our Jewellers, knowing of no other
Beryll but this, name it Amply the Beryll ; but it ought
never to be fo called but with the Addition of its own
proper Name Carneiian 5 the Beryll of the Antients being
a Stone of quite another Kind a tranfparent, and of a bluifh
green; and evidently the very Gem which we now call
the Aqua marina.

k The Jafper is another of the femipellucid Stones ; it
is much of the fame Grain and Texture with the Agates,
but not fo hard, or capable of fo elegant a Polifh, nor does
it approach fo near Tranfparency ; its general Colour is
green, but it is fpotted or clouded with feveral others, as
yellow, blue, brown, red, and white. It is found both in
the Eaji and Weft Indies^ in Bohemia^ in many Parts of
Germany , and in England : I have a Specimen of it found
here, little inferior to the Oriental, and better than any I
ever faw from Genrwny. Our Lapidaries diftinguifh it into
the Oriental and Common, and fubdivide thofe Differences
according to the Colour of the Spots or Veins. The Ori-
ental is much harder, and capable of a much better Polifh
than any of the others ; it is of a bluifh green, and the
Veins generally red.

The European or common Jafpers are, of all Degrees,
of green, and variegated with feveral Colours ; the Eng-
lijbj in particular, are hard, commonly of a deep green,
often not veined or fpotted at all, and when they are, it
is commonly with red or flefh Colour, fome times with
white, and fometimes with both thofe Colours.

The Heliotrope, or common Blood-ftone, is of this kind
alfo, and very little, if really at all, different from the O-
riental Jafper 5 the Colour is like that of a bluifh green,



( 59 )

Han, the k Jafper, and the 1 Sapphire ; which laft
is fpotted, as it were, with Gold.



and the Variegation red, but in Spots rather than Veins,
and of a deeper Colour.

1 The Sapphire of the Antients, here defcribed, was a
Stone very different from the Gem we now know by that
Name, and was of the Cyanus, or Lapis Lazuli Kind ;
hut not, as fome have too haftily judged, the Lapis Lazuli
itfelf*

We fhall find by what this Author fays hereafter, that
thefe were evidently two different Stones ; and indeed Pliny^
and the reft of the antient Naturalifts, if carefully read,
will be found to have clearly diftinguifhed them, and de-
fcribed them to be what they really were, different Species
of the fame Genus. They were both mixed Mattes, both
blue, variegated with white, and yellow ; but differed in
this, that the Cyanus had the yellow Matter, in form of
Duft, irregularly and confufedly mixed among the other
Matter of the Mafs ; whereas the Sapphire was beautifully
fpangled with it, in regular, diftin£t, and feparate Spots.
Thefe were its greateft Chara&eriftic, and obtained in its
conftant Epithets of p^c-oVaro? and xi vcro ^ i 7^' ineft (fays
Pliny i fpeaking of the Cyanus ) ei aliquando et aureus pulvis,
non quails in Sapphirinis, Sappbirus enim et aureii punfth
collucet ; or, according to Sabnaftus, in Sapphiris enim au-
rum punclis collucet ; and others of the Ancients defcribing
it, have tdvifupo^ ^Go$ 'lx cov cnribri$as xfi?*** ^ ? " ^ 'J/**^** and

Upon the Whole, what can be collected from a carefu?
Perufal of the Antients on this Subject is, that the Stone
thev knew by the Name of the Sapphire, was an opake.
Or at beft but imperfectly tranfparent, Gem, of a fine blue,
deeper than that of the Lapis Lazuli, and variegated with
Veins of a white fparry Subftance, and diftinct feparate
Spots of a gold Colour.

* Quam Gemmam Plinius Sapphirum vocat, Cyanus eft feu Lapis Lazuli.
Boet. 183.

The Sapphirus of Pliny is much different from our Sapphire; and his Dc
fcxiption aniwers to the Lapis Lazuli, Wudiu. Matb. FoJJ\ 29.



( 6o)



Ths Sapphire of the Antients was therefore not only not
the fame with the Gem we now know by that Name, but
had not even the leaft Refemblance to it ; I fee no Reafon ?
however, to conclude from hence, as Woodivard and fome
others have done, that our Sapphire was unknown to
them ; it was unqueftionably of the Number of their tranf-
' parent Gems, though not diftinguifhed by a particular ge-
nerical Name : De Laet imagines it was one of the many
Kinds they reckoned of the Anicihyft or Hyacinth ; but I
think it appears much more probably to have been the Gem
they called the Beryllus Aeroides \ as they did, for the fame
Reafon, their blue Jafper "laams a^Uaa-a. Pliny defcribes
the Beryll in general to be (except in Colour) of the Na-
ture of the Emerald, and fays it was brought from the In-
dies. Their Beryll was what we now call the Aqua Mari-
na^ a beautiful tranfparent Gem of a bluifti greeny and
there is abfolutely no Stone which our Sapphire more nearly
refembles than this, and to which, if it were not allowed
a particular generical Name of its own, it could more pro-?
perly be referred ; nor could there, I think, De otherwife
conceived a better Name for it than fuch a one as would
exprefs, as this did, a tranfparent Stone of a * fkie blue,
and (except in Colour) of the Nature of the Emerald.

Our Sapphire is a very elegant, tranfparent Gem, in
moft Species of a beautiful blue, and nearly approaching to
the Ruby in Hardnefs. It owes its Colour to Particles of
Copper difTolved in fome Menftruum of an alkaline Na-
ture, and, as more or lefs of this cupreous Matter has en-
tered its original Compofition, is of a deeper or paler blue,
and in the entire Abfence of it, perfectly colourlefs, and
refembling a Diamond.

We have now among the Jewellers, four Species of this
Gem, i. The blue Oriental Sapphire. 2, The white
Sapphire. 3. The Water Sapphire. 4. The Milk Sapphire,

The firft, or fine blue Oriental Sapphires, are greatly fu-
perior to the Occidental, and are called, in regard to their
deeper or paler Colour, Male and Female. We have



• Sereni cnim coeli et lucidifiimi habet colorem. Beeu



( 61 )

XLIV. m The Emerald has alio its peculiar Pro^



them from the Ifland of Ceylon, and from Pegu, Bifnagar,
Conanor, Calecut, and fome other Parts of the Eaft Indies.

The fecond is principally from the fame Places, and is
a true Sapphire, though wholly colourlefs, being of the fame
Hardnefs with the former, and equalling it in Splendor and
Tranfparency.

The third is the Occidental Sapphire ; thefe we have
principally from Sllefia and Bohemia, They are of different
degrees of blue, but never are fo well coloured as the Ori-
ental, or nearly fo hard y their conftituent Matter coming
nearer the Texture of common Cryftal than the gemmeous
Subftance of the Sapphire.

The fourth, or Milk Sapphire, is the fofteft and leaft
valuable of all ; this is the Leuco-Sappbirus of Authors ; it
is brought from Silefia, Bohemia, and fome other Places 2
It is tranfparent, and its Colour is that of Milk, with a
flight tinge of blue.

The Oriental Sapphire will lofe its Colour in the Fire
without any Lofs of its Splendor or Tranfparency, and :5
jfometimes made by this means to counterfeit the Diamond ;
as the natural white Sapphire is alfo often made to do ; but
tho* thefe are both very beautiful Stones, they want much
of the Hardnefs and Brilliancy of that Gem, and may always
be eafily difcovered by a fkilful Eye.

m The Emerald is a moft beautiful Gem, tranfparent,
and of a lively grafs green, without the leaft Admixture of
any other Colour ; the Romans called this the Neronian or
Domitianian Gem, the Perfians and Indians call it Pacha,
and the Arabians, Zamarrut, from whence it is generally
fuppofed the Word Smaragdus is derived y though, in my
Opinion, there is much more Probability that that W ord
was from the Greek Verb c^dcraru^ luceo, or jplendeo, as
this Gem was ever in great Efteem for its particularly vivi4
Luftre. It has its Colour from fome Particles of Copper dif-
folved in an acid Menftruum, mixed with it at its original:
Concretion ; and will lofe it and become colourlefs in trie
Fire like the Sapphire.

The Antients diftinguiihed twelve Kinds of the Emerald",
fome of which feem, however, to have been rather Stones



( 62 )

Xfioctv icwTtj, f^ijfjcc fc wet *Xut]qv@» 9 y 3 ^we-

^ •crfog Ta ofifAodQi dyaQv}- <$io xcti rd a-<p^t,yi^ic6

^eiy£0@^ J peydXi}. tlXqv el 7xri$djetv T dwFgcc-
(pcag Set \jzv\(> r (ZctGiXkoov toov AiyvTrjicov, <pa,<r)



of the Prafius or Jafper kind^ as they talk of Emeralds
which were not tranfparent, and of enormous Size ; and
others no more than coloured Cryftals and Spars from Cop-
per Mines ; fo that a more fcienttfic way of writing would
probably have much curtailed the Lift.

The prefent great Diftinction is into Oriental and Oc-
cidental ; the former are excefllvely hard, of a lively Co-
lour, and equally beautiful in all Lights. Thefe are of no
determinate Figure, but generally approaching to a round
or oval, the largeft of them feldom coming up to the Size
of a Hazel Nut : But thefe are now become very fcarce,-
and what we have among the Jewellers may much better
be diftinguifhed into the American and European ; of thefe
the American are greatly fuperior to the others both in
Hardnefs and Luftre, and are indeed to the European^ wha&
in moft other Gems the Oriental are to the Occidental.
They are found in many Parts of America^ principally in
Peru. They are often very elegant and beautiful Stones, :
and fometimes not inferior to the Oriental in Colour.
They exceed all other Emeralds in Size, fome of them
having been found of two Inches diameter. And there
are Accounts of much larger.

The European are found in Germany ? Italy ^ England^
and fome other Places* They are the leaft valuable Kind,
and are not only inferior to the others in Hardnefs, Co-
lour, and Tranfparency, but alfo in Size,



( 63 )

perties ; For it affimilates Water, as was before ob-
served, to its own Colour i A Stone of a middling
Size will do this to a fmall Quantity only of the
Water it is put into, a large one to the Whole ;
but a bad one to no more than a little of it, which
lies juft about it. It is alfo good for the Eyes 5 for
which Reafon People £arry about them Seals en-
graved on it, that they may have them to look on.
It is, however, a fcarce Stone, and but fmall ; unlefs
we are to give Credit to the Commentaries of the j£-
gyptianKings, in which it is recorded, that there was
once fent as a Prefcnt from a King of Babylon an



The true Oriental Emerald is of the fame Hardnefs with
the Sapphire ; the American are very different in this re-
flect, and really of different Kindt, fome of them coming
very near the Hardnefs of the Oriental, and others little
exceeding that of common Cryftal \ the European in ge-
neral are of this laft Texture alfo, and, determinately
fpeaking, are rather coloured Cryftals than real Emeralds.

The Property of the Emerald, of aflimilating Water to
its Colour, here commemorated by this Author, has much
puzzled thofe who have written on thefe Subjects fince ;
they have none of them been able to find it in the Eme-
rald, and that for this plain Reafon, that they have all looked
for what the Author never meant : They expected to find,
that the Emerald would impart a Tincture or tailing Co-
lour to Water, by being infufed in it, as vegetable Sub-
ftances, &a do ; whereas Theophrajtus means no more,
than that its Radiations will tinge Water, if made the
Medium through which they pafs with their own Colour,
This had before been obferved of it in regard to the Air,
and it has been faid, * Inficere circa fe repercuffnm aerem.
Our Author obferves, that it will do the fame in W ater ;
and, according to its Size and Goodnefs 3 diffufe a Green-
hefs through that alfo, if laid in it.



* Pliny, L. 37. c.



( 64)

&&<riXieo$ 9 pyx,®* p n ri\p^7rv}X^ 9 ^Xctr^ ^
e r(/7rf}X tw ' dvcweteSg q Kj cv t<£ & Aiog c£zhi<rx,ov

fiu Tcou 3 0 TetvSif KdXx/xfyoov yjzsi *sro?\Acov,



" There are, befide what is here related, many other
Accounts of Emeralds of an enormous Size, though none
fb aftontfhingly incredible as this : All thefe I imagine to
be either abfolutely falfe ; Defcriptions of Things which
never had Being : Or erroneous ; Accounts of Things
which really have been, but have been mifreprefented
through Ignorance of otherwife in the relating. Of this
iaft Kind 1 imagine this /Egyptian Account to be, ana 1
believe that there really were Stories of thefe Shapes and
Sizes among them, but that they were not Emeralds, but
of fome other beautiful green Stone of the Jafper or fome
like Kind.

The Antients, in their Accounts of the Emerald, we
find, have diftinguimed three Kinds of their twelve, as
much fuperior to the others ; thefe were,

1. The Scythian, which greatly excelled all the other
Kinds, and of which Pliny obferves, that quantum Sma-
ragdi a gemmis dijiant, tantum Scytbici a ceteris Smarag-
dis. The Emerald in general was fometimes, from the
particular Excellence of thofe of this Country, called the
Scythian Gem, oj 1kv% by the Greeks, and Scythis by the
Latins.

2. The BaSfrian, which nearly approached to the Scy-
thian in Colour and Hardnefs, but was always fmall. And

3. The /Egyptian, which were dug in the Mountains
about Coptosi and were fometimes of confiderable Size,
but of a muddy Colour, and wanted the vivid Luftre of
the two former Kinds.

Thefe were the Characters of the three fineft Species of

the



( 65 )

Emerald 11 four Cubits in length, and three in breadth.
And that there was in their Temple of Jupiter ', ail
Obelifk compofed of four Emeralds, which was
forty Cubits long, and in fome Places four, and in
others two Cubits wide. Thefe Accounts we have
from their Writings.

XLV. But of thofe which are commonly called
the 0 Tani, the largeft any where known is in 'Tyre $



the Emerald of the Antients ; the other nine were, the
Cyprian^ the /Ethiopian^ the Herminian, the Perftan^ the
jfttic, the Median^ the Carthaginian ^ or, according to fome
of the Critics, Calchedonian^ for they imagine the Word
is mif-fpelt Carchedonii for Chalcedonii^ the Arabian^ called
Cbolus, and the Laconic. Thefe were all Emeralds of a
lower Clafs than the three firft named ; they were in gene-
ral found in and about Copper Mines, and were, many of
them very little deferving the Name of the Emeralds ; they
differed in their degrees of Colour, Hardnefs, Luftre, and
Tranfparency, and the Perfian, in particular, was not pel-*
lucid. To thefe Species of the Emerald, Pliny obferves,
they added the Tanos, a Gem brought from Perfia^ of an
unplealing Green, and foul within. From his Manner of
mentioning it not among, but after the Species of the
Emerald, and faying that others gave it a Place among
them, it is evident that he did not allow it to be a genuine
Emerald.

0 In the old Editions of this Author there was a fmall
Lacuna after rw at the End of which was dvuv, the End
of the Word wanting. This Defect had been in fome
of the firft of the more modern Editions, filled up only
with the Letter T, and the Word made Tavvv but after
Editors, diflatisfied with this, and obferving that the Au*
thor afterwards mentions the Baclrian Emeralds, refined
upon the former way of filling the Lacuna with a fingle
Letter, and made it B a *1f»Wv, in which manner it is now
generally received by the Critics, and ftands in almoft all
Editions : I have, however, brought it back to the old
Tavuv again * which, from what I have to offer in defence

F



( 66 )

Xj ^ TzicouTq ylvijul rig cputrig*

p riys^) 3 to/^ ci/ ktpntlSi Kj yvay-fioig ro-



ot it, I believe cannot but be owned to have been evident-
ly die original Reading. In this I am fenfible I diffent from
die generality of Critics, and, as in fome other Places,
even from Salmafius, the heft, moft diligent, and accurate
of them all, and to whom I am much indebted in many
parts of this Work ; but I had rather diffent from a thou-
fand Critics than from Reafon.

That Bazl^avuv cannot have been the original Reading
here is evident, from the Charafteriftics of that Species be-
fore named, the principal of which was its Smallnefs. Ma-
ny of the other Emeralds were at Times found fmall, but
the Baclrian always fo ; its general Character was, that it
was too fmall for engraving Seals on, and therefore only ufed
for ornamenting Veffels and other Utenfils of Gold. And
it is certain, that if Tbeopbraftus had known this Exception
to its common Character, he would have named it here-
after, when defcribing it, and mentioning its conftant Small-
nefs. But befide the Improbability of a large Pillar of a
Gem ufually too fmall for a Seal ; why do thofe Gentle-
men imagine Tbeopbraftus^ who we fhall find hereafter was
well acquainted with the Stones of this Clafs, mould fuf-
pecl: the Baclrian Emerald to be a baftard Kind : It was
well known to him to be a genuine Emerald, and was ge-
nerally efteemed the fecond in Value ; the beft in the
World except the Scythian.

That he could never, therefore, mean the Baclrian E-
merald here, where he is defcribing a large, and, as he
fufpe&s, baftard Stone, is certain ; and that he did mean
the Tanus, I think is, from his Account, almofl: equal-
ly clear. He is talking of the excefHve Size of Eme-
ralds ; and after having mentioned two Accounts, neither
of which, he tacitly declares, he can believe, he here adds
a third, the Truth of which he feems not to doubt, but
fufpeds the Genuinenefs of the Stone. Pliny ^ we fee, is



(6?)

for there is there a very large Pillar of this Stone in
the Temple of Hercules : But perhaps this is no true
Emerald, but of the Pfeudo-Smaragdus, or baftard
Kind ; for there is fuch a Stone of that Clafs.
XLVI. p The common baftard Emeralds are



juft of the fame Opinion in regard to the TanuS, ranking
it, according to the common Opinion, in the fame Chap-
ter with the Emeralds, but not allowing it a Place among
them, according to his own Sentiments : That Author has
generally copied clofely from Thcophrajius in Things of
this kind, and almoft every where adopted his Opinions ;
'tis highly probable, therefore, that he had read this Paf-
fage with Tajw, and thence formed his Sufpicions of its not
deferving a Place among the genuine Emeralds. And to
this it may be added, that Theophrajhts, though very par-
ticular in his Accounts of the Emerald, and all its Kinds,
has no where elfe mentioned this.

p After the mention of the Tanus, which the Author
fufpecls to be a baftard Kind of Emerald, and which was
brought from remote Places, he now gives the Hiftory of
the Baftard Emerald in general, which he obferves was
common, and produced in Places more frequented. What
the Antients knew by the Names of Baftard Gems, were
Cryftals from Mines, tinged with the Colours of the vari-
ous Gems ; and that by the fame means, the Admixture of
metalline Particles at the Time of their original Concre-
tion : Thefe had therefore the Colour, and in fome degree
the Beauty of the coloured Gems, but wanted their vivid
Luftre and their Hardnefs. And thus the Baftard Emeralds
here mentioned were many of them no more than com-
mon Cryftal tinged by Particles of Copper diflblved in an
Acid. But though this was the general and more determi-
nate Senfe of the Words Pfeudo-Smaragdus^ &c. yet they
were often ufed in a laxer Senfe, and applied to Subftances
of different kinds more eftentially diftinct from the GemClafs
than thefe, only from their having fome Refemblance, per-
haps in fome Cafes in little more than Colour, to the Gems
they had the Credit to be named from. And of this Kind 3



(68)

iroig, ^tJukS fidhi^oty <3&i q q KvV^ov a) -mg
xcogv%eioig 9 Xj cv vjjVg> t£ cRmcetpSpi} Kaf)%vi$cvi.

coaxrtf* tclKKol ^ y Quag, x^ pclQhg Tzoixcnv cv
KuVga cwtIw xgcQ' cujtIw 'zrohXccg* dj(>J<rxovf) 3



3 f I may be indulged in a random Guefs, I fhould ima-
gine this Tanus to have been, which it is evident fome
had placed among the Emeralds, and of which this Author
knew not whether he might not refer it to the Baftard
Emerald, though moft probably it was no more than a
fine Jafper, ranked among thefe Gems by lefs intelligent
People, from its having a good green Colour, and fome
degree of Diaphaneity ; for I have feen Oriental Jafpers,
which, though opake in the Mafs, have been tolerably pel-
lucid, and of a beautiful green, when cut into thin Plates.

The Places where thefe Baftard Emeralds were found,
favour very much the general Account I have given of
them. The Copper Mines of Cyprus could not but abound
in Cryftals tinged with the Matter of the Mine, and refem-
bling Emeralds, And Pliny obferves of the Carthaginian^
that they were always bad, and that the Store of them
failed when the Copper Mines there were exhaufted.
Copper feems, therefore, to have been effential to their
Formation ; and their want of Luftre and Hardnefs fiiews
them not to have been truly Gems, but, what I have be-
fore called them, coloured Cryftals.

Salmaftus is of opinion, that Ka^wn here is an Error,
and that the Word fhould be X«x%>?&m ; and that the Iiland,
the Name of which the Author has not mentioned, was
DemonefuSj in which there were antiently Copper Mines.

Others are for preferving the Word as it ftands, and
fuppofe the Ifland to be Cothon or Coton, mentioned by
Strabo, and placed over againft Carthage. I have every
where paid great Deference to that excellent Critic's Opi-
nions ; but in this cannot agree with him, becaufe if this
be an Error in the Copies of this Author, it is alfo to be
amended in Arijiotle, Pliny, and the reft of the Antients,



( 69 )

produced in Places known and well frequented, e-
ipecially in two ; the Copper Mines of * Cyprus , and
an Ifland over againft Carthage. In this Ifland the
true Emerald is alfo fometimes found. Thefe are
dug out of the Earth as the other, and in Cyprus
there are many Veins of them together ; few, how-



who all have it Carchedonins^ not Chalcedonius ; and I fee
no Reafon why we mould doubt but that there may have
been Copper Mines in Ccthon, though exhaufted or loft
many Ages fince. There are lb many Tallages in the An-
tients, where thefe Alterations are absolutely necefTary,
that a Commentator who wifhes the W orld to have any
Opinion of the Certainty of what they have left us, ought
to be very careful how he adds to the Number without
apparent Neceffity.

q Thefe were the Emeralds which in after Times were
diftinguifhed into two Kinds, and made two of the twelve
Species they reckoned of this Gem, the Cyprian and Car-
thaginian ; but it is evident from this Author's Account,
that they were really no genuine Emeralds, but are two
of the Kinds which a more fcientific way of writing would
have ftruck off from that Lift : Pliny accounting them
Emeralds, we fee, fays they were always bad ; and Theo-
phrajius tells us, they ferved as Chryfocolla, for the folder-
ing of Gold ; and that fome were of an Opinion, which
it is eafy to fee he himfelf alfo favours, that they were of
the chryfocolla Kind ; for he adds, they were evidently of
the fame Colour. This Opinion was unqueftionably very juft,
and thefe Emeralds, as they were called, were no other than a
larger, clearer, and purer Kind of Chryfocolla, differing from
the common Chryfocolla of thofe limes in nothing but that
they were of a brighter Colour and purer Texture, from
there having been lefs of terreftrial or other heterogene
Matter, alfumed into them at their original Formation.
Their anfwering the Purpofes of Chryfocalla in foldering
Gold, is alone a fufficient Proof of the Truth of this, for
had they been real Emeralds, or any thing elfe truly of the
Gem Kind, they never could have ferved for fuch a Ufe.



( 7° )

WTotvicu jaeys0©* \%wcu o-Qyvy®©** ctXX eAar*
rxg cu txoXXqu. §10 £ srgos T xoXXficiv cwTy au-
ra* £ j$v<rtx, noXhf fi> tooxrsQ v\ %(wvoKoXXa.
tviol yz $v} Kj \zsroXoifjt,£dvx(ri r cwtIw <pu<riv eivcu.
Xj fir xqoclv 'srccQGfxoLa, Tvfx&vxcriv.

'AXXci ri j£ r xptrorcoXXa, ScffytXvig £ ci> n>7g
Xf>v<reiois, K m paXXov cv 7i?g xct,Xxa(>vKetois> uojrif*
\v Tug rxg TOTTXg.



r The preceding Account of the Cyprian Emeralds muft
appear very ftrange to any one who imagines the Chryfo-
coila of the Moderns to be the Subflance I here clafs thofe
fuppofed Gems with ; but it is to be obferved, that the
Chryfocolla of the Antients here mentioned, and meant in
that Account, was a Subftance very different from, and
indeed not at all refembling what is at prefent known by
that Name.

Our Borax, which we call Chryfocolla for the fame
Reafon which obtained the. original Chryfocolla its Name,
its Ufe in foldering Gold, is a Subftance which refembles
that of the Antients in no one thing but that Property;
and is a Salt, made by the Evaporation of an ill tafted
and foul Water, of which there are Springs in Perfia^
Mufcovy, and Tartary.

The Chryfocolla^ of this Author, and of the Antients,
was a fparry Matter, of a beautiful green Colour, found
in Copper Mines ; or if in thofe of other Metals, no where
but where there was an Admixture of Copper with the
Metal of the Mine. It owed its Colour, as the green Cry-
frals and Emeralds do, to that Metal, and was generally
found in form of Sand ; but if embodied in Mafles of other
Matter, was always feparable by warning or other Means j
and when feparated, appeared locfe and in the fame Form*
Jt was in different Places of different degrees of Colour^



( 7* )

ever, are found there big enough for Seals to be
engraved on ; but the fmall ones are very nume-
rous, infomuch that they ufe them for foldering of
Gold; which Purpofc they ferve in the manner of
Chryfocolla. Some have imagined them, indeed, to
be of the chryfocolla Kind, and in Colour they cer-
tainly are very like,

XLVII. r The Chryfocolla is found in great Quan-
tity in Gold Mines and even much more plentifully
in thofe of Copper, and the Places near them.

XLVIII. The true Emerald is, as before obfer-
ved, a fcarce Stone ; it feems to be s produced from



but the deeper colour'd, and fuch as refembled the Eme-
rald, was the mofl: efteemed. It is defcribed by Diofcorides
and Pliny to be colons herbte fegetis Icete mrentis^ and por-
rctcei coloris \ which is exactly what the Greeks called ^aViwy.
And Diofcorides , in another Place, fays the beft Chryfo-
colla was that which was xaWap«% w^^acav, fatiate por-
raceum. The Chryfocolla of the Antiens was therefore ve-
ry different from that of the Moderns ; and was what, in
a purer State, and larger Size, might in thofe Times very
naturally be, and really was, accounted a Species of the
Emerald.

s The Jafper is often the Matrix of the Prafius, and that
of the Emerald; this latter is often called the Root or
Mother of the Emerald, as that Gem is fometimes found
adhering to it : And, indeed, there are often Parts of the
Prafius, which, when cut, are not diftinguiftiable from ge-
nuine Emeralds. The Jafper itfelf alfo often emulates the
Colour and Appearance of the Prafius and Emerald, And
indeed when we confider what has already been obferved,
in regard to the original Formation of Gems, we cannot
wonder if they are often found degenerating in Appear-
ance, or improving into, and much oftener affixed upon,
or in fome meafure blended into, the Subftance of one ano-
ther. What the particular Stone here mentioned by the
Author was, it is not eafy to afcertain, perhaps fome Stone,



( 72 )

wot; h Kvirga xiOov, y\g to j£ yi^icrv X fidgety $og
id YifAicv 3 'idcotrig* cog &7rco peloiG&&XyiKijag ^>m §

(aQ'. ,; E«r* rig ewrvig tfSacrloi vrfug ji h&fiTrQpv.

v. AvTfj te $rj <zj£tr]y} tJ? S'twdph K&l ™ *
xv(/ov. ^ ^ ox txtx yhvtyty rd ir^uyiStcc. (£



which they improperly reckoned among the Emeralds, per-
haps a Prafius, clearer than ordinary, affixed to a Jafper,
as it frequently is, as well as to Cryftals and other Sub-
ftances ; perhaps no more than a Jafper, finer than ordi-
nary at one End ; for it was often found in thofe Time's
green and pellucid; viret & Jape tranjlucet Jct/pis^ -fays
Pliny^ L 38. eg, and poffibly a true genuine Emerald af-
fixed to it, as often to the Prafius, and affixed to, or im-
merfed in others : But, whatever it was, it is certain, from
the prefent more rational Syftem of the Origin of the Gem
Clafs, that it had been in this mixed State from the Time
of its original Concretion ; and would affuredly have for
ever continued fo, there being no Agent in nature of Power
to have changed the Jafper Part into the Nature of the
other.

The medicinal Virtues of the Emerald, according to the
Antients, were fo many, that, to look over their Accounts
of them, one would imagine it deferved even more Efteem
as a Medicine than as a Gem : They accounted it a certain
Remedy, taken internally in Powder, for Poifons, and the
Bites of venomous Beafts, for Fluxes of the Belly, the
Plague, and peftilential Fevers, Haemorrhages, and Dyfen-
teries ; the Dofe was from four to ten Grains. External-
ly worn as an Amulet, they efteemed it a certain Reme-
dy for Epilepfies, and imagined it had the Power of eafing
Terrors, and driving away evil Spirits ; tied to the Belly
or Thigh of Women with-child, they attributed to it die
Virtues of the Eagle-ftone, of flaying or forwarding Deli-
Very 5 and thought it an infallible Prefervative of Chaftity,



( 73 )

the Jafper, For it is faid there has been Found in
Cyprus a Stone, the one halF oF which was Eme-
rald and the other Jafper, as not yet changed.

XLIX. There is fome Workmanlhip required
to bring the Emerald to its Luftre, For originally
it is not Fo bright.

L. It is, however, excellent in its Virtues, as
is alFo the Laps 1 Lyncurius^ which is likewiFe ufed



to the Violations of which it had that innate Abhorrence,
that if but worn on the Finger in a Ring, it flew to pieces
on the committing them.

It may not be amifs to have thus once given an Account
of the Virtues the Antients attributed to Gems ; for they
had almoft as large a Lift for every Kind as this. The
greateft part of thefe cannot but be feen at flrft view to be
altogether imaginary ; and as to the Virtues of the Gems
in general, it is now the reigning Opinion, that they are
nearly all fo, their greateft Friends allowing them no other
than thofe of the common alkaline Abforbents. However,
whether the metalline Particles, to which they owe their
Colours, are, in either Quantity or Quality, in Condition
to have any Effecl: in the Body, is a Matter worthy a ftricl:
and regular Tryal; and that would at once decide the
Queftion between us and the Antients, and mew whether
we have been too rafh, or they too fuperftitious.

1 There has been more Confufion and Error about the
Lapis Lyncurius of the Antients, than about any other
Subftance in the whole foflile Kingdom. What I have to
offer in regard to it, is very different from the gene-
rally received Opinions ; thefe are, however, firft to be
examined for if they are right, this has no Title to be
heard.

The flrft and moft generally received is, that it was
what we now call the Belemnites : This is the Opinion of
Woodward^ &c. &c. &c. how true this is, is to be examin'd
from their Accounts ; and as they are, moft of them, only
Copies, and thofe often erroneous ones, of this Author, he



(74)



is, where his Defcriptions are long enough, always firft to
confulted, and moft relied on ; and from his Words I ven-
ture to pronounce it evident, that the Lapis Lyncurius was
not the Belemnites. He firfl; fays, it was fit for engraving
Seals on ; which every one who ever faw a Belemnites muft
pronounce impoflible to have been meant of it ; its Tex-
ture rendering it the moft improper Subftance imaginable
for fuch Ufes. And next, that it was of a very foiid Tex-
ture, like that of the Stones or Gems the firft Sight of a
Belemnites muft alfo prove, that this was not meant of it ;
for it is not of a folid Texture, nor of a Grain, as we call
it, any way refembling that of a Stone, but compofed of
a number of tranfverfe Striae, and of the Texture, fpecific
Gravity, and Hardnefs of Talk, which could never give it
a Title to what our Author fays of the Lyncurius ; that it
was not only hard and folid, but r^ewWvj, extremely fo.
Hence, I prefume, I may firft venture to pronounce this,
which is the common Opinion, evidently erroneous, and
that the Lapis Lyncurius of the Antients was not the Be-
lemnites.

The few who diffent from this Opinion, of the Num-
ber of whom are Gcoffray^ Gefner *, &c. hold, that the
Lapis Lyncurius of the Antients was no other than Amber.
This is the fecond and only other Opinion worth naming,
and the Favourers of it bring many Paflages from the Copiers
of the Antients, to confirm it : All which ferve to prove
what I have before obferved, that many quote the Antients
who have never read them; and mew how ufeful, and, in-
deed, abfolutely neceflary, a correct Edition of this Work
of this Author is, in Researches of this kind. This Opi-
nion is even more eafily than the other proved erroneous
from the Words of this Author, who not only compares
the Lyncurius , in fome of its Properties, to Amber, which,

* Ego Lyncurium a fuccino differre non video : et id quoque pro Gemma
fcjtbitum olim, prefer tini quod aureo colore pellucet et fplendet, minime
dubito.



( 75 )

for engraving Seals on, and is of a very folid Tex-
ture, as Stones are ; it has alfo an attractive Power,
like that of Amber, and is faid to attraft not only



as I have before obferved in a parallel Cafe in the Note
on the Sapphire, is fufficient Proof, that they cannot be
the fame ; as no body would ever think of comparing a
Thing to itfelf : But after having gone through a compleat
Defcription of the Lyncurius, according to the received,
tho' eroneous, Opinion of thofe Times, of its being pro-
duced from the Urine of the Lynx ; he begins a feparate
Account of Amber under its own proper Name, and
fhews he was well acquainted with its Nature and Proper-
ties, and knew it to be a native Foffile. Hence it is there-
fore alfo evident, that the Lapis Lyncarius was not Am-
ber, and that the generally received Opinions of it are
both evidently erroneous. That fuch as had not read the
Antients themfelves mould fall into Errors of this kind,
from the Cbfcurity and Confufion of thofe who copied from
them, we cannot wonder. But here it may not be amifs
to obferve, that it is not the Antients themfelves, but
thefe Copiers and Quoters of them, who are generally ob-
fcure. EpiphaniuS) who was better acquainted with them,
has made a different Guefs, and is, indeed, the firft Au-
thor who has had the leaft Thought of what I fhall at-
tempt to prove is evidently the Truth in regard to this
Stone.

What it is not, has been fuirkiently proved. It remains
to enquire, what it really is : The Way to judge of this
is, to confider what the Antients have left us about it :
What TJoeophraJius fays we have before us ; that it was of
a ftonyTexture is plain from his Account, and may be con-
firmed from all thofe who wrote more determinately ; they
have always called it, ti&og aa/ya^o? Epiphanius has, tv^o-
f/.E9 $\ Xocfye^ov &tw xcLNkpivuv WiQov. And Plihy^ 1. 8. c. 38.
Lyncum humor ita reddiiu^ ubi gignuntur^ glaciatur arefcique
in Gemrnas Carbunculis fmiiles^ & igneo colore fulgentcs Lyn-
curium vocatas. Can any one imagine this a Defcription
of a Belemnites ? All that we find in the Antients about it,



(7M

dxxd £ %u\kov (£ crityov, tdv {/ \B7rjog. coazrig £

vd. v Eti 5 2$&>$*vn re ctyoSyi £ *&vppd. BeA-
t/w ^ t# r dyyiM, vj rd r ripsaw, igif rd r
dppevw, ij rd t By\Xelcov. dg Kj £ vgoffig SfaQt*
l>x<ry$, £ ? vrovetv, *; vrovav* Kj £ t£ Qd^dlog
%Xcog <pu<rect)g 9 9 %W>oTef>ov, 70 § JygoT^ov.

l/G'. Evf/cKhHri y dvopvrjcvjeg ol ifiTT&got. Kctjct-
XffjTrj?) j& Kj \7rct11dra4 yijv otccv xgqcy. yiv?)

3 £ kc^b^FizcIx Tig card? whelm.



in fhort, is of this Kind, and determines the Lapis Lyncu-
rius to have been a tranfparent Gem, of no determinate
Shape, and of a yellowifli red or flame Colour, fometimes
paler, and fometimes deeper, which diftinguiflied it into
Male and Female, as we mall fee hereafter in this Author ;
and of a Texture fit for engraving on. Had the Antients
meant to have defcribed our Belemnites, they would not
only not have named any one of thefe Characters, but would
certainly have defcribed its Shape, which is the moft ftriking,
obvious, and remarkable thing about it. We are therefore
to feek for fome Stone better anfwering this Defcription 5
and this we find, even to the utmoft Exa&nefs, in the Gem
which we now call the Hyacinth, which it is alfo evident
they have never defcribed under any other Name but this ,
(for what they called the Hyacinth, was a Stone of a very
different Kind, and reckoned by us either among the Gar-
nets or Amethyfts) and which it is not eafy to conceive



(77)

Straws and fmall pieces of Sticks, but even Copper
and Iron, if they are beaten into thin Pieces. This
Diodes affirms.

LI. The Lapis Lyncurius is pellucid, and of a
fire Colour : And thofe Stones which are produced
from the Animal in its native Wildnefs, are better
than thofe from the tame ; as alfo thofe from the
Male, than thofe from the Female : As the dif-
ferent Nourifhment the Creature eats, and the dif-
ferent Exercife it ufes, as well as the Difference of
its whole Habit of Body, in being either dryer or
moifter, make great Differences in the Stones.

LII. They are found, in digging, by People
who are fkilful ; though the Creature, when it has
voided its Urine, hides it, and heaps the Earth to-
gether about it. The polifliing thefe Stones is
alfo a Work of great Trouble.



how they could better or more exactly have defcribed,
than they have in their Accounts of the Lyncurius. I have
before obferved, that Theophrajius mentions more than one
Species of it, and we at prefent know three. Pliny feems,
in the PafTage I have quoted from him, to have meant that
beautiful Species of it which we call the Hyacintba la bella y
a Gem in great Efteem, of a flame Colour with an Ad-
mixture of a deep Red, but without any tendency to Black-
nefs. Thefe we have from Cambaia^ and other Parts of
the Eqft Indies , and fometimes from Bohemia , but not fo
hard or beautiful as the Oriental. Our fecond Kind are
the faffron-colour'd \ thefe are next in Efteem after the
La Bella , and are from the fame Places. The third are the
amber-colour'd \ thefe have no mixture of red •> thefe were
the female Lyncuria of the Antients, and are the leaft e-
fteemed of all : They are found in Silefia 9 Bohemia^ Spain^
and Italy.



( 7* )

vy. 'Ett« 3 Xj J* v ijAex/goy A«'0@*. ^ }S o^tw-



v This is much to the Honour of Tbeophrajius. I have
before had occafion to obferve, that in departing from the
Opinions of this Author, After-ages became more and
more ignorant, their Syftems erroneous, and their Accounts
full of Confufion and Obfcurity ; till in fome late Ages we
have been at the pains of unlearning what our Forefathers
had been taught by them, and now have brought our-
felves to Syftems of real Knowledge, by clofer Obferva-
tions of Nature. In many Cafes, we find all that we have
been ftudying for is to know juft what we might have
learnt from the Works of this Author alone. Of this I
have before given fome lnftances ; and the Sentence before
us, is another very remarkable one: That Amber is a
Stone, or native Foffile, the beft of the modern Wri-
ters feem as certain, as that Gems, Rocks, or Mi-
nerals are fo. It has, however, for many Ages been
judged by fome, to be a vegetable, and by others an animal,
Subftance. And a thoufand idle and incoherent Syftems
have been received as to its Forma tion : Diof cor ides thought
it an Exfudation of the black Poplar ; and P//Vzy, of the
Pine ; and others, the Fat or Semen of Whales. And it
is but of late, that the World has been again brought
into the Opinion, that it is, as this Author efteem-
ed it, a mere native Foflile : It is of various Colours, white,
brown, and yellow, and is found in Maffes of different
Shapes and Sizes, on the Shores, in many Parts of the
World, particularly in PruJJia -> but where-ever it is found
on the Shores, it is alfo to be found, if carefully fought
for, in the neighbouring Cliffs, the Sea having had no
Share in bringing it to light ; but that it has, in Storms
and high Tides, wafh'd it out of the Strata of thofe Cliffs,
and cleaned and rounded it at the Edges^ by its conftant



(79)

LIII. v Amber alfo is a Stone : It is dug out of
the Earth in Liguria, and has, like the before
mentioned, a Power of Attraction : But the greateft
and mod evident attractive Quality is in that Stone
which attra6ts w Iron. But that is a fcarce Stone,



tofling it about, and rubbing it againft harder Subftances.
Amber is naturally inverted with a Cruft, as the Flints
and other natural foflile Nodules are it is found in this
State, in digging in Prujfia, Pomerania, and ether Places,
and is called Rock Amber. When it has been warned out
of its native Place by the Sea, and diverted of this Cruft,
it is called Wafh'd Amber, or Smooth Amber. We have
of both thefe Kinds in England \ the rough is found in
digging to confiderable Depths in Clay, but is commonly
of an ill Colour, and impregnated with the vitriolic Salts,
with which almoft all our Clay-pits abound, in fuch a de-
gree, as often to crumble and fall to pieces, when it has
been fome time expofed to the Air : The other, or Wafh'd
Amber, we have on many of our Shores, particularly the
Northern, and that fometimes not inferior to the fineft of
the PruJJian.

w The Author takes occafion here, among the Stones en-
dued with an attractive Quality, to mention the Loadftone,
the moft known and moft powerful of them all. The an-
tient Greeks called this, 'Hfccxhux AiGoc, and the later, MaRrt?
tifios. It has fince been by fome improperly called, inftead
of Heraclea, Herculea, as if it had obtained its Name from
Hercules ; whereas it had it from Her ac lea, a City of Zy-
dia, near which it was found in great abundance. Kix^ificu

$1 «tos octto nrriq 'Hgcotte'iaq t£s h Av¥ia, Txohzu)^ fays HefychillS.

This, therefore, was its original Name among the antient
Greeks, and indeed its only Name, for the Word Magne-
tis, which was alfo in common Ufe among them, lignified
a quite different Stone : Their MaJ^r*? ?u0o? was a white
filvery-looking Stone, with no Power of Attraction, and
in frequent Ufe for turning into Veffels of many kinds, as
this Author obferves in another Place. And the later Greeks
calling the Loadftone by the fame Name which both had



t



(So)

Taroiet ^ O^QcLcriv. £ 73 9 Av9&kiov, Xj y y oft(f>oij%
Siatpoivij*



from Magnefia in Lydia, the Place where they were found,
have occafioned almoft endlefs Errors in the lefs cautious
Writers fince. The Loadftone is a ferruggineous Sub-
ftance, found in many Parts of the World, and in Maffes
of different Size : It is commonly found in or about Iron
Mines, and among ferrugineous Matter. We have them
from moft Parts of the World, and there are very good
ones found in England ; there have been many picked up
In Devonflnre and the neighbouring Counties, as well as
other Parts of the Kingdom ; and I not long fince found
a Fragment of one, which will take up a fmall Needle.,
within two Miles of London.

* The Hyaloides has been by different Authors fuppofed
to be the Afteria, the Iris, the Lapis Specularis, and the
Diamond ; all which feem very random Gueffes, and liable
to Objections not to be furmounted. The Stone, I think,
appears rather to be the Ajlrios of Pliny, which he de- 1
fcribes to be a fine white or colourlefs Gem, approaching
to the Nature of Cryftal, and brought from the Indies :
His Words are, having been fpeaking of the Afteria, Si-
militer Candida eft, qu<z vocatur Aftrios, cryjiallo propinquans,
in India nafcens, & in Pallenes Lit tori bus. Intus a centro ceu
Jlella lucet fulgore Lung Plena. Quidam caufam nominis
reddunt quod A/iris oppofita fulgore?n rapiat, & regerat ;
optimam in Carimania gigni nulla?nque minus obnoxiam vitio,
I. 37. c. 9. And Stones of this Kind have of later Years
l>een found near the River of the Amazons in America, and
taken for Diamonds.

'The



(.8i )

and found in but few Places : It ought, however,
to be ranked with thefe Stones, as it poffefles the
fame Quality*

LIV. There are, befide thefe, many other Gems
ufed for the engraving Seals on as the x Hyaloides,
which refle&s the Images of Things, and is pel-
lucid ; the Carbuncle, and the y Omphax as alfo
2 Cryftal, and the a Amethyft ; both which are,
in like manner, pellucid.



y The Omphax was mod probably the Beryllus Oleaginus
of Pliny ^ which, from what little is left us about it, ap-
pears to have but little deferred to be ranked among the
Beryls, and feems much more properly diftinguifhed by a
particular Name, as this Author has allowed it.

z Cryftal is the moft known and moft common of all
this Clafs of Stones ; our Lapidaries diftinguifh it into two
Kinds, the Sprig Cryftal, and Pebble Cryftal. The firft is
found in the perpendicular FhTuresof Strata, in Form of an
hexangular Column, adhering to the Matter of the Stra-
tum at its Bafe, and terminating at its other End in a
Point. The other is found lodged at random in the ftony
or earthy Strata, or loofe among Gravel, and is of no cer-
tain or determinate Shape or Size, but refembles the com-
mon Flints or Pebbles in Form.

There are, befide thefe, regular and hexangular Cryftals,
found alfo lodged in the Strata, fometimes pointed at both
Ends, fometimes covering the external Surface of fmall
roundifti Nodules, and fometimes (hot all over the Infide
of hollow ones of various Sizes : Thefe laft are called the
echinated and concave cryftalline Balls; and the former
the double-pointed Cryftal, Cryjt alius in acumen utrinque defi-
nens. The Pebble Cryftals- of England are often of very con-
ftderable Hardnefs ; and fome have been found there which
the Lapidaries have faid approached to the white Sapphire.
The pointed and hexangular are what Authors have called
Iris's and Pfeudo-ada?nantes. The Antients were of opi-
nion, that Cryftal was only Water congealed in long trait



( 82 )

vs. Ev{j<ntovf) 3 j£ cwtcu 9 (c li 2a'g<W,

v?. Kcu ctXXui S\ cog wgoeigrfy, izrgoTegov <5W-
<Po^g tx%(rat 9 ^ Quvcovvpoi Tir^og dxXqXocg. TS

Xctffix, 7d p dicttycivig, eguQgGTtjio)! xotXetrui
h fryXv 7} J) hutycivig p, fjLsXdvJzfiov ^, <£ ct^criv.
itj Tci Xufaxt/ct, axrcwTtog. gov tv ByXu &ct(pa-
veregov, kcc) ^uvdore^ov. actXetron q (c c Kvuvog> 0
j£ cVfplw, 0 3 BqXvg* fjLtXdvJeg®* 3 0 duplw*



of Time, into an Ice, more durable than the common.
And Pliny thought it was no where to be found but in
exceffively cold Regions ; but we are now very certain,
that it is found even in the hotteft.

a The Amethyft of the Antients was the fame with the
Gem known yet by that Name : It is a very elegant
Stone, of a purple or violet Colour, in different de-
grees of Deepnefs. It is found both in the Fiffures, and
lodged among the Matter of the Strata ; and fometimes,.
like common Cryftal, in concave Balls, refembling the
iEtitae. It owes its Colour to Iron : And common Cry-
ftal and Spar are often found in and about Mines of that
Metal, tinged in different degrees to a Refemblance of it.
The Antients reckoned five Species of the Amethyft, dif-
fering in degrees of Colour ; and we have at leaft as many
among the jewellers at prefent, though they are not at the
pains to diftinguifh them by particular Names ; they
divide them in general into Oriental and Occidental ;
the former are very fcarce, but of great Hardnefs, Luftre,
and Beauty ; the latter are from many Places, particularly
Saxony y Germany^ and Bohejnla : They are often as finely
coloured as the Oriental, but are foft as Cryftai : In Eng-
land we alio fometimes find them very beautiful, and of
tolerable Hardnefs.

The Amethyft lofes its Colour in the Fire, like the Sap-



( *3 )

LV. Thefe, as alfo the Carneh'an, are fometimes
found in the dividing other Stones.

JLVI. Other Differences there alfo are, as was
before oblerved, in Gems of the fame Name : As
in Carnelians, that Species which is pellucid and
of a brighter red, is called the b Female-, and that
which is pellucid and of a deeper red, with fome
tendency to Blacknefs, the Male. The Lapis
Lyncurius is diftinguifhed in like manner, the
Female of which is more tranfparent, and of a
paler yellow ; and the c Lapis Cyamis is in the fame
manner divided into Male and Female the Male
is in this alfo of the deeper Colour.

phire and Emerald : The Oriental kind, diverted of its
Colour by this means, comes out with the true Luftre and
Water of the Diamond ; and is fo nice a Counterfeit of
it, that even a very expert Jeweller may be deceived by
it.

b The Divifion of the Gems into Male and Female, from
their deeper or paler Colour, I have before obferved, is
in a manner general, and runs through almoft the whole
Clafs ; the Male is always the deeper, the Female the pa-
ler ; tho' both Kinds, as they are called, are often found
in the fame Stone. This Difference in the degree of Co-
lour, happens from the different Quantity of the metalline
Particles, to which they wholly owe their Colours, mixed
with diem at their original Formation. And I make no
doubt, but that there are fome of all the Kinds perfectly
colourlefs, if v/e were enough acquainted with their exacT:
Texture and decree of Hardnefs to be able to diftinguifh
them by it ; and that if v/e were, we mould as furely
find white Emeralds, and white Amethyfrs, as white Sap-
phires ; there being fcarce any of the coloured Gems of
which we do not fee the Male and Female, as they are
called, and of which fome Specimens of the Female are-
no t found nearly as colourlefs as Cryftal.

c TheCarnelian and Lapis Lyncurius have beenfpoken of
already. The Gem which the Antients called Cyanus, is

G 2



(84)

v£. To S' d cvv%tov 9 fiutlij X&xa (pctiw <&ctg
*&AA^A#. 79 $' dpeQvcrov oIvcottov tj[ %goa.



what we now know by the Name of Lapis Lazuli, a
Stone common among us in the Tops of Snuff-boxes and
other Toys ; and of which the glorious blue Colour called
Ultramarine by the Painters is made. This has alfo been
already treated of occafionally in the Notes on the Sapphire.
To what is there faid of it, it may be not improper to
add, that it is a true Copper Ore, generally yielding about
~ of that Metal, and commonly a little Silver : It is of
two Kinds, the Oriental and German, the former is from
Afia, Africa, and the Eaji Indies ; the Colour produced
from this is not fubjecT: to Injuries, from Time or any other
Accidents : the German is found not only in the Kingdom
whofe Name it bears, but in Spain, Italy, and Saxony al-
fo, in Mines of different Metals, particularly of Copper.
The Colour made from this is fubjecT: to Injuries from ma-
ny Accidents, and in time turns green. The Stone, where-
ever found, is generally of the fame Figure and Complexi-
on, excepting, that the Oriental is harder than the other
kinds. It is compofed always of three Subftances, with
which there is fometimes mixed a fourth, a kind of Mar-
chafite, of a mining yellow Colour, and flying off in the
Calcination with a fulphureous Smell, like that of the
common Pyritae ; the other three Subftances, of which it
is conftantly compofed, are hard, fine cryftalline Spar, fa-
turated with Particles of Copper, and by them ftained to
a beautiful deep blue : This is what may be called the Ba-
lis, and is variegated with a white cryftalline Matter, and
a yellow Talk of the foliaceous Kind ; but the Flakes of it
are fo fmall, that the Whole appears in the Form of a
Powder.

d The Onyx is a femi-pellucid Stone, of a fine flinty Tex-
ture, taking an excellent Polifh, and is ftriclly of the Flint
Clafs.

I have before obferved, in the Note on the Alabafter,
that that Stone had, from its fimilar Ufe among the An-
tients, alfo the Name of this Gem 3 and that great Errors



(8 5 )

LVII. There is alfo the d Onyx, variegated with
white and brown placed alternately ; and the Ame-
thyft, which refembles Red-wine in Colour.



had been occafioned, by later Authors not underftanding
always which of the two they meant. But this is not all
the Confufion there has been in regard to this Stone ; for
the Antients have, many of them, defcribed it fo loofely
and indeterminately, that it is fcarce pofliblc, from their
Writings, to fix any Characlieriftic, or fay dcterminately
what their Onyx was : And we find, in confequence of this,
many different Stones defcribed as Onyxes by the Writers
fince. It is to the Honour of Thcophrajtus, however, to be
obferved, that he has ftrictly and exaclly determined what
this Stone was ; and that if the late Writers had confuked
him, inftead of being led into a thoufand Mazes by the lefs
fcientific Authors fince, they would never have defcribed
Carnelians, and a multitude of other more different Stones,
under this Name ; but have known, that the Onyx was as
much a diftincT: Stone with him, as the Emerald or the
Amethyrf, and as different from many of thofe they have
defcribed under its Name, as they from one another.

From his Account we are to determine, then, that the
Onyx is a Stone of a whitifh Ground, variegated w T ith Zones
of brown: And fuch are the true and genuine Onyxes we fee
at prefent. What may farther be added to its Defcription is,
that its Ground is often of the Colour of the human Nail,
bright and mining ; the Zones are laid in perfect Regulari-
ty, and do not, according to the Judgment of the niceft
Diftinguifhers of the prefent Times, exclude it from the
Onyx Oafs, of whatfoever Colour they are, except red,
in which cafe it takes the Name of Sardonyx : The Colour
of the Ground, and Regularity of the Zones, are therefore
the diftinguifhjng CharaSeriftics of this Stone : And in the
laft, particularly, it differs from the Agate, which often
has the fame Colours, but placed in irregular Clouds, Veins,
or Spots.

We have our Onyxes both from the Eaft and WcJ} In-
dies \ as alfo from Spain, Italy, and Germany \ and there
have been tolerably fine ones found in England*

G3



( 86 )



a The Agate is another of the femi-pellucid Stones of
the Flint Clafs ; it is of the fame degree of Hardnefs with
the Onyx, and differs from it, as was before obferved, in
the irregular and uncertain manner of its Spots, Clouds,
and Variegations, being placed. It has ccmmonly a grey
horny Ground ; its Variegations are of different Colours,
and often moft beautifully difpofed \ reprefenting fome-
times, very exactly and elegantly, Trees, Shrubs, and
Plants, Clouds, Rivers, and Forefts, and fometimes Ani-
mals : There are Stories of very Arrange Reprefentations on
fome of them ; and, indeed, the beautiful Images we often
riow fee upon fome, may incline one to believe many of
the ftrange Things we hear of them.

The Antients have diftinguiftied Agates into many Spe-
cies, to each of which they have given a Name, importing
its Difference from the common Agate ; whether it were
in Colour, Figure, or Texture : From their Colours, they
called the red Hccmachates, the white Leucachate^ and the
plain yellowifti, or wax-coloured, Cer achates. Thofe which
approached to, or partook of the Nature of other Stones,
they diftinguifhed by Names compounded of their own ge-
nerical Name, and that of the Stone they rcfembled or
partook of : Thus that Species which feemed allied to the
Jafpers they called ^ a fp- Achates ; and that which partook
of the Nature of the Carnelian, Sard- Achates ; and thofe
which had the Refemblance of Trees and Shrubs on them,
they called, for that Reafon, Dcndr achates : Thefe are
what our Jewellers at this time call Mocho-S tones, but
improperly ; for they are not the Product of that King-
dom, but are only ufed to be brought from other Countries,
and fhipp'd there for the Ufe of our Merchants.

Others they have named idly from their imaginary Vir-
iu'. s ; as that Kind which they fuppofed had the Power of
conquering the Rage of Lions 3 and other wild Beafts 3 they


( §7 )

LVIII. The a Agate alfo is an elegant Stone ; it
has its Name from the River Achate in Sicily > and
is fold at a great Price.

LIX. There was alfo once found in the Gold
Mines of b Lampfacus, an admirably beautiful Gem,



called therefore Asovlo^e?, which fome have imperfectly
tranflated Leonina only, and fuppofe the Stone to have been:
fo named, from its being of the Colour of a Lion's Skin :
How much they were miftaken, we may know from this
remarkable Defcription of it in fo old an Author as Or-
pheus ;

Ta zxi fjitv wp r j7zpoici ^sovlocs pr,v ovofvpveci

Pliny feems not to have perfectly underftood the Hiftory
of this Species ; as he is too often alfo in other Places
guilty of Errors, in regard to the Greek Authors from whom
he takes his Accounts of Things. Indeed it feems much to
be queftioned, whether the Stone itfelf be not as much the
product of Imagination, as the Virtues afcribed to it :
However, as there was fo evident a Proof as this, of its
having obtained its Name from its fuppofed Virtues, be-
caufe it was mo»\m ^^sVaV, not its Colour, I could not
omit giving it a Place, to afcertain the original Meaning of
a Name fo much mifunderftood.

The Agate was firft difcovered in the River Achate^
from which, as our Author obferves, it had its Name, but
has fince been found to be the Product of almoft every
Nation upon Earth. The fineft in the World are thofe of
the Eajl Indies : It is found alfo in great plenty in Italy y
Spa in , and Germany^ where there are fometimes alfo very
elegant ones ; England is not without them : In general,
the EngUJh are not good ; but fome few of them have been
found little inferior to the fineit of the Oriental.

b La?npfacus was a City of Afia^ near the Hellcfponi, in

G 4



( 88 )

gpv, o-Q&yltSiov yXvfytgov dv£7rtfi(p()q B<x<riXei, 3^
to <z&ct]cv.

YLou cubrut j£ dfjua, t« tt#A« xcu 73 oordviov
tXXG-iv. cu 3 ^ ok *EXXd$(&, <$CVgAe<re£^.

%d. Oiov id dvQpjLKiov Td t£ 'O^xofipx $ 'A^-
xu&ctg c . €^ ^ * £r(g^ fjLtXdv}tf>&> toJ X/tf. xar-
C5r7g^ J) s£ c667^ *zroi$(rt< Kj o T()oiQqvi@* d , £r(3^»
§ "sro/ft/A©*, r# j£ (potvucoig, rd ^ Xdjx,o7g %gd-
pctcri* <zroiKiX(&> 'j £ o KoaJv9i(&, mg ajujug
X(>dfAci<ri. txrXlu) to XdjKQTtpov Xj %Ao^o«Jg^g^oy, 75
J" oAou woXXot TvFxdvxtrw ol 7di2toi*

'AAA* 0; <z3%ir]ot azrdvtoi, Xj e£ ixlym tv-



the Neighbourhood of which there were Mines worked for
Gold, Silver, and Copper. What the Gem was, here
mentioned by the Author^ there is no determining ; but
in all probability, from its having a Place fo near the A-
gates, it was a more than ordinarily beautiful Stone of that
Kind.

c The Arcadian Carbuncles of the Antients, were of
the Garnet kind, but fo deep coloured, that they were
little efteemed \ and thofe of other Countries, which were
of the fame kind, but little regarded among them.

d The Trazenian I have before obferved in the Notes
on the Anthrax, was w r hat we call the Amandine, a Stone
now little known or regarded. And the Corinthian feems
to have been only a meaner and worfe Kind of it : Toward
the end of the Defcription of this Specie?, after the Word
nrfiiv, there was a Lacuna, affording room for a Word of
about three or four Syllables ; it is here filled up from Sal-
mflfas, whofe Motive for giving the Word XsWrsgo* was,
that Pliny * who has copied this Paffage from Thcophrajius^



( 8 9 )

on which, after it had been fent to Tyre, a Seal was
engraved, which for its Excellence was prefented
to the King.

LX. Thefe are very beautiful, and very fcarce :
But thofe produced in Greece, are of the meaneft
and worft Kind.

J^XI. Such are alfo the Carbuncles of Orchome-
nus in c Arcadia, which are darker coloured than
the Chian ; but are, however, ufcd for making
Mirrors ; and the Trcezenian d , which are varie-
gated with purple and white : The Corinthian is
alfo of this Kind ; it is variegated with the fame
Colours, but is whiter and paler. And finally,
there are many others of this Sort.

LXII. But the moft perfeft and valuable Car-
buncles are fcarce, and had only from a few Places %



{hews, that he had read or underftood it fo, by giving pal-
lidlcres & candldiores for it. And it may be obferved in
general, that there is no better way of judging of the ob-
fcurer Paffages of the Antients at this time, than by ob-
ferving how they have underftood one another.

e The Antients we find made great Diftindtion between
the different Species of the Carbuncle ; fome of which they
fet alrnoft no Value on, and others they efteemed at a
very high Rate. This Author has very carefully and ex-
actly diftinguiflied and afcertained the Places of the one as
well as the other.

The Carthaginian or Garamantine Carbuncle was, as I
have obferved in another Place, what we now call the
Garnet, &c. This Place was fo famous for it, that it was
called by many the Carchedonius Lapis, Ka^Atc? x»0o$.

Quo Carchedonios optas ignes lapideos

Nifi ut fcintitlent ? Publ. Syr.

That the Carthaginian and Garamantm Carbuncle were



( 90 )

"lounrig f , dig $ «V roc XidoxoWa ^ T ^



really the fame Stone, is afcertained by Strabo, ^ Si Cv\^

Kufi%n$vvw aoiM^ovlcct TuGo*. And Epipbanius adds his Confir-
mation of this Place being famous for the Carbuncle, y'.vslut,
SI ip Kccpx^ovi r% Ai&vw, Pliny, and other of the Anticnts,
confirm alfo their being found in Egypt and Ma ([ilia ; and
Salmafius has very judicioufly rendered the laft mentioned
Place intelligible, by altering it from -*n(pu> as it always be-
fore was written, to the Name of a Kingdom in the
inland part of /Ethiopia. It is to be obferved, however,
that the following Ages grew nicer in regard to their
Gems ; for two of the Kinds we find here placed among
the more perfect and valuable, the Egyptian, and (accord-
ing to the juft mentioned Emendation of -f^o?) Ethio-
pian, were even before the Days of Pliny, ranked among
the meaner Kinds ; Archelaus cjf in JEgypto circa Thsbas
nafci tradidit fragilcs, v cm fas, morienti Carboni fimiles.
And, Satyrus /Ethiopicos die it ejfe pingues lucemque non emit-
tentes, ant f undented, fed convoluto igne flagrant es, lib. 37.
c. 7.

f The Jafper and the Emerald in general have already
been fpoken of. The Batlrian Emeralds were allowed, as
has been before obferved, the fecond place in Value :
Our Author's Account of them, and the Place and Plan-
ner in which they were found, has been copied by mofr.
of the Authors who wrote after him, though all of them
have not been careful enough to do him jufticc, by doing
it correctly. It is evident, that Pliny rendered his tuvvyivw

apf/M, tellure aperta, (though it is not exactly fo print-
ed in any of the Copies, but, tunc enim terta, terja, or
tellure inierniient,) becaufe Solinus and Ificlorus have it, tunc
enim dcteflo fob facillime inter ni tent, and tunc ciiam tellure



( 9* )

as Carthage and Maffilia, from JEgypt? about the
Cataracts of the Nile> and the Neighbourhood of
Syene, a City of the Elephantines, and from the
Country called Pfebos.

LXIII. In Cyprus alfo are found the Emerald and
the Jafper f ; but what are ufed for fetting in Cups



deoperta intermicant ; which {hews that they had read it
tellure aperta in him, however our later Copies may have
deviated from the old ones. But the fame Ijldorus con-
demns Pliny in another part of this Sentence, by tranferibing
from him his noted Error, of rendering the kMkoxnx of
Tbeopbrajlus by colliguntur en'un in coynmijjuris faxorum :
The Meaning of Tbeopbrajlus evidently is, that thefe Bac-
trian Emeralds were ufed for ornamenting Veflels of Gold,
by being fixed in them in various Figures. That this was
a common piece of Luxury among the Antients, and that
Emeralds and Berylls, the only other green Gem, were
moftly employed in it, as making the bell: Figure in Gold,
is to be feen in many Paffages of the Antients.

Gcmmatum Scyihicis ut luceat ignibus aurum
Jdfpice quot digitos exuit ijle calyx. Martial.

£5f inaquales Beryllo

Virro tenet Phialas. Juvenal.

What the Author here means by tU rcc TuOoWxa, is evi-
dently, that thefe Baclrian Emeralds, tho' very fine, were
but fmall, and therefore principally ufed to ftud and orna-
ment VeiTels of Gold. And this Pliny has fo far mifun-
derftood, that he has tranflated it, that they were found
in the Gommiffurce Saxorum. And as Errors never fail to
be faithfully copied and handed down to Pofterity, this has
been carefully handed down to us by every Author fince,
while Tbeophrajlus, who never meant any fuch thing, or
imagined there were any fuch things as Stones to be found
in thofe Defarts, was either forgot, or accufed of the
Error.



( 92 )

BdKlg/avqg «Vi Tar go g 79 i$[ict. QuXXlymn S* w~
rxg \jzjv {rig) 'ErKitrlug, i7T7retg tfyovjeg' tvti yctg
i/jLtpwetg yivovf), wx(j&pw $ &f*>px 9 ii jti£-

yue/Ttjg jc#A*ty$</@*, x 2$&(pctvyg j* ry s <ptW.
isroiSari <T e£ curt? rig *z?Qkv}zXetg ogfjixg 0 y'w\)
^ cv IffMto riv), <z$tynt\v\<Twg ^ *&Mcug % ty'i^ei
$ 71 re 'ivSiKy X®&> >W WW Tlv *C r cv ry

5 The Pearl was in great efteem among the Antients.
It was among the Ro?nans allowed the fecond Place among
Jewels, and feems ever to have been a particular Favourite
with the Ladies.

Pearls are produced in many kinds of Shell-fifti, but the
fineft, and what are properly the genuine Pearl, are bred in
the concha mar gar it if era plerifquc, Ecrberis antiquis Indis
difta. Lift. Hift. Conch. Our Author feems to have been very
well acquainted with the Hiftory of the Pearl ; and, doubt-
lefs, means this very Shell by his ot^Icj rm. Androfthenes
alfo confirms its being this very Shell that the fine Oriental
Pearls are found in, 'lv $1 73w icaxz&ti \iumi Blg&gi, &| 7 *
pafaefTis *»0o?. I have ventured to add an 5 to the W ord
^ucc^cc7rXYic7i(o in the Greek Text, becaufe the Senfe and ori-
ginal Meaning of the Author feem to have been fo. The
Shell which produces the Pearl is not at all like the Pinna,
and fome have cenfured this Author for faying it was ;
which he feems never really to have done, but to have
known the Hiftory of the Subftance he is treating of much
better, and have faid, as I have made it by the Addition
of that fingle Letter, probably loft in fome of the Copies,
that the Pearl is produced in the Berberi, and in like man-
ner in the Pinna marina^ which it alfo was 3 and which
the Antients knew it was.



( 93 )

and other Vefiels of Gold, they have from Baftriana,
toward the Defart : They go thither on Horfeback
to fearch for them, at the Time of the blowing of
the Etefian or annual Eafterly Winds •, for they are
ieen at that Time, as the Sands are violently toffed
about by the Winds : What they find there, how-
ever, are but fmall.

LXIV. Of the Number of the Pretious Stones
is that alfo which is called the s Pearl. It is not
of a pellucid Nature, but Bracelets, and other Or-
naments of great Value are made of it. It is pro-
duced in a kind of Oyfler, and, in like manner, in
the Pinna marina ; and is found in the Indies, and
on the Shores of certain Iflands in the Red Sea.



The Pearl is no more than a morbid Excrefcence from
the Shell it is form'd in ; it confifts of feveral Laminae laid
clofely round one another, as the Bezoar, the Calculi in
human Bladders, and other animal Stones. When fmall,
they are called Seed-pearls, and when larger than ordinary,
Vniones. Our Jewellers diftinguifh them into Oriental
and Occidental. They are found in many Places, as well
as in different Shells ; the fineft in the World are thofe of
the Perfian Gulph : There are a great number found about
Cape Comorin and the Ifland of Ceylon, but they are greatly
inferior to the Perfian \ and very large ones have been found
about Borneo, Sumatra, and the neighbouring Iflands, but
not of the fine Shape and Water of the Perfian.

The Occidental have a milky Caft, and want the po-
lifhed Glofs of the Oriental. They are very plentiful in
many Parts of America; as alfo in Silefia, Bohemia, and
Scotland ; and we meet with them every Day in our Oy-
fters and Mufcles here, but feldom of any great Beauty.

Some have been of opinion, that they were bred fingly,
one only in a Shell, and that they thence had their Name
Uniones ; but this is an egregious Error, many being very
frequently found together \ nay, there are Accounts of one
Shell producing I2Q#>



( 94 )

aXKou Ttvig. oiov o,re thktyctg i(n)K\o$ l \ vtoikIx©*
[teXavt (not) X^jkc*)' xoti ijv xctXS<ri 1 Xa,7r(p$i()ov.
(wr% ydg (AiXcavct, chc ayctv dipped § kvuvx tS



h Foffile Ivory and Bones of Animals lodged long before
in the Earth, are frequently dug up in all Parts of the
World. Thefe Subftances have preferved their Texture,
Solidity, and Colour, in different degrees, according to the
Nature of the Matter they have lain among : Sometimes
they are dug up firm, folid, and fcarce altered in Colour ;
fometimes fo rotten, as to crumble to pieces in handling ;
and fometimes ftained to various Colours, from the diffolved
Particles of metalline or mineral Matter among which they
have been lodged.

Of this Kind is the Turquoife, generally efteemed and
called a Stone, but, in reality, no other than the Bones
and Teeth of Animals, accidentally lodged near Copper
Mines, or Places where there is cupreous Matter in the
Earth. This, if diffolved by a proper acid Menftruum, makes
the Bone a green Turquoife, of which there are fome
found in Germany and elfewhere : And if the cupreous Par-
ticles were diffolved in a proper alcaline Menftruum, they
convert the Bones orTeeth into the Subftance of which they
penetrate, into the common blue Turquoife ; which Co-
lour it is fometimes found beautifully ana equally tinged
with all through, and fometimes only in Spots and Lines of
a very deep Blue, but which the Afliftance of Heat will
diffufe through the whole Mafs, and make it as beautifully
palely, and uniformly blue, as that found naturally fo.

The Word p&<m in this Place has been always tranflated
black ; and Pliny copies it in that Senfe from this Author,
for he fays, Theophraftus auftor eft £ff ebur fojjile candido
£ff nigro colore inveniri. If we may be allowed to under-
ftand it as I have done, only in the very Senfe in which he
ufes it in the very next Line, and judge that he means by
it no more than a deep Blue ; as 'tis certain he there does,
where he applies it to the Sapphires for No-body can



( 95 )

LXV. Thefe are of peculiar Excellence and Va-
lue. And there are yet alfo fome others to be men-
tioned ; as the foffile h Ivory, which is variegated
with white and a dark Colour ; and the 1 Sapphire,
which is of a dark Dye, and not very different from



imagine he intended to call that black ; if we receive the
Word, I fay, in this Senfe, and determine that the Au-
thor means to fay, that foflile Ivory was white variegated
with blue, and remember what is juft before obferved of
the Torquoifes only fpotted and veined w r ith a very deep
Blue, as thofe of France all are, and many of many other
Places, till brought to the Fire, we mall underftand this
Paflage, the Meaning of which has never yet been guefs'd
at s in a very clear and very particular Light, and find,
that the Subftance here defcribed is the genuine rough
Turquoife, which our Author has very properly called no
other than foflile Ivory, as perhaps all he had feen were
of Elephants Teeth, and feems very well acquainted with
it in its rough State : Whether the manner of diffufing its
Colour by Fire was known at that Time, is more than
can now be pofitively determined : Moft probably it was
not, and they looked upon the native blue Turquoife, which
they called Callais^ as a different Subftance,

That the Syftem of the Torquoifes owing their Colour
to Copper diffolved in a proper Alcali, is certainly juft, I
have this to prove, that by a fimilar Operation I have myfeli
made Turquoifes, many of which I have now by me, and.
which have been acknowledged true Turquoifes by our
beft Lapidaries.

1 The Sapphire has been fpoken of at large already ; I fhall
only add here, that the Word pihuwa, in this Place evidently
fignifies not black, but deep blue, as I have underftood it
id the former Line. And that this Paffage is a ftrong Con-
firmation, that the Sapphire and Cyanus are not the fame
Stone, fince he here compares one of them to the other.
And, as I have often had Occafion before to obferve, we-
cannot fuppofe he would compare a Thing to itfelf.



■■■mra



(96 )

Sqg, rj, Kccjd T&vo/tct,, cog cupa)®* fygx f oXi7rqyl-
ex,X<&x,(&h $\ o paXXov Ku\x<ri XQtofAcb ol Acogetg
To 11 KxyixXicv, ^ tx ciazreg



k The Prafius is the Stone known by our Jewellers
under the Name of the Root of the Emerald, and before
mentioned in the Notes on that Gem.

It is a Gem of the lower Clafs, of an impure green, in
which there is commonly fome Tinge of yellow. The An-
tients diftinguifhed it into three Kinds ; the one of a plain
green, the others variegated with white, and with red ;
we often fee it now coloured from the other Gems or co-
loured Stones on which it is produced, but make no diftin-
ftions from thofe Accidents.

We have, however, as the Antients had, three Kinds
of it diftinguifhed hy Colour, though none of them varie-
gated ; they are, the deep green, the yellowifh green, and
the whitifh yellow ; the laft has very little green in it, and
more properly belongs to the Lapis Nephriticus Clafs, as
but femi-pellucid.

It is found in the Eaji and Weft Indies, and in Germa-
ny Sile/ia, Bohemia* and England, but is little valued any
where.

Woodzvard errs in thinking our Jewellers call this the
Smaragdo-Prafus; that and the Chryfoprafus are both, in-
deed, called Species of it, but are much fuperior to it in
Beauty and Value. The Chryfoprafus is a Stone of greater
Luftre and Hardnefs than the Prafius, and is in Colour
of an equal Mixture of green and yellow. And the
Smaragdo-Prafus, a beautiful Gem, of a grafs green, with
the flighteft Caft imaginable of yellow.

The Diftinctions between the Emerald, Prafus, Chryfo-
prafus, and Smaragdo-Prafus, are, indeed, very nice, but
2 they



( 97 )

from the Male Cyanus; as alfo the k Prafius, which
is 'of an asruginous Colour.

LXVI. And the 1 Haematites* or Blood-ftcne*
which is of a denfe, folid Texture, dry, or, accord-
ing to its Name, fceming as if formM of concreted
Blood : There is alio another Kind of it, called
XantbuSj which is not of the Colour of the former,
but of a yellowifh White, which Colour the Do*
rians call Xanthtts.

LXVII. To thefe may be added 11 Coral, for its



they are very jufh The Antients, we find, were well
acquainted with them, and feme of our Lapidaries are very
clear in them at this Time : And as the Hiftory of Gems
is at bell a thing too full of Confufion and Uncertainty,
we ought, of all things, to avoid adding to it, by lofing
more of the old Diftinctions.

The 1 Haematites is an Iron Ore, and a very rich one,
perhaps the richeft in the World, for there is fome of it
which contains more than half Iron. It is generally of a
ferrugineous reddim Colour, very heavy, and in Texture
refembling the fibrous Talcs. The Antients had five Kinds
of it, fome of which are now loft : The Ethiopian, which
was the moft efteemed, and probably meant by the firft
Kind mentioned here, was of the fame Kind with ours.
The Xanthus or Xuthus, $t$k 9 here mentioned afterwards,
was that which was afterwards called Elatites : It was na-
turally of this pale, yellowifh Colour, but became red, as
all ferrugineous Bodies do by burning.

Our Haematites is fometimes of a plain ftriated Texture,
and fometimes has its vSurface rifing very beautifully into
globular Tubera, or Inequalities, refembling Clufters of
large Grapes. It is found in Spain, Italy, Germany, Eng~
land, and eifewhere; that of our own Kingdom is very
rich in Iron, fome of it yielding i~ of that Metal, and
running into a malleable Iron on the firft Fufion.

11 The Nature and Origin of Coral has been as much
contefted as any one Point in natural Knowledge ; the
Modems can neither agree with the Antients about it, no*

H



(98 )

bib©*) ?y xfa P t(>v6gov, vs&tptfe 3, ag av pl£cc.



with one another : And there are at this Time, among the
Men of Eminence in th fe Studies, fome who will have it
to be of the vegetable, others of the mineral, and others
only Nidus's and Cafes to fome of the animal Kingdom.
It were eafy to overthrow all that has been advanced, as to
its belonging to Animals, or being of the mineral King-
dom, but that there is not Room here for all one could
wifh to fay. As no one, however, has been at more pains
to prove it of mineral Origin than our own Dr. Woodivardy
it may not be amifs here, in few Words, to defend Theo-
phrajlus's (pvZlcu u SaXarlv?, againft that Gentleman's Hy-
pothecs : and fhew, as it evidently is fo, that Theophraftus
was in the right, in determining that it was a Vegetable,
and confequendy the Doclor miftaken, in imagining it to
have been formed in the manner of Foflils. And this I
promife myfelf may be done even from his own Account.
It may be proper to premife here, that it was of abfolute
necemty to the fupporting that Gentleman's Syftem of the
Solution of Foftils at the Deluge, that this mould be pro-
ved to be one, becaufe he gives it as a Certainty, that all
the foiTtle Corals have been in a State of Solution, which,
had they ever been vegetable Bodies, they could not, ac-
cording to his own Syftem, have been. If his Syftem be
juft in this Point, I have Proofs, that, whatever he might
conclude from it, it really makes for the antient Opinion,
of Coral's being a Vegetable ; for whatever may have been
the Cafe in regard to the foftile Corals in the Doctor's Ca-
binet, I have one which I very lately took up from 25 Feet
deep in a Clay-pit in the Neighbourhood of London : Which
fhews evidently, that it never has been in a State of Solu-
tion, and muft have been therefore according to his own fy-
ftem a vegetable Body \ for there are Numbers of fmall Ba-
lani affixed on it, and that not immerfed in, or laid on it in
irregular and uncertain Poll ures (as muft have been the Cafe,
if they had accidentally been lodged in and on it at theTime
9f its concreting in the Waters of the Deluge) but fixed in



(99)

Subftance is like that of Stones : Its Colour is red,
and its Shape cylindrical, in fome fort refembling a
Root. It grows in the Sea.



the very Manner in which they are found when living and
in their natural Pofture ; which it is impomble they mould
be, if ever they had been diflodged from it ; as they muft
have been, if ever it had been in a ^tate of Solution. Nor
are we to imagine, that the foifile Corals have been in a
State of Solution, becaufe they have often very different
Matter from the Coralline in their Constitution ; nay,
fometimes feem almoft wholly compofed of fuch : For we
frequently find foflile Wood, which, according to that Gen-
tleman's own Syftem, never has been in a State of Solu-
tion, faturated in like manner with the Matter of the
common Pyrites, and fometimes feeming wholly compofed
of it. And this very Specimen of Coral of mine, which,
it is evident, never has been in a State of Solution, is yet
almoft wholly converted into an Agate.

To this it may be added, that after all the pains that
Gentleman has taken to prove that Corals are Fofiils, and
formed by mere Appofition of Corpufcles, not by Vegeta-
tion ; his chemical Analyfis of red Coral, has brought him
to a neceflity of allowing, that there is fomething of a
vegetable Nature in them : And how can he imagine this
came there ? When I can be informed how fomething of
a vegetable Nature can be produced otherwife than from
Seed, I may come over to the Doctor's Opinion, that Co-
rals have been form'd by mere Appofition of Particles
wafti'd out of the neighbouring Rocks : But till then muft
'oelieve, that no vegetable Matter can be produced other-
wife than by Vegetation ; and confequently, as even himfelf
owns, Corals have in them fomething of a vegetable Na-
ture, that they are Vegetables ; and that Tbeophrajlus was
in the right, when he faid they grew in the Sea.

It is matter of great concern to me, that I am obliged
in this, and fome other parts of this Work, to diffent from
the Opinions of the Author above-mentioned, to whom
the World owes more real and everlaftingly true Difco-
veries in the Hiftory of Foflils, than to any one Mam

H z



< 100 )

£6. Toqv 5 XiQcov txqKKcu rmg cu <pv<r$ig f ^ r
L Kcu 0 Kvocvog cwTotpvvjg, zx&v cv Icwtm



befide whoever wrote ; and to whom I am myfelf fo much
indebted in this very Work : But Truth is to be fought
for at the Expcnce of the Opinions of all the Authors in
the World ; and as Dr. Woodward is an Author fo much
and fo defervedly efteemed, where-ever he is in Errors,
few would venture to believe him fo, unlefs convinced of
it, cither by ocular Demonftration, or the apparent Te-
ftimony of the general Opinion of the Antients : Where
thefe have made againft him, there, and there alone, I
have ventured to diilent from him ; but cannot but obferve,
that he has, in this Cafe of the Corals, been guilty of that
■ Precipitancy of which he fo angrily accufes fome other ex-
cellent Authors ; and when he fo feverely cenfured in this
matter, in which himfelf was in the wrong, a Gentleman
to whom the World is almoft as much indebted as to him-
felf in things of this Kind, he mould have confidered that
it might be his own Fate to be afterwards treated in the
fame manner another Time, and remembred the excellent
Spanijb Proverb, which advifes a Man who has a Glafs
Head never to throw Stones.

m The petrified Calamus Indicus of the Antients, was
one of the ftarry-furfaced foflile Coralloids ; and, indeed,
was not named without fome appearance of Reafon : The
Specimen I have of it, very prettily and exactly refembles
that Body.

n The Gold and Silver Ores are of fo many Kinds, and
fuch various Appearances, that it is an almoft endlefs fcene
q{ Variety that may be found in vifiting the various Mines,



( io I )

LXVIII. The m petrified Calamus Indicus alfo,
is not very different from this. Bat thefe are more
properly the Subjects of a different fett of Obfer- :
vations.

LXIX. Befide thefe there are alfo many Kinds
of metalline Stones, fome of which contain both
n Gold and Silver, though the Silver alone is via-
ble ; and thefe are very remarkable, both for their
Weight and Smell.

LXX. As alfo the native Blue, or ° Lapis Ar-



or examining the Specimens from them. Gold, Woodward
obferves, is, more or lefs of it, incorporated with almoft all
kinds of terreftrial Bodies : And Silver I have feen in almoft
an infinite variety of Forms ; that of Saxony is incorporated
generally with Sulphur and Arfenick, and has from them an
external fliew of Gold, for which Reafon it is called there
Rot-gulden Ertz, that is, Red-golden-looking Ore : This is
very heavy, and when broken is of a very ftrong Smell.

Befide thefe, the common Marchaiites and Pyritas many
of them hold Gold and Silver in fmall Quantities, and are
of various Colours, and contain fulphureous, arfenical, and
other different Matter, enough to give them both Smell
and Weight, and fometimes both, to a very great degree,

° The &va,vo$ or Cyanus here mentioned, is not the blue
Gem before defcribed under that Name, but the blue Co-
lour ufed by Painters, and fince called Lapis ArtneAus, by
which Name alone it is now known. The Greeks called
this and the Gem both by the common Name K**w$, Cy-
anus, and had no other Name for this, but generally took
care to diftinguifh which they meant by the Context ; as
it is here evident by its Epithet aJr&p^c, by way of di-
ftinclion from the artificial Caruleum ufed in Paintings ;
(for the Cyanus Gem, ox Lapis Lazuli, cannot be fuppofed
to have been fo fubjedt to be counterfeited) and its contain-
ing their Chryfocolla, which the Lapis Armenus always
does, that the Paint, and not the Gem, was the Cyanus
meant here. The Antients calling thefe two different Sub-

H i



( )

XgvroKoXXotv. uXXyj $ XiQ&, cpoU t!w X(*°M

cd. To oXov 5 ci/ -rug pZlclxXoig ^Xii^ut Kj i<W-
re 0 Qvcr&g <&{/(tkov^) r tm&tw. m tcl juiv etci yijg,
Kctdoc7n^ * &l%£p 9 £ M/x7©^ tc& oiov appx, kcc-
6cc7rt(> XfnxroKoXXu, ^ kvuvoq* t& $ xovlag, oiov

* LGCV^OC^KYly Zj 'ApptWCOV, Kj 0(TCt CfAQlOl T&TQig.



fiances by the fame Name, has, however, been the Occa-
fion of innumerable Confufions and Mifunderftanding of
their Works ; and that not only among the lefs careful of
the Moderns, but even among fome of their earlieft: Co-
piers. And we are not to wonder if many are at prefent
milled, as it is now generally thought going very far back if
we go back to Pliny ; when we find that even Pliny, who
has taken the greater part of his f ;iftory of FofTils from this
Author, has in many Places evidently and notorioufly mif-
underflood him : And of this we have an evident Inftance
in the prefent Cafe ; for he has confounded the two Sub-
ftances called by this Name, and faid of the Gem Cya-
nus, what Theophrajlus, from whom he tranflated it, fays
of the Paint ; as I lhall have Occarion to obferve at large,
when I, come hereafter to the Paflage from which Pliny
franflated it.

The Cyanus here meant, therefore, is the Lapis drme-
nus, called by the Germans, Bergblau, and by the French ,
Verd azur. It is a mixt earthy Subftance, of a beautiful
greenifii Blue, and feems compofed of arenaceous and o-
chreous Matter, tinged to that Colour by Particles of Cop-
per. It was firft found in Armenia, from whence it has
its prefent Name, and ufed to be brought from thence ;
but has fince been difcovered in Germany, Bohemia, Sax-
$ny, and many other Places : Our own Kingdom produces
it, and that as good as any in the World, but in what
Quantity I cannot fay. I remember to have feen it in the



( I0 3 )

menus i which has in it Chryfocolla ; and another
Stone, in Colour refembling the p Carbuncle, but
much heavier.

LXXI. Upon the whole, there are many and
very remarkable, different Kinds of foffile Subftances
dug in Pits ; fome of which confift of an argilla-
ceous Matter, as * Ochre, and Reddle ; others of
a fandy, as Chryfocolla and the Laps Armenus ;
and others as it were of Afhes, as r Sandaracb* Or-
pmenty and others of that Kind.



Fiffures of Stone, among fome of the Talcs, not far from
Mountforrel in Leicejlerfiire, and have of it, which I
brought thence.

p The Stone next mentioned, and faid to refemble the
Carbuncle, but to be heavier, was probably of the Cinna-
bar kind, of which hereafter : Some Specimens of this
Foflil I have feen of a very fine Texture, and beautiful
Colour ; and all of it has the other Quality here mention-
ed, Weight.

q Ochre and Reddle are Earths of the fame Nature and
Texture, and only differ in Colour ; there are many kinds
of each, feveral of which will be fpoken of hereafter : They
are all of a fine argillaceous Texture, commonly eafily
crumbling to pieces, and ftaining the Fingers in handling.
They are ufed in Medicine and by the Painters. The
common yellow Ochre is a cheap and very ufeful Colour :
And the common Reddle is often fold in the Druggifts
Shops either in its native State, if pale enough, as it fome-
times is, or mixed with Whiting, under the Name of Bole
Armeniac.

The Ochres all contain more or lefs Iron ; for the yel-
low ones will all become red by burning.

r Sandarach and Orpiment are alfo two Subftances of
the fame Nature and Texture, differing in Colour, like
the Ochre and Reddle ; and, in like manner, the yel-
low will become red by burning.

H 4



( ™4 )

cb . Kai r u 7stb;rcov TsXHXg ccv rig Xa&oi rag
iSiOT^g. eW; 'A K$oi rag rsicwrocg \x&<ti
yu^g^ eig ri fjbr\ wd^M, oomsg enrofop. oiov 70
(Arj yhvtyQ envois', dXhd hiQotg krs^otg r .

Py\ QXug j&\ 57 i{f rag egfaoiag ^ r fJL&^ovw
XiQav VuoXhq O^&tyogcji. aXXoi rar^o) ydg ' cl
^ yhwifjo), kol9cc7T£() thixQq, £ ro^v/jroi rvf%d~
VXtrt, KccdctTrtj) ^ q * MaJv?r/$ aurr} v\ (c



Orpiment is the 'A^mzov of the antient, and 'Apamx.lv
of the later Greeks. The Arabians call it Zarnicb Asfar : It
is a very beautiful Subftance, compofed of large Flakes,
refembling thefe of the Lapis Specularis, but of a glorious
Yellow, very weighty, and fometimes holding a fmall
Quantity of Gold.

There are, befide this fine Orpiment, two other Iefs
beautiful Kinds ; the one compofed of an impurer Sub-
ftance, refembling common Sulphur, fpangled all over with
fmall Flakes of the fine foliaceous Kind ; the other more
impure than the lair, and tinged of a paler or deeper Green
in many Places, from Particles of Copper. Thefe are
what may be called the three different Kinds of this Foffil ;
but there are, bolide thefe, almoft endlefs Varieties of it,
in regard to its deeper or paler Colour, and the extraneous
Matters contained in it.

Yellow Orpiment burns to a Redncfs in the Fire, emit-
ting a naufeous Smell; and this red Mafs is fometimes
called red Orpiment : But the genuine and natural red Or-
piment is the Sandarach here mentioned ; this the Arabians
call Zamick-Abmcr ; it is of the fame Nature with the
former, but generally in larger Malfes, and not of that
foliaceous Texture, but in more compact Glebes,

All the kinds of Orpiment and Sandarach are found in



( io5 )

LXXII. Many other Properties there alfo are in
thefe Subftances, which are eafily obferved. As that
fome of the Stones before named are of fo firm a
Texture, that they are not fubjeft to Injuries, and
are not to be cut by Inftruments of Iron, but only
by other Stones 8 .

LXXIII. On the whole, there is a great Diffe-
rence in the Texture of the larger Stones ; as may
be learnt from the different Manners in which they
may be worked ; fome may be cut, others engra-
ved on, and fliaped, as before obferved, by the
Turner's Inftruments, as the t Magnet Gem, a Stone



the Mines of Gold, Silver, and Copper ; and fometimes
two or more of them mixed in the fame Glebe. I have,
from the Mines of Goffelaer in Saxony , a moft elegant
piece of the foliaceous Orpiment, which has two fine Veins
of native Sandarach running acrofs it : It was brought to
me under the Name of a Gold Ore, and I believe really
does contain a fmall Quantity of that Metal.

5 This is a Doctrine well known to our Lapidaries, and
without the Knowledge of which the Diamond, the firft
and fineft of all Gems, never could have been worked into
Form at all ; for nothing will cut it but itfelf. Other
Gems and Stones are either work'd with Diamond-pow-
der, or with that of Emery, one of the hardeft Subftances
in nature except the Diamond, and afterwards with Tri-
poly, and other fofter Powders.

1 The Magnet Gem, or MaJJ?T*s Moq of the antient
Greeks, I have before obferved, was a Stone of an entirely
different Nature from the Loadftone, which we now call
the Magnet. The Stone here meant, was a very bright
white Subftance, fo nearly refembling Silver in appearance,
that it was not, at firft fight, to be diftinguifhed from it :
It was found in large Maflcs, and was of a Texture eafily
to be wrought into any Shape or Figure. This made it in
great Efteern among the Antients, and in conftant Ufe,



( io6 )

o^i v&tfjw "vxjd<r& % cog ys $ rmg Bcutfjid-

o$\ Tlktlxg o* ei<r)v ol isxp/flpoi vrdcrag rug
IgFxcriug. 87T« Kj cv v XltyvQ mSrSg Tig Wtv ogu-
xjcg. eg Tg/tf scLhcb £ot B'dXdrjYigy Tgofyvh®*
£ @o\oo$ri$. £ -n^tdjircUy net) yAu'cpe^) 2^ to

(JLahcMGV. OTCtV $ TtTUgaQlj ( H^f '^ZW&Oiffi ) T«

Sari 3' g| cwf£ Qtttin tc£ cflrilyjiirsfix,

Sq^x diwotfJLiv* iviot $ cihXoig yhvCfiovf),

<r/^£©* S* * SlUUCt^. KxGd7Ti(> etTTOfjSl/V* ol 3 (T<-



turned into Veflels of different kinds. What Stone it was,
is at prefent not to be certainly determined ; probably it
may be now loft, at leaft among the Nations we have
commerce with.

What I have before obferved of the Antients calling
this filvery Stone the Magnet, and our Loadflone the
Heraclius Lapis, is confirmed, in very plain Words, by

&<tcl 9 i $s 'HpajthzwTH; tgv eriSqgav linaTroiroLi.

v This Stone was afterwards called Lapis Siphnius, from
the Place where our Author obferves it was found, which
was an Ifland in the JEgean Sea, called by fome Merope.
What the Antients in general have left us about it befide,



( ™7 )

of very elegant Appearance, and much admired by
many : This carries a fine Refemblance of Silver,
though it is in reality a Stone of an entirely dif-
ferent Kind.

LXXIV. Many alfo there are, which admit all
Kinds of working \ as in v Siphnus there is a foffile
Subftance of this kind, which is dug in Lumps,
and roundifh MafiTes, at about three Furlongs di-
llance from the Sea : This may at firft be either
engraved on, or worked by the Turner into any
Form by reafon of its Softnefs ; but when it is af-
terwards burnt and wetted with Oil, it becomes
black and folid Veffels of different kinds, for the
fervice of the Table, are made of this.

LXXV. All Subftances of this kind are to be
worked on by Iron Inftruments ; but others there
are, which, as before obferved, will not be touch'd
by them, but mud be cut by other Stones ; and
others yet, which may be cut with Iron, but the
Inftruments mull be dull and blunt w : Which is
much as if they were not cut by Iron.



is, that it was of ftrer.gth to bear the Fire. And Vef-
fels made of it, ferved, as thofe of Earthen-ware, for the
common Offices of Boiling, £sta Pliny fums up their Ac-
counts of it in thefe Words : In Siphno Lapis eft qui cava-
tur 9 tornaturque in vafa coquendis cibis utilia^ vel ad efcu-
lentorum ufus; and a little afterwards, Sed in Siphnio Jingu-
late quod> excalfaftus^ oho nigrefcit durefcitque, natura moU
liffimus.

w The Marbles, Alabaflers, and moft other Stone of
Strata, are of the Number of thofe which we cut with
blunt Iron Inftruments. But if we confider our Manner
of performing this, which probably is the fame that was
ufed in this Author's Time, and is not without the Af-



( io8 )

%cc]sc&'i<h r (rijrigov, o 3 city©* touutIw p $iwa-
rcu S^^etv ^ pu9[*i£etv 9 s£ v\g ou <r<p%aylhg 9
x. £ 7ffockiv 9 0 A*0©*, yhv(px<ri rag tr(p^ryl^ocg y



fiflance of Water and Sand, we (hall find, that thefe are
.not properly to be divided from the Clafs of thofe ufually
cut with other Stones ; for, in reality, the Sand in this
Cafe does more than the Iron, and is a fimilar Subftance to
the Powder of hard Stones ufed to Gems, tho' coarfcr.
The Art of cutting and polifhing the harder Gems with other
Stones was known very early in the World : We have
Accounts from fome of the earlieft Authors, of Fragments
of Diamonds being fet in a convenient manner for hand-
ling, and made into Tools for the working on other Gems
with. Diamond-powder is the great thing in ufe with us on
thefe Occafions, and next to it Emery ; and Emery was
alfo known to the Antients, and ufed by them on the fame

Occafions. £/x*£i$ ?u9o$ lf)v ;? raq \|/r)p«s ot $ctK.1vfaoy7<u$<H api-
%8<7i, Diofcorides. E^fpK upux J£o$, y apixptlou extozn fcf-

Hefychius.

Cardanus imagines, but erroneoufly, that the Porus of
the Antients was our Emery ; or elfe, that our Emery was
unknown to them 3 which is no lefs an Error : For it is
evident, they were well acquainted with its Ufes. And
what he adds, of their working on Gems with the Porus,
and Fragments of the Lapis Obfedianus^ Salmafius 9 who
h$d certainly read more than moft Men, affirms, he never



( ™9 )

LXXVI. Iron, however, being harder in its Tex-
ture than Stone, will cut fuch as are both harder
and more folid than thefe.

LXXVII. There feems, however, yet an Abfur-
dity in this, fince the Whetftone has Power upon,
and takes off a Part of the Iron Inftruments which
are fharpened on it, and the Inftrument may be
made to cut and work upon the Whetftone ; but
notwithftanding, will not cut thofe Gems which are
work'd into Seals tho' the Stone with which they
are worked is compofed of the lame kind of Matter
with the Whetftone, or fomething not very unlike it.
Thefe Stones are from Armenia x .



could find any Account of among them. Pliny relates,
indeed, that Fragments of the harder kind of the OJiraates
were ufed for this Purpofe ; lib.'y]. c. 10. Ojlracla feu
Ojlracites eji iejlacea durior : altera Achate? fimilis nifi quod
Achate: politura pinguefcit ; duriori tanta inejl vis ut alia
gemma fcalpantur fragmenfis ejus. And that a Sand prepared
from the Porus, was ufed for polifhing Marble, but not
Gems, CraJJior enim harena laxioribus fegmentis terit, & plus
erodit marmorts, majufque opus fcabritie politura relinquiu
Rurfus Thebe'icla polituris accommodatur, & qua Jit e per a
lapide ant e pumice. For poro lapide, many of the Copies
have toro lapide, and duro lapide \ but the concurrent Ac-
counts of other of the Antients determine it to be this par-
ticular Stone that is meant. And the fame Author ex-
prefsly fays, that the Obfidianus could not cut the true
Gems, Obfidiana fragmcnta veras gemmas non fcarifant.

x The Armenian Whetftones, Coticida of the Latins,
and 'Ax vat of the Greeks, were of a Stone of extreme
Hardnefs ; and, as we may learn from this Paffage, of the
fame Nature with that, which they ufed for the working
fome of thofe Stones which Iron could not touch.

This Stone ufed for working on others they firft had
from Cyprus s and fome of the antient Greeks called it A-



ty\. Qcwfictw 3 (puns Hffj fiotcrotviQcrvig rov



damas, from its extreme Hardnefs ; as they alfo did fome-
times Iron for the fame Reafon : Which Manner of writ-
ing has much mifled their Copiers ; and even Pliny, who,
after having in one Place given the right Account of this
Stone, and called it Cos, in another miftakes it for a Dia-
mond, and calls it fuch. This was the Effect of his co-
pying from different Authors in different parts of his Work;
and not feeing in many Places that they were defcribing
only the fame Subftance under two different Names. This
Cyprian Stone was long in efteem, and ferved not only for
polifhing, but boring Holes through fuch Gems as they
ftrung on Threads, to wear as Bracelets, and other the like
Ornaments. But After-ages found out the Armenian, which
proving much harder than it, became more generally ufed,
and at length entirely banifhed the other. That this Ar-
menian was of the fame Kind with their 'Atcovat, is evident
from this Paflage of Theophrajlus ; and that it had the Pro-
perties of the Cyprian, and was ufed as it, is plain from
Stepbanus's Account of it, ^a^p/ovW ^ *^ ov ™ yt-vtyvw
vgwrruactv rocc trfyayTbccs. Pliny's Account of other Gems be-
ing bored by Cyprian Diamonds, means no more, than
that they were worked by a Stone of the Nature of the
'Aw?), brought from Cyprus.

y The Stone here defcribed is the Lapis Lydius of Au-
thor, commonly called the Touch-Hone, from its Office of
trying Metals by the Touch. The excellent Salmajius, ge-
nerally fo happy in underftanding the Antients, and to whom
I am obliged, in the courfe of this Work, much oftner
than to any other Author, is guilty of a Miftake in regard
to this Stone, and erroneoufly accufes Pliny of a great Er-
ror, in a thing in which that Author, however often faulty,
is perfectly right. Errors in the Works of Men of fuch
Eminence as this excellent Critic, ought above all things,
to be fet right ; as they otherwife pafs with the generality
of Readers as certain and unquestionable Truths. And



( III )

LXX VIII. The Nature of the Stone which tries
y Gold is alfo very wonderful, as it feems to have
the fame Power with Fire which is alfo a Teft
of that Metal. Some People have, for this Reafon,



this, in particular, being in the Name of a Stone, ought
to be cleared rather than any other, as Errors about Names
are what alone have given more than half the Confufion we
have, in regard to the Works of the Antients. Pliny has
faid of this Stone, Auri argentique mentionem comitatur la-
pis? quern coticulam appellant ? quondam non folitus inveniri nifi
in fiumine Tmolo? ut audor eft Theophraftus ; nunc vero pafi
fim? quern alii Heraclium? alii Lydium vacant. On which
Salmafius's Remark is this, Fallitur Plinius peccatque non
mediocriter. Lapis hie Lydius quo aurum £sf argentum pro-
batur? nunquam diclus eft Heraclius? fed ille alter Lydius
qui ferrum rapit. I am forry to fay it, but it is fallitur
Salmafius? not Plinius ? for we need look no farther than
this Author to know, that Heraclius was as common a
Name for the Touchftone among the Antients, as for the
Loadftone, fee p. 16, where he exprefsly fays, that the
Touchftone was fo called, ol $1 ficcaavt^tiv rov u^v^ov uc-tte° Hn
x.x'Kzpv.'n ^Ggs 'HpdxKcia % i AvH. The Loadftone and Touch-
ftone were therefore both called, among the Antients, from
their common Country, Lapis Lydius? and Lapis Heracli-
us. And for that Reafon there have been great Errors in
regard to them, in many of the lefs careful Writers fince :
As about the two Cyanus's, and, in ftiort, all the Sub-
ftances which they had thus confufed, in not allowing par-
ticular Names to. It has fince been called Lapis Bafa-
nites? from its Ufe in trying Metals ; Chry files? from its
particular Efficacy in tryal of Gold ; and Coticula? becaufe
it was generally formed, for Conveniency, into the Shape
of a fmall Whetftone. We are not to fuppofe, however,
that this Stone alone ferves for this Purpofe ; in Italy a
green Marble, called there Verdello? is now generally ufed
in its ftead ; and in moft other Places the Ba fakes? a black
Marble, found in regularly fhaped Columns, many placed
together, as in Ireland? where a Quantity of it is called
the Giants Caufeway.



( 112 )

nt% cht dyav oheicog t><7n>()xv]eg. x r aim o-
^TflK $oki fidget. dXXct to -ariJg ta> ret j^coftciQ,

Swua<8g ydg, cog Zoikbv, OKXaftZdvetv
<pvcri)i.

regov. core py} fxovov r ox, £ KctQdfwretog, dxxd
^ r %ocXkov Kctjdx^v(rov 9 (c cc()Fv(iov yvcv{j,£etv> %j
•arcVov «V t sot,TY\£p fApixT). (ripeta. $ Ww cw-
roTg ^zro § tXuw<?x. ixdx^ov $ ^Ve^ c * ra *
hlXvQov* eiToc r£Ju^fj[Jt,6(/ov 9 ij q[Aio£oX(&>4 e% &7

% TpoXS. Xhoc <T ij <pj<n£ ccvtcSv nctt x^r^csi^g,
t srXureic(, f y cr^o/yuA^. \iiy$©* $i ccroy $i7r\oc(rta,

r^;

WfjLctcrictv rd dvoo wgog r yXiov, y rd k^tco. £
SoKifjidZet id dvco. txw Siov, on fyiQpripcf*



* The true Lydius was originally found only in this Ri-
ver, afterwards in many other Places ; and at prefent is
verv plentiful in many of the larger Rivers of Germany.
This Author gives a very circumftantial Account of the

Pro-



( "3 )

queflioned the Truth of this Power in the Stone ;
but their Doubts are ill founded, for this Tryal is
not of the fame Nature, or made in the fame
Manner with the other. The Tryal hy Fire is by
the Colour, and Quantity loft by it ; but that by the
Stone, is made only by rubbing the Metal on it ; the
Stone feeming to have a Power of receiving fepa-
ratcly the diftinft Particles of different Metals.

LXXIX. It is faid alfo, that there is a much-
better kind of this Stone now found out, than that
which was formerly ufed ; infomuch, that it now
ferves not only for the Tryal of the refined Gold,
but alfo of Copper or Silver coloured with Geld;
and (hews how much of the adulterating Matter by-
weight is mixed with Gold : This has Signs which
it yields from the fmalleft Weight of the adulte-
rating Matter, which is a Grain, from thence a
Colybus, and thence a Quadrans or Semi-Obolus
by which it is eafy to diftinguifh if, and in what
degree, that Metal is adulterated.

LXXX. All thefe Stones are found in the Ri-
ver z Tmolus; their Texture is fmooth, and like
that of Pebbles ; their Figure broad not round ; and
their Bignefs twice that of the common larger fort
of Pebbles. In their Ufe in the Tryal of Metals,
there is a Difference in Power between their upper
Surface, which has lain toward the Sun, and their
under, which has been to the Earth, the upper per-
forming its Office the more nicely ^ and this is



Property of this Stone ; and they had in his Time very
good ones, and knew very well how to ufe them, if they
could do what he fays with them.



( ii4 )

rd clvco. kuXum $ q vy^orviq elg tv (yKXotfA&dveiVt
tTret^ Kj cv rstg Ktw^oLcri tv SoKipd^&v aV-
tycri yd{> Tivet vgtiScl e£ cwrv\g t (ti '&7n)Xt&'oC4v{.
QvfxQuAvet 3 txto £ dhXag r XtQcov* (£ w rd

idiov 7t % toxg.



vrd, Al ft xv r XlQav Ssl&Qogeu, ^ Siwdfteig
$ov eiriv cv rxroig.

srfi'. At 5 $ TVs ixdrjoveg p, iSidrsgcu ^e.



a The Author now enters on an Account of the various
Earths. The Differences of which are, indeed, very ef-
fential. It is to be obferved, that he fets out in his ufual
Manner, perfectly juffly, and philofophically. The two
great Chara&eriftics of Earths^ are their eafy DifTufibility in
Water, and Concretion and Induration on being feparated
from it, and their being fufible by Fire. The firft of thefe
Qualities elTentially diftingurfhes them from moft other Fof-
fils : The other they have in common with Stones ; and,
indeed, with all other foffile Bodies whatever. It was im-
poffible for this Author to have known this, unlefs he had
had our Afliftances. But we know by Experiments with
powerful Burning-glaffes, that all foffile Subftances, as well
as Earths, are fuiible and verifiable, the Diamond itfelf
not excepted , as lias been obferved more at large in its
proper Place.

Earths, determinately fpeaking, afeopake Bodies, difFufi-
ble by Water, and vitrifiable by extreme Heat, friable when
dry, not inflammable, and generally infipid to the Tafte :
Not that thefe are certain, univerfal Characteriftics, and'li-



( "5 )

Confonant to Reafon, as the upper Part is the dry-
er; for the Humidity of the other Surface hinders
its receiving fo well the Particles of the Metals :
For the fame Reafon alfo it does not perform its
Office fo well in hot Weather as in colder, for in
the hot it emits a kind of Humidity out of its Sub-
ftance, which runs all over it : This hinders the me-
talline Particles from adhering perfe&ly, and makes
Miftakes in the Tryals. This Exfudation of a humid
Matter is alfo common to many other Stones, among
others, to thofe of which Statues are made ; and this
has been looked on as peculiar to the Statue.

LXXXI. Thefe then, in general, are the Dif-
ferences, and particular Qualities of Stones.

LXXXII. Thofe of Earths are fewer, indeed, but
they are alfo more peculiar.

LXXXIII, a Earth is fubjeft to be liquated,



able to no Exceptions. Whatever may be the Cafe in the
Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms, it is the Misfortune in
the Study of foflile Bodies, that fuch has been the Confu-
fion and Intermixture of their conftituent Particles at the
general Deluge, that there are none fuch to be eftabliflhed
in it; for there are fo many heterogene Particles, of a
thoufand different Kinds, mixed even with the fame Foffil
in different Places, that there is no determining it to any
Certainty, even in its manner of Variation from its pure
State* What I have given may pafs, however, for a ge-
neral Character of what, in Treatifes of Fofliis, we mean
by the Word Earths ; which may be afterwards diftin-
guifhed into Clays, Ochres, Boles, Maries, Chalks, and
Loams : Sand, and the common vegetable [Mould, which
fome give a Place in the Catalogues of Earths, have of
right no Bufinefs among them ; for the firft is only either
a imaller kind of Gravel, conlifting of an infinite number
of fmall Pebbles of different Shapes and Colours , or the
conftituent Particles of the Stone of Strata or other Bodies

I %



'( »6 )

mg xvloTg g(>vkIgi$, coajrZ(> (J? o Xi8(&>. fjcctXcLr}^)
q, larXlvdxg tz vs-oixcriVy w rag re 'zroiKiXctg, ncti
rug uXXctg rag ^wjjiGe^ctg, aTrcLo^ug $ tstv^SvJ^S
K [/.aXoirjoyJig, 'zxroixo'tv.

ttS'. h El q xa) o mh(&> 6k veXiriS©*, cog



accidentally loofe : And the latter owes its prefent mode of
Exiftence, in a great meafure, to putrified animal and ve-
getable Subftances of a thoufand Kinds - y and is, diftincUy
fpeaking, no genuine Foflil.

In order to the right understanding what is meant by
the calling any Subftance by either of the other Names, it
may not be improper briefly to give their feveral Diftin-
clions, fo fir as the general Uncertainty of the Foflile
Kingdom will permit.

1 . Clays are Earths compofed of very fine Parts, fmooth,
heavy, not eafily mixing with Water ; and when mixed,
not readily fubfiding in it; compact, vifcid, and leaving a
fatty ImprcHion on the Tongue ; foft while in the Stratum,
and hardening by Fire into a kind of ftony Texture.

2. Ochres are ponderous earthy Subftances, more fat
than Chalk, and lefs fo than Clay, readily difFufible in
Water, and friable when dry, ftaining the Fingers in
handling, and principally differing from the Boles, in that
they are of a loofer Texture.

3. Boles are ponderous earthy Subftances, more fat
than Chalk or Marie, but lefs fo than Clay; ponderous,
of an aftringent Tafte, melting in the Mouth, ftain-
ing the Fingers ; and generally partaking more or lefs of
the Nature of Iron ; as indeed, in fome degree, do moft,
if not all, the other Earths, but the Boles generally more
than any.

4. Maries are light friable Subftances, of a middle Na-
ture, between Clay and Chalk, not fo fatty as the former,
nor fo denfe as the latter, eafily diffufible in Water, and,
when rafted, dry, infipid, and adhering to the Tongue.

5. Chalks are earthy Subftances, denfe, brittle, readily
diffufible in W ater, and quickly feparating themfelves from



( "7 )

altered From its original State and Confiftence, and
afterwards indurated again. It will melt, as Stones,
with fufible and foflile Subftances ; and is ibftened,
and made into Bricks : Thefe are of various Kinds,
and compofed in various Manners, but are all made
by moiftening and burning.

LXXXIV. »> But if Glafs be made, as fome af-



it by Subfidence, ftaining the Fingers in handling, and, in
tafting, flicking to the Tongue.

6. And Loams are earthy Bodies, of a denfc, rough
Texture, confifting of clayey or ochreous Matter, with
arenaceous Particles of various Figures, Sizes, and Co-
lours, immerfed in and intimately mixed with it, probably,
at the time of the univerfal Deluge.

Much more might be faid on this Occafion were this a
proper Place for it; but this general and fuccincT: Account
of what is meant by the general Names of Clays, £sV.
may be fufficient for what is intended in this Place ; which
is only to give fomething of a determinate Idea of what
is meant by the Words Chalk, Bole, &c. when there fhall
be occafion hereafter to fay any of the Bodies defcribcd
by this Author is one or other of thefe Subftances.

b All Earths, as I have before obferved, are vitrifiable by
extreme degrees of Heat. Nothing is more certain,
than that the Vitrification, or converting the Subftances of
which Glafs is made, into that Form, is the Effect of the
extreme Force of Fire ; and that the beft fort of Glafs is
that in the making of which Flints have been ufed, is a
Truth as much known now, as it was in the days of Tbeo-
phraftus.

The Things of which our Glafs is made are, Pot-
afhes, (made in different Places from different Species
of the Herb Kali, and other vegetable Subftances, by
burning, and called by the French Soude^ and by the
Italians Barillia : The common Pot-afhes are made
from the Kali Cochleatum majiis ; but the fineft, from
the Kali Hifpaaicum fupinum annuum^ Sedi foliis brevibus^
figured and defcribed in the Memoirs of the Royal Acade-



( "8 )

nveg Qdtri, xcu cwty\ isrv^cocrei yws^). iSicoldrvj J' v\
too ^aXm ^itFvv^y}. ttgcg Tqzt&'cu ^ py-
vvcdg, (c (Siwapiv t%et vStTlyv, oo<?£ to xccXXet

5re. ngg/ 3 TLikiiilotv % Wi rig ?j z\pe^) yy, ngj
ylvty yXi%(*d. rotvTvi £ dXeityxa Tag dpiriXxs
dvTt itx Ttrgog TXg i7rag*

7T$ . E?ti <T ctv c Xctp&dvav Kj Tcwrocg rdg J/a-
Cpo&g co-cot rsr^og tIw ^rsXidatriv <&(pveig* t7ret
cuy%> T%g txtcov Tsroixvcu %vfix$ hx^c^g^ dxx^



my of Sciences of Paris;) fome ftony arenaceous or cry-
ftaliine Matter, as Sand, Flints, Cryftal, or Marble ; and
M.mganeze, a ferrugineous Subftance : to which fome add
a finall Quantity of pure Salt of Tartar : Thefe Ingredients
are calcined into what the Workmen call Fritt ; and af-
terwards run, by Violence of Fire, into Glafs of different
Colours and degrees of Purity, according to the different
Ingredients.

The Glafs of the Antients was, in the different Ages of
the World, in different degrees of Purity and Excellence,
according to the Ingredients of which they made it ; which
were Sand, Nitre, Flints, and Shells. Sand was the firft
Ingredient ever ufed or thought of for the making Glafs ;
and for many Ages, there was even no other Sand ufed
among the Greek - than that found clean wafhed on the Banks
and in the Beds of Rivers, and this, from its Ufe, might
very probably acquire the Name of Uelitis 9 or Glafs-Sand.

In the beginning of this Sentence, the other Copies
of this Author have uihiim* I have ventured to follow
Sahnafius in his mod: rational Opinion, that it was in
the Original ittfmfos, and a little afterwards to give



( »9 )

firm, of the Uelitis, a vitrifiable Sand, it owes its
Production to the extreme Force of Fire : The
beft is that, in the making of which Flints have al-
fo been ufed ; for befides that they melt and mix
with the running Mafs, they have a peculiar Excel-
lence in the making the Glafs, infomuch thatthey
give the Differences in the clearnefs of the Colour.

LXXXV. There is in Cilicia b a kind of
Earth, which by boiling becomes tough and vif-
cous \ with which they cover the Vines inftead of
Birdlime, to preferve them from the Worms.

LXXXVI. It may alfo be proper to men-
tion here the Earths which are naturally endued
with a Quality of petrifying Subftances immerfcd
in them fince thofe which yield peculiar and dif-
ferent c Juices, have unqueftionably fome fixed and



X**w> for what has hitherto flood according to De

Laet, who very juftly fufpecls, that Flints were much
more likely to be made an Ingredient in Glafs than Brafs.
And, indeed, when we confider the many Lacunae and
greater Errors in the Copies of this Author, we cannot
wonder that fuch as thefe have been pafs'd over, which were
only Errors in a Letter or two.

b The Chician Earth, ufed as a Preferver of Vines from
Infedls, was of the Clafs of the harder Bitumens, which
the Heat of Boiling- water would juft bring to a proper
Confidence for fpreading over the Stocks of thofe Shrubs,
and partly by entangling and fmothering Infe<3s that were
climbing up, and partly by its driving them away by its
Smell, it preferved the Buds from being deftroyed.

c The various Accounts we have of petrifying Earths and
Waters, are all idle, erroneous, and imaginary, according to
the ingenious and excellent Dr. Woodward^ who affirms, that
even what has been reported fo confidently of the petrifying
W ater of the Lake Oneagh in Ireland, one of the moft famous
petrifying Springs on record, has been (hewn, by a mors



( )

Xuv Tiy txxcrcu (pvciv cicxref) kcu cu Tag roov

<PVT0)V d .

7r^\ 'AAAct ftaAAoi/ oui rig rxg mg ^gco^ctcri ciict-
y$p{<TM) ciazreg ^ cl y&Setg X^\)*

Try. Kcu ^ q $ecrig t&tcov, acnreg i£ ^XW & m
7T0(<Bp, qm Qvppcfis riv(^ y y SirjQqcrstog fyofyjyjg.

7>(f * Kcu aiiuyi $r) (pu^v\) TsrtTrvgcofjS/ja, ^ oiov
Kct&xsxcwfJtyct, owu Kj i e ZavSacpKij <£ to 'A'pfe-



accurate Enquiry and Tryals, not to be true \ and that the
petrified Wood brought thence, has been all of it lodged in
the Earth at the bottom of thatLakeat the time of the De-
luge. If this be the Cafe here, it is, in all probability, in o-
ther Places too \ and what gives it the better face of Proba-
bility is, that petrified Wood is as often found in the lobfe
Strata of Gravel, &c* and lodged in Earth or Stone as in the
Beds of thefe Waters. Some may imagine, from having feen
the Effects of the droppingWell at Knarejborough, Rujhbank^
and feverai other Springs in Northumftotlfhire, Cbedwortb^
and Nor leach Springs in Gkutefterjbire, and many other pe-
trifying Springs, as they are called in England, and elfe where,
that this is denying things for which they have the Evi-
dence of their Senfes : But fuch Perfons are to be taught,
that what they efteem Petrifa&ions, are no other than
Incruftations of fparry, argillaceous, and other Matter,
brought away with thefe Waters in their Pafiage through
the Strata, and fettling from them again. And that there
is great Difference between changing the very Subflance,
and only covering the Surface of a Body. Thefe Petrifac-
tions, as they are called, being no other than Precipita-
tions of Matter too heavy to be longer fuftained in the
Water ; and which, being very fine, adapts iifelf to every
prominence and Cavity of the Body it fettles upon, and
cxaclly afliimes its Shape. The firft Procds in thefe Ope*



( 121 )

peculiar Properties, and are diftindt Kinds; as are
alio thofe which fupply Nourifhment to Plants d .

LXXXVII. Nor ought thofe to be lefs confi-
dered which are Angular and remarkable in their
Colours, and for that Reafon ufed by Painters.

LXXXVIII. The Production of thefe, as was
obferved in the Beginning of this Treatife, is from
the mere Afflux or Percolation of their conftituent
Particles.

LXXXIX. Some of thefe feem burnt, and to
have fuffered Changes by means of Fire, as e San-
darach, Orpiment, and others of that Kind ; all of



rations of Nature forms only an extremely thin Cruft over
the Body, on which there after fettle at Times many more,
often to a Cruft. of confiderble Thicknefs in the whole, but
always giving evident Proofs of the Manner in which it
was lucceffively formed, by the Number of thin Strata it
is compofed of.

d Vegetable Mould, I have before obferved, is no ge-
nuine ForTil.

e Orpiment and Sandarach have been fpoken of in gene-
ral already ; they are found in different degrees of Purity
and Beauty : In fome Places, infread of the fine foliaceous
Flakes, or mining Glebes, in which they are dug in moft of
the Mines, they are taken up impure, ill colour'd and in
form of a coarfe Powder; the yellow looking more like
dirty Fragments of common Brimftone, and the red like
dufly pieces of a bad Bole, than like what they really are.
Thefe are, however, purchafed by our Painters for Cheap-
nefs ; and they fay, with proper Management, make as
good Colours as the finer Pieces ; though, in their Barrels,
they look more like Afhes than the beautiful Subftances
they really are. Thefe are from fome part of Germany.
And if the Orpiments and Sandarachs which happened to
come in Theophraftufs way, were of this Kind, there is
nothing ftrange in his fuppofing them to have been acted
upon by fubterranean Fires.



( I 22 )

pittJv, ^ tcI #AX# rd TDicwra. urdvQ, $' 9 dg dftXtog
Ci7retv, ^hri dvaGvfxtdoreug, tcwtcc ty\<&g £
KxTTVoSSxg* <£(J.(T}i^) $q vrdvQi. cv tiuq y^dXKoig
7aig ^fvijeiotg Tg k%i ffivreioig 9 evict* r j Xj cv rtig

i'. Olov f 'ApptVMov, Xav$ct£$ixii, XgvcroxoXXx,
* M*X7©*, Kv*v@«, eA^*7@- 0 xt@* 9



f The Ochre here meant is the common yellow Kind.
A Confirmation that the dfemKov of the Antients was Or-
piment, and not a white Arfenick, as fome have errone-
oufly judged, is this Paffage of this Author, where he fays,
It is, when powdered, of the Colour of the yellow Ochre.

The Yellow Ochre of many Parts of this Kingdom is
excellent for the Ufe of Painters, and fome of it finer than
any in the World : It is found of two Kinds ; the one in
great plenty, conftituting, in many Places, whole Strata of
very confiderable Thicknefs. This is the moft common,
but is coarfe, and often mixed with arenaceous and
other heterogene Alatter in different Quantities. The other
Kind is found in the perpendicular FifTures of other Strata.
This is not common, nor to be had in any great plenty,
but is ever of a glorious Colour, and perfectly pure, and
crumbles between the Fingers into an impalpable Powder.
As all the Matter which compofes it muft have been ex-
tremely fine and fubtle, or it never could have got into
thofe Places, into which there was no way for it, but thro*
the Pores of the folid Strata. I know not whether our
Painters are acquainted with this Kind, but it muft, as
JVoodzvard has obferved, be very much preferable to the
common ones for their Ufe, becaufe of its Finenefs ; and
it might be had in fome Quantity on fearching the proper
Places : I remember to have feen much of it in different
Places about Mendip Hills in Sdmerfeijhire 9 from whence I
brought the Specimens in my poffeilion.

g Reddle, or Red Ochre, is >as common and as good in



( "3 )

them, however, plainly fpeaking, owe their prefent
Form to the Exhalation of their more humid ] w ts;
and thefe, in particular, feem to have been dried,
and, as it were, fmoaked. They are found in Mines
of Gold and Silver, and fome in thofe of Copper
alfo.

XC. Of this kind are f Orpiment, Sandarach, C"
focolla, s Reddle, Ochre, and the Lapis Armenus 5 but



England as the Yellow ; it is, like that, generally found
itfelf forming Strata, but fometimes of a glorious Colour and
extreme Finenefs, in Fiffures of other Strata. I have a Spe-
cimen of fome from the Foreft of Dean in Gloucejierjbire,
very little inferior to the Sort brought from the Ifland of
Ormuz in the Perfian Gulph ; and fo much valued and ufed
by our Painters under the Name of Indian lied. It is, in-
deed, fo like, both in Colour and Quality, that it is ufed
for it, as the People employed in taking it up informed
me, and fent to London to be fold under its Name. On
comparing it with fome of the true Perfian kind, which I
had from the Eaft-Indies, I find it of a paler Colour, but
of a much finer Texture ; and therefore, upon the whole,
perhaps not lefs valuable.

Mifunderftandings of Pliny, occafioned by Errors in the
Copies, have been the Occafion of fome very unlucky Er-
rors about the (xiriet of the Greeks ; which has been con-
cluded, from what he has been fuppofed to have faid,
to be Cinnabar, which they called alfo Minium. The
Paflao-e which has given Occafion to thefe Miftakes ftands
in moft Copies thus, Milton vocant Grceci Minium, quidam
Cinnabari ; which feems an abfolute Affirmation of this,
but is, in reality, no other than a double Error, in the
Words, and in the Pointing : And what Pliny meant to
have faid is evidently no other than this, Rubricam Milton
Graci vecaiit % C3 5 minium Cinnabari. The Greeks call
Reddle Miltcs, and Minium Cinnabar, which is exactly
the Truth. And the PafFage, as thus reftored by S alma-
fius, ftands accordingly, Jam enim Trojanis temporibus ru-
brica in honore eraf, qui naves ea commendai> alias circa pi-



( "4 )

£ tear t?id%i?a. r ^ dxXcov piy etcri pd£2oi 9 rla)
$ 'ilx&v ddgoetv *zr&g (pcto-iv etvou. Mi^gv

•ETCIbQoS&TI !w \ d<?2 €ig T& dv fyetKtXct, /C^i^

id. 'AAA& M/a7# ts £ *Xl;Kg£S aH&%5 fit-

TCtXXU. xff TCWTOiy KOiQdm^ OV Kct7T7ruSoKl^ 9

c^vrje^j 'araAAjf. x&Xe7rov 3 7dtg pz\dXXoig tyaoriv
eivcu to nrviyztQg. tcl^u yd(> yjy cv cXiyw t&to
wow.

BeX^Vty ^ Sokh pixl©* n Keicc elvcu. (yfvov-
rai $ 'nrXeixg.) r) pi xv etc r [AzjdxXtov, £
rd Qoya/ct, \%H h pitfov.



Sfuras, pigment aque varus. Milton vocant Graci, minium-
que Cinnabari. Homer, fpeaking of the Grecian Ships,
has Njia? iM?lo7ra,cr)8c, and it is impoilihle he mould mean by
it, that they were ftained with the Minium, or Cinnabar,
which was not known till after his Time, as we mall fee
by this Author's Account of it hereafter. Cinnabar
was originally the Indian Name of the Gum we now
call Sanguis Draconis ; and was given to this other Sub-
ftance (called alfo Miniu??i,) from its Refemblance to that
in Colour.

h Reddle always contains in it more or lefs of Iron ;
and there is one kind of it called Smitt in England, which
is fometimes fo rich, as to be worth working for that Me-
tal, and have the Name of an Iron Ore. What this Au-
thor obferves, of its being better in the Reddle Pits than
in Iron Mines, is contrary to what we find now in Eng-
land. The Reddle I juft before have mentioned, as fome-
times fold in London under the Name of Indian Red, is much



( "5 )

this laft is fcarce, and found only in fmall Quanti-
ties , whereas there are fometimes whole Veins of
the others. Ochre is faid to be found generally
heaped together; and Reddle fcattered, as it werei
every way. Painters ufe this Reddle in their Pic-
tures, as alfo Ochre, inftead of Orpiment ; for when
powder'd they fcarce at all differ in Colour, however
different they appear in the Mafs.

XCI. There are alfo in fome Places peculiar Pits
of Reddle and Ochre, as in Cappadocia, from whence
they are taken in vaft Quantities : But in thefe Pits,
it is faid, the Labourers are in danger of Suffoca-
tion ; which unhappy Accident fometimes comes on
very fuddenly.

XCII. The be ft Reddle, for there are many
Kinds, is thought to be that of Cea 9 and particu-
larly that which is taken from the Reddle Pits ; for
it is alfo fometimes found in h Iron Mines.



the fineft I have ever feen ; and that was not from a Reddle
Pit, but from among the Iron Ore in the Foreft of Dean.
I have feen the Pits peculiarly worked for this Subftance
in Derby/hire and Stafford/hire^ and have of the Reddle
from them, which is good, but much inferior to that of
the Foreft of Dean in all refpe&s : And, indeed, Reafon
informs us that it always naturally muft be fo ; for it mud,
as I before obferved, neceffarily be vaftly finer in the Fif-
fures of Strata, than where it conftitutes Strata itfelf.
And as all Reddle owes its Colour, which is its Value,
to Iron, it muft naturally have moft of it, when neareft
the largeft Quantities of that Metal : I can therefore fee
no Reafon for that of the Pit's being eftcemed the beft by
the Antients, unlefs they valued it for its Texture and
Confiftence : Then, indeed, that muft be preferred, as it
is the moft compact and denfe ; the other being ever
loofer and more crumbly.



( 126)

irutqv • cuuT'/i \<?iv 5\ Kct7T7rccci'oKiK'q. not} dy slut
o &g XivelvZu;* at 3 tji Aqpvo* ptjuXXdlef) kuQ*
cwrlw.

5 There were among the Antients two Earths of Lemnos
well known and in common Ufe, though to different Pur-
p< fes : Thefe Diftin£Hons have been fince loft, and that
Lofs has caufed us a great deal of Confufion. Thefe two
were diftinguifh'd by the Names of Terra Lemnia^ and
Rubrica Lemma, Tv A^^ncc and MlyQoq Aypviu, the Le?nnian
Re J die, and Lcmnian Earth : The firft of thefe was ufed
by Painters, as it was taken out of the Pit; the fecond
was firft made into Cakes, and fealed with great Ceremo-
nies ; and was in very high efteem in Medicine. I fhall
be the more particular on thefe Earths, as it will natu-
rally lead to a better underftanding of fome other of the
Earths now much in ufe in Medicine, at leaft the Names
of which are fo. The great Occafion of the Errors about
the Lemnian Earths, is theMiftake of Pliny, in confounding
them together, as he evidently has done, not diftinguifhing
the medicinal fealed Earth of that Place, from the Reddle
ufcd by Painters.' The fealed Earth was efteemed facred,
and the Priefts alone were fufFered to meddle with it.
They mixed it with Goat's Blood, made the Impreftion
of a Seal upon it ; and it was, therefore, called erfyuyU,
and Sphragis by the Latins ; i $1 Aypvia, %syopi4m yn W\i itc

tKcX uv^^ttqi et':a,<7r'hclo'0 , ov]zc i >^ atpccyiZpfAtvoi tlk&Vl cliyoc, cr(pccy7$&

x&7&(w'> D'ofcorides. This, therefore, was the Sealed Earth
of Lemnos, the Earth ufed in Medicine, and called by the
Phyficians Lemnian Earth : The hand the Priefts had in the
making it up, got it the Name of Sacred Earth,
And this feems to be the very fame with the true Terra
Lemnia ufed at this time ; which is a fat unduous Clay,
of a pale red Colour, made up in Cakes of about half an
Ounce weight, fometimes lefs, and brought from Lemnos,
and many other parts of the Turiijb Dominions : This we



( I2 7 )

XCIII. There are befide thefe alfo, the 1 Lemnidn
Reddle, and the Sinopic, as it is commonly called ;
but it is dug in Cappadocia, and thence carried to
Sinope. There are particular Pits in Lemnos, in
which nothing but the Earth is dug.

XC1V. There are three kinds of the k Sinopic 9



now call Terra Lemma Rubra, by way of diftinclion from a
white Earth, lefs unctuous and more aftringent than the
red, which is dug in Lemnos only. And we have fometimes,
befide thefe, an unfealed Earth from the fame Place, which
is yellowifh, with blackifh Specks ; and has this Advantage
of the other, that we are fure it is genuine ; for we are
fenfible they are too often counterfeited.

Thefe were the Terrce Lcmnits ufed in Medicine. The
Rubrica Lemnia was a kind of Reddle of a firm Confif-
tence and deep red Colour, dug in the fame Place, but
never made into any Form or fealed, but purchafed in the
rough Glebes by Artificers of many kinds, who had Ufes
for it in Colouring. That Pliny confounds thefe two Sub-
fiances is to be feen in this Paflage : Rubrics genus in ca
vcluere maxime inteliigi. §)uidam fecundtz aucloritatis, pal-
mam enim Leninite dabant* Minio proxima hcec eft, multum
anti qui s celcbrata, cum infula in qua nafcitur, nec nifi fignaia
venundabatur : unde & Spbragidem appellavere : Where it
is evident, that he thought the Lemnian Reddle was the
Subftance fealed and called Sphragis, or Sealed Earth. But
that they were not the fame, and the Earth, and not the
Reddle was the Subftance which was feal'd, is evident
from Galen, 1. i. de Antidotis, KaGaVsp In) Asanas y«s

ftiXfe, Xuteh dvTyv apuvov « fXiXlov, aMa yr,v. en yccp T»$ A§-

k The Sinopic Earth, which we know at prefent is the
firft Kind mentioned by this Author ; the other two we
are wholly unacquainted with, though among the Anticnts
they were much in efteem with Painters. Our Rubrica
Sinopica is a denfe, heavy, firm Subftance, of a deep red
Colour, ftaining the Fingers in handling, and of a ftyptic
aftringent Tafte. Tournefcrt imagines it a native Crocus



( "8 )

xcl\2m)/j 9 in n'lyvv&g* Tag q in^cg

is. Tivi*) 5 ok £ *£lx£pg KxleuccuOjjSl/jfft. a?Xq
^ei^cov* it J) KuJ/#. QuuueiSt ^ Cft«j/©^,

<p<a<n, xoiQ,xcw6evl@* twos 7*rci]/$o%HX y tIw ''XX-

W' TiQecuri $* «V Tag xxpivxs x^ T &S xtvccs

fiSiXXov ptXccvJz&v, Kj dvOgoMco$e<?i()ct,v 'sroiSo'i, pa/)-
■Tvgei a ctv 7} jpea-is cuuto. co^&tz to \sgn Txrv^og
CC7rctV& TCWTCt fJLsjctQclXXeiV' etTreg ofJLolotv i) <s^c-
TrXqtruiv ^« tIuj ivtcwQo, t% (pvcrixy ko[jli£hv K



Martis ; and certain it is, that it owes its Colour, at leaft,
to that Metal.

It is dug at this Time, as it was in that of Theophraflus*
in Cappadocia^ and carried to Sinope for Sale, from whence
it has its Name, and from whence Sinopis became after-
wards a general Name for the Red Ochres. M/Xio? SUq l%ur
§£ov Livuir^oo^ Hefychius and fo many others. If the prefent
Efleem for this Subftance was greater than it is, as indeed
I can on Experience affirm it ought to be, it might be had,
I believe, in many other Places befide Cappadotia. I have

fome



( "9 )

of a deep Red, another of a whitifh Colour, and
the other of a middle Colour between the other
two, which is called the pure fimple Kind, becaufe
it is ufed without mixing, whereas they mix the
others.

XCV. There is alfo a kind of this made of
Ochre, by burning, but it is not nearly lb good as
the others. The making this was an Invention of
Cydias, who took the Hint of it, as is laid, from
obferving, in a Houfe which was on fire, that fome
Ochre which was there, when half burnt, aflumed
a red Colour.

XCVI. The way of making the factitious is
this : They put the Ochre into new earthen Vef-
fels, which they cover with Clay and fet in Fur-*
naces ; and thefe, as they grow hot, heat alfo the
Ochre, and the greater degree of Fire they give,
the deeper and more ftrongly purple the Matter be-
comes. The Origin of the native Kinds feems
to teftify that this Method is not irrational, for all
thefe feem to have fuffered Changes by the aftion
of Fire : From whence we may rationally conclude,
that this way of making the faftitious, is either of
the fame kind, or at lead very analagous to that
ufed by Nature for the Production of the genuine 1 .

fome of it perfectly fine, which was dug in the New Jer*
feys in America^ where it is frequently found in digging at
about 15 or 20 Feet deep, and is called, I fuppofe from its
Colour and ftaining the Hands, Blood-ftone. It was ori-
ginally ufed, not only in Painting, but in Medicine ; and
though now difufed, and not known in the Shops, deferve9
to be brought into Ufe again, being a much better Aftrin-
gent, as I have found by repeated Tryals of that from
America , than any of the Earths now in ufe*

1 The making a Red Ochre from the Yellow by burning

K



( *3° )

i -\ ' 11

tooxtQ cv Alyv7rl<p * ^ Ktw* Tg/a * r\ Aiyv-

^ 0 Aiyv7rli(& eig rcl aK(>oiQ, Xetco/jt,ct&* 0 3
ZKuSyg, eig roi vSa^e^ot. XK<£>ct<?cg <T 0 Alyv-
irji(&>. Kj 01 y&<pcv]£g rd <s?&i rig @ct<rihetg y £
tSto y&cpxcrt, rig txt^cot@^ @cicri)\d)g \7r01y1as 72%-



is as well known, and as much practifed among the People
who deal in Colours for painting now, as it was in the
Time of this Author. I cannot but obferve, however,
that his calling this a Sinopis, is a Proof of what I have
before obferved, that that Word became a Name for all
the Subftances of the Red Ochre kind. As to what
this Author obferves, of the native Red Ochres owing
their Colour to Fire, it is very certain, that moft of them
fhew no Marks of ever having been acted on by that Ele-
ment. And we know very well, that the ferrugmeous
Particles which can make the Matter red in burning, can
alfo impart that Colour to it without the afliftance of
Fire. Notwithstanding which, it mutt be allowed, that
there are fome of thefe red Subftances ; and not only
thefe, but fome other Bodies, particularly fome of the Hae-
matites kind, which feem, even in their native Beds, to
carry evident Marks of their having been wrought on and
changed by Fire ; though it is not eafy to fay, how or
when it fliould have happened.

11 The factitious Sinopis juft mentioned, I have obferved,
was no other than a factitious Reddle, properly fpeaking;
and what the Author here mentions, was probably another
Kind, made from fome other Species of Yellow Ochre,



( i3i )

XCVII. The Reddle alfo is of two Kinds, the
native, and the factitious ll ,

XCVIII. There is alfo, befide the native Lapis
Armenia, a factitious Kind made in Egypt. There
are, indeed, three different Sorts of this; the Z?-
gyptian, the Scythian , and the Cyprian m ; of which
the Egyptian is the beft for clear ftrong Paintings,
and the Scythian for the fainter. The Egyptian is
factitious \ and the Hiftorians, who write the An-
nals of the Kings of that Nation, think it a thing
worthy a Place in their Hiftories, which King of
Egypt was the Inventer of the artificial Caeruleum in
Imitation of the native.



and called Reddle, from its being of a pale red, and re-
fembling that of the common native Red Ochre \ as the
other was called factitious Sinopis* from its being of a deeper,
and refembling the genuine Sinopis of Cappadocia.

m I have, in another Place, obferved the Confufion which
has arifen from Pliny's confounding the Cyanus Gem with
the Cyanus Paint, or Lapis Ar menus. We have a great
Inftance of this Error in his Tranflation of this PafTage of
our Author ; which he has given the Senfe of, but has ren-
dered the Whole perfectly unintelligible, by faying all this
of the Cyanus Gem, which it is moft evident Theopbrajlus
fays of the Lapis Armenus, or Cyanus Paint. There can be no
queftion but that this Author is here treating of this Sub-
ftance, the Cyanus Paint, or Lapis Armenus, and not the
Lapis Lazuli^ as he has done with the Gems long fince >
and is now treating of the Earths, and particularly thofe
ufed in Painting ; and his Defcription of the Ufe of it makes
it fo notorioufly plain, that it is aftonifhing Pliny could mi-
ftake him: The PafTage in Pliny is (fpeaking of the Cyanus
Gem) Optima Scytbica, chin Cypria y pojlremo JEgyptia*
Adulieratur maxime tin5furd y idque in gloria -regis JEgyptii
afcribitur, qui primus earn tinxit ; dividitur autem & bcec in
mares fceminafque. inejl ei aliquando & aureus pulvis, &a

K 2



( 132 )

(f. m ®cc<ri S* ol rd (pdgfJLcMct, Tgjl&ovlzg, r jUSV
Kvctviv e£ icwTX vroietv x^topoflg, re-flu^* 7} ft
txt^cctoVj ok r MttJotcItoov X<&xqtc&1w ii 3 J&Ve-

(>cl. Tcwrd re $vj Tt%vif ylv\), £ $ri tv \pi/jiv-
Biov. TiQe^) $ [to\i£$@-> uVg£ o£xg at rsridoig. 6-
tuv j) Aa€;j *zrdx@»> v\XUov tztA?^, (\ct/u,£dv{ r j
fidXi^cf, cv ypityig Since) tot dvolyxviv* eiv t>m-



m The Colours, of different degrees of Deepnefs, which
were prepared from this Subftance, were Separated by
means of Water : The Method of preparing them was,
by beating the Matter to Powder, and putting that in a large
quantity of Water, and faving, in different Veffels, that
which fubfided at different Times, the heavier part, confirm-
ing of larger Particles, finking almoft immediately, and the
lighter, which confuted of much fmaller and finer, not till
after a confidcrableTime. Thefe different Quantities of Co-
lour that had fubfided at the differentTimes, were then fepa-
rately ground to a proper Finenefs, and kept as different
Colours for Ufe. And this is the Meaning of the Xeirlvraruv
and vjuxvldruv of our Author, and Crajfiorem tenuiorcrrwe of
Plhiy : Which fome, who imagined they were talking of
the Degree of Colour, and not of the Finenefs and Coarf-
nefs of the Particles of the Matter, could not bring them-
felves to understand. Indeed, in many of the Paffages
complained of as unintelligible in the Antients, the Ob-
fcurity has been more owing to the wrong Apprehenfion
of the Commentators, than the Perplexity of the Authors.



( m )

XCIX. Prefents are alfo made to great Perfons
in fome Places of this Subftance, as well that which
has pa(Ted the Fire as that which has not; and the
Phoenicians pay their Tribute in it.

C. m People who prepare Colours fay alfo, that the
Lapis Armenus of itfelf makes four different ones the
two Extremes of which are, firft, that which con-
fifts only of its fined Particles, and is very pale ;
and the other, that which confifts of its largeft,
and is extremely deep.

CI. But thefe are the Works of Art, as is alfo
Cerufe n , to make which, Lead is placed in earthen
Veffels over fliarp Vinegar, and after it has acquired
fome thicknefs of a kind of Ruft, which it com-
monly does in about ten Days, they open the Vef-
fels, and fcrape it off, as it were, in a kind of Foul-



n We have three or four different Methods of making
Cerufe now ufed among us, but all are of the fame Kind
with this of TheophrafluS} and are the Effect of Vinegar on
Lead. It is by fome made by infufing Filings of Lead in
ftrong Vinegar, which in twelve or fourteen Days will al-
moft entirely difiblve them, and leave a very good Cerufe
at the bottom of the VefTel. Others make it, by plunging
thin Plates of the fame Metal into Vinegar, and placing
them in a gentle Heat ; thefe Plates will be, in about ten
Days or lefs, covered with a white Ruft, which is to be
fcraped off, and the Plates plunged into the Vinegar again;
and fo fcraped at Times till they are wholly eaten in pieces :
All the different Scrapings are afterwards ground to Pow-
der together and kept for Ufe. And others make it, by
putting Vinegar into an earthen Veffel, then covering it
clofely with a plate of Lead, and fetting it in the Sun in
hot Weather ; and this Plate will, in about ten Days, be
diffolved and precipitated in farm of Cerufe to the bottom
of the Veffcl.

K 3



( 134 )

vX(nv cocnrtg dj^oorci tivm ait curfj> tvuXiv (t<-
S'ioco'i) Kj ttclXiv Mug oiv xcilctvxXoocrctHri* to $ 9 iira-
$>vc$uov, a> rg/^Jjfg/ Tg/£*<r/, Kj i(p8x<riv to r j
eo^ocjov v^i^cc^jov 151 to xpipvQiov.

Hoc^7rKri(rltog ^ £ 0 log ylv\)* XctXxog ^
IgvOgog, tgvyog W#g^), Kj u7to^wjb^ to Str-

yivofyov. xtco t7ri(pcun^) T$e/j&jj(&> n .

qy. rlvs^) 3 Kj KtvvdGccf*/* to cuuTo(f)u\g 9 to
3, host tglatriccv 0 , cwTOtpueg fi, y to <sre< I&fg/ay,



n Our Manner of making Verdigrefe is as like this of the
Antients, as that of our making Cerufe ; and it is very e-
vident, that both the one and the other have been handed
down from very early Ages to us. The Manner in which
we make it is this : The Preffings of Grapes are,
when taken from the Prefs, fpread on Hurdles, and laid
in the Sun to dry ; after they have lain in this Manner two
or three Days, and are pretty well dried, they are made
into a Parte with Wine, and left to ferment ; afterwards,
while in a ftate of Fermentation, they are made into
Balls, and again laid in Wine till thoroughly wetted with
it, and then placed in proper Veflels at a little diftance
over the Wine, and fliut up together in this manner for
near a Fortnight ; after which they fmell very ftrong and
pungent, and are in a Condition to extracl: the Ruft from
Copper; they are then beaten together into a Parte, and
laid, Stratum fuper Stratian, with thin Plates of Copper,
on wooden Bars in the fame VefTels ; and in a Week or
ten Days the Verdigrefe is formed. The Plates are then
taken out, and wrapt in linnen Cloths dipped in Wine,
and laid for three Weeks in a Cellar. After which the
Verdigrefe is fcraped off for Ufe.

0 The Antients, we find, had what they called the na-



( *35 )

nefs ; they then place the Lead over the Vinegar
again, repeating over and over the fame Method of
fcraping it, till it is wholly diffolved ; what has been
fcraped off they then beat to Powder, and boil for a
long time ; and what at laft fubfides to the bottom
of theVeffel is the Cerufe.

CII. In a manner alio, fomething refembling this,
is Verdigreafe made ; for Copper is placed over the
Lees of Wine, and the Ruft which it acquires by
this means is taken off for Ufe : And it is by this
means that the Ruft which appears is produced n .

OIL There are alfo two kinds of Cinnabar, the
one native, the other factitious 0 ; the native, which



tive and factitious Cinnabar as well as we ; their native
Cinnabar was the lame with ours, but the factitious very
widely different. Theirs was, we fee, no other than a Pre-
paration of a fine Alining arenaceous Subftance, which was
the Sil Aiticum Romanorum injudicioufly confounded by
Vitruvius with the Ochra Attica of the Antients ; whereas
ours is a Subfbnce formed, by the Art of Chemiftry, of
Quickfilver and Sulphur, into a denfe heavy Mafs, of a
bright red, marked with fhining filvery Streaks.

The native Cinnabar of the Antients and of the Mo-
derns are, however, the fame ; and theirs, as well as ours,
was a denfe heavy mineral Subftance, of a fhining red Co-
lour ; from which Quickfilver was extracted. This Sub-
ftance was alfo called Minium ; and, in After-times, be-
coming fubjecr. to Adulterations with Lead Ore calcined
to a Rednefs, after the two Names had long been ufed in
common, the Word Minium became at laft appropriated
to the calcined Lead Ore only \ and the Cinnabar was ufed
only to fignify what we now underftand by it, the Sub-
ftance from which Quickfilver was to be extracted.

The Word Cinnabar iuwsi£*p f however, among the old
Writers in Medicine, frequently is ufed to fignify a Thing
of a very different Kind, a vegetable Juice, called by us

K 4



( 136 )

QcXvjgov <r(po$£p j£ XiQoohg* <& ii <b Koh%(ng. txt3
$e (patriv eivcu x,(wiwk)v. cvzujcL^aXXmrt 7v£djov]eg*
W 'A tear t()Fci7ictv 'E(pea-# [aikqcv i£ ivog

ro7r%. povov §* Wiv apiA,®**, QvXXiyxci Xciuttv-
£/^W#v, Ka,8d7re() o kokx&>* rouurlw 3 Tt>/\pa,v]tg
oXoog cv dfyetotg XiQlvoig Xeto\djIw irXwuxtriv cv
%ctXKOig, fJiiK^cv at tcocAoig. tv vtpi^dfB/JGV TtrdXiv



Dragons-blood ; and long idly believed to be really the
Blood of Dragons. This generally was, however, called
K*wa6«§» 'lvhxov, from its Country, to diftinguifh it from the
other, or mineral Cinnabar, yinlai ol h avrr, KmaQoc^ to
T^ybpivov 'ivctwov, dno ruv Szyfyav u><; Suxpv cwtxyopivov, Diofcorides*

This Cinnabar they therefore knew as a perfectly diftincT:
Subftance, though called by the fame Name. And the mi-
neral native Cinnabar, the thing here fpoken of, was, we
find, a hard ftony Subftance : Ours is a compact weighty
Body, found fometimes pure, and fometimes incorporated
with different other Subftances, or containing other Sub-
ftances incorporated with it.

The pure Cinnabar is generally of a bright red, fome-
times deeper, fometimes paler, but commonly fparkling or
glofly \ fome is found of a deeper and dufkier Colour in the
Mafs, but becomes of a fine Red when rubbed to Powder :
And fome of it refembles the Haematites of fome Kinds.

When incorporated with other Subftances, it is chiefly
found in Spar, or in loofe, arenaceous or fparry Stones ;
fometimes, but much mere rarely, in clayey Earth, and
fometimes in a talky Matter, greyifh, or bluifh, or
whitifji.



( *37 )

is found in Spain, is hard and ftony ; as is alfo that
brought from Colchis, which they fay is produced
there in Rocks and on Precipices, from which they
get it down with Darts and Arrows. The fadti-
tious is from the Country a little above Ephefus it
is but in fmall Quantities, and is had only from
one Place. It is only a Sand, fliining like Scarlet,
which they colled, and rub to a very fine Powder,
in Veffels of Stone only ; and afterwards wafh in
other Veffels of Brafs, or fometimes of Wood : What
fubfides they go to work on again, rubbing it and
walhing it as before. And in this Work there is
much Art to be ufed ; for from an equal Quantity
of the Sand fome will make a large Quantity of the



It frequently holds incorporated with it, befide Quick-
filver, Gold, Silver, fparry and marcafitical Bodies, and
fometimes Lead.

It i%found in Hungary., Bohemia, Saxony, Spain, France,
Italy, and the Eajl- Indies-, but no where in greater plenty
than about Rofenburg in Hungary ; where it is found chiefly
in a whitifli fparry Stone on the fides of the Hills ; and is
gathered by the poor People, after it has been cleared and
uncovered by Rains. The purer native Cinnabar has been
ufed to be much efteemed both by the Painters and in
Medicine ; but our factitious kind equalling it in Beauty,
and being much cheaper, has banifhed it from ambno- the
Painters. And it were to be wifli'd the Cafe were the
fame in Medicine, for the Dofe may be much better as-
certained in the factitious, than the native ; which we can
never be fure of as to its exact degree of Purity, and which
may alfo contain other mineral Subftances, which we have
no Intent of giving, mixed and incorporated with it.
That of Hungary, however, is what always ought to be
kept for internal Ufe (if it be to be fo ufed) as it is com-
monly more pure than that of any other Place,



( 13* )

7exyv\q* oi ox £ tea 'nroXv &&irot3o'tv vl ^,
w^g %v aXettpovJeg. yivQ $ ™ $ v<rdf$/Jov Kara

$\ Kaja^ei^cu <5e <pa<ri Kj X^ety tIw tfaciav,
KaXXlav Tivct, 'AOqvcuov ok r dgfvgeiav. og oio$v@»

vrpyfyaTdjeTo £ QwjtXzfy. £7T« 3 ^o7e73 or; c£fc
6%<f, t* 3 KccX^@^ t9cw[Aa£e 2^ rlw xqo-

c&v, XTGog \tt\ t e^Faciav yXOe tcujtIw. £ TzraXcucy

\<?lv* aXXoC VTCi BT9J ftdXl? CVlVYlKQv'Q, d^xfi^

HgpfclGxXov 'AQyvycri,

q T£X V7 li Tc ^ 0 ^ i0C ^oiet* it) txtcov to, p XQrpitog
X&tfl* Te * d fiovov (ft avj arias, coottb^ rag dXuretg.
tvia tr&og dp(poiy. aaxre^ %vtov d^Fv^ov p . eV* yd(>
Tig X(>eia ^ txtx. ^oietrca gtuv ti (Kwas'Sag/)



p We have now many ways of extracting the QuickfuVer
from Cinnabar, but all by the Affiftance of Fire. Where the
Mineral is rich, the common way is by a kind of Defolia-
tion per defcenfum in this Manner: After beating it to Pow-
der, it is put into narrow-neck'd earthen Veffels, which
are flopped with bundles of Mofs crambed pretty hard in-
to them : Thefe are then turned bottom upwards, and
their Necks, thus flopped, let into the Mouths of other



( *39 )

Powder, and others very little, or none at all. The
wafhing they ufe is very light and fuperficial, and
they wet it every time feparately and carefully. That
which at laft fubfides is the Cinnabar, and that
which fwims above in much larger quantity is only
the fupcrfluous Matter of the Wafhing.

CIV. It is faid, that one Callias^ an Athenian^
who belonged to the Silver Mines, invented and
taught the making this artificial Cinnabar. He had
carefully got together a great quantity of this Sand,
imagining, from its fhining Appearance, that it
contained Gold : But when he had found that it did
not, and had had an Opportunity, in his Tryals
of admiring the Beauty of its Colour, he invented
and brought into ufe this Preparation of it. And
this is no old thing, the Invention being only of
about ninety Years date \ Praxibulus being at this
Time in the Government at Athens.

CV. From thefe Accounts it is manifeft, that
Art imitates Nature, and fometimes produces very
peculiar Things ; feme of which are for Ufe, others
for Amufement only, as thofe employed in the or-
namenting Edifices ; and others, both for Amufe-
ment and Ufe. Such is the Production of Quick-
filver p, which has its Ufes : This is obtained from



Veffels of a like Shape, which are buried in the Ground.
After the Joinings are very firmly luted, a Fire is made
about the Place ; and when the Veffels grow hot, the
Quickfilver gets loofe, and draining through the Mofs
which flops the Mouth of the upper Veffel, in which it
is, falls perfectly fine and pure into the lower. This is
a common way at the richer Mines. At others, the Cin-
nabar is put into Retorts^ and fet in proper Furnaces \ and



( I 4° )

zoo. Tci p, Zv toicwtcl x&x civ Tig XctGot srA«'#.

Tcov 3 [A,e&Ah<£>Ttiv rot cv 7i7g yzutpctviriv



and the Quickfilver is raifed by the Heat in Fumes and
falls into the Receiver, which is filled three parts with
cold Water, to make it condenfe again the more readily.
But there is fome Cinnabar which contains fo much Sul-
phur, that the Quickfilver it holds can never be got loofe,
without the Addition of fomething to abforb the Sulphur.
This Kind is generally deftilled by the Retort, with Quick-
lime, Filings of Iron, Wood-allies, Salt of Tartar, Pot-
afhes, or fomething of that kind. And from the Refiduum
cf thefe Deftiilations, a pure and genuine Lac Sulphur is
may be prepared, by the common way of boiling and
precipitating with deftilled Vinegar. Our factitious Cinna-
bar, made only by fubliming Mercury and Sulphur toge-
ther, exactly refembles the native of fome kinds in all its
Qualities ; and yields its Quickfilver pure and fluid again
by the fame Means.

But befide all thefe ways of procuring Quickfilver from
the Cinnabars, it is fometimes found pure, unmixed, and
fluid in the Bowels of the Earth. And this Kind Diofcori-
des diftinguifhes by the Name of vfydpfvpoq xatf lavrov. This
is cleared from its Earth by warning in common Water ;
and from fome other heterogene Matters, by Salt and Vi-
negar, and then is ftrained through Leather, and called
Virgin Quickfilver.

It is a Mineral of a perfectly fingular kind, and when
pure and unmixed, keeps constantly its fluid Form. It
may be amalgamed with all other metaliek Subftances, but
is moft difficultly made to mix with Antimony, Iron, and
Copper. It penetrates the Subftance of all Metals, and dif-
folves, and makes them brittle. It is the heavieft of the



( I4i )

native Cinnabar, rubbed with Vinegar in a brafs
Mortar with a brafs Peftle. And many other Things
of this kind others, perhaps, may hit upon.

CVI. There yet remain alfo of the foflile King-
dom certain remarkable Earths dug out of Pits, the
Formation * of which, as was obferved in the be-
ginning of this Treatife (owing either to the mere
Afflux or Percolation of their conftituent Parts) is



Metals except Gold, which is to it as 4 to 3, or there-
about ; and therefore will not fwim in it, as all other Me-
tals do. It is, however, notwithftanding its Weight, ex-
tremely volatile, and eafily raifed in form of a very fubtle
Vapour ; and in that Form, diffipated entirely by means
of Fire.

Quickfilver, from its ill Effects on the Miners and Peo-
ple employed about large Quantities of it, was long efteem-
ed a Poifon among the Antients. Diofcorides reckons it
a thing which muff have very pernicious Effects in Medi-
cine ; and Galen believed it highly corrofive. It firft got
into Ufe externally among the Arabians \ and afterwards,
but not till long afterwards, got introduced into the Num-
ber of internal Medicines, from the repeated Obfervations
of its Safety and good Effecfs when given to Cattle, and
from the hardy Attempts of fome unhappy People, who
had ventured to take it down in large Quantities (in or-
der to procure Abortion) without any ill Effect.

q The various Operations of Nature, in the Formation
of thefe and other foflile Subftances, have been treated of
at large in the beginning of this Work ; the greateft of all
Diftinclions among thefe, is that of fuch as are found in the
perpendicular Fiffures, and fuch as are depofited in Strata.
The Difference between thefe Kinds in their degree of
Purity and Finenefs, is extremely great, as I have before
obferved, and muft neceffarily be fo, from their different
manner of Formation ; as thofe of the perpendicular Fif-
fures have been formed by Percolation, at different Times ;
and thofe of Strata, by mere Subfidence from among the
Waters of the general Deluge.



( )

0*(>meyig £ opcthtoje&s r aXXuv. ^
*3rccv]oict Xay^clvxctv rlu) r \5snK&t$)0dv r

tb ^ 24& T ^ ^ ^oi^v\o)v S^&tyo&v. i£ cov rug
l&shavjav}eg 9 rug eft rrjzovjeg ngjf T(J.^ovJeg f Qtw]^
Bicco-i rug XiOxg rcig ok 'Acrlag eig ravrctg uyo-
l$jjag.

A\ 3 ouuTotpvHg, y^j d^px rc*> <z&(t1<» to
X^G-ifjiov Xx&trcu, c£t$ov ?$&g «Vw, yj TS-fja^g 9
y rg f MyXictg, £ y c KipaXi'a, <£ q Sapa, ujf



r The high-colour'd Earths ufed by Painters and in Me-
dicine, owe their feveral Colours, in a great meafure, to
the fame Caufe as the Gems, &c. do theirs, a Mixture of
metalline Matter of various Kinds, which ftains them, as
it does thofe, with the Colour it naturally yields, in the
particular kind of Solution its Particles have met with.
Thus Copper, diffolved in a proper Alkali, makes, with a
proper gemmeous Matter, a blue Sapphire \ and with Earth,
the Lapis Armenus^ a Subftance before defcribed. And
the fame Particles difiblved in a proper Acid, give to gem-
meous Matter the Colour which makes it an Emerald ;
and to Earth, that which makes it the Terre verte, an
Earth ufed by our Painters, of a dufky greenifh Colour,
and denfe, unctuous, clayey Constitution ; generally brought
from Italy 9 but to be met with entirely as good here at
home. And Iron, which gives that glorious Red to the
Ruby, the Garnet, and the Amethyft, with Earth, makes
the red Boles, Ochres, and Clays.

s The Melian Earth of the Antients was a fine white
Marie, of a loofe crumbling Texture, and eafily diffufible
in Water or other Liquors. Some have imagined it to have
been of other Colours ; but that it was really white, we
have the unqueftionable Authority of the Antients : Pliny
not only defcribes it to be fo> in his general Account of it*

2,



( H3 )

from a more pure and equal Matter than the other
more common Kinds. And thefe receive their va-
rious Colours from the Differences as well of their
Properties of afting on other Bodies r , as of their
being fubje£t to be adted on by them. Some of
thefe they foften, and others melt, and afterwards
reduce to Powder; and from thefe compofe the
ftony Maffes which we receive from Afia,

CVII. But the native, which have their Ufe as
well as Excellence, are only three or four ; the
5 Mellaril the t Cimolian^ the Samian, and the Tym-
phakan^ called Gypfum.



but afterwards confirms it in another Chapter, where he
lays it was the White of the great Painters of Antiquity :
Lib. 35. c. 6. fpeaking of it among the other Earths, he
fays, Melinum candidum et ipfu?n^ eft optimum in Melo in-
fida. And lib, 35. c. 7. fpeaking of the Painters of An-
tiquity, he fays, Shiaiuor cole ri bus foils , immortalla ilia ope-
ra fecere^ ex albis Mellno^ ex Silaciis Attico^ ex rubris Sino-
pide Pontica^ ex nigris Atra?nento. I mention thefe two
Pailages as the befr. way of judging certainly from Pliny ;
for he often errs, and where he has occafion to mention
the fame Subftance a fecond time, frequently contradicts
what he kid before faid of it. This is to be obferved in
too many Places in that Author, and has arifen from this,
that he was a general Colle£tor, and often carelefly put
clown what different Authors had faid of the fame Sub-
ftance, either under the fame, or under different Names, in
different Places of his Work where two fuch Authors had
been both uncertain as to the Truth, and probably the
World in general alfo, they frequently made different Con-
jectures ; and where one had erred, the other frequently
corrected him. The Accounts of both, therefore, given
by a third Perfon in their own W ords, in different Parts
of Pliny's Hiftory, and that without mentioning them as
the Opinions of different Perfons, has been the Occafion
of great part of the Contradictions in that Author. But



( 144 )



where he has mentioned the fame thing in different Places,
and that with the fame Defcription, I always judge he may-
be abfolutely depended on, and that the general Opinion
of the World was on his Side.

With this Account of the Melian Earth, as white, it is
very furprifing that the generality of Authors, and even
thofe of the firft Clafs, have conftantly imagined it to be
yellow. The Occafion of the Miftake has been, that the
Melinns Color of the Latins^ M-famv xifipou of the Greeks^
is yellow. This, they took it for granted, had its Origin
from the Colour of the Melian Earth, a Subftance antient-
Iy ufed in Painting, and which therefore they concluded
muft be yellow, and defcribed it accordingly. In this
manner have numberlefs other Errors crept into Natural
Hiftory by Accident, by Miftakes in other Matters ; and
been afterwards facredly propagated by a fervile Sett of
Writers, who have never dared to think for themfelves,
but have taken upon truft whatever they have found in
their Anceftors Works, however diflbnant to Reafon,
and, in many Cafes, even to the Teftimony of their Senfes.
The Occafion of this fo general Error, is no more than
the miftaking the Etymology of the Word M^cc, Melinus y
which is not derived from M*??ua?, or M^ioc yyj, the Melian
Earth here defcribed, but from p»?us, pomu?n, an Apple ;
and exactly meant that kind of yellow common on ripe
Apples of many Kinds ; and the ftric~l Senfe of the Verb
is, according to the moft correct Lexicographers,
Colore luteo ejfe^ Jive pomum refer ente : Thefe are their very
Words. And hence, from an Error in a Subject foreign to
Natural Hiftory, has happened, we fee, an egregious Er-
ror in that Study, and which has been propagated on from
Author to Author, for want of confulting even a good
Lexicon.

1 The Cimolian Earth had ( like the other Kinds ) its
Name from the Place where it was originally dug, the
Ifland Cimolus. Many Authors have ranked this among
the Clays, and Tournefort makes it a Chalk, but it appears

to



( 145 )

CVIII. Of thefe the Painters ufe only the MelU
an 5 they meddle not with the v Samian^ though it



to me to have been neither of thefe, but properly and di-
ftincUy a Marie, an Earth of a middle Nature, between
both : It was white, denfe, of a loofe Texture, and gene-
rally impure, having Sand or fmali Pebbles among it,
infipid to the Tafte, but foft and unctuous to the Touch.
Many have imagined our Fullers-earth to be the Clmolia of
the Antients, but erroneoufly : The Subftance which comes
neareft it of all the now known Foflils, is the Steatites of
the Soap Rock of Cormvall^ which is the common Matter
of a great part of the Cliff near the Lizard Point. The
Antients ufed their Cimola for cleaning their Cloaths : And
partly from the fimilar Ufe of our Fullers-earth, and partly
from an erroneous Opinion of its being the fame with that ot
the Antients, it has obtained the fame Name. We, indeed,
know at prefent two different Subftances under this Name,
with the different Epithets of alba and purpurafcens ; a
much more appofite one than the laft of which might ea-
fily have been ufed. By the Cimolia Alba^ we mean the
Earth ufed for making Tobacco-pipes ; and by the Cimolia
Purpurafcens, the common Fullers-earth, of fuch conftant
and important Ufe in the cleaning our woollen Cloaths.

v The Samian Earth is a denfe, ponderous, unctuous Clay,
of a fubaftringent Tafte, and either white, or afh-colour'd ;
it is ufed principally in Medicine, and it has the fame Vir-
tues with the Terra Lemnia, and others of this Clafs, and
is dug in the Iiland of Samos^ from whence it has itsName, and
never was dug in any other Place that we know of. Pliny,
indeed, fays that it was alfo dug in the Ifland of Melos,
but not ufed by the Painters becaufe of its Fatnefs. He
errs, however, in this, which is apparently only a carelefs
Tranflation of the Paffage before us. And it may be obfer-
ved, from a thoufand Inltances of this kind, how neceffary
it was to bring the genuine Work of this Author on this
Subject to a more frequent and eafy Ufe, to avoid the being
milled by Pliny and others, who have mifreprefented fo ma-
ny Things from him ; and given thofe Mifreprefentations
and Errors, as Accounts from their own Knowledge ; The

L



( H6 )

7gct%£$6$ tyij d)\i7r\g, bri rrfi yfuffig d^ior\et
$jlqcKXqv. cfl-gf f\ MriXidg \%{ cv 70 <&dy$i. «<ri

. O^r/wfec ^ #2/ orx esw 0£0ei/ 9^jcr^ nig
C¥ £#^0, #AA' dvotFzcuov q v7rjiov, y wXoiyiov. vj



Paffage in Pliny is, Melinum candidum et ipfum eft optimum
in jMelo infula j in Samo nafcitur^ fed eo non utuntur Piftores
propter pinguitudinem. It is moft evident, that this is ta-
ken from the Paffage now before us in Theophrajius \ but
Pliny deviates from his Original into a very great Error in
it : Theophrajius does not fay, that the Melian Earth was
dug in Sa?nos, and was not ufed by the Painters ; but that
the Samian Earth, another Subftance which he had juft be-
fore mentioned, and was about to fay fomething more about,
was not ufed by them ; and adds, that in both thefe Places
there were many various Kinds of Earth, but not that
the Kind named from either, was found in the other.

w Our Author's Account of this Earth, and the manner
of digging it, has been generally copied by thofe who have
defcribed it fince. Pliny fays, accubantes effodiunt ibi inter faxa
venas fcrutantes* And in another Place, Sarnies dua funt,
quce Syropicon (or Colly r ion) et quce After appellant ur. And
Other of the old Authors much to the fame Effect.

I have before obferved, that this Earth was either white
or afti-colour'd ; thefe two Colours conftituted the Diffe-
rence between the two Kinds, and were what were called
the Ajler and Collyrion ; The white was the After •, fuppofed
by many to be a Talc, and fo called, for its mining; and
the afiVcoloured was called, from its Colour, Collyrion,



( H7 )

is very beautiful, becaufe it is fat, denfe, and urw
dtuous whereas fuch as are of a loofer Texture,
crumbling, dry, and without Fatnefs, are fitter
for their Ufe ; all which Properties the Melian^
particularly that of Pharis, poffeffes. There are,
however, befide thefe, in Melos and Samos both,
many various kinds of Earths.

CIX. The Diggers in the Pits of Samos cannot
ftand upright * at their Work, but are forced to lie
along, either on their Backs or on one Side ; for
the Vein of the Earth they dig runs length-way,
and is only of the depth of about two Foot, tho*



KaxXygjof. Kotovpa among the Greeks fignified a kind of
Loaf baked in Ames, and commonly brought to the Co-
lour of the Aflies in the doing : And from a Refemblance
to this was this Earth called Collyrion^ or the afh-colour'd
Samian Earth.

Pliny imagined it had this Name from its being a com-
mon Ingredient in certain Medicines for the Eyes, commonly
called Collyria \ but Diofcorides, from whom he took the
occafion of this Conjecture, does not attribute this Quality
to the Samian Earth of either kind, but to the Lapis Sa-
mius^ a Stone found among it. And from this Error alone;
it is, that fo many have imagined that the Samian Earth
was ufed in Medicines for the Eyes. Indeed when an
Error in regard to the Antients is once fet on foot, there
is no knowing what a Series of different Miftakes may be
the Confequences of it. Thefe Medicines for the Eyes,
called Collyria i though they did not give the Name to the
afh-colour'd Samian Earth fo called, may ferve, however,
to confirm the Opinion of its having it on occafion of its
Colour refembling that of Afhes ; frnce they had theirs
from the fame Caufe, and were only called Collyria^ that
is afh-colour'd Medicines, from their being made of Sub-
ftances of the Tutty kind, and refembling Afhes in Co-
lour.

L %



( 148 )

Slirxg, tv $ @clQ(&h TxroXXto {xh^W \§> izdrsgct,

Kj TXcLXlV Wi£CW CUJTtjs KCU £Tfi£JU/ <X>XU* TBT ~



w The Antients had many kinds of Gypfum, very diffe-
rent from one another, and ufed for different Purpofes :
but the principal Kinds were three , i . the Terra Ty?n-
phaica Gypfum incolis dicla, r»j TvptpdUvi w oi «r«p) TvpQa'i-
uv rvq Tonus ixelv&q x.a.>£ai rViJ/ov, The Tymphaican Earth,
called by the Inhabitants Gypfum \ 2. the real genuine
Gypfum, which was made, by burning, from a certain
talcy Subftance of the Lapis Specular is kind ; and 3. that
made by burning many different Species of Stones of the
Alabafter and other fimilar kinds.

The Tymphaican here mentioned appears to have been
an Earth approaching to the nature of the Maries, but with
this remarkable Quality, that it would make a kind of Plai-
fter or Cement by mixing with Water, without having
pafled the Fire. This Subftance is yet to be found in many
Places carefully fought after. I remember to have taken up an
Earth, which I found to have this Property, near Goodwood,
the Seat of his Grace the Duke of Richmond, in Sujfex.
And Mr. Morton is recorded to have fent to Dr. Woodward,
from Clip/Ion Stone-pit in Northamptonfhire, an Earth truly
of this kind, and endued with this Quality, under the Name
of Calx Nativa : His is defcribed to be a whitifh gritty
Earth ; but what I found was a true genuine Marls, fome-
thing loofe in Texture, but with no Sand or other ftony

a



( i49 )

much more in breadth, and is inclofed in on every
fide with Stones, from between which it is taken.
There is alfo in the Mafs of the Vein a diftindt
Stratum near the middle, which is of better Earth
than that without it ; and within that there is fome-
times another yet finer; and even beyond that a
fourth : The far theft of thefe is that which is called
the After.

CX. Earths of fome kinds are alfo ufed about
Cloaths, particularly the Cimolian. The Tymphaican
is alfo ufed for the fame Purpofes ; and the People
of Tymphxa and the neighbouring Places call it
w Gypfum.

Matter among it \ and of this kind the Gypfum Tymphdi-
cum evidently was. This Author calls it an Earth only,
and obferves, that the People about the Places where it
was found called it Gypfum^ I fuppofe from its having
the Properties of that 6'ubftance. As to its Ufe about
Cloaths, the Subftance I picked up in Sujfex feemed of a
Texture fo much refembling that of Fullers-earth, that if
it could be conveniently ufed, it feemed to promife to an-
fwer all the Purpofes of it, and fo did the Gypfum Tym-
pha'icum of the Antients, of which Pliny exprefsly fays,
Gracia pro Cimoiia Tymphdico utitur Gyffo, lib. 36. c. 17.

This therefore, or fomething like this, muft be the firft
of the three principal Gypfums of the Antients ; the other
two Kinds I fhall have occafion to mention hereafter ; but
muft firft obferve, in regard to this Paffage, that it has
been ftrangely corrupted in different Copies ; inftead of
Tv^ov, it is in feveral *v%o?\ and what I have given
from the very judicious Conjeclure of De Laet^ is in moft
Copies r. (jlovo'j. The XJk of our Fullers-earth about Cloaths,
and, in all probability, that of the Cimoiia of the Antients,
was the fame; this is not only that trifling one, of the ta-
king out accidental Spots of Greafe got in the wearing, but
what is the moft important of all things in the Woollen
Cloth Manufacture, the cleanfing the Pieces of it, at the



( i5o )



time of making, from that vaft Quantity of Greafe, Tan,
and other Filth they are fouled with, from- the Tar and
Greafe ufed externally in the Diforders of the Sheep be-
fore morn, and the Oil necefTary to be thrown into the
Cloath in the working.

% The Cyprian Gyp/urn here mentioned I account a dif-
ferent kind from the Tymphaan, and to be, indeed, the
true genuine Gypfu?n made from the talcy Subftance be-
fore mentioned. Pliny feems to favour this Divifion
of the Gypfums into three Kinds, where he fays, lib. 36.
c. 23. Co gnat a Calci res Gypfum ejl ; plura ejus genera.
Nam e Lapide coquitur, ut in Syria ac Tburiis : & e terra
foditur, ut in Cypro fcf Perrhibcsis, e fumma tellure cff
Tympha'icum ejl. And according to this, the three Kinds be-
fore diftinguifhed may be called the Tymphaan, Cyprian,
and Syrian. The Tymphtean is the earthy one already de-
fcribed, which might, very probably, be found near the
Surface, as being truly an Earth, not a Stone. The fe-
cond is the true genuine Gypfum, made from the Talc,
or Lapis Speculates, called alfo, for that Reafon, Metallum
Gypfinum. And the third, the Kind made from the Ala-
barters and other Stones of a fimilar Texture.

That this Cyprian Gypfum, or that Kind burnt from
the Lapis Specular 1 s, or genuine Metallum Gypfmum, was
the fineft and befl: of all the Kinds, we have alfo Pliny s
Word, lib. 36. c. 24. Omnium autem optimum fieri comper-
twn efl e lapide fpeculari fquamamve talem habente.

y The Syrian, or third kind of Gypfum, this Author here
obferves, was made by burning certain Stones, which he
afterwards very well defcribes, and which we may fee from
his Account were of the very Kind with thofe we now
principally ufe for that Purpofe, and call Parget, or Plai-
fter-ftonc, different kinds of which are dug in Derby/hire



( )

CXI. Gypfum is produced in great Quantities in
the Ifland of Cyprus x , where it lies open, and eafy
to be difcovered, and come at, the Workmen ha-
ving but very little Earth to take away before they
get it. In Phoenicia and y Syria alfo they have a



and Torkjhlre in England, and the Pits of Moni?nartre in
France. There are many other Kinds in different Parts,
both of France and England, very little different from thefe
and from each other ; but in general all of them very well
anfwer the Defcription Theophrajlus gives of the Stones from
which what I have called the Syrian Gypfum of the Anti-
cnts was made.

It is to be obferved that we, as well as the Antients,
burn many very different Stones into our Gypfu?n, or Plai-
ner of Paris, as it is commonly called ; fome of which are
of the Nature of the foliaceous, others of the fibrous Talcs,
others compofed of Matter feeming the fame with that of
the Talcs, but amaffed together in a different Form, be-
ing neither fibrous nor foliaceous, but feemingly in coarfe
Powder or arenaceous Particles cf uncertain Figures, and
held together in the fame manner as the Grit of the
Stone of Strata : And others truly and legitimately of the
Alabafter kind ; in many of thefe, Particles of genuine
fparry Matter alfo difcover themfelves -> and in feveral, the
MafTes are wholly furrounded with, and in many Places
their very Subftance penetrated by a reddifh earthy Mat-
ter : Thefe require different degrees of burning, according
to their different Texture, to bring them to the State pro-
per for ufe : But in moft of them it is done in a very little
time, and by a very flight Calcination, in comparifon to
that required for equally altering moft other Subftances.
And the reddifh Kinds burn to a Gypfum, equally white
with that made from the whiteft. The Gypfum of Mont-
martre in France, the beft and fineft in the World, is burnt
to a proper State in about two Hours. Ours of Derby-
Jhhe takes but little more time if properly managed ; and
that of Yorkflnre, which is generally redder and coarfer, a
little more than that. We have no Opportunities of try-



( *$* )

hlQzg 'sroiSfrtv. B7retQ, <5' at Qvfyoig. ^ ^ cxet
ywe^j tvoXXyi. T(Jrti $' vj ^ TvpCpctiav, ^ <zj&

g*6'. 'O ^ hide; tupegvjg tS z , A\a£ct<r£jTvi. pi-
yag <T & Te^ve^), cI?kXcc x&XiKoodyig. q 3 yXi^or/jg



ing the Lapis Specularis of the Antients now, hut by the
general Confent of the W riters of Antiquity, the Gypfum
made of it exceeded all the other Kinds, the Subftance
itfelf from this obtained a Name by which it became after-
wards generally known, which was Gypfmum metallum,
The want of knowing this, however, among the Com-
mentators on fome of the Works of the Writers fince, has
occafioned much blundering ; for finding Accounts, in the
moft exprefs Words, of Windows and Reflecting Mirrors,
made of the Metallum Gypjinum ; and not conceiving that
this was only another Name for the Lapis Specularis^ which
it had obtained from being the Matter of which Gypfu?n
was made, they made no fcruple of blotting out the Word
Gypfinwn^ becaufe they did not underhand it, a Thing too
cuftomary among this Sett of People, and fupplied its place
with Cyprinum^ leaving a Paffage which they imagined ve-
ry dark, much darker than they found it.

z Pliny fays, the Stones burnt to make Gypfum ought to
be of the Marble or Alabafter kind ; and that in Syria they
chofe thehardeft they can get; lib. 36. c. 24. §hti coquitur
Lapis non dijjimilis Alahajlritce effe debet aut marmorofo ; in
Syria durijfimos ad id eligunt^ &c. His Commentators fay
he took this from this Author; htzc ex Thcophrajli^ lib.
IJfp* Dal. If he did, he has been very carelefs in his

tranflating him ; a Fault I have been obliged to obferve in
fome other Places, that he is too apt to be guilty of. In



( 153 )

Gypfum, which they make by burning certain
Stones. They have a Gypfum in Thuria too, in
great plenty ; as alfo about Tymphaa, and in the
Country of thzPerrhtebeans, and many other Places 5
but thefe are of a peculiar Kind, and are rather of
a ftony, than of an earthy Texture.

CXI I. The Stone from which Gypfum is made,
by burning, is like z Alabafter; it is not dug, how-
ever, in fuch large Mafles, but in feparate Lumps.
Its Vifcidity and Heat, when moiftened, are very
wonderful.



this Paffage, however, I am of opinion he is not juftly to
be accufed of it ; for, with his Commentators Leave, I
muft obferve, that it appears very plainly, from this and
the Context, that he did not take this from Theophraftus.
This Author does not fay, that they chofe in Syria the hard-
eft Stones, but r£q antes-s^c, thofe of the fimpleft Texture $
and the Remainder of the Sentence in Pliny, which is, co-
quuntque fimo buhulo ut celerias urantur, being evidently from
fome other Source, as there is not the leaft Syllable of any
thing like it in this Author, makes it probable, that he had
it together from fome other Writer, or from the common
Tradition of his Time. I muft confefs, the Word r«£«o7« T ss
coming fo clofe after the ^ap^cc^ aw^ar/^?, would have
made me very naturally fufpeft Pliny of taking his Account
carelelly from this Author ; but the Context, which is evi-
dently not hence, may very reafonably clear him. This I
have been the more particular in obferving here, as it may
be a Means of clearing that Author in fome, at leaft, of
the many PafTages in which he may be even more than he
deferves accufed of mifunderftanding the Authors he copi-
ed from, in too many Places he has indeed but too evi-
dently done this., though in fome, where he is fufpected of
it 3 perhaps he may not be copying from the Authors we
accufe him of mifreprefenting, but from others,' who had ei-
ther accidentally, or purpofely, deviated from what thofe
had written, and whofe Works may be now loft to us.



( *54 ) ^

rov r hidov &&te%Qvleg. %clv 7S aXXo (ixXw^) mir
Sto KoXhyja'cu. HG^uvjtg q, j£ vcSug ffhxeovjes, ret"

SmtoTtfa. $(i%x<n 3 'Z&ttyXQYipcL 73-gog r!w

<& tcL ft *s;{7r]6d)Ct vQvj()fff). tu avco KgtfjicL-

()tt. AwJct?) 3 Heft vtpcugzyS/jvj, tfcIAiv Xj wclAiv
£ (boivUlw €ig TCUJTCt [XUXl^Ct. <Z3&( $* 'ItclxUv X)

&g rlw a xovUtnv G? ol y&tyelq ma, r tIw



* What I have given tig rw kov'cmtw, fpeaking of the Ufe
of the Gypfum in Italy ^ has flood in moft Copies %U t»\ o*-
XBtov, which has been diftrufted by many not to be the ge-
nuine Reading ; but imagined by Furlanus to hare been



( l*J )

CXIII. They ufe this in Buildings, cafing
them with it, or putting it on any particular Place
they would ftrengthen. They prepare it for Ufe,
by reducing it to Powder, and then pouring Wa-
ter on it, and ftirring and mixing the Matter well
together with wooden Inftruments : For they can-
not do this with the Hand becaufe of the Heat.
They prepare it in this manner immediately before
the Time of ufing it for in a very little while af-
ter moiflening, it dries and becomes hard, and not
in a Condition to be ufed.

CXIV. This Cement is very ftrong, and often
remains good, even after the Walls it is laid on
crack and decay, and the Sand of the Stone they
are built with moulders away ; for it is often feen,
that even after fome part of a Wall has feparated
itfelf from the reft, and is fallen down, other parts
of it fhall yet hang together, and continue firm and
in their Place, by means of the Strength of this
Matter which they are covered with.

CXV. This Gypfum may alfo be taken off from
Buildings, and by burning, again and again, be
made fit for Ufe. It is ufed for the cafing the
Outfides of Edifices, principally in Cyprus and Phoe-
nicia, but in Italy, for * whitening over the Walls,
and other kind of Ornaments within Houfes. Some
Kinds of it are alfo ufed by Painters in their Bufi-
nefs ; and by the Fullers, about Cloaths.



erroneoufly put for %U rov ofvov, and he has tranflated the
Paffiige accordingly; the ^na<nv is from the Opinion of
Salmafius, and feems to have been the very Meaning of the
Authors for having been juft before mentioning its Ufe on



( 156)

uroXv r aXKoov. Elg o ^ fioiXXcv, (£ (JLd\i£¥

*H ft Siwapig cv TXroig %j ifig Ttixroig*
y\ ^ cpucrig eoiMV d[x<poT2^i vroog Xj k£ tc£

£ Kovlag, Kj k£ rd £ y?jg 9 SegfjboTyi'Q, (£ yAi^/go-
ti{&. pdhXov 3 tKocTe&g \jzxre^x^ctg. BsgpoTeyi
$ wn'ag, yhi^oii^ q woku $ yy\g.

qiyi. v On $ sf*7rvp(&>, KdnetQev tyavtgov. ydg
Tig vcuJg Ipctlyiyog, (ZgsxGsvjcov IpaTiGov, ug lywu-

xctpivdlovjeg cujtIw %cju Kouovjsg. ncuxai ^ pdhiqct
rxg (jictgfjLccgxg Kj u7rXx<z't(>xg' ssgtoldrxg ft *z$£cf^
7kQev]eg tv Scirjov xcclecdg kcu /acIXXgv. cSokS

%l&(fy!et. 07fli(Tciv\tg $\ K07r]x(Tiv coaxref* Try ko-
vfctv.



the Outfides of Houfes, and being going on to recount its
other various Ufes, there was nothing fo natural for him to



( *57)

CXVI. It is alfo excellent, and fuperior to all
other Things, for making Images ; for which it is
greatly ufed, and efpecially in Greece^ becaufe of
its Pliablenefs and Smoothnefs.

CXVII. Thefe Qualities of the Gypfum, there-
fore, fit it for thefe and fuch other Ufes ; for it
feems naturally to have, as it were together, the
Heat, and Tenacity of Lime, and the more vifcous
Earths. But it poffeffes both thefe Qualities in a
much fuperior degree to either of the others, which
have them fingly for it acquires, on being moi-
ftened, a Heat much greater than that of Lime,
and is much more tenacious than the moil vifcous
of the Earths.

CXVIII. That its fiery Power is very great,
is evident from this remarkable Inftance : That a
certain Ship which was laden with Cloaths, by
fome Accident letting in Water ; the Cloaths being
wetted by that means, the Gypfum that was put a-
mong them took fire, and burnt both the Cloaths
and the Ship.

CXIX. In Syria and Phoenicia they prepare a
Gypfum by Fire ; putting into proper Furnaces
Stones, principally of the Marble, and other Kinds,
which are of the moft fimple Texture, and heat-
ing them to a certain degree ; the harder Kinds
they lay upon thofe which burn more readily; and
when burnt, the Matter appears to be of extreme
Strength, and fitted for enduring a long time : Af-
ter this they beat the Stones to powder like Lime,
to make them fit for Ufe.



mention next, as its Ufe in ornamenting the inner parts
of them, the very thing it is moft famous for now.



( 158 )

gH. 'Etc t&ix £ civ $G%eit\i etvcu Qcm(*h on &vg*
tofyg rig v\ $mti$ mutt} il oAov iftV b .



b The Obfervation the Author concludes this Work with
is unqueftionably moft juft. We are well acquainted with
the many Changes which the Particles of Fire, infinuating
themfelves into Bodies, are able to make ; of which, their



FINIS.



( *59 )

CXX. From all this it feems evident, that the
Properties and Nature of this Matter, are in a
great degree owing to the Fire b .



changing the Talcs and Alabafters into Gyp/urn^ and the
Lime-ftones of various kinds into Lime, are not the leaft
worthy our Obfervation, though from their being common
and every day before our Eyes, they are but little regarded.



FINIS.


T W O



TWO

LETTERS:

ONE, TO

Dr. James Parsons, F.R. S.

On the Colours of the Sapphire
and Tu r clu o i s e.

Read before the Royal Society, Thurfday,
June 19, 174$.

AND THE OTHER,

ToM artinFolkes, Efqy

Doctor of Laws, and
PRESIDENT of the Royal Society.

On the Effects of different Menftruums
on Copper*



M



( J«3 )



LETTER I.

T O

Dr. James Parsons, F. R. S.

On the Colours of the Sapphire
and Turquoise.

Read before the Royal Society, Thurfday,
June 19, 1746.

SIR,

WHEN the Specimen I have ventured to
publifh of my Notes on Theoprhastus
■was favourably mentioned Yefterday, by
you and fome other Gentlemen, whofe good Opi-
nions I am very fenfible how much Reafon I have
to be proud of ; you may remember that fome of
the Company objefted to the Sapphire's being co-
loured by Particles of Copper, and feemed very firm
in the Opinion, that that Gem owes its Colour to
a Native Zaffer.

M %



( i64)



I am forry I have only Room to name Things
in thofe Notes, without Opportunities of entering
into a Detail of the Experiments by which I have
generally been able to give convincing Proofs of the
Truth of I what affeit. HaJ I Room there to give
an Account, as I could wifh, of thefe, or enter at
large into the Arguments founded on them, I am
apt to believe many ObjeftiQns of this kind would
have been obviated : But as it has been impoffible for
rc*§ to do this every where in thecourfe of that Work*
it may not be improper to take this Opportunity of
entering more at large into the Reafons which have
induced me to be of the Opiniorj that has given Rife
to this Objection and endeavour, by Arguments
founded only on Fafts, and a drift and impartial
Obfervation of Nature, to fettle the great Queftion
among the more eminent of the later Naturalifts j
Whether it be to a Native Zaffer^ or to Particles of
Copper^ that the blue Gems in general owe their
Colour,

I need not tell You, who are fo well acquainted
with the Works of the French Naturalifts, that the
Sapphires being coloured by a Native Zaffer y is
not the Opinion of thofe Gentlemen alone who
now made the Qbjeftion \ but many have favourecl
it, and it is at prefect generally received.

For my own Part, you will obferve, through the
Courfe of thole Notes, that I have not tied myfelf
down to the Sentiments of any particular Author, but
have, as my own Experiments and Obfervations
directed, at Times agreed to, and in other Places dis-
puted, the Opinions of the whole Number, both of



( 165 )

P hilofophers and Critics, and as Experiments, the
only fure Guides to Knowledge, have led me to it,
have adopted, or diffented trom their Opinions:
How I have fucceeded in this in the Example be-
fore us, the faireft way of judging will be firft,
fairly to give the Arguments ufed in Support of the
other, and common Opinion ; which are principally
three, and which have the Appearance of being of
fome Weight. They are :

1. That the Turquoife is evidently coloured by

the fame Matter with the Sapphire, and
that the Matter of its Colour is known to
be a Native Zaffer.

2. That Copper is not capable of giving the. deep

Blue of fome of the deeper Sapphires ; and
Veins and Stria of the rough native Tur-
quoifes,

3. That Zaffer is the Subftance which colours

the common blue Glafs ; and that it is ca-
pable of giving the Colour of the deepefl:
native Sapphires ; as is evident from the
counterfeit ones which are coloured with if,
and are of all the Degrees of Colour of
the genuine.

To which permit me to anfwef,

Firft, That it was incumbent on the Aflertors of 4
this Do&rine, to have proved the Exiftence, and
examined the Nature and Properties, of this No*
the Zaffer, before they attributed fuch great Ef-
fects to it. I am not alhamed to fay, that I don'fc

M 3



( 166 )

know what Native Zaffer is ; that I never yet faW
any fuch Foffil, nor believe I ever fhall, and notwith-
ftanding that Dr. Woodward, and fome other able
Naturalifts have ventured to name fome of their un-
known Specimens native Zaffers, I cannot bring
myfelf to think that Nature ever formed any Sub-
ftance that could be properly fo called ; all that I
have been fhewn as fuch, having been Things which
a little Chemiftry was able to fhew that Naturalifts
ought to have been afhamed of calling by fuch a
Name : Not that I would pretend to limit the Ope-
rations of Nature within the Bounds of our narrow
Underftandings, or declare any thing impofliblc,
becaufe it has not yet been feen to be effected ; but
I think the Aflertors of fuch great Effefts from
fo very uncertain a Subftance, ought, if ever they
had feen it, to have given a more rational Account
of it than any we have at prefent.

The Zaffer we know, and with which the blue
Glafs and counterfeit Sapphires are ftained, is a
Preparation which feems to owe its prefent Mode
of Exiftence merely to the extreme Force of Fire,
and is perhaps no genuine Produdtion of Nature,
even in a latent State, except in its conftituent
Principles ; but fuch another Subftance as the lixi-
vial Salt of Plants, which though always produci-
ble from its Subjed by Fire, was not inherent in it,
in that Form, (as it evidently never was, notwith-
ftanding the erroneous Opinions of fome Perfons,
founded on the Obfervation of a flight Fermentation
of fome parts of Vegetables with particular Acids )
but produced by the extreme Force of Fire uniting the
effential Salt of the Plant with its Earth and a little



( *t )

of its Oil. This Zaffer is prepared from Coldly %
metallic Mineral of Saxony and other Places, in fome
degree refembling Antimony, and affording, by the
Afliftance of Fire, the Arfenics, this Subftance, and
Smalt , with the Addition of a fix'd Alkali. After the
Fire of a reverberatory Furnace has driven off the ar~
fenical Particles, the remaining Mafs is powdered and
calcined three or four times over and then beincr
mixed with three times its Quantity of powdered
Flints, affords us the common Zaffer. This is the Pre-
paration of that Body and how likely we are ever
to find a Subftance truly of this Kind native in
the Bowels of the Earth, it is eafy to judge.

n

But as Conjectures* however rational, ought ne-
ver to be made the Bafis to found Arguments on
in Cafes of this kind, it may not be improper to
examine what Weight, even allowing the Exiftence
of a native Zaffer , there is in the Arguments
founded on its fuppofed Effedts.

And to the Firft, That the T urquoife and Sap*
phire are coloured by the fame Matter, and that
that Matter is univerfally allowed to be a native
Zaffer : I fhall take the Liberty to anfwer, That
I ailow the Sapphire and Turquoife to be coloured
by Particles of the fame Kind 3 that I know it to
be the common Opinion, that the Turquoife is
coloured by Zaffer , and not by Copper ; but that I
alfo know it to be an erroneous one. I am very
fenfible that many Great Men, and fome particu-
larly, for whom I have in general the higheft E-
fteem, have countenanced this Opinion ; but can-
not fear to diffent from them, fince I am able to

M 4



( 168 )

produce the Teftimony of the Senfes, that the
T urquoife owes its Colour to Copper only, having
fucceeded in a Courfe of Experiments, by which
I have been able to diveft the turquoije wholly of
its Colour ; to precipitate and preferve that Colour
feparate and alone, to prove that Colour, by the
Effetts of different Menftruums, to be abfolute Cop-
per ; and by Experiments founded on this Procefs*
to give, by a Solution of Copper in a volatile Al-
kali, the true 7* urquoife Colour to the Subftante of
the native Turquoifes, which is abfolutely no other
than animal Bone; and make, by that means, thofe
factitious Turquoifes which you have feen put, be-
fore a judiolbus Affembly, to the feverefl Tryals,
and giving all the Marks of the genuine. I fend
you with this a Specimen of one of thofe very
Pieces, which you will find has fufFered no Change
in its Colour fince ; and fhall hereafter do myfelf
the Honour of communicating the whole Procefs
to the Royal Society.

To the Second Argument, That Copper is not
capable of giving fo deep a Blue as that of feme
of thefe Gems \ I have to anfwer, That Experi-
ments have taught me that it can ; and, as a Proof
of it, I fend you a Specimen of a Solution of Cop-
per ^ the very one with which I ftained the facti-
tious T'urquoifes, which you will find of the true
Colour of the deepeft Male Sapphires, and deeper
than the commonly called black Veins of the rough
native Furquoifes, if carefully examined.

The Authors of this Objeflion might, indeed,
have known, from the excellent Mr. Boyleh Expe-



( )

riments, that Copper is the laft Thing to be, with
any fhew of Reafon, fufpe&ed of wanting this Pro-
perty 5 for that Gentleman has proved, that a Grain
of that Metal is capable of giving a blue Colour to
530,620 times its Bulk of Water. And when the
Arguers for the Colour of thefe Gems being from
Zaffer, and not this Metal, confider in how ex-
tremely fmall a Quantity the metalline Particles, be
they of what Kind foever, can be fuppofed to be
mixed with the Matter of the Gems, I am apt to
believe they will find this Quality fo remarkable
in Copper, and wanting in Zaffer a thing of the firft
Confequence,

In regard to the Third Argument, That the ge-
nuine Sapphires are probably coloured by Zaffer
becaufe blue Glafs, and the common counterfeit
Sapphires are fo - y I cannot butobferve, that I fhould
as loon infer, from the Pruffian Blue's ftriking the
Colour of the Sapphire on Canvas, that the Gem
owed its Dye to Blood, as think an Argument
of any weight couid be deduced from that Obfer-
vation. External Appearances are of little weight
in Philofophy ; and I am forry to fay, that it was
only a very fuperficial View of thefe Things, that
could ftart an Objection to Copper's colouring the
Sapphire, from them •, for a more careful Exami-
nation of thefe very Bodies, muft afford Arguments
for the contrary, as it will evidently prove, that the
Colour of the Sapphire cannot be owing to the
fame Subftance with that of thefe Glafles : the
very Heat neceffary for forming them, would, in
a few Minutes, wholly diveft the fined Sapphire in
the world of all its Colour.



( l 7° )



Experiments of this kind are not* indeed, in
every body's Way, but it is eafy to propofe one
on the fame Foundation, which it is in every one's
Power readily to try, and which will equally and
unanfwerably prove the Truth of the Arguments
founded on it.

The common blue Glafs is made from the com-
mon or cryftal Frit melted with Zaffer ; and the
fineft counterfeit Sapphires, with a cryftal Glafs,
work'd with an Admixture of Lead, and this Zaf-
fer, in the Proportion of about One fiftieth part.
The Lead gives, in this Cafe, an additional Den-
fity to the Glafs, which adds greatly to the Luftre
of the counterfeit Gem as the more denfe the
tranfparent Matter is, the more bright and vivid
the metalline Tinge appears through it ; but while
Lead thus increafes the Denfity, it debafes the Glafs
in another refpedt of equal Confequence, in that it
makes it fofter. Whichever of thefe Subflances,
however, is made the Subjed: of this Experiment,
Che Effeft will be the fame $ for if we bring to the
Tryal of only a clear Charcoal Fire, a genuine Sap-
phire, and either of thefe factitious Subflances, and
throw them together into it, we fhall foon fee that
they owe their Colours to Particles of a very diffe-
rent kind ; for the Genuine will be feen to emit a
fine clear blue Flame, the Counterfeit not fo much
as the leaft Vapour \ and when, after this, they are
taken out together, the true Sapphire fhall be found
wholly colourlefs and tranfparent, as a piece of Cry-
ftal, and the Counterfeit or Glafs, unaltered. This,



( w )

and the Deadnefs of the one, though ever fo well
coloured, compared to the native vivid Brightnefs
of the other, muft evidently fhew the Difference
of the Subftances to which thofe Colours are ow-
ing.

Fire, which is thus able to diveft the Sapphire
of its Colour, has alfo the fame Effe£l on the Tur-
quoife, as the Workers on it well know : And this
is eafily accounted for, if they are coloured, as I
am convinced they are, by a fine metalline Sulphur.
But I will venture to affirm, that it could not be
the Cafe, if thofe Gems were coloured by a Zaffer.

Let it not be here objefted, that the Workers
on the native Turquoifes are obliged to have Re-
courfe to Fire to give them their Colour, and that
therefore it is not probable, that the fame Power
fhould be able to take it away ; for the Truth of
this, is only, that the Colour of the native Turquoifes
of fome Countries, is not equally fpread through
the whole Mafs, but lodged in different Parts of ic
fn form of Veins and Stride : It is to diflodge the
Colour from thefe Veins ^ and diffufe it equally thro*
the whole Mafs, that they have Recourfe to Heat %
a very gentle Heat is all they dare truft on this
Occafion, and is always found fufficient. And
what I would obferve from the Whole of this is,
that this EfFe£t of Fire on the rough Turquoifes , is
a. Proof that their Colour is owing to the fame
Particles with that of the Sapphire ; and that this
diflodging and diffufing it through the whole Mafs,
is the firft Step toward the diffipating and entirely



( *7* )

driving it off ; for a little too long Continuance in
the fame Heat, will, as 7 the Workmen too often
find to their Sorrow, wholly drive off the Blue, and
leave the Matter colourlefs^ as the Sapphire when
taken from the Fire.

Thus have I endeavoured tb prove, in anfwer to
the Arguments ufed in Support of the Sapphire's
being coloured by a native Zaffer (befide the too
great Probability, that there is no fuch Subftance
in Nature as this native Zaffer) that the Turqiioife
is coloured by the fame Means with that Gem, and
both by Copper. That Copper is, of all Bodies in
the foffile World, moft capable of diffufing its Co-
lour ; and that the blue Glafs and counterfeit Sap-
phires being coloured by Zaffer, are a Proof that
the genuine Sapphire is not fo.

And thus eafily are Objedions of this kind an-
fwered, when brought to a fair Hearing ; but the
Misfortune is, that many of them never are fo.
And permit me to add, that thefe idle Cavils
ftrike at the Root of all Philofophy. The Af-
fertors of this Opinion, perhaps, do not confider
the Confequences of it. If they will not allow
Copper to colour this Gem, the fame Reafonings
muft lead them to deny, that the reft of the co-
loured Gems owe their different Dyes to metalline
Particles : And where would they propofe to find
native Zaffer s of the proper Colours for them all ?

A little Obfervation indeed of Nature in her other
Works of this kind, might alone have been, one



( i73 )

would think, fufficient to have prevented fuch Obje-
ctions as thefe : For why fhould a Man who fees that
the Vitriol, which has Copper for its Bafis, is blue, and
knows that the Lapis Lazuli and Lapis Armenus are
Copper Ores, that the Cryftals and Spars about Cop-
per Mines are very often blue, and that very many of
the Ores of that Metal are of a true Sapphire Colour,
hefitate at believing that Gem to owe its Colour to
the fame Metyl ?

I am, with all Refpeff*,
SIR,

Broad-way, Weftminfter,

June 19, 1746. Your moji Obedient

Humble Servant^



John Hi l



( >7* )



LETTER II.

T O

Martin Folkes, Efqy

Doctor of Laws; and

PRESIDENT of the Royal Society.

On the Effe&s of different Menftruums
on Copper.

SIR,

IN a Letter to Dr. Parsons of the igtb of the
laft Month, which you did me the Honour to
have read before the Royal Society, at their
meeting on the fame Day, I endeavoured, princi-
pally by means of fome Experiments I had been
lately making, to fettle the Queftion fo much difpu-
ted among the prcfent Natural ifts, Of what the blue
Gems in general are coloured from. What engaged
jne in the Difpute at that Time, was an Objection
raifed againft the Opinion I had declared myfelf
of in this Cafe, in the Specimen of my Notes on
Theophrajlus: And I am very happy to find, that
even the Gentlemen who made that Objeftion arc
now convinced, that it is to Copper alone that the
Sapphire and ST urquoife owe their beautiful Blue,
5



HHHI



( *7S )

For myfelf, I muft acknowledge that tho* I have
long been convinced of the Fad, the Manner in which
it was effected, was ]ong a great Difficulty to me :
The Menftruum in which my Tintture of Copper,
which proved to the Senfes, that Copper was capable
of giving the deepeft and fineft Blue imaginable,
was made, was a volatile alkaline Spirit : And where
Nature could find in the Bowels of the Earth any-
thing analogous to a volatile urinous Alkali pro-
duced by Chemiftry, was a Queftion not eafily an-
fwered. The particular Salt of the mineral Waters
feems to approach, indeed, fomething to a Men-
ftruum of this kind 5 and Dr. Hoffman has proved,
that it is at leaft much fitter to be clafTed with the
Alkalies than with the Acids. But the Syftem of
the Colours of the blue Gems being from Copper^
muft ftand upon a very precarious Bafis, if there
could be found no other Menftruum than one we
are fo very uncertain about, to ftrike their Colour
from that Metal.

Copper ■, however, is, in truth, perhaps the far-
theft of all the Metals from being fubjeft only to
the Power of one appropriated Menftruum ; and a
Courfe of Experiments on it, have now Ihewn me,
that we need not have Recourfe to fo uncertain a mi-
neral Subftance as this latent Alkali, for producing
a Blue from it ; but that Menftruums of another
kind, even Acids, and thofe the very Acids, whofe
principles are the commoneft of all others in the
Earth, can afford us the fame Colour from it, and
are every where to *be found in great abundance.



( 176 )

Gold is foluble only in Aqua regia ^ for all the
other Menftruums that are talk ? d of for it, have a
genuine Sea-falt for their Bafis, and are therefore
only fo many Kinds of Aqua regia ; Silver, in Aqua
fortis, but not in Aqua regia, Spirit of Salt, Oil of
Vitriol, or, in fhort, in any but the nitrous Acids ;
whence it may very properly be faid, that Sea-falt
is the true Diffolvent of Gold, and Nitre of Silver.
Lead is readily diflblved by the weaker Acids, but
not at all by Aqua regia ; and but difficultly by
many of the ftronger Iron by moft of the acid
Salts ; and Tin by Aqua regia, and not eafily by
any other Menftruum, unlels firft diverted of its
Sulphur by Calcination ; but Copper is to be diflbl-
ved by every kind of Salt ; and, in fhort, by almoft
every thing that ever had in Chemiftry the Name
of a Menftruum ; and produces, with its different
Solvents, an almoft infinite Variety of very beauti-
ful Colours : So that it may indeed have been the
Bafis of the Colour of, perhaps, more of the Gems
than has yet been imagined.

Filings of Copper dropt into the Flame of 3,
Lamp, thrown into an horizontal Direftion by a
Blow-pipe, emit a very beautiful green Flame.

Mixed with three times their Quantity of corror
five Sublimate, and afterwards diverted of the Mer-
cury by Fire, they form, with the remaining Salts,
a tranfparent Refin of a beautiful Hyacinth Colour,
which will melt and burn in the Fire, emitting alio
a fine green Flame,



( '77)



Expofed to the Fumes of Quickfilver, they be*
come white and fliining like Silver.

Melted with Zink, they make an uniform Mafs
of a fine gold Colour, as they do Brafs with Cala-
mine.

Held over melted Orpiment, they become not
only white but brittle.

And by extreme Violence of Fire, are converted
into a hard, denfe, glaffy Matter, of a deep Red ;
tranfparent, and in feme degree refembling the
Sorane Garnet.

It has been the general Opinion of the Chemifts*"
that Solutions of this Metal in Acids were green,
and in Alkalies blue; fome, however, have alter'd,
from a few Experiments of their own, or perhaps
only from what they imagined muft have been the
Succefs of Experiments, this general Account, and
particularly among fome of the more modern Wri-
ters, it has flood, that Copper diffolved in Acids
or fix'd Alkalies, affords a green Colour; and in vo-
latile Alkalies, a fine Blue : But you will obferve, by
the following Experiments, that thefe Accounts are
neither of them to be depended on : And, indeed,
whoever has Difquifitions of this kind to attempt,
will always find, that it muft be a Knowledge of
Nature, and not of Books, that muft afford him
what he can depend on ; and that Syftems built on
any body's Experiments but his own, will be found
to ftand on a very infirm Bafis.



N



( 178 )



What I have been able to learn, by repeated
Experiments on this Metal in Menftruums of all
kinds, is, that the Solutions of it in different Flu-
ids, cannot be, in regard to Colour, determinately
reduced into Method at all ; the different Acids
having the Properties talk'd of in the Alkalies, of
producing different Colours, and even the fame Acid
being fometimes capable of affording either a green
or a blue Solution, according to the different Quan-
tity of the Metal diffolved in it. In Cafes of this
kind, however, I have every where judged the mod
perfedt Solution the propereft to defcribe the EfFe£t
of the Menftruum by : And what I have principally
learnt by thefe Experiments, be pleafed to accept
the following Account of,

A Solution of Copper in Oil of Olives, is of a
fine grafs Green; in white Wax, of a bluifh Green,
approaching, to the Colour of our Aqua marine*?
and in pure Water, of a dead whitifh Green.
In regard to thefe Menftruums it is, however, to
be obferved, that the exprefs'd vegetable Oils do
not diffolve Copper, as Oils, but by means of cer-
tain other heterogene Particles which they contain - y
for all exprefs'd vegetable Oils contain in them Wa-
ter, and a latent acid Salt of both which, I am
pretty certain, they may be wholly diverted by Fire,
and rendered, by that means, incapable of adting
as Menftruums on this Metal ; for I have found,
that Oil of Olives, after long boiling, has been ca-
pable of extradting fcarce any Colour at all from
Copper ; and make no doubt but that it might be-



( *79 )

lb perfeftly deprived of its Acid, as well as Water,
by long boiling with Litharge, or feme fimilar
Subftance proper to imbibe its Acid, as to have no
Power of diffolving this Metal, at all. Nor is this
latent Acid peculiar to the exprefs'd Oils alone,
thofe procured by Dlftillation evidently contain it
alfo, as the excellent Dr. Hoffman has proved, who
by grinding the diftilled Oils of Lavender and Tur-
pentine with Salt of Tartar, obtained thence a neu-
tral Salt.

Wax, in like manner* diffolves Copper no other-
wife than by a true, genuine, and pretty fharp Acid,
which it evidently contains, and which is eafily fe-
parated from it by Diftillation with a very gentle
Heat. And in regard to Water, it may not be
improper to obferve, that though it is but a poor
Diffolvent of Metals with us, yet it may, in the
Bowels of the Earth, do Wonders : For we find evi-
dently, that the Power of Water, as a Menftruum,
depends, in many Cafes, exactly on its Degree of
Heat * and as it is capable of the greater Heat, the
greater Weight of the Atmofphere it is preiTed by,
we know not to what Height its Pleat and diflbl-
ving Power may be raifed at great Depths in the
Earth.

Of the mineral acid Menftiuums, Spirit of Sea-
fait, Spirit of Nitre, and Aqua regia^ all afford
green Solutions of Copper ^ but with this Difference,
that the Spirit of Salt gives a yellowifh Green, the
Spirit of Nitre a deep Green, with no Yellownefs
at all \ and the Aqua regia, a bright vivid Green,

N 2



( i8o )

but there is fome Admixture of Yellow in if, about
in the fame mcafure that it is in fome of the Gems;
which Tliny defcribes by, Quorum extremus igriicih
lus in flavedinem exeat. The Solution in Spirit of
Nitre is of the true Emerald Colour, and extremely-
bright and vivid ; and each of the others refembles
very exaftly the Colour of a particular Gem of the
fame Clafs ; the firft of them being perfectly of the
Colour of the yellowifh green Prafius, and the third
of the Smaragdo-prafius.

Thefe Colours are each of them very beautiful ;
and that of the Solution in Aqua regia is no other
than what muft be expe&ed, when we know the
Colours of the other two, the Spirits of Salt and Nitre
being fimple Menftruums, and affording a green,
and a yellowifh green Solution \ and the Aqua re-
gia^ a compound Menftruum, partaking of the Na-
ture of both the others, it muft naturally give a So-
lution of a Colour between both, that is a Green
with lefs Yellow than that of the Spirit of Salt.

But though thefe three acid Menftruums afford
green Solutions of this Metal, it is too hafty a Con-
clufion to infer from thence, that all the acid Men-
ftruums will therefore do the fame for Solutions of
Copper in Oil of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, and A-
qua fortis^ are all blue. They are in different
Degrees, tho' all nearly approaching to each other,
and the deepeft of them not darker than that of
the common Turquoifes. Thefe Solutions have alfo
this peculiar Property, that they immediately pre-
cipitate their Copper on Iron if immerfed in them,



( !&i )

and may ferve to explain the Effe6ls of thofe vitri-
olic Waters which are faid to convert Iron into
Copper. A Piece cf Iron Wire dipped into any of
thefe Solutions, and taken almoft immediately out
again, is feen covered with Copper fo far as the
Menftruum has touched it ; and by drawing the
Fingers carefully over it, a fine thin Tube of pure
Copper may be taken off from it : This may ferve
to fhew us of what Kind the Menftruum is which
Nature ufes to produce the blue Vitriol from Cop-
per^ which in Solution has the fame Effed \ and
proves that the Ziment or vitriolic Water, fo fa-
mous for its fuppofed Virtue, of turning Iron into
Copper^ is no ocher than a blue Vitriol in a fluid
State, becaufe fufpended in too large a Quantity of
aqueous Matter ; perhaps, indeed, containing Parti-
cles of many other Kinds, but evidently owing its
character! ftic Quality, to Particles of Copper in a
State very nearly refembling that of blue Vitriol,
though at prefent in Solution,

That the natural Colour of Solutions of Copper
in the vitriolic Acids is blue, is evident from only
leaving a Drop of any of them on a Plate of Cop-
per^ which is prefently covered with blue Cryftals :
And any one a little acquainted with Chemiftry will
know, that no Difference is to be expefted in So-
lutions made with Oil of Sulphur from thofe witl;
Oil of Vitriol ; for thefe Acids differ fcarce fenfibly
when both well rectified, and indeed appear, on
ftrift Examination, to be really the fame Thing ;
the fame univerfal mineral Acid, exiftent every-
where in the Earth, and fometimes oerceiveable,

• N 3



( i8a )

by the Senfes, in the fuffbcating Damps of Mines,
being the certain Bafis of both \ as alfo of a third,
that of Alum; and though the different Matter it
meets with in Alum, Vitriol, and Sulphur, gives it
a different Appearance in the Concrete, yet when
freed from that Matter by Chemiflry, and rendered
as pure as that Art will make it, it appears the
fame thing whether drawn from one or the other
of thefe Subftances,

That Oil of Vitriol, therefore, and Oil of Sul-
phur, fhould produce a Solution of Copper of the
fame Colour, is no other than what muft naturally
be expefted : But that Aqua for lis, which is a com-
pound Menftruum, and made, though partly from
Vitriol, which affords a blue Solution, yet partly
alfo from Nitre, which we have fecn before affords
a fine green one, fhould give a fimply blue Solu-
tion, as it evidently does, without the leaft Ad-
mixture of Green, may feem, at firft view, fome-
thing ftrange. But here I muft obferve, that Spirit
of Nitre is the Menftruum I hinted at in the Be-
ginning of this Letter, as capable of affording dif-
ferent Colours, from different Quantities of the Men-
tal diffolved in it. And nothing, indeed, is more
certain, than that the greeneft Solution of Copper in
Spirit of Nitre, may be turned into a pale Blue,
only by adding more and more Filings of the fame
Metal, up to the proper Quantity for the Change.

Thefe, of all my Experiments on Copper, are what
have afforded me the greateft Satisfaction in the
Subjed of the prefent Enquiry j as they fhew, that



( i«3 )

Nature is fo far from being tied to one (ingle Men-
ftruum for producing the Sapphirine Colour from
Copper, that inftead of the Colours of the blue Gems
being owing only to the EfFefts of a fingle, fcarce,
and indeed uncertain Menftruum on that Metal, we
find they are producible from the Adion of others,
and thofe the moft common, moft abundant, and,
indeed, univerfal Menftruums of the foffile World.
We need be no longer at a lofs to find where Na-
ture could meet with a fufficient Quantity of a pro-
per Menftruum to extraft from Copper the Colour
neceflary for the various blue Gems, when we fee,
that the univerfal native foffile Acid, whether in
form of Vitriol, Sulphur, or Alum, and unquefti-
onably not lefs when alone ; and even the nitrous,
under proper Limitations, are able abundantly to
produce it.

Of the vegetable Acids, diftilled Vinegar, Le-
mon-juice, and Spirit of Verdigreafe, all give green
Solutions of Copper ; but with this Difference, that
the firft gives fome faint Bluifhnefs v/ith the Green;
the fecond is a pale whitifh Green and the third,
the true, pure, and unmixed Green of the Emerald,

The fermented vegetable Acids, therefore, have
more Effeft on this Metal than the native ; this is
evident from the deeper Colour, and from the much
greater Quantity of the Metal feparable from Solu-
tions with them, made in the fame Proportions ;
And the Spirit of Verdigreafe may very naturally
excel both, as it is the ftrongeft vegetable Acid that
Art can any way produce ; though it is truly no

N 4



(i8 4 )

other than a Vinegar abforbed by Copper^ and af-
terwards driven from it again by the Force of Fire,
little altered, except as rendered more pure. It
is remarkable, that Copper will thus part with this
Acid in its proper and natural Form ; whereas no
other Metal will ; for Iron and Lead, the only other
Metals that will admit this Acid, alter it in the
Mixture from its original Nature ; for it can never
be produced from them again in its natural State,
but is in both Cafes quite a different thing : When
feparated from Lead, it appears in Form of an oily
fat Liquor; and from Iron, little other than infipid
Water. The Spirit of Verdigreafe is, however, the
ftrongeft of all vegetable Acids; and, accordingly,
extracts from Copper the Colour neareft approaching
to that of the Solutions of that Metal in fome of
the ftrongeft mineral Acids.

Of the fix'd Alkalies, Salt of Wormwood, Pot-
atoes, and Oil of Tartar per deliquium, all afford So-
lutions of Copper of a glorious, deep, celeftial Blue,
and no way diftinguitoable from one another, if
the Solutions are made in exadt Proportions. An
JErugo^ of a greenito Colour, is indeed producible
on Copper by thefe Mcnftruums ; and a fmall Quan-
tity of a fimilar Subftance is fometimes found fwim-
ming on the Surface of thefe very Solutions : But
this is not purely the genuine Effect of the Men-
ftruums, but a Change wrought in the Solutions
made by them, by Particles of adventitious Salts
floating in the Air, and mixing with a fmall Quan-
tity of them. Thefe Changes of Colour in the So-*
Jutions of Copper from an Admixture qf Salts of §



( i«5 )

different Kind, tho* but in fmall Quantities, wefhall
fee hereafter in this Letter are very natural and eafiiy
producible Effefts ; and need not wonder at a fmall
Quantity of an ASrugo of this kind floating on the
Surface of the Menftruum, or affixed to a Plate of
Copper wetted with it, and expofed to the Air, tho'
the true Solution of Copper in the Menftruum is
blue ; when we confider, that a Solution of the
blue Vitriol in a Water impregnated with Sal Ar-
moniac is green, notwithftanding that a fimple So-
lution of Copper in that Salt is blue, as we fhall fee
hereafter: (Such is the endlefs Variety refulting
from Mixtures of Salts as Menftruums) and that
the natural JErugo produced on Copper by the Salts
floating in the Air, is green.

It is not to be wondered at, that the Solutions
of Copper in the fix'd Alkalies produced from dif-
ferent vegetable Subftances, are no way different
from one another, fince thefe Bodies a£t in thefe
Solutions, not as the peculiar Salts of this or that
Plant, but as a Body made, not by any Operation
of Nature, but by the Effeft of Fire ; which has
ftrongly united the eflential Salt, the Earth, and
fome fmall Portion of the Oil of the Vegetable
they have been prepared from : For all thefe fix'd
Alkalies of Plants may be refolved into a bitter fa-
line Subftance, a ftronger fix'd Alkali, and a pure
fimple Earth ; and in the Operation there will a fmall
Quantity of an oily Matter always be difcovered.

Of the volatile Alkalies, Spirit of Sal Armoniac^
Spirit of Urine, and Spirit of Hartfhorn, all afford



( i86)

Solutions of Copper of the moft beautiful and vivid *
celeftial Blue ; this is of different Degrees, according
to the different Quantity of the Metal diffolved *
but in equal Proportions, and with the Spirits of
equal Strength, the Colour is exa&ly the fame in
them all. The volatile Alkalies have in their O-
perations on this Metal, therefore, a great Analo-
gy to the fix'd. Thefe Menftruums confift only
of a very fine, fubtle, volatile, alkaline Salt, fuf-
pended in a fmall Quantity of Water, which has
no Share in extra&ing this glorious Colour ; for the
dry volatile Salts of the fame Subftances, mixed
with Copper Filings, and corked up in a Vial to-
gether, acquire, in a Day or two, the very fame
Colour.

Of the neutral Salts, a Solution of Copper with
crude Sal Armoniac, is of a glorious Blue ; with na-
tive Borax, of a fine deep Green ; and with Sea-falt,
of a pale whitifh Green : Of thefe, the Sal Armoniac
diffolves it the fooneft, the Sea-falt takes more time,
and the Borax is flowefl of all. The reft of the So-
lutions alfo mentioned here, require different Time
and different Methods to produce them ; the Spirit
of Nitre diffolves the Metal almoft inftantaneoufly,
Aqua fortis is nearly as quick in its Operation, and
Aqua regia requires only a little Time but cf the
others, fome require long and tedious Procefles, and
others a6t beft, or perhaps only, by Vapour and
one of thefe Proceffes fhews, that where Mr. Boyle
fays, he knew a Menftruum which by its Vapour
would diffolve a certain Metal, though it would
fcarqe work on it at all in Subftance ; he is only



( i8 7 )

talking of Copper and Vinegar. Sal Armoniac,
k is to be alfo obferved, affords us another In-
ftance whence Nature may be fupplied with a
Menftruum for giving a blue Solution of Copper,
fince, tho' the Sal Armoniac common among us now
is factitious, there is no queftion but that there is, and
ever has been, a true native Sal Armoniac ; and there
needs no more than Copper dilTolved in Water im-
pregnated with it, to give the different Blues of all
the deepeft Sapphires in the World ; it being mod
eafy to procure a Solution of Copper of any degree
of blue, only from a Solution of this Salt in Water,
digefled for a few Days on Filings of that Metal.

The Colours producible from Salt and Borax
may eafily be imagined to be alfo plentiful enough,
fince the Salt of Salt-fprings and Sal Gem are evi-
dently the fame with Sea- fait in all refpeds, and are-
abundant every where in the Earth and native Bo-
rax is found to be plentiful enough in fome Parts
of the World, and perhaps is in many others alfo,
where it has not been yet difcovered.

Thefe, Sir, are a few of the many Experiments
the Enquiry after what Menftruum Nature has ufed
to impart, by the Affiftance of Copper, the Blue
Colour to the Sapphire, Turqiioife, and other blue
Gems, has led me into. A great many more might
have been mentioned, and much more faid on the
A6tion of thefe ; but as thefe are felefted, fo as
to give Proofs of the AClion of two or three Men-
ftmums of every Kind, and what regards the End



( i88 )

propofed, every where mentioned in the Obferva-
tions on them, more would have been unneceffary.
From what is obferved, however, it is eafy to in-
fer, that more of the Gems than barely thofe I
have occafion to treat of here, may owe their Colour
to this Metal •, and even more, in reality may, than
I have yet given Hints for the conjecturing at for
what I have hitherto defcribed, are only the Effefts
of the fimple Menftruums which are here defcri-
bed : But Nature, we fhould remember, may alfo
ufe compound ones : And what an almoft infinite
Variety of Colourings may arife from fuch Mix-
tures it is fcarce to be conceived ; for not only dif-
ferent Colours may be produced from the Effcfts
of different Menftruums combined, in order to work
on the Metal ; but even the fame Colour already
procured, may be almoft infinitely varied from the
A&ion of new Menftruums upon it. Thus a So-
lution of Copper in any of the before mentioned
Acids, fo weak as to leave the Menftruum colour-
lefs like Water, may in an Inftant, by the Affufion
of a few Drops of Oil of Tartar per deliquium> be
converted into a glorious Blue; or by alike Quan-
tity of Spirit of Nitre, into a beautiful Green :
Nay, when by this means made blue, may be yet
changed into green by a larger Quantity of the
Acid : And even when thus made green, again
converted into its former blue, by a yet larger quan-
tity of the Alkali.

The blue Tin6lures of Copper made in the fix'd
Alkalies, may alfo be divefted of their Colour, an<



H IHI



( ^9 )

rendered colourlefs and pellucid like Water, by
Acids, if the Proportions be carefully regarded :
The blue Liquor here is made colourlefs, as the
colourlefs Liquor was before made blue ; and the
pellucid Liquid thus produced, will exhibit all the
Phenomena before defcribed in that originally co-
lourlefs. To this it may be added, that even the
ftrong blue and green Solutions are eafily changed
from blue to green, and from green to blue, in the
lame Manner : But I fhall have Opportunity to
fpeak of thefe Changes more at large in another
Place ; as I intend, with your Permiffion, to fhew
before the Royal Society, thefe and fome other
Experiments on the original Rife, Deftru6tion, Re-
production, and Changes, of the Colours of the
Solutions of this Metal.

The great Thing that I have aimed to prove
by thefe Experiments, is however, I prefume, by
this time, rendered clear and inconteftable That
Nature is not tied to one only Menftruum for the
producing Blue from Copper ; and that but a very
fcarce and uncertain one: Since it is evident, that
the Bodies neceflary to give it are many, and thofe,
many of them common and every where abundant.
That the common and univerfal mineral Acid, fo
abundant every where in all the Kinds of Pyrites,
the Acid of Sulphur, Vitriol, or Alum ; which are,
indeed, the fame with the former, and with each
other, in different Combinations, can do it : And
even no better a Menftruum than common Water
running over a Quantity of native Sal Armoniac, is



( *9° )

able to produce from Copper, all the different De-
grees of Blue, from that of the paleft to that of the
deepeft Oriental Sapphires.

I am, with the great eft Refpeff,

SIR,

Broad-way, Weftmintter,

June 19, 1746. Your moft Obedient

Humble Servant*



John Hi l l 4



C '9* )



GREEK INDEX.

A

J^Ac^a? Pag. 46

A!yv7rlt@* Kvocvog 130

AiyvvrliS) v Av0g£ucss cm 90

A! par it is 96

■ HtfvW 96

"Axda^ov 7^©" A/9«* 40

VUovij 108

'AAa6#s"e/T»js' 2 2

k#As^©- ''Ovvf, fi. 23

'AfteSt/crav 80

- QivaHFQv ry Xfiox 84
'AvO^'jcjov 80

cm AgnxSlag 88

7, Av9^| ^ 26, 40

» " on YioL^YiSovog 44

cm MaosiKictg ibid.

• <B& X M/Xjjlov ibid.

; Kce/vO*@- 88

• -Tfoi$vi©- ibid.

w Av9^x£j" g&atIc) cardviQi- ibid.

— ■ ■ c# Alyv7r% 90

— • cy, 2vj}vjj$ ibid.

*- « cm ibid.

*A770oA$Q<?ig n8

'A^tSiKOS A/9®* 50



( J 92 )

*Aff^/a;, A/801 l| 10S

' Af feviKQV I02

VWaf, kill 01 e| 142

'Ayjjf „ 148

"At*jkIqi A/floi 12

'A^TJjff 86

B

Brtxfe/tfvfo, ^^oi^ySoi oh, 92

»■ ' « » ptyolkQi ibid.

AiSoj <sr&i 32

r

r? 2

Tjj? iSidrtggti ho(,$o&) 114

T)J A»jp«flc 9 n. 126

— K*juaAt# 1 142

— M^AiW ibid.

— HxfAia ibid.

— Tt^cpouw} ibid.
rAuaflo) Ai'floi 1 8

rJ^® - i4 2 5 150

■ 00 Qvejosg 152

■ KvVgfti 152

— at 2ue/V 150, 156

— of ^oiv/jcp ibid.

•» ifA7TV()QS |y# I56

ibid.

Tv4/0) ytffiiF) srgoV rd oho^o^jAoila 1 54

rJvJ/^ tflpwig vrvgwSqs 158

A

A/tf$0§dM r A/flow 20

Atwolpetg r A/Swv 12

E

'EAscptff oqvkIqs 94

ibid.

,'E$l<ra, TLivvdQaes on *3^

KaJfck 138
5 *HA2>c7gov



5



( x 93 )

H

* ogvxlov <sj£* Aiyvzr/.rrJ ibid.

■ OUJT& thKeiv dvuuccutg ibid.
'H^'xAft* 16

0

A/9o* 32

rJvJ/@- 152
1

— — Of KvTTf « 9°

'iSvjpjoiv <g&a, KivvuGagi 134

UiQTiflw a> w~$ A/9o<? 12

'loV 134

K

KaAtfju©- 'IvJixoV &reAifla^'<gF* IOO

KdZWiiov®* C4ti "Av9^| 44

Kt&pos 3°

KiAjx/av, <o€i 1 1 8

■ ■ TtfM/T|j <%Ael(pi£<n vote ccp7rzh%g ibid.

JLivvdGotyi X34

ibid.

^fiww ibid.

'l&ietxi ibid.

jtar' Ijfacr/otv i^'E^cCxi *3^

■ s$-#y iipi*®- ibid.
Kim-j^? 3^

•1 i| c^>£ B-oLAolojViS ibid.

a/6* ■ ibid,

f*vA«% > ibid.



( *94 >

- cv Mv.ha 38, 54

Lv 2,iK2Al(* 56

Kofove/cvy n. 147

Kxp&fatov 96

* <pvV) h t5 Safari *s ibid.

Wv9/©- v Av6^| ' 88

KguVaM©" 80
Kvxvog 82, 102

• » AtyvVJi©* 130

«— * ccp'pijv '/ij 9-#Av? 82

*— — [AsAdifiegtQ* 0 elfpqv ibid.

»' cuutqQvys 100

4 QKOk\&¥ 102

• ikd%is@* 1 2 2

• KuVe/©* 130

' - ■ Sxufljj? ibid.

» " Qcd/a?S$ ibid.

Ku^vx Te jx ibid*

Kv7r&.@» Kvccvog ibid.

*I«air<f ibid.

KvTfly "A^fv^ov 138

• c& K/wafia:^ ibid*

A

Aau^dav A/fl@* 86

Aiiuvia yyj I 2 6

Ai'Oo* arvr/loi j 2

~-r-— thjcJoJ ibid.

— — yAv7r?©i 18

» vrtsroi ibid.

* i3fy*5oTc] ibid.

fe» ■ ■ b^av^o} (52

— «za€* B<W? ibid.

— — • Tittle) l6

A/9©- 'AgjiCixcV -o

T#l*e/0* 38



( "95 )

A/So? bi 'E&viotSt 3$

. olvbeyfr ouoict I° 2

• — - — ftacrotvifaa r %gv<?Q9 110

dugjrKtf b> T^oAw 1 1 2

• 'HpanKet* # } ^



gov <%j/*<r<5fc



ibid.



■ Ait? a %ou(Or 36

■ n«e/(^ ?°

— mfleAiaoff lbld -
X.'®- lb,d -

0,6«Ixo* lbld -



78

ibid.

A/Saw <xx,cw?Qv

40

.A-sro^?©- At 9©*

36

AvJJcvgyiov 7 2

£Ax</ wcrzrsf is jjA£jJgc» 74*

■ ■ appev fcj 3">?Av ^2

M

M*fv?TK A/6®- I0 +

MagfoiejrYis . 9 2

" ci/ oVg«w t/v) ibid.

* • o*/ T zriwacAQ ibid.

£ 44*

54

MtAtjIon -zs€^, 44
Mf'A7#« 102, 122, 124

— — CCUTOjAol^ 1 3°

. rex*'!") ibid -

0«a7(V») c*K«* J[?4

&t ¥ pUKKm i bid »

" Atjuv/fl»

O 2


( 196 >

M!hl& TtvomKyj 126

• tsiv TLcmkccScmm ibid.

Mvhlca 26

N
O

'OSfA/CKo? cu nrlclgav ^poc^cpySm 64

"O^cp^i; 8 a

'b-^avo? A/A©*, n. -4

n

IL#es& a/9©- 20

ittv1e?u%Q$ A/8©- ibid.

* ^£§2 *kid*

■ /^cf^ t? ^o<» ibid.

n^fo) a/So* 18

II«f©- 2r2

s

2aju/# yy\ I4 2

2#'arp«f©" 26

' ^uo-0^5-©" 58

2#fjto(p#3'©-, n. 14

SiiviViQv TwvJf A/9&;v aflrJrj) I 8

cuurtjs fyjq T£/'# ibid*

, ibid.

• — ! exAdU©* 128



( 197 )

zv^jjix JLvSix ibid.



S/tyvi.©- A/9®- 106

DxaflVuAjj* a/0®- 4°

2/**^®- 14* 26, 62

90

' cm I s BzKl&civrtS 9 2

<gj£<t7m $uvdy>4 7 2

* otjoV rcc 0 [A pal a dyct.§n 6 2

' — C46 T? IflftCDTKy®* 7°

» Taw JcaA^f^®* 4

• i^oiSTeu t ^o'tfv i?J<s1®- 1*k>tjj 62

— s ( u^*A„ ibid -

Sp'e** n. ' 108

Stt/a®*, n. 34

Stt/v®^ lbld -



2 5



TavoV 6 4
T^'Ji, A/Sai c* 3^
Tjjx7p) A/601
ThcIo) A/9oi
T^wAoj, A /Go * c//C
TvpCpoocj} J 4 2

T*04£jvi®' "Av9^| 8 5

T



12
l6
I 12



2
Il6



&A®- ^ ibid f



o 3



( )

X '



a



116

4

22
20

70, I02

58

66
68
ibid.

90

102, 122, 124



THE

GENERAL INDEX.

N. B. The Letter n refers to the Notes.
A



CID Salt in expreffed Oils, Page 178

in (Milled Oils, ibid.

Ad AM AS Cyprius , n . j j 0

Egyptian Carbuncles, gt
/Etites

Afflux, Foiiils forni'd by it, j

Agate, gj

what, and whence brought, n. 86

Leonine, n. gy

Its various Kinds, n. 86

Alabandine, n. 45

Alabaster, 23

Gypfum made from it, n. 148

Amandine, n. 4/3
Amber,

a native Foffil, ibid,

erroneous Opinions about it, n. 78

Amethyst, g f

owes its Colour to Iron, n. 82

lofes its Colour in the Fire, n. ibid.

Ampelites Lapis, m 36

Aquilinus Lapis, n. 17

Arabicus Lapis, 51



Armenia, Stones thence to cut others with,

o +



( 200 )



Armenus Lapis i 103

Mgypiiatiy 131

Scythian^ ibid.

Cyprian, ' ibid,

fictitious ibid.

Asia, ftony Maffes thence, 143

AsPHALTUM, n. 35

Assius Lapis , n. 14

Aster, a kind of Samian Earth, 149

Attraction the Caufe of Cohe fion of Foffils, 1 q



B

Bactriana, Emeralds found there
Balass Ruby, n.
Basanites Lapis, n.
Bergblau, n.
Belemnites, n.

Ben a, bituminous Stones found there,
Beryllus Oleaginus of Pliny, n.
Bitumen Judaicum, n.
Bloodstone, or Hematites,

. or Heliotrope, n.

Boles, what, n.
Bricks,

Broc Atellc of the Italians, n.

C



CjERULEUM nativmn, 103

fictitious, of Egypt ^ 131

Calamus Indicus petrified iox

Callais, n. 95

Callimus of the Eagle -ftone, how form'd, n. ig

Call 1 as, Inventer of a factitious Cinnabar, 13^

Calx natha, n. 148

(pA^NEL Coal, n. 36

Cappadocia, Reddle dug there 125

the Rubrica Sinopica dug there, 137
£arbuncle, 27, 43, 45, 81



92

46

III

102

74

33
81

35
97
58

Il6
II 7

22



( 201 )

Carthaginian,

Corinthian, gg

Majjilian, ^ t

of Orchomenus, gg

of Pfcbos, g r

of Sycne, ibid.

Trcezenian, g^
Carnelian, 27, 56, 59, 83, —

Male and Female g ^

Carthage, Carbuncles had thence, A ^

Emeralds found there 6^

Cea, fine Reddle thence J25

Cerachates, n. g5

Ceruse, how made, ig^

Chalks, what, n. u5

Chert, a kind of Flint, n. go

Chernites, 23

Chian Marble, 21

Cholus, a kind of Emerald, n. 5^

Chrysitis Lapis, n. IXI
Chrysocolla, yj 5 jj^

of the Anticnts, what, n, y Q

Chrysoprasus, n. ^5

Cilician Earth, 1T g
Cimolian Earth,

of the Anticnts, what, n, 14^

Cinnabar, ^

native, ibid,

what, and where found^ n, 1 36

found in Spain, j^j
factitious,

when firft found out j
from Ephefus,

procured from a red Sand, ibid,

firft found by Callias,

Dragons-blood fo called^ 2^6

Clays, what, n, u6

Coal, 39

Cohesion of Foflils, the Caufe of it, n. g X

Colchis, Cinnabar found there, j^j

Cold, Concretion of fome Foffils owing to it, 1 j



( 202 )



Cori x. folublc in all Salts, 178

diffolved in Aqua for 'is, 180

in Aqua regia, 179

with Borax, 186

in difiiiled Vinegar, 183

in Juice of Lemons, ibid,

in Oil of Vitriol, 180

in Oil of Sulphur, ibid,

in Oil of Tartar 184

in Oil of Olives 178

with Pet- afhes 1 84

Salt of Wormwood, ibid.

S al Armoniac, 186

Sea-falt, ibid,

in Spirit of Sal Armonlac^ 185

in Spirit of Hartfhorn, ibid,

in Spirit of Urine ibid,
in Spirit of Nitre, 179, 182

in Spirit of Salt, ibid,

in Spirit of Vcrdigreafc 183

in Water, 178

in Wax, ibid*

Coral, 97

a Vegetable 98, 99

Cot Hon, Emeralds found there, n. 68

CoTicuLiE, n. 109

Crystal, 81

Crystalline Balls echinated, n. ibid.

concave, n. ibid.

Cyanus, 83

Male and Female, ibid,

what and whence, n. 84

Cyprian Diamonds, what, n. no

Cyprus, Gypfum thence, 151

Emeralds found there, 69

D

Dean, Foreft of, Reddle thence, n. 123

Dendrachates, n. 86

Diamond, 47



( 2o 3 )



E

Eagle Stone, n. > I 7

Earth, the original Structure of it, n. 7

Strufture of it after the Deluge, 8

Earth, what, ^ JI 3

its various Kinds, n.

how coloured, n. z 4 2

verifiable, JI 7

CiUcian, ufed to Vines, 1 19

coloured Kinds ufed by Painters, 121

Ctmollan I 43

of the Antients, what, n. 144

of the Moderns, what, 145
Lemnian, n.

Melian, *43

of the Antients, what, n. 142

Samian, *49

not ufed by Painters, }\$

of the Antients, what, n. ibid,

how dug, J 47

called After, *49

called Collyrlon, n, 147

Tympbaican, *43

called Gypfwn, x 49

the Bafis of Stones, 3

petrifying, lr 9

El atites, a kind of Blood-ftone, n. 97
Emerald, 2 7> 6i 3 ----
itsHiftory, n. 61,62,63,64

Oriental, n. 6 3

European, n. ^2

Scythian, n. . 6 4

Bacirian, n. J bid.

/Egyptian, n. ibid -

from Cyprus, 9 1

Baclriana, how found, 92

feeming produced from the Jafpcr, 73

u fe d as Ch r) focolla, 7 1

of enormous 6ize in Egypt, 65
called 7W, ' ibid.

Bafhrd, where found, 69



( 204 )

Emerald ilrikes a Green through Water, 15, 63

good for the Eyes, 63

other medicinal Virtues of it, 72

Emery, known to the Antients, n. i 0 8

Erineas, Stone found there 39



Fire, how it occafions Fluidity, n. 31

Stones not hurt by it, 41

why fome Stones not hurt by it, 49

Flints, Formation of them, n. 18

ufed in making Glais, 1 jg

Formation, original, ofFoflils, n. 6

Fossils, all fufible, n. 114

Fusion, Humidity neceflary to it, 31

General Caufe of it, n. 32



Gagates, n, 31

Garnet, n. 46

Sorane, n. ibid.

Gems, coloured by metalline Particles, n. 43

Difficulty of methodizing them, n. 42

Male and Female, 83

Geodes, or baftard Eagle-ftone, n. 19

Glass, 117

of the Moderns, how made, n. 1 1 8

of the Antients, how made, 1 1 g

blue, what, 176

Gold, Stone that trys it, in

Gypsum, 151

the Antients had many Kinds, n, 148

of Cyprus, 151

of Phoenicia, ibid,

of Tlouria, 153

of Syria, j^l

of Tymphcca^ 153

made of different Stones, n, 151

of Stones like Alabafter, 153

ufed in Buildings, 155

&ow prepared for Ufe, ibid.



20-5 )



ufed about Cloaths,
of Syria, how made,
its Nature owing to Fire,
Tymphaican Earth fo called,
Gypsinum Metallum, what, n.

H

HiEM ACHATES, n.
HAEMATITES Lapis,

Heat, Concretion of fome Foflils owing to it,
Heliotrope, n.
Heraclian Stone,
Hyacinth, n.

La Bella, n.
Hyaloides,

the Ajtrios of Pliny, n.



*7:



. J 57
ibid,

159

149

IS*



86

97
11

58
in

47

77
81

80



Jaspachates, n.
Jasper,

from Cyprus,

the Matrix of the Prafnts, n.

fometimes emulates the Prafius, n.
Jet, n.
Iris, n.
Ivory, foflile,

altered more or lefs in the Earth, n,

Turqitoife of this kind, n.

M

K

Kali, Salt of it ufed in Glafs-making, n.

L

Lampsacus, Stone found there,
Lapis Armcnus,

yields four Colours,

factitious,

Mgyptian>

Scythian,

Cyprian,



86

59

9 r

. 7 1
ibid.

35
81

95

94
ibid.



117



g 7

*°3
1.33
*3i
ibid,
ibid,
ibid.



( 206 )

Lapis Specular is, Gypfum made of it, ru 14 8

Lemnian Earth, n. 126

Reddle, 1 27

Leucachates, ru 86

Lipara Stone, 37

LlTHANTHRAX, n. 40

Loadstone, n. 79

Loams, what, ru 117

Lydian Stone, 17, 11 1

where found, 113

Tryal by it how made, ibid.

Difference in the Sides, ibid.

Tries belt in cold Weather, 115
Lyncurius Lapis, 73, 75, 77

of the Antients, what, n. 74, 75

Male and Female, 83

M

Magnet Gem, .105

of the Antients, what, ft. 100

Marles, what, n. 116

Marble, not fufible in the Fire, 29

Parian, 2 1

Pentelicart} ibid.

Chian, ibid.

Theban, ibid.

Massilia, Carbuncles thence, 45, 91

Melian Earth, 143

of the Antients, what, n. 142

white, not yellow, n. ibid.

Melos, Pumices found there, '55

Men dip Hills, Ochre thence, n. 122

Merope, an Iiland 5 the fame with Sip/mas, n. 106

Metallum Gypfihum, what, n. 152

Miletian Carbuncle, 45

Milt os of the Greeks, what, n. 123
Minium, n. 123, 135

Mocho Stones, n. 86

Molaris Lapis, 27

a kind of Pyrites, n. 29

Mould vegetable, n. 115

Mundick, n. .30



( 20 7 )

N

Nephriticus Lapis, n. 96

Nisuros, Pumices found there, 53

O

Obsidianus Lapis 1 n. 24

Ochre, 103

what, n. 116

Yellow, two Kinds, n. 122

Omphax, 81

the Beryllus Oleaginus of Pliny, n. ibid.

Oneagh, petrifying Lake there, n. 119

Onychites Marmot; n. 22

Onyx, 85

what, and whence brought, n. 85

Alabafter fo called, n. 84

Orchomenus, Carbuncle thence, 89

Ormuz, Gulph of, red Earth thence, n. 123,
Orpiment, 103, 121

what, and whence brought, n, 104

becomes red in burning, ibid,

Ostracites, Gems polifned with it, 109



Parian Marble, 21

Pearl, 93
what, and whence brought, n. 92, 93

Pebbles, how formed, n. 18

Percolation, Foflils formed by it, 7

Pentelican Marble, 21

Petrifying Earths, 119

Stone, 1 5

Phoenician Gyp/urn^ 151
Phoenicians pay their Tribute in Lapis Anntnus, 133

Pharis, Me Han Earth of that Place, 147

Pinna Marina, Pearls in it, 93

PlSSASPHALTOS, II. 35

Porus, a Marble fo called, 23

Prasius, 97

what, and whence brought, n. 96



( 208 )

Principles of mixed Bodies, 4,

Psebos, Carbuncles thence, 91

Pseud o-^aa mantes, 8f

Smaragdus, 67

Pumice, 49

made by Fire* ibid,

from the Froth of the Sea, ibid*

by burning the Lapis Arabicus, §1

different Kinds formed different Ways, 53
in the Openings of the burning Mountains, 5 1

of Nifuros, 53

of Melos, 55

black, of the Sicilian Shores, 57

only a Cinder made by burning, n. 49

different Stones called by this Name, n. 52

of Nifuros, was probably a Pyrites , n. 53

Pyritje, 27

what they contain, n. 29

Pyrrhopoeiclus of Pliny, n. 22

a

Qualities, different of Foffils, whence, 9

Quicksilver, 139

Ways of extracting it from Cinnabar, n. 138

found pure in the Earth, n. 143

Errors of the Antients about it, n* 141

R

Reddle, 103

of two Kinds,- 131

of feveral Kinds, n. 123

that of the Pits preferred, 123

contains Iron, n. 124

Lemnian, 127

Sinopic, ibid,

what, and whence, n. 128

a native Crocus Mart is, lie 127

Rock Ruby, n. 46

Rot gulden Ertx, n. 101

Rubacelle, n. 46

I £U2Y,



( 209 )

Ruby, true, n.

Balais, n. .
Spinell, n.

S

Salts, lixivial, what,

Salt acid in expreffed Oils, .*7*
in diftilled Oils,

SaMian Earth, \^

not ufed by Painters, *45

of the Antients, what, lbld -

how dug, J 47

caUed Ajhr, J 49

called Collyrion, H7

tv i ibid.
^amos, Pits there,

Sand, what, n. *

Sandarach, ^ 5

Sandastrum, n. 7;

Sarcophagus 2,<7/>/j, n. »
Sapphire, *7> 59, 95

of the Antients, what, n. 59
of the Moderns, n.
counterfeit, how made,
Sardachates, n.

ScAPTESYLiE, Stones found there, 4*

Sicilian Pumices, 57

Sil Atticum % what, n. ^35

Sinopic Earth, . ?

ducr in Cappadocia, \™ a <

three Kinds of it, ibld '

found In America, n. .* 2 9

a Kind of it made of Ochre, lbldw

Sinopis, a common Name for red Earths? n, 130

Siphnus, Stone found there, I0 7

Smaragdo Prafusy n. ^9°
Smiris, n.

Soap Rock, ft. . 145

Solidity of Foffils, Caufe of it, ri< 3*

Spain, Native Cinnabar found there, *37

Sphragis, n. .

Spinel! Rub^ iu ^ 40



60
170
86



( 2IO )

Spinvs, • 35

Spars, n. 26

formed by Percolation and Afflux^ ibid,

their natural Colour white, n. 27

affume their Shape from Metals, n. ibid,

coloured by Metals, n. 28

not fufible in the Fire, ibid.

Stalagmite, n. 9

Stalactite, n. ibid.

Steatites, n. 145

Stone attracting Iron, 79

Stones containing Gold and Silver, 10 1

refembling Carbuncles, but heavier, 103

which bring forth Young, 1 7

the different Kinds, whence, 13

different fit for different Works, 19

fome not to be cut by Iron, 105

but by other Stones, J07

fufible, 27

Syene, Carbuncles thence, 91

Syenites of Pliny, n. 22

Syria, Gypfum thence, 151

.1

Tan us, a Kind of Emerald, 65

a large one in Tyre^ ibid,

T£RRA Lemnia, n, 1 26

Sinopica, • 127

what, and whence, n» 128

Cimolta^ 1 43

Melia, ibid.

Samia, 145

Tymphaica y 143

Terrs Verte, n. 142

Tetras, Stones found there, 39

Theban Marble, 21

Thracius Lapis i n. 32

Topaz, n. 44

Tophus, 23
the fame with the Topjfstein of the Germans, ibid.

Trcezenian Carbuncle, 89



( 2" )

Turquoise, n. 94.
coloured by Copper, n. 94, 163
rough, 94, 171

Tymphaican Earth, 143

called Gypfwn, 149

V

Vegetable Mould, what, n, 115

Uelitis, 119

Verd' Jzur, n. 102

Verdello, n. in

Verdigrease, how made, J35

Vinegar, a Solvent of Copper, 183

Virtues of the Gems enquired into, n» 73

Uniones, n. 93

W

Water, confidered as a Menftruum, 179

Copper diflblved in it, 178

the Bafis of Metals, 3

Waters petrifying, n. 120

Wax, a Solvent of Copper, 178

by what Means, 179

Wrern, a kind of Flint, n. 30

Whetstones, 109

Wood petrified, n. J 20

X

Xanthus, a kind of Haematites, 97

Y

Yellow Ochres, J 22

Z

Zaffer, native, whether exiftent, 166

common, how made, ibid,

blue Gems fuppofed coloured by it, 164

why fuppofed fo, 1 65
the Arguments confidered, 168, 169, 170

Zarnich Jsfar, n, }°4-

Jbmer, n. 1,old -

Ziment, 181

FINIS.



BOOKS printed for C. D a v i s.



L T7 Lements of the Art of Ajf&ying Metals ; in two Parts ; the
fir ft containing the Theory, the fecond the Practice of the
faid Art. The whole deduced from the true Properties and Na-
ture of FoJJils ; confirmed by the moll accurate and unquestionable
Experiments, explained in a natural Order, and with the utmoft
CI earners. By John- Andrew Cramer, M. D. Tranflated from
the Latin, and illuftrated with Copper Plates. To which are ad-
ded feverai Notes and Obfervations, not in the Original, particu-
larly ufeful to the Englijb Reader. With an Appendix, contain-
ing a Lift of the chief Authors, that have been publifhed in Eng-
lijh, upon Minerals and Metals. 81/0.

II. The compleat Mineral Laws of Derby/hire, taken from the
Originals ; 1 . The High Peak Laws, with their Cuftoms. 2.
Stony Middleton and Eame, with a new Article made, 1733.
3. The Laws of the Manor of Ajbfortb i'th* Water. 4. The
Low Peak Articles, with their Laws and Cuftoms. 5. The Cu-
ftoms and Laws of the Liberty of Litton. 6. The Laws of the
Lordmip of Tidfwell. And all their Bills of Plaint, Cuftoms,
Crofs Bills, Arrefts, Plaintiff's Cafe, or Brief ; with all other
Forms receflary for all Miners and Maintainers of Mines within
each Manour, Lordjhip, or Wapentake.

Quid dulcius Hominum Generi, a Natura datum ejl y quam fui
hi que liber i.

III. The Natural, Experimental, and Medicinal Hiftory, of
the Mineral Waters of Derby/hire, Lincolnjhire, and Torkjhire $
particularly thofe of Scarborough ; wherein they are carefully ex-
amined and compared, their Contents difcovered and divided, their
l ies fhewn and explained, and an Account given of their Difco-
vtry and Alterations. Together with the Natural Hiftory of the
Earths, Minerals, and FoJJils, through which the chief of them
pafs ; the groundlefs Theories and faJfe Opinions of former Wri-
ters are expofed, and their Reafonings demonftrated to be inju-
dicious and inconclufive To which are added large marginal
Notes, containing a methodical Abltracl: of all the Treatifes hi-
therto publifhed on thefe Waters, with many Obfervations and
Experiments ; as alfo four Copper Plates, reprefenting the Cry-
ftals of the Salts of Thirty-four of thofe Waters. By Thomas
Short, M. D. of Sheffield. In two Volumes Quarto.

I V. The Hiftory and Antiquities of Harwich and Dover court,
Tspographical, Dynaftical, and Political. Firft colle&ed by Silas
Taylor, alias Domville, Gent. Keeper of the King's Stores there;
and now much enlarged in all its Parts; with Notes and Obferva-
tions relating to Natural Hiftory. Illuftrated with Copper Plans
reprefenting the Cliff itfelf, the FoJJils contained therein, and o-
ther principal Things, by Samuel Oale.

2
